Totemism and Exogamy, Vol. 2 (James George Frazer, 1910)
Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive (archive.org/details/india.history.resource.88093). Vol. 2 of Frazer's four-volume treatise - totemism in Australia, Africa and the Americas.
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

00083140 

Digitized with financial assistance from 

1-7 Burekl, 

FOUNDATION 

An Initiative by 

WITH YOU, RIGHT THROUGH 

on 15 October, 2018 

TOTEMISM AND EXOGAMY 

MACMILLAN AND CO., LiMiTED 
LONDON + BOMBAY - CALCUTTA 
MELBOURNE 
THE MACMILLAN COMPANY 
NEW YORK - BOSTON * CHICAGO 
ATLANTA + SAN FRANCISCO. 

THE MACMILLAN CO. OF CANADA, L*p. 
TORONTO 

392-3 
FI fe 
/ 
Ref nO 

391-5 

WOQUUUV UIUC VT 
00083140 

CONTENTS 

An ETHNoGRAPHICAL SURVEY oF ToTEMISM (Continued) Pp. 1-640 
CHAPTER V.—TOTEMISM IN TorRRES STRAITS . Pp. 1-24 

Cuaprer VI.—Toremism in New GUINEA . Pp. 25-62 

§ 1. Totemism at Mawatta in Daudai, pp. 25-34. 
§ 2. Totemism of the Bugilai and Tora, pp. 34 57-, 
§ 3. Totemism in Kiwai, pp. 35-40. 

§ 4. Totemism in the Toaripi or Motumotu Tribe of the ‘Elema District, 
Pp. 40-42. 

§ 5. Totemism i in the Central Division of British New Guinea, pp. 42-46. 

§ 6. Totemism i in South-Eastern New Guinea, pp. 46-55. 

$7. Totemism in Dutch and German New Guinea, pp. 55-62. 

CuaPter VII.—TotremMisM IN MELANESIA . . Pp. 63-150 

§ 1. Melanesia and the Melanesians, pp. 63-65. 

§ 2. Exogamous Classes in Melanesia, pp. 65-69. 

§ 3. Totemism and Exogamy ‘in Southern Melanesia, pp. 69-101. 
§ 4. Totemism and Exogamy in Central Melanesia, pp. 101-1 18, 
§ 5. Totemisrh in Northern Melanesia, pp. 118-134- 

§ 6. Totemism in Eastern Melanesia (Fiji), pp. 134-150. 

CuHapPTreR VIII.—Toremism in POLYNESIA . . Pp. 151-184 

§ 1. Traces of Totemism in Samoa, pp. 151-167. 

§ 2. Traces of Totemism in Rotuma, pp. 167-172. 

§ 3. Traces of Totemism in Hawaii and Tahiti, pp- 172-175. 

§ 4. Traces of Totemism in Ponape and other parts of Polynesia, PP- 
175-177- 

§ 5. Traces of Totemism in Tonga, pp. 177-179- 

§ 6, Traces of Totemism in Tikopia, pp. 179-183- 

§ 7. Totemism in the Pelew Islands, pp. 183 59 

Vv 

vi 

TOTEMISM AND EXOGAMY 

CHAPTER IX.—TorEMisM IN INDONESIA. . Pp. 185-217 

§ 1. 
§ 2. 
§ 3. 
§ 4. 

Totemism and Exogamy in Sumatra, pp. 185-197. 
Totemism in the Moluccas, pp. 197-202. 

Analogies to Totemism in Borneo, pp. 202-213. 
Alleged Sexual Communism in Indonesia, pp. 213-217. 

{ 
CuapTer X.—Toremism 1n INDIA. : . Pp. 218-335" 

§ 1. 
§ 2. 
§ 3. 

"§ 4. 
§ 5. 
§ 6. 
§ 7. 
§ 8. 
§ 9. 

Totemism in Central India, pp. 218-230. 

Totemism in the Madras Presidency, pp. 230-251. 

a and the Classificatory System among the Todas, pp. 251- 
269. 

Totemism in Mysore, pp. 269-275. 

Totemism in the Bombay Presidency, pp. 275-278. 

Totemism in North-West India, pp. 278-284. 

Totemism in Bengal, pp. 284-318. 

Totemism and Exogamy in Assam, pp. 318-328. 

The Classificatory System of Relationship in India, pp. 329-335: 

CHAPTER XI.—TRACES OF TOTEMISM IN THE Rest oF ASIA 

Pp. 336-353 

CHAPTER XII.——Toremism 1n SoutH Arrica’ . Pp. 354-393 

§ 1. 
§ 2. 
§ 3. 
§ 4. 
§ 5. 

Totemism among the Herero, pp. 354-368. 

Totemism among the Bechuanas, pp. 369-380. 

Totemism among the Ama-Xosa and Ama-Zulu, pp. 380-388. 

A Theory of Bantu Totemism, pp. 388-392. 

Hints of Totemism among the Bushmen and Hottentots, pp. 392 57. 

Cuapter XIII.—Toremism 1n East AND CENTRAL AFRICA 

§4n 
§ 2. 

§ 3. 

§ 4. 
§ 5. 
§ 6. 
§ 7. 
§ 8. 
§ 9. 

Pp. 394-542 

Totemism in Central Angoniland, pp. 394-401. 

Totemism among the Wagogo, Wahehe, and Waheia of German 
East Africa, pp. 402-407. 

Exogamy and the Classificatory System of Relationship among the 
Masai, pp. 407-417. 

Totemism among the Taveta, Pp. 417-419. 

Totemism among the A-kamba, pp. 420-424. 

Totemism among the Mweru, pp. 424-426. 

Totemism among the Suk, Maragwetta, and Kamasia, Pp. 426-431. 

Totemism among the Nandi, pp. 431-446. 

Totemism in Kavirondo, pp- 446-451. 

§ Io. 
“$1. 

§ t2. 

.§ 13. 

§ 14. 

§ 15. 

§ 16. 
«$17. 
- § 18. 

CONTENTS 

Exogamy among the Bageshu, PP. 451-454. 
Totemism among the Bakene, PP- 454-457. 
Totemism among the Basoga, PP- 457-461. 
Totemism among the Bateso, PP- 461-463. 
Totemism among the Baganda, pp. 463-513. 
Totemism among the Banvoro, PP. §13-530- 
Totemism among the Batoro, PP- 530-532. 
Totemism among the Bahima, PP- 532-540. 
Exogamy among the Gallas, pP- 540-542. 

CuHaprer XIV.—ToremisM 1n WEST AFRICA 

$1. 
§ 2. 
§ 3. 
§ 4. 
§ 5. 
§ 6. 
§ 7. 

Totemism in Senegambia, pp. 543-547. 
Totemism on the Ivory Coast, PP- 547-553. 
Totemism on the Gold Coast, pp. 553-576. 
Totemism on the Slave Coast, pp. 576-587. 
Totemism in Southern Nigeria, pp. 587-600. 
Totemism in Northern Nigeria, pp. 600-608, 
Totemism in Congo and Angola, pp. 609-630. 

vii 

- Pp. 543-630 

CHAPTER XV.—ANALOGIES TO TOTEMISM IN MADAGASCAR 

VoL, H, 

Pp. 631-640 

AN ETHNOGRAPHICAL SURVEY 
OF TOTEMISM (Continued) 

CHAPTER V 

TOTEMISM IN TORRES STRAITS 

FROM the foregoing survey we may infer that totemism and Totemism 
exogamy, in one form or another, are or have been practised nea 
by all the aboriginal tribes of Australia. Passing now from among the 
Australia to the islands of Torres Straits, which divide Vos". 
Australia on the north from New Guinea, we shall find both of Torres 
totemism and exogamy in vogue also among the Western seit 
Islanders ; for these people are, like the Australians, divided 

into exogamous totem clans and believe themselves to be 

united by certain intimate ties to their totems. Our know- 

ledge of the social and totemic system of the islanders is 

due to the researches of Dr. A. C. Haddon and his colleagues, 

whose writings furnish the materials for the account which 
follows,’ 

The islands of Torres Straits fall roughly into three The 
groups, namely, the Western, composed of ancient igneous coupes . 
rocks, which support a somewhat sparse flora; the Central, Staits. 
which are mainly banks of coral sand overgrown with 
vegetation ; and the Eastern, consisting of modern volcanic 

1 Reports of the Cambridge Anthro- 
pological Expedition to Yorres Stratts, 
volume v. Soczology, Magte and Religion 
of the Western Islanders (Cambridge, 
1904). Compare A. C. Haddon, Head- 
hunters, Black, White, and Brown 
(London, 1901), pp. 132 sgg., 171 
sq.; td@., “The Religion of the 
Torres Straits Islanders,” <Axthropo- 
dogical Essays presented to Edward 
Burnett Tylor (Oxford, 1907), pp. 
175-188. For reports of Dr. Haddon’s 

VOL. II 

earlier researches among these islanders, 
see A, C, Haddon, ‘‘ The Ethnography 
of the Western Tribes of Torres Straits,” 
Journal of the Anthropological Insti- 
tute, xix. (1890) pp. 297-440; ?a@., 
“Legends from Torres Straits,” Fo/k- 
lore, i. (1890) pp. 47-81, 172-1963 
td., **The Secular and Ceremonial 
Dances of Torres Straits,” Jnter- 
nattonales Archiv fir Ethnographie, 
vi. (1893) pp. 131-162. 

The 
islanders, 

2 TOTEMISM IN TORRES STRAITS CHAP. 

rocks and possessing a fertile soil and usually abundance 
of food, though here also a deficient fall of rain during the 
north-west monsoon fesults in a scarcity of garden produce, 
which sometimes ends in famine. In physical appearance, 
temperament, and culture the islanders are typical Western 
Papuans. Yet there is a remarkable difference between the 
languages of the Eastern and Western Islanders ; for while’ 
the affinities of the language spoken by the Eastern Islanders 
are Papuan, the affinities of the language spoken by the 
Western Islanders are Australian, and there is no genealogical 
connection between the two languages. It seems probable 
therefore that the original stock of the Western Islanders 
was Australian, and that a gradual infusion of Papuans 
from New Guinea has assimilated their features to the 
Papuan type without materially affecting their speech” It 
is only in the Western Islands, where the original native 
stock appears to be Australian, that totemism has been 
found in practice, though traces of its former existence may 
perhaps be detected in the Eastern Islands? The Western 
Islands in which the totemic system has been specially 
observed are Mabuiag, Badu, Moa, Muralug, Nagir, Tutu 
and Yam, and Saibai® The native word for a totem is 
augtid (plural augidal)’ In the following table all the 
known totems of clans in the Western Islands are arranged 

' A. C. Haddon, ‘‘The Religion 
of the Torres Straits Islanders,” Anth- 
vopological Essays presented to Edward 
Burnett Tylor (Oxford, 1907), p. 1753 
Reports of the Cambridge Anthropo- 
logical Expedition to Torres Straits, 
volume iii. Linguistics, by Sidney H. 
Ray (Cambridge, 1907), pp. 509-511. 

2 A. C. Haddon, in Anthropological 
Essays presented to E. B. Tylor, p. 178. 
For fuller details, see W. H. R. 
Rivers and A. C. Haddon, in Reforts 
of the Cambridge Anthropological Ex- 
pedition to Torres Straits, volume vi. 
Sociology, Magic and Religion of the 
Eastern Islanders (Cambridge, 1908), 
PP. 173-177, 254-257. Ameangst the 
possible traces of totemism enumerated 
by Dr. Haddon is the belief that the 
ghosts of the dying or dead appear to 
the living in the form of various animals ; 

when a group of people is named after 
a species of animal, the ghost of the 
departed usually presents himself or 
herself in the likeness of an animal 
of that particular species. Women are 
thus represented by flying animals, 
bats and birds; which, adds Dr. 
Haddon, ‘looks suspiciously like 
what has been termed a ‘sex-totem’” 
(Anthropological Essays presented to 
EZ. B. Tylor, p. 178). 

3 Reports of the Cambridge Anthro- 
pological Expedition to Torres Straits, 
volume v. Sociology, Magic and Religion 
of the Western Islanders, pp. 154 sg. 
For the sake of brevity this volume 
will be cited as Expedition to Torres 
Straits, v. 

4 Expedition to Torres Straits, v. 

153. 

v TOTEMISM IN TORRES STRAITS 3 

: : 7 Nae 
according to their natural kinds, with the native names for 
them printed ir’ italics.’ 

TOTEMS OF THE WESTERN ISLANDERS OF TORRES STRAITS 

Natural Kinds. 

Totems. 

Mammals . 

Birds 

Reptiles 

Fishes 

Invertebrates 
Plants 

Inanimate objects 

~~ 

dog (umaz), flying-fox (sapor), dugong (dangad). 

fish-eagle (xgagalaig), hawk (aubu), a sea-bird 
(Atak), frigate-bird (womer), a wading-bird 
(saw), a yellowish bird (gd¢), reef-heron 
(farbat), cassowary (sam). 

crocodile (£odal), monitor (2arum), gecko (szs), 
snake (¢abz), sea-snake (ger), green turtle 
(surlal or waru), turtle-shell turtle (uzawa), 
matwa (a turtle ?). 

sucker-fish (gafu), saker, wad, shovel-nosed 
skate (Aaigas), various kinds of ray (¢agcmul), 
a species of ray (¢olupaz), hammer-headed 
shark (urst), shark (éaidam), a kind of 
shark (kutikut2), uzt. 

a sea-snail (wzag). 

a tuber (diabau), hibiscus (kokwam). 

a stone (£u/a), a stone (goda), a star (7¢uz). 

Thus out of thirty-six recorded totems no less than 
thirty-one are animals, two are plants, and three are 

inanimate objects. 

The two plant totems are found only 

in Saibai, an island off the south coast of New Guinea? 

In each island there were a number of totem clans, all 
the members of each clan having the same totem or totems. 
Most of these clans had more than one totem, but one Principat 
totem was more important than the others and might be 
called the chief totem, while the rest were subsidiary. In 
some cases two or more clans might have the same chief 
totem, while their subsidiary totems differed. For example, 

1 Expedition to Torres Straits, v. 157. 2 Ibid. v. 157. 

The 
totems 

of the 
Western 
Tslanders. 

and sub- 
sidiary 
totems. 

Local 
segrega- 
tion of the 
totemic 
clans, 

Exogamy 
and 
descent of 
the totem 
clans, 

4 TOTEMISM IN TORRES STRAITS CHAP. 

in Mabuiag there were two clans which had the dugong 
for their chief totem, but in one of them the subsidiary 
totem was the crocodile, and in the other it was the 
sucker-fish.* 

The members of each totem clan generally lived together 
in one district ; at least this was soin Mabuiag. At present 
all the'people of that island live in one village, but they 
still acknowledge that each clan has its established place, 
and the members of a clan were often spoken of by the 
name of its place; thus the Dugong-Crocodile clan of 
Mabuiag, living at Panai, was often spoken of as the Panai 
people. A man did not change his totem by changing his 
district: if a Panai man went to live elsewhere, he did not 
cease to be a Dugong-Crocodile man. This definite 
connection between clan and district has now ceased, and 
at the present time members of different clans may even 
live in the same house.’ . 

Descent of the totem clan is, and, so far as the 
genealogical records go back, always has been, in the male 
line. A man has the same totem or totems as his father. 
A wife keeps the totem which she has inherited from her 
father: she does not take her husband’s totem. "The clans 
were exogamous; sexual intercourse, as well as marriage, 
was prohibited between members of the same _ clan. 
However, marriages might take place between clans that 
had the same chief totem, but different subsidiary totems. 
In the genealogies such marriages are found to occur most 
frequently between persons whose chief totem was the 
crocodile. The two or three Crocodile clans of Mabuiag 
probably arose by fission, one original Crocodile clan 
splitting up into several, which distinguished themselves 
from each other by their subsidiary totems. There is 
definite evidence that the two Dugong clans of Mabuiag— 
the Dugong-Crocodile clan and the Dugong-Sucker-fish 
clan—originated in this way. But these clans are now 
regarded as quite distinct, and the possession of the same 

‘thief totem is not considered a bar to marriage, or only so 

to a slight extent. But the prohibition to marry a woman 
of the same totem clan did not extend to women of other 
1 Expedition to Torres Straits, v. 159. 2 Ibid. v. 159 sg. 

v TOTEMISM IN TORRES STRAITS 5 

islands: thus a Dugong man of Mabuiag might marry a 
Dugong woman of Moa or Parema.! 

Further, it appears that the totem clans of the Western The totem 
islands of Torres Straits were formerly grouped in two sale és 
exogamous classes or phratries.”, In the island of Mabuiag have been 
these two classes’ were called “the Children, or People, of &ouPed™ 
the Great Totem” and “the Children or People of the gamous 
Little Totem” respectively. The Children of the Great ea. 
Totem were the clans of the Crocodile, the Cassowary, and “lled 
the Snake, with whom were associated the members of the paar 
Dog clan. The Children of the Little Totem were the dren of the 
clans of the Dugong and Shovel-nosed Skate, with whom Totem 
were associated the clans of the Shark, the Ray, and the ee 
Turtle (surlal or waru). It is interesting to observe that of the 
this grouping of the totem clans corresponds to the mode Opn 
of life of the totem animals. The totems of the first group 
(the Children of the Great Totem) are all land animals, the 
four legs of the crocodile clearly outweighing in the native 
mind the amphibious habits of the reptile. On the other 
hand the totems of the second group (the Children of the 
Little Totem) are all marine animals; or, as a native said, 

“They all belong to the water, they are all friends.” 
* Further, the two groups or classes of clans, the Children of Local 
the Great Totem and the Children of the Little Totem, oe 
appear formerly to have inhabited separate districts of the two 
Mabuiag. Thus the Dugong clan used to live at Panai and ‘ses or, 
phratries in 

the Shovel-nosed Skate clan at Sipungur and Gumu, all of Mabuiag. 
which places are on the windward, or south-east side of the 
island. On the other hand Wagedugam, on the north-west 
side of the island, was regarded as the district of the clans 
which had land animals for their totems (the Children of 
the Great Totem), and one of the Crocodile clans and one 
of the Snake clans certainly lived there. But the other 
Crocodile clan or clans and the other Snake clan lived on 
the south-east side, close to the district of the Children of 
the Little Totem. If, as has been suggested, clans with 
the same chief totem arose through the subdivision of one 
original clan, it is possible that all the Crocodile and Snake 

1 Expedition to Torres Straits, v. 2 Jbid. v. 172-179, 241. 
1§9-161, 236. 3 Above, p. 4. 

Local 
Segrega- 
tion of the 
totemic 
clans in 
Tutu and 
Saibai. 

Probably 
each of 

the two 
groups or 
classes of 
totemic 
clans was 
formerly 
exogamous. 

6 TOTEMISM IN TORRES STRAITS CHAP. 

people originally lived together at Wagedugam. However, 
the old geographical separation of the two groups of totem 
clans has been obliterated by the missionaries, who have 
persuadéd the people to gather together in one village, where 
there is no segregation of totemic groups.’ 

In the island of Tutu the Crocodile and Shark (dazdam) 
clans formed one group, while the Hammer-headed Shark 
(Zursz), the Cassowary, and the Dog clans formed another 
group. The first of these two groups owned the northern 
half of the island, and the second group owned the southern 
half of the island.? In the island of Saibai the single village 
formerly consisted of a double row of houses separated by a 
long open space or street, and the houses of each clan were 
placed side by side in the following order :-— 

Snake. Wild tuber (dazbaz). 
Crocodile. Dog. Cassowary. 

The people who lived on one side of the street were 
friends, but were constantly quarrelling with the people on 
the other side of the street, though they generally took 
their wives from their neighbours over the way. Finding 
that this division of the clans on opposite sides of the 
street led to faction fights, a South Sea teacher mixed 
the houses up, and the old grouping of the clans has dis- 
appeared.$ 

It is probable that the two groups into which the totem 
clans of Torres Straits thus fall were originally exogamous 
classes or phratries, in other words, that the members of 
one group might only marry members of the other group. 
It is true that the evidence of the genealogies in the island 
of Mabuiag does not support this view; but on the other 
hand in Saibai nearly two-thirds of the marriages take 
place between the two groups, which seems to shew a 
decided tendency to exogamy of the groups. On the whole 
we seem to be justified in assuming that the distribution of 
the totem clans of the Western Islands of Torres Straits 
into two exogamous classes or phratries was an ancient 
feature of their totemic system, although the old rule of 

1 Expedition to Torres Straits, v. 2 Tbid. v. 173. 
172 5g. 3 [bid. v. 174 sg. 

v TOTEMISM IN TORRES STRAITS 7 

exogamy of the classes has partially broken cCown in Saibai 
and completely broken down in Mabuiag.! 

Thus in the islands of Torres Straits exogamy of the The exo- 
classes or phratries has proved less lasting than the oS. 
exogamy of the totem clans; for we have seen that a man clansseems 
is still bound to seek his wife from another totem clan. ae 
Yet even in the totem clans the rule of exogamy appears to for it is 
be decadent, since a man is free to marry a woman of the SWiettt 
same totem as himself in two cases. In the first place, he exceptions. 
may marry a woman of the same totem as himself provided 
she belongs to another clan, which has indeed the same 
chief totem as his own, but different subsidiary totems. In 
the second place, a man may marry a woman of the same 
totem as himself, provided she belongs to another island. 

This last case proves that it is deemed more essential to 
marry a woman of another locality than of another totem ; 

in other words, that local exogamy is superseding cl&in 
exogamy, as it has done among the Kurnai of South-East 
Australia.* In short, totemism as a system for the regula- 

tion of marriage is in a state of decay in these islands. At 

the present time in Mabuiag and probably throughout the Marriage is 
Western Islands marriage is regulated more by kinship than a Sea 
by clanship; a man is forbidden to marry not only women kinship 
of his own totem clan, but also women of other totem clans SMS: 
if they are connected with him by certain ties of kinship.* 
“The general result of the analysis of the genealogical 
record confirms the marriage laws as stated by the natives. 

It certainly shows that marriages between people nearly 
related to one another never occurred, while marriages 
between people related to one another even remotely were 

rare. No single case occurs in Mabuiag or Badu in which 
marriage has taken place between own brothers and sisters, 

‘and no definite case between dadat® of the same clan. 

Only one case is recorded of marriage between first cousins, 

and that is one in which it is almost certain that the 

1 Expedition to Torres Straits, v. 5 Babat are brothers and sisters in 
175-179, 241. the group or classificatory sense of the 
2 See above, pp. 4 59. terms, See £xpeditton to Torres 
3 See above, vol. i. p. 494. Straits, v. 129, 131 sgg.3 and as to the 

4 Expedition to Torres Straits, v. classificatory relationships in general, 
160 sg., 235. see above, vol. i. pp. 289 sg. 

Solidarity 
of the 
totem 
clans, 

Mystic 
affinity 
between 
members 
of a clan 
and their 
totem: the 
members 
of a clan 
resembled 
their 
totemic 
animal in 
character, 

8 TOTEMISM IN TORRES STRAITS CHAP, 

genealogical record is incorrect. On the other hand, sixteen 
cases at least are recorded in which marriage has taken 
place between people related tq one another by some degree 
of cousinship more remote than that of first cousin, In 
nearly all these marriages the relationship is either very 
remote (third cousins or second cousins once removed) or 
there are extenuating circumstances.” ! 

The solidarity of the totem clan was a marked feature 
in the social life of the people: it took precedence of all 
other considerations. Nor was the bond limited to the 
people of the clan who dwelt together ; an intimate relation- 
ship existed between all people who had the same totem, 
whatever the island or the district might be which they 
inhabited ; even warfare did not affect the friendship of 
totem-brethren. Any man who visited another island would 
be cared for and entertained as a matter of course by the 
residents who were of the same totem as himself. But if 
there happened to be no people of the same totem as 
himself on the island, he would stay with a clan which was 
recognised as being in some way associated with his own. 
Thus a Dog man of Tutu would visit the Shovel-nosed 
Skate people of Mabuiag,. because they had the dog for one 
of their subsidiary totems.” 

A close relationship or, as Drs. Haddon and Rivers put 
it, a mystic affinity is held to obtain between the members 
of a clan and their totem. “This is a deeply ingrained idea 
and is evidently of fundamental importance. More than 
once we were told emphatically, ‘ Augud [totem] all same as 
relation he belong same family.’ A definite physical and 
psychological resemblance was thus postulated for the human 
and animal members of the clan. There can be little doubt 
that this sentiment reacted on the clansmen and constrained 
them to live up to the traditional character of their respective 
clans.”* Thus the Cassowary, Crocodile, Snake, Shark, and 
Hammer-headed Shark clans are said to love fighting ; while 
the Shovel-nosed Skate, the Ray, and the Sucker-fish clans are 

1 W. H. R. Rivers, in Zxpedition, 3 A. C. Haddon and W. H. R. 
to Torres Straits, v. 239. Rivers, in Expedition to Torres Straits, 
2 Expedition to Togres Straits, v. v. 184. 
16k. 

v TOTEMISM IN TORRES STRAITS 9 

reputed to be peaceable. The reason of the distinction is no 
doubt to be found in the ferocity of the one set of animals 
and the gentleness of the other. The cassowary, which 
xanks with the truculent creatures, is a bird of very un- 
certain temper which kicks with extreme violence. Inter- 
mediate between the fierce-and the gentle clans is the Dog 
clan, which is thought to be sometimes pugnacious and 
sometimes pacific, just like real doys, which sometimes fawn 
and sometimes snarl and bite. So it is precisely with a 
Dog man. At one time he will be glad to see you, at 
another time, when you least expect it, he will whip out his 
stone-headed club and hit you a swingeing blow. Men of 
the Dog clan are also believed to have great sympathy with 
dogs and to understand their habits better than do other 
people. When men of the Snake clan are angry they loll 
out their tongues and wag them, just like real snakes ; and 
when they are fighting, they cry out, “Snake bites!” which 
is a charm to make the reptile sting. Crocodile people are 
said to be very strong and to have no pity; just like real 
crocodiles. Cassowary men are thought to have long legs 
and to run fast, just like real cassowaries. When a casso- 
wary man went out to fight, he would say to himself, 
“My leg is long and thin, I can run and not feel tired; 
my legs will go quickly and the grass will not entangle 
them.” ? 

The affinity which was supposed to exist between people The 
and their totems was indicated by certain outward emblems dl 
which men and women either wore or had impressed on members 
their persons. Thus the members of a totem clan sometimes 0? 62” 

and their * 

carried a piece of their totem (augud) or a carved representa- eae 
. . : . was 
tion of it; sometimes the badge of the. totem was cut in jngicated 

their flesh.? For example, likenesses of dugongs, crocodiles, by ew 
%, , | outwar 
snakes, and shovel-nosed skates were sometimes cut on the embiems 

loins of women of these totem clans; but the custom was not °F badges, 
sometimes 

universal. In Mabuiag girls of the cassowary totem might by scars 

scarify the calf of each leg with a mark like an arrow- pt inthe 
lesh. 

head (¥), which represents the footprint of the bird ; or they 

1 Expedition to Torres Straits, v. 3 Jhid. v. 158, 163, 164, with 
164, 165, 166, 168 57., 184 sg. plate ix. 
2 Jbid. v. 188. 

As a rule 
people did 
not kill 
and eat 
their 
totemic 
animals, 

to TOTEMISM IN TORRES STRAITS CHAP, 

might have an appropriate mark cut on the loins.’ In the 
same island men of the snake totem were said to have a 
coiled snake cut on the calf of each leg, while the women 
had two coiled snakes cut on the loins. Further, the men 
of that clan were reported to have also had two small holes 
in the tip of the nose, which were evidently intended to 
represent the nostrils of their totem the snake.” Men of 
several clans, particularly the Dugong and Shovel-nosed 
Skate clans, were said to have had their totems (augud) cut 
on their right shoulder, but Dr. Haddon and his colleagues 
never saw any indication of it, though complicated marks 
were often cut on that part of the body.2 In Mabuiag men 
who had the shovel-nosed skate for their totem carved a 
likeness of that fish on their tobacco-pipes.* In the same 
island men and women of the Crocodile clan might wear as 
a badge a piece of crocodile skin or two or three scales 
of a crocodile fastened by a string round the neck and 
hanging down either in front or behind. Usually instead 
of this badge the men would put some kind of leaf in their 
hair over the forehead, when they walked in the bush; and 
on certain occasions they would dab a round spot of red 
paint on the pit of their stomachs.” Men of the Dog clan 
in Mabuiag wore no badge, but would ornament their 
tobacco-pipes and bamboo bows with figures of their totem 
the dog.® Men of the Shark and Ray clans in Mubuiag 
are also said to have worn no badges, but to have carved 
sharks and ray-fish respectively on their tobacco-pipes or 
other objects.’ 

Standing in a relation of mystic affinity to their totems 
and in a sente identifying themselves with them,’ people 
naturally abstained from killing and eating their totems, but 
they were free to kill the totems of other clans. If a 

1 Expedition to Torres Straits, v. 8 *< Individuals identified themselves 
166. with their totem (augud) by decorating 
2 Jéid, v. 168, with plate ix. themselves or their belongings with 
fig, 2. representations of the totem. <A 
3 Jbid, v. 159, 163, 164. psychical affinity was supposed to 
4 [bid. v. 164. exist between the totem and its human 
be Fgh 58 kin” (A. C. Haddon, in Anthropo- 
Bae EN 5 logical Essays presented to E. B. Tylor, 
6 Ibid. v. 169. p. 177). 
7 Ibid. v. 169. 

v TOTEMISM IN TORRES ar ad 11 

Crocodile man killed a crocodile, the othet Crocodile men 
killed him; if a man of another clan killed one of the 
reptiles, the Crocodile men would not molest him, but they 
mourned for the death of their relative the crocodile, If a 
Cassowary man were seen killing a cassowary, his fellow- 
clansmen would injure or kill him, they felt so sorry for the 
death of the bird. They said, “Cassowary (sam) he all same 
as relation, he belong same family.” If a Dog man killed 
a dog, the other Dog men would fight him; if a man of 
another clan killed a dog, the other Dog men would let him 
alone, though they felt sorry. However, there were two ex- 
ceptions to the rule that a member of a totem clan might not 
kill or eat his totem. Members of the Dugong and Turtle But mem- 
(surlal) clans were allowed to kill and eat their totems the abo 
dugongs and turtles respectively. The reason for this special] and Turtle 
indulgence is no doubt the importance of the dugong and ¢jins re 
turtle as articles of diet. In all the islands flesh-meat, with kill and eat 
the exception of fish, is very scarce, and it would be too a ee 
much to expect the members of these two clans to abstain 
entirely from eating their respective totems. Indeed the 
Cambridge anthropologists, to whose researches we owe our 
knowledge of the totemic system of these islanders, were 
told that the totem was eaten in Mabuiag because the 
island is a “poor place” and “men hard up.” So Dugong 
men were allowed to catch dugong, but might not eat the 
first one they caught on a fishing expedition: the second 
and following ones they might keep. The Turtle men 
observed the same regulation with regard to turtles. The 
same rules applied to people who had the dugong and 
turtle for their subsidiary totems.’ 

At the present day, through the influence of foreigners, 
the old totem taboos are falling into desuetude. In the 
island of Saibai people now kill and eat their totems.” But The totems 
never even in the old days, so far as can be ascertained, was Gabino 
there any religion or worship of the totems. On_ this 
subject Dr. Haddon observes: “The totem animals of a 

1 A.C. Haddon, ‘The Ethnography 40 Torres Stratts, v. 185, 186. 
of the Western Tribe of Torres Straits,” 
Journal of the Anthropological Institute, 2 Expedition to Torres Straits, v. 
xix, (1890) pp. 392 sg.; Expedition 186. 

12 TOTEMISM IN TORRES STRAITS CHAP. 

clan are sacred only to the members of that clan; but the 
idea of sacredness is very limited, merely implying a family 
connection, a certain amount of magical affinity and the 
immunity of a totem animal from being killed by a member 
of that clan. No worship or reverence, so far as I know, 
was ever paid to a totem. Animals are not treated as 
rational beings or talked to more than with us, perhaps 
not so much so.”? 

Members In Mabuiag men of the Turtle and Dugong clans 

of the iq performed magical ceremonies in order to ensure a supply 

Turtle and ; 
Dugong of turtles and dugong. Thus these ceremonies correspond 
Panag ” exactly to the magical ceremonies (¢x¢ichiuma) which the 
ee Arunta and other tribes of Central Australia perform for 
to ensure a the multiplication of their totems. The men of the Turtle 
supply of clan might not go turtle-fishing until a turtle had been 
turtles and 
dugong. caught by members of some other clan. But the first 
turtle caught during the turtle-breeding season was handed 
over to the men of the Turtle clan. It was taken not to 
the village, but to the £wod of the clan, that is, to the 
general meeting-place of the men which no woman might 
enter.” Here the animal was smeared all over with red 
ochre (parma), after which it was known as the Red Turtle 
(parma surlal). The clansmen painted themselves with a 
red mark across the chest and another across the abdomen, 
evidently to represent the anterior and posterior margin of 
the plastron, or under-shell, of their totem the turtle. They 
wore head-dresses of cassowary feathers and danced round 
the turtle whirling bull-roarers (4¢gu) and shaking as rattles 
the nutshells of Pangium edule (goa). A length of the 
gawai creeper was cut off and slightly sharpened at one 
end: this was then inserted in the cloaca of the turtle and 
pushed up and down several times. This was an act of 
pantomimic magic to “make him (that is, all the turtle) 
proper fast,”* in other words, to cause the turtles to multiply. 
The turtle was then given to the Dugong men, who ate it. 
This ceremony was performed in daylight without any 
| Expedition to Torres Straits, v. of their public life, see Expedition to 
363 59. Torres Straits, v. 3, 365-367. 
2 As to the gwod, which may perhaps 3 « Fast” in the English jargon 

be described as the forum of the men, which is spoken by these islanders 
the social, political, and religious centre means the act of copulation. 

v TOTEMISM IN TORRES STRAITS 13 

attempt at secrecy; but neither women and children nor 
even men of other clans came near while it lasted.’ Thus 
we see that the men of the Turtle clan, like men of the 
Witchetty Grub, Emu, and other totems among the Arunta, 
were credited with the power of magically multiplying their 
totem for the benéfit of the community in order to increase 
the general food-supply; and this imaginary power they 
endeavoured to exert by performing a ceremony which was 
clearly based on the principle of imitative or homceopathic 
magic, since they painted themselves to resemble turtles 
and mimicked the act of copulation on the body of the 
dead turtle. ‘ 

Again, the Dugong clan in Mabuiag used to perform a Ceremony 
magical ceremony to compel the dugong to swim towards Roa 
the island and be caught. This rite they observed in the clan to 
sacred meeting-place (Awod) of the men, close to the shore peas 
at a place called Dabungai, which faces northward to the come and 
reefs where the dugong chiefly feed and abound. The °° *"8"* 
Dugong men who officiated were painted with a red line 
from the tip of the nose, up the forehead and down the 
spine to the small of the back, in order to resemble the 
wake of mud that streams behind the dugong when it is 
browsing upon the Cymodocea, which grow on a soft bottom. . 

A wooden model of a dugong, which was used as a charm 
to attract the fish, was painted in like manner. Further, 
certain plants were twisted round the waists and arms of 
the Dugong men who took part in the ceremony; their 
forehead was decked with upright leaves to represent the 
spouting of the dugong when it comes to the surface of the 
water to breathe, and leaves were inserted in the arm-bands 
of the performers to simulate the water splashing off a 
dugong when it is floundering in a shoal. A medicine or 
charm for the dugong was compounded out of certain plants, 
including the Sesuvzum Portulacastrum. These plants were 
put on the ground and the dugong was laid on the top of 
them. Several men hoisted the dead dugong up by its tail 
so as to make it face towards the rest of the island, thereby 
indicating to the living dugong in the sea the way they 
should come from the reefs to the island in order that they 
1 Expedition to Torres Straits, v. 183 sq. 

Subsidiary 
totems. 

14 TOTEMISM IN TORRES STRAITS CHAP. 

might be caught and eaten.’ This ceremony, like the turtle 
ceremony just described, clearly involves the principle of 
imitative magic, since the Dugong men paint themselves to 
resemble dugong. But whereas the turtle ceremony is 
intended to breed turtles, the dugong ceremony is intended 
merely to attract, not to multiply, the fish. 

We have seen that most of the totem clans of these 
islands had several totems, namely a chief totem and one 
or more subsidiary totems. Thus in Mabuiag the most 
important clan had the dugong for its chief totem and the 
crocodile for its subsidiary totem ;? the Shovel-nosed Skate 
clan had the green turtle (sur/al) and the dog for its 
subsidiary totems; a Crocodile clan had for its subsidiary 
totems the snake, a blue-spotted fish (wad), and the sucker- 
fish ;* the Cassowary clan had for its subsidiary totems the 
dugong and the snake;* the Turtle (su7/a/) had for its 
subsidiary totems the frigate-bird and the flying-fox ; one 
Snake clan had for its subsidiary totem the dugong, and 
another Snake clan had for its subsidiary totems the turtle 
(surlal) and sucker-fish ;° and the Dog clan had for its 
subsidiary totem the turtle.® All these examples of clans 
with subsidiary totems are drawn from the island of Mabuiag. 
In the island of Badu the Crocodile clan had for its subsidiary 
totems the turtle and the sucker-fish ; the Dugong clan had 
for its subsidiary totem the cassowary ; and the Cassowary 
clan had for its subsidiary totem the ray-fish.’ In the island 
of Muralug one clan was said to have no less than seven 
totems. In Nagir the shark totem was found associated 
with the dugong totem, the gecko with the turtle, and a 
small fish (saker) with maiwa (a turtle?). In Tutu also 
clans were found with more than one totem; thus the 
hammer-headed shark was associated with the frigate-bird 
in one clan and with the turtle (warz) in another; while 
another clan had for its totems the crocodile and the frigate- 
bird.® 

What is the origin and meaning of this custom of 

1 Expedition to Torres Straits, v. 5 Ibid. v. 167. 
182 59. 8 Jbid. 68 

2 Jbid. v. 162. - oe tee 

3 Tbid. v. 164. 7 Ibid. v. 170 59. 

4 [bid. v. 166. 8 Ibid. v. 180, 

v TOTEMISM IN TORRES STRAITS 15 

1 
associating totems together? How comes it that a man Subsidiary 
has generally more than one totem? When the question oe 
y have 

was put to the people of Mabuiag, the usual answer was originated 
that a man sometimes took the totem of his mother as well pial 
as of his father. It is in favour of this explanation that taking the 
the subsidiary totems of one clan were generally the chief ri “ 
totems of other clans, At the present time, and as far back mothers 

* eT in addition 
as the genealogical record extends, the subsidiary totems jo those 
belong to every member of the clan, and have not changed hee 
from individual to individual, except in a few cases. Now ; 
there are good grounds for thinking that the practice of 
maternal descent instead of paternal descent once prevailed 
in the Western Islands,’ and it is a plausible hypothesis 
that the existence of subsidiary totems is a survival of the 
change from one mode of descent to the other, the man who 
first adopted his father’s totem inheriting his mother’s totem 
and then transmitting both to his descendants.? On this 
theory the possession of two or more subsidiary totems by 
a clan would be explained by supposing that the practice 
of taking the mother’s totem in addition to the father’s 
had been continued for two or more generations. This 
explanation of subsidiary totems is supported by the evidence 
of the natives, who actually derive these secondary totems 
from the custom of taking the mother’s totem ;3 and more- 
over it is confirmed by the analogy of the practice in some 
tribes of North Australia, among whom a man has to respect 
his mother’s totem in addition to his father’s.‘ 

1 Amongst the grounds for this con- or anger. Again, a boy’s guardian at 

clusion are the close relations which 
in Mabuiag exist between a man and 
his sister’s child ; for under the system 
of mother-kin a man’s sister’s sons 
stand to him in the position in which 
under the system of father-kin his own 
sons stand to him. In Mabuiag the 
relationship of wadwam, that is, the 
reciprocal relationship of sister’s son 
and mother’s brother, carried with it 
some remarkable privileges resembling 
those which in Fiji were enjoyed by 
the vasz or sister’sson. For example, 
in Mabuiag a sister’s son (wadwamn) 
might take, lose, spoil, or destroy any- 
thing belonging to his uncle and the 
uncle would utter no word of reproach 

his initiation was not his father but his 
mother’s brother, and it is said that as 
a lad grew up to manhood, he cared 
more for his mother’s brother (wadwam) 
and less for his father, Once more, 
when two men were fighting, the 
wadwam (mother’s brother or sister’s 
son) had the right to make him desist 
by a mere word or by simply holding 
up his hand. See W. H. R. Rivers, 
in Expedition to Torres Straits, v. 144- 
147, 150 sg. 

2 A. C. Haddon and W. H. R. 
Rivers, in Expedition to Torres Straits, 
v. 180, 

3 Jbid. v. 180. 

4 See above, vol. i. pp. 233-237. 

Or sub- 
sidiary 
totems 
may have 
originated 
through 
the absorp- 
tion of 
several sub- 
ordinate 
clans ina 
more 
powerful 
one. 

Classifica- 
tory system 
of rela- 
tionship. 

Rules of 
avoidance 
between 
persons 
connected 
by 
marriage. 

16 TOTEMISM IN TORRES STRAITS CHAP. 

Another possible explanation of subsidiary totems is 
that they indicate the absorption of one or more clans into 
another, On this hypothesis the chief totem would be the 
original totem of the powerful clan which absorbed the 
others, while the subsidiary totems would be the original 
totems of the weaker clans which were absorbed, but which 
were allowed after the union to keep their old totems in a 
subordinate position.!. On the other hand there is evidence, 
as we have seen, that some of the existing totem clans have 
arisen not by amalgamation but on the contrary by sub- 
division, the new clans so formed retaining the original 
totem of the old undivided clan, but tacking on to it 
different subsidiary totems for the sake of distinction.’ 
Whatever explanation be adopted of these subsidiary 
totems, they seem to differ in kind from those subtotems 
of Australian tribes which have already been considered.* 

As usual, we find that in the Western Islands of Torres 
Straits totemism and exogamy go along with the classi- 
ficatory system of relationship. Thus, for example, a man 
applies the same term fatz to his father and to his father’s 
brothers ; he applies the same term afu to his mother and 
to his mother’s sisters; he applies the same term azz to 
his own children and to the children of his brothers, but he 
applies quite a different term (wadwam) to the children of 
his sisters.* Thus a man may have and commonly has 
many “fathers” and “mothers” who neither begat nor bore 
him; he has many “sons” and “daughters,” some or all of 
whom he never begat. 

A man never mentioned the personal name of his father- 
in-law, his mather-in-law, his son-in-law, or his daughter-in- 
law, and a woman was subject to the same restrictions in 
regard to the personal names of her husband’s relations. 
If a man did use the personal name of his brother-in-law, 
he was ashamed and hung down his head. The shame was 
only relieved when he had made a present to his offended 
brother-in-law. He had to make similar presents for 

1 A. C. Haddon and W. H. R. 431 599.5 451 599-5 470 S9Q-5 540, 
Rivers, in Expedition to Torres Straits, 567. 
v. 181. 4 W. H. R. Rivers, in Expedition 

2 See above, p. 4. to Torres Straits, v. 129, 133, 134; 
3 See above, vol. i. pp. 427 5gg., 135, 141. 

v TOTEMISM IN TORRES STRAITS 17 

mentioning the personal names of his mother-in-law and 
his father-in-law, his sister-in-law, and his son-in-law and 
daughter-in-law. This disability to use the personal names 
of relatives by marriage was associated with the common 
custom which forbids a man or woman to speak to these 
relatives. If a man wished to speak to his father-in-law or 
mother-in-law, he spoke to his wife, and she spgke to her 
parent. But if any direct communication between them 
became absolutely necessary, it was said that a man might 
talk a very little to his father-in-law or mother-in-law in a 
low voice. On the same conditions he might be allowed Relations 
in case of necessity to speak a very little to his brother-in- Labia 
law. Sometimes the two communicated through the wife in-law. 
of one of them.! Nevertheless brothers-in-law were bound 
together by certain mutual obligations which rendered the 
tie between them a close one. For example, the chief 
performer at the death-ceremonies was the brother-in-law of 
the deceased ; and when a man went in his canoe on a 
fishing expedition, his brother-in-law had to go with him 
and perform certain definite duties, such as heaving the 
‘anchor, hoisting the sail, lighting the fire, and cooking the 
food, in fact he had to work very hard. Again, brothers- 
in-law had the privilege of wearing each other’s masks ; and 
further, if a number of canoes were going out to fight, and 
one man’s canoe turned back, his brothers-in-law would turn 
back also. In short, a man had the right to demand 
certain services from his brother-in-law. The whole group 
of customs may be a survival from a condition of society 
in which a man used to take up his abode with his wife's 
family and was bound to render them services. This 
custom of a husband living with his wife’s family is known 
among anthropologists as deena marriage and is naturally 
associated with the system of mother-kin. Thus the 
mutual obligations of brothers-in-law in the Western 
Islands of Torres Straits furnish another indication of a 
time when descent among these people was traced in the 
maternal instead of in the paternal line.” 

1W. H. R. Rivers, in Expedition 150. For other evidence of a former 
to Torres Straits, v. 142 Sq. custom of maternal descent in these 
2 W. H. R. Rivers, of. cet. v. 148- islands, see above, p. 15, note. In 

VOL. II Cc 

The 
Levirate. 

Exchange 
of sisters in 
marriage. 

There are 
signs that 
in Torres 
Straits 
totemism 
was de- 
veloping 
into a 
worship of 
heroes or 
gods. 

18 TFOFEMISM {N TORRES STRAITS . CHAP. 

A widow was not obliged to marry again, but if she did 
marry again she generally, at least in Mabuiag, followed 
the custom of the Levirate by marrying the brother of her 
deceased husband. That custom appears in Mabuiag to 
have been observed as a means of keeping the property 
within the clan ; for even when the brother of the deceased 
did not marry his widow, he still looked after her, the 
children, and the property.’ At all events the custom of the 
Levirate seems in these islands, as in Australia and Africa,’ 
to have no connection with polyandry; for there is no 
evidence that polyandry was ever practised in Torres Straits.* 

The practice of exchanging sisters in marriage was 
common in these islands, as it was among the aborigines 
of Australia. Indeed the genealogies seem to shew that 
in the Mabuiag-Badu community the majority of marriages 
were brought about by men giving their sisters to each 
other to be their wives. The natives apparently think that 
the practice originated in the custom of purchasing a wife ; 
for the price paid for a wife is high, and a poor man could 
avoid the expense by giving, or promising to give, his sister 
in marriage to his wife’s brother instead of a payment for 
his wife.* 

Although in the islands of Torres Straits the totems 
were not worshipped, as indeed they never are worshipped 
in true totemism, yet signs are not wanting that in this 
region the totemic system, if it had been left to itself, might 
have developed into a higher form of faith with anthropo- 
morphic heroes or gods in place of the old totem animals. 
Thus the people of Yam told the story and shewed the 
shrines of two brothers named Sigai and Maiau, who seem 
to have been hovering on the borderland between animals 
and men. The brethren, it is said, first appeared in the 
island in the likeness of a hammer-headed shark and a 
crocodile respectively. The natives went to receive them 

Ceylon when a wife goes to live with to Torres Straits, v. 244-246. 
her husband, it is a deega marriage; 

2 See ab I. i, p. 507. 
and when he goes to live with her, eet Pa 

it is a dcena marriage. See J. F. 3 W. H. R. Rivers, in Expedition 
McLennan, Studies in Ancient History + Torres Straits, v. 243. 
(London, 1886), p. 101. 4W. H. R. Rivers, of. cit. v. 

IW. H. R. Rivers, in Expedition 241 sg. 

v LOTEMISM IN TORRES STRAITS 19 

in two parallel columns, and each line of nen adopted one 

of the animal-shaped heroes as its collective totem (augud). 
Having received the august visitors they escorted them to a Shrinesand 
sacred place (kwod) of the men and there installed them in figies of 

7 : 2 Sigai and 

two shrines set side by side. The hallowed spot may Maiau, the 
still be seen about the middle of the island of Yam: it is eee ae 
in an open glade surrounded by rocks and trees. A fence shark and 
of mangrove stakes, with two doorways at one end, enclosed Pe Sa, 
a space of ground about thirty-three feet square. Within 

the enclosure were the two shrines, consisting of two long 

low huts with thatched roofs of palm leaves, each of them 

with an opening that faced towards one of the two doorways 

in the outer fence. Each hut was about twenty-five feet 

long by four feet wide and four and a half feet high. 
Within the two huts were two large models or images of 

the two totems (augud) made of turtle shell and representing 

a hammer-headed shark and a crocodile respectively. The 

tail of each of these effigies was supported by a forked 

stake, and on the back of each were a couple of crescentic 
objects made of turtle-shell and decorated with imitation 

eyes and a fringe of cassowary feathers, which simulated 
eyebrows. Several reddened rods, decorated with white 
feathers of the reef-heron and terminating in the red plumes 

of the bird-of-paradise, projected vertically from the image, 

while festoons of bird-of-paradise plumage, shells, and seed- 

rattles were stretched between the red rods. The figure of 

the crocodile was painted with yellow ochre, and the scales 

on its body were indicated. The hammer-headed shark 

was painted black on the back and white on the belly, and 

its body was further adorned with tufts of feathers of the 
bird-of-paradise. Under each of the two images was a 

stone in which the spirit of that particular totem (augud) 

was believed to reside, and outside of the sacred enclosure 

were two heaps of shells which were called the navels of 

the totems. The hammer-headed shark in the one hut 
represented the hero Sigai; the crocodile in the other hut 
represented the hero Maiau. So sacred were these two 
shrines with their images of a hammer-headed shark and a 
crocodile that no woman or other uninitiated person might 

visit them. Such persons had indeed heard of Sigai and 

Annual 
dances 

of the 
Shark men 
and the 
Crocodile 
men in 
honour 

of the 
Shark-hero 
and the 
Crocodile- 
hero, 

20 TOTEMISM IN TORRES STRAITS CHAP. 

Maiau, but they did not know that the former was a 
hammer-headed shark and the latter a crocodile; this 
mystery was too sacred to be disclosed to the uninitiated. 
Food used to be piled in two heaps on the ground, one for 
the shark and one for the crocodile; and every year, when 
the north-west monsoon was blowing, the men danced totem 
dances and sang, the men of the hammer-headed shark on 
one side and the men of the crocodile on the other, all of 
them painted with red paint and wearing coronets of 
feathers on their heads, but the feathers of the hammer- 
headed shark men were white, while the feathers of the 
crocodile men were black. They danced and sang at 
evening, several times during the darkness of night, and 
again when the day was breaking. As they sang they 
stretched out their arms, holding the palms outwards and 
moving the hands sideways. These songs brought fine 
weather, no matter whether the wind howled and the rain 
beat on the singers. The very same songs were sung by 
the men when they were going out to war. They danced 
and sang in all their warlike accoutrements, the men of the 
hammer-headed shark in one long file and the men of the 
crocodile in another, while the black and white plumage on 
their heads nodded to the wind. A few men danced ina 
third row for the sea-snake (ger), who had also a shrine 
within the sacred enclosure ; his shrine was a heap of Fusus 
shells with an image of the sea-snake on it, If any man 
fell asleep while the rest were dancing and singing, they 
poured water over him to rouse him from his slumber ; for 
it was believed that for every man that slept at such a time 
a man would be killed in the battle. By singing these 
songs on the holy ground the warriors fancied they would 
be able to go where they liked. When they were about to 
deliver an attack, they prayed,“O totem Sigai and totem 
Maiau, both of you close the eyes of those men so that they 
cannot see us.” After that the enemy were slaughtered 
like sheep, for they could not stand to their arms. 

° 
1A. C. Haddon, in EZxfedition to Religion of the Torres Straits Islanders,” 
Torres Straits, v. 64-66, 373-378; Anthropological Essays presented to 
td., Headhunters, Black, White, and £E. B. Tylor, p. 185. 
Brown, pp. 178-180; zd., ‘* The 

v TOTEMISM IN TORRES STRAITS 21 

Thus in the island of Yam the hammer-headed shark The 
and the crocodile seem to have been on the point of Fenn 
sloughing off their animal skins and developing into purely shark 
anthropomorphic heroes or gods, while in the food offered, ae 
the prayers prayed, the songs sung, and the dances danced seem to 
in their honour we see the rudiments of religious worship. 23"¢ been 
The sacred enclosure also with its shrines and images of point of 

the animal-shaped heroes is not far removed from a temple. {<vePing 
In these things and these customs we have passed beyond anthropo- 
the limits of true totemism and are standing on the aolaed 
borders as it were of a new country, in which we may 80ds.- 
descry afar off the beast-gods of ancient Egypt and still further 

away the human gods of Greece with their animal familiars. 

The stones too in which the souls of the shark-hero and 

the crocodile-hero were supposed to reside outside of their 

bodies have their analogies in the customs and the stories 

of many peoples.’ With these two stones, embodying the 

souls of the shark and the crocodile, may we not compare 

the sacred stones (churinga) of the Central Australians 

which are intimately associated both with the totem animals 

and with the souls of the men of the totem?” Such stones 

may perhaps form the missing link between the animals 

on the one side and their human kinsmen on the other. 

The island of Mabuiag had also its warrior-hero in the The 
person of Kwoiam. From the accounts given of him,4.°" 
this personage appears to have been an Australian by Kwoiam 
descent, either a pure-bred or a half-bred native of North oe 
Queensland, who so signalised himself by his prowess, that oa 
myths gathered round his memory, blurring and transfiguring chal = 
the man into a cloudy being of fairyland. He is said to 
have had for his totem the shovel-nosed skate or the 
shovel-nosed skate and the turtle. Moreover, he made 

1 «¢ The unique features of the totem 
cult of Yam were the representation of 
the augud in a definite image, each of 
which was lodged in its own house, 
and the presence of a stone beneath 
each effigy in which resided the life of 
the augud. I believe this materialisa- 
tion of a totem has not been met with 
elsewhere and is so important a 
development of totemism as practically 
to place it beyond the realm of true 

totemism. The animal kindred are now 
replaced by a definite effigy, the soul 
of which is kept in an external recep- 
tacle, and the effigy is further associated 
with a hero” (A. C. Haddon, in 
Expedition to Torres Straits, v. 397 
sg.). As to the customs and stories 
of the external soul, see Zhe Golden 
Bough,? iii. 351 sgq. 

2 See above, vol. i. pp. 189, 193 
59g. 

Shrine of 
the two 
magical 
crescents. 

22 TOTEMISM IN TORRES STRAITS CHAP. 

two crescents of turtle-shell, which he fed with the savour 
of cooked fish, and which blazed with light when he 
wore them in the dark. These crescents were made by 
Kwoiam one night at the new moon, and their shape was 
copied by him from the silver crescent in the sky. One° 
of them he wore on his upper lip and the other on his 
chest, and adorned with them he capered about, brandish- 
ing his javelin and throwing-stick and chanting a song. 
The crescents possessed magical properties: they led the 
wearer straight to the enemy and gave him the victory. 
Both of them were called augud, which was the name 
regularly given to a totem, and they became the emblems 
respectively of the two classes or phratries into which the 
totem clans of Mabuiag were divided. The Children of 
the Great Totem, who formed one of these classes or 
phratries, had for their emblem the turtle-shell crescent 
which Kwoiam wore on his lip, for that was deemed the 
more important cf the two; while the Children of the Little 
Totem. had for their emblem the crescent which Kwoiam 
wore on his breast, because that was reckoned the less 
important of the two. These two precious objects were 
kept in a cave in the sacred isle of Pulu, a little rocky 
islet on the reef to the west of Mabuiag. Dense bushes 
and rocks of fantastic shapes surround and lend an air 
of mystery to this most hallowed spot, where, in the 
recesses of the cavern, were stored not only the magical 
crescents but also the heads of all the men, women, and 
children who had been slain in war. Each crescent was 
deposited, along with a star-shaped stone-headed .club, in 
a large basket full of skulls. These grinning trophies were 
usually painted red, and some of them had artificial noses 
made of beeswax and eyes made of the opalescent nacre of 
the nautilus shell. More skulls were also piled in the 
inner corners of the cave. The men of the two classes or 
phratries vied with each other in their efforts to procure the 
skulls of enemies for the sacred basket in which their 
particular crescent, the emblem or ensign of their class, was 
kept. When it was deemed necessary to strengthen the 
magical virtue of the two crescents, they were placed on two 
heaps of Fusus shells which were called “ the large navel of the 

v TOTEMISM IN TORRES STRA{TS 23 

totem ” (avgud) and “the small navel of the totem” (augud) 
respectively. These heaps, however, were not at the cave 
but at a meeting-place (Awod) of the men beside the shore 
of the sacred isle. Like the ark of God, the two magical The two 
‘crescents were carried forth to war and inspired their ™s!! 

crescents 
votaries with hopes of victory. Before the expedition set were 

out, the sacred emblems were washed and decorated with (7n°*, 
red paint, flowers, and cassowary feathers. The headmen war and 
of the two classes or phratries bore each the particular pate 4 
crescent that belonged to his class, the one wearing it over pence 
his mouth and the other on his chest. Thus arrayed they totemic 
marched at the head of their respective columns. They eae 
might neither speak nor be spoken to. Behind them came them 
two men who touched the leaders with an arrow, if they ae. 
took the wrong road. The augud had to be treated with 
respect. We hear of a certain man who in the excess of his 

zeal outran the column of warriors, but he stumbled and 
almost broke his leg because he went in front of the holy 

relics, which ought always to lead the way. The possession 

of these magical emblems had a great effect in raising the 
spirits of the men; indeed without them they hardly dared 

to fight. Thus the crescents were in a sense the standards 

of the two groups or classes of totem clans and led them to 
battle. The hero Kwoiam, who made them, was sometimes 
spoken of in Mabuiag as himself an augud or totem; 
indeed in the group of islands round Muralug he was 
regarded as the “big augud” and even as “the augud of 

every one in the island.” On his death he was raised by 

the people of Mabuiag to something that approached to the 

rank of divinity, and there and in the islands to the south 

he is still held in honour; even the natives of Cape York 
peninsula in Queensland still speak of Kwoiam.' 

The ruins of Kwoiam’s house are shewn in Mabuiag Scenes 
near the top of a hill, and on the other side of the crest, cae hi 
looking westward towards the sacred isle of Pulu, is the legend of 
low cairn that marks his grave. To this day the leaves of *¥°i™. 

1 Expedition to Torres Straits, v. 4 ‘*The Religion of the Torres Straits 
59.5 70 59-5 79 599-5 153 5g.) 367-3733; Islanders,” Anthropological Essays 
A. C. Haddon, Headhunters, Black, presented to E. B. Tylor, p. 184, 
White, and Brown, pp. 136-147 ; td., 

A far- 
spreading. 
landscape. 

Seeds 
of heroic 
fables. 

24 TOTEMISM IN TORRES STRAITS CHAP. V 

the bushes that grow on the hillside are dyed red with his 
sacred blood. The hill-top commands a fine view of the 
scenes associated with his legend and of the neighbouring 
islands. It was visited by Dr. Haddon, who has rescued 
the dusky hero and his story from oblivion. He has 
described for us the far-spreading landscape that met his 
gaze. Below him stretched a grassy plain studded with 
pandanus and other trees where Kwoiam was born and 
where he had his gardens, the gardens that are now tilled 
by alien hands. Far way beside the sea, under the shadow 
of a grove of palms, appeared the village with its church, 
telling of altered times. Further off, bounded on the north 
by wooded hills, was spread out. the pale green water of the 
bay, fringed with white where the surf broke in foam on the 
sands, but passing into caerulean blue where it deepened 
beyond the bounding reef into the open sea. From the 
brilliant colouring of the foreground, where the red rocks and 
verdant foliage of the palms and gardens contrasted with the 
sear hues of the parched plain and the peacock tints of the 
bay, the eye ranged away over a waste of waters to where, 
far in the south, the long serrated crest of the islands of 
Moa and Badu rose up against the sky and all colour was 
lost in the dull monotonous grey of a moisture - laden 
atmosphere.’ 

Thus in these Western Islands of Torres Straits we 
may detect, amid the ruins of totemism, the seeds of a 
mythology which might in time have grown up and 
blossomed into a body of heroic legends and divine fables 
like those which still invest with an eternal charm the 
mountains and islands of Greece. 

1A, C, Haddon, Meadhunters, 147; Expedition to Torres Straits, 
Black, White, and Brown, pp. 144" 82 sg. 

PR 

A 

ee Ry 
e OF rue @ 
w BOMBAY wp 
© BRANCH & 
% OF THR RY 
BT EA 

CHAPTER .VI 
TOTEMISM IN NEW GUINEA 

WHEN we pass from Torres Straits to the great island of Totemism 
New Guinea which bounds them on the north, we still meet Say 
with a combination of totemism and exogamy like that in New 
which we have found in Australia and in the Western Islands @""** 
of Torres Straits. Unfortunately our information with 
regard to the totemic and exogamous systems of New 
Guinea is very meagre; it is probable that the systems are 

much more widely spread there than appears from the brief 

and scanty notices of them which are all that we have to 

hand at present. We must hope that future researches will 
supply the many blanks in our knowledge of these interesting 

tribes. 

§ 1. ZYotemism at Mawatta in Daudat 

On the southern coast of New Guinea, in the western Mt. Beard- 
part of British territory, totemism has been observed in the PS, | 
tribe which inhabits the village of Mawatta (Mowat) on the totemismat 
river Katau, in the district of Daudai. The first to report “*™*"* 
their totemic system was Mr. Edward Beardmore, who says: 

“The Mowat tribe is divided into different clans each 
having its own totem, the animal being held sacred and the 
flesh not partaken of by the members of that clan. A 
representation of the totem is not cut on any part of either 
men or women, but the latter have some mark made to 
denote the clan. ... The child is named by the father 
with one name only, ‘according to his fancy, without any 
regard to his tribe or family.” “Everything is eaten with- 

1 ¥, Beardmore, ‘“‘The Natives of of the Anthropological Institute, xix. 
Mowat, Daudai, New Guinea,” Journal (1890) p. 459. 

25 

Marriage 
customs. 

Exchange 
of sisters in 
marriage. 

Mr. Hely’s 
account of 
totemismat 
Mawatta. 

26 TOTEMISM IN NEW GUINEA CHAP. 

out regard to persons or occasions, except the flesh of the 
porpoise. The porpoise is no more sacred than anything 
else ; souls of the departed having it as a totem enter into 
it only in the same way as souls of others go into other 
animals.”! “There appears to be no restriction as to 
marriage within or without the same tribe or clan. Adultery 
is commonly though not openly practised. I cannot find 
out for a certainty what are the forbidden degrees of con- 
sanguinity in relation to marriage, but as far as practicable 
the members of one family or descendants of one forefather, 
however remote, may not intermarry. Polygamy, but not 
polyandry, is practised: their reason for this custom is that 
the women do the principal part of the work in procuring 
vegetable or fish food. Marriage is arranged by the 
respective parents when the children are growing up, or in 
infancy and by exchange, thus :—if a man has sisters and 
no brother he can exchange a sister for a wife, but in the 
case of both brothers and sisters in a family the eldest 
brother exchanges the eldest sister, and the brothers as they 
are old enough share equally, but if the numbers are unequal 
the elder takes the preference. It sometimes happens that 
a man has no sister and he cannot obtain a wife. Some- 
times a wife is procured by purchase. It may also happen 
that a woman will have the man of her choice in spite of 
all laws to the contrary. The wife goes to the husband’s 
house. . . . Men do not exchange wives. A widow becomes 
the wife of the deceased husband’s brother. A man may 
not look at nor speak to his mother-in-law.” * 

A fuller account of totemism in the Mawatta (Mowat) 
tribe was afterwards obtained by Mr. B. A. Hely, who gives 
the name of the tribe as Kadawarubi, that is, “the men 
(arubi) of Kadawa.”* He found nine septs or totem clans 
among the people, of which the totems were as follows :— 

1 E, Beardmore, of. cit. p. 462. 

2 E. Beardmore, of. czt. pp. 460 
sg. The writer’s account of the ex- 
change of sisters in marriage is far 
from clear. For Mr. Hely’s account 
of the custom, see below, pp. 28 sg. 

3B, A. Hely, ‘Totemism of the 
Kadawarubi Tribe,” in Appendix CC 

to Annual Report on New Guinea, 
1897-1898 (Brisbane, 1898), p. 136. 
Mr. Hely’s account is reprinted with 
additions in Reports of the Cambridge 
Anthropological Expedition to Torres 
Straits, volume v. Sociology, Magic and 
Religion of the Western Islanders, pp. 
187 sq. 

VI TOTEMISM AT MAWATTA IN DA UDAI 27 

Cassowary (d/ware). 
Alligator (Z2bara). 
Dog (um). 
Tortoise (Zomoa). 
Rock snake (gera). 

Shark (dazdamu). 
Kangaroo (usara). 
Stinging ray (‘opzmoro). 
Ground shark (Zomuhoro). 

The researches of Dr. C. G. Seligmann have since 
extended the list, for in addition to the foregoing he 
discovered a number of other totems as follows :—! 

Banded sea snake (odofera), 

A plant with edible tubers 
(¢omant). 

A swamp tree (fae). 

A particular kind of banana 
(tbubz). 

A plant like a yam (audt). 

Dugong (#omoro). 

A marsupial (apatir2). 

A fish (2uez2). 

Sago (do), 

A fruit (Azbuomere). 

Hawk? (wario). 

Bamboo (gagarz). 

A creeper or parasite (omere), 
Pig (40romo). 

A shell, Zrzton sp. (¢uture). 
A fish (d¢dar2), 

A red fruit (Aakiwar2). 
Catfish (duon0), 

Coconut (02). 

The following is Mr. Hely’s account of Mawatta totemism: Respect for 
—“The people may neither kill nor eat their totems. Many ‘he !etems: 
village squabbles arise from the killing of the totem of 
one sept by the people of another. A man killing a 
kangaroo, for instance, and carrying it past a house inhabited 
by people of the kangaroo sept, may be reviled or insulted 
in some way. His friends side with him, and a general 
slanging match ensues, and often sticks and stones are 
resorted to. The septs have always intermarried; the Rules of 

° ° wise e marriage 
parties to a marriage, however, retaining their own totems, ang 
but observing each other’s to some extent. For instance, descent. 
a woman of one sept marrying a man of another sept may 
not eat his totem or handle it. If she does so he will not 
use food prepared by her, nor cohabit with her for a period. 

In the same way the husband must not eat or kill the wife’s 
totem under similar penalties.”* From a later statement of 

Mr. Hely’s it appears that 

1 For this list and other particulars 
as to Mawatta totemism I am in- 
debted to the kindness of Dr. C. G. 
Seligmann, who liberally placed his 
manuscript materials at my disposal. 

2B. A. Hely, ‘*Totemism of the 

in saying “The septs have 

Kadawarubi Tribe,” in Appendix CC 
to Annual Report on New Guinea, 
1897-1898 (Brisbane, 1898), p. 136; 
Reports of the Cambridge Anthropo- 
logical Expedition to Torres Straits, 
v. 187. 

Communal 
houses. 

Exchange 
of sisters in 
marriage, 

28 TOTEMISM IN NEW GUINEA CHAP. 

always intermarried” he meant to affirm that the men and 
women of the same clan were free to marry each other, in 
other words, that the rule of exogamy did not apply to the 
totem clans; he supposed that the people, “being so much 
advanced in civilisation, have broken through old laws relat- 
ing to marriage.” But this statement was contradicted by 
the informants of the Cambridge Anthropological Expedition, 
who distinctly declared that “members of’the same clan (gw) 
may not intermarry as ‘belong same family, but they may 
marry into any other ‘family.””! According to Mr. Hely, 
“totems are hereditary: an only child invariably follows his 
father’s totem. Where there are two or more children they 
may be divided between the septs of their parents.” But 
the members of the Cambridge Anthropological Expedition 
were told that children follow the totem (zdzhara) of their 
father only.2, “Of old each sept lived under one roof; this 
accounts in a way for the size of the original houses of these 
people. There appears not to be, nor to have been, any 
punishment for wrongful assumption of a totem—-probably 
the necessity never arose. In battle and dance, members of 
various septs painted effigies of their totems on their backs 
and chests for the guidance of their fellows should aid or 
attention be needed. No permanent totem marks a 
carried. All the septs appear to be equal, none being of 
more importance or distinction than others.” ® 

In this tribe we are told that “it is a fixed law that the 
bridegroom’s sister, if he has one unmarried, should go to 
the bride’s brother or nearest male relative; she has no 
option. . . . Except in cases where the bridegroom has no 
sister no payment is made to the parents of the bride until 
a child is born, when the husband presents his wife’s father 
with a canoe or arm-shells, tomahawks, etc. . .. In these 
comparatively civilised days at Mawatta and elsewhere, it 
is becoming customary for men and women to marry 

+ 

1 Reports oy the Cambridge Anthro- 
pological Expedition to Torres Straits, 
v. 187 sg. The members of the ex- 
pedition were also told that people 
now eat their own totem (zb¢hara or 
ebéhart). 

2 Reports of the Cambridge Anthro- 

pological Expedition to Torres Straits, 
vy. 188, 

3 B. A. Hely, in Annual Report on 
New Guinea, 1897-1898 (Brisbane, 
1898), p. 136; za., in Reports of the 
Cambridge Anthropological Expedition 
to Torres Straits, v. 188. 

VI TOTEMISM AT MAWATTA IN DAUDAI 29 

without the exchange of sisters or payment. The customs 
above stated, however, generally prevail in the district.” + 

The members of the Cambridge Anthropological Expe- 
dition learned that in the Mawatta tribe the totem clans 
appear to be grouped in two classes or phratries, of which 
the one has for its chief totem the crocodile (Azéara) and the 
other the cassowary (ad¢warz), A man told them that his 
father’s totems were cassowary and doy, and that his 
mother’s were crocodile and shark, and he volunteered the 
information, that the former totems “stop ashore,” while the 
latter “stop in water.” Associated with the crocodile are 
also komuhoro (described as “crank shark”) and a small 
insect afzdz. At Mawatta two fences are erected for the 
ceremonies of initiation, one fence for the Crocodile-Shark 
group of clans and the other for the Cassowary-Dog group 
of clans. The women sit on one side of the fence and the 
boys to be initiated (Zerenga) on the other. The ceremonies 
last three days. No bull-roarers are used. The boys are 
told about their totems, and masks of turtle-shell, representing 
human faces, are shewn to them. When a Dog (amu) man 
goes out to fight, he ties a red poisonous seed round his 
neck, and paints in white mud a representation of his totems 
the cassowary and the tortoise on his right and left chest 
respectively.” 

From the foregoing account we gather that the 
Kadawarubi tribe of Mawatta (Mowat) is divided into a 
number of totem clans, which are perhaps exogamous, with 
descent in the male line, and further that these clans are 
grouped in two classes or phratries. Moreover, it appears 
that in this tribe men and women may have several totems, 
ahd that husband and wife respect each other’s totems in 
addition to their own. 

The totemic system of Mawatta was again investigated 
by Dr. C. G. Seligmann during a short visit in the year 1904, 
and he has’kindly communicated to me the following parti- 
culars on the subject. The members of a totem clan have 

1 B. A. Hely, ‘‘ Native Habits and bane, 1894), p. 57. 
Customs in the Western Division,” 2 Reports of the Cambridge Anthro- 
Appendix P to Annual Report on pological Expedition to Torres Straits, 
British New Guinea, 1892-1893 (Bris- vv. 188. 

Totem 
clans 
grouped 
in two 
classes or 
phratries. 

Dr. Selig- 
mann’s 
informa- 
tion as to 
totemism at 
Mawatta. 

Respect 
shewn 
for the 
totemic 
animal. 

Associated 
totems at 
Mawatta. 

30 TOTEMISM IN NEW GUINEA CHAP, 

a number of totems, usually, if not always, animals and one 
or two plants. A man objects to the killing of his totem 
animal by others and would protest against it; he would 
“bury”? his totem if he found it dead, but would not put 
earth on his head as a sign of mourning. One trustworthy 
native informant would not “bury” a dead alligator, if he 
saw one, though he would be sorry. Another informant, 
whose chief totem was the dog, would “ bury” a dead dog if 
he found one, and would go away if he saw any one killing 
or eating a dog, or he might perhaps threaten to kill the 
other man’s totem. “TI believe,” says Dr. Seligmann, “ these 
rules only applied to the most important totems, which, as 
far as I could ascertain, were always animals. Certainly 
men with sago and coconut as their totems eat these 
important articles of diet, but a man from Sumai with 
sago as his totem said that he would not use this for 
house-building ; he would use the za palm _ instead. 
Apparently all totems are called murumara. No one 
would eat his own principal totem, but a man has no 
objection to eating the totem of his wife, and in this case 
it is cooked by a friend or by another wife, not by the 
owner of the totem. The wife would, however, be angry 
and refuse to permit cohabitation that night ; after a wash 
on the following day the ordinary relations would be 
resumed. On the other hand a woman who ate her 
husband’s totem would not only be debarred from co- 
habitation, but might not use her husband’s drinking 
vessels.” 

Thus at Mawatta each person, man or woman, had several 
totems associated together ina group. Amongst such groups 
of associated totems found by Dr. Seligmann were: 1. Alli- 
gator, shark, bamboo; 2. Dog, a creeper (omere), and a kind 
of banana (2dubu); 3. Cassowary, tortoise, bamboo, a red fruit 
and a shell; 4. Sting-ray, rock-snake, ground-shark, banded 
sea-snake, and a plant with edible tubers; 5. Dog, kangaroo, 
a fruit, and a kind of banana; 6. Dog, kangaroo, a marsupial, 
a creeper, a fruit, and coconut; 7. Alligator, shark, catfish, 
pig, and sago. In each group the first totem is the most 
important. Alligator and shark were always associated, but 

1 Dr. Seligmann does not know how the people dispose of their dead. 

VI TOTEMISM AT MAWATTA IN DAUDAI 31 

the plants associated with these animal totems varied. It 
appears that a person might have a large number of associated 
totems which were of comparatively little importance. With 
the possible exceptions of the coconut and sago, which were 
staple foods, the animal totem was far more important than 
the plant totem ; and when a man was asked for his urumara 
he always mentioned his animal totem. 

Dr. Seligmann agrees with Messrs. Beardmore and Hely Marriage 
in finding no clear evidence that the totem clans at Mawatta \raenm, 
were exogamous. On this subject he observes : “ Apparently 
there is no hard and fast rule about marriage within the 
totem clan. A man, Tom Turubi, with totems Azbara, baidam, 
do and éorvemo, married Soimu of %zbara with the same sub- 
sidiary totems; Banasi of Azbara, baidam and several other 
(probably the same) subsidiary totems married Moeru with 
the same totems. In neither case was any disapproval 
expressed by other tribesmen, but it appeared to me that this 
practice was an innovation. There is a vague aetiological 
legend according to which the people of old Mawatta long, 
long ago collected everything in piles, and each of them 
selected or had selected for them certain things which they 
might not eat and which became their nurumara.” 

Further, men who had sago for their totem performed Magical _ 
magical ceremonies to make the sago palm flourish, in order (Tipe 
that its fruit might be eaten. Thus these rites for the pro- sago grow 
duction of sago were strictly analogous to the magical 
ceremonies called intichtuma, which the natives of Central 
Australia perform for the multiplication of their edible 
totems, whether animals or plants. And similarly it 
would seem that Mawatta men who had coconuts for 
their totem performed magical rites to make coconuts grow 
and multiply. On this interesting subject I will reproduce 
Dr. Seligmann’s account in his own words :— 

“An old man Duani with coconut as one of his totems 
(who in old days would not have eaten his animal totem 
the wallaby) ate coconut as he pleased. Men with sago 
as totem would eat sago and make all the preparations for 
eating it, including cutting down the tree. It was believed 
that sago planted by a sago man grew better than other 
sago. Perhaps the feeling was that the sago man knew 

Story of 
the sago 
man who 
made sago 
to grow by 
his magic. 

32 TOTEMISM IN NEW GUINEA CHAP, 

more about sago and the necessary ritual, which included 
the placing of a magic mixture of ‘grass’ ash and burnt 
pig’s snout in the hole in which the young sago shoots 
were to be planted. Probably this proceeding was entirely 
magical; for I gathered that the quantity of the mixture 
used was too small to allow of its being effective as manure; 
and it was said that only men having sago as a totem knew 
all about this method. I could not determine whether sago 
men would perform this magic for others, though it was 
held that there was a form of magic which sago men would 
practise for the benefit of the gardens of others. No one 
would be told that this was being done; but when the sago 
grows well, the people know that the sago men have been 
looking after their gardens. The ceremony was performed 
at Kiwai,! but made the sago grow all over the district. 
Details were not obtainable, 

“The ceremony in the case of the coconut was purely 
magical; a bush fruit (obutoma) was rubbed against the 
sprouting nut before it was planted. 

“The following refers to sago magic. Segera of Sumai 
in Kiwai, a man with ;sago as one of his totems, lost his 
son, whose death was ascribed to magic. He was ‘wild’ 
and caused all the sago in the district to be bad, while 
the coconut palms bore no fruit. But in his own garden 
at Sumai the sago was good and his house Boromo Tuburu 
was not hungry, while all others suffered from lack of food. 
The influence of his magic spread as far as Bugi and many 
people died; but Debiri had plenty of sago, for there it is 
not planted but grows wild. Then the people went to 
Segera and asked him to make things go right, for many 
people had died. And Segera was sorry for what he had 
done, and went round the country planting one sago shoot 
in each garden; and all the sago grew well and there was 
no more famine. When Segera was old and ill he told 
his people he thought he would soon die. ‘This year I 
finish; I make your gardens good’; and he instructed 
them that when he was dead they were to cut him up 
and place pieces of his flesh in their gardens, but his head 
was to be buried in his own garden. By his own instruc- 

. ’ 
1 Kiwai is an island to the eastward of Mawatta. See below, pp. 35 599. 

VI TOTEMISM AT MAWATTA IN DAUDAI 33 

tions .his body was taken into the bush to be cut up. Of 
Segera it is said that he outlived the ordinary age and that 
no man knew his father, but that he made the sago good 
and no one was hungry any more. 

“It was clear that sago ‘medicine’ was especially 
associated with Kiwai, where sago grows luxuriantly ; for 
Segera was a Kiwai man, and when my informants told 
me of the pig-snout and ashes mixture used to medicine 
the sago shoots they especially requested me not to let 
the Kiwai men know that they had given me_ this 
information. Again, some of my informants thought that 
the unknown magic already referred to, which makes the 
sago grow, was performed at Kiwai. A few of the oldest 
men said that they had known Segera in their youth, and 
the general opinion seemed to be that Segera died not more 
than two generations ago.” 

The people of Mawatta, like the Papuans of New Analogy 
Guinea in general, are far beyond the Australian abori- penal 
gines in respect of culture, for they build large com- rites to the 
munal houses and till the ground, turning it up with T3sca 
hoes.! Yet side by side with a rational agriculture they performed 
practise magical ceremonies to promote the growth of aan 
fruits. These ceremonies they may well have inherited Australians. 
from ancestors who, like the Central Australian savages, 
resorted to magic, and to magic alone, for the purpose 
of stimulating the growth of edible plants. We need 
hardly doubt that Segera of Sumai, in Kiwai, who had 
sago for his totem and performed magical ceremonies to 
make the sago palms bear fruit, was a real personage, 
and that at his death his body was actually cut up and the 

1 E. Beardmore and A. C. Haddon, 
“‘ The People of Mowat, Daudai, New 
Guinea,” Journal of the <Anthropo- 

weapons are the bow and arrow 
with flint heads. Excellent boat- 
builders, they merely do a coasting 

logical Institute, xix. (1890) pp. 462, 
463, 468. As to the culture of the 
Papuans in general, see J. Deniker, 
The Races of Van (Paris, 1900), p. 
497: “The Papuans are tillers of 
the soil, and especially cultivate sago, 
maize, and tobacco; occasionally they 
are hunters and fishers, and are then 
very adroit in laying snares and 
poisoning waters; their favourite 

VOL, Il 

trade, and while understanding well 
how to handle a sail, rarely ever 
venture into the open sea. Graphic 
arts are developed among them.” Dr. 
C. G. Seligmann tells me that he 
believes Mr. Deniker to be mistaken 
as to the use of arrows with flint 
heads; no such arrows, he informs 
me, have yet been found in any part 
of British New Guinea. 

D 

Magical 
use of bull- 
roarers to 
make the 
yams grow, 

Initiation 
ceremonies. 

Traces of 
totemism 
among the 
Bugilai. 

34 TOTEMISM IN NEW GUINEA CHAP, 

pieces distributed in the gardens to fertilise them. Many 
examples of the use of human flesh to fertilise the fields 
might be cited from the practices of savages.’ The treat- 
ment of the sago man’s body after death resembles the 
treatment of the body of Osiris in the ancient Egyptian 
legend, and the analogy serves to confirm the view, which 
I have suggested elsewhere, that the Egyptian legend 
preserves a reminiscence of a dynasty of deified kings, 
who in their lifetime were supposed to quicken the growth 
of the corn by their magic, and whose bodies after death 
were cut up and distributed over the fields in order to 
promote the same useful object.? 

The people of Mawatta also resort to magic to make 
the yams grow. After a new garden has been made, they 
swing a bull-roarer (wadubu) on the morning and evening 
of the day when the yams are dug in; and they swing it 
again when the sticks are being put in to support the 
climbing tendrils of the plants. Women may not see the 
bull-roarer, but they may hear its booming sound. If 
the bull-roarers were not thus swung, the people think 
that the gardens would not be fruitful.2 However, we are 
not told that this ceremony for promoting the growth 
of yams is performed by men who have the yam for their 
totem. 

Initiation ceremonies (moguru) are performed on boys 
at puberty, but they seem not to be very closely associated 
with the totems. Dr. Seligmann’s informants agreed that 
the boys knew all about their totems before they were 
initiated. 

§ 2. Totemism of the Bugilat and Toro 

On the south coast of New Guinea, to the west of 
Daudai, there is a tribe called the Bugilai, whose country, 
distant some sixteen miles from Dauan, lies about 142° 30’ 
of East Longitude. The following brief account of their 
“gods” and “ families,’ which we owe to the late Rev. 
James Chalmers, seems to shew that the Bugilai have 

1 The Golden Bough, Second Edition (London, 1907), pp. 330 s¢g. 
Edition, ii. 237 s¢¢. 3 From Dr, C. G. Seligmann’s 
2 Adonis, Attis, Ostris, Second notes. 

VI TOTEMISM OF THE BUGILAI AND TORO 35 

totemism. “They have many gods, One family will make 
the crocodile its god, and they will on no account eat any part 
of it. When they can secure a small one alive, it is carried 
to where they are living, and presents of food and things 
are laid down beside it. It is the same with the kangaroo. 
The family, whose god it is, will not touch it; and so with 
the other animals and birds.”? 

Still further west, on the Bensbach River, which marks Totemism 
the boundary between British and Dutch New Guinea, there foo” as 
is a tribe called the Toro, who are described by Dr. C. G. 
Seligmann as “a totemistic folk, with descent of the totems 
in the male line. Perhaps the majority of the totems are 
birds. A number of palm-wood bull-roarers were collected, 
but we could learn nothing about their use.”? Among their 
totems are the crocodile, pig, turtle, cassowary and other 
birds, a number of fish, and certain edible plants, such as a 
species of mangrove and a yam-like tuber. Dr. Seligmann 
believes that each person has several totems and that one of 
them is very much more important than the rest. A man 
should not eat his totems, but this rule does not apply to 
certain edible plants. No man may marry a woman of 
the same totem clan as his own, and children belong to 
the clan of their father. Boys have to pass through cere- 
monies of initiation at which bull-roarers are swung and 
pigs sacrificed.* 

§ 3. Totemism in Kiwai 

Totemism has further been observed in Kiwai, a long, The people 
ae : : of Kiwai 
low, swampy and malarial island, little above sea-level, which jive in jong 

lies off the mouth of the Fly River in Southern New Guinea. pores and 
The native inhabitants of the island differ somewhat from theeroands 
the Torres Straits Islanders in appearance and customs ; 
their skin is a very little lighter and their nose more arched ; 
they do not use ceremonial masks except for the last stage 
of initiation, and they build long houses. They are not 
hunters, but everywhere cultivate the soil, raising crops of 
1 J. Chalmers, “Notes on the geographical Investigations in New 
Bugilai, British New Guinea,” Journal Guinea,” Zhe Geographical Journal, 
of the Anthropological Institute, xxxiii, xxvii. (1906) p. 229. 
(1903) p. 109. 3 From Dr. C. G. Seligmann’s 
2C¢. G. Seligmann, ‘Anthropo- notes. 

Totem 
clans 
among the 
people of 
Kiwai. 

Unusually 
large 
number 

of plant 
totems. 

Respect 
shewn for 
the totems, 

36 TOTEMISM IN NEW GUINEA CHAP. 

taro, yams, and sweet potatoes, and possessing coco-nut- 
palms, bread-fruit, mango, and many other fruit-trees. Dr. 
Haddon thinks it probable that these people came down the 
Fly River and drove some at least of the aborigines out 
before them.’ Accordingly, though they inhabit an island, 
their totemic system may fitly be described along with that 
of the mainland of New Guinea. 

The people of Kiwai are divided into a number of 
exogamous totem clans with descent in the paternal line. 
The following clan totems have been recorded :—* 

Cassowary. 
Crocodile (alligator). 

A reed (dudumabu). 
Pandanus (duboro-mabu). 

A small variety of bamboo (gagari- Stone. 

mabu). A tree (mabere-urit). 
A crab (which lives in the nipa- Nipa-palm. 

palm). A species of fig-tree (Juduri). 
Mangrove. Croton or dracaena (050). 
Catfish. Coco-nut-palm (02). 

Polynesian chestnut. 

In this list the number of plant totems is unusually large 
compared to that of animal totems. One of the animal 
totems (the crab) is even associated with a plant totem (the 
nipa-palm), apparently as a subsidiary totem with a chief 
totem.’ Yet the large number of vegetable totems will not 
surprise us when we remember that these people, in contrast 
to the Australian savages, subsist not by hunting but by 
agriculture. The native name for a totem in Kiwai is 
nurumara, People may not kill nor eat their totems. 
When a tree is the totem of a clan, the members of the clan 
do not eat the fruit of the tree nor use its wood for building 
or for any other purpose. For example, people who have 
the nipa-palm for their totem roof their houses with sago 
leaves instead of with nipa-palm leaves; people of the 

1A, C. Haddon, Headhunters, p. 135; A. C. Haddon, Headhunters, 

Black, White, and Brown, pp. 96, 
101; J. Chalmers, ‘‘ Notes on the 
Natives of Kiwai Island, Fly River,” 
Journal of the Anthropological Institute, 
xxxiii. (1903) pp. 117-124. 

2B. A. Hely, ‘‘Totemism, Pede- 
darimu Tribe (Kiwai Island),” in Ap- 
pendix CC to Annual Report on New 
Guinea, 1897-1898 (Brisbane, 1898), 

Black, White, and Brown, pp. io! sg. 3 
Reports of the Cambridge Anthropo- 
logical Expedition to Torres Straits, v. 
189. The two last totems on the list 
(croton or dracaena and coco-nut-palm) 
are given by Dr. Haddon alone. 

3 A. C. Haddon, Headhunters, 
Black, White, and Brown, p. 102. 

VI TOTEMISM IN KIWAI 37 

Pandanus clan make mats out of banana leaves instead of 
out of pandanus leaves ; and people of the Bamboo clan do 
not use bamboos, They think that to kill, eat, or use their 
totem for any purpose would cause severe eruptions on 
their bodies. Children inherit their father’s totem, and a Rules of 
wife assumes her husband’s totem. People of the same ere 
totem clan may not marry each other; they must always descent. 
find their wives or husbands, as the case may be, in another 
clan. A wife goes and lives with her husband in his clan 
house. For each clan inhabits a large house of its own: 
none but members of the clan may eat or sleep in it. In 
fighting or dancing a figure of the totem is painted on 
a man’s back or chest with clay or coloured earth, and it 
may be carved on objects or otherwise used as a sort of 
crest. It was a fixed law in battle that no man should Friendly 
attack or slay another who bore the same totemic crest as ane 
himself. Strangers from other and even hostile tribes could persons of 
safely visit villages where there were clans with the same {ce 
totems as their own; for such visitors would be fed and 
lodged by the men of their totem." 

The largest village of Kiwai is Iasa. Here there are Large 
sixteen large houses, each occupied by the members of one ¢ommun” 

houses, 
clan only, though occasionally a clan may have more than each 

one house. Some of the houses are permanently occupied rae tie 
by the natives of the district; others belong to natives of ‘lan. 
other districts who only occupy their houses at Iasa during 

a part of the year. For the population of Kiwai is more or 
less migratory, living at different times in different places 
according to the crops or harvests. For example, the 
natives of the southern part of the island congregate at Iasa 
annually for two or three months to cut sago, and this 
affords an opportunity for celebrating the rites of initiation, 
which in Kiwai seem to be associated with agriculture. 
Thus at one time of the year Iasa may be thickly peopled, 
while at another time it is nearly empty. Moreover, some 

of the clans appear not to have houses at the village. Each 

1B, A. Hely, ‘*Totemism, Pede- pp. 134 sy.; A. C. Haddon, of. cit. 
darimu Tribe (Kiwai Island)” in Ap- pp. 101-103; Reforts of the Cantbridge 
pendix CC to Annual Report on New Anthropological Expedition to Torres 
Guinea, 1897-1898 (Brisbane, 1898), Straits, v. 189 sg. 

Ceremonies 
at initiation 
performed 
to ensure 
good crops. 

38 TOTEMISM IN NEW GUINEA CHAP. 

clan house has its headman, who is supreme in it; and each 
clan house in a village formed, as it were, a separate state. 
Fights between the houses, in other words, between the 
clans, used to be common occurrences. But when the 
whole village or tribe was engaged in war with another 
village or another tribe, the command was entrusted to that 
man amongst the heads of houses who had most experience 
and the highest reputation. In time of peace these heads 
of houses neither had nor attempted to exercise any influence 
outside of their own clan. Each family has its own separate 
compartment, with its own separate fireplace, in the long 
central portion of the clan house; and at each end of the 
house is a room which is set apart for the use of the men, 
corresponding to the clubhouses and tabooed structures which 
serve the same purpose in other parts of New Guinea. Such 
clubhouses or tabooed buildings for the use of the men are 
called dubu in the Central District and marea in the Mekeo 
District. In Kiwai a village may consist of a single house 
several hundreds of feet long; one of these communal 
dwellings has been found to measure nearly seven hundred 
feet in length. The houses are built on posts at a height of 
from four to six feet above the ground. The separate 
rooms of the several families run along each side of the 
house, leaving in the middle a long broad passage, where 
feasting and dancing take place.’ 

In the rites of initiation which are held at Iasa, in Kiwai, 
ceremonies are performed to ensure good crops of yams, 
sweet potatoes, bananas, and sago. In order to make the 
yams, sweet potatoes, and bananas grow well, bull-roarers 
(madubus) are swung and shewn to the novices in a tabooed 
enclosure out in the bush. In order to ensure a good crop 
of sago the novices are again taken into the bush, and a 
wooden image of a naked woman is shewn to them. This 
wooden image is called an ovava. Smaller forms of the 
image, consisting of a thin flat board carved in the shape 
of a human being, are called umuruburu. The exhibition of 

1A. C. Haddon, Headhunters, Rev. J. Chalmers, ‘Notes on the 
Black, White, and Brown, pp. 99 sg.; Natives of Kiwai Island,” Journal of 
Reports of the Anthropological Expedi- the Anthropological [mnstitute, xxxiii. 
tion to Torres Straits, ve 189, 190 59.3 (1903) p. 118. 

VI TOTEMISM IN KIWAI 39 

these images, supposed to increase the supply of sago, is 
called the moguru ceremony: it takes place during the 
rainy season.' While the ceremony is being performed, 
the men are decorated and wear head-dresses of cuscus skin. 
These head-dresses, as well as the wooden images and the 
bull-roarers, are sacred and may not be seen by women or 
uninitiated boys. When the ceremonies are to be performed, 
the mysterious implements and head-dresses are carried by 
night from the house to the bush, and at the conclusion of 
the rites they are returned to their hidden receptacles in the 
end-rooms of the long houses. In the interval between the 
moguré ceremony and the yam harvest the men make 
pandean pipes (fzago) and every young man carries and 
plays one of them. Dr. Haddon was told that the wooden 
figures representing nude women “look after” sago in the 
same way as the bull-roarers “look after” yams, sweet 
potatoes, and bananas; and Mr. Sidney H. Ray learned 
that the effigies of women (ovara) were exhibited to the 
initiates during the north-west monsoon, at the time when 
the sago is planted, but that the bull-roarers (szadubus) are 
swung and shewn to the initiates at the time when the yams 
are planted in the south-east monsoon.” 

1 «<The effigies Kurumt, Uruparu 
and Paromiti are made of wood and used 
at the time of initiation (Afoguru). To 
see them, large feasts are prepared and 
the season is made a very festive one. 
The lads are coloured with red and 
white, in the same way as the effigies, 
and have long pendants of fine wisps, 
made from the young frond of the sago 
palm, hanging from their ears. When 
the lads are shown these effigies, fire is 
showered over them by the old men, 
and they are warned against revealing 
anything said or done under terrible 
penalties of being murdered, poisoned, 
or seized with a fearful disease of which 
they can never get rid. The more 
secret and immoral practices I cannot 
here repeat” (Rev. J. Chalmers, 
**Notes on the Natives of Kiwai 
Island,” Journal of the Anthropological 
Institute, xxxiii. (1903) p. 119). In 
this ceremony the dressing of the lads 
in fronds of the sago-palm is probably 

part of the magical rite for the fertilisa- 
tion of the palm. ‘‘ The /oguru time 
(the initiation ceremony) is a period 
of general license, and in some respects 
very much resembles that at Maipua 
and the neighbouring district ” (Rev. 
J. Chalmers, of. czt. p. 124). 

2A, C. Haddon, Headhunters, 
Black, White, and Brown, pp. 104- 
106; Reports of the Cambridge An- 
thropological Expedition to Torres 
Straits, v. 218 sg. According to the 
Rev. J. Chalmers, the bull-roarer is 
called burumamaramu, and the old 
men swing it and shew it to the young 
men when the yams are ready for 
digging in May and June. The word 
éuruma means a variety of yam, and 
the maramu means ‘‘mother”; so 
that the name of the bull -roarer 
(4urumamaramu) means ‘‘ the mother 
of yams”—a highly significant title. 
See Reports of the Cambridge An- 
thropological Expedition to Torres 

Analogy of 
these cere- 
monies to 
the Aus- 
tralian 
intichiuma. 

Exchange 
of sisters 
as wives. 

Traces of 
totemism 
among the 
Toaripi. 
Every man 
regards a 
particular 
edible 
animal as 
sacred be- 
cause his 
ancestor 
did so. 

TOTEMISM IN NEW GUINEA CHAP. 

40 

It does not appear that these ceremonies for the increase . 
of sago, yams, and so forth are now performed especially, 
still less exclusively, by men who have these plants for their 
totems. Yet on the analogy of the zu¢zchzuma ceremonies 
of the Central Australian tribes we may conjecture that this 
was formerly the case ; in other words, that the members of 
each totem clan were bound to perform magical ceremonies 
for the multiplication of their totems, in order that the rest 
of the community might benefit thereby. 

In Kiwai it is customary to give a sister in exchange 
for a wife ; or, to be more exact, when a man marries, he has 
to give to the brother, or nearest male relative, of the bride, 
his sister, foster-sister, or some other female relation to be 
the wife of his brother-in-law. If he has no female relation 
to give, he will borrow one for the purpose from a family 
in which there is a superfluity of daughters. “Persons of 
the same name may marry, and a father may take his 
step-daughter and his own daughter to wife; but brother 
and sister, and cousins do not marry.” ? 

§ 4. Totemism in the Toaripi or Motumotu Tribe 
of the Elema District 

The Elema District stretches along the coast of the 
Papuan Gulf in Southern New Guinea from Cape Posses- 
sion on the east to the Alele River of the Purari delta 
on the west. In this district the, Toaripi or Motumotu 
tribe now occupies two villages situated at the mouth 
of the Williams River.” The people are not hunters, but 
practise agriculture diligently and live chiefly on fish and 

Stratts, v. 219. Compare J. Chalmers, 
“Notes on the Natives of Kiwai 

xxxiii. (1903) pp. 125, 129, 132. The 
tribal name Motumotu as an alternative 

Island,” Journal of the Anthropological 
Institute, xxxiii. (1903) p. 119. 

1 Rev. J. Chalmers, ‘‘ Notes on the 
Natives of Kiwai,” Journal of the 
Anthropological Institute, xxxiii. (1903) 
p. 124; Reports of the Cambridge 
Lixpedition to Torres Straits, v. 189. 

2 Rev. J. H. Holmes, ‘‘ Notes on 
the Elema Tribes of the Papuan Gulf,” 
Journal of the Anthropological Institute, 

to Toaripi is mentioned by the Rev. J. 
Chalmers (‘* Toaripi,” Journal of the 
Anthropological Institute, xxvii. (1898) 
p- 326), who in an earlier work used the 
name Motumotu alone (Pioneering in 
New Guinea (London, 1887), pp. 162 
5qgg.). To judge from the map given 
by Mr. Chalmers in this last work the 
home of the Motumotu (Toaripi) is 
situated about 146° 8’ of East Longi- 
tude. 

vI TOTEMISM IN THE ELEMA DISTRICT 4! 

vegetables! It appears that the Elema tribes and the 
Toaripi in particular have a form of totemism. At least 
we gather this from the following account of their religious 
ideas, which we owe to a missionary settled among them, 
the Rev. J. H. Holmes.? In these tribes, Mr. Holmes tells 
us, a man regards as sacred what in the Toaripi language is 
called his wa/are. This is always an edible animal, whether 
a mammal, bird, or fish, but never, so far as Mr. Holmes 
could ascertain, a tree, plant, or inanimate object. A man 
never kills or eats his own uwalare, but apparently he may kill 
and eat those of other people without giving offence. For 
example, a man whose walare is a pig will never eat pig’s 
flesh, and a man whose wa/are is a dog will never eat dog’s 
flesh, but he may eat pig’s flesh whenever he can get it. 
“The beak, feathers, tail, or any part of a walare object that 
lend themselves to decorative or ornamental purposes are 
sacred to the individual from whose walare they are taken ; 
by him these parts may be plaited and made into ornaments 
for personal adornment, but under no pretence can a man 
of one wa/are use for adornment the parts of the walure of 
his neighbour without giving grave offence.” “A native’s 
explanation why a certain mammal, bird or fish is regarded 
[as] sacred by him as his particular walare is, that this 
animal was regarded as sacred by his original ancestor. 
He assigns no reasons why it was selected by the ancestor 
to become such.” The ancestor, it is said, never injured, 
killed, or ate the particular animal, “and because it was 
held sacred by him, his posterity for all time must also 
regard it as sacred.” Yet Mr. Holmes adds that “it appears 
that a son can kill the walare of his father, share the same 
with members of the family, and join with them in eating 
it and not give offence to the father, because he has not 
by any personal act violated his obligations to the object 
he individually considers sacred as his walare.” If this 
statement is correct, it is clear that a man cannot inherit 

Anthropological Institute, xxxii. (1902) 
pp. 426 sg. In a later paper by the 

1 Rev, J. Chalmers, ‘* Toaripi,” 
Journal of the Anthropological Institute, 

xxvii. (1898) p. 327. 

2 Rev. J. [H.] Holmes, ‘* Notes on 
the Religious Ideas of the Elema Tribe[s] 
of the Papuan Gulf,” Journal of the 

same writer (Journal of the Anthropo- 

logical Institute, xxxiii. (1903) p. 125, 

his name appears as J. H. Holmes, - 
which I have assumed to be correct. 

Traces of 
totemism 
in the 
Central 
Division 
of British 
New 
Guinea. 

Roro- 
speaking 
and 
Mekeo- 
speaking 
tribes. 

Exogamous 
clans with 
badges and 
paternal 

42 TOTEMISM IN NEW GUINEA CHAP. 

his walare from his father. Yet Mr. Holmes’s account 
seems to imply that the wa/are is hereditary, since it owes 
its sanctity to a consecration by “the original ancestor.” 
Apparently, therefore, people must inherit their walare 
from their mothers, not from their fathers. When a man 
accidentally kills one of his walave animals, he laments 
and fasts for a certain time, observing many mourning 
customs as if he had lost a relative. But if he kills one of 
his walare animals wrongfully in a fit of anger, as soon as 
he recognises what he has done, he gives himself up to 
violent grief, abstains from all food, isolates himself from 
his relations, and dies of hunger. Mr. Holmes is not aware 
whether the respect for the walare imposes any limitations 
on marriage, the distribution of property, and the order of 
succession to tribal privileges.’ 

ss 
§ 5. Lotemism in the Central Division of British New Guinea 

That portion of British New Guinea which is politically 
known as the Central Division extends on the southern 
coast from Cape Possession in the west to Mullins Harbour 
in the east, a distance of some two hundred and fifty miles. 
In the centre and west of this district information concerning 
certain of the tribes was obtained by Dr. C. G. Seligmann, 
and I am indebted to him for the following account of traces 
of a totemic system which he discovered among the natives.” 

The tribes among whom the remains of a system 
probably totemic in origin are most obvious inhabit the 
delta of the St. Joseph River at the western extremity of 
the area under consideration. These are the Roro-speaking 
tribes inhabiting the strip of coast from Cape Possession to 
Kabadi and behind them the Mekeo-speaking tribes, the 
Biofa and the Vee. 

The Roro-speaking tribes are divided into a number of 
exogamous clans (zfsubu) with paternal descent. There are 
usually a number of local groups (also called z#subu) in each 

1 Rev. J. [H.] Holmes, ‘* Notes on 2 A briefer account has been pub- 
the Religious Ideas of the Elema lished by Dr. Seligmann (‘* Anthropo- 
Tribe[s}] of the Papuan Gulf,” Journal geographicai Investigations in British 

of the Anthropological Institute, xxxii. | New Guinea,” The Geographical Journal, 
(1902) pp. 426 sg. XXvii. (1906) pp. 232 59.). 

vI TOTEMISM IN CENTRAL NEW GUINEA 43 

clan, but some weak clans apparently consist each of a single descent 
local group. Every clan has a number of badges called caca dese 
which, generally speaking, may only be worn or used by 
members of the clan; sometimes a particular badge may 

be used exclusively by the members of one local group, but 

in such a case the local group is usually a strong one, and 

its members regard themselves as practically forming a clan. 

The names of the clans and local groups are generally The badges 
geographical or sometimes derived from the name of an Parente 
ancestor; but the most important class of badges (oaoa) or mam- 
bear names derived from birds or more rarely from ™2'S2n4 
mammals, and representations of these are carved on the on theclub- 
posts supporting the clubhouses. These carvings, however, ~~ 
are sometimes so conventionalised as to represent only some 
prominent feature of an animal or bird, and then they may 
not be recognised till their origin is pointed out by natives. 
Examples of the association of clubhouses with ahimals or 
birds are common in the villages of the Waima, one of the 
Roro-speaking tribes among whom the clubhouses are 
sometimes called by the names of birds. Thus Azrava, 
which means “the hornbill,” is the name of the clubhouse 
of Abotaiara, a Waima village. The hornbill is also the 
chief badge of the Abotaiara people, and representations 
of the beak of the hornbill are carved as the capitals of the 
lateral supporting posts, or the base of the capital is carved 
so as to represent the markings found on the upper mandible 
of the bird. Again, although the upper mandible and 
even both mandibles are common ornaments, only the 
men of the Abotaiara settlement have the right to wear 
them with both mandibles pointing forwards in the middle 
line of the head. Further, the dried heads of two hornbills 
are nailed to the front main post of the clubhouse, while 
an effigy of a bird said to represent a hornbill hangs from 
the roof close to this post. 

The crocodile is the chief badge of the Roro-Aiera Crocodile, 
village, and it is carved in relief on the posts of the club- eae 

iguana, 
house, each carved effigy being six or eight feet long. A and fish 
freshwater chelonian, the iguana (Varanus sp.), and a 48% 
fish called akumu, which resembles a garfish, are also 
carved as badges on clubhouses ; the akumu in particular is 

The Mekeo 
tribes are 
divided into 
exogamous 
clans 
{pangua) 
which are 
grouped 
together in 
two classes 
(ngopu) 
each class 
has its own 
plant called 
tauafangai. 

Badges of 
the Mekeo 
clans. 

44 TOTEMISM IN NEW GUINEA CHAP. 

a common badge. But not all badges on clubhouses can be 
traced directly to living creatures. It is not quite clear 
whether a clan who have an edible bird such as the horn- 
bill for their badge would kill one of the species, but on 
the whole they seem to be ready not only to kill but to 
eat it. Certainly people who have the fish akumu for 
their badge (oaoa) catch and eat it freely. 

The Mekeo tribes are also divided into exogamous clans 
( pangua), local groups of which may be found in a number 
of villages; and the clans themselves commonly consist of 
a number of zkupu or family groups. Clans recognising 
their common descent form together a ngopu group. In 
each tribe there are two such original mgopu groups 
descended respectively from the two original stocks into 
which the tribe was at first divided. In the Biofa tribe the 
names of the two mgopu groups are Inawi and Inawae; in 
the Vee tribe they are Ngangai and Kuapengi. Typically 
the various clans of a particular ~gopu group should have 
a common name for their clubhouse (%/) and a common 
tauafangat, The zauafangai is an animal or plant, but 
generally a plant; for,instance the bread-fruit tree is the 
tauafangat of a number of clans, all of which belong to 
one zgopu group. What the function of an zauafangat 
is, we do not know. People who have the bread-fruit 
tree for their zauafangat pay no reverence to the tree 
and freely eat the fruit. Nor is the tree cultivated in 
Mekeo or indeed, so far as appears, in any neighbouring 
district. It seems as if both the Mekeo tribes had quite 
forgotten the original significance of their zauafangat. But 
they say that it is very old, far older than the clan badges 
called kangakanga, which answer to the clan badges (aoa) 
of the Roro people. The Mekeo clubhouses are smaller 
than those of the Roro-speaking tribes, and they bear no 
representation of animals or birds. Some of the Mekeo 
clan badges are parts of animals, such as the sword of the 
sword-fish and the crest of the cockatoo, or they may be 
imitations of characteristic features of animals or plants 
constructed out of feathers, the feathers of the bird imitated 
being sometimes used for this purpose. These badges 
are worn by members of the respective clans; the right 

VI TOTEMISM IN CENTRAL NEW GUINEA 45 

to wear them is as a rule jealously guarded. In the cases Men will 
personally investigated by Dr. Seligmann men would not 20t cat the 
eat the bird or fish which served as their clan badge, which is 
though they would not hesitate to kill it and take its stirs 
feathers or other characteristic part. There is, indeed, a clan. 
feeling, at least in the case of the sword-fish, that when a 
sword-fish is killed by a man who has not got its sword 

for his clan badge (kangakanga), he should remove it and 

give it to a man whose clan badge it is. Married women 

eat the animals which serve as their husbands’ clan badges 
(kangakanga); indeed they are often given the flesh of such 

of them as their husbands have killed and plucked. The 
animals which serve as clan badges are apparently not 
supposed to protect their respective clans, nor are magical 
ceremonies performed to increase their number. When the Some of 
clan badge is a plant, strips of its dried leaves may be worn aren 
in the dance. One clan has taken as its badge a repre- plants. 
sentation of an individual palm-tree, which has the rare 
peculiarity of forking at some height above the ground, 

each of the two limbs so formed bearing the usual tuft of 

leaves at its extremity. These two tufts of leaves are 
imitated by a feather head-dress which is the badge of the 

clan. Other clans imitate the outlines of particular 
mountains in feathers and employ these imitations as 

their badges. 

A careful enquiry into the history of the Mekeo people Each of 
has led Dr. Seligmann to the conclusion that each of their wove 
two tribes, the Biofa and the Vee, was originally divided tribes 
into two exogamous and intermarrying clans (angua), each es 
clan having a tree for its badge (zauafangai), the bread- divided 
fruit tree being the badge of the one clan and a palm-tree Siero 
called du being the badge of the other. The reciprocal <lans with 
relation between each pair of intermarrying clans in a tribe their 
was called utuapie. Thus, if Dr. Seligmann is right, the >adees 
social organisation of these people, as of so many others, 
formerly consisted of a division of the whole .community 
into two exogamous sections; it furnishes, in fact, another 
instance of what we have called the two-class system. 

The remaining tribes of the Central Division, so far as we 

know, are divided into exogamous clans with paternal descent. 

Exogamous 
clans with 
badges and 
paternal 
descent in 
other tribes 
of the 
Central 
Division, 

Totemism 
in South- 
Eastern 
New 
Guinea. 

Evidence 
of Sir 
William 
Macgregor. 

Birds 
the most 
common 
totems. 

Exogamy 
and 
maternal 
descent of 
the totem. 

46 TOTEMISM IN NEW GUINEA CHAP. 

Clan badges are still found among them and are carved on 
the clubhouses ; but so little importance is attached to them 
that many men, for example in the strong Motu tribe, 
hardly know what their badge is and not uncommonly a 
wrong badge will be found carved on the rafters of a house. 
If the clan badges are relics of totemism, as seems likely 
enough, it is clear that in these tribes totemism has fallen 
into decay, and that what had once been sacred emblems are 
now but little removed from meaningless ornaments. 

§ 6. Totemism in South-Eastern New Guinea 

Totemism appears to be found all over the south- 
eastern portion of New Guinea from Table Bay on the 
south coast eastwards; moreover, it seems to extend through 
the chain of islands which stretches eastward from the 
south-eastern end of New Guinea as far as the Louisiade 
Archipelago. On this subject the Governor of New 
Guinea, Sir William Macgregor, wrote as follows in his 
annual report for 1895-6: “One ‘of the most interesting 
subjects in ethnology to which attention has been given 
during the year is that of Totemism. That this exists in 
a modified form from the Louisiades to Orangerie Bay 
seems clear. It also extends up the north-east coast; but 
it appears to have been quite unknown, in a recognisable 
form, west of Cloudy Bay. It is a matter that requires much 
further and very patient investigation, and its elucidation 
proceeds but slowly. Birds are the most common emblems 
of the totem tribes, but animals, fishes, and even insects are 
used. Pictorial representation of the totem has not been 
observed anywhere. The general belief seems to be that 
the totem contains the spirit of a common ancestor. The 
native would not kill his totem animal, and was prepared to 
go to war with any person or tribe that did so. Its 
principal effect is in regard to sexual relations) No man 
can marry a woman having the same totem as himself, 
even if their tribes live so widely apart as to be complete 
strangers to each other. All sexual commerce between 
men and women of the same totem is completely prohibited. 
Any violation of this great principle was nearly sure to 

vi YOTEMISM IN SOUTH-EASTERN NEW GUINEA 47 

lead to serious disturbance, unless it were heavily paid for. 
To have a common totem does not interfere with or prevent 
fighting between individuals or tribes. The children take 
the totem of the mother. People belonging to tribes 
west of Orangerie Bay, after they are brought into contact 
with totem tribes, readily adopt the idea that it is the 
correct thing to have a totem, and they are always prepared 
to mislead the inexperienced inquirer. On the other hand 
its influence is waning already in the east in at least some 
respects. Serious men may even now be seen eating their 
sacred totem with evident relish, but its influence in match- 
making will probably not become wholly extinct for several 
generations to come.”? 

Two years later, again speaking of totemism in New 
Guinea, Sir William Macgregor reported as follows: “ All 
over the east end of the Possession this strange institution 
has still very considerable power. It comes west as far as 
Mairu or Table Bay, where it disappears. It certainly 
extends a considerable way up the north-east coast. Up to 
the present time no trace of it has been discovered in the 
Mambare district, though many inquiries have been made 
on the subject. It seems probable it exists there, however, 
for many natives have cicatricial markings on the shoulders 
and back that would lead one to suppose they had something 
to do with totemism. . 

“In the east the child inherits the totem of the mother Paternal 
in most places, if not everywhere; in the west the practice ae 
is more to inherit the totem from the father. This is quite in the west. 
in harmony with the higher position occupied by women 
in the east as compared with the west. Totemism in the 
west seems to be fast becoming extinct. The younger 
generation do not appear to know very much about it— 
generally nothing. It will long retain some power in the 
east end.” ? 

Fuller information as to totemism at Wagawaga, a village Totemism 
situated on Milne Bay at the south-eastern extremity of t W282 

aga and 
New Guinea, was obtained by Dr. C. G. Seligmann, who Tubetube, 

1 Annual Report on British New 2 Annual Report on British New 
Guinea for 1895-6 (London, 1897), Guinea for 1897-8 (London, 1899), 
PPp- 40 sg. Pp. 75- 

Clans with 
three or 
four totems 
(bird, fish, 
snake, and 
often 
plant) and 
descent in 
the female 
line. 

At Waga- 
waga there 
are three 
exogamous 
clans, each 
with a bird, 
fish, snake 
and plant 
totem. 

48 TOTEMISM IN NEW GUINEA CHAP. 

also investigated the totemic system in ‘Lubetube (Slade 
Island), a small island of the Engineer Group to the east 
of New Guinea. Totemism in Tubetube had already been 
observed and recorded by the Rev. J. T. Field. For many 
particulars as to totemism both at Wagawaga and Tube- 
tube I have to thank the courtesy of Dr. C. G. Seligmann.’ 
Speaking of the natives of Tubetube, Dr. Seligmann 
says: “The social system of these folk is substantially 
that which later we found to extend throughout a wide 
area in the eastern and south-eastern divisions of British 
New Guinea. Essentially this is a condition in which a 
community consists of a number of totemistic clans with 
descent of the totems in the female line. Each clan has 
at least three totems—a bird, a ‘fish, a snake, and often 
a fourth, a plant. Each clan in a given locality consists 
of a number of hamlets, each consisting of say, from three 
to five houses, inhabited by a single family group. A 
number of such hamlets, scattered over a considerable area 
and inhabited by members of different clans, constitute a 
village.” ? 

At Wagawaga on Milne Bay there are three exogamous 
totem clans named respectively the Garuboi, the Modewa, 
and the Hurana. These have each at least one bird totem 
associated with a fish, snake,’ and plant totem. All these 
totems are called pzanaz. Such groups of totems possessed 
each by a single clan are called by Dr. Seligmann linked 
totems. Among the bird totems are the crow, the reef heron, 
the white cockatoo, a species of dove, and a species of hawk. 
Among the fish totems is the skate. Both the clans and the 
totems are inherited by children from their mothers. Yet 
Dr. Seligmann found that at Wagawaga people paid more 
respect to their fathers’ totems than to their own. It was 
said that a man might kill and even eat his own totem bird ; 
he would certainly catch and eat his own totem fish; and 
it was asserted that he would not hesitate to kill his own 
totem snake if it lay across his track, or to destroy his own 

1-Much, though not all, of the Guinea,” Afan, ix. (1909) pp. 4-9. 
following information as to totemism 2C. G. Seligmann, ‘* Anthropo- 
at Wagawaga was afterwards published geographical Investigations in New 

by Dr. Seligmann. See C. G. Selig- Guinea,” The Geographical Journal, 
mann, ‘‘ Linked Totemsin British New xxvii. (1906) pp. 237 5%: 

‘vit «= TOTEMISM IN SOUTH-EASTERN NEW GUINEA 49 

totem plant whenever it was convenient to do so, But on Men pay 
the contrary it was clear that no Wagawaga man would eat ™" 

: ‘ P respect 

or destroy his father’s totem bird or birds, or would even to their 
approach a fire at which they were cooking. If he saw his aps 
father’s totem bird being killed, he might go away for a animal 
short time or remonstrate with the killer, but he would not (2)? 
fight him, nor would he shew any régard for the dead bird, 
except that he would not touch it. If in fishing it happened 
that the totem fish of a man’s father was caught, the man 
would ask one of his fellows to remove the fish from the 
net, but he would not suggest that it should be put back in 
the water, though he would not himself touch or eat it. 
Further, a man feared his father’s totem snake; he would 
certainly not kill it and would seek to avoid the reptile. 
The relation of a man to his father’s totem plant was not 
so clear, but it seemed that he would generally take care 
not to injure it. In particular a number of Modewa men, 
whose fathers were Garuboi, agreed that they would not 
injure their father’s totem plant ofzok¢ when they met with 
it in the bush, but if it interfered with their gardens they 
would destroy it. No man would wear the feathers of his 
father’s totem bird, though he would not hesitate to wear 
the feathers of his own totem bird or birds ; indeed their 
plumage was his usual and most appropriate decoration, 
though he would also wear the feathers of other birds, such 
as the cockatoo or the much rarer white reef-heron. 

In regard to marriage, a man would not marry a woman Exogamy 
who had the same totems as his father; in the old days he ae 
would not even sleep with one or sit too near her when he clans at 
visited the girls’ house (pofuma); but things have changed V*8*¥#82 
nowadays and the old clan rules are no longer observed 
by lovers before marriage. Formerly it seems that though 
no man would marry a girl of his own totem, some of 
the bolder spirits did not shrink from looser relations with 
these girls; and though such conduct was condemned, the 
offence was yet deemed too trivial to be punished or to 
bring any evil consequences on the lovers or their clans- 
folk, A man would eat his wife’s totem fish just as he 
would eat his own, and she in like manner would eat hers 
and his. 

VOL. 11 E 

50 TOTEMISM IN NEW GUINEA CHAP, 

The three totem clans at Wagawaga were arranged in 
two groups thus :— 

Clans. Clan-groups, 
Garuboi . . . ; : . Garuboi. 
Modewa \ Meodowe: 
Hurana 
The clans These clan-groups appear to have been originally 

ripe tae exogamous classes or phratries ; for a man might not marry 
groups, a woman of his own clan-group. But this rule is now often 
ecu °* broken, whereas the prohibition to marry a woman of the 
same totem clan is still generally observed. Here therefore 
exogamy of the class has proved less durable than exogamy 
of the totem. Further, the dual grouping of the clans 
formerly determined who should take part in the cannibal 
feast held to avenge the death of a fellow-villager, who 
Terms of had been killed by a hostile community. Moreover, the 
address. distribution of the clans into these two groups or classes 
regulated the terms of address which the people employed 
in speaking to each other; for a person used one set of 
terms in addressing members of his own group or class and 
a different set of terms in addressing members of the other 
group or class. Thus a man ‘would address an old man 
of his own class (which was that of his mother, descent 
being in the maternal line) as “ maternal uncle” (aude), but 
he would address a man of his father’s generation in the 
other class as “ paternal uncle” (sahiav) ; he would address 
an old woman of his own class as “mother” (Azzau), but he 
would address an old woman of the other class as “ paternal 
aunt” (eau); he would address a man or woman of his own 
status in his own class as “brother” (warthizv) or “sister” 
(owe), but he would address a person of his own status in 
the other class as “cousin” (ozmau). Thus these terms of 
address, like the classificatory terms of relationship, are 
based on the distribution of the community into two 
exogamous classes. 
In Tube- Like the people of Wagawaga in New Guinea, the natives 
pected of Tubetube, a small island of the Engineer Group to the east 
exogamons Of New Guinea, are divided into exogamous totem clans with 
clans with maternal descent, and just as at Wagawaga every person has 

maternal 
descent; regularly three associated or linked totems, a bird, a fish, and 

vi YOTEMISM IN SOUTH-EASTERN NEW GUINEA _ 31 

asnake. The clans are six in number and are distributed each clan 
into fourteen villages, each village with its own chief (¢audara), ala 

while one of these chiefs is recognised as paramount over the bird, a fish, 
whole island. Men and women of the same clan or totem, “42 
even though they live in different and distant villages, may 
neither marry nor have sexual intercourse with each other ; 
any such union would be regarded as incestuous and would 
bring on the guilty persons the openly expressed contempt 
of the whole community. All the children belong to their 
mother’s clan and inherit her totems. Travellers and visitors 
from a distance are assured of a welcome and brotherly 
treatment from the members of the same totem clan in the 
villages to which they come. Almost the first question 
addressed to a stranger is, “What is the name of your 
bird?” or “ What is the name of your fish?” A man who 
is in need or hungry may help himself, without asking leave, 
to any food that may be in the village or house of people 
of his own totem clan, and no objection will be made by 
the owners. All members of a totem clan can be trusted 
to help each other in war and other emergencies, and thus 
totemism plays an important part in the social life of the 
people. When a man dies, his grave is dug and his body 
buried, not by the people of his own village, but by members 
of his totem clan in another village, who come or are fetched 
from a distance to perform the last duties of respect to their 
fellow-clansman. No member of a clan may eat his totem 
nor may others kill it without incurring the resentment of 
the clan whose totem animal has been slain. 

Such is the account of totemism in Tubetube which Dr. Selig. 
we owe in the main to the Rev. J. T. Field. Fuller in- awit 
formation in some respects was obtained by Dr. C. G. Selig- tion, 
mann, and I am indebted to him for the following particulars, 

1 Rev. J. T. Field (of the Wesleyan 
Mission), ‘‘Tubetube,” in Appendix 
CC to Annual Report on New Guinea, 
1897-1898 (Brisbane, 1898), p. 
zd, ‘‘Exogamy at Tubetube, British 
New Guinea,” Report of the Eighth 
Weeting of the Australasian Association 
Jor the Advancement of Sctence, held at 
sWelbourne, Victoria, 1900 (Melbourne, 
1901), p. 301. The former of Mr. 
Field’s papers is quoted in Reports of 

1343 

the Cambridge Anthropological Expe- 
dition to Torres Stratts, v. 192 sq. 
The statement that each clan has at 
least three totems, a bird, a fish, anda 
snake, is Dr. Seligmann’s (‘* Anthropo- 
geographical Investigations in British 
New Guinea,” Zhe Geographical 
Journal, xxvii. (1906) p. 237). Mr. 
Field mentions only bird and fish 
totems, 

Bird 

totems in 
the island 
of Rogea. 

Respect 
shewn for 
totems. 

Carved 
representa- 
tions of 
totems. 

52 TOTEMISM IN NEW GUINEA CHAP, 

While at Tubetube, as at Wagawaga, every person has 
three clan totems, a bird, a fish, and a snake, they have not 
as a rule a plant totem in addition; ‘indeed only one or 
two plant totems seem to have been found in Tubetube. 
In the island of Rogea, with the inhabitants of which the 
people of Tubetube intermarried, the following birds were 
found to be totems: a species of pigeon, the fish-hawk, 
the scarlet lory, the reef heron, the crow, the cockatoo, the 
Pavadisea raggiona, the hornbill, the £¢k¢ (a wader ?), and the 
flying fox. The totems associated with the hornbill were 
a shark, a constrictor snake, and a tree called fazyabu. 
“Tubetube differed from Wagawaga in one important 
matter of totemic practice, namely the greater respect in 
which a man held his own bird totem. A Tubetube man 
would not eat his totem bird, nor would he touch it when 
dead, in fact he seemed to treat his totem bird with the 
same outward measure of respect as he should show towards 
his father’s, except that he wore its feathers. At the present 
day Tubetube men do not hesitate to eat their totem fish, 
but it was not clear whether this was a modern innovation 
or not; the balance of opinion seemed to be that it had 
always been customary to do so.” However, a few men 
from the islands of Basilaki and Rogea, between Tubetube 
and the mainland, all of them youngish, agreed in asserting 
that they would not eat their own or their father’s totems, 
whether birds or fish. Men customarily wore the feathers 
of their own totem birds, though not of the birds which 
were their fathers’ totems. No totem shrines were found in 
Tubetube, and no man was supposed to have any particular 
influence over the birds or other animals which were his 
totems, nor were any ceremonies performed for the multi- 
plication of the totems. Representations of totem birds, 
snakes, and fishes are commonly carved on houses, canoes, 
spatulas, floats, in fact on all the wooden utensils and 
ornaments of the natives of South-Eastern New Guinea 
and the neighbouring archipelagoes. But these carvings 
may be executed by any one who possesses the requisite 
skill; the carver is not limited in the choice of his 
designs either to his own totems or to the totems of his 
employer. 

vi TOTEMISM IN SOUTH-EASTERN NEW GUINEA 53 

Although totemic badges were not painted on the Behaviour 
bodies of warriors, and though no attempt was made to ala 
avoid fighting with men of the same totem clan, yet a man women of 
who had killed a member of his own clan in the heat of ome 
battle would be sorry for it and would not help to carry 
the body to the canoe in order that it might be eaten. But 
it was not clear whether in the old times a man would or 
would not eat a man of his own totem from another and 
hostile community. Marriage never took place within the Exogamy, 
same totem clan, but illicit connections between young people 
of the same totem before marriage were not unknown. 

Such intrigues were viewed as immoral, but it does not seem 

that any particular bad luck was supposed to attend the act 

or that steps were taken to punish either of the offenders. 

After marriage a wife commonly abstained from eating her Respect 
husband’s totem, and he from eating hers ; indeed this rule aia 
of abstinence was extended by the wife to the totem of her and wives 
husband’s father and by the husband to the totem of his fF °¢c 
wife’s father. “It was pointed out that this was a matter of totems. 
mutual courtesy and convenience, since a husband or wife 

would tend to feel uncomfortable and even to quarrel with 

a partner who had recently killed and eaten his or her 
partner’s own or father’s totem.” Dr. Seligmann could not 

find in Tubetube any trace of a grouping of the clans in 

two classes or phratries, such as still exists at Wagawaga. 

He surmises that it formerly existed but has disappeared 
through the greater degeneracy of the native customs in 

the island. 

In Tubetube totemism and exogamy are as usual found Classifica- 
to coexist with the classificatory system of relationship. 07 7'™ 
Thus, for example, a man gives the same name Zama to his tionship in 
father and to his father’s brothers ; he gives the same name aaa 
sina to his mother and to his mother’s sisters ; and he gives 
the same name zazu to his own sons and daughters and to 
the sons and daughters of his brothers. He calls each 
of the sons and daughters of his brothers his child (watuna), 
and each of them calls him “my father” (tamagu). In 
like manner a woman calls her sister's children her own 
children (atu) and they call her their mother (szza). But 
on the other hand a man does not speak of his sister’s 

Peculiar 
features of 
totemism 
at Waga- 
waga and 
Tubetube. 

54 TOTEMISM IN NEW GUINEA CHAP. 

children as his own children, nor do they call him their 
father. They are game (nephews and nieces), not natu 
(children), to him; and he is dara (maternal uncle), not: 
tama (father), to them. The children of two brothers 
are brothers and sisters to each other, and so are the 
children of two sisters. The same terms are used to ex- 
press the relationship between the children of two brothers 
or the children of two sisters, whom we should call first 
cousins, as are used to express the relationship between full 
brothers and sisters. Such cousins, the children of two 
brothers or of two sisters, are actually regarded as brothers 
and sisters and in all things live and act accordingly. A 
woman is duna of her own brother, and sanakava of her 
own sister; she is also duna of the male child and Aenakava 
of the female child of her mother’s sister ; but on the other 
hand she is xubatna of a child, whether male or female, of 
her mother’s brother. Similarly a man is duna of his own 
sister and kanakava of his own brother ; he is also duna of 
the female child and kanakava of the male child of his 
father’s brother ; but on the other hand he is xwbazna of the 
child, whether male or female, of his father’s sister. Under 
this system, as usually happens, a man may give the name 
of “father” (tama) to a man who is younger than himself 
and the name of “mother” (s¢za) to a woman who is 
younger than himself.’ To us this sounds absurd only 
because we associate the ideas of procreation with the 
ideas of fatherhood and motherhood; but the imaginary 
absurdity disappears when we employ the terms father and 
mother in their classificatory sense to describe the social 
relation in which certain groups of persons stand to each 
other without in the least implying the physical act of 
procreation. 

The totemic systems of Wagawaga and Tubetube, which 
we have now reviewed, present some peculiar features. Such 
is the possession of three or four associated or linked totems 
by each clan, these totems being regularly a bird, a fish, a 

1 Rev. J. T. Field, ‘‘Exogamy at vancement of Science, held at Melbourne, 
Tubetube, British New Guinea,” Re- Victoria, 1g00 (Melbourne, 1901), pp. 
port of the Eighth Meeting of the 301-303. 

Australasian Association for the Ad- 

vi TOTEMISM IN SOUTH-EASTERN NEW GUINEA 55 

snake, and (where a fourth totem is added) a plant. Again, 
the greater respect which a man, at least at Wagawaga, pays 
‘to his father’s totem than to his own is remarkable. It may 
perhaps mark a transition from maternal to paternal descent 
of the totem; for if the reverence for his own totem, in- 
herited from his mother, were to continue to wane, while 
the reverence for his father’s totem were to continue to wax, 
the result might be that at last the maternal totem would be 
ousted entirely by the paternal totem, and we should have 
descent both of the totem and of the clan transferred from 
the female to the male line. Other interesting features of 
the totemism of Tubetube are the respect which husbands 
and wives shew for each other’s totems and the reason which 
they assign for so doing. We have seen that in the Mawatta 
tribe of New Guinea married people are equally complaisant 
in the matter of their respective totems.’ This rule of 
mutual respect, as I shall point out later on, may help to 
explain the classic tale of Cupid and Psyche. 

Lastly, the Kworafi, a tribe near Cape Nelson, on the Totemism 
north-east coast of British New Guinea, have a system of (00ng the 
totemism. Every person has as a rule a totemic animal, or 
a principal totemic animal; usually the creature is a bird. 
At marriage the wife takes the totemic animal of her 
husband, but the husband also respects his wife’s totem. 
Children take the totem animal of their father as their 
principal totem. Possession of the same totem is not a 
bar to marriage. In the same village there are people of 
different totems, but persons of the same totem live together 
in the same row of houses and under the same roof.” 

§ 7. Totemism in Dutch and German New Guinea 

The evidence adduced in the preceding section proves Indications 

that totemism exists or has existed at intervals all along the of tem 
southern coast of the island within the British dominions. German 
But when we pass the British boundaries and enter the 74 °"* 
territories of Holland and Germany, the institution is found Guinea. 

totally to disappear, or at most to leave only scanty and 

1 See above, p. 30. in den Jahren 1904-1906,” Zestschreft 
2 R. Pach, ‘Reisen in Neu-Guinea fiir Ethnologie, xxxix. (1907) p. 389. 

56 TOTEMISM IN. NEW GUINEA CHAP, 

dubious traces of itself. Whether totemism never existed 
there, or has vanished almost completely, or flourishes 
without attracting the notice of Dutch and German officials, 
travellers, and missionaries, is a question on which the 
future may throw light. That the general silence on this 
subject of the writers who have described Dutch and German 
New Guinea is to be ascribed rather to the inattention of 
observers than to the absence of the institution itself is. 
suggested by the few hints or indications of totemism which 
loom dimly from their writings like lamps seen through 
a fog. 

Amongst Thus a German missionary, Mr. Konrad Vetter, reports 

ap amok as follows of the Yabim, a tribe who live near Simbang on 

people — the east coast of German New Guinea, about latitude 6° 50/ 

think that : 

they are South :— . 

akin:ta “ Relations of families to particular animals: totemism— 

certain . 

animals, Different families assert that they once had an animal among 

Laan their kinsfolk, because their ancestress gave birth to a 

they spare. Crocodile or a pig in addition to ordinary human beings. 
Such monstrous occurrences are very frequent in their stories, 
in which all sorts of transformations are reported. In one 
case a man traces his descent directly from a pig and for 
that reason will not eat pork. Persons who are thus related 
on the mother’s side believe that after death they will be 
changed into animals of the particular species. The 
crocodile is spared by his kinsfolk and they expect to be 
treated with equal consideration by him. If the beast is 
killed and eaten by other people, his kinsfolk are in duty 
bound to prepare a funeral feast, to strike up a lament, and 
perhaps also to perform a sham-fight. The doers of the 
deed give a present by way of expiation. Others allege 
that they will be changed into fabulous cave-pigs, ‘which, 
though they have no existence, are very much feared by the 
natives. The inhabitants of one village are turned into 
wallabies aS a punishment, because one of them knocked 
off the end of the canoe of the ghostly ferrymen.”* This 
‘tribe appears, as we might have anticipated, to have the 

1K. Vetter, “Uber papuanische marck-Archipel, 1897 (Berlin), pp. 8759. 
Rechtsverhiltnisse,” Nachrichten tiber Compare td., Komm hertuber und hilf 
Kaiser Wilkelms-Land und den Bis- uns! Drittes Heft (Barmen, 1898), 

vi TOTEMISM IN DUTCH AND GERMAN NEW GUINEA 57. 

classificatory system of relationship along with totemism. For Classifica- 
example, a man gives the name of “father” to his father’s FU sorns. 
brothers and the name of “mother” to his mother’s sisters, ship. 
but he gives different names, equivalent to our “uncle” and 
“aunt,” to his mother’s brothers and to his father’s sisters. 

The children of two brothers or again of two sisters are 
reckoned brothers and sisters; and they are called elder or 
younger brother and sister, not with reference to their real 

ages, but according as their parents are elder or younger, so 

that a man may bestow the title of “ younger brother” on a 

cousin who is actually older than himself. On the other 

hand the children of a brother on the one side and of a sister 

on the other side are not brothers and sisters, they are cousins, 
Married people may not touch their parents-in-law nor even 
mention their names.’ All males are circumcised at a secret Practice 
ceremony at which bull-roarers are swung and flutes played. Sieiias 
The shrill or booming notes of these instruments are believed bull-roarers 
by the women to be the voice of the spirits which look after 77 ™* 
the lads at this time. A bull-roarer is kept in the young 

men’s house (/uwz) of every village, and no woman or un- 
circumcised boy may see it under pain of death. The 

flutes used at these rites are of two patterns, one called the 

male and the other the female; the two are married 
together. No woman may see these sacred flutes; it is 
supposed that any woman who saw them would die.® At 
circumcision the lads are supposed to be swallowed by a 

spirit, who vomits them up out of his stomach on receipt of 

a number of pigs, which are killed and eaten on these 

p. 22. From the latter account we 7a@., Komm heriiber und hilf uns! 

learn that the Crocodile family and the 
Pig family are both resident at Simbang. 
Mr. Vetter’s information is repeated by 
B. Hagen, Unter den Papua’s (Wies- 
baden, 1899), p. 225, and by M. 
Krieger, Meu-Guinea (Berlin, preface 
dated 1899), p. 183. 

1K, Vetter, ‘Uber papuanische 
Rechtsverhiltnisse,” Machrichten ber 
Kaiser Wilhelms-Land und den Bis- 
marck- Archipel, 1897, pp. 88, 92. 
Compare M. Krieger, Meu-Guinea 
(Berlin, #.d.), p. 166, who refers to 
Mr. Vetter as his authority. 

2K. Vetter, of. cit. pp. 92 59.3 

Zweites Heft (Barmen, 1898), p. 183 
J. [? K.] Vetter, ‘‘ Aus der Marchenwelt 
der Papuas in Kaiser-Wilhelms-Land,” 
Mitthetlungen der geographischen Gesell- 
schaft su Jena, xi. (1892) p. 105. 

3 0, Schellong, ‘Das Barlum-fest 
der Gegend Finsch-hafens,” Jter- 
nationales Archiv fiir* Ethnographie, 
ii. (1889) p. 156. A long description 
of the circumcision rites is given by 
Mr. Schellong (of. cz. pp. 145-162). 
The village of Simbang appears to 
be situated on Finsch Harbour, so that 
the accounts of Messrs. Vetter and 
Schellong refer to the same people. 

Stories told occasions. 
to promote 

the growth 
of the 
crops. 

Traces of 
totemism 
at Doreh. 

58 TOTEMISM IN NEW GUINEA CHAP. 

The people live by the fruits of the earth and 
seek to promote their growth by the telling of popular tales, 
which are apparently supposed to act as spells or enchant- 
ments. When the yams have been gathered and stored in 
the houses, tales of wonder and adventure are told by the 
glimmering light of the fire to an attentive audience, and at 
the ehd a wish is expressed that the yams may bear fruit 
abundantly, that the taro may be very big, the sugar-cane 
very thick, and the bananas very long.? In their intention 
the stories thus told resemble the spells which in Central 
Australia the men of totem clans croon for the increase of 
their totems. 

Far away from Simbang, nearly at the other end of New 
Guinea, another trace of totemism may perhaps be detected 
within Dutch territory at Doreh, on the north-west coast of 
the Great Geelvink Bay. Here there is a long communal 
house’ which has been described as “a sort of temple or 
building dedicated to the memory and erected for the 
worship of the ancestors of the people who are now settled 
at Doreh and Mansinama.” The edifice is raised above the 
ground on posts which are carved in the likeness of men 
and women, crocodiles, a fish, and a serpent. These like- 
nesses of men and women are said to represent the ancestors, 
and the effigies of crocodiles and so forth are explained by a 
legend that some of their forefathers were descended from 
these animals.2 The story may possibly be a relic of 
totemism, since such tales of the descent of men from 
animals are commonly told to explain the origin of totem 
clans. In Indonesia many stories are recounted of women 
who have given birth to animals, and in particular of women 
who have brought forth twins, one of the twins being a beast 

and the other a human being. 

1K. Vetter, ‘‘Uber papuanische 
Rechtsverhaltnisse,” Nachrichten siber 
Kaiser-Withelms-Land und den Bis- 
marche Archipel, 1897, Pp. 93- 

2K. Vetter, in ALttheilungen der 
geographischen Gesellschaft 2 Jena, 
xii. (1893) p.953 7@., Komm heriiber 
und hilf uns! Zweites Heft (Barmen, 
1898), p. 26. 

3 Nieuw Guinea ethnographisch en 

Thus at Balen in New Guinea 

natuurkundig ondersocht en beschreven 
(Amsterdam, 1862), pp. 151-155 
(Bijdragen tot de Taal. Land- en Volken- 
hkunde van Nederlandsch- Indié, New 
Series, vol. v.). The description of 
the edifice is repeated by H. von 
Rosenberg, Der malayische Archipel 
(Leipsic, 1878), pp. 451 sg. 

4 See above, vol. i. pp. 5 579. 

v1 TOTEMISM IN DUTCH AND GERMAN NEW GUINEA 59 

a native told a missionary that an ancestress of his had given 
birth to an iguana and a human child at tne same time, for 
which reason he respected iguanas. The crested pigeon 
(kroondutf in Dutch) and the black cockatoo also belonged to 
his family, but he paid less respect to them than to iguanas, 
for he would not hesitate to shoot these birds whenever he 
got the chance, though he would not eat or even touch their 
dead bodies.’ Again, another writer in speaking of the 
north-west coast of Geelvink Bay informs us that, according 
to the natives, their souls sometimes pass at death into 
cassowaries, fish, or pigs, and that in such cases the relatives 
of the dead will not partake of these animals.’ Beliefs 
and taboos of this sort savour of totemism. Lastly, Totemisin 
the Tugert or Kaya-Kaya, a notorious tribe of head- Tages 
hunters at Merauke in the south-east corner of Dutch Kaya-Kaya. 
New Guinea, close to the British boundary, are reported 
to have “a complicated totemic system, comprised ‘of 
plants and animals, with head groups and _ subdivisions. 
The totem is hereditarily transmitted through the father. 
They have mask-dances, initiation ceremonies, with a cere- 
mony of regeneration, but no circumcision. They have 
bull-roarers.” ® 

Both sexes among the Kaya-Kaya are divided into The Kaya- 
classes according to their ages; there are seven such va he 
classes or age-grades for the males and six for the females, into age- 
Each class or age-grade has its distinctive badges and mode aaa 
of wearing the hair. Amongst the males the first age- its distinct- 
grade (patur) comprises all boys up to puberty. These paren 
live with their parents in the village and are free to go of wearing 
anywhere. But as soon as the signs of puberty appear Se 
on their persons, they pass into the second age-grade Sees big 
(arot-patur) and are banished from the village, which they ; 
are forbidden to enter unless they fall ill, In that case 
they are carried to their father’s house in the village, but 

must shun the presence of women and girls. Otherwise 

"2 Alb. C Kruijt, Het Animisme in nederlandsch Aardrijkskundig Genoot~ 
den indischen Archipel (The Hague, schap, Tweede Serie, x. (1893) p. 635. 
1906), p. 122. 3 Dr. Rudolf Péch, ‘Travels in 

2 F. S. A. de Clercq, ** De West-en German, British, and Dutch New 
Noordkust van nederlandsch Nieuw- Guinea,” Zhe Geographical Journal, 
Guinea,” Zidschrift van het kon. xxx. (1907) pp. 614, 616. 

The flower 
of his 
youth. 

” 
Marriage. 

Old age. 

60 TOTEMISM IN NEW GUINEA CHAP. 

they live with the young men in the bachelors’ hall or 
men’s house, called gotad, which is built by itself behind 
the village in the forest or under the shadow of the coco- 
nut palms. There may be more than one such bachelors’ 
hall. Women may never enter one of these buildings 
when there are people in it, but the men often gather 
there. When the lad is fully developed, he passes into 
the third age-grade (wokravid or bokravid). He still may 
not enter the village, and the presence of women and 
girls is absolutely forbidden to him. If he sees one of 
them afar off on the path, he must hide himself or go 
round about to avoid her. The fourth age-grade (ewat?), 
which may last three or four years, is the heyday of life 
for a Kaya-Kaya man. He is now in the prime of youth 
and vigour, and decked out in all his dandified finery he 
preens and plumes himself like a cock strutting before his 
dames. He knows that the world admires him, and that 
the girls in particular peep after him with languishing eyes. 
Now is the time for him to set people talking of him and 
telling how brave he is in the chase after the wild boar or 
the kangaroo, what a Turk he proves himself on the war- 
path when the meh go out to snip off human heads. It is 
true that he must still avoid women, but when he knows 
that they are passing near the bachelors’ hall he will make 
a loud noise, so that they may say, “That’s he! What a 
young buck it is!” Now too is the time for him to 
choose a wife, if one has not been already reserved for 
him. He makes presents to the girl of his choice, and 
if she accepts them, the two are regarded as betrothed. 
The young man thus enters the fifth age-grade (szakzme), 
which is that of the betrothed men. He is now free to 
return to the village and to live there, and he ceases to 
avoid women, though good manners require him to appear 
somewhat shy and bashful in their presence. When he 
marries he passes into the sixth age-grade (asmnangib), 
which is that of the married men. He is now master of 
himself and of his wife; he is accountable to no man for 
his actions, for there are no chiefs and no judges. He 
lives a free man among his peers. When he grows old 
he passes into the seventh and last age-grade (smes-snzakitm), 

vi TOTEMISM IN DUTCH AND GERMAN NEW GUINEA 61 

which is that of the old men. He now receives the title 
of somb-anem, which may be translated “signior” or “great 
man,” and his opinion carries weight in council, Every 
man, if he lives to old age, must pass through all of these 
age-grades ; he may not omit any of them. The transition 
from one age-grade to another is always an occasion of 
feasting and dancing. 

The six age-grades of the women correspond to the Six age- 
seven of the men, except that there is none among them all 
which answers to the second age-grade of the men. Among 
the women the first two age-grades (called kivasum and 
wahuku respectively) comprise all girls up to the age of 
puberty. The third age-grade (Aivazum-iwag) answers to 
the ewati of the men. It is the time when a girl blossoms youth ana 
out in the pride of youthful beauty, the admired of all beauty. 
admirers, the cynosure of neighbouring eyes. In the fourth 
age-grade (¢wag) she is generally betrothed, and may either 
stay in the village or work in the plantations with the other 
women, But she is spared the heavy burdens and the hard 
toil; for care is taken to preserve the fresh bloom and grace 
of her youth till marriage. Hence the girls for the most 
part are plump and buxom. Strangers may not tamper 
with them in the presence of the men. More than one 
Chinaman and Malay has paid with his head for making 
too free with Kaya-Kaya maidens. The fifth age-grade Marriage 
(saf) is that of the married women. A wife is the slave of 44 toil. 
her husband. It is she who bends under the heavy load, 
while he saunters lightly behind her with his bow and 
arrows and perhaps a basket. However, he relieves her of 
the hardest field labour, hoeing the ground himself while she 
weeds it; and husband and wife may be seen side by side 
mending the ditches and cutting sago-palms and banana- 
trees. It is the wife’s business to pound the sago and bake 
it into cakes; and she cooks the venison. The sixth age- Declinin, 
grade (smes-iwag) is that of the old women. If she is hale %"* 
and hearty, an old woman will still go out to the plantations 
to help her husband or her gossips; while the feeble old 
crones potter about in the village, weaving mats, mending 
nets, or making cradles to rock their infant grandchildren, 
who in due time will grow up to tread the same long weary 

62 TOTEMISM IN NEW GUINEA CHAP. VI 

way till death calls them too to rest from their labours.’ 
So runs the common round of life for Kaya-Kaya men and 
women under the burning suns and in the verdurous forests 
of their native land. 

Such are the scanty indications of totemism and kindred 
institutions which I have been able to glean in German and 
Dutch New Guinea. It is to be hoped that future research 
in these vast territories will supplement our meagre informa- 
tion on the subject. 

1-P, H. Nollen, ‘Les Différentes 558-573) of this article is devoted to 
Classes d@’4ge dans la société kaia- a description of the various badges and 
kaia, Merauke, Nouvelle Guinée modes of wearing the hair which are 

Neéerlandaise,” Amthropos, iv. (1909) distinctive of the different age-grades. 
PP. 553-573- The greater part (pp. 

CHAPTER VII 
TOTEMISM IN MELANESIA 

§ 1. Melanesia and the Melanesians 

To the north-east, east, and south-east of New GuineaThe | 
stretches a long chain of islands from the Admiralty Islands een 
on the north-west to New Caledonia and the Loyalty Islands 
on the south-east. Between the extremities of the chain lie 
the islands of New Ireland (New Mecklenburg), New Britain 
(New Pomerania), the Solomon Islands, the Santa Cruz 
group, the Banks’ Islands, and the New Hebrides, while to 
the east of the New Hebrides is situated the group of the 
Fiji Islands. The whole of this archipelago, or rather chain 
of archipelagoes, is known as Melanesia or the Black Islands 
on account of the swarthy complexion of the natives. It 
lies altogether within the southern tropics. The islands are 
for the most part volcanic and very mountainous, with a 
fertile soil, fine forests, and luxuriant tropical vegetation. 
Many of the volcanoes are active, vomiting fire and smoke 
or rolling down tides of glowing lava. Some of the 
mountains are lofty. The Solomon Islands, for example, 
contain peaks of eight and ten thousand feet in height. 
Star Island, or Meralava, in the Banks’ Islands, is a massive 
cone towering so abruptly from the sea to a height of three 
thousand feet that strangers sailing past marvel that in- 
habitants should be found to cling to its steep shelving 
sides. The enormous crater of Ambrym in the New 
Hebrides, at the height of two thousand five hundred feet, 
is a centre of vast rugged fields of lava, hitherto unapproach- 
able, while round the main mass of the volcano rise extinct 
cones covered with forests to their summits and forming a 

63 

64 TOTEMISM IN MELANESIA CHAP, 

lovely landscape. In other of the islands also, particularly 
in Fiji and Esperitu Santo, one of the New Hebrides, the 
scenery is very beautiful, a land of high mountains, fair 
valleys, deep woods, and murmuring streams, arched by the 

The dreamy blue of the tropical sky.’ In themselves as in their 
ses a geographical situation the Melanesians appear to be inter- 
their mediate between the Papuans of New Guinea on the one 
language side and the Polynesians on the other. For while physically 
culture. the dark-skinned, woolly-haired Melanesians resemble the 
dark - skinned, woolly -haired Papuans,? the Melanesian 
language is distinct from the Papuan, but akin to the 
Polynesian, exhibiting the common speech in an older and 
fuller form. Socially and intellectually the Melanesians 
stand far above the level of the Australian aborigines ; for 
they till the soil, lead a settled life, build regular houses, 
use bows and arrows, construct outrigger canoes, and even 
employ various native mediums of exchange, of which the 
well-known shell-money is the most remarkable.‘ 
The For our purpose the vast number of islands which 
Melanesian 

Islands fal) Compose Melanesia may be conveniently distinguished into 

into four four great groups or archipelagoes, which I shall call 
ihe an Northern, Central, Southern, and Eastern Melanesia respec- 
oe. tively. Northern Melanesia consists of what is now named 
and | the Bismarck Archipelago, embracing the large islands of 
Eastern. 

New Britain -and New Ireland, together with the lesser 

islands of New Hanover, St. Mathias, the Admiralty 

1¥, H. H. Guillemard, Azestra- 
lasia, I. Malaysia and the Pacific 

H. Guillemard, of. cz¢. p. 458). 
2 J. Deniker, Zhe Races of Man 

Archipelagoes (London, 1894), pp. 430, 
431, 432, 435, 442, 444, 448, 450, 
451, 452, 456, 458, 467 sg.; R. H 
Codrington, The Alelanestans (Oxford, 
1891), pp. 12 sgg.; H. B. Guppy, 
The Solomon Islands: their Geology, 
General Features, etc. (London, 1887), 
pp: 1 sgg. Some glowing descriptions 
of Fijian scenery are given by Miss 
Beatrice Grimshaw, From Fiji to the 
Cannibal Islands (London, 1907), pp. 
43 59-5 54 sg., 76-78, 106, 109 sg. 
New Caledonia, the most southerly 
island of Melanesia, while very moun- 
tainous, differs somewhat from the 
other islands in its comparatively cool 
climate and scanty vegetation (F. H. 

(London, 1900), pp. 45, 4933 T. H. 
Huxley, MWan’s Place in Nature and 
other Anthropological Essays (London, 
1906), pp. 224 sg. 

3 Sidney H. Ray, in Reports of the 
Cambridge Anthropological Expedition 
to Torres Straits, vol. iii. Lingutstics 
(Cambridge, 1907), p. 528; R. H. 
Codrington, 7he Melanesian Languages 
(Oxford, 1885), pp. 10 sgg. 

4 J. Deniker, Zhe Races of Man, 
pp. 498 sg. As to the mediums of 
exchange, particularly the shell-money, 
see R. H. Codrington, 7he Melanesians, 
Pp. 323 sgg.; R. Parkinson, Dredssig 
Jahre in der Siidsee (Stuttgart, 1907), 
pp. 82 sq. 

vi MELANESIA AND THE MELANESIANS 65 

Islands, and the Duke of York Islands (New Lauenburg), 
these last being a small group between New Britain and 
New Ireland. Central Melanesia is composed of the Solomon 
Islands. Southern Melanesia comprises the Santa Cruz 
group, Torres Islands, the Banks’ Islands, the New Hebrides, 
the Loyalty Islands, and New Caledonia. Lastly, Eastern 
Melanesia consists of the Fijian archipelago. 

§ 2. Exogamous Classes in Melanesia 

Roughly speaking, over the whole of the Melanesian Exogamy 
Islands either exogamy or totemism or at least traces of van 
them have been found either separately or in conjunction. valent in 
The most notable exception to this general statement is raid 
presented by the large island of New Caledonia, where, so possible 
far as I know, neither totemism nor exogamy has been as cine 
yet discovered. Dr. Guillemard, indeed, tells us that “ the Caledonia. 
various tribes are bound together by alliance into two main 
bodies, after a system similar to that mentioned as existing 
in the Aru Islands,”! but whether these bodies are exo- 
gamous classes does not appear. However, the New Classi- 
Caledonians have apparently the classificatory system of ea 
relationship, which always raises a presumption of the exist- relation- 
ence, past or present, of exogamous classes. Thus, we are >” 
told that in New Caledonia first cousins, the children of two Caledonia. 
brothers or of two sisters, are regarded as themselves brothers 
and sisters, and must therefore strictly shun each other not 
only in marriage but in ordinary social intercourse, being 
forbidden to look at one another or to meet in a path. But Cousin 
on the other hand first cousins who are the children of a ™*8*s 
brother and a sister respectively are not regarded as brothers 
and sisters but merely as what we should call cousins, and 
there is no objection at all to their marrying each other ; 
on the contrary marriages between such cousins are thought 
particularly proper. Again, just as the sons of brothers are 
themselves called brothers, so each of them applies the name 

of “father” to every one of his father’s brothers; and in 

1 F, H. H. Guillemard, Australasia, Compendium of Geography and Travel). 
Il. Malaysia and the Pacific Archipela- As to the two brotherhoods of the Aru 
goes (London, 1894), p. 459 (Stanford’s Islands, see Below, pp. 200 sg. 

VOL. U F 

Extra- 
ordinary 
privileges 
enjoyed by 
a man in 
respect of 
his sister’s 
sons, 

66 TOTEMISM IN MELANESIA CHAP. 

this way it may happen that a man has five or six men, 
all of whom he calls his father, and some of whom may be 
younger than himself.’ All these are indubitable marks of 
the classificatory system of relationship. According to the 
experienced Catholic missionary, Father Lambert, children 
take the name of their father’s family, not of their mother’s ;? 
but -a clear trace of the mother-kin exists in the extra- 
ordinary privileges which a man enjoys in respect of his 
sister’s son, who under a system of mother-kin would be his 
male heir. Thus if a man has lost blood from any cause, 
and his mother’s brother sees the blood, he, the maternal 
uncle, at once pronounces the words za kout and thereby 
acquires very extensive rights over the property of his 
nephew. For example, if the nephew is out a-fishing and 
is bitten by a fish, his uncle may say ma fout and take 
away from him his net. If the nephew has fallen from a 
coco-nut palm and hurt himself, the uncle is free to take 
possession of his yam fields. If the nephew has been 
wounded in battle or in sport, if in sickness he has been 
bled by a doctor, the uncle may repair to the dwelling 
of’ his wounded relative and after seeing the blood he may 
carry off from the house whatever he pleases. The sufferer 
has no right to murmur. Accordingly when a New Cale- 
donian has hurt himself and knows that his uncles are in the 
neighbourhood, he conceals the accident, lest his affectionate 
relatives should get wind of it and hasten to pay him a 
series of domiciliary and predatory visits.» The remarkable 
privileges thus accorded to a maternal uncle in New 
Caledonia resemble those which in Fiji are mutually enjoyed 

jee? oY 
+ 

Po ~ ate Oy 
1 Le Bare Lambert, Meurs et super- 
Stitions des Néo-Calédoniens (Nouméa, 
1900), pp. 114 sg. 

2 Le Pere Lambert, of. cz¢. p. 82. He 
tells us that a tribe is composed of an 
aggregate of small tribes or family 
stocks (‘‘familles souches”), the houses 
of which are mixed, without being 
confounded, in the same village. As 
examples of these families he men- 
tions the Ouimoma, Teamboueonama, 
Bouaema, Oualairima, Powadilima, 
Boualoma. These families take their 
names from certain men of past times, 

Ouimo, Teamboueon, Bouae, Oualairi, 
Pouadili, Boualo, and so forth, When 
an Ouimo man marries a Teamboueon 
woman, the children are always 
Ouimoma. This, without amounting 
to an affirmation that the families 
are exogamous, points in the direc- 
tion of exogamy with paternal 
descent. 

3 Le Pere Lambert, of. céé. pp. 
115 sg. A custom of the same sort 
is practised by the Goajiro Indians 
of South America, See above, p, 

53- 

wh" EXOGAMOUS CLASSES IN MELANESIA 67 

by a man and his sister’s son (vasz),’ only that whereas in 
Fiji the balance of advantage would seem to be on the side 
of the nephew, in New Caledonia on the contrary it appears 
to be altogether on the side of the uncle. 

In most other parts of Melanesia the evidence for the pr. 
existence of exogamy, or of totemism, or at all events of piers 
something very like totemism, is comparatively plentiful. whether 
But while Melanesian exogamy is clearly identical in prin- 2S7sin 
ciple with the exogamy of Australia, Torres Straits, and Melanesia. 
New Guinea, it is not so certain that Melanesian totemism, 
if we may call it so, is identical in principle with the totemism 
of Australia and the other regions with which we have 
hitherto been concerned. Indeed the English missionary 
and scholar, the Rev. Dr. R. H. Codtington, who is our best 
authority on Central and Southern Melanesia, doubts whether 
the term totemism is applicable to the beliefs and customs of 
the islanders with which he is acquainted. Whether that be 
so or not, these customs and beliefs, taken along with the con- 
comitant system of exogamous classes, present a sufficiently 
close resemblance to true totemism to justify us in consider- 
ing them in this work. We shall begin our survey with 
Southern and Central Melanesia, that is, with those parts of 
the archipelago of which the natives have been described for 
us by Dr. Codrington. His book must always remain the 
standard authority on the subject, as indeed it is one of the 
fullest and most accurate accounts ever given of any savage 
race.” Its scope, he tells us, is confined to the Solomon Islands, 
Ysabel, Florida, Savo, Guadalcanar, Malanta (Malaita), San 
Cristoval, Ulawa, to the Santa Cruz group, the Banks’ and 
Torres Islands, and three of the Northern New Hebrides, 
Aurora, Pentecost, and Lepers’ Islands.’ 

“In the native view of mankind,” says Dr. Codrington, Melanesian 
“almost everywhere in the islands which are here under $750, 
consideration, nothing seems more fundmental than the into two 

1 See T. Williams, 7772 and the 
Fijians ® (London, 1860), i 34 sgg. 

2 R.H. Codrington, D.D., The Afela- 
nestans: Studies in thetr Anthropology 
and Folk-lore (Oxford, at the Clarendon 
Press, 1891), See also R. H. Codring- 
ton, ** Notes on the Customs of Mota, 
Banks Islands,” with remarks by the 

Rev. Lorimer Fison, 7vansactions and 
Proceedings of the Royal Society of Vic- 
toria, xvi, (1880) pp. 119-143. 

3 R. H. Codrington, Zhe J/elan- 
esians, p. 2. The Torres Islands are 
not to be confused with the islands of 
Torres Straits. 

or more 
exogamous 
classes with 
maternal 
descent. 

The 
exogamous 
classes of 
Melanesia 
are analo- 
gous to 
those of 
Australia. 

Group re- 
lationships, 

68 TOTEMISM IN MELANESIA CHAP, 

division of the people into two or more classes, which are 
exogamous, and in which descent is counted through the 
mother. This seems to stand foremost as the native looks 
out upon his fellow-men ; the knowledge of it forms probably 
the first social conception which shapes itself in the mind of 
the young Melanesian of either sex, and it is not too much 
to say that this division is the foundation on which the fabric 
of native society is built up. There are no Tribes among 
the natives; if the word tribe is to be applied as it is to the 
Maori people of New Zealand, or as it is used in Fiji. No 
portion of territory, however small, can be said to belong to 
any one of these divisions ; no single family of natives can 
fail to consist of members of more than one division; both 
divisions where there are two, and all the divisions where 
there are more than two, are intermixed in habitation and in 
property ; whatever political organization can be found can 
never be described as that of a tribe grouped round its 
hereditary or elective chief.”! 

Thus the exogamous classes of Melanesia are strictly 
analogous to those of Australia. They are in no sense 
tribes, clans, or septs; they are social divisions which have 
no other function than that of regulating marriage. And 
just as in Australia so in Melanesia the distribution of the 
community into exogamous classes determines the relations 
in which every member of it stands to every other and the 
terms in which he expresses it. Here, as elsewhere, the 
classificatory terms of relationship express the group relations 
which are a direct consequence of the division.of the people 
into exogamous groups or classes. “Speaking generally,” 
observes Dr. Codrington, “it may be said that toa Melanesian 
man all women, of his own generation at least, are either 
sisters or wives ; to the Melanesian woman all men are either 
brothers or husbands, An excellent illustration of this is 
given in the story of Taso from Aurora in the New Hebrides, 
in which Qatu discovers and brings to his wife twin boys, 
children of his dead sister; his wife asks, ‘Are these my 
children or my husbands?’ and Qatu answers, ‘Your husbands 
to be sure, they are my sister’s children.” In that island 
there are two divisions of the people; Qatu and his wife 

!R. H. Codrington, Zhe Alelanesians, p. 21. 

vi EXOGAMOUS CLASSES IN MELANESIA 69 

could not be of the same, Qatu and his sister and her 
children must be of the same; the beys therefore were 
possible husbands of Qatu’s wife, but had they belonged to 

the other division their age would have made her count them 

her children rather than her brothers, It must not be under- 
stood that a Melanesian regards all women who are not of his 

own division as in fact his wives, or conceives himself to have 
rights which he may exercise in regard to those women of 
them who are unmarried ; but the women who may be his 
wives by marriage, and those who cannot possibly be so, 
stand in a widely different relation to him; and it may be 
added that all women who may become wives in marriage 

and are not yet appropriated, are to a certain extent looked 

upon by those who may be their husbands as open to a 
more or less legitimate intercourse. In fact appropriation 

of particular women to their own husbands, though estab- 
lished by every sanction of native custom, has by no means 

so strong a hold in native society, nor in all probability 
anything like so deep a foundation in the history of the 
native people, as the severance of either sex by divisions 
which most strictly limit the intercourse of men and women 

to those of the section or sections to which they do not 
themselves belong.” ? 

_ Thus Dr. Codrington’s view of the relation in which Individual 
among the Melanesians individual marriage stands to the eee 
exogamous classes accords perfectly with the view which tion on 
the best authorities on the Australian aborigines take of &5°? ” 
the relation in which individual marriage stands to the 
exogamous classes in Australia. In both these regions 
individual marriage is probably an innovation on an older 
system of group marriage, that is, of the marriage relations 
which are determined -by the exogamous classes and ex- 
pressed by the classificatory terms of relationship. 

§ 3. Totemism and Exogamy in Southern Melanesia 

In the Banks’ Islands and the Northern New Hebrides In the 
the exogamous classes or kins, as Dr. Codrington calls them, Fos, 
are only two in number ; and the system, with its descent in and the 

1 R. H. Codrington, The Afelanesians, pp. 22 59. 

Northern 
New 
Hebrides 
there are 
only two 
exogamous 
classes, 
with 
descent 

in the 
female line. 

jo TOTEMISM IN MELANESIA CHAP. 

the female line, corresponds accordingly to the simple two- 
class system of the Urabunna and other Australian tribes, 
Each of these classes is called a veve or vev, which properly 
means “mother.” But neither in the Banks’ Islands nor in 
the New Hebrides have the exogamous classes names to dis- 
tinguish them from each other, nor has either of them any 
badge or emblem ; “in their small communities every neigh- 
bour is well known.”? Thus we see that when the exogamous 
divisions are few in number, the Melanesians, like some of 
the Central Australians? are quite able to discriminate 
between them without having recourse to distinctive names 
for the divisions. And just as among the Australians so 
among the natives of the Banks’ Islands, the Torres Islands, 
and the Northern New Hebrides each of these exogamous 
classes has its recognised equivalent in the neighbouring 
communities, even though the languages of these communities 
are different. Thus a Banks’ Islander knows who are of his 
own class and who are not in every island of his own group 
which he visits; and if he passes to Aurora in the New 
Hebrides he finds the equivalents of the two classes there 
also. Similarly the Aurora men know well who are of their 
class in Pentecost and Lepers’ Island; and the Lepers’ 
Islanders know their class in Espiritu Santo. Those who 
are of one class (veve) are said to be ¢avala ima to the others, 
that is “of the other side of the house.” A woman who 
marries does not come over to her husband’s side of the 
house, that is, she does not join his class (veve), but she is 
said to be “at the door” (ape mateima), the doors being at 
the ends of the native houses. Nor does the husband come 
over to his wife’s side of the house; that is, he does not join 
her class. The children all belong to their mother’s side ; 
that is, they take her class. All of the same class are sogoz 
to one another. Hence a man’s children are not his sogoz, 
since they belong to the other exogamous class ; his nearest 
relations in the next generation are his sister’s children.* 

Not only are the members of each class forbidden to 

1R, H. Codrington, Zhe Melan- 2 See above, vol. i. pp. 264 sg. 

estans, pp. 24 sg. As to veve or vev 3 R. H, Codrington, Zhe Melan- 
meaning ‘‘mother,” see R. H. Cod- eszans, p. 24. 

rington, Zhe Alelanesian Languages #R. H. Codrington, of. cz. p. 
(Oxford, 1885), p. 47- 25. 

vi TOTEMISM IN SOUTHERN MELANESIA 71 

marry within their own class and obliged to seek their wives tregular 
or husbands, as the case may be, in the other class, but os 
irregular intercourse between members of the same class is marriage is 
regarded as a crime, as incest. Formerly in the island of (ridden 
Florida a man who committed such a crime would have members 
been killed and the woman would have been made a harlot ; rab eect 
now that the severity of ancient manners has been relaxed «lass. 
money and pigs can condone the offence, but a much heavier 
fine is exacted than if a man had been caught sinning with 
a woman of the other class, who might have been his wife. 
In the Banks’ Islands, if it became known that two members 
of the same class had been guilty of this disgraceful crime, 
as they considered it, the people of the other class would 
come and destroy the gardens of persons who belonged to 
the same class as the erring couple, nor would the persons 
so attacked offer resistance or utter a complaint. It was 
the same in Lepers’ Island, where the seducer had to make 
large payment to the near relatives of the woman he had 
seduced in order to appease their anger and “fence against ” 
the fault. But cases of incest of this sort were always rare 
in all the islands; so strong was the feeling against the 
commerce of the sexes within the class.) On the other 
hand the feeling that the intercourse of the sexes was 
natural when the man and woman belonged to different 
classes, was shewn by the form of native hospitality which 
provided a guest with a temporary wife. The observance of 
this custom is now readily denied in the Solomon and Banks’ 
Islands, but it is not denied in the Northern New Hebrides, 
and Dr. Codrington thinks there can be little doubt that it 
was once common everywhere. Only the woman lent to 
the guest must be one who might have been his wife; she 
must belong to the other exogamous class (veve).? 

These facts are rightly adduced by Dr. Codrington as 
evidence that individual marriage, or the appropriation of 

2R. H. Codrington, Zhe Alelan- 
estans, pp. 23 sg. However, in Araga, 
Pentecost Island, though irregular in- 
tercourse between persons of the same 
class is punished with the destruction 
of the gardens of the offending side by 
members of the other, yet marriages 
within the class are not unknown. 

Those who contract them are despised 
and even abhorred, but money and pigs 
have been given and received, and so 
the marriage is allowed to stand. See 
R. H. Codrington, of. cz. p. 26. 

2 R. H. Codrington, of. cit. p. 
24. 

72 TOTEMISM IN MELANESIA CHAP. 

Arethe particular women to their own husbands, has neither so 
pier strong a hold on the people nor so deep a foundation in 
relics of an their history as the exogamy of the classes ; in other words, 

cone they tend to shew that individual marriage was preceded by 
ee group marriage. The question whether the exogamous 
classes (veve) are in fact traces of an old communal system’ 

of marriage among the Melanesians has been raised by Dr. 
Codrington. He points out on the one hand that the natives 

have no memory of a time when all the women of one side 

were in fact common wives to all the men of the other side, 

and that there is no occasion on which the women become 
common to the men who are not of their class. The licence 

at festive gatherings is confessed to be great, but it is dis- 

orderly and illegitimate, and is not defended on the ground 

Inthe of prescription.’ But “on the other side,” says Dr. Codring- 
eee te ton, “is to be set the testimony, the strong testimony, of 
terms for words. This is given by the plural form in which the terms 
moe, for ‘mother’ and ‘husband’ or ‘wife’ are expressed. In 
rae the Mota? language the form is very clear ;. va is the plural 
the plural Prefix ; the division, side, or kin, is the veve, and mother is 
pet they ya veve; soai is a;member, as of a body, or a component 
‘ accordingly part of a house or of a tree, and 7a soaz is either husband or 
toa time . Wife. To interpret va as a prefix of dignity is forbidden by 
relation- the full consciousness of the natives themselves that it 
pinnae expresses plurality. The kin is the veve, a child’s mother is 
toexis ‘they of the kin, his kindred. A man’s kindred are not 
eto called his veve because they are his mother’s people ; she is 
rather than called his veve, in the plural, his kindred, as if she were the 
pines representative of the kin; as if he were not the child of the 
particular woman who bore him, but of the whole kindred 

for whom she brought him into the world. By a parallel 

use to this a plural form is given to the Mota word for child, 
veremera, with a doubled plural sign; a single boy is called 

not ‘child’ but ‘children, as if his individuality were not 
distinguished from the common offspring of his veve. The 

same plural prefix is found in other Banks’ Island words 
meaning mother; rave in Santa Maria, ve¢ve in Vanua Lava, 

reme in Torres Islands. The mother is called vatahkz in 
. td 
1B. H. Codrington, The Melanesians, p. 27. 
2 Mota is one of the Banks’ Islands. 

vil TOTEMISM IN SOUTHERN MELANESIA 73 

Whitsuntide, and ratahig? in Lepers’ Island, that is the sisters, 
the sisterhood, because she represents the sister members of 
the wazvung who are the mothers generally of the children. 
Similarly the one word used for husband or wife has the 
plural form. In Mota a man does not call his wife a member’ 
of him, a component part of him, but his members, his com- 
ponent parts ; and so a wife speaks of her husband. It is 
not that the man and his wife make up a composite body 
between them, but that the men on the one side and the 
women on the other make up a composite married body. 
The Mota people know that the word they use means this ; 
it was owned to myself that it was so, with a Melanesian 
blush, and a protestation that the word did not represent a 
fact.” ? 

If the plural forms for the Melanesian words meaning Ciassi- 
mother, husband, wife, and child thus point to a time when erat - 
only relations between groups were recognised and relations relation- 
between individuals were ignored, the same inference may 30" o.. 
_ be drawn from the classificatory system of relationship which of the 
in common with so many savages the Melanesians employ. rie 
Thus to take the classificatory system of Mota, one of the 
Banks’ Islands, which may serve as a representative example, 

a man applies the same term ¢amaz to his father and to his 
father’s brothers; he applies the same term veve to his 
mother and to his mother’s sisters; he applies the same 
term atuz to his own children and to the children of his 
brothers ; and a woman applies the same term matui to her 
own children and to the children of her sisters. In fact, as 
Dr. Codrington puts it, “all of one generation within the 
family connexion are called fathers and mothers of all the 
children who form the generation below them; a man’s 
brothers are called fathers of his children, a woman’s sisters 
are called mothers of her children; a father’s brothers call 
his children theirs, a mother’s sisters call her children theirs.” ® 
It is true that this wide application of the terms father and 
mother does not imply any vagueness in the minds of the 

1 Watvung is the name for an exo- The Afelanesians, p. 26. 

gamous class (zqve) in Lepers’ Island : 2 R. H. Codrington, 7he Afelan- 
the word means a bunch of fruit, as if estans, pp. 28 sg. 
all the members of the same class hung 3 R. H. Codrington, of. c#t. p. 363 

on one stalk. See R. H. Codrington, compare 2d. pp. 35-39. 

The 
Melanesian 
use of 
the terms 
‘¢ father ” 
and 

“« mother 
do not 
imply 
physical 
paternity 
and 
maternity. 

Children 
belong to 
the exo- 
gamous 
class (veve) 
of their 
mother, 

74 TOTEMISM IN MELANESIA CHAP. 

natives of the present day as to physical paternity and 
maternity; they know quite well what women bore and 
what men begot what children, and they can distinguish if 
necessary between the real and the nominal parents.’ 
Nevertheless the extended use of terms which we translate 
“father” and “mother” points to a time when the meaning 
of the words was very different from that of physical pater- 
nity and maternity. For under the system which we are 

” considering a boy is sometimes called “father” to a man 

who is old enough to be his natural father, or “grandfather ” 
to a man of his own age Similarly, a girl may be 
“mother” to a woman who is old enough to be her real 
mother, and “grandmother” to a woman of her own age. 
But no Melanesian in such a case is so foolish as to imagine 
that the boy begat the man or that the girl gave birth to 
the grown woman. It is obvious, therefore, that the Melan- 
esians, like all peoples who employ the classificatory system 
of relationship, attach a meaning very different from that 
of physical paternity and maternity to the terms which we 
translate “father” and “mother.” Here as elsewhere the 
application of the classificatory terms of relationship is only 
intelligible on the ‘hypothesis that there was a time in the 
history of the race when a group of women were the common 
wives of a group of men, and when all the men were the 
“fathers” and all the women were the “ mothers” of all the 
children born of the group marriage, these terms “ father” 
and “mother” signifying merely that the persons so desig- 
nated were members of intermarrying groups, not at all that 
they had begotten or borne, as the case might be, all the 
children whom they called their sons and daughters. Unless 
we can thus distinguish the classificatory sense of these terms 
from our own, it is vain to attempt to understand the primi- 
tive history of marriage. 

Although in these islands the system of mother-kin 
prevails, since children belong to the exogamous class (veve) 
of their mother and not of their father, nevertheless “it 
must be understood that the mother is in no way the head 
of the family. The house of the family is the father’s, the 

1 R. H. Codrington, Zhe A/elan- 2 R. H. Codrington, op. cit, Pp. 39 
estans, pp. 36 sg. note}, 

vu TOTEMISM IN SOUTHERN MELANESIA 75 

garden is his, the rule and government are his; it is into and their 
the father’s house that the young bridegroom takes his wife, °°", 
if he has not one ready of his own. The closest relation- tion is not 
ship, however, according to native customs, is that which "sae 
exists between the sister’s son and the mother’s brother, mother's 
because the mother who transmits the kinship is not able lees 
to render the service which a man can give. A man’s sons 

are not of his own kin, though he acts a father’s part to 

them ; but the tie between his sister’s children and himself 

has the strength of the traditional bond of all native society, 

that of kinship through the mother. The youth, as he 
begins to feel social wants, over and above the food and 
shelter that his father gives him, looks to his mother’s 
brother as the male representative of his kin. It is well 
known that in Fiji the vasz, the sister’s son, has extra- 
ordinary rights with his maternal uncle. The correspond- 

ing right is much less conspicuous and important than this 

in the Melanesian Islands west of Fiji; but it is a matter of 

course that the nephew should look to his mother’s brother 

for help of every kind, and that the uncle should look upon 

his sister’s son as his special care; the closeness of this 
relation is fundamental.” ? 

While in these islands marriage is regulated by the The exo- 
distribution of the whole community into two exogamous Fumes. | 
classes, the simple rule that a man may not marry a woman classes is 
of his own class is supplemented, as usually happens, by SYPPIe: by 
further rules which prevent him from marrying women who mules which 
are nearly related to him, even though they belong to the raerage 
class into which he is allowed to marry. Such women are between 
his female first cousins, the daughters of his mother’s fear-of tin: 
brother or of his father’s sister: his other female first Particularly 
cousins, namely the daughters of his mother’s sisters and cousins. 
of his father’s brothers, necessarily belong to his own 
exogamous class, and being therefore debarred from him by 
the rule of class exogamy need not be considered here. 

But the rule of class exogamy raises no barrier to the 
marriage of a man with his first cousin when she is the 
daughter of his mother’s brother or of his father’s sister, 
since in either of these cases she belongs to the other 

1 R, H. Codrington, The Melanesians, p. 34- 

Custom of 
avoidance 
between a 
man and 
his mother- 
in-law, 

* not come near him. 

76 TOTEMISM IN MELANESIA + CHAP, 

exogamous class from which he is bound to take a wife. 
Indeed in some tribes, for instance the Urabunna in 
Australia, we have seen that such a first cousin is a man’s 
proper wife But among the Melanesians of the Banks’ 
Islands the marriage of such cousins is forbidden by custom, 
though not by the law of the classes; the children of a 
brother and a sister, though they necessarily belong to 
different exogamous classes, are nevertheless regarded as 
too near akin to marry; if they married they would be 
said to “go wrong.” ? 

Similarly, the two-class system with female descent, 
which prevails in these islands, permits a man to marry his 
mother-in-law, since she necessarily belongs to the same 
exogamous class as his wife; but custom strictly interdicts 
such marriages. Not only does it forbid them to marry, 
but as usual it also forbids them to hold ordinary social 
intercourse with each other. In the Banks’ Islands these 
rules of avoidance and reserve are very strict and minute. 
A man will not come near his wife’s mother and she will 
If the two chance to meet in a path, 
the woman will step out of it and stand with her back 
turned till he has gone by, or perhaps, if it be more con- 
venient, he will move out of the way. At Vanua Lava, in 
Port Patteson, a man would not even follow his mother-in- 
law along the beach until the rising tide had washed her 
footprints from the sand. Yet a man and his mother-in-law 
may talk to each other at a distance; but a woman will on 
no account mention the name of her daughter’s husband, 
nor will he name hers. On the other hand a man does 
not avoid his wife’s father nor does a woman avoid her 
husband’s father, though neither of them will mention their 
father-in-law’s name.? In the New Hebrides the practice is 
much the same as in the Banks’ Islands. For example, in 
Lepers’ Island a man and his mother-in-law will not come 
near each other, but they may converse; only when he 

1 See above, vol. i. pp. 177 sgg. 

2 R. H. Codrington, Zhe Afelan- 
estans, p. 29. 

3 R. H. Codrington, of. cit. pp. 
42-44. In the Solomon Islands, 
according to Dr. Codrington, there 

is little avoidance between a man 
and his mother-in-law. But we are 
at present dealing with the marriage 
customs of the Southern Melanesians, 
not of the Central Melanesians, to 
whom the Solomon Islanders belong. 

Vil TOTEMISM IN SOUTHERN MELANESIA 97 

speaks to her, she must turn away. She may not address 
him by his name, though she does not mind using it in 
speaking of him to others. Here, too, as in the Banks’ 
Islands a woman does not avoid her husband’s father.’ 
Hence it appears that in the eyes of these people the tie 
between a woman and her daughter’s husband is closer than 
that between a man and his son’s wife. This agrees with 
what we have observed elsewhere ® and what we might have 
anticipated on general grounds, namely, that in an early 
stage of society the bond between a mother and her child is 
tighter than that between a father and his child, in other 
words, that maternity counts for more than paternity. 

That all such customs of mutual avoidance between a 
man and his wife’s mother originated in an instinctive feeling 
that they ought not to marry each other though the class 
system permitted them to do so, is, as we have seen, the 
view of Dr. A. W. Howitt,’ and it is by far the most prob- 
able explanation of the custom that has yet been pro- 
pounded. So far as the people we are now dealing with are Custom of 
concerned, the theory is to some extent confirmed by the *vodance 

between 
parallel rules of avoidance which are observed among them, brothers 

on the one hand between a mother and her sons, and on the 8"9 °°" 
other hand between brothers and sisters. Thus in Lepers’ between 
Island, one of the New Hebrides, when a boy has reached a ai 
certain age he no longer lives at home, as he had hitherto 

done, but takes up his quarters in the club-house (gama/z), 

where he now regularly eats and sleeps. “And now begins 

his strange and strict reserve of intercourse with his sisters 

and his mother. This begins in full force towards his 
sisters; he must not use as a common noun the word 

which is the name or makes part of the name of any of 

them, and they avoid his name as carefully. He may go to 

his father’s house to ask for food, but if his sister is within 

he has to go away before he eats; if no sister is there he 

can sit down near the door and eat. If by chance brother 

and sister meet in the path she runs away or hides. Ifa 

1 R. H. Codrington, Ze MMelax- never marriages of mothers with their 
estans, p. 45. sons, See above, p. 40, and below, 
2 Among exogamous peoples wep. 118. 
sometimes find marriages of fathers 
with their daughters permitted, but 3 See above, vol. i. p. 285 note. 

Such rules 
of avoid- 
ance are 
apparently 
intended 
to guard 
against 
the risk of 
improper 
relations 
between 
these near 
kinsfolk. 

TOTEMISM IN MELANESIA CHAP. 

78 

boy on the sands knows that certain footsteps are his sister’s, 
he will not follow them, nor will she his. This mutual 
avoidance begins when the boy is clothed or the girl 
tattooed. The partition between boys and girls without 
which a school cannot be carried on is not there to divide 
the sexes generally, but to separate brothers and _ sisters. 
This avoidance continues through life. The reserve between 
son and mother increases as the boy grows up, and is much 
more on her side than his. He goes to the house and asks 
for food ; his mother brings it out but does not give it him, 
she puts it down for him to take; if she calls him to come 
she speaks to him in the plural, in a more distant manner ; 
‘Come ye, she says, mz vanai, not ‘Come thou’ If 
they talk together she sits at a little distance and turns 
away, for she is shy of her grown-up son. The meaning of 
all this is obvious.” 

In fact, such rules of avoidance seem only explicable on 
the hypothesis that they originate in a horror of sexual inter- 
course between a brother and a sister or between a mother 
and her son, a horror which has led the people consciously or 
unconsciously to remove as far as possible all temptations to 
such incest by socially dividing brothers from their sisters and 
mothers from their sons. The difference between these cases 
and the avoidance of a man and his mother-in-law is that, 
whereas under the two-class system with female descent a 
man and his mother-in-law belong to different exogamous 
classes and are therefore theoretically marriageable, brothers 
and sisters, mothers and sons belong to the same exogamous 
class and are therefore not even theoretically marriageable to 
each other. The reason why the custom of avoidance is still 
observed between the two latter sets of relations, though they 
are already excluded from each other by the rule of class 
exogamy, may be a feeling that incest with a sister or a 
mother is a crime so great that the rule of class exogamy 

1R. H. Codrington, Zhe Alelan- 
estans, p. 232. The mutual avoidance 
of brother and sister is found also in 
New Caledonia. A brother and sister 
do not lodge in the same house, and 
do not look at each other. If they 
meet by chance on a path, the sister 

will throw herself into the bushes 
or into water to avoid her brother, 
and he will pass on without turning 
his head. See Le Pere Lambert, A/eurs 
et superstitions des, Néo- Calédoniens 
(Nouméa, 1900), p. 114. 

vil TOTEMISM IN SOUTHERN MELANESIA 79 

is an insufficient safeguard against it, and that it needs to 

be reinforced by other rules or customs which deepen and 

widen the gulf between these near relations. If most 
peoples, both barbarous and civilised, who share the horror 

at such unions, nevertheless place no social obstacles between 
brothers and sisters, between mothers and their sons, the 
reason may be that by inheritance through many generations 

the abstention from incest with sisters and mothers has 
become so habitual and instinctive in all normally consti- 

tuted persons that the external barriers which were once 

placed between brothers and sisters, between mothers and 

sons, have grown superfluous and so have gradually fallen 

away of themselves. The widespread custom of lodging The 
the young unmarried men in houses apart from their families anes 
may have been one of these artificial barriers ; it may have unmarriea 
been adopted for the purpose of preventing a dangerous frirate 
intimacy between the youths and their mothers and sisters. houses is 
At least the Melanesian practice described by Dr. Codring- scones 
ton points in this direction ; for the marked avoidance of a against 
youth by his mother and sisters begins just at the time ee 
when he becomes sexually dangerous and when, therefore, 

he is banished from the home to sleep with other males in 

the public club-house. Such club-houses, where the un- 
married men lodge away from their families, are common in 

New Guinea, Melanesia, and other parts of the world.’ 

In that part of Melanesia which is described by Dr. Custom 
Codrington “the Levirate obtains as a matter of course. oo 
The wife has been obtained for one member of a family by 
the contributions of the whole, and if that member fails by 
death, some other is ready to take his place, so that the 
property shall not be lost; it is a matter of arrangement for 
convenience and economy whether a brother, cousin, or 
uncle of the deceased shall take his widow. The brother 
naturally comes first; if a more distant relation takes the 
woman he probably has to give a pig. In Lepers’ Island if 
a man who is a somewhat distant cousin of the deceased 
wishes to take the widow, he adds a pig to the death-feast 
of the tenth or fiftieth day to signify and support his 
pretensions, and he probably gives another pig to the 

1 See H. Schurtz, Altersklassen und Mannerbinde (Berlin, 1902), pp. 202 sg, 

In 
Melanesia, 
the Levi- 
rate rests 
on an 
economic 
basis ; it 
is nota 
relic of 
polyandry. 

Traces of 

totemism 

in Southern 
* Melanesia. 

Ceremony 
performed 
by a man 
of the 
Octopus 
family to 
catch 
octopuses. 

80 TOTEMISM IN MELANESIA CHAP, - 

widow’s sisters to obtain their good-will. If two men 
contend for the widow she selects one, and the fortunate 
suitor gives a pig to the disappointed. In fact a woman, 
when once the proper payment has been made for her, 
belongs to those who have paid, the family generally ; hence 
a man, as in the story of Ganviviris, will set up his sister's 
son in life by handing over to him one of his own wives ; 
not because the young man has a right to his uncle’s wives, 
but because the woman is already in the family.”' Thus 
in Melanesia the custom of the Levirate at the present day 
rests on a purely commercial or economic basis: the widow 
has been bought and paid for by the family, she is their 
property, and they will not part with her, at least without 
compensation. Here, as in most parts of the world, there 
is no evidence that the Levirate is derived, as J. F. McLennan 
thought, from a practice of polyandry; for in Melanesia 
“anything properly called Polyandry is unknown, nor is it 
easy for natives to conceive of it as a possible marriage 
state.” * 

Thus far we have found only exogamy in its simplest 
form among the natives of Southern Melanesia, the whole 
community being divided into two intermarrying classes with 
descent in the female line. It remains to ask, is the system 
of exogamous classes combined with totemism in Southern 
Melanesia as it is in so many other places? The traces of 
totemism which Dr. Codrington has found in these islands 
are few. In the northern part of Aurora, one of the New 
Hebrides, there is a family which is named after the octopus 
(wirtta); and if a man of another family desired to catch 
and eat octopus, he would take one of the Octopus family 
with him to stand on the shore and cry “So-and-so wants 
octopus,” after which plenty of fhe fish would be taken. 
This custom closely resembles the magical ceremonies 
(txtichiuma) of totem clans in Central Australia who provide 

1 R. H. Codrington, Zhe Alelan- 
estans, pp. 244 59. 

2R. H. Codrington, of. cz. p. 
245. However, Dr. Codrington adds: 
*« Still cases are known in the Banks’ 
Islands where two widowers live 
with one widow, and she is called 
wife to both, any child. she may have 

being called the child of both. Such 
cohabitation, however, is not so much 
marriage as a convenient arrangement 
for people who find themselves alone 
in later life” (of. cét. pp. 245 sg.). 
The writer mentions a few more excep- 
tions or apparent exceptions. 

VII TOTEMISM IN SOUTHERN MELANESTA 81 

other people with a supply of their totem animals or plants 

to eat. However, this Octopus family in Aurora have no 

scruple about eating the fish from which they take their 

name, nor do they trace their descent from it! If this is 

totemism, it is totemism in decay. Again, in Lifu, one of Dead _ 

the Loyalty Islands, when a father was about to die, he pope 

might tell his family what sort of animal he would be after butterflies. 

his death, it might be a bird or a butterfly. Henceforth 

creatures of that sort would be sacred to his family, who 

would neither hurt nor kill one of them. If a member of 

the family happened to light on one of the sacred birds or 

butterflies or whatever it might be, he would say, “ That is 

papa” and offer him a coco-nut.2 Similar customs occur, 

as we shall see, in the Solomon Islands. Such beliefs and 

practices clearly tend to establish totemism or something 

which resembles totemism so closely that it might be 

indistinguishable from it; for if the prohibition to kill and 

eat the sacred animal became hereditary in a family and 

were explained by a transformation of an ancestor into the 

animal, such a family would be to all intents a totem clan. 

But to this point we shall return later on. : 
Further, in some parts of the Banks’ Islands and _ the Belief of 

New Hebrides certain of the natives believe that their life ‘Me natves 

is associated with a material object, whether an animal, a Banks’ 

plant, or an inanimate thing, which might be described as 1##nds 

that their 

their personal or individual totem. In Mota, one of the life is 
Banks’ Islands, such a personal totem, if we may call it so, #sociate 
’ P' > Y » inseparably 

is named an ataz or a tamaniu; in Aurora, one of the New ules tay 
° . . . . ° . . materia: 
Hebrides, it is called a nunu; and it is highly significant object, 

that the first two of these terms (ataz and tamaniu) are in arpa 

different islands the accepted -equivalents of the English avai, 

“soul.” The following is Dr. Codrington’s account of these 77", 
Or munu. 

curious objects, in which a portion of a man’s life, or what 
has been called his external soul, is apparently supposed to 
reside: “The use of the word afaz in Mota seems properly 
and originally to have been to signify something peculiarly 

1 R. H. Codrington, Zhe Ale/an- ing a note of Mr. Sleigh of Lifu. 
estans, p. 26. 3 R. H. Codrington, Zhe Alelan- 

2 E. B. Tylor, “Remarks on Totem- estans, pp. 249, 251. The word for 
ism,” Journal of the Anthropological ‘*soul” in Mota is afaz, in Aurora it 
Institute, xxviii. (1899) p. 147, quot- 1s Zanianzu. 

VOL. II c 

82 TOTEMISM IN MELANESIA CHAP, 

and intimately connected with a person and sacred to him, 
something that he has set his fancy upon when he has seen 
it in what has seemed to him a wonderful manner, or some 
one has shewn it to him as such. Whatever the thing 
might be the man believed it to be the reflection of his own 
personality ; he and his @¢az flourished, suffered, lived and 
died together. But the word must not be supposed to have 
been borrowed from this use and applied secondarily to 
describe the soul; the word carries a sense with it which is 
applicable alike to that second self, the visible object so 
mysteriously connected with the man, and to this invisible 
second self which we call the soul. There is another Mota 
word, famaniu, which has almost if not quite the same 
meaning as ataz has when it describes something animate or 
inanimate which a man has come to believe to have an 
existence intimately connected with his own. The word 
tamaniu may be taken as properly ‘likeness,’ and the noun 
Mode of form of the adverb éama, as, like. It was not every one in 
procuring Mota who had his tamaniu; only some men fancied that 
a tamaniu, s ‘. i ” 
they had this relation to a lizard, a snake, or it might be a 
stone; sometimes the thing was sought for and found by 
drinking the infusion of certain leaves and heaping together 
the dregs; then whatever living thing was first seen in or 
upon the heap was the ¢amaniu, It was watched but not 
fed or worshipped ; the natives believed that it came at call, 
and that the life of the man was bound up with the life of 
his ¢amaniu, if a living thing, or with its safety ; should it 
die, or if not living get broken or be lost, the man would 
die. Hence in case of sickness they would send to see if 
the ¢amaniu was safe and well. This word has never been 
used apparently for the soul in Mota; but in Aurora in the 
New Hebrides it is the accepted equivalent. It is well 
worth observing that both the a¢az and the ¢amaniu, and it 
may be added the Motlav /a/egz, is something which has a 
substantial existence of its own, as when a snake or stone is 
a man’s afai or famaniu; a soul then when called by these 
names is conceived of as something in a way substantial.”? 
Again, the word xunu “is used in Aurora to describe the 
fancied relation of an infant to some thing or person from 
1 R. H. Codrington, Ze A/elanesians, pp. 250 59- 

vIr TOTEMISM IN SOUTHERN MELANESIA 

83 

which or from whom its origin is somehow derived. A woman The xunu 
before her child is born fancies that a cocoa-nut, bread-fruit, thine which 
or some such thing has some original connexion with her a pregnant 
infant. When the child is born it is the manu of the cocoa- fancifully 

nut, or whatever it may be, and as it grows up it must by associated 
no means eat that thing, or it will be ill; no one thinks that alerts 
there is any real connexion in the way of parentage, but the again 
child is a kind of echo. There is another way in which a when the 
child is the xuxu of a person deceased. Thus Arudulewari child grows 
is the xunu of a boy whom his mother brought up and who must by no 
was much beloved by her. This boy died not long before char hing 
Arudulewari was born, and then the mother believed that 
her foster-child had wished to come back to her, and that 
the infant was his unu. But Arudulewari is not that 
person, nor, as he says, is his soul supposed to be the soul 
of the dead boy; he himself is the xunu, the echo or 
reflection of him. So Vilemalas, a name which means 
‘ Bring-the-day-after,’ was born after an adopted child of 
his mother’s had been killed and not brought back till the 
day after, and he is the ~unu of the slain person come in 
his place. In Mota there is no such use of zunuai} but 
there is a notion that a man may have something not 
exactly his ataz or tamaniu, with which he is originally 
connected. A man will scatter money into a deep pool 
among the rocks on the shore into which the tide is pouring, 
a sacred place ; he will call on his near forefathers, dive in, 
and seat himself upon the bottom. If he sees anything 
there, a crab or cuttle-fish perhaps, he fancies that.is his 
real origin and beginning ; he gets szaxa, supernatural power, 
from it, and pigs will multiply to him.” ? 

This instructive account of the things with which some 
Melanesians believe their life to be mysteriously united 

1 Nunuat is the form which the 
word munu has in Mota. It there 
means an ‘‘ abiding or recurrent impres- 
sion on the senses.” ‘*A man who 
has heard some startling scream in the 
course of the day has it ringing in his 
ears; the scream is over and the sound 
is gone, but the xumwaz remains; a 
man fishing for flying-fish paddles all 
day alone in his canoe with a long 
light line fastened round his neck; he 

lies down tired at night ‘and feels the 
line pulling as if a fish were caught, 
though the line is no longer on his 
neck ; this is the #zsuaz of the line. 
To the native it is not a mere fancy, it 
is real, but it has no form or substance ” 
(R. H. Codrington, 7he Melanesians, 

pp. 251 5g.). 

2 R. H. Codrington, The Melan- 
esians, pp. 252 sg. 

84 TOTEMISM IN MELANESIA CHAP. 

thes : suggests points of comparison with totemism or with beliefs 
ey akin to totemism elsewhere. A distinction must apparent 
atai and PP y 
in be drawn between the efaz and the ¢zaszanzu of Mota on the 
are oD- 

tained bya ONe side and the zwxu of Aurora on the other; for whereas 

ie a the ataz and tamaniu are acquired by a man for himself, the 
imsetr, 

the xunu is 2umu is determined for him by his mother at birth or rather 

hacpstaaes before it. Hence, while the a¢a? and the ¢amanzu correspond 

his mother Closely to the personal totem of the Australians and the per- 
before his sonal totem or manitoo of the North American Indians,’ the 
hence the #unu resembles in some respects the ordinary clan totems of 

atai or the Central Australians, since like them it is determined 

tamaniu 

and the before birth by the fancy of the mother, and appears like 
nuUnu . . . 

correspond them to be, at least in some cases, a reincarnation of the 
in era spirit of a dead person. For even though the natives may 
measure . . . : . 
to the be serious in asserting that persons born like Arudulewari 
abel 4 and Vilemalas are not the actual reincarnation but only the 
theclan “echo” or “reflection” of the dead children who have “come 
socclively back” or been “brought back” to the mother, yet it seems 
Reincarna- Most probable that such beliefs are only a slightly modified 
ree and form of a real belief in the reincarnation of the dead. And 
penton if the manu may be or may formerly have been the spirit of 
iat as a dead person reborn from the mother’s womb, what are we 
otemism. 

to say when the zuzu is a coco-nut, a bread-fruit, or some 
such thing? Analogy suggests that in these cases the hut, 
or the fruit, or whatever it was, may in like manner have 
been supposed to enter into the mother and impregnate her ; 
in fact that her child may have been thought to be nothing 
but the nut, or the fruit, or whatever it was, disguised in 
human form. Similar stories of the impregnation of women 
by fruits and so forth are world-wide,’ and no doubt they 
rest ultimately on a real belief that such things can happen. 
Thus the zuu of Aurora confirms, or at all events is explic- 
able by, the primitive theory of conception which appears to 
lie at the root of totemism. Hence if the facts recorded by 
Dr. Codrington are not totemism of the ordinary type, they 

1 See above, vol. i. pp. 49 5g. 412 
$q.5 482 sg., 489 sg., 497 5g. The 
custom of the personal totem (manitoo 
or guardian spirit) of the North Ameri- 
can Indians will be fully described in 
the third volume of this work. 

2 See E. S. Hartland, 7he Legend 

of Perseus, i, (London, 1894) pp. 71 
sqg. 3 my note on Pausanias, vii. 17. 
ir (vol. iv. pp. 138-140), and the 
additional references, in my Adonis, 
Attis, Osiris, Second Edition (London, 

1907), p. 79, note® 

vu TOTEMISM IN SOUTHERN MELANESIA 85 

nevertheless seem to throw light on the origin of the whole 
system. 

Lastly, in Vate or Fate, one of the most southerly of the Trace of 
New Hebrides, a trace of totemism may perhaps be detected aang 
in the statement that “household gods were supposed to 
be present in the shape of stones, trees, fish, and fowls, 
These incarnations were never eaten by their respective 

worshippers.” ! 

Since the foregoing discussion of traces of totemism in pr.Rivers’s 
Southern Melanesia was written and printed, I have received evidence as 
through the courtesy of Dr. W. H. R. Rivers an early copy in Mela- 
of his paper “ Totemism in Polynesia and Melanesia,” which ®°** 
embodies the results of investigations made by him per- 

sonally in these regions in the year 1908, The results are 

part of the work done by Dr. Rivers for the Percy Sladen 

Trust Expedition. His evidence and conclusions both 

tend, as it appears to me, to confirm the inferences which 

I had drawn independently from Dr. Codrington’s testimony. 
Accordingly I shall leave the foregoing discussion as I wrote 

it, and shall now embody the new facts which the recent 
enquiries of Dr. Rivers have brought to light? 

In the Reef Islands,’ which form part of the Santa Cruz Totemism 
group, the people are divided into a number of exogamous hee Nae 
classes or clans, each of them with one or more kinds of part of the 
animals which the members of the class or clan are forbidden Seg 
to eat. The exogamous classes are called mata, and each 
has its own spécial name. Dr. Rivers heard of eight such 
classes, though they are not all found on all of the islands. 

In the island of Nukap.the classes are four in number and 
bear the names of Pelembo, Pependal, Penvel, and Pelengam. 
In the island of Peleni they are five in number and bear the 
names of Pelembo, Pependal, Pelewe, Pekuli, and Pepali. 
Dr. Rivers does not mention the rule of descent of the 
classes, but we conjecture that as elsewhere in Melanesia 

1 G, Turner, Samoa (London, 1884), 3 In collecting the following informa- 
334. tion Dr. Rivers was much helped by 
2 See Dr. W. H. R. Rivers, ‘Totem- members of the mission, especially by 
ism in Polynesia and Melanesia,” the Rev. W. J. Durrad and the Rev. 
Journal of the Royal Anthropological CC. E. Fox. 

Institute, xxxix. (1909) pp. 156-180. 

p. 

86 TOTEMISM IN MELANESIA CHAP. 

children ‘belong to the class of their mother. Members 
of the Pelembo class may not eat eels, and on Nukap 
this prohibition applies both to sea eels and to fresh water 
eels, On the island of Peleni, however, members of the 
Pelembo class draw a distinction between sea eels and 
fresh water eels ; for while none of them will eat sea eels, 
some of them will eat fresh water eels, though others will 
not, opinions differing as to whether the salt water and the 
fresh water species are the same or different animals. The 
very raising of this question of zoological classification 
suggests that totemism is here breaking down. Another 
indication of this falling away from totemic orthodoxy is 
that the Pelembo people in the same island of Peleni partake 
of turtle, while their stricter brethren in the island of Nukap 
do not. However, even in Peleni turtle is tabooed to the 
Pelembo people when sickness is rife ; which shews how old 
superstitions revive in times of distress. Members of the 
Pelewe class in Peleni may not eat the flying fox (eke) nor 
the stingray (/az) nor a fish called awau, which is perhaps a 
Scorpoena. The forbidden animals of the other classes or 
clans are all fishes, the species of which Dr. Rivers was not 
able to identify. The islanders believe vaguely in their 
descent from the forbidden animals. They have common 
houses for the men, and apparently each exogamous class 
or clan (mata) should have its own men’s house (a/a/ax), 
though at the present time members of different classes live 
together in the same house. Thus it appears that the Reef 
Islanders have totemism of the ordinary sort characterised 
by exogamy of the totemic clans or classes and prohibitions 
to eat the totemic animals.’ 
Totemism Further, in the Santa Cruz group Dr. Rivers ascertained 
ee thé existence of normal totemism in the small island of 
of the Temotu, at the north-west corner of the larger island of 
Santa Cruz Ndeni, and his informants were confident that the institution 
Islands. ° 
was general in Santa Cruz. They knew of four exogamous 
classes or clans called zau in their own island; one of the 
classes is named after a fish called sdu, another after the 
shark (bua), another after a red fish like the trumpeter-fish 

1 W. H.R. Rivers, **Totemism in che Royal Anthropological Institute, 
Polynesia and Melanesia,” Journal of xxxix. (1909) pp. 164 57. 

vit TOTEMISM IN SOUTHERN MELANESIA 87 

(mbemb/a), and another after the pawpaw (¢ambao). Each 
class or clan believes itself to be descended from the sort of 
animal from which it takes its name. The people who have 
the red fish (#dembla) for their totem are said to have red 
eyes, thus resembling their totemic animal. But in addition 
to their totems the members of each class or clan are 
forbidden to eat certain other kinds of animals or plants. 
Thus the du people, besides the fish of that name, may 
not eat the octopus (so), a sea-snake (vo), a red yam 
(ningiamb), and the fowl (40). The mbembla people may 
not eat the turtle (vz), the /ondoz, a sea crayfish, the octopus, 
and a big banana (fapindo). The Shark (dua) people 
may not eat that part of a shark’s flesh which lies under the 
black part of its skin; whereas they are free to eat the flesh 
which lies under the white skin near the tail. No man may 
marry a woman of his own class or clan (#au). 

The existence of totemism in the Santa Cruz group, as 
Dr. Rivers afterwards learned, had already been reported by 
Mr. Wilhelm Joest. That traveller found the islanders 
divided into twelve exogamous and totemic classes or clans 
(nau), each named after a species of animals or plants, which 
members of the particular class or clan are forbidden to eat. 
The prohibited animals or plants are as follows: the shark 
(mbua), the dolphin (zazu), the whale (de¢z/a), the dog (kulz), 
the pigeon (#00), the fowl (Azo), three fishes (xzdda, modu, 
mbilla), the pawpaw (Za/ao), and two other plants (the nzaka 
and kanalapit:). It is believed that any one who eats the 
prohibited fishes or the pigeon will fall to pieces, his teeth 
dropping out ; while he who has a plant for his totem is 
forbidden to dig it as well as to eat it. Persons who have 
the dog for their totem may not give any of their food to a 
dog. Further, no man will utter any word of which the 
name of his totem forms part.” 

Thus the combined evidence of Mr. Joest and Dr. Rivers 
clearly proves the existence of normal totemism in the 
Santa Cruz group. We see among these islanders what 

1 W. H. R. Rivers, ** Totemism in 2 W. Joest, reported by A. Baessler, 
Polynesia and Melanesia,” /Journal of Neue Stidsee-Bilder (Berlin, 1900), pp- 
the Royal Anthropological Institute, 386-388. 

xxxix. (1909) pp. 165 sg. 

W. Joest’s 
evidence 
as to 
totemism 
in the 
Santa Cruz 
Islands. 

Totemism 
in Vani- 
kolo. 

Descent 
from the 
totem. 

Totemism 
in Efate. 

88 TOTEMISM IN MELANESIA CHAP. 

Dr. Rivers calls the cardinal signs of totemism, namely 
exogamous classes or clans named after animals or plants, a 
belief in the descent of members of the classes or clans from 
their eponymous animals or plants, and a prohibition, to eat 
these animals or plants. 

Further, Dr. Rivers with the help of the Rev. W. J. 
Durrad ascertained the existence of normal totemism in the 
island of Vanikolo. The islanders are divided into ten 
exogamous and totemic classes or clans, each named after 
its totem. The totems are as follows: a kind of fish (mere) ; 
the hermit crab (vesenamaka); the stingray (vere); a kind 
of fish (xomerue); the sea-lion (zve); a mullet (wanue) ; 
water (zve); fire (nepie); a bowl (degmete); and grass 
(ambum?z). Whenever the totem is a fish, members of the 
class or clan are forbidden to eat it; but the restrictions 
laid on people whose totems are not fish are various. Thus 
Water people may not drink the water of a certain bubbling 
pool; Grass people may not walk on grass; and Bowl 
people may not eat food prepared in a bowl. Only the 
Fire people seem to be subject to no taboo. In all cases 
people trace their descent from their totem. Thus Fish 
people are descended from fishes; Water people are de- 
scended from water ; Fire people are descended from a fire 
which can still be seen; Grass people are descended from 
grass which gave birth to a female child ; and Bowl people 
are descended from a child who floated to their island in a 
bowl. Thus it is quite clear, as Dr. Rivers observes, that in 
this district, in the heart of Melanesia, we have genuine 
totemism.? 

Again, far away from the Santa Cruz group, Dr. Rivers 
was informed by the Rev. Dr. J. W. Mackenzie of what 
appears to be normal totemism in the island of Efate, 
one of the most southerly islands of the New Hebrides 
group. For these islanders are divided into ten or more 
exogamous classes called xaflak, each of which takes its 
name from a plant or animal. The following are the 
totems, as we may call them, from which the classes or 
clans derive their names: (1) the wamakaur, a tuber like 

1 W. H.R. Rivers, Totemism in the Royal Anthropological Institute, 
Polynesia and Melanesia,” Journal of xxxix. (1909) pp. 166 sg, 

Vit TOTEMISM IN SOUTHERN MELANESIA 

89 

the arrowroot ; (2) the taro; (3) the yam; (4) the coco- 
nut; (5) the breadfruit; (6) the der, 4 kind of fungus; 
(7) the xamal, a kind of wild yam; (8) the xzfa, a plant 
with large leaves like those of the banana; (9) the Aram, a 
shell; and (10) the wz, the octopus. We are not told 
whether the members of these exogamous classes are 
forbidden to eat the plants or animals from which they take 
their names. In any case, as Dr. Rivers rightly observes, 
the association of exogamous divisions with eponymous 
plants and animals makes it highly probable that these 
divisions are totemic clans of the ordinary sort.’ 

But while Dr. Rivers has thus proved the existence of In the 

normal totemism both in the Santa Cruz group 

Banks’ 
to the Islands 

north of the New Hebrides and in the island of Efate to there exist 

the south of it, he failed, after very full enquiries, to discover 

beliefs and 
customs 

any evidence of the institution in the Northern New Hebrides, from which 

namely in the Banks’ and Torres Islands. However, 

totemism 
might be 

though he did not find the institution itself, he made a developed. 

very interesting discovery; for he found among these 
islanders, particularly among the natives of Mota and 
Motlav, a series of beliefs and customs from which a 
system of totemism pure and simple, that is, of totemism 
stripped of its later adjunct, exogamy, might easily 
have been developed. As the discovery is of great 
importance for its bearing on the whole question of the 
origin of totemism, it will be best to report it at full 
length in the discoverer’s own words. Dr. Rivers writes 
as follows :— 

“Though developed totemism thus appears to be absent, 
there was found in the Banks’ Islands a group of beliefs 
which are of the greatest interest in connection with the 
possible origin of totemism. In these islands devoid of the 
developed institution there exist beliefs which seem to 
furnish the most natural starting point for totemism, beliefs 

1 W. H. R. Rivers, ‘* Totemism in 
Polynesia and Melanesia,” Journal of 
the Royal Anthropological Institute, 
xxxix. (1909) p. 172. I had already 
indicated the probable presence of 
totemism in Efate (Fate) on the 
strength of Dr, George Turner’s evi- 
dence, who tells us that the fish and 

fowls in which the ‘‘ household gods” 
were incarnate were not eaten by their 
worshippers. See above, p. 85. That 
statement completes the evidence for 
totemism in Efate. 

2 W. H. R. Rivers, of. c#t. pp. 
173-175. 

Dr. Rivers's 
account 
of these 
customs 
and beliefs. 

go TOTEMISM IN MELANESIA CHAP. 

which Dr. Frazer has been led by the Australian evidence 
to regard as the origin of the institution. 
In Mota “In the island of Mota in the Banks’ group there are 
certain many individuals who are not permitted by the custom of 

edible 

animals the island to eat the flesh of certain animals nor to eat 
apc ae 4 certain fruits nor touch certain trees. The ground for the 
tocertain prohibition in most cases is that the person is believed to be 

pecause’ the animal or fruit in question, his mother having received 

abet some influence from the animal or plant at conception or at 
others are . 

Tinpens some other period of pregnancy. 

to al “The course of events is usually as follows: a woman 
receive 

acertain Sitting down in her garden or in the bush or on the shore 
influence finds an animal or fruit in her loincloth. She takes it up 
from the ‘ . + : 
particular and carries it to the village, where she asks the meaning of 
Kind of |. the appearance. The people say that she will give birth to 
fruit before a Child who will have the characters of this animal or even, 
the birth Of it appeared, would be himself or herself the animal. The 
woman then takes the creature back to the place where she 
had found it and places it in its proper home; if it is a 
land animal on the land; if a water animal in the pool or 
stream from which it had probably come. She builds up a 
wall round it and goes to visit and feed it every day. After 
a time the animal will disappear, and it is believed that that 
is because the animal has at the time of its disappearance 
entered into the woman. It seemed quite clear that there 
was no belief in physical impregnation on the part of the 
animal, nor of the entry of a material object in the form of 
the animal into her womb, but so far as I could gather, an 
animal found in this way was regarded as more or less 
supernatural, a spirit animal and not one material, from the 
beginning. 

“It has happened in the memory of an old man now 
living on Mota that a woman who has found an animal in 
her loincloth has carried it carefully in her closed hands to 
the village, but that when she has opened her hands to 
show it to the people, the animal has gone, and in this case 
it was believed that the entry had taken place while the 
woman was on her way from the bush to the village. 

“TI could not find out what interval usually elapses 
between the disappearance of the animal and the birth of 

VII TOTEMISM IN SOUTHERN MELANESIA 91 

the child, but this did not seem to be regarded as a matter 
of importance, for it was clear that this belief was not 
accompanied by any ignorance of the physical ré/e of the 
human father, and that the father played the same part in 
conception as in cases of birth unaccompanied by an animal 
appearance. We found it impossible to get definitely the 
belief as to the nature of the influence exerted by the 
animal on the woman, but it must be remembered that 
any belief of this kind can hardly have escaped the many 
years of European influence and Christian teaching which 
the people of this group have received. It is doubtful 
whether even a prolonged investigation of this point could 
now elicit the original belief of the people about the nature 
of the influence. 

“When the child is born it is regarded as being in some The child, 
sense the animal or fruit which had been found and tended reeaae 
by the mother. The child may not_eat the animal during with the 
the whole of its life, and if it does so, will suffer serious #1". 
illness, if not death. If it is a fruit which has been found may not 
the child may not eat this fruit or touch the tree on which “™ 
it grows, the latter restriction remaining in those cases in 
which the fruit is inedible. Thus a fruit used as a taboo 
mark would be useless for this purpose to one who owed to 
it his origin. 

“A case has occurred quite recently in which a girl 
unwittingly offended against the prohibition. She was an 
eel-child, and when quite young had gone to fish with some 
companions on the shore. They caught some fish including 
an eel, and all were cooked by them on the shore in the 
same pot, and were then eaten. A few hours afterwards 
the child began to rave and became quite mad. The 
people inquired into the doings of the child and found that 
she had not eaten any part of the eel, but only the fish 
cooked in the same pot, and this was held to be sufficient to 
have produced her condition. 

“T inquired into the idea at the bottom of the prohibi- 
tion of the animal as food, and it appeared to be that the 
person would be eating himself. It seemed that the act 
would be regarded as a kind of cannibalism. It was 
evident that there is a belief in the most intimate relation 

g2 TOTEMISM IN MELANESIA CHAP, 

between the person and all individuals of the species with 
which he is identified. 
The child “A further aspect of the belief in the animal nature 
Bobsned fof a child is that it partakes of the physical and mental 
of the characters of the animal with which it is identified. Thus, 
panier if the animal found has been a sea-snake, and this is a 
which itis frequent occurrence, the child would be weak, indolent and 
identified. Slow ; it an eel, there will be a similar disposition; if a 
hermit crab, the child will be hot-tempered; if a flying 
fox, it will also be hot-tempered and the body will be dark ; 
if a brush turkey, the disposition will be good ; if a lizard, 
the child will be soft and gentle; if a rat, thoughtless, hasty 
and intemperate. If the object found has been a fruit, here 
also the child will partake of its nature. In the case of 
a wild Malay apple (salmalagaviga) the child will have 
a big belly, and a person with this condition will be asked 
‘Do you come from the malmalagaviga?’ Again if the 
fruit is one called womarakaragat the child will have a 
good disposition. ; 
Similar “In the island of Motlav not far from Mota they have 
beliets in the same belief that if 4 mother has found an animal in 
her dress, the child will be identified with that animal and 
will not be allowed to eat it. Here again the child is 
believed to have the characters of the animal, and two 
instances given were that a child identified with a yellow 
crab will have a good disposition and be of a light colour, 
while if a hermit crab has been found, the child will be 
angry and disagreeable. In this island a woman who 
desires her child to have certain characters will frequent 
a place where she will be likely to encounter the animal 
which causes the appearance of these characters. Thus, 
if she wants to have a light coloured child, she will go 
to a place where there are light coloured crabs. 
The pro- “T inquired very carefully whether a case had ever 
hibition _ been known in which the prohibition of an animal as food 
animal or due to this belief had been passed on to a child or other 
pees not descendant, but it was clear that such an idea was quite 
ary i : : 
oie wiee foreign to the beliefs and customs of the people. The 
beliefs and taboo is purely an individual matter. In every respect but 
customs this, there is the’ closest resemblance with totemism. In 

vir TOTEMISM IN SOUTHERN MELANESIA 93 

the food prohibition and the belief in descent from or closely 
identity with the animal or plant, wé have two of the jremble 
constant and characteristic features of totemism, while the 
belief in the physical and mental resemblance of man and 
animal is found in typical totemism as in that of the 
Western people of Torres Straits. We have only to have 

the taboo and belief in descent and resemblance transmitted 

to a group of descendants to have typical totemism. We 
have here a perfectly natural and intelligible explanation 

of the origin or of one origin of totemism, and yet it 
occurs in a people whose social system has no totemic 
features at the present time whatever it may have had 

in the past.” : 

Then, having referred to the conceptional theory of the These 
origin of totemism which I proposed in 1905, and having beliefs and 
quoted a passage from my exposition of it, which has been the Banks’ 

‘ Islanders 
already laid before the reader, Dr. Rivers proceeds as support the 
follows:* “In this passage Dr. Frazer has assumed a series concep- 
of situations very closely resembling that which I have on of 
actually found to exist in the Banks’ Islands, and there totemism. 
is definitely established the existence of the belief which plains the 
forms the basis of his conceptional theory. It is true ee 
that in the Banks’ Islands the belief and attendant customs of totemism 
have not become the starting point of totemism, but there 7G natucal 
are many ways of accounting for this, whether it be true way. 
that totemism never existed in these islands or whether 
the institution was once present and was lost during the 
development of the secret societies. The most important 
feature of the Banks’ belief is that the supposed animal 
or plant nature of the child is accompanied by a taboo 
on the flesh of the animal as food or on the use of the 
plant. Perhaps the most universal feature of totemism is 
the existence of a restriction of this kind and the con- 
ceptional theory of totemism furnishes a ready explanation 

of this universality. Further, it enables us to understand 

1 See above, vol. i. pp. 154 s¢9., 
where my original exposition is re- 
printed without any change except the 
addition of a marginal summary. The 
particular passage quoted by Dr. 
Rivers will be found on p. 159, 

“Thus if she chanced at the time to 
be watching a kangaroo,” etc. 

2 w. H.R. Rivers, ‘‘ Totemism in 
Polynesia and Melanesia,” Journal of 
the Royal Anthropological Institute, 
xxxix. (1909) p. 176. 

Dr. Rivers’s 
evidence 
agrees with 
that of Dr. 
Codrington 
as to the 
nunu, 

The 
customs 
and beliefs 
of Mota 
and Motlav, 
described 
by Dr. 
Rivers, 
agree 
closely with 
the totemic 
system of 
the Arunta 
and other 
Central 
Australian 
tribes. 

94 TOTEMISM IN MELANESIA CHAP. 

not only belief in descent from the totem, but also the 
ambiguity which so often accompanies this belief. Thus 
in the Eastern Solomons we have seen that while acknow- 
ledging their descent from the totem-animal, the people 
regard this animal rather as the. representative of a human 
ancestor than as the ancestor itself. This belief becomes 
perfectly natural if the ancestor has two natures, one human 
and the other animal; if he is, as in the Banks’ Islands, 
an animal in human form. The characteristic features of 
totemism become perfectly natural if the institution has 
grown out of such a belief as that of the Banks’ islanders, 
or the similar beliefs suggested by Dr. Frazer.” 

This highly instructive and important evidence of Dr. 
Rivers suggests some remarks. In the first place the 
customs and beliefs described by him in Mota and Motlav 
are clearly equivalent to the zuxu customs and _ beliefs 
described by Dr. Codrington in Aurora, another of the 
New Hebrides; and Dr. Rivers’s account confirms on all 
points the interpretation which I had given independently 
of the xunu 

In the second place it is to be observed that if only 
all the inhabitants of Mota and Motlav imagined them- 
selves to have been conceived and born in this fashion, and 
if they all observed the corresponding taboos, we should 
have what may be called a totemic system which would 
resemble very closely the totemic system of the Arunta and 
other tribes of Central Australia. For in that case every 
man, woman, and child would believe himself to be for all 
practical purposes the incarnation in human form of a spirit 
animal or plant which had entered into his or her mother’s 
womb at some time during pregnancy ; for in the circum- 
stances described by Dr. Rivers the spirit animal or plant 
is apparently not supposed to enter her at the actual 
moment of impregnation but always at some other time. 
The main differences between the beliefs of the Australians 
and the Melanesians in this respect are two. First, whereas 
according to the Melanesians the thing which enters the 

1 See below, pp. 104 59. was printed before I received Dr. 
2 See above, pp. 83-85, where my _ Rivers’s paper on the subject. 
interpretation of the zzz stands as it 

VII TOTEMISM IN SOUTHERN MELANESIA 95 

woman is a spigit animal or plant, according to the 
Australians it is a spirit child, the reincarnation of an 
ancestor who is associated rather than identified with an 
animal or plant. But this distinction is after all a very 
slender one; for we are expressly told that to the thinking 
of the Arunta the ancestors who are thus born again “are 
so intimately associated with the animals or plants the 
name of which they bear that an alcheringa man of, say, 
the kangaroo totem may sometimes be spoken of either 
as a man-kangaroo or as a kangaroo-man. The identity 
of the human individual is often sunk in that of the animal 
or plant from which he is supposed to have originated.” 
Second, the other main distinction between the Australian 
and the Melanesian beliefs is, that whereas the Australians 
believe the unborn spirits of their totemic ancestors to be 
distributed over the country at certain definite spots, each 
of which as a rule is inhabited by the spirits of only one 
totem, the Melanesians appear to imagine the unborn spirits 
of their totemic animals and plants to be under no such 
local restrictions, but to be free to enter into women any- 
where. In this respect, therefore, the Melanesians occupy 
precisely the stage of thought which on purely theoretical 
grounds I postulated as the one immediately antecedent 
to the stage at present occupied by the Arunta and other 
Central Australian tribes; in fact the Melanesian system 
is exactly what I called “the original pattern, the absol- 
utely primitive type of totemism.”? At the present day, 
it is true, the system is not universally diffused among 
the islanders ; many, but not all, of them believe themselves 
to have been thus conceived by their mothers, and accord- 
ingly many, but not all, of them observe the totemic taboos 
which such a mode of conception entails with regard to 
the particular kind of animal or plant with which each 
person so brought into the world believes himself to be 
identified. But when we remember that the islanders have 
for many years been subjected to European influence and 
missionary teaching, we may reasonably surmise that the 
system which now partially obtains among them was 

1 Spencer and Gillen, Mative Tribes above, vol. i. p. 188. ; 
of Central Australia, p. 119. See 2 See above, vol. i. pp. 157-162. 

In Motlav 
there is an 
approach 

96 TOTEMISM IN MELANESIA CHAP, 

formerly universal, in other words, that in the old days 
every man, woman, and child believed himself or herself 
to have been thus conceived and to be thus related to a 
particular species of animals or plants, which accordingly 
he or she respected as their kinsfolk. If that was so, 
it becomes probable that the knowledge which these 
Melanesians now possess of the part played by the father 
in the begetting of children was learned by them from 
Europeans, and that formerly they were as ignorant of 
it as many Australian tribes are to this day. * 

Amongst the Melanesians we may perhaps detect an 
approach to the characteristic Australian distribution of the 

to the local unborn spirits among local totem centres ; for we have seen 

totem 
centres of 
the Arunta. 

We do 
not know 
whether in 
Melanesia, 
as in 
Central 
Australia, 
aman is 
free to 
marry a 
woman of 
the same 
concep- 
tional 
totem as 
himself. 
But we may 
conjecture 
that he is 
free to do 
so, since 
the con- 
ceptional 
totems are 
not heredi- 
tary. If 

that in Motlav, when a woman wishes to conceive a child 
of a particular sort, she resorts to a place known to be 
frequented by spirit animals or plants of the kind which 
she desires the infant to resemble. In the case mentioned 
by Dr. Rivers the place frequented by light coloured crabs, 
to which women repair in order to receive spirits of light 
coloured crabs into their wombs, is hardly distinguishable 
from what the Arunta would call an oknanikilla or local 
totem centre of a Crab clan. 

Thus the conceptional totemism, as we may call it, of 
the Banks’ Islanders presents many points of resemblance 
to the conceptional totemism of the Arunta and other tribes 
of Central Australia. But on one point of fundamental 
importance our information in regard to the system of the 
Banks’ Islanders is unfortunately defective. Dr. Rivers 
omitted to enquire whether a man may or may not marry a 
woman who has the same conceptional totem as himself ; 
whether, for example, an Eel man is allowed or forbidden 
to marry an Eel woman. In other words, we do not know 
whether the Banks’ Islanders apply the rule of exogamy to 
their conceptional totems as they do to the two great social 
classes (veve) into which they are divided. Dr. Rivers has 
written to Melanesia to enquire into the matter, and it is to 
be hoped that information will be forthcoming which will 
clear up the ambiguity. Meantime the question remains in 
suspense. Arguing from analogy, I conjecture that the 

1 As to these okvanzkilla, see above, vol. i. pp. 189 s¢g. 

VII TOTEMISM IN SOUTHERN MELANESIA 97 

Banks’ Islanders, like the Arunta and other Central Australian this con- 
tribes, do not apply the rule of exogamy to their conceptional ae 
totems, in fact, that their conceptional totemism has no prove to 
influence whatever on marriage. The reason why, like the aroha 
Arunta, they should keep their totemism quite distinct from blance 
their exogamy is, if my int tation of exog: b pene 
xogamy is, if my interpretation of exogamy be correct, the con. 
very simple. It is that exogamy was devised to prevent ceptional 

the marriage of certain kinsmen with their kinswomen, and ee : 
that this object could not be achieved by applying the rule phan 
of exogamy to totemic groups which, like those of the Australia 
Banks’ Islanders and the Central Australians, are not aS 
hereditary. For example, with conceptional totemism such 
as we find it in these two regions, we may have a family 
consisting of a Crab father, a Lizard mother, a Rat son, and 
an Eel daughter. Now if you wish to prevent the brother 
from marrying his sister, the father from marrying his 
daughter, and the mother from marrying her son, it is clear 
that you cannot do it by laying down a rule that no man 
may marry a woman of his own totem. For this rule, even 
if strictly observed, would still leave the Rat brother free to 
marry his Eel sister, the Crab father free to marry his Eel 
daughter, and the Lizard mother free to marry her Rat son. 
That is why, as I have already pointed out,’ the Arunta 
and other Central Australian tribes, retaining the primitive 
system of conceptional totemism, have not applied the rule 
of exogamy to their totemic -clans, which accordingly have 
no influence whatever on marriage; and that is why I 
conjecture that the Banks’ Islanders in like manner, who 
have a similar system of conceptional totemism, do not apply 
the rule of exogamy to the groups of persons who have the 
same conceptional totems, though they do, like the Central 
Australians, apply the rule rigidly to the two great hereditary 
classes (veve) into which the whole community is divided. 
If my conjecture should prove to be correct, it is obvious 
that the resemblance between the conceptional totemism of 
the Banks’ Islanders and that of the Central Australians 
would be very close indeed ; and we should have fresh and 
strong confirmation of the view, which I have advocated, 
that the two institutions of exogamy and totemism are in 
1 Vol. i. pp. 165 59, 
VOL, II H 

If the 
beliefs and 
customs of 
the Melan- 
esians re- 
present 
totemism 
in embryo 
it becomes 
difficult 

to dis- 
criminate 
between a 
clan totem 
and an 
individual 
or personal 
totem, since 
the differ- 
ence 
appears 

to be one 
of number 
rather than 
of kind, 

98 TOTEMISM IN MELANESTIA CHAP, 

their nature and origin entirely distinct from and independent 
of each other. Whether these things are so or not, will 
hang in large measure on the answer to be given to Dr. 
Rivers’s question. I hope that the answer may yet come in 
time to find a place later on in this work. 

Another observation suggested by Dr. Rivers’s important 
discoveries is this. If he is right, as I believe him to be, in 
thinking that the beliefs and customs of the Banks’ Islanders 
with regard te conception practically amount to totemism in 
embryo, it becomes very difficult to draw a sharp line of 
distinction between what I call the clan totem and the 
individual or personal totem. For it seems clear that 
on the Mota, as on the Arunta, system the relation between 
a man and his totem is one and the same whether he is the 
only man who stands in that relation to the totemic animal 
or whether there are a multitude of people who do so. For 
example, if in any community there are fifty people who 
claim to be Eels because the spirit of an eel entered into 
their mothers ; and if there be one solitary man who claims 
to be a Hermit Crab because the spirit of a hermit crab 
entered into his mother, shall we say that the fifty Eel 
people have got the ¢el for their totem, and that the one 
solitary Hermit Crab man has not got the hermit crab for 
his totem, merely because there is only one of him, while 
there are fifty of the others? It is hardly right thus to 
discriminate between kinds on the ground of a merely 
numerical difference. If we call the eel the clan totem of 
the fifty, we seem. bound to call the hermit crab the 
individual or personal totem of the one. And it is to be 
remembered that with the conceptional mode of determining 
the totems, which was probably in all cases the original 
mode, it is very much a matter of accident whether a 
totemic group expands into a multitude or dwindles away to 
one or nothing. If many pregnant women happen to be 
visited, say, by butterflies, then there will be many Butterfly 
men and women born, and the Butterfly clan will be strong 
accordingly ; and if only one pregnant woman happens to 
be visited by, say, a flying fox, then there will be only one 
Flying Fox man or woman in the community. But 
accident or fashion (for we have seen that women have their 

VII TOTEMISM IN SOUTHERN MELANESIA 99 

tastes in such matters) might easily determine that these 
proportions should be reversed, so that Flying Foxes should 
swell into a powerful clan and Butterflies be reduced to a 
single specimen. In short in truly primitive totemism the 
distinction between a clan totem and an individual totem is 
merely one of number; the clan totem is the totem of 
many, the individual totem is the totem of few or one. 

Further, it may be observed that a system of concep- A system 
tional totemism like that of the Arunta and the Banks’ a al 
Islanders leaves a good deal of freedom to the women in totemism 
determining what shall be the totem of their child. For sete 
in Motlav, as we saw, a woman will visit the place which freedom to 
is known to be frequented by a particular sort of animal, eaeutals a 
in order that the spirit of one of these animals may enter mine the 
her womb and be born in human form. It is probable that ¢rtoir 
this choice is often exercised by women in similar circum. children, 
stances ; hence it would be easy for a mother to arrange eee 
that her child should be of her own or of her husband’s (ne 
totem, and so to initiate descent of the totem either in the the totem 
maternal or in the paternal line. This is another way in ee 
which purely conceptional totemism might easily pass into or in the 
hereditary totemism ; whereas it is very difficult to imagine “™**line 
how a system of hereditary totemism could ever develope 
or degenerate into a system of conceptional totemism pure 
and simple. This is, as I have already pointed out, a reason 
for holding that the conceptional totemism of the tribes in 
the centre of Australia is older than the hereditary totemism 
of the coastal tribes.’ : 

Lastly, it is not without significance that the taboos The taboos 
imposed by conceptional totemism on the Banks’ Islanders ce 
come into operation from birth and not merely from puberty. ceptional 
Even children must strictly abstain from eating their totems see 
or they will suffer severely if they partake of the forbidden operation 
food. The reason for the abstinence is, on Dr. Rivers’s oat 
shewing, very simple; it is that each person identifies him- puberty. 
self so completely with the animal or plant, which is his 
totem, that were he to eat it he would be in a manner 
eating himself. Thus the abstinence from the flesh of the 
animal or from the fruit of the plant has no relation to 

1 See above, vol. i. pp. 156 sg., 242 sg. 

Further in- 
formation 

obtained 

by Dr. 
Rivers 
regard 
to the 

in 

AIMaAntU, 

the animal 
with which 
aman’ 

life is 

thought to 
be bound 

up. 

s 

2 

100 TOTEMISM IN MELANESIA CHAP. 

marriage, as we might suspect it of having if it did not 
come into operation till puberty. This so far confirms the 
conclusion which I have conjecturally reached, that among 
the Banks’ Islanders, as among the Arunta and kindred 
tribes of Central Australia, the two institutions of totemism 
and exogamy are totally distinct. If that conclusion should 
prove to be correct, we should accordingly in both these 
regions enjoy the great advantage of being able to study 
the two systems separately ; for in both regions, if I am 
right, exogamy has crossed but not confused the totemic 
scent. With these two examples before us of totemism and 
exogamy existing side by side, yet not commingling, in 
the same community, it should be as easy for us to dis- 
criminate between the institutions in theory as it obviously 
is for the natives to distinguish between them in practice. 
Some fresh information was further procured by Dr. 
Rivers with regard to the ¢amaniu of the Banks’ Islanders, 
which has already been described on the authority of Dr. 
Codrington.’ The ¢azaniu, says Dr. Rivers, is at the same 
time a person’s familiar and his life-token. When any one 
wishes to obtain a ¢amaniu he resorts to a wizard who has 
supernatural power (sana) in such matters or who is the 
hereditary possessor of a stone endued with magic virtue. 
The wizard then solemnly extracts the juice of certain 
leaves, drinks it, and deposits the leaves in some cleft of 
the rocks, where they cannot be reached by salt water. 
The people wait till the leaves stink and then watch the 
cleft to see some animal come out. When the creature 
appears, it is regarded as the ¢amaniu of the person on 
whose behalf the rite has been performed. It is taken up, 
put in a stitable place, and visited from time to time. No 
man will eat an animal of the same sort as his ¢amanzu. 
The creature is supposed to perform two functions, a 
maleficent and a beneficent. In its maleficent character 
it acts as a minister of vengeance, attacking the enemies 
of its master at his desire communicated through the wizard 
who procured it originally for him. Thus, if it is an eel, 
it will bite its master’s foes; if it is a shark, it will swallow 
them. On the other hand, when the owner of the tamaniu 
1 See above, pp. 81 59. 

vii TOTEMISM IN SOUTHERN MELANESIA 101 

falls ill, the animal ‘appears in the igre amtiste character 

of a life-token. The patient goes or sends to inspect it 

and ascertain how it fares; for the life of the man ‘is 
bound up with that of the animal. If something is dis- 
covered sticking to the creature’s skin, it is removed, and 

the man naturally recovers. But if the animal is found 

dying, the man is dying also; and when it departs this 

life he gives up the ghost. A case of this kind happened 

lately in Mota. A blind man had as his familiar animal ‘the blina 
(tamaniu) a large lizard which lived in the roots of a big eae 
banyan tree near the village. Having fallen sick he told (samanix) 
a friend to go and see the reptile, saying “Look at me,” "4. 
by which he meant to say “Look at the lizard, which is 

me.” The first time the friend went to the tree, his heart 

failed him and he retreated without daring to call upon 

the lizard. But fortified by the companionship of some 

other men he returned to the spot and called to it, and 

out crawled the lizard, looking very sluggish and weak. 

They asked it if it felt poorly, and the creature nodded its 

head and slunk back into the roots of the tree. Soon after 

the blind man died and the banyan tree fell down, and that 

was the end of the lizard also. The banyan tree is still 

lying down, and if you doubt the truth of what I say, you 

may go and see it for yourself.) 

§ 4. Totemtsm and Exogamy in Central Melanesia 

In the Solomon Islands, which form what may be called 
Central Melanesia, the people are also divided into exogamous 
classes, with female descent ; but whereas in Southern Mela- 
nesia these exogamous classes are only two in number, in 
Central Melanesia they are more than two. Thus in the Six 
island of Florida there are six exogamous classes (hema), ee" 
each with its distinctive name. These six classes are the (4ema) in 
Nggaombata, the Manukama or Honggokama, the Honggo- "1°" 
kiki, the Kakau, the Himbo, and the Lahi. The meanings 
of three of these class-names are known ; for Honggo signifies 
“cat’s cradle,” Manukama is “an eagle,” and Kakau is “a 

1 W. H. R. Rivers, ‘‘Totemism in the Royal Anthropological Institute, 
Polynesia and Melanesia,” Journal of — xxxix. (1909), pp. 176 sg. 

83149 

Three 
exogamous 
classes in 
Ysabel 
Island. 

These 
classes 
seem to 
have been 
formed by 
subdivision, 

102 TOTEMISM IN MELANESIA CHaP. 

crab.” But these six exogamous classes (ema) in Florida “ no 
doubt represent a much simpler original division ; for two of 
them have local names, of Nggaombata in Guadalcanar, and 
Himbo, the Simbo somewhat indefinitely placed among the 
islands to the west, from whence these two fea are known to 
have come. The Nggaombata and the Himbo, perhaps only 
as strangers, go together ; and the Lahi, a small division, are 
said to be so closely connected with Himbo that the mem- 
bers cannot intermarry. Whether Honggokama and Manu- 
kama are names of one fema, or of two divisions into which 
the one is separating, is a question. The Honggokama and 
the Honggo-kiki, the great and the little, are plainly parts 
of one original. It is not the case in Florida that an original 
double division has simply split and split again; but the 
settlement of foreigners has so complicated the arrangement 
that few natives profess to be able to follow it.”! Again, in 
Bugotu of Ysabel Island there are three exogamous classes 
(winahuhu) called respectively Dhonggokama, Vihuvunagi, 
and Posomogo. None of these three classes corresponds 
exactly to any of the six classes in Florida, but one of them 
(the Dhonggokama) is said to be the same as the ancient 
class which split into the Honggokama and Honggokiki in 
Florida; and the other two, in Dr. Codrington’s opinion, 
may well be believed to be themselves the divided other 
member of the original pair? Thus, if Dr. Codrington is 
right, the three exogamous classes of Ysabel have been pro- 
duced by the subdivision of one original pair of classes ; 
while the six classes of Florida have been formed partly 
by subdivision, partly by the immigration of people of 
other classes than those of the old inhabitants. All this 
points to the conclusion that in Central, as in Southern, 
Melanesia the original exogamous classes may have been 
only two in number. When the exogamous divisions 
increase beyond two, separate names for them become 

‘ necessary; whereas when there are only two “sides of 

the house,” as the Melanesians call them, no name is 
needed for either.2 We have seen that two of the 

1R. H. Codrington, Zhe AMelan- 30 59. 
esians, pp. 29 sgq. 3 R. H. Codrington, of. cét. p. 
2k. H. Codrington, of. ct. pp. 31. 

vil TOTEMISM IN CENTRAL MELANESIA. 103 

exogamous classes in Florida are named after animals, the 
eagle and the crab. 

As usual, these exogamous classes (ema) are not The 
political divisions. Members of different classes are necessarily (ices. are 
intermixed in every village and even in every family, since social, not 
husband and wife never belong to the same class and ee ie 
children never belong to the class of their father. But one district 
while the population of every village must necessarily be aes 
mixed, it is not necessary that members of all the six fom __ 
classes should be found in it. In a considerable village the eee 
principal chief is the head of the class which predominates "°" 
there, while the headmen of the lesser classes are lesser 
chiefs. But with the system of maternal descent and the 
rule that the wife goes to live with her husband’s people the 
predominance of any one class in a village cannot be per- 
manent. <A chief passes on as much of his property and 
authority as he can to his sons, and as his sons are never 
of his own class, it follows that in any particular district 
authority tends to shift from one class to another with each 
generation. “If then in a certain district one kindred is now 
most numerous, in the next generation it cannot be so, for 
the children of those now most numerous will be naturally 
many more in number, and will none of them be of kin to 
their fathers.” ? 

It adds very much to the distinction between these six Each 
exogamous classes (ema) in Florida that each of them has (.2°"°" 
one or more things which it holds in abhorrence, the (4ea) has 
members of the class being strictly forbidden to eat, Aenea 
approach, or behold the thing or things in question, Such it holds in 
things are called the duo of the class. One of the very cet 
first lessons learned by a Florida child is what is its dzto, to Pot eat. 

. . touch, 
eat or touch or see which would be a dreadful thing. In or see. 
one case only is this abomination (420) the living creature 
from which the class takes its name: the Kakau class is 

1R. H. Codrington, 7he Afelan- the rule of maternal descent, would’ 

estams, pp. 33 sg. We have seen 
(above, p. 75) that in Melanesia a 
young man takes his wife to live with 
him in his father’s house. If on the 
contrary it had been the custom for 
the husband to take up his abode with 
his wife’s people, this, combined with 

have caused the exogamous classes in 
any one district to be stable and per- 
manent from generation to generation, 
since the women would remain at 
home and give birth to children of 
their own class. 

104 TOTEMISM IN MELANESIA CHAP, 

named after the kakau crab and may not eat it. The 
Nggaombata class may not eat the giant clam; the Lahi 
may not eat of a white pig; the Manukama class, which is 
called after the eagle, may eat the eagle but may not eat 
the pigeon; the Kekau or Crab class is forbidden to eat 
both the crab and the parrot Tvichoglossus Massena} 
The duto If jany member of these classes be asked why he 
abomina- abstains from his abomination (4uto), he will probably 
classis said answer, Dr. Codrington tells us, thaf“Tf is his ancestor ; for’ 
to have example a Manukama man will say that the pigeon which 

been its 
ancestor or he will not eat is his ancestor. An intelligent native, how- 

associated ever, gave Dr. Codrington in writing a somewhat different 
-account of the matter. He wrote: “This is the explana- 
tion of the duto. We believe these ¢indalo (the object of 
worship in each kema) to have been once living men, and 
something that was with them, or with which they had to 
do, has become a thing forbidden, zambu, and abominable, 
buto, to those to whom the “xdalo belongs.” The example 
which this native took was the clam of the Nggaombata 
class. The ghost (¢ézdalo) of a famous ancient member of 
that class was called Polika and used to haunt a beach 
opposite Mage, where a large snake (fo/7) was believed to 
represent him. Members of the Nggaombata class might 
not approach that beach because Polika was their abomi- 
nation (zo). On another beach, where they catch fish 
wherewith to sacrifice to Polika, there is a clam (g7ma) to 
which they give the name of Polika and they used to 
believe the clam to be in some way Polika himself; hence 
they abstained from the clam (géza) and it became their 
abomination (ézto).” 

Probably The difference between these accounts of the origin and 

aan as meaning of the abominations (4/0) of the exogamous classes * 

thatthe is perhaps not great. The ordinary native says simply that 

people the animal from which he abstains was his ancestor; the 

were 
actually educated and perhaps sophisticated native in his written 
descended . : 
from ther account of the matter says that the animal was not his 
buto. ancestor but was merely associated in an unexplained way 
with the ghost of an ancestor. We may suspect that the 
1 R. H. Codrington, Zhe Afelan- 2, R. H. Codrington, of. cit. pp. 

estans, p. 31 5g. 31 5g. 

vil TOTEMISM IN CENTRAL MELANESIA 105 

latter account is nothing but an attempt to rationalise what 
seemed to an educated native the absurd belief of his less 
enlightened fellows that they were descended from a real 
animal of the species. No doubt such a belief is absurd, 
and Dr. Codrington’s sable informant was right to reject it. 
But for all that the belief in their descent from animals in 
the most literal sense may very well have been held by 
these savages long before any of them under European 
influence bethought himself of saying that the animal was 
not really his ancestor but only associated with him. Such 
cheap and transparent devices for transforming ancient 
nonsense into a bastard imitation of sense meet us in all 
mythologies, the Greek as well as the Melanesian. It is a 
common article of faith with totem clans that they are 
descended from their totem animals or plants ; and we may 
surmise that the things from which these exogamous classes 
in Melanesia abstain were originally totems of the ordinary 
sort, to which the members of the classes or clans traced 
their origin. However, Dr. Codrington, our authority for 
all the facts with which we have been dealing, takes a some- 
what different view of the matter; and as the opinion of so 
accurate and judicious an observer is entitled to the highest 
respect, I will subjoin his instructive observations in full. 
He says :— 
“There will occur at once the question whether in this pr. 

we do not find totems. But it must be asked where are ee 
the totems? in the living creatures after which two of the the suo is 
divisions are named, or in those creatures which the members peat ae 
of the several divisions may not eat? It is true that the some an- 
Kakau kindred may not eat the crab sakau ; but the Manu- Ccst) 524 
kama may eat the bird manukama. If there be a totem would be 
then it must be found in the duto; in the pigeon of the aa 
Manukama and the giant clam of the Nggaombata, which “hich is 

: mR accordingly 
are said to be ancestors. But it must be observed that the respected 
thing which is abominable to eat is never believed to by his de- 
be the ancestor, certainly never the eponymous ancestor, of 
the clan ; it is said to represent some former member of the 
clan, one of a generation beyond that of the fathers of the 
present members of it,a Aukua. The thing so far represents 

him that disrespect to it is disrespect to him. The most 

106 TOTEMISM IN MELANESIA CHAP, 

probable explanation of these éu¢o may indeed throw light 
upon the origin of totems elsewhere, but can hardly give 
totems a home in the Solomon Islands. The duo of each 
kema is probably comparatively recent in Florida; it has 
been introduced at Bugotu within the memory of living men. 
It is in all probability a form of the custom which prevails 
in Ulawa, another of the Solomon Islands. It was observed 
with surprise when a Mission school was established in that 
island, that the people of the place would not eat bananas, 
and had ceased to plant the tree. It was found that the 
origin of this restraint was recent and well remembered ; a 
man of much influence had at his death not long prohibited 
the eating of bananas after his decease, saying that he would 
be in the banana. The elder natives would still give his 
name and say, ‘We cannot eat So-and-So. When a few 
years had passed, if the restriction had held its ground, they 
would have said, ‘ We must not eat our ancestor. This re- 
presents what is not uncommon also in Malanta near Ulawa, 
where, as in Florida also, a man will often declare that after 
death he will be seen as a shark.” ! 
The — "Thus Dr. Codrington is of opinion that the abominations 
ane (Suto) or taboos of the exogamous classes may have originated 
ancestor within recent times in the fancies of influential men, who at 
Sean’ and their death announced that their spirits would haunt certain 
which thus animals or plants and warned their kinsfolk henceforth to 
ire eee Ag abstain from eating these animals or plants. Dr. Codrington 
descend- may be quite right in this opinion ; but granting that he is 
ants, may , ° : 
have been SO, we have still to ask what put these fancies into the heads 
sia ee of these dying men? was it a mere whim? a caprice for 
{atai, which they could assign no reason? We may conjecture 
pares: that they had what seemed to them good reasons for thinking 
with which that after their decease they would be in the bananas or the 
ale sharks or whatever it might be. A sufficient ground for 
existence such a belief seems to be furnished by what Dr. Codrington 
ae ‘zs Himself has told us about the a¢az and tamaniu of Mota and 
thought to the zzzu of Aurora.2 We have seen that in these islands 
cr some men think that there exists an intimate and vital 
that thing connection between themselves and certain material objects, 

1 R. H. Codrington, 7he Afelanesians, pp. 32 sg. 
2 See above, pp. 81-83. 

vil TOTEMISM IN CENTRAL MELANESIA 107 

whether animals, plants, or inanimate things, which accordingly was often 
they may not kill, eat, or injure; and further that in the peated 
case of the xunu these tabooed objects (which closely his mother 
resemble the duto of the Solomon Islands) are determined ae 
by the fancies of the mothers before the birth of the children, sick fancies 
It is not unreasonable to suppose that such beliefs furnish sd ectonins 
the clue to the seemingly arbitrary declaration of some akg hse 
Solomon Islanders that after death they will be in particular ;oot of 
species of animals or plants; a man might naturally imagine totemism. 
that his departed spirit would dwell hereafter in the thing 

with which it had all his life been mysteriously associated. 

If so, the prohibitions which such men lay on their friends, 

and which, transmitted by inheritance to a group of kinsfolk, 

do constitute substantially a totem clan, may ultimately be 
traceable to what appears to be the tap-root of totemism, 

that is, to the sick fancies of pregnant women. For such 

fancies fully explain two of the most characteristic features 

of totemism, namely the identification of a man with his 

totem and the belief in the descent of the clan from it. The 

mother identifies her child with the thing that she supposed 

to have entered her womb when she first felt it quickened ; 

the man as he grows up identifies himself with that thing 

and respects it accordingly all his life; and if he enjoys 
influence over his fellows, he may persuade them to respect 

the same thing after his death, because they imagine that 

he will be in it. Thus through the identification of dead 

men with their totems a reverence for the totems tends 
readily to be combined with or to pass into a reverence and 
worship of ancestors, 

However that may be, each exogamous class in Florida Kach 
has not only its abomination (4u¢0) or taboo but also its en as 
ghost (¢zdalo), whom the members of the class worship and Florida has 
call vaguely their ancestor. Such worshipful ghosts are a an 
Polika of the Nggaombata class (who is identified with the whom the 
clam which is the duéo of the class),’ Barego of the Kakau Eas 
class, Kuma of the Honggokama class, Sisiro of the Himbo worship 
class, Manoga of the Manukama or Lahi class, and a ghost ao 
whose personal name is unknown of the Honggokiki class, ancestor. 
As the classes are intermixed in the villages, though one of 

1 See above, p. 104. 

Heave- 
offerings to 
the ghost 
Manoga. 

108 TOTEMISM IN MELANESIA CHAP. 

them generally musters more members than the rest in any 
particular district, sacrifices are offered in each village or 
group of villages to éach of the ghosts of the classes; and 
the sacrificer is the man who knows the special leaves and 
creepers, and sorts of dracaena, and ginger, and shavings of 
a tree, and words of power (sana), with which the particular 
ghost is best approached. This knowledge the sacrificer 
receives from his predecessors. He belongs to the exogamous 
class which is dominant in the place, and he is in fact the 
ostensible chief! The place of sacrifice is near the village 
and consists of an enclosure with a little house or shrine in 
which relics are preserved. When a public sacrifice is to 
be offered, the people assemble on the spot, but only the 
sacrificer, who is chief and priest in one, may enter the 
shrine. He makes a small fire of sticks, muttering words 
of power (sana), but he may not blow the sacred flame. 
On it he throws a little food, asking the ghost to take it 
and to grant his prayer. If the flame blazes up, he knows 
that the ghost is there blowing it. The remainder of the 
sacrificial food the priest carries back to the assembled 
people, eats some of it himself, and gives portions to the 
worshippers who eat it'or take it away. At the sacrifice to 
Manoga, the ghost of the Manukami or Lahi class of the 
Florida people, the procedure is as follows. When the 
sacrificer invokes this ghost, he heaves the offering round 
about and calls him; first to the east, where rises the sun, 
saying, “If thou dwellest in the east, where rises the sun, 
Manoga! come hither and eat thy tz mash!” Then 
turning he lifts it towards the place where the sun goes 
down, and says, “If thou dwellest in the west, where sets 
the sun, Manoga! come hither and eat thy satu!” There 
is not a quarter to which he does not lift it up. And when 
he has finished lifting it he says, “If thou dwellest in heaven 
above, Manoga! come hither and eat thy ¢wtu! If thou 
dwellest in Buru or Hagetolu, the Pleiades or Orion’s belt ; 
if below in Turivatu; if in the distant sea; if on high in 
the sun, or in the moon; if thou dwellest inland or by the 
shore, Manoga! come hither and eat thy tutu !”? 

1R. H. Codrington, Zhe Afelan- 2 R. H. Codrington, of. cz#. pp. 130- 
estans, p. 132, 132. 

Vil TOTEMISM IN CENTRAL MELANESIA 109 

The existence of exogamous and perhaps totemic divisions vir. ¢. yp. 
of the people in the Solomon Islands has been observed as 
and recorded by others than Dr. Codrington. Thus Mr. evidence 
C.°M. Woodford writes: “During my last residence on cs 
Guadalcanar, it came to my knowledge that an extensive classes 
and widespread system of ‘castes’ or totems, for want of ce 
words to better express my meaning, exists upon this and Islands. 
some of the adjacent islands. The name for them on 
Guadalcanar and upon Gela or Florida is Kea, upon Savo 
Ravu. At Veisali, at the west end of Guadalcanar, the 
word used is Awa. I could find out very little about them. 
Their influence is, however, powerful. The natives told me 
that a man might not marry a woman belonging to his own 
caste. They are not confined to tribes speaking one 
language, but, as in some of the instances I cite below, 
natives belonging to tribes speaking a different language 
will be found to belong to the same caste. I can conceive 
it due to the protection afforded by these castes that certain 
natives can pass freely backwards and forwards between 
tribes at open war, as occurred to my knowledge last year, 
when severe fighting was taking place between the island of 
Savo and the west end of Guadalcanar, or that natives are 
enabled to remain in a village when others have had to leave 
on account of anticipated attack by another village. Of 
these castes the largest and most powerful is the Gambata.” 
Other classes, or castes as he calls them, which Mr. Woodford 
met with were the Kiki, Lakoli, Kakau, and Tanakindi.! 

More details with regard to totemism and exogamy in Dr. _ 
the central group of the Solomon Islands were obtained by eas 
Dr. W. H. R. Rivers during a visit which he paid to the in a 
archipelago in 1908. His investigations confirm and aa 
supplement the account of Dr. Codrington. He found that Exo. 
the natives of Florida, Ysabel, Guadalcanar (possibly only 820%, 
the northern half), Savo, and probably part of the Russell clans in 
Islands are divided into several exogamous classes or clans, co , 
marriage being forbidden between members of the same Guadal- 

° : : canar, and 
class. In the island of Florida two of the six exogamous J\o. 
1C. M. Woodford, 4 Naturalist Islands in 1886, 1887, and 1888 
among the Headhunters; being an (London, 1890), pp. 40 59. 
Account of three Vistts to the Solomon 

Equiva- 
lence of the 
exogamous 
classes in 
the various 
islands. 

Sacred 
objects 
associated 
with the 
exogamous 
classes. 

110 TOTEMISM IN MELANESIA CHAP. 

classes (4ema) recorded by Dr. Codrington, namely the 
Himbo and the Lahi, have now apparently either died out 
or been absorbed into others. Over the greater part of the 
island of Ysabel there are only three exogamous classes, 
namely the Dhonggokama, the Vihuvunagi, and the 
Posomogo. In the island of Guadalcanar Dr. Rivers heard 
of six exogamous classes, called the Lakwili, Kindapalei, 
Haumbata, Kakau, Kiki, and Simbo. In the island of 
Savo he reports the existence of five exogamous classes 
called vavu, bearing the names respectively of Gaumbata, 
Dhonggo, Lakwili, Kikiga, and Kakauga. Further, Dr. 
Rivers ascertained that, just as among neighbouring 
Australian tribes, so among these Solomon Islanders the 
exogamous classes of one island have their recognised 
equivalents in the exogamous classes of the other islands. 
Thus the Kindapalei of Guadalcanar corresponds to the 
Dhonggokama of Ysabel, the Honggokama of Florida, and 
the Dhonggo of Savo. If a Guadalcanar man of the class 
Kindapalei went to live on the island of Ysabel, he would 
not be allowed to marry a woman of the class Dhonggokama 
but would be limited in his choice to women of the two 
other exogamous classes (Vihuvunagi and Posomogo) in 
that island. The Dhonggokama of Ysabel appears to 
answer to both the Honggokama and,the Honggokiki of 
Florida. The Lakwili of Guadalcanar or Savo corresponds 
to the Vihuvunagi of Ysabel, while the Kakau corresponds 
to the Posomogo.! As we have seen, Dr. Codrington 
believes that the number of the exogamous classes has been 
multiplied by the subdivision of an original pair of classes.” 
Dr. Rivers on the other hand suggests that in some cases 
the number miay have dwindled through the extinction of 
one or more classes, and he points to the Himbo and Lahi 
of Florida as instances of extinct classes.* 

In all of the islands each exogamous class has one 
or more sacred objects, and when these are animals they 
may not in general be eaten. Sometimes the natives 
believe that they are descended from the tabooed animals. 

+ W. H. R. Rivers, *Totemism in xxxix. (1909) pp. 168, 170. 
Polynesia and Melanesia,” Journal of 2 See above, p. 102. 
the Royal Anthropological Institute, 3 W. H.R. Rivers, of. cit. p. 170. 

vu TOTEMISM IN CENTRAL MELANESIA IIT 

These sacred objects will be considered separately for each 
island. 

In the island of Florida the sacred objects are called sacreq 
tindalo, that is, ghosts. These have already been described eee 
on the authority of Dr. Codrington,’ to whose account Dr. ete., in the 
Rivers has nothing to add. In the island of Ysabel the iis 
holy things are called ¢:ndadho, which appears to be only 
a dialectical variation of timdalo (“ghost”). The three 
exogamous classes have each its sacred bird which members 
of the class may not eat. The bird of the Vihuvunagi cfass 
is the eagle (s#anuhutu); the bird of the Dhonggokama 
class is the frigate-bird (sbe/ama), and the bird of the 
Posomogo class is a parakeet (Azgara). A man of the 
Vihuvunagi class said that this class has five other sacred 
objects (¢éndadho), namely, the shark (e/e), crocodile (vma), 
snake (polz), eel (oloi), and thunder (rete), and that the four 
animals may not be eaten by members of the class.” 

In the island of Guadalcanar the sacred objects are Sacred 
called ¢zda’o, which is merely a variant of ¢izdalo, the /*imals, 

, etc., in the 

having dropped out. Each exogamous class has here a island of 
large number of these venerated things. Thus the Lakwili ee 
class reveres certain men who were said to have been the 
first members of the class or clan, certain images and two 
animals, namely, the eel (szauvo) and a small fish (koke), 
neither of which may be eaten by members of the class. 
The Kindapalei class reveres their first man, together with a 
snake called choholzsi, the sun and moon (spoken of together 
in one word as wvzlamanaso), and a sacred fire called lake 
zambu. The Haumbata class reveres their first man, a shark 
(baheanapombo), and a pigeon (zaroha) ; members of the class 
will not eat the shark nor the pigeon. About the other 
exogamous classes the information obtained by Dr. Rivers 
was less definite ; but it seems that the shark was tabooed 
as food both to the Kakau and to the Kiki class, and that 
members of the Simbo class might not eat the monitor 
lizard’ 

In the island of Guadalcanar the sacred objects (¢7zda’e) 
1 See above, pp. 103 sg. the Royal Anthropological Institute, 

2 W. H.R. Rivers, ‘‘Totemism in xxxix. (1909) p. 168. 
Polynesia and Melanesia,” Journal of 3° W.HL.R. Rivers, of. ct, pp. 168 59. 

Great 
reverence 
for the 
sacred 
objects 
(animals, 
sun, moon, 
ete.) in 
Guadal- 
canar. 

Sacred 
animals, 
etc., in the 
island of 
Savo. 

liz TOTEMISM IN MELANESIA CHAP, 

of the exogamous classes are much revered ; Dr. Rivers’s 
informant, a Christian, said that they were worshipped. If 
a man of the Haumbata class wishes to kill an enemy on the 
land, he goes to a place which belongs to the sacred pigeon 
(xaroha), and there he calls on the bird to give him super- 
natural power (sana) and strength (susuliha). He offers a 
pudding, fish, pork, and tobacco, and the pigeon bestows on 
him supernatural power to slay his foe. But if he wishes to 
kill his enemy at sea, he makes offerings to the sacred shark, 
an@ the beast will smash his enemy’s canoe and eat him up. 
Again, the sacred snake (chopolisz) of the Kindapalei class is 
a very big creature which lives on a rock at a place called 
Koli. The place is -forbidden to everybody except to 
members of the class Kindapalei, and even they only go 
there to worship the snake. If other people wish to pass 
the spot, they must paddle past it in a canoe or walk far out 
on the reef. The Kindapalei people offer puddings’ and 
other things to the snake, and in return he gives them 
supernatural power (sana). They obtain supernatural 
power also from the sun and moon and likewise from the 
sacred fire. The fire springs out of the rock at a certain 
place, and the people carry offerings thither and burn them in 
the flame. Also if they kill a man, they bring his tongue 
and lips and offer them to the sacred fire. There is also 4 
place sacred to the sun and moon, where similar offerings 
are made. If people eat their sacred animal (¢cnda’o), they 
fall ill, For example, if a man of the Haumbata class eats 
a sacred pigeon, he grows sick and blood gushes from his 
mouth and nostrils. To cure him it is needful to make 
offerings to the pigeon, after which he may perhaps recover. 
If any man eats his sacred shark, sores will be sure to break 
out on his body.’ ; 

In the island of Savo the sacred objects are called 
manjaliz, When they are animals they are tabooed and not 
eaten by members of the class ; but they are not worshipped. 
Members of the Gaumbata class respect an image, a spirit 
woman, and the monitor lizard (vava), which they will not 
eat. Members of the Dhonggo class respect a spirit man 

1 W. H.R. Rivers, ‘*Totemism in ‘the Royal Anthropological Institute, 
Polynesia and Melanesia,” Journal of xxxix. (1909) p. 169. 

Vu TOTEMISM IN CENTRAL MELANESIA 113 

and a sacred bird (¢anebu kosu), which is the same as the 
eagle (smanuhutu) of Ysabel. Members of the Lakwili 
class will not eat a small monitor lizard (sangavulu); and 
members of the Kikiga class abstain from three kinds of 
animals, namely, the shark, a large flat fish (4éimantbarava), 
and a pigeon (kurau).! 

Reviewing the information which he obtained from the Ail this 
Solomon Islands, Dr. Rivers observes that “the evidence, ees 
taken as a whole, points strongly to the condition being one totemism 
of genuine totemism, but in a relatively late stage, in which pea 
“the totems and other sacred objects, including human Stage. 
ancestors, are all classed together as ¢izdalo, while so far as 
the social aspect is concerned, it is possible that there has 
been a considerable departure from the original condition. 

The only piece of evidence I can bring forward in favour of Totemic 
this latter position is derived from a place called Kia at the {25 
north-western end of Ysabel. While I was in the Western Ysabel, 
Solomons I was told that at Kia they had a large number of 
social divisions which appeared to be clans. When in 
Ysabel I asked the late Dr. Welchman about this, and he 

said that they had there a large number of divisions in place 

of the normal three of the rest of the island. Shortly 

* béfore his death he sent me a list of these divisions showing 

that each of the three normal Ysabel sections was divided 

into a number of smaller divisions, each taking its name 

from an object which Dr. Welchman called a totem. He 

did not expressly state in his letter to me that these totems 

were not eaten, but I have no doubt that his use of the 

term was meant to imply this.”? The following table 
exhibits Dr. Welchman’s list of the subdivisions and the 
sacred objects or totems from which they take their 
names :—* 

1 W. H. R. Rivers, ‘¢ Totemism in xxxix. (1909) pp. 169 59. 

Polynesia and Melanesia,” Journal of 2 W.H. R. Rivers, of. ct. p. 171. 
the Royal Anthropological Institute, 3 W. H.R. Rivers, of. edt. p. 171. 

VOL. Ii 

114 TOTEMISM IN MELANESIA CHAP. 

Classes, Subdivisions with their Totems. 

A tree like the banyan (wdahe?). 

A blue pigeon (sbaumbahulu). 
The dugong (rum). 

. Tree with edible leaves (homébarae), 
. The paper mulberry (samara). 

A large banana (efizg2). 

Vihuvunagi 

Dhonggokama | 

ee as 

A white cockatoo (aggahil). 
. The sun (¢aunu). 

. The porpoise (gogosulu), 
The flying fox (ggenggefe). 
The bivalve Unio (rurugu). 
The opossum (Jazze). 

The boatbill heron (402). 
The toucan (smemeha sondu). 
A fish (vavailz), 

LP EWARVEY Ym 

The kingfish ? (Aus). 

. The turtle (zengge). 

. A black banana, wild and inedible (Zosa). 

A shell fish, Pteroceras lambis (ronggis?). 

. A night bird, identified from a picture with the 

| 
jerfalcon (Azkzturu). 
Posomogo 

wmkh WH Qo 

The Conus generalis (mbulau). 
. The large areca nut (ede). 
. A grass (sesehi). 
. A clam (/afalehe). 
10. The bright yellow coco-nut (4ozlo). 
11, A yellow land snail, Carocolla (¢araoa). 
{| 12. A small sword fish ? (pakehana). 

DP OND 

Thus we have here, as Dr. Rivers observes, a grouping of 
what seem to be totemic clans into a number of larger groups 
or classes. If similar subdivisions formerly prevailed all over 
Ysabel and the other islands where exogamy is still practised, 
we could understand the diversities which now exist in regard 
to the exogamous classes throughout the archipelago.’ ’ 

The natives of Ysabel have the classificatory system of 
relationship.” Thus, in the generation above his own a man 

1 W. H. R. Rivers, ‘‘Totemism in 2 For the following particulars as to 
Polynesia and Melanesia,” Journal of the classificatory terms of relationship 
the Royal Anthropological Institute, in Ysabel I am indebted to the courtesy 
XxxIx. (1909) pp. 171 Sg. of Dr. W. H. R. Rivers. 

vil TOTEMISM IN CENTRAL MELANESIA - 115 

applies the same term ¢amanggu to his father and to his Classif- 
father’s brothers. He applies the same term zndonggu pee of 
to his mother and to his mother’s sisters; but he also relationship 
applies the same term to his father’s sisters, In his own ™ Ye 
generation he has different terms for elder brother 
(toganggu) and younger brother (¢ahinggu); and he applies 

these same terms to the sons of his father’s brothers and to 

the sons of his mother’s sisters. He applies the same term 
vavimenggu to his sisters and to the daughters of his father’s 
brothers and of his mother’s sisters. On the other hand he 
applies a different term, panjanggu, to all his other first 
cousins, the sons and daughters of his father’s sisters or of 

his mother’s brothers. A husband calls his wife sauungu, 

and she also calls him tauungu. He calls his wife’s sisters 
tvanggu, and she similarly calls his brothers zvanggu. In 

the generation below his own a man applies the same term 
dadhenggu to his sons and daughters and to the sons and 
daughters of his brothers; but -he applies a different term 
tumbunggu to the sons and daughters of -his sisters. A 
woman on the other hand applies the same term dadhengga 

to her sons and daughters and to the sons and daughters 

both of her sisters and of her brothers. Thus, the system 

of Ysabel confuses the father’s sister with the mother ; 

it distinguishes the wife’s sisters from the wife; it distin- 
guishes the husband’s brothers from the husband ; and in 

the mouth of a woman it confuses the sons and daughters of 

her brothers with the sons and daughters of her sisters. All 

these are so many signs of the incipient break-down of the 
classificatory system. The system prevails in very similar 

forms among the natives of Florida and Guadalcanar. 

Again, exogamous classes, with animal badges, if not Exo. 
with totems, have been recorded in the northern islands ane 
of the Solomon group. Thus with regard to the Short- animal 
lands Group we learn that “the people are divided into ere 
nine classes respectively, Bomana, pigeon: Talasak?, Shortlands 
heron: Banafu, white cockatoo: Talapuni, the eagle- ‘24 
hawk: Fanapara, like the minor bird. “The subdivision 
of this latter one is Maratigino, the minor bird: Oza, the 
flying fox: Tafotta, the iguana: Szmea, the horn-bill, a 
subdivision of which is Semeapeka. There is a subdivision 

Mr. C. 
Ribbe’s 

evidence. 

116 TOTEMISM IN MELANESIA CHAP. 

of Bomana called Bomana karo. These divisions are all 
exogamous.”' Again, Mr. C. Ribbe, who spent two years in 
the Solomons, informs us that in Shortland Island or Alu, 
which lies to the south of the large island of Bougainville, 
“the division of the natives into secret societies or rather 
into totems is remarkable. There is quite a number 
of such totems in the Shortlands. They are generally 
named after animals, for there are Dove, Shark, Eagle, 
Cuscus, and Crocodile totems. Many of them are friendly, 
many are hostile to each other. Men may not marry girls 
of the same totem; the son belongs to a different totem 
than that of his father, since he follows his mother. Father 
and son may therefore be opposed to each other as enemies. 
Sometimes certain totems are powerful and respected and 

. dominate the rest by their might. Thus in the lifetime of 

King Gorei the Dove totem was the most powerful and 
respected, but after his death it soon declined, and when I 
was in the Shortlands it numbered only a few members, 
The totems of the Shortland Islands have also adherents in 
Northern Choiseul, in Treasury Island, and on the north-east 
and south-west coasts of Bougainville. Even people who 
speak quite different languages or dialects, for example, the 
natives on the north-east coast of Bougainville by comparison 
with the rest, may belong to one and the same totem. It is 
not unusual even in time of war for persons from hostile 
villages to go to and fro without being killed, for their totem 
protects them. Whether they have any outward badges, | 
could not definitely ascertain, but I am inclined to assume 
it, otherwise it would be inexplicable how the islanders can 
distinguish to what totem a stranger belongs. Several times 
I observed that’ when people of Gieta were come to Fauro, 
the Fauro people could positively say whether the persons dis- 
embarking from the canoe belonged to the Dove or the Shark 
totem. At all festivities, whether at dances, marriages, funeral 
ceremonies or what not, there are exact rules as to the order 
in which the people are to be provided with food. In the 

1 Extract from an account by Mr. kindly extracted and sent to me by 
Macdonald of the cremation of the the Rev. George Brown, D.D., of the 
body of a famous chief Gorai in the Wesleyan Mission. 

Shortlands Islands. The passage was 

vir TOTEMISM IN CENTRAL MELANESIA 117 

different villages, in which there are mostly several totems 

side by side, each has its council house and its leader, who 

may be also chief of the village. In other cases the leader 

is subordinate to the village chief, but only provided that 

the chief's totem is at the time the most powerful.”? 
Although the system of mother-kin prevails in respect of the 
exogamous classes, Mr. Ribbe tells us that “all the rights 

are on the side of the man. The woman is more the slave 

and beast of burden than the mate and companion of her 
husband.”? And we learn from him that the usual rule of Avoidance 
avoidance is observed between a man and his wife’s mother. ae 
After his marriage he may neither see nor converse with mother. 
her. If he meets her, he may not recognise her, but must 
make off and hide himself as fast as he can.’ 

Again, we learn from Mr. R. Parkinson, who has resided Exogam- 
for many years in Melanesia, that the whole population of Gus lessee 
Buka, the island to the north of Bougainville, is divided into matermat 
two great classes, which have the cock and the frigate-bird ati i 
for their respective crests, and are named accordingly Keveu Bougain- 
and Afanu, each of them after the name of its bird. The ean, 
classes are exogamous: a man of the one class must always of Bougain- 
marry a woman of the other, and the children always take a ee 
the class and crest of their mother. In Northern Bougain- 
ville the same two birds are the crests of the classes or clans, 
and the rules of marriage and descent are the same. But 
while the name of the frigate-bird (#anw) is the same, the 
name of the cock (e¢oa) is different. In Southern Bougain- 
ville and in the islands of Bougainville Strait the relations 
of the classes are the same, except that a larger number of 
birds serve as crests, and that the people who have the same 
crest are not named after it, but have a separate class or clan 
name. Thus the people who have the dove (éao/o) for their 
crest are called Baumane; those who have the hornbill 
(popfo) are called Simaa ; those who have the cockatoo (axa) 
are called Banahu ; those who have the frigate-bird (sanua) 
are called Talapuini; those who have the ¢égenou are called 
the Hanapare ; those who have the £af7 are called Talasaggi ; 

1. Ribbe, Zwet Jahre unter den 2 C. Ribbe, of. cit. p. 141. 
Kannibalen der Salomo-Inseln(Dresden- : : 
Blasewitz, 1903), pp. 140 59. 3 C. Ribbe, of. ctf. p. 144. 

The crests 
are always 
birds. 

Men free 
to marry 
their own 
daughters, 

Exogam- 
ous classes 
with 
maternal 
descent in 
Northern 
Melanesia. 

118 TOTEMISM IN MELANESIA CHAP. 

and those who have the /aéz/e are called Habubusu. These 
classes or clans are exogamous; a man always marries a 
woman of another class or clan; the children always belong 
to their mother’s clan. There are no outward and visible 
badges ; everybody seems to know everybody else’s crest. 
People who have the same crest regard each other as nearly 
related. For example, if a man of the cock or the hornbill 
crest comes to another village, he will there be hospitably 
lodged and entertained by people of the same crest. The 
crests are always birds, never beasts or fish. As children 
always belong to their mother’s clan, into which their father 
marries, it follows that a man may theoretically marry his 
own daughters, Indeed in Buka and Northern Bougainville 
the theory is carried out in practice; there it happens not 
infrequently that a father weds his own daughter and begets 
children by her. This is not regarded as illegitimate, 
whereas the union of two persons of the same crest is viewed 
as acrime. In Southern Bougainville and in the islands of 
Bougainville Strait the same opinion is held, only it is not 
put in practice so often as in the north... We have seen 
that in the island, of Kiwai, off New Guinea, a father is 
similarly allowed to marry his own daughter. 

§ 5. Lotemism in Northern Melanesia 

Northern Melanesia is composed mainly of the two large 
islands of New Britain (New Pomerania) and New Ireland 
(New Mecklenburg) with the small islands of the Duke of 
York (New Lauenburg) group lying in the channel between 
them. Here as in Southern Melanesia the natives are 
divided into two exogamous classes with descent in the 
maternal line, and each class has a particular species of 
insect to which it pays the same sort of respect that a 

1 R. Parkinson, Zur Ethnographic 
der nordwestlichen Salomo Inseln (Ber- 
lin, 1899), p. 6 (Abhkandlungen und 
Berichte des Konighchen Zoologischen 
und Anthropologisch-Ethnographischen 
Museums su Dresden, 1898-99, vol. 
vii.). Compare zd., Dreissig Jahre in 
der Stidsee (Stuttgart, 1907), pp. 481, 
660 sg. The exogamous divisions 
are variously called by Mr. Parkinson 

classes, stocks or kins (.S¢démme), clans, 
and totem groups. Some of the names 
of the classes reported by Mr. Parkin- 
son for Bougainville and the islands of 
Bougainville Strait are clearly identical 
with those reported by Mr. Macdonald 
for the Shortlands Islands, which lie 
in Bougainville Strait. See above, 
pp. 115 sg. 
2 See above, p. 40. 

VII TOTEMISM IN NORTHERN MELANESIA 119 

totemic clan pays to its totem. How fat these exogamous 
classes extend in New Britain and New Ireland we are 
unable to say, since the greater part of the interior of both 
these islands is still unexplored. Of New Britain only the 
northern portion, which bears the name of the Gazelle Penin- 
sula, is comparatively well known, and even within the 
peninsula there is an aboriginal race named the Baining, 
‘inhabiting the mountainous country in the west, about whom 
our information is meagre.’ Accordingly the following 
account of the exogamcus classes in New Britain must be 
understood to apply only to the natives of the tableland and 
coasts in the north-east of the Gazelle Peninsula. In their 
language, as well as in other respects, these people closely 
resemble the inhabitants both of the Duke of York Islands 
and of the southern half of New Ireland; and Mr. R. 
Parkinson may be right in thinking that New Ireland is 
the hive from which the present natives of the Duke of 
York Islands and of the Gazelle Peninsula have swarmed 
southward. 

The first apparently to observe and record the existence 
of exogamous classes among these people was the experienced 
Wesleyan missionary, the Rev. George Brown;® and the fullest 
account of them we owe to another English missionary, the 
Rev. Benjamin Danks. It may be well to subjoin Mr. Danks’s 
account in his own words :— 

“For marriage purposes the people of New Britain are 
divided into two classes or divisions. The names of these 
very vile thing indeed if this rule is 
ever broken. In fact, there are only 
two instances known where two chiefs 
2R, Parkinson, of. cit pp. 46 New Ireland had dared to disregard 

8 this prohibition. The children are all 
40. of the same class as the mother, in all 

1R. Parkinson, Dreissig Jahre in 
der Stidsee (Stuttgart, 1907), pp. 43 
$99-» 155 599. 

‘3 See the Rev. G. Brown, ‘‘ Notes 
on the Duke of York Group, New 
Britain, and New Ireland,” Journal of 
the Royal Geographical Society, x\vii. 
(1877) p. 149: “All the people in 
Duke of York Group, New Ireland, 
and New Britain, so far as we have 
been, are divided into two distinct 
classes, called respectively Maramara 
and Pikalaba, and the custom is that a 
Maramara must marry a Pikalaba, and 
vice-versa. It is considered to be a 

cases, and as they must all marry into 
the other class, intermarriages are thus 
in a great measure prevented, though 
in addition to this there are also pro- 
hibited degrees even between Maramara 
and Pikalaba. The land, coco-nuts, 
and fruit-bearing trees also in all dis- 
tricts are apportioned between these 
two classes, so that on the death of the 
father, the children in most cases go to 
the mother’s village, where alone they 
have land or coco-nuts.” 

120 TOTEMISM IN MELANESIA CHAP. 

Thenatives divisions on the Duke of York Island and New Treland are 
eal _ Maramara and Pikalaba. On New Britain proper the two 
the Duke Classes are named after two mythological personages, one 
eae named Zo Kabinana, the other To Kovuvuru. The first of 
divided for these two is considered as the founder, creator, or inventor of 
ee all good and useful things. Fruitful land, well-built houses, 
intotwo fine fish traps, were all the work or inventions of Zo Kabin- 
class. ana; also all good institutions, customs, and usages are 
spectively supposed to have been derived from him. Hence the word 

rls tains kabinana in the New Britain language means wse, and in 

Pikalaba. kabinanapa ia we have an active transitive verb, which 
means to do a thing wisely or well. The Zo written before 
Kabinana simply denotes the masculine gender and may in 
Fnglish be strictly rendered as ‘Mr.’ In this name we 
may have wisdom personified. All savages like and respect, 
and view with no little reverence, a wise man. In New 
Britain to call a man Zo Kadbinana when he is working at 
anything is simply to pay him a very high compliment. 

“To Kovuvuru is considered by far the lesser person of 
the two. He is credited with having created all the bad 
barren land, all the high hills, and everything which is 
clumsy or ill formed. To call a man Zo Kovuvure when he 
is doing anything is simply to make him ashamed. Yet I 
have never found that the class which bears the name of 
To Kovuvuru is considered to occupy, socially, an inferior 
position to the Zo Kabinana class. 

“On the Duke of York group the names given to these 
two personages are Zo Kabinana and To Pulgo. 

In the “The totems of these classes on Duke of York are two 
yike of insects. That of the Maramarais the Ko gila le, ze. the leaf 
island the Of the horse chestnut tree, so named because being about the 
ae length and size, and resembling very much in other respects 
classes are the leaf of that tree. It is a beautiful insect, and when 
*wornsects. resting on a leaf of the tree, from which it takes its name, it 
is difficult to distinguish it from the leaf. The Pzkalaba’s 
totem is the Kas, which is doubtless the Mantis religtosus. 
Respect “The Maramara class will on no account injure, or 
tor the allow to be injured with impunity, their totem, the Ko gila 
Ze, but they have not the slightest compunction in abusing 
the Kam. The Prkalaba class reverence the Kam, but do 

VI TOTEMISM IN NORTHERN MELANESIA 121 

not hesitate to destroy the Ko gila le, if they can do it 
secretly. Both these classes believe that their ancestors 
descended each from their own particular totem, which they 
designate as Zakun miéat, ze. our relative. Any evil or 
abuse inflicted by one class on the other’s totem is 
considered as a casus belli, and is an insult which the class 
is bound to avenge. 

“No man may marry a woman of his own class. To do The classes 

so would bring instant destruction upon the woman, and if pcos 
not immediate death to the man, his life would never be persons of 
secure. The nearest relative (male) of the woman would pica’ 
immediately seek her and kill her the moment he found her, marry each 
I have been told by natives that both man and woman would oh", 
be killed as early as possible. The relatives of the woman death. 
would be so ashamed that only her death could satisfy 
them. The man might possibly escape, but I think not. 
But it is scarcely any use speculating as to what would be 
done to the man, because such a case never occurs in-a 
thickly populated district. If a man should be accused of 
adultery or fornication with a woman, he would at once be 
acquitted by the public voice if he could say, ‘She is one of 
us, ze. she belongs to my totem, which in itself precludes 
the possibility of any sexual intercourse between us. The 
shame of such intercourse is as great between them as is the 
shame and disgrace of sexual intercourse between brother 
and sister in a Christian community. 

“But while such is the case, the evil consequences of The 
inter-family connections are not averted altogether, and but a aeret: 
for an inner regulation which exists, but which is not uncle with 
absolutely binding, those evil consequences would be aa! 
accelerated, Two brothers are both of the same totem, say forbidden 
Pikalaba. They each marry a Maramara woman. Their ?¥ om 
children are of the mother’s tctem, taking their descent classes, is 
from their mother. Now it is possible for one brother to pe aan 
take the other brother’s daughter to wife, and no exception by public 
may be taken to it because the girl does not belong to his pan 
totem, but to her mother’s. A man may not take to wife 
his sister’s daughter, because she is of his totem. So upon 
theoretical grounds a man may without law-breaking marry 

- . . . . 
his niece. But there is great repugnance to such unions 

Dr. G. 
Brown on 
the exo- 
gamous 
class of 
New 
Britain, etc. 

122 TOTEMISM IN MELANESIA CHAP. 

among the natives of New Britain, and in one case where 
such an union was brought about, the natives with whom I 
conversed upon the subject utterly condemned it. This 
public feeling against such marriages is that inner regulation 
mentioned above.”! A curious corollary of the exogamy of 
the two classes is that “if twins are born, and they are boy 
and girl, they are put to death because being of the same 
class and being of opposite sex, they were supposed to have 
had in the womb a closeness of connection which amounted 
to a violation of their marital class law.” The two 
exogamous classes are not distinguished from each other by 
any outward badge or mark which a European can recognise. 
Yet a native knows at once the class to which another native 
belongs.’ 

“All lands, fruit-trees, fishing-grounds in the lagoon 
belong definitely to the respective classes. A MJaramara 
cannot set his fish-trap on Pvkalaba fishing-stones, and 
vice versa. Such an act would certainly cause a fight. 
Intermarriage in either class is absolutely forbidden. Any 
such marriage would be considered incestuous and would 
bring speedy punishment: in fact, the whole of the people 
would be horrified at! such an event and the parties would 
almost certainly be killed. They also called incestuous 
(kuou) any one who killed or ate any portion of a person 
of the same class as himself, e.g. a Maramara who killed or 
ate a Maramara. The children all belong to the mother’s 
class. These respective classes are well known, but there 
are no outward signs or marks to distinguish them. I 
think that in theory, but in theory only, every Maramara 
woman is every Pzzalaba man’s wife, and vice versa, but 
there is no trace, so far as I know, of anything like communal 

marriage: on the contrary 

1 Rev. Benjamin Danks, ‘* Marriage 
Customs of the New Britain Group,” 
Journal of the Anthropological Institute, 
xviii. (1889) pp. 281-283. 

2 Rev. B, Danks, of. cz#. p. 292. 

3 Joachim Graf von Pfeil, Studien 
und Beobachtungen aus der Stidsee 

(Brunswick, 1899), p. 27. This 
writer’s account of the exogamous 

it appears to me that the 

classes and totems of the New Britain, 
Duke of York, and New Ireland 
natives (of. cz#. pp. 27 sg.) agrees 
closely with that of Mr. B. Danks and 
may be borrowed from it. That there 
is no external mark to distinguish the 
two exogamous classes in the Gazelle 
Peninsula is stated also by Mgr. Couppé, 
‘*En Nouvelle-Poméranie,” Les A@s- 
sions Catholiques, xxiii. (1891) Pp. 365. 

VIL TOTEMISM IN NORTHERN MELANESIA 123 

regulations prohibiting the intercourse or even mentioning 
the names of relatives show that this ‘was very repugnant 
to public sentiment and feeling.” ! 

Other writers who have noticed the two exogamous Other 
classes of the natives of the Gazelle Peninsula make no are 
mention of the class names Maramara and Pikalaba, but the two 
merely tell us that the natives distinguish the two classes by “*** 
two words which in their language mean or are derived from 
the personal pronouns “we” and “they.” Thus a man 
speaking of his own class would say a@ ée avet “our class,” 
and speaking of the other class he would say a@ te diat 
“their class.”? This may be compared to the custom in 
Southern Melanesia, where there are no distinctive names 
for the two classes, but where the members of each class 
distinguish their own class as “our side of the house” and 
the other class as “the other side of the house.” ® 

As usually happens under a system of mother-kin, the Close re- “ 

relation between a man and his sister’s children is especially oe 
close. 

The relation is expressed by the word #matuana, man and 
which is a reciprocal term, being applied both by the dures 
nephew to his uncle and by the uncle to his nephew. 

The maternal uncle, we are told, “takes the chief place 
in the Melanesian family, and the parents fall into the 
background before him. The whole law of the family 
and of inheritance is regulated by the relation between 
kinsfolk on the mother’s side; kinship on the father’s 
side is not considered. The children belong neither to 
the father nor to the mother but to the mother’s brother 

or to her nearest kinsman. 

1 Rev. G. Brown, D.D., Afelan- 
estans and Polynesians, their Lie 
Histories illustrated and compared (in 
manuscript), The author has kindly 
allowed me to quote from some portions 
of this forthcoming work. 

2 Pp. A. Kleintitschen (Missionary in 
New Britain), Die Kiistenbewohner der 
Gazellehalbinsel (Hiltrup bei Miinster, 
preface date Christmas, 1906), p. 191. 
According to Monsignore Couppé, the 
term which people apply to their own 
class is A-temavet, from a-te ‘sprung 
from” and a-vet ** we”; and the term 
which they apply to the other class is 

If a woman marries a man 

A-tematan, from a-te ‘‘sprung from” 
and az ‘‘some one,” “‘another.” See 
Mgr. Couppé, ‘En Nouvelle- 
Poméranie,” Les Misstons Catholiques, 
xxiii, (1891) p. 365. According to 
Mr. R. Parkinson the terms in question 
are favevet “we” and tadiat ‘‘they.” 
See R. Parkinson, Dreissig Jahre in 
der Siidsee, p. 67. In the Duke of 
York Islands ‘‘ we” is dat and ‘* they ” 
is diat. See R. H. Codrington, Zhe 
Melanesian Languages (Oxford, 1885), 
p. 116. 

3 See above, p. 70. 

Mutual 
avoidance 
of brothers 
and sisters, 

and of 
relations by 
marriage. 

124 TOTEMISM IN MELANESIA CHAP. 

of another tribe, all the children must return to the 
tribe of the mother and to her sept. The maternal uncle 
has the full right to dispose of his nephews and nieces, and 
in coming to his decisions he need not trouble himself about 
the wishes of the parents. When the children are grown 
bigger, they leave their father and mother and go to their 
matuana, They live in his house and work forhim. They 
have every motive to stand on a good footing with him, for 
they look to him entirely and are dependent on him. From 
their parents they have nothing to expect, after they have re- 
ceived from them bare life. When they are marriageable, the 
maternal uncle must buy them a wife. On the death of the 
matuana, it is not his own children but his nephews who come 
forward as heirs. With the inheritance goes also the honour 
to bury the deceased and to divide his shell-money.”? 

The mutual avoidance between brother and sister which 
we have met with in Southern Melanesia? is practised to 
some extent among the natives of the Gazelle Peninsula in 
New Britain. After her marriage a sister is not allowed to 
have social intercourse or to talk with her brother; she 
never utters his name, but designates him by another word.* 
Strict rules of etiquette 'also regulate the relations between a 
man and his wife’s family ; a violation of them would be 
regarded as a grave breach of decorum and punished 
correspondingly. A man and his wife’s parents call each 
other zzmuan, but they never call each other by their own 
names, indeed it is forbidden to do so. The taboo goes so 
far that if, for example, the father-in-law is called Breadfruit | 
(kapiaka), or Coco-nut (/ama), two not uncommon names, 
the son-in-law may not call breadfruit breadfruit or coco-nuts 
coco-nuts, but rnust use some other word for one or the other. 
Son-in-law and parents-in-law may offer each other betel- 
nuts, but they may not eat with each other nor see each other 
eat. A man may not enter the house of his wife’s parents. 
After her marriage a woman stands in precisely the same 
relations to her husband’s family. Brothers-in-law are also 

1 Pp, A. Kleintitschen, Dze* Adésten- 3, R. Parkinson, Dretssig Jahre in 
bewohner der Gazellehalbinsel, pp. der Stidsee, pp. 67 sq. 
190 sy. 

2 See above, pp. 77 5g. * R. Parkinson, of. czt. p. 67. 

vil TOTEMISM IN NORTHERN MELANESIA 125 

forbidden to mention each other’s names. If one of them 
speaks to another, he always uses the plural form; the 
proper name of his brother-in-law never passes his lips. A 
man who addresses his brother-in-law by his name, offers 
thereby the greatest insult to the whole of his wife’s family. 
How deeply the insult is felt may be inferred from its 
punishment; for the affront is a capital offence, and the 
offender is put out of the way.' 

As usual, exogamy coexists with the classificatory system Classi- 
of relationship. “While we, for example, specially designate t°'Y 

system of 
by the word ‘father’ the person who is father, the Melanesian relation- 

rather expresses by that word the relation which exists a 
between father and son. Thus he says of a father and son Britain. 
‘ Dir tamana, ‘ They two are fathers, that is, the relation of 
fatherhood exists between them. The uncle on_ the 
father’s side is also addressed as father, and the children 
of different brothers call each other brothers. But if the 
father of one child and the mother of another are brother 
and sister, then these children call each other @ Nauvana. 
The Melanesian child gives the name of mother not only 
to the woman who bore it, but also to all its aunts on the 
mother’s side. A European who is not familiar with these 
relations is surprised when he hears a Melanesian boasting 
of having three mothers. His confusion becomes greater 
when the three mothers in question stoutly assert ‘ A sztal 
ga kava ia; ‘We all three gave birth to him’”? This 
passage, which I have translated literally from the account 
of a Catholic missionary who has lived among the people 
he describes, well illustrates the difference between the savage 
and the civilised conceptions of fatherhood and motherhood, 
and proves once more, if another proof were needed, how 
vain it is to attempt to understand the classificatory system 
of relationship if we persist in associating the ideas of 

1p, A. Kleintitschen, De Adésten- 
bewohner der Gazellehalbinsel, p. 190. 

be rendered uncle. The aunt on the 
mother’s side has also been termed 

2 Pp. A. Kleintitschen, of. cz¢. pp. 
188, 190. The Rev. B. Danks writes : 
‘The uncle (maternal) has often 
been called father in my _ hearing, 
while the father’s brother has been 
termed on Duke of York Zadag, and 
on New Britain Afatwagu, which may 

mother” (B. Danks, ‘‘ Marriage Customs 
of the New Britain Group,” Journal 
of the Anthropological Institute, xviii. 
(1889) p. 294). In this statement it 
would seem that the paternal uncle and 
the maternal uncle have been inadvert- 
ently interchanged. 

Totemism 
and exo- 
gamy in 
New 
Treland. 

Totemic 
dances, 

126 TOTEMISM IN MELANESIA CHAP. 

procreation with the terms which in that system are the 
nearest equivalents to our terms “ father” and “ mother.” 

In New Ireland (New Mecklenburg) marriage may only 
take place between persons who have different family crests 
or totems ; sexual intercourse between persons of the same 
totemic group is regarded as incest and is still punished 
with the death of the woman at least and often with that of 
both the culprits. The avengers are always men of the same 
totem. The totems are birds (szanu). Children always 
take their totem from their mother. Persons who have the 
same totem regard each other as near relations, even if they 
are quite strangers, and they receive and entertain each 
other in their houses, as if they had been friends and 
acquaintances for years. Asa rule they band together to 
carry out enterprises in common. In wars between the 
districts, if there should be men of the same totem arrayed 
on both sides, they will tacitly avoid each other and attack 
men of a different totem. Inthe great carvings which serve 
as memorials of the dead the totemic bird (szanu)'of the 
deceased must always be represented. Among these totemic 
birds are the hornbill and the dove. But other animals, such 
as serpents, lizards, sharks, dolphins, and pigs, also figure in 
the memorial carvings, some of them representing evil spirits 
which combat and are vanquished by the totem.’ 

The natives of New Ireland dance totem-dances in 
imitation of the movements of their totemic birds, and 
the dancers who personate the bird always belong to 
its totemic group. For example, men who have the horn- 
bill (Rkytidoceros plicatus Forst.) for their totem stand in 
pairs, one pair behind the other in a long row, each man 
holding in his mouth a carved and painted mask of a 
hornbill’s head. The hornbill is a shy and wary bird 
which, while it eats the fruits on the tree-tops, keeps a sharp 
look-out for its foes, turning its head in all directions, and 
flying away with a peculiar scream and a loud flapping of 

1 R. Parkinson, Dredssig Jahre ix in many Melanesian languages. See 
der Stidsee, pp. 267, 648-651. The R. H. Codrington, Zhe Melanesian 
word manz, with variations of it (man, Languages, p. 39. 
men, mon, etc.), stands for ‘* bird” 

vi TOTEMISM IN NORTHERN MELANESIA 127 

its wings whenever it takes alarm. These motions and 
these sounds are all mimicked by the dancers. Another 
totemic dance represents a dove, which is a totem, pursued 
by its enemy the serpent. Two men personate doves 
hopping from bough to bough, while two long lines of men 
represent the serpent wriggling after its prey.’ 

In the central part of New Ireland (New Mecklenburg) Two exo- 

the whole native population is divided into two exogamous 

gamous 
classes 

classes which bear the names of Pakdlaba or Malabar (Patilata 
and Zarago or Taragau respectively.” These names are Tae 
borrowed, with slight changes, from the native names for two with bird 

totems in 

birds Malaba (Haliaetus leucogaster) and Taraga (Pandion Centra 

leucocephalus). Both the birds are sacred to the natives, who 
say of them a maz tabu, “a bird sacred,” and will not catch 
or kill them. They are also displeased if the birds are shot 
by a European or a Chinese; and should they obtain 
possession of the dead bird, they treat it like a human 
being. Members of the exogamous class to which the bird 
gives its name bury it and give a feast in its honour, just as 
is customary at the death of a man. However, this custom 
is more and more on the wane. The two birds may pro- 
visionally be called the totems of their respective classes.* 
It is commonly supposed that the original ancestor of each 
class had his abode in a flowing water especially in a 
mountain spring. The waters of the Prkalaba or Malabar 
class do not allow people of the Zavago class to bathe in 
them, and wice versa. The souls of all the dead, whether 
men, women, or children, go to the water of their totem and 
sometimes live in great trees beside it. They may not 
stray far from the spot, but at night they can quit the water, 

1 R. Parkinson, Dredssig Jahre in 
der Siidsee, pp. 279 sq. 

2 P. G. Peckel, ‘Die Verwandt- 
schaftsnamen des mittleren Neu- 
mecklenburg,” Azthropos, iii. (1908) 
p- 458; Albert Hahl (Herbertshche), 
“Das mittlere © Neumecklenburg,” 
Globus, xci. (1907) p. 313. The 
former writer gives the names as 
Pakilaba and Tarago, without noting 
any variations, The latter writer 
gives the names as Afa/adar and 
Taragau or Tarago, but notes that 

alternative names for A/alabar class 
are Ptkalabar (sic) and Alantkulai. 
The names /akilabaand Alalabar seem 
to be merely other forms of the names 
fPikalaba and Maramara. See above, 

PP. 119 599. 

3 P. G. Peckel and A. Hahl, Z/.cc. 
According to the latter writer, the 
dead bird is buried in the chief’s en- 
closure or compound (fakz/). Both 
these writers speak of the two birds as 
the totems of their respective classes. 

New 
Treland. 

Maternal 
descent of 
the classes: 
marriage 
within the 
class 
punished 
with death. 

Sub- 
divisions 
of the two 
classes. 

128 TOTEMISM IN MELANESIA CHAP, 

and then it is dangerous for living people of the other totem 
to meet them. However, in such a ghostly encounter a 
man is protected by the ghosts (¢aberan) of people of his 
own totem.) 

The wife of a Pakilaba man must always be a Tarago 
woman, and the wife of a Zavago man must always be a 
Pakilaba woman; in short, the two classes Pakilaba and 
Tarago are exogamous. All the children belong to the 
class of their mother and take her totem. If nevertheless 
two persons of the same class marry, they fall under what is 
called the dudo or ban. The punishment for their crime 
is hanging, which the culprits must inflict upon themselves. 
However, under the influence of the whites this custom is 
falling into desuetude. The children of such an incestuous 
union are called a nat-na-tahanuo? 

Each of the two exogamous classes is divided into 
numerous clans or families called a@ Hun or a Huntunan, all 
of them with their own names, which are said to be those 
of influential ancestors long dead. Thus the Pakdlaba class 
includes the clans or families a Tunubuah, a Hunanar,a 
Lsnamarodu, etc.; and the class Zarago includes the clans or 
families a Sosir,a Rapis, a Selaman, a Ulohothot, etc® In 
Sohun the clans, arranged under their respective classes, are 
as follows :—* 

Bisakubar (said to mean “red earth ”). 
Banban (said to mean “ arbour ”). 
Sarauai (meaning ?). 

Balage (?). 

. Dunobua (name of a stream in Sohun). 
Heba (?). 

. Baka (name of a river in Kudukudu ?). 
Karbabus (name of a tree). 

Buranta (name of a stream in Sohun). 

. Matalapuau (name of a stream in Matanangas). 
. Dul (name of a serpent). 

Pakilaba 
or 
Malabar 

ANY Pm 

Tarago 

WPwna 

1 A. Hahl, ‘*Das mittlere Neu- inflicted on the criminals by their 
mecklenburg,” Globus, xci. (1907) nearest kinsfolk. 

P- 313, 314. . ee 
TEA BG, -Peckelicit Aniboha He: 4. iO arias am i 
(1908) p. 458. Compare A. Hahl, (1908) p. 459. 
in Globus, xci. (1907) p. 313, who 4 A. Hahl, in Glodus, xci. (1907) 
says that the punishment of death isp. 313. 

VII ‘TOTEMISM IN NORTHERN MELANESIA 129 

At her first menstruation every girl must retire into a 
small house or chamber (sdak), which is built in the 
ordinary large house of the women. Here she has to hide Apparent 
herself for ten months, though at night she is allowed to go ae. 
into the open on condition of cowering down so that no one marriage 
may observe her state. She is attended to by old women, % 5° 
who introduce to her all the men, even the married men, munism. 
But after ‘she emerges from her seclusion, she belongs to her 
future husband alone.’ This custom appears to be a relic 
of sexual communism or of group marriage. 

The natives of Central New Ireland (New Mecklenburg) ciassi- 
combine, as usual, totemism and exogamy with the classifi- enn 
catory system of relationship. Children apply the same relation. 
term mama or tamagu (both meaning “my father”) to their edie 
own father and to his brothers; and conversely a man New 
applies the same term natigu (“my child”) both to his own "#94 
children and to the children of his brothers. Descent being 
in the maternal line, the totem of a man and his brothers is 
always different from the totem of their children.? Children 
apply the same term makaiz (“my mother”) to their own 
mother and to her sisters ; and conversely a woman applies 
the same terms rvanugu bulu (“my boy”) and ranugu 
hinastk (“my girl”) both to her own children and to the 
children of her sisters. Descent being in the maternal line, 

‘the totem of a mother and her sisters is always the same as 
the totem of their children.® The sons of two brothers or 
of two sisters call each other brothers (Aatatasin), and the 
sons of these sons also call each other brothers, and so on 
through all generations. Brothers in the same generation 
have always the same totem. The daughters of two sisters 
or of two brothers call each other sisters!(Aa‘asahin), and the 
daughters of these daughters also call each other sisters, and 
so on through all generations. Sisters in the same genera- 
tion have always the same totem. The son and daughter 
of two brothers (Aa¢atasin) or of two sisters (hatasahzn) call 
each other brother and sister (Aatahinen), and the son and 

1 A. Hahl, in Globus, xci. (1907) 

PG. 

P. 313. 

2 P, G. Peckel, in Axthropos, iii. P. G. Peckel, of. cét. p. 464. 

(1908) pp. 463, 472. P. G. Peckel, of. cé#. p. 465. 
VOL. II K 

3 Peckel, of- cif. pp- 464, 
472. 

4 

6 

Some 
marriages 
between 
persons 
near of kin 
are pro- 
hibited by 
the class- 
law and 
others by 
custom. 

Mutual 
avoidance 
of cousins. 

130 TOTEMISM IN MELANESIA CHAP. 

daughter of that son and that daughter call each other 
brother and sister (atahznex), and so on through all genera- 
tions. Such a son and daughter in the same generation 
have always the same totem.’ The sons of a brother and a 
sister call each other dy dapun; and the daughters of a 
brother and a sister also call each other air lapun. Such 
sons have always different totems, because their mothers 
have different totems ; and such daughters have also always 
different totems, because their mothers have different totems.” 
The son and daughter of a brother and a sister (Aacahinen) 
call each other air hinen kokup. They have always different 
totems, because their mothers, have different totems.’ 

From the foregoing account it will be seen that marriage 
between a mother and her son is excluded by the law of 
class exogamy, because mother and son belong to the same 
class and totem. Further, marriage between a brother and 
sister is excluded for the same reason, because both belong 
to the same class and totem. Further, marriage between 
cousins who are children of two brothers is excluded, for 
the same reason, because the children are of the same 
class and totem. Further, marriage between cousins who 
are children of two sisters is excluded for the same 
reason, because the children are of the same class and 
totem. But on the other hand the law of class-exogamy 
does not, with maternal descent of the classes, exclude the 
marriage of a father with his daughter, because he and she 
always belong to different classes and totems; nor does it 
exclude the marriage of cousins who are the children of a 
brother and a sister respectively, because such cousins always 
belong to different classes and totems. Yet both such 
marriages, though not forbidden by the law of class-exogamy, 
are most rigidly forbidden by custom. The penalty for 
incest with a daughter is death by hanging.* Cousins who 
are the children of a brother and a sister respectively not 
only may not marry each other; they may not approach 
each other, they may not shake hands or even touch each 
other, they may not give each other presents, they may not 

1 Pp. G. Peckel, in Anthropos, iii. 3 Pp. G. Peckel, of. cit. p. 470. 
(1908) pp. 465 sg. 
2 P. G. Peckel, of. ct. p. 467. 4 P, G. Peckel, of. cit. p. 463. 

vil TOTEMISM IN NORTHERN MELANESIA 131 

mention each other’s names. But they are allowed to speak 
to each other at a distance of some paces.’ 

There can be no doubt that this mutual avoidance of Themuual 
cousins who are forbidden by custom, though not by the esa 
class-law, to marry each other is a precaution to prevent the and of 
violation of the custom; whether it has been instituted Dohes 
deliberately or grown up instinctively, its effect is to raise isa pre. 
an artificial barrier between the forbidden persons and so Qoaine 
far to deliver them from temptation. Now similar rules of incest. 
avoidance are observed not only between such cousins but 
also between brother and sister, although brother and sister, 
being always of the same totem, are forbidden by the law of 
class-exogamy to marry each other. There is a mutual 
shyness or shame between them. They may not come 
near each other, they may not shake hands, they may 
not touch each other, they may not give each other 
presents; but they are allowed to speak to each other 
at a distance of some paces. The penalty for incest 
with a sister, like that for incest with a daughter, is death 
by hanging.? We can therefore scarcely doubt that the 
mutual avoidance of brother and sister has been either 
instituted deliberately or grown up instinctively as a pre- 
caution against incest between them; sexual intercourse 
between a brother and sister is apparently viewed as a crime 
so serious, that the ordinary rule of exogamy is not a 
sufficient safeguard against it, but must be reinforced by 
other and stringent measures. In Southern Melanesia, as 
we have seen, the same mutual avoidance of brother and 
sister exists and is to be explained in the same way? 

A brief account of totemism and exogamy in Southern Totemism 
New Ireland (New Mecklenburg) is given by Messrs. E. Southern 
Stephan and F. Graebner: It applies to the coast from Ireland. 
Umuddu to Cape St. George and runs as follows :— 

“The social life is founded on marriage, and the 
marriage union is first of all influenced by the circumstance 
that the inhabitants of every district belong to two totems, 
as to which, with the exception of those of Laur, it is 
doubtful whether, in spite of their designation as Pazsszn, 

1 P, G. Peckel, im Asthropos, iii. 2 P. G, Peckel, of. c#t. p, 467. 
{1908) pp. 467, 470 sg. 3 Above, PP. 77 599. 

132 TOTEMISM IN MELANESIA CHAP, 

they are named after birds. It was only after long acquaint- 
ance with the people of Lamassa that we were able to 
penetrate in some measure into these complicated relations. 
There the people belong either to the class! baumbaum or 
to marrimarr, and every native in the village can tell with 
surprising certainty the ‘class bird’? of every inhabitant. 
These two totems extend, according to Tompuan’s state- 
ments, to Lambell, Kandass and Mioko. Mioko and 
Lamassa are quite different linguistic areas, but the inhabi- 
tants trade with each other and live on good terms. . . 
Laur has for its class birds tavrangau (Pandion haliaetus) 
and mannigulat or mallawa. Marriages between Laur and 
the districts Kandass and Pugusch seem not to take place. 
Persons who have the same totem may not marry each 
other. The children always belong to their mother’s totem, 
that is, mother-right is the rule.” To which the writers 
add: “It must always be emphatically stated that the 
Mother. terms father-right and mother-right indicate simply and 
song solely the group to which the individual belongs and the 
mother. other definite systems of relationship determined thereby ; 
rue. rathet they have not the least to do with the higher or lower 
trary. position of women.! Indeed it might on the contrary be 
affirmed that in general women are more highly esteemed in 
districts where father-right is the rule than in districts where 
mother-right prevails.” * Of these two exogamous classes 
baumbaum and marrmarr the name of the latter appears to 
be identical with savramara, the name of one of the two 
exogamous classes in New Britain.’ 

Totemism Off the east coast of New Ireland (New Mecklenburg) 
eee of lie two groups of islands, the one called Tanga or Caens 
Tanga andand the other Aneri or St. John. In these islands and in 
Aner the district called Siara on the south-eastern coast of New 
Ireland all the natives have totems, which they call manu 
(“birds”), though in fact among the totems are animals as 
well as birds. These totemic creatures are the sea-eagle 

1 Stammesgenossenschaft. Neu-Mecklenburg (Bismarck-Archipel), 
Die Ktiste von Umuddu bis Kap St. 
Georg (Berlin, 1907), pp. 106 sg, 

3 Emil Stephan und Fritz Graebner, 4 See above, pp. 119 sgg. 

2 Stammesvogel. 

vil ITOTEMISM IN NORTHERN MELANESIA 133 

(manlam), the dove (am bal), the black and white fly-catcher 
(an dun), two kinds of parrots (angkika ahd am pirik), the 
sea-gull (tagau), the dog (/fumpul), and the pig (/wsbo). 
No man may marry a woman of his own totem, and more 
than that, the men of any one totem clan are not free to 
marry the women of any other totem clan. The Sea-gull 
men always marry Sea-eagle women. The Parrot men of 
one clan (the az pirik) may only marry Parrot women of 
the other clan (the axgkika) or Dove women. The Black 
and White Fly-catcher men may marry Sea-eagle, Sea-gull, 
and Dove women, and also the women of one of the two 
Parrot clans (namely, the azgkika). The Pig men may 
marry women of any other totem except Sea-eagle women , 
and Dog men may marry women of any totem but their 
own. Sexual intercourse between men and women of the 
same totem is punished with death. At festivities and 
gatherings of all sorts, as well as in the frequent feuds, 
members of the same totem keep together. The totem 
birds and animals are not in any way respected ; they are 
eaten just like any ordinary beasts and birds.’ 

In the St. Mathias and Kerue or Emirau Islands, to the Totemism 
north of New Hanover, the natives are divided into exo- cients 
gamous classes each with its totem or totemic badge, but no Kerue, and 
particulars as to the system have been obtained? Lastly, }¢™y'y 
the totemic system exists among the natives of the Admiralty 
Islands, which may be regarded as forming the north- 
western extremity of Melanesia. The Admiralty Islanders 
are divided into three tribes or stocks, the Moanus, the 
Matankor, and the Usiai. Of these the Moanus are a sea- 
faring folk, who inhabit the coast; they build their villages 
on the beach or in shallow water on reefs; the houses 
always stand upon piles. The Usiai are an inland people 
who build their houses on the ground. The Matanakor are 
intermediate between the other two tribes, for they are tillers 
of the soil as well as mariners. In many respects the 
islanders resemble the Papuans of New Guinea, but the 
population seems to be hybrid; for. there are traces of a 
fairer race mixed with the swarthy Papuan element, which 

1 R. Parkinson, Dretssig Jahre in der Stidsee, pp. 652 5g. 
2 R. Parkinson, of. czt. p. 337- 

Rules of 
marriage 
and 
descent. 

134 TOTEMISM IN MELANESIA CHAP. 

dominates the breed.’ All three tribes of the Admiralty 
Islanders are divided into totemic clans or groups, of which 
the following have been recorded :— 

1. The group Xo/, with five different totems, namely a kind of fish 
(Aanas), the pig (fou), the cuscus (/auvat), the crocodile (mébxaz), 
and a large fish (kemendra). The Kol group is strongly repre- 
sented in Papitalai. 

2. The group Poendrilez, a kind of fish, dominant in Siwisa. 

3. The group Pad, the dove, strongly represented in the island of Pak. 

4. The group Pew, the shark. 

5. The group Kodad, the crab. 

6. The group 7junjak, a kind of oyster, and Sawo/, the pearl-oyster. 

7. The group 7jauka, Philemon coquerelli, and Pongopong, a fruit. 

8. The group U7z, a species of silurus (German Schweinjisch). 

9. The group Kareng, a parrot, and Kararat, the turtle. 

10. The group Karifou, a kind of heron. 

11. The group 77z/im, a kind of starling, and Zzhir, a parrot. 

12. The group MNgong, the sea-swallow, and Paltmat, the flying 
squirrel. 

13. The group Kafa, the frigate-bird, and Kanauz, the tropic-bird. 

14. The group Kana, a kind of sea-swallow. 

The totem (patandrusu) is inherited by children from 
their mother. Persons of the same totem may not marry 
each other, but of late the rule has been less strictly observed, 
especially among the Usiai and Matankor. Among the 

* Moanus, on the other hand, marriage with a woman of the 

Relations 
between 
persons of 
the same 
totem. 

Respect 
for the 
totem. 

Exogam- 
ous classes 
not found 
in Fiji. 

same totem is viewed as incestuous and disgraceful. Persons 
of the same totem arrayed on opposite sides in battle will 
not attack each other. Castaways and strangers are treated 
as friends by people of the same totem; and a man will 
not steal from members of his totemic group. But there is 
no outward mark or badge to distinguish the persons, the 
houses, or the canoes of the different totem clans. When 
the totem is an edible animal, members of the totem clan 
abstain from eating it.’ 

§ 6. Totemism in Eastern Melanesta (Fiji). 

The most easterly branch of the Melanesian stock are 
the Fijians, whose archipelago, including the two large 
islands of Viti Levu and Vanua Levu, is situated in the 

1 R. Parkinson, Dretssig Jahre in der Stidsee, pp. 351, 354- 
- 2 R. Parkinson, of. c##. pp- 392 59- 

vil TOTEMISM IN EASTERN MELANESIA (FIL) 135 

Pacific Ocean to the eastward of the New Hebrides. While 
exogamous classes such as prevail in the rest of Melanesia 

have not been found in Fiji, clear traces of totemism have Traces of 
been detected in the respect which tribes and subdivisions of ‘tems 
tribes pay to particular species of animals and plants. Thus Thomas 
the English missionary Thomas Williams, one of our earliest Willams 
and best authorities on the people of Fiji, writes as follows : indwelling 
“Certain birds, fish, plants, and some men, are supposed to Sites of 
have deities closely connected with or residing in them. plants, and 
At Lakemba, Tui Lakemba, and on Vanua Levu, Ravuravu, ly 
claim the hawk as their abode; Viavia, and other gods, the 

shark. One is supposed to inhabit the eel, and another the 
common fowl, and so on until nearly every animal becomes 

the shrine of some deity. He who worships the god dwelling 

in the eel, must never eat of that fish, and thus of the rest ; 

so that some are ¢abu from eating human flesh, because the 

shrine of their god is a man. The people clearly maintain 

the Popish distinction between the material sign and the 
spiritual essence symbolized ; but, in one case as in the other, 

the distinction seems sometimes to be practically lost. Thus 

the land-crab is the representative of Roko Suka, one of the 

gods formerly worshipped in Tiliva, where land-crabs are 
rarely seen, so that a visit from one became an important 
matter. Any person who saw one of these creatures, 
hastened to report to an old man, who acted as priest, that 

their god had favoured them with a call. Orders were forth- 

with given that new nuts should be gathered, and a string of 

them was formally presented to the crab, to prevent the deity 

from leaving with an impression that he was neglected, and 
visiting his remiss worshippers with drought, dearth, or death.”* 

On the coast of Viti Levu another English missionary, the 

Rev. Lorimer Fison, found a native teaching his son to worship 

his god, which was the native Fijian rat, at a small shrine 

near the beach. On being asked why he worshipped the rat, 

the man answered, “ Because he is our father.” 4 

1 A god. Mission to the Vitian or Fijian Islands 

2 Another god. (Cambridge, 1862), p. 392. 

3 Thomas Williams, 7777 and the # Rev. Lorimer Fison, “On Apparent 
Fijians, Second Edition (London, Reminiscences of Totemism in Fiji,” 
1860), i. 21959. Compare B.Seeman, Annual Report on New Guinea, 1897- 
Viti, an Account of a Government 1898 (Brisbane, 1898), p. 136. 

136 TOTEMISM IN MELANESIA CHAP. 

Father de A Catholic missionary, Father J. de Marzan, reports that 
Maran ©? in the large island of Viti Levu certain tribes have each a 
in Fiji. pair of principal totems consisting of a tree and an animal, 
and that some tribes call themselves by the name of one or 
other of their totems, but oftener by the name of their tree 
totem than of their animal totem. Thus the Vunaqumu 
tribe has for its totem the gumu tree; the Bau tribe has 
for its totem the dau tree; the Namoto tribe has for its 
Listof totem the soto or voto tree; and the Nareba (Naremba) 
oes tribe has for its totem the veda, which is a kind of hawk. 
their But many tribes are not named after their totems. Father de 

totems. Marzan gives the following list of tribes with their totems :— 

Tribe. Tree Totem, Animal Totem. 
Vunaqumu qumu auna (eel) 
Nasalia we bale (serpent) 
Namoto moto kula (kind of parrot, French 
perruche) 
Jubai baka (banyan) | deka (bat) 
Naboro boro (pepper) | ura (shrimp) 
Nanuyamalo vastlt vokat (lizard) 
Naha boa belt (? loach, French doche?) 
Batinikia vasa boto (frog) 
Navitilevu Sou dele (titmouse) 
Waimaro (Soloira)| molaca stcé (a shell) 
Oralau boa saca (Fijian quail) 
Nareba yakona (kava) | reba (hawk) 
Nagole dakua veve (perch) 
Lomairuna masulele waituitus (hawk) 
Naboubuco mako soge (pigeon) 
Accessory The subdivisions of a tribe sometimes have what may 

torems. be called accessory totems of their own in addition to the 

general tribal totem. For example, the Nanuyamalo tribe 
has for its totem the lizard, and the division of the tribe 
which lives at Wainimala has for its accessory totem the 
parrot (Aaka) in addition to the lizard, the totem of the 
whole tribe. 

Respect The respect paid to the principal totems was very great. 

Paid dems, Thus the tree totem might not be cut, except to procure its 

vu TOTEMISM IN EASTERN MELANESIA (FI/1) 137 

leaves or branches as a personal decoration in the dances ; 

the animal totem might not be eaten without incurring 

death or the anger of the spirits. Hence old people still 
abstain from eating their totems. The younger generations 

are less particular, but still they have a great respect at least 

for the totem animal. Strangers passing through the territory 

of another tribe may not eat the tribal totem, and they are 
strictly forbidden to mention its name aloud. Any stranger 

who infringes these rules must pay a fine to the tribe or receive 

a beating. A woman who is married in another tribe respects 

the totems of her husband’s tribe as well as her own. But her 
children respect only the paternal totems, unless they go to 

live in their mother’s tribe. The totem animal was supposed Appeat- 
always to appear to a mother just before the birth of her 37° 
child. Further, the totem was consulted in war, in sickness, animal to 
at marriage, and so forth. Its appearance was a good or perore, 

before 
bad omen, a sign of life or of death according to the place child-birth; 
where it appeared. Before a war the priest or diviner used aa from 
to dream of the totem and in accordance with his dream he ‘t in war. 
predicted to the people the issue of the war. For example, 

if the tribal totem was a lizard, and the priest in his dream 

saw the lizard going up a tree, it was an omen of victory ; 

but if he saw it coming down the tree, it was an augury of 

defeat.’ 

Further traces of totemism in Fiji were independently Dr. Rivers 
observed and recorded by Dr. W. H. R. Rivers during a ism in Fi 
short visit which he paid to the islands in 1908.” He tells 
us that the people of the interior of Viti Levu form a number 
of independent communities, which may probably be regarded 
as tribes, and each tribe is again divided and subdivided into 
sections which now bear little resemblance to totem clans of 
the ordinary pattern. The animals from which descent is Belief in 
traced and whose flesh is forbidden as food are usually fo", 
associated with the tribes rather than with their divisions, sacred 
though some of these divisions have often sacred animals or “""** 
plants peculiar to themselves in addition to those which are 

1 J. de Marzan, “Le Totémisme In his researches Dr. Rivers was helped 
aux Isles Fiji,” Anthropos, ii. (1907) by Mr. A. B. Joske, who has long been 
Pp. 400-405. in charge of the northern and eastern 

2 W. H. R. Rivers, ‘* Totemism in parts of the interior of the island. 
Fiji,” Alan, viii. (1908) pp. 133-136. 

138 TOTEMISM IN MELANESIA CHAP. 

sacred or tabooed to them as members of the tribe. The 
following are examples all taken from a small district in the 
northern part of the interior of Viti Levu. The people of 
Cawanisa have as their sacred animal the dravizdravz, a small 
aquatic creature of some kind; they believe that they are 
descended from it, and they will not eat it. The Nadrau 
(Nandrau) or Navuta people have as their sacred animal 
the gliyago a small black bird with a long beak, and 
this bird is tabooed to the whole tribe. But some of the 
divisions of the tribe have in addition taboos peculiar to 
themselves; thus the Wailevu division will eat neither 
the dog nor a fish called dadea, and the Kaivuci division 
may not eat snakes, Again, the Navatusila people had 
as the sacred animal common to them all the ganivutu, 
a fish-hawk; but one of their divisions, the Hamarama, 
was also forbidden to eat fowls; another, the Vadrasiga, 
might not eat the cog?, a pigeon; the Naremba (Nareba) 
might not eat the bird called veba;* and three divisions, 
the Ivisi, Nanoko, and Iasawa, might not eat the dog. 
In each case the members of the smaller groups believed 
in their descent from the tabooed animal. Other sacred 
animals of this part of the island were the owl, a bird called 
tuctuz, a species of lizard, the kingfisher, and a prawn. The 
people who believed in their descent from a prawn were 
allowed to eat the animal, but only with its shell. 

On the foregoing evidence Dr. Rivers observes :* “I think 
ek are that few will doubt that the foregoing facts demonstrate the 
associated existence of totemism in Fiji. There are present the three 
rather with Characteristic features of this institution: belief in descent 

tribes than 
Ne their from the totem, prohibition of the totem as an article of food, 
Sone aid and the connection of the totem with a definite unit of the 
marriage is social organisation. In the third feature Fijian society 
regulated . ° . : . 
differs from that usually associated with totemism in that 

by kinship, 
the sacred animal usually belongs to a group which appears 

Additional 
totemic 
taboos. 

In Fiji the 

not by 
exogamous 

classes. 

1 In the official spelling of Fijian 
words g stands for the sound of zg 
in finger, g for the sound of mg in 
singer, 5 for the sound of mé, and d 
for the sound of zd. Some writers 
adopt the official spelling, others retain 
the ordinary English mode of repre- 
senting the sounds. I have not at- 

tempted to reduce these divergences 
in my authorities to uniformity ; hence 
some inconsistencies in spelling may be 
observed in my statements. 

2 The veba isa hawk. See above, 
p- 136. 

3 W. H. R. Rivers, ‘‘ Totemism in 
Fiji,” Afan, viii, (1908) pp. 134 sg. 

vu TOTEMISM IN EASTERN MELANESIA (FI/1) 139 

to correspond to a tribe instead of belonging to a division of 
the tribe. The Fijian social organisation has, however, 
departed so widely from the primitive type that this is not 
surprising. At present marriage is regulated solely by 
kinship, and there is no evidence that any of the social 
divisions are exogamous. Though the sacred animals 
usually belong to the tribe, they are, as we have seen, still 
also frequently connected with the smaller divisions which 
may possibly be the representatives of exogamous septs ; 
and the customary connection of a sacred animal with the 
tribe as a whole is probably late, a result of the high 
development of chieftainship in Fiji, the chief having 
imposed his totem on the whole tribe. 

“ Among these hill tribes it seemed clear that the sacred Fijian 
animals had become gods, which had, however, retained their ,°°"* 
animal form definitely. I was told by one of the Nadrau passed or 
people of certain rules of conduct given to them by ae eeke 
the bird gé/yago, and it would seem that we have here an Withanimal 
early stage in the evolution of a god from a totem animal. ure 
During a short stay in the Rewa district in the low country, 

I found a condition showing a later stage in this evolution. 

Here each village had a deity called Zzevorvo with a name Deities 
which usually showed no sign of an animal origin, but in many (072) | 
cases these deities had the power of turning into animals, and into 

in such cases the people of the village in question were not *™'™!s 
allowed to eat the animal. Thus, the people of Lasakau, 

a division of Bau, had a Zzevoro called Butakoivalu, who 
turned into the sese, a bird of the same shape as the 
giliyago, but of a different colour, being blue with a white 
breast. The bird could not be eaten, and here, as in the 

hills, it was clear that the restriction extended to the whole 
people and was not limited to either of the two divisions of 
which the Lasakau people are composed. The village of 
Tokatoka had as ftévoro, Rokobatidua, lord of one tooth 
(mentioned by Williams),’ who could turn into a hawk. The 

1 «© Roko Mbati-ndua, ‘the one- 
toothed lord,’ has the appearance of a 
man with wings instead of arms, and 
emits sparks of fire in his flight through 
the air. On his wings are claws with 
which to catch his victims, and his one 

tooth, fixed in the lower jaw, rises 
above his head” (Th. Williams, 77 
and the Fijians,? i, 218). The wings 
and claws of this deity may well be 
vestiges of his former character as a 
hawk. 

Fijian 
totemism 
throws 
light on 
the myths 
of ancient 
Egypt and 
Greece. 

Classi- 
ficatory 
system of 
relation- 
ship in 
Fiji. 

140 TOTEMISM IN MELANESIA CHAP. 

people of Vunivaivai had as ¢evoro Gonirogo, who could 
turn into a snake. The Zzevovo of Moana and Naluna were 
Ranasau and Rokodelana respectively, both of whom were 
in the habit of turning into the large shark called go.” 

Dr. Rivers appears to be unquestionably right in holding 
that the sacred animals associated with tribes or subdivisions 
of tribes in Fiji are totems in the process of evolving into 
gods, and that a more advanced stage in this evolution is 
represented by the village deities called sevoro, which, though 
no longer conceived as animals, can yet assume at pleasure 
the shapes of those animals with which they were formerly 
identical ; while the ancient totemic prohibition to eat of the 
totem survives in the rule which forbids the worshippers of 
the village god to partake of the particular creature, be it 
bird, or beast, or fish, into which their deity can thus 
transform himself. Such transformations throw light on 
the fables of ancient Egypt and Greece, which describe the 
metamorphoses of the gods into animals. 

If the tribal divisions in Fiji no longer observe the rule of 
exogamy, and thus a characteristic feature of totemism has 
disappeared, nevertheless a record of the former existence of 
exogamous classes survives in the classificatory system of 
relationship, which appears to be universally prevalent 
among all peoples who retain or have lately lost the totemic 
organisation. Thus in the generation above his own a 
Fijian applies the same term ¢ama-nggu “my father” to his 
own father and to his father’s brothers; and if he wishes 
to distinguish between his father’s brothers, he calls his 
father’s elder brother “my great father ” (¢asma-nggu lavu) and 
his father’s younger brother he calls “ my little father ” (¢asma- 
nngu llc). But he applies a different term, namely vungo- 
nggu “my uncle” to his mother’s brother. He applies the 
same term ¢nxa-nggu “my mother” to his own mother and 
to his mother’s sisters ; and he calls the wife of his father’s 
elder brother “my great mother” (¢2xa-nggu lavu), and he 
calls the wife of his father’s younger brother “my little 
mother” (¢éna-nggu Jlailat). But he applies a different 
term, namely, vungo-nggu, to his father’s sister. In her own 
generation a woman applies the same term watz-nggu “my 
husband ” to her husband and to her husband’s brothers. In 

vu TOTEMISM IN EASTERN MELANESIA (FI/£) 141 

the generation below his own a man applies the same term 
luve-nggu “my child” to his own children and to his brothers’ 
children ; a woman applies the same term /uve-uggu “my 
child” to her own child and to her sisters’ children.’ But 

while a man calls his brothers’ children his own children, and 

a woman calls her sisters’ children her own children, a man 
applies a quite different term (vungo-nggu “my nephew” or 

“ my niece ”) to his sisters’ children, and a woman applies quite 

a different term (vungo-nggu “my nephew ” or “ my niece”) 

to her brothers’ children.? And corresponding to these Distinction 
differences, whereas the children of two brothers are them- pe 
selves regarded as brothers and sisters, and are therefore not able and 
marriageable with each other, and whereas similarly the ae 
children of two sisters are themselves regarded as brothers able 
and sisters, and are therefore not marriageable with ““"~ 
each other, on the other hand a man’s children are not 
regarded as the brothers and sisters of his sister’s children, 

and these two sets of children, the offspring of a brother 

1L. H. Morgan, Systems of Con- 
sanguinity and Affinity of the Human 
Family (Washington, 1871), pp. 573, 
576, from information supplied by the 
Rev. Lorimer Fison. Morgan’s work 
forms vol. xvii. of the Smithsonian 
Contributions to Knowledge. On the 
classificatory system in Fiji, see further 
L. Fison, in Journal of the Anthropo- 
logical Institute, xxiv. (1895) pp. 360- 
371; and Basil H. Thomson, zdzd. 
Pp. 371-387. A different set of classifi- 
catory terms was obtained among the 
Nandrau people of Fiji by Dr. W. H. 
R. Rivers, to whom I am indebted 
for the following particulars. A man 
applies the same term amu to his 
father and to his father’s brothers ; the 
same term #au to his mother and to 
his mother’s sisters; the same terms 
tutua ‘‘elder brother” and ‘fathinggu 
** younger brother” to his brothers and 
to the sons, elder or younger, of his 
father’s brothers and of his mother’s 
sisters; he applies the same term 
nganenggu to his sisters and to the 
daughters of his father’s brothers and 
of his mother’s sisters; and the same 
term /uvenggu to his sons and daughters 
and to the sons and daughters both of 

his brothers and sisters. A man calls 
his wife mangua, but his wife’s sisters 
veilavét or tavali, A wife calls her 
husband manz, but her husband’s 
brothers zdaku. The distinctions thus 
drawn between a wife and her sisters, 
and between a husband and hisbrothers, 
and the confusion between a man’s 
children and his sister’s children, 
mark the decay of the classificatory 
system. Dr. Rivers confirms the 
accuracy of the classificatory terms 
given by Mr. Lorimer Fison for the 
coast of Fiji. 

2 L. H. Morgan, Systems of Con- 
sanguinity and Affinity of the Human 
Family, pp. 570, 5733; Basil H. 
Thomson, ‘‘Concubitancy in the 
Classificatory System of Relationship,” 
Journal of the Anthropological Institute, 
xxiv. (1895) p. 372; z@., The Fijians, 
a Study of the Decay of Custom (London, 
1908), p. 183. The form of the word 
given by Mr. Thomson (vugo) in the 
former of these two passages differs 
from that given by Morgan (wzmg0) 
only in spelling. See above, p. 138, 
note!, as to the spelling of Fijian 
words. 

Veinda- 
volant 
(marriage- 
able) and — 
veinganent 
(not 
marriage- 
able). 

In some 
parts of 
Fiji first 
cousins, 
thechildren 
of a brother 

142 TOTEMISM IN MELANESIA CHAP, 

and a sister respectively, are marriageable with each 
other; indeed they'are each other’s proper mates. Thus 
sharply, as regularly happens under the classificatory 
system, do the Fijians distinguish cousins who are the 
children of a brother and a sister respectively, from cousins 
who are the children of two brothers or of two sisters. The 
former, when they are male and female, are born husband 
and wife to each other; the latter are born brother and 
sister to each other and may on no account marry. The 
relation of the former to each other is expressed by the 
Fijian term veindavolant, which means “ marriageable,” 
literally “concubitants”; the relation of the latter is 
expressed by the Fijian term ve¢nganenz, which means “ not 
marriageable,” literally “those who shun each other.”? 
“The young Fijian is from his birth regarded as the 
natural husband of the daughters of his father’s sister and 
of his mother’s brother. The girls can exercise no choice. 
They were born the property of their male concubitant if 
he desire to take them.”? Vetndavolani or concubitants “ are 
born husband and wife, and the system assumes that no 
individual preference ¢ould hereafter destroy that relation ; 
but the obligation does no more than limit the choice of a 
mate to one or other of the females who are concubitants 
with the man who desires to marry. It is thus true that in 
theory the field of choice is very large, for the concubitous 
relation might include third or even fifth cousins, but in 
practice the tendency is to marry the concubitant who is 
next in degree—generally a first cousin—the daughter of a 
maternal uncle.” ® 

It is interesting to observe that whereas first cousins, 
the children of a brother and sister respectively, are 
generally in Fiji regarded as the proper mates for each 
other, “in Lau, Thakaundrove, and the greater part of 

1 L,. Fison and Basil H. Thomson, 
in Journal of the Anthropological In- 
stitute, xxiv. (1895) pp. 360 s¢g., 371- 
373; Basil H. Thomson, Zhe Fi7zans, 
pp. 182 sgg. 

2 Basil H. Thomson, in Journal of 
the Anthropological Institute, xxiv. 
(1895) p. 3733 7%, Zhe Fijians, p. 
184. Elsewhere Mr, Thomson observes 

that ‘‘every man went to his mother’s 
tribe for a wife, and was indeed under 
an obligation to marry his first cousin, 
the daughter of his mother’s brother” 
(in Journal of the sinthropological [n- 
stitute, xxiv. (1895) p. 343). 

3 Basil H. Thomson, in Journal of the 
Anthropological Institute, xxiv. (1895) 
P- 3753 ¢d., Zhe Fijians, pp. 186 59. 

vu TOTEMISM IN EASTERN MELANESIA (FI/1) 143 

Vanualevu, the offspring of a brother and sister respectively and a sister 
do not become concubitant until the second generation, respectively, 
In the first generation they are called zadu, but marriage allowed 

is not actually prohibited”! Thus in respect of first pm’, 
cousins, the children of a brother and a sister respectively, cousins, the 
the general Fijian practice resembles that of the Urabunna ee 
in recommending or even enjoining their marriage ; whereas meee 
the practice of Lau, Thakaundrove, and the greater part of are allowed 
. Vanualevu resembles that of the Dieri, in discouraging, if not ee 
forbidding, the marriage of such first cousins, while at the with the 
same time it allows their children, who are second cousins, PANS. 
to marry each. other freely? As I have already pointed as against 
out the rule which enjoins the consanguineous marriage aia 
of certain first cousins is older than the custom which 
forbids it. The prohibition was another step onward in 

the exogamous march, another impediment opposed to the 
freedom of marriage, another degree added to the table of 
forbidden kin. 

It is to be remarked that under the ordinary Fijian rule Right of a 
all a man’s female first cousins, the daughters of his father’s parry all 
sisters or of his mother’s brothers, were equally his con- his wife's 
cubitants or legitimate wives; in other words, he had‘ the *"“~ 
right to marry all his wife’s sisters. “This brings us,” 
says Mr. Basil Thomson, “to a fresh starting-point from 
which the concubitous relationship is established. Since a 
man who is the concubitant of a woman is necessarily also 
the concubitant of all her sisters, by a natural evolution, 
if he marries a woman unrelated to him by blood, and aso 
facto makes her his concubitant, all her sisters become his | 
concubitants also. In the past they would have been his 
actual wives, for a man could not take one of several sisters 
——he was in honour bound to take them all. In the same 
way a woman and her sisters became the concubitants of 
all her husband’s brothers, and upon his death she passed 
naturally to her eldest brother-in-law if he cared to take 
her. This does not imply polyandry or community among 
brothers, but rather what is known to anthropologists as 

1 Basil Thomson, The F2jians, pp. 2 See above, vol. i. pp. 177 sg.y 
190 sg.; id. in Journal of the Anthro- 180 sg., 346. 
hological Institute, xxiv. (1895) Pp. 379» 

144 TOTEMISM IN MELANESIA : CHAP. 

Levirate, a woman’s marriage to her brother-in-law being 
contingent on her husband’s death.” * 
ae righty The rule that when a man marries a woman he has a 
taken wit . : . . 
the right of tight to marry her sisters also is widespread, notably among 
eens the Indians of North America.” It is clearly the converse 
marr 1S . . . . 
pated Aes of the rule which assigns a man’s widows to his brothers, 
tee and as the latter rule points to the marriage of women to 
aformer a group of brothers,’ so the former rule points to the 
pha of marriage of men to a group of sisters. Taken together, 
marriage the two customs seem to indicate the former prevalence 
between a * 
number of Of Marriage between a group of husbands who were brothers 
brotherson to each other and a group of wives who were sisters to 
th ; . , 
side anda each other. In practice the custom which permits a man 
number of to marry several sisters has diverged in an important 

sisters on : . 

the other. respect from the custom which permits a woman to marry 
several brothers ; for whereas the permission granted to a 
man to marry several sisters simultaneously in their lifetime 
has survived in many races to this day, the permission 
granted to a woman to marry several brothers has generally 
been restricted by the provision that she may only marry 
them successively, each after the death of his predecessor. 
We may conjecture that the cause of the divergence between 
the two customs was the greater strength of the passion 
of jealousy in men than in women, sisters being more 
willing to share a husband between them than brothers 
to share a wife. 

‘Temporary The Fijian classificatory term vetndavolanz, denoting 

reversions . . 

to group groups of men and women who are by birth potential 

marriage spouses to each other, corresponds to the uxawa of the 

in Fiji. 
Arunta, the zupfa of the Urabunna, and the oa of the 
Dieri.6 And just as in Australia the terms expressive of 
group marriage coexist with customs which can only be 
regarded as temporary reversions to an actual practice of 
group marriage, so it is apparently also in Fiji. On this 
subject Mr. Fison tells us that “the term vezndavolant 
expresses something more than is conveyed by our own 

1 Basil Thomson, 7ke Fijians, pp. sequel. The custom is practised also 

185 sg. 3; id. in Journal of the Anthro- by some Australian tribes. See above, 
pological Institute, xxiv. (1895) pp. vol. i. p. 577, note’. 

374 5g. : 3 See above, vol. i. pp. 501 sgg. 
2 The evidence will be given in the 4 See above, vol. i. p. 363. 

VIL TOTEMISM IN EASTERN MELANESIA (FI/I) 145 

word ‘ marriageable. It expresses a righ¢, and an obligation, 
as well as a gualification ; a right which asserts itself clearly 
enough, even in settled agricultural tribes such as the Fijian, on 
certain ceremonial occasions. Under ordinary circumstances it 
is overridden by the later proprietory right conferred by actual 
marriage or betrothal, but it is still strong enough to assert itself 
on those occasions when the people deem it necessary to revert 
for a time, as they say, to the customs of their ancestors,” ? 

One of the occasions when the old group rights between 
men and women are temporarily revived is the celebration 
of the rites of circumcision. In some parts of Viti Levu, Revival _ 
namely in those in which the mysteries of the xanga or Stone eh tie 
Enclosure are practised, when a man of note is dangerously at rites of 
ill, the relations meet in council and agree to circumcise acco 
lad as a propitiatory measure. Notice having been given to 
the priests, an uncircumcised lad, either the sick man’s son or 
one of his brother’s sons, is taken by his kinsmen to the 
Vale tambu or God’s House and there presented as a soro, or 
offering of atonement, that his father may recover. His 
escort at the same time make valuable presentations of 
property and liberal promises of more. The priest 
graciously accepts both the presents and the promises and 
appoints a day for the performance of the operation. When 
the day has come, and the son of the sick chief has been 
circumcised along with other lads whose friends have agreed 
to take advantage of the occasion, the bloody foreskins, 
each stuck in the cleft of a split reed, are taken to the xanga 
or sacred stone enclosure and there presented to the chief 
priest. Holding the reeds in his hand, the priest presents 
the foreskins to the ancestral gods, and prays for the sick 
man’s recovery. “Then follows a great feast, which ushers 
in a period of indescribable revelry. All distinctions of 
property are for the time being suspended. Men and 
women array themselves in all manner of fantastic garbs, 
address one another in the most indecent phrases, and 
practice unmentionable abominations openly inthe public 
square of the town. The nearest relationships—even that 
of own brother and sister—seem to be no bar to the 

1. Fison, ‘‘The Classificatory <Asthropological Institute, xxiv. (1895) 
System of Relationship,” Journal of the p. 367. 

VOL, II L 

On these 
occasions 
tribal 
brothers 
and sisters 
were in- 
tentionally 
coupled. 

146 TOTEMISM IN MELANESIA CHAP. 

general licence, the extent of which may be indicated by 
the expressive phrase of an old Nandi chief who said, 
‘While it lasts, we are just like the pigs. This feasting 
and frolic may be kept up for several days, after which the 
ordinary restrictions recur once more. The rights of property 
are again respected, the abandoned revellers settle down into 
steady-going married couples, and brothers and sisters may 
not so much as speak to one another. Nowhere in Fiji, as 
far as I am aware, excepting in the Nanga country, are these 
extravagances connected with the rite of circumcision.” 1 
Fuller accounts of the licence permitted on these occasions, 
based in part on a written statement taken down by Mr. 
Edward O’Brien Heffernan, Native Advocate and Stipendiary 
Magistrate, from the lips of a native in presence of the principal 
chiefs of Nandi, Vunda, and Sambeto, were sent in manuscript 
by Mr. Fison to Professor E. B. Tylor, who writes on the 
subject as follows: “The details of indecent dances and rites 
referred to may be left in MS., but it is of interest, as bearing 
on the argument as to early communal intercourse, of which 
such customs may possibly be ceremonial survivals, to notice 
that their principle is formulated in an accepted native 
phrase. On the fourth day, when the food is no longer ¢adu, 
but ¢ava (permitted), and the great feast is prepared, it is said 
that there are no fauked ni vuaka se alewa (‘owners of pigs 
or women’). Not only does it appear that the groups of 
tribal brothers and sisters (using this term according to the 
native system of kinship) are not excluded from this 
temporary communion, but another MS. account by Mr. 
Fison mentions their being intentionally coupled, falling in 
one behind another in the Nanga procession, with the 
accompanying chant in the most explicit terms, Ve cégenta e 
tue mata, This rite seems at least open to interpretation as 
a remarkable case of ‘consanguine marriage’ being kept up 

as a ceremonial institution.” ? 

1 Rev. Lorimer Fisun, ‘*The 
Nanga, or Sacred Stone Enclosure of 
Wainimala, Fiji,” /ournal of the 
Anthropological Institute, xiv. (1885) 
pp. 27 sg. As to the zanya or sacred 
stone enclosure and the rites performed 
in it, see further A. B. Joske, ‘* The 

Similarly Mr. Fison himself, 

Nanga of Viti-levu,” /#ternationales 
Archiv fiir Ethnographie, ii. (1889) 
pp- 254-266. 

2 E. B. Tylor, in Jonrunal of the 

Anthropological Jnstitute, xiv. (1885) 
p- 28, note 2. 

vil TOTEMISM IN EASTERN MELANESIA (FI/1) 47 

commenting on the temporary licence a¢corded to the sexes 
at these times, justly observes: “We cannot for a moment 
believe that it is a mere licentious outbreak, without an 
underlying meaning and purpose. It is part of a religious 
rite, and is supposed to be acceptable to the ancestors. But 
why should it be acceptable to them unless it were in 
accordance with their own practice in the far away past?”? 

The full force of the argument from this coupling Im ordinary 
together of brothers and sisters in a licentious orgy can only nes 
be appreciated when we remember that in Fiji brothers and and sisters, 
sisters, whether own or tribal, are in ordinary life forbidden ewe 
even to touch or to speak to each other. On this subject forbidden 
Mr. Fison tells us that “in Fiji, my sister’s son’s son looks seat 
upon my daughter’s daughter or my brother's daughter’s each other. 
daughter as his sister (~gané) quite as much as if she 
were his own sister. He will mganena (avoid) her as care- 
fully as if she were the daughter of his own mother. 

If she enter a house in which he is sitting with his legs 
extended, he will draw up his feet and look away from 

her. If he meet her in the path he will ignore her 
existence. It would be indecent for him to be alone with 

her, to touch her, or even to speak to her. If he must 
speak of her, he will not use the term of relationship 
between them; he will not say ‘my zgane’ (my sister)—he 

will refer to her as ‘one of my kinsfolk.’ In short, he makes 

no distinction between her and his own sister, the daughter 

of his own father and mother.”? Similar rules of avoidance, 

as we have seen, are observed between brothers and sisters 

in other parts of Melanesia and appear to be only explicable 

on the hypothesis that they are intended to obviate the 
danger of incest between these near relations.®? That The per- 
hypothesis is rather confirmed than weakened by theo even 
Fijian custom which permits and even apparently compels obligation 

. ° ° of incest 
incest between brothers and sisters, whether own or tribal, petween 

1 Rev. Lorimer Fison, in Journal of 
the Anthropological Institute, xiv. 
(1885) p. 30. 

2 Rev. Lorimer Fison, ‘* The Classi- 
ficatory System of Relationship,” 
Journal of the Anthropological Insti- 
tute, xxiv. (1895) p. 363. Compare 
Th. Williams, 4772 and the Fijians?, 

i, 136 sg. : ‘* Brothers and sisters, first 
cousins, fathers and _ sons- in-law, 
mothers and daughters-in-law, and 
brothers and sisters-in-law, are thus 
severally forbidden to speak to each 
other, or to eat from the same dish.” 

3 See above, pp. 77 sgg., 124, 131. 

brothers 
and sisters, 
own or 
tribal, as 
a solemn 
rite can 
only be 
explained 
asa , 
temporary 
reversion 
to an 
ancient 
custom. 

148 TOTEMISM IN MELANESIA CHAP. 

as a solemn rite; for if such a thing were known to be 
possible on certain special occasions and it was deemed 
most desirable, as it was, to prevent it at all other times, we 
can easily understand why in common life not merely 
decorum but the most scrupulous reserve should be observed 
between brothers and sisters. The two extremes of habitual 
reserve and occasional licence are equally explained by the 
theory that the licence is a temporary reversion to an old 
and discredited practice, against the general recrudescence 
of which the reserve is intended to act as a safeguard. For 
it is to be borne in mind that notwithstanding the sexual 
orgy which takes place at circumcision the Fijians, like all 
the other peoples with whom we have been dealing, hold 
the incest of brothers with sisters, whether own or tribal, in 
great horror. Ifa man in ordinary life were to run off with 
a girl who stands in the relation of sisterhood (vecnganent) 
to him, even though the sisterhood were not own but tribal, 
“the whole tribe would be up in arms, for he has brought 
pollution upon them all, and all are in danger.”* Thus the 
very same act which ordinarily is regarded as a crime that 
endangers the whole tribe is at other times permitted or 
even enforced as a religious rite for the opposite purpose 
of propitiating the deified ancestors on whose favour the 
welfare of the community is believed to depend.” 

The Fijian custom which gives a man a right to marry 
his first cousin, the daughter of his mother’s brother or of 

1 Rev. Lorimer Fison, ‘‘ The Classi- 
ficatory System of Relationship,” 

They were malevolent. Firstly, they 
had been chiefs of the blood royal who 

Journal of the Anthropological Insti- 
tute, xxiv. (1895) p. 368. 

2 As to the place of ancestor- 
worship in the religion of Fiji, see 
Basil H. Thomson, *‘ The A@/ou-l’u 
(Aneestor-Gods) of the Fijians,” 
Journal of the Anthropological Insti- 
tute, xxiv, (1895) pp. 340-359, who 
observes (p. 343): ‘* You are not to 
understand that every man when he 
died was deified by his sons and grand- 
sons. . . . It was rather the master- 
ful and oppressive chiefs that were 
deified, because their subjects doubted 
whether even in death they lost their 
power to harm. This brings us to the 
second fact about the gods of Fiji. 

had been masterful and oppressive in 
life ; and secondly, they were malevo- 
lent and must be appeased by pro- 
pitiatory sacrifices. If you pressed a 
Fijian to say what became of the kind 
and wise chiefs, he would perhaps say 
that they too became spirits honoured 
in the world to come, but that since 
they were by nature inoffensive there 
was no object in propitiating them and 
so they were forgotten.” However, 
Williams distinguishes the ha/ou vu, or 
gods strictly so-called, who are supposed 
to be eternal, from the 4alou yalo, or 
deified mortals, the spirits of chiefs, 
heroes, and friends, See Th. Williams, 
Fiji and the Fijians,? i, 216. 

VII TOTEMISM IN EASTERN MELANESIA (FIJI) 149 

his father’s sister, was carefully investigated by Mr. Basil H. Frequency 
Thomson, formerly in charge of one of the Government 270 cet 
departments in Fiji. In order to ascertain the frequency of marriage 
such concubitous (veindavolant) marriages and their effect ™ 
on the offspring he and his coadjutors caused a census to be 

taken of twelve villages, not selected from one province, but 

chosen only for convenience of enumeration in the widely 
separated provinces of Rewa, Colo East, Serna, and Ba. 

As regards the frequency of marriage between relations, 
whether first cousins or others, an analysis of the census 
shewed that the concubitous (vezxdavolanz) relations, who had 

married together and who in nearly every case were actual 

first cousins, formed 29.7 per cent of the total number of 
families, and that “the concubitant and other relations who 

have intermarried number over two-fifths of the people, while 
one-third of the married people have been brought up 
together in the same village, and only one-fourth, not being 
relatives, have come from different towns.”' With reference superiority 
to the effect on the offspring, the results of the census shewed eae 
that concubitous marriages, that is, the marriages of first of first 
cousins who are the children of a brother and a sister re- Sign Be 
spectively, were much superior to any of the other marriages a brother 
as regards both the number and the vitality of the children ; Said 
for not only were more children born to them, but a larger tively. 
proportion of the children born survived.? “In every re- 

spect,” says Mr. Basil H. Thomson, “the concubitants appear 

to be the most satisfactory marriage class” ;* and he adds: 

“Tam aware that the figures are far too small to allcw of 

any generalisation from them, but at the same time, it is to 

be remembered that the inhabitants of these twelve villages 
represent a fair sample of the population, and also that we 

found the relative positions of the married classes to be 
generally the same in each village taken individually. We 

have here a phenomenon probably unique in the whole 

1 Basil H. Thomson, ‘‘Concubit- 
ancy in the Classificatory System of 
Relationship,” Journal of the Anthropo- 
logical Institute, xxiv. (1895) pp. 382 
sg. Of the relations other than con- 
cubitous cousins who have married 
two-fifths ‘‘are near relations, uncle 
and niece, and non-marriageable 

cousins - german, brother and_ sister 
according to the Fijian ideas. But 
the remaining three-fifths are more 
distantly related than are the con- 
cubitants ” (¢47d. p. 383). 

2 Basil H. Thomson, of. cét. p. 383. 
3 Basil H. Thomson, of. c7#. p. 385. 

150 TOTEMISM IN MELANESIA CHAP. VII 

range of anthropology—a people who for generations have 
married their first cousins and still continue to do so, and 
among whom the offspring of first cousins were not only 
more numerous but have greater vitality than the children 
of persons unrelated. Nay more, the children of concubit- 
ants—-of first cousins whose parents were brother and sister 
——have immense advantages over the children of first 
cousins who are the offspring of two brothers or two sisters 
respectively.”’ And in conclusion he asks: “Is the classi- 
ficatory system of relationships after all more logical in an 
important respect than our own? Is there really a wide 
physical difference between the relationship of cousins who 
are offspring of a brother and sister respectively and that of 
cousins whose parents respectively were two brothers or two 
sisters? Ought marriage in the one case to be allowed or 
even encouraged, and in the other case as rigidly forbidden 
as if it were incestuous ?”? 

1 Basil H. Thomson, ‘‘ Concubit- The results of Mr. Thomson’s investi- 
ancy in the Classificatory System of gations into cousin-marriages in Fiji 
Relationship,” Journal of the Anthropo- have been republished by him in his 

logical Institute, xxiv. (1895) p. 386. book Zhe Fiyians (London, 1908), 
2 Basil H. Thomson, of. czt. p. 387. pp. 195 sgg. 

CHAPTER VIII 
TOTEMISM IN POLYNESIA 

§ 1. Traces of Totemism in Samoa 

In the wide area occupied by the Polynesian race totemism Totemism 
and exogamy appear to exist, or at all events to be reported, pana 
together only in the Pelew Islands, which are situated in the the Pelew 
extreme west and are inhabited by the Micronesian branch 8!2"4s- 
of the Polynesian family. It is true that in some of the in samoa 
other islands, particularly in Samoa, there! exists or existed a recap of 
system of animal-worship and plant-worship associated with animals 
families or clans which bears a close resemblance to totemism, 246 P@"'s 
and has probably been developed out of it. But in these seems to 
islands the system lacks one of the characteristics of ordinary pate 
totemism in that the families or clans are not reported to be out of 
exogamous ; and moreover in Samoa the sacred animals pa eer 
and plants seem certainly to have advanced beyond the 

stage of totems pure and simple and to have attained to 

the dignity of gods. Thus it would appear that in this part 

of Polynesia totemism has developed into a religion. Ac- 
cordingly, it is better not to speak, as I and others have 
spoken, of the Samoan system as if it were totemism of the 

ordinary type. An excellent account of that system has 

1In my TZotemism (Edinburgh, butes, Professor E. B. Tylor objects 

1887), which is reprinted above, vol. i. 
pp. 1 sgg., I spoke of Samoan totems 
without qualification, though I pointed 
out (pp. 81 sg.) rightly, as I still 
believe, that in Polynesia and particu- 
larly in Samoa, totemism was passing 
into the worship of anthropomorphic 
deities with animal or vegetable attri- 

to the application of the term totems 
to the sacred animals and plants both 
of Samoa and Fiji (‘* Remarks on 
Totemism,” Journal of the Anthro- 
pological Institute, xxviii, (1898) pp. 
142 sg.), and I so far agree with him 
that I think I should not have spoken 
of them as totems without qualification ; 

151 

Dr. 
Turner’s 
account of 
the house- 
hold and 
village 
gods of 
Samoa, 

Animal in- 
carnations 
of the 
Samoan 
household 
gods. 

152 TOTEMISM IN POLYNESIA CHAP. 

been given us by the experienced English missionary Dr. 
George Turner,' and it deserves our attention, since it exhibits 
what seems to be the passage of pure totemism into a religion 
of anthropomorphic gods with animal and vegetable attri- 
butes, like the deities of ancient Egypt and Greece. 

Dr. Turner distinguishes the gods of the household from 
the gods of the village. The following are the general 
explanations which he gives in regard to both these classes 
of deities :— 

“At his birth a Samoan was supposed to be taken under 
the care of some god, or aztu, as it was called. The help of 
several of these gods was probably invoked in succession on 
the occasion, and the one who happened to be addressed just 
as the child was born was fixed on as the child’s god for life. 

“These gods were supposed to appear in some vészble 
tncarnation, and the particular thing in which his god was 
in the habit of appearing was to the Samoan an object of 

veneration. 

for they are, in my judgment, not 
normal totems but totems developed 
or developing into deities. But if, as 
I understand, Professor Tylor denies 
all connection between them and 
totemism, I am unable to follow him. 
I am not alone in holding that both 
in Fiji and in Samoa we can detect 
the passage of pure totemism into 
religion. Dr. Rivers, as we have 
seen (pp. 138 sg.), is decidedly of this 
opinion with regard to Fiji. And 
other experienced observers, the Rev. 
G. Taplin, the Rev. George Brown, 
and Mr, R. Parkinson, agree in inter- 
preting the sacred animals and plants 
of Samoa as totems or survivals of 
totems. See the Rev. G. Taplin, 
quoted above, vol. i. pp. 481 sg. ; the 
Rev. G. Brown, ‘*On Totemism in New 
Britain and Samoa,” Annual Refort 
on New Guinea, 1897-1898 (Brisbane, 
1898), p. 137. (**We have both in 
New Britain and in Samoa customs 
which certainly appear to be survivals 
of totemism,” etc.); R. Parkinson, 
Dreissig Jahve tn der Stidsee, p. 673 
(“Auch auf einigen polynesischen 
Insein finden wir Uberveste einer 
Institution, welche ich nur als Totem 

It was, in fact, his idol, and he was careful 

deuten kann. So hatte auf Samoa jede 
bedeutende Familie trgend ein Tver,” 
etc.). That Dr. George Turner, to 
whose admirable work we are mainly 
indebted for our knowledge of the 
Samoan religion, should not have com- 
pared the sacred animals and plants of 
the Samoans to the totems of the 
North American Indians and other 
savages is not surprising when we 
remember how little attention the 
subject of totemism had received even 
from anthropologists at the time (1884) 
when his book was published. It was 
not to be expected that a missionary 
engaged in his own absorbing work in 
remote islands of the Pacific should 
make himself acquainted with the 
latest results of comparative anthro- 
pology and mythology. 

1 George Turner, LL.D., Samoa a 
hundred years ago and long before, 
with a preface by E. B. Tylor, F.R.S. 
(London, 1884). Much of the infor- 
mation contained in this very valuable 
book had already been published by 
the author in an earlier work (Mineteen 
Years in Polynesia, by the Rev. George 
Turner, London, 1861). 

viii TRACES OF TOTEMISM IN SAMOA 153 

never to injure it or treat it with contempt. One, for 
instance, saw his god in the eel, ancther in the shark, 
another in the turtle, another in the dog, another in the owl, 
another in the lizard, and so on throughout all the fish of 
the sea, and birds, and four-footed beasts, and creeping 
things. In some of the shell-fish, even, gods were supposed 
to be present. A man would eat freely of what was 
regarded as the incarnation of the god of another man, but 
the incarnation of his own particular god he would consider 
it death to injure or eat. The god was supposed ‘to avenge 
the insult by taking up his abode in that person’s body, and 
causing to generate there the very thing which he had eaten, 
until it produced death. This class of genii, or tutelary 
deities, they called aztu fale, or gods of the house. 

“ The father of the family was the high priest, and usually The father 
offered a short prayer at the evening meal, that they might cate (psd 
all be kept from fines, sickness, war, and death. Occasion- the priest 
ally, too, he would direct that they have a family feast in sateen 
honour of their household gods; and on these occasions a god. 
cup of their intoxicating ava draught was poured out as a 
drink-offering. They did this in their family house, where 
they were all assembled, supposing that their gods had a 
spiritual presence there, as well as in the material objects to 
which we have referred. Often it was supposed that the 
god came among them and spoke through the father or 
some other member of the family, telling them what to do 
in order to remove a present evil or avert a threatened one. 
Sometimes it would be that the family should get a canoe 
built and keep it sacred to the god. They might travel in 
it and use it themselves, but it was death to sell or part 
with a canoe which had been built specially for the god. 

“ Another class of Samoan deities may be called gods of Samoan 
the town or village. Every village had its god, and every oe 
one born in that village was regarded as the property of that 
god. I have got a child for so-and-so, a woman would say 
on the birth of her child, and name the village god. There 
was a small house or temple also consecrated to the deity of 
the place. Where there was no formal temple, the great 
house of the village, where the chiefs were in the habit of 
assembling, was the temple for the time being, as occasion 

Samoan 
temples. 

Priests of 
village 
gods. 

Offerings 
to Samoan 
gods. 

154 TOTEMISM IN POLYNESIA CHAP. 

required. Some settlements had a sacred grove as well as a 
temple, where prayers and offerings were presented. 

“In their temples they had generally something for the 
eye to rest upon with superstitious veneration. In one 
might be seen a conch shell, suspended from the roof in a 
basket made of cinnet network; and this the god was 
supposed to blow when he wished the people to rise to war. 
In another, two stones were kept. In another, something 
resembling the head of a man, with white streamers flying, 
was raised on a pole at the door of the temple, on the usual 
day of worship. In another, a cocoa-nut shell drinking cup 
was suspended from the roof, and before it prayers were 
addressed and offerings presented. This cup was also used 
in oaths. If they wished to find out a thief, the suspected 
parties were assembled before the chiefs, the cup sent for, 
and each would approach, lay his hand on it, and say, ‘ With 
my hand on this cup, may the god look upon me, and send 
swift destruction, if I took the thing which has been stolen.’ 
The stones and the shells were used in a similar way. 
Before this ordeal, the truth was rarely concealed. They 
firmly believed that it, would be death to touch the cup and 
tell a lie. 

“ The priests in some cases were the chiefs of the place ; 
but in general some one in a particular family claimed the 
privilege, and professed to declare the will of the god. His 
office was hereditary. He fixed the days for the annual 
feasts in honour of the deity, received the offerings, and 
thanked the people for them. He decided also whether or 
not the people might go to war. 

“ The offerings were principally cooked food. The first 
cup was in honour of the god. It was either poured out on 
the ground or waved towards the heavens. The chiefs all 
drank a portion out of the same cup, according to rank ; 
and after that the food brought as an offering was divided 
and eaten there before the god. This feast was annual, and 
frequently about the month of May. In some places it 
passed off quietly ; in others it was associated with games, 
sham-fights, night-dances, etc., and lasted for days. In time 
of war special feasts were ordered by the priests. Of the 
offerings on war occasions women and children were 

VII TRACES OF TOTEMISM IN SAMOA 155 

forbidden to partake, as it was not their province to go to 
battle. They supposed it would bring sickness and death 
on the party eating who did not go to the war, and hence 
were careful to bury or throw into the sea whatever food 
was over after the festival. In some cases the feasts in 
honour of the god were regulated by the appearance in the 
settlement of the bird which was thought to be the incar- 
nation of the god. Whenever the bird was seen the priest 
would say that the god had come, and fix upon a day for 
his entertainment. 

“The village gods, like those of the household, had all Animal in- 
some particular incarnation : one was supposed to appear asCrae 
a bat, another as a heron, another as an owl. If a man Samoan 
found a dead owl by the roadside, and if that happened to in 
be the incarnation of his village god, he would sit down and 
weep over it, and beat his forehead with stones till the blood 
flowed. This was thought pleasing to the deity. Then the 
bird would be wrapped up and buried with care and cere- 
mony, as if it were a human body. This, however, was not 
the death of the god. He was supposed to be yet alive, 
and incarnate in all the owls in existence. The flight of 
these birds was observed in time of war. If the bird flew 
before them, it was a signal to go on; but if it crossed the 
path, it was a bad omen, and a sign to retreat. Others saw 
their village god in the rainbow, others saw him in the 
shooting star; and in time of war the position of a rainbow 
and the direction of a shooting star were always ominous.” ? 

From this account it appears that what Dr. Turner calls 
the household god was determined for each person at birth, 
and that consequently a person’s household god need not be 
that of his father or of his mother or of his brothers and 
sisters ; every member of a family might have a different 
household god. However, a preference was apparently given 
first to the household god of the father and next to that of 
the mother. For when a woman was about to be delivered 
of a child, her father or her husband generally prayed to the 
household god of the child’s father first; but if the birth 
was tedious or difficult, he would invoke the god of the 
mother’s family ; and when the child was born, the mother 

1G. Turner, Samoa, pp. 17-21. 

Examples 
of Samoan 
household 
gods. 

** Child of 
the Moon.” 

ae The 
LongGod.” 

‘©The Red 
Liver.” 

“' Ends 
of taro 
leaves.” 

156 TOTEMISM IN POLYNESIA CHAP. 

would call out, “Whom were you praying to?” and the god 
prayed to just before was carefully remembered and its 
incarnation duly acknowledged throughout the future life of 
the child.’ 

The following are examples of the household gods of 
Samoa. The name of one household god was “ Child of the ': 
Moon” (Alozmasina) and the god was seen in the moon. 
When the new moon appeared in the sky, all the members 
of the family called out, “Child of the moon, you have 
come.” They assembled also, and presented offerings of 
food, and feasted together, and joined in the prayer : wy 

uy eo 
Oh, child of the moon! ; ees a / ee where 
Keep far away " 
Disease and death.” 

Another household deity was called “the Long God” 
(Leatualoa), and was seen in the centipede. A tree near the 
house was the abode of the divine insect ; and when one of 
the family was sick he used to spread a mat under the tree 
and draw an omen of recovery or death according as a centi- 
pede crawled over or pnder it -: 9+ 

Another family god bore the title of “the Red Liver” 
(O le Auma), and he was seen or was incarnate in the wild 
pigeon. If any visitor staying with the family roasted a 
pigeon, some member of the household had to pay the 
penalty by being wrapt up in leaves and laid in a coo] oven, 
as if he were about to be baked. That was intended to 
appease the wrath of the god at the roasting of a pigeon. 
The use of the reddish-seared leaves of the bread-fruit- was 
also thought to be insulting to this deity, and no member of 
the family might employ them for any purpose under pain 
of suffering from rheumatic swellings and an eruption like 
chicken-pox all over his body.* 

Another family god was called “ Ends of the taro leaves ” 
(lulautalo). To him the ends of leaves and of other things 
were sacred and might not be handled or used in any way 
by members of the family. In daily life it was no small 
trouble to this household to cut off the ends of all the taro, 

1G, Turner, Samoa, pp. 78 59. 3 G. Turner, of, cz?. p. 69. 
* G. Turner, of. cet. p. 67. 4 G. Turner, of. cz. pp 69 59. 

Vil TRACES OF TOTEMISM iy SAMOA 157 

bread-fruit, and coco-nut leaves which they needed for cook- 
ing. Ends of taro, yams, bananas, fish, etc, were also care- 
fully laid aside and considered as unfit for food as if they 
had been poison. In case of sickness, however, the god 
allowed or even required that the patient should be fanned 
with the ends of coco-nut leaflets.’ 

Another household god was called “the Chief of Fiji” « Chief 
(O de alii o fiti) and shewed hiimself in the shape of an eel ; 
hence eels were never eaten by the household. They offered 
him the first-fruits of their taro plantations.? Another family 
had a god whom they called Vave, and he also was incarnate 
in the eel. When one of the family was ill, they prayed to 
Vave, and if next morning they found an eel among their 
household stuff, it was an omen of death Another house- 
hold had its god in a tree with sweet-scénted yellow flowers 
(Conanga Odorata), and the native name (70s0'07) of the tree 
was the name of the god. Another family had two gods 
embodied in pig’s heart and octopus, and Pig’s Heart and 
Octopus (fatupuaa ma le fee) were accordingly the names 
bestowed on these divine beings. Men, women, and children 
of the family were most scrupulous never to eat either pig’s 
heart or octopus, believing that to do so would be to swallow 
a germ of a living pig’s heart or octopus, by which the insulted 
gods would bring about the death of the sacrilegious eater.’ 

Another family god bore the name (fua) of a large tree Other 
(Hernandia Peltata) and lived in the tree, of which accord- er 
ingly no member of the family dared to pluck a leaf or break families. 
a branch. The same god was also incarnate in the octopus 
and likewise in the land crab, and if one of these crabs 
crawled into the house, it was a sign that the head of the 
household would die. Another family god called Samani 
was seen in the turtle, the sea eel, the octopus, and the 
garden ‘lizard. Any one who ate or injured any of these 
creatures had either to make-believe to be baked in an 
unheated oven or else to drink rancid oil as a penance and 
a purgative.’ A household god in several families was called 

1G. Turner, Samoa, p. 79. 5 G. Turner, of. czt. p. 72. ' 
* G, Turner, of. ctf. pp. 79 57. 6 G. Turner, of. cit, p. 72. 
3G. Turner, of. cit. p. 66. : » ; P7 
4G. Turner, of. cif. p. 71. G. Turner, of. cet. p. 72. 

The god 
Tongo. 

“Tid 
gently 
rising. 

The god 
Moso and 
his many 
incarna- 
tions. 

158 TOTEMISM IN POLYNESIA CHAP. 

Soesai. In one he was seen in the domestic fowl; in 
another his incarnations were the eel, the octopus, and the 
turtle. Prayers for life and recovery were offered to him in 
great danger and also at child-birth.| Again, another god 

named Tongo had different animals for his incarnations in’ 

different families. In one family he was incarnate in the 
bat and had a partiality for turmeric. In another he was 
incarnate in the stinging ray fish. If the family heard that 
a neighbour had caught a fish of that sort, they would go 
and beg him to give it up and not to cook it. If he refused, 
they fought him. In a third family Tongo was incarnate in 
a mullet, and if a member of the family ate a mullet he fell 
ill and squinted.”, The mullet and the stinging ray fish were 
also the incarnations of another household god called Moso. 
If any member of the family tasted of these sacred fish, he 
had to drain a cup of the dregs of rancid oil as a punishment 
and to stay the wrath of the god. But if visitors or friends 
caught one of the sacred fish, whether a stinging ray or a 
mullet, a child of the family would be laid down in a cold 
oven as a peace-offering to the deity for the indignity done 
to him by the strangers.? Similarly a family god called 
“Tide gently rising” (Zagsymalze) was incarnate in the 
cuttle-fish in one family, in the mullet in a second, and in 
the turtle in a third. If one of these incarnations had beén 
cooked in the family oven, whether by a member of the 
family or by a stranger, the oven could not be used again 
till some one had been laid in it as a mock burnt-offering, 
It was death to the family to use the desecrated oven with- 
out performing this expiation.* The god Moso seems to 
have been a veritable Proteus or Vishnu in respect of the 
number of his avatars or incarnations. Not content with 
appearing to one family, as we have seen, as a mullet and 
a stinging ray fish, he appeared to another as a pigeon, to 
another as a domestic fowl, to another as a cuttle-fish, to 
another as a creeper-bird called fuza (Sturnotdes atrifusca), 
and to another asa man. The human incarnation of this 

(r 

deity helped himself to food from the plantations of his - 

neighbours. If they chased him, he disappeared out of their 

1G, Turner, Samoa, p. 74- 3G. Tumer, of. cit. p. 38. 
2G. Turner, of. cét. pp. 74 5g. * G. Turner, of. czt, Pp» 59- 

VHI TRACES OF TOTEMISM IN SAMOA 159 

sight, from which they inferred that tC was a god, and 
prayed and sacrificed to him accordingly... The household 
god, “ Tide gently rising,” likewise presented himself to one 
family in the likeness of a man, a member of the family, 
who used to be consulted by his kinsfolk as an oracle on all 
occasions of importance. If his answers were not to their 
liking, they might turn and beat him. In another place the 
same god “Tide gently rising” was incarnate in an old man, 
who acted as the doctor of the family. The neighbours also 
brought their sick to him to be healed. His principal 
remedy was to rub the affected part with oil, to shout “ Tide 
gently rising” (Zazsumale) five times in a loud voice, and 
five times to call on the god to come and heal.” 

Another family god, who bore the high-sounding title of « King of 
“King of Chiefs” (Zuzaliz) had the sea eel, the octopus, and “es.” 
the mullet for his incarnations ; and he was moreover seen 
in the ends of banana leaves, If any one used the end of 
a banana leaf as a cap, he was punished with baldness. All 
the children born in this family were called by the name of 
their god.2 Another god called Taumanupepe, which means Butterfly 
“fight creature butterfly,” was incarnate in butterflies. If 8°¢ 
any member of the household caught or killed a butterfly, 
he was liable to be struck dead by the god.* Again, in one 
of the villages of Aana there was a household which had 
the fresh-water prawn or crayfish (#/avaz) for its god. The 
reason was said to be that once upon a time a woman had 
been bathing and was brought to bed prematurely. When 
she told her friends, they searched for the child but could 
find only an unusually large number of prawns or crayfishes, 
into which they imagined that the infant must have been 
changed. From that time they began to regard the crayfish 
as the incarnation of a new household god, to offer it food, 
and to pray to it for the prosperity of the family.’ 

Again there was a household god named Sepo, who The god 
assumed different animal shapes in different families. An p<P02n4 
inland family in Upolu called him “ Lord of the mountain ” incarna- 
and believed him to be incarnate in the domestic fowl and "°* 

1G. Turner, Samoa, pp. 36 599. 4G. Turner, of. czz. p. 76. 
2G. Tumer, of. cit. Pp. 58 59- . 
3G. Turner, of. czt. P- 75 59- 5 G. Turner, of. cit. Pp. 77. 

The cuttle- 
fish god. 

The turtle 
god, 

Samoan 
village 

ods. 
The cockle 
god. 

160 TOTEMISM IN POLYNESIA CHAP. 

the pigeon. Another family saw him in a very small fish, 
which is hard to catch; and a third family discerned the 
deity in the prickly sea-urchin. The penalty for eating this 
last incarnation was that a prickly sea-urchin grew inside 
the body of the eater and killed him.’ A similar penalty 
was exacted by other household gods for similar offences. 
Thus there was a family which had the cuttle-fish (/e’e) for 
their household god. If any visitor caught a cuttle-fish and 
cooked it, or if any member of a family had been where a 
cuttle-fish was eaten, the family would meet in consultation 
and choose a man or woman to go and lie down in a cold 
oven and be covered with leaves, as if he or she were being 
baked, this being a peace-offering to avert the wrath of the 
divine cuttle-fish, And while the man or woman was lying 
in his leafy shroud in the oven, the rest of the family 
engaged in prayer, saying, “O bald-headed cuttle-fish, for- 
give what has been done—it was all the work of a stranger.” 
If they did not thus humble themselves before the cuttle- 
fish, they thought that he would come and cause a cuttle- 
fish to grow in their insides and so be the death of them.’ 
Again, in another family the household god was called 
“Sacred Fulness” (Apel/esa) and was incarnate in the turtle. 
A member of the family dared not eat a turtle, but he might 
help a neighbour to cut up and cook one; only while ‘he 
was doing so he kept a bandage tied over his mouth, lest an 
embryo turtle should slip down his throat, grow up, and cause 
his death? Again, there was a family god called Salevao, who 
was incarnate in the eel and the turtle. If any member of the 
family was rash enough to consume an eel or a turtle, he was 
taken ill, and before he died the god was heard to say from 
his inside, “I am killing this man ; he ate my incarnation.‘ 
So much for the family or houschold gods of Samoa. 
The following are examples of the general village gods. 
There was a village god called Nonia who was supposed to 
be incarnate in the cockle. If any person of the village 
picked up a cockle on the shore and carried it away, a 
cockle would appear on some part of his body; if he ate 
the shell-fish, it would grow on his nose. May was the 

1G. Turner, Samoa, p. 51. 3G. Turner; of. ct. pp. 67 sy. 
2G, Turner, of. c##. pp. 31 5g. 4G. Turner, of. ctf. pp. §0 sg. 

Vu TRACES OF TOTEMISM IN SAMOA 161 

month when the cockle-god was specially worshipped with 
feasts and prayers ; for that is the time when the wet season 
changes into the dry, and coughs and other ailments are 
then prevalent. On the days of worship the people of the 
village went about with bundles of cockles and through 
them prayed to their cockle-god.1_ The people of a small The sea- 
island saw their god in the sea-eel (Maraena), on which °! 84. 
they bestowed the title of “Beginner of the Heavens” 
(Fuai langi). If a sea-eel were cast up on the beach by a 
gale or a great wave, it boded ill and the whole people were 
in commotion.? Some villages worshipped twin gods called «The 
“the Lizard and the Stone” (p2/¢ ma le maa) in time of war, rege int 
famine, and pestilence. The month of May was specially 
appointed as the season for prayer and sacrifice. The lizard 
was the guiding incarnation, and lizards were carefully 
watched in time of war. If a lizard darted across the path 
before the warriors, they faced about and returned home at 
once ; but if it ran on ahead of them they advanced cheer- 
fully to meet the enemy. Another way of taking omens 
from a lizard was this. The middle post of the great house 
was wrapt in coco-nut leaves from the floor to the ridge- 
pole, and the chiefs assembled and watched it. If a lizard 
ran straight down the leafy pole, it was a good omen; but 
if it took a zigzag course, it was a bad sign, and fighting 
was suspended? A village god in Upolu bore the name of The light- 
Swift (4 «#/2) and was seen in the lightning, and omens "8 8°¢ 
were drawn from lightning in time of war. If the flashes 
were frequent, it meant that the god had come to help and 
direct his people. If the lightning played constantly over 
a particular spot, it was a warning that the enemy was 
lurking there in ambush. Continual flashes in front shewed 
that the foe was being repulsed; but if the lightning came 
from the front backwards, it betokened danger and was an 
order to retreat. Another village god bore the name of 
Shade (/aamalu) and was seen in a cloud or shade. Ifa 
cloud went before the army marching to war, they advanced 
boldly ; but if the clouds were behind them, they were 
afraid. In time of war the same deity was also represented 

1G, Turner, Samoa, pp. 40 sg. 3 G, Turner, of. caf. Pp. 44- 

2G. Turner, of. cit. p. 32. 4G. Turner, of. ct. PP. 59 59- 

VOL. IH M 

Village 
gods in 
stones. 

Village 
gods in- 
carnate 
in men. 

162 TOTEMISM IN POLYNESIA CHAP. 

by a fish, the movements of which were watched and served 
as omens. But in ordinary life the god was represented by 
a trumpet-shell. In the month appointed for the annual 
worship, all the people met in the place of public assembly 
with heaps of cooked food. First, they made offerings and 
prayed to the god to avert calamities and give prosperity ; 
then they feasted with and before their god, and after that 
any strangers present might eat. 

Some village gods were believed to reside in stones, and 
such deities were apparently associated especially with rain 
and the fertility of the ground. Thus, for example, two 
oblong smooth stones stood on a raised platform of loose 
stones inland of a village. They were thought to be the 
father and mother of Saato, a god who controlled the rain. 
Offerings of cooked taro and fish, accompanied by prayers, 
were laid on these stones to secure a spell of fine weather ; 
and when food was scarce and the people went to search for 
wild yams, they would give a yam to the stones, because 
they thought that these gods caused the yams to grow and 
could lead them to the places where the edible roots grew 
most plentifully.2. , Again, in another village two smooth 
stones were guarded with great care in a temple. One of 
them was believed to create the yams, the bread-fruit, and 
the coco-nuts ; the other sent fish to the net.2 In another 
village a stone was housed as the representative of a rain- 
making god. When rain was wanted, the priest and his 
followers, arrayed in fine mats, carried the stone to a stream, 
dipped it in the water, and prayed for rain. But when the 
weather was rainy and they wished to make it fine, they 
laid the stone by the fire and kept it hot till the clouds 
rolied away and the rain was over.* 

In Savaii some village gods were believed to be incarnate 
in men. One of these human incarnations was a cannibal, 
and human flesh used to be laid before him whenever he 
called for it. His power extended to several villages and 
his descendants were traced down to the time when Dr. 
Turner wrote. Another village god in Savaii was supposed 

1G, Turner, Samoa, pp. 26 59. 4 G. Turner, p. 45. 
2 G. Turner, of. cé?. pp. 24 sg. 
3 G. Turner, of. cit. pp. 44 59. 5 G. Turner, of. céf. pp. 48 59. 

Vu TRACES OF TOTEMISM IN SAMOA 163 

to be incarnate in a man who walked about unseen by the 
people. But strangers could see him in the likeness of a 
handsome young man with a girdle of leaves. He bore the 
name of Tuifiti or “ King of Fiji”. His special abode was a 
grove of large trees (Afzelia bijuga), which nobody dared to 
fell. They say that a party from Upolu once tried to cut 
timber in the sacred grove, but blood flowed from the tree 
and all the sacrilegious strangers fell ill and died.’ 

Some of the village gods were identical, at least in name, Worship of 
with the family or household gods. Thus the cuttle-fish encod? 
(fee) was a general village god in some places. In one 
village the month of May was sacred to him. No traveller 
might then pass through the village by the public road, and 
no canoe might appear in the lagoon. There was much 
feasting, and athletic sports, such as club-exercise, spear- 
throwing, and wrestling, were held. A new temple was also 
built at this time, and every man, woman, and child had to 
contribute something towards it, if it were only a stick or 
reed for the thatch. While some of the -people built the 
temple, the rest fought each other in good earnest with a 
view to settle any old scores that might be outstanding. 
He who got most wounds was thought to be most favoured 
of the god. The fighting ended with the completion of the 
‘temple ; and if at any other time neighbours quarrelled and 
came to blows, the god viewed them with displeasure, because 
they had not saved up their difference for the day of the 
year on which his temple was built.?_ In another district the 
worship of the cuttle-fish lasted three months. Any one 
who passed along the road or paddled his canoe in the 
lagoon during that sacred season would be beaten, if not 
killed, for insulting the god. For the first month torches 
and all other lights were forbidden, because the deity was 
about and did not wish to be seen. At this time, also, all 
unsightly projecting burdens, such as a log of wood on the 
shoulder, were prohibited, lest the divine cuttle-fish should 
take umbrage at these things as an impious mockery of his 
tentacles.* Again, “Tide gently rising” (Tadsumatic) was 
the deity of a whole district in Upolu as well as of particular 

1G. Turner, Saneoa, pp. 62 sg. 2G. Turner, of. c#t. pp. 29 sg. 
3G. Turner, of. cit. p. 30. 

Worship 
of the 
goddess 
« Tide 
gently 
rising.” 

Worship 
of the god 
Moso, 

Samoan 
war-gods 
and their 
incarna- 
tions, 

War-gods 
incarnate 
in owls, 

164 TOTEMISM IN POLYNESIA CHAP. 

families. She was said to have been a lady who went away 
among the gods and was worshipped first by her family and 
then by all the people of the land. The bat was one of her 
incarnations, and bats flew about her temple in unusual 
numbers in time of war. One of them flying ahead of the 
troops was a good omen. Ifa neighbour killed a bat, a war 
might follow to wipe out the insult in blood. Another 
representative of this deity was a shrub (Ascarina lanceolata). 
June was the usual month for her worship. All kinds of 
food from land and sea were provided for a feast, but only 
the priest’s family might partake of it. Whatever they 
could not eat was buried at the beach. After that the 
people battered each other's scalps with clubs till the blood 
streamed down over their faces and bodies. Old and young, 
men, women, and children all took part in the scrimmage. 
The blood shed was regarded as an offering which pleased 
the deity, and induced her to grant their prayers for health, 
good crops, and victory. Once more the god Moso, who 
took so many forms,’ was a village god in one place and 
represented by a stone on which travellers laid scented 
wreaths as offerings. In another place he was represented 
by a large wooden bowl called “sudden death” (pz), because 
curses shrieked by the priest over the bowl consigned thieves 
and other undetected miscreants to instant destruction.’ 
Again, one of the kings of the district of Atua was supposed 
to be the god Moso by night and far away, but in the day- 
time he moved about in the likeness of a mortal man among 
men.* ; 

Besides their family or household gods and their village 
gods the Samoans had also war-gods, who in character 
resembled the other deities, being commonly thought to be 
incarnate in animals or embodied in inanimate objects. 
Thus there was a war-god called “ Destruction” (Fanonga), 
who was supposed to be incarnate in the Samoan owl (Sévix 
delicatula). In time of war, offerings were presented to a pet 
owl, which was kept for the purpose. If it hovered over the 
troops on the march, it was a good omen; but if it flew 
away towards the enemy, it was thought that the god had 

1G. Tumer, Samoa, pp. 56 59. : G. Turner, Samoa, PP- 30 5q.4 36. 
2 Above, p. 158. G. Turner, of, cit. pp» 36 59. 

VIII TRACES OF TOTEMISM IN ens 165 

gone to join the foe. If a dead owl was found under a tree 
in the village, all the people assembled on the spot, burned 
their bodies with firebrands, and beat their foreheads with 
stones till the blood flowed by way of testifying their sorrow. 
Yet the god was not dead; he still lived and moved about 
in all the other owls of the country.’ Another war-god 
named “Mangrove” (Zongo) was also incarnate in an owl 
and gave omens to the warriors by his flight. If a dead 
owl were found under a tree, the person who discovered it 
would at once cover it with native white cloth. Then all 
the people of the village would gather round the dead owl, 
and sitting down would beat and bruise their foreheads with 
stones as an offering of blood to the god, while they raised 
the death wail to testify to the deity their sorrow at the 
calamity which had befallen him. Yet their god was not 
dead: he continued to live in all the surviving owls.’ 
Other war-gods were deemed to be incarnate in herons, 
king-fishers, rail-birds (Rad/us Pectoralis), and the Porphyris 
Samoensis, and omens were drawn in time of war from the 
flight or appearance of these birds. Another war-god called 
“ Swift” (Vave) was incarnate in a pigeon, which was care- 
fully kept and fed by the different members of a family in 
turn. But the special residence of the god was an old tree, 
which was a place of refuge for murderers and others whose 
life was forfeit in the eyes of the law. A criminal who 
reached the tree was safe. The avenger of blood might 
pursue him no further. The large bat or flying-fox was 
the incarnation of a war-god “Sepo the Strong” in Savaii ; 
if it flew before the warriors, all was well, but if it 
turned round and shut up the way, it was a warning to 
go back. In a number of villages the war-god Salevao 
was incarnate in a dog, generally a white one If the 
beast wagged his tail, barked, and dashed ahead in sight 
of the enemy, the omen was good ; but if he slunk back or 
howled, it was bad.® In other villages the war-god was 
incarnate in a lizard; and before the warriors went out to 

1G. Turner, Samoa, pp. 25 sg. 4G. Turner, of. ct. p. 64. 

2 G. Turner, of. cit. pp. 60 59. 

3G. Turner, of. ct. pp. 35, 48, 52, 
54 59., 61, 64, 65. 6 G. Tumer, of. czt. p. 49. 

5 G. Turner, of. cét. p. 51. 

War-gods 
incarnate 
in pigeons, 
bats, dogs, 
and lizards. 

Rainbow 
and spear 
gods, 

The ~ 
Samoan 
worship 

of animals, 
plants, and 
other 
natural 
objects 
appears to 
have been 
developed 
out of 
totemism 
but not to 
be totem- 
ism pure 
and simple. 

166 TOTEMISM IN POLYNESIA CHAP. 

battle, omens were drawn from the movements of a lizard in 
a bundle of spears. Ifthe reptile ran about the points of 
the spears and the outside of the bundle, the omen was 
favourable ; but it was unfavourable if the animal crept for 
concealment into the middle of the bundle.’ Two different 
war-gods were believed to be in the rainbow, and in war the 
position or brightness of a rainbow was ominous of victory 
or defeat.” Once more, another war-god was represented by 
a long spear made of coco-nut wood to which the people 
made offerings and prayed. They carried the spear with 
them on the war-fleet as a sign that the god was with them. 
In time of peace the god acted as a good physician, healing 
sickness on receipt of his fee, which took the shape of prayer 
and sacrifice.’ 

From the foregoing summary it appears plainly that the 
Samoan worship of animals, plants, and other natural objects 
was not pure totemism. For in pure totemism there is 
nothing that can properly be described as worship of the 
totems. Sacrifices are not presented to them, nor prayers 
offered, nor temples built, nor priests appointed to minister 
to them. In a word, totems pure and simple are never 
gods, but merely species of natural objects united by certain 
intimate and mystic ties to groups of men. But in the 
Samoan system the worshipful beings are clearly gods. The 
people pray and sacrifice to them, hold festivals in their 
honour, build temples and maintain priests for their worship. 
Some of the deities are purely anthropomorphic, since they 
appear in human form and are incarnate in living men. 
But most of them retain a close affinity with natural objects, 
especially with various species of animals, in which they are 
believed to be incarnate. It is a reasonable hypothesis that 
this affinity with natural objects and particularly with species 
of animals is a survival of totemism; in other words that 
the Samoan gods, or most of them, have been developed 
directly out of totems. The hypothesis is necessarily incap- 
able of demonstration, but it seems to explain the curiously 
complex Samoan pantheon ina simple and natural way. The 
reverence shewn by families for species of animals which 

1G. Turner, Samoa, pp. 46 sg. 2 G. Turner, of. cét. pp. 35. 43- 
3G, Turner, of. cét. pp. 61 sg. 

VII TRACES OF TOTEMISM IN SAMOA 

167 

they are forbidden to injure or eat is parallel to the reverence 
which totemic people exhibit for their totems; the story 
that a family worships crayfishes because an ancestress gave 
birth to crayfishes, er at all events to a child which turned 
into crayfishes,’ resembles the stories told by many totem 
clans of their descent from their totemic animals; and, 
further, the belief that to eat or otherwise injure a sacred 
animal may be punished by the growth of an animal of the 
same sort in the body cf the culprit has its analogies among 
the totemic tribes of Australia.” 

In regard to marriage we are told that exogamous No exo- 
classes do not exist in Samoa, and that the only restrictions 222% , 
on marriage are those which bar the union of relatives, Samoa. 
the Samoan table of prohibited degrees being more extensive 
and stringent than ours. However, it was a common practice 
in the old days for a man in his wife’s lifetime to take her 
sister or sisters as concubines.’ 

§ 2. Traces of Totemism in Rotuma 

To the west of Samoa and north-west of Fiji lies the ramity 
island of Rotuma, the natives of which are Polynesians, Sods with 
The island was formerly divided into five districts, and these carnations 
districts “ were subdivided into Hoag, a name applied to all" Rotuma. 
the houses of a family, which were placed together, forming, 
if the family was a large one, a small village; it is also 
applied to the family itself. Each of these hoag had a 
name, which was conferred on one member of the oag, who 
was invariably zpso facto its head, or pure.”* Each family 
or clan, as we may perhaps call these oag, had its atua or 
god, who was usually incarnate in some species of animal, 

1 See above, p. 159. 

2 See above, pp. 428 sg., 482. 

3 Rev. George Brown, D.D., Jfe/a- 
nesians and Polynesians, their Life 
fTistories illustrated and compared (in 
manuscript). Dr. Brown lived many 
years in Samoa and is intimately 
acquainted with the people and their 
customs. Compare W. H. R. Rivers, 
‘‘Totemism in Polynesia and Mela- 
nesia,” Journal of the Royal Anthropo- 
logical Institute, xxxix. (1909) p. 160. 

4 J. Stanley Gardiner, ‘‘The Natives’ 
of Rotuma,” Journal of the Anthropo- 
logical Institute, xxvii. (1898) pp. 428, 
429. As to the physical characteristics 
of the natives Mr. Gardiner says: 
‘* Here and there individuals could be 
picked out typical of Samoa and Tonga ; 
but I have seen none, save direct de- 
scendants of Fijians, that had curly 
hair or any appearance approximating 
to that of the Melanesian ” (of. c7t, p. 
408). 

Priest and 
priestess 
of the 
hammer- 
headed 
shark, 

Priest of 
the sting- 
ing ray 
fish. 

168 TOTEMISM IN POLYNESIA CHAP. 

such as the hammer-headed shark (¢andfa), the sandpiper 
(jude), the lizard (olusz), the gecko (safrop), and so on. If 
a man happened to kill one of the animals in which his god 
was incarnate he had to make a great feast, cut all his hair 
off, and bury it just in the same way that a man would be 
buried, But the members of a family or clan (Aoag) were 
free to kill the sacred animals of other families ; for it was 
only their own god (atua) who had power over them. The 
hammer-headed shark (¢anzfa) was the god, or the incar- 
nation of the god, of the district or village of Maftau. He 
had a priest (apzozztu) who officiated on all great occasions, 
and a priestess whose business it was to heal sickness and 
remedy all minor ills. People were forbidden to sing and 
dance round the priest's house. When Maftau was in 
trouble or going to war, a great feast would be held and 
the best of everything would be thrown into the sea for 
the hammer-headed shark. These offerings comprised a 
root of kava, a pig, taro, yams, and always a coco-nut leaf. 
Much uncooked food was also given to the priest, who 
would presently come out of his house, smeared with paint, 
foaming at the mduth, and quivering all over. He would 
perhaps drain a bowl of kava, tear a pig in pieces and eat it 
raw, or take great mouthfuls of uncooked yams, the taste 
of which is exceedingly fiery. Then he would fall down in 
horrible convulsions and speak oracularly ; for the hammer- 
headed shark was now supposed to be in him and té speak 
with his voice. For the time being he was all-powerful, and 
whatever he told the people they had to do; but when he 
came to himself he forgot what he had said in the state of 
possession and was an ordinary man again. The priestess 
healed sickness by falling into a frenzy and driving out the 
devil which was troubling the patient, for which she received 
a pig and a mat as payment. The god of Matusa, another 
village or district of Rotuma, was the stinging ray (oze), 
which is common on the reef. An old man of the priestly 
family claimed that these fish used to come round him on 
the reef and follow him about.’ 

From this account, for which we are indebted to Mr. J. 

1 J. Stanley Gardiner, ‘The Natives logical Institute, xxvii. (1898) pp. 
of Rotuma,” Journal of the Anthrofo- 467 sq. 

VII TRACES OF TOTEMISM IN ROTUMA 169 

Stanley Gardiner, it would seem that the religious system of Resem- 
Rotuma closely resembled that of Samoa; in both we see 0° 
family gods incarnate in species of animals which are sacred religious 
to all the members of the family ; in both, too, it is believed ale 
that the gods may be at least temporarily incarnate in human a Se 
beings and speak with their voice. 

In the island of Rotuma, as among the Dieri, second Cousin 
cousins were allowed to marry each other if they were the ene 
grandchildren of a brcther and sister respectively, but not 
if they were the grandchildren of two brothers or of two 
sisters,’ 

The natives of Rotuma have the classificatory system of Classif- 
relationship. Thus in the generation above his own a man pene re 
applies the same term oz-fa “my father” to his \father, to relationship 
his father’s brothers, to his mother’s brothers, to the husbands ™ 8°?" 
of his father’s sisters, and to the husbands of his mother’s 
sisters ; he applies the same term o7-hon-z “my mother” to 
his mother, to his mother’s sisters, to his father’s sisters, to 
the wives of his father’s brothers, and to the wives of his 
mother’s brothers. In his own generation he applies the 
same terms sa-si-gi “my brother” and sag-hon-¢ “ my sister ” 
to his brothers and sisters and to all his first cousins, namely, 
to the sons and daughters of his father’s brothers, to the 
sons and daughters of his father’s sisters, to the sons and 
daughters of his mother’s brothers, and to the sons and 
daughters of his mother’s sisters. He calls his wife hot-e-na 
or en, “my wife”; but he calls his wife’s sister hom-fu-e, 

“my sister-in-law.” <A wife calls her husband ve-ven-7 “my 
husband,” but she calls her husband’s brother hom-fu-e, “my _ 
brother-in-law.” In the generation below his own a man 
applies the same terms /e-e fa “my son” and /e-e hon-i “my 
daughter ” to his sons and daughters and to all his nephews 
and nieces, namely, to the sons and daughters of his brothers 
and to the sons and daughters of his sisters. Similarly a 
woman applies the same terms /-e fa “my son” and /-e 
hon-t “my daughter” to her sons and daughters and to all 
her nephews and nieces, namely, to the sons and daughters 

1 J. Stanley Gardiner, ‘‘ The Natives As to the marriage of second cousins 
of Rotuma,” Journal of the Anthropo- among the Dieri, see above, vol. i. 
logical Institute, xxvii. (1898) p. 478. — p. 346. 

Thus the 
Rotuman 
form of the 
classifica- 
tory system 
distin- 
guishes 

the wife's 
sister from 
the wife 
and the 
husband’s 
brother 
from the 
husband. 
On the 
other hand it 
confuses the 
mother’s 
brother 
with the 
father, and 
the father’s 
sister with 
the mother; 
it confuses 
all cousins as 
‘brothers " 
and 
“sisters,” 
and all 
nephews 
and nieces 
as ‘‘sons”’ 
and 
‘«daughters.” 
Morgan 
thought 
that these 
confusions 
were primi- 
tive and 
originated 
in the 
group 
marriage 
of own 
brothers to 
their own 

TOTEMISM IN POLYNESIA CHAP. 

170 

of her sisters and to the sons and daughters of her 
brothers.’ 

Thus the Rotuma form of the classificatory system 
distinguishes the wife’s sister from the wife and the husband’s 
brother from the husband. On the other hand it confuses 
the mother’s brothers and the husbands of the father’s sisters 
with the father: it confuses the father’s sisters and the wives 
of the mother’s brothers with the mother: it confuses all 
first cousins, whether the children of two brothers, or of two 
sisters, or of a brother and a sister respectively, under the 
appellation of “ brothers ” and “sisters”; and it confuses all 
nephews and nieces, whether the children of brothers or of 
sisters, under the appellation of “sons” and “ daughters.” 
We may safely assume that a form of the classificatory 
system which distinguishes a wife’s sister from a wife, and a 
husband’s brother from a husband, is later than one which, 
like the Australian, confuses a wife’s sister with a wife and a 
husband’s brother with a husband.? But what are we to 
say of the confusion of the mother’s brothers and of the 
father’s sisters’ husbands with the father? of the confusion 
of the father’s sistets and of the mother’s brothers’ wives 
with the mother ? of the confusion of all first cousins under 
the appellations of “brothers” and “sisters”? of the 
confusion of all nephews and nieces under the appellation of 
“sons” and “daughters” of their uncles and aunts? Is the 
Polynesian form of the classificatory system, which confounds 
these relationships, earlier or later than the Australian form 
which distinguishes them? L. H. Morgan, the discoverer of 
the classificatory system of relationship, believed that the 
Polynesian, or, as he chose to call it, the Malayan, form of 
the classificatory system was the earlier of the two; indeed 
that it is the absolutely primitive form of the system. His 
reasons for thinking so were in brief these. The confusion 
of the mother’s brother with the father and of the father’s 

1L. H. Morgan, Ancient Society 
(London, 1877), pp. 419-423. The 
Rotuma terms of relationship are re- 
ported by Morgan on the authority 
of the Rev. John Osborn, Wesleyan 
missionary at Rotuma (of. ¢t?7. p. 403, 
note!). A brief indication of the classi- 
ficatory system of relationship in Rotuma 

is given by Mr, J. Stanley Gardiner in 
his statement that ‘‘theterm o/fa applies 
to the father or uncle, and oshon7 to 
the mother or aunt ” (‘¢ The Natives of 
Rotuma,” Journal ofthe Anthropological 
Institute, xxvii. (1898) p. 478). 

2 See vol. i. pp. 299, 390, 301, 302, 
303, ete. 

VIII TRACES OF TOTEMISM IN ROTUMA 171 

sister with the mother appears to point to the marriage of sisters; but 
brothers with their own sisters ; and this form of marriage a 
was assumed by him to be the first stage in the advance from are late 
a former condition of unlimited sexual promiscuity. On his pe ale 
theory the first limitation imposed on a state of absolute cadence 
sexual communism was the custom which restricted men to O.t'.4. 
cohabitation with their own sisters instead of allowing them tory system. 
to cohabit with all women indifferently. This marriage of a 

group of own brothers with their own sisters gave rise, in 
Morgan’s opinion, to the oldest form of the human family, 
namely, to the consanguine family, as he called it, out of 

which he believed all other forms of the family to have been 
afterwards developed. The evidence for the former wide 
prevalence of this marriage of own brothers with own sisters 

in groups was mainly, almost exclusively, drawn by Morgan 

from the Polynesian or, as he called it, the Malayan form of 

the classificatory system with its characteristic confusion of 

the mother’s brother with the father, of the father’s sister 

with the mother, and of a brother’s children with his sister’s 
children.! But in recent years Dr. W. H. R. Rivers, arguing 

from similar confusions in other forms of the classificatory 
system, particularly the forms which prevail among the 
Torres Straits’ Islanders, the Kurnai of South-East Australia, 

and the Two Mountain Iroquois of North America, has 

made it highly probable that the confusion of these relation- 

ships in the Polynesian form of the classificatory system is 

not early but late, and that it marks the decadence rather 

than the primitiveness of the system.” If he is right, as I 
believe him to be, Morgan’s principal, almost his only, 
argument in favour of the former wide prevalence of a form 

of group marriage in which the husbands were own brothers 

and their wives were their own sisters, falls to the ground. 

It does not, of course, follow that the theory of the former 
prevalence of such group marriages is false because the 
argument on which it has been rested is weak or nugatory ; 

but it does follow that if the theory is to be accepted as 

1 See L. H. Morgan, Ascent Origin of the Classificatory System of 
Society, pp» 385 59.. 401 sg., 408 sg., Relationships,” Athropolegical Essays 
412 59- presented to Edward Burnett Tylor 

2w. H. R. Rivers, “‘On the (Oxford, 1907), pp. 310-315. 

In Hawaii 
gods were 
thought to 
be em- 
bodied in 
animals, 
trees, 

stones, etc. 

172 TOTEMISM IN POLYNESIA CHAP. 

proved or probable it must be supported by other evidence. 
To this subject we shall recur later on in this work. 

§ 3. Traces of Totemism in Hawati and Tahit: 

A system of gods embodied in animals, trees, stones, 
and so forth appears to have obtained in Hawaii. At 
least this is suggested by the following passage from a 
history of Hawaii which was composed by natives in their 
own language in the year 1820, and was printed by the 
natives themselves at Lahainaluna, in the island of Maui, in 
the year 1838. In this interesting record of a state of 
things which has long passed away we read as follows: 
“ Another subject of oppression was the taboo (4apuz). of the 
idols. The trees were idols for the people and for the chiefs. 
If a man had for his idol the oka tree, the ohia was taboo 
for him; if the bread-fruit tree was the idol of another, the 
bread-fruit tree was taboo for him. Similarly the taboo 
applied to all the trees of which men had made for them- 
selves divine images, and it was the same also for the food. 
If kalo was a person’s idol, kalo was taboo for that person. 
It was the same for all the eatables of which they had made 
gods. Birds served as idols for some people; if it was a, 
fowl, the fowl was taboo for the worshipper. Similarly for 
all the birds that were deified. The idol of another was a 
quadruped, and if it was a pig, the pig was taboo for him. 
Similarly for all the animals which became gods. Another 
had for an idol a stone; it became taboo, and he might 
not sit upon the stone. The idol of another was a fish, 
and if it was a shark, the shark was taboo for him. It 
was the same for all the fish, and in the same manner 
they deified everything on earth and in the sky and all the 
bones of men.”! 

Similarly the French traveller, L. de Freycinet, who 
visited Hawaii in the early part of the nineteenth century, 
informs us that some of the inhabitants worshipped fowls, 

1 Jules Remy, A@ Afooolelo Hawaii, this work the Hawaiian text is printed 
Histoire de PArchipel Havaiien (/les with a French translation on the 
Sandwich), Texte et Traduction (Paris opposite page. I have translated the 
and Leipsic, 1862), pp. 163, 165. In passage from the French version, 

vit TRACES OF TOTEMISM IN HAWAII AND TAHITI 173 

lizards, owls, rats, and so forth.’ Apparently the worshippers 
believed that the souls of the dead transmigrated “into the 

bodies of their sacred animals. At least this is affirmed by Shark gods 
Freycinet with regard to sharks. He says that a man who pe 
worshipped sharks would throw his stillborn child, with an migration 
offering of taro, kava, and sugar-cane, into the sea, believing *‘"*. . 
that the child’s soul would enter the body of a shark and dead into 
that afterwards sharks would spare the living members of T*** 
the family. Moreover, there were temples dedicated to 

sharks where the priests at morning and evening offered 
prayers to the shark-idol. These men rubbed themselves 

with water and salt, which drying on their skin produced an 
appearance of scales. They also clothed themselves in red, 
uttered piercing cries, and leaping over the temple-enclosure 
pretended that they knew the exact moment when the 
children which had been thrown into the sea were changed 

into sharks, For this welcome revelation they received 
presents of pigs, kava, coco-nuts, and so forth from the 
grateful parents.” Fishermen in Hawaii-sometimes wrapped 

their dead in the native red cloth and threw them into the 

sea to be devoured by sharks, believing that the souls of the 
departed would animate the sharks which devoured their 
bodies, and that accordingly these voracious monsters would 
afterwards spare their living human kinsfolk. 

Similarly in Tahiti there were “atua mao or shark gods ; Shark gods 
not that the shark was itself the god, but the natives ™ T@bit. 
supposed the marine gods employed the sharks as the agents 
of their vengeance. The large blue shark was the only 
kind supposed to be engaged by the gods; and a variety of 
the most strange and fabulous accounts of the deeds they 
have performed are related by their priests. These voracious 
animals were said always to recognize a priest on board any 
canoe, to come at his call, retire at his bidding, and to spare 
him in the event of a wreck, though they might devour 
his companions, especially if they were not his mavru, or 
worshippers. . . . The shark was not the only fish the 

1L. de Freycinet, Voyage autour 2L. de Freycinet, of. ci¢. pp. 
du monde executé pendant les années 595 sg. 
1817, 1818, 1819, e¢ 1820, tome 3 W. Ellis, Polynesian Researches, 
ii, Premiere parte (Paris, 1829), p. Second Edition, iv. (London, 1836) 
594. p. 361. 

174 TOTEMISM IN POLYNESIA CHAP. 

Sacred Tahitians considered sacred.”* “Among the animate 

Sue objects of their worship, they included a number of birds 
as well as fishes, especially a species of heron, a kingfisher, 
and one or two kinds of woodpecker, accustomed to frequent 
the sacred trees growing in the precincts of the temple. 
These birds were considered sacred, and usually fed upon 
the sacrifices. The natives imagined the god was imbodied 
in the bird, when it approached the temple to feast upon 
the offering ; and hence they supposed their presents were 
grateful to their deities. The cries of those birds were also 
regarded as the responses of the gods to the prayers of the 
priests.” ? 

These Hawaiian and Tahitian customs and beliefs are 
not totemism, but it is possible that like the similar Samoan 
superstitions they may have been developed out of it. 

Classifi- The Hawaiians have the classificatory system of relation- 
gystea of Ship. Thus a man applies the same term ma-ku-a ka-na 
relationship “my father” to his father, to his father’s brothers, to his 
in Hawaii. other's brothers, to the husbands of his father’s sisters, and 
to the husbands of his mother’s sisters. He applies the 
same term ma-ku-a wa-hee-na “my mother” to his mother, 
to his mother’s sisters, to his father’s sisters, to the wives of 
his father’s brothers, and to the wives of his mother’s brothers. 
In his own generation he applies the same terms £azt-ku-a-a-na 
“my elder brother” and saz-ku-wa-hee-na “my elder sister ” 
to his elder brothers and sisters and to all his elder first 
cousins, namely to the elder sons and daughters of his 
father’s brothers, to the elder sons and daughters of his 
father’s sisters, to the elder sons and daughters of his 
mother’s brothers, and to the elder sons and daughters of 
his mother’s sisters. He applies the same term wa-hee-na 
“my wife” to his wife, to his wife’s sisters, and to his 
brothers’ wives. Similarly a woman applies the same term 
ka-na “my husband” to her husband, to her husband’s 
brothers, and to her sisters’ husbands. In the generation 
below his own a man applies the same term #at-kee ka-na 
“my son” and kai-kee wa-hee-na “my daughter” to his 
sons and daughters and to all his nephews and nieces, 

IW. Ellis, Polynesian Researches, i. (London, 1832) p. 329. 
2 W. Ellis, of. czt. i. 336. 

vit TRACES OF TOTEMISM IN HAWAII AND TAHITI 175 

namely, to the sons and daughters of his brothers and to 
the sons and daughters of his sisters. Similarly a woman 
applies the same terms kaz-kee ka-na “my son” and kai-kee 
wa-hee-na “my daughter” to her sons and daughters and to 
all her nephews and nieces, namely, to the sons and daughters 
of her brothers and to the sons and daughters of her sisters.’ 

Thus though the terms of relationship in the Hawaiian In the 
system differ throughout from those of the Rotuman system,” Fae 
the principles of classification are the same in the two confusion 
systems, except that whereas the Hawaiian confounds the oe with 
wife’s sister with the wife and the husband’s brother with the wife's 
the husband, the Rotuman distinguishes the wife’s sister oe 
from the wife and the husband’s brother from the husband. busband 
In that respect, therefore, the Hawaiian system is doubtless Riabene’s 
the older of the two and agrees with the Australian. In oni 2 
all the other relationships which have been enumerated the In other 
Hawaiian form of the classificatory system agrees in principle ep anno 
with the Rotuman. Like the Rotuman, it confuses the system 
mother’s brothers and the husbands of the father’s sisters \ 0 the 
with the father: it confuses the father’s sisters and the wives Rotuman 
of the mother’s brothers with the mother: it confuses all 34... 
first cousins, whether the children of two brothers, or of two 
sisters, or of a brother and a sister respectively, under the 
appellation of “ brothers” and “sisters” ; and it confuses all 
nephews and nieces, whether the children of brothers or of 
sisters, under the appellation of “sons” and “ daughters.” 

All such confusions we have seen reason to regard as 
innovations imported into the classificatory system and as 

marks of its decadence.? 

§ 4. Traces of Totemism in Ponape and other parts 
of Polynesia 

Brief indications of totemism or of a religion developed Traces of 
out of it are reported from other parts of Polynesia. Thus ne 
in Nukulaelae, or Mitchell Group, “household gods were parts of 
incarnate in certain birds and fishes, and, as in Samoa of Pes. 
old, no one dared to eat the incarnation of his god.” * 

1L. H. Morgan, Asctent Society 3 See above, pp. 170 sgg. 

London, 1877), Pp- 419-422. 
( ee ase ) ies Sq. 4G. Turner, Samoa, p. 280. 

Traces of 
totemism 
in Ponape, 
one of the 
Caroline 
Islands, 

176 TOTEMISM IN POLYNESIA CHAP. 

In Nukufetau and Namumanga also household gods were 
incarnate in fishes,’ and in Nui they were seen in fish, 
birds, and so forth” Of the Kingsmill Islanders we 
are told that “some worship the souls of their departed 
ancestors, or certain birds, fish, and animals. . . . The 
natives always refuse to eat the animals, fish, etc., 
worshipped by them, but will readily catch them, that 
others may partake of the food. . . . Fish and animals that 
are held sacred are only addressed with prayers by their 
worshippers.”? As to the natives of Banabe or Ascension 
Island it is said that “certain animals, also, particularly fish, 
are esteemed sacred among them,—some, as eels, being so 
to the whole people, while others are merely prohibited to 
particular families. O’Connell supposes this to proceed 
from some rude system of metempsychosis, connected with 
their religious belief.”* Again, in the island of Tikopia, 
which is inhabited by Polynesians though it lies between the 
Santa Cruz group and the New Hebrides, some if not all of 
the natives are said to have gods whom they take from 
among the animals. One, for example, has the eel for his 
god, another a fish, another the bat, and so on. Indeed we 
are told that the eel and the ray-fish take rank among the 
principal deities of Tikopia, and that it would be a crime to 
eat them.” Again, in Ponape, one of the Caroline Islands, 
“the different families suppose themselves to stand in a 
certain relation to animals and especially to fishes, and 
believe in their descent from them. They actually name 
these animals ‘mothers’; the creatures are sacred to the 
family and may not be injured. Great dances, accompanied 
with the offering of prayers, are performed in their honour. 
Any person who killed such an animal would expose himself 
to contempt and punishment, certainly also to the vengeance 

1 G. Turner, Samoa, pp. 285, 289. 

2G. Turner, of. czt. p. 301. 

3 Charles Wilkes, Warrative of the 
Onited States Exploring Expedition 
(New York, 1851), v. 86. 

4 Horatio Hale, United States Ex- 
ploring Expedition, Ethnology and 
Philology (Philadelphia, 1846), p. 84. 
James O’Connell, 2 shipwrecked 

mariner, spent five years on the island. 
He escaped in 1833 and published at 
Boston an account of his adventures 
‘containing much valuable informa- 
tion” (74. p, 80). 

5 J. Dumont D’Urville, Foyage 
autour du monde et a la recherche de 
la Perouse, v. 195, 305, 307. The 
Tikopians are Polynesians (26. p. 
304). 

Vill 

TRACES OF TOTEMISM IN PONAPE 177 

of the insulted deity. They believe that blindness is the 
consequence of such disregard of the totem. But 
conjuration and medicine may interfere to avert the evil, 
The eel (kamzik) is sacred to the Tipunpanemai and 
Lajilap, the shark to the Lipetan, the cuttle-fish to the 
Tipenuai, and so on.”' According to others, however, the 
sacred animal of the Tipenuai is not the cuttle-fish but the 
sting-ray, for which they shew great veneration. When one 
of these fish is left high and dry on the beach, they put 
it back in deep water; and formerly when one of the clan 
died, they used to pour coco-nut milk on the water as if 
for the benefit of a sting-ray, which might perhaps be 
thought to lodge the soul of the deceased in its body.” 
In Ponape the people are divided into families or clans (yau 
or 7zf) with descent both of the family and of the property 
in the maternal line. A man’s proper heirs are his sister's 
sons, The names of some of these clans are derived from 
birds. Thus one clan is named after the blue heron, 
another after the devil-bird or native owl, aiid another after 
the, boatswain-bird.* 

§ 5. Traces of Totemism in Tonga 

Further evidence of the diffusion of totemism, or of a Dr. Rivers's 
system derived from it, in Polynesia was obtained by Dr. oygence 
W. H. R. Rivers in the course of his expedition to the Polynesia. 
Pacific in 1908. In Tonga he learned that each family 

1 Dr. Hahl, ‘ Mittheilungen tiber 
Sitten und rechtliche Verhaltnisse auf 
Ponape,” L£thnologisches Notisblatt, 
vol. ii. Heft 2 (Berlin, 1901), p. Io. 
Dr. Hahl is, or was, Vice-Governor. 
In the passage which I have translated 
the words ‘“ Afissachtung des Toten” 
seem to be a mistake of the German 
printer for “ Afissachtung des Totem” 
and I have translated them accordingly. 
Compare F. W. Christian, 7ze Caroline 
Islands (London, 1899), p. 75: ‘‘ The 
worship of the i or deified ancestors, 
coupled with a sort of zoolatry or 
totemism, is the backbone of the 
Ponapean faith. Every village, every 
valley, hill or stream has its gesdus 
foci, every family its household god, 

VOL. II 

every clan its presiding spirit, every 
tribe its tutelary deity. . . . All these 
nz are honoured under the guise of 
some special Dird, fish, or tree in which 
they are supposed to reside, and with 
which they are identified.” 

2 J. Kubary, Dee soctalen Einricht- 
ungen dev Pelauer (Berlin, 1885), p. 
122, note. Mr. F. W. Christian also 
says that ‘‘ the totem,” as he calls it, of 
the Tip-en-uai tribe is the sting-ray. 
See F. W. Christian, Zhe Caroline 
Islands (London, 1899), pp. 324, 381. 

3 Dr. Hahl, of. c#t. pp. 7 59.5 9 59.3 
F. W. Christian, Zhe Caroline [slands, 

P- 74. 
4 F. W. Christian, Zhe Caroline 
Islands, p. 324. 

N 

Traces of 
totemism 
in Tonga. 

The classi- 
ficatory 
system of 
relation- 
ship in 
Tonga 

TOTEMISM IN POLYNESIA CHAP. 

178 

had its god (otua), and that these family gods were thought 
to be embodied in animals, stones, or a2 man. Among 
animals regarded as incarnations of family gods were the 
octopus, the flying fox, and the pigeon. People never ate 
animals in which they supposed their gods to be incarnate. 
Dr. Rivers was informed that the natives believed themselves 
to be descended from their sacred animals; and he adds: 
“This scanty Tongan evidence distinctly strengthens the 
belief that we have to do with true totemism, for while 
there is a close resemblance with the beliefs and practice 
of Samoa there is in addition the belief in descent from the 
totem-animal.” ! 

While the Tongan families or clans are not known to 
have been exogamous within the time during which the 
islands have been under European observation, the pre- 
valence of the classificatory system of relationship among 
them raises a presumption that exogamy was practised at 
some time, perhaps a remote time, by their ancestors. The 
following are examples of classificatory terms of relationship 
in the Tongan language. In the generation above his own 
a man applies the same term ekw tamaz, “my father,” to 
his father, to his father’s brothers, and to the husbands of 
his mother’s sisters ; he applies the same term eku fae, “my 
mother,” to his mother, to his mother’s sisters, and to the 
wives of his father’s brothers. But he applies different terms, 
namely, hoku tuajina and hoku mehekitaga, to his mother’s 
brothers and to his father’s sisters respectively. In his own 
generation he applies the same term hoku taokete, “my 
elder brother,” to his elder brothers, to his male cousins, the 
sons of his father’s elder brothers, and the sons of his 
mother’s elder sisters. He applies the same term Hoku tehina, 
“my younger brother,” to his younger brothers and to his 
male cousins, the sons of his father’s younger brothers or of 

his mother’s younger sisters, 

1 W. H.R. Rivers, ‘‘ Totemism in 
Polynesia and Melanesia,” Journal of 
the Royal Anthropological Institute, 
Xxxix. (1909) p. 160. William Mariner, 
who lived for some years in Tonga 
from 1806 onwards, reports that ‘the 
primitive gods and deceased nobles 
sometimes appear (visibly) to mankind, 

But he applies other terms, 

to warn or to afford comfort and 
advice: that the primitive gods also 
sometimes come into the living bodies 
of lizards, porpoises, and a species of 
water-snake, hence these animals are 
much respected ” (W. Mariner, Account 
of the Natives of the Tonga Islands, o 
Second Edition (London, 1818), ii. 99). 

VII TRACES OF TOTEMISM IN TONGA 179 

namely hoku tama-amehekitaga and hoku tamaa tuajina, to 
his other cousins, the children of his father’s sister and of 
his mother’s brother respectively. He applies the same 
term hoku unoho, “my wife,” to his wife, to his wife’s sisters, 
and to his brothers’ wives. A woman applies the same term 
hoku unoho “my husband” to her husband, to her husband’s 
brothers, and to her sisters’ husbands. In the generation 
below his own a man applies the same terms hoku foha “my 
son” and hoku ofefine “my daughter” to his sons and 
daughters and to his nephews and nieces, the sons and 
daughters of his brothers. But he applies a different term 
hoku tlamutu “my nephew” or “my niece,” as the case may 
be, to the sons and daughters of his sisters.’ 

In thus distinguishing (1) the mother’s brother from Differences 
the father, (2) the father’s sister from the mother, (3) aca 
the children of the father’s brother and of the mother’s form of the 
sister on the one hand from the children of the father’s rae 
sister and of the mother’s brother on the other hand, and from the 
(4) the children of a man’s sister from his brother's children R43" 
and from his own, the Tongan form of the classificatory Hawaiian 
system differs both from the Hawaiian and from the” 
Rotuman form and has thereby preserved, if Dr. Rivers 
is right and Morgan wrong, a number of older features 
which are now lost in the other two.’ 

§ 6. Traces of Totemism in Tikopia 

_ Further, Dr. Rivers obtained fuller particulars as to the animal 
animal gods of Tikopia, about which, as we saw, the French esti 
explorer J. Dumont D’Urville had already briefly reported.’ 

Tikopia is a tiny island about a hundred and twenty miles 

east of the Santa Cruz group. In spite of its neighbourhood 

to Melanesia, the inhabitants of the island are Polynesian 

by blood, language, and institutions. They apply the name 

of god (atua) to a number of animals which may not be 

1 L. H. Morgan, Systems of Con- the Classificatory System of Relation- 
sanguinity and Affinity of the Human ship,” Anthropological Essays presented 
Family, pp. 573 $99- to E. B. Tylor (Oxford, 1907), p. 314. 

2 See above, pp. 170 sgg., and 
W. H. R. Rivers, ‘On the Origin of 3 See above, p. 176. 

The four 
sections of 
Tikopia 
and their 
atiua, 

Belief in 
descent 
from thes, 
sacred 
animals. 

180 TOTEMISM IN POLYNESIA CHAP. 

eaten, and they use the same term in speaking of an 
ancestor. Some of the divine animals are revered by the 
whole people, but others only by the members of one or 
other of the four sections into which the population is 
divided. The names of the four sections are the Kavika, 
the Taumako, the Tafua, and the Fangalele. The Taumako 
may not eat the sea-eel (¢oke) nor a bird called rufe. The 
Tafua.may not eat the fresh-water eel (Za), the flying fox 
(peka), and the turtle (fox). The two latter animals are 
forbidden food to the whole community ; but they are held 
to be especially sacred to the Tafua. The Fangalele may 
not eat a small black bird called soko nor a fish called one. 
The Kavika may not eat the octopus (/eke); but it is also 
tabooed to the whole people. Similarly the sting-ray (/a7) 
may not be eaten by any one. A man of a division may 
not kill the animal which he is forbidden to eat. If one of 
the Fangalele caught an ove fish, he usually threw it back 
into the water; but he might give it to a man of another 
division. On the other hand Dr. Rivers was told that if 
a man of one division killed the sacred animal of another 
division he would fall sick and would then send for a man 
of the division to which the animal belonged, and the man 
would come and call upon the sacred creature (a¢ua) to 
make the patient well." 

Further, says Dr. Rivers, “it was quite clear that there 

g was a belief in descent from the animal azua. This presents 

difficulties when a division has more than one aéua, but 
according to my informant in some cases a division had 
more than one animal ancestor. He said that the Kavika 
were descended from the octopus, and the Taumako from 
the eel, the story being that in the old times a man of 
each division died and became an octopus in the one 
case and an eel in the other. The Tafua believe chiefly 
in their descent from the flying fox, but they also believe 
that a second man of this division became after death 
a fresh-water eel. Similarly, two men of the Fangalele 
became animals, one the ome fish and the other the 
moko bird. Thus the belief is not so much in descent 

1 W. H.R. Rivers, “‘Totemism in ‘the Anthropological Institute, xxxix. 
Polynesia and Melanesia,” Jowrnal of (1909) pp. 160 sg. 

~ 

VII TRACES OF TOTEMISM IN TIKOPIA 181 

from an animal as in descent from a man who became 
an animal. 

“In addition to these animals there are also plant ata. Sacred 
One of these is a plant with large leaves like the taro, ene 
,called ape, which is sacred to the Kavika and may not 
be eaten by the people of that division while free to the 
rest of the community. This plant seems to belong to 
the same category as the animal atza, and it will be 
noticed that it belongs to a division which but for this 
would have only one sacred object. Three of the divisions 
have also vegetable ava which seem to belong to a different 
category. These are the yam, the taro, and the coconut, 
belonging respectively to the Kavika, the Taumako, and 
the Tafua. These plants might, however, be eaten by all, 
but the Kavika do not like to see any one cut the taro 
with a knife, and they scrape off the skin with the shell 
of a mussel. In this case it was said that it was the top 
of the yam which was especially regarded as the atua. 
Similarly, the Taumako do not like to’ see the taro cut 
with a knife, and here again it was a special part, the eye 
of the taro, which was regarded as the a¢ua. The Tafua 
also objected to a knife being used to open a coconut, 
and always used a stone, This restriction on the use of 
a knife is of course recent, and is an interesting example 
of the feeling that sacred objects should not be subjected 
to usages which have come from without into the ordinary 
life of a people. 

“The special relation between each division of the Customs as 
people and their sacred plant is shown in the planting ‘? Piantns 

the sacred 

season, the first yams being planted by the chief of the plants and 
Kavika, while the chief of the Taumako plants the first taro. ran Aig 
The chiefs of the respective divisions are also the first to 
eat their sacred vegetables. In the case of the coconut the 
special privilege of the Tafua is that its chief has the power 
of imposing a ¢apu. The Fangalele have no plant eéza, 
but their chief assists the chief of the Kavika in planting 
the first yams.” * 
Although exogamy is not found in Tikopia, the inhabi- 

low. H. R. Rivers, “‘Totemism in ‘he Aoyal Anthropological Institute, 
Polynesia and Melanesia,” Journal of — xxxix. (1909) pp. £61 sg. 

Dr. Rivers 
on totems 
in Tikopia. 

The classi- 
ficatory 
system of 
relation- 
ship in 
Tikopia. 

The 
Tikopian 
form of 
the classifi- 
catory syS- 
tem agrees 
with the 

182 TOTEMISM IN POLYNESIA CHAP, 

tants being free to marry members of their own or of other 

divisions, Dr. Rivers believes that the sacred animals of the 

divisions and the sacred age plant of the Kavika division 

are probably true totems; while with regard to the sacred, 

plants—the yam, taro, and coco-nut—of the other three , 
divisions, he inclines to think that their association with 

the divisions springs from some beliefs quite independent 

of totemism.’ 

The natives of Tikopia have the classificatory system 
of relationship? Thus in the generation above his own 
aman applies the same term fa to his father and to his 
father’s brothers; and he applies the same term mau to 
his mother and to his mother’s sisters. In his own genera- 
tion he applies the same term Zaza to his brothers and 
to all his male first cousins, whether the sons of his 
father’s brothers, or of his father’s sisters, or of his mother’s 
brothers, or of his mother’s sisters. He applies the same 
term ave to his sisters and to all his female first cousins, 
whether the daughters of his father’s brothers, or of his 
father’s sisters, or of his mother’s brothers, or of his mother’s 
sisters. A man calls his wife mofine, and she calls him 
matua. He calls his wife’s sisters by the same name (¢azna) 
which he applies to his brothers ; and she calls her husband’s 
brothers by the same name (¢azvza) which she applies to her 
brothers. In the generation below his own a man applies 
the same term fama to his sons and daughters and to all 
his nephews and nieces, the sons and daughters of his 
brothers and sisters. Similarly a woman applies the same 
term ¢ama to her sons and daughters and to all her nephews 
and nieces, the sons and daughters of her brothers and 
sisters, 

Thus the Tikopian form of the classificatory system 
has departed from the original pattern in several respects. 
First, it distinguishes the wife’s sister from the wife and the 
husband’s brother from the husband. Second, it confuses 
first cousins, the children of two brothers or of two sisters 

1 W. H. R. Rivers, ‘* Totemism in 2 For the following particulars as to 
Polynesia and Melanesia,” Journal of the classificatory terms of relationship 
the Royal Anthropological Institute, in Tikopia I am indebted to the 
xxxix. (1909) p. 162. courtesy of Dr. W. H. R. Rivers. 

VII TRACES OF TOTEMISM IN TIKOPIA 183 

on the one hand, with first cousins, the children of a brother Rotuman 
and of a sister respectively on the other hand, calling them aaa 
all “ brothers” and “sisters” indifferently. Third, it confuses from the 
a man’s children with his sister’s children, and a woman’s seed 
children with her brother’s children. In all these respects 
the Tikopian system agrees with the Rotuman; and we 
have seen reason to think that all these deviations from the 
original pattern are signs which mark an incipient break- 

down of the classificatory system.’ 

§ 7. Totemism in the Pelew Islands 

Another part of Polynesia, in the widest sense of the Exogamous 
term, where pure totemism or something practically in- (375 Wi", 
distinguishable from it has been recorded is the group of maternal 
the Pelew Islands, which lies at the extreme western (o"pucn 
limit of the Polynesian area, about midway between the Islands. 
Caroline Islands on the east and the Philippine Islands 
on the west. The natives belong to that branch of the 
Polynesian stock which is called Micronesian. They are 
divided into a large number of exogamous families or clans 
(6lay) with descent in the maternal line. In an ordinary 
village there will be members of a score of such clans living 
together? Each clan has its sacred animal, bird, or fish, in 
which perhaps, though this is not certain, the souls of dead 
members of the clan may formerly have been supposed to 
lodge. Among these sacred creatures or clan totems, as 
we may call them, are sea-eels, crabs, fish, and parrots.’ 
Further, each district or village has its god, and all these 
district or village gods have their sacred animals, which are 

generally fish, Among the sacred animals of the village 

1 See above, pp. 170 sq. 

2 J. Kubary, Die soctalen Etnricht- 
ungen der FPelauer (Berlin, 1885), 
pp. 33-36; za. ‘Die Religion der 
Pelauer,” in A. Bastian’s Allerled aus 
Volks- und Menschenkunde (Berlin, 
1888), i. 16. 

3 J. Kubary, ‘‘ Die Religion der 
Pelauer,” in A. Bastian’s Alerlez aus 
Volks- und Menschenkunde, i. 12-16, 
20 sqg., 38, 68. The native name for 

these clan totems is alia, adalsahel, 
or asing?. Of these terms the first 
(Aaléd) seems to be the most general 
and to be equivalent to “god.” 
According to Professor K. Semper 
these 4al/ids or sacred animals are 
‘absolutely identical with the sofems 
of the Americans, the Abongs of the 
Australians, etc.” The word ald, he 
tells us, means “holy.” See K. 
Semper, Die Palau-Insein (Leipsic, 
1873), pp. 87 note, 193 sg. 

Classifi- 
catory 
system in 

Polynesia. 

184 TOTEMISM IN POLYNESIA CHAP, VI 

gods are the shark, the ray-fish, the Platyurus fasciatus, the 
Dysporus, the Birgus latro, a species of crab, the puffin, and a 
species of night-heron (Vycticorax manilensis). According to 
Mr, J. Kubary,-our principal authority on the Pelew Islands, 
the sacred animals of the village gods have certainly been 
developed out of the sacred animals of the families or clans,’ 
If he ig right, the analogy with the Samoan system of 
family and village gods, each of them often incarnate in a 
species of animals, strongly suggests that in Samoa also the 
village gods with their animal incarnations have been 
developed out of the family gods with their animal incarna- 
tions, and that these animal incarnations themselves were 
originally totems. The inference, if it is sound, points to 
totemism as the origin of all those cases of sacred animals 
associated with families which have met us in other parts of 
Polynesia.” 

Lastly, the classificatory system of relationship, which 
appears to be found all over Polynesia, raises a presumption 
that the Polynesians or their ancestors were formerly divided 
into exogamous classes.® 

1 J. Kubary, ‘“*Die Religion der 
Pelauer,” in A. Bastian’s Adlerlei aus 
Volks- und Menschenkunde, i, 20, 
38 59. 

2 That totemism and exogamy were 
formerly prevalent all over Polynesia 
appears to have been the view also of 
the experienced observer J. Kubary, 
though he uses neither of these terms. 
See J. Kubary, Dee soctalen Einricht- 
ungen der Pelauer, pp. 35 5q-3 ed. 
“Die Religion der Pelauer,” in A. 
Bastian’s Allerlet aus Volks- und 
Menschenkunde, i, 12 sg. 

3 As to the classificatory system of 

relationship in Polynesia, see above, 
PP. 169 sgg., 174 sg., 178 59., 182 59., 
and L. H. Morgan, Systems of Con- 
Sanguinity and Affinity of the Human 
Family, pp. 448 s9q.. 517 s99., 568 
$99.3 td., Ancient Society (London, 
1877), pp. 401 sgg. As to the classifi- 
catory system of relationship among 
the Maoris, see further Elsdon Best, 
“* Maori Nomenclature,” Journal of the 
Anthropological Institute, xxxii. (1902) 
pp. 385-190, 198-201; zd, ‘* Maori 
Marriage Customs,” 7vansactions and 
Proceedings of the New Zealand Insti- 
tute, xxxvi. (1993) PP- 24-28. 

CHAPTER IX 
TOTEMISM IN INDONESIA 

§ 1. Totemism and Exogamy in Sumatra 

THE interior of the large islands of Sumatra, Borneo, 
Celebes, and other lesser islands of the Malay Archipelago 
is inhabited by a race of men to whom the name of 
Indonesian is now given. They resemble the Malays in 
appearance, speak dialects of the same family of speech, 
and, like the Malays, are for the most pdrt tillers of the 
soil.’ The Dutch writers, to whose laudable diligence we 
owe many valuable accounts of the native races of the 
Indian Archipelago, commonly call the aborigines of these 
islands by the name of Alfoors, to distinguish them from the 
Malays, and it might be convenient to adopt this designation 
in English, reserving the name Indonesian as a general 

The 
Indonesian 

race, 

term to include the two different yet kindred races. Among The Battas 

these aborigines perhaps the best known are the Battas 
or Bataks in the interior of Sumatra, who, while they 
practise agriculture and cattle-breeding, live in well-built 
houses, and even possess an ancient literature written in 
an alphabet of their own, are nevertheless addicted to 
cannibalism in a peculiarly ferocious form,? and have also 
preserved a system of totemism and exogamy. Their 
principal seat, from which the various tribes have spread,* 
1 J. Deniker, Ze Races of Man,pp. literature and alphabet of the Battas, 
486-488. see F. Junghuhn, of. czt. ii. 254 sgg. ; 
2 F. Junghuhn, Dee Battalinder auf WW. Marsden, Hestory of Sumatra 
Sumatra (Berlin, 1847), ii. 155 sgg.3 (London, 1811), pp. 200 sg. 
J. Freiherr von Brenner, Besuch bet 3 J. B. Neumann, ‘Het Pane- en 

den Kannibalen Sumatras (Wiirzburg, Bila- stroomgebied op het eiland 
1894), pp. 205 sgg7. As to the Sumatra,” 77dschrift van het Neder- 

185 

of Sumatra, 

186 TOTEMISM IN INDONESIA CHAP. 

is Lake Toba, a great sheet of dark blue water enclosed by 
high steep banks, which are broken into winding bays.! 

Exogamous The Battas are divided into a number of exogamous clans 

clans 

( margas) 
of the 
Battas. 

called margas or mergas with descent in the male line ; in other 
words, husband and wife must always be’ members of 
different clans and the children belong to the clan of their 
father, not to the clan of their mother. The clans are 
further divided into subclans, which often dweil far apart 
from each other.? There is no local division between the 
clans; members of different clans live mixed up together, 
though certain clans predominate in certain districts. 
There are said to be five principal clans which are 
represented in all the Batta tribes. Members of the same 
clan regard each other as kinsfolk; on a journey a man 
will receive hospitality in a strange village from a member 
of his clan. The relationship between members of the 
same clan (s#arga or merga) is regarded as very close; 
according to the generation to which they respectively 
belong they are to each other brothers and sisters, fathers 
and children, aunts and nieces, and so on. Not only is 
marriage forbidden between members of the same clan, but 
sexual intercourse between such persons is viewed as incest 

in the highest degree and 

Tandsch Aardrijkskundig Genootschap, 
Tweede Serie, iii. Afdeeling, Meer 
uitgebreide Artikelen, No. 1 (Amster- 
dam, 1886), p. 9. 

1 J. Freiherr von Brenner, Besuch 
bet den Kannibalen Sumatras (Wirz- 
burg, 1894), p. 70. 

21, de Backer, L’Archipel Indien 
(Paris, 1874), p. 470; G. W. W. C. 
Baron van Hoévell, ‘“Iets over ’t 
oorlogvoeren der Batta’s,” Z7yjdschrift 
woor Nederlandsch Indit, N.S. vii. 
(1878) p. 434, note!; G. A, Wilken, 
Over de Verwantschap en het huwelijks- 
en erfrecht bij de volken van het maletsche 
ras (Amsterdam, 1883), pp. 20 sg., 36 
(reprinted from De IJndische Gids 
for May 1883); J. B. Neumann, 
**Het Pane- en Bila- stroomgebied op 
het eiland Sumatra,” 7idschrift van 
het = Nederlandsch Aardrijkskundig 
Genootschap, Tweede Serie, iii. Afdee- 
ling, Meer uitgebreide Artikelen, No. 
3 (Amsterdam, 1886), pp. 473, 491; 

Further, 

J. Freiherr von Brenner, Besuch bef 
den Kannibalen Sumatras, p. 1973 
P. A. L. E. van Dijk, ‘‘Eenige Aanteek- 
eningen omtrent de verschillenden 
Stammen (Margas) en de Stamverde- 
ling bij de Battaks,” Z7dschrift voor 
Indische Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde, 
xxxviii. (1895) pp. 296 sg. 

3 W. Volz, ‘*Die Battak - Lander 

‘in Zentral-Sumatra,” Zeitschrift der 

Gesellschaft fiir Erdkunde zu Berlin, 
1907, p. 685. 

4 M. Joustra, ‘‘ Het leven, de zeden 
en gewoonten der Bataks,” Aededeel- 
ingen van wege het Nederlandsche 
Zendelinggenootschap, xlvi. (1902) pp. 
388 sg.; J. B. Neumann, “ Het Pane- 
en Bila- stroomgebied op het eiland 
Sumatra,” Zijdschrift van het Neder- 
landsch Aardripkskundig Genootschap, 
Tweede Serie, iii, Afdeeling, Meer 
uitgebreide Artikelen, No. 2 (Amster- 
dam, 1886), p. 242, and No. 3, 

P. 491. 

severely punished.‘ 

1X TOTEMISM AND EXOGAMY IN SUMATRA 187 

each clan has its sacred animal or plant, which the members Totems 
of the clan are forbidden to eat, and some of the clans are pains . 
named after their sacred animals or totems. Thus the clan 
Nasoetion is forbidden to eat the flesh of a white buffalo 
(horbo badar); the clan Si Regar and its subdivisions may 
not eat the flesh of goats; the clan Harahap and its 
subordinate septs may not partake of white turtle doves 
(dalam); the clan Babijat is prohibited from eating tigers, 
panthers, and such creatures; the clan Tompoel is debarred 
from eating dogs, the clan Si Pospos from eating cats, the 
clan Sagala from eating apes ; and members of the Hasiboean 
clan may make no use of paddy-melons.' Further, the 
members of the Guru Singa clan are forbidden to partake 
of the flesh of the hornbill ;2 members of the Kataran clan 
may not eat locusts; and the flesh of deer and doves is 
tabooed to the Gersang Sahing clan.? Various reasons are Reasons 
assigned by the Battas for the observance of these totemic #874 
prohibitions. Sometimes they say that they are descended totemic 
from their totemic animals and that their souls transmigrate “°° 
into these creatures after death ; sometimes they allege that 
one of the animals saved the life of their forefathers or 
conferred other obligations on them.* Thus the members 
of the Kataran clan say that once upon a time, when their 
ancestor Si Kataran had hidden himself in a field from his 
enemies, a locust alighted on his head and by its cheery 
chirping beguiled his pursuers into the belief that there 
was no man in the field ; hence no member of the.clan will 
now eat a locust. Again, members of the Ginting clan 
refuse to partake of the flesh of a white buffalo because they 

1 J. B. Neumann, ‘‘ Het Pane- en 
Bila- stroomgebied op het eiland 
Sumatra,” Zijdschrift van het Neder- 
landsch Aardrijkskundig Genootschap, 
Tweede Serie, iii. Afdeeling, Meer 
uitgebreide Artikelen, No. 2 (Amster- 
dam, 1886), pp. 311 sg.3 td. 2. 
Tweede Serie, iv. Afdeeling, Meer 
uitgebreide Artikelen, No. 1 (Amster- 
dam, 1887), pp. 8 sg. 

2jJ. Freiherr von Brenner, Zin 
Besuch bet den Kannibalen Sumatras, 
p. 199; M. Joustra, ‘Naar het 
landschap Goenoeng,” Jfededeelingen 

van wege het Nederlandsche Zendeling- 
genootschap, xlv. (1901) p. 81. 

3 J. Freiherr von Brenner, Zin 
Besuch bet den Kannibalen Sumatras, 

pp. 198, 199. 
4 J. B. Neumann, Wc. ; J. E. (B. 7] 
Neumann, ‘‘Kemali, Pantang en 

Réboe bij de Karo-Bataks,” 7ijdschrift 
voor Indische Taal- Land- en Volken- 
kunde, x\viii. (1906) p. 512. 

6 J. Freiherr von Brenner, Zzx 
Besuch bet den Kannibalen Sumatras, 
p- 199. 

Classi- 
ficatory 
terms of re- 
lationship 
among the 
Rattas. 

Cousin 
marriages. 

Rules of 
avoidance 
between 
brother 

188 TOTEMISM IN INDONESIA CHAP. 

say that some of their ancestors were suckled and reared by 
a white buffalo cow ;! and members of a dog clan abstain 
from eating dogs because they believe that a dog saved the 
life of one of their forefathers.? 

There are indications that the Battas employ the classi- 
ficatory system of relationship. Thus we are told that 
members of the same exogamous clan are, according to 
their respective age and sex, brothers and sisters, or fathers 
and children, or aunts and nephews, etc., to each other, even 
when the relationships thus expressed are not those of 
blood ; and further, that the terms father and mother, etc., 
are used in a much looser sense by the Battas than by us 
in cases where the kinship is very remote.® Another hint 
of the classificatory system of relationship is that a man 
has a right to marry the daughter of his mother’s brother, 
and the girl very seldom refuses him, even rejecting the 
offers of richer and handsomer suitors in order to marry her 
cousin. Such marriages between cousins are very customary, 
indeed they are regarded as desirable and normal. Ifa 
man does not wed the daughter of his mother’s brother, his 
uncle may take offenge, nay, some people even say that 
the gods (dibata) are angry. On the other hand, marriage 
with the daughter of a father’s sister is not only forbidden but 
punishable.* The same distinction between marriage with 
the daughter of a mother’s brother, which is allowed and even 
recommended, and marriage with the daughter of a father’s 
sister, which is forbidden, will meet us again in Sumatra.’ 

Like other peoples with the classificatory system of 
relationship the Battas observe certain rules of avoidance 
in regard to near relations by blood or marriage ; and we 

ij. Freiherr von Brenner, Ex 

Besuch bei den Kannibalen Sumatras, 
p- 201; M. Joustra, ‘‘Naar het 
landschap Goenoeng,” \/ededeelingen 
van wese het Nederlandsche Zendeling- 

genootschap, xlv. (1901) p. 81. 

2 J. Freiherr von Brenner, of. c7t. 
p. 200. 

3 M. Joustra, ‘* Het leven, de zeden 
en gewoonten der Bataks,” Afededeel- 
ingen van urge het Nederlandsche 
Zendelinggenootschap, xvi. (1902) pp. 
389, 391. 

4 J. B, Neumann, “« Het Pane- en 
Bila- stroomgebied op het eiland 
Sumatra,” Z7ydschrift van het Neder- 
landsch Aardrijkskundig Genootschap, 
Tweede Serie, iii. Afdeeling, Meer 
uitgebreide Artikelen, No. 2 (Amster- 
dam, 1886), p. 243, No. 3, p. 4923 
M. Joustra, ‘ Het leven, de zeden en 
gewoonten der Bataks,” J/ededeelingen 
van wege het Nederlandsche Zendeling- 
genootschap, xivi. (1902) p. 390. 

5 See below, p. I9I. 

IX TOTEMISM AND EXOGAMY IN SUMATRA 189 

are informed that such avoidance springs not from the and sister, 
strictness but from the looseness of théir moral practice. ae. 
A Batta, it is said, assumes that a solitary meeting of a man mother and 
with a woman leads to an improper intimacy between them. °°” 
But at the same time he believes that incest or the sexual 
intercourse of near relations excites the anger of the gods 

and entails calamitics of all sorts. Hence near relations 

are obliged to avoid each other lest they should succumb to 
temptation. A Batta, for example, would think it shocking 

were a brother to escort his sister to an evening party. 

Even in the presence of others a Batta brother and sister 

feel embarrassed. If one of them comes into the house, the 

other will go away. Further, a father may never be alone 

in the house with his daughter, nor a mother with her son. 

A man may never speak to his mother-in-law nor a woman 

to her father-in-law. The Dutch missionary who reports 

these customs adds that he is sorry to say that from what 

he knows of the Battas he believes the maintenance of most 

of these rules to be very necessary. For the same reason, 

he tells us, as soon as Batta lads have teached the agé 

of puberty they are no longer allowed to sleep in the family 

house but are sent away to pass the night in a separate 
building (djambon) ; and similarly as soon as a man loses 

his wife by death he is excluded from the house.’ 

On the death of a man his wives pass with his property Custom 
to his heir, who is his younger brother or eldest son. If the he 
brother desires to marry them, the women have no right 
to refuse. In regard to sons, the custom has changed. 
Marriage with a stepmother is now forbidden. Formerly, 
the eldest son might marry his stepmother as soon as his 
father died. His own mother, when the eldest son was heir, 
might either remain a widow or go to her late husband's 

' M. Joustra, ‘‘ Het leven, de zeden 
en gewoonten der Bataks,” .Wededee/- 
ingen van were het Nederlandsche 

Nederlandsche Zendelingvenootschap, 
xlix. (1905) pp. 123 sg., 125. From 
the latter writer we learn that a man 

Zendelinggenootschap, x\vi. (1902) pp. 
391 sg. As to the avoidance between 
a man and his daughter-in-law and be- 
tween a woman and her son-in-law, see 
further J. H. Meerwaldt, ‘‘ Gebruiken 
der Bataks in het maatschappelijk 
leven,” <Alededeelingen van wege het 

and his daughter-in-law are expected 
to communicate with each other only 
through a third person, and that he 
may not utter her name. In like 
manner a woman may not mention the 
name of her son-in-law. 

Burial 
according 
to totem. 

Totemism 
and exo- 
gamy in 
Man- 
dailing. 

190 TOTEMISM IN INDONESIA CHAP. 

younger brother as she chose. If her deceased husband had 
no younger brother or he refused to have her, she , might 
marry another man with the consent of her son. This 
custom is still observed.’ In one Batta tribe all the children 
whom a woman has by her second marriage are reckoned 
the children of the first husband.” 

Members of -the various totem clans are buried in 
different positions. Thus members of the Harahap clan, 
which has wild turtle-doves for its totem, are buried with the 
head to the west; members of the Si Regar clan, which 
have goats for their totem, are interred with the head to the 
east ; and members of the Dadi clan are laid in the grave 
with their heads to the north.2? We have seen that a similar 
custom was observed by the Wotjobaluk tribe of Australia.‘ 

Exogamy and apparently totemism are also found in 
Mandailing, a district on the west coast of Sumatra. Here 
the population is divided into exogamous clans (sargas), 
each of which traces its descent from a male ancestor. 
‘Marriage within the clan (#arga) is forbidden and viewed 
as incest. In some cases the prohibition of marriage 
extends over a group of clans, all of which regard themselves 
as related in the male line. The names of nine such 
exogamous clans are recorded. Children belong to the 
clan of their father. It is not easy to ascertain the origin 
of these divisions. The people themselves, when asked, 

Reverence can generally give no answer. However, the members of 

shewn by 
members 

one clan, called Parindoeri, assert that they are descended 

of the tiger from a tiger, and at the present day when a tiger is shot 

clan for 
tigers. 

the women of the clan are bound to offer betel to the 
dead beast. When members of this clan come upon the 
tracks of a tiger, they must, as a mark of homage, enclose 
them with three little sticks. Further, it is believed that the 
tiger will not attack or lacerate his kinsmen, the members 

1 J.B. Neumann, “ Het Pane- en Bila- 2 F, Warneck, ‘‘Das Eherecht bei 
stroomgebied op het eiland Sumatra,” den Toba-Batak,” Bzdragen tot de 
Tijdschrift van het Nederlandsch Aar- Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde van Neder- 
drijkskundig Genootschap,Tweede Serie, /andsch-Indié, \iii. (1901) p. 542. 

III. Afdeeling, Meer uitgebreide Arti- 3 . cit. DP. 503. 
kelen, No. 3 (Amsterdam, 1886), pp. J.B Nem renee 
487 sg. 4 Above, vol. i. pp. 454 599: 

1X TOTEMISM AND EXOGAMY IN SUMATRA 191 

of this clan. Marriage between two persons of the same 

clan has occasionally happened. Such an event is regarded 

as a disgrace to the community in which it takes place, and 

the guilty couple are banished from it. The husband is 
obliged to sacrifice a buffalo, a cow, or a goat for the 
common weal. When a husband dies, his widow goes to The 
his younger brother or other male kinsman by blood, who eaten 
almost always marries her. But an older brother may not married by 
marry her; such a marriage would be regarded as incest. } tha 
The children of brothers are reckoned brothers and sisters, of the 
Marriage with the daughter of a mother’s brother is regarded nae 
as very desirable,. but marriage with the daughter of a marriages. 
father’s sister is forbidden! This extended application of 

the terms brother and sister, and this preference for marriage 

with a first cousin, the daughter of a mother’s brother, are so 

many indications of the classificatory system of relationship. 

The rule that a man’s widow is inherited by his younger 
brother, but never by his elder brother, is a very characteristic 

feature of the north-central tribes of Australia,? and, as we 

shall see presently, it is very commonly observed in India. 

Further, traces of a totemic system may perhaps be Traces of 
detected among the Gajos, a people who inhabit a district ae 
of Northern Sumatra inland from Achin. They are divided Gajos. 
into families or clans, the members of which are forbidden 
to eat certain animals or other food. Such taboos are 
always explained by an oath or curse of an ancestor who 
swore the oath or uttered the curse in consequence of some 
event recorded by tradition. Thus the fish /okot is not eaten 
by an older branch of the clan of Petiambang. The flesh 
of the white buffalo (Zoro djégoz) is tabooed to a particular 
part of the same clan, whose foreign origin is still faintly 
remembered. The wood-pigeon is forbidden to another clan 
in Gajo Loeds. In Pepareq there are people who may not 

1H. Ris, ‘ De onderafdeeling Klein Heyting, ‘‘ Beschrijving der Onderaf- 
Mandailing Oeloe en Pahantanen hare deeling Groot-Mandeling en Batang- 
bevolking met witzondering van de natal,” 7ijdschrift van het Nederlandsch 
Oeloes,” Bijdragen tot de Taal-Land- Aardrijkskundig Genootschap, Tweede 
en Volkenkunde van Nederlandsch- Serie, xiv. (1897) pp. 245 5¢-, 257. 
Indié, xivi. (1896) pp. 472 ae 490s 2 Spencer and Gillen, Northern 
492, 493, 494, 508 sg.; Th. Tribes of Central Australia, p. 510. 

Subdivision from the rest. 

of a clan 
and 

192 TOTEMISM IN INDONESIA CHAP. 

eat the shoots of bamboos. The inhabitants of Doeren may 
not use dongra leaves as plates for rice, etc.’ The Gajo 
clans appear to be exogamous with descent in the male 
line.2 When a clan grows too numerous to live together, 
part of it will choose a leader of their own and break off 
After the separation the members of the 
two groups or clans thus formed no longer call each other 

deliberate brothers, but their common descent is regarded as a bar to 

abolition of 
the rule of 

exogamy. 

Exogamy 
with 
paternal 
descent in 
Southern 
Sumatra, 

marriage between them unless they mutually agree to remove 
the bar and solemnly to announce that henceforth the two 
groups or clans may take wives from each other. This 
deliberate abolition of exogamy receives different names in 
different places2 When we find exogamous clans with 
prohibited foods we may reasonably suspect the existence, 
present or past, of totemism. The Gajos, indeed, now 
profess Islam, but their Mohammedan creed is mixed with 
old pagan superstitions.‘ 

While these are all the certain or probable cases of 
totemism which I have noted in Sumatra, the institution 
of exogamy both with paternal and with maternal descent 
is found in other parts of that great island. Thus the 
Pasemahers of Southern Sumatra are divided into five clans 
called swmbuz; marriage is not permitted between members 
of the same clan (szzmduz), and children belong to the clan of 
their father. If a man marries a woman of his own clan, 
the people believe that the gods will punish with destruc- 
tion the guilty pair and their offspring.” Each Pasemaher 
clan inhabits a separate district, so that local exogamy 
here coexists and coincides with clan exogamy.® Again, 

Land- en Volkenkunde van Neder- 
landsch - Indié, 5th Series, vol. vi.) 
Each sumbui is subdivided into a 

1 C. Snouck Hurgronje, Het Cajé- 
land en sijne Bewoners (Batavia, 1903), 
p- 328. 

2C. Snouck Hurgronje, of. <é. 
pp. 268, 271 sg. 
3 C. Snouck Hurgronje, of. cé¢. pp. 
79 59: 
# C. Snouck Hurgronje, of. cit. p. 
27. 
; 3 G. A. Wilken, Over het Huwelijks- 
en Erfrecht bij de Volken van Zuid- 
Sumatra (The Hague, 1891), pp. 6-8 
(reprinted from Bijdragen tot de Taal- 

number of sku, and each suku has a 
number of villages (dszn). Com- 
pare G. G. Batten, Glimpses of the 
Eastern Archipelago (Singapore, 1894), 
p. 104. 

6 G. A. Wilken, Over de Verwant- 
schap en het Huwelijks- en Erfrecht 
bij de Volken van het Maleische Ras 
(Amsterdam, 1883), p. 13 (reprinted 
from De Indische Gids, May 1883). 

1x TOTEMISM AND EXOGAMY IN SUMATRA 

193 

the inhabitants of Lebong, a district of Southern Sumatra, are 
similarly divided into exogamous clans (sukz), with paternal 
descent ; in other words, no man may marry a woman of his 
own clan (swkz), and children belong to the clan of their father. 
The father is the head of the family, and his sons are his heirs.” 

On the other hand exogamy combined with maternal Exogamy 
descent is found among the Menangkabaw Malays, who With 
inhabit chiefly the province of Upper Padang in the interior descent 
of Sumatra. These people are divided into a number of = Sumat. 
clans (suku): no man may marry a woman of his own clan 1>¢ Me™ 

angkabaw 

(suku), and the children belong to the clan of their mother, mens 
Members of the different clans live side by side in the same Upper 

district. 

It seems that the Malay race was originally 

Padang 
province 

divided into four clans (swku), which have multiplied by are divided 

subdivision. 

No settlement is thought complete which does 

into exo- 
gamous 

not contain members of all the four original clans, the names clans 
of which are Koto, Piliang, Bodi, and Tjeniago. Neverthe- Oe 
less, though members of the different clans live in the same inherited 
village, each clan has its separate quarter ,or ward of the eae 
village, where it dwells apart from the others. There is a 
legend that four king’s sons married respectively a woman, a 

tiger, a dog, and a cat, and so became the ancestors of four 
different clans, but these clans appear to be local. A trace 

of totemism may perhaps be detected in the legend of their 
descent? It is reckoned incest if a man marries a woman 

of his own clan (swuku). However, young people of the 

same clan, but not related to each other by blood, sometimes 
marry for love, and payment of a fine suffices to condone the 
offence. Amongst these Malays of the inland district of 
Padang a woman at marriage remains in her mother’s 
family and her mother’s house, where she is visited by her 
husband by day or by night. The two do not live together, 

for the husband also remains after marriage in his mother’s 

1 A. L. van Hasselt, Volksbeschrij- 
ving van Midden-Sumatra (Leyden, 
1882), pp. 214 sg., 2523; G. A. 
Wilken, Over het Huwelijks-en Erfrecht 
bij de Volken van Lutd- Sumatra 
(The Hague, 1891), p. 8. : 

2 A. L. van Hasselt, Vodksbeschri7- 
wing var Aidden-Sumatra, pp. 182 
sg., 214; G. A. Wilken, Over de 

VOL, II 

Verwantschap en het Huwelijks- en 
Erfrecht bij deVolken van het Maleische 
Ras (Amsterdam, 1883), pp. 10 5¢., 
18, 20, 24-26, 

3 J. C. van Eerde, ‘‘Een hawelijk 
bij de Minangkabausche Maliers,” 
Tijdschrift voor Indische Taal- Land- 
en Volkenkunde, xiiv. (1901) p- 393. 

oO 

Husband 

and wifedo tq accommodate it. 

not dwell 

194 

house. 

TOTEMISM IN INDONESIA 

CHAP. 

Asawoman’s family increases, the house is enlarged 
Thus any one of the long houses in 

together; Which the Menangkabaw Malays live will be found to 
contain only persons descended from the same mother, 
namely children with their mothers, their mothers’ sisters 
and mothers’ brothers, their grandmothers, their grand- 

each con- 

tinues after 

marriage 

to live in 

his or her 
mother’s 

house. 

Exogamous 

clans with 
maternal 
descent 
among the 
Orang- 
Mamag of 
Indragiri. 

mothers’ sisters and brothers, and so on. 

The husbands of 

the women, the fathers and grandfathers of the children, 
do not dwell in the house; they continue to live with their 

brothers and sisters in their mother’s home. 

Hence natur- 

ally enough the head of the household and of the family, 
who has the title of #zamaq, is not the woman’s husband, but 

her eldest brother. 

He stands to his sister’s children in the 

same social position in which amongst us a father stands to 
his own children, enjoying the privileges and incurring the 
obligations of paternity. When a man dies, his property 
passes, not to his children, but first to his brothers and sisters, 

and next to his sisters’ children. 

When a woman dies, her 

property passes to her children or, if she has no children, to 

her brothers and sisters.) 

Further, the Malay inhabitants of 

Mapat-Toenggoel ang Rantau-Binoewang, two districts in the 
north-east of Sumatra, are similarly divided into exogamous 
clans (suku) with descent in the maternal line: no man may 
marry a woman of his own clan (swku), and the children 

belong to the clan of their mother. 

In Rintau-Binoewang 

a man at marriage goes to live with his wife’s parents.” 
Again, exogamy combined with maternal descent is 
practised by the natives of the Indragiri district on the 

eastern side of Sumatra. 

Here the Orang-Mamaq are 

divided into a number of exogamous clans called swku, each 
of which is understood to comprise all descendants exclusively 
in the female line from the same ancestress of the stock. 
The members of a clan (swku) live together and are very 

closely united to one another. 

1A. W. PP. Verkerk Pistorius, 
Studien over de inlandsche Huishouding 
tn de Padangsche Bovenlande (Zalt- 
Bommel, 1871), pp. 42-45 ; A. L. van 
Hasselt, F v/Asbeschrijving van Midden- 
Sumatra, pp. 245-247; G. A. Wilken, 
Over de Verwantschap en het Huwelijks- 

Each clan is answerable for 
> 

en Erfrecht bij de Volken van het 

Maleische Ras (Amsterdam, 1833), pp. 

24-27. 

2G. A. Wilken, De Verbretding van 
het Matriarchat op Sumatra (The 
Hague, 1891), pp. 14 59. 

Ix TOTEMISM AND EXOGAMY IN SUMATRA 195 

the deeds of all its members. Marriage within the clan is 
forbidden. Man and woman after marriage continue to belong 
each to his or her own clan; neither passes into the clan 
of the other. They seldom live together; when they do, it 
is the husband who comes to live with his wife. Husband 
and wife do not form a household ; that is constituted only 
by the woman and her children. At the head of such a 
household stands the eldest brother of the mother; he is 
called the mamag. At the head of the clan is a headman 
(panghoeloe) chosen by the maternal uncles, and the 
headman is confirmed in his dignity by the prince. The 
father has no right over his children ; they belong wholly to 
their mother’s clan. Titles, dignities,and property pass only 
in the female line. Since, in the opinion of the Orang- 
Mamagq, no relationship exists between children and their 
father, they naturally inherit none of his property at his 
death. He may, however, make them presents in his life- 
time. A man’s clan is responsible for his debts after his 
death ; his children may not be taken in pledge for them.’ 

In Tiga Loeroeng, another part of Indragiri, the people Exogamous 
are also divided into exogamous clans called swku, each with (ans with 
its headman (fanghoeloe) chosen by the mothers’ eldest descent 
brothers (szamags) and confirmed by the prince. The Dosa 
conception of the clan is here the same as among the Orang- 
Mamagq. But in Tiga Loeroeng the custom of husband and 
wife living together is almost universal. The husband 
either dwells in his wife’s house or builds a house on land 
belonging to her clan. Yet though he lives in the house 
with his children, the father has little power over them; the 
mamag or mother’s eldest brother retains the greatest share 
of authority over them, his nephews and nieces. In this 
district there are more exceptions to the rule that dignities 
pass in the female line. As to inheritance, the property 
owned by each of the spouses before marriage remains his 
or hers or that of their clan after the death of the other ; but 
the property acquired by them during marriage—the harta- 
soearang, as it is called—is divided on the death of one of 

1A. FL P. Graafland, ‘*De ver- de Zaal- Land- en Volkenkunde van 
breiding van het Matriarchat in het MNederlandsch-/ndté, xxxix. (1890) pp. 
Landschap Indragiri,” Bijdragen tot 42-44. 

Clans ina 
transitional 
state 
between 
mother-kin 
and father- 
kin, 

196 ZTOTEMISM IN INDONESIA CHAP. 

them, own children and sisters’ children having equal rights 
to the inheritance. If a man dies leaving debts, his 
children are responsible for one half of them, while the other 
half must be paid by the members of his clan. If a wife 
dies leaving debts, her children are usually responsible for 
the whole amount and may be taken in pledge for them.’ 
These customs mark a step towards the establishment of 
father-kin beside or instead of mother-kin ; and an indica- 
tion and probably to some extent a cause of the change is 
the cohabitation of husband and wife in the same house. 

In the same region, up stream from Batoe Sawal, we 
find still clearer traces of a transition from mother-kin to 
father-kin. Here the clan (sukz) still exists and forms a 
strong bond of union between its members, but its limits 
are not so sharply defined, for the rule of exogamy has 
broken down. Each clan has still its headman, chosen as 
before and confirmed by the prince ; but sometimes the men 
of military age have a voice in his election as well as the 
mothers’ eldest brothers (samags). Marriages within the 
clan are common, even between blood relations who are 
forbidden by Mohammedan law to marry each other. 
When husband and wife belong to different clans, it seldom 
happens that both continue after marriage members of his 
and her clan respectively. Generally one of the two joitis 
the clan of the other. It depends entirely on the com- 
parative numbers, power, and dignity of the two clans 
whether the husband joins his wife’s clan or she joins his. 
If the husband’s clan is the more powerful, the wife will 
leave her village, and the family house will be built in the 
village of the husband’s clan. In that case the children 
belong to their father’s clan, and their mother’s eldest 
brother has little or no power over them. Still, even when 
the husband’s clan is the stronger, it sometimes happens 
that after a divorce the mother and her children return to 
her own clan. In matters of inheritance the relationship of 
the children to both parents is recognised. At the death 
ofeither parent the property is often divided equally between 

1A. F. P. Graafland, “De ver- de Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde van 
breiding van het Matriarchat in het Mederlandsch-[ndié, xxxix. (1890) p. 
Landschap Indragiri,” Biydragen tot 44 sg. 

1x TOTEMISM AND EXOGAMY IN SUMATRA 197 

the survivor and the children. Sister’s children have no 
share in the inheritance, if the deceased left children of his 
own. Debts of either spouse or of both pass at death to the 
children, who may be taken in pledge for them.’ 

The inhabitants of Nias, an island to the west of Exogamous 

sos : ith 

Sumatra, are divided into a number of exogamous clans cea 
with descent in the paternal line. Clans of the same name descent in 
the island 

are found distributed all over the island. No man may ¢¢ yias. 
marry a woman of his own clan, and a younger sister is not 
allowed to marry before her elder sister. Men buy their 
wives and regard them as their property. On the death of 

a husband his widow passes to his son and heir, unless she is 

his own mother. Property descends to the children. The 
eldest son receives a double portion. A wife does not 
inherit from her husband, nor a husband from his wife.” 

§ 2. Totemism in the Moluccas 

In some islands of the Moluccas, the archipelago which 
extends between Celebes on the west and New Guinea on 
the east, indications of totemism occur in the belief of the 
natives that they are descended from certain animals or 
plants, which accordingly they abstain from eating and in- 
juring, Thus in Amboyna and the neighbouring islands Totemism 
the people of some villages allege that they are descended eee 
yna and 
from trees, such as the Cappellenia moluccana, which had Ceram. 
been fertilised by the Pandton Haliaetus. Others claim to 
be sprung from pigs, octopuses, crocodiles, sharks, and eels. 
People will not burn the wood of the trees from which they 
trace their descent, nor eat the flesh of the animals which 
they regard as their ancestors. Sicknesses of ali sorts are 
believed to result from disregarding these taboos.’ Similarly 

1A. FL P. Graafland, ‘*De ver- 
breiding van het Matriarchat in het 
Landschap Indragiri,” ABijdragen tot 
de Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde van 
Nederlandsch-Indté, xxxix. (1890) pp. 
45-47. 

2 J. T. Nieuwenhuisen en H. C. B. 
von Rosenberg, ‘‘ Verslag omtrent het 
Eiland Nias und deszelfs Bewoners,” 
Verhandelingen van het Bataviaasch 
Genootschap van Kunsten en Weten- 
schappen, xxx. (Batavia, 1863) pp. 39, 

84 sg., 107; H. von Rosenberg, Der 
malayische Archipel (Leipsic, 1878), 
Pp. 154 sg., 160; G. A. Wilken, Over 
de Verwantschap en het Huwelijks- en 
Erfrecht bij de Volken van het Maleische 
Ras (Amsterdam, 1883), pp. 31,45 599- 
3 J. G. F. Riedel, De slutk- en 
hroesharige rassen tusschen Selebes en 
Papua (The Hague, 1886), pp. 32, 61 ; 
G. W. W. C. Baron van Hoévell, 
Ambon en meer bepaaldelijk de Ocliasers 
(Dordrecht, 1875), p. 152. 

198 TOTEMISM IN INDONESIA CHAP. 

in Ceram, people who believe that they are descended from 
crocodiles, serpents, iguanas, and sharks will not eat the 
Exogamous flesh of these animals.’ Further, we find exogamy as well 
cans (/e") as traces of totemism in Ceram; for the people of Waai- 
Rama district are divided into at least five exogamous 
clans called zfax. No man may marry a woman of his 
own clan (#/az): a woman at marriage passes into her 
husband’s clan; and the children belong to the clan of their 
father. On the death of her husband a woman may marry 
again, but only with a man of her late husband’s clan. 
Usually she marries the nearest blood relation of the 
deceased.” 

Totemism To the west of Ceram and Amboyna lies the large 
ar coral-girt island of Buru, a land of lofty mountains and 
Buru. deep valleys covered with forests of magnificent timber ‘and 

The abori: Watered by many rivers.2 The aboriginal inhabitants of 
= sa Buru, who belong to the light brown Indonesian race,* are 
divided into divided into exogamous clans called fexmas. No man may 

exogamous marry a woman of his own clan; the wife joins her 

tana husband’s clan, and the children belong to the clan of their 
ua father. Each clan inhabits a separate district, which is the 
descent. property of the clan and is also called a /enna, or more 
strictly rahzsin fenna; at the head of each is a chief, whose 
office is generally hereditary. The names of the clans are 
said to be mostly derived from trees.® Since each exogamous 
clan (fenna) dwells apart in its own territory, it follows that 
here, as among the Pasemahers of Sumatra, local exogamy 
Legends coexists and coincides with clan exogamy. Various legends 
cigin of a8 told to account for the origin of the clans, Thus the 
the clans. members of the Toefwai clan say that one day a ketapan tree 

1j. G. F. Riedel, De sluik- en 
kroesharige rassen tusschen Selebes en 
Papua (The Hague, 1886), p. 122. 

G. A. Wilken, ‘‘Bijdrage tot de 
Kennis del Alfoeren van het eiland 
Boeroe,” Verhandelingen van het Bata- 

2 T. J. Willer, Het Ziland Boeroe 
(Amsterdam, 1858), pp. 7, 20. 

3 J. H. W. van der Miesen, ‘‘ Een 
en ander over Boeroe,” Afededeelingen 
van wege het Nederlandsche Zendeling- 
genootschap, xlvi. (1902) pp. 427-429 ; 
J. G. F. Riedel, De slutk- en kroesharige 
rassen tusschen Selebes en Papua, p. 1. 

4 J. G. F. Riedel, of. c¢t. p. 4. 

5 T. J. Willer, Het Eiland Boeroe 
(Amsterdam, 1858), pp. 100 sg. 3 

viaasch Genootschap van Kunsten en 
Wetenschappen, xxxviii. (Batavia, 1875) 
pp. 3, 12, 16; ¢@., Over de Verwant- 
schap en het Huwelijks- en Erfrecht bif 
de Wolken van het Maleische Ras (Am- 
sterdam, 1883), pp. 14 5g.3 A. Bastian, 
Indonesien, i, (Berlin, 1884) pp. 136, 
137; J. G, F. Riedel, De sluik-en kroes- 
harige rassen tusschen Selebes en Papua, 
pp. 20, 22; J. H. W. van der Miesen, 
op. cit. pp. 431, 439. 

IX TOTEMISM IN THE MOLUCCAS 199 

split from top to bottom and their forefather came forth 
from it. The Wai Loewa on the coast allege that they are 
descended from a crocodile in the River Oki, and the croco- 
diles, which swarm there, are accordingly held by them in high 
veneration. They believe that a crocodile will never harm 
them, because he is their blood relation. The Reboet clan 
owes its existence to the compassion of a shark. For their 
ancestor was shipwrecked and would certainly have perished, 
if a shark had not taken pity on him and brought him safe 
to land. Since that time there has been a good under- 
standing between the sharks and the Reboet clan, who 
firmly believe that if one of their number were to be cast 
away at sea, the sharks would at once rush to his rescue 
and bring him to shore.’ A man’s wife is purchased for 
him by his clan; hence when he dies any member of his 
clan has legally a right to marry the widow without paying 
for her. But the prior right always rests with the nearest The 
male relations of the deceased. Usually the eldest brother /¢¥"*e- 
of the dead man takes her to wife; but if he refuses, the 
right passes to his next brother, and so on. But a younger 
brother of the deceased is forbidden (foto) to marry his 
elder brother’s widow. If the deceased left no brothers or 
only younger brothers, other members of the clan may claim 
the widow, for she is regarded as the property of the clan, 
having been paid for by them. When a young man has Elopement. 
gained the affection of a girl, it is customary for him, with 
the knowledge of her parents, to run away with her to the 
forest, where the couple remain in hiding, while the parents 
of the girl negotiate with the young man’s clan about the 
price that is to be paid for the bride, When that is settled 
the young couple return and are married in the usual way.’ 

In the Babar Archipelago the inhabitants of some Belief in 
villages assert that they are descended from wild pigs or ah Polit 
crocodiles and they revere the animals accordingly. People from wild 
who are descended from wild pigs may not eat pork ; and ”'8* 

1 J. H. W. van der Miesen, “Een Boeroe,” Verhandelingen van het Bata- 
en ander over Boeroe,” Jfededcelingen viaasch Genootschap van Kunsten en 
van wege het Nederlandsche Zendeling- Wetenschapfen, xxxviii. (Batavia, 1875) 
genootschap, xivi. (1902) pp. 431 59. pp. 17, 18, 19 sg. As to the Levirate 

2G. A. Wilken, ‘‘ Bijdrage tot de in Buru, compare J. H. W. van der 
Kennis der Alfoeren van het eiland Miesen, of. c7t. p. 454. 

200 TOTEMISM IN INDONESIA CHAP. 

crocodiles, people who are sprung from crocodiles must cast half a pig, 
Se eode betel, and so forth as offerings into a river, and moreover 
etc., which they must hang golden earrings on a tree at the spot where 
members they made their offering.’ In the islands of Leti, Moa, and 
families are Lakor there are families that worship crocodiles and sharks ; 
rey and some of these families may not eat shark’s flesh, because 
toeat. they believe that one of their ancestors, drifting out to sea, 
was helped by a shark.? In the island of Keisar or Makisar 
some people think that they are descended from pigs, 
-crocodiles, or the Physeter macrocephalus, and accordingly 
will not eat the flesh of these creatures. Persons who 
belong to the crocodile family make offerings to crocodiles 
by throwing betel and parts of a boiled fowl into the sea, 
while they invoke the reptiles. The sacrificer and his 
relations then partake of the rest of the fowl? Again, in 
the island of Wetar or Wetter people are found in most 
villages who claim to be descended from serpents, crocodiles, 
turtles, wild pigs, dogs, and eels, and who are therefore for- 
Traces of bidden to eat the flesh of these animals.* Further, in the 
eae Aru Archipelago, which lies to the south of the western end 
Archi- of New Guinea, some, families revere crocodiles and sharks 
Pelago. as their ancestors ; they will not eat these creatures and they 
keep images of them in their houses.° Every family and 
every house in the Aru Islands has its badge or crest which 
is sacred (fomali) and may not be used by any one else. The 
badge is always carved on a beam of the house. Amongst 
these crests are serpents, crocodiles, dogs, the sea-slug called 
trepang (déche de mer), elephants’ tusks, chopping-knives, and 
human figures, both male and female. The misuse of a 
family crest often results in feuds which last for years 
Two between two villages.© The Aru Islanders are divided into 
shige two brotherhoods or confederacies called respectively Uli- 
confeder- lima and Uli-siwa, which are found also all over the 
yon pares Moluccas, The brotherhoods are hostile to each other, but 
pelago. 
1 J. G. F. Riedel, De sluck- en kroes- 4 J. G. F. Riedel, of. cét. p. 432. 
harige rassen tusschen Selebes en Papua, 5 J. G, F. Riedel, op. c#t, p. 253. 
pP- 334, 341, 348. 6 C. Ribbe, ‘Die Aru-Inseln,” 
2J.G. F. Riedel, of. cet. pp. 376, Festschrift sur Jubelfeier des 25 
377. jahrigen Bestehens des Vereins fiir 
3 J. G. F. Riedel, of. cit. PP. 412, Erdkunde xu Dresden (Dresden, 1888), 
414. pp. 165 sg. 

IX TOTEMISM IN THE MOLUCCAS 201 

their origin is uncertain. In the Aru Islands the Uli-lima 
brotherhood prevails on the coast and the Uli-siwa in the 
interior.. There is nothing to shew that these brotherhoods . 
are exogamous classes or phratries. It is to be noted that 
the natives of the Aru Islands are not Indonesians but 
Papuans, of the usual type, with black or sooty brown skins, 
woolly or frizzly hair, thick-ridged prominent noses, and 
rather slender limbs. They may have migrated thither from 
New Guinea,’ or may even have dwelt there from the time 
when the islands formed part of the mainland of New 
Guinea. For the Aru Islands are divided from New Guinea 
only by a shallow sea, and in their luxuriant tropical forests, 
stately palms, beautiful tree-ferns, and gorgeously-coloured 
birds and insects, they present many points of resemblance 
to the plants and animals of that great island-continent.® 
Lastly, it may be noted that exogamy in a somewhat Exogamous 

peculiar form exists among the natives of the northern eicag tiefa) 
part of Halmahera, a large island to the west of New paternal 
Guinea. These people are divided into a number of sfscent™ 
exogamous clans, each called a ofa: the rules are that hera. 
no man may marry a woman of his own @éofa, and that 
the children belong to the ‘fa of their father. Sexual 
intercourse between members of the same éofa is deemed 
very culpable, but is not a crime. The lovers are parted, 
and each marries a member of another Zofa. However, 
these ¢ofas do not answer exactly to the exogamous clans 
which under the various names of marga, suku, and fenna 
are met with in Sumatra and Buru; for whereas “in these 
countries every clan has its own name which may be 
followed in the ascending or descending line so long as 
members of the clan exist, and which marks an eternal 
line of division so far as marriage is concerned between 
persons who are descended, in however remote a degree, 
from the same ancestor, in Halmahera, on the other hand, 

1¢. Ribbe, “Die Aru-Inseln,” 3 A. R. Wallace, Zhe Malay Archi- 
Festschrift sur Jubelfeter des 25 pelago,® pp. 428 sgg., 431 599-5 435 
jahrigen Bestehens des Vereins fiir $9.5 443 599-5 457 59.) 463 59-5 484 
Erdkunde 2u Dresden (Dresden, 1888), sgg.3 C. Ribbe, of. cét. pp. 160 sg. 
p. 170. Among the birds are various species 

2 C. Ribbe, of. att. p. 160; A. R. of the exquisitely coloured Birds of 
Wallace, Zhe <Alalay Archipelago® Paradise. 
(London, 1877), PP- 430, 433 59- 

Analogies 
to totem- 
ism in « 
Borneo. 

Many 
Sea Dyak 
families 
abstain 
from 
injuring 
certain 
animals. 

202 TOTEMISM IN INDONESIA CHAP. 

the clan has no name of its own and is not reckoned after 
the fourth generation. Thus a great-great-grandson can 
marry the great-great-granddaughter of the same great- 
great-grandfather.”’ In Halmahera, also, taboos (éobess0) 
are observed which savour of totemism. Thus, one man 
may not eat venison, another may not eat pork, another 
may not eat fowls, another may not eat coco-nuts; and 
so on in great variety.” 

§ 3. Analogies to Totemism in Borneo 

Among the many Indonesian tribes which inhabit the 
great island of Borneo no system of totemism in the strict 
sense has as yet been discovered ; but on the other hand 
some of their customs and beliefs present analogies to 
those of totemic peoples, and might with some show of 
reason be interpreted either as traces of decadent or as 
rudiments of incipient totemism. Thus we are told that 
among the Sea Dyaks of Sarawak many families abstain 
from injuring certain animals or birds either in consequence 
of dreams or because the animals are traditionally said to 
have helped the ancestors of the families. Some Dyaks, 
for example, are forbidden to kill civet cats, others to kill 
orang-utans, and others to kill alligators; and they give 
such reasons as the following for respecting the creatures : 
“ One of my ancestors, a clever man, cured a sick alligator, 
and then they made an agreement that neither should 
injure the other.” Another said that when his great- 
grandfather first settled at the hill of Banting, on the 
Lingga, orang-utans abounded there and helped the’ settlers 
to repulse the enemies who attacked them ; for these apes 
crowded to the edge of the fruit groves and glared fiercely 
at the foe. As a reason for not destroying cobras, the 
Dyaks say: “It has always been forbidden; those who 
dream of them are lucky, and often do the great spirits put 
on the forms of snakes.”* “The superstitious dread of 

1T. J. Willer, Het Eiland Boeroe Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde, xxvii. 
(Amsterdam, 1858), pp. 44 5g., 53- (1882) p. 449. 

2C. F. H. Campen, ‘De gods- 3 Spenser St. John, Zife im the 
dienstbegrippen der Halmaherasche Forests of the Far East, Second Edition 
Alfoeren,” Zijdschrift voor Indische (London, 1863), i. 84. 

IX ANALOGIES TO TOTEMISM IN BORNEO 203 

eating certain animals is a point of resemblance between 

them and the inhabitants of the west coast of -Africa; the 
reason being, they suppose these animals bear a proximity 

to some of their forefathers, who were begotten by them, or 

begot them.”! Again, most of the Dyaks are forbidden to 

eat the flesh of horned animals, as cattle’ and goats, and 

many tribes extend the prohibition to the wild deer. “They 

say, that some of their ancestors, in the transmigration of 

souls were formerly metamorphosed into these animals ; 

and they slyly, or innocently add, that the reason why the 
Mohamedan Malays will not touch pork is, that they are 

afraid to eat their forefathers, who were changed into the 
unclean animal. It has often struck me that the origin of 

many of their superstitions arose from the greediness of the 
elders; as in some of the tribes they, together with the 
women and children, but not the sturdy young men, may 

eat eggs. In other instances the very old men and the Prohibition 
women may eat of the flesh of the deer, while the young Pt ih 
men and warriors of the tribe are debarred from venison horned 
for fear it should render them as timid as the graceful "4s 

such as 
hind. The taboo which prevents certain families from con- cattle, 

suming the flesh of snakes and other kinds of reptiles, most 5°." ce 
probably arose from some incident in the life of one of their 
ancestors, in which the rejected beast played a prominent 
part.”? “The Silakau and Lara Dayaks who have 
emigrated from Sambas into Lundu, do not eat the flesh 
of the deer, from an opinion that they descended from 
Dayak ancestors, but Mr. Chalmers, in his experience of 
the Sarawak Land Dayak, never heard of any prejudice 

existing against killing or eating any animals except the 

1 Charles Brooke, Ze Years in 
Sarawak (London, 1866), i. 62. 
Compare 7a. i. 47, ii. 151. 

bullocks, which are eaten by other 
tribes. The abstinence from the flesh 
of horned cattle seems to be the most 

2 Spenser St. John, Life in the 
Forests of the Far East, Second 
Edition (London, 1863), i. 186 sg. 
Compare P. J. Veth, Borneo’s Wester- 
Afdeeling (Zalt-Bommel, 1854-1856), 
ii. 314: “Many Dyak tribes abstain 
more or less strictly from the flesh of 
horned cattle, buffaloes, deer, goats, 
and fowls, from the milk and butter 
of cows, and from certain sorts of 

widely spread, but Mr. van Lijnden 
was assured at Silat that the Dyaks 
of that region fejt no scruple about 
eating the flesh of horned cattle, 
provided they could procure it. 
The eating of venison, in the 
opinion of many, is punished by all 
sorts of misfortunes and even by 
madness.” 

The taboo 
on horned 
cattle and 
deer is too 
general to 
be tatemic. 

204 TOTEMISM IN INDONESIA CHAP. 

faint-heartedness supposed to be produced by venison.”? 
“The ox, the buffalo, the deer, the goat, fowls and some 
kinds of vegetables, are forbidden food to some or other 
of these tribes. Of these animals, those which are held 
most sacred are the bull and cow, and nothing’ would 
induce a Dyak of any of the tribes of Sarawak, to eat 
anything into the composition or cooking of which either 
the flesh of the animal, or any part of its productions has 
entered ; so that, if offered any of the food which has been 
prepared for an European, they immediately ask if it has 
been cooked with butter or ghee; in which case they will 
not partake of it. . . . The prohibition against eating the flesh 
of deer is much less strictly practised, and in many tribes 
totally disregarded. ... In the large tribe of Singhie, it 
is observed in its fullest extent, and is even carried so far, 
that they will not allow strangers to bring a deer into 
their houses, or to be cooked by their fires. The men of 
the tribe will not touch the animal, and none but the 
women or boys, who have not been on a war expedition, 
which admits them to the privileges of manhood, are 
allowed to assist the European sportsman in bringing home 
his bag. It is amongst this, the Sow, and other tribes on 
the same branch of the river, that goats, fowls, and the fine 
kind of fern (aku), which forms an excellent vegetable, are 
also forbidden food to the men, though the women and 
boys are allowed to partake of them, as they are also of the 
deer’s flesh amongst the Singhie Dyaks. The tribe of Sow, 
whose villages are not far from the houses of Singhie, does 
not so rigorously observe the practice. Old men, women, and 
boys may eat of its flesh; the middle-aged and unmarried 
young men only being prohibited from partaking of it.” 

On the foregoing evidence it may be observed that the 
prohibitions to eat the flesh of horned cattle and deer seem 
to be too general to be totemic; since a characteristic 
feature of true totemism is that its taboos are observed not 

y whole tribes or communities but only by particular 
stocks or families which compose the tribe or community. 
In particular the prohibition to eat deer’s flesh cannot be 

1 Spenser St. John, Life iu the 2 Hugh Low, Sarawak (London, 
Forests of the Far East,? i. 206. 1848), pp. 265 sg. 

1x ANALOGIES TO TOTEMISM IN, BORNEO 205 

totemic in tribes where venison is forbidden only to the 
fighting men but allowed to old men, women, and children. 
Wherever that distinction is observed, we may safely assume 
that the true reason for the abstinence from venison is the 
one assigned by some of our authorities, namely, a fear 
lest by partaking of deer’s flesh the eater should be infected 
by the timidity of the deer. 

On the other hand when certain foods are tabooed not Certain 
to whole tribes or communities but only to particular eae 
families, the resemblance of such taboos to totemism is to certain 
much closer. For example, the family of a Kayan chief on™" 
the Tinjar River in Sarawak is known to have held the 
gibbon apes sacred for at least three generations; the 
animals were never killed by any member of the house- 
hold, and the wall of the chief’s private room was decorated 
with conventional representations of the apes. The chief 
himself regarded these creatures as his best friends, and 
that day was sure to be lucky when they crossed his path 
in the jungle, or when their musical, almost bird-like, call 
was heard near the house. In speaking of the animals 
he cast down his eyes and spoke in an almost inaudible 
voice, as if the very breathing of so sacred a name were 
profanation.' Such hereditary veneration for a species of 
animals certainly savours of totemism. Again, we are 
told of the Dyaks that “there is a fish which is taken 
in their rivers called a puttin, which they would on no 
account touch, under the idea that if they did they would 
be eating their relations. The tradition respecting it is, Tradition 
that a solitary old man went out fishing and caught a ‘o explain 

, 7 * the taboo 
puttin, which he dragged out of the water and laid down onacertain 
in his boat. On turning round, he found it had changed 
into a very pretty little girl. Conceiving the idea she 
would make, what he had long wished for, a charming 
wife for his son, he took her home and educated her 
until she was fit to be married. She consented to be 
the son’s wife, cautioning her husband to use her well. 

Some time after their marriage, however, being out of 
temper he struck her, when she screamed, and rushed away 

1 W. H. Furness, 7he Home-life of Borneo Head-hunters (Philadelphia, 
1902), pp. 55 59 

Tales of 
the type of 
Beauty and 
the Beast. 

Messrs, 
Hose and 
McDougall 
on evidence 
for totem- 
ism in 
Sarawak. 

206 ‘TOTEMISM IN INDONESIA CHAP. 

into the water ; but not without leaving behind her a beautiful 
daughter, who became afterwards the mother of the race.”? 

The tradition thus told to account for the hereditary 
veneration of a species of fish clearly belongs to that type of 
tales of which the best-known examples are the story of Cupid 
and Psyche and the story of Beauty and the Beast. As such 
tales are told on the Gold Coast of West Africa to explain the 
origin of true totemic taboos,*the occurrence of a similar legend 
among the Dyaks may be reckoned as a hint or indication 
of totemism, past, present, or future, in Borneo. <A similar 
story is told to explain why the Sea Dyaks revere the birds 
of omen. A chief named Siu, it is said, married a beautiful 
young woman, who was really a bird, though he knew it not. 
She made him promise never to kill or hurt a bird or even 
to hold one in his hands ; for if he did so, she would be his 
wife no longer. So they married and lived happily together 
for years, till one unhappy day the husband, forgetting his 
promise, took a bird in his hand and stroked it. Then his 
wife went away sadly to return no more. The sorrowful 
husband and the son she had borne him sought the lost wife 
and mother till they found her in her old home, the house of 
the Ruler of the Spirit World. Fain would he have persuaded 
her to- return with him, but she would not. So father and 
son had to go back alone. But before they departed the 
Ruler of the Spirit World taught them how to revere the 
sacred birds and to draw omens from them.’ 

The question whether the superstitions connected with 
animals in Sarawak are or are not evidence of totemism 
has been carefully discussed by Messrs. C. Hose and W. 
McDougall. Amongst the evidence which they-adduce the 
following facts may be particularly noted. In a Kenyah 
house a fantastic figure of a gibbon ape is carved on the 
ends of all the main cross-beams, and the chief of the people 
says that this has been their custom for many generations. 

1 The Bishop of Labuan, ‘ Wild 
Tribes of Borneo,” 7ransactions of the 
Ethnological Society of London, N.S. 
ii. (1863) pp. 26 sg. 

2 See below, Chap. XIV. § 3, 
Totemism on the Gold Coast. 

3 Rev. E. H. Gomes, ‘* Two Sea 
Dyak Legends,” Journal of the Straits 

Branch of the Royal Asiatic Society, 
No. 41 (January 1904, Singapore), pp. 
12-28. 

4 Charles Hose and W. McDougall, 
‘The Relations between Men and 
Animals in Sarawak,” Journal of the 
Anthropological Institute, xxxi. (1901) 

Pp. 173-213. 

1x ANALOGIES TO TOTEMISM IN BORNEO 207 

None of these people will kill a gibbon and they claim that 

the ape helps them as a friend ; but other Kenyahs kill and 
probably eat the animal.’ Men of the Kayan tribe some- Kayan 
times dream that they have become blood-brothers with mem sup- 
crocodiles and exchanged names with them. Such men eae 
believe that they are safe from crocodiles and will not relations to 
kill the reptiles, Moreover, the descendants of these men 
regard themselves as intimately related to crocodiles. For 
example, a man named Usong whose father and uncle had 

both become blood-brothers to crocodiles considered him- 

self to be the son and nephew of the reptiles. His uncle 

was known by the generic name for a crocodile (dazya) ; 
Usong himself, when he went out hunting, would ask 

his crocodile-uncle and his crocodile-father to send him 

a wild pig.2 Again, Usong’s cousin Wan had a great- 
great-grandfather who became blood-brother to 8 crocodile ; 

and Wan several times met this crocodile in dreams. 

Once he dreamed that he fell into a river swarming with 
crocodiles, and that he climbed on to the head of one of 

them, which told him not to fear and carried him to the 

bank. Wan’s father received charms from a crocodile and 

would not on any account kill one of the monsters, and 

Wan regarded himself as intimately related to crocodiles 

in general. Again, the Kayans have “a somewhat Kayans 
uncertain belief” that the coco-nut monkey (Afacacus —— " 
nemestrinus) is a blood-relative of theirs; hence they will 

kill the animal only when it plunders their rice-crop, but 

they will never eat it, as other people do.* Further, a chief Kata- 
of a Malanau household in the Kalamantan tribe, together MNS, 
with all his people, “will not kill or eat the deer Cervulus deer. 
muntjac, alleging that an ancestor had become a deer of this 

kind, and that, since they cannot distinguish this incarnation 

of his ancestor from other deer, they must abstain from 
killing all deer of this species.”° The reason thus assigned 

1C. Hose and W. McDougall, 
‘*The Relations between Men and 
Animals in Sarawak,” Journal of the 

3 C. Hose and W. McDougall, of. 
cit, p. 191. 

Anthropological Institute, xxxi. (1901) 
p. 188. 

2 C. Hose and W. McDougall, of. 
cit. Pp. 190 5g., 210. 

4 C. Hose and W. McDougall, of. 
eit. p. 191. 

5 C. Hose and W. McDougall, of. 
cit. p. 193. 

Kala- 
mantans 
related to 
crocodiles. 

208 TOTEMISM IN INDONESIA CHAP. 

for respecting the species resembles the reason which 
according to Sir George Grey the West Australian aborigines 
allege for respecting their Aobong or totem.’ Again, the 
people of Miri, who are also Malanaus and Kalamantans, 
claim to be related to the large deer (Cervus equinus) and 
some of them to the suntjac deer also; and the Bakongs, 
another group of Malanaus, hold a similar belief with regard 
to the bear-cat (Artcctes) and the various species of Para- 
doxurus. The reason which the Bakongs give for regarding 
these animals as their relations is that when they go to the 
graveyards they often see one of the beasts coming out of a 
tomb. These tombs are rough wooden coffins raised only a 
few feet above the ground, so that carnivorous beasts can 
easily devour the corpses and make the coffins their lair. 
The Bakongs apparently believe that the souls of their dead 
transmigrate into the beasts which issue from the tombs.’ 
Moreover, the Kalamantans seem to be more intimately 
related to crocodiles than other tribes of Sarawak. For 
example, one Kalamantan group, the Long Patas, claim the 
crocodile as a relative, because a certain man named Silau 
turned in his lifetime into a crocodile. Just as the trans- 
formation was taking place, he told his kinsmen that he was 
becoming a crocodile, and made them swear never to kill 
crocodiles in future. Hence when the Long Patas people 
come upon a crocodile lying on the bank of the river, they 
say, “ Be easy, grandfather, don’t mind us, you are one of us.” 
Many people in the old days met Silau in his crocodile 
shape and spoke to him; his teeth and tongue were always 
like those of aman. He told his human friends that when 
they were travelling on the river they should always tie 
leaves of the Dracaena under the bows of their boats, in 
order that the crocodiles might know them and abstain 
from attacking them. So the people still tie the leaves 
under the bows when they are embarking to go on a 
journey by water. Some of the Kalamantans even refuse to 
eat anything cooked in a vessel in which crocodile’s flesh 
had previously been cooked; they say that were a man 

1 See above, vol. i. p. 551. Animals in Sarawak,” Journal of the 
2C. Hose and W. McDougall, Axthropolegical Institute, xxxi, (1901) 
“The Relations between Men and _ p. 193. 

IX ANALOGIES TO TOTEMISM IN BORNEO 209 

unwittingly to eat of such food, his body would be covered 
with sores.’ Similarly, many of the Ibans or Sea Dyaks 
claim to be related to crocodiles and will not eat their flesh 
or kill them except in revenge for the destruction of a 
kinsman by a crocodile. 

But the Ibans or Sea Dyaks have another institution Guardian- 
which in some respects closely resembles totemism. This is (Prong) 
what they call their myavong or guardian-spirit. It is a among the 
subject on which they are very reticent. Indeed Dr. Hose ee 
lived on friendly terms with Ibans of various districts for 
fourteen years without ascertaining the meaning of the word 
nyarong or suspecting the great importance of the part 
which the thing plays in the lives of many of them. - The 
ayarong or guardian-spirit resembles the sanitoo of the Like the 
North American Indian, being the special protector of some wang 
individual Iban to whom he reveals himself in a dream. American 
Usually, but not always, he is thought to be the spirit of an one 
ancestor or other dead relative. In the dream the nyarong's nib 
first shews himself in human form and tells the man that he 
will be his guardian; at the same time he may or may not 
inform the dreamer what shape he will assume in future. 

Next day the Iban wanders through the jungle looking for 
signs by which he may recognise his spirit-helper. If an 
animal behaves in an unusual manner, if a startled deer 
gazes at him for a moment before bounding away, if a 
gibbon ape gambols persistently about in the trees near him, 
if he lights upon a bright quartz-crystal or a strangely 
twisted root or creeper, that animal or that thing is for him 
full of a mysterious significance, and is deemed the abode of 
his zyarong or guardian-spirit. Sometimes a man may dream 
that on going into the jungle he will meet his zyarong in the 
shape of a wild boar. He will then of course go to seek 
it, and if by chance other men of the house should kill 
a wild boar that day, he will go to them and beg for its head 
or buy it, if need be, at a great price. Having procured the 
head, he carries it home, offers it cooked rice and kills a 

1C. Hose and W. McDougall, pp. 193 sg. 
‘The Relations between Men and 
Animals in Sarawak,” Journal of the 2 C. Hose and W. McDougall, of. 
Anthropological Institute, xxxi. (1901) —cé#t. p. 199. 

VOL. P 

210 TOTEMISM IN INDONESIA CHAP. 

fowl before it, smearing the blood on the head and on himself 
and humbly begging for pardon. Or he may leave the 
carcass in the jungle and sacrifice a fowl before it there. 
Next night he hopes to dream of his guardian-spirit again, 
and he may then be told to take the tusks of the dead boar 
for luck. Unless he dreams something of that sort he feels 
that he has been mistaken and that the boar was not really 
his guardian-spirit. 
Not every It is not every one that has a guardian-spirit (xyarong), 
onehas@ though all ardently desire it. Perhaps only one man in 
guardian- 
spirit. fifty or a hundred may be so fortunate. Many a young 
man goes out to sleep on the grave of some distinguished 
person or in a wild and lonely spot and lives for days on a 
very spare diet, hoping that a guardian-spirit will come to 
When the him in his dreams. Most commonly the guardian-spirit 
raaetara takes the form of some animal, and then afl individuais of 
the form of that species become objects of especial regard to the lucky 
an animal, Than, who will neither kill nor eat them himself and will as 

wil not ki far as possible restrain others from doing so. Sometimes 
an animal the cult of a guardian-spirit (nyarong) spreads through a 
species. whole family or household. Children and grandchildren 
usually respect the species of animals to which their father’s 
and grandfather’s guardian-spirit belonged, and they may 

occasionally sacrifice fowls or pigs to it. 

The gibbon To illustrate this general account of the Iban xyarong 
piatdlaa: by particular instances, an Iban named Angus will not kill 
spirit. gibbon apes, because the guardian-spirit of his grandfather 

was a gibbon. Once a man came to his grandfather in a 
dream, said to him, “Don’t you kill the gibbon,” and then 
turned into a grey gibbon ape. This ape helped him to 
grow rich, and to take human heads, and in many other 
ways. When he died, he said to his sons, “Don’t you kill 
the gibbon,” and his sons and grandsons have obeyed the 
precept ever since.2 Again, Messrs. Hose and McDougall 
were told by Payang, an old Katibas Iban, that when he 
was young a man came to him in a dream and said, “ Some- 

1¢. Hose and W. McDougall, pp. 199 5g. 
‘©The Relations between Men and 
Animals in Sarawak,” Journal of the 2 C. Hose and W. McDougall, of. 
Anthropological Institute, xxxi. (1901) ¢t#. P. 201. 

IX ANALOGIES TO TOTEMISM IN BORNEO. 211 

times I become a python and sometimes a cobra, and J] Thepython 
will always help you.” Ever since then the cobra has pine 
helped him very much, but he cannot say for certain whether spirit. 
it has helped his children. However, he has forbidden them 
to kill it. The subject is one which he does not like to 
speak about.’ Again, an Iban named Imban, who settled River- 
on the Baram River, was once sick and saw in a dream the aoa 
large river-turtle (7vionyx subplanus) and made a_ promise spirits. 
that if he got well again he would never kill the animal. 
When he tried to impose a fine on his people for killing 
river-turtles, they appealed to Dr. Hose as_ resident 
magistrate, who decided that if Imban insisted on sparing the 
lives of river-turtles he must remove from the Baram River 
to a small tributary stream. This he did, a few of his 
people followed him, and on them he now enforces a strict 
observance of the cult of river-turtles.2 Once more, a com- Porcupines 
munity of Ibans built a new house on the Dabai River some cnnidlai: 
years ago, and one day, while they were building, a spirits. 
porcupine ran out of a hole in the ground hard by. That 
same night one of the men dreamed that the porcupine 
bade them join their new house to his, the porcupine’s 
house. Ever since then they have held annual feasts in 
honour of the porcupines which live under the house, and 
nobody in the house dares to injure one of them, though 
they will still kill and eat other porcupines in the jungle. 
When any one is sick in the house, they offer food to the 
porcupines and regard their good offices as much more 
important than the ministrations of the medicine-man. 
Some relations of these Ibans afterwards settled in the 
village, and for a time the sacred mystery of the porcupines 
was hidden from them. At the end of three months the 
precious secret was disclosed to the mnew-comers, the 
porcupines were feasted with every sort of cooked rice, fowls 
were slain and their blood daubed on the face of every 
person in the house, and the old men prayed to the 
porcupines to grant them long life and health.’ 

1C. Hose and W. McDougall, 2 C, Hose and W. McDougall, of. 
‘©The Relations between Men and c#. p. 201. 
Animals in Sarawak,” Journal of the 

Anthropological Institute, xxxi, (1901) 3 C. Hose and W. McDougall, of. 
p- 201, cit, Pp. 202. 

These 
super- 
stitions in 
Borneo 
have no 
bearing on 
marriage. 

On the 
whole the 
Borneo 
customs are 
germs of 
totemism 
rather than 
the institu- 
tion itself. 

212 TOTEMISM IN INDONESIA CHAP. 

In discussing the question whether these and kindred 
facts may be thought to constitute totemism or not, Messrs. 
Hose and McDougall observe that they have not been able 
to discover any vestiges of a social organisation based upon 
totemism. “There is no trace,” they tell us, “of any 
general division of the people of any tribe into groups which 
claim specially intimate relations with different animals, 
except in the case of the Kalamantans; and in their case 
such special relations seem to be the result merely of the 
different conditions under which the various scattered groups 
now live. There are no restrictions in the choice of a wife 
that might indicate a rule of endogamy or exogamy. There 
are no ceremonies to initiate youths into tribal mysteries ; 
certain ceremonies in which the youths take a leading part 
are directed exclusively to training them for war and the 
taking of heads in battle. We know of no instance of any 
group of people being named after an animal or plant which 
is claimed as a relative and in the case of the more homo- 
geneous tribes, such as the Kenyahs and Kayans, all 
prohibitions with regard to animals and all benefits conferred 
by them are shared equally by all the members of any one 
community, and, with but very few exceptions, are the same 
for all the communities of the tribe.” ? 

On the whole Messrs. Hose and McDougall conclude 
that the various superstitions entertained by the tribes of 
Sarawak with regard to animals are not to be regarded as 
survivals of totemism.? On,the other hand they suggest 
that some of these superstitions contain the germs out of 
which a true totemic system might be developed. Such 
seeds of totemism may perhaps be detected in the Iban 
customs and beliefs with regard to the zyarong or guardian- 
spirit. Like the sanztoo or personal totem of the North 
American Indians and of some Australians* these guardian- 
spirits, which are usually species of animals, are commonly 
obtained in dreams; and when the reverence for the species 

1C. Hose and W. McDougall, zt. p. 209. 
“The Relations between Men and 
Animals in Sarawak,” Journal of the 3 See above, vol. i. pp. 49 57., 497 59. 
Anthropological Institute, xxxi. (1901) The mazitoos or guardian-spirits of the 
pp. 204 sg. American Indians will be described 
2 C. Hose and W. McDougall, of. _ later on. 

1X ANALOGIES TO TOTEMISM IN BORNEO 213 

of animals is transmitted, as it sometimes is, by inheritance 
to all a man’s descendants or even, if he be a chief, to all 
the members of the community, the relation between such 
persons and the revered animals is hardly distinguishable 
from clan totemism. These facts and considerations ac- 
cordingly support to a certain extent the view of some 
American ethnologists, who hold that the totems of clans 
have regularly been developed out of the totems of indi- 
viduals.! That view will be considered more fully later on. 
Meantime with regard to Borneo in general and to the 
province of Sarawak in particular we may acquiesce in the 
opinion of Messrs. Hose and McDougall, that the super- 
stitions of the natives with regard to animals do not 
constitute totemism proper, though they illustrate some of 
the ways in which a totemic system might originate. “The 
further development of such incipient totems among these 
tribes,” says Messrs. Hose and McDougall, “is probably 
prevented at the present time, not only by their agricultural 
habits, but also by their passionate addictjon to war and 
fighting and head-hunting; for these pursuits necessitate 
the strict subordination of each community to its chief and 
compel all families to unite in the cult of the hawk to the 
detriment of all other animal-cults, because the hawk is, by 
its habits, so much better suited than any other animal to 
be a guide to them on warlike expeditions.”* 

§ 4. Alleged Sexual Cammunism in Indonesia 

Before we quit Indonesia to pursue the evidence for Reported 
totemism and exogamy elsewhere, it may be well to call s¢s of 
. . sexualcom- 
attention to some reported cases of sexual communism munism in 
in this region. One such report reaches us from the ‘desi 
Poggi or Pageh Islands, two islands of the Mentawei The Poggi 
group, which lies off the western coast of Sumatra. The ?Paseh 
natives of these islands are said to differ in their character 

and customs from all the other peoples of the Indian 

1C, Hose and W. McDougall, 
«The Relations between Men and 
Animals in Sarawak,” Journal of the 
sinthropological Institute, xxxi. (1901) 
pp. 211 sg. The relation of clan 
totems to individual or personal totems 

will be discussed later on in this work. 

2 C. Hose and W. McDougall, of. 
cit, pp. 211 sg. As to the cult of 
the hawk, which is the chief omen- 
bird of the Kenyahs, see zd. pp. 
175 S9q- 

Communal 
houses. 

Supersti- 
tions of the 
Poggi 
Islanders. 

214 TOTEMISM IN INDONESIA CHAP. 

Archipelago and to stand at a very low level of culture. 
Their complexion is reddish-brown ; their features have a 
Jewish cast and are full of expression. Men and women 
are tattooed nearly over their whole bodies; the men wear 
nothing but a loin-cloth. The tattooing is begun in child- 
hood and lasts at intervals for years. The people live 
in largeicommon houses from a hundred and fifty to two 
hundred and fifty feet long, by thirty to thirty-six feet 
wide, solidly built of planks and heavy beams. The 
houses are dark and dirty ; a smoky fire is kept smouldering 
in each of them day and night. In a large village there 
will be three or four such communal dwellings. The men 
occupy themselves with hunting and fishing. In the chase 
they use bows and arrows and sometimes a spear; in 
fishing they employ nets and a sort of harpoon, with 
which they are very expert. They also collect gum-elastic, 
coco-nuts, and other .things which are in demand among 
the traders. The women till the ground, that is, they 
plant sugar-cane, tobacco, and bananas, generally beside 
a river and near the village. They prepare the food, look 
after the pigs, and help the men in making canoes and 
other work. Rice, salt, writing, and money are unknown 
to these islanders; the little trade they do with the few 
vessels which cross over from Sumatra is conducted by 
means of barter. Government does not exist. Every 
man protects himself. Yet the people live on peaceable 
and friendly terms with each other; quarrels are rare and 
murder almost unknown. They are said to have no religious 
worship, though they believe in certain evil spirits which 
haunt the woods, the caves, the air, the water, and the 
earth, manifesting their power in thunder and lightning, 
wind, rain, floods, earthquakes, and so on. However, the 
natives have “a very remarkable and strange custom to 
which they are strongly attached and which they observe 
faithfully under all circumstances, It consists in this, that 
on certain occasions they are bound to remain in their 
village and may not quit it for any cause whatever ; 
further they will allow no stranger to enter the village, 
much less their dwellings; they may neither give nor 
receive anything; they must abstain from certain foods, 

1x ALLEGED SEXUAL COMMUNISM IN INDONESIA 215 

and may not trade.”? These periods of seclusion closely 
resemble the communal taboos or interdicts (gexnas) which 
are often laid on villages among the hill tribes of Assam.’ 

Such is in outline the description given of the Poggi Reported 
Islanders in the year 1852 by two Dutch officers, a naval Sn iis 
lieutenant and a civilian, who were charged by their govern- among the 
ment to examine and report upon the islands. Their 798... 
account of the marriage customs of the natives runs thus: 

“The contracting of marriages, in the sense of the Malays, 
Javanese, and other indigenous peoples, is amongst the 
Poggians a thing unknown. They live in that respect 
entirely as they please among each other. The whole of 
the women are, as it were, the property of the men, and 
the men on the other hand are the property of the women. 
When a girl has conceived, the child is her whole and 
undivided property. The father, who indeed is generally 
unknown, has never any right over it. However, it happens Late 
that when men are tattooed all over and are therefore ™™8* 
between forty and fifty years old, they take to themselves 
a separate wife: that occurs as follows. When the parties 
have agreed to enter into marriage, they give notice of 
it to all the inhabitants of the village; then they step 
into a canoe decked with leaves and flowers and put off 
to the fishing. Returning after three, four, or sometimes 
eight days they are deemed to be married, and the men 
have then respect for the woman even as the women have 
for the man. The children whom the woman in most cases 
brings with her into the marriage then become the property 
of the man, and so if these children (the girls) get children 
in turn. It generally happens that girls who have one or 
more children are thus taken in marriage. Sometimes also 
it occurs that younger men, when they imagine themselves 
the father of such and such a child, take the mother to 
be their separate and only wife; but in such cases the 
man is careful to be completely tattooed as soon as 

1 Pp. A. M. Hinlopen en P. Severijn, 
** Verslag van een onderzoek der Poggi- 
eilanden in 1852,” Zijdschrift voor 
Indische Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde, 
ii, (1854) pp. 319-337. 
27, 

C. Hodson, ‘*The Native 

Tribes of Manipur,” Journal of the 
Anthropological Institute, xxxi. (1901) 
pp. 306 sg.; za. ‘* The Gena amongst 
the Tribes of Assam,” Journal of the 
Anthropological Institute, xxxvi. (1906) 
PP 92 599. 

Other 
alleged 
cases of 
sexual 
communism 
in 
Indonesia. 

216 TOTEMISM IN INDONESIA CHAP. 

possible, for so long as that is not done he may not 
marry, or rather his wife would not be respected. The 
women, who are marriageable very early, are in their 
youth, from the age of twelve to twenty, very pretty, 
some of them even charming; but they age soon and are 
generally, while still in the heyday of life, quite withered. 
There is little or rather no jealousy among them; yet with 
respect to persons from other villages or strangers they are 
more on their guard with their women. But as that is a 
general characteristic of the people, it seldom happens that 
persons, whether men or women, of one village, come into 
close contact with persons of another village.” 

The preceding account of the relations of the sexes 
in the Poggi or Pageh Islands, even if we assume it to 
be correct, hardly justifies the statement that among these 
people marriage is unknown? It rather shews that individual 
marriage, though known, is exceptional and is usually 
deferred till comparatively late in life. “ Another people,” 
says the late Professor G. A. Wilken, “among whom 
marriage is quite unknown are the Loeboes. They practise 
absolutely free love and unite indifferently with any one 
according to the whim of the moment. Communal 
marriage also exists among the Orang Sakai of Malacca. 
A girl remains with every man of the tribe in turn till 
she has gone the round of all the men and has come 
back to the first one. The process then begins afresh. 
In Borneo, too, there are some tribes, such as the Olo 
Ot (those of Koetei), which contract no marriage. Lastly, 
we find the same thing reported of Peling or Poeloe 
Tinggi, one of the islands of the Banggaai Archipelago.” * 

1 Pp, A. M. Hinlopenen P. Severijn, 
‘« Verslag van een onderzoek der Poggi- 
eilanden in 1852,” Tijdschrift voor 
Indische Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde, 
ii. (7854) PP. 327 54. 

. A. Wilken, Handlecding voor 
de doceliienl Volkenkunde van 
Nederlandsch - Indié (Leyden, 1893), 
p. 263. On the other hand Colonel 
Henry Yule said more justly: ‘The 
community of women is positively 
asserted to exist among the Poggy 
or Pagi Islanders off the west coast 

of Sumatra” (Cathay and the Way 
Thither, i. 85, note 2) ; and he referred 
for his authority to the paper in the 
Tijdschrift which I have quoted. 

3G. A. Wilken, Handleiding voor 
de vergelijkende Volkenkunde van 
Nederlandsch - Indié (Leyden, 1893), 
p- 263. This was a posthumous work 
and contains few references to the 
original authorities, with which, how- 
ever, no one was better acquainted 
than Prof. Wilken. 

xX ALLEGED SEXUAL COMMUNISM IN INDONESIA 217 

I do not know what authority Professor Wilken had Such 
for saying this, but he was a learned and careful writer, Pt, 
deeply versed in all that concerns the peoples of the further 
Indian Archipelago, and no doubt he did not make these nee 
statements rashly. Still they would require to be carefully 
tested before we could feel sure of their accuracy. In 
such matters error is easy and the truth very difficult to 
ascertain. 

* e 
gbowearn| 
2 BRANCH & 
% OF Thr 

& 
Sean of 

In India 
totemism 
and exo- 
gamy 

are found 
especially 
among the 
wild hill 
tribes of 
the Dravi- 
dian stock. 

CHAPTER X 

TOTEMISM IN INDIA 

§ 1. Zotemism in Central India 

IN those regions of India where high mountains and table- 
lands present natural barriers to the irruption of conquering 
races, there linger many indigenous tribes, who, in contrast 
to the more cultured peoples of the lowlands, have remained 
in a state of primitive savagery or barbarism down to 
modern times. Not a few of these aboriginal hill-tribes, 
especially’ of the Dravidian stock, retain a social system 
based on totemism and exogamy ; for they are divided into 
numerous exogamous clans or septs, each of which bears the 
name of an animal, tree, plant, or other material : object, 
whether natural or artificial, which the members of the clan 
are forbidden to eat, cultivate, cut, burn, carry, or use in any 
other way. Amongst such tribes are the Bhils or Bheels, 
a people of the Dravidian stock in Central Indian, who 
inhabit the rough forests and jungles of the rocky Vindhya 
and Satpura mountains. Into these fastnesses it is believed 
that they, like many other aborigines of India, were driven 
by the tide of Hindoo invasion. They are a race of dark ° 
complexion and diminutive stature, but active and inured to 
fatigue.” The Bhils of the Satpura mountains have been 

1 Census of India, rgor, vol. i. 
Part I. (Calcutta, 1903) p. 530; Sir 
Herhert Risley, Zhe People of India 
(Calcutta, 1908), p. 93. The first to 
call atterrtion to the wide prevalence of 
totemism combined with exogamy in 
India was Mr. (now Sir Herbert) Risley. 
See his article, ‘‘ Primitive Marriage 
tn Bengal,” Zhe Asiatic Quarterly 

Review, July 1886, pp. 71-96. 

2 Encyclopedia Britannica,® iii. 
630; Captain C. Eckford Luard, in 
Census of India, 1gor, vol. xix. Central 
India, Part I. (Lucknow, 1902) pp. 2, 
4. Compare Colonel Kincaird, ‘On 
the Bheel Tribes of the Vindhyan 
Range,” Journal of the Anthropological 
Institute, ix. (1880) pp. 397-406. 

218 

CHAP. X TOTEMISM IN CENTRAL INDIA 219 

little affected by civilisation and lead an existence which has 
been described as most primitive. A mere report that a 
white man is coming often suffices to put these savages to 
flight. They have no fixed villages. The collection of huts 
which takes the place of a village is abandoned at the least 
alarm, and even in such a hamlet every man builds his hovel 
as far away as he can from his neighbours, whose treachery 
and lust he dreads.’ 

The Bhils of these mountains are divided into many Exogamous 
exogamous and totemic clans or septs. Thus the Bhils of fae 
Barwani, who inhabit the Satpura hills, are divided into among 
forty-one such clans; while the Bhils of the Vindhya ‘° Bris. 
mountains are divided into more than fifty. When two 
clans have the same totem, they may not intermarry. 
Children belong to their father’s clan.2 Among the clan 
totems of the Bhils of Barwani are moths, tigers, snakes, 
cats, the fish called £hattia, peacocks, pigeons, sparrows, and 
many species of trees and plants, including the bamboo, sal 
(Shorea robusta), pipal, bor, sag (Tectonograndis), jamun 
(Eugenia jambolana), bahera (Beleria Myjrobolan), nirgun 
(Vitex negundo or trifolia), astera or apta (Bauhinia tomentosa), 
semel (Bombax heptaphyllum),.the kalami plant (Convolovous 
repens), etc. The majority of the totems are trees or plants. 

All the Bhils revere and refrain from injuring or using their Reverence 
totems, and they make a formal obeisance to them in pass- raapted 
ing, while the women veil their faces. When women desire to for their 
have children they present an offering called mannat to their °™* 
totem. One of the clans is named Gaolia-Chothania after 
its totem gaola, which is a creeper. Members of the clan 
worship the plant; they never touch it with their feet if 
they can help it, and if they touch it accidentally they 
salaam to it by way of apology. The Maoli clan worships a 
goddess at a shrine which women may not approach. The 
shape of the shrine is like that of the grain-basket called 
kilya ; hence members of the clan may neither make nor 
use such baskets, and none of them may tattoo a pattern 

1 Captain C. E. Luard, in Census The People of India, p. 98; Colonel 
of India, rgor, vol. xix. Central India, Kincaird, *‘ On the Bheel Tribes of the 
Part I. (Lucknow, 1902) p. 197. Vindhyan Range,” Journal of the 

; 2 Captain C. E. Luard, of. ct. Anthropological Institute, ix. (1880) p. 
pp. 197-201, 228; Sir Herbert Risley, 397. > 

220 TOTEMISM IN INDIA CHAP. 

resembling the basket on his body. The Mori clan has the 
peacock for its totem. When they wish to worship the 
bird, they go into the jungle and look for its tracks. On 
finding the footprints they salaam to them, clean the ground 
round about, and spreading a piece of red cloth lay an offer- 
ing of grain on it. ‘They also describe a swastzka in the 
earth beside the offering. If a member of the clan know- 
ingly sets foot on the track of a peacock, he is sure to suffer 
from some disease afterwards. If a woman of the clan sees 
a peacock, she must veil her face or look away. The 
Sanyar clan is called after its totem the cat (senyar), which 
the members of the clan reverence. They may never touch 
a cat except to preserve it from harm, and they will not 
even touch anything into which a cat has thrust its mouth. 
It is deemed very unlucky if a cat enters the house, and to 
prevent this they commonly keep a dog tied up near the 
door. The Ava clan takes its name from its totem the 
moth (ava), and members of the clan will not hurt moths. 
The Khatta clan derives its name from its totem the #/attza 
fish, which they preserve ; the Piplia clan worships the pipal 
tree, and the Semlia clan worships the sesmel tree (Bombaa 
heptaphyllum), and menhbers of the clan will not touch a pot 

in which the flowers of this tree have been cooked.’ 
Exogamous Another totemic people of Central India are thé 
and totem? K hangars of Bundelkhand, who, though they profess the 
among the Hindoo religion and claim to be Rajputs by descent, are 
ee probably Dravidians” They are divided into many 
exogamous clans or septs (gotras), among which the follow- 
ing may be noted. The Bel clan reveres the def tree, which 
they never cut nor injure. The Bela clan reveres the dela 
plant, which in like manner they neither cut nor injure. 
The Samad clan holds the samad tree sacred. The Suraj 
clan professes to be descended from the sun (sura7) and to 
worship that luminary. The Guae clan is called after its 
totem the iguana (guae), which they never injure. The Nag 

1 Captain C. E. Luard, in Census Herbert Risley, Zhe People of India, 
of India, rgor, vol. xix. Central India, p.99. * 
Part I. (Lucknow, 1902) pp. 198-201 ; 
also Census of India, 1907, vol, 1, 2 W. Crooke, Tribes and Castes of 
Ethnographic Appendices (Calcutta, the North-West Provinces and of Oudh 
1903), pp. 162 sg. Compare Sir (Calcutta, 1896), iii. 228-231. 

x TOTEMISM IN CENTRAL INDIA 221 

clan reveres and claims kindred with the serpent (aga), and 
they never destroy any snake, The Ghur or Ghor clan reveres 
the horse (ghur, ghora); members of the clan never mount 
a horse nor will they allow one to be used in marriage 
processions, The Hathi clan reveres and claims kindred with 

the elephant (Aathz); and at marriage, contrary to the. 

practice of the Horse clan, they mount the bridegroom on 
an elephant. The totem of the Gau clan is the cow, and 
the totem of the Magar clan is the alligator, which is 
worshipped by them at weddings and on other occasions. 
The Nahar clan is of the kindred of their totem the lion 
(nahar); and the Bar clan is of the kindred of the banyan 
tree (dar), which they worship. The Kusam clan reveres the 
safflower (Ausanz) and they never wear olothes dyed in its juice. 
The Nim clan reveres the 2 tree and they never cut it nor 
use its fruit. The Chanwar clan has rice (chanwar) for their 
totem and they never eat it. The Haldi clan reveres the 
turmeric plant’and never makes use of its dye. Another clan 
has a species of iguana (chandan-guae) for their totem, and 
they never injure it. The rule of exoganiy is that a man 
may marry neither in the clan (gotra) of his father nor in 
that of his mother until three generations have passed.’ 

The Arakhs of Bundelkhand, another Dravidian people 
related to the Khangars, are also divided into exogamous 
and totemic clans or septs. Thus the Lahher clan abstains 
from touching their totem the /ehera tree ; and the Chandan 
clan worships the chandan tree (Santalum album) and never 
harms it. The Chanwar clan takes its name from its totem, 
rice (chanwar), which they never touch nor eat. The Ghora 
clan reveres the horse (ghorva) and the Hathi clan reveres the 
elephant (Aathz). The Gau clan has the cow for its totem, 
and the Ent clan has a brick (e#7) for its totem; hence 
members of this last clan never use bricks, but build their 
houses of plain wattle and mud.” 

1 Captain C. E. Luard, in Census 
of India, rgor, vol. xix. Part I. p. 227, 
and vol. i. Ethnographic Appendices, 
p. 166; W.Crooke, 7rdbes and Castes 
of the North-West Provinces and of 
Oudh, iii. 229 sg. That suraj means 
“sun” is mentioned by W. Crooke, 

Tribes and Castes of the North-Western 
Provinces and Oudh, iii. 247. 

2 Captain C. E. Luard, in Census o7 
India, rgor, vol. xix, Part I. p. 228, 
and vol. i. Ethnographic Appendices, 
p. 166. 

Exogamuus 
and totemic 
clans 
among the 
Arakhs. 

222 TOTEMISM IN INDIA CHAP. 

Exogamous The Korkus are a Kolarian tribe, speaking their 
peeled aboriginal language and inhabiting the Satpura, Mahadeo, 
among the and Maikul hills in the Central Provinces. They are found 
Korkus. in various stages of barbarism or civilisation, but for the 
most part they cling to the hills and jungles and visit the 
nearest towns in the plains only to market. They are a quiet, 
peaceable people, who cultivate the soil a little when they 
can find a level patch of ground, but subsist chiefly by 
cutting and selling bamboos, firewood, and other produce of 
the jungle. They are divided into exogamous and totemic 
clans or septs (gots) with descent in the male line, children 
belonging to the clan of their father. The clans take their 
names from their totems, among which are the following: 
busum (thatch grass), jambu (the jamun tree, with an edible 
fruit), dete (another wild fruit-tree), sz/oo (another wild fruit- ° 
tree), sewath¢ (a small thorny creeper), chzlathi (a large 
thorny creeper), /ofa (stalks of the Makai Jawari, etc.), athoa 
(a wooden ladle, made from dethe wood), kollia (ashes), kasda 
(a ravine), zakhar (cucumber), sakhum (teak), and makhya tola 
(Indian corn). Persons of the same totemic clan may not 
marry each other. A younger brother is supposed to marry 
‘his deceased elder brothér’s wife. 
Exogamous) The Gonds are a non-Aryan tribe, who on grounds of 
ane treme language are classed as Dravidian. They belong properly 
among the to the Central Provinces, though some of them are found in 
Gonds. Chota Nagpur and other parts of Bengal.2 In the Central 
Provinces the Gonds inhabit the hilly country which surrounds 
the wide plains of Chhattisgar. Sharp and striking is the 
contrast between these bare, open, well-cultivated and 
thickly-populated lowlands on the one hand, and the virgin 
forests and dense jungle of the highlands on the other 
hand, where tigers and wild buffaloes abound, where the 
antelope and spotted deer roam the wilds, and aboriginal 
tribes are thinly scattered among the woodland glades. 
Some of the Gonds, however, have adopted Hindoo manners 
and settled in the plains, renouncing social intercourse with 
1 W. H. P. Driver, “The Korkus,” I. (Nagpur, 1902) p. 189. 
Journal of the Asiatic Soctety of Bengal, 
lxi. Part I. (Calcutta, 1893) pp. 128- 2 (Sir) H. H. Risley, Tribes and 

130; R. V. Russell, in Census of India, Castes of Bengal (Calcutta, 1892), i. 
1901, vol. xiii. Central Provinces, Part 292. 

x TOTEMISM IN CENTRAL INDIA 223 

their brethren in the jungle! Like mary other tribes of 
the Central Provinces, the Gonds are divided into exogamous 
clans, which take their names from a plant, animal, or other 
natural or artificial object. Among the things which give 
names to Gond clans are sarkam (mango), marad (a tree), 
kunjam (a tree), marskola (an axe), taram (a tree), sutwadewa 
(a porcupine), wrrusz (a large lizard), tmrésar (a tendu tree), 
kuimrayete (a goat), and ¢umram (a pumpkin). Members 
of the ¢aram clan will not eat the leaves of the keolari 
tree.” 

A somewhat different account of the Gond clans (gotras Mr. Bose’s 
or gots) in the Central Provinces was given at an earlier {cw of 
time by Mr. P. N. Bose, who writes as follows: “ There clans. 
appear to be special minor deities for each got. The Gonds 
are divided into five gots. One of these gots comprises 
worshippers of three deities, another of four deities, a third of 
five deities, and so on. The three deities of the first of these 
gots are, 1 was told, the bull, the tiger, and the crocodile ! 
These animals are considered sacred by, and, would not con- 
tribute towards the food of, those who belong to this 
particular got; but the members of the other gots would not 
scruple to eat the flesh of any of these animals! I cannot, 
however, vouch for the correctness of this information; I 
often inquired about the gof-gods, but never got any 
satisfactory answer. The four deities of the four-god go¢ are, 
I was informed at one place, the Budha Deo himself and his 
three, brothers, Aginkumar, Rausarna, and Audia-Singha ; at 
another place I was told the four gods were the tortoise, the 
crocodile, a kind of fish called dodh,and a ferocious bird the 
name of which was given as sarewa.”* And after giving 
the names of many clans, arranged under five groups 
according to the number of deities worshipped by each, Mr. 
Bose adds: “It would be interesting to know the signification 
of these terms. The meanings of a few I could gather are 

1 Pp. N. Bose, ‘‘ Chhattisgar, Notes 
on its Tribes, Sects, and Castes,” 
Journal of the Asiatic Soctety of Bengal, 
lix. Part I. (Calcutta, 1891) pp. 269 
5G., 273. 

2 R, V. Russell, in Census of India, 
gor, vol, xiii. Central Provinces, 

Part I. (Nagpur, 1902), p. 189. 

3 P. N. Bose, ‘‘ Chhattisgar, Notes 
on its Tribes, Sects, and Castes,” 
Journal of the Asiatic Society of Bengal, 
lix. Part I. (Calcutta, 1891) pp. 281 
Sg. 

224 TOTEMISM IN INDIA CHAP. 

given. It will be seen that they ‘refer to some tree or 
animal. The names of some of the special gods of the five 
groups just mentioned have been given before. .They refer 
mostly to animals, such as the crocodile, the bull, the tiger, 
etc. The gots into which the worshippers of the three 
deities (which are the bull, the tiger, and the alligator) are 
divided are what are called Bhaibunds, and they cannot inter- 
marry ; they must form alliances with other gots. Similarly 
the worshippers of the four deities are Bhatbunds, and 
so on.” ! 
Marriage In the Bilaspore district of the Central Provinces the 
ae Gonds and also the Ghasias permit the marriage of cousins 
Gonds. on the mother’s side, that is, of a man with the daughter of 
his mother’s brother, because she is of a different exogamous 
clan (gotra) from his; but he may not marry his first cousin, 
the daughter of his father’s brother, because she is of his 
own exogamous clan (go¢ra) and is therefore forbidden to 
him by the law of exogamy. But the Gonds and the 
Ghasias are the only castes in Bilaspore which permit the 
marriage of cousins on the mother’s side. Amongst all the 
other castes of the district “the marriage of cousins is held 
in abhorrence because they are regarded as brothers and 
sisters. In fact there is no one word for cousin in the 
language of the people. The words ‘ brother’ and ‘ sister’! 
include a cousin also. If a man wishes to be exact, he will 
say of his cousin: ‘He is my older father’s son,’ meaning 
his father’s elder brother’s son. Or again, he may say, ‘He 
is my aunt-mother’s son,’ meaning his mother’s sister’s son, 
and soon. He would be shocked at the mere mention of 
Cousin- marriage with cousins.”* Nevertheless, marriage with a 
ae first cousin, the daughter of a mother’s brother, is a general 
generally. custom in many parts of India, for example in Malabar, 
Cochin, and Travancore, and in the Telugu-speaking country, 
where it has a special name (sénarikam). It is observed 

1 Pp. N. Bose, ‘‘Chhattisgar, Notes deities which they worship. 

on its Tribes, Sects, and Castes,” 2 E. M. Gordon, Jadian Folk-tales 
Journal of the Asiatic Society of Bengal, (London, 1908), pp. 6 sg. Compare 
lix. Part I. (Calcutta, 1891) p. 285. Mr. ° zd. ‘Some Notes concerning the 
Bose seems to apply the term got both People of Munghéli Tahsil, Bilaspur 
to the exogamous clans themselves and _ District,” Journal of the Asiatic Society 
to the five groups under which they are of Benga, Ixxi. Part IIf. (Calcutta, 
classed according to the number of 1903) Pp. 45. 

x TOTEMISM IN CENTRAL INDIA 225 

with particular strictness by the Komatis, a Telugu people. 
Cases also occur in which marriage with 4 first cousin, the 
daughter of a father’s sister, is especially enjoined, but they 
are less common. More usually marriage is allowed with 
either the daughter of the mother’s brother or with the 
daughter of the father’s sister ;_ and where both are permitted, 
the former (namely marriage with the daughter of a mother’s 
brother) is sometimes preferred.’ 

A few examples of the marriage of first cousins in Cousin. 
Southern India may be cited as examples. Thus “marriage ethan 
among the Kallans? is said to depend entirely upon con- Kallans. 
sariguinity. The most proper alliance is one between a 
man and the daughter of his father’s sister; and, if an 
individual has such a cousin, he must marry her, whatever 
disparity there may be between their respective ages. A 
boy, for example, of fifteen must marry such a cousin, even 
if she be thirty or forty years old, if her father insists upon 
his so doing. Failing a cousin of this sort, he must marry 
his aunt or his niece, or some near relative. . If his father’s 
brother has a daughter, and insists upon his marrying her, 
he cannot refuse: and this whatever may be the’ woman’s 
age. Among the Vallambans (Tamil cultivators), the Cousin. 
maternal uncle’s or paternal aunt’s daughter is said to be Pantin 
claimed as a matter of right by a boy, so that a lad of ten Vallam. 
may be wedded to a mature woman of twenty or twenty. >"> 
five years, if she happens to be unmarried and without issue. 

Any elderly male member of the boy’s family—his elder 
brother, uncle, or even his father—will have intercourse with 

her, and beget children, which the boy, when he comes of 

age, will accept as his own, and legitimatise. One of the Cousin. 
customs of the Komatis (Telugu traders) is that which sone 
renders it the duty of a man to marry his uncle’s daughter, Komatis. ‘ 
however sickly or deformed she may be. This custom is 

known as ménarikam, and is followed by a number of 

1 See the evidence collected by Dr. _ the custom in India. 
W. H. R. Rivers, in his paper, ‘‘ The 
Marriage of Cousins in India,” Journal 2 The Kallans are a Tamil caste of 
of the Royal Asiatic Society, July 1907, thieves in Madura and Tinnevelly. 
pp. 625-628. In this paper (pp. 611- See E. Thurston, Ethnographic Notes 
640) Dr. Rivers has discussed the 2 Southern India (Madras, 1906), pp- 
significance as well as the diffusion of 18, 24. 

VOL. 1° Q 

Cousin- 
marriages 
among the 
Nattamans., 

Cousin- 

marriages 
among the 
Goundans. 

Cousin- 
marriages 
among the 
Idaiyan 
and 
Yerukalas. 

226 TOTEMISM IN INDIA cnaP. ' 

Dravidian castes, but it is perhaps more strictly observed by 
the Komatis than by others. Some Komatis have, in recent 
times, given up this custom, and, as the common folk among 
them put it, have suffered by the loss of their sons-in-law 
and other mishaps. Kanyakapuranam, the sacred book of 
the Komatis, is a lasting monument of the rigidity with 
which w#énarikam was maintained in ancient days. The 
custom has apparently been copied by the Desasta Brahmans 
of Southern India, in whom it would, but for modern 
enlightenment, have almost been crystallised into law. The 
Ayyar Brahmans have adopted it in order to keep the family 
property intact within it. 

“A Nattaman (Tamil cultivator) man has a right to 
marry the daughter of his father’s sister, and, if she is given 
to another man, the father’s sister has to return to ‘her 
father or brother the dowry, which she received at the time 
of her marriage, and this is given to the man who had the 
claim upon the girl. 

“Among the Goundans (cultivators) of Coimbatore, a 
boy of seven or eight is occasionally married to a maternal 
uncle’s or paternal aunt’s daughter of sixteen or eighteen. 
In this case it is said that the boy’s father is the de facto 
husband. But this barbarous and objectionable custom is 
more honoured in the breach than in the observance, and is 
hardly practised, though it is alleged that it can be enforced 
by appeal to the community, and that, upon any objection, 
the boy’s mother is entitled (to threaten) to drown herself in 
a well, or (as is not unfrequently the case), she will incite 
her friends to tie a ¢a/z on the girl by fraud or force.’ The 
maternal uncle’s daughter is absolutely the correct relation- 
ship for a wife. It is the bride’s maternal uncle who carries 
her to the xdttu-kal (place where grain seedlings are raised) 
at the village boundary, and this is equivalent to a publica- 
tion of the banns.... The Idaiyan (Tamil shepherd) 
bridegroom makes a present of four annas and betel to 
each of the bride’s maternal uncle’s sons, who have a natural 
right to marry her. The acceptance of the presents indicates 
their consent to the marriage. One of the bride’s maternal 

} To tie a /a/2 on the girl isto per- her. See E. Thurston, Zthnographic 
form a mock marriage ceremony on Notes in Southern India, pp. 121 sqq. 

x TOTEMISM IN CENTRAL INDIA 227 

uncles carries her in his arms to the marriage booth, while 
another uncle carries a lighted torch oa a mortar. ... 
Among the Yerukalas (a nomad tribe in the Telugu country) 
polygamy is practised, and the number of wives is only 
limited by the means of the husband. Marriage of relations 
within the degree of first cousins is not allowed. The rule 
is relaxed with respect to a man marrying the daughter of 
his father’s sister, which is not only allowed, but a custom 
prevails that the two first daughters of a family may be 
claimed by the maternal uncle as wives for his sons.” ? 

To these examples of cousin-marriage in India may be Cousin- 
added the custom of the Todas in the Neilgherry Mountains. eit a 
Among the Todas a man ought to marry his first cousin, Todas. 
the daughter either of his mother’s brother or of his father’s 
sister. Hence a Toda man applies the same term sun to 
his mother’s brother and to his wife’s father, because these 
two personages are, or ought to be, one and the same man. 
Similarly, he applies the same term mum to his father’s 
sister and to his wife’s mother, because these two personages 
are, or ought to be, one and the same woman.” 

Similarly in two of the three great Dravidian languages Identity of 
of Southern India, the Tamil and the Canarese, the term for atl 
mother’s brother and wife’s father is one and the same : in brother 
Tamil it is sama, in Canarese it is mava. In the third pn} wie's 
great Dravidian language of Southern India, namely the 
Telugu, the name for the wife’s father is sama (as in Tamil) 
and the name for the mother’s brother is menamama. This 
identity or close correspondence between the terms for 
mother’s brother and wife’s father in the three great 
Dravidian languages of Southern India tends, with other 
evidence adduced by Dr. Rivers, to establish the conclusion 
which he draws from it, namely, that the custom of marrying The 
a first cousin, the daughter either of the mother’s brother (77 38° 
or of the father’s sister, is an ancient Dravidian institution, cousins is 
which probably in former times was observed by all the SPPatently 

an ancient 

members of that great family, although at the present day Devcon 
institution. 

1E. Thurston, Bthnographic Notes ‘+The Marriage of Cousins in India,” 
in Southern India, pp. 53-56. Journal of the Royal Asiatic Soctety, 
2W. H. R. Rivers, Zhe Todas July 1907, pp. 619 sg. 
(London, 1906), pp. 487 5g., 502; éd. 

228 TOTEMISM IN INDIA CHAP. 

some of them have relinquished it. In point of fact it is 
among peoples of the Dravidian stock, whether they speak 
the Tamil or the Telugu language, that the right or the 
obligation to marry such first cousins still survives. 
Thecustom If we ask why a man should not only be allowed but in 
of cousin: some cases expected and required to marry his first cousin, 
Pare the daughter either of his father’s sister or of his mother’s 
relic ofthe brother, the only probable answer seems to be the one 
ofthe . indicated by Dr. Rivers,’ namely, that the custom is derived 
community from the bisection of the community into two exogamous 
exogamous moieties or classes, such as we still find, or found till very 
‘esses’ lately, in the Urabunna and many other Australian tribes ; 
for where such a bisection exists the children’ of a brother 
and the children of his sister necessarily belong to different 
exogamous moieties or classes and are therefore proper mates 
for each other. We have seen that amongst the Urabunna 
in Central Australia the custom of such cousin-marriages co- 
exists with the bisection of the community, and is obviously 
Hence the derived from it. We may, therefore, with much probability 
Ale ie infer that the Dravidians, who retain to a considerable extent 
have had the custom of such cousin-marriages, have inherited it from a 
formerly , time when their ancestors were divided, like many Australian 
exogamous tribes at the present time, into two exogamous moieties or 
eethat classes. This inference is greatly strengthened by the 
Gees observation that the Dravidians, like the Australians, seem 
tribes. | to have universally possessed, as indeed they still to a great 
extent possess, the two institutions of totemism and the 
classificatory system of relationship,* both of which are 
bound up either (as is the case with the classificatory system 
of relationship) essentially or (as is the case with totemism) 
accidentally with the bisection of the community into two 
exogamous moieties or classes. 
But this account of cousin-marriage in India has been a 
digression, though not an impertinent one. We now return 

to our immediate subject, which is the evidence for ‘the 
1 W. HL R. Rivers, ‘The Marriage Jdian Empire, ‘vol. i. (Oxford, 

of Cousins in India,” Journal of the 1909) pp. 378 599. 

Royal Asiatic Society, July 1907, pp. 2 W. H. R. Rivers, of. cit. pp. 

618-621, 623. As to the languages 622 59. 

of the Dravidian family, see Zhe 3 See above, vol. i. pp. 177-181. 

Imperial Gazetteer of India: The 4 See below, pp. 329 5997- 

x TOTEMISM IN CENTRAL jyPia 229 

existence of totemism and exogamy athong the natives of 
the Central Provinces of India. 

Another totemic people of Central India are the Savars, Exogamous 

an aboriginal tribe of cultivatorsand menials, who have been 24 totemic 
variously classed as Dravidians and as Kolarians. Some of among the 
them are found in Orissa, Chota Nagpur, Western Bengal and 87's. 
Madras as well as in the Central Provinces. They are 
divided into many exogamous clans with paternal descent. 
The wife belongs to her husband’s clan after marriage, and’ 
the children belong to the clan of their father. Among the 
clans with their totemic taboos are the following. The 
Saram clan may not eat sambar; the Murmu clan may not 
eat the nilgau (a species of antelope) ; the Barhia clan may 
not eat wild pig; the Guincha clan may not eat tree-mice ; 
the Ir-tirki clan may not eat guinea-pig ; the Nag clan may 
not kill a cobra; the Sua clan may not kill nor eat a parrot ; 
and the Toro clan may not kill nor eat a lizard? 

The division of a people into exogamous and totemic Exogamous 
clans is found among many other tribes in the Central one ome 
Provinces, Such clans, we are informed, “are confined for among 
the most part to the Dravidian tribes, and where they are Ser inbes 
found in other castes, probably indicate either that the caste Central 
itself is of non-Aryan origin or that a section of a tribe has "°° 
become enrolled in it as a sub-caste.”* The following table 
exhibits the names of some of these totemic tribes with 

some of their clan totems :—* 

1 (Sir) H. H. Risley, Zyebes and India, rgor, vol. i. India, Part I. 

Castes of Bengal, ii. 241 sqg.3 E. T. 
Dalton, Descriptive Ethnology of Bengal, 
pp. 149 sg. The Kolarian family of 
speech should rather be called the 
Munda, after one of its principal forms. 
Different opinions have been held as 
to whether it belongs to the same family 
as the Dravidian or not; but recent 
enquiries tend to show that the Munda 
or Kolarian and the Dravidian lan- 
guages have not a common origin. 
See Mr. G, A. Grierson, in Cessus of 

(Calcutta, 1903) p. 278, note!; Zhe 
Imperial Gazetteer of India: The Indian 
Empire, vol. i. (Oxford, 1909) pp. 
378 59., 382 5g. 

2 W. H. P. Driver, “Notes on 
some Kolarian Tribes, No. II.” Journa. 
of the Asiatic Society of Bengal, \x. 
Part I. (Calcutta, 1892) p. 34. 

3 R. V. Russell, in Cezsus of India, 
zgor, vol. xiii. Central Provinces, 
Part I, (Nagpur, 1902) p. 189. 

4 R. V. Russell, Ae. 

[TABLE 

Totemic 
clans 

among the 

Boyas. 

230 TOTEMISM IN INDIA CHAP. 

Tribe. Clan Totems. 

{| Aasté (elephant), dhainsa (buffalo), sendur (ver- 

Ahirs : “|. milion), sézgha (lion). 
B te richharia (bear), kudaha (jackal), dandar (monkey), 
ae . . { Aumhardora (a Kumhar’s thread). 
Bharias_. : nag (a snake). 
dhana (coriander), magra (crocodile), sua (parrot), 
Chadars belha (bel tree). 
purain (lotus leaves), machhit (fish), oliha 
Chamars (jackal). 
Dangris . ‘ nagkuria (snake), morkuria, (peacock).! 
Darjis ; . | bed (a tree), piparia (a pipal tree). 

f chirai (a bird), wamjan (a tree), min (a fish), bagh 
(tiger), zn (salt), dhan (rice), zag (snake), 

Dhangar-Oraons 
| “Limuan (tortoise). 

. chandan (sandal-wood), dhatua (a vegetable), 
Dhimars ; { imachhia (a fish). 
Ghasias. : bichhi (scorpion), kalasarp (cobra). 
: bheria (wolf), aonla (a tree), araz/ (the snake 
Halbas of that name), #Asza (buffalo), zagéans (snake), 
: , bel (a tree), baghbans (tiger), bandarbans 
(monkey). 

Many of the totemic clans in the Central Provinces are 
reported not to observe the rule which forbids members of a 
clan to kill or use their totem; even the meaning of the 
clan names is often forgotten.’ 

§ 2. Totemism in the Madras Presidency 

In the Madras Presidency the Boyas, a great Telugu- 
speaking tribe of the Deccan districts, comprise two 
1 In these two names the second 2 R. V. Russell, in Census of /udia, 

portion (Zura) is perhaps the native 7gor7, vol. xiii. Central Provinces, 
word for ‘‘ clan.” Part I. (Nagpur, 1902) p. 189. 

x TOTEMISM IN THE MADRAS PRESIDENCY 231 

endogamous sections, namely the Forést_ men (Myasa or 
Vyadha) and the Village men (Urz), of whom the former 
subsist on game and other produce of the woods, while the 
latter have settled down in villages and live by fishing and 
day labour. The tribe is subdivided into one hundred and 
one totemic clans or septs, many of which bear the names of 
plants and animals. Such clans are the Ants (Chimalu), 
the Bulls (Eddulu), the Buffaloes ( Yenumalu), the Centipedes 
CJerrabotula), the Sweet-scented Oleanders (Genxneru), the 
Grasses (Kusa),the Dogs (Kukkala), the Paroquets (Chilakala), 
the Peacocks (Vemzlz), the Cows (Avuda), the Lizards (Udu- 
mala), the Locusts (Afidathala), the Gazelles ( /inkala), the 
- Goats (Mekala), the Jackals (Wakka), the Sparrows (Pichiga), 
the Pigeons (Guvvala), Turmeric (Pasupu), and Sugar-cane 
(Cheruku). Other clans are named after other objects such 
as Butter-milk (Mayiga), Hand (Hastham), Ear (Chevvula), 
Beard (Geddam), Whiskers (Mésala), Charcoal (Boggula), 
Bread (Rottala), Hut (Gudisa), Garden (Jota), Light (/o?z), 
Fire (Aggt), Mat (Chapa), Drum (Thappata), etc. Members 
of the clans are said to shew the usual‘ reverence for the 
totemic animals or plants after which they are named by 
not touching or using them in any way.’ 

The Kalingi, a caste of temple priests and cultivators ‘rotemic 
in Ganjam and Vizagapatam, are divided into several ee “ 
exogamous clans (gofras), each comprising a number of Kalingi. 
families (vamsas), of which some are totemic, such as the 
Arudra or Lady Bird clan or family, and the Ravi-chettu 
or Ficus religiosa clan or family. Each section is said to 
worship its totem.’ 

The Kurni, a caste of weavers and cultivators in Totemic 
the Madras Presidency, comprise two main divisions, of ied 

g the 
which one is said to be subdivided into sixty-six totemic Kurni. 
clans or septs (gofras), Amongst them are avishina (saffron), 
hon (gold), yerige (cummin), adalat (Bengal-gram, Czcer 
arietinunt), menasu (pepper), mudla (thorn), sampige (a flower- 
ing tree, Michelia champaca), and yemme (buffalo)? 

The Vakkaliga of Madras are a caste of Canarese 

lw. Francis, in Census o India, and Tribes of Southern India, i. 198 sq. 

rgors, vol. xv. Madras, Part I. (Madras, 2 W. Francis, of. cit. pp. 157 59. 
1902) p. 146; Edgar Thurston, Castes 3 W. Francis, of. cz, p. 165. 

232 TOTEMISM IN INDIA CHAP, 

Totemic cultivators, who originally belonged to Mysore and are now 
ca the found mainly in Madura and Coimbatore. They are divided 
Vakkaliga, into exogamous and totemic clans (#z/as), which include 
Chinnada (gold), Belli (silver), Khajjaya (a cake), Yemme 
(a buffalo), Alagi (a pot), and Jola (cholum). They employ 
Brahman priests and are beginning to burn their dead, but 
they eat animal food." 
The The Kasubas are a forest tribe of the beautiful Neil- 
Kasubas of sherry Mountains in the Madras Presidency, but a branch 
the Neil- . ‘ : A . ecg ve 
gherries. Of the tribe is also found in certain contiguous districts of 
the feudatory State of Mysore, particularly in Gundlupet, 
Chamarajanagur, and Yelandur. They work on the coffee 
plantations, which occupy clearings in the forest. Their 
language is a dialect of Tamil akin to the Irula language, 
with a strong Canarese element, and some of them claim 
connection with the Irulas. Kasubas and Irulas occasionally 
Totemic intermarry. But unlike the Irulas, the Todas, and other hill 
clans of the tribes of the Neilgherry Mountains, the Kasubas are divided 
Kasubas. ° ‘ ‘ 
into many totemic clans or septs, of which the following 
have been recorded :— 

1. The Nagara-kula or Cobra clan. The members of 
this clan do not kill the cobra de capello. Whenever they 
see the snake, they make obeisance to it and burn incense 
before it. 

2. The Bellz-kula or Silver clan. The women of this 
clan do not wear silver (de//2) ornaments (known as muvups) 
on the toes of either foot. 

3. The Bhumti-kula or Earth clan. The members of 
this clan burn incense in honour of Earth on festival days, 
such as Szvasathri, a popular Hindoo festival. 

Other Kasuba clans are the Sambar-kula, the Or-kula, 
the Karataguru-kula, and the Uppiliguru-kula; but the 
totems of these have not been ascertained. We may 
probably assume, though we are not expressly told, that all 

Cousin. these clans are exogamous. A Kasuba man usually marries 
marriages his first cousin, the daughter of his father’s sister ; indeed 
he is bound to marry her, unless she is older than himself. 
In that case he may marry either his first cousin, the 

1 W. Francis, in Census of Zndia, 1901, vol. xv. Madras, Part I. (Madras, 
1902) p. 182. 

x TOTEMISM IN THE MADRAS PRESIDENCY 233 

daughter of his mother’s brother, or his hice: the daughter 
of his sister. The remarriage of widows is discountenanced, 
but not forbidden. 

The Balijas are the chief Telugu trading caste and are The 
scattered throughout all the districts of the Madras Presi- Bas. 
dency. Like other Telugu castes of Southern India, the exogamous 
Balijas are divided into exogamous clans or septs (dutiperu), 
which bear, amongst others, the following names Tiger 
(pelt), Lizard (dalli), Cow (avula), Peacock (nemzli), Buffalo 
(yenumala), Split Pulse (pappu), Cummin seeds (jtlakara), 
coco-nut’ (zarikella), Pepper (mztriyala), Sandal Paste (gand- 
ham), Pearls (smutyala), Coral (pagadala), Silk house 
(pattindla), Musket (tepakala), Bell (gantla), and Rings 
(ungarala)? 

The Bants are the chief land-owning and cultivating The Bants, 
class in South Canara, and they are, with one exception, the ee aN 
most numerous caste of the district. Most of them profess clans. 
the Hindoo religion, but about ten thousand of them are 
Jains They are divided into a number of exogamous 
clans or septs (da/z), which are traced in the female line ; 
that is, children belong to their mother’s, not to their father’s 
clan. Marriage between persons of the same clan (da/z) “ is 
considered incestuous, as falling within the prohibited 
degrees of consanguinity.” Nor is the taboo limited to 
persons of the same clan ; it extends to certain allied (Loodz) 
clans as well. Moreover, a man is forbidden to marry his 
first cousin, the daughter of his father’s brother, though she 
belongs to a different clan. The Bant clans take their 
names from animals, plants, and other objects, such for 
example as the tiger, scorpion, bandicoot rat, fowl, jack-tree 
(Artocarpus integrifolia), green peas, Nux Vomica, Eleusine 
Coracana, jaggery, ashes, and weaver.* 

The Besthas are a Telugu caste, who gain their liveli- 
hood as hunters, fishers, farmers, bearers, and cooks.® Like 

1 C, Hayavadana Rao, ‘The Kasu- Southern India, i. 134, 140 sy. 
bas, a Forest Tribe of the Nilgiris,” 4 E, Thurston, of. cit. i. 149, 151. 
Anthropos, iv. (1909) pp. 178-181. 

2 Census of India, 1901, vol. xv. 5 E, Thurston, of. c##, i, 163 sg. 
Madras, Part I., by W. Francis 6 E. Thurston, of. cit. i. 218, As 
(Madras, 1902), p. 144. to the Besthas in Mysore, see further 

3 E. Thurston, Castes and Tribes of below, pp. 272 sq. 

234 TOTEMISM IN INDIA CHAP. 

The other Telugu castes, they are divided into exogamous septs 
eta (éntzperulu) and gotras, and the members of some of the 

exogamous gotras observe certain taboos which appear to be totemic. 
rlaDe Thus, members of the Jessamine (salle) gotra may not touch 
jessamine ; and members of the Ippala gotra may not touch 
or use the 7a tree (Basséa latifolia).' 
The Thé Bhondari are the barbers of the Oriya country, 
Bhondari, Jiving in Ganjam.” They are divided into exogamous clans, 
exogamous Of which some are named after the peacock (sofzro), the 
oe cobra, Achyranthes aspera, and light (dhippo). Members of 
the clan who take their name from the Achyranthes aspera 
may not touch the plant nor use its root as a tooth-brush. 
Members of the Light clan may not extinguish lights with 
their breath or in any other way, and they will not light 
lamps unless they are wearing silk or cloths that have been 
Cousin. washed and dried after bathing.? A Bhondari ought not to 
marriages: marry his first cousin, the daughter either of his mother’s 
brother or of his father’s sister.‘ 
The The Bottadas are a class of Uriya cultivators and 
Boualas. Jabourers, speaking a dialect of Uriya. The caste is divided 
exogamous into three endogamous sections, of which one, the Bodo or 
‘lans. genuine Bottadas, is subdivided into a number of exogamous 
clans or septs (Jamsa), some of which are named the Tiger 
(bhag), the Cobra (zag), the Tortoise (kochchimo), the Lizard 
(goyz), the Monkey (sakado), the Dog (kukkuro), and the 
“ Cousin- Goat (che/z). A man may claim in marriage his first cousin, 
marriages: the daughter of his father’s sister. A younger brother often 
marries the widow of his deceased elder brother.® : 
The The Chenchus are a Telugu-speaking jungle tribe, 
oor who inhabit the hills of the Kurnool and Nellore districts, 
exogamous Like other Telugu classes, the Chenchus are divided into 
ae exogamous clans or septs (¢#tipferu), which bear amongst 
others such names as Horse (gurram), Goats (mekala), 
Plantain-tree (arat?), Garden (¢ota), Houses (¢xdla), Pit 
(gundam), and Sovereign (savaram, the gold coin).® 
The Devangas are a caste of weavers who are found all 

1 E. Thurston, Castes and Tribes of 4 E. Thurston, of. ct, i. 232. 
Southern India, i. 221. 5 E. Thurston, of. czt. i. 264 59., 

2 E. Thurston, of. c#t. i. 230. 266. . 

3 E. Thurston, of. cét. i. 231. 6 E. Thurston, of. cit. ii. 26, 39. 

x TOTEMISM IN THE MADRAS PRESIDENCY 

235 

over the Madras Presidency. Some of them speak Telugu The 

and others Canarese.} 

Devangas, 

The Telugu-speakiag section of the 2; 

caste is the more conservative of the two; they have not exogamous 

adopted the Brahmanical ceremonials to such an extent as 
their Canarese-speaking brethren. 

clans. 

These Telugu-speaking 

Devangas are divided into a large number of exogamous 
clans or septs, of which the following are given as 

examples :—’* 

Akasam, sky. 

Anumata, seeds of Dolichos lablad. 
Boggula, charcoal. 

Bandla, rock or cart. 

Chintakat, tamarind fruit. 
Challa, buttermilk. 

Chapparam, pandal or booth. 
Dhoddi, cattle-pen, or courtyard. 
Dhuggani, money. 

Yerra, red. 

Katta, a dam. 

Kompala, houses. 

Konangi, buffoon. 

Katikala, collyrium. 

Kaththiri, scissors, 

Moksham, heaven. 

Pasupala, turmeric. 

Pidakala, dried cow-dung cakes. 
Pothula, male. 

Pachipowaku, green tobacco. 
Padavaila, boat. 

Pouzala, a bird. 

Pammi, clay lamp. 

Thalakoka, female cloth. 
Thutla, hole. 

Utla, ropes for hanging pots. 

Vasthrala, cloths. 

Konda, mountain. 

Kaththi, knife. 

Bandar? (treasurer). 

Busam, grain. 

Dhondapu, Cephalandra indica. 
Elugoti, assembly. 

Gattu, bank or mound. 
Paidam, money. 

Gonapala, old plough. 

Gosu, pride. 

Jigala, pith, 

Matam, monastery. 

sVadira, liquor or heap of earth. 
Medam, fight. 

Mastla, dirt. 

Oltkala, faneral pyre and ashes. 
Prithvi, earth. 

Peraka, tile. 

Punjala, cock or male. 
Pinjala, cotton-cleaning. 
Pichchiga, sparrow. 

Stkha (Audumié ; tuft of hair). 
Sandadla, \anes. 

Santha, a fair. 

Sajje, Setaria ttalica. 

In this curiously miscellaneous list of names there are 

few plants and still fewer animals. 
are worshippers of Siva and wear the /ingam. 

The majority of Devangas 
“Tn some Sacteaf 

parts of Ganjam the country folk keep a large number of bulls 

Brahmani bulls. 

When one of these animals dies, very 

elaborate funeral ceremonies take place, and the dead beast 
is carried in procession by Devangas, and buried by them 
As the Devangas are Lingayats, they have a special reveren 

1 E. Thurston, Castes and Tribes of Southern India, ii, 154. 
,? E. Thurston, of. cz. ii. 160 sg. 

236 TOTEMISM IN INDIA cua. 

for Basavanna, the sacred bull, and the burying of the 
Brahmani bull is regarded by them as a sacred and 
meritorious act.”’ Thus like many other people in India 
the Devangas retain the old social organisation in exogamous 
clans after they have accepted the Hindoo religion. 
The The Dhombs are a Dravidian caste of weavers and 
Phombs. menials, who are found in the hill tracts of Vizagapatam. 
They appear to be an offshoot of the Doms of Bengal.’ 
Some of their clans or septs bear the names of Tiger (dhag), 
Bear (alu), Cobra (nag), Hanuman (the monkey god), 
Tortoise (kochchipo), Frog (bengrt), Dog (kukra), Sun (surya), 
Fish (atsya), and Lizard (yatkonda). It is said that among 
the Dhombs “ monkeys, frogs, and cobras are taboo, and also 
the sunaré tree (Ochna squarrosa). The big lizard, cobras, 
frogs and the crabs which are found in the paddy fields and 
Cousin. are usually eaten by jungle people, may not be eaten.”* A 
The = Dhomb may claim his first cousin, the daughter of his 
Levirate. father’s sister, in marriage. 7 A younger brother usually 
marries the widow of his deceased elder brother.‘ 
The. The Ganigas or Gandlas are a Telugu caste whose chief 
tunieés: _ occupation is oil-pressing. They are divided into clans or 
and taboos. septs (gotras), some of which observe certain taboos. Thus, 
members of two clans may not cut the tree Erythroxylon’ 
monogynum ; members of two others may not cut Feronia 
elephantum ; and members of another may not cut Vyctanthes 
arbor-tristis, Members of certain other clans do not 
cultivate turmeric, sugar-cane, or a kind of millet (Panicum 
miliare). Ifa young man of this caste dies a bachelor, the 
corpse is married to an arka plant (Calotropis gigantea) and 
is adorned with a wreath of its flowers.° 
The Gollas, The Gollas are the great pastoral caste of the Telugu 
zamous People. Their hereditary occupation is tending sheep and 
cattle and selling milk, but many of them have now acquired 
lands and are engaged in farming, and some are in Govern- 
ment service.’ Like many other Telugu castes, the Gollas 
are divided into exogamous clans or septs (¢utiperu) 

1 E, Thurston, Castes and Tribes of 3 E. Thurston, of. cit. ii. 176 sg. 
uthern India, ii. 161 sg. 4 E. Thurst 4. ii. 8 

E, Thurston, of. cit. ii. 173 sg. ai mestoni ae es . eae aa 
o the Doms of Bengal, see below, 5 E, Thurston, of. cét. ii. 266, 267. 
13 59. 8 E. Thurston, of, cét. ii. 284. 

x TOTEMISM IN THE MADRAS PRESIDENCY 237 

and gotras. Among the former (the intiperu) are the 
following :—' 

Agni, fire. Katari, dagger. 

Avula, cows. Mugi, dumb. 

Chinthala, tamarind. Nakkala, jackal. 

Chevvula, ears. a Saddikudu, cold rice or food. 
Gundala, stones. Sevala, service. 

Gurram, horse. Uilipoyala, onions. 

Gorrela, sheep. Vankayala, brinjal (Solanum 
Goranila, henna (Lawsonza alba). melongena). 

Kokala, woman’s cloth. 

Members ‘of the Raghindala (Ficus religiosa) gotra in the ‘Taboos 
Golla caste are not allowed to use the leaves of the sacred api 
fig or peepul tree as plates for their food. Members of the gorras. 
Palavili gotra never construct palavil? or small booths inside 
the house for the purpose of worship. Members of the 
Akshathayya gotra are said to avoid fice coloured with 
turmeric or other powder (akshantalu), Members of the 
Kommi, Jammi, and Mushti gotras avoid using the komm 
tree, the Prosopis spicigera, and the Strychnos Nux-vomica 
respectively.2, The Gollas have adopted the Hindoo religion, 
some of them worshipping Vishnu and others Siva.’ 

The Gudalas are a Telugu caste of basket-makers in ‘rhe 
Vizagapatam and Ganjam. Like so many other Telugu (udmas, 
castes, the Gudalas are divided into exogamous clans or exogamous 
septs (¢tiperulu), amongst which are, for example, the Jackal °""* 
(nakka) clan, the Cotton (paththz) clan, and the Setaria 
ttalica (korra) clan. Another clan takes its name from 
gantt, “a hole pierced in the lobe of the ear.” In this caste Cousin. 
the custom called ménarikam is observed of marrying a first "ges. 
cousin, the daughter of the mother’s brother.‘ 

The Haddis are a low class of Oriyas, corresponding to The 
the Telugu Malas and Madigas and to the Tamil Paraiyans.° ioe 
They are divided into many exogamous clans or septs exogam 
(6amsam). One of these takes its name from the elephant > | 
(hathz), and when members of this clan see the foot-prints 
of an elephant they take up some of the dust from the spot 
and mark their foreheads with it. They also draw the, 

1E. Thurston, Castes and Tribes of 3 E. Thurston, of. c?t. ii. 292. 
Southern India, ii. 290. 4 E. Thurston, of. ctt. ii. 300, 3 
2 E. Thurston, of. c@¢. ii. 291. 5 E. Thurston, of. cét. ii. 313. 

Cousin- 
marriages. 

The 
Halepaik, 
their 
exogamous 
clans. 

Worship 
of the 
totems, 

The 
anappans, 
vir 
ramous 

238 TOTEMISM IN INDIA CHAP. 

figure of an elephant when they perform the memorial 
services for the dead (svadhk) and other ceremonies,’ Con- 
trary to the usual Oriya custom, the Haddis permit the 
practice of ménarikam or marriage with a first cousin, the 
daughter of a mother’s brother.” The Haddis who inhabit 
the southern part of Ganjam are known as Ghasis, and 
among their exogamous clans or septs (damzsam) are the 
Cobra (zaga) clan, the Horse (asvo) clan, the Tamarind 
(chintala) clan, and the Parched Rice (4arz) clan? 

The Halepaik are Canarese toddy - drawers, who are 
found in the northern part of the South Canara district. 
They are Hindoos by religion, professing the worship of 
Vishnu, and are divided into exogamous clans or septs (da/2), 
which descend in the female line. Among the names of the 
clans are Chendi (Cerbera Odollum), Honne (Calophyllum 
tnophyllum), Tolar (wolf), and Devana (god). It is recorded 
of the Halepaiks of the Canara district in the Bombay 
Presidency that “each exogamous section, known as a dadz 
(literally a creeper), is named after some animal or tree, 
which is held sacred by the members of the same. This 
animal, tree, or flower, etc, seems to have been once con- 
sidered the common ancestor of the members of the Jda/z, 
and to the present day it is both worshipped by them, and 
held sacred in the sense that they will not injure it. Thus 
the members of the zagdalz, named apparently after the 
nagchampa flower, will not wear this flower in their hair, as 
this would involve injury to the plant. The Kadavebalt 
will not kill the sambhar (deer: fadave), from which they 
take their name.” The Halepaiks of South Canara seem to 
attach no such importance to their clan names.° 

The Janappans or Saluppans were originally a section of 
the Balijas, but they have developed into a distinct caste. 
Saluppan is the Tamil form of the name Janappan, which is 
supposed to be derived from janapa, “hemp,” because 
members of the caste manufactured, and indeed still manu- 
facture, gummy-bags of hemp fibre. Most of the caste is 

1 E. Thurston, Castes and Tribes of 5 E. Thurston, of. cé. ii. 321, 
bouthern India, ii. 314. quoting ‘** Monograph, Eth. Survey of 
? E. Thurston, of. c7t. ii. 315. Bombay, 12, 1904.” As to the Hale- 
E. Thurston, of. c#t. ii. 319. paiks of the Bombay Presidency, see 

. Thurston, of. c2t. ii. 320 sgg. also below, p. 276. 

x TOTEMISM IN THE MADRAS PRESIDENCY 239 

now engaged in trade or agriculture. They profess the 
Hindoo religion, some of them being foliowers of Vishnu 

and others of Siva. The caste usually speaks Telugu.’ The 
Janappans of the Telugu country are divided into twenty- 

four clans or septs (gofras), some of which observe totemic Totemic 
taboos, Thus members of the Frog (kappa/a) clan will not °° 
injure frogs, because they say that once on a time when 
some of the family were fishing, they made a haul of big 
frogs instead of fish, Members of the Thonda clan abstain 

from using the fruit or leaves of the thonda plant (Cephal- 
andra indica), though it is one of the commonest of native 
vegetables ; and similarly members of the Mukkanda clan 

may not use the fruit of the Momordica Charantéa. Again, 
members of the Kola clan are forbidden to eat the Lolasz 
fish ; and members of the Vamme clan refrain from eating 

the fish Jombadai, because some of their ancestors found a 
number of these fish in the marriage pot in which they 
intended to fetch water.’ 

The Jogis are a caste of Telugu mendicants, and like The Jogis, 
other Telugu castes they are divided into exogamous clans eeineié 
or septs (éxtiperu), of which the following are cited as clans. 
examples :—* 

Vagiti, court-yard, Bindhollu, brass water-pot. 
Uluvala, horse-gram. Cheruku, sugar-cane. 
Jalli, tassels of palmyra leaves put | Chappadz, insipid. 

round the necks of bulls. Boda Dasirt, bald-headed mendi- 
Vavaii (relationship). cant. 
Gundra, round. Gudi, temple.- 

In the Jogi marriage ceremony the maternal uncles of Maternai 
the young couple tie threads made of human hair to the pian 
wrists of the bride and bridegroom and carry the two on ceremony. 
their shoulders into the marriage booth (Janda/).* 

“The Kapus or Reddis are the largest caste in the The Kapus 
Madras Presidency, numbering more than two millions, and & Reds. 
are the great caste of cultivators, farmers, and squireens in 
the Telugu country. In the Gazetteer of Anantapur they 

are described as being the great land-holding body in the 

1 E, Thurston, Castes and Tribes of. 3- E. Thurston, of. ct#. ii. 494, 496. 
Southern India, ii. 447, 449 sg- . 
2 E, Thurston, of. cit. ii. 448 5g. 4 E. Thurston, of, cz¢. ii. 497. 

Exogamy 
and 
totemism 
among the 
Kapus or 
Reddis. 

Exogamous 
clans of 
the Kapus 
or Reddis. 

Totemic 
taboos 
observed 
by the 
Reddis. 

240 TOTEMISM IN INDIA CHAP. 

Telugu districts, who are held in much respect as substantial, 
steady-going yeomen, and next to the Brahmans are the 
leaders of Hindu Society. In the Salem Manual it is 
stated that ‘the Reddis are provident. They spend their 
money on the land, but are not parsimonious. They are 
always well dressed, if they can afford it. The gold 
ornaments worn by the women or the men are of the finest 
kind of gold. Their houses are always neat and well built, 
and the Reddis give the idea of good substantial ryots. 
They live chiefly on rdgi (grain: Eleusine Coracana), and are 
a fine powerful race, ”? 

However, these fine, powerful, well-dressed men, these 
gentlemen farmers, these substantial steady-going yeomen, 
these leaders of society with their neat well-built houses 
and jewels of fine gold, nevertheless retain the primitive 
institutions of exogamy and to some extent of totemism. 
So false is the popular notion that these ancient customs are 
practised only by vagrant savages with no house over their 
heads and little or no clothing on their backs, 

Among the exogamous clans or septs into which the 
Kapus or Reddis are divided may be mentioned the 
following :-—* 

Avula, cow. Meékala, goats. 

Alla, grain, Kanugala, Pongamia glabra. 
Bandit, cart. Mungaru, woman's skirt. 
Barrelu, buffaloes. Nagalz, plough. 

Dandu, army. Tangédu, Cassta auriculata. 
Gorre, sheep. Udumala, Varanus bengalensis. 
Gudise, hut. Varige, Setaria italica. 
Guntaka, harrow. Yeddulu, bulls. 

Kodla, fowl. Yénuga, elephant. 

Further at Conjeeveram, we are told, “some Panta 
Reddis have true totemistic septs, of which the following are 
examples :— 

“ Magilt (Pandanus fascicularis\. Women do not, like 
women of other castes, use the flower-bracts for the purpose 
of adorning themselves. A man has been known to refuse 
to purchase some bamboo mats, because they were tied with 
the fibre of this tree. 

1 E. Thurston, Castes and Tribes of Southern India, iii. 222 59. 
2 E. Thurston, of. cit. iii. 230 59. 

x TOTEMISM IN THE MADRAS PRESIDENCY 241 

“Tppi (Bassia longifolia). The tree, and its products, 
must not be touched. 

“ Mancham (cot), They avoid sleeping on cots, 

“ Arigala (Paspalum scrobiculatum). The grain is not 
used as food. 

“ Chintaginjalu (tamarind seeds). The seeds may not 
be touched, or used. . 

“Puccha (cttrullus vulgaris; water melon). The fruit 
may not be eaten.” ? 

The Komatis are the great trading caste of the Madras The _ 
Presidency, and are found in almost all districts of it. They *°™*"* 
are also to be met with in Mysore, the Bombay Presidency, 

Berar, the Central Provinces, and as far north-west as 
Baroda.? Everywhere they speak Telugu and are devoted 
to their mother-tongue, despising the sister language Tamil. 
Indeed we are told that Telugu is the most mellifluous of all 
the Dravidian languages and sounds harmonious even in the 
lips of the vulgar and illiterate. It has been called the 
Italian of the East.® 

The Komatis are a highly organised caste, being divided, Totensm 
and subdivided into many clans or septs which are strictly rae 
exogamous and totemic ; in other words, no man may marry among the 
a woman of the same clan as himself, and all the members Rovian 
of a clan revere their totem in the usual way, making no 
secret of their reverence. When the totem is a plant, they 
say that any person who breaks the totemic taboo will be 
punished by being born as an insect for seven generatians. 
But it is possible to obtain exemption from the rule. A 
person who wishes to eat the forbidden fruit may do so by 
annually performing the funeral ceremonies of the totemic 
ancestor at Gaya, the great Hindoo place of pilgrimage, 
where obsequies for ancestors are celebrated,* 

To enumerate all the totemic clans of the Komatis Tutemc 
would, we are told, be tedious. The following is a select Q°™5°"" 
list of them with their totems :—* 

1 E. Thurston, Castes and Tribes Southern India, iii. 312, 314. 
of Southern India, iii. 231. 5 E. Thurston, of. ct. 312 sg.3 
2 +, aes compare W. Francis, in Census 6 
BaSThvistonyety. ar Hb 308 Inde, 1901, vol. xv. JMadras, Part Hf 
(Madras, 1902) p. 162. As to the 
Komatis and their exogamous clans in 
4 E. Thurston, Castes and Tribes of | Mysore, see below, pp. 273 59. 

VOL. Il R 

3 E. Thurston, of. c7¢. iii, 307 sg., 
citing the opinion of Mr. Henry Morris. 

CHAP. 

242 TOTEMISM IN INDIA 
I. CLANS WITH PLANT TOTEMS 
Clans. Plant Totems. 
Munikula : . . | agast (Sesbania grandifiora). 

Amalaki or Usiri 

Anupa or Anupala . 

Tulasi or Tulashishta 

Chinta, Chintya, or Vara-) 
chinta 

Vakkala . 

Puchcha. 

Padma-sista 

Kamala . 

Aranta 

Thotakula 

Uthakula 

Mandu . 

Dikshama 

Venkola . 

Sauna 

amalaki or ustri (Phyllanthus Emblica). 
anupala (Dolichos Lablab). 
tulast (Ocimum sanctum). 

chinta (Tamarindus indica). 

vakkalu (Areca Catechu). 

puchcha (Citrullus Colocynthis). 
padma (red lotus). 

kamalam (white lotus). 

aratt (Musa sapientum: plantain), 
thotakura (Amarantus, sp.). - 
uththarént (Achyranthes aspera). 
mamadikaya (Mangifera indica). 
adrikshapandu (grapes). 

vankaya (Solanum Melongena: brinjal). 
samanthi (Chrysanthemum indicum). 

II. CLANS WITH ANIMAL TOTEMS 

Clans. 

Te 

Animal Totems. / 

Gosila, Sathya Gosila, and Uthama Gosila . 

Asthi 

Enupa 

Ghonta 

Ananta 

Bhramada or Brahmara 

cow 
elephant 
buffalo 
horse 
cobra 
bee 

III. CLANS WITH HEAVENLY BODIES AS TOTEMS 

Clans, 

Heavenly Bodies. 

Arka or Surya . % 
Chandra, Chandra Sishta, Suchandra; i) , 

Vannavamsam 

x TOTEMISM IN THE MADRAS PRESIDENCY 243 

We have seen that a Komati can claim his first cousin, Cousin 
the daughter of his mother’s brother, in marriage by virtue ™“™8*- 
of the custom called ménarikant 

The Koravas or Yerukalas, as they are also called, are The 
a tribe of vagabonds, thieves, quack doctors, and fortune- yor" ° 

Yerukalas, 
tellers, who are scattered throughout the length and breadth and their 
of India. When railways spread over the country, these Gan 
gentry travelled on them with enthusiasm, partly for the 
purpose of robbing passengers in their sleep, partly in order 

to escape expeditiously from places which they had made 

too hot to hold them. They speak a gibberish compounded 

out of Tamil, Telugu, and Canarese.2 The Koravas are 
divided into exogamous clans or septs, of which the following, 

given by Uppu Yerukalas, may be taken as examples :-—* 

Dasari, Vaishnavite mendicant. | Mogzlé (Pandanus fascicularis). 

Sukka, star. Uyyala, swing. 
Kampa, bush of thorns. Ragala, rag? grain. 
Avula, cows. Pula, flowers. 
-Thoka, tail, Katari, dagger. 
Kanaga (Pongamia glabra). Ambojala, lotus. 
Bandi, cart. Samudrdla, sea. 
Gajjala, small bell. — Venkatagirt, a town. 

Amongst the Koravas or Yerukalas, we are informed, Totemism 
“totemism of some kind evidently exists, but it is rather odd oe 
that it has not always any apparent connection with the sept Yerukalas. 
or house name. Thus, the totem of persons of the Konéti 
sept is horse-gram (Aol/lu in Tamil), which they hold in 
veneration, and will not touch, eat, or use in any way. The 
totem of the Samudrala sept is the conch shell, which 
likewise wifl not be used by those of the sept in any manner. 

It may be noted that persons of the Raméswari sept will not 
eat tortoises, while those of the Konéti sept are in some 
manner obliged to do so on certain occasions ” * 

Among the Koravas or Yerukalas a custom prevails 
“by which the first two daughters of a family may be 

1. E. Thurston, Castes and Tribes of | Southern India,” Transactions of the 
Southern India, iii. 314. See above, Lthnological Soctety of London, New 

pp. 225 sg. Series, vii. (1869) pp. 186-188. 
2 E. Thurston, of. czt. iii. 438 599. 3 E. Thurston, of. cé#. iii. 452. 
As to these blacklegs, see also J. Shortt, 4 E, Thurston, of. cit. iil. 453, 

M.D., ‘On the Wild Tribes of quoting Mr. Fawcett. 

Cousin 
marriages ; 
right of a 
man to 
marry the 
daughter 
of his 
father's 
sister. 

The 
Kurubas. 

The 
Kurumbas, 
a wild 
jungle 
tribe of 
the lower 
Neilgherry 
Hills. 

244 TOTEMISM IN INDIA CHAP. 

claimed by the maternal uncle as wives for his sons. The 
value of a wife is fixed at twenty pagodas. The maternal 
uncle’s right to the first two daughters is valued at eight out 
of twenty pagodas, and is carried out thus :—If he urges his 
preferential claim, and marries his own sons to his nieces, he 

‘pays for each only twelve pagodas; and, similarly, if he, 

from not having sons, or any other cause, forego his claim, 
he receives eight pagodas of the twenty paid to the girl’s 
parents by anybody else who may marry them.”? Among 
the Yerukalas of the Vizagapatam district a man may marry 
either the daughter of his father’s sister or the daughter of 
his mother’s brother. 

The Kurubas are a caste of petty landowners, shepherds, 
weavers, cultivators, and stone-masons. Their complexion 
varies from very dark to light brown. It is a disputed 
question whether the civilised Kurubas of the plains and 
open country are related or not to the wild uncouth 
Kurumbas, a primitive folk, squat and broad-nosed, who 
dwell in the feverish recesses of the jungle and on the lower 
slopes of the Neilgherry Hills.® These Kurumbas are much 
dreaded as sorcerers by their neighbours, and their name is 
popularly derived from the Tamil word urumba, “ wicked- 
ness.” However, the Badagas of the Neilgherry Hills 
employ them in the capacity of priests who officiate at the 
various seasons of the agricultural year. Every Badaga 
village has its own Kurumba priest. At the ploughing 
season he comes up from his sweltering valley to the breezy 
hills and ploughs the first furrow ; at the sowing season he 
sows the first handful of grain; and at harvest he reaps the 
first sheaf with the sickle. or these services he receives 
his dues or a proportion of the ripe grain at the harvest 
home. And if the standing crop should be attacked by 
insects, which threaten to blight it, up comes the swarthy 
Kurumba priest again, and lowing like a calf is supposed 
thereby to kill the vermin.4 Mr. Edgar Thurston was told 

1 J. Shortt, M.D., ‘*On the Wild 3 E. Thurston, of. cit. iv. 134 599., 
Tribes of Southern India,” 7ransactions 155 sgq. 
of the Ethnological Society of London, 4 Captain Henry Harkness, 4 De- 
New Series, vii. (1869) pp. 187 sg. scription of a Singular Aboriginal Race 
2 E. Thurston, Castes and Tribes inhabiting the Summit of the Netlsherry 
of Southern India, iii. 484. Hills (London, 1832), pp. 56 sg., 83 

x TOTEMISM IN THE MADRAS PRESIDENCY 245 

that among the Kurumbas of the Neilgherries it is the 
custom for several brothers to take one wiie in common, and 
that they do not object to their women being open to others 
also. There is said to be no marriage rite. A. man and 
woman will mate together and live as husband and wife.’ 

Whether related to the Kurumbas or not, the Kurubas Exogamous 
are divided into clans (gumpus), and these again are sub- Sv?clans 
divided into exogamous subclans or septs (gotras), which are Kurubas. 
said to be mostly of totemic origin and to retain their 
totemic character to this day. “The Arisana gétram is 
particularly worthy of notice. The name means saffron 
(turmeric), and this was originally taboo ; but, as this caused 
inconvenience, the £orra grain has been substituted, although 
the old name of the sept was retained.”® The names of 
sixty-six of these exogamous and totemic subclans or septs 
have been recorded. Among them are Elephant, Snake, 
Scorpion, Buffalo, Tortoise, Black Ant, Dog, Goat, Ebony, 
Prosopis Spicigera, Basella rubra, Feronia elephantum, Hibiscus 
esculentus, Cummin, Bengal Gram, Jessamine, Chrysanthe- 
mum, Millet (Pantcum miliare), Pepper, Milk, Clarified Butter, 

Fire, Sun, Moon, Ocean, Silver, Gold, Bell-metal, Pearl, Conch- 

shell, Earth-salt, Flint, Ant-hill, Bangle, Ring, Gold Ring, 

Metal Toe-ring, Lace, Blanket, Cup, Drum, Pick-axe, Loom, 
Bamboo Tube, Cart, Booth, Hut, Devil, Headman, and 
Mohammadan.2 Among the Kurubas of North Arcot the 
consent of the maternal uncle is necessary to a marriage, 

and at the wedding he leads the bride to the nuptial booth. 

A Kuruba may marry two sisters, either on the death of Marriag- 
one of them, or if the first wife is barren or suffers from an bebe 
incurable disease.‘ 

The Madigas are the great leather-working caste of the The 
Telugu country, corresponding to the Chakkiliyans of the ea 
Tamil area. They live in hamlets at a distance from the caste of 
villages of other people, by whom they are greatly despised. "°°": 

5g., 87, 109 note, 130 sg.3 F. Metz, 1 E, Thurston, Castes and Tribes of 
The Tribes inhabiting the Netlyherry Southern India, iv. 169. 

Hills, Second Edition (Mangalore, 2 E. Thurston, of. cit. iv. 141, 
1864), pp. 11§ sgg.3 J. W. Breeks, quoting Mr. H. A. Stuart. 

an Account of the Primitive Tribes 3 E. Thurston, of. ct. iv. 141 sg. 
and Monuments of the Nilagiras (Lon- 4 E. Thurston, of. ct. iv. 147, 

don, 1873), Pp- 53 59. quoting Mr. Stuart. 

Female 
incarnation 
of the 
goddess 
Matangi. 

Madiga 
ceremony 
to avert 2 

plague. 

246 TOTEMISM IN INDIA CHAP. 

When an ox or a buffalo dies, the Madigas gather round 
it like vultures, strip off the skin and tan it, and batten on 
the loathsome carrion. Their habits are squalid in the 
extreme and the stench of their hamlets is revolting. They 
practise various forms of fervent but misguided piety, lying 
on beds of thorns, distending the mouth with a mass of 
mud as large as a cricket-ball, bunging up their eyes with 
the same stuff, and so forth, thereby rendering themselves 
perhaps well-pleasing to their gods but highly disgusting to 
all sensible and cleanly men. An unmarried, but not 
necessarily chaste, woman of the caste personifies the favourite 
goddess Matangi, whose name she bears and of whom she is 
supposed to be an incarnation. Drunk with toddy and 
enthusiasm, decked with leaves of the margosa tree (VWelia 
Azadirachta), her face reddened with turmeric, this female 
incarnation of the deity dances frantically, abuses her adorers 
in foul language, and bespatters them with her spittle, which 
is believed to purge them from all uncleanness of body and 
soul, Even high-class Reddis, purse-proud Komatis, and 
pious Brahmans receive the filthy eructations of this tipsy 
maniac with joy and gratitude as outpourings of the divine 
spirit." When an epidemic is raging, the Madigas behead a 
buffalo before the image of their village goddess Uramma, 
and a man carries the blood-reeking head in procession on 
his own head round the village, his neck swathed in a new 
cloth which has been soaked in the buffalo’s blood. This is 
supposed to draw a cordon round the dwellings and to 
prevent the irruption of evil spirits. The villagers subscribe 
to defray the expense of the procession. If any man refuses 
to pay, the bloody head is not carried round his house, and 
the freethiker or niggard is left to the tender mercies of 
the devils. The office of bearer of the head is an ill-omened 
and dangerous one; for huge demons perch on the tops of 
tall trees ready to swoop down on him and carry him and 
his bleeding burden away. To guard against this catastrophe 
ropes are tied to his body and arms, and men hang on like 
grim death to the ends of them. Moreover, they slice 
lemons and throw the slices in the air, that the devils may 

1 E. Thurston, Castes and Tribes of Southern India, iv. 292 sq., 295-305, 
308-310. 

x TOTEMISM IN THE MADRAS PRESIDENCY 247 

2 
pounce on them instead of on the man. Yet with all these 
precautions, it is not easy to persuade a Madiga to walk 
about a plague-stricken village with a bloody buffalo’s head 
on his own head and a bloody muffler round his neck.’ 

These things are not totemism ; but it is perhaps worth Totemism 
while to mention them by way of reminding the reader of a es 
truth which he should constantly bear in mind. Even religion of 
among tribes who practise it most scrupulously totemism ‘¢ Peles 
does not exhaust or satisfy man’s religious instincts. On practise it; 
the contrary it commonly plays only a subordinate part in a 
the religion or superstition of a people. The fear of the subordi- 
dead, the awe of the great powers of nature, the reverence ee 
for the gods, may all contribute in various and often far 
greater proportions to the complex system of religious creed 
and ritual. It is the more needful to lay stress on. this 
because in considering totemism by itself, as we do in this 
work, we are apt to see it out of perspective, in other words, 
to exaggerate its importance in comparison with that of 
many other factors which, because they are not mentioned, 
are apt to be forgotten. 

The Madigas are divided into a number of endogamous Hxogamous 
sections, and these sections are in turn subdivided into many "5, 
exogamous clans or septs, which take their names from the Madigas. 
buffalo, cow, donkey, frog, scorpion, locust, tamarind, jessa- 
mine, Edleusine Coracana, silver, cowry shells, winnowing- 
basket, thread, knife, broom, and other objects.” 

The Malas are another low caste of Southern India. TheMalas, 
They are described as the Pariahs of the Telugu country ; Telaeu 
they may not enter the temples nor use the ordinary village caste. 
wells. No love is lost between them and the Madigas. 

The two sets of ragamuffins squabble with each other about 
social precedence. The Madigas blackguard the Malas in 
foul language, and the Malas despise the Madigas for 
devouring carrion, and will not drink water out of the same 
well, The chief occupation of the Malas are weaving and 

working as farm labourers; a few till their own lands.’ 

1 E. Thurston, Castes and Tribes of — Southern Indta, iv. 318 sq. 

Southern India, iw. 313 sg., quoting 

Bishop Whitehead. 3 E. Thurston, of. cét. iv. 294 59., 
2 EF. Thurston, Castes and Tribes of 329 59.5 350. 

248 TOTEMISM IN INDIA : CHAP. 

Exogamous They are divided into many exogamous clans or septs 
eee named after many things, such as the cow, horse, snake, cat, 
snails, crow, gnat, ginger, tamarind, jessamine, Ficus bengal- 
ensts, Acacia arabica, Glycosmis pentaphylla, tobacco, milk, 
ant-hill, stone, horn, wind, ocean, ear, cart, sack, loom, 
hammer, spear, drum, dolls, washerman, good conduct, and 
sneezing? 
The The Maravars or Maravans are a Dravidian tribe in the 
pirabeld extreme south of India. They are found chiefly in Madura 
vans,a and Tinnevelly, where they occupy the districts bordering on 
peavit@™ the coast from Cape Comorin northward. In the old days 
lawlessand they were a fierce and turbulent race, famous for their 
prevatory military prowess. Their subjugation gave the British much 
trouble at the end of the eighteenth and the beginning of 
the nineteenth century. Once marauders, they are now to 
some extent peaceful tillers of the ground, but in the 
Tinnevelly district they furnish nearly all the village police 
and likewise the thieves and robbers, often indeed combining 
the professions of thieving and catching thieves. But their 
natural bent is rather for committing than for detecting and 
punishing crime. In his double capacity of constable and 
robber, the Maravan is a power in the land. He levies 
blackmail according to a regular system, and in cattle-lifting 
he has no equal throughout the Presidency of Madras.” The 
Kondayamkottai Maravars or Maravans of Tinnevelly are 
perhaps the purest bred of this race of freebooters and the 
least affected by modern civilisation. They are very dark, 
strong, well-built men, and being fearless, active, and 
energetic they are the terror of their peaceful neighbours. 
Though every man’s hand is against them, they hold their 
own; even jthe British Government has failed to repress 
them? : 
Exogamouns (The Kondayamkottai Maravans are divided into six 
fs ~—s exogamous clans or branches, as they call them. Each 
Konda- clan or branch (4o¢iw) is named after a plant, and is sub- 

yamkottai os : oye os 
eyembene divided into three subclans (#4z/ais). Descent is in the 

1 E, Thurston, Castes and Tribes of 3 F. Fawcett, ‘‘The Kondayam- 

Southern India, iv. 347 sq. kottai Maravars, a Dravidian Tribe of 

Tinnevelly, Southern India,” /ournal 

2 Edgar Thurston, of. cit. v. 22 5g., of the Anthropological Znstitute, xxxiii. 
27 59g. (1903) p. 58. , 

x TOTEMISM IN THE MADRAS PRESIDENCY 249 

female line; in other words, children bélong to the clan of 
their mother, not to that of their father. While no man 
may marry a woman of his own clan, he is not free to marry 
a woman of any of the other clans without restriction. 
For example, a man of the Betel Vine clan may marry a 
woman of the Coco-nut clan, but not a woman of the 
Areca Nut clan nor of the Date clan. But the restrictions 
on marriage, beyond the rule of clan exogamy, are not fully 
known. The following is a list of the clans with their 

subclans :— 

Clans (Kothz). English Equivalent. Subclans (A‘A7/az). 

Viramudithanginan 
Sedhar 

Semanda 

Agastyar 

Jilaku pepper vine 

Vettile betel vine 

Vaniyan 
Vettuvan 
Nataivendar 
Kelnambhi 
Anbutran 
Gautaman 
Sadachi 

+ Sangaran 

Pichipillat 

Akhil 
Lokhamurti 

(apes 

I lakhiya Pandiyan 
Thennang coco-nut 
Komukham areca nut | 

Lehang dates 

Panang palmyra 
Jambhuvar , 

Among the Kondayamkottai Maravars first cousins, the Cousin- 
children of two brothers, may not marry each other ; but first eee 
cousins, the children of a brother and a sister respectively, Maravars. 
may and should marry each other. A man often marries a 
wife of his father’s subclan (44z/az)-; indeed there seems to 
be an idea that he ought to do so.” A widow may marry the 

her deceased husband’s elder brother, but not his younger L«virate. 
1 F, Faweett, in Journal of the 2 F. Faweett, in Journal of the 

Anthropological [nstitute, xxxiii. (1903) Anthropological /nstitute, xxxiii. (1903) 
p. 61; E. Thurston, of. czz. v. 33. p. 62. 

Exogamous 
clans 

of the 
Medaras. 

Cousin- 
marriages. 

Marriage 
with two 
sisters. 
Exogamous 
clans of 
the Mogers. 

The Muka 
Doras and 
their 
exogamous 
clans. 

Cousin- 
marriages. 

250 TOTEMISM IN INDIA CHAP. 

brother. Property devolves through males. Daughters 
cannot inherit.’ 

The Medaras are workers in bamboo in the Telugu, 
Canarese, Oriya, and Tamil countries. They are divided 
into gotras and exogamous clans or septs, some of which are 
named after animals, plants, and other objects, such as the 
tiger, snake, civet cat, Bengal gram, Sesbania grandvfiora, 
Butea frondosa, ant hill, and a new pot. All the Medaras 
formerly worshipped Siva, but now many of them worship 
Vishnu also, Amongst them a man most commonly marries 
his first cousin, the daughter of his mother’s brother ; less 
frequently he marries his first cousin, the daughter of his 
father’s sister. Marriage with a deceased wife’s sister is 
regarded with special favour, A man often marries two 
living sisters, if one of them is diseased.’ 

The Mogers are Tulu-speaking fishermen of the South 
Canara district. Like other Tulu castes, they are divided 
into exogamous clans or septs (da/is), some of which bear 
the names of Ame (elephant), Bald (a fish), Déva (god), Dyava 
(tortoise), Honne (Pterocarpus Marsupium), Shetti (a fish), and 
Tolana (wolf). 

The Muka Doras are a Telugu-speaking caste, who are 
traditionally regarded as one of the primitive hill tribes, 
Nowadays they are farmers and itinerant hucksters, and may 
be seen travelling about the country with pack: bullocks at 
the time of the rice harvest. They are divided into two 
sections, one of which worships the sun and the other the 
cobra. Each section is further subdivided into exogatnous 
clans or septs (#¢zpérudu), the names of which, so far as they 
are recorded, are taken frox.” trees or plants, namely, the 
vemu or ni tree (Melia Azadirachta), chikkudi (Dolichos 
Lablab), velanga (Feronia elephantum), and kakara (Momordica 
Charantia). A man ought to marry his first cousin, the 
daughter of his mother’s brother ; and that uncle, the father 
of the bride, officiates at the wedding.‘ 

The Mutrachas are a low Telugu caste, who are most 

1F. Fawcett, in Journal of the Southern India, v. 52, 54 59. 

Anthropological Institute, xxxiii. (1903) 3 E. Thurston, of. cif. v. 65, 69 
65 . , op. ett. v. 65, 69. 

2 E. Thurston, Castes and Tribes of 4 E. Thurston, of. cit. v. 103 5g. 

x TOTEMISM IN THE MADRAS PRESIDENCY 251 

numerous in the Kistna, Nellore, Cuddapah, and North The 
Arcot districts. They engage in vatious occupations as aie 
hunters, fishers, palanquin bearers, and village watchmen. exogamous 
They are divided into exogamous clans or septs (¢ntipérula), “?"* 
which are named after the cow, the tiger, the jackal, doves, 

the fly, the Ficus bengalensis,a house, a garden, a swing, a 

dagger, an iron measure for grain, a watchman, and so 

forth? 

The Padma Sale are a Telugu-speaking caste of weavers, The 
who are scattered all over the Madras Presidency. Like Seen 
other Telugu castes they are divided into exogamous clans their exo- 
or septs (ntipérus), some of which take their names from the 8270" 
gazelle, the horse, the scorpion, the crane, the mango, the 
indigo plant, tamarind seeds, Lawsonia alba, Cassia auriculata, 

Acacia arabica, cotton, ant-hill, beard, ditch, pots, and so on.” 

They profess the religion of Vishnu, but some of them 

worship Siva. The deity of the caste is Bhavana Rishi, to 

whom, in some places, a special temple is dedicated. Every Worship of 
year a festival is held in honour of this divinity, and during ‘¢ ts 
its continuance the god and goddess are represented by two 
decorated pots placed on the model of a tiger, to which on 

the last day of the festival great quantities of rice and 
vegetables are offered. Members of the caste revere tigers 

and believe that the beasts will not molest them.’ 

§ 3. Exogamy and the Classificatory System among the 
Todas 

The Todas are a small tribe, now less than a thousand The Todas, 
in number, who inhabit the jofty and isolated tableland of 2 7! 

. ‘ pastoral 
the Neilgherry Hills. They are a purely pastoral people tribe of the 
devoting themselves to the care of their herds of buffaloes tied 
and despising agriculture and nearly all manual labour as origin and 
beneath their dignity. Their origin and affinities are “7s | 
unknown ; little more than vague conjecture has been 
advanced to connect them with any other race of Southern 

India. They are a tall, well-built, athletic people, with a 
1 E. Thurston, Castes and Tribes of 449, 451. 

Southern India, v. 127 sg., 130. 3 E. Thurston, of. c#t. v. 448, 449, 
2 E. Thurston, of. ctt. v. 448, 451. 

252 TOTEMISM IN INDIA CHAP. 

rich brown complexion, a profusion of jet black hair, a large, 
full, speaking eye, a Roman nose, and fine teeth: The men 
are strong and very agile, with hairy bodies and thick beards. 
Their countenances are open and expressive ; their bearing 
bold and free; their manners grave and dignified; their 
disposition very cheerful and friendly. In intelligence they 
are said to be not inferior to any average body of educated 
Europeans. In temperament they are most pacific, never 
engaging in warfare and not even possessing weapons, 
except bows and arrows and clubs, which they use only for 
purposes of ceremony. Yet they are a proud race and hold 
their heads high above all their neighbours.' The country 
which they inhabit has by its isolation sheltered them from 
the inroads of more turbulent and warlike peoples and has 
allowed them to lead their quiet dream-like lives in al! the 
The land of silence and rural simplicity of an Indian Arcadia. For the 
the Todas. tableland which is their home stands six or seven thousand 
feet above the sea and falls away abruptly or even 
precipitously on every side to the hot plains beneath. Its 
steep sides, where they approach the lowlands, are clothed 
with dense, almost impenetrable jungle, a hotbed of fever, 
in which the traveller sleeps at his peril. Above this 
pestilential belt, still ascending, he comes to grassy slopes 
and forests like those of temperate climates, and when he has 
reached the summit he finds himself in a cool breezy upland, 
a land of green rolling downs and rounded hills, the turf gay 
with wild flowers and interspersed with rich woods, deep in 
ferns and moss, where the crimson splendour of the 
rhododendron vies with the snowy purity of the white 
camelia, while the woodland glades and lonely green valleys 
are gladdened by purling brooks, their banks mantled thick 
with dog-roses and jessamine. Aiter meandering through 
these beautiful glens the streams either lose themselves in 
sedgy morasses in the hollows of the hills, or finding their 
way to the brink of the tableland they tumble over the edge 
in roaring cataracts and clouds of glittering spray to swell 
1 Captain Henry Harkness, 4 De- W. E. Marshall, Zvavels amongst the 
scription ofa Singular Aboriginal Race Todas (London, 1873), pp. 45, 583 
inhabiting the Summit of the Neil- W.H. RB. Rivers, Zhe Todas (London, 

gherry Hills (London, 1832), pp. 6 1906), pp. 18 sgg., 586, 693 sgy. 
599+, 12 sqg., 16 sgg.; Lieut.-Colonel 

x EXOGAMY AMONG THE TODAS 253 

the rivers that sweep round the base of the mountains 
thousands of feet below. But in all this Icvely land it is the Prospect 
prospect from the sharp edge of the tableland which travellers oe eae 
dwell upon with the most rapturous delight. The scene is tableland. 
perhaps most impressive early in the day, when the white 

sea of morning clouds at the feet of the spectator gradually 

opens up and rolls away like a curtain with the growing 

heat of the sun, revealing in its gaps now a vast crimson 

plain veined with dark lines of wood, now a long rocky 

ridge gleaming like fire in the sunlight, till a purple cloud- 
shadow blots it out and a fresh line of crags and ravines 

starts into view beyond. Jagged peaks hung with woods 

frame the nearer landscape and in the distance faint blue 
mountains melt like dreams into the azure of the sky. 
Under the shifting lights and shadows of the morning sun 
struggling with mist and cloud the scene is a phantasmagoria, 

a perfect dissolving view, all the colours glowing with gem- 

like radiance in the intense tropical sunshine and the keen 

thin mountain air.’ 

In this happy and peaceful land, remote from the The 
turbulence of the busy world, enjoying an equable, temperate, yl98°5, °F 
and highly salubrious climate within a few degrees of the 
equator, the Todas live in little villages dotted about the 
grassy hills and valleys where their herds of buffaloes crop 
the herbage. Generally a village nestles in a beautiful 
wooded hollow near a running stream. It is composed of a 
few huts surrounded by a wall with two or three narrow 
openings in it wide enough to admit a man but not a 
buffalo. The huts are of a peculiar construction. Imagine 
a great barrel split lengthwise and half of it set lengthwise 
with the cut edges resting on the ground, and you will get a 
fair idea of a Toda hut. *The half-barrel forms the rounded 
thatched roof and long rounded sides of the dwelling, and 
juts for some feet, like the eaves of our houses, beyond the 
short upright wall that closes the end of the barrel in which 
is the door. Near the village is commonly a dairy with a 

1 Captain H. Harkness, .f De- amongst the Todas, pp. 52-57; J. W. 
scription of a Singular Aboriginal Race Breeks, An Account of the Primitive 
inhabiting the Summitt of the Neil- Tribes and Monuments of the Nilagiris 

gherry Hills, pp. 1-6, 45,6059.,1515g.; (London, 1873), pp. 2 sg.; W. H. 
Lieut. -Colonel W. E. Marshall, Zrave/s RR. Rivers, The Todas, pp. 4 599. 

The daily 
life of the 
Todas. 

The sacred 
buffaloes, 
sacred 
dairies, 
and sacred 
dairymen. 

254 TOTEMISM IN INDIA CHAP. 

pen for the buffaloes at night and a smaller pen for the 
calves, 

The daily life of the Toda men is spent chiefly in 
tending the buffaloes and in doing the work of the dairy. 
The milking of the cows and the churning of the butter fall 
mainly to the younger men and boys, though the elder men 
also bear a hand in these honourable labours. Women are 
entirely ‘excluded from the work of the dairy; they may 
neither milk the cows nor churn the butter. Besides the 
common buffaloes there are sacred buffaloes with their own 
sacred dairies, where the sacred milk is churned by sacred 
dairymen. These hallowed dairies are the temples and the 
holy dairymen are the priests, almost the gods, of the 
simple pastoral folk. The dairyman leads a dedicated life 

Rulesof life aloof from the vulgar herd. His walk and conversation are 

observed 

by a sacred 

dairyman. 

The Toda 
religion of 
the dairy. 

regulated by stringent rules. If he is married he must leave 
his wife and not go near her or visit his home during the 
term of his incumbency, however many years it may last. 
No person may so much as touch him without reducing his 
holiness to the level of a common man. He may not cross 
a river by a bridge but must wade through the water at the 

ford, and only certain fords may be used by him. If a 

death occurs in the clan he may not attend the funeral 
unless he resigns his sacred office. However, there are 
different degrees of sanctity among the sacred dairymen. 
Some are diviner than others and have to submit in virtue 
of their superior divinity to a severer code of burdensome 
restrictions. In short, the greater part of the religious ritual 
of the Todas turns upon what seem to us the commonplace 
operations of milking cows and churning butter. These are 
the things which absorb most of the life and thoughts of this 
bucolic folk. . To their simple minds the most sacred things 
in the wide world are the bells which they hang upon the 
necks of their buffaloes. These priceless treasures they guard 
with religious care in the holy dairies and daily feed them 
with curds and milk.’ 

1 W. H.R. Rivers, Zhe Todas, pp. 131, 144 599.5 424 59g., 566 sg., ete. ; 
23 599. Captain H. Harkness, Description of 

2 W. H. R. Rivers, of. cit. pp. a Singular Aboriginal Race inhabiting 

31, 38 s¢9., 49 599., 56 sgg., 61 5q9q., the Summit of the Neilgherry Hills, 
66 s¢g., 71 sgg., 83 599., 98 sgg., pp. 11 5gg., 62 sgg.3 F. Metz, The 

x EXOGAMY AMONG THE TODAS 255 

The Todas have the institution of exogamy without the Endo- 
institution of totemism. The whole tribe is divided into 897s". 

two endogamous groups, the Tartharel and the Teivaliol. gamous 
Regular marriage is not allowed between these groups, eran. 
though irregular unions are permitted: a Tarthar man must 
marry a Tarthar woman, and a Teivali mana Teivali woman. 
Each of these primary divisions is subdivided into a number 
of exogamous clans; no man or woman may marry a 
woman of his or her own clan, but must marry into another 
clan. But while marriage is prohibited between members 
of the same clan, it would seem that sexual intercourse is not 
prohibited and indeed commonly takes place between them. 
In a certain religious ceremony preliminary to the entrance 
of a dairyman of the highest class into his sacred office a 
special part has to be taken by a woman who possesses the 
qualification of never having had carnal intercourse with a 
man of her own clan, and it is said to be far from easy to find 
such a woman.! Descent is reckoned in the male line; in 
other words, children belong to the clan of their father, not to 
the clan of their mother. The clan system is territorial, not 
totemic ; each clan owns a number of villages and takes its 
name from the chief of them. Generally the villages 
belonging to a clan are situated in the same part of the 
hills, but a clan often possesses outlying villages at a con- 
siderable distance from the chief group. These villages are 
not all occupied at the same time. The people move about 
from one to another as the seasons change or the pastures in 
the neighbourhood begin to fail.2 A man’s proper wife, the 

Tribes inhabiting the Netlgherry Hills, 
pp. 17, 19 sgg.; Lieut.-Colonel W. E. 
Marshall, Zravels amongst the Todas, 
PP. 128 sgg., 135 599-, 141 599.) 146 
599, 153 sgqg.; J. W. Breeks, An 
Account of the Primitive Tribes and 
Monuments of the Nilagiris, pp. 8 sq., 
13 sg.,16. The dairyman of the highest 
and most sacred grade bears the title 
of palol or palal. The ceremonies of 
his ordination are elaborate, and it is 
on him that the restrictions mentioned 
in the text are specially obligatory. To 
the rule of celibacy observed by this 
sacred dairyman (fa/o/) there is a 
remarkable exception. If he has held 

office for eighteen years without a break, 
he must have intercourse with a girl or 
young woman of the Tartharol division. 
They meet in a wood by day, the girl 
being adorned in all her finery; and 
after the meeting the dairyman must 
remain naked in the wood till sunset. 
See W. H.R. Rivers, Zhe Todas, pp. 
98-105, 153-165. 

1 W. H. R. Rivers, of. c¢t. pp. 
505 597-5 539. 

2WwW. H. R. Rivers, of. céé. pp. 
34, 36 sg., 123 577. 504 59., §40 59., 
546. As to the migrations of the 
Todas from village to village see also 
Captain H. Harkness, of. cé¢. pp. 12 sg. 

256 TOTEMISM IN INDIA CHAP. 

Cousin. woman whom he ought to marry, is his first cousin, the 

Hatta ee daughter of his mother’s brother or of his father’s sister. 

Todas. But he is forbidden to marry his other first cousins, the 
daughters of his father’s brothers or of his mother’s sisters. 
These latter cousins he includes under the general term 
piiliol, which he applies to all the relatives with whom by the 
custom of the tribe he is prohibited from contracting 
marriage.’ 

Polyandry The Todas have a completely organised and definite 

Tear’.’** system of polyandry, and in the vast majority of polyandrous 

the poly- marriages the husbands are own brothers. Indeed, when a 

androus , ig oe . 
husbands WOman marries, it is understood that she becomes the wife 

ee of his brothers at the same time. If the husband is a boy 
e . . . . . 
evn. and his wife a girl, any brother born after the marriage will 

brothers. in like manner be deemed to share in his older brother’s 
marital rights. When the joint husbands are not own 
brothers, they may either live with the wife in one family, 
or they may dwell in different villages. In the latter case 
the usual custom is for the wife to reside with each husband 
in turn for a month; but there is no hard and fast rule in 
the matter. When the joint husbands are own brothers 
they live together in amity ; in such a family quarrels are 
said to be unknown. The Todas scout as ridiculous the 
idea that there should ever be disputes or jealousies between 
the brother-husbands. When a child is born in a family of 
this sort, all the brothers are equally regarded as its fathers ; 
though if a man be asked the name of his father, he will 
generally mention one man of the group, probably the most 
prominent or important of them. But if they should be all 
Ceremony dead but one, he will always call that one his father.2 When 
oe a the joint husbands are not brothers, they arrange among 
month of themselves who is to be the putative father of each child as 
satay it is born,? and the chosen one accepts the responsibility by 
nancy: the performing a certain ceremony called pursitpimz, “bow (and 
giving of arrow) we touch,” because it consists in the husband formally 
andarrow. presenting his wife with a little imitation bow and arrow. 

The ceremony takes place about the seventh month of the 

1 W. H. R. Rivers, 7he Todas, pp. 2 W. H. R. Rivers, 7he Todas, pp. 
502, 509, 512. As to these cousin- 515-518. 
marriages see above, p, 227. 3 W. H. R. Rivers, of. ett. p. 517- 

x EXOGAMY AMONG THE TODAS 257 

woman’s pregnancy and begins on the evening before the 
day of the new moon. Husband and wife repair to a wood, 
where he cuts a niche in a tree and places a lighted lamp in 
the niche. The two then search the wood till they find the 
wood called puv (Sophora glauca) and the grass called nark 
(Andropogon schoenanthus). A bow is made from the wood 
by stripping off the bark and stretching it across the bent 
stick so as to form the bowstring. The grass is fitted to the 
little bow to stand for an arrow. Husband and wife then 
return to the tree. The relatives of the pair also gather at 
the spot and the husband and wife salute them in the formal 
Toda fashion by bowing and raising the feet of the honoured 
persons to their foreheads. The wife then sits down under 
the tree in front of the lamp, which glimmers in the gloam- 
ing or the dark from its niche, on a level with her eyes as 
she is seated on the ground. The husband next gives her 
the bow and arrow, and she asks him what they are called. 
He mentions the name of the, bow and arrow, which differs 
for each clan. Question and answer are repeated thrice. 
On receiving the bow and arrow the woman raises them to 
her forehead, and then holding them in her right hand she 
gazes steadily at the burning lamp for an hour or until the 
light flickers and goes‘ out. The man afterwards lights a 
fire under the tree and cooks jaggery and rice in a new pot. 
When the food is ready, husband and wife partake of it 
together. Meantime, while he has been cooking, the wife 
has tied up certain foods in a bundle and deposited it under 
the tree. Afterwards the relatives return from the village 
and all pass the night in the wood, the relatives keeping a 
little way off from the married pair. When the day breaks, 
the day of the new moon, they all return to the village to 
feast.' - 

This remarkable ceremony is always performed in or On the 
about the seventh month of a woman’s first pregnancy, PvOrm. 
whether her husbands are brothers or not. It only takes ceremony 

eons depend: 
place at a subsequent pregnancy when the family wish for (Prd, 

1 W. H.R. Rivers, The Todas, pp. 
319-321. Compare Mr. Metz’s briefer 
account of the ceremony as reported by 
Lieut.-Colonel W. E. Marshall, 7raze/s 
amongst the Todas, pp. 214 sg. Dr. 

VOL. I 

Rivers dves not tell us what is finally 
done with the bow and arrow. Mr. 
Metz says that the wife deposits them 
at the foot of the tree. 

258 TOTEMISM IN INDIA CHAP, 

recognition any reason to alter the fatherhood of the children. When 
we 4 the joint husbands are brothers, it is the eldest brother who 
of the gives the little bow and arrow. The fatherhood of the 
ne child, or rather the social recognition of it, depends entirely 
on the performance of this ceremony, so much so that he who 
gives the bow and arrow is counted the father of the child 
even if he be known to have had no former connection with 
the woman; and on the other hand if no living man has 
performed the ceremony, the child will be fathered on a dead 
man. An indelible disgrace attaches to a child for whom 
The the ceremony has not been performed.’ With regard to the 
ae meaning of these curious observances Dr. Rivers remarks 
ceremony that since they are only observed at a woman’s first pregnancy, 
of marr@8* or when it is desired to change the fatherhood of a child, “ it 
pregnation seems clear that they closely resemble marriage ceremonies. 
inone. They would seem to be either marriage ceremonies which 
have been postponed till shortly before the birth of the first 
child, or, what is more probable, pregnancy ceremonies re- 
sembling those customary in India, which have acquired 
social significance and have come to resemble marriage 
ceremonies.” * Perhaps the observance in question is an 
old rite of marriage: and impregnation in one. We have 
seen that some Australian tribes regard the acceptance of 
food from a man by a woman not only as a marriage 
ceremony but also as the actual cause of conception.2 Now 
in the Toda custom husband and wife partake of a meal 
together under a tree, which clearly plays an important, 
though obscure, part in the ceremony In this connection 
we should remember that trees are often supposed to possess 
the power of getting women with child.* The burning lamp 
in the tree, which the woman gazes steadily at for some time 
after receiving the bow and arrow, must also be endowed, to 
the thinking of the Todas, with some mysterious significance ; 
and here again it deserves to be borne in mind that sparks 
of fire as well as trees have been thought by some peoples to 
be able to impregnate the women on whom they fall.’ 

1 W. H.R. Rivers, Zhe Todas, pp. ’ 4 The Golden Bough, Second Edition, 
322, 516, 517 sy., 531. i. 192 sg. 

2W. i R. Rivers, of. cé. pp. ° See my Lectures on the Early 
322 59. History of the Aingship, pp. 218 $99.5 

3 See above, vol. i. pp. 577 57¢ and below, pp. 259-262. 

x EXOGAMY AMONG THE TODAS 259 

The belief in the fertilising power both of trees and The South 

of fire is retained to this day among South Slavonian P3vonians 
peasantry, whose superstitions are redolent of the most tree-spirits, 
remote antiquity. Amongst them, we are informed, “the hie 
barren woman is pitied and despised. Her position in her the dead 
husband’s home becomes more and more untenable. The nt 
husband tries in company with his wife to remedy the evil with child. 
by means of magic. The following two charms rest on 
the old belief in the tree-soul which dwells in the tree in 
the form of a wood-worm. The wife takes a wooden vessel 
full of water and stands under a beam or rafter, where 
dust drops from the worm-eaten wood. Her husband 
strikes the beam or rafter with something heavy and shakes 
the worm-worn dust out of it. If the woman is lucky enough 
to catch even a pinch of the worm-worn dust, she drinks it 
up with the water. Many women seek for a worm in the 
knots of a hazel-bush, and if they find one they eat it. A 
spark of fire has also similar power to impregnate a woman. 
The woman holds a wooden vessel full of water beside the fire 
onthe hearth. The husband meantime knocks two fire-brands 
together so that the sparks fly out. When some sparks fall 
into the vessel, the woman drinks the water out of it. Many 
barren women also repair to a grave, in which a pregnant 
woman is buried, bite grass from the grave, invoke the deceased 
by name, and beg her to bestow the fruit of her body upon 
them. After that they take a little earth from the grave and 
carry it constantly about with them under their girdle.” ? 

These practices seem plainly to imply a belief that The beliefs 
women can be got with child directly by a tree-soul, a spark rls 
of fire, or the spirit of a dead child, without the need of Slavonians 
intercourse with the other sex. Such a belief is identical creon 

in principle with that which we have found to be held by ar 
the tribes of Central and Northern Australia and by the cai 

Melanesians of the Banks’ Islands.2 Those who are familiar oe 
the Central 

1F, S. Krauss, Svéte ud Brauch Lincolnshire saying that if a woman's -\ustralians. 

der Stidslaven (Vienna, 1885), pp. apron is burnt above the knee by a 

530 sg. As to the power of fire to spark or red-hot cinder flying out of a 

impregnate women Miss Mabel Pea- fire she will become a mother.” 

cock wrote to me from Kirton-in- 

Lindsey, Lincolnshire, 30th October 2 See vol. i, pp. 188 s9797., 536 599. 

1905: ‘Not long ago I was tuldofa 576 sgg.; vol. ii. pp. 84 57-1 89 syy- 

Similar 
beliefs are 
indicated 
by certain 
popular 
customs at 
marriage, 
such as 
strewing 
the bride 
with corn 
or placing 
a child in 
her lap. 

TOTEMISM IN INDIA CHAP. 

260 

with the tenacity of life possessed by superstition will not 
wonder at finding one of the crudest and most primitive of 
its manifestations still held and put in practice by European 
peasants. The simple truth appears to be that the physio- 
logical facts on which conception and child-birth depend are 
not yet clearly understood by a large part of mankind, 
who still imagine, like the Australian savages, that women 
can be impregnated by quite other means than those 
which nature has ordained. The same belief is still clearly 
indicated in many popular customs, for examples of which 
we need not go outside of Europe. Often the original 
intention of these customs is forgotten, but sometimes it 
is remembered. As instances we may take the common 
practice of strewing corn, rice, beans, peas and so forth on 
a bride, and another common practice of placing a male 
child in her lap.! Both these customs are not unfrequently 
observed with the avowed intention of fertilising the woman. 
Thus at wedding feasts in Bohemia and Silesia “ peas or 
groats are thrown on the bridal pair in order that they may 
be fruitful; and as many grains as remain lying on the 
bride’s dress, so many children will she have.”* Again, at 
an Esthonian wedding an infant boy is placed in the bride’s 
lap as she sits at table, and the people believe that she will 
bear all the more male children for having observed this 
custom.2 Again, at Mostar in Herzegovina, as soon as a 
bride enters her husband’s house she goes straight to the 
hearth, sits down beside it on a bag of fruits, and stirs the 
fire thrice. While she does this, they bring her a small boy 
and set him in her lap. She turns him thrice round, “in 

zw. 
Korn,” 

Mannhardt, ‘‘ Kind und 

1 For the practice of strewing corn, 
Mythologische Forschungen, 

rice, etc., ona bride or both on the bride 

and bridegroom, see W. Mannhardt, 
** Kind und Korn,” J/ythologische 
Forschungen (Strasburg, 1884), pp. 354 
sqq.3 L. v. Schroeder, Die Hochzeits- 
briéuche der Ehsten (Berlin, 1888), pp. 
112-122. The practice in question 
is rightly interpreted by both these 
writers as a fertilisation ceremony. 
For the custom of placing a male child 
in the bride’s lap, see L. v. Schroeder, 
op. cit. pp. 123-127, who has correctly 
explained this custom also. 

p. 360. 

3 Boecler-Kreutzwald, Der LEhsten 
aberglaubische Gebrduche, Wetsen und 
Gewohnhetten (St. Petersburg, 1854), 
p- 38. Compare J. B. Holzmayer, 
** Osiliana,” Verhandlungen der gelehrt- 
en Gesellschaft su Dorpat, vii. Heft 2 
(1872) p. 91; F. J. Wiedemann, Aus 
dem inneren und aussern Leben der 
Ehsten (St. Petersburg, 1876), p. 
318. ~- 

x EXOGAMY AMONG THE TODAS 261 

order that she may bring male children into the world.” ? 

In this interesting ceremony we see clearly combined the 
fertilising virtue of the fruits upon which the bride sits, of 

the fire which she stirs, and of the male child who is placed 

on her lap. Such marriage rites are doubtless very ancient, 

far older than the marriage ceremony which is performed 

over the couple by the priest or clergyman in a Christian 
church. Similarly in the ancient Indian law-books it is pre- 
scribed that after a bride has entered her husband’s house 

and a ceremony of placing wood on the fire has been 
observed, husband and wife should sit down on a red bull’s 

hide, and he should set in her lap the son of a wife who has 

only sons and whose children are alive, and should at the 

same time speak these words, “May a male embryo enter 

thy womb, as an arrow the quiver; may a man be born 

here, a son after ten months.”? While he recited these 
words, as a charm avowedly intended to ensure the birth of 

a son, the husband fastened to his wife an arrow which had 

been steeped in sour milk and honey from the thirteenth to 

the fifteenth day of the month. This ceremony and these 

words seem to furnish the clue to the Toda ceremony of 
presenting a pregnant wife with a bow and arrow; they 
confirm the interpretation of that ceremony as an ancient 

rite of impregnation, the arrow being regarded as a symbol 

of the embryo which is discharged into the woman’s womb. 
Further, the notion that the fire has power to impregnate Ancient 
women is brought out very clearly in another ancient Indian eae 
ceremony which was performed for the purpose of ensuring sparks of 
the birth of a male child. Fire was made by the friction of S"© ” &* 
two different kinds of wood, one upon another, the upper with child. 
wood (/icus religiosa) being regarded as a male and the 

under wood (Mimosa suma or Prosopis spicigera) as a female. 

When fire had been thus kindled, sparks from it were thrown 

into the melted butter of a cow which had a male calf, and 

1F, S. Krauss, Sitte und Brauch 
der Stidslaven (Vienna, 1885), p. 4305 
compare zd. pp. 428, 447, 448. The 
South Slavs sometimes strew millet on 
a bride. See F. S. Krauss, of. cz¢. pp. 
445, 448. ; 

2 The Grihya-Sutras, translated by 
H. Oldenberg, vol. i. pp. 42, 45; vol. 

li. p. 263 (Zhe Sacred Books of the 
Last, vols, xxix. and xxx.). 

3 Hymns of the Atharva- Veda, 
translated by Maurice Bloomfield (Ox- 
ford, 1897), pp. 97, 356 (Zhe Sacred 
Books of the East, vol, xiiii.)3 W. 
Caland, 4lténdisches Zauberritual (Am- 
sterdam, 1900), p. 154. 

Food eaten 
as a mode 
of im- 
pregnating 
a woman, 

TOTEMISM IN INDIA CHAP. 

262 

this butter was pushed up the right nostril of the woman. 
Moreover, sparks of the fire were put into a honey-drink, 
which was given to her to quaff. Lastly, the fire was 
surrounded by the wool of a male animal, and this wool 
was then tied on the future mother... These ceremonies 
seem clearly intended to put a male child into the woman’s 
womb by means of the sparks which are struck out by the 
friction of the two woods. The same idea comes out in 
another ancient Indian charm spoken by a husband to his 
wife: “The embryo which the two Asvins produce with their 
golden kindling-sticks : that embryo we call into thy womb, 
that thou mayst give birth to it after ten months.” ? 

Further, it seems probable that, as I have suggested, 
many of the foods which husband and wife partake of 
together as a marriage ceremony may have been formerly 
supposed, as they are still supposed by some Australian 
tribes, not merely to prepare the woman for conception but 
actually to impregnate her. To examine the instances of 
this widespread custom at length would lead me too far. 
I .will cite only one. The Livonians, not content with 
strewing wheat, barley, oats, peas, and beans on the bride 
at every door in her new home, used to oblige both bride 
and bridegroom to eat the testicles of a goat or a bear 
with the. avowed intention of rendering the pair prolific. 
For the same reason they would not allow any castrated 
animal to be slaughtered at a wedding feast,* no doubt 

1 Hymns of the Atharva-Veda, 3 Above, vol. i. pp. 577 5g. 

translated by Maurice Bloomfield (Ox- 
ford, 1897), pp. 97, 460 (Zhe Sacred 
Books of the East, vol. xiii.); W. 
Caland, Altendés¢hes Zauberritual (Am- 
sterdam, 1900), pp. I15 sg. The 
idea that in making fire by friction the 
two fire-sticks represent a male and 
female in the act of copulation is very 
widespread among savages. Ample 
evidence of this will be given in the 
third edition of Zhe Golden Bough, in 
treating of the Vestal fire-worship. 
Meantime see E. Kuhn, Die Heraé- 
kunft des Feuers und des Gottertranks* 
(Giitersloh, 1886), pp. 64 sq. 

2 The Grihya-Sutras, translated by 
H. Oldenberg, vol. ii, p. 199 (Zhe 
Sacred Books of the East, vol. xxx.). 

4 J. Meletius (Maletius, Maeletius, 
Menecius), ‘‘ De Sacrificiis et Idolatria 
veterum Borussorum, Livonum, aliarum- 
que vicinarum Gentium,” in De Rus- 
sorum, Muscovitarum et Tartarorum 
Religione, Sacrificits, Nuptiarum, Fu- 
nerume ritu(Spiraelibera civitate, 1582), 
pp. 261 sg. 3 2@. in Scriptores Rerum 
Livonicarum, ii, (Riga and Leipsic, 
1848), p. 3913 zd. in ALtttedlungen der 
Litterarischen Gesellschaft Masovia, 
viii. (Lotzen, 1902) p. 192. For 
many examples of bride and_bride- 
groom eating together as a marriage 
ceremony, see E, S. Hartland, Zhe 
Legend of Perseus, ii. (London, 1895) 
PP- 343 59g. In these ceremonies Mr, 
Hartland seems to see nothing more 

x EXOGAMY AMONG THE TODAS 263 

lest by partaking of its flesh the husband should lose his 
virility. 
The attempt to explain the curious custom observed by The 
the Todas in the seventh month of a woman’s first pregnancy y Suaectae 
has led me into a digression ; but the digression can hardly cause of 
be regarded as irrelevant if it helps us to realise better [oncjPte’, 
how widely spread and how deeply rooted is that ignorance deep. 
of the true causes of conception which appears to lie at the 
root of totemism. We now return to the subject from 
which we digressed, the polyandry of the Todas. 
The custom of polyandry among the Todas is facilitated, The 
if not caused, by a considerable excess of men over women, Polyandry 
and that excess has been in turn to a great extent Todas is 
brought about by the practice of killing the female <onmectet 
children at birth. It seems clear that female infanticide has numerical 
always been and still is practised by the Todas, although in lara 
recent years under English influence it has become much men over 
: *W4e . . women, 
less frequent. The motive for killing the girls is unknown ; and that 
there is little evidence or probability that lack of food and @sain is 
: : . P caused in 
the consequent difficulty in rearing a large family have had part by the 
anything to do with it, though a Toda has been known: to Practice of 
allege poverty as an excuse for the crime. The murder is infanticide. 
said to be done not by the parents but by old hags, who 
choke the infants. We are told that boys are never killed. 
However, the Todas are taciturn and reserved on the subject, 
and it is difficult to wring the truth from them... We 
cannot therefore at present say whether the disproportion 
between the sexes, produced by female infanticide, has been 
the principal or only cause of polyandry among the Todas. 
It is possible that the causes both of their polyandry and of 
their female infanticide lie deeper down in some dark abyss of 
superstition, which the plummet of science has not yet sounded 
nor its lamp illuminated. At the present time the polyandry 

of the Todas tends to become combined with polygyny ; in 

than a covenant or bond of union 
between the married pair brought 
about by their sharing the same food. 
Yet the interpretation of the ceremony 
as a rite of impregnation might have 
been suggested to him by the numerous 
stories, which in the same work he has 

collected, of women who were im- 
pregnated by eating of certain foods. 

1 Lieut.-Colonel W. E. Marshall, 
Travels amongst the Todas, pp. 194 
sgqg.3 W. H. R. Rivers, The Todas, 
PP. 477-480, 518 sg., §20 59. 

Irregular 
marriages 
of the 
Todas. 
Each man 
may 
become the 
secondary 
husband 
of several 
women, 
and each 
woman the 
secondary 
wife of 
several 
men. 

264 TOTEMISM IN INDIA CHAP. 

other words men are beginning to have several wives as well 
as wives to have several husbands. “Two brothers, who in 
former times would have had one wife between them, may 
now take two wives, but as a general rule the two men have 
the two wives in common. In addition polygyny of the 
more ordinary kind exists among the Todas, and is probably 
now increasing in frequency, as one of the results of the 
diminished female infanticide.” * 

In addition to their regular marriage the Toda practise 
an irregular, but publicly recognised and lawful, form of 
marriage which they call sokhthoditiz, This is a form of 
group-marriage resembling the group-marriage which 
prevails among the Dieri and other tribes of Central 
Australia? In virtue of it a man becomes a secondary 
husband (snokhthodvaiol) to one or more married women 
with the consent of the woman’s primary husband, who 
receives payment from the man. A woman has been 
known to have three such secondary husbands in addition to 
her primary husband or group of husbands. On the man’s 
side the practice of keeping secondary wives is expensive, 
and this seems commonly to limit their number to two at 
the most. Such secondary or group marriages are con- 
tracted with nearly the same formalities as the ordinary 
primary marriages. After the ceremony the couple may 
either live together like man and wife, or the man may only 
visit the woman from time to time in the house of her prim- 
ary husband. The latter is the more usual practice. The 
children which a man may have by a secondary wife are 
not reckoned to him, but to the primary husband. It is 
somewhat remarkable that these secondary or group marriages 
are most commonly contracted between members of the two 
endogamous Tarthar and Teivali divisions, between whom 
no ordinary marriage may take place; that is to say, no 
Tarthar man may marry a Teivali woman, and no Teivali 
man may marry a Tarthar woman, in the regular way ; but 
he may and generally does so in an irregular but still public 
and lawful manner. However, a man of one of these two 
divisions may not perform the bow and arrow ceremony for 

1 W. H. R. Rivers, The Todas, p. 521. 
2 See vol. i, pp. 308 5797-5 363 599. 

x EXOGAMY AMONG THE TODAS 265 

a pregnant woman of the other division ; and this disability 
would of itself prevent her children from be‘ng fathered upon 
him. 

Thus it appears that every Toda woman may have Lax _ 
several secondary husbands as well as a group of primary Pay of 
husbands, and that every Toda man may have several in sexual 
secondary wives besides a single primary one. But this is ee 
not all. Among the Todas at the present time the marriage 
tie has become very loose, and wives are constantly trans- 
ferred from one husband or group of husbands, to another, 
the new husband or husbands paying a certain number of 
buffaloes to the old.” Further, it appears that among the 
Todas adultery is not regarded as a wrong and furnishes no 
ground for divorce. There exists no word for adultery in 
the Toda language, and apparently no idea corresponding 
to it in the Toda mind: Far from its being regarded as Aduitery 
immoral, the stigma of immorality seems rather to rest on pete = 
the man who grudges his wife to another. So churlish an offence. 
a man, the Todas think, cannot after death go straight to 
heaven; he must pass through what has been called the 
Toda hell, but what is more accurately described as a mild 
variety of Purgatory, in order to purge himself of his guilt, 
before he reaches the happy land, where there are no pigs 
and rats to grub up the soil and spoil the country, and 
where dead people walk about till they have worn down 
their legs to stumps, when the presiding deity sends them 
back to be born again with new legs into the world? Such 
is, apparently, according to Toda ideas, the fate of the man 
who objects to be a cuckold. So lax, or rather so per- 
verted, according to our ideas, is their standard of morality. 

And the laxity is said to be as great between the sexes 
before as after marriage.* In short, to quote the words of 
the latest and most accurate investigator of this peculiar 
people, in Toda society “there seems to be no doubt 
that there is little restriction of any kind on sexual 
intercourse.” ° 

1 W. H.R. Rivers, Zhe Todas, pp. 3 W. H. R. Rivers, Zhe Zodas, pp. 
526-529. 397-400, 529 5g. 

2Ww. H. R. Rivers, of. cét. pp. aot rae 2 
523-525. The name for this custom Wes By Rivetty apsctl; Dei8 3's 

of transferring wives is /erersth?. 5 W. H.R. Rivers, of. cz#. ps 529. 

The classi- 
ficatory 
system of 
relation- 
ship among 
the Todas. 

The classi- 
ficatory 
terms for 
“* father,” 

The classi- 
ficatory 
terms for 
‘* mother.” 

266 TOTEMISM IN INDIA CHAP. 

The Todas possess the classificatory system of relation- 
ship. They have two well-marked groups of terms ex- 
pressive of kinship ; one set of terms is used in speaking 
of relatives indirectly, the other is used in addressing them 
directly. The latter are fewer in number and are employed 
in a much more general sense. In what follows, the terms 
applied indirectly will be given first; and the terms of 
address, where they exist, will be added in brackets. 

Thus in the generation above his own a man applies the 
same term zz (aza) “father” not only to his real father but 
to all the men of his father’s clan who are of the same 
generation as his father; hence he gives the name of 
“father,” amongst others, to all his father’s brothers. In 
Toda society this latter extension of the term is very 
natural, since all of a father’s brothers have a right to share 
his wife and beget children by her, and in such circumstances 
it must be a particularly wise Toda who knows his own 
father. Indeed, as we have seen, all the father’s brothers 
are counted the fathers of his children, so that the children 
naturally bestow the title of father upon them. Further, a 
man applies the same term zz (aza) “father” to all the 
husbands of his mother’s sisters, and not merely to the 
husbands of her real sisters, but to the husbands of her clan 
sisters, that is, to all the men who are married to women of 
the same clan and generation as his mother. Reasoning 
by analogy we might suppose from this that, just as brothers 
are at present group-husbands, so sisters may once have 
been group-wives among the Todas, though they are not so 
now. Such a supposition would at least explain why a son 
calls the husbands of his mother’s sisters his “ fathers.” 

Further, injthe generation above his own a man applies 
the same term av (ava) “mother” not only to his real 
mother but to all the women of his mother’s clan who are 
of the same generation as his mother; hence he gives the 
name of “mother” amongst others, to all his mother’s 
sisters. This extension of the term “ mother” again points 

1 The following account of the Toda __A list of Toda kinship terms had pre- 
system of relationship is derived from viously been given by Lieut.-Colonel 
Dr, W. H. R. Rivers’s description of | Marshall in his book Z7vavels amongst 
it in his book Zhe Todas, pp. 483-494. the Todas, pp. 74-77+ 

x EXOGAMY AMONG THE TODAS 267 

to a marriage group in which a number of sisters are married 
to one or more husbands who hold them and the children in 
common. Further, a man applies the sare term av (ava) 
“ mother ” to all his father’s wives other than his real mother, 
and also to all the wives of his father’s brothers. This ex- 
tension of the term points to a marriage group in which a 
number of brothers hold their wives and children in common ; 
and such groups, as we have seen, actually exist among the 
Todas.' 

Taking the two sets of terms for “father” and “ mother” The Toda 
together we infer from them a former system of marriage in ee, 
which a group of brothers was married to a group of sisters, and 
At the present day only half of this system survives among scieotie 
the Todas; the group of husbands who are brothers is left, marriage 

but the group of wives who are sisters has disappeared. a Se 

In a man’s own generation he has different terms for oes 
“elder brother” and “ younger brother,” and again for “elder 5. .5;. 
sister ” and “ younger sister.” Further, he has distinct terms ficatory 
for a brother and sister who are of the same age as himself. ee 
An elder brother is a (anna) ;, a younger brother is xodrved and 
(enda) ; an elder sister is akkan (akka); a younger sister is‘ ™ 
nodrvedkugh (enda) ; a brother or sister of the same age as 
the speaker is egal (ega/a). Further, a man applies the 
terms for “brother” and “sister” not only to his blood 
brothers and sisters, but also to all the men and women of 
his own clan and generation, calling them “elder brother,” 
“ younger brother,” “ brother of the same age,” “ elder sister,” 
“younger sister,” “sister of the same age” according to their 
sex and their age in relation to his own, Further, the 
various terms for “brother” and “sister” are applied to 
each other by first cousins, the children either of two sisters 
or of two brothers. But on the other hand they are not 
applied to each other by first cousins, the children of a 
brother and of a sister respectively ; such cousins call each 
other matchuni, and we have seen that they are the proper 
mates for each other in marriage; a man ought to marry 
his first cousin, the daughter either of his mother’s brother 
or of his father’s sister. Hence a man applies the same 
term mun (mama) to his mother’s brother and to his wife’s 

1 See above, pp. 263 sg. 

‘The classi- 
ficatory 
terms for 

268 TOTEMISM IN INDIA CHAP. 

father, because his mother’s brother actually is, or should 
be, his wife’s father, since he ought to marry his first cousin, 
the daughter of his maternal uncle. And for an analogous 
reason a man applies the same term uz (smiimia) to his 
father’s sister and to his wife’s mother, because his father’s 
sister actually is, or should be, his wife’s mother, since he 
ought to marry his first cousin, the: daughter of his father’s 
sister. 

In the generation below his own a man applies the same 
terms mokh (ena) and kugh (ena) daughter to his own sons 

‘‘son” and and daughters and to the sons and daughters of all the men 

** daugh- 
ter.” 

of his.own clan and generation; hence amongst others he 
applies them to all the sons and daughters of his brothers, 
and this extension of the terms is very natural in Toda 

. society, where a man’s brothers are normally also the 

The Toda 
form.of the 
classifi- 
catory 
system of 
relation- 
ship shews 
some 
advance 
towards a 
descriptive 
system. 

husbands of his wife, so that his children and their children 
may often be indistinguishable. However, in speaking of 
his brother’s children a Toda may, if he pleases, make clear 
whether he is speaking of the child of an elder or of a 
younger brother; thus he may say en xodrvedvain mokh, 
“my younger brother’s son.” 

In this last case, as in some other cases, the Todas 
occasionally define their relationships to others more exactly 
than is usual in the classificatory system. Thus they 
seem to be advancing from a classificatory to a descriptive 
system of relationship. On this subject Dr. W. H. R. 
Rivers, to whom we owe the preceding account of the Toda 
system, observes: “It seemed to me that the Todas afford 
an interesting example of a people who are beginning to 
modify the classificatory system of kinship in a direction 
which distinctly: approaches to the descriptive system. The 
essential features of the system of kinship are those known 
as classificatory, but the Todas have various means of dis- 
tinguishing between the near and distant relatives to whom 
the same kinship term is applied. Two examples of this have 
already been given ; the son of an own sister may be called 
‘my sister’s son,’ while the son of a clan sister is called ‘ our 
sister’s son, and the own brother of a mother is simply 
called mu, while in the case of a clan brother of the mother, 
the name of the man is added. Further, a term which is 

x EXOGAMY AMONG THE TODAS 269 

definitely descriptive may be used in the examples quoted 
above. The Todas have reached a stage of mental develop- 
ment in which it seems that they are nc longer satisfied 
with the nomenclature of a purely classificatory system, and 
have begun to make distinctions in their terminology for 
near and distant relatives.” ! 

In Dr. Rivers’s opinion the Toda system of relationship ‘rhe Tog, 
is closely akin to that of the Dravidians of Southern India Heals 
in particular he regards it as a simplificd form of the Tamil ‘tami _ 
system with many points of identity? A brief account of ‘Yst™. 
the Tamil system will be given in the sequel.® 

§ 4. Totemism in Mysore 

In the native Indian state of Mysore there is a large jxocamous 
caste of shepherds who take their name of Kurubas from and _ 
kurt, “a sheep,” and rank with the Sudras. They are Neh 
distributed all over the state. Their language is Kannada, oe 
but those of them who border on Telugu districts have 
adopted the Telugu tongue.* The caste is divided into more 
than a hundred exogamous septs or clans which are known 
in the vernacular as fudas. Hardly any one can give a 
complete list of these clans. It is said that Revanna, the 
original ancestor of the caste, divided it into as many 
divisions as there are grains in four seevs of paddy, and that 
being unable to find plants and animals enough after which 
to name them he was obliged to call some of the clans after 
meaner objects. Many of the names seem, it is said, to be reverence 
“adopted without any inward significance”; but on the ee by 
other hand it is well ascertained that the things which give for thele 
their names to some of the clans are not eaten or otherwise *°™* 
used even now by members of the clans. Such things 
therefore fall within the definition of a totem. Thus 
people of the Adu or Goat clan (4w/a) abstain from eating 
or killing the female goat. People of the Ave or Elephant 
clan are said not to ride on elephants but only to use them, 

1 W. H.R. Rivers, Zhe Zodas, pp. graphical Survey of Mysore, i. (Banga- 

492 59. lore, 1906) pp. 1, 3 (Preliminary 
2 W. H. R. Rivers, of. cz/. p. 494- Issue). See also above, pp- 244 5g. 
3 See below, pp. 330 599. 5 The Ethnographical Survey of 

4+ H. Y. Nanjundayya, The Ethno- Alysore, i. 5. 

270 TOTEMISM IN INDIA CHAP. 

if at all, as beasts of burden. Members of the Ane clan 
abstain from eating the kitchen herb (Celosta albida) from 
which they take their name. People of the Avasiva or 
Saffron clan formerly refrained from using or touching 
saffron; but as saffron is a commodity of every-day use 
they have transferred their respect to Navane grain or panic 
seed (Panicum). But still they do not grow saffron. 
Members of the Avasu clan, the meaning of whose name is 
doubtful, will not cut the banyan tree. Members of the 
Att or Indian Fig clan will not cut that tree nor eat its 
fruit. Members of the Bandi or Cart clan ought perhaps 
strictly to abstain from using carts; but that is too much 
to expect of them, so they satisfy their conscience by not 
sitting in the cart in which their god is carried. People of 
the Basart or Ficus infectoria clan and people of the Bela 
or Wood-apple Tree neither cut nor burn the tree after 
which they are named. Members of the Be// or Silver clan 
do not use silver toe-rings. Women of the Balagara or 
Glass Bangle clan do not, or at all events should not, use 
glass bangles but only bangles made of bell-metal. 
Members of the Bevz or Margosa Tree clan worship the 
tree and will not cut if or burn it nor use its oil for lamps. 
People of the Benne or Butter clan do not use butter. 
Members of the Baxnz clan will neither cut nor sit in the 
shade of the danni, a prickly tree (Prosopis spicigera). 
Members of the Chatta or Bier clan will not carry their 
dead on biers but only by hand. Women of the Honnu or 
Gold clan will not wear jewels of gold. Members of the 
flurali or Horse Gram clan do not abstain from gram, 
because it is deemed a necessary article of food, but they 
abstain instead, from jungle pepper. People of the A/enasu 
or Pepper clan neither cultivate the pepper creeper nor cut 
it. Members of the Magare (a kind of tree) clan do not sit 
under the shade of the tree, much less do they cut or burn the 
tree. Members of the Oxzke or Pestle clan do not touch a 
pestle but use a wooden hammer instead of it. In all, no 
less than one hundred and eleven of these exogamous septs 
or clans are recorded. Besides those which have been 
mentioned there are others which take their names re- 
spectively from the dog, rabbit or hare, he-goat, she-buffalo, 

x TOTEMISM IN MYSORE 271 

scorpion, ant, ant-hill, sandalwood tree, peepul tree, tamarind 
tree, cummin-seed, pumpkin, jessamine, cotton, the sun, moon, 
night, salt, flint, bell-metal, pearl, conch shell, manure, milk, 
butter-milk, a drum, cage, reel of thread, arrow, knife, 
garland, rope, temple, pickaxe, bracelet, fire-brand, toe- 
ring, bamboo-tube, needle, ring, weaver’s shuttle, etc. 
Members of the same exogamous sept or clan (£z/a) are 
regarded as brothers and sisters and therefore may not 
marry each other. Children belong to the clan of their 
father. A man may not marry his cousin, the daughter of Cousin 
his mother’s sister; but he is particularly recommended to ™*8*% 
marry his cousin, the daughter of his mother’s brother. He 
may marry two sisters, but not simultaneously.” A widow The 
is allowed to remarry, but she is forbidden to marry her pate 
deceased husband’s brother or even any man of his clan 

The Holeyas are an outcast or pariah caste of Mysore, Exogamous 
who number about a tenth of the total population of the sae 
state. They are employed as agricultural labourers and clans 
artisans. They are divided into many exogamous septs or ries 
clans (udas), all of which descend in the male line only. 
The clans take their names from the elephant, buffalo, 
rabbit, snake, cuckoo, fig-tree, tamarind, beans, plantain, 
musk, jessamine, a thorny plant (xaggaligaru), ears of corn, 
pigeon pea, betel leaf, garland, milk, honey, sun, moon, 
earth, gold, silver, lightning, ant-hill, burial-ground, temple, 
sheep-fold, oil-mill, bolt, bag, crowbar, nose-ring, saw, 
umbrella, etc. When the name of the clan denotes an edible Totemic 
plant, grain, and so forth, the members of the clan abstain °° 
from eating the thing from which they take their name. 
When the thing is a tree, people of the clan shew their 
reverence for it by not felling it or burning the wood. It is 
said that when a man of the Naggaligaru clan is pierced by 
a thorn of the plant, he may not pluck it out for himself, 
but must get a member of another clan to do so for him4 
A man may not marry his cousin, the daughter of his Marriage 
mother’s sister, but he generally marries either his niece, Wi?" 
1 The Ethnographical Survey of graphical Survey of Mysore, ii. (Banga- * cousin: 

Mysore, i. 28-32. lore, 1906} pp. I, 5, 19, 22-24 (Pre- 
2 Tbid. i. 8. liminary Issue). Compare E. Thurston, 
3 Jord. i. 16. Castes and Tribes of Southern India, ii. 

4H. Y. Nanjundayya, 7he Ethno- 343 sg. 

272 TOTEMISM IN INDIA CHAP. 

the daughter of his elder sister, or his cousin, the daughter 
of his mother’s brother or of his father’s sister. He ought 
not to marry a niece who is the daughter of his younger 
sister; but if,no other suitable wife is to be found, the 
objection may be overruled. A man or a man and his 
brother may marry two sisters simultaneously, but the 
The custom is not recommended.’ A widow is allowed to 
Levirate marry again, but is forbidden to marry any of her deceased 
forbidden. F 
husband’s brothers; she may, however, marry one of his 

cousins. In no case may she marry a man of her father’s 

clan.” 
sue The Bestha caste is composed of fishermen, lime-burners, 
nna a palanquin bearers, and cultivators. At the last census 

exogamous (1901) they numbered about 153,000 persons and were 
; scattered all over the State of Mysore. They profess the 
Hindoo religion and worship the ordinary Hindoo gods. 
They are divided into exogamous clans or septs (Auda), 
some of which bear the following names :—Gold (chzuna), 
Silver (dcU/z), Sun (surya), Moon (chendra), Goddess (dev2), 
Charioteer (suta), Cloud (mugz/u), Marriage chaplet 
(Bhashinga), Pearl (sutiu), Precious Stone (vatva), Musk 
(kasturé), Coral Bead (havala), and Jessamine (mallige). It 
is said that members of the Silver clan do not wear silver 
ornaments except at marriage* No.man may marry a 
woman of his own clan or sept (Av/a). Polyandry is 
Mariage unknown, but polygamy is freely practised. The same man 
wi may not marry two sisters simultaneously, but the first 
sister. wife’s sister is generally preferred as a second wife. Two 
brothers may marry two sisters, the elder brother marrying 
the elder sister and the younger brother marrying the 
younger sister. A farmer does not give his daughter in 
marriage to a fisherman; nor does a fisherman give his 
daughter in marriage to a farmer ; and neither a farmer nor 
a fisherman will contract a marriage with a daughter of a 
palanquin-bearer. The price of a bride is twelve rupees; 
for a second marriage she is to be had at half-price. A 
1 The LEthnographical Survey of graphical Survey of Mysore, v. (Banga- 
iysore, ii. 7. lore, 1901) pp. 1, 10, 11 (Preliminary 

2 Ibid. ii, 13. oie 

4 The Ethnographical Survey of 
3-H. V. Nanjundayya, The Ethno- Alysore, v. 2. 

x TOTEMISM IN MYSORE 273 

widow is allowed to marry her late husband’s elder brother, The 

but such marriages are rare.’ einige 
The Komatis, whom we have already met with in the Exogamous 

Madras Presidency,” are a trading class of Mysore, ranking 2"4. 

high in the scale of castes. They are Hindoos by religion clans 

and almost as strict as Brahmans in observing rules of #78. 

personal cleanliness and restrictions as to eating and 

drinking. Their language is Telugu, but in the Kannada 

districts of the state they speak Kannada, and some have 

almost forgotten their mother tongue. They are divided 

into a hundred and one exogamous septs or clans (gotras), 

some of which are grouped together in exogamous classes 

or phratries. One such group (class or phratry) comprises 

ten clans, another four; seven groups include three clans 

each; and sixteen groups include two clans each. The Totemic 

great majority of the clans are named after plants, grains, °° 

fruits, or flowers, and members of the clans abstain, or used 

to abstain, from eating or otherwise using the thing from 

which they derive their name. However, in many families 

no such taboos are observed. Sometimes, when people 

have forgotten what their original taboo was, they regard 

the pandanus flower as the thing which they may not use.4 

Among the plants, fruits, and flowers which give names to 

the exogamous clans (gotras) are the flower of the tree 

Bauhinia purpurca, the fruit of the tree Emblica myrabolan, 

lime fruit, pumpkins, green pulse, red lotus, black lotus, 

white lotus, snake-gourd, the gourd Momordica, a bitter 

gourd, black gram, Bengal gram, the kitchen herb Closza 

albida, plantain fruits, a small kind of castor oil seed, 

pigeon peas, a prickly tree with an edible fruit (Prosopis 

Spicigera), the gigantic swallow-wort (Calotropis gigantea), 

the long pepper, the pungent fruit Protos officinalts, flax 

(Linum usitatissimum), mango, pomegranate, bambo seed, 

Panicum grain, wheat, grapes, guava, dates, the Indian 

fig, sugar-cane, the fragrant grass Cyperus rotundus, cuscus 

grass, chrysanthemum, asafoetida, jessamine, Holy Basil, 

1 The Ethnographical Survey of graphical Survey of Mysore, vi, (Banga- 
sUysore, v. 3 5q-5 7, 8. lore, 1906) pp. 1, 5, 28 sg. 
2 See above, 241 sgg. 4 The Ethnographical Survey of 
3H. V. Nanjundayya, The Ethno- Afysore, vi. 5 59- 
~ VOL, II T 

274 TOTEMISM IN INDIA CHAP. 

China rose, fragrant oleander, red watercresses, horse radish, 
red radish, nutmeg, mustard, the fragrant screw pine, sandal- 
wood, tamarind, and civet. Other objects which give names 
to clans are curds of the sheep, red ochre, alum, camphor, 
and white silk. Apparently none of the clans are named 
Obligation after animals.’ A boy is obliged to marry his cousin, the 
omar daughter re his mother’s brother, however unattractive she 
may be; and on his side the maternal uncle must give his 
daughter in marriage to his nephew, the son of his sister, 
however poor the young man may be. Widows are not 
allowed to marry again.” 
Exogamous A subdivision of the weaver caste in Mysore is known 
a as Bili Magga (“white loom”) from the white muslin and 

totemic 
clans other cloth which they weave. They speak the Kannada 
among the i wate “S Nine 
BiliMagga, language, but their origin is unknown. They are divided 
into sixty-six exogamous septs or clans (gotras), which are 
distributed into two groups known respectively as the Siva 
and the Parvati group or as the male and the female group. 
Each group contains thirty-three clans (gofras) with the 
usual prohibition of marriage between persons bearing the 
same family name. Most of the clans are named after 
animals, plants, implements, and so forth; and members of 
the clans appear to deem it sinful to injure the things whose 
name they bear. Among the objects which give names to 
the Bili Magga clans are the buffalo, bull, horse, serpent, 
squirrel, sparrow, Brahman kite, banni tree, another kind of 
tree (Pongamia glabra), asafoetida, cummin seed, the pandanus 
flower, jessamine, grass, paddy, broken corn, flour, pepper, 
butter, milk, saffron, turmeric, sand, field, forest, the sun, 
white, nest, boulder, cart, pestle, plank, pot, rope, and tank.’ 
Exogamous The Nayindas are a caste in Mysore whose business is 
pee that of shaving. But their profession is deemed inauspicious, 

totemic 

clans and people, particularly married women of the upper classes, 
among the . . 
Nayindas, Will not so much as mention the name of the caste. If 

they must refer to a barber, they call him “one who is not 
to be thought of,” or “one who is not to be named,” 

1 The Ethnographical Survey of further above, pp. 225 sg. 
Mysore, vi. 32-41. 3-H. V. Nanjundayya, Zhe Ethno- 
2 The Ethnographical Survey of graphical Surveyof Mysore, viii. (Banga- 
Alysore, vi. 8,22. As tothe marriage lore, 1907) pp. 1, 8-10 (Preliminary 
of cousins among the Komatis, see Issue). 

x TOTEMISM IN MYSORE 275 

especially when they allude to him at night.! The caste 
falls into two main divisions according as the members of 
it speak the Kannada or the Telugu language. The 
Telugu-speaking Nayindas are further subdivided into a 
number of exogamous septs or clans, which are named after 

animals, plants, flowers, and other objects, with the usual Totemic 
prohibition of killing, cutting, or using them2 Thus the °° 

Chitlu clan is named after a tree, which the members 
neither cut nor burn. People of the Gurram or Horse 
clan will not ride a horse. The /amdz clan takes its name 
from a kind of reed, which the clanspeople will not cut. 
The Kanagula or Honge clan are called after a tree, the 
Pongamia glabra, which they will not cut nor burn nor use 
the oil of its seed. People of the Kavu clan will not 
cut the aru tree from which they take their name. 
Members of the JMal/eda or Jessamine clan and of the 
Samanti or Chrysanthemum clan will not use the jessa- 
mine and chrysanthemum flowers respectively. People of 
the Mavilu or Peacock clan will not eat peacocks. People 
of the Pasupu or Turmeric clan will not raise crops of 
turmeric ; and people of a clan named U/¢tareni after the. 
Achryvanthes aspera will neither cut nor touch that plant.’ 
In most sections of the caste a widow is allowed to marry 
again, but she is forbidden to marry her deceased husband’s 
brother, whether younger or elder.‘ 

§ 5. Lotemism in the Bombay Presidency 

“In the Bombay Presidency,” says Sir Herbert Risley, 
“the Katkaris of the Konkan will not kill a red-faced 
monkey, the Vaidus, or herbalists of Poona will not kill a 
rabbit, and the Vadars whose name is derived from the Vaa 
(Ficus Indica), will not fell the Indian fig tree. The totemistic 
character of the septs which regulate marriage is, however, 
most pronounced in the Kanara district which borders on 
the Dravidian tract of the South. The rice-growing caste 

1H. V. Nanjundayya, 7ze Ethno- Mysore, xii. 2 sq. 
graphical Survey of Mysore, xii. (1907) | og ey Vs 
p. 1 (Preliminary Issue). se ae TS 
2 The Ethnographical Survey of 4 Lbid, xii. 9. 

The 
Levirate 
forbidden. 

Sir Herbert 
Risley on 
totemism 
in the 
Bombay 
Presidency. 

Totemic 
taboos 
among the 
Halvakki 
Vakkal. 

Exogamous 
clans 
among the 
Halepaik. 

Maternal 
descent of 
the clans 
among the 
Halepaik. 

Devaks or 
sacred 
family 
symbols 
among the 
Marathas. 

276 TOTEMISM IN INDIA CHAP. 

of Halvakki Vakkal in Kanara have a number of exo- 
gamous septs or éafi (lit. a creeper) which include the 
tortoise, the sambar, the monkey, the hog-deer, two sorts of 
fish, saffron, the acacia and several other trees, and the axe 
used for felling them. As we find them now, these groups 
are plainly totemistic. Thus the members of the screw- 
pine da/7 will neither cut the tree nor pluck its flowers, and 
those of the Bargal dali will not kill or eat the darga or 
mouse-deer. The followers of the S/zrin dal, named after 
the shzrkal tree (Acacia speciosa), will not sit in the shade of 
the tree, and refrain from injuring it in any way. But in 
Kanara, as in Orissa, there is a tendency to disguise or get 
rid of these compromising designations as the people who 
own them rise in the social scale. The Halepaik, once 
freebooters and now peaceful tappers of toddy trees, are 
divided into two endogamous groups, one dwelling on the 
coast and taking its name (Zengina) from the cocoanut 
tree, and the other living in the hills and calling itself 
Bainu after the sago-palm. Each of these again contains a 
number of exogamous dalis. The Tengina have the wolf, 
the pig, the porcupine, the root of the pepper plant, turmeric, 
and the river; to which the Baimu add the snake, the 
sambar, and gold. The members of the Négchampa group 
will not wear the flower of that name in their hair, nor will 
the Kadave bali kill a sambhar. Two of the dalzs are called 
after the low castes Mahar and Hole, and it is curious to 
find that the other groups, though they will take girls from 
these dalzs, will not give them their own daughters to wife. 

‘Among the Halepaiks, unlike most of the Kanara castes, 

the dalz descends through the female line, that is to say, 
the children! belong to the da/ of the mother, not of the 
father. Similar groups are found among the Suppalig 
(musicians), the Ager (salt workers and makers of paim-leaf 
umbrellas), the Ahir (cowherds), and the Mukur (labourers 
and makers of shell-lime). Several of these have the 
elephant for a totem and may not wear ornaments of ivory.” ! 
Again, the Marathas of the Bombay Presidency, who 
worship the Brahman gods and keep the Brahman festivals, 
are divided into families, each of which has its atvak or 
1 Sir Herbert Risley, Zhe People of India (Calcutta, 1908), pp. 98 59. 

x TOTEMISM IN THE BOMBAY PRESIDENCY 277 

sacred symbol. These symbols appeat to have been 
originally totems; for a man may not marry a woman 
whose devak, reckoned on the male side, is the same as his 
own. Worship is paid to the devaks at marriage and at 
other important ceremonies, The following is a list of the 
chief devaks :—' 

The panch pallav or five leaves of the Ficus Indica, Ficus religtosa, 
Cynodon dactylon, Bauhinia racemosa, and Syzyjium jambolanum or 
rather Lugenia jambolana. . 

Kadamb (Nauclea cadamba or Anthocephalus cadamba). 

Umbar (Ficus glomerata). 

Lotus (Nelumbium speciosum). 

Conch shell. 

Turmeric tubers. 

Gold. 

Ketaki (Pandanus odoritissimus). 

Nagchampa (Mesua ferrea). 

Rui (Calotropis gigantea), 

Peacock’s feather. 

Lamps (Chiradks), 360 in number. 

Sword. 

Mango-leaf (Alangifera indica). 

Ficus religiosa (singly). 

Bhardwaj, feather of a crow pheasant. 

Bamboo. 

Wreath of Onions. 

Rudriksh (Elaeocarpus ganttrus). 

Surya-Kant (crystal). 

Ficus Indica (singly). 

Shami (Prosopis spicigera). 

Eagle’s feathers, 

Garud vel (?) 

Nirgud (Vitex negundo or trifoliata). 

Marvel (Andropogon scandens). 

Aghidéa (Achyranthes aspera). 

With regard to the worship of these devaks or sacred Worship 
of the 

symbols at marriage we are told that after the boy-bride- 777; at 
groom has been rubbed with turmeric and bathed, “ next marriage. 

comes the marriage guardian or devak worship. A day or 
two before the marriage a man at the house of the boy and 
of the girl bathes, and with music and a band of friends 

1 Census of India, 1901, vol.i. Jndia, The correction Eugenia jambolana for 
Ethnographic Appendices (Calcutta, Syzyjium jambolanum is due to Mr, 

1903), pp. 94, 99 (from the Bombay Edgar Thurston. 
Gazetteer, by Sir James Campbell). 

278 TOTEMISM IN INDIA CHAP. 

goes to the tree, which is the family guardian, offers sandal, 
fiowers, burnt frankincense, and sweetmeats to it, cuts a 
branch, lays it in a winnowing fan, and brings it home with 
music. He takes it to his god-room and worships it alone 
with his family gods, which are represented by betel nuts in 
a winnowing fan. Meanwhile five unwidowed girls wash a 
grindstone or j@/é and lay sandal, flowers, and sweetmeats 
before it, and a family washerman worships the stone slab 
or fata, and a feast to married women and a few friends 
and relations completes the guardian or devak worship.” ! 

§ 6. Totemism in North-West India 

Exogamous In North-West India the Agariyas are a small Dravidian. 
See tribe inhabiting the hilly parts of Mirzapur south of the Son. 
clans They profess the Hindoo religion and occupy themselves 
among the 4 thai . ° : . 
Agariyas. With the smelting and forging of iron, a laborious business 
which may partly account for their gaunt and worn appear- 
ance.” The tribe is divided into seven exogamous and 
totemic clans or septs (kuris). Thus the Markam clan take 
their name from the tortoise, which the members of the clan 
will neither kill nor eat. The Goirar clan is called after a 
tree of the same name, which members of the can will not 
cut. The Paraswan clan derive their name from the falasa 
tree (Butea frondosa), and members of the clan will neither 
cut the tree nor eat out of platters made from its leaves. 
The Sanwan clan say that they are called after sam or hemp, 
which they will not sow nor use, The Baragwar clan are 
named after the dar tree (Ficus Indica); they will not cut 
or climb the tree, nor will they eat out of its leaves. | 
Banjhakwar, the name of another clan, is said to be a 
corruption of Bengachwar, from Jeng “a frog,” which the 
members of the clan will not kill or eat. Members of the 
Gidhle clan will not kill or even throw stones at a vulture 
(gidhk). The only rule of exogamy observed by the 
Agariyas is that no person may marry within his or her 

1 Census of India, tgo1, vol. i. 2 W. Crooke, Zrihes and Castes of _ 
India, Ethnographic Appendices, p. 96 the North-Western Provinces and Oudh 
(from the Bombay Gazetteer, by Sir (Calcutta, 1896), i. 1 sg., 8, 12. 
James Campbell). 

x TOTEMISM IN NORTH-WEST INDIA 279 

clan (kurt). When a man dies, his younger, but not his The 

elder, brother has a right to marry the widow; it is only 
when he has renounced his claim, that she is free te marry 
another.” 

The Baiswar are a tribe of doubtful but probably 

Levirate, 

Exogamous 

non-Aryan origin in the hill country of Mirzapur. They none 
rank as respectable high caste Hindoos, and are either land- clans 

holders or tenants with rights of occupancy. The tribe is 
divided into clans or septs, which are exogamous in theory 
though apparently not always in practice. Some of the 
clans are totemic. Thus the Khandit clan takes its name 
from the sword (khanda), which the members hold in great 
respect. The Bansit clan revere the bamboo (dams) and 
allege that the ancestor of the clan was produced out of it. 
These are said to be the two original clans, from which the 
other five are derived.® 

The Bhangi are a sweeper tribe or caste of India. 
At Benares some of them are divided into several exogamous 
clans (gotras), which appear to be totemic. Thus the Kharaha 
or Hare clan will not eat hares, and the Pattharaha or 
Stone clan will not take their food out of stone vessels. 
The Chuhan clan derive their name from the rat (chuha), and 
the Pathrauta clan from a vegetable called pethre-ka-sag.* 

The Dhangars are a Dravidian tribe allied to the 
Oraons of Chota Nagpur. They are found in Gorakhpur 
and the south of Mirzapur, as well as in the Central 
Provinces. Though nominally Hindoos, they worship none 
of the regular Hindoo deities. The tribe is divided into 
at least eight exogamous clans, most or all of which are 
totemic. Thus Ilha is said to mean a kind of fish, which 
the members of this clan will not eat; Kajur is the name 
of a jungle herb, which people of the clan do not use; 
Tirik is the name of a clan which may be identical with 
Tirki, the name of the Bull clan among the Oraons ; in Chota 
Nagpur members of this clan will not touch any cattle 
after their eyes are open. The Lakara clan in Mirzapur 

1 W. Crooke, Zribes and Castes o, 4 W. Crooke, of. cit. i. 272 59. 
the North-Western Provinces and Oudh, 5 W. Crooke, of. cét. ii. 263 sg., 
i, 2. 269. Asto the totems of the Dhangars 
2 W. Crooke, of. cit, i. 5. in the Central Provinces, see above, 

3 W. Crooke, of. ct#, i. 126, 130. p. 230. 

among the 

Baiswar. 

Exogamous 
clans 
among the 
Bhangi. 

Exogamous 
clans 
among the 
Dhangars. 

The 
Levirate. 

Exogamous 
clans 
among the 
Ghasiyas. 

Traditions 
as to the 
origin of 
the totemic 
clans. 

280 TOTEMISM IN INDIA CHAP. 

takes its name from the hyaena (akar bagha), which mem- 
bers of the clan will not hunt nor kill. The Bara clan in 
Mirzapur will not cut the dar tree (Ficus Indica). The 
Ekka clan say that their name means “leopard,” and 
accordingly they will not kill leopards. The Tiga clan 
profess to derive their name from a jungle root, which 
they will not eat. Lastly, the Khaha clan say that their 
name means “crow,” a bird which they respect and will 
not injure’ The Dhangars observe the custom of the 
levirate ; for when a man dies his younger brother has a 
right to marry the widow. Only when he gives up his 
claim to her may she marry another. The property of the 
first husband passes to the levir, that is, to the brother 
who has married the widow, but the sons of the levir 
are not by a legal fiction fathered on his deceased elder 
brother. 

The Ghasiyas, a Dravidian tribe in the hill country 
of Mirzapur, are divided into seven exogamous clans. 
Khatangiya, the name of one clan, is said to mean “a man 
who fires a gun”; and members of the clan worship the 
matchlock. The Sunwan or Sonwan clan, which ranks 
highest, is said to take its name from gold (sona). When 
any Ghasiya becomes ceremonially impure, one of the 
Sunwan clan purifies him by sprinkling him with water in 
which a little bit of gold has been placed. The Janta clan 
is alleged to take its name from the quern or flour-mill 
(janta) ; they say they got this name because a woman of 
the clan was delivered of a child while she sat at the quern. 
The Bhainsa clan claim descent from a godling called 
Bhainsasur, whom they worship with the sacrifice of a 
young pig on the second of the light half of the month 
Karttik. Simarlokwa, the name of another clan, is said to 
mean “the people of the cotton tree”; and to explain it 
they say that once a great cotton tree fell on the clan and 
crushed them all except one pregnant woman, who escaped 
and so preserved the clan from extinction. The Khoiya 

1 W. Crooke, Zrzbes and Castes of totemic clans of the Oraons, some of 
the North-Western Provincesand Oudh, which bear the same names as those of 
ii, 265; ¢@., The Popular Religion and the Dhangars, see below, pp. 287 s¢g. 

Folk-lore of Northern India (West- 
minster, 1896), ii. 150 sg. As to the 2 W. Crooke, of. cté. ii. 267. 

x TOTEMISM IN NORTH-WEST INDIA 281 

clan derive their name from a wild dog (kotya, Cuon 
rutilans), because a member of the clan is said to have 
been persuaded by a Rajah to eat one of these animals, 
which the Rajah had killed in hunting. Lastly, the 
Markam clan take their name from the tortoise, which they 
worship because a tortoise once carried a member of the 
clan across a river in flood... Among the Ghasiyas the The 
custom of the levirate prevails with the usual restriction 
that it is only a younger brother who has the right to 
marry the widow of his deceased elder brother. There is 
no pretence of fathering the sons of the levir on his dead 
brother.? : 

The Kharwars are a tribe of landholders and cultivators Exogamous 
in South Mirzapur. Their origin appears to be Dravidian. eae ae 
A portion of the tribe is found in Bengal, where they have Kharwars. 
preserved their totemic organisation more perfectly than 
in Mirzapur? North of the River Son in Mirzapur the 
tribe is divided into four exogamous clans and one 
endogamous clan. The four exogamous clans are as 
follows. The Surajbansi claim descent from the sun (suraj). 

The Dualbandhi say that their name comes from duzal, 

“a leather belt,” because they were once soldiers. The 

Patbandhi aver that they are so called because they once 

were very rich and wore silk (pat). Lastly, the Benbansi 

give two explanations of their name. Some of them say 

it comes from den, “a bamboo,” because the clan is 

descended from a bamboo, and some of its members will 

not cut bamboos. Others derive the name from a haughty 

Rajah of the name of Ben. The endogamous clan of the Endogam- 

Kharwars bears the name of Khairaha, which they are said eee 

to take from the zhair tree (Acacia catechu), because they Kharwars. 

extract catechu from it. The occupation is deemed dis- 

reputable ; hence the members of the clan may not marry 

into the other four clans and are therefore forced to marry 

among themselves. In regard to the marriage of widows The 

and the levirate the tribe is at present in a state of transi- b”'"™'* 
1 W. Crooke, 7ribes and Castes of As to the Kharwars of Bengal, see 

the North-Western Provinces and Oudh, below, pp. 295 59. 

ii. 408 sgg. 4 W. Crooke, Z7tbes and Castes of 
2 W. Crooke, of. cit. ii. 413. the North-Western Provinces and Oudh, 

3 W. Crooke, of. cit. iii, 237 sg. iii. 238 5g. 

Exogamous 
and 

totemic 
clans 

among the 
Nats. 

Totemic 
taboos. 

Marriage 
with blood- 
relations. 

It is doubt- 
ful whether 
totemism 
exists in 
the Punjab. 

282 TOTEMISM IN INDIA CHAP, 

tion. The more Hindooised Kharwars forbid both, but the 
more primitive portion of the tribe permits them.’ 

The Nats are a so-called gypsy tribe of dancers, 
acrobats, and strumpets, who are found scattered all over 
the North-Western Provinces of India. The problem of 
their origin and affinities is very perplexing and its solution 
very uncertain. Perhaps the term Nat designates an 
occupation rather than a race, and includes members of 
different stocks, who have been grouped together only 
because they pursue the same vagrant life, ministering to 
the pleasure of idlers by rope-dancing, tumbling, and in 
other less reputable ways.2, The Bajaniya Nats of Mirzapur 
are divided into seven exogamous and totemic clans. The 
Makriyana take their name from makri, “a spider,” and no 
member of the clan will kill the insect. The Gauharna 
clan derive their name from gof, the alligator or lizard of 
the Ganges, and none of them will harm the reptile. 
Another clan bears the more ambitious title of Deodinaik 
or “leader given by God,” and the members of this. clan 
are generally the headmen of the tribe. The Bahunaina 
clan take their name from the fly, which members of the 
clan will not injure. ,Members of the Sanpaneriya clan 
will not kill the snake (samp), from which they derive their 
name ; and members of the Suganaik clan in like manner 
refuse to harm parrots (suga) after which they are called. 
One clan, the Gagoliya, cannot give any explanation of 
their name. The rule not to take a wife within the clan 
is the only prohibition on intermarriage, and it is notorious 
that the Nats marry very near blood-relations.? 

It is not easy to say definitely whether totemism exists 
in the Punjab. The custom of exogamy is indeed almost 
universal among the Hindoos there as elsewhere, but there 
seems to be little or no clear evidence that the exogamous 
clans or septs (gots) are totemic, that is, that they observe 
certain taboos with regard to plants, animals, or other 
objects which they deem sacred. On this subject a good 

1 W. Crooke, 7rtbes and Castes of 2 W. Crooke, of. cit. iv. 56 sg. 
the North-Western Prowinces and Oudh, 
iti, 242. 3 W. Crooke, of. czt. pp. 61 59. 

' 

x TOTEMISM IN NORTH-WEST INDIA 283 

authority, Mr. H. A. Rose, observes: “A few instances Mr. H. A. 
have apparently survived among the Aroras, and there are Rose. 
possibly stray cases among the Jats of the south-eastern totemism 
plains, the Gujars, Rajputs, and other castes, even the Sees 
Khatris, but the evidence is not conclusive, for little but 

the names remain, the instances of respect paid to the 
totem itself being few and uncertain. Amongst the Kanets 

of the Simla hills there are a few £he/s which have originated 

in some manifestation of divine favour by a tree, which is 
subsequently worshipped as an ancestor, its name being 

also adopted as the khel name.” Examples of such Kanet 

clans (&/els) are the Palashi, named after the palash tree; 

the Pajaik clan named after the gaya tree; and the Kanesh 

clan named after the kanash tree.’ Other instances of 
totemic clans in the Punjab are perhaps to be found in the 
Agarwal group of Banias, who are divided into fourteen 
exogamous clans (gots). Of these clans the Kansal takes 

its name from a grass (fans), and the Bansal takes its name 

from the bamboo (dams), and neither clan may cut or injure 

the plant after which it is called.” 

On the subject of exogamy in the Punjab I will quote ny 
the observations of a high authority, the late Sir Denzil on exogamy 
C. J. Ibbetson: “The tribe as a whole is strictly endo- Punjab 
gamous; that is to say, no Jat can, in the first instance, 
marry a Gujar or Ror, or any one but a Jat; and so on. 

But every tribe is divided into gentes or gots; and these 
gentes are strictly exogamous. The gens is supposed to 
include all descendants of some common ancestor, wherever 
they live. ... Traces of phratries, as Mr. Morgan calls 
them, are not uncommon. Thus the Mandhar, Kandhar, 
Bargujar, Sankarwal, and Panihar gentes of Rajputs sprang 
originally from a common ancestor Lao, and cannot inter- 
marry. So the Deswal, Man, Dalal, and Siwal gentes of 
Jats, and again the Mual, Sual, and Rekwal gentes of 
Rajputs, are of common descent, and cannot intermarry. 

'H. A. Rose, Census of India, p. 331. Compare (Sir) Denzil C. J. 
1901, vol. xvii. Punjab, its Feudatories, Vbbetson, Report on the Revision of 
and the North-West Frontier Province, Settlement of the Panipat Tahsil and 
Part I. (Simla, 1902), p. 332. As to Aarnal Parganah of the Karnal Jis- 
exogamy, without totemism, in the ¢rzct (Allahabad, 1883), pp. 77-79. 
Punjab, see Mr. H. A. Rose, of. cit. 2-H. A. Rose, of. ctt. p. 327. 

Natural 
features of 
Chota 
Nagpur. 

284 TOTEMISM IN INDIA CHAP. 

The fact that many of the gentes bear the same name in 
different tribes is‘explained by the people on the ground 
that a Bachhas Rajput, for instance, married a Gujar woman, 
and her offspring were called Gujars, but their descendants 
formed the Bachhas gens of Gujars. This sort of tradition 
is found over and over again all over the country ; and in 
view of the almost conclusive proof we possess (too long to 
detail herd) that descent through females was once the rule 
in India, as it has been probably all over the world, I think 
it is rash to attribute all such traditions merely to a desire 
to claim descent from a Rajput ancestor.” ! 

§ 7. Totemism in Bengal 

In Bengal the district of Chota Nagpur has for ages 
formed a secure asylum for those aboriginal tribes who have 
been driven from the lowlands by the tides of invasion that 
have swept over the plains of the Ganges. It is a high 
tableland guarded on all sides by precipitous jungle-clad 
hills and pierced here and there by rugged paths which a 
handful of resolute men could hold against an army. The 
first settlers who forced their way up through the dense 
thickets and steep declivities to the summit must have 
rejoiced to find themselves at last not so much on the crest 
of a mountain range as on the edge of a far-spreading land 
of rolling wooded hills, diversified by fertilising streams and 
broken here and there by fantastic pinnacles of rock, which 
in places resemble the vast domes of temples buried in the 
earth. Here in a genial climate, safe from pursuit, the 
refugees could draw breath and look down tranquilly on 
the bustle and tumult of life far off in the plains below. 
Here, therefore, the rude children of nature could maintain 
their freedom and preserve their simple habits with but little 

change from generation to generation.” 

1 (Sir) Denzil C. J, Ibbetson, Report 
on the Revision of Settlement of the 
Panipat Tahsil and Karnal Parganah 
of the Karnal District (Allahabad, 
1883), p. 77. 

2 Lieut.-Col. E. T. Dalton, ‘ The 
Kols of Chota-Nagpore,” 7vansactions 

It is accordingly 

of the Ethnological Society of London, 
New Series, vi. (1868) pp. 1 5g.; F. B. 
Bradley-Birt, Chota Nagpore, a little- 
known Province of the Empire (London, 
1903), pp. I sgg. 3 W. Crooke, Natives 
of Northern India (London, 1907), 

PP: 7 59 

x TOTEMISM IN BENGAL 285 

among the aboriginal tribes of Chota Nagpur that we find 
preserved, perhaps more perfectly than elsewhere in India, 
the ancient systems of totemism and exogamy. 

Of these tribes the Oraons, whose name is probably TheOraons 

derived from the Dravidian foro, “man,” appear to be the 
earliest settlers in the plateau. They are pvre-blooded 
Dravidians, of the darkest brown complexion, approaching 
to black, with coarse, jet-black hair, which inclines to be 
frizzly, projecting jaws, thick lips, broad flat noses, and bright 
full eyes. Their language is Dravidian. They cultivate 
the soil; indeed, they claim to have introduced the use of 
the plough into Chota Nagpur instead of the old barbarous 
mode of tillage, which consists in burning the jungle and 
sowing a crop of pulse or Indian-corn in the ashes,| Their 
country is the northern and western parts of Chota Nagpur. 
In these days it presents to view a vast stretch of terraced 
rice-fields, divided by swelling uplands, some well wooded 
with groves of mango, tamarind, and various useful or 
ornamental trees, others still crowned with relics of the 
primaeval forests, which are preserved with religious care to 
serve as haunts for the woodland spirits. Huge piles or 
soaring pinnacles of granite rock add an element of strange- 
ness and romance to the scene. Far off the fair landscape 
is generally bounded by blue hills.’ 

Yet the dwellings of the savages who claim to be the 
original lords of this fair domain assort but ill with the 
grandeur of the scenery. Their mud-built huts, incapable of 
affording decent accommodation to a family, are huddled 
together in a fashion little conducive to health, convenience, 
or decorum. Groups of such houses are built in rows of 
three or four facing each other and forming a small enclosed 
courtyard, which is seldom properly drained or cleaned. 
In these hovels human beings and cattle herd together. 
Only the swine have sties of their own. When the huts are 
built of the red laterite soil of which the uplands are 
generally composed, they are as durable as if constructed of 

1 (Sir) H. H. Risley, Zrihes and pp. 76 sg. 
Castes of Bengal, Ethnographic Glossary 2 Colonel E. T. Dalton, Descriptive 
(Calcutta, 1891-1892), ii. 138 5g.,148; Z2¢thnology of Bengal (Calcutta, 1872), 
W. Crooke, Natives of Northern India, p. 246. 

and their 
country. 

Houses of 
the Oraons, 

286 ZTOTEMISM IN INDIA CHAP. 

brick and mortar; indeed such walls last indefinitely, 
provided that they are protected from the drip of the rain 
by roofs or merely by a slight coping of leaves or straw. 
Rachelors’ In all the older Oraon villages, which adhere to the ancient 
rere customs, there is a bachelors’ house called a dhumkuria, 
kuria)in where all the unmarried men and boys must sleep under 
Sin penalty of a fine. The young unmarried women also sleep 
apart from the houses of their parents; but where they pass 
the night is somewhat of a mystery. Colonel Dalton was 
told that in some villages a separate dormitory, like the 
dormitory of the bachelors, is provided for them, where they 
consort together under the charge of an elderly duenna ; 
but he believed the more common practice to be to 
distribute them among the houses of the widows, and this is 
what the girls themselves assert, if they answer at all when 
the question is put to them; but they are reticent on the 
subject. But however billeted, it is well known that they 
often find their way to the bachelors’ hall, and in some 
villages actually sleep there. “TI not long ago,” says Colonel 
Dalton, “sawa dhumkuria in a Sirguja ‘village in which boys 
and girls all slept every night. They themselves admitted 
the fact, the elders of the village confirmed it, and appeared 
to think that there was no impropriety in the arrangement. 
That it leads to promiscuous intercourse is most indignantly 
denied, and it may be there is safety in the multitude; but 
it must sadly blunt all innate feelings of delicacy. Yet the 
young Oraon girls are modest in demeanour, their manner 
gentle, language entirely free from obscenity, and whilst 
hardly ever failing to present their husbands with a pledge 
of love in due course after marriage, instances of illegitimate 
births are rare, though they often remain unmarried for some 
years after reaching maturity. Long and strong attachments 
between young couples are common.” * 
Loose However, the charitable view which the gallant colonel 
relations _, took of the relations between Oraon maids and bachelors is 
among the not shared by other experienced authorities on the Indian 
Neues people. Thus Sir Herbert Risley observes that among the 
marriage. OQraons “sexual intercourse before marriage is tacitly 
recognized, and is so generally practised that in the opinion 

1 E, T. Dalton, Descriptive Ethnology of Bengal, pp. 246-248. 

x TOTEMISM IN BENGAL 287 

of the best observers no Oraon girl is a virgin at the time of 
her marriage. To call this state of things immoral is to 
apply a modern conception to primitive habits of‘ life. 
Within the tribe indeed the idea of sexual morality seems 
hardly to exist, and the unmarried Oraons are not far 
removed from the condition of modified promiscuity which 
prevails among many of the Australian tribes. Provided 
that the exogamous circle defined by the totem is respected, 
an unmarried woman may bestow her favours on whom she 
will. If, however, she becomes pregnant, arrangements are 
made to get her married without delay, and she is then 
expected to lead a virtuous life. Prostitution is unknown. 
Intrigues beyond the limits of the tribe are uncommon, and 
are punished by summary expulsion.” ? 

The Oraons are divided into a great many exogamous Exogamous 
and totemic clans. At least, seventy-one such clans are 2°4 

totemic 
known to exist. They are named after their totems, which cians of 

the Oraons. 

are sacred or tabooed to members of their respective clans. 
The totems are mostly animals or plants, which the clans- 

people are forbidden to eat. 
two clans, The following is 
by Sir Herbert Risley :—* 

1 (Sir) H. H. Risley, Zribes and 
Castes of Bengal, ii. 141. Sir Herbert 
Risley’s view is accepted by Mr, W. 
Crooke, who writes of the Oraons: 
“The youths, like those of the Nagas, 
are supposed to sleep in a bachelors’ 
hall; but the intercourse of the sexes 
is practically unrestricted, ante-nuptial 
connections are the rule rather than 
the exception, and marriage, as they 
understand the term, is equivalent to 
cohabitation” (Natives of Northern 
India, p. 77). On this subject Mr. 

Iron and salt are totems of 
the list of totemic clans given 

E. A. Gait, of the Indian Census, 
writes to me: ‘‘Risley is certainly 
right about premarital communism 
amongst the Oraons, I have been 
told that if an Oraon girl is thought 
unduly coy all the youths of the village 
combine against her and get her 
deflowered by one or more of their 
number.” : 

2 (Sir) H. H. Risley, Zrédes and 
Castes of Bengal, ii. Appendix, pp. 
113 5g. 

[TABLE 

288 

TOTEMISM IN INDIA 

ORAON TOTEMS 

(Sir Herbert Risley) 

CHAP 

Clan, 

Amri 
Bagh 
Bandh 
Bando 

Bakula 
Bar 
Barwa 
Basa 
Bekh 
Beanh 

Bhakla 
Chigak 
Chirra 
Chowria Musa 
Dhan 
Dhechua 
Dirra 
Dom Khakha 
Ekka 
Lrgo 
Gari 
Garwe 
Gede 
Gidht 
Gislihe 
Godo 
Golala 
Gondrari 
Induar 
Hachua 
Kaith 
Kanda 
Kaua 
Kendt 
Kenu 
Keond 
Kerketa 

Totem. Clan. Totem. 
rice soup Khalkhoa cannot eat fish caught 
tiger by baling water out 
of a tank or pool 
a wild cat which barks || Azeksa curry vegetable 
at night Khes cannot eat plants that 
paddy-bird grow in ponds 
Ficus Indica Khetta a cobra 
a wild dog Khoepa a wild dog 
a tree Kinda a date palm 
salt Kispotta pig’s entrails 
a large fish with thorns || Koswar a kind of fish 
on its back Kujur a fruit used to stain 
the horns of cattle 
a jackal at the Sohrai festival 
a squirrel Kundri curry vegetable 
field-rat Ausuwa a fish 
rice soup forbidden Lakra a hyaena 
kingcrow Lila a kind of fish 
a kind of eel Linda an eel 
a raven Loha iron 
tortoise Mahato a title 
a rat Mingt a kind of eel 
monkey f Munjniar a wild creeper 
a stork Murga cock 
a duck Nagbans cobra 
a vulture Orgonra a hawk 
a bird Pusra fruit of kusum tree 
crocodile Putri a tree 
Rort a fruit or tree 
a tree Runda a fox 
a kind of eel Sal fish 
tortoise Sarno 
curry vegetable Suar hog 
sweet potato Tig Hanuman | monkey 
crpw Tirki young mice 
a tree Tirkuar fruit 
a fish Tirtia 
a fruit \Tiru a kind of fish 
a bird which makes a || Zofoar a bird with a long tail, 

noise like 2e¢ het 

and body mottled 
black and white 

A list of twenty-seven Oraon totems is given by the 

Rev. F. Hahn. 

It differs in some points from the one 

given by Sir Herbert Risley, the differences being probably 

x TOTEMISM IN BENGAL 289 

due to local variations in the totemic system or nomen- 
clature of the tribe. Mr. Hahn’s list is as follows :—! 

. Chelek Cheta . 

12. Toppo. 
. Kerketta 

22. Bakhla 

23. Khess . 

24. Madge 

25. Kisskhocol . 

ORAON TOTEMS 

(Rev. F. Hahn) 

Clans. Totems. 
. Lakra. tiger; nothing of a tiger is eaten by the members 
of this clan (sept). 
2. Chigalo jackal ; nothing of a jackal is eaten by the members 
of this clan. 
3. Kispota the intestines or stomach of a pig are not eaten by 
this clan. 
4. Kaya . the wild dog; nothing of him is eaten. 
5. Kartu. the black Zanuman ape ; not eaten, 
6. Tiga . the field mouse ; not eaten. 
7. Tirki . young mouse ; not eaten. 
8. Orgora hawk ;. not eaten. 
9. Gidhi . vulture ; not eaten. 
10. Khakha crow ; not eaten. 

swallow ; not eaten. 
woodpecker ; not eaten. 
quail ; not eaten. 

14. Dhicua swallow-tailed bird ; not eaten. 
15. Ekka . tortoise ; not eaten. 
16. Minj . eel; not eaten. 
17. Kindo. carp fish ; not eaten. 
18. Khalkho shad fish; not eaten. 
19. Kujur. a creeper, from the fruit of which an oil is obtained, 
which is not used by the Kujur people. 
20. Bara . the Ficus Indica; the fruit is not eaten. 
. Chitkha the Ficus religiosa ; the fruit is not eaten. 

tank weed ; the roots may not be eaten by this clan. 

paddy. The conjy [?] is not used by this clan unless 
it is diluted. 

mahua ; the flower may not be eaten. 

a thorny tree; the fruit is forbidden to this can. 

26. Panna iron; may never be touched with the tongue or the 
lips. 
27. Bek salt ; may not be eaten on the tip of the finger. 

1 Rev. F. Hahn, ‘*Some Notes on 
the Religion and Superstitions of the 
Oras,” Journal of the Asiatic Soctety 

VOL. II U 

of Bengal, \xxii. Part III. (Calcutta, 
1904) pp. 18 sg. 

Respect 
shown to 
the totems. 

Dalton on 
the Oraon 
clans and 
totems. 

TOTEMISM IN INDIA CHAP. 

290 

From a comparison of the lists we may infer that the 
kerketa and the ¢opoar of Sir Herbert Risley’s list are 
the quail and the woodpecker respectively. In regard to 
the totems generally, Mr. Hahn tells us that they “are held 
sacred in some way or other,” and that the respect shewn to 
them is regarded as homage paid to ancestors.’ Hence it 
would seem that the Oraons, like many other totemic 
peoples, conceive themselves to be descended from their 
totems. 

A few of the Oraon clans and their totems were first 
recorded by Colonel E. T. Dalton. He tells us that “ the 
Tirki have an objection to animals whose eyes are not yet 
open, and their own offspring are never shewn till they are 
wide awake. The £kér will not touch the head of a tortoise. 
The Katchoor object to water in which an elephant has been 
bathed. The Amdzar will not eat the foam of the river. 
The Kzujrar will not eat the oil of the Kujri tree, or sit 
in its shade. The Zéga will not eat the monkey.”? In 
general he observes that “the family or tribal names are 
usually those of animals or plants, and when this is the 
casé, the flesh of some part of the animal or fruit of the tree 
is tabooed to the tribe called after it.”* 

The rule of exogamy observed by the Oraons is the 

1 Rev. F. Hahn, ‘‘Some Notes on 
the Religion and Superstitions of the 
Orads,” Journal of the Asiatic Society 
of Bengal, \xxii. Part III. (Calcutta, 
1904), p. 18. 

2 Tjieut.-Col. E. T. Dalton, ‘The 

Kols of Chota-Nagpore,” Transactions 
of the Ethnological Society of London, 
N.S. vi. (1868) p. 36. In his later 
work, Descriptive Ethrology of Bengal, 
p- 254, Colonel Dalton gives the follow- 
ing list of Oraon clans (or tribes, as he 
calls them) with their taboos :—- 

may not eat oil from this tree or sit in its shade 

Clans. Taboos. 
Tirki | may not eat tk, young mice 
Ekhar may not eat head of tortoise 
Kirpotas do not eat the stomach of the pig 
Lakrar may not eat tiger’s flesh 
Hujrar 
Gedhiar | may not eat kite 
Khakhar os > «= Crow 
sWinjar 49 » eel 
Kerketar ” 3; the bird so named 
Barar 

may not eat from the leaves of the Ficus Indica 

+E. T. Dalton, Descriptive Ethnology of Bengal, p. 254. 

x TOTEMISM IN BENGAL 291 

simple one that a man may not marry a woman of his own Marriage 

clan. There is no objection to a man’s marrying a woman co 

of his mother’s clan. Children belong to the clan of their 

father. In addition to the rule of exogamy there seems to’ 

be a system of prohibited degrees, though no one can state 

it clearly. Still every Oraon admits that he may not marry 

his mother’s sister nor his first cousin on the mothez’s side, 

though he will probably not be able to say how far these 

prohibitions extend in the descending line. Again, no man The 

may marry the widow of his younger brother nor his rc ed 

deceased wife’s elder sister; but he may marry the widow riage with 

of his elder brother and his deceased wife’s younger sister.’ deceased 

: sister. 
Another large Dravidian tribe of Chota Nagpur who The 

retain totemism and exogamy are the Mundas. Physically ana 

they are among the finest“of the aboriginal tribes of the Nagpur. 

plateau. The men are about five feet six in height, their 

bodies lithe and muscular, their skin of the darkest brown or 

almost black, their features coarse, with broad flat noses, 

low foreheads, and thick lips? Thus from the physical point The 

of view the Mundas are pure Dravidians. Yet curiously Munda or 

enough they speak a language which differs radically from language. 

the true Dravidian. Together with the languages of the 

Kherwaris, Kurkus, Kharias, Juangs, Savatas, and Gadabas 

it forms a separate family of speech, to which the name of 

Kolarian used to be applied ; but modern philologers prefer 

to name it Munda after its best known representative, the 

language of the Mundas. This interesting family of language 

is now known to be akin to the Mon-Khmer languages of 

Further India as Well as to the Nicobarese and the dialects 

of certain wild tribes of Malacca. It is perhaps the language 

which has been longest spoken in India, and may well have 

been universally diffused over the whole of that country as_ 

well as over Further India and Malacca before the tide of 

invasion swept it away from vast areas and left it out- 

standing only in a few places like islands or solitary towers 

rising from an ocean of alien tongues.» The Mundas are 

1 (Sir) H. H. Risley, Zribes and (London, 1903), p. 24. 
Castes of Bengal, ii. 141. 3 Imperial Gasetteer of India, The 
2 F.B. Bradley-Birt, Chota Nagpore, Indian Empire, i. (Oxford, 1909) pp- 
a little-known Province of the Empire 382 sq. 

292 TOTEMISM IN INDIA CHAP. 

Exogamous divided into many exogamous clans (#z//s), of which no less 

and 
totemic 
clans of the 
Mundas. 

Totemic 
taboos. 

The Hos 
or Larka 
Kols. 

than three hundred and thirty-nine are enumerated by Sir 
Herbert Risley. The great majority of them appear to be 
totemic, deriving their names from animals or plants which 
the members of the clan are forbidden to eat. Children 
belong to the clan of their father.’ Among the totemic 
animals of the Munda clans are the tiger, leopard, elephant, 
wolf, jackal, crocodile, a kind of snake, river-snake, cobra, 
stag, deer, wild cow, horse, monkey, hog, dog, wild dog, cat, 
rat, mouse, tree-mouse, porcupine, rabbit, squirrel, tortoise, 
hawk, kite, vulture, quail, parrot, peacock, swan, crow, king- 
crow, pigeon, cock, fowl, and many other birds, black bee 
or hornet, fly, red tree-ant, black tree-ant, red flying ant, rice 
weevil, earth worm, a red worm, leech, eel, water-snake, and 
fish of various sorts. Among the totemic plants of the clans 
are rice, fried rice, paddy, yam, plantain, potato, sweet potato, 
a curry vegetable, areca nut, lotus, various fruits, fig, fig-tree 
root, Ficus Indica, tamarind, kussum-tree, mango, a kind 
of grass, mushroom, and moss. Among the miscellaneous 
totems are salt, red earth, ashes, a kind of mud, vermilion, 
copper, cocoon, horn, bone, clarified butter, honey, new rice 
soup, full moon, moonlight, rainbow, the month of June, 
Wednesday, brass bracelet, verandah, umbrella, basket-maker, 
torch-bearer, and the Rautia caste. The totemic taboos 
of three clans are’ respectively not to eat beef, not to wear 
gold, and not to touch a sword. Members of the clan which 
has paddy (unhusked rice) for its totem are forbidden to eat 
rice and rice soup; they eat millet instead. Members of the 
clan which takes its name from the wdbarn tree do not use 
the oil which is extracted from the trée.2 The Mundas 
cultivate rice and celebrate festivals at harvest.® 

Another large non-Aryan tribe which is divided into 
exogamous clans are the Hos or Larka Kols. As they are 

1E. T. Dalton, “The Kols of pp. 102-109. 
Chota-Nagpore,” Zransactions of the . % : 
Ethnological Society of London, N.S. pirate ee 
vi. (7868) pp. 26, 365 id., Descriptive oo Sat, Ue Appendix, Pp. 
Ethnology of Bengal, p. 189; (Sir) 409: 
H. H. Risley, 7ribes and Castes of 3 (Sir) H. H. Risley, Zrides and 
Bengal, ii. 101 sg., and Appendix, Castes of Bengal, ii. 104. 

x TOTEMISM IN BENGAL 293 

closely akin to the Mundas, they may be noticed here, 
though Singbhum, the district which they inhabit, does not 

form part of Chota Nagpur proper, but lies to the south- 

east of it. The most fertile and highly-cultivated part of 

this region surrounds the station of Chaibasa, and here are 
massed about two-thirds of the Hos or Kols. To the south- 

west, bordering on Chota Nagpur, is a mountainous tract of 

vast extent sparsely peopled by the wildest of the Kols, 
whose poor villages nestle in the deep valleys of these 
rugged highlands. Like their kinsmen the Mundas, the 

Hos or Kols are classed on linguistic grounds as Kol- 
arians| They are a purely agricultural people, and all their Agriculture 
festivals are connected with the cultivation of the ground, % Ho 
They raise three crops of rice in the year, and they also 
cultivate maize, millet, tobacco, and cotton. Their agri- 
cultural implements, which they make themselves, are a 
wooden plough tipped with iron, a harrow, a large hoe, a 
sickle, and a battle-axe, which serves more peaceful purposes 

than the name implies. They plough with cows as well as 

oxen, but prefer buffaloes to bullocks. The cattle are used 

only for ploughing ; for the Hos, like many other hill tribes 

of India, never touch milk.2 In the most fruitful part of the Villages of 
land the villages are often prettily situated on a hillside * #* 
looking away over the flat-terraced rice-fields and the rolling 
uplands. Ancient and noble tamarind trees overshadow the 
roomy, substantially built houses with their thatched roofs 

and neat verandahs. The outhouses are so placed as to 

form with the farm-house itself a square courtyard with a 

large pigeon house in the middle. Not far off, in the shade of 

the solemn tamarind trees, are the graves covered with great 

slabs of stone, on which in the cool of the evening, when their 

work is done, the elders love to sit and smoke their pipes, 
gossipping of village affairs and no doubt often recalling the 

days of their youth and the memory of the rude forefathers 

who sleep their long sleep under these ponderous stones.® 

1 E. T. Dalton, Descriptive Ethno- known Province of the Empire (London, 
logy of Bengal, pp. 177 59.3 (Sir) 1903), pp. 82 sgg. 

H. H. Risley, Tribes and Castes of 2 E. T. Dalton, Descriptive Ethno- 
Bengal, i. 319. As to the Hos logy of Bengal Fo06sn 
and their country, see further F. B. OEY RENE RS PPE RI S9 390 590: 

Bradley-Birt, Chota Nagpore, a little- 3 E. T. Dalton, of. czt. p. 189. 

High 
places and 
sacred 
groves of 
the Hos. 

Exogamous 
clans of 
the Hos, 

Totemism 
and 
exogamy 
among the 
Bedias 
and other 
tribes of 
Chota 
Nagpur. 

294 TOTEMISM IN INDIA CHAP. 

Every village has its high place and its sacred grove, 
where the gods, unseen by mortal eyes and unrepresented 
by images, receive the offerings of their worshippers. 
The high place is some mighty mass of virgin rock, 
to which man has added nothing and from which he has 
taken nothing away. The sacred grove is a fragment of 
the primeval forest left standing when the rest of it was 
felled, lest the sylvan deities, rendered houseless by the 
woodman’s axe, should forsake the land for ever. For ages 
these venerable trees have been carefully protected, and even 
now if one of them is destroyed, the gods manifest their 
displeasure by withholding the rains in their due season. 
It is to these woodland deities that the husbandman looks 
for a bounteous harvest ; it is to them that he pays his 
devotions at all the great festivals of the agricultural year. 
The Hos or Larka Kols are divided into at least forty- 
six clans or septs, which strictly observe the rule of exogamy, 
no man being on any account allowed to marry a woman of 
his own clan. “With this exception” says Sir Herbert 
Risley, “their views on the subject of prohibited degrees 
appear to be lax, and I understand that marriages with near 
relatives on the mother’s side are tolerated provided that a 
man does not marry his aunt, his first cousin, or his niece.” 
The clans of the Hos, like those of the Mundas, are 
called #/s. Among the names of the clans Colonel Dalton 
found only one which is that of an animal ; however, accord- 
ing to Sir Herbert Risley, many of the names appear to be 
totemic. Six of the clans are identical in name with six 
clans of the Santals, who are themselves akin to the Hos.? 

Another totemic people in Chota Nagpur are the Bedias, 
a small agricultural tribe of the Dravidian stock. They are 
divided into nineteen exogamous and totemic clans or septs, 
and the clan totems include the squirrel, cobra, tortoise, owl, 
pigeon, and other birds, various kinds of fish, the banyan tree, 
the Bassia /atifolia, and the mahua flower.2 The Bhars, a 
1 E. T. Dalton, Descriptive Ethno- i. 320, ii. Appendix, p. 60. 
logy of Bengal, pp. 185-188. 3 (Sir) H. H. Risley, Zréées and 
2 E. T. Dalton, Descriptive Ethno- Castes of Bengal, i. 83, ii. Appendix, 

logy of Bengal, p. 189; (Sir) H. H. p. 8 That the septs or (as I call 
Risley, 7rzbes and Castes of Bengal, them) clans of the Bedias are exogamous 

x TOTEMISM IN BENGAL 295 

small Dravidian caste of Chota Nagpur and Western Bengal, The Bhars. 
are for the most part cultivators of the soil. They are 
divided into seven exogamous clans or septs, of which four 

have for their totems the tortoise, the peacock, the bamboo, 

and the de fruit. The other three clans (Agni, Brahmarishi, 

and Rishi) are eponymous, that is, they derive their names 

from real or mythical ancestors, not from totems.) In Chota The 
Nagpur the Goalas, the great pastoral caste of India, are 9"** 
divided into thirty-one exogamous and totemic clans or 
septs of the type common in that part of the country. 
Among their clan totems are the tiger, deer, calf, cobra, rat, 
field-rat, red tree-ant, eel, swan, mango, Ficus Indica, pakar 

fruit, lotus, a kind of grain, a grass,and an arrow. One clan, 

(the Sona) is forbidden to wear gold ; another (the Tirki) to 
touch cattle after their eyes are open.? The Kharias, a The 
Dravidian tribe of cultivators in Chota Nagpur, are divided harias. 
into at least thirty-four exogamous and totemic clans or 
septs. Among the clan totems are the tiger, elephant, 
tortoise, cobra, red ant, eel, several kinds of birds and fish, 

the Ficus Indica, paddy, salt, and a rock. The exogamous 

rule is regularly observed, no man being allowed to marry a 
woman of his own clan. On the other hand, it is said that 

the totemic rule to regard the totem as sacred or taboo is 

not now very generally observed; it must, however, have 
been at one time in force, for a clan of wild Kharias, whom 

Mr. Ball met with on the Dalma range in Manbhum, had 

the sheep for their totem and were not allowed to eat mutton 

or even to use a woollen rug. The Kharwars, a Dravidian The 
Kharwars, 

is not expressly mentioned by Sir 
Herbert Risley, but I assume that they 
and all the other septs enumerated by 
him in his Z7ribes and Castes of 
Bengal, Ethnographic Glossary, vol. ii. 
Appendix I., are in fact exogamous. 
That they are so appears to be clearly 
implied by Sir Herbert Risley in his 
general account of exogamy. See his 
essay ‘* Primitive Marriage in Bengal,” 
Asiatic Quarterly Review, July 1886, 
pp. 75 sgg.3 The People of India, pp. 
154 sy. 

1 (Sir) H. H. Risley, 772bes and 
Castes of Bengal, i. 95, ii. Appendix, 
Pp. 9. Asto eponymous septs or clans, 

see zd, ‘* Primitive Marriage in Bengal,” 
Asiatic Quarterly Review, July 1886, 
pp. 81 sg.3 7@.,*The People of India, 
P- 155. 

2 (Sir) H. H. Risley, Z7zbes and 
Castes of Bengal, i. 282, 288, ii. Ap- 
pendix, pp. §1 sg. 

3 (Sir) H. H. Risley, Zrzbes and 
Castes of Bengal, i. 466, ii. Appendix, 
pp. 77 sg. As to the taboo on the 
sheep and its products, see V. Fall, 
Jungle Life in India (London, 1880), 
p. 89, ‘*The Keriahs do not eat the 
flesh of sheep, and may not even use a 
woollen mg”; E. T, Dalton, Descrip- 
tive Ethnology of Bengal, p. 161. 

The Koras. 

The 
Koshtas. 

The 
Kurmis. 

296 TOTEMISM IN INDIA CHAP. 

tribe of cultivators and landholders in Chota Nagpur and 
Southern Behar, are divided into more than seventy 
exogamous clans ‘or septs, of which many are totemic. 
Among the totems of their clans are the tiger, elephant, 
cobra, cow, tortoise, rat, squirrel, red tree-ant, eel, hawk, swan, 
duck, hen, a water-fowl and other kinds of birds, Ficus Indica, 
plum, pineapple, various other fruits and grasses, salt, lime, 
coral, gold, copper, a top-knot, a neck ornament, an arrow, 
and goldsmith. The Koras are a Dravidian caste of earth- 
workers and cultivators in Chota Nagpur, and Western and 
Central Bengal. Probably they are an offshoot from the 
Munda tribe. Amongst them, wherever the exogamous 
clans have been preserved, the rule is that a man may not 
marry a woman of his own totem, but the mother’s totem is 
not taken into account. Amongst their totems are the bull, 
pig, tortoise, heron, wild goose and a fish (sa/ or saula).? 
The Koshtas are a caste of weavers and cultivators in Chota 
Nagpur. Some at least of their exogamous clans are totemic, 
such as the Baghal (tiger), Bhat (rice), Chaur (yak’s tail), 
Khanda (sword), Kurm (tortoise), Manik (gem), and Nag 
(snake). But there is no evidence that the members of the 
clans pay any respect to the totems whose names they bear. 
Among the Koshtas a widow is expected to marry her 
deceased husband’s younger brother, if one survives him.’ 
The Kurmis are a very large caste of cultivators in Chota 
Nagpur, Upper India, Behar, and Orissa. Their origin is 
obscure. In Chota Nagpur and Orissa their exogamous 

_clans number sixty and are purely totemic. The clan 

totems include the tiger, crocodile, tortoise, buffalo, jackal, 
snake, rat, cat, spider, kite, wild goose, bamboo, betel palm, 
fig, kesar grass, gold, net, pierced ears, and hunter. One 
clan (Bansriar) will not play the danzs¢ or bamboo flute. 
Another will not wear silk, and another will not wear shell 
ornaments,* 
The Lohars are the blacksmith caste of Chota Nagpur, 

Behar, and Western Bengal, comprising a large and hetero- 

} (Sir) H. H. Risley, Zyzbes and 3 (Sir) H. H. Risley, of. ez#. i, 513, 
Castes of Bengal, i. 472, 474, ii. ii, Appendix, p. 84. 
Appendix, pp. 78 59. 

2 (Sir) H. H. Risley, of. czt. i. 506, £ (Sir) H. H. Risley, of. cz#. i. 528 
507, ii. Appendix, p. 83. $q9q-, ii. Appendix, pp. 87 59. 

x TOTEMISM IN BENGAL 

297 

geneous aggregate of members of different tribes and castes. 
In Chota Nagpur the caste is divided into sixty-eight 
exogamous clans or septs, of which many, if not all, are 
totemic. Among their clan totems are the tiger, elephant, 
cobra, snake, tortoise, cow, bullock, wild cat, fox, red tree-ant, 
eel, hawk, kingcrow, crow, heron, birds of other sorts, bamboo, 
fig, sweet potato, lotus, grass (Zons), turmeric, and net. The 
Tirki clan may not touch any animals after their eyes are 
open! The Mahili are a caste of labourers, palanquin- 
bearers, and workers in bamboo, who are found in Chota 
Nagpur and Western Bengal. They are divided into about 
thirty exogamous and totemic clans. Some of the totems 
are the bull, nilgau (a species of antelope), eel, cater- 
pillar, wild goose and other birds, jack-fruit tree, wild fig, 
and turu grass. One clan has ears for its totem, and 
members of it are forbidden to eat the ear of any animal.’ 
The Nagesar are a small Dravidian tribe of cultivators in 
Chota Nagpur, short, very dark, and ugly. The exogamous 
clans into which they are divided bear totemic names which 
occur among the Mundas and many other Dravidian tribes. 
Among their totems are the bull, the cobra, two kinds of eels, 
the mango, and the Ficus Indica. One of their clans (the 
Sonwani) is forbidden to wear gold.* 

Totemism 
and : 
exogamy 
among the 
Lohars, 
Mahili, 

and 
Nagesar of 
Chota 
Nagpur. 

The Pans are a low caste of weavers, basket-makers, and Totemism 

and 

menials scattered under various names (Chik, Ganda, Pab, exogamy 
Panika, Panwa, Tanti, etc.) throughout the north of Orissa among the 

and the southern and western parts of Chota Nagpur. 

are descendants of Aryan colonists, who settled of old in 
Chota Nagpur and were subdued by the Dravidian races of 
that country. But the numerous totemic clans into which 
they are divided seem to furnish strong evidence of their 
Dravidian origin.* On this subject Sir Herbert Risley 
observes: “ The caste has a very numerous set of totems, 

1 (Sir) H. H. Risley, 7ribes and 
Castes of Bengal, ii. 22, and Appendix, 
PP. 94 59. 

2 (Sir) H. H. Risley, of. cit. ii. 40, 
and Appendix, pp. 96 sg.; 7@., The 
People of India, p. 95. 

3 E.T. Dalton, Descriptive Ethnology 

of Bengal, pp. 131-133; (Sir) H. H. 
Risley, 7rtbes and Castes of Bengal, ii. 
122, and Appendix, p. 111. 

4 (Sir) H. H. Risley, Zrédes and 
Castes of Bengal, ii. 155 sg., and Ap- 
pendix, pp. 36 sg., 115-117; E. T. 
Dalton, Descriptive Ethnology of 
Bengal, p. 325. 

Pans of 
It Orissa and 

has been conjectured on very slender grounds that the Pans Chota 
a 

gpur. 

Totemic 
taboos. 

Totemism 
and 
exogamy 
among the 
Rautias of 
Chota 
Nagpur. 

298 : TOTEMISM IN INDIA CHAP. 

comprising the tiger, the buffalo, the monkey, the tortoise, 
the cobra, the mongoose, the. owl, the kingcrow, the pea- 
cock, the centipede, various kinds of deer, the wild fig, the 
wild plum, and a host of others which I am unable to 
identify. They have in fact substantially the same set of 
totems as the other Dravidian tribes of that part of the 
country, and make use of these totems for regulating marriage 
in precisely the same way. The totem follows the line of male 
descent. A man may not marry a woman who has the same 
totem as himself, but the totems of the bride’s ancestors are 
not taken into account, as is the case in the more advanced 
forms of exogamy. In addition to the prohibition of 
marrying among totem kin, we find a beginning of the 
supplementary system of reckoning prohibited degrees. The 
formula, however, is curiously incomplete. Instead of 
mentioning both sets of uncles and aunts and barring seven 
generations, as is usual, the Pans mention only the paternal 
uncle and exclude only one generation. They are therefore 
only a stage removed from the primitive state of things when 
matrimonial relations are regulated by the simple rule of 
exogamy, and kinship by both parents has not yet come to 
be recognized.”? To'the Pan or Chik totems enumerated 
above by Sir Herbert Risley may be added the cat anda 
small wild cat, the frog, the cow, the rat, the wood-louse, 
the crab, a red tree-ant, the flying bug, a water-snake, the 
hawk, the swan, the paddy-bird, the Ficus Indica, the 
tomato, curry vegetable, fork of a tree, Aanst grass, Bassta 
latzfolza, horn, bull’s horn, a yak’s tail, iron, the moon, and a 
ship. The members of one clan (Balbandhiya) are bound to 
tie up their hair. The members of another clan (Dz) may not 
eat after lights are lit. The members of another (A/ahabaar) 
may not kill or chase the wild boar; and the members of 
another (Rikhiasan) are forbidden to eat beef or pork.’ 

The Rautias are a caste of landholders and cultivators in 
Chota Nagpur, who are probably Dravidian by origin, but 
have been refined in features and complexion by a large 
infusion of Aryan blood. They are divided into many 

1 (Sir) H. H. Risley, Zrédes and ii. Appendix, pp. 36 59., I15- 
Castes of Bengal, ii. 156. 117. 
2 (Sir) H. H. Risley, of, cit. 

x TOTEMISM IN BENGAL 299 

exogamous clans (gars or gots), of which some are totemic. 
Such are the clans which take their names respectively from 
the eel, the tortoise, the snake, the cat, the wild dog, the 
squirrel, the vulture, the Aasz grass, the sword, and the axe. 
The rule that the totem is tabooed to members of the clan 
appears in, the case of the Rautias to apply only to the 
animal-totems, which may be named, but may not be killed or 
eaten. On the other hand members of the Sword clan and 
of the Axe clan are not forbidden to use these weapons, nor 
is a man of the 4asz Grass clan prohibited from touching the 
grass from which his clan is supposed to be descended. The 
clan, with its totem, is inherited by children from their 
father. While a man is forbidden to marry a woman of his 
own totemic clan, he is free to marry a woman of his 
mother’s clan. The simple rule of clan exogamy is accord- 
ingly supplemented by a table of prohibited degrees made 
up, like our own, by enumerating the individual relatives 
whom a man is forbidden to marry, and not, as is more usual, 
by prohibiting intermarriage with certain large classes of 
relations or with the descendants, within certain degrees, of 
particular relations, It is considered right that a widow The 
should marry her late husband’s younger brother. Under Levitate. 
no circumstances may she marry his elder brother. Any 
children she may have by the younger brother are deemed 
his and not his deceased brother’s.' 

The last totemic people of Chota Nagpur whom we shall Totemism 
notice are the Turis, a non-Aryan caste of cultivators, ae 
workers in bamboo, and basket-makers, whose physical type, among the 
language, and religion prove that they are a Hindooised off- iia 
shoot of the Mundas. Their exogamous clans are for the Nagpur. 
most part totemic and correspond closely to those of the 
Mundas, They include Bar (Ficus [ndica), Charhad (tiger), 
Hansda (wild goose), Hastadda (eel), Induar (a kind of eel), 
Jariar (lizard), Kachhua (tortoise), Kerketa (a kind of bird), 

Samp (snake), Saur (fish), Susat (deer), Suven (a kind of 
fish), Zivk? (mouse), and Tofpo (bird).? 

1 (Sir) H. H. Risley, 7rzbes and sg., and Appendix, p. 140. As to 
Castes of Bengal, ii. 199, 200, 201, the Kerketa, Tirki, and Tofpo totems, 
and Appendix, p. 123. see above, pp. 288, 289, 290, 295. 

2 (Sir) H. H. Risley, of. edt. ii. 333 

The 
Santals. 

Migratory 
agriculture 
of the 
Santals. 

The social 
system of 
the Santals, 
their 
exogamous 
clans and 
subclans. 

300 TOTEMISM IN INDIA CHAP, 

But while the secure tableland of Chota Nagpur is the 

‘home of many aboriginal tribes which have retained the 

ancient social system of totemism and exogamy, it is by no 
means the only part of Bengal in which totemic peoples are 
found. Amongst these the best known are the Santals, a 
large Dravidian tribe of cultivators, who have their nucleus 
in the Santal Parganas cr Santalia, but are also found 
scattered at intervals over a strip of Bengal which stretches 
for about three hundred and fifty miles from the Ganges to 
the Baitarni and is bisected by the meridian of Bhagalpur or 
87° East longitude. So far as physical appearance goes, the 
Santals may be regarded as typical examples of the pure 
Dravidian stock. Their complexion varies from very dark 
brown to almost charcoal-like black ; the proportions of the 
nose approach those of the negro ; the mouth is large, the lips 
thick and protruding, the hair coarse, black, and sometimes 
curly. On the ground of their language, however, the 
Santals are classed as Kolarians or Mundas.' Though they 
till the soil, their habits are migratory ; they do not care 
to settle for long in one place, but clear fresh patches for 
cultivation in the woods and so move on. A country denuded 
of the forest which furnishes them with the hunting grounds 
they love and the virgin soil they prefer has little attraction 
for them. When by their own labour the trees have been 
felled, the jungle cleared, and the land brought under 
cultivation, they quit it and retire into the backwoods, 
where their harmonious flutes sound sweeter, their drums 
find deeper echoes, and their bows and arrows may be 
used again. 

The social structure of the Santal tribe is very elaborate. 
It is divided into twelve clans or septs and at least seventy- 
six subclans or subsepts. Both clans and subclans are 
exogamous and both appear to be totemic. No man may 
marry into his own clan (farz) or subclan (khunt), but he 
may marry into any other clan, including his mother’s ; on 

1 E. T. Dalton, Descriptive Ethno- Six W. W. Hunter, Annals of Rural 
logy of Bengal, p. 207; (Sir) H. H. Senga/® (London, 1872), is in great 
Risley, 772bes and Castes of Bengal,ii. part devoted to a detailed and sym- 
22459.3 Thelmperial Gazetteer of India, _ pathetic account of the Santals. 

The Indian Empire, vol. i. (Oxford, 2 E. T. Dalton, Descriptive Ethno- 
1909), p. 383. The work of the late ogy of Bengal, pp. 208 sq. 

x TOTEMISM IN BENGAL 301 

the other hand he is not allowed to marry into his mother’s 
subclan. Children belong to their father’s clan. The 
twelve exogamous clans are: 1. Hasdak (wild goose) ; 2. 
Murmu (the nilgau or nilgao, a species of antelope, Portax 
pictus); 3. Kisku; 4. Hembrom (betel palm); 5. Marndi 
(grass) ; 6. Saven (the constellation Pleiades); 7. ZTudu; 8. 
Baske; 9. Besra (hawk); 10. Pauria (pigeon); 11. Chore 
(lizard), and 12. Bedea or Bediya (sheep?). The Pauria 
(pigeon) and the Chore (lizard) clans are said to have been so 
called because on a famous hunting party conducted by the 
tribe members of these clans failed to kill anything but pigeons 
and lizards respectively. Members of the J7urmu (antelope) 
clan may not kill the species of antelope (Portax pictus) from 
which they take their name nor may they touch its flesh.’ 
Among the subclans or subsepts (Ahunts) into which the 
Santal clans (farzs) are divided we may note Kahu (crow), 
Kara (buffalo), Chilbinda (eagle-slayer), Rohk-Lutur (ear- 
pierced), Dantela (so called from breeding pigs with very 
large tusks for sacrifice), Gua (areca nut), Kachua (tortoise), 
Nag (cobra), Somal (deer), Kekra (crab), Rohit (panjaun tree), 
Boar (a fish), Handi (earthen vessel), Szk¢ya (a chain), Barchi 
(spearmen), Saxkk (conch shell), Szdup or Siduk (a bundle 
of straw), Agaria (charcoal-burners), and Lat (bake meat 
in a leaf-platter).” Many of the subclans observe certain Traditional 
curious traditional usages. Thus at the time of the harvest eee 
in January members of the Sarex (Pleiades) clan and the subcians. 
Szdup (bundle of straw) subclan set up a sheaf of rice in 
the doorway of their cattle sheds. This sheaf they may not 
themselves touch, but some one belonging to another subclan 
must be got to take it away. Men of the Saven clan and 
the Sada subclan do not use vermilion in their marriage 
ritual ; they may not wear clothes with a red border on such 
occasions, nor may they be present at any ceremony at which 
the priest offers his own blood to propitiate the gods. Men 
of the Saren clan and the /ug¢ subclan, on the other hand, 
smear their foreheads with vermilion (sézdur) at the harvest 
1 E. T. Dalton, Descriptive Ethnology Bengal,® p. 202 (as to exogamy cf the 
of Bengal, pp. 212 sg.; (Sir) H. H. clan and paternal descent). 
Risley, Zribes and Castes of Bengal, ii. 2 (Sir) H. H. Risley, Zrtbes and 

226-228, and Appendix, pp. 125 sg.; Castes of Bengal, ii. Appendix, pp. 
(Sir) W. W. Hunter, dznals of Rural 125 sg. 

302 TOTEMISM IN INDIA CHAP. 

Traditional festival and go round asking alms of rice. With the rice 

usages of 
the Santal 
subclans, 

The 
Levirate 
among the 
Santals. 

they get they make little cakes which they offer to the gods. 
Members of the Savenx clan and the Manjhi-Khil subclan 
are so called because their ancestor was a manjhi or village 
headman. Like the Sada-Saren, they are forbidden to attend 
when the priest offers up his own blood. Members of the 
Saren clan and the NMaiki-Khil subclan claim descent from 
a nazki or village priest and may not enter a house of which 
the inmates are ceremonially unclean. They have a sacred 
grove (jadhirthan) of their own apart from the common 
sacred grove of the village, and they dispense with the 
services of the priest who serves the rest of the village. 
Members of the Saven clan and of the O# subclan sacrifice a 
goat or a pig in their houses, and during the ceremony they 
shut the doors tight and allow no smoke to escape. The 
word of, which is the name of the subclan, means to suffocate 
or stifle with smoke. Members of the Saven clan and the 
Mundu or Badar (dense jungle) subclan offer their sacrifices 
in the jungle, and allow only males to eat of the flesh of the 
animals which have been slain. Members of the Save clan 
and the J/a/ subclan may not utter the word sa? when they 
are engaged in a religious ceremony or sitting to determine 
tribal questions. Men of the Sarex clan and the /éiu sub- 
clan may not kill or eat the 7z4z or babbler bird after which 
they are called, nor may they wear a particular sort of neck- 
lace known as jzhu mala from the resemblance which it bears 
to the babbler bird’s eggs. The babbler bird is said to 
have guided the ancestor of the clan to water when he was 
dying of thirst in the forest. Members of the Savex clan and 
the Saxkh (conch shell) subclan may not wear shell necklaces 
or ornaments. ; Members of the Saren clan and the Barchir 
(spearman) subclan plant a spear in the ground when they 
are engaged in religious or ceremonial observances.’ 

The Santals think it the right thing for a widow to marry 
her deceased husband’s younger brother, if one survives him, 
but under no circumstances may she marry his elder brother.’ 
An eldest son is always named after his grandfather? 

1 (Sir) H, H. Risley, Zribes and 231. 
Castes of Bengal, ii, 228. 3 E. T. Dalton, Descriptive Ethno- 
2 (Sir) H. H. Risley, of. cit. ii. logy of Bengal, p. 214. 

x TOTEMISM IN BENGAL 303 

The principal festival of the Santals is the sohrai or Sexual 
harvest festival celebrated in the month of Posh (November- pies ia 
December), after the chief rice crop of the year has been got Santals at 
in. Public sacrifices of fowls are offered by the priest in (54"** 
the sacred grove; pigs, goats and fowls are sacrificed by 
private families, and a general saturnalia of drunkenness and 
debauchery prevails. Chastity is in abeyance for the time, 
and all unmarried persons may indulge in promiscuous 
intercourse. This licence, however, does not extend to 
adultery, nor does it cover intercourse between persons of 
the same clan, though even that offence comniitted during 
the harvest festival is punished less severely than at other 
times. It is possible that this period of licence may be a 
temporary revival of old communal rights over women. 

Another well-known Dravidian tribe of Bengal among the 
whom totemism combined with exogamy has been discovered ee 
are the Khonds, Kondhs, or Kandhs, who inhabit a_ hilly country. 
tract called Kandhmals in Boad, one of the tributary states 
of Orissa in the extreme south of Bengal. A portion of the 
tribe is also found in Gumsur, formerly a tributary state, 
which now forms part of the Ganjam District in Madras. 

The Khonds of Orissa call themselves Maliah, to distinguish 
themselves from the Khonds of Gumsur.? Their country is 

wild and mountainous, consisting of a labyrinth of ranges 
covered with dense forests of sa/ trees. They are a shy and 

timid folk, who love their wild mountain gorges and the 
stillness of jungle life, but eschew contact with the low- 
landers and flee to the most inaccessible recesses of their 
rugged highlands at the least alarm. They subsist by Migratory 
hunting and a primitive sort of agriculture, clearing patches ee 
of land for cultivation in the forest during the cold weather Khonds. 
and firing it in the heat of summer. The seed is sown 
among the ashes of the burnt forest when the first rains 

have damped it. After the second year these rude tillers 

of the soil abandon the land and make a fresh clearing in 

the woods.® The cruel human sacrifices which they used 

1 (Sir) H. H. Risley, Zrébes and among the Khonds,” Journal of the 
Castes of Bengal, ii. 233- Asiatic Society of Bengal, \xxiii, Part 
2 (Sir) H. H. Risley, of, ct. i. 3973 TIE (Calcutta, 1905) p. 40. 
J. E. Friend- Pereira, ‘ Totemism 3 (Sir) H. H. Risley, Zc. 

304 TOTEMISM IN INDIA CHAP. 

Pune to offer to the Earth Goddess in order to ensure the 
aeattee ‘fertility of their fields have earned for the Khonds an 
the fields. unenviable notoriety among the hill tribes of India. These 

sacrifices were at last put down by the efforts of British 

officers,’ 
Exogamous The Khonds of Orissa are divided into fifty exogamous 
aoe septs or clans called gochis, each of which bears the name of 
a Be. a village (muta) and believes its members to be all descended 

from a common ancestor. As a rule the clanspeople live 
together in the village or group of villages from which they 
take their name. Each clan, is further split up into sub- 
clans called kdambus. No man may marry a woman of his 
own clan even though she may belong to another subclan. 
Both clan and subclan are inherited by children from their 
father ; no traces of female kinship have been detected 
among the Khonds, unless the rule which forbids a man to 
take a wife from his mother’s subclan may be regarded as 
such.? The statements of some older writers further point 
Sere to the practice of totemism among the Khonds. Thus one 
among she Of them says that many Khond chieftains “lay claim to a 
Khonds. fabulous descent, and point to their coat of arms as indi- 
cating the animal or object from which their ancestors 
sprung. The Rajah of Goomsur, for example, had a pea- 
cock, another prince a snake, and a third a bamboo tree; 
and these cognizances are no small source of pride.”® 
Again, another writer tells us that “Khond names seem to 
be universally taken from natural objects, never expressing 
qualities. Thus, there is the Meeninga, or Fish tribe; the 
Janinga, or Crab tribe ; the Pochangia, or Owl ; the Syalinga, 
or Spotted Deer tribe; the Grango, or Nilgae”;* and he 
further informs us that “marriage can take place only 
betwixt members of different tribes, and not even with 
strangers who have been long adopted into or domesticated 
with a tribe ; and a state of war or peace appears to make 

1 See Major-General John Campbell, 2 (Sir) H. H. Risley, Z7ribes and 
Personal Narrative of Thirteen Years’ Castes of Bengal, i. 400 sg. 

nevice, GmOn SE ane, Ase Teves of 3 Major-General J. Campbell, Fer- 

sito ‘fice ene ee aes A sonal Narrative a T) hapteee Years 
: 2 TO04)5 Service, etc., p. 26, 

Major S. C. Macpherson, A/emorzals of 

Service in India (London, 1865); Zhe * Major S. C. Macpherson, AZ- 

Golden Bough,? ii. 241-246. morials of Service in India, p. 78.' 

x ZTOTEMISM IN BENGAL 305 

little difference as to the practice of intermarriage betwixt 
tribes. The people of Baramootah and of Burra Des 
ia Goomsur have been at war time out of mind, and 
annually engage in fierce conflicts, but they intermarry 
every day.” 

In recent years these indications of totemism among the Mr. Friena- 
Khonds have been confirmed by the researches of Mr. J. E. Perea’s 
Friend- Pereira, whose enquiries were prosecuted mainly in totemism 
the northern section of the tribe, particularly among the 7y0ns n° 
group of clans who inhabit the tributary state of Boad or 
Bod, a part of the tributary state of Daspalla, and the 
former tributary state of Gumsur, which now belongs to 
the Ganjam district of Madras. The western part of the 
country investigated by Mr. Friend-Pereira is a high plateau 
intersected by the many ramifications of the Ghaut Mountains. 
Eastward the land opens out into broader and more fertile 
valleys, till the plateau begins to merge into the plains 
of Ganjam. On reaching Boad we have passed into the 
lowlands, though even here hills rise like islands from the 
alluvial flats. As the country changes, so do its inhabitants. 

For the Khonds of the western highlands are wilder and 
more primitive than their brethren of the plains; as a rule 
they speak no language but their native tongue, they still 
eat pork and drink strong drink, and their women go about 
with nothing but a loin-cloth to hide their nakedness. On 
the other hand the Khonds of the low countries speak the 
Uriya tongue, have more or less eschewed pork, and in the 
plains of Boad and Gumsur are hardly distinguishable from 
the Uriyas in features, language, and mode of life? These 
two sections of the Khond tribe, the more and the less 
civilised, are known respectively as the Uriya Khonds and 
the Mulua or Mal Khonds. The Malua or Mal Khonds, 
the wilder inhabitants of the highlands, already refuse to 
intermarry with the Uriya Khonds of the plains, whom 
they despise as degenerate for having abandoned many 
of their old native’ customs and assimilated themselves 
to Hindoos. It seems probable that in time a complcte 

1 Major S. C. Macpherson, 4f- among the Khonds,” Journal of the 

morials of Service in India, p. 69. Asiatic Society of Bengal, \xxiti. Part 
2 J. E. Friend-Pereira, ‘*Totemism III. (Calcutta, 1905) pp. 40 59. 
VOL. IL x 

306 TOTEMISM IN INDIA CHAP. 

separation will take place. between the two branches of 
the tribe.’ 
The Chota Among the Malua or Mal Khonds there exist certain 
Paju com" communes or confederacies of clans, of which the largest and 
theKhonds most influential is known as the Chota Paju or Chota 
ae Padki. It comprises six clans or rather subclans and 
occupies the centre of the eastern half of the Mal country.” 
The following is Mr. Friend-Pereira’s account of the totemic 
system of the confederacy: “The constitution of Chota 
Paju confederacy is peculiar. Chota Paju or Chota Padki 
means the six padu or countries. There are six territorial 
areas called Mutha (a handful) as follows: Bidumendi and 
Bakamendi, Gimalmendi and Grandimendi, Sandumendi and 
Dutimendi ; and each of the pairs forms a sub-commune. 
In each of the six muthds are found families of various 
stocks with different totems :—as for instance, a dominant 
stock called gayesvar whose totem is the elephant and whose 
title is maliko; a stock bearing the title of kuzdro and 
possessing as their totem @drd (a cudgel or heavy stick); a 
stock styled dzso¢ whose totem I have not been able to 
discover; a stock surnamed fodan who are admittedly 
descended from a pqno and who will not touch the mohri 
(clarionet)—an instrument on which faxo musicians play at 
marriage celebrations and other festivities of the Khonds; a 
stock styled x@ko who worship the pdaxjz (almanac) as a 
tutelary deity and who have as their totem deta (cane) ; 
a stock called da@go or chita kvrandi (chameleon) who tike 
their title from their totem, the éégo; another maliko stock 
-who are supposed to be descended from a kumhar (potter) 
and will not touch the pztzd (potter's hammer) which is their 
totem ; a stock surnamed dehra who are also supposed to be 
descended from another class of kumhar—the khond-kumhar 
—whose totem I could not discover; a third stock with the 
title maliko whose tutelary deity is az gosdni (Uriya: hathi 
gosain) but whose totem is not very clear; and lastly the 
servile Rdparmendi Khonds who have both the titles saliko 
1 (Sir) H. H. Risley, Zribes amd Khonds,” Journal of the Astatic So- 
Castes of Bengal, i. 398. The form ciety of Bengal, \xxiii. Part III. (Cal- 
Malua is used by Sir H. H. Risley, eats; 1905) pp. 40 sq. 

the form Mal by Mr. J. E. Friend- J. E. Friend-Pereira, of. cét. p. 
Pereira, ‘*Totemism among the 41. 

x TOTEMISM IN BENGAL 307 

and kuxzaro and possess as their totem the f7kuri—a small 
kettle-drum on an earthenware body which was used in 
former days to summon clansmen to ‘a gathering. All 
the members of these various stocks cannot intermarry 
within the six confederated szuthas, and they form an 
exogamous group in themselves, being considered, by a 
fiction of course, members of one great brotherhood. This 
exogamous group of various totem stocks is the goch¢ of Mr. 
Risley, who was misled into believing that all the members 
of a gochi were of the same blood.”! If a member of the 
Chameleon (chita krandz) clan meets his totemic animal on 
a journey, he will at once turn back and tell his relations in 
an awed whisper, “I have seen our god” (Maz penu mel’ te). 
Thereupon the priest of the clan will be sent for to offer 
a propitiatory sacrifice and to find out why the deity has 
deigned to appear to the clansman.” 

Another Khond commune or confederacy bears the The Tin 
name of Tin Pari or Borgocha. The name Zin Pari means 21! com- 
“the three septs or clans,” though in fact the confederacy theKhonds 
comprises three distinct communes, in each of which are *y" i's 
found different family stocks. The three dominant septs or 
clans are the Dela Pari, the Kalea Pari, and the Sidu Pari. 

In the Khond language de/a means a_twig, and the totem of 
the Dela Pari clan is the twig of any tree. Hence the 
members of the clan will never use twigs in constructing a 
house of wattle and daub, and they will never stay in one of 
the temporary huts of branches and leaves (k%r7@) which the 
people generally set up in the fields for the purpose of 
watching the crops; for the Dela Pari think that if they 
slept in such a hut by night they would be carried off by 
tigers? The Sidu Pari clan takes its name from stdu, which 
in the Khond language means “they are not.” Legend 
says that the clan formerly dwelt in caves. When strangers 
approached, the clanspeople disappeared into their caves like 
rabbits in a warren; 1...ce their name of s¢du, “they are 
not.” Be that as it may, the Sidu Pari clan will not enter 

1 J. E. Friend-Pereira, ‘*Totemism to the gocht, see above, p. 304. 
among the Khonds,” Jornal of the 2 sd. : RAS 
Asiatic Society of Bengal, \xxiii. Part JoEs anes Bereira, of. 26: DPS 
III. (Calcutta, 1905) pp. 43 sg. As 3 J. E. Friend-Pereira, of. cit. P» 44+ 

Other 
Khond 
communes 
with their 
totems. 

308 TOTEMISM IN INDIA CHAP. 

a cave nor dig a hole such as a well or a tank. But they 
perform 4 religious rite, in which a structure like a dolmen 
figures. Two slabs of stone are planted perpendicularly in 
the ground, a third rests on the top of them, and the whole 
represents a cave (gumpa), within which the priest offers a 
sacrifice! The totem of the Kalea Pari clan has not been 
ascertained, but they have a legend which appears to be a 
degenerate form of the Swan Maiden or Cupid and Psyche 
type of story, which elsewhere is associated with totemism. 
They say that a youth hunting in the forest came on a 
group of girls bathing in a mountain stream, and that 
smitten with love of one or more of them he caught up 
their clothes and disappeared with them into the jungle. 
The girls belonged to his own exogamous group and there- 
fore could not be his wives. Knowing that the penalty for 
such an incestuous union was death, he dared not return to 
his village, so he became a fugitive and a wanderer till at 
last he made his way to the Tin Pari country, where he 
founded the Kalea Pari or thief clan. At an annual festival 
of the clan the priest makes a rude flag by tying a piece of 
cloth to a pole, which he carries with great solemnity from 
village to village. All the young men and women of the 
clan follow in procession, chanting lewd songs as part of the 
ritual. The flag is then ceremoniously buried in the ground. 
Yet unchastity or incontinence is said to be strictly tabooed 
to both men and women of the Kalea Pari clan, who regard 
it as a sacrilege that would provoke the unappeasable wrath 
of the deity. Hence the women of the clan enjoy a reputa- 
tion for immaculate virtue.” 

In another Khond commune or confederacy called 
Bengrikia a dominant stock or clan is the Bheti, who take 
their name from their totem d/etz7,a rope of twisted straw, 
which on being lit smoulders long and furnishes fire in the 
absence of lucifer matches. The use of such ropes is 
forbidden to members of the clan.2 Two other communes 

1 J. E. Friend-Pereira, ‘‘Totemism Psyche tale in connection with totem- 
among the Khonds,” Journal of the ism, see above, pp. 205 sg. We shall 
wtstatic Society of Bengal, \xxiii. Part meet with such tales again in West 
III. (Calcutta, 1905) p. 46. Africa, 

2 J. E. Friend-Pereira, of. c7t. p. 45. 3 J. E. Friend-Pereira, of. cé¢. pp. 
As to the Swan Maiden or Cupid and = 46, 47. 

x TOTEMISM IN BENGAL 309 

or confederacies bear each the name of Ath Kombo, and 
each is divided into four sub-communes, of which each in 
turn contains many totem clans. Of these clans a large 
one takes .its name from its totem, the Adzsari or mallard 
duck, and is said to have sprung from an egg of that bird.’ 
Another confederacy, which bears the name of Tin Kombo, 
includes totemic clans which have for their respective 
totems, among other things, the lac insect, the she-bear, the 
fruit of the sa/ tree (Shorea robusta), the tender shoots of 
bamboos, the tree (Butea frondosa) on which lac is generally 
cultivated, the horn of an animal, and a woman’s loin-cloth? 
As specimens of the totems found among the wilder Khonds of 
the west and in Gumsur are recorded pana (frog), srdsu (snake), 
Ziteri (button quail), ginderz (lesser florican), da@ak (crow 
pheasant), ivp¢ (mohul: Bassia latifolia), and sola (grass) 

“In the matter of marriage prohibitions,’ says Mr. Marriage 
Friend-Pereira, “the Khonds appear to have a series of Probibr 
exogamic circles that beginning with the smallest unit—the among the 
gochi or commune—goes on expanding until it reaches a “D4 
circumference of truly stupendous magnitude in the totem. 

The circle of actual prohibition is the commune, for a man 

may on no account marry within its limits even though it 

consist of widely different totem stocks. He must always 
. seek for a wife outside the commune, but subject to certain 
restrictions.” Thus he may not marry a woman of another 
totem stock if she’ belongs to a commune which is in 
alliance with his own; he may not marry a woman of 
another commune, whatever her totem may be, if she is 
known or supposed to be of the same blood as himself; and 
lastly he may not marry a woman of any commune, though 
she may be a perfect stranger to him, if her totem is the 
same as his. This prohibition of marriage with a woman of 
the same totem is the most comprehensive of the rules of 
exogamy among the Khonds.* 

The Asuras are a small non-Aryan tribe of Lohardaga 

1 J. E. Friend-Pereira, ‘‘Totemism _p. 49. 
among the Khonds,” Journal of the 3 J. E. Friend- Pereira, of. cit. 
Asiatic Soctety of Bengal, \xxiii. Part p. 49. 
. IIT. (Calcutta, 1905) p. 48. + J. E. Friend-Pereira, of. ct. pp. 
2 J. E. Friend- Pereira, of. cit. 5059. 

Totemism 
and 
exogamy 
among the 
Asuras, 

Respect 
for the 
totem. 

Totemism 
and 
exogamy 
among the 
Bagdis. 

Totemic 
taboos. 

The 
Levirate. 

Table of 
prohibited 
degrees . 
and 
formula 
for reckon- 
ing them. 

310 TOTEMISM IN INDIA CHAP. 

(Ranchi) and the eastern portion of Sarguja, who live almost 
entirely by smelting iron. They are divided into thirteen 
exogamous and totemic clans, namely Azzd (an eel), Baroa (a 
wild cat), Basrtar (bamboo), Beliar (bel fruit), Kachua (a 
tortoise), Katthawar (kattha or chichinga fruit), Kerketa 
(a bird), Mukruar (a spider), Nag (a snake), Rote (frog), Szar 
(jackal), Zzvk¢ (a bird), and Zofo (a bird). A man may 
not marry a woman of his own clan nor may he eat, cut, 
or injure the plant or animal after which his clan is called? 
The Bagdis are a caste of cultivators, fishers, and menials 
of Central and Western Bengal, who appear from their 
features and complexion to be of Dravidian descent and 
closely akin to the tribes commonly classed as aboriginal. 
In the district of Bankura, where the original structure of 
the caste seems to have been particularly well preserved, the 
Bagdis are divided into nine endogamous subcastes, which 
are in turn subdivided into exogamous clans or septs. 
Many of these clans or septs are totemic, as Ara (fish), 
Baghrishi (tiger), Kachchap (tortoise) Kasbak (heron), 
Pakbasanta (bird), Patrisht (bean), Ponkrisht (jungle cock), 
Salrisht or Salmachh (the sal fish). The totem is tabooed 
to members of the’ clan; for example, members of the 
Heron clan may not kill or eat a heron; and members of 
the Bean clan may not touch a bean. A man must marry 
within his subcaste but outside of his totem clan. For 
example, a man of the Tentulia subcaste must marry a 
Tentulia woman, but a Tortoise man may not marry a 
Tortoise woman. Children belong to their father’s clan ; 
for example, the children of a Heron man and a Bean 
woman would be Herons. A widow may marry her late 
husband’s younger brother, but she is not obliged to do so.” 
The rule of clan exogamy is supplemented, as commonly 
happens, by a table of prohibited degrees. Marriage with 
any person descended in a direct line from the same parents 
is forbidden as long as any relationship can be traced. To 

1 (Sir) H. H. Risley, Zribes and India, 1go1r, vol. i. India, Part i. 

Castes of Bengal, i. 25, ii. Appendix, 
p- 2. 

2 (Sir) H. H. Risley, Zrzbes and 
Castes of Bengal, i. 37, 38, 40, ii. 
Appendix, p. 5; #. in Census of 

pp. 181, 182, 184. As to the Asurs 
compare W. H. P. Driver, ‘* Notes on 
some Kolarian Tribes,” Journal of the 
Asiatic Society of Bengal, Wii, Part i. 
(Calcutta, 1889) pp. 7-10. 

x TOTEMISM IN BENGAL 31 

simplify the calculation of collateral relationship the follow- 
ing formula is in use: “Paternal ungle, maternal uncle, 
paternal aunt, maternal aunt—these four relationships are 
to be avoided in marriage.” Ordinarily the prohibition only 
extends to three generations in the descending line, includ- 
ing the person under consideration.’ 

The Bhumij are a non-Aryan tribe of Manbhum, Sing- The 
bhum, and Western Bengal who on grounds of language Pum): 
have been classed as Kolarian. They are without doubt akin to the 
closely allied to, if not identical with the Mundas. Indeed “™"¢** 
they are apparently nothing but a branch of the Mundas, 
who have spread eastward, mingled with the Hindoos, and 
thus for the most part severed their connexion with the 
parent tribe. The Bhumij of Western Manbhum are 
certainly pure Mundas, They inhabit a country which is 
bounded on the west by the edge of the Chota Nagpur 
plateau and is thickly studded by Mundari graveyards; the 
present inhabitants call themselves Mundas or, as the name 
is usually pronounced in Manbhum, Muras; they speak 
the Mundari language, and they observe all the customs 
practised by their brethren on the tableland of Chota 
Nagpur. For example, like the Kolarians generally, they Their 
build no temples, but worship the deity in the form of Pani 
stone smeared with vermilion in a sacred grove (sarna) near 
the village. The sacred grove always consists of purely 
jungle trees, such as the sa/, and can therefore be recognised 
with certainty as a fragment of the primaeval forest left 
standing, when the rest was felled, to serve as a last refuge 
for the old sylvan deities from the woodman’s axe. Again, Their 
like the Mundas of the tableland, the Bhumijs burn their ae 
dead and bury the charred bones and ashes under grave- 
stones, of which some are of enormous size. On certain 
feast days the simple folk lay small offerings of food under 
these big stones to regale the dead ; and early next morning ~ 
the victuals are consumed by prowling Hindoos of the 
baser sort. But to the east of the Ajodhya range all this 

1 (Sir) H. H. Risley, Zyzbes and original it runs Chachera, mamera, 
Castes of Bengal, i, 38. The same phuphera, masera, ye char nata bachake 
formula, ‘* Paternal uncle, maternal shad: hota hat. See Sir Herbert 

uncle,” etc., is in use for the same _ Risley, 7he People of India, p. 156, 
purpose throughout Behar. In the 

312 TOTEMISM IN INDIA CHAP. 

Kast of the is changed. Both the Mundari language and the title of 

Ajodhya 
range the 

‘Munda have dropped: out of use; the aboriginal inhabitants 

Bhumij are of this eastern tract call themselves Bhumij or Sardar and 

becoming 

assimilated 

to the 
Hindoos. 

Totemism 
and 
exogamy 
among the 
Bhumij. 

speak Bengalee. Yet the physical features of the race 
remain the same; and although they have adopted Hindoo 
customs and are fast becoming Hindoos, there can be no 
doubt that they are descendants of the Mundas who settled 
in the country and received the name of Bhumij from 
Hindoo immigrants. They now worship the Hindoo gods 
in addition to their old aboriginal deities ; but the tendency 
now is to keep the latter in the background and to relegate 
the less formidable of them to the women and children to 
be worshipped in a hole-and-corner way with the help of a 
tribal hedge-priest (Laya), who is supposed to be specially 
familiar with their divine tastes and habits. Some of the 
leading men of the tribe, who call themselves Bhuinhars and 
possess large landed estates on terms of police service, have 
set up as Rajputs and keep a low class of Brahmans as 
their family priests; but they cannot conform with the 
Rajput rules of intermarriage and they marry within a 
narrow circle of pseudo-Rajputs like themselves. The rest 
of the tribe, which at the last census numbered over three 
hundred and seventy thousand souls, are still divided into a 
number of exogamous and totemic clans, thus presenting an 
interesting example of an old non-Aryan tribe which, in 
the very act of blossoming out into a regular caste in 
the Brahmanical system, nevertheless preserves the ancient 
savage institutions of totemism and exogamy. Among the 
totemic clans of the Bhumij are Badda Kurkutia (a kind of 
worm), Bhuzya (a fish), Gulgu (another fish), Hansda (wild 
goose), Heutyong (betel palm), Jaru (a bird), Kasyad (tortoise), 
Leng (mushroom), Nag (snake), Obarsari (a bird), Salrishi 
(sal fish), Sandilya (a bird), Zesa (another bird), Tumarung 
(a pumpkin), and Zutz (a sort of vegetable)? A man may 
not marry a woman of his own clan nor a woman who 

1 (Sir) H. H. Risley, Zribes and see also E. T. Dalton, Descriptive 
Castes of Bengal, i. 116-118; 7@. Ethnology of Bengal, pp. 173 599. - 
in Census of India, rgor, vol. i. India, 
Ethnographic Appendices, p. 149. 2 (Sir) H. H. Risley, The People of 
As to the Bhumij, whose name is said Jndia, pp. 94 59.3 1@., Tribes and 
to mean “the children of the soil,” Castes of Bengal, ii. Appendix, p. 12, 

x TOTEMISM IN BENGAL 313 

comes within the standard formula for reckoning prohibited Prohibited 
degrees, calculated as a rule to the third generation in the ‘tee 
descending line, though sometimes it is extended to five. 

The Bhumij deem it right for a widow to marry her The 
late husband’s younger brother or cousin, when that is Levirate. 
possible.’ 

The Binjhias are a tribe of cultivators and landholders in Totemism 
the south of the Lohardaga (Ranchi) district, in Palamau, and Seay 
in the tributary states of Gangpur and Sarguja in Bengal, and among ihe 
in Patna of the Central Provinces. The Southern Binjhias "i. 
speak Uriya among themselves, but use for ordinary pur- 
poses the Hindoo jargon current in Chota Nagpur. They 
are a quiet, unwarlike people with flat faces and black 
complexions, allied perhaps to the Asuras or Agariyas, 

They are divided into exogamous and totemic clans which 

take their names, for example, from the squirrel, the rat, the 
bull-frog, the tortoise, the crocodile, the serpent, various kinds 

of fish, the hen, the paddy-bird, the fas grass (Saccharum 
spontaneum), and vermilion (sézdur). The clan name descends 

in the male line. The Vermilion clan (Szzduria) use vermilion 

at marriage, but the Bamboo clan (Banse?tz) will not touch 
bamboos at a wedding. A man may marry two sisters, Marriage 
provided he marries the elder of the two first, but not With two 
otherwise. “ It is considered right for a widow to marry ee 
her late husband’s younger brother.” Levirate. 

The Doms are a Dravidian caste of menials in Bengal, Totemism 
Behar, and the North-Western Provinces. It has been held By 
that they are the surviving representatives of an older, ruder, among the 
and blacker race who preceded the Dravidians in India, noes 
some of them being driven by the invaders to take refuge in 
mountain fastnesses and pestilential jungles, while others, 
such as the Doms of Kumaon, were reduced to perpetual 
servitude. They are divided into very many exogamous 
clans. In Behar these clans seem to be territorial or titular, Respect 
but in Bankura their names are totemic, and the members ee 
of a clan abstain from injuring the animal after which they 
are named. Among their clan totems are the tortoise, 
the cobra, the rat, the bull, a fish (saur), the kerketa bird, 

1 (Sir) H. H. Risley, 7ribes and 2 (Sir) H. H. Risley, of. edt. i. 13.4 
Castes of Bengal, i, 122, 123. 5q., ii, Appendix, p. 13. 

314 TOTEMISM IN INDIA CHAP. 

and a tree (s#ahua) from the flower of which a wine is 

made.’ 
Totemism The Gonds, who have already met us in Central India,” 
pay are also to be found in Bengal, where they occur in the 
exogamy 

among the Tributary States of Chota Nagpur, in the south of Lohar- 
Co daga (Ranchi), and in Singbhum. Here also they are divided 
and into exogamous and totemic clans which take their names 
Juangs. from the tiger, the snake, the tortoise, the buffalo, the horse, the 
hawk, the goose, several kinds of fish, the sea, iron, a bead, 
etc.® The Goraits or Koraits are a non-Aryan caste of 
musicians, comb-makers, and cotton-carders in the south-west 
of the Lohardaga (Ranchi) district. They are divided into 
exogamous and totemic clans, which include, among others, 
the Bagh (tiger), the Bar (Ficus Indica), Induar (a kind of 
eel), Khalkho (a fish), Kuri (a fruit from which oil is made), 
Sandh (bullock), Sontirk? (gold), and TZopoar (a kind of- 
bird). Members of the Zrkz clan “cannot eat birds born 
blind, nor deep-setting eggs.”* The Juangs are a non- 
Aryan tribe of Keunjhar and Dhenkanal in Orissa, who on 
grounds of language have been classed as Kolarian and 
have been thought to be closely related to the Mundas. 
Primitive They are a primitive folk, who had no knowledge of metals 
habits of | till foreigners came amongst them. Their language contains 

the Juangs: : y 
their shift- no word for iron or any other metal. They neither spin nor 

Pe ene weave, nor have they ever attained to the art of making 
ground. the simplest pottery. In their habits they are still semi- 
nomadic, for they often shift the sites of their villages and 
occupy isolated huts in the midst of their patches of cultiva- 
tion, whilst the crops are on the ground. The agriculture 
which they practise is of the rudest kind. They destroy the 
forest trees by fire and sow a little rice, pulse, pumpkins, 
sweet potatoes, and so forth in the ashes. Their huts are 
tiny, measuring about six feet by eight, and very low, “ with 
doors so small as to preclude the idea of a corpulent house- 
holder.” But for the boys there is a separate dormitory at 

1 (Sir) H. H. Risley, Zyzbes and 2 See above, pp. 222 sgq. 
Castes of Bengal, i. 240, 2423 ii. 3 (Sir) H. H. Risley, Zrides and 
Appendix, p. 44. As tothe Domsin Castes of Bengal, i. 292 5g., ii. Ap- 
North-West India, see W. Crooke, pendix, p. 54. : fu 
Tribes and Castes of the North-Western 4 (Sir) H. H. Risley, of. ct. 1. 297 
Provinces and Oudh, ii. 312 599. sq., li, Appendix, p» 55+ 

x TOTEMISM IN BENGAL 315 

the entrance of the village. This is p building of some Separate 

pretensions, built on a raised plinth of earth and containing ot 

two apartments, an inner and an outer. The boys sleep 

and the musical instruments of the village are kept in the 

inner apartment. Guests and travellers are lodged in this 

building. The tribe is divided into a number of exogamous 

and totemic clans, which take their names from the tigress, 

elephant, buffalo, bear, boar, fox, dog, dove, bee, mosquito, 

paddy, pumpkins, the tobacco flower, various sorts of mush- 

rooms, a palm, the jav7 tree, the #ahua tree, hailstones, etc. 

As usual, no man may marry a woman of his own totemic 

clan. A widow is expected, but not compelled, to marry The 

her deceased husband’s younger brother. TANS: 
Another primitive and still pagan folk who retain the 

totemism are the Korwas, a Dravidian tribe of Sarguja, Korwas, a 

-Jashpur, and Palamau. They claim to be the aborigines of aca 

the country they occupy, which is a land of hill and dale, tribe 

well-cultivated plains and forest-clad mountains, well suited 

to the mixed population that inhabits it. The Korwas, a 

short, dark, hirsute, but strong and active people, exceedingly 

wild and uncouth in appearance, cling to the highlands, where 

they lead a savage and almost nomadic life. They live in 

detached hamlets or solitary huts, sometimes perched on the 

ledge of mountain precipices in spots which, seen from 

below, might appear accessible only to birds. Themen hunt 

and the women dig for roots. But they also practise a Their rude 

primitive form of agriculture, clearing away the jungle and Se 

tilling the virgin soil for two or three years, then deserting and shift. 

the place as the land becomes exhausted and moving their is "lee. 

homesteads further into the depths of the forest. Their 

principal crop is a kind of pulse called arhar (Cajanus [ndicus). 

It is reaped in December, and the savages then celebrate Their 

their harvest home with extravagant revelry, drunken dances, acta 

and unbridled debauchery. They also sow summer rice, harvest. 

vetches, millet, pumpkins, sweet potatoes, yams, and chillis. 

The hoar frosts, which in the cold weather lie thick and 

white on the ground almost every morning, forbid the 

i (Sir) H. H. Risley, Zrzbes and Descriptive Ethnology of Bengal, pp. 
Castes of Bengal, i. 350, 352, 3533 ii. 152 s¢q- 
Appendix, p. 61; E. T. Dalton, 

Totemism 
and 
exogamy 
among the 
Korwas. 

Totemism 
and 
exogamy 
among the 
Kumbars. 

Respect 
for the 
totem. 

316 TOTEMISM IN INDIA CHAP, 

growth of winter rice on these high uplands. The claim 
of the Korwas to be the aboriginal inhabitants of the 
country is supported by the circumstance that the priests 
whose duty it is to propitiate the old local deities are always 
chosen from their tribe.’ The Korwas are divided into a 
number of exogamous and totemic clans. Among the 
totems of the clans are the tiger, the snake, the parrot, the 
wild goose, the erketa bird, two kinds of eel, a_ fish, 
the mango, a jungle fruit, myrabolam, unhusked rice, 
ploughs, and pestles for pounding grain. To what extent 
the totems are tabooed to members of their respective clans 
is uncertain, The general tendency is for such prohibitions 
to fall into disuse, and the only rule which really holds its 
ground is the one which forbids marriage between persons 
whose clan-name is the same.” 

The Kumhars are the potter caste of Bengal, Behar, and 
Orissa. There is a wide difference of opinion among our 
authorities as to their traditional parentage. As regards 
exogamy the practice of Kumhars differs greatly in different 
parts of the country ; for example, in Eastern Bengal, where 
the Mohammedan influence is strong, only one or two clans 
are known to the caste and marriage within the clan is 
permitted. On the other hand the Jagannathi Kumhars of 
Orissa, who hold a fairly high social position in that 
province, are subdivided into the following exogamous 
clans :—Kaundinya (tiger), Sarpa (snake), Meul (weazel), 
Goru (cow), Mudir (frog), Bhad-bhadria (sparrow), and 
Kurma (tortoise). The members of each clan shew their 
respect for their totemic animal, whose name they bear, by 
not killing or injuring it and by bowing when they meet it. 
Moreover, the whole caste abstains from eating, and even 
goes so far as to worship, the sad fish, because the rings on 
its scales resemble the potter's wheel, the symbol of their 
craft. The Khatya Kumhars in Orissa have only one clan 
and are therefore really endogamous, having no other clan 
to marry into. Their single clan bears the name of the Vedic 
Rishi Kasyapa, and they venerate the tortoise (kachhap). This 

1 E. T. Dalton, Descriptive Ethno- Bengal, i. §11-513. ; 
logy of Bengal, pp. 221 sgq.; (Sir) 3 (Sir) H. H. Risley, of, ct: i. 512, 
H. H. Risley, Tribes and Castes of ii. Appendix, p. 83. 

x TOTEMISM IN BENGAL. 317 

lends weight to the plausible conjecture that many of the lower 
castes in Bengal who are beginning to set up as pure Hindoos 
have taken advantage of the resemblance in sound between 
kachhap and kasyap (chh and s both becoming s/ in 
colloquial Bengalee) to convert a totemic title into an 
eponymous one, while they went on to appropriate as many 
of the exogamous Brahmanical clans (gotras) as they 
thought fit’ In Lohardaga some of the exogamous Kumhar 
clans take their names from the elephant, a river-fish, the 
Ficus Indica, and kansi grass.” 

The Mals are a Dravidian caste of cultivators in Totemism 
Western and Central Bengal. Many of them are employed aaa 
as village watchmen. They profess the Hindoo religion and among 
no vestiges of an older faith can now be traced among them. rig 
The most primitive members of the caste are to be found in and _ 
Bankura, where they are divided into five exogamous clans sae a 
named after the tortoise, the snake, and various birds. In 
Midnapur and Manbhum the Mal clans take their names 
from two sorts of fish and a bird. Among the Mals of 
Western and Central Bengal the primitive rule of exogamy 
is in full force, and no man may marry a woman of the 
same totemic clan as himself. Prohibited degrees are 
reckoned by the standard formula calculated in the 
descending line to five generations on the father’s and to 
three on the mother’s side.2 The Mauliks are a Dravidian 
caste of Manbhum and Western Bengal. They are divided 
into at least four exogamous clans, all of which are totemic. 

The totem of one clan is a tree-rat, of a second a rock- 
snake, of a third another kind of snake, and of the fourth a 
small red bird with a long tail, No man may marry a 
woman of his own totemic clan, nor a woman who falls 
within the usual formula for reckoning prohibited degrees.* 
The Parhaiyas are a small Dravidian tribe of Palamau, 
divided into nine exogamous and totemic clans with the 
tiger, the cobra, the vulture, the crow, the grasshopper, the 
bloodsucker, etc, for their totems.6 Their features are 

1 (Sir) H. H. Risley, Zrises and 47, 49, and Appendix, p. 97. 

Castes of Bengal, i. §17 sg. 520 sg. + (Sir) H. H. Risley, of. ct. ii. 82, 
* (Sir) H. H. Risley, of. c#/. ii. and Appendix, p. 100. 
Appendix, p. 86. 6 (Sir) H. H. Risley, of. cit. ii, 164, 

3 (Sir) H. H. Risley, of. ezt. ii. 45, | and Appendix, p. 118. 

Maternal 
descent of 
totem not 
found in 
Bengal, 

The Khasis 
of Assam. ; 

Their 
language. 

Their 
Mongolian 
features. 

TOTEMISM IN INDIA CHAP. 

318 

Turanian, but they speak the Hindoo language and affect 
Hindoo customs, though they retain practices which genuine 
Hindoos regard with disgust and abhorrence.’ 

In concluding this survey of totemism and exogamy in 
Bengal it deserves to be stated expressly that within that 
province no single case has yet been found of a totemic clan 
which is inherited in the maternal line. All the totemic 
peoples of Bengal observe paternal, not maternal, descent of 
their clans and totems.” 

§ 8. Totemism and Exogamy in Assam 

Among the hill tribes of Assam, who have retained 
many primitive customs and beliefs, the Khasis or Khasias 
appear to have preserved a totemic system or something 
closely resembling it.2 They inhabit the Khasi and Jaintia 
hills* The origin and affinities of the Khasis are still 
uncertain, but it has been proved that their language is 
closely akin to the Mon-Khmer, Palaung, and Wa languages 
in Burma and the Malay Peninsula. This raises a pre- 
sumption that the Khasis are of the same stock as the tribes 
who speak these tongues. They have strongly marked 
Mongolian features, namely oblique eyes, a broad bridgeless 
nose, high cheek bones, a short head, and little or no beard. 
In person they are short and stumpy, but sturdily built, 
especially about the calves of the legs. Even the women 
can carry heavy loads which natives of the plains could 
hardly lift. Their disposition is cheerful, and their habits 

1, T. Dalton, Descriptive Ethno- 
logy of Bengal, p. 131. 

2 (Sir) H. H. Risley, ‘ Primitive 
Marriage in Bengal,” Zhe Asiatic 
Quarterly Review, July 1886, p. 94. 

3 Above (vol. i. pp. 67 sg.) I noted 
what seemed to me at the time when I 
wrote the passage (1887) a discrepancy 
between the evidence of Colonel E. T. 
Dalton and (Sir) H. H. Risley as to 
the Khasis or Kasias. The apparent 
discrepancy is explained very simply, 
as my friend Sir Herbert Risley 
courteously informed me in a letter 
(3rd October 1890), by the fact that, 

when Col. Dalton wrote, the province 
of Assam still formed part of Bengal, 
whereas when Sir Herbert Risley 
wrote, it had ceased to do so, having 
been severed in the year 1874 from 
the Lieutenant-Governorship of Bengal 
and formed into a separate Chief- 
Commissionership. See (Sir) W. W. 
Hunter, 4 Statistical Account of Assam 
(London, 1879), i. 1. 

4 Major P. R. T. Gurdon, Zhe 
Khasis (London, 1907), pp. I sg., 
6 sqq. 

6 Major P. R. T. Gurdon, Zhe 
Khasis, pp. 10 s¢q. 

x TOTEMISM AND EXOGAMY IN ASSAM 319 

industrious.' They subsist chiefly by agriculture and live in 
villages, the sites of which are seldom changed. They are 
industrious tillers of the soil and well know the uses of manure. 
Among the crops which they raise are rice, maize, millet, yams, 
potatoes, plantains, lemons and oranges.? With regard to 
their social organisation Mr. E, A. Gait writes as follows :-— 

“The Khasis are subdivided into an immense number Mr. E. A. 
of exogamous clans or septs. The theory is that these sant 
clans are composed of persons descended from the same clansof the 
female ancestor, and intermarriage between persons of the “?*** 

> 3 P 
same clan is strictly forbidden. The meaning of the names 
used to denote these septs is not always known, but so far 
as I have been able to get translations, they may be divided 
into four main classes :— 

“(a) Totemzstic, such as the pumpkin clan, the crab clan, Clannames 
the monkey clan, etc. In these cases it is supposed that perv? 
the ancestor of the clan came from a pumpkin, crab, or a totems. 
monkey, and I am informed that the ¢otem was formerly 
taboo to the persons designated by it. Nowadays, how- 
ever, the old traditions are losing their hold upon the people, 
and the ¢adoo is no longer strictly enforced. 

“(6) Names indicative of origin, such as Khar Shilot Clannames 
(people of Sylhet), Khar Akor (‘polite Bengali’), etc. I a 
former days, before the British occupation, raids were con- 
stantly being made on the people of the plains, and their 
women were carried off as slaves. The offspring of these 
slave women, who were also looked upon as slaves, were 
known by the name of their mother, which thus became a 
new clan name. Clans with names denoting this origin 
are very common throughout the hills, and this no doubt 
accounts for the deviations from the general Mongolian type 
of face which are occasionally to be noticed. 

“(c) Nicknames applied to the original ancestor, such aS Nicknames 
Balit (white), Dukli (selfish), Klim (adultery), Khrawjli oe 
(great abomination), etc. ; 

“(d) Occupational, as, for instance, the blacksmith clan, Names 
the Bania clan, and a few others. Fees: 
pations. 

1 Census of India, 1891, Assam, by Es Major P. R. T. Gurdon, Zhe 
E. A. Gait, vol. i, (Shillong, 1892) A’sasés, pp. 26, 335 39 599-, 433 s99- 
p. 257. 

320 TOTEMISM IN INDIA CHAP. 

The clans “Each clan comprises on an average from 100 to 1000 
divided "members, the larger ones being again divided into subclans. 
clans. I have not been able to make out the utility or object of 

the latter, as the rule of exogamy is invariably applied to 
the larger or main clan. I may note, however, that the 
same tendency of the old exogamous groups, to subdivide 
themselves into new ones, is noticeable amongst many 
other tribes, eg. the Mikirs, Garos, Lalungs, etc.” ? 
Mother-kin A remarkable feature of the Khasi social system is the 
wong the prevalence of mother-kin instead of father-kin, which obtains 
almost universally elsewhere in India. Among the Khasis 
a woman is always head of the family. So long as a man 
remains in his mother’s house, whether he be married or 
single, he is earning for her family (vr), and his property 
goes at his death to her or, failing her, to his grandmother. 
Amanss Should both his mother and grandmother be dead, his 
saan sisters inherit his property, and next to them his sister’s 
children. children. Thus in practice, as usually happens under the 
system of mother-kin, a man is more nearly connected with 
his sister's children than with his own. His brother’s 
children can never be his heirs, since they belong to a 
Amarriea Gifferent clan. When a Khasi has left his mother’s house 
man lives and gone to live with his wife in her mother’s house, as 
house of is the usual custom, then his property descends to his wife 
his wite’s and her children, with the exception of his personal ornaments 
and clothing, which go to his own brothers and sisters. All 
relationship is reckoned through the woman, not through the 
man. Children belong to their mother’s clan, and even the 
chief or king (Szewz) is succeeded by his mother’s or his 
sister’s child, not by his own. His own offspring belong to 
their mother’s clan, inherit her property, and bear her family 
name. There is nothing to shew that among the Khasis 
this system of mother-kin is derived from polyandry ; for 
polyandry neither exists among them at present nor 
survives in their traditions.” 

1 Census of India, 1891, Assam, by E. A. Gait, vol. i. p. 2593 Census of 
E. A. Gait, vol. i. (Shillong, 1892) dia, 1902, vol. i. India, Ethnographte 
pp. 258 sg.3 Census of India, 1901, Appendices, p. 199. As to mother-kin 
vol. i. Zudia, Ethnographic Appendices, among the Khasis, see fuller details in 
Ppp. 198 sg. Major P. R. T. Gurdon’s book, 7ze 

2 Census of India, 1891, Assam, by KAhasis, pp. 62 sgg., 76 sgg., 82 sag. 

xX TOTEMISM AND EXOGAMY IN ASSAM 321 

The principle of the exogamy of the clan is very strictly Exogamy 
observed by the Khasis. “As the clang are strictly exo- np ag 
gamous, a Khasi cannot take a wife from his own clan; to 
do this would entail the most disastrous religious, as well as 
social consequences. For to marry within the clan is the To marry 
greatest sin a Khasi can commit, and would cause ex- pera 
communication by his kinsfolk and the refusal of funeral inexpiable 
ceremonies at death, and his bones would not be allowed a‘ 
resting-place in the sepulchre of the clan.”’ The crime of 
marrying within the clan (4ur) is called haba shong sang ; 
it admits of no expiation. 

With regard to the question whether the Khasi clans Traces of 
are totemic, Major Gurdon observes that some of them bear een ike 
the names of animals or of trees, such as the Sfrzeh or Khasis. 
Monkey clan, the Zham or Crab clan, and the Diengdoh 
clan. This last clan takes its name from the adzengdoh tree, 
because their first ancestress is said to have kept a huge 
drove of pigs, which she fed in a large trough hollowed out 
of a diengdoh tree. We also hear of an Oak clan among 
the Khasis ;* nor is this unnatural, for there are beautiful 
oak forests in part of the Khasi country, indeed the oak and 
the rhododendron are the principal trees in the woods.> How- 
ever, “the members of these ctens,” says Major Gurdon, “do 
not apparently regard the animals or natura! objects, from 
which they derive their names, as totems, inasmuch as they 
do not abstain from killing, eating or utilizing them. The 
names of these objects are connected generally with some 
story, concerning the history of the clan, but there is no 
evidence to show that the clans-folk ever regarded the 

Compare (Sir) W. W. Hunter, 4 Svat- 
tstical Account of Assam (London, 
1879), ii. 217 sg., 219 sq. 

1 Major P. R. T. Gurdon, 
Khasis, p. 77. 

2 Major P. R. T. Gurdon, of. céz. 
p. 158. 

3 Major P. R. T. Gurdon, of. cit. 
pp. 63-65. 

# See (Sir) W. W. Hunter, 4 Srat- 
tistical Account of Assam (London, 
1879), ii. 218: ‘* The Khasias believe 
in metempsychosis, or the transmigra- 

VOL. 

The 

tion ofsouls. After death, human beings 
are transformed into monkeys, crabs, 
tortoises, frogs, etc. . . . There is 
no caste system, but each clan is called 
after some object of nature, as the Oak 
clan, the Crab clan, etc. etc., and 
these names entail certain restrictions 
beyond which intermarriage is for- 
hidden.” This passage suggests that 
among the Khasis the souls of the 
dead are supposed to transmigrate into 
their totems. 

5 Major P. R. T. Gurdon, 
Khasis, pp. 7, 8. 

The 

Y 

322 TOTEMISM IN INDIA CHAP. 

above animals or objects as their tribal totems.”! Never- 

theless, some of the Khasi clans still observe taboos which . 
may be relics of totemism. Thus the Nongtathiang clan 
may not eat lemons; the Khar-umniud clan must abstain 
from pork; the royal (Sze) family of Cherra may not eat 
dried fish, and the royal (Szem) family of Mylliem taboo 
pumpkins.’ A further trace of totemism may perhaps be 
detected in the superstitious objection entertained by some 
Khasi individuals and families to different kinds of food, 
which they will not allow to be brought into their houses." 

The Garos A tribe of Assam who resemble the Khasis in their 
of Assam. combination of exogamy with mother-kin are the Garos. 
They occupy the extreme north-west portion of the 
mountainous tract which extends from Cape Negrais to 
the Brahmaputra. Their ethnical affinities are uncertain. 
They have no traditions of a migration, and the only peoples 
with whom they claim kinship are the Bats and the 
English.*| The Garos subsist by a rude form of agriculture, 
Exogamous raising crops of maize, rice, cotton, and millet. They are 
panes divided into a number of exogamous clans called makharis, 
with which Dalton says may be translated “ motherhoods.” The 
satag descent of the Garo, as ofthe Khasi, clans is in the female 
among the line, children belonging to the clan of their mother, not 
a to that of their father. A man may not marry a woman 
of his own clan (sahari), but must take his wife from 
one of the clans with which his family have from time 
immemorial exclusively allied themselves. Some of the 
noblest families have only one clan with which, as a rule, 
Among the they may intermarry.© With the Garos, as with the 
eas Khasis, the wife is the head of the family and through 
headof her all the family property descends. “Among Garo 
para families,” says Sir W. W. Hunter, “women enjoy a power 
property and position quite unknown among more civilised tribes 

descends . g Es gs 4 
through 1 Major P. R. T. Gurdon, Zhe ia., in Journal of the Anthropological 

her, Khasts, pp. 65 sg. Institute, ix. (1880) p. 295. Compare 
2 Major P. R. T. Gurdon, of. c#t. E. T. Dalton, Descriptive Ethnology of 
p. 159. Bengal, p. 57. 
3 (Colonel Sir Henry) Yule. ‘* Notes 4 E, T. Dalton, of. cit. pp. §8 59. 
on the Kasia Hills and People,” be YS Dalton, osc cs 65 
Journal of the Asiatic Society of Bengal, re, aan Pe 
xiii., Part ii. (Caleutta, 1844) p. 6233 6 E, T. Dalton, of. cit. p. 63- 

x TOTEMISM AND EXOGAMY IN ASSAM 323 

and peoples.” “ However the contract is entered upon,” 
says Mr. E. A. Gait, “it is agreed that fee woman occupies 
the superior position. The husband enters her mother’s 
family, and the children belong to her clan, and not to that 
of the father. All property goes through the woman, and 
males are incapable of inheriting in their own right.” A Marriage 
remarkable custom observed by them is that a man who i ae 
marries the favourite or, according to another account, the law. 
youngest daughter of a household has to marry his mother-in- 
law in the event of the death of his father-in-law, and through 
her he succeeds to all the property, which thus descends in 
the female line. It is consequently not uncommon to see a 
young Garo introducing as his wife a woman who is old 
enough to be his mother, and who is in point of fact his 
mother-in-law and sometimes his aunt to boot. Sons 
inherit nothing from their parents, and have to look to, the 
family into which they marry for their establishment in life. 
A young husband takes up his abode with his wife in the Aman 
house of her parents. “It would certainly appear,” says jv Wi 
Colonel Dalton, “ from the social customs of the Garos that parents. 
their great lawgiver must have been a female. The men 
do much of the heavy work and all the fighting, and are so 
far not deprived of their natural obligations as the stronger 
animal, but in other respects they are dependent on the 
females.”’ As a consequence, perhaps, of the social superi- 1 is the 
ority of women among the Garos it is regularly the girl, not Nbolias 
the young man, who makes the proposal of marriage. man, who 
Indeed it is her duty as well as her privilege to do so. fariiee 
Any infraction of this rule is summarily and_ severely ; 
punished. If it transpires that a youth has so far forgotten 
the modest reserve natural to his sex as to ask a maiden to 
marry him, the whole of her clan resents it as a blot on 
their scutcheon which can only be washed out by pig’s blood 
and copious libations of beer to be paid for by the clan of 
the abandoned culprit.” 

The information at Mr. Gait’s disposal did not enable him 

1E. T. Dalton, Descriptive Ethno- Assam, by E. A. Gait, vol. i. (Shillong, 
logy of Bengal, p. 63; (Sir) W. W. 1892) p. 229. 
Hunter, 4 Statistical Account of Assam, 2 E. T. Dalton, Descriptive Ethno- 
ti, 153 59.3 Census of India, 1891, logy of Bengal, p 04. 

324 TOTEMISM IN INDIA CHAP. 

Indications to say whether the exogamous clans (#aharis) of the Garos are 

pected totemic or not,’ but that they are in fact totemic is rendered 

Garos. | probable by the following statement of Sir Herbert Risley, 
which summarises the evidence for the existence of totemism 
in Assam. He says: “In Assam the Garos have monkeys, 
horses, bears, mice, lizards, frogs, crows, pumpkins, and a 
number of trees among their totems; the Kacharis recognize 
as totems the tree snail, the sxzga insect, the sesamum 
plant, the £umru or giant gourd, and the tiger. Members 
of the tiger sept have to throw away their earthenware 
utensils by way of atonement when a tiger is killed. The 
louse and the buffalo are the only animal totems on record 
among the Khasi; the Kuki have the dog; the Lalung 
eggs, fish, and pumpkins; the Mikir totems appear to be 
mainly vegetable. Our information, however, on totemism 
in Assam is extremely scanty, and the subject requires 
further investigation.” ? 

Exogamy The Lalungs are a tribe of Assam whose members are 
a found chiefly in Nowgong and the two adjacent districts, 
races of 

totemism the Khasi and Jaintia Hills and Kamrup. In regard to 
ee their social organisation Mr. E. A. Gait tells us that “the 
Lalungs are divided into a large number of exogamous 
groups or phoids, which again are subdivided into smaller 
groups. It is difficult to get at the meaning and origin of 
the terms used to designate these groups. Amongst those 
recognised I find the ‘bamboo, the ‘hill peak, and ‘salt’ in 
use as clan names. The explanation given in these cases, 
which is probably merely a guess, is that the founder was 
The White born on a hill, in a salt-box, etc. The only undoubted case 
rempkin’_ of totemism which I have found is that of the Ahara sali or 
white pumpkin clan, who will neither eat, grow, nor even 
touch the gourd after which they are named. Another clan 
is named after the mali fish, and another is said to be 
descended from two girls who had offended Mahadeo, and 

were in punishment converted into Lalungs. 
“The usual custom in regard to marriage is for the 
parents of the girl to find a husband for her and take him to 

1E. A. Gait, de. 
2 Sir Herbert Risley, Zhe People of India, p. 101. 

x TOTEMISM AND EXOGAMY IN ASSAM 325 

their house as a member of their family. The offspring of Marriage 
such a marriage enter the clan of thé mother. Sometimes, ee 
however, girls are enticed away ; and when this is the case, Lalungs; 
they enter their husband’s clan, together with any children Teesaen 
that may be born to them. The husband either pays a from , 
sum of money to the girl’s parents as compensation for the Boa 
girl, or else makes over to them the first female child that descent. 
is born of the marriage. In Kamrup it is reported that 
children in all cases enter the father’s clan, and in the dual 
practice in vogue amongst the Lalungs of Nowgong it is 
possible that we witness the process of change from the 
maternal to the paternal method of reckoning relationship 

which has already been completed amongst the Lalungs of 
Kamrup and the Kacharis of the whole of the Brahmaputra 

Valley but which has not yet commenced amongst the 
Garos. 

“In the Khasi and Jaintia Hills and the more remote Common 
portions of the Nowgong district, the unmarried male paeten 
Lalungs reside in a common house, or bachelor’s chang, men. 
similar to that found in Garo and Naga villages. In this 
respect, also, the Lalungs appear to be in an interesting 
state of transition, as the practice is no longer in vogue in 

Kamrup and the more accessible portions of Nowgong.”? 

The Native State of Manipur is situated in the eastern The 
portion of Assam, bordering on Upper Burma. It embraces Moning Gt 
an immense variety of climate and scenery, ranging from 7,3, — 
lofty mountain peaks to hot swampy valleys. Tea is country. 
indigenous to the hills; india-rubber grows in profusion ; 
about twenty different species of oak have been observed, 
and forests of huge teak trees form a natural source of 
wealth. The lakes and hills abound with wild-fowl and 
game. The natives call themselves Meitheis. They are a Their 
people with Mongoloid features, and speak a language allied a 
to the Tibeto-Burman family of speech. Their affinity with ethnical 
the wild hill tribes such as the Nagas and Kukis seems to nites. 
be well ascertained, though they have advanced considerably 
beyond these savages in mental refinement and material 

1 Census of India, 1891, Assam, by E, A, Gait, vol. i, (Shillong, 1892) 
p. 231. 

They are 
Hindoos by 
religion 
and live by 
agriculture. 

Exogamous 
clans 

among the 
Meitheis. 

Rules of 
inter- 
marriage 
between 
the clans. 

The 
Levitate 
forbidden. 

Each 
exogamous 
clan has its 
tabooed 
object, 
perhaps a 
totem, 

326 TOTEMISM IN INDIA CHAP. 

civilisation. Having adopted the Hindoo religion in the 
eighteenth century, they now claim to be Hindoos by 
descent. They subsist chiefly by agriculture; rice is at 
once their principal crop and their staple article of food. 
The countless streams which gush from the foot of the 
mountain ranges fertilise the soil and produce abundant 
harvests even when in the more open parts of the valleys, 
away from the hills, the land is parched with drought.’ 

The Meitheis are divided into seven exogamous clans, 
which bear the names of Ningthaja, Kumul, Luang, Angom, 
Moirang, Khabananba, and Chenglei. The vernacular name 
for such a clan is sa/ez, Each clan includes a number of 
subordinate groups or subclans called yusmnaks, the number 
varying from a hundred and fifteen in the Ningthaja or- 
Royal clan to seventeen in the Khabananba. Tradition 
runs that, there were formerly ten clans, but that two or 
three have become extinct. Each clan has its head (fa), 
who is sometimes called its king (séngthou), The general 
rule that no man may marry a woman of his own clan is 
supplemented by another which forbids him to take a wife 
from his mother’s clan. Further, certain of the clans are 
or were formerly forbidden to intermarry. Thus Angoms 
might not marry Khabananbas, Moirangs, or Luangs ; 
the Luangs might not take their wives from among the 
Kumuls; and the Moirangs were forbidden to marry both 
into the Khabananba clan and into one or two families of 
the Chenglei clan. The family of Moirang Laipham seems 
to have been prohibited to the Ningthaja clan, but the case 
is obscure, and the prohibition, if it existed, is the only one 
which affected the Ningthajas. A widow may remarry, but 
not with her deceased husband’s brother.” Children belong 
to the clan of their father.’ 

Each exogamous clan of the Meitheis has an object 
which is tabooed (namungba) to it ; and the members believe 
that if they were inadvertently to touch one of these objects, 

!E. T. Dalton, Descriptive Ethno- 1 sg., 10 sg,, 22, 39 59-, 43 5g. 
logy of Bengal, pp. 48 sg.; T. C. * T. C. Hodson, 7he Aetthets, pp. 
Hodson, ‘The Native Tribes of 73-77. 
Manipur,” Journal of the Anthropo- 3 So Mr. T. C. Hodson informs me. 
logical Institute, xxxi. (1901) p. 300; The statement is not, I think, made in 
id., The Meitheis (London, 1908), pp. his book Zhe Afeithets. 

x TOTEMISM AND EXOGAMY IN ASSAM 327 

they would die a mysterious death or suffer from some 
incurable, incomprehensible disease, pine away, and die. Such 
tabooed objects may provisionally be ¢alied totems. The 
totem of the Ningthaja clan is a reed ; that of the Moirangs, 

a buffalo; that of the Kumuls, a fish! The totems of the 

four other clans are not recorded. Further, special taboos 

may be created according to circumstances. Thus, if a man 

falls from a tree, the elders of his clan may gather round 

the tree and solemnly declare that it and even all trees of 

the’ same gort shall henceforth be taboo (zamungba) to the 
clanspeople: . his is known, for example, to have happened 

to a particular} mango tree, from which a man fell and was 
killed. Again} near Imphal, the capital, are two fine peepul 

trees, between which no man of the Moirang clan would 

dare to walk, because the bones of Moirang men who 
perished in a great battle long ago are said to lie beneath 
them.? Further, each clan as a rule worships its eponymous Each clan 
ancestor. For example, the Luang clan worships Luang oe 
pokpa, and the Khuman clan worships Khuman_ pokba. ancestor. 
However, the worshipful ancestors of two clans, the 
Ningthaja and the Angom, appear not to be eponymous ; 

for the Angom clan worships Purairomba, and the Ningthaja 

clan worships Pakhangba, otherwise called Nongpok Ning- 

thou, “the King (xzngthou) of the East.” This last worship- 

ful ancestor is believed to appear from time to time to men 

in the form of a snake.» These facts seem to shew that the 
Meitheis to some extent combine totemism with the worship 

of ancestors. 

These are all the indications of totemism combined with 
exogamy which I have noted in Assam. But on the other Fsvgamy 
hand the custom of exogamy is practised in that country by (yr 
tribes which do not, or at all events which are not reported, tents 
to have totemism besides. Nearly all the hill tribes of (yee 
Assam, indeed, are divided into exogamous'‘clans, Each Assam. 
clan traces its descent from a common ancestor, and 

17. C. Hodson, The Afeithet’s, p. Anthropological Institute, xxxi. (1901) 
118, P- 3033; @a@., The Meithets, pp. 118 sy. 

27. C. Hodson, **The Native 3 T. C. Hodson, The Afetther's, pp. 
Tribes of Manipur,” /ozrnal of the 99 59. 

328 TOTEMISM IN INDIA CHAP. 

marriage within the clan is forbidden. In most tribes - 
descent is counted in the paternal line, the children belong- 
ing to their father’s clan ; but to this rule, as we have seen, 
there are two notable exceptions in the Garos and Khasis, 
who practise the system of mother-kin as opposed to father- 
kin. Among the tribes who are divided into exogamous 
clans with descent in the paternal line are the Mikirs,? the 
Daflas, who inhabit the hills north of Darrang and Lakhim- 
pur; the Deori Chutiyas ; and the Naga tribes, such as the 
Angamis, the Aos, and the Semas.® Among the Angamis 
’ each village is inhabited by many exogamoustclans, between 
which great rivalry exists. In the old days blood feuds 
and fights were common between the clans of the same 
village ; indeed it is said that they were far bitterer than 
the feuds between the villages. In the village of Kohima, 
which contains seven clans, each dwelling in its own quarter, 
a party from another village has been known to massacre 
all the members they could find of a particular clan, while 
the members of the other clans stood looking on without 
making the least effort to stop the slaughter.* The institution 
of large common houses in which the unmarried men pass 

unmarried the night exists among the Naga tribes, for example, among 

the Aos and the Semas. Such houses are called morangs ; 
they are adorned with the trophies of war and of the chase, 
particularly with human skulls ; for the Nagas, like the Dyaks 
of Borneo, used to be passionately addicted to head-hunting. 
Most of these ghastly trophies they obtained not in fair fight 
but by treachery, often lurking about a hostile village to 
decapitate defenceless women and children when they went 
out to draw water; for the skulls of these poor wretches 
entitled their cowardly murderers to all the honours of war. 

1 Census of India, 1891, Assam, by 
E, A. Gait, vol. i. (Shillong, 1892) p. 
122. 

2 Edward Strack, Zhe MUkirs, 
edited by Sir Charles Lyall (London, 
1908), pp. 16, 17, 23 sgg. The exo- 
gamous clans of the Mikirs are called 
kurs. 

3 Census of India, 1891, Assam, by 
E. A. Gait, vol. i, (Shillong, 1892) 
Pp. 222, 223, 234, 238, 239, 245, 

247. The exogamous clans of the 

Naga tribes are commonly called £he/s, 
but the Angamis themselves call them 
tepfus or ténos (op. cit. p. 238). Mr. 
Gait here gives a list of thirty-two 
Angami clans,‘ adding that the list 
could easily be extended. 

4 Census of India, 1891, Assam, by 
E. A. Gait, vol. i. (Shillong, 1892) p. 
238. 

35 Census of India, 1891, Assam, by 
E, A. Gait, vol. i. (Shillong, 1892) 
pp. 242 sg. 246, 247, 248 59.3 

x CLASSIFICATORY SYSTEM OF RELATIONSHIP 329 

§ 9. The Classificatory System of Relationship in India 

From the foregoing survey of totemism in India we Totemism 
gather that this remarkable institution, combined as usual ie 
with exogamy, is widespread among the swarthy, almost appear to 
black aboriginal race called Dravidian, with their squat Hee aes 
figures, dark eyes, and broad negro-like noses, who represent in former 
the most primitive type of man in India and occupy the canals 
oldest geological formation in the country, to wit, the medley see ie 
of forest-clad ranges, terraced plateaux, and undulating plains Dravidians, 
which stretches from the Vindhya mountains on the north acdeinal 
to Cape Comorin on the south." Indeed the evidence seems inhabitants 
to justify us in inferring that at one time or another totemism In“. 
and exogamy have been practised by all the branches of this 
numerous and ancient people. Though some of the branches 
now speak languages, namely the Munda or Kolarian and 
the Dravidian proper, which differ fundamentally from each 
other,” yet tribes of both branches are found to be totemic 
and exogamous ; in other words, the customs of totemism 
and exogamy cross the linguistic boundaries which divide 

‘the Dravidian stock and unite the members of that great 
family by the bond of common institutions. The Dravidian 
speech proper includes, amongst others, three great languages, 
the Tamil, the Telugu, and the Canarese, and from the 
preceding survey it would seem to follow that totemism at 
the present day is more prevalent among the Telugu-speaking 
than among the Tamil-speaking and Canarese - speaking 
branches of the Dravidian family.® It appears doubtful 

W. H. Furness, ‘The Ethnography , 

of the Nagas of Eastern Assam,” 
Journal of the Anthropological Insti- 
tute, xxxii, (1902) pp. 451 sgg. “As 
to the Naga tribes in general, see 
Lieut, - Colonel R. G. Woodthorpe, 
** Notes on the Wild Tribes inhabiting 
the so-called Naga Hills,” Journal of 
the Anthropological Institute, xi. (1882) 
pp. 56 sgg., 196 sgg.; Miss Gertrude 
M. Godden, ‘* Naga and other Frontier 
Tribes of North-East India,” /Journa/ 
of the Anthropological Lustitute, xxvi. 
(1897) pp. 161 sgg., xxvii. (1898) pp. 
2599.3 W. Crooke, Natives of Northern 

India (London, 1907), pp. 37 sgq¢- 

1 Sir Herbert Risley, Zhe People of 
India, pp. 43, 46; Lmperial Gasetteer 
of India, Empire of India, i. (Oxford, 
1909) p. 296. 

2 The Imperial Gazetteer of India, 
The Indian Empire, i. (Oxford, 1909) 
pp. 378 57., 382 sg. 

3 On Tamil, Telugu, and Canarese 
as branches of the Dravidian family 
of speech, see Census of India, ror, 
vol. i. Zedza, Part I. (Calcutta, 1903) 
pp. 284 599.3 The Imperial Gazetteer 
of India, The Indian Empire, i. (Ox- 
ford, 1909) pp. 378 59g. 

TOTEMISM IN INDIA CHAP. 

33° 

Itisdoubt- Whether totemism proper is practised by any race of India 
ane except the Dravidian. We have indeed found some resem- 
ism exists blances to it in combination with exogamy among the 
Tene 22Y Mongoloid peoples of Assam, but it is not certain that these 
except the resemblances are proof of the actual existence of the institu- 
Digan: oH, Exogamy, but not totemism, is practised by the 
Aryan race in India; for the Brahmans, Rajputs, and other 
high castes among the Hindoos are regularly divided into 
exogamous clans or septs (gotras or gots), and the rule that 
no man may marry a woman of his own clan (gotra or go?) 
is strictly observed.? So far as I am aware, no other Aryan 
people besides the Hindoos is certainly known to have 
regulated marriage by a rule of exogamy. Can it be that 
the ancestors of the Hindoos borrowed the institution from 
the aborigines with whom they came into contact when they 

settled in India ? 

The Having found totemism and exogamy firmly established 
ae among the Dravidian peoples of India, we may expect to 
as usual, find these institutions accompanied by the classificatory 
oes™ system of relationship ; for, so far as we can see at present, 
exogamy it may be laid down ‘as a general rule, that every people 
with the . ; . 7 ° ° 
lasek: who practise totemism and exogamy count their relationships 
said ‘ according to the classificatory system. To this rule the 
stem O ee ° . 
relation- Dravidians are no exception ; for the family systems of the 
ship. Tamil-speaking, the Telugu-speaking, and the Canarese- 
speaking branches of the Dravidian stock have been 
accurately recorded, and all three are classificatory, agreeing 
with each other not only in general character but in minute 
particulars, though the actual terms of relationship for the 
The most part differ dialectically in the three languages. Further, 
rie aa the Dravidian family system, as it exists amongst the Tamils, 
amily i" 7 : . . 
system the Telugus, and the Canarese, is substantially identical with 
closely with the family system of the Seneca-Iroquois Indians of North 
that of the America,> which will be described in a later part of this 

1 See above, pp. 319, 32159., 32359, 
326g. As to the Mongoloid character 
of the Assamese, see Sir Herbert Risley, 
The People of India, p. 413; The 
Imperial Gazetteer of India, The Indian 
Empire, i. (Oxford, 1909) p. 295. 

2G, Biihler’s Grundriss der Indo- 

Arischen Philologié und Altertums- 
kunde, Recht und Sitte, von Julius 
Jolly (Strasburg, 1896), pp. 62 sg. 

3 As to the Tamil, Telugu, and 
Canarese systems of relationship, and 
their relation to the Seneca-Iroquois 
system, see L. H. Morgan, Systems of 

x CLASSIFICATORY SYSTEM OF RELATIONSHIP 331 

book.’ No two peoples on earth are ‘iets widely separated Seneca- 
from each other than the Dravidians of Central and Southern oi ie 
India and the Iroquois of North-Eastern America. Their America. 
agreement in the principles and most of the details of a 
complex family system has been justly described by its 
discoverer, L. H. Morgan, as “ one of the most extraordinary 
applications of the natural logic of the human mind to the 

facts of the social system preserved in the experience of 
mankind.” ? 

Coming to details, we may take the Tamil system as Ciassi- 
typical of the Dravidian family. As commonly happens = 
under the classificatory system of relationship, there is in lationship 
Tamil no term for brother or sister in the abstract. These" ™ 
relationships are conceived in the twofold form of elder and Separate 
younger, and there are separate terms for each. To all of hina 
my brothers and sisters who are older than myself I apply younger 
the respective terms for elder brother and elder sister ; to aoe e. 
those who are younger than myself I apply the respective 
terms for younger brother and younger sister. There are 
two synonyms for elder brother, namely ¢ématydn and 
aundn ; two synonyms for elder sister, namely ahhkdr] and 
tamdkay ; two synonyms for younger sister, namely 
tangaichchi and tangay; but there is only one term for 
younger brother, namely ¢amdbz. Perhaps one set of these 
synonyms was originally used by the males and the other by 
the females ; but be that as it may, the two sets are now 
employed indiscriminately.* 

In the generation above his own a Tamil man applies Ciassi- 
the same term ¢aékkdppdn, “father,” to his father, to his cae 
father’s brothers, and to the husbands of his mother’s sisters, Tamil fn 
distinguishing them however as “ great (pérdyd) father” or aaa 
“little (sériy@) father” according as they are older or brother, 
younger than his father. But, as usually happens under the eta 
classificatory system of relationship, he applies a different Wife. son. 

‘ ‘ daughter. 
term mdmdn, “uncle,” to his mother’s brothers. He applies 

Consanguinity and Affinity of the 1 See vol. iii. pp. 19 sq. 

Human Family(Washington, 187 1), pp. 2 L. H. Morgan, Aaczent Society, 
386-398, with the Tables, pp. 511 599., p- 441. 
523 sgq. (Smithsonian Contributions 3-L..H. Morgan, Systems of Con- 

to Knowledge, vol. xvii.) ; td., Ancient sanguinity and Affinity of the Human 
Society (London, 1877), PP- 435-452. Family, p. 389. 

Anomalous 
feature in 
the Tamil 
system. 

332 » TOTEMISM IN INDIA CHAP. 

the same term fay, “ mother,” to his mother, to his mother’s 
sisters, and to the wives of his father’s brothers, distinguish- 
ing his mother’s sisters from his mother as “great (périy@) 
mother” or “little (sérzy@) mother” according as they are 
older or younger than his mother. But, as usually 
happens under the classificatory system of relationship, 
he applies a different term attaz, “aunt,” to his father’s 
sisters. In his own generation he applies the same terms 
témaziyan, “elder brother,” akkdrl, “elder sister,” ¢asbz, 
“ younger brother,” and ¢azgay, “ younger sister,” to his own 
brothers and sisters, elder or younger, and to his first cousins, 
the sons and daughters, elder or younger, of his father’s 
brothers or of his mother’s sisters. But, as usually happens 
under the classificatory system he applies quite different 
terms to his other first cousins, the sons and daughters either 
of his father’s sisters or of his mother’s brothers; these he 
calls his mditétindn, “male cousin,” and his smaztunnt, 
“female cousin.” In the generation below his own he 
applies the same term mdkdn,“ son,” and mdékdl, “ daughter,” 
to his own sons and daughters and to the sons and daughters 
of his brothers. But, as usually happens under the classifi- 
catory system of relationship, he applies different terms 
marumakan, “nephew,” and mdadrumékal, “niece,” to the sons 
and daughters of his sisters. Again, in the generation 
below his own he calls the son and daughter of his male 
first cousin (the son either of his father’s brother or of his 
mother’s sister) “my son” and “my daughter”; but the 
son and daughter of his female first cousin (the daughter 
either of his father’s brother or of his mother’s sister) he 
calls “my nephew” and “my niece.” So far, all is regular 
in the Tamil system, but now we come upon an anomaly. 
In the generation below. his own, a man calls the’ son and 
daughter of his male first cousin (the son either of his father’s 
sister or of his mother’s brother) not, as we should expect, 
“my son” and “my daughter,” but “my nephew” and “ my 
niece” ; and contrariwise he calls the children of his female 
first cousin (the daughter either of his father’s sister or of his 
mother’s brother) not, as we should expect, “my nephew” 
and “my niece,” but “my son” and “my daughter.” This 
variation from the normal pattern of the classificatory system 

x CLASSIFICATORY SYSTEM OF RELATIONSHIP 333 

is difficult to explain. It is the only important particular in 
which the Tamil system of India differs from the Seneca- 
Iroquois system of North America, which in this respect has 
remained truer to the logical principles of the classificatory 
system.! 

Lastly, it may be noted as very remarkable that the Classifica- 
Singhalese of Ceylon, though they speak an Aryan Wry system 
language,” nevertheless possess the classificatory system of tionship 
relationship. Thus in the generation above his own Picasa 
man applies the same term afféd “father” to his father, of Ceylon. 
to his father’s brothers, and to the husbands of his 
mother’s sisters ; and he distinguishes his father’s brothers 
and the husbands of his mother’s sisters as “great (loka) 
father,’ or “intermediate (szadduma) father,’ or “little 
' (punchi, kudé, or bala) father” according as they are older 
or younger than his father. But, as usually happens in the 
classificatory system of relationship, he applies a different 
term mdmdé “uncle” to his mother’s brothers and to the 
husbands of his father’s sisters. He applies the same term 
ammdé “mother” to his mother, to his mother’s sisters,’ and 
to the wives of his father’s brothers; and he distinguishes 
his mother’s sisters and the wives of his father’s brothers as 
“great mother,” “intermediate mother,” or “ little mother” 
according as they are older or younger than his mother. 

But, as usually happens in the classificatory system of 
relationship, he applies a different term xenddé “aunt” to his 
father’s sisters and to the wives of his mother’s brothers. In 
his own generation he applies the same terms sahkédarayd 
“brother” and sahédari “sister” to his brothers and sisters 
and to his first cousins, the children either of his father’s 
brothers or of his mother’s sisters. But, as usually happens 
in the classificatory system of relationship, he applies different 
terms massind “male cousin” and xéud “female cousin” to 
the sons and daughters of his mother’s brothers and of his 
father’s sisters. In the generation below his own he applies 

1 L. H. Morgan, Systems of Con- Science of Language (London, 1880), 
sanguinily and Affintty of the Human ii. 76 sg.; Sir John B. Phear, The 
Family, pp. 389-391, with the Tables, .dryan Villase in India and Ceylon 
pp. 523 599.3 t., lncient Society, pp. (London, 1880), p. 177; J. Deniker, 
436-452. The Races of Man, p. 416. 

2 A, H. Sayce, Latroduction to the 

334 TOTEMISM IN INDIA CHAP. 

” 

the same terms paid “son” and duva “daughter” to his 
sons and daughters and to the sons and daughters of his 
brothers. But, as usually happens in the classificatory 
system of relationship, he applies different terms déxa 
“nephew” and /## “niece” to the sons and daughters of 
his sisters. Similarly a woman applies the same terms pA7d 
“son” and duva “daughter” to her sons and daughters and 
to the sons and daughters of her sisters. But, as usually 
happens in the classificatory system of relationship, she 
applies different terms déva “nephew” and /é## “niece” to 
the sons and daughters of her brothers. As the Singhalese 
apply the same term mdd “uncle” to the husband of a 
father’s sister and to a father-in-law ; and as they apply the 
same term xendd “aunt” to the wife of the mother’s brother 
and to a mother-in-law, we may infer’ by analogy that a 
man’s proper wife is his cousin, the daughter either of his 
father’s sister or of his mother’s brother.’ 
The So far as I know, the Singhalese are the only Aryan- 
ictcienacte speaking people who possess the classificatory system of 
the only relationship. This remarkable exception to the rule that 
Aryan- the Aryan-speaking peoples use the descriptive, not the 

speaking 

pon classificatory, system of relationship points to the con- 
ave the 

classifica. clusion that the Singhalese, though they are Aryans by, 

eee speech, are not Aryans by blood, but have at some time 
ship, They abandoned their native aboriginal tongue for an Aryan 
ae ck language, retaining nevertheless the classificatory relation- 
people who Ships, though they designate these by words which may 
tier or may not be Aryan. This conclusion is in turn 
an Aryan strongly confirmed by the physical type of the Singhalese, 

fnsuese which is not that of a pure Aryan breed. On this subject 

retained I will quote the observations of Sir John B. Phear. He 

ee se says: “The Singhalese people themselves generally have 

system of the appearance of being the result of at least an inter- 

lation- : ‘ : 
ai mixture of an Aryan with some other, yellow-tinted, 

coarsely-built, ethnic element. It is remarkable that they 
are broad-shouldered, deep-chested, and muscular, with a 

1A. A, Perera, ‘Glimpses of As to cousin-marriages and the in- 
Singhalese Social Life; Relationship ference to be drawn from the identity 
and Rights of Property,” Zhe Jndian of these terms of relationship, see 
Antiqguary, xxxiii. (1904) p. 143. above, pp. 224-228. 

2 A. A. Perera, of. cit. p. 143. 

x CLASSIFICATORY SYSTEM OF RELATIONSHIP —§ 335 

pronounced calf to the leg, like all Mongolian peoples, this hypo- 
and unlike the Aryans of India. But their most striking piceonne " 
peculiarity, perhaps, is the excessive hairiness of both male by the 
and female. The chest of the man often resembles a door- Sante 
mat, and the hair of his head reaches low down his back, a Singhaiese, 
feature which attracted the notice of the earliest Greek Nees 
geographers. The lower part of the abdomen also, both in of a pure 
male and female, is profusely hairy. This extraordinary ratio 
capillary development is certainly the reverse of what we 

see in those Mongolian peoples with whom we are best 
acquainted. It’seems, however, that the Ainos, a Turanian 

race on the extreme east of Asia, possess it even to a 
greater extent than the Singhalese, and that they at an 

early historical period were widely spread over the islands 

and tracts of country now covered by the Japanese, Chinese, 

and Malays. Can it be that the Singhalese are, by blood, 

_ in a large measure traceable to an Aino or a cognate origin, 

and that they owe little more than their language, literature, 

and religion to the invasion of Aryans from Upper Bengal, 

of which history tells us ?”? 

The geographical position of the Singhalese people The geo. 
certainly favours the hypothesis that they are an aboriginal cee teag 
race who have been driven into their last entrenchments of the 
by the pressure of alien invaders; for they are pent up in ,usbalese 

the southern portion of Ceylon” while the northern portion ae that 
: . : 4a: . ° t < 
of the island is occupied by a Dravidian population speaking aboruinal 

the Tamil language.* Clearly if the Singhalese retreated race pent 
. . eras up io their 
into their present home before the advance of the Dravidians jast refuge. 
from the north, they had no other spot of ground to which 
to turn: the next step would have carried them into the 
sea. They must turn to bay or perish, 

1 Sir John B. Phear, Zhe Aryan 416. 
Village in India and Ceylon (London, 3 The Imperial Gazetteer of India, 
1880), pp. 177 59. The Indian Empire, vol. i. (Oxford, 

2 J. Deniker, Zhe Races of Man, p. 1909) p. 380. 

CHAPTER XI 
TRACES OF TOTEMISM IN THE REST OF ASIA 

Noclear WHILE totemism combined with exogamy is widely spread 
evicence among the aboriginal tribes of India, it is remarkable that 

existence of no single indubitable case of it has been recorded, so,far as 
ee I know, in all the rest of the vast continent of Ash. In 
Seah of the preceding chapters we have traced this curious system of 
society and superstition from Australia through the islands 
of Torres Straits, New Guinea, Melanesia, Polynesia, 
Indonesia, and India. On the eastern frontier of India 
toternism stops abruptly, and in our totemic survey of the 
world we shall not mdet with any clear evidence of it again 
till we pass to Africa or America. If we leave India out 
of account, Asia, like Europe, is practically a blank in a 
totemic map of the world. Whether this absence of 
evidence is due to the absence of the institution, to the 
negligence and supineness of observers, or merely to the 
ignorance of the present writer, is a question which future 
research may perhaps decide. Here I shall confine myself, 
to noting either the slight hints of totemism in Asia which I 
have met with or the positive statements of good authorities 
as to the absence of the system in the regions known to 

them. 
Totemism In the first place, then, though totemism, or something 
fewtin very like it, occurs in Manipur, on the eastern frontier of 

any tribe India,’ it has not yet been discovered in any tribe of Burma. 
oF Berm On this subject our principal authority on the ethnology of 
Upper Burma, Sir J. George Scott, observes: “So far as is 
yet known there is no tribe which habitually takes its family 
1 See above, pp. 326 59. 
336 

cu. x1 TRACES OF TOTEMISM IN THE REST OF ASIA 337 

name, or has crests and badges taken from some natural 

object, plant, or animal.” It is true that a rule of exogamy Exogamy 
attaching to family names is observed by the Kachins or (n0}8 ue 
Chingpaw, who inhabit the country on the north, north-east, of Burma. 
and north-west of Upper Burma. Among these people 

there are at least ninety-seven different names of ‘families, 

and all persons bearing the same family name regard them- 

selves as of one blood and will not marry each other, even 

though they may belong to different tribes ; but the origin 

of these family names has not been ascertained.? Further, Exogamy 
the Chins are divided into forty or more exogamous clans, #7ons 7 
called a‘so or ‘kum; no man may marry a woman of his Burma. 
own clan, but “after the marriage ceremonies are over, the 

wife is initiated into her husband’s clan, and has her wrists 
wrapped round with a cotton-yarn as a witness to all evil 
spirits that she is under the guardianship of the ‘kun of 

her husband. So, too, all children, four or five days after 

birth, are admitted in like manner into the ‘kuz.”* But 
exogamy alone is no proof of totemism. Again, many Legends 
Indo-Chinese races of Burma trace their descent from ee 
animals, eggs, or other natural objects; but such legends animals, 
are not of themselves evidence that the tribes who relate ,@'" 
them are totemic, even when the legend is associated with a 

taboo, as happens, for example, with the Southern Chins of 
Burma, who are forbidden to kill or eat the king-crow 

which they regard as their parent, because it hatched the 

original Chin egg.* 

1 Gazetteer of Upper Burma and the 
Shan States, by (Sir) J. George Scott, 
assisted by J. P. Hardiman, part i. 
vol. ii. (Rangoon, 1900), pp. 39 sg. 
Sir J. G.. Scott finds traces of totemism 
‘in the prescribed form of names for 
Shan and Kachin children and in the 
changing or concealing of personal 
names,” as well as in ‘the limiting of 
marriages between the inhabitants of 
certain villages only, practised both by 
tribes of Karens and Kachins.” But 
these things have no necessary con- 
nection with totemism. 

2 bid. parti. vol. i. (Rangoon, 1900) 
Pp. 402 59. 
4 Rev. G. Whitehead, ‘Notes on 
VOL. II 

the Chins of Burma,” Zhe Indian 
Antiquary, xxxvi. (1907) p. 206. 
The word ‘kun signifies the common 
ancestry of the clan as well as the clan 
itself. . 

4 Census of India, rgor, vol. xii. 
Burma, Part I. (Rangoon, 1902) by 
C. C. Lowis, p. 133. Mr. Lowis here 
adduces other similar traditions current 
among the races of Burma. The Was 
say that their primaeval ancestors were 
tadpoles; the Palaungs trace their 
origin to a Naga princess, who laid 
three eggs; the Kachins believe that 
they are descended from a man who 
was made out of a pumpkin, but this 
belief does not deter them from eating 
pumpkins. 

Zz 

Professor 
de Groot 
on the 
absence of 
evidence 
for totem- 
ism in 
Eastern 
Asia. 

Chinese 
tribes with 
animal 
names, 

338 TRACES OF TOTEMISM IN THE REST OF ASIA cuay. 

When we pass from Burma to the vast empire of China 
which borders it on the north, positive evidence for the 
existence of totemism is still to seek. On this subject 
our best authority on the religions of China, Professor 
J. J. M. de Groot of Leyden, writes as follows: “A strong 
belief in animal progenitors of men, families, and tribes may, 
in any country where the worship of ancestors is prevalent, 
readily lead to methodic veneration of such beasts. Con- 
sidering, however, that, so far as we can learn from books, a 
descent from beasts has never been positively claimed by 
the inhabitants of what we may call ancient China proper, 
the existence of ancestor worship in such a garb must be 
dismissed at once for the provinces north of the Yangtsze. 
If we peruse the long list of Chinese tribal names, we find 
half a dozen names of animals, viz. Bear, Dragon, Horse, 
Cow, Crow, and Swallow ; but, to judge from the researches 
of native authors, they do not point to any alleged descent 
of the tribes they denote, from an animal ancestor. The 
two first, which are very rare, are stated to have been at the 
outset individual names, adopted as family names by the 
descendants of the bearers. The Horse tribe, which has a 
much larger number of members, derives this name from the 
first letter of the cognomen of one of its ancestors. Cow, 
likewise a rare surname, marks descent from an individual 
whose cognomen it was; while Crow or Raven denoted the 
office or office-badge of some ancestor. And Swallow is 
only apparently an animal name, representing in reality 
the name of an ancient country in the present Pehchihli. 
Words denoting wolves or dogs were never in China actual 
tribal names. And South-China, the old country of the 
Man, whose mythic pedigree has its root in the dog Dish- 
gourd? Never have our studies of books brought us across 
anything intimating that the dog is there more especially an 
object of worship than other animals, or a respected do-daim 
whose flesh does not appear in the popular bill-of-fare. 
Zoolatry, as we shall show afterwards, is a prominent 
feature of China’s religion. But the statement must here 
be made that, as yet, we have found no trace in China 
of animals being worshipped in their capacity of tribal 
progenitors, so that we entertain serious doubts whether 

x1 TRACES OF TOTEMISM IN THE REST OF ASIA 339 

any so-called totemism exists in East Asia as a religious 
phenomenon.” ! 

It is true that in China, as among the Kachins of Exogamy 
Burma, a rule of exogamy attaching to family names is eo 
observed ; since no Chinaman is allowed to marry a China- names in 
woman who bears his own family or clan name;? but ane 
exogamy, as I have said, in itself furnishes no proof of 
totemism. There are estimated to be about four hundred 
different family names in China, and among these names 
are words denoting animals, plants, and other natural objects, 
such as Horse, Sheep, Ox, Fish, Bird, Plum, Flower, Leaf, 

Rice, Forest, River, Hill, Water, Cloud, Gold, Hide, Bristles, 

and soon. “Custom and law alike prohibit intermarriage 

on the part of people having the same family surname. 

The children are of the father’s family, that is, they 
take his family surname.”*® Amongst the Y-kia, an 
aboriginal race of Southern China, the same custom is 
observed. Children take their patronymic name (sz) from 

their father, and with certain exceptions no persons who 

bear the same patronymic are allowed to marry each other.‘ 
Again, the people of Corea are divided into exogamous clans, Exogamous 
each of which traces its descent by primogeniture from a Ponta 
single male ancestor. The prohibition of marriage between 
persons who bear the same clan name “is more than a law 

with penalty for infraction; it is a traditional custom of 
which the negative is inconceivable.” Some of the clan 
names are those of natural objects, such as Horse, Fish, 
Mule, Plum, Pear-tree, Willow-tree, Dwarf Nettle (Cectzs 
sinensis), Gold, and Stone ; but we are told that no totemic 
devices are used by members of the clans.’ 

In recent years a social system which bears some Reported 
resemblance to totemism has been reported to exist among teens ie 
the Lolos, an aboriginal race of Southern China. These Lolos, an 
people are found in all parts of the province of Yunnan and nee 

1 J. J. M. de Groot, The Religtous 

4 Dr. P. R. Deblenne, in La AZsséon Southern 
System of China, iv. (Leyden, 1901) Lyonnaise d Exploration commerciale 
en Chine 1895-1897 (Lyons, 1898), 
Pp. 368, 369. 

5 W. Hough, ‘‘ Korean Clan Organ. 
ization,” American Anthropologist, New 
Series, i. (1899) pp. 150, 152, 153, 
154. 

p- 271. : 

2 J. H. Gray, China (London, 1878), 
i, 186. 

3 L. H. Morgan, Ancient Society 
(London, 1877), pp. 364 sg., quoting 
Mr. Robert Hart, of Canton. 

China. 

Lolo sur- 
names are 
derived 
from 
animals 

or plants, 
and people 
may not 
eat or 
touch the 
animal or 
plant from 
which their 
surname is 
derived. 

340 TRACES OF TOTEMISM IN THE REST OF ASIA cuar. 

in a few districts of Kweichow ; but the home of their race 
is Szechwan, where in the fastnesses of the great Taliang 
Mountains they still retain their independence in a country 
as large as Wales. European travellers have skirted that 
country, but as yet none have entered it, so that our know- 
ledge of the pure Lolos is very slight. Mr. A. Henry, 
stationed at Szemao, a Customs post in the south of Yunnan, 
has studied the Lolos of that neighbourhood,’ and it is to 
him that we owe a notice of their social system which 
contains at least some hints of totemism. He writes: “It 
is interesting then to know that Lolo surnames always 
signify the name of a tree or animal or both tree and 
animal, and that these are considered as the ancestors of the 
family bearing the name. This name is often archaic. 
Thus the surname Bu-luh-beh is explained as follows :— 
Bu-luh is said to be an ancient name for the citron, which is 
now known as sa-/u. The common way of asking a person 
what his surname is, is to inquire ‘What is it you don’t 
touch?’ and a person of the surname just mentioned would 
reply, ‘We do not touch the sa-d« or citron. People 
cannot eat or touch 'in any way the plant or animal, or both, 
which enters into their surname. The plant or animal is 
not, however, worshipped in any way. People of the same 
surname may marry if there is no obvious relationship. 
There are, however, groups of two or three surnames, 
amongst whom intermarriage is forbidden, and no explana- 
tion of this is given. There are also groups of two or three 
surnames who are called comrades, and intermarriage 
amongst them is favoured. Marriage is brought about by 
the father of the boy selecting a wife for his son. She is 
brought home by the groom and a friend, and is accom- 
panied by her brothers and a number of attendant girl 
friends. The feast occurs in the father-in-law’s house. The 
remarkable peculiarity amongst the Lolos is that invari- 
ably, some days after marriage, the bride escapes and runs 
home to her father’s house.” The husband sends presents 
to her father to induce her to return, and if these do 
not soften her heart he may go and persuade her with a 

1 A. Henry, “The Lolos and other ‘he Anthropological Institute, xxxiii 
Tribes of Western China,” Journal of (1903) pp. 96, 98 sg. 

xt. TRACES OF TOTEMISM IN THE REST OF ASIA 341 

stick.’ In this account the prohibition to eat or touch the 
object from which the family takes its name is strongly 
suggestive of totemism ; but on the other hand the absence 
of the exogamous rule, which forbids a man to marry a 
woman of his own family or clan, seems to prove that, if 
totemism exists among the Lolos, it is not totemism of the 
common type. 

Again, some hints of totemism have been reported as to Traces of 
the little-known aborigines of Formosa. Those of them who ‘hong the 
inhabit the mountains and forests in the interior of the aborigines 
northern part of the island are said to be divided into tribes, by 
each tribe with its own village, its own name, and almost its 
own language. Further, each tribe or village possesses an Each 
animal, under whose special protection the inhabitants believe Hence 
themselves to dwell, and accordingly they keep and feed it guardian 
in a cage. Some will thus keep a serpent, others a leopard, Dp we 
and soon, It is possible that these guardian animals are 
totems. The people live in settled villages, which they 
sometimes fortify. The men hunt and fish, using nets and 
hooks ; the women till the fields, spin, weave, and make 
excellent mats. Among the crops which they raise are rice, 
millet, hemp, and tobacco. All unmarried men and lads Common 
sleep together in a common building raised on posts several ution 
feet above the ground. Here the heads which they took in ried men. 
war from their enemies, especially the Chinese, used to be 
hung, and here festivals are held. Sometimes the inhabitants 
of a village observe a fast and a species of taboo (/Azang), 

during which no one may enter the village.” 

When we pass from the vast empire of China to the vast taications 
empire of Russia in Asia, the indications of totemism which rayon 
meet us are still very few and slight among the many 
heterogeneous races who profess allegiance to the Czar. 

Such indications are reported of the Yukuts, a race of 
Turkish stock in Siberia, who inhabit the district of Yakutsk 

1 A. Henry, **The Lolos and other der Eingebornen der Inseln Formosa 
Tribes of Western China,” Journal of und Ceram,” Verhandlungen der 
the Anthropological Institute, xxxiii. Berliner Gesellschaft fiir Anthropologie, 
(1903) pp. 105 sg. Ethnologie und Ureeschichte, 1882, pp. 

(56) sg., (60), (61), (62) (appended to 

2 W. Joest, “ Beitrige zur Kenntniss the Zedtschrift fiir Ethnologie, xiv.). 

Sacred 
animals of 
the Yakut 
tribes. 

Exogamous 
divisions 
among the 
Yakuts. 

Traces of 
the classi- 
ficatory 
system 
among the 
Yakuts. 

342 TRACES OF TOTEMISM IN THE REST OF ASIA cuar. 

and the valley of the Lena’ Von Strahlenberg, a Swedish 
writer of the early part of the eighteenth century, who has 
given us a description of Siberia, says of the Yakuts that 
“each tribe of these people looks upon some particular 
creature as sacred, e.g. a swan, goose, raven, etc., and such is 
not eaten by that tribe, though the others may eat it.” ? 

The Yakuts are certainly divided into exogamous 
sections called aga-ussa or “ father-kin,” from aga, “father,” 
and ussa,“kin.” A wife must always be taken from another 
aga-ussa.; indeed well-to-do men will not even marry a wife 
of their own zasleg, which is another and usually larger 
division comprising within it from one to five aga-ussas* 
But the nature of these divisions is not defined, and there is 
nothing to shew whether either the aga-ussa or the nasleg 
is identical with the “tribe” spoken of by von Strahlenberg. - 
If either identity could be made out, it would go far to prove 
the existence, present or past, of totemism among the 
Yakuts. Further, it would seem that the Yakuts have the 
classificatory system of relationship. For they have no 
general word either for brother in general or for sister in 
general; but they have special terms for elder brother and 
younger brother, for elder sister and younger sister ; further, 
they apply “the term ‘child’ or ‘my child’ not only to 
their own proper children, but also to the children of 
brothers, or of sisters, or even to brothers and sisters them- 
selves, if they are very much younger.”* Among the 

1H. Vambery, Das TZtrkenvolk marry, he must, says Middendorf, 

No 

(Leipsic, 1885), pp. 146 sg. 

2 An Historico-Geographical Descrip- 
tion of the North and Eastern Parts of 
Europe and Asta, but more particularly 
of Russia, Siberin, and Great Tartary, 
written originally in High German by 
Mr. Philip John von Strahlenberg, 4 
Swedish Officer, thirteen years Captive 
tn those Parts, now faithfully translated 
into English (London, 1738), p. 383. 
The number of Yakut tribes, according 
to Von Strahlenberg, is ten (of. ct. p. 
380). 

3 W. G. Sumner, “ The Yakuts, 

‘abridged from the Russian of Siero- 

shevski,” Journal of the Anthropological 
Institute, xxxi, (1901) pp. 73 59-, 87. 
‘©When a Jakut (Siberia) wishes to 

choose a girl from another clan. 
one is permitted to marry a woman 
from his own” (Sir John Lubbock, 
The Origin of Civilisation, Fourth 
Edition (London, 1882), p. 135). 
In support of these statements Sir 
John Lubbock (Lord Avebury) refers 
to Middendorf, Szbirische Reise, p. 72, 
and Miiller’s Description de toutes les 
Races de PEmp. de Russie, Pt. U1. p. 58. 
I accept the truth of the writer’s state- 
ments, though I have not been able to 
verify his references. 

4 W. G. Sumner, “The Yakuts,” 
Journal of the Anthropological Institute, 
xxxi. (1901) p. 90. The account here 
reproduced from the Russian is so 
vague, and the facts so mixed with 

xt TRACES OF TOTEMISM IN THE REST OF ASIA 343 

Yakuts, further, the mutual avoidance of 2 woman and her Avoidance 
husband’s relations, and of brothers and sisters appears to © Drowhers 
be practised to a certain extent. In regard to the latter we among the 
are told that “boys ten or twelve years of age do not eat ‘**"* 
with their sisters ; they do not lie down to sleep with them 

on the same bed. The boy is given a separate bed, which 
involves a special expense. They do it apparently not from 
modesty, but in obedience to an ancient prohibition in the 

nature of a taboo. These very sisters, however, may go 
completely naked, entirely untroubled by the presence of their 

grown brothers.” ! 

Among the Samoyeds we are told that a man may not Exogamous 
marry a woman of his father’s clan, but must marry a ee re 
woman of his mother’s clan, however near the relationship Samoyeds. 
between bride and bridegroom may be.? If this statement, 
which appears to be well authenticated, is correct, it proves 
the existence of exogamy, though not of totemism, among 
the Samoyeds. Further, it may be noted that some of the Tribes 
tribes of the Kara Kirghiz or Black Kirghiz, inhabiting 0°"? 
the northern spurs of the Thian Shan range and the high animals 
mountains from Kashgar on the east to Khokan on the ping. 
west, are divided into tribes, some of which bear the names Kirghiz. 
of animals. The whole people falls, first, into two divisions, 
namely the Ong or the Right and the So/ or the Left. The 

Ong or Right division includes six tribes, of which three are 

speculation, that no precise information 
can be extracted from it. It is not 
even quite clear whether the was/eg and 
aga-ussa (which the translator regularly 
represents by sé) are kinship or local 
divisions, but apparently they are the 
former. 

1 W. G. Sumner, ‘The Yakuts,” 
Journal of the Anthropological Institute, 
xxxi. (1901) p. 90. As to traces of 
avoidance between a woman and her 
husband’s relations, see 257d. p. 93. 

2 «Ueber den religidsen Glauben 
und die Ceremonien der heidnischen 
Samojeden im Kreise Mesen, nach dem 
Russischen,” Zeitschrift fiir allgemetne 
Erdkunde, N.F. viii. (1860) p. 55. 
The original article here extracted and 
translated into German was written by 
the Archimandrite Benjamin of Arch- 
angel and published in the fourteenth 

volume of the Wastnxzk of the Imperial 
Russian Geographical Society. Though 
the writer deals specially with the 
Samoyeds of Mesen in the Government 
of Archangel, he says that exactly the 
same marriage law is observed by the 
Samoyeds of Siberia. Similarly, Pallas 
says that when a Samoyed wishes to 
marry, he chooses a woman of another 
family or clan (2 einem andern Gesch- 
lecht). See P.S. Pallas, Reise durch 
verschiedene Provinzen des Russischen 
Reichs, iii. (St. Petersburg, 1776) p. 76. 
Similarly, J. G. Georgi says of the 
Samoyeds: ‘From disinclination to 
marry among relations, they all seek 
brides in other families or clans (é 
andern Geschlechtern).” See J. G. 
Georgi, Beschreibung aller Nationen 
des Russischen Reichs (St. Petersburg, 
1776), p. 282. 

Marriage 
customs 
of the 
Gilyaks of 
the Amoor 
River. 

Avoidance 
of brothers 
and sisters. 

Classi- 
ficatory 
system of 
relation- 
shipamong 
theGilyaks. 

Personal 
names 
among the 
Gilyaks. 

344 TRACES OF TOTEMISM IN THE REST OF ASIA cua. 

named after the stag, the yellow eland, and the great eland 
respectively.' But I know of no evidence that these tribes 
are either exogamous or totemic. 

Among the Gilyaks of the island of Saghalien certain 
marriage customs are observed which may appropriately be 
noticed in this book. Brothers appear to hold their wives 
to a certain extent in common ; for when an elder brother is 
away on a journey, his younger brother enjoys marital rights 
over his elder brother’s wife ; but the converse does not hold 
good, an elder brother never has any rights over his younger 
brother’s wife.? Further, the mutual avoidance of brothers 
and sisters is in vogue among the Gilyaks. Boys and girls 
live and play with each other, but when they have reached 
the age of puberty brothers and sisters may no longer speak 
to one other, or if they do speak it must be with averted 
eyes.* Further, it appears that the Gilyaks have the classifi- 
catory system of relationship ; for we read that “the villages 
are in general inhabited by members of one and the same 
family ; every Gilyak comes into the world with so many 
fathers and so many mothers that it is somewhat difficult to 
understand their system of relationships. He always calls 
by the name of y/é,'that is, ‘ father, not only his father but 
the brothers and male cousins german of his father; and he 
calls by the name of ymé&, that is, ‘mother,’ the sisters and 
the female cousins german of his mother. All the children 
of brothers and cousins german are considered as brothers 
and sisters, and are distinguished by the name of vouer,a 
sort of collective name like the word Geschwister in German. 
The family forms a very sharply limited clan, but marriage 
between relations is not allowed; the father has a great 
authority over his sons, and the oldest brother over his younger 
brothers, The families are grouped in tribes and boast of 
descending from the same father, and every Gilyak always 
knows the name of his tribe. When a child is born into the 
world, he receives a name; there is a cycle of names in each 
tribe, and in the tribe two persons may not bear the same 

1 W. Radloff, Aus Sibirien (Leipsic, (preface). 
1884), i. 230 59.3 ta., Proben der Volks- 2 P. Labbé, Un bagne Russe, L’ lle 
litteratur der Nordlichen Tiirkischen de Sakhaline (Paris, 1903), pp. 170 5g. 
Stdmme, v. (St. Petersburg, 1885) p. i. 3 P. Labbé, of. cit. p. 167. 

xt ZRACES OF TOTEMISM IN THE REST OF ASIA 345 

name; if a child receives a name which i$ already borne by 
a man still living, the man or the child wiil die within the 
year. When aman dies, it is forbidden to pronounce his 
name; but when the festival of the bear comes round, at 
which they sacrifice the beast and send him as a messenger 
to the divinity, in order to obtain game and fish in 
abundance, they beat the bear’s skin crying out the name of 
the deceased, and from that day the name may be pronounced 
by all and will be given to a child subsequently born. The 
names of boys are chosen by the father, who consults with 
the old men of the family on the subject ; they often signify 
‘strength, ‘courage, ‘bravery,’ ‘intelligence, etc. The 
names of women are not necessarily taken from the cycle of 
the tribe.” ? 

From this account of Gilyak personal names we may The 
infer that these people assume an intimate connection sae 
between a person’s name and his life or soul; and further, believe in 
perhaps, that they believe ‘in the reincarnation of the dead, sete 
a deceased person coming to life again in the child who ofthe dead, 
bears his name. If that is so, the Gilyaks in this respect 
resemble not only the Central Australian aborigines but 
also the Indians of North America, among whom, as we 
shall see later on, a dead person is supposed to come to life 
again or “to be raised up,” as they sometimes express it, in 
the person of his namesake. 

The inference that the Gilyaks believe the dead to be Beliefofthe 
reborn in the persons who bear their names is confirmed by oaks" 
the observation that a precisely similar belief is held by carnation 
another people of North-Eastern Asia, the Koryaks, whose %'"°*** 
customs and beliefs have lately been investigated with 
great care by Mr. Waldemar Jochelson. The Koryaks 
think that before a child is born, the Supreme Being, a 
benevolent but rather inert old man who lives up in 
the sky with his wife and children, sends into the mother’s 
womb the soul of a deceased relative of the child to be born’ 
again. He keeps a supply of souls suspended by straps 
from the cross-beams of his house ; and as is the length of 
a soul’s strap, so will the length of that soul’s life be when 
. it is reborn into the world. A long strap, a long life, and a 
1 P. Labbé, Un bagne Russe, L’lle de Sakhaline (Paris, 1903), pp. 165 sg. 

Children 
are named 
after the 
deceased 
relatives 
whosesouls 
have been 
reborn in 
them. 

Exogamy 
among the 
Golds of 
the Amoor, 

Exogamous 
clans 
(xala) of 
the Golds. 

346 TRACES OF TOTEMISM IN THE REST OF ASIA cuar. 

short strap, a short life ; that is the idea. Accordingly as 
soon as a child is born, it is given the name of the deceased 
relative whose soul has been reborn in it. There are various 
ways of identifying him or her. Sometimes the father uses 
for this purpose a divining stone called the Little-Grand- 
mother. This he ties by a string to a stick and swings it 
backwards and forwards, enumerating the names of the dead 
kinsfolk both on his own and on his wife’s side of the house. 
When he mentions the name of the one whose soul has 
entered into the baby, the stone swings faster. Or he may 
observe the behaviour of the child while the names are 
being mentioned. If the infant squalls at any name, that 
cannot be the name of the person reborn in it. But if the 
child stops squalling or smiles at the mention of any name, 
then they know that to be its real name, the name of the 
kinsman or kinswoman who has come to life again in it. 
Then the father takes up the baby in his arms and carrying 
it from the sleeping-tent to the house tells the people, “A 
relative has come.” If any mistake is made in identifying 
the soul which has entered into the new-born child, some- 
thing will certainly ail that child ; but the mistake may be 
corrected and the name changed by means of another appeal 
to the Little-Grandmother or other mode of divination.’ 

Lastly, strict exogamy of the clan is practised by the 
Goldi or Golds, a tribe settled in the middle course of the 
great Amoor River; and from the following account it 
seems to follow that the organisation of society in exogamous 
clans is common, if not universal, among the peoples of 
Siberia. The tribes of this region were investigated for the 
Jesup North Pacific Expedition by Mr. Berthold Laufer in 
the years 1898 and 1899, and he reports upon the exogamy 
of the Golds as follows :-— 

“The social organization of the Gold is very simple, and 
resembles that of all other Siberian peoples. The whole 
tribe is grouped into clans called rody by the Russians, and 
azala by the Gold. The members of such clans constitute 
patronymic societies. All the families of a clan bear the 

1 Waldemar Jochelson, Zhe Koryak, Pacific Expedition, vol. vi. parti.). As 
Religion and Myths (Leyden and New to the Supreme Being, his wife, and 
York, 1905), p. 100 (Zhe Jesup North family, see 257d. pp. 23 sg. 

x1 TRACES OF TOTEMISM IN THE REST OF ASIA _ 347 

same name. For example, in Sendaka, the region between 
Chabarovsk and Vyatskoye, the following names occur most 
frequently: Posaxara, Ojal, Xader, Perrainka, Axtanka, 
Oninka, Donka, Yukkami, Udinka, Pozar. The members 
of such clans are scattered over the whole territory occupied 
by the tribe. Some clans have a double name. Thus the 
clan Axtanka is also styled Beldi. The names of a great 
many of their clans are met with among the Mangun and 
Amoor-Gilyak ; for example, the name Posaxara occurs 
among both these tribes. From this fact may be traced 
the race mixture of early times. Marriage is strictly 
exogamic. A man belonging to the clan Perminka is never 
allowed to take a wife of the same family name.” ? 

A Gold buys his wife from her father, and he may have Polygamy. 
as many wives as he can buy and keep. When he dies, his The 
brother may marry the widow on condition that she consents ee 
to have him? “A peculiar feature of the Goldian language Terms 
is that the terms of relationship are divided into two classes, ae 
The names of relatives on the paternal side are different ancne the 
from those on the maternal side. Moreover, each of these 
classes is again subdivided, distinguishing terms used for 
relatives older from words for those younger than father or 
mother. The elder brother of the father is called fafa ; his 
younger brother, achkd ; the father’s elder sister, dadd, his 
younger sister ghughdé; the mother’s elder sister dadd, her 
younger sister, ovkd.”* This distinction between elder and 
younger brothers and sisters points to the existence of the 
classificatory system among the Golds. We may surmise 
that the system is widespread among the tribes of Northern 
Asia, though observers have paid but little attention to it. 

Such are the few slight indications or hints of totemism 
and exogamy which I have been able to glean in Asia 
outside the limits of India.* 

1 B. Laufer, ‘‘ Preliminary Notes on 

Explorations among the Amoor Tribes,” 

American Anthropologist, New Series, 
ti, (1900) p. 318. 

2 B. Laufer, of. cz. pp. 319 59., 
322. 

3 B. Laufer, of. cit. p. 321. 

£ The lateGerman traveller Vaughan- 
Stevens alleged that he had discovered 

something which he took for totemism 
among the Sakai, an aboriginal tribe of 
the Malay Peninsula. But no reliance 
can be placed on his evidence, and I 
prefer not to repeat his confused state- 
ments on the subject. See W. W. 
Skeat and C. O. Blagden, Pagan Races 
ofthe Malay Peninsula (London, 1906), 
ii. 62-64, 258 sg. The barbarous 

348 TRACES OF TOTEMISM IN THE REST OF ASIA cnap. 

Absence of In view of the now prevalent theory which connects the 
ws™s™ American Indians with the peoples of Northern Asia, it is 

exgamny of some interest to observe that the two tribes, the Chukchees 
a N: . . . 
Prune and the Koryaks, who inhabit the part of Asia nearest to 

ae America, appear to be entirely without both totemism and 

of North- exogamy, the two great institutions so characteristic of the 

Sacre North American Indians. The striking discrepancy thus 
revealed between the social organisation of these neighbour- 
ing peoples in the two continents does not favour the theory 
of their racial affinity. 

Group- But while neither the Chuckchees nor the Koryaks have 
Among the totemism and exogamy, it deserves to be noticed that the 

Chukchees. Chukchees, who occupy the north-eastern extremity of Asia, 
possess a system which has been called group-marriage. It 
will be best to describe the system in the words of Mr. 
Waldemar Bogaras, who has lived among the people and 
made a careful study of their institutions. His account 
applies particularly to the marriage customs of the Reindeer 
Chukchees ; with those of the Maritime Chukchees he is less 
familiar. He says: 

“ Group-Marriage-——Marriage among the Chukchee does 
not deal with one couple only, but extends over an entire group. 
The Chukchee group-marriage includes sometimes up to ten 
married couples. The men belonging to such a marriage- 

tribes in the mountains of Northern keep in captivity for a time and then 
Tonquin abstain from eating the flesh sacrifice, is not to be confused with 
of dogs, and they say that one of their totemism. See Zhe Golden Bough, 
people lost an eye through looking at Second Edition (London, 1900), ii. 
some Annamites, who were engaged in " 374 sgq. 

eating dog’s flesh. But this is not of 1 The social organisation and the 
itself a trace of totemism, though it has __ religious beliefs of the Chukchees and 
been adduced as such. See E. Lunet the Koryaks have been carefully in- 
de Lajonquitre, Fithuographiedu Tonkin vestigated in recent years by members 
Septentrional (Paris, 1906), p. 240. of the Jesup North Pacific Expedition, 
The Rev. J. Batchelor believes that he the prime object of which was to ascer- 
has found totemism among the Ainos, tain the ethnical relations between the 
an aboriginal race of Japan; but his aboriginal races of America and Asia. 
ideas of totemism appear to be vague, See W. Jochelson, Zhe Koryak (Leyden 
and the evidence which he adduces is and New York, 1908); W. Bogaras, 
quite insufficient. See the Rev. John Zhe Chukchee (Leyden and New York, 
Batchelor, 7he Aiuu and thety Folk- 1904-1909). These works form vol- 
fore (London, 1901), pp. 8-10, 83 sgg., umes vi. and vii. of the publications 
156-164, 206. The respect which the of the Jesup North Pacific Expedition, 
Ainos and some tribes of the Amoor and are issued as memoirs by the 
River (the Gilyaks, Golds, and American Museum of Natural History, 
Orotchis) pay to bears, which they New York. 

xt TRACES OF TOTEMISM IN THE REST OF ASIA 349 | 

union are called ‘companions in wives’ (Aew-tu'mgzz). 
Each ‘companion’ has a right to all the wives of his 
‘companion, but takes advantage of his right comparatively 
seldom, namely, only when he visits for some reason the 
camp of one of the ‘companions.’ Then the host cedes him 
his place in the sleeping-room. If possible, he leaves the 
house for the night; goes to his herd, for instance. After 
such a call, the companion visited generally looks for an 
occasion to return the visit, in order, in his turn, to exercise 

his rights. 
“The union, in group-marriages, is mostly formed Group- 
between persons who are well acquainted . .. , especially noay 

between neighbors and relatives. Second and third cousins formed 
are almost invariably united by ties of group-marriage ; mae 
brothers, however, do not enter into such unions. In ancient ances and 
times this form of marriage was obviously a union between pcs 
the members of a related group. In course of time, other cousins. 
friendly persons began to be included in the union. The 

rite accompanying the formation of group-marriages reflects 

such an origin, for it is intended to give the union the 
character of a tie between relatives. The persons concerned 

make sacrifices and anoint themselves with blood, first in one 

camp, and then in the other. After that they are considered 

as belonging to one fireside, as do the relatives in the male 

line. According to tradition, group-marriages with persons 

of high standing were much sought after by younger people. 

They would send their relatives as match-makers, and would 

even serve in a strange herd in order to enter such a union, 
precisely as is the custom in individual marriages. 

“The older people, however, were reluctant to enter the Asa rule, 
group-union with young people, especially if the latter were oan: 
single. The mixing of ages in the group-marriage is not marriages 
approved of. If a married man, on the other hand, has no 7° the 
children, but desires to have some, he is anxious to make a same age. 
union with a strong single man. The aversion to including 
bachelors in the marriage-group is primarily based on the 
absence of reciprocity. The bachelor gains from entering 
the union, but gives nothing in return. 

“The inmates of one and the same camp are seldom 
willing to enter into a group-marriage, the reason obviously 

350 TRACES OF TOTEMISM IN THE .REST OF ASIA cuar. 

Partners being that the reciprocal use of wives, which in group- 
sire marriage is practised very seldom, is liable to degenerate 
generally into complete promiscuity if the members of the group live 
pees too close together. However, many exceptions occur to 
camps. both rules. ... I have been told that poor people, on 
entering the group-union, are sometimes so friendly that they 
live in on¢ tent, and even in the same sleeping-room. . . . 
Practically “ At the present time the unions through group-marriage 
ae embrace practically ali Chukchee families. Not to be 
families are connected with such a union, means to have no friends and 
an '" good-wishers, and no protectors in case of need; for the 
marriage. members of a marriage-group stand nearer to one another 
‘han even relations in the male line. -As pointed out above, 
10owever, these two ties often coincide, 
“In some cases five or six persons enter into a group- 
narriage, and all enjoy equal marital rights. In other cases 
a man may have several companions in group-marriage who 
do not stand in a similar relation to one another. . . . 
Group- “Union through group-marriage is considered equal toa 
wnasiderea DIOOd tie. The children born in the families of a marriage- 
equaltoa union are regarded as cousins, or even as brothers and 
blood-tie. sisters. They cannot marry each other, which is natural, for 
they might easily have a common father.”? 
The From this account we gather that practically the whole 
pcre of the Chukchee tribe or nation lives in a state of group- 
marriage marriage, which is regulated by custom and does not approach 
proms to sexual promiscuity. The members of such groups are 

pps aaa commonly blood relations, especially second or third cousins, 
Tr: 
ofeach of about the same age ; though persons of very unequal ages 

ee sometimes live together in a marriage-group.” ‘That the 
usua e : . . 
bbed-sela- partners in these connubial unions are theoretically deemed 

ena to be blood relations, even when they are not so in fact, is 

tions, plainly indicated by the ceremony of smearing themselves 
with the blood of sacrificial victims in the camps of both the 
partners ; for this is nothing but a form of the widespread 
blood-covenant whereby two persons are supposed to unite 
1 Waldemar Bogaras, The Chwk- another camp I saw two neighbors ot 
chee (Leyden and New York, 1904- very unequal ages, whose tents stood 
1909), pp. 602-605 (forming vol. vii. side by side, and who were united by a 
of The Jesup North Pacific Expedition). group-marriage” ( a) cit. p. 603). 
2 Mr. W. Bogaras writes: ‘In 

x1 TRACES OF TOTEMISM IN THE REST OF ASIA 351 

themselves artificially by a tie of consanguinity ; and we are 
expressly told that “union through group-marriage is con- 

sidered equal to a blood tie.” Hence among this people Consan. 
consanguinity is not of itself a bar to marriage, but rather riveaind 
the contrary. “The Chukchee,” we are told, “ have several among the 
methods of securing brides and concluding marriages. One Chukchees. 
of these is through marriage between relatives, if possible in 

the same family, or at least in the same camp, or in the 
neighboring camp, where families of the same blood reside. 

Most frequent are marriages between cousins.” However, 
marriage between brother and sister or between uncle and 

niece is considered incestuous.’ The intention of these 
group-marriages appears’ to be mutual protection ; persons 

who do not belong to any such social union are deemed 
friendless and unprotected. 

The tie of affinity between men who are married to Close tie 
sisters is deemed very strong; indeed in the olden times it between 
was considered to be even stronger than brotherhood, and married 
there was a proverb that in battle two such men should °° **- 
fight and fall side by side. There is a special name for this< 
relationship ; two men married to two sisters call each other 
takalhin, which means properly “ brace-companion.” ? 

It is somewhat remarkable that though Chukchee The 
brothers do not unite in a marriage-group, nevertheless the paliong 
younger brother regularly marries the widow of his elder Chukchees, 
brother according to the custom of the levirate. If the 
deceased left no brothers, the widow passes to one of his 
cousins. But, in accordance with a rule of which we have 
met with instances in Australia, Indonesia, and India; it is 
only a younger brother or a younger cousin who may thus 
succeed to the place of his dead kinsman ; an elder brother 
or an elder cousin has no right over the widow of his younger 
brother or younger cousin.‘ 

As might be anticipated from their marriage system, in 

~ 1 W. Bogaras, The Chukchee, p. 236, 279, 280, 281, 291, 302, 310, 
576. Mr. Bogaras knows of two cases 313, 315. Much more rarely it is the 
of incestuous intercourse between father elder brother who marries the widow of 

and daughter. his deceased younger brother. See 
F above, pp. 249 5g7., 272 59- 
? W. Bogaras, of. cét. p- $40. - w. Bogaras, The Chukchee, pp. 

3 See above, py! 191, 222, 234, 607 sg. 

352 TRACES OF TOTEMISM IN THE REST OF ASIA cuap. 

The which exogamy plays no part, the Chukchees do not possess 
engines the classificatory system of relationship. A man applies the 
the classii- Same term (ezdzw) to his father’s brother and to his mother’s 
aie of brother ; but he applies quite a different term to his father 
relation- (e@¢hin). He applies the same term (echchaz) to his father’s 
its sister and to his mother’s sister; but he applies quite a 
different term (e/a) to his mother. He applies the same 
terms to all his cousins, whether on the paternal or on the 
maternal side; but he applies quite different terms to his 
brothers and sisters.) 
Amongst The Koryaks who inhabit the country immediately to 
the Koryaks 

there is. the south-west of the Chukchees, at the head of the Sea of 
Liem Okhotsk, are equally without the institutions of totemism 
nor exo. and exogamy. Amongst them marriage is regulated, not 
at iee by an organisation of the community in exogamous clans, 
regulated but purely by.the degrees of relationship or affinity which 
pled exist between individuals. A man is forbidden to marry 
ofcon- his mother and her sisters, his father’s sisters, his own sisters, 
or affinity, His cousins, and his nieces, the daughters either of his brother 
or of his sister. Between all other blood-relations marriages 
are permitted. Amongst the relations by marriage whom a 
man is forbidden to take to wife are his stepmother, the 
sisters of his living wife, the elder sisters of his dead wife, 
the sisters of his brother’s wife, and the widow of his 

Marriage younger brother.? On the other hand, while he may not 

ee eq Marry the sister of his living wife, he is obliged to marry his 
wife's deceased wife’s younger sister, though he is forbidden to 
veer marry her elder sister. Similarly a widow is bound to 
The marry her deceased husband’s younger brother, but is for- 

levirate. bidden to marry his elder, brother. Thus among the 
Koryaks the common custom of the levirate, which obliges 
a widow to marry her deceased husband’s brother, has its 
counterpart in a custom which obliges a widower to marry 
his deceased wife’s sister; but in both cases the custom is 
subject ‘to the condition that the brother or sister who 
marries the widow or the widower must be younger than 
the deceased husband or wife? 

1 W. Bogaras, The Chukchee, pp. 750, 761 (The Jesup North Pacific 
538 sg. Expedition, vol. vi.). 

2 W. Jochelson, 74e Koryak(Leyden 3 Ww. Jochelsony, of. ae. pp. 737, 
and New York, 1908), pp. 736 sg., 748 sgg. 

xt TRACES OF TOTEMISM IN THE REST OF ASIA 353 

The relations between the sexes among the Koryaks are Strictness 

much stricter and, judged by our standard, more moral than 1 'he 

among the Chukchees and other neighbouring tribes. Girls between 
are expected to remain chaste before marriage, and the pace 

custom is on the whole observed. It is deemed shameful if Koryaks. 
a girl is found with child before marriage. Young men will 

not serve for such'a frail one. She is sent away into the 
wilderness to bring forth in pain and sorrow the fruit of her 

sin ; and she kills the poor babe and buries it in the earth or 

in the snow. In the olden time her family would sometimes 

make war on the family of her seducer.’ 

Like the Chukchees, the Koryaks do not employ the The 

classificatory system of relationship. There is one word Koryaks 

have not 

(enniw) for father’s brother and mother’s brother, but quite got the 
a different word (aga) for ffther. There is one word (étche?) eee 

for father’s sister and mother’s sister, but quite a different system of 
. ‘ relation- 
word (e/a) for mother. There is one word for cousins, snip, 

whether paternal or maternal, but quite different words for 
brothers and sisters.’ 

1 W. Jochelson, Zhe Koryak, pp. pronunciation of the Koryak words. 
733-735: They convey little meaning to an 
English reader. My spelling must 

2 W. Jochelson, of. cit. pp. 759 therefore be understood to represent 
sg. I have not reproduced the typo- the sounds only approximately. The 
graphical subtleties by which Mr. same observation applies to my spelling 
Jochelson attempts to mark the exact of the Chukchee terms of relationship. 

VOL, II 2A 

Totemism 
widely 
diffused 
in Africa, 

The 
Herero, a 

CHAPTER XII 
TOTEMISM IN SOUTH AFRICA 

§ 1. Totemism among the Herero 

WHEN we pass from Asia to Africa the evidence for the 
existence of totemism and exogamy again becomes com- 
paratively copious ; for the system is found in vogue among 
Bantu tribes both of Southern and of Central Africa as well 
as among some of the pure negroes of the West Coast. We 
begin with the Herero, Ovaherero, or Damaras as they used 
to be called, who inhabit German South-West Africa. 

The Herero are a tall finely-built race of nomadic herds- 

Bantu tribe Men belonging to the Bantu stock, who seem to have 
of nomadic migrated into their present country from the north and east 

herdsmen, 

The land 
of the 
Herero. 

some hundred and fifty or two hundred years ago.’ The 
desert character of the country and its seclusion from the 
world long combined to preserve the primitive manners 
of the inhabitants. A scanty and precarious rainfall com- 
pels them to shift their dwellings from place to place in 
order to find pasture for their cattle ; and an arid, absolutely 
rainless coast of dreary sandhills affords no allurement to the 
passing mariner to land on the inhospitable shore. From 
the sea the land rises to the high mountains of the interior 
in a series of tablelands, separated from each other by great 

sandstone cliffs. In the hot 

1 J. Irle, Die Herero (Giitersloh, 
1906), pp. 49 5797., 53 59g. The time 
when the Herero migrated into their 
present country has been variously 
estimated at from one hundred to three 
hundred years ago. In such a matter 
certainty is unattainable. Compare 

season the burning tropical 

Josaphat Hahn, “Die Ovaherero,” 
Lettschrift der Gesellschaft fiir Erd- 
kunde xu Beritn, iv. (1869), pp. 227 
sqq.3 H. Schinz, Deutsch-Sidwest- 
Afrika (Oldenburg and Leipsic, n.d.), 
pp. 142 sg.; E. Dannert, Zum Rechte 
der Herero (Berlin, 1906), pp. 1 599- 

354 

CHAP. XII TOTEMISM AMONG THE HERERO 355 

sun converts these vast plains into a parched wilderness, 
where springs of water are few and far between, and the 
scorched grass, crumbling into dust at the touch, affords no 
nourishment to the languishing cattle. But when the first 
rains, accompanied by thunderstorms of tremendous violence, 
have fallen, the whole scene changes as by magic. The 
wastes are converted into meadows of living green, gay with 
a profusion of beautiful flowers and fragrant with a wealth 
of aromatic grasses and herbs; the trees, too, burst into 
blossom and perfume the air with their sweet scent. Now 
is the time when the cattle roam at large on the limitless 
prairies, and beasts of all kinds descend from their summer 
haunts in the mountains, bringing life and animation where 
the silence and solitude of death had reigned before. But 
when the rainy season is over, the colours quickly fade, and 
the: sun-baked plains soon wear again their former hue of 
melancholy grey. Only the deep glens which intersect the 
tablelands then afford coolness and shade, and form the best 
highroads into the interior. The jaded and thirsty traveller 
who suddenly descends from the desolation and furnace-like 
heat of the tableland into one of these ravines, where the 
river murmurs over a pebbly bed between banks of tall 
reeds, skirting flowery meadows and verdant groves, may 
well fancy himself transported into an enchanted land.’ 

In their native state the Herero are a purely pastoral The flocks 
people, though round about the mission stations some of them 274nerés 
have learned to till the ground. They possess, or used to Herero. 
possess, immense herds of cattle and flocks of sheep and goats. 
These are the pride and joy of their hearts, almost their 
idols. Their riches are measured by their cattle; he who 
has none is of no account in the tribe. Men of the highest 
standing count it an honour to tend the kine; the sons of 
the most powerful chiefs are obliged to lead for a time the 
life of simple herdsmen. They subsist chiefly on the milk 
of their herds, which they commonly drink sour. From a 
motive of superstition they never wash the milk vessels, 
believing firmly that if they did so the cows would yield no 

1 Josaphat Hahn, “Das Land der pp. 195 sgg.; J. Irle, Die Herero 

Herero,” Zettichrift der Gesellschaft (Giitersloh, 1906). Pp. 9 599. 
Str Erdkunde za Berlin, iii, (1868), 

The 
circular 
huts and 
villages 
of the 
Herero. 

Totemism 
among the 
Herero, 

TOTEMISM IN SOUTH AFRICA CHAP. 

356 

more milk. Of the flesh they make but little use, for they 
seldom kill any of their cattle, and never a cow, a calf, or a 
lamb. Even oxen and wethers are only slaughtered on 
solemn and festal occasions, such as visits, burials, and the 
like. Such slaughter is a great event in a village, and 
young and old flock from far and near to partake of the 
meat.’ 

Their huts are of a round beehive shape, about ten feet 
in diameter. The framework consists of stout branches, 
of which the lower ends are rammed into the ground, while 
the upper ends are bent together and tied with bark. The 
intervals between the ribs are stopped with brushwood or 
long grass, and the whole is coated on the outside with 
a mixture of cow-dung, blood, and clay. A hole large 
enough to let a man creep through on all fours serves 
as a door, and a smaller hole higher up allows the smoke 
to escape. On the approach of the rainy season the huts 
are covered with raw hides, which are weighted with great 
stones to prevent them from being blown away by the wind. 
A village is composed of a number of these round huts 
arranged in a circle about the calves’ pen as a centre and 
surrounded by an Jartificial hedge of thorn-bushes.2 At 
night the cattle are driven in through the hedge and take 
up their quarters in the open space round the calves’ pen? 

A special interest attaches to the Herero because they 
are the first people we have met with in our survey who 
undoubtedly combine totemism with a purely pastoral life ; 
hitherto the totemic tribes whom we have encountered have 
been for the most part either hunters or husbandmen. As 

1C¢. J. Andersson, Lake Ngami® 
(London, 1856); p. 230; J. Chapman, 
Travels in the Interior of South Africa 
(London, 1868), i. 3253; J. Hahn, 
“Die Ovaherero,” Zettschrift der 
Gesellschaft fiir Erdkunde su Berlin 
iv. (1869) pp. 244-247; C. G. 
Bittner, Das Hinterland von VWal- 
Jischbat und Angra Pequena (Heidel- 
berg, 1884), pp. 228 sg.; H. Schinz, 
Deutsch - Stidwest - Afrika (Oldenburg 
and Leipsic, n.d.), pp. 158-161; J. 
Irle, Die Herero, pp. 32 599., 113. 

2 Francis Galton, Narrative of an 
Explorer in Tropical South Africa 

(London, 1890), p. 1163 J. Hahn, of. 
cit, iv. (1869) p. 247; H. Schinz, of, 
cit, pp. 155 sgg.;3 J. Irle, Die Herero, 
pp. 111 sg. Similarly a Zulu village 
consists of a number of round beehive 
huts arranged in a circle about the cattle 
pen ascentre, and sometimes surrounded 
with a palisade to keep out wild beasts 
(Dudley Kidd, Zhe Essential afr 
(London, 1904), pp. 12 sg., with plates 
4 and 7). This was, perhaps, the 
original type of the Bantu village. 

3H. Schinz, Deztsch - Siidwest - 
Afrika, p. 159. 

xu TOTEMISM AMONG THE HERERO 357 

might have been anticipated, the totemism of the Herero is 
coloured by the main occupation of their life, the care of 

the cattle, and it presents besides certain peculiar features. 

The people are divided into a number of clans arranged on Double 

a curious double system, so that every person belongs at pels 
once to two different clans, one of which, called an eanda clans 
(plural osaanda), he inherits from his mother, and the other, Selene 
called an oruzo (plural ofuzo), he inherits from his father. nal clans 
Hence, while the legends which relate the origin of the ered tha 
paternal clans (otuzo) refer only to men, the legends which Herero. 
relate the origin of the maternal clans (oszaanda) relate only 

to women, each of these maternal clans tracing its descent 

from a clan-mother. According to some writers the 
distinction between the two sets of clans is that the maternal 

clans are social communities and the paternal clans religious 
communities ; but it seems doubtful whether this distinction 

holds good. Both sets of clans appear to be totemic; at 

all events, this is suggested not only by their names, but 

also by the rules and prohibitions, peculiar to itself, which 

each clan has to observe, especially in regard to diet and 

costume. 

There are at present, according to most authorities, eight 

1 My account of the clan system 
of the Herero has been pieced together 
from the following sources: C, J. 
Andersson, Lake Ngamt,? pp. 221 sg., 
222 sg.3; Francis Galton, Narrative 
of an Explorer in Tropical South 
Africa,’ p. 115 ; Josaphat Hahn, ‘‘ Die 
Ovaherero,” Zeitschrift der Gesellschaft 
fiir Erdkunde zu Berlin, iv. (1869) 
pp. 501 sg.; G. Viehe, ** Some Customs 
of the Ovaherero,” (South African) 
Folk-lore Journal, vol. i. part iii. (Cape 
Town, 1879) pp. 40 note, 48; H. 
Brincker, Worterbuch und kursge- 
Jasste Grammatik des Otji-Herero 
(Leipsic, 1886), s.vv. ‘eanda’ and 
‘ oruzo,’ pp. 7, 195 sg.; H. von Fran- 
gois, Vama und Damara, Deutsch-Sitid- 
west--lfrika (Magdeburg, n.d.), pp. 
171 sgg.; Dannert, ‘‘ Soziale Verhalt- 
nisse der Ovaherero,” JA/ittheclungen 
der Geographischen Gesellschaft su 
Jena, vi. (1888) p. 117; H. Schinz, 
Deutsch-Stidwest-Afrika, pp. 162-165 ; 
J. Kohler, ‘Das Recht der Herero,” 

Zeitschrift fiir vergleichende Rechts- 
wissenschaft, xiv. (1900) pp. 295-298; 
P. H. Brincker, ‘“‘ Charakter, Sitten 
und Gebrauche speciell der Bantu 
Deutsch - Siidwestafrikas,” A/ittec/ung- 
en des Seminars fiir ortentalische 
Sprachen 2u Berlin, iii. (1900) Dritte 
Abteilung, pp. 72 sg.3 G. Viehe, 
‘*Die Omaanda and Otuzo der Ova- 
herero,” <Alittetlungen des Seminars 
Stir ortentalische Sprachen zu Berlin, 
v. (1902) Dritte Abteilung, pp. 109- 
117; J. Ine, Die Herero, pp. 87-93 ; 
Eduard Dannert, Zum Rechte der 
Herero (Berlin, 1906), pp. 11-19. The 
fullest accounts are those of Brincker, 
Schinz, Kohler, Viehe (Berlin, 1902), 
Irie, and Dannert. Andersson and 
Hahn make no mention of ofu20; 
Bensen, quoted by Prof. Kohler, says 
nothing of omaanda. Some of these 
writers perhaps confused the two kinds 
of clans. Being unable to sift their 
evidence I content myself with repro- 
ducing it. 

The 
maternal 
clans 
(omaanda). 

The names 
of the 
maternal 
clans 
(omaanda). 

358 TOTEMISM IN SOUTH AFRICA CHAP. 

principal maternal clans (omaanda, plural of canda), most of 
them with their subdivisions or septs. According to the 
latest authority, however, Mr. E. Dannert, there are only six 
principal omannda. The members of each of these clans 
have their own traditions and their own special laws as to 
food and other matters. For example, they are forbidden 
to eat cattle or sheep of certain sorts, the sorts being deter- 
mined by the form, colour, shape of the horns, and so on, 
of the animal... Thus the people of one clan (eanda) 
will perhaps not eat of the flesh of oxen which are marked 
with black, white, or red spots; those of another refuse 
to partake of a hornless sheep; those of a third would 
not touch the meat of draught oxen. Before a Herero 
accepts meat which is offered to him, he carefully inquires 
as to the colour of the animal, whether it had horns, 
and so forth; and should it prove to be of the forbidden 
kind, he will probably abstain from it, even though he may 
be dying of hunger. Some carry their scruples so far as to 
avoid touching vessels in which such meat has been cooked ; 
even the smoke of the fire by which it was prepared is 
considered injurious? These clans do not live each by 
itself; on the contrary, men of all clans are found dwelling 
together in the different tribes. Yet the members of any 
one clan, though they may reside in different tribes, form 
among themselves a social community which plays a great 
part in matters of inheritance ; for property, especially pro- 
perty in cattle, must remain in the same maternal clan 
(eanda). 

The names of the maternal clans (omaanda) are com- 
pounded of a prefix e (the initial letter of eanda), the 
syllable kue (the root of omukue, “ father-in-law,” “son-in- 
law,” “mother-in-law,” “daughter-in-law,” etc.), and finally 
a word of various signification, such as ejuva, “ sun,” ombura, 
“rain,” and soon. Thus the name of the clan as a whole 

1 C.J. Andersson, Late Ngamz, p. 
221; J. Hahn, ‘‘ Die Ovaherero,” Zezt- 
schrift der Gesellschaft fiir Erdkunde 
au Berlin, iv. (1869) p. 502; H. 
Brincker, Worterbuch und kurszgefasste 
Grammatih des Otji-Herero (Leipsic, 
1886), s.v. ‘canda,’ p. 7. 

2 C.J. Andersson, Lake Neganiz, pp. 

222 sq. 

3G. Viehe, ‘*Die Omaanda und 
Otuzo der Ovaherero,” ALétezlungen 
des Seminars ftir ortentalische 
Sprachen su Berlin, v. (1902) Dritte 
Abteilung, pp. 109 sg., 112; J. 
Irle, Die Herero, p. 89; E. Dannert, 
Zum Rechte der Herero, p. 13. 

xII TOTEMISM AMONG THE HERERO 359 

signifies that the members of it are related by marriage to 
the object after which they are named. Thus Ekuejuva is 
“the clan which is related by marriage to the sun”; 
Ekuenombura, “the clan which is related by marriage 
to the rain.” When we speak of a person or persons 
of a clan, we substitute the prefix om (singular) or 
ova (plural) for the prefix e, thus:—Omukuejuva, “a 
member of the Sun clan”; Ovakuejuva, “members of the 
Sun clan,”? 

The principal maternal clans (omaanda) of the Herero are List of the 
as follows :— principal 

maternal 

1. The Zkuejuva or Sun (ejuva) clan, the name signify- clans 
ing properly “the clan which is related by marriage to the “72” 
sun.”® The members of the clan eat no black and white Herero. 
speckled sheep. The clan is divided into four septs, which 
take their special names from an arrow, scratching, the 
omutati tree, and the pheasant. 

2. The Ekuenombura or Rain (ombura) clan. 
divided into septs. 

3. The Ekuendjata clan. Their name is derived by 
Mr. G. Viehe from ondata, “a spring of water.” The clan 
includes two septs called “the Great Heap” and “the 
Little Heap ” respectively. 

4. The Ekuauti or Shrub (out) clan. 

5. The Ekuagjiti or Tree (ofzt2) clan. According to 
Mr. E. Dannert this is a sept of the preceding clan and 
takes its name from a strongly aromatic shrub called 
okuatjeti, which the Herero use for rubbing their bodies. 

6. The Ekuahere, the Marmot or Rock rabbit‘ (eheve) 

It is not 

1G, Viehe, ‘‘ Die Omaanda und 
Otuzo der Ovaherero,” A/ittetlungen 
des Seminars fiir orientalische 
Sprachen 2u Berlin, v. (1902) Dritte 
Abteilung, p. 112, As to the pre- 
fixes omu and ova see H. Brincker, 
Worterbuch und kurzgefasste Gram- 
matik des Otji-Herero, pp. 136 sq. 

2-C. J. Andersson, Lake Ngamz, p. 
221; J. Hahn, ‘‘ Die Ovaherero,” Zez¢- 
schrift der Gesellschaft fir Erdkunde 
zu Berlin, iv. (1869) pp. 501 sg. ; 
J. Brincker, Worterbuch und kurrge- 
fasste Grammatik des Otji-Herero, p. 
73 H. Schinz, Deutsch-Sidwest-Afrika, 

p. 163; G. Viehe, ‘‘Omaanda und 
Otuzo der Herero,” of. czt, pp. T1159. ; 
J. Inle, Die Herero, pp. 89 sg.; E. 
Dannert, Zum Rechte der Herero, pp. 
17 sg. 

3 axceuing to Mr. E. Dannert 
(Zum Rechte der Herero, p. 17), the 
name is derived from a word meaning 
“cheap,” not “sun.” But the weight 
or at least the majority of the authorities, 
including that of the lexicographer Dr. 
H. Brincker, is against him. 

4 Variously described in German 
as ‘Seine Art Murmeltier” and 
“ Felsenkaninchen.” 

Some 
writers 
have 
perhaps 
confused 
the 
maternal 
clans 
(omaanda) 
with the 
paternal 
clans 
(otuzo). 

360 TOTEMISM IN SOUTH AFRICA CHAP. 

clan. According to Mr. E. Dannert, this is a sept of the 
following clan. 

7. The Ekuendjandje or Liberal (omajandje) clan. It 
includes two or three septs which are called after sunset, 
darkness, and perhaps the rock rabbit. 

8. The Akuatjive clan. Their name, according to Dr. 
Brincker, is derived from a word meaning “wicked” or 
“evil” ; according to Mr. E. Dannert, it comes from a word 
meaning “tree.” The clan falls into two divisions, one of 
which takes its special name from a bush (omungambu) and 
the other from the morning (omuhuka). 

Other maternal clans (omaanda) enumerated by Dr. 
Brincker in his dictionary of the Herero language are :— 

9. The Ekuahorongo or Koodoo (ohorongo) clan. 

10. The Ekuesembt or Chameleon (esemdz) clan. And 
we hear of another called Ekuenanjimi, said to be so named 
from an ornament of iron wire (omguanjimz) which members 
of the clan wear. . 

Several of these maternal clans (omaanda) derive their 
names from the same objects after which some of the 
paternal clans (ofuzo) are named; for we shall see im- 
mediately that among the paternal clans are some which 
call themselves after the sun, the koodoo, the chameleon, 
and liberality. It is possible that some writers have con- 
fused the maternal clans (omaanda) with the paternal clans 
(otugzo); and indeed C. J. Andersson and Josaphat Hahn 
speak only of omaanda without appearing to know of the 

‘existence of the ofuzo. One of the latest and best authorities 

on the Herero, Mr. Eduard Dannert, definitely affirms that 
several writers have confounded the two distinct sets of 
clans.” He himself denies that the maternal clans (omaanda) 
are totemic in character, with definite rules as to wearing 
the hair, keeping various sorts of cattle, and abstaining 
from various kinds of food. Such customs, according to 
him, are characteristic of the paternal clans (o¢uzv), not of 
the maternal clans (omaanda)> If he is right, the double 
system of paternal and maternal clans among the Herero 

1C. J. Bittner, in H. Brincker’s 2 E. Dannert, Zum Rechte der 
Worterbuch und kuragefasste Gram- Herero, p. 16. 
matth des Otji-Herero, p. 7. 3 E. Dannert, of. cét. pp, 13 sgg. 

xu TOTEMISM AMONG THE HERERO 361 

is not so complex and confusing as at fist sight it appears 
to be. 

The Herero profess to account for the origin of their Legends 
maternal clans (omaanda) by tales which seem to shed but Coe 
little ligtit on the subject. Most of these stories turn on account for 
two or three sisters who went to the obsequies of their uncle, ‘"* rs" 
and of whom the younger was always the more sage and maternal 
fortunate. For example, the origin of the Sun clan and the ees: 
Rain clan is set forth in the following anecdote. Once 
upon a time there were two sisters, whose uncle was dead ; 
and they thought they would go to the funeral. The 
one said, “It is very hot; let us wait for the rain.” But 
the other had no fear of the heat, and away she went to the 
funeral. So the one who waited for the rain was called 
“ She who is related by marriage to the rain” (omukuen-om- 
bura), and the one who did not fear the noon-day heat was 
called “ She who is related by marriage to the Sun” (osmu- 
kuejuva). That was the origin of the Rain and the Sun clans." 

Again, the origin of the Spring of Water clan (Ekuenayjata) 

is explained by the following legend. Once upon a time 
there were some women and they all went on a journey. 
And it came to pass that they found a spring of water and 
sat down by it to drink. But the water did not suffice for 
them all. So some of them said, “Let us go on.” But 
others said, “Let us dig for water to drink.” So some 
went on, and some stopped behind, and those who stopped 
behind at the spring (omdjata, now pronounced ondata) were 
called Ovakuendjata. That is the origin of the Spring of 
Water clan (Ekuendjata).* 

A tale told to account for the origin of the Shrub or Twig 
clan and the Tree clan runs thus. There were two sisters, 
an elder and a younger, and they went to the funeral of their 
uncle. On the way the younger sister found a sweetly 
smelling shrub called okakuatjite and plucked its fragrant 
twigs (ouzz) ; so she was called Omukuauti. Then the elder 
sister came and plucked the wood or thick branches (ovd?z, 

1G. Viehe, “Die Omaanda und Herero, p. 90. 
Otuzo der Herero,” Afitted/ungen 
des Seminars fiir orientalische 2G. Viehe, ‘*Die Omaanda und 

Sprachen zu Berlin, v. (1902) Dritte Otuzo der Herero,” of. ct. pp. 114 
Abteilung, p. 113; J. Irle, Dee sg.3 J. Irle, Die Herero, p. 91. 

The 
paternal 
clans 
(ofuzo) 
of the 
Herero. 

Each clan 
(oruzo) 
observes 
certain 
rules as to 
food, the 
wearing of 
their hair, 
and the 
kinds of 
cattle and 
sheep 
which they 
may keep. 

The 
Chameleon 
clan. 

362 TOTEMISM IN SOUTH AFRICA CHAP. 

singular ofztz) of the shrub; so she was called Omukatjiti. 
That is the origin of the Shrub or Twig clan (Zkuaut¢) and 
of the Tree clan (Ekuatjit?). 

The paternal clans (otuzo, plural of ovuzo) are much more 
numerous than the maternal clans (omaanda), More than 
twenty of them have been recorded, but the list is probably 
incomplete. The etymology of the word oruzo and the 
meaning of most of the names of these paternal clans are 
alike obscure. These names regularly begin with ory or oro, 
which is the genitive prefix of oruzo ; for example, Ovoesembi 
is the Chameleon clan, the name being compounded of oro 
and esembz, “chameleon.” When we wish to express the 
members of a clan we prefix ovo, the usual sign of the 
personal plural; for example, Ovosembi, “they of the 
chameleon.” Among these paternal clans are the clans 
of the sun, the chameleon, the koodoo (a species of ante- 
lope), rag, liberality, and a girdle or necklace made out 
of pieces of the shells of ostrich eggs. The members of 
each clan (07420) are bound to observe certain customs 
in regard to food, the wearing of their hair, and so on. 
Some may not keep hornless cattle; others may not keep 
oxen with white backs; others keep neither gray cattle 
nor gray dogs; some are forbidden to eat tongues, others 
to eat the leg of an ox, others to eat the small stomach 
of cattle, others to eat gray oxen, others to eat hornless 
oxen, others to eat draught oxen, others to eat the shins, 
shoulder-blades, and blood of cattle, others to eat hares, 
others to eat the steinbock ; some may not drink the milk 
of gows of certain colours or characterised by horns of 
a certain shape. When animals of a sort which the 
custom of his clan forbids him to keep are born in a herd, 
the owner has to give them away or sell them, sometimes 
for an old song. The members of one clan will not touch 
clothes, skins, or anything else that has been put off by 
other people. Members of the Chameleon clan (Oro-esembz) 
take their name from the chameleon (esemdz), which they 
regard as sacred: they call the creature “old grandfather” 

1G. Viehe, ‘‘Die Omaanda und zu Berlin, v. (1902) Dritte Abteilung, 
Otuzo der Herero,” Alittet/ungen des pp. 115 sg.3 J. Irle, Die Herero, 
Seminars ftir ortentalische Sprachen p. 92. 

XI TOTEMISM AMONG THE HERERO 363 

and will not kill it. If they find a chameleon, they take 

it to the sacred hearth (okuruo) of the kraal and let it run 

about there for good luck. They prefer to keep brown and 
brindled cattle; they keep no grayish sheep and no dun- 
coloured cattle, nor will they eat the flesh of such animals. 
Members of the Rag clan (Oruomakoti, from ekoti, ‘ ‘rag ”) The Rag 
throw away the tripe of slaughtered cattle ; they keep yellow °?™ 
and dun-coloured kine, but no hornless or earless sheep, nor 

may they eat the flesh of such animals. Members of the the sun 
Sun clan may only eat and drink while the sun is visible ; “" 
they keep hornless cattle, and eat none that is of a bluish 

tinge. The Koodoo clan (Ovrojaharongo, from ohorongo, the 
“koodoo”) may not eat the koodoo ; but they sacrifice the Koodoo 
beast and make magic with it, and the horns of the koodoo ee 
decorate their graves: they keep no hornless beasts, no 

beasts with crumpled horns, and no beasts without ears. 

The Liberals, as we may call the members of the Liberal he 
clan (Oruonguendjandje, from ondjandje, “ liberal”), sacrifice Liberal 
and make magic with wethers that have a growth behind ©” 
the ear; they neither keep nor eat gray cattle, and the 

flesh of tongues is also forbidden to them. Members of the The 
Girdle or Necklace (ombongora) clan do not eat the blood of Giri or 
sheep nor flesh from the lower part of the animal’s front legs ; clan. 
and women of this clan may not eat a sheep’s breast. Each the 
paternal clan (oruzo) has its badge or scutcheon, which the aie ivi 
male members wear on the nape of the neck. It may be, - 
for example, a boar’s tusk or a sea-shell.' 

1 As to the paternal clans (otto) 
of the Herero see G. Viehe, in (South 
African) Folk-lore Journal, i. (1879) p- 
40 note; zd. ‘*Die Omaanda und 
Otuzo der Ovaherero,” Alitéezlungen 
des Seminars fiir _— orientalische 
Sprachen xu Berlin, v. (1902) Dritte 
Abteilung, pp. 109-111; H. Brincker, 
Worterbuch und kuragefasste Gram- 
matik des Ojt-Herero (Leipsic, 1886), 
pp. 195 sg.3 P. HH. Brincker, 
**Charakter, Sitten und Gebraduche 
speciell der Bantu Deutsch-Siidwest- 
alrikas,” Afitterlungen des Seminars 
fiir orientalische Sprachen 2u Berlin, 
iii. (1900) Dritte Abteilung, p. 73; 
H, Schinz, Deutsch -Stidwest-Afrika 
(Oldenburg and Leipsic, n.d.), pp. 164 

sg.; H. von Francois, Mama und 
Damara, Deutsch - Stidwest - Afrika 
(Magdeburg, n.d.), pp. 172 sg.3 J. 
Kohler, ‘*Das Recht der Herero,” 
Lettschrift fiir vergleichende Rechts. 
wissenschaf?, xiv, (1900) pp. 295 s¢¢.3 
td,, ‘*Weiteres iiber das Recht der 
Herero,” Zeitschrift fur vergleichende 
Rechtswissenschatt, xix. (1906) pp. 412 
599.3 J. Irle, Die Herero (Giitersloh, 
1906), pp. 87-89; E. Dannert, Zam 
Rechte der Herero (Berlin, 1906), pp. 
11-16, Our two principal authorities 
on the subject are Messrs. G, Viehe and 
E. Dannert. Mr. Irle’s account agrees 
closely with that of Mr. G. Viehe and 
is perhaps dependent on it. 

Rules as to 
marriage in 
the Herero 
clans. 

TOTEMISM IN SOUTH AFRICA CHAP. 

364 

We have unfortunately very little information as to the 
rules which regulate marriage in the Herero clans, both 
maternal and paternal. From a passing utterance of one of our 
authorities we gather that the maternal clans (osaanda) are 
exogamous; husband and wife always belong to different 
omaanda. _As to the paternal clans (ofuzo) one of our 
authorities definitely affirms that exogamy does not exist, and 
another says that marriage commonly takes place within the 
clan. Yet we may doubt whether on this point they are 
not mistaken. From the statement that a wife at marriage 
passes into her husband’s paternal clan (oruzo)* we may 
perhaps surmise that the two always belong to different 
paternal clans, in other words, that the paternal clans (ofuzo) 
like the maternal (omaanda) are exogamous. Some writers 
say that at marriage a wife quits her maternal clan (eanda) also 
for the maternal clan of her husband, though her children 
belong to her original maternal clan (eanda), not to his. But 
the statement perhaps rests on a confusion with the paternal 
clan (ovuzo); for it is positively affirmed by good authorities 
that no person may quit the maternal clan (eazda) which he or 
she has inherited at birth from the mother.” Another hint 
of the exogamy of the paternal clans (o¢uzo) may possibly 
be elicited from the following utterance: “A young man who 
wishes to choose a wife for himself has, in most cases, not a 
very ample field for his choice, as he is bound by many social 
circumstances and regulations which it would take too much 
space to explain here.” This tantalising statement of a well- 
informed missionary, the Rev. G. Viehe, is curtly elucidated 
by his editor with the remark “eanda and perhaps oruzo,” ® 

1 Dannert, ‘Soziale Verhaltnisse 
der Ovaherero,” Afitteilungen der Geo- 
graphischen Geselischaft 2u Jena, vi. 
(1888) p. 117. 

2 Bensen and Meyer, quoted by 
Prof. J. Kohler, ‘*Das Recht der 
Herero,” Zettschrift fiir vergleichende 
Rechtswissenschaft, xiv. (1900) pp. 
300 sg. 

3G. Viehe, ‘‘Die Omaanda und 
Otuzo der Ovaherero,” Afitted/ungen 
des Seminars fiir _ orientalische 
Sprachen zu Berlin, v. (1902) Dritte 
Abteilung, p. 109; J. Irle, Deze 
Herero, p. 87; E, Dannert, Zam 

Rechte der Herero, p. 19. 

4H. Brincker, Worterbuch und 
kurzgefasste Grammatik des Otjt- 
Herero, p. 7; Meyer, reported by Prof. 
J. Kohler, in Zettschrift fiir vergleich- 
ende Rechtswissenschaft, xiv. (1900) p. 
306; E. Dannert, Zum Rechte der 
Herero, p. 19 (on Meyer’s authority). 

5 G. Viehe, ‘Die Omaanda und 
Otuzo der Herero,” of, ct. p. 1093 
J. Irle, Die Herero, p. 87. 

6 G. Viehe, ‘‘ Some Customs of the 
Ovaherero” (South African) Folk-lore 
Journal, i. (1879) p. 48. Yet in his 
own treatise on the Herero clans, to 

XII TOTEMISM AMONG THE HERERO 365 

In the absence of definite information it is impossible to Conjectures 
do more than hazard a conjecture as to the origin of this mavens 
double system of clans. We might suppose that it had the double 
arisen through the union of two totemic tribes, one of which 3-0" we 
had maternal descent of the totem and the other paternal. Snore the 
But, so far as I am aware, there is nothing in the customs ; 
of the Herero to confirm this hypothesis, nor do I remember 
to have met with any instance of such an amalgamation 
elsewhere. We might also suppose that the twofold system 
marks an attempt, not fully carried through, to substitute 
paternal for maternal descent. We have seen that maternal 
descent appears to have preceded paternal descent among 
the Western Islanders of Torres Straits.’ Hence it is not 
impossible that the Herero are in a state of transition 
between the two. 

Like many other exogamous and totemic peoples, the Cousin 
Herero favour the marriage of cousins, the children of a dmone the 
brother and of a sister respectively ; while at the same time Herero. 
they forbid and even regard with horror as incest the 
marriage of cousins, the children of two brothers or of two 
sisters. On this subject Mr. Dannert tells us that “ marriages 
between relations are so much preferred that marriages 
between persons who are not related to each other are a 
rarity. Again, among relations marriages between cousins 
are especially preferred, but only between children of a 
brother and a sister, not between the children of two brothers 
or of two sisters, because the Herero assert that children of 
such cousins are weak and die. . . . Indeed such a marriage 
is not only improper, but is actually regarded as a horror, 
because the children of two brothers or of two sisters are 
themselves brothers and sisters according to Herero law, and 
sexual intercourse between them is viewed as incest and even 
subjects the culprits to the consequences of the blood-feud.” ? 
However, Mr. Dannert adds that the custom which directs a 
man to marry his cousin, the daughter either of his mother’s 

which I have so often referred (‘* Die 2 E. Dannert, Zam Rechte der 

Omaanda und Otuzo der Herero”), Herero, p. 33 sg. Compare Bensen, 

Mr. Viehe does not vouchsafe a word quoted by Prof. J. Kohler, ‘‘ Das 

as to the restrictions on marriage, with Kechte der Herero,” Zedtschrift fir 

which he seems to be well acquainted. wergleichende Rechtswissenschaft, xiv. 
1 See above, p. 15. (1900) pp. 300 s¢. 

Group- 
marriage 
among the 
Herero. 

Mr, E. 
Dannert’s 
investiga- 
tion of 
group- 
marriage 
among the 
Herero. 

366 TOTEMISM IN SOUTH AFRICA CHAP. 

brother or of his father’s sister, is often broken through, but 
that even then the wife is still looked for among the kinsfolk 
of her husband.) ; 

The Herero sometimes practise a form of group-marriage, 
for which the native name is oupanga. According to the 
missionary and lexicographer Dr. Brincker this institution 
“is a custom of the heathen Herero, consisting in a com- 
munity of women and property, though the community of 
property exists only in so far as the oma-panga (the 
members of such a community) may not refuse each other 
anything. Originally oupanga is the right word for ‘ friend- 
ship, but through the custom of the community of women, 
which exercises a very corrupting influence on the people, it 
has acquired a very evil flavour, so that we should be shy of 
using it in that sense.”? Elsewhere the same writer tells us 
that “two men who are each efanga to the other bind 
themselves by mutual presents of cattle and other things to 
an intimate friendship which makes accessible to every 
epanga the wives of his epanga, and on the other hand confers 
the right to take anything from his herd at pleasure. This 
evil custom has had as a consequence that the heathen 
Herero women bear comparatively few children.”* Again, 
Mr. Bensen, District Superintendent of Omaruru, informs us 
that “three men unite together and hold their wives and 
cattle in common, that is, they use their wives mutually and 
slaughter their cattle among each other. This they call 
oupanga. The children remain with the father who married 
the woman who bore the child, even when it can be proved 
that one of the two other men is its real father.” * 

The subject of these group-marriages has lately been 
studied with care by Mr. E. Dannert. From him we learn 
that they are concluded by a verbal agreement without any 
religious or other formalities, and that they may be dissolved 

1E. Dannert, Zum Rechte der teilungen des Seminars fiir oriental- 

Herero, p. 37. 
2H. Brincker, 
kursgefasste Grammatik des 
Herero, p. 227. 
3 Dr. H. P. Brincker, ‘* Charakter, 

Sitten und Gebrauche speciell der 
Bantu Deutsch-Siidwestafrikas,” A/z- 

Worterbuch und 
Oi- 

ische Sprachen zu Berlin, iii. (1900) 
Dritte Abteilung, p. 86. 

4 Bensen, quoted by Prof. J. Kohler, 
“Das Recht der Herero,” Zedtschrift 
fir vergleichende Rechtswissenschaft, 
xiv. (1900) p. 298. Compare H. von 
Francois, Nama und Damara, Deutsch- 
Stidwest-Afrika, pp. 198 sq. 

XH TOTEMISM AMONG THE HERERO 367 

at any time, which commonly happens through a dispute 

bred by one of the women concerned. But it is remarkable Brothers 
that among these Herero of South-West Africa, just as Mf", 
among the Chukchees of North-Eastern Asia,’ brothers do join ina 
not form an oupanga or group-marriage ; indeed it is strictly Fariage. 
forbidden (4u sera) for them to do so. More than that, the 

male partners in a group-marriage should not be related to 

each other by blood at all. But on the other hand, provided 

the husbands are no relations to each other, the wives in such 

a marriage may be sisters. Further, the children of a group- 
marriage are not considered to be brothers and sisters to 

each other. Moreover, according to Mr. E. Dannert, the 
community of wives does not carry with it a community of 
goods. The partners may not even ask anything direccly of 

each other ; if they wish to do so they must send the request 
through a messenger, who delivers his message in veiled 
language and roundabout phrases. However, at a festival 

it is a point of honour with the host to give his connubial 
partner the choicest morsel of flesh, and to supply him with 

the best wether as provision for a journey. If the partner- 

ship should afterwards be dissolved, each partner must restore 

‘or make good to the other what he has received from him 
during the continuance of the group-marriage.? 

Although brothers may not share their wives in their life- The 
time, surviving brothers inherit them at the death of their pil ieee 
relatives ; in other words, the Herero observe the custom of Herero, 
the levirate. In this again their practice resembles that of 
the Chukchees.2> Among the Herero it is usually the younger 
brother who inherits the widow of his deceased elder brother, 
and the intention of the custom, according to Mr. E. Dannert, 
is to keep the property in the family. For the same reason 
it is customary for the heir to marry not only the widow but 
her growing daughters by her first husband, in order to 
secure to himself the heiresses and with them the enjoyment 
of their substance.* 

Lastly, it may be noted that the widespread practice of 
mutual avoidance between persons related by marriage is 

1 See above, pp. 349, 351. 3 See above, p. 351. 
2, Danner, Zum Rechte der 4, Dannert, Zen Rechte der 
Herero, pp. 39-42. Herero, pp- 38 54. 

Avoidance 
between a 
manand his 
betrothed 
wife’s 
parents. 

Maternal 
clans 
(omaanda) 
among the 
Ovambo, 

368 TOTEMISM IN SOUTH AFRICA CHAP, 

observed by the Herero, As soon as a man is betrothed, he 
and the parents of his future wife must shun each other’s 
company ; till the marriage takes place they may neither 
see nor speak to one another. The bride also is not allowed 
to shew her face to the bridegroom. If she does so, or if 
the man openly goes up to her parents, it is regarded on 
both sides as equivalent to breaking off the match.) And 
after marriage a man and his wife’s mother are said to be 
omu-henendu, that is, strangers or unapproachable to each 
other. They may not eat together, and what the one has the 
other may not have.” 

To the north of Hereroland dwell the Ovambo, who 
unlike their nomadic kinsmen and herdsmen the Herero 
lead a settled agricultural life® They are said to be 
divided into maternal clans (omaanda) like the Herero, but 
apparently no details of their social organisation have been 
published. “The institution of the omaanda,’ says Mr. 
Schinz, “is found not only among the Ovaherero, but also 
among all the Ambo tribes, the Uumbangala and probably 
also among all other Bantu peoples; it is therefore hardly 
open to doubt that the origin of this grouping is to be 
traced back to the time when the Bantu peoples, now’ 
scattered over the whole of equatorial Africa, formed a 
single homogeneous tribe.”* Unfortunately our knowledge 
of the social organisation of the Bantu tribes is far too 
imperfect to allow us to affirm that they are all divided 
into exogamous totemic clans, whether with maternal or 
paternal descent. Nevertheless the number of Bantu tribes 
in which totemism and exogamy are known to coexist 
suffices to render it probable that these institutions either 
are or have been at one time universal throughout the 
peoples of the Bantu stock. 

1E. Dannert, Zum Rechte der 271-322. 
Herero, p. 25. 4H. Schinz, Deutsch - Siidwest- 
2H. Brincker, Worterbuch und Afrika, p. 164. Compare Josaphat 
hurzgefasste Grammatik des Oyi- Wahn, ‘‘Die Ovaherero,” Zeztschrift 

Herero, p. 140, s.v. ‘omu-henendu’ ; 
J. Irle, Die Herero, p. 106, 

3 J. Irle, Die Herero, p, 238. AS 
to the Ovambo see especially H. 
Schinz, Deutsch-Sidwest-Afrika, Pp» 

der Gesellschaft fiir Erdkunde zu 
Berlin, iv. (1869) p. 501; Dannert, 
** Soziale Verhaltnisse der Ovaherero,” 
Mittheilungen der Geographischen 
Gesellschaft su Jena, vi. (1888) p. 117. 

x TOTEMISM AMONG THE BECHUANAS 369 

§ 2. Totemism among the Bechuanas 

Another Bantu people who retain the totemic organisa- The Bechu- 
tion are the numerous and well-known Bechuanas, They vestoral 
‘form a large nation scattered over an immense area, which and agri- 
stretches from the Orange River on the south to the isk 
Zambesi on the north, while it is bounded on the west by 
the great Kalahari desert, and on the east by the Drakenberg 
Mountains, which divide the Bechuanas from the Zulus and 
Swazies.| The nation is divided into many tribes, each 
occupying its own territory, but they all speak the same 
language with certain minor differences of dialect and 
cherish substantially the same superstitions and customs. 
They speak of themselves only by their tribal names and 
have no one native name for the whole nation, country, or 
language, though they have adopted the European practice 
of calling the nation Bechuana and the language Sechuana.” 
The Bechuanas, of whom the Basutos form the eastern branch, 
are on the whole a peaceable people. The men devote them- 
selves to the chase and to tending the cattle, the women to 
house-building, the cultivation of the fields, and preparing 
the food. They raise crops of Caffre corn (Sorghum caffrum), 
maize, sugar-cane, pumpkins, beans, and tobacco. Their huts 
are circular, but in general do not conform to the common 
beehive pattern, since they consist of walls built of wattle and 
clay with conical thatched roofs. However, the huts of the 

Basutos are of the ordinary beehive shape? 

1G. Fritsche, Die Lingeborenen 
Sdd-Afrika’s (Breslau, 1872), p. 151. 
2 Rev. W. C. Willoughby, ‘ Notes 
on Totemism of the Becwana,” Journal 
of the Anthropological Institute, xxxv. 
(1905) p. 295. Mr. Willoughby calls 
the people Becwana and their language 
Secwana, I prefer to adhere to the 
traditional and well-established spelling 
of the names. For lists of the Bechuana 
tribes with their territories, see G. 
Fritsche, Dze Eingeborenen Siid- 
Afrika’s, pp. 151 sqg.3 F. Frédoux, 
**Quelques mots sur les Béchuanas,” 
Bulletin de la Société de Géographie 
(Paris), IV™e Série, xiv. (1857) pp. 

372-375- 
VOL. 1 

<> 

SP ay 

3G. Fritsche, Die Eingeborenen 
Stid-Afrika’s, pp. 176 sg., 183, 187 
sg. 3 J. Mackenzie, Zen Years North 
of the Orange River (Edinburgh, 
1871), p. 500; E. Casalis, Zhe 
Basutos (London, 1861), pp. 125 sgg., 
153 5797-, 159 sgg. As to the share of 
the sexes in agriculture Casalis writes : 
‘Among the Basutos, the Bapelis, 
and the Zulus or Matabeles of Natal, 
agriculture is looked upon in the most 
honourable light, and more generally 
pursued, both sexes devoting them- 
selves to it with equal ardour. The 
other tribes still leave to the women 
the task of clearing and sowing the 
elds” (Zhe Basutos, p. 159). 

2B 

370 TOTEMISM IN SOUTH AFRICA CHAP. 
The The Bechuana tribes are commonly named after animals, 
Bechuana plants, or other objects, which the members of each tribe 

are named hold sacred, regarding them with a high degree of super- 
aaimats, » Stitious reverence and fear. These sacred animals or other 

animals, 

plants, objects they call their seboko (stboko) or seloko, which means 
or other . ¢ > A ° 

thing, their “glory,” or their seveto, or their seano, We may call 
which them their tribal totems. The majority of the tribes appear 

members . A . 
of the tribe to be riamed after animals, and in such cases no tribesman 

eae as dares to eat the flesh or to clothe himself in the skin of the 
creature whose name he bears. They will not even look 
upon their sacred animals, if they can help it, for fear of 
some evil befalling them. If the beast is hurtful, as the lion, 
it may not be killed without great apologies being made 
to it and its pardon being asked. Purification is necessary 
after the commission of such a sacrilege. Each tribe is 
said to dance (d¢xa or Una) or sing in honour of its totem ; 
hence when you wish to ascertain to what tribe a man 
belongs, you ask him, “ What do you dance?” The tribes- 
men swear by their totem, and among all the tribes it is a 
universal custom to apply the name of the totem animal 
to the chief as a term of respect. For example, when the 
Bakwena or Crocodile tribe had assembled in council to meet 
Sir Charles Warren, the assembly shouted “O crocodile man ” 
at each point of their chief's speech. But “up to the 
present time,” says the latest enquirer, the Rev. W. C. 
Willoughby, “I have failed to find the slightest trace in 
philology, customs, or folklore, of any sacrificial rite con- 
nected with the totem-animals of these tribes.” Nor could 
Mr, Willoughby discover any evidence that the Bechuanas 
believe the totem animal to be their ancestor.’ 

1 T, Arbousset et F. Daumas, Re/a- 
tiond’un Voyaged’ Explorationau Nord- 
est de la Colonie de Bonne-Espérance 
(Paris, 1842), pp. 349 599-5 421 599. $ 
D. Livingstone, Afsstonary Travels 
and Researches in South Africa 
(London, 1857), p- 133 F. Frédoux 
(Missionaire 4 Motito), ‘* Quelques 
mots sur les Béchuanas,” Bulletin de 
la Soctété de Géographie (Paris), IV™me® 
Série, xiv. (1857) pp. 376 sg.3 E. 
Casalis, The Basutos (London, 1861), 
pp. 211 sg.; J. Chapman, Zravels ix 

the Interior of South Africa (London, 
1868), i. 46 sg.; J. Mackenzie, Zen 
Years North of the Orange River 
(Edinburgh, 1871), pp. 391 sg.3 G. 
Fritsche, Dée Eingeborenen Sud - 
Afrika’s, pp. 152-1543 E. Holub, 
Sieben Jahre in Sid-Afrika (Vienna, 
1881), i. 403, 412, 478; C. R. 
Conder, ‘‘The Present Condition of 
the Native Tribes in Bechuanaland,” 
Journal of the Anthropological Institute, 
xvi. (1887) pp. 83 sg. 3; Annales de la 
Propagation de la Foi, \ix. (Lyons, 

XII 

the 

TOTEMISM AMONG THE BECHUANAS 

371 

The following is a list of some of the Bechuana tribes List of 
with their totems :—" 

Ba-huena, “those of the crocodile.” 
Ba-tlapi, “those of the fish.” 
Ba-chueneng, “those of the monkey.” 
Ba-nare, “those of the buffalo.” 
Ba-tlou, “those of the elephant.” 
Ba-taung, “those of the lion.” 
Ba-tauana, “those of the young lions.” 
Ba-phiring, “those of the wolf.” 
Ba-nuku, “those of the porcupine.” 
Ba-morara, “those of the wild vine.” 
Bal-letsatst, “those of the sun.” 
Ba-kuabi, * those of the wild cat.” 
Ba-noga, ‘those of the serpent.” 

Ba-puti, “those of the duyker or bluebuck” (a kind of antelope, 
Cephalolophus mergens). 

Ba-mangwato, totem the duyker or bluebuck. 

Ba-hurutst, “those of the baboon.” 
Ba-khatli, “those of the ape.” 
Ba-tlokoa, “those of the ant-eater.” 

Ba-rolong, totem sometimes said to be iron (¢sifz) and sometimes 

hammer (70/0). 
Ba-tsetse, “those of the tsetse fly.” 
Ba-mogoma, “those of the garden hoe.” 

Ba-hurutshe, original totems the eland and hartebeest. 

Ba-pedi, totem the mountain-hare. 
Ba-pula, “those of the rain.” 

Ba-pulana, ‘those of the showers.” 
Ba-fukeng, “those of the dew, or mist.” 
Ba-tlaru, “those of the python.” 

Ba-firi, “those of the hyzna,” 
Ba-kubuon, “those of the hippopotamus.” 
Ba-haole, “those of the rhinoceros.” 

Ba-kuru, “those of the corn-cleaners, or corn-shellers.” 

1887) p. 98; Father Porte, ‘* Une 
Mission au Bechuanaland,” A/sstons 
Catholigues, xxvi. (Lyons, 1894) p. 
165; zd. “*Les reminiscences d’un 
Missionaire du Basutoland,” AL¢sszons 
Catholigues, xxviii. (Lyorts, 1896) p. 
2833; G. McCall Theal, Records of 
South-Eastern Africa, vii. (1901) pp. 
404 sg.3; G. W. Stow, The Native 
Races of South Africa, edited by 
George McCall Theal (London, 1905), 
pp. 408 sgg.; Rev. W. C. Willoughby, 
“ Notes on the Totemism of the 
Becwana,” Journal of the Anthropo- 
logical Institute, xxxv. (1905) pp. 295 

sqg. The Bechuana name for a tribat 
totem is seboko according to Arbousset 
and Daumas, steko according to Dr. 
Theal, sedoko according to Father 
Porte, and serefo or seaxo according to 
the Rev, W, C. Willoughby. Probably 
seboko, seloko, and sereto are only 
different ways of representing the same 
sounds, 

1 For the authorities, see the writers 
cited in the preceding note. The 
chief lists are those of Arbousset and 
Daumas, Frédoux, Casalis, Fritsche, 
Stow, and Willoughby. 

Bechuana 
tribes with 
their 
totems, 

372 TOTEMISM IN SOUTH AFRICA 

CHAP. 
The 
Crocodile 
tribe, 

Men of the Ba-kuena or Crocodile tribe say that the 
crocodile is one of themselves, their master, their father, 
and they make an incision in the ears of their cattle to 
imitate the mouth of a crocodile. They revere the animal, 
they sing of it, and they swear by it! Yet if they happen 
to go near a crocodile, they spit on the ground and 
indicate its presence by saying Boleo ki bo, “ There is sin.” 
They imagine that the mere sight of it causes inflammation 
of the eyes. And if a man of the Crocodile tribe has the 
misfortune to be bitten by a crocodile or even to have been 
splashed with water by the reptile’s tail, he is banished 
the tribe. Livingstone met with one of these exiles living 
in another tribe. The man would not tell him the cause 
of his exile, lest the explorer should regard him with 
the same disgust which his fellow-tribesmen felt for him.? 
However, the crocodile is revered by all the Bechuana 
tribes, whether it is their totem or not. They commonly 
believe that if a man wounds a crocodile, he will suffer so 
long as the reptile suffers, and that if it dies he will die also. 
They will not even look upon the reptile if they can help it, 
for fear of some evil befalling them.’ 

Men cf the Ba-nuku (Ba-nokou) or Porcupine tribe are 
distressed if any one ‘has hurt a porcupine. If the animal 
has been killed, they religiously collect its quills, spit on 
them, and rub their eyebrows with them, saying, “ They 
have killed our brother, our master, one of ourselves, him 
whom we sing.” They would fear to die if they touched 
its flesh; yet they deem it wholesome for an infant to 
insert into its joints certain portions of the stomach of 
a porcupine, mingled with the juices of plants which are 
believed to possess some occult virtue. The rest of the 
medicine is given by the mother to her child to drink. 

Members of the Bataung or Lion tribe are very loth 

The 
Porcupine 
tribe. 

1 Arbousset et Daumas, Voyage Missions Catholiques, xxviii. (1896) 
@Exploration, p. 422; E. Casalis, p. 283. 
The Basutos, p. 211. 3 Rev. W. C. Willoughby, in 

2 D. Livingstone, ALssionary Travels 
and Researches in South Africa, p. 
255; C. R. Conder, in Journal of the 
Anthropological Institute, xvi. (1887) 
p- 84; Father Porte, ‘*Les reminis- 
cences d’un Missionaire du Basutoland,” 

Journal of the Anthropological [nstetute, 
xxxv. (1905) p. 300; J. Chapman, 
Travels in the Interior of South Africa, 
i. 46 sq. 

+ Arbousset et Daumas, 
@ Exploration, pp. 349 5¢- 

Voyage 

xu TOTEMISM AMONG THE BECHUANAS 373 

to kill a lion, fearing to lose their sight were they to look The Lion 
at the dead beast. If they do kill a lion, they are careful sues 

to rub their eyes with its skin in order to prevent the 
imaginary danger. They would not eat its flesh, as do 

the members of other tribes; for how could they eat 

their grandfather (szogo/u)? And whereas in other tribes 
powerful chiefs are wont to flaunt lion-skins on their shoulders 

as a royal mantle, no man of the Lion tribe would dare to 

wear a lion’s skin.) 

Members of the Ba-nxare or Buffalo tribe not only will The 
not themselves kill the buffalo or eat its flesh or make use nore 
of any part of the animal; they will not even lend their 
spears to other people to cut its flesh or their needles to 
sew its hide.’ 

People who have the hare for their totem bore the The Hare | 
ears of their children, both boys and girls, at the age ee 
of twelve years. But if a mother has lost several children 
in infancy, she will be afraid to wait so long and will pierce 
the new baby’s ears before she takes it outside of the house.* 

When the sun rises in a clouded sky, members of the The Sun 
Ba-letsatsi or Sun tribe say that he is afflicting their “™* 
heart. All the food of the previous day is then given 
to matrons or old women, who alone may touch it or 
give of it to the young children whom they nurse, The 
people go down in a body to the river to wash their 
bodies. Every one throws into the water a stone taken 
from his hearth, which he replaces by one picked up in 
the bed of the stream. On returning to the village after 
this ablution the chief kindles a fire in his hut, and his 
subjects come and get fire for themseives from his. Then 
follows a general dance, accompanied by a monotonous 
chant, on the public place of the village. In this dance 
he who has lost his father lifts his left hand towards the 
sky ; he who has lost his mother lifts his right hand; and 
orphans who have lost both their parents, raise neither 
their right nor their left hand, but cross both on their 

1 Arbousset et Daumas, Voyage es South Africa, i. 47. 
PExploration, pp. 423 5g. 3 W. C. Willoughby, in Journal of 
the Anthropological Institute, xxxv. 
2 J. Chapman, 7ravels in the Interior (1905) pp. 299 sg. 

The Iron 
tribe and 
the 
Garden- 
hoe tribe, 

The 
duyker or 
bluebuck 
tribe. 

374 TOTEMISM IN SOUTH AFRICA CHAP. 

breast! The meaning of this ceremony is not quite clear, 
but perhaps it is intended to disperse the clouds which 
hide the sun, the fire in the hut of the Sun chief being 
somehow supposed to renew the fire of his celestial 
brother. 

Members of a tribe which has iron for its totem will 
not work the metal.2 Members of the Ba-mogoma or 
Garden-hoe tribe are allowed to employ the hoe in 
cultivating their gardens, but they would deem it profana- 
tion to use it for any other purpose, and it would be a 
very serious matter were they to strike a dog with it? 

An old man of the Ba-mangwato tribe, who have the 
duyker or bluebuck (a kind of antelope) for their totem, 
told Mr. Willoughby that many years ago, in a time of 
famine, the tribesmen ate some duykers which they found 
in their game pits, but that they were careful to protect 
themselves from harm by rubbing the meat with certain 
medicines. In those days, if a man of the duyker totem 
happened to kill a duyker in his game trap, he would slip 
a noose over its neck at the end of a long stick and drag 
the beast home to be eaten by people of another totem ; 
but he would not himself eat or even touch it. Another 
man of the duyker totem told Mr. Willoughby that when 
his son was a baby they took him to the home of his 
maternal grandfather, who venerated another totem. The 
grandmother one cold day thoughtlessly wrapped the 
child in a duyker skin, and the consequence was that 
the child’s head was covered with sores, which they could 
not heal till a medicine-man applied the fur of a duyker 
to them.‘ Thus the totem supplies a homceopathic remedy : 
it can heal th¢ injury which it inflicts.° Though the duyker 
or bluebuck (pzzz) is the sacred animal of the Ba-mangwato, 
yet to look upon it was a calamity to the hunter or to 
women going to the gardens. And members of the tribe 
may not tread on the skin of the animal. A Ba-mangwato 

“1 Arbousset et Daumas, Voyage 3 W. C. Willoughby, in Journal of 

@ Exploration, pp. 350 sg. the Anthropological Institute, xxxv. 
2 F. Frédoux, “ Quelques mots sur (1905) p. 299. 

les Béchuanas,” Bellet7n de la Soctété 4 W. C. Willoughby, of. ct. p. 

de Géographie (Paris), IV™® Série, xiv. 298. 

(1857) p. 377- 5 Compare above, vol. i. p. 22. 

XH TOTEMISM AMONG THE BECHUANAS 375 

chief has been seen performing most undignified antics, 
springing from side to side in order td avoid treading on 
the skin of a duyker in a missionary’s house.’ 

Some of the Bechuana tribes have a subsidiary totem subsidiary 
in addition to their principal totem. Thus the Ba-hurutshe, phates he 
who appear to be a stock embracing several tribes, had Bechuanas. 
originally two totems, the eland and the hartebeest. They 
would not touch the hartebeest, but the only part of the eland 
which they held sacred was the &shilco, which they described 
as the fat around the heart, and one section of the tribe, 
while retaining the old totems, thought it right to eat even 
this. They distinguished between the two totems by 
saying, Pino ke kyama sereto ke phofhu, that is, “The dance 
is to the hartebeest; the veneration is for the eland.” A small The wila 
section of the tribe, called the Bomakgane section, venerate > totem. 
the wild boar as a subsidiary totem, without neglecting the 
old tribal totems, the eland and the hartebeest. They say 
that once, when their chief was childless, a medicine-man 
whose totem was the wild boar gave the chief some medicine, 
assuring him that a son would be born to him and ordering 
that the son and all his descendants should venerate the 
wild boar. Hence the section of the tribe adopted the wild 
boar as a subsidiary totem.? Another section of the same The 
Ba-hurutshe tribe has abandoned its old totems the eland ee 
and the hartebeest and has adopted the baboon instead. 

They say that a chief of the tribe once captured a young 
baboon and tamed it, but his son, in playing with the 
animal, allowed it to escape. The father was angry and 
beat his son, who retaliated by seceding with a section 

of the tribe ; and the seceders adopted the baboon as their 
totem2 According to Mr. Willoughby, the Ba-kuena or 
Crocodile tribe is also an offshoot of the Ba-hurutshe, and have 

in their turn given rise to the Ba-mangwato tribe, whose totem The 
is the duyker or bluebuck. To explain why they venerate the eve = 
duyker, the Ba-mangwato say that their original ancestor, totem. 
hard pressed by his foes, took refuge in a thicket, and that 

1 J. Mackenzie, Zen Years North of the Anthropological Institute, xxxv. 
the Orange River (Edinburgh, 1871), GPs Pp. 299, 301. 
pp. 391 sg. . C. Willoughby, of. cit. pp. 
2 W. C. Willoughby, in Journal of 299, a 5g. 

The 
subsidiary 
totems 
seem to 
have arisen 
through 
subdivision 
of a tribe. 

The 
Bechuanas 
all hate the 
chameleon 
and the 
lizard, be- 
cause they 
associate 
them with 
the origin 
of death. 

376 TOTEMISM IN SOUTH AFRICA CHAP. 

a duyker saved him by springing from the thicket and so 
diverting the attention of his enemies.’ The Ba-dlaru or 
Python tribe is sometimes called the Ba-smothlo-a-re, “the 
men of the Wild Olive,” because their great ancestor 
Mo-tlaru (“he of the python”) and his followers erected 
their huts under spreading olive trees.? These facts point 
to the; conclusion that subsidiary totems sometimes arise 
through the subdivision of a tribe; a new community so 
formed may either adopt an entirely new totem or, retain- 
ing its old one, may add a subsidiary totem to distinguish 
it from other branches of the same totemic stock. 

While each Bechuana tribe as a rule reveres one or more 
species of animal, all of them are at one in regarding two 
harmless reptiles, the chameleon and the lizard, with a violent 
antipathy, because in their opinion these creatures brought 
death into the world and all our woe. The way in which 
they did so was this. In the beginning God made up his 
mind that when men died they should come to life again, 
and he sent the chameleon to convey the glad tidings to 
the first Bechuanas. But while the reptile was crawling to 
deliver its message, God changed his mind and sent the 
lizard post haste after the chameleon to say that now he 
had thought better of it men were to die outright and be 
done with it. The bearer of this gloomy intelligence out- 

1 W. C. Willoughby, in Journal of 
the Anthropological Institute, xxxv. 
(1905) pp. 295, 299, 300. As to the 
relation of the Ba-hurutshe, the Ba- 
kuena, and the Ba-mangwato, see also 
J. Mackenzie, Zen Years North of the 
Orange River, pp. 356 sg.: ‘The 
precedence as to rank among the 
tribes in North Bechuana-land is taken 
by the Bahurutse. The first-fruits of 
a new harvest must be first partaken 
of by Moilwe, the present chief of 
that tribe. For another chief to 
loma, without waiting to hear that 
his superior had done so, would be 
a public insult and a cause for war. 
But in recent times such transgressions 
have been numerous, for the Bahurutse 
are not now a powerful tribe. The 
Bangwaketse, the Bakwena, and the 
Bamangwato were originally one people. 

Tradition retains a glimmering of the 
circumstances of their separation, The 
Bakwena included the Bamangwato 
when they separated from the Bang- 
waketse ; but afterwards a subdivision 
took place, the Bamangwato being 
the younger or minor party, We 
have already seen that afterwards the 
Bamangwato again divided, the minor 
party being now the Batowana, at 
present residing at Lake Ngami.” 
This successive subdivision of the 
tribes, with the consequent rise of 
new totems, is instructive. On the 
history of the Bahurutshe, Bakuena, 
and Bamangwato tribes, see G. W. 
Stow, Zhe Native Races of South 

Africa, pp. §18 59g. 

2G. W. Stow, Zhe Native Tribes 
of South Africa, p. §28. 

xu TOTEMISM AMONG THE BECHUANAS 377 

stripped the laggard chameleon ; so that when the gospel 
messenger at last came panting in with! tidings of a joyful 
resurrection, nobody would believe him, and both reptiles 
were knocked on the head out of hand, the lizard for coming 
in first with bad news and the chameleon for coming in 
second with good. That is why all the Bechuanas hate 
both these reptiles to this very day. 

The Bawenda are a Bantu people who inhabit the The 

rugged but fertile mountain country between the Levuvu Payend 
and Limpopo rivers in the northern part of the Transvaal. animal 
They keep cattle and practise agriculture, raising crops of aan 
sweet potatoes and maize; in the old days they smelted 
iron and fashioned the metal into all the tools and weapons 
they needed. To secure them against attack their villages 
are hidden away in thick underwood or perched in places 
difficult of access on the steep sides of the mountains. 
Narrow slippery footpaths lead with many turns and windings 
up hill and down dale, through high grass and dense brush- 
wood, to a collection of round huts with thatched roofs 
encircled by rich vegetation and shaded by tall trees, among 
the boughs of which a noisy troop of monkeys may be 
jabbering and disporting themselves? Each district has its 
special god, and the gods of some districts are animals, 
For example, one district reveres a large snake, and another 
the mountain-monkey. Where the mountain-monkeys are 
the gods, they are not molested and so become very tame, 
often indeed coming down from their mountains and paying 
visits to people in the village® These district deities in 
animal shape are probably totems. 

The Makalakas inhabit a high, healthy and fruitful The 
region, which forms the watershed between the valleys of arp so 
the Zambesi and Limpopo rivers. They are reported to be totems. 
the most skilful cultivators of the soil in the whole of 
Bechuana-land.* From the following account it would seem 
that they share the totemic system of the Bechuanas: “ The 
Makalakas have the same prejudices with regard to the 

1J. Chapman, Zyravels in the the Spelonken (London, 1908), pp. 9 
Interior of South Africa, i 47. 59.5 IL Sg., 14 5g. 21-23, 28 59., 73- 
Compare E. Casalis, Zhe Basutos, p. 3 R. Wessmann, of. cit. p. 81. 

242. 4 J. Mackenzie, Zen Years North of 

2 R. Wessmann, 7he Bawenda of the Orange River, pp. 149, 298. 

Thus the 
Bechuana 
tribes are 
totemic, 
but it does 
not appear 
that they 
are exo- 
gamous. 

Bechuana 
regard for 
consan- 
guinity. 

Cousin 
martriages. 

378 TOTEMISM IN SOUTA AFRICA CHAP. 

flesh of certain animals that other tribes have. One man 
starved himself for a whole day because it was his motupo, as 
they call it, not to eat the water-buck ; another, because he 
worshipped sheep, and could not eat the flesh. The Maka- 
lakas generally dcexa (a superstitious reverence) the ewhobo 
(meerkat). The Mashapatani dzena the skoko or baboon ; 
others worship the crocodile, and other animals and reptiles, 
which they will not defile themselves by touching.” ? 

The foregoing evidence suffices to prove that the 
Bechuana tribes are totemic ; for the seboka of each tribe is 
clearly its totem. Whether the tribes are also exogamous 
is not stated by the authorities I have consulted. From 
their silence it is natural to infer that the tribes do not 
observe the rule of exogamy, in other words, that a man is 
free to marry a woman of his own tribe. Such an inference, 
however, is at the best precarious, and it becomes doubly 
precarious when we consider how many other branches of 
the Bantu stock combine totemism with exogamy. Yet if 
the Bechuana tribes are, as they appear to be, communities 
each inhabiting its own territory to the exclusion of other 
tribes, it is probable enough that the rule of exogamy does 
not apply to them ; since the exogamous system generally 
rests on a basis of septs or clans interfused with each other 
in the same territory, rather than on tribes which occupy 
each a country of its own. However, in the absence of 
positive evidence the question of the exogamy of the 
Bechuana tribes must remain in suspense. 

With regard to the marriage of near kin, we are told 
that “the Bechuanas and the Caffres acknowledge and 
respect the same degrees of consanguinity as we do. They 
do not reckon relationship beyond the degree of second 
cousin. Marriages between brothers and sisters, uncles and 
nieces, nephews and aunts, are ‘disapproved of. Those 
between cousins frequently take place, but there are some 
tribes that condemn them as incestuous.”? The writer 
unfortunately does not discriminate between the different 
cousins who may or may not marry each other. If we may 

1j. Chapman, Zyavels in the 1868), ii. 284. 
Interior of South Africa (London, 2 E. Casalis, 7he Basutos, p. 191. 

xu TOTEMISM AMONG THE BECHUANAS 379 

judge by analogy, it is probable that; the children of a 
brother and a sister are allowed, while the children of two 
brothers or two sisters are forbidden, to marry each other. 

On the question whether, if the parents are of different Chitdren 
tribes, the children belong to the tribe of the father or to ene 
that of the mother, our authorities are again silent; but the tribe 
from their silence we may in this case infer with more con- orgs 

- fidence that the children belong to the tribe of the father 

and not to that of the mother. For in the descent of 

property the rule of primogeniture is strictly observed by 

the Bechuanas ; a man’s heir is his eldest son, who inherits 

everything and gives to his brothers and sisters only what 

he chooses to leave to them. Women inherit nothing. 

Even in his father’s lifetime the eldest son enjoys many 

advantages. He bears the title of “son-lord,” while his 

younger brothers are called “son-servants,” and his father 

dares to do nothing of any importance without consulting him 

and asking his consent.’ All this is patriarchal ; yet a possible Trace of | 

trace of mother-kin survives in the rights which in some Tek” 

Bechuana tribes the maternal uncle has over his nephews rights and 

and nieces, Thus among the Basutos the maternal uncle is a tg 

understood to replace the mother, whose sex keeps her in regard to 
*. his sister's 

a state of dependence. This is a counterbalance to the chitdren. 

authority of the father and of the eldest son, especially in 

‘polygamous families, where rivalry is generally keen. It is 

the special duty of the maternal uncle to protect his sister’s 

child and to purify it by means of sacrifices. When the rite 

of circumcision is performed, he presents his nephew with 

a javelin and a heifer; and he also defrays in part the 

expenses of the young man’s marriage. In return he is 

entitled to a share of the spoil taken by his nephews in war, 

of the game they kill, and of the cattle that come into the 

family at the marriage settlement of his nieces. It often 

happens that the maternal uncle fills the office of prime 

minister and regent at the chief's court.” 

Wives are bought from their parents with a price which Wives ob- 
varies according to the tribe from five to twenty-five or seiebs 
thirty head of cattle* The death of her husband does not 

1 E, Casalis, Zhe Basutos, pp. 179, 2 E. Casalis, of. cet. pp. 179, 180 sg. 
187, 190. 3 E. Casalis, of. c#t. pp. 181 sg. 

The 
levirate. 

Little evi- 
dence of 
totemism 
in the 
eastern 
branch 

of the 
Bantu 
family in 
South 
Africa, the 
Ama-Xosa 
and the 
Ama-Zulu. 

380 TOTEMISM IN SOUTH AFRICA CHAP. 

release the widow from the rights which his family have 
acquired over her by purchase. She falls by law to one of 
his brothers or to the next of kin. The children of this 
second union bear the name of her first husband and are 
understood to belong to him, and to inherit his possessions ; 
they have very small claim to the succession of their real 
father., But the obligation on the widow to remain in the 
family even although she has already borne children to the 
deceased seems to shew that the purchase of which she was 
the object is the chief obstacle to her liberation.' Here as 
elsewhere the brother of the deceased inherits the widow, 
not in virtue of a former system of polyandry, but because 
she has been bought and paid for by her husband’s family 
and passes to his heir with the rest of the inheritance. 

§ 3. Totemism among the Ama-Xosa and Ama-Zulu 

While the evidence for totemism, if not for exogamy, is 
ample among the western and the central branches of the 
Bantu family in South Africa, namely, the Herero and the 
Bechuanas, it is very scanty for the eastern branch of 
the family, the Ama-Xosa and Ama-Zulu, who inhabit the 
south-eastern coasts of Africa from Cape Colony to Delagoa 
Bay.” Indeed so meagré is the evidence that we may even 
doubt whether these Eastern Bantus have totemism at all. 
However, the following passages at least suggest that the 
Zulus, like many other branches of the Bantu stock, are or 
have at one time been divided into totemic clans. The 
Englishman Farewell, who resided for some time among 
the Zulus in the early part of the nineteenth century, is 
the authoyity for the statement that among them “it is 
prohibited in many families to eat certain animals’ flesh, © 
such as in some beef, in others elephant’s, in others hippo- 

1 E. Casalis, The Basutos, p. 190. 

2 The Ama-Xosa occupy the southern 
part of this territory as far north as the 
Bashee River. Beyond that river 
northward extend the tribes who may 
be grouped together under the general 
name of Ama-Zulu. . Properly speaking 
the Zulus were a comparatively unim- 
portant tribe till the despot Chaka, in 

the early part of the nineteenth century, 
raised them to a position of power and 
made them the terror of all the tribes 
from the Am-Xosa to Delagoa Bay. 
See J. Shooter, Zhe Kajirs of Natal 
and the Zulu Country (London, 1857), 
pp. iti. sg.; G. Fritsche, Dze Ainge- 
borenen Siid-Afrika’s, pp. 6 sgg., 119 
59q. 

XII THE AMA-XOSA AND AMA-ZULU 381 

potamus’. It is said, that provided any family transgress The 
this rule, and eat the forbidden flesh, their teeth will drop 771 
out, which is termed motupo. The forbidden flesh to all the taboo. 
royal family is the hearts of animals. All children must 
follow the *otupo of their father, which causes much 
difference in families.” Here it should be observed that 

the Zulu word motupo, which expresses the family pro- 
hibition, is identical with the Makalaka word which 
designates the totemic taboo.? Further, the Scotchman 
David Leslie, who lived among the Zulus later on in the 
nineteenth century, tells us that “the whole Zulu nation, as 

at present constituted, is broken up into little tribes, the 
remnants of those conquered by Chaka. Each tribe has its 
Esebongo or name of thanks ; for instance, one tribe is called 
Emtetwa, or scolders; another Niaow, or foot; another 
Zungu, or weariness ; and when a chief makes a present of 
anything to one of his people, they will say, ‘ Yes, father ; 

yes, Zungu’; or ‘Yes, Emtetwa, as the case may be. 

Each of these tribes has its peculiar habits and customs ; for One Zulu 
instance, one, Mat-e-enja (dog’s spittle) will not eat goat- (ride will 
flesh, because they always leave a goat on the grave of their goat's flesh. 
dead. When any one dies they bury him, and over his 

grave they spread out his mat, blankets, etc, and on the 

latter they place a goat, then go away and leave it. They 

say the goat never deserts the spot, but grazes about, and 

on the fourth day dies. If they eat any part of a goat 
unawares, they are seized with epilepsy and die. Even the 

young children in the kraal, who are too young to know 
anything of this, when a piece of goat-flesh is given to them, 

will not eat it, but carry it in their hands for a little, and 

then throw it away; and, be it remembered, that meat is 

their greatest dainty.”* Again, with regard particularly to Supersti- 
the Ama-Xosa we read that “the superstitious prejudices pees 
against eating certain foods are most widely spread, yet against 
these also will be observed by one tribe, while another will jogs" 

disregard them, without it being possible to discover any among the 
Ama-Xosa, 

2 Captain W. F. W. Owen, Narra- 2 See above, p. 378- 
tive of Voyages to explore the Shores 3 David Leslie, dmong the Zulus 
of Africa, Arabia, and Madagascar and Amatongas, Second Edition (Edin- 
(London, 1833), ii. p. 396. burgh, 1875), p. 146. 

Abhorrence 
of fish. 

Rule of 
exogamy 
among the 
Zulus and 
other 
Eastern 
Bantus : no 
man may 
marry a 
woman 
who bears 
the same 
family 
name as 
himself. 

382 TOTEMISM IN SOUTH AFRICA CHAP. 

reason for the different practice. As a general rule it may 
be assumed that all the Bantu peoples of South Africa 
abhor the use of fish as food; they call fish ‘water- 
serpents’ and are careful not even to touch them. Many 
also reject pork as an article of diet, though this abstinence 
is neither so universal nor so fanatic as the rejection of fish ; 
further, the particular tribes display peculiar prejudices in 
regard to many other animals, whether in refusing to eat or 
even to kill them.”? 

Further, the Zulus and other Eastern Bantus observe a 
rule of exogamy, for no man may marry a woman who 
bears the same family name (zsébongo) as himself, even 
though no blood relationship can be traced between them.’ 
For example, Amanywabe is a family name among the 
Zulus, the Pondos, the Tembus and many other tribes. 
The people who bear this family name in the different 
tribes cannot trace any relationship with each other, yet no 
marriage between them is permitted. Moreover, they have 
ceremonies peculiar to themselves. Thus, for example, the 
customs observed at the birth of a child are exactly the 
same in every part of the country among people of the 
same family title, thoygh they may never have heard of 
each other, while neighbours of the same clan, but of 
different family titles, practise customs altogether dissimilar. 
In addition to the exogamy of the family name it is a rule 
with the Eastern Bantus that no man may marry a woman 
related to him by blood on the father’s side, however remote 
the relationship may be. Some tribes, as the Pondos, 
Tembus, and Xosas, extend the same prohibition to all 
women related by blood on the mother’s side also. Children 
take the family,title of their father, and are thus free to marry 
persons of the same family title as their mother, provided 
that no blood relationship can be traced between them. 

1 G. Fritsche, Die Zingeborenen Siid- 
Afrika’s, p. 106. 

2 F, Speckmann, Dee Hermanns. 
burger Mission in Afrika (Hermanns- 
burg, 1876), pp. 134; G. McCall 
Theal, Records of South - Eastern 
Africa, vii. (1901) pp. 430 sg. The 
family or praise name, zsibongo or 
tstbonga, is to be distinguished from 

the z-gama or individual name _be- 
stowed on a person soon after birth. 
The latter (the ¢-gumzaz) is the more 
sacred of the two. See J. Shooter, 
The Hafirs of Natal and the Zulu 
Country, pp. 219-222. 

3G. McCall Theal, Records of 
South-Eastern Africa, vii. 430 59. 
Compare J. Shooter, 7he Aafirs of 

xu THE AMA-XOSA AND AMA-ZULU 383 

Similarly, among the Matabele, who are an offshoot of the 
Zulus, persons who have the same family name may not 
marry each other; but this relationship is reckoned only in 
the male line.’ 

“Every man of a coast tribe regarded himself as the bDitterence 
protector of those females whom we call his cousins, second f a 
cousins, third cousins, and so forth, on the father’s side ; to the 
while some had a similar feeling towards the same relatives Oreos. 
on the mother’s side as well, and classified them all as between the 
sisters. Immorality with one of them would have been reese 
considered incestuous, something horrible, something un- ue ae 
utterably disgraceful. Of old it was punished by the death the interior. 
of the male, and even now a heavy fine is inflicted upon 
him, while the guilt of the female must be atoned by a 
sacrifice performed with due ceremony by the tribal priest, 
or it is believed a curse will rest upon her and her issue. . . . 

In contrast to this prohibition the native of the interior 
almost as a rule married the daughter of his father’s brother, 
in order, as he said, to keep property from being lost to 
his family. This custom more than anything else created 
a disgust and contempt for them by the people of the coast, 
who term such intermarriages the union of dogs, and 
attribute to them the insanity and idiocy which in recent 
times has become prevalent among the inland tribes.” ? 
Speaking of unions which the Bantu regard as incestuous, 

another writer observers that they “are not punishable by 

Natal and the Zulu Country, pp. 45 dren of a father’s sister as well as the 

sq. 3 F. Speckmann, Die Hermanns- 
burger Mission in Afrika, pp. 134 59. 

1L. Decle, Three Years in Savage 
Africa (London, 1898), p. 158. As 
to the descent of the Matabele from 
the Zulus, see L. Decle, of. cét. pp. 
150 sg¢. 

2G. McCall Theal, Records of 
South-Eastern Africa, vii. 431, 432. 
In a note Dr. Theal tells us that 
among the Hlubis and others, com- 
monly called Fingos, a man may marry 
the daughter of jhis mother’s brother 
and other relatives on that side, but 
not on his father’s side. The expres- 
sion, a cousin ‘‘on the father’s side,” is 
ambiguous, because it includes the chil- 

children of a father’s brother, and 
these two sets of cousins in the estima- 
tion of many peoples stand on quite a 
different footing from each other. By 
cousins on the father’s side Dr. McCall 
Theal seems to mean the children of a 
father’s brother. The expression, a 
cousin ‘on the mother’s side,” which 
Dr. McCall Theal employs, is equally 
ambiguous, because it includes the 
children of a mother’s brother as well 
as of a mother’s sister, and these two 
sets of cousins in the estimation of 
many peoples stand on quite a different 
footing. By cousins on the mother’s 
side Dr. McCali Theal perhaps means 
especially the children of a mother’s 
sister. 

Dread of 
consan- 
guineous 

marriages. 

Marriage 
with two 
sisters 
simul- 
taneously. 

The 
levirate. 

TOTEMISM IN SOUTH AFRICA CHAP. 

384 

Kafir law ; but they have a far more powerful preventative 
in their superstitious fears, which teach them to dread that 
some supernatural evil will befall the parties committing 
such acts; they lose caste, as it were, and are considered 
in the light of sorcerers: hence such crimes are seldom 
committed. Consanguineous marriages are prohibited by 
custom rather than by law; and if the parties are not too 
nearly related, and resolutely persist in their determination 
to marry, and if the man is prepared to pay pretty dearly 
for his wife, they generally succeed in gaining their point. 
Such cases are, however, very unfrequent. Relationship by 
affinity merely, and not by JSlood, presents no obstacle to 
marriage, and a man may even marry two sisters at the . 
same time.” Indeed such marriages with two sisters at 
the same time are common among the Zulus? as they are 
among many other peoples. “Incestuous marriages,” says 
another writer, “ are dissolved, and a heavy penalty inflicted 
on the man. Any relationship which may be traced to 
whatever distance is considered as coming within the bounds 
of consanguinity ; and intercourse is punished, whether it be 
by marriage, or by carnal connection without marriage. To 
marry two sisters is not considered incestuous; but to 
marry the descendants of a man’s ancestors is considered 
incest.” ® 

The Zulus, Swazies, and Pondos practise the custom of 
the levirate ; that is, the widow is married by the brother 
of her deceased husband, and the children she has by him 
are reckoned not to their real father but to his dead brother. 
Among the Fingoes it is the younger brother who weds his 
elder brother’s widow. The custom of the levirate is not™ 
observed by he Tembus and Gaikas.‘ 

1 Mr. Warner’s notes, in Col. Mac- 
lean’s Compendium of Kafir Laws and 
Customs (Cape Town, 1866), pp. 60 sg. 

2 F. Speckmann, Die Hermanns- 
burger Mission in Afrika (Hermanns- 
burg, 1876), p. 135. Compare J. 
Shooter, Zhe Aafirs of Natal and the 
Zulu Country, p. 46. 

3 Mr. Brownlee’s notes, in Col. Mac- 
lean’s Compendium of Kafir Laws and 
Customs, p. 112; compare 762d. p, 159. 

4 J. Shooter, Zhe Kafirs of Natal 
and the Zulu Country, pp. 46, 86; Col. 
Maclean, A Compendium of Kafir Laws 
and Customs (Cape Town, 1866), p. 
159; Rev. J. Macdonald, ‘* Manners, 
Customs, Superstitions, and Religions 
of South African Tribes,” Journal of 
the Anthropological Institute, xix. 
(1890), p. 272; Dudley Kidd, 7%e 
Essential Kafir (London, 1904), pp- 
226 sg. 

XII THE AMA-XOSA AND AMA-ZULU 385 

Among the Eastern Bantu the same ceremonial avoid- Rules of 
: 7 : avoidance 
ance of relations by marriage, and especially of a mother- Priveen a 
in-law, is practised which we have already met with among man and 
: : his wife's 
many other exogamous and totemic peoples. Custom requires jother 
that a man should “be ashamed of” his wife’s mother, that and be- 
. t h di ] h h ° H. tween a 
is to say, he must studiously shun her society. € May woman 

not enter the same hut with her, and if by chance they meet and her 
. oa husband’s 

on a path, one or other turns aside, she perhaps hiding father. 

behind a bush, while he screens his face with a shield. If 

they cannot thus avoid each other, and the mother-in-law 

has nothing else to cover herself with, she will tie a wisp of 

grass round her head as a token of ceremonial avoidance. 

All correspondence between the two has to be carried on 

either through a third party or by shouting to each other 

at a distance with some barrier, such as the kraal fence, 

interposed between them. They may not even pronounce 

each other’s proper name (-gama).' Similarly, a woman is 

cut off from all social intercourse with her husband’s father 

and all his male relation’ in the ascending line. She may 

not enjoy their company nor be in the same hut with them ; 

she is supposed not even to look at them. Further, she 

is debarred from pronouncing their names even mentally. 

Nay, more than that, she may not pronounce the emphatic 

syllable of their names even when it occurs in other words ; 

in such cases she is bound either to substitute a different 

syllable or to employ an entirely different word. Hence 

this custom has given rise to an almost distinct language 

among the women. The tabooed syllable is the one which 

immediately follows the prefix of the proper name. 

» 

1 L, Alberti, De Kaffers aan de Zuid- 
kust van Afrika (Amsterdam, 1810), p. 

Compendium of Karr Laws ana 
Customs, p. 92. Compare Rev. J. 

136; J. Shooter, Zhe Aafirs of Natal 
and the Zulu Country, p. 46; David 
Leslie, Among the Zulus and Ama- 
tongas, Second Edition (Edinburgh, 
1875), pp. 14%, 172; Mr. Wamer’s 
notes, in Maclean’s Compendium of 
Kafir Laws and Customs, p. 93; Rev. 
J. Macdonald, in Journal of the Anthro- 
pological Institute, xix. (1890) p. 273; 
id., Light in Africa (London, 1890), 
Pp. 163 sg. 

2 Mr. Warner’s notes, im Maclean’s 

VOL. II 

Macdonald, “cc. ; David Leslie, of. 
cit. pp. 141 sg., 172 sg.3 L, Alberti, 
De Kaffers aan de Zuidkust van Afrika, 
p. 136. The ceremonial avoidance of 
the names of relations is calied A/ontpa. 
It applies to the personal name 
(#-gama), but not to the family or 
praise name (zszbongo or <isébonga). 
See J. Shooter, Zhe Hafirs of Natal 
and the Zulu Country, pp. 221 sg. ; 
and for more details Zhe Golden 
Bough,? i. 413 sg. 
2c 

386 TOTEMISM IN SOUTH AFRICA CHAP. 

The classi- The Ama-Zulus possess the classificatory system of 
Heo relationship. Thus in the generation above his own a 
relationship man applies the same term w#-ma-ma, “my mother,” to his 
een mother, to his mother’s sisters, and to the wives of his 
father’s brothers. He applies the same term u-da-da, “my 
father,” to his father, to the husbands of his mother’s sisters, 
and, curiously enough, to his father’s sisters. A man calls 
his first cousin, the son of his father’s brother, wx/o natu, 
“my (own) brother.” He calls his brother’s wife his wife, 
and she calls her husband’s brothers her husbands. But 
the form of the system seems to. present many anomalies 

or deviations from the primitive pattern.’ 
pe Another Bantu people of South Africa who possess the 
system of Classificatory system of relationship are the Barongo of 
Aunty Delagoa Bay. Their customs and beliefs have been re- 
Barongo of corded with praiseworthy diligence by the Swiss missionary 
pea Mr. H. A. Junod.2 From his account it does not appear 
that the Barongo now practise either totemism or exogamy, 
but their classificatory system of relationship raises a pre- 
sumption that at one time or other they must have been 
divided into exogamous classes. In the generation above 
his own a man applies the same term ¢atana, “ father,” to his 
father, to his father’s brothers, to the husbands of his 
mother’s sisters, and to the brothers of the husbands of his 
mother’s sisters. Further—and this is one of the peculiarities 
of the Barongo system—a man applies the term éatana, 
“father,” to certain of his first cousins, namely, to the sons 
of his father’s sisters. Hence it often happens that a 
Barongo “father” is younger than his own son. Yet the 
Barongo are not so mad as to think that the father begat 
his son before he (the father) was born; they merely use 
the term “father” in a sense which does not at all imply the 
physical act of procreation ; and unless we in like manner 
can rid our minds of that implication, it is in vain for us 
to wrestle with the complexities of the classificatory 
system. Again, in the generation above his own a man 

} See L. H. Morgan, Systems of Washington, 1871). 
Consanguinity and Affinity of the 
Human Family, pp. 463 sgq., with 2 Henri A. Junod, Les Ba-Ronga, 
the Tables, pp. 523 599. (Smithsonian Etude ethnographique sur les indigines 
Contributions to Knowledge, vol. xvii., de la Bate de Delagoa (Neuchatel, 1898). 

x THE AMA-XOSA AND AMA-ZULU 387 

applies the same term samana, “ mother,” to his mother, to 

all his father’s other wives (for the Barcngo, like other 

Bantu peoples, are polygamous), and to his mother’s sisters. 

But while he calls his father’s brother his father, and his Privileges 
mother’s sister his mother, he by no means regards his poe 
mother’s brother as his father nor his mother’s brother’s wife of his 

as his mother.’ Far from it, the relation in which he stands "rr"! 
to his mother’s brother (#aloumé) is a very free and easy one, and his 

reminding us of the high and mighty manner in which in Fiji aig 
a sister's son (vas#) comports himself towards his unfortunate wife. 
maternal uncle. In fact, he may do what he likes to his 
mother’s brother, who on his side stands in terror of his 
nephew, being bound to humour him in all his whims and 
caprices. Nor is this all. The relation in which the 
nephew (szoupsyana) stands to his uncle’s wife is, if possible, 
still more free and easy. He calls her his wife (zsad¢z), and she 
calls him her husband (ouna), and the two are at liberty to 
act accordingly. When the nephew honours his maternal 
uncle with a visit, he regularly repairs to the hut of that one 

of his uncle’s wives who most takes his fancy, and there 
deposits a mat in the hut. The reason, according to Mr. 
Junod, why the nephew is free to treat his maternal uncle’s 
wives so cavalierly is simply that when the uncle dies, he 
(the nephew) steps into the dead man’s shoes by marrying 
the widows in a batch; so that he only anticipates his 
rights by the familiarities which he takes with them in his 
uncle’s lifetime. 

In his own generation a man applies the term damakwabo Cousins 
(plural of makwado), “brothers and sisters,” to his brothers es 
and sisters and also to all his cousins german even to the fifth brothers 
and sixth generation. In the generation below his own a man coe 
applies the same term xouana, “son” or “ daughter,” to his and nieces 
sons and daughters and to his nephews and nieces, the sons ae 
and daughters of his brothers. And similarly in the genera- ii 
tion below her own a woman applies the same term zouana, apes 
“son” or “ daughter,” to her sons and daughters and to her 
nephews and nieces, the sons and daughters of her sisters. 
Further, as usually happens under the classificatory system 
of relationship, grand-uncles and grand-aunts are called 
grandfathers and grandmothers (kokouana), and grand- 

Marriage 
of cousins 
forbidden. 

Rules of 
avoidance 
between 

388 TOTEMISM IN SOUTH AFRICA CHAP. 

nephews and grand-nieces are called grandsons and grand- 
daughters (stoukoulou). 

The marriage of cousins, even in the fourth, sixth, 
eighth and tenth degrees, is prohibited among the Barongo ; 
indeed two persons are forbidden to marry each other if it 
can be shewn that they have a single common ancestor, 
however remote. The prohibition is particularly stringent 
when the relationship is traced through males; it is some- 
times relaxed after four generations when the relationship is 
traced through women. In such cases the husband has to 
pay a sum in addition to the customary bride-price for the 
purpose, as they say, of “killing the scruples” (dlaya 
chilongo), after which the tie of consanguinity is supposed to 
be severed. Yet the rule which thus bars the marriage of 
cousins among common people is totally disregarded in the 
marriage of chiefs.” 

Amongst the Barongo we find the custom of ceremonial 
avoidance observed between persons who are related by 

relations by marriage. Such persons are called dakonouana to each 

marriage 
among the 
Barongo. 

According 
to Dr. 
Theal the 
reverence 
of the 
Rantus for 

other, and they cannot even pronounce the word without a 
feeling of discomfort, almost of fear. Yet curiously enough 
among them the woman whom a man is bound to shun 
most strictly is not his wife’s mother but his sister-in-law, 
the wife of his wife’s brother. Ifa man meets the wife ofhis 
wife’s brother on a path, he must at once make way for her. 
He dare not eat out of the same dish with her. He speaks 
to her with embarrassment, and if he approaches her hut, 
he will not enter but will crouch at the door, and greet his 
formidable sister-in-law in a trembling voice? 

t 
§ 4. A Theory of Bantu Totemism 

Before leaving this part of our subject, it is proper to 
call attention to an explanation which has been given 
of Bantu totemism by Dr. Theal, the eminent historian 
of South Africa. According to him the reverence of the 

1 H. A. Junod, Les Ba-Ronga, Etude 2 H. A. Junod, Les Ba-Konga, pp. 
ethnographique sur les indigines de la 84-86. 
Baie de Delagoa (Neuchatel, 1898), pp- i 3H. A. Junod, of, ett. pp. 73, 79- 
72-83. I. 

+ 

xu A THEORY OF BANTU TOTEMISM 389 

Bantus for their totemic animals rests on a belief that the their sacred 
souls of their dead are lodged in the creatures; in other & ‘otemic 
words, totemism with them is only one form of the worship rests on a 
of ancestors. He says: “The Bantu believed that the spirits (o'ct t* 

of the dead visited their friends and descendants in the form of their 
of animals. Each tribe regarded some particular animal as oer a 
the one selected by the ghosts of its kindred, and therefore into these 
looked upon it as sacred. The lion was thus held in pee 
veneration by one tribe, the crocodile by another, the 
python by a third, the bluebuck by a fourth, and so on. 
When a division of a tribe took place, each section retained 
the same ancestral animal, and thus a simple method is 
afforded of ascertaining the wide dispersion of various 
communities of former times. For instance, at the present 
day a species of snake is held by people as far south as 
the mouth of the Fish river and by others near the Zambesi 
to be the form in which their dead appear. This belief 
caused even such destructive animals as the lion and the 
crocodile to be protected from harm in certain parts of the 
country. It was not indeed believed that every lion or 
every crocodile was a disguised spirit, but then any one 
might be, and so none were molested unless under peculiar 
circumstances, when it was clearly apparent that the animal 
was an aggressor and therefore not related to the tribe. 
Even then, if it could be driven away it was not killed. A 
Xosa of the present time will leave his hut if an ancestral 
snake enters it, permitting the reptile to keep possession, 
and will shudder at the thought of any one hurting it. The 
animal thus respected by one tribe was, however, disregarded 
and killed without scruple by all others. The great majority 
of the people of the interior have now lost the ancient 
belief, but they still hold in veneration the animal that 
their ancestors regarded as a possible embodied spirit. 
Most of them take their tribal titles from it, thus the 
Bakwena are the crocodiles, the Bataung the lions, the 
Baphuti the little blue antelopes. Each terms the animal 
whose name it bears its szboko, and not only will not kill it 
or eat its flesh, but will not touch its skin or come in 
contact with it in any way if that can be avoided.” ' 

1G, McCall Theal, Records of South-Eastern Africa, vii. 404 sq. 

390 TOTEMISM IN SOUTH AFRICA CHAP. 
It is true On this it is to be observed that while it is true the 
gat the , Zulus and other Caffre tribes believe the dead to be rein- 
other carnated in serpents,’ there is no evidence that the revered 
cafe serpents are their totems. The belief in the transmigration 

believe the of human souls at death into the bodies of snakes is too 

Liteon ee widespread to be accepted as of itself a proof of totemism. 

nated in And Dr. Theal admits that the Bantus of the interior, by 
rely ae whom he appears to mean the Bechuanas, have lost the 

pierre belief that their dead ancestors are in their totemic animals, 

totemism. But what evidence is there that they ever had such a belief? 

I do not remember to have met with any. The title of 

“father” or “grandfather” or “brother” bestowed on a 

totemic animal is not a proof that the soul of a dead 

kinsman is believed to be in the beast, since such titles are 

bestowed on totemic animals by people who entertain no 

such belief? On the whole, then, Dr. Theal’s explanation 

of Bantu totemism, though he does not use the term, appears 

to be an inference of his own from the facts rather than to 

rest on definite statements of the Bantu themselves. The 

interence is, indeed, a perfectly legitimate one, but it is not 
conclusive so long as it lacks positive native testimony. 

At the same timd in favour of Dr. Theal’s view it 

Pik deserves to be remembered that some Bantu peoples believe 

lieve i _in the transmigration of their dead into other animals than 
the souls o} 

Other 

thedeaad serpents. Thus the Banyai on the lower Zambesi think 
ih that the souls of their dead chiefs enter into lions and 
Paver hyzenas, and therefore they never kill these creatures, so that 
a ai the country swarms with them. When they meet a lion or 
my , eyo e : . : 

and other hyzna, they salute it in their customary fashion by clapping 
ee their hands. Similarly, the Makanga in the angle between 

the Shire and Zambesi rivers refrain from killing lions, 
because they believe that the spirits of deceased chiefs are 
lodged in them. The Barotse, a people akin to the Zulus °® 
in the upper valley of the Zambesi, imagine that the souls 

1 See especially Callaway, Reéigious 456 sg., 490, 495 57.1 528. 

System of the Amazulu, part ii. pp. 140- 
144, 196-200, 208-212; and for more 
evidence of this belief in Africa and 
elsewhere, see my Adonis, Attis, Ostris, 
Second Edition (London, 1907), pp. 
73 599- 

2 See above, vol. i. pp. 423, 448 59.5 

3 D, Livingstone, Afssionary Travels 
and Researches in South Africa, p. 615. 

4 A. Werner, Zhe Natives of British 
Central Africa (London, 1906), p. 64. 

5 J. Deniker, Zhe Races of Man, 
p. 466. 

XII A THEORY OF BANTU TOTEMISM 391 

of chiefs transmigrate into hippopotamuses.’ Some tribes 

on the upper Zambesi suppose that every man transmigrates 

at death into an animal, and that he can choose in his 
lifetime the particular creature into which his soul shal] pass 

when it has shuffled off the human frame. In order to 
partake of the animal’s nature he swallows maggots bred in 

its putrid carcase and imitates the voice and movements of 

the living brute, whether it be a lion, a panther, a jackal, a 
crocodile, a hippopotamus, a boa-constrictor, or what not.” 

Of certain Caffres, apparently also on the upper Zambesi, Theory 
we are told that they judge of the sort of animal into which peesen| 
a man will transmigrate at death by the likeness which he the deaa 
bore to it in his life. Thus the soul of a big burly man pape te 
with prominent teeth will pass into an elephant ; a strong into the 
man with a big head and a long beard will be a lion; an ais 
ugly fellow with thick lips and a large mouth will be a resembled 
hyena; a long lanky man with bright eyes will be a mhéaco, joo" 
serpent. All these animals accordingly they deem sacred 

and inviolable.’ Another tribe of Caffres at the foot of 
Mount Caroeira, in the upper valley of the Zambesi, think 

that the souls of the departed come back in the guinea-fowl 

that perch on the thick-foliaged trees under whose shadow 

their kinsfolk lie buried.*| The Ababua in the upper valley some 

of the Congo fancy that after death their spirits will dwell te Cias 
in the bodies of leopards or gorillas or Hippopotamuses ; think that 
every man chooses one or other of these beasts for his Prope an 
future abode, and the creature of his choice he henceforth animals 
deems sacred and will not eat its flesh. Some of the reer 
Congo peoples who hold this faith conform to the habits of Will trans- 
their chosen animal in their lifetime; and when the chosen ae ? 
animal is a leopard or a crocodile, the practices of the 
leopard-men or the crocodile-men are horrible. Many tribes 

in the northern parts of the Congo basin hold that the 

souls of great chiefs always transmigrate into the bodies of 

1 L. Decle, Three Years in Savage 
Africa (London, 1898), p. 74. 

2 A. Bertrand, Zhe Atngdom of the 
Barotsi, Upper Zambesta (London, 
1899), p. 277, quoting the account of 
the French missionary M. Coillard. 

3 Father Courtois, ftScenes de la 
vie Cafre,” Altssions Catholiques, xv. 

(Lyons, 1883) p. 593. 

$ Father Courtois, “A travers le 
haut Zambéze,” Afisstons Catholiques, 
xvi, (Lyons, 1884) p. 299. 

§ Joseph Halkin, Quelgues peuplades 
du district de [Uelé, i. (Liége, 1907) 
p. 102, 

392 TOTEMISM IN SOUTH AFRICA CHAP. 

Amongst gazelles, hippopotamuses, or leopards! The Bahima, a 
the Behim@ pastoral people of Ankole, between Uganda and the Congo 
intrans- Free State, believe that their dead kings turn into lions, 
ee their queens into leopards, and their princes and princesses 
a a into snakes. There are three belts of forests where the 
but is quite bodies of kings, queens, and princes and princesses are 
ee deposited, and where the wonderful transformation into the 
appropriate animals is supposed to take place. In each of 
these forests there is a temple with priests, who attend to 
the worship of the sacred animals, be they lions, leopards, or 
snakes. The ghosts of commoners have no special abode 
There | but wander about near the villages.” This last case is 
remst0 particularly instructive because, as we shall see, the Bahima 

sufficient have totemism; yet their belief in the transmigration of 
ground for es d : ae ‘ld b t toh 
connecting Kings, queens, and princes into wild beasts seems to have no 

the ae relation to their totemic system, since none of the animals 
t . . . 
Bantu with into which the royal and noble dead transmigrate are found 
their belief jn the list of their totems. Similarly in regard’ to the 
in metem- . . . 
psychosis. SOuthern Bantu tribes, with whom we are concerned in this 
chapter, there appears to be no sufficient ground for con- 

necting their totemism with their belief in metempsychosis. 

§ 5. Hints of Totemism among the Bushmen and Hottentots 

No clear With respect to the two other native races of South 
Sieh Africa, the Bushmen and the Hottentots, who probably 

Bushmen occupied the whole of the continent from the fifteenth 
and 

Hottentors degree of south latitude to the Cape of Good Hope till they 

had totem- were gradually reduced in numbers and circumscribed in 
ism and : : ae 
exogamy. territory by the tide of Bantu invasion from the north,‘ 

there is no clear proof or even indication that either of 
them was organised on a basis of totemism and exogamy. 
Of the Bushmen whom he met with on the Zouga River 
Livingstone tells us that “the animal they refrain from 

1 Notes analytiques sur les collections ‘Notes on the Bahima of Ankole,” 
ethnographiques du Muste du Congo,i. Journal of the African Soctety, No. 
(Brussels, 1902-1906) p. 162. xxii, (January 1907) pp. 151-153. 

2 J. Roscoe, ‘* The Bahima, a Cow 
Trib. of Enkole,” Journal of the Royal SES belaw, Be 530: 
Anthropological Institute, xxxvii,(1907) 4 J. Deniker, Zhe Races of Man, 
pp. I01 sg.; Major J. A. Meldon, p. 467. 

xu HINTS OF TOTEMISM AMONG THE BUSHMEN 393 

eating is the goat, which fact, taken in connection with the super. 
superstitious dread which exists in every tribe towards a Stitious 

. . . : : . . respect of 
particular animal, is significant of their feelings to the only the Bush- 
animals they could have domesticated in their desert home.” ? ee 
Similarly Mackenzie writes that “ the Madenassana Bushmen 
bina the common goat; that is to say, it is their sacred 
animal, as the £wena or alligator is to the Bakwena. Now 
just as it would be hateful and unlucky to the Bakwena to 
meet or gaze upon the alligator, so the common goat is the 
object of ‘ religious’ aversion to these Bushmen ; and to look 
upon it would be to render the man for the time impure, as 
well as to cause him undefined uneasiness.”* But this only 
proves that the Bushmen revered or dreaded, for the two 
sentiments are near akin in the minds of many savages, the 
common goat; and such a feeling for a single species of 
animal does not constitute totemism. If it could be shewn 
that other tribes of Bushmen entertained a like reverence or 
dread for other species of animals, this would certainly raise 
a presumption of totemism; but apparently Livingstone did 
not mean to affirm this; the other tribes he speaks of may 
have been the Bechuanas, with whose tribal totemism he 
was acquainted. 

As to the Hottentots we learn that on the banks of the Hordes of 
Kei-Garib River some hordes of Koranas, a branch of the a 
Hottentot race, bore the names of Right Hands, Left after 
Hands, Sorcerers, Springbucks, Scorpions, Asses, Hippo- 2n'™' 
potamuses, and Tall Ones; and that further to the west, on 
the middle course of the Orange River, were tribes of 
Koranas, who rejoiced in the titles of Bush Folk, Cats, 
Narrow Cheeks, Tailors, and Tanners.® But such tribal 
names are not in themselves any proof of totemism. 

1 D. Livingstone, Missionary Travels the Orange River, p. 135 note. 
and Researches in South Africa, p. 165. 3 G. Fritsche, Die Lingeborenen Suid- 
2 J. Mackenzie, Zen Years North of Afrika’s, p. 367. 

Scenery of 
British 
Central 
Africa 
orthe . 
Nyasaland 
Protectorate. 

CHAPTER XIII 
TOTEMISM IN EAST AND CENTRAL AFRICA 

§ 1. Totemism in Central Angoniland 

BRITISH CENTRAL AFRICA or the Nyasaland Protectorate 
comprises that vast region of Central Africa which lies 
embedded among the great lakes, bounded on the east by 
Lake Nyasa and extending to the southern end of Lake 
Tanganyika on the north. The country consists in large 
measure of high plateaux reached by toilsome and pre- 
cipitous ascents of several thousand feet, from the sharp 
edge of which you look back and down on a yawning 
gulf, where the far-spreading landscape stretches away, 
league upon league, into the dim distance or the deep 
indigo-blue waters of the lake shimmer in the sun. The 
surface of these plateaux is a rolling grass land variegated by 
swelling downs and granite mountains and watered by small 
streams and lakes. There is but little of those sweltering 
jungles and matted luxuriant forests which a European mind 
naturally associates with the scenery of the tropics. Indeed 
the air of these high uplands is coo] and bracing ; in clear 
weather the sky is of a beautiful pale blue ; and the wild 
flowers, such as the violets, the buttercups, the forget-me- 
nots, and the anemones, which bespangle the short grass 
might almost beguile an Englishman into imagining himself 
at home.’ : 

The population of the Nyasaland Protectorate includes 

1 Sir H. H. Johnston, British Natives of British Central Africa 
Central Africa (London, 1897), pp- (London, 1906), pp. 8 sgq. 
4 599-5 35 5q.3 A. Werner, The 

394 

cnap. xut TOTEMISM IN CENTRAL ANGONILAND 395 

many tribes belonging to different stocks and speaking The native 

different languages, but they are all members of the great ek begat 
: : : 7 gS to 

Bantu family. Of the various stocks the Nyanja-speaking the Bantu 

peoples are the most numerous and important. They *™!y- 

include many tribes, amongst whom are the Amananja, the 

Ambo, the Anyanja, and the Achewa. The Angoni, who The 

give their name to Central Angoniland, a district of the pect 

Protectorate lying at the south-west end of Lake Nyasa, of zulu 

are a Zulu people, who having rebelled against the despot cet 

Chaka were defeated by him and fled northward, crossing 

the Zambesi in 1825 and settling in the country to the 

west of Lake Nyasa. They have intermarried with other 

tribes, particularly with the Achewa, so that they are now 

a mixed race; but the northern Angoni still speak the 

Zulu language, though with some dialectical modifications. 

At present the Angoni are not so much a separate people 

as aruling caste dwelling in the midst of British Central 

African tribes whom their ancestors conquered! The 

natives of British Central Africa live chiefly by agriculture. 

The chase is a subsidiary pursuit, and except among the 

Wankonde, at the north end of Lake Nyasa, the keeping of 

cattle is an accident or an appanage of chieftainship. 

Among the principal crops raised by the natives are maize, 

millet, rice, beans, swe@t potatoes, yams, pumpkins, and 

tobacco, The arts of weaving, pottery, and basketry are Arts and 

practised by the people, and they are acquainted with the Mausires 

working of iron and copper. Their houses are for the most natives, 

part circular in shape with walls of wattle and daub and 

thatched roofs.’ 

The Nyanja-speaking natives of Central Angoniland are Exoga. 
divided into exogamous and totemic clans, some with aoa 
descent in the male and others in the female line. clans 
Generally children take their clan from their father, but 2mong the 

natives of 

in some cases from their mother. The name of the clan Cantral 
. ngoni- 

a land. 
1 Sir H. H. Johnston, Sritzsk (London, 1907), p. viii. 

Central Africa (London, 1897), pp. 

389-392; A. Werner, Zhe Natives of 2 Sir H. H. Johnston, British 

British Central Africa (London, 1906), Central Africa, Pp. 424 5979., 430 

Pp. 24 sgg., 208 sgg., 278 sgg.3 R. 599.5 435 59-1 453 599-, 457 59q.3 A. 

Sutherland Rattray, Some Folk-lore Werner, The Natives of British Central 

Stories and Songs in Chinyanja Africa, pp. 176 sqg. 

Obsolete 
words 
among the 
clan names, 

396 TOTEMISM IN EAST AND CENTRAL AFRICA cnap. 

is nearly always that of an animal, but sometimes it is 
that of a plant or other thing.’ The following are some of 
the animal names of clans :—?* 

Negaluwe, bush-pig. 

Ngondo, hartebeest. 

Nsamba, fish. 

Mabvu, wasp. 

Nkoma, coney. 

Duwe, zebra. 

Pofu, eland. 

Nyatz, buffalo. 

Nyuchi, bee. 

Soko, baboon, 

Among the names of clans derived from plants or 
inanimate things are the following :—* 
Gumbo, water-melon. 
Manda, mushroom. 
Manzi, water. 
Mvulu, rain, 
Minga, thorn. 
Churu, ant-hill. 

Among the clan, names are many old words, which are 
no longer used in common speech to designate the objects 
they formerly denoted. For instance, the old word for a 
zebra was duwe, which is still the Same of the Zebra clan, 
but the modern word for a zebra is mbidzi. The old 
word for an eland was jofu, which is still the name 
of the Eland clan, but the modern word for an eland 
is nchefu. Again, the old word for a baboon was soko, 
which is still the name of the Baboon clan, but the modern 
word for a baboon is nyani.* It is possible that in these 
and similar cases the old names may have been disused 
and new ones substituted out of respect to the sacred 
animals; and a like cause may perhaps explain seeming 
discrepancies in other totemic tribes, among whom the 
clan not unfrequently bears a different name from that 
of its totem. 

1 R. Sutherland Rattray, Some Folk- 3 R. Sutherland Rattray, of. cit. 
lore Stories and Songs in Chinyanja, pp. 177. 
Pp. 174. 

2 R. Sutherland Rattray, of cit. * R. Sutherland Rattray, of. c#t. 
p- 176. . p. 176. 

XII TOTEMISM IN CENTRAL ANGONILAND 397 

The natives of Central Angoniland generally shew a Respect 

regard for the animal, plant, or thing which gives its name eee, 
‘ ives 

to their clan ; in short, they respect their totems. A person of Angoni- 

may not kill, eat, or destroy his totem ; and if it is an animal, nie ee 

he may not wear its skin. For example, a man of the totems. 

Elephant clan was not supposed to benefit, even indirectly, 

by the barter of an elephant’s tusks, though he might give 

the calico, beads, or whatever he got for them to his wives 

and friends. The taboo on eating the flesh of the totem 

animal is called kusala. If a person violates the taboo by 

eating, whether knowingly or not, of the meat, it is believed 

that his body will break out in spots, which is called 

kuwenga. The remedy for this eruption of the skin is to 

bathe the body in a decoction made from a bone of the 

animal, the eating of which caused the malady.’ Thus 

here again the totem furnishes a homceopathic remedy by 

healing the harm it did.’ 

Some of the tabooed objects or totems are not whole Split 
animals but only parts of them. Thus there is a clan ‘™s 
called Afoyo which means “life” or “heart”; and_ its 
tabooed object or totem is the heart of a goat. Again, 
there is another clan called Mpumulo, which means 
“nose,” and the members of it may not eat the face and 
nose of an ox or cow.’ Such totems I have called split 
totems.‘ 

It is polite to address a person by his or her clan name ; 
indeed in addressing a woman it is the clan name which 
is always used. But certain clan names of chiefs might not Clan 
be spoken after dusk; any one who wished to address (ites of 
a chief in the dark had to use some other and common with their 
name, such as P2772, the clan of the Hills. Among some pone 
of the clan names borne by chiefs are the following :— totems. 

Maseko (a Zulu word). This was the clan name of 
the Angoni chiefs who settled in what is now Dedza 
district. Mascko in Chingoni (the Angoni language) 
means a pebble, also a kind of bird; but the tabooed 

1 R. Sutherland Rattray, Some Folk- 3 R. Sutherland Rattray, Some Fo/k- 
lore Stories and Songs in Chinyanja, lore Stories and Songs in Chinyanja, 
pp. 174 59. p- 176. 

2 See above, vol. i. p. 22. * See above, vol. i. p. Io. - 

398 TOTEMISM IN EAST AND CENTRAL AFRICA cnuar. 

objects, in other words the totems, of the clan are fish and 
elephant’s flesh, fowls, and rhinoceros’ flesh. 
Jere (a Zulu word, meaning a bangle). The tabooed 
object or totem of the clan is fish. 
Nyjobvu, the elephant, the name of the Elephant clan. 
The tabooed object is elephant’s flesh. 
Piri| (a word of Achewa origin), the Hill clan. The 
Achewa tabooed object or totem of the clan is the baboon. The 
legend that A chewa have a legend that all their people formerly bore 

wea insti this clan name of /772, till their chieftainess Nyangu called 
ment them all together and, in order to prevent the evils of 
reo Lie close interbreeding, gave each family a new name, which 
’ was to descend to the children and children’s children. In 
this tribe (the Achewa) children belong to the clan of ‘their 
mother, not of their father. The reason alleged for the 
practice is that in the far past the chiefs were women, and 
so their children took their clan names from their mothers 
to mark their royal descent. This legend of the origin of 
totem clans is interesting, because, like similar Australian 
traditions, it points to the deliberate institution of exogamy 

as a means to prevent the marriage of near kin.' 
Belief of Both the Angoni and the Achewa believe in reincarna- 
eae tion. Some say that after death they turn into the thing 
Achewa from which they take their name, that is, into their totem, 
een as their fathers and kinsfolk did before them ; others affirm 
of souls. that they turn into other animals, not into their totems.’ 
Thus their theory partly confirms and partly disagrees with 
Dr. Theal’s view that Bantu totemism rests on a belief in 
the transmigration of the souls of the dead into their totem 
Dance animals.s Connected with this belief in metempsychosis 
fincas 4 isa certain dance called Znyau, which is danced to songs 
as animals. with a weird cadence all over the Angoniland plateau. 
It is always danced after a funeral on a moonless night or 
before the moon is up. The dancers are members of a 
secret society disguised as various animals. Women are 
allowed to be present at it. The intention of the spectacle 

seems to be to make the people think that the dancers 

1 R. Sutherland Rattray, Some Folk- 2 R. Sutherland Rattray, of. cz? 
lore Stories and Songs in Chinyanja, p. 178. 
PP. 175 59., 177. 3 See above, pp. 388 599. 

XI TOTEMISM IN CENTRAL ANGONILAND 399 

are real animals, and that one of them is the dead man 
risen from the grave and reincarnated in animal shape. - 
The secret society which furnishes the performers for this 
dance has a cryptic language and a password with a 
countersign. Candidates for admission to it in old days 
had to undergo a variety of ordeals, some of them revolt- 
ing, some of them cruel, which sometimes ended fatally. 
Amongst other things the novice was set up on very high 
stilts. Intruders on the society were instantly killed? 

No man may marry a woman who bears his own clan Rule of 
name, though she may be of another race and live in a °*°8*™Y 
distant country, for all members of the same clan are in the 
relation of brother and sister. In other words, the totem 
clans are strictly exogamous. The rule of exogamy appears 
to hold good among all the tribes, whether they trace 
descent in the male or in the female line. On the other 
hand, the rule of taboo as applied to the totem is seemingly 
unknown or ignored among others? Among the Achewa, Maternal 
as we have seen, children take their clan from their mother, ae 
not from their father ; and the same rule of exogamy with descent. 
maternal descent is observed by the Yaos, another tribe of 
British Central Africa® In this tribe the chieftainship 
as well as the clan descends in the female line; a chief is 
succeeded, not by his son, but by his sister’s son. On the 
other hand, the Angoni apparently trace descent and transmit 
the chieftainship in the male line, following in these respects 
the Zulu custom.’ First cousins may marry each other Rules as 
provided that they are the children respectively of a brother eeage 
and a sister, because in that case their totems will be of first 
different. For example, a man of the Zebra clan has a son 
and daughter who are both necessarily Zebras. The Zebra 
son marries a woman of another clan, but his children will 
be Zebras like himself, since among the Angoni the clan 
descends in the male line. But the children of his Zebra 

' R. Sutherland Rattray, Some Folk- 4 Sir H. H. Johnston, British 

dore Stories and Songs in Chinyanja, 
pp. 178 sg. 

2 R. Sutherland Rattray, of. cét. pp. 
177, 202. 

3 A. Werner, The Natives of British 
Central Africa, p. 252. 

Central Africa, p. 471; A. Werner, 
The Natives of British Central Africa, 
P. 254. 

5 A. Werner, of. cit. pp. 253, 258; 
R. Sutherland Rattray, Some Folk-lore 
Stories and Songs in Chinyanja, pp. 
188 sg. 

Mutual 
avoidance 
of a man 
and his 
wife’s 
mother. 

400 TOTEMISM IN EAST AND CENTRAL AFRICA cuap. 

sister will not be Zebras, since she must marry a man of 
another clan, say the Eland clan, and her children will take 
their father’s clan, not hers; if the father is an Eland, the 
children will be Elands too. Thus the Zebra brother and 
sister will have respectively Zebra and Eland children, and 
these first cousins will be free to marry each other, since 
they belong to two different totem clans. But first cousins 
who are children of two brothers may not marry each other, 
because they are necessarily of the same totem clan. For 
example, two Zebra brothers have a son and daughter 
respectively, but these first cousins may not marry each 
other because they are both Zebras like their fathers. First 
cousins who are children of two sisters may marry each 
other provided that their mothers married men of different 
clans, for in that case the two cousins will have different 
totems. For example, if two Zebra sisters marry two 
Eland men, their children, who are first cousins, will all 
be Elands and therefore cannot marry each other, since 
they have all the same totem. But if one Zebra sister 
marries an Eland man, and the other Zebra sister marries 
an Elephant man, then the children of the two sisters will 
be Elands and Elephants respectively, and these first 
cousins may marry each other, since their totems are 
different. On the other hand, in tribes with exogamy and 
female descent, first cousins, the children of two sisters, may 
never marry each other because they must always be of the 
same totem ; but first cousins, the children of two brothers, 
may marry each other provided that their fathers married 
women of .different clans, for in that case the two cousins 
will have different totems. First cousins, the children of a 
brother and a sister respectively, are as free to marry under 
a system of exogamy with female descent as under a system 
of exogamy with male descent, because in both cases the 
cousins have necessarily different totems.' 

A man’s social position with regard to his wife’s mother 
changes immediately after his marriage. The two avoid 
each other on every occasion, and should they meet by 

1 R. Sutherland Rattray, Some Folk- Natives of British Central Africa, pp. 
lore Stories and Songs in Chinyanja, 252 sq. 
p. 202. Compare A. Werner, The 

XHI TOTEMISM IN CENTRAL ANGONILAND 

401 

chance they cover their faces and run away from each other. 
* All this,” we are told, “is from some sense of shame and 
modesty which hardly finds a counterpart among civilized 
nations, and has, of course, nothing to do with the fact that 
the son-in-law has to perform various menial acts of service 
for his wife’s mother and relations.”' Among the Anyanja 
and Yaos it is the universal custom for a man at marriage 
to go and build a house at his bride’s home. The practice 
no doubt is connected with the rule that in these tribes the 
children belong to their mother’s kin, not to their father’s. 
“One of the new husband’s first duties is to hoe a garden 
for his mother-in-law, though he is bound by the rules of 
propriety to avoid her to a certain extent. He must not 
eat in her presence nor see her eat, and there are various 
other restrictions, all of which come to an end when he has 
brought her the first grandchild, with a present. The same 
rules apply also to the father-in-law, and to the maternal 
uncles of both; while the wife has to observe them with 
regard to her husband’s parents, and ¢/ezr uncles.” ” 

These tribes appear to possess the classificatory system Traces of 

of relationship ; for we are told that a man applies the name ria 
of father not only to his real father but to all his father’s system of 
brothers ; and that similarly he applies the name of mother ae 
not only to his real mother but to all his mother’s sisters. 
Further, there is no single word for “ brother” or “sister” in 
general, but there are distinct words for “elder brother” and 
“younger brother,’ and similarly for “elder sister” and 
“younger sister.” There is a word which means “sister” 
when used by a brother, and “brother” when used by a 
sister, but which is never applied to a person of the same 
sex as the speaker.’ All these are marks of the classificatory 
system of relationship. 

1 R. Sutherland Rattray, Some Folk- 
lore Stories and Songs in Chinyanja, p. 
204. The Wankonde in British Central 
Africa ‘have that curious custom by 
which a man is practically forbidden to 
speak to or even look at his mother-in- 
law. This also obtains amongst the 
A-nyanja to some extent ; yet here the 

VOL. H 

son-in-law has to hoe his mother-in- 
law’s garden and assist her in many 
other ways” (Sir H. H. Johnston, 
British Central Africa, p. 415). 

2 A. Werner, Zhe Natives of British 
Central Africa, p. 132. 

3 A. Werner, of. cit. p. 254. 

2D 

The 
Wagogo 
and their 
totemic 
clans. 

402 

TOTEMISM IN EAST AND CENTRAL AFRICA cuap. 

N 2. Trt--"sin among the Wagogo, Wahehe, and Waheia 

clans. 

of German East Africa 

The Wagogo are a Bantu-speaking people of mixed 
blood who inhabit the Iramba tableland in German East 
Africa to the south of Kilima Njaro.) They both till the 
ground and keep cattle? They are divided into totemic 

The following is a list of their clans with their 

totems (7uz?vo), which they may not eat or use.* 

Clans. Totems (muziro). 

1. Wanyagowe . suhanga, an animal about as large as a hog, 
which lives chiefly on white ants. It sleeps 
in a hole underground in the daytime. 

2. Wanyang’anga Moéala, bush buck. 

3. Wanyacipegu Fumbu, a certain part of the stomach. 

4. Wanyagatwa. Neghanu, civet cat, and mébala. 

5. Wasewando . WMobala. 

6. Wamunyanzoka Things killed by snakes. 

7. Wambuga Sheep with short tail. 

. 8. Wasenhvina . Cisunha, a very tiny red bird, and Mhyenesi, 

{ a bird said to warn of danger. 
9. Watemekwira Muhanga. 

10, Wakando Fumbu. ; 

11, Wamusukuma Moata, roan antelope. 

12. Waseng’ongo To carry a spear which is concave on both 
sides. 

13. Wanyang’hwalo Ne’ hwahe, a kind of wild vegetable. 

14. Wamunyambwa Red clothes. 

15. Wamunyatoma sy 5 

16. Wasembuce . Muhanga. 

17. Wegongo Nhongolo, eland, 

18. Wamunyiranga Ciséva, a kind of squirrel. 

19. Wamunyanguluwe . | 1/éa/a, or a spotted animal of any kind. 

20. Wamunyang’hali Wamusitakwendwa, a tree which they do 
not use for building or firewood. 

21, Wamunyanduli Nhongolo. 

22. Wanyeguruwi Negubi, pig. 

1 J. Deniker, 7he Races of Man, Wagogo of German East Africa,” 
p. 464; F. Stuhlmann, Jt Emin Journal of the Anthropological In- 
Pascha ins Herz von Afrika (Berlin, stitute, xxxii. (1902) pp. 336 syg. 

1894), pp. 49 59-, 767 59. 

2 Rev. H. Cole, ‘*Notes on the 3 Rev. H. Cole, of. cit. pp. 305 sg. 

Xu TOTEMISM IN GERMAN EAST AFRICA 403 

Clans. Totems (#ustvo). 
23. Wanyagundu . | Red clothes. 
24. Wanyelangali . | Metriri, an animal something like a badger. 
25. Wasigani.. . | Premature calf. 
26. Wang’halunga . | Ne’halu, a small bulb resembling an onion. 

27. Wamusitakwendwa | Tree of this name which they do not use for 
building or firewood (see above, No. 20). 

28. Wamunyachuma . | Red copper wire. 
‘29. Wanyamhumbwa . | AMachikwang’hala, a bird which makes a 

peculiar noise in flying. 

30. Wabalagudi . . | Maagulagu, a bulb which is used in anointing 
and for stomach-ache. 

31. Waseyingwe . . | C#tuwa, entrails of an animal. 

32. Wamunyaciri . | Ltoga, liver. 

33. Wasehaba . . | Cipehema, end of breast-bone. 

The Wagogo think that if a person kills or eats the I effects 
animal which is the totem of his clan, he thereby endangers % Gis 
his relations, but not himself. Thus, when they see a the totem. 
child suffering from scabs on its head, they say at once that 
the child’s father has eaten his totem (suz¢vo) and that is 
why his child has scabs (sapere).! 

We are not informed whether the Wagogo ae are 
exogamous, nor whether they are inherited in the paternal 
or the maternal line. A widow usually marries a brother The 
or other relation of her deceased husband. ~ She may lvirate 
indeed refuse to do so, but such refusals are rare. A man Avoidance 
may not look at his mother-in-law, but he may speak to pons By 
her at a distance. The same restrictions apply to a woman marriage. 
in respect to her father-in-law. 

“At time of circumcision,” says Mr. Cole, “ abusive Licence at 
language is very much indulged in, and the women especially “rou” 
lose all sense of modesty, and the country becomes a mighty 
bedlam.”* This brief statement seems to indicate that a 
period of sexual licence, if not of promiscuity, accompanies 
the operation of circumcision among the Wagogo, just as it 
used to do among the Fijians.‘ 

1 Rev. H. Cole, ‘*‘ Notes on the 2 Rev. H. Cole, of. cét. p. 312. 

Wagogo of German East Africa,” 3 H 1, pe 338. 
Journal of the Anthropological In- Rev. H. Cole, op. ezt. p. 33 
stitute, xxxti. (1902) p. 307. 4 See above, pp. 145 579. 

404 TOTEMISM IN EAST AND CENTRAL AFRICA Cia?- 

Two sets As a Wagogo clan has its musivo (forbidden thing), so 

of totems, each Wagogo family has its mulongo (forbidden thing), 

andthe which is transmitted from the father to his children, The 

mulorg0. wife may have a different malongo from that of her husband, 
but her children do not inherit it. The mulongo is 
apparently forbidden only after marriage. To eat the 
mulongo involves the loss of hair and teeth; to eat the 
muziro is said to cause the skin to fall off! From this 
account it would seem that the Wagogo have, like the 
Herero, a double set of totems, one set (suztro) being 
appropriated to the clans and the other set (sulongo) to 
the families. The latter are hereditary in the male line. 
But details of the system are wanting. 

The The Wahehe inhabit the district of Iringa in German 

pea East Africa, to the south of the Ruaha River. They are 

East a tall, slim, well-built people; the features of the men are 

Africa, regular and expressive, the faces of the women are comely. 
Their country is a beautiful mountain land, with a cool, often 
cold climate, where the cutting winds oblige the natives to 
go warmly clad. Though they raise crops of maize, sweet 
potatoes, and beans,ithe country is not well adapted to 
agriculture. On the other hand, it lends itself admirably 
to pasture ; for the rugged mountains abound in clear, cold, 
rushing streams and fine waterfalls, which keep the grass 
on their banks lush and green throughout the year. Hence 
the Wahehe are above all a tribe of herdsmen ; all their pride 
and ambition are in their herds. No man will willingly part 
with a single head of cattle, and even in time of famine he 
will rather go with an empty stomach than diminish the 
number of his beloved herds by slaughter. The houses of 
the Wahehe are built of stakes coated with clay. They are 
square in shape with perpendicular walls and flat roofs. As 
a rule each family occupies its own house.” 

The totems The Wahehe have totems which descend in the male 

eile line, the children taking their totem from their father. But 
are always their totemism is not combined with exogamy ; a man is free 
animals or 
eta 1 Rev. H. Cole, ‘Notes on the sfetute, xxxii. (1902) p. 317. 

" Wagogo of German East Africa,” 2 E. Nigmann, Die Wahehe (Berlin, 

Journal of the Anthropological In- 1908), pp. v. 1, 3- 

XIII TOTEMISM IN GERMAN EAST AFRICA 405 

to marry a woman of the same totem as himself. If a wife’s 

totem differs from that of her husband, she retains it after 

her marriage. At present a whole district will often have, 

with insignificant exceptions, the same totem. A totem 

is called mstro or mundsilo, though the commoner expression 

for it is suzko. It always consists in, or carries with it, 

the prohibition to eat a certain food, and this prohibition 

is strictly observed. The forbidden food is always an 

animal, very often only a particular part of an animal. 

The punishment for eating the tabooed flesh is supposed 1n effects 

to be a lingering and painful sickness inflicted on the of eating 
é ite , the totemic 

delinquent by the ancestral spirits. Scab and other skin animal. 

diseases are often attributed by the sufferer himself to 

some unwitting violation of the totemic taboo. In such a 

case he hastens to consult the medicine-man or magician 

(mlagusst) and to offer an expiatory sacrifice. Even 

children observe the totemic taboo from their earliest 

years. Yet, though a man may not eat, he may freely 

hunt and kill his totem animal. Among the tabooed foods 

or totems of the Wahehe are the guinea-fowl, an unborn 

calf, sheep’s head, the heart and kidneys of all animals, and 

two species of gazelle (s#ato and func). The heart and 

kidneys of all animals are a very common totem. Some- A family 

times a family has two totems, and if one of them is very weichad 

inconvenient, they may rid themselves of it by an appropriate but may 

. rid itself of 

ceremony. For example, there was a rich cattle-owner who op. 

had for his totems a species of gazelle (/vo) and an unborn 

calf. The latter proving inconvenient, he swallowed a 

certain medicine, seasoned an unborn calf with the same, 

and ate it. As he survived the ordeal, his family renounced 

the unborn calf as a totem, but kept the gazelle.’ 

Amongst the Wahehe the marriage of cousins who are Cousin 
the children of two brothers or two sisters is not allowed Samone ie 
but there is no objection to the marriage of two cousins who Wahebe. 
are the children of a brother and a sister respectively. The 
Wahehe practise polygamy. Even the poorest man, we are Polygamy, 
told, has at least two wives, while the rich have twenty or 
even fifty. Such customs seem to point to a large numerical 

1E Nigmann’ Dic Wahehe (Berlin, 1908), pp. 42 59. 
2 E. Nigmann, of. cz#. p. 60. 

The 
levirate. 

Totemism 
among the 
Waheia. 

Exoga- 
mous clans 
among 

the Yao, 
Makua, 
and 
Makonde. 

406 ZOTEMISM IN EAST AND CENTRAL AFRICA cuap. 

majority of women over men. Wives are purchased from 
their fathers, the price of a bride varying from two hoes to 
four head of cattle according to the rank of the family... On 
a man’s death the bulk of his property goes to his eldest 
son. Wives with no children or with children under age 
are inherited by the grown son or, if there is none, by the 
brother of the deceased. But a man never thus takes to 
wife his own mother or her sisters. The principal wife is 
regularly inherited by the full brother or, if there is no full 
brother, by the half brother of the deceased.” 

Another totemic tribe of German East Africa are the 
Waheia, a Bantu people who inhabit Bukoba, on the western 
side of the great Victoria Nyanza Lake. They are divided 
into exogamous clans called #adzla, each with a particular 
kind of animal for its totem. One clan has for its totem 
the lizard, another the long-tailed monkey. No man may 
marry a woman of his own clan, and he may not kill or eat 
any part of his totem animal. If he kills or eats the animal, 
he is supposed to suffer from an eruption of the skin. Thus 
thé totemism of the Waheia appears, so far as we can judge 
from the brief report of it, to be of the normal pattern. 

Lastly, it may be noted that several Bantu tribes of 
German East Africa, such as the Yao, the Makua, and the 
Makonde, are known to be divided into exogamous clans 
with descent in the maternal line, though they appear not 
to practise totemism. Among the Yao the system is 
decadent, but among the Makua and Makonde it is still 
in full bloom, and in these two tribes some of the clans 
are named after animals or plants on which the members 
of the clan are said to have especially subsisted. Among 
the Makonde the clans are very numerous; the names of 
fifty-two of them have been recorded. The name for an 
exogamous clan in the language of the Yao is /ukosyo 
(plural makosyo), in the language of the Makua it is 

1 E. Nigmann, Die Wahehe (Berlin, Ostafrika,” Zedtschrift fiir vergleichende 
1908), p. 59. Rechtswissenschaft, xv. (1902) pp. 2, 
3, referring to Lieutenant Richter, 

in Mittheilungen aus den Deutschen 
3 J. Kohler, ‘Das Banturecht in Schutsgedieten, xii. $3, 84- 

2 E. Nigmann, of. cit. p. 61. 

XII TOTEMISM IN GERMAN EAST AFRICA 407 

nthimmu, in the language of the Makonde it is /taua) 
All these tribes live chiefy by agriculture, though they 
do not neglect the chase.’ 

§ 3. Exogamy and the Classificatory System of Relationship 
among the Masat 

Among the savages of eastern equatorial Africa the The Masai 
redoubted Masai are probably the most famous, their puoi 
remarkable military organisation and fighting propensities 
having long rendered them the terror of their neighbours, 
and secured their predominance in the wide, often bare 
and arid plains over which these warlike herdsmen roam 
with their flocks and herds, once enormous in number but 
now sadly thinned by the cattle plague. Their present 
country extends from about one degree north of the 
equator to six degrees south of it both in British and 
German territory. Neither in language nor in appearance 
do the Masai belong to the Bantu family. They are tall They seem 
slender, lithe men, with features which have not much of eat 
the negro in them and which sometimes approach to the Nilotic 
European type. It is believed that the race has been Carne 
formed by a cross between the Nilotic negroes and sent 
the Hamitic peoples of the Galla and Somali family, stock. 
who blended with each other long ago and dwelt 
apart somewhere in the mountains or tablelands which 
stretch eastward from the White Nile to the Karamojo 
country. From this cradleland of their race some cause 
unknown, whether the pressure of tribes from the north, 
or intertribal warfare, or famine consequent on drought, 
seems to have driven the Masai eastward and southward 
to the country between the great extinct volcano of Mount 
Elgon and the shores of Lake Rudolph. Here a division 
took place within the tribe. One branch betook themselves 
to agriculture ; the other and more powerful branch con- 
tinued, or reverted to, a purely pastoral life, and raiding 
their neighbours in all directions not only acquired vast 

1 K, Weule, Wéssenschaftliche Ergeb- _ Ostafrikas (Berlin, 1908), 59 s7., 66 
nisse meiner ethnographischer For- sq., 104 s¢q. 
schungsvetse in den Siidosten Deutsch- 2 K. Weule, of. czt. p- 37: 

Exogamy 
and the 
classifi- 
catory 
system 
among the 
Masai. 

Clans and 
exogamous 
subclans 
among the 
Masai, 

408 TOTEMISM IN EAST AND CENTRAL AFRICA cuap. 

herds of cattle but pushed southward and made themselves 
lords of equatorial Africa from Ugogo and the Unyamwezi 
country eastward to within a hundred miles of the Indian 
Ocean.’ 

Though the Masai apparently are not a totemic people, 
they practise exogamy and possess the classificatory system 
of relationship. A brief notice of these institutions will 
therefore not be out of place in this work. 

The Masai are divided into four clans named //-AZser, 
Il-Menagana, Il-Mokesen, and Il-Molelyan. These clans are 
not exogamous, but they are divided into subclans which 
are exogamous. For example, the //-Azser clan contains, 
among others, the subclans /n-gidofig? and //-Parkenett. A 
man of the /z-gidoftg¢ subclan may not marry a daughter of 
an Jn-gidoig? man; but he may marry the daughter of an 
ll-Parkeneti man; that is, he may not marry a woman of 
his own subclan, but he is free to marry a woman of his 
own clan provided that she belongs to a different subclan. 
Further, he is at liberty to marry a woman of any clan other 
than his own; for instance, an //-Azser man may marry the 
daughter of a man of the //-Mefgana clan, or of the 
fl-Mokesen clan, or of the //-Molelyan clan. Members of 
the various subclans are usually to be found in all the 
districts and subdistricts into which the territory of the 
Masai is divided. Marriages are not affected by geo- 
graphical considerations. In all the subdistricts a man 
enjoys the same marital rights which he has in his own 
subdistrict. 

From the foregoing statement it will be seen that among 

1 Sir Harry Johnston, Zhe Uganda 
Protectorate, Secdnd Edition (London, 
1904), ii. 796 sgg.3 A. C. Hollis, Zhe 
Masai, their Language and Folklore 
(Oxford, 1905), pp. iii., xi. sgg. The 
other principal authorities on the Masai 
are Joseph Thomson, 7hrough Masai 
Land (London, 1895), pp. 403 599.3 
Oscar Baumann, Durch Massailand 
sur Nelguelle (Berlin, 1894), pp. 156 
sqg.; S. L. Hinde and H. Hinde, The 
Last of the Masat (London, 1901) ; 
M. Merker, Deze ./asad (Berlin, 1904). 

2 For this information I am indebted 

to the courtesy of Mr. A. C. Hollis, 
who has very kindly placed at my 
disposal the results of his careful en- 
quiries into the Masai system of 
relationship. These results will soon, 
I hope, be published entire in the 
Journal of the Royal Anthropological 
Institute. Meantime for some of the 
facts mentioned in the text I may refer 
readers to Mr. Hollis’s book The 
Masai (Oxford, 1905), pp. 260 sg., 
303. As to the clans and subclans of 
the Masai with their rule of exogamy 
see also M. Merker, Die Masai (Berlin, 

1904), pp. 16 s¢g. 

xHI EXOGAMY AMONG THE MASAI 409 

the Masai descent is reckoned in the male line; children 

belong to the clan of their father. Thus the Masai have 

the system of father-kin. Yet a trace of the system of Traces of 
mother-kin seems to survive in the remarkable rights which ae 
a man enjoys over his sister’s children, who under a system Masai. 

of mother-kin would be his natural heirs. “A maternal Reciprocal 
uncle (o/-apu) exercises great influence over his nephews, as "ightsofthe 
it is believed that if he were to curse them they would die. uncie ana 
He can at any time stop a fight in which one of his nephews Bis sister's 
is engaged by merely calling on his nephew to desist, as each other. 
the nephew would be afraid of his right arm withering if he 

were to disobey. This power is to a certain extent 
reciprocal, and if a man were to start beating his wife he 

would have to stop if his maternal nephew ordered him to 

do so... . If the uncle desires anything that is the property 

of his nephew’s father, the nephew must buy it from his 

father, who will at once give it up when he knows for whom 

it is required. This power of taking property is reciprocal 

and in fact applies to all persons who address one another 

as ol-apu and ol-le-’ng-apu, etc. A nephew, for instance, 

can go to his maternal uncle’s kraal, and if his uncle is 

absent, he can slaughter a goat or drink his uncle’s milk, 

and nothing would be said. He cannot, however, drive off 

a cow without his uncle’s sanction, but permission would 

not be refused.” * 

While the sexual relations of the Masai, judged by our First ana 
standard, are very loose in some respects, they are exceed- seein 
ingly strict in others. “First cousins and second cousins forbidden 
may not marry, but there is no objection to third cousins eeicas 
marrying if the relationship is no nearer than o/-/e-’sdtwa (or of third 
en-e-'sotwa). Thus, a man’s son’s son’s son may not marry [One are 
the man’s brother’s son’s son’s daughter, nor may a man’s allowed 
son’s son’s son marry the sister’s son’s son’s daughter, but bape 
there would be no objection to a man’s son’s son’s son to marry 
marrying the brother’s daughter’s daughter’s daughter or the es 
sister’s daughter’s daughters daughter. Likewise, though a 
man’s son’s son may not marry the man’s maternal uncle’s 
son’s son’s daughter, he may marry the maternal uncle’s 
son’s daughter's daughter. These unions are always con- 

1 From Mr, A. C. Hollis’s unpublished papers. 

Punish- 
ments for 
incest 
among the 
Masai. 

Continence 
observed 
by the 
Masai in 
making 
poison and 
brewing 
honey- 
wine. 

410 TOTEMISM IN EAST AND CENTRAL AFRICA cuap. 

tingent on the two parties not belonging to the same subclan. 
The rules of consanguinity and affinity which regulate 
marriage also apply to the sexual intercourse of warriors 
with immature girls before marriage and to the rights of 
hospitality after marriage. No warrior may select as his 
sweetheart (e-sanja) a girl of the same subclan as himself, or 
one who is more nearly related to him than third cousin, 
and only then if the terms of address used are o/-/e-’sdtwa 
and en-e-’sdtwa; and no traveller may cohabit with the wife 
of a member of his own age-group’ if that man is married 
to one of his near relations, or to a daughter of his subclan. 

“If a man is knowingly guilty of incest, or has sexual 
intercourse with a daughter of his own subclan, he is 
punished by his relations, who flog him and slaughter some 
of his cattle. If he fornicates or commits adultery with a 
daughter of a member of his own age-group, he is punished 
by the members of his age-group. His kraal is destroyed, 
he is severely beaten, and a number of his oxen are 
slaughtered. If a warrior or boy commits adultery with a 
wife of a man belonging to his father’s age-group, he is 
solemnly cursed by the members of that age-group. Unless 
he pays the elders tw6 oxen, one for them to eat and the 
other to enable them to buy honey-wine, and prays them to 
remove the curse, it is supposed he will die. If a man 
unintentionally commits incest—and it is quite conceivable 
that a man might not know his fourth or fifth cousin, for 
instance, should the two live in different districts—he has 
to present a cow to the girl’s relations in order to ‘kill the 
relationship ’ (a-ar eng-anyit).” ? 

Like many other savages the Masai on certain occasions 
observe strict continence from purely superstitious motives. 
One of these occasions is the making of poison. During 
the eight days that a man is making poison he is treated 
almost as an outcast. He must leave his house at 4 A.M. 
and not return till 7 P.M., when he must rub clay on his 
body; he may not eat when the sun is above the horizon ; 
he may only relieve nature far away from the kraal; and he 

1 As to the age-groups of the Masai _et-e-’sofwa, see below, pp. 416 sg. 

see below, pp. 412 sgg. As to the 2 From Mr. A. C, Hollis’s unpub- 
relationship denoted by o/-/e.’sdtwa and _ lished papers. 

XH EXOGAMY AMONG THE MASAI 4lt 

must sleep alone. Perhaps some civilised reader may jump 
to the conclusion that this isolation of thé poison-maker is a 
sage precaution, a sort of quarantine, designed to obviate 
the risk of his inadvertently infecting some of his friends 
with the venom. If any of my readers has made that jump, 
I must beg him to retrace his step. Such an inference, like 
most attempts to rationalise superstition, only betrays an 
incapacity in the civilised mind to place itself at the point 
of view of the savage. The motive which induces the 
Masai poison-maker to keep aloof from his fellows is not 
any regard for them; far from it, what he fears is not that 
the poison would hurt them, but that they would hurt the 
poison ; he believes that were he to break any of these rules 
the poison would have no effect. This is not a matter of 
inference ; it is the avowed belief of the Masai. In like 
manner strict continence must be observed by the persons 
who are brewing honey-wine ; and in this case there can be 
no question of infection. A man and a woman are chosen 
to brew the honey-wine, and it is considered essential that 
both of them should be chaste for two days before they 
begin to brew and for the whole of the six days that the 
brewing lasts. A hut is set apart for them and they occupy 
it till the wine is ready for drinking ; but they are strictly 
forbidden to sleep together. When the wine is made, they 
are paid and go their ways. The Masai think that if the 
couple were to break the rule of continence while the wine 
is brewing, not only would the wine be undrinkable but the 
bees which made the honey would fly away.’ We shall in 
vain attempt to understand the marriage customs of savages 
if we do not allow for the element of superstition in them. 
The savage attributes to the relations of the sexes with The savage 
each other a certain mysterious influence, a magical virtue, “ues 
which the civilised man has long ceased to associate with mysterious 
such processes and which he finds it hard even in imagina- ei 
tion to comprehend. Yet some of these superstitions, virtue to 
incomprehensible though they may be to us, probably lie $7). 
at the root of many customs which we still strictly 
observe without being able to assign any valid reason for 
doing so. 

1 From Mr. A. C. Hollis’s unpublished papers. 

Mutual 
avoidance 
of a man 
and his 
wife’s 
mother. 

The 
levirate. 

Age-groups 
or age- 
grades 
among the 
Masai. 

412 TOTEMISM IN EAST AND CENTRAL AFRICA cuap. 

Among the Masai, as among so many savages, a man 
and his wife’s mother must mutually avoid each other, Ifa 
son-in-law enters his mother-in-law’s hut, she must retire 
into the inner compartment and sit on the bed, while he 
remains in the outer compartment. Thus separated they 
may converse with each other. Own brothers-in-law and 
sisters-in-law (0-sindani le-anyit and e-sindani e-anyit) must 
also avoid one another, though this rule does not apply to half 
brothers-in-law and sisters-in-law (0-sindani and e-sindanz). 
When a man dies, his full brother may not marry the 
widow, but she may be taken to wife by his half-brother, 
the son of the same father but not of the same mother. 
Indeed the only person who is allowed to marry a widow 
is one of her deceased husband’s half-brothers or paternal 
cousins. However, it often happens that widows never 
marry again but dwell with their children in the kraal of 
the eldest living brother of their late husband, who 
becomes the guardian of his nephews and nieces.’ 

Reference has been made to the age-groups or age- 
grades, as they are now commonly called, into which the 
Masai are divided. These are determined by the times at 
which boys and girls are circumcised. The account which 
the people themselves give of the custom runs thus :—“ The 
Masai have what they call ages (’/-pororz, singular of poror or 
ol boror). Children are not all circumcised together ; they 
are divided up into ages, for they are not all alike in point 
of years. First of all the big ones are circumcised, and the 
small ones wait until they grow up (ae. until they reach the 
age of puberty). Now, those who are circumcised first 
belong to what is called the right-hand circumcision, and 
that is one age. The younger ones wait and are circum- 
cised later." They also become members of this age. 
When the next circumcision festivals are held, those 
circumcised belong to what is called the left-hand 
circumcision, and that is the next age. The younger 
ones wait as before, and when they are circumcised they 
likewise join this age. Now, two ages are considered 
equivalent to one _ generation. Each age has three 
divisions, first, those known as ‘The big ostrich feathers,’ 

1 From Mr. A. C. Hollis’s unpublished papers. 

‘XUL EXOGAMY AMONG THE MASAI 413 

secondly, those called ‘The helpers,’ and thirdly, those 
known as ‘ Our fleet runners,’” + 

To make this account more explicit it should be said The age- 

that when leave is granted by the medicine-man (o/ oibonz) aes 

4 etermined 
to hold the circumcision festivals, one feast is held in every by the 
subdistrict every year for four years in succession, and cite 
all those circumcised during these four years belong to the youth of 
right-hand circumcision. An interval of about three and a Doth sexes 
half years then intervenes before another festival is held. cumcised. 
All youths circumcised during the next four years belong to 
the left-hand circumcision. Boys asa rule are circumcised 
between the ages of thirteen and seventeen. Orphans and 
the children of poor parents often wait until they are 
twenty.” 

Thus four circumcision ceremonies are performed in au persons 
every seven and a half years, and all persons circumcised at et 
any time during such a period constitute an age-group or the same 
age-grade (ol poror or of boror); hence the period which pede 
constitutes an age-grade is seven andahalf years. Further, a half 
two successive age-grades are known respectively as “ the Jititeon 
right-hand circumcision” and “the left-hand circumcision ” age-grade. 
and together form a generation. Each of these two 
age- grades has to observe certain rules, which forbid 
the pronunciation of certain words and the eating of 
certain foods. Thus persons of “the right-hand circum- Taboos 
cision” may eat neither the heads nor the tails of slaughtered eae 
cattle ; they may not call a fold for goats eng an en dare, peat = 
they must call it e merata en dare; they may not call a 
head of okungu, they must call it of ogunja; they may not 
call a tail of gorom, they must call it ez asuba. Persons of 
“the left-hand circumcision” may not eat pumpkins and 
cucumbers ; and they may not call arrow-poison e sajét, 
they must call it e dueratz. To do or say anything in the 
presence of one who is forbidden by custom to say or do it 

is an insult which often provokes retaliation on the spot? 

1A. C. Hollis, Zhe Masai, their Ol poror is the form given by Mr, A. 
Language and Folklore (Oxford, 1895), | C. Hollis. 
pp. 261 sg. Compare M. Merker, 2A. C. Hollis, The Alasaz, therr 
Die Masai (Berlin, 1904), pp. 70 sg., Language and Folklore, p. 262 note; 
who gives of bordr as the Masai ex- M. Merker, Die Afasai, pp. 60 sg. 
pression for an age-group or age-grade. 3M. Merker, of, cét. p. 71. 

414. ZYOTEMISM IN EAST AND CENTRAL AFRICA cuap. 

The On this institution of age-grades rests the military 
military — organisation of the Masai. At circumcision a youth enters 

organisa- e . . 
tion of the the army as a recruit (o/ Jarnoti, plural 2 barnoZ) ; after 
Masai rests passing into the next age-grade he becomes a full warrior 

division of (of murant or ol morant, plural cf muran or tl moran), All 
ey the men who have been circumcised about the same time, 
grades. and who therefore belong to the same age-grade, are known 
by a distinctive name, such as “the White Swords” or 
“the Invincibles,”” If a man was circumcised at the age 
of fifteen, he will have completed his terms of service as 
a recruit and. as a warrior at the age of thirty, since 
two age-grades together make up a period of fifteen years. 
In former days a man might not marry until he had served 
Cohabita- his time as a soldier, that is, until he was about thirty 
cn ide years of age; but meanwhile he was free to cohabit, and 
wih did habitually cohabit, with young unmarried girls in a 
Sees separate kraal, where the warriors and the girls lived 
Diet of the together. After circumcision warriors plait their hair and 
warriors. subsist entirely on the flesh, blood, and milk of their cattle, 
varied with honey and sugar-cane. Game and all kinds 
of corn are forbidden to them; they may not smoke nor 
They may touch intoxicants. Moreover, they will not eat milk and flesh 
meihangd Of the same day. Their custom is to eat nothing but milk 
Beet on te for some days and then nothing but flesh and blood for some 
for fear o¢ ays more. But before they pass from one diet to the other, 
injuring they take a strong purgative to make sure that no trace of 
the cows. . : : 
the former food remains in their stomach ; so scrupulous are 
they not to bring milk into contact with flesh and blood. 
This custom they observe from a superstitious fear that such 
a contact would injure the udders of the cows from which the 
milk was drawn and would diminish their supply of milk. 
At marriage a man is freed from all restrictions on his diet ; 
he may now eat vegetable food, drink honey-wine, and snuff 
tobacco. He becomes an elder (0/ soruo, plural z/ moruak), 

retires from the standing army, and passes into the reserve.’ 

1A. C. Hollis, Zhe Afasai, their Through Masai Land(London, 1885), 
Language and Folkiore, pp. xvi. 3023; pp. 426 sgg.; S. L. Hinde and H. 
M. Merker, Die Wasa?, pp. 66 sg., 73, Hinde, Zhe Last of the Masai (London, 
599, 82 sgg.; Oscar Baumann, Durch 1901), pp. 55, 56 sgg., 66 sg9.,-72 59g. 
Massailand sur Nilquelle (Berlin, As to the diet of the warriors and elders, 
1894), pp. 161 sg.; Joseph Thomson, see J. Thomson, Zhrough Afasai Land, 

EXOGAMY AMONG THE MASAI 

XIN 

415 

Further, membership of an age-grade carries with it rights of 
certain rights of hospitality, which any member is entitled hospitality 
to claim from his fellows in other villages. Thus we are members 
told, in the words of the Masai themselves, that “when a orem 
Masai goes to other kraals to pay a visit, he does not on entitled to 
his arrival enter a hut unless he knows the owner, for if he G2 "™ 
belongs, for instance, to the Aimer age, he must not enter fellows. 
the hut of one of the Kishumu age, as he does not belong 
to this age. He will ask where the huts of the members of 
the Aimer age are, and when he has been shown them, he 
will enter one. When he has entered, the owner of the hut 
leaves him and goes to search for a place to sleep in else- 
where, the stranger remaining with his wife. Or if the 
owner of the hut has several wives, he goes to sleep with 
one of these, leaving the stranger in the hut he entered. A 
Masai cannot refuse hospitality to a stranger (of his own 
age) for he is afraid that the other members of his age will 
curse him, and he will die.” ? 

From this native account we gather, first, that in a 
village or kraal the huts of people of the same age-grade are 
grouped together ; and, second, that men of the same age- 
grade have a right to share each other’s wives, in fact that 
something like sexual communism prevails between men 
and women of the same age-group. This latter inference Sexual 
is confirmed by what we learn both of the sexual privileges P"y'v8° 
and of the sexual disabilities which,an age-grade entails abilities 
upon its members. On the one hand we have seen that Speen 
man is severely punished by members of his own age-grade “se-grades. 
if he has sexual intercourse with any of their daughters ; 
and that he is fined or solemnly cursed’ by members of his 
father’s age-grade if he commits adultery with one of their 
wives? On the other hand, men are free to cohabit with 
women, married or unmarried, of their own age-grade. On 

PP. 429-431, 4433 P. Reichard, other. On this subject see further my 

Deutsch-Ostafrika (Leipsic, 1892), pp. 
287 sg.3; O. Baumann, /c.; M. 
Merker, Die Masai, pp. 32 59.3 A. 
C. Hollis, The Masai, their Language 
and Folklore, p. xvi. Of these writers 
Captain Merker is the only one who 
explains why the Masai will not bring 
milk and flesh into contact with each 

paper ‘* Folklore in the Old Testa- 
ment,” in Aztkropologtcal Essays pre- 
sented to E. B. Tylor (Oxford, 1907), 
PP. 151 sgg. 

1A, C. Hollis, The AVasat, their 
Language and Folklore, pp. 287 sq. 

2 See above, p. 410. 

The Masai 
seem to 
live in a 
state of 
group- 
marriage 
regulated 
by the 
age-groups 
and the 
exogamy 
of the 
subclans. 

The 
classifi- 
,catory 
system 

of relation- 
ship among 
the Masai. 

416 ZYOTEMISM IN EAST AND CENTRAL AFRICA cnapr. 

this subject the Masai themselves say :—“ No warrior or 
boy may commit adultery with a woman of his father’s age. 
If he does so, and it becomes known, he is cursed. Should 
he be cursed, he pays two oxen (one in lieu of honey-wine), 
and he prays the elders to remove the curse. The elders 
eat the ox when they drink their honey-wine. But this is 
not the case if a man commits adultery or fornication with 
a woman or girl of his own age. This is not an offence.”! 
“From this it will be seen,” says Mr. Hollis, “that the 
Masai are polyandrous as well as polygamous. A man 
may marry as many wives as he can afford to purchase, and 
a woman may cohabit with any man belonging to her 
husband’s age.”* This seems equivalent to saying that 
sexual communism, or something very like it, prevails 
between all the men of one age-grade and all the women 
of the corresponding age-grade, subject no doubt to the rule 
of exogamy which forbids a man to marry or have sexual 
intercourse with a woman of his own subclan. In other 
words, the Masai appear to live in a state of group-marriage 
based on the organisation of the whole community in age- 
grades and restricted by the exogamy of the subclans. 

With such a social organisation the Masai naturally 
possess the classificatory system of relationship. Their 
terms of relationship differ accordingly as the relative is 
spoken of indirectly or addressed directly. For example, 
“my father” referred ,to indirectly is menye, but addressed 
directly he is papa. “My mother” referred to indirectly is 
Agoto, but addressed directly she is yezyo. In the generation 
above his own a man applies the same term “ my father” 
(menye or papa) to his father and to his father’s brothers ; 
and he applies the same term “my mother ” (goto or yetyo) 
to his mother, to his mother’s sisters, and to the wives of 
his mother’s brothers. In his own generation he applies the 
same terms o/-alashe, “ brother,” and eng-anashe, “ sister,” 
indirectly to his brothers and sisters and to his cousins, the 
sons and daughters of his father’s brothers. On the other 
hand, he does not, as by analogy we should expect, apply 
the terms “ brother” and “sister” to his first cousins, the sons 

1 A.C. Hollis, The Masai, their 2 A, C. Hollis, of, cit. p. 312, 
Language and Folklore, p. 312. note?, 

XHI 

EXOGAMY AMONG THE MASAI 417 

and daughters of his mother’s sisters ; h¢ calls them indirectly 
ol-le-’sdtwa or en-e-’sdtwa according as they are male or 
female ; and he has different terms again, as we might have 
anticipated, for his other first cousins, the children either of 
his father’s sisters or of his mother’s brothers. A husband 
applies different terms to his wife and to his wife’s sisters ; 
and a wife applies different terms to her husband and to her 
husband’s brothers. In the generation below his own a man 
applies the same terms o/-aydni, en-gerai indirectly to his 
sons and to his brothers’ sons; and he applies the same 
terms en-dito, en-gerai indirectly to his daughters and to his 
brothers’ daughters.’ 

§ 4. Totemism among the Taveta 

The Taveta or Wa-taveta are a mixed race of Hamitic The Taveta 

and Bantu stock, who number between three and four acne 
thousand souls, and inhabit the rich and fertile district of 
Taveta at the foot of the great snow-clad Kilima Njaro, the 
highest mountain in Africa. Through the country winds 
the Lumi River, its banks covered with luxuriant forests of 
gigantic trees festooned with creepers, while in the glades 
of the forest appear a few picturesque huts surrounded by a 
grove of bananas or by a field of corn and sweet potatoes.” 
All land in the Taveta forests belongs to the inhabitants, 
each member of a family owning a portion. No stranger 
may cultivate a patch of ground without the owner's leave. 
The plains are considered no man’s land. Dread of the 
Masai formerly prevented the Taveta from settling there.* 

All the Taveta respect the ground-hornbill (szudide, in TheTaveta 
Kiswahili ndzte), a large black bird with red gills and white a 
markings on its wings. It is believed that anybody who kills hornbill. 
one of these birds will be struck down by a mysterious disease 
which will carry him off in a few days. But being revered 

1 From Mr. Hollis’s unpublished 
papers, which he has very kindly 
placed at my disposal. 

2 A. C. Hollis, ‘Notes on the 
History and Customs of the People of 
Taveta, East Africa,” Journal of the 
African Society, No. I, (October 1901) 
p- 98. 

VOL. II 

3 A. C. Hollis, in Journal of the 
African Society, No. I. p. 118. 

* A. C. Hollis, of. ct. pp. 103 sg. 
Mr. Hollis writes to me (27th May 
1908) that the sacred bird is the 
ground -hornbill, not the turkey - 
buzzard as he stated in the paper 
referred to. With regard to the 

2E 

Totemic 
families of 
the Taveta. 

The sub- 
families or 
subclans 
of the 
Taveta are 

exogamous, 

418 ZTOTEMISM IN EAST AND CENTRAL AFRICA cuap. 

by the whole people the ground-hornbill cannot properly be 
described as a totem. However, the Taveta are divided 
into four clans, each of which is subdivided into a number 
of totemic families. The following is a list of the families 
with their sacred objects, which we may call their totems :— 

Family. Totem. 

None. 

Grant’s gazelle (Gazella granti; native Ki- 
taveta name datar?). 

Impala antelope (Aepyceros melampus ; native 
name sarigha). 

Vegetable called in Kitaveta maadu, in Ki- 
swahili mnavu. 

Muinjari-wa-Kakuku 
Shomi 
Moserengi 

Muinjari-wa-Mesera 

Ndighiri-wa-Mbele 
Ndighiri-wa-Mkamati 

Suiya Spleen of any animal. 
Chokawa 
MDOHO A small kind of pigeon called in Kitaveta 
Mrambeni : 
kthunguru. 
Ngumba 

Kwisu-wa-Ugweno 

eng Portion of the stomach of any animal (in Ki- 
taveta £ita-shira). 

Dakama 

Manyi 

Mbale 

Somandzi-wa-Reta 

Muru 

Somandzi-wa-Kahe 

Somandzi-wa-Kiruveni 

Mushroom. 

A monkey (Cercopithecus-viridis- griseo; in 
Kitaveta mgima, in Kiswahili £272). 

A tree called mringaringa much employed 
for the purpose of making beehives or 
honey-barrels. 

SORIA: Umba 

| 
| 
4 
| 

'In regard to rules of marriage Mr. A. C. Hollis informs 
me? that the totemic families or clans, as he would now 
call them, of the Taveta are not exogamous, but that the 

ground-hornbills of Africa we are told 
that since the days of Bruce there are 
few African travellers who have not 
met with and described these birds, 
whose large size and fearless habits 
render them conspicuous as they walk 
or run on the ground or perch on 
trees when they are disturbed. The 

genus is found from Abyssinia to 
Natal. See Alfred Newton, Diction- 
ary of Birds (London, 1893-1896), pp. 
433 59- 
A. C. Hollis, in Journal of the 
African Society, No. I. pp. 98, 104." 
2 In a letter dated Nairobi, East 
Africa Protectorate, June 15th, 1909. 

XII TOTEMISM AMONG THE TAVETA 419 

subfamilies or subclans are so; that is, a man may marry a 
woman of his own totemic family or clan, provided that she 
does not belong to the same subfamily or subclan as himself. 
Thus, for example, a Taveta man of the Somandzi-wa-Kahe 
family or clan may marry a woman of that clan, provided 
that they do not both belong, say, to the Mnene-wa- 
Somandzi subfamily or subclan. Again, a man and woman 
of the Kwisu-wa-Ugweno family or clan may marry each 
other, provided that they do not both belong to the same 
subdivision of it. In these respects the marriage rules of 
the Taveta agree with those of the Masai.! 

When a man dies, his possessions are divided among The 
his sons, the eldest receiving the lion’s ‘share, and_ his levitate 
wives go to live with his eldest surviving brother, or, if 
there is no brother, with the eldest surviving cousin (father’s 
brother's son). A woman inherits nothing.” 

Like the Masai, the Taveta are divided into age-grades., Age-grades 
Each “age” (rika, in Kiswahili Azvimu) is a period of ate 
fifteen years and has a special name. The government of 
the country is entrusted for periods of about fifteen years 
to the men of one of these age-grades, at whose head are 
four middle-aged chiefs. It is said that the members of a 
particular age-grade come into power whenever they can 
kidnap the daughter of one of the ruling chiefs or one 
of his contemporaries. In this they are aided by the 
elders of the former age-grade, who went out of power 
some fifteen years before, when the reigning age-grade came 
in; for these deposed elders are glad to treat the rulers for 
the time being as those rulers once treated them. In olden 
times the reigning chiefs and their fellows never suffered 
themselves to be ousted without a battle-royal, and it was 
with some difficulty and danger that the younger men seized 
the reins of government. Formerly it was a matter of no 
small consequence to belong to the reigning age-grade, for 
two-thirds of the spoils of war and of the duty (Aomgo) leviable 
on all caravans passing through the country were appropri- 
ated by the chiefs and their contemporaries, while the rest 
went to the witch-doctors and the other old men? 

1 See above, p. 408. African Society, No. I. p. 118. 
2 A. C. Hollis, in Journal of the 3 A. C, Hollis, of. cit. pp. 104-106, 

Country 
of the 
A-kamba. 

Mr. C. W. 
Hobley's 
researches 
among the 
A-kamba. 

Mode of 
life of the 
A-kamba, 

420 TOTEMISM IN EAST AND CENTRAL AFRICA cuap. 

§ 5. Totemism among the A-kamba 

The A-kamba or Wakamba are a Bantu tribe in the 
British East Africa Protectorate. They occupy a triangular 
stretch of country some ninety miles wide from east to 
west by a hundred and fifty miles long from north to 
south, Roughly speaking, their territory is bounded on the 
west by the Uganda Railway from Mutito Andei to Kiu 
stations and thence northward by a line running as far as 
the eastern slopes of Mount Donyo Sapuk ; on the north it is 
bounded by the Tana river and from the junction of the 
Thika and Tana by a line running east as far as the 
northern end of the Mumoni range and onward to 38° 30’ 
East Longitude; while on the east the boundary runs 
south along that meridian as far as 2° 30’ South Latitude. 
The tribe, which is said to be probably the purest Bantu 
race in British East Africa, has lately been studied with 
care by the Administrator, Mr. C. W. Hobley. He has 
collected a large amount of unpublished information on the 
tribe, and generously allows me to draw on his manuscript 
materials. The following account of the social and totemic 
system of the A-kamba is accordingly based on_ his 
researches.’ 

The people call themselves in the plural A-Kamba 
(singular Mu-Kamba), though they are more generally 
known as Wakamba (with the Kiswahili prefix Wa—mean- 
ing “people”). I shall retain their own form of the name. 
They are a sturdy race of husbandmen, who raise a large 
variety of crops, including sorghum, eleusine grain, sugar-cane, 
sweet potatoes, yams, beans, manioc, pumpkins, and bananas. 
They alsd keep cattle, sheep, goats, and bees; they are 
skilful at working iron and copper wire into bracelets, 
necklaces, and so forth; and they make pottery without the 
use of the wheel. Their houses are of the common circular 
type with walls about four feet high and a conical roof. 
They kindle fire by twirling a piece of hard wood on a 

1 For an earlier account of the Wakamba und ihre Nachbarn,” Ze?¢- 
A-kamba or Wakamba, see J.M.Hilde- schrift fir Ethnologie, x. (1878) pp. 
brandt, ‘‘Ethnographische Notizen tiber 347 sgq. 

XUI TOTEMISM AMONG THE A-KAMBA 421 

piece of soft wood, using dry leaves as tinder. In war the 
only weapons they carry are bows and arrows, swords and 
clubs ; unlike the southern Bantu tribes they do not employ 
spears and shields. They are very good shots with the bow ; 
nearly all their arrows are envenomed with a poison made 
from the vad tree and the poison gland of the scorpion. 

The A-kamba are divided into a large number of Exoga- 
exogamous clans, some at least of which appear to be poeta 
totemic. Two classes of clans are distinguished, namely A-kamba. 
the original clans and the subdivisions of them. For 
example, Mu-tui is an original clan and there are three 
subdivisions of it, namely Mu-Sii, Mu-Mui, and Mwa- 
Ithangwa. Originally members of these subdivisions were 
not allowed to marry each other, though curiously enough they 
might marry back into the original stock. Thus a Mu-Sii 
might not marry a Mu-Mui, but either of them might marry a 
Mu-Tui. But this custom is not rigorously enforced nowa- 
days ; for they say that the numbers of each clan are becom- 
ing so great that the intermarriages in question are no longer 
regarded as a serious offence. A man may marry more than 
one wife from one clan or subdivision of a clan, but he may 
not marry two sisters. The widespread custom of providing a 
visitor with a temporary wife prevails among the A-kamba ; 
but the woman thus lent to a guest must not be a member 
of his own clan. The totemic prohibitions recorded by Mr. Totemic 
Hobley are few in number. Thus, among the clans (saz) ine ‘he 
of the Kitui district, the Ngutu have the liver of animals A-kamba. 
for their totem (u¢huku); another, the Ndewa, is prohibited 
from killing a species of kite (#bungu). Among the clans 
(baz) of the Mumoni district, the Ba-Nzi are forbidden to 
eat the lungs and the Ba-Lema to eat the liver of any 
animal; one half of the Ba-Mutongoi may not eat pig’s 
flesh, and several clans are debarred from eating the flesh of 
the bush-buck. This bush-buck (called by them xdoya or 
ndwaya) is one of the principal totems of the A-kamba. 
Members of the Eombi clan are particularly strict in 
observing the taboo, It is said that some hunters once 
broke out into dreadful sores in consequence of killing a 
bush-buck ; so they tabooed the animal for the future. 
People who have the bush-buck for their totem may not 

422. TOTEMISM IN EAST AND CENTRAL AFRICA cnar. 

Prohibition keep a tame animal of ‘the species in their village; they 

Mao are forbidden to touch a bush-buck or even to wear pieces 
animal of its skin. Members of the Asi clan are very strict 
oe observers of their own particular taboo, which is the 

speciés. prohibition to eat liver. Were an Asi man to eat liver, it 
is believed that his eyes would weep continually afterwards. 
Women have to observe the totemic taboos equally with the 
men, and in addition they may never eat the tongue or heart 

Aman of an animal. A married man is forbidden to eat the totem 

mye animal of his wife’s clan, and so are his children. 

wife's Apart from their totemic animals the A-kamba regard 

totem other birds and beasts with superstitious respect or fear and 

Birds and . . 
beasts of draw omens from their appearance. Thus there is a small 
asap kind of woodpecker with a red head called ngoma komt, 

A-kamba, Which the A-kamba will not kill. If it calls out on the 
left side of a traveller, it is a good omen and may lead the 
lucky man to a dead elephant. If it sings out on the 
traveller’s right side, the omen is not good; but if it calls out 
ahead of the wayfarer, he may count on being attacked by 
a lion or a rhinoceros. If a hyzna or jackal crosses your 
path from left to right, it is auspicious ; but if it crosses the 
path from right to left, it is inauspicious. The ground- 
hornbill (zdundu) is a bird of ill omen. If it perches on a 
tree near a village so as to overlook the village and utters 
its deep bass booming note, some one in the village is sure 
to sicken and die within a few days; so people place 
broken cooking-pots in the trees near a village to frighten 
away the birds. These examples shew, what should be 
obvious without them, that totemic peoples entertain super- 
stitious beliefs in regard to animals other than their totems 
and draw! omens from them ; which should be a warning 
against rashly inferring that a beast or bird of augury must 
necessarily be a totem. The truth is that totemism is only 
one of a multitude of forms in which superstitions touching 
animals and plants have crystallised. 

Story of the The A-kamba have also a great wealth of folk-tales, in 

ce i which birds and beasts play conspicuous parts without having 

andthe anything to do with totemism. One of them is clearly akin 

ee to the Bechuana story of the origin of death... Once on a 

1 See above, pp. 376 59. 

XU TOTEMISM AMONG THE A-KAMBA 423 

time, so say the A-kamba, God (Exgaz) sent out the chameleon, chameleon 
a frog, and a bird called ztoroko, which is a kind of thrush Preachea 
with a black head and a buff breast (Cossypha irnolacus), rectlon bs 
The three were charged by God to find people who died pene 
one day and came to life again the next. So off they set, and they 
the chameleon leading the way, for in those days he was a pyc? © 
very important person indeed. They came to some people him. 
lying like dead; so the chameleon went up to them 

and said softly Nzwe, niwe, niwe. That annoyed the 
thrush, and he asked the chameleon testily what he was 
making that noise for. The chameleon answered, “I am 

only calling the people who go forward and then come 
back.” He said that the dead could come back to life, 

but the thrush derided the idea. Sure enough, however, 

in response to the call of the chameleon the dead people 
opened their eyes and listened to him. But here the thrush 

cut in and told them that dead they were and dead 

they must remain. Then away he flew, and though the 
chameleon preached to the corpses, telling them he had 

come from God to resuscitate them, and that they were 

not to believe the lies of that shallow sceptic the thrush, 
nevertheless the corpses obstinately refused to budge. 

So the chameleon returned to God and reported to him 

what had happened, and how when he preached the 
resurrection to the dead corpses the thrush had roared 

him down, so that the corpses could not hear a word he 

said. God then cross-questioned the thrush, who said that 

the chameleon so bungled his message that he felt it his im- 
perative duty to interrupt him. The confiding deity believed 

the thrush and being very angry with the chameleon he 
degraded him from his high estate and made him walk so 

slow, lurching to and fro before every step he takes. But 

God promoted the thrush to the office of wakening mankind 

from their slumber every morning, which he does punctually 

at 2 AM. two hours before the note of any other bird is 

heard in the tropical forest. 

Every married woman among the A-kamba is thought Spirituat 
to have two husbands, the one corporeal and the other eee ae 
spiritual. Her fertility is believed to depend on _ the A-kamba. 
attentions of her spiritual husband, who is the spirit of one 

Mutual 
avoidance 
of a man 
and his 
wife’s 
mother. 

Between 
the age of 
puberty 
and her 
marriage 

a girl must 
avoid her 
own father. 

424. TOTEMISM IN EAST AND CENTRAL AFRICA Chap, 

of her ancestors; and if she does not bear children, a 
ceremony is performed to propitiate the spiritual spouse.’ 

Among the A-kamba, as among so many exogamous 
peoples, a man has to avoid his mother-in-law. If they 
meet in the road, they both hide their faces and pass by 
in the bush on opposite sides of the road. Were a wife 
to hear that her husband had stopped and spoken to her 
mother in the road, she would leave him. When a man 
has business to discuss with his wife’s mother, he goes to 
her hut at night and she will talk to him from behind a 
partition? However, the A-kamba havea way of ridding 
themselves of this burdensome restriction. A man who wishes 
to do so, gives due notice of his intention, and then on a certain 
day the people of the neighbourhood assemble at the village 
where his mother-in-law lives. There they dance and feast 
at his expense, and he also formally presents a blanket both 
to his father-in-law and to his mother-in-law. After that he 
may communicate freely with his wife’s mother. 

Between the age of puberty and the time of her marriage 
a girl has in like manner to avoid her own father. If they 
meet in the road, she hides while he passes; nor may she 
ever go and sit near him in the village until the day comes 
when he tells her that she is betrothed to a certain man. 
After her marriage she does not avoid her father in any 
way. This prohibition of ordinary social intercourse 
between a father and his daughter so long as the girl is 
mature and unmarried can hardly be interpreted otherwise 
than as a precaution designed to prevent an improper 
intimacy between the two. The rule therefore confirms 
the like interpretation of all similar rules of avoidance 
between relatives of different sexes.® 

§ 6. Totemism among the Mweru* 

The Mweru are a very large tribe of the British East 
Africa Protectorate, inhabiting the northern and north- 

1 This interesting information as to 2 The rule of avoidance of a wife’s 
spiritual husbands among the A-kamba_ _— mother has also been recorded for the 
I derive from a letter of Mr. C. W. A-kamba by Mr. L. Decle (Three 
Hobley to me. The letter is dated Years in Savage Africa, p. 490). 
Nairobi, British East Africa, 21st 3 See above, pp. 77 sgg., 188 sg. 
June 1909. 4 For the following account of 

XII TOTEMISM AMONG THE MWERU 425 

eastern slopes of Mount Kenia and ithe Jombeni range. TheMweru 
They are not pure A-Kikuyu, but appear to have a *t divided 
strong strain of Masai blood. They are divided into exo- gamous 
gamous and totemic clans called mzwziria. No man may 74 
marry a woman of his own clan, but must seek a wife in clans 
another. The members of each clan have a distirictive 
badge or pattern, which they mark on their honey-pots ; 

they have other marks for their cattle, which are made on 

the ears and flanks of the beasts. Each clan has its totem 

called netiré or “the forbidden thing.” When the totem is A man 
an edible object, a youth may not eat it until he is adult Hot, 
and has been initiated. His father makes medicine and after 
performs a certain ceremony in which the youth has to take eee 
part. The young man can then eat his totem without 

suffering any ill effects from so doing. The following is a List of 

cae : : N 

list of Mweru clans with their totems, so far as these are Vert 

known :— totems. 
Clan (mwéria). Totem (zetiri). 

1. Ntowaita (in the Mweru lan- 
guage £u-ita means “ to cut”) 

2. Athanya { The twine with which their vyondo 
° ; : : or baskets are made. 
3. Njaru . : ; . . | White cattle. 
4. Nthia . : : . Speckled or mottled cattle. 
5. Ntuni . ‘ : . Red cattle. 
: A plant called mukuz which has 
ena | a edible root. 
7. Athinga Giraffe. 
8. Antuanthama (ante in ” the | 
Mweru language means Mpala. 
“ people”) ' 
9. Singamburi . Goats. 
“ 
10. pee ( the greedy } Neotragus (dié-dih). 
11. Angilo. , Black cattle. 
12. Mwianda (anda is the Mweru 1 Lice 
word for “louse ”) J : 

13. Amatu (#za/« in Mweru means Francolin, a kind of partridge 
“ears ”) (in Swahili, Azringende). 

Mweru totemism I am indebted to the has very courteously placed his unpub- 
kindness of Mr. C. W. Hobley, who lished materials at my disposat. 

Tradition- 
ary origin 
of the 
Ntowaita 
clan. 

Thedistrict 
of Baringo 
and its 
people. 

The 
pastoral, 
nomadic 
tribes of 
the plains, 
and the 
agricul- 
tural tribes 
of the hills. 

426 TOTEMISM IN EAST AND CENTRAL AFRICA cuatv. 

The first of these clans, the Ntowaita, is the dominant 
one. There is a legend to explain the origin of the name, 
which is supposed to come from a verb u-zta, “to cut.” 
The clan say that once when they were hard pressed by 
their enemies, who penned them in on the banks of.a river, 
their medicine-man (/aibon) by his magic art opened a 
passage for them through the waters, which, after they had 
passed over on dry land, closed up again behind them, thus 
presenting an impassable barrier to their pursuers. 

§ 7. Totemisién among the Suk, Maragwetta, and Kamasia 

The tribes which inhabit the large district of Baringo in 
the British East Africa Protectorate have recently been 
investigated by the Hon. K. R. Dundas, and he has dis- 
covered the existence of totemism and exogamy in several 
of them. Through the kindness of Mr. A. C. Hollis I 
am allowed to extract from Mr. Dundas’s unpublished 
papers the following account of the people and their social 
system." 

The district of Baringo stretches from Lake Rudolph 
on the north to Lake Hannington on the south, and from 
the eastern wall of the Great Rift Valley on the east to the 
Kamasia Hills, the Elgeyo Escarpment, and the Tirkwel 
River on the west. Little Lake MHannington, which 
terminates the Baringo district on the south, might 
appropriately be called the Lake of the Flamingoes, for 
these beautiful birds haunt the margin of the lake and its 
submerged banks by countless thousands, seeming in places 
to tinge its blue-green surface with a flush of rosy pink.’ 
The popuiation of the district falls naturally into two classes, 
the pastoral, nomadic tribes of the plains, and the agricul- 
tural tribes of the hills. To the nomad herdsmen of the 
plains belong the Suk and Turkana; to the husbandmen 
of the hills belong the Kamasia, Chebleng, Ndo, and Hill 
Suk. The two branches of the Suk are essentially the 

1 Mr. Dundas’s account of the tribes 2 Sir Harry Johnston, 7he Uganda 
of the Baringo district will probably be Protectorate, Second Edition (London, 
published in the Journal of the Royal 1904), i. 13 599. 

Anthropological Institute. 

XUI THE SUK, MARAGWETTA, AND KAMASIA 427 

same tribe, the Suk of the plains being an overflow from the 
hills, whence indeed their numbers are being daily recruited. 

Yet the population of the plains is thin and sparse. For 

the country is a desert of barren rocks or drifting sands, 
where lines of palm trees, dotted here and there, mark afar 

off the courses of the wadies or dry river-beds. In these 
lowlands the heat during the day is so intense that the 
natives rarely venture out except in the cool of the 
morning or of the evening. All the hill tribes build their Tne 
villages on terraces high up the hillside to escape the het 
swarms of mosquitoes which infest the low country during of the hit 
the rains. The only crops raised by these highlanders ‘> 
are eleusine and millet; the country is subject to long 
spells of severe drought, and when their crops fail, the 
natives of the more arid and barren regions in the north 

are often hard put to it, having to eke out a miserable 
subsistence for months together on roots, berries, rats, and 
mice, with an occasional windfall of an elephant to fill 
their shrunken bellies. Naturally they make the most 

of such water as they have and are expert in the art of 
irrigation. 

The Suk or Bawgott, as they call themselves, are a tall, The Suk 
well-built people, slim and lithe, light of foot and nimble 2° dvided 
runners. Like most East African tribes they are a mixed gamous 
race. They all speak dialects of one language which is ee 
closely akin to the Nandi tongue. The pastoral Suk, who clans with 
number about three thousand all told, seem to have begun ary 
to migrate into the Baringo district in the first half of the 
nineteenth century. The Suk tribe is divided into exoga- 
mous and totemic clans (orten, singular oro) with paternal 
descent ; in other words, each clan has its totem, no man may 
marry a woman of his own clan, and children take their clan 
and their totem from their father, not from their mother. 

The following is an incomplete list of the Suk clans with 
their totems :— 

[TABLE 

428 TOTEMISM IN EAST AND CENTRAL AFRICA cnapr. 

SUK CLANS AND TOTEMS 

Clan. Totem. Clan. Totem. 
Kagorondor . frog Chebarsitch lion 
Kaborai 35 Araboin . God or rain (ed/at) 
Chepbai 5 Kibbesetim 55 an 
Chemmergwan buffalo Chibbekapturu | hyzna 
Sangei 55 Legen 36 
Chebokuo Pe Chebajigwa bee 
Kajonyir 5 Turgoll . zebra 
Moiyoi - Orror ant-eater 
‘Kachemmergaw baboon Sopan . elephant 
Kagiserr sun Chepbau hyrax 
Saniak : kite Chéman e tree from which the 
Kachigawk . 2 i Suk get oil 
Chibberwongo lion Terem ? 
The Amongst the Suk a widow passes into the possession of 
ae a brother of her late husband ; if there is no brother, she’ 
the Suk. belongs to the clan of the deceased. 

The Chebleng is the name given to a number of tribes who 
Marsewet'@ occupy the western wall of the Elgeyo Valley, and of these 
are divided tribes the most northerly are the Maragwetta. Beyond 
Ltcmic them, still further to the north, are the Ndo, and beyond them 
clans. again the Hill Suk. The Maragwetta and Ndo resemble 
the Suk in their manners and customs, and like the Suk 
they are divided into totemic clans, but we are not told 
whether the clans are exogamous. Each clan occupies a 
separate geographical district. The following is a list of 
Maragwetta clans with their totems and districts :—— 

MARAGWETTA CLANS AND TOTEMS 

Clan. Totem. District. 
1. Tallai kogat, the crow Beya 
z. Oreon Kaksegai 
3. Sirichon . seran, the dik-dik, a small antelope | Katut 
4. Kamugo. kogai, the crow Kabioso 
5. Tallai kogai, the crow - Bogorror 

XIII THE SUK, MARAGWETTA, AND KAMASIA 429 

South of these districts are five more; each with its own 
totemic clan, but these have not been visited by our 
informant, the Hon. K. R. Dundas. 

The following is a list of Ndo clans with their totems 
and districts :— 

NDO CLANS AND TOTEMS 

Clan. Totem. District. 
1. Saban. : ; . | the elephant Sibo 
2. Tallai or Tulin . : . | the crow and jackal | Kapsagat 
3. Kapsegom ‘ : . | strere, the kite Kaksegom 
4. Tallai : : F . | 4ogaz, the crow Kapsekerr 
5. Tallai A ‘ : : 5 i Kamarein 
6. Kapsegom F . | strere, the kite Kauwau 
7. Tallai and Legen . . | crow and frog Mareich 
8. Chepbogamwoi . F . | the buffalo Kabell 

The Maragwetta are very nearly related to the Elgeyo, 
who are allied to the Nandi. The Ndo appear to be a 
mixture of Maragwetta and Suk, with perhaps a slight 
infusion of Masai or Samburu blood. On passing from the 
Hill Suk to the Maragwetta and Ndo a traveller is at once 
struck by the higher civilisation of the two latter tribes, 
whose houses, in contrast to those of the Suk, are exceed- 
ingly well built and collected in villages, which are arranged 
in terraces, one above the other, on the hillside, giving an 
impression of cleanliness and order. This superiority is 
probably due in great measure to the more favourable 
natural conditions under which they live ; for their country 
is fertile and well watered, so that wheres: the Suk hover 
on the verge of starvation, the Maragwetta and Ndo are 
comparatively rich ; famine is hardly known among them, 
and every year they sell the surplus stock of their grain and 
tobacco to other tribes. 

Superiority 
of the 
Maragwetta 
and Ndo 
to the Suk. 

Perhaps the most numerous of all the hill tribes in The 

Baringo are the Kamasia, who occupy the range of hi 

Kamasia 
Ils tribe is 

named after them. They form a very large and powerful divided 

tribe, divided into many geographical districts and many 
totemic clans. Mr. Dundas was unable to obtain a full list 

into many 
totemic 

clans, 

Marriage 
rules of the 
Kamasia 
clans ; 

only two 
clans are 
exogamous. 

The 
Turkana 
are divided 
into exo- 
gamous 
clans, 
which seem 
not to be 
totemic. 

430 TOTEMISM IN EAST AND CENTRAL AFRICA cHapP. 

of their totemic clans; but the following lists contain the 
clans in two districts, the Kapteberewa and the Nderois *+— 

KaMASIA CLANS (KAPTEBEREWA DISTRICY) 

Clan. Totem. Clan. Totem. 

1. Kapkeruwa the sun (sof) || 8. Kapsonok the sun (sof) 

2. Kaptogongo sj ibs i 9. Kapartaber Per 

3. Kamengo 3. at 10. Kapkolumon age hy 

4. Kapchessoito Nee 55 11. Tallai the leopard 

5. Kapalangwa ay. es 12. Kawbil the porcupine (sade?) 
6. Kameiwan Ree nha 13. Tungaw the hyzena (chesin) 
7. Kaperchino at 35 ' 14. Kirimos > i 

In this list the number of clans which have the sun for 
their totem is remarkable. Mr. Dundas understood from 
the Kamasia that members of all these Sun clans were free 
to intermarry with each other and even to marry wives of 
their own clans ; indeed that the only two exogamous clans 
in the list are the Kawbil and Tungaw. 

KAaMAsIA CLANS (NDEROIS DISTRICT) 

Clan. Totem. | Clan, Totem. 
1. Kimoi. . | the buffalo 4. Sot F . | the sun 
2. Mogei . . | the bee 5. Kimwan . | the guinea-fowl 
3. Tallai. . | the frog 6. Terriki . . | the elephant 

Ahother people of the Baringo district investigated by 
Mr. Dundas are the Turkana. It is commonly supposed 
that the Suk and Turkana are closely related to each other ; 
but beyond a superficial resemblance due to tall stature and 
a common infusion of Samburu blood, Mr. Dundas failed to 
discover any real similarity between the two. Indeed the 
differences between them are many and striking. Thus 
whereas the Suk are very slender, the Turkana are big-limbed 
and heavily built; whereas the Suk speak a peculiarly soft 

XUI THE SUK, MARAGWETTA, AND KAMASIA 432 

language, a dialect of Nandi, the Turkana speech, which 
closely resembles the Masai, is deep, hoarse, and guttural ; 
whereas the Suk circumcise both sexes, the Turkana circum- 

cise neither; whereas the Suk are very truthful and honest, 

the Turkana are very untruthful and dishonest, so that a 
traveller in their country has to keep a sharp look-out, for 

they will steal everything they can lay hands on. Lastly, 
although the Turkana are divided into exogamous clans, 

these clans, unlike those of the Suk, appear not to be 
totemic; at least after much questioning Mr. Dundas 
entirely failed to find any form of totemism among them. 

Each sex is divided inro three age-grades. The first age- Age-grades 
grade of the males is that of the young boy (xdue) ; the Tone the 
second is that of the warrior (¢gz/e); and the third is that 

of the old man (fasikou). The corresponding age-grades of 

the women are called apesur, aberu, and agemat. The 
generations of warriors are called asavanissia. Each 
generation, as it attains the warriors age, is given a 
distinctive name. Apparently a new age is created about 

every four or five years. 

§ 8. Totemism among the Nandi* 

The Nandi are a tribe of mixed blood, who apparently The Nandi, 
combine elements of the Bantu, the Nile negro, the Masai, aie 
and the pigmies, with perhaps a dash of the Galla. Some 
of the men are tall with features almost of the so-called 
Caucasian type; others are dwarfish with protruding cheek- 
bones and low foreheads. Until 1905 they inhabited the The Nandi 
whole of the highlands known as the Nandi plateau in 
the British East Africa Protectorate, extending from Mount 
Elgon on the north to the Nyando valley on the south, 
and being bounded by Kavirondo on the west and the 
Elgeyo escarpment on the, east. The country has an 

1} The Nandi are the subject of a 
valuable monograph by Mr. A. C. 
Hollis (7he Nandi, their Language 
and Folh-lore, Oxford, 1909), on 
which I have freely drawn. See also 
C. W. Hobley, Zastern Uganda, an 
Ethnological Survey (London, 1902), 

pp. 10 sgg., 36 sgg.3 ¢@. ‘*Anthro- 
pological Studies in Kavirondo and 
Nandi,” Journal of the Anthropological 
Institute, xxxiii. (1903) pp. 325 599.3 
Sir Harry Johnston, Zhe Uganda 
Protectorate, Second Edition (London, 
1904), li. 853 syg. 

Habits of 
life of the 
Nandi. 

Their 
houses. 

432. TOTEMISM IN EAST AND CENTRAL AFRICA chap. 

altitude of from six to seven or even ten thousand feet 
above the sea; the soil is magnificent, but a great part 
of the land is covered with dense forest, the rainfall 
is very heavy, and fogs blot out the landscape for days 
together. The nights, too, at such an elevation are bitterly 
cold. Yet the scenery has much that reminds an English- 
man or Scotchman of his native land. Here are swelling 
green downs crested with woodland as in Sussex or Surrey, 
roaring burns of brown water tumbling over grey rocks, 
forests of gaunt junipers that look at a little distance like 
the pines and firs of Scotland, meadows full of forget-me- 
nots and clover, and ferny hollows spangled with buttercups, 
daisies, and violets. In clear weather you may see far off, 
from some breezy height or at the end of a forest glade, the 
silvery gulfs and ghostly mountains of the Victoria Nyanza, 
dim and faint as dreams.’ , 

In the year 1905 the Nandi, having made themselves 
obnoxious by attacks on the Uganda Railway and on peaceful 
natives, were removed from their native highlands and 
placed in a reserve somewhat to the north of the escarpment 
which bears their name.? They keep cattle and raise large 
crops of eleusine grain and millet ; they also cultivate beans, 
pumpkins, sweet pdtatoes, and tobacco. The men clear the 
bush for plantations and help to sow the seed and to harvest 
some of the crops; the rest of the agricultural work is done 
by the women. Most of the fields are allowed to lie fallow 
every fourth or fifth year. Cattle-herding is the chief occupa- 
tion of the men and the big boys. They breed cattle, sheep, 
and goats. Formerly their herds were enormous.? The Nandi 
do not live in villages. Every man has his own hut or huts 
near his fields of eleusine grain and millet. The huts are 
circular, built of wattle and mud, with walls about four feet 
high and conical roofs of grass.“ Certain women of the 
tribe make unglazed, but ornamented, pottery in huts built 
specially for the purpose.” Iron is smelted and forged by 
Uasin Gishu Masai, who live among the Nandi® 

1 A.C. Hollis, Zhe Nandi (Oxford, 
1908). p. 1; C. W. Hobley, Zastern 
Oganda, p. 12; Sir Harry Johnston, 

The Uganda Protectorate, Second Edi- 
tion (London, 1904), i. 28 sgg. 

A. C. Hollis, The Nandi, p. 1. 
A. C. Hollis, of. ct. pp. 17-20. 
A. C. Hollis, op. edt. p. 13- 
A. C. Hollis, of. cet. p. 35- 
A. C. Hollis, of. c7¢. p. 36. 

Oo m & pb 

xt TOTEMISM AMONG THE NANDI 433 

The Nandi are divided into totemic clans (vet, plural The Nandi 

ortinuek) which are not, however, exogamous ; a man may ee 
freely marry a wife of his own clan, Each clan is sub- totemic 
divided into families named after the ancestors who are aa 
supposed to have been the first to settle in the Nandi however, 
country. For instance, the Kamarapa family of the Kipiegen ee amois 
clan are descended from one Marapa, and the Kapkipkech 
family of the Sokom clan are descended from one Kipkech. 
These families, as distinguished from the clans, observe the 
rule of exogamy; in other words, no man may marry a 
woman of the same family as himself. 

The following is a list of the Nandi clans with their 

totems :—? 

Principal Name | Other Names (used by | Totem or Sacred Anintal (siondo). 

of Clan (ore?). Women only). 
1. Kipoiis Mende (Leluot) jackal 
Kerus (Solopchot) cockroach 
2. Kipkoiitim | Kapongen (Peliot) elephant 
Kiram-gel (Wytritiet) chameleon 
3. Kipamwi | Ngemwiyo (Cheptirgichet) duiker 
Kipketoi 
4. Kipkenda | Maiimi (Segemyat) bee 
Maram-goiig (Mororochet) frog 
Ram-dolil 
Kuchwa 
Kami-pei 
5. Kipkdkés | Kapsegoi (Chepkokostot) buzzard 
6. Kipiegen | Ingoke (Moset) baboon 
Katamwa (Murioz) house rat 
Kipwalei 
7. Talai8 Kipya-kut (Ngetundo) lion 
* Tule-kut 
Kimapelameo 
8. Toiyoi Moriso (Pirechet) soldier ant 
(Robza) rain 
9. Kipsirgoi | Pale-kut (Toret) bush pig 
Kapil 
Malet-kam 
to. Sokom KApyupe (Chepsiriret) hawk 
1 A. C. Hollis, The Nandi, pp. 4-6. 2 A. C. Hollis, of, cét. p. 5. 
We are not told whether the clans and 3 The medicine-men, or Orkoizk 
families descend in the male or the (equivalent to the Masai ’L-ozbonok), 
female line. all belong to this clan. 

VOL, Il 2F 

Respect 
shewn 
for the 
totemic 
animals. 

Power of 
Bee men 
over bees. 

434 TOTEMISM IN EAST AND CENTRAL AFRICA cnar. 

Bera Aa ‘). ee ae by | Totem or Sacred Animal (tiondo). 
11. Moi | Rarewa 
| KAparit-kisapony (Kojfigonyot) crested crane 
Partatukasés (Soet) buffalo 
12. Kiptopke | Tuitokoch (Chereret) monkey (Cercopithe- 
cus griseo-uiridis) 
13. Kamwaike | Kipongoi ( Tatyuet) partridge 
14. Tungo Korapor (Kimaketyet) hyzna 
Pale-pét 
15. Kipaa Koros (Erenet) snake 
Kapcher-Mwamweche | (Koroztyet) Colobus monkey 
16. Kipasiso Kipkoyo (Asésta) sun 
; Kaparakok (Putiguitgwet) mole 
17. Chemur (Kiptuset) wild cat 

In former times the killing of the sacred animal, or 
totem, was strictly forbidden, and any breach of this law 
was severely punished, the offender being either put to 
death or driven out of his clan and his cattle confiscated. 
Nowadays the custom is less rigorously enforced ; it is stil] 
considered wrong to kill the sacred animal, but if its life is 
taken, an apology to the creature seems to be thought a 
sufficient reparation. Thus a man of the Elephant clan 
told Mr. Hollis that he had shot an elephant, his sacred 
animal, because it had good tusks ; and when the beast lay 
dead on the ground, he went up to it and said, “So sorry, 
old fellow, I thought you were a rhinoceros.” He sold the 
tusks to the Swahili, gave the elders a present, and the 
matter was hushed up. Children, however, are taught to 
respect the totem of their clan, and if a child were to kill 
or hurt his totem he would be severely beaten." 

Men of the Bee clan seem able to control bees. Once 
when Mr. Hollis and his carriers had been put to flight by a 
swarm of bees, leaving their baggage behind them, a man of 
the Bee clan, practically naked, went boldly among the angry 
insects, led them back to their nest, and returned scathless.” 

Besides respecting their sacred animals, the members of 

Hollis, The Nandi, p. 6. 

IAC, 
2 A. C. Hollis, of. ct. pp. 6 sq. 

XH TOTEMISM AMONG THE NANDI 435 

the various clans are bound to do or to abstain from doing Taboos 

certain things. The following is a list of the several pro- ae 
hibitions and peculiarities.’ acm 

Clan——Kipoiis. Totess—jackal and cockroach 

No man of this clan may take as his first wife a woman The 
who has previously conceived ; but if he has himself got her ai 
with child, then he may take her as a junior wife. The 
people of this clan may hunt, but may not make traps; 
they may not build their huts near a road ; and they may 
not wear the skins of any wild animals except the hyrax. 
They may not intermarry with the Talai clan. 

Clan—Kipkoiitim. Totems—elephant and chameleon 

The members of this clan do not as a rule hunt, but The 
they may eat all kinds of game; yet they are forbidden to Kipkolitin 
wear garments made from the skins of any wild animal 
except the hyrax. Under no circumstances may they 
marry a girl whovhas already conceived. 

Clan—Kipamwi. Totem—duiker 

The members of this clan are great hunters and live The 
largely by the chase. But they may not eat the flesh of aaa 
the duiker or of the rhinoceros. None of them may plant 
millet, or settle in Lumbwa, or have any intercourse what- 
ever with the smiths. They may not even build their huts 
near those of the smiths, nor buy their weapons directly 
from them, nor allow their goats to meet the goats of the 
smiths on the road. They are forbidden to intermarry with 
the Tungo clan. 

Clan—Kipkenda. Totems—bee and frog 

No person of this clan may go to Kavirondo or to The 
Kamasia. They may not hunt, make traps, or dig game | panda 
pits; but they are free to eat all kinds of meat and wear 
the skins of any wild animals except the duiker. At a 

1 A.C. Hollis, The Nand?, pp. 8-11. 

The 
Kipkokés 
clan. 

The 
Kipiegen 
clan. 

The Talai 
clan. 

436 ZYOTEMISM IN EAST AND CENTRAL AFRICA cuar. 

marriage a goat must always be slaughtered when the bride 
is fetched home. Members of this clan may not intermarry 
with the Kiptopke clan. 

Clan—Kipkékés. Totem—buzzard 

The members of this clan are forbidden to settle in 
Nyangori and in Kavirondo; they may not hunt and they 
may not wear the skins of any wild animals except the 
hyrax, but they may eat the flesh of all game except the 
rhinoceros and the zebra. They are forbidden to marry a 
girl who has already conceived, and they may not inter- 
marry with the Tungo clan. 

Clan—Kipiegen. Totems—baboon and house rat 

No member of this clan may settle in Lumbwa, or eat 
zebra meat, or hunt, or dig pits, or make traps, or wear the 
skin of any wild animal except the hyrax. They may not 
bleed oxen or gather honey during the rains, and they may 
not marry as a first wife a girl who has already conceived. 
But a man of the clan is allowed to take as a junior wife a 
girl whom either he or one of his brothers has gotten with 
child. Members of this clan may not intermarry with 
either the Kiptopke or the Tungo clan. 

Clan—Talai. ZTotem—tlion 

Members of the Lion clan may not wear a head-dress of 
lion-skin nor eat the meat of an animal which has been 
killed by a lion. They may not settle in Nyangori or 
Kamasia ; in battle they may only fight on the right flank ; 
they may strike nobody on the head; and they may only 
bleed oxen in the morning. All children of this clan wear 
a necklace made of pieces of gourd, and during the circum- 
cision festival the boys wear a necklace of beads made out 
of ostrich egg-shells. Members of the clan may not see 
the bull-roarer or the friction drums which are sounded at 
circumcision.’ A man of this clan may not marry a girl 

1 As to the ceremonies observed by to the bull-roarer and friction drums, 
the Nandi at circumcision, see A. C. see zd. p. 40. 
Hollis, The Nandi, pp. $2 sgqg. As 

XU TOTEMISM AMONG THE NANDI 437 

who has already conceived, nor may he intermarry with the 
Tungo, Kipoiis, and Sokom clans. 

Clan—Toiyoi. Totems—soldier ant and rain 

If soldier ants enter the house of a member of this clan, The Toiyoi 

they are requested to leave, but they are not driven out ; “> 
on the contrary, the people themselves vacate the house, if 
necessary, until the ants have passed on. During a heavy Ceremony 
thunderstorm members of the clan seize an axe, rub it in riba 
the ashes of the fire, and then throw it outside of the hut, Toiyoi dan 
exclaiming, “Thunder, be silent in our town” (TZozyot, sts ened 5 
kain-nyo). The intention of throwing out the axe is - 
probably to wound or at least frighten the spirit of the 
thunder and so drive him away. Similar means of putting simiar 
an end to a thunderstorm have been adopted by savages eee. 
and peasants in Europe and elsewhere both in ancient and thunder- 
modern times. Thus in Upper India it is still a very potiaey 
common practice to throw out axes and knives to scare by other 
the thunder demon;! and a cook’s chopper deposited °° 
outside the house with the blade upwards is equally 
effective to keep off hail.2 So, too, in a storm South 
Slavonian peasants carry out sharp-edged tools into the 
farmyard, in order that the witches may hurt themselves 
on them and stop the hail? Italian peasants of the 
Romagna adopt the like means to keep the hail from their 
crops and vines.“ During a thunderstorm some savages of 
New Britain stick a spear with its point upwards at the 
door of the hut. This, they think, will prevent the 
lightning from striking the hut, because he, the lightning, 
will fear to hurt himself on the point of the spear’ So, 
when the Indians of Canada were asked by the Jesuit 
missionaries why they planted their swords in the ground 
with the point upwards, they replied that the spirit of 
thunder was shrewd, and that if he saw the naked blades he 

1 W. Crooke, Popular Relision and religiéser Brauch der Stidslaven 
Folk-lore of Northern India (West- (Miinster i. W. 1890), pp. 118 sg. 
minster, 1906), i. 34. 4M. Placucci, Ust ¢ Pregiudizy det 

2 North Indian Notes and Queries, aes ne aa Rapiaene VEBlerno; 
t1g, 8 Be (Apri 1391). oR. Pines Dreissig Jahre in 

3 F. §S. Krauss, Volksglaube und der Siidsee (Stuttgart, 1907), p. 197. 

Taboos 
observed 
by the 
Toiyoi 
clan. 

The 
Kipsirgoi 
clan. 

438 ZTOTEMISM IN EAST AND CENTRAL AFRICA chap. 

would not come near the huts.’ The Esthonians in Russia 
fasten scythes, edge upward, over the doors of their cottages 
in order that the demons, fleeing before the thundering god, 
may cut their feet on them if they try to seek shelter in the 
house. Sometimes for a like purpose the Esthonians take 
all the edged tools in the house and throw them out into 
the yard. It is said that, when the storm is over, gouts of 
blood are often found on the scythes and knives, showing 
that the demons have been wounded by them.” During a 
thunderstorm the Sakai of the Malay Peninsula run out of 
their houses and brandish their poles and weapons to drive 
away the demons.’ In antiquity the Thracians used to shoot 
arrows at thunder and lightning and to threaten the god.* 
But to return to the Nandi. 

No member of the Toiyoi clan may build in or near a 
forest, or wear the skin of any wild beast but the hyrax, or 
settle in Kamasia, Elgeyo, or Lumbwa. They prefer to elope 
with the girl of their choice rather than to marry her in the 
usual way; and they are glad if their daughters conceive 
before marriage, counting it a sign that as wives they will be 
prolific. But they may not themselves marry a girl who 
has already conceived. No child of the clan is named till it is 
six or seven years of age. The women generally wear brass 
instead of iron-wire ornaments. 

Clan—kKipsirgoi. Totem—bush pig 

The members of this clan are mainly hunters ; but they 
may not kill a beast which has been wounded by a member 
of another ¢lan. Also they may not touch a donkey nor 
allow one to graze near their herds. For his first wife a 
man of this clan must always choose a girl who has already 
conceived ; and if necessary he must capture her and 
arrange about the purchase-money with her parents 
afterwards. 

1 Relations des Jésuites, 1637, P- 53. p. 110. 
(Canadian reprint, Quebec, 1858). 3 Lieut.-Col. James Low, ‘* The 
2 Boecler-Kreutzwald, Der Ehsten Sakai,” Journal of the Indian Archt- 

abergliubtische Gebrduche, Weisen und pelago, iv. (Singapore, 1850), p. 430. 
Gewohnheiten (St. Petersburg, 1854), 4 Herodotus iv. 94. 

XII TOTEMISM AMONG THE NANDI 439 

Clan—Sokom. Totem—hawk 

The members of this clan may not settle in Kavirondo The 
or Lumbwa ; they may not eat the flesh or wear the skin of en 
the duiker, but with that exception they may eat any kind 
of meat and wear the skin of any wild animal: they must 
always live apart and build their huts away from those of 
other people; and they must make their own fire by the 
friction of fire-sticks. They may not intermarry with the 
Tungo, Kiptopke, and Talai clans. 

Clan—Moi. TJotem—crested crane and buffalo 

The people of this clan are not allowed to settle in The Moi 
Kamasia or raid in Kavirondo. They may not build in or" 
near a forest, nor take small boys prisoners to adopt them, 
nor wear a garment made of the skin of a duiker or a bush- 
buck. Their first wife must be a woman who has never 
borne a child. When they shift their kraals or break down 
their huts, they must choose a site to the east of their 
former abode. Three days before a circumcision festival 
begins, the members of this clan perform a special ceremony 
called &ireku leget. The cattle of this clan are not branded 
like most Nandi cattle, but ear-marked. 

Clan—Kiptopke. Zotem—monkey (Cercopithecus 
gristo-viridis) 

This clan may not dig pits for game nor make traps, The 
and their cattle may not pass the night outside of their Hiptopke 
own kraal. Members of the clan may not intermarry with 
the Kipkenda and Sokom clans. 

Clan—Kamwatke. Totem—partridge 

No member of this clan may settle in Nyangori or marry The _ 
a girl who has already conceived. The clan is forbidden ee 
to intermarry with the Kipaa and Tungo clans. 

Clan—Tungo. Totem—hyena 

This clan is held in high esteem, and one of their The Tungo 
number is chosen as a judge or umpire in all disputes. “?™ 

The Kipaa 
clan. 

The 
Kipasiso 
elan. 

The 
Chemur 
clan. 

440 TOTEMISM IN EAST AND CENTRAL AFRICA cuar. 

It falls to them to close the roads against the attack of an 
enemy and to form the rear-guard in a retreat. No man of 
this clan may elope with a girl if her parents refuse their 
consent, and he may not ask for a bride till the girl has 
performed a ceremony called kdépkiyat. The marriage price 
for a girl of the clan is less than for the girls of any other 
clan, being only one ox and five goats. When a hyzna 
howls at night, the women of the clan do not flick their ox- 
hide covers till it stops, as do the women of all the other 
clans ; and when the corpse of a man of the clan is thrown 
out in the usual way for the hyznas and they do not devour 
it at once, the body may not be turned over on its other 
side like the bodies of other people.’ The clan does not 
intermarry with the Kipamwi, Kipkokdés, Kipiegen, Talai, 
Sokom, and Kamwaike clans. 

Clan—Kipaa. Totems—snake and Colobus monkey 

Members of this clan may not hunt or make traps, and 
they may wear the skin of no wild animal except the hyrax. 
They may only bleed their cattle in the morning during the 
rains, and they may hot intermarry with the Kamwaike clan. 
Whenever it is possible, a member of this clan is engaged 
to plant the Zoroszot sticks, which are planted in a circle near 
the back entrance of the bridegroom’s hut at marriage. 

Clan—Kipasiso. Totems—sun and mole 

People of this clan may not catch rain water in vessels 
or use it for cooking. If a goat sniffs at their grain or walks 
over it when it is spread out to dry or ripen, they may not 
use it except for feeding unnamed children. With them 
the ceremony of naming a child is not performed till the 
child is six or seven years old. When people of the clan 
make porridge, they must first of all sprinkle a little spring 
water on the fire. They may drink milk one day after 
eating game. 

There is another clan called Chemur, which has the wild 

1 A.C. Hollis, Zhe Nandi, pp. 7, 3A. C. Hollis, of. cit. pp. 11, 
II, 70 sg. 62 5g. 

x11 TOTEMISM AMONG THE NANDI 44i 

cat for its totem; but its taboos and peculiarities are not 
known. 

All the names of the Nandi clans, as well as the names The 

applied to them by women, have meanings, but the meanings D2™° ¢f 
of many of them are obscure.’ However, some of the names the Nandi 
of the clans are clearly derived from their totems. Thus ao 
the Kipkékds clan takes its name from its totem the buzzard cone 
(chepkikds); the Kipasiso clan takes its name from its , 
totem the sun (aszs) ; and the Kipaa clan takes its feminine 
name Koros from its totem the Colobus monkey (£ovoz7?). 
The name of the Toiyoi clan means “thunder ” (¢ozyoz) ; and 
we have seen that members of this clan perform a ceremony 
to stop a thunderstorm.? Hence we may conjecture that 
thunder as well as rain is, or used to be, one of their totems, 
and that like the Arunta and other tribes of Central 
Australia they claim the power of controlling their totem 
by magic. The Kipamwi clan has for its totem the duiker, 
and the animal is sometimes called by the same name 
(kipamwt). Kami-pei, one of the women’s names for the 
Kipkenda clan, means “those who eat water”; and the 
name is appropriate, since one of the totems of the clan is 
the frog. Pali-pet, one of the women’s names for the Tungo 
clan, means “those who go to bed in the morning,” and 
clearly alludes to the nocturnal rambles of the hyzena, which 
is one of the totems of the clan. The name of the Moi 
clan means “calf,” and doubtless refers to the buffalo, which 
is one of the totems of the clan. Again, Rarewa is one of 
the women’s names for the same clan, and it means “ heifer.” 
With these examples before us we may guess that many 
of the other names for the Nandi clans are derived from 
their totems, though their meanings are now obscure. 

While one of the Nandi clans has for its totem the The _ 
hyzena, all the Nandi, like most tribes of East Africa, p¥="4's 
hold that animal in respect or fear, apparently because it respect or 
devours corpses and may thus be supposed to be physically rag her 
akin to the living as well as to the dead, since it has absorbed ae it 

the flesh and blood of their kinsmen. The Nandi expose totem 
or not. 
1 For the following remarks on the (dated 3rd September, 1908). 
names of the Nandi clans I am in- 2 See above, p. 437- ABB 4 
debted to a letter of Mr. A. C. Hollis v a 
* Oe +r. - 

442, TOTEMISM IN EAST AND CENTRAL AFRICA cuar. 

The Nandi the bodies of their dead near their huts in order that they 

expose 
their dead 
to the 
hyzenas. 

Punish- 
ment for 
imitating 
the cry of 
a hyena. 

may be eaten by the hyznas. The relations who lay the 
corpses on the ground call to the animals to come and eat 
them ; and if on the second day after the death they find 
that the body has not been touched by the brutes, they kill 
a goat and place the flesh on and near the corpse, in the 
hope of attracting the attention of the hyznas.! Hence 
naturally enough the Nandi imagine that hyznas hold 
communication with the spirits of the dead and can talk 
like human beings. When several children in one family 
have died, the parents place the next newly born babe for 
a few minutes in a path along which hyzenas are known to 
walk ; for they hope that these brutes will intercede with 
the spirits of the dead, and that the child may live. They 
will not molest a hyena prowling round their houses, though 
they will not hesitate to kill or wound him on unappropriated 
land. Nobody dares to imitate the cry of a hyzna under 
pain of being banished from the tribe or of being refused 
a husband or wife in marriage. If a child so far for- 
gets itself as to mimic the howl of a hyzna, he may not 
enter the hut till a goat has been slaughtered and the 
excrement rubbed on‘him, no doubt as a form of purifica- 
tion; after that he is soundly thrashed. While a hyzna 
howls at night, all Nandi women, except those of the Tungo 
clan, flick their ox-hide coverlets till the melancholy sound 
dies way in the darkness. If the droppings of a hyzna 
are found on a plantation, the corn is deemed unfit for use 
until the field has been purified by a person from Kamasia, 
who receives a goat for his pains.” These Nandi super- 
stitions about the hyzna are another instance of the 
respect in which among a totemic people an animal may 
be held by persons who have not got it for their totem. I 
call attention to such superstitions for the sake of warning 
my readers against the common error of hastily concluding 
that any animal which a savage treats with a superstitious 
regard must needs be his totem. 

The same association with the dead probably explains 
the widespread veneration in which the hyzna is held by 
the Wanika of East Africa. Thus we are told that “the 

1 A. C. Hollis, The Nandi, pp. 70 59. 2 A. C. Hollis, of. cit. p. 7. 

XII TOTEMISM AMONG THE NANDI 443 

greatest funeral ceremonies held by the Wanika are those The 
which they. get up on the death of hyznas. They regard Wor" 
that animal with the most singular superstition. They look people 
upon it as one of their ancestors, or in some way associated arise 
with their origin and destiny. The death of the hyzna is hyena; 
the ‘occasion of universal mourning. The mahanga (wake) mer 
held over a chief is as nothing compared to that over the not their 
hyzna. One tribe only laments the former, but all tribes i 
unite to give importance to the obsequies of the latter.”! It 

is true that the Wanika do not, like the Nandi, regularly 
expose their dead to be devoured by hyznas; on the 
contrary, they bury them in deep, well-dug graves. But 

the bodies of the friendless, of criminals, and of other 
exceptional persons, are thrown into the woods or among 

the rocks to be the prey of prowling hyznas.2 This custom 

may have sufficed to ensure to the animal the place which 

it occupies in the religion of the Wanika. Certainly the 
universality of the respect in which the foul animal is held 

by the Wanika nation proves that it cannot be a totem ; for 

a totem is regularly the sacred animal of a section of a 
people, not of the whole. 

Amongst the Nandi on a man’s death his sons inherit his Rutes of 
flocks and herds, the bulk of the property going to the eldest eres 
son of the principal wife. When an unmarried warrior or a Nandi. 
man with no sons dies, his brothers inherit his property. If 
he has no brothers, his step-brothers are his heirs, and failing 
them his paternal cousins succeed.* Thus the Nandi have 
father-kin in the matter of inheritance. Yet a trace of Trace of 
mother-kin survives among them in the position of influence mowrer-kin 
and authority which the maternal uncle occupies in the family. power 
An understanding exists between a boy and his mother’s i" 
brother such as exists between no other relations. When a uncle over 
boy is in disgrace, his mother’s brother is asked to intervene 7S **"* 
on his behalf. The nephew may not be circumcised, or have 
his teeth extracted, or have the lobes of his ears pierced, 
without the leave of his maternal uncle. It is always usual 

for warriors to give their maternal uncle a cow after a raid in 

1 Charles New, Life, Wanderings, 2 Charles New, of. cef. pp. 121, 
and Labours in Eastern Africa({London, 22. 
1873), p. 122. 3 A.C. Hollis, Tze Nandi, pp. 72 sg. 

The 
levirate. 

Unclean- 
ness of the 
manslayer. 

The 
classifi- 
catory 
system of 
relation- 
ship among 
the Nandi. 

444 TOTEMISM IN EAST AND CENTRAL AFRICA cnap. 

return for the kindness he shewed them in childhood. The 
most terrible thing that can happen to a Nandi is to 
displease his maternal uncle. If he does so, the uncle 
formally curses his nephew by scratching his shin till the 
blood flows, rubbing in ashes, and saying, “ The child of our 
child! May this blood eat thee, for we gave life to thy 
mother that she might bear thee.” It is believed that a 
nephew so cursed will die in a few days unless by a present 
of cattle he can persuade his uncle to remove the curse,’ 

Among the Nandi a widow nominally becomes the 
property of either the next elder or next younger brother 
of her late husband ; but often she lives in her old home 
with one of her sons or goes to reside with her father or a 
brother. 

A Nandi who has killed a member of his own clan is 
regarded as unclean for the rest of his life, unless he can 
kill two other Nandi of a different clan and can pay the 
fine himself. He may never again enter any cattle-kraal 
except his own, and whenever he wishes to enter a hut he 
must strike the earth twice with a rhinoceros-horn club 
before he crosses the threshold.* 

The Nandi possess the classificatory system of relation- 
ship. Thus a person of any age or sex applies the same 
term of address to his or her father, to his or her father’s 
brothers, and to the husbands of his or her mother’s sisters. 
He or she applies the same term of address to his or her 
mother, to his or her mother’s sisters, and to the wives of 
his or her father’s brothers. Referring indirectly to his 
brothers and sisters, and to his first cousins the children 
either of his father’s brothers or of his mother’s sisters, he 
applies the same term ¢upchet to them all. A man refers 
to his own sons and daughters by the same term dakwet by 
which he refers to the sons and daughters of his brothers.‘ 
The terms of relationship differ according as the relation is 
addressed directly or referred to indirectly; and in some 
cases the terms of address differ according to the age and 
sex of the speaker. Thus a father is referred to as kwanda 
or kwanit, but addressed as papa by a boy, as apoiyo by a 

1 A, C. Hollis, Zhe Nandi, p. 94. 3 A. C. Hollis, of. cét. P. 74. 
2 A. C. Hollis, of. c#t. p. 73- 4 A. C. Hollis, of. c##. PP. 92 59. 

XHI TOTEMISM AMONG THE NANDI 445 

man, and as pakwa by a girl or woman. A mother is 
referred to as kamet or kametit, but addressed as korket by 
a man and as ezyo by a boy, girl, or woman. 

While the Nandi people are divided genealogically into Age-grates 
clans and families, they are also divided socially, like the moar 
Masai, the Taveta, and the Turkana, into what are now called 
age-grades, which are determined, as the name implies, not 
by the descent but by the age of their members. As 
such age-grades are common in savage communities and 
appear to have been instrumental in building up the classifi- 
catory system of relationship,? which in turn is intimately 
bound up with exogamy, they deserve to be noticed 
in this book. Among the Nandi the male sex is divided 
into boys, warriors, and elders; and the female sex is 
divided into girls and married women. The first stage 
for both sexes continues till circumcision, which is per- 
formed both on boys and girls. Roughly speaking, the 
ceremony of circumcision is performed about the age of 
puberty. It may take place between the ages of ten and 
twenty, but most commonly it is performed on boys between 
fifteen and nineteen. A festival of circumcision for boys is 
celebrated about every seven and a half years and lasts for 
a couple of years. All boys who are circumcised at the same 
time are said to belong to the same age or cycle (ipinda).* 
There are seven ages in all, which make up a total of about The seven 
fifty-three years, They always bear one of the following “8° 
names and succeed each other in the following order :— 

Maina (small children, who will be circumcised about 1915). 

Nyonge (boys between 10 and 20; their circumcision festival began 
in 1907). 

Kimnyzke (men between 18 and 28, circumcised about 1900). 

Képlelach (men between 26 and 36, circumcised about 1892). 

Kipkoitmet (men between 34 and 44, circumcised about 1885). 

Sowe (men between 42 and 52, circumcised about 1877). 

Juma (men between 50 and 60, circumcised about 1870). 

In each age or cycle there are three subdivisions called 

1A. C. Hollis, Zhe Nandi, pp. 11 sg., 52 sgg. Since the Nandi were 
g2 sg. removed to their reserve (see above, 
P- 432), they have so far altered the 
custom that boys are now circumcised 
3 A. C. Hollis, The Mandi, pp. every year or so, like girls. 

2 See above, vol. i. pp. 179 sg. 

446 TOTEMISM IN EAST AND CENTRAL AFRICA cnap. 

fires (#zat, plural sostinuek), probably because the members 

of each subdivision associate round their own fires, and do not 

allow the members of the other subdivisions to join them.! 
Ceremony About every seven and a half years the guardianship of 
id trans" the country is solemnly transferred from the men of one 
erring the é : 
guardian- age, now grown old, to the men of the age immediately 
pias succeeding them. The ceremony at which the transference 
from the takes place is one of the most important in the Nandi 

eens. annals. The last was performed about 1904, the next will 

to another. take place about 1911. All the adult male population, so 
far as possible, gather at a certain spot; but no married 
warrior may attend, nor may he or his wife leave their 
houses while the ceremony is being performed. The Chief 
Medicine Man (Orkozyot) must be present ; and the ceremony 
opens with the sacrifice of a white bullock, which is purchased 
by the young warriors for the occasion. After the meat has 
been eaten by the old men, each of the young men makes a 
small ring out of the hide, and puts it on one of the fingers 
of his right hand. A circle is then formed round the Chief 
Medicine Man, who stands near a stool, about which is 
heaped cow dung studded with the fruit of the /afotuet shrub 
(Solanum campylanthum). All the old men and the 
members of the age immediately preceding the one in 
power stand up, whilst the warriors who are going to 
receive the control of the country sit down. On a sign from 
the Chief Medicine Man the members of the preceding age- 
strip themselves of their warrior’s garments and don the fur 
robes of old men. The warriors of the age in power, that 
is, those who were circumcised about four years before, are 
then solemnly informed that the safety of the country and 
the welfare of the people are committed to their hands, 
and they are! exhorted to guard the land of their fathers. 
After that the people disperse to their homes.” 

§ 9g. Totemism in Kavirondo 

Kavirondo, Kavirondo is a district of British East Africa at the 

the county north-eastern end of Lake Victoria Nyanza. It is a rolling 

le. 
ai 1A. C. Hollis, The Mandi, p. 12 As to the fur robes (Aarosses) of the 

2 A. C. Hollis, of. c#t. pp. 12 sg. old men, see zd. pp. 28 sg. 

XU TOTEMISM IN KAVIRONDO 447 

grass country, breezy and healthy, at a eee of from four 
thousand to five or six thousand feet abcve the sea, but 
much warmer and sunnier than the bleak highlands of 
Nandi, which bound it on the east. The contrast, too, is 
striking between the tiny cultivated plots of the Nandi and 
the miles and miles of cornland in Kavirondo. Where the 
land is not in tilth, the prairies are gorgeous with wild 
flowers, notably with sunflowers, which turn some of the 
hillsides into a blaze of yellow. The people, who have 
been described as “ebon statuary,” are more flourishing and 
happy, better fed, and stronger than their eastern neighbours 
the Nandi. Men and women work naked in the fields. 
They live in clusters of straw huts which glister like gold 
in the sun and are surrounded by an immense floral hedge 
gay with the pink blossoms of the acanthus and the coral 
red of the aloes. Their staple food is grain, supplemented 
by sweet potatoes and bananas." 

The population of Kavirondo comprises tribes of several Different 
different stocks, which may be distinguished as the Bantu pais 
Kavirondo, the Nilotic Kavirondo, the Masai, and_ the tion of 
Eldorobo. Under the Bantu Kavirondo are included the “*”"" 
Awa-Rimi, the Awa-Ware, and the Awa-Kisii; under 
the Nilotic Kavirondo are the Ja-Luo and the Elgumi or 
Wamia ; while of the Masai stock the only representatives 
in the country are the Guasangishu, who have given up 
their nomadic habits and live in scattered settlements 
among the Kavirondo. The Eldorobo are an aboriginal 
tribe of wandering hunters, who roam the forests of the 
Mau plateau and are very rarely seen by Europeans. They 
live chiefly on the flesh of the Colobus monkey and other 
small mammals, which they shoot with poisoned arrows, 
and they also collect much wild honey.’ 

The natives of Kavirondo, both of the Bantu and of The 
the Nilotic stock, are divided into totemic clans, which, in T2UY% of 

Kavirondo, 

contrast with those of their neighbours the Nandi, are both of the 
: : : : Bantu and 
exogamous. To this difference in the social systems Of of the 

1. W. Hobley, Eastern Uganda, pp.7-11. As to the Kavirondo people, 
an Ethnological Survey (London, see also Sir Harry Johnston, Zhe 
1902), p. 133; Sir Harry Johnston, Uganda Protectorate (London, 1904), 
The Uganda Protectorate, i. 34,44599. ii. 722 sgq. 

2.C. W. Hobley, Eastern Uganda, 

448 TOTEMISM IN EAST AND CENTRAL AFRICA cnap. 

Nilotic the Kavirondo and the Nandi a student of these races, 
prs Mr. C. W. Hobley, is disposed to attribute in great measure 
intoexo- the superior vigour of the Kavirondo. “No Kavirondo,” he 
odtotemic S2YS, “Marries in his own clan, and the degeneracy due to 
clans, inbreeding is obviated by this salutary custom.” ? 
The totemic system both of the Kavirondo and of the 
Nandi has been investigated by Mr. C. W. Hobley, and it 
may be well to give the results of his enquiries in his own 
words, although in what concerns the Nandi his account has 
to be supplemented by the much fuller information collected 
by Mr. A. C. Hollis, which has been already laid before the 
reader? Mr. Hobley writes as follows :—*® 
Mr. “The natives of the Bantu Kavirondo, Nilotic Kavirondo 
ate and Nandi groups all have a belief in the totems or muziro, 
Seecomehs but, apparently, no such thing as totem worship exists, nor 
‘do the Bantu and Nilotic Kavirondo believe in their descent 
from the muzivo or totem, but a Nandi informed me that 
many of his tribe did believe in their original descent from 
a totem. 
“ Among the Bantu people each clan appears to have its 
own particular totem, and this may have given rise to their 
custom of exogamy, but in Nandi each individual is said 
to have his own totem irrespective of the clan. Practically 
the whole of the Nilotic group appear to have the same 
totems, but, in some parts, there are certain variations from 
what may be called the standard list of forbidden foods. 
Thus, although the exogamy which exists among the Nilotic 
Kavirondo may have originally arisen from totemism, the 
present survival of the belief has lost its original character. 
“In all the groups the totems appear to be animals, no 
example of a vegetable totem has been discovered. 
Supposed “The Bantu group use the word muzirvo to denote the 
aieacee of totem and, contrary to the usual belief, the eating of a 
eating the totem animal is not thought to be followed by death, but 
enatiel only by a severe skin eruption; and if, by any mischance, 

the meat of the totem is eaten, the evil consequences referred 

1. W. Hobley, Eastern Uganda, Africa, Anthropological Studies in 

p. 13. Kavirondo and Nandi,” Journal of 
2 See above, pp. 433 599- the Anthropological Institute, xxxiii. 
3C. W. Hobley, ‘British East (1903), pp- 346-349. 

xu TOTEMISM IN KAVIRONDO 449 

to can be averted by making a medicine dawa, extracted 
from certain herbs, and this extract is mixed with the 
fat of a black ox and rubbed all over! the body of the 
patient. 

“Among the Nilotic Ja-Luo the totems are called Totems 

kwero, and there is a long list of Awero animals which are eee 
forbidden as food to both men and women ; there is, how- Ja-Luo. 
ever, an additional list of food that women must not touch. 
Upon no occasion is the rule of the Awero relaxed, but, 
curiously, the animals on this index expurgatorius are con- 
sidered malignant in their influence, and it is thought praise- 
worthy to kill them. Thus any wero animal can be 
hunted, with the exception of the crested crane (Balearica 
gibbericeps), which is, generally speaking, strictly preserved 
by all the Kavirondo. The Gemi tribe, however, do not 
consider it wrong to kill and also eat this beautiful bird. 
The Gemi, Lego, and Sakwa tribes can also eat the wild 
cat, called by them ogwang. The Ja-Luo often wear the 
teeth of the leopard and crocodile as ornaments, and the 
skin of the leopard and wild cat; this is not considered an 
infringement of the £wero law. 

“ EXAMPLES OF THE TOTEMS OF THE BANTU FAMILY 

Clan or Tribe. Special Totems. 
Nisesi clan of Awa Wanga : Imbongo, bushbuck. 
Marama and part of Tsoso and | Pik waterbicker lean 
Isukha 2 2 a. 
Awa-Genya and Awa-Mrashi_. Liust, pigeon. 
Awa Shekwi of Nyole . é Njofi, elephant. 
In Ketosh there are several, Makuyi, a large black and white 
according to the clan, but over stork which appears in large 
a large portion the special flocks about November ; it eats 
totem is locusts. 
Tasoni tribe (Ngaki section) .. fsunu, reed buck. 
Ithako, E. Tsoso, S. Kabras_. Imbongo or Ngawe. 
A1biakalo, white ants in the flying 
Probably the totem most common stage (but cooked). They can 
in Kabras is be eaten raw, but not when 
cooked. 

VOL. Il 26 

Belief 
of the 
Kadimo 
in their 
descent 
from the 
python. 

Sacred 
snakes 
among the 
Wanyam- 
wezi. 

450 ZYOTEMISM IN EAST AND CENTRAL AFRICA cuap. 

“THE TOTEMS (AWERO) OF THE NILOTIC GROUP 

Name Name 

in Tho-Loo, in Tho-Loo. 
Crocodile . : . yang Nile monitor (lizard) . Ngnech 
Hyzena : : . Ndiek Python . 5 . Nyelo 
Leopard. . . Okwach | Mongoose. ; . Gort gori 
Baboon : . Bim Rock hyrax : . Kumnér 
Monkey Onguer (Cercopithecus sp.) | Tortoise. . Opuku 
Wild cat. Ogwang | Colobus monkey . Kuru 
Jackal. : . . Buwem | Wart hog . : . Linbirri 
Vulture . : . Achut-th | Frog - . . Ogwan 
Crow . - : . Agako Crested crane . . Llwang 
Kite . . . . Otenga Ground hornbill . Arumtich 

“The following are in’ addition wero or ‘tabu’ to 
the women :—Fowls, eggs, elephant, hippopotamus, sheep 
(latter only among Kisumu and Gemi). The women’s 
kwero are not serious ones, ze. a breach of the law is not 
followed by death. 

“THE TOTEMS OF THE NANDI GROUP 

Nandi name. | Nandi name. 
Hyzena . . Wagetiet Water tortoise . Chebkukuchet 
Jackal . ; . Leluot Chameleon . . Nyeretiat 
Kite. : . Chebineret Crested crane . Kungonyot 
Buzzard ‘ . Chebhukusiot | Elephant . . Beliot 

“The elephant, although looked upon as a totem, can 
be eaten without evil effects. 

“T omitted to mention above that the Kadimu people, who 
live on the Lake near the mouth of the River Nzoia, believe 
that they are descended from the python; these reptiles 
are looked ypon as sacred, and annual sacrifices are made 
upon a hill in Kadimu to the common ancestor. The 
Kadimu people are a Bantu tribe which has adopted the 
language of the Nilotic Ja-Luo, and it is thus the only 
Bantu tribe in the country which looks upon its totem as 
its ancestor, 

“Certain snakes, however, are looked upon as sacred 
animals among some of the Unyamwezi clans, and it is 
highly probable that, as among the Kadimu, this is due 
to the belief that the snake was their common ancestor. 

XHI TOTEMISM IN KAVIRONDO 451 

*Many Wanyamwezi consider it a deadly sin to kill a 
snake, and one occasionally meets an individual belonging 
to one of these clans who is said to be immune from the 
effects of snake poison.’ 

“The totems of the Koromjo people who live north Totems 
of Mount Elgon are snakes, frogs, the monitor lizard, the sie 
hyzena, and the cheetah; they believe they will die if they 
eat any of these. If, however, by any mischance, the meat 
of a muzirvo animal be eaten, a medicine called Eyavri, if 
taken in time, will save the life of the person. It is made 
from a tree with very dark leaves called Emuthz; the patient 
is violently purged and, eventually, recovers.” 

Among the Bantu tribes of Kavirondo a man has the Right to 
right to marry all the younger sisters of his wife as they Vin. * 
come of age; they cannot be given in marriage to any one sisters. 
else till he has declined their hands. 

§ 10. Exogamy among the Bageshu 

The Bageshu are a large Bantu tribe or nation, estimated The 
to number not less than a million, who inhabit chiefly the ete 
eastern and south-eastern slopes of the lofty Mount Elgon, people of 
on the eastern boundary of the Uganda Protectorate. They Seon 
are a primitive race of cannibals standing low down in the 
human scale. Their country might be called a land without 
graves ; for like the Nandi they fling out their dead towards 
evening to be devoured by the wild beasts. But the old 
women steal forth under cover of darkness and carve out 
the prime pieces of the corpses to furnish a meal, while they 
leave only the refuse to the brutes. These savages were 
visited in their native homes by the Rev. John Roscoe in the 
summer of 1908, and it is on his notes that the present 
account of the people and their customs is based.* 

The Bageshu say that they formerly dwelt high up on The 
Mount Elgon, inhabiting the caves which abound there, and Soupty 

of the 
that they have gradually worked their way down to the Bageshu, 
a land of 
7 mountains 
1 Compare above, vol. i. p. 20. 3 Rev. J. Roscoe, ‘Notes on the ang 

2-C. W. Hobley, Zastern Uganda, Bageshu,” Journal of the Royal watertalls, 
p- 173 Sir Harry Johnston, Zhe Anthropological Institute, xxxix. (1909) 
Ueanda Protectorate, ii. 747. pp. 181-195. 

The caves 
used by the 
Bageshu as 
retreats in 
time of 
danger. 

Agricul- 
ture of the 
Bageshu. 

452. FOTEAMISM 1N EAST AND CENTRAL AFRICA cuar, 

lower slopes, which they now occupy, each clan taking in 
fresh land year by year, but always descending in a straight 
line so as not to encroach on the domain of their neighbours. 
The sides of the great mountain are terraced and afford 
ample room for good gardens and villages ; and copious 
streams of excellent water flowing from the summit provide 
for the needs of the people and irrigate the plantations. 
Many of these streams, tumbling over the precipitous sides 
of the mountains, form beautiful waterfalls which dash them- 
selves in clouds of iridescent spray on the rocks hundreds of 
feet below. The superstitious natives regard these foaming, 
thundering cascades as the abode of spirits, and they catch 
the falling water in vessels to carry it home and sprinkle it, 
as a charm for health and strength, on the heads of their 
children. In the mountains, too, there are many natural 
caves which for ages have served the people as strongholds 
to which they flee in time of danger. Some of them used 
to be kept always stored with provisions, so that at the 
least alarm the villagers could retreat to them, driving their 
bleating flocks and lowing herds before them up steep and 
narrow paths which often formed the solitary approach to 
these sequestered fastnesses. There the sheep and cattle 
were kept in the caverns by day to be driven out to pasture 
in the darkness of night. The breed of cattle which the 
Bageshu keep is well adapted to life in these highlands, for 
it is small and nimble, and can browse and scramble like 
the goats themselves on the sides of the mountains. The 
cows are herded by boys and girls, and both sexes are free 
to milk them. But, the Bageshu live mainly by agriculture. 
They work chiefly at their plantations of plantains in the 
valleys and moist hollows of the hills. These furnish their 
staple food, but they also raise crops of millet, maize, sweet 
potatoes, peas, and a variety of dwarf beans.” 

The Bageshu are divided into a number of exogamous 

1 Rev, J. Roscoe, “Notes on the Harry Johnston, Zhe Uganda Pro- 
Bageshu,” Journal of the Royal tectorate, i. 52 599. 
Anthropological Institute, xxxix. (1909) 
pp. 181 sg., 189. As to the great 2 Rev. J. Roscoe, ‘‘ Notes on the 
caves on Mount Elgon, see Joseph Bageshu,” Journal of the Royal 
Thomson, Through Masai Land Authropolosical Institute, xxxix. (1909) 
(London, 1885), pp. 509 sgg.; Sir pp. 192 sg. 

XU EXOGAMY AMONG THE BAGESHU 453 

clans, each of which occupies its own lands and holds aloof Exoga- 
mous clans 
from its next neighbours, resenting as an act of hostility ¢¢ the 
and ground for war any encroachment upon its territory. Bageshu. 
However, the members of neighbouring clans meet on pean 
occasions of festivities, and each clan seeks its wives from 
an adjacent clan. The names of twenty-nine clans were 
ascertained by Mr. Roscoe. No man may marry a woman 
either of his father’s or of his mother’s clan; all the women 
of his mother’s clan are regarded as his near relations ; his 
mother’s sisters he calls his mothers. The marriage between 
a young couple is arranged by their parents; it is a purely 
financial transaction ; the affection of the parties chiefly con- 
cerned has nothing to do with it. Polygamy is commonly 
practised ; a man may marry the sisters of his first wife, if he 
chooses to do so. A father names his child after one of his Children 
ancestors, and the ghost of the eponymous ancestor is believed aia 
to take charge of the child and to become its guardian spirit. ancestors, 
When a wife has been unfaithful, she prays the ancestral ghost ace 
of the child’s real father to protect it against the ancestral became 
ghost of its nominal father, who may naturally be supposed paaisn 
to owe the bastard a grudge. If a child pukes and pines spirits. 
after receiving its name, the medicine-man will sometimes 
advise the parents to change the infant’s name and give it a 
new one, in order thereby to place their offspring under the 
patronage of a more efficient guardian spirit? 

Boys and girls are both circumcised at the age of Circum. 
puberty; it is then that the lads are initiated into the “0° 
mysteries of the clan. Their severed foreskins are collected 
and buried under the chief’s house. At the same time both Fxtraction 
sexes have the front lower teeth extracted. When their % ‘et 
wounds are healed, the boys and girls bathe in a sacred 
pool, which is supposed to be guarded by snakes. A festival 
of dancing and beer-drinking follows. It lasts for several 

1 Rev. J. Roscoe, ‘* Notes on the 
Bageshu,” Journal of the Royal 

12. Bapete, 13. Bakikaye, 14. Ba- 
beva, 15. Bakumunya, 16. Basihu, 

Anthropological Institute, xxxix. (1909) 
pp. 182 5g, The names of the Bageshu 
clans which Mr. Roscoe obtained are 
as follows: 1. Babesi, 2. Banyuwaka, 
3. Bankoki, 4. Baholasi, 5. Bahuku, 
6. Baduda, 7. Basukuye, 8. Baliyenda, 
9. Baluke, 10. Balage, 11. Bakike, 

17. Bamasiki, 18. Bakonde, 19. Ba- 
yobe, 20. Basane, 21. Balusekya, 22. 
Balukulu, 23. Bamoni, 24. Batunduye, 
25. Babangobe, 26. Batisu, 27. Bam- 
bobi, 28. Bakumana, 29. Bafumbe. 

2 Rev. J. Roscoe, of, cit. p. 184. 

Sexual 
orgy after 
cireum- 
cision. 

Totems not 
discovered 

among the 
Bageshu. 

The 
Bakene, 

a Bantu 
people ot 
Busoga, 
inhabiting 
the papyrus 
swamps 

of the 
Mpologoma 
River. 

454 ZTOTEMISM IN EAST AND CENTRAL AFRICA cuapr. 

days, and during its continuance “ there is the fullest license 
given to both sexes; men and women have promiscuous 
intercourse without any restraint.”’ We have seen that 
similar scenes of debauchery attend the practice of circum- 
cision in Fiji and among the Wagogo.? The exact meaning 
of such’ orgies is not clear. 

Mr. Roscoe’s enquiries failed to elicit the existence of 
totems among the Bageshu; but he adds: “There was 
every indication of the system, the limited knowledge of 
the language, however, made it impossible to get at them.” ® 
It is to be hoped that future enquiries among this interesting 
people will supply the blank in our record. 

§ 11. Totemism among the Bakene 

The Bakene are a Bantu tribe of Busoga, the country 
which bounds Uganda on the east. The tribe was visited 
in the summer of 1908 by the Rev. J. Roscoe, to whom 
we owe an account of the people.* They live chiefly on 
the Mpologoma River, but they extend to Lake Kioga and 
are said to be found also on Lake Salisbury. The Mpolo- 
goma River rises in Mount Elgon and flows for some miles 
in a southerly direction ; it then winds westward and rapidly 
widens out until it empties itself into Lake Kioga. The 
current is choked and the water dammed up by the 
enormous growth of papyrus, so that the river expands into 
a series of broads or lagoons, which in some places are fully 
six miles wide. It thus forms a complete barrier between 
the Banty tribes on the one bank and the Nilotic races on 
the other as far as Lake Kioga, and the barrier is continued 
by the Nile to Lake Albert Nyanza. The Mpologoma 
River is the true home of the Bakene; the tall papyrus 
beds of its swamps provide a perfect jshelter for their 
floating houses, and its fish furnish them with an abundant 
supply of food. They build their huts on the roots of the 

1 Rev. J. Roscoe, ‘‘ Notes on the 
Bageshu,” Journal of the Royal 

Bageshu,” Journal of the Royal 
Anthropological Institute, xxxix. (1909) 

Anthropological Institute, xxxix. (1909) 
pp. 185-187. 

2 See above, pp. 145 5979., 403. 

3 Rev. J. Roscoe, ‘‘ Notes on the 

p. 182. 

4 Rev. J. Roscoe, ‘‘ Brief Notes on 
the Bakene,” J/an, ix. (1909) pp. 116- 
121. 

XIE TOTEMISM AMONG THE BAKENE 455 

papyrus at a safe distance from the shore and are careful to 
hide them away in the recesses of the marsh. Tortuous 
water-ways fringed by tall papyrus plants, which tower like 
green walls on either side of the winding channel, lead to 
their secluded dwellings, and as the traveller glides along 
them in a canoe, with no sound to break the silence but the 
monotonous splash of the paddle and the ripple of the water 
at the bow, he might almost fancy himself transported to 
Venice, were it not that forests of reeds have taken the 
place of marble palaces, and a sky of deeper than Italian 
blue broods overhead. It is pleasant to come upon such an 
African Venice in the early morning when the sun is up and 
to see the people, men, women, and children, busy at their 
various occupations, some baiting their fish-traps, others 
fishing in deep water, women plunged up to their waists in 
the swamp emptying holes of the small fry that have been 
caught in them overnight, and children paddling in tiny 
canoes from tuft to tuft of papyrus, or watching a crocodile 
as he floats lazily basking in the sunshine. On some of the 
clumps of papyrus miniature huts may be observed; in 
these the spirits of the dead are supposed to dwell, and 
there offerings of food and clothes are deposited that the 
ghosts may not come and haunt the living.’ 

In their customs, language, and appearance the Bakene 
closely resemble the Basoga of the north-east, and they have 
a tradition that their forefathers came from that quarter. 
Both ‘sexes extract the two lower front teeth, and the women 
pierce the under lip, but they do not disfigure themselves in any 
other way.” They subsist chiefly on fish, which they catch 
with rods, lines, traps, and by spearing them in shallow water. 
They eat the fish both fresh and dried, and they barter them 
for clothing and for other food. Their houses, built on the 
floating roots of papyrus, usually open directly on the water, 
so that the people step from their door into their canoe. 
Men, women, and even small children are all expert 
paddlers. The canoes are dug out of solid logs, and are 
propelled by long heavy paddles, which, like the gondoliers 
of Venice, the canoemen generally ply standing up. The 

1 Rev. J. Roscoe, ‘Brief Notes 116 sg. 
on the Bakene,” A/an, ix. (1909) pp. 2 Rev. J. Roscoe, of. c#t, pp. 116 sg. 

An African 
Venice. 

Miniature 
huts for 
the dead. 

The 
Bakene 
resemble 
the Basoga. 
They are a 
fisher-folk. 

Exoga- 
mous and 
totemic 
clans of the 
Bakene. 

Rules of 
marriage. 

Indication 
of the 
classifi- 
catory 
system. 

The bridal 
convoy. 

456 ZOTEMISM IN EAST AND CENTRAL AFRICA cnay. 

water-ways are kept open by constant use and by cutting 
back the rank growth of the reeds. The side canals, as we 
may call them, are private ways; each of them is for the 
use of the family whose hut stands at the end of it. The 
entrance to one of these side canals is often arched over, 
and charms hang from the arch to protect the inmates of 
the hopse from harm.! 

The Bakene are divided into a number of exogamous 
and totemic clans. The Bakoma clan has for its totem the 
husk of the small millet (6/0) ; the Baholwa clan has for its 
totem the guinea-fowl; the Bagota clan has for its totem 
the kyachult,a small animal of the cat tribe; the Babira 
clan has for its totem the zg’onge, an otter; and the 
Bahaugo have for their totem the szondo, a civet cat. 
Besides these clans there are two others, the Bagule and the 
Bahobando, the totems of which Mr. Roscoe was not able to 
ascertain. Each clan has its head man or chief; he is 
elected by the clan and holds office for life, unless he forfeits 
it by vicious conduct or is incapacitated by illness.’ 

The people seem to be debarred from marrying into the 
clan of their father as well as into the clan of their mother. 
At least this appedrs to be implied by Mr. Roscoe’s state- 
ment that “ polygamy is practised by the tribe, and they are 
also exogamists. The children all regard their father’s 
relations as their own special clan, and their mother’s sisters 
are all mothers to them, so that the relationship always 
debars them from marrying into their mother’s clan.”* The 
custom of children regarding their mother’s sisters as their 
mothers is a clear mark of the classificatory system of 
relationship. It is a woman’s brother, not her father, who 
has the right to give or to refuse her hand in marriage; 
and it is he who conducts her to her new home. For 
a man may not marry till he has built a new house for 
his wife. Thither the bride, veiled from head to foot in a 
bark-cloth, is conveyed in a canoe, attended by her friends 
in their canoes, the whole convoy singing to the measured 
dip of the paddles in the water. They time the voyage, be 

1 Rev. J. Roscoe, ‘* Brief Notes on 2 Rev. J. Roscoe, of. cf. pp. 117, 
the Bakene,” A/az, ix. (1909) pp. 116 120. 
SJuy 1IQ 5g. 3 Rev. J. Roscoe, of. cit. p. 117. 

XHI TOTEMISM AMONG THE BAKENE 457 

it long or short, so as to reach the bride’s new home when 
the sun is setting behind the papyrus swamp and all the 
water-ways are ruddy with his dying light. The bridal 
party stays overnight with the young couple, and next 
morning they receive presents from the bridegroom and 
paddle home.! 

A child is named after one of its father’s ancestors, whose Children 
ghost is supposed to look after it. Twins are thought to apple 
be a gift of the gods, and the happy father announces their ancestral 
birth by beating a drum. The sound is taken up and ne, 
repeated by his neighbours, so the good news goes rumbling of twins, 
down the water-ways for a long distance. The father’s 
sister’s son hastens to the house, closes the front door, and 
makes a temporary opening at the back of the hut. He 
takes the leading part in the dancing ceremonies which 
follow. The after-birth of the twins is put into two new 
cooking-pots and dried ; then it is taken ashore and left in 
the grass near one of the gardens.’ . 

§ 12. Totemism among the Basoga 

Immediately to the east of Uganda and divided from it busoga, it, 
by the ample stream of the new-born Nile, is the district of Hele 
Busoga, bounded on the south by the broad waters of the and 
Victoria Nyanza. In physical features and in the character of “!™**. 
the people Busoga strongly resembles Uganda. The country 
has been described as a dam which shores up the northern 
end of the great lake and slopes away from it gradually to 
the northward. Grand tropical forests, gay with the bright 
blossoms of many flowering trees and enlivened by parrots 
and other birds of brilliant plumage, occupy much of the 
land, and on plunging into their depths the traveller from 
the east coast feels that he has reached at last the Africa 
of his dreams. In the clearings of the woods flourish 
luxuriant plantations of bananas. But the climate is 
unhealthy, and there are few running streams; for the 
brooks, choked with rank vegetation, soon degenerate into 

1 Rev. J. Roscoe, ‘ Brief Notes ‘on 2 Rev. J. Roscoe, of. cit. pp. 118 
the Bakene,” A/ax, ix. (1909) pp. 117 sg. A 
Sq. Soe 2 ? 
a in e 

The 
Basoga, 
their way 
of life. 

Totemic 
clans of the 
Basoga, 

Three 
tribes in 
Busoga. 

Paternal 
descent of 
the totems. 
Respect 
for the 
mother’s 
totem. 

458 ZOTEMISM IN EAST AND CENTRAL AFRICA cuap. 

swamps in the sunless glades of the forest or into marshes 
in the open.’ The inhabitants of the country, the Basoga, 
are closely akin to their neighbours the Baganda in race, 
appearance, customs, and language. They live in thatched 
beehive huts, keep cattle, sheep, goats, and fowls, and till 
the ground. Their favourite food is the banana, but they 
also cultivate and use sweet potatoes, ground-nuts, beans, 
eleusine, and sorghum. Tobacco and cotton are grown. 
The country has never, like Uganda, been united under a 
single ruler; the people have always been broken up into 
separate communities under more or less powerful chiefs.” 

The Basoga were investigated in the summer of 1908 
by the Rev. John Roscoe, who found that they are divided 
into a large number of exogamous and totemic clans with 
descent in the paternal line. I am indebted to his kindness 
for the following information on the subject. 

There are three distinct tribes in Busoga. First, in the 
north-west of the .country is the tribe commonly called 
Gabula’s, after an important chief of that name; they used 
to look to the Banyoro as their feudal lords. Second, in 
the north-east of the country is the tribe called Zibondo’s, 
after a chief of that name; they used to look to the Nilotic 
Bateso as their feudal lords. Third, in the east of; the 
country is a tribe which may be called Luba’s, after a former 
chief; they have always looked to the Baganda as their 
feudal lords. 

Descent of the totem among the Basoga is in the male 
line ; that is, children belong to the totemic clan of their 
father, not of their mother. But, as happens in other Bantu 
tribes, children respect their mother’s totem during their 
minority, and neither they nor their children may marry 
into her clan. 

The following is a list of the Basoga clans and totems, 
so far as they have been ascertained by Mr. Roscoe :— 

1 Sir Harry Johnston, Zhe Uganda % Sir Harry Johnston, The Uganda 
Protectorate (London, 1904), i. 66-68. Protectorate, ii. 713-715. 

459 

Totems, 

bushbuck (#07290) 

a bird called nsosolé Or 
sosolya 
bushbuck (7/070) 

leopard (pala) 

jackal (mepesz) 

a grass called dzyanja, 
which the clan may 
not cut or touch 

hippopotamus (22726) 

a little salt ? (Ao/e) 

a dove (eméba) 

civet cat (enfumbe) 

the lungfish (#ak¢ba/a) 

chaff or husks from 
the semsem 

white ants (eswa) 

bushbuck (forgo) 

chaff of all kinds 
(m2s?st) 

crow (oviwa) 

guinea-fowl (7240/2) 

reedbuck (zaza) 

the mouth of an old 

water-pot. The clan 
may not touch it nor 
have it in their 
presence 

posts made from a tree 
called zsambya. The 
clan may not use such 
postsin building their 
houses or fences 

dog (embwa) 

the clan may not look 
at the full moon 

lungfish (sabibain) 

XIII TOTEMISM AMONG THE BASOGA 
CLANS OF NORTH-WEST BUSOGA (GaABULA’S TRIBE) 
Clans. Totems. Clans. 
I. Mpongo . | bushbuck (#zZ072g0) 31. Sendasi . 
2. Baigaga chaff from millet (42/0) || 32. Mutedeba 
3. Bahoya see 33. Bango 
4. Kwanga . | hippopotamus (jovze) 
5. Soswa jackal (#p7s?) 34. Toli . 
6. Baisongo . | serval (s0nd0) 35. Bere . 
7. Mulondo . | grey monkey (z47ma) || 36. Mayanja. 
8. Lemu . leopard (#:pala) 37. Kisuwi 
9g. Wiro . certain women who may {| 38. Basuswi 
not come near men || 39. Mwebya. 
at any time 
to. Mulimi . | goats of a particular 
colour 40. Semagoba 
11. Ruba . . | Oribi gazelle (4aszr7) || 41. Wenzu_ . 
12, Mutwa .j{female bushbuck || 42. Busigisigi 
(mfongo) 43. Baego . 
13. Mpazira yams (7067) 44. Sekiju. 
14. Mwanga . Se 45. Bakose . 
15. Mugonya . | mushrooms (éz¢zko) 
16. Kinminya | jackal (#752) 46. Umbwe . 
17. Kitengya . | wild pig (#74222) 47. Basoko 
18. Mukose chaff from the small || 48. Bambade 
millet (62/0) 
19. Mulemya . ae . 49. Eboka 
20. Segaga .|chaff from the small || 50. Sango 
millet (42/0) 51. Kaima 
21, Semoyo . | bushbuck (mpongo) 52. Gulu. 
22. Mulandya sie 
23. Bamyakat- | waterbuck (77067) 
amya 
24. Kadodo frog (&zkere) 
25. Nsanga birds (Zanyony?) 53- Kiemba . 
26. Nyanzi . 
27. Muluta Colobus monkey 
28. Muyombo | a bird called Lasusimu 
29. Musere rivers which are full or 
overflowing (mga |i $4. Kaibare . 
gjude). Theclanmay |} 55. Kigoma . 
not draw water from 
them nor attempt to || 56. Lubanga. 
cross them 57. Sabwiri . 
30. Mugwano 
H 

460 TOTEMISM IN EAST AND CENTRAL AFRICA cua. 

CLANS OF NORTH-EAST BUSOGA (ZIBONDO’S TRIBE) 

os 

Clans. Totems. Clans. Totems. 

1. Balondo . | grey monkey (ina) || 12. Banangwe | goats which are pre- 

2. Basekwe .| Ist ¢otem mushroom maturely born (aka- 
(butiko) ; 2nd totem bust akasolwa) 
tabulantya 83. Bakoyo . | lungfish (s#améa) 

. Senkwunga| 1st fofem elephant |} 14. Semugaya | water lizard (sbzlu/) 
(njouu); 2d totene | 15. Bagaya . | birds (syony2) 

be 

antelope (ozone) 16, Mwasi_ . | an antelope (zja:?) 
4. Baise or | bushbuck (sforg0) 17. Basekula. | wild pig (6757) 
Ngobe 18. Kitamwa } guinea-fowl (s#/o/1) 
5. Semwayo. | birds (akasense) 19. Mwangu. | bushbuck (sponge) 
6. Basubo two birds known as || 20. Nono. . | cooked _ plantains 
hkanyali and kasaki (ujfuku) 
7. Baise or | 4 root of the arum lily || 21. Senyulya | a bird called &zsenki 
Magamba| = (s¢rzyamirz) 22. Tambi bs 
8. Gaga . .|husks of the small || 23. Mabiro . | dry slices of vegetable 
millet (42/0) marrow (dihzkej2) 
g. Semsolya . | otter (sg0ng0) 24. Katuma . | flea (shzhusy?) 
10, Bakika . | buffalo (sbog0) 25. Mulinda . | swallow (ka/az) 
11. Njeru wes 26. Nyana_. | small calves (2yav7a) 

From the preceding tables it appears that only two (the 
first and the last) of all these clans take their names from 
their totems ; in all the other recorded cases the name of the 
clan differs from the name of the totem. Further, several 
clans bearing different names have nevertheless the same 

The totem. Thus in Gabula’s tribe no less than six clans have 
baie e for their totem the bushbuck ; and the one which takes its 
clans may Name (Mpongo) from the animal is the principal clan of the 
be sub- country. This suggests that the various Bushbuck clans 
divisions of ese Sant 
one, may be subdivisions of one large original Bushbuck clan, all 
of which, when they branched off from the parent stock, took 
new and different names for the sake of distinction, while at 
the same time they all retained the old bushbuck totem. 
First In regard to the marriage of cousins it is a rule with the 
Slee Basoga that a man’s children may not marry his sister’s 
but second children, but that his son’s children may marry his sister’s 
Slloved, to Caughter’s children. In other words, first cousins, the 
marryeach children of a brother and sister, are forbidden to marry each 
other. other, but second cousins may marry each other, provided 
that they are the grandchildren of a brother and a sister 

respectively, and that the father of one of them was a son 

XIII TOTEMISM AMONG THE BASOGA 

461 

of that brother, and that the mother of one of them was a 
daughter of that sister. , 

Among the Basoga it was customary for a wife to induce Custom of 
her sister or sisters to come and live with her and become Mnyns 
wives of her husband. When a man died, his brother might sisters. 
marry the widow or widows, provided he were chosen 
heir to the deceased ; or if the brother were not heir, he 
might still receive from the heir one of the widows to wife. 

But except in these cases a man had no right to marry the 
widows of his deceased brother. 

A husband avoided his wife’s mother and only spoke to Avoidance 
her when she was in another room and out of sight. He adiindig 
respected his wife’s father but did not avoid him.’ 

The Basoga abhor incest even in cattle. If a bull covers abhor- 
his mother-cow or his sister-cow, the two culprits are sent pee 
by night to a fetish tree and tetlfered to it, there to meditate even in 
on the heinousness of their offence till the morning, when “tt 
the chief appropriates them to his own use.” 

§ 13. Zotemism among the Bateso 

The Bateso, as they call themselves, are a tribe of The 
Nilotic negroes, whose territory borders on Northern Busoga. Bates # 
They are commonly known as the Bakedi or Naked People Nilotic 
on account of their absence of clothing, which is common “"°™ 
to both sexes. This nakedness of theirs excites the disgust 
of the Baganda, who are prudish in matters of dress.2 The 
Nilotic negroes, of whom the Bateso are a branch, extend 
along the north bank of the Nile and round the eastern side 
of the Victoria Nyanza. Some of the tribes claim kinship 
with the Nandi and Masai. They seem to observe fewer 
religious ceremonies than the Bantu peoples and have no 
name for the Creator, but speak of the rain-maker as the 
supreme being. They often employ Bantu medicine-men 
and fetishes when they migrate into Bantu countries.‘ 

1 For the information as to the 
marriage customs, as well as the totems, 
of the Basoga I am indebted to the 
kindness of the Rev. John Roscoe. 

2 Sie Harry Johnston, Zhe Uganda 
Protectorate, ii. 719. 

3 /bid. ii. 772. See below, pp. 464, 
467. 

4 From the notes of the Rev. John 
Roscoe, who visited the Bateso in the 
summer of 1908 and has kindly fur- 
nished me with the following notice of 
the tribe and its clans. As to the 
Nilotic negroes, see Sir Harry John- 
ston, The Uganda Protectorate, ii. 
756 599. 

462 YTOTEMISM IN EAST AND CENTRAL AFRICA cuavr. 

The Bateso The Bateso are an agricultural people, who regard millet as 
aia their staple food, though they also grow many other cereals and 
and vegetables, such as maize, semsem, sweet potatoes, marrows, 
pastoral. dwarf beans,and peas, They also keep flocks of goats,and most 
of them have cattle besides. Both men and women work in the 
fields, and the young men herd the cattle. Goats and cows are 
often herded together. A village will contain from four to forty 
Their families. The huts are circular in shape and constructed of stout 
round huts. banches interwoven with creepers. The interstices of the walls 
are stopped with mud, which is smoothed on the inside so as to 
present an even surface, while the outside is left rough. An 
upright pole in the centre supports the conical roof, which is 
Polygamy. carefully thatched. Each wife has a hut of her own, and a man 
may have as many wives as he can afford to pay for. Often he 
builds houses for them in villages some little distance apart. 
Exo- The tribe is divided irto a number of exogamous and 
gamous __totemic clans with descent in the male line. Children there- 

and totemic a ‘ . 
clans of the fore belong to their father’s clan and may not marry into it, 

Bateso. but they are also forbidden to marry into their mother’s 
clan. The following is a list of the Bateso clans with their 
totems, so far as these were ascertained by the Rev. John 
Roscoe :— 

BATESO CLANS 
ae 
Clans. Totems. | Clans. Totems. 
| 
1. Katikoko . | sheep (zdiga) 8. Bararaka | bones of the Oribi 
2. Pasama_. | sugar-cane (¢ivoko) antelope 
3. Maditoko . | bonesfromcooked meat ' 9. Igorya_ . | Oribi antelope 
4. Eraraka .| they may not look at | 10. Pokoro . | they may not snave a 
the Oribi antelope baby’s head 
§. Kuribwoko| mushrooms 11. Katikoko |a tree called the 
6. Koroko_. | Oribi antelope | edodoro 
7. Traka . . | Oribi antelope 12. Madokoya | Oribi antelope 
Frequency In this list the number of different clans which have the 

itor Oribi antelope for their totem is remarkable. Here again, as 

totem. in the case of the Bushbuck clans of the Basoga,’ we may 
suspect that the multiplication of the same totem in different 
clans has arisen through the subdivision of one original clan 
which possessed the common totem. 

? See above, p. 460. 

XHI TOTEMISM AMONG THE BATESO 463 

"Asa rule parents agree to the future marriage of their Marriage 
children while these are both small. When the children eo 
grow up, the boy’s father gives the dowry and the engage- 
ment is formally settled. The dowry varies from two to 
twenty cows, with a number of goats, which may be as many 
as fifty. The children generally live in different parts of the 
country and seldom see each other before marriage. A man Right to 
might marry several sisters, and they might agree to live 2.) 
together, but such was not the usual practice. When a sisters. 
man dies, his eldest son as a rule succeeds him and inherits 
the property. The widows belong to the heir, and should 
the clan select as heir a brother of the deceased, he marries 
the childless widows as a matter of course. With regard to First 
cousin marriages the rule of the Bateso seems to agree with ae 
that of the Basoga ; that is, first cousins, the children of a but second 
brother and a sister respectively, are forbidden to marry each onowed, to 
other ; but second cousins are allowed to marry each other, marry each 
provided that they are the grandchildren of a brother and a °"* 
sister respectively, and that the father of the one was a son 
of that brother, and that the mother of the other was a 
daughter of that sister. In other words, a man’s children 
may not marry his sister’s children, but a man’s son’s 

children may marry his sister’s daughter’s children. 

§ 14. Totemism among the Baganda 

The great tribe or rather nation of the Baganda are a Uganda, 
Bantu people, whose country, named after them Uganda, $* oe 
stretches along the north and north-western shores of Lake scenery, 
Victoria Nyanza. Though Uganda lies on the equator, it 
enjoys a mild and equable climate in consequence of its 
great elevation, between five and six thousand feet, above 
the level of the sea. The nights are often refreshingly cool, 
and in the day the heat is seldom oppressive. Vegetation 
hardly withers at any time, for, lying within the belt of 
perpetual rain, the land is kept evergreen by showers even 
in the dry season. In spite of the great moisture of the 
atmosphere, Uganda was on the whole fairly healthy till the 
fatal epidemic of sleep-sickness broke out and made havoc 
with the native population. The rich soil, constantly 

The 
Baganda 
the highest 
type of the 
Bantu race. 
Their 
dress. 

Cultivation 
of the . 
banana. 

464 TOTEMISM IN EAST AND CENTRAL AFRICA cuap. 

watered by the tain, is luxuriantly fertile. On the whole 
the scenery is uniform, consisting for the most part of rolling 
green downs intersected by deep swampy valleys, where 
sluggish rivers ooze through dense thickets of reeds and 
papyrus, while the hill-sides on either bank are clothed with 
magnificent tropical forests and a rank undergrowth of 
ferns. In these beautiful woods the trees are festooned with 
creepers ; troops of monkeys swing from bough to bough 
and rend the air with their discordant shrieks; flocks of 
grey parrots fly screaming about ; delicate little honey-birds, 
their plumage glowing like rubies or emeralds in the sun- 
shine, hover over the gay flowers on the edge of the forest ; 
and in the open glades countless butterflies, of all the hues 
of the rainbow, flit through the air. As the traveller recedes 
from the lake northwards, the valleys widen, the hills lessen, 
then die away into a great plain covered with jungle or 
thinly wooded and cleft at long intervals by huge drains 
choked with rushes, the home of elephants, rhinoceroses, 
antelopes, and wild boars.’ 

In intelligence, material culture, and polity the Baganda 
represent the highest level attained by any pure Bantu race. 
Unlike most Africans, they clothe themselves from head to 
foot; the native laws as to dress were very strict, and it 
was death for a man or woman to be found in the public 
roads without proper clothing.? Their staple food is the 
banana, of which many varieties are cultivated. The natives 
say that there are more than a hundred sorts. Some are 
boiled green, others eaten ripe, others made into beer; and 
every variety has its special name. The tree flourishes 
everywhere ; every village and every hut is surrounded by 
banana groves, which are very neatly kept. With its great 
brilliantly green leaves, glossy black stems, and huge purple 
spathes a banana plantation presents a feast of colour to 
the eye. If you climb a hill in any densely populated 
district you will see these verdant groves stretching away 

1 C. T. Wilson and R. W, Felkin, to the healthiness of Uganda. Stuhl- 

Uganda and the Egyptian Soudan 
(London, 1882), i. 143 sgg.3 F. Stuhl- 
mann, Jt Emin Pascha ins Hers von 
Afrika (Berlin, 1894), pp. 170 59.5 
Sir Harry Johnston, 72e Uganda Pro- 
tectorate, i. 85 sgg. Opinions differ as 

mann says that it is very healthy; Sir 
Harry Johnston says (of. cét. ii. 646) 
that it is not healthy either for Euro- 
peans or natives. 

2 C. T. Wilson and R. W. Felkin, 
op. cit, i. 151 5g. 

XII TOTEMISM AMONG THE BAGANDA 465 

mile after mile on every side and reaching far up the hill- 
slopes to the horizon. Next to the banana, the sweet potato 

is the main article of food and is the chief vegetable culti- 
vated by the Baganda, though they also grow yams, beans, 
pumpkins, sugar-cane, maize, and millet. The cultivation 

of the ground is chiefly carried on by the women ; house- 
building and war are, or used to be, the occupations of the men. - 

It is thought that a barren wife prevents her husband’s planta- 
tions from bearing fruit, but that a prolific wife causes the 
trees to bear plentifully.. The Baganda keep cattle, sheep, 

and goats, and drink the milk of their cows, but most of the 
herds are tended for them by Bahima herdsmen.” The ‘he arts 
manufactures of the Baganda include pottery, bark cloths, 2™4™a"™ 
baskets, mats, metal-work, wood-work, leather-making, and of the 
dyeing. In all branches of industry they display a fine es 
artistic sense. Their pottery is beautifully finished and 
tastefully decorated ; their baskets are so skilfully woven 
that they are water-tight. In metal-work the blacksmiths 

of Uganda are far superior to their neighbours ; they obtain 

the iron ore in the country. But the handicraft in which 

the Baganda most excel is perhaps the dressing of skins, 
which they make as soft and pliant as kid-leather and dye 
them with patterns in black and orange.? They are a 
musical race and possess a tolerable variety of musical 
instruments, including harps, drums, flutes, horns, and a sort 

of harmonium called amalinda; this last consists of a 
number of flat pieces of hard resonant wood which are laid 
side by side and struck with drumsticks so as to give 
out melodious notes. The harp of Uganda is interesting 
because its shape agrees exactly with that of the ancient 
Egyptian harp depicted on the monuments.’ 

' C. T. Wilson and R. W, Felkin, 
Oganda and the Egyptian Soudan 
(London, 1882), i. 145, 158 5g., 171 
sg..3 F. Stuhlmann, A/zt Emin Pascha 
ins Hers von Afrika (Berlin, 1894), p. 
1793 Sir Harry Johnston, 7he Uganda 
Protectorate, i. 96 sqq., ii. 673 59.3 
Rev. J. Roscoe, ‘‘ Further Notes on the 
Manners and Customs of the Baganda,” 
Journal of the Anthropological Institute, 
XXxxil. (1902), pp. 38, 52 s¢., 56 sgq. 

2 C. T. Wilson and R. W. Felkin, 

VOL. U 

op. cit, i. 163 sg.3 Sir Harry John- 
ston, of. ctt. ii. 669 sg.3 Rev. J. 
Roscoe, in Journal of the Anthropo- 
logical Institute, xxxii. (1902), Pp. 79. 

3 C. T. Wilson and R. W. Felkin, 
op. ct. i. 176-181; F. Stuhimann, 
op. cit, pp. 176 sgg.; Sir Harry John- 
ston, op, cit. ii, 661 sgg. 

4 C. T. Wilson and R. W. Felkin, 
op. cit. i. 154 syg.3; Sir Harry John- 
ston, of. cit. ii. 664-666. 

2H 

466 TOTEMISM IN EAST AND CENTRAL AFRICA chap. 

The houses In house-building the Baganda excel their neighbours, 

of the 

Hapendae the houses of the upper classes being neat, clean, and roomy. 
The establishments of the great chiefs or earls are very 
large, sometimes covering: several acres and. comprising 
many huts. The whole is surrounded by a high fence of 
grass supported by trees, generally fig-trees, which send out 
a crown of leaves and afford a grateful shade. Within the 
enclosure the ground is divided by fences into courts or 
gardens, each with its house or houses, and each shaded by 
bananas and fig-trees. The houses in the inner courts are 
occupied by the chief and his harem; those in the outer 
courts are tenanted by slaves. All chiefs of high rank 
have such establishments in the country as well as a town 
house in the capital. The town residences of the prime . 
minister (Kad¢zkzro) and another high minister (the Kzsbugwe 
or keeper of the king’s placenta) occupy enclosures each 
of about half a mile square in the capital, and each contains 
from one hundred to two hundred huts for wives and 
retainers. The fences of an earl’s residence which adjoin a 
public road are beautifully worked ; the height of the fence 
and the size of the reed-rib which runs along top and 
bottom indicate thé rank of the owner. The huts of the 

peasants are much simpler ; 

they are circular or dome- 

shaped, and being thickly thatched with fine long grass 
down to the ground resemble gigantic beehives. An 
Uganda town is a garden-city embowered in fine trees and 
rich vegetation and intersected by broad well-kept avenues, 
which sometimes stretch away in a straight line for a mile 
‘The or more together.’ A feature of the country which strikes 

native 
roads of the 

the European traveller, and which, like so much else, evinces 

Baganda. the superiority of the Baganda to the surrounding nations, 
is the wonderful network of native roads, which connect the 
principal villages with each other and with the capital. 
These roads often lead straight as an arrow over hill and 
dale, through forests and across swamps, and even in thinly- 
peopled districts they are kept remarkably clean and free 

1C. T. Wilson and R. W. Felkin, 
Uganda and the Egyptian Soudan 
(London, 1882), i. 172 sgg.3 Sir 
Harry Johnston, Zhe Uganda Pro- 
tectorate, i, 104-106, fi, 649 sgg. 3 

Rev. J. Roscoe, ‘‘ Further Notes on 
the Manners and Customs of the 
Baganda,”. Journal of the Anthropo- 
logical Institute, xxxii, (1902), p. 65. 

XIII TOTEMISM AMONG THE BAGANDA 

467 

from weeds. Across the larger swamps are carried cause- 
ways built on piles and forming. hayd roads, which rise 
some six feet above the surface of the marsh, with tunnels 
at intervals through the piles to allow the slowly oozing 
water of these choked and sluggish rivers to find its way.’ 

The Baganda are also honourably distinguished by Character 
personal cleanliness and a care for the sanitation of their ae 
houses and villages which is very rare in native Africa. 

A proof of their intelligence is their aptitude for arithmetic. 
They have native names for all multiples of ten up to 
twenty millions. Yet with all their refinement in the arts 

of life, their scrupulous, almost prudish regard for decency,* 
and their vegetable diet, the Baganda are by no means 
weaklings or effeminate. They are so strong that they will Their 
race a bicycle for miles without an effort, and their valour phish 
made them in former times the terror of the surrounding 
nations, not only on land but on the water. Every man 
who could handle a spear and a shield was a soldier, and 
armies were mustered with astonishing rapidity. They had 

a large fleet of war-canoes, splendidly built and sometimes 
manned by a crew of forty men. It was a fine sight to see 

two or three hundred of these graceful vessels threading 
their way among the wooded islands of the great lake, the 
regular dip of their paddles in the water keeping time to 

the measured beat of the drums.° 

The native government of Uganda was an absolute The native 
monarchy: the king held in his hands the power of life and sae 
death ; he owned the whole of the land, and could dispose Uganda an 

of it at his pleasure. The only exception to this last rule nen, 

1 C, T. Wilson and R. W, Felkin, 
Uganda and the Egyptian Soudan 
(London, 1882), i. 146 sg.3 Sir 
Harry Johnston, Zhe Uganda Pro- 

were fined if they exposed their legs in 
the king’s presence. ‘ The chiefs and 
people became fastidiously prudish on 
the subject of clothing, and regarded 

tectorate, ii. 657 Sq. 

2 C. T. Wilson and R. W. Felkin, 
op. cit, i, 1843 Sir Harry Johnston, 
op, cit. ii. 646 sg. 

3 C. T. Wilson and R. W. Felkin, 
op. cit, i, 226; Sir Harry Johnston, 
op. cit. ii, 695. 

4Sir Harry Johnston, of. cit. ii. 
647 sq-5 685. In the old days courtiers 

a nude man as an object of horror. 
They preferred in their language not 
to call a spade a spade, but to sub- 
stitute for any plain noun dealing with 
sex or sexual intercourse the politest 
and vaguest of paraphrases” (26. p. 
685). 

6 Sir Harry Johnston, of. cét. ii. 673. 

6 C. T. Wilson and R. W. Felkin, 
op. cit. 1. 193, 201-203. 

Election of 
the king. 

The prime 
minister, 
the earls, 
and the 
chiefs. 

468 TOTEMISM IN EAST AND CENTRAL AFRICA cuap. 

was that land which had served as the burying-ground of a 
clan for three generations belonged to it in perpetuity and 
not even the king could take it away.' The king must 
always be of the blood royal, but whereas commoners trace 
their descent through their paternal clan, the kings trace 
their pedigree through the maternal clan. When the king 
dies, his successor is chosen from among his sons by the 
prime minister (Katkiro) and another great nobleman 
(Kasuju), the guardian of the princes; but curiously 
enough they may never elect the eldest son, who holds 
the office of Kzwewa or father of all the young princes. 
Generally the king before his death tells the prime minister 
which of his sons he wishes to succeed him, and if his 
choice is a good one, his wishes are followed ; otherwise the 
electors do not hesitate to set them aside.” After his 
election the king appoints the Kaézkivo (prime minister and 
chief justice), and also ten earls (Basazas) to rule the ten 
earldoms (sagas) into which the whole country is divided. 
In each earldom there are chiefs (Bam), who are also 
appointed by the king in consultation with the earl; but 
after their appointment the chiefs are responsible not to the 
king but to the earl! All taxes and all duties exacted from 
labourers engaged in public works pass through the earl’s 
hands to the prime minister. The earl is responsible for 
all the people in his earldom ; he tries all cases within his 
dominions, and if an appeal from. his verdict is made, he 
attends when the case is tried in a higher court. He and 
the chiefs under him are bound to see that the roads and 
bridges leading from the capital to their country residences 
are kept in repair. Earls and chiefs have large tracts of 
land in their gift, and members of their respective clan gather 

1 Rev, J. Roscoe, ‘* Further Notes 
on the Manners and Customs of the 
Baganda,” Journal of the Anthropo- 
logical Lnstitute, xxxii. (1902), pp. 50 
sq., 62, 66. The native system of 
government in Uganda has been care- 
fully investigated by Mr. Koscoe, who 
has kindly placed at my disposal much 
unpublished information collected by 
him. I shall draw upon it in what 
follows. 

* Rev. J. Roscoe, in Journal of the 
Anthropological Institute, xxxi, (1901), 
p. 129, and xxxii, (1902), pp. 27, 44, 
62. Some of the details in the text 
are derived from Mr. Roscoe’s un- 
published manuscripts. According to 
Messrs. Wilson and Felkin, the king 
is chosen by three hereditary bakungu 
or chiefs of the highest rank (C. T. 
Wilson and R. W. Felkin, Uganda ana 
the Egyptian Soudan, i. 193 sg., 200). 

XUI TOTEMISM AMONG THE BAGANDA 469 

about them in the hope of obtaining either offices or banana 
plantations. Each earldom has annually to contribute, in 
addition to a tax on every hut, a certain amount of labour 
for the execution of public works, such as building houses and 
fences for the king, making roads, and bridging swamps.’ 

Two very important personages in the polity of the The Queen 
Baganda are the Queen Mother or Dowager Queen (Mama- ON 
sole) and the Queen Sister (Lubuga). If the king’s mother her power 
is alive when he comes to the throne, she naturally assumes priviisass: 
the office of Queen Mother; but if she is dead, another 
woman of her clan is elected to the dignity. The office 
carries many privileges with it, and estates in each earldom 
are attached to it. She appoints chiefs to manage her 
estates and bestows on them the same titles which the king 
confers on his ministers. She has absolute power over her 
chiefs and followers ; she holds her own court, tries all her 
own cases, and is called a king. But after she has come 
into office, she only visits her son once, when she appoints 
his three principal wives. After that the king may never 
see his mother again, for were he to see her, they think that 
some evil, probably death, would surely ensue. Yet he 
may consult her and she may advise him through a third 
party. A running stream must always flow between her 
residence and his. 

The Queen Sister (Zubuga) has also her own establish- ‘The Queen 
ment with lands and officers attached to it just like the amuba 
king; she rules her own people and is called a_ king. her power 
Neither she nor the Queen Mother pays taxes, nor do they alee 
contribute labourers for public works. In old times the 
Queen Sister was also the king’s wife, indeed the only 
one of his wives to whom he was formally married. Yet 
she might not bear him a child. After his death she she guards 
takes charge of his tomb (szzda/o) and removes her house- ot 
hold to the hill where the tomb is situated. There she (mato), 
rules all the earls and chiefs of the deceased king, her “tte 

ghost of 

brother, and has land enough to give to each of them Hie late 
gardens which enable them to live in comfort. The royal eee 

tomb (sulalo) is the abode of the king’s ghost. It is a to dwell. 

l Rev. J. Roscoe, in Journal of the Anthropological Hestitute, xxxii, (1902), 
pp. 63 s¢y. 

470 TOTEMISM IN EAST AND CENTRAL AFRICA cuar. 

large house which the king always builds in his lifetime 
within the royal enclosure. The new king deserts the 
enclosure of his predecessor and constructs a new one in 
another place. But the late king’s tomb is kept in repair by 
the State. The enclosure and the interior of the tomb are 
looked after by the king’s widows who had children by him 
or who were specially chosen for the duty. If any one of 
these widows dies or leaves the tomb for any reason, her 
clan must supply another woman as a substitute, who is 
The jaw-.,reckoned among the wives of the deceased king. In a 
oa chamber at the back of the tomb are kept the jaw-bone 
of the late and the placenta of the departed monarch, and to these his 
i wis QHOst is supposed to be attached. The jaw-bone in par- 
tomb, ticular is called “the king.” When the dead king wishes to 
securinae hold his court, or it is desired to consult him-about anything, 
the spirit. the jaw-bone and the placenta are brought out from the 
cee dc inner chamber and placed on a dais or throne, which is 
high priest covered with lion and leopard skins and railed off by a row 
Secaiariel of spears and shields. Communications with the departed 
from the ruler are held by means of his high priest (#andwa), who 
Sua, ana acts as his prophet or medium. This power the priest 
feing tr acquires by drinking beer out of the dead king’s skull ; after 
the king's that the king’s spirit enters into the priest, whenever his 
spirithe late Majesty desires to communicate with his successor or 
Praclee with the people. On such occasions the priest goes to the 
throne and, speaking to the spirit in the inner room, tells 
him the business he has come about. He then smokes one 
or two pipes and begins to rave, which is a sign that he is 
possessed by the king’s spirit. In this condition, imitating 
the king’s voice, he declares the king’s will. After this 
communication has been made, the spirit returns to the 
inner room, and the priest goes away. The possession 
of the priest by the king’s spirit is only occasional, not 
permanent. Within the house, or rather mausoleum, dwell 
the wives who bore children to the late king; his other 
wives have separate houses within the enclosure. Outside 
of the enclosure the Queen Sister has her residence, and 
with her are several of the late king’s chiefs, who have 
been pensioned off and, hold pieces of land, but bear the 

same titles as of old. The Queen Sister has authority 

XI TOTEMISM AMONG THE BAGANDA 471 

over all the chiefs and widows who are associated with 
the royal tomb.’ 

Both the Queen Mother and the Queen Sister enjoyed Remark- 
a remarkable privilege. They were allowed to practise ee ye 
polyandry, cohabiting with as many men as they pleased, the Queen 
but not marrying them or bearing them children; indeed Sree 
death was the penalty if they had offspring. Hence they Sister ; 
resorted to abortion. Yet so loose were their relations ;°°,™" 
with the other sex that according to a common saying all many 
Uganda was their husband. They were fickle, living with aes 
a man for a few days and then inviting another to take Please, but 
his place: All the other princesses were equally forbidden say 
to marry, but they were not equally privileged, for though ec iee 
one of them might occasionally be given in marriage to a children 
great chief as a mark of special favour, the rest were con- ne 
demned to perpetual virginity, because they were regarded of death. 
as the king’s wives, and if they were detected in an intrigue, 
the punishment was death. Yet most of: them led a life 
of debauchery. We read that “they often use every 
blandishment, and even force, to secure some young peasant, 

the unhappy object of their affection; but, should he be 

1 Rev. J. Roscoe, ‘* Notes on the 
Manners and Customs of the Baganda,” 
Journal of the Anthropological Lusti- 
tute, xxxi, (1901), pp. 128-1303 2d. 
‘Further Notes on the Manners and 
Customs of the Baganda,” Journal of 
the <Anthropological Institute, xxxii. 
(1902), pp. 43-46, 67. I have also 
drawn on Mr. Roscoe’s manuscript 
materials for a few details as to the 
Queen Mother and the Queen Sister, 
particularly for the statement that they 
both bear the title of king in the 
king’s lifetime. Similarly Mr. R. P. 
Ashe says that in Uganda ‘there are 
three persons who bear the royal title 
of Kabaka, namely the king, the queen- 
mother, and the queen-sister” (7wo 
Kings of Uganda, p. 87). After the 
king’s death the Queen Sister (Zzebzga) 
seems to take the title of Va/inya. With 
regard to the worship of the dead kings 
of Uganda compare C. T. Wilson and 
R. W. Felkin, Uganda and the Egyp- 
tian Soudan, i. 208: ‘‘The former 
kings of the country appear also to be 

regarded as demi-gods, and their graves 
are kept with religious care, and 
houses are erected over them, which 
are under the constant supervision of 
one of the principal chiefs of the 
country, and where human sacrifices 
are also occasionally offered.” Mr. 
Rk. P. Ashe has recorded the belief 
“that the soul of a departed king can 
come back and enter into certain 
persons who are said to samzra—‘ be 
possessed of ’—the spirit of such and 
such a departed king. The word 
Samira, translated ‘ possessed of,’ is 
not, however, passive, but has more 
the force of the Greek middle. The 
active form of the word would be 
sama, That the person who samiras 
has control over the spirit seems to be 
the prevalent idea, and Mutesa begged 
that after his death no one should 
samira him. A person who samzras, 
works himself up into a state of ecstasy 
or madness until the afflatus has sub- 
sided” (R. P. Ashe, Zwo ATvugs of 
Uganda, p. 316). 

472, TOTEMISM IN EAST AND CENTRAL AFRICA cuar. 

discovered with them, he must meet the awful fate of death 
by fire, the common capital punishment in Buganda.”* We 
are reminded of the lovers of Semiramis.” 

Totemism On the whole, Uganda has been justly described as 
in genes “one of the best organised and most civilised of African 
Baganda kingdoms at the present day.”*® It is therefore all the 
are divided 

into many more remarkable to find that a nation which has made so 
totemicand considerable advances in culture should nevertheless retain 
‘lan a totemic system of the most regular orthodox pattern. 
For the Baganda are divided into a large number of totemic 
clans, the members of which observe the two fundamental 
canons of normal totemism, since they abstain both from 
injuring their totem and from marrying a woman of the 
same clan. Each clan is called a ha (plural dzka); it 
traces its origin to one man, and has a principal totem and 
a secondary totem. The principal totem, by which the clan 

1 R. P. Ashe, 7wo Atngs of Uganda, 
pp. 87 sg.3 Rev. J. Roscoe, ‘* Notes 
on the Manners and Customs of the 
Baganda,” Journal of the Anthropo- 
logical Institute, xxxi. (1901), p. 122 5 
id. ‘Further Notes on the Manners 
and Customs of the Baganda,” Journal 
of the Anthropological Institute, xxxii. 
(1902), pp. 36, 67. 

2 The Golden Bough,? iii. 162 sg. 

3 Sir Harry Johnston, 7he Uganda 
Protectorate, ii. 636. 

4 For the following account of the 
totemic system of the Baganda I am 
indebted almost entirely to the re- 
searches of my friend the Rev. John 
Roscoe of the Church Missionary 
Society, who has drawn his informa- 
tion direct from the best native sources, 
questioning men of each clan as to their 
customs and traditions. Inhis researches 
he has had the active co-operation of 
the native Prime Minister (Aa/tkzro), 
who gave him all facilities for prosecut- 
ing his enquiries. As Mr. Roscoe is 
further intimately acquainted with the 
native language, and has for many 
years enjoyed the confidence of the 
people, his writings on the subject of 
their customs and beliefs possess the 
highest authority. He has collected a 
large mass of information which still 
remains unpublished. I have gladly 

availed myself of his generous per- 
mission to make free use of the manu- 
script materials which he has placed in 
myhands. For his published accounts of 
Baganda totemism, on which as well as 
on his unpublished papers I have drawn 
in the text, see Rev. J. Roscoe, ‘* Notes 
on the Manners and Customs of the 
Baganda,” Joursal of the Anthropologt- 
cal Institute, xxxi. (1901), pp. 118 s9., 
120, 1213 7d, ‘Further Notes on 
the Manners and Customs of the 
Baganda,” Journal of the Anthropologt- 
cal Institute, xxxii, (1902), pp. 27-29, 
35, 50, 51, §3. For earlier accounts of 
totemism among the Baganda see 
R. P.’ Ashe, Zio Kings of Uganda, 
pp- 85, 285; F. Stuhlmann, J/i¢ 
Emin Pascha ins Herz von Afrika 
(Berlin, 1894), p. 190; L. Decle, 
Three Years in Savage Africa (London, 
1898), p. 443; Sir Harry Johnston, 
The Uganda Protectorate, ii. 691 sg. 
Mr. Ashe was the first to put the to- 
temic system of the Baganda on record. 
He clearly stated the two principles 
that no one may eat his totem animal 
or marry a woman of his totem clan. 
Among the clans which he mentions are 
those of the Grasshopper (Zusexzanc), 
Sheep (Zxdiga), and Crocodile 
(Zngonya). He gives the native 
name for aclan as £yzka, plural ebyika. 

xT TOTEMISM AMONG THE BAGANDA 473 

is always known, is called szustro; the secondary totem is Fach clan 
called kabivo. Both totems are sacred to members of the ar a 
clan, who may neither kill nor destroy them. Other people, totem 
however, may kill or destroy them for a reasonable purpose (”4“”) 
without hurting the feelings of members of the clan. Except secondary 
in the case of the royal family, children always take their (eabére). 
father’s totem and belong to his clan. A wife adopts her Children 
husband’s totem, but retains her own and teaches her oo 
children to regard both sets of totems as sacred. When the totem and * 
children grow up and leave their home they may do as they poe"? 
please about their mother’s totem; they are not bound to 
observe it. Yet it is, or used to be, customary for them 

to adopt their mother’s totem also, so that a man’s children 

would usually have their mother’s totem as well as _ his. 

But the mother’s totem did not descend to the second 
generation ; children took the totem of their father and 
generally also the totem of their mother, but not the totem 

of their grandmother. Each clan has special names for its Each clan 
children, so that members of a clan always know from Poise 
child’s name whether it belongs to them or not. It is itschitdren, 
customary to have a second name for common use and to 

keep the childhood name secret, for it is contrary to usage for 

a person to mention the clan to which he belongs. If there 

is a question of importance to be solved, he will, indeed, readily 

tell his clan name, and even his childhood name. But if there 

is no special reason for giving it, he will refuse to answer the 
question and will refer the enquirer to a third person for the 
information. They think that any one who kills or eats his 1m effects 
totemic animal or plant will die, or, if not, that he will fall sick se tee 
or suffer from an eruption of sores all over his body. The the abitn: 
usual explanation they give of their totems is that their 
forefathers fell ill after partaking of them, and that they 
accordingly enjoined their children not to kill or eat the 
animal or plant which had disagreed with them. 

All the women of a man’s clan are regarded as his 4 wan may 
sisters; hence he may neither marry nor have sexual sid 
intercourse with them. Any infraction of this rule used into his 
to be punishable by death. It was thought that if a man Oa 
secretly broke the rule, either he or his children would fall mother's 

ill, so that his guilt would transpire and punishment ‘*™ 

The 
Lung-fish 
(Mamba) 
clan is an 
exception 
to the 
rule of 
exoganny. 

Each clan 
has its 
family 
estates 
(masiga). 

474 ZTOTEMISM IN EAST AND CENTRAL AFRICA cuar. 

follow. Further, no man may marry into his mother’s 

clan, since all the women of that clan are regarded as his 
mother’s sisters and are called his great mothers or his little 
mothers (Gakulu or banyina bato) according to their age, 
But it is the correct thing for a man to take his second wife 
from his father’s mother’s clan. This wife always bears the 
title of Masaza ; it is she who shaves her husband’s head and 
pares his nails and sees to it that the clippings of the hair 
and the parings of the nails do not fall into the hands of an 
ill-wisher, who might do her husband a mischief by working 
magic with these severed portions of his person. However, 
the rule of exogamy, which applies to all the other 
Baganda clans, does not apply to the Lung-fish (J7ammba) 
clan. But that clan is the largest of all and is, moreover, 
divided into two sections, each with a different secondary 
totem and each residing in a different district. One section 
dwelling by the lake has another fish called azaguya for its 
secondary totem ; the other section, dwelling inland, has the 
frog for its secondary totem. We are not told, but seem 
left to infer, that the rule of exogamy may only be broken 
by members of different sections of the clan, rot by members 
of the same section ; in other words, that a Lung-fish man 
may only marry a Lung-fish woman if her secondary totem 
is different from his ; that is, if he is a /uguya-fish man, she 
must be a Frog woman ; if he is a Frog man, she must be a 
Muguya-fish woman. 

Each clan has its family estates, which are as a rule 
situated on some hill with the gardens running down its 
slopes into the valleys. The principal estates, situated in 
different parts of the country, are called MJasiga and re- 
present the chief branches of the clan. Generally they 
were the estates belonging to the sons of the father of the 
clan, but a few were those of the grandsons. Great-grand- 
sons were seldom counted as heads of the branches of a clan. 
Upon each of the estates there is a chief who is responsible 
for the conduct of the members of his branch of the clan. 

The Father If he has the oversight of the whole clan he is called its 
or head of Father. The Father of the clan has naturally the best and 

the clan. 

most important estate. Many of the clans have their family 
gods (/ubare), or they may have charge of one of the 

XII ZTOTEMISM AMONG THE BAGANDA 475 

national gods. In such cases the chief of the clan or of the 
branch of the clan on whose estate the temple stands 
becomes the priest and has charge of the temple. The 
temples are generally built on the tops of hills, and are 
surrounded by some good land for the use of the god. 

Besides these old family estates the clan has others Hereditary 
called butaka, where three or four generations of the clan ee 
have been buried. It behoved a chief to be ever on the (éxtaéa) of 
alert to prevent members of a clan from burying their dead ‘es. 
in good gardens, which they wished to secure for their 
children ; because even the king would scruple to turn out 
any man who had succeeded in burying three generations in 
the place. If people were discovered burying their dead in 
a garden, they were ordered to take the body away to the 
family estate. The burial place of a clan is regularly on the 
top or side of a hill and is enclosed by a fruitful garden of 
bananas. When three successive generations, father, son, and 
grandson, have been interred in such a garden, it becomes a 
butaka or freehold burial ground, where other members of the 
clan may bury their dead. Some members of the clan must 
reside in it to tend the graves and keep others from using it. 

They are given the land around the graves as a remuneration 
for their watchful care. 

Each clan has its special beat of drum. In Uganda Fach clan 
the drum is an indispensable instrument. It peals forth the a 
news of birth and of death, of joy and of sorrow, of peace beat of the 
and of war. To its measured cadence the feet of the weary “2 
wayfarer keep time; burdened porters press forward more 
cheerily for its notes; and chiefs are known afar off by the 
roll and rumble of their drums. 

For sympathy and help in time of trouble a man always sociul 
turns, to the members of his totemic clan. When one of them la 
has been murdered, his relations and his clan take up the clans- 
matter and seek the murderer to punish him ; failing to find P®°?'* 
him they hold one of his clan as a hostage. 

With regard to the origin of their totemic clans the Traaition 
Baganda have a tradition, which runs thus. In the reign of aha 
Kintu, the first king, the whole nation lived by the chase the totemic 
alone. When game became somewhat scarce, King Kintu, ““"* 
with the general consent of his people, made it a law that 

List of the 
clans of the 
Baganda 
with their 
totems. 

476 TOTEMISM IN EAST AND CENTRAL AFRICA cuap. 

certain species of animals should be tabooed to certain 
families, in order that these animals might have a better 
chance of multiplying than if everybody hunted them in- 
discriminately. The test adopted in order to determinate 
which animals were to be tabooed was one of health or 
digestion. If a family found that the flesh of a certain 
animal disagreed with it, the members of that family 
abstained in future from partaking of that animal. In that 
way, according to tradition, originated the totems of the 
clans." The theory that the totemic taboos are based on a 
sort of Act for the Preservation of Game can hardly be 
primitive. Like the somewhat similar view propounded by 
Mr. W. E. Roth as to the origin of totemism in Queensland,” 
it has all the appearance of an inference drawn in later 
times by persons of a rationalising turn of mind, who have 
long outgrown the crude superstitions which lie at the root 
of totemism. Moreover, as might be expected, the traditions 
of the Baganda are not consistent with each other on the 
subject. For according to other accounts, when Kintu 
came to the country, he found several of the clans there 
before him, or they came to him from neighbouring countries. 
From the tradition$’ we may gather that Kintu was a power- 
ful ruler who invaded and conquered the land, and by his 
statecraft incorporated the clans into one nation under his 
government. If asked from whom he is descended, any 
Mugandu®* will readily answer “From Kintu”; if he is 
questioned more closely, he will give an account of the 
father or founder of his clan, where he came from, and when 
he first joined either Kintu or one of the early kings. 

The clans of the Baganda take their names from their 
principal totems (szuztro). The following is a list of the 
clans with their principal and secondary totems, so far as 
they have been ascertained.‘ 

1 This tradition forms part of Mr. 
Roscoe’s unpublished papers. He 

the Anthropological Institute, xxxii. 
(1902), pp. 27 sg. ; compare the list 

sent it to me from Uganda on the 
29th November, 1908. 

2 See vol. i. p. 137. 

3 The singular form of Baganda. 

4 The fullest list hitherto published 
of the Baganda clans and totems is that 
given by Mr. J. Roscoe in Journal of 

given by him in Journal of the An- 
thropological Institute, xxxi. (1901), 
p. 118. A list of twenty-nine totemic 
clans is given by Sir Harry Johnston 
(The Uganda Protectorate, ii. 691 sg.) 
The table in the text is based chiefly on 
Mr. Roscoe’s manuscripts, especially on 

XUL 

'TOTEMISM AMONG THE BAGANDA 

477 

BAGANDA CLANS AND TorEMs 

=) 

Principal Totem Go ses Secondary T Ped es : 
ene ee arse English Equivalent. 4 haber oo | Peat Equivalent. 
1. Ngo leopard Rasimba genet 
2. Alpologoma lion mpungu eagle 
3. Negeye Colobus monkey meunyungu small monkey 
4. Negonge otter? hasimba genet 
5. Msenene grasshopper (small green| wadangogo (or {a small insect 

locust) nabanggogoma) which lives in 
the plantain 
6. Kune civet cat Atherekere frog 
7. Njown elephant nuubue hippopotamus 
8. Mamba lung-fish ? muguya a small fish 
9. Mana lung- fish ? katuba or, ac- j a fish 

cording to | 

many, 4zke- | a frog 
vehere } 
to, Laugave 4manis or pangolin | dzéi/o mushroom 
(scaly ant-eater) 
11. Endiga sheep mpologoma lion 
12. (a) Mbogo buffalo utamu a new cooking- 
pot 
13. Nima small grey monkey byenda entrails of 
animals 
14. (a) Albewo Oribi antelope hayest grey rat 
15. (6) Aatinvuma | a small seed of a shrub, all kinds = of 
used as beads beads 
16, (a) Myont birds # kungueu a special kind of 
bird 
17. (a) Alusu a large rat® MUYOSE a small rat 
18. (a) Kobe yam kama another kind of 
yam 
19. (a) Mpind? beans & kindira a wild bean 
20. (a) (6) Ngabi bushbuck 7 Jerengese a kind of grass 
21. (6) Albwa dog iron bell for dogs 
22, (a) (6) Kibe jackal mpire puff-adder 
23. (a) Noubu hippopotamus nfudu tortoise 

a list of principal and secondary totems 
which he sent me on 22nd December 
1908. In his published accounts Mr. 
Roscoe does not notice the secondary 
totems, 

1 Mr. L. Decle calls the animal a 
beaver (7hree Years in Savage Africa, 
p- 443). Mr. Roscoe agrees with F. 
Stuhlmann and Sir Harry Johnston in 
calling it an otter, which is no doubt 
correct. 

* The Protopterus, according to Sir 
Harry Johnston and Mr. F. Stuhlmann, 

3 Cercopithecus petaurista or rufuvt- 
ridis, according to Sir Harry Johnston. 

4 The widew-bird (H7dua, Pen- 
thetria, Chera, etc.), according to Sir 
Harry Johnston. 

6 Ground-rat, an uctodont rodent 
{Thrycnomis swinderentanus), accord- 
ing to Sir Harry Johnston. Mc. 
Stuhlmann calls it f2a/acodes. 

6 Haricot beans, according to Sir 
Harry Johnston, 

7 Tragelaphus, according 
Harry Johnston, 

to Sir 

478 TOTEMISM IN EAST AND CENTRAL AFRICA cuar. 
fagee wniee thie English Equivalent. Seneniany Totem English Equivalent. 
its name to the clan. (kabiro). 

24. (a) Mtalaganya | Cephalophus antelope | malere tree fungus 

25. (2) Njasa reedbuck 

26. Aasimba genet ! 

-27. Byenda entrails of animals maugive lungs of animals 

28. Me esalibwa | tailless cow ngali crested crane 

nga teriko 
mukiro® 

29. (a) Ente ya lub- | spotted cow 

ombuwe 

30. (a) Nganga hornbill 

31. (a) (6) Ma’st rainwater from roofs 

32. (a) (6) Namun’-| crow mutina hearts of animals 

gona 

33- (a) Kinyomo red ant 

34. (a) Avtete kind of grass 

35. (a) Mealé crested crane 

36. Autiko mushroom usonko and | snail and small 

nsanga ivory discs 

37. Mutima heart maugwe lungs 

38. Lukindo§ wild date palm 

39 Nombe* ox (Budd only) 

40. Gonya (Ewn- | crocodile 

* gonya)® 

41. Wpewo wind & 

42. Bugemet beer from wild date | 

palm 

43. Nkeje? small fish like sprat 

44. Atwugulu® owl ? 

45. Kanyonyit aka- | small bird which cries 

bira munte? among cows 

1 Serval cat, according to Sir Harry 
Johnston. 

% Elsewhere Mr. Roscoe gives the 
native name of this clan as evée etalina 
mukiro, The clan is usually called 
the Bagabo clan. 

3 Mentioned by Sir Harry Johnston, 
but not by Mr. Roscoe. : 

* Mentioned by Sir Harry Johnston, 
but not by Mr. Roscoe. Sir Harry 
Johnston adds: ‘‘It is remarkable to 
find this old Bantu word for ‘ox’ 
surviving in the totem name. In 
ordinary parlance in Luganda and 
Urunyoro it has long since been 
dropped in favour of enté” (The 
Uganda Protectorate, ii. 692 note). 

6 This clan is mentioned by R. P. 
Ashe (7wo Aings of Uganda, p. 85). 

Mr. F. Stulhmann (44¢ Emin Pascha 
ins Herz von Afrika, p. 190 note*), and 
Mr. L. Decle (Zhree Years in Savage 
Africa, p. 443). It is mentioned 
neither by Mr. Roscoe nor by Sir 
Harry Johnston. According to Mr. 
Decle, the Crocodile clan is found 
in the Sese Islands of the Victoria 
Nyanza. ; 

® Rev. J. Roscoe, ‘‘ Nantaba, the 
Female Fetich of the King of Uganda,” 
Man, viii. (1908), p. 132, and below, p. 
486. The Wind clan is not mentioned 
by Mr. Roscoe in his lists of the clans, 
because his informant having died he 
was unable to confirm the statement 
and the Aa¢zkivo threw doubt on it. 

7 Not mentioned by Mr. Roscoe in 
his latest (manuscript) list. 

XIII TOTEMISM AMONG THE BAGANDA 479 

In the foregoing table the clans marked (a2) were never Some clans 
: . were not 

allowed to present a prince as heir to the throne. The ajowed to 
king might indeed marry girls from these clans and have give an 

: 3 3 heir to the 
children by them, but none of these children might ever throne, 
succeed to the crown. In order to evade this disqualifica- 
tion the members of these clans gave their daughters to 
members of other clans, who adopted them; and the 
children of such women, being reckoned to their adopted 
clans, were eligible to the throne. The clans marked (0) in Some clans 
the table joined other clans, either because their own clans oii 
were despised, or because they desired that their daughters, 
by adoption into these clans, might have children who might 
succeed to the kingdom. Though they thus associated with 
other clans and had -the right to use their totem names, yet 
they were never regarded by these associated clans as blood 
relations ; hence they were free to marry members of their 
adopted clans. Thus the Aaténvuma (small seed) clan joined 
the Mushroom clan. The Bushbuck clan joined the Monkey 
clan. The Dog clan joined the Civet Cat clan. The Jackal 
clan joingd the Otter clan. The Rainwater clan joined the 
Lion clan. The Crow clan joined the Otter clan. 

We will now take up a number of the Baganda clans Mr. 
separately and give some account of their customs, duties, Ses°e* 
privileges, and superstitions. The following details were tion as to 
taken down from the lips of members of the clans by the ese 
Rev. John Roscoe, whose indefatigable zeal has rescued Baganda. 
them, with so much more, from the oblivion that must 
otherwise almost certainly have overtaken them. I am 
indebted to his friendship and kindness for permission to 
incorporate in this book these vanishing relics of a savage 
past.’ 

The Leopard (go) clan has for its secondary totem the The 
genet (kasimba). Members of this clan are not allowed to 0p" 
eat any meat which has been torn by an animal or even 
scratched by one. If one of their cows has been torn by a 
wild beast, they may not let it mix with the herd, even 
though its wounds are healed ; they must sell the cow. The 

! In his manuscript notesontheclans I have not thought it necessnry to 

Mr. Roscoe generally gives a list of the reproduce this part of his information. 
principal landed estates of each clan. 

480 YOTEMISM IN EAST AND CENTRAL AFRICA cuat. 

Leopard clan is a royal one, but of its many branches there 
is only one of which the members are deemed eligible to the 
throne. The clanspeople are not bound to do any work for 
the king. Their only public duty is to keep up the estate 
called Magonga, where Kintu first lived, and where there is 
a temple to him. They claim also to possess the original 
plantain which was brought into the country at Kintu’s first 
coming. It is a sacred plant. 

The Lion The Lion (M/pologoma) clan has for its secondary totem 

ean the eagle (mpungu). It is a royal clan and claims descent 
from Sabaganda, a son of Kintu. To explain their totems 
they say that Kintu killed a lion and an eagle and had their” 
skins made into royal rugs. Since then the beast and the 
bird have been deemed sacred, and their skins, together with 
a leopard’s skin, form the royal rug on which the kings sit 
or stand at state ceremonies. The clan has charge of a 
small drum called zalubare which is always kept and used in 
the shrine of Kintu on the hill Magonga in the Busuju district. 
On another hill in one of their estates (Nsanganzira, in the 
Busiro district) there is a shrine of the great national god 
Mukasa, where each king, as he went to Nankere to observe 
the ceremonies for the prolongation of his life, used to change 
his clothes and leave the discarded garments to be kept in 
the holy place. No member of the Lion clan is eligible for 
the throne. The king might marry women of the clan, 
but if they bore him sons, the infants were strangled at 
birth ; only daughters of these royal wives were suffered 
to live. The Lion clan had a deity called Luwada on their 
estate of that name. He was served by a priest, a member 
of the clan; and from time to time the god took bodily 
possession of the priest and made his wishes known through 

him. 
‘The The Colobus Monkey (/Vgeye) clan has for its secondary 
sankey totem a small black monkey (sanyungu) with longish hair. 
clan. The clan is reckoned one of the oldest in the country. 

They say that Kintu found it settled there when he first 
came to Uganda, and that they furnished him with his 

1 As to these ceremonies see my described them on the authority of the 
Adonis, Aitis, Osiris, Second Edition, Rev. J. Roscoe. 
(London, 1907), p. 405, where I have 

XII TOTEMISM AMONG THE BAGANDA 481 

first wife Nambi. They trace their origin to a man named 
Kyesimba Kasuju. Judged by the number of offices which 

it holds about the king, the Colobus Monkey clan is an 
important, one. They supply the king’s butler, the potter 
who ‘makes the royal cooking pots, and also the man who 

has charge of the royal drinking-water. This last bears the 

title of Kalinda and used always to be put to death when 

the king died, in order that his ghost might wait on the 
king’s ghost in the other world. Another member of the 
Colobus Monkey clan has charge of all the king’s goats; 

and another is always sent by the new king to announce his ‘The sacred 
accession to the god Mukasa, taking with him for the deity ”°” 
an offering of nine slaves, nine women, nine white cows, 
nine white goats, nine white fowls, nine loads of cowry 
shells, and nine loads of bark cloths, During his journey 

this envoy to the god may not eat with any one; he crosses 

the lake in a special canoe, and when he enters the temple 

he wears two bark cloths, as though he were a prince. 

The Otter (Vgonge) clan has for its secondary totem The Otter 
the genet (asimba). The forefather of the clan, by ‘2 
name Mwanga-kisolo, is said to have been prime minister 
to Kintu, who killed him in a fit of rage.’ Their chief Makers of 
duty in the king’s service is to make his bark cloths. ?¢"8s 
They also supplied the king with a wife whose special duty cloths. 
it was to make his bed. When the king died, she had to 
go to his tomb there to wait on the royal ghost till death 
relieved her of her duties. The clan also furnished the king 
with a butler, whose chief duty was to look after the royal 
tobacco. After being knocked on the head by his royal A god of 
master, the founder of the Otter clan, Mwanga-kisolo, was seeity, 
raised to the rank of deity, and in that capacity helped his 
clansmen by making their women fruitful and their cattle 
prolific. In gratitude for his help mothers brought him 
offerings of beer, cattle, and firewood. His temple stood on 
the hill Nseke. The priest was always a member of the 
Otter clan, but the inspired medium or prophet who spoke 
the god’s will might be chosen by the deity from any clan. 

The Grasshopper or Green Locust (Vsenene) clan has for 

1 See the legend given more in /ournal of the Anthropological Institute, 
detail by the Rev. J. Roscoe, in xxxii. (1902) pp. 25 sg. 
VOL. 1 21 

482 TOTEMISM IN EAST AND CENTRAL AFRICA cnap. 

The Grass- its secondary totem an insect called xabangogoma, which 

hopper 
clan. 

Ceremony 
performed 
by women 
of the 
Grass- 
hopper 
clan when 
they catch 
grass- 
hoppers 
for their 
husbands 
to eat. 

lives in the upper part of the plantain stem. They were 
originally a cattle-keeping clan and lived in Busongola, 
which formed part of Bunyoro. Their forefather was 
Kiroboza. In consequence of a quarrel the clan split in 
two, one part remaining in Bunyoro and the other migrating 
to Uganda. On their Bujubi estate in Busuju the Grass- 
hopper clan has a fetish which is supposed to protect the 
clanspeople from plague. It is kept in a small shrine 
enclosed by a fence. An old Munyoro woman used to 
keep the shrine in order and free from weeds. 
The particular grasshopper or green locust (nsenene) 
which gives its name to a clan is eaten by the Baganda, 
who regard it asa great delicacy. At certain times of the 
year the insect is found in large numbers and the people 
go out to capture it. Any married woman of the Grass- 
hopper clan may then catch and cook the grasshoppers for 
her husband to eat, though she may not herself partake of 
them. Her husband “immediately after eating them must 
have intercourse with his wife, in order to cause the locusts 
to increase and avert any ill consequences to her children, 
which might otherwise arise from her catching her totem : 
this is an annual ceremony when the locusts first appear.” ! 
When any king had twins born to him, it was the duty of 
the head of the Grasshopper clan to relieve him of the 
burdensome ceremonies and taboos entailed by the birth 
of twins and to undertake them himself vicariously for his 
Majesty.” Further, it is the business of this clan to look 
after the men who decorate the navel-strings of the kings 
and give them over to the chief or minister Kimbugwe.* 

with her, otherwise sickness will enter 

1 Rev. J. Roscoe, in Journal of the 
Anthropological Institute, xxxii. (1902) 
p- 53. Mr. Roscoe has sent me some 
fuller notes in manuscript on the Grass- 
hopper or Green Locust clan. In 
these notes, which I have used in the 
text, Mr. Roscoe writes thus with 
regard to the ceremony .in question : 
“© There is a restriction attached to the 
first meal of the season ; when a woman 
has prepared some of the grasshoppers 
for her husband, he must either jump 
over her or have sexual connection 

his family. On account of this taboo 
the clan has always been held in great 
respect in the country.” 

2 As to the ceremonies and taboos 
entailed by the birth of twins, see the 
Rev. J. Roscoe, of. ett. pp. 32-35. 

3 As to the elaborate care taken of 
the king’s navel-string, see the Rev. 
J. Roscoe, ‘‘ Kibuka, the War God 
of the Baganda,” Jan, vii. (1907), 
p- 165: ‘In the case of princes 
the cord [navel-string] is carefully 

x11 TOTEMISM AMONG THE BAGANDA 

483 

Moreover, when one of the king’s wives has lost several 
children at birth or in infancy, and she has been delivered 
of another, she is sent to the head of the Grasshopper 
clan to be guarded until the child is weaned. This clan always 
supplied the king with one wife, who took the title of 
Nakimera, in memory of the wife who gave birth to Kimera, 
one of the early kings. 

The Civet Cat (Fuméde) clan has for its secondary totem The Civet 
the frog (kckerekere). The members of the clan can give no © “lan. 
explanation of the origin of their totems. They claim to 
have been settled in Uganda long before the coming of 
\Kintu and to have been at that time the most important of 
all the clans. They trace their origin to a king of Uganda 
named Ntege, who was deposed by the conqueror Kintu 
but was allowed to retain a few estates and the title of king. 
When Kintu died, his son Cwa received a wife named Naku 
from Ntege, and since then every king has married a wife of 
the Civet Cat clan, who regularly takes the name of Naku 
as her title. On the principal estate of the clan there is a 
temple to Naku, which was once of great importance. At 
this shrine the kings used to perform some of the ceremonies 
for the prolongation of their life. Other ceremonies for 
this purpose were observed on another estate of the Civet 
Cat clan (the estate of Baka), when the king returned from 
Nankere. On the hill of Baka stood a temple to the god of 

preserved, and the fortunate prince who 
becomes king has the cord decorated 
and made into a twin (mzlongo) 
as described above. This is handed 
to the Kimbugwe’s care, who is one 
of the most important chiefs in the 
country. Each month, directly after 
the new moon appears, the Kimbugwe 
has to bring the ‘twin’ and carry it 
wrapped in barkcloths to the king, 
who holds it for a moment or two and 
then hands it back to the Kimbugwe. 
It is carried in state to the Kimbugwe’s 
enclosure, drums are beaten in the 
procession, and the twin is honoured 
asaking. When it is returned to its 
house it is not put inside, but is placed 
by the door and guarded all night ; 
next morning Kimbugwe comes and 
rubs butter on it and restores it to its 
usual place inside the temple or hut.” 

Along with the navel-string is pre- 
served the placenta, which the Baganda 
regard as a double or twin (mxlongo) of 
every person who is born. Apparently 
the navel-string is viewed as the thing 
to which the ghost of the placenta, 
which is the person’s double, attaches 
itself. The Baganda think that the 
placenta of a prince has power to kill 
the offspring of royalty ifit is not treated 
with honour. Hence kings always keep 
their placenta and have it decorated and 
treated as a person. The Kimbugwe, 
who has charge of it, is the second 
minister in Uganda, next to the prime 
minister (Aatikivo), with whom he 
takes his seat in all councils of state. 
See Rev. J. Roscoe, in .J/an, vii. (1907), 
pp. 164 sg.3 #@. in Journal of the 
Anthropological Institute, xxxii. (1902) 
PP. 33, 63, 76. 

484 ZOTEMISM IN EAST AND CENTRAL AFRICA cCnuap. 

that name, who was one of the first deities of the country. 
The priest was always a member of the Civet Cat clan, but 
the god was free to choose his inspired medium from any 
other clan. On the same estate there was a temple to 
Wanga, a deity who was imported from the Sese Islands in 
Lake Victoria Nyanza. This Wanga once restored light to 
the world by lifting the sun and moon out of a pit into 
which they had fallen in the reign of King Juko. When 
any person appealed from the king’s decision to the poison 
ordeal, it was the duty of the Civet Cat clan to supply the 
man who administered the potion. 
The The Elephant (Vjovz) clan has for its secondary. totem 
Recpnaes the hippopotamus. They claim to be descended from 
Sesanga, who came to Uganda with Kintu as his herds- 
Ceremonies man and settled down at Sesanga in Busuju. For many 
at the cr years the clan continued to supply the kings of Uganda 
king. with their chief herdsmen, and as hevdsined they had to 
perform certain rites at the coronation of a king. The new 
monarch came to inspect them and to be initiated by them 
into the business of a herdsman. They presented him with 
a flute on which, King Kimera is said to have played 
when he herded the kine. The new king played 
a few notes on the flute and gave it back to the herds- 
men. Next they handed the king a _ milk-pot and 
placed on his shoulders a calf-skin, such as herdsmen wear 
when they are tending the cattle. Thus attired the king 
had to herd cows for a time. Then the flute, the milk-pot, 
and the calf’s skin were delivered back to the chief herdsman 
and put away in the hut where they were kept, not to be 
used again in the king’s lifetime. The island of Bulungugi 
was one of the estates of the Elephant clan. It had to 
supply the king’s table with a particular kind of fish called 
nsonst, which is much relished by the Baganda. It was also 
the duty of the Elephant clan to furnish the royal household 
with a particular kind of bark-cloth; and after a king’s 
death the chief herdsman had to drink the bowl of liquid 
butter in which the dead monarch’s jawbone had been placed. 
If the butter disagreed with him, he was put to death as an 
impostor, who had wormed his way unlawfully into the 
Elephant clan. No true born Elephant-man, they thought, 

XIU TOTEMISM AMONG THE BAGANDA 485 

could suffer in his stomach for drinking the melted butter in 
which the king’s jawbone had been steeped. The Elephant 
clan had also charge of two drums, one of which was beaten 
when the king went out to hunt. One of their chiefs always 
helped to decorate the king’s navel-string, which, as we have 
seen,| was regularly preserved and treated with great ceremony, 
Another member of the clan had charge of the king’s war 
apron, a leopard’s skin beautifully dressed. 

The Lung-fish (Mamba) clan is the largest of all the The Lung- 
*Baganda clans, and, as we saw,’ it is divided into two coon 
séctions, which have different secondary totems. One branches. 
section has for its secondary totem the small fish called 
muguya, The other section has for its secondary totem the 
katuba, a fish which lives in the swamps. But others say 
that the secondary totem of this section is the frog 
(kikerekere); and that is why members of this section are 
called Frogs (Bakerekere). These two sections of the 
Lung-fish clan intermarry with each other, just as if they 
had not the same primary totem ; and they are the only 
clan of the Baganda who are thus free to marry among 
themselves. The lung-fish is a favourite food of the 
Baganda, but no member of the Lung-fish clan may kill 
or eat it. Both sections of the clan trace their descent 
from one man, and each claims to be the more important of 
the two. But the A/uguya branch has the clearest records 
of its forefathers. They say that they came to Uganda 
from a place called Bumogera to the north of the great 
lake. Their forefather was one Mubiru. All through 
their history they have been connected with canoes and 
fishing, and the reason why some of them quitted their old 
country and settled in Uganda in the reign of Kintu was a 
dispute about a canoe. They became the king’s principal 
canoe-builders, and one of them was made chief over the 
royal canoes. The Frog branch of the Lung-fish clan trace The frog- 
their descent from a man Nankere, who was compared to a "Xe ™3™ 
frog on account of the number of children he spawned and 
also because of his dirty habits. The only duty the Frogs 
had in respect of the king was to find a substitute for him 

1 Above, p. 482 n. 3, 2 Above, p. 474. 
3 Sir Harry Johnston, 7ke Uganda Protectorate, ii. 692. 

486 TOTEMISM IN EAST AND CENTRAL AFRICA cuar. 

when he went through the ceremonies for the prolongation 
of his life. The Frog-man (Nankere) was never allowed to 
attend the king’s receptions or even to see his Majesty 
except when the king came to perform these important 
ceremonies. Yet every new king sent the Frog-man a 
leopard’s skin for his use, as if the Frog-man were of the 
blood royal ; for leopard skins are reserved for royalty. 
The Manis The Manis or Pangolin (Zugave) clan has for its 
ae secondary totem a fungus which grows on tree trunks 
Ant-eater) (butiko wa malere). The animal which they have for their 
cee primary totem is perhaps more familiarly known as the 
Spiny ant-eater. The clan is one of the oldest in thé 
country. They say they were there when Kintu came to 
it. Their forefather was Mukibe Sekiwunga, to whom 
Kintu gave the hill of Kapaka in Busiro. The clan has 
two temples with their priests and mediums; one is a 
temple of Wanga, the other is a temple of Wamala. 
The chief steward of the Queen Sister (Lubuga) is 
Capture always taken from this clan. Further, a chief of the 
priouret Spiny Ant-Eater clan had always to bring to a new 
of the spirit king at his coronation the curious fetish called Nantaba, 
ofthewind. hich seems to have been a spirit of the wind captured at 
the cutting down of a special sort of tree (/usambye) and 
imprisoned in a gourd. A member of the Wind clan had 
always to be present at this capture of the spirit of the 
wind. The captive spirit in her gourd (for she was deemed 
feminine) was afterwards kept in a hut and held-in high 
esteem ; but whenever the wind blew high, a drum was 
beaten in the hut to let the prisoner know that, roar as she 
might, she gould not escape. She was thought to help the 
king’s wives to become mothers; so on sunny days the 
gourd used to be brought out and set in the sun in the 
middle of the courtyard, and the king’s wives would come 
and sit round it, looking wistfully at the wonderful gourd 
‘and hoping to receive into their wombs its quickening 
virtue. But when the king died, the gourd was thrown 
away, and the spirit of the wind was caught afresh in a new 
gourd for the new king.’ It was at this ceremony of 

1 Rev. J. Roscoe, ‘* Nantaba, the Female Fetich of the King of Uganda,” 
Man, viii. (1908) pp. 132 sg. 

XU TOTEMISM AMONG THE BAGANDA 487 

catching and imprisoning the wind that a chief of the Spiny 
Ant-Eater clan was bound to assist. Further members of 
this clan take charge of two of the king’s drums and 
also of his royal rug, on which he stands or sits at state 
ceremonies, It consists of four skins stitched together, the 
skin of a lion, the skin of a leopard, the skin of a hyzna, and 
the skin of an eagle. 

The Sheep (Zzazga2) clan has for its secondary totem The Sheep 
“the lion (mpologoma). The clan was in Uganda before “@™ 
Kintu came to it. They trace their descent from a man 
Mbale who lived at Mbale in Mawokoto. A chief of the 
Gheep clan was entrusted with one of the king’s principal 
fetishes called Méajwe, who had his priest, his inspired 
medium, and his place where human victims were sacrificed 
to him. The clan had also charge of the war-god Kibuka The war- 
and his temple.! The mortal remains of that great and oF 
powerful deity, consisting of his jawbone, his genital organs, 
and a piece of his navel-string, are now preserved in the 
Ethnological Museum at Cambridge. 

The Buffalo (A/dogo) clan took for a second totem a The 
new cooking pot; hence they were never allowed to use ges 
a cooking pot to cook their food until some one else had 
used it once or twice. They say that their forefather was a 
man called Nabuguyu, who came to Uganda from Bunyoro in 
the early days of the kings but after the time of Kintu. This The king’s 
clan has always had the honour of being the bearers of the °° 
kings of Uganda. Wherever the king went he was carried 
astride on the shoulders of men of the Buffalo_clan, who 
relieved each other when they were tired of their royal burden, 
one bearer shooting the king from his shoulders tothe shoulders 
of another man without allowing his Majesty’s feet to touch 
the ground ; for the king never walks anywhere outside of his 
own enclosure. They went along ata great pace and covered 
long distances in a day when the king was on a journey. 

The bearers had a special hut in the royal enclosure, so 
that they were always at hand when the king wanted 
them. The clan also supplied bearers for the king’s 
mother and sister, because these two women were regarded 

1 Rev. J. Roscoe, ‘Kibuka, the War God of the Baganda,” AZan, vii. (1907) 
pp. 161-166. 

The 
Monkey 
clan. 

The office 
of Mugema 
or earl of 
Busiro. 

488 ZTOTEMISM IN EAST AND CENTRAL AFRICA cuar. 

as queens and treated with the respect due to royalty.’ 
Moreover, the Buffalo clan had charge of the bark-cloths 
on which the king sat while he was being carried ; these 
they had to guard with great care lest they should be 
contaminated by the touch of people of other clans. No man* 
might put his hand on the shoulder of a Buffalo man even 
in a friendly way, because that was the seat of the king. If 
any one thoughtlessly took such a liberty, the Buffalo man 
would promptly ask him, “ Are you a prince?” and would 
have him fined for his presumption. Further, the Buffalo clan 
provided the king with one of his principal wives, who bore 
the title of Nanzigu. She always had her own little 
enclosure inside the royal one and was quite separate from 
the other wives. The king used to appoint a page to supply 
her with torches for her house. On their Muguya estate the 
clan had charge of a temple of Musoke, to which the king 
always sent offerings and received in return oracles from 
the god. In another of their estates there is a river where, 
oddly enough, the ghost of a leopard had his abode. Near 
the river was a temple, with its priest; and the ghost 
revealed its will by the mouth of an inspired man. 

The Monkey (V&zima) clan had for its secondary totem 
the entrails of animals (dyezda). They trace their origin to 
a man named Bwoya, who came to Uganda with Kintu. 
To the Monkey clan belongs the high office of Mugema, or 
earl of Busiro,? who has the title of the King’s Father and 
whose person is inviolable; any one who laid his hands 
familiarly on the earl might in the old days be put to 
death. At the coronation it is the Mugema who places 
the crown on the king’s head, makes him swear to be loyal 
to the people, and charges the people to be loyal to the 
king. His chief duty, however, is to act as prime minister 
(Katikiro) to the dead‘kings. He has charge of all the 
royal tombs. Wherever a king is buried, the hill on 
which his temple stands becomes part of the domain 
of the Mugema or earl of Busiro. Indeed his earldom 

« 
1 From the Rev. J. Roscoe’s manu- Mother and Queen Sister, see above, 
scripts. Compare 7d. in Journal of pp. 469 sgq. 

the Anthropological Institute, xxxii. 2 Compare Rev. J. Roscoe, of. cit. 
(1902) p. 62. <aAs to the (Queen p. 46. 

XI TOTEMISM AMONG THE BAGANDA 489 

took its name from the tombs; for Busiro means the 

place of the masivo or graves. It was the earl’s duty to 

see that the bodies of the kings were properly embalmed, 

that their jawbones were extracted, and that a temple was 
prepared for the reception of the jawbone and the navel- 
string. Another of his duties was to supply each wife 

of the. king at a certain stage of her pregnancy with a 

_girl who always remained with her till the child was 

bérn. Some rules of etiquette were strictly observed by Etiquette 
the Mugema. It was not thought proper for him to visit pv" 
other chiefs or to eat in their houses. He might not enter Mugema. 
the king’s house or the houses of the king’s wives. If he 
wished to talk to the king, he had to do so sitting outside 

the house by the door, while his Majesty answered from 
within. When a prince was asked who was his father, it The king's 
was customary for him to answer “ The Mugema,” but never (yarn 
“The King.” Moreover, if any of the king’s wives were on the 
found to be unfaithful and were about to be put to death by “"8°"* 
the king’s command, it was enough for them to say that 

they were with child by the Mugema (¢u lya Mugema) to_be 
allowed to live ; indeed all the king’s wives in their pregnancy 

made use of this expression. Yet the Mugema had charge 

of the place of execution where the paramours of princesses, 

wives who had been false to the king, and men who had 
married near relations were put to death. 

The Antelope (J/pezvo) clan has for its secondary totem The 
a large grey rat (kayost). Their forefather was Kaimye- ee 
butenga, who came to Uganda with Kintu and was 
afterwards raised to high office by King Cwa with the 
title of Kibare. Ever since then the Kibare, a member of 
the Antelope clan, has acted as viceroy during the king’s 
absence from the capital. He has also charge of the king’s 
state crown, which is adorned with a pair of antelope horns. 

The clan helps to make the rug on which the king sits on 
solemn occasions. 

The Seed clan takes its name from a small seed The Seed 
(katinvuma) which of old was worn as a bead in Uganda. ‘*” 
The clan has for its secondary totem beads of all kinds. 

They explain the origin of their totem by saying that once 
a girl snatched some seeds from another girl, her playmate, 

Bearers of 
deities and 
fetishes. 

The Bird 
clan. 

The fetish 
Buganda. 

490 ZYOTEMISM IN EAST AND CENTRAL AFRICA cuap. 

and swallowed them. To recover the stolen property the 
parents of the injured damsel resorted to the summary 
process of killing the little culprit, opening her stomach, and 
extracting the seeds. Since then the family of the dissected 
girl have foresworn the use of beads. That is why seeds 
and beads are their totem. They trace their descent from 
a man named Kyadondo, a son of Kintu, first king of 
Uganda. They furnish the bearers to carry the deities from 
place to place or to war. Representatives of the clan must 
assist at the building of any new temple to a god; and 
when the king has a new house built in the royal enclosure, 
the chief Segaluma, who is a member of the Seed clan, has 
to carry the fetishes into the house to bless it before the 
king or any of his wives may use it. For a few months 
after a king has come to the throne, this chief has to attend 
him constantly with a number of fetishes for the purpose of 
dispelling any harm which his enemies may try to do him 
by magic. For the same reason the chief sleeps at the 
king’s door and presents his Majesty in the morning with a 
bow] of water with which the king washes his face and 
hands to remove, not the dirt, but anything uncanny which 
may have settled on him during the hours of slumber. The 
ablutions of savages have often no other motive. Cleanliness 
may be, according to the proverb, next to godliness in point 
of value; it is almost certainly later than godliness in the 
order of evolution. Men were pious and dirty long before 
they were impious and clean.’ 

The Bird (Vyonyz) clan has to respect all birds ; members 
of the clan may not eat any. Yet with this comprehensive 
taboo they have taken as their special totem a particular 
kind of bird called nyang¢ and for their secondary totem 
another bird called unguvu, which is a brown bird with 
long tail feathers. They claim descent from a man named 
Njuwe, who was in Uganda before Kintu came toit. They 
have charge of a fetish called Buganda, one of the most 
potent and dreaded of all the fetishes. Anybody who went 

1 On water as a means of warding xv. (1886) pp. 77 sgg.; I. Goldzieher, 
off dangerous spirits, see my article, ‘‘ Wasser als Damonen abwehrendes 
‘¢Some Burial Customs’ as Illustrative Mittel,” Archiv fiir Religionswissen- 

of the Primitive Theory of the Soul,” —scha/t, xiii. (1910) pp. 27 sgg. 
Journal of the Anthropological Institute, 

XIII TOTEMISM AMONG THE BAGANDA 491 

near the door of a hut where the fetish stood was put to 

death. The sacred fire, which burned perpetually at the The per. 
entrance to the royal enclosure and was only extinguished oer ee 
at the king’s death, used to be guarded by a chief named ; 
Musoloza, a member of the Bird clan. The clan had also The royat 
the charge of a certain royal drum, which was beaten at sana 
intervals by day and by night to tell the people by its 
booming sound that the king was still alive. They also 
supplied every king with a wife and a head cook. 

The Rat (A/usu) clan has for its secondary totem a The Rat 
small rat (muyoze) Both these species of rats are“ 
herbivorous and edible to other people, though not to 
members of the clan. The forefather of the clan was a man 
Miigo who came to Uganda with Kintu. King Mawanda 
appointed the clan to the offices of guardians of the royal 
privies and spies upon the army. 

The Yam (Kode) clan has for its secondary totem another ‘The Yani 
kind of yam which they call Zama. They say that their °"- 
forefather Sedumi came into Uganda with the conqueror 
Kintu. To explain the origin of their totems they tell how 
their ancestor Sedumi, who came in with the conqueror, 
stole some yams and being detected was so ashamed that 
he hanged himself. Since then his descendants have 
abstained from eating yams. The clan had charge of the 
bow and arrows with which the human scapegoat (Ayonzire) 
used to be shot for a new king at his accession to the 
throne. Further, it was the duty of the clan to make a The king's 
kind of white bark-cloth for the king, also a special sort of @*lets. 
anklets which the new king wore when he ceased mourning 
for his predecessor. They were made of a particular kind 
of wood from a tree which grew on one of the estates of the 
clan. These anklets were worn only one day and then kept 
by one of the king’s wives who belonged to the Yam clan. 
Moreover, the clan had charge of the special hoe which was 
used to dig the shallow sort of grave under the trestle upon 
which the body of the king was laid for interment. And 

1 As to the perpetual fire at the the fire is there called Kalinda. In the 
king’s gate see Rev. J. Roscoe, in text I follow Mr. Roscoe’s unpublished 
Journal of the Anthropological Institute, papers. 

xxxii. (1902) p. 51. The guardian of 

The king’s 
navel- 
string. 

The Bean 
clan. 

492. TOTEMISM IN EAST AND CENTRAL AFRICA cuap. 

when the king’s jaw-bone was removed, members of the 
clan had to put it into an ant-hill, till the ants had gnawed 
away all the flesh from the bone. Further, a large royal 
shield called Lamanya and a royal flute called kanga were 
committed to the keeping of the Yam clan. It was they 
who made the king’s bedstead, and they helped to adorn his 
navel-string which, as we have seen,! was always religiously 
preserved. On their estate in Buziwa they had a shrine 
where the navel-strings of Kayonge and Male were kept. 
The chief who had charge of this shrine bore the title of 
Male, and he herded some sacred buffaloes of the king. On 
two of their estates the Yam clan had also temples of the 
two national gods Wanema and Nainda; and on another of 
them all the paddles for the temple of the great national 
god Mukasa were kept.2, On yet another of their estates 
they had a clan deity named Kabala. 

The Bean (A@pindz) clan has for its secondary totem a 
wild bean (£zzndiru). They trace their descent from a man 
named Wakaibu, whom they say Kintu found in Busiro 
when he came to Uganda. To explain the origin of their 
totem they say that once when a member of the clan was 
fleeing before his enemies his foot caught in a bean creeper, 
so that he fell to the ground and was speared to death by 
his foes before he could get up. His flowing blood formed 
the river Naki’za. From that day the bean has been the 
totem of the clan; no member of the clan will eat or even 
cultivate beans. One of them is said to have once partaken 
of the forbidden food and to have died on the spot. From 
early times the clanspeople have been among the makers of 
bark-cloth for the king ; one of their ancestors is said to 
have learned the art in Bunyoro. But their chief service for 
the king was to take care of four of his large canoes and to 

Worship of man them with crews. They worship the spirit of the river 

the river 
Naki'za, 

Naki’za, which, as we have seen, is supposed to have been 
formed by the blood of their ancestor. The head of the 
clan is the priest. There is no temple, but at the ford there 
are two great piles of sticks and grass, one on either bank. 

1 Above, p. 482 n. 3. J. Roscoe, in Journal of the Anthro- 
pological Institute, xxxii. (1902) PpPp- 
2 As to these national gods see Rev. 74 59. 

XII TOTEMISM AMONG THE BAGANDA 493 

At these heaps members of the clan offer goats, beer, bark- 
cloth and fowls, and kneeling down before the heap they 
pray the spirit of the river to help them. The priest takes 
charge of the offerings. If they are live animals, he guards 
them for the deity ; if they are food or beer, he eats or 
drinks them himself. When people ford the river, they Ceremony 
throw a handful of grass or a few sticks on one of the heaps ™ "° 
before they plunge into the current ; and when they emerge 
dripping from it on the further bank, they cast a few more 
sticks or blades of grass on the other heap as a thank-offering 
for a safe crossing. But if the river is in flood, the priest 
will let no member of the clan adventure himself into the 
angry swirling torrent under pain of death. 

The Bushbuck (Vgad7) clan has for its secondary totem The 
a kind of grass (jerengese), on which bushbucks love to rata 
browse. This clan claims to be related to the kings of 
Uganda; for they say that they are descended from a woman 
Wanana, who was wife to Wunyi, king of Bunyoro, and that 
when Kalimera prince of Uganda was visiting his uncle 
Wunyi at the court of Bunyoro he had an intrigue with his 
uncle’s wife, and that she bore him a son Kimera, who after- 
wards sat on the throne of Uganda. Yet, though they 
plumed themselves on their kinship with the royal house, no 
member, at least no male member, of the Bushbuck clan 
might enter the royal presence, because King Kimera is 
said to have been killed while he was hunting bushbuck. 
Both the animal and the clan are tabooed to the kings of 
Uganda. Nevertheless when the king sent out his catch- Privilege of 
poles into the roads to seize all and sundry for the purpose '"* ‘!""- 
of sacrificing them to the gods, any person who could prove 
that he or she was a member of the Bushbuck clan was at 
once released, while the rest were dragged away to be 
massacred... Women of the Bushbuck clan might become 
wives of the king, but if one of them gave birth to a male 
child, he was strangled at birth, Hence women of the 
Bushbuck clan who were promoted to the royal harem 
claimed to belong to the Monkey (V&sma) clan. On the 

1 As to these wholesale massacres where the account is based on informa- 
see my Adonis, Attis, Ostris, Second tion given me by the Rev, J. Roscoe. 
Edition (London, 1907), pp. 405 59., 

The lion- 
‘ god, 

The Dog 
clan, 

The tombs 
of the 
Queens. 

The Jackal 

clan, 

Temples of 
Mukasa. 

The 
Hippo- 
potamus 
clan. 

Legend of 
a woman 

who gave 

birth toa 

tortoise. 

494 TOTEMISM IN EAST AND CENTRAL AFRICA cyap. 

hill Masike the clan had a temple of the lion-god Yaiga ; 
he is said to have been an ancestor of the clan and to have 
turned into a lion at his death. 

The Dog (J/6wa) clan has for its second totem the iron 
bell which hunters fasten round the loins of their chief dog 
when they are hunting. They trace their pedigree back to 
a man Lusunde, who lived on their Kigwa estate in Busuju. 
On their Lusundu estate they had a temple to the national 
deity Musisi; the priesthood of the god was always held by 
the chief of the estate. Members of the Dog clan have 
charge of the tombs of the Queens. When the Queens are 
growing old and feeble, they go to a hill named Lusaka, 
where they say Queen Wanyana sat at her first coming to 
Uganda. From a tree in the garden where her tomb stands 
bark-cloth has always been made for the king. It is the duty 
of the Dog clan to make and put the fetish into the king’s 
chief mujaguzo drum. After the king has gone through the 
ceremonies for the prolongation of his life, a member of the 
Dog clan takes charge of the dowager Queen. 

The Jackal (Xzde) clan has for its secondary totem a 
horned puff-adder (szpirz). They say their forefather was 
a man named Muige, who crossed over in his canoe to 
Uganda from the island of Nyende in the reign of Kimera. 
The clan had three temples on their estates, al] dedicated to 
the great national god Mukasa. The priests of all three 
temples were members of the Jackal clan, but the inspired 
mediums of the god might be drawn at his pleasure from 
any clan. The only work the Jackal clan did for the king 
was to keep in repair the canoe in which their father is said 
to have paddled to Uganda. It was one of the royal 
canoes and with its crew was always kept in readiness to 
put off at the king’s command. 

The Hippopotamus (Vvaduz) clan has for its secondary 
totem the tortoise (zfudu). They claim to be descended 
from Kaita, a son of Kintu. To explain the origin of their 
totems they tell a strange tale. They say that when Kaita 
was born his mother brought forth a tortoise instead of the 
afterbirth, and that this tortoise afterwards turned into a 
hippopotamus, so that the clanspeople are related to both 
their totemic animals, the tortoise and the hippopotamus. 

XIII TOTEMISM AMONG THE BAGANDA 495 

All the estates of the Hippopotamus clan lie on or near the 

lake. They had to keep several large carioes always ready 

for the king’s Service, each with its crew to man it. They The king's 
had to help to find drummers to beat the signal drum in S“™™* 
the royal enclosure, whose deep notes rose above the hum of 

day and broke the stillness of night at regular intervals, 
proclaiming to his people that the king of Uganda was in 

life. Members of the clan made shields for the king 

and his retainers, and also bracelets and anklets for 

his wives. The Hippopotamus clan worshipped all the 

gods of the lake, to wit Mukasa, Musisi, and Wanema. 

They cared for the temple of Nangera, son of Musisi, in the 

island of Mbazi. To this deity they ascribed all their 
prosperity and good fortune, and to his temple in the island 

the chiefs of the clan repaired to make him thank-offerings 

for his favours. 

The Cephalophus Antelope (Nialaganya) clan has for The Cepha- 
its secondary totem a fungus (malere) which grows on the as 
trunks of trees. Their forefather was named Bambaga, clan. 
who is said to have attended Kintu when he first came 
to Uganda. The clan were hunters and had the charge 
of the king’s dog named Mukoza. They tied a sacred bell 
called Szrzlwamagamba round the dog’s loins when they 
hunted with it, believing that the bell not only told them 
where the dog was, but also enabled the animal to put up 
the game and drive them into the net. They hunted all 
wild animals from the buffalo down to the smallest kind of 
edible rat, and they had to bring the king from time to 
time a portion of their bag. On their estate of Bugala ope rein 
the Cephalophus Antelope clan had a shrine where the king’s Hosa 
fetish Lugala was kept. This fetish was a large gourd, and 
the chief of the estate, who always takes the title of Bambaga, 
had charge of it. Every new moon, on the fifth day after the 
crescent appeared in the sky, the fetish Lugala was carried in 
state to the capital and handed to the king, who took it for 
a few moments and then returned it to the keeper. This 
gourd had an iron crown, consisting of three heart-shaped 
hoes fastened to a ring by a prong. The crown was called 
Kalamasi and was always carried to battle and placed with 
.other fetishes in a hut near the hut of the general in command. 

496 TOTEMISM IN EAST AND CENTRAL AFRICA cuar. 

Sacred Further, in the Gomba district the Cephalophus Antelope 
ae clan had charge of a sacred drum named Nakanguzt, which 
which had a fetish inside it. This drum was brought to court and 
sanctuary beaten when the king had been mourning and wished to 
forman cease. At the sound of the drum the whole country knew 
and beast. that the court had gone out of mourning and that they must 
hasten to do the same. So they shaved their heads and 
laid aside all tokens of sorrow. Any person who delayed to 
do so was captured and put to death. The shrine where 
the drum was kept served as a sanctuary for man and 
beast. If a slave or a man condemned to death escaped to 
it, he was safe and free ; he was the slave of the drum and 
might not be carried off. Should any animal, cow, goat, 
or sheep, stray thither, it might not be taken away or killed, 
and it was free to roam as it pleased in future ; for it had 
become the property of the drum and was a sacred animal. 
The The Reedbuck (Vyasa) clan has for its secondary totem 
Keedbuck a kind of antelope (xjugudw). This clan has always lived 
in the great wood called the Mabira forest. Their forefather 
" Hunters of Lutimba was there when Kintu came to the country. From 
elephants. the earliest times they have been hunters of elephants, and 
when the monarchy was established they became hunters 
to the kings and paid them tribute in ivory from the 
elephants they killed. They also supply some workmen 
to build the houses in the royal enclosure. They had the 
care of the gods of the chase in the wild woodland country 
where they dwelt. The chief god to whom they appealed 
for help in hunting was Mpa-amaso, but they also worshipped 
Mbiru, Nahalanga (who is also called Dungu), Nabambu, and 
eo Nyenga. The night before they went out to hunt they 
by elephant Placed their spears in the temple of one of the gods and 
hunters. offered beer and a goat to secure the blessing of the deity. 
And in the chase they wore a fetish called zzzga on the 
upper right arm, believing that the fetish lent certainty to 
their aim and strength to their arm, and that it entangled 
the prey so that it could not escape. When they killed an 
elephant they drew out the nerve from the tusk and buried 
it in a sequestered spot, marking the place lest any one 
should unwittingly step over it. For they thought that the 
ghost of the elephant was in the nerve of his trunk, and 

XUI TOTEMISM AMONG THE BAGANDA 497 

that if any man stepped over it he would die. Immediately Ceremony 
after the coronation of a new king the Reedbuck clan brought ere a 
him a tusk of ivory, which he had to jump over in order to tion of 
cause the elephants to multiply in the land. sephanle 

The Tailless Cow (Eute etalina mukiro) clan is usually The 
called the Bagabo clan. It has for its secondary totem the sar 
crested crane. They cannot say why they have a tailless..»2«* 
cow for their chief totem, but they tell a story to explain 
their secondary totem, the crested crane. They say that Legend of 
a girl of the clan had been newly married and was returning iin 
home with some companions. Being left alone in the road intoa 
for a short time she began to eat some small fruits which the ‘reste 
natives call wtuntunu. On their return her companions found 
the bride munching the fruit and jeered at her. At this she 
was so ashamed and angry that she fled from them to a 
flock of crested cranes and was never seen again. Her 
companions averred that no sooner had she reached the 
flock of birds than she turned into a crested crane herself; 
and from that time the clan took the crested crane for their 
secondary totem. They trace their descent from a man 
named Kitongole who came from Bunyoro. Their business Hereditary 
has always been that of smiths, and the art of smelting and Sms. 
working iron has been handed down among them from 
father to son for generations. They smelt the iron from 
the ore and work it up as they require it. They are 
smiths to the king and pay tribute to him in hoes. Their 
‘ chief deity was Wangi. His temple stood on the hill 
Mulema, and on the same estate of the clan was another 
temple to the god Lwerekera. Each god had his inspired Ispirea 
medium or prophet, but a single priest attended to both Prophets. 
temples. When one of the prophets died, the clan met in 
solemn conclave to discover whom of their number the deity 
would choose to be the vehicle of divine inspiration, and the 
chosen vessel at once gave the usual symptoms of inspiration. 
This was the only occasion on which the Tailless Cow clan met 
for any religious observance. At other times members of the 
clan repaired singly to one or other of the temples to enquire 
of the god or to make him offerings for favours received. 

The Crow (Namu’ngona) clan has for its secondary The crow 
totem the hearts of animals. The clan is commonly called “0. 

VOL. II 2K 

498 TOTEMISM IN EAST AND CENTRAL AFRICA cuar. 

Bandyala; its chief estates are in the Budu district. They 
claim to be the descendants of a man Kidiba, a son of 
Kintu ; and they explain their totem the crow by saying 
that their forefather Kidiba cultivated land near a tall tree 
on the branches of which crows used to build their nests, so 
the people near it were called the people of the crows. 
The Crow clan is one of those which may not give birth 
to a prince; so to evade this disqualification they bestowed 
their daughters on men of the Otter clan, who presented 
them to the king as members of the Otter clan ; hence the 
Crow clan claims to be related to the royal family. 
oe of The Crow clan had a god (dubare) called Kagera. 
ees by His temple was at Kasaka in Budu, and his chief business 
per was to bestow offspring on women; but he also helped 
; members of the clan in all kinds of sickness. Any woman 
of the clan who did not have children as soon as she wished, 
went to the temple, taking with her a present of a gourd 
of beer, a bark-cloth, a cowry shell, and a seed of the 
wild banana, The priest consulted the god for her, and 
having obtained the necessary instructions gave the woman 
an amulet to wear, some herbs mixed with water to drink, a 
cowry shell, and a seed of the wild banana, also a girdle 
made of a creeper to put on. With these things she went 
back to her husband and soon found herself with child. 
When the infant was born, the mother returned to the 
Baie. temple and made a thank-offering to the god. Sometimes 
cereiieny the god Kagera and his divine partner Kasinya were 
ier invoked by the Crow clan to give them rain. In a season 
Crow clan, Of drought the people would go to the temple with an 
offering of food and beer, and some of the withered fruits of 
‘the earth to shew to the god. The priest told the god what 
had been brought to him, shewed the withered fruits, and 
asked for rain for the people. The deity answered by the 
mouth of a woman named Kaisa. When the showers 
began to fall, the people beat their drums in honour of the 
god who had granted their prayer. Once a year the clan 
held a great festival at the temple, dancing and feasting for 
four days, the drums beating the whole time and fires 
burning brightly all night long.’ 

1 From the Rev. J. Roscoe’s manuscripts. 

XH TOTEMISM AMONG THE BAGANDA 499 
| 

The Mushroom (Butzéo) clan took for their secondary The 
totem the snail (zsonko) and small ivory discs (sanga). pais 
They say that their forefather was Manyagalya, who came to 
Uganda with Kintu ; but it was his son Wagaba who formed 
the clan and forbade them to eat mushrooms, because when 
he had buried his father Manyagalya he found mushrooms 
growing on the grave next morning. Manyagalya is said 
to have brought the first plantains into Uganda, also the 
kind of fig-tree from which bark-cloth is made. Members Bark-cloth 
of the clan’ have been makers of bark-cloth ever sincé. It ™**°™ 
was Manyagalya, too, who brought the seeds for their bottle- 
gourds, and presented the king with the first gourd. On 
their estate of Bukerere in Kyagwe stood the temple of 
Nende, the second god of war. The care of this deity was 
the most important duty the clan had to perform. The 
priest of the god was a member of the clan. They had also 
charge of a certain royal drum and a royal stool, both of 
which were made in the Wagaba garden of the clan. 
Moreover they were gate-keepers to the king and made The king's 
all the reed gates for the royal enclosure. When they had Corea 

_made the new gate for the royal enclosure after the accession 

of a king, they took toll of the cattle and tribute that entered 

the gate for the first time. They had also to supply the 
Queen Sister (Zuduga), the. prime minister, and the second 
minister (Kzmbugwe) with gate-keepers. Moreover, the The king’s 
Mushroom clan had charge of the king’s gourd namvuma, ag 
from which his forefather first drank. Every new moon 

this drinking-cup was brought to the king, who took it into 

his hands and then passed it back to the keeper. One of 

the king’s wives, called Najuko, is always taken from the 
Mushroom clan. When a king on his accession occupies: 

his new enclosure, this wife must dig the first sod in it for 
making the gardens. 

The Heart (Afutzma) clan has for its secondary totem The Heart 
the lungs (maugwe) of animals. Though they may eat the“ 
flesh of any animal, they are strictly forbidden to touch the 
heart and lungs. They have kept exclusively to the south 
of Uganda; all their estates are in the Budu district. 

Their forefather is said to have been a man Namugera, 
who lived and died on an island near Sese. His sons 

Basket- 
weavers, 

500 ZOTEMISM IN EAST AND CENTRAL AFRICA cuap. 

came to Uganda and accepted service under King Wunyi, 
who gave them their Budu estates. The clan is noted 
for its skill in weaving fine baskets. They had to bring 
a tribute of fish caught in the river Mujuzi to the king 
every six months. On the hills Bale and Lwamunyeni 
the clan has two small temples to the national god Mukasa 
with priests and mediums. 

Worshipof The Heart clan had also charge of a temple where the 

the python 
by the 
Heart clan. 

The feed- 
ing of the 
sacred 
serpent 
with milk. 

The 
ython’s 
inspired 
medium 
(Mandwa). 

python was worshipped under the titles of Selwanga and 
Magobwe, which were also names of men. The temple 
stood in a forest on the bank of the Mujuzi River. The 
estate is called Bulonge ; it forms part of Budu, a district in 
the south of Uganda, bordering on the western shore of the 
Victoria Nyanza. The temple was a large conical hut built 
of poles and thatched with grass. On the floor was spread 
a layer of sweet-smelling grass, and upon it was the sacred 
place of the python, a log and a stool covered with bark-cloth. 
A round hole in the side of the hut allowed the serpent 
to crawl out and in. The guardian of the python was a 
woman called Nazimbe, who might never marry. She 
daily fed the serpent with milk out of a large wooden bowl, 
the reptile lying with its head over the stool and drinking 
freely. The milk was drawn from certain sacred cows, 
which were kept for the sole use of the python. White clay 
was mixed with the milk which the serpent drank ; and the 
creature was also given fowls and small goats, 

Within the hut, opposite the serpent’s place, stood a bed- 
stead, on which the python’s inspired medium (J/andwa) 
and his assistant slept. It was the medium’s duty to bring 
the milk from the sacred cows for the python, and from 
time to time he took fowls or goats and tied them on the 
bank of the river, and the python went down and devoured 
them. These offerings were made whenever the medium 
wished to go afishing, because the python was believed to 
have power over the river and all the fish in it. After a 
good catch the medium would call all the people of the 

1 The following curious and valuable in the text, is derived from the manu- 
description of the worship ofthe python, scripts of the Rev. J. Roscoe, which 
like the rest of the information as to he has generously placed at my dis- 
the Baganda clans which is embodied _ posal. 

XI TOTEMISM AMONG THE BAGANDA jor 

estate together to partake of a sacred mteal of the fish 
caught ; he prepared the fish and they provided the cooked 
vegetables and beer. From time to time the medium went 
over to the Island of Sese to get cows from the god Mukasa 
with which to provide milk for the python. The reason 
why he applied to Mukasa was that the god’s wife was a 
female python named Nalwanga, sister of the male python 
Selwanga ; hence according to the custom of the country 

_ Mukasa was bound to make presents to his wife’s brother 
from time to time. The cows always came decorated with 
creepers about their bodies to shew that they were sacred. 
They were kept close by the temple and milked daily for 
the python. 

The chief business of the python was to bestow offspring The 

on people. Newly married men and husbands of barren wives *t°4 

thon 
resorted to the temple for the purpose of obtaining children called the 
with the help and blessing of the serpent. Other requests one 
were also brought to him, but he was called above all the 
Giver of Children. The king himself used to send the chief 
of the district (Pokzno) to the python to ask his blessing, 
that he might have offspring. 

The time for the worship of the python was at the Worship of 
new moon. For several days before the moon appeared {'¢,Python 
the people made preparations, because no work might be moon. 
done on the estate for seven days. As soon as the crescent 
was seen, the drums beat and the people gathered for the 
worship, bringing their offerings for the god, which were 
chiefly beer, cowry shells, and a few goats and fowls. The 
hereditary priest, who was always chief of the estate, came 
with a following of lesser chiefs. Having received the 
offerings from the people and informed the python of the 
requests which were made to him, the priest dressed the 
medium in the sacred garb that he might be ready for the 
python to take possession of him. This garb consisted of Leto 
two bark-cloths thrown over the shoulders, two white goat- 27y te, 
skins worn as aprons, a leopard skin wrapt round the ais 
chest, and a crown of goatskin, decked with beads and eee 
wild banana seeds, on the head. Thus attired, and holding who was 
two fly whisks in his hand, the medium received from the Tee eae 

priest a cup of beer and some of the milk mixed with white 

The 
totemic 
system 

of the 
Baganda 
seems to 
contain 
little that is 
primitive. 

s02 ZTOTEMISM IN EAST AND CENTRAL AFRICA cuav. 

clay from the python’s bowl. These he quaffed, and then, 
the spirit of the python coming upon him, he fell on his 
face and wriggled like a serpent on his belly, uttering 
strange sounds and speaking in an unknown tongue. When 
the fit of inspiration was over, and the medium, exhausted 
by the strain, had fallen into a deep sleep, an interpreter 
explained the inspired but mysterious utterances to the 
fortunate persons whose prayers had been granted. He 
told them what human means it was necessary to adopt in 
order to ensure the divine blessing, what medical treatment 
the wife must undergo, and so forth. When the children 
promised by the python were born, the happy parents had to 
bring an offering of a goat or fowls to the temple, and if they 
failed to do so, their little ones were stricken with disease. 
The preceding account of the totemic system of the 
Baganda, which we owe to the prolonged and accurate 
researches of the Rev. John Roscoe, suggests several ob- 
servations. In the first place there appears to be little in 
the system that can be described as primitive or that 
throws light on the origin of totemism. The Baganda are 
a people who have made very considerable advances in 
culture, and though they retain the division into totemic 
clans for the regulation of marriage, and continue to respect 
their totemic animals and plants, they seem for the most 
part to have passed beyond the savage superstitions which 
probably lie at the root of totemism. In general they 
either cannot account at all for their totems or they account 
for them by jejune stories, the worthless product of a late 
and shallow rationalism. The fundamental notion of a 
physical kinship between a man and his totem seems to 
have almost disappeared. Yet in a few cases it survives. 
Thus the clan which has for its totems the hippopotamus 
and the tortoise tells how their ancestress gave birth to a 
tortoise, which afterwards turned into a hippopotamus, so 
that members of the clan are akin to both their totem 
animals.' This story smacks of true totemism. Again, the 
tradition of the*Tailless Cow clan, that they took the crested 
crane for their secondary totem because a girl of the clan 
had been turned into a bird of that sort,? also reflects the old 
1 See above, p. 494. 2 See above, p. 497- 

XIII TOTEMISM AMONG THE BAGANDA 503 

totemic sense of the closeness between man and beast and 
the easy transition from one to the other. Slighter traces 
of the same train of thought may be detected in the story 
of the Mushroom clan, that they respect mushrooms because 
mushrooms grew on their founder’s grave ;1 and again in the 
tradition of the Frog branch of the Lung-fish clan, that their 
human ancestor resembled in certain respects a frog.” With 
these hints of genuine totemism before us we may guess 
that many more totemic clans of the Baganda formerly 
explained the origin of their totems by similar legends of a 
physical affinity between their human ancestors and their 
totemic animals or plants. 

Another feature in the totemism of the Baganda which Atsence of 
bespeaks its high development or rather decay is the almost ™S°") 
total absence from it of magical ceremonies for the for the 
multiplication or control of the totems. The only clear ee 
and indubitable exception is the ceremony performed by control of 
Grasshopper women for the multiplication of their edible wer 
totem the grasshopper.? As the Baganda clans are regularly 
forbidden to injure or eat their totems, it would seem that 
this ceremony can only be performed by Grasshopper 
women for the benefit of other people, who eat grasshoppers 
and regard them as a dainty. Thus the rite observed by 
women of the Grasshopper clan for the multiplication of 
grasshoppers is strictly analogous to the zz¢zchzusma or magical 
rites observed by totem clans in Central Australia for the 
multiplication of their totems. But this is the only case of such 
a magical rite performed by a totemic clan for the increase 
or control of the totem which Mr. Roscoe was able to 
discover among the Baganda, though he made searching 
enquiries on the subject. However, a hint of the same thing 
occurs in the rule that a member of the Wind clan must 
assist at the capture of the spirit of the wind.‘ We have 
also seen that the King of Uganda performed a magical 
ceremony for the multiplication of elephants with the 

1 See above, p. 499. Grasshopper clan and is therefore free 

to eat grasshoppers; and the same 

privilege is enjoyed by his children, 
3 See above, p. 482. Observe that since they are of his clan and not of 

the husband of the Grasshopper woman __ their mother’s. 

is of course not a member of the 4 See above, p. 486. 

2 See above, p. 485. 

The 
totemic 
system 
of the 
Baganda 
seems to 
have had 
very little 
influence 
on their 
religion. 

504 TOTEMISM IN EAST AND CENTRAL AFRICA char. 

assistance of elephant-hunters;! but as these elephant- 
hunters belonged to the Reedbuck, not to the Elephant, 
clan, the ceremony is not strictly analogous to the Central 
Australian ceremonies of zntichizma. 

Another observation suggested by Mr. Roscoe’s account 
of Baganda totemism is that the system appears to have 
had extremely small influence on the religion of the people. 
There is little or no evidence that in Uganda, as in Samoa,” 
the old totemic superstitions were developing into a regular 
worship of the totemic animals and plants. Each totemic 
clan seems, indeed, to practise certain religious observances 
of its own; but, apart from the custom of not killing or 
injuring the totem, these observances have little or no 
reference to the totemic animals or plants. For the most 
part they are concerned either with the great national deities 
or with the once human but now deified ancestor of the 
clan. Even when we do find a totemic clan worshipping an 
animal with truly religious rites, that animal is not their 
totem. It is the Heart clan, not a Python clan, which 
worships the python. Thus the totemism of the Baganda 
should serve as a warning against the supposition that 
totemism almost necessarily develops, first, into a worship 
of sacred animals and plants, and afterwards into a worship 
of anthropomorphic deities with sacred animals and plants 
for their attributes. At the same time we are bound to 
remember that the system of the Baganda has all the 
appearance of being highly developed, and that it may have 
passed through one or more stages of this development before 
it came within the ken of European observers. It is possible 
that the ancestors to whom the clans trace their origin were 
once deemed to be animals or plants of the totemic species ; 
or to be more exact, it may have been imagined that the 
ancestors were beings who partook both of the nature of 
men and of the nature of animals or plants, so that to the 
vague thought of those primitive philosophers it was im- 
possible to draw a sharp distinction between the two, Such 
semi-human creatures, hovering on the line between man and 
beast or between man and plant, were according to Central 
Australian traditions the forefathers of the totemic clans. 

1 See above, p. 497. 2 See above, pp. 15! 599. 

XIII TOTEMISM AMONG THE BAGANDA 505 

One more observation suggested by the foregoing notice some 
of the Baganda clans is that some of the clans seem almost ea ) 
to have developed into hereditary professional castes. Thus clans seem. 
the members of one clan are elephant-hunters ; the members 2/0*t ' 
of a second are smiths ; the members of a third are makers developed 
of bark-cloth ; and the members of a fourth are noted for peedi 
their skill in basket-weaving. And this incipient tendency ane 
towards an industrial system based on a division of labour castes. 
between families has apparently been fostered by the kings, 
who have assigned to most, if not all, of the clans certain 
special duties or functions to be performed by them for the 
royal family. Hence in Uganda, as probably in many other 
barbarous nations, the existence of an absolute monarchy 
has been favourable to the growth of the mechanical arts by 
creating a demand for many different kinds of skilled labour 
and by holding out ample rewards for proficiency in them. 

A very singular feature of the Baganda clans is that in Each 
spite of the custom of exogamy, which necessitates a constant * (P°. 
inflow of fresh female blood from outside into the clan, each clans 
clan nevertheless preserves a distinct physical type of its ee 
own, which is so clearly marked that an experienced observer has its own 
can commonly tell a man’s clan at sight without needing to ee 
ask him which he belongs to. Thus, for example, members which 
of the Grasshopper clan are distinguished by high pointed fot to be 
heads ; members of the Lung-fish clan may be recognised by sas : 
their broad noses ; and members of the Oribi Antelope clan marriage 
are conspicuous for the refined cast of their features, particu- ae 
larly their thin shapely noses and less protuberant lips. 

The royal family is likewise distinguished from others by 
the finer type of its features, which are thought to resemble 
those of the Bahima; yet the type differs from that of the 
Oribi Antelope clan. Exact measurements confirm and 
accentuate these corporeal distinctions, which cannot be 
ascribed to any artificial manipulations or mutilations of the 
body, since no such manipulations or mutilations are 

practised by the Baganda. Yet when a woman bearing all 

ary 

1 For this information as to the of many members of the various clans, 
physical types of the Baganda clansI and these measurements will be pub- 

am indebted to the Rev. J. Roscoe. lished in due course, 
He has taken many exact measurements ah 8 BAR > 

Suggested 
explanation 
of the 
permanence 
of the 
paternal 
type. 

506 TOTEMISM IN EAST AND CENTRAL AFRICA cuap. 

the characteristic features of her clan is given in marriage 
to a man of another cldn and has children by him, these 
children reproduce the physical type, not of their mother, 
but of their father ; they resemble him, not her ; the mother’s 
bodily characteristics are, so to say, obliterated in her off- 
spring. Why this should be so, why among the Baganda 
children should regularly be like their fathers and not like 
their mothers, is a question on which that branch of 
biological science which investigates the propagation of the 
species may yet throw light. If the popular opinion, shared 
by experienced breeders, that impressions made on mothers 
during their pregnancy are often permanently imprinted on 
their offspring, should prove to be correct, we could easily 
understand why women, taken in childhood from their 
mothers’ families and brought up, as they usually are among 
the Baganda, in the families of their future husbands, should 
bear children who reproduce the physical type of the persons 
whom their mothers have had constantly before their eyes 
during the critical seasons of conception and’ pregnancy. 
And on the same principle we might perhaps expect to find 
conversely, that wherever it is the custom for husbands to 
take up their abode permanently in their wives’ families, the 
children would tend to resemble their mothers rather than 
their fathers, since in that case the women during pregnancy 
would be surrounded by persons of their own physical type, 
not by persons of the physical type of their husbands. Yet 
this tendency would probably be far less decided than the 
other ; since on the hypothesis in question the physical type 
of the father must always count for much, and the impression 
which it makes on the wife and mother, though it might be 
weakened, could hardly be wholly effaced by the impression 
made on her by persons of a different type. If there is any 
truth in these speculations, it may be anticipated that where- 
ever a wife lives with her husband’s family, the children will 
strongly resemble their father ; and that wherever a husband 
lives with his wife’s family, the children will tend, though in 
a far less degree, to resemble their mother. But to the 
question thus raised by the physical diversity of the Baganda 
clans we shall have occasion to recur in the sequel. 

Like the tribes of Central and Northern Australia the 

XIII TOTEMISM AMONG THE BAGANDA 507 

Baganda believe that women may be impregnated without Relief 
commerce with the other sex; but unlike the Australian hen de 
aborigines they hold that such impregnation is exceptional, that con- 
not universal.! When a wife is found to be pregnant in ee 
circumstances which exclude the possibility that the child place with- 
might have been begotten by her husband, she will some- >t) 

times plead that she got it through the flower of the banana They 
falling on her back or shoulders, while she was at work saleaiea 
in her garden. This account is at once accepted as a aey Pe 
sufficient explanation of her pregnancy and her husband is by the. . 
satisfied ; for the Baganda do not doubt that a woman may ees 
be impregnated by the flower of the banana. If a woman 
were for any reason debarred from having recourse to this 
plea, she might under the old régime be lawfully put to 
death by her husband, and such executions were not 
infrequent. Nothing could well illustrate more strikingly the 
firm faith of the Baganda in the possibility of conception 
without cohabitation than the readiness of a husband to 
accept such an excuse and on the strength of it to let 
the adultress go free, whom otherwise he might have 
punished with death. The notion that the flower of the 
banana may get with child any woman on whom it falls is 
perhaps connected with the custom, invariably observed by 
the Baganda, of burying an infant’s placenta at the root of 
a banana tree. For as they deem the placenta a double or 
‘twin, as they call it, of the child, they might easily fancy 
that a spirit child is absorbed by the root of the tree and 
that, being drawn up by the sap, it breaks out in the 
sunshine into the great purple bloom of the banana, ready 
to drop on some passing woman and to be born again from 
her womb. The same custom may also explain the notion 
of the Baganda that a banana grove is the play-ground of 
ghosts. No wonder that a woman should become a mother 
on such haunted ground. 

But in Uganda children may come, unfathered, into the Suicides 
world in less lovely ways than from the purple blossoms of a 274... 
verdurous banana grove. Infants born feet_foremost are born feet 

: : : foremost 
killed and buried at cross-roads; and at cross-roads the ... buried 

1 For the evidence of this belief I am indebted to my friend the Rev. 
John Roscoe. 

at cross- 
roads, and 
it is be- 
lieved that 
their spirits 
can enter 
into passing 
women and 
be born 
again. 

Marriage 
of first 
cousins 
forbidden, 
but mar- 
riage of 
second 
cousins 
allowed, 
Mutual 
avoidance 
of first 
cousins, 

Custom of 
avoidance 
between a 
man and 
his wife's 
mother and 
between a 
woman 
and her 
husband’s 
father, etc. 

508 ZOTEMISM IN EAST AND CENTRAL AFRICA cuar. 

bodies of suicides are burned together with the fatal tree on 
which they hung or the house in which they took their lives. 

All women, whether married or unmarried, who pass these 

ill-omened spots, cast sticks or straws on the graves till great 
piles have accumulated over them. This theydo to prevent the 
unquiet spirits from entering into them and being born again.’ 

These superstitions demonstrate the belief of the Baganda 
that women may and do conceive without the co-operation 
of a male. We have seen reason to think that notions of 
this sort lie at the root of totemism. 

Marriage between first cousins is forbidden among the 
Baganda.? Weare not told that there is any exception to this 
rule. But second cousins are free, at least in certain cases, 
to marry each other. Thus whereas first cousins, the children 
of a brother and of a sister respectively, are forbidden to 
marry each other, the children of these cousins are at liberty 
to do so in the case where the father of one of them is the 
son of that brother, and the mother of the other is the 
daughter of that sister. In short, a man’s children may 
not marry his sister’s children, but a man’s son’s children 
may marry his sister’s daughter’s children. Not only may 
first cousins not marry each other but they may not even 
come near each other nor speak to each other, they may not 
enter the same house nor eat out of the same dish.* This 
custom of mutual avoidance no doubt springs from the pro- 
hibition of marriage and is intended to guard against incest. 

Further, among. the Baganda, as among so many peoples 
who practise exogamy, a man may neither see his mother-in- 
law nor speak to her face to face. If he wishes to hold any 
communication with her, it must be done through a third 
person, or she may be in another room out of sight and talk 
to him through the wall or open door. A woman may 
speak to her father-in-law, but she may not take his hand or 

Protectorate, ii, 688. 
3 From information given me by the 
Rev. J. Roscoe. 

1 From information given me by 
the Rev. J. Roscoe. Compare his 
** Further Notes on the Manners and 

Customs of the Baganda,” Jozrnal of 
the Anthropological Institute, xxxii. 
(1902) p- 30. 

2 Sir Harry Johnston, 7he Uvanda 

4 Sir Harry Johnston, 7he Uganda 
Protectorate, ii. 695, confirmed and 
extended verbally by the Kev. J. 
Roscoe. 

XIII TOTEMISM AMONG THE BAGANDA 509 

touch him or even hand him anything. Any breach of these 
customs is supposed to be punished by nervous debility with 
tremors in the hands and other parts of the body.’ Further, 
a man had to avoid his sister’s daughters ; he might neither 
eat with them nor let them come near him. They were not 
allowed to enter his house if he was at home.” 

The Baganda have the classificatory system of relation- 
ship? Thus in the generation above his own a man calls 
his father Aitange, “my father,” and he calls his father’s 
brother, whether younger or older than his father, &ztange 
muto, “my little father.” But he has quite a different term 
(kajawe) for his mother’s brothers. He calls his mother ange, 
“my mother,” and he calls his mother’s sister, whether older 
or younger than his mother, szange muto, “ my little mother.” * 
But he has quite a different term (sengawo) for his father’s 
sisters. In his own generation he applies the term muganda 
wange to his brothers and the term muganda to his male first 
cousins, the sons either of his father’s brothers or of his mother’s 
sisters. He applies the same term mwanyzna to his sisters and 
to his female first cousins, the daughters either of his father’s 
brothers or of his mother’s sisters. But he has quite different 
terms for his other first cousins, the children either of his 
father’s sisters or of his mother’s brothers. Thus he calls 
the sons and daughters of his father’s sisters kég¢bwewe, and 
he applies the same term to the daughters of his mother’s 
brothers. The sons of his mother’s brothers he calls kojawe; 
but he may also call them suganda, “brothers.” In the 
generation below his own a man applies the same term 
mutabane to his sons and to his brothers’ sons. The term 
muganda wange is applied by a man to his brother and 
by a woman to her sister. The term mwanyina is applied 

1 Rev. J. Roscoe, ‘‘Notes on the 
Manners and Customs of the Baganda,” 
Journal of the Anthropological Institute, 
xxxi, (1901) p. 124; zd. ‘ Further 
Notes on the Manners and Customs of 
the Baganda,” /ournal of the Anthropo- 
logical Institute, xxxii. (1902) p. 39. 
Compare Sir Harry Johnston. Zhe 
C'ganda Protectorate, ii. 688. 

2 From the manuscripts of the Rev. 
J. Roscoe. 

3 The following account of the 

classificatory system of relationship 
among the Baganda is drawn from the 
manuscripts of the Rev. J. Roscoe, 
which he has kindly placed at my 
disposal. 

4 «¢The clan system also has a 
tendency to make relationship rather 
genera] than particular, and hence a 
child calls all its father’s brothers 
‘father,’ and all its mother’s sisters 
‘mother’” (R. P. Ashe, Zwo Aings 
of Uganda, pp. 286 sq.). 

The classi- 
ficatory 
system 

of rela- 
tionship 
among the 
Baganda. 

Two 
peculiari- 
ties of the 
classifica~ 
tory system 
of rela- 
tionship 
among the 
Baganda. 
First, 
aman 
calls his 
mother's 
brother's 
wife his 
wife and 
she calls 
him her 
husband. 

510 YTOTEMISM IN EAST AND CENTRAL AFRICA cuav, 

by a man to his sister and by a woman to her brother. 
It deserves to be noticed that the system of relationship 
of the Baganda is sufficiently advanced to distinguish 
between a wife and a wife’s sisters, and conversely between 
a husband anda husband’s brothers. Thus a man calls 
his wife mukazi or muka; but he calls his wife’s sisters 
mulamu, A woman calls her husband éa or base ; but 
she calls her husband’s brothers sulamu. 

Two peculiarities in the classificatory system of the Baganda 
deserve particular notice. In the first place a man calls his 
mother’s brother’s wife his wife (#zuhasz), and she calls him 
(her husband’s sister’s son) her “ husband ” (dase). This seems 
toimply that among the Baganda in former times, as among 
the Barongo at present,’ a nephew exercised marital rights 
over the wife of his maternal uncle (his mother’s brother), or 
in other words, that a woman was bound to submit to the 
embraces of her husband’s nephew (his sister’s son) whenever 
the nephew chose to require it of her. The implication is 
strongly confirmed by the observation that among the 
Baganda as among the Barongo the nephew still inherits the 
wife (or one of the wives) of his deceased maternal uncle ; 
that is, on his uncle’s death he marries the woman (his 
uncle’s wife) whom even in his uncle’s lifetime he had called 
his wife, and the widow on her side marries the man (her 
husband’s nephew) whom even in her husband’s lifetime she 
had called her husband. Similarly among the Republican 
Pawnees of North America a man called his mother’s 
brother’s wife “my wife” (74-te-luk-tuk-i), and consistently 
with this nomenclature he called the woman’s child “my 
child” (pe-row).2, We can now understand why in several 
Indian tribes.of North America, such as the Minnetarees 
and the Choctaws, a man calls his first cousins, the children 
of his mother’s brother “my son” and “my daughter” ; and 
why conversely in these tribes a man calls his first cousins, 
the children of his father’s sister “my father” and “my 
mother.”* These terms so applied are perfectly intelligible 

1 See above, p. 387. (Smithsonian Contributions to Anow- 
2L. H. Morgan, Systems of Con- Lede, xvii.). 
sanguinity and Affinity of the Human 3 See below, vol. ii. pp. 149, 
family (Washington, 1871), p. 331 175 5g. 

XII TOTEMISM AMONG THE BAGANDA 51 

on the hypothesis that in former times a mian of these tribes, 
like a Barongo man at present, regularly exercised marital 
rights over the wife of his maternal uncle (his mother’s 
brother), for in that case the woman’s children might be in 
* very truth his sons and daughters. Similarly, in the Mota 
form of the classificatory system a man is called the father 
(tamat) of his first cousins, the sons and daughters of his 
mother’s brothers,’ which suggests that he has, or once had, 
marital rights over their mother, the wife of his maternal 
uncle, in other words, that a man is bound to place his wife 
at the disposal of his nephew, the son of his sister, whenever 
the nephew chooses to exact the privilege. This accords 
very well with the extraordinary rights which in Fiji the 
sister’s son (vasz) enjoyed against his maternal uncle, his 
mother’s brother. 

The second peculiarity in the classificatory system of the The second 
Baganda which deserves attention is this, A man calls his Peyleny 
wife’s brother’s daughter his wife, and she calls him her Baganda 
husband. This is explicable on the hypothesis that the two ae : 
enjoy, or formerly enjoyed, the right of having sexual inter- tory system 

: . : -_ is thata 
course with each other. That right would in turn explain man cat's 
the names which among certain tribes of North American a euts 
Indians first cousins, the children of a brother and of a sister daughter 
respectively, apply to each other. Thus among the Miamis hs wie 
and Shawnees a man calls his female cousin, the daughter calls him 
of his mother’s brother, “my mother,” and she calls him a ee & 
“my son.”? This would be intelligible if the man’s father 
had a right of access to his wife’s brother's daughter, for in 
that case his son might be quite right in calling that woman 
“ my mother,” since she might really have given birth to him. 

Thus these particular Melanesian and North American These two 
terms for cousins are readily explained by the peculiarities of eee 

‘s ‘ ; ies explain 
the Baganda system to which I have just called attention : certain 
we have only to assume that among the Baganda the terms ee 
“husband” and “ wife” mean what they imply, and we at American 

once understand why in Melanesia and North America two as 

' R.H. Codrington, Zhe Afelanesians children of a brother and sister respec- 
(Oxford, 1891), pp. 37-39- tively, in the Omaha and Creek forms 

2 See below, vol. iii. pp. 70 s7., 74. of the classificatory system (76%. pp. 
Compare the terms for cousins, the 115-117, 165-167). 

The 
peculiari- 
ties of the 
DBaganda 
system 
point to 
certain 
extended 
marital 
rights. 

Relics of 
mother-kin 
among 

the 
Baganda. 

512, -TOTEMISM IN EAST AND CENTRAL AFRICA cuar. 

persons, who seem to be first cousins, may quite correctly 
call each other “ mother ” and “son” respectively. 

It should be observed that whereas the first of the 
peculiarities of the Baganda system points to the exercise of 
marital rights by a man over a woman in the generation 
above him, namely, his mother’s brother’s wife, the second 
peculiarity points to the exercise of marital rights by a man 
over a woman in the generation below him, namely, his 
wife’s brother’s daughter. It is remarkable that, if we may 
judge by their terms of relationship, both these privileges 
should have been accorded to men by the Baganda. 

The first of the peculiarities of the Baganda system to 
which I have called attention may be considered a relic of 
mother-kin ; for it seems hardly possible to explain other- 
wise the custom which allows a man to call his mother’s 
brother’s wife “ my wife” and to marry her on the decease 
of his maternal uncle. Such a custom points plainly to that 
position of privilege enjoyed by a man in respect of his 
maternal uncle which was perfectly natural when he was his 
uncle’s heir under the system of mother-kin, but which 
becomes strange and anomalous under a system of father- 
kin, such as now obtains in Uganda, under which a man’s 
heirs are not his sister’s sons, but his own sons. Another 
relic of the privileges formerly granted to the sister’s son 
under a system of mother-kin survives among the Baganda 
at funerals ; for it is then the duty of the sister’s son, and of 
him alone, to conclude the obsequies by solemnly burning 
the house-pole of his deceased maternal uncle.' But among 
the Baganda, as among other peoples who have followed 
the custom of mother-kin, the advantage is by no means 
altogether on the side of the nephew as against his maternal 
uncle ; on the contrary we are told that in former times “a 
man always looked upon his sister’s children and treated 
them as slaves.”? This despotic power possessed by a man 
over his sister's children is a natural consequence of the 
system of mother-kin, which places a woman’s brother, not 
her husband, at the head of her family and thereby permits 
him to exercise the same authority over her children which’ 

' From information given me by the 2 From the papers of the Rev. J. 
Rev. J. Roscoe. Roscoe. 

XII TOTEMISM AMONG THE BAGANDA 513 

under the system of father-kin would be é¢xerted by their 
father. In the history of institutions the authority of the 
maternal uncle, the mother’s brother, as a rule precedes that 
of the father: avuncult potestas is commonly older than 
patria potestas. 

To the traces of mother-kin among the Baganda may Maternal 
perhaps be added the rule according to which kings and {eset 
princes belong to the clan and take the totem of their royal 
mother, while commoners on the other hand always belong pe 
to the clan and take the totem of their father. But,.as we 
shall see presently, there is reason to think that this royal 
custom of heredity, so different from the custom of their 
subjects, is rather an importation from an alien race than 
evidence of the ancient practice of the Baganda themselves. 

§ 15. Zotemism among the Banyoro 

The Banyoro are a Bantu people inhabiting Unyoro, the The 
country which lies to the north-west of Uganda and borders pany 
on Lake Albert. Down the centre of this region runs a line country. 
of bold heights, sometimes rising into pinnacles and crags of 
striking aspect. Here the country is open, grassy, and 
rocky, but along the western foot of the ridge stretches a 
belt of tropical forest, where chimpanzees live and large- 
tusked elephants abound... The Banyoro shew an ad- 
«mixture of Hamitic and Nilotic blood with the Bantu stock. 

Their figures are tall and shapely and their faces would be 
pleasing but for the practice of extracting the four lower 
incisor teeth. They keep cattle, sheep, and goats, but their 
staple food is now the sweet potato and the eleusine grain. 
They have a totemic system, which has been briefly de- Totemism 
scribed as follows by Sir Harry Johnston: “The Banyoro Bae 
are divided into many clans, which would appear to have 
totems as sacred symbols or ancestral emblems like the 
similar clans in Uganda. This institution, however, like so 
many other customs connected with the Banyoro, has lately 
been much defaced and obscured by the appalling depopula- 
tion of the country consequent on civil wars and foreign 

1 Sir Harry Johnston, 7he C'ganda 2 Sir Harry Johnston, of. cit. 

ii. 
Protectorate, i. 139 sq9. 581, 586. ©) Ra 
VOL. i 2L v 
® Orit 

Two 
groups 

of totems 
among the 
Banyoro, 
the one 
pastoral, 
the other 
agricul- 
tural, 

514. ZOTEMISM IN EAST AND CENTRAL AFRICA cuar. 

invasions. The animals or plants chosen as totems are 
much the same as in Uganda, varying, however, with the 
existence or non-existence of the symbols in the flora and 
fauna of Unyoro. There is probably a greater pre- 
ponderance of antelopes as totems compared with what 
occurs in Uganda. It is unlawful by custom for a 
Munyoro to kill or eat the totem of his clan. Thus, if 
the hartebeest should be the totem of a clan or family, 
members of this clan must not kill or eat the hartebeest. I 
have never been able to ascertain either from Banyoro or 
Baganda that their forefathers at any time believed the clan 
to be actually descended from the object chosen as a totem. 
The matter remains very obscure. It may be remotely 
connected with ancestor-worship, which is certainly the 
foundation of such religious beliefs as are held by the 
Banyoro, as by most other negro races.” * 

Full details as to the totemic system of the Banyoro 
were obtained by the Rev. John Roscoe during a visit which 
he paid to their country in June 1909. He found that their 
totems fall on the whole into two groups, the one pastoral, 
the other agricultural, corresponding to the twofold division 
of the people into herdsmen and husbandmen. These two 
classes are socially distinct. The herdsmen are descendants 
of a nomadic race who have settled down in permanent 
abodes, while their large herds are still driven from place to 
place for pasturage, according to the requirements of the 
seasons and the state of the grass. They despise the 
husbandmen as an inferior race and speak of them as peasants 
and slaves. Few cattle are kept by these farmers and the 
few they have are grudged them by the herdsmen, who think 
that a mixed diet of milk and vegetables, such as farmers who 
breed cattle naturally permit themselves, must be detrimental 
to the milch kine, the contact of milk with vegetables in the 
stomachs of the people being supposed to affect sympathetic- 
ally the milk in the udders of the cows. If a man should 
partake of vegetable food, he may not drink milk for twenty- 
four hours afterwards ; but if the vegetable which he has eaten 
should be sweet potatoes, the abstinence from milk must be 
prolonged for three days. Such periods of abstinence are 

1 Sir Harry Johnston, 7e Uganda Protectorate, ii. §87 sq. 

XHI TOTEMISM AMONG THE BANYORO 515 

doubtless intended to guard against the snpadt of milk with 
vegetables in the belly of the eater. We have seen that 
among the Masai, another great pastoral tribe of Africa, 
warriors in like manner scrupulously avoid a mixed diet of 
milk and vegetables, and no doubt for the same reason, 
since these Masai warriors are also most careful not to mix 
milk with flesh or blood in their stomachs, lest the contact 
of the two should sympathetically injure the cows and. 
thereby diminish their supply of milk. However, amongst 
the Banyoro there is a class of people intermediate between 
the herdsmen and the farmers ; they consist of husbandmen 
who have been admitted by marriage into some of the 
pastoral clans, and whose mixed totems accordingly reflect a 
blending of the two distinct modes of life. 

All the Banyoro clans are exogamous with descent in the The 
male line; that is, no man may marry a woman of his own ena 
clan, and the children always belong to the clan of their exogamous 
father, not to that of their mother. So strict is the rule of os 
exogamy that formerly breaches of it were capital crimes: a in the 
man who married a woman of his own clan was put to ™e! 
death. However, to this rule the practice of the royal 
family, as we shall see, presented a singular exception. 

In the following list of Banyoro clans with their totems List of 
and taboos, which we owe to the researches of the Rev. J. ane 
Roscoe, the distinction between the three classes, the herds- totems, 
men, the husbandmen, and the mixture of the two, is indicated 2"4 

taboos. 
by grouping the clans of these divisions separately :— are 

1 See above, p. 414. 

[TABLE 

516 

TOTEMISM IN EAST AND CENTRAL AFRICA cuap. 

CLANS OF THE BANYORO 
I. Pastoral Clans 

ro, 

It. 

12, 

13. 

Clans. 

. Babito 

. Balisa 

. Bafumam- 

bogo 

. Basonga 
. Balanze 

. Basita 
. Basingo 

. Baginin 

. Baisanza 

Basengya 
Babyasi 

Banyakwa 

Bacwezi 

Primary Totems. 

Subsidiary Totems. 

Taboos, etc. 

bushbuck (7gaéz) | rainwater from the 

roofs of houses 
(maleghya) 

cows which have | rain water from the 

red marks on a 

black or red 

ground (¢émda) 
grasshopper 

(nsenene) 
grasshopper 

a nursing mother 

milch cow which 
has been with 
the bull 

cows with humps 

Redand white cows 
(mpula) 

a woman who 
enters a house 
and solicits a 
man and isafter- 
wards found to 
be with child 
(dutweke) 

the tongues of 
animals (dim?) 

milch cows with 
calf fora second 
time (ekuluzt) 

cows with straight 
horns (7gabz) 

cows which have 
drunk salt water 

roofs of houses 
(maleghya) 

(1) a kind of cow 
with peculiarred 
marks (daméo) ; 
(2) the buffalo 

grasshopper 
dew upon the 
grass 

cows in calf 
(murara) 
rain water from the 

roofs of houses 

cows which have 
been with the 
bull 

This is the clan of the royal 
family and princes. 

No member of this clan may 
drink the milk or eat the 
flesh of cows thus marked 
with red, 

The clan may not drink the 
milk of cows thus marked, 
nor eat the flesh of cows, 
buffaloes, or grasshoppers. 

No woman who is nursing a 
child may enter into the 
kraal or house of any 
member of the clan. 

Members of the clan may 
neither drink the milk of 
cows that have been to the 
bullnortouchthedewy grass. 

Members of the clan may not 
drink the milk nor eat the 
flesh of humped cows and 
cows which die in calf. 

Members of the clan may not 
drink the milk nor eat the 
tlesh of red and white cows, 
nor use the rain water which 
has dripped from roofs. 

Such a woman may never enter 
the kraals of such a clan 

, again, nor may any member 
of the clan hold any inter- 
course with her. 

The clan may not drink the 
milk nor eat the flesh of 
such cows. 

The clan may not drink the 
milk nor eat the fiesh of 
straight-horned cows. 

Members of the clan may not 
drink the milk of cows. 
which have drunk salt 
water until the second day 
after the animals have par- 
taken of the brine; and 
they may not drink the 
milk of cows which have 
been to the bull for five 

days afterwards. ‘i 

TOTEMISM AMONG THE BANYORO 

517 

CLANS OF THE BANYORO—continned 

Subsidiary Totems. 

a nursing mother 
whose child is a 
girl 

Il. Mixed Clans 

| rainwater of the 
roofs of houses 
a nursing mother 

empty baskets 
(2azb0 kasa) 

a kind of monkey }another kind of 

XIII 
Clans. Primary Totems. 
x4. Baitira cows of a parti- 
cular colour 
(mbasz) 

us. Bakwonga | bushbuck (zgaéz) 

16. Baswa bushbuck (adi) 

17. Mbazi cows of a parti- 
cular colour 
(mbazi) 

18, Baboro the hearts of 

aninials 

19. Bayangwe 
(exkende) 

20. Bagwiju a house which has 
been burnt 
down 

21. Batongo the stomachs of 
animals (amara) 

22, Basengya | bushbuck (xgadz) 

23. Banywagi | bushbuck (xgadi) 

24. Baduku a worn-out drum- 
skin on the top 
of a drum 
(kabambiro) 

25. Bahenga ja species of bird 
(Ragondo) 

26. Banyakwa | bushbuck (xgaéi) 

27. Bane a fungus growing 
on trees (katozz) 

28. Baisanza {a small _ edible 
animal (efo), 
possibly a kind 
of-antelope 

29. Bakimbiri |a nursing mother 
(ésereka) 

30. Bakwonga — bushbuck (xgad¢) 

31. Bakwonga |a trickling stream 

{subsection | (ekirira) 
of the pre- 
ceding) 

32. Bapima bushbuck (adi) 

33. Bagombe hippopotamus 
(2¢roko) 

34. Baisanza grasshopper 
(nsenene) 

35. Banyam- a water bird 

paka 

(Aagondo) 

monkey (zobe) 

rain water from the 
roofs of houses 

Taboos, etc. 

A nursing mother may not 
enter the houses nor the 
kraals of this clan. 

No member of the clan may 
approach such a house or 
take anything from it. 

A nursing mother may not 
enter the house of any 
member of this clan. 

Members of the clan may not 
cross a trickling stream, 

Some 

of the 
Banyoro 
clans have 
the same 
name but 
different 

518 

TOTEMISM IN EAST AND CENTRAL AFRICA cuar- 

Clans. 

CLANS OF THE BANYORO—confinued 

Ill. Agricultural Clans 

Primary Totems. 

Subsidiary Totems. 

Taboos, etc. 

36. 

37- 

38. 

39. 

40. 

to marry members of any other. 

Basambo 

Banyoza 

Bayaga 

Batwa 

Bakimbira 

. Bakimbira 

. Baraha 

Bagimu 
Baregeya 

. Bahembo 

. Basengya 

an empty basket 

a kind of bird 
(zyoza) 
birds in general 

milch kine (duh- 
ana) 

potter's clay 
(dumba) 

a nursing mother 
{ésereka) 

wagtail (azanyan- 
gonge) 

yams (ngobe) 

birds called 
ndegeya 

an empty basket 
(Aaibo kasa) 

a wooden porridge 
spoon 

a pointed instru- 
ment of wood or 
iron 

an empty basket 

small millet (4/0) 

stalks of grass or 
straws 

millet (do) which 
has been over- 
looked after it 
has been reaped 
and left in the 
field all night 

No one may bring an empty 

basket into the presence of 
members of the clan, nor 
present any pointed instru- 
ment to them without first 
wrapping it up. 

Members of the clan may not 

destroy or eat birds. If at 
harvest, any reaped millet 
has been forgotten in the 
field, members of the clan 
may not transport it to the 
store-house on the following 
day. On account of this 
second totem the clan is 
called Abaruka omabibi, 

Members of the clan may not 

milk cows nor put stalks of 
grass or straws in their 
mouths (sug), when they 
are walking, as other people 
commonly do. 

No member of the clan may 

touch a wooden porridge 
spoon. 

In this list it will be observed that some clans have the 
same name but different totems, while others conversely have 
the same totem but different names. 
clans ‘are distinct; members of any one of them are free 

Each and all of these 

For example, a Baisanza 

XIII TOTEMISM AMONG THE BANYORO 519 

lau way marry a Baisanza woman, provided that his totem totems i 
is the animal called ef0 and hers the grasshopper (msenene) ; Siners 1" 

or again, a Bakwonga man may marry a Bakwonga woman, names but 
provided that his totem is the bushbuck and hers a trickling uencne 
stream. Conversely a man of the bushbuck totem may 
marry a woman of the bushbuck totem, provided that, for 
example, he is of the Babito clan and she of the Bakwonga 

clan; or again, a man of the grasshopper totem may marry . 

a woman of the grasshopper totem, provided that he is of 

the Bafumambogo clan and she of the Basonga clan. Thus 

the two badges of exogamy are as usual the totem and the 

name of the clan, but where the badges overlap, either of 

them has ‘power to override the other; men and women 

of the-same totem may marry each other, if only their clan 
names differ ; men and women of the same clan name may 
marry each other, if only their totems differ. 

We naturally ask, How is it that clans of the same These 
name come to have different totems? How is it that ae 
clans of different names come to have the same totem ? arisen 
The answers to these questions can only be conjectural, since oe 
no positive information on the subject seems to be forth- division 
coming. We may suppose, for example, that these % cl 
anomalies have both arisen by subdivision ; that is, that a sections, 
clan bearing the same name and possessing the same totem ace 
may have subdivided into several sections, each of which ‘or the 
became a new clan and in order to distinguish itself from its Beans 
mother clan and sister clans either took a new name, while either a 
q . new name 
it retained the old totem, or conversely took a new totem, ora new 
while it retained the old name. The frequent occurrence of ‘**™- 
the bushbuck totem, for instance, suggests that a large 
original clan of Bushbucks may have split up into a number 
of minor clans, each of which adopted for distinction a new 
name while it clung with pride to the old bushbuck totem. 

We have seen similar grounds for conjecturing that a like 
subdivision of a Bushbuck clan has taken place among the 
Rasoga," 

Like the Baganda, the Banyoro clans have regularly subsidiar 
a secondary or subsidiary as well as a primary totem. The (is 
most probable explanation of this duplication of totems Banyoro, 

; 1 See above, p. 460. 

Peculiari- 
ties of some 
of the 
Banyoro 
totems, 
Split 
totems, 

Temporary 
totems, 

520 ZOTEMISM IN EAST AND CENTRAL AFRICA cuar. 

seems to be that the subsidiary totem was the totem of an - 
ancestress of the clan, the wife perhaps of the founder, and 
that out of regard for her feelings her descendants continued 
ever afterwards to respect her totem in addition to the one 
which they inherited from their fathers. Though this 
explanation of subsidiary totems was not definitely put 
forward by the natives whom Mr. Roscoe questioned on the 
subject, it is the conclusion to which the most reasonable 
and probable of their answers, taken together, appeared to 
point; and it is strongly confirmed by a custom common to 
the Baganda and the Banyoro, both of whom regularly 
respect their mother’s totem as well as their father’s up to 
the time of their marriage and very often to the end of 
their lives.' We have seen that the natives of the Western 
Islands of Torres Straits account for their subsidiary totems 
in a precisely similar way.” 

Some of the Banyoro totems are remarkable. In the 
first place there are several of what I have called split 
totems, such as the tongues, the hearts, and the stomachs of 
animals. Then the varieties of cows which form several 
totems deserve to be noted, such as red and white cows, 
cows with red blotches, cows with humps, and cows with 
straight horns. To a pastoral people the custom of thus 
constituting a variety of totems by differentiating between 
their cattle is natural enough ; we shall meet with it again 
among the pastoral Bahima.* But some of the pastoral 
totems of the Banyoro are singular, if not unique, in this 
that they are temporary, not permanent like all or almost 
all the totems which we have hitherto met with in our 
survey of totemism. Such temporary totems are cows that 
have been to the bull and cows that have drunk salt water ; 
for the taboos which make these animals into totems are not 
permanent ; one of them lasts only five days and the other 
lasts only one or, two days. Almost the only other 
temporary totemic taboos, so far as I remember, which have 
been recorded elsewhere are the prohibitions laid on soine 
clans in India to look upon or touch either animals with 
their eyes shut or animals with their eyes open ; * for clearly 

1 As to the Baganda practice see above, p- 473- 2 See above, p. 15. 
3 See below, pp. 536 59. 4 See above, pp. 279, 290, 295, 297, 314- 

XIII TOTEMISM AMONG THE BANYORO 521 

these taboos cease to operate either when the animals open 

or when they shut their eyes. Amongst the Banyoro Nursing 
another temporary totem is that of a nursing mother ; for Moers as 
here again it follows that when the woman ceases to nurse a 

child, the embargo laid on her is removed ; she ceases to be 

a totem and is now free to enter the houses of members 

of the totemic clan, where during the period of lactation she 

might not set foot. With this temporary human totem we 

may compare the Central Australian totem of laughing 

boys.' For as a woman is not always nursing, so a boy 

is not always laughing ; hence when she ceases to nurse and 

he to laugh, they both cease to be totems, the one for the 
Banyoro in the heart of Africa, the other for the Warramunga 

and Tjingilli in the heart of Australia. What taboo the 

totem laughing boys carries with it we do not know; on 
analogy we may conjecture that the members of this clan 

are distinguished from their more light-minded fellows by 

the unmoved gravity of their deportment, and that social 
etiquette requires them to avert their eyes and stop their 

ears whenever a youngster bursts into a guffaw. As to the The 
totem nursing mothers among the Banyoro our information eg adie 
is precise: such women may not enter the houses or even mothers 
the kraals of the clan of which they are the totem. The el 
origin of this singular totem is obscure; but when we froma 
remember how many superstitious rules are observed by pou 
pastoral tribes in Africa aon a fear of impairing the supply magically 
of milk from their cows,” we may guess that the same fear siglo 
underlies the rule which excludes women during the period of ss 
of lactation from the houses and kraals of certain clans — 
Perhaps the idea is that the milk in the woman’s breasts 

would be so much milk abstracted from the udders of the 

cows. If that notion were general among the pastoral 
Banyoro, it would readily explain why a nursing mother 

occurs so often either as a primary or as a subsidiary totem 

of their clans? It is possible that the same superstitious 

. 

1 Spencer and Gillen, Northern ford, 1907), pp. 154 sgq. 
Tribes of Central Australia, p. 773. 3 After proposing this explanation 
See also above, vol. i. p. 253. of the totem nursing mothers I 

2 See my paper ‘Folk-Jore in questioned my friend the Rev. J. 
the Old Testament,” Anthropological Roscoe on the point, and he informed 
Essays presented to E. B. Tylor (Ox- me that the herdsmen do definitely 

First 
cousins 
forbidden 
but second 
cousins 
allowed 

to marry 
each other. 

Marriage 
with a 
wife's 
sisters. 

Avoidance 
of a wife’s 
mother, 

522 ZYOTEMISM IN EAST AND CENTRAL AFRICA CHap. 

apprehension of injuring the cows, rather than any regard for 
the health of the people, may be the motive for forbidding 
some of the Banyoro to drink the milk of cows which have 
lately been to the bull or which have lately drunk salt 
water. In confirmation of this view it may be added: that 
among the Banyoro menstruous women are forbidden to 
drink milk lest they should harm the cows; they have 
then to live on vegetables, or if a man is rich he may give 
his wife at such periods an old cow, whose milk she may 
drink without the risk of hurting a valuable animal by her 
dangerous contagion. 

Among the Banyoro first cousins, the children of a 
brother and a sister respectively, are forbidden to marry 
each other; but second cousins, the grandchildren of a 
brother and a sister respectively, are allowed to marry 
each other, if the father of the one is a son of that brother, 
and if the mother of the other is a daughter of that sister. 
In other words, a man’s children may not marry his sister’s 
children ; but a man’s son’s children may marry his sister’s 
daughter’s children. 

There are no restrictions on a man’s marrying several 
sisters ; he may marry two or more sisters at the same time. 
Moreover, if his wife dies, especially in childbed, he expects 
her parents to furnish him with one of her sisters to replace 
the dead wife. Further, if his wife proves childless, he may 
demand one of her sisters in marriage, and in that case the 
barren wife may either remain with him or return to her 
parents, as she pleases. A man has not a legal right to 
marry his dead brother’s -widow, but he may do so if the 
clan appoints him heir to the deceased. Formerly a man 
avoided his wife’s mother and might not meet her or speak 
face to face with her, though he was allowed to carry on a 
conversation with her if he sat outside the house and she 
inside. He greatly respected his wife’s father, but was free 
to see him and speak with him, 

To the rule of exogamy observed by the totemic clans of 

believe the entrance cf a nursing not able to ascertain, So far as it 
mother into their houses or kraals to goes, the statement of the herdsmen 
be in some way harmful to their cows; confirms the explanation which I had 
but in what the harm consists, he was independently given of the totem. 

XII TOTEMISM AMONG THE BANYORO 523 

the Banyoro there was one remarkable exception. Princes peor dae 
might cohabit with princesses and have children by them, Oi <r 

though in such cases the couple necessarily belonged to the exogamy 
. : : : among the 

same totemic clan, namely, the Babito clan with its totem ganyoro. 
the bushbuck. However, this cohabitation was not marriage. Princes 
“ The rule,” says Mr. Roscoe, “ was for princes and princesses Ree ee 
to live together promiscuously and not to regard each other with 

= : > . ; princesses 
as husband and wife, though the king might take a princess of their 
and keep her in his enclosure.” He might even cohabit ?" 
thus with his full sister and beget children by her. We can, and 
have seen that among the Baganda the royal family was in encreted 
like manner exempt: from the rule of exogamy, the- king. with their 
regularly marrying his own sister, who was necessarily a ‘S's 
member of his own totem clan, though he might not have a 
child by her.’ Similarly we shall find that among the 
Bahima the princes were allowed to marry their own sisters.” 

What is the reason for these remarkable anomalies ? 
Why should the royal families of three great African 
tribes, the Baganda, the Banyoro, and the Bahima, observe a 
marriage custom which so flagrantly contravenes the practice 
of their subjects and which, if observed by any but the royal 
family, would excite their deepest horror and detestation ? 
A possible answer is that in all three tribes the royal The 
families are members of an alien race to which the rule of ae 
exogamy was unknown, and that when they established explained 
themselves as reigning dynasties in Uganda, Unyoro, ples 
and Ankole, they adhered to their ancestral practice that the 
of endogamous and consanguineous marriages, while they Faeaily of 
allowed their people to follow their ancient custom of Unyoro 
exogamy. Thus as strangers and foreigners the king and ania 
the princes might be thought to be exempt from those laws ofan 
which were binding on natives of the country ; and hence pees 
they might with impunity continue to do what if done by nse 
anybody else would have been accounted a high crime and was 
misdemeanour punishable with death. This explanation ™"*"°W?- 
of the endogamy of these royal families is the oné 
adopted by the experienced observer the Rev. John 
Roscoe, who holds that the ruling dynasties of the 
Baganda, Banyoro, and Bahima have all sprung from 

1 See above, p. 469. 2 See below, p. 538. 

524 TOTEMISM IN EAST AND CENTRAL AFRICA cuayr. 

one common stock, and that stock the Galla, If he is 
right, the native rulers of these three important peoples are 
alien conquerors, who have adopted the language and to a 
great extent the habits of their Bantu subjects, though they 
still retain, or retained till lately, a form of marriage 
which flouts one of the most deeply implanted principles 
Therule of the Bantu mind. However, in adapting themselves 
en to their surroundings the kings of Uganda went a step 

forbad 
kings of further than the kings of Unyoro; for while they regularly 

eee married their sisters, they regularly abstained from begetting 
children children by them. The most probable explanation of this 
Ps abstention is that it was a concession made by politic 

havebeena monarchs to the strength of public opinion: their subjects 
concession 

té the winked at the shocking. marriages :of their: kings, because 
Lal they knew that these marriages would be barren. In 

of ther | Unyoro either the dynasty was less conciliatory or the 
subjects. people was less scrupulous ; for there the kings were free 
not only to cohabit with, but also to beget children on the 
women of their own clan, even on their own full sisters. Yet 
in one important respect the princesses of Unyoro enjoyed 
less freedom than the Queen Sister of Uganda. For whereas 
the Queen Sister of Uganda might take any man, whether 
prince or peasant, to her bed, the princesses of Unyoro might 
have none but princes for their lovers ; a commoner who pre- 
sumed to intrigue with a princess was punishable with death. 
‘The reason But even if we assume that the ancestors of these royal 
why in. houses knew nothing of the rule of exogamy, we must 
some royal 
families still ask why the kings of Uganda were not only per- 
pinot) mitted but required to marry their sisters. A simple and 
is probably highly probable explanation of the marriage of a king or 
ae chief with his sister was long ago suggested by J. F. 

old custom McLennan.’ Under a system of mother-kin a man’s heirs 

f mother- ° ° 7 
kin with, are his sister’s sons, and accordingly, where that system 

anew prevails, it is the king’s sister's son, not his own son, who 
practice of * ° . . . 
father-kin; Succeeds him on the throne. This custom is practised in 

! The. Patriarchal Theory, based on chieftainship to a sister’s son, appears 
the papers of the late J. F. McLennan, to have been nullified in some cases by 
edited and completed by D. McLennan means of an extraordinary but effective 
(London, 1885), p. 95; ‘* Another expedient—-by the chief, that is, 
rule of chiefly succession which has marrying his own sister.” 
been mentioned, that which gives the 

XII TOTEMISM AMONG THE BANYORO 525 

many lands and is particularly common in Africa.’ But for the 
offspring 

when, through a growing certainty of paternity or from br evch 
other causes, men became more attached to their own marriages 
children than to the children of their sisters, it was natural oe 
that they should wish to transmit to them their property descent,. 
* the pater- 
and power; and as no men had so much to transmit as.) Ang 
kings, so no men had a stronger motive for substituting the mater- 

paternal for maternal descent. Thus situated they could pane Se 
hardly fail to perceive that there was a simple expedient peta own 
chiiaren 

which would enable them to institute a new custom Of andthe - 
descent through men without abolishing the old custom of ee aia 
descent through women. According to immemorial tradition , 
a king’s heirs were his sister’s sons; hence if he only 
married his sister, her sons would also be his ; the system of 
maternal descent would be combined with paternal descent ; 
time-honoured usage would be respected, while the natural 
instincts of a father would also be satisfied. We may con- 
jecture that this was the ultimate origin of the numerous 

cases in which kings have habitually married their sisters, 

while commoners abstained from such marriages as incestu- 

ous.” Among the Hovas of Madagascar a slightly different 

device was adopted to accomplish the same end. The 

king generally married, not his sister, but her daughter, his 

niece, and the children whom he had by her were the heirs 

to the throne in virtue of a twofold right, since they inherited 

the blood royal from their mothers as well as from their 
fathers.’ It is possible that a similar motive may explain 

the leave granted by some peoples to an uncle to marry his 

niece in the case in which the 

1 For examples in Africa see A. 
H. Post, Afrikanische Jurisprudens 
(Oldenburg and Leipsic, 1887), i. 16 
599. 

2 See my note on Pausanias, i. 7. 1 
(vol. it. p. 85). 

3 Le Baron d’Unienville, Statistigue 
@ THe Maurice (Paris, 1838), iii. pp. 
286 sg. 

4 For marriage with a niece, a 
sister’s daughter, see above, pp. 271 
sq. Such marriages are frequent in 
Mysore and probably in other parts of 
India also. The usual rule appears to 
be that a man may marry the daughter 

niece is his sister’s daughter.‘ 

of his elder sister, but not the daughter 
of his younger sister, unless there is no 
other suitable wife for him. Some- 
times the marriage with the daughter 
of an elder sister is not only allowed 
but specially favoured, See H. V. 
Nanjundayya, Zhe Ethnographical 
Survey of Alysore, i. 8, iii. 7, iv. § 59., 
vii. 7, villi, 2, x. 5, xi. 4, xii. 5 
(Bangalore, 1906-1907, Preliminary 
Issue). Among some Indians of Brazil 
a man’s proper wife was his niece, the 
daughter of his sister. See below, 
vol. iii. p. 575. 

526 ZFOTEMISM IN EAST AND CENTRAL AFRICA cuay, 

Such a marriage would serve the same purpose as marriage 
with a sister and would be less shocking to traditional 

sentiment. 
‘The life In the old heathen days both the life and the death of 
and death the kings of Unyoro were regulated by many precise and 
of the 

kings of - curious rules, the discovery ‘of which is not the least.interest- 
ek ing result of Mr. Roscoe’s enquiries in the country. As the 
lated by present king is a Christian, many of the old customs have no 
exact HES: Goubt fallen into desuetude and might have passed away 
unrecorded if they had not been rescued from oblivion by 
the exertions of a scientific investigator. Though they do 
not appear to be directly connected with totemism, a brief 
account of them may be welcome to the reader as illustrative 
of that state of savagery, to us so strange and so remote, of 
which totemism is only one particular product. 
‘The king The diet’ of the king of Unyoro, like the diet of the 
ee, kings of ancient Egypt,’ was strictly regulated by immemorial 
tables, but custom. He might never eat vegetable food, but must sub- 

ace ee sist on milk and beef. Mutton he might not touch. The 

and beef. beef he ate must be that of young animals not more than 
one year old, and it must be spitted and roasted beforé a 
wood fire. But he might not drink milk and eat beef at the 
same meal. He drank milk thrice a day, in the morning, in 
the afternoon, and at night before he went to bed ; after the 
draught of milk in the afternoon he went to sleep and in the 
evening he might eat beef. But he was free to quaff beer 
after partaking of meat. When he went to drink milk in 
the dairy, every man must leave the royal enclosure and all 
the women had to cover their heads till the king returned. 
No one might see him drink. One wife accompanied him 
to the dairy and handed him the milk pot, but she averted 
her face while he A edined it. 

The milk- A sacred herd was kept for the king’s use, and nine cows, 

ae the neither more nor less, were daily brought to the royal 

cows. enclosure to be milked for his majesty. They were always 
kine which had given birth to their first calves, and they 
were herded by men whose business it was to keep the 

1 The only flesh which the kings of | measure of wine. See Diodorus Siculus, 
Egypt might eat was veal and goose; i. 70. Compare Zhe Golden Bough, 
and they might only drink a prescribed Second Edition, i. 241. 

XII TOTEMISM AMONG THE BANYORO 527 

animals from the bulls, so long as they were being milked The 
for the king. _Three milkmen were charged with the task- anne 
of tending and “milking the nine cows in the royal enclosure. 
They held office for a year, and during all that time they 
must strictly abstain from women; any act of incontinence 
on their part, it was believed, would be injurious both to 
the cows and to the king. When they were about to milk 
the cows they had to wash and smear their faces, arms, and 
chests with white clay before they addressed themselves to 
their office ; and two wives of the king, who were also con- 
cerned with the solemn affair of the royal milk-drinking, had 
to cleanse or (as we should think) to dirty themselves in 
like manner. The boy who brought the nine cows from The royal 
the pasture to the royal enclosure must be a member of a wey. 
particular clan and under the age of puberty. When he came 
to puberty, he was dismissed from his post and given in 
marriage by the king’s order. During his tenure of office 
he, like the king, never partook of vegetables or of mutton ; 
he must live strictly chaste and might not go into long grass 
nor in any way scratch or wound himself so as to draw 
blood ; for it was believed that the loss of his blood would 
be detrimental to the king. Nobody might touch him. As 
he came along the road driving the sacred cows before him, 
he cried out three or four times and at the cry the people 
fled from him, covering up their heads till he and the cows 
had passed by." On reaching the royal enclosure he cried 
out again, and the three milkmen came and took charge of 
the cows. With the aid of one of the king’s wives the milk- 
men milked the cows according to certain exact rules into 
a'sacred pot, which neither they nor the woman might 
touch ; a carrier was used to prevent them from defiling the 
holy vessel by their profane contact. Before the cows were 
milked their udders and -teats were smeared with butter to 
cleanse them, and before the milkman milked any of the 
cows water was poured over his hands by the king’s wife. 

The milk of the nine sacred cows was then carried in the How the 

sacred pot into the dairy, where it was kept for the king “ns dank 

1 The information here given as to of a man who had served as the royal 
the sacred cows and the cowboy was cowboy in his youth. 
obtained by Mr. Roscoe from the lips 

Relation 
of magic 
sympathy 
between 
the cow- 
boy and 
the king. 

Belief that 
incontin- 
ence in 
their sub- 
jects may 
be fatal to 
kings and 
cows. 

528 TOTEMISM IN EAST AND CENTRAL AFRICA cuar. 

alone. Thrice a day he drank it sitting on a certain stool, 
while the wife who had handed him the pot reverently 
turned away. Any milk that remained over when the king 
had slaked his thirst must be drunk by the boy who had 
fetched the cows from the pasture. This custom probably 
furnishes the clue to the curious rules of life which had to 
be observed by the cowboy. By drinking the leavings 
of the royal milk he was doubtless supposed to stand to the 
king in a relation of such intimate sympathy that any injury 
to his person, particularly any loss of blood, would be instan- 
taneously felt by the king as if it had been inflicted on his 
own body. That, too, we may conjecture, was the reason 
why the cowboy had to be under puberty and to observe 
strict chastity. Any act of incontinence on his part might 
be deemed harmful, perhaps fatal, to the king. Similarly, 
as we have seen, the three milkmen in the royal enclosure 
had to abstain from women during their term of office lest 
by indulging in sexual intercourse they should do harm to 
the cows and to the king. In like manner the most sacred 
dairyman of the Todas in India has to avoid women 
altogether ;+ and with the example of the Banyoro before 
us we may safely conclude that the reason for his chastity 
is a belief that his unchastity would be harmful to the 
buffalo cows.” In other parts of Africa the incontinence of 
their subjects, particularly of the young, is supposed under 
certain circumstances to entail the death of kings or other 
sacred personages, Thus in the Bantu kingdom of Humbé, 
on the banks of the Cunene River in the south of Angola, 
every breach of chastity committed by young people under 
the age of puberty used to be inexorably punished with 
death whenever it came to light, because the people believed 
that if the offence were not thus expiated their king would 
die within the year. Of late years the capital punishment 
has been’‘commuted into a fine of ten head of cattle; and 
this mitigation of ancient severity has attracted crowds of 
youthful debauchees to Humbé from the neighbouring tribes, 

iw. H. R. Rivers, Zhe Todas jecturally before the Banyoro parallel 
(London, 1906), p. 236. See above, was known. See my article ‘‘ Folk- 
p. 254. lore in the Old Testament,” Anthropo- 

logical Essays presented to E. B. 
2 T had reached this conclusion con- Zy/or (Oxford, 1907), p. 162. 

_ they were still in the full possession of their faculties and 

. 

XIII TOTEMISM AMONG THE BANYORO 529 

among whom the same offence is still punished for the same 

reason with all the old rigour. For a similar reason, 

apparently, during the sickness of a Caffre chief his tribe 

was bound to observe strict continence under pain of death.? 

And in the kingdom of Congo when the holy pontiff called 

Chitomé was going his rounds through the country, all his 

people had to live strictly chaste, and all persons found 

guilty of incontinence at such times were put to death with- 

out mercy, because his loving subjects deemed that universal 

chastity was then essential to the preservation of him whom 

they revered as the head of their religion and their common 

father The mode in which the crime is supposed to 

produce this disastrous result is not apparent ; perhaps the 

expenditure of vital energy which it entails in the criminals 

is thought to exhaust the corresponding energy of the king. 
During the time a king of Unyoro lay dead all the fires ani fires ex- 

in the country were extinguished, and when food had to be tinguished 

cooked, people kindled fire by the friction of sticks and put of a king. 

it out as soon as it had served its purpose. After the new 

king was crowned, the people obtained new fire for their 

houses from the new fire in the royal enclosure. 

The kings of Unyoro had to take their own lives while The king 
of Unyoro 
had to take 

before their bodily vigour was impaired by the ravages of his own life 
disease. As soon as the king felt unwell and thought ee ae 
he was about to die, he called his principal chiefs and vigour was 
after discussing affairs of state with them in council he Sie 
went to a private house, where only his chief wife was cee ot 
allowed to visit him. There he asked her for “the cup,” 
the poisoned cup, which seems to have been kept always 

ready, and having received it at her hands he drained 

it and in a few moments was dead. This custom lasted 

down to within living memory. The father of the last 

king, Kaberega, who is now living an exile in the Seychelles, 

perished thus. If the king faltered or was too ill to ask 

1 Charles Wunenberger, ‘La 3 J. B. Labat, Relation historique 

Mission et le Royaume de Humbé sur 
les Bords du Cunéne,” Les ALtsstons 
Catholiques, xx. (1888) p. 262. 

2L, Alberti, De Aaffers (Amster- 
dam, 1810), p. 171. 

VOL. 

del’ Ethiopie Occidentale (Paris, 1732), 
i. 259 sg. The two latter instances 
have already been cited by me in 
Psyche’s Task (London, 1909), pp- 49 
Sg. 

2M 

The fight 
for the 
kingdom. 

The custom 
of putting 
a sick king 
to death 
seems to 
rest ona 
belief in 

a sympa- 
thetic bond 
between 
king and 
people. 

The 
Batoro, 

530 ZOTEMISM IN EAST AND CENTRAL AFRICA cnuap. 

for the cup, it was his wife’s sad duty to administer the 
poison. His death was kept secret for a time, only the two 
principal chiefs being taken into confidence by the wife. 
The public announcement of the death was made by the 
chief milkman. Taking a pot of the sacred milk in his 
hands he mounted the house-top and cried, “ Who will drink 
the milk?” - With these words he dashed the pot on the 
roof; it rolled off and falling to the ground was broken in 
pieces. That was the signal for war to the death between 
the princes who aspired to the throne. They fought till only 
one was left alive; he was the king. Any prince who did 
not choose to enter the lists retired to the country and lived 
there till the internecine struggle was over. The conqueror 
buried his father and ascended the throne. He inherited 
the kingdom and all his predecessor’s private property and 
most of his women. But the chief wife of the deceased king 
was clubbed to death in his open grave, and so was the boy 
whose duty had been to drive the sacred cows daily to be 
milked for his royal master. These two were buried with 
the departed monarch. Others of his wives were set apart 
to minister to him, the living to the dead, at his tomb. 
They remained under the authority of his successor, 

The rule which obliged the kings of Unyoro to kill 
themselves or be killed before their strength of mind 
and body began to fail through disease or age is only a 
particular example of a custom which appears to have 
prevailed widely among barbarous tribes in Africa and to 
some extent elsewhere. Apparently this curious practice 
rests on a belief that the welfare of the people is 
sympathetically bound up with the welfare of their king, 
and that to suffer him to fall into bodily or mental decay 
would be to involve the whole kingdom in ruin.’ 

§ 16. Totemism among the Batoro 

The Batoro are a Bantu people inhabiting the district of 
Toro to the west of Uganda and to the south of Unyoro. 
They are said to be really a section of the Banyoro with 

1 The evidence for the prevalence adduced by mein Zhe Golden Bough, 
and meaning of the custom has been Second Edition, ii. 8 sgq., etc. 

XHI TOTEMISM AMONG THE BATORO 531 

perhaps less admixture of Hamitic blood. Tall men are 
common among them, but the ordinary Toro peasant is a 
rather degraded representative of the Bantu type.’ The Totemism 
Batoro are divided into exogamous and totemic clans, the 2m0ns the 
members of which observe the two fundamental laws of 
ordinary totemism by refusing to eat’ their totemic animals 
and to marry women of their own totemic clan. Apparently 
people are forbidden to kill as well as to eat their totemic 
animal. Descent is in the paternal line; in other words, 
children take their clan and totem from their father, not from 
their mother. Among the totems are the sheep, the dog, the 
omusu (an edible rodent of a size between a large rat and a 
small rabbit), the ezpara (an antelope, the same as the zwzpala 
of South Africa), the xjaza (a small antelope), the exsenene 
(edible grasshoppers), white ants (that is, termites), esamba 
(a large fish found in Lake Albert Edward), raindrops, and 
perhaps the exjoga (hyrax), the engadd (a small antelope), and 
fowls. The totem of the royal family of Toro is the sheep. 
On his conversion to Christianity the king publicly ate 
mutton to shew that he respected his totem no longer. In 
this incomplete list of Batoro totems it seems clear that 
many totems are identical with those of the Baganda, such 
as the sheep, the dog, the rodent called omusu (Baganda 
musu), the antelope njaza (Baganda zjaza, reedbuck), the 
grasshopper ensenene (Baganda msenene), the fish emamba 
(Baganda mamba), the antelope engabi (Baganda xgadz, 
bushbuck), and raindrops. Nor is this agreement between 
the totems of the two peoples surprising ; for in past years 
the Baganda used to raid the Batoro and kidnap their 
children, and the Batoro retaliated on the Baganda to the 
best of their ability. Many of the kidnapped children have 
grown up in their adopted country, and in the present 
peaceful times they are sometimes exchanged and so return 
to the land of their birth, The only way in which after an 
interval of years the relationships can be traced is by means 
of the totem. When a Mutoro? man or woman, brought up 
in Uganda, comes on a visit to Toro, where his or her 
kinsfolk may be supposed to live, the first question which 

1 Sir Harry Johnston, Zhe Uganda 2 Mutoro is the singular of Batoro 
Protectorate, ii. 580. and means a native of Toro. 

Ankole, 

the country 
of the 
Bahima, 

532 ZOTEMISM IN EAST AND CENTRAL AFRICA cuar. 

every one will ask him or her is, “What is your totem 
(omustro)?” Before long he or she is claimed as a relation 
by some one, and the claim is always acknowledged. Men 
are loth to take the law of a member of their own totem 
clan even when they have sustained a serious injury at his 
hands. The word for totem, omuziro (plural emsiro) is 
connected with the common verb ofu-sira, “to abstain 
from”; hence it means “that from which one abstains,” 
“that which is unlawful.” ? 

§ 17. Totemism among the Bahima 

The Bahima are a Bantu-speaking tribe of herdsmen, 
who inhabit Ankole, a region larger than Wales, which 
lies between Uganda on the east and the Lake Albert 
Nyanza and the Congo Free State on the west. The 
eastern part of the country consists of undulating downs 
mostly bare of trees but covered with short grass, which 
affords excellent pasture. Here the climate is temperate and 
salubrious ; the nights and early mornings are cool or even 
cold. To an Englishman there is something homelike in 
the scenery, with its ¢lear running streams, its brackens and 
daisies and brambles. In the dry season the grass withers 
and becomes like hay. It is then fired and burned down to 
the roots. But soon it begins to sprout again, and latge 
herds of cattle are driven to browse on the fresh green blades 
which cover the swelling downs. But the population of 
these breezy uplands is sparse. The western part of Ankole 
is very different. There the land is mountainous, well 
cultivated, and thickly populated: the rivers and swamps 
in the valleys are choked with papyrus, and the mists 
hang thick all night; while down by the lake-shore we 
meet with dense tropical forests, great heat, and swarms of 
mosquitoes, In the north-west the scenery is very beautiful. 
Here the great broken-down craters of extinct volcanoes are 
filled with clear still lakes, their placid waters overspread 

1 For this account of the totemism who has resided for nine years as a 
of the Batoro I am indebted to the missionary in Toro, and has translated 
kindness of the Rev. H. E. Maddox, the Bible into the language of the 
of the Church Missionary Society, people. _ 

xu TOTEMISM AMONG THE BAHIMA 

533 

with the blue lotus or mirroring the surrounding hills and 
mountains together with the fantastically rich vegetation of 
palms, forest trees, and flowering creepers, which clothe the 
banks with a mantle of perennial green.’ 

The origin of the Bahima is uncertain. According to Origin 
one theory they migrated from the east, perhaps from the 9 i? 
Masai country. Others suppose that they came from Egypt. 

Some of their pots and musical instruments are said to bear 
a strong resemblance to Egyptian pottery and instruments.” 

They are a fine tall race with spare, lithe figures, Physical 
shapely heads, straight well-carved noses, high foreheads, and $PResance 
thin lips. The neck is long and graceful, which gives the character 
head a light easy poise, very different from that of the negro ee. 
with his squat neck. Their complexion, too, is far less dark 
than his; indeed it is sometimes a pale or reddish yellow. 

Their deportment is dignified. In appearance they differ 
absolutely from the negro type, and in character they are 
equally distinct from most Bantu-speaking peoples, their 
uniform apathy, listlessness, and unruffled calm contrasting 
strongly with the excitability, rapid utterance, and furious 
gesticulation of other African races. The Muhima (singular 

of Bahima) is never in a hurry. Pride is the keynote of 

his character; his ancestors conquered the country some 
generations ago and he inherits the tradition of the 
dominant race. All menial labour is done by his slaves, 

the Bahero or Bairo, who till the ground, build huts, 

and carry water for their lords and masters. The only The 
occupation which the Muhima deems worthy of him is ue 
the tending of the cattle. He loves the huge-horned herdsmen. 
beasts, which, sometimes vicious with other people, are 
gentle and docile under his care. He pets them, talks to 

them, coaxes them, weeps over their ailments, and sometimes 
commits suicide when a favourite animal dies. Their cattle 

are of the Galla type, with straight back, no hump, and 

1 Major Meldon, ‘‘ Notes on the 
Bahima of Ankole,” Journal of the 
African Society, No. XXII. (January 
1907) pp. 136 sg.; Rev. J. Roscoe, 
«The Bahima, a Cow Tribe of En- 
kole,” /ozernal of the Royal Anthropo- 
logical Institute, xxxvii. (1907) p. 94 3 
Sir Harry Johnston, The Uganda Pro- 

tectorate, i, 122 sqq. 

2 Rev. J. Roscoe, ‘‘The Bahima, 
a Cow Tribe of Enkole,” Journal of 
the Royal Anthropological Institute, 
Xxxvil. (1907) p. 96. Compare Sir 
Harry Johnston, Zhe Uganda Pro- 
tectorate, ii. 610 sq. 

Customs 
and super- 
stitions as 

534 ZOTEMISM IN EAST AND CENTRAL AFRICA cuap. 

enormous horns; the colour is fawn, dun, gray, or white, 
sometimes blotched with white or other tints. The men 
always milk the cows. Women are forbidden to do so, but 

soning they churn the milk into butter, which the Bahima chiefly 

They avoid 
vegetables 
from fear 
of injuring 
the cows. 

use as an unguent. The staple food of the Bahima is milk. 
They drink it fresh in the morning and at noon, but never 
allow it to stand after midday or to turn sour. They 
eschew fowls and fish. Both men and women may eat beef, 
but not, under ordinary circumstances, vegetables. A person 
who eats vegetables ought not to drink milk. They think 
that to eat certain vegetables, such as peas, beans, and 
potatoes, and to drink milk at the same time, would 
endanger the life both of the cow from which the milk came 
and of the calf which came from the cow. But a menstruous 
woman is forbidden to drink milk and is compelled to eat 
vegetables and to drink beer so long as her sickness lasts. 
This she does, not because vegetables and beer are believed 
to be good for her at such times, but because it is thought 
that milk in her stomach would be very bad for the cows, 
It is the cows, and not the woman, which are supposed to 
benefit by the diet. Fora similar reason it is a rule with the 
Bahima never to boil' milk ; they imagine that to boil milk 
would cause the cows to fall ill and die. But beer may be 
drunk by the people without any harm to the cattle. And 
just as the Bahima are careful not to mix milk with vegetables 
in their stomachs from fear of hurting the cows, so they are 
careful not to mix milk with meat; hence the men drink 
milk without beef in the morning and afternoon and eat 
beef without milk at night. But they have no objection to 
mixing beer with meat in their stomachs; so at night they 
wash down the beef with beer. Their beer is made from 
plantains, and it is on plantains that the Bahima women 
subsist at their monthly periods when their perilous condition 
debars them from the use of milk. Hence the Bahima have 
need of plantains. But they would not dream of cultivating 

1 Major Meldon, ‘‘ Notes on the 
Bahima of Ankole,” Journal of the 

Anstitute, xxxvii. (1907) pp. 94 59.3 
Sir Harry Johnston, 7he Uganda Pro- 

African Society, No. XXII. (January 
1907) p. 141; Rev. J. Roscoe, * The 
Bahima, a Cow Tribe of Enkole,” 
Journal of the Royal Anthropological 

tectorate, ii. 610 sgg. The type of the 
Hima cattle and its distribution in 
Africa are described by Sir H. John- 
ston (of. cit. ii. 620 599.). 

XII TOTEMISM AMONG THE BAHIMA 

535 

the vegetable with their own hands. That labour they leave 
to their slaves the Bahero or Bairo, not from pride but from 
superstition, because they believe that they would injure the 
cattle by thus tampering with vegetables. Besides beer they 
have a common intoxicating drink which is made from milk 
or honey.’ The huts of the Bahima are of a primitive bee- 
hive pattern, built of sticks and grass and arranged in a 
circle.? 

The Bahima are governed by kings, whose principal The kings 
wealth consists of their herds. Indeed the king is regarded ira 
as the owner of all cattle. Land is not valued by him or 
his people except as pasture ; it is not carefully delimitated 
as in Uganda. When the king dies, his body is deposited 
in a sacred forest and is supposed to turn into a lion. His 
name after death may not be pronounced. If it was a 
common word, it is abolished from the language and a new 
one substituted. For example, the king is often called a 
lion, and in such a case the name for lion has to be changed 
at his decease. Before his death the king nominates his 
successor.® j 

The Bahima are divided into fourteen exogamous and Exogam- 
totemic clans. The following list of the clans with their ous and 
totems (#uzirvo) was obtained by the Rev. J. Roscoe during clans of the 
a visit which he paid to the tribe in the summer of 

1904 :—' 

1 Rev. J. Roscoe, ‘‘The Bahima, 
a Cow Tribe of Enkole,” Journal of 
the Royal Anthropological Institute, 
xxxvii. (1907) pp. 100 sg., 106, I11 ; 
Major Meldon, ‘‘ Notes on the Bahima 
of Ankole,” Journal of the African 
Soctety, No. XXII. (January 1907) 
pp. 146 sgq.; R. P. Ashe, Zwo Atngs of 
Uganda (London, 1889), pp. 338 s¢q¢- 
Some of the statements in the text are 
based on information verbally given me 
by the Rev. John Roscoe. A similar 
practice in regard to menstruous women 
is observed by the Banyoro. See above, 
p- 522. As to the prohibition to boil 
milk see my paper ‘‘ Folk-lore in the 
Old Testament,” in Anthropological 

Essays presented to. B. Tylor (Oxford, 
1907), pp. I51 sgg. 

2 Rev, J. Roscoe, ‘‘The Bahima, a 
Cow Tribe of Enkole,” Journal of the 
Royal Anthropological Institute, xxxvii. 

(1907) pp. 116 sg.; Major Meldon, 
‘Notes on the Bahima of Ankole,” 

Journal of the African Society, No. 

XXII. (January 1907) pp. 148 sg. 

3 Rev. J. Roscoe, ‘‘The Bahima, 
a Cow Tribe of Enkole,” Journal of 
the Royal Anthropological Institute, 
xxxvii. (1907) pp. 96 5gg., 101. As 
to the transmigration into lions, see 
above, p. 392. 

4 Rev. J. Roscoe, of. czt. pp. 99 59. 

536 -TOTEMISM IN EAST AND CENTRAL AFRICA cuar. 

Clans. 

. Abahinda! 
. Abasambo 
. Abagahiya 
Abasingo 
Abasito 
Abasaigi 
Abami 

. Abagai 

ON ANEW 

g. Abasingo 

10, Abasikatwa . 
11. Abakimbiri . 

12. Abatalogo 
13. Abatwa 

I4. Abaitira’ 

Totems. 

iVkima, a monkey. 

Neabe, a cow. 

Nevobe, a cow, 

Kttale, a cow with a black stripe from neck to tail. 

Kigabo, a cow. 

Lulimit, a cow’s tongue. 

Ente luuzimu, a cow with black or white spots. 

Ngobe, a cow with stripes upon it; they may not 
drink the milk from it or even touch it. 

A cow with markings running from head to tail. « 

Ente yalukungu, a cow of a dark brown colour, 

A cow born feet first. 

Ebyenda, entrails of cows. 

Abdalongo, twins, When a woman gives birth to 
twins, they desert the kraal, place the mother 
and her twins with her parents, and build a new 
kraal ; after the twins have cut their first teeth, 
the husband restores his wife to her home and 
has intercourse with her. 

Mabere, the human breast. When a woman gives 
birth to a female child, they bring a piece of 
cow dung, put upon it a little human milk, and 
throw the dung into ite kraal to be trampled 
by the cows. 

In this list of totems it will be observed that the 

Preponder- 

ance of majority are cows or parts of cows. This is natural enough 
cows or | oY 

partsof in a tribe of herdsmen. Similarly among the pastoral 
among the Herero, Wahehe, Mweru, and Banyoro a large number of the 
totems totemic taboos of the clans refer to their cattle and sheep.” 
Patina, From the lists of totems and totemic taboos recorded 
Split among these tribes it seems to follow that the practice of 
copes splitting the totem, in other words, of adopting as a totem 
to-be either a part of an animal or a more or less fortuitously 

especially marked variety of it, is especially common among pastoral 
common 

among _ tribes. Such totems are, for example, a cow’s tongue, a cow’s 
Seana q entrails, the small stomach of cattle, the leg of an ox, a sheep’s 

to consist head, the hearts and kidneys of animals, an unborn calf, a cow 
in parts Of with a black stripe, a cow with a white back, speckled cattle, 
sheep or in grey cattle, hornless cattle, humped cattle, a cow born feet first, 
1 Members of this clan are princes 2 See above, pp. 358 s99., 405, 

only. 425, 516 sg., 520. 

XY TOTEMISM AMONG THE BAHIMA 537 

cows that have drunk salt water, and cows that have been accidental 
to the bull. The reason for thus splitting or particularising \Fincc 
the totem, for cutting it down from a whole species of animals. 
animals to a mere accidental variety or even to a small part Sone 
of an animal, is perhaps not far to seek. For it may be probably 
observed that the animals which are thus carved up among See 
the clans are commonly good to eat; usually they are the eruisiak 
cattle of a pastoral people who live solely or chiefly by their destael 
flocks and herds. In such cases it is easy to see that to eile 
have cattle in general for a totem would involve very great venience 
hardship for the clan which was so imprudent as to adopt it. baal 
For if cattle were their totem, they would be debarred from taboo on 
eating the flesh of the beasts and from drinking their f+ 
milk ; and what was there left for them to fall back 
upon? Famine would stare the tribe in the face. Thus 
put to it, their wits sharpened by hunger, the more subtle- 
minded of the people hit upon an expedient which at once 
satisfied their consciences and filled their bellies. The 
ingenuity which can split a hair could easily split a totem. 
In fact they quieted their scruples by rigorously abstaining 
from a part, perhaps the least succulent part, of the whole 
animal, or from a.variety, if possible a rare and accidental 
variety, of the species, so that they need never, or hardly 
ever, suffer the pangs of hunger for lack of a prime joint to 
stay their stomachs. Hence we may infer that split totems 
of this sort are commonly late and more or less artificial, the 
product of a lawyer-like turn of mind refining on the gross 
superstitions of primitive savagery. Yet even in regard to 
these apparently degenerate totems we must not forget that 
they may sometimes spring from what is probably the tap- 
root of totemism, the sick fancies of pregnant women. For 
if the conceptional theory of totemism is correct, it might 
very well happen that a woman, on feeling the first pre- 
monitions of maternity within her, should anxiously consider 
what food she had last been eating ; and if, forexample, she 
had dined on calf’s head or leg of mutton, then calf’s head or 
leg of mutton would be her baby’s totem when it was born. 

Some of the Bahima clans are subdivided, but the sub- Sub. 
divisions retain the old totem (s#aszro) common ,to them “ivsions 

: ‘ns of Bahima 
all in addition to the new one adopted by each. The clans. 

Origin of 
the totems 
obscure. 

Marriage 
rules. 

Princes 
may marry 
their sisters, 

Fraternal 
polyandry 
among the 
Bahima. 

The 
Levirate. 

338 TOTEMISM IN EAST AND CENTRAL AFRICA cua. 

Rev. John Roscoe, to whom we are indebted for our 
knowledge of Bahima totemism, could obtain no satis- 
factory information as to the origin of the totems. “The 
same feeble explanations given by the Baganda were 
offered, namely, that some of their ancestors partook of 
some portion of the animal and died from the effects, the 
descendants were then prohibited from eating that food, and 
it became the family totem.”’ The members of a clan.are 
supposed to be closely related to each other, so that the 
same term is applied by one to another that would be 
applied to a brother, a sister, or a cousin.? No man may 
marry into his father’s clan: all the women of that clan are 
reckoned his near relations, and are called his mothers, 
sisters, and so forth. These restrictions do not apply to 
princes ; they may marry their sisters and have intercourse 
with their married sisters; only betrothed or unmarried 
princesses are forbidden to them. The rule of exogamy 
does not apply to the mother’s clan, though it is not usual 
for a lad to marry into it 

The Bahima sometimes practise polyandry, several 
brothers marrying one wife and enjoying her in common. 
When a man is poor,'when his herd does not yield milk 
enough to support a wife, or he cannot afford the number of 
cows required for a marriage dowry, he may ask one or 
more of his brothers to join him, and together they may 
raise the requisite tale of animals. A woman will readily 
agree to such an arrangement and become the wife of two 
or three brothers. They have the right to share her bed 
turn and turn about until she is with child, when the elder 
brother alone has the right of access to her. The children 
born under such circumstances belong to the elder brother. 
The custom of polyandry seems to be rare among the 
Bantu peoples. The only other people known to Mr. 
Roscoe who practise it are the Baziba to the south of 
Uganda.4 

When a man dies, his widows are taken by his surviving 

1 Rev. J. Roscoe, ‘* The Bahima, a 2 Rev. J. Roscoe, 4c. 
Cow Tribe of Enkole,” Journal of the 
Royal Anthropological Institute, xxxvii. 
(1907) p. 99. + Rev. J. Roscoe, of. cit, p. 105. 

3 Rev. J. Roscoe, of. cit. p. 105. 

XUI TOTEMISM AMONG THE BAHIMA 539 

brother, unless he happens to have two wives already. In 
that case the eldest son of the deceased takes charge of the 
widows, but they are regarded as the property of his 
paternal uncle, who pays them marital visits from time to 
time. Any children born to these widows are accounted 
the children of the deceased, not of their real father his 
brother,! 

Women keep themselves veiled from all men, even from Loose 
their fathers and brothers ; yet sexual morality among the Soke 
Bahima is very lax. Once a woman is married, all of the 
restrictions are at an end. She may welcome to her bed Bhima. 
any of her husband’s relatives or friends with impunity ; and 
the children resulting from such intercourse belong to the 
husband. When a friend visits a man, hospitality requires 
that the host should abandon his wife to his guest in the 
early morning; and in her husband’s absence a wife is 
bound to receive and grant her favours to a visitor. It is 
also customary to exchange wives; for instance, when a 
man and his wife visit a friend, the two men invariably 
exchange their wives during the visit. 

It is remarkable that the rare custom of fraternal poly-~ The 
andry, together with great laxity in matters of sexual morality, echoes 
should be found in two purely pastoral tribes widely separated epee - 
from each other, the Bahima in Central Africa and the Todas poe 
in Southern India The coincidence suggests that there is pastoral 
something in the pastoral life which favours the growth of mass 
abnormal relations between the sexes. In this connection because 
we are reminded of the form of group marriage which is oe 
practised by the Herero, another pastoral people,‘ and of bition of a 
the late marriages and free intercourse of the unmarried gig. oa 

among yet another pastoral people, the Masai*® rhage 
probable explanation of the prevalence of polyandry in a af subsist: 

pastoral tribe has been acutely suggested by the Rev. ah se 
John Roscoe. He points out that some pastoral tribes ants 

of Africa, such as the Bahima and the pastoral Ban- 'able to 
support a 

yoro, who live chiefly on the milk of their herds, care- wife of his 

1 Rev. J. Roscoe, ‘‘ The Bahima, a 3 As to the fraternal polyandry and 
Cow Tribe of Enkole,” Journal of the loose sexual morality of the Todas, see 
Royal Anthropological Institute, xxxvii. above, pp. 256, 263-265. 

(1907) p. 103. 4 See above, pp. 366 sg, 
2 Rev. J. Roscoe, of. czt. p. 105. 5 See above, pp. 414, 41§ s¢. 

own and 
hence is 
driven to 
share her 
with others, 

The 
Gallas. 

540 TOTEMISM IN EAST AND CENTRAL AFRICA CHAP. 

fully abstain from a vegetable diet lest the contact of 
vegetables with milk in their stomachs should injure the 
milch kine and thereby endanger their principal means 
of subsistence. Accordingly in these tribes a man. who 
marries must have caws enough to enable him to sup- 
port a wife and family, since he cannot hope to eke 
out a livelihood by tilling the ground. But a poor man 
cannot afford to keep so many cows; hence he is 
under a strong temptation to club together with other 
poor men, whether his brothers or not, and putting their 
cattle into a common stock to purchase and keep one 
wife in common between them. Thus the superstition 
which debars these people from a vegetable diet not only 
impoverishes them and retards economic progress by 
prescnting a serious obstacle to the adoption of agri- 
culture ; it affects society in another and curious way by 
fostering a type of marriage which effectually checks the 
growth of population, and which can hardly fail to be 
injurious to the women and thereby to their offspring. Thus 
the baleful influence of superstition may reach far beyond 
those immediate and obvious consequences which directly 
flow from it ; indirectly, like a foul exhalation from a marshy 
soil, it may poison unseen the whole life of a people. © 

§ 18. Exogamy among the Gallas 

To the south of Abyssinia dwell the Gallas or Oromos, 
as they call themselves, a numerous nation of the purest 
Ethiopian type, tall and slender in person, of a brown or 
reddish-brown complexion, with an elongated head, frizzly 
hair, oval face, and straight thin nose. The women are 
very handsome; they are much sought for as slaves and 
concubines, and fetch the highest prices.| Formerly the 
Gallas were, like the other tribes of this part of East Africa, 
a purely pastoral people, subsisting chiefly on the flesh, 
blood, and milk of their flocks and herds. Even now those 
of them who practise agriculture generally disdain to labour 
in the fields- with their own hands and never allow their 

ij. Deniker, The Races of Man, Wanderings, and Labours in Eastern 
pp. 438 sg. 3 Charles New, Life, Africa (London, 1873), p. 270. 

XI EXOGAMY AMONG THE GALLAS 

541 

women to demean themselves by such toil. The work of 
tilling the-ground is mostly left to slaves and_hirelings. 
They will not eat the flesh of wild animals; fowls they 
reject as a species of vulture, and fish as a species of 
serpent.’ 

“In regard to marriage,’ we are told, “they have a Eyogam- 
peculiar custom, They are divided into two tribes or esas: 
classes, the Baretuma and the Harusi, and the men of each Gatns. 
tribe have to select their wives from the other; the 
Baretumas marry the Harusi and vice versa. The marriage 
of their own tribespeople is considered highly improper, the 
relationship being too near. Herein the Gallas appear to 
advantage when compared with most other East Africans, 
who often marry over and over again into the same family ; 
and perhaps this custom of the Gallas will account, in some 
measure, for their high physical development.”? This 
-important statement appears to have been overlooked by 
subsequent writers on the Gallas. If it is correct, it 
establishes the existence among the Gallas of exogamy 
based on the division of the community into two inter- 
marrying classes. Marriages between near relations are sister. 
unusual among the Gallas; yet in many cases they permit ™"ages. 
marriage between brothers and sisters.* If the latter state- 

1 Ph. Paulitschke, ¢hnographie pp. 202) of two divisions of the Galla 

Nordost-Afrikas, die Materielle Cultur 
der Dandkil, Gallaund Soma! (Berlin, 
1893), p. 211; Charles New, Life, 
Wanderings, and Labours in Eastern 
Africa (London, 1873), p. 272. Com- 
pare J. L. Krapf, 7ravels, Researches, 
and Misstonary Labours during an 
Eighteen Years’ Residence in Eastern 
Africa (London, 1860), p. 78. 

2 Charles New, Life, Wanderings, and 
Labours in Eastern Africa, pp. 273 5g. 

3 For example no notice of it, so far 
as I have observed, is taken by the 
author of the most systematic treatise 
on the Galla and Somali peoples, Dr. 
Philipp Paulitschke, in his valuable work 
Ethnographie Nordost- Afrikas, die 
Matertelle Cultur der Dandhil, Galla 
und Somal (Berlin, 1893); De Geistige 
Cultur der Dandkil, Galla und Somél 
(Berlin, 1896), Dr, Paulitschke speaks 
(op. ctt., Die Materielle Cultur, etc., 

which are called respectively Luba (or 
Birmadu) and Wata, and which he 
appears to describe as endogamous, 
though his expression (‘‘ Luda und 
Wata hetraten nur unter etnander”’) 
is ambiguous and susceptible, so far 
as I understand the niceties of the 
German language, of the contrary 
interpretation, namely, that the diyi- 
sions are exogamous. To these two 
classes he adds two others, the smiths 
and the sorcerers, ‘‘the members of 
which only marry among each other,” 
an expression equally ambiguous, but 
probably intended to convey that each 
of these professions is endogamous. 

4 Ph. Paulitschke, Z¢thnographie 
Nordost-Afrikas, die Materielle Cultur 
der Danékil, Galla und Soméal (Berlin, 
1893), Pp. 196: ‘* Dre Ehen unter 
nahen Verwandten sind bei *dAfar 
und Somal unerhirt und verboten, bet 

The 
Levirate. 

Absence of 
the classi- 
ficatory 
system of 
relation- 
shipamong 
the Gallas 
and 
Somalis. 

542 TOTEMISM IN EAST AND CENTRAL AFRICA cu. xi 

ment is correct, it bears out the view of the Rev. J. Roscoe 
that the royal families of the Baganda, the Banyoro, and 
the Bahima all belong to the Galla stock ; since in the royal 
houses of these three tribes brothers are, or were till lately, 
allowed to mate with their sisters... A man has a right to 
marry the widow of his deceased brother; if he does not 
exercise his right, she may not marry any one else without 
his consent.? Descent is traced in the male line ; children 
belong to their father’s family. No trace of mother-kin has 
been detected either among the Gallas or among the 
Somalis. The Galla system of relationship appears not to 
be classificatory. The term for father (ada) is quite different 
from the term for father’s brother (qwasz//a) as well as from 
the term for mother’s brother (gdja). The term for mother 
(hada) is different from the term for mother’s sister (Zadada2). 
Similarly the Somali system of relationship is also not 
classificatory. The term for father (dba) is different from 
the term for father’s brother (adéra) as well as from the 
term for mother’s brother (afzz). The term for mother 
(hoje) is different from the term for mother’s sister (Labr-jér) 
as well as from the term for father’s sister (eddo).* Evidence 
for totemism appears tq be totally lacking among the Gallas 
and Somalis, which so far confirms the observation that 
wherever totemism exists it is associated with the classifi- 
catory system of relationship.’ The aversion which the 
Gallas entertain to fowls and fish and their refusal to eat 
them ° are not totemic ; for they are common to the whole 
people and are shared besides by many other African tribes 
quite independently of totemism. 

3 Ph. Paulitschke, 

den Galla swar auch ungebrauchlich, 
aber in manchen Fallen ist selbst die 
Schwesterehe erlaubt” ; compare zbid. 
p- 202. The expression Schwesterehe 
is ambiguous ; lest I should have mis- 
understood the author, I quote his 
statement in full. 

1 See above, pp. 469, 523, 538. 

2 Ph. Paulitschke, Z¢hnographie 
Nordost-Afrikas, die Materielle Cultur 
der Danékil, Galla und Somél (Berlin, 

1893), p- 205. 

Ethnographie 
Nordost-Afrikas, die Geistige Cultur 
der Danékil, Galla und Somat (Berlin, 
1896), p. 142. 

4 Ph, Paulitschke, of. c#t. pp. 188 
5g. 
5 This is not to be understood to 
imply the converse proposition, namely, 
that wherever the classificatory system 
of relation exists it is associated with 
totemism. 

8 See above, p. 541. 

CHAPTER XIV 
TOTEMISM IN WEST AFRICA 

§ 1. Totemism in Senegambia 

THE following accounts seem to shew that totemism prevails An the 
widely among the tribes of Senegambia, particularly among er ai 
the Mandingoes ; and its occurrence here is all the more gambia 

remarkable because some of the tribes who practise it are believe 

that each 
professing Mohammedans. Thus Dr. Tautain, speaking of family has 
the Banmanas (Bammanas), writes as follows: “Here 2 *latve 

- . 7 Be among the 
though I know neither its range nor its origin, I would call animals ; 
attention to the belief held by all the peoples of Senegambia, oe 
that every family has a relative among the animals. The family 
flesh of this relative, if it is an edible animal, is forbidden hee 
if it is a dangerous animal, the man can brave it with animal 

impunity and heal the injuries which it inflicts on others. ti 
A Wassooloonke, a kinsman of a kind of scorpion reputed 2° hurt 
them. 

to be very dangerous, told us that one of these animals 
could run all over his body without stinging him ; a Laobe, a 
kinsman of a ¢viganocephalus, related that if anybody chanced 

to be bitten by the serpent he prided himself on healing 

him by simple touches. The animal sparing the man, the 

man ought to spare the animal, and I have seen a Mandingo 

of Bambook, kinsman of a python, offer the whole of his 
month’s pay to save one of these serpents, which another 

man wished to kill. We caused the serpent to be given 

to him; he undid the noose which was strangling it, and 

flung it into the Senegal to let it escape. If he had not 
prevented this murder, the whole of his family would have 
perished. The python used to come and visit every child 

543 

544 TOTEMISM IN WEST AFRICA CHAP. 

who was born in that family within eight days after birth ; 
and my Mandingo acquaintance was resolved to kill all 
his children who did not receive such a visit. Before hand- 
ing the serpent over to him they had hurt the animal a- 
little by dragging it to right and left; and for eight days 
the Mallinké most carefully avoided stepping on the points 
traversed by the python, I suppose from fear of injuring it.”? 
Again, speaking of the Mandingoes of the Upper 
Senegal, Dr. Bellamy observes that “each race has an 
animal among its ancestors. Some have the hippopotamus, 
others the crocodile, etc.” ? 
Dr. Again, Dr. Rangon, another French explorer of the 

Lact interior of Senegambia, relates an incident which shews, as 
as to he remarks, that though the Malinkés have been subjected 
gus to the influence of Islam they have not abandoned their 
gambia. old heathen superstitions. He was lodging at Dikhoy, a 

village near the Gambia River, inhabited by Malinké Keitas, 
and it chanced that his servant was playing with a small 
bird, a kind of pretty sparrow which he had caught that 
morning on the march. Seeing him do so, the chief of a 
neighbouring village begged Dr. Rangon to set the bird at 
liberty. “That,” said he, “would give me great pleasure ; 
for I am a relation of the bird. My family name (diamox) 
is Sidibe.” The French traveller consented on condition 
that the chief would tell him how he came to be a relation 
of the bird. Accordingly the chief told him that once his 
grandfather, the first of the Sidibes, was out hunting 
elephants, and having lost his way in the forest was like 
to die of thirst, till one of these little birds, fluttering before 
him, led him to a stream of water. “From that time,” said 
he, “the Sidibes have been relations of the bird, since but 
for it our father would certainly have died. Hence we are all 
forbidden to kill it, to eat its flesh, and to allow any one to 
hurt it in our presence.” To this Dr. Rangon adds that 

1M. le Docteur Tautain (Ex- p. 545. Dr. Tautain’s information 
médecin de la Mission Gallieni), was collected during a residence at 
** Notes sur les Croyances et Pratiques Segu on the Niger. 

religieuses des Banmanas,” Revue 2 Dr. Bellamy, ‘‘ Notes Ethno- 

@Ethnographie, iii. (1885) pp. 396 
sq. The Banmanas (Bammanas) and 
the Mallinkes (Malinkes) are branches 
of the Mandingo family. See below, 

graphiques recueillies dans le Haut- 
Sénegal,” Revue @Ethnographie, v. 
(1886) p. 81. 

XIV TOTEMISM IN SENEGAMBIA 545 

“similar legends are handed down among all the families 

of the Soudan, and each family is allied th some animal or 

another. Thus the Keitas are relations of the hippopotamus, 

no doubt because their ancestor Soun-Dyatta, according to 

the tradition, was one day turned into a hippopotamus while 

he was bathing at Koulicoro, on the Niger ; the N’Diaye are 

relations of the lion, and the Dialo of the partridge. Others 

again are allied to the scorpion, and others to the leopard.” * 
Fuller details as to the totemic clans of the Mandingoes Captain 

are furnished by Captain Binger. He tells us that the Bivse's 

evidence 

Mandingo (Mandé) stock is divided into many branches, as to_ 
each with its own family name and its fetish (¢exmé) or aeaee 
totem. Of these he enumerates four principal families or, the Man- 
as we may call them, totemic clans, namely :— ba 
(1) The Bammana or Crocodile clan, so called from 
their fetish (¢erné) or totem the crocodile (6améa or bamma). 
In the French Soudan this clan is commonly but incorrectly 
called Bambara, a word which means “ infidel.” 
(2) The MMal-nké or Hippopotamus clan, so called 
from their fetish (¢exxé) or totem the hippopotamus (sa/2). 
(3) The Sama-nké or Elephant clan, so called from their 
fetish (¢enné) or totem the elephant (sama). 
(4) The Sa-mokho or Serpent clan, so called from their 
fetish (¢exné) or totem the serpent (sa). 
These four great totemic clans are further grouped in 
tribes, each with its tribal name (dzamou) and one or more 
fetishes (¢enné) or totems. Some of these tribes have again 
split up, and their fractions have totems of their own by 
which they distinguish themselves from each other. Thus The 
the Crocodile clan (Bammana) has divided into several pes 
branches, one of which has for its totems cracked calabashes its sub- 
and often the dog; another branch has for its totems the 20s. 
lion, the dog, and the milk of wild beasts; and a third 
branch, which comprises the family of the Smiths, has for 
its totems the condiment Jandougou, a species of ape 
(koban), and the dog. Again, the Hippopotamus clan The 
(Malinké) has divided into several branches, of which one Hippo 

i potamus 
has the palm rat and panther for its totems (¢ené) ; another clan and 
its su 
1 Dr, André Rancon, Dans Ja Scientifique (Paris, 1894), pp. 443 divisions 
Haute-Ganibie, Voyage @ Exploration 445. LIBR 
VOL. IT 2N 

oo - Pr 

Totemic 
clans 
among the 
Fofana. 

Totemic 
clans 
among the 
Fulahs of 
Gambia. 

546 TOTEMISM IN WEST AFRICA CHAP. 

has for its totem (¢ené) the iguana; and a third has for its 
totems (tenn) the boa, the triégonocephalus serpent, and the 
field rat.’ 

Further, the Fofana, another Mandingo people, are also 
divided into totemic clans. These Fofana are ‘not so much 
a.tribe as a sort of caste, the members of which live mixed 
up with the other Mandingoes. They have no external 
mark of difference. Some of them are Mohammedans, some 
are heathen. They enjoy a high reputation for probity 
throughout the Soudan. Their subdivisions or clans have, 
like the other Mandingo clans, their fetishes (¢exné) or 
totems, “the practices in regard to which are more or less 
respected.” These subdivisions or clans are four in number, 
namely : 

(1) The Fofana-Kagoro, whose totem (en?) is the 
panther. 

(2) The Fofana of Nouroukrou, whose totem (¢enxné) is 
the elephant. 

(3) The Fofana of Nyamina, of Bakhounou, and of 
Worodougou, whose totems (¢exné) are the lion, the panther, 
and a species of serpent. 

(4) The Fofana ,Souransa, who have for their totem 
(tenné) the boa (maninian)? 

From these accounts it appears that in spite of 
Mohammedan influence the Mandingoes retain a strong 
sense of their relationship to their totemic animals, which 
they will neither themselves injure nor suffer others to injure, 
if they can help it. Whether their totemic clans are 
exogamous is not mentioned by our authorities. 

Again, the Fulahs of Gambia are divided into families or 
clans called dulendas, which appear to be totemic. Each 
clan abstains from eating animals of a certain species. 
They believe that to eat of the forbidden animal would 
make them blind, and that to touch or spill its blood would 
cause a severe disease of the skin. Thus the Kandis and 
Kahs, two branches of one clan (du/enda), may not eat 

1 Le Capitain Binger, Du Niger au Captain Binger’s evidence of Mandingo 
Golfe de Guinée (Paris, 1892), ii. 375- totemism. 
377- Compare J. Deniker, Zhe Races 

of Man, pp. 448 sg. I have to thank 2 Le Capitain Binger, Du Miger au 
Mr, J. Deniker for referring me to Golfe de Guinée, ii. 377+ 

XIV TOTEMISM IN SENEGAMBIA 547 

partridges: the Baldehs, Bandens, and Bahs, three branches 
of another clan (du/enda), may not eat guihea-fowl ; and so 
on with members of all the other clans. The head of a 
clan is always a man, and relationship is reckoned through 
males.’ 

§ 2. Totemism on the Ivory Coast 

Viewed from the sea, the Ivory Coast has little to please The Ivory 
the eye or attract the mariner. A long line of sands ©** 
on which the great rollers break eternally in crawling, 
seething foam; beyond the sands a long narrow lagoon 
stretching parallel to the sea for miles on miles; and 
beyond the lagoon a low flat monotonous land relieved only 
by verdant groves of coco-nut palms, in which the native 
villages are embosomed :—these are the main features of this 
part of the African seaboard.2 The French, who own this 
part of Africa, have extended the name of the Ivory Coast 
far into the interior, and among the inland population of 
this wide region totemism is found. 

Thus in the district of Seguela we are told that Totems 
“every family possesses a fava. The ¢ana is the fetish roles 
which belongs to it, and its chief virtue is to cause the 
death of those who, for any reason, eat that which, when 
the fetish is an animal, ought to be sacred to them. 
According to tradition, the choice of the ¢aza was determined 
by the intervention, whether beneficent or otherwise, of the 
particular animal in the family, so that through the principle 
of gratitude the-creature has become sacred. That is why 
so many families have for their ¢axa the lion, the panther, 
the hippopotamus, etc. Vegetable ¢amas are rare. How- 
ever, Diorole and the people of Tieina have rice for their 
tana in a country which produces much of it; and the 
natives content themselves with maize and a soup of 
bananas.” ® 

1 Extract from a Report to the 
British Colonial Office by Mr. W. B. 
Stanley. I have to thank Mr. N. W. 
Thomas for sending me the extract 
and the authorities of the Colonial 
Office for their permission to make use 
of it. 

2 Rev. J. Leighton Wilson, Hestern 

Africa, its History, Condition, and 
Prospects (London, 1856), pp. 140 sg. 

3 Gouvernement Général del Afrique 
Occidentale Francaise: Notices publides 
par le Gouverhement Général 2 Poccasion 
de PExposition Coloniale de Marseille: 
La Céte &l[voire (Corbeil, S. et O., 
1906), p. 254. The word faza or 

The Siena 
or Senoofo 
and their 
country. 

The Siena 
and the 
Mandin- 
goes, 

548 TOTEMISM IN WEST AFRICA CHAP, 

Further, totemism is practised by the Siena, Senoofo, or 
Sienamana, a people who inhabit a great area in that 
portion of the French Soudan which lies between the Upper 
Niger and the Ivory Coast. Northward and westward their 
country does not reach to the valley of the Niger properly 
so called, though it approaches it in the direction of Segu, 
a town situated on the great river. On the north the Siena 
territory borders on the district of Dienné, on the south-east 
it reaches the bend of the Black Volta River at Banda, 
while on the west it touches at one point the meridian 
which passes through Boogooni. The nature of the country 
is typical of the Soudan. It is a land where savannahs 
alternate with sparse woods, where brooks and rivers abound, 
their flood waters giving rise in the rainy season to vast 
marshes, which dry up with the growing heat of the sun 
from: the month of January onwards. On the south the 
Siena do not encroach on the extreme northern limits of 
the great belt of tropical forests, which stretch away south- 
ward towards the Gulf of Guinea. Throughout this wide 
area the Siena form the great majority of the population, 
though dispersed among them dwell some alien peoples of 
the Mandingo stock, who have secured for themselves a 
dominant position either by force of arms or by their 
superior intelligence and civilisation. A certain number of 
Siena, especially members of the old native aristocracy, have 
aped the manners of the higher race in order to maintain 
their rank in the new order of society. These renegades 
have adopted the Mandingo language, the Mandingo 
costume, the Mandingo family names, and even the Man- 
dingo religion, which is Mohammedanism. Many marriages 
have taken place between the aborigines and the newcomers, 
and the children born of such unions are sometimes tattooed 
with the mark of certain Siena tribes, which consists of 
three scars spread like a fan on each cheek. Hence some 
confusion has arisen in the minds of Europeans between the 
alien overlords and their native vassals ; though in point of 

tanan (of which tenné is only another ‘‘ Le Peuple Siéna ou Sénoufo,” Revie 
spelling, see above, pp. 545 5g.) is a des Etudes Ethnographiques et Socio- 
Mandingo verb meaning ‘‘not to eat” —/ogigues, i. (1908) p. 453. 

or “not todrink,” See M. Delafosse, 

XIV TOTEMISM ON THE IVORY COAST 549 

fact, whether we consider their physical characteristics, their 
language, or their customs, the difference is profound 
between the Siena and the Mandingo. The Siena are in Physical 
general tall and strong, though their muscles are not well do 
developed. Their complexion varies from light to dark the Siena. 
brown, but it is oftener dark than light. The hair is 

scanty ; only the old men as a rule have beards. In many 

places persons may be seen with a light complexion and 

red hair. The head is commonly flat on the top, and the 

neck long and slender. The nose is fairly long but broad, 

and the lips are thick. Being better husbandmen than fighters, 

the Siena have always been the prey of slave-hunters, and 

having been sold and resold they are now found in great 
numbers in almost all the provinces of West Africa.’ 
Agriculture is their chief occupation. They are diligent The Siena 
tillers of the soil. Everywhere, except where Mandingo epee 
influence is predominant, you see vast fields, regularly laid ture, 

out and well kept, stretching away on the level and rising 

up the sides of the hills and mountains. Every spot of 
ground, except where the bare rock protrudes, is under 
cultivation. Even attempts at drainage and irrigation are 

to be met with, which are abundantly rewarded by the fine 

crops of the rice-fields. Other crops raised are yams, 
manioc, millet, and maize. Work at the fields goes on from 

year’s end to years end, men, women, and children all 
bearing a hand according to their several aptitudes. To 
prevent the impoverishment of the soil the crops are 
changed from season to season in the same field; and 

where the population is not too dense to admit of it 

the fields are suffered to lie fallow one year in three. But Shifting of 
where the land does not suffice for this purpose, the natives alkene 
do not hesitate to abandon their village and transport them- the land is 
selves and their belongings to a new village, perhaps ten or °™*** 
twelve miles away, in a region which is either wild or has 

been abandoned for many years. Indeed among some of 

volume entitled Gouvernement Générac 
de PAfrique Occidentale Francaise, 

1 Maurice Delafosse (Céte d’Ivoire), 
“Le Peuple Siéna ou Sénoufo,” 

Revue des Etudes Ethnographiques et 
Sociologiques i. (1908) pp. 36-18, 26. 
The same writer had previously con- 
tributed a notice of this people to the 

Notices publites par le Gouvernement 
Général @ Toccasion de P Exposttion 
Coloniale de Marseille, La Cote d’ Ivotre 
(Corbeil, S. et O., 1906), pp. 364, etc. 

Five 
totemic 
clans of 
the Siena. 

Leopard 
clan. 

Antelope 
clan. 

Black Ape 
clan. 

Farth- 
squirrel 
clan. 

550 TOTEMISM IN WEST AFRICA CHAP, 

the Siena this shifting of cultivation has been carried to such 
a pitch that they may almost be regarded as nomads, for 
they often do not reside more than three years in the same 
place. Their migrations, rendered necessary by the nearly 
total absence of lime in the soil of this part of Africa, has 
not a little contributed to retard their civilisation by 
preventing the permanent establishment of large centres 
of population, which might in time have become cradles of 
culture. Yet large permanent villages, almost towns, do 
exist ; but the families who dwell in them possess farms 
from five to twenty miles distant, on which some members 
of each family permanently reside. This dispersion of the 
population goes far to explain the® political and social 
organisation of the Siena, who are split up into many tribes 
and subtribes as well as into totemic clans.' 

The division of the Siena into totemic clans is inde- 
pendent of their division into tribes and subtribes, The 
number of the clans seems to be five. Each clan has its 
sacred animal or rather species of animal, and takes its 
name from the animal. The clan name is called /¢é in the 
Siena language ; in the Mandingo language it is called diamon 
or more exactly gyaml. These five clan names are found 
indiscriminately among all the tribes and subtribes, though 
some names are commoner in certain tribes than in others. 
The five clan names (/#¢) of the Siena are as follows :—* 

1. Soroo, Sorouo, or Soro, the name of the panther or 
leopard (Fels pardus). The Panther or Leopard clan seems 
to be considered the noblest. 

2. Yeo, Yio, or Yé, the name of the red antelope with 
white stripes and spots (7vagelaphus scriptus). The Man- 
dingoes call the animal sna. 

3. Siluo or Silué, the name of the black ape (Colobus 
polycomus). This clan has for its totem not only the black 
ape but a small black bird. 

4. Sekongo or Sekonho, the name of the earth squirrel * 
(Xerus erythropus). There are many members of this clan 

* Maurice Delafosse, “‘Le Peuple tribes and subtribes, see 77d. pp. 
Siéna ou Sénoufo,” Revue des Etudes 22 sqq. 
LEthnographiques et Soctologiques, i. 2 Maurice Delafosse, of. c7?. p. 451. 
(1908) pp. 242 5g. 3 as to the Siena 3 6* Keureutl de terre.” 

XIV TOTEMISM ON THE IVORY COAST 551 

in the castes of artisans and smith; but the clan is 
distributed among other classes of society also, for the 
division into castes is independent of the division into 
totem clans. 

5. Zué or 77d, the name of the wart hog (Phacochéertus Wart Hog 
Africanus), or perhaps of the “red boar” (Potamochoerus 
penicillatus). The identification is uncertain. 

The members of each clan are forbidden to eat not only Totemic 

their totemic animal, whose name they bear, but also aes 
variety of other foods, both animal and vegetable. Thus 
members of the Leopard clan are prohibited from eating not 
only leopards but also pythons and several species of birds. 
The Mandingoes who live among the Siena are also divided 
into totemic clans. One Mandingo clan, for example, has 
for its sacred animal or totem the hippopotamus ; another 
clan has the crocodile. The Mandingo name for one of 
their totemic clans is damon, corresponding to the Siena 
term /é. Some of the Siena have given up their own clan 
names and adopted the corresponding clan names of the 
Mandingoes, or have even dubbed themselves by Mandingo 
clan names which have nothing to correspond to them 
among the Siena.! 

The explanation which the Siena give of the origin of Explana- 
their totemic clans is simply that the ancestor of each clan jonni 
was helped in some way by an animal; and that out of give of 
gratitude for its help and in order to commemorate it he ea 
took the name of the animal and forbade his descendants to 
kill or eat creatures of that species. The Siena believe that Supposed 
: . : : : :, effects of 
if a man kills his totemic animal, another member of his kiting or 
clan dies instantaneously. As each clan numbers thousands «ting the 
of people scattered over thousands of square miles, it is alk 
equally difficult to confirm and to refute this superstition. 

If a man eats the flesh of his totemic animal, a cancer will, 
sooner or later, eat away his own mouth. If he even by 
accident sets foot on the carcase, he will fall ill, unless he 
offers an expiatory sacrifice, according to prescribed rites, 
on the very spot where the sacrilege was committed. They 
say also that when a man dies, his soul passes into an 

1 Maurice Delafosse, ‘Le Peuple LZthnographigques et Soctologiques, i. 
Siéna ou Sénoufo,” Reaue des Etudes (1908) pp. 451, 452. 

The souls 
of people at 
death are 
believed 
to trans- 
migrate 
into their 
totemic 
animals, 
and after- 
wards to 
be reborn 
in human 
infants. 

Thus 

on the 
Siena view 
there is a 
constant 
interchange 
of souls 
between 

a clan and 
its totemic 
animals, 
Sympa- 
thetic bond 
between 
each 
individual 
and his or 
her totem. 

552 TOTEMISM IN WEST AFRICA CHAP. 

animal of the totemic species which happens to be born 
at that moment; and that when the animal in turn dies, 
the soul returns into the body of a newborn infant of the 
clan which bears the animal’s name. “ This belief,” we are 
told, “sufficiently explains the horror which the Siena 
manifest at killing or eating the animal whose name their 
family bears; they would think that they were eating or 
killing one of their kinsfolk.” } 

Thus on the Siena theory the link between a totemic 
clan and its totemic animal is very close indeed ; since the 
animals of that species are thought to be animated by the 
souls of the dead clanspeople, and on the other hand the 
living clanspeople are supposed to be animated by the souls 
of the dead animals. There is thus imagined to be a 
constant interchange of souls, a sort of spiritual seesaw, 
between the human beings and the beasts. A different and 
perhaps inconsistent article of the Siena totemic creed is 
the notion that when an animal of the totemic species is 
killed a member of the corresponding totemic clan dies 
instantaneously. This belief seems to imply that a sympa- 
thetic bond exists between each man and an individual of his 
totemic species, so that to injure or kill the one is to injure 
or kill the other. To put it otherwise, we may perhaps say 
that every member of the clan has an external soul lodged 
in the body of one of the animals, so that when the beast 
perishes so does he. We shall presently see that this belief 
in external human souls lodged in the bodies of animals 
occurs on the coast of Guinea and in other parts of 
Africa.” It is interesting to find it on the Ivory Coast 
forming apparently an ‘integral part of totemism and 
associated further with a theory both of transmigration and 
of reincarnation. Similarly among the tribes of Central 
Australia totemism goes hand in hand with a theory of 
reincarnation, though not of transmigration, and among 
these Australians too we find clear traces of a belief in 
external human souls lodged’ for safety outside of their 
bodies, The independent occurrence of these various 

1 Maurice Delafosse, ‘Le Peuple (1908) p. 452. 
Siéna ou Sénoufo,” Revue des Etudes 2 See below, pp. 593 577: 
Ethnographiques et Sociologiques, i. 3 See above, vol. i, pp. 124 577- 

XIV TOTEMISM ON THE IVORY COAST 553 

elements in the totemic systems of tribes sp widely separated 
suggests that their combination can hardly be fortuitous, 
and that accordingly any hypothesis which is adequately 
to explain totemism must take account of them all. 

It deserves to be noticed that another people of the Traces of 
Ivory Coast, the Neyaux, who are divided into many tribes rata 
or rather families, appear to possess the classificatory system system of 
of relationship. For among them, we are told, “the degrees ee 
of relationship are very ill defined. Long periphrases are,Neyaux. 
necessary to determine them. Cousins, even very distant 
cousins, call each other brothers. The uncle is called 
father and the aunt mother, so that it is impossible to know 
which is which. When you shew a man one of his young 
nephews, he will say, ‘He is my son. He will often say 
the same thing even of a friend’s son. However, one can 
always ascertain whether the person in question is his real 
son, for in that case he declares ‘Ma mlé a yo ko, ‘ He is 
the son of my flesh.’ ”? 

In this passage the writer does not distinguish between 
paternal and maternal uncles and aunts, nor between 
nephews the sons of a brother and nephews the sons of a 
sister. On the analogy of the use of the classificatory 
terms elsewhere we may conjecture that it is the paternal 
uncle, the father’s brother, who is called father; that it is 
the maternal aunt, the mother’s sister, who is called mother ; 
and that it is the sons of his brother, not the sons of his 
sister, whom a man calls his sons. 

§ 3. Totemism on the Gold Coast 

The system of totemism combined with exogamy appears The Tshi- 
to prevail among all the Tshi- or Twi-speaking tribes who pee 
inhabit the Gold Coast of West Africa. Of these tribes the the Gold 
best known are the Fantees on the coast and the powerful °° 
Ashantee nation in the interior. Less familiar to Europeans 
are the Ahantas on the coast, and the Wassaws, the 

Tshiforos or Tufels, the Assins, the Adansis, the Akims, 

1 Gouvernement Général del Afrique del Exposition Coloniale de Marsetlle: 
Occidentale Francaise: Notices publiges La Céte @lvoire (Corbeil, S. et 1BRA 
par le Gouvernement Général a Voccaston 1906), pp. 558, 560. » 4 

or ,... 

They live 
in small 
villages 
scattered 
amidst 
the dense 
forest. 

Their 
isolation 
and the hot 
enervating 
climate 
have 
combined 
to retard 
their 
progress. 

TOTEMISM IN WEST AFRICA CHAP. 

554 

the Akwapims, and the Akwamus, all inland tribes. The 
Tshi-speaking peoples, whatever tribe they belong to, are 
all true negroes as distinguished from the negroids in the 
Mohammedan States to the north and the Bantu tribes of 
the Congo region to the south-east. The greater part of the 
Gold Coast consists of low hills and ranges covered with 
dense, almost impenetrable forest. To the east and west 
of the Gold Coast the nature of the country changes, and 
instead of wooded hills there runs a long line of lagoons 
parallel to the sea and separated from it only by sand dunes. 
The Tshi-speaking tribes are essentially people of the forest, 
and appear never to have spread over the open country of 
the lagoons. They live in insignificant villages and hamlets, 
built in small clearings of the woods, between which com- 
munication is kept up by narrow footpaths through the 
jungle. Coomassie and Djuabin are the only purely native 
assemblages of houses worthy the name of towns. In such 
a country, where men live scattered in half-isolated com- 
munities, mere specks in a vast tract of tangled forest, 
ideas permeate but slowly, and in spite of an intercourse 
with Europeans which has lasted for more than four hundred 
years the social and moral condition of the Tshi-speaking 
tribes has changed but little since they were first discovered 
by the Portuguese mariners. Not least among the causes 
which have retarded progress must be reckoned the languor 
of a hot, enervating, unhealthy climate, which depresses the 
vital energies and renders every effort a burden.” So 
unfavourable to the best interests of man is a country where 
nevertheless prolific nature supplies his material wants with 
profusion, and the landscape often wears an aspect of soft 
beauty and richness, the low green hills receding, range 
beyond range, to the horizon, their verdurous sides and 
hollows interspersed with smiling fields and variegated with 

1A. B. Ellis, The Tshi-speaking 
Peoples of the Gold Coast of West 
Africa (London, 1887), pp. 2sg. The 
language is commonly called 7shz, 
but the word is pronounced Tchwi 
(Ellis, of. cit. p. 2), Messrs. Connolly 
and ffoulkes call the language 7wi. 
See R. M. Connolly, ‘Social Life in 
Fanti-land,” Journal of the Anthropo- 

logical Institute, xxvi. (1897) pp. 1315 
134; A. ffoulkes, ‘‘The Fanti Family 
System,” Journal of the African Society, 
vol. vii. No. 28 (July 1908), p. 3943 
E, Perregaux, Chez les Achanti (Neu- 
chatel, 1906), pp. 7 sg. 

2A. B. Ellis, Zhe Tshi-speaking 
Peoples of the Gol Coast, pp. 1-8. 

XIV TOTEMISM ON THE GOLD COAST 

555 

graceful palms and umbrella-trees, on which the eye rests 
with pleasure.’ 

Yet the natives of these sweltering forests have advanced Rude 
beyond the hunting stage and maintain themselves by the geal 
cultivation of the ground. But their agriculture is rude. culture 
The Fantee farmers do not occupy their lands permanently. een 
They clear patches in the forest by burning down the trees, Fantees. 
turn up the soil lightly with the hoe, and scatter the seed, 
which a few weeks’ rain causes to spring up as if by magic. 

For three or at most five years they till the same plot, then 
abandon it to nature, which soon covers the fallow land with 

a rank tropical vegetation. Now, as in the days of Hanno, The forest 
the ancient Carthaginian voyager, nothing is commoner in 
these regions than to see the column of smoke by day and 

of fire by night, which tells where the sable husbandmen are 
burning the forest to form their temporary fields. Among Arts and 
the crops which they ‘raise are maize, cassava, yams, plantains, @a/so! B 
bananas, ground nuts, and palm oil? The Fantees are also 

skilful canoe-builders and daring fishermen; they weave 

good native cloths, and make pottery of a simple kind. But 

the most honourable occupation with them is that of a gold- 

smith, and the delicacy of their filigree workmanship is 

surprising, when we consider the rudeness of their tools.* 
The arts and industries of the Ashantees in the interior 

1 J. Leighton Wilson, Western 
Africa (London, 1856), p. 146. 

2 R. M. Connolly, ‘Social Life in 
Fanti-land,” Journal of the Anthropo- 
logical Institute, xxvi. (1897) pp. 129, 
147 sqg.; E. Perregaux, Ches les 
Achantt, pp. 27 sgg. The Carthaginian 
Hanno, who was one of the first navi- 
gators to explore the west coast of 
Africa, relates that at one place where 
they landed they could see nothing but 
forest by day and many fires at night. 
See Geographt Graect Minores, ed. C. 
Miiller, i, rr sgg. Mungo Park 
observes that ‘‘the burning the grass 
in Manding exhibits a scene of terrific 
grandeur. In the middle of the night 
I could see the plains and mountains, 
as far as my eye could reach, variegated 
with lines of fire; and the light reflected 
on the sky made the heavens appear in 
a blaze. In the day time, pillars of 

smoke were seen in every direction ; 
while the birds of prey were observed 
hovering round the conflagration, and 
pouncing down upon the snakes, lizards, 
and other reptiles which attempted to 
escape from the flames. This annual 
burning is soon followed by a fresh and 
sweet verdure, and the country is there- 
by rendered more healthful and plea- 
sant” (Zravels in the Interior Districts 
of Africa, London, 1807, pp. 387 59.). 
There is reason to think that whole 
regions of Africa have been converted 
from forests into steppes by the custom 
of burning down the woods. See Zhe 
Geographical Journal, xxxii. (1908) pp. 
429 sg. 

3 R. M. Connolly, ‘Social Life in 
Fanti-land,” Journal of the Anthropo- 
logical Institute, xxvi. (1897) pp. 148 
5g. 

Arts and 
industries 
of the 
Ashantees. 

The soil 
impreg- 
nated with 
gold, 

The 
totemic 
clans of 
the Tshi- 
speaking 
tribes. 

The 
Leopard 
clan, 

TOTEMISM IN WEST AFRICA CHAP. 

556 

are similar ; they cultivate maize, sugar-cane, yams, plantains, 
bananas, ground-nuts, cotton, indigo, and coffee; they build 
houses with walls of clay, weave cotton cloths of beautiful 
patterns and substantial texture, which they dye a fine 
indigo blue; and like the Fantees they are expert gold- 
smiths. The soil of the country is impregnated with gold ; 
the precious metal is procured both by digging and washing, 
and forms one of the principal exports. But the gold mines 
are very imperfectly worked, indeed some of them are not 
worked at all, because they are sacred to certain fetishes. 
Like the Baganda of Central Africa, the Ashantees combine 
a system of totemism with a barbarous civilisation and a 
powerful, though not unlimited, monarchy. 

The Tshi-speaking tribes of the Gold Coast are divided 
into twelve principal exogamous and totemic clans or septs. 
The following is the list of the clans, with their taboos, as 
they have been recorded by the late Colonel Sir A. B. 
Ellis, one of our principal authorities on these tribes.* 

1. The Zchwiden-fo or Leopard clan, the name of which 
is derived from ehtchwi, “a leopard.” The leopard is the 
real sacred animal of this clan, but members of it now abstain 
from the flesh of all feline animals. Should a member of 
the Leopard clan chance to touch a dead leopard, he must 
scatter shreds of white cloth on it and anoint the muzzle of 
the beast with palm-oil in token of respect and sorrow. If 
he happens to kill a leopard, he will say, “I have killed my 
brother,” and will anoint its wounds. When a dead leopard 
is brought into a town, members of the Leopard clan smear 
themselves with chalk and bury the beast. If a member of 

1 J. Leighton Wilson, [Western Peoples of the Gold Coast, pp. 206 sg. 

Africa, pp. 184-188; T. E. Bowdich, 
Mission from Cape Coast Castle to 
Ashantee, New Edition (London, 1873), 
pp. 254 sgg.3; E. Perregaux, Ches des 
Achanti, pp. 27 59g., 85 syg- 

2 As to the Ashantee monarchy, see 
J. L. Wilson, Western Africa, pp. 175 
sqq.3 A. B. Ellis, Zhe Tshi-speaking 
Peoples of the Gold Coast, pp. 274 599. 3 
E. Perregaux, Chez les Achanti, pp. 
139 599. 

3 A, B. Ellis, Zhe Tsht-speaking 

Compare T. E. Bowdich, A/isston from 
Cape Coast Castle to Ashantee (London, 
1873), pp. 180-182; R. M. Connolly, 
‘Social Life in Fanti-land,” Journal 
of the Anthropological Institute, xxvi. 
(1896) pp. 132 sg.3 C. H. Harper 
and others, ‘‘ Notes on the Totemism 
of the Gold Coast,” Journal of the 
Anthropological Institute, xxxvi. (1906) 
pp. 178-188; A, ffoulkes, ‘* The 
Fanti Family System,” Journal of the 
African Society, vol. vii. No. 28 (July 

1908), pp. 395 599. 

XIV TOTEMISM ON THE GOLD COAST 557 

the clan met a leopard on a journey, he would turn back. 
Moreover, when a member of the Leopard clan dies, they 
scratch the picture of a leopard on the wall of the house and 
on the coffin, and the mourners make spots on their bodies 
with red, white, and black clay to represent a leopard. They 
also put spots on the neck of the corpse, for were this not done, 
the deceased would turn into a leopard. When the head- 
man of the Leopard clan is dying, a leopard is heard crying 
in the forest.2 To see or hear a leopard is unlucky; it 
portends the death of one of the Leopard clan. Sometimes 
members of the Leopard clan put out palm-oil mash in 
the forest and hang up a spotted cloth as an offering to the 
leopards.® 
2. The Unsinna-fo or Bush-cat clan. The bush-cat or The Bush- 
civet cat is the sacred animal of this clan, members of which °! ©!" 
are bound to abstain from the flesh of the animal and of 
other animals akin to it, such as the genet. According to 
Mr. C. H. Harper, who calls this clan the Msonnafo, mem- 
bers of it “respect the bush cat, the crow, and a red snake, 
nson, ‘the terror of the Nsonnafo. They would not hang a 
crow on their farms to scare birds. If they were to kill a 
crow or bush cat they would get sores on their bodies. In 
the old days if they were to find a crow or a bush cat dead 
they would bury a piece of white cloth with the crow and a 
piece of speckled cloth with the bush cat. Whenever the 
red snake appears it means certain death to one of the 
family.” 4 
3. The Kwonna-fo or Buffalo clan. 
Buffalo clan abstain from the flesh of the buffalo. aks 
4. The Jutchwa-fo or Dog clan. The flesh of dogs is The Dog 
esteemed a delicacy by the natives, but members of the Dog ‘=. 

Members of the The 
Buffalo 

1C. H. Harper, ‘‘Notes on the 
Totemism of the Gold Coast,” Journal 
of the Anthropological Institute, xXxvi. 
(1906) pp. 180 sg. Compare Mr. A. 
van Hieu, in Joursal of the Anthropo- 
logical Institute, xxxvi. (1906) p. 186, 
who tells us that, if a member of the 
Leopard clan has killed a leopard, 
women perform a funeral ceremony 
over the carcase, and the slayer has 
to observe a rite for the purpose of 

appeasing the soul of the dead beast. 
The rite in question is probably that of 
anointing the leopard’s wounds, as 
described in the text. 

2C. H. Harper, ‘‘Notes on the 
Totemism of the Gold Coast,’* Journal 
of the Anthropological Institute, xxxvi. 
(1906) p. 183. 

3 C. H. Harper, of. ezt. p. 184. 

4 C. H. Harper, op. c#t, p. 181. 

TOTEMISM IN WEST AFRICA CHAP. 

558 

clan may not partake of it. Members of the Dog clan are 
forbidden to keep dogs as well as to eat them. They also 
respect a small bird and a small snake, and used to hang 
the small bird on the neck of a dog.’ 

The 53. The Axnzono-fo or Parrot clan. Members of this clan 

eae may not kill or eat parrots.” 

The 6. The Adradzz-fo or Plantain clan. In the interior of the 

Hantain country members of the Plantain clan still abstain from eating 

plantains, but in the south such an abstention is no longer 

usual. This infringement of the totemic taboo may very 
well, as Ellis suggested, be due to the pressure of hunger ; 
for the plantain is the staple article of food among the 
natives, so that an embargo laid on it naturally entails 
some inconvenience and hardship. 

The Corn- 7. The Abrutu-fo or Corn-stalk clan. 

cee 8. The Appiadi-fo or Servant clan. 

Servant g. The Yoko-fo or Red-earth clan. Yoko is the native 

Taped. flame for the red ochrous earth with which the northern 

earth clan. tribes stain the lower part of the walls of their rooms and 
piazzas. 

The 10. The Agona-fo or Palm-oil Grove clan. 

donee a 11. The Abbahdzi.fo. The etymology of the name is 

The - uncertain, It may perhaps mean “Cannibal clan” and be 

seevaat compounded of abbak, “ child,” and dzz, “to eat.” 

The 12. Dumina-fo. Colonel Ellis was unable to ascertain 

Dumina-fo the meaning of this name.’ 
; To this list of clans, recorded by Colonel A. B. Ellis, we 
may add on Mr. C. H. Harper’s authority 

The Bat 13. The Aszzz or Bat clan; and 

ei 14. The Setchi+z or Vulture clan.* 

vaneake Tradition says that the whole of the Tshi-speaking tribes 
clan. 

are descended from the first twelve of these clans, and in point 
of fact members of the clans are found in tribes the most 

widely separated from each 

1C. H. Harper, ‘Notes on the 
Totemism of the Gold Coast,” Journal 
of the Anthropological Institute, xxxvi. 
(1906) p. 181. 

2-C. H. Harper, Lc. 

other. Indeed, these twelve 

does not profess to be complete. For 
some variations and additions see C. 
H. Harper, ‘‘ Notes on the Totemism 
of the Gold Coast,” Journal of the 
Anthropological Institute, xxxvi. (1906) 

3 The above is Colonel Ellis’s list of | pp. 179 sgq. 
totemic clans (Zhe Tshi-speaking Peoples 4C. H. Harper, of. ct. pp. 179, 
of the Gold Coast, pp. 206 sg.), but it 180. 

X1v TOTEMISM ON THE GOLD COAST 559 

divisions are common to each one of the mere tribes, 

The first four clans, namely the Leopard, Bush-cat, Buffalo, and ‘The 
Dog clans, are said to be the oldest, and the rest are believed i ae 
to be offshoots of them and inferior in dignity.’ Members Buffaio, | 
of each clan are very loyal to each other, whatever the 3° P08 
tribe may be to which they belong. Thus, when a member said to be 
of a clan dies, all the other people of the clan are liable to o a 
share the funeral expenses, although among the Fantees it wk 
is now customary for only the near relatives to defray them. ae A 
Yet cases still occur in which it is the clan and not the a totemic 
family which bears the cost of burial. For example, if te ae 
Bush-cat man of Akwapem comes to Axim and dies there 

away from his family, the Bush-cat people of Axim will 

bury him and share the funeral expenses among themselves. 

Hence, when a stranger comes to a place, he always 
announces the totem clan to which he belongs, and he is 
thereupon received by the local members of his clan as if he 

had been born among them, though in fact he may belong 

to a tribe whose name is scarcely known in the district.” 

The clans have common burial-grounds and common lands, 

but they do not live in separate parts of the town. Every 
member has a right to a share in the clan lands, and in 

some cases the members help to pay each other’s debts. 

When a captive enemy was about to be sacrificed and there 
happened to be a man of the same totemic clan among his 
captors, he would save the captive from death by exchanging 
another prisoner for him. 

The totemic animal is called Grandfather (ana), a title Respect 
of respect which was also used in addressing the kings of fen". 
Ashantee.* But we are told that though the members of a animals. 
clan respect their totem they do not worship it as a god ; 
for example, a Fantee of the Leopard clan does not hesitate 
to shoot a leopard if it devours his sheep, and a member of 

the Plantain clan does not mutter a prayer when he eats a 

1A. B. Ellis, Zhe Tshi-speaking vol. vii. No. 28 (July 1908), pp. 
Peoples of the Golé Coast, p. 207; T. 396 sg. 
E. Bowdich, Afisston from Cape Coast 3 C. H. Harper, ‘“‘Notes on the 
Castle to Ashantee (London, 1873), pp. Totemism of the Gold Coast,” Journal 
181 sg. of the Anthropological Institute, xxxvi. 
2 A. ffoulkes, ‘The Fanti Family (1906) pp. 183 sg. 
System,” Journal of the African Society, 4 C. H. Harper, of. cit, p. 181. 

Trans- 
migration 
or trans- 
formation 
of the 
clans- 
people 
into their 
totemic 
animals. 

Divisions 
(toro) 
hereditary 
in the 
paternal 
line, with 
their 
taboos. 

TOTEMISM IN WEST AFRICA CHAP. 

560 

plantain However, food is said to be offered to the 
totemic animal ;? we have seen that members of the Leopard 
clan sometimes place palm-oil mash in the forest and hang 
up a spotted cloth as an offering to a leopard.® The 
totemic animal is not slain sacrificially.4 According to Mr. 
A. van Hieu, there is a belief that the members of a totemic 
clan transmigrate at death into their totems; and further 
“each tribesman or clansman reveres all members of the 
totem species equally, the old folks, however, believe every 
member has his particular totem for his protection, and his 
fate is so bound up in it, that if it dies he must himself die” 
also, though not at the same moment.”* If this account is 
correct, it would seem that totemism is here, as apparently 
also on the Ivory Coast,® based upon the doctrines both of 
transmigration and of external human souls lodged in the 
bodies of animals. The doctrine of transmigration or of trans- 
formation seems to be held especially by the Leopard clan. 
They think that if any member of the clan eats a certain plant 
called swsua he will turn into a leopard ; also that a dead man 
of the Leopard clan will be transformed into a leopard and 
destroy the farms of the clanspeople or otherwise plague them, 
if they have incurred his displeasure by performing his funeral 
ceremonies negligently or failing to respect his wishes.’ 

Apart from their totemic clans (ebussca or abusua) with 
their taboos, which they inherit from their mothers, the 
Tshi-speaking people are divided into a number of other 
divisions with taboos, which they inherit from their fathers. 
These divisions, descending in the paternal line, are called 
ntoro. The four principal toro are these :— 

- p. 187. 

1 A. ffoulkes, ‘The Fanti Family 
System,” Journal of the African Soctety, 
vol, vii. No. 28 (fuly 1908), pp. 
398 59. 

2 A, van Hieu, in Journal of the 
Anthropological Institute, xxxvi. (1906) 

. 187. 
J 3°C. H. Harper, ‘Notes on the 
Totemism of the Gold Coast,” Journal 
of the sinthropological Institute, xxxvi. 
(1906) p. 184. See above, p. 557. 
4A. van Hieu, in Journal of the 
Anthropological Institute, xxxvi. (1906) 
One person told Mr. C. H. 
Harper ‘‘that the totem animal or 

in its place a sheep is slain yearly” 
(Journal of the Anthropological In 
stitete, xxxvi. (1906) p. 184). But the 
statement cannot be accepted without 
further confirmation, though it is borne 
out by a reported similar practice of 
the Bini. See below, pp. 588 sg. 

5 A. van Hieu, in Journal of the 
Anthropological Institute, xxxvi. (1906) 
p. 187. 

6 See above, pp. 551 59. 

7 C. H. Harper, ‘* Notes on the 
Totemism of the Gold Coast,” Journa. 
of the Anthropological [nstittute, xxxvi. 
(1906) p. 182. 

xIv TOTEMISM ON THE GOLD COAST +561 

1. Bosumprah. Members of this division are forbidden 
to eat white fowls, Afasia yams, and to drink palm wine on 
Wednesdays. It is thought that leopards will not hurt 
members of this division, and that when a leopard is killed 
a human member of the division dies. These beliefs shew 
that the Bosumprah division is especially associated with 
leopards, and they seem further to indicate that each human 
member of the division is supposed to have an external soul, 
or at all events a vital part of him, in the body of a leopard. 

2. Bosumoru. Members of this division are forbidden 

“to eat the flesh of dogs and hyaenas. 

3. Bosumchwi. Members of this division are forbidden 
to eat tortoise and deer and to drink palm wine on 
Sundays. 

4. Nketia. Members of this division are forbidden to 
drink palm wine on Tuesdays. 

If a member of any of these paternal divisions (vforo) Thus, like 
eats the forbidden food or drinks palm wine on the forbidden (fe ferer 
days, it is believed that he will fall sick, and in such cases a speaking 
fowl and eggs must be sacrificed to the man’s soul (ofra) to (oRes Of 
make him well again. The prohibitions are passed on by a eee 
man to his children, so that he himself is rid of them. The cians — 

. maternal totemic clans (ebussia or abusua) and the paternal pereditary 
divisions (ztoro) with their prohibitions exist side by side and female line 
independently of each other, the ztoro being especially fecinne 
connected with fetish, The natives say that “you take in the male 
your father’s fetish and your mother’s family.”? Thus these ""* 
two sets of social groups, the maternal edussta and the 
paternal foro, are exactly analogous to what I have called 
the maternal clans and the paternal clans, the omaanda and 
the otuzo, of the Herero; and the analogy serves to confirm 
the view, which has been doubted or denied,’ that the 
maternal omaanda of the Herero are really totemic clans 
with totemic taboos like the ofwso. However, the exact 
nature of the kinship group denominated by Zoro is un- 
certain. It comprises, apparently, the near blood relations 

1¢. H. Harper, ‘*Notes on the ffoulkes calls them edussza ( Journal of 
Totemism of the Gold Coast,” Journal the African Society, vol. vii. No. 28, 
of the Anthropological Institute, xxxvi. July 1908, p. 395). 
(1906) pp. 184 sg. ° Mr. Harper calls 2 By Mr. E. Dannert. See above, 
the maternal clans aéwsua. Mr. p. 360. 

VOL. Il 20 

The 
totemic 
clans of 
the Gold 
Coast are 
exogamous ; 
a breach 
of the 
exogamous 
tule was 
formerly 
punished 
with death 
or slavery. 

562 TOTEMISM IN WEST AFRICA CHAP, 

of the father, especially his cousins... Mr. Harper, to whom 
we are indebted for the information about these paternal 
divisions (zfovo), did not ascertain whether they have any 
influence on marriage, in other words, whether they are 
exogamous or not. If they are not exogamous, this would 
apparently add to their resemblance to the ofuzo of the 
Herero, which in like manner are reported to impose no 
restrictions on the marriage of their members.2 We 
shall find a little later on that a similar system of clans 
inherited from the mother and taboos inherited from the 
father occurs also among some Bantu peoples of the Lower 
Congo. 

The totemic clans of the Gold Coast are exogamous; a 
man may neither marry nor have sexual intercourse with a 
woman of the same totemic clan as himself. In old days 
transgressors of these rules used to be beheaded or sold into 
slavery. At the present time, if such a breach of morality 
were committed, the case would be investigated by the head 
of the clan or the chief of the town; the guilty parties 
would be divorced and the man fined; moreover a sheep 
would be killed and the male culprit would have to walk in 
its blood, apparently as a mode of purification. Were a 
chief to have anything’ to do with a woman of the same 
clan as himself, he would be deposed. It is sometimes 
difficult to ascertain whom a man may marry, because the 
same clan is known by different names in different places. 

‘In case of doubt it is customary to consult an old man of 

the town. King Tachie of Accra, being appealed to in 
many matrimonial cases, is said to have given the matter 
up in despair and to have ruled that when people came 
from the forest and married people on the coast, an investi- 
gation of their clans was needless. And amongst the coast 
people, in point of fact, the exogamous laws of the clans are 
not strictly enforced, though there is a prejudice against 
marriage within the clan.2 A man is free to marry a woman 

1C. H. Harper, ‘‘Notes on the Totemism of the Gold Coast,” Journal 
Totemism of the Gold Coast,” Journal of the Anthropological Institute, xxxvi. 
of the Anthropological Institute, xxxvi. (1906) pp. 182 sg. The statement 
(1906) pp. 184 s¢. that a man should neither marry nor 
2 See above, p. 360. have sexual intercourse with a woman 
3C. H. Harper, ‘*Notes on the of his own clan is confirmed by Mr. 

XIV TOTEMISM ON THE GOLD COAST 563 

of any totem clan except his own.! Thd Fantees attribute 
the institution of the clans to a wise seer of old, and they 
are said to consider the practice of exogamy as very 
beneficial for the improvement of the species.? On the 
other hand the children of parents who both belong. to the 
same clan are thought not to live long. 

Children belong to the totemic clan of their mother.‘ Children 
In fact, “the custom, so prevalent among the lower races, of tae ee 
tracing descent through the mother and not through the clanof their 
father, also prevails among the Tshi-speaking tribes.”® The ™™* 
Fantees apply the same name edussza both to the totemic 
clan and to the family,® and “each family includes members 
on the mother’s side only; thus the mother, and all her 
children, male and female, belong to her family ; so do-her 
mother and maternal uncles and aunts; but her father and 
ail his relatives are nothing at all to her, nor are her husband 
nor any of his relatives ; her daughters’ children, male and 
female, are members of her family, but her son’s children are 
not, as they belong to the family of the son’s wife.”" Every 
child bears the name of his mother’s. family as a cognomen 
in addition to the name given to him at birth by his father, 
while a person’s first name is invariably taken from the day 

A. van Hieu and a negro inform- 
ant (Journal of the Anthropological 

may not marry a woman of his own 
clan. According to a negro informant 

Institute, xxxvi. (1906) pp. 186, 188). 
Mr. A. ffoulkes tells us that marriages 
within the clan (sept) do sometimes 
occur but are not countenanced ( Journal 
of the African Society, vol, vii. No. 28 
(July 1908), p. 399). Colonel A. B, 
Ellis does not mention the rule of 
exogamy. 

1 A. van Hieu, in Journal of the 
Anthropological — Institute, XxXvi. 
(1906) p. 186. Mr. R. M. Connolly, 
in speaking of the exogamy of the 
clans, says that a Buffalo man may 
only marry a Bush-cat woman ‘and 
wice versa, and so with the others” 
(‘Social Life in Fanti-land,” Journal 
of the Anthropological Institute, xxvi. 
(1897) p. 133). This implies that 
the men of any clan are restricted 
in the choice of their wives to the 
women of one other clan only; but 
probably the statement is not to be 
pressed to mean more than that a man 

‘‘a man may not marry twice in each 
totem ” (Journal of the Anthropological 
Institute, xxxvi. (1906) p. 188). 

2 R. M. Connolly, ‘‘ Social Life in 
Fanti-land,” Jotrzal of the Anthropo- 
logical Institute, xxvi. (1897) p. 132. 

3 A. van Hieu, in Journal of the 
Anthropological Institute, xxxvi. (1906) 
p. 186. 

4C. H. Harper, ‘Notes on the 
Totemism of the Gold Coast,” Journal 
of the Anthropological Institute, xxxvi. 
(1906) p. 183; A. ffoulkes, ‘‘ The 
Fanti Family System,” Journal of the 
African Society, vol. vii. No. 28 (July 
1908), pp. 400, 40I. 

5 A. B. Ellis, Zhe Tshi-speaking 
Peoples of the Gold Coast, p. 297. 

6 A. ffoulkes, ‘‘The Fanti Family 
System,” Journal of the African Soctety, 
vol. vii. No. 28 (July 1908), p. 395- 

7 A, ffoulkes, of. cit. p. 399- 

Women as 
chiefs or 
queens. 

A man's 
heirs are his 
brothers 
and the 
sons of his 
sisters, 

The throne 
of Ashantee 
also de- 
scends to 
brothers 
and the 
sons of 
sisters, 

564 TOTEMISM IN WEST AFRICA CHAP. 

of the week on which he was born. The eldest living 
ancestor in the maternal line is the head of the family, but 
when the head is a woman she generally delegates her 
authority to her eldest son or to the eldest male of the 
family, especially when the family is a royal one. Women 
have, however, been known to occupy the stool or throne as 
reigning chiefs." One such queen reigned some years ago in 
Daboasi, the chief town of an important district on the 
Lower Prah; she owned large tracts of mahogany-bearing 
land and exercised power through her elders and interpreter.” 
However, among all the Tshi-speaking tribes a man’s heir is 
regularly his brother, born of the same mother, and, in 
default of such, his eldest sister’s eldest son. Should these 
fail, the nephew next in order of descent is the heir, and in 
default of nephews the son inherits. But should there be 
neither nephew nor son, the principal native-born slave of 
the family succeeds to the property. Among the Fantees 
there is a variation of this general rule, for with them the 
slave succeeds to the exclusion of the son, who only inherits 
his mother’s property. Under native law a man may 
chastise his sister’s children and sell or pawn them for his 
own debts, but under no circumstances may he do so to his 
own children, since they do not belong to his family, but to 
their mother’s ; and for a like reason he may neither punish 
nor pawn his brother’s children.*| The same rule of female 
descent which regulates the inheritance of private property 
determines the succession to the throne of Ashantee; the 
order of succession is the brother, the sister’s son, the son, 
the chief vassal or slave to the stool. “This extraordinary 

1 A. ffoulkes, “‘The Fanti Family 
System,” Journal of the African Society, 
vol. vii. No. 28 (July 1908), pp. 

99 59. 

2 R. M. Connolly, ‘Social Life in 
Fanti-land,” Journal of the Anthropo- 
logical Institute, xxvi. (1897) p. 146. 

3 A. B. Ellis, Zhe Zshi-speaking 
Peoples of the Gold Coast, p. 298; E. 
T. Bowdich, Afission from Cape Coast 
Castle to Ashantee (London, 1873), 
p- 205. Compare R. M. Connolly, 
**Social Life in Fanti-land.” Journal 
of the Anthropological Institute, xxvi. 
(1897) p. 146: ‘The rightful heir in 

native law is the eldest nephew, 7.¢. 
the eldest sister’s eldest son, who 
invariably succeeds to all the property 
and position of his uncle, including 
wives, children, slaves, if there be any, 
and who thus becomes liable for the 
debts of the deceased. In default of 
such an heir, the principal relatives of 
the deceased select one of their number 
to succeed, and the man so selected 
becomes .the legal heir, just as if he 
had been the nephew.” 

# A, ffoulkes, ‘*The Fanti Family 
System,” Journal of the African Society, 
vol. vii. No. 27 (July 1908), p. 405. 

xIV TOTEMISM ON THE GOLD COAST 565 

rule of succession,” wrote Bowdich at a time when the wide 
prevalence of similar rules was unknown, “excluding all 
children but those of a sister, is founded on the argu- 
ment, that if the wives of the sons are faithless, the 
blood of the family is entirely lost in the offspring, 
but should the daughters deceive their husbands it is still 
- preserved.” ? 

In Ashantee “the sisters of the king may marry or The king's 
intrigue with whom they please, provided he be an eminently "5's "4 

women of 
strong or personable man; that the heirs of the stool may the blood 

: ; 2 royal i 

be, at least, personably superior to the generality of their Tohahied 

countrymen.”” The same licence is or was granted all areallowed 
to marry 

women of royal blood in Ashantee, but leave had first to be or intrigue 
obtained before they might gratify their passions, otherwise vibe noe 
their lovers and all who had abetted them were put to death. ae 
When one of the king’s sisters had married, with his per- 
mission, a man of low rank, the baseborn churl was expected 
to kill himself when either his wife or his only male child 
departed this life. Should the poltroon dare to survive his 
noble wife or noble son, a significant hint would be dropped 
which generally induced him to anticipate the knife of the 
executioner® = 

Besides the twelve principal totemic clans there are Other and 
several other family divisions among the Tshi-speaking Pore 
tribes ; but these are all local, include comparatively few clans or 
members, and are apparently of much more recent origin. *™"** 
Sometimes these more recent divisions preserve traditions 
of their origin, and in such traditions the founder of the 
family, from whom the name is derived, always figures as 
an actual animal, bird, or fish, who, however, possessed the 
power of assuming human shape at will. For example, in The Horse- 
the town of Chama, at the mouth of the River Prah, there ae 
lives a family called Savfu-n’ennam, which is a name 
compounded of sarfu, “horse-mackerel,” 7’, a negative, and 
ennam, “fish,” that is, “the flesh of fishes,” and means 
literally “no sevfu flesh.” The foundress of this family is 

1E. T. Bowdich, V¢sston from 2 E. T. Bowdich, .lfission from 
Cape Coast Castle to Ashantee(London, Cape Coast Castle to Ashantee (London, 
1873), pp. 185, 205. Compare E. 1873), p. 205. 
Perregaud, Chez les Achanti, pp. 3 A, B. Ellis, Zhe Tshi-speaking 
140 sg. Peoples of the Gold Coast, p. 287. 

566 TOTEMISM IN WEST AFRICA CHAP. 

believed to have been a horse-mackerel (sarfu), and the 
following tale is told about her.’ 
Tale of the A man of Chama, whose wife had lately died, was 
eS walking disconsolately by the seashore when he met a young 
mackerel woman, who asked him why he walked alone and looked so 
sad. He told her why, and at last, captivated by her beauty, 
descended he begged her to be his wife. She consented, and lived 
froma with him in his house. All went well for a time, but after 
married some months she grew restless and uneasy and told’ her 
hei husband she must go away to see her folk at home. He 
wife, till made no objection, only stipulating that he -should go with 
they % ; 
guarrelled her. To this at first she would by no means agree, saying 
pare to that alone she came and alone she must return. But he 
herkinsfolk pressed her. They were walking on the seashore and she 
ee said, “I will not let you go with me, because you would 
in the sea. laugh at me when we came back.” But when he vowed 
and swore that never would he laugh at her or speak of her 
home and her folk, at long and at last she told him that 
her home was in the sea, and that her folk were fishes and 
she herself a fish. If he would go with her, he must count 
the breakers, as they burst in foam on the strand, and dive 
with her under the third. He did so and together they 
passed under the water to the home of her people the fishes. 
They welcomed her joyfully, and she told her tale, and 
made known her husband to them. A house was prepared 
for him, and he was warned not to stray outside of it. For 
a time he kept to the house, but one day he ventured out 
and as he rose towards the surface, some fishermen spied 
him shimmering with a phosphorescent light through the 
green water. They took him for a fish and speared him 
and would have dragged him out of the sea if a shark had 
not bitten the line and released him. His friends the fishes 
took him back'to the house, and drew out the spear, and 
healed his wound.’ But when he was made whole again, 
fearing that some worse thing might befall him, they sent 
him and his wife away, giving him as a parting gift the 
spear, which they charged him to keep carefully hidden. 
So the two went back to their old house on the land, and 
the man hid the spear in the thatch of the roof. They 

1 A, B. Ellis, Zhe Tshi-speaking Peoples of the Gold Coast, pp. 207 sgq. 

xIV TOTEMISM ON THE GOLD COAST 567 

lived together for some years, till the owner of the house, 
renewing the thatch of the roof, in an {ll hour discovered 
the spear. He knew it for his own, which he had lost years 
before by throwing it into the sea at a fish. Being pressed 
to tell how he had come into possession of it, the husband 
of the fish-wife reluctantly told the secret of his strange 
adventure. No harm came at once of his broken promise 
to his wife; but he had lately taken a second wife and she, 
having one day quarrelled with the: first wife, taunted her 
with being a fish. Sore at heart, the fish-wife resolved to 
return to her home in the sea and to be a fish again. 
Bitterly she upbraided her husband for betraying her secret, 
and said she would leave him to-return no more, In vain 
he tried to dissuade her; she would not listen to his 
entreaties, but ran to the shore and bidding him a last 
farewell plunged into the sea with her youngest child 
in her arms. But her two elder children were left behind 
with her husband, and from them is descended the 
Horse-mackerel family, none of whom may ever eat a 
horse - mackerel ; for the lost wife and mother was a fish 
of that sort." 

A family called Appei, belonging to the town of The Appei 
Appam, tell a similar story of their origin. They say that family's 
a man named Insanna, the last of his race, was fishing with have 
a casting-net among the rocks at night, bewailing his solitary (ume 
lot and his inability to buy a wife, when he caught a fine agger fish, 
fish of the kind called appez He was about to kill it when “Do ™'s 

married to 
the fish said, “Do not kill me. I will be your wife and you 4 man and 

my husband.” So he carried it home and left it there, ae 
while he returned to the beach to fish When he came 
back again to his house, he found a handsome young woman 
busy with the household work; she told him that she was 
the fish he had caught, and that she had been sent by his 
dead parents to be his wife. Further, she warned him that 
neither they nor their descendants might eat affe7 fish, or 
else they would have to return at once to the sea. So the 
family strictly observed the prohibition and multiplied till 

UA. B. Ellis, Zhe Zsh?-speaking verbal differences, in Journal of the 
Peoples of the Gold Coast, pp. 208-211. African Society, No. 17 (October 
The story is repeated, with merely 1905), pp. 104-107. 

568 TOTEMISM IN WEST AFRICA CHAP, 

they occupied the whole country, which after them became 

known as Appei m’ or Appam.' 
Duala Stories of the same type are reported from other parts 
story of a of West Africa. The following is a Duala tale from 
married a Cameroon. A hunter once killed a palm-squirrel, brought 
Parva, it home, and gave it to his wife, who hung it up over the 
hearth. Soon after she died, and in the hunter’s absence 
the palm-squirrel turned into a woman, dressed his meal 
for him, and then changed back into a squirrel. It puzzled 
the hunter on his return from the chase to find his meals 
ready for him until, by the spider’s advice, he hid in a 
corner and saw the squirrel turn into a woman. -.He caught 
it, stroked it on the head with his hand, and said, “ Beast 
that now standest as a human being before me, to-day I 
saw everything. Be not a beast again. I love thee. Be 
from to-day my wife.” The palm-squirrel said to him, “I 
give thee a command. Thou must never say to me that I 
was once a beast, and am now a human being. If thou 
sayest so, it is all over with our marriage.” The two 
Duala married and lived together till now.? Another Duala story 
pea from the same region relates how a hunter clove a hard 
whose wife brown fruit called a szpondo and a woman came forth 
fame forth from it. He asked her to marry him and she consented, 
mpordo but warned him that he must never say she had come from 
; a mpondo or she would go back to the fruit and he would 
see her no more. So they married; but one day when 
he was out hunting, his mother twitted the wife with 
having come from a mpondo fruit. She was very angry 
and said, “ From a mpondo I came and to a wpondo | return,” 
At these words the absent husband felt. his body quake. 
He returned home heavy at heart and asked his mother 
where his wife was. She told him what had happened. 
Crying “ Woe! woe! woe!” he hastened away to seek his 
lost wife. Wherever he went he called her and she 
answered him, but from far away, oh so far away. He said 
to her, “Come back. I have just returned from the hunt.” 

1A. B, Ellis, 7he Tshi-speaking chen,” Afittheilungen des Seminars fir 
Peoples of the Gold Coast, pp. 211 ortentalische Sprachen su Berlin, v. 
5g. (1902), dritte Abtheilung, pp. 139- 
2 W. Lederbogen, ‘*Duala-Mar- 142. 

ay TOTEMISM ON THE GOLD COAST 569 

But she answered, “I will not come back.? She conjured 

up a great sea between them, and she stood cn one side of 

it and he on the other. He began to weep and said again 

to her, “Oh make the sea to vanish away.” But she replied, 
“No, I will never, never have you for my husband. again, 
because your mother said I came from a mpondo,” Then 
she went away. Her husband also went away. He went 
home and drove his mother from his house. A solitary man 

he lived and a solitary man he died. He never married 
again.' 

Another West African story sets forth how a fairy woman West 

took compassion on a solitary hunter and turned herself into a “fi" 

story of a 
forest-rat (#torz), which the hunter shot and brought back to his hunter who 
camp. Next day, when he was out hunting, the fairy crept fe aie 
out of the dead forest-rat, tidied up the camp, and cooked in theshape 
a dinner ready for the hunter. On his return from the phe 
chase the hunter was surprised to find the table spread for Rs ines 
dinner. The same thing happened on three successive coates 
days, and the man was puzzled. He consulted a prophet, ny ae 
by whose advice he lay in wait for the fairy woman, seized for ever. 
her at her kindly labours when she was about to turn back 

into a rat, and throwing a magic powder over her body he 
persuaded her, struggling, murmuring, and sobbing, to be 

his wife. They married and the world went very well with 

him, for ships came and brought him wealth, and his wife 

bore him children; now the children of a fairy mother 

thrive and are very wise. But one day, when ships had 

come in and he had been drinking with the sailors, the 

heart of the hunter was lifted up and he reproached his 

wife with having come out of a rat. Next morning, when 

he was sober, she told him she was about to leave him for 

ever. He pleaded with her, and the two elder children 
pleaded for him, but all in vain. She took the two younger 
children and walked away down the path from the town. 

Her husband and the two elder children watched them 
receding in the distance, till they came to the bank of the 

river and wading into the water disappeared in the depths.” 

1 W. Lederbogen, ‘‘Duala-Mar- (1902), dritte Abtheilung, pp. 142- 
chen,” .We¢theilungen des Seminars ftir 145. 
ortentalische Sprachen su Berlin, v. 2 R. HL Nassau, Fetichism in West 

570 TOTEMISM IN WEST AFRICA CHAP. 
Such Similar tales have met us among the Dyaks of Borneo.’ 
belong to All such stories belong to the class of which the tales of 
thesame the Swan Maiden and of Beauty and the’ Beast are typical 
class as the 2 oa : : : 
tales of examples.” Finding narratives of this sort told by totemic 
ate peoples to explain their totemic taboos we may conjec- 

and Beauty ture that they all sprang, directly or indirectly, from 

and the the cycle of ideas and customs which centre round the 
Probably institution of totemism. In some of these tales the 
oe husband, in others the wife is a fairy who shifts his or 
atedin her shape from bestial or vegetable to human, and who will 
totemism. 

leave his or her sorrowing partner for ever to return to 
the beasts’ or the plants if a particular taboo -relating to 
his or her animal or vegetable nature be infringed. 
Such stories are explained naturally and simply on the 
supposition that they referred originally to husbands and 
wives who, under a system of totemism and exogamy, 
would claim kindred with animals or plants of different 
kinds, the husband assimilating himself to one sort of 
creature and the wife to another. In such households 
husband and wife would naturally resent any injury done 
to their animal kinsfolk as a wrong done to themselves; and 
domestic jars would easily arise whenever one of the couple 
failed to respect the humble relations of the other. Among 
some totemic tribes, as we have seen,® the danger of these 
intestine feuds is to some extent obviated by the rule that 

M. Roalfe Cox, Zstroduction to Folk- 
Zore (London, 1895), pp. 120-123. 
The classical fable of Cupid and Psyche 
(Apuleius, A/efamorph. iv. 28-vi. 24) 
belongs to the same class of tales. 
Such stories have been rightly explained 

Africa (London, 1904), pp. 351-358. 
The writer says nothing as to the people 
or place from which this story was 
obtained. 

1 See above, pp. 205 sg. 

2 On stories of this sort, especially 
in the folklore of civilised peoples, see 
Th. Benfey, Pantaschantra (Leipsic, 
1859), i. 254 sgg.; W. R. S. Ralston, 
Introduction to F. A. von Schiefner’s 
Tibetan Tales (London, 1882), pp. 
XXxVii.-xxxix. ; A. Lang, Custom and 
ilyth (London, 1884), pp. 64 sgg. ; 
S. Baring-Gould, Curtous Myths of the 
Middle Ages (London, 1884), pp. 561- 
578; E.Cosquin, Covtes populaires dela 
Lorraine, ti. 215-230; W. A.Clouston, 
Popular Tales and Fictions (Edinburgh 
and London, 1887), i. 182-191 ; Miss 

by Mr. Andrew Lang (of. cit.) as 
based on savage taboos, but so far as I 
know he does not definitely connect 
them with totemism. One of the 
oldest and most beautiful tales of this 
kind is the ancient Indian story of 
Pururavas and the nymph Urvasi. See 
the Satapatha Brahmana, translated by 
J. Eggeling, Part v. pp. 68 sgg. (Sacred 
Books of the East, vol. xliv.). I shall 
recur to these stories and illustrate 
them further in the third edition of 
The Golaen Bough, 
3 See above, pp. 27, 30, 53. 

XIV TOTEMISM ON THE GOLD COAST 571 

husband and wife must each pay due respect to the totem 
of the other, but such mutual obligations appear to be rare; 
so far as we can judge from the accounts, the usual custom of 
totemic peoples is that men and women revere each their 
own totem, but are not bound to shew any reverence for the 
totems of their spouses. In these circumstances husband 
and wife are constantly liable to quarrel over their totems, 
and it would be natural enough that such bickerings should 
often result in a permanent separation. Totemism may 
have embittered many lives and broken many hearts. A 
reminiscence of-such quarrels and estrangements is apparently 
preserved in the sad: story of the fairy wife or the fairy 
husband who lives happily for a time with a human spouse, 
but only in the end to be parted for ever. 

A story of a somewhat different type is told by the Legendary 

Parrot clan of the Fantees to explain why they revere (eo 
parrots. The original ancestor of the clan is said to have clan among 
been a woman who went to a far country and was there "°Fartees- 
married. But she quarrelled with her husband and left him 
to return to her own land. On her way home she met a 
man who would have killed her if a parrot had not screamed 
at the moment, and her assailant, mistaking the cry of the 
bird for the voice of people coming to the rescue, fled and 
left her. Hence all the descendants of that woman respect 
parrots, because a parrot saved their ancestress from death.! 
In this narrative the reverence for the totem is explained, as 
often happens, by a service which the totemic animal is said to 
have -rendered to the ancestor of the clan; yet a reminis- 
cence of the other and probably more primitive explanation 
appears to be contained in the quarrel of the wife with 
her husband. 

The totemic system of the Fantees, one of the principal Seven 
tribes of the Tshi- or Twi-speaking peoples, has been Princip"! 

totemic 

examined by Mr. Arthur ffoulkes, District Commissioner clans he 
of the Gold Coast Colony. He finds seven principal totemic Frnecs. 

1 A. ffoulkes, ‘The Fanti Family A. B, Ellis, gives Annona as the name 
System,” Journal of the African Society, of the Parrot clan and Agona as the 
vol. vii. No. 28 (July 1908), p. 397. name of the Palm-oil clan. Perhaps 
The name of the Parrot clan is here in the present passage Agona is a 
given as Agona. But elsewhere (p. mistake for Annona or Annono, as 
395) the writer, in agreement with Ellis spells the name. 

The 
fetishes of 
the negroes 
are not 
always 
clearly 
distin- 
guishable 
from their 
totems, 
especially 
when the 
fetishes are 
hereditary. 

572 TOTEMISM IN WEST AFRICA CHAP. 

clans or septs, as he calls them, namely, the Bush-cat, the 
Parrot, the Leopard, the Buffalo, the Plantain, the Dog, and 
the Silurus (Adwinadzt). Each of these principal clans, he 
tells us, has its branch or branches, and in some tribes the 
branch is regarded as the principal clan. For example, the 
Bush-cat clan is the principal one at Cape Coast Castle, 
Denkera, and Fanti Yankumase, and at Cape Coast Castle 
it has a branch called Dwéstna, the name of which is derived 
from a plant. The Parrot clan has a Red-earth branch 
and a Palm-oil branch at Cape Coast Castle; but at Fanti 
Yankumase the Red-earth clan is the principal one and the 
Parrot clan and the Palm-oil clan are both subordinate. 
Further, at Fanti Yankumase there is another branch, namely, 
the Kite or Hawk (Osansa) clan. At Denkera; again, the 
Palm-oil clan is the principal one, and the Red-earth clan 
and the Parrot clan are both subordinate. At Cape Coast 
Castle the Leopard clan has a branch called the Corn-stalk 
(Eburute) clan." 

Amongst the negroes of Guinea, with whom we are 
here concerned, there exist many other superstitious practices 
and beliefs concerned with plants and animals which do 
not strictly fall under the head of totemism. Such customs 
and beliefs are commonly classed under the vague name of 
fetishism. How precisely the fetishes of the negroes are 
related, if indeed they are related, to their totems is by no 
means clear, nor is it always easy to draw a sharp line of 
distinction between them. On the one hand, totems 
commonly give their names to exogamous groups or clans 
of people and have been hereditarily revered by them time 
out of mind. . On the other hand, fetishes do not give their 
names to persons or families, need not be hereditary, and do 
not regulate the marriage of the people who revere them. 
Yet these distinctions are not universally present ; for many 
things, which seem entitled to be called totems, do not give 
their names to groups or clans of people and do not regulate 
marriage. The relation of totemism to fetishism in West 
Africa is one which requires further investigation. To discuss 
it here might lead me too far from my immediate subject. 

1A. ffoulkes, “‘The Fanti Family vol. vii. No. 28 (July 1908), pp- 
System,” Journa? of the African Society, 395 59. 

XIV TOTEMISM ON THE GOLD COAST 

573 

I must content myself with briefly noticing those hereditary 

fetishes of families or of districts which mosf nearly resemble 

totems. Among the negroes of the Gold Coast the common 

names for a fetish seem to be dossum (bohsum, bosoum, boossum, 

busum) and suhman (souman, sumang), the distinction 
between them apparently being, that whereas a suhman is 

the fetish of an individual, the dossum is the fetish of a 

family, district, or town.’ Yet when a Jdossum or fetish 
becomes hereditary in a family, it is obvious that, super- 

ficially at least, it approximates to a totem. Amongst the Hereditary 
Tshi-speaking peoples of the Gold Coast such hereditary es 
fetishes are often deliberately adopted as a mode of main- a means of 
taining the tie of kinship between members of a family perry 
who are about to part from each other. The mode in which bond of 
the bond is in such cases cemented has been thus described “s"'?- 
by Colonel A. B. Ellis :—? 

“ Besides the abstention from the flesh of certain animals, Mode in 
birds, fish, etc. by different families, such as has been ee 
already described, and which is a complete abstention at fetish of a 
all times, one also finds upon the Gold Coast amongst she 
certain families a fixed occasional abstention, as for instance, 
on one day of the week from a particular kind of food. 

This abstention originates in quite a different manner to the 
foregoing. When a family finds it necessary to separate, 
and perhaps to become split up into two or three sections, 
as the tutelary deity of the family can only remain with one 
section, and that the one to which the head of the family 
belongs, it is usual for all the members to assemble 
together, and a priest, after rinsing the tutelary deity in 
water in which he has placed some herbs, gives each member 
some of the fluid to drink. While they are so doing, the 
priest announces that it is the will of the god, that hence- 
forth no one of the family shall ever partake of a certain 
article of food on a certain day or days, so that in years to 

sgq.; R. M. Connolly, “ Social Life in 

1 W. Bosman, ‘‘ Description of the 
Fanti-land,” Journal of the Anthropfo- 

Coast of Guinea,” in Pinkerton’s 

Poyages and Travels, xvi. 348, 420; 
Brodie Cruickshank, Eighteen Years 
on the Gold Coast of Africa (London, 
1853), ii, 129 sgg.3 A. B. Ellis, 
The Tshi-speaking Peoples of the Gold 
Coast, pp. 

17 599-5 79 Sgq., 176, 

logtcal Institute, xxvi. (1897) p. 1593 
E. Perregaux, Ches /es Achanii, pp. 
270, 275. 

2A. B. Ellis, Zhe Zshd-speaking 
Peoples of the Gold Coast, pp. 212 
5q- 

Fetish 
animals on 
the Gold 
Coast, as 
hyaenas 
at Accra, 
crocodiles 
at Dix 
Cove, and 
vultures at 
Coomassie. 

TOTEMISM IN WEST AFRICA CHAP, 

574 

come, the remembrance of their being under his protection 
shall not be lost. Usually it is only on one day out of the 
seven that the article of food mentioned by the priest is 
prohibited, and the ordinary day for such an’ abstention is 
Tuesday. Thus one continually meets persons, some of 
whom will not on-Tuesday eat eggs, others fowls, others 
plantains, and so on. In some cases, though but rarely, 
people are found who have to abstain from two kinds of 
food or more. This is due to a second family separation ; 
but more generally, with the adoption of the second variety 
of abstention, the first is discontinued.” } 

Amongst the Jdossums or hereditary fetishes which 
approximate to totems and might easily be confused with 
them, a conspicuous place on the Gold Coast, as in other 
parts of Guinea, is held by the sacred animals which are 
revered in particular districts. Thus, for example, hyaenas 
are sacred at Accra and crocodiles at Dix Cove. A native 
who should kill a hyaena at Accra would incur a serious 
penalty.” At Coomassie vultures are sacred to the royal 
family ; in former days they might not be molested under 
pain of death. Hence the birds grew so bold that they 
would pounce upon the fish or meat which people carried 

1 It may be worth while to compare 
B. Cruickshank’s account of this 
deliberate institution of an hereditary 
fetish, He says: ‘*There is one 
peculiar form, which the Fetish worship 
of a family about to be separated takes, 
which deserves to be recorded, as in it 
we have no external representation of 
an idol. In view of a separation which 
will most probably prevent them from 
ever again worshipping the Boossum, 
to which they have made their devotions 
hitherto, they repair to the priest, or 
sofoo, and having explained . their 
wants, he pounds up some Souman or 
Fetish substance, and mixes it with 
water into a drink, which the whole 
family swallow together. While par- 
taking of this strange communion, the 
priest declares to them that his 
Boossum commands that none of this 
family shall ever after partake of such 
and such an article of food, naming, 
perhaps, fowl, mutton, beef, pork, 

eggs, milk, or anything which he may 
choose to mention at the time. The 
Fetish edict, once pronounced against 
a particular article of food under such 
circumstances, no one of the family 
ever tastes it more; and thus we find 
one who will not taste a bit of chicken, 
another an egg, a turkey, and so on; 
and this abstinence from a particular 
species of food descends to the children, 
who are under the necessity of observ- 
ing a similar abstinence. In this case’ 
the parties are supposed to have 
swallowed their,idol, and to have him 
existing in their own persons, and the 
abstinence prescribed forms a continued 
act of worship” (B. Cruickshank, 
Eighteen Years on the Gold Coast, ii. 
133 5g.). 

2 E. T. Bowdich, Mission from Cape 
Coast Castle to Ashantee (London, 
1873), p. 216 note*; J. L. Wilson, 
Western Africa (London, 1856), p. 
210, 

XIV TOTEMISM ON THE GOLD COAST 575 

on their heads.’ These instances and others of the same 
sort*.should warn us of .the danger of hastily assuming that 
the hereditary worship of certain sacred animals in particular 
districts is identical with totemism. It is premature, for 
example, to conclude that the ancient Egyptian reverence 
for different animals in different towns and districts was 
necessarily totemic. 

So far as I know, we have no exact account of the Indications 
system of relationship prevalent among the Tshi-speaking eae 
tribes of the Gold Coast, but there are some slight indica- catory 
tions that the system is classificatory. For the term heen 
“father” (egya) is applied also to the father’s brothers ; 3” ship among 
and the following notice of the family system, though loose speaking 
and vague, points in the same: direction. “On the Gold Peoples of 
Coast,” says a Catholic missionary, “now as in the time Coast. 
of the patriarchs, the word family is understood in a much 
wider sense than that which is generally current in Europe. 

At Elmina the family is not composed only of the father, 
the mother, and the children; included in it are also the 
cousins, often very distant cousins, the uncles, the nephews, 
and even the slaves. You will hear all male cousins calling 
each other brothers, sometimes also the uncle and the 
nephew if they are about the same age, and more than that 
the children of the master and those of the slave. If there 
is too great a disparity of age between uncle and nephew, 
the latter calls the other his father. Similarly a Fantee 
applies the name of mother to his aunt, his grand-aunt, and 
his old female cousins. At first sight one is rather surprised 
on learning that a single man has so many children, and 
especially that a child can have so many fathers and so 
many mothers. If you would know of any one who is his 
father and who is his mother, you must put the question 
to him in these terms : ‘Who is the father. that begot you ? 
Who is the mother that bore you?’ If you ask him 
simply, ‘What is the name of your father? What is the 
name of your mother?’ it may be that he will give you 

1A. B. Ellis, 7he Tshi-speaking System,” Journal of the African 
Peoples of the Gold Coast, pp. 213 sg. Society, vol. vii. No. 28 (July 1908), 

2 See below, pp. 583 s¢g., 590 59g. p. 405. 

3 A. ffoulkes, “‘ The Fanti Family 

The Slave 
Coast of 
West 
Africa. 

The Ewe- 
speaking 
peoples of 
the Slave 
Coast, 

576 TOTEMISM IN WEST AFRICA CHAP. 

successively four or five fathers and as many mothers 
without including the authors of his being in the number. 
Those whom he will give you as his fathers will be his 
uncles and his old male cousins who live in the same house 
with him, and his mothers will similarly be his aunts and 
old female cousins,” * 

§ 4. Totemism on the Slave Coast 

The Slave Coast of West Africa extends from the Volta 
River on the west to the delta of the Niger on the east. 
Unlike the hilly and densely wooded region of the Gold 
Coast, the country is low, flat, and open, with but little 
“true forest. Along the coast stretches a line of broad, 
shallow .lagoons divided from the sea by a ridge of sand, 
which varies in breadth from a few yards to two or three 
miles. The valleys of the rivers are wooded, and the 
mangrove flourishes along the shores of the lagoons, but 
the prevailing feature of the landscape is a sandy grassy 
plain, dotted with clumps of trees and euphorbia. The 
climate is damp, hot, and very unhealthy.” 

For a distance of some hundred and fifty miles along 
the coast and some two hundred miles or more inland 
the country is inhabited by negroes who speak a copious 
and expressive language called the Ewe, which differs 
both from the Tshi language spoken by their western 
neighbours and from the Yoruba language spoken by 
their eastern neighbours the Yorubas. The best known 
and most powerful of the tribes speaking the Ewe 
tongue are the people of Dahomey, till lately a warlike 
and aggressive kingdom, which acquired an infamous 
notoriety from its system of human sacrifices. That king- 
dom has now passed under the dominion of France; and 
the Togos, another Ewe-speaking tribe of the Slave Coast, 
have given their name to the German colony of Togo-land. 
According to native traditions the Ewe-speaking peoples 

1 Father Galland, **A la Céte Africa (London, 1890), pp. 1-5. Com- 
dor,” Les Alisstons catholiques, xxv. pare P. Bouche, La Cote des Esclaves 
(1893) p. 284. et le Dahomey (Paris, 1885), pp- 2 599.3 

J. Spieth, Die Zwe-Stimme, Material 

2 A. B. Ellis, The Ewe-speaking sur Kunde des Ewe-Volkes in Deutsch- 

Peoples of the Slave Coast of West Togo (Berlin, 1906), pp. 12* sgq. 

xiv TOTEMISM ON THE SLAVE COAST 577 

are not aborigines, but migrated into their present territory 

from the north-east at no very distant period.’ They Their agrit 
support themselves chiefly by agriculture, raising crops of aac 
maize, yams, sweet potatoes, manioc, rice, beans, earth-nuts, : 
and cotton. The staple food is maize. Men, women, and 
children share the labour of the fields. They turn up the 

soil with hoes, for the use of the plough is unknown. As 

a preparation for the crops the grass‘is burned. every year, 

and the ashes serve to manure the ground. © But the cultiva- 

tion is shifted annually from place to place; and ten or 
twelve years commonly elapse before the same field is 
again planted and reaped. The oil-palm also plays an 
important part in the life of the natives; large tracts of 
country are covered with groves of this useful tree, and the 
natives turn every one of its products to account. They 
make pottery without the use of the wheel, spin cotton 
thread, weave excellent hanging mats of grey stuff shot 

with blue or red threads, and work iron, copper, and gold 

with a skill which is remarkable when we consider the 
rudeness of their tools. The people, both men and women, 

are keen traders and haggle over every penny.” 

The government of a Ewe-speaking tribe is in general Govern- 
aristocratic, resting in the hands of chiefs and a king. The ees 
chiefs acknowledge the supremacy of the king ; but he is con- speaking 
trolled by them, and can neither make peace nor war nor ‘'?% 
enter into any engagements or negotiations which affect the 
interests of the tribe without their consent. Such matters 
are always debated by the king and chiefs in council. The 
populace have no voice at all in the government. Each 
chief is a petty king in his own domain. But the govern- Absolute 
ment of Dahomey differed from that of other Ewe-speaking ems 
tribes in being an absolute monarchy. The king was a homey. 
despot; his will was law; he was subject to no control 
whatever. Property of every kind, including land, belonged 
theoretically to him, and he might lawfully confiscate it to 

1A. B. Ellis, The Ewe-speaking 28%, 55* sg., 298 sqg-» 319 599+ 
Peoples of the Slave Coast, pp. § 5997.3 356 sgg., 706, 762 sgg., 7803 J. 
J. Spieth, Die Lwe-Stimme, pp. 11*, Bouche, Za Céte des Esclaves, pp. 53 
53* sg¢., 56* sgg.; J. Deniker, Zhe sgg., 195 sg.; H. Klose, Zogo unter 
Races of Man, p. 452. Deutscher Flagge (Berlin, 1899), pp- 
2 J. Spieth, Die Ewe-Stimme, pp. 258 sg., 262 59. 
VOL. II 2P 

Sanctity of 
the king’s 
person. 

Wars of 
Dahomey. 

Totemic 

clans of 

the Ewe- 
speaking 
tribes of 
the Slave 
Coast. 

578 TOTEMISM IN WEST AFRICA CHAP. 

his own use. Whatever a man had he had only on suffer- 
ance so long as the king chose to let him remain in 
possession. The theory was pushed so far that parents 
were held to have no right to their own children; these, 
like everything else, belonged to the king, and their fathers 
and mothers were permitted to retain them only during his 
pleasure. All the women of the country, both native-born 
and captives, were his absolute property, to be disposed 
of by him at his discretion. No man might have a wife 
unless she was purchased from the king or conferred upon 
him as a reward of bravery. The king’s person was 
sacred ; his subjects affected to believe that he neither ate 
nor slept; it was criminal to say the contrary. He always 
ate in secret, and any man who was so rash or unfortunate 
as to see him in the act was put to death, When he drank 
in public, which he did on extraordinary occasions, every 
one turned his head aside and the women held up cloths 
to screen the monarch from the gaze of his subjects. In 
his presence there was no distinction of ranks: all were 
slaves before him. Even the highest chiefs had to prostrate 
themselves and grovel on the earth at his feet. For 
centuries the kings of Dahomey waged wars of aggression 
on their neighbours for the purpose of capturing slaves and 
human victims for sacrifice. The surrounding countries 
were desolated and exhausted by their ravages. In these 
wars a conspicuous part was taken by regiments of stalwart 
Amazons, armed and disciplined like regular soldiers, who 
fought with desperate valour. These viragos were con- 
sidered to be the king's wives and were sworn to celibacy. 
Any one who proved to be frail was put to death with her 
paramour.’ 

The Ewe-speaking tribes of the Slave Coast, like the 
Tshi-speaking tribes of the Gold Coast, are divided into 
exogamous and totemic clans, and every community is 
heterogeneous, comprising members of several or even of 
all the various clans. Unfortunately our information on 
the subject is scanty; for Colonel A. B. Ellis, almost the 

1J. L. Wilson, Western Africa, sgg.; A. B. Ellis, The Zwe-speaking 
pp. 202-206; P. Bouche, La Céte des Peoples of the Slave Coast, pp. 161 syg., 
Esclaves, Pp- 343 599-1 353 #99., 360 182 599. 

XIV TOTEMISM ON THE SLAVE COAST 579 

only writer who appears to have observed and recorded Ewe 
totemism, lost a portion of his notes. The following are all 
the totem clans which he was able to remember :-— 

(1) The Leopard clan (Kpo-do, compounded of £po, 
“leopard,” and do, “ people, clan, or tribe ”). 

(2) The Snake clan (Ordanh-do, from ordanh, “ snake”). 

(3) The Lion clan (Deata-do or Jahnta-do, from dzata 
or jahnia, “ lion”). 

(4) The Yam clan (Tehvi-do, from tehvi, a variety of 
yam). 

(5) The Crocodile clan (Z/o-do, from elo, “ crocodile”). 

(6) The Monkey clan (Eddu-do, from eddu, a monkey 
with long black hair). 

“The usual reverence is paid by the members of a clan Respect 
to the animal or plant from which the clan takes its name. ene 
It may not be used as food, or molested in any way; but 
must always be treated with veneration and respect. The 
general notion is that the members of the clan are directly 
descended from the animal or plant—eponymous.” * 

The Anglos are a Ewe tribe who inhabit the country Totemism 
between the delta of the Volta River and the Keta lagoon. yi 
One of the twelve subdivisions of the tribe is named 
Adsoviawo, after a species of fish (adsovia), which is never 
eaten by its namesakes, because they think that a fish of 
that sort once stuck in the throat of one of their ancestors 
and choked him. The Adsoviawo people are mostly 
fishermen.” 

The totemic clans of the Ewe tribes are exogamous and ‘The 
the descent appears, at least among the common people, to Ree 
be reckoned in the female line; that is, a man may not the Ewe 
marry a woman of his own totem clan and the children Nitale 
belong to the clan of their mother, not to that of their father. mous with 
But our information on this subject is scanty. The late iG 
Colonel’ Sir A. B. Ellis says: “As is usual with people eh ad 
who are divided into totem-clans, the Ewe tribes are exo- 
gamous ; marriage between members of the same clan being 
forbidden. This restriction is, however, not now always 
scrupulously observed by the sea-board tribes. Kinship is 

1A, B. Ellis, 7he Ewe-speaking 2H. Seidel, ‘“‘Der Fischfang in 
Peoples of the Slave Coast, p. 100, Togo,” Globus, lxxxii. (1902), p. 112, 

But 
amongst 
the upper 
classes of 
Dahomey 
descent is 
traced in 
the male 
dine, 

580 TOTEMISM IN WEST AFRICA CHAP. 

traced through females, and the order of succession to property, 
etc.,, is brother, sister’s son. The eldest brother is the head 
of the family, and his heir is the brother next in age to 
himself ; if he has no brother, his heir is the eldest son of 
his eldest sister.”1 | However, in default of brothers and of 
sisters’ sons the firstborn son succeeds to his father’s property.” 
“Tn all cases of separation the children accompany the wife, 
who pays to the husband a sum to reimburse him for what 
he has paid for their maintenance. The general custom of 
regarding children as related to the mother and not to the 
father, does not apply, it must be observed, to the upper 
classes of Dahomi, in which the father is regarded as 
having the greater claim.” ® 

The same writer suggests that among the Ewe tribes the 
transition fromm mother-kin to father-kin, so far as it has 
taken place among the higher classes, may have originated 
in an example set by the despotic kings of Dahomey, whose 
power enabled them to guard their wives so closely that 
they could be fairly sure of the paternity of their children. 
“Amongst the upper classes of Dahomi we find, as has 
already been stated, a different system of kinship existing, 
it being there traced through males. This, which carries 
with it a proprietorship of a father in his children not 
recognized elsewhere, has very probably been brought abont 
by the exercise of arbitrary power. Owing to the manner in 
which the actual wives of the king are immured in palaces, 
hedged in by various restrictions, and guarded by women 
soldiers who are the king’s wives in name, the paternity of 
the children borne by the king’s wives would no longer be 
doubtful ; and an autocratic ruler might well set aside custom 
and declare that his son should be his heir and successor, 
instead of his brother or nephew. The upper classes might 
follow his example, but, unless the new system were imposed 
by law, the masses would hardly do so; and in Dahomi we 
find that this system is confined to the upper classes, the 

1A. B. Ellis, Zhe Lwe-speaking afrika,” Zeitschrift der Gesellschaft fiir 
Peoples of the Slave Coast of West LErdkunde 2u Berlin, xii. (1877) p. 
Africa, p. 207. 390. 
3 A. B. Ellis, Zhe Ewe-speaking 
2 G, Ziindel, ‘‘ Land wnd Volk der Peoples of the Slave Coast of West 
Eweer auf der Sclavenkiiste in West- Africa, p. 206. 

XIV TOTEMISM ON THE SLAVE COAST 581 

masses still retaining kinship through females only. That 
universally in Dahomi descent used fotmerly to be traced 
through females, the existence of such words as no-vi-nutsu, 
‘brother,’ literally ‘mother’s son, and 1o-vi-nyonyu, ‘ sister, 
literally ‘ mother’s daughter,’ seems to show. The fact that 
the king’s sons have no rank during the lifetime of their 
father may also be a survival of such a system.” 7 

Amongst the Ewe people first cousins, the children of two Cousin 
brothers or of two sisters, may not marry each other ; but on ™#™iages. 
the other hand marriage is allowed between two first cousins 
who are the children of a brother and of a sister respectively.” 

“When a man dies, his widows devolve upon his heir, he 
whose wives they become, in name at all events, for it is not levirate 
incumbent upon him to consummate the union. When a 
brother succeeds a brother it is more usual for the union to 
be consummated than when a nephew succeeds an uncle.” ® 
It appears to be only a younger brother who is entitled to 
marry his deceased brother’s widow.* But while a man may 
marry his deceased brother’s wife, he is not allowed to marry 
his deceased wife’s sister.° 

Amongst some of the Hos, a Ewe tribe in German avoidance 
territory, when a woman lives in her husband’s house, he ° 4 wife's 
may not eat in the house of her parents and they may Pree 
not eat in his. <A breach of this rule is shameful; many 
people say it would prevent the wife from bearing children.® 

In former times the women of the blood-royal of Dahomey License 
were permitted to intrigue with any man they pleased; but ce 
in the latter half of the nineteenth century this custom was of the 
put down by King Galele on account of the scandals which oa 
it caused ; since his reign women of the blood-royal have Dahomey 
contracted ordinary marriages.” Similarly among the Yoruba- S740 

African 
kingdoms, 

1A. B. Ellis, The Hwe-speaking 
Peoples of the Slave Coast of West 
Africa, pp. 209 sg. 

2G. Ziindel, ‘‘Land und Leute 
der Eweer auf der Sclavenkiiste in 
Westafrika,” Zet¢schrift der Gesellschaft 
Suir Erdkunde au Berlin, xii. (1877) p. 
399. 

3 A, B. Ellis, Zhe Ewe-speaking 
Peoples of the Slave Coast of West 
Africa, p. 205. 

4 A. B. Ellis, of, czt. p. 212. 

6 G. Ziindel, “‘Land und Leute 
der Eweer auf der Sclavenkiiste in 
Westafrika,” Zeztschrijt der Gesellschaft 
Sir Erdkunde zu Berlin, xii. (1877) p. 
390. 

6 J. Spieth, Die Ewe-Stimme, p. 
744. 
TA. B. Ellis, Zhe Lwe- speaking 
Peoples of the Slave Coast of West 
Africa, pp. 204, 211 sg. 

Traces 
of com- 
munism 
in land 
among 
the Ewe 
tribes, 

A family 
respon- 
sible for 
the mis- 
deeds 

of its 

members. 

582 TOTEMISM IN WEST AFRICA CHAP. 

speaking peoples of the Slave Coast the daughters of kings 
or chiefs are free to live with or marry whom they like, and 
they may change their partners as often as the whim 
takes them.’ The license thus accorded to princesses in 
many African kingdoms, including Ashantee, Uganda, and 
Unyoro* as well as Dahomey and Yoruba-land, may 
possibly be a relic of sexual communism, which survived in 
royal families after it had become extinct among the 
commen people. 

Traces of a primitive communism may perhaps be 
detected among the Ewe tribes in other departments of 
social life than in the relations of the sexes. “ By native 
law and custom there is no private property in land, but a 
family in occupation of land cannot be disturbed ; and land 
so occupied only practically reverts to the community when 
it is abandoned or thrown out of cultivation. When once 
land has been allotted to a family, the usufruct belongs to 
that family for as long as it chooses to cultivate it; but the 
land cannot be sold by the occupiers or assigned to any 
third party. Amongst the inhabitants of the sea-board 
towns, however, the decisions of the colonial law-courts have 
fostered the notion of individual property in land, in so far 
as the land on which houses are built is concerned, and there 
are indications of its extending still further.” * 

Again, the common responsibility of a whole family for 
the misdeeds of any of its members is almost certainly among 
the Ewe peoples a survival of a former time when the rights 
and interests of the individual were merged still more com- 
pletely in the rights and interests of the community. On 
this subject we read: “The family collectively is re- 
sponsible for all crimes and injuries to person or property 
committed by any one of its members, and each member is 
assessible for a share of the compensation to be paid. On 
the other hand, each member of the family receives a share 
of the compensation paid to it for any crime or injury com- 
mitted against the person or property of any one of its 

1 A, B. Ellis, Zhe Yoruba-speaking 565. 
Peoples of the Slave Coast of West Africa 3 A. B. Ellis, The Ewe-speaking 
(London, 1894), p. 187. Peoples of the Slave Coast of West 
2 See above, pp. 471 59-5 523. 59-, <f/rwa, pp. 217 59. 

XIV TOTEMISM ON THE SLAVE COAST 583 

members. Compensation is always demanded from the 
family instead of from the individual wrong-doer, and is paid 
to the family instead of to the individual wronged. In 
respect to this custom of collective responsibility and 
indemnification, the Ewe family resembles the old Welsh 
‘kindred’: the practice in Wales, however, has generally 
been regarded as being connected with the tenure of the 
family lands, whilst, amongst the Ewe-speaking peoples there 
is no private property in land, which all belongs to the tribe. 

“It seems that this system of family responsibility Trace of 
was, amongst the Ewe and Tshi-speaking peoples, pre- aig or 
ceded by one of community responsibility ; under which a whole 
each member of a village, or other community, was assessible ity for the 
for a share of the fine to be paid in compensation of injuries deeds of its 
committed by one of the community upon others not belong- ™e™>*S- 
ing to it. This wider responsibility only now survives 
amongst the Ewe tribes in the liability of any member of a 
village or town to be seized and held as a hostage for the 
payment of a debt owing by another member of the same 
community ; and amongst the Tshi-speaking peoples in the 
right which every creditor has to seize, in payment of a debt, 
the goods or person of any third party who belongs to the 
same community as the debtor. This custom seems to 
show that the community preceded the family, which one 
would certainly expect to be the case, when it is remembered 
that men must have dwelt together in groups, long before 
any such notion as that of kinship had been formed.” * 

Distinct, apparently, from the totems of the clans are Local 
the local sacred animals which are revered in different at aR 
districts of the country; for it would seem that while a the Slave 
totemic animal is respected only by the members of its © 
particular clan, who form merely a fraction of the population 
of any one district, the local sacred animals in question are 
respected by all the inhabitants of the district without 
exception. Yet the local sacred animal is sometimes a 
beast of the same species as the totemic. Thus in Dahomey Leopards 
the leopard is regarded as sacred and is especially worshipped Dace 
by the royal family. Theoretically a man who killed a 

1 ALB. Ellis, The Ewe-speaking Peoples of the Slave Coast of West Africa, 
PP- 208 sg. 

Crocodiles 
sacred at 
Whydah, 
Porto 
Novo, etc, 

584 TOTEMISM IN WEST AFRICA CHAP. 

leopard was put to death; according to Forbes, he was 
sacrificed to the offended deity, but in reality the culprit 
escapes by paying a fine and performing certain ceremonies 
to propitiate the god. The leopard is thought to be 
animated by an indwelling spirit, so that he who slays one 
of these beasts does not destyoy the object of his worship, he 
merely deprives the spirit of its bodily tabernacle, a serious 
offence which calls for a costly atonement. Shrines con- 
taining rude effigies and drawings of leopards are common 
in Dahomey, and at these the people pray and sacrifice to 
the leopard-god. Leopard’s claws are deemed amulets and 
are highly prized. At the court of Dahomey some of the 
king’s wives, usually the youngest and handsomest, bear the 
honourable title of Leopard Wives (Af0-s2), and on state 
occasions wear striped cloths. 

The crocodile is worshipped at Bageida, Porto Seguro, 
Savi, Porto Novo, and Badagry. In the days of the former 
kingdom of Whydah there were two pools near the royal 
palace at Savi where crocodiles were bred, and a numerous 
priesthood was set apart for their service. But nowadays 
offerings to the crocodiles are as a rule made only by 
members of the Crocodile clan, or by persons whose business 
obliges them to sail on the lagoons. There are no longer 
temples and priests dedicated to the worship of crocodiles, 
The native notion seems to be that a crocodile is the abode 
of a spirit who, in default of a human body, has taken up his 
abode in the carcase of the reptile. Spirits in these reduced 
circumstances are believed to be generally malignant and 
to vent their spite on mankind by entering beasts of prey. 
However, opinions differ on the subject, and there is no well- 
established standard of crocodile orthodoxy. In districts 
where the animal is worshipped it may not be molested.’ 

1A. B. Ellis, Zhe Ewe-speaking 
Peoples of the Slave Coast, pp. 74 sg. 
Compare F. E. Forbes, Dahomey and 
the Dahomans (London, 1851), i. 160 
$9-5 171-174. A Ewe hunter who 
kills a leopard has to observe many 
curious ceremonies, He is painted 
with red and white earth on the left 
side of his body in imitation of a 
leopard’s spots, and he has, amongst 

other things, to make a funeral feast 
for the animal and to tie up its head 
carefully ; for the upward look of its 
eyes is believed to retard the rain. 
See H. Spieth, in Avitthetlungen der 
Geographischen Gesellschaft 2u Jena, 
ix. (1890) pp. 17-19; J. Spieth, Die 
Lwe-Stimme, p. 29*. 

2A, B. Ellis, Zhe Lwe-speaking 
Peoples of the Slave Coast, pp. 71-74. 

xiv - TOTEMISM ON THE SLAVE COAST 585 

Again, the python is worshipped as a sacred animal in Worship of 
Dahomey, especially at Whydah, also at Agweh, at Great the python 
and Little Popo, and in the kingdom of Porto Novo. Its epee 
Ewe name is dangbe, which means “ life-giving snake” (dan 
“snake,” gbe “life”).1 The worship of the serpent appears 
to have originated at Whydah, and thence to have spread 
over Dahomey. The python is esteemed the god of wisdom 
and of earthly bliss. He it was that opened the eyes of the 
first man and woman who came into the world; for our 
first parents, like puppies, were born blind. The temple The temple 
or house of the python at Whydah is a round hut thatched Se 
with grass; it stands in a small oblong enclosure near the 
middle of the town. Inside the fence are a few sacred trees, 

a small round hut containing an image of Legba, the Priapus 
of these negroes, and on the ground calabashes and earthen 
vessels full of water, maize flour, palm-wine, cowries, and 
other offerings made by the worshippers. Holes are left 
in the walls of the temple to let the serpents craw! out 
and in. The sacred reptiles are free to range the town and 
the neighbourhood. When one of them has strayed into Respect 
the house of a European, a priest goes to fetch the errant fr°™" 
god, and having purified himself by rubbing certain fresh serpents. 
green leaves between the palms of his hands, he prostrates 
himself before the serpent, takes it up gently in his arms, 
and carries it home. A native of Whydah who meets a 
python in the path prostrates himself before it, rubs his 
forehead on the earth, and covers himself with dust in token 
of humiliation. “You are my master,” he cries, “you are 
my father, you are my mother; my head belongs to you; 
be propitious to me.” Amongst the Ewe tribes who worship Formerly 
the python, a native who kills a python, even by accident, {hy hoe? 
is by custom liable to be burned alive, and formerly the a python | 
punishment was invariably inflicted. But now, though Bee ek 
pretence is made of burning the culprit, he is allowed to the penalty 
escape with his life from a blazing hut, on condition of pay- iets 
ing a heavy fine and of running the gauntlet of the python- 
worshippers, who belabour him with cudgels till he has 
purified himself by plunging into running water. In: old 
days even Europeans have been put to death for killing a 

1 Father Baudin, in Les ALissions Catholigues, No. 779, May 9, 1884, p. 232. 

The sacred python. 
serpent has 
his human 

wives. 

god. 

Offerings to desuetude, 

The focal 
worship 
of sacred 

the coast 
of Guinea 

586 

TOTEMISM IN WEST AFRICA 

CHAP, 

The sacred serpent has many human wives, whom 

he marries secretly in the temple; but it is the priests who 

consummate the union. 

The wives bring water for the 

pythons, and make grass mats; at festivals they decorate 

the temple and offer sacrifices. 

The festivities are usually 

kept up all night, and degeperate into unbridled orgies of 

lust, in which the wives of the god play their part. 

It is 

the serpent god, they say, who possesses them and makes 
them act thus; it is he, too, who gets them with child. 
Schools of Opposite the temple are schools or seminaries of the python- 
the pythons od, in which any child who may happen to touch or be 
touched by one of the reptiles must be kept for a year at 
the expense of the parents and taught the songs and dances 
peculiar to the worship. Formerly adults, especially women, 
were liable to be similarly treated if they had the misfortune 

to touch a python; 

even the wives and daughters 
powerful chiefs were not exempt from the penalty. 

of 
But 

the scandalous abuses of the custom, together with the 
decline of the priestly power, have caused it to fall into 

Common offerings to the serpent-god are iron 
the python. rods bent to imitate the coils of a serpent. 

These represent 

the male animal, and 4 bell-shaped image of iron represents 

the female. 

They may be seen in sacred groves near 

lagoons and springs of water; and beside them are placed 
calabashes or covered earthen vessels containing water and 
other offerings for the serpents.’ 

It is possible that the local worship of sacred animals on 
the Slave Coast, as on the Gold Coast and in the delta of 
animals on the Niger,? has been developed out of totemism, but there 
is no positive evidence of such a derivation, and it would be 

1 P. Bouche, La Céte des Esclaves, 
pp. 385-397; A. B. Ellis, Zhe Ewe- 
speaking Peoples of the Slave Coast, 
pp. 54-63. As Whydah is a seaport 
which has long been inhabited by 
European traders, the worship of the 
serpent there has often been described. 
For earlier accounts of it see W. 
Bosman, ‘ Description of the Coast of 
Guinea,” in Pinkerton’s Voyages and 
Travels, xvi. 494-500; Labat, Voyage 
au chevalier Des Marchais en Guinée, 
Isles Voisines, et & Cayenne (Amster- 
dam, 1731), ii. 133-1613; Astley’s 

New General Collection of Voyages and 
Travels, iii. (London, 1746) pp. 28- 
373 J. Duncan, 7yravels in Western 
Africa (London, 1847), pp. 126 59., 
195 sg.; F. E. Forbes, Dahomey and 
the Dahomans (London, 1851), i. 107. 
Whydah is called Fida by Bosman, 
and Juda by Des Marchais. As to 
the human wives of the serpent-god at 
Whydah, see further my Adonis, Attis, 
Ostris,® pp. 57 599. 

2 See above, pp. 574 59-» and below, 
Pp. 590 5979- 

XIV 

rash to assume it. 

TOTEMISM ON THE SLAVE COAST 

587 

it is, therefore, better to treat as distinct, on the one hand, 
the worship paid to a species of animals by all the inhabitants developed 
of a district, and, on the other hand, the respect shewn for 
their totemic animal by all the members of a totem clan. 
In both cases we see a community bound together by a 
common reverence for a species of animals, but whereas in 
the former case the community is a local group, in the 

latter it is a kin. 

§ 5. Zotemism in Southern Nigeria 

In the absence of proof to the contrary may 

perhaps 
have been 

out of 
totemism. 

No unambiguous evidence of totemism, in the strict The delta 
sense of the word, appears to have been as yet discovered 
among the pagan tribes who inhabit the delta of the Niger, 
a dreary land of fetid pestilential swamps and impenetrable 
forests, intersected by a vast network of turbid, sluggish 

streams and creeks. 

of the 
Niger. 

But a regular system of totemism and exogamy prevails Totemism 
among the Bini, the tribe which has given its name to the 

great city of Benin. 

by Mr. N. W. Thomas, Government Anthropologist for 
West Africa, to whose courtesy I am obliged for the 

following particulars.’ 

1 Lieut.-Col. A. F. Mockler-Ferry- 
man, British Nigeria (London, 1902), 
p- 4. For descriptions of the dismal 
scenery of the Niger delta, see (Sir) 
H. H. Johnston, ‘‘ The Niger Delta,” 
Proceedings of the R. Geographical 
Soctety, x. (1888) pp. 749579. 3 Major 
A, G. Leonard, The Lower Niger and 
ts Tribes (London, 1906), pp. 13 sg. 
The last of these writers observes : 
“Yet although in many localities 
animals and reptiles represent the 
ancestral or protecting deities of the 
clan or community, no tribe or clan 
that I know of is named after any 
particular animal or reptile” (Major 
A. G. Leonard, The Lower Niger and 
tts Tribes, p. 318). Lieut.-Colonel 
Mockler-Ferryman calls attention to 
“the very marked traces of totemism 
which are found in West Africa”; but 
the list of totemic clans which he gives 
is not said to be drawn from Nigeria, 

The name which the Bini use for 

and as it coincides, or nearly so, with 
the lists given by the late Colonel A. B. 
Ellis (see above, pp. 556 5g7., 579), 
we may surmise that he was thinking 
rather of the natives of the Gold Coast 
and the Slave Coast than of the tribes 
of Nigeria. See Lieut.-Col. A. F. 
Mockler-Ferryman, Sritish Nigeria 
(London, 1902), pp. 266 sg. 

2 Some indications of totemism 
among the Bini had previously been 
given by Mr. R. E. Dennett, from 
whose account we gather that certain 
animals and plants are tabooed as food 
to certain families, that these taboos 
(awa or agza) are inherited by children 
both from their father and their mother, 
and, further, that in some cases, at least, 
a man may not marry a woman who has 
the same taboos as his father. Among 
animals thus tabooed to some people 
are snakes, antelopes, monkeys, and 
elephants ; among plants are yams and 

and 
exogamy 

The system has lately been investigated among 

the Bini. 

588 TOTEMISM IN WEST AFRICA CHAP, 

a totem or totemic taboo is awa (plural awaighe). Each 
family or clan has one or more totems (awazgbe), which are 
generally animals or plants. Asa rule no one may kill or 
eat his or her totemic animal nor use his or her totemic 
plant. Even food which has been touched by the totemic 
animal is occasionally prohibited to members of the clan. 
The totemic families or clans are also exogamous ; that is, 
no man may marry a woman who has the same totem 
(awa) as himself. However, this rule is falling into 
Awife may desuetude. A woman may not cook nor eat her husband’s 
ene totem if he is in the house; she may not even eat it after 
husband's his death, so long as she is suckling his child. Descent of 
toremwhile the totem is in the male line; that is, children belong to 
the house. their father’s totemic family or clan and observe his totemic 
taboo or taboos. Some clans tell stories to account for the 
origin of their totems. One clan, for example, says that 
the boa is their totem because it helped one of their 
members ; another clan says that black seeds are their totem 
and are therefore tabooed to them, because black seeds 
Sacrificeof brought disgrace on the clan. To the rule that the totemic 
the totems animal or plant may not be killed, eaten, or used by 
members of the clan there are certain interesting exceptions, 
especially in connection with burial ceremonies. On the 
first day of the burial ceremonies some families make soup 
out of their totemic plant or animal with which to sacrifice 
to the feet of the dead man. Afterwards the soup which 
has been so made and sacrificed, or more usually the portion 
of it.which remains over from the sacrifice, is either thrown 
away, or eaten by the family, or consumed by strangers. 
The sacrificed portion may also be put to the lips of 
members of the family and then thrown away. Further, 
the totemic leaf or rope may be used. in various ways at the 
burial rites of a member of the family. Thus it may be 
employed to wrap or tie the body, or to wrap the yams 
brought by the sons-in-law ; or it may be set at the feet of 
the corpse. If the burial rites are not properly performed, 
the Bini believe that the deceased will not get to heaven 

a small fruit called ¢h#hzkz. See R. Mr. Dennett’s brief account has in 
E. Dennett, At the Back of the Black general been confirmed by Mr. N. W. 
.Van’s Mind (London, 1906), p. 231. Thomas’s researches. 

xIV TOTEMISM IN SOUTHERN NIGERIA 589 

(elimi) ; or that if he does, his sojourn in the realms of 
bliss will be brief, for his sainted relatives will expel him 
and appropriate to themselves the yams which were offered 
for his benefit at the funeral. “Very rarely the forbidden Annual 
. : . : . : sacrifice of 
animal is sacrificed on occasions other than burial rites, the totem. 
instead of in the death customs; it is then (1) eaten by the 
family or (2) by strangers. The sacrifice is annual,”? 

The following is a list of Bini totems which have been List of 

discovered by Mr. N. W. Thomas :— Dee. 
BINI TOTEMS 
1, Calabash seed. 16. Boa. 31. Food touched by fowl 
2. Antelope (eruhe). 17. All snakes. or over which fowl 
3. Tortoise. 18. Monkey with white has jumped. 
4. Leopard. spot. 32. Black bean. 
5. Bush cow. 19. Mashed yam. 33. Bush cat. 
6. Osan leaf. 20. Pumpkin. 34. Emile (wild yam 2). 
7. Umeche leaf. 21. /bugwache leaf. 35. Erhumoy? bird (Atvi- 
8. Coco yam. 22. Porcupine. can pheasant ?). 
9. /ufu(pudding) cooked| 23. Calabash top. 36. Lyveye leaf for soup. 
on preceding day, 24. Palm wine. 37- Oton (squirrel). 
10. Ants’ nest as pot rest. | 25. Bush rat. 38. Animals with heads 
11. Fish. 26. Calabash spoon. cut off. 
12. Jrkzelo rope. 27. Arhumoto snake. 39. Rat. 
13. £boso leaf. 28. Fowl. 40, Ochwe tree, 
14. Dog. 29. Olswz leaf. 41. Kneelingononeknee. 
15. Eating in squatting | 30. Odo fruit. 42. Snail. 
position. 43- Kite. 

The foregoing account of Bini totemism, which we owe Observa- 

to the researches of Mr. N. W. Thomas, suggests some /onson the 
‘oregoing 

observations. In the first place the prohibition laid on a evidence. 

wife to cook or eat her husband’s totem while he is in the S yreney 

house seems to be a precaution to prevent domestic brawls not cook 
from arising between husband and wife over their different (St > 
totems, and so far the rule confirms my theory of the totem. 
totemic origin of the widely diffused group of tales which 
conform to the type of the Swan Maiden, or Beauty and the 
Beast, or Cupid and Psyche.’ 

In the second place the annual sacrifice of the totem is The 
the first example of such a custom which we have met with @nual or 
in our survey of totemism ; for the catching and killing of Sere 

their totems by the Arunta and other tribes of Centra] the bie 
confirms 
1 From Mr. N. W. Thomas’s manuscripts. 

2 See above, pp. 570 59. 

‘W. Robert- 
son Smith’s 
theory. 

Totemism 
in Fugar. 

Local 
worship of 
sacred 
animals in 
Southern 
Nigeria. 
The sacred 
leopard of 
Idah. 

59° TOTEMISM IN WEST AFRICA CHAP. 

Australia is not strictly speaking a sacrifice at all.’ Further, 
the sacrifice of the totemic animal or plant to a dead member 
of the clan, and the eating of it by his kinsfolk, or the 
touching of their lips with the sacrificed portion of it at a 
funeral, seems to be plainly sacramental ; it is to all appear- 
ance a solemn communion with the totemic animal or plant, 
which is effected both by eating a portion of the sacred and 
at other times tabooed food, and also by offering it at the 
same time to the corpse, in order that the dead as well as 
the living members of the clan may ‘partake of its blessed 
influence. Thus these sacrifices and this form of communion 
with the totem furnish a strong confirmation of the theories 
which the late W. Robertson Smith, with the acumen of 
genius, propounded as to the nature and purpose of a 
totemic sacrament long before any actual example of such a 
rite had been discovered.” It seems probable that further 
researches in this part of Africa would bring many more 
instances of such sacraments to light. 

The territory of Fugar, which forms part of the Idah 
District in Southern Nigeria, contains twenty compounds, 
each with its prohibited animal or plant. In only one 
case is the prohibited animal sacrificed; a dog is killed 
in the family of Ebozua, the head chief. In the Wepa 
country, opposite Idah, on the west side of the Niger, 
there are two great exogamous divisions named Ego and 
Atzikia? 

Apart from the existence of regular totemism among the 
Bini, the inhabitants of certain districts of Southern Nigeria 
revere particular species of sacred animals. Thus the leopard 
is held in great veneration by the Igaras of Idah, who call it 
“father” (atta), though they do not object to kill it in the 
chase. When a dead leopard is brought into Idah, it is 
dressed up in white and borne on the heads of four men 
from house to house, with singing and the beating of drums. 
Each householder gives a present of cowries or cloth to the 
owner of the leopard, and at last the carcase is buried with 

1 See vol. i. pp. 109 sgg., 230 599. of the Semites, New Edition (London, 
2 See W. Robertson Smith, article 1894), pp. 295, 405. 
“ Sacrifice,” Encyclopaedia Britannica, 3 Mr. N. W. Thomas, in a letter to 

Ninth Edition, vol. xxi. (1886) pp. me dated Benin City, October 25th, 
137 sg. 3 td., Lectures on the Religion 1909. 

XIV TOTEMISM IN SOUTHERN NIGERIA 591 

great ceremony and firing of guns. Were this custom 
neglected the people think that the beast’s spirit would 

punish them. The kings (4éas) of Idah are buried in a 

place called the Grave of the Leopard.’ Again, we are 

told that in the delta of the Niger “each little community 

had its ‘totem,’ or sacred animal, in whose species the 
ancestral spirit—the soul of the tribe, so to speak— 

was supposed to dwell. Thus, in Brass, they worshipped Worship of 
the python snake; in Bonny, the monitor lizard. Only ‘hspython 
nine or ten years ago this animal worship was so _ real and of the 
that the British authorities in the Oil Rivers were compelled 773°, 
to afford it a certain amount of recognition. Europeans Bonny. 
were forbidden to kill the sacred lizard of Bonny, or 

the still more sacred serpent of .Brass, and were heavily 

fined by their consul if they infringed this prohibition. 

. At Bonny the monitor lizards became a sickening 
nuisance. They devoured the Europeans’ fowls, turkeys, 
ducks, and geese with impunity ; they might lie across the 
road or the doorways of houses with their six feet of length, 
and savagely lash the shins of people who attempted to pass 
them with their whip-like serrated tails, and if you wounded 
or killed one of them then there was no end of a to-do. 

You were assaulted or robbed by the natives, harangued by 
the Consul on board a man-of-war, and possibly fined into 
the bargain. In other parts of the delta it might be the 
shark, or the crocodile, or some water-bird that was wor- 
shipped, but nowhere was this zoolatry carried to greater 
lengths than at Bonny and Brass. For its effectual abolish- 
ment, which has been of the greatest benefit to the well-being 
of Europeans and natives alike, we owe our thanks, not to the 
intervention of naval or consular officials, nor to the bluff 
remonstrances of traders, but to the quiet, unceasing labours 
of the Church Missionary Society, who, by winning the natives 
from these absurd practices, have brought about such a change 
of affairs that now the python is promptly killed at Brass 
whenever it makes its appearance, and the monitor lizard 
is relegated to the woods and swamps. ... Before that 
time, if a python seized a child in the streets in its coils, 
and slavered it with its viscous saliva, the mother—so far 
1 A, F. Mockler-Ferryman, Up the Niger (London, 1892), pp. 308 sg. 

592 TOTEMISM IN WEST AFRICA CHAP, 

from interfering to save it—must stand by and call out her 
thanks, and summon her friends and relations to rejoice with 
her that the god-python had so honoured her family as to 
devour her child.” ? 
sacred Down to the year 1894 Fishtown, a town of the Brass 
ehraeadlas tribe, was overrun with sacred pythons, but in that year a 
fire broke out which not only demolished all the houses, but 
destroyed so many of the divine reptiles that the new town 
penalty for has been comparatively free of them ever since. Formerly 
va the penalty for killing a sacred python, or any other of the 
python. local sacred animals, was death; and even powerful and 
wealthy chiefs could not escape condign punishment for so 
heinous an offence. At present any person who by accident 
or design destroys one of these reptiles must report the affair 
to the high priest, who sits in judgment on him and imposes 
a fine. Moreover, the culprit must purify himself by daubing 
his body with sacred chalk or mud, which is afterwards 
washed off with water. When a python died a natural 
death it used to be customary to levy contributions and bury 
it with the funeral rites and honours accorded to a chief. 
A similar custom is said to be still observed in other parts 
of the country when'any sacred animal has given up the 
Sacred ghost. All the coast tribes are reported to revere the fish- 
fish-hawks. hawk and to observe towards it all the usages which are 
customary in regard to sacred pythons, monkeys, and the 
rest of the divine menagerie. Hence these hawks have 
grown almost tame and allow the natives to go close up to 

them? 
possible Among the pagan negroes of the Cross River, in the 
nae interior of the Niger delta, the Assistant District Commis- 

among the Sioner, Mr. C, Partridge, has noted some customs and beliefs 
Sinaia which may possibly be connected with totemism. At 
Nkimboma, a village of the Eshupum tribe, on the right 

i H. H. Johnston, H.M. Vice-Con- The custom of daubing the body of the 
sul for the Oil Rivers, ‘‘The Niger python-killer with chalk may be in- 
Delta,” Proceedings of the Royal Geo- tended to ward off the angry ghost of 
graphical Society, x. (1888) pp. 760 the dead serpent ; for we are told that 
Sq: in Benin ‘‘evil spirits are all kept off 
2 Major A. G. Leonard, 7he Lower by bedaubing oneself with chalk” (H. 
Niger and its Tribes, pp. 328-332. Ling Roth, Great Benin, p. 61). 

The writer’s account is general and 3 Major A. G. Leonard, 7he Lower 
does not apply to Fishtown only. Niger and its Tribes, p. 322. 

XIV TOTEMISM IN SOUTHERN NIGERIA 593 

bank of the Aweyong River, the head-chief’s hut contains a Sacred . 
painted board with three figures in relief representing a man, 12"; 

a woman, and a lizard. In answer to Mr. Partridge’s ques- Eshupum 
tions the chiefs said: “Our forefathers said the lizard was vaeeie 
their forefather, and they would not kill or eat it, but we River. 
do not now pay regard to that law. No, we don’t punish 

a man who kills a lizard. Yes, we still give drink and 

fufu (yam pudding) to this juju. It is the juju of the town, 

not of the Eshupum tribe.”! Further, in some of the Carvings of 
towns of the Cross River there may be seen carved wooden ‘rocodiles, 
poles, which Mr. Partridge compares to the totem-posts of snakes, 
North American Indians. These poles are carved with cece 
figures of men, women, and animals, such as crocodiles, the Cross 
dogs, snakes, and lizards ; they may be twelve or fifteen feet River | 
high, and are sometimes surmounted by a human skull and 
surrounded by a circle of stones. One such great post will 

stand in the open square of a town. The one at Ogada, in 

the Eshupum tribe, is said to be the chief fetish of the place. 
Figures of animals are also carved on the big drums which 

some Cross River towns possess.*? But there is no proof 

that any of these carvings are totemic. ; 

In discussing the question whether totemism exists Belief 
among the tribes of Nigeria, it is well to notice a remarkable ae 
belief which some of them cherish as to an intimate relation Nigeria 
between the souls of men and the bodies of animals. They ye 
think that the souls of living people may be lodged tempor- an animal 
arily or permanently in the bodies of animals, so that any each 

injury done to the beast is felt by the man or woman whose his life 
soul is housed in its carcase, and the death of the one entails a 
the death of the other. Thus among several tribes on the 
banks of the Niger, between Lokoja and the delta, there 
“exists “a belief in the possibility of a man possessing an 

alter ego in the form of some animal, such as a crocodile or 

a hippopotamus. It is believed that such a person’s life is 

1. Partridge, Cross River Natives 
(London, 1905), pp. 217 sg. Juju is 
the native term for fetish, 

2 C. Partridge, Cross River Natives, 
pp. 219-224. Mr. Partridge inclines 
to regard as totemic also the clay figures 
of men and animals modelled in low 

VOL, 

relief, which may be seen on the walls 
of houses and verandahs in the Cross 
River district. Among the animals so 
represenied are the leopard, serpent, 
crocodile, lizard, dog, iguana, and rat, 
but never the elephant. See C. Part- 
ridge, of. cit. p. 176. 

2Q 

The hippo- 
potamus 
woman, 

Belief in 
external or 
bush-souls 
among the 
Calabar 
negroes. 
A man’s 

. bush-soul 
is supposed 
to exist in 
a wild 
animal, 
such as a 
leopard or 
a tortoise ; 
and if the 
animal 
is hurt or 
killed, the 
man will 
fall ill or 
die, 

594 TOTEMISM IN WEST AFRICA CHAP. 

bound up with that of fhe animal to such an extent that 
whatever affects the one produces a corresponding impression 
upon the other, and that if one dies the other must speedily do 
so too, It happened not very long ago that an Englishman 
shot a hippopotamus close to a native village; the friends 
of a woman who died the same night in the village demanded 
and eventually obtained five pounds as compensation for the 
murder of the woman.” * 

In like manner every Calabar negro believes that 
he has four souls, one: of which always, lives outside 
of his body in the form of a wild beast of the forest. 
This external or bush soul, as Miss Kingsley calls it, 
may be almost any animal, for example, a leopard, a fish, 
or a tortoise; but it is never a domestic animal, and 
never a plant. Sometimes when a man sickens, it is 
believed to be because his bush-soul is angry at being 
neglected, and a witch-doctor being called in will advise 
him to make an offering to the offended soul. Wandering 
in the Calabar forests you will often see little dwarf huts 
with these offerings in them, They are made wherever the 
bush-soul was last seen by the witch-doctor; for a man 
cannot see his own bush-soul unless he possesses the second- 
sight. If the angry soul is appeased by the offering, the 
man recovers; but if not, he dies. When a man learns 
from a diviner what sort of creature his bush-soul is, he 
will thereafter be careful not to kill any animal of that . 
species, and he will strongly object to any one else doing 
so; for if the animal is killed or injured he himself will die 
or be ill, Conversely, when the man dies, his bush-soul can 
no longer find a good place, but goes mad and rushes into 
the fire or charges people and is killed, and that is the end 
of it, for the bush-soul is not immortal. A man and his 
sons have usually the same sort of animals for their bush- 
souls, and so with a mother and her daughters. But 
sometimes «all the children of a family take after the 
bush-soul of their father; for example, if his external soul 
is a leopard, all his sons and daughters will have leopards 
for their external souls. And, on the other hand, sometimes 
they all take after their mother ; for instance, if her external 

1 C. H. Robinson, Hausaland (London, 1896), pp. 36 sg. 

TOTEMISM IN SOUTHERN NIGERIA 

XIV 

595 

soul is a tortoise, all the external souls of her sons and 
daughters will be tortoises too. Such is tae account which 
Miss Kingsley gives of the bush-souls of the Calabar 
negroes, Some additional particulars on the subject are 
furnished by Mr. Richard Henshaw, Agent for Native 
Affairs at Calabar. He tells us that a man may only 
marry a woman who has the same sort of bush-soul as 
himself; for example, if his bush-soul is a leopard, his wife 
also must have a leopard for her bush-soul. Thus it would 
seem that endogamy rather than exogamy is the marriage 
rule in regard to bush-souls. Further, we learn from Mr, 
Henshaw thaf a person’s bush-soul need not be that either 
of his father or of his mother. For example, a child with 
a hippopotamus for his bush-soul may be born into a family 
all of whom have wild pigs for their bush-souls; this 
happens when the child is the reincarnation of a man whose 
external soul was a hippopotamus. In such a case, if the 
parents object to the intrusion. of the alien soul, they may 
call in a medicine-man to check its growth and finally 
abolish it altogether, after which they will give the child 
their own bush-soul, Or they may leave the matter over 
till the child comes of age, when he will choose a bush-soul 
for himself with the aid of a medicine-man, who will also 
select the piece of bush or water in which the chosen 
animal lives. When a man dies, then the animal which 
contains his external soul “becomes insensible and quite 
unconscious of the approach of danger. Thus a hunter can 
capture or kill him with perfect ease.” Sacrifices are 
often offered to prevent other people from killing the 
animal in which a man’s bush-soul resides. The tribes of 
Calabar which hold these beliefs as to the bush-soul are the 
Efik and Ekoi.? 

1 Miss Mary H. Kingsley, 7ravels 
in West Africa (London, 1897), pp. 
459-461. My lamented friend the 
authoress was kind enough to give me 
in conversation (Ist June 1897) some 
details which do not appear in her 
book ; among these are the statements, 
which I have embodied in the text, 
that the bush-soul is never a domestic 
animal, and that when a man knows 
what kind of animal his bush-soul is, 

he will not kill an animal of that 
species, and will strongly object to any 
one else doing so. Miss Kingsley 
could not say whether persons who 
have the same sort of bush-scul are 
allowed or forbidden to marry each 
other. 

2 John Parkinson, ‘Notes on the 
Efik Belief in ‘ Bush-soul,’” az, vi. 
(1906), pp. E21 sg. This belief of the 
Calabar negroes has been briefly re- 

4 man 
may only 
Marry a 
woman 
who has 
the same 
sort of 
bush-soul 
as himself. 

TOTEMISM IN WEST AFRICA CHAP, 

596 

The Ibos A similar belief in the external souls of living people is 
also think entertained by the Ibos, an important. tribe of the Niger 
man’s soul delta, who inhabit a country west of the Cross River. 
may curing They think that a man’s spirit can leave his body for a 
take up its time during life and take up its abode in an animal. This 
Snee is called #shz anu, “to turn animal.” A man who wishes to 
the body of acquire this power procures a certain drug from a wise man 

aes and mixes it with his food. After that his soul goes out 
Masini and enters into the animal. If it should happen that the 
18 Kl 

man die, animal is killed while the man’s soul is lodged in it, he 
dies ; and if the animal be wounded, his body will presently 
be covered with boils. This belief instigates to many deeds 
of darkness; for a cunning fellow will sometimes surrepti- 
tiously administer the magical drug to his enemy in his 
food, and having thus smuggled the other’s soul into an 
animal will destroy the animal and with it the man whose 
soul is in it.’ A like belief is reported to prevail among 
the tribes of the Obubura Hill district on the Cross River. 
Once when Mr. Partridge’s canoe-men wished to catch fish 
near a town of the Assiga tribe, the people objected, saying, 
“Our souls live in those fish, and if you kill them we 
shall die.” ? 

Similarly Similar beliefs are entertained by the natives of the 
eaiag Cross River valley within the German province of Cameroon. 
nativesin Groups of people, generally the inhabitants of a village, 
German * . : . ° 

territory have chosen various animals, with which they believe them- 
believe selves to stand on a footing of intimate friendship or 
themselves . . . : 

tobeso Yrelationship. Amongst such animals are hippopotamuses, 

corded bya missionary, the Rev. Hugh 
Goldie. He says: ‘‘ Ukpong is the 
native word we have taken to translate 
our word sow. It primarily signifies 
the shadow of a person. It also 

animal may be a man’s wkfong, gets 
sick or dies, the like thing happens to 
him. Many individuals, it is believed, 
have the power of changing themselves 
into the animals which are their 

signifies that which dwells within a 
man, on which his life depends, but 
which may detach itself from the body, 
and visiting places and persons here 
and there, again return to its abode in 
the man. . . . Besides all this, the 
word is used to designate an animal 
possessed of an ukpong, so connected 
with a person’s wkfong that they 
mutually act upon each other. When 
the leopard, or crocodile, or whatever 

ukpong” (Rev. Hugh Goldie, Calabar 
and its Mission, new edition, Edin- 
burgh and London, 1901, pp. 51 sg.). 
Compare Major A. G. Leonard, The 
Lower Niger and its Tribes, p. 217. 

} John Parkinson, ‘‘Note on the 
Asaba People (Ibos) of the Niger,” 
Journal of the Anthropological Institute, 
xxxvi, (1906) pp. 314 sg. 

2 C. Partridge, Cross River Natives, 
pp. 225 sg. 

XIV TOTEMISM IN SOUTHERN NIGERIA 597 

elephants, leopards, crocodiles, gorillas, fish, and serpents, sympa- 
all of them animals which are either very strong or can ae 
easily hide themselves in the water or a thicket. This certain 
power of concealing themselves is said to be an indispensable eee 
condition of the choice of the creatures for the purpose, potamuses, 
since the animal friend or helper is expected to damage an uae 
enemy by stealth ; for example, if he is a hippopotamus, he crocodiles, 
should pop up suddenly out of the water and capsize the a 
enemy's canoe. Between the animals and their human serpents) 
friends or kinsfolk a sympathetic relation is supposed to atta 
exist such that the moment the animal dies the man dies the 

dies also, and similarly the moment the man perishes so ae 
does the beast. From this it follows that the animal kinsfolk 7752. 
must never be shot at or molested for fear of injuring or 
killing the persons whose lives are bound up with the lives 
of the brutes. This does not, however, prevent the people 
of a village, who have elephants for their animal friends, 
from hunting elephants. For they distinguish between 
human-elephants and elephant-elephants, and while they 
take great care not to injure the former they have no 
objection, but rather the contrary, to killing the latter. 
They say that a hunter who has the elephant for his friend 
always knows a human-elephant when he meets him ; indeed 
the recognition is mutual, and animal and man go their 
several ways without harming each other. And to avoid 
mistakes the hunter regularly sacrifices to the elephant- 
fetish before he sets out for the chase; after that if he 
meets a human-elephant, the beast will lift up one of its 
fore-feet and hold it before its face, which is as much as to 
say, “Don’t shoot.” This belief in the sympathetic relation 
between animals and men, whose lives are inseparably 
bound up with each other, is said to be nowhere so strongly 
held as among the natives of the upper Cross River, par- 
ticularly in the German district of Ossidinge. This is a 
land of hills, covered in parts with virgin forest and dense 
underwood, and cleft by many deep ravines and romantic 
mountain glens, affording ample cover to the wild beasts 
with which the simple natives imagine their fortunes to be 
linked. Some of these shy creatures, having not been 
molested by man for ages, have ceased to fear him and even 

Similar 
beliefs as 
to animal 
doubles or 
human 
souls 
existing in 
animal 
bodies are 
found in 
other parts 
of Africa. 

598 TOTEMISM IN WEST AFRICA CHAP. 

live on a certain footing of intimacy with their human 
brethren. At least we are told that the inhabitants of one 
little village are on very friendly terms with a herd of sacred 
hippopotamuses which have their abode in a stream not far 
off. A German official, on promising not to kill any of the 
beasts nor to reveal their lair to others, was privileged to 
witness the unwieldy monsters disporting themselves in a 
pool, after the beams of the morning sun, striking down 
over the tree-tops, had dispelled the mist which lay on 
the surface of the water. The chief who acted as guide 
called to the animals, and they seemed to answer to the 
call and followed him as he moved along the bank like a 
flock of sheep following their shepherd.’ 

Nor are such notions confined to the tribes of the Niger 
delta. At the town of Paha, in the northern territories of 
the Gold Coast, there are pools inhabited by crocodiles 
which are worshipped by the people. The natives believe 
that for every death or birth in the town a similar event 
takes place among the crocodiles.> Among the Angass, of 
the Kanna District in Northern Nigeria, “when a man is 
born, he is endowed with two distinct entities, life and a 
kurua (Arabic vz). 1 . . When the rz enters a man, its 
counterpart enters some beast or snake at the same time, 
and if either dies, so also does the body containing the 
counterpart. This, however, in no wise prevents a man from 
killing any game, etc., he may see, though he knows full 
well that he is causing thereby the death of some man or 
woman. When a man dies, his life and 72z both leave him, 
though the latter is asserted sometimes to linger near 
the place of death for a day or two.”* The Balong of 
Cameroon, in German West Africa, like the Calabar 
negroes, think that every man has several souls, of which 
one is in his body and another in an animal, such as an 
elephant, a wild pig, a leopard, and so forth. When a man 

1 Alfred Mansfeld, Urwald-Doku- 3 Extract from a Report by Captain 
mente, Vier Jahre unter den Crossfiuss- _ Foulkes to the British Colonial Office. 
negern Kameruns (Berlin, 1908), pp. My thanks are due to Mr. N. W. 
220-223. For a description of the Thomas for sending me this extract 
country, see zézd. pp. 1 sgg. and to the authorities of the Colonial 

2 The Daily Graphic, Tuesday, Office for their permission to publish 
October 7, 1902, p. 3. it. 

XIV TOTEMISM IN SOUTHERN NIGERIA 599 

comes home, feeling ill, and says, “I shall soon die,” and is as 

good as his word, the people aver that one of his souls has 

been killed by a hunter in a wild pig or a leopard, and that 

the death of his external soul has caused the death of the 

soul in his body. Hence the corpse is cut open, and a 
diviner determines, by an inspection of the inwards, whether 

the popular surmise is correct or not.’ In the Congo 
region some chiefs link their destiny with that of an animal. 

Thus the chief Bankwa of Ndolo, on the Moeko River, had 
conferred this distinction on a certain hippopotamus of the 
neighbourhood, at which he would suffer no one to shoot.” 

At the village of Ougek, in the Gaboon, a French missionary 

slept in the hut of an old Fang chief. Awaking in the 
middle of the night he saw a huge black serpent of the 

most dangerous sort ready to dart at him. He was about 

to shoot it when the chief stopped him, saying, “In killing 

the serpent, it is me that you would kill. Fear nothing. 

The serpent is my elangela.”® 

What is the relation of such beliefs and practices to Relation 

totemism? When a whole family—parents, children, and es A 
children’s children—believe that their external souls are in practices to 
a certain species of animals, and for that reason abstain ‘°e™s™ 
from killing, eating, or injuring the creatures, it is obvious 

that the relation in which the family stands to the species 

of animals bears at least a superficial resemblance to 
totemism. Elsewhere I have conjectured that the origin of 
totemism is to be sought in the belief of the possibility of 

thus depositing the soul for safety in an external object ;* 

and we have seen that among the Sienas of the Ivory 
Coast the belief in human souls lodged in the sacred 
animals appears to form an integral part of totemism.® To. 

that question we shall return later on. Meanwhile I will 
observe that probably superstitions of this sort are much 

more widely diffused than the evidence to hand would lead 

us to suppose. In particular the widespread belief in were- 

1 J. Keller (missionary), ‘‘ Ueber das 3 Father Trilles, ‘Chez les Fangs,” 
Land und Volk der Balong,” Deutsches Les Misstons catholiques, xxx. (1898) 
Kolonialblatt, October 1, 1895, p- 484. 322. 

2 Notes analytiques sur les Col- 4 The Golden Bough, Second Edition, 
lections ethnographiques du Musée du iii. 389 sq. 

Congo, i. (Brussels, 1902-1906) p. 150. 5 See above, pp. 551, 552 s¢. 

Were- 
wolves, 
were-tigers, 
ete. 

Traces of 
totemism 
among the 
Hausas 
and Fulani 
of Northern 
Nigeria. 

600 TOTEMISM IN WEST AFRICA 

CHAP, 

wolves, were-tigers, and other animals of that sort, may 
perhaps on analysis be found to resolve itself into a belief 
in the external soul. For it should be noticed that, at least 
in some ‘cases, the owner of a bush-soul is thought to be 
able to turn himself temporarily into an animal of the kind 
in which his bush-soul is lodged.’ Now this faith in the’ 
temporary transformation of a man into a beast is the 
essence of the were-wolf superstition.” 

§ 6. Lotemism in Northern Nigeria 

In recent years enquiries pursued by Mr. H. R. Palmer, 
Resident in Charge of Katsina, among the Hausas and 
Fulani of Northern Nigeria have elicited a good deal of 
evidence’ tending to shew that, despite the spread of 
Mohammedanism in this part of Africa, many of the natives 
still entertain beliefs and observe customs like those which 
we have found widely diffused over Western Africa from 
Senegambia to Cameroon. With regard to these customs 
and beliefs a doubt may indeed be raised as to whether 
they should be classed under the head of totemism or not; 
but in many points they resemble true totemism so closely 
that it seems desirable to take account of them in the 
present work. A system of superstition like totemism is 
founded on modes of thought so loose and vague that any 
attempt to lay down its boundaries with rigorous precision 
would necessarily be futile ; and if we wish to penetrate to 
its inner meaning and ultimate source, we must not circum- 
scribe the scope of our enquiry by rigid definitions, which, 
however appropriate to a philosophical treatise, are out of 
place in the exploration cf a region so hazy and indefinite 

' See above, pi 596, with the Rev. 
H. Goldie’s account in the footnote. 

2 As to were-wolves, were-tigers, 
and creatures of that sort, see W. 
Hertz, Der Werwolf (Stuttgart, 1862) ; 
W. H. Roscher, ‘‘Das von der Kyn- 
anthropie handelnde Fragment des 
Marcellus von Side,” Adbhandlungen 
der philolog.-histor. Classe der konigl, 
sachs, Gesellschaft der Wissenschaften, 
xvii. No. 3 (Leipsic, 1896); J. J. M. 
de Groot, ‘‘De Weertijger in onze 
Kolonién en op het oostaziatische 

oJ 

Vastelande,” Bijydragen tot de Taal- 
Land- en Volkenkunde van Neaer- 
landsch-Indté, xlix. (1898) pp. §49-585 ; 
7d., The Religious System of China, iv. 
156 sgg.3; A. C. Kruijt, ‘* De weerwolf 
bij de Toradja’s van Midden-Celebes,” 
Tijdschrift voor Indische Taal- Land- en 
Volkenkunde, xii. (1899) pp. 548-567 ; 
J. Knebel, ‘‘ De weertijger op Midden- 
Java,” ibid, pp. 568-587; A. C. 
Kruijt, Het Animisme in den Indischen 
Archipel (The Hague, 1906), pp. 109 
59q» 

XIV TOTEMISM IN NORTHERN NIGERIA 601 

as the mind of a savage. In researches of this sort it is 
safer ‘to take too wide than too narrow & view of the matter 
in hand, since it often happens that light is thrown on the 
dark recesses of the subject by something which at first 
sight might seem to lie wholly outside of its boundaries, 

For the following account of indications of totemism 
among the. Hausas and Fulani I am indebted to the courtesy 
of Mr. H. R. Palmer, who has very liberally placed his 
manuscript materials at my disposal. 

From the earliest times apparently the northern portion The | 
of Hausaland has been"inhabited by two distinct races, a parece 
nomadic people of Berber blood and a settled people of negro the Hausas 
or negroid blood. The nomadic Berbers are now known Gree cia: 
as Fulani, the settled negroes as Hausas. Yet the Hausas Most of 
themselves appear to be a cross produced by the fusion of ri bane 
Berber invaders with the aboriginal negro or negroid popula- eee 
tion of the country. The /imgua franca of Hausaland is put some 
Hausa. At the present day almost all the peoples called aoe 
Hausas are Mohammedans, but nevertheless there exist heathens 
among them some communities which have not yet been ™i". 
converted to the dominant faith and still retain to a certain 
degree the customs of their forefathers. These communities 
are known as Maguzawa, a word which seems to mean 
“jdolaters.”” Though they do not profess Islam, the 
Maguzawa have been so far influenced by their Moslem 
rulers and conquerors that they have abandoned many of 
their old ways, and what they retain of them is in fact, 
though not in name, a crude monotheism with some local 
spirit in the place of Allah. However, enough of their 
ancient paganism lingers to indicate roughly the nature of 
the beliefs which Islam has displaced and is steadily dis- 
placing. Besides these Maguzawa there are a certain 
number of pagan Fulani and other heathen peoples of 
Berber affinity, who have migrated into Hausaland at various 
times in the past. 

In manners and customs as well as in race the Fulani Different 
and Hausas differ from each other. The Hausa is polyg- ance 

amous and exogamous; the Fulani is monogamous and 2 nad , 
: : . ulani an 
endogamous. The Hausa buys his wife and takes her to his yyausas, 

own house; the nomadic Fulani does not expect his wife 

602 TOTEMISM IN WEST AFRICA CHAP. 

to come and live with him until two years have elapsed after 
the wedding. Indeed the sexual relations among these 
nomads closely resemble those which are observed by the 
Tuaregs, among whom the husband goes to live* with his 
wife, not the wife with her husband. In both peoples there 
is the same loose morality before marriage and the same 
strict morality after it. The first-born son of a Fulani always 
lives with his mother’s kinsfolk till his father dies. He is 
Marriage called his father’s shame (Auaya). Among some of the pagan 
of hal, Fulani marriage between half brothers and sisters is allowed, 
and sisters. provided that the common parent is the father ; but marriage 
between half brothers and sisters, the children of the same 
mother, is forbidden. Precisely the same rule was followed 
by the ancient Athenians... Such a custom is probably a 
relic of mother-kin, that is, of the mode of tracing relation- 
ship through the mother and not through the father ; for 
under that system in its rigid form the children of the same 
father but not of thé same mother are not related by blood 
and are therefore free to marry each other. At the present 
day, however, the practice of tracing descent in the female 
line hardly exists south of the country occupied by the 
. Mother-kin Kelgeres, But in Mr, H. R. Palmer’s opinion it is certain 
pase that mother-kin anciently prevailed alike among the Hausas, 
among the the Fulani, and the Tuaregs. According to him, the 
a a evidence available in the Soudan tends to shew that the 
Tuaregs. custom of reckoning descent on the female side only was 
particularly characteristic of the Berber or Hamitic peoples. 
Traces Both the heathen Fulani and the heathen Hausas 
of sexual practise a rite, probably very ancient, which savours of 

iam among sexual communism and is intended, if Mr. Palmer is right, 
nae to ensure the fecundity of the clan. Among the Fulani the 
sl ceremony is called Gzréwali; it is held at the end of the 
ceremony Year. The youths and maidens gather in the forest. When 
Lae the young men have formed a line, the girls come up to 

them and each chooses her partner. Food is cooked and 

eaten and the couples pass the night together. The 

observance of this custom is deemed of great importance for 

1 Philo Judaeus, De spectalibus the Early History of the Kingship, p. 
legibus (vol. ii. p. 303, ed. Th. 245. 
Mangey). Compare my Lectures on 

XIV TOTEMISM IN NORTHERN NIGERIA 603 

the prosperity of the clan. Any father who prevented his 
children from taking part in the orgy would be expelled from 
the community. 

Among the pagan Hausas the custom is similar in sub- The Hausa 
stance though different in details. It is called Fité Furra. nea vita 
In the autumn several girls and as many boys are shut up Furra. 
together in an enclosure and left there for a month. Food 
is brought them by an attendant called a dog (karre). The 
whole expense is borne by some rich man, who thinks he 
thereby confers a benefit on the community. <A long upright 
pole called jzgo or gansami is set up inside of the enclosure, 
and sacrifices of goats, sheep, fowls, and so on are offered to 
the spirits Kuri and Uwagona. Of these spirits Kuri is the 
Hausa Pan, a woodland deity who wears a goat’s skin and 
barks like a dog in the forest. Uwagona isa female divinity 
who has been compared to Cybele or Demeter. At the end 
of the month any of the girls who are found to be with child 
are considered to be the wives of their youthful partners. 

Traces of totemism or of something like it occur both 
among the heathen Fulani and among the heathen Hausas. 

There is only one equivalent in the Hausa language for the 

words totem and taboo, which we have borrowed from the 
savages of North America and Polynesia. It is kan-gidda 

and means “ head of the house” or “that which is upon the 
house.” The totems, if we may call them so, of such pagan Totems of 
Fulani as are to be found in the northern portion of Hausa- ae 
land appear to be chiefly birds, as for example the partridge 

and the dove, but some people have an animal totem in 
addition toa bird. Among the animal totems is the iguana. 

All the Fulani believe that if they were to kill their totemic 

birds or animals, they would die. 

All the pagan Hausas confess to having at least one Totems of 
totem or taboo. Persons who have the same totem or }4°,238 
taboo constitute a clan, but these totemic clans bear no 
fixed relation to the political divisions of the country, as 
these divisions exist and have existed for five or six hundred 
years. Each political division has its badge, which is 
tattooed on the faces of the children without regard to their 
totemic clan. 

The following examples of Hausa clans with their 

The black 
snake 
totem. 

The hippo- 
potamus 
totem. 

The 
featherless 
fowl totem. 

The frog 
totem. 

604 TOTEMISM IN WEST AFRICA CHAP. 

totems and taboos havé been collected by Mr. H. R, 
Palmer. 

1. The Mahalbawa, a Katsina Hausa hunter community. 
—tTheir totem is a short black snake called kwakia. They 
believe that fhey are descended from the snake and that if 
they killed it they would die. The clan is exogamous with 
descent in the male line; in other words, no man may 
marry a woman who has the black snake Awakia for her 
totem, and children take their totem from their father, not 
from their mother. If the snake is friendly, it lives among 
the rafters, and when a boy is born, the reptile crawls down 
to the floor of the hut. Should the snake kill an animal, 
the flesh of the animal may not be eaten by any member of 
the clan. Thus the Mahalbawa seem to be a typical totemic 
clan; for the totem is hereditary, they believe themselves 
to be descended from the totemic animal, they will not kill 
it, and they will not marry women who have the same totem 
as themselves. 

2. The Yan Dorina Hausas, “children of a hippopota- 
mus.’—Their totem is the hippopotamus, and they sacrifice 
to the beast on the banks of a stream a hen which is 
coloured like an ostrich. 

3. The Biritchi Hausas, Maguzawa called “ kai na fara,” 
—tTheir totem is a featherless fowl. Mr. Palmer’s informant 
said that this fowl (Auduku kasa) is sacrificed on very 
special occasions once a year. Members of the clan may 
not eat food which has been touched by iron. If fire has 
burnt the town, they will not eat what is left of the corn. 
They do not carry fire in a calabash (Aworda) but only in 
an earthenware dish (akwoshz). These Hausas do not 
work on Sunday, but offer sacrifice on that day. 

4. The Garubawa of Keffindukuduku, Katsina—They 
say they are of Berber origin. Their totem is a frog (kwado), 
which they will not touch. They think that after death a 
bad soul wanders about, but that a good soul is born again 
of a woman in the family, generally reappearing as a grand- 
son of the deceased. There is a village pole at which 
wrestling matches take place. They say that so long as 
the pole stands the powers of the village youth remain 
unshaken. If the pole should be blown down, it will not 

XIV TOTEMISM IN NORTHERN NIGERIA 605 

be set up till the next generation. The name of the pole 
is gansamz, which means “son of the Queen.” 

5. The Kutumbawa, Hausas of Kuzauri and Kano.— the 

Their totems are two trees, the black thorn (dashz) and blackthorm, 
tamarind (¢samza). They may not cut nor burn these trees, and large 
Another totem of theirs is a large green snake (dau magur/i), anaes 
which they will not kill nor touch. They sacrifice on the 
top of a crag near by to “ the spirit that turns bones white” 
(dodo ba farin kasshi). Their prosperity was believed to be 
bound up with a black rock poised on the top of the crag, 
The rock used to warn them of coming war by shrieking 
thrice ; when it fell, they were conquered. 

6. The Baawa.—By race and religion they are Fulani the fox 
pagans, by profession they are nomadic herdsmen. They ‘™. 
do not kill their cattle except for a feast, and then the 
animals must be slaughtered at the foot of a tree which has 
little sap. But on the contrary trees with much sap are 
given to cattle to eat as a medicine. In contrast to the 
Biritchi, they may only take up fire in a calabash (kworda) ; 
if a woman with child should be so imprudent as to 
take up fire in an earthen vessel, she would have a mis- 
carriage, The totem of Mr. Palmer’s informant was a fox 
(yanyawa). 

7. The Baban Dammo,—These are Hausas of the The iguana 

earliest Katsina stock. Their totem is an iguana (damzuo), tem. 
and they believe themselves to be descended from the animal. 
They will not eat hot food out of a calabash and they will 
not use a calabash to carry fire in. They think that souls 
live after death and kill the living, if they are not placated. 
In order to prevent the soul from getting out of its earthly 
tabernacle and doing a mischief, they lay thorns on a corpse. 
Unable to escape through the prickly barrier without scratch- 
ing its tender substance, the poor soul perforce remains quiet 
in the rotting body. 

8. The Romawa, Hausas of Kano.—Their totem is a snake 
snake (dan bida). It descends in the male line from father totem. 
to children. A woman keeps her own totem after marriage. 

They will not marry women who have the same totem as 
themselves ; in other words, the clan is exogamous. 

9. The Kiawa, Hausas of Kano,—Their totem is an, 

Elephant 
totem. 

Iguana 
totem. 

Kamuchi 
totem. 

Lion totem, 

Black 
snake 
totem. 

Lion, tree, 
and hawk 
totems. 

Partridge 
totem, 

Python 
totem. 

606 TOTEMISM IN WEST AFRICA CHAP. 

elephant. They sacrifice at the foot of a tamarind tree 
(¢samia) to Kuri and Uwadawa. 

10. The Darbawa Hausas of Baurenia in Katsina-— 
Their totem is an iguana (dammo). They now marry within 
the clan, but say that formerly they did not do so. They 
think that the soul of a dead man enters into a woman and 
is reborn in a grandson. 

11. The Yan Tugamma, Hausas of Maradi.—Their 
totem is Aamuchi (?). They will not wear any clothes of a 
light blue colour, believing that if they did they would grow 
poor. 

12. The Berawa, Hausas of the district of Yaudaka 
(Katsina).—Their totem is a lion, which they dare not 
touch. They kill all snakes. They will not burn a silk 
cotton tree nor carry fire in a calabash. 

13. The Geauaskawa, Hausas of Dan Gani Katsina.— 
Their totem is a black snake (Awakia), and they think that 
the soul of the snake dwells in their king. 

14. The Dubawa of Wawalkazsa, Katsina Hausas.— 
Their totems are a lion, a tree (Azria), and a hawk (shzrua). 
They will not take up fire in an earthen pot (£asko), believing 
that to do so would cause headache. So they carry fire on 
two sticks. 

15. The Sarikin Machira (Chief of the Blacksmiths) 
has for his totem the partridge (s#akorua) and thinks he 
would die if he killed the bird. One of his ancestors 
killed a partridge, took it home, ate it, and died the very 
same night. Not only so, but the whole family were burnt 
to ashes in a fire soon afterwards, all but one woman, who 
never would eat partridge again. When people asked her 
why she would not eat partridge, she replied, “It is the 
totem (kangidda) of my grandfather. He ate it, and see 
what happened!” The blacksmiths, potters, and other 
industrial clans seem to have been originally servile Berber 
peoples. They are commonly called “slaves of the Fulani.” 

16. The Yan Gido, Katsina Hausas.—Their totem is 
the python (asa). At the beginning of the year, which 
falls in autumn, they hold a great feast, at which they 
sacrifice to Kuri, the woodland deity who wears a goat’s 
skin, and also to Uwardawa, who causes men to go sideways 

XIV TOTEMISM IN NORTHERN NIGERIA 607 

like a crab. Children take their totem frcm their father. 
A man prefers to marry a woman who has the same totem 
as his mother ; in other words, the men of this clan prefer to 
intermarry with the women of one particular clan only. In 
regard to the marriage of cousins, children of sisters or of 
half-sisters may not marry each other; children of brothers 
or of half-brothers may not marry each other ; but the child 
of a brother or of a half-brother may marry the child of a 
sister or of a half-sister. 
Other Hausa and Fulani clans with their totems, as Other 

ascertained by Mr. H. R. Palmer, are as follows :— aoe 

HAUSA AND FULANI CLANS AND TOTEMS! 

Clans. Districts. Totems. 
17. Yan Maisa . | Metazu in Katsina | a snake (dan bida) 
18. Tannawa . . | Kano crocodile 
19, Yan Tuga. . | Kano lion 
20. Ba Daffawa _—_. | Katsina black snake (Awakia) 
21; Dasawa_. . | Katsina black snake (Awakia) 
22. Dogarawa . . | Remin Gado in } crocodile (4adda) and black 
Kano snake (Awakia) 
23. Kimbawa (prob- wah crow (hankaka) and black 
ably Fulani mixed snake (waka) 
with Hausas) 
24. Tosawa. . | Jikamshi Katsina | black snake (4wakia) 
25. Damfawa (Fulani)| Zamfara ‘crested crane (gamraka) 
and crow (haukaka) 
26. Sulibawa (Fulani) | Katsina a dove (kurchia) 
27. Rungumawa .| Katsina black snake (Awakia) and 
tamarind tree 
28. Arawa F . | Daura snake (dan magurji) 

In the preceding list the number of clans which have many 
snakes, especially the black snake (Awakza), for their totems blacksnake 
: ° : coe totems. 
is remarkable. Mr. Palmer is of opinion that these snake 
people represent the negroid element in the population. 

The Hausa states are seven in number, each of them ruled seven 
by aking. Down to the nineteenth century the daughters of apical 
the king of Daura were always married to slaves, and the king ; 

1 In this list all the clans are Hausa except Nos. 23, 25, and 26, which are 
Fulani. 

Marriage 
of king's 
daughters 
‘to slaves. 

Death and 
burial of 
Hausa 
kings. 

New Year's 

festival 
among the 
Hausas. 

608 TOTEMISM IN WEST AFRICA CHAP. 

was always chosen from their children, not from the children 
of the late king. The Queen Mother was always a most 
powerful personage. This shews that in Daura, as in Ashantee, 
royal blood was traced only in the maternal line, and that 
the lineage of the king’s father was deemed a matter of no 
consequence.' The manner of the death and burial of 
Hausa kings is worthy of notice. In three of the kingdoms, 
namely Gobir, Katsina, and Daura, the customs observed on 
such occasions were these. On the first signs that a king 
was failing in health or becoming infirm, an official who 
bore the title of Killer of the Elephant (Karzagiwa) 
appeared and throttled him by holding his windpipe. The 
entrails of the dead king were then removed and his body 
was smoked over a slow fire for seven days. By that time 
the election of a successor was complete. The king elect 
was conducted to the centre of the town, called Head of the 
Elephant (fan giwa), and was there made to lie down on 
a bed. A black ox was next brought and slaughtered. over 
the prostrate prince, the blood being made to run all over his 
body. Then the ox was flayed, and the dead king, being 
wrapped up in the hide, was dragged along the ground to the 
place of burial, which was a circular pit, where he was buried 
in a sitting posture. After his bath of ox blood the new 
king had to reside for seven days in his mother’s house, 
where he was washed daily. On the eighth day he was 
conducted in state to the palace. In Daura the new king 
had besides to cross over the body of the dead king? 

At the New Year’s feast (Wasan Wowo) among the 
Hausas it is still the custom for a man to put on a mask 
with the horns of an ox fixed above his head and to dance in 
this costume. The Hausas believe that the dance promotes 
a good crop of corn. This custom suggests that the Hausas 
imagine the spirit of the corn to be incarnate in an ox or a 
bull. A similar belief has been held by many other peoples.’ 
It seems to be quite independent of totemism. 

1 As to the rule of succession to the from Mr. H. R. Palmer’s manuscript. 
throne of Ashantee, see above, pp. 564 
sqg.3 and my Lectures on the Early 
History of the Kingship, p. 235. 

2 These particulars as to the death 4 The Golden Bough, Second 
and burial of Hausa kings are derived Edition, ii. 277 sgg., 294 sqgq. 

3 From Mr. H. R. Palmer’s manu- 
script. 

. 

TOTEMISM IN CONGO AND ANGOLA 609 

§ 7. Totemism in Congo and Angola 

The Bakalai or Bakele are a large Baniu tribe inhabit- The 
ing the lower valley of the Ogowe River in French Congo, amare 
who swarmed down from some unknown part of the interior Congo. 
about eighty years ago. Formerly nomads, they have now 
become carriers and merchants. Their settlements are 
widely scattered ; communities of them are often found 
living in independent towns surrounded by other tribes. 

They cultivate the soil to a certain extent, possess a few 

goats and chickens, and subsist in part by hunting and 
fishing.’ Like many other Bantu peoples, the Bakalai pu 
appear to be divided into clans which are both totemic and pare 
exogamous. At least this seems to follow from an account asto totem- 
given of their customs by Du Chaillu, who spent some time uy 
among them. His testimony is all the more valuable be-~ among the 
cause, writing at a time when neither totemism nor exogamy ®***"" 
was commonly known, he records his discovery of totemism 

with evident surprise. The passage runs thus: “This day 

I had a glimpse at another curious superstition of these 
people. One of the hunters had shot a wild’ bull, and when 

the carcass was brought in the good fellow sent me an 
abundant supply of the best portions. The meat is 

tough, but was most welcome for a change. I had a great 

piece boiled for dinner, and expected Quengueza to eat as 

much as would make several hungry white men sick. 

Judge of my surprise, when, coming to the table and 

seeing only the meat, he refused to touch it. I asked why? 

‘It is roondah for me, he replied. And then, in answer to Belief of 
my question, explained that the meat of the Bos brachicheros ‘h* Bakalai 

: that women 
was forbidden to his family, and was an abomination to have given 
them, for the reason that many generations ago one of their parbiets by 
women gave birth to a calf instead of a child. I laughed penceee 
but the king replied very soberly that he could show me a ele 
woman of another family whose grandmother had given birth sPecies- 

to a crocodile—for which reason the crocodile was roondah to 

that family. Quengueza would never touch my salt-beef, nor 

1 J. L. Wilson, Western Africa, pp. (London, 1861), p. 383; J. Deniker, 
300 sg.3; P. B.du Chaillu, Explorations The Races of Man, p. 459. 
and Adventures in Equatorial Africa 

VOL. II 2R 

The 
Bakalai 
taboos 
(roondah) 
aretotemic, 

10 TOTEMISM IN WEST AFRICA. CHAP. 

even the pork, fearing lest it had been in contact with the 
beef. Indeed, they are all religiously scrupulous in this 
matter ; and J found, on inquiry afterwards, that scarce a man 
can be found to whom some article of food is not roondah. 
Some dare not taste crocodile, some hippopotamus, some 
monkey, some boa, some wild pig, and all from this same 
belief. They will literally suffer the pangs of starvation 
rather than break through this prejudice; and they very 
firmly believe that if one of a family should eat of such 
forbidden food, the women of the same family would surely 
miscarry and give birth to monstrosities in the shape of the 
animal which is voondah, or else die of an awful disease. . 
Sometimes I find that the fetich-man forbids an individual 
to touch certain kinds of food for some reason, or no reason 
rather. In this case the prohibition extends only to the 
man, and not to his family. It is astonishing how strictly 
such gross feeders as they are adhere to their scruples. 
It shows the power a superstitious faith has even over a 
lawless people as these are. I am certain nothing in the 
world would have induced the old king to eat the flesh of 
the wild bull, or even to eat out of a dish in which that had 
been cooked or otherwise contained.” * 

In this passage Du Chaillu clearly distinguishes purely 
personal taboos, arbitrarily imposed on __ individuals, 
from the hereditary taboos (voondah) which have been 
observed by whole families for many generations. These 
hereditary taboos appear to be strictly totemic. The term 
voondah, which Du Chaillu applies to them, is plainly 
identical with ovunda, the form of the word employed by 
Dr. Nassau’ and Miss Kingsley. The word means 
“prohibited,” and has been adopted by, the missionaries 
as the nearest native equivalent they could find for 
“sacred” or “holy.”? Further, the totemic families 
or clans of the Bakalai appear to be exogamous; for, 
speaking of this tribe, Du Chaillu observes again with 
surprise: “It is a curious fact, that, though they will take 

1 Paul B. Du Chaillu, Explorations in West Africa, pp. 456 5g.; R. H. 
and Adventures in Equatorial Africa Nassau, Fetichism in West Africa 
(London, 1861), pp. 308 sg. (London, 1904), pp. 78-80, 211. 

2 Miss Mary H. Kingsley, Zravels 

xiv’. TOTEMISM IN CONGO AND ANGOLA 611 

their brother’s or father’s wives in marriage, they will not 

marry a woman of the same family or clan with themselves. 

This is the case also among other tribes.”1 As he Exogamy 
indicates in this last sentence, Du Chaillu found the rule pera drs 
of exogamy observed by other tribes of the Gaboon region the Gaboon 
besides the Bakalaii Elsewhere he says: “Tribes and ‘8'°™ 
clans intermarry with each other, and this brings about a 
friendly feeling among the people. People of the same 

clan cannot marry with each other. The least consanguinity 

is considered an abomination ; nevertheless, the nephew has 

not the slightest objection to take his uncle’s wives, and, as 

among the Bakalai, the son to take his father’s wives, except 

his own mother.” ? 

From all this we may conclude that the Bakalai have thus the 
totemism of the common type; that is, that they are divided ee 
into clans, and that the members of each clan are forbidden to totemism 
marry each other and to eat the flesh of a particular species eae 
of animal. With regard to the descent of the Bakalai clans type. 
we have not definite information, but since in this tribe. the peels 
son inherits his father’s property,* we may perhaps infer that them seems 
the clan also is inherited by children from their father and eee 
not from their mother. In this respect the Bakalai differ lire. 
from their neighbours ; for among the surrounding tribes all 
clans are considered to descend on the female side, and a 
man’s heirs are first his brothers and next his nephew, the 
eldest son of the eldest sister. Among these tribes, more- 
over, the headship of the clan is hereditary, and descends 
like property in the female line from a man to his 
brothers and his sisters’ sons.‘ In short, the tribes among 
whom the Bakalai live have the system of mother-kin as 
opposed to father-kin. 

The explanation which the Bakalai give of the origin of The ex. 
their totemic clans deserves our particular attention, for it Liepraa 
has all the appearance of being primitive. In substance Bakalai 

it agrees with the system of conceptional totemism which a 
1 Pp. B. Du Chaillu, 7yavels and 3 P. B. Du Chaillu, of. ct. p. 429. 
Adventures in Equatorial Africa, p. + P. B. Du Chaillu, of. ci. p. 429. 
388. The writer here remarks that, so far 
as he knows, the Hakalai are the only 
2 P. B. Du Chaillu, .f Journey fo tribe of this region among whom a son 
Ashango-land (London, 1867), p- 427. inherits his father’s property, 

612 TOTEMISM IN WEST AFRICA CHAP, 

appears to prevails among the Banks’ Islanders! In both of these 
beprimitive widely -separated regions it is believed that a woman 
and agrees 5 : 

in principle can be impregnated by and bring forth an animal or 
ee plant. Among the Banks’ Islanders the imaginary animal 
the Banks’ or plant so born is identified with the real child whom 
Islanders the woman gives birth to, and henceforth animals or 
concep- plants of that sort become tabooed or sacred to the child ; 

Sea they are his personal or individual totem, being peculiar 
to him and not transmitted by him to his descendants. 
This is, if I am right, the absolutely primitive stage 
of totemism. The Bakalai have advanced beyond that 
stage, for among them the totems have become hereditary ; 
but the tribe still retains the primitive belief that women 
can give birth to animals of the totemic species, and that 
‘they would surely do so if they ate of the totemic animal. 
This again confirms the view, which a consideration of the 
Central Australian evidence led me to suggest, that concep- 
tion may often have been thought to be caused by the 
animal or plant which a woman has eaten of, and which 
accordingly becomes the totem of her child when it is born.” 

The Fans, The Fans, or Fangs, are a large and vigorous tribe or 
or ens*; nation who occupy a vast region of French Congo from 
Congo, Cameroon on the north to about the fourth parallel of 
South latitude. They are estimated to number many 
millions, and are said to be multiplying fast. Their 
language, which comprises many dialects, belongs to the 
Bantu family, but differs considerably from other languages 
of that stock. It is believed that the Fans, or Pahouins as 
they are called by the negroes of the Gaboon, are recent 
immigrants into the country. Their habits are nomadic, 
for though they build villages they shift the sites of them 
from time to time. They collect ivory, make pottery and 
The Fans baskets, and are skilful workers in iron? They possess an 
havea — elaborate system of taboos or ei, as they call them, some 

system of f 
taboos of which appear to be totemic. For we are told that some 

1 See above, pp. 89 59g. Deniker, Zhe Races of Man, pp. 

2 See vol. i. p. 159. 45859. ; Father L. Martrou, ‘* Les e&¢ 

3 Miss Mary H. Kingsley, Travels des Fang,” Anthropos, i. (1906) PP- 
in West Africa, PP. 316 sgg.3 J. 745 599- 

. 

XIV 

TOTEMISM IN CONGO AND ANGOLA 

613 

individuals and some tribes bear the names of animals, such (eé2), some 

as Elephant, Panther, Gorilla, Crocodile, Eagle, and so forth ; 

, 

of which 
seem to be 

and that a man may not eat the animal whose name he totemic. 

bears, it is taboo (ek) to him. 

Such taboos may be 

common to a whole tribe, the members of which pay 
particular respect to a certain animal and will not kill it. 
But details of their totemic system, if such it is, are lacking. 

The Fan villages are exogamous ; 

in other words, a man 

may not marry a woman of the same village, she is taboo 

(ek1) to him. 

It happens, indeed, that such marriages some- 

times take place when the village is large and the relation- 

ship between the couple is distant ; 

but persons contracting 

these unions are looked at askance, and any misfortune which 
befalls them is regarded as a punishment of their misdeed.? 
The marriage of cousins, apparently both on the father’s and Marriage 
the mother’s side, is also forbidden among the Fans.’ 

with 
cousins 
forbidden, 

Another people of this region among whom totemism or The Ba- 
traces of it may perhaps be detected are the Bantu tribes, 
which once composed the great native kingdom or empire of the ancient 
Congo, with its several provinces, including the provinces of 
Loango, Cacongo, and Ngoio to the north of the river 
Congo, and the province of Songo, Sonio, or Sonho to the 

south of it 

The general name which these Bantu tribes. 

apply to themselves is Ba-fioti or the Dark-skinned People ; 
the special name applied to the inhabitants of the Loango 

coast is Bavili.° 

1 Father Trilles, ‘* Mille lieues dans 
Vinconnu, a travers le pays Fang,” 
Les Missions Catholigues, xxxiv. (1902) 
pp. 287 sg. ; Father L. Martrou, ‘‘ Les 
ekt des Fang,” Anthropos, i. (1906) 
PP- 747-751, especially pp. 7 5 5 sg. 

2 Father L. Martrou, ‘* Les e& des 
Fang,” Axnthropos, i. (1906) p. 754. 

3 Miss Mary H. Kingsley, Zraveds 
in West Africa, p. 321. 

4 J. B. Labat, Relation héstorique 
de PEthiopie Occidentale (Paris, 1732), 
i. 19 sgg. The dismemberment of the 
empire resulted in the formation of 
separate kingdoms of Loango, Cacongo, 
Ngoio, etc. Compare Dapper, De- 

As all these tribes were for centuries 

scription de PAfriqgue (Amsterdam, 
1686), pp. 320 sgg.; Astley’s New 
General Collection of Voyages and 
Travels, iii. (London, 1746) pp. 212 
59+) 234 sgqg.; Angelo and Carli, 
“Voyage to Congo,” in Pinker- 
ton’s Voyages and Travels, xvi. 158; 
Proyart, ‘* History of Loango, Kakon- 
go, and other kingdoms in Africa, 
in Pinkerton’s Voyages and Travels, 
xvi. 549 57.3 J. L. Wilson, Western 
Africa, p. 315; A. Bastian, Ein Besuch 
in San Salvador (Bremen, 1859), Pp. 
170; R. E. Dennett, Seven Years 
among the Fjort (London, 1887), pp- 
72 599- 

§ R, E. Dennett, Mores on the Folk- 

fioti or 
Bavili of 

kingdom 
of Congo. 

614 TOTEMISM IN WEST AFRICA CHAP, 

subject to Portugal and professed the Catholic faith,’ it is 
almost inevitable that their native customs and _ beliefs 
should be tinctured by European influence. However, 
they. still possess an elaborate system of taboos (ézxa, 
singular ziza), some of which may perhaps be totemic 
Theseveralin origin. Thus the several tribes, provinces, and districts 

Sere have their tabooed or sacred animals. The whole tribe of 
and Congo has for its sacred animal the leopard ; and the three 
jistricts _ subtribes of Sonio, Cacongo, and Loango have for their 
sacred sacred animals respectively the cricket, the eel, and the wild 
animals+ ox or bull. Further, each province under the rule of its 
leopards, chief (fumu) has two sacred animals; for example, the 
ea province of Xibanga has for its sacred animals the fowl and 

andechim- the duiker, or gazelle. Again, each district under its head- 

Panzees- man (Kongo Zovo) has its sacred animal; for example, the 
chief district of the Xibanga province has for its sacred 

Families animal the chimpanzee. Further, families have also their 

have also sacred animals, which are forbidden to themas food. Every 

their sacred . 7 : 

animals, person with any pretensions to good birth should have four 

Diese sacred animals, namely, that of his father, that of his mother, 

chimpan- and those of two grandparents. For example, one man has 
ae the antelope and the chimpanzee as the sacred animals of 
partridges. his father and mother respectively, and the pig and otter as 
the sacred animals of two grandparents. Another has the 
antelope and partridge’as the sacred animals of his father 
and mother respectively, and the pig as the sacred animal of 
his grandparents.” Sickness is often attributed to the 

patient’s rashness in partaking of the flesh of the animal 

lore of the Fjort (London, 1898), p. 
1; td. *‘ Bavili Notes,” Fo/k-lore, xvi. 
(1905) p. 371, note; ¢a@., At the Back 
of the Black Man’s Mind (London, 
1906), pp. 3 sg.; A. H. Keane, 
Africa,’ ii. 145-147 (Stanford’s Com- 
pendium of Geography and Travel); 
E. Pechuél-Loesche, Die Loango-Ex- 
pedition, Dritte Abteilung, Zweite 
Halfte (Stuttgart, 1907), pp. 1 sg. 
One of our chief informants on these 
tribes is Mr. R. E. Dennett, who 
resided for many years on the coast 
of Loango. He gives the tribal or 
national name as Fjor, Fioti, or 
Fiote. 

1 J. L. Wilson, Western Africa, pp. 
313 599. 

2 R. E. Dennett, ‘ Bavili Notes,” 
Folk-lore, xvi. (1905) pp. 390, 395- 
3973 id., At the Back of the Black 
Man’s Mind, pp. 144, 152-154. The 
writer’s statements lack clearness and 
precision, and I cannot feel sure that 
I have interpreted them aright. He 
does not define the terms tribe, sub- 
tribe, province, and district ; and he 
does not know whether the grand- 
parents in question are the two 
grandfathers or the two grandmothers, 
or one grandfather and one grand- 
mother, 

XIV 

which is forbidden to his family.’ 
mother’s family, and he may not marry any woman who 
has the same sacred animal as his mother. 
that the deity punishes breaches of this marriage law by 
withholding the-rains in due season.” 
that the Fiot families are totemic, exogamous, and hereditary 
A man’s heirs are, first, his brothers ; Mother. 

in the maternal line. 

TOTEMISM IN CONGO AND ANGOLA 

615 

next, his sister’s son ; third, his mother’s relations ; and failing 

all these his own childeen® 

The mother alone has the right 

to pawn her children, but she must first consult the father ; 

he cannot himself pawn his children.‘ 

marry his first cousins, the daughters of his father’s brothers ; 
but he may marry his first cousins, the daughters of his 

father’s sisters.” 

ficatory system of relationship; for a man applies the same 
term, fata, to his father and to his father’s brothers, and the 
same term, ama, to his mother and to his mother’s sisters.® 
Besides the taboos which appear to be totemic, the Ba-fioti Taboos of 

observe many others of various sorts. 

Some of these are 

associated with certain offices, others with sacred groves 
(dcbc/a, singular x¢bz/a), others with the possession of certain 

sacred fetishes. 

Others, again, are purely individual or 

personal, being arbitrarily imposed on sick people by the 
priest or medicine-man (gage), or on children at birth by 

the priest or the parents." 

A man belongs to his Aman may 
not marry 
any woman 
It is believed who has 
the same 
sacred 

Hence it would seem animal as 
his mother, 

kin. 

A man may not Cousin- 

. Marriages. 

Apparently, the Ba-fioti have the classi- The elessi- 

ficatory 
System. 

various 
sorts. 

The taboos enjoined on people from their infancy Merolla’s 

appear to be very common, 
On this subject an old missionary to the Congo. 
“It is a custom that either the 

rigidly observed. 
Congo writes as follows : 

1 A. Bastian, Die deutsche Expedt- 
tion an der Loango-hiiste (Jena, 1874- 
1875), i ii, 166. 

2 R. E. Dennett, AZ the Back of the 
Black Man’s Mind, pp. 36, 52. 

3 R. E. Dennett, of. cet. p. 46. 

4 R. E. Denneté, of. ct. p. 41. 

5 R. E. Dennett, of. ct, p. 36. 

& R. E, Dennett, of, ett. p. 35- 

7 Merolla, ‘‘ Voyage to Congo,” in 
Pinkerton’s Foyages and Travels, xvi. 

237 5g. 3 Proyart, ‘* History of Loango, - 

Kakongo, and other. kingdoms in 

if not universal, and to be 

, 
Africa,” Pinkerton’s Voyages and 
Travels, xvi. 595; A. Bastian, Dee 
deutsche Expeditionander Loango-Kiiste 
(Jena, 1874-1875), i. 183-187, 356, ii. 

165 sg.; R. E. Dennett, “Bavili Notes,” 

Folk-lore, xvi. (1905) pp. 398 sgq.3 7d., 
At the Back of the Black Man’s Mind, 
Pp- 155 sgg. ; E. Pechuél-Loesche, Dre 
Loango-Expedition, Dritte Abteilung, 
Zweite Halfte (Stuttgart, 1907), pp. 
455 sgg.; Sir Harry Johnston, George 
Grenfell and the Congo (London, 
1908), ii. 672 sg., quoting Bentley's 
Kongo Dictionary, s.v. ‘mpangu.” 

account of 
taboos in 

616 IOTEMISM IN WEST AFRICA CHAP. 

parents or the wizards give certain rules to be inviolably 
observed by the young people, and which they call chegzlla ; 
these are to abstain from eating either some sorts of poultry, 
the flesh of some kinds of wild beasts, such and such fruits, 
roots either raw or boiled after this or another manner, with 
several other ridiculous injunctions of the like nature, too 
many to be enumerated here. You would wonder with 
what religious observance these commands are obeyed. 
These young people would sooner chuse to fast several days 
together, than to taste the least bit of what has been for- 
bidden them ; and if it sometimes happen that the chegella 
has been neglected to’ have been given them by their 
parents, they think they shall presently die unless they 
go immediately to receive it from the wizards.” To illus- 
trate the superstitious respect with which these taboos are 
observed the missionary tells us of a young negro who, on 
discovering that he had unwittingly partaken of his forbidden 
animal (in this case a wild hen) four years before, at once 
fell atrembling and died within four-and-twenty hours.’ 
Even such necessaries of life as manioc and bananas may 
be included among the tabooed foods, though the burden 
is sometimes considerably lightened by restricting the 
prohibition, for example, to certain kinds of bananas, or to 
bananas cooked in one particular way, as roasted or boiled, 
or to the eating bananas on one day of the week but not on 
the others, and so forth. But the range of these taboos is 
not limited to foods ; it extends to other things, such as 
colours and articles of dress, or to actions of various kinds. 
One man, for example, may be forbidden to travel on a 
certain day of the week; another man may not smoke 
anywhere but in his hut, or he may not smoke in the 
presence of strangers ; another man may be forbidden to see 
his newborn infant until the child can stand by itself; and 
so on.’ It is possible that these and similar prohibitions 
laid on children from infancy may be ultimately derived 

1 Merolla, ‘* Voyage to Congo,” in According to Bastian, these superstitious 
Pinkerton’s Voyages and Travels, xvi. prohibitions are called x7za on the 
237 59. Loango coast, but gu7xélles further 

south. Quzxiiles is no doubt the same 

2 A. Bastian, Die deutsche Expedi- with chegilla, the form of the word 
tion an der Loango-Kriste, i. 183-185. used by Meralla. 

ay TOTEMISM IN.CONGO AND ANGOLA 617 

from totemism of the conceptional kind, though the link 
which perhaps once united them appears how to be broken. 
But the evidence does not warrant us in assuming this 
derivation. ; 

On this subject the Rev. J. H. Weeks, who has lived The Rev, 
as a missionary for twenty-seven years among the Bantu oe a 
peoples, of the Lower Congo, especially in the neighbourhood traces of 
of San Salvador, writes as follows: “As regards totemism, "Ss" 

among the 
after very careful enquiries I have come to the conclusion peoples 

that, while it may very probably have been at one time in pea 
vogue in this region, the only indication of such prevalence still Congo. 
surviving is to be found in certain tribal names, of which up to 

the present I have been able to procure the following :— 

“Est kia ntu mia nsensge, or the people belonging to the 
heads of the mole-cricket (#zenze). The people are proud 
of the name, because the xsenze always sticks its head up, 
even when being cooked; but they hunt, cook, and eat the 
mole-cricket. : 

“Est kimfulu, or the tortoise people, who catch and eat 
tortoises. 

“Fst kinanga, or the cowrie people, who live in a town 
near Kitovola.” ? 

Such names certainly do not of themselves afford any Hereditary 
proof or even presumption of totemism. Traces of, or Gooeal 
perhaps rather analogies to, totemism are to be found transmitted 
in the hereditary taboos (s#pangu) observed by the people. fo"? 
These taboos are transmitted from a father to his sons; to his 
daughters observe them so long as they are in their ee 
father’s house, but when a daughter marries she generally 
drops her father’s taboo and adopts that of her husband. 

“In one family the inherited tabu was not to eat any 
wild animal or fish with spots on it, such as the striped 
antelope, certain gazelles, civet cats, leopards, shrimps, etc., 
and the penalty for breaking this tabu was a very bad skin 
disease—a form of leprosy, The idea here was simply to 
avoid any flesh food that had a spotted skin. The mmpangu 
of another lad was not to eat hippopotamus flesh or yams, 
the penalty being elephantiasis; not to eat crayfish, the 

1 Rev. J. H. Weeks, ‘* Notes on some Customs of the Lower Congo People,” 
Folk-loré, Xx. (1909) Pp. 63- 

But while 
taboos are 
inherited 
from the 
father 
only, 
children 
belong 

to their 
mother’s 
family and 
inherit the 
property 
of their 
maternal 
uncle, 

Moreover, 
the clans 
(ehandas) 

are heredi-: 

tary in the 
maternal 
line. 

618 TOTEMISM IN WEST AFRICA CHAP. 

penalty being a skin disease on the hand; not to eat raw 
palm nuts, the penalty being an outbreak of scald head ; not 
to eat a spotted fish called z/umbu, the penalty being 
ophthalmia and loss of eyelashes ; not to eat the esunda 
or great bull frog, the penalty being that the eyes will 
bulge out like the frog’s. Here the penalties are in accord 
with the broken prohibitions ;—-eating hippopotamus will 
cause elephantiasis or a leg like the legs of a hippopotamus ; 
eating the s/umbu, a fish with opal eyes, causes ophthalmia, 
and eating the frog causes bulging eyes.” * 

If Mr. Weeks is right, as he seems to be, in his explana- 
tions of these taboos, they are based on the now familiar 
tenet of sympathetic magic that a man partakes of the 
qualities of the animal whose flesh he eats. When these 
qualities are undesirable, as in the cases cited by Mr. Weeks, 
the flesh of the animal in question is naturally avoided, and 
such avoidance may be wholly unconnected with totemism. 
Yet the restriction of each of these taboos to a particular 
family and its hereditary transmission in the family are 
totemic in principle. However, it is somewhat remarkable 
that among these peoples, while hereditary taboos are 
inherited from the father alone, according to the custom of 
the country children belong to their mother’s family, not 
to their father’s, and inherit the property of their maternal 
uncle, not the property of their father. Hence when a lad 
grows up, his maternal uncle will one day bring a calabash 
of palm wine to the town and claim him, and the father has 
no power to prevent his son from going away with his uncle. 
However, the lad himself may refuse to go and may remain 
under the tutelage of his father as long as he likes. But if 
he elects to go with his uncle, the father’s responsibility for 
him is at an end.2 Moreover, the people are divided into 
clans called eandas, which appear to be hereditary in the 
maternal line. “The difference between ekanda (clan) and 
vumu (family or dynasty, lit. stomach, womb) is that ekanda 
is the name for all the wumuz of a clan. The tree is the 
ckanda and the branches are the vamu. The clan does not 

1 Rev. J. H. Weeks, “Notes on 307 sg. 
some Customs ot the Lower Congo 2 Rev. J. H. Weeks, of. cét. xix. 
People,” olk-lore, xx. (1909) pp. (1908) pp. 414, 415, 423, 425, 427. 

XIV ZOTEMISM IN CONGO AND ANGOLA 619 

originate with the man, but has its origin in the woman 

only ; and it is the same with the subdivisions of the clan 

into families, each division or subdivision starts from a 
woman, ... Every woman with children, grandchildren, 

and great-grandchildren would be the originator of a vusu, 

as all her descendants would be considered as coming from 

her womb.”' With regard to marriages between members Custom of - 
of different clans “it is not a hard and fast rule, but it is a into only 
rule very generally followed, for the sons and daughters one clan. 
of one clan to marry only the daughters and sons of one 

other clan, and not to intermarry with several different clans. 

By thus intermarrying within the limits of one clan they think 

better treatment is ensured for the women of each clan.” * 

‘Similarly we have seen that a Python clan of the Hausas The 
prefers to intermarry with one other clan only. Among the ee 
Australian aborigines also we have met with tribes in which into only 
men of any one totemic clan are restricted in their choice of foy clans 
wives to the women either of a few clans or of one only," is observed 

and a like restriction is observed by the Kondayamkottai Sega 
Maravans of Southern India.> Parallel to these restrictions Australia, 
on marriage is “the curious way Kulin Brahmins have of eee 
marrying into only a pa/f7 or ‘corresponding’ family. Hence 

if there are many girls in one family and only one marriage- 

able male in the fa//z family, he must marry all the girls. 

If there are no males in the pa/ti family, the girls can never 

be married. This has actually happened within my own 
experience in Jessore. The other occurrence (of only a few 

palté males) is the cause of Kulin polygamy, the existence 

of which was angrily denied by several correspondents of the 

Times not long ago. If ever polygamy was excusable, it was 

this. It is a sin to allow a Kulin maid to remain unmarried, 

and if there is only one fd/t/ male available, why, he has to 

do his duty like a man.” ° 

1 Rev. J. H. Weeks, ‘* Notes on 
some Customs of the Lower Congo 
People,” Folk-lore, xix. (1908) pp. 
425, 426. 

2 Rev. J. H. Weeks, of. c7/. p. 
410. Mr. Weeks omits to say whether 
a@ man may marry a woman of his own 
clan, that is, he does not tell us whether 
the clans are strictly exogamous, but he 

implies that exogamy is the general 
custom. 

3 See ahove, p. 607. 

4 See above, vol. i. pp. 176, 177 
note!, 374, 387, 388, 407 s9. 

5 See above, p. 249. 

6 Mr. J. D. Anderson, Teacher of 
Bengali in the University of Cambridge, 
formerly Magistrate and Collector of 

620 TOTEMISM IN WEST AFRICA CHAP. 

Such _ It seems probable that all such extreme restrictions on 
sackaeg intermarriage between clans or families are late rather than 
ably late primitive. There is positive evidence that this is so in 
Leas regard to the marriage of Kulin Brahmans: the rule which 
‘This seems allows a Kulin family to intermarry only with one or two 
a as corresponding families appears to have been adopted as an 
marriage extension of a reform instituted in the fourteenth century of 
customs . . ° . 

of Kulin our era. On this subject Sir Herbert Risley writes as 
Brahmans. 

follows: “The reforms undertaken in the fourteenth century 
by Devi Vara, a ghatak or genealogist of Jessore, extended 
only to the Kulins. These were divided into three grades :—— 
(1) Swabhava, or original Kulins, (2) Bhanga, (3) Bansaja, 
The Swabhava grade was further subdivided into 36 meds, 
or endogamous groups, each bearing the name of the original 
ancestor of the clan or of his village. This restriction of the 
marriage of Kulins to their own se/ was the leading feature 
of Devi Vara’s reform. Its principle was adopted and 
extended, it is believed, by the Kulins themselves, in the 
singular arrangement known as Péltz-Prakriti, or preserva- 
tion of the type, by which families of equal rank were 
formed into- triple groups as it were, for matrimonial 
purposes, and bound to observe a sort of reciprocity. Thus 
Mukhuti families were bound to marry their sons to the 
daughters of the Chatterji and Banerji families, and vce 
versé. All kinds of complications are said to have arisen 
from this understanding. If, for example, the Mukhuti had 
only one marriageable son and the Chatterji or Banerji ten 
daughters approaching puberty, the former must marry all 
ten, or all must remain spinsters. . . . With the spread of 
education among the upper classes of Bengal an advance in 
social, morality has been made and the grosser forms of 
polygamy have fallen into disrepute. But the artificial 

Chittagong, in a letter to me dated 

22nd December 1909. In another 
letter (26th December 1909) Mr. 
Anderson says that ‘the custom is, 
or should be, known to all Bengal 
civilians,” and for native authority he 
quotes Syama Caran Sirkar’s /ntro- 
duction to the Bengali Language (1861), 
pp. 406 sg. The correspondence in 
the Zémes and the Report of a Com- 

mittee appointed by the Government 
of Bengal on the subject of Kulin 
polygamy are reprinted by Sir Herbert 
Risley in his book Zhe People of India 
(Calcutta, 1908), Appendix VII. pp. 
cxxxix. sgg. No impartial reader who 
glances over the correspondence and 
the Report of the Government Com- 
mittee can doubt on which side truth 
lies, 

xiv LOTEMISM IN CONGO AND ANGOLA 625 

organization of the caste still presses hard on a Kulin father 
who is unlucky enough to have a large family of daughters. 
These must be married before they attain puberty, or 
disgrace will fall on the family, and three generations of 
_ancestors will be dishonoured.”* But to return to Africa. 

From the foregoing account we gather that the social Thus in 
system of the Bantu people of the Lower Congo presents some TAF 
analogies to the social system of the Herero, a Bantu tribe inherited 
of South-West Africa? For both the Congo people and the fom the 
Herero are divided into clans which descend in the maternal and taboos 
line; both sets of clans appear, though this is not quite rasan 
certain, to be exogamous; and they bear names (Congo father the 
ekanda, Herero eanda) which closely resemble each other. ed 
Further, both the Congo people and the Herero have, quite ones 
independently of their maternal clans, a number of heredi- resemble 
tary taboos which, unlike the clans, descend in the paternal yee 
line from a father to his children, and which are apparently 4 simitar 
not subject to a rule of exogamy; in other words, so far double 
as the evidence goes, there is no objection to the marriage Jenn also 
of a man and woman who have inherited the same taboo among the 
from their respective fathers.® Further, the two sets of Lae a 
taboos resemble each other in this, that both among the ©oast. 
Congo people and among the Herero a woman regularly 
adopts the hereditary taboo of her husband at marriage.‘ 
These resemblances between the social systems of two Bantu 
peoples so widely separated from each other as the Herero 
of South-West Africa and the tribes of the Lower Congo 
can hardly be accidental ; they point to a fundamental com- 
munity of institutions, which further research may prove to 
be shared by many other Bantu tribes. This curious double 
system of clans inherited from the mother and taboos inherited 
from the father deserves to be studied with more attention 
than it has yet received. We have seen that it occurs also 

among the Tshi-speaking peoples of the Gold Coast. 

1 (Sir) H. H. Risley, 77zbes and + As to this rule among the Herero, 
Castes of Bengal, EthnographicGlossary see above, p. 364. 

(Calcutta, 1892), i. 147 sg. 5 See above, pp. 560sgg. Amongst 
2 the Wagogo, also, there are two sets of 
See above, pp. 357 597 taboos, one of which attaches to the 

3 I was perhaps wrong in doubting clan and the other is inherited from 
this for the Herero (above, p. 364). the father. See above, p. 404. 

Individua 

622 TOTEMISM IN WEST AFRICA CHAP, 

In addition to the hereditary taboos (mpangu) which 

or personal descend in families through the males, the Congo people 

taboos 

among the Observe a number of individual or personal taboos, to which 

Congo 
people. 

Club- 
houses for 
Jads and 
unmarried 
men, 

The 
levirate. 

Avoidance 
of a wife's 
mother. 

they apply quite a different name (x/ongo), which seems to 
mean “ medicine ” or “ poison.” When a person is ill, the 
medicine-man is called in and forbids the patient to eat 
a certain food for the rest of his life. Thus one man will 
be debarred from -eating cassava, another from eating pig 
or the snout of a pig, another from eating goat or the head 
of a goat, another from eating a certain kind of fish, and 
another from eating a certain kind of vegetable. The 
forbidden food is the person’s z/ongo. Sometimes the pro- 
hibition lasts only a certain time, say six months. Some- 
times it: is put’on an unborn child and remains in force 
until the child’s hair is cut and his nails trimmed, or until he 
or she marries, or until the first child is born to him or her. 
The choice of the forbidden thing appears to be purely 
arbitrary ; it is determined by the whim of the medicine-man 
and bears little or no relation to the nature of the malady. 
Nevertheless to violate the taboo would, the natives think, 
be sure to cause the sickness to return. 

Down to about twenty-five years ago there were club- 
houses for lads and unmarried men in all important villages ; 
on reaching the age of twelve years every boy had to take up 
his abode in the bachelors’ club-house of the village or town. 
Unbetrothed girls visited the house in the dark by arrangement 
with the young men, but they might not reveal the secrets 
of the place. -Their parents encouraged the girls to resort 
thither, believing that if they did not go they would be barren.” 

These people practise the levirate ; that is, when a man 
dies, his widow is married by one of his surviving brothers. 
A man may not speak to his mother-in-law. If it is 
necessary for him to communicate with her, he must employ 
a messenger. If he meets her on the road by accident, no 
fine is inflicted ; but if he sees her coming and does not slink 
out of her way, public opinion will condemn him so strongly 

1 Rev. J. Hl. Weeks, ‘‘Notes on The name for such a club-house is <0 
some Customs of the Lower Congo a méongi or nso a toko. 
People,” Folk-lore, xx. (1909) p. 309. a 
2 Rev. J. H. Weeks, of. céf. xix. 3 Rev. J. H. Weeks, of. cét. xix. 
(1908) p. 418, xx. (1909) p. 201. (1908) p. 413: 

XIV. TOTEMISM IN CONGO AND ANGOLA 623 

that he will be compelled to send her q goat as a peace- 
offering and to beg her pardon. Mr. Weeks is probably 
right in thinking that this custom of avoidance was instituted, 
and is enforced, for the purpose of preventing incest,’ 

The Ovakumbi are a pastoral tribe in the extreme The 
south of the Portuguese colony of Angola. Their country, 2 meet 
known as Humbe, is a plateau about three thousand feet high tribe of 
on the right bank of the Kunene River. The language of the ate 
tribe belongs to the Bantu family. The wealth of the people 
is in their herds, to which they are fondly attached. Their 
villages, like those of many other pastoral Bantu tribes, 
consist of round huts arranged in a circle about the cattle 
pen and surrounded by a fortification of thorns and pales. 

The government is in the hands of a king (sobda) assisted 

by a council of nobles; his powers are very extensive, and 

he transmits his dignity, not to his own son, but to the 

eldest son of his uterine sister or, in default of such a 
nephew, to his uterine brother. The veneration paid to 

him amounts almost to worship. He is supposed to 
possess the power of making rain; and his subjects 
imagine that a breach of chastity committed by the un- 
married youth would, if left unpunished, entail the king’s 

death within the year. Hence all such offences are capital 
crimes. However, of late years the rigour of the law has 

been relaxed, and the culprits are now suffered to escape 

with the payment of a fine in cattle. Among the Ovakumbi Traces of 
all families which trace their descent from a common para 
ancestor are dedicated to a bird or beast, which they may Ovakumbi. 
neither kill nor injure. Any breach of this law is rigorously 
punished. The sacred bird of the royal family is revered 

by the whole tribe. A white trader who dared to kill one 

of these birds was brought to trial and had to atone for his 

crime by forfeiting almost. all his stock-in-trade.? These 

facts seem to indicate that the Ovakumbi, like many other 

Bantu tribes, are divided into totemic clans. 

1 Rev. J. H. Weeks, ‘* Notes on Mission et le royaume de Humbé, sur 
some Customs of the Lower Congo les bords du Cunéne,” Les Afissions 
People,” Fodk-lore, xx. (1909) p. 310. Catholiques, xx. (1888) pp. 224, 235, 

2 Charles Wunenberger, “La 251 5g.) 261 sqg., 271 sg. 

The — 
Baluba, 

a Bantu 
people in 
the Congo 
Free State. 

Traces of 
totemism 
among the 
Baluba. 

624 TOTEMISM IN WEST AFRICA CHAP, 

The Baluba are an important nation in the southern 
part of the Congo Free State.’ Their territory lies between 
the Sankuru and Kasai rivers. The language which they 
speak belongs to the Bantu family. Apparently some 
of the Baluba tribes or clans have totemism. At least 
this seems to follow from the account which the missionary- 
traveller, Mr. F. S. Arnot, gives of their tribal divisions. 
He says: “Not far distant from these parts many of the 
Luba people have the combination dashz/a in their family 
name. For instance, the Ba-shilange (Kalamba’s people), 
Ba-shilambwa, Ba-shilanzefu. M. Le Marinel and I were 
talking over the probable meaning of the combination. 
We knew that Ba was a plural prefix, but it was not until 
after some thought that I remembered that the word skz/a 
(sometimes chi/a or jtla) is that which the Luba people use 
for ‘antipathy’ If I were to ask the Yeke people why 
they do not eat zebra flesh, they would reply, ‘ Chzjzla, i.e. 
‘It is a thing to which we have an antipathy’; or perhaps 
better, ‘It is one of the things which our fathers taught us 
not to eat. The Biheans use the word chi-kola to express 
the same thing. The words nge, mbwa, nzefu in the above 
combination mean respectively leopard, dog, elephant. So 
it seems as though the word Ba-shz/ange means ‘ The people 
who have an antipathy to the deopard’; the Ba-shilambwa, 
‘ Those who have an antipathy to the dog’; the Ba-shilanzefu, 
‘Those who have an antipathy to the ed/ephant’* We called 
a native, and after a great deal of questioning he understood 
what we were driving at, and we found our conclusion to be 
correct. He then told us how the Ba-shilambwa and Ba- 
shilanzefu got their names. At one time they were only 
known as the Ba-shilambwa because they considered it was 
wrong to eat the dog. But one day a number of them went 
across the Lubi River to hunt elephants and stayed many 
days, during which rains had fallen, the river became much 
swollen, and when the hunters returned they could not cross. 
While they were wondering what to do an elephant came 

1 J. Deniker, Zhe Races of Man, ii. 830. 
p- 462. 3 «* An alternative translation might 
2 Sir Harry Johnston, George Gren- be, ‘Those who hold the elephant 
fell and: the Congo (London, 1908), sacred’—F. S. A.” 

XIV TOTEMISM IN CONGO AND ANGOLA 625 

past, and seeing. that they were troubled, asked what was 
the matter. They were all much surprised, of course, to 
hear the elephant speak. But it went on, saying they must 
not be surprised, for it was a human being. like themselves ; 
they could not cross the river, but z¢ could very easily, and 
advised them to get on its back, which they did, and reached 
the other side in safety. Ever since that time they have 
refused to eat the flesh of the elephant, and are now known 
as the Ba-shilanzefu.”! In this passage the word shz/a, chila, 
or 7i/a, seems only another form of #éssille, keshila; or kesila, 
which, like aa, means “taboo” in the Fiot language ;7 and 
the account points to the existence among the Baluba of at 
least three clans, which have for theit totems respectively 
the leopard, the dog, and the elephant. 

To the north of the Baluba nation is the Bakuba or Totemism 
Bushongo tribe, occupying the valley of the Sankuru River, arene ee 

the waters of which find their way to the Congo, * An subtribe 
anthropological expedition organised by Messrs. E. Torday 
and T. A. Joyce has lately investigated the Bambala sub- © e oo 
tribe of the Bushongo or Bakuba tribe, and has discovered “ 
among them a rather decayed form of totemism. In this 
subtribe the totems are hereditary, and persons who have 

the same totem may not marry each other, though in the 
present generation the prohibition is being disregatded. 

The institution is said to be very old and to have been 
instituted by the Creator, the first of the hundred and twenty- 

three chiefs who have ruled over the nation? 

Still further to the north, in the region of the Upper Totemism 

‘ * * , and 
Congo and its northern tributaries, a system of exogamy ercguitny 

and of something very like totemism is reported to among the 
northern 

prevail among the Ababua, the Mabinza, the Basoko and jites of 
Mougelima, the Mogbwandi, the Maele, the Bakere,, the the Congo 

Balesa, the Upoto, the Bangala, the N’Gombe, and the prertin 
1 F.S. Arnot, Bihéand Garenyanse, Adolph Bastian uses guzxil/es as equi- 

or Four Years further Workand Travel valent to xtna (Die deutsche Expedition 

an Central Africa (London, n.d.; an der Loango-Kiiste, i. 183). 

preface dated March 1893), p. 102. 
28 E. Pechuel-Loesche, Die Loango- 3 For this notice of Bambala 

Expedition, Dritte Abteilung, Zweite totemism I am indebted to the courtesy 

Halfte (Stuttgart, 1907), p. 456. of Mr. T. A. Joyce. 

VOL, II 28 

626 TOTEMISM IN WEST AFRICA CHAP, 

Mog- Bobangi. Each of these ethnical groups or nations is 
Gane divided into a number of independent tribes, which live 
"quite apart from each other in spite of the resemblances of 
language and customs which may be observed‘ between 
them. Every tribe again is subdivided into exogamous 
subtribes or ‘clans, each of which occupies its own well- 
marked geographical district, and traces its descent from a 
Belief common ancestor, whose name it bears. Among these 
that the ~~ peoples every man believes that after death he will be 
clanspeople * , . ° < . 
atdeath reincarnated in the body of an animal, the kind of animal 
Fe ee tea Deing that into which the soul of his fathér transmigrated at 
ncarnated 
in the his decease; for the totems, as we” may call them, are 
pea inherited by children from their fathers. The particular 
totemic kind of animal is the same for all members of a tribe, 
animals. though they belong to, different exogamou’ clans. For 
example, the Moganzulu tribe of the Ababua nation has for 
its sacred animal or totem the hippopotamus; and the 
Molisi tribe of the same nation has for its totem the 

Relation chimpanzee. The relation between a man and his totem is 

Euan ,one of mutual help and protection. The totethic animal 
protection will not hurt the tribesman, and on his sidé the tribesman | 
mena .will not kill, eat, or touch his totemic animal nor even pass 

his totem. the spot, where one of the species has died. The animals 
which ‘serve as totems are sometimes imaginary; for the 
natives conceive certain natural phenomena, such as thunder, 
the rainbow, and the echo, to exist in the form of animals, 
and these fanciful beings are totems of some tribes. Some- 
Ababua times, but rarely, the totem is a planf. Among the 
totems. totems of the Ababua tribes are the leopard, hippopota- 
mus, yellow-backed Cephalophus antelope, spiny ant-eater 
(pangolin ‘¢ricuspis), jerboa, small white-bellied rat, black 
Azande Swallow, plant called zdééz, thunder, and echo. In the 
totems. —_ Azande nation the totems of tribes include the lion, leopard, 
Mog- serpent, and thunder personified as an animal. In the 
ey Mogbwandi nation the totems of tribes include the leopard, 
elephant, wart-hog, and black serpent. Sometimes a 
subtribe or clan will allow fugitives from another tribe to 
settle on their land; and as these fugitives continue to 
respect their old totemic animal, it follows that two different 
totems may be found coexisting in the same local subtribe 

XIV TOTEMISM IN CONGO AND ANGOLA 627 

or clan. Much more rarely the protector or totem of the Sex totems 
women differs from that of the men. It geems to do so, Soot 
for ‘example, among the Bawenza and Moodungwale, two 
Ababua tribes, and also among the Bakango. In such 

cases apparently the protectors of the mep and women 
respectively are sex totems or sex patrons, such as we have 
hitherto met with only in South-East Australia! But 
details as to these African sex totems or sex patrons, if 

such they be, are wanting. Further, it appears that in- Personal 
dividual men or womeri sometimes have animal-guardians ‘*™* 
of their own, which generally differ from the totemic 
animal of the tribe. And apart from the prohibition to eat 

the flesh of the animal-guardian there exist many taboos 

on food which might easily be confused with totemic taboos,” 

The same region in the north-east of the Congo Free Mr. J. 
State was investigated in the years 1907 and 1908 by an ore 
anthropological expedition which was sent out by the Duke researches 
of Mecklenburg and led by Mr. J. Czekanowski. The object eee 
of the expedition was to explore the tribes which occupy the oe the 
terrltory between the head-waters of the Congo and the Nile. Free 
- Roughly speaking, the region in question forms a vast State. 
triangle bounded on the east by the great lakes and the 
Upper Nile, on the north by the Uele River, and on the 
south-west, by the Upper Congo. Among the tribes which The tribes 
itembraces are(1) the small tribes of the Babembo, Babwari, ice 
Bagoma and Bahororo on the western shore of Lake 
Tanganyika ; (2) the Bakondjo in the mountains about the 
western shore of Lake Albert Edward; (3) the Bakusu, 
Manyema, and Bakumu on the Upper Congo; (4) the 
Mabudu, Malika, Banyari, Mubali, Bapaye, Turumbu, and 
Basoko, scattered over the country which is intersected by 
the fourth parallel of North latitude and stretches from 
the great bend of the Congo eastward to near Lake Albert 
Nyanza. All these tribes speak languages belonging to 
the great Bantu family. North of them dwells (5) the 
group of tribes known under the general name of Mangbetu 

1 See above, vol. i. pp. 47 5g., 390 trionales du Congo,” Le Afouvement 
59., 456 sqqg., ete. - Géographigue, 13 juin 1909, coll. 
277-280'; 7d, in Revue des Etudes 

2 A. de Calonne Beaufaict, “La L£thknographiques et Sociologiques, ii, 
Zoolatrie chez les peuplades septen- (1909) pp. 193-195. 

These 
tribes are 
divided 
into 
totemic 
and exo- 
gamous 
clans with 
paternal 
descent. 

Law 
of the 
blood- 
feud. 

628 TOTEMISM IN WEST AFRICA CHAP. 

(Monbuttoo) and comprising the Balele, Bakere, Niapu, 
Medje, Maberu, and Mangbele. The little-known Barumbi 
(Urumbui) tribe, between the Tshopo and Lubila rivers, 
speaks a language of the Mangbetu family. The Mangbetu 
are the traders and fishermen of the Uele River valley. Akin 
to the Mangbetu in material culture, though otherwise 
isolated, is (6) a group of tribes including the Bangba, 
Mabudu, Mayogu, Mundu, Abarambo, and Madyo ; also (7) 
another group of tribes to the eastward, which comprises the 
Momvu, Balese, Bambuba, and Mombutu. (8) The Azande 
occupy the northern part of the Congo basin and part of the 
basin of the Bahr-el-Ghazal. Lastly, in the extreme north-east, 
the coal-black Nilotic negroes of the Upper Nile fal! into three 
groups, namely (9) the Madi group, (10) the Bari group, and 
(11) the Acholi group, and each of these groups includes a 
number of separate tribes. Thus the Madi group comprises the 
Madi in the narrower sense, the Kaliko, Logo, Avokaya, Moru, 
Lugware, and Lendu; the Bari group includes the Bari, 
Fadjulu, Yambara, Kuku, and Kakwa ; and the Acholi group 
comprises, amongst others, the Lur or Alur, whose country 
lies immediately to the north of Lake Albert Nyanza’ | 
So far as these tribes were investigated by the Duke of 
Mecklenburg’s Expedition they were found to be divided 
into totemic and, with very few exceptions, exogamous clans, 
variously known in different tribes as enganda, ekihanda, 
tunga, muliango, etc., with descent in the paternal line. The 
single exception to the rule of exogamy is presented by some 
of the Azande clans, ‘including the Avungura clan, which is 
the royal clan of the reigning dynasty. In this as in so 
many royal African clans endogamy is customary, and sexual 
intercours¢ between fathers and daughters appears to be not 
uncommon. With these few exceptions the rule of clan 
exogamy prevails throughout the entire area visited by the 
expedition ; and nowhere was descent found to be traced in 
the maternal line. Each clan possesses its own lands and is 
held together mainly by the law of the blood-feud ; where- 
ever that law is suppressed, the clan falls to pieces. If the 

1 J. Czekanowski, ‘*Die anthropo- Zeitraum vom 1 Juni 1907 bis 1 August 
logisch-ethnographischen Arbeiten der 1908,” Zeitschrift fur Ethnologie, xli. 
Expedition S. H. des Herzogs Adolf (1909) pp. 591-611, with the map. 
Friedrich zu Mecklenburg fiir den 

XIV TOTEMISM IN CONGO AND ANGOLA 629 

clans live mixed up together, blood revenge assumes the 

form of secret murder ; if the clans live apart, it takes the 
character of open war. Further, every clan has an object 
which it reveres, that is,a totem. The totem is often an Respect 
animal or plant, and in such cases it may not be eaten and ean 
the animal may not be killed by members of its totemic totem. 
clan. One tribe (the Balera) seems even to take blood 
revenge for the killing of their totems. In some tribes, such Trans- 
as the Azande, Abarambo, Mayogu, and Bangba, the dead eeaeon 
are believed to turn into their totems. for example, some of dead into 
the Azande fancy that at death they are transformed into ale 
Colobus monkeys, water-snakes, leopards, shrew-mice, lizards, 

and lightning, according to the particular totemic clan to 
which they belong. This belief in the transformation or 
transmigration of the dead into their totems was repeatedly 
assigned as the reason for not eating the totemic animal; in 
eating its flesh the people do not know but that they may 

be eating one of their deceased relations. The number of 
clans composing a tribe varies greatly ; among the Bakondjo 
twelve or fourteen clans were ascertained by the expedition ; 
among the Banyoro seventy. 

‘Thus one result of the Duke of Mecklenburg’s Expedition 

has been greatly to extend the area of Central Africa over 
which totemism and exogamy are reported to prevail. It is 

to be hoped that full details as to the totemic systems of 
these tribes may soon be published. 

Of their other marriage customs we know very little. Cousin- 
Among the Babembo or Wabemba and the Wahorohoro, paTige 
two tribes to the west of Lake Tanganyika, even the 
most distant cousinship forms a bar to marriage. More than Mutual 
that, among the Wahorohoro a man is bound to avoid his *;°s2nee 
female cousin. He may not speak to her nor remain in her 
company. If she enters a house where he chances to be, he 
will at once depart.2 Yet among the Wabemba a man may 
marry his paternal aunt (sama ngasz), though never his 

1 J. Czekanowski, ‘* Die anthropo- 
logisch-ethnographischen Arbeiten der 
Expedition S. H. des Herzogs Adolf 
Friedrich zu Mecklenburg fiir den 
Zeitraum vom § Juni 1907 bis 1 August 
1908,” Zettschrift fir Ethnologie, xii. 

(1909) pp. 596-598. The number of 
Banyoro clans ascertained by Mr, Roscoe 
was forty-six. See above, pp. 516-518. 

2Ch. Delhaise, Votes ethno- 
graphiques sur quelques peuplades du 
Tanganika (Brussels, 1905), pp- 19; 35- 

The 
levirate. 
’ 
Right 
to marry 
a wife’s 
younger 
sister. 

Avoidance 
of wife's 
mother. 

Avoidance 
of hus- 
band’s 
maternal 
uncle. 

630 TOTEMISM IN WEST AFRICA CHAP. XIV 

maternal aunt... Among the Watumbwes and Watabwas, 
two’ other tribes of Lake Tanganyika, there is said to be a 
curious limitation of time set to marriage. When a wife 
has borne two children, her husband deserts her and takes a 
new’ wife, but only to abandon her in turn as soon as he has 
had two children by her; and so on.2 Both the Wabemba 
and the Wahorohoro practise the levirate ; when a man dies, 
his oldest brother marries the widow. On the other hand, 
among the Wabemba when a man’s wife dies he has the right 
to marry her younger sister, if she is still unmarried. But if 
all his deceased wife’s sisters are married, the widower sends 
through his father-in-law a present to the husband of his 
late wife’s younger sister, and the woman is ceded to him by 
her husband for a single day; were that not done, the 
widower could not get any other woman to marry him. 
Afterwards the widower restores his deceased wife’s sister to 
her husbard and looks out for another wife for himself.* 
Among the Upoto, who inhabit the banks of the Congo 
between 20° and 22° East longitude, a man may never look 
at his mother-in-law, and she may not look at him. If he 
meets her by chance, he must turn his head away. Were he 
to look .at her, he would have to pay her a fine” Of this 
common rule there is a curious variation among the Ba-Huana, 
one of the principal peoples inhabiting the banks of the Kwilu, 
a tributary of the Kasai, which in its turn flows into the Congo 
from the south-east. In this tribe a man must avoid both 
his wife’s parents. He may never enter their house, and if 
he meets them on the road, he must turn aside into the bush 
to avoid them. On the other hand, the wife may visit her 
husband’s parents, and indeed is expected to show them great 
respect ; but she is bound to avoid her husband’s maternal 

‘uncle in the same way as her husband avoids her parents.® 

1Ch. Delhaise, Notes ethno- eldest surviving brother. Probably 

graphiques sur quelques peuplades du 
Tanganika (Brussels, 1905), p. 11. 

2 Ch. Delhaise, of. czt. p. 20. 

3 Ch. Delhaise, of. c¢t. pp. 18, 36. 
It is not quite clear whether by ‘‘ his 
oldest brother” (sox fréve le plus dgé, 
son frére ainé) is meant 2 brother 
older than the deceased, or merely the 

the latter is the meaning. 

4 Ch. Delhaise, of. cit. p. 18. 

5 M, Lindeman, Les Upotos (Brussels, 
1906), p. II. 

6 E. Torday and T. A. Joyce, 
*‘ Notes on the Ethnography of the 
Ba-Huana,” Journal of the Anthropo- 
logical Institute, xxxvi. (1906) pp. 
272, 274, 285 sg. 

CHAPTER XV 
ANALOGIES TO TOTEMISM IN MADAGASCAR 

THE question whether totemism exists among the Malagasy, mr. A. yan 
or inhabitants of Madagascar, has been carefully discussed Gennep on 
: : e€ ques. 

by Mr. A. van Gennep in a learned monograph.’ After tion of 
fully considering the evidence he comes to the conclusion Sears 
that totemism in the strict sense of the word has not yet gascar, 
been found in Madagascar.2. With that conclusion I agree, 
and, accordingly, in a treatise on totemism I might dismiss 
the subject without further remark. Yet if, nevertheless, 
I have decided to notice some of the Malagasy facts which 
might be interpreted as totemic, it is because a good deal 
of uncertainty still exists as to the distinction which is 
to be drawn between totemism and ‘other systems of 
superstition which resemble it; and, accordingly, light may 
be thrown on the line of demarcation by observing some of 
the cases which lie on the border and, so to say, simulate 
totemism without really being identical with it. For a 
similar reason, in dealing with West African totemism I have 
called attention to the local worship of sacred animals and to 
the conception of the bush-soul, because these superstitions 
might easily be confounded with totemism, and may indeed 
be more or less remotely connected with it, though in 
practice it is desirable to treat them as different. 

Nowhere, perhaps, in the world at the present day are Systems 
systems of taboo more rife and more elaborate than in ea 

Madagascar,‘ and as these taboos (/ady) are often laid on peevalent 
in ada- 

1 Arnold van Gennep, Zabou et §90 s599., 593 599. gascar. 
Totémisme a Madagascar (Paris, 1904). 4 The common Malagasy word for 

2 A. van Gennep, of. cit. pp. 314597. taboo is fady, See W. Ellis, Hzstory 

3 See above, pp. 574 59s 583 sgg., of Madagascar (London, x.d., preface 

631 

All 
Malagasy 
families 
seem to 
have their 
sacred 
species of 
animal 
which they 
will not eat. 

Sacred 
animals 
among the 
Sakalava. 

Sacred 
animals 
among the 
Betsimis- 
araka. 

632 ANALOGIES TO TOTEMISM IN MADAGASCAR cuar. 

animals and plants, it is no wonder that some of them should 
pass at first sight for evidence of totemism. Thus we are 
told that “all the Malagasy in general regard as sacred 
(Jadinrazana) some animal which varies with the family. 
They do not worship the animal, but they do not eat it from 
fear of death, because their ancestors (razana) never ate of it, 
and this fady is transmitted from father to son. Whence 
comes this belief? The most intelligent natives among the 
Malagasy cannot explain it. Among the sacred animals are 
mentioned the pig, the eel, the babacoote (a species of lemur), 
the dolphin, the green pigeon, the sheep, the kid, etc. But 
what is sacred for one family is not so for another. So 
when a Malagasy is invited to a strange house, he begins by 
asking his host whether his fadinrazana is in the house, in 
order that he may not approach it and much less eat it.”? 
Among the Sakalava of Northern and Western Madagascar 
“each tribe, each village, each family has adopted a special 
Jady ; for some it is fowlsyfor others fish ; some will never 
kill a crocodile, or a wild boar, or a scorpion, or a centi- 
pede ; in fact, they have gone so far as to live only on rice 
and fresh or dried beef, and to allow all noxious animals to 
swarm about them.”* Again, among the Betsimisaraka, 
“owing to some connection with their ancestors, certain 
animals are reverenced by various tribes: eg. one family 
claims to be descended from a woman who was born of a 
cow, and therefore does not eat beef; another shews the 
greatest respect for the dabakoto (Lichanotus brevicaudatus), the 
largest species of lemur, because one was said to have saved 

dated 1838), i. 402 sg.; H. F. Stand- 
ing, ‘‘Malagasy fady,” The Anta- 

nanarivo Annual and Madagascar’ 

Magazine, vol. ii. (Antananarivo, 
1896), pp. 252-265 (reprint of the first 
four numbers); and especially A. van 
Gennep, Zabou et Totémisme & Mada- 
gascar, pp. 12 sgg. 

1L. Crémazy, quoted by A. van 
Gennep, Zabou et Totémisme a Mada- 
gascar, p. 209. 

2? M. Faucon, quoted by A. van 
Gennep, 7abou et Totémisme 2 Mada- 
gastar, p. 210. Similarly, speaking 
of the Sakalava, the Rev. A. Walen 

observes: ‘‘Each family regards cer- 
tain things as forbidden to itself only, 
for things forbidden to one family may 
be allowed in another. Great differ- 
ences exist in this matter ; even in the 
self-same tribe the things forbidden to 
each family may be totally different. 
Yet there are rules regarding this that 
pertain to the whole clan, and even to 
the whole tribe, which all must obey, 
lest the wrath of the ancestors be 
excited and vengeance come upon 
them” (A. Walen, ‘*The Sakalava,” 
Antananarivo Annual and Madagascar 
Magazine, vol, ii. (Antananarivo, 1896), 
p. 241). 

xv ANALOGIES TO TOTEMISM IN MADAGASCAR 

633 

an ancestor from a severe fall; the dead body of this lemur 
they bury with the honours paid to a humaa being, and any 
person having shot one would find it hard to get a night’s 
lodging in one of the villages of the tribe.”! In one village The 
of this tribe’ Dr. Catat, who had killed a babacoote, was race 
accused by the inhabitants of having killed “one of their lemur) is 
grandfathers in the forest,” and he had to promise not to Te@rdedas 
skin the animal in the village? The Betsileo also revere by several 
the babacoote as an ancestor of their own; and accord it qn 
solemn funeral, digging a grave for it, wrapping its body 
in a shroud, weeping and sobbing over it, and making it 
offerings of their hair. The Betanimena tribe likewise 
believe the babacoote to be an embodiment of the spirits of 
their ancestors, and they look with horror on the slaughter 
.of one of these pretty and engaging animals.‘ Hence both 
they and the Betsimisarakas ransom the animals, alive or 
dead, in order to set them at liberty or give them an honour- 
able burial. The name dabacbote means “the old man” ; 
and the grave aspect and sedate manners of the creature, 
which is found only in the densest parts of the forest, give 
him a venerable appearance.® 

Again, some tribes in the south of Madagascar claim some 
to be descended from wild boars and will not kill or eat (tbesclaim 
these animals. Accordingly wild boars swarm in their descended 
country and ravage the crops without any attempt being hosts sa 
made to destroy them. Every man prefers to watch his others from 
fields day and night rather than assassinate his grandfather *"°*P- 
the wild boar.’ Others of the Malagasy boast of being 

1G, H. Smith, ‘*Some Betsimis- 
araka Superstitions,” Antananarivo 
Annual and Madagascar Magazine, 
No. to (Antananarivo, 1886), p. 239. 

2 A,van Gennep, 7abou et Totémisme 
a@ Madagascar, p. 215. 

3 Abinal and La Vaissiére, quoted 
by A. van Gennep, 7abou et Totémisme 
@ Madagascar, pp. 215 sg.3 Father 
Abinal, ‘Croyances fabuleuses des 
Malgaches,” Les Aftssions Catholigues, 
xii. (1880), p. 526. 

4 J. Sibree, Ze Great African Island 
(London, 1880), p. 270. As to the 
large ruffed lemurs (babacootes ?) see 
W. Ellis, Zhree Vistts to Madagascar 

(London, 1858), pp. 437 sgg., who 
describes one of them in captivity as 
‘“¢gentle and sociable, seemingly grateful 
for any trifling notice or kindness.” 

5 A.van Gennep, Zabou et Totémisme 
Q Madagascar, p. 215; H. W. Little, 
sVadagascar, tts History and People 
(Edinburgh and London, 1884), p. 321. 

6H. W. Little, A/adagascar, its 
History and People (London, 1884), 
p. 321. 

7 Father Abinal, ‘* Croyances fabu- 
leuses des Malgaches,” Les J/issions 
Catholiques, xii. (1880) p. 527; A. 
van Gennep, Zabou et Totémisme a 
Madagascar, p, 228. 

634 ANALOGIES TO TOTEMISM IN MADAGASCAR cuap. 

akin to sheep, and they have a horror of eating mutton. 
They say that all their illnesses and misfortunes come 
through inadvertently touching the flesh or fat of sheep, or 
treading on the wool which has fallen from the backs of 
their woolly fathers. The missionary who reports this tells 
us that once at a picnic which he gave to his pupils, some 
sly youths dressed up a stew of mutton and called it veal to 
amuse themselves at the expense of one of their companions, 
who was descended from a sheep. The sheepish victim of 
this practical joke ate heartily of his kinsman and sported 
about for an hour afterwards, but on being told what he 
had eaten he broke out into a cold sweat, fell down, vomited, 
and had to be carried back to the village, where he was 
Belief of Sick for three days.’ Again, “the serpent is honoured by 
the Betsileo the people in some parts of the island with a superstitious 
that F - ous 
serpents awe, founded upon the extraordinary belief that the spirits 
contain the of their fathers often inhabit the forms of the reptiles after 
spirits of : i . : 
the human they leave the body. This horrible idea is very strong 
dead. among the Betsileo. . . . Many of the Betsileo families 
have small enclosures near their dwellings, where they 
maintain numbers of these reptiles, and regard them still 
as being in a way family connections.” One of these 
serpents used to come daily from the forest to be fed with 
milk by a family who addressed it by name and treated it 
as one of themselves. A Catholic priest killed it and had 
to flee for his life; the whole country rose against him.? 
The Betsileo, we are told, believe in the transmigration of 
souls, and think that dead Hovas change into a harmless 
and beautifully marked species of serpent which they call 
Jangany. When one of these serpents is found, the people 
assemble and psk if it is the serpent of So-and-So, mention- 
ing in succession the names of various chiefs who are dead, 
and the reptile is said to nod its head when the right name 
is mentioned. The relations of the deceased chief then 
carry the reptile carefully to his house, where oxen are 
killed and a funeral feast given. A little of the blood is 

1 Father Abinal, ‘‘Croyances fabu- @ Madagascar, p. 236. 
leuses des Malgaches,” Les Afisstons 2H. W. Little, Aladagascar: its 
Catholiques, xii. (1880) pp. 527 sg.; History and People (London, 1884), 
A. van Gennep, Zabou et Totémisme pp. 86 sg. 

xv ANALOGIES TO TOTEMISM IN MADAGASCAR 635 

presented to the serpent, after which the creature is set free 

near the chief’s grave. Chiefs of lower rank are thought to 

turn into crocodiles. In one Betsiled town the eel is souts of 
tabooed (fady). Once when a stranger had caught an eel cieairoa 
and cooked it in the town, the natives threw away the , 
cooking-pot and all the spoons and plates which had come 

into contact with the animal.2 According to Father 
Abinal, the souls of plebeian Betsileo are supposed to 
transmigrate into eels, and in order to facilitate this spiritual 
transformation they open the corpse, extract the inwards, 

and throw them into a sacred lake; the eel which swallows 

the first mouthful becomes the domicile of the soul of the 
departed, and it may not be eaten by the Betsileo.? Again, souls of 
the curious nocturnal animal called the aye-aye (Chetromys ees 
madagascariensis) is supposed by many Betsimisaraka to nocturnal 
be an embodiment of their forefathers; hence they will nee 
not touch it, much less do it an injury. It is said that aye-aye. 
when they find one of the creatures dead in the forest, they 

make a tomb for it and bury it with all the forms of a 
regular funeral. They believe that if they tried to trap it 

they would die Again, a species of falcon (Zinnunculus Sacrea 
Newtoni? Gurm.) is deemed sacred by certain families in los. 
the neighbourhood of Anorotsangana; a naturalist having 
killed one of these birds was told by a native that he had 
committed a sacrilege, and was asked to give up the body 

that it might be buried in a sacred place.2 Another species 

of falcon (Falco minor) gives its name (Voromahery, 
“powerful bird”) to a tribe which inhabits Antananarivo 

and its neighbourhood; hence the Malagasy Government 

has adopted this bird as its crest. They stamp its image 

on the seals and affix it to the pinnacle of the great 

1G, A. Shaw, ‘*The Betsileo, Magazine, vol. ii. (Antananarivo, 1896) 

Religious and Social Customs,” 4z- 
tananarivo Annual ana Madagascar 
Magazine, Reprint of the First Four 
Numbers (Antananarivo, 1885), p. 
411, See, further, Father Abinal, 
** Croyances fabuleuses des Malgaches,” 
Les Missions Catholiques, xii. (1880) 
Pp. 550 5sg., who speaks of the revered 
serpent as a boa. 

2 H. F. Standing, ‘‘ Malagasy fady,” 
Antananarivo Annual and Madagascar 

p- 263. 

3 Father Abinal, ‘*Croyances fabu- 
leuses des Malgaches,” Les Afisstons 
Catholiques, xii. (1880), p. 551. 

4G. A. Shaw, ‘*The Aye-aye,” 
Antananarivo Annual and Madagascar 
Magazine, vol. ii.{Antananarivo, 1896) 
p. 203. See, further, A. von Gennep, 
Tabou et Totémisme a Madagascar, 
pp. 223 sg. 

5 A. van Gennep, of. c?f. p. 261, 

636 ANALOGIES TO TOTEMISM IN MADAGASCAR cmap. 

Sacred palace.’ Lastly, the dolphin is deemed sacrci by the 
dolphins. inhabitants of the Isle Sainte Marie, off the eastern coast 
of Madagascar. They never chase the dolphin, kill it, or 
eat its flesh, because a dolphin is believed to have rendered 
a service to one of their ancestors.” 
Mr. van Evidence of the same sort could be multiplied, but the 
gennep foregoing examples may suffice. Their superficial resemb- 
a lance to totemism is obvious; yet various considerations 
istics seem to shew that the facts do not suffice to prove the 
para existence of totemism proper in Madagascar. Among the 

are lacking considerations which have weighed with Mr. van Gennep 

in Mada-_ in coming to this conclusion are the following :— 
gascar. 

(1) The Malagasy have no general word like /otem, 
kobong, and szboko for a tabooed animal. 

(2) Apparently the group of people to whom a species 
of animals or plants is tabooed do not as a rule among the 
Malagasy bear the name of the forbidden animal or plant. 

(3) The tabooed animal is not regarded as the protector 
of the family or clan who are bound to respect it. 

(4) Whereas totemic clans are generally exogamous, 
among the Malagasy, on the contrary the clans are in the 
immense majority of cases endogamous. 

(5) Among really totemic peoples rites of initiation 
commonly play a great part; but such rites apparently 
are and have always been unknown among the Malagasy.’ 

For these and other reasons Mr. van Gennep concludes 

found in Madagascar.” * 

1 A. van Gennep, Zabou et Totém- 
isme & Madagascar, p. 261. 

2G. Ferrand, Contes populaires 
Malgaches (Paris, 1893), pp. 145 59-3 
A. van Gennep, Zabou ef Totémisme a 
Madagascar, p. 257. 

3 A. van Gennep, of. cit. pp. 306 
sgqg. With regard to endogamy, the 
Malagasy in general are divided into 
three social classes, the nobles (And- 
rians), the commoners (Hovas), and 
the slaves (Andevos) ; and these three 
classes do not marry with each other. 
Further, the nobles and commoners 
are again subdivided into clang each of 
which as a rule marries within itself and 

should say that “none of the characteristics of true totemism are to be 
I should prefer to say that, while 

not with another clan. See J. Sibree, 
** Relationships and the Names used * 
for them among the Peoples of Mada- 
gascar, chiefly the Hovas,” Journal of 
the Anthropological Institute, ix, (1880) 
Pp. 47 sg.3 ta@., The Great African 
Island, pp. 180-185 ; A. van Gennep, 
Tabou et Totémisme @ Madagascar, 
Pp. 125 sgq., 130, 136 sg., 160 sgq. 
The rule that totemic peoples practise 
rites of initiation is subject to large 
exceptions. Such rites are not found, 
for example, among the Baganda in 
Africa, nor among many tribes of North 
American Indians. , 

4 A. van Gennep, of. cit. p. 314. © 

HOUND UVM AN TTA 

00083140 

Digitized with financial assistance from 

An Initiative by 

tT Bild 

FOUNDATION 

WITH YOU, RIGHT THROUGE 

on 15 October, 2018
