UM MOUIIY A001 TAY

00037405

t

00037405

Digitized with financial assistance from

+7 Biel,

FOUNDATION

An Initiative by

WITH YOU, RIGHT THROUGH

on 27 November, 2018

ERP) Fas

TTOMAN. POW ER
4

) NATURE, ITS GROWTH, AND ITS DECLINE.

4 Ps : BY
EDWARD A. FREEMAN,D.C.L,, LL.D.,
OKNIGHT COMMANDER OF ThE GREEK ORDER OF THE SAVIOUR,
AND OF THE SERVIAN ORDER OF TAKOVA,

> CORRESPONDING MEMBER OF THE IMPERIAL ACADEMY OF SCIENCES °
OF SAINT PETERSBURG,

i Tore vika.

eus id a

WITH THREE COLOURED MAPS.

; Rondon:
MACMILLAN AND CO,
1877.

eS - ;
J [The Right of Translation and Reproduction is Reserved.)

INVICTAE ° GENTIS * INVICTO - PRINCIPI
FIDEI * AC - LIBERTATIS * VNICO - PROPVGNATORI
IN: ives * AMABILI ‘ IN - BARBAROS - TERRIBILI :
NICOLAO
DEI: GRATIA'

MONTIS : NIGRI + ET + BERDAE * PRINCIPI

VICINARVM * GENTIVM * DEO - IVVANTE * LIBERATORI * FVTVRO

VITA ET VICTORIA.

=

POLAND

is
CLMIMEN SG

tenner

\
PHOENTA

THE OTTOMAN DOMINIOD
(EDRUAKY 877
Seale

Smemovdiate (raven Tarrbers

Tribusnacy States

PREFACE,

I SHOULD: wish this little book to be taken as
in some sort a companion to my lately reprinted
History and Conquests of the Saracens. I there,
while speaking of most of the other chief Mahometan
nations, had’ no opportunity of speaking at all at

f the Ottoman Turks. That lack is here sup-

ed, supplied that is in the same general way in
which the whole subject of Mahometan history was
treated in the’ earlier volume, Neither pretehds to
be at all a full account of any branch of the subject ;
in both I deal with Eastern and Mahometan affairs
mainly in their reference to Western and Christian
affairs, The Ottoman Turks have had, at least for
some cénturies past, a greater influence on Western
and Christian affairs than-any other Eastern and
Mahometan people. Their history, from the point df
view in which I look at it, is therefore the natural

- completion of my former subject.

But there’ is.one wide difference ‘between the two
books, a difference wide at least in appearance, though
I believe that the difference is in appearance only.

62

viii PREFACE.

In ordinary language, my former book would be
said to be primarily historjcal; it would be called
political, only secondarily and to a very small extent.
My present book may be thought to be—in the.
eyes of those who draw a distinction between history
and politics it will rightly be thought to be—
political rather than historical. But between history
and politics: I can draw no distinction. History is
the politics of the past; politics are the history of
the present. The same rules of criticism apply to
judging alike of distant and of recent facts. The
same eternal laws of right and wrong are |to be
applied in forming our estimate of the actors in either
case. The championship of right and the champion-
ship of wrong bear exactly the same character
‘age. A Montfort and a Gladstone, a Flambard an
Beaconsfield, must stand. or fall together. It shews
the low view that some men take of politics that they
can conceive the word only as meaning a struggle to
support some and upset others among the momentary
candidates for office. Men who have no higher notion
of politics than this seem unable to understand that
there are those who support or oppose this or that
minister, because he follows or does not follow a
.certain line of policy, who do not follow or oppose a
certain line of policy because it is or is not the policy
of this or that minister. Politics, the science of Aris-
totle, the science of the right ruling of men and
nations, means something higher than this. It teaches
us how to judge of causes and their effects ; it teaches

PREFACE. ix
us how to judge of the character of acts, whether done
yesterday or thousands of years ago, The past is.
studied in vain, unless it gives us lessons for the pre-
sent ; the present will be very imperfectly understood,
unless the light of the past is brought to bear upon it.
In this way, history and politics are one. In my
former little book, consisting of lectures read before
a certain society at its own request, it would have
‘been obviously out of place to do more than point
the political moral of the story in a general way.
The subject naturally led me to shew that the pre-
tended reforms of the Turk were in their own nature
good-for-nothing. Two and twenty years ago, I drew
that inference from the general current of Mahometan.
history ; and I think that the two and twenty years of
Mahometan history which have passed since then,
have more than borne out what I then said. My.
present business is‘to work out the same position
more fully, from a survey of that particular part of
Mahometan history which bears most directly on
that position, and on the immediate practical appli-
¢ation of that position. I use the past history of
the Ottoman Turks to shew what is the one way
which, according to the light of reason and experience,
can be of any use in dealing with the Ottoman Turks
of the present day.

In this way then my book is at once political and
-historical. That is, it deals with the politics or the
history—I use those words as words of the same
meaning—both of past and of present times. In

x PREFACE,

opposition to all theoretical and sentimental ways
of looking at things, I argue from what has happened
to what is likely to happen. I argue that what has
been done already can be,done again. As every land
that has been set free from the Turk has gained by
its freedom—as every land which remains under the
Turk has but one wish, namely to get rid of the Turk
—as the lands which are set free do not envy the
bondage of their enslaved neighbours, while the lands
which remain enslaved do envy the freedom of their
liberated neighbours—I therefore argue from all this
that the one work to be done is to put the enslaved
lands on the same level as the liberated lands.. So to
do is the dictate of right ; so to do is the dictate of
interest. As long as any Christian land remains —
under the Turk, there will be discontents and dis-
turbances and revolts and massacres; there will be
‘diplomati¢ difficulties and complications ; in a word,
the “eternal Eastern Question” will remain eternal.
From the experience of the past I infer that the only
way to settle that question is to get rid of the stand-
ing difficulty, the standing complication, the standing
cause of discontent and revolt and massacre, namely
the rule of the Turk. And I further infer from the
experience of the past that the rule of the Turk can
be got rid of, because, wherever men have thoroughly
had the will to get rid of him, he has been got rid
of. He has been got rid of in Hungary, in Servia,
in the liberated part of Greece. With the same
hearty will and zealous effort, he may be got rid of in

PREFACE, xi

all the other ‘lands where he still does his work of
evil. By the policy of Canning backed by the sword
of Sobieski, perhaps by the policy of Canning without °
the sword of Sobieski, the Eastern Question may be
solved. But, as long as there is neither sword’ nor.
policy, but only the helpless babble of a man who
can never make up his mind, the Eastern Question
will go on for ever.
Since my last chapter was written, the long talked-
of Protocol has been signed. I do not pretend to
know what-can be the object of Russia or of any
other power in proposing or signing it. The one
practical thing’ about it is that it does not bind
Russia to disarm. That is, it does not take away
from the South-eastern nations the last hope of
deliverance that is left to them. It is with a blush
that an Englishman writes such words as these. It
is with shame and sorrow that an Englishman has to
confess that, when another nation undertakes the work
which should above all things have been the work of
England, the utmost that he can dare to hope for is
that England may not be a hinderer in that work.
‘We have no wish for Russian aggrandizement, for
Russian ascendency, for Russian influence in any
form. We believe that the exclusive ascendency of
Russia in the South-eastern lands would be an evil ;
only we do not hold it to be the greatest of evils. We
would fain sce England, Russia, any other civilized
power, have its fair share of influence in those lands.
But, if we are reduced ‘to a choice between. Russia

xii PREFACE.

and the Turk, then we must choose Russia? Our
consciences are clear ; the choice is not of our seek-
ing; it is forced upon us, it is forced upon the South-
eastern nations, by the professed enemies of Russia.
It is those professed enemies of Russia who are doing
the work of Russia. It is they who are allowing
‘Russia to take on herself alone the office in which
England and all civilized nations ought to join with
her, that of the protector of the oppressed nations.
The policy of reason is to hinder any evil designs
which Russia may be thought to have—though I
know of no reason for always attributing evil designs
to Russia more than to any other power—by frank
and cordial alliance with her in designs which, at least
in profession, are good. The deliverance of the subject
nations ought to be, if possible, the work of all Europe.
Failing that, it should be the work of Russia and
England together. But if England holds back and
leaves Russia to do the work alone, the fault lies with.
England and not with Russia: If the designs of
Russia are good, we lose the glory of sharing in
them ; if her designs are evil, we fail to employ the
best means of thwarting them. The policy with
which Englfarid entered into the Conference, the
resolve that, in no case whatever, was any thing to
be done, that in no case should the Turk be either
helped or coerced, was the very policy which Russia,
if she has any hidden designs, would wish England
to follow.

The disarmament of Russia at this moment would

PREFACE. xiii

be to take away from the subject nations their last,
hope, that which the policy of Lord Derby has made
their last hope. It would be to leave those nations
helpless in the clutches of their tyrants. Intervention
must come sooner or later. As long as the Turk
rules, the present state of things will go on. As long
as the Turk rules, there will always be revolts, there
will always be massacres. Europe cannot endure this
state of things for ever. One European nation at least
stands ready to step in and.put an end to it. We wish
that that nation did not stand alone; but if, by the
fault of other nations, she does stand alone, we cannot
blame her, we cannot thwart her. Lord Beaconsfield
and Lord Derby have brought things to such a pass,
that there is no hope but in Russia. It is something
that, even in their hands, the Protocol is not so drawn
up as not to cut off that only hope.

‘Otherwise the Protocol, as a document, and the
other documents which follow it, are simply talk of
the usual kind. The Protocol talks about this and
that circular and declaration of the Turk as if it
meant something. It talks “of good intentions on
the part of the Porte”—-the “ Porte” being the usual
euphemism for the Ring that ordered the massacres,
It talks of their “honour”—the honour of the men
whose falsehoods Lord Salisbury and General Ignatieff
rebuked to their faces. It talks of their “ loyalty "— ©

‘the loyalty of the men whose promises are, in the
schoolboy proverb, like pie-crust. It talks about “ re-
forms,” as if the Turk would ever make reforms. It

xiv PREFACE.

“invites the Porte,” in the queer, cumbrous, language
of diplomacy, “to consolidate the pacification by re-
placing its armies on a peace-footing, excepting the
number of troops indispensable for the maintenance
of order.” What is “order”? By order the Turk
means one thing; the Bulgarian or the Thessalian
means another thing. By order the Turk means a
state of things in which the Bulgarian and the Thes-
salian lie still, while. the Turk deals with them as he
chooses. The number of troops indispensable for the
maintenance of order in this sense may be got at, if
we know how mary unarmed Christians.can be kept
in bondage by one armed Mussulman. In the eyes
of the Bulgarian and the Thessalian, order means a
state of things for which it is in the first place indis-
pensable that there should be no armed Turks in
his country at all. Where the armed Turk is, there
can be no order; for the presence of the armed Turk
‘means the commission of every form of outrage with-
out fear of punishment. Turkish troops can never be
put on a peace-footing ; because, where Turkish troops
are there can be mo peace, except in that old sense
in which men call it peace when they have made a
wilderness.

And, to do all these wonderful measures of. reform,
the Turk is to “take advantage of the present lull.”
Where is. the “lull”? Certainly nowhere in the lands
east of the Hadriatic’ There is no lull in Bulgaria,
where the Turk goes on with his usual work of blood
and outrage day by day. There is no lull in Free

PREFACE.» XV

Bosnia, where the victorious patriots have driven out
the Turk, and where they stand. with their arms in
their hands lest he should come in again. There is
no lull on the Black Mountain, where the triumphant
champions of freedom, the men to whom the back of
a Turk is the most familiar of all sights, stand ready
to march, ready to extend their own freedom to
their suffering brethren. While all this is going on,
diplomatists see a lull, They meet and talk, and
say that, “if” the things happen which are happen-
ing every day, then they will meet again and have
another talk.
The sayings and doings of Lord Derby have long
since passed out of the range of practical politics.
’ He seems to have lost even that amount of practical
vigour which is involved in forbidding an act of
humanity or in exhorting the Turk to suppress an
insurrection. Of all things absolutely helpless the
most helpless surely is the conditional signature of
‘the Protocol. Yet, if anything, the long letter which
accompanies the Protocol is more helpless still. This
part of the document is really worth preserving.

** Under these circumstances it appears to the Russian Government
that the most practical solution, and the oné best fitted to secure the
maintenance of general peace, would be the signature by the Powers of
a Protocol which should, so to speak, terminate the incident.

‘* This Protocél might be signed in London by the representatives of
the Great Powets, and under the direct inspiration of the Cabinet of
St. James.

“The Protocol would contain ne more than the principles upon
which the several Governments would have based their reply to the

Russian Circular. It would be desirable that it should affirm that the
present state of affairs was one which concertied the whole of Europe,

xvi PREFACE.

and should place on record that the improvement of the condition of the
Christian population of Turkey will continue to be an object of interest
to all the Powers.

‘The Porte having repeatedly declared that it engaged to introduce
reforms, it wdald be desirable to enumerate them on the basis of Safvet
Pacha’s Circular. Ig this way there could be no subsequent misunder-
standing as to the promises made by Turkey.

** As a period of some months would not be sufficient to accomplish
these reforms, it would be preferable not to fix any precise limit of time.
It would rest with all the powers to determine by general agreement
whether Turkey was progressing in a satisfactory manner in her work
of regeneration.

“«The Protocol should mention that Europe will continue to watch
the progressive execution of the reforms by means of their diplomatic
representatives.

“If the hopes of the Powers should once more be disappointed, and
the condition of the Christian subjects of the Sultan should not be
improved, the Powers would reserve to themselves to consider in com-
mon the action which they would deem indispensable to secure the
well-being of the Christian population of Turkey and the interests of
the general peace.

**Count Schouvaloff hoped that I should appreciate the moderate
and conciliatory spirit which actuated his Government in this expression
or their views. They seemed to him to contain nothing incompatible
with the principles on which the policy of England was based, and
their application wouid secure the maintenance of general peace.”

It appears then that, on March 31, 1877, Lord
Derby still believed that the Turk was going to
reform ; he still believed that, in watching his doings,
there would be something else to watch than the:
‘kind of doings which the Turk has always done
for the last five hundred years. Such an example
of the charity which believeth all things can be
surpassed only by the charity of Origen and Tillot-
son, both of whom, according to Lord Macaulay,
did not despair of the reformation of a yet older
‘offender. But, in the practical, everyday, world in

PREFACE. xvii

which we live, these illusions of a charitable senti-
mientalism cannot be taken into account. Thé
months during which Lord Derby is willing to look
on, hoping for the regeneration of Turkey, may be
profitably spent in accomplishing the regeneration
of Turkey by the only means by which it can be
regenerated, by putting an end to the rule of the Turk.
If Lord Derby expects the regeneration of Turkey
to be brought about by any other means, he will
no more see that done in 1877 than he or anybody
else has seen it done in any other year since 1356.

On the whole then, “the inspiration of the Cabinet
of St. James” does not seem likely to do much to-
wards “terminating the incident,” if, by “terminating
the incident” is meant putting an end to the “ eternal
Eastern Question” and its causes. The phrase is not
a bad one. The presence of the Turk, and the
“eternal Eastern Question” which his presence causes,
is really only an “incident,” though it is an incident
which has gone on for five hundred years. The Turk’s
presence in Europe is incidental. It is something
strange, abnormal, contraty to the general system of |
Europe, something which keeps that system always
out of gear, something which supplies a never-failing
stock of difficulties and complications. The Turk in
Europe, in short, answers to Lord Palmerston’s defini-
tion of dirt. He is “matter in the wrong place.”
The sooner the “incident” of his presence is
“terminated,” by the help of whatever “inspiration,”
the better. An inspiration likely to terminate that

xviii PREFACE.

‘incident might have come from the Cabinet of St.
James in the days of Canning. It is not likely to
come from one who proposes to fold his hands for
some mortths to see what the Turk will do. Those
who have their tyes open, and who do not talk about
“terminating incidents,” know perfectly well that the
Turk will, during those months, go on doing as he
has done in so many earlier months. He will go on
making things look smooth at Constantinople, while
he does his usual work in Bulgaria and Crete.

But there is yet another danger. If everything
rested with Lord Derby, with a man who is steadfastly
purposed to employ himself with a vigorous doing of
nothing, we should at least have one kind of safety.
In the hands of Lord Derby, if we do no good, we
shall do no harm, except so far as the doing of
nothing is really the’ worst form of the doing of
harm. From him, if we hope for no active good, we
need fear no active mischief. But there is another |
power against which England and Europe ought to
be yet more carefully on their guard. ~It is no use |
mincing matters. The time has come to speak out
plainly. No well disposed person would reproach
another either with his nationality or his religion,
unless that nationality or that religion leads to some
direct mischief. No one wishes to place the Jew,
whether Jew by birth or by religion, under any dis-
ability as compared with the European Christian.
But it will not do to have the policy of England, the.
welfare of Europe, sacrificed. to Hebrew sentiment.

PREFACE. xix

nger is no imaginary one. Every one must have
d that the one subject on which Lord Beacons-.
hrough his whole career, has been in earnest
en whatever has touched his own people. A
r about everything else, he has been thoroughly
s about this. His national sympathies led him
most honourable action of his life, when he
k his party for the sake of his nation, and drew
the next day from the-Standard newspaper the
k that “no Jew could be a gentleman.” On that
he Jew was a gentleman in the highest sense.
cted as one who could brave much and risk
for a real conviction. His zeal for his own
e is really the best feature in Lord Beaconsfield’s
r. But we cannot sacrifice our people, the people
ryan and Christian“Europe, to the most genuine
fin an Asian mystery. We cannot have England
Furope governed bya Hebrew policy. While
1 Derby simply wishes to do nothing one way
other, Lord Beaconsfield is the active friend of
Turk. The alliance runs through all Europe.
ughout the East, the Turk and the Jew are
ied against the Christian. In theory the Jew
rt Mahometan rule is condemned to equal de-
ation with the Christian. In practice the yoke
es much more lightly upon the Jew. As he is
.a cultivator of the soil, as he commonly lives
he large towns, the worst forms of Turkish
ession do not touch him. He has also endless
s of making himself’ useful to the Turk, and

XxX PREFACE.

oppressive to the Christian. The Jew is the t
the Turk, and is therefore yet more hated thz
Turk. This is the key to the supposed intol
of Servia with regard to the Jews. I can spe
Strvia; I have no information as to Roumania.
Servian legislation is not aimed at Jews as Jev
Jews are eligible to the highest offices in Servia
aimed at certain corrupting callings which in p
fact are practised only by Jews. Strike out the
« Jew,” and instead name certain callings which
but Jews practise, and the law of Servia

perhaps still be open to criticism on the grou
political economy ; it could be open to none o
ground of religious toleration. The union of th
and the Turk against the Christian came out i
strongest form when Sultan Mahmoud gave the
of the martyred Patriarch to be dragged by the
through the streets of Constantinople. We ca
have the policy of Europe dealt with in the like
There is all the difference in the world betwee
degraded Jews of the East and the cultivated
honourable Jews of the West. But blood is str
than water, and Hebrew rule is sure to lead
Hebrew policy. Throughout Europe, the most fies
Turkish part of the press is largely in Jewish h
It may be assumed everywhere, with the sm
class of exceptions, that the Jew is the friend o
Turk and the enemy of the Christian. The outsp
voice of the English people saved: us last aut
from a war with Russia on behalf of the Turk.

PREFACE. XX

brags of the Mansion-House were answered by the
protest of Saint James's Hall. But we must be on
our guard. If Russia once goes to war,with the
Turk, a thousand opportunities may be found for
picking a quarrel. Every step must be watched.
As we cannot have the action of Canning, we must
at least make sure that the inaction of Lord Derby
shall be the worst thing that we have.

As I have for many years read, thought and

written, much about the present subject and other
subjects closely connected with it—as they have, I
“may say, been through life my chief secondary object
of study, I have thought it worth while to give a
list of the chief articles which I have written on
such matters during the last three and twenty years.
I forbear to mention mere letters in newspapers,
which are endless. I think’ the dates will shew that
my attention to these matters is at least not anything
new. ’
The Byzantine Empire. North British Review.
February, 1855.

Mahometanism in the East and West. “North
British Review. August, 1855.
' The Greek People and the Greek Kingdom. Edin-
burgh Review. April, 1856.

The Eastern Church. Edinburgh Review. April,
1858.

Medizeval and Modern Greece. National Review.
January, 1864. ~

xxii PREFACE.

Mahomet. British Quarterly Review. January,
1872,

Public and Private Morality. Fortnightly Review.
April, 1873.

The True Eastern Question. Fortnightly Review.
December, 1875.

Montenegro. Macmillan’s Magazine. . January,
1876,

The Illyrian Emperors and their Land. British
Quarterly Review. July, 1876.

The Turks in Europe. British Quarterly Review.
October, 1876.

Present Aspects of the Eastern Question. Fort-
nightly Review. October, 2876. ;

The Geographical Aspect of the Eastern Question.
Fortnightly Review. January, 1877.

The English People in relation to the Eastern
Question. Contemporary Review. February, 1877.

Race and Language. Contemporary Review.
March, 1877.

I may add that the present volume is in some sort
an expansion of the argument of a small tract called
the “ Turks in Europe,” which I lately wrote as the
first number of the series called “Politics for the
People.”.

SOMERLEAZE, WELLS, SOMERSET,
April 9th, 1877.

CONTENTS.

CHAPTER I.

“EASTERN AND WESTERN EUROPE .

‘CHAPTER IL.
‘THE RACES OF EASTERN EUROPE .«

CHAPTER IIL
THE OTTOMAN TURKS AND FHEIR RELIGION .

CHAPTER IV.
THE RISE AND GROWTH OF THE OTTOMAN POWER

“CHAPTER V.
THE DECLINE OF THE OTTOMAN POWER

CHAPTER VI.

:THE REVOLTS AGAINST THE OTTOMAN POWER

CHAPTER VII.
THE PRACTICAL QUESTION

PAGER

27

87

. 166

. 250

THE
OTTOMAN POWER IN EUROPE;

ITS NATURE, ITS GROWTH, AND ITS DECLINE.

CHAPTER I.
EASTERN AND WESTERN EUROPE.

THE rule of the Ottoman Turks in Europe is in
itself a phenomenon without a parallel in history.
For a length of time ranging in different parts from
two to five hundred years, a large part of the fairest
and most historic regions of the earth, a large part of
the most renowned cities, the ancient seats of empire
and civilization, have groaned under the yoke of
foreign rulers, rulers whose rule is in no way changed
by lapse of time, but who remain at the end of five
hundred years as much strangers as they were at
the beginning. In the lands where European civiliza-
tion first had its birth, the European has been ruled by
the Asiatic, the civilized man by the barbarian. There
have been other phenomena in European history
which have approached to this ; but there is none that
‘supplies an exact parallel. A race which stands apart’

B

2 EASTERN AND WESTERN EUROPE,

from all the other races of Europe in all which makes
those races European, in all which distinguishes Euro-
pean man from Asiatic or African man, has held an
abiding deminion over those parts of Europe which
are in their history preeminently European, over
those parts of Europe from which the rest have learned
wellnigh all that has made Europe what it is. Alike
in Europe and in Asia, the ancient seats of European
dominion, the cities whence European man once ruled
over Asia, are now in the hands of the Asiatic who rules ,
in Europe. The earliest homes of European culture
and European history have fallen under the rule of a
race to whom European culture and European history
are strange. The spots whence Christian teaching
first went forth to win the nations of Europe within |
the Christian fold have passed into the hands of
votaries of the faith which is the most direct enemy
and rival of Christianity. Looked at as historical
events, these changes might pass as being merely
among the strangest among the strange revolutions
of history. But the phenomena of Turkish rule go
deeper than this. Changes of this kind have happened
in all parts ofthe world. They have happened with
special frequency in the Eastern world. It is not
merely that one dynasty or one race has overthrown
another. It is not merely that a people of con-

. querors have held a people of subjects in bondage.

If this were all, there would be parallels enough.
The great and strange phenomenon is that, while
Europe believes itself to be the quarter of the world
which takes the lead of all others, there is still'a large
part of Europe, and that the part of Europe which has,
so to speak, made the rest of Europe European, which
abides under the dominion of rulers who have nothing

NATURE OF TURKISH RULE, 3

to do with Europe beyond the fact that they live and
bear rule within its borders.

The phenomena of Turkish rule in Europe are so
strange that their very strangeness sometjmes in a
manner hides itself. Our usual modes of speaking are
at fault. It is hard to describe the actual state of
things, except by the use of words which belong to
another state of things, and which, when applied to
the state of things which exists in South-eastern
Europe, have no meaning. If we use such words as
nation, people, government, law, sovereign, subject, we
must give them all special and new definitions. If
we fancy that South-eastern Europe contains any-
thing which answers to the meaning of those words
in Western Europe, we are altogether deceived. We
-have a political and social nomenclature which suits
the nations of Western Europe, as forming one poli-
tical and social world. We have no special nomen-
clature to describe an opposite state of things at
the other end-of Europe; and, if we transport our '
Western nomenclature there, we find ourselves using”
_ words which have nothing to answer to them. In

fact the gap which divides the Turk from the nations
of Europe is so wide and impassable that ordinary
language fails to express it. ‘It is so wide and impas-
sable that we are sometimes tempted to forget how
wide and impassable it is. The nations of civilized
Europe have so much in common with one another
that their differences strike us all the more because
they have so much in common. ‘We are therefore apt
to forget how much they really have in common, how
they stand together as members of one body, bound
together by many ties, how they are kinsfolk whose
points of unlikeness are after all trifling compared

B2

4 EASTERN AND WESTERN EUROPE,

with their points of likeness. As opposed to the Turk,
they are one body. They have a crowd of things in
common in which the Turk has no share. To under-
stand then what the Turk really is, how strange an
anomaly his presence in Europe is, it will be well to
run through the chief points of likeness between the
nations of civilized Europe, to point out the chief
things which they all share as common possessions.
When we clearly understand how much all European
nations, in spite of political and religious differences,
really have in common, we shall better understand
how utterly the Turk is a stranger to all of them
alike.

Fully to understand the nature of this common
store which belongs to the nations of civilized Europe,
‘but in which the Turks have no share, we must go
_back to the very beginning of things. All the chief
nations of Europe belong to one branch of the human
family ; they all speak tongues which can be shown
to have been at first the same tongue. There was a
time when the forefathers of all the nations of Europe,
Greek, Latin, Teutonic, Slavonic, and Lithuanian, were
all one people, when they marched in one common
company from the common home far away. Setting
aside a few remnants of earlier races which our
‘forefathers found in Europe, setting aside a few
settlements which have in historic times been: made
in Europe by men of other races, all the nations of
Europe belong to the one common Aryan stock, And
those which do not, the earlier remnants, the Jater
settlers, have all, with one exception, been brought
more or less thoroughly within the range of Aryan
influences. If ‘not European, by birth, they have
become European by adoption. Here then is one

KINDRED OF THE EUROPEAN NATIONS.

great common possession, namely, real original unity of
race and speech. (1) And it surely cannot be doubted
that this original unity of race and speech had a mest
powerful, though an unconscious, influence, in bringing
the European nations together as members of one.
great commonwealth, in distinction from those who
have no share in this ancestral possession. The original
unity worked.for ages before men knew anything of’
its being; it bound men together who had no thought
whatever of the tie which bound them. The Gaul, the
Roman, the Goth, had no knowledge of their original
kindred. But that original kindred did its work all the
same. It enabled Gaul, Roman and Goth, to, be all
fused together into one society, a society in which the
Hun and the Saracen had no share. First and fore-
most then among the common possessions of civilized
Europe, we must place the common possession of
Aryan blood and speech. Throughout Europe that
which is Aryan is the rule; that which i is not Aryan
is the exception. And for ‘the most part that which
is not Aryan has more or less thoroughly put on an
Aryan guise. Here then is the first common posses-
sion which marks off Aryan Europe from those who
have no share in the common heritage.: ;
But original community of descent and language
are not all. By themselves they might not have been
enough to form the nations of Europe into one great
society. We have far-off kinsfolk, sprung from the
same ancestral stock, speaking dialects of the same
ancestral language, who have beén parted off so long
and so utterly that the‘ original kindred has now
become mere matter of curious interest, with little or
no working upon practical affairs. If Latin, Teuton
and Slave are all kinsmen to one another, the Persian

6 EASTERN AND WESTERN EUROPE.

and the Hindoo are kinsmen no less. And yet the
Persian and the Hindoo are not, like the Latin, the
Teuton, and the Slave, members of one gréat com-
monwealth of nations. The geographical separation
between the Eastern and the Western Aryans has
caused the Western, Aryans to form a distinct
commonwealth of nations, quite apart from their
Eastern kinsfolk. The Western Aryans have settled
in lands which are geographically continuous, and
that geographical contiauity, has enabled them to add
to original tie of race and speech, the further tie of
partnership in a common history. They all form
part of one historic world, the world of Rome. They.
all share, more or less fully, in the memories which are
common to all who have been brought within the
_ magic influence of either of the two seats of Roman
- dominion. The modern nations of Europe were
either once subjects of the Roman Empire, or else
they are settlers within that Empire, in the character
half of conquerors, half of disciples. Or even if they lie
beyond the bounds of the older Empire, even if they
never submitted to its political authority, they have -
still bowed beneath its moral influence, All Europe, .
_Eastern and Western, has a common right in Rome
and in all that springs from Rome, in the laws, the
arts, the languages, the general culture, which Rome
taught them. Of that Roman influence there have —
been two centres; Western Europe sat at the feet of
the Old Rome by the Tiber ; Eastern Europe sat at
the feet of the New Rome by the Bosporos. From
Rome, Old and New, from the city of Romulus and
from the city of Constantine, has come the civilization
which distinguishes Europe from Africa and Asia.
In that heritage all Europe has a share. From that

INFLUENCE OF ROME. 7

source all Europe has learned a crowd of ideas and
memories and sympathies, in which those nations
which stood outside the Roman world never had a
share.. All Europe alike has its right in» those two
languages of the Roman world which have ever been,
in one shape or another, the groundwork of European
culture. The Greek and thé Latin tongues, the
tongue of poetry and science, the tongue of law
and rule, the undying literature of those two tongues,
the endless train of thoughts and feelings which have
their root in that literature, all these are a common
and an exclusive possession of ‘civilized Europe.
They are a common heritage which parts off Roman
Europe from those nations which never came under
the abiding spell of Roman influence.

But besides their common origin and common history,
‘there is another common possession of the nations of
Europe, a possession which is the greatest result of
their common history, the greatest: gift which Rome
gave alike to her children, her subjects, her conquerors,
and her far-off disciples. Besides a common origin
and a common history, the nations of Europe havea
common religion. Besides, being Aryan and Roman,
Europe is aiso Christian. In its historic aspect,
Christianity is the religion of the Roman Empire, the
religion of all those lands which either formed part of
the Roman Empire or which received their culture

_from Rome, Old or New. It is the religion of Europe;
‘if it is no longer the religion of the lands out of
Europe which once were Roman, it is because in those
lands it has undergone more or less of physical up-
rooting. In its origin Semitic and Asiatic, Christianity
became in its history preeminently European and
Aryan. Born in a remote province of the Empire, it

8 EASTERN AND WESTERN EUROPE.

became the religion of the Empire; it became the
religion of all the nations to which the Empire gave
its creed as well as its law and its culture. But beyond
those limits it hardly spread. It is the creed of
civilized Europe and America, because civilized
Europe and America share in the common heritage
of Rome. It is not the creed of Asia and Africa;
because over the greater part of Asia and Africa the
influence of Rome never spread, and where it did
spread it has been. rooted out by the events of later
history. Nor does it really affect this common
possession that the nations of Europe have accepted
Christianity in various forms, that each great division
of nations has moulded the common possession into .
a shape of its own, according to its own national
character and national feelings. To go no deeper into
the divisions of Christendom, there is’ on the. face of
things a Greek, a Latin, and a Teutonic Christianity,
each of which has features which are special to itself,
in ceremony, in discipline, and even in doctrine. And -
these differences have led to divisions, hatreds, persecu-
tions, wars. And yet, among all this division, there is
real unity. Christianity is, after all, a common posses-
sion, a common tie, even among nations who are.almost
ready to refuse to one another the name of Christians.
They may carry on their disputes even in the face of
men of another faith, and yet, as compared with men
of another faith, their union is stronger than their
diversity. Between the professors of any two forms
of Christianity the points of likeness are, after all,
more and stronger than the points of unlikeness. In
most cases this is true even of mere dogma. In all
cases it is true of those indirect results of Christian
teaching which are ‘the truest common possession of

INFLUENCE OF CHRISTIANITY. 9

Christian nations. What those results are we will go
on to examine further ; but we have already found a
third note, a third possession, which the nations of
civilized Europe—reckoning also of course their
colonies in other lands—have in common and have.
almost exclusively, Civilized Europe, besides being
Aryan and Roman, is also Christian.

We now go a step further: The common origin. of
the European nations, combined with their geogra-
phical position, allowed them to have a common .
history. That common history gave them a common
creed. And that common history and common creed
working together have given them a common civiliza-
tion, a common morality, a common possession of
political, social, and intellectual life. Community of
origin and community of history gave the European
nations a common possession of political and ‘intel- ©
lectual instincts, and their common faith, to say the
least, did not stand in the way of the developement
of those common political and intellectual instincts,
This last assertion needs, if not some qualification, at
least some explanation. Men who have given them-
.selves out as representatives of the Christian religion,
men who have borne the names of Christian teachers
and Christian rulers, have often stood in the way of
those instincts. Political freedom and intellectual
life have often-been suppressed and proscribed in the
name of the Christian religion. Persecutions and
wars against men professing other creeds, against
men professing other forms of Christianity, have
- often been decreed in the name of Christianity. But
Christianity itself has done none. of those things.
Those who have done them have not obeyed but
disobeyed the genuine teaching of Christianity. That

ine) EASTERN AND WESTERN EUROPE.

this is so will appear more plainly when we come to
speak of the practical working of another religion.
The historical work of Christianity has been this.
The common creed of Europe, working together with
the common origin and common history of Europe,
has produced’ the common civilization of . Europe.
The common creed has strengthened. whatever was
good, it has weakened whatever was evil, in the state
of. European society when that-common creed was
first adopted. It has been enabled to do so mainly
through the negative side of its teaching. Christianity
lays down no political or civil precepts. It prescribes
no form of government ; it forbids no form of govern-
ment. Its precepts are purely moral. It lays down
no code of laws. It simply lays down moral precepts,
" according to which its individual professors are bound
to shape their private actions, and therefore according
to which communities made up of those professors
‘are bound to shape their public actions. It prescribes
justice and mercy. It prescribes good will and good
deeds to brethren in the faith in the first instance, but
to men of other creeds as well,’ To-do good unto all
men, specially unto such as are of the household of
faith, is the sum of its teaching.
In short, Christianity is so far from laying down
_any political or civil’code that it does not even lay
down a moral code. The practical application of its
moral precepts to political and social questions is left
to its disciples to work out for themselves. Take for
instance ‘the two great features which distinguish
Eastern from Western society, features which are
closely connected with one another, and of which it
may be safely said that one at least implies the
other. Eastern society not only allows slavery and

EASTERN AND WESTERN SOCIETY. Ir

polygamy, but it is grounded upon them. An Eastern
nation from which slavery and polygamy were wholly
swept away would cease tobe an Eastern nation. It
would, whatever its geographical position, ‘have, in
the most important social respects, become Western,
To say that Eastern society is grounded on slavery’
and polygamy of course does not imply that each par-
ticular man in an Eastern nation is necessarily either
a slave-owner or a master of many wives. Slavery
and polygamy on any great scale must always be
in their own nature the privileges of the few. But
Eastern society is founded ‘on. those institutions
in the same sense in which it might be said that
some forms of Western society have been founded
on those ideas which, for want of better words,
may be called by the inaccurate, but not wholly
meaningless, names of feudal and chivalrous. The
possibility of slavery and polygamy in all cases, their
presence in many cases, give. Eastern society its
distinctive character. The characteristics of Western
society, on the other hand, are that polygamy has
never existed, and that slavery has everywhere died
out, ‘We may say that polygamy has never existed ;

for the few cases to the contrary are so purely excep-
tional as to have no practical bearing on the matter.(?)
And we may say that. slavery has everywhere died.
out, when it has vanished from every part of Christian
Europe and even from the great mass of European
colonies.. This character of Western society is the
fruit of Christianity working on the earlier institutions
of the European nations. With regard to polygamy '
there was hardly any need to legislate. Christianity
was first preached to societies where monogamy was
the law ; amid great licentiousness of manners and a

12 EASTERN AND WESTERN EUROPE.

lax law of divorce, no subject of the Roman Empire
could have more than one lawful wife at a time. And
what was the law of the Roman Empire was in this.
respect ‘the general law of' the Teutonic nations also.
Here then the. business of Christianity was, not to
lay down any new principle, but to work a general
purification of morals and to abridge the licence of
divorce, It is on this last head that rules are laid -
down in the Gospel which come nearer to the nature
of civil precepts than any other. But it would be
hard to find any direct prohibition of polygamy in
the Christian Scriptures. The institution was allowed
by the Old Law, and it is not in so many words
taken away by the New. But every moral precept
of Christianity tells against it. And this tendency,
working together with the teaching both of Roman
and of Teutonic law, has caused all’ Christian
trations to take monogamy for granted as something
absolutely ‘essential to a Christian society. With
slavery on the other hand Christianity ‘has had to
fight a much harder battle. In the case of polygamy,
Christian teaching could go hand in hand with Roman
and Teutonic law. In the case of slavery, Christian
teaching found both Roman and Teutonic law
arranged against it. The New Testament contains
no precept which directly forbids slavery ; indeed
it assumes it as one of the ordinary conditions of
that Roman society to which Christianity was first
preached. But the moral precepts of Christianity are
distinctly inconsistent with slavery, and they have in,
‘the end, slowly but surely, done their work. Men first .
learned that it was a sin against Christian fellowship
to hold a fellow Christian in bondage. Thus, first
actual slavery, and then the milder forms of serfdom

POLYGAMY AND SLAVERY. a E

and villainage, have gradually died out or have been
abolished in all European nations. The rule which
men thus learned to apply to men of their own creed
-and their own colour they learned more slqwly to
apply to men of other creeds and other colours. The
abolition of the slavery of the black man in European

colonies has followed the abolition of the slavery of
the white man in Europe itself, Personal slavery has.
so long died out in Western Europe, even villainage:
has so long died out in England, that we are apt to |
forget that slavery remained a common institution in

all Western Europe, and not least in our own island,

‘for ages after the establishment of Christianity.. Good

men in the eleventh and twelfth centuries preached’
against the bondage and sale of fellow Christians, as

good men in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries

have preached against the bondage and sale of fellow

men, But in the end the implied teaching of the

Gospel has triumphed. As Christianity, working

along with Roman law, effectually shut out poly-

gamy, so in the end Christianity, even in the teeth of

Roman law, has effectually driven out slavery.

We may fairly say that, if there were no other.
differences, these two points alone would be enough’ to.
distinguish Eastern and Western society. The differ-.
ence between a polygamous community and one in!
which polygamy is forbidden or unknown is an essential
difference, a difference which runs through everything,
a difference of another kind from ordinary differences
in religion, manners, or forms of government. It isa
difference which directly affects the condition of half
the human species, and which indirectly affects the
condition of the other half. The whole social state’
of a polygamous and a monogamous people is wholly

14 EASTERN AND WESTERN EUROPE.

different. It is a difference which does not admit of
degrees, a difference in which the first step is every-
thing. And it should further be noticed that polygamy
practically implies slavery, and that it is the greatest.
encouragement of slavery. The difference of slavery
or no slavery by itself does not make so wide a gap,
and it does admit of degrees. We might say that the
prohibition of polygamy is implied in the earliest
conception of Western society; the prohibition of
slavery belongs only to its fullest developement. But
both prohibitions alike are characteristic of Western
society as we now conceive it; they form an irre- ,
concileable difference between that society and any
society which allows either of the two great evils,
one of which we never knew, while from the other
we have set ourselves free.
Now. as the European nations have all these
‘common possessions, historical, religious, and social,
it has naturally followed that they have all tended
more or less strongly to a‘ common type of govern-
ment and polity: It has often been shown that the
various governments of Europe, notwithstanding all
their points of unlikeness, and notwithstanding the
widely different courses which they have run, have
all sprung out of certain common elements, and that
they have all along kept certain great ideas in com-
mon. And, for a good while past, all of them seem to
be, as it were, converging towards one model. The
worst European governments in the worst times have
kept up a certain show of right, a certain profession
of regard for law, even where the laws were worst in
themselves and were worst administered. And in’
later times most European governments, even those
which have been in some things unjust and oppres-

WESTERN GOVERNMENTS. 15

sive, have tended more and more towards a system!
which does tolerably fair justice between man and
man, at all events in matters where the interest of the
government is not concerned. Where European
governments have become most nearly despotic, it
has always been by the overthrow or dying out of
earlier and freer institutions. And in every European.
country but one, despotism has in its turn died out.or
been overthrown. Russia is now the only European
country which has not some kind of political constitu-
tion, some measure of political freedom, greater or
jess. In making this exception, we.must remember,
on the one hand, that Russia is, both through its geo-
graphical position and through its former bondage
to Asiatic rulers, the least European of European
‘countries. And we must remember also that, though
Russia has as yet no political constitution, yet even
in Russia there are many tendencies at work in
the direction of freedom, and.that publi¢ opinion is
beginning to have a power there which would have
seemed impossible only a short time back. But of
the countries of Western Europe, all at this moment
have constitutions of some kind. We may say, at all
events by comparison with other times and places,
that all the governments of Western Europe, though
doubtless some are better than others, all fairly dis-
charge the first. duties of government. It is only in
a very few parts of Western Europe, that any great
crime of one man against another is likely to go
unpunished. And, even where it is so, the fault can
hardly be said to rest either with the law or with the
government, but rather with some local cause which

makes it hard to put the law in force. One Western |
government is doubtless better than another, whether .

16 EASTERN AND WESTERN EUROPE.

in the law itself or in the administration .of the law.
But all of them fairly discharge the great duty of
defending their subjects from wrong to their persons
or properties. In all of them the voice of the nation
has some way, more or less perfect, of making itself
known. In all of them the ruler has a right to allegi-
- ance from the subject, because the subject receives pro-
tection from the ruler. In short, in Western Europe,
and above all in England, we are so used to the rule
of law that we can hardly understand the absence of
law. We can understand the temporary suspension
of law through a state of war or revolution; we
cannot understand its abiding absence. In. one
sense indeed the utter absence of law is impossible.
in every society, even the rudest, there is some check,
either of religion or of traditional custom, upon the
personal will of the ruler. But the regular legal-order
of things to which Western Europe is used, and to
which England has very long been used, is by no
means a thing which Has existed in all times and
places. The notion of an appeal to the law in the
case of any wrong is so familiar to our minds that we
find it hard to conceive a state of things where no
such appeal is to be had. ‘But it is specially im-
portant to remember that the good administration of
justice, an administration which has been. getting
better and better for nearly two hundred years, and
to which we are so thoroughly accustomed that we
are apt to take it for granted, is a thing which has
been rare in the history of the world, and which in
its perfect form is not very old among ourselves,
Speaking roughly then, and by comparison with
other times and places, we may say that in all the
countries of Western Europe the main ends of govern--

NATIONAL GOVERNMENTS. . 17

ment are well carried out. This or that government
may be bad in some particular points; but on the
whole it is an instrument. of good. To say the very
least, it does more good than it does harm. And
more than this, as a rule; the governments of Western
Europe are-national governments. There are particu-
lar parts in several of the countries of Western Europe
in which men complain, with greater or less reason, :
that they are not under national governments, that
they are under governments which are not of their
own choosing and which they would willingly throw
off. But the parts where complaints of this kind are
made make up but a very small part of Western ©
Europe. They are mere exceptions to-a general rule.
And, even where people complain of a foreign
dominion, that foreign dominion does not, as com-
pared with other times and places, carry with it any
monstrous oppression. .In no part of Western Europe
is there such a sight to be seen-as that of a large
country where the people of the land are in bondage
to foreign rulers, where they are shut out from any
real share in the government: of their own land, and
where they cannot get any redress from their foreign
rulers, even for their greatest wrongs. Even the
exceptional cases which have just. been spoken of are
something very different from this. And, setting
those exceptional. cases: aside, the whole of Western
Europe may be fairly said to be under governments
which are really national ‘governments, governments
which the people of the land may wish to improve in
this or that point, but. which they do net wish to
throw off altogether. The nation and the Govern-
ment have common interests, common feelings. The
Government may fail rightly to understand the
Cc

18 EASTERN AND WESTERN EUROPE.

interests, feelings, and wishes of the nation ; but it has
not, openly and avowedly, interests, feelings, and wishes |
opposed to those of the nation. The King or other
chief of the Government is the acknowledged head of
the nation. Even if in any case he chances to be of
foreign birth, he throws off as faras he can the character
of 4 stranger, and puts'on as far as he..can the cha-
racter of a native ruler. If not a countryman by birth,
he becomes a countryman by adoption. His govern-
ment may be better or worse; his personal character
may make him more or less popular; but in any
case the nation accepts him as its leader at home and
its representative abroad. - The. land, the nation, and
the chief of the nation are all bound together. The
‘interests of England and the interests of the English,
the interests of France and the interests of the
French, are phrases of exactly the same meaning.
Nor does it come into any man’s head ‘that the Queen
of Great Britain or the President of the French
- Republic has, in any public matter at home or
abroad, any personal interests opposite to or separate
from the interests of the lands and nations over
which they severally rule.
Now it should here be noticed that; though nearly
the whole of Western Europe is now under national
governments, it is far frorn being true that all those
governments were national governments from the
beginning. Mast of them had their beginning in
conquest ; most of them began in the forcible settle-
‘ment of one people in-a land occupied by another —
people. : But in most cases it has gradually come
to be forgotten that the government had its begin-
ning in conquest. The conquerors and conquered .
have, sooner or later, learned to feel as one people,

ORIGIN. OF WESTERN GOVERNMENTS. 19

and to acknowledge ‘a common head in the ruler of
their common land. Sometimes the conquerors have
learned the language and manners of. the conquered ;
sometimes the conquered have learned the’ language
and manners of the conquerors. Sometimes the
conquerors have taken the name of the conquered ;
sometimes the conquered have taken the name of
the conquerors. In either case, conquered and. con-
querors have, sooner or later, become one people;
and, in some cases, evén where they have not so
thoroughly become one people as this, even where
the languages of the conquerors and the conquered
have gone on side by side, it has been found that
old wrongs can be thoroughly forgotten, and that the
_two nations have practically become one in face of all
other nations, Thus, in the old days of the Roman.
dominion, when the Roman Empire was spread over
all the lands around the Mediterranean sea, the con-
quered nations were, step by step, admitted to the
rights of Romans. They adopted the language and
manners of Rome ; they forgot their old national names
and feelings, and spoke of themselves only as Romans.
So in later times, when the German people of the
Franks settled in a large part of Gaul and gradually
spread their. power over the rest, the conquerors and
the conquered gradually became one people. The
conquerors learned the language of ‘the conquered,.
and the conquered came, step by step, to call
themselves by the name of the conquerors. It
matters to no man _in France now, whether his
forefathers long ago were of Iberian, Celtic, Roman,
Gothic, Burgundian, or Frankish blood. All are now
thoroughly mingled together in the one French
nation. So in our own island, where English, Scots,
C2

20 EASTERN AND WESTERN EUROPE.

and Welsh have been brought together, partly by
conquest, partly by treaties, though old national
feelings are not forgotten, though even distinct
languages are still to some extent in use, yet all
form politically one nation. No man in Great
Britain wishes to throw off the common government
of Great Britain, or to cut off his own part of Great
Britain from the rest. So again, when England
was conquered by the Nosmans, and a foreign
king and a foreign nobility bore rule over the land,
still the conquerors and the conquered drew near
together in a wonderfully short time. The conquerors
gradually learned to speak the tongues of the con- _
quered, to share their feelings, and fo call themselves:
by their.name. It matters nothing to any Eng-
lishman now whether his forefathers ages back were
of Old-English or of Norman birth. It mattered but
little even so soon after the Conquest as the reign of
Henry the Second, In all these cases, governments
which began in conquest have, sooner or later, some-
times very soon indeed, become national governments.
And we may remark that the tendency of conquerors
and cofiquered to be in this way fused together is
especially characteristic of Western Europe, and
above all, of those parts of Western Europe which —
formed parts of the Roman Empire. For the in-
fluence of Rome on men’s minds was such that,
within the provinces which had become thoroughly
Roman, all conquerors, at least all Aryan conquerors,
came so far under its power as at least to learn to
speak some form of the Roman language. In Italy
above all, though the land has been conquered over
and over again, though till lately it was divided
among many separate governments, yet all the

FUSION OF CONQUERORS AND CONQUERED. 21

successive conquerors had learned the speech of
the land, and. had become one with the people of
the land where they settled. One can have no doubt
that, in all these. cases, the common origin of the
European natidns, even though they knew nothing
about it, had-a real-effect in making it easier for
different nations to join into one. And in the lands
which had become thoroughly Roman the process
of union was easier still.

We have thus seen how many things all the nations
of Europe, among all their differences, really have
in common. They have a common origin, a common
history, a common religion, a common civilization,
common social, moral, and political ideas. And
the result of al] thisjs that they, for the most part,
live under national governments, under fairly good
governments—that, even where the government began
in conquest the conquerors and the conquered have
‘commonly been able to come togetheras one people—
that there is no large part of Western Europe where ©
the people of the land can even pretend. that they
are under foreign rulers—that in the few parts where
there is foreign rule, that foreign rule does not carry -
with it any very gross oppression. We have seen —
that in the countries of Western Europe there is
no separation of interest or feeling between the
land, the people, and the government. The nation
is a body of which the King or other ruler is the head.
When we have well taken in all these things, we shall
be really able to understand the peculiar position of
the Turks in .South-eastern Europe, and how utterly
it differs from anything to which we are ,used in
Western Europe.

Thus the Turks have given their name to the land -

22 EASTERN AND WESTERN EUROPE.

which they conquered, exactly as the Franks have
given their name to the land which they conquered.
The one land is called Turkey, as the other is called
France. But the history of the Turks in Greece,
Bulgaria, Servia, and the other lands which they
conquered has been quite different from the history
of the Franks in Gaul. The Franks in Gaul have
been altogether lost in the general mass of the
people of the land. But the Turks in Turkey are |
just as distinct now from the mass of the people of
the land as they were when, they first came into
it. It is not a question whether a man’s remote
forefathers were Turks or not; the question is a
much more immediate and practical one, whether a
man is himself a Turk or not. The Turks, though
‘they have been. in some parts of Turkey for five
hundred years, have still never become the people
of the land, nor have-they in any way become one
with the people of the land. They still remain as
they were when they first came in, a people of strangers
bearing rule over the people of the land, but in every
way distinct from them. They have not adopted the
language and manners of the people of the land, nor
have the people of the land adopted their language
and manners. After dwelling in the same land for so
many ages, they have never become the country-
men of the people of the land; they still remain .
foreigners and oppressors. The process of conquest,
which in all western conquests came to an end sooner
or later, still goes on in the lands conquered by the
Turk. So far as there is any law and government at
all, it is carried on for the interests of the conquering
strangers, and not for the interest of the people of the
land. The so-called sovereign is in no sense the head

POSITION OF THE TURKS. 23

of the people of the land, but is simply the head of
the conquering strangers,

Now when we have thoroughly taken in the real
nature of such a state of things as this, we’ at once
ask how it came about. We ask why it is that there
is in South-eastern Europe a state of things so
different from anything to which we are used in
Western Europe? Why is it that, while in the West
the differences between conquerors and conquered
/have -been everywhere gradually forgotten, in the
East the difference remains. as strong at.the end of
five hundred years as it was at the beginning? Why
has the Turk failed to assimilate the people of the
land, and why have the people of the land failed no
' less to assimilate the ‘Turk? Why has the Turk not
been able to do as the Roman did of old, to win the.
people of the land to his own speech and manners, to

make them in short Turks, as the people of Gaul and
Spain became Romans? Or why, on the other hand,
could not the Turk lose himself among the people of
the land whom he conquered, as the Frank lost himself
in Gaul, as the Lombard did in Italy; as the Norman
‘did in England? Why is it that the people of the
land and their conquerors have. never in all these
years been fused into one people, in the same way
which happened in all the other cases which we have
mentioned? Why is it that, while, in all these other
cases, a government which began in conquest has gra-
dually become a national government, discharging the
duties of government, while it: has- often become a
thoroughly free government, the Turk has in all these
ages nevergiven so much as common protection for
life, property,and personal rights to the nations under
his rule? The causes are many; some of them are to.

24 EASTERN AND WESTERN EUROPE.

be found in the earlier history of the lands which the
Turk invaded ; some are to be found in the peculiar
position of the Turk himself. We may say that the
first set 6f causes made it harder for any conquering
people in those lands to become naturalized as they
did in the West, and that the peculiar position and
character of the Turk made what in any case would
have been hard altogether impossible.

We have thus traced out the chief points in which
the nations of Western Europe agree with one another,
and we have shewn in a general way how their state

' differs from the state of the South-eastern lands which
aré under the rule of the Turks, We must now go on

to trace out more in detail what the rule of the Turks
is, and the causes which. made it-what it is. But before
we go into these points, it will be well to set forth
rather more at length some of the points which, even
were the Turks away, would still distinguish Western
and Eastern Europe. These differences ought to be
well ‘understood, because they certainly helped the
advancé of the Turks when they invaded these lands,
and because they have a direct bearing on the relation
of the Turks to the subject nations and of the subject
nations to one another. These points of difference
between Eastern and Western Europe, which were
points of difference before the Turks came, and which -
will remain points of difference even if the Turks are
taken away, will fittingly form the subject of a separate
chapter.

NOTES.

(1, p. 8.) In speaking thus I am fully aware that, in a strictly scientific
sense, speech is no sure index of race. What Mr. Sayce says at the .

- beginning of the fifth chapter of his Principles of Comparative Philology

is perfectly true from a purely scientific view, That is to say, no yatign is

of absolutely pure descent. No nation can make out such a pedigree as

would satisfy a lawyer jn the case of a man claiming an estate or @ peer-

age. But for practical and historical purposes, speech is, not ifideed a

” sure index, but a presumption of race. We assume speech as the index
of race, except when we know historically that a nation has changed its-

speech; and for historical and practical purposes we do not need that

absolute purity of race which is demanded by the scientific inquirer.

_ We may compare a nation to a Roman gens, which started as 4 family,
but which in course of time admitted many members who were not
nattrally descended from the original forefather. -We apply in short
the Roman law of adoption to nations as well as to families. For
histotical purposes, we. assume Teutons, Slaves, or any other people
marked out by distinction of speech, to be for historical purposes a tace,
even though there will always be some admixture of blood, and in
some cases a great deal, It is possible for instance that the Gaulish or
the Greek nations, at the first time when we hear of them, were latgely
made up of people who were not Greeks or Gauls by blood, but had .
simply adopted the Gaulish or the Greek tongue. About this history can
say nothing, But history can say for certain that in after ages the Gauls
exchanged their own tongue for Latin, while the Greeks kept their own
topgue. I therefore do not scruple to speak of race and speech in a
manner which is perfectly true for my present purpose, though it may not
be quite scientifically accurate. For instance I should say that atnong
the Slavonic nations there is unity of race and speech. The Slaves may

in pre-historic times have assimilated other nations, as we know that they
assimilated the original Bulgarians. But for all practical purposes they
form one race, marked out by the use of a kindred speech. To speak of
the Slavonic race is historically true, though it may not be scientjfically’
accurate. But to speak of the “Latin race”. is neither scientifically ac-
curate nor historically true. For the so-called Latin race is simply made
up of nations which at different times adopted the Latin language, but -
which we know had no further connexion with the original Latin than

26 EASTERN AND WESTERN EUROPE.

coming of the same common Aryan stock, while some of them, namely,
whatever is of Iberian descent, are not Aryan at all, The reader will
thus understand in what sense I use the word race in these chapters.
The people of Hydra are Greek by speech, Albanian by race. The
people of Rsara are Greek both by speech and race, even though they
may in pre-historic-times have had Karian or Phoenician forefathers. 1
have worked this matter out at greater length in the Comtemporary
Review for March, 1877. ah
(2, p. 11.) Polygamy was utterly unknown both to Greek and to

Roman Jaw. The story of Anaxandridés King of Sparta (Herodotus,
v.40), who was specially allowed for a special reason to have two wives
at once, only brings the generat rule into greater prominence. So
something like polygamy seems to have been practised by one or two of
the later Macedonian kings, besides the well-known case of Alexander
himself. But this only shows that they had partially adopted Eastern
mannets, and the practice never became usual even among kings, much
less among other men. . Among the Germans, Tacitus (Germania, 18), °
speaks of polygamy as practised only by a few for special reasons—
** Prope soli barbarorum singulis uxoribus contenti sunt, exceptis admo-
dum pau¢is, qui non libidine, sed ob nobilitatem, plurimis nuptiis -
ambiuntur.” So even in Christian times the Merwing Dagobert
(Fredegar, ¢. 50) had three acknowledged queens at once. “ Tres
habebat ad instar Salomonis reginas, maxime et pluritnas concubinas,”
. But all’ such cases are exceptional. It was not legal polygamy, but
a lax law of divorce, with which Christianity had to struggle, alike -
among Greeks, Romans, and Teutons.

CHAPTER IL
THE RACES OF EASTERN EUROPE.

THE object of the present chapter is to point out .
those features in the history and condition of South-
eastern Europe which would, even if the Turk were
away, make it different in many things from Western
. Europe. . These points of difference may be shortly
summed up in one, that distinctions of race and creed
are far more lasting in Eastern Europe than they
are in Western. The great case, the case where there
is the widest difference of all, is of course the differ-
ence between the Turk and his. Christian subjects,
But ‘the wide gap between race and race, between
creed and creed, though it takes its strongest and
most repulsive form in the case of the Turk, is not
altogether peculiar to his case. If we go back to the |
times before the Turk came, we should still find in
South-eastern Europe a state of things quite different
to that to which we. are used in Western Europe.
The difference will of course not be so great, nor
will it be at all of the same kind, as the difference
which has been made by the coming of the Turk.
Still there is a widely marked difference, and a
difference the causes of which it is well worth our
while to search, out.

28 THE RACES OF EASTERN EUROPE.

A very small amount of thought will shew that all
differences of race and speech are much more marked
and much more lasting in the East of Europe than
they afe in the West. It will also shew that -differ-
ences in religion have greater importance in the East
than they have in the West, and that they put on
more of the character of national differences. In the
West, as we have seen, the different races which have
settled in each of the great countries of Western
Europe have come together to form one distinct
nation in each. In each land, say England, France,
Germany, one type of man, marked by the use of one
language, is the rule. Everything which departs from: -
that rule, everything which uses any other language,
is exceptional. And anything that departs from the
general rule takes for the most part the form of mere
fragments or survivals, objects of curious historical
and linguistic interest, but having no bearing on
practical politics. The political unity of France is not
threatened because Flemish, Walloon, Breton, Basque,
and Provengal are all spoken within the French border.
The political unity of Great Britain is not threatened
because Welsh and. Gaelic are spoken within its
coasts. The recent conquests of Germany stand on
a different ground, because they are recent conquests,
and because each of the disaffected districts lies in
close neighbourhood to a larger population of its
own speech. If the Breton-speaking districts of.
France joined on to a large independent Breton-
speaking state, the Breton element in France would
not be so politically unimportant as it now is. Ireland
stands on a different ground, partly because two great
islands never can be so thoroughly united as a con-
tinuous territory, partly because for some centuries

NATIONAL TYPES IN THE WEST. 29

a variety of causes made the state of things in Ireland
rather Eastern than Western.) With these excep-
tions, the rule holds good. In Western Europe each
land has a dominant type, Roman or Teutonic;
whatever departs from both those types is. every-
where exceptional and politically unimportant. And
the exceptional districts, where there are any, mark
their character as survivals by their geographical
position. The old tongues, those which are older
than both Roman and Teutonic, live on only in
corners by themselves: In no part of Western
Europe -do we find districts inhabited by men
differing in speech” and national feeling, lying in
distinct patches here and there over a large coutitry.
A district like one of our larger counties in which
one parish, perhaps one hundred, spoke Welsh, another
Latin, another English, another Danish, another Old-
French, another the tongue of more modern settlers,
Flemings, Huguenots or Palatines, is something which
' we find hard to conceive, and which, as applied to our
own land or to any other Western land, sounds absurd
onthe face of it.

When we pass into South-eastern Europe, this
state. of things, the very idea of which seems
absurd in. the West, is found to be perfectly real.
All the races which we find dwelling there at the
beginning of recorded history, together with several
races which have come in since, all remain, not as
mere fragments or survivals, but as nations, each with
its national language and national feelings, and each
having its greater or less share of practical importance
in the politics of the present moment. Setting aside
races which have simply passed: through the country
without occupying it, we may say that all the races

30 THE RACES OF EASTERN EUROPE.

which have ever settled in the country are there still as
distinct races, And, though each race has its own par-
ticular region where it forms the whole people or the
great majority of the people, still there are large dis-
tricts where different races really live side by side in the
-very way which seems so absurd when we try to con-
ceive it in any Western country. We cannot conceive
a Welsh, an English, and a Norman village side by
side ; but a Greek, a Bulgarian, and a Turkish village
side by side is a thing: which may be seen in many
parts of Thrace. The.oldest races in those lands, those
which answer to Basques and Bretons in Western
Europe, hold quite another pésition from that of
Basques and ‘Bretons in Western Europe. They form
three living and vigorous nations, Greek, Albanian,
and Rouman, They stand as nations alongside of
the Slaves who came in later, and who answer roughly |
to the Teutons in the West, while all alike are under
the rule of the Turk, who has nothing answering to
him in the West. But it must be further remémbered
that this abiding life of races and languages is
not confined to the lands which are under the Turk:
It comes out in its strongest. form in these lands ; but
it comes out also in a formnearly as strong in the lands
which form the Austro-Hungarian monarchy. Itis in
short a characteristic of Eastern Europe generally as
distinguished from Western. And the-causes of this
difference will be easily seen, if we look carefully into
the history of Eastern Europe as distinguished from
Western.

The main causes of this difference between Eastern
and Western Europe are twofold. The first cause
is the different position which the Roman Empire |
held in the West of Europe and in the East. The

PERMANENCE OF RACES IN THE EAST. 31

second cause is the presence in the East of certain
elements. which have nothing answering to them
in the West. East and West have three elements
in common, while the East. has a fourth ,element
which it has all to itself. First, there are, both
- in ‘East and West, the nations which were there
before the Roman power began. Secondly, there is
the Roman power itself, still existing in its effects.
Thirdly, there are the Aryan nations which came.in
‘since the establishment of the Roman power. All
these are common to West and East; only their
Proportions and relations to one another are not the
same in the East as they are in the West, a difference
which is caused by the different positions which the
Roman power held in the twocases. But, fourthly, the
East has a fourth element which is not to be found
in the West, namely the non-Aryan races which have
come in since the establishment of the Roman power. |
‘Among these the Turks are the most important; but
they are not the only non-Aryan settlers, and the |
difference between the settlement of the Turks and
the settlements of the other non-Aryan races forms
. one of the most instructive parts of our whole subject.
In examining these two causes of those differences
between Eastern and Western Europe which lie on
the surface, we shall find that the condition of the
earlier nations which were there before the Romans
came, and over whom they extended their power,
was altogether different in the East from what it was
in the West. In the West, in Gaul and Spain, the
Romans found nations much less civilized than them-
selves, nations which were ready to look up. to their
conquerors as masters and to adopt the language, the
‘ manners, and the.name of Romans. In the West

32 THE RACES OF EASTERN EUROPE.

therefore the first element, the element older than
the Roman dominion, has lingered on only in the
shape of fragments and survivals. The great mass of
the people of those lands became practically Roman.
In the West the second element in our list, the
Roman element, swallowed up nearly the whole of
the first. But in Eastern Europe the Romans found
a nation more civilized than themselves, a nation
which they conquered politically, but to which in-
everything else they were as ready to look up, as the.
nations of the West were ready to look up to them. .
This was the Greek nation. When the Romans
conquered the South-eastern lands, they found there
three great races, the Greek,: the Illyrian, and
the Thracian. Those three races are all there
still. The Greeks speak for themselves. The
Illyrians are represented by the modern Albanians...
The Thracians are represented, there seems every
reason to believe, by the modern Roumans.(?)
Now had the whole of the South-eastern lands
been inhabited by Illyrians and Thracians, those
lands would doubtless have become as thoroughly
Roman as the Western lands became. .There would
be in the East Romance and Slavonic nations, as
there are in the West Romance and Teutonic na-
tions, with perhaps some fragments and survivals
of Illyrian and Thracian lingering on, as Basque and -
Breton have lingered on in the West. But the posi-
tion of the Greek nation, its long history and its high
civilization, hindered this. The Greeks could not
become Romans in any but the most purely political
sense. Like other subjects of the Roman Empire,
they gradually took the Roman name; ‘put they kept
their own language, literature, and civilization. In

THE ROMANS AND THE OLD RACES. 33

short we may say that the Roman Empire in the
East became Greek, and that the Greek nation became
Roman. The Eastera Empire and the Greek-speaking
lands became nearly coextensive. Greek became
the one language of the Eastern Roman Empire,
while those that spoke it still called themselves:
Romans.(*) Till quite lately, that is till the modern
ideas of ‘nationality began to spread, the Greek-
speaking subjects of the Turk called themselves by
no name but that of Romans. This people, who
might be called either Greek or Roman, but who have _
now again taken up the Greek. name, has lived on as
a distinct nation to our own time. It is a nation
which has largely assimilated its neighbours, but
which has not been assimilated by them,

While the Greeks thus took the Roman name
without adopting the Latin language, another people ©
in the Eastern peninsula adopted both nanre and
- language, exactly as the nations of the West did.
If, as there is good reason to believe, the modern
‘Roumans represent the old Thracians, that nation
came under the general law, exactly Jike the
Western nations. The Thracians became thoroughly
Roman in speech, as they have ever since kept
the Roman name. ‘They form in fact one of the
Romance nations, just as much as the people of Gaul
orSpain. They are a Romance nation on the Eastern
side of the Hadriatic instead of on the Western.
The third nation, that of the Ilyrians, Skipetar,
or \Albanians, have been largely assimilated by the
Greeks, Though they may be truly said to exist as
a nation, still their existence as a nation has been
mainly owing to their being a wild people living in
a wild.country. They hold a position between that

D

34. THE RACES OF EASTERN EUROPE.

of a nation like the Greeks and that of a mere survival
of a nation like the Basques. The Roumans too,
though they Jearned the Roman language and have
kept the Roman name, can never have so fully adopted
the Roman civilization as the Gauls and Spaniards
did. In short, the existence of a highly civilized
people like the Greeks hindered in every way the in-
fluence of Rome from being so thorough in the East
as it was in the West. The Greek nation lived on, and
alongside of itself, it preserved the other two ancient
nations of the peninsula. Thus all three have lived
on to the present as distinct nations. Two of them,
the Greeks and the Illyrians, still keep their own
languages, while the third, the old Thracians, speak
a Romance language and call themselves Roumans.
Thus the existence of the Greek nation with its
higher. civilization has influenced the relations of the
Romas power to the old nations of the peninsula, and
it has kept them alive as nations. It also affected the
relations of the.Roman power to the Aryan nations
which came in afterwards. These are, to sum it
up in a word, the Slaves. The Slavonic nations
hold in the East a place answering to that which
is held by the Teutonic nations in the West. They
were the later Aryan settlers, the settlers who came
into the Empire after the establishment of the Roman
power. The Teutonic nations themselves founded no
lasting settlements within the Eastern Empire.(*) The
Goths used the Eastern Empire as a highway to the
West; they marched through it at pleasure, but it
was not till they had reached the West that they
founded lasting Gothic kingdoms.¢) On the northern
frontier of the Eastern Empire Teutonic kingdoms
were founded by the Gepide and the Lombards.

THE TEUTONS AND THE SLAVES. 35

But even these were not lasting. The Gepidz were
cut off altogether, and the Lombards passed into
Italy, to find their real place in history there. The
place in history which in the West belongs*to the
Teutonic’ nations which founded kingdoms in -Gaul,
Spain, and Italy, is filled in the East by the Slavonic
nations who made their way into the Empire, and
were the forefathers of the present inhabitants of:
Croatia and Dalmatia, of enslaved Bosnia and Bul-
garia, of liberated Servia and of unconquered
Montenegro. Just like the Teutons in the West, the
Slaves in the East came into the Empire in all
manner of characters, as captives, as mercenaries, as
allies, at last as conquerors.. In the sixth century ~
they carried havoc through all the provinces between

the Hadriatic and the Euxine; ‘in the seventh century

the Emperors found it wise to allow them to make

permanent settlements in those provinces which in

time grew into regular kingdoms. From this time

we must count the Slavonic people and the Slavonic ©
languages as one great element, in number perhaps

the greatest element, in the lands which form the

great eastern peninsula of Europe.

But though the Slaves in the East thus answer in many
ways to the Teutons in the West, their position with
regard to the Eastern Empire was not quite the satne
‘as that of the Teutons towards the Western Empire.
The Western Empire was purely Roman. The
Eastern Empire was from one side Roman, and from
another sideGreek. Its capifal was the old Greek city
of Byzantium,refounded and enlarged to become the
New Rome or Constantinople. Its capital then was
at once Greek and Roman, and so was the dominion
of which it was the head. It was politically Roman,

; ‘D 2

36 THE RACES OF EASTERN EUROPE.

but intellectually Greek. Its political traditions, its
laws, the succession and titles of its Emperors, were
all Roman, and, down to its final conquest by the
Turks, it never knew any name but the Roman Empire.
Latin remained for some ages the language of
government and warfare. Byzantine Greek is full of
Latin technical terms, very mugh as English is, through.
the effects of the Norman Conquest, full of French
technical terms. But ‘Greek was the language of
literature and religion, and in the end it drove Latin
out for all purposes. Thus, while the nations which
pressed itito the Western Empire came within the reach
of an undivided Roman influence, those which: pressed
‘into the East came within the reach of a divided in-
fluence, partly Greek, partly Latin. Such a divided .
influence was in itself less strong than the purely
Latin influence in the West. Add to this that the
Roman power in the East was centred in a single city
in a-way in which it was not in the West. The moral
power of the Old Rome -has been far greater than
that of the New. But the physical power of the New
Rome as a city has been far greater than that of the
Old. The Roman Empire grew out of the OJd Rome ;
but, when the Roman power'was at its height, the
local Rome itself had ceased to be the ruling city. .
All Western Europe had, so to speak, become Rome,
and the local Rome itself was not more Roman than
other parts. Its geographical position, which had
made it the head of Italy, hindered it from remaining
the political. head of Western Europe. The city of
Rome was takén over and over again by Teutonic con-
querors ; but by that very means its conquerors came
more and more under Roman influences. Thus in the
West the political succession of the Old Rome passed

OLD AND NEW ROME. a7

away to ‘Veutonic kings, while Rome herself, through
the absence of the Emperors, became the seat of a
new kind of dominion under her bishops. “The New
Rome, on the other hand, was a great city,’a great
fortress, which, as a city and fortress, commanded the
whole Eastern Empire, and which for nine hundred
years no foreign invader could ever take. Hence,
in the West, as the Roman power died out politically,
its moral influence was strengthened. In the East it
lived on as a political power, a power centred in one
great city, a city which the nations which pressed
into the Empire were always trying to take but never
could. The Slaves who pressed into the Eastern
Empire admired and reverenced and looked up to the
New Rome. They learned its religion, and much of
its civilization. Still it remained a separate political
power, with which they were often at'war. It followed
from all this that the Slaves in the Eastern Empire
remained distinct, in a way in. which Goths, Franks,
and Burgundians in the Western Empire did not.
They learned much from the half Roman, half Greek,
power with which they had to do; but they did not
themselves become either Greek or Roman, in the way
in which the Teutonic conquerors in the Western
Empire became Roman. Thus, as the existence ot
the Greek nation and Greek civilization preserved the
older nations as distinct nations; so the half Greek,
half Roman, character of the Eastern Empire, com-
bined with the centring of its whole power in a_
single city, kept the new comers, that is chiefly the
Slaves, also apart as distinct nations. Thus, while in —
the West everything except a few survivals of earlier
nations, is either Roman or .Tettonic, in the East,
Greeks, Illyrians, Thracians or Roumans, and Slaves,

38 THE RACES OF EASTERN EUROPE.

all stood side by side as distinct nations when the
next set of invaders came, and they remain as distinct
nations still. ——

We thus see that, even with regard to the three
‘elements which Eastern and Western Europe may be
said to have in common, there are some’ marked dif-
ferences between the two. Im both there were the
_‘nations who were there before the Roman times, there

was the Roman power itself, and there were the
Aryan nations which had come in since the establish-
ment of the Roman power. But we have seen that
the relations between these threé elements were not
quite the same in the East and in the West. In the
East the distinctions of race and language were broader
and more lasting than they were in the West. Still,
with all their differences and rivalries, these nations had
much in common; they all had their share in those
things which are the common heritage of Christian
_ Europe. They were all Aryan ; they were all Christian ;
they had all come more or less fully under Greek and
Roman influences. Still various causes had made it
hard for them to unite, and they remained distinct
and often hostile nations. These points become of
importance when we come to the fourth element in
Eastern Europe, the settlement in it of nations wholly
foreign alike to Greeks, Albanians, Thracians, and
Slaves—nations, in a word, which were neither Aryan
nor Christian. The last and greatest of these were
the Ottoman Turks. But before we come to the
history of the Ottoman Turks, it will be well to com-
are their settlement with the earlier settlements of
other nations more or less akin to them,(®) as this
comparison will be found to be one of the most
instructive parts of our subject.

NON-ARYANS IN EAST AND WEST. 39

The rélations of Eastern and of Western Europe
to those nations which were neither Aryan nor Chris-
tian have been widely. different. One might have
expected that the Semitic nations, the nations of
South-western Asia, the Phoenicians, Hebrews, and
Arabs, ‘would have played a greater part in the
history of Eastern Ewrope than they played in the
history of Western Europe. Yet the contrary has
been the case both in earlier and in later times.
Whatever influence the Phoenicians may have had on
the Greeks in the earliest times, the Phcenician settle-
ments in Europe in historical times were all in the
West, in Spain, in Sicily, in the other islands of the
Western Mediterranean. So it was ages after with
the Arabs or Saracens. They robbed the Eastern
Empire of Syria, Egypt, and Africa; they ravaged
Asia: Minor; they twice besieged Constantinople
itself ; but they formed no lasting settlement within
the bounds of Eastern Europe. But in the West they
conquered nearly the whole of Spain, and they kept
part of that conquest for nearly eight hundred years.
They held Sicily for a shorter, but a considerable
time; and the only European province of the Eastern -
Empire which they ever won, the island of Crete,
was woh by a band of adventurers from Spain, Thus
the strictly Semitic power, the power of the Saracen
as distinguished from that of the Turk, has really
been stronger in Western than in Eastern Europe. —
Yet we cannot reckon the Semitic power as one
of the elements in Western Europe. It was only in
Spain that the Saracen power was really abiding,
and even from Spain it has utterly passed away. It
could pass utterly away, because, though it lasted so
long, it was always an alien power in Europe, and

40 THE RACES OF EASTERN EUROPE.

never ‘really took root. We need not count the
‘Semitic power as an element either in Eastern or
Western Europe; for in Eastern Europe the Semitic
nations‘ never settled, and from Western Europe they
are quite gone. The case is quite different with
regard to that class of nations which form an im-
portant element in Eastern Europe, but which have
nothing answering to them in the West. This is the
group of nations to which the Turks belong, and of
which in Europe the Ottoman. Turks are the most
prominent. members.

Taking then the Turk as the greatest and the most
prominent specimen of those nations in Eastern
Europe which did not originally belong to the
European community of nations, and leaving out of
sight for a. moment, the -fact that. he is only.
one member of that class, let us ask how the
Turk looks as compared with the other nations of
the Eastern peninsula, Greek, Albanian, Rouman,
and Slave, We have seen ‘that two chief causes had
-combined to keep those nations. distinct, and to make
any union among them vety hard.. At last. there
came among them, in the form of the Ottoman Turk,
a people with whom union.was not only hard but
impossible, a people who were kept distinct, not by
special circumstances, but by the inherent nature of
the case. Had the Turk been other than what he
really was, he might simply have become a new
nation alongside of the other South-eastern nations,
Being what he was, the Turk could not do this. He
could not sit down alongside of the other nations.
He could not assimilate the other nations or be assimi-
lated by them. He could not sit down among the
other nations as a constant neighbour and occasional

THE TURKS. 41

enemy. If he came among them at all, he could come
only as a ruler, and; if as a ruler, then as an oppressor.
We must now trace out what are the causes which,
even in Eastern Europe where the lasting distinction
of races is a characteristic of the history of the
country, have given the Turk a position wholly
unlike the position of any of the other races.

- Why then has the conquest made by the Turks
been of a nature so different, not only from other
conquests made in Western Europe, but even from
other conquests made in Eastern Europe? Why is.
the position of the Turks as a distinct people some- .
thing quite unlike the position of any other people, |
even in lands where nations have.a tendency to
remain specially distinct ? The reason is because the
Turk has no share in any of those things ‘which,
among all differences, are shared in common by the
European nations. The Turk belongs to another
branch of. the human family from the nations of
Europe. He has no share in the common history
of these nations, in their common memories, their
common feelings, their common civilization. Lastly,
‘what is more important than al] the rest, he does
not profess any of the forms of the Christian religion,
but follows the religion of Mahomet.

-First then, the Turk has no share in that original
kindred of race and language which binds together
all the European nations, The original Turks did
not ‘belong to the Aryan branch of mankind, and
their original speech is not an Aryan speech. The
Turks and their speech belong to altogether another
class.of nations and languages. They were wholly
distinct alike from the Aryan inhabitants of Europe

42 THE RACES OF EASTERN EUROPE.

and from the inhabitants of Western Asia, who,
wherever they were not Aryan, mainly belonged to
the Semitic family. The Semitic nations must, in all
those points which ‘distinguish Eastern from Western
life, be set down as belonging to the Eastern divi-
sion. Yet in some points of language they come-
nearer to the Aryans than the other non-Aryan
nations, and some of them have reached a higher stage
of civilization and civil polity than any of the nations
which lie beyond both the Aryan and the Semitic
range. It is not needful for our purpose to go deep
into any scientific enquiry, as to the exact relations of
those nations and languages of Asia and Northern
Europe.which are neither Aryan nor Semitic. For our
purpose, it will be enough to class all those of them
witlr which our subject has anything to do under a
name which is sometimes given to them, that of
Turanian. The old Persians, who spoke an Aryan
tongue, called their own land Jvan, and the barbarous’
land to the north of it they called Zuran, In their
eyes Iran was the land of light, and Turan was the
land of darkness. From this Turan, the land of
Central Asia, came the many Turkish settlements
which made their way, first into Western Asia and
then into Europe. The Turks are thus far more dis-
tant from any of the Aryan, or even from any‘of the
Semitic nations, of Europe and Asia than any one of
those nations can be from any other. From us Euro-
peans they are more distant than the Persians and
Hindoos; who are Aryan kinsfolk, though we and they
have been so long parted. They are more distant—
a, fact which it is very important to notice—even than
their Semitic forerunners and teachers in the Ma-
hometan religion, the Arabs or Saracens. It is true

IRAN AND TURAN. 43

that the original Turkish blood must have been
greatly modified, as their language has been greatly
modified, by their passage through Persia and Asia
Minor. It must also have been greatly modified by
‘their being joined by many Eurepean renegades, and
by their custom of forcing the youth of the nations
whom they conquered to serve in their armies and to
embrace. their religion. In this way we might say
that the Turks in Europe are an artificial nation, and
it is certain that many of them must be, in actual
descent, of European blood. But the original stock
was something altogether foreign to Europe, and, in
a case like this, it is the original stock which gives the
character to the whole. The Turks in Europe have
neither assimilated the nations which they have con-
quered, nor have they been assimilated by them.
They have simply. adopted a great many renegades,
one by one. And those renegades have of course
been assimilated by the body which they have joined.
They have practically become Turks,

Now we cannot reasonably doubt that this original
difference in blood and language has made it harder
than it would otherwise have been for the Turks
to’ become partakers of ‘the common. possessions of
the European nations, in short for them to become
an European nation. It would in any case have
made it harder for them, either, ike conquerors in
Western Europe, to become one people with the con-
quered, or, like conquerors in Eastern Europe, to sit
down as a distinct nation alongside of other natioris.
But there is no reason to believe that, had other
circumstances been favourable, the original difference
of race would of itself have made it impossible for
them to do so. Experience teaches us the contrary.

44 THE RACES OF EASTERN EUROPE. |

For other Turanian nations beside the Ottoman
Turks ‘have also made their way into Europe, and
the history of some of those nations has been quite
unlike the history of the Ottoman Turks. These
other Turanian nations came into Europe much earlier
than the Turks, and they came by a different road,
In chronological strictness then they should’ have
been mentioned before the Turks; but, in order to
make the difference between their history and that
_ of the Ottoman Turks. more clear, it seemed well first
of all to draw a general picture of the position of
. the Ottoman Turks. The chief point to be shown is
that, while in any case it was harder for a Turanian
than for an Aryan people to enter into the European
fellowship, yet, in the case of other Turanian nations,
though hard, it-was not impossible. In the case of.
the Ottoman Turks certain special circumstances
made it altogether impossible.

Setting aside any curious questions as to the re-
mains of Turanian nations in Europe earlier than
the coming of the Aryans, the historical incursions of
the Turanian nations, their attacks upon the Aryan

-nations of Europe, began more than a_ thousand
years before the coming of the Ottoman Turks, in
the fourth century of our zra. Thus the Huns began
to make themselves terrible to Romans, Teutons and
Slayes. But in Western Europe neither the Huns ©
nor any other Turanian people ever made any lasting
settlements,(?) When Attila and his Huns invaded
Gaul in the fifth century, Romans, Goths, and Franks

all joined together. They smote the barbarians on
the Catalaunian fields, and saved Western Europe
from a Turanian occupation. In the East things
took a different course. There Turanian settlers,

OLDER TURANIAN INVASIONS. 45

ages before the coming of the Ottoman Turks, grew
up into great kingdoms. Passing by a crowd of
nations which play an important part in Byzantine
history but. which have left no modern traces behind |
them, we must mark that the Avars founded a great
kingdom ‘on the northern borders of the Eastern
Empire and often carried havoc through the -lands
of the Empire itself. The Avars passed away be-
neath the sword. of Charles the Great; but two
other Turanian settlements must. be specially noticed,
because they throw much light on the present ques-
tion. Long before the Turks came into Europe,
the Magyars or Hungarians had come; and, before
the’ Magyars came, the Bulgarians had come.
“Both the Magyars and the Bulgarians were in their
origin Turanian nations, nations as foreign to the
Aryan people of Europe as the Ottoman Turks
themselves. But their history shows that a Turanian
nation settling in Europe may eithet be assimilated
- with an existing European nation or may sit down
as an European nation alongside of others. The
Bulgarians have done one of these things; the
Magyars have done the other; the Ottoman Turks
have done neither.

So much has been heard lately of the Baleatians
_as being in. our times the special victims of the
Turk that some people may find it strange to hear
who the original Bulgarians were. They were a people
more or less nearly akin to the Turks, and they came
"into Eurepé as barbarian conquerors who were as
much dreaded by the nations of South-eastern Europe
as the Turks themselves were afterwards. The old
Bulgarians were a Turanian people, who settled in
a large part of the South-eastern peninsula, in lands

46 THE RACES OF EASTERN EUROPE.

which had been already occupied by Slaves, They
‘came in as barbarian conquerors; but, exactly as
happened to so many conquerors in Western Europe,
they were presently assimilated by their Slavonic
subjects and neighbours. They learned the Slavonic
speech ; they gradually lost aH traces of their foreign
origin. Those whom we now call Bulgarians are a
Slavonic people speaking a Slavonic tongue, and
they have nothing Turanian about them except
the name which they borrowed from their Turanian
masters. Their case has been not unlike that of
the settlements of the Franks in Gaul or of the Nor-
mans in England. When we call their land Bulgaria
and its people Bulgarians, it is almost as if our own
land were called Normandy and ourselves Normans.
It is in some points as when the land and people
of Gaul came to be called France and French from
their Frankish conquerors. The Bulgarians entered
the Empire in the seventh century, and embraced
Christianity in the ninth. They rose to great. power
in the South-eastern lands, and played a great part in
their history. But all their later history, from a com- .
paratively short time after the first Bulgarian conquest,
has been that of a Slavonic and not thatof a Turanian
people. The history of the Bulgarians therefore shows
that it is.quite possible, if circumstancesiare favourable,
for a Turanian people to settle among ‘the Aryans
of Europe and to be thoroughly assimilated by the -
Aryan nation among whom they settled. ;

The other case of earlier Turanian settlement,
that of the Magyars or Hungarians, shows that
Turanian settlers can, even when they are not
assimilated, sit down in Europe and become an
European nation. The Magyars, who two hundred

BULGARIANS AND MAGYARS. 47

years ago were among the subjects and victims
of the Turks, have lately taken to profess great
friendship for the Turks on the ground of common
origin, This is certainly carrying the doctrine of
‘race very far indeed, . But there is just this much of
truth in it, that the Turanian Magyars came into
Europe, like the Bulgarians, as a race of Turanian
conquerors. They came in the last years of the
ninth céntury. For a while they were the terror
of East and West. But in the West they simply
ravaged; in the East they sat down as a distinct
nation, And to this day they still keep marked
traces of their foreign origin, while the original
Bulgarians lost all traces of theirs in about two
hundred years. The Magyars still remain a distinct
nation, speaking their own Turanian tongue. In the
kingdom of Hungary to which they have given
their name, they still abide. as in some sort a
ruling race among its Slavonic inhabitants, though
they certainly: do not hold them in the same kind
of bondage in which the Turks hold their subject
nations. We therefore cannot say that the Magyars
have been assimilated, like the old Bulgarians ;

. but we may fairly say that they have been incor-
porated among the nations of Europe. For, not very
long after their settlement, they adopted the religion
and the general civilization of Europe, and they have
ever since been reckoned as an European nation.
It has been a point of great importance in the
history of Eastern Europe that the Magyars, though
geographically they belong rather to. Eastern than
to Western Europe, got their Christianity and civi- |
lization from the. West, and not from the East.
But our present point is that, though they kept

48 THE RACES OF EASTERN EUROPE.

their own tongue and remained a distinct nation,
they did adopt the religion and civilization of Europe
in some shape. Thus, though their history has not
been the same as the history: of the Bulgarians, it has
been very different from the history of the Turks.
And it should always be remembered that ~- both
Bulgarians and Magyars have been among the
nations whom the Turks have overcome and borne
tule over. Their original kindred with the Turks
has not enabled them, any more than any of the
other nations whom the Turks overcame, either to
assimilate the Turks to themselves, or to be assimi-
lated by them.

It is therefore most important constantly to bear in
" mind the history of the Bulgarians and Magyars, and
the difference between their case and that of the
Turks. Two of the Turanian nations which settled
in Europe have’ become more or less thoroughly
European. The third has. not become European
at all. This shows that even difference of origin,
though very important, is not of itself enough to
account for the fact that the Turks, though they have
been so long settled in Europe, have never become
European. ‘The cause of that fact must be sought
in difference of origin, combined with certain other
circumstances which have affected the settlement of
the Turks, but which did not affect the settlements of
the Bulgarians or the Magyars. ~

We have thus traced out the special characteristics
of the nations of South-eastern Europe, as compared
with the nations of thé West. We have seen how the
earlier nations which were there before the Roman
conquest still abide as nations. We have seen how
one of them did in a manner make the Roman Empire

SUMMARY. 49

its own, how in those lands the names Roman and
- Greek cane to have much the same meaning. We
have seen how, after the establishment of the
Roman power, the Slavonic nations settled *in the
Eastern Empire, much in the same way in which
the Teutonic nations settled in the Western Empire,
‘but with some important differences, differences
which arose out of the earlier history of those lands
and ‘which have affected their later history. We have ©
seen further how in the East there was a fourth
element which has nothing answering to it in the
West, namely the settlement of nations which were
not European or Aryan at all. We have seen that
some of these non-Aryan settlers could be assimilated
by their Aryan neighbours, while others could sit
down alongside of them as one nation among others.
That is, in different ways, they could both become
more or less thoroughly European. Lastly we have
seen that- another race of non-Aryan settlers has
been able to do none of these things, but has always
remained distinct. It has conquered a large part
of Europe and held’ several European. nations in -
bondage, but it has never itself in any sort become
European, We must now go on to ask what were
the special reasons which hindered the Ottoman
Turks from doing as the Bulgarians did, or even as
the Magyars did, what in short has hindered them
from ever becoming an European nation.

50 THE RACES OF EASTERN EUROPE.

NOTES..

(1, p. 29.) The truth js that during the last century the state of
things in Ireland was the nearest parallel in Western Europe to the
state of things in South-eastern Europe. The rule of the English in
Ireland was, we may hope, never quite so bad as the rule of the Turk in
South-eastern Europe, but it was a rule of essentially the same kind.
It was a rule of race over race, of creed over creed, exactly like the
rule of the Turk ; and, just as in the East, nationality and religion went
together. . The subject class, the great Roman Catholic majority of the’
island, consisted of the native Irish and of those of the earlier English
and Norman settlers who had practically become Irish, ‘‘ Hibernis
ipsis Hiberniores,” as the phrase ran. The ruling Protestant body
consisted of those settlers, mainly later settlers, from Great Britain who
kept their own nationality, and were Protestant in religion. Practically
the state of things in Ireland was of the same kind as the state of things
in Turkey.; but the historical origin of the two cases was different. In
the case of the Turk and his subjects, the distinction was both national
. and religious from the beginning, In the case of Ireland a distinction
which was originally national afterwards became religious. That is to
say, in the sixteenth century the native Irish, and those of the settlers
who had become kish, clave to the Roman Catholic religion, while the
ruling English caste became Protestant. Thus the distinction became
more marked, as it is easier.to tell what religion a man professes than
‘to tell from what blood he springs. ,Thus, while the earlier laws are
against the Irish as Irish, the later Jaws are against Roman Catholics
as Roman Catholics. The state of the Roman Catholic in Ireland
while the penal laws lasted was closely akin to the state of the
Christians in Turkey. It was a state of disability and degradation, -
but not of religious persecution strictly so called. But the main
difference between the two cases is that in Ireland wrongs have been
redressed, while in Turkey they have not. On this head I shall have
something to say in a later chapter. :

(2, p. 32.) Ido not put forth this theory of the Thracian origin of
the Roumans with perfect confidence, but it seems to me more likely
than any other. It is commonly taken for granted that the Roumans
are the descendants of Roman colonists in Dacia, and of Dacians who
adopted the Latin language. The phenomena of Dacia would thus be
the same as the phenomena of Gaul and Spain. But then it should be

NOTES. 51

remembered that Dacia was, of all the provinces of the older Roman
Empire, the last won, and the first lost. Conquered by Trajan, given
up by Aurelian, it was Roman only for about one hundred and seventy
years. The land was from that time onwards the highway of every
nation which pressed into Europe from the lands north of tte Euxine ;
and it is most strange if Latin should have lived on there when it died out
in the neighbouring lands, or never made its way into them. But in truth
the Roumans or Vlachg até ¢ven now by no means confined to Dacia.
They are stil! found in many other parts of the peninsula, and their
settlement in the present Rouinania was most likely owing to a later
migration. The Rouman- power in those lands seems to have begun
only in the thirteenth century. (See Jirecek, Geschichte der Bulgaren,
p. 265.) It is much easier to suppose that these Latin-speaking people
in the Eastern peninsula represent, not specially Dacians or Roman
colonists in Dacia, but the great Thracian race generally, of which the
Dacians were only a part. The Thracian coast was early studded with
a fringe of Greek colonies, as it remains still; but the mass of the
Thracian land was never Hellenized. It was thus ready at the time of _
the Roman Conquest to be Romanized, just as Gaul and Spain were.

It adopted the Lafin language, while Greece and the Hellenized
lands clave to Greek, ‘The Roumans would thus represent those of
the Roman provingials of Thrace and Mcesia who kept on their adopted
Roman nationality in the teeth of Slavonic conquests. The Vlachs
or Rumunje and the Greeks or ‘Pwpaio: both keep the Roman name,
though in different forms. (See more in Jirecek, pp. 66, 74.)

(3, P. 33-) “EAAgy, it must be remembered, from the, New Testament
onwards, meant pagan. :

(4, p- 34-) The Tetraxite Goths in the Jand of Crim, if they are to be
called subjects of the Empire, did not become so by settling within its
bounds, but by entering into relations with it from outside.

(5, p- 34-) This is a point of special contrast between the Teutons
and the: Slaves in the East. The Teutons only marched through ; the
Slaves settled. °

(6, p. 38.) I do not take on me to rule whether there is any real:
kindred, strictly so-called, between the Bulgarians, the Magyars, and
the Ottoman Turks. They have for our purpose a kind of negative
kindred. The speech of all these belongs to a class quite distinct from
either the Aryan or Semitic.

(7, p- 44.) If there is any exception, it is the seit of the Alans
in Spain. But the Alans, if they were Turanian to start with, would
seem to have been early brought under Teutonic influences, and they
have left no traces behind them in modern times.

CHAPTER IIL
THE OTTOMAN. TURKS AND'‘THEIR RELIGION.

WE must now go back to the points which we drew
out in the first Chapter, the points in which Euro-
pean nations agree together, but in which the Turk
differs from all of them, the things which -they all
have in common, but in which the Turk has no share.
First among these we placed general kindred of race
and speech, inasmuch as all the European nations,
with the smallest exceptions, belong to Aryan stock,
while the Turks belong to the Turanian stock.
But we have further seen in the last chapter, that this
original difference, had it stood by itself, would not
have been enough to hinder the Turks from becoming
Europeans by adoption. It doubtless would in any
case have made it harder for them to do so; but it.
would not of itself have made it impossible. For, as we
have seen, other Turanian nations, the Bulgarians and

. Magyars, have become European by adoption. We
have now to see what it was by virtue of which the
change which was hard, but still possible, in the case
of the Bulgarians and Magyars has been altogether
impossible in the case of the Ottoman Turks.

To answer this, we must go through our other points
of likeness and unlikeness in order. The ‘second

THE TURKS ALIEN TO EUROPE. 53

point which we saw that the European nations had in
common, besides their original Aryan kindred, was
that they have a common history. They. all have
certain historic memories in common, memories which
- are chiefly derived from the dominion and influence of
Rome. From these memories comes a vast common
stock of what we may call literary and intellectual
possessions. In all this the Bulgarians and Magyars,
so far as they became European, came to have their:
share, if not by inheritance at least by adoption. The
_ Bulgarians came under Greek, the Magyars under Latin,
influences, But in all those memories, and in all that _
comes of those’ memories, as the Turks have no share
by inheritance, so neither have they ever won any
share by adoption. They have no share in that stock
of common ideas and feelings which belongs to the’
‘European nations in general. They have no share in
the two languages which are the common possession
of Europe, the Greek and the Latin. They have
their own languages and literature, of which we for the
most part know nothing, as they for the most part
know nothing of ours. They have their own Turkish
language, as we have our own tongues, Teutonic,
Romance, or Slavonic. What Greek and Latin have
been to us, Arabic and Persian have been to them,’
They have occupied one of the two great seats of
Roman power, one of the great seats of Greek civili-
zation, but they have not thereby. become Roman or
Greek, or European in any way. While the Teutons
in the West, while the Slaves in the East, came into
the Roman Empire, as half conquerors, half disciples, —
the Turks have come in wholly as conquerors, not at
all asdisciples. Settled in Europe, they have remained
untouched by all that distinguishes Europe and the

54 THE OTTOMAN TURKS AND THEIR RELIGION.

colonies of Europe from Asia and Africa. The throne
of the New Rome is occupied by an- Asiatic ruler
surrounded by an Asiatic people. Nor is this any the
less true, because, not the Turkish people in general,
but the ruling class among them, have very lately put
on a certain European varnish. The nature of the
Turkish power is not changed because certain classes
of Turks learn to speak an European language and
to wear an ‘European dress. Such a. mere varnish
has nothing in common with the deep moral influence
which the Western Rome had on the Teuton and the
Eastern Rome on the Slave. The Turk still remains
foreign to the feelings and habits and historic
memories of Europe. Of the other two Turanian
settlements in Europe this is not true. The modern
Bulgarian is whatever the other Slaves are; the
Magyar, though he keeps his Turanian language, has
his share in the great heritage of Western- Europe, in
the tongue and the civilization of Rome.

This ‘brings us to the third point of difference
between the Turks and the European nations, the
point which is really the key to all the other points of
difference. We have seen that it is not impossible for
Turanians settled in Europe to become more or less
thoroughly European, to obtain a share in much of
those things which distinguishes European nations from
others. But while other Turanian nations have done
this, the Turks have never done it. Why is this?
Why could not the Turks do either as the Bulgarians
did or as the Magyars did? The reason is because
the Bulgarians and the Magyars embraced the common
religion of Europe, while the Turks have never em-
braced it. Here is the great difference of all. As
soon as the Bulgarians and Magyars became Christians,

PAGANS AND MAHOMETANS, 55

the great differeace between them and the other
nations of Europe was at once taken away. The
‘Bulgarians indeed, after some questioning and dis-
puting, embraced Christianity in its Eastern form, .
while the Magyars embraced it in its Western form.
And many troubles and divisions in Europe have come
of this difference. Still both did become Christians,
and thus both became sharers in all.those ideas and
feelings which are common to Christians of every sect,
but which are not shared by Pagans or Mahometans.
The Turks, on the other hand, entered Europe as
Mahometans, and Mahometans they still remain,
Here then is the great point of difference of all, that
point which makes it altogether impossible for the
Turks really to become an European nation. ‘ They
cannot become an European nation, as long as they
remain Mahometans; and there is.no known case of
any Mahometan nation accepting any other religion.
The question will now fairly be asked, why could
not the Turks lay aside their old religion, as the Bul-
garians and Magyars laid aside theirs, and embrace
the religion of Europe as the Bulgarians-and Magyars
embraced it. The answer may be given in a very few
words, The Bulgarians and Magyars could embrace
Christianity, because they were heathens; the Otto-
man Turks could not embrace Christianity, because
they were Mahometans. Because the Bulgarians and
Magyars were further off from the religion and civili-
zation of Europe than the Turks were, for that very
reason they were able to adopt the religion and
civilization of Europe, and the Turks were not. This
is a case in which we may reverse the familiar proverb,
and say that no bread is practically better than half a
loaf. That is to say,a half civilization stands asa

56 THE OTTOMAN TURKS AND THEIR RELIGION.

hindrance in accepting a more perfect civilization. A
half truth in religion stands in the way-of accepting
' more. perfect truth. -Experience proves this in all
ages of European history. The rude nations of
Western, Northern, and Eastern Europe easily
adopted the religion and civilization of Rome. No
Mahometan nation has ever been known to accept
Christianity ; no nation that has reached the half
civilization of the East has ever been known to accept
the full civilization of the West. This fact, the fact
of the wide distinction in these matters between the
Ottoman Turks and the earlier Turanian settlers in
Europe, is the very key of our whole subject. The
Turks are what they are, and they remain what they
are, because their religion is Mahometan. It by no
means follows that every Mahometan government
must be as bad as the Ottoman government is now.
For many Mahometan governments have been much
better. But no Mahometan government can ever give
to its subjects of other religions what we in Western
Europe are used to look on as really good govern-
ment. No Mahometan nation can reaily become part
of the same community of nations as the Christian
‘nations of Europe. These positions make it needful
to look a little further into the nature of the Maho-
metan religion, and into the relations which, under a
Mahometan government, must always exist, between’
its Mahometan subjects and-its subjects of other
religions.

This question is in itself a perfectly general one, not
a special question between Mahometanism and Chris-
tianity, but a question between Mahometanism and all
other religions. It is not needful here to enquire what
would be the position of a nation-of some third religion,

MUSSULMANS AND NON-MUSSULMANS. 57

neither Christian nor Mahometan. We need not ask.
whether such a nation could be really admitted into-the
European community, or whether it could give really,
good government to any Christian or Mahometan
subjects that it might have. A great deal might be
said in answer to such a question, as a matter of
curious speculation. But the question is of no
practical importancé for our present subject, The
only practical choice in Europe lies between Chris-
tianity and Mahometanism. The practical point is.
that, whatever a nation of some third religion might
do, a Mahometan nation cannot live on terms of real
community with Christian nations; a Mahometan
government cannot give real. equality and good
government to its Christian subjects. The question
in modern Europe lies between Christian and Ma-
‘hometan, because all the nations of Europe besides
the Turks are Christian, But it must be borne in
-mind. that. the question. of the relation between.
_Mahometan.and Christians is only part of a greater
question, that is, of the relation between Mahv-
metans and men of other religions generally. What
is true of Mahometans and Christians in Europe, is,
or has been, true of Mahometans and Pagans in
Asia. ' It is true that the opposition between Maho- -
metanism and Christianity in Europe has been
sharper than the opposition between Mahometanism
and ‘other religions elsewhere. And this has come of
two causes; first, because Christianity and Maho-
metanism are more- distinctively rival religions than
any other two religions that can be named; secondly,
because Christians in Europe, have, for nearly four hun-
dred years past, had little to do with any Mahometans
except the Ottoman Turks, that is, with the fiercest.

58 THE OTTOMAN TURKS AND THEIR RELIGION.

and the most bigoted of all Mahometans.() Still,
the relation” between Mahometans and Christians in
South-eastern Europe is only part of the general
relation between Mahometans and men of other
religions everywhere. What is true in the case of
South-eastern Europe will be found to be true in
the main, though it will often need some qualification,
in every land where Mahometans have borne rule
over men of any other creed.

The fact simply is that no Mahometan govern-
ment ever has given or can give real equality to its
subjects of other religions. It would be most unjust:
to, put all Mahometan governments on a level in this
matter. There have been Mahometan rulers who
have avoided all wanton oppression of their non-
Mahometan subjécts; but, even. under the best
Mahometan rulers, the infidel, .as he is deemed in
Mahometan eyes, has never been really put oft a level |
with the true believers. Wherever Mahometans have
borne rule, the Mahometan part of the population
has always been a ruling race, and the Christian or
other non-Mahometan part has always been a subject
‘race. The truth is that this always must be so;
it is an essential part of the Mahometan religion
that it should be so. The Koran, the sacred book
of the Mahometans, bids the true believers to
fight against the infidels, till the infidels either em-
brace Islam or submit to pay tribute. By paying
tribute, they purchase the right to their lives and
their property, which are .otherwise held to be
forfeited, and to the exercise of their religion on
certain conditions. Their fate therefore is not the
worst of all possible fates; they are not, like some
conquered nations, either swept away from the face

MUSSULMAN TOLERATION. 59

of the earth or condemned to actual personal slavery.
Nor are they subject to anything which can in strict-
ness be called religious persecution. That is to say,
the Christian, or rather the _non-Mussulman, subject
of a Mahometan government is not, simply as a non-
Mussulman, subject to death, bonds, or other legal
punishment. That he should be free from penalties
of this kind is implied in this very notion of the
tributary relation. His payment of tribute exempts
him from any penalities of the kind. So far the
‘position of the Christian under a Mahometan ruler is
better than that of the Christian heretic has been
under many Christian rulers. His religion is tolerated ;
but it is simply tolerated, and the toleration is of a
purely contemptuous kind. There.is no real religious
equality. The Christian may freely embrace Islam,
and no Christian may hinder him from so doing. But
for a Mahometan to embrace Christianity is a crime
to be punished with death. Thus the non-Mussulman
subjects of a Mussulman ruler sink to the condition of
a subject people. In the case of a people conquered
by Mussulman invaders, they sink into bondmen in
their own land. They remain a distinct and inferior
community, reminded: in every act of their lives that
the Mussulmans aré masters and that they are servants.
They so remain as long as they are faithful to their
religion: by forsaking it, they may at any moment
pass over to the ranks of their conquerors. Thus
every Christian under a Mussulman government is in
truth confessor for his religion, as he might gain
greatly by forsaking it. Still it is plain that such a
state of things as this, grievous and degrading as it
is, does not in theory involve any act of personal
oppression, That is to say, though the Christian is

60 THE OTTOMAN TURKS AND THEIR RELIGION.

treated in every thing as inferior to the Mussulman,
yet his life, his property, and the honour of his family
might be safe. Under any Mahometan ruler who
did his duty according to his own law, they would be
safe, because the Christian by the payment of tribute
purchases his right to all these things. But the great
evil of a law which condemns any class of people to
degradation is that the practice under such a law is sure _
to be worse than the law itself, The relation between
Christian and Mussulman under Mussulman rule is
fixed, not by a law like an Act of Parliament, which
may at ‘any time be changed, but by a supposed
divine law which cannot be changed. The relations
between the Christian and the Mussulman, that is,
the abiding subjection and degradation of the Chris-
tian, are matters of religious principle. The law
enjoins neither persecution nor personal oppression :
it enjoins toleration, though merely a contemptuous
toleration. But, when the toleration which the law
enjoins is purely contemptuous, when the subjection
of all religions but the dominant one is consecrated
by a supposed divine sanction, it is almost certain.
that the practice will be worse than the law; it-is
almost certain that contemptuous toleration will pass
into an ordinary state of personal oppression, varied
by occasional outbursts of actual persecution. So
history shows that it has been. Instances may indeed
be found in which Christians or other non-Mussul-
mans have fared better under a Mussulman govern-
ment, than the law of the Koran prescribes ; as a rule,
they have fared worse. It could in truth hardly be
otherwise. When the members of one religious body
feel themselves to be, simply on accaunt.of their
‘religion, the superiors and masters of their neighbours

IRREGULAR OPPRESSION. 61

of another religion, the. position is.one which opens
every temptation to the worst passions of the human
heart. A man must have amazing command of hint-
self, if, when it is his religious duty to treat a certain
class of men as subject and degraded, he does not
deal with them in a way which carries with it some-
thing yet more than subjection and degradation. A
bad man, even an average man, will be tempted every
moment to add direct insult atd oppression beyond
what the letter of his law ordains. -And so it has
been in.the history of all Mahometan governments’
which have borne rule over subjects of other religions,
especially over Christians, The best have been
what in Western Europe we should call bad; and
their tendency has been, like most bad things, te
get worse. The Christian subjects of Mahometan
powers have often been much better off than Christian
subjects of the Turk are now. But in no case have
‘they been what in Western Europe we should call
really well off, and the tendency has always been for
their condition to get gradually worse and worse.

The truth is that the Mahometan religion is, above
all others, an aggressive religion. Every religion
. which dées not confine itself to one nation, but which ©
proclaims itself as the one truth for all nations, must
be aggressive in.one sense, That is to say, it-must be
anxious to bring men within its pale; in other words
it must be a missionary religion. Now Mahometan-
ism is eminently a missionary religion ;(*) but it is
something more. It is aggressive in another sense -
than that of merely persuading men to embrace its
doctrines, It lays down the principle that the faith is
to be propagated by the sword. Other religions, .
Christianity among them, have been propagated by

62 THE OTTOMAN TURKS AND THEIR: RELIGION,

the sword; but it is Mahometanism only which lays
it down as a matter of religious duty that it should
be so propagated.. No ruler who forced Christianity
by the sword. on unwilling nations could say that
any precept of the Gospel. bade him do so. And,
as the precepts of the Gospel: have come to be better
understood, most Christians have agreed that such a
way of spreading the faith is altogether contrary to the |
spirit of the Gospel. But the Mussulman-who fights
against the infidel till he makes his choice between
the old alternatives of Koran. or Tribute: is simply
ebeying the most essential precept of his. religion.
This duty of spreading the faith by the sword, which
the Koran énforces on:all Mussulmans, at. once places
the Mahometan religion in 2 specially hostile position
towards all other religions. And furthermore the
whole character of that religion makes it the special
rival of Christianity. Without going into. questions
of theological dogma, one main cause of this special
rivalry betwéen Christianity and Islam is- because
those two religions have so much in common. The
Christian would say of the Mahometan, and the Maho-
metan would say of the Christian; that in each case
the creed of the other had more of truth in it than
there was in any other creed which was not the whole
truth. As compared with heathen religions, the strife
between Christianity and Mahometanism has the pro-
verbial bitterness of the strifes of kinsfolk. A few
plain facts.show the special rivalry of the two religions.
Many heathen nations have embraced Christianity,
and many have embraced. Mahometanism. They
have done so in both cases, sometimes freely, some-
times by force. And in both cases they have, by
embracing either Christianity or Mahometanism,

CHRISTIANITY AND ISLAM. 63

raised themselves in every way, moral, social, and
religious. The advantage has been so clearly on the
side of the Christian or Mahometan teacher that the
heathens themselves have come to perceive it. But no
Christian nation. has ever embraced Mahometanism ;
no Mahometan nation has ever embraced Christianity.
For they are. distinctly tival religions, and not only
rival religions, but réligions which représent rival
systems of social and political life. Each holds itself
to be theologically the one truth ; each believes itself
to represent a higher and better civiland social.system.
And the Mahometan further believes that his civil
and social system is directly of divine authority. The
Christian does not hold that the Gospel is a legal code
for all times and places; the Mahometan does hold that
the Koran is such a code. Here, as Christians and
all who are not Mahometans hold, lies the great fault
of the Mahometan system. Precepts which were
admirable in the time and place where they were
first given, precepts which were a great reform when
Mahomet first preached them to the Arabs of the .
seventh century, have been forced, wherever the
Mahometan power has spread:itself, upon ail nations
for all time. Hence, while a Christian. government is
simply bound.to shape its conduct according to the
moral precepts of the Gospel, a Mahometan govern-
ment is bound to enforce the Koran as the Jaw of the
land. Hence too,‘ while the Gospel. is altogether
silent about the- relations between the spiritual
and temporal powers, while Christian nations have
therefore settled that question in different ways at
different times, the Mahometan religion settles it in
one way for all time. Wherever. the Mahometan
system is fully carried out, the spiritual power carries

‘64. THE OTTOMAN TURKS AND THEIR RELIGION.

the temporal power with it. The successor of the
Prophet, the Caliph, is Pope and Emperor in one.
In the Mahometan system there. is no distinction
between Church and State, no distinction between
religious and civil duty. Every action of a good
Mussulman is not only done from a religious motive,
but is done directly as a religious act. From this
spring both the best and the worst features of the
Mahometan system.’ This carrying of religion into
everything, the swallowing up, as one may. say, of the |
secular life in the religious life, leads to miuch that is
good in the relations of Mahometans towards one
another. A good and earnest Mahometan, who
carefully follows the precepts of his own law, must, at
least towards men of his own faith, practise many of .
the moral virtues. The Mussulman too is never
ashamed of his religion or of any of the observances
which it enjoins. And this is certainly more than
we can.say of all Christians. In short, if Islam had
never gone beyond Arabia, we might have reckoned
Mahomet among the greatest benefactors of mankind.
The only fault which could in such a case have been
laid to the charge of his system would be that, in re-
forming the old evils of the Eastern world, polygamy
and slavery, he had for ever consecrated. them. The
worst that we could have said of Islam within its own
peninsula would have been that it was so great a reform
as to make a still greater reform altogether hopeless.
But this very feature which brings out so much good
in the relations of Mahometans to one another is the
very one which, before all others, makes Mahomet-
anism the worst of all religions in its relation to
men of any other religion: The feeling of exclusive
religious pride and religious zeal which it engenders

GOOD SIDE OF ISLAM. 65

is very like that spirit of exclusive patriotic zeal and
pride which may be seen in the history of various
nations. ‘The Mahometan has something.in common
with the old-Roman. The good and the bad features
of the old Roman character sprang from the same
source. The Roman commonwealth was to him what
the creed of Islam is to the sincere Mahometan. For
the Roman commonwealth he would freely give
himself, his life. and all that he had. Towards his
fellow citizens of that commonwealth he practised
many virtues. But as he was ready to sacrifice him-
self to the commonwealth, so he was equally ready
to sacrifice everything else. The rights of other
nations, the very faith and honour of Rome herself,
were as nothing in his eyes, if he deemed that the
greatness of the commonwealth could be advanced
by disregarding them. So it’is with the Mahometan
religion.. No religion has ever called forth more
intense faith, more self-sacrificing zeal, on the part
of its own professors. But the one precept which
‘corrupts all, the precept which bids the true believer
to fight against the infidel, turns that very faith and
. zeal which have in them so much ta be admired into
the cruellest instruments of oppression against men
of all other creeds.
At this stage it may very likely be asked, and that
‘not unfairly, whether it is meant to charge all Maho-
metan nations and all Mahometan governments. with
the crimes which disgrace the rule of the Ottoman
Turks. The answer is easy. If it is meant to ask
-whether all Mahometan nations and governments
have been guilty of those crimes in the same degree,
we may unhesitatingly answer, No. There is a vast
difference between one’ Mahometar nation or govern-
F

66 THE OTTOMAN TURKS AND THEIR RELIGION,

‘ment and another, just as there is a vast difference
_ between one Christian or Pagan nation or government
and another. But it is none the less true’ that the.
crimes which mark the Ottoman rule spring directly
from the principles of the Mahometan religion. They
show the worst tendencies of that religion carried out
in their extremest shape. There have been other
Mahometan ‘powers- under which those tendencies
have ‘not been allowed to reach-the same growth.
That is to say, there have been Mahometan govern-
ments which have ‘been very far from being so bad.
as that of the Ottoman Turks, But under every
Mahometan government those tendenciés must exist
in some degree ; therefore, while some Mahometan
governments. have been far better than others, no
Mahometan government can be really good according
to a Western standard. For no Mahometan govern-
ment which rules over subjects’ -which are- not
Mahometans can give really equal rights to all its
subjects. The utmost that the best Mahometan ruler
‘can do is to save his subjects of other religions from
actual persecution, from actual personal oppression ;
-he cannot save them from degradation. He cannot,
without forsaking the principles of his own religion,
put them on the same level as Mussulmans.. The.
utmost that he can do is to put his non-Mussulman
subjects in a state which, in every Western country
would be looked upon as fully justifying them in.
revolting against his rule. And, as we have seen, the
tendencies to treat them'worse than this are almost
irresistible. Among the Ottomans those tendencies
have reached their fullest development. A ‘rude
people, a bigoted people, in its beginning a band of.
adventurers rather than a nation, rose to power under

SPECIAL POSITION OF THE OTTOMANS.. 67

a line of princes who were endowed with unparalleled
gifts for winning and keeping dominion, but-who had
but a small share in those qualities which make.domi-.
nion something other than a mere rule of force. The
Ottomans have been’simply a power. They have been
a power whose one work has been the subjugation of ©
other nations, Mahometan as well as Christian, a power
whose sole errand has been that of conquest, and
which therefore, as soon as it ceased to conquer, sank
into.a depth of wickedness and weakness beyond all
other powers, ' The Ottoman. Furk, a conqueror and
nothing more, has had no share in the nobler qualities -
which have distinguished many other Mahometan
nations which have been. conquerors and something
else as well. He has no claim to be placed. side by.
side with the higher specimens of his own creed, with
the early Saracens or with the Indian Moguls. It
would be a blessed change indeed if the lands of
South-eastern Europe could be transferred from the
rule ‘of the corrupt gang at Constantinople to a rule
just, if stern, like that of the first Caliphs. But, even,
under the rule of the first Caliphs, they would still
be in a case which would cause any Western people .
_to spring to arms. -No Mahometan ruler, I repeat,
can give moré than contemptuous toleration; he
cannot give real equality.of rights. One Mahometan
ruler tried to do so, and not only tried but succeeded.
‘But he succeeded only by casting away the faith which
hindered his work. Akbar was the one prince born
in Islam who gave equal rights to his subjects who
did not profess the faith of Islam. But he was also
the one princé born in Islam who cast away the faith
‘of Islam... To do his work, the noblest work that
despot ever did, he had to cast aside thé trammels
F 2

68 THE OTTOMAN TURKS AND THEIR RELIGION.

of a creed under which his work could never have
been done. - No fact proves more clearly that under
Mahometan rule there can be no real reform than the
fact that the one Mahometan prince who wrought a
real reform had to cease to be Mahometan in order
to work it.(°)

‘So again with regard to another point. It may be
asked, Is the Mahometan religion: necessarily incon-
sistent with proficiency in literature, art, and science?
Here too a different answer may be given according

_to the different standard which we take. The East
-has its own literature, art, and science, apart from
- those of the West: the East has its own civilization
apart from that of the West. We may deem that the
East is inferior to the West in all these things, and
history proves that it is so. But the real point is, not
that one is inferior or superior to the other, but that
they are essentially distinct. Our position is that.
the Turk has never won for himself any share in the
- common intellectual possessions of the West. Even
in the East, no one would place him in these respects
-on a level with either the Arab or the Persian. But
‘our point is wholly with regard to his share in the
intellectual possessions of the West. In those pos-
sessions we may say that no Mahometan nation has |
ever had a full share, and that the Ottoman Turk
has had no share at all. The Saracen, both of the
East and of the West, has his distinct place in the
history of art and science; the Ottoman Turk has
none. What the real share of the Saracens in these
matters is I have tried to show elsewhere. I need
here only repeat that those who speak of the Spanish
Saracens as ever having at any time had learning, art,
and science all to themselves simply show that they

MAIIOMETAN ART AND SCIENCE. 69

are themselves in the blackness of darkness with
regard to the history of Christendom generally, and
specially with regard to the history of the Deten
Rome.(‘) |
We have gone off somewhat from the main track
of our argument to mark how far the. special evils
of Ottoman tule are shared by Mahometan govern-
ments in general, and how far they are directly owing
to the Mahometan religion. The answer is that they
are directly owing to the Mahometan religion, that
they must in some measure affect every Mahometan
government, but that the special character and posi-
tion of the Ottoman Turks has aggtavated the worst
tendencies of the Mahometan religion, and has made |
their rule worse than that of any of the other great
Mahometan powers of the world.(®) We now come
back to the fifth point of difference between the
state of South-eastern Europe under the Turk and
the state of the nations of Western Europe under
their.several. national governments. It follows from
all that has gone before that the nations of Western
‘Europe, saving those small exceptions which have
been already spoken of, have national governments
of their own, but that the nations of South-eastern
Europe have not. Let us once more compare the
Bulgarian and the Ottoman Turk. The Bulgarians
came in as heathen invaders. They embraced Christi-
anity, and were lost among their Christian neighbours
and subjects. Their government then became a
national government. ' The Turks came in, not as.
heathen but as Mahometan invaders. They have not
embraced Christianity. They haye always remained
distinct from their Christian neighbours and subjects.
Their government has- never become a_ national

7O THE OTTOMAN TURKS AND THEIR RELIGION.

government to any but the invading race themselves.
It is a string of causes and effects. The rule of
the Bulgarian could become a national government,
because he embraced Christianity, and he was able
- to embrace Christianity because he came in as a
- heathen. The rule of the Ottoman Turk has never
become a national government, because the Turk has
never embraced Christianity, he could not embrace
Christianity because he came in as a Mahometan. It
is a fact well worthy of remembrance that both the
Bulgarians, and somewhat jaterthe Russians, when they .
became dissatisfied with their’ own heathen religion,
had Mahometanism and Christianity both set before
them, and that they deliberately’ chose’ Christianity.
Had either of those nations chosen otherwise, the
history of Europe would have been very different:
from what it has been. . The rule of the Bulgarian
would have been what the rule of the Turk has been.
The state of things which began in the South-eastern
lands in the fourteenth century would have begun in
the ninth. We need not stop to show how different
thé whole history of the world would have been, if the
heathen Russians, instead of adopting Christianity,
had adopted Mahometanism. As it was, both nations
made a better choice, and the history of the Bulgarian,
- as compared with that of the Ottoman Turk, has
given us the most instructive of lessons. The heathen |
conquerors could be turned into Christian brethren ;
the Mahometan conquerors could not. And, remain-
ing Mahometans, they could not give a national
government to those of the conquered who remained
Christians. Now among those who so remained were
the bulk of the conquered nations, the. nations, them-
selves as nations. Many individuals everywhere, in

CONTRAST OF BULGARIANS AND TURKS. 71°

some lands large classes, embraced; as was..not very
wonderful, the religion of the conquerors, and so
rose to the level of the conquerors. But the vast
majority clung.stedfastly to the faith whose con-
tinued profession condemned them ‘to be bondmen.
in their own land. Thus the distinction of religion
marked off the two classes of conquered and con-
querors, subjects and rulers, the people of the land
and the strangers who held them in subjection. Had
it been merely the distinction of conqueror and: con-
quered, that might have died out as it has died out
in so many lands. The Turk might by this time
‘ have been as thoroughly assimilated as the Bulgarian.
But the distinction of religion kept on for ever the
distinction between conquerors and conquered. The
process of conquest, the staté of things directly follow-
ing on. conquest, still goes on after five hundred
years.
Thus the rule of the Mahometan Turk is not, and
cannot be, a national government to any of his Chris-
_ tian subjects. This must be thoroughly understood,
because so many phrases which we are in the habit of
using are apt to lead to error on this point. We said
in an earlier chapter that many words which have one
meaning when we apply them to the state of things in
Western Europe, have another meaning or no meaning
at all when we apply them to the state of things in’
South-eastern, Europe. If in speaking of things in
South-eastern. Europe we use such words as “sove-
reign,” “subject,” “government,” “law,” we must re-
member that we are using them with’ quite another
meaning than they bear when applied to the same
things in Western Europe. Thus in common. lan-
guage we speak of the power which is now established

72 THE OTTOMAN TURKS AND: THEIR RELIGION.

at Constafitinople as the Turkish “government” or
the Otcoman “government.” We speak of the
Sultaa as the “sovereign” of Bulgaria, Bosnia, Thes-
saly, of Crete. We speak of the Christian inhabitants
-of those countries as the Sultan’s “subjects.” His
subjects they undoubtedly are in one sense; but it is
in a sense quite different from that which the word
bears in any Western kingdom. The word “subject”
has two quite different meanings when we speak of a
Turkish subject and when we speak of a British sub-
ject. When we call an Englishman a British subject,
we mean that he is a member of the British state, and
we call him subject rather than citizen simply because
the head of the British state is a king or queen and
not 4 republican magistrate. Every British subject
‘is the member of a body of which the Queen of
Great Britain and Ireland is.the head. But if we
call a‘ Bulgarian an Ottoman subject, it does not
mean that he is the member of a body of which the.
Ottoman Sultan is the head. It means that he is the
member of a body which is held in bondage by the
body of which the Ottoman Sultan is the head. ' It
does not simply mean that he is a ‘subject of. the
Grand Turk as a political ruler. It means that he
is also subject to all the lesser Turks-as his daily op- ©
pressors. If we speak of “government,” the “ Turkish
government,” and the. like, the words are apt to sug-
gest, often unconsciously, that they have the same
-meaning when they are applied to Eastern Europe -
as they. have when applied to Western Europe.
What we understand by “government” in Western
Europe is the administration of the law.. The govern-
ment is the body which protects those who obey the
law, and which punishes those who. break it.. And in

MISAPPLICATION OF WORDS. 73

all the countries of Western Europe, whether they are
called kingdoms or commonwealths, the nation itself
_ has some share, more or less perfect, more or less
direct, in appointing and controlling both thdse who
make the Jaw and those who administer it. When
this is the case, it,matters nothing for our purpose
whether the state is called a kingdom or a common-
wealth, whether the mass of the nation are spoken of
as “subjects” or as “citizens.” For our purpose, for the
compatison between Eastern and Western Europe,
“subject” and “citizen” mean the same thing. We
speak of a British “subject” and we speak of a French »
“citizen;” but the use of the two different words simply
marks the difference of the form of the executive in the
two countries. “ Subject” and “citizen” alike mean a
man who is a member of a political community, and:
who has, or may by his own act acquire, a share in
the choice of those who -make and who administer the
law. The duties of the sovereign and of the subject
are correlative. The subject owes allegiance to the
sovereign who gives him protection; the sovereign’
owes protection to the subject who lives under his
‘ allegiance. All this. applies in its fulness to all con-
stitutional states, whether they are called kingdoms
or commonwealths, It applies in a less degree even |
to despotic states, so far as the despotic sovereign is
really the head of the nation and has interests and
feelings in common with the nation. But in South-
eastern Europe, under the rule of the Turk, there is
nothing which answers. to the state of things which we
have just been describing. if therefore we. use
words like “government,” “sovereign,” “subject,” -
to describe a state of things which does. not exist’
in those lands, we must remember in what sense we

74 THE OTTOMAN TURKS AND THEIR RELIGION.

are using them. As far as the Turks themselves
are concerned, the Turkish government is a govern-
ment, though a despotic one. To the Turks the
Sultan‘ is their sovereign, the head of their nation.
As: members of that nation, they are his . subjects.
A Turk is a subject of the Sultan, if not in the sense
in which an Englishman is the subject of his Queen,
yet at least. in the sense in which a Russian is the
subject of his Emperor. But the. Christian - subjects
‘of the Sultan, that is the people of the lands in which
the Sultan and his Turks are encamped as strangers,
so far from being the Suitan’s subjects in the English
sense, are not even his subjects in the Russian sense.
He is not the head of their nation, but the head of a
foreign nation, a nation whom they look on as their
bitterest enemies. They are not his subjects, because
he does not give them that protection which is involved
in the relation of sovereign ‘and subject, that protection
which the Russian receives from his despotic sovereign
no less than the Englishman from his constitutional
sovereign. They are not -his subjects in the English, -
or even in the Russian sense, because, as he gives them
no protection, they owe him no allegiance. He is
not their sovereign, but a stranger who holds them
down by force. They are not his subjects, except in
the sense of being held down by force. If we apply
the word “sovereign” and “subject” to the relation
between the Turkish Sultan and the Christian nations
which are under his power, we must remember that
we use those words in a sense in which we might
speak of a burglar who has broken into a house as the
“sovereign” of that house, and the owner of the hguse
and his family as the “subjects” of the burglar.
The rule of the Turk in short ever the Christian

“SOVEREIGN ” AND “SUBJECT.” 75

nations which are under his power is a rute of mere
force and not arule of law. This must be so when-
ever a Mahometan government bears. rule over
subjects of any other religion ; but it is so ima truer
and fuller sense when the Mahometan government is.
the government of the Ottoman Turk. The rule of a
Mahometan power cannot be a rule of law to its subjects
of any other religion ; for them no law, strictly speak-
ing, exists. They have not, as the people have in a con-
stitutional state, any share, however indirect, in making’
the law. So far from having a share in making the
law, the law is not éven made in their interest or for
their benefit, as it may be even in a despotic state,
when the despot is really the head of the nation. Ina
Mahometan state the only law is the Koran, the sacred
book of Mahomet; or rather it is not the Koran
itself, but what the Koran-has: been .made into by
successive expounders and commentators. But the
law thus made is a law made wholly in the interest
of the Mahometan rulers, not at all in that of their
Christian subjects. The Christian is in strictness out
of the pale of the Jaw ; the utmost that he can do is
to purchase certain rights, the security of his life,-his
_ property and the exercise of his religion, by the
payment of tribute. The law is not made for him,
and the law is not administered for him. So far as
he is in theory entitled to its protection, that protec-
tion is a mere name, because the witness of an infidel
cannot by the Mahometan law be- taken against the
trué believer. The Christian is thus absolutely without
protection. Even supposing the court to deal quite
justly according ‘to its own rules, to punish all crimes
which are proved according to its own rules, still a
crime done by a Mahometan against a Christian can

76 THE OTTOMAN TURKS AND THEIR RELIGION.

hardly ever be punished, because it can hardly ever
be proved. If it be done in the presence of any
number of Christian witnesses, but of Christian wit-
nesses only, their witness cannot be taken and the
crime cannot be punished. Such is the theory of the
Mahometan law. Its practice has been better and
worse in different times and places. Under the
Turkish rule now it is for the most part very hard to
get justice done for a crime committed by a Maho-
metan against a Christian, unless the Christian can
both bribe the judge and hire Mahometan witnesses.
Practically then a Mahometan may do what he
, Chosés to a Christian with very little fear of being
punished for it. It is plain that to apply the words
“law” and “government” to a state of things like
this is a mere abuse of words. For the Christian
subject of the Turks law and government do not exist.
The thing which usurps their names is not law and ~
government, but simply a system of piganleed:
brigandage.- |

The utter difference between the cneanihe of the
word government, as applied to Western and to
South-eastern Europe, will be best understood if we
look at it in this way. We Have seen that among -
the nations of Western Europe; unless in a few ex-
ceptional corners, no one wishes to get rid of the
government of his country, though he may wish to
modify and improve it in many ways. The Swiss,
the Englishman, the Russian, live under very different
forms of government ; and it is possible that this or
that man among those three. nations may think that
the form of government which he sees in one of the
other nations is better than his own. He may wish -
to reform his own government according to the model

- “GOVERNMENT.” 77

of the other. But, at the utmost, all that he wishes
is to reform the government of his country, not to
get rid of it. All alike wish to remain members
of a political community which shall be Swiss, Eng-
lish, or Russian. But the Christian subject of the
Turkish government does not wish to reform the
Turkish government ; he does not wish to re-construct
it after the model of some other government ; he
simply wishes to get rid of it altogether. He is not
a member ofa Turkish political community ; for,
while he is under the power of the Turk, he stands
outside all political communities. Nor does he wish
‘to become a member of a Turkish political cem-
munity; for he is not a Turk, and he does not look °
on Turks as his countrymen. What he wishes is to
become a member of a political community of his own
_ nation, which shall have nothing to do with the Turk.
- He knows nothing of the so-called Turkish “govern-
ment,” or of his so-called “sovereign” the Sultan,
except so fat as he is compelled. by force to know
something of them. They are not the heads of his
* own nation, but the heads of a foreign and hostite
nation. These are the plain facts as to the state of ,
South-eastern Europe ; and, if we do not wish to use ©
words which are altogether misleading, we must adapt:
our language to the facts; otherwise we shail fall into
strange mistakes, Thus it has sometimes been said
that, if the Christians of the East have grievances, they
ought to lay them before “their own government,” and -
not to listen to “ foréign intriguers.” In so saying, not
only are the facts of the case altogether misstated, but
_the words themselves are used in a misleading sense.
As ‘a matter of fact, the subject nations have, over
and over again, laid their grievances before the power

78 THE OTTOMAN TURKS AND THEIR RELIGION,

which calls itself their government, and they have got
no redress by so doing. . It is impossible that they
gould have redress“ by so doing, for the power to
which they applied was not their own govern-
‘ment, for any. government at all. That powér-
could not redress their grievances, because to re-
dress their gtievances would be to destroy itself.
For the existence of that power, that falsely called
“government,” is itself the greatest of their griev-
ances, the root and cause of all lesser grievances. :
Those again who are spoken of as foreign intriguers
ate, in the eyes of the subjects of the Turk, not
foreigners but countrymen. They are that part of
their countrymen who have kept or won their freedom,
while they themselves are left in bondage, The
English statesman who gave that’ piece of advice
spoke as if the Turk was the countryman of the
Bosnian Christian, as if the Turkish government was.
his government, as if the Servian or the Montenegrin
was a foreigner to him. In truth, the Bosnian Christian
looks on the Servian or Montenegrin as his country~-
_ man; he looks on the Turk as a foreigner, He does
not look on the Turkish government as his government
at all; for it does not discharge the common duties
of government. But he would gladly be under any
government, Servian, Montenegrin, or any other,
which would discharge those duties. So we often
hear of the “interests of Turkey,” “the friends of
Turkey,” “the enemies of Turkey.” If by “Turkey”
is meant the land and people over which the Turks
rule, as we should mean if we spoke of the “ interests,”
the “friends,” the “enemies,” of England or France,
then those phrases are used in a sense which: is utterly
misleading. People talk of the “interests of Turkey,”

“TURKEY” AND THE TURKS. 79

meaning the “interests of the Turks,” But whatever
is for: the real interest of Turkey is. against the
interest of the Turks: for the interest of the Turk is
to keep Turkey in bondage; the interest of Turkey
is to get free from the bondage of the Turk. So the
enemies of the Turks are the friends of Turkey ; the
friends ‘of. the Turk are the enemies of Turkey. At
the late Conference at Constantinople we sometimes
heard of the “representatives of Turkey,” mean-
ing two Turks who were allowed to sit with the
European ambassadors. Now, all those European
ambassadors might in a sense be called “represen-
tatives of Turkey ;” for it is to be hoped that they
were all trying to do something for the good of the
land and people of Turkey. But ‘the two Turks were
in no way “representatives of Turkey ;” for they -
were doing all that they could against the land and |
people of Turkey by striving to prolong their own <
‘wicked dominion ‘over them. a
So again at the same Conference there was talk
about a “foreign occupation” of this or that province
of the land which we call Turkey. By a “ foreign.
occupation” was ‘meant the presence of civilized
troops who should protect the people of the land. -
But those who used that phrase seemed to forget.
that those lands are already under a foreign occu-
‘pation, a foreign occupation of the worst kind. The
Turks, as has been often'said, are simply an: army
of occupation in a conquered country. They have
been so for five hundred years, and they remain so
still. They are encamped. on the lands of other
nations, where they hold down the rightful owners
‘by force. They are essentially an army; for every. —
Turk_is armed, while the Christian is unarmed. The

80 THE OTTOMAN TURKS AND THEIR RELIGION.

only objection to calling them an army is -that in

an army there is discipline, and a soldier who does

wrong may be punished, while in the Turkish army

of occupation there is no‘discipline. For every Turk

may do whatever wrong he chooses to the people of
the land, and he is never punished for so doing.

Wherever the armed Turk is, whether he is enlisted
as a regular soldier of the Sultan or not, there is

the foreign army of occupation. What was really

proposed. was, not to bring in a foreign occupa-
. tion as something new, but to change one foreign —
occupation for another. It was proposed to put a

friendly foreign occupation instead of ‘a_ hostile

ene; it was proposed to take away the Turkish

army of oppressors, and to put instead an European

army of protectors.. It was proposed to take away

the army which killed and robbed the people of the

‘land at pleasure, and to put instead of them an army
which should save the people of the land from being
killed and robbed. That the army of foreign robbers
‘themselves disliked such a proposal was.only natural :
but it was very strange to hear, as we often heard,

that such a measure was against the dignity, the
. independence, or the interests-of “Turkey.” The

- Turk of course did not want to be put.-aside, and
to put him aside might be said to be. against his
interest; but to put him aside was the very thing’
which the interest of Turkey, its land and people,
demanded above all things.

This way of talking about “Turkey” bail “the Turks”
as if they meant the saine thing comes from our
Western way of looking at things. . As England is the
land of England, as France is the land of the French,.
we get almost unwittingly into a way of speaking

THE TURKS AN ARMY OF OCCUPATION. 81

as if Turkey were the land of the Turks. And if we
allow ourselves to speak in a misleading way, we can
hardly fail to get in some degree confused in our
thoughts as well as in our words. We cannot too
constantly remember, we cannot too oftén repeat,

that the Turks in the land which we call Turkey are
not the people ofthe land, but simply an army of
occupation encamped among them. They are an
army of foreign invaders; towards whom the people
of the land have only one interest and one duty,
namely to free themselves. from the foreign yoke as.
soon as they can. The words “army of occupation”

so exactly express the tfuth of the case that there
are no words which the friends of the Turks+—that is,
the enemies of the land and people of Turkey—~so
greatly dislike to hear. Those words exactly set
forth the truth of the case; they bring out strongly
that the Turk, though he has been so long in’ the
land, is as much a stranger as he was when he first
came, that his rule which began in force has been
kept on by sheer force ever since. It was a foreign
army which entered the land five hundred years back,
and it is a foreign army which keeps the land in
bondage still. The Turk who occupies the Greek
and Slavonic lands-is still as much a stranger in
those lands, as much a mere foreign invader, as the
Germans were in France, when a few years back they
held part of France as an army of occupation. In
one case the foreign occupation lasted. only for a
year or two; in the other case it has gone on for
ages; but it has not changed its nature by length of
time. Only between the two cases there was this
great difference, that France was occupied by a
civilized and disciplined army, acting according to

G

82 THE OTTOMAN TURKS AND THEIR RELIGION.

‘the rules of civilized warfare, while the Greek and
Slavonic lands are occupied. by a barbarian army
which knows no fules of discipline at all. The.
regulaf soldiers of the Sultan are doubtless the least
mischievous part of the army of occupation, for they
are under some kind of discipline. The worst part
of the army of occupation is made*up of the armed
Turks scattered through the whole land, who are
under no discipline, and who do whatever evil they
may think good. To call them an army of occu-
pation is not, as the friends of the Turks often say, a
figurative or rhetorical way of speaking. It is the
soberest and truest way of setting forth. the past
history and the present state of the Turk, and of the
lands which he holds under his yoke.

We have seen now what the Turk is, and’ we have
seen that it is mainly his religion that has made him
what he is. From all this another point follows. A
system of this kind, a system under which the bond-
ee of the mass of the people of a country is enforced

by their rulers as a matter of religious duty, is in-
capable of reform. It can be got rid of; it cannot
be reformed. It may be got rid of in three ways;
first, by the rulers embracing the religion of their
subjects; secondly, by the subjects embracing the
religion of their rulers; or thirdly, by trans-
ferring power to hands under which contending
races and religions may be put on a level of real
equality. The two former alternatives do not come
within the range of practical politics. The general
conversion of the Mahometans to Christianity is out
of the question. It is barely possible in some special
districts under special circumstances.(®) The general
conversion of the Christians to Mahometanism .is

REFORM IMPOSSIBLE. 83

equally out of the question ; and, even setting purely
theological feélings aside, it is a solution which no one
in Western Europe could wish for. The only means
of putting an end to the state of things which necés-
sarily follows on Mahometar rule is to put an end to
the Mahometan rule itself. Schemes of reform lie as
much out of the range of practical politics as any
general conversion either way. A Mahometan govern-
_ment cannot really reform; it cannot get rid of the
inherent evils of Mahometan society ; nor can it get rid,
of the unjust relations in which in every Mahometan
country Mahometans must stand towards men-of other
religions. Christianity has got rid of the two great
evils of: polygamy and slavery. Mahometanism can-
not get rid of them, because they are allowed and
consecrated by the Mahometan law.. So too a Ma-
hometan government cannot really reform the relations
between its Mahometan and non-Mahometan subjects.
It cannot give its non-Mahometan subjects the bene-
fits which they have a right to demand. It cannot
put them on a level with its Mahometan subjects : it
cannot put them on a level with the inhabitants of
countries where the government is not Mahometan.
For it is the first principle of the Mahometan religion
not to do any of these things. One Mahometan govern-
ment may be, as-we have seen, very much better than
another ; but none can be really good. The utmost
that any Mahometan government can do is to protect
its non-Mahometan-subjects from actual persecution,
from actual personal oppression. It cannot, do more
than this. Do what it will, it cannot, as long as it
remains Mahometan, make its non-Mahometan. sub-
jects other than.a subject class in their own land. It
therefore cannot reform, in the sense in which reform
G2

84 THE OTTOMAN TURKS AND THEIR RELIGION.

is understood in Western Europe. It cannot give the
people of Eastern Europe what they seek for and
what they have a right to. demand, namely a con-
dition equal to that of the people of Western Europe.
Any scheme which expects that which js impossible
lies without the range of practical politics. The
expectation of reforms from the Turk, as expecting
what is beyond all things impossible, lies pre-
eminently without that range. The only: solution
which comes within that range is the transfer of the
power of the Turk to other hands.

We have thus seen who the Turk is, and what he
is. We have seen in what he differs froin the
nations of Europe, and why he can never really
enter into the fellowship of the nations of Europe.
We have seen that the Turks are a people alien
to the blood, language, civilization, and religion of
Western Europe. They have made conquests; but
they have never legitimated their conquests-in the
way that other conquerors have. They have
never ¢ither assimilated the .conquered -nor yet
been themselves assimilated by them. They have
always remained a distinct race, holding the people of
the land in bondage. The people under .their rule
have no national government; what calls itself a
government is simply a dominion of strangers ruling
by force. Their Sultan gives no protection to his’
Christian subjects; therefore his Christian subjects
owe him no allegiance. And this state of things is
one which cannot be mended, because it is a state of
things which the religion of the Turks enforces as
a religious duty. They are Mahometans, and a
Mahometan government is bound to treat its subjects
of other religions as a conquered race, and not to put

SUMMARY. 85

them on a level with Mahometans. As long therefore
as that Mahometan government lasts, there can be tio-
real reform. If the people of South-eastern Europe
are to be made really free, if they are to be raised to
‘the level of the people of. Western Europe, the great
hindrance which keeps them from so doing must be
taken out of the way. That hindrance is thé power
of the Turk. The power of the Turk must therefore .
pass away. ‘ ,
- We have thus, in these three chapters, traced in a
general way, the nature of the Ottoman power in
Europe. We will now go on in the following chapters
to trace out somewhat more fully what the Ottoman
Turks have done in the European lands in which they
are encamped. -That is, we will go on to trace out
the leading features in the history of the Ottoman:
power in Europe, how it began, how it rose to great-
ness, how it sank to the state of utter corruption and
degradation in which we see it now.

86 THE OTTOMAN TURKS AND THEIR RELIGION.

NOTES.

-(1, p. §8) After the Castilian Conquest of Granada, the nations of
. Western Europe had nething to do with any Mahométan péople in West-
ern Europe itself. But, besides the Ottoman Turks, they had a good deal
to do with the Mahometan powers of Africa, that is they suffered a good
deal at their hands in the way of piracy, but most of these African
powers were at least nominally under the supremacy of the Ottoman
Sultan. Their history therefore of some centuries back is rather a part ©
of that Ottoman history than @ part of the SS of the European
power of the Saracens,

(2; p. 61.) All that can be: said on ‘ehahiceedibe as a missionary
religion will be fourid in the introductory lecture of Mr. R. B. Smith’s
“Mohammed and Mohammedanism.” Mr. Smith seems to have got up
very carefully all that can besaid on the Mahometan side ; unluckily he :
does not seem to have bestowed the same care on any part “of the history
of Christendom. Like most. panegyrists of Mahometanism, especially .
of Saracenic art and learning, he forgets. that whatever the Saracens
knew they learned from the abiding home of civilization at New Rome.

" (3, p. 68.) On Akbar see History and Conquests of the Saracens,
p.tt4

(4, p. 69.) History and Conquests of the ‘Saracens, p-. 155—159.

(5, p. 69.) I am not called on to inquire whether South-eastern
Europe or Persia has at this moment the worst government. In .
Persia the Mahometans are the nation; Christians and Fire-worship- |
pers—if any Fire-worshippers be left—are small minorities. ‘The main
question there lies between Mahometan and Mahometan. A& regards
Mahometans, the Persian government may possibly be worse than the
Turkish. So may the Egyptian government. But, as regards Maho-
metans, the Persian government is not inherently incapable of réform ;
it may conceivably be brought to the best Mahometan standard. The
great feature of Ottoman rule in Europe is that it is. primarily and
essentially a rule of Mussulman over non-Mussulman. : So to be is the
nature of its whole being. This the government of Persia is only to
a very small extent, and, as regards Christians, we might say quite
incidentally.

(6, p. 82.) On the possibility of reconversion in Bosnia and , the
Mahometan parts of Albania I shall find something to say further on.

CHAPTER IV.

THE RISE AND GROWTH OF THE OTTOMAN
POWER.

We have thus traced out the distinguishing: charac- °
teristics of Eastern and of Western Europe. We, have
seen what are the great races which have from the
beginning inhabited the South-eastern peninsula. We
have shown the special position of the Turks among
them, and the points in which they stand aloof from
-the European nations. We have seen also what is the
nature of their rute over those European nations which.
they have brought into bondage, and how impossible
it is that their rule can ever be mended. Thus far we’
have done this only in a general way ; we have seen
what, according to the laws of. cause and effect, could
hardly have failed to happen. We have now to see
more fully how the working of those causes and
effects has been ‘carried out in fact. We have seen
what the Turks, being what they were, could not fail .
to do. We must now see more minutely, by the help
of history, what the Turks have really done. al

Our immediate subject is not the history of all
the Mahometan nations, not even the history of
all the , Turkish dynasties, but more specially
the history of the Ottoman Turks, and mainly the’

88 RISE AND GROWTH OF OTTOMAN POWER.

history of their doings in the lands which they
have conquered in Europe. -Of the first Mahome-
tans, that is the Arabs or Saracens, and df the
earlier‘ Turkish dynasties, I have said something
in another book, and I will repeat as little as-I
can of what I have said there. At the same time,
in treating the special history of the Ottoman Turks,
it will be nécessary to draw .certain distinctions.
For some of the things which we may have to say
about the Ottoman Turks will apply to Mahometan
powers in- general, and some will not. It is quite
certain, as has already been shown, that no Mahome-
tan, government can ever rule over men of another
religion in a way which any one in Western Europe
would call ruling well. It is quite certain that no
Mahometan nation can ever rise to the highest point
of civilization. Still there aré great differences, which
ought not to be forgotten, between one Mahometan
nation and another, just as there are differences between
one Christian nation and another. Some Mahometan
nations have been much more civilized than others,
and the rule of some Mahometan governments over
men of other religions has been milder than that of
others, In speaking of the Ottoman Turks, we must
carefully distinguish what is common to them with all
other Mahometan nations and what is peculiar to
themselves, We must distinguish the Turks from the
Saracens, and we must further distinguish the’ Otto-
man Turks from other Turks. We may safely say
that no Mahometan nation—we are almost tempted
to say no other nation—ever produced so long a series
of great rulers as the Ottoman Turks. That is, if by
greatness we understand the power of carrying out
a man’s purposes, good or bad. No people can show

‘

THE TURKISH RACE. 89

so long a succession of rulers who were at once wise
statesmen and skilful captains as the early Ottoman
Sultans. Their business was to conquer ; as long as
they went on conquering they were great ; when they
ceased to conquer they fell into utter.decay and
degradation. Again, as regards what we call civiliza-
tion, as distinguished from’ political and military
succéss, the Ottoman Turks will be found to stand
above some and below others of the chief Mahometan
nations. But what specially distinguishes them is
that'no other ‘Mahometan people has ever had so
great a dominion over men of other religions. It
follows that the worst feature of the Mahomietan
religion, its treatment of the unbeliever, comes out on
a greater scale and in a worse form in their history
than in any other.

The Ottoman Turks, it must be aaenbeed are
only one branch out of many of the great Turkish
family, which is one.of the most widely spread among
the families of mankind. There were several dynas-
ties of Mahometan Turks before the Ottomans arose,
and there are to this day vast nations of Turks, some
of them mere savages, who have never embraced Ma-
hometanism. It must always be borne in mind that
all Mahometans are not Turks, and that all Turks are
not Ottomans, ‘The Turks with whom we have. to do
are those Turks who learned the Mahometan religion

at the hands of the Saracens, and specially with that ~

body of them which made their way into Europe and
founded the Ottoman dominion there. The Turks

and Saracens first came.to have dealings with one

another at the moment when the Saracen dominion

which the Turks were to supplant was at the-

height of its power. This was.in the year 710,

'

90- RISE AND GROWTH OF OTTOMAN POWER.

seventy-eight years after the death of Mahomet. It
was in that year that the Saracens passed from Africa
into Spain, and made the beginning their greatest
conquest in Europe. In the same year they first
crossed the Oxus, and began te make converts and
subjects among those Turks who lived between that
great river and the Jaxartes.. In the next year
the conquest of Sind gave the Saracen dominion the
greatest extent that it ever had. This last possession
however was not long kept, and the great Maho-
metan conquests in India, conquests: with which
we have now no concern, did not begin till long
afterwards. But. it is worth noticing that it was
almost at the same moment that the Mahometan
religion and the Mahometan power made their way
into India, into Western Europe, and into the land
which was then the land of the Turks. The Caliph
or successor of the Prophet, the temporal and spiritual
chief of all who profess the Mahometan creed, now
ruled over lands washed by the Atlantic and over
lands washed by the Indian Ocean. The word which
went forth from his palace at’ Damascus was obeyed
on the Indus, on the Jaxartes, and on the Tagus. —
While the whole Mahometan world was thus under
one ruler, the Christian nations were divided among
many rulers. But there were two Christian powers
which stood out above all others. The Roman Em-
pire still had its seat at Constantinople, and' still held,
though often in detached pieces, the greater part of
the European coast of the Mediterranean Sea, The
Saracens had lopped away Syria, Egypt, and Africa ;
the Slaves-had pressed into the South-eastern penin-
sula; the Bulgarians had settled south of the Danube,
and the Lombards had conquered great part of Italy.

SARACENS AND TURKS. Or

Still both the Old and the New Rome obeyed the one
Roman Emperor, and the: Roman Empire was still
the first of Christian powers, and still kept the chief
rule of the Mediterranean. The other great Christian
power. was that of the Franks in Germany and -Gaul,
the power which was, at the end of the century, to
grow into a new Western Empire with its.seat at the
Old Rome. Thus the Roman power still went on,”
only cut short and modified in various. ‘ways by the
coming in of the Teutons in the West and of the
Slaves in the East. And herein comes a very instruc-
tive parallel. For, as soon as the Saracens began to
conquer and convert the Turks, the Turks begin to
play a part in the history of the Saracen dominion in
“Asia which is much like the part which was played
in Europe by the’ Teutons towards the Western
Roman Empire and by the Slaves towards the
Eastern. The Turks appear under the Caliphs as
slaves, as subjects, as mercenaries, as practical masters,
as avowed sovereigns, and lastly, in the case of the
Ottomans, as themselves claiming the powers of the
Caliphate. The dominions of the Caliphs gradually
broke up into various states, which were ruled for the
most part by Turkish princes -who left a merely
nominal superiority to the Caliph. It is not our
business here to go through all of them. But one
must be mentioned, that out of which the Ottoman
dynasty arose. This was the Turkish dynasty of the -
house of Seljuk, which was the greatest power in Asia
in the eleventh century. Their early princes, Togrul
Beg, Alp-Arslan, and’ Malek Shah, were not only
great conquerors, but great rulers’ after the Eastern
pattern. They had- many of the virtues which
are commonly.found in the founders of dynasties

g2 RISE AND GROWTH OF OTTOMAN POWER.

and their immediate successors. The Seljuk Turks

pressed their conquests to the West, and so had more.
to do with Christians than any of. the Turkish dynas-

ties before them had. And it should carefully be.
noticed that it is from this time that a more special

and crying oppression of the Christians under .Ma-

hometan rule begins. The Turks, even these earlier

and better Turks, were a ruder and fiercer people than

the Saracens, and they were besides full of the zeal of
new converts. Doubtless, even under the Saracen

rule, the Christian subjects of the Caliphs had always

been oppressed and sometimes persecuted. But it is —
plain that, from the time when the power of the
Turks began, oppression became harder and perseécu-
tion more common. It was the increased wrong-
doings of the Turks, both towards the native Chris-
tians and towards pilgrims from the West, which
caused the great cry for help which led to the cru-
sades. There were no crusades as long as the Saracens
_tuled; as soon as the Turks came in, the crisates
began.

In the latter part of the eleventh century began
those long continued invasions of the Eastern Roman
Empire by the Turks which led in the end to the
foundation of the Ottoman power in Europe. There
is no greater mistake than to think that the whole
time during which the Eastern Empire went on at
Constantinople was a: time of mere weakness and
decline. Such a way of talking at once shows its own
folly. A power which was beset by enemies on all
sides, in a way in which hardly any other power ever
was, could not have lived on for so many ages, it could
not have been for a great part of that time one of
the chief powers of the world, if it had been all that

THE EMPIRE AND THE SELJUK TURKS. 93

time weak and declining. The Eastern Emperors are
often said by those who have not read their history
to have been all of them weak and cowardly men.
Instead of this, many of them were great conquerors
and rulers, who beat back their enemies on every
side, and made great conquests in their turn. The
great feature in the history of the Eastern Empire
is not constant weakness and decline, but the alterna- .
tion of periods of weakness and decline followed by
periods of recovered strength. In one century pro-
vinces are lost ; in another they are won back again,
and new provinces added. It was in one of these
periods of decline, following immediately after the
greatest of all periods of renewed -power, that the
Turks and Romans first came across one another.
I say Romans, because the people of the Eastern
Empire called themselves by no other name, and the
nations of Asia knew them by no other name. The
Eastern Empire was indeed fast becoming Greek,
as the Western Empire may be said to have already
become German. But the Emperors and their subjects
never called themselves Greeks at any time, and the
time has not yet come when it becomes convenient
to give them the name.

The Turkish invasion of the Empire came just
after a time of brilliant conquest and prosperity.
under the Macedonian dynasty of Emperors. This:
dynasty began in the ninth century and went on
into the eleventh. Under it the Empire gained a
great deal, and lost comparatively little. At the
very beginning of the period, in 878, the Saracens
completed the conquest of Sicily, which had been
going on for about fifty years. A hundred years
later, in 988, Cherson, an outlying: possession vin"

94. RISE AND GROWTH OF OTTOMAN POWER.

the Taurie peninsula or Crimea, was taken by the
Russian Vladimir. On the other hand, the power of
the Empire was vastly increased both in Europe and
in Asia. The dominions of the Emperors in Southern
Italy were increased ; Crete was won back ; the great
Bulgarian kingdom was conquered, and the other
Slavoni¢ states in the Eastern peninsula, became
either subject or tributary to the Empire. In Asia
large coriquests, including Antioch, were made from
the Saracens ; Armenia was annexed, and the power of
the Empire was extended along the eastern shores of
the Euxine. The greatest conquests of all were made
in the reign of Basil the Second, called the Slayer of
the Bulgarians, who reigned from 976 to 1025. A
dominion of this kind, which depends on one man, is
‘something like a watch, which, if wound up, will go
for a while by itself, but will presently go down, if it
is not wound up again. So, as after Basil no great
Emperor reigned for some while, the- Empire began
again to fall back, not at once, but within a few years-
About the middle of the eleventh century came one
of the periods of decline, and the Empire was cut
short: by the Normans in Italy and by the Turks in
Asia. The Seljuk Sultan Alp-Arslan invaded: Asia
Minor, a land which ‘the Saracens had often ravaged,
but which they had never conquered. He overthrew~
the Emperor Romanos in battle, and treated him per-
sonally with marked generosity. This was in 1071,
and from this time dates the establishment of the
- Turks, as distinguished from the Saracens, in the lands
which had been part of the Roman Empire. All the
inland part of the peninsula was now occupied by the
Turks, and, when in 1092 the great Seljuk dominion
was broken up; the city of Nikaia or Nice, the place ~

THE ohEUES IN ASIA MINOR. . 95

of the famous council, became the capital of a Turkish
dynasty. The map will show how near this brought
the Turks to Constantinople. And it might hardly
have been thought that three hundred and sixt¥ years
would pass before the Turks entered the imperial
city. But, as ruling over a land conquered from-the’
Roman Empire, the Sultans who reigned at Nikaia
‘called themselves Sultans of Rowm, that is of Rome. i
It was this great advance of the power of the Seljuk
Turks which caused the Christian nations of the West
to come to the help of their brethren in the East.

The history of the crusades concerns us here only
so far as, by affecting both the Eastern Roman Empire
and the power of the Seljuk Turks, they did in the end
pave the way for the advance of the Ottomans. The
effect of the first crusade was to drive back the Turks
from their position at Nikaia which was so threaten-
ing to the Empire. The Emperors who now reigned,
those of the house of Komnénos, were for the most
part either wise statesmen or good soldiers. Under
their reigns therefore came another period of renewed
strength, though the Empire never again became what
it had been under the Macedonians... We are most
concerned with their advance in Asia. There, follow-.
ing in the wake of the crusaders, they were able to
win back a great part of the land, and the capital of the
Seljuk Sultans fell back from Nikaia to Ikonion. The
dominion of these Sultans gradually broke up after
the usual manner of Asiatic powers, and so paved the
way for the.comiing of a mightier power of their own
race, But ‘aeanwhile events were happening in Europe
which equally paved the way for the growth of new
powers there. After the time of revival under the
‘Komnenieg Emperors came another time of decline, |

96 RISE AND GROWTH OF OTTOMAN POWER.

in the latter years of the twelfth century. The Bul-
garians threw off the Roman yoke, and formed a
restored Bulgarian kingdom which cut the Empire
short to the north-west. At the other end of the ~
Empire, a separate Emperor set himself up in the
isle of Cyprus. A time of utter weakness and dis-
union had come, when it seenied as if the Empire
must fall altogether before any vigorous enemy.

And so in some sort it happened. A blow presently
came which may be looked on as really the ending
of the old Roman Empire of the East. In 1204
- Constantinople was taken by a band of crusaders
‘who had turned away from the warfare’ to which
they were bound against the Mahometans in Asia,
to overthrow the eastern bulwark of Christendom in
Europe. Now begins the dominion of the Franks
or Latins in Eastern Europe. “The Christians of
the West were known as Latins, as belonging to
the Western or Latin Church which acknowledged
the .authority of the Bishop of Rome. And they
were called Franks, as, Western Europeans are called
in the East to this day, because most of them
came from countries where the French tongue was
spoken. But along with the French-speaking cru-
saders came the Venetians, who had a great trade
in the East, and who had already begun to estab-
lish their power in Dalmatia. Constantinople was
taken, and Baldwin Count of Flanders was set up’.
as a Latin Emperor. So much of Romania, as the
Eastern Empire was called, as the Franks and Vene-
‘ tians could get- hold of was parcelled out among the
conquerors. But they never conquered the whole,
and Greek princes kept several parts: of the Empire.
Thus what. really happened was that the Empire was

THE LATINS AT CONSTANTINOPLE. 97

split up into a number of small states, Greek and
Frank. We now cannot help using the word Greek ;
for, after the loss of Bulgaria, the Empire was wholly
confined to Greek-speaking people, and we need some
name to distinguish them from the Franks or Latins.
But they: still called themselves Romans; and it is
strange, in reading the Greek writers, to hear of wars
between the Romans and the Latins, as if we had
‘gone back to the early days of the Old Rome and
the Thirty Cities of Latium. Latin Emperors reigned
at Constantinople for nearly sixty years. For a few
years there was a Latin kingdom of Thessalonica,
‘and there were Latin princes at Athens ahd in Pelo-
ponnésos, while the commonwealth, of Venice kept
the great islands of Corfu () and Crete, and allowed
Venetian families to establish themselves as rulers in
several of the islands of the /Egean. On the other
hand, Greek princes reigned in Epeiros, and two.
Greek Empires were established in Asia. One had
its seat at Trapezous or Trebizond on the south-east
coast of the Euxine, while the other had jts seat at
Nikaia, the first capital of the Turkish Sultans of ©
Roum. This last set of Emperors gradually won back .
a considerable territory both in Europe and Asia, and
at last, in 1261, they won back Constantinople from
the Latins. Thus the Eastern Roman Empire in some
sort began afresh, though with much smaller territory
and power than it had before the Latin conquest. It
was threatened on all sides, by Bulgarians, Servians,
Latins, and: Turks; and no great Emperors reigned:
in this last stage of the Empire. Yet, even in these
last days, there was once more something of a
revival, and the Emperors gradually won back nearly’

the whole of all Peloponnésos.
y

98 RISE AND GROWTH OF OTTOMAN POWER.

Thus a way was opened for a new race of conquerors
both inx-Europe and Asia, by the breaking up of the
power of the old Emperors who, even as late as the
eleventh century, had reigned at once in Italy and in_
Armenia, Instead of the old Eastern Empire, there
was now only a crowd of states, two of which, at Con-
stantinople and Trebizond, kept on the titles of the
_old Empire. None of them were very great, and
most of ‘them at enmity with one another. The
thirteenth century too, which saw the break-up of the
Empire in Europe, saw also the break-up of the older.

Mahometan powers in Asia and the beginning of the
last and the most abiding of all. This was in fact
the time when all the powers of Europe and Asia
seemed to be putting on new shapes. In the thir-
teenth century the Western Empire in some sort came.
to an end as well as the Eastern. For after Frederick
the Second the Emperors kept no abiding power in
Italy. In Spain the Mahometan power, which had
-once held nearly .the whole peninsula, was shut up
within the narrow bounds of the kingdom of Granada.
Castile now took its place as the leading power ‘of
Spain, and France was inthe like sort established as
the ruling power,of Gaul. And, while great Christian
powers were thus established in the western lands
which had been held by the Mahometans, the Caliph-
ate of Bagdad itself was overthrown by conquerors
from the further lands of Asia, I have said in an
earlier book that at this time in the middle of the
thirteenth century, Islam seemed to be falling back
everywhere. But in truth the blow which seemed the
most crushing of all, the overthrow of the Caliphate
by the Moguls, was part of a chain-of events which
brought on the stage a Mahometan power more

BEGINNING OF THE OTTOMANS. 99

terrible than all that had gone before it, We have
now come to the time of the first appearance of the
Ottoman Turks.

-I have spoken elsewhere of the conquests of the
Moguls both in Europe and in Asia. We have here
to deal ‘with them only so far as, in the course of their
attacks on all other powers Christian and Mahometan,
they began also to cut short the power. of the Seljuk
Sultans of Roum. But these last found unlooked-for
helpers. ~ The tale runs that, in 4 battle between the
Turks and the Moguls, the Turks, as the weaker side,
were being worsted, when an unknown company of
men came to their help. These proved to be a wan-
dering band of Turks from the far East, who, in the
confusions of the times, were seeking a settlement
under their leader Ertoghrul. Through their help the
Seljuk Sultan overcame his enemies. The strangers
were rewarded with a grant of lands, and those lands,
step by step; grew into the Ottoman Empire. At this
time the Latin Empire still lingered at Constantinople, -
but the Greek Emperors at: ‘Nikaia had won back
large territories both in Asia and in Europe. Partly
at the expense of the Greeks, partly at the expense
of other Turkish Emirs or princes, Ertoghrul and his
son Othman or Osman gradually grew in power.
Warriors flocked to the new standard, and Othman
became the most powerful prince in Western Asia.
From him his followers took the name which it has
ever since borne, that of Osmanli or Ottoman.

‘Our strictly Ottoman history now begins, and one
characteristic feature of Ottoman history may strike
us from the very beginning. The house of Othman
arose on the ruins of the house of Seljuk; but

H 2

100. RISE AND GROWTH OF OTTOMAN POWER.

whatever our own day may be destined to see, no other
power has yet arisen on the ruins of the house of
Othman. No other Eastern power has had such an
abiding life.. The Bagdad Caliphate lasted as long by
meré reckoning of years; but for many ages the Bagdad
Caliphate was a. mere shadow. Other Eastern powers
have' commonly broken in pieces after a few genera-
tions, The Ottoman power has lasted for six hundred
years; and, stranger than all, when it seemed for a
moment to be going the way of other Eastern dynas-
ties, when the power of the Ottoman Turk seemed to
be breaking in pieces as the power of the Ghaznevid
and the Seljuk Turk had broken in pieces before him,
the scattered fragments were again joined together,
and the work of conquest and rule again began. But
by means of this very abiding life, by prolonging the
rule of a barbarian power in the midst. of modern
civilization, the rule of the Ottoman has shewn us, in
a way in which the earlier Turkish dynasties could
not shew us, what a power of this kind comes to in -
the days of its long decay. -An Eastern dynasty,
above all a Mahometan dynasty, is great and glorious.
according to an Eastern standard as long as it
remains a conquering dynasty. The Ottoman Turks
remained a conquering dynasty longer than any
other. Their power was thus so firmly established
that it has been able to outlive the causes which
broke up earlier dynasties. But, by having its being
thus prolonged, it has lived on to give an example of ..
corruption and evil of every kind for which it would
be hard to find a parallel among the worst of earlier
dynasties.

The Ottoman Turks have never been, in any strict .
sense, a nation. They were in their beginning a.

THE OTTOMANS NOT A NATION. _ IOI

wandering horde, and even in the time of theit
greatest dominion they kept up much of the charac-
ter of a wandering horde. They have nowhere really
become the people of the land, Where they have
not borne tule over Christians, they have borne
rule over other Mahometans, and they have often
‘oppressed them nearly as much, though not quite in
the same way, as they have oppressed their Christian
subjects. They have been, we may say, a ruling
‘ordér, a body ready to admit and to promote any
one of any nation who chose to join them, provided
of course that he accepted the Mahometan religion.
In this has'jain their strength and their greatness ;
but it has been throughout, not the greatness of a
nation, but the greatness of a conquering army, bear-
ing rule over other nations. Stripping conquest and
forced ‘dominion of the false glory which surrounds
them, we may say that the Ottomans began as a band
of robbers, and that they have gone on ag a band of
robbers ever since. Toa great part of their history,
especially to their position in our own times, that
description would apply in its fulness. But it would
not be wholly fair to speak in. this way of the early
Ottomans. The settled and self-styled civilized Turk
is really more of a robber than the wandering bar-
barian under whom his power began, When conquest
simply means transfer from one despot to another,
the conquered often gain rather than lose. The rulé
of the conquering despot is stronger than -that’ of
the despot whom he conquers; and a strong despot
usually comes nearer to a good ruler than a weak
one. That is to say, he does a kind of justice in
his dominions. However great may be his own
personal crimes and oppressions, he puts some check:

102. RISE AND GROWTH OF OTTOMAN POWER.

on the crimes and oppressions of others. As long
therefore as the Ottoman rulers were. strong, as long
as they were conquerors, there was a good side to
their rule. Most of the Sultans were stained with
horrible crimes in their own persons ; but most of
the early Sultans had many of the virtues of rulers
and conquerors. It was when their power began to
decay that the blackest side of their rule’ came out.
‘The oppression of the Sultans themselves becamé
greater. To oppression was added the foulest corrup-
tion, and the weak Sultans were not able, as the strong
ones had been, to keep their own setvants in some
kind of order. In short, the Ottoman rulers were
the longest, and the early Ottoman rulers were the
greatest, of all lines of Eastern despots. Because of |
their greatness, their power has been more long tived

than any other. Because it has been more long lived,

it has in the end become worse than any other.

We must be prepared then from the beginning to
find in the Ottoman rulers much that is utterly repul-.
sive to our moral standard, much that is cruel, much
that is foul, joined with much that may fairly be
called great. They were in any case great soldiers.
If we may apply the name statesmanship to carrying
out any kind of purpose, good or bad, they were also
great statesmen. And it is not till they have passed.
into Europe that their worst side distinctly prevails.
And he who was at once the greatest of all and the
worst of all was he who fixed his throne in Con-
stantinople, As long as they remained in Asia, the
Ottomans might pass for one among. many Asiatic |
dynasties. It is their establishment in Europe which
gave them their special character.

It is hardly for me to settle how far the exploits

REIGNS OF OTHMAN AND ORKHAN. 103

of the patriarch of the new dynasty, of Ertoghrul
himself, belong to legend or to history. Both he and
his son Othman were merely Asiatic rulers. They
were not even avowed sovereigns ; they still respected
the nominal superiority of the Seljuk Sultan at
Ikonion. ‘Othman bears a high character among
Eastern rulers; yet he murdered his uncle simply
for dissuading him from a dangerous enterprise.
The slaughter of brothers and other near kinsfolk
has always been a special feature of Ottoman rule.
Othman however at least slew his uncle in a
moment of wrath; later Sultans sacrificed their
brothers by wholesale out of cold-blooded policy.
Othman enlarged his dominions at the expense of
the Emperors,-and just before his death, in 1326, his
armies took Brusa,.which became the Asiatic capital
of the Ottomans, It is with Othman’s son Orkhan
that the Ottoman Empire really begins. He threw
off his nominal allegiance to the Sultan, though he
still bore only the.title of Emir. And in his time the
Ottomans first made good their footing in Europe.
But while his dominion was still only Asiatic, Orkhan
began one institution which did more than anything
else firmly to establish the Ottoman power. This
was the institution of the tribute children. By the
law of Mahomet, as we have seen, the unbeliever is
_ allowed to purchase life, property, and the exercise
of his religion, by the payment of tribute. Earlier
Mahometan rulers had been satisfied with tribute in
the ordinary sense. Orkhan first demanded a tribute
of children. The deepest of wrongs, that which other —
tyrants did as’.an occasional outragé, thus became
under the Ottomans a settled law. A fixed propor.
tion of the strongest and most promising boys among

104 RISE AND GROWTH OF OTTOMAN POWER.

the conquered Christian nations were carried off for
the service of the Ottoman princes. They were
brought up in the Mahometan faith, and ‘were
employed in civil or military functions, according
to their capacity. Out of them was formed the
famous force of the’ Janissaries, the new soldiers,
who, for three centuries, as long as they were levied
in this way, formed the strength of the Ottoman
armies. , These children, torn from their homes and
cut off from every domestic and national tie, knew
only the religion and the: service into which they
were forced, and formed a body of troops such as
‘no other ‘power, Christian or Mahometan, could
command. In this way the strength of the conquered
nations was: turned against themselves, They could
not. throw off the yoke, because these among them
who were their natural leaders were’ pressed into the
‘service of their enemies. It was not till the practice
of levying the tribute on children was. left off that the
conquered nations shewed any power to stir. While
the force founded by Orkhan lasted in its first shape,
the Ottoman armies: were irresistible. But all this
shews how far the Ottomans were from being a
national power. Their victories were won by soldiers
who were really of the blood of the Greeks, Slaves,
and other conquered nations. In the same way,
while the Ottoman power was strongest, the chief
posts of the Empire, civil and’ thilitary, were con-
stantly held, not. by native Turks, but by Christian
renegades of all nations. The Ottoman power in
short was the power, not of a nation, but simply of —
an army. The Ottomans began, and they have gone
on ever since, as an army of occupation in the lands
of other nations.

THE JANISSARIES. 105

By the end of Orkhan’s reign the Ottoman. power
was fully established in Asia Minor. Its Emirs had
spread their power over all the other Turkish settle-
ments, and nothing was left to the Christians but a few
towns, chiefly on the coast. Above afl, Philadélphia
and Phékaia long defended themselves gallantly after
everything else was lost. The chief Christian. power,
in Asia was new no longer the Roman or Greek
Emperor at Constantinople, but the more distant
Emperor at Trebizond. Besides their possessions on
the south coast of the Euxine, these Emperors also
held the old territories of the Empire in the Tauric -
Chersonésos or Crimea. The Turks had now the
whole inland part of Asia Minor. And this inland:
part of Asia Minor is the only part of the Ottoman

- dominions where any Turks are really the people of
the land. The old Christian population has been
quite displaced, and Anadol or Anatolia, the land of
the East, is really a Turkish land. Yet it can hardly

be said to be an Ottoman land. There the -ruling

body have borne sway over the descendants of the -
old Seljuk Turks. The Ottomans in short are

strangers everywhere. They are strangers bearing

_rule over other nations, over Mahometans in Asia,

over Christians in Europe.

The Ottoman rule over Christians in Europe began
‘in the last years of Orkhan, The state of South-
eastern Europe in the fourteenth century was very
‘favourable’ for the purposes of the Turks. We have
seen how utterly the old Empire was broken up, and |
how the Greek-speaking lands were divided among ~
a crowd of states, Greek and Frank. A new power
had lately arisen in the Aegean through the occupa-
tion of Rhodes and some of the neighbouring islands

106 RISE AND GROWTH OF OTTOMAN POWER.

by the Knights of St. John. A military order is not
well fitted for governing its dominions; but no power
can be better fitted for defending them, and the
Knights of St. John at Rhodes did great things
against the Turks. The power of the Emperors at
Constantinople, cut short by thé Turks in Asia, was
cut short by the Bulgarians in Europe. It was only.-
in Péloponnésos that they advanced at the cost of the
Latins. Just at the time before the Turks crossed
into Europe, a new power had arisen, or rather an.
old power had grown to a much greater place
than it held before. Stephen Dushan, King of
Servia, who took the title of Emperor, had estab-
lished a great dominion which took in, most part
of Macedonia, Albania, and Northern Greece. But
the Greek Emperors kept Constantinople and the
lands rcund about it, with detached parts of Mace-
donia and Greece, including specially the great city
_ of Thessalonica. Had the Servian Emperor been
able to win Constantinople, a power would have been
formed which might have been able to withstand the
Turks. Servia would have been the body, and Con- °
stantinople the head. As it. was, the Turks found in
‘Servia a body without a head, and in Constantinople
a head without a body. The Servian Empire broke
up on the death of its great king, and the Greeks were
divided by civil wars. Thus, instead of Servians and
Greeks together presenting a strong front: to the
Turks, the Turks were able to swallow up Greeks,
Servians, and all the other nations, bit by bit.

The Ottomans did not make their first appearance
in Europe as avowed conquerors. They appeared,
sometimes aS momentary ravagers, sometimes as

THE OTTOMANS IN EUROPE. 107

mercenaries in the Imperial service or as alli¢s of
some of the contending parties in the Empire. Thus
in 1346 the Emperor John Kantakouzénos called in
the Turks to help him in civil war. From -this’ time
we may date their lasting presence in Europe, though
they did not hold any permanent possessions there
til in 1356 they seized Kallipolis in the Thracian .
Chersonésos. This was the beginning of the Ottoman:
dominion in Europe. From this time they advanced
bit by bit, taking towns and provinces from the
Empire and conquering the kingdoms beyond the
Empire, so that Constantinople was quite hemmed in.
But the Imperial city itself was not taken till nearly a
hundred years after the first Turkish settlement in
Europe. It must always be. remembered that the
Turks overcame Servia and Bulgaria long before they
won Thessalonica, Constantinople, and Peloponnésos.
Their first conquests gathered threateningly round
Constantinople; but they did not as yet actually
attack it. Nor-did they always at once incorporate
the lands which they subdued with their immediate
dominions. In most of the lands of which the Turks
got possession, the process of conquest shews three
stages. There is, first, mere ravage for the sake of
plunder, and to weaken the land which was ravaged.
Then the land is commonly brought under tribute of
some other form of subjection, without being made a
part of the Sultan’s immediate dominions. Lastly,
the land which is already practically conquered be-
comes a mere Ottoman province. In this way it is
worth noticing that, as we shall see further on, a large
part of the European dominions of the Turk, though
they were subdued long before the taking of Con-
stantinople, were allowed to keep on some shadow

308 RISE AND GROWTH OF OTTOMAN POWER.

of separate being under tributary princes till after °
Constantinople was taken.

The first lasting: settlement of the Turks on Euro-
pean brownd was made, as we have seen, while Orkhan
still reigned. But it was in the reign of Murad or
Amurath the First, the successor of Orkhan, that the
first settlement at Kallipolis grew into a compact
European power. Ina very few years from their first
occupation of European territory, the Turks had
altogether hemmed in what was left of the Empire.
As early as 1361 Amurath took Hadrianople, which
became the European capital of the Ottomans till
they took Constantinople?) Nothing was now left
to the Empire but the part of Thrace just round
Constantinople, with some of the cities, on the
 Euxine, together with the outlying possessions
. which the Emperors still kept in Macedonia and

Greece. Among them. were the greater part of
. Peloponnésos, and the Chalkidian peninsula with
Thessalonica. In Asia all that remained -to the
Empire was a little strip of. land just opposite
Constantinople, and the two cities of Philadelphia
and Phékaia, which might now almost be looked on
as ‘allied commonwealths rather than as parts of the
_ Empire. But Amurath not only cut the Empire
short, he also carried his arms into the Slavonic
lands to the north. They lay as temptingly open to
conquest as the Greek lands. The power of Servia
went down at once after the death of Stephen. Dushan,
and Bulgaria a few years later was split up into
three separate kingdoms. Amurath’s first important
conquest in this direction ‘was the taking of Philip-
popolis in 1363. That city had changed masters
several times, but it.was then Bulgarian. Bulgaria

CONQUESTS OF AMURATH THE FIRST. 109

just now, besides her own divisions, had wars with
Hungary to the north-and with the Empire to the
south. Yet amid.all this confusion, several powers
did unite to withstand. the Turks; and it was- only
gradually, and after several battles, that either Servia
or Bulgaria was conquered. It seems to have -been
about 1371 that the chief Bulgarian kingdom, that of
Trnovo, became tributary. But while Servia and
Bulgaria were breaking in pieces, Bosnia to the north-
west of them, which lay further away from the Turks,
was growing in power, A great Slave confederation
was formed under the Bosnian King Stephen, and —
Bosnians, Croats, and Servians for a little white won
some successes over the Turks. But at last a great
confederate army, Bosnian, Servian, Bulgarian, and
Wallachian, was utterly defeated by the Turks at
-Kossova in 1389. Amurath himself was killed, not in
the battle, but by a Servian who pretended to desert.
But he was at once succeeded by his son Bayezid or
‘Bajazet, who reaped the fruits of the victory. In the
course of two or thrée years after the’ battle, Servia
and Wallachia became tributary, and the greater part
of Bulgaria was altogether conquered.

It is from the battle of Kossova that the Servians,
and the Southern Slaves generally, date the fall of
their independence. Bosnia, in its corner, still re-
mained but little touched; it was ravaged, but not yet
conquered, But all the lands which had made up the
great Servian and Bulgarian kingdoms of former times
were now either altogether conquered by the Turk, or
made tributary to him, or else driven to maintain
their independence by ceaseless fighting. And as the
lands which the Turks subdued were made into
tributary states before they were fully annexed, the

IIQ RISE AND GROWTH OF OTTOMAN POWER.

Turks were able to use each people that they brought
under their power as helpers against the next people
whom they attacked. Thus at Kossova Amurath
had already Christian tributaries fighting on his side.
From this time till Servia was completely incorpo-
rated with the Turkish dominions, the Servians had
to fight in the Turkish armies against the other Chris-
tian nations which the Turks attacked. In this. way

' the strength of the Christian nations was used against

one another, till the Turk thought the time was come
more directly to annex this or that tributary land. In
this the policy of the Ottomans was much the same
as the policy of the Romans in old times. For they
also commonly made the lands which they conquered
into dependent states, before they formally made
them into Roman provinces. .In either case/t may
be doubted whether the Jands which were left in this
intermediate state gained much by not being fully

annexed at once. Still the way by which the Otto-
man Empire came together suggests. the way by
which it ought to fall asunder. Some of the tributary
lands have always kept a certain amount of separate
being. Some have, after a long bondage, come back
again to the tributary state. ‘In . short, experience
shews that the natural way for restoring these lands
to their ancient independence is by letting them pass
once more through the intermediate state. Only this
time it must be with their faces turned in the direc-
tion of a modre thorough freedom, not of, as in ages
past, in the direction of a more thorough bondage.

_ The accession of Bajazet marks a distinct change
in the history of Ottoman conquest. Up to this time
the Ottoman princes had shewn themselves—except .
in the exaction of the tribute children—at least not-

CORRUPTION UNDER BAJAZET. 1it

worse than other Eastern conquerors. With Amurath’s
successor Bajazet the darker side of the Ottoman
‘dominion comes more strongly into view. He was
the first to begin his reign with the murder of a
brother out of cold «policy. Under him too that
foul moral corruption which has ever since been the
distingyishing characteristic of the Ottoman Turk
came for the first time into its black prominence.
Other' people have been foul and depraved ; what is
specially characteristic of the Ottoman Turk is that
the common road to power is by the path of the foulest
shame. Under Bajazet the best feature of the Ma-
hometan law, the almost ascetic temperance which it
teaches, passed away, and its worst features, the re-
cognition of slavery, the establishment of the arbitrary
right of the conqueror over the conquered, grew into-
a system of wrong and outrage of which the Prophet
himself had never dreamed. Under Bajazet the Turk
fully put on those parts of his character which dis-
tinguish him, even more than other Mahometans,
from Western and Christian nations. Yet amid all
this corruption, Bajazet could sometimes exercise
a stern Eastern justice, and the mission of his race,
the mission of warfare and conquest, still went on ;
Bajazet was surnamed the Thunderbolt, and he was
the first of the Ottoman princes to exchange the
humbler title of Emir for that of: Sultan. Yet, after
Bajazet had consolidated the results of the victory of
Kossova by his Bulgarian and Servian conquests, the
actual dominion of the Ottomans did not make such
swift advances under him as it had made under his.
father Amurath. It was rather distinguished by a
scourge worse than: that of actual conquest, by con-
stant plundering expeditions, carried on chiefly for the

112 RISE AND GROWTH OF OTTOMAN POWER.

sake of booty and slaves—the slaves being specially
picked out for the vilest purposes, These ravages
spread everywhere from Hungary to Peloponnésos.
But the most remarkable conquest of Bajazet was in
Asia. Philadelphia still held out, and its citizens
still deemed themselves subjects of the Emperors at
Constantinople. Yet, when Bajazet thought proper
to add the city to his dominions, the Emperor Manuel
and his son-were forced; as tributaries of the Sultan,
to send their contingent to the Turkish army, and to
help in the conquest of their own city.(?) But enemies
presently came against Bajazet both from the West
and from the East. His enemy from the West he
overthrew ; but he was himself overthrown by his
enemy from the East. A large body of crusaders
came to the help of Sigismund King of Hungary,
the same who was afterwards Emperor of the West.
But Bajazet, at the head of his own Turks and of his
‘Christian tributaries who were of course forced to
serve with them, overthrew Sigismund .and his allies
in the battle of Nikopolis in 1396. A number of
Christian knights from the West were massacred after
the battle, and others ‘were put to ransom; among
these last was one whose name connects Eastern and
Western history, John Count of Nevers, afterwards
Duke of Burgundy, the second of those dukes of
Burgundy who play so great a part in the history of
France, England, and Germany. Bajazet also was
the first of the Sultans who directly attacked Con-
stantinople. Things looked as if the last traces of
the Eastern Empire were now about to be wiped out.
But the Ottoman conqueror was presently met by a still
more terrible conqueror from the further East. -The
conquests of Timour, the famous Tamerlane, which

VICTORY OF TIMOUR. 113

spread slaughter and havoc through Mahometan Asia,
gave a moment’s respite to Christian Europe, Of his
career I have said somewhat elsewhere.(*) What con-
cerns us now is that Bajazet was overthrown and’ taken
captive by Timour at Angora in 1402. No such blow
ever fell on any Ottoman prince before or after.

After the défeat and captivity of Bajazet, things
looked as if the Ottoman dominion had run the
common course of an Eastern dominion, as if it
was broken up for ever. And, as I before said, the:
most wonderful thing in all Ottoman history is that,
though it was broken up for a moment, it was able
to come together again. The dominions of Bajazet
were for a while divided, and their possession was
disputed among his three sons. At last they were
joined ‘together again under his son Mahomet the
First. Still the time of confusion was a time of relief
to the powers which were threatened by the Turks,
and; even after Mahomet had again joined the
Ottoman dominions together, he was not strong
enough to make any great conquests. Thus the
European power of the Ottomans made but small
advances during his reign. It was otherwise under
his son Amurath the Sécond, during whose reign of
thirty years, from 1421 to 1451, the Turkish power,
notwithstanding some reverses, greatly advanced.
He failed in ‘an attack on Constantinople; but he
took Thessalonica, which had lately passed from the
Empire to the Venetians. Soin his wars with
Hungary he underwent several defeats from the great
captain Huniades ; .but his defeats were balanced by
victories. And in one battle it must be allowed that
the Turk was: in the right and the Christian in the |
wrong. In a triumphant campaign, the Hungarian

I

114 RISE AND GROWTH OF OTTOMAN POWER.

army had reached the Balkan. By the peace which
followed, Servia again became independent, and
Wallachia was ceded to Hungary. Then Wiadislaus,
King of Hungary and Poland, was persuaded to break
the treaty, but he was defeated at Varna and the Otto-
man power was-again restored. Still the crowning of
all, by the taking of the Imperial city and the com-
plete subjugation of the lands on the Danube, was
not the work of Amurath, but was reserved for the
_days of his son,

’ This son was Mahomet the Second, surnamed the
Conqueror. We may take him as. the ideal of his
race, the embodiment in their fullest form of Ottoman
greatness and Ottoman wickedness. A general and
statesman of the highest order even from his youth,
a man who. knew his own purposes and knew by what
ends to: achieve his purposes, no man has a clearer
right to the title of great, so far as we can conceive
greatness apart from goodness.’ We hear of him also,.
not merely as soldier and statesman, but as a man
of intellectual cultivation in other ways, as master of
many languages, as a patron of the art and literature
of his time. On the other hand, the three abiding
Ottoman vices of cruelty, Just, and faithlessness
stand out in him all the more conspicuously from
being set.on a higher pedestal. He finished the work
of his predecessors; he made the Ottoman power
in Europe what it, has been ever since. He gave a
systematic form to the customs of his house and to
the dominion which he had won.’ His first’ act. was
the murder of his infant ‘brother, and he made the
murder of brothers a standing law of his Empire.
He overthrew the last remnants of independent

TAKING OF CONSTANTINOPLE. 115

Roman tule, of independent Greek nationality, and
he fixed the. relations which the Greek part of his
subjects were to bear both towards their Turkish.
masters and towards their Christian ‘fellow-subjects.
He made the northern and western frontiers of his
Empire nearly what they still remain, “The Ottoman
Empire, in short, as our age has to deal with it, is,
before all things, the work of Mahomet the Conqueror.
The prince whose throne was fixed in the New Rome
held altogether another place from even the mightiest
of his predécessors.

Mahomet had reigned two years, he had lived
twenty-three, on the memorable day, May 29th 1453,
when the Turks entered the city of the Caesars and
when the last Emperor Constantine died in the breach.
The last ruling prince of his house, he was also the
worthiest. .The degradation of the last hundred years
of the Empire is almost wiped out in the glory of its
fall.’ The Roman Empire of the East, which had
lasted so long, which had withstood and outlived so
many enemies, whose princes had beaten’ back the
Persian and the Saracen, the Avar, the Bulgarian,
and the Russian, now at last fell before the arms of
the Turk, The New Rome, so long the head of the
Christian and civilized world, became the seat of.
Mahometan and barbarian rule. The Sultan took
the place of a long line of Caesars. And the great ©
church of Saint Sophia, the most venerated temple of
the whole Eastern Church, the seat of Patriarchs and
the ‘crowning-placé of Emperors, has been, from
Mahomet’s day to our own, a mosque for Maho-
metan worship. And now that the Imperial city was
at last taken, Mahomet" seemed to make it his policy
‘both to eee in whatever remained unconquered,

12

116 RISE AND GROWTH OF OTTOMAN POWER.

and to bring most of the states which had hitherto
been tributary under his direct rule. Greece itself,
though it had been often ravaged by the Turks, had
not been added to their dominions. The Emperors
had, in the very last days of the Empire before the
fall of Constantinople, recovered all Peloponnésos,
“except ‘some points which were held by Venice.
Frank Dukes also reigned at Athens, and another
small duchy lingered on in the islands of Leukas
and Kephailénia and on the coasts of Akarnania.
The Turkish conquest of the mainland, again saving
the Venetian points, was completed by the year
1460, but the two. western islands were not taken
until 1479. Euboia was conquered in 1471, when
‘the Venetian governor Erizzo, who had stipulated
for the safety of his head, had his body sawn
-asunder. No deeds of this: kind are recorded of the
earlier Ottoman princes; but by Mahomet’s time
the Turks had fully learned those Jessons of cruelty
and faithlessness which they have gone on practising
ever since. The Empire of Trebizond was conquered
in 1461, and the island of Lesbos or Mytiléné .in
1462. There was now no independent Greek state
left. Crete,.Corfu, and some smaller islands and
points of coast, were held by Venice, and some of
the islands of the A2gean were still ruled by Frank
princes and by the Knights of Saint John. But, after
the fall of Trebizond, there was no longer any inde-
pendent Greek state: anywhere, and the part of the
Greek nation which was under Christian rulers of any
kind was now far smaller than the part which was
under the Turk.

While the Greeks were thus awhoily: subdued, the
Slaves fared no better. In 1459 Servia was reduced

-CONQUESTS OF MAHOMET THE SECOND, 117

from a tributary principality to an Ottoman province;
and six years later Bosnia was annexed also. The
last Bosnian king, like the Venetian governor in
Euboia, was promised his life; but he and his sons
were put to death none the less. One little fragment
of the great Slavonic power in those lands. alone
remained. The little district of Zeta, a part of the
Servian kingdom, was never fully conquered by the
Turks, One part of it, the mountain district called
Tsernagora or Montenegro, has kept its independence
to our own times. Standing as an outpost of freedom
and Christendom amid surrounding bondage, the
Black Mountain has been often attacked, it has
been several times overrun, but it has never been con-
quered. In a ceaseless warfare of four huridred years,
‘neglected, sometimes betrayed, by the Christian
powers of Europe, this small people, whose whole
number does not equal the population of some of our
great towns, has still held its own against the whole
might of the Turkish power, First under hereditary
princes, then under warrior bishops, now under here~
ditary princes again, this little nation of heroes, whose
_territory is simply so much of the ancient land of
their race as they are able to save from barbarian
invasion, have still held their own, while the greater
powers around them have fallen. To the south of ©
them, the Christian Albanians held out for a long
time under their famous chief George Castriot or
Scanderbeg. After his death in 1459, they also came
under the yoke. These conquests of Mahomet gave
the Ottoman dominion in “Europe nearly the same
extent which it has now. His victories had been
great, but they were balanced by some defeats. The
conquest of Servia and Bosnia opened the way to

-118 RISE AND GROWTH OF OTTOMAN POWER,

endless inroads into Hungary, South-eastern. Ger-
many, and North-eastern Italy. But as yet these
lands were merely ravaged, and the Turkish power
met with some reverses. In 1456 Belgrade was saved
by the last victory of Huniades, and this time
Mahomet the Conqueror had to flee. In another part
of Europe, if in those days it is to be counted for
Europe, Mahomet won the Genoese’ possessions in
the peninsula of Crimea, and the Tartar Khans who
ruled in that peninsula and the neighbouring lands
became vassals of the Sultan. The Ottomans were
thus brought into the neighbourhood of Poland, Lithu-
ania, and Russia. The last years of Mahomet’s reign
were marked by a great failure and a great success.
He failed to take Rhodes, which belonged to the
Knights of Saint John ; but his troops suddenly seized
on Otranto in Southern Italy. Had this post been
kept, Italy might have fallen as well as Greece; but
the Conqueror died the next year, and Otranto was
won back,

Thus two Empires, and endless smaller states, came
out of the power of the Ottomans under the mightiest
of their Sultans. Greeks, Slaves, Albanians, all came
under the yoke. But it must not be forgotten that it
was by the arms of men of Greek, Slave, and Alba-
nian blood that they were brought under the yoke.
For the Janissaries formed the strength of the Otto--
man armies, and the Janissaries were formed of the
kidnapped children of the conquered nations, Thus
the Christian nations of South-eastern Europe had
their own strength turned against them, and were
overcome by the arms of their own children. And
presently the far-seeing eye of Mahomet found out
that their wits might be turned against them as well

MAHOMET’S POLICY. 119

as their arms. He saw that the Greeks had a keener
wit, either than his own Turks or than the other
subject nations, and he saw that their keen wit might,
in the case of a part of the-Greék nation, be made an
instrument. of his purposes. By his policy. the
Eastern .Church itself was turned into an instrument
of Turkish dominion. Speaking roughly, the lower
clergy throughout the conquered lands have always
_ been patriotic leaders, while the Bishops and other
higher clergy have been slaves and instruments of
the Turk. Greek Bishops bore rule over Slavonic
churches, and so formed another fetter in the chain
by which the conquered nations were held down. In
course of time the Sultans extended the-same policy
to temporal matters. The Greeks, not of Old Greece,
but of Constantinople, the Fanariots, as they came to
.be called, became in some sort a ruling race among
their fellow-bondmen. Their ability made them use-
ful, and the Turks learned to make use of their
-ability in many ways. In all conquests a certain
class of the conquered finds its interest in enter-
ing the service of the conqueror. As a tule, such
men are the worst class of the conquered. They
are commonly more corrupt and oppressive than
the conquerors themselves. It therefore in no way
lessened but rather heightened the bitterness of
Ottoman rule, that it was largely carried on by Chris-
tian instruments. The Slavonic provinces had in fact
to bear a two-fold yoke, Turkish and Greek. But
this it should be remembered only applies to the
Greeks of Constantinople. The Greeks of .Greece
itself and the rest of the Empire were no better off
than the other subjects of the Turk. It must be
remembered too that, after all, the Fanariot Greeks

120 RISE AND GROWTH OF OTTOMAN POWER.

themselves were a subject race, cut off from all share
in the higher rule of their country. That was reserved
for men of the ruling religion, whether native Turks
or renegades of any nation, And lastly it shouldbe
remembered that, under the’ rule of Mahomet the
Conqueror, every man, Turk, Christian, or renegade,
held his life and all that he had at the pleasure of
Mahomet the Conqueror.

The Turkish rule was now fully established over a
considerable part of Europe, over nearly the whole of
the lands between the Hadriatic and the Euxine.
Save where the brave men of Zeta still held out on
the Black Mountain and where the city of Ragusa
still kept its freedom; no part of those lands was
under a national government. The few islands and
pieces of coast which had escaped the Turk were
under the rule either of Venice or of other Frank
powers. From that day, till in our own century Servia
and Greece became free, all those lands have been in
bondage. The greater part of them remain in’ bond-
age still. Their people have not only been subjects
of a foreign prince; they have béen subjects of .a
foreign army in their own Jand. The rule of law has
for all those ages ceased in those lands. ‘The people
of the land have had only one way of rising out of
their state of bondage; namely by embracing the
religion of their conquerors. This many of them
did, and so were transferred from the ranks of the
oppressed to the ranks of the oppressors. In some
parts whole classes did so. This happened specially
in Bosnia. There the mass of the land-owners em-
braced Islam in order to keep their lands, while the
body of the people remained faithful. These renegades

‘ESTABLISHMENT OF TURKISH RULE. 121

and their descendants have ever since formed -an

oligarchy whose rule has been worse than that of ‘the

Turks themselves, The same thing happened in

Bulgaria to some degree, though to a much less extent

than in Bosnia. It was only in Albania that the Ma-

hometan faith was really adopted by the mass of the

people of large districts. In Albania a large part of .
the country did become Mahometan, while other parts

remained Christian, some tribes being Catholic and

some Orthodox. But, as a rule, throughout the Euro-

pean lands which were conquered by the Turk, the

‘mass of the people clave to their faith, in defiance of
all temptations and all: oppressions. Rather than

forsake their faith, they have endured to live on as

bondsmen in their own land, under the scorn and lash

of foreign conquerors, while apostasy would at arty:
moment have raised them to the level of their con-
querors. ‘They have endured to live on, while their
goods, their lives, the honour of their families, were
at the mercy of barbarians, while their sons were kid-

napped from them to be brought up in the faith of
the oppressor and to swell the strength of his armies.

In this state of abiding martyrdom they have lived,

in different parts of the lands under Turkish rule, for

two, for four, for five hundred years. While the

nations of Western Europe have been able to advance,

they have been kept down under the iron heel of

their tyrants. And because they have not been able
‘to advance as the nations of Western Europe have

advanced, men in Western Europe are not ashamed

to turn round and call them degraded and what not,

as though we should be any better if we had lived

under a barbarian yoke for as many ages as they

have lived.

I22 RISE.AND GROWTH OF OTTOMAN POWER.

It may however be asked with perfect fairness, how
came the Ottoman Turks, starting from such small
beginnings and having at first such small power, to
make such great conquests, and to win and to keep so
many lands, both Christian and Mussulman? With
regatd to the conquests of the Ottomans over other
Mussulmans, there is nothing wonderful in their
making them; the wonderful thing is that they
were able to keep them, Their rise to power was.
exactly like the rise to power of many other Eastern
dynasties. Only, while other Eastern dynasties have
commonly soon broken in pieces, this one kept
on unbroken. Or it would be truer to say, what is ©
really more wonderful; that, after the fall of Bajazet,
the Ottoman power did break in pieces for a moment,
but that it was able fo come together again. The
continued succession of able princes in the House
of Othman, the firm -administration which they
established, their. excellent military discipline, and
above aH the institution of the Janissaries, will
account for a great deal. And before long we shall
see that. the Ottoman Sultans won a further claim
to the religious allegiance, not only of their own
subjects, but of all orthodox Mussulmans. With
regard to their conquests over Christians, the state of
the South-eastern lands at that moment gave them
many advantages. The Ottomans were a power—
nation is hardly the word—in the full freshness of
youth and enthusiasm, military and religious. Every
Janissary, it must be remembered, brought to his
work the zeal of a new convert. As yet the Ottomans
were in their. full strength, under princes who knew
how to use their strength. They found in South-
eastern Europe a number of disunited powers, jealous

CAUSES OF TURKISH SUCCESS. 123

of one another, and many of them having no real
basis of national life. The Eastern Empire was worn
out, The vulgar talk about its weakness and degra-
dation, which, is mere vulgar talk when it is’ applied
to .the whole time of the Byzantine history, ceases
to be vulgar talk if it is confined to the last hundred
and fifty-years of Byzantine history. It would séem
as if the strength of the Greeks had been worn out
by winning back Constantinople. Certain it is that
the Emperors who reigned at Nikaia in the thirteenth
century were far better and more vigorous rulers than
the Emperors who reigned at Constantinople in the
fourteenth century. Certain it is that the greatness of
Constantinople, its strength and its great traditions,
helped to prolong the existence of a power whose
real day was past, and thereby to hinder the growth
of the more vigorous Slavonic nations which might .
otherwise have stepped into its place, The Frank
powers, save Venice, were small and weak, and they
were nowhere national. We may believe that their
rule was nowhere quite so bad as that of. the Turks ;
still it was everywhere a foreign rule. The Greeks .
who were under Venice and under the Frank princes,
were under rulers who were alien to their subjects in
speech, race, and creed. There could be no loyalty
or national feeling felt towards them. It is not
very wonderful that the Turkish Sultans, with their
Stern determination and their admirably disciplined
armies, could swallow up these powers, disunited
and some of them decaying, one .by one. Again
the fashion of making their conquests for a while
merely tributary, instead of at once fully annexing
them, helped the purpose of the Turk by enabling.
him to employ the forces of. one nation to help

124. RISE AND GROWTH OF OTTOMAN POWER.

in subduing the nation next beyond it. So did
the fashion of harrying and plundering lands be-
fore. their’ actual conquest was attempted. Men
might be tempted to doubt whether regular bondage
to the. Turk might not be a less evil than having
their lands ravaged and their children carried away
into slavery,

As most things in history have their parallel, it
may be well to notice that the cause which brought
the Ottoman power nearer to destruction than it ever
was brought at any other time was essentially the
same as one of the causes which most promoted its

success. Any two sects of Christians, any two sects
of Mahometans, are really separated from one
another by a difference which should seem very slight
compared with the difference which separates both of
them from men of the other religion. Yet in practice
it is not always so. The Eastern Empire was saved
from Bajazet, and its existence was prolonged for
fifty years, because Timour, who belonged to the
Shiah sect of Mussulmans, waged a religious war on
the Ottomans, who have always belonged to the
Sonnite sect. And in exactly the same way, nothing
helped the Ottomans so much as the dissensions
between the Eastern and Western. Churches, the
members of which could be got heartily to act with
one another. Many of the Greeks said that they
would rather see the Turks in Saint Sophia than the
Latins, and they lived to see it. And the Latins,
with a few noble exceptions, could never be got to
give any real help to the Greeks. All this illustrates
the law that the quarrels of near kinsfolk are the
most bitter of any. And it is after all another
instance of this same law which, as has already been

REIGN OF BAJAZET AND SELIM. 125

said, makes Christianity and Islam rival. religions
above all others. .

The Turkish dominion in Europe was now tho-
roughly formed. For some years after the death of
Mahomet the Conqueror, it was hardly at all enlarged.
The next Sultan, Bajazet the Second, who reigned
from 1481 to 1512, was not a man of war nor in any
way a man of genius like his father. His character
was an odd mixture of sensuality and religious
mysticism, two things which, under the Mahometan
system, are not incompatible. His wars were con-
fined to winning a few points from Venice, and to
constant ravages of Hungary and the other Christian
lands to the north. Here we may mark how evil
deeds produce evil. The horrible cruelties of the
Turks in these incursions provoked equal cruelties
on the part of the Christians, and so a black strife
of retaliation went on. Such a reign as this was
naturally unsatisfactory to the ruling race. Bajazet

was deposed, and, after the manner of deposed princes,

he speedily died. Then came the eight years’ reign

of his son Selim, called the Inflexible. His was a
reign of conquest, but of conquest .waged mainly
against Mahometan. enemies beyond the bounds of
Europe. Syria and Egypt were added to the Otto-
man dominion, and the Sultan added to that secular
title the spiritual authority: of the Caliphate. The
-real Caliphs of the Abbasside house had come to an

end when Bagdad was taken by the Moguls; but a

line of nominal Caliphs, who had no temporal power

whatever, had gone-on in Egypt. From the last of
.. these phantoms Selim obtained a cession of his
rights, and ever since the Ottoman Sultans have been

126 RISE AND GROWTH OF OTTOMAN POWER.

acknowledged as chiefs of their religion by all ortho-
dox Mussulmans, that is all who belong to the Sonnite
_sect and admit the lawfulness of the first three Caliphs.

The Petsians and other Shiahs of course do not ac-
knowledge the religious supremacy of the Sultan, any
more than the Orthodox and the Reformed Churches
in Christendom acknowledge the supremacy of the
Pepe. The Caliph, it should. be. remembered, is
Pope and Emperor in one. For one who was already,
Sultan thus to become Caliph was much the same as
if, in the West, one who was already Emperor had
_ also become Pope.

The rule of the new Caliph was in some things
‘worse than that of any of the Emirs and Sultans who
had gone before him. In systematic blood-thirstiness,
. whether towards Christians, towards heretical Maho-
metans, or towards his own ministers and servants,
Selim outdid all who had gone before him. ' But here
comes out one of the special features of Ottoman rule.
The one check on the despot’s will is the law of the.
Prophet. What the law of the Prophet bids on any:
particular matter the Sultan must learn from the
official expounders of that law. And it must be
said, in justice to these Mahometan doctors, that, if
they have sometimes sanctioned special deeds of
wrong, they have also sometimes hindered them. So
it was in the reign of Selim. The Mufti Djemali,
whose name deserves to be remembered, several
times turned the Sultan from bloody purposes. At
last he withstood Selim when ‘he wished to massacre
all the Christians in his dominions and to forbid the
exercise of the Christian religion. Now such a pur-
pose was utterly contrary to the text of the Koran,
and the act of Djemali in hindering it was the act of a

SELIM AND SULEIMAN. 127

righteous man and an honest expounder of his own
law. But be it remembered that, if the question
had been, not whether Christians should be mas-
sacred, but whether they should be admitted to
equality with Mahometans, Djemali must equally
‘have withstood the Sultan’s purpose. The contem-
ptuous toleration which the Koran enforces equally
forbids massacres on the one side and real emanci-
pation on the other.

The next reign was a long and famous one, that of
-  Suleiman—the name is the same'as Solomon—called'
the Magnificent and the Lawgiver, who reigned from
1520 to 1566.. Mahomet had established the Empire;
Suleiman had to extend it. But Suleiman was a
nobler spirit than Mahomet. Under any other sys-
.tem, he would have been a good as well as a great
ruler, And allowing for some of those occasional’
crimes which séem inseparable from every Eastern
despotism—crimes which in his case chiefly touched
his own ministers and his own family—we may say
that he was a good prince according to his light. The
Ottoman Empire was now at the height of its power.
Its army was the strongest and best-disciplined of
armies, But the Christian nations were now growing
up to a level with their Mahometan enemies. Even
the long and ¢ruel wars among the Christian powers
themselves, while they hindered those powers from
joining together to withstand the Turk, schooled them ~
in the end severally to cope with him. Suleiman took
Rhodes early in his reign, and the Knights withdrew.
to Malta. He again besieged them at Malta in the last
years of his reign, but this time without success. But
the greatest of Suleiman’s victories and the most
instructive for our purpose, are those which he won

128 RISE AND GROWTH OF OTTOMAN POWER.

in Hungary. At the beginning of his reign, in 1521,
he took Belgrade. Five years later, the last of the
separate Kings of Hungary—those I mean who were
not also Archdukes of Austria—Lewis the Second,
died in battle against the Turks at Mohacs. After
that the crown of Hungary was for a long while.
disputed between rival Kings, Thus at once on
- Lewis’ death, John Zapolya, Prince’ of Transsilvania,
and Ferdinand of Austria, who was afterwards
Emperor, were both chosen by different parttes.
Suleiman found it to his interest to support Zapolya ;
. he even besieged Vienna, though in vain. The end
was that the Emperors kept that part of Hungary
which bordered on Austria and their other dominions,
while princes who were vassals of the Turk reigned in
Transsilvania and the eastern part of the kingdom.
But the Turk himself took a larger share of Hungary
than either, and a pasha ruled at Buda as well as at |
Belgrade. Here too the progress of the Turks was
helped by disunion among the Christians. Just as
further south the Turks profited: by the dissensions
between the Catholics and the Orthodox, so in Hun-
gary they profited by the dissensions between the
Catholics and the Protestants. These last were of
various sects, but all alike were persecuted by the
bigotted Austrian Kings. It was no wonder then
that the Protestants preferred the alliance, and even _
- the sovereignty, of the Sultan to the rule of a Catholic
sovereign. This fact has often been made a strange
use of by the partisans of the Turks, No doubt the
contemptuous toleration which the Turk gives to his
’ Christian subjects was better than actual persecution,
_and men who were actually persecuted might well
think that they gained by becoming his subjects. It

PERSECUTION AND TOLERATION, 129

would be so even now. - A-man who was forbidden to
exercise his religion under pain of death of bonds
would even now gain by becoming a subject of the
Turk, He would have to put up with degradation ;
he would have to take his chance of irregular oppres-
sion, oppression which might sometimes amount to
robbery or murder ; but no sentence of law would con-
demn him to death or bonds or banishment, simply:
for the practice of his religion. And if it is so even -
now, much more was it so in the time of Suleiman, .
when oppression was not so great as it is’ now, and
when it was the policy of the Sultan to attach one
party, in the Hungarian nation to himself, that they
might act as his allies against the other party. But
this does not prove that the Turk is, or ever was,
really tolerant, as toleration is now understood in the -
West. Their toleration was always contemptuous,
or at most politic. And, though it is certain that
in Suleiman’s day any English Roman Catholic
or Hungarian Protestant would have gained by
becoming the subject of Suleiman, it is still more
certain that neither of them would gain by becoming
a subject of the Sultan now.

Besides the conquests of Suleiman in Hungary,
the relations between the Turk and the two Rouman
principalities of Wal'achia and Moldavia were now
definitely settled, They were to be vassal states,
paying tribute; but the Sultan was to have no part
in their internal government. No Turk was to live in
the country, and the princes were to be freely chosen’
by the nobles and clergy of the principalities. This
system lasted from 1536 to 1711.- Then the Sultans

ook to appointing and deposing’ the princes at

leasure, They appointed Fanariot Greeks ; and ‘o,

: K

130 RISE AND GROWTH OF OTTOMAN POWER.

strangely enough, the Greeks, bondmen in their own
land, became rulers tn another.

Splendid as was the character and the rule of
Suleiman, still it is from his day ‘that both Turkish
and Christian writers date the decline of the Turkish
power. Suleiman ceased to manage all state affairs
so directly as earlier Sultans had dene. The power of
the Viziers and the influence of the women increased.
The taxes were farmed out to Jews, Greeks, and others,
a system which always at once lessens the revenue of
the sovereign and increases the burthens of the subject.
Conquest, we are told, brought with it luxury, love
of ease, love of weath. The soldiers fought less for
victory than for plunder. Certain it is that, while up
to Suleiman’s time the Ottoman power had steadily
advanced, after his time it began to go down. The

Turkish lords of New Rome, like their Roman and
Greek predecessors, had their times of revival, their
days of unexpected conquest. But, on the whole, the
Ottoman power now steadily declined.

After Suleiman came a second Selim, known as the

. Drunkard, a name which marks the little heed which
he paid to the precepts of his own law. His short reign,
from 1566 to 1574, was marked by the first great re-
verse of the Ottoman arms. This was the overthrow
‘of the Turkish fleet by the fleets of Spain and of
Venice in the great fight of Lepanto in 1571. It has
been often said, and said’ with perfect truth, that though
the Turk was defeated in the battle, yet he had really
the better in the war. For the Turk lost only his fleet,
which might be replaced, while the Venetians lost the
great island of Cyprus, which has ever since formed
part of the Turkish dominions. But the battle of

BEGINNING OF DECAY. I3E

Lepanto none the less marks the turning-point in
the history of the Ottoman power. It broke the
spell, and taught men that the Turks could be con-
quered. Hitherto, though they had failed in particular
enterprises, their career had been one of constant
advance. Now, for the first time, they were utterly
defeated in a great battle. And, with the: military
power of the Ottomans, their moral power decayed
also. The line of the great Sultans had come ‘to
an end. Several of the later Sultans were men of
vigour and ability ; but the succession of great rulers
which, unless we except Bajazet the Second, had
gone on without a break from Othman to Suleiman
the Lawgiver, now stopped. The power of the
‘Sultans over their distant dominions was lessened,
while the power of the Pashas grew. The discipline
of the Ottoman armies was relaxed, and the courts
of most Sultans became a scene of corruption of every
kind. Early in the seventeenth century men marked
the decay of the Turkish power, and expected that
it would presently fall’to pieces. Why did it not fall?
The growth of the Turkish-power is easily explained.
A succession of such men as the early Sultans,
wielding such a force as the Janissaries, could not fail
to conquer. Why their power lasted so long after.
it began to decay may seem, at first sight, less easy
to explain. But the causes are not very far to seek.
The preservation of the same ruling family, and that
a family whose head is not only Sultan of the Otto-
mans, but is deemed by orthodox Mussulmans to be
the Caliph of the Prophet, alone counts for a good
deal. More important still has been the. possession
of the Imperial city. New Rome, under her elder
lords, held on under greater dangers than have ever
K 2

132 RISE AND GROWTH OF OTTOMAN POWER.

threatened their Ottoman successors. In quite late
times the Turkish power has been propped up by
the wicked policy of the governments of Western
Europe. But, long before that policy began, men
had begun to ask why the Ottoman power did not
fall. The possession of Constantinople is of itself
perhaps reason enough. In the case of the later
Byzantine Emperors, the possession of Constantinople
ptolonged the existence of a power which otherwise
must have fallen, and whose prolonged existence did
no good to the world.’ The case is exactly the same
with the dominion of the Ottomans.

We have thus traced the growth of the Ottoman
‘power, from its first. small beginnings till it had
swelled into a vast dominion, first’in Asia and then
in Europe. It had grown to that extent of power
by the great qualities of a long succession of princes,
whose skill in the craft of conquerors and rulers
sometimes goes far to make us forget their crimes.
And, in the case of the Ottoman Sultans, it is not
merely their personal crimes that we are tempted
to forget. Their personal crimes may be paralleled
in the history of other times and other nations, But
there has never been in European history, perhaps
not in the history of the whole world, any other
power which was in everything so thoroughly a fabric
of wrong as the power of the Ottomans, There has
been no other dominion of the same extent lasting
for so long a time, which has been in the same way
wholly grounded on the degradation. and oppression
of the mass of those who were under its rule. Others
among the great empires of the world have done much
wrong and caused much suffering ; but they have for

SUMMARY. 133

the most part done something else besides doing wrong
and causing suffering. Most of the other powers of the
world, at all events most of those which play a part
in the history of Europe, if they had a dark side,
had. also a bright one. To také the great example
of all, the. establishment of the Roman dominion
carried with it much of wrong, much of suffering,
much wiping out of older national life. But the
Empire of Rome had its good side also. If Rome
destroyed, she also created. If she conquered, she
also civilized ; if she oppressed, she also educated,
and in the end’ evangelized. She handed on to
the growing nations of Europe the precious inhe-
_ritance of her tongue, her law, and her religion. The
rule of the Ottoman Turk has no such balance of
good to set against its evil. His mission has been
simply a mission of destruction and oppression. From
him the subject nations could gain nothing and learn
nothing, except how to endure wrong patiently. His
rule was not merely the rule of strangers over nations
in their own land, It was the rule of the barbarian
over the civilized man, the rule of the misbeliever over
the Christian. The direct results of Turkish conquest
have been that, while the nations of Western Europe
have enjoyed five hundred years of progress, the
nations of South-eastern Europe have suffered five
hundred years of bondage and of all that follows
on bondage. The rule of ‘the Turk, by whatever
diplomatic euphemisms it may be called, means the
bondage and degradation of all who come beneath
his rule. Such bondage and degradation is not an
incidental evil which may be reformed; it is the
essence of the whole system, the groundwork on
which the Ottoman power is built. The powe which

134. RISE AND GROWTH OF OTTOMAN POWER.

Othman began, which Mahomet the Conqueror firmly
established, which Suleiman the Lawgiver raised to
its highest pitch of power and splendour, is, beyond
all powers that the world ever saw, the embodiment
of wrong. In'the most glorious regions of the world,
‘the rule of the Turk has been the abomination of
desolation, and nothing else. Out of it no direct
good can come; indirect good can come of it in
one shape only. The natives of South-eastern
Europe came under the yoke through disunion.
.Greek, Slave, Frank, could not be brought to com-
bine against the Turk. Orthodox and Catholic could
not be brought to combine against the Mussulman, If
the long ages during which those nations have paid the-
penalty of disunion and intolerance shall have taught
them’ lessons of union and tolerance, they.may have
gained something indirectly, even from five hundred
years of Turkish bondage. We have thus far traced
the steps by which they came under the yoke. We
have now to trace the stepg by which, on the one
hand, the yoke was made harder, while, on the other
hand, hopes began to dawn which promised that the
yoke might one day be thrown off. We have in this
chapter traced the gradual course of the growth of
the Ottoman power ; in the next chapter we must go
on to. trace the gradual course of its decline.

NOTES.

(1, p. 97.) Corfu is the island which called itself Korzyra, but which
in Attic and modern Greek is called Kerdyra. It is better to use the
real Greek names of Greek places than their Turkish or Italian names.
But Corfu is a case where one Greek name has been changed for
another. It comes from kopugat, peaks, or pertys from mipeae neh ent,
the gulf. -

(2, p. 108.) The dates of the death of Orkhan and of the seti of
Hadrianople seem not to be quite certain. I have followed Von Hammer
and Finlay, who place the death of Orkhan in 1359, and the taking of
Hadrianople in 1361. But it seems that there are other authorities
according -to which Orkhan did not die till 1362, and Hadrianople was
taken the next year. See Jirecek, Geschichte der Bulgaren, p. 319.

(3, p. 112.) The different dates given to the taking of Philadelphia
range from 1374 to 139%; but it seems to have been taken during the
reign of Bajazet.

(4) p. 113.) See History and Conquests of the Satncens, p- 181.

CHAPTER V.
THE DECLINE OF THE OTTOMAN POWER.

THE difference between the time which. we have
just gone through and the time to which we have now
come is well marked in this way. Thus far it is easy
for any one who follows the history, even in the most
general way, to carry in his head the names and order
' of the Ottoman Emirs and Sultans. - Each of them
has a character of his own; the reign of each is
marked by some special event, commonly by some
conquest, which is the prince’s own doing. The reign
of Othman is marked by the establishment of the
Ottomans as an Asiatic power. Under Orkhan they
pass into Europe. Under the first Amurath Hadria-
nople is taken ; the Eastern Empire is hemmed in;
Servia becomes tributary. Bajazet, the first Sultan,
defeats the great crusade from the West at Nikopolis,
Mahomet the First restores the Ottoman power after
its overthrow by Timour. Amurath takes Thessalo-
nica and overthrows Wladislaus at Varna. Mahomet
the Conqueror wins the city of the Czesars ; he gives
his dominions their lasting extent, and organizes as
well as conquers. The second Bajazet, the first
Sultan who was deposed, seems like a shadow from
the second period cast back into the first. But the
few years of Selim nearly double the extent of the

THE LATER SULTANS. 137

Ottoman dominion, and crown its master with the
sacred honours of the Caliphate. Under Suleiman
the Ottoman power reaches its highest point.
Even the second Selim, unworthy of remembrance
in himself, lives in the memory as the prince in
whose days Cyprus was won and Lepanto lost.
Thus far it is easy to go, even without book. But
to remember the Sultans after Selim needs an effort.
A few of them stand out through some special point
in their character. Amurath the Fourth, (1623-1640)
stands forth as the most bloody, Ibrahim (1640-1648)
as the most brutally sensual, of the line. Suleiman
the Second (1687-1691) and Mustafa the Second
(1695-1703) were men of some.force of character, who
might have played a greater part than they did, if .
they had lived in days when their empire was rising
instead of falling. Of course any one who studies the
Ottoman history minutely will be able to remember
the Sultans of this time, just as he may remember the
Kings of England or France, great and small. The
difference is that no one who reads.the general history
of the world with any thoughtfulness will fail to re-
member the order of the Sultans ‘for the first two
hundred years or more, while for the next two hundred
‘years he may follow the general course of events, and
the general relations. of the Ottomans to other powers,
without always remembering who was Sultan at any
particular time. No one can help remembering that
Amurath died at Kossova and that Mahomet took
Constantinople. But it is easy to remember the
second siege of Vienna, and to remember what terri-
tories were lost and won ‘by the peace of Carlowitz
and the peace of Passarowitz, without remembering
who was Sultan when each of those events happened.

138 THE DECLINE OF THE OTTOMAN POWER.

At one part of the history, namely the second half
of the seventeenth century, the ministers stand out
rather than the sovereigns. In an Eastern despotism,
' where all alike are the slaves of the prince, there can
hardly be such a thing as an hereditary aristocracy.
A man may rise from the lowest place, even from
slavery itself, to the highest offices in the empire.
It is rare then in the Ottoman empire, or in any
other Eastern despotism, to find anything like a suc-
cession of power in the same family. But in the
seventeenth century there was an exceptional case of
this kind. in the family of Kiuprili. Several members
of that house were chief ministers of the Sultans ; they
were all men of ability, and some of them were really
-better and more tolerant rulers than the common run
either of the Sultans or their ministers, But, as a
rule, through the whole of this period, such a sketch
as this may deal with events and with the general’
course of things, without having so much to say as
before about particular men.- In short, the time of
the great Sultans has passed away, and the time of
the small Sultans has begun.

Allowing, as has been already said, for occasional:
fits of revived energy, the Ottoman power went
steadily down after the time of Suléiman the Lawgiver.
It went down in two ways. Though territory was
still sometimes won, yet on the whole the Ottoman
frontiers fell back. After Suleiman no lasting conquests
of any importance were made, except those of the
islands of Cyprus and Crete. The frontier on the
north towards Hungary, and in later times towards .
Russia, though there have been considerable fluctua-'
tions and winnings back of territory, has on the whole
steadily gone back. And, iast of all, in our own age

‘THE SULTANS AND THEIR MINISTERS, 139

large parts of the Ottoman territory have beén
separated from it to form distinct states, either
tributary or wholly independent.. In these ways the
extent of the Ottoman dominion on the map has
lessened wonderfully indeed.since the days of Sulei-
man. And, during the greater part of the times with
which we are dealing, the power of the Sultans was
getting less and less in the dominions which were left
to them. The central administration got more and
more corrupt, more under the influence, of ministers,
favourites, and women than under the authority of the
Sultans themselves. The Pashas or governors of pro-
vinces got more and more independent, and in some.
cases they made their offices practicatly hereditary. In
some parts indeed, especially toward the end of the
last century, when the power of the Sultans was at its
lowest, there was utter anarchy without any control
of any kind. Through the seventeenth century especi-
ally; we may mark the short reigns of the Sultans, as
contrasted with the long reigns of most of the great
Sultans. Many of them were deposed and murdered,
as they have again begun to be in our own times. ,
Nor must we forget, as one cause of decay, the |
‘wretched education, if we may so call it, of the Sul-.
tans themselves. Kept in a kind of imprisonment till
they came to the throne, with every means of enjoying
themselves, but with no means of learning the: duties
of rulers, they came forth from prison to be clothed
with absolute power. One is really inclined to wonder
that they were not even worse than they were, and
‘that any of them shewed yy sign of virtue or ability
of any kind.

This may pass as a general picture of the charac-
ter of Ottoman rule during the. days of the decay of

140 THE DECLINE OF THE OTTOMAN POWER.

the Ottoman power.- But it concerns us more to
know what was the effect of this state of things on the
nations which the Turks held in bondage. It must
not be thought that the decay of the power of the
Sultans brought any direct or immediate relief to the
subject nations. Some indirect advantages they did
’ gain from it; but in the main the weakening of the
power of the Sultans, the general decay of their
empire, meant not lessened but increased oppression ;
it meant, not.lighter, but heavier bondage ‘to be borne
by their Christian subjects. The great Sultans, as a
rule, were not men who delighted in oppression for
oppression’s sake. Their personal crimes mainly
touched those who were personally near to them;
they had wisdom enough to see that they would gain
nothing by making the bondage of the conquered
nations intolerable. In all despotisms there is more
chance of justice and mercy from the head despot
than from his subordinates, and many a tyrant has
deemed tyranny a privilege of the crown which no
subordinate might share. As thé power of the Sul-
tans grew weaker, the subject nations lost their one
chance of redress. In such a state of things grinding
local oppression at the hands of a crowd of petty
tyrants takes the place of the equal, if stern, rule of
the common master of all.. Under such grinding local
oppression, lands were untilled, houses were unin-
habited, the population of the country sensibly
lessened. But, as the demands both of central and
of local rulers did not lessen, the burthens of those
who survived were only made the heavier. Such, with
a few moments of relief, has been the general state of
things in South-eastern Europe since the decline of
the empire began. There have been exceptions.

FEELING OF THE SUBJECT NATIONS. 141

One of the viziers of the house of Kiuprili; Zade
Mustafa, who became vizier in 1689, was an excep-

‘tional case of a Turkish ruler who did every justice
to the Christians which the Mahometan law allowed.
He thereby for the while did much for the truest
prosperity of his master’s dominions, Other ministers
of the same family had the wisdom to follow the
same. course; but the beginning of better times, or
at least of brighter hopes, for the subject nations,
which may be dated: from the latter years of the
seventeenth century, was mainly owing to quite
different causes.

Those causes were chiefly two, the remission of the
tribute of children and the advance of the Christian
powers at the expense of the Turk, As was before
said, as long as the tribute of children was levied, the
subject nations really could not stir. From the time
when -it ceased; even when there was no actual
improvement in their condition, there was the be-
ginning of hope. There was a stirring of national’
life, such as there could not be as long as their best
strength was taken from them. And every success
gained by any Christian power against their masters
raised the hopes. and heightened the spirit of those
who were under the yoke. Herein comes out the
main difference between a national government and
the rule of strangers. When any Christian power was
at war with the Turk, the enslaved nations looked on
the enemies of the Turk, not -as their enemies, but
as their friends. Every failure on the part of their
masters, every danger that threatened their masters,
gave them a hope of deliverance. Jn any Western
country we should deem it.treason for any man to
help, or wish success to, the enemies of his country.

142 THE DECLINE OF THE OTTOMAN POWER.

But to the Christians under the Turk, it was the Turk
who seemed the enemy of their country. Those who
made war on the Turk seemed, not the enemies of
their country, but its friends. And so it ever will be,
as long as, instead of being under a government of
their own, they are left under the yoke of strangers.
The subject nations have ofteri been very badly’
treated by Christian powers who professed to be
their friends, Hopes have often been kindled, pro-
mises have often been made, which were never
fulfilled. Still, all these causes joined together to
stir up men’s minds, and.to raise them from the state
of utter wretchedness and despair under which they
had been bowed: down for so many generations.

From the middle of the seventeenth century the
Turks had constant wars with the neighbouring
Christian. powers, wars in which, though the Turks
sometimes won victories and recovered provinces,
their dominion on the whole went back. The chief
powers with which they had to strive up to thé latter
part of the seventeenth century were the common-
wealth of Venice and the kingdom of Hungary, then
held by the Emperors of the House of Austria. They
had also wars with Poland, when the Polish kingdom,
in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, stretched
much further to the south-east, than it did before or
after. And lastly, they have had wars with Russia,
which, for a long time past, have been of greater
moment than any of the others. But, in the latter
part of the sixteenth and the greater part of the
seventeenth century, the chief wars were those with
Venice and with the Emperors in their character
of Kings of Hungary. Both the Venetian and the

WARS WITH VENICE AND THE EMPERORS. 143

Hungarian wars greatly affected the interests of the
subject nations. The Hungarian wars chiefly affected
the Slaves, and to some extent the Roumans. The
Venetian wars mainly affected the Greeks, and to
some extent also the Slaves. The possessions of
Venice in the East consisted of islands and points or”
lines of coast. These might easily be lost and won,
as they often were, without the loss or gain of one
settlement greatly affecting any other. But the
kingdom of Hungary had, before the time of Sulei-
man, lain as a compact mass, with a continuous
frontier, to the north of the Ottoman dominions. And,
as the Ottoman frontier went back, Hungary gradually
took that character again. Along the Danube and its
great tributaries, sometimes the power of the Em-
perors, sometimes the power of the Sultans, advanced.
But on the whole the Ottoman frontier fell back. It
will be seen by the map how great a territory has
been won back from the Turks since the days of
Suleiman. On the other hand, though the Venetians
gained some successes, though they often won back
lands which they had lost and sometimes even won
new lands, still, on the whole, the Venetian power fell
back, andthe Ottoman power advanced. In both
cases, the change of frontier between the Turk and
Venice or between the Turk and the Emperor was, for
the Greek and Slavonic inhabitants of the disputed
lands, a mere change of masters. Still there was the
difference between civilized and barbarian masters.
The rule of Venice in her distant possessions was bad,
and often oppressive. It could awaken no kind of
national or loyal feeling on the part of the subjects
of the commonwealth. Still it was not brutal
and bloody, like that of the Turks. And, on the

144 THE DECLINE O¥ THE OTTOMAN POWER.

Hungarian frontier, when the Austrian kings ceased
to persecute, instead of Hungarian Protestants wel-
coming the Turk as a deliverer, the Christian subjects
of the Turks welcomed every success of the Imperial
arms as bringing deliverance to themselves. :

It may be as well to sketch, as far as may be, in
one continuous story the chief gains and losses of
territory, especially among the islands, which hap-
pened in the long wars between the Venetians and
the Turks. At the time when the Turks took Con-
stantinople, Venice had a dominion in Dalmatia, the
boundaries of which had often fluctuated in the wars
between Venice and the Kings of Hungary, and which
afterwards no less fluctuated again in the wars between
Venice and the Turks. . Many of the Dalmatian towns
in this way changed masters over and over again;
but it would be impossible to tell their story except
at great length. But the commonwealth of Ragusa, by
contriving to keep on good terms with the Turks, kept
on its independence throughout. When Mahomet
took Constantinople, besides her Dalmatian dominion,~-
Venice held some territory to the south on the Alba-
nian coast, and also several points on the coasts both
of Northern Greece and of Peloponnésos, Argos and
Nauplia. She also held the great islands of Crete, |
Euboia, Corfu, and Cyprus. The first three of these
she had kept continuously from the Latin taking of
Constantinople. Euboia and Crete she kept till they
were conquered by the Turks, while Corfu she kept till
the end, The other islands off the west coast of Greece,
commonly called the Ionian Islands, were tossed to and
fro over and over again between Venetians, Turks, and
Frank princes. But in the end Venice got them all,
and kept them till the time of her own fall. Several of

CONQUEST OF CRETE. 145

the islands of the Aégzean were also held either by the
commonwealth of Venice or by Venetian families.
In 1489 the Venetians got possession of the island of
Cyprus; which had hitherto been a Frank kingdom.
The Venetian possessions in Peloponnésos, Euboia,
and most of those in the smaller islands of the
fEgean, were gradually conquered by the, Turks ftom
the reign of Mahomet the Conqueror to that of Sulei-
man. Thus, at the time when the decay of thé Otto-
man Empire began, Venice had lost a great part of
_her Eastern territories, but she still kept a large in-
sular dominion. Shehad Cyprus, Crete, Corfu and the
. other Ionian Islands, and a few points on the western’
coast and in the A®gzan. In all these she was a ruler
over Greeks, or, in some of the northern points, over
Albanians. In Dalmatia she ruled over Slaves, except
so far as the coast towns had largely become Italian.
_ We have already seen how Cyprus was lost in the
reign of Selim the Second. Inthe next century Crete
was lost also. The Turks attacked the island in
1645, and the war went on till 1660, when Crete was
lost. This is called the war of Candia, from the long
siege of the town of Candia, which was most gallantly
‘defended by the Venetians, with the help of many
volunteers from Western Europe. It must be re-
membered that, though the island has sometimes
got to be called Candia, from the town of Candia
and its memorable siege, yet the island itself has
never changed its name, but has always been called
Crete both by Greeks and Turks. This great island
now passed under Turkish bondage. The mass of
the people remained faithful, and sank to the usual
Jot of the subject nations, or rather to a worse
lot than most of them. For a good many of the
L

146 THE DECLINE OF THE OTTOMAN POWER.

inhabitants became Mussulmans, so that there are
Greek-speaking Mussulmans in Crete, just as there
are Slavonic-speaking Mussulmans in Bosnia. And
the result was the same as it was in Bosiiia, and
as it was everywhere. These renegades and their
descendants were more oppressive to their Christian
fellow-countrymen than the Turks themselves. In
Cyprus, on the other hand, the exactions of the
Sultan’s government were even greater than in most
other parts; but Turks and Christians in the island
were on better terms than usual. It is important to
remember these distinctions; for it is easy, by draw-
ing inferences which apply to one time or place.
only, and applying them to other times and places
to fall into great mistakes. The Christian subjects
‘of the Turk were everywhere in bondage; they were
everywhere in a case which in Western Europe would .
be held to. justify them in revolting. But it is- not
wonderful that bondage was lighter in some places
and heavier in others; nor is it wonderful that, as a
rule, renegades and their descendants were worse
oppressors than the natural Turks. For the conqueror
can afford to shew some kind of mercy, if it be only
contemptuous mercy. The renegade is full of a mean
spite towards better men than himself.
These were the chief changes of territory with
regard.to those great islands which were at different
times held by Venice in the East of Europe. Corfu
alone was always held by the Republic for nearly
six hundred years, from the Latin taking of Con-
stantinople to her own fall. But besides the’wars in
the islands and the wars in Dalmatia, Venice had.
also important wars with the Turks on the mainland
of Greece. But these wars had a great deal. to do

END OF THE TRIBUTE OF CHILDREN. 147

with wars which were carried on at the same time by
other European powers.’ It.will therefore be well to
go back a little in our story, in order to understand
-the general position in which the Turkish power stood
in the latter part of the seventeenth century. Though,
as we have seen, several of the Sultans of this time
were men of some vigour, though they were often
served by able ministers, still decay and corruption
had greatly advanced, and’ the Ottoman power was
going down on every side. It was during this century
that the tribute of children was gradually left off.
The Janissaries were now no longer what they had
been, and the tables were now altogether turned in
military matters between the Turks and the nations
of Europe. Mahomet the Conqueror had commanded
armies such as no European power could put in the
field against him. In the two centuries which had
passed since his time, the military system of every
European. power had improved, while the system of
. the Turks had gone back. They had lost their own
old discipline, and they had not learned the discipline
of European armies. Thus the latter part of the
seventeenth century was a general time of loss to.
the Ottoman power. Besides Venice and Hungary,
the Turks had wars with Poland and Russia, of which
we shall say more presently. Notwithstanding some
occasional successes, the Turkish power gave way at
all these points. During this period wars with the Turks
were going on at various points from Peloponnésos
to the mouth of the Don. But the war in Hungary
formed the centre of all. This was now the region
where the great struggle between Turks and Christians.
was waged, and in that region at this time the Turkish
frontier steadily went back. The wars of this time
L2

148 THE DECLINE OF THE OTTOMAN POWER.

were like a vast battle, in which Venice at one end,
Poland and Russia at the other, were attacking
and defending this and that outpost, while the main
struggle went on in the lands upon the Danube.

' We have seen that the conquests of Suleiman left
only a small part of Hungary to its nominal king
the Emperor. The greater part of the land was
ruled by a Turkish Pasha, while Transsilvania and
part of Hungary itself formed a vassal principality.
The state of things in these lands often changed, and
there were several wars in the sixteenth and seven-
teenth centuries. But, on the whole, the Turks kept.
-their predominance in Hungary. In the latter half
of the seventeenth century things began to change.
In 1663, while the siege of Candia was still going on,
when Mahomet the Fourth was Sultan and Leopold
‘the First was Emperor and King of Hungary, a war
began in which for the first time the Imperial arms
decidedly had the better. The war was famous for
the great battle of Saint Gotthard, fought in 1664, in
which the Imperial general Montecuculi won a great
victory over the Turks under the Vizier Kiuprili.
This battle was by land: much the same as Lepanto
was by sea. It was the first great overthrow of the
Turks; it therefore marks a turning-point in their
history. Or rather it was really of much greater mo-
ment than Lepanto.: For, though Lepanto broke the
spell of Turkish success, it really did no material harm
to the Turkish power. But Saint Gotthard was really
the.beginning of a long series of victories over the Turks
on the part both of the Emperors and of other Christian
’ powers. Yet it was like Lepanto in this, that, as the
victory of Lepanto was accompanied by the loss of

BATTLE OF. SAINT GOTTHARD. 149 .

Cyprus, so the victory of Saint Gotthard was very
soon followed by the loss of Crete. The battle was
followed’ by a truce for twenty years between the.
Emperor and the Turks. Meanwhile the affairs of
the Cossacks, the wild people of the border-lands
between Poland, Russia, and the Turkish vassal
states north of the Euxine, led to wars both with
Poland and Russia. The Polish war lasted, ftom
1672 to 1676. In this, though the famous John
Sobieski won several brilliant victories both before
and after his election to the Polish crown, yet
Poland lost the strong town of Kaminiec, and the
whole province of Podolia. This should be noticed,
as it was the last time that the Turks won any large
territory from any Christian power, as distinguished
from merely winning back territory which’ they had °-
held before. In this war both Sultan Mahomet and
his minister Kiuprili had a share. Its issue is in-
structive. Sobieski won battles,.but the Turks kept
Podolia. For the Turks were just now ruled, in the
person of Kiuprili, by a single wise and strong will,
while, though the Poles are one of the bravest nations
on earth, yet the weak and disorderly nature of their
government made them constantly lose in other ways
what they won in fighting. In the Russian war, the
first war of any moment between Russia and the
Turk, the Sultan, who had just won a superiority over.
the Cossacks of Ukraine from the Poles, lost it again
to the Russians. But the real beginnings of the
struggle between Russia and the Turk come a- few
years later, though still within the times with which
we are dealing. It will be better to go back to what
were at the time the more important wars in Hungary
and Greece.

150 THE DECLINE OF THE OTTOMAN POWER.

We have already seen that the religious: intoler-
ance of the Austrian Kings in Hungary gave a great:
advantage to the Turks, and that it often made the
Protestants of Hungary think, with good reason,
' that the rule of the Turk was the less heavy bond-
age of the two. No king did himself and his sub-
jects more harm in this way than the Emperor
Leopold the First. His persecutions, and the revolts
to which they led, laid not only Hungary but the
Empire itself open to the Turks. Mahomet the
Fourth was still Sultan ; but he had lost his wise
minister Kiuprili, and the present vizier Kara
Mustafa was fond of planning enterprises too great
for his power to carry out. It was he who had con-
ducted the unsuccessful war with Russia ; now in 1682
he undertook, not only to complete the conquest of
|Hungary, but once more, like Suleiman, to invade
jGermany itself. In 1683 the Turks again besieged
‘Vienna, and the city was saved, not at all by the
Emperor, but by John Sobieski and his Poles.
Austria and Hungary were in truth delivered from
he Turk by the swords of a Slavonic people, the
people of a kingdom which, within a hundred years,
Austria helped to dismember. A war now went on,
which lasted till 1698. The Turks were gradually
driven out of Hungary. In this war Sobieski at the
beginning, and Prince Eugene of Savoy in its later
stages, won some of their most famous victories. It
might at the time be doubted whether Hungary
gained much by being delivered from the Turk, only
to be put under such a king as Leopold. No doubt
Hungary has had much to complain of at the hands
of her Austrian Kings; but the same rule applies
here as everywhere else. The Christian government

DELIVERANCE OF HUNGARY, ISI

can amend- and reform;. the Mahometan govern-
ment cannot. During the reign of the next Sultan,
Suleiman the Second, came the administration of
another Kiuprili, the one who has been already
mentioned as one: of the very few Turkish rulers who
ever really thought of the welfare of the Christians.
under Turkish rule. At the time, it was doubtless
better to be a Christian under Kiuprili than to be a
Protestant under Leopold. But mark the difference:
in the long run. Hungary was freed from the Turk;
Bosnia and Bulgaria remained under his yoke. No
subject of the Hungarian crown, not even in those
Slavonic lands which have good reason to be dis-
contented with Magyar supremacy, would now wish
to change places with a Christian subject of the Turk.
But it is hard that a people like the Magyars, who
owe their freedom to Slavonic help, should’ grudge
their Slavonic neighbours the same freedom which
they themselves enjoy.

While the centre, as we may-call it, of the general
Christian army was thus. victoriously bearing the
main brunt of the strife in Hungary, much was also »
done by what we may call the two wings, the ancient -
power of Venice, the seemingly new, but really only
revived, power of Russia. It was now that Venice,
whose island dominion ‘had been-cut so sadly short
by the loss of Crete, suddenly began to play a great
part on the mainland of Greece. We have seen that
Peloponnésos had wholly fallen into the hands of the
Turks, the greater part under Mahomet, and the
little that was left by him under Suleiman. But
in some of the wilder parts of the country, as in
the peninsula of Maina, the Christians long kept a
rude independence. It was not till 1614 that the

Is2 THE DECLINE OF THE OTTOMAN POWER.

people of Maina were compelled to pay the haratch,
the tribute by which the non-Mussulman buys the
right to toleration at the hands of the Mussulman.
The Greek coasts were often visited by Spanish and
other European ships in their wars with the Turk, so
that the Greek inhabitants really suffered instead of
their masters. At last, in the year after the siege of
Vienna, when the Turkish power was giving way in
Hungary, it seemed a good time for Venice to stfike
ablow. So in 1684 the great Venetian commander
Francesco Morosini, who was chosen Doge in the
- course of the war, began the conquest of the peninsula.
It was thought that Peloponnésos would be more
easily held than Crete. The Venetian forces, with
help from other parts of Europe, conquered all Pelo-
ponnésos. The war also went on in Attica and
Euboia: Athens was taken, and it was in this siege
that the Parthendén, the great temple of Athéné, was
ruined. It had been a church under the Emperors
and under the Frank Dukes; but the Turks had
turned it ‘into-a powder magazine, and a falling shell
caused. an explosion which broke it.down. But the
Venetians were not able to keep anything beyond
the isthmus; Peloponnésos itself they did keep for
a while. Thus a large part of Greece was placed
under a government which, if not national, was at
least civilized. The Greeks at this time had no hope
for anything better than a change of masters. But
the Venetian was at least a better master than the
Turk: Peloponnésos passed under political bondage
to the republic; but its people were saved from
personal oppression and degradation.

But meanwhile events were happening in what we
may call the other wing of the great battle, events

VENETIAN CONQUEST OF PELOPONNESOS. 153

which, though they seemed less at the time than either
the Hungarian or Venetian wars, were. the beginning
of much that has gone on with increasing importance
down to our own time. This is the beginning of those
long wars between Russia and the Turk at which we
have already glanced. Russia, it should not be for-
gotten, though it is less than two hundred years since
she began again to play a part in European affairs,
is really a very old power. Russia is a nation which.
made a start, so to speak, early in life, which then re-
‘ceived a great check, and which began a second career
some ages after. In the ninth century the Russians,
a Slavonic people, though under rulers of Scandi-
navian descent, threatened the Eastern Empire,
just as the Bulgarians and afterwards the Servians
did. Only, while the Bulgarians and Servians came
by land, the Russians for the most part came by sea.
They crossed the Euxine, and tried to take Con-
stantinople, and afterwards they. had wars with the
Emperors on the Danube. Presently Russia became
Christian; Vladimir, its first Christian prince, had
as I have already said, deliberately preferred ‘Chris-
tianity.to Islam. The Russians got their Christianity
from Constantinople, and thus, being both. Slavonic
in race and Orthodox -in creed, they had a closer tie
to the nations who were under the Turk than any of
the nations of Western Europe. The ‘Church of
Russia was for several ages dependent on the Church
of Constantinople; but for several ages too Russia
had no means of taking any share in the affairs of
South - eastern Europe, or indeed in the general
affairs of Europe at all. Two things joined to keep
Russia back. First, the great Russian power of the
ninth and tenth centuries broke up into several smaller

154 THE DECLINE OF THE OTTOMAN POWER.

states. Then, in the thirteenth century, the power
of Russia was altogether overthrown: by those same
Mogul invasions which, by overthrowing the Seljuk
Turks and the Bagdad Caliphate, had made the
ground ready in Asia for the first growth of the
Ottomans. On these Moguls, better known by the
name of Tartars, Russia was dependent for more than
two hundred years. Thus the. Russians, like the
people of South-eastern Europe, had in some sort
Mahometan masters. They had not indeed, as the
Greeks, Bulgarians; and Servians had, a body of
oppressors scattered through their whole land. They
were rather like Wallachia and the other lands which
were tributary to the Turk. Still they had felt
bondage at the hands of Mahometan masters. “They
had therefore a traditional hatred of Mahometan
rule ;' and, as members of the Orthodox Church, they
had a tie of special fellowship with the, South-eastern
‘Christiaris. The history of Russia answers in some
points to the history of Spain. In both these lands
. at the extreme east dnd west of Europe, Mahometan
masters had to be driven out, and there are some
points of likeness in the processes by ne they were
driven out in the two cases.

At-the time which we have now reached, two of the
great seats of the Tartar power, at Kasan and at
Astrakhan, had long been held by Russia: But the
Tartars of Crim, that is of the: peninsula of Crimea
and the neighbouring lands, still remained. And, as
long as they remained, Russia, whose fleets had in old
times sailed over the Euxine to attack Constantinople,
was even more thoroughly cut off from that sea
than Castile had been cut off from the Mediterranean
by the Saracens of Granada. The Khans of Crim

GROWTH OF RUSSIA, 155

had been vassals of the Sultans ever since the time of
Mahomet the Conqueror, and their affairs, and those
of the Cossacks to the north:of them, led to disputes
between Russia, Poland, and the Turks. The wars
between Russia and the Turks, began in the middle
of the seventeeth century, and we have already spoken
of a war somewhat later, in which Russia won the
land of Ukraine. But in the reign of Peter the Great,
‘under whom Russia first began to play any great.
part in European affairs, the wars between Russia
and the Turks put on a new character. Hitherto the
-Euxine had been wholly under the power of the
Turks, and was chiefly used for their trade in slaves.
No European nation had had any commerce there
since Mahomet the Conqueror had taken the Genoese
possessions in Crimea. The object of Russia was
now for a long time to get free access to the sea,
which the Turks of course tried to keep to themselves,
This strife was begun when Peter the Great took Azov
in 1696. For a long while after that time the posses-
sion of Azov, as the key of the Euxine, was the great
point of contention between Russia and the Turks.
It was disputed with fluctuating success during a
great part of the next century.

Thus, at the end of the seventeenth century, the
Turks had been at war with all their Christian neigh-
-bours, and they had lost territory at all points except
one. They had gained Podolia; but they had lost
Peloponnésos, Hungary, and Azov. Most of these
territories they formally gave up by treaties in. 1699
and 1700. The peace of Carlowitz in 1699 marks a
point in the history, or more truly in the decline, of
the Ottoman power. Up to this time the Sultans had
deemed themselves the superiors of all European

156 THE DECLINE OF THE OTTOMAN POWER.

“princes, and had treated them and their arnbassadors
with great haughtiness. Sometimes they imprisoned
ambassadors, and dealt in other ways contrary to the
received law of nations. Strictly following the law of
their own Prophet, they would not make peace with
any Christian power; they would only grant truces.
Now, in the reign of Mustafa the Second, they were .
dtiven to treat with European powers on equal terms,
and formally to give up territory. They formally
ceded Peloponnésos to Venice, and gave back Podolia
to Poland. But, oddly enough, it was not a peace for
ever, but only a truce for twenty-five years, which was
concluded between the Turk and the power which had
won most back from him. By this truce the Turks
gave up all Hungary, except the district called the
Banat of Temesvar, with Transsilvania-and the greater
part of Slavonia. This treaty, it should be remarked,
was concluded under the mediation of England and
the United Provinces. This shows that we have now
got to the beginnings of modern diplomacy. Russia
was not a party to the Peace of Carlowitz; but she
concluded an armistice for two years, which in the
next year was changed into a thirty years’ truce. By ~
this truce Russia kept Azov.

The Turkish power thus received: one of the
heaviest blows that was ever dealt to it. From
that blow it has never really recovered. The power
of the Turk has never again been what it was before
the wars which were ended by the Peace of Carlowitz.
But we have already said that the Ottoman power,
just like the Byzantine: power before it, had times of
revival, which alternated with times of decay. So,
through a great part of the eighteenth century, the

TREATIES OF CARLOWITZ AND PASSAROWITZ. 157.

Turks were still able to win victories, and, though
they won no new.ground, they sometimes won back
a good deal of what they had lost. There soon were
wars again between the Turks and all their European
enemies, except Poland, whose day of greatness has
now come quite to an end. War with Russia broke
- out again in 1711, and this time the Turks had the
better. By the Treaty of the Pruth, Azov was re-
stored to the Turk. Heré was one success, and this was
followed by the Turkish conquest of Peloponnésos,
Ténos, and whatever else Venice held on the Eastern
‘side of Greece in 1715. The Turks went on to threaten
Corfu and Dalmatia; but in 1716 the Emperor
Charles the Sixth, who of course was also King of
Hungary, made an alliance with Venice. Charles the.
Sixth was more powerful than any Emperor had
been since Charles the Fifth, Men began to hope
that the Turks might be altogether conquered, and
that a Christin Emperor might again reign at Con-
stantineple. This indeed did not happen; but the
Imperial armies, under Prince Eugene, made large
conquests from the Turks. The small part of |
Hungary and Slavonia which the Turks kept was
won back, and Belgrade, with a large part of Servia,
a small strip of Bosnia, and the western part of
Wallachia, became part of the dominions of the
House of Austria. Things were now different from
“what they had been under Leopold. Every inch of
territory won from the Turk was so much won for
civilization and comparative good government, and’
the Imperial armies were welcomed as -deliverers by
the people of the lands which they set free. By the
Peace of Passarowitz, in 718, made for-another term
of twenty-five years, all these conquests were con-

158 THE DECLINE OF THE OTTOMAN POWER.

firmed to the Emperor. But he shamefully neglected

the interests of Venice, and Peloponnésos was again

confirmed to the Turk, when there were hopes of

winning it back, Venice now, as a power, passes out

of our story, though we shall hear again of the fate

of what was left of her Eastern possessions. Through

the rest of the eighteenth century Austria and Russia

are. the powers which keep up the struggle; in the

nineteenth century it is Russia only. .

There is no need to go through every detail of -war

and diplomacy in these times, but only to mark those

events which form real landmarks ‘in the decline of
the Turkish power. Thus it has no bearing on our

’ subject, though we may mark it for its very strange-

ness, that in the latter days of Peter the Great
the Czar and the Sultan joined together to make

conquests from Persia. And when the war again
- began in Europe, the tide seemed at first to have
turned to the side of the Turks. Russia was eager to”
get back Azov, and the Emperor Charles was ready
to go on with the conquests which had begun early
‘in his reign. War began again on the part of Russia
in 1735, and of Austria in 1737. The Russians made
conquests, but did not keep them ; and, now that the
Emperor Charles had no longer a great general like
Eugene, he lost much of what he had won in ‘the

earlier war. By the peace of Belgrade, in 1739,
Belgrade, with all that had been won in Servia, Bosnia,

and Wallachia was given back by the Emperor to the
Turk. We read of this and other like things very
calmly, as this or that clause of a treaty,.and we some-
times forget what they really mean. To give up those
lands to the Turk meant that the péople of those lands
were taken from under'a government which was not

BELGRADE HANDED TO AND FRO. 159

a national government, which doubtless had many
faults according to the standard of our times, but
which still was a Christian and civilized government
having some notion of right and, wrong, and were put
once more under the’cruel bondage of Mahometan
tyrants. How the people of these lands felt as to the
change, we see by the way in which, whenever they
had a chance, they helped the Imperial armies against
the Turks. We see this specially in the next war
between Austria and the Turk, which was waged in
the last years of the Emperor Joseph the Second.
Belgrade was again taken, and other conquests were
made; but nearly all was given back by the Emperor
Leopold the Second at the Peace of Sistova in 1791,
when the Turk again got Belgrade. In this last war
the Servians fought most gallantly on the Imperial side,
and. learned much military discipline. But, as usual,
they were made the playthings of policy in other
- directions, and were shamefully given up to their cruel
masters. Buta great deal came out of the taste of
_ civilized government and civilized discipline which
Servia had in these wars.

The war which was ended by the Peace of Sistova
was the ‘last of the wars between the Turks and the
Emperors of the House of Austria for the possession
of Hungary, Servia, and the other lands on the Danube,
wars which had gone on, with breaks from time to time,
ever since the battle of Mohacz. The result of all these
wars was that Hungary was freed from the Turk,
but that Servia.and Bosnia were left in his clutches,
But it must always be borne in mind that all these
lands alike, Hungary, Servia, and the rest, have
been lost and won again in exactly the same way.

The frontier which now divides the Hungarian.

160 THE DECLINE OF THE OTTOMAN POWER.

kingdom from the Turk is simply the result of the

successive victories and defeats of the Austrian

arms, from the deliverance of Vienna in 1683 to the

betrayal of Belgrade in-1791. There is no reason but

the accidents of those wars, the accident that Charles

the Sixth had a great general early in his reign and

had no great general in his later years, to account for’
the fact, that part of the lands on the Danube are now

under a civilized government, while part are left under

the Turk. In the days of Sobieski and Eugene, men

had not learned to talk about the integrity and the

independence of the Ottoman Empire,”or to think

it a good thing for Christian nations to be held in
_ Turkish bondage. Whatever. may have been the

‘mixture of generous and merely politic motives in

the minds of the men of those times, they at least.

did not openly profess the doctrine that certain

nations should be deprived of the rights of human

beings for the sake of the supposed interests of some -
other nation. The great powers of those days,

Austria and Russia alike, cruelly deceived and for-

sook the nations that were under the Turks. But

they at least did not tell them that their bondage ©
was to be maintained as if it were something for the
general good of mankind. The ministers of the
despotic governments of those days were not ashamed
to use the subject nations for their own purposes, and
then to betray them. But they would have been
ashamed to stand up and either to deny that those
subject nations had wrongs, or to make those wrongs _
a matter of mockery.

The wars between Austria and the Turk are thus
ended. They ended in establishing the frontier which

WARS. OF CATHARINE THE SECOND. 161

remains still, except so far as one of the lands which
were given up to the Turk has won its freedom
for itself. But the wars between the Turk and
Russia still went on. As long as the Austrian wars
went on, there was commonly a Russian war at the
same time, while there were other wars with Russia
in which Austria had no share. Thus, at the Peace of
Belgrade in 1736, when Austria gave up so much, it
was agreed that the fortifications of Azov should be
destroyed, and that Russia should be. shut out from
the Euxine. It was not till the reign of Catharine
the Second that: the real advance of Russia began.
The first war of her reign began with the declaration
of war by the Turk in 1768, and it was ended by the
famous treaty of Kainardji in 1774. Two points are
specially to: be noticed in ‘the wars which now begin.
This first war had a special effect in stirring up the
Greeks to revolt. A Russian fleet appeared in the
Aigean, and the Greeks of Peloponnésos rose against
their oppressors. They were badly used by Russia,
just as the Servians were by Austria; they were by
no means backed up as they ought to have been
against the Turks, or protected from their vengeance.
Still it was a great thing for the Grecks again to . feel
that their masters had powerful enemies, and that
they themselves could do something against their
masters. And, now too the people of Montenegro
begin to play a part in all the wars against the Turk.
They had always kept their own independence by
endless fighting. Their land had been often overrun,
but it was never really conquered. Montenegro was
now under the rule of its Bishops, who, somewhat
strangely according to our notions, acted also as civil
and military chiefs. Russia had long given the
M

162 “THE DECLINE OF THE OTTOMAN POWER.

Montenegrins a certain measure of help and encourage-
ment, and in all the wars from this time, Montenegro,
as an Orthodox land always at war with the Turk,
was found an useful ally. :

The treaty of Kainardji, which finished this war,
marks an important stage in the history, just as the
Peace of Carlowitz marked another. The Peace of
Carlowitz taught the Turk that he was no longer to
deal with the Christian nations of Europe as if he
were their superior. The Peace of Kainardji taught
him the further lesson that he was not really their
equal. The Ottoman power was now for the first time
brought into some measure of dependence. By this
treaty Russia at last gained the long disputed posses-
sion of Azov, with some other points on the Euxine,
and the Fartars of Crim were recognized as a state
independent of the Turk. It is worth notice that,
by the treaty, the spiritual authority of the Sultan,
as Caliph of the Prophet, was fully recognized on
behalf of these Tartars, at the same time that they
were released from his temporal authority. The.
principalities of Wallachia and Moldavia were re-
stored to. the Turk, on condition of his observing their
ancient privileges and at the same time acknow-
ledging a right in Russia to remonstrate in case of -
any breach of them. Russia was acknowledged by
this treaty as the protector of the Christian sub-.
jects of thé Turk; in truth the principle was pro-
claimed, though not in so many words, that Turkish
rule was something different, from anything that
we understand by government. It was practically
proclaimed that those whom he called his sub-
jects had need of the protection of another power
against the man who called himself their sovereign.

PEACE OF KAINARDJI. 163

Both at the time and ever after, this treaty has been.
looked on-as the beginning of the fall of the dominion
of the Turk. For it did in truth make the Ottoman
power in some sort dependent on Russia, and ever
since the power of the Turk has steadily gone down
and the power of Russia has steadily advanced. °

At the same time it must be remembered: that
whatever good Russia did at this time to the enslaved
nations was wholly indirect. More than once Russia
stirred them up to revolt, and then left them in the
lurch.- The truth is that, in those days, the more gene-
rous emotions which, in our days, have stirred whole
nations, especially the feeling of sympathy between
men of kindred race, hardly existed. It was not, as
now, the Russian people who were stirred to help
’ their oppressed brethren ; it was merely the rulers of
Russia who ¢arried out their own schemes of policy.
Still, with every step that the power of the Turk
_ went back, tlie-nations that were still under his yoke
took fresh heart. At no time have they really wished
for annexation by Russia, though doubtless at any .
time, if they had been driven to choose between the
rule of the Turk and the rule of the Russian, they
would have chosen the rule of the Russian. But
every time that the power of their masters was weak-
‘ened, they saw fresh hopes of deliverance, whether
by the help of Russia, or, better ‘still, by their own
right hands. We must therefore set down every
advance made by Russia at the cost of the Turk as,
indirectly at least, a step towards the deliverance of
the subject nations.

After the Treaty of Kainardji those steps pressed
fast upon one another. In 1783 the land of Crim

M 2

164 THE DECLINE OF THE OTTOMAN POWER.

was altogether incorporated with Russia, which thus
at last got a great sea-board on the Euxine. This was
one of those things which could not fail to happen.
The Tartars of Crim could not possibly keep on as
an independent state. It.was something like Texas,
which, when it was cut off from Mexico, could not
fail to be joined to the United States. Russia, a
growing power, could not be kept back from the sea.
The next war, from 1787 to 1791, was the last in
which Austria shared, that which was ended by the
Peace of Sistova, when Belgrade was last given back
to the Turk. It almost seemed as if, between the two
Christian powers, the Turk would have been altogether
crushed. But, as we have seen, the Emperor Leopold
drew back, and the loss of the Austrian alliance,
together with the general state of affairs in Europe,
. caused Russia to draw back also. Still this war gave
Russia the famous fortress of Oczakow, and advanced
the Russian frontier to the Dniester. Russia thus
gained, but Christendom lost. For this increase of
the territory of Russia did not mean the deliverance
of any Christian people, while the surrender of
Belgrade was the betrayal of a Christian city to
the barbarians. It did not perhaps much matter when
Russia ended a war in which Montenegro had helped
her without making stipulations on behalf of Monte-
negro. For the Montenegrins could help themselves,
and could keep their own borders. “It was different
when Greeks and Servians, who had helped Russia and
Austria, were again left under the rule of the Turk.
Still the whole course of events helped to raise the
hopes of the subject nations, and to make them feel
their strength. Before the next war between Russia

DEALINGS WITH THE SUBTECT NATIONS. 165

atd the Turk began, one of the subject nations had
done great things for its own deliverance,

“We have now reached another marked stage in our
tale. We have gone through the history of the.
decline of the Ottoman power, so far'as that decline
was the work either of its own vices or of warfare
with enemies beyond its borders. The two causes
had worked together. Each cause of decline had
strengthened the other, and the two together had
called a third cause into being. Up to this time, our
tale of warfare has been mainly a tale of external
warfare, -So far as we have had any revolts of the
subject nations to record; they have not gone beyond
help, given by the subject nations to the external
enemies of the Turk. From this point the character
of the story changes. The main interest will now
gather round the efforts of the subject nations to free
themselves. The externa] wars of the Turk now
stand in a certain relation in the general histo
of the world; they stand in a special relation to
the struggles of the subject nations themselves.
The wrongs of those nations are the cause or the
pretext or the occasion for every war. Something
for their good or for their harm is contained in every
treaty. We may therefore fittingly-draw a line at
this: point; we may end our history of the mere.
decline of the Ottoman power, and begin a new
chapter with the revolts of the subject nations.

CHAPTER VI.
THE REVOLTS AGAINST THE OTTOMAN POWER.

WE have now reached our own century. We have
to tell the history of things of which the latest are
still going on, while the earliest happened so near to
- our own times that a few old people can still re-
member them. The wars of the seventeenth and
eighteenth centuries had taught the subject nations
their own strength, and they now began to strive to
win freedom for themselves. Both the two great
races have had their share in the work. The Slaves
began ; the Greeks followed ; in later times the Slaves
have again been foremost. The history is a continu-
ous tale, so far as that there has hardly been a moment
during the present century when revolt against the
Turk has not been going on in some corner or other
of his dominions. But, for that very reason, because
different nations have revolted’at different times and
in different places, the story is in another sense not
continuous. The greatest of the Slavonic revolts and
the greatest of the Hellenic revolts were going on at
the same time, without having much directly to do
with one another. It will therefore be well, first to
tell the story of the deliverance of Servia, then the

. STATE OF SERVIA. 167 -

story of the deliverance of Greece, and then the story
of the revolts, partly Greek but mainly Slavonic,
which have happened since Europe betrayed the
‘subject nations to the Turk by the treaty of Paris in
1856,

The surrender of Belgrade to the Turk was the last
and the most shameful act of the wars between the
Turk and the Eniperors, Yet.this betrayal of the
Servians by their Christian allies did very directly
help towards the freedom of Servia. It taught the
Servians that they might, by their own right hands,
win something better than either of the two things
which as yet had been their only choice. They
learned that they might cease to be the subjects
of the Sultan without becoming the subjects of
the Emperor. As soon as the Servians were given
back to the Turk after a taste of civilized govern-
ment, they found themselves worse off than ever. The
Emperor, in giving up Belgrade, did indeed stipulate
for an amnesty for the Servians who had acted on his
side; but just at that moment amnesties and stipula+
tions of any kind did not count for much. It would
have been a hard fate, if men who. had been once set
free had been given back to one of the great Sultans,
or even to one of the Saracen Caliphs. But a harder
fate than either was in store for the Servians whom
the Peace of Sistova gave back to the Turk. The
greater part of the Ottoman dominion was now ina
state of utter anarchy. The authority of the Sultan -
went for nothing. Servia was now in the hands of
local military chiefs, the leaders of the rebellious
Janissaries. In some parts bands of men which might
be called armies went about taking towns and ravag- ©
ing the country at pleasure?) Brave men among

168 REVOLTS AGAINST THE OTTOMAN POWER.

the Christians took to a life of wild independence,
throwing off, for themselves at least, the Turkish
yoke altogether. In other parts the Sultans found
it necessary to allow the Christians to bear arms,
in defence alike of themselves and of the Sultan’s
‘authority against Mussulman rebels. Thus, in all
these ways, the subject nations were gaining courage
and were learning the use of arms. And it must be
remembered that now the bravest and strongest of
their children were no longer taken from them, but
were left to grow up as leaders of their countrymen.
In guch a state of things as this, the rule of the Sultan,
where it was to be had, was the least of many evils.
We therefore sometimes actually find an alliance
between the Sultan and the Christians against their
local oppressors. This was the case in Servia. The
Servians, under the yoke of their local oppressors,
‘cried to the Sultan for help, and the Sultan was for
a while disposed to favour their efforts against his
rebellious officers. But the war- against local
oppressors gradually swelled into a war against the
chief oppressor himself. Herein is an instructive
lesson. A Sultan may for a while, for his own pur-
poses, favotir his Christian subjects. against local
Mahometan oppressors. But such an alliance can
never be lasting; it can last only so long as the
interests of the Sultan and the interests of the
Christians remain the same: and that can only be for
a very short time. The two may act together as
long as they have a common enemy; as soon as
that common enemy is overthrown, their interests
part asunder. The yoke of the Sultan will often
be lighter than that of the local tyrant; but men
who have thrown off the heavier yoke will not be

THE SERVIANS AND THE SULTAN. 169

willing to put their necks under the lighter yoke.

They will rather be stirred up by their success to

cast off every yoke, heavy or light. On the other
hand, though a Sultan may find it for his momentary

interest to favour Christians against Mahometans who

‘are in rebellion against himself, he will not find it

for his interest to do anything which may stir up a

general spirit of resistance in the Christians against .
the. Mahometans. The alliance between a -despot

and a people is always dangerous and precarious;

because such an alliance can only be founded on

interest, and the interest of a despot and of a

_ people can never be the same for any long time

together. And this, which is true in any case,

becomes tenfold more true when the despot is Maho- .
metan and the people are men of any other religion.
So it was with Servia. The war which began in 1804
with an appeal to the Sultan against local oppressors
_grew in the next year into war with the Sultan himself,
which led in the end to the deliverance of Servia.

By this time the affairs of Servia,and of the subject
nations generally, were getting mixed up, in a way
in which they had not been before, with the general
affairs of Europe. It was not now merely the powers
whose dominions bordered on those of the Turk, but
Western powers like France and England, which came
to have a direct share in the affairs of the South-
eastern lands. We have seen something like the
beginning of this at the Peace of -Carlowitz, where
England and the United Provinces acted as me-
diators. And, long before that, French Kings, beth
Francis the First and Lewis the Fourteenth, were not
ashamed to give help and comfort to the Turks in
their wars with the Emperors. Lewis the Fourteenth,

‘170 REVOLTS AGAINST THE OTTOMAN POWER.

while he was persecuting Protestants in his own king-
dom, was not ashamed to pretend to be the protector
of the Protestants in Hungary and Transsilvania. But,
from the last years of the eighteenth century onwards,
the affairs of the South-eastern lands began to have a
much more direct connexion with the affairs of Europe
in general. The French Revolution had begun before
the Emperor Leopold had given up Belgrade to the
Turk. The wars which sprang out of that revolution
began soon after; and they were at their full height

when the Servians were fighting for their freedom. |
After the surrender of Belgrade, but before the
Servian revolt really began, Russia and the Turk
had beconie allies. The revolutionary French, under
Buonaparte, had in 1798 attacked Egypt, and this
led the Turk into an alliance with Russia and
England. Oddly enough, one result of this alliance
between a Mussulman, a Protestant, and an Orthodox
power was to set up again for a little while the tem-
poral dominion of the Pope which the French had
upset. At a later stage, in 1805, Russia again de-
manded 4 more distinct acknowledgement of the.
' Russian protectorate over the Christians. Sultan
Selim wept, and presently came under the influence
of France, which power, by annexing the Illyrian pro-
vinces of Austria, had become his neighbour. Selim
presently, Turk-like, broke his faith by deposing the
princes of Wallachia and Moldavia contrary to treaty,
and now England and Russia were both armed
against him. The barbarian bragged as usual, and
-this time with more reason than usual. A Turkish
fleet was burned in the Propontis by the English ;
a little more energy, and Constantinople might have
been taken, and Europe might have been cleansed of

THE SERVIAN WAR. 171

Asiatic intruders. Later still, when Buonaparte and
Alexander of Russia were for a while friends, there
were further schemes for getting rid of the Turk
altogether, and for dividing his dominions between
Russia, Austria, and France. Such a division would
doubtless have been an immediate gain for the subject
natioris. Any civilized masters, Russian, Austrian,
or French, would have been better than the ‘Turks,
even ynder a reforming Selim, “But for some at least
of the subject nations better things weré in store.
- They were, partly by their own valour, partly by
_ help from Christian nations, to be raised to a state
‘in which ‘they had no need to acknowledge any
masters. at all.

The war between Russia and the Turk went on till
it was ended in 1812 by the Peace of Bucharest, By
that peace Russia kept Bessarabia and all Moldavia
east of the Pruth, which river became the boundary
instead of the Dniester. The war concerns us chiefly
so far as its course influenced the course of the war
between the Turk and the Servian patriots. When-
ever Selim was frightened by the advance of Russia,
he made promises to the Servians ; whenever he
thought that he had a chance against Russia, he
withdrew or broke his promises. Up to. 1805 the
Servian war was not strictly war against the Sultan,
it was a war against the Sultan’s rebellious enemies.
Under their leader, Czerni, Kara, or Black George, the
Servians fought valiantly against their local tyrants,
but they tried to make favourable terms with the
Sultan through the mediation of Russia. Selim,
instead of granting any terms, attacked the men
who had been fighting against his enemies. But
Czerni George and the other Servian chiefs

172 REVOLTS AGAINST THE OTTOMAN POWER.

crushed his forces right and left, and the Russian
army was on the march. Selim was cowed; he
offered to let Servia go free in every thing, except
payment of tribute and keeping a small Turkish
garrison in Belgrade. But, as soon as Selim heard
of the French successes against Russia, he backed
out of his promises and went on with the war.
Presently, in 1807, Selim was deposed and soon
after murdered, as was also Mustafa who was set
up in hig stead. Then, in 1808, began the reign
of the fierce Mahmoud the Second, another Turkish
réformer, the nature of whose reforms are well re-
membered by the people of Chios. The war went
on till the peace with Russia in 1812. That treaty
contained some provisions on behalf of Servia which
might have been more clearly expressed, but which
certainly were meant to make Servia a tributary
state, free: from all Turkish interference in its internal
‘affairs, But now the Turk no longer feared Russia ;
he feared her still less when Buonaparte was
marching against her. Mahmoud therefore thought
himself strong enough to break the treaty. Servia
was attacked agajn; Czerni George lost heart, and
took shelter in the Austrian dominions. Servia was
conquered, and Mahmoud the reformer ‘had it all
his own way, The old tyranny was brought back
again. The Turk did after his wont; every deed of
horror which is implied in the suppression of an
insurrection by Turkish hands was done in the sup-
fren of the insurrection of Servia. When Belgrade
ubmitted, the Turks promised to put no man to
death, Turk-like, they beheaded and impaled the
men to whom they had promised their lives. Men
still live who remember seeing their fathers writhing

DELIVERANCE OF SERVIA.. . 173

on, tHe stake before the citadel of Belgrade. For
these good services Servia has been told by the man
who rules the counsels of England that she ought
to be grateful to the Turk.

Such was the first act of the Servian diane Servia
was conquered; her first deliverer had fled. But a
new deliverer arose in Milosh Obrenovich. He was
not a hero like Czerni George, and he was-guilty of
some great crimes, specially in procuring the death of
George himself. Still he gradually won the freedom
of the land, and in 1817 hé was chosen Prince.
Servian affairs dragged on for several years; this and
that agreement was made with the Turk, but none
were fully carried out. By the treaty of Akerman, in
1826, Mahmoud consented to Servian independence.
The land was to be-free, saving only the payment of
tribute and the keeping of Turkish garrisons in cer-
tain fortresses. But Mahmoud thought but little
of treaties. He massacred the Janissaries, he made
himself a new army, and thought that he could defy
all mankind. He was taught better, as we shall see
‘when we come to the affairs of Greece, at Navarino
and at Hadrianople. It was not till the treaty of
Hadrianople in 1829 that the provisions for the
independence of Servia were really carried out. .

. Since then Servia has been a separate state under
its own princes ; but more than one change of dynasty
has taken place between Milosh and his descendants
and the descendants of Czerni George. The land has
flourished and advanced in every way, as it never
could have done under Turkish masters. The Prince,
of Servia rules over a free people. But for a long
time freedom was imperfect, as long as the Turks kept
garrisons in Belgrade and other fortresses. In 1862

I 74 REVOLTS AGAINST THE OTTOMAN POWER.

Servia had a proof that, where the Turkish soldier is
allowed to tread, he wig do as he has ever done. A
brutal outrage of the usual Turkish kind on a young
Servian was resisted ; the barbarian garrison presently
bombarded Belgrade. Diplomacy dragged on its
weary course; but,at last, after five years, Servia
was wholly freed from the presence of the enemy.
The Turkish troops were withdrawn, and since then
Servia has been wholly free, saving the tribute which
goes, which sometimes does not go, from the purses -
of her free children, for the tyrant. whose yoke she
has thrown off to squander on his vices and follies.

Such has been the deliverance of Servia. We
must now go back some years to begin the tale of the
deliverance of Greece. And, though the deliverance
of Greece itself did not begin till Servian freedom was
nearly won, still the deliverance of Greece is closely
connected with a chain of events which influenced the
affairs of Servia. Down to .the last years of the
eighteenth century, no part of the Greek nation was

“even nominally free. That part of the nation that
was not subject to the Turk was subject to Venice,
The Venetian possessions now consisted of the Ionian
Islands, and a few points on the coast of Albania —
and Epeiros. These last lay in detached pieces.
to the south of the dominion of Venice in Dal-
matia. When Austria and France divided the
Venetian possessions in 1797, these outlying pos-
_sessions of Venice were to pass to France. « But,
when Russia and the Turk made an alliance in the
‘next year, it was settled that the Turk should have
the Venetian possessions on the coast, and that the
islands should be formed into a nominal republic,

THE VENETIAN POSSESSIONS.IN GREECE. 175

which should be at once tributary to the Turk and
under the protection of Russm. Of the points onthe
coast some were presently subdued by the famous
Ali Pasha of Joannina, but Parga held over till after
the general peace, and was then surrendered. As
the acquisition of Podolia late in the seventeenth
century was the last case in which the Turk extended
his dominion over a considerable province which he
had never -before held, so this was the last time in’
which he extended his dominion by the acquisition of
’ outlying points on the coast of one of his provinces.
Both this and the supremacy over the islands might
pass for an increase of the power of the Turk; but
all these transactions were in effect a blow dealt to
his power. The towns which were taken really passed,
not to the Sultan, but to his rebellious vassal Ali, and
the surrender of Parga against the will of its inhabi-
tants stirred up a strong feeling everywhere, And
the erection of the islands into a separate state
was really a great step in the direction of. Greek
freedom. However nominal might be the freedom
of a commonwealth which was put under the
lordship of two despots, men saw in its foundation
the beginning ‘of better things for the Greek people.
Part of the Greek nation had been declared free, and
however shadowy their freedom might be, such a
declaration could not fail to do much towards kindling
the hopes of that part of the nation which was still
under the yoke. Thus.the Greeks at one end: and
the Servians at the other were stirred up at about the
same time. The new commonwealth was presently
swallowed up by France ; but at the Peace in 1815 it
was ‘set up again, under a protectorate on the part
of England which did not differ much from actual

176 REVOLTS AGAINST TIIE OTTOMAN POWER.

sovereignty. Still the Greeks who were subjects of
the Turk saw by their side other Greeks who, if not
really free, were at least under civilized instead of
under barbarian masters?) And this helped to
keep up hope and a spirit of enterprise in the whole
nation.

We are now coming near to the greatest events
‘in the later history of the Turkish power and of
the nations under the Turkish yoke. This is no
other than the general uprising of the Greek nation
against its barbarian lords, the liberation of part
of the Greek nation, and the formation of the
liberated part into a new and independent European
state. The revolt of Servia began first; but the
Greek and. the Servian war were going on at the
same time, and both were mixed up with the
general affairs of Europe, especially with the wars
between Russia and the Turk. It is only in this
last way that the Greek and the Servian revolutions
are at all brought together. Each was an indirect
help to the other, by diverting a part of the
Turkish force; but the two struggles could hardly
be said to be carried on in concert. : Many causes
joined together to stir up the spirit of the Greek
nation, When we speak of the Greek nation, we
miust remember that the Greeks and those Albanians
who belong to the Orthodox Church have always had
a strong tendency to draw together. A large part of
Greece was at various times settled by Albanians, and
among these should be specially mentioned the people
of the small islands of Hydra and Spezza, because
they did great things for the. cause. But there are
Albanians in other parts of Greece also, and it must

ALI OF JOANNINA. | 77

‘be remembered that the Albanians generally, both
Christian and Mahometan,.have always kept up a
strong national feeling. Christians and Mahometans
alike have always been discontented, and often rebel-_
lious, subjects of the Turk, Some of them were able
to maintain their independence for a long time in
wild parts among the mountains. Such were the
people of Souli, Christian Albanians who were never
fully subdued till 1803, when they were overcome by
Ali of Joannina. This was a conquest of Christians
by Mahometans; but it was not a conquest of
Christians by Turks. It was in truth a conquest
of Albanians by Albanians. Ali was a cruel and
faithless tyrant; stilt he was not a Turk, but an
Albanian; he was a rébel against the Sultan, and
the was so far an indirect friend of the Sultan’s,
enemies. And, like many other tyrants, among all his
own evil deeds, he did a certain amount of good by
keeping smaller oppressors in order. Thus the most
opposite things joined together to weaken the Turkish
power and to stir up the spirit of the Greeks. The
way in which the Souliots withstood Ali, and the way
in which Ali. withstood the Sultan, both helped. Just
at the end of his life, Ali, who had destroyed’ the
freedom of Souli and Parga, was actually in. alliance
with the Greeks who. had risen up to win’ their own
freedom.(°)

The Greek Revolution, or War of Independence,
began in 1821, and the first fighting was where one
would certainly not have looked for it, namely, in the
Danubian Principalities. It could hardly be said
that the Greeks had suffered any wrongs in that part
of the world; but the rule of Greek princes had
brought together a considerable Greek element in that

; N

178 REVOLTS AGAINST THE OTTOMAN POWER.

quarter, and it was there the war actually began.
There was fought the first battle at Drageshan, where
the Greeks showed that they could fight bravely, but
where they were defeated by. the Turks. The real
Greek War of Independence was of quite another kind,
and had quite another ending. It is most important
to remember that the rising was in no way confined to
the narrow bounds of that part of Greece which was
set free in the end, The whole Greek nation rose in
“every part of the Turkish dominions where they had
numbers and strength to rise. They rose throughout
Greece itself; both within the present kingdom and
in Epeiros, Thessaly, and Macedonia, in Crete too and
Cyprus and others of the islands. In some parts they
_were too weak to rise at all; in some parts the rising
was easily put down; and in some parts where there
was no rising at all the Turk did as he always had
done, as he always will do whenever he has the power.
Wherever the Turk was strong enough, he did then
exactly as he did last year. Fifty years and more ago
men were shocked by the story of the massacres of
Chios, Kassandra, and Cyprus, just as we have been
shocked by the story of the massacres of Bulgaria.
Sultan Mahmoud, whom it has been the fashion to
praise, was guilty of exactly the same crimes as his
predecessors and his successors. In Constantinople —
’ innocent men were slaughtered day by day by the
‘Sultan's order. The Patriarch Gregory suffered
‘martyrdom ; and what should specially be noticed, -
good men ‘among the Turks themselves who tried to
stop the cruelties of Mahmoud and the Turkish.
4 populace were, in some places murdered, in others
disgraced.(*) This also has oe again in our
_ Own time. :

THE GREEK WAR OF INDEPENDENCE. 179

The effect of Mahmoud’s cruelties was to put down
the revolt in many places, but in many others,
especially in the greater part of old Greece, the
Christians were able to hold their own. Truth forbids,
ug to pretend that the Greek war was a scene of
unmixed virtue and patriotism.on the Greek side.
No insurrection ever was or will be. War is a fearful
scourge, even when carried on by civilized armies ; and
it is, in the nature of things, something yet more fear.
ful when it is carried on between barbarians and men.
who have long been held down by barbarians, and have
therefore learned somewhat of barbarian ways, The
revolt of Greece against the Turk, like the revolt of the
Netherlands against Spain, was marked by some ugly
deeds on the part of the patriots as well as on the part
of the oppressors. And, as usual, jealousies and dis-
sensions often weakened the patriot arms. . It could
not be otherwise ; men who had just escaped from:
bondage will carry about them, some of the vices of
“the _slave ; it is only i in the air of freedom that they
can get rid of them. But many great and noble
deeds were done also. Among the foremost in the
struggle were the men of some of the islands, the
Albanians of Hydra and Spezza, and the Greeks of
Psara. These islands were among the parts of the
Turkish dominions which suffered least, or rather they
did not directly suffer at all. They contributed a
‘quota of men to the Sultan’s fleet, and beyond that
were left to themselves. Shallow people sometimes
ask, Why, should men who were so much better off
than their neighbours be the foremost to revolt? The
reason is simply because they were better off than
their neighbours. Men who enjoy a partial freedom, ;
who therefore have some kngnicdee of what freedom

N 2.

180 “REVOLTS AGAINST THE OTTOMAN POWER.

is, will be more eager to win perfect freedom, and will
be better able to win it than those who are in utter
bondage and who have neither heart nor strength to
stir. Besides this, there are such things, though some
people seem to think otherwise, as noble and generous
feelings, which lead those who are free themselves to
help those who are in bondage. Therefore great
things were done in the War of Independence by
those who were themselves nearest to independence.
Such were the two foremost men of the War of Inde-
pendence by sea, the Albanian Andrew Miaoulés of
Hydra and the Greek Constantine Kanarés of Psara.

The Greek revolution was mainly the work of the
Greeks themselves, counting among them the Christian
Albanians. They had some help, but not very much,
from the other subject nations. The Servians had
their own war of independence going on; but a few
Bulgarian and Rouman volunteers did good service
in Greece, But more was done by volunteers from
England, France, and other western countries, Lord
Byron’s name is well known as one who in his latter

days gave himself for the Greek cause, and much
was done by other Englishmen, as Lord Cochrane,
Sir Richard Church, General Gordon, and Captain
Hastings, the worthy fellow of Miaoulés and Kanarés
by sea. These are men whose names should be
remembered in days like ours, when Englishmen sell
themselves to the service of the barbarian. And great
things were done by the Greeks and Albanians them-
selves, as by the Souliot hero Mark Botzarés, and
by Alexander Mavrokordatos, who was not a mili-
tary man, but a Fanariot of Constantinople, almost
the only one of that class who did anything. He

MAHMOUD GETS HELP FROM EGYPT. 181

bravely defended Mesolongi against the Turks in one
of its two sieges. In short, among many ups and
downs, the Greeks, with such help as they had, were
able to hold the greater part of Greece itself against
‘the Turks. From European governments, Russian
or any other, they had no help. -Most powers were
against them; none were. for them; till at length
‘things took such a course that Christian rulers could
not for very shame keep themselves from stepping jin.
After the war had gone on for some years, Sultan |
Mahmoud found that neither his massacres in other
places nor the armies which he sent against Greece
itself could break the spirit of the Greek people.
Greece at. one end, Servia at the~ other end,
were too strong for him. He had to send for what
was really foreign help. In the break-up of
the Turkish power, Mahomet Ali, the Pasha of
Egypt, had made himself practically independent
of the Sultan, just as earlier Turkish Emirs had made
themselves independent, at one time of the Saracen
Caliphs, at another time of the Seljuk Sultans.
Mahmoud, in order to bring back the Greeks under
his yoke, had to humble. himself to ask for help of
his rebellious vassal. In a war against Christians,
where plunder and slaves might be had, Mahomet Ali
was ready to help; so he sent his son Ibrahim
(Abraham) with an Egyptian force. The Greeks,
who had held their ground against the Turks alone,
found Turks and Egyptians together too strong for
them. Ibrahim, who afterwards, . like most tyrants,
was honourably received in England, went on the
deliberate principle of making the land a desert, by
slaying or enislaving the whole Christian population.
Thus he went on, committing every kind of crime

182 REVOLTS AGAINST THE OTTOMAN POWER.

and fiendish outrage that even a Turk could think of
in Crete, Peloponnésos, and elsewhere, from 1824 to
1827. At last the patience of Europe was worn out.
‘What - followed is well worthy of our study
just now. The first movement on behalf of right
came from England, and England: at once sought
for Russia as ally. The Minister of England, Mr.
Canning, did not write and tell the Turk to suppress
the insurrection; he did not forbid any help to be
given to the victims of the Turk; he did not think |
that the liberation of Greéce lay beyond the range
of practical politics. He saw well enough that there
were difficulties ; but he knew that human duty chiefly
takes the form of overcoming difficulties. In short,
he was a man and an Englishman, with the heart of
a man and an Englishman, and he actéd as such.
In 1826 England and Russia agreed‘on a scheme for
the ‘liberation of Greece which was distinctly drawn
(up, not “in the narrow interests of England or of
‘Russia, but in the interests of humanity. Both.
powers disclaimed any advantage for themselves ; they .
sought the advantage of others and of humanity in
general. Greece was to become a separate tributary
state, like Servia, Presently Mahmoud signed the
(treaty of Akerman with Russia, which, as we have’
‘seen, is an important stage‘ in the history of all the
Iprincipalities on’the Danube. But with regard to
‘Greece Mahmoud was obstinate ; the wild beast would
‘not let go his prey till it was dragged out of his
jjaws. In those days men knew the art, which seems
since to have been forgotten, of dealing with wild
beasts in such cases.. The “rights,” the “dignity,” the
“ susceptibility” of the barbarian went for very little
then. The sentimental admiration of the Turk had

_BATTLE OF NAVARINO. 183

not yet set in, nor did base talk about English interests
then rule everything. Canning was guided by reason
and humanity, In July 1827 England, France, and
Russia signed the Treaty of London, by which they
bound themselves to-compe! the Turk, by force, if it
should be needful, to acknowledge the freedom of
Greece. In November was fought the great battle of
Navarino. Three great European powers, representing
three great divisions of the Christian name, Orthodox
Russia, Catholic France, Protestant England, joined
their forces to crush the power of the barbarian and
to set free his victims. The Turkish and Egyptian
fleet was destroyed, and Greece was saved. But by:
that time the great English Minister was dead; the
Treaty of London was his last work. Men succeeded
him who could not understand his spirit or walk in
his steps. The great salvation of Navarino was
spoken of in the next King’s speech as an “untoward
event.” England therefore had no share in the great
works that followed. France had the glory of
clearing Peloponnésos from the Egyptian troops;
Russia had the glory of bringing the Turk on. his
knees at Hadrianople. Mahmoud himself had to
yield, and by accepting the Treaty of London, to
consent to the liberation of Greece.

Such was the wise and generous policy of England
under a great Minister; such was the way in which
she fell back under smallér men. Such was the way.
in which, fifty years back, three great European
powers could join together.to do rightéousness.
The pride of the Turk was utterly humbled; his
power was utterly broken. A large part of his:
dominions was taken from him; that is, a large
part of mankind was set free from his tyranny,

184 REVOLTS AGAINST THE OTTOMAN POWER.

and again admitted to the rights of human beings.
Servia and Greece were now free; Greece became not
only free, but altogether independent. This last was
a special humbling: of Mahmoud’s pride. He had
insolently said that he would allow no interference
‘between him and those whom he called his subjects.
No one should interfere with his right to rob, massacre,
and do ail other things that a Sultan doés to his sub-
‘jects. He was presently driven to acknowledge the
independence of those subjects, to deal with them
as an independent power, to receive a minister from
them, and to send a minister to them. And all this
was done simply by union, determination and vigour,
‘by dealing with the Turk, not after any sentimental
fashion, but as reason and experience teach us is the
only way to deal with him. Mahmoud bragged as
loud as any Turk can brag wow; but his bragging
was stopped at Navarino and Hadrianople. And we
learn another lesson from this history. As long as
Mahmoud thought that he could have bis own way, he
massacred whom he would, Christian and Mussulman.
After Navaring and Hadrianople he left off massacring.
To bring the Turk to reason only. needs a will: the
way is perfectly plain. Canning not only knew the
way, but had the will. Any other Minister who has
Canning’s will can easily find Canning’s way.

Greece now became an independent state; but it
took some time for the powers exactly to settle its
boundaries and its form of government. Several
boundaries wére traced out, one after another, and
at one time it was actually proposed to leave
all the western part of the present kingdom, Aitolia -
and Akarnania, to the Turk. As it was, somewhat

WISDOM OF CANNING, 185

more than this was set free; but still a large part
of the Greek nation was left in bondage, includ-
ing some of the parts which had done and suf-
fered most in the War of Independence. Epeiros,
Thessaly, and ChaJkidiké, Crete and Chios, and
Psara, the birthplace of Kanarés, were all left to’
the barbarians. It is hard to give any reason why, if
one part of the nation was to be freed, another part
was to be left in bondage. And now that the Turk
was utterly cowed and weakened, it would have been
as easy to wrest a large territory from him as a small,
‘one. The truth is that the powers. were beginning to
be afraid of their own work. Nowhere in Europe
was there any man in power with a wise and generous
heart like Canning. The crushing of a despot and
the setting up of a free people was something which
seemed new and. strange. {t was something which
the powers of those days, as they could not wholly
back out of what they had already done, seemed
anxious to do as feebly and imperfectly as they could.
Mere diplomacy seems never to understand either
the facts. of the past. or the needs of the present. For
mere diplomacy always thinks that it can settle
every thing by mere words and by signing papers; it
leaves the thoughts and wishes and feelings of nations
‘out of sight." The diplomatists wished to cripple
Greece, and they did cripple it. In so doing, they
did a great wrong to that part of the Greek nation
which they left in bondage, and they hindered that
part of Greece which was set. free from flourishing
as it otherwise might have done. All history shows
that, when a people has been set free, its impulse is
‘ to extend itself and to enlarge its borders, either by
arms or by persuasion. Greece was shut up in a

186 REVOLTS AGAINST THE OTTOMAN POWER.

narrow boundary, and was strictly forbidden to
extend itself The policy of the powers with regard
to Greece was as much as if, when the Swiss Con-
federation began, the powers of Europe had said that
Uri, Schwyz, and Unterwalden might remain united,
and might even admit Luzern, but that they might
on no account: admit Bern or Ziirich. Happily in
the fourteenth century there was no diplomacy, and
nations were allowed to grow; in the ninéteenth
century there was diplomacy, and nations were not
allowed to grow.

The folly of the narrow boundary given to the new
state was soon shown in a marked way. Greece had
as yet no settled form of government, and things
were in a most confused and disorderly state. Servia ”
had been more lucky; for her struggle had given her
a prince of her own, who, though he dig some’ evil
deeds, was a man of energy and knew fow to rile.
But Count Capo d’Istria, who was nowfat the head
of affairs’ in Greece, though a betfer man _ than
Milosh, was less: able to rule over/‘a newly feed
people. The great ‘powers now settled that Greece
- should have a king, anda king of some fo eign
reigning family. Prince Leopold, afterwards King of
the Belgians, accepted the crown; but he presently
resigned it, because he saw that ‘no Greek state could
flourish which was pent up in such a narrow frontier.
‘Above all, he saw no good in a Greek kingdom which
did not take in Crete. But no; Crete was on no.
account to be free, and Greece thus lost the services
of a prince who, as his reign in Belgium showed,
was the wisest prince of his time. Capo dIstria was
murdered in 1831, and the confusions in Gréece got
worse. At last in 1833 the powers sent a young

THE GREEK KINGDOM. 187

Bavarian prince, Otho by name, as king, with a
Bavarian regency. The regents did: not know how to.
manage matters, and by their centralizing schemes
‘they rooted out such traces of the old institutions of
the country,as had lived through years of Turkish
bondage. Otho reigned as an absolute sovereign till
1843, when the kingdom became constitutional. In
1862 Otho was deposed, and was presently succeeded
by another young foreign prince, George of Denmark.
In 1864 the Ionian Islands, hitherto a nominal
commonwealth under the protectorate of England,
became part of the Greek kingdom. -

It is the fashion to say that the experiment of
Greek freedom has failed, and that its failure proves
something against setting free other lands which are
under the Turk. In a certain sense, it is true that
free Greece has failed. That is, it- has failed to
answer the extravagant hopes which were formed by
some Greeks and some friends of Greece when the:
War of Independence began. Some people thought
that Greece was to be again all that Greece had been
in days when Greece was in truth the whole of the
civilized world. The history of the world never goes _
back in that kind of way. It is also perfectly true,
that the kingdom of Greece has not flourished so much —
as even.more reasonable people hoped. Still Greece
has gained greatly, and has advanced greatly,.since
she was set free. She is again a nation. She is free
from the brutal and bloody yoke. of the Turk. She
_ is under civilized instead of barbarian rule. And her

difficulties have been great, difficulties which were
partly inherent in the case, partly the fault of the
~ European powers. Greece might have succeeded
better, if she had had no memories of days of past

188 REVOLTS AGAINST THE OTTOMAN POWER.

greatness, and if she had been less in sight of modern
European. civilization. She might then have grown
steadily and healthily from the point which she had
already reached. As it is, she has, in the very nature
of the case, had unsuitable models set before her.
‘Then again, in those parts of the world, those states
seem. to succeed best which are most left to them-
selves. Servia has succeeded better than Greece,
because Servia has been less meddled’ with than
Greece; Montenegro has succeeded better than
Servia, because Montenegro has not been meddled
with at all. But a great part of the failure of Greece,
so far as Greece has failed, has been the fault of the
European powers. She has been half cockered, half
snubbed, neither of which are healthy ways of treating
a young nation. The powers gave her an absurd
frontier, and sent a prince instead of a man to rule
her. If we look below the surface of modern affairs
in Greece, we shall see that whatever is good in the
state of -Greece has been the work of the Greek
people themselves, that whatever is bad is the work
of foreigners, or of Greeks who have aped the ways
of foreigners. Greece has done much and has gained
much. At all events, no Greek could wish to exchange
the present place of his country for the place of any
province of the Turk. Ifthe promising child has done
less as a grown man than might have been hoped, it
is largely because foolish nurses insisted on keeping
him in swaddling clothes throughout the days of his
youth. , ;

After the final establishment of the Greek kingdom
came atime of more than twenty years, an. epoch in
which men’s minds. changed in.a wonderful way with

TURKISH REFORMS. 189

regard to South-eastern Europe. Sultan Mahmoud,
who had shewn himself one of the bloodiest tyrants in
- history, set up in his later days for a reformer. The
tman- who had the blood of Chios on his hands
put forth beautiful proclamations, as his successors
‘have done since, promising all kinds of good govern-
ment to his subjects of all religions. This kind of
talk has taken many peéople.in; but no Turkish
reform has been ever carried out; no Turkish reform
was ever meant to be carried out. The object is
always simply to throw dust ‘in the eyes of Europe.
For the Turk is cunniig-ana-he-Kowe that he can
always deceive some people, especially diplomatists
and others who look to names instead of things. The
only real reform that Mahmoud or any of his
successors ever made is doubtless a reform from the
point of view of the Turk, but it is no reform
from the point of view of the nations which the Turk
holds in ‘bondage. That is, Mahmoud and his
successors, while they have broken all.their promises
of good government to the subject ‘nations, have
improved and strengthened their army in order the
better to keep the subject nations in bondage. And
in this work officers of several European nations, to
their everlasting shame, have not blushed to help
them. Gh.
Then again, besides this foolish belief in Turkish
reforms, a foolish fear of Russia grew up in men’s
minds during this time. No doubt it is wise for any
power to be on its guard against any other power ; but
it is not wise to treat any power with unworthy
‘suspicion, and to try to thwart the objects of that
‘power, simply because they are the objects of that
power. Gradually a strange notion has sprung up,

190 REVOLTS AGAINST THE OTTOMAN POWER.

that, because Russia was thought to be dangerous,
therefore Russia is to be thwarted in every way, and
the Turk is to be patched and bolstered up in every
way. For fear lest Russia should get too much
power, Englishmen became ready to support ‘the
Turk, and to give him greater power of oppression.
Nothing could.be. more foolish. If we are afraid of
Russia’ taking the South-eastern lands or gaining
an exclusive influence in those lands, the true way
to hinder it is for ourselves to gain influence in those
’ lands, by showing ourselves the friends of the subject
nations and helping them in every way to throw
off the yoke.. In all their struggles, in the Greek
War of Independence and in every other, the hearts
of the subject nations turned first to England. They
turned to England, because they wished to be free,
and they held that England, as a free country,
would help them better than any other. For one
moment under Casining, England acted a wise, a
righteous, and a generous part. She made herself the
_ protector of the oppressed, and the oppressed gave
her their love and thankfulness. Since then we have
. gone back. We have thrust away the nations which
asked our protection ; we have done all that we could
to prop up the wicked power of their oppressors. In
our foolish fear of Russia, we have done all that
Russia could most wish us to do.: We have taught
the subject nations, whose impulse was to look to
England for help, to look to Russia for. help
instead. -And when we have done all this, we
turn round and blame, sometimes Russia, sometimes
the subject nations, for a state of things which is
simply the result of our own foolish fears.

In the latter days of Mahmoud, while his pretended

MAHOMET ALI. Igi

reforms did little good to the Christians, they set his
Mahometan subjects against him. There weré Maho-
metan revolts in Bosnia, Albania, and other parts, and.
Mahomet Ali of Egypt, the same who had helped
‘Mahmoud against the Greeks, began to found a
dominion of his own. He founded a dominion at the
expense of the Ottoman Turks, just as the first
Ottomans had founded a dominion at the expense of
the Seljuk Turks. He held Egypt and Crete, and
presently conquered Syria. As usual, the rule of the
new despot was not so bad as that of the old one.
Mahomet was a tyrant of that kind which will not
endure smaller tyrants;.so, like Ali of Joannina, he
established, if “not really good government, at least
something of stern order in his dominions. It was
clearly the natural course of things for the new power
to grow at the expense of the old; and it was clearly
the policy of the European powers to let the two bar-
barians struggle against one another, and only to keep
them from doing any further wrong to any Christian
people. But by this time men had begun to think
that “English interests” called for the support of the
Turk.’ So the power of England was uséd to take
Syria from Mahomet, and to give it back to the
Turk. That meant to take both Mahometans and
Christians in Syria from a rule which was com-
paratively good, and to put them under the worst .
rule of all. Since then the Turk has had his way in
Syria; he has done his Damascus massacres and the
like. Happily for once England did interfere to get
a better government for Lebanon. Here again what
was gained was gained by energy, by acts and not
by words. It’ marks the difference between Lord
Dufferin’s interference and later cases of interference,

192 REVOLTS AGAINST THE OTTOMAN POWER.

that, instead of idle talk and compliments, a,
Turkish Pasha was hanged, and a large measure of
freedom was given to his Christian victims.

These Asiatic affairs: concern our subject only
indirectly, nor have J teld them at all at length. Nor
need we here to’ go at length through the provisions
of the several treaties which were made between the
liberation of Greece and Servia and the beginning of
the Crimean war.®) Nor yet is it needful to go
through the history of that war. But it must be remem-
bered'that the disputes which led to that war arose,
not with Russia, but with Louis-Napoleon Buonaparte.
It was Buonaparte’s evident policy to pick quarrels
in succession with the great military powers of the

continent, and each time to give his doings a
respectable look, by getting some free nation to help
him. ‘He began with Russia, and altogether deceived
England into a war with Russia, though Russia had
done England no harm. He next attacked Austria,
under pretence of helping Italy. But Italy was not
deceived as England was; she was able to make use
of Buonaparte against her enemy, and then to estab-
lish her own freedom in defiance of Buonaparte
himself. Lastly, he attacked Prussia, expecting that
he would deceive South Germany ;- but South
Germany, as all the world knows, would not listen
to him, and this third time he and his power were
got- rid of altogether. But the first time England
was the dupe of his.schemes, and plunged into a war
with Russia on behalf of the Turk. Buonaparte be-
gan by getting up a quarrel about the Holy Places
at Jerusalem on behalf of the Latins against the
Orthodox, , Then .the Emperor Nicolas of Russia

THE TURK THE ALLY OF ENGLAND. 193

demanded a fuller acknowledgement of his rights as
protector of the Orthodox, and he, on the Turk’s
refusal, occupied the Principalities. The Turk then
declared war and was, after a while, helped by France
and England, and, later again, by Sardinia. Few
Englishmen perhaps now remember the noble appeals
of the Russian Emperer to his subjects when he was
thus attacked by two Christian powers who drew the
sword to hinder the nations of South-eastern Europe
from having the protection of a sovereign of their _
own faith against their oppressor. (*) The English
declaration of war spoke of “coming forwards in
the defence of an ally whose territory is ‘invaded,
and whose dignity and independence are assailed.”
It went on to speak of an ally, “the integrity and
independence of whose empire had been recognized
as essential to the peace of Europe.” It even spoke '
of “the sympathies of the English people with right _
against wrong:” The Turk then, whose power England
had helped to crush in 1827, had in 1854 become
the ally of England. To be the ally of the Turk
could only mean to become the enemy of the Turk’s
enemies, that is, the enemy, not only of Russia, but of
the nations which the Turk holds in bondage. It was
declared that the “ independence and integrity of the
Ottoman Empire”—that is, the continuance of the
bondage of those nations—was essential to the peace
of Europe. It was declared that right was on the side
of the barbarian power which existed only by tramp-
ling every f form of cee under foot. We went to war to

194 REYOLTS” LOANS THE OTTOMAN POWER.

othegianenan et: S"independence,” at any rate,
could mean ing but the uncontrolled power of
doing evil at his own will.

' In all these dealings with the Turk, it is most
important to remember that the ordinary phrases
of law and politics do not apply. . There is no
question of international right in any matter that
touches the Turk; for the existence of the Turkish
power is itself a breach of all international right,
He exists only by the denial of all national rights
to the nations which he keeps in bondage. The '
Russian Emperor was not interfering between a
lawful government and its subjects; for the rule of
the Turk is not a government, but a mere system of
‘brigandage; and those whom the Turk calls his
subjects are not his subjects but his victims. And
if there was danger to Europe from Russia gaining
an exclusive influence over the South-eastern nations,
England had no one but herself to blame for that.
It was the policy of England which had driven those
nations to seek for a protector in Russia, when they
would much rather have found .a protector in
England. In such a cause as this, in the cause of the
independence of the Turk, that is, on behalf of his
right to hold Christian nations in bondage, three Chris-
tian powers made war upon Russia. The armies of
England, France, and Sardinia’ appeared as allies of
the armies of the Turk. Free Greece was held down
by force, lest she should give what help she could
against the common enemy.~ And, as if to throw

BTTOMAN POWER.

was solemnly ad-
Buropean and Christian
to. the advantages of
concert was in effect to
eastern nations were shut out
‘that law and that concert.
, and the power which de-
ons from the rights of nations, could

m at the same time.
spirit the powers further engaged to
> “independence and territorial integrity of .
) toman “Empire” and they guaranteed the Strict
rvation of this engagement. It is worth while to
nd see what these words mean. To guarantee
territorial integrity of the Ottoman Empire could
"only mean that the powers would hinder any part of
the lands which were under the yoke of the Turk
from being set free from his yoke, whether by be-
coming independent states or by annexation to any
other power. It meant, for instance, that Thessaly,
Epeiros, and Crete might not be joined to Greece.
It meant that Bosnia, Herzegovina, or Bulgaria might
not become independent states as Greece had become.
It meant that no part of these lands might be added to
Montenegro, or even put under the power of Austria.
It was declared to be a matter of European interest
that the Turk should keep what he had got. And
it was further declared to be matter of European
interest that the Turk should be allowed to treat all
that he had got as he thought good. For the powers
guaranteed the independence of the Ottoman Empire,
which could only mean the right of the Sultan to do,
what he pleased; that is of course, to commit any
oppression that he pleased. And this was made

THE TREATY OF PARIS. | 197

clearer still by the ninth clause. Sultan Abd-ul-Medjid
had at the time of the treaty just put forth one of the
usual papers of lying promises, talking about his con-
cern for all'his subjects, and promising to do this and
that without distinction of race or religion. Reason
. and experience should by this time have. taught .men.

that all promises of the kind were good for nothing.
’ But this empty talk of the Turk was treated by the
powers as if it had been something serious. The tréaty
speaks respectfully of the “firman which had. spon-
taneously emanated from the sovereign will of the
Sultan.” The powers go on to say—one might
almost think that it was in irony—that they “accept:
the value of this communication ;” and they-go on
to disclaim any right “collectively or separately” to +
interfere with “the relations between the Sultan and
his subjects, or in the internal administration of his
empire.” That is to say, if words have any meaning,
the powers pledged themselves to let the Turk do ~
‘what he would with the nations under his yoke, and
promised that they would do nothing to help them. °
The “relations between the Sultan and his subjects”
could only mean the usual relations between the op-
pressor and the oppressed, between the murderer and —
the murdered, between the robber and the robbed,
between the doer of every kind of outrage and the
sufferer of every kind of outrage. “Those relations had
_ been for ages, as the powers must have known, the re-
lations between the Sultan and those whom he called
his subjects. There was no guaranty, only the word
of a Turk, to make any one think that things were’
likely to change. Asa matter of fact, they have not
changed ; things have gone on since Abd-ul-Medjid’s
paper of false promises exactly as they went on before,

198 REVOLTS AGAINST THE OTTOMAN POWER.

or, if anything, they have been worse still. The rela-
tions between the Sultan and his subjects, that is the
relations between the tyrant and his victims, have gone
on just as they went on before ; or, if anything, they
have become worse still. And with those relations the
Christian powers pledged themselves not to interfere.
There is of course no need to believe that the
European powers deliberately meant to do all this.
‘They may have really put faith in the false promises
of the Turk. To be sure the Turk ‘had ‘even then
broken his word so often that no wise man ought to
have trusted him; still he had not then broken his
word so often as he has now. Or they may have
been simply led away by the misuse of names and
phrases. They may really not have fully taken in
what the “independence and integrity of the Ottoman
Empire” meant. They may not have seen how dif-
ferent a meaning is conveyed by the words “ relations
between the Sultan and his subjects” from the mean-
ing which those words bear when they are applied to
any European sovereign. They might not have taken
in the great distinction that, though the relations be-
tween any European sovereign and his subjects or part
of his subjects may happen to be bad and oppressive,
still the evil is incidental and may be reformed, but
that with regard to the Sultan and his subjects the
relation is essentially evil in itself and never can be
reformed. Diplomatists are so much governed by
words and names, they are so used to think so much of
sovereigns and courts, or at most of governments and
states, and so little of nations, that they may really
not have understood what it was to which they
were pledging themselves. But, whatever they meant
to pledge themselves to, what’ they did pledge

THE TURK’S FALSE PROMISES. 199

themselves to was this, that the Turk might do what
he would with the nations of South-eastern Europe,
and that the Christian powers would do nothing to
hinder him.

The paper of false promises which was now put
forth by Abd-ul-Medjid_ was not the first paper of the
kind, neither was it the last. Sultan after Sultan has
put forth paper after paper of the same kind. These
papers have been full of promises which, if they had
been carried out, would have made as good a system
of government as a despotic government -can ‘be.
Only they’ never. have been ‘carried: out ; they have
never been meant to be carried out; they never can
be carried out. The object of the Turk in making
these promises is to go on working his wicked will
on the subject nations, and at the same time to deceive
the European powers who ought to step in and deliver
them. The Turk promises anything, but he does
nothing. His tyranny gets worse and worse, because
it has become the tyranny, not so much of the Sultans
themselves as of a gang of men about them. ‘We have -
seen that in the time of the great Sultans the oppres-
sion of the subject people was not so great as it
became afterwards. And when, in later times, the
Pashas of the several provinces became hereditary
and nearly independent, a Pasha would sometimes
take a certain care and feel a certain pride in the
well-being of his province, and would therefore not
push oppression to the uttermost. It -has been in
the days of pretended reform that the last stage of
oppression has been reached. Every chance, every
hope, has passed away from the oppressed people since
all power has come in our own day into the hands

200 REVeLTS AGAINST THE OTTOMAN POWER.

of a éortapt Ring—as the Americans call it—at_Con-
stantinople. These men have carried centralization
to its extreme point, and with centralization, corrup-
tion, oppression, evil of every kind, have reached their
height. A gang of men who in any other land would
find their way to the gaol or the gallows rule the
Ottoman Empire. It is worth while to see who these
men are. A: man who inherits power from his fore-
fathers, if he has the faults, will also commonly have
some of the virtues, of high birth ; he will understand
the feelings which are expressed in the phrase
“ noblesse oblige.””. A man who has risen from a low
estate to a great, one by his own merits is the noblest
sight on earth. But the men who form the Ring
at Constantinople belong-to neither of these classes.
The man who has risen from a low estate to a great
_ one by vile means, the man who has bought his
place by bribes, the slave who has risen by craft
and cringing, the wretch who has risen. by that viler
‘ path which Christian tongues are forbidden to speak
of, but which is the Turk’s surest path to power,
in such men as these the lowest and basest form of
human nature is reached. And such men as these
‘rule at pleasure over South-eastern Europe.. Barba-
rians at heart, false, cruel, foul, as any of the old
Turks, but without any of the higher qualities of the
old Turks, these men have picked up just enough of
the outward show of civilization to deceive those who
do not look below the surface. They meet the
Ministers of civilized powers on equal. terms; they
wear European clothes; they talk an European
tongue, and are spoken of as “ Excellency” and
“ Highness.” The wretched beings called Sultans are
thrust aside as may‘be thought good at the moment;

THE RULE OF THE RING. 201

but the relations between the Sultan and his subjects,
the relations with which at the treaty of Paris the
Christian powers bound themselves not to interfere,
go on everywhere in full force. There is no barbarian
so dangerous as the barbarian who is cunning enough
to pass himself off for a civilized man.

Under such a rule as this it naturally follows
that sheer falsehood governs everything. Lying
promises have. been made over and over again,
whenever it has been wished to make a fair show
in the eyes of Europeans. But of course no promise.
is ever kept. The Turk professes to abolish slavery ;
but slavery and the slave-trade go on. In truth the
peculiar institutions of Turkish society could not go
on without them. The Turk promises that Christians
shall be allowed freely to own and buy land. But
when the Christian buys land, his Mussulman neigh-
bour comes and takes thé fruits, or perhaps turns him
out of the land altogether. The Turk promises that
Christians shall have seats in local councils. That is
to say, in a’ district where the Christians are a great
majority, one or two Christians are admitted to the
local council, simply to make a show.. They are
afraid to oppose their Mussulman colleagues, and
their Mussulman colleagues are able to say that the
Christian members have consented to the acts of
the council. ‘The Turk promises that men of all
religions shall be equal before the law. ‘But it is
certain that in most parts of the Turkish dominions
no redress can be had for any wrong done by a
Mussulman to a Christian, except by bribing both
judge and witnesses. Christians are put to death’
without trial simply for resisting Mussulmans.in com-
mitting the. foulest outrages. In short no Christian

202 REVOLTS AGAINST THE OTTOMAN POWER.

under the Turkish rule can feel that his life, his
property, the honour of his wife and children, are safe
for a moment. The land is rujned by heavy taxes,
wrung from the people by every kind of cruelty, in’
order to keep up the luxuries and wickedness of their
tyrants. Such, under the rule of the Ring, are the
ordinary relations between the Sultan and his sub-
jects. To keep on those relations untouched is one
of those “sovereign rights” of the Sultan about which
diplomatists. are very tender. To meddle with his
exercise of those rights—that is with the way in which
the Ring exercises them for him—would be to touch
his honour, his dignity, his susceptibility; it would
be to interfere with the independence of the Ottoman
Empire. To lessen the area within which those rights
are exercised would be to interfere with its integrity.
And the independence and integrity of the Ottoman -
Empire are, we all know, sacred things. They, and
all that they imply, all that comes of them, are in
some mysterious way essential to the welfare of
Europe. They are cheaply’ purchased, we are bound
to believe, by the desolation of wide and fertile
kingdoms, and by the life-long wretchedness of their.
people.
One thing is always specially to be borne in mind,
that oppression and wrong of every kind are not
merely the occasional, but the constant, state of
things under the rule of the Turk. We are apt to
think of some sudden and special outburst, like the
doings of the Turk in Bulgaria last year, as if: it
stood by itself. In truth those doings in no way
stand by themselves. The kind of deeds which were
done then, and at which all mankind shuddered, were
nothing new, nothing rare, nothing strange. They

“ ATROCITIES” NOTHING STRANGE. 203

were the ordinary relations between the Sultan and
his subjects, the ordinary exercise of his sovereign
rights. They were the necessary and immediate
results of the independence and integrity of the
. Ottoman Empire. Deeds of the same kind which
were-done then are always doing wherever the Turk
has power. The only difference between the “ Bulga-
tian atrocities” and the ordinary state of things under
the Turk is that certain deeds which are always being
done now and then were done, in much greater num-
bers than usual, in particular places at a particular
time. “Atrocities” were going on before ; they have
been going on since; the only difference is that in
those particular places, at that particular time, they
were thicker on the ground than usual. It is the same
' kind’ of difference as if a police magistrate, who is
used to deal every day with some half-dozen chargés |
of drunkenness, should some day find that he had to’
deal with hundreds or thousands of charges, In both
cases, there is nothing new or strange in the thing
itself ; only there is more of it than usual, This is a
plain truth which must never pass out of mind. The
ordinary state of things under Turkish rule, those
relations between the Sultan and his subjects with
which the powers of Europe pledged themselves not
to meddle, are simply a lasting state. of “ Bulgarian
atrocities.” .Only it is not often that so many are
done at one time or in one place, as were done ih
particular times and places last year.

There is- something very strange in the way in
which the European powers, and England to our
shame more than any other, have lent themselves to
prop up this wicked dominion of the Turk. Wehave
done for the Turk things that we do not’ do for any

204: REVOLTS AGAINST THE OTTOMAN POWER.

other power. We have treated him as if we had
some special call to prop up his dominion, as if it
was some special business of ours to persuade our-
selves and to persuade others that bitter was sweet
and that evil was good. Every thing that one power
could do for another has been done for the Turk,
‘ although everything that is done for the Turk is done
against the enslaved nations. It has been thought a
great point to give the Turk every help-in providing
himself with a strong army and navy. The strong
army and navy are of course among the means
by which he holds the subject nations in bondage.
Officers of Christian nations, Englishmen among them,
have not been ashamed to take service under the
barbarian and to help in his work of oppression.
Christian governments have not been ashamed to
lend officers to discipline the armies by which the
oppressor holds down his victims. Christian men have
not been ashamed. to lend their money to the Turk,
and Christian governments have not been ashamed to
encourage them in lending it, well knowing that the
" money would be spent on the follies and cruelty of a‘
barbarian court, and knowing that the interest on the
money could be paid only by practising-every form
of oppression on the people of the subject nations. ,
The subject nations themselves look meanwhile with
‘somewhat different eyes on the sovereign rights of -
the Suitan and on the independence and integrity of
. the Ottoman Empire. To them those rights, that
independence and integrity, simply mean subjection
to strangers in their own land, subjection which in-
volves every kind of wrong that one human being
can do to another. In their eyes the Sultan who
calls himself their sovereign ‘is not their sovereign,

THE TURK UPHELD BY CHRISTIANS. 205

nor do they hold that he has any rights over them. .
By them the foreign tyrant at whose bidding they aré
daily robbed, murdered, and-dishonoured, is known,
not as their sovereign, but as “the Blood-sucker.”
And to throw off the yoke of the Blood-sucker, they ,
deem it their duty to strive in every way, and to
strive with arms. in their hands whenever they have

the chance.

We have seen that by the treaty of 1856 the Turk
promised to do this and,that which he never did, and
that the European powers declared that they had no-
right to interfere between him and those whom he
called his subjects. Since that day the énslaved
nations have had no. hope but in their own swords.
Servia and Greece had more or less of help from the
European powers ; but in the later revolts against the
Turk the Christians have never had any help from
the European powers, and in most cases the influence
of the European powers has been used see them
and in favour of their masters.

Since 1856 there have been several fevalts of the ©
subject nations, and several wars have been waged by -
the Turks against the independent state of Monte-

negro, When the treaty of Paris was made, when

there was so much care to guarantee the independénce
and integrity of the Turk, no one thought of guaran-

_ teeing the independence and integrity of Montenegro

against the Turk. By thé terms of the treaty it was
lawful for the Turk to enslave any part of Monte-
negro; it was not lawful for Montenegro to set free
any part of Turkey. But in all struggles the free
people of the Black Mountain have always helped
their enslaved brethren, and their enslaved brethren

206 REVOLTS AGAINST THE OTTOMAN POWER.

have always helped them. And both have always
been helped by the brave men of the Bocche at
Cattaro, who themselves not so long back revolted
against their Austrian rulers. But, though late events
have led us to think more of the Slavonic nations
than of the Greeks, we must remember that the Greeks
have suffered equally, and that they have more than
once revolted’ as well as the Slaves. And, when they
have revolted, they have of course been helped by
their free countrymen in the kingdom of Greece, just
as the Slaves ‘have been helped by their brethren in
Montenegro and Dalmatia. To people who go wholly
by words and names, it seems something strange and
wicked that these free Greeks and Slaves should help
their oppressed kinsfolk. They talk about “ foreign
aggression,” “foreign intrigues,” “secret societies,” and
every other kind of nonsense, sometimes of falsehood.
Yet these men who help the oppressed are simply doing
what brave and generous men would do and have
done in every time and place. They are simply doing
what every Englishman would do in the like case. If
we could fancy a state of things in which one English
county was free and the next county in Turkish
bondage, it is quite certain that the men of the free
county would help their enslaved neighbours when
they revolted. It is quite certain that they would
plan schemes of revolt. with them, and would point
out to them fitting times and places for revolt. Todo
this, which is simply what every good man would do.
‘everywhere, is, when it is done by Greeks or Slaves,
called “foreign intrigue,” “foreign agitation,” and the
like. So, if we could conceive Yorkshire being free and
Lancashire being in bondage, and if the men of York-
shire did anything to help the men of Lancashire, they

“FOREIGN INTRIGUERS.” 207

ought to be called “foreign intriguers” too. For there
is no greater difference between the men of Monte-
negro' and the me, of Herzegovina, between the
men of Aitolia and the men of Thessaly, than there
is betwéen the men of Yorkshire and the men of
Lancashire.. No reason can be given why one part of
either nation should be free and the other part in
bondage. At least, if there is any reason, it is a
reason that can be seen only by diplomatists or by
sentimental lovers of Turks. The reason is not seen
by those who are most concerned in the matter, and
it never will-be seen by them.

Of the Greek revolts one was actually going on in
Epeiros at the time of the Crimean war. It was of
course thought very wrong both for the men of Epeiros
to try and set themselves free, and for the men of free
Greece to try and help them. They were said to be
stirred up by Russia and the like. If they were
stirred up by: Russia, it is not easy to see what there
was to blame either on their part or on the part of
" Russia. But another Greek revolt, ten years after the
treaty of Paris, is of more importance, The wisdom
of King Leopold, when he said that Crete ought to be
joined to the Greek kingdom, and the folly of those
who would not-let it be joined, were now proved
indeed.» In 1866 the people of Crete rose against
their tyrants, and. they kept up a gallant struggle
till 1868.(7) In this war the way in which the en-
slaved people were treated by the western powers,
and especially by England, comes out very strongly.
In many parts of the Turkish dominions English
constls:seem to be sent there only to cook reports
in favour of the Turk; but in Crete the English

208 REVOLTS AGAINST THE OTTOMAN POWER.

consul, Mr. Dickson, was a humane man, who did
all that he’ could to savé women, children, and- other
helpless people from the cruelty of the Turks. Some of
- these poor people were carried off in safety to Greece
‘in ships of several European nations, amongst others
in the English ship Assurance under the command
. of Captain Pym. But the English Foreign Secretary,.
Lord Stanley, now Earl of Derby, forbad that any such
- act of humanity should bé done again. It does not
appear that the governments of any other European
nation acted in the same way. England alone, or
rather the minister of England—for few Englishmen
- knew much about it—must bear the shame of having
‘in cold blood forbidden that old men and women and
' children and helpless persons of all kinds should be
saved from the jaws of the barbarians. The thing
is beyond doubt; it is written in a Blue Book; no.
man can deny the fact; no good man can justify
it. No blacker page in the history of England, no
blacker page in the history of human nature, can be
found than the deed of the man who, for fear of being ,
misconstrued in this way or that--for that seems to
have been the real motive—could write letters for-
bidding any further help to be given to those who
‘were simply seeking to save their lives from: their
destroyers. (®) No doubt what was going on in Crete
was the ordinary relation between the Sultan and his
subjects; no doubt the powers had pledged them-
selves not to interfere between the Sultan and his
subjects ; still it is hard to believe that the treaty of
Paris itself meant that no help should be given in
such a case as this. But if it did, then the morality
which can talk of the faith of treaties in such a case
is the morality of Herod. If any one holds that Lord

THE CRETAN WAR. 209

Derby. did right in deliberately orderjng that the
Cretan. refugees should not be saved from their
murderers, because of the treaty of Paris, he need only
go one step further to hold that. Herod did right’ in
ordering John the Baptist to be beheaded, because
his oath had bound him to do so. The faith of
treaties and the sanctity of an oath are much the
same in the two.cases. No treaty, no oath, can bind
a man himself to do a crime: nor can it bind him, —
when he has the power of hindering a crime, to
allow it to be done.

Crete was in the end conquered; and, again to
the shame of England, it was largely conquered by
means of an Englishman.. This was an English naval
officer, Hobart by name, who was not ashamed to
enter into the service of the barbarian, to take his
pay, and to help him to bring Christian nations
under his' yoke. In the old days of the crusades, .
there was one Englishman, Robert the son of
Godwine, who went to the holy war, who saved the
life of King Baldwin in battle, who was at. last taken
prisoner by the Mussulmans, and who, rather than
deny his faith, was: shot to death with arrows in the
market-place of Cairo. “Somewhat later there was
another Englishman, Robert of Saint Alban’s, a knight .
of the Temple, who betrayed his order, his country,
and his faith, who took service under Saladin, and —
mocked the last agonies of the Christians when
Jerusalem was taken. We have had such men as
both of these in our own day. The glory of Robert |
son of. Godwine has its like in the glory of Hast-
ings. The. shame of Robert of Saint Alban’s has
its like in the shame of Hobart. Of all the deeds
done in naval warfare surely the most glorious was

P

210 REVOLTS AGAINST THE OTTOMAN POWER.

when Hastings went forth in his Karteria to free
‘Greece from the barbarian. The basest: was surely
‘when Hobart ‘abused. English naval. skill to bring
back Greeks under the Turkish yoke. Crete was
conquered; the Turk again, after his manner, made
‘false promises, and set up a sham constitution. Under
this constitution the island has of course been as
much oppressed as ever, and it is now as ready as
ever to’ seek deliverance from the yoke and union
with its free brethren. So it always has been; so it
always will be; men who feel. the yoke on’ their
own necks will always strive to cast it off. Men who
see their brethren under the yoke will always come to
help them. to shake off the yoke. And they will do
this, even though diplomatists tell them that, for some
teason which they at least cannot see, the yoke must
still be pressed upon them.

Among the other. nations which are subject or
tributary to the Turk, the Rouman lands north of
the Danube have made great advances towards
freedom since the treaty of Paris. By that treaty
Wallachia and Moldayia were to remain distinct
principalities under the supremacy of the Turk.
The territory of Moldavia was somewhat increased
by the ‘cession of a small part of Bessarabia which
Russia had by the treaty to give up, in order to keep
her frontier ‘away from the Danube. In 1858 the
relations of these lands were more definitely settled.
The two principalities were united for some purposes ;
‘but they were still to have separate native princes.
The princes were to be chosen by the assemblies of
each principality, and to be invested by the Sultan, to
whom each principality was to pay a tribute. But

UNION OF ROUMANIA. 21t

the Rouman people were eager for a more perfect
union. In 1859 the ‘two principalities. elected the
same prince, Alexander Cusa. As the union of the
two principalities made the Rouman nation stronger,
the Turk and the friends of the Turk grumbled;
but the Turk had to acknowledge the new state of
things under protest. In 1866 Prince Alexander
was deposed, and a prince of a reigning family,
Charles of Hohenzollern-Sigmaringen, was ‘chosen.
The Turk again grumbled, and trade show of -fight-
ing; but again he had to give way. And now
Roumania, under a prince who is a kinsman of the
- German Emperor, may be looked on as practically.
independent of the Turk.

But the main interest of these later times gathers
round the Slavonic subjects of the Turk and their
free brethren in Montenegro. It will be seen at once
by the map that the principalities of Servia and
Montenegro come at one point very near to each
other. They thus leave the lands of Herzegovina,
Bosnia, and Turkish Croatia almost cut off from
the mass of the Turkish dominion. These are the
lands where oppression has been even worse than
elsewhere. It has been so above all in Bosnia, where
the Mussulmans are not Turks but descendants of
renegade Slaves. And mark further that, while the
oppression in these lands is even greater than else-
‘where, their people have more to stir up hopes of
freedom than in most other parts of the Turkish
dominion, Enslaved Bosnia naturally envies free
Servia; enslaved Herzegovina naturally envies free
Montenegro, Add to this that a great part of
these lands consists of wild mountains, where a few

. P2

212 REVOLTS AGAINST THE OTTOMAN POWER.

brave men can easily hold out against a much
greater force. In these lands therefore revolts have
been common. In Bosnia one might say that
there is always some revolt of some kind going on,
for in that land there is a treble discontent. The
Christians are discontented, alike with their imme-
diate oppressors, the Mussulmans of the country and
with the Sultans who promise reforms and do not
carry thém out. The Mussulmans,.on the other
hand, who, though oppressors of , Christians, are
themselves for the most part very lax Mussulmans,
are almost equally discontented with the Sultans,
because, under the centralizing system at Constan-
tinople, they have lost a good deal of their power..
It seems strange that the part of the whole Turkish
dominion which is in the worst bondage of all,
should be a land which is furthest. away of any in
Europe from the seat of the: Turk’s own power, a
land which borders close on a Christian kingdom, to .
which part of it was. actually joined by the peace of
Passarowitz. But though there have always been
disturbances of one kind or another in Bosnia, the
great centre of real national revolt has rather been in
Herzegovina, There men see the free heights of
Montenegro rising above them, and they ask why
they should hot be as free as their brethren. It is
no wonder then that the Turk has given his main
efforts to subdue the valiant principality. A short
sketch of its later history will therefore be, needful
in order fully to understand the relations. between
the Turks, the Montenegrins, and those neighbours of
Montenegro who are, some under Turkish and some
under Austrian rule.

.Not very long before the Crimean. war, the con-

HISTORY OF MONTENEGRO. 213

stitution of Montenegro was altogether changed.
The line of prince-bishops came to an end. . The
bishopric, with the civit and military government
attached to it, had been as nearly hereditary as a
bishopric could be That is, it. commonly passed
from uncle to nephew. In 1851 the last Vladika
or Prince-Bishop, Peter.the Second, died.) - His
nephew Daniel, who, according to rule, would have
succeeded him, felt no call to become a Bishop; so
it was agreed between him and the Senate that the
spiritual and temporal powers should be separated,
that Daniel should reign as an hereditary prince, and
that the new Metropolitan should be simply Bishop
without any temporal power. The Russian Emperor,
the.one protector of Montenegro, approved ; but the:
Turk sought a ground of quarrel out of this change in,
the constitution of a perfectly independent state, The
Prince and: people of, Montenegro had’ a clear right
to make what changes in their own government they
‘thought fit; but it must be remembered that the“
Sultans have always claimed a. supremacy over
Montenegro, which they have never been able to
establish and which the Montenegrins have never
acknowledged. In 1852 Sultan Abd-ul-Medjid sent
the Slavonic renegade Omar to try to subdue the free
Slavonic and Christian state., The pedple of Herze-
govina, as usual, helped: their free: brethren, and the
renegade was beaten in several fights. In 1853, by
the intervention of Russia and Austria, the Turk sus-
pended ‘hostilities with Montenegro ; the insurgents
of Herzegovina ‘had been already cajoled by the
usual promises to lay down their arms. ,

During the Russian war Montenegro, as a state,
took no share in the struggle. But, on the one hand,

214 REVOLTS AGAINST THE OTTOMAN POWER.

Prince Daniel found it impossible wholly to keep his
people from action against the Turk, and, on the other
hand, his efforts to remain neutral only raised up
disaffection and revolt in his own dominions. At the
Congress of Paris, the Prince strove to get the assem:
bled powers to acknowledge his independence, and to
allow an extension of the Montenegrin frontier to the
“sea. But the powers were just then too busy provid-
ing for the interests of barbarian intruders to give
.any heed to the claims of the heroic people who had
for so many ages formed the outpost of Christendom
against them, He made the same appeal the next
year, when part of the people of Herzegovina asked
for annexation to Montenegro. But all that he got
was a recommendation to acknowledge the supremacy
of the Turk, on which condition some small increase
of territory might be allowed to him. All this time
war was going on, and in 1858 the Turks were utterly
routed by the Montenegrins in the battle ‘of Grahovo.
"Two years later Daniel was murdered. His rule had
been hatsh and stern; but he had done much to
establish the reign of law and order in his principality.
The same work has been carried on more peacefully
and gently under the present Prince Nicolas, under
whom the country has made perhaps greater advances
than any other part of Europe has in the same short
time. No land is now safer for the traveller, and the
chief objects of the Prince have been peaceful objects
enough, making roads and establishing schools. The
death of Daniel raised the spirit of the Turks, and:
the spirit of the Turks shewed itself in the’ usual
fashion by increased cruelties in Herzegovina. The
land was given up to the rule of bashi-bazouks,
Again the people rose against their tyrants, .and,.

REIGNS OF DANIEL AND NICOLAS, 215

though the. Prince did what he could to remain
neutral, it was of course impossible to keep Monte-
negrin volunteers from going to help their brethren.
The Turk then again attacked the principality. The
renegade Omar was again sent to do a renegade's
work against the faith and the nation which he had
betrayed, Adorned by this time with the highest
knighthood of an English order, our Grand Cross of
the Bath went forth to do the errand of the barbarian
to whom he had sold himself. This time unluckily
he was more successful; Montenegro had tioew in
1862 to consent to an humiliating treaty. The claim
of supremacy on the part of the Turk was not brought
forward. But the Turk claimed to keep a road across
the principality with Turkish garrisons and block-
houses along it. The Turk also, with a mean spite,
demanded the banishment of Mirko, the Prince’s
father, who had been the Montenegrin commander in
‘the war, But neither of these conditions was carried
out; the demand for them was simply a piece of
Turkish brag, which did little real harm, In diplomatic
language a concession was made to the honoyr, the
dignity, the susceptibility, and all the other fine and
delicate feelings of the Sublime Porte. The treaty
was doubtless humiliating; but it was little more.
The effects of .Montenegrin victory in 1858 were’ far
more deep and lasting than the effects of Montenegrin |
ill-success in 1862, Seven years later, the Prince had
a yet more difficult part to play, when in 1869 a revolt
arose, not against the Turk, but against the Austrian.
The brave men of the Bocche rose against certain
regulations which they deemed to be breaches of their
privileges, and they stood their ground so manfully
that at last they submitted only on_very favourable

216 REVOLTS AGAINST THE OTTOMAN POWER,

terms. Fourteen years of peace aia mucn ror te
principality ; but, as was presently shewn, those
fourteen years of peace did nothing to weaken the
warlike strength of the unconquered race which had
kept its freedom for so many ages. |

And now we have at last come to the great events”
of the last two years, those events which all generous
hearts trust may be.the beginning of the -end, the

_death-blow struck to the wicked dominion of the:
Turk. The oppressed nations have risen’ over and
over again; they have been over and over again
cajoted or overcome. But this time they. rose with
the full determination never to be again cajoled, but
‘either to win their freedom or to perish, . And they
‘have kept their word. Wherever the Turk rules within
the lands which really rose against him, he rules only
over the wilderness that he has made. The people
of the land are either still holding their land in arms
against him, or else they have fled from his rage to -
.seek shelter in other lands where he cannot réach
them. The present movement has been the result of
a general stir. through a]l the South-Slavonic lands.
The minds of the Slave people throughout the
peninsula were much moved on the occasion of a
visit made by Francis Joseph of Austria to his ©
Dalmatian kingdom. It was a visit of reconciliation,
and it suggested the thought that the King of
Dalmatia, Croatia, and Slavonia—such are among the
titles of the prince who is also King of Hungary and -
Archduke of Austria—was likely to take up a policy
favourable to the Slavonic part of his subjects. -A
vigorous hand at such a moment might perhaps have
gone. far to carry out the dreams of Charles the Sixth.

REVOLT OF HERZEGOVINA. 217

A King of Slavonia who also ruled at Vienna might
have done more than the work of Bulgarian’ Samuel
or of Servian Stephen.

The revolt began in the summer. of 1875, Like
most of the great events of history, its causes and its
_immediate occasions must be distinguished. Its one.
‘abiding cause was the abiding oppression of the Turk.
Men’s minds were further stirred by the King’s visit
‘to Dalmatia, and some special outrages of the Turks
caused the flame to burst forth. The immediate occa-
sion was a specially brutal outrage of the barbarians
towards two Christian women. Then the sword of .
the Lord was drawn, as it-was drawn of old by
Gideon against the tyrant of Midian, by the Mae-
cabees against the tyrant of Syria. And from that
day to this the sword of the Lord has not been
sheathed. With the praises of.God in their mouth and
a two-edged sword in their hands, the champions of
their faith and freedom have stood forth to be avenged
_ of the heathen and to rebuke the people. On many
a bleak hill-side the men of those rugged lands have -
waxed valiant in fight and turned to flight the armies
of the aliens. Twice in the pass of Muratovizza have
the hosts of the barbarian turned and fled, smitten
down before a handful of patriots, as the Persian
turned and fled at Marathdn, as the Austrian turned
and fled at Morgarten. And the men who won those
fights are still unconquered. Neither the arms nor.
‘the promises of the Turk have overcome them. The °
Bloodsucker sent his armies against’ them, and they
cut his armies in pieces. He sent his emissaries with
lying words to beguile them, and they cast his lying
words back in his teeth.

218 REVOLTS AGAINST THE OTTOMAN POWER.

As the first immediate occasion of the war was th
visit of King Francis Joseph to Dalmatia, it seeme”
' fora while as if the Austrian policy was not ‘wholly

unfavourable to the Christian cause. That the strong.

-est sytnpathy for the revolt was felt through all th
Slavonic lands under Austrian rule might be taker
for granted. As many volunteers from Montenegr:
joined the insurgents, so did many—in some cases
the full force of whole districts—of the fighting men
from the Bocche. Under her governor, General Rodich,
Dalmatia was a good neighbour to the kindred land of
Herzegovina. The insurgents practically got every
help that they could have without what is called, in
diplomatic language a breach of neutrality—that is
without Austria openly taking the part of the patriots
against the Turks. It was only much later, when
the Magyar feeling in Hungary had shewn itself
strongly against the Slaves, that the Austrian govern: -
ment took any strong steps the other way. The
strongest step of all was the kidnapping and imprison-
ment of the insurgent leader Ljubibratich, who was:
seized in May 1876 on Herzegovinian ground, and
kept in ward till March 1877. The jealousy felt by :
the Magyars towards any thing like Slavonic inde-
pendence has been one of the most striking things
‘throughout the whole story. Their own land was
delivered from the Turk by Slavonic swords; yet
now they grudge any hope of deliverance to the
Slavonic subjects of the Turk.

I need not here go in any detail through the his-'
tory, either military or diplomatic, of the year 1876,
The leading facts are in everybody's meméry ; the
time for them to be written in detail as a matter of
past history has not yet come.(?%) I will only point

" REVOLT OF BULGARIA. 219

out some of those features of the story which have
been specially misunderstood, and which, by throwing
light on the real nature of Turkish rule, give us
practical lessons as to the course which Europe ought
to take at the present moment. The main facts of
the tale are easily told. The war had gone on for
nearly a year in Herzegovina and Bosnia, when an
attempt at a rising took place in Bulgaria also. The
Bulgarian people are a quiet, industrious, race, who
had been making advances in civilization which
seemed quite wonderful for peaple who had to bear
such a yoke as they had. There can be little doubt
that this advance of a subject nation aroused the envy
of the Turks, and that the Ring at’ Constantinople
worked with a deliberate policy to oppress and, if pos-
sible, to destroy the whole Bulgarian people. The
rst means that they took to this end was to plant
olonies of savage Circassians in Bulgaria, who were
allowed to commit any kind of outrage against their
Christian neighbours. Thus Bulgaria had its own
special grievance, The ingenuity of the Highnesses
and Excellencies at Constantinople had lighted on a
new thing ; they had found out a third scourge, worse
than the Turk himself, worse than the renegade Slave
_in Bosnia or the renegade Greek in Crete. Thus it
was no wonder that, when the Bulgarians saw the
success of their brethren to the North-west, they ©
tried to rise also, But Bulgaria is. not a land fitted
for irregular fighting, nor are its people men of war
like the Slaves of the mountain lands. Thus the
Bulgarian revolt was a feeble revolt, compared with
revolts in the other two lands. While the Turks
-could not put down the revolt in Bosnia.and Herze-
govina, they easily put it down in Bulgaria. How

220 REVOLTS AGAINST THE OTTOMAN POWER.

they put it down all the world knows. They put it
down in the usual Turkish fashion; the wild beast
simply did according to his kind; only a great part
of the world then learned for the first time what the
-kind of the wild beast really was. There can be no
‘doubt that the massacre was deliberately ordered by
‘the Ring- at. Constantinople, the Highnesses and
Excellencies of polite diplomacy. This is proved by
_the facts that they honoured and. decorated’ the chief
doers of the massacre, while that they neglected, and
sometimes punished, those Turkish officers who acted
at all ina humane way. To this day, in defiance of
all remonstrances from the European powers, the chief
doers of the massacre remain unpunished, while we
still héar of Bulgarians, sometimes: being punished,
sometimes being amnestied, for their share in the
attempt to free their country. It:is plain that the
Ring do not dare to punish men, who acted by their
own orders, for fear lest their own- share in what was
done should come to light.), Two things should be
always borne in mind, first, that the doings of last
May are still unpunished; secondly, that doings of
the same kind, though doubtless not so thick on
the ground, have been going on. ever since,

By the time that the Bulgarian massacres happened,
the patience of the two principalities of Servia and
"Montenegro was worn out. Volunteers had joined all
along, but now the strain was too great; the govern-
ments could no longer keep in the national impulse,
‘and both states declared war against the Turk. On
the part of Montenegro, it must be borne in mind that
that war has been thoroughly successful. The bar-
barians have been, as they have so often been before,

. MONTENEGRIN AND SERVIAN WAR. ° 221

utterly routed by the valiant men of the Black Moun-
tain. In negotiating with the Turk, the Prince .of
Montenegro has every right to negotiate as a conqueror
with a conquered enemy. With Servia the case has
been different. Its small force valiantly withstood the
barbarians for a long while, but, even with the help of
Russian volunteers, their strength was not, equal to
that of their enemies. The Turk was. thus able to
occupy part of Servia, andin the part which he occu-
pied he did after his wont; he did as he had done
in Bulgaria. Then came an armistice; then came
‘the European conference. At the moment when I
write Servia, has made peace, things being put much
as they were before the war. Victorious Montenegro
is still negotiating, and of course demands the fruits
of victory from the vanquished Turk. In the greater
part of Bosnia and Herzegovina the Turk rules over
a wilderness. In one corner of Bosnia the Christians
still hold their own. The barbarians have been
utterly driven out; men are already beginning to
speak of that corner of land as Free Bosnia. Mey
‘it ever remain so.(”)

Meanwhile, while both Christians and Turks alike
have been acting. in their several ways, the powers
bof Europe have been talking. A great deal of paper
,and ink, a great deal of human breath, has been
wasted on matters where paper and ink and talk
of any kind were simply useless. The note which
was drawn up in December 1875 by the Austro-
Hungarian minister Count Andrassy, and to which
the other powers, England somewhat reluctantly,
agreed, was a document, such as has not often been
presented to a power which calls itself independent.¢

222 REVOLTS AGAINST THE OTTOMAN POWER.

It set forth in very strong words, flavoured in some’
parts with. very strong sarcasm, the wickedness of
Turkish rule and the constant breach. of Turkish
promises. As a sermon preached to the Turk to
enlighten his consciénce and to bring him to better
ways, nothing could have been better. Only Europe
ought by that time to have known that it is no use
preaching sermons to the Turk, that no amount of
preaching will ever enlighten his conscience or bring
him to better ways. Five hundred years ago, when
the Turk and his doings were something new, such a
document would not have been out of place, and
either the first. or the second Amurath would have
been more likely to listen to good advice than the
corrupt Ring who now bear rule at Constantinople.
To the Andrassy note, a good sermon and no more,
England, so far as England is represented by Lord
Derby, agreed. In May a stronger paper, called the
Berlin Memorandum, was drawn up, which was some-
what more practical. It contained, among other things, ©
‘proposals that the Christians should be allowed to
be armed as well as the Mussulrnans, and that the
Turkish troops.should be concentrated: in certain —
particular places. Here was at least something de-
finite, some approach towards doing something. It
was indeed quite impossible that these proposals
could be carried out without doing a great deal
more ; still it was-a preposal to do something, as
opposed to mere talk. But, as the Berlin Memo- ,
randum was a proposal to do something, England, as
far as England is represented by Lord Derby, refused ”
to joinin it. Later in the year, when the heart of
the people of England was thoroughly stirred up,
Lord Derby himself wrote letters which also were

DIPLOMACY. P28

very good sermons for the instruction of the Turk,
but which served no practical purpose. Lastly, in
December the Conference of the six great powers
met at Constantinople. Strange to say, two Turks
were allowed to sit along with the representatives of
Europe, and one of them was allowed to be the
President of the Conference. So to do was accord-
ing to diplomatic traditions. That is to say, if the
Conference had been held in London or Paris, an
English or French minister would have had
residency. But, putting diplomatic traditions a
‘nthe eye of common sense, to allow Turks to git
uropean ministers was allowing the crimi
with his judge, and to settle the verdict ay
upon himself. Of such a Conference 4
come. The powers made certain propo
which, if they could have been ca
have been a real reform. The owes
that they never could have bee
as the Turk was allowed to
‘Turks who were admitted
ministers of course objectg
would have lessened thg
The European ministegiy

the Turks refused
nant that was le

224 REVOLTS AGAINST THE OTTOMAN POWER.

that the rule of the Turkish dominions has changed

from a corrupt despotism to a more corrupt oligarchy,

it matters very little who bears the title of Sultan.

The Sultan, heir of Othman and Caliph of the Pro-

phet as he is, is now Set aside as suits the convenience
: of the governing Ring. The decay which has fallen

upon the whole Ottoman power has specially fallen

on Othman’s own house. As no house once pro-
Pr duced so many mighty men in succession, so now no
se has fallen so low. The race of Mahomet and
eiman, the race which produced men of energy
lately as the last Selim and the last Mahmoud,
unk into a line of sots and idiots. This or that
Bidiot is set aside by the governing Ring,
ether sot or idiot is drawn out of the harem
ead as may be convenient. Abd-ul-Aziz
aside, and presently died. Those who
dward the Second of England and
Russia died of their own free will
e the same of Abd-ul-Aziz. Then
pderful things were to be done
ptly the Ring set him aside
os were to come of Abd-
-ul-Hamid has done no
Modern Sultans at least
jon. No one would
amid personally
done in their

is hardly

last few

CHANGE OF SULTANS. 225

a Turk named Midhat, who was for the moment
in power, but who has since, after the manner of
Eastern ministers, fallen from power, put forth what
he called a constitution for the Ottoman Empire.
The Sultan was no longer to be a despot, but was to
reign, like an European’ King, with a Ministry and a
Parliament, The object of the trick was plain; it
was simply to throw more dust in the eyes ‘of Europe,
just at the time of the meeting of the Conference.
The Turks who sat at the Conference were able to
say, “We are going to make greater reforms out of
our own heads than any that you bid us to make,”
Again they could say, “The Sultan is now a
constitutional King, and cannot do this and that
without consulting his Parliament.” Any plain man
could see through so transparent .a trick; yet some
people in Western Europe have been so blind as to
_argue that time-should be given to the Turk to work
his new constitution and give his new reforms a chance.
' That.is, the Turk is to be allowed so much time longer
‘to go on doing his wickedness unchecked. For, as no
Turkish promise has ever been kept, as none of the
pretended Turkish reforms have ever been made,
there is no reason. to suppose that Midhat or any
other Turk really meant any reform this time any
more than any other time. And, supposing the con-
stitution were to be carried out, it would, if it be
possible, make things worse; it could not possibly
make them better, For, first of all, the constitution
‘isa mere sham. It is a copy of the sham constitu-
tion of France under the tyranny of Louis-Napoleon
Buonaparte. It would leave all real power in the
hands of the Sultan, or rather of thie Ring, and the
Ring would be able to carry on theit oppression and
.Q

A
iP nstitutional ently And again, if the pretended -
” Parliament had any real power, nothing would ‘be
gained. It would be simply the sham of admitting
Chfistians to local councils done over again on a
" greater scale. Midhat took care that in his sham Par-
“liament the Mussulmans should greatly outnumber.
the Christians. Again, the constitution would put the
| final stroke to the system of centralization, and would
Fs “avipe out any traces that are still left of communities
) keeping any kind of separate being.

But a greater political truth than all this lies be-
hind this pretence of a Turkish constitution. Setting
aside the absurdity of putting the representatives of
civilized European nations alongside of representa- ,
tives of this or that barbarous Asiatic tribe, expe-
rience shows that a common Parliamient is not a
good form of government for several nations which
have little in common, or which, from any cause, are
strongly hostile to one another. A King who rules
despotically over several, nations will often tule them
better than if he ruled with a common Parliament for
all of them. For a well-disposed despot may deal
equal justice to all the nations under his rule, and

gay not rule in the interest of any one nation in par-
ar. But in a common Parliament of two or more
s which have no interests in common, or which
mutual dislike, that nation which has the
umbers will .outvote the others, and all
ill be done. in the interest of the domi-

is shown by several cases
jong civilized and kindred

Sinstance only, the Germans ,

le of the Danish Kings com-

aS oe me =) . =
REVOLTS AGAINST THE OTTOMAN POWER,

‘know what it means; in others the people,

of w yer creed, refuse to elect at all; in others the
- Pasha names the members himfelf, or pete names.

the “Mussulmans himself and orders the Bishop and

“the Rabbi to name the Christians and the me

And now for some comments on those events of
the last two years which we have thus so briefly |
run through. To those who had been watching these —
matters for many years, it seemed strange, and yetit
did not seem strange, that, for a long time after the |
revolt began, it was the hardest thing in the world to
get people in general to take any heed to it. People
in the West really knew very little of the real state of
things in the East. If they thought about them at
all, they had a kind of notion that the Turk had been
an ally both of England and of France, and that he
had joined with England and France to win victories
over Russia. Then too people had been brought up,
so far as they thought about the Eastern Christians
at all, in a.kind of prejudice against them. It was a
svery old prejudice, a prejudice which dated from the
mes of the old disputes between the Eastern and
tern Empires and between the Eastern and

n Churches. And this. traditional prejudice —

ked in the minds of many who have never

Mthe disputes between the Empires or the

Acain, among those who knew a little —

las a theological prejudice against the —

ih in the minds both of Catholics and

the Catholics have a feeling against

POPULAR PREJUDICES IN ENGLAND. 229

the Orthodox, becaus¢ they have never submitted to.
the Pope.. On the other hand, Protestants are often
taught to -believe th@t the Orthodox are something
worse than if they did believe inthe Pope. Then
there have been all kinds of foolish talk about the
. Turk being a “gentleman” and the like, ard about
his subjects being “degraded.” Those who talked in
this way did not stop to think who it was who had
“degraded” them; they did not stop to think that it
is very hard for men to improve so long as they are
in bondage, and that the only way to make them
improve is to set them free. Thus it came about that
most people knew and. cared very. little about the
matter, and that the prejudices of those who knew
a little about the matter went largely the wrong way.
Those who really knew what was going on, those who
had looked at these matters all their lives, knew that
a very great work had begun in South-eastern Europe.
They knew in short that one of thé great crises of
the world’s history had'come. Of course those who
could see were mocked at by those who could not see.
It has always been so since the beginning of the
world. Altogether it was very hard to make people
really know or care anything about the great events
that were going on, till the doings of the Turk in
Bulgaria opened their eyes, Those who had been
carefully watching the course. of events saw nothing
strange in those doings. But to the mass of people.
in England those doings seemed as strange as they
were horrible. Till then they had never known what
the Turk was. Now at last the Turk himself taaght
them what he was. He showed himself in his true
colours, and when the English people saw him in his
true colours, their natural feelings of right and wrong

230 REVOLTS AGAINST THE OTTOMAN POWER.

overcame all their traditionaly prejudices, and they

declared: that they would no more have anything to

do with the doers of such deeds.

' An opportunity was thus offered to the English

Government to play a great and noble part, if they

had known how to play it. Had the Government.
listened to the voice of the people, England might

have done as great a work for right as she did fifty

years before. But the English Government had no .
feeling for right, no understanding of the. great

events that were going on. And mere ‘party men,

men who thought it of more importance that this

or that man should be for a year or two minister

in England than that the wrongs-of ages should be

redressed, began to utter every kind of calumny

against those who spoke for right, to misquote their

words, to misrepresent their motives. It really seems:
that there are those who cannot understand that

men do’ sometimes act from ‘a‘feeling of right and

wrong, and that everybody is not always thinking

only about keeping this man in power or turning

that man out of power. As the English Government

refused to listen to the voice of the English people,

the partizans of that Government set themselves to

oppose the great and righteous national feeling. The

noblest emotion that ever stirréd any nation was

checked by a paltry party-spirit. The. truth is that

political party ought to have had nothing to do with

the matter. Conservatives and Liberals in England

had sinned equally, they had often joined together in.
sinning, against the oppressed nations of the East.

They might have joined together to repent, and. to

undo their misdeeds. The Liberal party repented ;

but it repented, not as a party, but as that part of

CONDUCT OF cut ENGLISH GOVERNMENT. 231

the nation which thpught right higher than party.
The Conservative y did not repent, because the
Conservative Goverment did not repent, and its
followers did not know how to repent without’ orders
from the heads of their party. . Thus, what with mere
political partizans, what with sentimental lovers of
Turks, what with people whose whole notion of
foreign politics is a foolish fear of Russia, England
, was hindered from doing as reason and the expe-
trience of the past would have led her to do. But
jreason and experience did something. The general
‘feeling of the nation made it quite impossible for any
minister, even the most reckless, to go to war with
Russia on behalf of the Turk.

There is something which seems very strange in
the utter blindness of the English Government and
their partisans to the great events which were goin
on. The very day that I am writing this, I t
up a newspaper dated in November 1875, 3
there found it said that the insurrection in
govina had been “unexpectedly prolong
the winter. In that word “unexpected
the key to’ the whole state of mind gf
and of men like Lord Derby. Th
are perfectly plain to men who
their’ reason were “ uhexpecte
one who knew the nature o
determination of the patg
tion and demoralization
perfectly well that the
could be put down,
like Lord Derby vwy
which such peop

i 232 “REVOLTS AGAINST THE O*TOMAN POWER,

any ‘of aldercat events of the world’s history. To
ine _ men of this stamp the success Qf every great move-
“ment in every age has been “une§pected.” They are
ein the same frame of mind as the Persian King
when he asked who the Athenians were, or as Leo the
“Tenth when he thought that nothing could come of

| .a-movement begun by so small a person as Martin
Luther. Just fey the same way, Lord Derby thought

| that the revolt was something which could be very |
easily suppressed, something which could be easily —
put out of the way and got rid of, so as to give no
more trouble. He pooh-poohed the insurrection, be-

| cause, like most great things, it looked little in its
‘beginning. He pooh-poohed it too, because it arose
from those great and generous feelings of men’s
hearts which some men feel so little themselves that
they do not understand that other men can feel them.
Lord Derby, Foreign Minister of England in the
Hineteenth century, pooh-poohed the movement in
Herzegovina, just as, if he had been Foreign Minister
of Rome or Persia in the seventh century, he would
ave pooh-poohed the movement of the camel-
Mm&er of Mecca and his first handful of followers.
poh-poohed it, as, if he had lived in the 'thir-
entury, he would have pooh-poohed the little

ycame to help the Seljuk Sultan against

ps, a few years later, he would have

“rash resolve of the three little

puntains to match themselves with

Duke. All these things

they might be easily

he Derbies of those

~t! at. they might easily

gut in each case the

grew into powers: yhich, for good .or for
their mark upon the history of the world.
But Lord Derby did something more tha
think that the revolt could be suppressed ;
something more than merely wish it to be supp
‘He, a civilized man, a Christian, an Englishma
} English minister, was not ashamed to write let
; urging the Turk to suppress the insurrection.(*)
_ was not ashamed to write letters by which he hope
| that the people of Dalmatia and Montenegro might
| be hindered from taking any part in the struggle.(1®)
It is worth while to stop and think, though seemingly
Lord Derby did not stop and think, what was the
meaning of his own words when he spoke of the ~
Turks suppressing the insurrection. It is to be
supposed. that Lord Derby had learned something
of the history of the century in which he lived, a
century in whose history he was himself called on
to be an actor. It ‘is to be supposed that he had ,
heard for instance of the massacre of Chios, of
the massacre of Damascus, of any other of the ©
doings of the Turks. He must surely have known
the fateto which he had condemned his own victims _
in Crete? What the Turkish suppression of an iy
surrection meant the world in general di ais
till the doings in Bulgaria becam
it is to be supposed that a Fo
business it is to know somet
condition of foreign col
every one knew whe
moment’s serious thou
suppress the insurrectio

LORD DERB

in. the legend couldfhinder
flowing up to the ffot of his

The whole corrspondence pu
Book shews. the same spirit. The
the greatness of the movement ; there
with the righteousness of the movement.
for instance-of the news being more or [8§
factory.” “Satisfactory” news, in the lang
the Blue Book, means.news by which it seems If
that the Turk will succeed in again bringing
victims jnto bondage. The triumph of evil, the
handing over of Christian nations to their oppressors,
the doing of all the deeds which the Turk does when
he gets back any piece of Christian soil into his power
this was what was called “satisfactory” in English
consulates; in English embassies, in the English Foreign
Office. When Servia was about to strike her gallant
blow for right, Sir Henry Elliot was not ashamed to
tell the Servian agent that he hoped that Servia
would be beaten. The deeds of Bulgaria had. then
been done; yet an Englishman, a representative of
England, could tell the representative of a Christian
people arming themselves for the freedom of their
brethren, that he wished that they might be beaten
by the Turk. That is, he said that he wished that
Servia might be dealt with as the Turk always deal
with beaten nations, as the Turk had just beg
dealt with Bulgaria, as he presently did deal yy
much of Servia as came within his clutchg
Lord Derby called on the Turk tog
insurrection, he said in effect, Go a
slay, rob, burn, torture,. ravish, fg
roasted child into his parenty
that you do when you sug

236 REVOLTS AGAINST THE OTAOMAN POWER.

Sir Henry Elliot wished Servia to e beaten, he wished
in effect that all these things shoud fall on Servia, or
rather that they should fall on thf whole of Servia,’
as they did fall on a part. No one believes that either
Lord Derby or Sir Henry Elliot really wished for -
‘anything of the kind. But men who had either heads
or hearts, men who were capable of understanding
and facing the great events in which they found
themselves actors, would have spoken in another
way. There are no despatches of Canning exhorting ©
Ibrahim to suppress the insurrection in Peloponnésos:

One trick of the favourers of the Turk through the _
whole business ‘has been, first to try to represent the
insusrection as something quite insignificant, and when
they found that this would not do, then, to represent
it as wholly the work of foreign intriguers, foreign
agitators, and the like. What is really meant by
foreign intriguers and foreign agitators I have already
shewn. They are foreign intriguers and foreign
agitators in’ the same sense in which Sir Philip
- Sidney was a foreign intriguer when he died at
-Zutphen for the freedom of the Netherlands. As
Englishmen then fought and died for the freedom of
a kindred land, so now many men from Montenegro
and from Russia, and from Italy too, fought and died
the same glorious death for the freedom of the op-
pressed Slavonic lands. Bit the belief which was
carefully spread abroad by the Turkish party in Eng-
land, the belief that the revolt was no real revolt, that
it was but a thing got up by men ‘from other lands, is
altogether false, It would seem as if those who
talked in this way really could not understand that»
men could ever rise and fight for their own freedom.

“ FOHPIGN INTRICUERS.”. - ‘237

That men should Jo so seemed so strange to them
that they cast abut for some other cause, and in-
vented this talk Jabout foreign intriguers. Monte-:
negrins fought i Herzegovina; Russians fought in
Servia ; and in both cases, as was- not wonderful, the
people who knew less of the art of warfare were
glad to accept commanders from the people who
knew more. But it is a great mistake, if it is not
something worse than a mistake, to say that the great
mass, or even any considerable part, of the Herze-
govinian army consisted of Montenegrins, or that the
great mass, or any considerable part, of the Servian
army consisted of Russians. In both cases the war
was strictly national; volunteers came, volunteers
were welcomed; but they were welcomed by men
who had -already. risen to, do the work for them~
selves. A moment’s thought will shew how foolish
this talk is about foreign intriguers and agitators.
Men who are under the yoke of the Turk do not
need. to be told what oppressions they are suffering
under; they do not need to be told that there is no
way of getting rid of those oppressions but by drawing
‘the sword for freedom. They know all that very’
- well, without any foreign intriguers to tell them. If
there are foreign intriguers, and if they get listened to,
that of itself is proof enough that there is something
which greatly needs redress in the land where they
do get listened to. If foreign intriguers came into
any well governed country and tried to persuade the
people to revolt, no one would listen to them. [f
foreign intriguers stir up a people to revolt, and if
that people listen to them, it is the surest of all
signs that there is something to revolt about.
‘Perhaps the most daring case of all of saying “the

238 REVOLTS AGAINST THE OTQOMAN POWER. |

thing that is not,” was that whiclwas made by Lord
‘Beaconsfield at Aylesbury. He tMere—to be sure it
was after dinner—ventured to sa¥ that, when Servia
began the war, it was the’ “ Secret societies of
Europe which made war on Turkey.” Now i truth
Servia did’ not make war on . Turkey ; Servia made
war on the Turk on behalf of Turkey. But of all the

untrue things that ever were said the most untrue was,

that the Servian war was got up by secret societies. No
doubt much help has been given by. societies ih Russia
and in other Slavonic lands. But those societies are
no more secret than our Anti-Corn-Law League was,
or any other of our political or religious societies.
Lord Beaconsfield also ventured to talk about Servia
being “ ungrateful” to the Turk. He called the Ser-
‘vian war an act of “treachery.” All this was simply
using words without any ‘meaning. Whatever an

open declaration of war may be, it is at least not.

treacherous, and it would certainly be very hard to
find any reason that the Servians had to. be grateful
to the Turk. Centuries of bondage, followed by
hideous breaches of faith, the impaling of - their
grandfathers in 1815, the bombarding of their capital

in 1862, the violation of their frontier in 1876, would:

seem to -be the things for:which, according to Lord
Beaconsfield, Servia ought to be thankful.

Another trick was to enlarge on and blacken to the
uttermost everything that was done, or said to be
done, on the patriot side which was not exactly
according to the laws of civilized warfare. The most
was made of anything amiss that was done, or said to
. be done, by amy insurgent, while anything that was
done by a Turk was slurred ‘over or hushed up
altogether. Most of these stories were mere lies, For

ALLEGED EXCHSSES OF THE PATRIOTS, 239

instance, the Turks,§Safvet and the rest of them,
tried to make the wfrld believe that they were inno-
cent lambs cruellyf set upon by Bulgarian lions.(*)
There is no doubt §hat the mass of the Stories which
were got up by the Turks and their friends: against
the Christian insurgents were mere falsehoods. But
suppose, as is quite possible, that some of them were
true, Is,it very wonderful if men who rise up to free
themselves from the most cruel yoke that man ever
was under, men who have been goaded: to revolt by
évery wrong that.a human being could endure, should
not always behave like the soldiers of civilized armies,
whose nations or governments. may have a dispute, but
who have no personal wrongs te embitter them against
one another? Inthe most civilized and best disciplined
armies there will always be some men who do wrong

‘things. In an insurgent and irregular ‘army the pro-_
portion of men who do such things will always be
greater. In strict morality, we. must condemn men
who commit any kind of excess, even in avenging the
bitterest of wrongs. But we cannot wonder at them ; .
we ought not harshly to condemn them. They are
doing as we ourselves should doubtless do in the same ~
case. In no case can the. excesses of the insurgent
who is avenging his wrongs bé put on the same level ~
of moral guilt as the excesses of the oppressor who is
‘wantonly inflicting wrongs. Men do not get better by’
dealings either with barbarian masters or with barbarian °
enemies. The way to make them better is, I must gay .
once more, to’ set them free from their bondage,

This is the fair way of looking at any particular
excesses which may have been here and there done by
the insurgents, whether in Herzegovina, Bulgaria, or
anywhere else. But most of the tales are simply false ;

242 REVOLTS AGAINST THE O7fOMAN POWER.

insurrection suppressed, the dpe rational way of
dealing with the whole matter Was many times set,
before them. Only they were too blind to see it.
Experience shews that, wherever*a land is set free
from the direct rule of the Turk, it gains greatly by
its deliverance. But experience also shews that the
separation need not be complete and sudden; it shews
that the tributary relation through which most of the
nations passed on.their road towards perfect bondage
forms an useful intermediate stage on their road
towards perfect freedom. So long as the Turk has no
share in the internal government of the country, there

is no great harm in the formal. relation of tribute and

vassalage. Indeed, as long as the Turk exists at all, the
tributary relation to a common over-lord has one ad-
vantage. It helpsto bind the several nations together ;
it helps to prepare the way for the time when the
Turk. can be got rid of altogether, and when the

tributary relation may be exchanged for a federal,

relafion. On the other hand, experience shews that

the Turk’s promises go for nothing, that his constitu-

tions go for nothing. Experience shews that, wherever
the Turk is allowed to keep troops or to have any
share in the nomination of rulers of any kind,
oppression goes on just the sameas if no promises
had ever been made. Experience further shews that
Christians and Mahometans-cannot live together—ex-
cept as oppressor and oppressed—under a Mahometan
government, but that:they can live perfectly well
together under a Christian government. From all this
it follows that the only way to secuire good government

for the revolted lands is to put an end to the-direct —

rule of the Turk over those lands. The. only way
is to establish some state of things in which, whatever

TEACHI$G OF EXPERIENCE. _ 243

" may be the form of government, the Turk shail have
no voice or authority in any internal matter. Nor
must he be allowed to keep garrisons in any of the,
lands which are to fe set free. Any form of govern-
ment which compassed these two objects, will be so
far a real gain. One kind of government may be
better than another; but by gaining these two points
the first essentials of good government will be secured.
Reason and experience taught this, and reason and
experience further taught that, if there was any
difficulty in creating absolutely independent states, any
difficulty in annexing the revolting lands to any of
the neighbouring states, there was the tributary rela-
tion to fall back upon. It had been tried, and it had
answered, The obvious immediate remedy therefore
was to enlarge the old tributary states or to make new
ones, in short to put the revolted lands in the same
position as Servia and Roumania. The lands would be
free, and the Sultan would still get all that he wants-
out of them, some money, that is, to squander as
Sultans, do. squander money. But Lord Derby said
that the formation of tributary states lay, in a phrase
which has become a kind of proverb, out of the range
of practical politics. The truth is that it was the one
thing which’ did lie within the range of practical
politics, while everything that Lord Derby did lay
altogether without that range. Lord Derby's one idea _
seemed to'be a sentimental notion that the Turk
might be got to mend by preaching ‘to him, And _
just like the Andrassy nate, so some of Lord Derhy’
-sermons, had they been preached to hearers w'”

the least likely to listen to them, w~

sermons indeed. They got bett”

Lord Derby found out that ¢’

. 244. REVOLTS' AGAINST THE OTFOMAN POWER.

were really in earnest about the matter. Still Lord
Derby’s whole course was. sentimental and not
practical. He refused the remedy which reason and
experience had shewn would ansver, and which lay
within the range of practical politics. Instead of that,
he tried the ‘remedy which reason and experience had
-shewn would not answer, and which therefore lay
without the range of practical politics.. So of course
nothing has been done. If, instead of Lord Derby’s
sentimental way of managing affairs, we had had
Canning’s practical way, things would have been
very different.

Here then is the end of our history and of our
comments upon it. In the last chapter we must see
what the practical guides, reason and experience,
tell us ought to be done to get us out of the difficulty
into which we have been brought by a long and

“ vigorous course of doing nothing.

NOTES.

(1, p. 167.) See Chapter XXVEIL. of Jirecek, Geschichte der Bul-
garen, headed Pasvanogiu und die Krdialijen.

(2, p. 176.) Perhaps the rule of Sir Thomas Maitland, King Tom:
as he was called, may not have been much. better than that of some
Pashas. But he was hatdly a specimen of English rylers in general.
One Lord High Commissioner at all events, Lord Guildford, thoroughly
deserved and won tie thankfulness of the Greek people.

(3, p- 177.) There are several valuable narratives of the Greek War
of Independence. The great work on the subject is the History of the
Greek Revolution (‘leropta tis "EAAnvucis "Exavactéccws), by Spyridén
Trikoupés, formerly Greek Minister in England. In German there is
the Geschichte des Aufstandes und der Wiedergeburt von Griechenland,
forming the fifth end sixth volumes of Gervinus’ Geschichte des neun-
achnten Jahrhunderts seit den Wiener Vertrigen. In English we have
the History by General Gordon, the plain narrative of an honest
soldier, who played a distinguished part in the war. And we have the
two volumes of the History of the Greek Revolution, which form the
conclusion of Mr. Finlay’s great series of medizeval and modern Greek
History. This brings the history down to a much Jater stage than either
of the others. It is the work of one of the keenest of observers, who
knew the history of the country from the beginning to the end ; but the |
bitter -and carping spirit in which it is written almost reminds one
of Cato the Censor, and his epithet Renee: Plutarch, Cato.
Major, 1

(4, p. 178.) See the account of the muyder of the Mollah at Smyrna
in Trikoupés, I, 289, Ed. 1; I. 251, Ed. 2, See also the story in
Vol, II. p. 103, Ed. t ; Il. p. 95, Ed, 2. Mahmoud himself disgraced his
Grand Vjier, Beterli Ali, giving as his reason that he wished to spare
the blood of the Greeks (j@éaqae vd peirOG THs (wis ray ‘EAAvwr, are
the words of the official papers in Trikoupés, I. pp. 112, 374, Ed. 1. 3
90, 338, Ed. 2.) The Sheikh-ul-Islam was also deposed because he had
refused his /éeva for a general slaughter of the Greeks, i. 192, Ed. i. 3.
163, Ed. it. |

(5, p- 192.) There was the Treaty of Unkiar-Skelessi in 1833,

246 REVOLTS AGAINST THE OTTOMAN POWER.

between Russia and the Porte, which concerns only the external rela-
‘tions between the two.powers, and merely confirms the arrangements
already madeé with regard to Greece. There were two Conventions of
Londoa in 1840, 1841 about the affairs of Syria ; and there was the
Convention of Balta-Liman, between Russi and the Porte, in 1849,-
which settled the affairs of the Danubian Principalgties, and which in
fact sacrified their liberties both to Russia and to the Turk.

6, Pp. 193.) See Annals of our Time, pp. 393, 40}.

(7, p. 207.) Accounts of the Cretan war were written by Mr. Skinner,
correspondent of the Daily News, in his book, ‘ Roughing it in Crete,”
and by the then American Consul, Mr. Stillman, ‘ The Cretan Insur-
rection of 1866-1868,” The official papers are to be found in a Blue
Book, “Correspondence respecting the Disturbances in Crete, 1866,
1867.” In official language a patriotic war is a “disturbance.” No
doubt it is a ‘* disturbance” to all the Foreign Offices.

(8, p, 208.) The despatch which contains Lord Stanley’s order on
this matter is No. 158, p. 140, of the Cretan Blue Book. The reasons
given for refusing help stand thus
_ Lord Stanley has received despatches from Greece which clearly
show that the proceedings of her Majesty’s ship, Assurance, in taking
off fron, Crete a certain number of refugees, has been regarded in Greece,
not in the light of a simple act of humanity, irrespective of political
considerations ; but as an indication on the part of her Majesty’s govern-
ment that they sympathise with the cause of the insurgents, and Lord
Stanley cannot doubt but thatthe same construction would be put on
any similar proceedings on the part of her Majesty’s-ships of war,
especially if taking place in consequence of express orders to that effect
sent.out from this country.

“« Lord Stanley fears that the effect of any such step would be to hold
out false hopes of assistance to the insurgents, and thereby in the end
to create far more suffering by the protracting of the suffering than that
which might be avérted at the moment by the removal of these destitute
persons.

“Her Majesty’s government deeply lament the further ruin and misery
in which a prolongation of the struggle cannot fail to involve the
Christians in Crete, but it is their duty not to expose themselves to mis-
construction, and net by an appearance of interventjon, the moral effect
of which might~be very great, to depart from the position of strict
neutrality which they have thought it their duty to assume.”

In plain words Lord Stanley deliberately sacrificed these poor
creatures to a cowardly dread of “‘ misconstruction.”” It is to be noticed
that he does not dare to condemn, though he very faintly approves, the
conduct of Captain Pym and Mr, Dickson (See pp. 141, 150). Only,

248 REVOLTS AGAINST THE OTTOMAN POWER.

some parts the Mahometans themselves are rising. In short, there
seems a hope that men of all creeds may join to shake off the yoke that
presses on all.

(13, p. 227.) The < same kind of talk was brought into the speech
which, at the opening of the sham Parliament, “was not spoken, or even
read, by the Grand Turk himself, but read by somebody else at his side.
Faney Mahomet the Conqueror or Suleiman the “Lawgiver having
speeches read for them.

(14, p. 233.) In the despatch written by Lord Derby on August 12,
1875, in the Blue Book (Correspondence respecting Affairs in Bosnia
and the Herzegovina, Turkey, No. 2, 2078); he writes thus to Sir
Henry Elliot :—. :

. “Her Majesty’s Government are not aware whether your Excellency
may have any opportunity of advising the Prince of Montenegro to
restrain his subjects from aiding the Insurrection. Should such an
opportynity offer, they do not doubt that you would avail yourself of it,
and they wish you to direct her Majesty’s agent at Belgrade to use his
“best efforts to counteract any dispositions which may be apparent in
Servia to aid or foment the disturbances.

“At- the same time her Majesty’s government are of opinion that
the Turkish government should rely on their own resources to suppress
the insurrection, and should deal with it as a local outbreak of disorder,
rather thaa give international importance to it by appealing for sup-
port to other powers.

‘*T have informed Musurus Pasha [the Greek who takes the pay of
the Turk in London] of the substance of this despatch.”

In the next letter we hear how ‘‘the Porte begged the Italian govern-
ment to join the other powers in counselling the Princes of Servia and

- Montenegro te observe a prudent attitude.” Perhaps by this time Lord
Derby himself has found out that the victorious sovereign of the Black

' Mountain is more used to the ‘‘attitude ” of Judas Maccabzeus and of
Rudolf Reding, than: to any ‘attitude ” that Lord Pedy. and the
“Porte” might deem ‘‘ prudent,”

(15, p. 233.) See the letters of Lord Derby in the Blue Book
(Correspondence respecting Affairs in Bosnia and the Herzegovina.
Turkey No. 2, 1876, p. 6, p. §7/--where Lord Derby cherishes the
vain hope of .extinguishing the insurrection before the spring. So in,
Turkey No. 3, p. 18, where Lord Derby discusses the “great dis-
couragement of the Turkish government” after a defeat of the Turks
by the insurgents with Dalmatian help, and how “it is feared that the
effect of it in- Montenegro will be very. mischievous.”’ The letter in
p. 115 to Mr. Adams is worth reading. ft seems to have taken two or
three Excellencies conferring. together to find out that ‘by whateve

1

‘ NOTES. 249

measures Montenegro might be restrained, the result to Turkey of dis-

sociating her from the insurrectionary cause would be a vital one.” And
so on, till on April 25, 1876, Sir Henry Elliot finds that the ‘last.
accounts from the north o%§ Bosnia are entirely satisfactory,” and adds

how ‘Rashid Pasha says that, the Austrian frontier being now effi-.
ciently guarded, the bands of insurgents had been easily dispersed

and tranquillity is restored in that district.” What state of things is

“entirely satisfactory” to Sir Henry Elliot, what kind of “tranquillity ”

is meant by Rashid Pasha, will be best studied in the letters of Miss Irby

from thé frontier of which he speaks.

(16, p. 239.) A curious illustration of the lengths to which Turkish
power of lying may go will be seen in the speech of “his Excellency
the President,” otherwise Safvet Pasha, in the Blue Book of Corre-
spondence respecting the Conference at Constantinople, pp. 217, 224.
Lord Salisbury and General Ignatieff seem both to have answered as
strongly as would be polite towards a fellow ‘‘ Excellency.”

(17, p.- 241). These facts are known to every one who ‘has ‘eal
studied the course ‘of the war, and has not been led away by slander-
ous words. I am happy to add from private sources the testimony of a
highly distinguished Russian general, who distinctly asserts that the
Servians are not inferior in military qualities to his own countrymen,
and that in fact they shewed themselves capable of greater endurance. -

CHAPTER VII.
THE PRACTICAL QUESTION.

AND: now at last we come to the great practical
question, What is to be done?. What is the duty of
England and of Europe in this great crisis of the
world’s history? I assume that England and Europe
have a duty in the matter. I am old-fashioned enough
to believe that there are such things as right and
wrong, and to believe that right is to be followed, and
that wrong is to be. avoided, in the affairs of nations
as well as in the affairs of private men. I assume that
nations as well as individuals owe a duty alike to God
above and to -man below. It would seem that there
are some who think otherwise. It would seem that
there are some to whom any mention of right or
wrong.as having anything to do with the matter is
ground | enough for an outburst of wrath or of scorn.
There art some who shamelessly put forth in the
face of day‘ the doctrine that interest alone is to be
thought of, that it matters not what wrongs are done,
what eos borne, if. some fancied interest of
England is supp&sed to be jeoparded by doing right.
I will quote, as an\example of the spirit in which the
ought not to be carried on, the
following passage fro\n a letter in one of the published

SIR HENRY ELLIOT ON “ INTERESTS.” 251

Blue Books addressed by Sir Henry Elliot to the
Earl of Derby, dated Therapia, September 4th,
1876 :—(})

** An insurrection or civil war is everywhere accompanied by cruelties
and abominable excesses, and this being tenfold the case in oriental
countries, where people are divided into antagonistic creeds and races,
the responsibility and sin of those who incite a peaceful Province to rise
becomes doubly heavy, and they now endeavour to throw them upon
others.

‘To the accusation of being a blind partisan of the Turks, I will
only atiswer that my conduct here has never been guided by any senti-
mental affection for them but by a firm determination to uphold the
interests of Great Britain to the utmost of my power, and that those '
interests are deeply engaged in preventing the disruption of the Turkish
Empire is a conviction which I share in common with the most eminent
statesmen who have directed our foreign policy, but which appears now
to be abandoned by shallow politicians or persons who have allowed
their feelings of revolted humanity to make them forget the capital.
interests involved in the question..

‘‘ We may, and must, feel indignant at the needless and monstrous
severity with which the Bulgarian inswrrection was put down, but the
necessity which exists for England to prevent changes from occurring
here which would be most detrimental to ourselves, is not affected by the
question whether it was 10,000 or Be persons who pe in ue
suppression.

‘*We have been upholding what we know to be a semi-civilized
nation, liable under certain circumstances to be carried ‘into fearful
excesses ; but the fact of this having just now been strikingly brought
home to us all cahnot be a sufficient reason for abandoning a policy
which is the only one that can be followed with due regard to our
interests.”

One’s breath is taken away on reading stich words
as these. The only excuse or palliation for them can
be that the writer, quartered so long among Turks, -
has caught someof the spirit of the Turk.

BeBapBdpwou, xpévios dv év BapBdpors.(*)

Or perhaps so to speak is injustice to the Turk.
When the Turk is suppressing an insurrection—1_

252 THE PRACTICAL QUESTION.

speak not of the Ring at Constantinople, but of the
actual doers of the deeds—he may, in his fierce
fanaticism, believe that he is doing good service to
Allah and his Prophet. The m6tives confessed by
’ Sir Henry Elliot are lower than this. Of right and
wrong, of duty, there is not a word.’ The one avowed
motive is interest, from one end to the other. It is
not merely that the blind partizanship, the affection,
whether sentimental: or otherwise, which the writer
shews for the Turk, comes out in the difference of tone
between the first paragraph that I have quoted and
the third. It is not merely that the devilish doings
ef the Turk are gently spoken of as “needless and
‘Monstrous severity,” while the high moral tone about
“responsibility” and “sin” is taken towards those
who strove, however vainly, in the noble cause of Bul-
garian freedom. This is not new. Wecan fancy Philip
of Spain feeling the same holy indignation at the sin
of William of Orange. We can fancy that there were
milder moments when Philip himself deemed that the
Fury at Antwerp was severity carried a little too
far. But what is new, not perhaps altogether new,
but characteristic of the dealings of the last generation
or two with this particular subject, is the calm avowal
that interest is to be the one guide of public action,
and that to interest humanity and every other nobler
feeling must give way.@) Whether the disruption
of the Turkish Empire would be good or bad for the
nations that live under it is not even thought of. All
that matters is that the interests of Great Britain are
deeply engaged in preventing that disruption. We
are graciously allowed to be indignant at Turkish
severity ; but even revolted humanity must not allow
us to forget the higher claims of “capital interest.”

THE NEW MORALITY. 253

It matters not who may perish, 10,000 or 20,000, if
their perishing will hinder changes that will be “ most

detrimental to ourselves.” We must prevent those

changes. We uphéld a semi-civilized nation, and the

nature of the power that we uphold has just now been

strikingly brought home to us. But if the upholding

of that power is the only policy which can be followed

with a due regard to our own interests, nothing that

that. semi-civilized power may do can be a sufficient

reason for abandoning it. Such is the morality, such is

. the doctrine, such, it seems, is the practice, of a repre-

sentative of England in the nineteenth century. One’
feels, in reading Sir Henry Elliot’s words, as Chatham

felt when he burst forth in that strain of righteous ©
eloquence which would hardly sound parliamentary in

the delicate ears of a modern House of Lords. He

called on Judges-and Bishops to “interpose the

purity of their ermine and of their lawn” to “save

his country from pollution.” He could not rest his

head on his pillow till he had poured forth “his:
eternal abhorrence” of “principles preposterous and ~
enormous,” “equally unconstitutional, inhuman, and

unchristian.” In his day to profess humanity and

Christianity as motives for public conduct had not

yet become matter for scorn. In the moral code

of Sir Henry Elliot Christianity seems to have no

place. Humanity. appears only as an offering of

small account, which may be wisely offered up at.
the shrine of all-ruling interest.

I take this passage merely as a specimen. Coming
as it does from an official person, couched in all the
calmness of official language, it proves more than the
wild ‘outpourings which are.sent-forth daily and
weekly by a certain section of the English press, a

PRIVATE AND PUBLIC MORALITY. 255

For it must not be forgotten that powers and nations
are simply aggregates of men, that every act of
national right or wrong doing is really an act of
personal right or Wrong doing on the part of those
men, few or many, whose awill determines the na-
tional action. And, if interest is to be the only rule
in ‘national affairs, if it is to be a rule to which
humanity is to. give way, it is hard to see what acts
of national perfidy and national cruelty may not be
justified. A morality which holds that Bulgarian
massacres are no ground for ceasing to uphold the
power which is guilty of Bulgarian massacres, has
little right to blame that power for: “needless and .
monstrous severity” in the Bulgarian massacres them-
selves. If the Turk deemed the Bulgarian massacres
to be for his interest, he did right, in Sir Henry
Elliot’s morality, in not allowing feelings of’ humanity
to hinder him in following the course which interest
dictated. If he was mistakén in thinking that the
" massacres were for his interest, that would be, in*
Sir Henry Elliot’s morality, at most an error of.
judgement, and not a moral crime.

I make then one assumption. I make ‘it as the
geometer makes those few assumptions with which
he starts, assumptions which he cannot prove, but
which he deems can abundantly prove themselves.
With those who deny. that’things which are equal to
the same are equal to one another the geometer does
not argue. With such an one he has no common
ground for argument. So neither can the moralist
argue with one who says either that there is no right
and wrong, or that right or’ wrong concern private
conduct only. With such an one he has no common
ground for argument. I must make my assumption,

26 THE PRACTICAL QUESTION.

as the geometer makes his. But having made the
assumption at starting, I trust that I may, like the
geometer, go on for the future, not with assumption,
but with argument. I trust to ghew, not indeed by
geometrical proof, but by such. proof as the nature of
the subject allows, first that England has a duty
in this matter, and secondly, that, in this matter
interest and duty do not clash.

The duty of England and Europe towards. the
nations which are under the Turk is simply the
duty of redressing a wrong which England and
Europe have themselves done. Neither a man nor
. a nation is at all called upon to go all over the
world seeking for wrongs to redress. If either a
man or a nation undertook so to do, that’ man or
that nation would soon find that there was very
little time left to do anything else. Neither man
nor nation is called upon to practise such mere
‘knight-errantry as this. Nor does it necessarily follow
that either a man or a nation is bound to go forth
to redress wrongs, even when those who are suffering
the wrongs call upon him to do so. It would be very
hard to settle beforehand in what cases either a man
or a nation is bound to give help to those who call
upon him to give it. The duty of either man or
nation in such matters must. greatly depend on the
circumstances of each particular case. But one thing
no one will deny to be&the duty of each particular
man. If he has himself Gone a wrong, then it is his .
duty to redress that wrong.* This will be denied by no
one who professes any mora¥ principle at-all, by noone
who believes that there are such things as right and
wrong in the common dealings between man and man.

DUTY OF REDRESSING WRONG DONE. 257

And—to make our one assumption once for all—if
there be such a thing as tight and-wrong in public
affairs, if nations are to be guided in their dealings
with.one another by the same moral rules by which
private men ought to be guided in their dealings with
one another, then it follows that, when. a nation has
done a wrong, it is the duty of that nation to redress
that wrong. For a nation to say that it will not
discharge this duty, because it is not for its interest
to do so, is exactly as base as it would be for a private
man to refuse to redress any wrong that he had done,
because it would be against his interest to do so.
Every kind of law, the law of honour, thé law of the
land, thé law of morals, the law of religion, all say
that a man who has done a wrong’ must redress that
wrong. They all say he must redress it, even if it be
against his interest to redress it. And the- higher
forms of teaching would go on to tell him that it
-was in any case his real interest to redress it. They
would tell him that the approbation of his own con-
sciénce, the esteem of other men—the law of religion
would add the approval of his Maker—are worth more’
than any sacrifice that he might make by doing right.
So, if we believe that right and wrong are to be
thought of in public affairs, if we do not think that
a nation may do any cruelty, any perfidy, that it may
fancy to be for its immediate interest, it follows that
a nation is as much bound as a private man to redress
any wrong that it has done. It must do right, even
to the prejudice of its own interests. It may, if it
pleases, comfort itself by thinking that, according to
the true saying that honesty is the best policy, its
interests will not suffer in the long run by doing its
auty: ;
S . +

258 THE PRACTICAL QUESTION.

Now that England, and Europe in general,” but
England in a more marked way than: any other
nation of Europe, have done wrong to the subject
nations of .South-eastern Europe hardly néeds. proof.
We need go no further than the passage which I
quoted a few pages back from Sir Henry Elliot's
letter to Lord Derby. Sir Henry Elliot there says,
in so many words, “We have been upholding what
we know to be a semi-civilized nation, liable under
certain circumstances to be carried into fearful ex-
cesses.” ,_In other words, we have been upholding
the Turk in his wicked dominion over Bulgaria,
‘Thessaly, Crete, and the other subject lands, It is not
merely that we have left things in those lands to
take their own course; it is not merely that we have
not helped the oppressed ; we have actively helped
the oppressor. This Sir Henry Elliot confesses. We
have upheld him, upheld him, knowing, as Sir Henry
Elliot goes on to say, what manner of thing it was
that we were upholding. Knowing that the rule of
the Turk wasa rule of the foulest oppression, we have
not merely done nothing to put an end to that
oppression, we have actively upheld the oppressor in
his oppression. All the powers that signed the treaty”
of Paris have been more or less guilty on this
score. England has been more constantly and glar-
ingly guilty than any other. We have throughout,
for more than forty years, upheld the Turk, because
we thought that it was for our own interest. That is,
‘we have done as a nation towards other nations in a
way which any man among us, Sir Henry Elliot I
doubt not as well as any other man, would blush to
do in common every day dealings between one man
and another,

-THE TREATY OF PARIS. 259

Uur great crime of all, the general crime of
Europe, the great sin against the oppressed nations of
the East, was the signing of the treaty of Paris. By
that treaty, as I hawe before shewn, England and the
other -powers bound themselves to let the Turk do .
-what he would with his Christian victims, and to do
nothing to hinder him. This was a very different
matter from merely not doing anything to help them,
or even from refusing to help them when they asked
us. [t was not a mere negative omission; it was a
positive wrong. Before the Crimean war the .
Christians under the rule of the Turk had a protector,
at least a power that claimed to be their protector, in
Russia. It is no use here to dispute either how far the
protectorate of Russia was formally acknowledged, or
how far the protection of Russia was either sincere
or effectual. Russia was at least a nominal and pro-
fessed protector. Now it would have been perfectly
-fair to argue that it was not well that the protection .
of those nations should be left to Russia alone, but
that it would be better that all the other powers, or
some of them, should join with Russia in protecting
them: It might have been argued that such a joint
protectorate would be better for the general interests -
of Europe, better even for the interests of the subject
nations themselves. To substitute such a protectorate _
as this for the sole protectorate of Russia might have
been a.wise and just measure. It might have been a
step towards getting rid of the Turk altogether. But
this was not what the treaty of Paris did. The treaty
of Paris took away from the subject nations what
little chance of protection they had, and it gave them
nothing instead. It took away the protectorate of
Russia, whatever that might be worth, and it put

$2

260. THE PRACTICAL QUESTION.

nothing in its place. The powers pledged themselves
not to interfere with the relations between the Sultan
and his subjects, knowing what those relations were,
‘what they always must be. Thty handed over’ the
subject nations to the power of the Turk, with no
better guaranty than the Turk’s paper of lying
promises. That is, they left the lamb in the jaws of
the wolf, with no safeguard except the wolf’s promise
not to: bite the lamb. :
The fault in the matter of the treaty of Paris was no
special fault of England. It was shared by England
with the other powers which signed the treaty. But
there is no ofher powér which has so steadily shewn
itself the friend of the Turk and the enemy of the
subjects of the Turk as England has done. There is
no other power which has so steadily, in the happy
phrase of Sir Henry Elliot, upheld the Turk. The
best proof of this is to be found in the feelings of the
Turks themselves. Through the whole of the doings
of the last two years, the. Turks have always taken for
granted that England was their friend. It has been
hard to persuade them that. England was not ready to ©
stand by them in aay cause and against any enemy.
One instance will do among many. At one point of
the doings of last year, the English fleet was, as all
the world knows, sent to Besika - Bay. Why it was
sent theré was at the time not perfectly clear. As
happened more than once in the events of last year,
Lord Beaconsfield gave one reason and Lord Derby
another. It matters little what the real reason was. ’
The instructive point of the business is the way in
which it was looked upon by every man, Turk or
Christian, in the lands which were most concerned.
Every man, in those lands, Turk or: Christian,

“UPHOLDING” THE TURK. 261

believed, rightly or wrongly, that the fleet was sent
to encourage the Turks and to discourage the
Christians. That such a belief could be general
speaks more than any long argument as to the
conduct of England in that part of the world, as to
the reputation. which the conduct of England has.

_won for her in that part of the world. Turk and

Christian, oppressor and oppressed, agreed in taking
for granted that an English fleet could have come for
no end except to carry on the usual work of England
in upholding the oppressor. Nor was anything done
to undeceive either Turk or Christian. Though it was
known what Turk and Christian. alike believed to be
the reason of the fleet’s coming, the fleet was still left
there. That is, England, so faras England is repre-
sented by those who then and now rule England, was
not unwilling that England should be looked upon
by Turk and Christian alike as the friend of the Hoek
and the enemy of the Christian.

It is hardly needful to pile together instances to

shew how truly Sir Henry Elliot speaks when he says

that we have upheld the Turk, Our loans of money,
our loans of men, our honours bestowed on the
barbarian and the renegade, the Grand Cross of
Omar, the Garter of Abd-ul-Medjid and Abd-ul-
Aziz—the reception given to the last-named
tyrant at the very moment when his hands were
reeking with the blood of Crete—the hideous
crime of refusing the shelter of English vessels to
the Cretan refugees—that dark day of shame and
sorrow when other nations did the work of humanity
and Englishmen were forbidden to share in it—all the
black doings of last year—the letters hounding the
Turk on the patriots of Herzegovina—the other

262 THE PRACTICAL QUESTION.

letters written to and fro to stir up Austria to depart
from her wise and righteous policy during the first
days of the war—the refusal of -every note, of every
proposition, from every other pogver which seemed
likely to do any thing to lessen the sufferings of the
oppressed nations—all these things, done by our rulers,
uncensured by our Parliament, but branded in the
movement of last autumn by the righteous and re-
pentant voice of the English people—all these things
form a black catalogue of wrong, a catalogue of deeds
done to uphold the oppressor and to snatch away any
shadow of hope that might arise in the breasts of his
victims. The England of Canning and Codrington,
the England of Byron and Hastings, has come to
this, that the world knows us as the nation which
upholds oppression for the sake of its own interests.

_ We have indeed a national sin to redress and to atone
for. We are verily guilty concerning our brother,
‘in that we saw the anguish of his soul when he
besought us and we would not hear. Nay, our guilt

. is deeper still. We have not only refused to listen
to our brother’s cry for help; we have not merely
looked on and passed by on the other side ; we have
given our active help to the oppressors of our brother.
We have “upheld” the foulest fabric of wrong that
earth ever saw, because it was deemed that the in-

\rerest of England were involved in “upholding” the
wrong and trampling down the right.

Such a list as this might be made much longer.
Perhaps one fact alone is a more speaking comment
than. all of the way in which England has “upheld”
the Turk. The tale has often been told in full();
all that I need do is to call it to remembrance.
When Sir Henry Bulwer was British Ambassador at

AMBASSADORS AND CONSULS. 263

Constantinople, a eesiide ‘was sent to the British
consuls in the Turkish dominions, bidding them send
in an account of the state of the country. Another
letter went with the circular, bidding them make their
report as favourable as they could to the Turks.
One consul received the circular without the letter ;
he sat down and wrote a trye account, a vivid pic-
ture of the horrors of Turkish rule. Then came the
Ambassador’s letter, and the consul sat down and
wrote a humble apology for having spoken the truth.
No means then, not even deliberate falsehood, are
deemed too base, if they can anyhow help to “uphold”
“the Turk. We may believe that Sir Henry Bulwer
would not have been guilty of falsehood, or of en-
couragement of falsehood, in any transaction between:
‘man and man. But in his public character, the great
duty of upholding the Turk was held to override the
dull rules of every-day morality. In his character. as
Ambassador, he was to carry out the old definition
of an Ambassador ; he was to act as “an honest man
sent to 4e abroad for the good of his country.”

Our national crime then is that we have upheld the
~ Turk for our own supposed, interests. That is, for the -
sake of our own supposed interests, we have doomed
the struggling nations to abide in their bondage. We
have doomed them to stay under a rule under which
the life and ‘property of the Christian, the honour of
his wife, the honour of his children of both sexes alike,
are at every moment at the mercy of the savages
whom our august and cherished ally honours and
promotes in proportion to the blackness ‘of their
deeds. We have, for our own interest, upheld the
power which has done its foul and bloody work in
Chios, at Damascus, and in Bulgaria, which is still

264 THE PRACTICAL QUESTION.

doing the same foul and bloody work wherever. a
victim is to be found. And, if we listen to Sir Henry
Elliot, though we know all this, though we know it
better than we ever did before, we are still to go on
upholding the doers. We uphold the power whose
daily work is massacre and worse than massacre. It
matters not whether ten thousand or twenty thousand
perish. We are still to uphold the slaughterer, for it
is to our interest that he should not be shorn of his
power of slaughtering.

Now, if there be any such thing as right and wrong
in public affairs, if moral considerations are ever to
come in to determine the actions of nations, it is hard
to see how. there can be deeper national guilt than
_ this. Unjust wars, aggressions, conquests, are bad
enough ; but they are hardly so bad as the-calm, un-
* blushing, upholding of wrong for our own interests.
Men may be led into wars and aggressions by passion
and excitement, by the fantasies of national honour
and glory, even by generous feelings led astray. But
here there is nothing to cloak the cold wickedness of
a base and selfish policy. We look on, we count the
cost, we see how the wrong-doer deals with his victim,
and we determine to uphold the wrong-doer, because
we think that to uphold him will suit some interest of —
our own. There is no question of national glory, no
question of national honour, nothing which can stir
up even a false enthusiasm. It is a calm mercan-
tile calculation that the wrongs of millions of men
will pay.. This is the case as stated by Sir Henry
Elliot ; this is the case as it is set forth by Lord
Derby, and by all who follow him in the ostentatious
setting forth of interest as the one motive of national
action. I do not believe that so. base a code of

THE DOCTRINE OF INTEREST. — 265

national conduct will be approved by any large body
of thinking Englishmen. It may indeed be approved
by those who glory in their shame, who make their
boast of putting jestice and humanity out of sight,
whose pride is that they never feel; or that, if they
feel, they succeed in speedily stifling, all the higher
and more generous feelings of man’s nature. But
I ‘would fain believe that, beyond such circles as
these, no deliberate approval would be given to the
_base doctrine of making interést our only rule. Some
may be misled by mere party-blindness. Some may
be misled by the mere.traditional repetition of mean-
_ingless formulz., But I do not believe that the bulk
of the English people are ready to affirm that the
conduct of the nation is to be systematically guided |
by principles on which any honest man would shrink
from acting in the common affairs of daily life.

I. assume then ‘that wrong has been done, that we.
are, as a nation, guilty of the sufferings of our Eastern
brethren. I assume that, by upholding the Turk, we
have made ourselves, as a nation, partakers in his
crimes. From this I infer that, where wrong has been
done, redress must be made. I infer that we must not:
‘merely fold our hands and let events take their course,
but that we must, as a nation, stand forth to undo the
wrong which, as a nation, we have done. _We must
do as we did fifty years ago, in those brighter days
when the policy of England’ was guided by an
Englishman with an English heart. We must do-as
Canning did. We must stand forth, in common, if it
can be, with the other powers of Europe, or with so
many of them as will join us, or if all fail, alone in the
strength of a. righteous cause, to undo the wrong that

266 THE PRACTICAL QUESTION.

we have done, to wipe away the tears that we have
made to flow, to burst asunder the chains that we
ourselves have riveted. We must do it by peaceable
means, if peaceable means can beemade to serve our
turn. But, if peaceable means will not serve our turn,
then, we must do it by force. If we have to fight, we
"never can fight ina worthier cause. We have fought for
this and that dream of national glory—we have fought
‘for this and that doctrine of the balance of power—
we have fought to maintain the rights of this and that
claimant of foreign crowns—we have even fought to
maintain the Turk in his dominion ; let us now fight,
if we must fight, as we fought fifty years back, for
righteousness. No army could ever march forth with
so Sure a certainty that every blow that it dealt would
count among the good works .of him -that dealt it,
as the army that should go forth to free the Greek
and Slavonic lands from Turkish bondage. Our
_thoughts go back to the days when crusades were
still crusades, before the warriors of the cross had
turned aside from their work to storm Zara and
Constantinople, or to become the tools of papal ven-
geance either on Emperors or on so-called heretics.
_We should go forth with the pure zea] of the great
assembly of Clermont; we should put the cross upon
‘our shoulders with the cry of “God wills it” on our
lips and in our hearts.

For force then, for coercion in the euphemistic
language of our.times, that is, in plain words, for war,
if war be needful—that is, not war on behalf of the
oppressor, but on behalf of the oppressed-——not war for
the Turk as in 1854, but war against the Turk as in
1827—we must stand ready. But the readier we are
for war, the more fully we have made up our mind for

HOW TO DEAL WITH THE TURK. 267

‘war if war be needed, the less likely it will be that war
will be needed. A real union of the powers of Europe,
a real and frank union between England and Russia,
can do all that is needed without war. If England
“can once make up her mind to act cordially with
other powers, if she will cease to reject every proposal,
to put stones in every path, to put spokes in every:
wheel, the thing may be done. The one thing to be
fully understood must be. that, though it may be done
without fighting, it cannot be done by mere talking.
Those who know the Turk know how to deal with the
Turk. They know how little his brag really goes
for, if it is met as it ought to be met. The bully is at
heart a coward. He will yield, if he once fully under-
stands that nothing will be yielded to him, With
the Turk it is as easy to gain a great point as a small
one ; it is as easy to take the ell as to take the inch.
To mere talk he will never yield the inch; to real
firmness he will at once yield the ell, All who have
had practical dealings with the barbarians know this.
When they have gained any point, they have gained
it, not by talk, not by empty courtesy, but by strong
words and strong deeds, by bringing to bear on the
barbarian mind the one argument which the barbarian,
mind can ‘understand, by cowing the wild beast by
sheer fear. By a resoluté mien and resolute words,
unarmed Europeans have made parties of armed
Turks tremble before them, and turn about and do
their bidding like humble slaves. It is exactly so in
dealings on a greater scale. The Turk brags as long
as he thinks that there is anything to be gained by
bragging. As soon as he finds that nothing can be
gained by bragging, he knocks under to the power
which he knows to be stronger than his own.

268 ‘THE PRACTICAL QUESTION,

The whole mistake lies in dealing with the Turk as
the civilized nations of Europe deal with one another.
He should be dealt with-as we deal with any other
barbarian.. We have already seen, that certain Turks
have learned to talk European languages, and to dress ©
‘themselves up in European clothes. It must always
be remembered that this makes no difference. The
men who ordered the massacres in Bulgaria wear

.tight.coats and jabber French, and expect to be called
Highnesses and Excellencies. But they ordered the
massacres in Bulgaria all the same. They ought to
be dealt with, not as Highnesses and Excellencies, but
as ‘the men who ordered the massacres in Bulgaria.
Their tight coats and French ought not to save them
. from being treated as what they are, as wild beasts
_ who have put themselves out of the pale of human
fellowship. Above all, the Turk should be made to
understand that his word goes for nothing. He has
lied too often to be believed. Reason and experience
tell us that, when a man ‘has lied nine hundred
and ninety-nine times, it is foolish to believe in the
thousandth time. It is only the foolish sentimentalists, :
the people who talk about the Turk being a “gentle-—
_Mman,” the people who think it proves something that he
does not shake hands (°), who would have us trust the
. convicted liar once’again. The Turk should be made
to feel that his most solemn assertions, his most
solemn promises, the pledges of this and that Excel-
lency, of this and that Highness, or of his Imperial
Majesty himself, are simply words without meaning.
He should be told that his Irades and his ‘Tanzimats,
his Hatti-sheriffs and his Hatti-humayouns, are all so
many names which the copiousness of the Turkish
language has devised to express the single idea of

THE “CIVILIZED” TURK. 260

waste paper. He must be told that his Midhat.
constitution is simply a mockery, a delusion, and ‘a
snare, a net spread in the sight of the birds who
ought to be too wise to be caught by it. When
the Turk feels that Europe knows what he is, and
has made up its mind to treat him as what he is,
there will be an end of his brag, an end of his lying.
He will most likely crouch humbly and accept his fate
at the. hand of his masters. If he chooses to rush
upon his doom, Europe is surely strong enough to'do
execution on the convicted criminal.

This is the way which reason and experience teach
us to deal with the Turk.’ Any other way of dealing
with him lies without the range of practical politics.
To put trust in him, to accept his promises as going
for anything, springs either from silly sentimentalism,
which still puts faith in the “gentleman,” murderer
‘and liar as he has shewn himself, or else it springs
from a guilty shrinking from the discharge of duty,
or indeed from doing anything at all.- Perhaps the
very height of blindness, the highest point that could
be reached in the art of doing nothing, the. art of
- cowardly shrinking from duty, is to be found in
a short letter from Lord Derby to Lord Salisbury
dated December 22, 1876.(®) Lord Derby there says
“that Her Majesty’s Government have decided that
England. will not assent to or assist in coercive
measures, military or naval, against the Porte.” He
adds, “the Porte must on the other hand be made
to understand, as it has from the first been informed,
that it can expect no assistance from ‘England in the
event of war.” That is to say, the Conference was to
do nothing. It was settled beforehand that nothing
was to come of it. It was absolutely certain, in any

270 THE PRACTICAL QUESTION,

but the blinded eyes of a Foreign Secretary, that the
Turk would do nothing except under coercion. Yet
it is laid down as a rule that England will not join in
coercion. “ Even if other powers do, England will not.

The European concert is to be broken, the arm of
"justice is to be stayed, because Lord Derby either
has a sentimental belief in the power of talk, or
else because he is afraid to do anything at all. To
do something for the Turk, to do something against
the Turk, are courses of which one is wrong and
the other right, but both of which come within
. the range of practical politics. To expect that the
Turk will yield anything to talk, when he knows that
it will be all talk and that no coercion will be used,
is the very height of silly sentimentalism. The sim-
plicity of what follows is indeed charming. “In the
event of the Porte persisting in refusing and the
Conference failing, your Excellency will of course
come away.” What would the Porte do except per-
sist in refusing when the Porte knew that it would
gain everything by refusing and nothing by yielding?
How could the Cottference do otherwise than fail,
when it was agreed beforehand that nothing was to
come of it? The Conference failed, because it was
doomed to failure before ifmet. It was doomed to
failure, because the representatives of Europe, instead
of calling up the convicted criminal to hear his
sentence, admitted two of the Ring, two of the
Highnesses and Excellencies who had ordered. the
Bulgarian massacres, to sit with them as equals, .
and one of them to take his place as president of
an assembly of civilized men. We have already seen
that the falsehoods with which Safvet opened the
Conference were contradicted by both the Pagis

NECESSARY FAILURE OF THE CONFERENCE. 271

and the Russian minjsters. But something more
was needed than a contradiction. The liar should
have been taught his place; he should have. been
made to understand that his talk went. for nothing..
He should have been told that Europe had come
together, not to hear him talk, but to —pronource
sentence upon him. Instead of this, point after point
was yielded. When the first point was yielded, all
was over. Indeed all was over before anything
-began; ail was over when the barbarian crirninal
was allowed to take his place among his European
judges.

_The Conference then failed. It could not but fail.
And, now that it has failed; one might appeal to a
feeling which once was strong in the hearts of Eng- |
lishmen, a feeling not so high as the sense of duty,
but at least higher than the mere base reckoning of
interest. Is the honour of England dead? Does
no man among the rulers or the people of England
feel his chéeks tingle at the insult that England
and all Europe has received at barbarian hands?
There were times when English swords would have’

‘leaped from their scabbards at far lighter ignominy
than that which England and Europe bore then.
Surely they never bore greater shame than when
their representatives were brought together simply
to hear that a barbarian power which lingers on
only by their sufferance would have none of their
counsels and none of their reproof. “The Turk
snapped his fingers in the face of England and of
Europe; he shewed England and Europe the way
to the door; and England and Europe have walked
out quietly. There is,.at least there was, such a
feeling as national self-respect. In the Government,

272 THE PRACTICAL QUESTION.

‘in the people, which can tamely endure such treatment
as this from a power which needs our upholding, that
feeling of self-respect. would seem to be wholly dead.
In the néw tode of conduct we are taught that right
and humanity are to be offered up to the Moloch of
interest. It would seem that the honest sense of
shame, to say nothing of the feeling of knightly
honour, are to be cast.into the fire along with them.
_ We see then that, in the name of morality, there is
something to be done,.and that, in the name of com-
‘mon sense, it. must set about being done in some other
quite different way than what was done at the late
“Conference. The proposals made at that Conference
all lay -out of ‘the range of practical politics. They
were a]l sentimental proposals, proposals which could
never be carried out, because they all went on the
‘supposition that the Turk might possibly do some-
thing without being forced to do it: Such a supposi-
tion is belied by all experience ;- it is- therefore wholly
unpractical. JI must here insist more fully on a
doctrine which I have already laid down, that in
settling the affairs of the South-eastern lands, two
points must be laid down as principles, . without
which no lasting or satisfactory settlement can. be
made. In any land on which it is proposed to
bestow freedom—I use the plain word freedom, not,
_ the silly.word “autonomy,” invented by diplomatists,
because it may mean anything or nothing—-in any
such land no Turkish soldier must be allowed to
tread, and the Turk must have no voice ‘in the ap-
pointment of its rulers, magistrates, or officers, high
or low. Every proposal which does not embody these
principles lies without the range of practical politics,
Any proposal which does not embody them can never

‘THE TWO NECESSARY POINTS. 273

lead to any lasting reform, because it leaves with the
Turk the power of undoing whatever is done. the
moment: the back of Europe is turned. “There was
talk of confining Turkish troops to particular spots,
cand of giving the Turk a voice along with the Euro-
pean powers in the choice of Governors. It is curious
to read how this very moderate form of restraint was
met by a Turk, as shown in a letter of Sir Henry
Elliot to Lord Derby, dated December. 30, 1876,(7)
He there describes a conversation which he had had
with Midhat-Pasha. Midhat, it should be reméem-
bered, besides being one of the Ring who ordered
the great Bulgarian massacre, had already been
Governor of Bulgaria. He had there undoubtedly
made some improvements in the way of roads and
the like, improvements of that kind which might be ~
useful for the ruling powers. But his personal ¢ruelties
and excesses of other kinds are already written in
the pages of Bulgarian history.(8) With this man
Sir Henry Elliot had “long been intimate,” The
proposals of. the European powers were thus com-
mented on-by the Turk talking to his “ intimate”
English friend.

“The project,-as it now stood, would be a are tomarda the certain
realization of the Russian dream of creating small autonomic ties in
European Turkey.

- “We had only to look back to what had occurred fifty years ago in
Servia, to become convinced that the compulsory confinement of the
Ottoman troops to the fortresses and principal towns would shortly lead
to the.expulsion of the Turks from the Province, and the establishment
of guast independence.” :

It would seem from this confession that the blessings
of Ottoman rule, as set forth by Safvet at the opening
of the Conference, even the special blessings of the
personal rule of Midhat, were not fully appreciated

. ? T

274 THE PRACTICAL QUESTION.

in Bulgaria. Bulgaria, like Servia, sought for ‘dee:
dence. It had no love for the presence of Ottoman
troops. .But Midhat must have given his English
“intimate” credit for a large.amount of ignorance of |
Servian history. “What occurred fifty years ago in
Servia,” to which this Turk ventures to.appeal, was the
brutal breach of faith on the part of the Turks, when
they impaled men to whom their lives. had been pro-
mised. Midhat feared that even the mild proposals of
the Conference would hinder himself or any other Turk
in Bulgaria from doing the same again. He feared
that the presence of foreign commissioners, of foreign
’ troops, of foreign gendarmerie, would hinder him or
any other Turk from bombarding any Christian city
which they fancied to bombard, as they bombarded
Belgrade only fifteen years back. The barbarian is
wise in his generation. _ He will admit of no restraint
on his power of doing evil. He will not endure that
the barbarian troops should be’ confined to particular
places, least of all to places like large towns, where
numbers, and in some cases the presence of Europeans,
may be some slight check.' He and his fellows must
have the whole land to range through unrestrained,
and to do their pleasure on all whom they find in the
land. Servia is free; the Turk has left her soil ;
life, property, family- honour, are safe within her
boundaries, Such an example is not lost upon Midhat.
He will allow no step which shall look at all in the
direction of extending these blessings to Bulgaria.
One land has escaped from his clutches ; he has learned
to be all the more careful lest another land should
escape from them also.

The example of Servia to swiiich Midhat appeals
in this conversation is indeed an instructive one. It

“TURKISH TROOPS TO BE SHUT OUT. 275

proves the wholé point. Servia is free, Servia flou-
rishes, because the direct .power ‘of the Turk has
wholly ceased within its borders. It is tributary and
no more. Turkish soldiers are no longer quartered
on any spot of the emancipated land. The Turk has
no voice in the choice of ‘prince or minister or magis-
trate for any spot on Servian soil. As long as Servia
was under Turkish rule, the land was as wretched as
Bosnia or Bulgaria. The extinction of Turkish rule
has’ made the change. Only ten years ago, while
there were still Turkish garrisons in certain places,.
those places. were still exposed to the crimes and
outrages which are implied in the presence of Turkish
garrisons. The. Turkish garrisons are gone, and the
people of ‘Belgrade and the other towns which are
delivered from their presence are as safe as any inha-
bitants of other. Christian towns elsewhere. In the
eyes of Midhat this state of things naturally seems
like the loss of a victim, For that-very reason, Europe
should the more strongly insist on the deliverance of
the other victims of Midhat and his fellows. Midhat’s
objection to confining the garrisons to certain points |
proves that the confining them to certain points would
be a gain. ‘ His fears that such confinement would
lead to total expulsion may be read as a hope that it _
will lead to total expulsion. But the experience of
Servia provés that the confining the enemy to certain
spots is not enough. As long as there is a Turkish .
garrison in any Bulgarian town, that town may at any
moment be dealt with as Belgrade was in 1862. There-
fore no Turkish soldier must be allowed to set foot
in any land which is’ supposed to be set free. The
usual law comes in, It is as easy to get much out of
the Turk as to get little. It will cost no more trouble
T 2

276 THE PRACTICAL QUESTION.

to compel the Turk to take away his garrisons alto-
gether than it will cost to compel him to confine them
to certain places. The Turk will never submit. to
restriction without coercion ; under coercion he will
submit as easily to the greater restriction as to the less.
One practical lesson then is learned by the example
of Servia; Turkish troops must be shut out of every
tand which it is designed to set free. The other great
.principle is that the Turk shall have no- voice in the
appointment of any one who is to bear rule or office
in the liberated lands, be he a prince or be he a
beadle. It is vain to stipulate that the governors or
other officers to be appointed shall be natives, or that
they shall be Christians. The Turk can always find
Christians as ready to do his work as any Mussulman.
He finds Greeks ready to do his work of falsehood at
European courts ; he has found at least one English-
man ready to do his work of blood in Crete. The
native who sells himself and his country for the pay
of a foreign master will always be a worse ruler than
the foreign master himself. In truth, one would
rather’ be ruled by those worthy Mussulmans who
refused to do the work of blood in Bulgaria than —
by any Christian who would take the. pay of the
Turk. Nor is it anything to say that these governors
shall be appointed with the approval of European
powers. Of all the proposals in the world this is
one which is most sure to lead to what diplomatists
so greatly fear by the names of “difficulties” and
“complications.” Such a proposal is a very seed-
‘plot of difficulties. and complications. The Turk is
cunning, and he will be sure to find some way of
setting the powers together‘by the ears, and of get-
ting his own way by the help'of some of them. Once

GOVERNORS NOT TO BE CHOSEN BY THE TURK. 277

more, the appeal is to experience. Look at Roumania
under the rule of princes who, though Christians,
were nominees of the Turk. Look at Roumania now
under the rule of an independent prince, Doubtless
there are things to amend in the state of Roumania,
as there are in thé state of other lands. But it*is
perfectly certain that, whatever Roumania has still-
to mend, she has gained much since shé attained.-a
practical freedom, and that whatever still needs mend-
ing in her will not: be mended any the quicker by
giving the Turk a voice in her affairs.

Two principles then are to be laid down, two princi+
ples which are taught-us by the witness of experience.
Wherever it is meant to give any degree of. freedom,
to work any degree of reform, within those borders
the presence of Turkish troops must be forbidden, ©
and the Turk must be shut out from any voice in
the internal affairs of those lands. These are the
only guaranties which are really any guaranties at
all. They are the. only securities against a con-
tinuance or a revival of all the horrors of Turkish
rule. Any proposals which do not start from those
two principles lie without the range of practical
politics. They may be dictated by a sentimental
regard for the honour, the dignity, or the suscepti-
bility of the Turk. They may be dictated by a
desire to escape for the moment from the hard neces-
sity of doing something. They are not dictated by a
rational regard for the welfare of the lands that are
to be benefited, or for the permanence of the reforms
which it. is sought to make. Lord Derby once
sneeringly spoke of “the eternal Eastern Question.”
He forgot perhaps that it was his own do-nothing

- policy which has done more than anything else ‘to

278 THE PRACTICAL QUESTION.

make the Eastern Question eternal. For, as long as
attempts at settlement are made which are not
founded on these two principles, the Eastern Question
will remain eternal. It will always be cropping up
- again, becduse nothing practical will have been done
to settle it. But these two provisions will secure, at
least negatively, the freedom and good government of
any land to.which they are applied. That is, they will
take away the great hindrance to freedom and good
government, namely the power of the Turk. They
may not settle the Eastern Question for ever, but they
will settle. one stage of it; they will make the way
ready for a full and final settlement.

These two points, the shutting out of* Turkish
garrisons and the denial to the Turk of any voice in
the appointment of governors, are matters of prin-
ciple, matters of absolute necessity, Everything else
is matter of detail, in settling which all manner of
particular circumstances may rightly be taken into
account, I felt no call here to: bring forward any cut
and dried scheme. To draw up any minute scheme
would be impossible without going into minute in-
quiries as to the condition and prospects of every
province, almost of every district. It is necessary
alike for Bosnia and for Thessaly that both those
Jands should be set -free from Turkish: soldiers and
from rulers appointed by thé Turk. It does not.
follow that the political state which would be best
for Bosnia would be best for Thessaly. Shall the
liberated lands become wholly independent states ?
Shall they be united by any federal tie? Shall they,
or any of them, remain in an external vassalage to
the Turk? Shall any of them be annexed to exist-
ing states, tributary or independent? Shall their

CIRCUMSTANCES OF DIFFERENT DISTRICTS. 279

constitutions be monarchic or republican? Shall
their princes bé hereditary or elective? All these
are important, and some of them difficult, questions,
questions which ave not to be answered off hand;
questions to which no single answer can be given, but
which must be answered one by one, according to
the particular circumstances of each district. The
point is that, under any of these. systems or forms of
government, freedom and good government are at
least possible ; under the direct rule of the Turk they
are impossible. Let the liberated lands be as Greece,
let them be as Montenegro, let them be as Servia, let
-them be as Dalmatia. In any of these cases, they
will be better off than they can be if they remain as”
Bosnia and Bulgaria are now. . In any of these cases,
it is possible—it is enough to say “ possible,” with-
out going on to “probable” or “certain ””—that the
essentials of good govetnment .and. civilized order
may be had. Where the Turk either sends troops.
or appoints rulers, they never can be had.

The. question will now naturally come, to what
lands are these advantages to be granted? The
answer doubtless is to as many lands as possible.
The greater the number of human beings that are set
free from the yoke of the Turk, the greater the gain
for mankind. But the Turk grew by degrees, and
something may be said for letting him die out by
degrees, The Roman world was once, in Gibbon’s
words, confined to a corner of Thrace ; and it may be
no unnatural stage in the course of events if for a
while the Turkish world, as far as Europe is concerned,
should be confined to the same corner of Thrace also.
As a matter of feeling, as a matter of historic

280 THE PRACTICAL QUESTION.

memory, the recovery of the Imperial City would
be the foremost object of ail. Before thoughts of
Bosnia and Bulgaria, before thoughts of Thessaly and
Crete, would come the cleansing of the New Rome,
the chasing of the barbarian from the throne of the.
Cesars, the driving out of the misbeliever from the
mighty temple of Justinian. But, in- a calmer
view, if the essential freedom of the Greek and
Slavonic lands can be purchased by letting the
barbarian’ still linger on a little while within the
bounds of Constantinople, let that sacrifice be made.
In Constantinople the Turk is less mischievous than he
is anywhere else. He cannot, in the great city, under
the eyes of Europeans, indulge the same frantic ex-
- cesses of tyranny which form his daily sport in Bosnia
and Bulgaria. Again, till Greek and Bulgarian have
‘settled their differences and drawn their boundary line,
till it is settled whether. the next Ceasar of the East
shall be a successor of Basil or a successor-of Samuel,
it may be as well to keep the glittering prize out
of the hands of either claimant. If then Bulgaria
and Bosnia and Herzegovina, Albania, Epeiros, and
Thessaly, Crete and every island of the A®gean, are
‘set free from the direct rule of the Turk, let him, if
such is to be the price, still tarry for a while in New
Rome. If it pleases Turkish susceptibility, or- rather
if it would better win the good will.of any European
power, let the Sultan still be over-lord ; let him still
take tribute from the lands which are freed from his
yoke; let him exercise a Sultan’s right of squander-
ing that tribute as he will, The Highnesses and the
Excellencies may lose ; but the Imperial Majesty will °
not lose. The Highnesses and Excellencies will lose
their power of mischief ; the Imperial Majesty may still

TRIBUTARY STATES. 281

wallow in a marble sty and gorge itself out of a gilded
trough. The lands would be set frée; their people
might be flourishing and happy. The sum of human
happiness would bg increased; the nations would be
happier; the Sultan would not be less happy; the
nations might again live the life of nations ; the Sultan
‘might go on living the life of a Sultan; it is only the
Ring and its tools, the Highnesses and the Excel-
lencies, who would lose by such an: arrangement,
and all that they would lose would be the power of
doing evil,

The plan of tributary states thus seems to be the least
violent form of change, and yet to be change enqugh
to secure all immediate practical objects. That plan
is the one practical course, the course which experience
' dictates; there are none but sentimental objections to

it. But there is one of those sentimental objections
which takes a somewhat plausible shape. To those who.
have studied these’ questions all their lives it is
amusing to see how certain writers in the weekly and
daily press, who have just found out for the first time
that theré are such beings as. Slavonic-speaking''
_ Mussulmans, are suddenly kindled with a burning
zeal for the welfare of these same Slavonic-speaking
Mussulmans. The same inen who think the slaughter
and outrage of any number. of Christians a mere
joke, who sneer at humanity and philanthropy when
Christians are their objects, who put “atrocity” in
inverted commas when itis a Christian who suffers
the atrocity, who put “insurrection” in inverted
commas when it is a Christian who rises against his
oppressor—these. men are ,véry eager, sometimes in
-sentences of wild screaming, sometimes in sentences
of. lumbering solemnity, to set forth the possible

282 THE PRACTICAL QUESTION.

wrongs of the Bosnian Mahometans, in case Bosnia
should ever be put under -a Christian government.
Those who sneer at philanthropy on behalf of a
Christian victim ¢an become wonderfully philanthropic
on behalf of a Mussulman oppressor. Those who will
not allow the “atrocity”. of evil deeds when the Chris-
tian is the sufferer, shriek with horror at the “atro-
city” the moment the Christian is the possible doer.
Those who will hardly bring themselves to believe that
the Turk is other than a suffering lamb clutch at the
faintest shadow of rumour to paint the revolted patriot
asa wolf. Let this kind of folly pass. We might in-
deed answer that no great wrong would be done in the, .
long run, if the oppressing minority and the oppressed
majority were to change places for a season. Buta
worthier answer may be given. ‘The abolition of the
- direct rule of the Turk is as much needed in the.
interest of the peaceable and orderly Mussulman, who
conscientiously follows his-own law and is ready to
leave his Christian neighbour to follow his, as it is in
the interest of the Christian himself. Such Mussul-
mans no one wishes to injure; no one wishes to make
them the subjects or inferiors of the Christians, or to
put them under any disability as compared with the
Christians. To them the rule of the Sultan, that is
in truth the rule of the corrupt and bloody gang at
Constantinople, is almost as oppressive, though not
quite in the same way, as it is to the Christian him-
self. The disabilities of the Christian often wrong
the peaceful Mussulman as well as the Christian. A
wanton murder of Mussulman by Mussulman has
been known to go unpunished when Christian wit-
nesses only could prove the fact.(°) Peaceable
Mussulmans, who keep those virtues which are said

THE MUSSULMAN POPULATION. 283

to distinguish the private Turk from the official Turk,
would have a far more favourable field for the prac
tice of thosé virtues under a Christian government. '
Such a governmentacould give equal justice to all its
subjects, and to them among the. rest. Such equal
justice they cannot find undér a government which
corrupts part of its subjects by giving them a power
of oppressing the rest.

While the notion of good poveniment for the
Christian under Mussulman rule is purely dreamy
and sentimental, to secure good government for the
peaceable Mussulman by putting him under Christian
rule is in every way practical. Those who know
the Mussulman - character. best believe that the.
peaceable Mahometan population, where there is
_ any, would sit down in perfect contentment under a
government of any kind which would relieve them
from the oppression of their present masters at Con-
stantinople, and would respect their religion and
customs. The Bulgarian beys with whom Mr. Calvert:
talked invited of their own accord the help of an’
European in the administration of the province.
. They complained of the ruling powers at: Constanti-

“nople almost as strongly as the Christjans-did. On
two points only would they support the powers at
Constantinople ; they would not be annexed by
Russia; they would not “have the Bulgarians put
over their heads.”() Most certainly no one wishes
to annex them to Russia; no one wishes to put the
Bulgarians “over their heads,” in the sense in which
they have hitherto been put over the heads of the
Bulgarians. Even in the Jand where oppression has
been worst of all, the Bosnian beys, the descendants
of renegades, still keeping up the old spite of the

284 THE PRACTICAL QUESTION.

renegade, are described none the less as very lax
votaries of Islam, as remembering their Christian
descent, as treasuring up the patents of nobility which
their forefathers received from tke ancient Christian
kings, Those who know them well think that, if
they were put under a Christian government, their
reconversion would not be hard; the bey would’
easily slide back into the baron. At this very mo-
ment some of them are crying out for an Austrian
occupation of their country; in other parts 'the native
Mussulmans are rising against the corrupt rule of the
Ring, against a constitution which is as great a
mockery for them as‘it is for the Christians, In short,
we have again only to make our old appeal to experi-
ence. Both Greek and Slavonic experience teach that
under a Mussulman government Mussulmans and men
of other religions cannot live together on equal terms.
English and Russian experience teaches that under a
Christian government Mussulmans and men of other
religions can live together on equal terms. In truth
Greek and Slavonic experience proves the same also.
There is a mosque at Chalkis and there is a mosque
at Belgrade. In this war even Mussulman refugees
have found a hospitable shelter in Montenegro. The few
Mahometans at Chalkis suffer no wrong or disability.
At Belgrade the case is still more instructive. When
the Turkish garrison left Belgrade, the settled Mussul-
man population went also, But why did they go?
Not by their own free will; not by the will of the Ser-
vians, who wished them to stay. They went by orders
from Constantinople, where the ruling powers wished to
make a case again Servia,as if Servia had driven them
‘out. But the mosque is there still; and its minister
is-paid by the.Servian state for his services towards

TOLERANCE IN THE CHRISTIAN. STATES. 285

any Mussulman remnant that may be left, or towards
any Mussulman travellers that may pass by. Here
surely there can be no charge of intolerance ; there
“may. be some ground for disestablishment.

In the particular? case of Bosnia, if any special
safeguard js neetted, the safeguard is plain. I believe
that either the Servian government in case of an-
nexation, or a native Bosnian government in case
of the foundation of a separate state, would be both
able and willing to do justice to its Mussulman
subjects. But, if it be thought otherwise, there is a
neighbouring power which is quite able to do all that
is needed. Let the King of Slavonia, Croatia, and
Dalmatia become King of Bosnia also.(¥4) ;

Another question may be raised, Are our thoughts
in this matter to be directed only to Europe? Is |
Asia to go for nothing? It is undoubtedly: a fact that |
Turkish rule has done its work yet more thoroughly
in Asia than in Europe.. It has been evén more
utterly desolating and blighting. It has more
thoroughly turned the garden into a wilderness. We
ask for the seats of Greek colonization, of Macedonian
and Roman rule; for the cities famous in the early
days of ecclesiastical lore and ecclesiastical contro-
versy, A far greater proportion of them than in
Europe have utterly perished; a far greater propor- —
tion, if they have not utterly perished, have ceased to
be the abodes of Christian and civilized men. The
territory of ancient commonwealths and -kingdoms
has become the pasture of a few wandering herds-
men. .To win those lands back again to civilized
rule would indeed be a noble work. It would bea
noble work too to free Syria, all its races, all its creeds,
united in nothing else, but united in hatred towards the

286° THE PRACTICAL QUESTION.

‘Ottoman master, from the yoke which equally weighs
down all the representatives of all the older inhabitants
of the land. . Yet it is in Asia, in the Anatolian penin-
sula and in the Anatolian peninsula only, that the Turk
is really at home. The Ottoman is‘nardly at home even
there ; but the Turk, the representative of the earlier.
and better Turkish races, is at home. There alone
can we speak of a really Turkish nation or people, as

. distinguished from a mere Turkish army of occupation.
Europe and Asia then stand on different grounds, and
at all events the settlement of Europe is the nearer
and the more pressing claim. .In Europe the rule of
the Turk must be wholly got rid of ; in Asia the Turk |
may be left alone in those parts where he really forms’
the people of the land, provided full room for freedom
and developement is given to that fringe of civilization
which still, as of old, cleaves to the Euxine and Egzan
coasts. The line of Othman is worn out; but a

Seljuk Sultan at Ikonion need be the object of no
more dislike or jealousy than a Shah of Persia.

Our argument then seems perfect. Granting our
one assumption to start with, the stages follow. on one
another almost like a’ demonstration in Euclid. If
there be such a thing as right and wrong in national .
affairs, then a nation which has done wrong to another
nation is bound to make rédress to that nation. Eng-
land has done deep wrong to those nations of Europe
which are under the rule of the Turk. Therefore

. England is bound to make redress to those nations,

But no real redress can be made to them as long as.
they are left.under the direct rule of the Turk. There-
fore they must be set free from the direct rule of the
Turk, and put in a relation at least not worse than
the present relation of Roumania and Servia. And

NEED OF IMMEDIATE ACTION, 287

this can be done, most likely without fighting, if only
the powers of Europe, or some of them, will agree to
deal with the Turk in the only way in which it is any.
use trying to deal with him. Amd such an agreement
with other powers may be made, if only England will
leave off making objections to every scheme which -
seems likely to do the least good to the oppressed
nations. .In a word our duty is plain, our duty is
easy ; we have nothing to do but to do it.

And it must be done-at once. -The tales which
come day by day from every corner of the lands
which still groan under Turkish tyranny might move
the heart of a Turk; they have moved the hearts of
some Turks, of those good Turks whom the Ring’
punished for their goodness. One might almost think
that they were enough to move the heart of an Am-
bassador ot a Foreign Secretary. Every day we hear
the same tales of murder and robbery and burning,
' of insult and outrage of every kind, which show that
those relations between the Sultan and his subjects of
which the treaty of Paris was so tender have at least
not.changed for the better since the treaty of .Paris,
_ So it is, so it ever has been ; $o it ever will be, as long
..as an inch of Christian soil is left under the wasting

rule of the barbarian.. There must be no delay, no
'shilly-shallying, no cowardly or sentimental chatter
about a year of grace. It is enough to tell us what
the year of grace means, that it was proposed by the
Turk himself through the voice of Midhat.@*) It
_ means that the Turk wants a little longer time to work
his wicked will on Eastern Christendom, and that for’
that end, he wants a little more time to throw dust in
the eyes of Western Christendom, “A. year’s grace is
asked to carry out reforms. What reason is there to

. 288 THE PRACTICAL QUESTION.

think that these reforms would be any more carried
out than the reforms which have been promised a
hundred times before? What reason is there to think’
that, if they were carried out, they would do the
slightest good to the oppressed hations? For they
would not take away the rule of the Turk, and where
the rule of the Turk_is there can be no reform. The
year of grace will be spent in -putting on a little
varnish and veneer in places where European eyes
_are likely to see it, while the back -parts of the |
fabric of rottenness will remaim untouched. It will
be spent in whitening the sepulchre which will
still be full within of dead men’s bones and of all
uncleanness. It will be spent in setting things so as
to make.a fair. show at Constantinople and Thessalo-
nica and a few other places where deluded Europeans
will see the show, while the relations between the
Sultan and his subjects, the relations from which
Midhat complains that Servia is set free, will go on
as ever in the dark places of Bosnia and Bulgaria, of
Thessaly and Crete. Yet it would seem that there
are Englishmen, that there are English statesmen,
who ‘cannot or will not see through such a flimsy
cheat as this. The net is set in vain in the sight of.
any bird, but it may be set openly enough in the eyes
of an English Foreign Secretary. Or is it merely
the shrinking from doing anything, the cowardly hope
that, in the space of a year, something may happen
to save the sad necessity of action and decision?
“The King may die, or the ass may die, or I may die
myself.” And this hand-to-mouth way of doing
things, this helpless waiting on something—hardly on
Providence—is what nowadays is called statesmanship.
A statesman now is not.the man who strives by the

A "YEAR OF GRACE.” 289

lessons of the present and the past to shape his
course for the future; it is the man who can devise
some petty momentary shift to save himself from the
trouble and responsibility of taking any course at ‘all.
Rather than face the responsibility of making up
his mind to do-anything, the modern statesman will
face the’ responsibility of condemning suffering
nations to go on bearing their. sufferings unhelped
and unpitied. To such a statesman as this the
notion of a year of grace, a’year in which he may
save himself from acting or thinking, is a Godsend
indeed. Those who do not wilfully shut their eyes,
those who walk by the light of reason and experience,
would be inclined, instead of talking of a year of
grace, to echo the cry, Now or never, now and for
ever. Of all the schemes which lie beyond the range
of practical politics, surely official weakness and
cowardice never lighted on a scheme which lay further
beyond that range than the scheme of giving the Turk
a year of grace to work his sham teforms.

The main argument then stands thus; but there.
are one or two by-points to which it may be well
to give a word or two. We are told over and over
again that, after all, the Turks are no worse than
other people, that Christian governments and Chris-
tian nations have done things just as bad, that the
Turks and the Christians in the South-eastern lands
are both very bad, that there is nothing to choose
between them, and that we shall do best to leave
them to themselves, Now most of these statements _
are quite false, and the arguments which are founded
on them are the merest fallacies. Still there is just
enough truth mixed with the falsehood to make the

; ; U

290 THE PRACTICAL QUESTION.

falsehood more dangerous. It may be therefore
worth while to point out where the falsehood and
fallacy lies.

One argument on behalf of the Turk, that which is
drawn from the fact that Christians are said to have
done things equally bad, has spread to the Turks them-

‘selves. At the Conference, when the Turks Safvet
and Edhem were trying to deceive the. European
ministers by quibbles about the meaning of the word —
“Bulgaria,” they had the further impudence to speak
of certain doings in France in past times, ag the
massacre of ‘Saint Bartholomew and the dragonnades, .
as parallels to the doings which they had themselves
ordered. The French ministers were naturally an-
gry.(%) The Turks doubtless thought that they were
saying something clever, and showing their knowledge
of European history. But what they said was very-
little to the purpose. If Turks do evil now, it does
not make that evil any the less to say that Frenchmen
do evil even now, much less to say that Frenchmen did _
evil a long time ago. Let it be proved that Charles the
Ninth or Lewis the Fourteenth was as bad as Safvet
himself, that does not make Safvet any the better.
Comparisons of this kind prove nothing. But, if
it can be proved that the government of Marshal
MacMahon, even that the government of ‘Louis-
Napoleon Buonaparte, is much better than that of -
Charles the Ninth, but that the government of Midhat,
Edhem, and Safvet is much worse than that of Sulei-
man the Lawgiver, something is proved the other
way. When we see that all the European govern-
ments, whatever faults they may still have, have
changed greatly for the better during the last three
hundred years, while the rule of the Turk has simply

FALLACIOUS PARALLELS. 291

got worse and_worse,-we are brought back to the
distinctions which we drew in an earlier chapter..
The worst form of misgovernment in an European
state is after all onJy the corruption or perversion
of a thing which is in itself good and which therefore
may be reformed. The rule of the Turk is in itself
evil, and cannot be reformed. It is perfectly true
that European governments, therefore that Christian
governments, have in past times done particular acts
which were as bad, or nearly as bad, as the doings of
the Turk. - But the worst doings of Christian govern«
ments have been in a manner incidental. They have
been the crimes of particular men or of particular
ages. They are not the necessary consequence of
any form of the Christian religion, or of any form of
government, from despotism to democracy, which has
ever existed in any European state. Therefore Euro-
pean governments have left off doing such things.
All European governments have mended ; some have
mended more than others, but all have mended more»
or less. The very worst have mended so far as to
be a great deal better than the rule of the Turk.
Take the country which we commonly think has
mended least of any in Western Europe. Take Spain.
A Spanish Protestant a hundred years back was liable
and likely to be burned alive. He would have been
better off as a. Christian subject of the Turk. But now,
though the Spanish Protestant complains with good
reason of vexatious restrictions on the public practice
of his religion, yet his life and property are as safe as
those of the Catholic. He would not now be better
off by. becoming a Christian subject of the Turk.
Christian governments have done particular acts as
bad as those of the Turk. But no Christian govern-
U2

292 THE PRACTICAL QUESTION..-

ment has been evil in its very nature in the way
in which the rule of the Turk is evil. No Christian
government. has gone on ruling so badly for so
long a time as the Turk has done. For any Euro-
pean government is, in its idea, a government of
men by rulers of their own nation, established for
the general good of the nation. It may. carry out
that idea more or less perfectly; but the idea is
in Itself a good one, and, when it is departed from -
in practice, reforms miay bring things nearer to what
they ought to be. But the idea of the Turkish rule
in Europe js a thing which is bad in itself. It is
always and essentially, not now and then and in-
cidentally, the rule of men of one religion over men
of another religion, carried on in the interest of
the men of the ruling religion only. Its very nature
involves the subjugation and degradation of the
mass of the people of the land; and subjugation and,
degradation are sure to grow into direct oppression
and outrage of every kind. Therefore the worst
European government is only misgovernment, the
abuse of a good thing which may be reformed. The
rule of the Turk is not government at all. It is
a thing evil in itself, which cannot be reformed,
but which, like other evil things, is sure to get
worse and worse.

Let us take the things which, if they are ies are
worst of all. Let us take the worst stories which have
been told of the doings of Russia in Poland and in
Turkestan. TI need not enter into the truth of either;
for argument’s sake, let us take them at the worst.(*4)
If the worst stories are true, nay, even if we take off
a good deal from the worst stories, no right-minded
man will defend them. Still they are quite different

¢

FALLACY ABOUT RUSSIA, 293

from the doings of the Turk. The worst stories from
Turkestan are after all not so bad as the doings in
Bulgaria. The element of brutal outrage and mockery,
for the sake of outrage and mockery, is wanting. And
in any case all thése things are incidental. They
are done towards enemies or revolters.- The par-
ticular doings in Bulgaria might also be said to be
done to enemies and revolters. But then something
of the same kind, though not so much of it at
once, is always going on in the Turkish dominions,
whether there are any revolts or not. The worst
things that have been said, truly or falsely, of any
Russian in Poland or Turkestan are incidental evils
which might be reformed. They are not always
going on in all times and in all places under the
Russian dominion. But doings of the same kind are
always going on in all times and. in all places under
the Turkish dominion. For they are the direct con-
sequence of the nature of the rule of the Turk, and
therefore they cannot be reformed.

"Perhaps | the most striking way of shewing the,
difference between governments which ‘can improve
and governments which can only get worse is to look
at the signatures to the treaty of 1856, and to compare
the history of the powers which signed it during the
twenty-one years that have passed. That treaty was
signed by England, France, Russia, Sardinia, and the |
Turk. In 1856 England still kept up traces of the
days when the people.of Ireland were bondmen on —
their own soil, as the people of Thessaly and Bulgaria
are still. In 1877 the dominion of the alien Church
has passed away, and the soil of Ireland has been
set free. In 1856 France was under a blood-stained
tyranny, and: her troops held Rome in bondage. In

294 ‘THE PRACTICAL QUESTION.

1877 France is a commonwealth ; Rome is the head
of free Italy, and he who figures in that treaty as
King of Sardinia is King of the whole ransomed land. .
In d856 Nicolas of Russia reigned over a people of
whom all but an exclusive class’ were bondmen. In.
1877 Alexander the Liberator reigns over a people
who are not yet politically free, but among whom
every man’s personal chains are broken. He reigns
over a land where the voice of a nation, strong in its
renewed life, is heard for the first time as it bids its
sovereign march forth to the relief of the oppressed.
In all these lands reforms may be wrought and have
been wrought. But all the change that one and
twenty years have wrought for the lands under
Turkish rule is that in 1877 the scorpions of Safvet
and Midhat and Edhem, of Selim and Chefvet and.
Achmet, are felt to be yet harder to bear than the
whips of. Abd-ul-Medjid were in 1856.

As for the feeble cry that the Christians in those
lands are as bad as the Turks, that I have dealt with
already in more places than one. All that need be
said here is one parting word of wonder and pity at
the moral state of those who can rake up and gloat
over every fault which long ages of wrong may have
caused to stain the glorious uprising of our suffering
brethren, while they catch with desperate zeal at every
straw which they deem maybe twisted to make out a
case for their oppressors.(*)

But now comes the last point which we have to:
argue, Is there after all any clashing in this matter
between the duty of England and _ her. interests ?
-Those who truly love their country, those to whom
her honour is dear, those to whom her real well-

QUESTION OF INTEREST. 295

being is dear, will say that, if duty and interest clash,
it is interest that must give way. But it is only the
feeblest and shallowest and most short-sighted view
of English interests which can persuade men that any
English interest wil be jeoparded by England doing
right. If we can conceive a man from some distant
land, able to understand and judge, but knowing
nothing of the actual facts of European politics—if
we can conceive such an one being told that it was
for the interest of an island at one end of Europe
that the people at the other end of Europe should
go on bearing unutterable wrongs—if he were told
that the people of that island had strained every
nerve, that they had poured forth their treasure and
their blood, to prolong the bondage of those nations
—if he were told that it was handed down as the
traditional policy. of that island that the oppressors
of those nations should at all- hazards be upheld
_ in their power of oppression—one is tempted to
apply the words of the apostle; Would he not say
that ye are mad? To such an one it would seem the
paradox of paradoxes to be told that the wrongs of
Bosnia and Crete could .in any way promote the
interest of England.. And the paradox would seem
greater still when he heard the way in which the dark
saying was explained, when he was told in what way
it was that England was supposed to find her interest
in the plundered and outraged homes of South-
eastern Europe. He would be told that there was
another power, another nation, a nation which had.
never wronged us, but to which we had done deadly
wrong, a nation whose advance we thought good to
dread and which we thought ourselves specially called
on for the ‘sake of our own interest to keep back from

296 THE PRACTICAL QUESTION.

winning influence over those lands. ‘He would be told
that these lands were struggling for freedom—that in
every struggle for freedom they had first looked for
help to the home of freedom—that, when they needed
protection, it was English protection which they first
sought—-that, when they had a crown to bestow, it
was to an English prince that they first offered it—but
that England steadily refused help, steadily refused
protection, for fear of increasing the strength of the
rival power, and so drove those nations, against their
will, to seek at the hands of: that rival power for that
help and protection which England refused to them.
This is in truth what we have been doing for many
years. And to our supposed impartial observer it would
indeed seem a.strange way of strengthening ourselves
and of checking the advance of that rival power. If
the man from the distant land spoke his thoughts out
openly, he would say, “O fools and blind, you are
working in the cause of the power which you wish to
weaken. You are doing all that you can to tarnish your
own fame, and to brighten the fame of the rival power.
You are throwing away the allies who offer themselves,
to swell your strength, and driving them against their
will to swell the strength of your rival.” He would
perhaps even be tempted to go on and say, “Is this
your own counsel? Is it not rather some device of
the very power which you dread? You tell me that
that power is a dark, subtle, intriguing power, a power
which has its spies and emissaries everywhere, prying
and thrusting themselves into every corner, and
everywhere doing the work of that power in secret.
Are you sure that you have no traitor in the camp?
are you sure that the policy of which you boast your-
selves is not in truth a suggestion of some spy or

FEAR OF RUSSIA. 297

emissary of your rival? Has ‘no such emissary.cun-
ningly found out the way to lure you into the path
where your interests will be sacrificed to the interests
of your rival, where your honour will be tarnished and
his honour madeto shine brighter ?.”

If we look the case fairly in thé face, without
troubling ourselves with oft repeated formule, it does
indeed scem like madness when we profess to dread
the advance of .Russia in South-eastern Europe, and
then by way of checking that advance, do all that we
can to make the nations of South-eastern Europe the
friends of Russia, the enemies of England. We profess
to fear that Russia may add the European dominions
of the Turk to the émpire which she has already.
Our ‘way to keep her from adding those lands to her
empire is to drive those lands to seek for annexation
to her empire, as the lesser evil in a choice of evils.
Those lands have not the faintest wish for annexation
to Russia. They are glad of the friendship of Russia,
as they would be still more glad of the friendship of
England. But there is not a man from the border of
Croatia to the border of liberated Greece who wishes
of his own free will to become a Russian subject.
We drive them to wish for it; we bring about a state
‘of things which leaves them no choice except the
Russian or the Turk; and then we turn about, and
wonder and cry out and deem ourselves wronged, and
look on those nations as monsters of wickedness, if,
in the sad choice which we ourselves have forced upon
them, they choose the lesser evil rather than the
greater. If a day ever comes when those lands are
formally annexed to Russia, if a day ever comes
when, without being formally annexed to. Russia, they
are brought under such exclusive’ Russian influence ,

298 THE PRACTICAL QUESTION.

as to become practically subjects of Russia, the men
who have brought all this about will be the men who
have held up the Russian hobgoblin befcre -the eyes
of England. Foremost among the truest friends of
Russia is the man who, when the p&ople of England
_and the people of Russia were stirred at the same
-moment by the same high and generous feelings, when
the sovereign of Russia was offering us the right hand
of fellowship in the noblest of works, had no answer
to give in the name of England but brags of insolent
defiance, sent forth, not from the council-chamber,

but from the banquet. And a trusty, though unwit-

ting, yoke+fellow he has found in the colleague who

surpasses all men in stirring heaven and earth to find
the means of doing nothing. If a Russian Emperor

ever mounts the throne of the New Rome, the men

who will have done most to guide him thither will be

Benjamin Earl of Beaconsfield and Edward Henry
.Earl of Derby.

It does indeed seem to be a matter of simple com-
mon sense that, if we are afraid of Russian encroach-
ment, of Russian influence in those lands, we ought at
once to seize every opportunity of making the people
of those lands our friends, every opportunity of teach-
ing them to look to us and not to Russia for help and
for counsel in their need. Except during the short
moment when the counsels of England were swayed
by wisdom and generosity under the rule of Canning,
we have done everything that we could to drive the
people of those lands to look to Russia as their helper.
This strange course is supposed in some mysterious
way to be likely to check the advance of Russia and to
lessen her influence.” There is really some reason to
suspect that we have herea result of a confusion which

HOW TO “SUPPORT TURKEY.” 299.

was spoken of in an earlier chapter. It really looks as
if this kind of traditional policy largely sprang out of
sheer inability to distinguish between Turkey and the
-Turks. Lord Palmerston, in words worthy ¢o rank
with the passage which I before quoted from Sir
Henry Elliot, says: “ We support Turkey for our own
sake and for our own interests. (%)” The truth is
that we do not support Turkey at all; we support
the enemy of Turkey, namely the Turk. To support
Turkey would be not only a generous policy; for
those who deem it a matter of paramount importance
to check the advance of Russia, it would be also 4 wise
policy. To support Turkey ought to mean to support
the ‘people of Turkey, to support the nations which
inhabit Turkey, to encourage every movement which ©
can give them more strength and more freedom,
and thereby to make them a. stronger barrier
against Russian encroachment, if Russian encroach-—
ment is dreaded. But to make Turkey free, strong,
national, able to hold her own, able to withstand en-
croachments from Russia or anywhere else, the only
way is to free Turkey from the Turk. In supporting
Turkey in this sense, we should be upholding a moral
power. In upholding the Turk at the expense of
Turkey, we are upholding a power of simple brute
force. The power of the Turk can never get beyond
brute force ; it has no moral basis, no moral strength,
and the lack of moral strength weakens its physical
strength also. The Turk can never bring against
Russia or against any other power the full resources
of thelands over which he rules. The ruler of any
other land can call into the field the full strength of
the nation which inhabits the land. But the Turk
can never call into: the field the full strength of the

300 THE PRACTICAL QUESTION.

nations which inhabit Turkey. At the outside, all
that he can bring is the strength of the army of occu-
pation which keeps the nations of Turkey. down.
But hee cannot even bring the full strength of the
army of occupation ; for part of that army of occu-
pation must be employed in keeping down, or rather
' in fighting against, the subject nations. Its full force
therefore can never be brought to act against the
invader from without. ;
_We are thus‘ brought. again to one of the dis-
tinctions. which we drew at the beginning. We
here see ‘the difference between a land which has
a national government and a land which is held
down by. strangers. The. national government is —
essentially strong; the domination of strangers is
essentially weak. When France and Germany were
at war, each side had to dread the efforts of the
enemy abroad; neither side had any reason to dread
the efforts of any enemy at home. Every man in
France was ready to fight for France; every man
in Germany was ready to fight for Germany. But if
Russia went to war with the Turk, the vast majority
of the people of European Turkey would at once
spring to arms, not to fight for the Turk but to fight
against him. The Turk would have to wage war in
every corner, not only against the invading army, but
against the people of the land which he calls his own,
. In trying then to support the Turk, we are supporting
a thing which is not only wicked, but is in its own .
nature weak. If we hold that our interest leads us to-
support Turkey, as a check on Russia, or for any other
reason, we must get rid of that which makes Turkey
weak, namely the rule of the Turk. In short, duty
and interest, if there be any interest in the matter,

INHERENT WEAKNESS OF THE TURK. 301

do not clash, but both lead us the same way. Duty
bids ‘us set free those suffering nations as am atone-
ment for the, wrongs which we have done to them.
‘Interest, if thereybe any interest in the matté, leads
us to set them free, in order that South-eastera
Europe may become strong, and may be mistress of
the whole of her own resources, which she. never can
be while she is under the foreign yoke of the Turk.
In saying this, I do not, put out of sight the in-
herent difficulties of the case. We cannot call up at.
a moment any single power which may at once take
the place of the Turk. We shall have to face the
difficulties which atise from the fact that so many
separate nations dwell in those lands, and that some
of them are unhappily divided by grudges against
one another. In such a case, it would be impossible
to call into being any power which should have the
full national ‘unity and national strength as is pos-
sessed by such a power, for instance, as France.
Such a power has never been in those lands, and it
never can be. That is the natural result of that
permanent distinction of races in those lands which
were spoken of in an earlier chapter. The utmost
that can be thought of, at all events for a long time
to come, would be a number of states united by a
close federal tie. And no one can hope that such
a federation of states would have the strength of
a single national -power. But it would be stronger
than the Turk. Jealousies between the several states
would be likely enough, and they would undoubtedly
be a source of weakness. But they would not be
the source of. such utter weakness as the necessity
‘under which the Turk lies of fighting at once against
his enemy without and against the great mass of those

302 THE PRACTICAL QUESTION.

whom he ealls his subjects within. But more import-
ant still would be the moral power which such an
union of states would have, as compared with the
wickedrule of the Turk. If Russia, as those who
call themselves her enemies say, cloaks all manner of
evi] designs under the pretext of helping the op-
pressed, that pretext would be at once taken from
her. She has always—I am again speaking the
language of her professed enemies—-a plausible ex-

cuse for interfering in those.lands as long as the Turk

rules over them. She will have no longer any such

pretext as soon as the rule of the Turk comes to

- an end, Any Russian attack on the Turk can now |
be coloured so as to have a fair show in the eyes of

men; no. such fair show could ever be given to an

attack on the freedom of any Greek or Rouman or

Slavonic land. One. favourite fallacy is that, because

tributary Roumania and Servia and‘ independent

Montenegro have now to look to Russia, and largely

to direct their policy by that of Russia, the whole of
European Turkey, if it were set free, would in the

same way look to Russia. But why are those states

now driven to look to Russia?’ Simply because they

have a dangerous neighbour in the ‘Turk, and no

helper but Russia offers himself. Take away the

Turk, and there would be no longer any necessity

for looking exclusively to Russia. Those lands might

well look to Russia with a traditional friendship ; but

they’ would be released from all necessity of practical

dependence upon her.

Again it does seem blindness indeed when those
who take up the cause of the Turk strive to serve his
cause by drawing the blackest picture of Russian rule
that can be drawn, by heaping together every tale, true

RUSSIAN POLICY AND INTERESTS. 303

or false, that can be found to the disparagement of
Russia. Of the real fallacy of some of these pictures I
have spoken already. But take the doings of Russia.
in Poland and Turkestan at the very worst, Russia
would not, for her own -interest’s sake, deal in the
same way with the people of Bosnia or Bulgaria. She
would not deal with those whose affections it was her
interest to win in the same way in- which she deals,
or at least is said to deal, with enemies and revolters.
But set this aside; take the very blackest picture
of Russia that can be drawn. We then ask, whose
concern is it? It is the concern of those who are
‘playing the game of Russia by. letting Russia win
moral influence. It is the concern of those who, by
refusing all other help to the subject nations, are
driving them to seek help from Russia. We who
assert the rights of the subject nations have no wish
to see them annexed by Russia. We have no wish
_to see them brought under exclusive Russian in-
fluence. They do not themselves wish for such
annexation or for such exclusive influence. Without
believing all that is said against Russia, fully taking
in the difference between Russia now and Russia
twenty years back, neither we nor the people of those
lands themselves believe that Russian annexation or
exclusive Russian influence would be any gain for
those lands. We therefore wish to strengthen those
lands, to strengthen them, if needs be, against Russia,
by freeing. them from the Turk. But those who
believe in the extreme blackness of Russia, those who
.make no distinction between the comparatively free
Russia of to-day and the enslaved Russia of past
times, are yet more called on to pause than we are
before they give Russia the moral advantage of repre-

304 THE PRACTICAL QUESTION.

senting herself as the one refuge of the oppressed.
All that we on the other hand say, all that the nations
themselves say, is this. Let us have neither Turk
nor Rfissian; but, if we must chooge between Turk
and Russian, then let us have Russian. It will be
wholly the fault of those who cut off those nations
from the hope of anything better than either, those
whose blind policy first drives those nations into the
arms of Russia, those who thus do the very work that
‘Russia would have done, and who then turn round
and tell us how very black a power it is for whose.
objésts they are themselves steadily working. |
If then Russian advance in thé South-eastern lands
is a thing to be dreaded, it, is the party that is always
crying out against Russia which is really playing the
game of Russia. Our traditional policy, the policy of
upholding the Turk against the people of Turkey, gives
Russia even physical, and still more moral, advantages
which otherwise she could not have. This strange
notion of adapting means to, ends is of a piece with
the glaring inconsistency of many of those who now
raise the cry of “Poland.” That cry is raised by
many who never thought of Poland, whose sympathies
were all with Russia against Poland, till they suddenly
found out that Poland might be turned into a conve-.
nient cry on behalf of the Turk or the Turk’s friends.
We have a right to talk of Poland, if we choose ; and
we have a right to talk also of sotnething nearer than
Poland. If the Russian hobgoblin ever appears to me
as a hobgoblin, it is when I look on the map and see
how very closely Russian guns are pointed towards
the capital of a people of our own race, our own faith,
almost our oyn language. It is not on behalf of the
Turk, not even on behalf of the Pole, but on behalf

‘CRY OF “POLAND.” 305

of the noble kingdoms of Sweden and Norway, that
Russia is really to be feared, if she is to be feared at
all. Wetalk about Sebastopol and the Black Sea, about
the danger of Russian fortresses on her own spore,
about the danger @ a Russian ship of war being seen.
in the Mediterranean. It would have been a worthier
object of European policy to insist that Russia should
withdraw from the isles of Aland. But the two glorious
Kingdoms of the North were never thought of till, in
the days of the Crimean war, it was found for a
moment that they too might be turned into a means
for upholding the Turk.?”) We who speak up for the
victims of the Turk, as we have no special hatredgfor
Russia, so we have no special love for her. All that
we ask is that Russia may be dealt with on the same
terms as any other European power. ‘We ask that
. she may be treated as neither better nor worse than
any other of the powers which make up the European
concert, We do not ask that she should be treated
with, greater confidence than any other power; we do-
ask that she may not be suspected, thwarted, insulted,
in a way in which we should not. suspéct, thwart, and
insult any other power. We believe that Russians,
like Englishmen, Germans, Frenchmen, or any other
nation, are neither angels nor devils, but men, capable ~
‘alike of good and of evil.. We have no great faith in
governments, least of all in despotic governments.
But we have a faith in nations; and we see in the
great uprising of the Russian nation on behalf of its
oppressed. brethren one of the noblest movements of
generous sympathy that the world ever saw. And
though we have little faith in governments, we may
now and then have faith in personal rulers. We
cannot look wholly askance at the prince who has
given freedom to his people. We have no love for
x

306 THE PRACTICAL QUESTION.

despots ; yet we can reverehce a Marcus and an
Akbar. And along with the names of Marcus and of
Akbar the voice of truthful history will one day place
the game of the second Alexander.

After all, when we come to sha&e off mere vague
traditionary fears, it is not easy to see where the real
danger to England from Russia lies. No one believes
that Russia has any notion of annexing or invading the
British Islands.. The fear is always for India. Now
in those vast lands of Asia the mission of Russia and
the mission of England is really very much the same.
Russia and England are‘the two European powers
onewhom the duty has fallen of carrying European
rule into two different parts of the great Eastern
continent. England is far more favoured in the lot
which has fallen to her share; but the duty which is
laid on both the powers is the same. I say the duty;
for neither for England nor for Russia can Asiatic
empire be thought either a gain or a glory, while for
both it is a fearful responsibility. No right-minded
man will justify all the acts.either of Russia or of
England in their Asiatic dominions; but both have
the same general mission, the mission of keeping
nations at peace which cannot be kept at peace,
except under the rule of some power stronger than
themselves. And both alike seem to be carried on
by a kind of irresistible destiny, which makes each
annexation léad to some further annexation. The
dominions of the two powers may some day meet;
and, when they do meet, it will be of the highest
moment for the world that they should meet as
friendly neighbours, and not’ as enemies, To be
always stitring up ill blood between the two powers
before that time comes is as foolish as it is wicked.

QUESTION OF INDIA. 307

As for the notion that a Russian occupation of Con-
stantinople would interfere with our road to India, a
glance at the map is enough to lay that hobgoblin.
It is in Egypt, not at Constantinople, that our ingerest
in that matter lie#

A more plausible ground of alarm is sought in the
alleged danger from the Mahométans of India, or at
least the Sonnite part of them, if we deal otherwise
than very respectfully with their supposed spiritual
head at Constantinople. But those who know the
Indian Mussulmans best say that they really care
very little for their supposed Caliph, that they most.
certainly will not revolt on his behalf. And ‘one
would really think that a devout Mussulman would
have very little respect for the Ring which deals
with Caliphs so lightly, and by whom the Successor
of the Prophet may any morning be set aside. From
the point of view of Mussulman orthodoxy, one
would rather expect to see a non-juring schism arise
on behalf of Murad, or:to hear of miracles wrought
atthe tomb of the martyred Abd-ul-Aziz. One
thing is certain, namely that, if the Indian Mahome- —
tans are likely to revolt on behalf of their Caliph, the
way to show them that revolt is useless will be to
show that their Caliph is no object of fear to us.
Firm dealing with the Turks will have a good moral
effect through the whole of Islam. Many Mussul-
mans believe that the Sultan is really the lord of all
European powers. | It is time to undeceive them.

‘But, after all, it is only a very shallow way of looking
at things which really believes that Russia has any
thought of annexing Constantinople. To gain exclu-
sive influence in the South-eastern lands, even to place
a Russian prince on the throne of Constantinople, are

X 2

308 THE PRACTICAL QUESTION.

possible and rational objects of Russian policy. Not so
the annexation of the Imperial city. Russian states-
men are wise enough to know, if English statesmen
are not, that the New Rome cannot change her nature.
The Queen of Nations, seated at tie junction of two
worlds, can never give up her Imperial calling. Her~
empire may be shut up within her own walls; but
she can never be subject. In the last agony of her
Latin Emperor, in the last agony of her restored
.Greek Emperors, she was still the seat of rule, ready
again to become the seat of wider rule under stronger
masters. Constantinople cannot be ruled from Saint
Petersburg, neither can Saint Petersburg. be ruled
from Constantinople. The Romanoff may reign in
New Rome; the Russian cannot. For the Romanoff
on the throne of New ‘Rome would cease to be
Russian. A cautious student of. politics not long
ago proposed to place on that throne a prince who
‘might be said to be English, German; and Russian
all at once. Once on that throne, he would not long
remain either English, German, or Russian. The
magic of the spot would assert its right. That magic
has touched the Turk himself. What Abd-ul-Hamid
. may deem himself to be it is’ hardly worth while to
ask; but Mahomet the Conqueror deemed himself
to be Cesar as well as Sultan. An European prince
on the throne of all the Constantines could not remain
merely English, merely Russian ; he would again be
the Czesar of the Eastern Rome, and nothing less.

One word more. It may be doubted whether there
is much to be said, from the point of view either of
morals or of politics, for these excessively long-sighted
views of things. The interests of England and the

CON Stanun OPLE. 309

interests of Russia may possibly clash at some far
distant day. Therefore, in order to make matters
worse when that day does come, we are to spend all
the time till it comes in making a sore and rubbgng at
it, in doing every®hing to stir up jealousy and ill will -
between the two countries. We are to suspect and
thwart Russia in every way that we can think, to force
her to become an enemy by treating her in all things
asanenemy. This is an over-wisdom which is nearly
allied to folly. Itis really only because Russia is so far
off that we can venture on such a course. We should
soon feel the effect if we dealt with a nearer power,
say France or Germany, in the same way. Diplo-
matists themselves cannot tell the future for certain.
On-the eve of a great war or revolution they generally
tell us that things are remarkably tranquil. When
they do come face to face with a great movement, all
that they can think of is to suppress it. In all this
there is an odd mixture of a longsightedness which
lays plans for generations to come, and a_short-
sightedness which cannot see. the clearest facts of
to-day and to-morrow. These very elaborate calcu-~
lations leave out two important elements in the
reckoning ; they leave out the will of God and the
will of man. A single man, great whether for good
or for evil, a Mahomet, a Buonaparte, a Garibaldi, is
enough to upset all their reckonings. A really great
man, one who is righteous as well as great, has a
higher wisdom. Such an one knows that the truest
prudence is to do the immediate duty of the moment,
believing that so doing will clear the way for the duty
of the neXt moment, whatever that duty may prove
to be. We are sometimes twitted with proposing to
drive out the Turk without having drawn out any

310 THE PRACTICAL QUESTION.

exact schemes as to what is to take the place of the
Turk. The answer is that, by taking the first steps,
the steps which are our manifest duty, we shall learn
whate are to be the next steps. The greatest deeds
that have ever been done, never *would have been
done, if their doers had waited till they had drawn out
their journals beforehand for seventy or for seven
years to come. If William the Silent had waited to
strike for the freedom of the Netherlands till he had
the Articles of Union of the Seven Provinces ready
in his pocket, he would have waited for ever. If
Washington had waited to strike for the freedom of
the American colonies till the Federal Constitution
had settled exactly what form of government was to
‘be put in the place of King George the Third, he too.
would have waited for ever. But one thing we may
foretell beforehand. In one case we may write our
journals beforehand. If we make-up our minds to
bring no real force to bear upon the Turk, if we give
-him Midhat’s year of grace, or any kind of grace at
all, then we may write our joumals beforehand, and
we may fill them beforehand with difficulties and
complications, with atrocities and insurrections, with
commissions and conferences, with notes and proto-
cols, with all things which arise .out of the Sultan's
relations with his subjects, and out of the feebleness
and blindness which refuses at once to strike the blow
which shall put those relations to an end. To do
nothing, to give a year of grace, may be a noble diplo-
matic triumph ; in the eye of common sense it simply
means to leave every thing to be done over again.

We have thus seen what the Turk is, what he has
done, how he has grown, how he has decayed, how

CONCLUSION. 31K

his victims have risen up against him, and how we
have dealt between him and his victims. We have
seen what is our duty to the brethren whom we have
wronged ; we have seen that our interest and our
duty do not clash. The policy of 1827 should be the
policy of 1877. “Pax in terris hominibus bonz
voluntatis.” Peace and friendship, frank and cordial
union, among all powers that will join to cleanse
Europe from its foulest wrong, its blackest shame.
But not peace where there is no peace—no partner-
ship, no paltering, with evil—no year of grace which
will only be another year of broken promises—but
united action in the noblest of causes, united action
to free the East from bondage, and to clear the West
‘from dishonour. Let us once more remember what the
enemy is. It is the common enemy of mankind. If
he no longer sacks Otranto or bombards Vienna, it.
is not because he lacks the will, but merely because
he lacks the power. Where he still holds power, his
power is in no way better, it is.rather in all things
worse, than it was when he sacked Otranto and bom-
barded Vienna. What the Turk, his Sultan and his
Sultan’s following, then were, that they still abide,
in all except the dazzling greatness which half leads us
to forget that their greatness was wholly a greatness
of evil. The Turk came into Europe as a stranger
and an oppressor, and after five hundred years he
is a stranger and an oppressor still. He has hin-
dered the progress of every land where he has set his
foot. He has brought down independent nations to
bondage ; by bringing them down to bondage, he has
taught them the vices of bondmen. He has turned
fertile lands “into a wilderness, he has turned
fenced. cities into ruinous heaps because under his

312 THE PRACTICAL QUESTION.

rule no man can dwell in safety. Wherever his rule
has spread, the inhabitants have dwindled away,
and the land has day by day gone out of cultivation.
While, other conquerors, even other Mahometan
conquerors, have done something for*the lands which
they conquered, the Ottoman Turk has done nothing
for the lands which he has conquered; he has done
everything against them. His dominion is perhaps
the only case in history of a lasting and settled
dominion, as distinguished from mere passing ‘in-
roads, which has been purely evil, without any one
redeeming feature. The Saracen in South-western
Europe has left behind him the memorials of a
cultivation. different from that of Europe, but still
a real cultivation, which for a while surpassed the.
cultivation of most European nations at the same
time. But the Turk in South-eastern Europe can
shew no memorials of cultivation; he can show only
memorials of destruction. His history for the five
hundred years during which he has been encamped
on European soil is best summed up in the pro-
verbial saying, “Where the Sultan’s horse-hoof
treads, grass never grows again.”

NOTES.

(1, p. 251.) Correspondence respecting the affairs of Turkey p. 197.

(2, p. 251.) Euripides, Orestes, 479.

(3, p. 252.) The most open profession of the doctrine that right goes
for nothing is to be found in a book of scraps, called ‘‘ England’s -
Policy in the East” by a ‘‘Baron Henry de Worms.” The Baron is
constantly speaking of we and us, as if he were speaking of some
nation, but he does not tell us on behalf of what nation he is entitled |
tospeak. In p. 15 a little knowledge of the Hebrew Scriptures might
have stood the Baron in good stead.

(4, p. 262.) The story ‘will be found in full in Mr. Denton’s
Christians in Turkey, 17-22.

{5, p- 268.) This singular argument will be found in a, pamphlet
called ** The Turks, Their Character, Manners and Institutions, as bear-
ing on the Eastern Question, by H. A. Munro-Butler-Johnstone, M. P.”
Itcomes in the very first page.

(6, p. 269.) Correspondence respecting the Conference at Constanti-
nople p. 56.

(7, p. 273.) .Correspondence respecting the Conference at Constanti-
nople, p. 243. ;

(8, p. 273.) See Jiretek, Geschichte der Bulgaren, 556, 558.
Midhat seems to have had a special fancy for hanging children,

(9, p. 282.) See Denton, Christians in Turkey, p. 131.

(10, p. 283.) Correspondence respecting the Conference, p. 170.

(11, p. 285.) I argued in favour of the annexation of Bosnia by the
Austro-Hungarian Monarchy in the Fortnightly Review as long ago as
December 1875, on the very ground which the friends of the Turks did
not think of till some months later,

3i4 THE PRACTICAL QUESTION.

_ (12, p. 287.) Correspondence respecting the Conference, p. 243.
“Let 4 fixed time, say a year, be granted to the Porte for carrying out
the reforms now being zzaugurated, and at the end of that period Jet the
Ambassadors report whether they were being fairly executed or not.”

(13, p® 290.) See Lord Salisbury’s letter in p. 271 of the Correspond-

encé respecting the Conference, where this scene is described as*I have

’ said in the text. But nothing like it can be found in the protocol of
the Meeting, p, 341. How are these things edited ?

(14, p. 292.) Perhaps the worst will be found in the book of the °
Baron Henry de- Worms mentioned already. I know not on what
evidence the Polish stories rest ; but, even if we helieve the worst, the
remarks in the text still apply.

(15, p- 294.) On the subject of mutual ‘‘atrocities,” to use the
word which has become technical, Trikoupés' remarks candidly and
reasonably, i. 305. Ed. i., p. 286. Ed. ii. ‘‘ Tocovrorpéaws Xpiorea-
voi Kad TodpKet epdvnoay én) rijs eravacrdcews ToAAdKS palyral Evds Kad
700 abrovd rxvrctov, GAA oXoALLoV ToupKikod Kiddgnoyvros vd madedwvTat
510. wralopara, EAAwv of ur} wraloavres.” .

(16, p. 209.) Lord Palmerston says, in a letter to Lord Aberdeen,
Life of Lord Palmerston, in September 1853, ii. 44, ‘It would be
easy to shew that strong reasons political and commercial make it
especially the interest of England that the integrity and independence
of the Ottoman Empire should be maintained.” At p. 46 he says, ‘‘We
support Turkey for our own sake and for our own interests ; and to
withdraw our support, or to cripple it, so as to render it ineffectual,
merely because the Turkish government did not show as much deference
to-our advice as our advice deserved, would be to place our national
interests at the mercy of other persons.” This is the doctrine of Sir
Henry Elliot put forth somewhat less unblushingly. Right and humanity
are put out of sight ; they are not, as with Sir Henry Elliot, brought in
to be insulted. It is curious,.in reading Lord Palmerston’s letters, to see
“how little, with all his sharpness, he understood the real facts of South-
eastern Europe. There is a curious letter in Vol. ii. p. 212, in which he
seems to be just getting a little glimmering of the real state of things at
the time of the accession of Abd-ul-Aziz. Earlier in September 1853
(see Vol. ii. p. 37) he seems really to have believed in Turkish reforms.
The Russian troops were then in- the Principalities. .“Jet him [thé
Russian Emperor] be satisfied, as we all are, with the progressive liberal
system of Turkey, and let him keep his remonstrances till some case and
occasion arises and calls for them. At present he has not been able
even to allege any oppression of the Christians, except that which he
himself practises in the Principalities.” Ina letter, so.late as 1853,

NOTES. 315

addressed to Baron Brunow, Vol. ii. p. 230, we get the usual talk about
Russia stirring up insurrections arid the like, especially in Bosnia. Did
Lord Palmerston really fancy that it needed Russians or anybody else to
stir up insurrection there, among either Christians or Mussulmans ?

(17, p. 305.) It is a speaking illustration of this real danger, if it be
true, as has just been gated in the papers, that the King of Sweden and
orway is seeking an alliance with the Turk,

THE END,

LONDON: R. CLAY, SONS, AND TAYLOR, PRINTERS, BREAD STREET HILL,
QUEEN VICTORIA STREET.

WORKS. BY EDWARD A. FREEMAN, D.G.L., LL.D.

_ ‘THIRD EDITION, WITH NEW PREFACE.
-HISTORY AND CONQUESTS OF: THE SARACENS.

Six Lectures. Crown 8vo. 3s. 6d.

HISTORICAL AND ARCHITECTURAL SKETCHES ;
poisa ate ee With Illustrations from Drawings’ by the ‘Author.

HIST STORICAL ESSAYS. Third Editian. 8vo. tos. 6d.
HISTORICAL ESSAYS.. Second ’Series. 8vo. os. 6d.

THE GROWTH OF THE ENGLISH : CONSTITU-
TION FROM THE EARLIEST TIMES. Third Edition. Crown 8vo. 55.

GENERAL SKETCH OF EUROPEAN HISTORY.

Fifth Edition, enlarged, with Maps, &c. 18mo. 3s. 6d.

COMPARATIVE POLITICS. Lectures at the Royal
Institution. ‘To which is added, THE UNITY OF HISTORY. The Rede
Lecture at Cambridge in 1872. 8vo. 145.

DISESTABLISHMENT AND DISENDOWMENT:
WHAT ARE THEY? Crown 8vo. 2s. 62.

HISTORY OF THE CATHEDRAL CHURCH OF
WELLS, AS ILLUSTRATING THE HISTORY OF THE CATHEDRAL
CHURCHES OF THE OLD FOUNDATION. Crown 8vo. 3s. 62.

OLD ENGLISH HISTORY. With Five Coloured Maps.,

Fourth Edition, Revised. Extra feap, 8vo. 6s.

HISTORY OF FEDERAL GOVERNMENT, FROM

« THE, FOUNDATION OF THE ACHAIAN LEAGUE TO THE
DISRUPTION OF THE UNITED STATES. Vol. I Generar InTRo-
‘puction—History OF THE GREEK FEDERATIONS. 8vo. 21s. -

MACMILLAN AND CO. LONDON.

In Five Vols. 8vo. price £4 19s.

MR. EDWARD A. FREEMAN'S HISTORY OF THE
pet tend CONQUEST OF ENGLAND: ITS CAUSES AND ITS
Vols I, I.—THE PRELIMINARY HISTORY AND THE REIGN OF
EADWARD THE CONFESSOR. Second Edition. 8vo. Price 36s.
Vol. I1.—THE REIGN OF HAROLD AND THE INTERREGNUM.
Second Edition. 8vo. Price 21s,
Vol. 1V.—THE REIGN OF WILLIAM THE CONQUEROR. Second
Edition. 8vo. Price ars.

Vol. V.—THE EFFECTS OF THE CONQUEST. . 8vo. Price 2zs.

“(A history in which vast and varied learning is combined with indomitable
patience, scrupulous accuracy, great literary skill, a fine historical style, and a fire of
eloquent enthusiasm, which abundantly justify our estimate of the first volume, that
itis by far the greatest history of our day.” —Brztish Quarterly Review.

“These volumes bear witness to his patient and vast research, and to an accuracy
which has very seldom been surpassed or equdiled, a history at once vivid, accurate,
and from its-own point of view exhaustive. ”— Fortnightly Review.

@xford : Printed at the Clarendon Press, and
PUBLISHED BY MACMILLAN AND CO. LONDON,
Publishers to the University.

t

HVRUUUUINY AUNT TMT
00037405

Digitized with financial assistance from

+7 Biel,

FOUNDATION

An Initiative by

WITH YOU, RIGHT THROUGH

on 27 November, 2018
