Report of the Exploring Expedition to the Rocky Mountains (John C. Frémont, 1845)
Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive: scan of the 1845 first edition (https://archive.org/details/cihm_38820). Frémont's report of the 1842 and 1843–44 expeditions — the 'Pathfinder's' survey that opened the Oregon Trail and California.
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

REPORT 


THE EXPLORING EXPEDITION 


THE ROCKY MOUNTAINS 


IN THE YEAR 1842, 


OREGON AND NORTH CALIFORNIA 
IN THE YEARS 1843-'44, 


BREVET CAPTAIN J. C. FREMONT, 
v , 
OF THE TOFOGRAPHICAL ENGINEERS, 


UNDER THE ORDERS OF COL. J. J. ABERT, CHIEF OF THE TOPOGRAPHICAL BUREAU. 


——— 


‘ 
PRINTED DY ORDER OF THE SENATE OF THE UNITED STATES. 


WASHINGTON: 
GALES AND SEATON, PRINTERS. 


1845. 


SPP MR Ba Ie Perper cy ote mene 


IN SENATE OF THE UNITED STATES, 
Mancu 8, 1845. 


Resolved, That the Secretary of War be requested to communicate to the Senate, if it be pre- 
pared, and if not, to the Secretary of the Senate during the recess, Brevet Captain Frémont's 
report of his late expedition to Oregon, in the years 1843-’d4; and that there be printed for 
the use of the Senate ten thousand extra cqpies of that report, together with the report of his 
expedition to the Rocky Mountains in 1842, which is hereby directed to be reprinted with the 
report of the last expedition. 


Attest : 
ASBURY DICKINS, 


Secretary of the Senate. 


117 4 bf 


‘ 


ate, if it be pree 
aptain Frémont's 
re be printed for 
the report of his 
eprinted with the 


ICKINS, 
‘of the Senate. 


NOTICE TO THE READER, 


The Senate of the United States and the House of Representatives 
having each ordered ten thousand copies of the reports of the two ex- 
ploring expeditions conducted by me to be printed together, I have 
deemed it regular and natural to place the report of 1842 first in the order 
of publication, although heretofore printed ; it being first in the order of 
time, and first in the progress of actual exploration, The two reports 
naturally go together, the second being a continuation of the first, and the 
two constituting parts of a whole, which will require a third expedition, 
now commencing, to complete. The first terminated at the Rocky moun- 
tains, and at the two points of greatest interest in that ridge—namely, the 
South Pass, and Frémont’s Peak; the former being the lowest depression 
of the mountains, through which the road to Oregon now passes, and the 
latter the highest elevation, from the base of which four great rivers take 
their rise, and flow in opposite directions, toward the rising and the setting 
sun. The second, after approaching the mountains by a different route, 
connects with the first expedition at the South Pass, and thence finds the 
great theatre of its labors west of the Rocky mountains, and between the 
Oregon river and North California. ‘The third expedition, now com- 
mencing, will be directed to that section of the Rocky mountains which 
gives rise to the Arkansas, the Rio Grande del Norte, and the Rio Colorado 
of California; and will extend west and southwest of that section, so as 
to examine the country towards the Pacific ocean, ascertain the lines of 
communication between the mountains and the ocean in that latitude, and 
complete the examination of the Great Salt lake and of the interesting re- 
gion which embosoms it. ; 

The map which illustrated the report of 1842 is now extended to illus- 
trate the entire expedition of 1843-’44, so that a view of both expeditions 
will be presented together. This map may have a meager and skeleton 
appearance to the general eye, but is expected to be more valuable to 
science on that account, being wholly founded upon positive data and ac- 
tual operations in the field. About ten thousand miles of actual travel- 
ling and traversing in the wilderness which lies between the frontiers of 
Missouri and the shores of the Pacific, almost every camping station being 


oa 


4 


the scene of astronomical or barometrical observations, furnish the mate- 
rials out of which this map has been constructed. Nothing supposititious 
has been admitted upon it; so that, connecting with Captain Wilkes’s sur- 
vey of the mouth of the Columbia, and with the authentic surveys of the 
State of Missouri, it fills up the vast geographical chasm between these 
two remote points, and presents a connected and accurate view of our con- 
tinent from the Mississippi river to the Pacific ocean. 

To this geographical map, delineating the face of the country over 
which we travelled, there is added another in profile, showing the eleva- 
tions, or the rise and fall of the country from the Mississippi to the Pacific. 
East of the Rocky mountains, two of these profile views are given—one 
from St. Louis to the South Pass, the other from the mouth of the Great 
Platte to the same point. The latter is the shortest ; and following, as it 
does, the regular descent of the river, and being seven hundred miles west 
of the Mississippi, it may be that the eastern éerminus of this line may 
furnish the point at which the steamboat and the steam car may hereafter 
meet and exchange cargoes in their magic flight across this continent. 
These profile views, following the travelling routes, of course follow the 
lowest and levellest lines, and pass the mountain at the point of its great- 
depression; but to complete the view, and to show the highest points 
as well as the lowest levels, many lofty peaks are sketched at their proper 
elevations, towering many thousands of feet above the travelling line. It 
may here be excusable to suggest that these profile maps here exhibited 
are, perhaps, the most extended work of the kind ever constructed, being 
from St. Louis (according to the route we travelled) near sixteen hundred 
miles to the South Pass; from the mouth of the Great Platte to the same 
Pass, about one thousand more; and then anotlier sixteen hundred from 
that Pass to the tide water of the Oregon; in all, about four thousand 
miles of profile mapping, founded upon nearly four hundred barometrical 
positions, with views sketched and facts noted in the field as we went. 

In the departments of geological and botanical science, I have not ven- 
tured to advance any opinions on my own imperfect knowledge of those 
branches, but have submitted all my specimens to the enlightened judg- 
ment of Dr. Torrey, of New Jersey, and Dr. Hall, of New York, who have 
kindly classified and arranged all that I was able to submit to them. 
The botanical observations of Dr. Torrey will be furnished in full here- 
after, there not being time to complete them now. The remarks of Dr. 
Hall, on the geological specimens furnished to him, will be ‘found in an 
appendix to the report; and to his palxontological skill I am indebted for 
the discovery of an oolitic formation in the region west of the Rocky 


bli the mate- 
Ipposititious 
‘ilkes’s sur- 
veys of the 
tween these 
of our con- 


ountry over 
g the eleva- 
the Pacific. 
given—one 
{ the Great 
owing, as it 
i miles west 
lis line may 
ay hereafter 
is continent. 
é follow the 
of its great. 
ghest points 
their proper 
ing line. It 
re exhibited 
ucted, being 
2en hundred 
to the same 
indred from 
ur thousand 
barometrical 
e went. 
ive lot ven- 
Ige of those 
tened judg- 
¢, who have 
lit to them. 
in full here- 
arks of Dr. 
found in an 
indebted for 
the Rocky 


5 


mountains, which further examination may prove to assimilate the geology 
of the New to that of the Old World in a rare particular, which had not 
before been discovered in either of the two Americas, Unhappily, much 
of what we had collected was lost by accidents of serious import to 
ourselves, as well as to our animafs and collections, In the gorges and 
ridges of the Sierra Nevada, of the Alta California, we lost fourteen horses 
and mules, falling from rocks or ,precipices into chasms or rivers, bottom- 
less to us and to them, and one of them loaded with bales of plants col- 
lected on a line of two thousand miles of travel; and, when almost home, 
our camp on the banks of the Kansas was deluged by the great flood 
which, lower down, spread terror and desolation on the borders of the 
Missouri and Mississippi, and by which great damage was done to our 
remaining perishable specimens, all wet and saturated with water, and 
which we had no time to dry. Still, what is saved will be some respect- 
able contribution to botanical science, thanks to the skill and care of Dr. 
Torrey; and both in geology and botany the maps will be of great value, 
the profile view showing the elevations at which the specimens were 
found, and the geographical map showing the localities from which they 
come, 

The astronomical observations, taken with goo: i1:struments, have been 
tested, where they were most important, by a three-;vld computation: one 
by Professor Walker, of Philadelphia, whose astronomical reputation is so 
great; another by Mr. Joseph C. Hubbard, a promising young mathema- 
tician from Connecticut; the third by myself; so that the correctness of 
the longitudes and latitudes may well be relied upon. 

In sketching the topographical features of the country, a branch of 
science in which he had been professionally educated, Mr. Charles Preuss 
had been my assistant in both expeditions; and to his extraordinary skill, 
supported by the pleasure he felt in the execution of his duties, I am in- 
debted for the continuous topographical sketches of the regions through 
which we passed, and which were never interrupted by any extremity of 
fatigue or privation. 

The barometrical and meteorological observations were carefully made 
with good instruments, and admit of no material error beyond the minute 
deviations inseparable from such operations. 

The third expedition, now commencing, is undertaken with ore ample 
means than the two former; and, being directed to a region so interesting 
in itself, and so new to science, can hardly fail to requite the enterprise 
which explores it. 

The report, or narrative, of this extended expedition, like the maps 
which illustrate it, will be strictly confined to what was seen, and to what 
is necessary to show the face and character of the country, and to add 


6 


something to science while fulfilling the instructions of the Government, 
. which chiefly contemplated a military topographical survey. A greater 

degree of popular interest might have been imparted to it by admitting a 
greater latitude of detail, but it was deemed best to adhere to the rigorous 
character of a report, and to present nothing, either in the narrative or in 
the maps, which was not the result of positive observation. 

J, U. FREMONT, 

Brevet Captain Topographical Engineer 

\ Wasuinoton City, March, 1845. 


¥ 


Pe ee 


Si Me eee 


ete aa 


De eas S 
Pains: Phe Sieh 


\ 


1] 


overnment, 

A greater 
admitting a 
the rigorous 
rative or in 


ngineer 


—— 
A REPORT 
oN 
AN EXPLORATION OF THE COUNTRY 
LYING BETWEEN THE 


MISSOURI RIVER AND THE ROCKY MOUNTAINS, 


ON THE LINE OF 


THE KANSAS AND GREAT PLATTE RIVERS. 


oo 


Teme ea ey ee 


= ee ne a 
aioe Sr pinche 


FIRST EXPEDITION—1842. 


Wasninoron, March 1, 1843. 


To Colonel J. J. Anzar, 
Chief of the Corps of Topographical Engineers: 

Sin: Agreeably to your orders to gy and report upon the country 
between the frontiers of Missouri and the South Pass in the Rocky moun- 
tains, and on the line of the Kansas and Great Platte rivers, I sat out from 
Washington city on the 2d ry ed May, 1842, and arrived at St. Louis, by 
way of New York, the 22d of May, where the necessary preparations were 
completed, and the expedition commenced. I proceeded in @ steamboat to 
Chouteau’s landing, about four hundred miles by water from St. Louis, 
and near the mouth of the Kansas river, whence we proceeded twelve 
miles to Mr, Cyprian Chouteaw’s trading house, where we completed our 
final arrangements for the expedition. 

Bad weather, which interfered with astronomical observations, delayed 
us several days in the early part of June at this post, which is on the right 
bank of the Kansas river, about ten miles above the mouth, and six be- 
yond the western boundary of Missouri, The sky cleared off at length, 
and we were enabled to determine our position, in longitude 94° 25' 46", 
and latitude 39° 5' 57". The elevation above the sea is about 700 feet. 
Our camp, in the mean time, presented an animated and bustling scene. 
All were busily occupied in completing the necessary arrangements for 
our campaign in the wilderness, and profiting by this short delay on the 
verge of civilization, to provide ourselves with all the little essentials to 
comfort in the nomadic life we were to lead for the ensuing summer 
months. Gradually, however, every thing—the malerie/ of the camp, men, 
horses, and even mules—settled into its.place, and by the 10th we were 
ready to depart; but, before we mount our horses, I will give a short de- 
scription of the party with which I performed this service. 

I had collected in the neighborhood of St. Louis twenty-one men, prin- 
cipally Creole and Canadian voyugeurs, who had become familiar with 
prairie life in the service of the fur companies in the Indian country. Mr. 
Charles Preuss, a native of Germany, was my assistant in the topographi- 
cal part of the ihe s L. Maxwell, of Kaskaskia, had been engaged as 
hunter, and Christopher Carson (more familiarly known, for his exploits in 
the mountains, as Kit Carson) was our guide. The persons engaged in 
St. Louis were : 

Clément Lambert, J. B. L’Esperance, J. B. Lefévre, Benjamin Potra, 
Louis Gouin, J. B. Dumés, Basil Lajeunesse, Frangois Tessier, Benjamin 
Cadotte, Joseph Clément, Daniel Simonds, Leonard Benoit, Michel Morly, 
Baptiste Bernier, Honoré Ayot, Francois Latulippe, Francois Badeau, 
Louis Ménard, Joseph Ruelle, Moise Chardonnais, Auguste Janisse, Ra- 
phael Proue. 


—_ 


[ 174] - 10 


In addition to these, Henry Brant, son of Col. J. B. Brant, of St. Louis, 
a young man of nineteen years of age, and Randolph, a lively boy ot 
twelve, son of the Hon. Thomas H. Benton, accompanied me, for the de- 
velopment of mind and body which such an expedition would give. We 
were all well armed and mounted, with the exception of eight men, who 
conducted as many carts, in which were packed our stores, with the bag- 
gage and instruments, and which were each drawn by twomules, A few 
loose horses, and four oxen, which had been added to our stock of pro- 
visions, completed the train. We sat out on the morning of the 10th, 
which happened to be Friday—a circumstance which our men did not fail 
to remember and recall during the hardships and vexations of the ensuing 
journey. Mr. Cyprian Chouteau, to whose kindness, during our stay at 
his house, we were much indebted, accompanied us several miles on our 
way, until we met an Indian, whom he had engaged to conduct us on the 
first thirty or forty miles, where he was to consign us to the ocean of 
prairie, which, we were told, stretched without interruption almost to the 
base of the Rocky mountains. 

From the belt of wood which borders the Kansas, in which we had 
passed several good-looking Indian farms, we suddenly emerged on the 
prairies, which received us at the outset with some of their striking char- 
acteristics ; for here and there rode an Indian, and but a few miles distant 
heavy clouds of smoke were rolling before the fire. In about ten miles 
we reached the Santa Fé road, along which we continued for a short time, 
and encaniped early on a small stream; having travelled about eleven 
miles. During our journey, it was the customary practice to encamp an 
hour or two before sunset, when the carts were disposed so as to form a 
sort of barricade around a circle some eighty yards in diameter. The 
tents were pitched, and the horses hobbled and turned loose to graze ; 
and but a few minutes elapsed before the cooks of the messes, of which 
there were four, were busily engaged in preparing the evening meal. At 
nightfall, the horses, mules, and oxen, were driven in and picketed— 
that is, secured by a halter, of which one end was tied to a small steel- 
shod picket, and driven into the ground; the halter being twenty or thirty 
feet long, which enabled them to obtain a little food during the night. 
When we had reached a part of the country where such a precaution be- 
came necessary, the carts being regularly arranged for defending the 
camp, guard was mounted at eight o’clock, consisting of three men, who 
were relieved every two hours; the morning watch being horse guard for 
the day. At daybreak, the camp was roused, the animals turned loose to 
graze, and breakfast generally over between six and seven o’clock, when 
we resumed our march, making regularly a halt at noon for one or two 
hours. Such was usually the order of the day, except when accident of 
country forced a variation; which, however, happened but rarely. We 
travelled the next day along the Santa Fé road, which we left in the af- 
ternoon, and encamped late in the evening on a small creek, called by the 
Indians Mishmagwi. Just as we arrived at camp, one of the horses set 
off at full speed on his return, and was followed by others. Several men 
were sent in pursuit, and returned with the fugitives about midnight, 
with the exception of one man, who did not make his appearance until 
morning. He had lost his way in the darkness of the night, and slept on 
the prairie. Shortly after midnight it began to rain heavily, and, as our 
tents were of light and thin cloth, they offered but little obstruction to 


cr ick caer 
Pla oes Seneca eta 


rain; 
rainy | 
We er 


imme 
fordal 
with | 
point, 
and | 
one h 
men 

drive 
bank 
tance 


f St. Louis, 


lively boy of 


»for the de- 

give. We 
ht men, who 
ith the bag- 
les. A few 
tock of pro- 
of the 10th, 
1 did not fail 
f the ensuing 
r our stay at 
viles on our 
uct us on the 
he ocean of 
alinost to the 


hich we had 
brged on the 
striking char- 
miles distant 
ut ten miles 
a short time, 
about eleven 
encamp an 
s to form a 
meter. The 
se to graze; 
es, of which 
1g meal. At 
d picketed— 
small steel- 
snty or thirty 
g the night. 
ecaution be- 
efending the 
4 men, who 
rse guard for 
ned loose to 
’clock, when 
one or two 
. accident of 
rarely. We 
ft in the af- 
called by the 
ie horses set 
Several men 
ut midnight, 
arance until 
and slept on 
and, as our 
struction to 


e- GE ATT 
ony ES hs ants ro aR e 
SST a gaa eee corey 


11 [ 174 ] 
rain; we were all well soaked, and glad when morning came. We hada 
rainy march on the 12th, but the weather grew fine as the day advanced. 
We encamped in a remarkably beautiful situation on the Kansas bluffs, 
which commanded a fine view of the river valley, here from three to four 
miles wide. ‘The central portion was occupied by a broad belt of heavy 
timber, and nearer the hills the prairies were of the richest verdure. One 
of the oxen was killed here for food. 

We reached the ford of the Kansas late in the afternoon of the 14th, 
where the river was two hundred and thirty yards wide, and commenced 
immediately preparations fur crossing. I had expected to find the river 
fordable ; but it had been swollen by the late rains, and was sv-eeping by 
with an angry current, yellow and turbid as the Missouri. Up to this 
point, the road we had travelled was a remarkably fine one, well beaten, 
and level—the usual road of a prairie country. By our route, the ford was 
one hundred miles from the mouth of the Kansas river. Several mounted 
men led the way into the stream, to swim across. The animals were 
driven in after them, and in a few minutes all had reached the opposite 
bank in safety, with the exception of the oxen, which swam some dis- 
tance down the river, and, returning to the right bank, were not got over 
until the next morning. In the mean time, the carts had been unloaded 
and dismantled, and an India-rubber boat, which I had brought with me 
for the survey of the Platte river, placed in the water. The boat was 
twenty feet long and five broad, and on it were placed the body and 
wheels of a cart, with the load belonging to it, and three men with paddles. 

The velocity of the current, and the inconvenient freight, rendering # 
difficult to be managed, Basil Lajeunesse, one of our best swimmers, took 
in his teeth a line attached to the boat, and swam ahead in order to reach 
a footing as soon as possible, and assist in drawing her over. In this man- 
ner, six passages had been successfully made, and as many carts with their 
contents, and a greater portion of the party, deposited on the left bank; 
but night was Crawing near, and, in our anxiety to have all over before 
the darkness closed in, I put upon the boat the remaining two carts, with 
their accompanying load. The man at the helm was timid on water, and, 
in his alarm, capsized the boat. Carts, barrels, boxes, and bales, were in 
a moment floating down the current; but all the men who were on the 
shore jumped into the water, without stopping to think if they could 
swim, and almost every thing—even heavy articles, such as guns and lead— 
was recovered. 

Two of the men, who could not swim, came nigh being drowned, and 
all the sugar belonging to one of the messes wasted its sweets on the 
muddy waters; but our heaviest loss was a bag of coffee, which con- 
tained nearly all our provision. It was a loss which none but a traveller 
in a strange and inhospitable country can appreciate ; and often afterward, 
when excessive toil and long marching had overcome us with fatigue and 
weariness, we remembered and mourned over our loss in the Kansas. 
Carson and Maxwell had been much in the water yesterday, and both, in 
consequence, were taken ill. The former continuing so, I remained in 
camp. A number of Kansas Indians visited us to-day. Going up to one 
of the groups who were scattered among the trees, I found one sitting on 
the ground, among some of the men, gravely and fluently speaking French, 
with as much facility and as little embarrassment as any of my own party, 
who were nearly all of French origin. 


Se TEE Te 


[ 174] | 12 


On all sides was heard the strange language of his own people, wild, 
and harmonizing well with their appearance. I listened to him for some 
time with feelings of strange curiosity and interest. He was now appa- 
rently thirty-five years of age; and, on inquiry, I learned that he had been 
at St. Louis when a boy, and there had learned the French language, 
From one of the Indian women I obtained a fine cow and calf in exchange 
for a yoke of oxen. Several of them brought us vegetables, pumpkins, 
onions, beans, and lettuce. One of them brought butter, and from a half- 
breed near the river I had the good fortune to obtain some twenty or 
thirty pounds of coffee. The dense timber in which we had encamped 
interfered with astronomical observations, and our wet and damaged 
stores required exposure to the sun. Accordingly, the tents were struck 
early the next morning, and, leaving camp at six o’clock, we moved about 
seven miles up the river, to a handsome, open prairie, some twenty feet 
above the water, where the fine grass afforded a Inxurious repast to our 
horses. 

During the day we occupied ourselves in making astronomical observa- 
tions, in order to lay down the country to this place; it being our custom 
to keep up our map regularly in the field, which we found attended with 
many advantages. The men were kept busy in drying the provisions, 
painting the cart covers, and otherwise completing our equipage, until the 
afternoon, when powder was distributed to them, and they spent some 
hours in firing ata mark. We were now fairly in the Indian country, and 
it began to be time to prepare for the chances of the wilderness. 
¢ Friday, June 17.—The weather yesterday had not permitted us to make 
the observations I was desirous to obtain here, and I therefore did not 
move to-day. The people continued their target firing. In the steep bank 
of the river here, were nests of innumerable swallows, into one of which 
a large prairie'snake had got about half his body, and was occupied in 
eating the young birds. ‘The old ones were flying about in great distress, 
darting at him, and vainly endeavoring to drive him off. A shot wound- 
ed him, and, being killed, he was cut open, and eighteen young swallows 
were found in his body. A sudden storm, that burst upon us in the after- 
noon, cleared away in a brilliant sunset, followed by a clear night, which 
enabled us to determine our position in longitude 95° 38' 05"', and in lati- 
tude 39° 06' 40". 

A party of emigrants to the Columbia river, under the charge of Dr. 
White, an agent of the Government in Oregon Territory, were about three 
weeks in advance of us. They consisted of men, women, and children. 
There were sixty-four men, and sixteen or sevetteen families. They had 
a considerable number of cattle, and were transporting their household 
furniture in large heavy wagons. I understood that there had been much 
sickness among them, and that they had lost several children. One of the 
party, who had lost his child, and whose wife was very ill, had left them 
about one hundred miles hence on the prairies; and as a hunter, who had 
accompanied them, visited our camp this evening, we availed ourselves of 
his return to the States to write to our friends. 

The morning of the 18th was very unpleasant. A fine rain was falling, 
with cold wind from the north, and mists made the river hills look dark 
and gloomy. We left our camp at seven, journeying along the foot of the 
hills which border the Kansas valley, generally about three miles wide, 
and extremely rich. We halted for dinner, after a march of about thir- 


MO a pee 


‘ 
i 
ny 


4 

if 

& 

ia 

* + 
F ah 
ah 


teen 
sas, 
After 
the a 
‘was g 
the n 
fondr 
sprin 
and 
up t 
cross 
ther 
clear 
07", 
ther 
WwW 
ment 
ting 
gene 
large 
of tk 
man 
was 
the 1 
com! 
our | 
but 
cons 
the 
influ 
the 
posi 
T 
sky 
rath 
of s 
and 
situ: 
prot 
slop 
tain 
whi 
is ¢ 
mal 
the 
larg 
abc 
thr 
ove 
of 
15° 
gal 


people, wild, 
im for some 
S now appa- 
at he had been 
ich language, 
f in exchange 
Ps, pumpkins, 
d from a half- 
me twenty or 
ad encamped 
and damaged 
s Were struck 
moved about 
p twenty feet 
repast to our 


ical observa- 
g our custom 
ttended with 
e provisions, 
age, until the 

Spent some 
1country, and 
BSS, 
ed us to make 
efore did not 
he steep bank 
one of which 
3 occupied in 
zreat distress, 
shot wound- 
ing swallows 
in the after. 
night, which 
» and in lati- 


narge of Dr. 
e about three 
und children. 
They had 
ir household 
d been much 
_ One of the 
ad left them 
fer, who had 
ourselves of 


1 was falling, 
's look dark 
ie foot of the 
miles wide, 
“about thir- 


13 [174 ] 


teen miles, on the banks of one of the many little tributaries to the Kan- 
sas, which look like trenches in the prairic, and are ey well timbered. 
After crossing this stream, I rode off some miles to the left, attracted by 
the appearance of a cluster of huts near the mouth of the Vermillion. It 
was a large but deserted Kansas village, scattered in an open wood, along 
the margin of the stream, on a spot chosen with the customary Indian 
fondness for beauty of scenery. ‘The Pawnees had attacked it in the early 
spring. Some of the houses were burnt, and others blackened with smoke, 
and weeds were already getting possession of the cleared places. Riding 
up the Vermillion river, I reached the ford in time to meet the carts, and, 
crossing, encamped on its western side, ‘The weather continued cool, the 
thermometer being this evening as low as 49°; but the night was sufficiently 
clear for astronomical observations, which placed us in longitude 96° 04' 
07", and latitude 39°15'19". At sunset, the barometer was at 28.845, 
thermometer 64°. 

We breakfasted the next morning at half past five, and left our encamp- 
ment early. ‘The morning was cool,the thermometer being at 45°. Quit- 
ting the river bottom, the road ran along the uplands, over a rolling country, 
generally in view of the Kansas, from eight to twelve miles distant. Many 
large boulders, of a very compact sandstone, of various shades of red, some 
of them four or five tons in weight, were scattered along the hills; and 
many beautiful plants in flower, among which the amorpha canescens 
was a characteristic, enlivened the green of the prairie. At the heads of 
the ravines I remarked, occasionally, thickets of sedi longifolia, the most 
common willow of the country. We travelled nigeteen miles, and pitched 
our tents at evening on the head waters of a small creek, now nearly dry, 
but having in its bed several fine springs. ‘The barometer indicated a 
considerable rise in the country—here about fourteen hundred feet above 
the sea—and the increased elevation appeared already to have some slight 
influence upon the vegetation. The night was cold, with a heavy dew; 
the thermometer at 10 p. m. standing at 46°, barometer 28.483, Our 
position was in longitude 96° 14' 49", and latitude 39° 30' 40". 

The morning of the 20th was fine, with a southerly breeze and a bright 
sky ; and at 7 o’clock we were onthe march. The country to-day was 
rather more broken, rising still, and covered every where with fragments 
of siliceous limestone, particularly on the summits, where they were small, 
and thickly strewed as pebbles on the shore of the sea. In these exposed 
situations grew but few plants; though, whenever the soil was good and 
protected from the winds, in the creek bottoms and ravines, and on the 
slopes, they flourished abundantly; among them the amorpdu, still re- 
taining its characteristic place. We crossed, at 10a. m., the Big Vermillion, 
which has a rich bottom of about one mile in breadth, one-third of which 
is occupied by timber. Making our usual halt at noon, after a day’s 
march of twenty-four miles, we reached the Big Blue, and encamped on 
the uplands of the western side, near a small creek, where was a fine 
large spring of very cold water. This is a clear and handsome stream, 
about one hundred and twenty feet wide, running, with a rapid current, 
through a well-timbered valley. To-day antelope were seen running 
over the hills, and at evening Carson brought usa fine deer. Longitude 
of the camp 96° 3$2' 35'', latitude 39° 45' 08". Thermometer at sunset 
75°, A pleasant southerly breeze ‘and fine morning had given place to a 

gale, with indications of bad weather; when, after a march of ten miles, 


= 


[ 174 ] 14 


we halted to noon on a small creek, where the water stood in deep pools, 
In the bank of the creek limestone made its appearance in a stratum about 
one foot thick. In the afternoon, the people seemed to suffer for want of 
water. ‘I'he road led along a high dry ridge; dark lines of timber indicated 
the heads of streams in the plains below; but there was no water near, 
and the day was very oppressive, with a hot wind, and the thermometer 
at 90°, Along our route the amorpha has been in very abundant but va- 
riable bloom—-in some places bending beneath the weight of purple clus. 
ters; in others without a flower, It seems to love best the sunny slopes, 
with a dark soil and southern exposure. Every where the rose is met 
with, and reminds us of cultivated gardens and civilization. It is scat- 
tered over the prairies in small bouquets, and, when glittering in the dews 
and waving in the pleasant breeze of the early morning, is the most beau- 
tiful of the prairie flowers, The ar/emisia, absinthe, or prairie sage, as 
it is variously called, is increasing in size, and glitters like silver, as the 
southern breeze turns up its leaves to the sun. All these plants have 
their insect inhabitants, variously colored; taking generally the hue of the 
flower on which they live. ‘he arfemisia has its small tly accompany- 
ing it through every change of elevation aud latitude; and wherever | 
have seen the asclepias tuberosa, 1 have always remarked, too, ou the 
flower a large butterfly, so nearly resembling it in color as to be distin- 
guishable at a little distance only by the motion of its wings. Travelling 
on the fresh traces of the Oregon emigrants relieves a little the loneliness 
of the road; and to-night, after a march of twenty-two miles, we halted 
on a small creek, which had been one of their encampments. As we ad- 
vance westward, the soil appears to be getting more sandy, and the sur- 
face rock, an erratic deposite of sand and gravel, rests here ona bed of 
coarse yellow and gray and very friable sandstone. Hveniug closed over 
with rain and its usual attendant, hordes of mus yuitoes, with which we 
were annoyed for the first time. 

June 22.—We enjoyed at breakfast this morning a luxury, very unusual 
in this country, in a cup of excellent coffee, with cream from our cow. 
Being milked at night, cream was thus had in the morning. Our mid-day 
halt was at Wyeth’s creek, in the bed of which were numerous boulders 
of dark ferruginous sandstone, mingled with others of the red sandstone, 
already mentioned. [ere a pack of cards, lying loose on the grass, mark- 
ed an encampment of our Oregon emigrants; aud it was at the close of 
the day when we made our bivouac in the midst of sone well-timbered 
ravines near the Little Blue, twenty-four miles from our camp of the pre- 
ceding night. Crossing the next morning a number of handsome creeks, 
with clear water and sandy beds, we reached, at 10 a. m., a.very beautiful 
wooded stream, about thirty-five feet wide, called Sandy creek, and some- 
times, as the Ottoes frequently winter there, the Ottoe fork. The country 
has become very sandy, and the plants less varied and abundant, with the 
exception of the amorpha, which rivals the grass in quantity, though not 
so forward as it has been found to the eastward. 

At the Big Trees, where we had intended to noon, no water was to be 
found. The bed of the little creek was perfectly dry, and,on the adjacent 
sandy bottom, cacéi, for the first time, made their appearance. We made 


here a short delay in search of water; and, after a hard day’s march of a 
twenty-eight miles, encamped, at 5 o’clock, on the Little Blue, where | 
our arrival made a scene of the Arabian desert. As fast as they arrived, . 


ea hey 
ast au 


fo eicieiatte 


a tr i 


ae 


1 in deep pools, 
1 stratum about 
ffer for want of 
imber indicated 
ho water near, 
1e thermometer 
undant but va- 
of purple clus. 
e sunny slopes, 
he rose is met 
on. It is scat- 
ing in the dews 
the most beau- 
prairie sage, as 
e silver, as the 
ese plauts have 
y the hue of the 
tly accompany- 
nnd wherever | 
ced, too, on the 
as to be distin- 
ys. ‘Travelling 
e the loneliness 
niles, we halted 
its. As we ad- 
Jy, and the sur- 
ere ona bed ot 
iug closed over 
with which we 


vy, very unusual 
from our cow. 
. Our mid-day 
nerous boulders 
» red sandstone, 
he grass, mark- 
s at the close of 
e well-timbered 
Amp of the pre- 
andsome creeks, 
n-very beautiful 
reek, and some- 
. The country 
ndant, with the 
tity, though not 


ater was to be 
on the adjacent 
ce. We made 
day’s march of 


le Blue, where | ~ 


as they arrived, 


Sih CO EE TTL 


tortie, 


15 [ 174] 


men and horses rushed into the stream, where they bathed and drank to- 
gether in common enjoyment. We were now in the range of the Paw- 
nees, who were accustomed to infest this part of the country, stealing 
horses from companies on their way to the mountains, and, when in suffi- 
cient force, openly attacking and plundering them, and subjecting them 
to various kinds of insult. For the first time, therefore, guard was mount- 
ed to-night. Our route the next morning lay up the valley, which, bor- 
dered by hills with graceful slopes, looked uncommonly green and beau- 
tiful. The stream was about fifty feet wide, and three or four deep, 
fringed by cotton wood and willow, with frequent groves of oak tenanted 
by flocks of turkeys. Game here, too, made its appearance in greater 
plenty. Elk were frequently scen on the hills, aud now and then an an- 
telope bounded across our path, or a deer broke from the groves. The 
road in the afternoon was over the upper prairies, several miles from the 
river, and we encamped at sunset on one of its small tributaries, where 
an abundance of préle (eguise¢um) atforded fine forage to our tired ani- 
mals. We had travelled thirty-one miles. A heavy bank of black clouds 
in the west came on us in a storm between nine and ten, preceded by a 
violent wind. ‘I'he rain fell in such torrents that it was difficult to breathe 
facing the wind, the thunder rolled incessantly, and the whole sky was 
tremulous with lightning; now and then illuminated by a blinding flash, 
succeeded by pitchy darkness, Carson had the watch from ten to mid- 
night, and to him had been assigned our young compagnons de voyage, 
Messrs. Brant and R. Benton. ‘This was their first night on guard, and 
such an introduction did uot augur very auspiciously of the pleasures of 
the expedition. Many things couspired to render their situation uncom- 
fortable ; stories of desperate and bloody Indian fights were rife in the 
camp; our position was badly chosen, surrotinded on all sides by timbered 
nollows, and occupying an area of several hundred feet, so that necessa- 
rily the guards were far apart; and now and then I could hear Randolph, 
as if relieved by the sound of a voice in the darkness, calling out to the 
sergeant of the guard, to direct his attention to some imaginary alarm ; 
but they stood it out, and took their turn regularly afterward. 

The next morning we hada specimen of the false alarms to which all 
parties in these wild regions are subject. Proceeding up the valley, ob- 
jects were seen on the opposite hills, which disappeared before a glass 
could be brought to bear upon them. A man, who was a short distance 
in the rear, came spurring up in great haste, shouting Indians! Indians! 
He had been near enough to see and count them, according to his report, 
and had made out twenty-seven. I immediately halted; arms were ex- 
amined and put in order; the usual preparations made; and Kit Carson, 
springing upon one of the hunting horses, crossed the river, and galloped 
off into the opposite prairies, to obtain some certain intelligence of their 
movements. 

Mounted on a fine horse, without a saddle, and scouring bareheaded 
over the prairies, Kit was one of the finest pictures of a horseman I have 
ever seen. <A short time enabled him to discover that the Indian war 
party of twenty-seven consisted of six elk, who had been gazing curiously 
at our caravan as it passed by, and were now scampering off at full speed. 
This was our first alarm, and its excitement broke agreeably on the mo- 
notony of the day. At our noon halt, the men were exercised at a target; 
and in the evening we pitched our tents at a Pawnee encampment of last 


[ 174] 16 


July. They had apparently killed buffalo here, as many bones were 

lying about, and the Satna where the hides had been stretched were yet 

moet | The road of the day had kept the valley, which is sometimes 
Ww 


terde 
I end 


rich and well timbered, though the country is generally sandy. Mingled — 9° ¢ 
with the usual plants, a thistle (carduus /eucdgraphus) had for the last Fins 
day or two made its appearance; and along the river bottom, (radescantia alon 
(virginica) and milk plant (asclepias syriaca*) in considerable quantities. nili 
Our march to-day had been twenty-one miles, and the astronomical ob- —  tirely 
servations gave us a chronometric longitude of 95° 22' 12", and latitude — Ji 
40° 26' 50". We were moving forward at seven in the morning, and in cupi 
about five miles reached a fork of the Blue, where the road leaves that broa 
_ river, and crosses over to the Platte. No water was to be found on the hors 
dividing ridge, and the casks were filled, and the animals here allowed a sittir 
short repose. ‘The road led across a high and level prairie ridge, where start 
were but few plants, and those principally thistle (carduus leucdgraphus,) his } 
I | and a kind of dwarf artemisia, Antelope were seen frequently during were 
the morning, which was very stormy. Squalls of rain, with thunder and and 
lightning, were around us in every direction; and while we were envel- the 
oped in one of them, a flash, which seemed to scorch our eyes as it —. hors 
passed, struck in the prairie within a few hundred feet, sending up a des 
column of dust. = « unde 
Crossing on the way several Pawnee roads to the Arkansas, we reach- prov 
ed, in about twenty-one miles from our halt on the Blue, what is called fron 
the coast of the Nebraska, or Platte river. This had seemed in the dis- tion 
tance a range of high and broken hills; but ona nearer approach were amie 
found to be elevations of forty to sixty feet, into which the wind had — furs 
worked the sand. ‘They were covered with the usual fine grasses of the — and, 
country, and bordered the eastern side of the ridge on a breadth of about — Pero 
two miles. Change of soil and country appeared here to have produced |  Selve 
some change in the vegetation. Cacti were numerous, and all the plants — The 
of the region appeared to flourish among the warm hills. Among them ~ bega 
the amorpha, in full bloom, was remarkable for its large and luxuriant —, °Ve 
purple clusters, From the foot of the coast, a distance of two miles across > deav 
the level bottom brought us to our encampment on the shore of the river, | ‘ile 
about twenty miles below the head of Grand island, which lay extended | Whe 
before us, covered with dense and heavy woods. From the mouth of the — ' € 
Kansas, aceording to our reckoning, we had travelled three hundred and pelk 


twenty-eight miles; and the geological formation of the country we had 


. . Coe ; 
passed over consisted of lime and sandstone, covered by the same erratic [| gett 


deposite of sand and gravel which forms the surface rock of the prairies @ ss 
between the Missouri and Mississippi rivers. Except in some occasional f_ a 
limestone boulders, I had met with no fossils, The elevation of the Platte [ pein 
valley above the sea is here about two thousand feet. The astronomi- | en 
cal observations of the night placed us in longitude. 98° 45' 49", latitude} a 
40° 41' 06". > som 
PETRIE SENSO OR LE a PO OREO / mor 

* ‘This plant is very odoriferous, and in Canada charms the traveller, especially when passing v ang 
through woods in the evening. ‘The French there eat the tender shoots in the spring, as we do ie furs 
asparagus. The natives make a sugar of the flowers, gatheting them inthe morning when they are oe eact 
covered with dew, and collect the cotton from the pods to fill their béds. On account of the silki- | ther 
ness of this ¢otton, Parkinson calls the plant Virginian silk.” —Loudon’s Encyclopedia of Plante. V 

e Sioux Indians e latte eat th i ili : ‘ 

meat of the buffalo. oe eat the young pods of this plant, boiling them with the turr 


ly bones were 
ched were yet 
1 is sometimes 
ndy. Mingled 
ad for the last 
1, éradescantia 
ble quantities. 
tronomical ob. 
", and latitude 
orning, and in 
ad leaves that 
found on the 
ere allowed a 
e ridge, where 
leucdgraphus,) 
Juently during 
h thunder and 
7e were envel- 
our eyes as it 
sending up a 


sas, we reach. 
what is called 
ed in the dis- 
ipproach were 
the wind had 
grasses of the 
eadth of about 
have produced 
all the plants 
Among them 
and luxuriant 
vo miles across 
re of the river, 
ilay extended 
‘mouth of the 
» hundred and 
untry we had 
2 same erratic 
of the prairies 
me occasional 
n of the Platte 
‘he astronomi- 
5' 49", latitude 


cially when passing 
1e spring, as we do 
ning when they are 
iccount of the silki- 
opedia of Plants. 


ling them with the ’ 


17 [ 174} 

June 27.—The animals were somewhat fatigued by their march of yes- 
terday, and, after a short journey of eighteen miles along the river bottom, 
I encamped near the head of Grand island, in longitude, by observation, 
99° 05' 24", latitude 40° 39’ 32", The soil here was light but rich, though 
in some places rather sandy; and, with the exception of a scattered fringe 
along the bank, the timber, consisting principally of poplar, ( popudus mo- 
nitjera) elm, and hackberry, (cedfis crassjfolia,) is confined almost en- 
tirely to the islands, 

June 28.—We halted to noon at an open reach of the river, which oc- 
cupies rather more than a fourth of the valley, here only about four miles 
broad. The camp had been disposed with the usual precaution, the 
horses grazing at a little distance, attended by the guard, and we were all 
sitting quietly at our dinner on the grass, when suddenly we heard the 
startling cry “du monde!’ In an instant, every man’s weapon was in 
his hand, the horses were driven in, hobbled and picketed, and horsemen 
were galloping at full speed in the direction of the new comers, screaming 
and yelling with the wildest excitement. “Get ready, my lads!’ said 
the leader of the approaching party to his men, when our wild-looking 
horsemen were discovered bearing down upon them; “nous allons altraper 
des coups de baguetle.’’ ‘They proved to be a small party of fourteen, 
under the charge of a man named John Lee, and, with their baggage and 
provisions strapped to their backs, were making their way on foot to the 
frontier. A brief account of their fortunes will give some idea of naviga- 
tion in the Nebraska, Sixty days since, they had left the mouth of Lar- 
amie’s fork, some three hundred miles above, in barges laden with the 
furs of the American Fur Company. They started with the annual flood, 
and, drawing but nine inches water, hoped to make a speedy and pros- 
perous voyage to St. Louis; but, after a lapse of forty days, found them- 
selves only one hundred and thirty miles from their point of departure. 
They came down rapidly as tar as Scott’s bluffs, where their difficulties 
began. Sometimes they came upon places where the water was spread 
over a great exten!, and here they toiled from morning until night, en- 
deavoring to drag their boat through the sands, making only two or three 
miles in as many days. Sometimes they would enter an arm of the river, 
where there appeared a fine channel, and, after descending prosperously 
for eight or ten miles, would come suddenly upon dry sands, and be com- 
pelled to return, dragging their boat for days against the rapid current ; 
and at others, they came upon places where the water lay in holes, and, 
getting out to float off their boat, would fall into water up to their necks, 
and the next moment tumble over against. a sandbar. Discouraged, at 
length, and finding the Platte growing every day more shallow, they dis- 
charged the principal part of their cargoes one hundred and thirty miles 
below Fort Laramie, which they secured as well as possible, and, leaving 
a few men to guard them, attempted to continue their voyage, laden with 
some light furs and their personal baggage. After fifteen or twenty days 
more struggling in the sands, during which they made but one hundred 
and forty miles, they sunk their barges, made a cache of their remaining 
furs and property, in trees on the bank, and, packing on his back what 
each man could carry, had commenced, the day before we encountered 
them, their journey on foot to St. Louis, ; 

We laughed then at their forlorn and vagabond appearance, and, in our 
(urn, a month or two afterwards, furnished the same occasion for merri- 
2 


(174 J 18 


ment to others. Even their stock of tobacco, that sine gua non of a voy- 
ageur, Without which the night fire is gloomy, was entirely exhausted, 
However, we shortened their homeward journey by a small supply from 
our own provision. They gave us the welcome intelligence that the buf- 
falo were abundant some two days’ march in advance, and made usa 
present of some choice pieces, which were a very acceptable change from 
our salt pork. In the interchange of news, and the renewal of old ac- 
quaintanceships, we found wherewithal to fill a busy hour; then we 
mounted our horses, and they shouldered their packs, and we shook hands 
and parted. Among them, I had found an old companion on the northern 
steele a hardened and hardly served veteran of the mountains, who had 
eerras much hacked and scarred as an old moustache of Napoleon’s * old 
guard.’’ He flourished in the sobriquet of La Tulipe, and his real name 
I never knew. Finding that he was going to the States only because 
his company was bound in that direction, and that he was rather more 
willing to return with me, I took him again into my service. We trav- 
elled this day but seventeen miles. 

At our evening camp, about sunset, three figures were discovered ap« 
preening, which our glasses made out to be Indians. ‘They proved to 

e Cheyennes—two men, and a boy of thirteen. About a month since, 
they had left their people on the south fork of the river, some three hun- 
dred miles to the westward, and a party of only four in number had been 
to the Pawnee villages on a horse-stealing excursion, from which they 
were returning unsuccessful. They were miserably mounted on wild 
horses from the Arkansas plains, and had no other weapons than bows 
and long spears; and had they been discovered by the Pawnees, could 
not, by any possibility, have escaped. ‘They were mortified by their ill 
success, and said the Pawnees were cowards, who shut up their horses in 
their lodges at night. L invited them to supper with me, and Randolph 
and the young Cheyenne, who had been eyeing each other suspiciously 
and curiously, soon became intimate friends. After supper, we sat down 
on the grass, and I placed a sheet of paper between us, on which they 
traced rudely, but with a certain degree of relative truth, the watercourses 
of the country which lay between us and their villages, and of which I 
desired to have some information. Their companions, they told us, had 
taken a nearer route over the hills; but they had mounted one of the sum- 
mits to spy out the country, whence they had caught a glimpse of our party 
and, confident of good treatment at the hands of the whites, hastened to 
join company. Latitude of the camp 40° 39’ 51", 

We made the next morning sixteen miles. I remarked that the ground 
was covered in many places with an effloresceice of salt, and the plants 
were not numerous. In the bottoms was frequently seen tradescantia, 
and on the dry lenches were curduus, cactus, aud amorpha. A high wind 
during the morning had increased to.a violent gale from the northwest 
which made our afternoon ride cold and unpleasant. We had the wel- 
one sight _ sige d hl pias on ae a the large islands, and encamped at a 

p of timber about seven miles . D ; 
 @htueetity:two tailes rom our noon halt, after a day’s march 
_ The air was keen the next morning at sunrise, the thermometer stand- 
ing at 44°, and it was sufficiently cold to make overcoats very comfortabl 
A few miles brought us into the midst of the buffalo, swarming tn tin. 
mense numbers over the plains, where they had left scarcely a blade of 


’ 


&. 
4 

q 
R, 
an 


ot 


PL aa ei Lae pe Et 


ee 
TT TD EP ‘ 


saaaiba #1 stars 
iicaatectas te: Nhe a 


gra 
rea 
suc 
We 
wh 
us 

day 
He 
dus 
son 
the 
qui 
ant 
fro! 
me 
foll 
mo 
fire 
anc 
sca 
life 
con 
hea 
hur 
mo 
wa 
son 
con 
nec 
the 
On 


' Ast 


and 
mo 
ter 
bu 
the 
pla 
of 

the 
nity 
too 
the 
I,s 
tan 
wh 
fro 


on of a voy- 
ly exhausted, 

supply from 
» that the buf. 
id made usa 
change from 
val of old ac- 
ur; then we 
e shook hands 
1 the northern 
hins, who had 
poleon’s * old 
his real name 
only because 
s rather more 
te. We trav- 


liscovered ap. 
hey proved to 
month since, 
me three hun- 
nber had been 
1 which they 
inted on wild 
ns than bows 
awnees, could 
d by their ill 
their horses in 
ind Randolph 
r suspiciously 
, we sat down 
n which they 
» watercourses 
d of which [ 
v told us, had 
1e of the sum- 
e of our party, 
s, hastened to 


lat the ground 
and the plants 
tradescantia, 

A high wind 
he northwest, 
had the wel- 
ncamped at a 
a day’s march 


ometer stand- 
y comfortable. 
tming in im- 


ely a blade of 


mt “gee 
oe v . « 


= a NTS a TY 


agate ape 
aT Be, 


Sint ie eee 
J, et 


5 RS ge ee 
= SS ls PER 


19 [ 174] 


grass standing. Mr. Preuss, who was sketching at a little distance in the 
rear, had at first noted them as large groves of timber. In the sight of 
such a mass of life, the traveller feels a strange emotion of grandeur, 
We had heard from a distance a dull and confused murmuring, and, 
when we came in view of their dark masses, there was not one among 
us who did not feel his heart beat quicker. It was the early part of the 
day, when the herds are feeding; and every where they were in motion. 
Here and there a huge old bull was rolling in the grass, and clouds of 
dust rose in the air from various parts of the bands, each the scene of 
some obstinate fight. Indians nal buffalo make the poetry and life of 
the prairie, and our camp was full of their exhilaration, In place of the 
quiet monotony of the march, relieved only by the cracking of the whip, 
and an “avance done! enfant de garce!’ shouts and songs resounded 
from every part of the line, and our evening camp was always tbe com- 
mencement of a feast, which terminated only with our departure on the 
following morning. At any time of the night might be seen pieces of the 
most delicate and choicest meat, roasting en appolas, on sticks around the 
fire, and the guard were never without company. With pleasant weather 
and no enemy to fear, an abundance of the most excellent meat, and no 
scarcity of bread or tobacco, they were enjoying the oasis of a voyageur’s 
life. ‘Three cows were killed to-day. Kit Carson had shot one, and was 
continuing the chase in the midst of another herd, when his horse fell 
headlong, but sprang up and joined the flying band. Though considerably 
hurt, he had the good fortune to break no bones; and Maxwell, who was 
mounted on a fleet hunter, captured the runaway after a hard chase. He 
was on the point of shooting him, to avoid the loss of his bridle, (a hand- 
somely mounted Spanish one,) when he found that his horse was able to 


come up with him. Animals are frequently lost in this way; and it is 


necessary to keep close watch over therm, in the vicinity of the buffalo, én 
the midst of which they scour off to the plains, and are rarely retaken. 
One of our mules took a sudden freak into his head, and joined a neigh- 
boring band to-day. As we were not ina condition to lose horses, I sent 
several men in pursuit, and remained in camp, in the hope of recovering 
him; but lost the afternoon to no purpose, as we did not see him again. 


' Astronomical observations placed us in longitude 100° 05’ 47", latitude 


40° 49' 55". 

July 1.—Along our road to-day the prairie bottom was more elevated 
and dry, and the hills which border the right-side of the river higher, and 
more broken and. picturesque in the outline. The country, too, was bet- 
ter timbered. As we were riding quietly along the bank, a grand herd of 
buffalo, some seven or eight hundred in number, came crowding up from 
the river, where they had been to drink, and commenced crossing the 
plain slowly, eating as they went. The wind was favorable; the coolness 
of the morning invited to exercise; the ground was apparently good, and 
the distance across the prairie (two or three miles) gave us a fine opportu- 
nity to charge them before they could get among the river hills. It was 
too fine a prospect for a chase to be lost ; and, halting for a few moments, 
the hunters were Brought up and saddled, and Kit Carson, Maxwell, and 
I, started together. They were now somewhat less than half a mile dis- 
tant, and we rode easily along until within about three hundred yards, 
when a sudden agitation, a wavering in the band, and a galloping to and 
fro of some which were scattered along the skirts, gave us the intimation 


(174) 20 


that we were discovered. We started together at a hand gallop, riding 
steadily abreast of each other, and here the interest of the chase became 
so engrossingly intense, that we were sensible to nothing else. We were 
now closing upon them rapidly, and the front of the mass was already 
in rapid motion for the hills, and in a few seconds the movement had 
communicated itself to the whole herd. 
A crowd of bulls, as usual, brought up the rear, and every now and 
“then some of them faced about, and then dashed on after the band a short 
distance, and turned and looked again, as if more than half inclined to 
stand and fight. Ina few moments, however, during which we had been 
quickening our pace, the rout was universal, and we were going over the 
ground like a hurricane. When at about thirty yards, we gave the usual 
shout, (the hunter’s pas de charge,) and broke into the herd. We enter- 
ed on the side, the mass giving way in every direction in their heedless 
course. Many of the bulls, less active and less fleet than the cows, pay- 
ing no attention to the ground, and occupied solely with the hunter, were 
precipitated to the earth with great force, rolling over and over with the 
violence of the shock, and hardly distinguishable in the dust, We sepa- 
rated on entering, cach singling out his game. 
My horse was a trained hunter, famous in the west under the narne of 
Provean, and, with his eyes flashing, aud the foam flying from his mouth, 
sprang on after the cow like a tiger, Ina few moments he brought me 
alongads of her, and, rising in the stirrups, I fired at the distance of a 
yard, the ball entering at the termination of the long hair, and passing 
near the heart. She fell headlong at the report of the gun, and, checking 
my horse, I looked around for my companions. Ata little distance, Kit 
was on the ground, engaged in tying his horse to the horns of a cow 
which he was preparing to cut up. Among the scattered bands, at some 
digtance below, I caught a glimpse of Maxwell; and while I was looking, 
a light wreath of white smoke curled away from his gun, from which I was 
too far to hear the report. Nearer, and between me and the hills, towards 
which they were directing their course, was the body of the herd, and, 
giving my horse the rein, we dashed after them A thick cloud of dust 
ung upon their rear, which filled my mouth and eyes, and nearly smoth- 
ered me. Inthe midst of this 1 could sce nothing, and the buflalo were 
not distinguishable until within thirty feet. ‘They crowded together more 
densely still as I came upon them, and rushed along in such a compact 
body, that I could not obtain-an entrance—the horse almost leaping upon 
them. In afew moments the mass divided to the right and left, the horns 
clattering with a noise heard above every thing else, and my horse darted 
into the opening. Five or six bulls charged on us as we dashed along 
the line, but were left far behind ; and, singling out a cow, I gave her my 
fire, but struck too high. She gave a tremendous leap, and scoured on 
swifter than before. I reined up my horse, and the band swept on like a 
torrent, and left the place quiet and clear. Our chase had led us into 
dangerous ground. A prairie-dog village, so thickly settled that there 
were three or four holes in every twenty yards square, occupied the whole 
bottom for nearly two miles in length. Looking around, I saw only one 
of the hunters, nearly out of sight, and the long dark line of our caravan 
crawling along, three or four miles distant. After a march of twenty-four 
miles, we encamped at nightfall, one mile and a half above the lower end 
of Brady’s island. The breadth of this arm of the river was eight hun- 


ee ee 8 


—— 


, 
yl 


llop, riding 
hase became 

We were 
as already 
vement had 


ry now and 
and a short 
’ inelined to 
ve had been 
ing over the 
ve the usual 

We enter- 
ieir heedless 
cows, pay- 
unter, were 
er with the 

We sepa- 


the nate of 
1 his mouth, 
brought me 
istance of a 
and passing 
id, checking 
listance, Kit 
s of a cow 
nds, at some 
was looking, 
which I was 
ills, towards 
ie herd, and, 
loud of dust 
ewrly smoth- 
buflalo were 
gether more 
1 a compact 
eaping upon 
ft, the horns 
horse darted 
lashed along 
yave her my 
scoured on 
pt on like a 
led us into 
1 that there 
:d the whole 
nW only one 
our caravan 
twenty-four 
e lower end 
s eight hun- 


2 ee 


SP ee 


hunters came in with a fat cow; and, as we had labored hard, we enjoyed 


21 [ 174 ] 


dred and eighty yards, and the water nowhere two feet in depth, The 
island bears the name of a man killed on this spot some years ago. His 
party had encamped here, three in company, and one of the number went 
off to hunt, leaving Brady and his companion together. These two had 
frequently quarrelled, and on the hunter’s return he found Brady dead, 
and was told that he had shot himself accidentally, Ie was buried here 
onthe bank; but, as usual, tle wolves had torn him out, and some human 
bones that were lying on the ground we supposed were his. ‘Troops of 
wolves, that were hanging on the skirts of the buffalo, kept up an uninter- 
rupted howling during the night, venturing almost into camp. In the 
morning, they were sitting at a short distance, barking, and impatiently 
waiting our departure, to fall upon the bones, 

July 2.—The morning was cool and smoky. Our road led closer to the 
hills, which here increased in elevation, presenting an outline of conical 
peaks three hundred to five hundred feet high. Some timber, apparently 
en Brows in the ravines, and streaks of clay or sand whiten their slopes. 

e crossed during the morning a number of hollows, timbered princi- 
pally with box elder, (acer negundo,) poplar, andelm. Brady’s island is 
well wooded, and all the river along which our road led to-day may, in 
general, be called tolerably well timbered, We passed near an encamp- 
ment of the Oregon emigrants, where they appear to have reposed several 
days. A variety of household articles were scattered about, and they had 
probably disburdened themselves here of many things not absolutely ne- 
cessary. I had left the usual road before the mid-day halt, andin the af- 
ternoon, having sent several men in advance to reconnoitre, marched di- 
rectly for the mouth of the South fork. On our arrival, the horsemen were 
sent in and scattered about the river to search the best fording places, and 
the carts followed immediately, The stream is here divided by an island 
into two channels, The southern is four hundred and fifty feet wide, 
having eighteen or twenty inches water in the deepest places. With the 
exception of a few dry bars, the bed of the river is generally quicksands, 
in which the carts began to sink rapidly so soon as the mules halted, so 
that it was necessary to keep them constantly in motion. 

The northern channel, two thousand two hundred and fifty feet wide, 
was somewhat deeper, having frequently three feet water in the numer- 
ous small channels, with a bed of coarse gravel. The whole breadth of 
the Nebraska, immediately below the junction, is five thousand three hun- 
dred and fifty feet. All our equipage had reached the left bank safely at 6 


_o’clock, having to-day made twenty miles. We encampted at the podin 


of land immediately at the junction of the North and South forks. Be- 
tween the streams is a low rich prairie, extending from their confluence 
eighteen miles westwardly to the bordering hills, where it is five and a 
half miles wide. It is covered with a luxuriant growth of grass, and 
along the banks is a slight and scattered fringe of cottonwood and willow. 
In the buffalo trails and wallows, I remarked saline efflorescences, to 
which a rapid evaporation in the great heat of the sun probably contrib- 
utes, as the soil is entirely unprotected by timber. In the vicinity of these 
places there was a bluish grass, which the cattle refuse to eat, called by 
the voyageurs “ herbe salée,” (salt grass.) The latitude of the junction is 
41°04' 47", and longitude, by chronometer and lunar distances, 100° 49'43". 
The elevation above the sea is about two thousand seven hundred feet. The 


ee 


c 174 J 22 


well a supper of roasted ribs and doudins, the chef d'auvre of a prairie 
cook, Mosquitoes thronged about us this evening; but, by 10 o'clock, 
when the thermometer had fallen to 47°, they had all disappeared, 

July 3.—As this was to be a point in our homeward journey, I mado a 
cache (a term used in all this country for what is hidden in the ground) of 
abarrel of pork. It was impossible to conceal such a proceeding from the 
sharp eyes of our Cheyenne companions, and I therefore told them to go 
and seo what it was they were burying. They would otherwise have 
not failed to return and deutey our cache, in expectation of some rich 
booty ; but pork they dislike, and never eat, We left our camp at 9, con- 
tinuing up the South fork, the prairie bottom affording us a fair road ; but 
in the long grass we roused myriads of mosquitoes and flies, from which 
our horses suffered severely. The day was smoky, with a pleasant breeze 
from the south, and the plains on the opposite side were covered with buf- 
falo, Having travelled twenty five miles, we encamped at 6 in the even- 
ing; and the men were sent across the river for wood, as there is none 
here on the left bank. Our fires were partially made of the bois de vache, 
the dry excrement of the buffalo, which, like that of the camel in the Ara- 
bian deserts, furnishes to the traveller a very good substitute for wood, 
burning like turf. Wolves in great numbers surrounded us during the 
night, crossing and recrossing from the opposite herds to our camp, and 
howling and trotting about in the river until morning. . 

July 4.—The morning was very smoky, the sun shining dimly and red, 
as in a thick fog. The camp was roused witha salute at daybreak, and 
from our scanty store a portion of what our Indian friends called the “ red 
fire water’’ served outto the men. While we wero at breakfast, a buffalo 
calf broke through the camp, followed by a couple of wolves. In its 
fright, it had secbably mistaken us for a band of buffalo, The wolves 
were obliged to make a circuit around the camp, so that the calf got a lit- 
tle the start, and strained every nerve to reach a large herd at the foot of 
the hills, about two miles distant; but first one, and then another, and 
another wolf joined in the chase, until his pursuers amounted to twenty 
or thirty, and they ran him down before he could reach his friends. 
There were a few bulls near the place, and one of them attacked the 
wolves, and tried to rescue him; but was driven off immediately, and the 
little animal fell an easy prey, half devoured before he was dead. We 
watched the chase with the interest always felt for the weak; and had 
there been a saddled horse at hand, he would have fared better. Leaving 
camp, our road soon a Gade ep the hills, in which strata of a marl like that 
of the Chimney rock, hereafter described, make their appearance, It is 
panel of this rock that the hills on the right bank of the Platte, a little 

elow the junction, are composed, and which are worked by the winds 
and rains into sharp peaks and cones, giving them, in contrast to the sur- 
rounding level region, something of a picturesque appearance. We 
crossed this morning numerous beds of the small creeks which, in the 
time of rains and melting snow, pour down from the ridge, bringing down 
with them always great quantities of sand and gravel, which have-gradu- 
ally raised their beds four to ten feet above the level of the prairie, which 
they cross, making each one of them a miniature Po. Raised in this way 
above the surrounding prairie, without any bank, the long yellow and 
winding line of their beds resembles a causeway from the hills to the 
river. Many spots on the prairie are yellow with sunflower, (helianthus.) 


emai ge 


Feat ciak-acoah Miia eile a ee 
. ‘ ‘ ° 
; : 


of a prairie 

10 o'clock, 
ured, 
ey, | mado a 
je ground) of 
ling from the 
them to go 
erwise have 
of some rich 
np at 9, con- 
ir road ; but 
from which 
asant breeze 
red with buf- 
‘in the even- 
here is none 
ois de vache, 
lin the Ara- 
le for wood, 
s during the 
ir camp, and 


mly and red, 
rybreak, and 
lled the “ red 
ast, a buffalo 
Ives. In its 
The wolves 
alf gota lit. 
the foot of 
auother, and 
d to twenty 
his friends. 
attacked the 
tely, and the 
; dead. We 
ik; and had 
or, Leaving 
marl like that 
rance, It is 
latte, a little 
y the winds 
tto the sur- 
rance. We 
‘hich, in the 
‘inging down 
have-gradu- 
rairie, which 
J in this way 
yellow and 
hills to the 
(helianthus.) 


23 (174 j 


Ans we were rey - slowly along this afternoon, clouds of dust in the 
ravines, among the hills to the right, suddenly attracted our attention, and 
in a few minutes column after column of buffalo came galloping down, 
making directly to the river. By the time the leading herds had reached 
the water, the prairie was darkened with the denge masses. Immediately 
before us, when the bands first came down into the valley, stretched an 
unbroken line, the head of which was lost among the river hills on the 
opposite side; and still they poured down from the ridge on our right. 
From hill to hill, the prairie bottom was certainly not less than two miles 
wide; and, allowing the animals to be ten feet apart, and only ten ina 
line, there were already eleven thousand in view, Some idea may thus 
be formed of their number when they had occupied the whole plain, In 
a short time they surrounded us on every side; extending for several miles 
in the rear, and forward as far as the eye could reach ; leaving around ns, 
as we advanced, an open space of only two or three hundred yards. This 
movement of the buffalo indicated to us the presence ef Indians on the 
North fork, 

I halted earlier than usual, about forty miles from the junction, and all 
hands were soon busily engaged in preparing a feast to celebrate the day. 
The kindness of our friends at St. Louis had provided us with a large 
supply of excellent preserves and rich fruit cake; and when these were 
added to a maccaroni soup, and variously prepared dishes of the choicest 
buffalo meat, crowned with a cup of coffee, and enjoyed with prairie ap- 
petite, we felt, as We sat in barbaric luxury around our smoking supper 
on the grass, a greater sensation of enjoyment than the Roman epicure at 
his perfumed feast. But most of all it seemed to please our Indian friends, 
who, in the unrestrained enjoyment of the moment, demanded to know if 
our “medicine daygcame olten.’’ No restraint was exercised at the hos- 
pitable board, and, to the great delight of his elders, our young Indian lad 
made himself extremely drunk. 

Our encampment was within a few miles of the place where the road 
crosses to the North fork, and various reasons led me to divide my party 
at this point. The North fork was the principal object of i survey; but 
I was desircts to ascend the South branch, with a view of obtaining some 
astronomical positions, and determining the mouths of its tributaries as 
far as St. Vrain’s fort, estimated to be some two hundred miles further up 
the river, and near to Long’s peak. ‘There 1 hoped to obtain some mules, 
which I found would be necessary to relieve my horses. In a military 
point of view, I was desirous to form some opinion of the country relative 
to the establishment of posts on a line connecting the settlements with 
the South pass of the Rocky mountains, by way of the Arkansas and the 
South and Laramie forks of the Platte. Crossing the country northwest- 
wardly from St. Vrain’s fort, to the American company’s fort at the mouth 
of Laramie, would give me some acquaintance with the affluents which 
head in the mountains between the two; I therefore determined to set out 
the next morning, accompanied by Mr. Preuss and four men, Maxwell, 
Bernier, Ayot, and Basil Lajeunesse. Our Cheyennes, whose village lay 
up this river, also decided to accompany us. The patty I left in charge 
of Clemént Lambert, with orders to cross to the North fork; and at some 
convenient place, near to the Coulée des Frénes, make a cuche of every 
thing not absolutely necessary to the further progress of our expedition. 
From this point, using the most guarded precaution in his march through 


C174 J 24 


the conntry, he was to proceed to the American company’s fort at the 
mouth of Laramie’s fork, and await my arrival, which would be prior to 
the 16th, as on that and the following night would occur some occultations 
which I was desirous to obtain at that place. 

July 5.—Before breakfast, all was ready, We had one led horse in ad- 
dition to those we rode, and a pack mule, destined to carry our instruments, 
provisions, and baggage; the last two articles not being of very great 
weight. ‘I'he instruments consisted of a sextant, artificial horizon, &c., a 
barometer, spy glass, and compass. The chronometer I of course kept on 
my person. 1 had ordered the cook to put up for us some flou;, coffee, and 
sugar, and our rifles were to furnish the rest. One blanket, in addition to 
his saddle and saddle blanket, furnished the materials for each man’s bed, 
and every one was provided with a change of linen. All were armed 
with rifles or double barrelled guns; and, in addition to these, Maxwell 
and myself were furnished with excellent pistols. Thus accoutred, we 
took a parting bygakfast with our friends, and set forth. 

Our journey the first day afforded nothing of any interest. We shot 
a buffalo toward sunset, and, having obtained some meat for our evening 
meal, encamped where a little timber afforded us the means of making a 
fire. Having disposed our meat on roasting sticks, we proceeded to un- 
pack our bales in search of coffee and sugar, and flour for bread. With 
the exception of a little parciied coffee, unground, we found nothing. Our 
cook had neglected to put it up, or it had been somehow forgotten. Tired 
and hungry, with tough bull meat without salt, (for we had not been able 
to kill a cow,) and a little bitter coffee, we sat down in silence to our mis- 
erable fare, a very disconsolate party; for yesterday’s feast was yet fresh 
in our memories, and this was our first brush with misfortune. Each man 
took his blanket, and laid himself down silently ; for th@worst part of these 
mishaps is, that they make people ill-humored. To-day we had travelled 
about thirty-six miles. 

July 6.—Finding that our present excursion would be attended with 
considerable hardship, and unwilling to expose more persons than neces- 
sary, I determined to send Mr. Preuss back to the party. His horse, too, 
appeared in no condition to support the journey; and accordingly, after 
breakfast, he took the road across the hills, attended by one of my most 
trusty men, Bernier. The ridge between the rivers is here about fifteen 
miles broad, and I expected he would probably strike the fork near their 
evening camp. At all events, he would not fail to find their trail, and re- 
join them the next day. 

We continued our journey, seven in number, including the three Chey- 
ennes. Our general course was southwest, up the valley of the river, 
which was sandy, bordered on the northern side of the valley by a low 
ridge ; and on the south, after seven or eight miles, the river hills became 
higher. Six miles from our resting place we crossed the bed of a consid- 
erable stream, now entirely dry—a bed of sand. Ina grove of willows, 
near the mouth, were the remains of a considerable fort, constructed of 
trunks of large trees. It was apparently very old, and had probably been 
the scene of some hostile encounter among the roving tribes. Its soli- 
tude formed an impressive contrast to the picture which our imaginations 
involuntarily drew of the busy scene which had been enacted here. The 
timber appeared to have been much more extensive formerly than now. 
There were but few trees, a kind of long-leaved willow, standing ; and. 


oS eS ae 


num 


man 
cay | 


v’s fort at the 
Id be prior to 
he occultations 


d horse in ad- 
r instruments, 
of very great 
orizon, &c., a 
ourse kept on 
bu’, coffee, and 
in addition to 
ch man’s bed, 
| were armed 
ese, Maxwell 
accoutred, we 


est. We shot 
rour evening 
of making a 
ceeded to un- 
bread. With 
nothing. Our 
gotten. Tired 
not been able 
ce to our mis- 
was yet fresh 
e. Each man 
it part of these 
had travelled 


attended with 
is than neces- 
His horse, too, 
ordingly, after 
ne of my most 
about fifteen 
tk near their 
r trail, and re- 


e three Chey- 
of the river, 
lley by a low 
hills became 
d of a consid- 
eof willows, 
onstructed of 
robably been 
es, Its soli- 
imaginations 
dhere. The 
ly than now. 
landing ; and. 


SSS 


; 25 [17 ] 
numerous trunks of large trees were scattered abont on the ground. [n 
many similar places I had occasion to remark an apparent progressive de- 
cay in the timber. Ten miles farther we reached the mouth of Lodge 
Pole creek, a clear and handsome stream, running through a broad vailey. 
In its course through the bottom it has a uniform breadth of twenty-two 
feet, and six inches in depth. A few willows on the banks strike pleas- 
antly on the cye, by their greenness, in the midst of the hot and barren 
sands, 

The amorpha was frequent among the ravines, but the sunflower (he/t- 
anthus) was the churacteristic ; and flowers of deep warm colors seem most 
to love the sandy soil. The impression of the country travelled over to- 
day was one of dry and barren sands. We turned in towards the river at 
noon, and gave our horses two hours for food and rest. I had no other 
thermometer than the one attached to the barometer, which stood at 89°, 
the height of the column in the barometer being 26.235 at meridian. The 
sky was clear, with a high wind from the south. At 2, we continued our 
journey; the wind had moderated, and it became almost unendurably hot, 
and our animals suffered severely. In the course of the afternoon, the wind 
rose suddenly, and blew hard from the southwest, with thunder and light- 
ning, and squalls of rain; these were biown against us with violence by 
the wind; and, halting, we turned our backs to the storm until it blew 
over. Antelope were tolerably frequent, with a large gray hare; but the 
former were shy, and the latter hardly worth the delay of stopping to shoot 
them ; so, as the evening drew near, we again had recourse to an old bull, 
and encamped at sunset on an island in the Platte. 

We ate our meat with a good relish this evening, for we were all in fine 
health, and had ridden nearly all of a long summer’s day, with a burning 
sun reflected from@he, sands. My companions slept rolled up in their 
blankets, and the Indians lay in the grass near the fire; but my sleeping 
place generally had an air of more pretension. Our rifles were tied to- 
gether near the muzzle, the butts resting on the ground, and a knife laid 
on the rope, to cut away in case of an alarm. Over this, which made a 
kind of frame, was thrown a large India rubber cloth, which we used to 
cover our packs. This made a tent sufficiently large to receive about half 
of my bed, and was a place of shelter for my instruments ; and as I was 
careful always to put this part against the wind, I could lie here with a 
sensation of satisfied enjoyment, and hear the wind blow, and the rain 
patter close to my head, and know that I should be at least half dry. Cer- 
tainly, I never slept more soundly. The barometer at sunset was 26.010, 
thermometer 81°, and cloudy; but a gale from the west sprang up with 
the setting sun, and ina few minutes swept away every cloud from the 
sky. The evening was very fine, and J remained up to take some astro- 
nomical observations, which made our position in latitude 40° 51’ 17", and 
longitude 103° 07' 00". 

July 7.—At our camp this morning, at 6 o’clock, the barometer was at 
26.183, thermometer 69°, and clear, with a light wind from the southwest. 
The past night had been squally, with high winds, and occasionally a few 
drops of rain. Our cooking did not occupy much time, and we left camp 
early. Nothing of interest occurred during the morning. The -same 
dreary barrenness, except that a hard marly clay had replaced the sandy 
soil. Buffalo absolutely covered the plain on both sides the river, and 
whenever we ascended the hills, seatteree herds gave life to the view 


(174 J 26 ; 
in every direction. A small drove of wild horses made their appearance on 
the low river bottoms, a mile or two to the left, and I sent off one of the In. 
dians (who seemed very eager to catch one) on my led horse, a spirited and 
fleet animal. The savage manwuvred a little to get the wind of the horses, 
in which he succeeded—approaching within a hundred yards without be. 
ing discovered. ‘he chase for a few minutes was animated and interest. 
ing. My hunter easily overtook and passed the hindmost of the wild drove, 
which the Indian did not attempt to asso; all his efforts being directed to 
the capture of the leader. But the strength of the horse, weakened by the 
insufficient nourishment of grass, failed in a race, and all the drove escaped. 
We halted at noon on the bank of the river, the barometer at that time be- 
ing 26.192, and the thermometer 103°, with a Jight air from the south, and 
clear weather. 

In the course of the afternoon, dust rising among the hills at a particular 
place, attracted our attention; and, riding up, we found a band of eighteen 
or twenty buffalo bulls engaged in a desperate fight. ‘Though butting and 
goring were hestowed liberally, and without distinction, yet their efforts 
were evidently directed against one—a huge gaunt old bull, very lean, 
while his adversaries were all fat and in good order. He appeared very 
weak, and had already received some wounds, and, while we were look- 
ing on, was several times knocked down and badly hurt, and a very few 
moments would have put an endtohim. Of course, we took the side.of 
the weaker party, and attacked the herd; but they were so blind with 
rage, that they fought on, utterly regardless of our presence, although on 
foot and on horseback we were firing in open view within twenty yards 
ofthem. But tlris did not last long. Ina very few seconds, we created 
a commotion among them. One or two, which were knocked over by the 
balls, jumped up and ran off into the hills; and tly began to retreat 
slowly along a broad ravine to the river, fighting furiously as they went, 
By the time they had reached the bottom, we had pretty well dispersed 
them, and the old bull hobbled off, to lie down somewhere. One of his en- 
eiies remained on the ground where we had first fired upon them, and we 
stopped there for a short time to cut from him some meat for our supper. 
We had neglected to secure our horses, thinking it an unnecessary precau- 
tion in their fatigued condition; but our mule took it into his head to start, 
and away he went, followed at full speed bythe pack horse, with all the 
baggage and instruments on his back. They were recovered and brought 
back, after a chase of a mile. Fortunately, every thing was well secured, 
so that nothing, not even the barometer, was in the least injured. 

The sun was getting low, and some narrow lines of timber four or five 
miles distant promised us a pleasant camp, where, with plenty of wood 
for fire, and comfortable shelter, and rich grass for our animals, we should 
find clear cool springs, instead of the warm water of the Platte. On our 
arrival, we found the bed of a stream fifty to one hundred feet wide, sunk 
some thirty feet below the level of the prairie, with perpendicular banks, 
bordered by a fringe of green cottonwood, but nota drop of water. There 
were several small forks to the stream, all in the same condition. With 
the exception of the Platte bottom, the country seemed to be of aclay form- 
ation, dry, and perfectly devoid of any moisture, and baked hard by the 
sun. Turning off towards the river, we reached the bank in about a mile, 
and were delighted to find an old tree, with thick foliage and spreading 
branches, where we encamped. At sunset, the barometer was at 25.950, 


s 


eee on ee 


r appearance on 
bff one of the In. 
e, a spirited and 
1d of the horses, 
rds without be. 
ed and interest. 
the wild drove, 
eing directed to 
eakened by the 

drove escaped, 
at that time be. 

the gouth, and 


5B ata particular 
and of eighteen 
gh butting and 
yet their efforts 
bull, very lean, 
appeared very 
we were look- 
ind a very few 
took the side.of 
e so blind with 
e, although on 
twenty yards 
nds, we created 
ed over by the 
gan to retreat 
y as they went. 
well dispersed 
One of his en- 
n them, and we 
or our supper. 
essary precau- 
is head to start, 
e, with all the 
d and brought 
Ss well secured, 
red, 
2r four or five 
lenty of wood 
als, we should 
latte. On our 
eet wide, sunk 
dicular banks, 
vater. There 
dition. With 
of aclay form- 
| hard by the 
about a mile, 
and spreading 
Was at 25.950, 


Q7 C174 J 
thermometer 81°, with a strong wind from S, 20° E., and the sky partially 
covered with heavy masses of cloud, which settled a little towards the 
horizon by 10 o'clock, leaving it sufficiently clear for astronomical ob- 
servations, which placed us in latitude 40° 33’ 26", and longitude 103° 
30' 37"'. 

July 8.—The morning was very pleasant. The breeze was fresh from 
S. 50° E. with few clouds; the barometer at 6 o’clock standing at 25.970, 
and the thermometer at 70°. Since leaving the forks, our route had passed 
over a country alternately clay and sand, each presenting the same naked 
waste, On leaving camp this morning, we sfruck again a sandy region, 
in which the vegetation appeared somewhat more vigorous than that 
which we had observed for the last few days; and on the opposite side of 
the river were some tolerably large groves of timber. 

Journeying along, we came suddenly upon a place where the ground 
was covered with horses’ tracks, which had been made since the rain, and 
indicated the immediate presence of Indians in our neighborhood. The 
buffalo, too, which the day before had been so numerous, were nowhere in 
sight—another sure indication that there were people near. Riding on, we 
discovered the carcass of a buffalo recently killed—perhaps the day before. 
We scanned the horizon carefully with the glass, but no living object was 
to be seen. For the next mile or two, the ground was dotted with buffalo 
carcasses, which showed that the Indians had made a surround here, and 
were in considerable force. We went on quickly and cautiously, keeping 
the river bottom, and carefully avoiding the hills; but we met with no 
interruption, and began to grow careless again. We had already lost one 
of our horses, and here Basil’s mule showed symptoms of giving out, and 
finally refused to advance, being what the Canadians call res¢é. He there- 
fore dismounted, an@ drove her along before him; but this was a very 
slow way of travelling. We had inadvertently got about halfa mile in 
advance, but our Cheyennes, who were generally a mile or two in the 
rear, remained with him. ‘There were some dark-looking objects among 
the hills, about two miles to the left, here low and undulating, which we 
had seen for a little time, and supposed to be buffalo coming in to water ; 
but, happening to look behind, Maxwell saw the Cheyennes whipping up 
furiously, and another glance at the dark objects showed them at once to 
be Indians coming up at speed. 

Had we been well mounted, and disencumbered of instruments, we 
might have set them at defiance; but as it was, we were fairly caught. 
It was too late to rejoin our friends, and we endeavored to gain a clump 
of timber about half a mile ahead; but the instruments and the tired state 
of our horses did not allow us to go faster than a steady canter, and they 
were gaining on us fast. At first, they did not appear to be more than 
fifteen or twenty in number, but group after group darted into view at the 
top of the hills, until all the little eminences seemed in motion, and, in a 
few minutes from the time they were first discovered, two or three hun- 
dred, naked to the breech cloth, were sweeping across the prairie. Ina 
few hundred yards we discovered that the timber we were endeavoring 
to make was on the opposite side of the river; and before we could reach 
the bank, down came the Indians upon us. . 

Iam inclined to think that in a few seconds more the leading man, 
and perhaps some of his companions, would have rolled in the dust; for 
we had jerked the covers from our guns, and our fingers were on the 


f 174 J 28 


triggers; men in such cases generally act from instinct, and a charge from 
three hundred naked savages is a circumstance not well calculated to 
promote a cvol exercise of judgment. Just as he was about to fire, Max. 
well recognised the leading Indian, and shouted to him in the Indian 
language, “ You're a fool, God damn you, don’t you know me?” The 


sound of his own language seemed to shock the savage, and, swerving | 


his horse a little, he passed us like an arrow. He wheeled, as [ rode out 


toward him, and gave me his hand, striking his breast and exclaiming | 


“Arapahi!”? They proved to be a village of that nation, among whom 
Maxwell had resided as a trader a year or two previously, and recognised 
him accordingly. We were soon in the midst of the band, answering as 
well as we could a multitude of questions; of which the very first was, of 
what tribe were our Indian companions who were coming in the rear? 
They seemed disappointed to know that they were Cheyennes, for they 
had fully anticipated a grand dance around a Pawnee scalp that night. 


The chief showed us his village at a grove on the river six miles ahead, — 


and pointed out a band of buffalo on the other side of the Platte, imme- 


diately opposite us, which he said they were going tu surround. They | 


had seen the band early in the morning from their village, and had been 
making a large circuit, to avoid giving them the wind, when they discov- 
ered us. In a few minutes the women came galloping up, astride on 
their horses, and naked from their knees down, and the hips up. They 
followed the men, to assist in cutting up and carrying off the meat. 

The wind was blowing directly across the river, and the chief requested 
us to halt where we were for a while, in order to avoid raising the herd. 
We therefore unsaddled our horses, and sat down on the bank to view 
the scene; and our new acquaintances rode a few hundred yards lower 
down, and began crossing the river. Scores of wild-l@oking dogs followed, 
looking like troops of wolves, and having, in fact, but very little of the 
dog in their composition. Some of them remained with us, and I checked 
one of the men, whom I found aiming at one, which he was about to kill 
fora wolt. The day had become very hot. The air was clear, with a 
very slight breeze; and now, at 12 o’clock, while the barometer stood at 
25.920, the attached thermometer was at 108° Our Cheyennes had 
learned that with the Arapaho village were about twenty lodges of their 
own, including their own families; they therefore immediately com- 

‘menced making their toilette. After bathing in the river, they invested 
themselves in some handsome calico shirts, which I afterward learned 
they had stolen from my own men, and spent some time in arranging 
their hair and painting themselves with some vermilion 1 had given 
them. While they were engaged in this satisfactory manner, one of.their 
half-wild horses, to which the crowd of prancing animals which had just 
passed had recalled the freedom of her existence among the wild droves 
on the prairie, suddenly dashed into the hills at the top of her speed. 
_ She was their pack horse, and had on her back all the worldly wealth of 
our poor Cheyennes, all their accoutrements, and all the little articles 
which they had picked up among us, with some few presents I had given 
them. The loss which they seemed to regret most were their spears and 
shields, and some tobacco which they had received from me. However, 
they bore it all with the philosophy of an Indian, and laughingly con- 
tinued ther toilette. They appeared, however, a little mortified at the 
thought of returning to the village in such a sorry plight. “Our people 


3 
HM 
We 
in 


3 will la 


_ had vi 


. ntercé 


stead 4 
if 1 lo 
object 
mysel 


slaug 
reach 
direct] 
other 
herd, 


directi 
us from 
pearal 
were 
instan 
could 
hind t 
again 
flitting 
more 

when 


. but, tl 


fatal 


_ing he 


village 

Gra 
laden 
ward 
contra 
comp 
lage « 
twent 
hoes. 
broad 
along 
kind « 
clean. 
cons o 
ed br 
days 
impu 


gun, 
mny cl 


upon. 
He b 
urour 
ually 
Whe: 
the ¢ 
simp! 


da charge from 
ell calculated to 
ut to fire, Max. 


in the Indiay, | 
ow me?” The, 
p, and, swerving | 


bd, as I rode out 


and exclaiming } 


1,among whon 
, and recognised 
d, answering as 
ery first was, of 
g in the rear? 
ennes, for they 
p that night. 


six miles ahead, | 


e Platte, imme. 


irround. They | 


, and had been 
en they discov. 
y up, astride on 
hips up. They 
he meat. 
chief requested 
aising the herd. 
e bank to view 
ed yards lower 
y dogs followed, 
ry little of the 
s, and I checked 
ras about to kill 
is clear, with a 
meter stood at 
Cheyennes had 
‘lodges of their 
mediately com- 
', they invested 
erward learned 
le in arranging 
n I had given 
er, one of their 
Which had just 
he wild droves 
9 of her speed. 
rldly wealth of 
2 little articles 
nts I had given 
heir spears and 
le. However, 
ughingly con- 
ortified at the 
“Our people 


29 [ 174 ] 


* will laugh at us,’’ said one of them, “ returning to the village on foot, in- 


stead of driving back a drove of Pawnee horses.”’, He demanded to know 
if 1 loved my sorrel hunter very much; to which I re lied, he was the 
object of my most intense aflection, Far from being able to give, I was 
myself in want of horses; and any suggestion of parting with the few I 


- had valuable, was met with a persmpiony refusal. In the mean time, the 
i 


slaughter was about to commence on the other side. So soon as they 
reached it, the Indians separated into two bodies. One party proceeded 
directly across the prairie, toward the hills, in an extended line, while the 
other went up the river; and instantly as they had given the wind to the 
herd, the chase commenced, ‘The buffalo started tor the hills, but were 


. intercepted and driven back toward the river, broken and running in every 


direction. The clouds of dust soon covered the whole scene, preventing 
us from having any but an occasional view. It had a very singular ap- 
pearance to us at a distance, especially when looking with the glass, We 
were too far to hear the report of the guns, or any sound; and at every 
instant, through the clouds of dust which the sun made luminous, we 
could see for a moment two or three buffalo dashing along, and close be- 
hind them an Indian with his long spear, or other weapon, and instantly 
again they disappeared. ‘The apparent silence, and the dimly seen figures 
flitting by with such rapidity, gave it a kind of dreamy effect, and seemed 
more like a picture than a scene of real life. It had been a large herd 
when the cerne commenced, probably three or four hundred in number; 


- but, though I watched them closely, I did not see one emerge from the 


fatal cloud where the work of destruction was going on. After remain- 


_ing here about an hour, we resumed our journey in the direction of the 


village. 

Gradually, as we rode ou, Indian after Indian came dropping along, 
laden with meat; and by the time we had neared the lodges, the back- 
ward road was covered with the returning horsemen. It was a pleasant 
contrast with the desert road we had been travelling. Several had joined 
company with us, and one of the chiefs invited us to his lodge. ‘I'he vil- 
lage consisted of about one hundred and twenty-five lodges, of which 
twenty were Cheyennes; the latter pitched a little apart from the Arapa- 
hoes, ‘They were dispused in a scattering manner on both sides of a 
broad irregular strect, about one hundred and fifty feet wide, and running 


along the river, As we rode along, I remarked near some of the lodges a 


kind of tripod frame, formed of three slender poles of birch, scraped very 
clean, to which were affixed the shield and spear, with some other weap- 
cns of a chief. All were scrupulously clean, the spear head was burnish- 
ed bright, and the shield white and stainless. It reminded me of the 
days of feudal chivalry ; and when, as I rode by, I yielded to the passing 
impulse, and touched one of the spotless shields with the muzzle of my 


-- gun, T almost expected a grim warrior to start from the lodge and resent 
ty challenge. The master of the lodge spread out a robe for me to sit 


upon, and the squaws set before us a large wooden dish of builalo meat. 
He had lit his pipe in the mean while, and when it had been passed 


— around, we commenced our dinner while he continued to smoke. Grad- 


ually, five or six other chiefs came in, and took their seats in silence. 
When we had finished, our host asked a number of questions relative to 
the object of our journey, of which I made no concealment; telling him 
simply that | had made a visit to see the country, preparatory to the es- 


ey ae 
abs 


a cae 


[ 174 ] 30 


tablishment of military posts on the way to the mountains. Although 
this was information of the highest interest to them, and by no means 


. 
- 


calculated to please them, it excited no expression of surprise, and in no | 


way altered the grave courtesy of their demeanor. The others listened 
and smoked. 1 remarked, that in taking the pipe for the first time, each 
had turned the stem upward, with a rapid glance, as in offering to the 


- 


Great Spirit, before he put it in his mouth, A storm had been gathering |. 


for the past hour, and some pattering drops on the lodge warned us that 


we had some miles to our camp. Some Indian had given Maxwell a | 


bundle of dried meat, which was very acceptable, as we had nothing ; and, 
springing upon our horses, we rode off at dusk in the face of a cold 
shower and driving wind. We found our companions under some densely 
foliaged old trees, about three miles up the river. Under one of them lay 
the trunk of a large cottonwood, to leeward of which the men had kin- 
dled a fire, and we sat here and roasted our meat in tolerable shelter. 
Nearly opposite was the mouth of one of the most considerable affluents 
of the South fork, la Fourche aux Castors, (Beaver fork,) heading off in 
the ridge to the southeast. 

July 9.—This morning we caught the first faint glimpse of the Rocky 
mountains, about sixty miles distant. Though a tolerably bright day, 
there was a slight mist, and we were just able to discern the snowy sum- 
mit of “ Long’s peak,’’ (“les deux oreilles” of the Canadians,) showing 
like a small cloud near the horizon. I found it easily distinguishable, 
there being a perceptible difference in its appearance from the white 
clouds that were floating about the sky. I was pleased to find that 
among the traders and voyageurs the name of “ Long’s peak” had been 
adopted and become familiar in the country. In the ravines near this 


_ place, a light brown sandstone made its first appearance. About 8, we 


discerned several persons on horseback a mile or two ahead, on the oppo- 
site side of the river. They turned in towards the. river, and we rode 
down to meet them. We found them to be two white men, and a mu:- 
Jatto named Jim Beckwith, who had left St. Louis when a boy, and gone 
to live with the Crow Indians. He had distinguished himself among 
them by some acts of daring bravery, and had risen to the rank of a chief, 
but had now, for some years, left them. They were in scareh of a band of 
horses that had goue off from a camp some miles above, isi charge of Mr. 
Chabonard. Two of them continued down the river, in search of the 
horses, and the American turned back with us, and we rode on towards 


*. island 


the camp. About eight miles from our sleeping place we reached Bijou’s __ 


fork, an affluent of the right bank. Where we crossed it, a short distance | © 


from the Platte, it has a sandy bed about four hundred yards broad; the 
water in various small streams, a few inches deep. Seven miles further 
brought us to a camp-of some four or five whites, (New Englanders, I be- 
lieve,) who had accompanied Captain Wyeth to the Columbia river, and 
were independent trappers. All had their squaws with them, and I was 


really surprised at the number of little fat buffalo-fed boys that were tum- | 
bling about the camp, all apparently of the same age, about three or four | 
years old." ‘They were encamped on a rich bottom, covered with a pro- | 
fusion of fine grass, and had a large number of fine-looking horses and | 
mules, We rested with them afew minutes, and in about two miles ar- |” 
rived at Chabonard’s camp, on an island in the Platte. On the heights | 


above, we met the first Spaniard I had seen in the country. Mr. Chabo- 


~~ forw 


nard 
their 
with 
the v 
taken 
Hele: 
the P 
ably « 
ally b 
Was ¢ 
was tf 
was \ 
Fre 
had | 
fine g 
were 
bottor 
had q 
peopl 
good 
of ig 
rally 
Taos, 
Jut 
morn 
na, la 
imme 
peak. 
forty 
dred 


is sai 
strea 
inarls| 
Black 
glitte 
ceive 
last t 
he ws 
in se 
They 
goods 
muleg 
and 

here 
moul 
was ¢ 
ern, | 
the d 

I 
objec 


ins. Although 
by no means 


rise, and in no © 


others listened 
first time, each 
offering to the 
been gathering 


varned us that 
en Maxwell a | 


d nothing ; and, 
face of a cold 
‘r some densely 
ne of them lay 
e men had kin- 
erable shelter. 


erable affluents — 


heading off in 


2 of the Rocky 
bly bright day, 
he snowy sum- 
lians,) showing 
distinguishable, 
rom the white 


ed to find that 


eak?? had been 
vines near this 

About 8, we 
\d, on the oppo- 
er, and we rode 
en, and a mu- 


himself among 


de on towards 


a short distance 
ards broad ; the 
uv miles further 
nglanders, I be- 
bia river, and 
em, and I was 
that were tum- 
ut three or four 


2 


- 


boy, and gone | 


rank of a chief, | - 
roh of a band of | 
charge of Mr. | 
search of the | 


reached Bijou’s — 


——— 
SSeS ee ame 


= 


ers 
Fa ae tae 
fe 


red with a pro- | 
ing horses and | 
two miles ar- | 
On the heights 


y. Mr. Chabo- |= forward to an exploration of their snowy recesses with great pleasure. 


31 [ 174 ] 


uard was in the service of Bent and St. Vrain’s company, and had left 
their fort some forty or fifty miles above, in the spring, with boats laden 
with the furs of the last year’s trade. He had met the same fortune as 
the voyageurs on the North fork, and, finding it impossible to proceed, had 
taken up his suinmer’s residence on this island, which he had named St. 
Helena, The river hills appeared to be composed entirely of sand, and 
the Platte had lost the mu dy character of its waters, and here was toler- 
ably clear, From the mouth of the South fork, I had found it occasion. 
ally broken up by small islands; and at the time of our journey, which 
was at a season of the year when the waters were at a favorable stage, it 
was not navigable for any thing drawing six inches water. The current 
was very swift—the bed of the stream a coarse gravel. 

From the place at which we had encountered the Arapahoes, the Platte 
had been tolerably well fringed with timber, and the island here had a 
fine grove of very large cottonwoods, under whose broad shade the tents 
were pitched. ‘There was a large drove ot horses in the opposite prairie 
bottom; smoke was rising from the scattered fires, and the encampment 
had quite a patriarchal air. Mr, C. receivecl us hospitably. One of the 
people was sent to gather mint, with the aid of which he concocted very 
good julep; and some boiled buffalo tongue, and coffee with the luxury 
of sugar, were soon set before us, The people in his employ were gene- 
rally Spaniards, and among them I saw a young Spanish woman from 
Taos, whom I found to be Beckwith’s wife. 

July 10.—We parted with our hospitable host after breakfast the next 
morning, aud reached St. Vrain’s fort, about forty-five miles from St. Hele- 
na, late in the evening. This post is situated on the South fork of the Platte, 
immediately under the mountains, about seventeen miles east of Long’s 
peak. It ison the right bank, on the verge of the upland prairie, about 
forty feet above the river, of which the immediate valley is about six hun- 
dred yards wide. The stream is divided into various branches by small 


* islands, among which it runs with a swift current. The bed of the river 


is sand and gravel, the water very clear, and here may be called a mountain 
stream. This region appears to be entirely free from the limestones and 
marls which give to the Lower Platte its yellow and dirty color. The 
Black hills lie between the stream and the mountains, whose snowy peaks 
glitter a tew miles beyond. At the fort we found Mr. St. Vrain, who re- 
ceived us with much kindness and hospitality. Maxwell had spent the 
last two or three years between this post and the village of Taos; and here 
he was at home, and among his friends. Spaniards frequently come over 
in search of employment; and several came in shortly after our arrival. 
They usually obtain about six dollars a month, generally paid to them it. 
goods, They are very useful in a camp, in taking care of horses and 
mules; and I engaged one, who proved to be an active, laborious man, 
and was ot very considerable service to me. The elevation of the Platt 
here is five thousand four hundred‘ feet above the sca. The neighborin, 
mountains did not appear to enter far the region of perpetual snow, which 
was generally confined to the northern side of the peaks. On the south- 
ern, | remarked very little. Were it appeared, so far as [ could judge in 
the distance, to descend but a few hundred feet below the summits. 

I regretted that time did not permit me to visit them; but the proper 
object of my survey lay among the mountains further north ; and I looked 


[ 174] 32 


vac! 


The piney region of the mountains to the south was enveloped in smoke, was 
and I was informed had been on fire for several months, Pike’s peak is thro 
said to be visible from this place, about one hundred miles to the south. of t1 
ward; but the smoky state of the atmosphere prevented my seeing it. mer, 
The weather continued overcast during my stay here, so that I failed in wat 
determining the latitude, but obtained good observations for time on the ravi 
mornings of the 11th and 12th, An assumed latitude of 40° 22’ 30” from ing | 
the evening position of the 12th, enabled me to obtuin, for a tolerably cor- cous 


rect longitude, 105° 12°12". ; ‘ lett 
July 12.—The kindness of Mr, St. Vrain had enabled me to obtaina | In fi 


couple of horses and three good mules; and, with a further addition to our |) brol 
party of the Spaniard whom I had hired, and two others, who were RY inh 
going to obtain service at Laramie’s fork, we resumed our journey at 10, | east 
on the morning of the 12th, We had been able to procure nothing at the mile 
post, in the way of provision. An expected supply from ‘Taos had not yet — rese 
arrived, and a tew pounds of cotlee was all that could be spared to us, In | rock 
addition. to this, we had dried meat enough for the first day ; on the next, | rain: 
we expected to find butlalo. From this post, according to the estimate of the 1 
the country, the fort at the mouth of Laramie’s fork, which was our next by f 
point of destination, was nearly due north, distant about one hundred and dieu 
twenty-five miles. was 

For a short distance, our road lay down the valley of the Platte, which of r 
resembled a garden iu the splendor of fields of varied flowers, which filled Sixt 
the air with fragrance. ‘The only timber I noticed consisted of poplar, ride 
birch, cottonwood, and willow. In something less than three miles, we upol 
crossed Thompson’s creek, one of the afflueuts to the left bauk of the prise 
South fork—a fine stream about sixty-five feet wide, and three feet deep. pare 
Journeying on, the low dark line of the Black hills lying between us and and 
the mountains to the left, in about ten miles from the fort, we reached Cache terru 
@ la Poudre, where we halted to noon, This isa very beautiful moun- . —— thirs 


tain stream, about one hundred feet wide, flowing with a full swift cur- 
rent over a rocky bed. We halted under the shade of some cottonwoods, 
with which the stream is wooded scatteringly. In the upper part of its 
course, it runs amid the wildest mountain scenery, and, breaking through 
the Black hills, falis into the Platte about ten miles below this place. In 
the course of our late journey, I had managed to become the possessor of 
a very uutractable mule—a perfect vixen—and her I had turned over to 
my Spaniard. It occupied us about half an hour to-day to get the saddle 
upon her; but, once on her back, José could not be dismounted, realizing 
the accounts given of Mexican horses and horsemanship ; and we contin- 
ued our route in the afternoon. 

At evening, we encamped on Crow (?) creek, having travelled about 
twenty-eight miles. None of the party were well acquainted with the 
country, and I had great ditliculty in ascertaining what were the names 
of the streams we crossed bet ween the North and South forks of the Platte. 
This I supposed to be Crow creek. It is what is called a salt stream, and 
the water stands in pools, having no continuous course. A fine-grained 
sandstone made its appearance in the banks. ‘The observations of the 
night placed us in latitude 40° 42', longitude 104° 57' 49". The barom- 
eter at sunset was 25.231; attached thermometer at 66°. Sky clear, 2xcept 
in the east, with a light wind from the north. 

July 13.—There being no wood here, we used last night the dois de 


ped in smoke, 

ike’s peak is 
sto the south- 
my seeing it, 
hat I failed in 
‘or time on the 
° 22' 30" from 
. tolerably cor- 


ne to obtain a 
addition to our 
rs, Who were 
journey at 10, 
nothing at the 
aos had not yet 
pared to us, In 
3; on the next, 
the estimate of 
h was our next 
ie hundred and 


e Platte, which 
rs, which filled 
isted of poplar, 
three miles, we 
ft bauk of the 
three feet deep. 
etween us and 
reached Cache 
eautiful moun- 

full swift cur- 
he cottonwoods, 
pper part of its 
eaking through 
this place. In 
he possessor of 
turned over to 

get the saddle 
inted, realizing 
and we contin- 


travelled about 
hinted with the 
ere the names 
sot the Platte. 
salt stream, and 
A fine-grained 
rvations of the 
'. The barom- 
y clear, 2xcept 


ight the dois de 


i 83 [174] 


)) — wache, which is very plentiful. At our camp this morning, the barometer 
was at 25,235; the attached thermometer 60°, A few clouds were moving 
through a deep blue sky, with a light wind from the west, Afler a ride 
© of twelve miles, in a northerly direction, over a plain covered with innu- 
‘® merable quantities of cacti, we reached a small creek in which there was 
/ —_—-water, and where several herds of buffalo were scattered about among the 
ravines, Which always afford good pasturage, We seem now to be pass- 
ing along the base of a plateau of the Black hills, in which the formation 
cousists of marls, some of them white and laminated ; the country to the 
© left rising suddenly, and falling off gradually and uniformly to the right. 

In five or six miles of a northeasterly course, we struck a high ridge, 
~ broken into conical peaks, on whose summits large boulders were gathered 
ep in heaps. The magnetie direction of the ridge is northwest and south- 
| east, the glittering white of its precipitous sides making it visible for many 
miles to the south. It is composed of a soft earthy limestone and marls, 

resembling that, hereafter described, in the neighborhood of the Chimney 
rock, on the North fork of the Platte, easily worked by the winds and 
rains, and sometimes moulded into very fantastic shapes, At the foot of 
the northern slope was the bed of a creek, some forty feet wide, coming, 
by frequent falls, from the bench above. It was shut in by high perpen- 
dicular banks, in which were strata of white laminated marl. Its bed 
was perfectly dry, and the leading feature of the whole region is one 
of remarkable aridity, and perfect freedom from moisture. In about 
six miles we crossed the bed of another dry creek ; and, continuing our 
ride over a high level prairie, a little before sundown we came suddenly 
upon a beautiful creek, which revived us with a feeling of delighted sur- 
prise by the pleasant contrast of the deep verdure of its banks with the 
parched desert we had passed. We had suffered inuch to-day, both men 
and horses, for want of water; having met with it but once in our unin- 
terrupted march of forty miles, and an exclusive meat diet creates much 
thirst. 

_ © Las bestias tienen mucha hambre,” said the young Spaniard, inquir- 
ingly ; “y da gente tambien,” said I, “ amigo, we’ilcamp here.”’? A stream 
of good and clear water ran winding about through the little valley, and a 
herd of buffalo were quietly feeding a little distance below. It was quite 
a hunter’s paradise; and while some ran down toward the band to kill one 
for supper, others collected bois de vache for a fire, there being no wood ; 
and | amused myself with hunting for plants among the grass. 

It will be seen, by occasional remarks on the geological formation, that 
the constituents of the soil in these regions are good, and every day served 
to strengthen the impression in my mind, confirmed by subsequent ob- 
Servation, that the barren appearance of the country is due almost en- 
tirely to the extreme dryness of the climate. Along our route, the country 
had seemed to increase constantly in elevation. According to the indica- 
tion of the barometer, we were at our encampment 5,440 fect above the 
sea, 

The evening was very clear, with a fresh breeze from the south, 50° 
east. The’ barometer at sunset was 24.862, the thermometer attached 
showing 68°. I supposed this to be a tork of Lodge Pole creek, so far as 
I could determine from our uncertain means of information. Astronomi- 


cal observations gave for the camp a longitude of 104° 39’ 37", and lati- 
tude 41° 08’ 31", 


i 
ke 
ie 

f 

ft 

+ 

ye 

’ 

4 

ir . 


3 


[174 J 34 


July 14.—The wind continued fresh from the same quarter in the morn- 
ing ; the day being clea:, with the exception of a few clouds in the hori- 
zon. At our camp at 6 o’clock, the height of the barometer was 24,830, 
the attached thermometer 61°, Our course this morning was directly 
north by compass, the variation being 15° or 16° ersterly. A ride of four 
miles brought us to Lodge Pole creek, which we had seen at its mouth 
on the South fork ; crossing on the way two dry streams, in eighteen miles 
from our encampment of the past night, we reached a high bleak ridge, 
composed entirely of the same earthy limestone and marl previously de- 
scribed, I had never see any thing which impressed so strongly on my 
mind a feeling of desolation. ‘The valley, through which ran the waters 
of Horse creek, lay in view to the north, but too tur to have any influence 
on the immediate view. On the peak of the ridge where [ was standing, 
some six or seven hundred feet above the river, the wind was high and 
bleak; the barren and arid country seemed as if it had been swept by 

fires, and in every direction the same cull ash-colored hue, derived from 

the formation, met the eye. On the summits were some stunted pines, 
many of them dead, all wearing the same ashen hue of desolation. We 
left the place with pleasure ; and, after we hic descended several hundred 
feet, halted in one of the ravines, which, at the distance of every mile or 
two, cut the flanks of the ridge with little rushing streams, wearing some- 
thing of a mountain character. We had already begun to exchange the 
comparatively barren lands for those of a more fertile character, Though 
the sandstone formed the broken banks of the creek, yet they were cov- 
ered with a thin grass; and the fifty or sixty feet which formed the bottom 
land of the little stream were clothed with very luxuriant grass, among 
which I remarked willow and cherry, (cerasus virginiana ;) aud a quan- 
tity of gooseberry and currant bushes occupied the greater part. 
The creek was three or four feet broad, and about six inches deep, with 
a swift current of clear water, and tolerably cool. We had struck it too 
low down to find the cold water, which we should have enjoyed vearer 
to its sources. At 2,p. m., the barometer was at 25,050, the attached 
thermometer 104% A day of hot sunshine, with clouds, and a moderate 
breeze from the south. Continuing down the stream, in about four miles 
we reached its mouth, at one of the main branches of Horse creek. Looking 
back upon the ridge, whose direction appeared to be alittle tothe north of 
east, we saw it seamed at frequent intervals with the dark lines of wooded 
streams, affluents of the river that flowed so far as we could see along its 
base. We crossed, in the space of twelve miles from our noon halt, three 
or four forks of Horse creek, and encamped at sunset on the most easterly. 
The fork on which we encamped appeared to have followed an easterly 
| direction up to this place ; but here it makes a very sudden bend to the 
north, passing between two ranges of precipitous hills, called, as I was in- 
! formed, Goshen’s hole. There is somewhere in or near this locality a 


ment. Looking back upon the spot, at the distance of a few miles to the 
northward, the hills appear to shut in the prairie, through which runs the 
creek, with a semi-circular sweep, which might very naturally be called 4 


which constitutes the rock of the Court-house and Chimney, on the North 
fork, which appeared to me a continuation of this ridge. The winds and 
rains work this formation into a variety of singular forms, The pass into 


place so called, but I am not certain that it was the place of our encamp: |” 


hole in the hills. The geological composition of the ridge is the same 


er in the morn- 
is in the hori- 
er was 24,830, 
y was directly 
A ride of four 
) at its mouth 
eighteen miles 
th bleak ridge, 
previously de- 
trongly on my 
ran the waters 
e any influence 
[ was standing, 
was high and 
been swept by 
», derived from 
) stunted pines, 
esolation, We 
several hundred 
{ every mile or 
, wearing some- 
9 exchange the 
acter. Though 
they were cov- 
rmed the bottom 
nt grass, among 
a 3) aud a quan- 
r part. 
iches deep, with 
ad struck it too 
enjoyed nearer 


* 


ead 


50, the attached — 


and a moderate 
ibout four miles | 


creek, Looking 


le tothe north of § 


lines of wooded 
uld see along its 
noon halt, three 
he most easterly. 
owed an easterly 
den bend to the 


led, as I was in- | , 
hr this locality a)” 
of our encamp- | | 


few miles to the 
which runs the 
rally be called a 


ey, on the North 
The winds and 
. The pass into 


dge is the same 


35 [174 J 


Goshen’s hole is about two miles wid*,and the hill on the western side 
imitates, in an extraordinary manner, 6 massive fortified a, with @ re- 
markable fulness of detail, The rock is marl and earthy limestone, white, 
without the least appearance of vegetation, and much resembles masonry 
at a little distance; and here it sweeps around a level area two or three 
hundred yrds in diameter, and in the form of a half moon, terminating 
on cir extremity in enormous bastions, Along the whole line of the 
parapeis appear domes and slender minarets, forty or fifty feet high, giving 
it every appearance of an old fortified town, On the waters of White 
river, where this formation exists in great extent, it presents appearances 
which excite the admiration of the solitary voyageur, and form a frequent 
theme of their conversation when speaking of the wonders of the country, 
Sometimes it offers the perfectly illusive appearance of a large city, with 
nunerous streets and magnificent buildings, among which the Canadians 
never fail to see their cabaret; and sometimes it takes the form of a soli- 
tary house, with many large chambers, into which they drive their horses 
at night, and sleep in these natural defences perfectly secure from any at- 
tack of prowling savages, Before reaching our camp at Goshen’s hole, in 
crossing the immense detritus at the foot of the Castle rock, we were in- 
volved amidst winding passages cut by the waters of the hill; and where, 
with a breadth scarcely large enongh for the passage of a horse, the walls 
rise thirty and forty feet perpendicularly. ‘This formation supplies the 
discoloration of the Platte. At sunset, the height of the mercurial column 
was 25.500, the attached thermometer 80°, and wind moderate from S, 
38° E. Clouds covered the sky with the rise of the moon, but I succeeded 
in obtaining the usual astronomical observations, which placed us in latitude 
41° 40' 13", and longitude 104° 24' 36" 

July \5.—At 6 this morning, the barometer was at 25,515, the thermom- 
eter 72°; the day was fine, with some clonds looking dark on the south, with 
a fresh breeze from the same quarter, We found that in our journey across 
the country we had kept too much tothe eastward, This morning, accord- 
ingly, we travelled by compass some 15 or 20° to the west of north, and 
struck the Platte some thirteen miles below Fort Laramie. The day was 
extremely hot, and among the hills the wind seemed to have just issued 
from an oven. Our horses were much distressed, as we had travelled 
hard; and it was with some dilliculty that they were ail brought to the 
Platte; which we reached at 1 o’clock. In riding in towards the river, 
we found the trail of our carts, which appeared to have passed a day or 
two since. 

After having allowed our animals two hours for food and repose, we 
resumed our journey, and towards the close of the day came in sight of 
Laramie’s fork. Issuing from the river hills, we came first in view of 
Fort Platte, a post belonging to Messrs. Sybille, Adams, & Co., situated 
immediately in the point of land at the junction of Laramie with the 
Platte. Like the post we had visited on the South fork, it was built of 
earth, and still unfinished, being enclosed with walls (or rather houses) on 
three of the sides, and open on the fourth to the river. A few hundred 
yards brought us in view of the post of the American Fur Company, call- 
ed Fort John, or Laramie. This was a large post, having more the air of 
military construction than the fort at the mouth of the river. It is on the 
left bank, on a rising ground some twenty five feet above the water; and 
its lofty walls, whitewashed and picketed, with the large bastions at the 


C174 J 36 


angles, gave it quite an imposing appearance in the uncertain light of 
evening, Acluster of lodges, which the language told us belonged to 
Sioux Indians, was pitched under the walls, and, with the fine back 
ground of the Black hills and the prominent peak of Laramie mountain, 
strongly drawn in the clear light of the western sky, where the sun had 
already set,the whole formed at the moment a strikingly beaut! pieture, 
From the company at St. Louis I had letters for Mr, Boudeau, the 5 tle. 
man in charge of the post, by whom I was received with great hospitalny 
and an efficient kindness, which was invaluable to me during my stay in 
ihe country. I found our people encamped on the bank, & short distance 
above the fort. All were well; and, in the enjoyment of a bountiful sup- 
per, which coffee and bread made luxurious to us, We soon forgot the fa- 
tigues of the last ten days. ; 55 

July \6.—1 found that, during my absence, the situation of affairs had 
undergone some change; and the usual quiet and somewhat monotonous 
regularity of the eamp had given place to exeitement and alarm, The 
cirenmstances which oceasioned this change will be found narrated in the 
following extract from the journal of Mr. Preuss, which commences with 
the day of our separation on the South fork of the Platte. 


Extract from the journal of Mr. Preuss. 


“July 6.—We crossed the plateau or highland between the two forks in 
about six hours, I let my horse go as slow as he liked, to indemnity us 
both for the previous hardship; and about noon we reached the North 
fork. ‘There was no sign that our party had passed; we rode, therefore, 
to some pine trees, unsaddled the horses, and stretched our limbs on the 
grass, awaiting the arrival of our company. After remaining here two 
hours, my companion became impatient, mounted his horse again, and 
sode off down the river to see if he could discover our people. I felt so 
marode yet, that it was a horrible idea to me to bestride that saddle again; 
wy | lay still. I kuew they could not come any other way, and then my 
companion, one of the best men of the company, would not abardon me. 
The sun went down; he did not come. Uneasy I did not feel, but very 
hungry; I had wo provisions, but [could make a fire; and as I espied 
two doves in a tree, I tried to kill one; but it meeds a better marksman 
itan myself to kill a little bird witha rifle. I made a large fire, however, 
lighted my pipe—this true friend of mine in every emergency—lay down, 
and let my thoughts wander to the far east. It was not many minutes after 
when I heard the tramp of a horse, and my faithful companion was by 
my side. He had found the party, who had been delayed by making 
their cache, about seven miles below. To the good supper which he 
Swought with him I did ample justice. He had forgotten salt, and I tried 
the soldier’s substitute in time of war, and used gunpowder; but it an- 
swered badly—bitter enough, but no flavor of kitchen salt. I slept well ; 
x0 was only disturbed by two owls, which were attracted by the fire, 
and took their place in the tree under which we slept. Their music 
avemed as disagreeable to my companion as to myself; he fired his rifle 
twice, and then they let us alone. 

“July 7.—At about 10 o’clock, the party arrived; and we continued our 
journey through a country which offered but little to interest the traveller. 
The soil was much more sandy than in the valley below the confluence 


tain light of 

belonged to 
ve flue back 
je mountain, 
» the sun had 
iil pleture, 
H, the ¢ nthe. 
it hospitalny 
omy stay in 
hort distance 
ountiful sup. 
forgot the ta- 


of affairs had 
L monotonous 
alarm, The 
srrated in the 
imenees with 


» two forks in 
indemnity us 
ied the North 
ide, therefore, 
limbs on the 
ling here two 
e again, and 
ple. I felt so 
saddle again; 
and then my 
abaadon me. 
feel, but very 
1 as I espied 
er marksinan 
fire, however, 
y—lay down, 
minutes after 
nion was by 
bd by making 
er which he 
It, and I tried 
r; but it an- 

I slept well ; 
d by the fire, 

Their music 
fired his rifle 


ontinued our 
the traveller. 
he confluence 


=r wT 


37 [ 174 } 


of the forks, and the face of the country no longer presented the refresh 
ing green which had hitherto characterized it, The rich grass was now 
found only in dispersed spots, on low grounds, and on the bottom land of 
the streams, A long drought, joined to extreme heat, had so parched up 
the upper prairies, that they were in many places bald, or covered only 
with a thin growth of yellow and poor grass, The nature of the soil ren- 
ders it extremely susceptible to the vicissitudes of the climate, Between 
the forks, and from their junction to the Black hills, the formation con- 
sists of marl and a soft earthy limestone, with granitic sandstone, Such a 
formation cannot give rise to a sterile soil; and, on our return in Septem: 
ber, when the country had been watered by frequent rains, the valley of 
the Platte looked like a garden; so rich was the verdure of the grasses, 
and so luxuriant the bloom of abundant flowers. The wild sage begins to 
make its appearance, and timber is so searce that we generally made our 
fires of the bois de vache. With the exception of now and then an isolated 
tree or two, standing like a light-house on the river ban'., there is none 
whatever to be seen, 

«July 8.-—Our road to-day was a solitary one, No game made its appear: 
ance—not even a buffalo or a stray antelope ; and nothing occurred to break 
the monotony until about 5 o’clock, when the caravan made a sudden halt. 
There was a galloping in of scouts and horsemen from every side—a hur- 
rying to and fro in noisy confusion; rifles were taken from their cover; 
bullet pouches examined ; in short, there was the ery of * Indians,’ heard 
again, I had become so much accustomed to these alarms, that now they 
made but little impression on me; and before [ had time to become ex- 
cited, the new comers Were ascertained to be whites, It was a large party 
of traders and trappers, conducted by Mr, Bridger, a man well known in 
the history of the country. As the sun was low, and there was a fine grase 
patch not far ahead, they turned back and encamped for the night with 
us. Mr. Bridger was invited to supper; and, after the ¢adble cloth was 
removed, we listened with eager interest to an account of their adventures. 
What they had met, we would be likely to encounter; the chances which 
had befallen them, would probably happen to us; and we looked upow. 
their life as a picture of our own, He informed us that the condition of 
the country had become exceedingly dangerous, The Sioux, who had 
been badly disposed, had broken out into open histility, and in the preced- 
ing autumn his party had encountered them in a severe engagement, in 
which a number of lives had been lost on both sides. United with the 
Cheyenne and Gros Ventre Indians, they were scouring the upper country 
in war parties of great force, and were at this time in the neighborhood of 
the Hed Buttes, a famous landmark, which was directly on our path. 
They had declared war upon every living thing which should be found 
westward of that point ; though their main object was to attack a large 
camp of whites and Snake Indians, who had a rendezvous in the Sweet 
Water valley. Availing himself of his intimate knowledge of the country, 
he had reached Laramie by an unusual route through the Black hills, and 
avoided coming into contact with any of the scattered parties. This gen- 
tleman offered his services to accompany us so far as the head of the Sweet 
Water ; but the absence of our leader, which was deeply regretted by us 
all, rendered it impossible for us to enter upon such arrangement. In a 
camp consisting of men whose lives had been spent in this country, I ex- 
pected to find every one prepared for occurrences of this nature; but, to 


[174] 38 


iny great surprise, I found, on the contrary, that this news had thrown 
them,all into the greatest consternation; and, on every side, I heard only 
one exclamation, ‘ J/ n’y aura pas de vie pour nous.’ All the night, scat- 
tered groups were assembled around the fires, smoking their pipes, and 
listening with the greatest eagerness to exaggerated details of Indian hos- 
tilities; and in the morniug I found the camp dispirited, and agitated by 
a variety of conflicting opinions. A majority of the people were strongly 
disposed to return; but Clément Lambert, with some five or six others, 
professed their determination to follow Mr, Frémont to the uttermost limit 
of his journey. The others yielded to their remonstrances, and, some- 
what ashamed of their cowardice, concluded to advance at least so far as 
Laramie fork, eastward of which they were aware no danger was to be 
apprehended. Notwithstanding the confusion and excitement, we were 
very early on the road, as the days were extremely hot, and we were 
anxious to profit by the freshness of the morning. The soft marly form- 
ation, over which we were now journeying, frequently offers to the trav- 
eller views of remarkable and picturesque beauty. ‘To several of these 
localities, where the winds and the rain have worked the bluffs into 
curious shapes, the voyageurs have given names according to some fan- 
cied resemblance. One of these, called the Cow7/-house, we passed about 
six miles from our encampment of last night, and toward noon came in 
sight of the celebrated Chimney rock. It looks, at this distance of about 
thirty miles, like what it is called—the long chimney of a steam factory es- 
tablishment, or a shot tower in Baltimore. Nothing occurred to interrupt 
the quiet of the day, and we encamped on the river, after a march of twen- 
ty-four miles. Buffalo had become very scarce, and but one cow had been 
killed, of which the meat had been cut into thin slices, and hung around 
the carts to dry. 

“July 10.—We continued along the same fine plainly beaten road, 
which the smooth surface of the country afforded us, for a distance of six 
hundred and thirty miles, from the frontiers of Missouri to the Laramie fork. 
In the course of the day we met some whites, who were following along 
in the train of Mr. Bridger; and, after a day’s journey of twenty-four 
miles, encamped about sunset at the Chimney rock, of which the annex- 
ed drawing will render any description unnecessary. It consists of marl 
and earthy limestone, and the weather is rapidly diminishing its height, 
which is now not more than two hundred feet above the river. Travel- 
lers who visited it some years since placed its height at upwards of five 
hundred feet. 

“July 11.—The valley of the North fork is of a variable breadth, from 
one to four, and sometimes six miles. Fifteen miles from the Chimney 
rock we reached one of those places where the river strikes the bluffs, 
and forces the road to make a considerable circuit over the uplands. 
This presented an escarpment on the river of about nine hundred yards 
in length, and is familiarly known as Scott’s bluffs. We had made a 
journey of thirty miles before we again struck the river, at a place where 
some scanty grass afforded an insufficient pasturage to our animals. 
About twenty miles from the Chimney rock we had found a very beau- 
tiful spring of excellent and cold water; but it was in such a deep ravine, 
and so small, that the animals could not profit by it, and we therefore 
halted only a few minutes, and found a resting place ten miles further 
on. The plain between Scott’s bluffs and Chimney rock was almost 


AINWIHS 


N¥90uN 


oD 4909" 2 Hy aD 


had thrown 
I heard only 
e night, scat- 
ir pipes, and 
f Indian hos- 
h agitated by 

ere strongly 
r six others, 
termost limit 
, and, some- 
east so far as 
er was to be 
ent, we were 
nd we were 
t marly form- 
sto the trav- 
reral of these 
1e bluffs into 
to some fan- 
passed about 
noon came in 
ance of about 
am factory es- 
:d to interrupt 
arch of twen- 
cow had been 
hung around 


beaten road, 
listance of six 
Laramie fork. 
llowing along 
yf twenty-four 
ch the annex- 
nsists of marl 
ing its height, 
river. Travel- 
»wards of five 


breadth, from 
the Chimney 
ikes the bluffs, 
r the uplands. 
hundred yards 
. had made a 
a place where 
our animals. 
| a very beau- 
a deep ravine, 
_ we therefore 
miles further 
k was almost 


AINWIHDS 


MOON 


a) soley #) aD 


LL ———— 


Sr 


39 [174] 


entirely covered with drift wood, consisting principally of cedar, which, 
we were informed, had been supplied from the Black hills, in a flood five 
or six years since. 

“ July 12.—Nine miles from our encampment of yesterday we crossed 
Horse creek, a shallow stream of clear water, about seventy yards wide, 
falling into the Platte on the right bank. It was lightly timbered, and 
great quantities of drift wood were piled up on the banks, appearing to be 
supplied by the creek from above. After a journey of twenty-six miles, 
we encamped on a rich bottom, which afforded fine grass to our animals, 
Buffalo have entirely disappeared, and we live now upon the dried meat, 
which is exceedingly poor food. The marl and earthy limestone, which 
constituted the formation for several days past, had changed during the 
day into a compact white or grayish white limestone, sometimes contain- 
ing hornstone; and at the place of our encampment this evening, some 
strata in the river hills cropped out to the height of thirty or forty feet, 
consisting of a fine-grained granitic sandstone; one of the strata closely 
resembling gneiss. 

“ July 13.—To-day, about 4 o’clock, we reached Fort Laramie, where 
we were cordially received; we pitched our camp a little above the fort, 
on the bank of Laramie river, in which the pure and clear water of the 
mountain stream looked refreshingly cool, and made a pleasant contrast to 
the muddy, yellow waters of the Platte.” 


I walked up to visit our friends at the fort, which is a quadrangular 
structure, built of clay, after the fashion of the Mexicans, who are gene- 
rally employed in building them. The walls are about fifteen feet high, 
surmounted with a wooden palisade, and form a portion of ranges of 
houses, which entirely surround a yard of about one hundred and thirty 
feet square. Every apartment has its door and window—all, of course, 
Opening on the inside. There are two entrances, opposite each other, and 
midway the wall, one of which is a large and public entrance; the other 
smaller and more private—a sort of postern gate. Over the great entrance 
is a square tower with loopholes, and, like the rest of the work, built of 
earth. At two of the angles, and diagonally opposite each other, are large 
square bastions, so arranged as to sweep the four faces of the walls. 

This post belongs to the American Fur Company, and, at the time of our 
visit, was in charge of Mr. Boudeau. Two of the company’s clerks, Messrs. 
Galpin and Kellogg, were with him, and he had in the fort about sixteen 
men. As usual, these had found wives among the Indian squaws; and, 
with the usual accompaniment of children, the place had quite a populous 
appearance. It is hardly necessary to say, that the object of the establish- 
ment is trade with the neighboring tribes, who, in the course of the year, 
generally make two or three visits to the fort. In addition to this, traders, 
with a small outfit, are constantly kept amongst them. The articles of 
trade consist, on the one side, almost entirely of buffalo robes; and, on the 
other, of blankets, calicoes, guns, powder, and lead, with such cheap or- 
naments as glass beads, looking-glasses, rings, vermilion for painting, to- 
bacco, and principally, and in spite of the prohibition, of spirits, brought 
into the country in the form of alcohol, and diluted with water before 
sold. While mentioning this fact, it is but justice to the American Fur 
Company to state, that, throughout the country, I have always found 
them strenuously opposed to the introduction of spirituous liquors. But, 


[ 174 ] 40 


in the present state of things, when the country is supplied with alcohol, 
when a keg of it will purchase from an Indian every thing he possesses— 
his furs, his lodge, his horses, and even his wife and children—and when 
any vagabond who has money enough to purchase a mule can go into a 
village and trade against them successfully, without withdrawing entirely 
from the trade, it is impossible for them to discontinue its use. In their 
opposition to this practice, the company is sustained, not only by their 
obligation to the laws of the country and the welfare of the Indians, but 
clearly, also, on grounds of policy ; for, with heavy and expensive outfits, 
they contend at manifestly great disadvantage against the numerous inde- 
pendent and unlicensed traders, who enter the country from various ave. 
nues, from the United States and from Mexico, having no other stock in 
trade than some kegs of liquor, which they sell at the modest price of 
thirty-six dollars per gallon. ‘be differeice between the regular trader 
and the coureur des bois, (as the French call the itinerant or peddling tra- 
ders,) with respect to the sale of spirits, is here, as it always has been, fix- 
ed and permanent, and growing out of the nature of their trade. The 
regular trader looks ahead, and.has an interest in the preservation of the 
Indians, and in the regular pursuit of their business, and the preservation 
of their arms, horses, and every thing necessary to their future and perma- 
nent success in hunting : the coureur des bois has no permanent interest, 
and gets what he can, and for what he can, from every Indian he meets, 
even at the risk of disabling him from doing any thing more at hunting. 
The fort had a very cool and clean appearance. The great entrance, in 
which I found the gentlemen assembled, and which was floored, and about 
fifteen feet long, made a pleasant, shaded seat, through which the breeze 
swept constantly; for this country is famous for high winds. In the 
course of conversation, I learned the following particulars, which will ex- 
plain the condition of the country: For several years the Cheyennes and 
Sioux had gradually become more and more hostile to the whites, and 
in the latter part of August, 1841, had had a rather severe engagement with 
a party of sixty men, under the command of Mr. Frapp, of St. Louis. The 
Indians lost eight or ten warriors, and the whites had their leader and 
four men killed. This fight took place on the waters of Snake river; and 
it was this party, on their return under Mr. Bridger, which had spread 
so much alarm among my people. In the course of the spring, two other 
small parties had been cut off by the Sioux—one on their return from the 
Crow nation, and the other among the Black hills. The emigrants to 
Oregon and Mr. Bridger’s party met here, a few days before our arrival. 


Division and misunderstandings had grown up among them; they were: 


already somewhat disheartened by the fatigue of their long and weari- 
some journey, and the feet of their cattle had become so much worn as 
to be scarcely able to travel. In this situation, they were not likely to 
find encouragement in the hostile attitude of the Indians, and the new 
and unexpected difficulties which sprang up before them. They were 
told that the country was entirely swept of grass, and that few or no buffa- 
Jo were to be found on their line of route; and, with their weakened ani- 
mals, it would be impossible for them to transport their heavy wagons 
over the mountain. Under these circumstances, they disposed of their 
wagons and cattle at the forts; selling them at the prices they had paid 
in the States, and taking in exchange coffee and sugar at one dollar a 
pound, and miserable worn-out horses, which died before they reached 


iyvO3 


3JaIwWvusuvi 


l with alcohol, 
he possesses— 
n—and when 
can go into a 
wing entirely 
use. In their 
only by their 
Indians, but 
ensive outfits, 
lumerous inde. 
1 Various ave. 
other stock in 
odest price of 
regular trader 
peddling tra- 
has been, fix- 
r trade. The 
rvation of the 
@ preservation 
re and perma- 
anent interest, 
lian he meets, 
at hunting. 
at entrance, in 
ed, and about 
ich the breeze 
inds. In the 
which will ex- 
heyennes and 
e whites, and 
‘agement with 
t. Louis. The 
ir leader and 
ke river; and 
h had spread 
ng, two other 
turn from the 
emigrants to 
‘e our arrival. 
ns; they were: 
g and weari- 
uch worn as 
not likely to 
and the new 
They were 
y or no buffa- 
eakened ani- 
eavy wagons 
osed of their 
hey had paid 
one dollar a 
they reached 


ivO4 


23IWvuYvi 


oe doraser! fn t 


the n 
- and | 
bree 
all v 
Lara 
enou 
Fort 
the n 
imi 
bravi 
lost s 
on hi 
’ shou 
cipal 
steal! 
days 
Tl 
tate | 
even 
enne. 
amo! 
ona 
whit 
or or 
the n 
to th 
‘andt 
Mr. 
Swe 
Tick : 
valle 
‘surpr 
| Open! 
up tk 
they 
‘ance 
and a 


as 


- 
Se a oes 
* 


ye 


aE SS 


' 41 [174 


the mountains. Mr. Boudeau informed me that he had purchased thirty, 
and the lower fort eighty head of fine cattle, some of them of the Durham 
breed. Mr. Fitzpatrick, whose name and high reputation are familiar to 
all who interest themselves in the history of this country, had reached 
Laramie in company with Mr. Bridger; and the emigrants were fortunate 
enough to obtain his services to guide them as far as the British post of 
Fort Hall, about two hundred and filty miles beyond the South Pass of 
the mountains, They had started for this post on the 4th of July, and, 
immediaiely after their departure, a war party of three hundred and fifty 
braves sat out upon their trail. As their principal chief or partisan had 
lost some relations in the recent fight, and had sworn to kill the first whites 
on his path, it was supposed that their intention was to attack the party, 
should a favorable opportunity offer; or, if they were foiled in their prin- 
cipal object by the vigilance of Mr. Fitzpatrick, content themselves with 
stealing horses and cutting off stragglers, ‘These had been gone but a few 
days previous to our arrival. 

The effect of the engagement with Mr. Frapp had been greatly to irri- 
tate the hostile spirit of the savages; and immediately subsequent to that 
event, the Gros Ventre Indians had united with the Oglallabs and Chey- 
ennes, and taken the field in great foree—so far as I could ascertain, to the 
amount of eight hundred lodges. Their object was to make an attack 
on acamp of Snake and Crow Indians, and a body of about one hundred 
whites, who had made a rendezvous somewhere in the Green river valley, 
or on the Sweet Water. After spending some time in buffalo hunting in 
the neighborhood of the Medicine Bow mountain, they were ‘o - vss over 

to the Green river waters, and return to Laramie by way of the South Pass 

‘and the Sweet Water valley. According to the calculation of the Indians, 
Mr. Boudeau informed me they were somewhere near the head of the 
Sweet Water. [ subsequently learned that the party led by Mr. Fitzpat- 
‘rick were overtaken by their pursuers near Rock [ndependence, in the 
valley of the Sweet Water; but his skill and resolution saved them from 


‘surprise, und, small as his force was, they did not venture to attack him 


| Openly. Here they lost one of their party by an accident, and, continuing 
“up the valley, they came suddenly upon the large village. From these 
they met with a doubtful reception. Long residence and familiar acquaint- 
ance had given to Mr, Fitzpatrick great personal influence among them, 
anda portion of them were disposed to let him pass quietly ; but by far 
the greater number were inclined to hostile measures; and the chiefs spent 
the whole of one night, during which they kept the little party in the midst 
Yof them, in council, debating the question of attacking them the next day ; 
‘But the influence of “the Broken Hand,’’ as they called Mr. Fitzpatrick, 
‘fone of his hands having been shattered by the bursting of a gun,) at length 
)prevailed, and obtained for them an unmolested passage; but they sternly 
@psured him that this path was no longer open, and that any party of 
Mhites which should hereafter be found upon it would meet with certain 
@estruction. From all that I have been able to learn, I have no doubt 
@pat the emigrants owe their lives to Mr, Fitzpatrick. 
@, Thus it would appear that the country was swarming with scattered 
far parties ; and when I heard, during the day, the various contradictory 
d exaggerated rumors which were incessantly repeated to them, I was 
t surprised that so much alarm prevailed among my men. Carson, one 
the best and most experienced mountaineers, fully supported the 


[174] 42 


opinion given by Bridger of the dangerous state of the country, and 
openly expressed his conviction that we could not escape without some 
sharp encounters with the Indians. In addition to this, he made his will; 
and among the circumstances which were constantly occurring to increase 
their alarm, this was the most unfortunate; and I found that a number 
of my party had become s« much intimidated, that they had requested to 
be discharged at this place. I dined to-day at Fort Platte, which has 
been mentioned as situated at the junction of Laramie river with the Ne. 
braska. Here I heard a confirmation of the statements given above, 
The party of warriors, which had started a few days since on the trail of 
the emigrants, was expected back in fourteen days, to join the village 
with which their families and the old men had remained. The arrival 
of the latter was hourly expected ; and some Indians have just come in 
who had left them on the Laramie fork, about twenty miles above. Mr. 
Bissonette, one of the traders belonging to Fort Platte, urged the propriety 
of taking with me an interpreter and two or three old men of the village ; 
in which case, he thought there would be little or no hazard in encounter- 
ing any of the war parties. ‘The principal danger was in being attacked 
before they should know who we were. 

They had a confused idea of the numbers and power of our people, and 
dreaded to bring upon themselves the military force of the United States, 
This gentleman, who spoke the language fluently, offered his services to 
accompany me so far as the Red Buttes. He was desiroussto join the 
large party on its return, for purposes of trade, and it would suit his views, 
as well as my own, to go with us to the Buttes; beyond which point it 
would be impossible to prevail on a Sioux to venture, on account of their 
fear of the Crows. From Fort Laramie to the Red Buttes, by the ordi- 
nary road, is one hundred and thirty-five miles; and, though only on the 
threshold of danger, it seemed better to secure the services of an inter- 
preter for the partial distance, than to have none at all. 

So far as frequent interruption from the Indians would allow, we occu- 
pied ourselves in making some astronomical calculations, and bringing up 
the general map to this stage of our journey; but the tent was generally 
occupied by a succession of our ceremonious visiters. Some came for 
presents, and others for information of our object in coming to the country ; 
now and then, one would dart up to the tent on horseback, jerk off his 
trappings, and stand silently at the door, holding his horse by the halter, 
signifying his desire to trade. Occasionally a savage would stalk in with 
an invitation to a feast of honor, a dog feast, and deliberately sit down 
and wait quietly until I was ready to accompany him. I went to one ; 
the women and children were sitting outside the lodge, and we took our 
seats on buffalo robes spread around. The dog was in a large pot over 
the fire, in the middle of the lodge, and immediately on our arrival was 
dished up in large wooden bowls, one of which was handed to each. 
The flesh appeared very glutinous, with something of the flavor and ap- 
pearance of mutton. Feeling sometning move behind ine, I looked round, 
and found that I had taken my seat among a litter of fat young puppies. 
Had I been nice in such matters, the prejudices of civilization might have 
interfered with my tranquiility; but, fortunately, I am not of delicate 
nerves, and continued quietly to empty my platter. 

The weather was cloudy at evening, with a moderate south wind, and 
the thermometer at 6 o’clock 85°, 


I was disappointed in my hope of ob- | 


taining a! 


“The moo 


scarcely 
The m 
o’clock at 


Yirain came 


aa 


about an 
principall 
number o 


inear the 


sizes, frot 
erally ca 


) place wh 


} occurret 
» They h 
Sie St. Loui 


tinction, | 
and child 
uses, exc 
in talking 
ence, as | 
which I | 
out of 0 
an opera 
tions to 

large the 
ascertain 
myself s« 
remainin 
was too 

been eng 
otherwis 
All thing 
evening, 
They we 
as inter 

to insur 
much ex 
life and 


gageme 
certain 
that the 
anxious 
desire, a 
the tim 
among 
f permiss 
the ridi¢ 
engaged 
Missou 
taking ¢ 
In case 


ountry, and 
ithout some 
ade his will; 
g to increase 
lat a number 
requested to 
, which has 
with the Ne. 
biven above, 
bn the trail of 
) the village 

The arrival 
just come in 
above. Mr, 
the propriety 

the village ; 
in encounter. 
ing attacked 


r people, and 
nited States, 
his services to 
useto join the 
uit his views, 
hich point it 
ount of their 
, by the ordi- 
h only on the 
of an inter- 


OW, We occu- 
1 bringing up 
vas generally 
me came for 
‘the country ; 
, jerk off his 
by the halter, 
stalk in with 
sly sit down 
vent to one ; 
We took our 
ge pot over 
‘ arrival was 
Jed to each. 
avor and ap- 
ooked round, 
ung puppies. 
1 might have 
t of delicate 


th wind, and 


hope of ob- | 


“number of horses, and large troops of dogs. 
inear the fort, and our camp was constantly crowded with Indians of all 
isizes, from morning until night; at which time some of the soldiers gen- 


| place which they respected. 


we permission. 


43 [ 174 J 


taining an observation of an occultation, which took place about midnight. 
The moon brought with her heavy banks of clouds, through which she 
scarcely made her appearance during the night. 

The morning of the 18th was cloudy and calm, the thermometer at 6 
o’clock at 64°. About §, with a moderate wind from the west, a storm of 


rain came on, accompanied by sharp thunder and lightning, which lasted 


about an hour. During the day the expected village arrived, consisting 
principally of old men, women, and children, They had a considerable 
Their lodges were pitched 


erally came to drive them all off to the village. My tent was the only 
Here only came the chiefs and men of dis- 
tinction, and generally one of them remained to drive away the women 
and children. The numerous strange instruments, applied to still stranger 
uses, excited awe and admiration among them, and those which I used 
in talking with the sun and stars they looked upon with especial rever- 
ence, as mysterious things of “great medicine.”’ Of the three barometers 
which J had brought with me thus far successfully, I found that two were 
out of order, and spent the greater part of the 19th in repairing them— 
an operation of no small difficulty in the inidst of the incessant interrup- 
tions to which I was subjected. We had the misfortune to break here a 
large thermometer, graduated to show fifths of a degree, which I used to 
ascertain the temperature of boiling water,and with which I had promised 
myself some interesting experiments in the mountains. We had but one 
remaining, on which the graduation extended sufticiently high; and this 
was too small for exact observations, During our stay here, the men had 


been engaged in making numerous repairs, arranging pack saddles, and 
otherwise preparing for the chances of a rough road and mountain travel. 
All things of this nature being ready, I gathered them around me in the 
evening, and told them that “I had determined to proceed the next day. 


They were all well armed. I had engaged the services of Mr. Bissonette 


as interpreter, and had taken, in the circumstances, every possible means 


to insure our safety. In the rumors we had heard, I believed there was 
much exaggeration, and then they were men accustomed to this kind of 


Hlife and to the country; and that these were the dangers of every day 
F occurrence, and to be expected in the ordinary course of their service. 
p They had heard of the unsettled condition of the country before leaving 
# St. Louis, and therefore could not make it a reason for breaking their en- 


gagements. Still, I was unwilling to take with me, on a service of some 
certain danger, men on whom I could not rely; and as I had understood 
that there were among then some who were disposed to cowardice, and 
anxious to return, they had but to come forward at once, and state their 
desire, and they would be discharged with the amount duc to them for 
the time they had served.” To their honor be it said, there was but one 
among them who had the face to come forward and avail himself of the 
T asked him some few questions, in order to expose him to 
the ridicule of the men, and let him go. The day after our departure, he 
engaged himself to one of the forts, and set off with a party for the Upper 
Missouri. I did not think that the situation of the country justified me in 
taking our young companions, Messrs. Brant and Benton, along with us. 
In case of misfortune, it would have been thought, at the least, an act of 


f 174 J 44 


great imprucence ; and therefore, though reluctantly, f determined to leayy 
them. Randolph had been the life of the camp, and the “ petit gargon? 
was much regretted by the men, to whom his buoyant spirits had afforde 
great amusement, ‘I'hey all, however, agreed in the propriety ot leavin 
him at the fort, because, as they said, he might cost the lives of some of the 
men in a fight with the Indians. . 

July 21.—A portion of our baggage, with our field hotes and observa. 
tions, and several instrumants, were left atthe fort, One of the gentlemen, 
Mr. Galpin, took charge of a barometer, which he engaged to observ 
during my absence; and I intrusted to Randolph, by way of occupation, 
the regular winding up of two of my chronometers, which were among the 
instruments left. Our observations showed that the chronometer which | 
retained for the continuation of our voyage had preserved its rate in a most 
satisfactory manner. As deduced from it, the longitude of Fort Laramie js After r 
7h. O1' 21", and from lunar distance 7A. O1' 29"; giving for the adopted ng that a 
longitude 104° 47' 43", Comparing the barometrical observations made ap, and, | 
during our stay here, with those of Dr. G. Engelman at St. Louis, we find «You | 
for the elevation of the fort above the Gulf of Mexico 4,470 feet. The Hoey kill 
winter climate here is remarkably mild for the latitude; but rainy weather ager tot 
is frequent, and the place is celebrated for winds, of which the prevailing BM) jes, 
one is west. An east wind in summer, and a south wind in winter, are fi, 9¢ you t 
said to be always accompanied with rain. re pon 

We were ready to depart; the tents were struck, the mules geared up, Biiyy, great 
and our horses saddled, and we waiked up to the fort to take the s¢irrup BB ave our 
cup with our friends in an excellent home-brewed preparation. While MiB)o of all 
thus pleasantly engaged, seated in one of the little cool chambers, at the Bi arriors 
door of which a man had been stationed to prevent all intrusion from the Hind we e: 
Indians, a number of chiefs, several of them powerful fine-looking men, Miyns. and 
forced their way into the room in spite of all opposition. Handing me the ming as 
following letter, they took their seats in silence : Mather tha 

othing t 
“Forr PLarre, Juillet 1, 1842, y ge 

“Mx. Fremonr: Les ches s’étant assemblés présentement me disent fi The ob 
de vous avertir de ne point vous mettre en route, avant que le parti de fmhat they 
jeunes gens, qui est en dehors, soient de retour, De plus, ils me disent Pnwilling 
qu’ils sont tré certains qu’ils feront feu a la premiére rencontre.  Ils(#hrough t 
doivent étre de retour dans sept 4 huit jours. Excusez si je vous fais cosfi™/umber t 
observations, mais il me semble qu’il est mon devoir de vous avertir du read th 
danger. Méme de plus, les chefs sont les porteurs de ce billet, qui vousfiwould gi 


snow or 
ery sure 
xpected 
vation 
hiefs wh 
he beare 


“« Nam 
he Black’ 


defendent de partir avant le retour des guerriers. bying th 
“ Je suis votre obcissant serviteur, ere too 
“JOSEPH BISSONETTE, noke th 

“Par L. B. CHARTRAIN., esides, t 

re with 

“ Les noms de quelques che/s.—Le Chapeau de Loutre, le Casseur de fijpe white 
Fléches, la Nuit Noir, la Queue de Bauf.”’ hat you 
| 83 but y 

(Translation. } ve our 

n to yo 


“Forr Prarre, July 1, 1842, 
“Mr. Fremont: The chiefs, having assembled in council, have just 
told me to warn you not to set out before the party of young men which 


e are t 
me her 


45 [ 174 ] 


ermined to lear is now out shall have returned, Furthermore, they tell me that they are 
"Hele garson' He ory sure they will fire upon you as soon as they meet you. They are 
de pdeger siti xpected back in seven or eight days, Excuse me for making these ob- 
riety Of leaving orvations, but it seems my duty to warn you of danger. Moreover, the 
es of some of the hiefs who prohibit your setting out before the return of the warriors are 
he bearers of this note, 

“fam your obedient servant, 


tes and observa. 


f the gentlemen, “JOSEPH BISSONETTE, 
ged to observe I “By L. B. CHARTRAIN, 


of occupation, 
Were among the « Names of some of the chie/.— The Outer Hat, the Breaker of Arrows, 
IOMSIGE which | he Black Night, the Bull’s Tail,”’ 
its rate in a most 
Fort Laramie js After reading this, I mentioned its purport to my companions ; and, see- 
for the adopted ng that all were fully possessed of its contents, one of the Indians rose 
ervations made bp, and, having first shaken hands with me, spoke as follows ; 
» Louis, we find “You have come among us ata bad time, Some of our people have 
1,470 tect. The Moen killed, and our young men, who are gone to the mountains, are 
at rainy Weather ager to avenge the blood o” their relations, which has been shed by the 
h the prevailing MM jites. Our young men are bad, and, if they meet you, they will believe 
1 in winter, are Miia you are carrying goods and ammunition to their enemies, and will 
re upon you. You have told us that this willmake war, We know that 
ules geared up, ur great father has many soldiers and big guns, and we are anxious to 
tke the stirrup Mave our lives. We love the whites, and are desirous of peace. ‘Think- 
aration. While ig of all these things, we have determined to keep you here until our 
hambers, at the Miarriors return. We are glad to see you among us. Our father is rich, 
rusion from the Bnd we expected that you would have brought presents to us—horses, and 
é-looking men, Mins, and blankets, But we are glad to see you. We look upon your 
Handing me the fifoming as the light which goes before the sun; for you will tell our great 
Mather that you have seen us, and that we are naked and poor, and have 
othing to eat; and he will send us all these things.” He was followed 
willed 1, 1842, y the others, to the same effect. 
nent me disent fi The observations of the savage appeared reasonable; but I was aware 
que le parti deffhat they had in view only the present abject of detaining me, and were 
us, ils me disent fMPnwilling I should go further into the country. In reply, I asked them, 
rencontre. Ils #hrough the interpretation of Mr. Boudeau, to select two or three of their 
je vous fais cosfi™umber to accompany us until we should meet their people—they should 
vous avertir dufjm™pread their robes in my tent and eat at my table, and on our return I 
billet, qui vous fould give them,presents in reward of their services. They declined, 
bying that there were no young men left in the village, and that they 
ere too old to travel so many days on horseback, and preferred now to 
ITTE, noke their pipes in the lodge, and let the warriors go on the war path. 
{[ARTRAIN. esides, they had no power over the young men, and were afraid to inter- 
re with them. In my turn I addressed them: “ You say that you love 
, le Casseur de fie whites; why have you killed so many already this spring? You say 
bat you love the whites, and are full of many expressions of friendship to 
s; but you are not willing to undergo the fatigue of a few days’ ride to 
ve our lives. We do not believe what you have said, and will not lis- 
Tul nto you. Whatever a chief among us tells his soldiers to do, is done. 
uly 1, 1842, e are the soldiers of the great chief, your father. He has told us to 


neil, have just Mi™pme here and see this country, and all the Indians, his children. Why 
ing men which 


f 


c1m4j) ° 46 


should we not go? Before we came, we heard that you had killed his 

eople, and ceased to be his children; but we came among you peaceably, 
bol ing out our hands, Now we find that the stories we heard are not 
lies, and that you are no longer his friends and children, We have thrown 
away our bodies, and will not turn back, When you told us that your 
young men would kill us, you did not know that our hearts were strong, 
and you did not see the rifles which my young men carry in their hands, 
We are few, and you are many, and may kill us all; but there will be 
much crying in your villages, for many of your young men will stay be- 
hind, and forget to return with your warriors from the mountains, Do 
you think that our great chief will let his soldiers die, and forget to cover 
their graves? Before the snows melt again, his warriors will sweep away 
your villages as the fire does the prairie in the autumn, See! I have 
pulled down my white Aouses, and my people are ready : when the sun is 
ten paces higher, we shall be on the march, [f you have any thing to tell 
us, you will say it soon.” I broke up the conference, as I could do noth- 
ing with these people; and, being resolved to proceed, nothing was to be 
gained by delay. Accompanied by our hospitable friends, we returned to 
the camp. We had mounted our horses, ahd our parting salutations had 
been exchanged, when one-of the chiefs (the Bull’s Tail) arrived to tell 
me that they had determined to send a young man with us; and if I 
would point out the place of our evening camp, he should join us there, 
“The young man is poor,’ suid he; “he has no horse, and expects youto 
give him one.’’? I described to him the place where Lintended to encamp, 
and, shaking hands, in a few minutes ‘ve were among the hills, and this 
last habitation of whites shut out from our view. 

The road led over an interesting plateau between the North fork of the 
Platte on the right, and Laramie river on the left. At the distance of ten 
miles from the fort, we entered the sandy bed of a creek, « kind of defile, 
shaded by precipitous rocks, down which we wound our way for several 
hundred yards, toa place where, on the left bauk, a very large spring 
gushes with considerable noise and force out of the limestone rock, It is 
called “the Warm Spring,’ and furnishes tothe hitherto dry bed of the 
creek a considerable rivulet. On the opposite side, a little below the 
spring, is a lofty limestone escarpment, partially shaded by a grove of 
large trees, whose green foliage, in contrast with the whiteness of the rock, 
renders this a picturesque locality. The rock is fossiliferous, and, so far as 
I was able to determine the character of the fossils, belongs to the carbonif- 
erous limestone of the Missouri river, and is probably the western limit of 
that formation. Beyond this point I met with no fossils of any descrip- 
tion. 

I was desirous to visit the Platte near the point where it leaves the 
Black hills, and therefore followed this stream, for two or three miles, to 
the mouth ; where I encamped ona spot which afforded good grass and 
préle (equisetum) for our animals, Our tents having been found too thin 
to protect ourselves and the instruments from the rains, which in this 
elevated country are attended with cold and unpleasant weather, I had 
procured from the Indians at Laramie a tolerably large lodge, about eigh- 
teen feet in diameter, and twenty feet in height. Such a lodge, when 
properly pitched, is, from its conical form, almost perfectly secure against 
the violent winds which are frequent in this region, and, with a fire in the 
centre, is a dry and warm shelter in bad weather. By raising the lower 


ee 


part, 
ant a 
free { 
Whil 
Mr. | 
laugh 
frequ 
suflic 
had a 
chan, 
plains 
open 
throu 
pice « 
tweet 
Sui 
this 
thers 
conti 
river 
beaut 
that ¢ 
rent, | 
either 
two | 
whicl 
detrit 
here, 
curra 
shine 
mant 
and 
appr 
the e 
tion, 
geolo 
with 
comp 
Belo 
the r 
some 
river 
open 
in at 
abun 
If 
territ 
and a 
mie ¢ 
ofa 
Uppe 


killed his 
uceably, 
d are not 
ve thrown 
that your 
re strong, 
sir hands, 
e Will be 
| stay be- 
sins. Do 
to cover 
reep away 
»! | have 
the sun is 
hing to tell 
do noth- 
was to be 
eturned to 
tions had 
‘ed to tell 
; and if I 
us there, 
pcts youto 
oencamp, 
, and this 


ork of the 
ice of ten 

of defile, 
or several 
ge spring 
vek. = =It is 
yed of the 
below the 
1 grove of 
f the rock, 
d, so far as 
e carbonif- 
rn limit of 
ny descrip- 


leaves the 
2 miles, to 
grass and 
id too thin 
ich in this 
her, I had 
bout eigh- 
ige, when 
ire against 
fire in the 
the lower 


| 
| 
4 


47 C174 J 


part, so as to permit the breeze to pass freely, it is converted into a pleas- 
ant summer residence, with the extraordinary advantage of being entirely 
free from mosquitoes, one of which I have never seen in an Indian lodge, 
While we were engaged very unskilfully in erecting this, the interpreter, 
Mr, Bissonette, arrived, accompanied by the Indian and his wife. She 
laughed at our awkwardness, and offered her assistance, of which we were 
frequently afterward obliged to avail ourselves, before the men acquired 
suflicient expertness to pitch it without difficulty, From this place we 
had a fine view of the gorge where the Platte issues from the Black hills, 
changing its character abruptly froma mountain stream into a river of the 
plains. Immediately around us the valley of the stream was tolerably 
open; and at the distance of a few miles, where the river bad cut its way 
through the hills, was the nurrow cleft, on one sile of which a lofty prect- 
pice of bright red rock rose vertically above the low hills which lay be- 
tween us, 

July 22.—In the morning, while breakfast was being prepared, I visited 
this place with my favorite man, Basil Lajennesse, Entering so far as 
there was footing for the mules, we dismounted, and, tying our animals, 
continued our way on foot, Like the whole country, the scenery of the 
river had undergone an entire charge, and was in this place the most 
beautiful I have ever seen, ‘The breadth of the stroam, generally near 
that of its valley, was from two to three hundred feet, with a swift cur- 
rent, occasionally broken by rapids, and the water perfectly clear. On 
either side rose the red precipices, vertical, and sometimes overhanging, 
two and four hundred feet in height, crowned with green summits, on 
which were scattered a few pines. At the foot of the rocks was the usual 
detritus, formed of masses fallen from above. Among the pines that grew 
here, and on the occasional banks, were the cherry, (cerasus virginiand,) 
currants, and grains de bauf (shepherdia argentea.) Viewed in the sun- 
shine of a pleasant morning, the scenery was of a most striking and ro- 
mantic beauty, which arose from the picturesque disposition of the objects, 
and the vivid contrast of colors. I thought with much pleasure of our 
approaching descent in the canoe through such interesting places; and, in 
the expectation of being able at that time to give to them a full examina- 
tion, did not now dwell so much as might have been desirable upon the 
geological forinations along the line of the river, where they are developed 
with great clearness, ‘The upper portion of the red strata consists of very 
compact clay, in which are occasionally seen imbedded large pebbles. 
Below was a stratum of compact red sandstone, changing a little above 
the river into a very hard siliceous limestone. ‘There is a small but hand- 
some open prairie immediately below this place, on the left bank of the 
river, which would bea good locality for a military post. There are some 
open groves of cottonwood on the Platte. ‘The small stream which comes 
in at this place is well timbered with pine, and good building rock is 
abundant. 

If it is in contemplation to keep open the communications with Oregon 
territory, a show of military force in this country is absolutely necessary ; 
and a combination of advantages renders the neighborhood of Fort Lara- 
mie the most suitable place, on the line of the Platte, for the establishment 
of a military post. I[t is connected with the mouth of the Platte and the 
Upper Missouri by excellent roads, which are in frequent use, and would 


[ 174 1 48 | 
} the 


not in any way interfere with the range of the buffalo, on which the att 
neighboring Indians mainly depend for support. It would render any \ 
posts on the Lower Platte unnecessary; the ordinary communication be. the 
tween it and the Missouri being sufficient to control the intermediate In- . war 
dians. It would operate effectually to prevent any such coalitions as are ler ¢ 
now formed among the Gros Ventres, Sioux, Cheyennes, and other Indians, ; witl 
and would keep the Oregon road through the valley of the Sweet Water | ever 
and the South Pass of the mountains consiantly open. <A glance at the | give 
map which accompanies this report will show that it lies at the foot of | sand 
a broken and mountainous region, along which, by the establishment of arte 
small posts in the neighborhood of St. Vrain’s fort, on the South fork of | and 
the Platte, and Bent’s fort, on the Arkansas, a line of communication would O! 
be formed, by good wagon roads, with our southern military posts, which traoi 
would entirely command the mountain passes, hold some of the most ‘| the | 
troublesome tribes in check, and protect and facilitate our intercourse with | whe 
the neighboring Spanish settlements. The valleys of the rivers on which roug 
they would be situated are fertile; the country, which supports immense ) lo th 
herds of buffalo, is admirably adapted to grazing ; and herds of cattle might } nated 
be maintained by the posts, or obtained from the Spanish country, which ¥ whie 
already supplies a portion of their provisions to the trading posts mentioned | 10 the 
above. | sibly 
Just as we were leaving the camp this morning, our Indian came up, } have 
and stated his intention of not proceeding any further until he had seen . Qu 
the horse which I intended to give him. I felt stronzly tempted to drive ~ one ¢ 
him out of the camp; but his presence appeared to give confidence to my relief 
men, and the interpreter thought it absolutely necessary. 1 was there- at oe 
fore obliged to do what he requested, and poiuted out the animal, with camp 
which he seemed satisfied, and we continued our journey. I had ima- good 
gined that Mr. Bissonette’s long residence ‘:ad made him acquainted our { 
with the country, and, according to his advice, proceeded directly forward, “a shad 
without attempting to regain the usual road. He afterward informed me i ed, is 
that he had rarely ever lost sight of the fort; but the effect of the mistake ' moutl 
was to involve us for a day or two among the hills, where, although we Ju 
lost no time, we encountered an exceedingly rough road. throu 
To the south, along our line of march to-day, the main chain of the thems 
Black or Laramie hills rises precipitously. ‘lime did not permit me to ree 
visit them; but, from comparative information, the ridge is composed of ment 
the coarse sandstone or conglomerate hereafter described. It appears to ereoy 
enter the region of clouds, which are arrested in their course, and lie in ee 
masses along the summits. An inverted cone of black cloud (cumulus) oe 
rested during all the forenoon on the lofty peak of Laramie mountain, ena 
which I estimated to be about two thousand feet above the fort, or six eee 
thousand five hundred above the sea. We halted to noon on the Fourche a oF 
mere, so called from being timbered principally with the diard amére, ne the 
(a species of poplar,) with which the valley of the little stream is tolerably effi be 
well wooded, and which, with large expansive summits, grows to the 1 ae 
height of sixty or seventy feet. 7 . 
The bed of the creek is sand and gravel, the water dispersed over the sie _ 
broad bed in several shallow streams. We found here, on the right bank, eas 
in the shade of the trees, a fine spring of very cold water. It will be re- of ora 


marked that I do not mention, in this portion of the journey, the tempera- 
ture of the air, sand, springs, &c.—an omission which will be explained in 


e ' 
a i 
ME aL! OS eae Di Sellinet i Re 


vhich the 
nder any 
ation be- 
diate In- 
ns as are 
r Indians, 
et Water 
nee at the 
he foot of 
shment of 
th fork of 
on would 
sts, Which 
the most 
urse with 
on which 
immense 
ttle might 
ry, which 
nentioned 


came up, 
had seen 
1 to drive 
ice to my 
ras there- 
mal, with 
had ima- 
cquainted 
forward, 
rmed me 

mistake 
ough we 


in of the 
nit me to 
iposed of 
ppears to 
nd lie in 
cumulus) 
ountain, 
brt, Or six 
Fourche 
ad amere, 
tolerably 
s to the 


over the 
wht bank, 
rill be re- 
tempera- 
lained in 


. a gait, 
iis eM RS ee aan al EN ere 


nteshspi cre total 


49 [ 174 j 


the course of the narrative, In my search for plants, ] was well rewarded 
at this place, , 

With the change in the geological formation on leaving Fort Laramie, 
the whole face of the country has entirely altered its appearance. Tast- 
ward of that meridian, the principal objects which strike the eye of a travel. 
ler are the absence of timber, and the immense expanse of prairie, covered 
with the verdure of rich grasses, and highly adapted for pasturagew Wher- 
ever they are not disturbed by the vicinity of man, large herds of buffalo 
give animation to this country. . Westward of Laramie river, the region is 
sandy, and apparently sterile; and the place of the grass is usurped by the 
artemisia and other odoriferous plants, to whose growth the sandy soil 
and dry air of this elevated region seem highly favorabie. 

One of the prominent characteristics in the face of the country is the ex~ 
traordinary abundance of the arfemisias. ‘They grow every where—on 
the hills, and over the river bottoms, in tough, twisted, wiry cluinps ; and, 
wherever the beaten track was left, they rendered the progress of the carts 
rough aad slow. As the country increased in elevation on our advance 
lo the west, they increased in size; and the whole air is strongly impreg- 
nated and saturated with the odor of camphor and spirits of turpentine 
which belongs to this plant. This climate has been found very favorable 
10 the restoration of health, particularly in cases of consumption ; and pos- 
sibly the respiration of air so highly impregnated by aromatic plants may 
have some influence. + 

Our dried meat had given out, and we began to be in want of food; but 
one of the hunters killed av antelope this evening, which aflorded some 
relief, although it did not go far among so many hungry men. At 8 o’clock 
at night, after a march of twenty-seven miles, we reached our proposed en- 
campment on the Fer-d-Cheval, or Horse-shoe creek. Here we found 
good grass, with a great quantity of pré/e, which furnished good food for 
our tired animals. This creek is well timbered, principally with diard 
amer2, and, with the exception of Deer creek, which we had not yet reach- 
ed, is the largest affluent of the right bank between Laramie and the 
mouth of the Sweet Water. 

July 23.—The present year had been one of unparalleled drought, and 
throughont the country the water had been almost dried up. By availing 
themselves of the annual rise, the traders had invariably succeeded in 
carrying their furs to the Missouri; but this season, as has already been 
mentioned, on both forks of the Platte they had entirely failed. The 
greater number of the springs, and many of the streams, which made 
halting places for the voyageurs, had been dried up. Every where the soil 
looked parched and burnt; the scanty yellow grass crisped under the foot, 
and even the hardiest plants were destroyed by want of moisture. I think 
il necessary to mention this fact, because to the rapid evaporation in such 
an elevated region, nearly five thousand feet above the sea, almost wholly 
unprotected by timber, should be attributed much of the sterile appearance 
of the country, in the destruction of vegetation, and the numerous saline 
efflorescences which covered the ground. Such I afterward found to be 
the case. 

I was informed that the roving villages of Indians and travellers had 
never met with difficulty in finding an abundance of grass for their horses ; 
and now jit was after great search that we were able to find a scanty vatch 
of grass, sufficient to keep them from sinking ; and in the course of a day 

4 


[174] 50 

or two they began to suffer very much, We found none to-day at noon ; 
and, in the course of our search on the Platte, came to a grove of cotton- 
wood, where some Indian village had recently encamped. Boughs of the 
cottonwood yet green covered the ground, which the Indians had cut 
down to feed their horses upon. It is only in the winter that recourse is 
had to this means of sustaining them ; and their resort to it at this time was 
a striking evidence of the state of the country. We followed their example, 
and turned our horses into a grove of young poplars. This began tq pre- 
sent itself as a very serious evil, for on our animals depended altogether 
the further prosecution of our journey. 

Shortly after we had left this place, the scouts came galloping in with 
the alarm of Indians. We turned in immediately toward the river, which 
here had a steep high bank, where we formed with the carts a very close 
barricade, resting on the river, within which the animals were strongly 
hohbled and picketed. The guns were discharged and reloaded, and men 
thrown forward, under cover of the bank, in the direction by which the 
Indians were expected. Our interpreter, who, with the Indian, had gone 
to meet them, came in, in wbout ten minutes, accompanied by two Sioux. 
They looked sulky, and we could obtain from them only some confused 
information. We learned that they belonged to the party which had been 
on the trail of the emigrants, whom they had overtaken at Rock Independ- 
ence, on the Sweet Water. Here the party had disagreed, and came nigh 
fighting among themselves. One portion were desitous of attacking the 
whites, but the others were opposed to it; and finally they had broken up 
into small bands, and dispersed over the country. ‘The greater portion of 
them had gone over into the territory of the Crows, and intended to return 
by way of the Wind river valley, in the hope of being able to fall-upon 
some small parties of Crow Indians. The remainder were returning down 
the Platte, in scattered parties of ten and twenty ; and those whom we had 
encountered belonged to those who had advocated an_attack on the emi- 
grants. Several of the men suggested shooting them on the spot; but I 
promptly discountenanced any such proceeding. They further informed 
me that buffalo were very scarce, and little or no grass to be found. There 
had been no rain, and innumerable quantities of grasshoppers had destroy- 
ed the grass. This insect had been so numerous since leaving Fort Lara- 
mie, that the ground seemed alive with them; and in walking, a little 
moving cloud preceded our footsteps. This was bad news. No grass, no 
buffalo—food ‘for neither horse nor man. I gave them some plugs of to- 
bacca, and they went off, apparently well satisfied to be clear of us; for 
my men did not look upon them very lovingly, and they glanced suspi- 
ciously at our warlike preparations, and the little ring of rifles which sur- 
rounded them. They were evidently in a bad huinor, and shot one of 
their horses when they had left us a short distance. 

We continued our march, and, after a journey of about twenty-one miles, 
encamped on the Platte. During the day, I had occasionally remarked 
among the hills the psorudea esculenta, the bread root of the Indians. The 
Sioux use this root very extensively, and I have frequently met with it 
among thein, cnt into thin slices and dried. In the course of the even- 
ing we were visited by six Indians, who told us that a larger party was en- 
camped a few miles above. Astronomical observations placed us in longi- 


tude 104° 59’ 59", and latitude 42° 39’ 25". 


We made the next day twenty-two miles, and encamped on the right 


sites Ses 


has ac iS SS ot AB a De Li 


*- ea ©8 Df = wm 


t noon; 
 votton- 
s of the 
had cut 
purse is 
ime was 
xample, 
n tq pre- 
together 


in with 
r, Which 
ery close 
strongly 
and men 
syhich the 
ad gone 
o Sioux. 
confused 
had been 
ndepend- 
ame nigh 
king the 
roken up 
portion of 
to return 
fallupon 
ing down 
n we had 
the emi- 
ot; but I 
informed 
d. There 
destroy- 
ort Lara- 
py, a little 
grass, no 
igs of to- 
bf us; for 
ed suspi- 
vhich sur- 
ot one of 


one miles, 
remarked 
ians. The 
et with it 
the even- 
ty was en- 
s in longi- 


‘the right 


psc oS EA in Se 


51 [ 174] 


bank of the Platte, where a handsome meadow afforded tolerably good 
grass. There were the remains of an old fort here, thrown up in some 
sudden emergency, and on the opposite side was a picturesque bluff of 
ferruginous sandstone. ‘There was a handsome grove a little above, and 
scattered groups of trees bordered the river. Buffalo made their appear- 
ance this afternoon, and the hunters came in, shortly after we had encamp- 
ed, with three fine coys. The night was fine, and observations gave for 
the latitude of the camp, 42° 47' 40". 

July 25.—We made but thirteen miles this day, and encamped about 
noon in a pleasant grove on the right bank. ow scaffolds were erected, 
upon which the meat was laid, cut up into thin strips, and small fires 
kindled below. Our object was to profit by the vicinity of the buffalo, to 
lay in a stock of provisions for ten or fifteen days. Iu the course of the 
afternoon the hunters brought in five or six cows, and all hands were 
kept busily employed in preparing the meat, to the drying of which the 
guard attended during the night. Our people had rgcovered their gayety, 
and the busy figures around the blazing fires gave a picturesque air to the 
vamp. A very serious accident occurred this morning, in the breaking of 
one of the barometers? These had been the object of ny constant solici- 
tude, and, as I had intended them principally for mountain service, I had 
used thei as seldom as possible ; taking them always down at night, and 
on the occurrence of storms, in order to lessen the chances of being broken. 
I was reduccd to one, a standard barometer of Troughton’s construction. 
This I Aetermined to preserve, if possible. The latitude is 42° 51' 35", 
and by a mean of the results from chronometer and lunar distances, the 
adopted longitude of this camp is 105° 50’ 45". 

July 26.—Early this morning we were again in motion. We had a 
stock of provisions for fifteen days carefully stored away in the carts, and 
this I resolved should only be encroached upou when our rifles should fail 
to procure us present support. I determined to reach the mountains, if it 
were in any way possible. In the mean time, buffalo were plenty. In six 
miles from our encampment, (which, by way of distinction, we shall call 
Dried Meat camp,) we crossed a handsome stream, called La Fourche 
Boisée. It is well timbered, and, among the flowers in bloom on its banks, 
I remarked several asters. 

Five miles further, we made our noon halt, on the banks of the Platte, 
in the shade of some cottonwoods. ‘There were here, as generally now 
along the river, thickets of hippophaa, the grains de baeu/f of the country. 


“They were of two kinds—one bearing a red berry, (the shepherdia argen- 


tia of Nuttall;) the other a yellow berry, of which the Tartars are said to 
make a kind of rob. 

By a meridian observation, the latitude of the place was 42° 50' 08". 
It was my daily practicé to take observations of the sun’s meridian altitude; 
and why they are not given, will appear in the sequel. Eight miles further 
we reached the mouth of Deer creek, where we encamped. Here was an 


abundance of rich grass, and‘our animals were compensated for past privas 


tions. ‘This stream was at this time twenty feet broad, and well timbered 
with cottonwood of an uncommon size. It is the largest tributary of the 
Platte, between the mouth of the Sweet Water and the Laramie. Our as- 
tronomical observations gave for the mouth of the stream a longitude pf 
106° 08' 24", and latitude 42° 52' 24", : 
July 27.—Nothing worthy of mention occurred on this day; we trav- 


a cee an meter 


AE RARE Se ORR 


C174] 52 


elled later than usual, having spent some time in searching for grass, 
crossing and recrossing the river before we could find a sufficient quantity 
for our animals. ‘Toward dusk, we encamped among some artemisia 
bushes; two and three feet in height, where some scattered patches of 
short tough grass afforded a scanty supply. In crossing, we had occasion 
to observe that the river was frequently too deep to be forded, though we 
always succeeded in finding a place where the water did not enter the 
carts. The stream continued very clear, with two or three hundred fect 
breadth of water, and the sandy bed and banks were frequently covered 
with Jarge round pebbles. We had travelled this day twenty-seven miles. 
The main chain of the Black hills was here only about sevey miles to 
the south, on the right bank of the river, rising abruptly to the height of 
eight and twelve hundred fect. Patches of green grass in the ravines on 
the steep sides marked the presence of springs, and the summits were clad, 
with pines. : 

July 28.—In two miles from our encampment, we reached the place 
where the regular road crosses the Platte. ‘There was two hundred feet 
breadth of water at this time in the bed, which has a variable width of 
eight to fifteen hundred feet. ‘The channels were gelferally three feet deep, 
and there were large angular rocks on the bottom, which made the ford in 
some places a little difficult. Even at its low stages, this river cannot be 
crossed at randum, and this has always been used as the best ford. The 
low stage of the waters the present year had made it fordable in almost any 
part of its course, where access could be had to its bed. ns 

For the satisfaction of travellers, | will endeavor to give some descrip- 
tion of the nature of the road from Laramie to this point. The nature of 
the soil may be inferred from its geological formation. The limestone at 
the eastern limit of this section is succeeded by limestone without fossils, 
a great varicty of sandstone, consisting principally of red sandstone and 
fine conglomerates. The red sandstone is argillaceous, with compact white 
gypsum or alabaster, very beautiful. The other sandstones are gray, yel- 
low, and ferruginous, sometimes very coarse. ‘I'he apparent sterility of 
the country must therefore be sought for in other causes than the nature of 
the soil. ‘The face of the country cannot with propriety be called hilly. It 
is a succession of long ridges, made by the numerous streams which come 
down from the neighboring mountain range. ‘lhe ridges have an undu- 
lating surface, with some such appearance as the ocean presents in an or-— 
dinary breeze. 

The road which is now generally followed through this region is there- 
fore a very good one, without any difficult ascents to overcome. The 
principal obstructions are near the river, where the transient waters of 
heavy rains have made deep ravines with steep banks, which renders fre- 
quent circuits necessary. It will be remembered that wagons pass this 
road only once or twice a year, which is by no means sufficient to break 
down the stubborn roots of the innumerable artemisia bushes. A partial 
absence of these is often the only indication 6f the track ; and the rough- 
ness produced by their roots in many places gives the road the character 
of one newly opened in a wooded country. This is usually considered the 
worst part of the road east of the mountains; and, as it passes through an 
open prairie region, may be much improved, so as to avoid the greater part 
of the inequalities it now presents. 

From the mouth of the Kansas to the Green river valley, west of the 


, ae ee eS 


a en ee ae ee a” a ae ae ee 


, ee Se ee ees are ey ee ee ae a 


grass, 
jantity 
pmisia 
hes of 
casion 
gh we 
er the 
d fect 
yvered 
miles. 
iles to 
glit of 
nes on 
‘e clad, 


place 
xd feet 
idth of 
| deep, 
ford in 
not be 

The 
stany 


eScrip- 
ure of 
Ohe at 
fossils, 
e and 
white 
y, yel- 
lity of 
lure of 
lly. It 


1; come 
an ore 


there- 

The 
ers of 
rs fre- 
‘s this 
break 
partial 
rough- 
racter 
ed the 
igh an 
rr part 


of the 


undue 


53 [ 174 J 


Rocky mountains, there is no such thing as a mountain road on the line.of 
communication. 

We continued our way, and four miles beyond the ford Indians were 
liseovered again; and Ihalted while a party were sent forward to ascertain 
who they were. Ina short time they returned, accompanied by a number 
of Indians of the Oglallah band of Sioux. From them we received some 
interesting information. ‘They had formed partof the great village, which 
they informed us had broken up, and was on its way home. The ae 
part of the village, including the Arapahoes, Cheyennes, and Oglallahs, 
had crossed the Platte eight or ten miles below the mouth of the Sweet 
Water, and were now behind the mountains to the south of us, intending 
to regain the Platte by way of Deer creek. ‘They had taken this unusual 
route in search of grass and game. ‘They gave us a very discouraging 
picture of the country. ‘The great drought, and the plague of grasshop- 
pers, had swept it so that scarce a blade of grass was to, be seen, and 
there was not a buffalo to be found in the whole region. Their people, 
they further said, had been nearly starved to death, and we would find 
their road marked by lodges which they had thrown away in order to 
move more rapidly, and by the carcasses of the horses which they had eaten, 

or which had perished by starvation. Such was the prospect before us. 

When he had finished the interpretation of these things, Mr. Bissonette 
immediately rode up to me, and urgently advised that I should entirely 
abandon the further prosecution of my exploration, “ Le meilleure avis 

que je pourrais vous donner c’est de virer de suite.” “'The best advice I 
can give vou, is to turd back at once.” It was his own intention to re- 
turn, as we had now reached the point to which he had engaged to attend 
me. In reply, I called up my men, and communicated to them fully the 
information I had just received. I then expressed to them my fixed de- 
termination to proceed to the end of the enterprise on which | had been 
sent; but as the situation of the country gave me some reason to appre- 
hend that it might be attended with an unfortunate result to some of us, 
I would leave it optional with them to continue with me or to return. 

Among them were some five or six who I knew would remain. We 
had still ten, days’ provisions; and, should no game be found, when this 
stock was expend2zd, we had our horses and mules, which we could eat 
when other means of subsistence failed. But not a-man flinched from 
the undertaking.  We’il eat the mules,’ said Basil Lajeunesse ; and 
thercupon we shook hands with our interpreter and his indians, and 
parted. With them I sent back one of my men, Dumés, whom the effects 
of an old wound in the leg rendered incapable of continuing the journey 
on foot, and his horse seemed on the point of giving out. Having re- 
solved to disencumber ourselves immediately of every thing not abso- 
lutely necessafy.to our future operations, I turned directly in toward the 
river, and encainped on the left bank, a little above the place where our 
council had been held, and where a thick grove of willows offered a suit- 

able spot for the object I had in view. 

The carts having been discharged, the covers and wheels were taken, 
off, and, with the frames, carried into some low places among tie willows, 
and concealed im the dense foliage in such a manner that the glitter of the 
iron work might not attract the observation of some straggling Indiay. 
In the sand, which had been blown up into waves among the willows, a 
large hole was tlien dug, ten feet square, and six deep. In the mean time, 


[174 ‘J 54 


all our effects had been spread ont upon the ground, and whatever was 
designed to be carried along with us separated and laid aside, and the re- 
maining part carried to the hole and carefully covered up. As much as 
possible, all traces of our proceedings were obliterated, and it wanted but | 
a rain to render our cache safe beyond discovery. All the men were now | 
set at work to arrange the pack saddles and make up the packs. | 
The day was very warm and calm, and the sky entirely clear, except 
where, as usual along the summits of the mountainous ridge opposite, the | 
clouds had congregated in masses, Our lodge had been planted, and, on 
account of the heat, the ground pins had been taken ou’, and the lower | 
art slightly raised. Near.to it was standing the barometer, which swung 
in a tripod frame; and within the lodge, where a small fire had been built, 
Mr. Preuss was occupied in observing the temperature of boiling water. 
At this instant, and without any warning until it was within fifly yards, 
a violent gust of wind dashed down the lodge, burying under it Mr. Preuss 
and about a dozen men, who had attempted to keep it from being carried 
away. I succeeded in saving.the barometer, which the lodge was carry- 
ing off with itself, but the thermometer was broken. We had no others 
of a high graduation, none of those which remained going higher than 
135° Fahrenheit. Our astronomical observations gave to this place, which 
we named Cuche camp, a longitude of 106° 38' 26", latitude 42° 50' 53", 
July 29.—All our arrangements having been completed, we left the en- 
campment at 7 o‘clock this morning. In this vicinity the ordinary road 
leaves the Platte, and crosses over to the Sweet Water river, which it | 
strikes near Rock Independence. Instead of following this road, I had 14 
determined to keep the immediate valley of the Platte so far as the mouth Fo 
of the Sweet Water, in the expectation of finding better grass. ‘l’o this I ( 
was further prompted by the nature of ny instructions. ‘To Mr. Carson 
was assigned the office of guide, as we had now reached a part of the 
country with which, or a great part of which, long residence had made 
him familiar, Ina few miles we reached the Red Buttes, a famous land- \B 
mark in this country, whose geological composition is red sandstone, lime- ( 
stone, and calcareous sandstone and pudding stone. 
The river here cuts its way through a ridge; on the eastern side of it 
are the lofty escarpments of red argillaceous sandstone, which are called 
the Red Buttes. In this passage the stream is not much compressed or 
pent up, there being a bank of considerable though variable breadth on 
either side. Immediately on entering, we discovered a band of buffalo. 
The hunters failed to kill any of them; the leading hunter being thrown 
into a ravine, which occasioned some delay, and in the mean time the 
herd clambered up the steep face of the ridge. It is sometimes wonderful 
to see these apparently clumsy animals make their way up and down the’ 
most rugged and broken precipices. We halted to noon before we had 
cleared this passage, at a spot twelve miles distant from Cache camp, where 
we found an abundance of grass. So far, the account of the Indians was 
found to be false. On the banks were willow and cherry trees. The 
cherries were not yet ripe, but in the thickets were numerous fresh tracks 
of the grizzly bear, which are very fond of this fruit. The soil here is 
red, the composition being derived from the red sandstone. About seven 
miles brought us through the ridge, in which the course of the river is north 
and south. Here the valley opens out broadly, and high walls of the red 
formation present themselves among the hills to the éast. We crossed ' 


r was 
ie re- 
ch as 


d but 
now 


xcept 
e, the 
d, on 
lower 
wung 
built, 
vater, 
yards, 
reuss 
irried 
arry- 
thers 

than 
vhich 
' 83". 


ie en- 
road 
ich it 
I had 
100th 
this I 


arson 
f the 
made 
land- 


lime- 


of it 
alled 
ed or 
h on 
ffalo. 
frown 

the 
erful 


1 the 


had 
here 
was 
The 
acks 
re is 
bven 
orth 

red 
ssed’ 


SPRING GATE 


HOT 


ter ei on ng ee ag - 


me ie 
a we 


iit ettlilie Miia insane 


So ER REED COMET eo 
<A Rei cet tet Ei pe : 


here a preity little creek, an affluent of the right bank, It is well timber- 
ed with cottonwood in this vicinity, and the absinthe has lost its shrub- 
like character, and becomes small trees six and eight feet in height, and * 
sometimes eight inches in diameter. T'wo or three miles above this creek 
we made our encampment, having travelled to-day twenty-five miles, 
Our animals fared well here, as there is an abundance of grass, ‘The river 
bed is made up of pebbles, and in the bank, at the level of the water, is a 
conglomerate of coarse pebbles about the size of ostrich eggs, and which 

I remarked in the banks‘of the Laramie fork. It is overlaid by a soil of 
mixed clay and sand, six feet thick, By astronomical observations, our 
position is in longitude 106° 54' 32", and latitude 42° 38’. 

July 30.—After travelling about twelve miles this morning, we reached 
a place where the Indian village had crossed the river, Here were the 
poles of discarded lodges and skeletons of horses lying abouts Mr. Carson, 
who had never been higher up than this point on the river, which has the 
character of baing exceedingly rugged, aud walled in by precipices above, 
thought it aivieabla to camp near this place, where we were certain of ob- 
taining grass, and to-morrow make our crossing among the rugged hills to 
the Sweet Water river. Accordingly we turned back and descended the 
river to an island near by, which was about twenty acres in size, covered 
with a luxuriant growth of grass. The formation here I found highly 
interesting. Immediately at this island the river is again shut up in the 
rugged hills, which come down to it from the main ridge in a succession 
of spurs three or four hundred feet high, and alternated with green level , 
prairillons or meadows, bordered on the river banks with thickets of wil- 
low, and having many plants to interest the traveller. The island lies be- 
tween two of these ridges, three or four hundred yards apart, of which 
that on the right bank is composed entirely of red argillaceous sandstone, 
with thin layers of fibrous gypsum, On the'left bank, the ridge is com- 
posed entirely of siliceous pudding stone, the pebbles in the numerous 
strata increasing in size from the top to the bottom, where they are as 
large as a man’s head: So far as [ was able to determine, these strata in- 
cline to the northeast, with a dip of about 15° Thjs pudding stone, or 
conglomerate formation, | was enabled to trace through an extended range 
of country, from a few miles east of the meridian of Fort Laramie to where 
I found it superposed on the granite of the Rocky mountains, in longitude 
109° 00’. From its appearance, the main chain of the Laramie mountain 
is composed of this rock; and in a number of places I found isolated hills, 
which served to mark a former level, which had been probably swept 
away. 

These conglomerates are very friable, and easily decomposed; and I 
am inclined to think this formation is the source from which was derived 
the great deposite of sand and gravel which forms the surface rock of the 
prairie country west of the Mississippi. af 

Crossing the ridge of red sandstone, and traversing the little prairie which 
lies to the southward of it, we made in the afternoon an excursion to a place 
which we have called the Hot Spring Gate. This place has much the ap- 
pearance of a gate, by which the Platte passes through a ridge composed 
of a white and calcareous sandstone. The length of the passage is about 
four hundred yards, with a smooth green prairie on either side. Through 
this place, thestream flows with a quiet current, unbroken by any rapid, 
and is about seventy yards wide between the walls, which rise perpen 


' 


| 
| 
| 
2 
| 


(174 J / 56 


dienlarly from the water, To that on the right bak, which is the lower, 
the barometer gave a height of three hundred aud sixty feet, This place 
will bo more particularly described hereafter, as we passed through it on 
our return, 

We saw here numerous herds of mountain sheep, and frequently heard 
the volley of rattling stones which accompanied their rapid descent down 
the steep hills, This was the first place at which we had killed any ot 
these animals; and, in consequence of this cireumstance, and of the 
abundance of these sheep or goats, (forthey are called by each name,) We 
gave to our encampment the name of Goat Island, Their flesh is much 
esteemed by the hunters, and has very much the flavor of the Allegany 
mountain sheep, I have frequently seen the horns of this auimal three 
feat long and seventeen inches in circumference at the base, weighing 
eleven pounds, But two or three of these were killed by our party at 
this place, and of these the horns were small, The use of these horns 
seems to be to protect the animal’s head in pitching down precipices to 
avoid pursuing wolves—their only safety being in places where they can- 
not be followed, The bones are very strong and solid, the marrow occu- 
pying buta very small portion of the bone in the leg, about the thickness 
of arye straw, The hair is short, resembling the winter color of our com- 
mon dacs, which it nearly approaches in size and appearance, Except in 
the horns, it has no resemblance whatever to the goat. The longitude of 
this place, resulting from chronometer and lunar distances, and an occulta. 
tion of « Arietis, is 107° 13' 29", and the latitude 42° 33' 27". One of our 
horses, which had given out, we left to receive strength on the island, intend- 
ing to take her, perhaps, on our return. 

July 31.—This morning we left the course of the Platte, to cross over 
to the Sweet Water. Our way, for a few miles, lay up the sandy bed of 
a dry ereck,in which I found several interesting plants. Leaving this, we 
wound our way to the summit of the hills, of which the peaks are here 
eight hundred feet above the Platte, bare and rocky. A long and gradual 
slope led from these hills to the Sweet Water, which we reached in fifteen 
miles from Goat Idand. I made an early encampment here, in order to 
give the hunters an opportunity to procure a supply from several bands of 
buffalo, which made their appearanes in the valley nearby. The stream 
here is about sixty feet wide, and at this time twelve to cighteen inches 
deep, with a very moderate current, 

The adjoining prairies are sandy, but the immediate river bottom is a 
good soil, which afforded an abundance of soft green grass to our horses, 
and where I found a variety of interesting plants, which made their ap- 
pearance for the first time. A rain to-night made it unpleasantly cold; 
and there was no tree here, to cnable us to pitch our single tent, the poles 
of which had been left at Cache camp. We had, therefore, no shelter 
except what was to be found under cover of the absinthe bushes, which 
grew in many thick patches, one or two and sometimes three feet 
high. , 

August 1.—The hunters went ahead this morning, as buffalo appeared 
tolerably abundant, and ‘I was desirous to secure a small stock of pro- 
visions; and we moved about seven miles up the valley, and encamped 
one mile below Rock Independence. This is an isolated granite rock, 
about six hundred and fifty yards long, and forty in height. Except in 
a depression of the summit, where a little soil Supports a scanty growth 


» lower, - 
is place 
gh it on 


y heard 
it down 
| any ot 
of the 
ne,) we 
iS Intech 
llegany 
al three 
eighing 
party at 
e horns 
pices to 
ey cati- 
V OCCU 
ickness 
ir com. 
cept in 
ittide of 
reculta. 
of our 
intend. 


SS OVer 
bed of 
his, we 
re here 
pradual 
fifteen 
rder to 
ands of 
stream 
inches 


mM isa 
horses, 
sir ap- 
r cold; 
P poles 
shelter 
which 
e feet 


peared 
f pro- 
amped 
> rock, 
ept in 
rowth 


A en di a eR agian te 


| 
{ 
if 


i{ 
| 


of whe 
withi 
aimoot 
with 
count 
those 
siona 
the ral 
this ¢ 
our ce 
meat, 
42° 2 
Au 
called 
agra 
and tl 
four |} 
choke 
right 
ite, 
tion, ¢ 
lome 
There 
of dri 
We 
squall 
turesq 
the m 
thous: 
to-nig 
have 
masse 
line ¢ 
and t 
have 
tation 
Ar 
ridge: 
these 
profu 
grand 
the ri 
its so 
eleva 
and s 
vatiol 
At 
along 
Scatte 
these 
marl, 


DEVit'S GATE 


DEVit'S GATE 


57 " C14] 


of shrubs, witha solitary dworf pine, it is entirely bare, Every where 
within six or eight feet of the ground, where the surface is sufficiently 
smooth, and in some places sixty or eighty feet above, the rock is inseribed 
with the names of travellers, Many a name famous in the history of this 
country, and some well known to science, are to be found mixed among 
those of the traders and of travellers for pleasure and curiosity, and of mis- 
sionuries among the savages, Some of these have heen washed away by 
the rain, but the greater number are still very legible, I'he position of 
this rock is in longitude 107° 56’, latitude .@® 2°' Se", We remained at 
our camp of Angust Ist until noon of the next day. oceupied in drying 
meat, By observation, the longitude of the place is 107° 25' 23", latitude 
42° 20' 56". . 

August 2.—Five miles above Rock Independence we ce; \¢ to a place 
called the Devil’s Gate, where the Sweet Water cuts througa the point of 
a granite ridge, The length of the passage is about t'iree hundrec vards, 
and the width thirty-five yards, The walls of rock are vertical, ana ubout 
four hundred feet in height; and the stream in the gate is almost entirely 
choked - by masses which have fallen from above, In the wall, on the 
right bank, is a dike of trap rock, cutting through a fine-grained gray grat 
ite, Near the point of this ridge crop out some strata of the valley forma- 
tion, consisting of @ grayish micaceous sandstone, and fine-grained con- 

lomerate, and marl, We encamped eight miles above the Devil’s Gate, 

here was no timber of any kind on the river, but good fires were made 
of drift wood, aided by the bois de vache. 

We liad to-night no shelter from the rain, which commenced with 
squalls of wind abvut sunset, The country here is exceedingly pic- 
turesque, On either side of the vallev, which is four or five miles broad, 
the mountains rise to the height of twive and fifteen hundred or two 
thousand feet. On the south side, the iange appears to be timbered, and 
to-night is luminous with fires—probably the work of the Indians, who 
have just passed through the valley, On she north, broken and granite 
masses'rise abruptly from the green sward of the river, terminating in a 
line of broken summits, Except in the crevices of the rock, and here 
and there ona ledge or bench of the mountain, where a few hardy pines 
have clustered together, these are perfectly bare and destitute of vege- 
tation. 

Among these masses, where there are sometimes isolated hills and 
ridges, green valleys open in upon the river, which sweeps the base of 
these mountains for thirty-six miles. Every where its deep verdme and 
profusion of beautiful flowers is in pleasing contrast with the sterile 
graudeur of the rock and the barremiess of the sandy plain, which, from 
the right bank of the river, sweeps up to the mountain range that forms 
its southern boundary, ‘The'great evaporation on the sandy soil of this 
elevated plain, and the saline efflorescences which whiten the ground, 
and shine like lakes reflecting the sun, make a soil wholly unfit for culti- 
vation. 

August 3.—We were early on the road the next morning, travelling 
along the upland part of the valley, which is overgrown with ar/emisia. 
Scattered about on the plain are occasional small isolaged hills. One of 
these which I examined, about fifty feet high, consisted of white clay and 
marl, in nearly horizontal strata. Several bands of buffalo made their ap- 


r 174 J 53 


pearance to-day, with herds of antelope ; and a grizzly bear—the only one 
we encountered during the journey+was seen scrambling up among the 
rocks. As we passed over a slight rise near the river, we caught the first 
view of the Wind river mountains, appearing, at this distance of about 
seventy miles, to be a low and dark mountainous ridge. The view dissipat- 
ed in a moment the pictures which had been created in our minds, by many 
descriptions of travellers, who have compared these mountains to the Alps 
in Switzerland, and speak of the glittering peaks which rise in icy majesty 
amidst the eternal glaciers nine or ten thousand feet into the region of eter- 
nal’ snows. ‘The nakedness of the river was relieved by groves of willows, 
where we encamped at night, after a march of twenty-six miles ; and nu- 
merous bright-colored flowers had made the river bottom look gay as a 
garden, We found here a horse, which had been abandoned by the In- 
dians, because his hoofs had been so much worn that he was unable to 
travel; and, during the night, a 77g came into the camp. 
August 4.—Our camp was. he foot of the granite mountains, which 
we climbed this morning to take’ some barometrical heights; and here 
among the rocks was seen the first magpie. Ou our return, we saw one 
at the mouth of the Platte river. We left here one of our horses, which 
was unable to proceed farther. A few miles from the encampment we left 
the river, which makes a bend to the south, and, traversing an undulating 
country, consisting of a grayish micaceous sandstone and fine-grained con- 
glomerates, struck it again, and encamped, after a journey of twenty-five 
iniles. Astronomical observations placed us in latitude 42° 32’ 30", and 
longitude 108° 30’ 13". ina ? 
August 5.—The morning was dark, with a driving rain, and disagree- 
ably cold. We continued our route as usual; but the weather became so 
bad, that we were glad to avail ourselves of the shelter offered by a small 
island, about ten miles above our last encampment, which was covered 
with a dense growth of willows. There was fine grass for our animals, 
and the timber afforded us cgmfortable protection and good fires. In the 
aftertioon, the sun broke through the clouds for a short time, and the ba- 
rometer at 5, p.m., was at 23.713, the thermometer 60°, with the wind 
strong from the northwest. We availed ourselves of the fine weather to 
make excursions in the neighborhood. The river, at this place, is border- 
ed by hills of the valley formation. They are of moderate height; one of 
the highest peaks on the right bank being, according to the barometer, one 
hundred and eighty feet above the river. On the left bank they are higher. 
They consist of a fine white clayey sandstone, a white calcareous sandstone, 
and coarse sandstone or pudding stone. 

August 6.—It continued steadily raining all the day ; but, notwithstand- 
ing, we left our encampment in the afternoon. Our animals had been 
much refreshed by their repose, and an abundance of rich, soft grass, which 
had been much improved by the rains.. In about three miles, we reached 
the entrance of a Aanyon, where the Sweet Water issues upon the more 
open valley we had passed over. Immediately at the entrance, and super- 
imposed directly upon the granite, are strata of compact calcareous sand- 
stone and chert, alternating with fine white and reddish white, and fine 
gray and red sandstones. ‘These strata dip to the eastward-at an angle of 
»about 18°, and form the western limit of the sandstone and limestone forma- 
tions on the line of our route. Here we entered among the primitive 
rocks. The usual road passes to the right of this place; but we wound, 


aa a a 


iis Si DIO naliodhieacne 


hil ii ot kale ena Rin bc Nine 


or ratk 
Wildn 
beens 
curren 
valley 
into lit 
The st 
tall pit 
granite 
hundre 
ments 
mica sl 
were 00 
which 
diamet 
iniles, ¢ 
be the 
there is 
at the | 
quartz 
in occa 
and left 
was ve 
nightfa 
two mi 
camp o 
forded 
Our fire 
misia, Vv 
and ma 
slate, w 
Auge 
from th 
before 1 
in the d 
while it 
Sweet \ 
timbere 
many st 
stream | 
onasm 
opening 
of large 
previous 
The a 
came fir 
ina few 
passed t 
out ona 
escarpm 
colored 
from tw 


nly one 
ong the 
the first 
f about 
lissipat- 
y many 
he Alps 
majesty 
of eter- 
willows, 
and nu- 
‘ay as a 
the In- 
nable to 


, which 
nd here 
saw one 
s, Which 
t we left 
dulating 
ned con- 
nty-five 
30", and 


lisagree- 
came sO 
-a small 
covered 
animals, 

In the 
-the ba- 
he wind 
ather to 
5 border- 
; one of 
ter, one 

higher. 
ndstone, 


thstand- 
ad been 
s, which 
reached 
he more 
hd super- 
us sand- 
nd fine 
angle of 
e forma- 
primitive 
wound, 


Aree Re Ral ae eat 


<i ti BO ata reiaccncias 


z a SS ee er ete eer ne 
° 


pieliaft ss 


59 C174 J 


or rather scrambled, our way up the narrow valley for several hours. 
Wildness and disorder were the character of this scenery. ‘The river had 
been swollen by the late rains, and came rushing through with an impetuous 
current, three or four feet Geep, and generally twenty yards broad. ‘The 
valley was sometimes the breadth of the stream, and sometimes opened 
into little green meadows, sixty yards wide, with open groves of aspen. 
The stream was bordered throughout with aspen, beech, and willow; and 
tall pines grew on the sides and summits of the crags. On both sides, the 
granite rocks rose precipitously to the height of three hundred and five 
hundred feet, terminating in jagged and broken pointed peaks; and frag- 
ments of fallen rock lay piled up at the foot of the precipices. Gneiss, 
mica slate, and a white granite, were among the varieties I noticed. Here 
were many old traces of beaver on the stream ; remnants of dams, near 
which were lying trees, which they had cut down, one and two feet in 
diameter. The hills entirely shut up the river at the end of about five 
miles, and we turned up aravine that led toa high prairie, which seemed to 
be the general level of the country. Hence, to the summit of the ridge, 
there is a regular and very gradual rise. Blocks of granite were piled up 
at the heads of the ravines, and small bare knolls of mica slate and milky 
quartz protruded at frequent intervals on the prairie, which was whitened 
in occasional spots with small salt lakes, where the water had evaporated, 
and left the bed covered with a shining incrustation of salt. The evening 
was very cold, a northwest wind driving a fine rain in our faces ; and at 
nightfall we descended to a little stream, on which we encamped, about 
two miles from the Sweet Water. Here had recently been a very large 
camp of Snake and Crow Indians; and some large poles lying about af- 
forded the means of pitching a tent, and making other places of shelter. 
Our fires to-night were made principally of the dry branches of the arte- 
misia, which covered the slopes. It burns quickly, with a clear oily flaine, 
and makes a hot fire. ‘The hills here are composed of hard, compact mica 
slate, with veins of quartz. 

August 7.—We left our encampment with the rising sun. As we rose 
from the bed of the creek, the snow line of the mountaius stretched grandly 
before us, the white peaks glittering in the sun. They had been hidden 
in the dark weather of the last few days, and it had been snowing on them, 
while it rained in the plains. We crossed a ridge, and again struck the 
Sweet Water—here a beautiful, swift stream, with a more open valley, 
timbered with beech and cottonwood. It now began to lose itself in the . 
many small forks which make its head; and we continued up the main 
stream until near noon, when we left it a few miles, to make our noon halt 
on a small creek among the hills, from which the stream issues by a small 
opening. Within was a beautiful grassy spot, covered with an open grove 
of large beech trees, among which I found several plants that I had not 
previously seen. ‘ 

The afternoon was cloudy, with squalls of rain; but the weather be-. 
came fine at sunset, when we again encamped on the Sweet Water, with- 
in a few miles of the Sourn Pass. The country over which we have 
passed to-day consists principally of the compact mica slate, which crops 
out on all the ridges, maling the uplands very rocky and slaty. In the 
escarpments which border the creeks, it is seen alternating with a light- 
colored granite, at an inclination of 45°; the beds varying in thickness 
from two or three feet to six or eight hundred. Ata distance, the granite 


— 


f 174 ] 60 . 


frequently has the appearance of irregular lumps of clay, hardened by ex- | yinuta 
osure. <A variety of aséery may now be numbered amoug the character. © sand o 
istic plants, and the artemisia continues in full glory; but cacti have be- ~  gtrata 
come rare, wid mosses begin to dispute the hilfS with them. The evening — tered a 
was damp and unpleasant; the thermometer, at 10 o’clock, being at 36°, — of parti 
and the grass wet with aheavy dew. Our astronomical observations placed — the afte 
this encamptment iu longitude 109° 21' 32", and latitude 42° 27' 15". the firs 
Early in the morning we resumed our journey, the weather still cloudy, © jaing st 
with occasional rain. Our general course was west, as I had determined |= New F 
to cross the dividing ridge by a bridle path among the broken country them st 
more immediately at the foot of the mountains, and return by the wagon the ‘I'w 
road, two and a half miles to the south of the point where the trail crosses, which 
‘ About six miles from our encampment bronght us to the summit. The and lat 
ascent had been so gradual, that, with all the intimate knowledge pos. large h 
sessed by Carson, who had made this country his home for seventeen which 
years, we were obliged to watch very closely to find the place at which posed t 
we had reached the culminating point. ‘This was between two low hills, © Aug 
rising on either hand fifty or sixty feet. When I looked back at them, —— tremely 


from the foot of the immediate slope on the western plain, theirsummits | jng int 
appeared to be about one hundred and twenty feet above. From the im- mounta 


4 
pression on my mind at this time, and subsequently on our return, I should % plain, b 
compare the elevation which we surmounted immediately at the Pass, to the glo 
the ascent of the Capitol hill from the avenue, at Washington. It is dilh- the mot 
cult for me to fix positively the breadth of this pass. From tite broken sunrise 
ground where it commences, at the foot of the Wind river chain, the view scenery 
to the southeast is over a champaign country, broken, at the distance of truly m 
nineteen miles, by the ‘Table rock; which, with the other isolated hills rie jou 
in its vicinity, seems to stand on a comparative plain. This I judged to and ma 
be its termination, the ridge recovering its rugged character with the Table and all 
rock. It will be seen that it in no manner resembles the places to which- mounta 
the term is commonly applied—nothing of the gorge-like character and and ma 
winding ascents of the Allegheny passes in America: nothing of the Great justice. 
‘St. Bernard and Simplon passes in Europe. Approaching it from the rhe pit 
mouth of the Sweet Water, a sandy plain, one hundred and twenty miles was agi 
long, conducts, by a gradual and regular ascent, to the summit, about the ridg 
seven thousand feet above the sea; aud the traveller, without being re- I find b 
minded of any change by: toilsome ascents, suddenly finds himself on the rent. ° 
waters which flow to the Pacific ocean. By the route we had travelled, wide, t 
the distance from Fort Laramie is three hundred and twenty miles, or nine approa 
hundred and fifty from the mouth of the Kansas. ley a fe 


Tains as 
very br 


Continuing our march, we reached, in eight miles from the Pass, the 
Little Sandy, one of the tributaries of the Colorado, or Green river at che 


Gulf of California. ‘The weather had grown fine during the morning, and Windir 
we remaived here the rest of the day, to dry our baggage ‘and take some most be 
+ astronomical observations. The stream was about torty feet wide, and ay trat 
two or three deep, with clear water and a full swift current, over a sandy ing the 
bed. It was timbered with a growtl of low bushy and dense willows, ‘ollowe 


among which were little verdant spots, which gave our animals fine grass, | wagnif 


and where I found a wamber of imterestimg plants. Among the neighbor- us and 
ing hills I noticed fragments of granite containimg magnetic iron. Longt- snow-C 
tude of the camp was 109° 37° 59", and latitude 42° 27' 34". bright 

August 9.—We made our moon halt today on Bw Seady, gmother , betwee 


rdened by ex. 
the character. 
cacti have be. 
The evening 
, being at 36°, 
vations placed 
27' 15". 
sr still cloudy, 
id determined 
oken country 
by the wagon 
e trail crosses, 
summit. The 
iowledge pos- 
for seventeon 
ace at which 
two low hills, 
ack at them, 
their summits 
From the im- 
‘turn, I should 
ut the Pass, to 
in. [tis dith- 
im tie broken 
lain, the view 
he distance of 
isolated hills 
| [ judged to 
rith the Table 
aces to which 
tharacter and 
: of the Great 
y it from the 
twenty miles 
immit, about 
ut being re- 
imself on the 
had travelled, 
miles, or nine 


he Pass, the 
n river at ihe 
morning, and 
nd take some 
et wide, and 
over a sandy 
nse willows, 
uls fine grass, 
he neighbor- 
ron. Longt- 


aly, @mother , 


see 


61 [ 174 ] 


tributary of Green river, The face of the country traversed was of a brown 
sand of granite materials, the de/rifus of the neighboring mountains, 
Strata of the milky quartz cropped out, and blocks of granite were scat- 
tered about, containing magnetic iron. On Sandy creek the formation was 
of parti-colored sand, exhibited in escarpments filty to eighty feet high. In 
the afternoon we had a severe storm of hail, and encamped at sunset on 
the first New Fork. Within the space of a few miles, the Wind moun- 
tains supplv a number of tributaries to Green river, which are all called the 
New Forks. Near our camp were two remarkable isolated hills, one of 
them sufliciently large to merit the name of inountain. They are called 
the ‘I'wo Buttes, and will serve to identify the place of our encampment, 
which the observations of the evening placed in longitude 109° 58' 11", 
and latitude 42° 42'46". On the right bank of the stream, opposite to the 
large hill, the strata which are displayed consist, of decomposing granite, 
which supplies the brown sand of which the face of the country is com- 
posed to a considerable depth. 

August 10.—The air at sunrise is clear and pure, and the morning ex- 
tremely cold, but beautiful. A lofty snow peak of the mountain is glitter- 
ing in the first rays of the sun, which las not yet reached us. The long 
mountain wall to the east, rising two thousand feet abruptly from the 
plain, behind which we see the peaks, is still dark, and cuts clear against 
the glowing sky. <A fog, just risen from the river, lies along the base ot 
the mountain. A little before sunrise, the thermometer was at 35°, and at 
sunrise 33°. Water froze last night, and fires are very comfortable. The 
scenery becomes hourly more interesting and grand, and the view here is 
truly magnificent; but, indeed, it needs something to repay the long prai- 
rie journey of a thousand miles. The sun has just shot above the wall, 
and makes a magical change. The whole valley is glowing and bright, 
and all the mountain peaks are gleaming likesilver. Though these snow 
mountains are not the Alps, they have their own character of grandeur 
and magnificence, and will doubtless find pens and pencils to do them 


justice. In the scene before us, we feel how much wood improves a view. 


rhe pines on the mountain seemed to give it much additional beauty. I 
was agreeably disappoiuted in the character of the streams on this side of 
the ridge. Instead of the creeks, which description had led me to expect, 
I find bold, broad streams, with three or four feet water, and a rapid cur- 
rent. The fork on which we are encamped iseupwards of a hundred feet 
wide, timbered with groves or thickets of the low willow. We were now 
approaching the loftiest part of the Wind river chain; and I left the Val- 
ley a few mites from our encampment, intending to penetrate the moun- 
tains as far as possible with the whole party. We were soon involved in 
very broken ground, among long ridges covered with fragments of granite. 
Winding our way up & long ravine, we came unexpectedly in view ofa 
most beautiful lake, set like a gem in the mountains. The sheet of water 
ay transversely across the direction we had been pursuing; and, descend- 
ing the steep, rocky ridge, where it was necessary to lead our horses, we 
‘ollowetl its banks to the southern extremity. Here a view of the utmost 
nagnificence and grandeur burst upon our eyes. With nothing between 
us and their feet to lessen the effect of the whole height, a grand bed of 
snow-capped mountains rose before us, pile upon pile, glowing in the 
bright light of an August day. Immediately below them lay the lake, 
between two ridges, covered with dark pines, which swept down from 


[ 174] 62 


the main chain to the spot where we stood. Here, where the lake glittered 
in the open sunlight, its banks of yellow sand and the light foliage of aspen 
groves contrasted well with the gloomy pines. “Never betore,’’ said 
Mr. Preuss, “in this country or in Europe, have I'seen such magnificent, 
grand rocks.” ‘I wasso much pleased with the beauty of the place, that 
I determined to make the main camp here, where our animals would find 
good pasturage, and explore the mountains with a small party of men, 
Proceeding a little further, we came suddenly upon the outlet of the lake, 
where it found its way through a narrow passage between low hills. Dark 
pines, which overhung the stream, and masses of rock, where the water 
foamed along, gave it much romantic beauty. Where we crossed, which 
was immediately at the outlet, it is two hundred and fifty feet wide, and 
so deep, that with difficulty we were able to ford it. Its bed was an ac- 
cumulation of rocks, boulders, and broad slabs, and large angular frag- 
ments, among which the x"imals fell repeatedly. 

The current was very swift, and the water cold, and of a crystal purity. 
In crossing this stream, I met with a great misfortune in having my ba- 
rometer broken. It was the only one. A great part of the interest of the 
journey for me was in the exploration of these mountains, of which so 
much had been said that was doubtful and contradictory; and now their 
snowy peaks rose majestically before me, and the only means of giving 
them authentically to science, the object of my anxious solicitude by 
night and day, was destroyed. We had brought this barometer in safety 
a thousand miles, and broke it almost among the snow of the mountains. 
The loss was felt by the whole camp—all had seen my anxiety, and aided 
me in preserving it. ‘The height of these mountains, considered by the 
hunters and traders the highest in the whole range, had been a theme of 
constant discussion among them; and all had looked forward with pleas- 
ure to the moment when the instrument, which they believed to be true 
as the sun, should stand upon the summits, and decide their disputes. 
Their grief was only inferior to my own. 

This lake is about three miles long, and of very irregular width, and 
apparently great depth, and is the head water of the third New Fork, a 
tributary to Green river, the Colorado of the west. On the map and in the 
narrative, I have called it Mountain lake. JI encamped on the north side, 
about three hundred and fifty yards from the outlet. This was the most 
western point at which I obtained astronomical observations, by which 
this place, called Bernier’s encampment, is made in 119° 08' 03" west lon- 
gitude from Greenwich, and latitude 43° 49’ 49". The mountain peaks, 
as laid down, were fixed by bearings from this and other astronomical 
points, We had no other compass than the small ones used in sketching 
the country ; but from an azimuth, in which one of them was used, the 
variation of the compass is 18° east. The correction made in our field 
work by the astronomical observations indizates that this is a very correct 
observation. 

As soon as the camp was formed, I set about endeavoring to repair my 
barometer. As I have already said, this wasa standard cistern barometer, 
of Troughton’s construction. The glass cistern had been broken about 
midway ; but as the instrument had been kept in a proper position, no air 
had found its way into the tube, the end of which had always remained 
covered, I had with mea number of vials of tolerably thick glass, some 
of which were of the same diameter as the cistern, and I spent the day in 


. > > 
Lee mS 


Rada Sei. 


slow 
but, 
groo 
the 
I co 
whi 
seen 
ther 
utm 
men 
prop 
furni 
glue 
was 
the 
same 
cess 
imm 

A d 
are t 
orad 
ter h 
side 
the q 


lake glittered 
lage of aspen 
before,”’ said 
magnificent, 
p place, that 
s would find 
irty of men. 
of the lake, 
y hills. Dark 
e the water 
ossed, which 
t wide, and 
was an ac- 
ngular frag- 


ystal purity. 
ring my ba- 
‘terest of the 
tf which so 
d now their 
ns of giving 
Olicitude by 
er in safety 
mountains. 
y, and aided 
2red by the 
a theme of 
with pleas- 
to be true 
ir disputes. 


width, and 
lew Fork, a 
D and in the 
north side, 
AS the most 
8, by which 
s west lon- 
tain peaks, 
stronomical 

sketching 
S used, the 
in our field 
ery correct 


D repair my 
barometer, 
bken about 
tion, no air 
S remained 
glass, some 
the day in 


4 
j 
if 


FS ES aS Anis sie 


63 [174] 


slowly working on these, endeavoring to cut them of the requisite length ; 
but, as my instrument was a very rough file, I invariably broke them. A 
groove was cut in one of the trees, where the barometer was placed during 
the night, to be out of the way of any possible danger, and in the morning 
I commenced again. Among the powder horns in the camp, I found one 
which was very transparent, so that its contents could be almost as plainly 
seen as through glass, This I boiled and stretched on a piece of wood to 
the requisite diameter, and sqgaped it very thin, in order to increase to the 
utmost its transparency. I then secured it firmly in its place on the instru- 
ment, with strong glue made from a buffalo, and filled it with mercury, 
properly heated. A piece of skin, which had covered one of the vials, 
furnished a good pocket, which was well secured with strong thread and 
glue, and then the brass cover was screwed to its place. The instrument 
was left some time to dry; and when I reversed it, few hours after, I had 
the satisfaction to find it in perfect order; its indications being about the 
same as on the other side of the lake before it had been broken. Our suc- 
cess in this little incideut diffused pleasure throughout the camp; and we 
immediately set about our preparations for ascending the mountains. 

As will be seen on reference to a map, on this short mountain chain 
are the head waters of four great rivers of the continent; namely, the Col- 
orado, Columbia, Missouri, and Platte rivers, It had been my design, af- 
ter having ascended the mountains, to continue our route on the western 
side of the range, and crossing through a pass at the northwestern end of 
the chain, about thirty miles from our present camp, return along the 
eastern slope, across the heads of the Yellowstone river, and join on the 
line to our station of August 7, immediately at the foot of the ridge. In 
this way, I should be enabled to include the whole chain, and its nume- 
rous waters, in my survey; but various considerations induced me, very 
reluctantly, to abandon this plan. 

I was desirous to keep strictly within the scope of my instructions ; and it 
would have required ten or fifteen additional days for the accomplishment 
of this object ; our animals had become very much worn out with the length 
of the journey; game was very scarce; and, though it does not appear in 
the course of the narative, (as I have avoided dwelling upon trifling inci- 
dents not connected with the objects of the expedition,) the spirits of the 
men had been much exhausted by the hardships and privations to which 
they had been subjected. Our provisions had wellnigh -all disappeared. 
Bread had been Jong out of the question; and of all our stock, we had re- 
maining two or three pounds of coffee, and a small quantity of maccaroni, 
which had been husbanded with great caréfor the mountain expedition 
we were about to undertake. Our daily meal consisted of dry buffalo 
meat, cooked in tallow; and, as we had not dried this with Indian skill, 
part of it was spoiled; and what remained of good, was as hard as wood, 
having much the taste and appearance of so many piecgs of bark. Even 
of this, our stock was rapidly diminishing in a camp which was capable 
of consuming two buffaloes in every twenty-four hours. These animals 
had entirely disappeared ; and it was not probable that we should fall in 
with them again until we returned to the Sweet Water. 

Our arrangements for the ascent were rapidly completed. We were in 
a hostile country, which rendered the greatest vigilance and circumspee- 
tion necessary. The pass at the north end of the mountain was generally 
infested by Blackfeet ; and immediately opposite was one of their forts, on 


—— 


r 174 J 64 


the edge of a little thicket, two or three hundred feet from our encamp- 
ment. We were posted ina grove of beech, on the margin of the lake, 


and a few hundred feet long, with a narrow prairi//on on the inner side, uae 
bordered by the rocky ridge. In the upper end of this grove we cleared a Th : 
circular space about forty feet in diameter, and, with the felled timber and . 
interwoven branches, surrounded it with a breastwork five feet in height. . on 
A gap was left for a gate on the inner side, by which the animals were f ; 
to be driven in and secured, while the.men slept around the little work, } 0h 
It was half hidden by the foliage; and, garrisoned by twelve resolute nha 
men, would have set at defiance any band of savages which might chance lel 
to discover them in the interval of our absence. Fifteen of the best lock 
mules, with fourteen nen, were selected for the mountain party. Our pro- hatha 
visions consisted of dried meat for two days, with our little stock of coffee f Gan 
and some maccaroni. In addition to the barometer and a thermometer, I ‘ ha 


took with me a sextant and spy glass, and we had of course our compasses, 
In charge of the camp I left Bernier, one of my inost trustworthy men, 


pices 


Ww 


who possessed the most determined courage. aha 
August 12.—Early in the morning we left the camp, fifteen in number, enree 
well armed, of course, and mounted on our best mules. A pack animal ; mi 
carried our provisions, with a coffee pot and kettle, and three or four tin and | 
cups. Every man had a blanket strapped over his saddle, to serve for his al 
bed, and the instruments were carried by turns on their backs. Ween-  ° Lions 
tered directly on rough and rocky ground; and, just after crossing the dire 
ridge, had the good fortune to shoot an antelope. We heard the roar, and . . 
had a glimpse of a waterfall as we rode along; and, crossing in our way ie 
two fine streams, tributary to the Colorado, in about two hours’ ride we react 
reached the top of the first row or range ef the mountains. Tere, again, PING: 
a view of the most romantic beauty met our eyes, It seemed as if, from A 
the vast expanse of uninteresting prairie we had passed over, Nature had level 
collected all her beauties together in one chosen place. We were over- with 
looking a deep valley, which was entirely occupied by three lakes, and rae 
froin the brink the surrounding ridges rose precipitously five hundred and On 
a thousand feet, covered with the dark green of the balsam pine, relieved val 
on the border of the lake with the light foliage of the aspen. ‘They all ae 
communicated with each other; and the green of the waters, common to We 
mountain lakes of great depth, showed that it would be impossible to for c 
cross them. ‘The surprise manifested by our guides when these impassable Apes 
ohstatles suddenly barred our progress proved that they were among the defi 
hidden treasures of the place, unknown even to. the wandering trappers of q ance 
the region, Descending theehill, we proceeded to make our way along 4 four 
te margin to the southern extremity. A narrow strip of angular frag- i 
ments of rock sometimes afforded a rough pathway for our mules, but grac 
generally we rode along the shelving side, pccasionally scrambling up, ata bidad 
considerable risk of tumbling back into the lake. ~ rant 
The slope wa? frequently 60°; the pines grew densely together, and peal 
the ground was covered with the branches and trunks of trees. ‘The air | Gur 
waS fragrant with the odor of the pines; and I realized this delightful ss 
morning the pleasure of breathing that mountain air which makes a con- am 
stant theme of the hunter’s praise, and which now made us feel as if we pe 
had all been drinking some exhilarating gas. ‘The depths of this unex- the 
plored forest were a place to delight the heart of a botanist. There was j He} 


a rich undergrowth of plants, and numerous gay-colored flowers in bril- q pin 


encamp- 
the lake, 
ner side, 
cleared a 
mber and 
n height. 
als were 
tle work, 
» resolute 
ht chance 
the best 
Our pro- 
of coffee 
ometer, I 
mM passes, 
thy men, 


number, 
k animal 
four tin 
ve for his 

We en- 
ssing the 
roar, and 
our way 
ride we 
re, again, 
8 if, from 
ture had 
bre over- 
kes, and 
red and 
relieved 
They all 
mmon to 
ssible to 
passable 
10ng the 
ppers of 
vy along 
ar frag- 
les, but 
up, ata 


her, and 
The air 
lightful 
Ss a con- 
ns if we 
Ss unex- 


ere was 
in bril- 


re 


+1 TO a ee 


—_ 
eee 


65 [ 174 ] 


liant bloom. We reached the outlet at length, where some freshly barked 
willows that lay in the water showed that beaver had been recently at work. 
There were some small brown squirrels jumping about in the pines, and a 
couple of large mallard ducks swimming about in the stream. 

The hills on this southern end were low, and the lake looked like a 
mimic sea, as the waves broke on the sandy beach in the force of a stron 
breeze. There was a pretty open spot, with fine grass for our mules; an 
we made our noon halt on the beach, under the shade of some large hem- 
locks. Wu resumed our journey afier a halt of about an hour, making our 
way up the ridge on the western side of the lake. In search of smoother 
ground, we rode a little inland; and, passing through groves of aspen, soon 
found ourselves again among the pines. Ismerging from these, we struck 
the summit of the ridge above the upper end of the lake. 

We had reached a very elevated point; and in the valley below, and 
among the hills, were a number of lakes at different levels; some two or 
three hundred feet above others, with which they communicated by foam- 
ing torrents. Even to our great height, the roar of the cataracts came up, 
and we could see them leaping down in lines of snowy foam. From this 
scene of busy waters, we turned abruptly into the stillness of a forest, 
where we rode among the open bolls of the pines, over a lawn of verdant 
grass, having strikingly the air of cultivated grounds. This led us, after 
a time,among masses of rock which had no vegetable earth but in hol ows 
and crevices, though still the pine forest continued, ‘Toward evening, we 
reached a defile, or rather a hole in the mountains, entirely shut in by dark 
pine-covered rocks, 

A small stream, with a scarcely perceptible current, flowed through a 
level bottom of perhaps eighty yards width, where the grass wus saturated 
with water. Into thisthe mules were turned, and were neither hobbled 
nor picketed during the night, as the fine pasturage took away all tempta- 
tion to stray; and we made our bivouac in the pines. The surrounding 
masses were all of granite, While supper was being prepared, I set out 
onan excursion .in the neighborhood, accompanied by one of my men. 
We wandered about among the crags and ravines until dark, richly repaid 
for our walk by a fine collection of plants, many of them in full bloom. 
Ascending a peak to find the place of our camp, we saw that the little 
defile in which we lay communicated with the long green valley of some 
stream, which, here locked up in the mountains, far away to the south, 
found its way in a dense forest to the plains. 

Looking along its upward course, it seemed to conduct, by a smooth 
gradual slope, directly toward the peak, which, from tong consultation as 
we aprroached the mountain, we had decided to be the highest of the 
range. Pleased with the discovery of so fine a road for the next day, we 
hastened down to the camp, where we arrived just in time for supper. 
Our table@ervice was rather scant; and we held the meat in our hands, 
and clean rocks made good plates,on which we spread our maccaroni. 
Among all the strange places on which we had occasion to encamp during 
our long journey, none have left so vivid an impression on my mind as 
the camp of this evening. The disorder of the masses which surrounded 
us; the little hole through which we saw the stars overhead; the dark 
pines where we slept; and the rocks lit up with the glow of our fires, 
made a night picture of very wild beauty. 
vlugust 13.—The morning was bright and pleasant, just cool enough 

5 


c 174 J 66 


to make exercise agreeable, and we soon entered the defile 1 had seen the 
preceding day. It was smoothly eo with.a soft grass, and scattered 
over with groups of flowers, of which yellow was the predominant color. 
Sometimes we were forced, by an occasional difficult pass, to pick our way 
on a narrow ledge along the side of the defile, and the mules were fre- 
quently on their knees; but these obstructions were rare, and we journeyed 
on in the sweet morning air, delighted at our good fortune in having found 
such a beautiful entrance to the mountains, This road continued for about 
three miles, when we suddenly reached its termination in one of the grand 
views which, at every turn, meet the traveller in this magnificent region. 
Here the defile up which we had travelled opened out into a small lawn, 
where, iti a little lake, the stream had its source. 

There were some fine as/ers in bloom, but all the flowering plants appear- 
ed to seek the shelter of the rocks, and to be of lower growth than below, 
as if they loved the warmth of the soil, and kept out of the way of the 
winds. Immediately at our feet a precipitous descent led to a confusion 
of defiles, and before us rose the mountains as we have represented them 
in the annexed view. It is not by the splendor of far-off views, which 
have lent such a glory to the Alps, that these impress the mind; but by a 
gigantic disorder of enormous masses, and a savage sublimity of naked 
rock, in wonderful contrast with innumerable green spots of a rich floral 
beauty, shut up in their stern recesses. Their wildness seems well suited 
to the character of the people who inhabit the country. 

I determined to leave our animals here, and make the rest of our way on 
foot. The peak appeared so near, that there was no doubt of our returning 
before night; and a few men were left in charge of the mules, with our pro- 
visions and blankets. We tool with us nothing but our arms and instru- 
ments, and, as the day had become warm, the greater part left our coats. 
Having made an early dinner, we started again. We were soon involved 
in the most ragged precipices, nearing the central chain very slowly, and 
rising but little. The first ridge hid a succession of others; and when, with 
great fatigue and difficulty, we had climbed up five hundred feet, it was but 
to make an equal desceut on the other side; all these intervening places 
were filled with small deep lakes, which met the eye in every direction, 
descending from one level to another, sometimes under bridges formed by 
huge fragments of granite, beneath which was heard the roar of the water. 
These constantly obstructed our path, forcing us to make long détours ; 
frequently obliged to retrace our steps, and frequently falling among the 
rocks, Maxwell was precipitated toward the face of a precipice, and saved 
himself from going over by throwing himself flat on the ground. We 
clambered on, always expecting, with every ridge that we crossed, to reach 
the foot of the peaks, and always disappointed, until about 4 o’clock, when, 
pretty well worn out, we reached the shore of a little lake, in which there 
was a rocky island, and from which we obtained the view Sven in the 
frontispiece. We remained here a short time to rest, and continued on 
around the lake, which had in some places a beach of white sand, and in 
others was bound with rocks, over which the way was difficult and dan- 
gerous, as the water from innumerable springs made them very slippery. 

By the time we had reached the further side of the lake, we found our- 
selves all exceedingly fatigued, and, much to the satisfaction of the whole 
party, we encamped. The spot we had chosen was a broad flat rock, in 
some measure protected from the winds by the surrounding crags, and the 


Hea ile tn nl ee 


SNIVLNN OW Y3SAIY GNIM FGHL 


id seen the 
1 scattered 
nant color, 
k our way 
s were fre- 
journeyed 
ving found 
| for about 
the grand 
ent region, 
mall lawn, 


its appear- 
an below, 
vay of the 
confusion 
nted them 
ws, which 
; but by a 
‘of naked 
rich floral 
vell suited 


ur way on 
returning 
h our pro- 
nd instru- 
our coats, 
1 involved 
wly, and 
rhen, with 
it was but 
ng places 
direction, 
ormed by 
he water, 
détours ; 
mong the 
nd saved 
nd. We 
, to reach 
k, when, 
lich there 
en in the 
inued on 
d, and in 
and dan- 
ippery. 
und our- 
1e whole 
rock, in 
, and the 


4O MGFIA 


SNIVLNN OW Y3ZAIY GNIM BHI 


Ae 
Ay 
4 


trun 
rent 
belo 
We 
not 
the 

leav 
the 

ing 
enca 
Fro 
this 
the 

hea 

ed fq 
gra 

saw 
like 
tains 
goat 
took 
ful. 

50°. 
only 
ence 


and 

unde 
rarit 
spru 
cold, 


67 C174) 


trunks of fallen pines afforded us bright fires. Near by was a foaming tor- 
rent, which tumbled into the little lake about one hundred and fifty feet 
below us, and which, by way of distinction, we have called Island lake. 
We had reached the upper limit of the piney region; as, above this point, 
no tree was to be seen, and patches of suow lay every where around us on 
the cold sides of the rocks, The flora of the region we had traversed since 
leaving our mules was extremely rich, and, among the characteristic ages 
the scarlet flowers of the dodecatheon denfutum every where met the eye 
in great abundance. A small green ravine, on the edge of which we were 
encamped, was filled with a profusion of alpine plants in brilliant bloom. 
From barometrical observations, made during our three days’ sojourn at 
this place, its elevation above the Gulf of Mexico is 10,000 feet. During 
the day, we had seen no sign of animal life; but among the rocks here, we 
heard what was supposed to be the bleat of a young goat, which we search- 
ed for with hungry activity, and found to proceed from a small animal of a 
gray color, with short ears and no tail—probably the Siberian squirrel, We 
saw a considerable number of them, and, with the exception of a stall bird 
like a sparrow, it is the only inhabitant of this elevated part of the moun- 
tains. On our return, we saw, below this lake, large flocks of the mountain 
goat. We had nothing to eat to-night. Lajeunesse, with several others, 
took their guns, and sallied out in search of a goat; but returned unsuceess- 
ful. At sunset, the barometer stood at 20.522; the attached thermometer 
50°. Here we had the misfortune to break our thermometer, having now 
only that attached to the barometer. I was takeur ill shortly after we had 
encamped, and continued so until late in the night, with violent headache 
and vomiting. This was probably caused by the excessive fatigue I had 
undergone, and want of food, and perhaps, also, in some measure, by the 
rarity of the air. The night was cold, as a violent gale from the north had 
sprung up at sunset, which entirely blew away the heat of the fires. The 
cold, and our granite beds, had not been favorable to sleep, and we were 
glad to see the face of the sun in the morning, Not being delayed by any 
preparation for breakfast, we set out immediately. 

On every side as we advanced was heard the roar of waters, and of a 
torrent, which we followed up a short distance, until it expanded into a lake 
about one mile in length. On the northern side of the lake was a bank of 
ice, or rather of snow covered with a crust of ice. Carson had been our 
guide into the mountains, and, agreeably to his advice, we left this litile 
valley, and took to the ridges again ; which we found extremely broken, 
and where we were again involved among precipices, Here were ice fields; 
among which we were all dispersed, seeking each the best path to ascend 
the peak. Mr. Preuss attempted to walk along the upper edge of one of 
these fields, which sloped away at an angle of about twenty degrees; but his 
feet slipped from under him, aud he went plunging down the plane. A few 
hundred feet below, at the bottom, were some fragments of sharp rock, en 
which he landed; and though he turned a couple of somersets, fortunately 
received no injury beyond a few bruises. Two of the men, Clement Lam- 
bert and Descoteaux, had been taken ill, and lay down on the rocks a short 
distance below ; and at this point I was attacked with headache and giddi- 
ness, accompanied by vomiting, as on the day before. Finding myself un- 
able to proceed, I sent the barometer over to Mr. Preuss, who was in a gap 
two or three hundred yards distant, desiring him to reach the peak, if pos- 
sible, and take an observation there. He found himself unable to proceed 


( (74 J 68 


further in that direction, and took an observation, where the barometer stood 
at 19.401; attached thermometer 50°, in the gap, Carson, who had gone 
over to him, succeeded in reaching one of the snowy summits of the main 
ridge, whence he saw the peak towards which all our efforts had been di- 
rected, towering eight or ten hundred feet into the air above him, In the 
mean time, finding myself grow rather worse than better, and doubtful how 
fur my strength would carry me, I sont Basil Lajounesse, with four men, 
back to the place where the mules had been left, 

We were now better acquainted with the topography of the country, and 
I directed him to bring back with him, if it were in any way possible, four 
or five mules, with provisions and blankets, With me were Maxwell and 
Ayer; and atter we had remained early an hour on the rock, it became so 
unpleasantly cold, though the day was bright, that we set out on our return 
to the camp, at which we all arrived safely, straggling in one after the other, 
] sontinnad ill during the afternoon, but became better towards sundown, 
when my recovery was completed by the appearance of Basil and four 
men, all mounted, The men who had gone with him had been too much 
fatigued to return, and were relieved by those in charge of the horses; but 
in his powers of endurance Basil resembled more a mountain goat than a 
man. They brought blankets and provisions, and we enjoyed well our dried 
meat and a cup of good coffee. We rolled ourselves up in our blankets, 
and, with our feet turned to a blazing fire, slept soundly until morning, 

August 15.—It hud been supposed that we had finished with the moun- 
tains; and the evening before, it had been arranged that Carson should set 
out at daylight, and return to breakfast at the Camp of the Mules, takin 
with him all but four or five men, who were to stay with mé and bring bank 
the mules and instruments, Accordingly, at the break of day they set out. 
With Mr. Preuss and myself remained Basil Lajeunesse, Clément Lambert, 
Janisse, and Descoteaux. When we had secured strength for the day by 
a hearty breaktast, we covered what remained, which was onough for one 
meal, with rocks, in order that it might be safe from any marauding bird ; 
and, saddling our mules, turned our faces once more towards the peaks, 
This time we determined to proceed quietly and cautiously, deliberately 
resolved to accomplish our object if it were within the compass of human 
means. We were of opinion that a long defile which lay to the left of yes- 
terday’s route would lead us to the foot of the main peak. Our mules had 
been refreshed by the fine grass in the little ravine at the Island camp, and 
we intended to ride up the defile as far as possible, in order to husbond our 
strength for the main ascent. Though this was a fine passage, still it was 
a defile of the most rugged mountains known, and we had many a rough 
and steep slippery place to cross before reaching the end. In this place the 
sun rarely shone ; snow lay along the border of the small stream which 
flowed through it, and occasional icy passages made the footing of the mules 
very insecure, and the rocks and ground were moist with the trickling 
waters in this spring of mighty rivers. We soon had the satisfaction to 
find ourselves riding along the huge wall which forms the central summits 
of the chain. There at last it rose by our sides, a nearly perpendicular wall 
of granite, terminating 2,000 to 3,000 feet above our heads in a serrated line 
of broken, jagged cones. We rode on until we came almost immediately 
below the inain peak, which I denominated the Snow peak, as it exhibited 
more snow to the eye than any of the neighboring summits. Here were 
three small lakes of a green color, each of perhaps a thousand yards in 


ehthex 


ter stood 
ad gone 
he main 
been di- 

In the 
tful how 
ur men, 


ntry, and 
ble, four 
well and 
came 8o 
if return 
he other. 
undown, 
and four 
» much 
ses; but 
t than a 
ur dried 
blankets, 
ning, 
ie moun- 
10uld set 
3, takin 
‘ing bac 
set out, 
ambert, 
» day by 
for one 
ng bird ; 
e peaks, 
iberately 
f human 
(of yes- 
ules had 
mp, and 
nd our 
ll it was 
a rough 
lace the 
which 
e mules 
trickling 
ction to 
summits 
ilar wall 
lated line 
ediately 
xhibited 
bre were 
yards in 


eee 


69 C174) 


diameter, and apparently very deep, These lay in a kind of chasm; and, 
according to the barometer, we had attained but a few hundred feet above 
the Island lake, The barometer here stood at 20,450, attached thermome- 
ter 70°, 

We managed to get our mules up toa little bench about a hundred feet 
above the lakes, where there was a patch of good grass, and turned them 
loose to graze, During our rough ride to this place, they had exhibited a 
wonderful surefootedness, Parts of the defile were filled with angular, 
sharp fragments of rock, three or four and eight or ten feet cube; and among 
these they had worked their way, leaping from one narrow point to another, 
rarely making a false step, and giving us no occasion to dismount, Having 
divested ourselves of every unnecessary encumbrance, we commenced the 
ascent, This time, like experienced travellers, we did not press ourselves, 
but climbed leisurely, sitting down so soon as we found breath beginnin 
to fail, Atintervals we reached places where a number of springs seabed 
from the rocks, and about 1,800 feet above the lakes came to the snow line, 
From this point our progress was uninterrupted climbing. Hitherto I had 
worn a pair of thick moccasins, with soles of parfléche; bit here I put on 
a light thin pair, which I had brought for the purpose, as now the use of 
our toes became necessary to a furtheradvance. IL availed myself of a sort 
of comb of the mountain, which stood against the wall like a buttress, and 
which the wind and the solar radiation, joined to the steepness of the smooth 
rock, had kept almost entirely free from snow. Up this | made my way 
rapidly, Our cautious method of advancing in the outset had spared m 
strength; and, with the exception of a slight disposition to headache, I felt 
no remains of yesterday’s illness, Ina few minutes we reached a point 
where the buttress was overhanging, and there was no other way ot sur- 
mounting the difficulty than by passing around one side of it, which was 
the face of a vertical precipice of several hundred feet. 

Putting hands and feet in the crevices between the blocks, | sueceeded 
in getting over it, and, when I reached the top, found my companions ina 
small valley below. Descending to them, we continued climbing, and in 
a short time reached the crest. I sprang upon the summit, and another 
step would have precipitated me into an immense snow field five hundred 
feet below. ‘To the edge of this field was a sheer icy precipice; and then, 
with a gradual fall, the field sloped off for about a mile, until it struck the 
foot of another lower ridge. I stood on a narrow crest, about three feet in 
width, with an inclination of about 20° N. 51° E. Assoon as I had grati- 
fied the first feelings of curiosity, I descended, and each man ascended in 
his turn; for I would only allow one at a time to mount the unstable and 
precarious slab, which it seemed a breath would hurl into the abyss below. 
We mounted the barometer in the snow of the summit, and, fixing a ramrod 
in a crevice, unfurled the national flag to wave in the breeze where never 
flag waved before. During our morning’s ascent, we had met no sign of 
animal life, except the small sparrow-like bird already mentioned. A still- 
ness the most profound and a terrible solitude forced themselves constantly 
on the mind as the great features of the place. Here, on the summit, where 
the stillness was absolute, unbroken by any sound, and the solitude com- 
plete, we thought ourselves beyond the region of animated life; but while 
we were sitting on the rock, a solitary bee (bromus, the humble bee) came 
winging his flight from the eastern valley, and lit on the knee of one of the 
men. 


ET ey ES 


[174] 70 


It was a strange place, the icy rock and the highest peak of the Rocky 
mountains, for a lover of warm sunshine and flowers ; aud we pleased our- 
selves with the idea that he was the first of his species to cross the mountain 
barrier—a solitary pioneer to foretell the advance of civilization. I believe 
that a moment’s thought would have made us let him continue his way un- 
harmed; but we carried out the law of this country, where all animated na- 
ture seems at war; and, seizing him immediately, put him in at least a fit 
place—in the leaves of a large book, among the flowers we had collected 
on our way. ‘The barometer stood at 18.293, the attached thermometer at 
44°; giving for the elevation of this summit 13,570 feet above the Gulf of 
Mexico, which: may be called the highest flight ofthe bee. It is certainiy 
the highest known flight of that insect. From the description given by 
Mackenzie of the mountains where he crossed them, with that of a French 
officer still farther to the north, and Colonel Long’s measurements to the 
south, joined to the opinion of the oldest traders of the country, it is pre- 
sumed that this is the highest peak of the Rocky mountains. The day was 
sunny and bright, but a slight shining mist hung over the lower plains, 
which interfered with our view of the surrounding country. On one side 
we overlooked innumerable lakes and streams, the spring of the Colorado of 
the Gulf of California; and on the other was the Wind river valley, where 
were the heads of the Yellowstone branch of the Missouri ; far to the north, 
we just could discover the snowy heads of the Zruis Tetons, where were 
the sources of the Missouri and Columbia rivers; and at the southern ex- 
tremity of the ridge, the peaks were plainly visible, among which were 
some of the springs of the Nebraska or Platte river. Around us, the whole 
scene had one main striking feature, which was that of terrible convulsion. 
Parallel to its length, the ridge was split into chasms and fissures; between 
which rose the thin lofty walls, terminated with slender minarets and 
columns, which is correctly represented in the view from the camp on 
Island lake. According to the barometer, the little crest of the wall on which 
we stood was three thousand five hundred and seventy feet above that place, 
and two thousand seven hundred and eighty above the little lakes at the 
bottom, immediately at our feet. Our camp at the Two Hills (an astro- 
nomica] station) bore south 3° east, which, with a bearing afterward ob- 
tained from a fixed position, enabled us to locate the peak. ‘The bearing 
of the Trois Tefons was north 50° west, and the directiou of the central 
ridge of the Wind river mountains south 39° east. The sum. iit rock was 
gneiss, succeeded by sienitic gneiss. Sienite and feldspar succeeded in 
our descent to the snow line, where we found a feldspathic granite. I had 
remarked that the noise produced by the explosion of our pistols had the 
usual degree of loudness, but was not in the least prolonged, expiring al- 
most instantaneously. Having now made what observations our means 
afforded, we proceeded to descend. We had accomplished an object of 
laudable ambition, and beyond the strict order of our instructions. We 
had climbed the loftiest peak of the Rocky mountains, and looked down 
upon the snow a thousand feet below, and, standing where never human 
foot had stood before, felt the exultation of first expiorers. It was about 2 
o’clock when we left the summit; and when we reached the bottom, the sun 
had already sunk behind the wall, and the day was drawing to a close. It 
would have been pleasant to have iingered here and on the summit longer; 

but we hurried away as rapidly as the ground would permit, for it was an 
object to regain our party as soon as possible, not knowing what accident 
the next hour might bring forth. 


< 
2 
C 


wa4yaseaitfw 


om™ bias ert at ml CU CBA 


e Rocky 
sed our- 
jountain 
believe 
way un- 
ated na- 
vast a fit 
‘ollected 
meter at 
Gulf of 
ertainly 
iven by 
French 
sto the 
t is pre- 
Jay was 
' plains, 
one side 
orado of 
7, where 
e north, 
re were 
1ern eXx- 
ch were 
e whole 
vulsion. 
petween 
ets and 
amp on 
n which 
ht place, 
s at the 
n astro- 
ard ob- 
bearing 
central 
bck was 
eded in 
I had 
had the 
ring al- 


JO NIVHO ItVYLNAD 


3H1 


YFIAIY GNIM 


SNIVINNOW 


down 
human 
bout 2 
the sun 
bse. It 
onger; 
as an 
cident 


W 
inn Vv 
orang 
gran 
turbe 
the fa 
of re 
cold, 

Ar 
our 
cliffs. 
ina 
ora 
of th 
rougl 
A co 
destit 
all ke 
brillia 
nifice 
selves 
we r4 
tempt 
found 
furnis 
on,a 
well. 
and t 
our a 
home 
Two 

In 
remet 
gelme 
done 

Au 
morn 
filled 
in ble 
of th 
wher 
Wate 


42° 2 


Inde} 
unmi 


71 [ 174 ] 


We reached our deposite of provisions at nightfall. Here was not the 
inn which awaits the tired traveller on his return from Mont Blanc, or the 
orange groves of South America, with their refreshing juices and soft fra- 
grant air; but we found owr little cache of dried meat and coffee undis- 
turbed. Though the moon was bright, the road was full of precipices, and 
the fatigue of the day had been great. We therefore abandoned the idea 
of rejoining our friends, and lay down on the rock, and, in spite of the 
cold, slept soundly. 

August 16.—We left our encampment with the daylight. We saw on 
our way large flocks of the mountain goat looking down on us from the 
cliffs. At the crack of a rifle, they would bound off among the rocks, and 
in a few minntes make their appearance on some lofty peak, some hundred 
or a th@sand feet above. It is needless to attempt any further description 
of the country; the portion over which we travelled this morning was 
rough as imagination could picture it, and to us seemed equally beautiful. 
A concourse of lakes and rushing waters, mountains of rocks naked and 
destitute of vegetable earth, dells and ravines of the most exquisite beauty, 
all kept green and fresh by the great moisture in the air, and sown with 
brilliant flowers, and every where thrown around all the glory of most mag- 
nificent scenes: these constitute the features of the place, and impress them- 
selves vividly on the mind of the traveller. It was not until 11 o’clock that 
we reached the place where our animals had been left, when we first at- 
tempted the mountains on foot. Near one of the still burning fires we 
found a piece of meat, which our friends had thrown away, and which 
furnished us a mouthful—a very scanty breakfast. We continued directly 
on, and reached our camp on the mountain lake at dusk. We found all 
well. Nothing had occurred to interrupt the quiet since our departure, 
and the fine grass and good codl water had done much to re-establish 
our animals. All heard with great delight the order to turn our faces 
homeward; and toward sundown of the 17th, we encamped again at the 
Two Buttes. 

In the course of this afternoon’s march, the barometer was broken past 
remedy. I regretted it, as I was desirous to compare it again with Dr. En- 
gelman’s barometers at St. Louis,to which mine were referred ; but it had 
done its part well, and my objects were mainly fulfilled. 

August 19.—We left our camp on Little Sandy river about 7 in the 
morning, and traversed the same sandy, undulating country. The air was 
filled with the turpentine scent of the various artemisias, which are now 
in bloom, and, numerous as they are, give much gayety to the landscape 
of the plains. At 10 o’clock, we stood exactly on the divide in the pass, 
where the wagon road crosses, and, descending immediately upon the Sweet 
Water, halted to take a meridian observation of the sun. The latitude was 
42° 24' 32". 

In the course of the afternoon we saw buffalo again, and at our evening 
halt on the Sweet Water the roasted ribs again made their appearance 
around the fires ; and, with them, good humor, and laughter, and song, were 
restored to t’e camp. Our coffee had been expended, but we now made a 
kind o; tea from the roots of the wild cherry tice. 

‘August 23.—Yesterday evening we reached our encampment at Rock 
Independence, where I took some: astronomical observations. Here, not 
unmindful of the custom of early travellers and explorers in our country, 


I INSEE BOD LG PPE LTO A 


f 174 J 72 


I engravedwon this rock of the Far West a symbol of the Christian faith, 
Among the thickly inscribed names, 1 made on the hard granite the im- 
pression of a large cross, whicl: [covered with a black preparation of India 
rubber, well calculated to resist the influence of wind and rain. It stands 
amidst the names of many who have long since found their way to the 
grave, and for whom the huge rock is a giant gravestone. 

One George Weymouth was sent out to Maine by the Earl of South- 
ampton, Lord Arundel, and others ; and in the narrative of their discoveries, 
he says: “The next day, we ascended in our pinnace that part of the 
river which lies more to the westward, carrying with us a cross—a thing 
never omitted by any Christian traveller—which we erected at the ultimate 
end of our route.’’ This was in the year 1605; and in 1842 I obeyed the 
feeling of early travellers, and left the impression of the cross deéply en- 
graved on the vast rock one thousand miles beyond the Mississippi, 
to which discoverers have given the national name of Rock Independence. 

In obedience to my instructions to survey the river Platte, if possible, I 
had determined to make an attempt at this place. The India-rubber boat 
was filled with air, placed in the water, and loaded with what was neces- 
sary for our operations; and I embarked with Mr. Preuss and a party of 
men. When we had dragged our boat for a mile or two over the sands, I 
abandoned the impossible undertaking, and waited for the arrival of the 
party, when we packed up our boat and equipage, and at % o’elock were 
again moving along on our land journey. We continued alomg the valley 
on the right bank of the Sweet Water, where the formation, as already de- 
scribed, consists of a grayish micaceous sandstone, and fine-grained con- 
glomerate, and marl. We passed over a ridge which borders or constitutes 
the river hills of the Platte, consisting of huge blocks, sixty or eighty feet 
cube, of decomposing granite. The cement which united them was proba- 
bly of easier decomposition, and has disappeared and left them isolate, and 
separated by sinall spaces. Numerous horns of the mountain goat were 
lying among the rocks ; and in the ravines were cedars, whose trunks were 
of extraordinary size. From this ridge we descended to a small open plain 
at the mouth of the Sweet Water, which rushed with a rapid current into 
the Platte, here flowing along in a broad, tranquil, and apparently deep 
stream, which seemed, from its turbid appearance, to be considerably 
swollen. I obtained here some astronomical observations, and the after- 
noon was spent in getting our boat ready for navigation the next day. 

August 24.—We started before sunrise, intending to breakfast at Goat 
island. I had directed the land party, in charge of Bernier, to proceed to 
this place, where they were to remain, should they find no note to apprize 
them of our having passed. In the event of receiving this information, 
they were to continue their route, passing by certain places which had been 
designated. Mr. Preuss accompanied me, and with us were five of my 
best men, viz: C. Lambert, Basil Lajeunesse, Honoré Ayot, Benoist, and 
Descoteaux. Here appeared no scarcity of water, and we took on board, 
with various instruments and baggage, provisions for ten or twelve days. 
We paddled down the river rapidly, for our little craft was light as a duck 
on the water; and the sun had been some time risen, when we heard before 
us a hollow roar, which we supposed to be that of a fall, of which we had 
heard a vague rumor, int whose exact locality no one had been able to de- 
scribe tc us. We were approaching a ridge, through which the river passes 


Sig aS Maine DOTTIE ALG ip 


grea 
pass 
teen 
self, 
valt 
liev 
this 
hav 
ridg 
first 
will 
obli 
the 
had 
rive 
rais 
in a 
the 
mat 
her 
to | 

I 
feet 
our 
80 ¢ 


an faith, 
» the im- 
of India 
It stands 
y to the 


f South. 
coveries, 
rt of the 
— thing 
ultimate 
eyed the 
ly en- 
ssissippi, 
endence. 
yssible, I 
ber boat 
AS Weces- 
party of 
sands, I 
al of the 
mek were 
ie valley 
eady de- 
ined con- 
stitutes 
ghty feet 
ts proba- 
late, and 
dat were 
iks were 
en plain 
rent into 
tly deep 
iderably 
he after- 
hay. 
at Goat 
bceed to 
apprize 
rmation, 
ad been 
e of my 
bist, and 
nh board, 
e days. 
a duck 
id before 
we had 
le to de- 
r passes 


te iP cal ekg RTE AA is: 


esi ee EAS ee om 


73 [ 174 ] 


by a place called * canon,” (pronounced kanyon,) a Spanish word, signify- 
ing a piece of artillery, the barrel of a gun, or any kind of tube; and 
which, in this country, has been adopted to describe the passage ofa river 
between perpendicular rocks of great height, which frequently approach 
each other so closely overhead as to form a kind of tunnel over the stream, 
which foams along below, half choked up by fallen fragments. Between 
the mouth of the Sweet Water and Goat island, there is probably a fall of 
300 feet, and that was principally made in the cafions before us; as, with- 
out them, the water was comparatively smooth. As we neared the ridge, 
the river made a sudden turn, and swept squarely down against one of the 
wails of the cafion with a great velocity, and so steep a descent, that it had, 
to the aye the appearawee of an inclined plane. When we launched into 
this, (®men jumped overboard, to check the velocity of the boat, but were 
soon in water up to their necks, and our boat ran on; but we succeeded in 
bringing her to a smal! poimt of rocks on the right, at the mouth of the 
cafiun. Ilere was a kivd of elevated sand beach, not many yards square, 
backed by the rocks, and around the point the river swept at a right angle. 
Trunks of trees deposited on jutting points 20 gr 30 feet above, and other 
marks, showed that the water here frequently rose to a considerable height. 
The ridge was of the same decomposing granite already mentioned, and 
the water had worked the surface, in many places, into a wavy surface of 
ridges and holes. We ascended the rocks to reconnoitre the ground, and 
from the summit the passage appeared to be a continued cataract foaming 
over many obstructions, and broken by a number of small falls. We saw 
nowhere a fall answering to that which had been described to us as having 
20 or 25 feet; but still concluded this to be the place in question, as, in the 
season of floods, the rush of the river against the wall would produce a 
great rise, and the waters, reflected squarely off, would descend through the 
passage in a sheet of foam, having every appearance of a large fall. Eigh- 
teen years previous to this time,as I have subsequently Jearned from him- 
self, Mr. Fitzpatrick, somewhere above on this river, had embarked with a 
valuable cargo of beaver. Unacquainted with the stream, which he he- 
lieved would conduct him safely to the Missouri, he came unexpectedly into 
this cafion, where he was wrecked, with the total loss of his furs. It would 
have been a work of great time and labor to pack our baggage across the 
ridge, and I determined to run the cafion. We all again embarked, and at 
first attempted to check the way of the boat ; but the water swept through 
with so much violence that we narrowly escaped being swamped, and were 
obliged to let her go in the full force of the current, and trust to the skill of 
the boatmen. The dangerous places in this cafion were where huge rocks 
had fallen from above, and hemmed in the already narrow pass of the 
river to an open space of three or four and five feet. These obstructions 
raised the water considerably above, which was sometimes precipitated over 
in a fall; and at other places, where this dam was too high, rushed through 
the contracted opening with tremendous violence. Had our boat been 
made of wood, in passing the narrows she would have been staved; but 
her elasticity preserved her unhurt from every shock, and she seemed fairly 
to leap over the falls. 

In this way we passed three cataracts in succession, where, perhaps 100 
feet of smooth water intervened ; and, finally, with a shout of pleasure at 
our success, issued from our tunnel into the open day beyond. We were 
so delighted with the performance of our boat, and so confident in her 


I 


Ee 


Se te Ri a OE 


aE SR ENTE Wer gn te 


_ 


Ns ee omen 


2 DL CN NITE SE 


c 174) 74 


owers, that we would not have hesitated to leap a fall of ten feet with her. 

é put to shore for breakfast at some willows on the right bank, immedi- 
ately below the mouth of the cafion; for it was now 8 o’clock, and we had 
been working since daylight, and were all wet, fatigued, and hungry. 
While the men were preparing breakfast, | went out to reconnoitre, The 
view was very limited. The course of the river was smooth, so far as I 
could see; on both sides were broken hills; and but a mile or two below 
was another high ridge. The rock at the mouth of the caiion was still the 
decomposing granite, with great quantities of mica, which made a very 
glittering sand. 

We re-embarked at 9 o’clock, and in about twenty minutes reached the 
iext cafion., Landing on a rocky shore at its commencement, we agcended 
the ridge to reconnoitre. Portage was out of the question. So , we 
could see, the jagged rocks pointed out the course of the cafion, on a wind- 
“ng line of seven or eight miles. It was simply a narrow, dark chasm in 
the eck 3 and here the perpendicular faces were much higher than in the 
previous pass, being at this end two to three hundred, and further down, as 
we afterwards ascertained, five hundred feet in vertical height. Our pre- 
vious success had made us bold, and we determined again to run the caifion, 
Every thing was secured as firmly as possible; and having divested. our- 
selves of the greater part of our clothing, we pushed into the stream. ‘To 
save our chronometer from accident, Mr. Preuss took it, and attempted to 
proceed along the shore on the masses of rock, whieh in places were piled 
up on either side; but,after he had walked about five minutes, every thing 
like shore disappeared, and the vertical wall came squarely down into the 
water. He therefore waited until we came up. An ugly pass lay before us. 
We had made fast to the stern of the boat a strong rope about fifty feet long; 
and three of the men clambered along among the roeks, and with this rope 
let her down slowly through the pass. In several places high rocks lay seat- 
tered about in the channel; and in the narrows it required all our strength 
and skill] to avoid staving the boat onthe sharp points. In oneof these, the 
boat proved a little too broad, and stuck fast for an instant, while the water 
flew over us; fortunately, it was but for an instant, as our united strength 
forced her immediately through. The water swept overboard only a sextant 
and a pair of saddlebags. I caught the sextant as it passed by me; but the 
saddlebags became the prey of the whirlpools. We reached the place where 
Mr. Preuss was standing, took him on board, and, with the aid of the boat, 
put the men with the rope on the succeeding pile of rocks. We found this 
passage much worse than the previous one,and our position was rather a bad 
one. To go back, was impossible ; before us, the cataract was a sheet of 
foam ; and shut up in the chasm by the rocks, which, in some places, seemed 
almost to meet overhead, the roar of the water was deafening. We pushed 
off again ; but, after making a little distance, the force of the current became 
too great for the men on shore, and two of them let go the rope. Lajeunesse, 
the third man, hung on, and was jerked headforemost into the river from a 
roek about twelve feet high ; and down the boat shot like an arrow, Basil 
following us in the rapid current, and exerting a!! his strength to keep in 
mid channel—his head only seen occasionally like a black spot in the white 
foam. How far we went, I do not exactly know ; but we succeeded in turn- 
ing the boat into an eddy below. “’Cré Dieu,’ said Basi. Lajeunesse, as 
he arrived immediately after us, “Je crois bien cuej’ai nagé un demi mile.”’ 
He liad owed his life to his skill as a swimmer, and I determined to take 


. 


_ paddl 


hima 
other 


again 
shot p 
We be 
ing to 
boat 
believ 
immed 
Three 
and s 
that I 
and I 
Mr. P 
below 
On the 
was in 
and w 
“lach 
mouret 
genero 
ered Ww 
of cloth 
instrur 
circle, 
a mom 
record 
ometri 
indulge 
thing fi 
signs, ( 
operati 
was m 
withdr 
Mr. Pr 
with a 
the car 
difficul 
contin 
procee 
Her 
rocks | 
feet ab 
ter fou 
been r¢ 
the not 
seatter 
Siu, an 
journa’ 
tions WwW 
notes, ° 


vith her. 
immedi- 
we had 
hungry. 
e. The 
far as | 
o below 
still the 
a very 


hed the 

ended 
é:: we 
a wind- 
hasm in 
nm in the 
lown, as 
Jur pre- 
e cafion, 
led. our- 
m. ‘To 
apted to 
re piled 
ry thing 
into the 
efore us. 
et long; 
Ms rope 
ay scat- 
trength 
ese, the 
é water 
ptrength 
sextant 
but the 
bp where 
he boat, 
and this 
bra bad 
heet of 
seemed 
pushed 
became 
lunesse, 
from a 
» Basil 
eep in 
} white 
Nn turn- 
sse, as 
mile.’’ 
o take 


a a 


25 (174 ] 


him and the two others on board, and trust to skill and fortune to reach the 
other end in safety. We placed ourselves on our knees, with the short 


_ paddles in our hands, the most skilful boatman being at the bow; and 


again we commenced our rapid descent. We cleared rock after rock, and 
shot past fall after fall, our little boat seeming to play with the cataract. 
We became flushed with success, and familiar with the danger; and, yield- 
ing to the excitement of the occasion, broke forth together into a Canadian 
boat song. Singing, or rather shouting, we dashed along; and were, I 
believe, in the midst of the chorus, wheu the boat struck a concealed rock 
immediately at the foot ofa fall, which whirled her over in an instant. 
Three of my men could not swim, and my first feeling was to assist them, 
and save some of our effects; but a sharp concussion or two convinced me 
that I had not yet saved myself. A few strokes brought me into an eddy, 
and I landed on a pile of rocks on the left side. Looking around, saw that 
Mr. Preuss had gained the shore on the same side, about twenty yards 
below ; and a little climbing and swimming soon brought him to my side, 
On the opposite side, against the wall, lay the boat bottom up; and Lambert 
was in the aet of saving Descoteaux, whom he had grasped by the hair, 
and who could not swim ; “ Lache pas,” said he, as I afterward learned, 
“ache pas, cher frore..”? “ Crains pas,’ was the reply, Je m’en vais 
mourir avant que de te livher.”? Such was the reply of courage and 
generosity inthisdanger For ahundred yards below, the current was cov- 
ered with floating books and boxes, bales of blankets, and scattered articles 
of clothing; and so strong and boiling was the stream, that even our heavy 
instruments, which were all in cases, kept on the surface, and the sextant, 
circle, and the long black box of the telescope, were in view at once. For 
a moment, I felt somewhat disheartened. All our books—almost every 
record of the jouwrney—our journals and registers of astronomical and bar- 
ometrical observatious—had been lostina moment. But it was no time to 
indulge in regrets; and I immediately set about endeavoring to save some- 
thing from the wreck, Making ourselves understood as well as possible by 
signs, (for nothing could be heard in the roar of waters,) we commenced our 
operations. Of every thing on board, the only article that had been saved 
was my double barrelled gun, which Descoteaux had caught, and clung to 
withdrowning tenacity. The men continued down the river on the left bank. 
Mr. Preuss and myself descended on the side we were on; and Lajeunesse, 
with a paddle in his hand, jumped on the boat alone, and continued down 
the cafon. She was now light, and cleared every bad place with much less 
difficulty. In ashort time, he was joined by Lambert ; and the search was 
continued for about a mile and a half, which was as far as the boat could 
proceed in the pass. 

Here the walls were about five hundred feet high, and the fragments of 
rocks from above had choked the riverinto a hollow pass, but one or two 
feet above the surface. Through this and the interstices of the rock, the wa- 
ter found its way. Favored beyond our expectations, all of our registers had 
been recovered, with the exception of one of my journals, which contained 
the notes and incidents of travel, and topographical descriptions, a number of 
seattered astronomical observations, principally meridian altitudes of the 
sitn, and our barometrical register west of Laramie. Fortunately, our other 
journals contained duplicates of the most important barometrical obszrva- 
tions which had been taken in the mountains. These, with a few scattered 
notes, were all that had been preserved of our meteorological observations. 


[ 174} 76 


In addition to these, we saved the circle; and these, with a few blankets, 
constituted every thing that had been rescued from the waters, 

The day was running rapidly away, and it was necessary to reach Goat 
island, whither the party had preceded us, before night. ‘In this uncertain 
country, the traveller is so much in the power of chance, that we became 
somewhat uneasy in regard to them. Should any thing have occurred, in 
the brief interval of our separation, to prevent our rejoining them, our situ- 
ation would be rather a desperate one. We had nota morsel of provisions— 
our arms and ammunition were gone—and we were entirely at the merey 
of any straggling party of savages, and not a little in danger of starvation, 
We therefore set out at once in two parties, Mr, Preuss and myself on the 
left, and the men on the opposite side of the river, Climbing out of the 
cafion, we found ourselves in a very broken country, Where we were not 
yet able to recognise any locality. In the course of our descent through 
the cafion, the rock, which at the upper end was of the decomposing granite, 
changed into a varied sandstone formation. ‘The hills and points of the 
ridges-were covered with fragments of a yellow sandstone, of which the 
strata were sometimes displayed in the broken ravines which interrupted 
our course, und made our walk extremely fatiguing. At one point of the 
cafion the red argillaceous sandstone rose in a wall of five hundred feet, 
surmounted by a stratum of white sandstone; and in an opposite ravine a 
column of red sandstone rose, in form like a steeple, about one hundred and 
fifty feethigh. ‘The scenery was extremely picturesque, and,notwithstand- 
ing our forlorn condition, we were frequently obliged to stop and admire it. 
Our progress was not very rapid. We had emerged from the water half 
naked, and, on arriving at the top of the precipice, [ found myself with only 
one moccasin. The fragments of rock made walking painful, and I was fre- 
quently obliged to stop and pull out the thorns of the evedus, here the pre- 
vailing plant, and with which a few minutes’ walk covered the bottom of 
my feet. From this ridge the river emerged into a smiling prairie, and, de- 
scending to the bank for water, we were joined by Benoist. The rest of 
the party were out of sight, having taken a more inland route. We crossed 
the river repeatedly—sometimes able to ford it, and sometimes swimming— 
climbed over the ridges of two more cafions, and towards evening reached 
the cut, which we here named the Hot Spring gate. On our previous visit 
in July, we had not entered this pass, reserving it for our descunt in the 
boat; and when we entered it this evening, Mr. Preuss was a few hundred 
feet in advance. Heated with the long march, he came suddenly upon a 
fine bold spring gushing from the rock, about ten feet above the river. 
Eager to enjoy the crystal water, he threw himself down for a hasty draught, 
and took a mouthful of water almost boiling hot. He said nothing to Be- 
noist, who laid himself down to drink ; but the steam from the water arrest- 
ed his eagerness, and he escaped the hot draught. We had no thermometer 
to ascertain the temperature, but [ could hold my hand in the water just long 
enough to count two seconds. There are eight or ten of these springs, dis- 
charging themselves by streams large enough to be called runs. A loud hol- 
low noise was heard from the rock, which I supposed to’be produced by the 
fall of the water. The strata immediately where they issue isa fine white and 
calcareous sandstone, covered with an incrustation of common salt. Leav- 
ing this Thermopyle of the west, in a short walk we reached the red ridge 
which has been described as lying just above GoatIsland. Ascending this, 
we found some fresh tracks anu a button, which showed that the other men 


oe NES a 


Sad tne 


| 
' 


had a 
the ri 
on th 
buffa 


subse4 
reach 
terred 
way ¢ 
night 

Au, 
ner o1 
as if { 
face, 
The J 
bars. 
sence 
The f 
Indiat 
amon 
piece, 
the jo 
seeme 

On- 
at the 
Was g) 
brillia: 
charac 
or six 
provir 
astron 

We 
Sioux 
in the 
sands, 
the se. 
amon 
We c! 
and, \ 
bluffs 
our w 
quent 
way t 
river, 
ber, o 
Our c 


blankets, 


‘each Goat 
suncertain 
‘o became 
scurred, in 
1, Our situ. 
ovisions—— 
the merey 
starvation, 
‘self on the 
out of the 
were not 
it through 
ng granite, 
ints of the 
which the 
juterrupted 
oint of the 
ndred feet, 
te ravine a 
undred and 
withstand- 
Ladmire it. 
water half 
f with only 
dl was fre- 
‘re the pre- 
bottom of 
ie, and, de- 
he rest of 
Ve crossed 
imming— 
ng reached 
svious Visit 
vent in the 
w hundred 
ly upon a 
the river. 
ty draught, 
1ing to Be- 
ater arrest- 
ermometer 
r just long 
rings, dis- 
A loud hol- 
iced by the 
white and 
alt. Leav- 
e red ridge 
nding this, 
other men 


Oo an a mean tama Sa 


er ASE RE aOR eC Rm 


27 [ 174 ] 


had already arrived, A shout from the man who first reached the top of 
the ridge, responded to from below, informed us that our friends were all 
on the island; and we were soon among them. We found some pieces of 
buffalo standing around the fire for us, and managed to get some dry clothes 
among the people, A sudden storm of rain drove us into the best shelter 
we could find, where we slept soundly, after one of the most fatiguing 
days I have ever experienesd 

August 25.—Karly this morning Lajeunesse was sent to the wreck for 
the articles which had been saved, and about noon we left the island, The 
mare which we had left here in July had much improved in condition, and 
she served us well again for some time, but was finally abandoned at a 
subsequent part of the journey. At 10 in the morning of the 26th we 
reached Cache camp, where we found every thing undisturbed. We disin- 
terred our deposite, arranged our carts which had been left here on the 
way out, aud, travelling a few miles in the afternoon, encamped for the 
night at the ford of the Platte. 

August 27,—At midday we halted at the place where we had taken din- 
ner on the 27th of July. The country which, when we passed up, looked 
as if the hard winter frosts had passed over it, had now assumed a new 
face, so much of vernal freshness had been given to it by the late rains. 
The Platte was exceedingly low—a mere line of water among the sand- 
bars. We reached Laramie fort on the last day of August, after an ab- 
sence of forty-two days, and had the pleasure to find our friends all well. 
The fortieth day had been fixed for our return; and the quick eyes of the 
Indians, who were on the lookout for us, discovered our flag as we wound 
among the hills. The fort saluted us with repeated discharges of its single 
piece, which we returned with scattered volleys of our small arms, and felt 
the joy of a home reception in getting back to this remote station, which 
seemed so far off as we went out. 

On the morning of the 3d of September we bade adieu to our kind friends 
at the fort, and continued our homeward journey down the Platte, which 
was glorious with the autumnal splendor of innumerable flowers in full and 
brilliant bloom. On the warm sands, among the hAelianthi, one of the 
characteristic plants, we saw great numbers of rattlesnakes, of which five 
or six were killed in the morning’s ride. We occupied ourselves in im- 
proving our previous survey cf the river; and, as the weather was fine, 
astronomical observations were generally made at night and at noon, 

We halted for a short time on the afternoon of the 5th with a village of 
Sioux Indiats, some of whose chiefs we had met at Laramie. The water 
in the Platte was extremely low; in many places, the large expanse of 
sands, with some occasional stunted trees on the banks, gave it the air of 
the seacoast ;‘ the bed of the river being merely a succession of sandbars, 
among which the channel was divided into rivulets a few inches deep, 
We crossed and recrossed with our carts repeatedly and at our pleasure ; 
and, whenever an obstruction barred our way, in the shape of precipitous 
bluffs that came down upon the river, we turned directly into it, and made 
our way along the sandy bed, with no other inconvenience than the fre- 
quent quicksands, which greatly fatigued our animals. Disinterring on the 
way the cache which had been made by our party when they ascended the 
river, we reached without accident, on the evening of the 12th of Septem- 
ber, our old encampment of the 2d of July, at the junction of the forks, 
Our cache of the barrel of pork was found undisturbed, and proved a sca~ 


[ 174] 78 


sonable addition to qur stock of provisions. At this place [ had determined 
to make another attempt to descend the Piatte by water, and accordingly 
spent two days in the construction of a bull boat, Men were sent out on 
the evening of our arrival, the necessary number of bulls killed, and their 
skins brought to the camp. Four of the best of them were strongly sewed 
together with buffalo sinew, and stretched over a basket frame of willow 
The seams were then covered with ashes aud tallow, and the boa! left ex. 
posed to the sun for the greater part of one day, which was sufleient to 
dry and contract the skin, and muke the whole work solid and strong. It 
had a rounded bow, was eight feet jong and five broad, and drew with 
four men about four inches water. On the morning of the | 5th we em- 
barked in our hide boat, Mr. Preuss and myself, with two men, We 
dragged her over the sands for three or four miles, and thon left her on a 
bar, and abandoned entirely all further attempts to navigate this river, The 
names given by the Indians are always remarkably appropriate ; and cer- 
tainly: none was ever more so than that which they have given to this 
stream—“ the Nebraska, or Shallow river.”? Walking steadily the remain- 
der of the day, a little before dark we overtook our people ar their even- 
ing cainp, about twenty-one miles below the junetion, ‘The next morning 
we crossed the Platte, and continued our way down the river bottom on 
the left bank, where we found an excellent plainly beaten road, 

On the i8th we reached Grand island, which is fifty-two miles long, with 
an average breadth of one mile and three-quarters, It has on it some small 
eminences, and is sufficiently elevated to be secure from the annual floods 
of the river. As has been already remarked, it is well timbered, with an 
excellent soil, and recommends itself to notice as the best point for a mili- 
tary position on the Lower Platte. 

On the 22d we arrived at the village of the Grand Pawnees, on the right 
bank of the river, about thirty miles above the mouth of the Loup fork. 
They were gathering in their corn, and we obtained from them a very we! 
come supply of vegetables, 

The morning of the 24th we reached the Loup fork of the Platte, At 
the place where we forded it, this stream was four hundred and thirty 
yards broad, with a swift current of clear water ; in this respect, differing 
from the Platte, which has a yellow muddy color, derived from the lime- 
stone and marl formation, of which we have previously spoken. The ford 
was diflicult, as the water was so deep that it came into the body of the 
carts, and we reached the opposite bank after repeated attempts, ascending 
and descending the bed of the river in order to avail ourselves of the bars. 
We encamped on the left bank of the fork, in the point of land at its junc- 
tion with the Platte. During the two days that we remained here for 
astronomical observations, the bad weather permitted us to obtain but one 
good observation for the latitude—a meridian altitude of the sun, which 
gave for the latitude of the mouth of the Loup fork, 41° 22' 11", 

Five or six days previously, I had sent forward C. Lambert, with two men, 
to Bellevue, with directions to ask from Mr. P. Sarpy the gentleman iu charge 
ofthe American Company’s establishment at that piace, the aid of his carpen- 
ters in constructing a boat, in which I proposed to descend the Missouri. On 
the afternoon of the 27th we met one of the men, who had been despatched 
by Mr. Sarpy with a welcome supply of provisions and a very kind note, 


‘which gave us the very gratifying intelligence that our boat was in rapid 


progress, On the evening of the 30th we encamped in an almost impene- 


eer Seas 


A Se 


trabl 


with 
the 
the fl 
exce] 
18 oc 
of UV 
ciden 
ing ft 
whie 

Oc 
feelin 
posit 
resid 
the p 
boat ¢ 
terho 
horse 
tion 3 
with | 
the m 
tions. 
the t 
above 
veyin 
ularly 
opera 
Louis 
sults, 
St. Li 
city b 
of W 

Ve 


Jetermined 
ceordingly 
vent out on 
|, and their 
igly sewed 
of willow 
oat aft OX-« 
wiieent to 
strong, It 
dvew with 
ith we em- 
men, We 
it her ona 
river. The 
e; and cer- 
ren to this 
he remain- 
their even- 
xt morning 
bottom on 


long, with 
some small 
nual floods 
sd, with an 
for a mili- 


n the right 
Loup fork. 
\ very we! 


latte, At 
und thirty 
t, differing 
1 the lime- 

The ford 
ody of the 
ascending 
f the bars. 
at its junc- 

here for 
in but one 
un, which 
1 twomen, 
1 iu charge 
1is carpen- 
ssouri. On 
espatched 
kind note, 
s in rapid 
t impene- 


a ce 


UT 


79 f 174 J 


trable undergrowth on the left bank of the Platte, in the point of jand at its 
confluence with the Missouri—three hundred and fifteen miles, aecordin 
to our reekowing, from the junction of the forks, and five hundred an 
twenty fron, Fort Laramie. 

From the junction we hod found the bed of the Platte occupied with nu- 
merous isiands, many of them very large, and all well timbered ; possess- 
ing, as well as the bottom lauds of the river, a very excellent soil, With 
the exception of some scattered groves on the banks, the bottoms are gen- 
erally without timber, A portion of these consist of low grounds, covered 
with a profusion of fine grasses, and are probably inundated in the springs 
the remaining part is high river prairie, entirely beyond the intluence of 
the floods, The breadth of the river is usually three-quarters of a mile, 
except where itis enlarge: by islands. That portion of its course which 
is occupied by Grand island has an average breadth, from shore to shore, 
of two and a half miles, The breadth of the valley, with the various ac- 
cidents of ground—sprities, mber, aud whatever I have thorght interest- 
ing fo travellers and settlers—-you will find indicated on the larger map 
which accompanies this report. 

October \.—1 rose this moruing long before daylight, and heard witha 
feeling of pleasure the tinkliug of cow bells at the settlements on the op- 
posite side of the Missouri, Early in the day we reached Mr, Sarpy’s 
residence ; and, in the security aud comtort of his hospitable mausion, felt 
the pleasure of being again within the pale of civilization, We found our 
boat on the stocks ; a few days sutliced to complete her; and. in the af- 
ternoon of the 4th, we embarked on the Missouri. All our equipage— 
horses, carts, aud the maderied of (he ceamp—had been sold at hublic auc- 
tion at Bellevue. ‘The strength of my party enabled me to man the boat 
with ten oars, relieved every hour; and we descended rapidly. Early on 
the morning of the LOth, we halted to make some astronomica! observa. 
tions at the mouth of the Kaisas, exactly four months since we had left 
the trading postof Mr. Cyprian Chouteau, on the sane river, ten miles 
above, On our desceut to this place, we bad employed ourselves in sur- 
veying and sketching the Missouri, making astronomical observations reg- 
ularly at night and at midday, whenever the weather permitted. ‘These 
operations on the river were continued until our arrival at the city of St. 
Louis, Missouri, on the 17th; and will be found imbodied with other re- 
suits, on the map and in the appendices which accompany this report. At 
St. Louis, the sale of our remaining effects was made; and, leaving that 
city by steamboat on the 18th, I had the honor to report to you at the city 
of Washington on the 29th of October. 

Very respectfully, sir, your obedient servant, 

J. C. FREMONT, 
2d Lieut. Corns of Topographical Engineers. 


. | 


j 


CATALOGUE OF PLANTS 
BY LIEUTENANT FREMONT. 
EXPEDITION 'TO THE ROCKY MOUNTAINS. 


BY JOHN TORREY. 


press 
large 
Fré 
the K 
1) conti 
over 
thoug 
depos 
on re 
sandy 
was t 

Cr 
two | 
mout! 
is ric! 
aster: 
speci 


eerie Tt 


ago i 
f Mr. ¢ 
figure 
way 
to La 
The 
abun 
coun 
(sun 
fork, 
latter 
and 1 
Frén 
Abo 
with 
baste 


PREFACE. 


* The collection of plants submitted to me for examination, though made under unfavorable 
circumstances, is a very interesting contribution to North American botany. From the mouth of 
the Kansas river to the ** Red Buttes,” on the North fork of the Platte, the transportation was 
effected in carts ; but from that place to and from the mountains, the explorations were made on 
horseback, and by such rapid movements, (which were necessary, in order to accomplish the objects 
of the expedition, ) that but little opportunity was afforded for collecting and drying botanical speci- 
mens. Besides, the party was in a savage and inhospitable country, sometimes annoyed by Indians, 
and frequently in great distress from want of provisions ; from which circumstances, and the many 
pressing duties that constantly engaged the attention of the commander, he was not able to make so 
large a collection as he desired. ‘To give some general idea of the country explored by Lieutenant 
Frémont, I recapitulate, from his report, a brief sketch of hisreute. ‘The expedition left the mouth of 
the Kansas on the 10th of June, 1842, and, proceeding up that river about one hundred miles, then 
continued its course generally along the ‘* bottoms” of the Kansas tributaries, but sometimes passing 
over the upper prairies, The soil of the river bottoms is always rich, and generally well timbered ; 
though the whole region is what is called a prairie country. ‘The upper prairies are an immense 
deposite of sand and gravel, covered with a good, and, very generally, a rich roil. Along the road, 
on reaching the little stream called Sandy creek, (a tributary of the Kansas, ) the soil became more 
sandy. ‘The rock formations of this region are limestone and sandstone. ‘The amorpha canescens 
was the characteristic plant; it being in many places as abundant as the grass. 

Crossing over from the waters of the Kansas, Lieutenant Fremont arrived at the Great Platte, 
two hundred and ten miles from its junction with the Missouri. The valley of this river, from its 
mouth to the great forks, is about four miles broad, and three hundred and fifteen miles long. It 
is rich, well timbered, and covered with luxuriant grasses. The purple /iatris scariosa, and several 
asters, were here conspicuous features of the vegetation. I was pleased to recognise, among the 
specimens collected near the forks, the fine large-flowered asclepias, that I described many years 
ago in my account of James’s Rocky Mountain Plants, under the name of A. speciosa, and which 
Mr. Geyer also found in Nicollet’s expedition. It seems to be the plant subsequently described and 
figured by Sir W. Hooker, under the name of A. Douglasii. On the Lower Platte, and all the 
way to the Sweet Water, the showy cleome integrifilia occurred in abundance. From the Forks 
to Laramie river, a distance of about two hundred miles, the country may be called a sandy one. 
The valley of the North fork is without timber ; but the grasses are fine, and the herbaceous plants 
abundant. On the return of the expedition in September, Lieutenant Frémont says the whole 
country resembled a vast garden ; but the prevailing plants were two or three species of helianthus, 
(sunflower.) Between the main forks of the Platte, from the junction, us high up as Laramie’s 
fork, the formation consisted of marl, a soft earthy limestone, and a granite sandstone. At the 
latter place, that singular leguminous plant, the kentrophyta montana of Nuttall was first seen, 
and then occurred at intervals to the Sweet Water river. Following up the North fork, Lieutenant 
Frémont arrived at the mouth of the Sweet Water river, one of the head waters of the Platte. 
Above Laramie’s fork to'this place, the soil is generally sandy. ‘The rocks consist of limestone, 
with a variety of sandstones, (yellow, gray, and red argillaceous,) with compact gypsum or ala- 
baster, and fine conglomerates. 


[ 174 ] 84 


The route along the North fork of the Platte allorded some of the best plants in the collection, 
The scence‘o rapifolia, Nutt., occurred in many places, quite to the Sweet Water ; lippia (zapania) 
cuncifolia (‘Torr. in James's plants, ouly known before trom Dr, James's collection ;) eereocarpus 
parvifolius, Nutt. ; eriogonum parvifolium, andemspilosun, Nutt. ; shepherdia argentea, Nutt., 
and geranium Mremontii, a now species, (near the Red Buttes,) were found in this part of the 
journey. In saline soils, on the Upper Platte, near the mouth of the Sweet Water, were collected 
several interesting Curxorovtacey, one of which was first diseovered by Dr. James, in Long’s 


expedition ; and although it was considered as a new genus, I did not deseribe it, owing to the want 
of the ripe fruit. It is the plant doubtfully referred by Hooker, in his Flora Boreali Amevicana, 
to Batis. He had seen the male flowers only. As it is certainly a new genus, T have dedicated it 
to the excellent commander of the expedition, as a well merited compliment tor the services he has 
rendered North American botany. 

The Sweet Water valley is a sandy plain, about one hundred and twenty miles jong, and gene 
erally about five miles broad ; bounded by ranges of granitic mountains, between which the valley 
formation consists, near the Devil’s gate, of a grayish micaceous sandstone, with marl and white 
clay. At the encampment of August 5th-6th, there occurred a fine white argillaccous sandstone, 
a coarse sandstone or pudding-stoue, and a white calcareous standstone, A few miles to the west 
of that position, Lieutenant Frémont reached a point where the sandstone rested immediately upon 
the granite, which, thenceforward, along his line of route, alternated with a compact mica slate. 

Along the Sweet Water, many interesting plants were collected, as may be seen by an examina- 
tion of the catalogue ; I would, however, mention the curious @nothera Nultallii, Tory. and'Gr. ; 
eurotia lanata, Moeq. 5 (Diotis tanata, Pursh ,) which seems to be distinct from Z2. ceraloides ; 
thermopsis montana, Nutt. ; gilia pulchedlt, Dougl.; cenecio tpartivides, Torr. and Gr., a new 
species ; and four or tive species of wild currants, (vibes rriguum, Dougl.,) &c. Near the mouth 
of the Sweet Water was found the pluntago eri: phora, Torr, a species first deseribed in my Dr. 
James's Rocky Mountain Plants. On the upper part, and near the dividing ridge, were collected 
several species of custilleja; pentsiemon micrantha, Nutt. ; several gentians ; the pretty little 
androsace occidentalis, Nutt. ; solidego ineana, Torr. aud Gr. 5 and two species of eriogonum, 
one of which was new. 

\ On the Sth of August the exploring party crossed the dividing ridge or pass, and found the soil 
of the plains at the foot of the mountains, on the western side, to be sandy. From Laramie’s fork 
to this point, diferent spevies of artemisia were the prevailing and characteristic plants ; occupying 
the place of the grasses, and filling the air with the odor of camphor and turpentine. Along Little 
Sandy, a tributary of the Colorado of the West, were collected a new species of phaca, (P. digi- 
talu,) aud purnassia fimbriata. 

On the inorning of the 10th of August, they entered the defiles of the Wind river mountains, a 
spur of the Rocky mountains, or northern Andes, and among which they spent about eight days, ! 
On the borders of a lake embosomed in one of the detiles, were collected sedum rhodisla, DC., 
(which had been found before, south of Kotzebue’s sound, only by Dr. James ;) senecio hydrophi- 
lus, Nutt. ; Vaecinium uliginosum ; betula glundulosu, ard B. occidentalis, Hook. ; eleagnus 
argentea, and shepherdia Cuncdensis. Some of the higher peaks of the Wind river mountains 
rise one thousand feet above the limits of perpetual snow. Licutenant Frémont, attended by four 
ef his men, ascended one of the loftiest peaks on the 15th of August. On this he found the snow 
line twelve thousand five hundred feet above the level of the sea. The vegetation of the mountains 
is truly alpine, embracing a considerable number of species common to both hemispheres, as well 
as some that are peculiar to North America. Of the former, Lieutenant Frémont collected pleum 
alpinum; vxyria reniformis; Veronica alpina; several species of salix; carex atrata; C. panicea; 
and immediately below the line of perpetual congelation, si/ene acaulis, and polemonium caruleum, 
6 Hook. Among the alpine plants peculiar to the western hemisphere, there were found orcophila 
sayrlifolia, Nutt. ; aquilegia coerulea, Torr. ; pedicularis surrecta, Benth. ; pulmonaria ciliata, 
James ; silene Drummondii, Hook. ; menziesia empetriformis, potentilla gracilis, Dougl. ; sev- 


i aS LT CCT ECS RT 


the collection. 
nia (zapania) 
) eercocarpus 
reniea, Nutt, 
is part of the 
were collected 
es, in Long’s 
by tothe want 
li Amovieana, 
0 dedicated it 
rviees he has 


ng, and gene 
ich the valley 
ul and white 
us sandstone, 
3 to the west 
ediately upon 
mica slate. 
ran examina 
orr. and Gr. ; 
'. ceratloides ; 
1Gr, a new 
ar the mouth 
d iu my Dr. 
vere collected 
¢ pretty little 
eriogonum, 


ound the soil 
aramie’s fork 
3 occupying 
Along Little 
u, (P. digi- 


suuntains, a 
eight days, 
divla, DC., 
io hydrophi- 
.3 eleagnus 
mountains 
hded by four 
id the snow 
¢ mountains 
res, as well 
cted pleum 
+ panicea; 
caruleum, 
d oreophila 
ia ciliata, 
ougl. ; sev- 


85 [ 174 ] 


eral species of pinus ; frasera speciosa, Hook. ; dodecatheon dentatum, Hook, ; phlone muscoidee, 
Nutt. ; senecio ’remontii, n. sp, Torr. and Gr, ; four or five asters, and vaccinium myrtilloides, 
Mx. ; the last seven or eight very near the snow line. Lower down the mountain were found 
arnica angustifolia, Vahl. ; senecio triangularis, Wook. ; 8. subnudus, DC. ; macrorhynchus 
troximoides, Torr. and Gr. s helianthella uniflora, Torr, and Cir. ; and linosyris viseidiflora, 
Hook. . 

The expedition left the Wind river mountains about the 18th of August, returning by the same 
route as that by which it ascended, except that it continued its course through the whole length of 
the Lower Platte, arriving at its junction with the Missouri on the Ist of October, 

As the plants of Lieutenant Frémont were under examination while the last part of the Flora of 
North America was in the press, nearly all the new matter relating to the Composite was inserted 
in that work. Descriptions of a few of the new species were necessarily omitted, owing to the 
report of the expedition having been called for by Congress before I could finish the necessary analyses 
and comparisons. ‘These, however, will be inserted in the successive numbers of the work to 
which I have just alluded, seaaneneae 
New York, Maréh, 1843. 


CATALOGUE OF PLANTS. 


we eee 


Crass I—EXOGENOUS PLANTS. 


RANUNCULACES, 


Clematis Virginiana, (Linn.) Valley of the Platte. June, July. 

Ranunculus sceleratus, (Linn.) Valley of the Sweet Water river. August 18-20, 
R. cymbalaria, (Pursh.) Upper Platte. July 31, August. 

Aquilegia coerulea, (Torr.) Wind river mountains. August 13-16. 

Actea rubra, (Bigel.) Upper Platte. August 26-31, 

Thalictrum Cornuti, (Linn.) Platte. 

T. megacarpum, n. sp. Upper Platte. August 26-21, 


MENISPERMACE %. 
Menispermum Canadense, (Linn.) Leaves only. On the Platte. 
BERBERIDACE®. 


Berberis aquifolium, (Torr. and Gr.) Wind river mountains. August 13-16. 


PAPA VERACES, 
Argemone Mexicana f albiflora, (DC.) Feris of the Platte. July 2. 


CRUCIFER. 
Nasturtium palustre, (DC.) Black hills of the Platte. July 26, August. 
Erysimum cheiranthoides, (Linn.) Black hills. July 23. 
E. asperum, (Nutt.) South fork of the Platte. July 4. 
Pachypodium, (Thelypodium, Endl. Gen., p. 876,) integrifolitum, (Nutt.) North fork of the 
Platte. September 4. Var. with longer pods. With the preceding. 
Vesicaria didymoearpa, (Hook.) Leaves only. North fork of the Platte, above the Red Buttess 
July 30. 


Braya, n. sp. Wind river mountains, near the limits of perpetual snow. August 15. 
Lepidium ruderale, (Linn.) On the Platte. June 29. 
CAPPARIDACES. 


Cleome integrifclia, (Torr. and Gr.) From the Lower Platte nearly to the mountains. June 29, 
July 2, August 21. 


Polanisia trachysperma, 8 (Torr. and Gr.) Black hills of the Platte. July 23. 
POLYGALACE. 
Polygala alba, (Nutt.) P. Beyrichii, (Torr. and Gr.) Forks of the Platte. July 2. 


DROSERACE. 
Parnassia fimbriata, (Banks.) Little Sandy creek, defiles of the Wind river mountains. Aug. 8. 


CARYOPHYLLACES. 


Arenavia congesta, (Nutt.) Highest parts of the Wind river mountains. August 13-16. 
Silene Drummondii, (Hook.) With the preceding. 
iS. acaulis, (Linn.) Wind river mountains, at the limits of perpetual snow. 


[ 174] 88 


PORTULACACE®, 
Talinum parviflorum, (Nutt.) Little Blue river of the Kansas, June 26. 
LINACE.®, 
Linum vigidum, (Pureh.) North fork of the Platte, July 8, 
L. perenne, (Linn,) Black hills to the Sweet Water of the Platte. August 2-31. 


GERANIACE.®, 
Geranium Fremontii, np Black hills, August 26-31, 
OXALIDACE.®, 
Oxalis stricta, (Linn.) On the Kansas, June, 
ANACARDIACE.E, 
Raus trilobata, (Nutt.) Red Buttes, July 29, 
MALVACE.£. 
Malva pedata, (‘Torr. and Gr.) Big Blue river of the Kansas. June 21. 
M. involucrata, (Torr. and Gr.) Little Blue river of the Kansas, June 23. 
Sida coccinea, (DC,) Little Blue river to the south fork of the Platte. June 22, July 4. 
VITACE.£. 
Vitis riparia, (Michx.) Grand island of the Platte. September 19, 
ACERACE.®. 
Negundo aceroides, (Maench.) On the lower part of the Platte. 


CELASTRACE&. 
Oreophila myrtifolia, (Nutt.) Summit of the Wind river mountains. August 13-14. 


RHAMNACE.E. 
Ceanothus velutinus, (Dougl.) With the preceding. 


_ C. Americanus, var. sanguineus. CC. sanguineur, (Pursh.) On the Platte. 


C. mollissimus, n. sp. Near the Kansas river. June 19, 
LEGUMINOS.E. 


Lathyrus linearis, (Nutt.) On the Platte, from its confluence with the Missouri to Fort Laramie. 
September 2-30. 

Amphicarpea monoica, (‘Torr. and Gr.) North fork of the Platte. September 4. 

Apios tuberosa, (Mench.) Forks of the Platte. September 13, 

Glycyrhiza lcpidota, (Pursh.) From near the Kansas river to the Black hills of the Platte. June 
21, July 25. | 

Pooralea floribunda, (Nutt.) Forks of the Platte. July 2. 

P. campestris, (Nutt.’?) and a more glabrous variety. With the preceding. July 2. 

P. lanceolata, (Pursh.) Black hills of the Platte. July 24. 

P. argophylla, (Pursh.) Little Blue river. June 23. 

P. tenuiflora, (Pursh.) (no flowers.) Forks of the Platte. September 12. 

Petalostemon violaceum, (Michx.) Big Blue river of the Kansas, &c. June 2], 

P. candidum, (Michx.) Red Buttes. July 29. 

Amorpha fruticosa, (Linn.) From the Lower Platte to the mountains. August 8, September 19. 

A. canascens, (Nutt.) Kansas and Lower Platte rivers. June 19, September 20, 

Lespedeza capitata, (Michx.) Mouth of the Platte. September 30. 

Desmodium acuminatum, (DC.) Little Blue river of the Kansas. June 22. 


Aaty 
Av n 
Avh 
Oxy 

a 
O1 
Pha 
Pre 
P. ( 
yl 
Kent 
Lup 
A- 
L. o 
Bapt 
Ther 
Cass 
Schre 
Darl 


Cera 

Ceret 
Purs 
Geu 

Sibbe 
Pott 
Pid 


Rose 
R.f 


uly 4, 


ort Laramie. 


Platte. June 


ptember 19. 


89 [174] 


Astragalus gracilis, (Natt,) Forks of the Platte, July 2, 

A, mollissimus, (Torr) Valley of the Platte, June 20, 

A. hypoglottis, Linn.) Sweet Water of the Platte, August 5. 

Oxytropis Lambertii, (Pursd.) Big Blue river of the Kansas to the forks of the Platte, June 
20, July %, 

O. Plattensis, (Nutt.’) (no flowers.) Goat island of the Upper Platte, July 31, 

Phaca astragalina, (DC,) Highest summits of the Wind river mountain, August 15, 

P. elegans, (fook,) var.’ Goat island of the Upper Platte, July St, 

P. (Orophaca) digitata, n. py Little Sandy river, August 8, 

DP. longifolia, (Nutt.) (leaves only.) Wind river mountains, August 12-17, 

Kentrophyta montana, (Nutt.) — Laramic river to the Sweet Water, July 14, August 5, 

Lupinus leucophyllas, (Lindl) Wind river mountains, and Sweet Water of the Platte, August 
A-21, 

L. ornatus, (Dougl.) 1. leucopsis, (Agardh.) With the preceding. 

Baptisia leucanthia, (‘Vorr, and Gr.) Kansas river, 

Thermopsis montana, (Nutt.) Sweet Water river, August 5, 

Cassia chamaerista, (Linn.) Mouth of the Platte. September 30, 

Schrankia wneinuta, (Willd.) Kansas and Platte rivers, June 19, September, 

Darlingtonia brachypoda, (DC.) On the Platte. September 17. 


ROSACEM, 


Cerasus Virginiana, (Torr. and Gr.) Upper north fork of the Platte, July 30, 
Cercocarpus parvifolius, (Nutt.) Bitter Creck, north fork of the Platte. July 22. 
Purshia tridentata, (DC,) Sweet Water river, &e. August 12, September, 
Geum Virginianum, (Linn.) Kansas river. June 20, 
Sibbaldia procumbens, (Linn.) Wind river mountains, near perpetual snow. August 13-14, 
Poftntilla gracilis, (Dougl.) With the preceding. 
P. diversifolia, (Leim.) Sweet Water of the Platte to the mountains, August 4-15, 
P. sericea B glabrata, (Lehm.) With the preceding. 
P. fruticosa, (Linn.) With the preceding. 
P. anserina, (Linn.) Black hills of the Platte. July 26-31, 
P. arguta, (Pursh.) Little Blue river of the Kansas, and Black hills of the Platte. June 23, 
August 28. 
Rubus strigosus, (Michx.) Defiles of the Wind river mountains, August 12-17, 
Amelanchier diversifolia, var. alnifolia, (‘Torr. and Gr.) Sweet Water of the Platte. August 5. 
Rosa blanda, (Ait.) Lower Platte. 
R. foliolosa, (Nutt.) var. leiocarpa. With the preceding. 
ONAGRACE., 
Epilobium coloratum, (Muhl.) Black hills of the Platte to the Sweet Water river, Aug. 4-32, 
E. spicatum, (Lam.) From the Red Buttes to the Wind river mountains. August 13-31, 
Anothera albicaulis, (Nutt.) North fork of the Platte. July 14. ; 
AS. Missouriensis, (Sims.) Big Blue river of the Kansas. June 19-20. 
4E. trichoealyx, (Nutt.) North fork of the Platte. July 30. 
4G. serrulata, (Nutt.) On the Kansas and Platte. June, July 14. 
E. rhombibetala, (Nutt.) On the Platte. September 18-20, 
#. biennis, (Linn.) Black hills to the Sweet Water river. July 23, August 4. 
4. (Taraxia) Nuttalit, (Torr. and Gr.) Upper part of the Sweet Water. 
4. speciosa, (Nutt.) Big Blue river of the Kansas. June 19-20, 
4B. Drummondii, (Hook.’) Black hills. July 26. 
Gaura coccinea, (Nutt.) Var.? Little Blue river of the Kansas, and south fork of the Platte. 
June 26, July 4. 


{ 174 J 90 


LOABACEM, 
Mentzelia nuda, (‘Tort. and Gr.) North fork of the Platte, July 14, 


GROSSULACEM, 
Ribes cereum, (Lindl.) Sweet Water of the Platte, Auguat 2-4. 
R. lacwstre, (Poir.) With the preceding. 4 leaves deeply lobed. R. eehinatum, (Dougl,) Per- 
haps a distinct species, 
R, irriguum, (Dougl.) With the preceding. 


CACTACES, 
Opuntia Missouriensis, (DC.) Forks of the Platte, July 2. 


CRASSULACE A, 
Sedum rhodiola, (DC.) On a lake in Wind river mountains, August 12-17, 


UMBELLIFER®. 


Heracleum lanatum, (Michx.’) Leaves only. The leaves are more glabrous than in the ordinary 
form of the plant. Alpine region of the Wind river mountains. 

Polytania Nuiiallii, (DC.) On the Kansas. June 20. 

Sium? incisum, n. sp. Stem suleate ; segments of the leaves distant, deeply incised or pinnatified ; 
the lower teeth or divisions often elongated and linear. North fork of the Platte, July 12. 

Edosmia Gardineri, (‘Torr. and Cit.) Without fruit, 

Cicuta maculata, (Linn.) Lower Platte, 

Musenium tenuifolium, (Nutt.) Alpine region of the Wind river mountains, 


CORNACE.®. 


Cornus stolonifera, (Michx.) On a lake in the Wind river mountains. August 12-17, 
C. circinata, (L’Her.) On the Platte. 


CAPRIFOLIACES, 


Symphoricarpus occidentalis, (R. Brown.) North fork of the Platte, July 10, August 31. 
S. vulgaris, (Michx.) Defiles of the Wind river mountains, August 13-14, 


RUBIACE.E. 
Galium boreale, (Linn.) Upper part of the North fork of the Platte. August 12-31. 


COMPOSIT.©. 
Vernonia fasciculata, (Michx.) On the Platte. : 
Liatris scariosa, (Willd.) Lower part of the Platte. September 27. 
L. spicata, (Willd.) North fork of the Platte. September 4. 
L. squarrosa, var. intermedia, (DC.) A small form of the plant. On the Platte. 
L. punctata, (Hook.) Black hills of the Platte. August 29, 
Brickellia grandifloria, (Nutt.) North fork of the Platte. 
Aster integrifolius, (Nutt.) Base of the Wind river mountains. 
A, adseendens, (Lindl.) Wind river mountains. Var. Fremontii, with the preceding. The 
highest summits to the limits of perpetual snow. August 16. 
A. levis, (Linn.) North fork of the Platte. 
A. Novi-Belgii, (Linn.) Sweet Water of the Platte. August 22. 
A. cordifolius, (Linn.) Lower Platte. 
A, multiflorus, 3 (‘Torr. and Gr.) Upper Platte, &c. 
A. falcatus, (Lindl.) Black hills to the Sweet Water. July 30, August. 
A. laxifolius, (Necs.) On the Platte, from its mouth to the forks. September 12-30. 


» (Dougl.) Per- 


in the ordinary 


or pinnatified ; 
July 12, 


12-17, 


ugust 31, 


ceding. 


A, oblongifolius, (Nutt) Lower Platte, &e, 

A. Nowa-Anglia, (Linn.) Lower Platte to the Wind river mountains, 
A. andinus, (Nutt.) Near the snow line of the Wind river mountains, 
A. glacialis, (Nutt.) With the preceding, 

A. salsuginonus, (Richards.) With the preceding, 

A, elegans, (Torr, and Gr.) Wind river mountaina, 

A. glaueus, (Torr, and Gr.) With the preceding, 

Dieteria viseora, (Nutt) On the Platte, 

D. coronopifolia, (Nutt.) With the preeeding. 

D, pulverulenta, (Nutt.) Near D, sevsilifiora, With the preceding. 


[ 174 J 


Aug, 18-Sept. 4 


Aug, 6, 


Erigeron Canadena, (Linn.) On the Platte, from near ita mouth to the Red Buttes. Latter 


part of September to July 30, 
EB. bellidiastrum, (Nutt.) On the Platte, 
BE. macranthum, (Nutt.) With the preceding. 
EB. glabellum, (Nutt.) With the preceding. 
EB. strigosum, (Muhl.) With the preceding. 


Gutierrezia euthamia, (‘Tort andGe.) Laramie river, Upper North fork of the Platte. Sept, 3. 


Solidago rigida, (Linn.) North fork of the Platte, 


S, Missouriensis, (Nutt.) Fort Laramie, North fork of the Platte. July 22, to the mountains. 


8. speciosa, (Nutt.) Uppor Platte, 


S. virga- aurea, (Linn.) var. muvltiradiata, (Torr, and Gr.) Wind river mountain, from the 


height of 7,000 feet to perpetual snow. 
S. ineana, (‘Torr. and Gr.) Sweet Water river. 
S. gigantea, (Linn.) var, @. From the Platte to the mountains. 
Linosyris graveolens, (‘Torr. and Gr.) Sweet Water river. Aug, 20. 
L. viseidiflora, (Hook.) Upper Platte. 
Aplopappus spinulosus, (DC.) Fort Laramie, North fork of the Platte. 


Sept. 3. 


Grindelia squarrosa, (Dunal.) Upper North fork of the Platte, and on the Sweet Water. July 


22-Aug. 21. 
Chrysopsis hispida, (Hook.) On the Platte. 
C. mollis, (Nutt.) With the preceding. ‘Too near C. folioso, (Nutt. ) 
Iva axillaris, (Pursh.) Sweet Water river. Aug. 3. 
Franseria discolor, (Nutt.) Near the Wind river mountains. 
Lepachys columnaris, (‘Torr. and Gr.) Little Blue river of the Kansas. 
Balsamorrhiza sagittata, (Nutt.) Wind river mountains. 
Helianthus petiolaris, (Nutt.) Black hills of the Platte. July 26, 
H. Maximiliani, (Schrad.) With the preceding. 
Helianthella uniflora, (Torr. and Gr.) Wind river mountains. 
Coreopsis tinctoria, (Nutt.) On the Platte. 
Cosmidium gracile, (Torr. and Gir.) Upper Platte. 
Bidens connata, (Muhl.) With the preceding. 
Hymenopappus corimbosus, (Torr. and Gr.) With the preceding. 
Actinella grandiflora, (‘Torr. and Gr.) n. sp. Wind river mountains. 


June 26, 


Achillea millefoliam, (Linn.) A. lanosa, (Nutt.) Upper Platte to the mountains. 


Artemisia biennis, (Willd.) On the Platte. 
A. cana, (Pursh.) Without flowers. With the preceding. 
A. tridentata, (Nutt.) On the Sweet Water, near the mountains. 


A. filifolia, (‘Torr.) South fork of the Platte, and North fork, to Laramie river. July 4-Sept. 3. 


A, Canadensis, (Michx.) With the preceding. 
A. Ludoviciana, (Nutt.) Black hills of the Platte. July 26. 
A. frigida, (Willd.) Black hills to the mountains. 


r 174] 92 


4, Lewisii, (Torr. and Gr.’) No flowers. On the Platte. 
Stephanomeria runcinata, (Nutt.) UppegPlatte. 
Gnaphalium tuliginosum, (Linn.) Var. fuliis angustioribus, Sweet Water river. 
G, palustre, (Nutt.) 6. (Torr. and Gr.) With the preceding. 
Arnica angustifolia, (Vahl) A. fulgens, (Pursh.)  Defiles of the Wind river mountains, from 
7,000 feet and upwards, August 13-14, A 
Senecio triangularis, (Hook.) 3. (Torr. and Gr.) With the preceding. Pedit 
S. subnudus, (DC.) With the preceding. (era 
S. Fremontii, (‘Vorr. and Gr.) n. sp. Highest parts of the mountains, to the region of perpetual 


snow. Aug. 15. Orel} 
S. rapifolius, (Nutt.) North fork of the Platte and Sweet Water. 
S. lanceolatus, (‘Torr. and Gir.) n. sp. With the preceding. 
S, hydrophilus, (Nutt.) On_a lake in the Wind river mountains, Aug, 12-17, on 
S, spartioides, (Torr. and Gr.) a. sp. Sweet Water river. August 21, Teuc 
S. filifolius, (Nutt.) 6 Fremontii, (Torr. and Gr.) Lower Platte. Lyeo 


pF ' . hy 
Cacalia tuberosa, (Nutt.) Upper Platte. ‘ ae 
Tetradymia inermis, (Nutt.) Sweet Water river, from its mouth to the highest parts of the Wind ae 
river mountaiius. J ent 
Salvic 


Cirsium altisimum, (Spreng.) Tower Platte. 
Crepis glauca, (Hook.) Upper Platte. 


Macrorhynchus (stylopappus) troximoides, (‘Torr. and Gr.) — Defiles of the Wind river mountains. Lippi 

Aug. 13-14, Nol 
Mulgedium pulchellum, (‘Vorr. and Gr.) Black hills of the Platte. July 25-31. Verbhe 
Lygodesmia juncea, (Don.) Upper Platte. V. ha 
Troximon parviflorum, (Nutt.) Sweet Water river, near the mountains. V. br 


LOBELIACE. 


Lobelia spicata, (1am.) On the Lower Platte. June 28. Pulm 
L. siphilitica, (Linn.) North fork of the Platte. September 4. ¥ rive 
Onos: 

CAMPANULACE.®. Batse 

Campanula rotundifolia, (Linn.) Lower Platte. Myost 


Specularia amplexicaulus, (DC.) Little Blue river of the Kansas. 


ERICACE.E. Lutor 

Phyllodoce empetriformis, (D. Don.) Defiles of the Wind river mountains. Aug. 13-16. Phac 

Vaccinium myrtilloides, (Hook.) Wind river mountains, in the vicinity of perpetual snow. shede 

Aug. 15. Jul 

V. uliginosum, (Linn.) With the preceding. 81 

Artostaphylos uva-ursi, (Spreng.) On a lake in the mountains. Aug. 12-17. ; for 

str 

PRIMULACE. mu 

Dodecatheon dentatum, (Hook.) Defiles of the Wind river mountains. Aug. 13-16. his 

Androsace occidentalis, (Nutt.) Sweet Water river. Aug. 5. sec 

Lysimachia ciliata, (Linn.) Forks of the Platte. July 2. lea 

Glaux maritima, (Linn.) Upper North fork of the Platte. July 31. wi 
SCROPHULARIACE. 

Orthocarpus luteus, (Nutt.) Swect Water river. Aug. 5. Philo 

Mimulus alsinoides, (Benth.) Defiles of the Wind river mountains. Aug. 13-16. } m¢ 

M. Lewisit, (Pursh.) With the preceding. P. &E 

Castilleja pallida, (Kunth.) Sweet Water river. Aug. 8. DP. p 


aera aes 


93 [174] 


C, miniala, (Benth.) Wind river mountains. August (3-16, There are two or three other 
species of this genus in the collection, which I have not been able to determine, 

Veronica alpina 3, (Hook.) Alpine region of the Wind river mountains. 
Pentstemon albidum, (Nutt.) Forks of the Platte. July 2. 
P. ceruleum, (Nutt.) South fork of the Platte. July 4. 
P. micranthum, (Nutt.) Sources of the Sweet Water, near the mountains. August 7. 
Pedicularts surrecta, (Beuth.)  Defiles of the Wind river inountains. August 13-16 
Gerardia longifula, (Nutt.) Lower Platte. July 22. 

OROBANCHACE.®. 
Orobanche fusciculata, (Mut.) South fork of the Platte. July 4. 

LABIAT.E, 

Monarda fistulosa, Quin.) On the Platte. 
Teucrium Canadense, (Liinn.) With the preceding. 
Lycopus sinualus, (EM) With the preceding. 
Stachys aspera, (Michx.) Forks of the Platte. July 2. 
NSeutlellavia galericulita, (Linn.) North of the Platte. July 10. 
Mentha Canadensis, (inn.) With the preceding. 


Pr. 


nountains, from 


on of perpetual 


rts of the Wind 


Salvia azurea, (Liam.) Kansas river and forks of the Platte. June 19-29, July 2. 
VERBENACE.A&. 

Lippia cuncifolia, GZapania cuncitolia, (‘Torr., in Ann. Lye. Nat. Hist. N. York, ii, page 234.) 

North fork of the Platte. July 12. 

Verbena stricta, (Vent.) With the preceding. 

V. hastata, inn.) With the preceding, 

V. bracteata, (Michx.) With the preceding. 
BORAGINACE.LE. 


Pulmonaria ciliata, (James ; Torr. in Aun. Lye. N. York, ii, page 224.) Defiles in the Wind 


ver mountains. 


LEE tt ene SS ee 


* river mountains. Auust 13-15, f 
Onosmodium molle, (Michx.) On the Platte. June 29. i 
Batschia Gmelini, (Michx.) Little Blue river of the Kansas. June 22. } 
oa : ; i 
Myosotis glowerata, (Nutt.) Forks of the Platte. July 2. é 
HWY DROPHYLLACE.E. i 
Luloca sericev, (uehm.) = Wind river mountains. h 
13-16. Phacelia leucophylia, 1. sp. Whole plant strigosely canescent ; leaves elliptical, petiolate entire ; ' 
petual snow. racemes numcrous, scorpivid, densely flowered.—Goat island, upper North fork of the Platte. : 
July 30. Perennial. —Stems branching irom the base. Leaves about two inches long, and 6 tu i 


8 lines wide ; radical and lower cauline ones on long petioles ; the others nearly sessile. Spikes 
forming a terminal crowded sort of panicle. Flowers sessile, about 3 lines long. Sepals } 
strongly hispid. Corolla one-third longer than the calyx ; the lobes short and entire. Stamens 
much exserted ; filaments glabrous. Style 2-parted to the middle, the lower part hairy. Ovary 
hispid, incompletely 2-celled, with 2 ovules in each cell. Capsule, by abortion, one-seeded ; 
seed oblong, strongly punctate. Nearly related to P. integrifolia, (Torr. ;) but differs in the 
leaves being perfectly entire, the more numerous spikes, one-seeded capsules, as well as in the 
whitish strigose pubescence of the whole plant. 


POLEMONIACE.%. 


Phlox muscoides, (Nutt. ) 
mountains. August 15. 

P. Hovdii, (Richards.) North fork of the Platte. July &. 

P. pilosa, (Nutt.) Big Blue river of the Kansas. June 20, 


Immediately below the region of perpetual snow, on the Wind river 


f 174 J 94 


Polemonium ceeruleum, (Linn., Hook.) Red Buttes on the Upper North fork of the Platte, 8 
humile, (Hook.) Highest parts of the mountains, near perpetual snow. August 13-15. 

Gilia (Cantua) longiflora, (‘Tort.) Sand hills of the Platte. September 16. 

G, pulehella, (Dougl.) Upper part of the Sweet Water, near the mountains. August 7-20. 

G., ineonspieua, (Dougl.?) Goat island, Upper North fork of the Platte. July 30. This differs 
from the Oregon plant in its fleshy, simply pinnatified leaves, with ovate, obtuse segments. 


CONVOLVULACE.R&. 


Calystegia sepium, (R. Br.) Forks of the Platte. July 2. a. 
Ipomaa leptophylla, n. sp. Stems branching from the base, prost glabrous, angular ; leaves 


lanceolate-linear, very acute, entire, attenuate at the base into a petiole ; peduncles | to 3-flow- 
ered ; sepals roundish-ovate, obtuse with a minute mucro.—Forks of the Platte to Laramie 
river. July 4-September 3. Imperfect specimens of this plant were collected about the sources 
of the Canadian, by Dr. James, in Long’s expedition ; but they were not described in my account 
of his plants. ‘The root, according to Dr. James, is annual, producing numerous thick pros- 
trate, but not twining stems, which are two feet or more in length. ‘The leaves are from two 
to four inches long, acute at each end, strongly veined and somewhat coriaceous. Peduncles 
an inch or more in length ; those towards the extremity of the branches only 1-flowered ; the 
lower ones bearing 2, 3, and sometimes 4 flowers, which are nearly the size of those of calys- 
tegia sepium, and of a purplish color, Sepals appressed, about five lines long. Corolla cam- 
panulate—funnel form, the tube much loager than the calyx. Stamens inserted near the base 
of the corolla ; filaments villous at the base, anthers oblong-linear, large. Style as long as the 
stamens ; stigma 2elobed ; the lobes capitate. Ovary 2-celled, with two ovules in each cell. 
SOLANACE., 

Nycterium luteum, (Donn cat.) South fork of the Platte. July 4. 

Physalis pubescens, (Willd.) Upper North fork of the Platte. July 23. 

P. pumila, (Nutt.) With the preceding. 

GENTIANACE.®, 

Gentiana arctophila i densiflora, (Griseb. ? in Hook. Fl. Bor. Am. ii, page 61.) Sweet Water 
of the Platte. August 4. 

G. affinis, (Griseb.) North fork of the Platte. September 9. 

G. pneumonanthe, (Linn.) Laramie river to Little Sandy creek, in the mountains. July 12- 
August 8. 

G. Fremontii, n. sp. Stem branched at the base ; branches 1 flowered ; leaves ovate, cuspidate, 
cartilaginous on the margin, erect ; corolla funnel form; plice small, slightly 2-toothed ; cap- 
sule ovate, at length entirely exserted on its thick stipe —Wind river mountains. —Annual. 
Branches several, 2 to 3 inches long, or nearly equal length. Leaves about three lines long, with 
a strong whitish cartilaginous border, shorter than the internodes. Flowers as large 2s those 
of G. prostrata, pentamerous. Calyx two-thirds the length of the corolla ; the teeth about one- 
third the length of the tube. Plicw of the coralla scarcely one-third as long as the lanceolate 
lobes. Stamens included ; anthers oblong, somewhat cordate at the base. Capsule in matu- 
rity, and atter dehiscence, (in which state all our specimens were collected, ) exserted quite be- 
yond the corolla, and, with its long stipe, resembling a style with a large bilamellate stigma. 
None of the capsules contained any seeds. ‘his species is nearly related to G. prostrata, 
(Haenk, ) and G. Aumilis, (Stev.,) but the former has spatulate obtuse recurved leaves, and the 
latter entire plice, which are nearly the length of the corrolla. In G. humilis, and in the allied 
G. squarrosa, (Ledeb.,) the capsule is exserted after discharging the seeds. 

Swertia perennis, 3 obtusa, (Hook.) From Laramie river to the Big Buttes. 

Frasera speciosa, (Hook.) Defiles of the Wind river mountains. August 13-14, 

Lisianthus Russelianus, (Hook.) Lower Platte to the forks. July-September. 


Apoe 


Ascle 
ii, 
wel 
lec 

A, ve 

A. tu 

Anan 

Acera 

A, an 


Frax 


Plant 
P. gn 


Chen 
yal 
Olion 
the 
Cyclo 
Plat 
Sueda 
Euroti 
Aug 
Freme 
tern 
war 
axil 
obs 
ovat 
wit! 
(2 1 
FP, ver 
the 
shr 
12 
ind 
the 
clo! 
3 t 
Lie 
Lo 
the 
col 
on! 


of the Platte, 4 
st 13-15, 


agust 7-20, 
0. This differs 
segments. 


angular ; leaves 
‘les 1 to 3-flow- 
atte to Laramie 
out the sources 
d in my account 
ous thick pros- 
es are from two 
us. Peduncles 
-flowered ;_ the 
those of calys- 

Corolla cam- 
d near the base 
2 as long as the 
in each cell. 


Sweet Water 


nse July l= 


ate, cuspidate, 
toothed ; cap- 
ins. —Annual. 
nes long, with 
large as those 
eth about one 
the lanceolate 
sule in matu- 
rted quite be- 
hellate stigma. 
'. prostrata, 
‘aves, and the 

in the allied 


95 [174 J 


APOCYNACE. 
Apocynum eannabinum, (Linn.) On the Platte. 


ASCLEPIADACE.F, 


Asclepias speciosa, (‘Torr. in Ann. Lyc. N. York, ii, p. 218.—A. Douglasii, Hook. Fl. Bor. Am. 


ii, p. 53, t. 142.) Forks of the Platte. July 2, Collected also by Mr. Nicollet in his North- 
western expedition. Hooker's plant differs in no essential characters from my A. speciosa, col- 


lected by Dr. James in Long’s first expedition, 
A. verticillata, (Linn.) Small variety. With the preceding. 
A. tuberosa, (Linn.) Kansas river. June 19, 
Anantheriz viridis, (Nutt.) Big Blue river of the Kansas, June 20. 
Acerates longifolia, (Ell.) Polyotus longifolia, (Nutt.) With the preceding. 
A, angustifolius, Polyotus angustifolius, (Nutt.) + With the preceding, 

OLEACE.®. 
Fraxinus platycarpa, (Michx.) Leaves only. Lower Platte, 
PLANTAGINACE.®, 


Plantago criopoda, (‘Torr. in Ann. Lye. N. York, ii, p. 237.) Mouth of the Sweet Water. July 31. 
P. gnaphaloides, (Nutt.) Little Blue river of the Kansas, June 24. 
CHENOPODIACE.E, 
Chenopodium zosterifolium, (Hook.) Platte. ’ 
C. allum, (Linn.) North fork of the Platte. July 12. 


Olione canescens, (Mocq. Chenop., p. 74.) Atriplex canescens, (Nutt.) Upper North fork of 


the Platte. July 26. 


Cycloloma platyphylla, (Mocy., l. «. P: 18.) Kochia dentata, (Willd. ) North fork of the 


Platte. September 4. 

Sueda maritima, (Mocy., |. c. p. 127.) With the preceding. 

Eurotia lanata, (Moeg., 1. cp. 81.) Drotis lanata, (Pursh.) Red Buttes to the mountains. 
August 18-25. 


Fremontia, n. gen. Flowers diclinous, monacious and ? dioicous, heteromorphous. Stam. Fl. in 


terminal aments, Scales eccentrically peltate, on a short stipe, angular, somewhat cuspidate up- 


ward. Stamens 2, 3, and 4 under each scale, naked, sessile ; anthers oblong. Pist. Fl. solitary, 
axillary. Perigonium closely adhering to the lower half of the ovary, the border entire, nearly 
obsolete, but in fruit enlarging into a broad horizontal angular and undulate wing. Ovary 
ovate ; styles thick, divaricate ; stigmas linear. Fruit a utricle, the lower two-thirds covered 
with the indurated calyx, compressed. Seed vertical ; integument double. Embryo tlat-spiral, 
(2 to 3 turns, ) green ; radicle inferior ; albumen none. 


F. vermicularis. (Butis? vermicularis, Hook.) Fl. Bor. Amer. ii, p. 128, Upper North fork of 


the Platte, near the mouth of the Sweet Water. July 30. A low glabrous, diffusely branched 
shrub, clothed with a whitish bark. Leaves alternate, linear, tleshy, and almost semiterete, 6 to 
12 lines long and 1 to 2 lines wide. Staminate aments about three-fourths of an inch long, cyl- 
indrical, at first dense, and composed of closely compacted angular scales, covering naked an- 
thers. Anthers very deciduous. Fertile flowers in the axils of the rameal leaves. Calyx 
closely adherent, and at first with only an obscure border or limb, but at length forming a wing 
3 to 4 lines in diameter, resembling that of Salsola = This remarkable plant, which [ dedicate to 
Lieutenant Fréimont, was first collected by Dr. James about the sources of the Canadian, (in 
Long's expedition, ) but it was omitted in my account of his plants, published in the Annals of 
the Lyceum of Natural History. It is undoubtedly the batis? vermicularis of Hooker, (! <., 

collected on the barren grounds of the Oregon river by the late Mr. Douglas, who found it with. 
only the staminate flowers. We have it now from a third locality, so that the plant must be 


' 


| 
| 


oP MITE ES LET AE TO 


; 


civ yj 96 


widely diffused in the barren regions towards the Rocky mountains. — [t belongs to the sub-order 
spirolobcwe of Meyer and Moequin, but can hardly be referred to cither the tribe suadina or to 
salsolx, differing trom both in its diclinous heteromorphous flowers, and also from the latter in its 
flat-spiral, not cochleate embryo, 

NYCTAGINACE.E, 

Oxybaphus nyetaginea, (Torr. in James's Rocky Mountain Plants.) Calymenia nyctagines, 
(Nutt.) Kansas river, June 20. 

Abronia mellifera, (Doug!.) North fork of the Platte, July 7-12, 

A, (tripterocalyx) micranthum, n. sp. Viseid and glandularly pubescent ; leaves ovate, undulate, 
obtuse, acute at the base, petiolate; perianth funnel form, 4-lobed at the summit, 3 to 4 androus; 
achenium broadly 3-winged.—Near the mouth ‘of Sweet Water river, August 1, Annual. 
Stem diffusely branched from the base, beginning to flower when only an inch high; the branches 
of the mature plant above a foot long. Leaves | to 14 inch in length ; petioles about as long 
as the lamina, Heads axillary. Tivoluere 5 leaved, 8 to t4-flowered ; leaflets ovate, acumi- 
nate. Pevianth colored, (purplish, ) 4 to 4 lines long; lobes semi-ovate, obtuse. Stamens inserted 
in the middle of the tube, unequal; anthers ovate, sagittate at the base, Ovary oblong, clothed 
with the 3 winged base of the calyx; style filiform; stigma filiform clavate, ineurved. Mature 
achenium about 7 lines long and 4 wide, the wings broad, nearly equal, membranaceous and 
strongly reticulated. Seed oblong, Mmbryo conduplicate, involving the deeply 2-parted mealy 
albumen; radicle linear terete; inner cotyledon abortive! outer one oblong, foliaceous, concave, 
as long as the radicle. This interesting plant differs from its congeners in its funnel-form pe- 
rianth, 3 to 4 androus flowers, aid broadly 3-winged fruit, but I have not been able to compare 
it critically with other species of abronia. It may prove to be a distinct genus. 

POLYGONACE.E., 

Polygonum Persiearia, (Linn.) North fork of the Platte. September 4. 

P. aviculare, (Linn.) With the preceding. 

P. amphibium, (Linn.) Sweet Water river, August 4. 

P. viviparum, (Linn.) Black hills. July 26, 

Lumes salicifolius, (Weinn.) With the preceding. 

Oxryria reniformis, (Hill) Alpine region of the Wind river mountains. August 13-16. 

Eriogonum ovalifolium, (Nutt.) Hovse-shoe creek, Upper North fork of the Platte. July 22. 

E. cespitosum, (Nutt.) With the preceding. 

EE. umbellatum, (‘Torr ) in Ain. Lye. Nat. Hist. N. York, ii, p. 241. Sweet Water river. Aug. 7. 

KE. Fremontii, n. sp. With the preceding. 

Zi, annuum, (Nutt.) Novth fork of the Platte. September 4, 

ELEAGNACE 4. 

Shepherdia argentea, (Nutt.) ‘Grains de beuf”’ Upper North fork of the Platte, from the 
Red Buttes to the mouth of the Swect Water. August 24-28. 

S. Canadensis, (Nutt.) Ona lake in the Wind river mountains. August 12-17. 

Eleagnus argenteus, (Pursh.) With the preceding. 

EUPHORBIACE.E., 


Euphorbia marginata, (Pursh.) Forks of the Platte. September 11. 
E, polygonifolia, (Linn.) South fork-of the Platte. July 4. 
3. corollata, (Linn.) On the Kansas. 
E. obtusata, (Pursh.) Little Blue river of the Kansas. July 23. 
Pilinophytum capitatum, (Klotsch in Wiegem. Arch., April, 1842.) Croton capitatum, (Michx.) 
Forks of the Platte. 
Hendecandra? (Esch.,) multiflora, n. sp.; annual canescent, with stellate pubescence, diccious; 


ae’ 


gtem 80 
stamina’ 
of} the 
larger le 
mond's 


Salix lo 
S. Muh 
some 
satiaf 
Populu 
P. ang 
Aug. 
P, mont 


Ulmus 
Scltis ert 


Betula 
B, oecid 


Pinus ri 
P. undet 

P. La 
P. (Abi 
P. near 
Juniper 


Sagitia 


Platan 
P. hyp 
Spiran 
Aplects 


Sisyrin 
Iris Mi 
Rhiz 
ered 


to the sub-order 
© suvdina or to 
y the latter in its 


nia nyctagines, 


ovate, undulate, 
3 to 4 androus; 
st 1. Annual. 
Hh; the branches 
8 about as long 
8 ovate, acumi- 
‘tamens inserted 
oblong, clothed 
urved. Mature 
byanaceous and 
2-parted mealy 
peous, concave, 
funnel-form pe- 
able to compare 


13-16. 
tte. July 22, 


river, Aug. 7. 


htte, from the 


m, (Michx. ) 


e, dicecious; 


| 


97 c 174) 


stem somewhat diffusely and trichotomously branched; leaves ovate-oblong; petiolate obtuse, entire; 
staminate flowers on crowded axillary and terminal compound spikes.—Laramie river, North fork 
of] the Platte. September 3—11.—About a foot high. Fructiferous plant unknown. With 
larger leaves. Forks of the Platte. July 2. This seems to be the same as the plant of Drum- 
mond’s Texan Collection, II, No. 266. 


SALICIACES, 


Salix longifolia, (Willd.) On the Platte. 

S. Muhlenbergii, (Willd.) With the preceding. Several other species exiat in the collection— 
some from the Platte, others from the mountains; but I have had no timo to determine them 
satisfactorily. 

Populus tremuloides, (Michx.) Lake in the Wind river mountains. 

P. angustifolia, (Torr. in Ann, Lye. N, Hist, of New York, ii, p. 249.) 
Aug. 21. 

P, monilifera, ( Ait.) 


Swoet Water river. 


Lower Platte. 
ULMACESA. 


Lower Platte. 
With the preceding. 


Ulmus fulva, (Michx.) 
Seltis crassifolia, (Nutt.) 


BETULACEA. 


Betula glandulosa, (Michx.) Ona lake in the Wind river mountains. 
B, oecidentalis, (ilook.) With the preceding. 


Aug. 12-17, 


CONIFER. 


Pinus rigida, (Linn.) Lower Platte. Without cones. Leaves in threes, about 3 inches long. 

P. undetermined. Defiles of the Wind river mountains. Aug. 13-14, Between P, strobus and 
P. Lambertiana. T.caves in 5’s, 1§ to 2 inches long, rigid. No cones. 

P. (Abies) alba, (Michx.) With the preceding. 

P. near balsamea. With the preceding. T.eaves only. 

Juniperus Virginiana, (Linn.) Lower Platte. 


ENDOGENOUS PLANTS. 


ALISMACES. 


Sagittaria sagittifulia, (Linn.) On the Kansas. 


ORCHIDACEAB, 


Platanthera leucophea, (Lindl) Black hills. July 27. 
P. hyperborea, (R, Br.) Laramie river to the Red Buttes. 
Spiranthes cernua, (Rich.) Sweet Water river. Aug. 6. 
Aplectrum hyemale, (Nutt) On the Platte. June 29. 


Aug. 26-31. 


IRIDACEZ. 


Sisyrinchium anceps, (Linn.) North fork of the Platte. July 12. 

Iris Missouriensis, (Nutt., in Jour. Acad. Phil. vii, p 58.) In fruit. Sweet Water river. Aug. 3. 
Rhizoma very thick. Leaves narrow, rigid, as long as the scape. Scape nearly naked, 2-flow- 
ered, terete, 10 inches high. Capsules oblong, obtusely triangular. Flowers not seen. 


7 


[174] 98 


LILIACE.£. 


Yucca angustifolia, (Sims.) Laramie river. July 14. 
Allium reticulatum, (Fras.) Defiles in the Wind river mountains. Aug. 12-17, 
Smilacina stellata, (Desf.) From the Laramie river to the Red Buttes. Aug. 26-31. 


MELANTHACES. 
Zigadenus glaucus, (Nutt.) Sweet Water river, Aug. 
JUNCACE.E. 
Juneus echinatus, (Muhl.) North fork ef the Platte. Sept. 4. 
COMMELYNACE. 


Tradescantia Virginica, (Linn.,) and a narrow-leaved variety, Kansas and Platte. 
CYPERACE.L. 


Carex festucacea, (Schk.) On the Kansas, June. 

C. Aurea, (Nutt.) Little Blue river of the Kansas. June 22. 

C. panicea, (Linn.) Alpine region of the Wind river mountains, near perpetual snow. Aug. 15. 
C, atrata, (Linn.) With the preceding. 


GRAMINE.E. 


Spartina cynosuroides, (Willd.) Little Blue river of the Kansas. June 22, 

Aristida pallens, (Pursh.) On the Platte. June 29. 

Agrostis Michauxiana, (‘Trin.) Little Blue river of the Kansas. June 23. 

Phleum alpinum, (Linn.) Alpine region of the Wind river mountains. Aug. 13-14. 

Bromus ciliatus, (Linn.), On the Platte. June-Aug. 

Pestuca ovina, (Linn.) Alpine region of the Wind river mountains. Aug. 13-14, 

Festuca nutans, (Willd.) On the Kansas. 

Poa laxa, (Haenke.) With the preceding, 

P. erocata, (Michx.) With the preceding. Spikelets 2-flowered. 

P. nervata, (Willd.) On the Kansas. 

Koeleria cristata, (Pers.) Big Blue river of the Kansas, and on the Platte as high as Laramie 
river. June 20—July 22, 

Deschampsia ceespitosa, (Beauv.) Alpine region of the Wind river mountains. Aug. 13-14, 

Andropogon scoparius, (Michx.) Lower Platte. 

A. nutans, (Linn.) Laramie river, North fork of the Platte. Sept. 3-4, 

Hordeum jubatum, (Ait.) Forks of the Platte. July 2. 

Elymus Virginicus, (Linn.) Big Blue river of the Kansas. June 20. 

E. Canadensis, (Linn.) Little Blue river of the Kansas. June 22. 

Beckmannia cruciformis, (Jacq.) North tork of the Platte. July 22. 


EQUISETACE®. 
Equisetum arvense, (Linn.) On a lake in the Wind river mountains. Aug. 12-17, 
.FILICES, 


Hypopeltis obtusa, (Torr. Compend. Bot. N, States, p. 380, 1826.) Aspidium obtusum, ( Willd.) 
Woodsia Perriniana, (Hook. and Grev. Icon. Fil. I. t. 68.) Physematium (Kaulf.) obtusum, 
(Hook. F]. Bor. Am. ii, p. 259.) On the Platte. 


_" 


t 


AY 
sas } 
dere 
June 
Broc 
was 
14"".( 

F; 
(of v 
of th 
long: 
judg 


7. 


26-31, 


atte. 


snow. Aug. 15. 


13-14. 


-14, 


high as Laramie 


Aug. 13-14, 


17, 


usum, ( Willd.) 
ulf.) obtusum, 


— 


99 [174 J 


ASTRONOMICAL OBSERVATIONS, 


The maps which accompany this report are on Flamsteed’s modified pro- 
jection, and the longitudes are referred to the meridian of Greenwich. 
For the determination of astronomical positions, we were provided with 
the following instruments: 
One telescope, magnifying power 120, 
One circle, by Gambey, Paris. 
One sextant, by Gambey, Paris. 
One sextant, by Troughton. 
One box chronometer, No, 7,810, by French, 
One Brockbank pocket chronometer. 
One small watch with a light chronometer balance, No. 4,632, by 
Arnold & Dent. 
The rate of the chronometer 7,810, is exhibited in the following state- 
ment: 


| “New York, May 5, 1842. 
“ Chronometer No. 7,810, by French, is this day at noon— 


‘“ Slow of Greenwich mean time - . 11’ 4" 
“ Fayt of New York mean time - - 4h. 45' 1" 
“ Loses per day - Q""Je 


“ARTHUR STEWART, 
“74 Merchants’ Eachange.” 


An accident among some rough ground in the neighborhood of the Kan- 
sas river strained the balance of this chronometer, (No. 7,810,) and ren- 
dered it useless during the remainder of the campaign. From the 9th of 


- June to the 24th of August, inclusively, the longitudes depend upon the 


Brockbank pocket chronometer; the rate of which, on leaving St. Louis, 
was fourteen seconds. The rate obtained by observations at Fort Laramie, 
14''.05, has been used in calculation. 

From the 24th of August until the termination of the journey, No. 4,632 
(of which the rate was 35'.79) was used for the same purposes. The rate 
of this watch was irregular, and I place but little confidence in the few 
longitudes which depend upon it, though, so far as we have any means of 
judging, they appear tolerably correct. 


f 174) 100 


Table of latitudes and longitudes, deduced from observations made 
during the journey. 


- - -—— oo 


Dato | Station. | Latitude, Longituds 
1842. | | Deg. min, ace. | Dex, min, see. 
May 27 | St. Louis, residence of Colonel Brant - - | os 37 SA 
Sune 8 | Choutenn’s lower trading pont, Kansas river uo 05) 57 4 35 46 
18 | Left bank of the Kansas river, seven miles above the 
ford ° ° : ° ° | 19 908 40 | 95 38 Ob 
is | Vermillion ereek — - - - - - 39 15 ow 6 O4 OF 
10 | Cold Springs, near the road to Laramie — - «| 39 30 40 96 14 49 
30 | Big Blue river : - - - >; 39 45 08 06 32 35 
25 | Little Blue river - - : - 109 26 50 8 22 12 
26 Right bank of Platte river. - : - -| 40 41 06 98 45 40 
2" Right bank of Platte river - . - - 40 39 32 99 O86 24 
28 | Right bank of Platte river. - . - -| 40 49 OSB 
30 | Right bank of Platte river - - -} 40 30 55 | 100 05 4 
Jaily 3 | Junction of North and South forks of the Nebraska 
| or Platte river - - - + -{| 41 05 O05 100 49 43 
4 | South fork of Platte river, left bank. 
6 | South fork of Platte river, island = - - - 40 61 17 103 O07 
V | South fork of Platte river, left bank - - -| 40 63 26 193 30 37 
11 | South fork of Platte riser, St. Verain's fort - - 40 22 35 105 12 12 
1% | Crow ereek - - : - -| 40 41 59 | 104 57 49 
18) On astream, name unknown . . -}| 41 Os 8O 104 39 37 
14 Horse eveek, Goshen’s hole? ° -| 4% 40° 1% 104 24 36 
16, Fort Laramie, vear the mouth of Laramie’s fork + | 42 te 10 104 47 «43 
28 , North fork of Platte river - - - - 4¥ 39 wh 104 59 89 
4 North fork of Platte river +. ° - - 12447 «40 
nh. North fork of Platte river, Dried Meat camp ° 4% 5L Bd 105 50 45 
26) North fork of Platte river, noon halt - - 42 50 08 
26 | North fork of Platte viver, mouth of Deer creek -| 43 62 24 106 08 24 
@N North fork of Platte river, Cache camp - -| 42 650 83 106 38 26 
24 | North fork of Platte river, left bank - : | 42 ua Ol 106 54 32 
40°) North fork of Platte river, Goat island . - 42. 33° 27 107 «13 29 
Sue 1 | Sweet Water river, one mile below Ruck Independ- | 
, ence + : - : - -| 412 29 56 | 107 25 2 
4 Sweet Wier river - - - ° -} 42 38 31 108 30 %3 
7 | Sweet Water river - - 2 27 15 109 21 32 
4 Little Sandy ereck, tri tary to the Colorado of the 
West - - ° -| 42 27 34 109 37 69 
3 | New fork, triutary to the Colorado - -| 42 42 46 109 58 th 
{0 | Mountain lake ° -ea- P -) 42 49 49 110. 08° 06: 
15 | Highest peak of the Wind river mountains, 
19 | Sweet Water, noon halt - . - ° 42 24 32 
19 | Sweet Water river - . - ” -| 42° 22 22 
20 | Sweet Water river - - - . -| 42 St 46 
32 | Sweet Water river, noon halt - - ~$ 42 26 10 
22 | Sweet Water river, at Rock Independence - | . 2 29 36 
33.) North fork of Platte river, mouth of Sweet oe - 42 27 #18 
30 | Horse-shoe creek, noon halt - -| 42 24 24 
ep. 3 | North fork of Platte river, right bank - .| 42 01 40 
a! North fork of Platte river, near Scott’s bluffs -| 4) 54 38 
© | Noszth fo.k of Platte river, right bank, six miles above 
Chimney rock + - -| 41 43° 36 
8 | North fork of Platte river, mouth of Ash creck -}| 41 17 #29 
9 | North tork of Platte river, right bank - -}| 42 14 30 
10 | North fork of Platte river, Cedar bluffs - -{ 4b 10 16 
'€@ | Platte river, noon halt “ . e -| 40 54 8S 
16 | Platte river, lott bank ~ - - -| 40 62 34 
57 | Platte river, left bank mn : : ~{| 40 42 38 


: 


101 ( 174 3 


tions made Tuble of latitudes and longitudes—Continued. 
= Date. Station, Latitude, | Longitude. 
| Longituda | ee 
| 1942. . | Deg. min. see, | Deg. min. oe 
| Dew, min, see. . 18 latte river, left bank - - . -| 40 40 2&1 
Leet e er ore _ 19 | Platte river, left bank . ° . . 40 39 44 
% 95 4 20 | Platte river, noon halt, lef bank - . -' 40 48 19 
20 Platte river, left bank - ° - -, 40 54 2 
0 388 OS 21 | Platte river, lett bank - - - -, 4t 06 37 
6 O4 OT 23 | Platte river, noon halt, left bank = - - -; 41 20 20 
06 14 49 23 | Platte river, loft bank - - - -| 41 22 h2 
06 32 35 25 | Platte river, mouth of Loup fork — - - : | 41 22 1 
98 22 12 28 | Platte river, mouth of Elk Horn river - -; 41 09 34 | 
98 45 40 29 | Platte river, left bank . - -!| 41 02 16 
99 O5 24 Oct. 2 | Bellevue, at the post of the American Fur Company, 
right bank of the Missouri river - - | 41 08 24 9 26 
100 08 4 4 | Left bank of the Missouri, opposite to the right benk | 
of the mouth of the Platte - - -| 41 02 11 
100 49 43 § | Missouri river - - - . -}| 40 34 08 
6 | Bertholet’s island, noon halt ° . -| 40 27 O8 
103 O7 6 | Missouri river, mouth of Nishnabatona river -| 40 16 40 | 
103 30 937 8 | Missouri river, left bank = - - . . | 39 36 O02 | 
105 12 12 10 | Missouri river, mouth of the Kansas river | 39 06 O38 | 
104 57 49 SN i NN A 
104 39 937 
104 24 36 
104 47 «43 
104 59 89 
105 50 45 
106 08 24 
106 38 26 
106 54 932 
Wwo7 3 206 
107 25 23 
108 30 &3 
109 21 32 
109 37 69 
109 58 Yt: 


110: 08° 08: e 


Pb 


A REPORT 


or THB 


EXPLORING EXPEDITION 


To 


OREGON AND NORTH CALIFORNIA, 


IN THE YEARS 1843-'44, 


SECOND EXPEDITION—1843—'44- 


Wasninoron Crry, March 1, 1845, 
Colonel J. J. Angnt, 
Chief of the Corps of Topographical Engineers: 

Sin: In pursuance of your instructions, to connect the reconnoissance of 
1842, which [I had the honor to conduct, with the surveys of Commander 
Wilkes on the coast of the Pacific ocean, so as to give a connected survey 
of the interior of our continent, I proceeded to the Great West early in the 
spring of 1843, and arrived, on the 17th of May, at the little town of Kan- 
sas, on the Missouri frontier, near the junction of the Kansas river with 
the Missouri river, where I was detained near two weeks in completing 
the necessary preparations for the extended explorations which my instruc- 
tions contemplated, 

My party consisted principally of Creole and Canadian French, and 
Americans, amounting in all to 39 men; among whom you will recognise 
several of those who were with me in my first expedition, and who have 
been favorably brought to your notice ina former report. Mr. Thomas 
Fitzpatrick, whom many years of hardship and exposure in the western 
territories had rendered familiar with a portion of the country it was de- 
signed to explore, had been selected as our guide ; and Mr. Charles Preuss, 
who had been my assistant in the previous journey, was again associated 
with me in the same capacity on the present expedition, Agreeably to your 
directions, Mr. Theodore Talbot, of Washington city, had been attached to 
the party, with a view to advancement in his profession ; and at St. Louis 
I had been joined by Mr. Frederick Dwight, a gentleman of Springfield, 
Massachusetts, who availed himself of our overland journey tu visit the 
Sandwich islands and China, by way of Fort Vancouver. 

The men engaged for the service were : 


Alexis Ayot, Louis Ménard, 
Frangois Badeau, Louis Montreuil, 
Oliver Beaulieu, Samuel Neal, 
Baptiste Bernier, Alexis Pera, 
John A. Campbell, Francois Pera, 
John G. Campbell, James Power, 
Manuel Chapman, Raphael Proue, 
Ranson Clark, Oscar Sarpy, 
Philibert Courteau, Baptiste Tabeau, 
Michel Crélis, Charles Taplin, 
William Creuss, Baptiste Tesson, 
Clinton Deforest, Auguste Vasquez, 
Baptiste Derosier, Joseph Verrot, 
Basil Lajeunesse, Patrick White, 
Francois Lajeunesse, Tiery Wright, 


Henry Lee, . Louis Zindel, and 


} 
i 
i 


it! 
Hi 
|, 
1 | 
| 

f 
q 
i 
nt) 


[ 174] 106 


Jacob Dodson, a free young colored man of Washington city, who vol- 
unteered to accompany the expedition, and performed his duty manfully 
throughout the voyage. ‘T'wo Delaware Indians—a fine-looking old man 
and hisson—were engaged to accompany the expedition as hunters, through 
the kindness of Major Cummins, the excellent Indian agent. L. Maxwell, 
who had accompanied the expedition as one of the hunters in 1842, being 
on his way to Taos, in New Mexico, also joined us at this place. 

The party was armed generally with Hall’s carbines, which, with a brass 
12-lb. howitzer, had been furnished to me from the United States arsenal at 
St. Louis, agreeably to the orders of Colonel 8S, W. Kearney, commanding 
the 3d military division. Three men were especially detailed for the man- 
agement of this piece, under the charge of Louis Zindel, a native of Germa- 
ny, who had been 19 years a non-commissioned officer of artillery in the 
Prussian army, and regularly instructed in the duties of his profession. The 
camp equipage and provisions were transported in twelve carts, drawn each 
by two mules; and a light covered wagon, mounted on good springs, had 
been provided for the safer carriage of the instruments. These were: 


One refracting telescope, by Frauenhofer. 

One reflecting circle, by Gambey. 

Two sextants, by Troughton. 

One pocket chronometer, No. 837, by Goffe, Falmouth. 
One pocket chronometer, No. 739, by Brockbank. 

One syphon barometer, by Bunten, Paris. 

One cistern barometer, by Frye & Shaw, New York. 
Six thermometers, and a number of small compasses. 


To make the exploration as useful as possible, 1 determined, in conform. 
ity to your general instructions, to vary the route to the Rocky mountains 
from that followed in the year 1842. The route then was up the valley of 
the Great Platte river to the South Pass, in north latitude 42°; the route 
now determined on was up the valley of the Kansas river, and to the head 
of the Arkansas, and to some pass in the mountains, if any could be found. 
at the sources of that river. 

By making this deviation from the former route, the problem of a new 
road to Oregon and California, in a climate more genial, might be solved ; 
and a better knowledge obtained of an important river, and the country it 
drained, while the great object of the expedition would find its point of 
commencement at the termination of the former, which was at that great 
gate in the ridge of the Rocky mountains called the South Pass, and on the 
lofty peak of the mountain which overlooks it, deemed the highest peak in 
the ridge, and from the opposite sides of which four great rivers take their 
rise, and flow to the Pacific or the Mississippi. 

Various obstacles delayed our departure until the morning of the 29th, 
when we commenced our long voyage; and at the close of a day, rendered 
disagreeably cold by incessant rain, encamped about four miles beyond the 
frontier, on the verge of the great prairies. 

Resuming our journey on the 3lst, after the delay of a day to complete 
our equipment and furnish ourselves with some of the comforts of civilized 
life, we encamped in the evening at Elm Grove, in company with several 

emigrant wagons, constituting a party which was proceeding to Upper Cal- 
ifornia, under the direction of Mr. J. B. Childs, of Missouri. The wagons 
were variously freighted with goods, furniture, and farming utensils, con- 


*, who vol- 
y manfully 
gz old man 
rs, through 
,» Maxwell, 
842, being 
e. 

vith a brass 
s arsenal at 
mmanding 
r the man- 
of Germa- 
lery in the 
sion. The 
lrawn each 
rings, had 
were: 


1 conform. 
mountains 
e valley of 
the route 
D the head 
be found. 


of anew 
be solved ; 
country it 
Ss point of 
hat great 
nd on the 
st peak in 
ake their 


the 29th, 
, rendered 
pyond the 


complete 
civilized 
h several 
pper Cal- 
B wagons 
sils, con- 


107 [ 174] 


taining among other things an entire set of machinery for a mill which Mr. 
Childs designed erecting on the waters of the Sacramento river emptying 
into the bay of San Francisco. 

We were joined here by Mr. William Gilpin, of Missouri, who, intending 
this year to visit the settlements in Oregon, had been invited to accompany 
us, and proved a useful and agreeable addition to the party. From this en- 
campment, our route until the 3d of June was nearly the same as that de- 
scribed to you in 1842. ‘Trains of wagons were almost constantly in sight ; 
giving tothe road a populous and animated appearance, although the great- 
er portion of the emigrants were collected at the crossing, or already on 
their march beyond the Kansas river. 

Leaving at the ford the usua! emigrant road to the mountains, (which you 
will find delineated with considerable detail on one of the accompanying 
maps,) we continued our route along the southern side of the Kansas, where 
we found the country much more broken than on the northern side of the 
river, and where our progress was much delayed by the numerous small 
streams, which obliged us to make frequent bridges. On the morning of 
the 4th, we crossed a handsome stream, called by the Indians Otter creek, 
about 130 feet wide, where a flat stratum of limestone, which forms the 
bed, made an excellent ford. We met here a small party of Kansas and 
Delaware Indians, the latter returning from a hunting and trapping expe- 
dition on the upper waters of the river; and on the heights above were 
five or six Kansas women, engaged in digging prairie potatoes, ( psoralea 
esculenta.) On the afternoon of the 6th, while busily engaged in crossing 
a wooded stream, we were thrown into a little confusion by the sudden ar- 
rival of Maxwell, who entered the cainp at full speed at the head of a war 
party of Osage Indians, with gay red blankets, and heads shaved to the 
scalp lock. They had run him a distance of about nine miles, from a creek 
on which we had encamped the day previous, and to which he had re- 
turned in search of a runaway horse belonging to Mr. Dwight, which had 
taken the homeward road, carrying with him saddle, bridle, and holster 
pistols. The Osages were probably ignorant of our strength, and, when 
they charged into the camp, drove off a number of our best horses; but we 
were fortunately well mounted, and, after a hard chase of seven or eight 
miles, succeeded in recovering them all. This accident, which occasioned 
delay and trouble, and threatened danger and loss, and broke down some 
good horses at the start, and actually endangered the expedition, was a first 
fruit of having gentlemen in company—very estimable, to be sure, but who 
are not trained to the care and vigilance and self-dependence which such an 
expedition required, and who are not subject to the orders which enforce 
attention and exertion. We arrived on the 8th at the mouth of the Smoky- 
hill fork, which is the principal southern branch of the Kansas; forming 
here, by its junction with the Republican, or northern branch, the main 
Kansas river. Neither stream was fordable, and the necessity of making 
a raft, together with bad weather, detained us here until the morning of 
the 11th; when we resumed our journey along the Republican fork. By 
our observations, the junction of the streams is in latitude 39° 03' 38", longi- 
tude 96° 24' 56", and at an elevation of 926 feet above the gulf of Mexico. 
For several days we continued to travel aleng the Republican, through a 
country beautifully watered with numerous streams, handsomely timbered; 
and rarely an incident occurred to vary the monotonous resemblance which 
one day on the prairies here bears to another, and which scarcely require 


f 174 J 108 


a particular description. Now and then, we caught a glimpse of a small 
herd of elk ; and occasionally a band of antelopes, whose curiosity some- 
times brought them within rifle range, would circle round us, and then 
scour off into the prairies, As we advanced on our road, these became 
more frequent; but as we journeyed on the line usually followed by the 
trapping and hunting parties of the Kansas and Delaware Indians, game 
of every kind continued very shy and wild, The bottoms which form the 
immediate valley of the main river were generally about three miles wide; 
having a rich soil of black vegetable mould, and, for a prairie country, well 
interspersed with wood. ‘The country was every where covered with a 
considerable variety of grasses—occasionally poor and thin, but far more 
frequently Juxuriant and rich. We had been gradually and regularly as- 
cending in our progress westward, and on the evening of the 14th, when 
we encamped on a little creek in the valley of the Republican, 265 miles 
by our travelling road from the mouth of the Kansas, we were at an eleva- 
tion of 1,520 feet. That part of the river where we were now encamped is 
called by the Indians the Big Timéber. Hitherto our route had been laborious 
and extremely slow, the unusually wet spring and constant rain having so 
saturated the whole country that it was necessary to bridge every water- 
course, and, for days together, our usual march averaged only five or six 
miles. Finding that at such a rate of travel it would be imposible to com- 
ply with your instructions, I determined at this place to divide the party, 
and, leaving Mr. Fitzpatrick with 25 men in charge of the provisions and 
heavier baggage of the ‘camp, to proceed myself in advance, with a light 
party of 15 men, taking with me the howitzer and the light wagon which 
carried the instruments. 

Accordingly, on the morning of the 16th, the parties separated ; and, bear- 
ing a little out from the river, with a view of heading some of the numerous 
affluents, after a few hours’ travel over somewhat broken ground, we en- 
tered upon an extensive and high level prairie, on which we encamped to- 
wards evening ata little stream, where a single dry cottonwood afforded the 
necessary fuel for preparing supper. Among a variety of grasses which to- 
day made their first appearance, I noticed bunch grass, ( /estuca,) and buffalo 
grass, (sesleria dactyloides.) Amorpha canescens (dead plant) continued 
the characteristic plant of the country, and a narrow-leaved duthyrus oc- 
curred during the morning in beautiful patches. Sida coccinea occurred 
frequently, with a psoralia near psoralia floribunda, and a number of 
plants not hitherto met, just verging into bloom. The water on which we 
had encamped belonged to Solomon’s fork of the Smoky-hill river, along 
whose tributaries we continued to travel for several days. 

The country afforded us an excellent road, the route being generally 
over high and very level prairies; and we met with no other delay than be- 
ing frequently obliged to bridge one of the numerous streams, which were 
well timbered with ash, elm, cottonwood, and a very large oak—the latter 
being, occasionally, five and six feet in diameter, with a spreading summit. 
Sida coccinea. is very frequent in vermilion-colored patches on the high 

and low prairie; and I remarked that it has a very pleasant perfume. 

The wild sensitive plant (schrankia angustata) occurs frequently, gen- 
erally ‘on the dry prairies, in valleys of streams, and frequently on the broken 
prairie bank. I remark that the leaflets close instantly to a very light touch. 


Amorpha, with the same psoralea, and a dwarf species of lupinus, are the 
characteristic plants. 


se of a small 
riosity some- 
us, and then 
these became 
lowed by the 
indians, game 
hich form the 
2 miles wide; 
country, well 
vered with a 
but far more 
regularly as- 
e 14th, when 
an, 265 miles 
> at an eleva- 
encamped is 
een laborious 
in having so 
every water- 
ly five or six 
sible to com- 
de the party, 
‘ovisions and 
with a light 
vagon which 


; and, bear- 
he numerous 
bund, we en- 
ncamped to- 

afforded the 
ses which to- 
,) and buffalo 
¢) continued 
athyrus oc- 
rea occurred 
h number of 
Du Which we 
river, along 


g generally 
lay than be- 
which were 
—the latter 
ing summit. 
bn the high 
prfume. 

ently, gen- 
the broken 
light touch. 
nus, are the 


109 [ 174 ] 


On the 19th, in the afternoon, we crossed the Pawnee road to the Ar- 
kansas, and, travelling a few miles onward, the monotony of the prairies 
was suddenly dispelled by the appearance of five six or buffalo bulls, form- 
ing a vanguard of immense herds, among which we were travelling a few 
days afterwards. Prairie dogs were scen for the first time during the day; 
and we had the good fortune to obtain an antelope for supper. Our eleva- 
tion had now increased to 1,900 feet. Sida coccinea was a characteristie 
on the creek bottoms, and buffalo grass is becoming abundant on the higher 
parts of the ridges. 

June 21.—During the forenoon we travelled up a branch of the creek on 
which we had encamped, ina broken country, where, however, the dividing 
ridges always afforded a good road. Plants were few; and with the 
short sward of the buffalo grass, which now prevailed every where, giving 
to the prairies a smooth and mossy appearance, were mingled frequent 
patches of a beautiful red grass, (aristida pallens.) which had made its ap- 
pearance only within the last few days, 

We halted to noon at a solitary cottonwood ina hollow, near which was 
killed the first buffalo, a large old bull. 

Antelope appeared in bands during the day. Crossing here to the affluents 
of the Republican, we evcamped on a fork, about forty feet wide aud one 
foot deep, flowing with a swift current over a sandy bed, and well wooded 
with ash-leaved maple, (negundo fraxinifolium,) elm, cottonwood, and a 
few white oaks. We were visited in the evening by a very violent storm, 
accompanied by wind, lightning, and thunder; a cold rain falling in torrents, 
According to the barometer, our elevation was 2,130 feet above the gulf. 

At noon, on the 28d, we descended into the valley of a principal fork of 
the Republican, a beautiful stream with a dense border of wood, consisting 
principally of varieties of ash, forty feet wide and four feetdeep. It was mu- 
sical with the notes of many birds, which, from the vast expanse of silent 
prairie around, seemed all to have collected here. We continued during 
the afternoon our route along the river, which was populous with prairie 
dogs, (the hotioms being entirely occupied with their villages,) and late im 
the evening encamped on its banks, The prevailing timber is a blue-foliaged 
ash, (fravinus, near F’. Amertcana,) and ash-leaved maple. With these 

were frazinus Americana, cottonwood,and long-leaved willow. We gave 
to this stream the name of Prairie Dog river. Elevation 3,350 feet. Our 
road on the 25th lay over high smooth ridges, 3,100 feet above the sea; 
buffalo in great numbers, absolutely covering the face of the country. At 
evening we encamped within a few miles of the main Republican, on a lit- 
tle creek, where the air was fragrant with the perfume of arlemisia filifolia, 
which we here saw for the first time, and which was now in bloom. Shortly 
after leaving our encampment on the 26th, we found suddenly that the na- 
ture of the country had entirely changed. Bare sand hills every where sur- 
rounded us in the undulating ground along which we were moving; aud 
the plants peculiar to a sandy soil made their appearance in abundance. A 
few miles further we entered the valley of a large stream, afterwards known 
to be the Republican fork of the Kansas, whose shallow waters, with a 
depth of only a few inches, were spread out overa bed of yellowish white 
sand 600 yards wide. With the exception of one or two distant and de- 
tached groves, no timber of any kind was to be seen; and the features of 
the country assumed a desert character, with which the broad river, strug; 
gling for existence among quicksands along the treeless banks, was strik- 


j 
it 
i 
Ht}, 
vat 
#4) 
a} 
rT 
i 
{ 
i. al 
Mii 
iff 
iq! 


C 174] 110 


ingly in keeping. On the opposite side, the broken ridges assumed almost 
a mountainous appearance; aud, fording the stream, we continued on our 
course among these ridges, and encamped late in the evening at a little pond 
of very bad water, from which we drove away a herd of builalo that were 
standing in and about it. Our encampment this evening was 3,500 feet 
above the sea. We travelled now for several days through a broken and 
dry sandy region, about 4,000 feet above the sea, where there were no run- 
ning streams; and some anxiety was constantly felt on account of the un- 
certainty of water, which was only to be found in small Jakes that occur 
red occasionally among the hills. ‘The discovery of these always brought 
pleasure to the camp, as around them were generally green flats, which af- 
forded abundant pasturage for our animals; and here were usually collected 
herds of the buffalo, which now were scattered over all the country in 
countless iumbers. 

The soil of bare and hot sands supported a varied and exuberant growth 
of plants, which were much farther advanced than we had previously found 
them, and whose showy bloom somewhat relieved the appearance of gene- 
ral sterility. Crossing the summit of an elevated and continuous range of 
rolling hills, on the afternoon of the 30th of June we found ourselves over- 
looking a broad and misty valley, where, about ten miles distant, and 1,000 
feet below us, the South fork of the Platte was rolling magnificently along, 
swollen with the waters of the melting snows, It was in strong and re- 
freshing contrast with the parched country from which we had just issued; 
and when, at night, the broad expanse of water grew indistinct, it almost 
seemed that we had pitched our tents on the shore of the sea. 

Travelling along up the valley of the river, here 4,000 feet above the sea, 
in the afternoon of July 1 we caught a far and uncertain view of a faint 
blue mass in the west, as the stn sank behind it; and from our camp in the 
morning, atthe mouth of Bijou, Long’s peak and the neighboring moun- 
tains stood out into the sky, grand and luminously white, covered to their 
bases with glittering snow. 

On the evening of the 3d, as we were journeying along the partially over- 
flowed bottoms of the Platte, where our passage stirred up swarms of mos- 
quitoes, We came unexpectedly upon an Indian, who was perched ona 
bluff, curiously watching the movements of our caravan. He belonged to 
a viliage of Oglallah Sioux, who had lost all their animals in the severity 
of the preceding winter, and were now on their way up the Bijou fork to 
beg horses from the Arapahoes, who were hunting butialo at the head of 
that river. Several came into our camp at noon; and, as they were hungry, 
as usual, they were provided with buffalo meat, of which the hunters had 
brought in an abundant supply. 

About noon, on the 4th of July, we arrived at the fort, where Mr. St. 
Vrain received us with his customary kindiness, and invited us te join him 
in a feast which had been prepared in honor of the day. 

Our animals were very much worn out, and our stock of provisions en- 
tirely exhausted when we arrived at the fort; but I was disappointed in my 
hope of obtaining relief, as I found it ina very impoverished condition ; and 
we were able to procure only a little unbolted Mexican flour, and some 
salt, with a few pounds of powder and lead. 

As regarded provisions, it did not much matter in a country where rarely 
the day passed without seeing some kind of game, and where it was fre- 
quently abundant. It was a rare thing to lie down hungry, and we had al- 


med almost 
ued on our 
little pond 
» that were 
; 3,500 feet 
broken and 
rere no run- 
1 of the un- 
that occur. 
ys brought 
3, Which af- 
lly collected 
country in 


‘ant growth 
ously found 
nce of gene- 
us range of 
selves over- 
t, and 1,000 
ently along, 
ong and re- 
just issued; 
t, it almost 


ove the sea, 
Vv of a faint 
amp in the 
ring moun- 
red to their 


‘tially over- 
rns of mos- 
rched ona 
elonged to 
he severity 
ijou fork to 
he head of 
ere hungry, 
unters had 


re Mr. St. 
to join him 


visions en- 
nted in my 
ition ; and 
, and some 


here rarely 
it was fre- 
we had al- 


111 [174] 


ready learned to think bread a luxury; but we could not proceed without 
animals, and our own were not capable of prosecuting the journey beyond 
the mountains without relief. 

I had been informed that a large number of mules had recently arrived 
at Taos, from Upper California; and as our friend, Mr. Maxwell, was 
about to continue his journey to that place, where a portion of his family 
resided, L engaged him to purchase for me 10 or 12 mules, with the un- 
derstanding that he should pack them with provisions and other necessa- 
ries, and meet me at the mouth of the Fondaine qui bouit, on the Arkan- 
sas river, to which point I would be led in the course of the survey. 

Agreeably to his own request, and in the conviction that his habits of 
‘ife and education had not qualified him to endure the hard life of a voy- 
ageur, I discharged here one of my party, Mr. Oscar Sarpy, having furnished 
him with arms and means of trausportation to Fort Laramie, where he 
would be in the line of caravans returning to the States. 

At daybreak, on the 6th of July, Maxwell was on his way to Taos ; and 
a few hours after we also had recommenced our journey up the Platte, 
which was continuously timbered with cottonwood and willow, on a gen- 
erally sandy soil. Passing on the way the remains of two abandoned 
forts, (one of which, however, was still in good condition,) we reached, in 
10 miles, Fort Lancaster, the trading establishment of Mr. Lupton. His post 
was beginning to assume the appearance of a comfortable farm: stock, hogs, 
and cattle, were rangiug about ou the prairie; there were different kinds 
of poultry ; and there was the wreck, of a promising garden, in which a 
considerable variety of vegetables had been in a flourishing condition, but 
it had been almost entirely ruined by the recent high waters, I remained 
to spend with him an agreeable hour, and sat off in a cold storm of rain, 
which was accompanied with violent thunder and lightning. We encamped 
immediately on the river, 16 miles from St. Vrain’s. Several Arapahoes, 
on their way to the village which was encamped a few miles above us, 
passed by the camp in the course of the afternoon. Night sat in stormy 
and cold, with heavy and continuous rain, which lasted until morning. 

July 7.—We made this morning an early start, continuing to travel up 
the Platte ; and in a few miles frequent bands of horses and mules, scatter- 
ed for several miles round about, indicated our approach to the Arapaho 
village, which we found encamped in a beautiful bottom, and consisting of 
about 160 lodges. It appeared extremely populous, with a great number 
of children; a circumstauce which indicated a regular supply of the means 
of subsistence, ‘The chiefs, who were gathered together at the farther end 
of the village, received us (as probably strangers are always received to 
whom they desire to show respect or regard) by throwing their arms around 
our necks and embracing us. 

_ It required some skill in horsemanship to keep the saddle during the per- 
formance of this ceremony, as our American horses exhibited for them the 
same fear they have for a bear or any othér wild animal. Having very few 
goods with me, I was only able to make them a meager present, accounting 
ior the poverty of the gift by explaining that my goods had been lett with 
the wagons in charge of Mr. Fitzpatrick, who was well known to them as 
the White Head, or the Broken Hand. I saw here, as I had remarked in 
an Arapaho village the preceding year, near the lodges of the chiefs, tall 


tripods of white poles supporting their spears and shields, which showed it 
to be a regular custom. 


f 
| 


Some gare eo ae 


[ 174 ] 112 


Though disappointed in obtaining the presents which had been evident 
ly expected, they behaved very courteously, and, after a little conversation, 
1 left them, and, continuing on up the river, halted to noon on the bluff, 
as the bottoms are almost inundated; continuing in the afternoon our 
route along the mountains, which were dark, misty, and shrouded—threat- 
ening a storm; the snow peaks sometimes glittering through the clouds be- 
yond the first ridge, 

We surprised a grizzly bear sauntering along the river; which, raising 
himself upon his hind legs, took a deliberate survey of us, that did not ap- 
pear very satisfactory to him, and he scrambled juto the river and swam 
to the opposite side, We halted for the night a little above Cherry creek ; 
the evening cloudy, with many mosquitoes, Some indifferent observations 
placed the camp in latitude 39° 43' 53", and chronometric longitude 105° 
24' 34". 

July 8.—We continued to-day to travel up the Platte; the morning pleas- 
ant, with a prospect of fairer weather. During the forenoon our way lay 
over a more broken country, with a gravelly and sandy surface ; although 
the immediate bottom of the river was a good soil, of a dark sandy montld, 
resting upon a stratum of large pebbles, or rolled stones, as at Laramie fork. 
On our right, aud apparently very near, but probably Sor 10 miles distant, 
and two or three thousand feet above us, ran the first range of the moun- 
tains, like a dark corniced line, in clear contrast with the great snowy chain 
which, immediately beyond, rose glittering five thousand feet above them. 
We caught this morning a view of Pike’s peak ; but it appeared for a mo- 
ment only, as clouds rose early over the mountains, and shrouded them in 
mist and rain all the day. Iu the first range were visible, as ut the Red 
Buttes on the North fork, very lofty escarpments of red rock, While trav- 
elling through this region, I remarked that always in the morning the lofty 
peaks were visible and bright, but very soon small white clouds began to 
settle around them-—brewing thicker and darker as the day advauced, until 
the afternoon, when the thunder began to roll; and invariably at evening 
we had more or less ‘fa thunder storm, At 11 o’clock, and 21 miles from 
St. Vrain’s fort, we reached a point in this southeru fork of the Platte, where 
the stream is divided into three forks; two of those (one of them being much 
the largest) issuing directly from the mountains on the west, and forming, 
with the easternmost brauch, a river of the plains, ‘The elevation of this 
point is about 5,500 feet above the sea; this river falling 2,800 feet in a 
distance of 316 miles, to its junction with the North fork of the Platte. In 
this estimate, the elevation of the junction is assumed as given by our bar- 
ometrical observations in 1842. 

On the easternmost branch, up which we took our way, we first came 
among the pines growing on the top of a very ligh bank, and where we 
halted on it to noon; quaking asp (populus tremuloides) was mixed with 
the cottonwood, and there were excellent grass and rushes for the animals. 

During the morning there occurred many beautiful flowers, which we 
had not hitherto met. Among them, the common blue flowering flax made 
its first appearance ; and a tall and handsome species of glia, with sleuder 
scarlet flowers, which appeared yesterday for the first time, was very fre- 
quent to-day. 

We had ‘ound very little game since leaving the fort, and provisions be- 
gan to get unpleasantly scant, as we had had no meat for several days 3 but 
towards sundown, when we had already made up our minds to sleep another 


evident 
yersations 
he bluff, 
1ouon our 
—tlreat- 
louds be- 


h, raising 
d not ap. 
nd swam 
ry creek ; 
ervations 
ude 105° 


ing pleas- 
way lay 
although 
ly mould, 
nie fork. 
s distant, 
he moun- 
wy chain 
ove them. 
for a mo- 
1 them in 
the Red 
hile trav- 
the lofty 
began to 
ced, until 
t evening 
iles from 
te, where 
ing much 
forming, 
bn of this 
feet ina 
latte, In 

our bar- 


nrst came 
here we 
xed with 
animals. 
vhich we 
lax made 
h sleuder 
very fre- 


sions be- 
ays; but 
ip another 


113 [ 174} 


night without supper, Lajeunesse had the good fortune to kill a fine deer, 
which he found feeding in a hollow near by; and as the rain began to fall, 
threatening an unpleasant night, we hurried to secure a comfortable camp 
in the timber. 

To-night the camp fires, girdled with appo/as of fine venison, looked 
cheerful in spite of the stormy weather, 

July 9.—On account of the low state of our provisions and the scarcity 
of game, I determined to vary our route, and proceed several camps to the 
eastward, in the hope of falling in with the buffalo. This route along the 
dividing grounds between the Sauth. fork of the Platte and the Arkansas, 
would also afford some additional geographical information, This morning, 
therefore, we turned to the eastward, along the upper waters of the stream 
on which we had encamped, entering a country of picturesque and varied 
scenery; broken into rocky hills of singular shapés; little valleys, with 
pure crystal watet, here leaping swiftly along, and there losing itself in the 
sands; green spots of luxuriant grass, flowers of all colors, and timber of 
different kinds—every thing to give it a varied beauty, except game. ‘To 
one.of these remarkably shaped hills, having on the summit a circular 
flat rock two or three hundred yards in circumference, some one gave the 
name of Poundcake, which it has been permitted to retain, as our hungry 
people seemed to think it a very agreeable comparison. In the afternoon 
a buffalo bull was killed, and we encamped on a sinall stream, near the 
road which runs from St. Vrain’s fort to the Arkansas, 

July 10.—Snow fell heavily on the mountains during the night, and 
Pike’s peak this morning is luminous and grand, covered from the summit, 
as low down as we can see, with glittering white. Leaving the encamp- 
ment at 6 o’clock, we continued our easterly course over a rolling country, 
near to the high ridges, which are generally rough and rocky, with a coarse 
conglomerate displayed in masses, and covered with pines. This rock is 
very friable, and it is undoubtedly from its decomposition that the prairies 
derive their sandy and gravelly formation. In 6 miles we crossed a head 
water of the Kioway river, on which we found a strong fort and cord/ that 
had been built in the spring, and halted to noon on the principal branch of 
the river. During the morning our route led over a dark vegetable mould, 
mixed with sand and gravel, the characteristic plant being esparcet(e, (ono- 
brychis sativa,) a species of clover which is much used in certain parts of 
Germany for pasturage of stock—principally hogs. It is sown on rocky 
waste ground, which would otherwise be useless, and grows very Juxu- 
riantly, requiring only a renewal of the seed about once in fifteen years. 
Its abundance here greatly adds to the pastoral value of this region. A 
species of antennaria in flower was very common along the line of road, 
and the creeks were timbered with willow and pine. We encamped on 
Bijou’s fork, the water of which, unlike the clear stream: \e had previously 
crossed, is of a whitish color, and the soil of the bottom »\ ery hard, tough 
clay. There was a prairie dog village on the bottom, ana, ‘n the endeavor 
to unearth one of the little animals, we labored ineffectual’. in the tough 
clay until dark. After descending, with a slight inclination, until it had 
gone the depth of two feet, the hole suddenly turned at a sharp angle in 
another direction for one more foot in depth, when it again turned, taking 
an ascending direction to the next nearest hole. I have no doubt that all 
their little habitations communicate with each other. The greater part of 

8 


[ 174 ] 114 


the people were sick to-day, and I was inclined to attribute their indispo- 
sition to the meat of the bull which had been killed the previous day. 

July 11.—There were no indications of buffalo having been recently in 
the neighborhood; and, unwilling to travel farther eastward, I turned this 
morning to the southward, up the valley of Bijou. Lsparcette occurred 
universally, and among the plants on the river I noticed, for the first time 
during this journey, a few small bushes of the absinthe of the voyageurs, 
which iscommonly used for fire wood, (arlemisia tridentata.) Yesterday 
and to-day the road has been ornamented with the showy bloom of a beau- 
tiful /upinus, a characteristic in many parts of the mountain region, on 
which were generally great numbers of an insect with very bright colors, 
(litta vesicatoria.) 

As we were riding quietly along, eagerly searching every hollow in 
search of game, we discovered, at a little distance in the. prairie, a large 
grizzly bear, so busily engaged in digging roots that he did not perceive us 
until we were galloping down a little hill fifty yards from him, when he 
charged upon us with such sudden energy, that several of us came near 
losing our saddles. Being wounded, he commenced retreating to a rocky 
piney ridge near by, from which we were not able to cuthim off, and we 
entered the timber with him, The way was very much blocked up with 
fallen timber ; and we kept up a running fight for some time, animated by 
the bear charging among the horses. He did not fall until after he had 
received six rifle balls. He was miserably poor, and added nothing to our 
stock of provisions. 

We followed the stream to its head in a broken ridge, which, according 
to the barometer, was about 7,500 feet above the sea, Thisisa piney ele- 
vation, into which the prairies are gathered, and from which the waters 
flow, in almost every direction, to the Arkansas, Platte, and Kansas rivers ; 
the latter stream having here its remotest sources. Although somewhat 
rocky and broken, and covered with pines, in comparison with the neigh- 
boring mountains, it scarcely forms an interruption to the great prairie 
plains which sweep up to their bases. 

The annexed view of Pike’s peak from this camp, at the distance of 40 
miles, represents very correctly the manner in which this mountain barrier 
presents itself to travellers on the plains, which sweep almost directly to its 
bases; an inimense and comparatively smooth and grassy prairie, in very 
Strong contrast with the black masses of timber, and the glittering snow 
above them. ‘his is the picture which has been left upon my mind; and 
I annex this sketch, to convey to you the same impression. With occasional 
exceptions, comparatively so very small as not to require mention, these 
prairies are every where covered with a close and vigorous growth of a 
great variety of grasses, among which the most abundant is the buffalo grass, 
(sesleria dactyloides.) Between the Platte and Arkansas rivers, that part 
of this region which forms the basin drained by the waters of the Kansas, 
with which our operations made us more particularly acquainted, is based 
upon a formation of calcareous rocks, The soil of all this country is ex- 
cellent, admirably adapted to agricultural purposes, and would support a 
large agricultural and pastoral population. A glance at the map accom- 
panying this report, along our several lines of travel, will show you that this 
plain is watered by many streams. Throughout the western half of the 
plain, these are shallow, with sandy beds, becoming deeper as they reach 
the richer lands approaching the Missouri river ; they generally have bottom 


= 
rr 
> 
3 


vir indispo- 
is day, 
recently in 
turned this 
fe occurred 
e first time 
voyageurs, 
Yesterday 
1of a beau- 
region, on 
ight colors, 


hollow in 
le, a large 
perceive us 
1, When he 
came near 
to a rocky 
off, and we 
id up with 
nimated by 
ter he had 
hing to our 


according 
1 piney ele- 
the waters 
Isas rivers ; 
somewhat 
the neigh- 
eat prairie 


tance of 40 
ain barrier 
ectly to its 
ie, in very 
ring snow 
mind; and 
occasional 
ion, these 
owth of a 
ffalo grass, 
, that part 
he Kansas, 
, is based 
try is ex- 
support a 
Ap accom- 

that this 
alf of the 
ey reach 
e bottom 


S.3IWNld 410 MIA 


NYWid 


| 


oe > - 


lands, bord 
region the 
where the 
ure, it is of 
the wester! 
deserves to 
no other tr 
to thd trave 
border of 
tions, and | 
for whom t 
ably correc 
scending a 
rarely appe 
there were 
one of the ¢ 
lace the v 
in the soutl 
encamped | 
on myself, 
On the si 
which in fr 
tected by a 
ing was tol 
the camp 7 
Turning 
th » mornin 
encamped j 
river, wher 
that the sp 
cing gas in 
cold. Dur 
flower, wa 
ely of espa 
We hada 
imoon, witl 
‘sunset, was 
July 13, 
tiermomet 
‘ins, and 
We resu 
i ‘yu anely go 
Hy ' . bayou Sal 
" the road 
to noon un 
uriating o 
| tae . j|markably 3 
‘several str 
| ») |Pasembling 
| | hitherto se 


‘ment of a 
suit of bu 


_ 


‘4. amely good lodge trail, which issues by the head of this stream 


115 C174 ] 


lands, bordered by bluffs varying from 50 to 500 feet inheight. In all this 
region the timber is entirely confined to the streams, In the eastern half, 
where the soil is a deep, rich, vegetable mould, retentive of rain and moist- 
ure, it is of vigorous growth, Mt. of many different kinds; and throughout 
the western half it consists entirely of various species of cottonwood, which 
deserves to be called Mhe tree of the desert—growing in sandy soils, where 
no other tree will grow ; pointing out the existence of water, and furnishing 
to thé traveller fuel, and food for his animals, Add to this, that the western 
border of the plain is occupied by the Sioux, Arapaho, and Cheyenne na- 
tions, and the Pawnees and other half-civilized tribes in its eastern limits, 
for whom the intermediate country isa war ground, you will have a toler. 
ably correct idea of the appearance and condition of the country, De- 
scending « somewhat precipitous and rocky hill side among the pines, whith 
rarely appear elsewhere than on the ridge, we encamped at its foot, where 
there were several springs, which you will find laid down upon the map as 
one of the extreme sources of the Smoky Hill fork of the Kansas, From this 
lace the view extended over the Aykansas valley, and the Spanish peaks 
in the south beyond, As the greater part of the men continued sick, I 
encamped here for the day, and ascertained conclusively, from experiments 
on myself, that their illness was caused by the meat of the buffalo bull. 

On the summit of the ridge, near the cainp, were several rock-built forts, 
which in front were very difficult of approach, and in the rear were pro- 
tected by a precipice entirely beyond the reach of arifleball, ‘The even- 
ing was tolerably clear, with a temperature at sunset of 63°, Elevation of 
the camp 7,300 feet, 

Turning the next day to the southwest, we reached, in the course of 
th » morning, the wagon road to the settlements on the Arkansas river, and 
encamped in the afternoon on the Fonéaine-qui-bouil (or Boiling Spring) 
river, Where it was 50 feet wide, with a swift current. I afterwards found 
that the spring and river owe their names to the bubbling of the efferves- 
cing gas in the former, and not to the temperature of the water, which is 
cold. During the morning, a tall species of gi/ia, with a slender white 
flower, was characteristic; and, in the latter part of the day, another vari- 
ety of esparcette, (wild clover,) having the flower white, was equally so. 
We had a fine sunset of golden brown; and, in the evening, a very bright 
moon, with the near mountains, made a beautiful scene. ‘Thermometer, at 
‘sunset, was 69°, and our elevation above the sea 5,800 feet. 

July 13.—The morning was clear, with a northwesterly breeze, and the 
tiermometer at sunrise at 46°, There were no clouds aloug the moun- 

ins, and the morning sun showed very clearly their rugged character. 

We resumed our journey very early down the river, following an ex- 

trot the 
bayou Salade, a high mountain valley behind Pike’s peak. ‘The soil alon 
the road was sandy and gravelly, and the river well timbered. We halte 
to noon under the shade of some fine large cottonwoods, our animals lux- 
uriating on rushes (eqguiselum hyemale,) which, along this river, were re- 
markably abundant. A varicty of cactus made its appearance, and among 
Several strange plants were numerous and beautiful clusters of a plant 
irasembling mirabilis jalapa, with a handsome convolvulus I had not 
hitherto seen, (calystegia.) In the afternoon we passed near the encamp- 
ment of a hunter named Maurice, who had been out into the plains in pur- 
jsuit Of buffalo calves, a number of which I saw among soine domestic cat- 


c 174 J 116 


tle near his lodge. Shortly afterwards, a party of mountaineers galloped 
up to us—fine-looking and hardy men, dressed in skins and mounted on 
ood fat horses; among them were several Connecticnt men, a portion of 

‘yeth’s party, whom I had seen the year before, and others were men 
from the western States, 

Continuing down the river, we encamped at noon on the Mth at its 
mouth, on the Arkansas river, A short distance abéve our encampment, 
on the left bank of the Arkansas, is a pueblo, (as the Mexicans call their 
civilized Indian villages,) where a nuaiber of mountaineers, who had mar- 
ried Spanish women, in the valley of ‘Taos, had collected together, and oc- 
cupied themselves in farming, carrying on atthe same time a desultory In- 
dian trade, ‘They were principally Americans, and treated us with all the 
rude hospitality thelr situation admitted ; but as all commercial intercourse 
with New Mexico was now interrupted, in consequence of Mexican de- 
crees to that effect, there wus nothing to be had in the way of provisions, 
They had, however, a fine stock of cattle, and furnished us an abundance 
of excellent milk. I learned here that Maxwell, in company with two 
other men, had started for Taos on the morning of the 9th, but that he 
would probably fall into the hands of the Utah Indians, commonly called 
the Spanish Yutes. As Maxwell had no knowledge of their being in the 
vicinity when he crossed the Arkansas, his chance of escape was very 
doubtful; but I did not entertain much apprehension for his life, having 
great confidence in his prudence and courage, I was further informed that 
there had been a popular tumult among the pued/os, or civilized Indians, 
residing near ‘Tavs, against the “/oreigners” of that place, in which they 
had plundered their houses and ill-treated their families. Among those 
whose property had been destroyed, was Mr, Beaubien, father-in-law of 
Maxwell, from whom I had expected to obtain supplies, and who had 
been obliged to make his escape to Santa Fé, 

By this position of affairs, our expectation of obtaining supplies from 
Taos was cut off. I had here the satisfaction to meet our good buffalo 
hunter of 1842, Christopher Carson, whose services I considered myself 
fortunate to secure again; and asa reinforcement of mules was absolutely 
necessary, [ despatched him immediately, with an account of our necessi- 
ties, to Mr. Charles Bent, whose principal post is on the Arkansas river, 
about 75 miles below Fon/aine-qui-bouit, He was directed to proceed 
from that post by the nearest route across the country, and meet me with 
what animals he should be able to obtain at St. Vrain’s fort. I also ad- 
mitted into the party Charles Towns—a native of St. Louis, a serviceable 
man, with many of the qualities of a good voyageur. According to our ob- 
servations, the latitude of the mouth of the river is 38° 15' 23"; its longi- 
tude 104° 58' 30"; and its elevation above the sea 4,880 feet. 

On the morning of the 16th, the time for Maxwell’s arrival having ex- 
pired, we resumed our journey, leaving for him a note, in which it was 
stated that I would wait for him at St. Vrain’s fort until the morning of the 
26th, in the event that he should succeed in his commission. Our direction 
was up the Boiling Spring river, it being my intention to visit the celebrated 
springs from which the river takes its name, and which are on its upper 
waters, at the foot of Pike’s peak. Our animals-fared well while we were 
on this stream, there being every where a great abundance of préle. Ipo- 
meu leptophylla, in bloom, was a characteristic plant along the river, gen- 


re galloped 
mounted on 
a portion of 
were men 


» lath at ite 
bcgee, yee 
ne call their 
ho had mar- 
her, and oc- 
esultory In- 
with all the 
| intercourse 
\lexican de- 
’ provisions. 
1 abundance 
vy with two 
but that he 
nonly called 
being in the 
oe was very 

life, having 
unformed that 
zed Indians, 
) which they 
mong those 
ier-in-law of 
id who had 


ipplies trom 
ood buffalo 
lered inyself 
hs absolutely 
our necessi- 
kansas river, 
to proceed 
et me with 
I also ad- 

i. serviceable 
ng to our ob- 
3's its longi- 


| having ex- 
hich it was 
rning of the 
ur direction 
he celebrated 
on its upper 
ile we were 
préle, Ipo- 
he river, gen- 


ne Sy ee 


117 (174 J 


erally in large bunches, with two to five flowers on each, Beautiful clus 
ters of the plant resembling mirabilis jalapa were numerous, and gly- 

rrhiza lepidota was a characteristic of the bottoms Currants nearly 
ripe were abundant, and among the shrubs which covered the bottom was 
a very luxuriant growth of chenopodiaceous shrubs, four to six feet high. 

On the afternoon of the 17th we entered among the broken ridges at the 
foot of the mountains, where the river made several forks. Leaving the 
camp to follow slowly, [ rode ahead jn the afternoon in search of the springs. 
In the mean time, the clouds, which had been gathered all the afternoon over 
the mountains, began to rolldown their sides; anda storm so violent burst 
upon me, that it appeared I had entered the storehouse of the thunder 
storms, I continued, however, to ride along wp the river until about sunset, 
and was beginning to be doubtful of finding the springs before the next 
day, when I came suddenly upon a large swooth rock about twenty yards 
in diameter, where the water from several springs was bubbling and boiling 
up in the midst of a white incrustation with which it had covered a portion 
of the rock, As this did not correspond with a description given me by the 
hunters, I did not stop to taste the water, but, dismounting, walked a little 
way up the river, and, passing through a narrow thicket of shrubbery bor- 
doting the stream, stepped directly upon a huge white rock, at the foot of 
which the river, already become a torrent, foamed along, broken by a small 
fall, A deer which had been drinking at the spring was startled by my 
approach, and, springing across the river, bounded off up the mountain. 
In the upper part of the rock, which had apparently been formed by depo- 
sition, was a beautiful white basin, overhung by currant bushes, in which 
the cold clear water bubbled up, kept in constant motion by the pop arn 4 
gas, and overflowing the rock, which it had almost entirely covered wit 
a smooth crust of glistening white. I had all day refrained from drink- 
ing, reserving myself for the spring; and as I could not well be more wet 
than the rain had already made me, I lay down by the side of the basin, 
and drank heartily of the delightful water. The annexed sketch is only a 
rude one, but it will enable you to form some idea of the character of the 
scenery and the beauty of this spot, immediately at the foot of lofty moun- 
tains, beautifully timbered, which sweep closely round, shutting up the 
little valley ina kind of cove, As it was beginning to grow dark, I rode 
quickly down the river, on which I found the camp a few miles below. 

The morning of the 18th was beautiful and clear, and, all the people 
being anxious to drink of these famous waters, we encamped immediately 
at the springs, and spent there a very pleasant day. On the opposite side 
of the river is another locality of springs, which are entirely of the same 
nature. The water hasa very agreeable taste, which Mr. Preuss found very 
much to resemble that of the famous Selter springs in the grand duchy of 
Nassau, a country famous for wine and mineral waters; and it is almost 
entirely of the same character, though still more agreeable than that of the 
famous Bear springs, near Bear river of the Great Salt lake, The follow- 
ing is an analysis of an incrustation with which the water had covered a 
piece of wood lying on the rock ; 


Carbonate of lime - : : - - 92.25 
Carbonate of magnesia - - - - - 121 
Sulphate of lime 

Chloride of calcium . - - - - .23 


Chloride of magnesia 


[174 J 


Silica : - - - : - - 1.50 
Vegetable matter - - - - - - .20 
Moisture and loss - - - - - 4.61 

100.00 


At 11 o’clock, when the temperature of the air was 73°, that of the 
water in this was 60.5°; and that of the upper spring, which issued from 
the flat rock, more exposed to the sun, was 69°, Atsunset, when the tem- 
perature of the air was 66°, that of the lower springs was 58°, and that of 
the upper 61° 

July 19.—A beautiful and clear morning, with a slight breeze from the 
northwest ; the temperature of air at sunrise being 57.5°. At this time 
the temperature of the lower spring was 57.8°, and that of the upper 
54.3°, 

The trees in the neighborhood were birch, willow, pine, and an oak re- 
sembling guercus alba. In the shrubbery along the river are currant bushes, 
(ribes,) of which the fruit has a singular piney y flavor ; and on the mountain 
side, in a red gravelly soil, is a remarkable coniferous tree, (perhaps an 
abies,) having the leaves singulary long, broad, and scattered, with bushes 
of spirxa arizxfolia. ‘By our observations, this place is 6,350 feet above 
the sea, in latitude 38° 52’ 10", and longitude 105° 22' 45". 

Resuming our journey on this morning, we descended the river, in order 
to reach the mouth of the eastern fork, which I proposed to ascend. The 
left bank of the river here is very much broken. ‘There is a2 handsome 
little bottom on the right, and both banks are exceedingly, picturesque— 
strata of red rock, in nearly perpendicular walls, crossing the valley from 
north to south. About three miles below the springs, on the right bank of 
the river, is a nearly perpendicular limestone rock, presenting a uniformly 
unbroken surface, t:"enty: forty feet high, containing very great numbers 
of a large univalve shell, which appears to belong to the genus ine-eramus, 
and in the appendix is designated by the No. 42. 

In contact with this, to the westward, was another stratum of Innestone, 
containing fossil shells of a different character; and still higher up on the 
stream were parallel strata, consisting of a compact somewhat crystalline 
limestone, and argillaceous bituminous limestone in thin layers. During 
the morning, we travelled up the eastern fork of the Fontaine-qui-bouit 
river, our road being roughened by frequent deep gullies ‘timbered with 
pine, and halted to noon on a small branch of this stream, timbered prin- 
cipally with the narrow-leaved cottonwood, (populdus angustifolia,) called 
by the Canadians dia;d amere. Ona hill, near by, were two remarkable 
columns of a grayish-white conglomerate rock, one of which was about 
twenty feet high, and two feet in diameter. They are surmounted by slabs 
of a dark ferruginous conglomerate, forming black caps, and adding very 
much to their columnar effect at a distance. ‘This rock is very destructible 
by the action of the weather, and the hill, of which they formerly consti- 
tuted a part, is entirely abraded. 

A shaft of the gun carfiage was broken in the afternoon; and we made 
an early halt, thes stream being from twelve to twenty feet wide, with clear 
water. As usual, the clouds had gathered to a storm over the mountains, 
and we had ashowery evening. At sunset the thermometer stood at 62°, 
and our elevation above the sea was 6,530 feet. 


~ RRS =a 


t 
a 
a 
r 
0 
r 
s 
0 


100.00 


», that of the 
‘h issued from 
when the tem- 
8°, and that of 


eeze from the 
At this time 
of the upper 


und an oak re- 
urrant bushes, 
n the mountain 
e, (perhaps an 
d, with bushes 
350 feet above 


river, in order 
yascend. The 
s a handsome 
picturesque— 
he valley from 
e right bank of 
ng a uniformly 
great numbers 
us ineceramus, 


of limestone, 
her up on the 
hat crystalline 
yers. During 
aine-qui-bouit 
‘timbered with 
timbered prin- 
stifolia,) called 
wo remarkable 
lich was about 
lounted by slabs 
nd adding very 
ery destructible 
ormerly consti- 


; and we made 
vide, with clear 
the mountains, 
er stood at 62°, 


119 c 174 4] 

July 20.—This morning (as we generally found the mornings under 
these mountains) was very clear and beautiful, and the air cool and pleas- 
ant, with the thermometer at 44°. Wecontinued our march up the stream, 
along a green sloping bottom, between pine hills on the one hand, and the 
main Black hills on the other, towards the ridge which separates the waters 
of the, Platte from those of the Arkansas, As we approached the dividing 
ridge, the whole valley was radiant with flowers; blue, yellow, piuk, white, 
scarlet, and purple, vied with each other in splendor. Esparcette was one 
of the highly characteristic plants, and a bright-looking flower (gat/lardia 
uristala) was very frequent; but the most abundant plant along our road 
to-day was geranium maculatum, which is the characteristic plant on this 
portion of the dividing grounds, Crossing to the waters of the Platte, fields 
of blue flax added to the magnificence of this mountain garden; this was 
occasionally four fect in height, which was a Juxuriance of growth that I 
rarely saw this almost universal plant attain throughout the journey. Con- 
tinuing down a branch of the Platte, among high and very steep timbered 
hills, covered with fragments of rock, towards evening we issued from the 
piney region, and made a late encampment near Poundcake rock, on that 
fork of the river which we had ascended on the 8th of July. Our animals 
enjoyed the abundant rushes this evening, as the flies were so bad among 
the pines that they had been much harassed. A deer was killed here this 
evening; and again the evening was overcast, and a collection of brilliant 
red clouds in the west was followed by the customary squall of rain. 

Achillea millefolium (milfoil) was among the characteristic plants of 
the river bottoms to-day. This was one of the most common plants during 
the whole of our journey, occurring in almost every variety of situation. 
I noticed it on the lowlands of the rivers, near the coast of the Pacific, and 
near to the snow among the mountains of the Sierra Nevada. 

During this excursion, we had surveyed to its head one of the two prin- 
cipal branches of the upper Arkansas, 75 miles in length, and entirely 
completed our survey of the South fork of the Platte, to the extreme sources 
of that portion of the river which belongs to the plains, and heads in the 
broken hills of the Arkansas dividing ridge, at the foot of the mountains. 
That portion of its waters which were collected among these mountains, it 
was hoped to explore on our homeward voyage. 

Reaching St. Vrain’s fort on the morning of the 23d, we found Mr, Fitz- 
patrick and his party in good order and excellent health, and my true and 
reliable friend, Kit Carson, who had brought with him ten good mules, with 
the necessary pack saddles. Mr. Fitzpatrick, who had often endured every 
extremity of want during the course of his mountain life, and knew well 
the value of provisions in this country, had watched over our stock with 
jealous vigilance, and there was an abundance of flour, rice, sugar, and 
coffee, in the camp ; and again we fared luxuriously. Meat was, however, 
very scarce ; and two very small pigs, which we obtained at the fort, did 
not go far among forty men. Mr. Fitzpatrick had been here a week, dur- 
ing which time his men had been occupied in refitting the camp ; and the 
repose had been very beneficial to his animals, which were now in tolera- 
bly good condition. 

T had been able to obtain no certain information in regard to the charac- 
ter of the passes in this portion of the Rocky mountain range, which had 
always been represented as impracticable for carriages, but the exploration 
of which was incidentally contemplated by my instructions, with the view 


‘ eee mete Bern " 


— 


[ 174] 120 


of finding some convenient point of passage for the road of emigration, 
which would enable it to reach, on a more direct line, the usual ford of 
the Great Colorado—a place considered as determined by the nature of the 
country beyond that river. It is singular that, immediately at the foot of 
the mountains, I could find no one sufficiently acquainted with them to 
guide us to the plains at their western base ; but the race of trappers, who 
formerly lived in their recesses, has almost entirely disappeared—dwindled 
to a few scattered individuals—some one or two of whom are regularly 
killed in the course of each year by the Indians. You will remember that, 
in the previous year, I brought with me to their village near this post, and 
hospitably treated on the way, several Cheyenne Indians, whom I had met 
on the Lower Platte. Shortly after their arrival here, these were out with 
a party of Indians, (themselves the principal men,) which discovered a few 
trappers in the neighboring mountains, whom they immediately murdered, 
although one of them had been nearly thirty years in the country, and was 
perfectly well known, as he had grown gray among them. 

Through this portion of the mountains, also, are the customary roads of 
the war parties going out against the Utah and Shoshonee Indians; and 
occasionally parties from the Crow nation make their way down to the 
southward along this chain, in the expectation of surprising some strag- 
gling lodges of their enemies, Shortly before our arrival, one of their par- 
ties had attacked an Arapaho village in the vicinity, which they had found 
unexpectedly strong; and their assault was turned into a rapid flight and 
a hot pursuit, in which they had been compelled to abandon the animals 
they had rode, and escape on their war horses. 

Into this uncertain and dangerous region, small parties of three or four 
trappers, who now could collect together, rarely ventured; and consequently 
it was scldom visited and little known. Having determined to’ try the 
passage by a pass through a spur of the mountains made by the Cdche-a- 
la-Poudre river, which rises in the high bed of mountains around Long’s 
peak, I thought it advisable to avoid any encumbrance which would oc- 
casion detention, and accordingly again separated the party into two divi- 
sions—one of which, under the command of Mr. Fitzpatrick, was directed 
to cross the plains to the mouth of Laramie river, and, continuing thence 
its route along the usual emigrant road, meet me at Fort Hall, a post be- 
longing to the Hudson Bay Company, and situated on Snake river, as it is 
commonly called in the Oregon Territory, although better known to us as 
Lewis’s fork of the Columbia. The latter name is there restricted to one 
of the upper forks of the river. 

Our Delaware Indians having determined to return to their homes, it be- 
came necessary to provide this party with a good hunter; and I accordingly 
engaged in that capacity Alexander Godey, a young man about 25 years 
of age, who had been in this country six or seven years, all of which time 
had been actively employed in hunting for the support of the posts, or in 
solitary trading expeditions among the Indians. In courage and profes- 
sional skill he was a formidable rival to Carson, and constantly afterwards 
was among the best and most efficient of the party, and in difficult situa- 
tions was of incalculable value. Hiram Powers, one of the men belonging 
to Mr. Fitzpatrick’s party, was discharged at this place. 

A French engagé, at Lupton’s fort, had been shot in the back on the 4th 
of July, and died during our absence to the Arkansas. The wife of the 
murdered man, an Indian woman of the Snake nation, desirous, like Naomi 


emigration, 
sual ford of 
nature of the 
tthe foot of 
rith them : 
appers, who 
ye eawindled 
re regularly 
member that, 
his post, and 
ym I had met 
ere out with 
overed a few 
ly murdered, 
try, and was 


lary roads of 
indians; and 
down to the 
some strag- 
» of their par- 
ey had found 
id flight and 
the animals 


hree or four 
consequently 
d to’ try the 
the Cadche-a- 
ound Long’s 
hh would oc- 
ato two divi- 
was directed 
nuing thence 
all, a post be- 
river, as it is 
own to us as 
ricted to one 


homes, it be- 
I accordingly 
out 25 years 
of which time 
e posts, or in 
> and profes- 
ly afterwards 
ifficult situa- 
en belonging 


ck on the 4th 
> wife of the 
s, like Naomi 


121 [ 174 J 


of old, to return to her people, requested and obtained permission to travel 
with my party to the neighborhood of Bear river, where she expected to 
meet with some of their villages. Happier than the Jewish widow, she 
carried with her two children, pretty little half-breeds, who added much to 
the liveliness of the camp. Her baggage was carried on five or six pack 
horses; and I gave her a small tent, for which I no longer had any use, as 
I had procured a lodge at the fort, 

For my own party I selected the following men, a number of whom old 
associations rendered agreeable to me: 

Charles Preuss, Christopher Carson, Basil Lajeunesse, Francois Badeau, 
J. B. Bernier, Louis Menard, Raphael Proue, Jacob Dodson, Louis Zindel, 
Henry Lee, J. B. Derosier, Francois Lajeunesse, and Auguste Vasquez. 

By observation, the latitude of the post is 40° 16’ 33", and its longitude 
105° 12' 23", depending, with all the other longitudes along this portion of 
the line, upon a subsequent occultation of September 13, 1843, to which 
they are referred by the chronometer. Its distance from Kansas landing, 
by the road we travelled, (which, it will be remembered, was very winding 
along the lower Kansas river,) was 750 miles, The rate of the chronometer, 
determined by observations at this place for the interval of our absence, 
during this month, was 33.72", which you will hereafter see did not sensibly 
change during the ensuing month, and remained nearly constant during 
the remainder of our journey across the continent. This was the rate used 
in referring to St. Vrain’s fort, the longitude between that place and the 
mouth of the Fontaine-qui-boutt. 

Our various barometrical observations, which are better worthy of con- 
fidence than the isolated determination of 1842, give, for the elevation of 
the fort above the sea, 4,930 feet. The barometer here used was also a 
better one, and less liable to derangement. 

At the end of two days, which was allowed to my animals for necessary 
repose, all the arrangements had been completed, and on the afternoon of 
the 26th we resumed our respective routes. Some little trouble was ex- 
perienced in crossing the Platte, the waters of which were still kept up by 
rains and melting snow ; and having travelled only about four miles, we 
encamped in the evening on Thompson’s creek, where we were very much 
disturbed by musquitoes, 

The following days we continued our march westward over comparative 
plains, and, fording the Céche-4-la-Poudre on the morning of the 28th, en- 
tered the Black hills, and nooned on this stream in the mountains beyond 
them. Passing over a fine large bottom in the afternoon, we reached a 
place where the river was shut up in the hills; and, ascending a ravine, 
made a laborious and very difficult passage arovnd by a gap, striking the 
river again about dusk. A little labor, however, would remove this diffi- 
culty, and render the road to this point avery excellent one. The evening 
closed in dark with rain, and the mountains looked gloomy. 

July 29.—Leaving our encampment about 7 in the morning, we travelled 
until 3 in the afternoon along the river, which, for this distance of about 
six miles, runs directly through a spur of the main mountains. 

We were compelled by the nature of the ground to cross the river eight 
or nine times, at difficult, deep, and rocky fords, the stream running with 
great force, swollen by the rains—a true mountain torrent, only forty or 
fifty feet wide. It was a mountain valley of the narrowest kind—almost 
achasm} and thescenery very wildand beautiful. Towering mountains rose 


[ 174 ] 122 


round about ; their sides sometimes dark with forests of pine, and sometimes 
with lofty precipices, washed by the river; while below, as if they indem- 
nified themselves in luxuriance for the scanty space, the green river bot- 
tom was covered with a wilderness of flowers, their tall spikes sometimes 
rising above our heads as we rode among them. A profusion of blossoms 
on a white flowering vine, (clematis lasianthi,) which was abundant along 
the river, contrasted handsomely with the green foliage of the trees, The 
mountain appeared to be composed of a greenish gray and red granite, which 
in some places appeared to be ina state of decomposition, making a red soil. 

The stream was wooded with cottonwood, box elder, and cherry, with 
currant and serviceberry bushes. After a somewhat laborious day, during 
which it had rained incessantly, we encamped near the end of the pass at 
the mouth of a sinall creek, in sight of the great Laramie plains, It con. 
tinued to rain heavily, and at evening.the mountains were hid in mists; 
but there was no lack of wood, andthe large fires we made to dry our 
clothes were very comfortable ; and at night the hunters came in with a 
fine deer. Rough and difficult as we found the pass to-day, an excellent 
road may be made with a little labor. Elevation of the camp 5,540 feet, 
and distance from St. Vrain’s fort 56 miles. 

July 30.—The day was bright again ; the thermometer at sunrise 52°; 
and leaving our encampment at 8 o’clock, in about half a mile we crossed 
the Cdche-d-da-Poudre river for the last time; and, entering a smoother 
country, we travelled along a kind of vad/on, bounded on the right by red 
buttes and precipices, while to the left a high rolling country extended toa 
range of the Black hills, beyond which rose the great mountains around 
Long’s peak. 

By the great quantity of snow visible among them, it had probably snow- 
ed heavily there the previous day, while it had rained on us in the valley. 

We halted at noon on a small branch; and in the afternoon travelled 


over a high country, gradually ascending towards a range of duttes, or 


high hills covered with pines, which forms the dividing ridge between the 
waters we had left and those of Laramie river. 

Late in the evening weencamped at a spring of cold water, near the 
summit of the ridge, having increased our elevation to 7,520 feet. During 
the day we had travelled 24 miles. By some indifferent observations, our 
latitude is 41° 02'19"". A species of Aedeome was characteristic along the 
whole day’s route. . 

Emerging from the mountains, we entered a region of bright, fair 
weather. In my experience in this country, I was forcibly impressed with 
the different character of the climate on opposite sides of the Rocky moun- 
tain range. The vast prairie plain on the east is like the ocean; the rain 
and clouds from the constantly evaporating snow of the mountains rushing 
down into the heated air of the plains, on which you will have occasion to 
remark the frequent storms of rain we encountered during our journey. 

July 31.—The morning was clear ; temperature 48°. A fine rolling road, 
among piney and grassy hills, brought us this morning into a large trail 
where an Indian village had recently passed. The weather was pleasant 
and cool; we were disturbed by neither musquitoes nor flies; and the 
country was certainly extremely beautiful. The slopes and broad ravines 
were absolutely covered with fields of flowers of the most exquisitely beauti- 
fulcolors. Among those which had not hitherto made their appearance, and 
which here were characteristic, was a new delphinium, of a green and 


and sometimes 
f they indem- 
een river bot. 
kes sometimes 
on of blossoms 
bundant along 
ie trees, The 
granite, which 
king a red soil. 
1 cherry, with 
us day, during 
of the pass at 
lains, It con. 
hid in mists; 
de to dry our 
me in with a 
, an excellent 
np 5,540 feet, 


t sunrise 52°; 
ile we crossed 
ig a smoother 
ie right by red 
extended toa 
ntains around 


robably snow- 
-in the valley. 
100n travelled 
» of buttes, or 


e between the 


ater, near the 
feet. During 
ervations, our 
istic along the 


of bright, fair 
mpressed with 
Rocky moun- 
ean; the rain 
ntains rushing 
ve occasion to 
ur journey. 

.e rolling road, 
» a large trail 
‘ was pleasant 
lies; and the 
broad ravines 
isitely beauti- 
pearance, and 
a green and 


123 [174 J 


lustrous metallic blue color, mingled with compact fields of several bright- 
colored varieties of astragalus, which were crowded together in splendid 
profusion. This trail conducted us through a remurkable defile, to a little 
timbered creek, up which we wound our way, passing by a singular and 
massive wall of dark-red granite. The formation of the country is a red 
feldspathic granite, overlying a decomposing mass of the same rock, form- 
ing the soil of all this region, which every where is red and gravelly, and 
appears to be of a great floral fertility. 

As we emerged on a small tributary of the Laramie river, coming in 
sight of its principal stream, the flora became perfectly magnificent; and 
we congratulated ourselves, as we rode along our pleasant road, that we 
had substituted this forthe uninteresting country between Laramie hills 
and the Sweet Water valley. We had no meat for supper last night or 
breakfast this morning, and were glad to sce Carson come in at noon with 
a good antelope. ‘ 

A meridian observation of the sun placed us in latitude 41°04'06"", In 
the evening, we encamped on the Laramie river, which is here very thinly 
timbered with scattered groups of cottonwood at, considerable intervals, 
From our camp, we are able to distinguish the gorges, in which are the 
sources of Cfche-a-la-Poudre and Laramie rivers; and the Medicine Bow 
mountain, toward the point of which we are directing our course this after- 
noon, has been in sight the greater part of the day. By observation, the 
latitude was 41° 15' 02", and longitude 106° 16' 54". The same beautiful 
flora continued till about 4 in the afternoon, when it suddenly disappeared, 
with the red soil, which became sandy and of a whitish-gray color, The 
evening was tolerably clear; tempcrature at sunset 64°, The day’s jour- 
ney was 30 miles, 

August 1.—The morning was calm and clear, with sunrise temperature 
at 42°, We travelled to-day over a plain, or open rolling country, at the 
foot of the Medicine Bow mountain; the soil in the morning being sandy, 
with fragments of rock abundant; and in the afternoon, when we ap- 
proached closer to the mountain, so stony that we made but little way. 
The beautiful plants of yesterday reappeared occasionally ; flax in bloom 
occurred during the morning, and esparcette in luxuriant abundance wasa 
characteristic of the stony ground inthe afternoon. The camp was roused 
into a little excitement by a chase after a buffalo bull, and an encounter 
with a war party of Sioux and Cheyenne Indians about 30 strong. Hares 
and antelope were seen during the day, and one of the latter was killed. 
The Laramie peak was in sight this afternoon. The evening was 
eile with scattered clouds: temperature 62°. The day’s journey was 26 
miles. 

August 2.—'Temperature at sunrise 52°, and scenery and weather made 
our road to-day delightful. The neighboring mountain is thickly studded 
with pines, intermingled with the brighter foliage of aspens, and occasional 
spots like lawns between the patches of snow among the pines, and here 
and there on the heights. Our route below lay over a comparative plain, 
covered with the same brilliant vegetation, and the day was clear and pleas- 
antly cool. During the morning, we crossed many streams, clear and rocky, 
and broad grassy valleys, of a strong black soil, washed down from the 
mountains, and producing excellent pasturage. These were timbered with 
the red willow and long-leaved cottonwood, mingled with aspen, as we ap- 
proached the mountain more nearly towardsnoon. Espurcette wasa char- 


} 
| 
‘ 
J 
f 
; 
* 
rf 


[174 J 


acteristic, and flax occurred frequently in bloom. We halted at noon on 
the most western fork of Laramie river-—a handsome stream about sixty 
feet wide and two feet deep, with clear water and a swift current, over a 
bed composed entirely of boulders or roll stones, ‘There was a large open 
bottom here, on which were many lodge poles lying about; and in the 
edge of the surrounding timber were three strong forts, that appeared to 
have been recently occupied. At this place I became first acquainted with 
the yampah, (anethum graveolens,) which I found our Snake woman en- 
gaged in digging in the low timbered bottom of the creek. Among the In- 
dians along the Rocky mountains, and more particularly among the Sho- 
shonee or Snake Indians, in whose territory it is very abundant, this is 
considered the best among the roots used for food. To us, it was an in- 
veresting plant—a little link between the savage and civilized life. Here, 
among the Indians, its root is a common article of food, which they take 
pleasure in offering to strangers; while with us, iv a considerable portion 
of America and Europe, the seeds are used to flavo soup. It grows more 
abundantly, and in greater luxuriance, on one of the neighboring tributa- 
ries of the Colorado than in any other part of this region; and on that 
stream, to which the Snakes are accustomed to resort every year to procure 
a supply of their favorite plant, they have bestowed the name of Yampah 
river. Among the trappers, it is generally known as Little Snake river; 
but in this aud other instances, where it illustrated the history of the peo- 
ple inhabiting the country, I have preferred to retain on the map ‘the abo- 
riginal name. By a meridional observation, the latitude is 41° 45' 59". 

In the afternoon we took our way directly across the spurs from the 
point of the mountain, where we had several ridges to cross; and, al- 
though the road was not rendered bad by the nature of the ground, it was 
made extremely rough by the stiff tough bushes of arlemisia tridentata,” 
in this country commonly called sage. 

This shrub now began to make its appearance in compact fields; and 
we were about to quit for a long time this country of excellent pasturage 
and brilliant flowers. Ten or twelve buffalo bulls were seen during the 
afternoon; and we were surprised by the appearance of a large red ox. 
We gathered around him as if he had been an old acquaintance, with all 
our domestic feelings as much awakened as if we had come in sight of an 
old farm house. He had probably made his escape from some party of 
emigrants on Green river; and, with a vivid remembrance of some old 
green field, he was pursuing the straightest course for the frontier that the 
country admitted. We carried him along with us as a prize; and, when 
it was found in the morning that he had wandered off, [ would not let him 
be pursued, for I would rather have gone through a starving time of three 
entire days, than let him be killed after he had successfn!ly run the gaunt- 
let so far among the Indians. I have been told by Mr. Bent’s people of 
an ox born and raised at St. Vrain’s fort, which made his escape from them 
at Elm grove, near the frontier, having come in that year with the wagons. 
They were on their way out, and saw occasionally places where he .had 
eaten and lain down to rest; but did not see him for about 700 miles, when 
they overtook him on the road, travelling along to the fort, having unac- 
countably escaped Indians and every other mischance. 


ee  . — 


* The greater portion of our subsequent journey was through a region where this. shrub consti- 
tuted the tree of the country ; and, as it will often be mentioned in occasional descriptions, the word 
arlemisia only will be used, without the specific name. 


* 


at noon on 
about sixty 
rent, over a 
a large open 
and in the 
appeared to 
nainted with 
: woman eh- 
mong the In- 
ng the Sho- 
dant, this is 
was an in- 
life. Here, 
h they take 
able portion 
_ grows more 
ring tributa- 
and on that 
ar to procure 
of Yampah 
Snake river; 
y of the peo- 
jap ‘the abo- 
2 45' 59", 

irs from the 
ss; and, al- 
ound, it was 
tridentata, 


fields; and 
nt pasturage 
during the 
arge red ox. 
ice, With all 
1 sight of an 
me party of 
of some old 
hier that the 
; and, when 
d not let him 
ime of three 
n the gaunt- 
’s people of 
be from them 
the wagons. 
here he had 
miles, when 
having unac- 


is. shrub consti- 
iptions, the word 


Pree ae Pee 
oe Ss) ae Zs hee . 


125 [ 174 J 


We encamped at evening on the principal fork of Medicine Bow river, 
near to an isolated ooniuin called the Medicine Butte, which appeared to 
be about 1,800 fect above the plain, from which it rises abruptly, and was 
still white, nearly to its base, with a great quantity of snow. The streams 
were timbered with the long-leaved cottonwood and red willow ; and dur- 
ing the afternoon a species of onion was very abundant. I obtained here 
an immersion of the first satellite of Jupiter, which, corresponding very 
nearly with the chronometer, placed us in longitude 106° 47' 25". The 
latitude, by observation, was 41° 37' 16''; elevation above the sca, 7,800 
feet; and distance from St. Vrain’s fort, 147 miles. 

August 3.—There was a white frost last night ; the morning is clear and 
cool. We were early on the roag, having breakfasted before sunrise, and 
in a few miles travel entered the pass of the Medicine Buéée, through which 
led a broad trail, which had been recently travelled by a very large party. 
Immediately in the pass, the road was broken by ravines, and we were 
obliged to clear a way through groves of aspens, which generally made 
their appearance when we reached elevated regions, According to the ba- 
rometer, this was 8,300 feet; and while we were detained in opening a 
road, I obtained a meridiona! observation of the sun, which gave 41° 35’ 
48"' for the latitude of the pass. The Medicine Butée is isolated by a small 
tributary of the North fork of the Platte, but the mountains approach each 
other very nearly; the stream running at their feet. On the south the 
are smooth, with occasional streaks of pine; ‘ut the butte itself is ragged, 
with escarpments of red feldspathic granite, and dark with pines; the snow 
reaching from the summit to within a few hundred feet of the trail. The 
granite here was more compact and durable than that in the formation 
which we had passed through a few days before to the eastward of Lara- 
mie. Continuing our way over a plait on the west side of the pass, where 
the road was terribly rough with artemisia, we made our evening encamp- 
ment on the creek, where it took a northern direction, unfavorable to the 
course We were pursuing. Bands of buffalo were discovered as we came 
down upon the plain; and Carson brought into the camp a cow which had 
the fat on the fleece two inches thick. Even in this country of rich pas- 
turage and abundant game, it is rare that the hunter chances upon a ter 
animal. ‘Our voyage had already been long, but this was the first good 
buffalo meat we had obtained. We travelled to-day 26 miles. 

August 4.—The morning was clear and calm; and, leaving the creek, 
we travelled towards the North fork of the Platte, over a plain which was 
rendered rough and broken by ravines, With the exception of some thin 
grasses, the sandy soil here was occupied almost exclusively by artemisia, 
With its usual turpentine odor. We had expected to meet with some diffi- 
culty in crossing the river, but happened to strike it where there was a very 
excellent ford, and halted to noon on the left bank, 200 miles from St. 
Vrain’s fort. The hunters brought in pack animals loaded with fine meat. 
According to our imperfect knowledge of the country, there should have 
been a small affluent to this stream a few miles higher up; and in the after- 
noon we.continued our way among the river hills, in the expectation of en- 
camping upon it in the evening. The ground proved to be so exceedingly 
difficult, broken up into hills, terminating in escarpments and broad ravines, 
500 or 600 feet deep, with sides so precipitous that we could scarcely find 
a place to descend, that, towards sunset, I turned directly in’ towards the 
river, and, after nightfall, entered a sort of ravine. We were obliged to feel 


' 
i 
? 
| 


3 eR a ce 


| 
| 
| 
| 
{ 
| 


C174] 


our way, and clear a road in the darkness; the surface being much broken, 
and the progress of the carriages being greatly obstructed by the artemisia, 
which had a luxuriant growth of four to six feet in height. We had 
scrambled along this gully for several hours, during which we had knocked 
off the carriage lamps, broken a thermometer and several small articles, 
when, fearing to lose something of more importance, I halted for the night 
at 10 o’clock, Our animals were turned down towards the river, that they 
might pick up what little grass they could find; and after a little search, 
some water was found in a small ravine, and improved by digging. We 
lighted up the ravine with fires of artemisia, and about midnight sat down 
to a supper which we were hungry enough to find delightful—although 
the buffalo meat was crusted with sand, and the coffee was bitter with the 
wormwood taste of the artemisia leaves, 

A successful day’s hunt had kept our hunters occupied until late, and 
they slept out, but rejoined us at daybreak, when, finding ourselves only 
about a mile from the river, we followed the ravine down, and camped ina 
cottonwood grove on a beautiful grassy bottom, where our animals indem- 
nified themselves for the scanty fare of the past night. It was quite a pretty 
and pleasant place; a narrow strip of prairie about five hundred yards long 
terminated at the ravine where we entered by high precipitous hills closing 
in upon the river, and at the upper end by a ridge of low rolling hills. 

In the precipitous bluffs were displayed a succession of strata containing 
fossil vegetable remains, and several beds of coal. In some of the beds the 
coal did not appear to be perfectly mineralized; and in some of the seams, 
it was compact and remarkably lustrous. In these latter places there were 
also’thin layers of a very fine white salts, in powder. As we had a large 
supply of meat in the camp, which it was necessary to dry, and the sur- 
rounding country appeared to be well stocked with buffalo, which it was 
probable, after a day or two, we would not see again until our return to the 
Mississippi waters, I determined to make here a provision of dried meat, 
which would be necessary for our subsistence in the region we were about 
entering, which was said to be nearly destitute of game. Scaffolds were 
accordingly soon erected, fires made, and the meat cut into thin slices to be 
dried; and all were busily occupied, when the camp was thrown into a 
sudden tumult, by a charge from about 70 mounted Indians, over the low 
hills at the upper end of the little bottom. Fortunately, the guard, who 
was between them and our animals, had caught a glimpse of an Indian’s 
head, as he raised himself in his stirrups to Jook over the hill, a moment 
before he made the charge ; and succeeded in turning the band into the 
camp, as the Indians charged into the bottom with the usual yell. Before 
they reached us, the grove on the verge of the little bottom was occupied 
by our people, and the Indians brought to a sudden halt, which they made 
in time to save themselves from a howitzer shot, which would undoubtedly 
have been very effective in such a compact body; and further proceedings 
were interrupted by their signs for peace. They proved to be a war party 
of Arapaho and Cheyenne Indians, and informed us that they had charged 
upon the camp under the belief that we were hostile Indians, and had dis- 
covered their mistake only at the moment of the attack—an excuse which 
policy required us to receive as true, though under the full conviction that 
the display of: our little howitzer, and our favorable position in the grove, 
certainly saved our horses, and probably ourselves, from their marauding 
intentions. They had been ona war party, and had been defeated, and 


wel 
thir 
part 
rou 
cust 
fron 
T 
one 
of G 
lope 
seve 
purs 
figh 
ber 
Nea 
at th 
and 


i * quie 
borh 
/ guns 


latiti 

A 
cleat 
barre 
the ¢ 


nised 
» and, 
% almo 
a pas 
was 
late i 
encal 
and g 
a fe 


uch broken, 
e artemisia, 
. We had 
ad knocked 
all articles, 
or the night 
er, that they 
little search, 
gging. We 
tht sat down 
i|—although 
iter with the 


ntil late, and 
rselves only 
camped ina 
imals indem- 
uite a pretty 
ed yards long 
s hills closing 
ing hills. 
fa containing 
f the beds the 
of the seams, 
xs there were 
e had a large 
and the sur- 
Which it was 
return to the 
f dried meat, 
e were about 
affolds were 
n slices to be 
hrown into a 
over the low 
guard, who 
an Indian’s 
ill, a moment 
and into the 
yell. Before 
was occupied 
h they made 
undoubtedly 
r proceedings 
e a war party 
y had charged 
, and had dis- 
excuse which 
onviction that 
in the grove, 
bir marauding 
defeated, and 


127 [174 ] 


were consequently in the state of mind which aggravates their innate 
thirst for plunder and blood, ‘Their excuse, however, was taken in good 
part, and the usual evidences of friendship interchanged. The pipe went 
round, provisions were a and the'tobacco and goods furnished the 
customary presents, which they look for even from traders,and much more 
from Government authorities. 

They were returning from an expedition against the Shoshonee Indians, 
one of whose villages they had surprised, at Bridger’s fort, o Ham/’s fork 
of Green river, (in the absence of the men, who were engaged in an ante- 
lope surround,) and succeeded in carrying off their horses and taking 
several scalps. News of the attack reached the Snakes immediately, who 
pursued and overtook them, and recovered their horses; and, in the running 
fight which ensued, the Arapahos had lost several men killed, and a num- 
ber wounded, who were coming on more slowly with a party in the rear. 
Nearly all the hurses they had brought off were the property of the whites 
at the fort. After remaining until nearly sunset, they took their departure; 
and the excitement which their arrival had afforded subsided into our usual 
quiet, a little enlivened by the vigilance rendered necessary by the neigh- 
borhood of our uncertain visiters. At noon the thermometer was at 75°, at 
sunset 70°, and the evening clear. Elevation above the sea 6,820 feet ; 
latitude 41° 36' 00"; longitude 107° 22' 27". 

August 6.—At sunrise the thermometer was 46°, the morning being 
clear and calm. We travelled to-day over an extremely rugged country, 
barren and uninteresting—nothing to be seen but artemisia bushes; and, in 
the evening, found a grassy spot among the hills, kept green by several 
springs, Where we encamped late. Within a few hundred yards was a very 
pretty little stream of clear cool water, whose green banks looked refreshing 
among the dry rocky hills, ‘The hunters brought in a fat mountain sheep, 
(oviy montana.) 

Our road the next day was through a continued and dense field of ar¢e- 
misia, which now entirely covered the country in such a luxuriant growth 
that it was difficult and laborious for a man on foot to force his way 
through, and nearly impracticable for our light carriages, The region 
through which we weré travelling was a high plateau, constituting the di- 
viding ridge between the waters of the Atlantic and Pacific oceans, and 
extending to a considerable distance southward, from the neighborhood of 
the Table rock, at the southern side of the South Pass, Though broken 


' up into rugged and rocky hills of a dry and barren nature, it has nothing 


either in the sand or in small lakes. 


ofa mountainous character; the small streams which occasionally occur 
belonging neither to the Platte nor the Colorado, but losing themselves 
; From an eminence, in the afternoon, 
a mountainous range hecame visible in the north, in which were recog- 


|) nised some rocky peaks belonging to the range of the Sweet Water valley; 


and, determining to abandon any further attempt to struggle through this 


% almost impracticable country, we turned our course directly north, towards 


a pass in the valley of the Sweet Water river. A shaft of the gun carriage 
was broken during the afternoon, causing a considerable delay; and it was 
late in an unpleasant evening before we succeeded in finding a very poor 
encampment, where there was a little water in a deep trench of a creek, 
and some scanty grass among the shrubs. All the game here consisted in 
a few straggling buffalo bulls, and during the day there had been but very 


ere nets et le et 


[174] 128 


little grass, except in some green spots where it had collected around springs 
or shallow lakes, Within fifly miles of the Sweet Water, the country 
changed into a vast saline plain, in many places extremely level, occasion- 
ally resembling the flat sandy beds of shallow lakes, Here the vegetation 
consisted of a shrubby growth, among which were several varieties of 
chenopodiaceous plants; but the characteristic shrub was Fremontia ver- 
micu/aris, with smaller saline shrubs growing with singular luxuriance, 
and in many places holding exclusive possession of the ground, 

On the everiing of the 8th, we encamped on one of these fresh-water 
lakes, which the traveller considers himself fortunate to find; and the next 
day, in latitude by observation 42° 20' 06", halted to noon immediately at 
the foot of the southern side of the range which walls inthe Sweet Water 
valley, on the head of a small tributary to that river, 

Continuing in the afternoon our course down the stream, which here 
cuts directly through the ridge, forming a very practicable pass, we enter 4 
the valley; and, after a march of about nine miles, encamped on our famii- 
iar river, endeared to us by the acquaintance of the previous expedition; 
the night having already closed in with a cold rain storm. Our camp was 
about twenty miles above the Devil’s gate, which we had been able to see 
in coming down the plain; and, in the course of ihe night, the clouds broke 
away around Jupiter for a short time, during which we obtained an im- 
mersion of the first satellite, the result of which agreed very nearly with 
the chronometer, giving for the mean longitude 107° 50' 07"; elevation 
above the sea 6,040 feet; and distance from St. Vrain’s fort, by the road 
we had just travelled, 315 miles, 

Here passes the road to Oregon; and the broad smooth highway, where 
the numerous heavy wagons of the emigrants had entirely beaten and 
crushed the artemisia, was a happy exchange to our poor animals for the 
sharp rocks and tough shrubs among which they had been toiling so long; 
and we moved up the valley rapidly and pleasantly. With very little de- 
viation from our route of the preceding year, we continued up the valley; 
and on the evening of the 12th encamped on the Sweet Water, at a point 
where the road turns off to cross to the plains of Green river. ‘The increased 
coolness of the weather indicated that we had attained a great elevation, 
which the barometer here placed at 7,220 feet; and during the night water 
froze in the lodge. 

The morning of the 13th was clear and cold, there being a white frost; 
andthe thermometer, a little before sunrise, standing at 26.5°. Leaving 
this encampment, (our last on the waters which flow towards the rising 
sun,) we took our way along the upland, towards the dividing ridge which 
separates the Atlantic from the Pacific waters, and crossed it by a road some 
miles further south than the one we had followed on our return in 1842, 
We crossed very near the table mountain, at the southern extremity of the 
South Pass, which is near twenty miles in width, and already traversed by 
several different roads. Selecting as well as I could, in the scarcely distin- 
guishable ascent, what might be considered the dividing ridge in this re- 
markable depression in the mountain, I took a barometrical observation, 
which gave 7,490 feet for the elevation above the Gulf of Mexico. You 
will remember that, in my report of 1842, I estimated the elevation of this 
Love at about 7,000 feet; a correct observation with a good barometer ena- 

' bles me now to give it with more precision. Its importance, as the great 
gate through which commerce and travelling may hereafter pass between 


iver 
dry s 
was 

trade 
dée-a 
ceive 
bird j 
belon 


yund springs 
the country 
el, occasion: 
e vegetation 
varieties of 
smontia ver- 
- luxuriance, 
d, 
. fresh-water 
and the next 
mediately at 
Sweet Water 


1, which here 
ss, we enter | 
on our famii- 
is expedition ; 
Our camp was 
en able to see 
e clouds broke 
yttained an im- 
ry nearly with 
07"; elevation 
rt, by the road 


ighway, where 
bly beaten and 
animals for the 
toiling so long ; 
i very little de- 
up the valley; 
ater, at a point 

The increased 
reat elevation, 
the night water 


a white frost; 
6.5% Leaving 
ards the rising 
ng ridge which 
by a road some 
return in 1842. 
bxtremity of the 
ly traversed by 
scarcely distin- 
idge in this re- 
al observation, 
Mexico. You 
levation of this 
barometer ena- 
ce, as the great 
py pass between 


129 [ 174 } 
the valley of the Mississippi and the north Pacific, justifies a —_— notice 
of its locality and distance from leading points, in addition to this statement 
of its elevation, As stated in the report of 1842, its latitude at the point 
where we crossed is 42° 24' 32"; its feagitade 109° 26'00"; its distance 
from the mouth of the Kansas, by the common travelling route, 962 miles; 
from the mouth of the Great Platte, along the valley of that river, according 
to our survey of 1842, 882 miles; and its distance from St. Louis about 400 
miles more by the Kansas, and about 700 by the Great Platte route ; these 
additions being steamboat conveyance in both instances. From this pass 
to the mouth of the Oregon is about 1,400 miles by the common travelling 
route; so that, under a general point of view, itmay be assumed to be about 
half way between the Mississippi and the Pacific ocean, on the common 
travelling route. Following a hollow of slight and easy descent, in which 
was very soon formed a little tributary to the Gulf of Calitornia, (for the 
waters which flow west from the South Pass go to this gulf,) we made our 
usual halt four miles frown the pass, in latitude by observation 42° 19' 43'S, 
Entering here the valley of Green river—the great Colorado of the West— 
and inclining very much to the southward along the streams which form 
the Sandy river, the road led for several days over dry and level uninter- 
esting plains; to which a low, scrubby growth of artemisia gave a uniform 
dull grayish color; and on the evening of the 15th we encamped in the 
Mexican territory, on the left bank of Green river, 69 miles from the South 
Pass, in longitude 110° 05' 05", and latitude 41° 53’ 54", distant 1,031 miles 
from the mouth of the Kansas, This is the emigrant road to Oregon, which 
bears much to the southward, to avoid the mountains about the western 
heads of Green river —the Rio Verde of the Spaniards, 

August 16,—Crossing the river, here about 400 feet wide, by a very good 

_ ford, we continued to descend for seven or eight miles on a pleasant road 

along the right bank of the stream, of which the islands and shores are hand- 
somely timbered with cottonwood, The refreshing appearance of the broad. 

Tiver, with its timbered shores and green wooded islands, in contrast to its 

dry sandy plains, probably obtained for it the name of Green river, which 
was bestowed on it by the Spaniards who first came into this country te 
trade some 25 years ago, It was then familiarly known as the Seeds-ke- 
dée-agie, or Prairie Hen (/e/rao urophusianus) river; a name which it re- 
ceived from the Crows, to whom its upper waters belong, and on which this 
bird is still very abundant. By the Shoshonee and Utah Indians, to whom 
belongs, for a considerable distance below, the country where we were now 
travelling, it was called the Bitter Root river, from the great abundance in 

_ its valley of a plant which affords them one of their favorite roots, Lower 

+ down, from Brown’s hole to the southward, the river runs through lofty 

4 hasms, walled in by precipices of red rock; and even among the wilder 
tribes who inhabit that portion of its course, I have heard it called by Indian 

efugees from the Californian settlements the Rio Colorado. We halted te 

oon at the upper end of a large bottom, near some old houses, which had 
een a trading post, in latitude 41° 46' 54", At this place the elevation of 
he river above the sea is 6,230 feet. That of Lewis’s fork of the Columbia 

t Fort Hall is, according to our subsequent observations, 4,500 feet. The 

@escent of each stream is rapid, but that of the Colorado is but little known, 

(pnd that little derived from vague report. Three hundred miles of its 

Bower part, as it approaches the gulf of California, is reported to be smooth 

od tranquil ; - its Upper part is manifestly broken into many falls 


C174] 130 

and rapids, From many descriptions of trappers, it is probable that i its 
foaming course among its lofty precipices it presents many scenes of wild 
grandeur; and though offering many temptations, and often discussed, no 
trappers have been found bold enough to undertake a voyage which has so 
certain a prospect of a fatal termination. The Indians have strange stories 
of beautiful valleys abounding with beavet, shut up among inaccessible 
walls of rock in the lower course of the river; and to which the neighbor. 
ing Indians, in their occasional wars with the Spaniards, and among them- 
selves, drive their herds of cattle and tlocks of sheep, leaving them to pas- 
ture in perfect security. 

The road here leaves the river, which bends considerably to the east; and 
im the afternoon we resumed our westerly course, passing over a somewhat 
high and broken country ; and about sunset, after a day’s travel of 26 miles, 
reached Black’s fork of the Green river—a shallow stream, with a some- 
what sluggish current, about 120 feet wide, timbered principally with wil- 
low, and here and there an occasional large tree, At 3 in the morning [ 
obtained an observation of an emersion of the first satellite of Jupiter, with 
other observations, The heavy wagons lave so completely pulverized the 
soil, that clouds of fine light dust are raised by the slightest wind, making 
the road sometimes very disagreeable. 

August 17,—Leaving our encampment at 6 in the morning, we travelled 
along the bottom, which is about two miles wide, bordered by low hills, in 
which the strata contained handsome and very distinct vegetable fossils. In 
a gully a short distance farther up the river, and underlying these, was ex- 
posed a stratum of an impure or argillaceous limestone. Crossing on the 
way Black’s fork, where it is one foot deepand forty wide, with clear water 
and a pebbly bed, in nine miles we reached Huin’s fork, a tributary to the 
former stream, having now about sixty feet breadth, and a few inches depth 
of water. It is wooded with thickets of red willow, and in the bottom is a 

tolerably strong growth of grass, ‘The road here makes a traverse of twelve 
miles across a bend of theriver. Passing in the way some remarkable bills, 
two or three hundred feet high, with frequent and nearly vertical escarp- 
ments of a green stone, consisting of an argillaceous carbonate of lime, al- 
ternating With strata of an iron-brown limestone, and worked into pictur 
esque forms by wind and rain, at 2 in the afternoon we reeched the river 
again, having made to-day 21 miles. Since crossing the great dividing 
ridge of the Rocky mountains, plants have been very few in variety, the 
country being covered principally with artemisia. 

August 18.—We passed on the road, this morning, the grave of one of 
the emigrants, being the second we had seen since falling into their trail; 
and halted to noon on the river, a short distance above. 

The Shoshonce woman took leave of us here, expecting to find some of 
her relations at Bridger’s fort, which is only a mile or two distant, on 4 
fork of this stream. In the evening we encamped on a salt creek, about 
fifteen feet wide, having to-day travelled 32 miles. 

I obtained an emersion of the first satellite under favorable circumstances, 
the night being still and clear, 

One of our mules died here, and in this portion of our journey we lost 
six or seven of our animals. The grass which the country had lately af 


forded was very poor and insuflicient; and animals which have been ac- j 
eustomed to grain become soon weak and unable to labgr, when reduced to | 
no other uourishment than grass. The American horses (as those are |~ 
asually called which are brought to this country from the States) are notof | = 


oe 


ye 
as 


le that iw its 
renes of wild 
discussed, no 
which has so 
range stories 
- inaccessible 
the neighbor- 
among them- 
them to pas- 


the east; and 
sr asome what 
rel of 26 miles, 
, with a some- 
ally with wil- 
the morming I 
f Jupiter, with 
pulverized the 
wind, making 


g, we travelled 
by low hills, in 
table fossils. In 
z these, Was eX- 
Srossing on the 
with clear water 
tributary to the 
ew inches depth 
h the bottom 1s 4 
averse of twelve 
remarkable bills, 
vertical escarp- 
onate of lime, al- 
rked into pictur 
resched the rivet 
he great dividing 
w in variety, the 


ne grave of one of 
hg into their trail; 


g to find some of 
two distant, on % 
a salt creek, about 
ble circumstances, 


tr journey we lost 
try had lately af- 


« 


wee 


~ 


rich have been ace | 


rses (as those are 


b States) are not of 


r, when reduced to | 


131 C174 J 
any serviceable value until after they have remained a winter in the coun- 
try, und become accustomed to live entirely on grass, 

August 19.—Desirous to avoid every delay not absolutely necessary, I 
sent ou Carson in advance to Fort Hall this morning, to make arrangements 
for a small supply of provisions, A few miles from our encampment, the 
road entered a high ridge, which the trappers called the “little mountain,” 
connecting the Utah with the Wind river chain; and in one of the hills near 
which we passed I remarked strata of a conglomerate formation, frag- 
ments of which were scattered over the surface, We crossed a ridge of 
this conglomerate, the road passing neara grove of low cedar, and de- 
seended npon one of the heads of Ham's fork, called Muddy, where we 
madv our midday halt, In the river hills at this place, f discovered strata 
of fossil) ferous rock, having an oodifie s(rue/ure, whicn, in connexion with 
the neighboring strata, authorize us to believe that here, on the west side 
of the Rocky mountains, we find repeated the modern formations of Great 
Britain and Europe, which have hitherto been wanting to complete the 
system of North American geology, 

The specimens from this locality ure designated in the appendix by the 
numbers 64, 68, and 74, 

In the afternoon we continued our road, and, searching umong the hills 
a few miles up the stream, and on the same bank, | discovered, among alter- 
nating beds of coal and clay, a stratum of white indurated clay, containing 
very clear and beautiful impressions of vegetable remains, This was the 
most interesting fossil locality I had met in the country, and I deeply re- 
gretted thot time did not pc omit me to remain a day or two in the vicinity; 
but Lconld not anticipate the delays to which I might be exposed in the 
course of our journey—or, rather, I knew that they were many and inevi- 
table; and after remaining here only about an hour, I hurried off, loaded 
with as many specimens as I could conveniently carry, 

Coal made its appearance occasionally in the hills during the afternoon, 
and was displayed in rabbit burrows in a kind of gap, through which we 
passed over some high hills, and we descended to make our encampment 
on the same streum, where we found but very poor grass. In the evening 


. fine cow, with her calf, which had strayed off frou some emigrant party, 


were found several miles from the road, and brought into camp; and as 
she gave an abundance of milk, we enjoyed to-night an excellent cup of 
coffee, We travelled to-day 28 miles, and, as has been usual since crossin 
the Green river, the road has been very dusty, and the weather smoky and 
oppressively hat. Artemisia was charactcristic among the few plants. 
August 20.—We continued to travel up the creek by a very gradual 
ascent and a very excellent grassy roud, passing on the way several small 
forks of the stream. The hills here are higher, presenting escarpments of 
parti-colored and apparently clay rocks, purple, dark red, and yellow, con- 
taining strata of sandstone and limestone with shells, with a bed of cement- 
ed pebbles, the whole overlaid by beds of limestone. The alternation of red 
and yellow gives a bright appearance to the hills, one of which was called 
by our people the Rainbow hill; and the character of the country became 
more agreeable, and trovelling far more pleasant, as now we found timber 
and very good grass. Gradually ascending, we reached the lower level of a 
bed of white limestone, lying upon a white clay, on the upper line of which 
the whole road is abundautly snpplied with beautiful cool springs, gushing 
out a foot in breadth and several inches deep, directly from the hill side. At 


' 
' 
' 
} 
; 
i 


2S Reet 


[174] 


noon we halted at the last main fork of the creek, at an elevation of 7,200 
feet, and in latitude,’ by observation, 41° 39' 45"; and in the afternoon con- 
tinued on the same excellent road, up the left or northern fork of the 
stream, towards its head, in a pass which the barometer placed at 8,230 feet 
above the sea. Thisisa connecting ridge between the Utah or Bear river 
mountains and the Wind river chain of the Rocky mountains, separating 
the waters of the gulf of California on the east, and those on the west be- 
longing more directly to the Pacific, from a vast interior basin whose rivers 
are collected into numerous lakes having no outlet to the ucean. From the 
summit of this pass, the highest which the road crosses between the Missis- 
sippi and the Western ocean, our view was over a very mountainous region, 
whose rugged appearance was greatly increased by the smoky weather, 
through which the broken ridges were dark and dimly seen. The scent 
to the summit of the gap was ‘occasionally steeper than the national road in 
the Alleghanies; and the descent, by way of a spur on the western side, is 
rather precipitous, but the pass may still be called a good one, Some 
thickets of willow in the hollows below deceived us into the expectation of 
finding a camp at our usual hour at the foot of the mountain; but we found 
them without water, and continued down a ravine, and encamped about 
dark at a place where the springs again began to make their appearance, 
but where our animals fured badly; the stock of the emigrants having 
razed the grass as completely as if we were again in the midst of the 
buffalo. 

August 21.—An hour’s travel this moruing brought us into the fertile 
and picturesque valley of Bear river, the principal tributary to the Great 
Salt lake. ‘The streain is here 200 feet wide, fringed with willows and 
occasional groups of hawthorus We were now entering a region which 
for us possessed a strange and extraordinary interest. We were upon the 
waters of the famous lake which forms a salient point among the remarka- 
ble geographical features of the country, and around which the vague and 
superstitious accounts of the trappers had thrown.a delightful obscurity, 
which we anticipated pleasure in dispelling, but which, in the mean time, 
left a crowded field for the exercise of our imagination. 

In our occasional conversations with the few old hunters who had visited 
the region, it had been a subject of frequent speculation ; and the wonders 
which they related were not the less agreeable because they were highly 
exaggerated and impossible: 

Hitherto this lake had been seen only by trappers who were wanderi ing 
through the country in search of new beaver streams, caring very little for 
geography; its islands had never been visited; and none were to be found 
who had entirely made the circuit of its shores; and no instrumental ob- 
servations or geographical survey, of any description, had ever been made 
any where in the neighboring region. It was generally supposed that it 
had no visible outlet; but among r the trappers, including those in my own 
camp, were many who believed that somewhere on its surface was a ter- 
rible whirlpool, through which its waters found their way to the ocean by 
some subterranean communication. All these things had made a frequent 
subject of discussion in our desultory conversations around the fires at: 
night; and my own mind had become tolerably well filled with their in- 
definite pictures, and insensibly colored with their romantic descriptions, 
which, in the pleasure of excitement, I was well disposed to believe, and 
half expected to realize. 


tion of 7,200 
ternoon con- 
fork of the 
|at 8,230 feet 
yr Bear river 
3, separating 
the west be- 
whose rivers 
». From the 
nthe Missis- 
inous region, 
ky weather, 

The scent 
ional road in 
stern side, is 
one. Some 
xpectation of 
but we found 
imped about 
appearance, 
rauts having 
midst of the 


to the fertile 
to the Great 
willows and 
region which 
ere upon the 
the remarka- 
he vague and 
ful obscurity, 
e mean time, 


ho had visited 
the wonders 
were highly 


re wandering 
very little for 
e to be found 
trumental ob- 
er been made 
posed that it 
se in my own 
Ace Was a ter- 
the ocean by 
de a frequent 
d the fires at. 
with their in- 

descriptions, 
0 believe, and 


— 


ee 


Seale. 43. Miles to an Inch 


we 


ny ¢z-zz\8 


is 


la the 


. 


Ts swe, of a oo 


x4 


Yt SHON 


TeH LuoON 


7S 


\ 


+ 


¥ 


%e, 
Plea ~ 


frnads 


W 
brea 
anotl 

Al 
emig 


mou 

W 
famil 
peare 
the fi 
reall 
good 
such 
a sec 
in th 
India 
feelin 


mour 
to the 
Smitl 
500 y 
route 
and r 


‘in pr 
herds 


133 [174] 


Where we descended into this beautiful valley, it is three to four miles in 
breadth, perfectly level, and bounded by mountainous ridges, one above 
another, rising suddenly from the plain. 

Annexed is a map of that portion of the river along which passes the 
emigrant road. In its character of level bottoms, enclosed between abrupt 
mountains, it presents a type of the streams of this region. 

We continued our road down the river, and at night encamped with a 
family of emigrants—two men, women, and several children—who ap- 
peared to be bringing up the rear of the great caravan. I was struck with 
the fine appearance of their cattle, some six or eight yoke of oxen, which 
really looked as well as if they had been all the summer at work on some 
good farm. It was strange to see one small family travelling along through 
such a conntry, so remote from civilization. Some nine years since, such 
a security might have been a fatal one; but since their disastrous defeats 
in the country a little north, the Blackfeet have ceased to visit these waters, 
Indians, however, are very uncertain in their localities; and the friendly 
feelings, also, of those now inhabiting it may be changed. 

According to barometrical observation at noon, the elevation of the valley 
was 6,400 feet above the sea; and onr encampment at night in latitude 
42° 03' 47", and longitude 111° 10’ 53", by observation—the day’s journey 
having been 26 miles. This encampment was therefore within the territo- 
rial limit of the United States; our travelling, from the time we entered the 
valley of the Green river, on the 15th of August, having been to the south 
of the 42d degree of north latitude, and consequently on Mexican territory; 
and this is the route all the emigrants now travel to Oregon. 

The temperature at sunset was 65°; and at evening there was a distant 
thunder storm, with a light breeze from the north. 

Antelope and elk were seen during the day on the opposite prairie; and 
there were ducks and geese in the river. 

The next morning, in about three miles from our encampment, we reach- 
ed Smith’s fork, a stream of clear water, about 50 feet in breadth. It is 
timbered with cottonwood, willow, and aspen, and makes a beautiful de- 
bouchement through a pass about 600 yards wide, between remarkable 
mountain hills, rising abruptly on either side, and forming gigantic columns 
to the gate by which it enters Bear river valley. The bottoms, which below 
Smith’s fork had been two miles wide, narrowed, as we advanced, to a gap 
500 yards wide; and during the greater part of the day we had a winding 
route, the river making very sharp and sudden bends, the mountains steep 
and rocky, and the valley occasionally so narrow as only to leave space for 

.a passage through. 

We made our halt at noon in a fertile bottom, where the common blue 
flax was growing abundantly, a few miles below the mouth of Thomas’s 
fork, one of the larger tributaries of the river. 

Crossing, in the afternoon, the point of a narrow spur, we descended into 
-a beautiful bottom, formed by a lateral valley, which presented a picture 
of home beauty that went directly to our hearts. The edge of the wood, 
‘for several miles along the river, was dotted with the white covers of emi- 
grant wagons, collected in groups at different camps, where the smokes 
were rising lazily from the fires, around which the women were occupied 
‘in preparing the evening meal, and the children playing in the grass; and 
herds of cattle, grazing about in the bottom, had an air of quiet security, 


TERESA arcs gente ee —— 


| 
I 
' 
tii 


[174] 134 


and civilized comfort, that made a rare sight for the traveller in such a 
remote wilderness. 

In common with all the emigration, they had been reposing for several 
days in this delightful valley, in order to recruit their animals on its luxuri- 
ant pasturage after their long journey, and gh tag them for the hard travel 
slong the comparatively sterile, bauks of the Upper Columbia. At the 
lower end of this extensive bottom, the river passes through an open caifion, 
where there were high vertical rocks to the water’s edge, and the road here 
turns up a broad valley to the right. It was already near sunset; but, 
hoping to reach the river again before night, we continued our march 
along the valley, finding the road iar good, until we arrived at a point 
where it crosses the ridge by an ascent of a mile in length, which was so 
very steep and difficult for the gun and carriage, that we did not reach the 
summit until dark, 

It was absolutely necessary to descend into the valley for water and grass; 
and we were obliged to grope our way in the darkness down a very steep, 
bad inountain, reaching the river at about 10 o’clock. It was late before 
our animals were gathered into camp, several of those which were very 
weak being necessarily left to pass the night on the ridge; and we sat down 
again to a midnight supper. The road, in the morning, presented an ani- 
mated appearance. We found that we had encamped near a large party of 
emigrants; anda few miles below another party was already in motion. 
Here the valley had resumed its usual breadth, and the river swept off 
along the mountains on the western side, the road continuing directly on. 

In about an hour’s travel we met several Shoshonee Indians, who in- 
formed us that they belonged to a large village which trad just come into 
the valley from the mountain to the westward, where they had been hunt- 
ing antelope and gathering service berries. Glad at the opportunity of 
seeing one of their villages, and in the hope of purchasing trom thema 
few horses, I turned immediately off into the plain towards their encamp- 
ment, which was situated on a small stream near the river. 

We had approached within something more than a mile of the village, 
when suddenly a single horseman emerged from it at full speed, tollowed 
by another, and another, in rapid succession; and then party after party 
poured into the plain, until, when the foremost rider reached us, all the 
whole intervening plain was occupied by a mass of horsemen, which came 
charging down upon us with guns and naked swords, lances, and bows 
and arrows—Indians entirely naked, and warriors fully dressed for war, 
with the long red streamers of their war bonnets reaching nearly to the 
ground—all mingled together inthe bravery of savage warfare. They had 


been thrown into a sudden tumult by the appearance of our flag, which, 


among these people, is regarded as an emblem of hostility; it being usually 
borne by the Sioux, and the neighboring mountain Indians, when they 
come here to war; and we had accordingly been mistaken for a body of 
their enemies. A few words from the chief quieted the excitement; and 
the whole band, increasing every moment in number, escorted us to their 
encampment, where the chief pointed out a place for us to encamp, near his 
own lodge, and made known our purpose in visiting the village. In avery 
short time we purchased eight horses, for which we gave in exchange 
blankets, red and blue cloth, beads, knives, and tobacco, and the usual other 


articles of Indian traffic. We obtained from them also a considerable quan-. 


{E., Saao ee 


in such a 


or several 
its luxuri- 
ard travel 
At the 
en cafon, 
road here 
isct; but, 
ur march 
ata point 
ch was so 
reach the 


and grass; 
ery sleep, 
ate before 
were very 
> sat down 
ed an ani- 
ra party of 
in motion. 
swept off 
ectly on. 
s, who in- 
come into 
been hunt- 
prtunity of 
ym them a 
ir encamp- 


he village,. 
l, followed 
ufter party 
us, all the 
hich came 
and bows 
bd for war, 
rly to the 
They had 
ag, which,, 
ng usually 
vhen they 
a body of 
nent; and 
us to their 
bp, near his 

In avery 
exchange 
sual other 


able quan-- 


i a 


135 [ 174] 


tity of berries of different kinds, among which service berries were the most 
abundant; and several kinds of roots and seeds, which we could cat with 
pleasure, as ag kind of vegetable food was gratifying to us, I ate here, for 
the first time, the Aooydh, or lobacco root, (valeriana edulis,) the principal 
edible root among the Indians who inhabit the upper waters of the streams 
onthe western side of the mountains, Ithasa very strong and remarkably 
peculiar taste and odor, which I can compare to no other vegetable that { 
am acquainted with, and which to some persons is extremely offensive. I¢ 
was characterized by Mr. Preuss as the most horrid food he had ever putin 
his mouth ; and when, in the evening, one of the chiefs sent his wife to me 
with a portion which she had prepared as a delicacy to regale us, the odor 
immediately drove him out of the lodge¥ and frequently afterwards he used 
te heg that when those who liked it had taken what they desired, it might 
be sent away. To others, however, the taste is rather an agreeable one, 
and I was afterwards always glad when it formed an addition to our scanty 
meals. It is full of nutriment; and in its unprepared state is said by the 
Indians to have very strong poisonous qualities, of which it is deprived by 
a peculiar process, being baked in the ground for about two days. 

The morning of the 24th was disagreeably cool, with an easterly wind 
and very smoky weather. We made a late start from the village, and, re- 
gaining the road, (on which, during all the day, were scattered the emigrant 
wagous,) we continued on down the valley of the river, bordered by high 
and mountainous hills, on which fires are seen atthe summit. ‘The soil 
appears generally good, aithough, with the grasses, many of the plants are 
dried up, probably on account of the great heat and want of rain. The 
common blue flax of cultivation, now almost entirely in seed—only a scat- 
tered flower here and there remaining—is the most characteristic plant of 
the Bear river valley. When we encamped at night on the right bank of 
the river, it was growing as in a sown field. We had travelled during the 
day 22 miles, encamping in latitude (by observation) 42° 36’ 56'', chrono- 
metric longitude 111° 42' 05". ; 

In our neighborhood, the mountains appeared extremely ‘rugged, giving 
still greater value to this beautiful natural pass. 

August 25.—This was a cloudless but smoky autumn morning, with @ 
cold wind from the SE., and a temperature of 45° at sunrise. Ina few 
miles I noticed, where a little stream crossed the road, fragmeuts of scoriat- 
ed bisalt scattered about—the first volcanic rock we had seen, and which 
now became a characteristic rock along our future road. In about six 
miles travel from our encampment, we reached one of the points in our 
journey to which we had always looked forward with great interest—the 
famous Beer springs. ‘he sketch annexed will aid in fixing your ideas 
of the place, which is a basin of mineral waters enclosed by the mountains, 
which sweep around acircular bend of Bear river, here at its most north- 
ern point, and which from a northern, in the course of a few miles acquires 
a southern direction towards the Great Sat Lake. A pretty little stream 
of clear water enters the upper part of the basin from an open valley in the 
mountains, and, passing through the bottom, discharges into Bear river. 
Crossing this stream, we descended a mile below, and made our encamp- 
ment in a grove of cedar immediately at the Beer springs, which, on ac- 
count of the effervescing gas and acid taste, have received their name from 
the veyageurs and trappers of the country, who, in the midst of their rude 


[ 174 J 136 


and hard lives, are fond of finding some fancied resemblance to the luxu- 
ries they rarely have the fortune to enjoy. 

Although somewhat disappointed in the expectations which various de- 
scriptions had led me to form of unusual beauty of situation and scenery, 
1 found it altogether a place of very great interest; and a traveller for the 
first time in a volcanic region remains in & constant excitement, and at 
every step is arrested by something remarkable and new. There is acon- 
fusion of interesting objects gathered together in a small space. ‘Around 
the place of encampment the Beer springs were numerous; but, as far as 
we could ascertain, Were entirely confined to that locality in the bottom. In 
the bed of the river, in front, for a space of several hundred yards, they 
were very abundant ; the eflerves@ng gas rising up and agitating the water 
in countless bubbling columns. In the vicinity round about were numerous 
springs of an entirely different and equally marked mineral character. Ina 
rather picturesque spot, about 1,300 yards below our encampment, and im- 
mediately on the river bank, is the most remarkable spring of the place. 
In an opening on the rock, a white column of scattered water is thrown up, 
in forin like a jet-@eau, toa variable height of about three feet, and, though 
it is maintained in a constant supply, its greatest height is attained only at 
regular intervals, according to the action of the force below. It is accom- 
panied by a subterranean noise, which, together with the motion of the 
water, inakes very much the impression of a steamboat in motion ; and, 
without knowing that it had been already previously so called, we gave to 
it the name of the Steamboat spring. The rock through which it is torced 
is slightly raised in a convex manner, and gathered at the opening into an 
urn-mouthed form, ayd is evidently formed by continued deposition from 
the water, and colored bright red by oxide of iron. An analysis of this 
deposited rock, which I subjoin, will give you some idea of the properties 
of the water, which, with the exception of the Beer springs, is the mineral 
water of the place.* It is a hot spring, and the water has a pungent and 
disagreeable metallic taste, leaving a burning effect on the tongue, Within 
perhaps two yards of the jet-d’cau isa small hole of about an inch in diam- 
eter, through which, at regular intervals, escapes a blast of hot air with a 
light wreath of smoke, accompanied by a regular noise. This hole had 
been noticed by Doctor Wislizenus, a gentleman who several years since 
passed by this place, &d who remarked, with very nice observation, that 
smelling the gas which issued from the orifice produced a sensation of gid- 
diness and nausea. Mr. Preuss and myself repeated the observation, and 
were so well satisfied with its correctness, that we did not find it pleasant to 
continue the experiment, as the sensation of giddiness which it produced 
was certainly strong and decided. A huge emigrant wagon, with a large 
and diversified family, had overtaken us and halted to noon at our encamp- 
ment; and, while we were sitting at the spring, a band of boys and girls, 


* ANALYSIS. 
Carbonate of lime : - - - - - - 92.55 
Carbonate of magnesia - - - - - - - 0.42 
Oxide of iron - - - ° - - - - 1.05 


Silica ad 
Alumina 


Water and loss 


#. 


1h ey. 


Ki 


the luxu- 


arious de- 
} scenery, 
er for the 
nt, and at 
2 is acon- 
‘Around 
, as far as 
ottom. In 
ards, they 
the water 
numerous 
cter. Ina 
t, and im- =f! 
the place. ‘te 
irown up, 
d, though 
xd only at 
is accom- 


to the layer COlun bia 


on of the ** 
ion; and, ante | 
e gave to ‘a. Meambuat Sprang 
t is forced a 7 . 
1g into an oe 
tion from Cal : 
sis of this .t { ty Beer. Spring ' ui 
roperties : b sett ‘A Aah ree oy a Prac , 
e mineral Yes, . Se ater tt a 
hgent and Mii, 3 (ON 4 ar 
b, Within ‘ ai! : ‘ 


in diam- 

ir witha 

hole had 
pars since 

tion, that 
bn of gid- 

tion, and 
easant to 
produced } 
h a large 
encamp- 
hud girls, 


—~ 


Seale One Mile te an dneh 


the hi 
mains 
spring 
are ag 
of Pik 
and h 
and s¢ 
of the 
and k 
quart 


Sulph: 
Sulph 
Carbo 
Carbo 
Chlori: 
Chlori 
Chlori 
Vegeté 


The 
before 
conside 

Int 
greate 
and ca 
with se 
very r¢ 
that ha 
which 
nel-sha 
colored 
with o 
them, a 
tracted 
I found 
discove 
same di 


137 [ 174 ] 


with two or three young men, came up, one of whom I asked to stoop 
down and smell the gas, desirous to satisfy myself further of its effects, But 
his natural caution had been awakened by the singular and suspicious 
features of ils place, and he declined my proposal decidedly, and with a 
few indistinct remarks about the devil, whom he seemed to consider the 
genius loci, ‘Vhe ceaseless motion and the play of the fountain, the red 
rock, and the green trees near, make this a pictureyque spor, 

A short distance above the spring, and near the foot of the same spur, is a 
very remarkable vollowsalena rock, soft and friable, consisting principally 
of carbonace of lime and oxide of iron, of regular structure, which is prob- 
ably a fossil coral, The rocky bank along the shore between the Steam- 
boat spring and our encampment, along which is dispersed the water from 
the hills, is composed entirely of strata of a calcareous /u/fa, with the re- 
mains of moss and reed-like grasses, which is probably the formation of 
springs. The Beer or Soda springs, which have givey name to this locality, 
are agreeable, but less highly flavored than the Boi/ing springs at the foot 
of Pike’s peak, which are of the samecharacter. They are very numerous, 
and half hidden by tufts of grass, which we amused ourselves in removing 
and searching about for more highly impregnated springs. ‘They are some 
of them deep, and of various sizes—sometimes several yards in diameter, 
and kept in constant motion by columns of escaping gas, By analysis, one 
quart of the water contains as follows : 


Cirains. 

Sulphate of magnesia - - - - - - 12,10 
Sulphate of lime = - - - - : " - 212 
Carbonate of lime - - - - . : - 3,86 
Carbonate of magnesia : - - - - - 3,22 
Chloride of calcium - - - : - - 1.33 
Chloride of magnesium : - : - : - 1,12 
Chloride of sodium - - : - - - 2.24 
Vegetable extractive matter, &c. = - - ° - 0,85 

26.34 


The carbonic acid, originally contained in the water, had maiuly escaped 
before it was subjected to analysis; and it was not, therefore, taken into 
consideration. 

In the afternoon I wandered about among the cedars, which occupy the 
greater part of the bottom towards the mountains. ‘The soil here has a dry 
and calcined appearance; in some places, the open grounds are covered 
with saline eftlorescetices, and there are a number of regularly shaped and 
very remarkable hills, which are formed of a succession of convex strata 
that have been deposited by the waters of extinct springs, the orifices of 
which are found on their summits, some of them having the form of fun- 
nel-shaped cones. Others of these remarkably shaped hills are of a red- 
colored earth, entirely bare, and composed principally of carbonate of lime, 
with oxide of iron, formed in the same manner. -Walking near one of 
them, on the summit of which the springs were dry, my attentien was at- 
tracted by an underground noise, around which I circled repeatedly, until 
I found the spot from beneath which it came ; and, removing the S| earth, 
discovered a hidden spring, which was boiling up from below, with the 
same disagreeable metallic taste as the Steamboat spring. Continuing up 


C174} 138 


the bottom, aud crossing the little stream which has been already mentioned, 
I visited several remarkable red and white hills, which had attracted my 
attention from the road in the morning. These are immediately upon the 
stream, and, like those ulready mentioned, are formed by the deposition of 
successive strata from the springs, On their summits, the orifices through 
which the waters had been discharged were so large that they resembled 
miniature craters, being some of them several feet in diameter, circular, and 
regularly formed as if by art. Ata former time, when these dried-up foun- 
tains were all in mot.on, they must have made a beautitul display on a 
grand scale; and nearly all this basin appears to me to have been formed 
under their action, and should be called the place of Jonntains, At the 
foot of one of these hills, or rather on its side near the base, are several of 
these small limestove columns, about one foot in diameter at the base, and 
tapering upwards to a height of three or four feet; and on the summit the 
water is boiling up and bubbling over, coustantly adding to the height of 
the little obelisks, In some, the water only boils up, no longer overtlowing, 
and lias here the same taste as at the Steamboat spring. ‘The observer will 
remark a gradual subsidence in the water, which formerly supplied the 
fountains, as on all the summits of the hills the springs are now dry, and 
are found only low down upon their sides, or on the surrounding plat. 

A little higher up the creek, its banks are formed by strata of a very 
heavy and hard scoriaceous basalt, having a bright metallic lustre when 
broken, The mountains overlooking the plain are of an entirely different 
geological character, Continuing on, | walked to the summit of one of 
them, where the principal rock was a granular quartz, Descending the 
mountains, and returning towards the camp along the base of the ridge 
which skirts the plain, I found at the foot of a mountain spur, and issuing 
from a compact rock of a dark-biue color, a great number of springs hav- 
ing the same pungent and disagreeably metallic taste already mentioned, 
the water of which was collected into a very remarkable basiu, whose sin- 
gularity, perhaps, made it appear to me very beautiful, It is large— 
perhaps filty yards in circumference; and in it the water is contained at 
an elevation of several feet above the surrounding ground by a wall of eal- 
careous /ufu, composed principally of the remains of mosses, three or four, 
and sometimes ten feet high, The water within is very clear and pure, 
and three or four feet deep, where it could be conveniently measured near 
the wall; and, at a considerably lower level, is another pond or basin of 
very clear water, aud apparently of considerable depth, from the bottom of 
which’ the gas was escaping in bubbling coluinns at many places. This 
water was collected into a small stream, which, in a few hundred yards, 
sank under ground, reappearing among the rocks between the two great 
springs near the river, which it entered by a little fall. 

Late in the afternoon [ sat out on my return to the camp, and, crossing 
in the way a large field of a salt that was several inches deep, found on my 
arrival that our emigrant friends, who had been encamped in company with 
us, had resumed their journey, and the road had again assumed its solitary 
character. The temperature of the largest of the Beer springs at our en- 
campmenut was 65° at sunset, that of the air being 62.5°. Our barometric 
observation gave 5,840 feet for the elevation above the gulf, being about 500 
feet lower than the Boiling springs, which are of a similar nature, at the foot 
of Pike’s peak. The astronomical observations gave for our latitude 42° 

39' 57", and 111° 46' 00" for the longitude. The night was very still and 


cloud 
the e 
telese 
Th 
smok 
perat 
of the 
the « 
and \ 
Re 
dow 
wits 
Susit 
river, 
for w 
river, 
one oO 
1 ace 
comp 
But 0 
only ¢ 
comfe 
of th 
him t 
way 
mean 
calves 
bly bi 
havin 
durin: 
In: 
bend, 
alway 
perfed 
placec 
ment, 
called 
sheep 
As 
by th 
the pl 
the ¢ 
found 
whicl 
hill, t 
the s 
there 
time 
nated 
paces 
whicl 
mann 


‘mentioned, 
tracted my 
ly upon the 
eposition of 
ces through 
y resembled 
‘ircular, and 
ied-up foun- 
lisplay on a 
wen formed 
na, At the 
‘¢ several of 
lie base, and 
summit the 
he height of 
overtlowing, 
observer will 
supplied the 
iow dry, and 
ing pla. 
ta of a very 
lustre when 
rely different 
nit of one of 
scending the 
of the ridge 
, and issuing 
springs hav- 
y mentioned, 
uv, Whose sin- 
It is large— 
contained at 
a wall of eal- 
three or four, 
ar and pure, 
yeasured near 
1 or basin of 
the bottom of 
places. ‘This 
indred yards, 
he two great 


and, crossing 
,found on my 
ompany with 
ed its solitary 
igs at our en- 
ur barometric 
ing about 500 
ire, at the foot 
r latitude 42° 
very still and 


139 C174] 


cloudless, and I sat up for an observation of the first satellite of Jupiter, 
the emersion of which took place about midnight; but fell asleep at the 
telescope, awaking just a fow minutes after the appearance of the star, 

The morning of the 26th was calio,and the sky without clouds, but 
smoky; and the temperature at sunrise 28,5°, Atthe same time, the tem- 
perature of the large Beer ipring, Where wo were encamped, was 56°; that 
of the Steamboat spring 87); and that of the steam hole, near it, 81.5%. In 
the course of the morning, the |ist wogons of the emigration passed by, 
and we were again left in our place, in the rear, 

Remaining in camp until nearly Li o’eloc!’, we travelled a short distance 
down the river, and balted to noon on the hoiuk, ata point where the road 

uits the valley of Bear river, and, crossing a ridge which divides the Great 
Jasin from the Pacific waters, rea” Fort Hall,! way of the Portneuf 
river, in a distance of probably fil'y m''es, or two and a helf days’ journey 
for wagons, An examination of the great lake which is the ontlet of this 
river, and the principal feature of geographical interest in (he busin, was 
one of the main objects contemplated inthe general plan of our survey, and 
I accordingly determined at this place to leave the road, and, after having 
completed a reconnoissance of the loke, regain it subsequently at Fort Hall, 
But our little stock of provisions had again became extremely low; we had 
only dried meat suflicient for one meal, and our supply of flour and other 
comforts was entirely exhausted, I therefore immediately despatched one 
of the party, Henry Lee, with a note to Carson, at Fort Hall, directing 
him to load a pack horse with whatever could be obtained there in the 
way of provisions, ar’! endeavor to overtake me ou the river, Jn the 
mean time, We had p'csod up along the road two tolerably well-grown 
calves, which would have become food for wolves, and which had proba- 
bly been left by some of the earlier emigrants, none of those we had met 
having made any «laim to then; and ou these I mainly relied for support 
during our cireri: to the lake. 

In sweeping around the point of the mountain which runs down into the 
bend, the river here passes between perpendicular walls of basalt, which 
always fix the attention, from the regular form in which it occurs, and its 
perfect distinctness from the surrounding rocks among which it has been 
placed. The mountain, which is rugged and steep, aud, by our measure- 
ment, 1,400 feet above the river directly opposite the place of our halt, is 
called the Sheep rock—probably because a tlock of the common mountain 
sheep (vvis montana) had been seen on the craggy point. 

As we were about resuining our march in the afternoon, I was «‘iracted 
by the singular appearance of an isolated hill with a concave summit, in 
the plain, about two miles from the river, and turned off towards it, while 
the camp proceeded on its way to the southward in search of the lake. I 
found the thin and stony soil of the plain entirely underlaid by the basalt 
which forms the river walls; and when I reached the neighborhood of the 
hill, the surface of the plain was rent into frequent fissures and chasins of 
the same scoriated volcanic rock, from forty to sixty feet deep, but which 
there was not suflicient light to penetrate entirely, and which I had not 
time to descend. Arrived at the summit of the hill, I found that it termi- 
nated in a very perfect crater, of an oval, or nearly circular form, 360 
paces in circumference, and 60 feet at the greatest depth. The walls, 
which were perfectly vertical, and disposed like masonry in a very regular 
manner, were composed of a brown-colored scoriaceous lava, evidently 


[174 ] 140 


the production of a modern volcano, and having all the appearance of the 
lighter scoriaceous lavas of Mount A&tna, Vesuvius, and other volcanoes, 
The faces of the walls were reddened and glazed by the fire, in which they 
had been melted, and which had left them contorted and twisted by its 
violent action. 

Our route during the afterncon was a little rough, being (in the direction 
we had taken) over a volcanic plain, where our progress was sometimes 
obstructed by fissures, and black beds composed of fragments of the rock, 
On both sides, the mountains appeared very broken, but tolerably well 
timbered. 

August 26.—Crossing a point of ridge which makes in to the river, we 
fell upon it again befure sunset, and encamped on the right bank, opposite 
to the en . pment of three lodges of Snake Indians, They visited us 
during the evening, and we obtained from them a small quantity of roots 
of different kinds, in exchange for goods. Among them was a sweet root 
of very pleasant flavor, having somewhat the taste of preserved quince, 
My endeavors to become acquainted with the plants which furnish to the 
Indians a portion of their support were only gradually successful, and af- 
ter long and persevering attention; and even after obtaining, I did not suc- 
ceed in preserving them until they could be satisfactorily determined. In 
this portion of the journey, I found this particular root cut up into such 
small pieces, that it was only to be identified by its taste, when the bulb 
was met with in perfect form among the Indians lower down on the Co- 
lumbia, among whom it is the highly celebrated kamds. It was long af- 
terwards, on our return through Upper California, that I found the plant 
itself in bloom, which J supposed to furnish the kamés root, (camassia es- 
culenta.) The root diet hada rather mournful effect at the conmence- 
ment, and one of the calves was killed this‘evening for food. The animals 
fared well on rushes. 

vlugust 27.—The morning was cloudy, with appearance of rain, and 
the thermometer at sunrise at 29°. Making an unusually early start, we 
crossed the river at a good ford; and, following for about three hours a trail 
which led along the bottom, we entered a labyrinth of hills below the main 
ridge, aitd halted to noon in the ravine of a pretty little stream, timbered 
with cottonwood of a large size, ash-leaved maple, with cherry and other 
shrubby trees. The hazy weather, which had prevented any very extended 
views since entering the Green river valley, began now to disappear. There 
was a Slight rain in the earlier part of the day, and at noon, when the ther- 
mometer had risen to 79.5°, we had a bright sun, with ‘blue sky and scat- 
tered cumuli. According to the barometer, our halt here among the hills 
was at an elevation of 5,320 feet. Crossing a dividing ridge in the after- 
noon, we followed down another little Bear river tributary, to the point 
where it emerged on an open green flat among the hills, timbered with 
groves, and bordered with cane thickets, but without water. A pretty little 
rivulet, coming out of the vill side, and overhung by tall flowering plants 
of a species | had not hitherto seen, furnished us with a good camping 
place. The evening was cloudy, the temperature at sunset 69°, and the ele- 
vation 5,140 feet. Among the plants occurring along the line of road dur- 
ing the day, epinetles des prairies (grindelia squarrosa) was in considera- 
ble abundance, and is among the very few plants remaining in bloom— 
the whole country having now an autumnal appearance, in the crisped and 


4 


yellov 
day, v 
Au 
rain, 
being 
the tre 
affordd 
in abo 
valley 
miles | 
river o 
we sh 
the m 
of salt 
steep § 
encam] 
and dt 
made t 
nothing 
noon, 
sionall 
approa 
night, 
ug 
NW,, 
bright s 
try, anc 
a trail t 
the mo 
plain re 
which 
small p 
north. 
stand tl 
into a | 
what 
huge 
with a 
plain h 
servati 
In th 
stream 
recede 
throug 
of tree 
dure of 
sides 0 
the mo 
eral cu 
side w. 
and pl 
tions fi 


ance of the 
volcanoes. 
which they 
sted by its 


he direction 

sometimes 
of the rock, 
erably well 


le river, we 
nk, opposite 
y visited us 
tity of roots 
sweet root 
ved quince, 
irnish to the 
ful, and af- 
did not suc- 
rmined. In 
ip into such 
en the bulb 
1 0n the Co- 
vas long af- 
d the plant 
massia es- 
commence- 
Che animals 


f rain, and 
rly start, we 
hours a trail 
bw the main 
m, timbered 
y and other 
pry extended 
ear. There 
en the ther- 
y and scat- 
ng the hills 
in the after- 
to the point 
bered with 
pretty little 
ring plants 
bd camping 
and the ele- 
f road dur- 
n considera- 
in bloom— 
crisped and 


141 [ 174 


yellow plants, and dried-up grasses. Many cranes were seen during the 
day, With a few antelope, very shy and wild. ; 

August 28.—During the night we had a thunder storm, with moderate 
rain, Which has made the air this morning very clear, the thermometer 
being at 55°. Leaving our encampment at the Cane spring, aud quitting 
the trail on which we had been travelling, and which would probably have 
afforded us a good road to the lake, we crossed some very deep ravines, and, 
in about an hour’s travelling, again reached the river. We were now ina 
valley five or six miles wide, between mountain ranges, which, about thirty 
miles below, appeared to close Up and terminate the valley, leaving for the 
river only a very harrow pass, or caiion, behind which we imagined that 


we should find the broad waters of the lake. We made the usual halt at’ 


the mouth of a small clear stream, having a slightly mineral taste, (perhaps 
of salt,) 4,760 feet above the gulf. In the afternoon we climbed a very 
steep sandy hill; and, after a slow and winding day’s march of 27 miles 
encamped at a slough on the river, There were great quantities of geese 
and ducks, of which only a few were shot; the Indians having probably 
made them very wild. The men employed themselves in fishing, but caught 
nothing. A skunk, (mephitis mericuna,) which was killed in the after- 
noon, made a supper for one of the messes. The river is bordered occa- 
sionally with fields of cane, which we regarded as an indication of our 
approach to a lake country. We had frequent showers of rain during the 
night, with thunder. was? 

August 29.—The thermometer at sunrise was 54°, with air from the 
NW., and dark rainy clouds moving on the horizon; rain squalls and 
bright sunshine by intervals. I rode ahead with Basil to explore the coun- 
try, and, continuing about three miles along the river, turned directly off on 
a trail running towards three marked gaps in the bordering range, where 
the mountains appeared cut througlf to their bases, towards which the river 
plain rose gradually. Putting our horses into a gallop on some fresh tracks 
which showed very plainly in the wet path, we came suddenly upon a 
small party of Shoshonee Indians, who had fallen into the trail from the 
north. We could only communicate by signs; but they made us under- 
stand that the road through the chain was a very excellent one, leading 
into a broad valley which ran to the southward. We halted to noon at 
what may be called the gate of the pass; on either side of which were 
huge mountains of rock, between which stole a little pure water stream 
with a margin just sufticiently large for our passage. From the river, the 
plain had gradually risen to an altitude of 5,500 feet, and, by meridian ob- 
servation, the latitude of the entrance was 42° 

In the interval of our usual halt, several of us wandered along up the 
stream to examine the pass more at leisure. Within the gate, the rocks 
receded a little back, leaving a very narrow, but most beautiful valley. 
through which the little stream wound its way, hidden by different kinds 
of trees and shrubs—aspen, maple, willow, cherry, and elder ; a fine ver- 
dure of smooth short grass spread over the remaining space to the bare 
sides of the rocky walls. These were of a blue limestone, which constitutes. 
the mountain here ; and opening directly on the grassy bottom were sev- 
eral curious caves, which appeared to be inhabited by root diggers. On one 
side was gathered a heay of leaves for a bed, and they were, dry, open 
and pleasant. On the roofs of the caves I remarked bituminous exuda- 
tions from the rock. 


> 


ee 


iS caicaiaiooeneamasbaseae sae 


~~ 


RR a EERE OT IO 


20n 7 ee Aerie 


ee ee eel 


f 174 J 142 


The trail was an excellent one for pack horses; but, as it sometimes 
crossed a shelving point,4o avoid the shrubbery we were obliged in several 
places to open a road for the carriage through the wood. A squaw on horse- 
back, accompanied by five or six dogs, entered the pass in the afternoon; 
but was too much terrified at fiuding herself in such unexpected company 
to make any pause for conversation, and hurried off at a good pace—being, 
of course, no further disturbed than by an accelerating shout. She was 
well and showily dressed, and was probably going to a village encamped 
somewhere near, and evidently did not belong to the tribe of root diggers. 
We had now entered a country inhabited by these people; and as in the 
course of our voyage we shall frequently meet with them in various stages 
of existence, it will be well to inform you that, scattered over the great 
region west of the Rocky mountains, and south of the Great Snake river, 
are numerous Indians whose subsistence is almost solely derived from roots 
and seeds, and such small animals as chance and great good fortune some- 
times bring within their reach, They are miserably poor, armed only with 
bows and arrows, or clubs; and, as the country they inhabit is almost 
destitute of game, they have no means of obtaining better arms. In the 
northern part of the region just mentioned, they live generally in solitary 
families; and farther to the south, they are gathered together in villages. 
Those who live together in villages, strengthened by association, are in 
exclusive possession of the more genial and richer parts of the country ; 
while the others are driven to the ruder mountains, and to the more in- 
hospitable parts of the country. But by sinply observing, in accompanying 
us along our road, you will become better acquainted with these people 
than we could make you in any other than a very long description, and 
you will find them worthy of your interest. 

Roots, seeds, and grass, every vegetable that affords any nourishment, 
and every living animal thing, insect or worm, they eat. Nearly approach- 
ing to the lower animal creation, their sole employment is to obtain food; § 
and they are constantly occupied in a struggle to support existence. q 

In the annexed view will be found a sketch of the S/anding rock—the § 
most remarkable feature of the pass where a huge rock, fallen from the 
cliffs above, and standing perpendicularly near the middle of the valley, 
presents itself like a watch tower in the pass. It will give you a tolerably 
correct idea of the charatter of the scenery in this country, where generally 
the mountains rise abruptly up from comparatively unbroken plains and — 
level valleys; but it will entirely fail in representing the picturesque beauty 
of this delightful place, where a green valley, full of toiiage,andahundred FF 
yards wide, contrasts with naked crags that spire up ini a blue line of pin- 
nacles 3,000 feet above, sometimes crested with cedar and pine, and some- 
times ragged and bare. 

The detention that we met with in opening the road, and perhaps a wil- 
lingness to linger on the way, made the afternoon’s travel short; and about 
two miles from the entrance we passed through another gate, and en- 
camped on the stream at the junction of a little fork from the southward, 
around whiciy the mountains stooped more gently down, forming a small 
open cove. 

As it was will early in the ailternoon, Basil amd myself in one direction, 
and Mr. Preuss mm another, st out to expleme the country, and ascended 
differemt neiginteoring peaks, mm the hope of seemg some indications of the 
lake; But though our elevation afforded magneficent views, the eye ranging 


| 


I iH 
ae 
} 

1) 


ese em SS 


oo Re eR RR EIEN 


ances 


3H1 43O SSyY4g 


INIGNVWIS 


woouwy 


sometimes 
d in several 
w on horse- 
afternoon ; 
dd company 
ace—being, 
. She was 
e encamped 
pot diggers. 
id as in the 
rious stages 
r the great 
Snake river, 
1d from roots 
rine some- 
2d only with 
it is almost 
ms. In the 
y in solitary 
y in villages. 
ition, are in 
the country ; 
the more in- 
ccompanying 
these people 
ription, and 


a et at 
ae — Se 


3H1L1 30 SSWd 


nourishment, 
ly approach- 
obtain food; 
blenice. 

ng rock—the 
len from the 
{ the valley, 
ua tolerably 
ere generally 
n plains and 
esque beauty 
nd a hundred 
e line of pin- 
he, and some- 


INIONVIS 


woo4w 


erhaps a wil- 
t; and about 
pate, and en- 
e southward, 
ming a small 


ne direction, 
and ascended 
ations of the 
e eye ranging 


throu 
coulc 
ente! 
ing ¢ 
berri 
low, 
whic 
indic 
over 
kniv 
But 
from 
their 
blan 
long 
wre 
ther 
this 
asv 
tere 
yea 
few 
cove 


, 143 [ 174 J 


over a long extent of Bear river, with the broad and fertile Cuche valley 
in the direction of our search, was only to be seen a bed of apparently 
impracticable mountains, Among these, the trail we had been dt 
turned sharply to the northward, and it began to be doubtful if it woul 
not lead us away from the object of our destination; but I nevertheless de- 
termined to keep it, in the belief that it would eventually bring us right. 
A squall of rain drove us out of the mountain, and it was late when we 
reached the camp. ‘Che evening closed in with frequent showers of rain, 
with some lightning and thunder. 

August 30.—We had constant thunder storms during the night, but in the 
morning the clouds were sinking to the horizon, and the air was clear and 
cold, with the thermometer at sunrise at 39°, Elevation by barometer 5,580 
feet. We were in motion early, continuing up the little stream without en- 
countering any ascent where a horse would not easily gallop, and, crossing 
‘ aslight dividing ground at the summit, descended upon a small stream, 
along which we continued on the same excellent road. _In riding through 
the pass, numerous cranes were seen ; and prairie hens, or grouse, (bonasia 
umbellus,) which lately had been rare, were very abundant. 

This little afluent brought us to a larger stream, down which we travelled 
through a more open bottom, on a level road, where heavily-laden wagons 
could pass without obstacle. The hills on the right grew lower, and, on 
entering a more open country, we discovered a Shoshonee village ; and be- 
ing desirous to obtain information, and purchase from them some roots and 
berries, we halted on the river, which was lightly wooded with cherry, wil- 
low, maple, service berry, and aspen. A meridian observation of the sun, 
which I obtained here, gave 42° 14’ 22" for our latitude, and the barometer 
indicated a height of 5,170 feet. A number of Indians came iminediately 
over to visit us, and several men were sent to the village with goods, tobacco, 
knives, cloth, vermilion, and the usual trinkets, to exchange for provisions. 
But they had no game of any kind; and it was difficult to obtain any roots 
from them, as they were miserably poor, and had but little to spare from 
their winter stock of provisions. Several of the Indians drew aside their 
blankets, showing me their lean and bony figures ; and I would not any 
longer teinpt them with a display of our merchandise to part with their 
wretched subsistence, when they gave as a reason that it would expose 
them to temporary starvation. A great portion of ‘the region inhabited by 
this nation formerly abounded in game; the buffalo ranging about in herds, 
as we had found them on the eastern waters, and the plains dotted with scat- 
tered bands of antelope ; but so rapidly have they disappeared within a few 
years, that now, as we journeyed along, an occasional buffalo skull and a 
few wild antelope were all that remained of the abundance which had 
covered the country with animal life. 

The extraordinary rapidity with which the buffalo is disappearing from 
our territories will not appear surprising when we remember the great 
scale on which their destruction is yearly carried on. With inconsiderable 
exceptions, the business of the American trading posts is carried on in their 
skins; every year the Indian villages make new lodges, for which the skin 
of the buffalo furnishes the material; and in that portion of the country 
where they are still found, the Indians derive their entire support from 
them, and slaughter them with a thoughtless and abominable extrava- 
gance. Like the Indians themselves, they have been a characteristic of 
_ the Great West; and as, like them, they are visibly diminishing, it will be 


Sain esti te 


TS 


ee eae RE eS a a ant 


[174] 144 


interesting to throw a glance backward through the last twenty years, and 
give some account of their former distribution through the country, and the 
limit of their western range. 

The information is derived principally from Mr. Fitzpatrick, supported 
by my own personal knowledge and acquaintance with the country. Our 
knowledge does not go farther back than the spring of 1824, at which time 
the buffalo were spread iu immense numbers over the Green river and Bear 
river valleys, aud through all the country lying between the Colorado, or 
Green river of the gulf of California, and Lewis’s fork of the Columbia 
river; the meridian of Fort Hall then forming the western limit of their 
range. The buffalo then remained for many years in that country, and 
frequently moved down the valley of the Columbia, on both sides of the 
river as fur as the Fishing fud/s. Below this point they never descended 
in any numbers, About the year 1834 or 1835 they began to diminish 
very rapidly, and continued to decrease until 1838 or 1840, when, with the 
country we have just described, they entirely abandoned all the waters of 
the Pacific north of Lewis’s tork of the Columbia. At that time,the Flat- 
head liidians were in the habit of finding their buffalo on the heads of Sal- 
mon river, and other streams of the Columbia; but now they never meet 
with them farther west than the three forks of the Missouri or the plains 
of the Yellowstone river. 

In the course of our journey it will be remarked that the buffalo have nos 
so entirely abandoned the waters of the Pacific, in the Rocky-mountain re- 
gion south of the Sweet Water, as in the country north of the Great Pass. 
This partial distribution cau only be accounted for in the great pastoral 
beauty of that country, which bears marks of having long been one of their 
favorite haunts, and by the tact that the white hunters have more frequent- 
ed the northern than the southern region—-it being north of the South Pass 
that the hunters, trappers, aud traders, have had their rendezvous tor many 
years past ; and from that section also the greater portion of the beaver and 
rich furs were taken, although ajways the most dangerous as weil as ¢he 
most profitable hunting ground. 

Ju that region lying between the Green or Colorado river and the head 
waters of the Rio del Norte, over the Yumpah, Kooyah, White, and Grand 
rivers—all of which are the waters of the Colorado—the buffalo never ex- 
tended so far to the westward as they did on the waters of the Columbia; 
and only in one or two instances have they been kuown to descend as far 
west as the mouth of White river. In travelling through the country west 
of the Rocky mountaius, observation readily led me to the impression that 
the buffalo had, for the first time, crossed that range to the waters of the 
Paciiic only a few years prior to the period we are considering ; and in this 
opinion I um sustained by Mr. Fitzpatrick, and the older trappers in that 
country. In the region west of the Rocky mountains, we never meet with 
any of the ancient vestiges which, throughout all the country lying upon 
their eastern waters, are found in the great highways, continuous for hun- 
dreds of miles, always several inches and sometimes several feet in depth, 
which the buffalo have made in crossing from one river to another, or in 
traversing the mountain ranges. TheeSnake Indians, more particularly 
those low down upon Lewis’s fork, have always been very grateful to the 
American trappers, for the great kindness (as they frequently expressed it) 
which they did to them, in driving the buffalo so low down the Columbia 


: iver. 


The extraordinary abundance of the buffalo on the east side of the Rocky 


ES is STE 


asa 

“ce | 
dians 
the c 
with 
and « 
tensi 
robe: 
year. 
obtai 
hide 
ably 
even 
robe 
twer 


years, and 
ry, aud the 


supported 
ury. Our 
vhich time 
rand Bear 
orado, or 
Columbia 
it of their 
untry, and 
des of the 
descended 
» diminish 
1, with the 
waters of 
1,the Flat- 
ads of Sal- 
ever meet 
the plains 


o have not 
ULtain re- 
reat Pass. 
t pastoral 
ne of their 
frequent- 
outh Pass 
for many 
caver and 
rell as she 


the head 
id Grand 
never ex- 
olumbia; 
nd as far 
ntry west 
ssion that 
rs of the 
nd in this 
rs in that 
neet with 
ing upon 
s for hun- 
in depth, 
her, or in 
ticularly 
ful to the 
ressed it) 
olumbia 


e Rocky 


145 [ 174] 


mountains, and their extraordinary diminution, will be made clearly evi- 
dent from the following statement: At any time between the yeurs 1824 
and 1836, a traveller might start from any given point south or north in the 
Rocky mountain range, journeying by the most direct route to the Missouri 
river; and, during the whole distance, his road would be always among 
large bands of buffalo, which would never be out of his view until he ar- 
rived almost within sight of the abodes of civilization. 

Atthistime, the buffalo oceupy but a very limited space, principally along 
the eastern base of the Rocky mountains, sometimes extending at their 
southern extremity to a considerable distance into the plains between the 
Platte and Arkansas rivers, and along the eastern frontier of New Mexico 
as far south as Texas. 

The following statement, which I owe to the kindness of Mr. Sanford, 
a partner in the American Fur Company, will further illustrate this subject, 
by extensive knowledge acquired during several years of travel through the 
region inhabited Uy' the buffalo : 


“The total amount of robes annually traded by ourselves and others 
will not be found to differ much from the following statement : 


Robes. 
American Fur Company : - : - - 70,000 
Hudson’s Bay Company : - - - - 10,000 
All other companies, probably - - - - 10,000 
Making a total of — - : : - - ‘ 90,060 


as an average annual return for the last eight or ten years. 

“In the northwest, the Hudson’s Bay Company purchase from the In- 
dians but a very small number—their only market being Canada, to which 
the cost uf transportation nearly equals the produce of the furs; and it is only 
within a very recent period that they have received buffalo robes in trade ; 
and out of the great number of buffalo annually killed throughout the ex- 
tensive regions inhabited by the Camanches and other kindred tribes, no 
robes whatever are furnished for trade. During only four months of the 
year, (from November until March, ) the skins are good for dressing ; those 
obtained in the remaining eight months being valueless to traders ; and the 


_ hides of bulls are never taken off or dressed as robes at any season. Prob- 


ably not more than one-third of the skins are taken from the animals killed, 
even when they are in good season, the labor of preparing and dressing the 
robes being very great; and it is seldom that a lodge trades more than 
twenty skins in a year. It is during the summer months, and in the early 
part of autumn, that the greatest number of buffalo are killed, and yet at 
‘this time a skin is never taken for the purpose of trade.” 


From these data, which are certainly limited, and decidedly within 
‘bounds, the reader is left to draw his own inference of the immense num- 
ber annually killed. gill 

In 1842, I found the Sioux Indians of the Upper Platte demonécs, as their 
French traders expressed it, with the failure of the buffalo ; and in the fol- 
lowing year, large villages from the Upper Missouri came over to the moun- 
tains at the heads of the Platte, in search of them. The rapidly progressive 
failure of their principal and almost their only means of subsistence has 
created great alarm among them ; and at this time there are only two modes 
presented to them, by which they see a good prospect for escaping starvas 

L 


146 


tion : one of these is to rob the settlements along the frontier of the States ; 
and the other is to form a league between the various tribes of the Sioux 
nation, the Cheyennes, and Arapahoes, and make war against the Crow 
nation, in order to take from them their country, which is now the best 
buffalo country in the west. This plan they now have in consideration ; 
and it would probably be a war of extermination, as the Crows have lon 
been advised of this state of affairs, and say that they are perfectly prepared, 
These are the best warriors in the Rocky mountains, and are now allied 
with the Snake Indians; and it is probable that their combination would 
extend itself to the Utahs, who have long been engaged in war against the 
Sioux. It isin this section of country that my observation formerly led 
me to recommend the establishment of a military post. 

The farther course of our narrative will give fuller and more detailed 
information of the present disposition of the buffalo in the country we 
visited. 

Among the roots we obtained here, I could distinguish only five or six 
different kinds; and the supply of the Indians whom we met consisted 
principally of yampah, (anethum, graveolens, ) tobacco root, ( valeriana, ) 
and a large root of a species of thistle, (circium Virginianum, ) which now 
is occasionally abundant, and is a very agreeably flavored vegetable. 

We had been detained so long at the village, that in the alternoon we 
made only five miles, and encamped on the same river after a day’s jour- 
ney of 19 miles. The Indians informed us that we should reach the bi 
salt water after having slept twice and travelling in a south direction. The 
stream had here eniered a nearly level plain or valley, of good soil, eight or 
ten miles broad, to which no termination was to be seen, and lying between 
ranges of mountains which, on the right, were grassy and smooth, unbro- 
ken by rock, and lower than on the left, where they were rocky and bald, 
increasing in height to the southward. On the creek were fringes of young 
willows, older trees being rarely found on the plains, where the Indians 
burn the surface to produce better grass. Several magpies (pica Hudsonicu) 
were seen on the creek this afternoon ; and a rattlesnake was killed here, 
the first which had been seen since leaving the eastern plains. Our camp 
to-night had such a hungry appearance, that I suffered the little cow to be 
killed, and divided the roots and berries among the people. A number of 
Indians from the village encamped near. 

The weather the next morning was clear, the thermometer at sunrise at 
44°.5, and, continuing down the valley, in about five miles we followed 
the little creek of our encampment to its junction with a larger stream, 
ealled Roseauz, or Reed river. Immediately opposite, on the right, the 
range was gathered into its highest peak, sloping gradually low, and run- 
ning off to a point apparently some forty or fifty miles below. Between 


this (now become the valley stream) and the foot of the mountains, we | 


journeyed along a handsome sloping level, which frequent springs from the 


hills made occasionally miry, and halted to noon at a swampy spring, where | 


there were good grass and abundant rushes. Here the river was forty feet 
wide, with a considerable current; and the valley a mile and a half in 
breadth ; the soil being generally good, of a dark color, and apparently well 
adapted to'cultivation. The day had become bright and pleasant, with the 
. therniometer at 71°. By observation, our latitude was 41° 59’ 31”, and the 
elevation above the sea 4,670 feet. On our left, this afternoon, the range 
at long intervals formed itself into peaks, appearing to terminate, about 


of the States ; 
of the Sioux 
nst the Crow 
now the best 
pnsideration ; 
ws have lon 
tly prepared, 
re now allied 
nation would 
ar against the 
formerly led 


more detailed 
e country we 


nly five or six 
met consisted 
, (valeriana, ) 
1,) which now 
egetable. 
alternoon we 
a day’s jour- 
reach the big 
irection. The 
d soil, eight or 
lying between 
mooth, unbro- 
cky and bald, 
ngs of young 
re the Indians 
a Hudsonicu) 
as killed here, 
s. Our camp 
ittle cow to be 
A number of 


br at sunrise at 
we followed 
arger stream, 
the right, the 
low, and run- 


pw. Between | 
nountains, we © 
brings from the | 
spring, where | 


was forty feet 
and a half in 
pparently well 
sant, with the 
D' 31", and the 
oon, the range 
rminate, about 


147 C1749 


forty miles below, in a rocky cape ; beyond which, several others were faint- 
ly visible ; and we were d sappointe when at every little rise we did not 
see the lake. Towards evening, our way was somewhat obstructed by 
fields of artemisia, which began to make their appearance here, and we 
encamped on the Roseaux, the water of which had acquired a decided} 
salt taste, nearly opposite to a cafion gap in the mountains, through whie 
the Bear river enters this valley. As we encamped, the night set in dark 
and cold, with heavy rain; and the artemisia, which wes hive our only 
wood, was so wet that it would not burn. A poor, nearly starved dog, 
with a wound in his side from a ball, came to the camp, and remained 
with us until the winter, when he met a very unexpected fate. 

September 1.—The morning was squally and cold ; the sky scattered over 
with clouds; and the night had been so uncomfortable, that we were noton 
the road until 8 o’clock. ‘Travelling between Roseaux and Bear rivers, we 
continued to descend the valley,which gradually expanded, as we advanced, 
into a level plain of good soil, about 25 miles in breadth, between moun- 
tains 3,000 and 4,000 feet high, rising suddenly to the clouds, which all day 
rested upon the peaks. These gleamed out in the occasional sunlight, man- 
tled with the snow which had fallen upon them, while it rained on us inthe 
valley below, of which the elevation here was about 4,500 feet above the 
sea. The country before us plainly indicated that we were approaching 
the lake, though, as the ground where we were travelling afforded no ele- 
vated point, nothing of it as yet could be seen ; and at a great distance ahead 
were several isolated mountains, resembling islands, which they were after- 
wards found to be. On this upper plain the grass was every where dead ; 
and among the shrubs with which it was almost exclusively occupied, ( arte- 
misia being the most abundant,) frequently occurred handsome clusters of 
several species of dieleria in bloom. Purshia tridentata was among the 
frequent shrubs. Descending to the bottoms of Bear river, we found good 
grass for the animals, and encamped about 300 yards above the mouth of 
Roseaux, which here makes its junction, without con:municating any 
of its salty taste to the main stream, of which the water remains perfectly 
pure. On the river are only willow thickets, (salix longifolia,) and in the 
bottoms the abundant plants are canes, solidago, and helianthi, and along 
the banks of Roseaux ure fields of malva rotundifolia. At sunset the ther- 
mometer was at 54°.5, and the evening clear and calm; but I deferred 

making any use of it until 1 o’clock in the morning, when I endeavored 
to obtain an. emersion of the first satellite ; but it was lost in a bank of 
clouds, which also rendered our usual observations indifferent. 

Among the useful things which formed a portion of our equipage, was an 
India-rubber boat, 18 feet long, made somewhat in the form of a bark canoe 
of the northern lakes. The sides were formed by two air-tight cylinders, 
eighteen inches in diameter, connected with others forming the bow and 
stern.’ - To lessen the danger from accidents to the boat, these were divided 
into four different compartments, and the interior space was sufficiently 
large to contain five or six persons and a considerable weight of baggage. 
The’ Roseaux being too deep to be forded, our boat was filled with air, and 
in about one hour all the equipage of the camp, carriage and gun included, 
ferried across. Thinking that perhaps in the course of the day we might 
reach the outlet at the lake, I got into the boat with Basil Lajeunesse, and 
paddled down Bear river, intending at night to rejoin the party, which in 
the mean time proceeded on its way. The river was from sixty to one 


ON 


Se I RE SE 


<i jeneienaaacaa — 
a RT a rans eh aera cn ne eS 


ee 


[ 174 ] 148 


hundred yards broad, and the water so deep, that even on the comparatively 
shallow points we could not reach the bottom with 15 feet. On either side 
were alternately low bottoms and willow points, with an oceasional high 
prairie ; and for five or six hours we followed slowly the winding course of 
the river, which crept along with a sluggish current among frequent détuurs 
several miles around, sometimes running fora considerable distance directly 
up the valley. As we were stealing quietly down the stream, trying in vain 
to geta shot at a strange large bird that was numerous among the willows, 
but very shy, we came unexpectedly upon several families of Root Diggers, 
who were encamped among the rushes on the shore, and oppeared very 
busy about several weits or nets which had been rudely made of canes and 
rushes for the purpose of catching fish. They were very much startled at 
our appearance, but we soon established an acquaintance ; and finding that 
they fad some roots, | promised to send some men with goods to trade 
with them. They had the usual very large heads, remarkable among the 


Digger tribe, with matted hair, and were almost entirely naked ; looking | 


very poor and miserable, as if their lives had been spent in the rushes where 
they were, beyond which they secmed to have very little knowledge of any 
thing. From the few words we could comprehend, their language was 
that of the Snake Indians. 

(ur boat moved so heavily, that we had made very little prugress ; and, 
finding that it would be impossible to overtuke the camp, a8 s00n 48 We were 
sufficiently far below the Indians, we put to the shore near a high prairie 
bank, hauled up the boat, and cached our effects in the willows. Ascending 
the bank, we found that our desultory labor had brought us only a few miles 


in a direct line ; and, going out into the prairie, after a search we found the # 
trail of the camp, which was now nowhere in sight, but had followed the | 


general course of the river ina large circular sweep which it makes at this 
place. ‘lhe sun was about three hours high when we found the trail ; and 
as our people had passed early in the day, we had the prospect of a vigorous 
walk ‘before us. lmmediately where we landed, the high arable plain on 
which we had been travelling for several days past terminated in extensive 
low flats, very generally oceupied by salt marshes, or beds of shallow lakes, 
whence the water liad in most places evaporated, leaving their hard surface 
encrusted with a shining white residuum, and absolutely covered with very 
small wnivalve shells. As we advanced, the whole country around us as: 
sumed this eppearance ; and there was no other vegetation than the shrubby 
chenopodiaceous and other apparently suline plants, which were confined 
to the rising grounds, Here and there on the river bank, which was raised 
. like a levee above the flats through which it ran, was a narrow border of 
grass and short black-burnt willows; the stream being very deep and 
staggish, and sometimes 600 to 800 feet wide. Aftera rapid walk of about 
15 miles, we caught sight of the camp fires among clumps of willows just 
as the sun had sunk behind the mountains on the west side of the val- 
‘dey, filling the clear sky with a golden yellow. These last rays, to us 50 


__ precious, could not have revealed a more welcome sight. To the traveller | 
“and the hunter, a camp fire in the lonely wilderness is always cheering ; 


and to ourselves, in our present situation, after a hard march in a region of 
novelty, approaching the debouches of a river, in a lake of almost fabulous 
reputation, it was doubly so. A plentiful supper of aquatic birds, and the 
interest of the scene, soon’ dissipated fatigue ; and I obtained during the 


in 


night 
observ 


course 
Wis @ | 
that we 
willow 
fowl m 
crotale 
the ear 
salicor 
In th 
small q 
was be. 
Dese 
bar to 
in seve 
miry n¢ 
evident 
covered 
at the li 
lake ett 
The riv 
were in 
species 
morass 
very Wi 
with a 
the mar 
plover, 
Altha 

] obtain 
servatio 
our stay; 
112° 19’ 
to the b 
night w 
since th 
to start, 
light pro 
ble sup 
scarce, 4 
hausted 
from M 
that pla 
journey 
Retu 
sunset if 
miles o 
mediate 


romparatively 
On either side 
easional high 
ding course of 
quent détuurs 
tance directly 
trying in vain 

the willows, 
Root Diggers, 
appeared very 
le of canes and 
uch startled at 
nd finding that 
goods to trade 
ble among the 


aked ; looking ’ 


e rushes where 
ywwledge of any 
language was 


progress ; and, 
oon us We were 
r a high prairie 
ws. Ascending 


nly afew miles 


li we found the 


‘ah 
“ 

why 

he 


ait followed the 5 
it makes at this 


d the trail; and 
bet of a vigorous 
arable plain on 
ed in extensive 
f shallow lakes, 
eir hard surface 
ered with very 
ry around us as: 
han the shrubby 

awere confined 
shich was raised 
hrrow border of 
very deep and 
id walk of about 
of willows just 
side of the val- 
Ast, rays, to us s0 


To the traveller | 


ways cheering; 
h in a region of 
almost fabulous 
c birds, and the 


ined during the 


149 [ 174 } 
night emersions of the second, third, and fourth satellites of Jupiter, with 
observations for time and latitude. 

Seplember 3.—The morning was clear, with a light air from the north, 
and the thermometer at sunrise at 45°.5. At 3in the morning, Basil 
was sent back with several men and horses for the boat, which, in a direet 
course across the flats, was not 10 miles distant; and in the mean time there 
was @ pretty spot of grass here for the animals, The ground was so low 
that we could not get high enough to see across the river, on account of the 
willows ; but we were evideutly in the vieinity of the lake, and the water 
fowl made this morning a noise like thunder, A peliean eowees ono- 
crotalus ) wus killed as he passed by, and many geese and ducks flew over 
the camp. On the dry salt marsh here, is scaree any other plant than 
salicornia herbacea. 

In the afternoon the men returned with the boat, bringing with them a 
small quantity of roots, and some meat, which the Indians had told them 
was bear meat. 

Descending the river for about three miles in the afternoon, we found a 
bar to any further travelling in that direction—the stream being spread out 
in several branches, and covering the low grounds with water, where the 
miry nature of the bottom did not permit any further advance. We were 
evidently on the border of the lake, although the rushes and canes which 
covered the marshes prevented any view ; aud we accordingly encamped 
at the little delta which forms the mouth of Bear river; a long arm of the 
lake stretching up to the north between us and the opposite mountains, 
The river was bordered with a fringe of willows aud canes, among which 
were interspersed a few plants; and scattered about on the marsh was a 
speciesof uniola, closely allied to U. spicata of our sea coast. The whole 
morass was animated with multitudes of water fowl, which appeared to be 
very wild—rising for the space of a mile round about at the sound of a gun, 
with a noise like distant thunder. Several of the people waded out into 
the marshes, and we had to-night a delicious supper of ducks, geese, and 
plover, 

Although the moon was bright, the night was otherwise favorable ; and 
] obtained this evening an emersion of the first satellite, with the usual ob- 
servations. A mean result, depending on various obser vations made during 
our stay in the neighborhood, places the mouth of the river in longitude 
112° 19’ 30” west from Greenwich; latitude 41° 30' 22"; and, according 
to the barometer, in elevation 4,200 feet above the gulf of Mexico. The 
night was clear, with considerable dew, which I had remarked every night 
since the first of September. The next morning, while we were preparing 
to start, Carson rode into the camp with flour and a few other articles of 
light provision, sufficient for two or three days—a scanty but very accepta- 
ble supply. Mr. Fitzpatrick had not yet arrived, and provisions were very 
scarce, and difficult to be had at Fort Hall, which had been entirely ex- 
hausted by the necessities of the emigrants. He brought me also a letter 
from Mr. Dwight, who, in company with several emigrants, had reached 
that place in advance of Mr. Fitzpatrick, and was about continuing his 
journey to V ncouver, 

Returninga bout five miles up the river, we were occupied until nearly 
sunset in crossing to the left bank—the stream, which in the last five or six 
miles of its course,is very much narrower than above, being very deep im- 
mediately at the banks; and we had great difficulty in getting our animals 


[174] 150 


ever. The people with the baggage were easily crossed in the boat, and 
we encamped on the left bank where we crossed the river. At sunset the 
thermometer was at 75’, and there was some rain during the night, witha 
thunder storm at a distance. 

September 5.—Before us was evidently the bed of the lake, being a great 
salt marsh, perfectly level and bare, whitened in places by saline efflo- 
reacences, with here and there a pool of water, and having the appearance 
of a very level sea shore at low tide, oe along the river was a 
very narrow strip of vegetation, consisting of willows, helianthi, roses, 
flowering vines, and grass ; bordered on the verge of the great marsh by a 
fringe of singular plants, which appear to be a shrubby salicornia, or a genus 
allied to it. 

About 12 miles to the southward ws one of those isolated mountains, 
now appearing to be akind of peninsula ; and towards this we ary AL 
directed our course, as it shige | afforded a good view of the lake ; but 
the deepening mud as we advanced forced us to return toward the river, and 
gain the higher ground at the foot of the eastern mountains, Here we halt- 
ed for a few minutes at noon, on a beautiful little stream of pure and re- 
markably clear water, with a bed of rock in situ, on which was an abun- 
dant water plant with a white blossom. There was good grass in the bot- 
ioms ; and, amidst a rather luxuriant growth, its banks were bordered with 
a large showy plant (eupatorium purpureum,) which | here saw for the 
first time. e named the stream Clear creek. 

We continued our way along the mountain, having found here a broad 
plainly beaten trail, over what was apparently the shore of the lake in the 
spring ; the ground being high and firm, and the soil excellent and covered 
with vegetation, among which a leguminous plant (glycyrrhiza lepfdota ) 
was a characteristic plant. The ridge here rises abruptly to the height of 
about 4,000 feet ; its face being very prominently marked with a massive 
stratum of rose-colored granular quartz, which is evidently an altered sedi- 
mentary rock ; the lines of deposition being very distinct. It is rocky and 
steep; divided into several mountains ; and the rain in the valley appears 
to be always snow on their summits at this season. Near a remarkable 
rocky point of the mountain, at a large spring of pure water, were several 
hackberry trees, (celtis,) probably a new species, the berries still green ; 
and a short distance farther, thickets of sumach (rhus. ) 

On the plain here I noticed blackbirds and grouse. In about seven 
miles from Clear creek, the trail brought us to a place at the foot of the 
mountain where there issued with considerable force ten or twelve hot 
springs, highly impregnated wish salt. In one of these, the thermometer 
Stood at 136°, and in another at 132°.5; and the water, which spread in 
pools over the low ground, was colored red.” 


* An analysis of the red earthy matter deposited in the bed of the stream from the springs, 
gives the following result: 


Peroxide of iron - 
Carbonate of magnesia 
Carbonate of lime 
Sulphate of lime - 
Chloride of sodium 
Silica and alumina 
Water and loss - 


he boat, and 
At sunset the 
night, with a 


being a great 
saline efflo- 
© appearance 
e river Wasa 
ianthi, roses, 
ut marsh by a 
jia, Or a genus 


d mountains, 
p apeereney’y 
he lake ; but 
the river,and 
Here we halt- 
pure and re- 
was an abun- 
ss in the bot- 
bordered with 
» saw for the 


| here a broad 
he lake in the 
t and covered 
iza leptdota ) 
» the height of 
vith a massive 
» altered sedi- 
it is rocky and 
valley appears 
a co Mi ga 

were several 
es still green ; 


about seven 
he foot of the 
or twelve hot 
b thermometer 
hich spread in 


from the springs, 


° 33.50 


@ee#e 
@ws 
> 
Ss: 


151 r 174) 


At this place the trail we had been following turned to the left, apparent. 
ly with the view of entering a gorge in the mountain, from which issued 
the principal fork of a large and comparatively well-timbered stream, called 
Weber's fork. Weaccordingly turned off towards the lake, and encamped 
on this river, which was 100 to 150 feet wide, with high banks, and very 
clear pure water, without the slightest indication of salt. 

September 6.—Leaving the encampment vated we opel directed our 
course for the peninsular bulle ucross a low shrubby plain, crossing in the 
way a slough-like creek with miry banks, and wooded with thickets of thorn 
(cratagus) which were loaded with berries. This time we reached the 
butte without any difficulty, and, ascending to the summit, immediately at 
our feet beheld the object of our anxious search—the waters of the Inland 
Sea, stretching in still and solitary grandeur far beyond the limit of our 
vision, It was one of the great points of the exploration ; and as we looked 
eagerly over the lake in the first emotions of excited pleasure, I am doubtful 
if the followers of Balboa felt more enthusiasm when, from the heights of 
the Andes, they saw for the first time the great Western ocean. It was 
certainly a magnificent object, and a noble ferminus to this part of our ex- 
pedition ; and to travellers so long shut up among mountain ranges, a sud- 
den view over the expanse of silent waters had in it something sublime. 
Several large islands raised their high rocky heads out of the waves; but 
whether or not they were timbered, was still left to our imagination, as the 
distance Was too great to determine if the dark hues upon them were wood- 
land or naked rock. During the day the clouds had been gathering black 
over the mountains to the westward, and, while we were looking, a storm 
burst down with sudden fury upon the lake, and entirely hid the islands 
from our view. So far as we could see, along the shores there was nota 
solitary tree, and but little appearance of grass; and on Weber’s fork, a 
few miles below our last encampment, the timber was gathered into groves, 
and then disappeared entirely. As this appeared to be the nearest point to 
the lake where a suitable camp could be found, we directed our course to 
one of the groves, where we found a handsome encampment, with good 
grass and an abundance of rushes, (equisetumhyemale.) At sunset, the ther- 
mometer was at 55°; the evening clear and calm, with some cumuli. 

September 7.—The morning was calm and clear, with a temperatare 

at sunrise of 39°.5, The day was spent in active preparation for our in- 
tended voyage on the lake. On the edge of the stream a favorable spot 
was selected in a grove, and, felling the timber, we made a strong coral, or 
horse pen, for the animals, and a little fort for the people who were to re- 
main. We were now probably in the country of the Utah Indians, though 
none reside upon the lake. The India-rubber boat was repaired with pre- 
pared cloth and gum, and filled with air, in readiness for the next day. 

The provisions which Carson had brought with him being now exhausted, 
and our stock reduced to a small quantity of roots, | determined to retain 
‘with me only a sufficient number of men for the execution of our.design ; 
and accordingly seven were sent back to Fort Hall, under the guidanée 

‘of Frangois Lajeunesse, who, having been for many years a trapper in the 
country, was considered an experienced mountaineer. Though they were 
provided with good horses, and the road was a remarkably plain one of 


only four days’ journey for a horseman, they became bewildered, (4s we: 


afterwards learned, ) and, losing their way, wandered about the country in 
parties of one or two, reaching the fort about a week afterwards. Some 


’ 
| 
dy 
| 
| 
| 
| 
| 
] 


i 
} 
| 


f 


—— 


ee 


[174] 152 


straggled i in of themselves, and the others were brought in by Indians who 

had picked them up on Snake river, about sixty miles below the fort, trav. 
elling along the emigrant road in full march for the Lower Columbia. The 
leader of this adventurous party was Francois. 

Hourly barometrical observations were made during the day, and, after 
departure of the party for Fort Hall, we occupied ourselves in continuing 
our little preparations, and in becoming acquainted with the country in 
the vicinity. The bottoms along the river were timbered with several 
kinds of willow, hawthorn, and fine cottonwood trees (populus canadensis) 
with remarkably large leaves, and sixty feet in height by measurement. 

We formed now but asmall family. With Mr. Preuss and myself, Car- 

son,Bernier, and Basil Lajeunesse, had been selected for the boat expedi- 
tion—the first ever attempted on this interior sea; and Badeau, with De- 
rosier, and Jacob, (the colored man, ) were to be left in charge of the camp. 
We were favored with most delightful weather. To-night there was a 
brilliant sunset of golden orange and green, which left the western sky 
clear and beautifully pure ; but clouds in the east made me lose an occulta- 
tion. The summer frogs were singing around us, and the evening was 
very pleasant, with a temperature of 60°—a night of a more southern au- 
tun. For oursupper we had yampah, the most agreeably flavored of the 
roots, seasoned by a small fat duck, which had come in the way of Jacob’s 
rifle. Around our fire to-night were many speculations on what to-morrow 
would bring forth, and in our busy conjectures we fancied that we should 
find every one of the large islands a tangled wilderness of trees and shrub- 
bery, teeming with game of every description that the neighboring region 
afforded, and which the foot of a white man or Indian had never violated. 
Frequently, during the day, clouds had rested on the summits of,their lofty 
mountains, and we believed that we should find clear streams and springs 
of fresh water; and we indulged in anticipations of the luxurious repasts 
with which we were to indemnify ourselves for past privations. Neither, 
in our discussions, were the whirlpool and other mysterious dangers forgot- 
ten, which Indian and hunter’s stories attributed to this unexplored lake. 


The men had discovered that, instead cf being strongly sewed (like that of 


the preceding year, which had so triump.: ntly rode the cajions of the Up- 
per Great Platte, ) our present boat was only pasted together in a very inse- 
cure manner, the maker having been allowed so little time in the construc- 
tion, that he was obliged to crowd the labor of two months into several 
days. ‘lhe insecurity of the boat was sensibly felt by us; and, mingled 
with the enthusiasm and excitement that we all felt at the prospect of an 
undertaking which had never before been accomplished, was a certain im- 
pression of danger, sufficient to give a serious character toour conversation, 
The momentary view which had been had of the lake the day before, its 


great extent and rugged islands, dimly seen amidst the dark waters in ‘the: 


obscurity of the sudden storm, were well calculated to heighten the idea 
of ‘undefined danger with which the lake was generally associated. 
September 8.—A ‘calm, clear day, with a sunrise temperature of 41°. 


In. view of our ‘present enterprise, a, part of the equipment of the boat kad 


been made to consist in three air-tight bags, about three feet long, and ca- 


pable:each of containing five gallons, . ‘These had been filled with water, 
the night before, and were now placed i in, the boat, with our blankets and. 


instruments, consisting of a sextant, telescope, spy glass, thermometer, and 
barometer. 


Ww 


rive 
we 
mor 
quire 
air te 
loite 
silen 
whe 
filled 
could 
ona 
tity a 
clear 
enou 
the n 
wate 
1'3 

Se, 
at 49 
ple h 
ways 
ing ; 
and | 
dista 
a she 
formi 
cove! 
gett 
tion, 
mud, 
fresh 
bed « 


a smi 


recti 
conti 
rentl 
whic 


lians who 
fort, trav- 
bia. The 


and, after . 
ontinuing 
sountry in 
h several 
inadensis) 
rement. 
yself, Car- 
at expedi- 
, with De- 
the camp. 
ere was a 
astern sky 
in occulta- 
ening was 
uthern au- 
red of the 
of Jacob’s 
to-morrow 
we should 
and shrub- 
ring region 
er violated. 
their lofty 
and springs 
ous repasts 
Neither, 
rers forgot- 
lored lake. 
like that of 
of the Up- 
very inse- 
e construc- 
nto several 
d, mingled 
spect of an 
certain im- 
nversation,. 
before, its 


en the idea 
ted. 


e boat had 
ng, end ca- 


bmeter, and 


ters in the: 
ture of 41°, 


with water, 
ankets and. 


ee 


Tere ee ee 


: 


153 [ 174 ] 

We left the camp at sunrise, and had a very pleasant voyage down the 
river, in which there was generally eight or ten feet of water, deepening as 
we neared the mouth in the latter part of the day. In the course of the 
morning we discovered that two of the cylinders leaked so much as to re- 
quire one man constantly at the bellows, to keep them sufficiently full of 
air to support the boat. Although we had made a very early start, we 
loitered so much on the way—stopping every now and then, and floating 
silently along, to get a shot at a goose or a duck—that it was late in the day 
when we reached the outlet. The river here divided into several branches, 
filled with fluvials, and so very shallow that it was with difficulty we 
could get the boat along, being obliged to get out and wade. We encamped 
on a low point among rushes and young willows, where there was a quan- 
tity of drift wood, which served for our fires. The evening was mild and 
clear; we made a pleasant bed of the young willows ; and geese and ducks 
enough had been killed for an abundant supper at night, and for breakfast 
the next morning. The stillness of the night was enlivened by millions of 
water fowl. Latitude (by observation) 41° 11’ 26; and longitude 112° 
J1' 30". ; 

September 9.—The day was clearand calm; the thermometer at sunrise 
at 49°, Asis usual with the trappers on the eve of any enterprise, our peo- 
ple had made dreams, and theirs happened to be a bad one—one which al- 
ways preceded evil—and consequently they looked very gloomy this morn- 
ing ; but we hurried through our breakfast, in order to make an early start, 
and have all the day before us for our adventure. Thechannel in a short 
distance became so shallow that our navigation was at an end, being merely 
a sheet of soft mud, with a few inches of water, and sometimes none at all, 
forming the low-water shore of the lake. All this place was absolutely 
covered with flocks of screaming plover. We took off our clothes, and, 
getting overboard, commenced dragging the boat—making, by this: opera- 
tion, a very curious trail, and a very disagreeable smell it stirring up the 
mud, as we sank above the knee at every step. The water here was still 
fresh, with only an insipid and disagreeable taste, probably derived from the 
bed of fetid mud. After proceeding in this way about a mile, we came to 
a small black ridge on the bottom, beyond which the water became sud- 
denly salt, beginning gradually to deepen, and the bottom was sandy and 
firm. It wasa remarkable division, separating the fresh water of the rivers 
from the briny water of the lake, which was entirely saturated with com- 
mon salt. Pushing our little vessel across the narrow boundary, we sprang 
on board, and at length were afloat on the waters of the unknown sea. 

We did not steer for the mountainous islands, but directed our course to- 
wards a lower one, which it had been decided we should first visit, the 
summit-of which was formed like the crater at the upper end of Bear river 
valley. So long as we could touch the bottom with our paddles, we were 
very gay ; but gradually, as the water deepened, we became more still in 
our frail batteau of gum cloth distended with air, and with pasted seams. 
Although the day was very calm, there was a considerable swell on the 
lake ; and there were white patches of foam on the surface, which were 
slowly moving to the southward, indicating the set of a current in that di 
rection, and recalling the recollection of the whirlpool stories. The water 
continued to deepen as we advanced ; the lake becoming almost transpa- 
rently clear, of an extremely beautiful bright-green color; and the spray, 
whic’ was thrown into the boat and over our clothes, was directly con- 


( 174 J 154 


verted into a crust of common salt, which covered also our hands and arms. 
* Captain,” said Carson, who for some time had been looking suspiciously 
at some whitening appearances outside the nearest islands, ‘‘ what are those 
yonder ?—won’t you just take a look with the glass?” We ceased paddling 
for a moment, and found them to be the caps of the waves that were begin- 
ning to break under the force of a strong breeze that was coming up the 
lake. The form of the boat seemed tobe an admirable one, and it rode on 
the waves like a water bird ; but, at the same time, it was extremely slow in 
its progress. When we were a jittle more than half way across the reach, 
two of the divisions between the cylinders gave way, and it required the 
constant use of the bellows to keep in a sufficient quantity of air. For a 
long time we scarcely seemed to approach our island, but gradually we 
worked across the rougher sea of the open channel, into the smocther water 
under the lee of the island ; and began to discover that what we took for 
a long row of pelicans, ranged on the beach, were only low clifls whitened 
with salt by the spray of the waves ; and about noon we reached the shore, 
the transparency of the water enabling us to sec the bottom at a consider- 
able depth. 

It was a handsome broad beach where we landed, behind which the hill, 
into which the island was gathered, rose somewhat abruptly ; and a point 
of rock at one end enclosed it in a sheltering way ; and as there was an 
abundance of drift wood along the shore, it offered us a pleasant encamp- 
ment. We did not suffer our fragile boat to.touch the sharp rocks; but, 
getting overboard, discharged the baggage, and, lifting it gently out of the 
water, carried it to the upper part of the beach, which was composed of 
very small fragments of rock. 

Among the successive banks of the beach, formed by the action of the 
waves, our attention, as we approached the island, had been attracted by 
one 10 to 20 feet in breadth, of a darlé-brown color. Being more closely 
examined, this was found to be composed, to the depth of seven or eight 
and twelve inches, entirely of the larva of insects, or, in common language, 
of the skins of worms, about the size of a grain of oats, which had been 
washed up by the waters of the lake. 

Alluding to this subject some monthsaiterwards, when travelling through 
a more southern portion of thisregion, in company with Mr. Joseph Walker, 
an old hunter, I was informed by him, that, wandering with a party of men 
in a mountain country east of the great Californian range, he surprised a 
party of several Indian families encamped near a small salt lake, who aban- 
doned their lodges at his approach, leaving every thing behind them. Be- 
ing in a starving condition, they were delighted to find in the abandoned 
lodges a number of skin bags, containing a quantity of what appeared to be 
fish, dried and pounded. On this they made a hearty supper; and were 
gathering around an abundant breakfast the next morning, when Mr. Walker 
discovered that it was with these, ora similar worm, that the bags had been 
filled. The stomachs of the stout trappers were not proof against their pre- 
judices, and the repulsive food was suddenly rejected. Mr. Walker had 
further opportunities of seeing these worms used as an article of food ; and 
I am inclined to think they are the same as those we saw, and appear to be 
a product of the salt lakes. It may be well to recall to your mind that Mr. 
Walker was associated with Captain Bonneville in his expedition to the 
Rocky mountains; and has since that time remained in the country, gen- 
erally residing in some one of the Snake villages, when not engaged in one 


} and arms. 
uspiciously 
at are those 
id paddling 
vere begin- 
ig up the 
1 it rede on 
ely slow in 
3 the reach, 
equired the 
sir. Fora 
adually we 
other water 
ve took for 
Is whitened 
J the shore, 
a consider- 


ich the hill, 
and a point 
ere was an 
int encamp- 
rocks ; but, 
y out of the 
‘omposed of 


ction of the 
attracted by 
nore Closely 
en or eight 
n language, 
‘+h had been 


ling through 
ph Walker, 
party of men 
surprised a 
, who aban- 
them. Be- 
abandoned 
peared to be 
; and were 
Mr. Walker 
es had been 
st their pre- 
alker had 
of food ; and 
appear to be 
nd that Mr. 
lition to the 
untry, gen- 
aged in one 


4 = 
\ 4 
B-, 
ee 
? . d + 
s 4.33 #4 
2 
WS. 
Tied 
<a 
Any 
“> 


ate 
a 


Fa ie 


“Ours 


E 34> > ~ 
a st ae EY a 


hey, ir 


fREO* pete gi. 
* x 


te apy jo? - 


L bt ODOOO 


above Me Ne 


SCALE 


155 [ 174] 


of his numerous epee expeditions, in which he is celebrated as one of 
the best and bravest leaders who have ever been in the country. 

The cliffs and masses of rock-along the shore were whitened by an in- 
crustation of salt where the waves dashed up against them ; and the evap- 
orating water, which had been left in holes and hollows on the surface of 
the rocks, was covered with a crust of salt about one-eighth of an inch in 
thickness. It appeared strange that, in the midst of this grand reservoir, one 
of our greatest wants lately had been salt. Exposed to be more perfectly 
dried in the sun, this became very white and fine, having the usual flavor 
of very excellent common salt, without any foreign taste ; but only a little 
was collected for present use, as there was in ita numberof small black 
insects. 

Carrying with us the barometer and other instruments, in the afternoon 
we ascended to the highest point of the island—a bare rocky peak, 800 feet 
above the lake. Standing on the summit, we enjoyed an extended view of 
the lake, enclosed in¢a basin of rugged mountains, which sometimes left 
marshy flats and extensive bottoms between them and the shore, and in other 
places came direetly down into the water with bold and precipitous bluffs. 
Following with our glasses the irregular shores, we searched for some in- 
dications of a communication with other bodies of water, or the entrance of 
other rivers; but the distance was so great that we could tnake out nothing 
with certainty. ‘To the southward, several peninsular mountains, 3,000 or 
4,000 feet high, entered the lake, appearing, so far as the distance and our 
position enabled us to determine, to be connected by flats and low ridges 
with the mountains in the rear. Although these are probably the islands 
usually indicated on maps of this region as entirely detached from the shore, 
we have preferred torepresent them, in the small map on the preceding page, 
precisely as we were enabled to sketch them on the ground, leaving their 
more complete delineation for a future survey. The sketch, of which the 
scale is nearly sixteen miles.to an inch, is introduced on'y to show clearly 
the extentof our operations, which, it will beremembered, were made when 
the waters were at their lowest stage. At the season of high waters in the 
spring, it is probable that all the marshes and low grounds are overflowed, 
and the surface of the lake considerably greater. In several places ( which 
will be indicated to you in the sketch, by the absence of the bordering moun- 
tains) the view was of unlimited extent—here and there a rocky islet ap- 
pearing above the water at a great distance ; and beyond, every thing was 
vague and undefined. As we looked over the vast expanse of water spread 
out beneath us, and strained our eyes along the silent shores over which 
hung so much doubt and uncertainty, and which were so full of interest to 
us, I could hardly repress the almost irresistible desire to continue our ex- 
ploration ; but the lengthening snow on the mountains was a plain indica- 
tion of the advancing season, and our frail linen boat appeared so insecure 
that I was unwilling to trust our lives to the uncertainties of the lake. I 
therefore unwillingly resolved to terminate our survey here, and remain sat- 
isfied for the present with what we had been able to add to the unknown 
geography of the region. We felt pleasure aiso in remembering that we 
were the first who, in the traditionary annals of the country, had visited the 
islands, and broken, with the cheerful sound of human voices, the long sol- 
itude of the place. From the point where we were standing, the ground 
fell off on every side to the water, giving us a perfect view of the island, 
which is twelve or thirteen miles in circumference, being simply a rocky 


156 


hill, on which there is neither water nor tvees of any kind; although the 
Fremontia vermicularis, which was in great abundance, might easily be 
mistaken for timber at a distance. The plant seemed here to delight ina 
congenial air, growing in extraordinary luxuriance seven to eight feet high, 
and was very abundant on the upper parts of the island, where it was al- 
most the only plant. This is eminently a saline shrub; its leaves have a 
very salt taste ; and it luxuriates in saline soils, where it is usually a char- 
acteristic. It is widely diffused over all this country. A chenopodiaceous 
shrub, whichis a new species of onrone, (O. rigida, Torr. § Frem ,) was 
equally characteristic of the lower parts of the island. ‘These two are the 
striking plants on the island, and belong to a class of plants which form a 
prominent feature in the vegetation of this country. On the lower parts of 
the island, also, a prickly pear of very large size was frequent. On the shore, 
neaf the water, was a woolly species of phaca ; and a new species of um- 
belliferous plant (lepto/@mia) was scattered about in very considerable 
abundance. These constituted all the vegetation that*now appeared upon 
the island. 

I accidentally left on the summit the brass cover to the object end of my 
spy glass; and as it will probably remain there undisturbed by Indians, it 
will furnish matter of speculation to some future traveller. In our excur- 
sions about the island, we did not meet with any kind of animal; a mag- 
pie, and another larger bird, probably attracted by the smoke of our fire, 
paid us a visit from the shore, and were the only living things seen during 
our stay. The rock constituting the cliffs along the shore where we were 
encamped, is a taleous rock, or stealite, with brown spar. 

At sunset, the temperature was 70°. We had arrived just in time to ob- 
tain a meridian altitude of the sun, and other observations were obtained 
this evening, which place our camp in latitude 41° 10' 42", and longitude 
112° 21' 05" from Greenwich. From a discussion of the barometrical ob- 
servations made during our stay on the shores of the lake, we have adopted 
4,200 feet for its elevation above the gulf of Mexico. In the first disap- 
pointmeni we felt from the dissipation of our dream of the fertile islands, I 
called this Disappointment island. 

Out of the drift wood, we made ourselves pleasant little lodges, open to 
the water, and, after having kindled large fires to excite the wonder of any 
straggling savage on the lake shores, lay down, for the first time ina long 
journey, in perfect security ; no one thinking about his arms. ‘The even- 
ing was extremely bright and pleasant ; but the wind rose during the night, 
and the waves began to break heavily on the shore, making our island 
tremble. 1 had not expected in our inland journey to hear the roar of an 
ocean surf; and the strangeness of our situation, and the excitement we 
felt in the associated interests of the place, made this one of the most in- 
teresting nights | remember during our long expedition. 

In the morning, the surf was breaking heavily on the shore, and. we 
were up early. The lake was dark and agitated, and we hurried through 
our scanty breakfast, and embarked—having first filled one of the buckets 
with water from the lake, of which it was intended to make sali. The 
sun had risen by the time we were ready to start; and it was blowing a 
strong gale of wind, almost directly off the shore, and raising a consider- 
able sea, in which our boat strained very much. It roughened as we got 
away from the island, and it required all the efforts of the men to make 


any head against the wind and sea; the mal< rising with the sun, and there. 


ough the 
asily be 
light ina 
eet high, 
t was al- 
s have a 
y a char- 
diaceous 
m ,) was 
o are the 
h form a 
r parts of 
he shore, 
s of um- 
siderable 
red upon 


nd of my 
idians, it 
ur excur- 
; a mag: 
our fire, 
on during 
we were 


ne to ob- 
obtained 
ongitude 
trical ob- 
» adopted 
st disap- 
islands, I 


s, open to 
er of any 
ina long 
he even- 
he night, 
ur island 
oar of an 
ment we 
most in- 


and we 
1 through 
> buekets 
hk. The 
lowing a 
leonsider- 
Swe got 


to make. 
and there: 


157 ( 174 J 


was danger of being blown into one of the open reaches beyond the island. 
At the distance of half a mile from the beach, the depth of water was 16 
feet, with a clay bottom; but, as the working of the boat was very severe 
labor, and during the operation of rounding it was necessary to cease pad- 
dling, during which the boat lost considerable way, I was unwilling to dis- 
courage the men, and reluctantly gave up my intention of ascertaining the 
depth, and the character of the bed. ‘There was a general shout in the 
boat when we found ourselves in one fathom, and we soon after landed on 
a low point of mud, immediately under the bulle of the peninsula, where 
we unloaded the boat, and carried the baggage about a quarter of a mile to 
firmer ground. We arrived just in time for meridian observation, and 
carried the barometer to the summit of the butte, which is 500 feet above 
the lake. Mr. Preuss set off on foot for the camp, which » as about nine 
miles distant; Basil accompanying him, to bring back horses for the boat 
and baggage. 

The rude-looking shelter we raised on the shore, our scattered baggage 
and, boat lying on the heach, made quite a picture ; and we called this the 
Fisherman’s camp. Lynosiris graveolens, and another new species of 
oBione, (O. conlertifolia—Torr. & Frem.,) were growing on the low 
grounds, with interspersed spots of an unwholesome salt grass, on a saline 
clay soil, with a few other plants. 

The horses arrived late in the afternoon, by which time the gale had 
increased to such a height that a man could scarcely stand before it; and 
we were obliged to pack our baggage hastily, as the rising water of the 
lake had already reached the point where we were halted. Looking back 
as we rode off, we found the place of recent encampment entirely covered. 
The low plain through which we rode to the camp was covered with a 
compact growth of shrubs of extraordinary size and fuxuriance. The soil 
was sandy and saline ; flat places, resembling the beds of ponds, that were 
bare of vegetation, and covered with a powdery white salts, being inter- 
spersed among the shrubs. Artemisia tridentata was very abundant, but 
the plants were principally saline ; a large and vigorous chenopodiaceous 
shrub, five to eight feet high, being charaateristic, with Fremontia vermicu- 
laris, and a shrubby plant which seems to be a new salicornia. We reached 
the camp in time to escape a thunder storm which blackened the sky, and 
were received with a discharge of the howitzer by the people, who, having 
been unable to see any thing of us on the lake, had begun to feel some 
uneasiness. 

September 11.—To-day we remained at this camp, in order to obtain 
some further observations, and to boil down the water which had been 
brought from the lake, for a supply of salt. Roughly evaporated over the 
fire, the five gallons of water yielded fourteen pints of very fine-grained 
and very white salt, of which the whole lake may be regarded as a saturat- 
ed solution. <A portion of the salt thus obtained has been subjected to 
analysis-—giving, in 100 parts, the following proportions : 


Analysis of the salt, 


Chloride of sodium, (common salt) - - - - 97.80 
Chloride of calcium - - - - - - °0.61 
Cloride of magnesium - - - - - - 0.24 


[174] 158 


Sulphate of soda - - : : . ° - 0.23 
Sulphate of lime - - : ° - ° .* 22 


Glancing your eye along the se & you will sce a small stream entering 
the Utah lake, south of the Spanish fork, and the first waters of that lake 
which our road of 1844 crosses in coming up from the southward. When 
I was on this stream with Mr. Walker in that year, he informed me that on 
the upper part of the river are immense beds of rock salt of very great thick- 
ness, Which he had frequently visited. Farther to the southward, the rivers 
which are afiluent to the Colorado, such as the Rio Virgen, and Gila river, 
near their mouths, are impregnated with salt by the cliffs of rock salt be- 
tween which they pass. These mines occur in the same ridge in which, 
about 120 miles to the northward, and subsequently in their more immediate 
neighborhood, we discovered the fossils belonging to the oolitic period, and 
they are probably connected with thut formation, and are the deposite from 
which the Great Lake obtains its salt. Had we remained longer, we should 
have found them in ils bed, and in the mountains around its shores. 

By observation, the latitude of this cainp is 41° 15' 50", and longitude 
112° 06' 43", 

The observations made during our stay give for the rate of the chro- 
nometer 31''.72, corresponding almost exactly with the rate obtained 
at St. Vrain’s fort. Barometrical observations were made hourly during 
the day. This morning we breakfasted on yampah, and had only kamas 
for supper; but a cup of good coffee still distinguished us from our Digger 
acquaintances. 

Seplember 12.—The morning was clear and calm, with a temperature 
at sunrise of 832°. We resumed our journey late in the day, returning by 
nearly the same route which we had travelled in coming to the lake ; and, 
avoiding the passage of Hawthorn creek, struck the hills a little below the 
hot salt springs. ‘I'he flat plain we had here passed over consisted alter- 
nately of tolerably good sandy soil and of saline plats. We encamped 
early on Clear creek, at the foot of the high ridge; one of the peaks of 
which we ascertained by measurement to be 4,210 feet above the lake, or 
about 8,400 feet above the sea. Behind these front peaks the ridge risés 
towards the Bear river mountains, which ave probably as high as the Wind. 
river chain. This creek is here unusually well timbered with a variety of 
trees. Among then were birch (betula, ) the narrow-leaved poplar (populus 
angustifolia, ) several kinds of willow (salix,) hawthorn (crategus, ) al- 
der (alnus viridis, ) and cerasus, with an oak allied to guercus alba, but 
very distinet from that or any other species in the United States. 

We had to-night a supper of'sea gulls, which Carson killed near the lake. 
Although cool, the thermometer standing at 47°, musquitoes were sufficient- 
ly numerous to be troublesome this evening. 

September 13.—Continuing up.the river valley, we crossed several small 
streams ; the mountains on the right appearing to consist of the blue lime- 
stone, which we had observed in the same ridge to the northward, alternat- 
ing here with a granular quartz already mentioned. One of these streams, 
which forms a smaller lake near the river,.was broken up into several chan- 
nels ; and the irrigated bottom of fertile soil was covered with innumerable 
flowers, among which were purple fields of eupatorium purpureum, with, 


° 0.23 
- 112 
100.00 


n entering 
{ that lake 
rd. When 
me that on 
reat thick- 
the rivers 
Gila river, 
*k salt be- 
in which, 
immediate 
veriod, and 
rosite from 
we should 
res, 
longitude 


the chro- 
» obtained 
rly during 
nly kamas 
ur Digger 


mperature 
turning by 
lake ; and, 
below the 
sted alter- 
encamped 
peaks of 
e lake, or 
ridge risés 
5 the Wind: 
variety of 
' (populus 
eZUS,) al- 
alba, but 


~ 


the lake. 
sufficient- 


eral small 
lue lime- 
, alternat- 
e streams, 
eral chan- 
umerable 
pum, with, 


159 c 174) 


helianthi, a handsome solidago (8. canadensis,) and a variety of other 
plants in bloom. Continuing along the foot of the hills, in the afternoon 
we found five or six hot springs gushing out together, beneath a conglome- 
rate, consisting principally of fragments of a grayish-blue limestone, efflor- 
escing a salt upon the surface, ° the temperature of these springs was 134’, 
and the rocks in the bed were colored with a red deposite, and there was 
common salt crystallized onthe margin. There was also a white incrust- 
ation upon leaves and roots, consisting principally of carbonate of lime. 
There were rushes seen along the road this afternoon, and the soil under 
the hills was very black, and apparently very good; but at this time the 
grassisentirely dried up. We encamped on Bear river, immediately below 
a cut-off, the cafion by which the river enters this valley bearing north by 
compass. The night was mild, with a very clear sky ; and I obtained a 
very excellent observation of an occultation of Tau.' Arietis, with other ob- 
servations. Both immersion and emersion of the star were observed ; but, 
as our observations have shown, the phase at the bright limb generally gives 
incorrect longitudes, and we have adopted the result obtained from the 
emersion ut the dark limb, without allowing any weight to the immersion. 
According to these observations, the longitude is 112° 05’ 12", and the lati- 
tude 41° 42’ 43", All the longitudes on the line of our outward journey, 
between St. Vrain’s fort and the Dalles of the Columbia, which were not 
directly determined by satellites, have been chronometrically referred te 
this place. 

The people to-day were rather low-spirited, hunger making them very 
quiet and peaceable ;.and there was rarely an oath to be heard in the camp— 
not even a solitary enfant de garce. It was time for the men with an ex- 
pected supply of provisions from Fitzpatrick to be in the neighborhood ; and 
the gun was fired at evening, to give them notice of our locality, but met 
with no response. 

September 14.—About four miles from this encampment, the trail led us 
down to the river, where we unexpectedly found an excellent ford—the 
stream being widened by an island, and not yet disengaged from the hills 
at the foot of the range. We encamped on a little creek where we had 
made a noon halt in descending the river. The night was very clear and 
pleasant, the sunset temperature being 67°. 

The people this evening looked so forlorn, that | gave them permission to 
kill a fat young horse which I had purchased with goods from the Snake 
Indians, and they were very soon restored to gayety and good humor. Mr. 
Preuss and myself could not yet overcome some remains of civilized preju- 


dices, and preferred to starve a little longer; feeling as much saddened as ° 


ifa crime had been committed. 

The next day we continued up the valley, the soil being sometimes very 
black and good, occasionally gravelly, and occasionally a kind of naked 
salt plains. We found on the way this morning a small encampment of 
two families of Snake Indians, from whom we purchased a small quantity 
of kooyah. They had piles of seeds, of three different kinds, spread out 
upon pieces of buffalo robe ; and the squaws had just gathered about a 
bushel of the roots of a thistle, (circitum Virginianum.) They were about 
the ordinary size of carrots, and, as | have previously mentioned, are sweet 
and well flavored, requiring only a long preparation. They had a band of 
twelve or fifteen horses, and appeared to be growing in the sunshine with 
about as little labor as the plants they were eating. 


[174 J 160 


Shortly afterwards we met an Indian on horseback who had killed an 
antelope, which we purchased from him fora little powder and some balls. 
We crossed the Roseaux, and encamped on the left bank ; halting early for 
the pleasure of enjoying a wholesome and abundant supper, and were pleas- 
antly engaged in protracting our unusual comfort, when Tabeau galloped 
into the camp with news that Mr, Pitapatrick was encamped elose by us, 
with a good supply of provisions—-flour, rice, and dried meat, and even a 
little butter, Fecliament to-viahimade va alhiaaietels and after a break. 
fast before sunrise the next morning, we were again on the road, and, con- 
tinuing up the valley, crossed some high points of hills, and halted to noon 
on the same stream, near several lodges of Snake Indians, from whom we 
purchased about a bushel of service berries, partially dried, By the gift ot 
a knile, | prevailed upon a little boy to show me the kooyah plant, which 
proved to be va/eriana edulis. The root, which constitutes the kooyah, is 
large, of avery bright yellow color, with the characteristic odor, but not so 
fully developed as in the prepared substance. It loves the rich moist soi! 
of river bottoms, which was the locality in which I always afterwards found 
it. It was now entirely outof bloom ; according to my observation, flower- 
ing in the monthe of May and June. In the afternoon we entered a long 
ravine leading to a pass in the dividing ridge between che waters of Bear 
river and the Snake river, or Lewis’s fork of the Columbia; our way being 
very much impeded, and almost entirely blocked up, by compact fields of 
luxuriant artemisia. Taking leave at this point of the waters of Bear river, 
and of the geographical basin which enclosesthe system of rivers and creeks 
which belong to the Great Salt Lake, and which sorichly deserves a future 
detailed and ample exploration, | can say of it, in general terms, that the 
bottoms of this river, (Bear, ) and of some of the creeks which I saw, form 
a natural resting and reeruiting station for travellers, now, and in all time 

to come. The bottoms are extensive; water excellent timber sufficient ; 
the soil good, and well adapted to the grainsand grasses suited to such an 
elevated regiou. A military post, and a civilized settlement, would be ot 
great value here; and cattle and horses would do well where grass and salt 
so much abound, The lake will furnish exhaustless supplies of salt. All 
the mountain sides here ave covered with a valuable nutritious grass, called 
bunch grass, from the form in which it grows, which has a second growth 
in the fall. The beasts of the Indians were fat upon it; our own found it 
a good subsistence ; and its quantity will sustain any amount of cattle, and 
make this truly a bucolic region. . 
We met here an Indian family on horseback, which had been out to gather 
service berries, and were returning loaded. ‘This tree was scattered about 
on the hills ; and the upper part of the pass was timbered with aspen ; (pop- 
ulus trem.,) the common blue flowering flax occurring among the plants. 

The approach to the pass was very steep ; aud the summit about 6,300 feet 

above the sea—probably only an uncertain approximation, as at the time of 

observation it was blowing a violent gale of wind from the northwest, with 
cumuli scattered in masses over the sky, the day other wise bright and clear. 

We descended, by a steep slope, into a broad open valley-—good soil ; from 

four to five miles wide ; coming down immediately upon one of the head- 

waters of the Paunack river, which here loses itself in swampy ground. 

The appearance of the country here is not very interesting. On either side 
is a regular range of mountains of the usual character, with a little timber, 
tolerably rocky on the right, and higher and more smooth on the left, with 


a LCE ee NR a 


SE abt ee — 


still 
level 
at da 
arte 
abun 
botto 
wate 
the s 
At 
camp 
we tr 
pelle 
the Ff 
At 
Se 
at da 
tain ¢c 
temp 
casio 
a few 
reach 
ing he 
feel 
promi 
this st 
occur 
the so 
into a 
at sun 
sion o 
marka 
satelli 
44' 40 
Sep 
sunris 
the Ci 
mark 
which 
guage 
natura 
rende. 
alent. 
and re 
to be ( 
most | 
transl; 
landm 
Cover 
of thi 
agree: 
valley 
miles 


1 killed an 
some balls. 
gz early for 
vere pleas- 
iu galloped 
lose by us, 
and even a 
er a break. 
|, and, con- 
ted to noon 
n whom we 
y the gift of 
lant, which 
e kooyah, is 
r, but not so 
h moist sor! 
wards found 
tion, flower- 
ered a long 
ters of Bear 
ir way being 
yact fields of 
f Bear river, 
sand creeks 
ives a future 
ms, that the 
I saw, form 
in all time 
br sufficient ; 
d to such an 
would be of 
rass and salt 
of salt. All 
grass, called 
“ond growth 
wn found it 
f cattle, and 


out to gather 
ttered about 
aspen ; (pop- 
g the plants. 
ut 6,300 feet 
ht the time of 
thwest, with 
ht and clear. 
bd soil; from 
of the head- 
py ground. 
either side 
little timber, 
he left, with 


RE RN mg rR RI. 


— 


NEA ahd me 


16 [ 174] 


still higher peaks looking out above the range. ‘The valley atlorded a good 
level road; but it was lote when it brought us to water, and we encamped 
at dark, The northwest wind had blown up very cold weather, and the 
artemisia, Which was our fire wood to-night, did not happen to be very 
abundant, This plantlovesa dry, sandy soil, and eannot grow in the good 
bottoms where it is rich and moist, but on every litthe eminence, where 
water does not rest long, it maintains absolute possession. Elevation above 
the sea about 5,100 feet. 

At night scattered fires glimmered along the mountains, pointing out 
camps of (be Indians ; and we contrasted the comparative seeurity in which 
we travelled through this country, with the guarded vigilance we were com- 
pelled to exert among the Sioux and other Indians on the eastern side.of 
the Rocky mountains. 

At sunset the thermometer was at 50°, and at midnight at 30°, 

September (7.—The morning sky was calm and clear, the temperature 
at daylight being 25°, and at sunrise 20°, There is throughout this moun- 
tain country a remarkable difference between the morning and midday 
temperatures, which at this season was very generally 40° or 50°, and oe- 
casionally greater; and frequently, alter a very frosty morning, the heat in 
a few hours would render the thinnest clothing agreeable. About noon we 
reached the main fork. The Pannack river was before us; the valley be- 
ing here 14 mile wide, fertile, and bordered by smooth hills, not over 500 
fect high, partly covered with cedar; a high ridge, in which there isa 
prominent peak, rising behind those on the lelt. We continued to descend 
this stream, and found on it at night a warm and comfortable camp, Flax 
oecurred so frequently during the day as to be almost a characteristic, and 
the soil appeared exeellent. The opposite hills on the right are broken here 
into a great variety of shapes. The evening was gusty, with a temperature 
at sunset of 59°. I obtained, about midnight, an observation of an emer- 
sion of the first satellite ; the night being ealm and very clear, the stars re- 
markably bright, and the thermometer at 30°, Longitude, from mean of 
satellite and chronometer, 112° 29' 52"; and latitude, by observation, 42° 
44' 40", 

September 18.—The day clear and calm, with a temperature of 25° at 
sunrise. After travelling seven or eight miles, we emerged on the plains of 
the Columbia, in sight of the famous “ Z'hree Buttes,” a well-known land- 
mark in the country, distant about 45 miles. ‘The French word butte, 
which so often occurs in this narrative, is retained from the familiar lan- 
guage of the country, and identifies the objects to which it refers, It is 
naturalized in the region of the Rocky mountains ; and, even if desirable to 
render it in English, | know of no word which would be its precise equiv- 
alent. It is applied to the detached hills and ridges which rise abruptly, 
and reach tov high to be called hills or ridges, and not high enough 
to be called mountains. Knod, as applied in the western States, is their 
most descriptive term in English. Cerro is the Spanish term; but no 
translation, or paraphrasis, would preserve the identity of these picturesque 
landmarks, familiar to the traveller, and often seen at a great distance. 
Covered as far as could be seen with artemisia, the dark and ugly appearance 
of this plain obtained for it the name of the Sage Deseri ; and we were 
agreeably surprised, on reaching the Portneuf river, to see 4 beautiful green 
valley with scattered timber spread out beneath us, on which, about four 
miles distant, were glistening the white walls of the fort. The Portneuf 

11 


4@~N 


<} 
ie) hi \/ wy 
WV <* ee 
“<* 
< 
en F 
oe FFEE ‘i 
- pa 3dag oy 
< O #3 4a3a33.3 <i _ 2 =i 
a ee a 
Oo, =m =i Si as 
— (en) 


[ 174] 162 


runs along the upland plain nearly to its mouth, and an abrupt descent of 
perhaps 200 feet brought us down immediately upon the stream, which at 
the ford is 100 yards wide and 8 feet deep, with clear water, a swift cur- 
rent, and serait bed ; but alittle higher up the breadth was only about 
$5 yards, with apparently deep water. 

In the bottom I remarked a very great number of springs and sloughs, 
with remarkably clear water and gravel beds. At sunset we encamped with 
Mr. Talbot and our friends, who came on to Fort Hall when we went to 
the lake, and whom we had the satisfaction to find all well, neither party 
having met with any mischance in the interval of our separation. They, 
too, had had their share of fatigue and scanty provisions, as there had 
been very little game left on the trail of the populous emigration ; and Mr. 
Fitzpatrick had rigidly husbanded our stock of flour and light provisions, 
in view of the approaching winter and the long journey before us. 

September 19.—This morning the sky was very dark and gloomy, and 
at daylight it began snowing thickly, and continued all day, with cold, dis- 
agreeable weather. Atsunrise the temperature was 43°. I rode up tothe 
fort, and purchased from Mr. Grant (the officer in charge of the post) sev- 
eral very indifferent horses, and five oxen in very fine order, which were 
received at the camp with great satisfaction ; and, one being killed at even- 
ing, the usual gayety and good humor were at once restored. Night came 
in stormy. 

September 20.—We had a night of snow and rain, and the thermometer 
at sunrise was at 34° ; the morning was dark, witha steady rain, and there 
was still an inch of snow on the ground, with an abundance on the neigh- 
boring hills and mountains. ‘The sudden change in the weather was hard 
for our animals, who trembled and shivered in the cold—sometimes taking 
refuge in the timber, and now and then coming out and raking the snow 
off the ground for a little grass, or eating the young willows. 

September 21.—Ice made tolerably thick during the night, and in the 
morning the weather cleared up very bright, with a temperature at sunrise 
of 29° ; and I obtained a meridian observation for latitude at the fort, with 
observations for time. ‘The sky was again covered in the afternoon, and 
the thermometer at sunset 43°. 

September 22.—The morning was cloudy and unpleasant, and at sunrise 
a cold rain commenced, with a temperature of 41°. 

The early approach of winter, and the difficulty of supporting a large 
party, determined me to send back a number of the men who had become 
satisfied that they were not fitted for the laborious service and frequent pri- 
vation to which they were necessarily exposed, and which there was reason 
to believe would become more severe in the further extension of the voyage. 
I accordingly called them together, and, informing them of my intention to 
continue our journey during the ensuing winter, in the course of which 
they would probably be exposed to considerable hardship, succeeded in 
prevailing upon a number of them to return voluntarily. These were: 
Charles De Forrest, Henry Lee, J. Campbell, Wm. Creuss, A. Vasquez, A. 
Pera, Patrick White, B. Tesson, M. Creely, Francois Lajeunesse, Basil 
Lajeunesse. Among these, I regretted very much to lose Basil Lajeunesse, 
one of the best men in my party, who was obliged, by the condition of his 
family, to be at home in the coming winter. Our preparations having been 
completed in the interval of our stay here, both parties were ready this 
morning to resume their respective routes. 


escent of 
which at 
wift cur- 
ily about 


sloughs, 
ped with 
} went to 
ler party 
_ They, 
1ere had 
and Mr. 
ovisions, 
s. 
ymy, and 
cold, dis- 
up tothe 
ost) sev- 
ich were 
J at even- 
ght came 


rmometer 
ind there 
he neigh- 
was hard 
es taking 
the snow 


nd in the 
ut sunrise 
fort, with 
soon, and 


At sunrise 


g a large 
d become 
huent pri- 
ras reason 
e voyage. 
tention to 
of which 
ceeded in 
bse were : 
squez, A. 
sse, Basil 
hjeunesse, 
tion of his 
ving been 
eady this 


163 [174 


Except that there is a greater quantity of wood used in its construction, Fort’ 
Hall very much resembles the other trading posts which have been alread 
described to you, and would be another excellent post of relief for the emi+ 

ration. It isin the low, rich bottom of a valley, apparently 20 miles long,. 
ormed by the confluence of Portneuf river with Lewis’s fork of the Colum- 
bia, which itenters about nine miles below the fort, and narrowing gradu- 
ally to the mouth of the Pannack river, where it hasa breadth of only two. 
or three miles. Allowing 50 miles for the road from the Beer springs of 
Bear river to Fort Hall, its distance along the ¢v'avelled road from the town 
of Westport, on the frontier of Missouri, by way of Fort Laramie and the: 
great South Pass, is 1,323 miles. Beyond this place, on the line of road: 
along the barren valley of the Upper Columbia, there does not occur, for 
a distance of nearly three hundred miles to the westward, a fertile spot of 
ground sufficiently large to produce the necessary quantity of grain, or 
pasturage enough to allow even a temporary repose to the emigrants. On 
their recent passage, they had been able to obtain, at very high prices and 
in insuflicient quantity, only such assistence as could be afforded by a 
small and remote trading post—and that a foreign one—which, in the supply 
of its own wants, had necessarily drawn around it some of the resources- 
of civilization, but which obtained nearly all its supplies from the distant 
depot of Vancouver, by a difficult water carriage of 250 miles up the Co- 
lumbia river, and a land carriage by pack horses of 600 miles. An Ameri- 
can tnilitary post sufficiently strong to give to their road a perfect security 
against the Indian tribes, who are unsettled in locality and very uncertain 
in their disposition, and which, with the necessary facilities for the repair 
of their equipage, would be able to afford them relief in stock and grain 
from the produce of the post, would be of extraordinary value to the emi- 
gration. Such a post (and all others which may be established on the line 
to Oregon) would naturally form the nucleus of a settlement, at which: 
supplies and repose would be obtained by the emigrant, or trading cara- 

vans, which may hereafter traverse these elevated, and, in many places,, 
desolate and inhospitable regions. 

I subjoin an analysis of the soil in the river bottom near Fort Hall, which: 
will be of assistance in enabling you to form some correct idea of its gen- 
eral character in the neighboring country. I characterize it as good land,, 
but the analysis will show its precise properties. 


Analysis of soil. 


Sila - - - - - - - - 68.55 
Alumina - - - - - - - 7.45 
Carbonate of lime - - - - - - 8.5} 
Carbonate of magnesia - - - - : - 5.09 
Oxide of iron - - - - - - - 1.40: 
Organic vegetable matter - - : - - 4.74 
Water and loss - . - * : - - 4.26 

: 100.00 


Our observations place this post in longitude 112° 29''54"', latitude 48° 
01' $0", and in elevation above the sea 4,500 feet. 
Taking leave of the homeward party, we resumed our journey down 


[174] 164 


the valley, the weather being very cold, and the rain coming ir hard gusts, 
which the wind blew directly in our faces: We forded the Portneuf in a 
storm of rain, the water in the river being frequently up to the axles, and 
about 110 yards wide. Alter the gust, the weather improve: a little, and 
we encamped about three miles below, at the mouth of the Pannack river, 
on Lewis’s fork, which here has a breadth of about 120 yards. The tem- 
perature at sunset was 42°; the sky partially covered with dark, rainy 
clouds. 

Seplenber 23.—The temperature at sunrise was 32° ; the morning dark, 
and snow falling steadily and thickly, with a light air from the southward. 
Profited of being obliged to remain in camp, to take hourly barometrical 
observations from sunrise to midnight. The wind at eleven o’clock set in 
from the northward in heavy gusts, and the snow changed into rain.” In 
the afternoon, when the sky brightened, the rain had washed all the suow 
from the bottoms ; but the neighboring mountains, from summit to foot, were 
luminously white—an inauspicious commencement ol the autumn, of which 
this was the first day. 

September 24.—-The thermometer at suarise was at 35°, and a blue sky 
inthe west promised a fine day. The river bottoms here are narrow and 
swampy, with frequent sloughs; and after crossing the Pannack, the roade 
continued along the uplands, rendered very slippery by the soil of wet clay, 
and entirely covered with artemisia bushes, among which occur frequent 
fragments of obsidian. At noon we encamped ina grove of willows, at the 
upper end of a group of islands, about halfa mile above the «2merican falls 
of Snake river. Among the willows here, were some bushes of Lewis and 
Clarke’s currant, (vibes aureum.) The river here enters between low mu- 
ral banks, which consist of a fine vesicular trap rock, the intermediate por- 
tions being compact and erystailine. Gradually becoming higher in its 
downward course, these banks of seoriated volcanic rock form, with occa- 
sional interruptions, its characteristic feature along the whole line to the 
Dalles of the Lower Columbia, resembling a chasm which had been rent 
through the country, and which the river had afterwards taken for its bed. 
The immediate valley of the river is a high plain, covered with black rocks 
and artemisias. In the south is a bordering range of mountains, which, 
although not very high, are broken and covered with snow ; and at a great 
distance to the north is seen the high, snowy line of the Salmon river 
mountains, in front of which stand out prominently in the plain the three 
isolated rugged-looking little mountains commonly known as the Three 
Buttes. Between the river and the distant Salmon river range, the plain 
is represented by Mr. Fitzpatrick as so entirely broken up and rent into 
chasms as to be iinpracticable fora manevenon foot. Inthe sketch annexed, 
the point of view is low, but it conveys very well some idea of the open 
character of the country, with the buttes rising out above the general line. 
By measurement, the river above is 870 (cet wide, immediately contracted at 
the fall inthe form ofa luck, by jutting piles of scoriaceous basalt, over which 
the foaming river must presenta grand appearance at the time of high water. 
The evening was clear and pleasant, with dew ; and at sunset the tempera- 
ture was 54°. By observation, the latitude is 42° 47' 05", and the longi- 
tude 112° 40'13". A few hundred yards below the falls, and on the left 
bank of the river, is the escarpment from which were taken the specimens 
that in the appendix are numbered 94, 96, 97, 101, 102, 106, and 107. 

September 25.—Thermometer at sunrise 47°. The day came in clear, 


JHL 


NVOIYIWvV 


Slivgd 


d gusts, 
eufina 
les, and 
tle, and 
k river, 
he tem- 
k, rainy 


ng dark, 
thward. 
metrical 
ck setin 
ain.” In 
he snow 
ot, were 
of which 


blue sky 
row and 
the roade 
vet clay, 
frequent 
y3, at the 
can falls 
ewis and 
low mu- 
iate por- 
er in its 
ith occa- 
e to the 
een rent 
r its bed. 
ck rocks 
8, which, 
ta great 
on river 
he three 
he Three 
the plain 
rent into 
annexed, 
the open 
eral line. 
racted at 
er which 
h water. 
teimpera- 
e longi- 
the left 
ecimens 
107. 
in clear, 


a 


JZHL 


NVOINYAWYV 


Slivgd 


with 
night 
small 
tered 
and € 
of wl 
the | 


peara 
at ev 
cated 
Se) 
42°, 
streat 
many 
calea 
reeds 
Th 
imagi 
follos 
we r 
place 
diate! 
pany 
Miss« 
nia ui 
no pt 
in the 
ficult 
with 
to tak 
and | 
to a} 
know 
consi 
Varic 
a gre: 
store 
had ¢ 
what 
know 
the S 
there 
time 
lay tl 
very 
know 
chars 
with 
tleme 
form: 
of th 
of an 


165 [ 174] 


with a strong gale from the south, which commenced at 11 of the last 
night. The road to-day led along the river, which is full of rapids and 
small falls. Grass is very scanty; and along the rugged banks are scat- 
tered cedars, with an abundance of rocks and sage. We travelled 14 miles, 
and encamped in the afternoon near the river, on a rocky creek, the bed 
of which was entirely occupied with boulders of a very large size. For 
the last three or four miles the right bank of the river has a palisaded ap- 
pearance. One of the oxen was killed here for food. The thermometer 
at evening was at 55°, the sky almost overcast, and the barometer indi- 
cated an elevation of 4,400 feet. 

September 26.—Rain during the night, and the temperature at sunrise 
42°, Travelling along the river, in about 4 miles we reached 4 picturesque 
stream, to which we gave the name of Fall creek. It is remarkable for the 
many falls which occur in a short distance ; and its bed is composed of a 
calcareous tufa, or vegetable rock, composed principally of the remains of 
reeds and mosses, resembling that at the Basin spring on Bear river. 

The road along the river bluffs had been occasionally very bad; and 
imagining that some rough obstacles rendered such a détour necessary, we 
followed for several miles a plain wagon road leading up this stream, until 
we reached a point whence it could be seen making directly towards a low 
place in the range on the south side of the valley, and we became imme- 
diately aware that we were on a trail formed by a party of wagons, in com- 
pany with whom we had encamped at Elm grove, near the frontier of 
Missouri, and which you will remember were proceeding to Upper Califor- 
nia under the direction of Mr. Jos. Chiles. At the time of their departure, 
no practicable passes were known in the southern Rocky mountains with- 
in the territory of the United States ; and the probable apprehension of dif- 
ficulty in attempting to pass near the settled frontier of New Mexico, together 
withthe desert character of the unexplored region beyond, had induced them 
to take a more northern and circuitous route by way of the Sweet Water pass 
and Fort Hall. They had still between them and the valley of the Sacramen- 
to a great mass of mountains, forming the Sierra Nevada, here commonly 
known as the Great California mountain, and which were at this time 
considered as presenting an impracticable barrier to Wheeled carriages. 
Various considerations had suggested to them a division of the party ; and 
a greater portion of the camp, including the wagons, with the mail and other 
stores, were now proceeding under the guidance of Mr. Joseph Walker, who 
had engaged to conduct them, by a long sweep to the southward, around 
what is called the point of the mountain ; and, crossing through a pass 
known only to himself, gain the banks of the Sacramento by the valley of 
the San Joaquin. It was a longand a hazardous journey for a party in which 
there were women and children. Sixty days was the shortest period of 
time in which they could reach the point of the mountain, and their route 
lay through a country inhabited by wild and badly disposed Indians, and 
very poor in game; but the leader was a man possessing great and intimate 
knowledge of the Indians, with an extraordinary firmness and decision of 
character. In the mean time, Mr. Chiles had passed down the Columbia 
with a party of ten or twelve men, with the intention of reaching the set- 
tlements on the Sacramento by a more direct course, which indefinite in- 
formation from hunters had indicated in the direction of the head waters 
of the Riviére aux Malheurs ; and having obtained there a reinforcement 
of animals, and a supply of provisions, meet the wagons before they should 


Ser 


| Rh 
ia 
' y 
H 
( 
i, 
| 
aH 
a | 


ti 
a 
4 


| 
‘ 
J 


Pe 


{ 174] 166 


have reached the point of the mountain, :t a place which had been pre- 
viously agreed upon. Jn the course of our narrative, we shall be able to 
give you some information of the fortune which attended the movements 
of these adventurous travellers. 

Having discovered our error, we immediately regained the line along 
the river, which the road quitted about noon, and encamped at 5 o’clock 
on a stream called Raft river, ( Rivicre aux Cajeuz, ) having travelled only 
13 miles. In the north, the Salmon river mountains are visible at a very 
far distance ; and on the left, the ridge in which Raft tiver heads is about 
20 miles distant, rocky, and tolerably high. Thermometer at sunset 44°, 
with a partially clouded sky, and a sharp wind from the SW. 

September. 27,—It was now no longer possible, as in our previous journey, 
to travel regularly every day, and find at any moment a convenient place 
for repose at noon or a camp at night; but the halting places were now 
generally fixed along the road, by the nature of the country, at places where, 
with water, there was a little scanty grass. Since leaving the American 
falls, the road had frequently been very bad ; the many short, steep ascents, 
exhausting the strength of vur worn-out animals, requiring always at such 
places the assistance of the men to get up each cart, one by one ; and our 
progress with twelve or fourteen wheeled carriages, though light and made 
for the purpose, in such a rocky country, was extremely slow ; and I again 
determined to gain time by a division of the camp. Accordingly, to day 
the parties again separated, constituted very much as before—Mr. Fitzpat- 
rick remaining in charge of the heavier baggage. 

The morning was calm and clear, with a white frost, and the tempera- 
ture at sunrise 24°. 

To-day the country had a very forbidding appearance ; and, after travel- 
ling 20 miles over a slightly undulating plain, we encamped at a consider- 
able spring, called Swamp creek, rising in low grounds near the point of a 
spur from the mountain. Returning with a small party in a starving con- 
dition from the westward 12 or 14 years since, Carson had met here three 
or four buffalo bulls, two of which were killed. They were among the 
pioneers which had made the experiment of colonizing in the valley of the 
Columbia, and which had failed, as heretofore stated. At sunset the ther- 
mometer was at 46°, and the evening was overcast, with a cold wind from 
the SE., and to-night we had only sage for fire wood. Mingled with the 
artemisia was a shrubby and thorny ahenapodiascous plant. 

September 28.—Thermometer at sunrise 40°. The wind rose early to 
a gale from the west, with a very cold driving rain; and, after an uncom- 
fortable day’s ride of 25 miles, we were glad when at evening we found a 
sheltered camp, where there was an abundance uf wood, at some elevated 
rocky islands covered with cedar, near the commencement of another long 
caiion of the river. With the exception of a short detention ata deep little 
stream called Goose creek, and some occasional rocky places, we had to- 
day a very good road ; but the country has a barren appearance, sandy, and 
densely covered with the artemisias from the banks of the river to the foot 
of the mountains. Here I remarked, among the sage bushes, green bunches 
of what is called the second growth of grass. The river to-day has hada 
smooth appearance, free from rapids, with a low, sandy hill slope bordering 
the bottoms, in which there is a little good soil. Thermometer at sunset 

-45°, blowing a gale, and disagreeably cold. 
September 29.— The thermometer at sunrise 36°, with a bright sun, and 


en pre- 
able to 
ements 


e along 
o’clock 
led only 
ta very 
is about 
set 44°, 


ourney, 
nt place 
re now 
; where, 
merican 
ascents, 
at such 
and our 
nd made 
| I again 
1, to day 
Fitzpat- 


empera- 


r travel- 
onsider- 
oint of a 
ing con- 
bre three 
nong the 
py of the 
he ther- 
ind from 
with the 


early to 
uncom- 
b found a 
elevated 
her loag 
eep little 
b had to- 
ndy, and 
the foot 
bunches 
as hada 
ordering 
at sunset 


sun, and 


| 


OUTLET OF SUBTERRANIAN RIVER 


167 C174 J 


appearance of finer weather. The road for several miles was extremel 
rocky, and soneqnenty bad; but, entering after this a sandy country, it 
became very good, with no other interruption than the sage bushes, which 
covered the river plain so far as the eye could reach, ond, with their uni- 
form tint of dark gray, gave to the country # gloomy and sombre appear- 
ance. Ail the day the course of the river has been between walls of the 
black volcanic rock, a dark linc of the escarpment on the opposite side 
pointing out,its course, and sweeping along in foam at places where the 
mountains which border the valley present always on the left two ranges, 
the lower one a spur of the higher ; and, on the opposite side, the Salmon 
river mountains are visible at a great distance. Having made 24 miles, 
we encamped about 5 o’clock on Rock creek—a stream having considera- 
ble water, a swift current, and wooded with willow. 

September 30.—-Thermometer at sunrise 28°. In its progress towards 
the river, this creek soon enters a chasm of the volcanic rock, which in 
places along the wall presents a columnar appearance; and the road be- 
comes extremely rocky whenever it passes near its banks. It is only about 
twenty feet wide where the road crosses it, with a deep bed, and steep banks, 
covered with rocky fragments, with willows and a little grass on its narrow 
bottom. ‘The soil appears.to be full of calcareous matter, with which the 
rocks are incrusted. The fragments of rock which had been removed b 
the emigrants in making a sont where we ascended from the bed of th 
creek were whitened with lime; and during the afternoon’s march I re- 
marked in the soil a considerable quantity of calcareous concretions. To- 
wards evening the sages became more sparse, and the clear spaces were oc- 
cupied by tufts of green grass. ‘The river still continued its course through 
a trough or open cafion ; and towards sunset we followed the trail of several 
wagons which had turned in towards Snake river, and encamped, as they 
had done, on the top of the escarpment. There was no grass here, the 
soil among the sage being entirely naked ; but there is occasionally a little 
bottom along the river, which a short ravine of rocks, at rare intervals, 
leaves accessible ; and by one of these we drove our animals down, and 
found some tolerably good grass bordering the water. 

Immediately opposite to us, a subterranean river bursts out directly from 
the face of the escarpment, and falls in white foam to the river below. In 
the views annexed, you will find, with a sketch of this remarkable fall, a 
representation of the mural precipices which enclose the main river, and 
which form itacharacteristic feature along a great portion of its course. A 
seatenehay and strange-looking country—one of fracture, and violence, and 

re. 

We had brought with us, when we separated from the camp, a large 
gaunt ox, in appearance very poor; but, being killed to-night, to the great 
joy of the people, he was found to be remarkably fat. As usual at such oc- 
currences, the evening was devoted to gayety and feasting ; abundant fare 
now made ap epoch among us; and in this laborious life, in such a country 
as this, our men had but little else to enjoy. The temperature at sunset 
was 65°, with a clear sky and a very high wind. By the observation of 
the evening, the encampment was in longitude 114° 25’ 04", and in lati- 
tude 42° 38’ 44”. 

October 1.—The morning clear, with wind from the west, and the ther- 
.mometer at 55°. We descended to the bottom, taking with us the boat, for 
the purpose of visiting the fall in the opposite cliffs ; and while it was being 


c 1744 168 


filled with air, we occupied ourselves in measuring the river, which is 
1,786 feet in breadth, with banks 200 feet high. We were surprised, on our 
arrival at the opposite side, to find a beautiful basin of clear water, formed 
by the falling river, around which the rocks were whitened by some saline 
inerustation, Here the Indians had constructed wicker dams, although I 
was informed that the salmon do not ascend the river so far; and its char- 
acter below would apparently render it impracticable. 

The ascent of the steep hill side was rendered a little difficult by a dense 

rowth of shrubs and fields of cane; and there were frequent hidden crev- 
ces-among the rocks, where the water was heard rushing below ; but we 
succeeded in reaching the main stream, which, issuing from between strata 
of the trap rock in two principal branches, produced almost immediately a 
torrent, 22 feet wide, and white with foam, It is a picturesque spot of sin- 
gular beauty ; overshaded by bushes, from under which the torrent glances, 
tumbling into the white basin below where the clear water contrasted beau- 
tifully with the muddy stream of the river. Its outlet was covered with a 
rank growth of canes, and a variety of unusual plants, and nettles, (urtica 
canabina, ) which, before they were noticed, had set our hands and arms 
on fire. The temperature of the spring was 58°, while that of the river 
was 51°, The perpendicular height of the place at which this stream issues 
is 45 feet above the river, aud 152 feet below the summit of the precipice, 
making nearly 200 feet for the height of the wall. On the hill side here, 
was obtained the specimen designated by the number 12 in the collection, 
consisting principally of fragments of the shells of small crustacea, and 
which was probably formed by deposition from these springs proceeding 
from some lake or river in the highlands above. 

We resumed our journey at noon, the day being hot and bright; and, 
after a march of 17 miles, encamped at sunset on the river, near several 
lodges of Snake Indians. 

Our encampment was about one mile below the Fishing fulls, a series 
of cataracts with very inclined planes, which are probably so named because 
they form a barrier to the ascent of the salmon; and the great fisheries 
from which the inhabitants of this barren region almost entirely derive a 
subsistence commence at this place. These appeared to be unusually gay 
savages, fond of loud laughter; and, in their apparent good nature and 
merry character, struck me as being entirely different from the Indians 
we had been accustomed to see. From several who visited our camp in 
the evening, we purchased, in exchange for goods, dried salmon. At this 
season they are not very fat, but we were easily pleased. The Indians 
made us comprehend, that when the salmon came up the river in the spring, 
they are so abundant that they merely throw in their spears at random, 
certain of bringing out a fish. 

These poor people are but slightly provided with winter clothing; there 
is but little game to furnish skins for the purpose ; and of a little animal 
which seemed to be the most numerous, it required 20 skins to make a 
covering to the knees. But they are still a joyous talkative race, who 

row fat and become poor with the salmon, which at least never fail 
them—the dried being used in the absence of the fresh. WWVe are encamped 
immediately on the river bank, and with the salmon jumping up out of the 
water, and Indians paddling about in boats made of rushes, or laughing 
around the fires, the camp to-night has quite a lively appearance. 
The river at this place is more open than for some distance above ; and, 


2 
| 


eat eis SEM 


the sh 
ral lit 
resqu 


again 
from 
able t 
river 
north 
river 
at the 
very t 
fields 
quent 
where 
stantl 
Very 
waist 


vhich is 
/,on our 
, formed 
e saline 
hough I 
ite char- 


a dense 
en crev- 
but we 
en strata 
liately a 
it of sin- 
glances, 
ed beau- 
d with a 
}, (urlica 
nd arms 
he river 
m issues 
recipice, 
de here, 
lection, 
rea, and 
receding 


t; and, 
several 


a series 
because 
fisheries 
derive a 
ally gay 
ture and 
Indians 
camp in 
At this 
Indians 
e spring, 
random, 


g; there 
p animal 
make a 
ce, who 
pver fail 
camped 
t of the 
aughing 


e; and,, 


169 C174 J 


for the time, the black precipices have disappeared, and no calcareous mat- 
ter is visible in the soll. the thermometer at sunset 74°; clear and calm, 

October 2.—The sunrise temperature was 48°; the weather clear and 
calm, Shortly after leaving the encampment, we crossed a stream of clear 
water, witha variable breadth of 10 to 25 yards, broken by rapids, and li or 
wooded with willow, and having a little grass on its small bottom land, 
The barrenness of the country is in fine contrast to-day with the mingled 
beauty and grandeur of the river, which is more open than hitherto, with a 
constant succession of falls and rapids. Over the edge of the black cliffs 
and out from their faces, are falling numberless streams and springs; and 
all the line of the river is in motion with the play of the water, In about 
seven miles we reached the most beautiful and picturesque fall I had seen 
on the river, 

On the o posite side, the vertical fail is perhaps 18 feet high ; and nearer, 
the sheet of foaming water is divided and broken into cataracts, where.seve- 
ral little islands on the brink and in the river above give it much pictu- 
resque beauty, and make it one of those places the traveller turns again and 
again to fix in his memory. There were several lodges of Indians here, 
from whom we traded salmon. Below this place the river makes a remark- 
able bend ; and the road, ascending the ridge, gave us a fine view of the 
river below, intersected at many places by numerous fish dams. In the 
north, about 50 miles distant, were some high snowy peaks of the Salmon 
river mountains ; and in the northeast, the last peak of the range was visible 
at the distance of perhaps 100 miles or more. The river hills consist of 
very broken massesof sand, covered every where withthe same interminable 
fields of sage, and occasionally the road is very heavy. We now very fre- 
quently saw Indians, who were strung along the river at every little rapid 
where fish are to be caught, and the ery haggai, haggai, (fish, ) was con- 
stantly heard whenever we passed near their huts, or met them in the road. 
Very many of them were oddly and partially dressed in overcoat, shirt, 
waistcoat, or pantaloons, or whatever article of clothing they had been able 
to procure in trade from the emigrants; for we had now entirely quitted 
the country where hawk’s bells, beads, and vermilion, were the current coin, 
and found that here only useful articles, and chiefly clothing, were in great 
request. These, however, are eagerly sought after ; and for a few trifling 
pieces of clothing, travellers may procure food sufficient to carry them to 
the Columbia. 

We made a long stretch across the upper plain, and encamped un the 
bluff, where the grass was very green and good; the soil of the upper 
plains containing a considerable proportion of calcareous matter. This 
green freshness of the grass was very remarkable for the season of the year. 
o_ we heard the roar of a fall in the river below, where the water in an 
unbroken volume goes over a descent of several feet. ‘The night is clear, 
and the weather continues very warm and pleasant, with a sunset tempera- 
ture of 70°. 

October 3.—The morning was pleasant, with a temperature at sunrise 
of 42°, The road was broken by ravines among the hills, and in one of 
these, which made the bed ofa dry creek, | found a fragmentary stratum, 
or brecciated conglomerate, consisting of flinty slate pebbles, with frag- 
ments of limestone containing fossil shells, which will be found described 
in the appendix under the numbers 16, 21, and 39. , 

On the left, the mountains are visible at the distance of twenty or thirty 


[174 J 170 


miles, appemring rane and rather low ; but at intervals higher peaks look 
out from beyond, and indicate that the main ridge, which we are leaving 
with the course of the river, and which forms the northern boundary of 
the Great Basin, still maintains its elevation. About 2 o’clock we ar- 
rived at the ford where the road crosses to the right bank of Snake river. 
An Indian was hired to conduct us through the ford, which proved imprac- 
‘ticable for us, the water sweeping away the howitzer and neariy drowning 
the mules, which we were obliged to extricate by cutting them out of the 
harness. The river here is expanded into a little bay, in which there are 
two islands, across which is the road of the ford; and the emigrants had 
passed by placing two of their heavy wagons abreast of each other, so as 
to oppose a considerable mass against the hody of water. The Indians 
informed us that one of the men, in attempting to turn some cattle which 
had taken a wrong direction, was carried off by the current and drowned. 
Since their passage, the water had risen considerably ; but, fortunstely, we 
had ‘a resource in a boat, which was filled with air and launched; and 
at seven o’clock we were safely encamped on the opposite bank, the animals 
swimming across, and the carriage, owilser: and baggage of the camp, 
being carried over in the boat. At the place where we crossed, above the 
islands, the river had narrowed toa breadth of 1,049 feet by measurement, 
the greater portion of which was from six to eight feet deep. We were 
obliged to make our camp where we landed, among the Indian lodges, 
which are semicircular huts made of willow, thatched over with straw, 
and open tothe sunny south. By observation, the latitude of our encamp- 
ment on the right bank of the river was 42° 55' 58"; chronometric longi- 
tude 115° 04' 46", and the travelled distance from Fort Hall 208 miles. 

October 4.—Calm pleasant day, with the thermometer at sunrise at 47°. 
Leaving the river at a considerable distance to the left, and following up 
the bed of a rocky creek, with occasional holes of water, in about six miles 
we ascended, by aiong and rather steep hill, to a plain 600 feet above the 
river, over which we continued to travel during the day, having a broken 
ridge 2,000 or 3,000 feet high on the right. The plain terminates, where 
we ascended, in an escarpment of vesicular trap rock, whieh supplies the 
fragments of the creek below. The sky clouded over, with a strong wind 
from the northwest, with a few drops of rain and occasional sunlight, threat- 
ening a change. 

Artemisia stil] coversthe plain, but Purshia tridentata makes its appear- 
ance here on the hill sides and on bottoms of the creeks—quite a tree in 
size, and larger than the artemisia. We crossed several hollows with a 
little water in them, and improved grass ; and, turning off from the road in 
the afternoon in search of water, travelled about three miles up the bed of 
a willow creek, towards the mountain, and found a good encampment, with 
wood and grass, and little ponds of water in the bed of the creek ; which 
must be of more importance at other seasons, as we found there several 
old fixtures for fishing. There were many holes on the creek prairie, 
which had been made by the diggers in search of roots. 

Wind increased to a violent gale from the NW., with a temperature at 
sunset of 57°. 

October 5.—The morning was calm and clear, and at sunrise the ther- 
mometer was at 32°. The road to-day was occasionally extremely rocky, 
with hard volcanic fragments, and our travelling very slow. In about nine 
‘ miles the road brought us to a group of smoking hot springs, with a tem- 


eratt 
ow pli 
the air 
of higt 
and re 
ant effe 
branch 
ral ine 
The 
incrus 


The 
mount 
and pi 
scatte: 
to cro: 
Salmo 
sunset 
some | 
willow 
bushe: 
botton 
comin 
water 
must | 

Th 

Oci 
entire 
road, 
hills < 
count 
the ar 
the cl 
shrub 
to the 

rass 
ried 
has p 


peaks look 
are leaving 
oundary of 
ck we ar- 
nake river, 
ed imprac- 
y drowning 
out of the 
h there are 
grants had 
ther, so as 
he Indians 
ttle which 
drowned. 
notely, we 
ched; and 
he animals 
the camp, 
above the 
surement, 
We were 
an lodges, 
ith straw, 
ir encamp- 
tric longi- 
)8 miles. 
rise at 47°, 
lowing up 
tsix miles 
above the 
+a broken 
es, where 
pplies the 
rong wind 
ht, threat- 


($ appear- 
> a tree in 
Ws with a 
he road in 
he bed of 
ent, with 
k ; which 
e several 
x prairie, 


srature at 


the ther- 
ly rocky, 
bout nine 
h atem- 


171 


erature of 164°,. There were a few helianthi in bloom, with some other 
ow plants, and the pee was green round about; the ground warm, and 
the air pleasant, with asummer atmosphere that was very grateful in aday 
of high and cold searching wind. The rocks were covered with a white 
and red incrustation ; and the water has on the tongue the same unpleas- 
ant effect as that of the Basin spring on Bear river. They form several 
branches, and bubble up with force enough to raise the small pebbles seve- 
ral inches. 
The following is an analysis of the deposite with which the rocks are 
incrusted : 


[ 174] 


Analysis. 

Silica : . : : : - 72,55 

Carbonate of lime - : : : - 1460 

Carbonate of magnesia - : - - 120 

Oxide of iron - - - - - 465 ‘ 

Alumina - -— - -. - - 0.70 

Chloride of sodium, &c. 

Sulphate of soda : : - 1.10 

Sulphate of lime, &c. 

Organic vegetable matter . - 5.20 

Water and loss ° 
100.00 


These springs are near the foot of the ridge, (a dark and rugged looking 
mountain, ) in which some of the nearer rocks have a reddish appearance, 
and probably consist ~{ a reddish-brown trap, fragments of which were 
scattered along the road after leaving the spring. The road was now about 
to cross the point of this mountain, which we judged to be a spur from the 
Salmon river range. We crossed a small creek, and encamped about 
sunset on a stream, which is probably Lake river. This isasmall stream, 
some five or six feet broad, with a swift current, timbered principally with 
willows and some few cottonwoods. Along the banks were canes, rose 
bushes, and clematis, with Purshia tridentata and artemisias on the upper 
bottom. The sombre appearance of the country is somewhat relieved in 
coming unexpectedly from the dark rocks upon these green and wooded 
watercourses, sunk in chasms; and, in the spring, the contrasted effect 
must make them beautiful. ; 

The thermometer at sunset 47°, and the night threatening snow. 

October 6.—The morning warm, the thermometer 46° at sunrise, and sky 
entirely. clouded. After travelling about three milesoveranextremely rocky 
road, the volcanic fragn.ents began to disappear ; and, entering among the 
hills at the point of the mountain, we found ourselves suddenly in a granite 
country. Here, the character of the vegetation was very much changed ; 
the artemisia disappeared almost entirely, showing only at intervals towards 
the ‘close of the day, and was replaced by Purshia tridentata, with flowering 
shrubs, and small fields of dieleria divaricata, which gave bloom and gayety 
to the hills. These were every where covered with a fresh and green short 

rass, like that of the early spring. This is the fall or second growth, the 
ried grass having been burnt off by the Indians; and wherever the fire 
has passed, the bright-green color is universal. The soil among the hills 


= 


eae eee 


ee 


isa 


=e ek oe a 


[174 J 172 


is altogether different from that of the river plain, being in many places 
black, in others sandy and gravelly, but of a firm and good character, ap- 
pearing to result from the decomposition of the granite rocks, which is pro- 
ceeding rapidly. 

In quitting for a time the artemisia (sage) through which we had been 
so long voyaging, and the sombre appearance of which is so discouraging, 
I have to remark, that I have been informed that in Mexico wheat is grown 
upon the ground which produces this shrub ; which, if true, relieves the soil 
from the character of sterility imputed to it. Be this as it may, there is no 
dispute about the grass, which is alinost universal on the hills and moun- 
tains, and always nutritious, even in its dry state. We passed on the way 
masses of granite on the slope of a spur, which was very much weathered 
and abraded: + This isa white feldspathic granite, with small scales of 
black mica; smoky quartz and garnets appear to constitute this portion of 
the mountain. 

The road at noon reached a broken ridge, on which were scattered many 
boulders or blocks of granite’; and, passing very small streams, where, with 
a little more than the usual timber, was sometimes gathered a little wilder- 
ness of plants, we encamped on a small stream, aftér a march of 22 miles, 
in company witha few Indians. Temperature at sunset 51°; and the night 
was partially clear, with a few stars visible through drifting white clouds. 
The Indians made an unsuccessful attempt to steal a few horses from us—a 
thing of course with them, and to prevent which the traveller is on per- 
petual watch. 

October 7.—The day was bright, clear, and pleasant, with a temperature 
of 45°; and we breaktasted at sunrise, the birds singing in the trees as 
merrily as if we were inthe midst of summer. On the upper edge of the 
hills on the opposite side of the creek, the black volcanic rock reappears ; 
and ascending these, the road passed through a basin, around which the 
hills swept in such a manner as to give it the appearance of an old crater. 
Here were strata and broken beds of black scoriated rock, and hills com- 
posed of the same, on the summit of one of which there was an opening re- 
sembling a rent. We travelled to-day through a country resembling that 
of yesterday, where, although the surface was hilly, the road was good, be- 
ing firm, and entirely free from rocks and artemisia. To our left, below, 
was the great sage plain ; and on the right were the near mountains, which 
presented a smoothly broken character, or rather a surface waved into 
numberless hills. The road was occasionally enlivened by meeting In- 
dians, and the day was extremely beautiful and pleasant; and we were 
pleased to be free from the sage, even for a day. When we had trav- 
elled about 8 miles, we were nearly opposite to the highest portion of the 
mountains on the left side of the Smoke river valley ; and, continuing ona 
few miles beyond, we came suddenly in sight of the broad green line of 
the valley of the Riviére Boisée, (wooded river,) black near the gorge 
where it debouches into the plains, with high precipices of basalt, between 
walls of which it passes, on emerging from the mountains. Following 
with the eye its upward course, it appears to be shutin among lofty moun- 

tains, confining its valley in a very rugged country. | 

Descending the hills, after travelling a few miles along the high plain, 
the road brought us down upon the bottoms of the river, which is a bean- 
tiful rapid stream, with clear mountain water, and, as the name indicates, 
well wooded with some varieties of timber—among whichare handsome cot+ 
tonwoods. Such astream had become quite a novelty in this country, and 


we we 
trees ag 
river ; 
came ta 
evening 
Att 
the fur 
constit 
massac 
name o 
On tl 
scatter 
along t 
the eve 
early th 
house 
Riviere 
hospita 
charge 
Herd 
our goo 
camp w 
again s 
which 
on sali 
Among 
which | 
tion of 
cultivat 
he succ 
non. f 
pressio! 
dairy, ' 
well; | 
was, he 
some a 
conside 
had ar 
only st 
are no! 
which 
Mar 
ance: V 
ginal i 
ple wi 
sistent 
from ¢ 
this gt 
be for 
Poi 
on the 
of civ. 


hany places 
Aracter, ap- 
hich is pro. 


p had been 
pcouraging, 
nt is grown 
es the soil 
there is no 
and moun- 
n the way 
weathered 
scales of 
portion of 


ered many 
here, with 
le wilder- 
f 22 miles, 
l the night 
te clouds, 
‘om us—a 
is on per- 


iperature 
trees as 
ige of the 
eappears ; 
which the 
ld crater. 
ills com- 
ening re- 
ling that 
good, be- 
it, below, 
ns, which 
ved into 
eting In- 
we were 
vad tray- 
on of the 
ning ona 
n line of 
le gorge 
between 
ollowing 
Ty moun- 


th plain, 
a bean- 
idicates, 
OME Cots 
try, and 


173 [ 174 ] 


we were delighted this afternoon to make a pleasant samp anion ane i 
trees again. There were several Indian encampments sca ihe asi in 
river; and a number of their inhabitants, in the aera pie cate re 
came to the camp on secrete with cpa ee ish to . 
ing was clear, and the temperature at su ‘ ; ; 
evAt the time of the first aeropalins of this region by pies bet ot 
the fur trade, a small party of men under the command o Satan 
constituting all the garrison ofa little fort on this river, were rhe ic a 
massacred by the Indians; and to this event the stream owes its 
of Reid’s river. : 
On the 8th we travelled about 26 miles, the ridge on the Sg en 
scattered pines on the upper parts; and, continuing the next Lith ata 
along the river bottom, after a day’s travel of 24 miles i e oe he 
the evening on the right bank of the river, a mile above ¢ Satie 
early the next morning arrived at Fort Boisé. ‘This is a ane idee g 
house on the right bank of Snake river, about a mile be ra ve rnin 
Riviere Boissée; and on our arrival we were received with ages 2 
hospitality by Mr. Payette, an officer of the Hudson ae aun oniee 
charge of the fort; all of whose garrison consisted in a pe a Mic da. Ni 
Herc the road recrosses the river, which is broad and een ses Asi 
our good boat, aided by two canoes, which were found ae ne pate 
camp was very soon transferred to the left bank. Here ne owe eens 
again surrounded by the sage ; artemisia tridentata, and the di ania 
which during our roy oe had oe made wit ane cats sae 
aline soils, being here the prevailing and almost Ml deed 
ies ae the surface was covered with the usual saline rhage a 
which here consist almost entirely of carbonate of soda, che a ee ge 
tion of chloride of sodium. Mr. Payette had made but ver a | Le 
cultivation, his efforts being limited to raising a lew vegeta sie adda 
he succeeded tolerably well; the post being principally ae vith a 
non, [He was very hospitable and kind to us, and we made ; eas ie 
pression upon all his comestibles; but our principal eee ae a 
dairy, which was abundantly supplied, stock appearing to gies pega at | 
well; and we had an unusual luxury in a present of fi a u ae 
was, however, by no means equal to that of Fort Ha ies phe ele 
some accidental cause. During the day we remained ee i eh 
considerable numbers of miserable halt. naked Indians around the su) A 
had arrived from the neighboring mountains. During the Had 
only subsistence of these people is derived from the salmon, ol vie panera 
are not provident enough to ey up ee for the winter, g 
ich many of them die from absolute starvation. ae 
ae little accounts and scattered histories, Be lane ri ennin 
ance which I gradually acquired of their modes of life, ha ef pe inet 
ginal inhabitants of this vast region pictured in my mind bi a bee : be 
ple whose great and constant occupation was the means o Pe ne 
sistence ; and though want of space, and other reasons, in atid ‘ani 
from detailing the many incidents which made these things a i eee 
this great feature among the characteristics of the country will gra y 
) upon your mind. 
Seni to <eour of Indians who had just arrived from We a ibegil 
on the left side of the valley, and who were regarding our usua “bP ii 
of civilization with an air of bewildered curiosity, Mr. Payette informe 


[ 174] 174 


that, every year since his arrival at this post, he had unsuccesstully en- 
deavored to induce these people to lay up a store of salmon for their winter 
provision. While the summer weather and the salmon lasted, they lived 
contentedly and happily, scattered along the different streams where the 
fish were to be found ; and as soon as the winter snows began to fall, little 
smokes would be seen rising among the mountains, where they would be 
found in miserable groups, starving out the winter; and sometimes, accord- 
ing to the general belief, reduced to the horror of cannibalism—the strong, 
of course, preying on the weak. Certain it is, they are driven to any ex- 
treinity for food, and eat every insect, and every creeping thing, however 
loathsome and repulsive. Snails, lizards, ants—all are devoured with the 
readiness and greediness of mere animals. 

In common with all the other Indians we had encountered since reach- 
ing the Pacific waters, these people use the Shoshonee or Snake language, 
which you will have occasion to remark, in the course of the narrative, is 
the universal language over a very extensive region. 

On the evening of the 10th, I obtained, with the usual observations, a 
very excellent emersion of the first satellite, agreeing very nearly with the 
chronometer. From these observations, the longitude of the fort is 116° 
47' 00" ; latitude 43° 49’ 22", and elevation above the sea 2,100 feet. 

Sitting by the fire on the river bank, and waiting for the immersion of 
the satellite, which did not take piace until after midnight, we heard the 
monotonous song of the Indians, with which they accompany a certain 
game of which they are very fond. Of the poetry we could not judge, 
but the music was miserable. 

October 11.—The morning was clear, with a light breeze from the east, 
and a temperature at sunrise of 33°. A part of a bullock purchased at the 
fort, together with the boat to assist him in crossing, was left here for Mr. 
Fitzpatrick, and at 11 o’clock we resumed our journey ; and directly leav- 
ing the river, and crossing the artemisia plain, in several ascents we reached 
the foot of a tidge, where the road entered a dry sandy hollow, up which 
it continued to the head; and, crossing a dividing ridge, entered a similar 
one. We met here two poot emigrants,(frishmen, )who had lost their horses 
two days since—probably stolen by the Indians; and were returning to the 
fort, in hopes to hear something of them there. They had recently had noth- 
ing to eat; and I halted to unpack an animal, and gave them meat for their 
dinner. In this hollow, the artemisia is: partially displaced on the hill sides 
by grass; and descending it — miles, about sunset we reached the Riviére 
aux Matheurs, (the unfortunate or unlucky river,) a considerable stream, 
with an average breadth of 50 feet, and, at thistime, 18 inches depth of water. 

The bottom lands were generally one and a half mile broad, covered 
principally with long dry grass; and we had difficulty to find sufficient 
good grass for the camp. With the exception of a bad place of a few hun- 
dred yards long, which occurred in rounding a point of hill to reach the 
ford of the river, the road during the day had been very good. 

October 12.—The morning was clear and calm, and the thermometer at 
sunrise 23°. My attention was attracted by a smoke on the right side of 
the river, a little below the ford, where I found-on the low bank, near the 
water, a considerable number of hot springs, in which the temperature of 
the water was 193°. The ground, which was too hot.for the naked foot, 
was covered above and below the springs with an incrustation of common 
salt, very white and good, and fine grained. a 


Lead 
road e 
admixt 
of the 
sharp a 
it becar 
in whic 
of the 
found, 
abunda 
river, 
the left 
we desd 
of wate 
us the ¢ 
here a 
the mo 
weathe 
usual, s 

1 obt 
lite, an 
44° 17’ 
from th 
feet. 

Octo 
28°. 
grass ; 
two, Wl 
drum a 
sight, | 
which | 
tains, : 
some tc 
and, m 

We 
the Co 
water, 
the soi 
tious g 
culiar | 

growth 
mount 
the ele 
as will 
the fer 
cluded 
region 
lakes, 
is the 

rivers 
And h 
tains, 


psstully en- 
heir winter 
they lived 
where the 
o fall, little 
y would be 
es, accord. 
the strong, 
to. any ex- 
, however 
ed with the 


nee reach- 
p language, 
arrative, is 


irvations, a 
ly with the 
ort is 116° 
0 feet. 

mersion of 
heard the 
y a certain 
not judge, 


n the east, 
ased at the 
re for Mr. 
ectly leav- 
ye reached 
up which 
d « similar 
1eir horses 
hing to the 
‘had noth- 
t for their 
hill sides 
ie Riviere 
le stream, 
h of water, 
|, covered 
sufficient 
few hun- 
reach the 


ometer at 
ht side of 
. near the 
erature of 
iked foot, 
common 


175 [ 174) 


Leading for 5 miles up a broad dry branch of the Malheurs river, the 
road entered a sandy hollow, where the surface was rendered firm by the 
admixture of other rock ; being good and level until arriving near the head 
of the ravine, where it became a little rocky, and we met with a number of 
sharp ascents over an undulating surface. Crossing here a dividing ridge, 
it became an excellent road of gradual descent down a very marked hollow ; 
in which, after 10 miles, willows began to appear in the dry bed of a head 
of the Riviére aux Bouleauz, (Birch river;) and descending 7 miles, we 
found, at its junction with another branch, a little water, not very good or 
abundant, but sufficient in case of necessity fora camp. Crossing Birch 
river, we continued for about 4 miles across a point of hill; the country on 
the left being entirely mountainous, with no level spot to be seen ; whence 
we descended to Snake river—here a fine-looking stream, with a large body 
of water and a smooth current; although we hear the roar, and see below 
us the commencement of rapids where it enters among the hills. It forms 
here a deep bay, with a low sand island in the midst. and its course among 
the mountains is agreeably exchanged for the black volcanic rock. The 
weather during the day had been very bright and extremely hot; but, as 
usual, so soon as the sun went down, it was necessary to put on overcoats. 

1 obtained this evening an observation of an emersion of the first satel- 
lite, and our observations of the evening place this encampment in latitude 
44° 17' 36’, and longitude 116° 56’ 45”, which is the mean of the results 
from the satellite and chronometer. The elevation above the sea 1,880 
feet. At this encampment, the grass is scanty and poor. 

October 13.—The mortiing was bright, with the temperature at sunset 
28°. The horses had strayed off during the night, probably in search of 
grass; and, after a considerable delay, we had succeeded in finding all but 
two, when, about 9 o’clock, we heard the sound of an Indian song and 
drum approaching; and shortly after, three Cayuse Indians appeared in 
sight, bringing with them the two animals. They belonged to a party 
which had been on a buffalo hunt in the neighborhood of the Rocky moun- 
tains, and were hurrying home in advance. We presented them with 
some tobacco, and other things, with which they appeared well satisfied, 
and, moderating their pace, travelled in company with us. 

We were now about to leave the valley of the great southern branch of 
the Columbia river, to which the absence of timber, and the scarcity of 
water, give the appearance of a desert, to enter a mountainous region where 
the soil is good, and in which the face of the country is covered with nutri- 
tious grasses and dense forest—land embracing many varieties of trees pe- 
culiar to the country, and on which the timber exhibits a luxuriance of 
growth unknown to the eastern part of the continent and to Europe. This 
mountainous region connects itself in the southward and westward with 
the elevated country belonging to the Cascade or California range ; and, 
as will be remarked in the course of the narrative, forms the eastern limit of 
the fertile and timbered lands along the desert and mountwinous region in- 
cluded within the Great Basin—a term which I apply to the intermediate 
region between the Rocky mountains and the next range, containing many 
lakes, with their own system of rivers and creeks, (of which the Great Salt 
is the principal, ) and which have no connexion with the ocean, or the great 
rivers which flow into it. This Great Basin is yet to be adequately explored. 
And here, on quitting the banks of a sterile river, to enter on arable moun- 
tains, the remark may be made, that, on this western slope of our continent, 


hi 
lf 
\ il 
a | 
|] 


[ 174 J 176 


the usual order or distribution of good and bad soil is often reversed ; the 
river and creek bottoms being often sterile, and darkened with the gloomy 
and barren artemisia; while the mountain is often fertile, and covered 
with rich ‘grass, pleasant to the eye, and good for flocks and herds. 

Leaving entirely the Snake river, which is said henceforth to pursue its 
course through cafons, amidst rocky and impracticable mountains, where 
there is no possibility of travelling with animals, we ascended a long and 
somewhat steep hill; and crossing the dividing ridge, came down into the 
valley of Burn? river, which here looks like a hole among the hills. The 
average breadth of the stream here is 30 feet; it is well fringed with the 
usual small timber; and the soil in the bottoms is good, with better grass 
than we had lately been accustomed to see. 

We now travelled through a very mountainous country ; the stream run- 
ning rather in a ravine than a valley, and the road is decidedly bad and 
dangerous for single wagons, frequently crossing the stream where the 
water is sometimes deep; und all the day the animals were fatigued in 
climbing up and descending a succession of steep ascents, to avoid the pre- 
cipitous hill sides; and the common trail, which leads along the mountain 
side at places where the river strikes the base, is sometimes bad even for 
ahorseman. The mountains along this day’s journey were composed, near 
the river, of a slaty calcareous rock in a metamorphic condition. It ap- 
pears originally to have been a slaty sedimentary limestone, but its pres- 
ent condition indicates that it has been altered, and has become partiall 
erystalline—probably from the proximity of volcanic rocks. But though 
travelling was slow and fatiguing to the animals, we were delighted with 
the appearance of the country, which was green and refreshing after our 
tedious journey down the parched valley of Snake river. The mountains 
were covered with good bunch grass, (/estuca ;) the water of the streams 
was cold and pure; their bottoms were handsomely wooded with various 
kinds of trees; and huge and lofty and picturesque precipices were dis- 
played where the river cut through the mountains. 

We found in the evening some good grass and rushes; and encamped 
among large timber, principally birch, which had been recently burnt and 
blackened, and almost destroyed by fire. The night was calm and tolera- 
bly clear, with the thermometer at sunset at 59°. Our journey to-day was 
about 20 miles. 

October 14.—The day was clear and calm, with a temperature at sunrise 
of 46°. After travelling about three miles up the valley, we found the 
river shut up by precipices in a kind of caiion, and the road makes a cir- 
cuit over the mountains. In the afternoon we reached the river again, by 
another little ravine; and, after travelling along it for a few miles, left it 
enclosed among rude mountains; and, ascending a smaller branch, en- 
camped on it about 5 o’clock, very much elevated above the valley. The 
view was every where limited by mountains, on which were no longer seen 
the black and barren rocks, but a fertile soil, with excellent grass, and 
partly well covered with pine. I have never seen a wagon road equally 
bad in the same space, as this of yesterday and to-day. I noticed where 
one wagon had been overturned twice, in a very short distance; and it 
was surprising to me that those wagons which were in the rear, and could 
not have had much assistance, got through at all. Still, there is no mud; 
and the road has one advantage, in being perfectly firm. The day had 
been warm and very pleasant, and the night was perfectly clear. 


Ocla 
clouds 
sun. 
grown 
played 
trap, d 
gillace 
parent 
whole 
and on 
black 
they a 
mark t 
covere 
descens 
encam| 
of hig! 

Fro 
Powde 
seul, (t 
stretch 
emigra 
Our Cz 
ahead 
belong 
were 0 
large g 
dle. \ 
the mo 
with h 
of pow 
animal! 

The 
with o 
Elevat 

Oct 
very b 
cold. 
lodge ; 
rise; t 
nearly 

Las 
noon; 
very § 

The 
tially | 
more | 

finer < 

Oct 
was fi 
with t 
to be 


rsed ; the 
e gloomy 
| covered 
8. 

pursue its 
ns, where 
long and 
n into the 
ills. The 
| with the 
tter grass 


ream run- 
bad and 
vhere the 
tigued in 
1 the pre- 
mountain 
even for 
sed, near 
» It ap- 
| its pres- 
 partiall 
it thoug 
ited with 
after our 
10untains 
streams 
various 
were dis- 


ncamped 
urnt and 
id tolera- 
-day was 


t sunrise 
und the 
keS a Cir- 
gain, by 
8, left it 
nch, en- 
py. The 
ger seen 
ass, and 
equally 
d where 
; and it 
d could 
o mud; 
day had 


177 [ 174 ] 

October 15.—The thermometer at daylight was 42°, and at sunrise 40°; 
clouds, which were scatterred over all the sky, disappeared with the rising 
sun. The trail did not much improve until we had crossed the dividing 
grounds between the Bru/é (Burnt) and Powder rivers. The rock dis. 
played on the mountains, as we approached the summit, was a compact 
trap, decomposing on the exposed surfaces, and apparently an altered ar- 
gillaceous sandstone, containing small crystalline nodules of anolcime, ap- 
parently filiing cavities originally existing. From the summit here, the 
whole horizon shows high mountains ; no high plain or level is to be seen; 
and on the left, from south around by the west to north, the mountains are 
black with pines; while, through the remaining space to the eastward, 
they are bald with the exception of gome scattered pines. You will re- 
mark that we are now entering a region where all the elevated parts are 
covered with dense and heavy forests. From the dividing grounds we 
descended by a mountain road to Powder river, on an old bed of which we 
encamped, Descending from the summit, we enjoyed a picturesque view 
of high rocky inountains on the right, illuminated by the setting sun, 

From the heights we had looked in vain for a well-known landmark on 
Powder river, which had been described to me by Mr. Payette as arbre 
seu/, (the lone tree;) and, on arriving at the river, we found a fine tall pine 
stretched on the ground, which had been felied by some inconsiderate 
emigrant axe. It had been a beacon on the road for many years past. 
Our Cayuses had become impatient to reach their homes, and travelled on 
ahead to-day; and this afternoon we were visited by several Indians, who 
belonged to the tribes on the Volumbia. ‘They were on horseback, and 
were ont on a hunting excn.sion, but fad obtained no better game than a 
large gray hare, of which each had some six or seven hanging to his sad- 
dle, We were also visited by an Indian who had his lodge and family in 
the mountain to the left. He was in want of ammunition, and brought 
with him a beaver skin to exchange, and which he valued at six charges 
of powder and ball. I learned from him that there are very few of these 
animals remaining in this part of the country. 


The temperature at sunset was 61°, and the evening clear. I obtained, 


with other observations, an immersion and emersion of the third satellite. ' 


Elevation 3,100 feet. A 

October 16.—-For several weeks the weather in the daytime has been 
very beautiful, clear, and warm; but the nights, in comparison, are very 
cold. During the night there was ice a quarter of an inch thick in the 
lodge ; and at daylight the thermoineter was at 16°, and the same at sun- 
rise; the weather being calm and clear. The annual vegetation now is 
nearly gone, almost all the plants being out of bloom. 

Last night two of our horses had run off again, which delayed us until 
noon; and we made to day but a short journey of 13 miles, the road being 
very good, and encamped in a fine bottom of Powder river. — 

The thermometer at sunset was at 61°, with an easterly wind, and par- 
tially clear sky ; and the day has been quite pleasant and warm, though 
more cloudy than yesterday ; and the sun was frequently faint, but it grew 
finer and clearer towards evening. 

October 17.—Thermometer at sunrise 25°. The weather at daylight 
was fine, and the sky without a cloud ; but these came up, or were formed 
with the sun, and at 7 were thick over all the sky. Just now, this appears 
to be the regular course—clear and brilliant during the night, and cloudy 

12 


SA 


vi + = 
——S 


Sree toacbanthe 


ee 


c 1744 178 


during the day. There is snow yet visible in the neighboring mountanis; 
which yesterday extended along our route to the left, in a lofty and dark- 
blue range, having much the appearance of the Wind river mountains, 
It is probable that they have received their name of the Blue mountains 
from the dark-blue appearance given to them by the pines, We travelled 
this morning across the affluents to Powder river, the road being good, firm, 
and level; and the country became constantly more pleasant and interest- 
ing. ‘The soil appeared to be very deep, and is black and extremely good, 
as well among tho hollows of the hills on the elevated plats, as on the river 
bottoms; the vegetation being such as is usually found in good ground, 
The following analytical result shows the precise qualities of this soil, and 
ke justify to science the character of fertility which the eye attributes 
to It: 


Analysis of Powder river soil. 


Silica - - - - : - - - 72,30 
Alumina - - ° - - - - - 6.25 
Carbonate of lime - - . - - . 6.86 
Carbonate of magnesia - - - - - - 4.62 
Oxide of iron - - - : - . - 1.20 
Organic matter - . - - . : 4.50 
Water and loss” - . - ° : : - 4.27 

100.00 


kium the waters of this stream, the road ascended by a good and moderate 
ascent to a dividing ridge, but immediately entered upon ground covered 
with fragments of an altered siliceous slate, which are in many places large, 
and render the road racking to a carriage. In this rock the planes of 
deposition are distinctly preserved, and the metamorphism is evidently due 
to the proximity of volcanic rocks. On either side, the mountains here are 
densely covered with tall and handsome trees ; aud, mingled with the green 
of a varicty of pines, is the yellow of the European larch (pinus laria,) 
which loses its leaves in the fall. From its present color, we were enabled 
to see that it forms a large proportion of the forests on the mountains, and 
is here a magnificent tree, attaining sometimes the height of 200 feet, which 
I believe is elsewhere unknown About two in the afternoon we reached 
a high point of the dividing ridge, from which we obtained a good view of 
the Grund Rond—a beautiful level basin, or mountain valley, covered with 
good grass, on a rich soil, abundantly watered, and surrounded by high 
and well-timbered- mountains; and its nume descriptive of its form—the 
great circle. It is a place—one of the few we have seen in our journey so 
far—where a farmer would delight to establish himself, if he were content 
to live in the seclusion which it imposes. It is about 20 miles in diameter; 
and may, in time, form a superbcounty. Probably with the view of avoid- 
ing a circuit, the wagons had directly descended into the Roni by the face 
of a hill so very rocky and continuously stecp as to be apparently imprac- 
licable ; and, following down on their trail, we encamped on one of the 
branches of the Grand Rond river, immediately at the foot of the hill. I 
had remarked, in descending, some very white spots glistening on the plain, 
and, going out in that direction after we had encamped, I found them to be 


MLSE ORR 


a pla 
the e 
road 
have 
direc 
miles 
we hi 
whict 
of the 
follow 
and e 
like st 
some 
of the 
The c 
the da 
was a 
differe 
45° 26 
Oct 
was a 
daylig 
We 
foras 
which 
stream 


ountaiis, 
and dark- 
ountains, 
ountains 
travelled 
‘ood, firm, 
1 interest- 
nely good, 
ny the river 
d ground. 
s soil, and 


attributes 
e 72,30 
‘ 6.25 
- 6.86 
- 4.62 
P 1.20 
- 4.50 
- 4,27 

100.00 


id moderate 
id covered 
laces large, 
planes of 
idently due 
ns here are 
lh the green 
nus larix,) 
re enabled 
itains, and 
feet, which 
e reached 
od view of 
vered with 
d by high 
form—the 
journey so 
re content 
h diameter ; 
v of avoid- 
ny the face 
y imprac- 
bne of the 
ie hill. I 
h the plain, 
them to be 


SSRN 


179 [ 174 7 
the bed of a dry salt lake, or marsh, very firm and bare, which was covered 
thickly with a fine white powder, containing a large quantity of carbonate 
of soda, (thirty-three in one hundred parts. ) 

The old pam had been lately burnt off from the surrounding hills, and, 
wherever the fire had passed, there was a recent growth of strong, green, 
and — grass ; and the soil of the level prairie, which sweeps directly 
up to the foot of the surrounding mountains, appears to be very rich, pro- 
ducing flax spontaneously and luxuriantly in various places, 


2nalysis af the Grand Rond soil. 


Silica - - - e- - - - 70,81 
Alumina « . : : : - . - 10,97 
Lime and magnesia . : : - - - 1.38 
Oxide of iron - - - " : - - 2,22 
Vegetable matter, partly decomposed —« - : 8.16 
Water and loss’ - : ° : : e. 5.46 
Phosphate of lime - - : - : 1.0} 

100.00 


The elevation of this encampment is 2,910 feet above the sea. 

October 18,—It began to rain an hour before sunrise, and continued until 
10 o’clock ; the sky entirely overcast, and the temperature at sunrise 48°, 

We resumed our journey somewhat later than usual, travelling in a 
nearly north direction across this beautiful valley ; and about noon reached 
a place on one of the principal streams, where I had determined to leave 
the emigraut trail, in the expectation of finding a more direct and better 
road across the Blue mountains, At this place the emigrants appeared to 
have held some consultation as to their further route, and finally turned 
directly off to the left; reaching the foot of the mountain in about three 
miles, which they ascended by a hill as steep and difficult as that by which 
we had yesterday descended to the Rond. Quitting, therefore, this road, 
which, after a very rough crossing, issues from the mountains by the heads 
of the Umatilah river, we continued our northern course across the valley, 
following an Indian trail which had been indicated to me by Mr, Payette, 
and encamped at the northern extremity of the Grand Rond, on a slough- 
like stream of very deep water, without any apparent current. There are 
some pines here on the low hills at the creek ; and in the northwest corner 
of the Rond isa very heavy body of timber, which descends into the plain. 
The clouds, which had rested very low along the mountain sides during 
the day, rose gradually up in the afternoon; and in the evening the sky 
was almost entirely clear, with a temperature at sunset of 47° Some in- 
different observations placed the camp in longitude 117° 28' 26", latitude 
45° 26' 47"; and the elevation was 2,600 feet above the sea. 

October 19.—This morning the mountains were hidden by fog; there 
was a heavy dew during the night, in which the exposed thermometer at 
daylight stood at 32°, and at sunrise the temperature was 35°. 

We passed out of the Grand Rond by a fine road along the creek, which, 
for a short distance, runs in a kind of rocky chasm. Crossing a low point, 
which was a little rocky, the trail conducted into the open valley of the 
stream—a handsome place for farms ; the soil, even of the hills, being rich 


(174 J 180 


and black. Passing through a point ae bore evidences of 
being much frequented by the Lndians, and in which the trees were some- 
times apparently 200 feet high and 3 to 7 feet in diameter, we halted 
for a few mifutes in the afternoon at the foot of the Blue mountains, on 
a branch of the Grand Rond river, at an elevation of 2,700 feet, Resuming 
our journey, we commenced the ascent of the mountain through an open 
ine forest of large and stately trees, among which the balsam pine made 
{ts appearance ; the road being good, with the exception of one steep ascent, 
with a corresponding descent, Which might both have been easily avoided 
by opening a way fora short distance through the timber. It would have 
been well had we encamped on the stream where we lad halted below, as 
the night overtook us on the mountain, and we were obliged to encamp 
without water, and tie up the animals to the trees for the night. We had 
halted on a sinooth open place of a narrow ridge, which descended very 
rapidly to a ravine or piney hollow, ata considerable distance belaw; and 
it was quite a pretty spot, had there been water near, But the fires at 
night look’very cheerless after a day's march, when there is no preparation 
for supper going on; and, after sitti ig some time around the blazing logs, 
Mr. Preuss and Carson, with several others, volunteered to take the India 
rubber buckets and go down into the ravine in search of water, It wasa 
very difficult way in the darkness down the slippery side of the steep moun- 
tain, and harder still to climb about half a mile up again; but they found 
the water, and the cup of coffee (which it enabled us to make) and bread 
were only enjoyed with greater pleasure. 

At sunset the temperature was 46°; the evening remarkably clear; and 
I obtained an emersion of the first satellite, which does not give a good re- 
sult, although the observation was a very good one. The chronometric 
longitude was 117° 28' 34", latitude 45° 38'07", and we had ascended to 
an elevation of 3,830 feet. It appeared to have snowed yesterday on the 
mountains, their summits showing very white to-day. 

October 20,—There was a heavy white frost during the night, and al 
sunrise the temperature was 37°, 

The animals had eaten nothing during the night ; and we made an early 
start, continuing our route among the pines, which were more dense than 
yesterday, and still retained their magnificent size. The larches cluster 
together in masses on the sides of the mountains, aud their yellow foliage 
contrasts handsomely with the green of the balsam and other pines. After 

a few miles we ceased to see any pines, and the timber consisted of several 
varieties of spruce, larch, and balsam pine, which have a regularly conical 
figure. These trees appeared from 60 to nearly 200 feet in height; the 
usual circumference being 10 to 12 feet, and in the pines sometimes 21 feet. 
In open places near the summit, these trees became Jess high and more 
branching, the conical form having a greater base. The instrument car- 
riage occasioned much delay, it being frequently necessary to fell trees and 
remove the fallen timber. ‘The trail we were following led up a long spur, 
with a very gradual and gentle rise. , 

At the end of three miles, we halted at an open place near the summit, 
from which we enjoyed a fine view over the mountainous country where 
we had lately travelled, to take a barometrical observation at the height of 
1,760 feet. 

After travelling occasionally through open places in the forest, we were 
obliged to cut a way through a dense body of timber, from which we 


tions 7 


the 
\ 
der 
itv 
wh 
thre 
Al 
us j 
mot 
of t 
the 
dep 
whi 
larel 
alow 
to fe 
to be 
were 
erall 
bran 
On 
the i 
sunr 
ant, ¢ 
Tl 
there 
mou 
WAS @ 
verg 
side, 
twee 
forest 
Percé 
cours 
its we 
This 
banks 
dian g 
With 
amor 
tains 
travel 
extens 
dentl 
whicl 
origin 
nia m¢ 
of sed 


ridences of 
vere some- 
we halted 
untains, on 
Resuming 
gh an open 
pine made 
teep ascent, 
ily avoided 
would have 
i below, as 
| to encamp 
1 We had 
conded very 
below; and 
the fires at 
preparation 
blazing logs, 
ke the India 
yr, It wasa 
) steep moun- 
it they found 
») and bread 


ly clear; and 
ive a good re- 
chronometric 
1 ascended to 
erday on the 


night, and al 


ade an early 
e dense than 
arches cluster 
vellow foliage 
r pines. After 
ted of several 
rularly conical 
n height; the 
times 21 feet. 
gh and more 
ystrument car- 
» fell trees and 
p a long spur, 


hr the summit, 
ountry where 
t the height of 


Drest, we were 
bm which we 


rere : — a 


18t 


[ 174 J 


emerged on an open mountain side, where we found a number of small 
springs, and encamped after a day’s journey of 10 miles, Our elevation 
here was 5,000 feet. 

October 21.— There was a very heavy white frost during the night, and 
the thermometer at sunrise was 30°, 

We continued to travel through the forest, in which the road was ren- 
dered difficult by fallen trunks, and obstructed by many small trees, which 
it was necessary to cut down, But these are only accidental difficulties 
which could easily be removed, and a very excellent road may be had 
through this pass, with no other than very moderate ascents or declivities 
A laborious day, which had advanced us only six miles on our road, brow he 
usin the afternoon to an opening in the forest, in which there was a fine 
mountain meadow, with good grass, and a large clear-water stream—one 
of the head branches of the Uma/ilah river. During this day’s ourne 
the barometer was broken; and the elevations above the sea, hereafter aivans 
depend upon the temperature of boiling water, Some of the white spruces 
which I measured to-day were twelve feet in circumference, and one of the 
larches ten; but eight feet was the average circumference of those measured 
along the road, I held in my hand a tape line as I walked along, in order 
to form some correct idea of the size of the timber, ‘Their height appeared 
to be from 100 to 180, and perhaps 200 feet, and the trunks of the larches 
were sometimes 100 feet without a limb; but the white spruces were gen- 
erally covered with branches nearly to the root, All these trees have i 
branches, particularly the lower ones, declining. or 

October 22,—The white frost this morning was like snow on the ground ; 
the ice was a quarter of an inch thick on the creek, and the thermometer at 
sunrise was at 20°, But, in a few hours, the day became warm and pleas- 
ant, and our road over the mountains was delightful and full of onjoyment 

he trail passed sometimes through very thick young timber, in which 

there was much cutting to be done; but, after travelling a few ‘miles the 
mountains became more bald, and we reached a point from which there 
was @ very extensive view in the northwest. We were here on the western 
verge of the Blue mountains, long spurs of which, very precipitous on either 
side, extended down into the valley, the waters of the mountain roaring be- 
tween them. On our right was a mountain plateau, covered with a dense 
forest; and to the westward, immediately below us, was the great Nez 
Percé (pierced nose) prairie, in which dirk lines of timber indicated the 
course of many affluents to a considerable stream that was scen pursuin 
its way across the plain towards what appeared to be the Columbia “iver 
This I knew to be the Walahwalih river, and occasional spots atong its 
banks, which resembled clearings, were supposed to be the mission or In- 
dian settlements ; but the weather was smoky and unfavorable to far views 
with the glass. The rock displayed here in the escarpmeuts is a compact 
amorphous trap, which appears to constitute the mass of the Blue moun- 
tains in this latitude ; and all the region of country through which we have 
travelled since leaving the Snake river has been the seat of violent and 
extensive igneous action. Along the Burnt river valley, the strata are evi- 
dently sedimeytary rocks, altered by the intrusion of volcanic products 
which in some instances have penetrated and essentially changed their 
original condition. Along our line of route from this point to the Califor- 
nia mountains, there seems but little cssential change. | oui specimens 
of sedimentary rocks show them to be much altered, amd olcanic produc- 
tions appear to prevail throughout the whole intervening stance. 


[14] 182 


The road now led along the mountain side, around heads of the precipi. 
tous ravines ; and, keeping men ahead to clear a road, we passed alternately 
through bodies of timber and small open prairies, and encamped ina large 
meadow, in view of the great prairie below, 

At sunset the thermometer was at 40°, and the night was very clear and 
right, Water was only to be had here by descending a bad ravine, into 
which we drove our animals, and had much trouble with them, in a very 
slose growth of small pines, Mr, Preuss had walked ahead, and did not get 
to camp this evening. The trees here maintained their size, and one of the 
black spruces measured 15 fect in circumference, In the neighborhood of 
the camp, pines have reappeared here among: the timber, 

October 23.—The morning was very clear; there had been a heavy 
white frost during the night, and at sunrise the thermometer was at 31°, 

Alter cutting through two thick bodies of timber, in which I noticed some 
small trees of hemlock spruce, (perusse,) the forest became more open, and 
we had no longer any trouble to clear a way, ‘The pines here were 11 or 12 
feet in circumference, andabout 110 feet high, and appeared to love the open 

rounds. ‘The trail now led along one of the long spurs of the mountain, 

escending gradually towards the plain; and after a few miles travelling, we 
emerged finally from the forest, in full view of the plain below, and saw 
the snowy mass of Mount Hood, standing high out above the surrounding 
country, at the distanee of 180 miles. ‘The road along the ridge was ex- 
cellent, and the grass very green and good; the old grass having been burut 
of early in the autumn. About 4 o’clock in the afternoon we reached 
little bottom on the Walahwalah river, where we found Mr. Preuss, who 
yesterday had reached this place, and found himself too far in advance of 
the camp to return. The stream here has just issued from the narrow ra- 
vines, which are walled with precipices, in which the rock has a brown 
and more burnt appearance than above, 

At sunset the thermometer was at 48°; and our position was in longitude 
118° 00' 39', and in latitude 45° 53’ 35", 

The morning was clear, with a temperature at sunrise of 24% Crossing 
the river, we travelled over a hilly country with good bunch grass; the 
river bottom, which generally contains the best soil in other countries, being 
here a sterile level of rock and pebbles. We had found the soil in the Blue 
mountains to be of excellent quality, and it appeared also to be good here 
among the lower hills. Reaching a litthe eminence, over which the trail 
passed, we had an extensive view along the course of the river, which was 
divided and spread over its bottom in a net work of water, receiving 
several other tributaries from the mountains. ‘There was a band of sever: ! 
hundred horses grazing on the hills about two miles ahead; and as we 
advanced on the road we met other bands, which Indians were driving out 
to pasture also on the hills. ‘True to its general character, the reverse of 
other countries, the hillsand mountains here were rich in grass, the bottoms 
barren and sterile, : 

In six miles we crossed a principal fork, below which the scattered water 
of the river was gathered into one channel; and, passing on the way sev- 
eral unfinished houses, and some cleared patches, where cornand potatoes 
were cultivated, we reached, in about eight miles farther, the missionary 
establishment of Dr. Whitman, which consisted, at this time, of one adobe 
house—i. e. built of unburnt bricks, as in Mexico. 

I found Dr. Whitman absent on a visit to the Dadles of the Columbia ; 
but had the pleasure to see a fine-looking large family of emigrants, men; 


oomwet 


wo 
pre 
due 
exp 
ing 
of 
for | 
ever 
hou 
helo 
Tl 
°¢ 
86°. 
fere 
tim 
mou 
fort, 
few 
bia 
1,2 
We 
are t 
the a 
blad 
a pla 
dust 
being 
vailit 
and ¢ 
the g 
been 
deed 
miles 
the t 
had | 


of tw 
nortk 
the ¢ 
open 
stitut 
and | 
of co 
and, 
leadi 
to th 
by tl 
both 
follo: 
wate 
lumt 


| precipi. 
lernately 
na large 


clear and 
rine, inte 
na very 
id not get 
ne of the 
rthood of 


a heavy 
at sy, 
ced some 
pen, and 
sllorile? 
the open 
;wuntain, 
‘ling, we 
and saw 
rounding 
> WAS CX- 
eon burut 
reached & 
Iss, Who 
dvance of 
rrow ra- 
a brown 


longitude 


Crossing 
rass; the 
jes, being 
the Blue 
ood here 
the trail 
hich was 
receiving 
bf severs! 
ind as we 
iving out 
everse of 
b bottoms 


ed water 
ay sev- 
potatoes 
issionary 
ne adobe 


blumbia ; 
nts, men; 


ances 


183 [174] 


women, and ebildren, in robust health, all indemnifying themselves for 
previous scanty fare, in a hearty consumption of potatoes, which are pro- 
duced here of a remarkably good quality, We were disappointed in our 
expectation of obtaining corn meal or flour at this station, the mill belon 
ing to the mission having been lately burntdown; butan abundant supply 
of excellent potatoes banished regrets, and furnished a grateful substitate 
for bread, A small town of N®z Pereé Indians gave an inhabited and 
even a populons — to the station; and, aller remaining about an 
hour, we continued our route, and encamped on the river about four miles 
below, passing on the way an emigrant encampment, 

‘Temperature at sunset, 49°, 

* October 25.—The weather was pleasant, with a sunrise temperature of 
36°, Our road to-day had in it nothing of interest; and the country of- 
fered to the eye only a sandy, undulating plain, through which a scantily 
timbered river takes its course, We hahed about three miles above the 
mouth, on account of grass; and the next morning arrived at the Nez Pereé 
fort, one of the trading establishments of the Hudson Bay Company, a 
few hundred yards above the junction of the Walahwalah with the Colum- 
bia river. Here we had the first view of this river, and found it about 
1,200 yards wide, and presenting the appearance ofa fine navigable stream. 
We made ourcamp in a little grove of willows on the Walahwalah, which 
are the only trees to be seen in the neighborhood; but were obliged to send 
the animals back to the encampment we had left, as there was scarcely a 
blade of grass to be found, ‘The post is on the bank of the Columbia, on 
a plain of bare sands, from which the air was literally filled with clouds of 
dust and sand, during one of the few days we remained here; this place 
being one of the several points on the river which are distinguished for pre- 
vailing high winds, which come from the sea, ‘I'he appearance of the post 
and country was without interest, except that we here saw, for the first time, 
the great river on which the course of events for the last half century has 
been directing attention and conferring historical fame. The river is, in- 
deed, a noble object, and has here attained its fullmagnitude, About nine 
miles above, aad in sight from the heights about the post, is the junction of 
the two great forks which constitute the main stream --ihat on which we 
had been travelling from Fort Hall, and known by the names of Lewis’s 
fork, Shoshonee, and Snake river; and the North fork, which has retained 
the name of Columbia, as being the main stream. 

We did not go up to the junction, being pressed for time; but the union 
of two large streams, coming one from the southeast, and the other from the 
northeast, and meeting in what may be treated as the geographical centre of 
the Oregon valley, thence doubling the volume of water to the ocean, while 
opening two great lines of communication with the interior continent, con- 
stitutes a feature in the map of the country which cannot be overlooked ; 
and it was probably in reference to this junction of waters, and these lines 
of communication, that this post was established. They are important lines, 
and, from the structure of the country, must forever remain so—one of them 
leading to the South Pass, and to the valley of the Mississippi; the other 
to the pass at the head of the Athabasca river, and to the countries drained 
by the waters of the Hudson Bay. The British fur companies now use 
both lines; the Americans, in their emigration to Oregon, have begun to 
follow the one which leads towards the United States. Batteaus from tide 
water ascend to the junction, and thence high up the North fork, or Co- 
lumbia. Land conveyance only is used upon the line of Lewis’s fork. 


[1744 184 


To the emigrants to Oregon, the Nez Percé is a point of interest, as being, 
to those who choose it, the termination of their overland journey. The 
broad expanse of the river here invites them to embark on its bosom; and 
the lofty trees of the forest furnish the means of doing so. 

From the South Pass to this place is about 1,000 miles ; and as itis about 
the same distance from that pass to the Missouri river at the mouth of the 
Kansas, it may be assumed that 2,000 miles#is the necessary land travel in 
crossing from the United States to the Pacific ocean on this line. From the 
mouth of the Great Platte it would be about 100 miles less, | 

Mr. McKiuley, the commander of the post, received us with great civili- 
ty; and both to myself, and the heads of the emigrants who were there at 


the time, extended the rites of hospitality in a comfortable dinner to which - 


he invited us. 

By a meridional altitude of the sun, the only observation that the weather 
permitted us to obtain, the mouth of the Walahwalah river is in latitnde 
46° 03' 46"; and, by the road we had travelled, 612 miles from Fort Hall, 
At the time of our arrival, a considerable body of the emigrants under the 
direction of Mr. Applegate, a man of considerable resolution and energy, had 
nearly completed the building of a number of Mackinaw boats, in which 
they proposed to continue their further voyage down the Columbia. I had 
seen, in descending the Walahwalah river, a fine drove of several hundred 
cattle, which they had exchanged for Californian cattle, to be received at 
Vancouver, and which are considered a very inferior breed. ‘The other 
portion of the emigration had preferred to complete their journey by land 
along the Yanks of the Columbia, taking their stock and wagons with them. 

Having reinforced our animals witn eight fresh horses, hired from the 
post, and increased our stock of provisions with dried salmon, potatoes, and 
a little beef, we resumed our journey down the left bank of the Columbia, 
being guided on our road by an intelligent Indian boy, whom I had en- 
gaged to accompany us as far as the Dalles, 

The sketch of a rock which we passed in the course of the morning 
is annexed, to show the manner in which the basaltic rock, which consti- 
tutes the geological formation of the Columbia valley, now presents itself. 
From an elevated point over which the road led, we obtained another far 
view of Mount Hood, 150 miles distant. We obtained on the river bank an 
observation of thesun at noon, which gave for the latitude 45° 58' 0S". The 
country to-day was very unprepossessing, aud our road bad; and as we 
toiled slowly along through deep loose sands, and over tragments of black 
volcanic rock, our laborious travelling was strongly contrasted with the 
rapid progress of Mr. Applegate's fleet of boats, which suddenly came glid- 
ing swiftly down the broad river, which here chanced to be tranquil and 
smooth. At evening we encamped on the river bank, where there was 
very little grass, and less timber. We frequently met Indians on the road, 
and they were collected at every favorable spot along the river. 

October 29.-—The road continued along the river, and in the course of 
the day Mount St. Helens, another snowy peak of the Cascade range, was 
visible. We crossed the Umatilah river at a fall near its mouth. This. 
stream is of the same class as the Walahwalah river, with a bed of volcanic 
rock, in places split into fissures. Our encampment was similar to that of 
yesterday; there was very little grass, and no wood. The Indians brought 
us some pieces for sale, which were purchased to make our fires. 

October 31.—By observation, our camp is in latitude 45° 50' 05", and 


baypru re | a> 


fb NE MS 


ast, as being, 
irney. The 
bosom; and 


as itis about 
nouth of the 
ind travel in 
. Fromthe 


great civili- 
ere there at 
ler to which: 


the weather 
s in latitude 
m Fort Hall. 
(s under the 
energy, had 
ts, in which 
mbia. I had 
ral hundred 
received at 

The other 
hey by land 
s with them. 
ed from the 
Otatoes, and 
e Columbia, 
n I had en- 


he morning 
hich consti- 
esents itself. 
another far 
rer bank an 
8' 0S". The 
and as we 
its of black 
bd with the 

came glid- 
ranquil and 
b there was 
n the road, 


e course of 
range, was 
uth. This 
of volcanic. 
r to that of 
ns brought 
S. 

b' 05", and 


T1IH 


a 


it 


310 


on) 


qViabri peasy 


YVNWNTOD 


1171VvVS V& 


longitud 
frost this 
24°. Ti 
usual sit 
rising sv 
clouds, | 
peak of 
all day i 
Our roac 
party of 
and forn 
ressed | 
anguagt 
We cc 
with mi 
islands, : 
wood; 1 
section i 
the appe 
lumnar | 
ments st 
We m 
tridenta 
very gov 
Nover 
the air i 
river, an 
tous roc. 
On th 
the rive 
appearal 
Nover 
room fo 
among t 
a great i 
soil was 
broken i 
John Da 
bed of re 
of all the 
deserves 
on the ri 
which h 
halted fc 
water. 
had bee! 
been wa 
for the n 
Noven 
covered 
scended 
road, an 


ot TA 1 


185 C 174] 


longitude 119° 22' 18", The night has been cold, and we have white 
frost this morning, with a temperature at daylight of 25°, and at sunrise of 
24°, The early morning was very clear, and the stars bright; but, as 
usual since we are on the Columbia, clouds formed immediately with the 
rising sun. The day continued fine, the east being covered with scattered 
clouds, but the west remaining clear; showing the remarkable cone-like 
peak of Mount Hood brightly drawn against the sky. This was in view 
all day in the southwest, but no other peaks of the range were visible. 
Our road was a bad one, of very loose deep sand. We met on the way a 
party of Indians unusually well dressed, wearing clothes of civilized texture 
and form. They appeared intelligent, and, in our slight intercourse, im- 
ressed me with the belief that they possessed some aptitude for acquiring 
anguages, 

We continued to travel along the river, the stream being interspersed 
with many sand bars (it being the season of low water) and with many 
islands, and an apparently good navigation. Small willows were the only 
wood; rock and sand the prominent geological feature. The rock of this 
section is a very compact and tough basalt, occurring in strata which have 
the appearance of being broken into fragments, assuming the form of co- 
lumnar hills, and appearing always in escarpments, with the broken frag- 
ments strewed at the base and over the adjoining country. 

We made a late encampment on the river, and used to-night purshia 
tridentata for fire wood. Among the rocks which formed the bank, was 
very good green grass. Latitude 45° 44' 23", longitude 119° 45' 09". 

November 1.—Mount Hood is glowing in the sunlight this morning, and 
the air is pleasant, with a temperature of 38°. We continued down the 
river, and, passing through a pretty green valley, bounded by high precipi- 
tous rocks, encamped at the lower end. 

On the right shore, the banks of the Columbia are very high and steep; 
the river is 1,690 feet broad, and dark bluffs of rock give it a picturesque 
appearance. 

November 2.—The river here entered among bluffs, leaving no longer 
room for a road; and we accordingly left it, and took a more inland way 
among the river hills; on which we had no sooner entered, than we found 
a great improvement in the country. The sand had disappeared, and the 
soil was good, and covered with excellent grass, although the surface was 
broken into high hills, with uncommonly deep valleys. At noon we crossed 
John Day’s river, a clear and beautiful stream, with a swift current and a 
bed of rolled stones. It is sunk in a deep valley, which is characteristic 
of all the streams in this region; and the hill we descended to reach it well 
deserves the name of mountain. Some of the emigrants had encamped | 
on the river, and others at the summit of the. farther hill, the ascent of 
which had probably cost their wagons a day’s labor; and others again had 
halted for the night a few miles beyond, where they had slept without 
water. We also encamped in a grassy hollow without water; but as we 
had been forewarned of this privation by the guide, the animals had all 
been watered at the river, and we had brought with us a sufficient quantity 
for the night. 

November 3.—After two hours’ ride through a fertile, hilly country, 
covered as all the upland here appears to be with good green grass, we de- 
scended again into the river bottom, along which we resumed our sterile 
road, and in about four miles reached the ford of the Fall river, (Rivitre 


i| [ 174 ] 186 


aux Chutes,) a considerable tributary to the Columbia, We had heard, on be 
reaching the Nez Percé fort, a repetition of the account in regard to the 
unsettled character of the Columbia Indians at the present time; and to 

our little party they had at various points manifested a not very friendly 
disposition, in several attempts to steal our horses. At this place I expected 

to find a badly disposed band, who had plundered a party of 14 emigrant 

men a few days before, and taken away their horses ; and accordingly we 

made the necessary preparations for our security, but happily met with no 
difficulty. 

The river was high, divided into several arms, with a rocky island at its 
outlet into the Columbia, which at this place it rivalled in size, and ap- 
parently deserved its highly characteristic name, which is received from ¥ 
one of its many falls some forty miles up the river, It entered the Colum. 
bia with a roar of falls and rapids, and is probably a favorite fishing station 
among the Indians, with whom both banks of the river were populous; 
but they scarcely paid any attention to us, The ford was very ditficult at 
this time, and, had they entertained any bad intentions, they were offered a 
good opportunity to carry them out, as I drove directly into the river, and 
during the crossing the howitzer was occasionally several feet under water, 
and a number of the men appeared to be more often below than above. 

Our guide was well acquainted with the ford, and we succeeded in getting 
every thing safe over to the left bank. We delayed here only a short time 
to put the gun in order, and, ascending a long mountain hill, left both 
rivers, and resumed our route again among the interior hills. ; 

The rour of the Falls of the Columbia is heard from the heights, where bec 
we halted a few moments to enjoy a fine view of the river below. In the ! ple 
season of high water it would he a very interesting object to visit, in order onl 
to witness what is related of the annual submerging of the fall under the me 
waters which back up from the basin below, constituting a great natural wh 
lock at this place. Buttime had become an object of serious consideration ; in 
and the Falls, in their present state, had been seen and described by many. ‘| 

After a day’s journey of 17 miles, we encamped among the hills ona of 1 
little clear stream, where, as usual, the Indians immediately gathered round rou 
us. Among them was a very old man, almost blind from age, with long \ 
and very white hair. I happened of my own accord to give this old man can 
a present of tobacco, and was struck with the impression which my un- cha 
propitiated notice made on the Indians, who appeared in a remarkable man- othe 
ner acquainted with the real value of goods, and to understand the equiva- | hos, 
lents of trade. At evening, one of them spoke a few words to his people, cou 
and, telling me that we need entertain no uneasiness in regard to our ani- T 
mals, as none of them would be disturbed, they went all quietly away. In with 
the morning, when they again came to the camp, I expressed to them the and 
gratification we felt at their reasonable conduct, making them a present of ville 
some large knives and a few smaller articles. ino 

November 4.—The road continued among the hills, and, reaching an O 
eminence, we saw before us in a little green valley, watered by a clear voly 
stream, a tolerably large valley, through which the trail passed. ing | 

In comparison with the Indians of the Rocky mountains and the great alon 
eastern plain, these are disagreeably dirty in their habits. Their huts were mou 
crowded with half-naked women and children, and the atmosphere within thre 


any thing but pleasant to persons who had just been riding in the fresh : diate 
morning air. We were somewhat amused with the scanty dress of one wale 


J,on 
» the 
id to 
mndly 
ected 
grant 
y we 
th no 


at its 
1 ap- 

from 
olum- 
tation 
lous; 
sult at 
ered a 
r, and 
water, 
nbove. 
yetting 
rt time 
t both 


where 
In the 
1 order 
er the 
ratural 
ration 5 
many. 
ls ona 
round 
h long 
Id man 
ny un- 
@ man- 
quiva- 
eople, 
ur ani- 
y. In 
m the 
sent of 


hing an 
nA clear 


e great 
ts were 
within 
e fresh 
of one 


187 C 174 J 


woman, who, in common with the others, rushed out of the huts on our 

arrival, apd who, in default of other covering, used a child for a fig leaf, 

The road in about half an hour passed near an elevated point, from 
which we overlooked the valley of the Columbia for many miles, and saw 
in the distance several houses surrounded by fields, which a chief, who had 
accompanied us from the village, pointed out to us as the Methodist mis- 
sionary station, 

In a few miles we descended to the river, which we reached at one of 
its remarkably interesting features, known as the Dalles of the Columbia. 
The whole volume of the river at this place passed between the walls of a 
chasm, which has the appearance of having been rent through the basaltic 
strata which form the valley rock of the region. At the narrowest place 
we found the breadth, by measurement, 58 yards, and the average height 
of the walls above the water 25 feet; forming a trough between the 
19cks—whence the name, probably applied by a Canadian voyageur. The 
mass of water, in the present low state of the river, passed swiftly between, 
deep and black, and curled into many small whirlpools and counter cur- 
rents, but unbroken by foam, and so still that scarcely the sound of a ripple 
was heard. ‘The rock, for a considerable distance from the river, was 
worn over a large portion of its surface into circular holes and well-like 
cavities, by the abrasion of the river, which, at the season of high waters, 
is spread out over the adjoining bottoms. 

In the recent passage through this chasm, an unfortunate event had oc- 
curred to Mr. Applegate’s party, in the loss of one of their boats, which had 
been carried under water in the midst of the Dalles, and two of Mr. Ap- 
plegate’s children and one man drowned. ‘This misfortune was attributed 
only to want of skill in the steersman, as at this season there is no impedi- 
ment to navigation ; although the place is entirely impassable at high water, 
when boat®pass safely over the great falls above, in the submerged state 
in which they then find themselves. 

The basalt here is precisely the same as that which constitutes the rock 
of the valley higher up the Columbia, being very compact, with a few 
round cavities. 

We passed rapidly three or four miles down the level valley, and en- 
camped near the mission. The character of the forest growth here 
changed, and we found ourselves, with pleasure, again among oaks and 
other forest trees of the east, to which we had long been strangers; and the 
hospitable and kind reception with which we were welcomed among our 
country people at the mission aided the momentary illusion of home. 

Two good-looking wooden dwelling houses, and a large school house, 
with stables, barn, and garden, and large cleared fields between the houses 
and the river bank, on which were scattered the wooden huts of an Indian 
village, gave to the valley the cheerful and busy air of civilization, and had 
in our eyes an appearance of abundant and enviable comfort. 

Our land journey found here its western termination. The delay in- 
volved in getting our camp to the right bank of the Columbia, and in open- 
ing a road through the continuous forest to Vancouver, rendered a journey 
along the river impracticable; and on this side the usual road across the 
mountain required strong and fresh animals, there being an interval of 
three days in which they could obtain no food. I therefore wrote imme- 
diately to Mr. Fitzpatrick, directing him to abandon the carts at the Walah- 
walah missionary station, and, as soon as the necessary pack saddles could 


r 174 J 188 


be made, which his party required, meet me at the Dalles, from which point 
I proposed to commence our homeward journey, The day after our ar- 
rival being Sunday, no business could be done at the mission; but on 
Monday Mr. Perkins assisted me in procuring from the Indians a large ca- 
noe, in which I designed to complete our journey to Vancouver, where I 
expected to obtain the necessary supply of provisions and stores for our 
winter journey. Three Indians, from the family to whom the canoe be- 
longed, were engaged to assist in working her during the voyage, and, with 
them, our water party consisted of Mr. Preuss and myself, with Bernier and 
Jacob Dodson. In charge of the party which was to remain at the Dalles 
I left Carson, with instructions to occupy the people in making pack saddles 
and refitting their equipage. The village from which we were to take the 
canoe was on the right bank of the river, about ten miles below, at the 
mouth of the Tinanens creek; and while Mr. Preuss proceeded down the 
river with the instruments, in a little canoe paddled by two Indians, Mr. 
Perkins accompanied me with the remainder of the party by land. The 
last of the emigrants had just left the Dalles at the time of our arrival, trav- 
elling some by water and others by land, making ark-like rafts, on which 
they had embarked their families and household, with their large wagons 
and other furniture, while their stock were driven along the shore. 

For about five miles below the Dalles, the river is narrow, and probably 
very deep ; but during this distance it is somewhat open, with grassy bot- 
toms on the left, Entering, then, among the lower mountains of the Cas- 
cade range, it assumes a general character, and high and steep rocky hills 
shut it in on either side, rising abruptly in places to the height of 1,500 
feet above the water, and gradually acquiring a more mountainous char- 
acter as the river approaches the Cascades, 

After an hour’s travel, when the stn was nearly down, we searched along 
the shore for a pleasant place, and halted to prepare supper. W@had been 
well supplied by our friends at the mission with delicions salted salmon, 
which had been taken at the fattest season ; also, with potatoes, bread, cof- 
fee, and sugar. We were delighted at a change in our mode of travelling 
and living. The canoe sailed smoothly down the river: at night we en- 
camped upon the shore, and a plentiful supply of comfortable provisions 
supplied the first of wants. We en‘oved the contrast which it presented to 
our late toilsome marchings, our wight watchings, and our frequent priva- 
tion of food. We were a motley group, but all happy: three unknown In- 
dians; Jacob, a colored man; Mr. Preuss, a German; Bernier, creole 
French ; and myself. 

Being now upon the ground explored by the South Sea expedition under 
Captain Wilkes, and having accomplished the object of uniting my survey 
with his, and thus presenting a connected exploration from the Mississippi 
to the Pacific, and the winter being at hand, [ deemed it necessary to econ- 
omize time by voyaging in the night, as is customary here, to avoid the 
high winds, which rise with the morning, and decline with the day. 

Accordingly, after an hour’s halt, we again embarked, and resumed our 
pleasant voyage down the river. ‘The wind rose to a gale after several 
hours; but the moon was very bright, and the wind was fair, and the canoe 
glanced rapidly down the stream, the waves breaking into foam alongside; 
and our night voyage, as the wind bore us rapidly along between the dark 
mountains, was wild and interesting. About midnight we put to the shore 
on a rocky beach, behind which was a dark-looking pine forest. We built 


a lm 


eo ef tes == TH es = ot ol CUceelCUmrrrlUCU 


h point 
our ar- 
but on 
rge ca- 
here I 
for our 
noe be- 
d, with 
jer and 
. Dalles 
saddles 
ake the 
y at the 
wh the 
ns, Mr. 
|. The 
il, trav- 
1 which 
wagons 


robably 
ssy bot- 
he Cas- 
ky hills 
t’ 1,500 

s char- 


d along 
ad been 
salmon, 
pad, cof- 
avelling 

we che 
ovisions 
ented to 
t priva- 

wn In- 
, creole 


n under 
survey 
ssissippi 
to econ 
oid the 


1ed our 
several 
e canoe 
pngside ; 
he dark 
he shore 

e built 


189 [ 174] 


up large fires cada the rocks, which were in large masses round about; 
and, arranging our blankets on the most sheltered places we could find, 
passed a delightful night. 

After an early breakfast, at daylight we resumed our journey, the weather 
being clear and beautiful, and the river smooth and still. On either side 
the mountains are all pine-timbered, rocky, and high. We were now ap- 
proaching one of the marked features of the lower Columbia, where the 
river forms a great cascade, with a series of rapids, in breaking through the 
range of mountains to which the lofty peaks of Mount Hood and St. Helens 
belong, aud which rise as great pillars of snow on either side of the passage. 
The main branch of the Sacramendo river, and the Tlamath, issue in cas- 
cades from this range; and the Columbia, breaking through it in a succes- 
sion of cascades, gives the idea of cascades to the whole range; and hence 
the name of the Cascapge Ranoe, which it bears, and distinguishes it from 
the Coast Range lower down, In making a short turn to the south, the river 
forms the cascades in breaking over a point of agglomerated masses of rock, 
leaving a handsome bay to the right, with several rocky pine-covered 
islands, and the mountains sweep at a distance around a cove where several 
small streams enter the bay. In less than an hour we halted on the left 
bank, about five minutes’ walk above the cascades, where there were several 
Indian huts, and where our guides signified it was customary to hire Indians 
to assist in making the portage. When travelling with a beat as light as 
a canoe, which may easily be carried on the shoulders of the Indians, this 
is much the better side of the river for the portage, as the ground here is 
very good and level, being a handsome bejiom, which I remarked was 
covered (as was now always the case along the river) with a growth of 
green and fresh-looking grass, It was long before we could come to an un- 
derstanding withthe Indians ; but at length, when they had first received 
the price of their assistance in goods, they went vigorously to work; and, 
in a shorter time than had been occupied in making our arrangements, 
the canoe, instruments, and baggage, were carried through (a distance of 
about half a mile) to the bank below the main cascade, where we again em- 
barked, the water being white with foam among ugly rocks, and boiling 
into a thousand whirlpools. The boat passed with great rapidity, crossing 
and recrossing in the eddies of the current. After passing through about 2 
miles of broken water, we ran some wild-looking rapids, which are called 
the Lower Rapids, being the last on the river, which below is tranquil and 
smooth—a broad, magnificent stream. On a low broad point on the right 
bank of the river, at the lower end of these rapids, were pitched many 
tents of the emigrants, who were waiting here for their friends from above, 
or for boats and provisions which were expected from Vancouver. In our 
passage down the rapids, I had noticed their camps along the shore, or 
transporting their goods across the portage. This portage makes a head 
of navigation, ascending the river. |! is about two miles in length; ani 
above, to the Dalles, is 45 miles of sto. h and good navigation. 

We glided on without further interruj..on between very rocky and high 
steep mountains, which sweep along t'« river valley ata little distance, 
covered with forests of pine, and showing occasionally lofty escarpments of 
red rock. Nearer, the shore is bordered by steep escarped hills and huge 
vertical rocks, from which the waters of the mountain reach the riverin a 
varicty of beautiful falls, sometimes several hundred feet in height. Occa- 
sionally along the river occurred pretty bottoms, covered with the greenest 


[ 174] 190 


verdure of the spring. To a professional farmer, however, it does not offer 
many places of sufficient extent to be valuable for agriculture; and after 
passing a few miles below the Dalles, I had scarcely seen a place on the 
south shore where wagons could get to the river, The beauty of the 
scenery was heightened by the continuance of ye: delightful weather, re- 
sembling the Indian summer of the Atlantic. A few miles below the cas- 
cades we passed a singular isolated hill; and in the course of the next six 
miles occurred five very pretty falls from the heights on the left bank, one 
of them being of a very picturesque character; and towards sunset we 
reached a remarkable point of rocks, distinguished, on account of prevailing 
high winds, and the delay it frequently occasions to the canoe navigation, 
by the name of Cape Horn. It borders the river in a high wall of rock, 
which comes boldly down into deep water ; and in violent gales down the 
river, and from the opposite shore, which is the prevailing direction of 
strong winds, the water is dashed against it with considerable violence. It 
appears to form a serious obstacle to canoe travelling; and I was informed 
by Mr. Perkins, that in a voyage up the river he had been detained two 
weeks at this place, and was finally obliged to return to Vancouver. 

The winds of this region deserve a particular study. They blow in cur- 
rents, which show them to be governed by fixed laws; and it is a problem 
how far they may come from the mountains, or from the ocean through the 
breaks in che Mountains which let out the river. 

The hills here bad lost something of their rocky appearance, and had 
already begun to deen? As the sun went down, we searched along the 
river for an inviting spot; uit, finding a clean rocky beach, where some 
large dry trees were lying on the ground, Wwe ran our boat to the shore ; 
ae, after another comfortable supper, piviizhed our way along the river in 
darkness, Heavy clouds covered the sky this evening, and the wind began 
to sweep in gusts among the trees, as if bad weather were coming. As we 
advanced, the hills on both sides grew constantly lower; on the right, re- 
treating from the shore, and forming a somewhat extensive bottom of luter- 
mingled prairie and wooded land. {n the course of a few hours, and op- 
posite to a small stream coming in from the north, called the Zea Prairie 
river, the highlands on the left declined to the plains, and three or four miles 
below disappeared entirely on both sides, and the river entered the low 
country. The river had gradually expanded ; and when we emerged trom 
the highlands, the opposite shores were so distant as to appear indistinct in 
the uncertainty of the light. About 10 0’clock our pilots halted, apparently to 
confer about the course ; and, after a little hesitation, pulled directly across 
an open expansion of the river, where the waves were somewhat rough for 
a canoe, the wind blowing very fresh. Much to our surprise, a few min- 
utes after'vards we ran aground. Backing off our boat, we made repeated 
trials at various places to cross what appeared to be a point of shifting sand 
bars, where we had attempted to shorten the way by a cut-off. Finally, one 
of our Indians got iuto the water, and waded about until he found a channel 
sufficiently deep, through which we wound along after him, and in a few 
minutes again entered the deep water below. As we paddled rapidly down 
the river, we heard the noise of a saw mill at work on the right bank ; and, 
letting our boat float quietly down, we listened with pleasure to the unusual 
sounds; and before midnight encamped on the bank of the river, about a 
mile above Fort Vancouver. Our fine dry weather had given place to a 
dark cloudy night. At midnight it began to rain; and we found ourselves 


2 ool LET I ye 


the | 
dail 
it co 
Nec 
kind 
assis 
othe 


com 
niece 
Per 
alre 
tain 
had 
foul 
pos 

I 
wel 
to | 
of 
ern 
geo 
sea 
wh 


10t offer 
nd after 
e on the 
' of the 
ther, re- 
the cas- 
next six 
ik, one 
nset we 
evailing 
igation, 
ot rock, 
wn the 
stion of 
once, It 
formed 
ied two 
r. 

in cur- 
roblem 
ugh the 


nd had 
ong the 
‘e some 
shore ; 
river in 
| began 
As we 
nhit, re- 
f inter- 
nd op- 
Prairie 
r miles 
he low 
d trom 
inct in 
utly to 
across 
igh for 
Vv min- 
peated 
g sand 
ly, one 
nannel 
a few 
down 
; and, 
usual 
pout a 
etoa 
selves 


=. -  EPG pe 


191 [ 174] 


suddenly in the gloomy and humid season, which, in the narrow region 
ijing between the Pacific and the Cascade mountains, and for a considerable 
dared along the coast, su plies the place of winter. 

In the moriii:g, the first object that attracted my attention was the barque 
Coluibia, lying at anchor near the landing. She was about to start on her 
voyage to sshgland, and Was now ready for sea; being detained only in 
waiting the arriva! of the express batteaus, which descend the Columbia 
and its north fork with {!¢ overland mail from Canada and Hudson’s bay 
which had been delayed beyoitd their usual time. 1 immediately waited 


upon Dr. McLaughlin, the executive officer of the Hudson Bay yo agi 
, who received me with the 


in the territory west of the Rocky mountai!’» ‘ IS Wee 
courtesy and hospitality for which he has been eminently distinguished, 
and which makes a forcible and delightful impression 9" 4 traveller from 
the long wilderness from which we had issued. I was imisf diately sup- 
plied by him with the necessary stores and provisions to refit ana .!'pport 
Iny party in our contemplated winter journey to the States; and also wn 
a Mackinaw boat and canoes, manned with Canadian and Iroquois voya- 
geurs and Indians, for their transportation to the Dalles of the Columbia. 
In addition to this efficient kindness in furnishing me with these necessar 
supplies, I received from him a warm and gratifying sympathy in the suf- 
fering which his great experience led him to anticipate for us in our home- 
ward journey, and a letter of recommendation and credit for any officers 
of the Hudson Bay Company into whose posts we might be driven by 
unexpected misfortune. , 

Of course, the future supplies for my party were paid for, bills on the 
Government of the United States being readily taken; but every hospitable 
attention was extended to me, and I accepted an invitation to take a room 
in the fort, “and to make myself at home while 1 staid.” 

I found many American emigrants at the fort, others had already crossed 
the river into their land of promise—the Walahmette valley. Others were 
daily arriving; and all of them had been furnished with shelter, so far as 
it could be afforded by the buildings connected with the establishment. 
Necessary clothing and provisions (the latter to be afterwards returned in 
kind from the produce of their labor) were also furnished. This friendly 
assistance was of very great value to the emigrants, whose familf®s were 
otherwise exposed to much suffering in the winter rains, which had now 
commenced, at the same time that they were in want of all the common 
necessaries of life. Those who had taken a water conveyance at the Nez 
Percé fort continued to arrive safely, with no other accident than has been 
already mentioned. The party which had passed over the Cascade moun- 
tains were reported to have lost a number of their animals; and those who 
had driven their stock down the Columbia had brought them safely in, and 
found for them a ready and very profitable market, and were already pro- 
posing to return to the States in the spring for another supply. 

In the space of two days our preparations had been completed, and we 
were ready to set out on our return, It would have been very gratifying 
to have gone down to the Pacific, and, solely in the interest and in the love 
of geography, to have seen the ocean on the western as well as on the east- 
ern side of the continent, so as to give a satisfactory completeness to the 
geographical picture which had been formed in our minds; but the rainy 
season had now regularly set in, aud the air was filled with fogs and rain, 
which left no beauty in any scenery, and obstructed observations. The 


( 172] 192 


object of my instructions had been entirely fulfilled in having connected 
our reconnoissance with the surveys of Captain Wilkes; and although it 
would have been agreeable and satisfactory to terminate here also our 
ruder astronomical observations, | was not, for such a reason, justified to 
make a delay in waiting for favorable weather, 

Near sunset of the 10th, the boats left the fort, and encamped after 
making only a few miles. Our flotilla consisted of a Mackinaw barge and 
three canoes—one of them that in which we had descended the river; and 
a party in allof 20 men. One of the emigrants, Mr, Burnet, of Missouri, 
whe had left his family and pronerty ui the Dalles, availed himself of the 
opportunity afforded by the revurn of our boats to bring them down to 
Vansoutes. This genilevian,as well as the Messrs, Applegate, and others 
of the emigrants wiiom I saw, possessed intelligence and character, with 
the moral and intellectual stamina, as well as the enterprise, which give 
solidity and respectability to the foundation of colonies, 

November 11,—The morning was rainy and misty. We did not move 
with the practised celerity of my own camp; and it was near 9 o'clock 
when our motley crew had finished their breakfast and were ready to start. 
Once afloat, however, they worked steadily und well, and we advanced at 
a good rate up the river; and in the afternoon a breeze sprung up, which 
enabled us to add a sail to the oars. At evening we encamped ona warm- 
looking beach, on the right bank, at the foot of the high river hill, immedi- 
ately at the lower end of Cape Horn, On the a atone shore is said to be 
a singular hole in the mountain, from which the Indians believe comes the 
wind producing these gales, Itis called the Devil’s hole; and the Indians, 
I was told, have been resolving to send down one of their slaves to explore 
the region below. At dark, the wind shifted into its stormy quarter, gradu- 
ally increasing to a gale from the southwest; and the sky becoming clear, 
I obtained a good observation of an emersion of the first satellite; the result 
of which, being an absolute observation, I have adopted for the longitude 
of the place. 

November 12.—The wind during the night had increased to so much 
violence, that the broad river this morning was angry and white; the 
waves breaking with considerable force against this rocky wall of the cape. 
Our @d Iroquois pilot was unwilling to risk the boats around the point, 
and I was not disposed to hazard the stores of our voyage for the delay of 
aday. Further observations were obtained during the day, giving for the 
latitude of the place 45° 33'09"; and the longitude, obtained from the 
satellite, is 122° 6' 15". 

Novemher 13.—We had a day of disagreeable and cold rain; and, late 
in the afternoon, began to appr ach the rapids of the cascades. There is 
here a high timbered island on the left shore, below which, in descending, 
I had remarked in a bluff on the river the extremities of trunks of trees 
appearing to be imbedded in the rock. Landing here this afternoon, I 
found in the lower part of the escarpment a stratum of coal and forest 
trees, imbedded between strata of altered clay containing the remains of 
vegetables, the leaves of which indicate that the plants were dicotyledonous. 
Among these, the stems of some of the ferns are not mineralized, but merely 
charred, retaining still their vegetable structure and substance; and in this 
condition a portion also of the trees remain. The indurated appearance 
and compactness of the strata, as well, perhaps, as the mineralized condi- 
tion of the coal, are probably due to igneous action. Some portions of the 


boa 
rock 
belc 
the 


wer 
we 
gun 
the 
pou 
muc' 
the : 
us § 
sant 
appe 
C 
bein 
uppé 
sittit 
salm 
the ¢ 
cous 
bone 
orna 
from 
Indi 
T 
neig 
cove 
abe 
rock 
rapi 
lav 
T 
trary 
to a 
and 
glo 
are 
the 
fea 
\ 
fou 
at ( 
‘we 


g connected 
although it 
ere also our 
» justified to 


imped after 
v barge and 
y river; and 
of Missouri, 
nself of the 
im down to 
, and others 
racter, with 
which give 


id not move 
ar 9 o’clock 
ady to start. 
rdvanced at 
z up, which 
ona Warm- 
ill, immedi- 
8 said to be 
e comes the 
the Indians, 
3 to explore 
rter, gradu- 
ming clear, 
; the result 
ec longitude 


to so much 
white ; the 
bf the cape. 
I the point, 
ie delay of 
ing for the 

from the 


; and, late 
There is 
escending, 
‘s of trees 
ternoon, I 
and forest 
emains of 
ledonous. 
but merely 
nd in this 
pearance 
ved condi- 
ons of the 


193 [ 174} 


coal precisely resemble in aspect the cannel coal of England, and, with the 
accompanying fossils, have been referred to the tertiary formation. 

These strata appear to rest upon a mass of agglomerated rock, being but 
a few feet above the water of the river; and over them is the escarpment 
of perhaps eighty feet, rising gradually in the rear towards the mountains, 
The wet and cold evening, and near approach of night, prevented me from 
making any other than a very slight examination, 

The current was now very swift, and we were obliged to cordedle the 
boat along the left shore, where the bank was covered with large masses of 
rocks, Night overtook us at the upper end of the island, a short distance 
below the cascades, and we halted on the open point, In the mean time 
the lighter canoes, paddled altogether by Indians, had passed ahead, and 
were out of sight. With them was the lodge, which was the ouly shelter 
we had, with most of the bedding and provisions, We shouted, and fired 
guns; but all to no purpose, as it, was impossible for them to hear above 
the roar of the river; and we remained all night without shelter, the rain 
pouring down all the time. ‘The old et a did not appear to mind it 
much, but covered themselves up as well as they could, and lay down on 
the sand beach, where they remained quiet until morning. The rest of 
us spent a rather miserable night; and, to add to our discomfort, the inces- 
sant rain extinguished our fires; and we were glad whep at last daylight 
appeared, and we again embarked, 

Crossing to the right bank, we corded/ed the boat along the shore, there 
being no longer any use for the paddles, and put into a little bay below the 
upper rapids, Here we found the lodge pitched, and about twenty Indians 
sitting around a blazing fire within, making a luxurious breakfast with 
salmon, bread, butter, sugar, coffee, and other provisions. In the forest, on 
the edge of the high blut! overlooking the river, is an Indian grave yard, 
cousisting of a collection of tombs, in each of which were the scattered 
bones of many skeletons. ‘The tombs were made of boards, which were 
ornamented with many figures of men and animals of the natural size— 
from their appearance, constituting the armorial device by which, among 
Indians, the chiefs are usually known. 

The masses of rock displayed along the shores of the ravine in the 
neighborhood of the casgades are clearly volcanic products. . Between this 
cove, which I called Grave-yard bay, and another spot of smooth water 
above, on the right, called Liders bay, sheltered by a jutting point of huge 
rocky masses at the foot of the cascades, the shore along the intervening 
rapids is lined with precipices of distinct strata of red and variously colored 
lavas, in inclined positions. 

The masses of rock forming the point at Liders bay consist of a porous 
trap, or busalt—a volcanic product of a modern period. The rocks bel6ng 
to agglomerated masses, which form the immediate ground of the cascades, 
and have been already mentioned as constituting a bed of cemented con- 
glomerate rocks appearing at various places along the river. Here they 
are scattered along the shores, and through the bed of the river, wearing 
the character of convulsion, which forms the impressive and prominent 
feature of the river at this place. 

Wherever we came in contact with the rocks of these mountains, we 
found them volcanic, which is probably the character of the range; and 
at this time, two of the great snowy cones, Mount Regnier and St, Helens, 
were in action. On the 23d of the preceding November, St. Helens had 

13 


7 


(174 J 194 


scattered its ashes, like a light fall of snow, over the Dalles of the Colum. 
bia, 50 miles distant, A specimen of these ashes was given to me by Mr, 
Brewer, one of the clergymen at the Dalles, 

The lofty range of the Cascade mountains forms a distinct boundary be- 
tween the opposite climates of the regions ~long its western and eastern 
bases, On the west, they present a barrier to the clouds of fog and rain 
which roll up from the Pacific ocean and beat against their rugged sides, 
forming the rainy season of the winter in the country along the coast, 
Into the brighter skies of the region slong their eastern base, this rainy 
winter never penetrates; and at the Dalles of the Columbia the rainy 
season is unknown, the brief winter being limited to a period of about two 
months, during which the earth is covered with the slight snows of a 
climate remarkably mild for so high a latitude, The Cascade range has 
an average distance of about 190 miles from the sea coast, It extends far 
both north and south of the Columbia, and is indicated to the distant ob- 
server, both in course and position, by the lofly volcanic peaks which rise 
ont of it, and which are visible to an immense distance, 

During several days of constant rain, it kept our whole force laboriously 
employed in getting our barge and canoes to the upper end of the cascades, 
The portage ground was occupied by emigrant families; their thin and in- 
sufficient clothing, bare-headed and bare-footed children, attesting the 
length of their journey, and showing that they had, in many instances, set 
out without a due preparation of what was indispensable, 

A gentleman named Liders, a botanist from the city of Hamburg, ar- 
rived at the bay J have calied by his name while we were occupied in bring- 
ing up the boats, 1 was delighted to meet at such a place a man of kindred 
pursuits; but we had only the pleasure of a brief conversation, as his canoe, 
under the guidance of two Indians, was about to run the rapids; and [ 
could not enjoy the satisfaction of regaling him with a breakfast, which, 
after his recent journey, would have been an extraordinary luxury, All 
of his few instruments and baggnge were in the canoe, and he hurried 
around by land to meet it at the Grave-yard bay; but he was scarcely out 
of sight, when, by the carelessness of the Indians, the boat was drawn into 
the midst of the rapids, and glanced down the river, bottom up, with the 
loss of every thing it contained. Inthe natural concern I felt for his mis- 
fortune, I gave to the little cove the name of Ltders bay. 

November 15.—We continued to-day our work at the portage. 

About noon, the two barges of the express from Montreal arrived at the 
upper portage landing, which, for large boats, is on the right bank of the 
river, They were a fine-looking crew, and among them I remarked a fresh- 
looking woman and her daughter, emigrants from Canada, It was satis- 
factory to see the order and speed with which these experienced watermen 
effected the portage, and passed their boats over the cascades. They had 
arrived at noon, and in the evening they expected to reach Vancouver. 
These batteaus carry the express of the Hudson Bay Company to the high- 
est navigable point of the north fork of the Columbia, whence it is carried 
by an overland party to lake Winipec, where it is divided—part going to 
Montreal, and part to Hudson bay. Thus a regular communication is 
kept up between three very remote points. 

The Canadian emigrant was much chagrined at the change of climate, 
and informed me that, only a few miles above, they had left a country of 
bright blue sky and a shining sun. The next morning the upper parts of 


=e 


' the Colum. 
o me by Mr, 


youndary be- 
1 and eastern 
fog and rain 
rugged sides, 
ig the coast, 
se, this rainy 
ia the rainy 
of about two 
t snows of a 
Je range has 
t extends far 
ie distant ob- 
‘is Which rise 


e laboriously 
the cascades, 
thin and in- 
attesting the 
instances, set 


Tamburg, ar- 
pied in bring- 
n of kindred 
as his canoe, 
apids; and [ 
kfast, which, 
luxury. All 
a he hurried 
s scarcely out 
s drawn into 


Ops with the 
t for his mis- 


ge. 
rrived at the 
bank of the 
rked a fresh- 
It was satis- 
d watermen 
. They had 
Vancouver. 
to the high- 
it is carried 
art going to 
hunication is 


e of climate, 
a country of 
per parts of 


a 
195 C174) 


the mountains which directly overlook the cascades were white with the 
freshly fallen snow, while it continued to rain steadily below. 

Late in the afternoon we finished the portage, and, embarking again, 
moved a little distance up the right bank, in order to clear the smaller rap- 
ids of the cascades, and have a smooth river for the next morning. 
Though we made but a few miles, the weather improved immediately 
and though the rainy country and the cloudy monntains were close behind, 
before ws was the bright sky; so distinctly is climate here marked by a 
mountain boundary, 

November 17.—We had to day an opportunity to complete the sketch 
of that portion of the river down which we had come by night, and of which 
I will not give a particular deseription, whieh the small seale of our map 
would not illustrate, Muaty places occur along the river, where the stumps, 
or rather portions of the trunks of pine trees, are standing along the shore, 
and in the water, where (ey may be seen at a considerable depth below 
the surface, inthe beautifully clear water, ‘These collections of dead trees 
are called on the Columbia the submerged Jores/, and are supposed to have 
been created by the effects of some convulsion which formed the cascades, 
and which, by damming up the river, placed these trees under water and 
destroyed them, But I venture to presume that the cascades are older 
than the trees; and as these submerged forests occur at fi@ or six placesalon 
the river, 1 had an opportunity to satisfy myself that they have been formed 
by immense land slides from the mountains, which here closely shut in the 
river, and which brought down with them into the river the pines of the 
mountain, At one place, on the right bank, | remarked a place where a 
portion of one of these slides seemed to have pianted itself, with all the 
evergreen foliage, and the vegetation of the neighboring hill, direetly 
amidst the falling and yellow lenves of the river trees, It occurred to me 
that this would have been a beautiful illustration to the eye of a botanist, 

Following the course of a slide, which was very plainly marked alon 
the mountain, | found that in the interior parts the trees were in their usua 
erect position; but at the extremity of the slide they were rocked about, 
and thrown into a confusion of inclinations, 

About 4 0’clock in the afternoon we passed a sandy bar inthe river, 
whence we had an unexpected view of Mount Hood, bearing directly 
south by compass, 

During the day we used oar and sail, and at night had again a delight- 
ful camping ground, and a dry place to sleep upon, 

November 18,.— The day again was pleasant and bright. At 10 o’clock 
we passed a rock island, on the right shore of the river, which the Indians 
use as a burial ground; and, halting fora short time, about an hour after- 
wards, at the village of our Indian friends, early in the afternoon we ar- 
rived again at the Dalles. 

Carson had removed the camp up the river a little nearer to the hills, 
where the animals had better grass. We found every thing in good order, 
and arrived just in time to partake of an excellent roast of California beef. 
My friend Mr. Gilpin had arrived in advance of the party. His object in 
visiting this country had been to obtain correct information of the Walah- 
mette settlements; and he had reached this point in his journey, highly 
pleased with the country over which he had travelled, and with invigorat- 
ed health. On the following day he continued his journey, in our return- 
ing boats, to Vancouver. 


1 
i 
\ 


‘ 


SESE RMT STN TERN AT YR EI NR NT ROMEE AEE, ORL NIE mm AE: 


[174 J 196 


The camp was now occupied in making the necessary preparations for 
our homeward journey, which, though homeward, contemplated a new 
route, and a great circuit to the south and southeast, and the exploration 
of the Great Basin between the Rocky mountains and the Sierru Nevada. 
Three principal objects were indicated, by report or by maps, as being on 
this route; the character or existence of which I wished to ascertain, and 
which I assumed as landmarks, or leading points, on the projected line of 
return, The first of these points was the Zvamath lake, on the table 
land between the head of Fall river, which comes to the Columbia, and 
the Sacramento, which goes to the bay of San Francisco ; and from which 
lake a river of the same name makes its wav westwardly direct to the 
ocean. This lake and river are often called Adume?, but I have chosen to 
write its name according to the Indian pronunciation. The position of 
this lake, on the line of inland communication between Oregon and Cali- 
fornia ; its proximity to the demarcation boundary of latitude 42°; its im- 
puted double character of lake, or meadow, according to the season of 
the year; and the hostile and warlike character attributed to the Indians 
about it—all made it a desirable object to visitandexamine. From this. 
lake our course was intended to be about southeast, to a reported lake 
called Mary’s, at some days’ journey in the Great Basin; and thence, still 
on southeast, to th reputed Buenaventura river, which has had a place 
in so many maps, and countenanced the belief of the existence of a great 
river flowing from the Rocky mountains to the bay of San Francisco. 
From the Buenaventura the next point was intended to be in that section 
of the Rocky mountains which includes the heads of Arkansas river, and 
of the opposite waters of the Californian gulf; and thence down the Ar- 
kansas to Bent’s fort, and hoiae. This was our projected line of return— 
a great part of it absolutely new to geographical, botanical, and geological 
science—and the subject of reports in relation to lakes, rivers, deserts, and 
savages hardly above the condition of mere wild animals, which inflamed 
desire to know what this ferra incognita really contained. It was a se- 
rious enterprise, at the commencement of wiuter, to undertake the traverse 
of such a region, and with a party consisting only of twenty-five persons, 
and they of many nations—American, French, German, Canadian, Indian, 
and colored—and most of them young, several being under twenty-one 
years of age. All knew that a strange country was to be explored, and 
dangers and hardships to be encountered ; but no one blenched at the pros- 
pect. On the contrary, courage and confidence animated the whole party. 
Cheerfulness, readiness, subordination, prompt obedience, characterized all ; 
nor did ary extremity of peril and privation, to which we were afterwards 


. exposed, ever belie, or derogate from, the fine spirit of this brave and gen- 


erous commencement. The course of the narrative will show at what 
point, and for what reasons, we were prevented from the complete execu- 
iion of this plan, after having made considerable progress upon it, and how 
we were forced by desert plains and mountain ranges, and deep snows, far 
to the south and near to the Pacific ocean, and along the western base of 
the Sierra Nevada; where, indeed, a new and ample field of exploration 
opened itself before us. For the present, we must follow the narrative, 
which will first lead us south along the valley of Fall river, and the east- 
ern base of the Cascade range, to the Tiamath lake, from which, or its 
margin, three rivers go in three directions—one west, to the ocean; another 
north, to the Columbia; the third south, to California. 


— 


OT ye — 


i 
d 
% 
k 
, 
€ 
‘ 


arations for 
ated a new 
exploration 
ra Nevada. 
as being on 
certain, and 
cted line of 
n the table 
umbia, and 
from which 
irect to the 
e chosen to 
position of 
n and Cali- 
42°; its im- 
e season of 
the Indians 
From this. 
ported lake 
thence, still 
vad a place 
»of a great 
Francisco. 
that section 
S river, and 
wn the Ar- 
of return— 
d geoiogical 
deserts, and 
ch inflamed 
[| Was a se- 
the traverse 
ive persons, 
Jian, Indian, 
twenty-one 
‘plored, and 
at the pros- 
vhole party. 
cterized all ; 
> afterwards 
ve and gen- 
yw at what 
plete execu- 
Lil, and how 
) snows, far 
ern base of 
exploration 
> narrative, 
d the east- 
hich, or its 
in; another 


——— 


TR: 


ee ee 


Re 


197 [ 174 J 


For the support of the party, I had provided at Vancouver a supply of 
provisions for not less than three months, consisting principally of flour, 
eas, and tallow—the latter being used in cooking; and, in addition to this, 
Thad purchased at the mission some California cattle, which were to be 
driven on the hoof. We had 104 mules and horses—part of the latter pro- 
cured from the Indians about the mission ; and for the sustenance of which, 
our reliance was upon the grass which we should find, and the soft porous 
wood, which was to be its substitute when there was none. 

Mr. Fitzpatrick, with Mr. ‘Tulbot and the remainder of our party, arriv- 
ed onthe 2lst; and the camp was now closely engaged in the labor of 
preparation. Mr. Perkins succeeded in obtaining as a guide to the Tlamath 
lake two Indians—one of whom had been there, and bore the marks of 
several wounds he had received from some of the Indians in the neighbor- 
hood; and the other went along for company. In order to enable us to 
obtain horses, he despatched messengers to the various Indian villages in 
the neighborhood, informing them that we were desirous to purchase, and 
appointing a day for them to bring them in. 

We made, in the mean time, several excursions in the vicinity. Mr. 
Perkins walked with Mr. Preuss aud myself to the heights, about nine miles 
distant, on the opposite side of the river, whence, in fine weather, an exten- 
sive view may be had over the mountains, including seven great peaks of the 
Cascade range ; but clonds, on this occasion, destroyed the anticipated pleas- 
ure, and we obtained bearings only to three that were visible: Mount Reg- 


nier, St. Helens, and Mount Hood. On the heights, about one mile south 


of the mission, a very fine view may be had of Mount Hood and St. Helens. 
In order to determine their positions with as much accuracy as possible, 
the angular distances of the peaks were measured with the sextant, at dif- 
ferent fixed points from which they could be seen. 

The Indians brought in their horses at the appointed time, and we suc- 
ceeded in obtaining « number in exchange for goods ; but they were rela- 
tively much higher here, where goods are plenty and at moderate prices, 
than we had found them in the more eastern part of our voyage. Several 
of the Indians inquired very anxiously to know if we had any dollars, and 
the horses we procured were much fewer in number than I had desired, 
and of thin, inferior quality ; the oldest and poorest being those that were 
sold to us. These horses, as ever in our journey you will have occasion to 
remark, are valuable for hardihood and great endurance. 

November 24.—At this place one of the men was discharged ; and at the 
request of Mr. Perkins, a Chinook Indian, a lad of nineteen, who was ex- 
tremely desirous to “see the whites,’? and make some acquaintance with 
our institutions, was received into the party, under my special charge, with 
‘the understanding that I would again return him to his friends. He had 
lived for some time in the household of Mr. Perkins, and spoke a few words 
of the English language. 

November 25.—We were all up early, in the excitement of turning to- 
wards home. The stars were brilliant, and the morning cold—the ther- 
mometer at daylight 26°. 

Our preparations had been finally completed, and to-day we commenced 
our journey. The little wagon which had hitherto carried the instruments 
I judged it necessary to abandon; and it was accordingly presented to the 
mission. In all our long travelling, it had never been overturned or injured 
‘by any accident of the road; and the only things broken were the glass 


MOM SEE TTS 


nn em -_- ne ————_— 


it 


iv 

(an 

. f 

f | 
2 et 
| \ 
# ida 
at) ey 
if 
& ‘ 
* 


C174] 198 


lamps, and one of the front panels, which had been kicked out by an un- 
ruly Indian horse. The howitzer was the only wheeled carriage now re- 
maining. We started about noon, when the weather had become dis- 
agreeably cold, with flurries of snow. Our friend Mr. Perkins, whose 
kindkess had been active and eflicient during our stay, accompanied us sev- 
eral miles on our road; when he bade us farewell, and consigned us to the 
care of vur guides. Ascending to the uplands beyond the southern fork of 
the Zinanens creek, we found the snow lying on the ground in frequent 
patches, although the pasture appeared good, and the new short grass was 
fresh and green. We travelled over high, hilly land, and encamped on a 
little branch of Tinanens creek, where there were guod grass and timber. 
The southern bank was covered with snow, which was scattered over the 
bottom ; and the little creek, its borders lined with ice, had a chilly and 
wintry look. A number of Indians had accompanied us so far on our 
road, and remained with us during the night. ‘Two bad-looking fellows, 
who were detected in stealing, were tied and laid before the fire, and guard 
oe over them during the night. ‘The night was cold, ard partially 
clear. 

November 26.—The morning was cloudy and misty, and but a few stars 
visible. During the night water froze in the tents, and at sunrise the ther- 
mometer was at 20°. Left camp at 10 o’clock, the road leading along tribu- 
taries of the Tinanens, and being, so far, very good. We turned to the 
right at the fork of the trail, ascending by a steep ascent along a spur to the 
dividing grounds between this stream and the waters of Fall river. The 
creeks we had passed were timbered principally with oak and other de- 
ciduous trees. Snow lies every where here on the ground, and we had a 
slight fall during the morning; but towards noon the gray sky yielded to a 
bright sun. This morning we hada grand view of St. Helens and Reg- 
nier: the latter appeared of a conical form, and very lofty, leading the eye 
far up into the sky. The line of the timbered country is very distinctly 
marked here, the bare hills making with it a remarkable contrast. The 
summit of the ridge commanded a fine view of the Taih prairie, and the 
stream running through it, which is a tributary to the Fall river, the chasm 
of which is visible to the right. A steep descent of a mountain bill brought 
us down into the valley, and we encamped on the stream after dark, guided 
by the light of fires, which some naked Indians belonging to a village on 
the opposite side were kindling for us on the bank. This isa large branch 
of the Fall river. There was a broad band of thick ice some fifteen feet 
wide on either bank, and the river current is swift and bold.) The night 
was cold and clear, and we made our astronomical observation this even- 
ing with the thermometer at 20° 

In anticipation of coming hardship, and to spare our horses, there was 
much walking done to-day ; and Mr. Fitzpatrick and myself made the day’s 
journey on foot. Somewhere near the mouth of this stream are the falls 
from which: the river takes its name. 

November 27.—A fine view of Mount Hood this morning ; a rose-colored 
mass of snow, bearing S. 85° W. by compass. The sky is clear, and the 
air cold; @qye thermometer 2°.5 below zero; the trees and bushes glittering 
white, and the rapid stream filled with floating ice. 

Stiletst and the White Crane, two Indian chiefs who had accompanied 


- us thus far, took their leave, and we resumed our journey at 10 o’clock. 


We ascended by a steep hill from the river bottom, which is sandy, to @ 


ees es 


by an un- 
pe 10W re- 
ecome dis- 
ins, whose 
ied us sey- 
‘d us to the 
hern fork of 
n frequent 
grass was 

ped on a 
nd timber, 
d over the 
chilly and 
far on our 
g fellows, 
aud guard 
d partially 


afew stars 
se the ther- 
long tribu- 
1ed to the 
spur to the 
iver. The 
1 other de- 
we had a 
ielded toa 
s and Reg- 
ng the eye 
y distinctly 
rast. The 
e, and the 
, the chasm 
ill brought 
irk, guided 
village on 
rge branch 
fifteen feet 
The night 
this even- 


there was 
> the day’s 
e the falls 


se-colored 
r,and the 
| glittering 


ompanied 
) o’clock. 
ndy, to a 


199 [174 J 


volcanic. plain, around which lofty hills sweep in a regular form. It is cut 
up by gullies of basaltic rock, escarpments of which appear every where in 
the hills. This plain is called ithe Taih prairie, and is sprinkled with some 
scattered pines, The country is now far more interesting to a traveller 
than the ronte along the Snake and Columbia rivers. To our right we 
had always the mountains, from the midst of whose dark pine forests the 
isolated snowy peaks were looking out like giants, They served us for 
grand beacons to show the rate at which we advanced in our journey, Mount 
Hood was already becoming an old acquaintance, and, when we ascended 
the prairie, we obtained a bearing to Mount Jefferson, 8. 23° W. The In- 
dian superstition has peopled these lofty peaks with evil spirits, and they 
have never yet known the tread of a human foot. Sternly drawn against 
the sky, they look so high and steep, so snowy and rocky, that it would 
appear almost impossible to climb them; but still a trial would have its 
attractions for the adventurous traveller. A small trail takes off through 
the prairie, towards a low point in the range, and perhaps there is here a 
pass into the Walahmette valley. Crossing the plain, we descended by a 
rocky hill into the bed of a tributary of Fail river, and made an early en- 
campment, The water was in holes, and frozen over, and we were obliged 
to cut through the ice for the animals to drink, An ox, which was rather 
troublesome to drive, was killed here for food. 

The evening was fine, che sky being very clear, and I obtained an im- 
mersion of the third satellite, with a good observation of an emersion of 
the first; the latter of which gives for the longitude, 121° 02' 43''; the 
latitude, by observation, being 45° 06'45". The night was cold—the ther- 
mometer during the observations standing at 9° 

November 28.—The sky was clear iu the morning, but suddenly clouded 
over, and at sunrise began to snow, with the thermometer at 18° 

We traversed a broken high country, partly timbered with pine, and 
about noon crossed a mountainous ridge, in which, from the rock occa- 
sionally displayed, the formation consists of compact lava, Frequent tracks 
of elk were visible in the snow. On our right, in the afternoon, a high 
plain, partially covered with pine, extended about ten miles, to the foot of 
the Cascade inountains. 

At evening we encamped in a basin narrowly surrounded by rocky hills, 
after a day’s journey of 21° miles. ‘The surrounding rocks are either vol- 
canic produets, or highly altered by volcanic action, consisting of quartz 
and reddish-colored siliceous masses. 

November 29.—We emerged from the basin, by a narrow pass, upon a 
considerable branch of Fall river, running to the eastward through a nar- 
row valley. The trail, descending this stream, brought us to a locality of 
hot springs, which were on either bank. ‘Those on the left, which were. 
formed into deep handsome basins, would have been delightful baths, if 
the outer air had not been so keen, the thermometer in these being at 89° 
There were others, on the opposite side, at the foot of an escarpment, in 
which the temperature of the water was 134°. These waters deposited 
around the spring a brecciated mass of quartz and feldspar, much of it of a 
reddish color. 

We crossed the stream here, and ascended again to a high plain, from 
an elevated point of which we obtained a view of six of the great peaks—- 
Mount Jefferson, followed to the southward by two others of the same class; 
and succeeding, at astill greater distance to the southward, were three other 


f | 
¥ 

im | 

: on 

i 

' 

\ } 

i | 

h 


SSR AEROSTAR 
ob © era 


[ 174 ] 200 


lower peaks, clustering together in a branch ridge. These, like the great 
peaks, were snowy masses, secondary only to them; and, from the best ex- 
amination our time permitted, we are inclined to believe that the range to 
which they belong isa branch from the great chain which here bears to 
the westward. The trail during the remainder of the day followed near 
to the large stream on the left, which was continuously walled in between 
high rocky banks. We halted for the night on a little by-stream. 

November 30.—Our journey to-day was short. Passing over a high 

lain, on which were scattered cedars, with frequent beds of volcanic rock 
in fragments interspersed among the grassy grounds, we arrived. suddenly 
on the verge of the steep and rocky descent to the valley of the stream we 
had been following, and which here ran directly across our path, emerging 
from the mountains on the right. You will remark that the country is 
abundantly watered with large streams, which pour down from the neigh- 
boring range. 

These streams are characterized by the narrow and chasm-like valleys 
in which they run, generally sunk a thousand feet below the plain. At 
the verge of this plain, they frequently commence in vertical precipices of 
basaltic rock, and which leave only casual places at which they can be 
entered by horses. ‘The road across the country, which would otherwise be 
very good, is rendered impracticable for wagons by these streams. There 
is another trail among the mountains, usually followed in the summer, 
which the snows now compelled us to avoid; and I have reason to believe 
that this, passing nearer the heads of these streams, would afford a much 
better road. 

At such places, the gun carriage was unlimbered, and separately descend- 
ed by hand. Continuing a few miles up the left bank of the river, we en- 
camped early in an open bottom among the pines, a short distance below a 
lodge of Indians. Here, along the river the bluffs present escarpments 
seven or eight hundred feet in height, containing strata of a very fine porce- 
lain clay, overlaid, at the height of about five hundred feet, by a massive 
stratum of compact basalt one hundred feet in thickness, which again is suc- 
ceeded above by other strata of volcanic rocks. The clay strata are variously 
colored, some of them very nearly as white as chalk, and very fine grained. 
Specimens brought from these have been subjected to microscopical exami- 
nation by Professor Bailey, of West Point, and are considered by him to 
constitute one of the most remarkable deposites of fluviatile infusoria on 
record. While they abound in genera and species which are common in 
fresh water, but which rarely thrive where the water is even brackish, not 
one decidedly marine form is to be found among them; and their fresh- 
water origin is therefore beyond a doubt. It is equally certain that they 
lived and died at the situation where they were found, as they could scarce- 
ly have been transported by running waters without an admixture of sandy 
particles; from which, however, they are remarkably free. Fossil infusoria 
of a fresh-water origin had been previously detected by Mr. Bailey in speci- 
mens brought by Mr. James D. Dana from the tertiary formation of Ore- 
gon. Most of the species in those specimens differed so much from those 
now living and known, that he was led to infer that they might belong to 


extinct Species, and considered them also as affording proof of an alterna- 


tion, in the formation from which they were obtained, of fresh and salt 
water deposites, which, common enough in Europe, had not hitherto been 
noticed in ihe United States. Coming evidently from a locality entirely 


_--—— 


| 


\ 
' 


differ 
brou; 
iting 
cent 


mon 
differ 

I 
but a 
of ot 
good 
tude 

De 
river 
all tt 
It wi 
at ov 
case 
thord 
me t 
cont 
imme 
posit 
grass 
in a 
grass 
some 
a gor 
wife 
part 
ende 

Di 
ing [ 
a hu 
abou 
bran 
regic 
ties 
was 
ceiv 

D 
with 
with 
very 
cam 
wat 


ke the great 
| the best ex. 
the range to 
here bears to 
llowed near 
1 in between 
im. 

over a high 
roleanic rock 
ed. suddenly 
e stream we 
th, emerging 
2 country is 
n the neigh- 


like valleys 
» plain. At 
precipices of 
hey can be 
ytherwise be 
ms. There 
he summer, 
n to believe 
ord a much 


ely descend- 
iver, We en- 
nce below a 
escarpments 
y fine porce- 
Vy a massive 
again is suc- 
re variously 
ine grained. 
vical exami- 
by him to 
nfusoria on 
common in 
rackish, not 
their fresh- 
n that they 
ould scarce- 
re of sandy 
sil infusoria 
ley in speci- 
ion of Ore- 
from those 
it belong to 
an alterna- 
h and salt 
therto been 
ity entirely 


—— 


oes 


tt 
rt 
R 
} 
“~s 
1 


—— eee 


201 [ 174] 
different, our specimens” show very few species in common with those 
brought by Mr. Dana, but bear a much closer resemblance to those inhab- 
iting the northeastern States, It is possible that they are from a more re- 
cent deposite ; but the presence of a few remarkable forms which are com- 
mon to the two localities renders it more probable that there is no great 
difference in their age. 

I obtained here a good observation of an emersion of the second satellite ; 
but clouds, which rapidly overspread the sky, prevented the, usual number 
of observations. Those which we succeeded in obtaining are, however, 
good; and give for the latitude of the place 44° 35' 23", aud for the longi- 
tude from the satellite 121° 10' 25". 

December 1.—A short distance above our encampment, we crossed this 
river, which was thickly lined along its banks with ice. In common with 
all these mountain streams, the water was very clear, and the current swift. 
It was not every where fordable, and the water was three or four feet deep 
at our crossing, and perhaps a hundred feet wide. As was frequently the 
case at such places, one of the mules got his pack, consisting of sugar, 
thoroughly wet, and turned into molasses. One of the guides informed 
me that this was a “salmon water,” and pointed out several ingeniously 
contrived places to catch the fish; among the pines in the bottom I saw an 
immense one, ahout twelve feet in diameter. A steep ascent from the op- 
posite bank delayed us again; and as, by the information of our guides, 
grass would soon become very scarce, we encamped on the height of land, 
in a tnarshy place among the pines, where there was an abundance of 
grass. We found here a single Nez Percé family, who had a very hand- 
some horse in their drove, which we endeavored to obtain in exchange for 
a good cow; but the man “had two hearts,” or, rather, he had one and his 
wife had another: she wanted the cow, but he loved the horse too much to 
part with it. ‘These people attach great value to cattle, with which they are 
endeavoring to supply themselves. 

December 2.—In the first rays of the sun, the mountain peaks this morn- 
ing presented a beautiful appearance, the snow being entirely covered with 
a hue of rosy gold. We travelled to-day over a very stony, elevated plain, 
about which were scattered cedar and pine, and encamped on another large 
branch of Fall river. We were gradually ascending to a more elevated 
region, which would have*been indicated by the rapidly increasing quanti- 
ties of snow and ice, had we not known it by other means. A mule which 
was packed with our cooking utensils wandered off among the pines unper- 
ceived, and several men were sent back to search for it. 

December 3.—Leaving Mr. Fitzpatrick with the party, I went ahead 
with the howitzer and a few men, in order to gain time, as our progress 
with the gun was necessarily slower. The country continued the same— 
very stony, with cedar and pine; and we rode on until dark, when we en- 
camped on a hill side covered with snow, which we used to-night for 
water, as we were unable to reach any stream. 

December 4.—-Our animals had taken the back track, although a great 
number were hobbled; and we were consequently delayed until noon. 
Shortly after we had left this encampment, the mountain trail from the 


* The specimens obtained at this locality are designated in the appendix by the Nos. 53, 54, 55, 
56,'57, 58, 59, 60. The results obtained by Mr. Bailey, in his examination of specimens from 
the infusorial strata, with a plate exhibiting some of the most interesting forms, will be found im- 
bodied in the appendix. 


[ 174] 202 


Dalles joined that on which we were travelling. After passing for several 
miles over an artemisia plain, the trail entered a beautiful pine forest, 
through which we travelled for several hours; and about 4 o'clock 
descended into the valley of another large branch, on the bottom of which 
were spaces of open pines, with occasional meadows of good grass, in one 
of which we encamped. The streamis very swift and deep, and about 40 
feet wide, and nearly half frozen over, Among the timber here, are larches 
140 feet high, and over % feet in diameter, We had to-night the rare sight 
of a lunar rainbow. 

December 5.—To-day the country was all pine forest, and beautiful 
weather made our journey delightful. It was too warm at noon for winter 
clothes; and the snow, which lay every where in patches through the forest, 
was melting rapidly. After a few hours’ ride, we came upon a fine stream 
in the midst of the forest, which proved to be the principal branch of Fall 
river. It was occasionally 200 feet wide—sometimes narroweil to 50 feet; 
the waters very clear, and frequen‘'v deep. We ascended along the river, 
which sometimes presented sheets Jf foaming cascades; its banks occa- 
sionally blackened with masses of scoriated rock, and found a good en- 
campment on the verge of an open bottom, which had been an old camp- 
ing ground of the Cayuse Indians. A great number of deer horns were 
lying about, indicating game in the neighborhood. The timber was uni- 
formly large; some of the pines measuring 22 feet in circuuference at the 
ground, and 12 to 13 feet at six feet above. 

In all our journeying, we had never travelled through a country where 
the rivers were so abounding in falls, and the name of this stream is singu- 
larly characteristic. At every place where we come in the neighborhood 
of the river, is heard the roaring of falls. The rock along the banks of the 
stream, and the ledge over which it falls, is a scoriaied basalt, with a bright 
metallic fracture. ‘The stream goes over in one clear pitch, succeeded by 
a foaming cataract of several hundred yards. In the little bottom above 
the falls, a small stream discharges into an enfonnoir, and disappears below. 

We had made an early encampment, and in the course of the evening 
Mr. Fitzpatrick joined us here with the lost mule. Our lodge poles were 
nearly worn out, and we found here a handsome set, leaning against one of 
the trees, very white, and cleanly scraped. Had the owners been here, we 
would have purchased them; but as they were.not, we merely left the old 
ones in their place, with a small quantity of tobacco. 

December 6.—The morning was frosty: and clear. We continued up 
the stream on undulating forest ground, over which there was scattered 
much fallen timber. We met here a village of Nez Percé Indians, who 
appeared to be coming down from the mountains, and had with them fine 
bands of horses. With thein were a few Snake Indians of the root-digging 
species. From the forest we emerged into an open valley ten or twelve 
miles wide, through which the stream was flowiag tranquilly, upward of 
two hundred feet broad, with occasional islands, and bordered with fine 
broad bottoms. Crossing the river, which here issues from a great moun- 
tain ridge on the right, we continued up the southern and smaller branch, 
over a level country, consistiug of fine meadow land, alternating with pine 
forests, and encamped on it early in the evening. A warmsunshine made 
the day pleasant. 

December 7.—To-day we had good travelling ground; the trail leading 
sometimes over rather sandy soils in the pine forest, and sometimes over 


. 


ei 
: 


meada 
cousta 
beauti 
wide. 
make 
the ve 
sentati 

I ol 
the br 
been @ 
and o 
marka 
The la 
occulti 

De 
ing, li 
mount 
stantly 
greate 
magui 
oblige 
marka 
of wh 
usual 
and tk 
are m 
usuall 
three | 

Dec 
Crossi 
toware 
soil w. 
near 0 
produ 

Dec 
reache 
dow, 
a few 
surrou 
a pict 
abund 
pine f 
tutes 
severe 
the C; 
lake, | 
rity 0 
chara 
induc 
middl 
the hx 
charg 


ug for several 
| pine forest, 
but 4 o'clock 
tom of which 
grass, in one 
and about 40 
re, are larches 
the rare sight 


and beautiful 
bon for winter 
ugh the forest, 
1 a fine stream 
branch of Fall 
rel to 50 feet; 
ong the river, 
s banks occa- 
d «a good en- 
an old camp- 
‘ry horns were 
ber was uni- 
ference at the 


ountry where 
eam is singu- 
neighborhood 
> banks of the 
with a bright 
succeeded by 
bottom above 
ppears below. 
if the evening 
ge poles were 
against one of 
been here, we 
‘ly left the old 


continued up 
Was scattered 
Indians, who 
rith them fine 
2 root-digging 
en or twelve 
ly, upward of 
red with fine 
| great moun- 
aaller branch, 
ing with pine 
unshine made 


2 trail leading 
metimes over 


203 C174) 
meadow land along the stream, ‘The great beauty of the country in summer 
constantly suggested itself to our imaginations; and even now we found it 
beautiful, as we rode along these meadows, trom half a mile to two miles 
wide. The rich soil and excellent water, surrounded by noble forests, 
make a picture that would delight the eye of a farmer; and I regret that 
the very small scale of the map would not allow ts to give some repre- 
sentation of these features of the country. 

I observed to-night an occultation of 7 Geminorum ; which, although at 
the bright limb of the moon, appears to give a very good result, that has 
been adopted for the longitude. The occultation, observations of satellites, 
and our position deduced from daily surveys with the compass, agree re- 
markably well together, and mutually support and strengthen each other. 
The latitude of the camp is 43° 30' 36"; and longitude, deduced from the 
occultation, 121° 33' 50". 

December 8.—To-day we crossed the last branch of the Fall river, issu- 
ing, like all the others we had crossed, in a southwesterly direction from the 
mountains. Our direction was a little east of south, the trail leading con- 
stantly through pine forests, ‘The soil was generally bare, consisting, in 
greater part, of a yellowish white pumice stone, producing varieties of 
maguificent pines, but not a blade of grass; and to-night our horses were 
obliged to do without food, and use snow for water. These pines are re- 
markable for the red color of the bolls; and among them occurs a species, 
of which the Indians had informed ‘ne when leaving the Dalles. The un- 
usual size of the cone (16 or 18° hes long) had attracted their attention; 
and they pointed it out to me among the curiosities of the country. The 
are more remarkable for their large diameter than their height, whic 
usually averages only about 120 feet. The leaflets are short—only two or 
three inches long, and five in a sheath; the bark of a red color. 

December 9.—The trail leads always through splendid pine forests. 
Crossing dividing grounds by a very fine road, we descended very gently 
towards the south, The weather was pleasant, and we halted late. The 
soil was very much like that of yesterday ; and on the surface of a hill, 
near our encampment, were displayed beds of pumice stone; but the soil 
produced no grass, and again the animals fared badly. 

December 10.—The country began to improve ; and about 11 o’clock we 
reached a spring of cold water on the edge of a savannah, or grassy mea- 
dow, which our guides informed us was an arm of the Tlamath lake ; and 
a few miles further we entered upon an extensive meadow, or lake of grass, 
surrounded by timbered mountains. This was the Tlamath lake. It was 
a picturesque and beautiful spot, and rendered more attractive to us by the 
abundant and excellent grass, which our animals, after travelling through 
pine forests, so much needed; but the broad sheet of water which consti- 
tutes a lake was not to be seen. Overlooking it, immediately west, were 
several snowy knobs, belonging to what we have considered a branch of 
the Cascade range. <A low point covered with pines made out into the 
lake, which afforded us a good place for an encampment, aud for the secu- 
rity of our horses, which were guarded in view ou the open meadow. The 
character of courage and hostility attributed to the Indians of this quarter 
induced more than usual precaution; and, seeing smokes rising from the 
middle of the lake (or savannah) and along the opposite shores, I directed 
the howitzer to be fired. It was the first time our guides had seen it dis- 
charged ; and the bursting of the shell at a distance, which was something, 


Yd 


[ 174 ] 204 


like the second fire of the gun, amazed and bewildered them with delight, 
It inspired them with triumphant feelings; but on the camps at a distance 
the effect was different, for the smokes in the lake and on the shores im. 
mediately disappeared, 

The point on which we were encamped forms, with the opposite eastern 
shore, a narrow neck, connecting the body of the lake with a deep cove or 
bay which receives the principal affluent stream, and over the greater part 
of which the water (or rather ice) was at this time dispersed in shallow 

ools. Among the grass, and scattered over the prairie lake, appaoie: to 

e similar marshes, It is simply a shallow basin, which, for a short period 
at the time of melting snows, is covered with water from the neighboring 
mountains ; but this probably soon runs off, and leaves for the remainder 
of the year a green savannah, through the midst of which the river Tla- 
math, which flows to the ocean, winds its way to the outlet on the south- 
western side, 

December 11.—No Indians made their appearance, and I determined to 
pay them a visit. Accordingly, the people were gathered together, and we 
rode out towards the village in the middle of the lake, which one of owr 

uides had previously visited. It could not be directly approached, as a 
arge part of the lake appeared a marsh ; and there were sheets of ice among 
the grass, on which our horses could not keep their footing. We therefore 
followed the guide for a considerable distance along the forest; and then 
turned off towards the village, which we soon began to see was a few large 
huts, on the tops of which were collected the Indians. When ‘ve had ar- 
rived within half a mile of the village, two persons were seen advancing 
to meet us; and, to please the fancy of our guides, we ranged ourselves 
into a long line, riding abreast, while they galloped ahead to meet the 
strangers. 

We were surprised, on riding up, to find one of them a woman, having 
never before known a squaw to take any part in the business of war. 
They were the village chief and his wife, who, in excitement and alarm at 
the unusual event and appearance, had come out to meet their fate together. 
The chief was a very prepossessing Indian, with very handsome features, 
and a singularly soft and agreeable voice—so remarkable as to attract gen- 
eral notice. 

The huts were grouped together on the bank of the river, which, from 
being spread out ina shallow marsh at the upper end of the lake, was col- 
lected here into a single stream. ‘They were large round huts, perhaps 20 
feet in diameter, with rounded tops, on which was the door by which they 
descended into the interior. Within, they were supported by posts and 
beams. 

Almost like plants, these people seem to have adapted themselves to the 
soil, and to be growjng on what the immediate locality afforded. ‘Their 
only subsistence at this time appeared to be asmall fish, great quantities of 
which, that had been smoked and dried, were suspended on strings about 
the lodge. Heaps of straw were lying around; and their residence in the 
midst of grass and rushes had taught them a peculiar skill in converting 
this material to useful purposes. ‘heir shoes were made of straw or grass, 
which seemed well adapted for a snowy country ; andthe women wore on 
their head a closely woven basket, which made a very good cap. Among 
other things, were parti-colored mats about four feet square, which we pur- 
chased to lay on the snow under our blankets, and to use for table cloths. 

Numbers of singular-looking dogs, resembling wolves, were sitting on 


the to 
its bir 
dians 
and o 
made 
the so 
tain i 
tains 
sage | 
are pa 
forest 
their 
two, § 
In 
acqi 
day. 
diame 
It isa 
night 
snow! 
heads 
fornia 
gress 
and s¢ 
Fro 
chara 
could 
count. 
journe 
were 
party. 
water 
anxie 
Buen: 
our h 
from | 
who | 
I ende 
the di 
allege 
our cc 
refusi 
De 
India: 
erous 
of the 
unmit 
in th 
treact 
Act 
dians. 
ably : 


1 with delight, 
bs at a distance 
the shores im. 


pposite eastern 
a deep cove or 
he greater part 
sed in shallow 
@, appeared to 
a short period 
1 neighboring 
the remainder 
the river Ta. 
t on the south- 


determined to 
gether, and we 
ich one of owr 
proached, as a 
ts of ice among 

We therefore 
rest; and then 
ras a few large 
hen ‘ve had ar- 
een advancing 
nged ourselves 
d to meet the 


yoman, having 
siness of war, 
it and alarm at 
ir fate together. 
lsome features, 
to attract gen- 


ir, Which, from 
lake, was col- 
its, perhaps 20 
by which they 
by posts and 


mselves to the 
forded. ‘Their 
at quantities of 
1 strings about 
sidence in the 

in converting 
straw or grass, 
omen wore on 
cap. Among 
which we pur- 
or table cloths. 
rere sitting on 


205 ( 174 J 


the tops of the huts ; and of these we purchased a young one, which, after 
its birthplace, was named Tlamath. The language spoken by these In- 
dians is different from that of the Shoshonee and Columbia river tribes ; 
and otherwise than by signs they cannot understand euch other, ‘They 
made us comprehend that they were at war with the people who lived to 
the southward and to the eastward; but I could obtain from them no cer- 
tain information. The river on which they live enters the Cascade moun- 
tains on the western side of the lake, and breaks through them by a pas- 
sage impracticable for travellers; but over the mountains, to the northward, 
are passes which present no other obstacle than in the almost impenetrable 
forests. Unlike any Indians we had previously seen, these wore shells in 
their noses, We returned to our camp, after remaining here an hour or 
two, accompanied by a number of Indians. 

In order to recruit a little the strength of our animals, and obtain some 
acquaintance with the locality, we remained here for the remainder of the 
day. By observation, the latitude of the camp was 42° 56' 51"; and the 
diameter of the lakv, or meadow, as has been intimated, about 20 miles. 
It isa picturesque and beautiful spot; and, under the hand of cultivation, 
night become a little paradise. Game is found in the forest; timbered and 
snowy mountains skirt it, and fertility characterizes it. Situated near the 
heads of three rivers, and on the line of inland communication with Cali- 
fornia, and near to Indians noted for treachery, it will naturally, in the pro- 
gress of the settlement of Oregon, become a point for military occupation 
and settlement. 

From ‘Tlamath lake, the further continuation of our voyage assumed a 
character of discovery and exploration, which, from the Indians here, we 
could obtain no information to direct, and where the imaginary maps of the 
country, instead of assisting, exposed us to suffering and defeat. In our 
journey across the desert, Mary’s lake, and the famous Buenaventura river, 
were two points on which I relied to recruit the animals, and repose the 
party. Forming, agreeably to the best maps in my possession, a connected 
water line from the Rocky mountains to the Pacific ovean, I felt no other 
anxiety than to pass safely across the intervening desert to the banks of the 
Buenaventura, where, in the softer climate of a more southern latitude, 
our horses might find grass to sustain them, and ourselves be sheltered 
from the rigors of winter and from the inhospitable desert. ‘Thé guides 
who had conducted us thus far on our journey were about to return; and 
I endeavored in vain to obtain others to lead us, even for a few days, in 
the direction (east) which we wished to go. The chief to whom I applied 
alleged the want of horses, and the snow on the mountains across which 
our course would carry us, and the sickness of his family, as reasons for 
refusing to go with us. 

December 12.—This morning the camp was thronged with Tlamath 
Indians from the southeastern shore of the lake; but, knowing the treach- 
erous disposition which is a rergarkable characteristic of the Indians south 
of the Columbia, the camp was kept constantly on its guard. I was not 
unmindful of the disasters which Smith and other travellers had met with 
in this country, and therefore was equally vigilant in guarding against 
treachery and violence. 

According to the best information I had been able to obtain from the In- 
dians, in a few days’ travelling we should reach another large water, prob- 
ably a lake, which they indicated exactly in the course we were about to 


( 174) 206 


pursue, We struck our tents at 10 o’clock, and crossed the lake in a nearly 
east direction, where it has the least extension—the breadth of the arm 
being here only about a mile anda half. There were ponds of ice, with 
but Fiutio grass, for the greater part of the way; and it was difficult to get 
the pack animals across, which fell frequently, and could not get up with 
their loads, unassisted, The morning was very unpleasant, snow falling at 
intervals in large flakes, and the sky dark. In about two hours we suc. 
ceeded in getting the animals over; and, after travelling another hour along 
the eastern shore of the lake, we turned up into a cove where there was a 
sheltered place among the timber, with good grass, and encamped. The 
Indians, who had accompanied us so far, returned to their village on the 
southeastern shore. Among the pines here, 1 noticed some five or six 
feet in diameter, 

December 13.—The night has been cold; the peaks around the lake 

leam out brightly in the morning sun, and the thermometer is at zero, 
We continued up the hollow formed by a small affluent to the lake, and 
immediately entered an open pine forest on the mountain, ‘The way here 
was sometimes obstructed by fallen trees, and the snow was four to twelv, 
inches deep. The mules at the gun pulled heavily, and walking was a 
little laborious, In the midst of the wood, we heard the sound of galloping 
horses, and were agreeably surprised by the unexpected arrival of our 
Tlamath chief, with several Indians. He seemed to have found his con- 
duct inhospitable in letting the strangers depart without a guide through the 
snow, ang had come, with a few others, to pilot us a day or two on the way, 
After travelling in an easterly direction through the forest for about four 
hours, we. reached a considerable stream, with a border of good grass ; and 
here, by the advice of our guides, we encamped. It is ubout thirty feet 
wide, and two to four feet deep; the water clear, with some current; and, 
according to the information of our Indians, is the principal affluent to the 
lake, and the head water of the Tiamath river, 

A very clear sky enabled me to obtain here to-night good observations, 
including an emersion of the first satellite of Jupiter, which give for the lon- 
gitude 121° 20' 42", and for the latitude 42° 51' 26". This emersion coin- 
cides remarkably well with the result obtained from an occultation at the 
encampment of December 7th to 8th, 1843; from which place, the line of our 
survey gives an easting of thirteen miles. The day’s journey was 12 miles, 

December 14.—Our road was over a broad mountain, and we rode seven 
hours in a thick snow storm, always through pine forests, when we came 
down upon the head waters of another siream, on which there was grass. 
The snow lay deep on the ground, and only the high swamp grass appeared 
above. The Indians were thinly clad, and I had remarked during the day 
that they suffered from the cold. This evening they told me that the snow 
was getting too deep on the mountain, and I could not induce them to go 
any farther. The stream we had struck issued from the mountain in an 
easterly direction, turning to the southwarl a short distance below ; and, 
drawing its course upon the ground, they made us comprehend that it pur- 
sued its way for a long distance in that direction, uniting with many other 
streams, and gradually becoming a great river. Without the subsequent 
information, which confirmed the opinion, we became immediately satisfied 
that this water formed the principal stream of the Sacramento river ; and, 
consequently, that this main affluent of the bay of Sau Francisco had its 
source within the limits of the United States, and opposite a tributary to the 


Col 
nort 


facti 
it Wi 
frien 
wou 
ellin 
wou 
turn 
Ron 
of la 
the, 
our 
ing | 
nake 
the s 
ever 

D 
deep 
mou 
qual 
snov 
wer 
whii 
exer 
whe 
and, 
the 1 
denl 
Ridi 
tical 
feet 
lake 
tains 
amo 
stort 
snov 
sun 
we | 
as ei 
SOV 


wisi 
for t 
gan 
the | 


lake in a nearly 
dth of the arm 
nds of ice, with 
8 difficult to get 
not get up with 
»Snow falling at 
0 hours we sue. 
ther hour along 
ere there was a 
neamped, The 
r village on the 
ne five or six 


round the lake 
eter is at zero, 
to the lake, and 

The way here 
s four to twelv, 
walking was a 
ind of galloping 
arrival of our 
> found his con- 
lide through the 
wu on the way, 
t for about four 
ood grass 5 and 
bout thirty feet 
le current; and, 
1 affluent to the 


»d observations, 
give for the lon- 
s emersion coin- 
cultation at the 
e, the line of our 
'y was 12 miles, 
1 we rode seven 
when we came 
here was grass, 
) grass appeared 
during the day 
e that the snow 
luce them to go 
mountain in an 
se below ; and, 
end that it pur- 
‘ith many other 
the subsequent 
diately satisfied 
nto river ; and, 
rancisco had its 
tributary to the 


207 [174] 


Columbia, and near the head of the Tianath river, which goes to the ocean 
north of 42°, and within the United States, 

December 15.—A present, consisting of useful goods, afforded much satis- 
faction to our guides; and, showing them the national flag, I explained that 
it was a symbol of our nation ; fs. they engaged always to receive it in a 
friendly manner. The chief pointed out a course, by following which we 
would arrive at the big watcr, where no more snow was to be found, Trav- 
elling in a direction N, 60° KE, by compass, which the Indians informed me 
would avoid a bad mountain to the right, we crossed the Sacramento where it 
turned to the southward, and entered a grassy level plain—-a smaller Grand 
Rond; from the lower end of which the river issued into an inviting country 
of low rolling hills, Crossing a hard-frozen or on the farther side of 
the Rond, we entered again the pine forest, in which very deep snow made 
our travelling slow and laborious. We were slowly but gradually ascend- 
ing & mountains and, after a hard journey of seven hours, we came to some 
naked places among the timber, where a few tufts of grass showed above 
the snow, on the side of a hollow ; and here we encamped. Our cow, which 
every day got poorer, waskilled here, but the meat was rather tough, 

December 16,—We travelled this morning through snow about three feet 
deep, which, being crusted, very much cut the feet of our avimals, The 
mountain still siatesly rose; we crossed several spring heads covered with 
quaking asp; otherwise it was all pine forest. The air was dark with falling 
snow, which every where weighed down the trees, The depths of the forest 
were profoundly still; and below, we scarce felt a breath of the wind which 
whirled the snow through their branches. I found that it required some 
exertion of constancy to adhere steadily to one course through the woods, 
when we were uncertain how far the forest extended, or what lay beyond; 
and, on account of our animals, it would be bad to spend another night on 
the mountain. ‘Towards noon the forest looked clear ahead, appearing sud- 
denly to terminate; and beyond a certain point we could see no trees, 
Riding rapidly ahead to this spot, we found ourselves on the verge of a ver- 
tical aud rocky wall of the mountain, At our feet—more than a thousand 
feet below—we looked into a green prairie country, in which a beautiful 
lake, some twenty miles in length, was spread along the foot of the moun- 
tains, its shores bordered with green grass. Just then the sun broke out 
among the clouds, and illuminated the country below, while around us the 
storm raged fiercely, Not a particle of ice was to be seen on the lake, or 
snow on its borders, and all was like summer or spring. The glow of the 
sun in the valley below brightened up our hearts with sudden pleasure; and 
we made the woods ring with joyful shouts to those behind; and gradually, 
as each came up, he stopped to enjoy the unexpected scene. Shivering on 
snow three feet deep, and stiffening in a cold north wind, we exclaimed at 
once that the names of Summer Lake and Winter Ridge should be applied 
to these two proximate places of such sudden and violent contrast. 

We were now immediately on the verge of the forest land, in which we 
had been travelling so many days; and, looking forward to the east, scarce 
a tree was to be seen. Viewed from our elevation, the face of the country 
exhibited only rocks and grass, and presented a region in which the arte- 
inisia became the principal wood, furnishing to its scattered inhabitants fuel 
for their fires, building material for their huts, and shelter for the small 
game which ministers to their hunger and nakedness. Broadly marked by 
the boundary of the mountain wall, and immediately below us, were the 


C174 J 208 


first waters of that Great Interior Basin which hos the Wahsatch and Bear 
river mountains for its eastern, and the Sierra Nevada for its western rim; 
and the edge of which we had entered upwards of three months before, at 
the Great Salt lake, 

When we had sufficiently admired the scene below, we began to think 
about descending, which here was impossible, and we turned towards the 
north, travelling always along the rocky wall, We continued on for four 
or five miles, making ineffectual attempts at several places; and at length 
sneceeded in getting down at one which was extremely diflicult of descent, 
Night had closed in before the foremost reached the bottom, and it was dark 
before we all found ourselves together in the valley, There were three or 
four half dead dry cedar trees on the shore, and those who first arrived 
kindled bright fires to light on the others, One of the mules rolled over 
and over two or three hundred feet into a ravine, but recovered himself, 
without any other injury than to his pack; and the howitzer was left mid. 
way the mountain until morning. By observation, the latitude of this en- 
campment'is 42° 57' 22". It delayed us until near noon the next day to 
recover ourselves and put every thing in order; and we made only a short 
camp along the western shore of the lake, which, in the summer tempera- 
ture we enjoyed to-day, justified the name we had given it. Our course 
would have taken us to the other shore, and over the highlands beyond ; 
but I distrusted the appearance of the country, and decided to follow a 
plainly beaten Indian trail leading along this side of the Jake, We were 
now in a country where the scarcity of water and of grass makes travel- 
ling dangerous, and great taution was necessary, 

December 18,—We continued on the trail along the narrow strip of land 
between the Jake and the high rocky wall, from which we bad looked down 
two duys before. Almost every half mile we crossed a little spring, or 
stream of pure cold water; and the grass was certainly as fresh and green 
as in the early spring. From the white eillorescence along the shore of 
the lake, we were enabled to judge that the water was impure, like that 
of lakes we subsequently found; but the mud prevented us from approach- 
ing it. We encamped near the eastern point of the lake, where there ap- 
peared between the hills a broad and low connecting hollow with the 
country beyond. From a rocky hill in the rear, [could see, marked out 
by a line of yellow dried grass, the bed of a stream, which probably con- 
nected the lake with other waters in the spring. 

The observed latitude of this encampment is 42° 42' 37", 

December 19.—After two hours’ ride in an easterly direction, through a 
low country, the high ridge with pine forest still to our right, and a rocky 
and bald but lower one on the left, we reached a considerable fresh-water 
stream, which issues from the piney mountains. So far as we had been 
able to judge, between this stream and the lake we had crossed dividing 
grounds; and there did not appear to be any connexion, as might be in- 
ferred from the impure condition of the lake water. 

The rapid stream of pure water, roaring along between banks overhung 
with aspens and willows, was a refreshing and unexpected sight ; and we 
followed down the course of the stream, which brought us soon into a 
marsh, or dry lake, formed by the expanding waters of the stream. It was 
covered with high reeds and rushes, and large patches of ground had been 
turned up hy the squaws in digging for roots, as if a farmer had been pre- 
paring the land for grain. 1 could not succeed in finding the plant for which 


atch and Bear 
: western rim; 
ths before, at 


vegan to think 
d towards the 
ed on for four 
and at length 
ult of descent, 
nd it was dark 
were three or 
» first arrived 
les rolled over 
vered himself, 
rwas left mid. 
ude of this en- 
ie next day to 
le only a short 
mer tempera- 
. Our course 
lands beyond ; 
rd to follow a 
ke, We were 
makes travel- 


W strip of land 
d looked down 
ttle spring, or 
esh and green 
| the shore of 
ure, like that 
fom approach. 
here there ap- 
low with the 
+, marked out 
probably con- 


ion, through a 
t, and a rocky 
le fresh-water 

we had been 
bssed dividing 
s might be in- 


nks overhung 
ight; and we 
s soon into a 
eam. It was 
und had been 
had been pre- 
lant for which 


— 


hy) Ey a oN Re 
- 


arn 


209 


C 174 J 


ahey had been digging. There were frequent trails, and fresh tracks of 
Indians ; and, from the abundant signs visible, the black-tailed hare appears 
to be numerous here. It was evident that, in other seasons, this place was 
a sheet of water, Crossing this marsh towards the eastern bills, and pass- 
ing over a bordering plain of heavy sands, covered with artemisia, we en- 
camped before sundown on the creek, which here way very small, having 
Jost its water in the marshy grounds. We found here wlerably good grass. 
The wind to-night was high, and we had no longer our huge pine fires, 
but were driven to our old resource of small dried willows and artemisia. 
About twelve miles ahead, the valley appears to be closed in by a high, 
dark-looking ridge. 

December 20 —'Travelling for a few hours down the stream this morn- 
ing, we turned a point of the hill on our left, and came suddenly in sight of 
another and much larger lake, which, along its eastern shore, was closely 
bordered by the high black ridge which walled itin by a precipitous face on 
this side. Throughout this region the face of the country is characterized 
by these precipices of black voleanic rock, generally enclosing the valleys of 
streams, and frequently terminating the hills. Often in the course of our 
journcy we would be tempted to continue our road up the gentle ascent of a 
sloping hill, which, at the summit, would terminate abruptly in a black preci- 
pice. Spread out over a length of 20 miles, the lake, when we first came 
in view, presented a handsome sheet of water; and [ gave to it the name 
of Lake Abert, in honor of the chief of the corps to which I belonged. The 
fresh-water stream we had followed emptied into the lake by a little fall; and 
I was doubt{)! for a moment whether to go on, or encamp at this place. The 
miry ground in the neighborhood of the lake did not allow us to examine 
the water convenienly, and, being now on the borders of a desert country, 
we were moving cautiously. It was, however, still early in the day, and I 
continued on, trusting either that the water would be drinkable, or that we 
should find some little spring from the hill side. We were following an 
Indian trail which led along the steep rocky precipice ; a black ridge along 
the western shore holding out no prospect whatever. The white efflores- 


eences which lined the shore like a bank of snow, and the disagreeable 


odor which filled the air as soon as we came near, informed us too plainly 
that the water belonged to one of those fetid salt lakes which are common 
in this region. We continued until late in the evening to work along the 
rocky shore, but, as often afterwards, the dry inhospitable rock deceived 
us; and, halting on the lake, we kindled up tires to guide those who were 
straggling along behind. We tried the water, but it was impossible to 
drink it, and most of the people to-night lay down without eating ; but 
some of us, who had always a great reluctance to close the day without 
supper, dug holes along the shore, and obtained water, which, being filtered, 
was sufficiently palatable to be used, but still retained much of its nauseat- 
ing taste. There was very little grass for the animals, the shore bein 
lined with a luxuriant growth of chenopodiacedus shrubs, which burne 
with a quick bright flame, and made our firewood. 

The next morning we had scarcely travelled two hours along the shore 
when we reached a place where the mountains made a bay, leaving at their 
feet a low bottom around the lake. Here we found numerous hillocks 
covered with rushes, in the midst of which were deep holes, or springs, of 
pure water ; and the bottom was covered with grass, which, although of a 
galt and unwholesome quality, and mixed with saline efflorescences, was 

14 


[ 174] 210 


still abundant, and made a good halting place to recruit our animals; and 
we accordingly encamped here for the remainder of the day. 1 rode ahead 
several miles to ascertain if there was any appearance of a watercourse en- 
tering the lake ; but found none, the hills preserving their dry character, 
and the shore of the lake sprinkled with the same white powdery substance, 
and covered with the same shrubs. ‘There were flocks of ducks on the 
lake, and frequent tracks of Indians along the shore, where the grass had 
been recently burnt by their fires. 

We ascended the bordering mountain, in order to obtain a more perfect 
view of the lake in sketching its figure ; hills sweep entirely around its 
basin, from which the waters have no outlet. 

December 22.—To-day we left this forbidding lake. Impassable rocky 
ridges barred our progress to the eastward, and: accordingly bore off to- 
wards the south, over an extensive sage plain. Ata considerable distance 
ahead, and a little on our left, was a range of snowy mountains, and the 
country declined gradually towards the foot of a high and nearer ridge im- 
mediately before us, which presented the feature of black precipices, now 
becoming common to the country. Outhe summit of the ridge, snow was 
visible ; and there being every indication of a stream at its base, we rode 
on until after dark, but were unable to reach it, and halted among the sage 
bushes on the open plain, without either grass or water. The two India- 
rubber bags had been filled with water in the morning, which afforded suf- 
ficient for the camp ; and rain in the night formed pools, which relieved the 
thrist of the animals. Where we encamped on the bleak sandy plain, the 
Indians had made huts or circular enclosures, about four feethigh and twelve 
feet broad, of artemisia bushes. Whetier these had been forts or houses, 
or what they had been doing in such a desert place, we could not ascertain. 

December 25.—The weather is mild ; the thermometer at daylight 38° ; 
the wind having been from the southward for several days. The country 
has a very forbidding appearance, presenting to the eye nothing but sage 
and barren ridges. We trode up towards the mountain, along the foot of 
which we tound a lake, which we could not approach on account of the 
mud ; and, passing around its southera end, ascended the slope at the foot 
of the ridge, where in some hollows we had discovered bushes and small 
trees—in such situations, a sure sign of water. We found here several 
springs, and the hill side was well sprinkled with a species of festuca— 
a better grass than we liad found for many days. Our elevated position 
gave us a good view over the country, but we discovered notliing very en- 


couraging. Southward, about ten miles distant, was another small lake, | 


towards which a broad trail led along the ridge; and this appearing to 


afford the most practicable route, | determined to continue our journey in 


that direction. 

December 24.—We found the water of the lake tolerably pure, and en- 
camped at the farther end. There were some good grass and canes along 
the shore, and the vegetation at this place consisted principally of chenopo- 
diaceous shrubs. 

December 25.—We were roused, on Christmas morning, by a discharge 
from the smail arms and howitzer, with which our people saluted the day; 
and the name of which we bestowed on the lake. It was the first time, per- 
haps, in this remote and desolate region, in which it had been so commem- 


orated. Always, on days of religious or national commemoration, our voy- },' 
ageurs expect some unusual allowance ; and, having nothing else, I' gave | 


} 


| 


f 


them 
useft 
here, 
The 
some 
a loft 
siona 
that 1 
afterr 
labor 
Ther 
stole: 
like v 
shrub 
were 
De 
sists ¢ 
formit 
tains | 
dividi 
sons o 
times 
ly moi 
high, ; 
ling de 
a narr 
up ale 
little S 
near tl 
botto 
belong 
camp 
longin 
Indian 
Dec 
brane 
up a bi 
a good 
81x Inc 
pass in 
weres 
unusu 
neigh 
we we 
our ho 
anothe 
encam 
still ab 
to-ni 
Dec 
horses 


r animals; and 

I rode ahead 
atercourse en- 
‘dry character, 
lery substance, 
f ducks on the 
2 the grass had 


a more perfect 
rely around its 


passable rocky 
gly bore off to- 
erable distance 
ntains, and the 
earer ridge im- 
precipices, now 
idge, snow was 
; buse, we rode 
among the sage 
The two India- 
ich afforded suf- 
ich relieved the 
andy plain, the 
igh and twelve 
forts or houses, 
d not ascertain. 


Vhe country 
othing but sage 
long the foot of 
account of the 
slope at the foot 
ushes and small 
nd here several 
es of festuca— 


evated position |; 
otliing very en- | 
ther small lake, © 


is appearing to 
P our journey in 


y pure, and en- 
and canes along 
ally of chenopo- 


, by a discharge 
paluted the day; 

first time, per- 
en so commem- 
bration, our voy- 


it daylight 38°; | 


| 


ing else, I gave | 


211 [ 174] 
them each a little brandy, (which was carefully guarded, as one of the most 
useful articles a traveller can carry,) with some coffee and sugar, which 
here, where ever eatable was a luxury, was sufficient to make them a feast. 
The day was :.ny and warm; and, resuming our journey, we crossed 
some slight dividing grounds into a similar basin, walled in on the right by 
a lofty mountain ridge. The plainly beaten trail still continued, and ocea- 
sionally we passed camping grounds of the Indians, which indicated to me 
that we were on one of the great thoroughfares of the country. In the 
afternoon I attempted to travel in a more eastern direction ; but, after a few 
laborious miles, was beaten back into the basin by an impassable country. 
There were fresh Indian tracks about the valley, and last night a horse was 
stolen. We encamped on the valley bottom, where there was some cream- 
like water in ponds, colored by a clay soil and frozen over. Chenopodiaceous 
shrubs constituted the growth, and made again our fire wood. The animals 
were driven to the hill, where there was tolerably good grass. 

December 26.—Our general course was again south. The country con- 
sists of larger or smaller basins, into which the mountain waters run down, 
formingpsmall Jakes; they present a perfect level, from which the moun- 
tains rise immediataly and abruptly. Between the successive basins, the 
dividing grounds are usually very slight ; and it is probable that, in the sea- 
sons of high water, many of these basins are ia communication. At such 
times there is evidently an abundance of water, though now we find searce- 
ly more than the dry beds. On either side, the mountains, though not very 
high, appear to be rocky and sterile. The basin in which we were travel- 
ling declined towards the southwest corner, where the mountains indicated 
a narrow outlet; and, turning round a rocky point or cape, we continued 
up a lateral branch valley, in which we encamped at night on a rapid, pretty 
little stream of fresh water, which we found unexpectedly among the sage 
near the ridge, on the right side of the valley. It was bordered with grassy 
bottoms and clumps of wiliows, the water partially frozen. This stream 
belongs to the basin we had left. By a partial observation to-night, our 
camp was found to be directly on the 42d parallel. To night a horse be- 
longing to Carson, one of the best we had in the camp, was stolen by the 
Indians. 

December 27.—We continued up the valley of the stream, the principal 
branch of which here issues from a bed of high mountains. We turned 
up a branch to the left, and fell into an Indian trail, which conducted us by 
a good road over open bottoms along the creek, where the snow was five or 
six inches deep. Gradually ascending, the trail led through a good broad 
pass in the mountain, where we found the snow about one fvot deep. There 
were some remarkably large cedars in the pass, which were covered with an 
unusual quantity of frost, which we supposed might possibly indicate the 
neighborhood of water; and as, in the arbitrary position of Mary’s lake, 
we were already beginning to look for it, this circumstance contributed to 
our hope of finding it near. Descending from the mountain, we reached 
another basin, on the flat lake bed of which we found no water, and 
encamped among the sage on the bordering plain, where the snow was 
still about one foot deep. Among this the grass was remarkably green, and 
to-night the animals fared tolerably well. 

December 28.—The snow being deep, I had determined, if any more 
horses were stolen, to follow the tracks of the Indians into the mountains, 


and put a temporary check to their sly operations; but it did not occur 


Oar road this morning lay down a level valley, bordered by steep moun. 
teimous ridges, rising very abruptly from the plain. Artemisia was the prin. 
eipal plant, mingled with Fremontia and the chenopodiaceous shrubs, 
The artemisia was here extremely large, being sometimes a foot in diame- 
Riding quietly along over the snow, we came sud- 
denly upon smokes rising among these bushes; and, galloping up, we found 
two huts, open at the top, and loosely built of sage, which appeared to have 
been deserted at the instant; and, looking hastily around, we saw several 
Indians on the crest of the ridge near by, and several others scrambling up 
We had come upon them so suddenly, that they had been well. 
A sage tire was burning in the middle; a 
few baskets made of straw were lying about, with one or two rabbit skins; 
and there was a li(tle grass scattered about, on whi 
“ Tabibo—bo !”’ they shouted from the hills—a » 
language, signifies whifte—and remained looking ., us from behind the 

Carson and Godey rode towards the hill, but the men r@n off like 
They had been so much pressed, that a worflan with two children 
liad dropped behind a sage bush near the lodge, and when Carson accident 
ally stumbled upon her, she immediately began screaming in the extremity 
of fear, and shut her eyes fast, to avoid seeing him. 
to the lodge, and we endeavored in vain to open a communication with the © 
By dint of presents, and friendly demonstrations, she was brought 
to calmness; and we found that they belonged to the Snake nation, speak- 
Right or ten appeared to live together, 
under the same little shelter; an“ they seemed to have no other subsistence 
than the roots or seeds they might have stored up, and the hares which live ® 
im the sage, and which they are enabled to track through the snow, and are j - 
Their skins afford them a little scanty covering. 
Herding together among bushes, and crouching almost naked over a little 
sage fire, using their instinct only to procure food, these may be considered, } 
among human beings, the nearest approach to the mere animal creation. 
We have reason to believe that these had never before seen the face of 1¢ 


ter and eight feet high. 


nigh surprised in their lodges. 


ihey had been lying. | 
« wich, in the Snake | 


She was brought back 


ing the language of that people. 


-very skilful in killing. 


” 


The day had been pleasant, but about two o’clock it began to blow ; and 
erossing a slight dividing ground we encamped on the sheltered side of) | 
hill, where there was good bunch grass, having made a day’s journey of 2 | 
The night closed in, threatening snow ; but the large sage bushes | 
made bright fires. i 

December 29.—The morning mild, and at 4 o’elock it commenced snow: 
ing. We took our way across a plain, thickly covered with snow, towardi | 
a range of hills in the southeast. ‘The sky soon became so dark with snow, | 
that little could be seen of the surrounding country ; and we reached th: 
summit of the hills in a heavy snow storm. 
proached, this had appeared to be only a ridge of low hills; and we were 
surprised to find ourselves on the summit of a bed of broken mountains, } 
which, as far as the weather would permit us to see, declined rapidly « | 
some low country ahead, presenting a dreary and savage character; and © 
for a moment I looked around in doubt on the wild and inhospitable pros: } 
pect, scarcely knowing what road to take which might conduct us to some 
Noticing among the hills the head of) | 


Ph tS 


eget S 


ie 


On the side we had ap 


place of shelter for the night. 


| grassy 
us to a 
low gt 
stream 
by the 
with v 
ered b 
mount: 
and cc 
very c 
distanc 
Indian 
rently 

Dec 
easter! 
termin 
could : 
more t 
of will 
positio: 
in Mar 
rapidly 
showec 
so narr 
a singu 
the litt 
either 
abunds 

Dece 
more d 
the dr 
which 
into an 
obtaing 
was sa 

Her 
a gloor 
countr 
of a V4 
worn ; 
scarce 


213 [ 174] 


| grassy hollow, I determined to follow it, in the hope that it would conduct 
us toastream. We followed a winding descent tor several miles, the hot- 
low gradually broadening into little meadows, and becoming the bed of a 
stream as we advanced; and towards night we were agreeably surprised 
by the appearance of a willow grove, where we found a sheltered camp, 
with water and excellent and abundant grass. The grass, which was cov- 
ered by the snow on the bottom, was long and green, and the face of the 
W, We came sud. mountain had a more favorable character in its vegetation, being smoother, 
ng up, we found and covered with good bunch grass. The snow was deep, and the night 
ippeared tohave | very cold. A broad trail had entered the valley from the right, and a short 
Wwe saw several } distance below the camp were the tracks where a considerable party of 
reserambling up Indians had passed on horseback, who had turned out to the left, appa- 
y had been well. rently with the view of crossing the mountains to the eastward. 
in the middle ; a December 80.—After following the stream for a few hours in a south- 
worabbit skins; | easterly direction, it entered a cation where we could not follow; but de- 
r had been lying. | termined not to leave the stream, we searched a passage below, where we 
ch, in the Snake |, gould regain it, and entered a regular narrow valley. The water had now 
rom behind the more the appearance of a flowing creek ; several times we passed groves 
men r@n off like of willows, and we began to feel ourselves out of all difficulty. From our 
ith two children position, it was reasonable to conclude that this stream would find its outlet 


did not occur 


by steep moun. 
sia was the prin. 
iaceous shrubs, 
a foot in diame- 


Carson accident: in Mary’s lake, and conduct us into a better country. We had descended 
in the extremity yanidly, and here we found very little snow. On both sides, the mountains 
vas brought back showed often stupendous and curious-looking rocks, which at several places 


nication with the" s9 narrowed the valley, that scarcely a pass was left for the camp. It was 


she was brought | singular place to travel through—shut up in the earth, a sort of chasm, 
ke nation, speak the little strip of grass under our feet, the rough walls of bare rock om 
to live together, gither hand, and the narrow strip of sky above. The grass to-night was 
other subsistence abundant, and we encamped in high spirits. 
hares which live ® December 31.—After an hour’s ride this morning, our hopes were once 
he snow, and ate | * more destroyed. The valley opened out, and before us again lay one of 
scanty coverins § the dry basins. After some search, we discovered a high-water outlet, 
aked over a litle} = which brought us in a few miles, and by a descent of several hundred feet, 
ay be considered, into another long broad basin, in which we found the bed of a stream, and 
animal creation) obtained sufficient water by cutting the ice. The grass on the bottoms 
een the face off was salt and unpalatable. ‘ 
__ Here we eoncluded the year 1843, and our new year’s eve was gather 
gan to blow ; and  agloomy one. The result of our journey began to be very uncertain; the 
heltered side oft) country was singularly unfavorable to travel; the grasses being frequently 
ays journey of 4 | of a very unwholesome character, and the hoofs of our animals were so 
large sage bushe}’” worn and cut by the rocks, that many of them were lame, and could 
_ scarcely be got along. 

New Year’s day, 1844.—We continued down the valley, between a dry- 
looking black ridge on the left and a more snowy and high one on the 
| right. Our road was bad along the bottom, being broken by gullies and 
impeded by sage, and sandy on the hills, where there is not a blade of 
grass, nor does any appear on the mountains. The soil in many places 
consists of a fine powdery sand, covered with a saline efflorescence; and 
the general character of the country is desert. During the day we di- 
= rected our course towards a black cape, at the foot of which‘a column of 
e character; an’ % smoke indicated hot springs. 
inhospitable pros: | January 2.—We were on the road early, the face of the country hidden 


onduct us to some!” by falling snow. We travelled along the bed of the stream, in some places 
lis the head of | 


ommenced snow ~ 
‘ith snow, towards | 
o dark with snov, | 
d we reached th 
side we had ap- 
ills; and we wert 
roken mountains, | 
eclined rapidly 0 | 


© _— _— 
wae SST 


a TEES an RE 


IBALL IMEI TI 2 A RTM TA EI EE TRE ISO TSF 


SRI AR ERO TT TS es AN Ee 


So ai a ree 


+ 
tai nceeispins cence 
- —_ 


f 174 J 214 


dry, in others covered with ice; the travelling being very bad, through 
deep fine sand, rendered tenacious by a mixture of clay, " he weather 
cleared up a little at noon, and we reached the hot springs o1 which we 
had seen the vapor the day before. There was a large field of ‘the usual 
salt grass here, peculiar to such places. The country otherwise is a per- 
fect barren, without a blade of grass, the only plants being some dwarf 


Fremontias. We passed the rocky cape, a jagged broken point, bare and 
torn. The rocks are volcanic, and the hills here have a burnt appear- 


anee—cinders and coal occasionally appearing as at a blacksmith’s forge. 
We crossed the large dry bed of a muddy lake in a southeasterly direction, 
and encamped at night without water and without grass, among sage bushes 
covered with snow. The heavy road made several mules give out to-day; 
and a horse, which had made the journey from the States successfully thus 
far, was left on the trail. 

January 3.—A fog, so dense that we could not see a hundred yards, 
covered the country, and the men that were sent out after the horses were 
bewildered and lost; and we were consequently detained at camp until 
late in the day. Our situation had now become a serious one. We had 
reached and run over the position where, according to the best maps in 
my possession, we should have found Mary’s lake, or river. We were 
evidently on the verge of the desert which had been reported to us; and 
the appearance of the country was so forbidding, that I was afraid to enter 
it, and determined to bear away to the southward, keeping close along the 
mountains, in the full expectation of reaching the Buenaventura river, 
This morning I put every man in the camp on foot—myself, of course, 
among the rest—and in this manner lightened by distribution the loads of 
the animals. We travelled seven or eight miles along the ridge border- 
ing the valley, and encamped where there were a few bunches of grass on 
the bed ofa hill torrent, without water. There were some large artemi- 
sias; but the principal plants are chenopodiaceous shrubs. The rock com- 
posing the mountains is here changed suddenly into white granite. The 
fog showed the tops of the hills at sunset, and stars enough for observations 
in the early evening, and then closed over us as before. Latitude by ob- 
servation, 40° 48’ 15”. 

January 4.—The fog to-day was still more dense, and the people again 
were bewildered. We travelled a few miles around the western point of 
the ridge, and encamped where there were a /ew tufts of grass, but no 
water. Our animals now were in a very alarming state, and there was in- 
ereased anxiety in the camp. 

January 5.—Same dense fog continued, and one of the mules died in 
camp this morning. I have had occasion to remark, on such occasions as 
these, that animals which are about to die leave the band, and, coming 
into the camp, lie down about the fires. We moved toa place where 
there wasa little better grass, about two miles distant. Taplin, one of our 
best men, who had gone out on a scouting excursion, ascended a mountain 
near by, and to his great surprise emerged into a region of bright sunshine, 
in which the. upper parts of the mountain were glowing, while below all 
was obscured, in the darkest fog. 

January 6.—The fog continued the same, and, with Mr. Preuss and Car- 
son, | ascended the mountain, to sketch the leading features of the country, 
as some indication of our future route, while Mr. Fitzpatrick explored the 
eountry below. In a very short distance we had ascended above the mist, 


but th 
cleare 
west ¢ 
ed, we 
of hot 
chann 
grass, 
uppea 
traces 
Ent 
after : 
the sp 
tolera 
agree 
aTh 
the jo 
hund: 
feet it 
reguli 
Naep 
but w 
ed on 
perati 
of the 
with ; 
the ce 
tom, 
are se 
but th 
comn 


bad, through 
"he weather 
vt which we 
of the usual 
ise is a per- 
some dwarf 
bint, bare and 
urnt appear. 
smith’s forge, 
brly direction, 
g sage bushes 
e out to-day; 
cessfully thus 


ndred yards, 

horses were 
at camp until 
ne. We had 
best maps in 
r. We were 
ed to us; and 
fraid to enter 
ose along the 
entura river, 
If, of course, 
n the loads of 
ridge border- 
es of grass on 
large artemi- 
he rock com- 
ranite. The 
: observations 
titude by ob- 


people again 
stern point of 
yrass, but no 
there was in- 


mules died in 
1 occasions as 
and, coming 
place where 
in, one of our 
da mountain 
ght sunshine, 
ile below all 


2uss and Car- 
‘the country, 
explored the 
ove the mist, 


Sn eee 


215 [174] 


but the view obtained was not very gratifying. The fog had partially 
cleared off from below when we reached the summit; and in the south- 
west corner of a basin communicating with that ini which we had encamp- 
ed, we saw a lofty coluinn of smoke, 16 miles distant, indicating the presence 
of hot springs. ‘There, also, uppeared to be the outlet of those draining 
channels of the country ; and, as such places afforded always more or less 
grass, I determined to steer in thatdirection. The ridge we had ascended 
appeared to be composed of fragments of white granite. We saw here 
traces of sheep and antelope. 

Entering the neighboring valley, and crossing the bed of another lake, 
after a hard day’s travel over ground of yielding mud and sand, we reached 
the springs, where we found an abundance of grass, which, though only 
tolerably good, made this place, with reference to the past, a refreshing and 
agreeable spot. 

This is the most extraordinary locality of hot springs we had met durin 
the journey. The basin of the largest one has a circumference of severa 
hundred feet ; but there is at one extremity a circular space of about fifteen 
feet in diameter, entirely occupied by the boiling water. It boils up at ir- 
regular intervals, and with much noise. The water is clear, and the spring 
deep ; a pole about sixteen teet long was easily immersed in the centre, 
but we had no means of forming a good idea of the depth. It was surround- 
ed on the margin with a border of green grass, and near the shore the tem- 
perature of the water was 206°, We had no means of ascertaining that 
of the centre, where the heat was greatest ; but, by dispersing the water 
with a pole, the temperature at the margin was increased to 208°, and in 
the centre it was doubtless higher. By driving the pole towards the bot- 
tom, the water was made to boil up with increased force and noise. There 
are several other interesting places, where water and smoke or gas escape, 
but they would require a long description. The water is impregnated with 
common salt, but not so much so as to render it unfit for general cooking ; 
and a mixture of snow made it pleasant to drink. . 

in the immediate neighborhood, the valley bottom is covered almost ex- 
clusively with chenopodiaceous shrubs, of greater luxuriance, and larger 
growth, than we have seen them in any preceding part of the journey. 

I obtained this evening some astronomical observations. 

Our situation now required caution. {Including those which gave out 
from the injured condition of their feet, and those stolen by Indians, we 
had lost, since leaving the Dalles of the Columbia, filteen animals; and of 
these, nine had been left in the last few days. [ therefore determined, un- 
til we should reach a country of water and vegetation, to feel our way 
ahead, by having the line of route explored some fifteen or twenty miles 
in advance, and only to leave a present encampment when the succeeding 
one was known. 

Taking with me Godey and Carson, | made to-day a thorough explora- 
tion of the neighboring valleys, and found in a ravine in the bordering 
mountains a good camping place, where was water in springs, and a suffi- 
cient quantity of grass for a night. Overshading the springs were some 
trees of the sweet cottonwood, which, after a long interval of absence, we 
saw again with pleasure, regarding them as harbingers of a better country. 
To us, they were eloquent of green prairies and buffalo. We found here a 
broad and plainly marked trail, on which there were tracks, of horses, and 


‘we appeared to have regained one of the thoroughfares which pass by the 


[ 174] 216 


watering places of the country. On the western mountains of the valley,, 
with which this of the boiling spring communicates, we remarked scat- 
tered cedars—probably an indication that we were on the borders of the 
timbered region extending to the Pacific. We reached the camp at sunset, 
after a day’s ride of about forty miles. The horses we rode were in a 
order, being of some that were kept for emergencies, and rarely used. 

Mr. Preuss had ascended one of the mountains, and occupied the day in 
sketching the country ; and Mr, Fitzpatrick had found, a few miles distant, 
a hollow of excellent grass and pure water, to which the animals were 
driven, as I remained another day to give them an opportunity to recruit 
their strength. Indians appear to be every where prowling about like wild 
animals, and there is a fresh trail across the snow in the valley near. 

Latitude of the boiling springs, 40° 39' 46". 

On the 9th we crossed over to the cottonwood camp. Among the shrubs 
on the hills were a few bushes of ephedra occidentalis, which afterwards 
occurred frequently along our road, and, as usual, the lowlands were occu- 
pied with artemisia. While the party proceeded to this place, Carson and 
myself reconnoitred the road in advance, and found another good encamp- 
ment for the following day. 

January 10.—We continued our reconnoisance ahead, pursuing a south 
direction in the basin along the ridge ; the camp following slowly after. On 
a large trail there is never any doubt of finding suitable places for encamp- 
ments. We reached the end of the basin, where we found, in a hollow of 
the mountain which enclosed it, an abundance of good bunch grass. 
Leaving a signal for the party to encamp, we continued our way up the 
hollow, intending to see what lay beyondthe mountain. The hollow was 
several miles long, forming a good pass, the snow deepening to about a 
foot as we neared the summit. Beyond, a defile between the mountains 
descended rapidly about two thousand feet; and, filling up all the lower 
space, was a sheet of green water, some twenty miles broad. It broke upon. 
our eyes like the ocean. The neighboring peaks rose high above us, 
and we ascended one of them to obtain a better view. The waves were 
curling in the breeze, and their dark-green color showed it to be a body of 
deep water. For along time we sat enjoying the view, for we had become: 
fatigued with mountains, and the free expanse of moving waves was very 
grateful. It was set like a gem in the mountains, which, from our position, 
seemed to enclose it almost entirely. At the western end it communicated 
with the line of basins we had left a few days since; and on the opposite: 
side it swept a ridge of snowy mountains, the foot of the great Sierra. Its 
position at first inclined us to believe it Mary’s lake, but the rugged moun- 
tains were so entirely discordant with descriptions of its low rushy shores: 
and open country, that we concluded it some unknown body of water; 
which it afterwards proved to be. 

On our road down, the next day, we saw herds of mountain sheep, and 
encamped on a little stream at the mouth of the defile, about a mile from 
the margin of the water, to which we hurried down immediately. The 
water is so slightly salt, that, at first, we thought it fresh, and would be 
prema to drink when no other could be had. The shore was rocky—a 

andsome beach, which reminded us of the sea. On some large granite 
boulders that were scattered about the shore, [ remarked a coating of a 
calcareous substance, in some places a few inches and in others a foot in 
thickness. Near our camp, the hills, which were of primitive rock, were: 


a 


Qiwvyagd 


aNvi 


RS iS as + ‘ : “i 


the valley, 
arked scat- 
lers of the 
p at sunset, 
are in good 
ly used. 
1 the day in 
‘les distant, 
imals were 
to recruit 
ut like wild 
y near. 


x the shrubs 
1 afterwards 
were occu- 
Carson and 
od encamp- 


ving a south 
ly after. On 
for encamp- 
1a hollow of 
yunch grass. 
way up the 
e hollow was 
r to about a 
e mountains 
ll the lower 
t broke upon: 
above us, 
waves were 
be a body of 
» had become: 
yes was very 
our position, 
mmunicated 
the opposite: 
Sierra. Its 
igged moun- 


rushy shores: 


ly of water ; 


n sheep, and 
a mile from 
ately. The 
ind would be 
as rocky—a 
arge granite 
coating of a 
ers a foot in 
e rock, were: 


sn 2am 


jWWHAG 


a 


axvvi 


aE 


ing t 
mile 
grass 


ther 
ceed 
fish ° 
cemt 
shru 
ephe 
‘Re 
heav 
T 
Part 
onl 
in it 
cord 
viev 
The 
alon 
strik 
lake 
und 
rese 
bet 


feet 
dist 


* 


from 
Carb 
Carb 
Oxid 
Alu 
Silic 
Orgs 


217 [ 174) 


also covered with this substance, which was in too great quantity on the 

mountains along the shore of the lake to have been deposited by water, 

and has the ry te a of having been spread over the rocks in mass.* 

? Where we had halted, appeared to be a favorite camping place for In- 
ians. 

January 13.—We followed again a broad Indian *rsil along the shore of 

the lake to the southward. For a short space we had rbom enough in the 
bottom ; but, after travelling a short distance, the water swept the foot of 
peers mountains, the peaks of which are about 3,000 feet above the 
ake. The trail wound along the base of these precipices, against which 
the water dashed below, by a way nearly impracticable for the howitzer. 
During a greater part of the morning the lake was nearly hid by a snow 
storm, and the waves broke on the narrow beach in a long line of foaming 
surf, five or six feet high. The day was unpleasantly cold, the wind driv- 
ing the snow sharp against our faces ; and, having advanced only about 12 
miles, we encamped ina bottom formed by a ravine, covered with good 
grass, Which was fresh and green. 

We did not get the howitzer into camp, but were obliged to leave it on 
the rocks until morning. We saw several flocks of sheep, but did not suc- 
ceed in killing any. Ducks were riding on the waves, and several large 
fish were seen. The mountain sides were crusted with the calcareous 
cement previously mentioned. There were chenopodiaceous and other 
shrubs along the beach; and, at the foot of the rocks, an abundance of 
cen occidentalis, whose dark-green color makes them evergreens vey 
the shrubby growth of the lake. ‘Towards evening the snow began to fal 
heavily, and the country had a wintry appearance. 

The next morning the snow was rapidly melting under s warm sun. 
Part of the morning was occupied in bringing up the gun; and, ae 
only nine miles, we encamped on the shore, oppositea very rematkable roc 
in the lake, which had attracted our attention for many miles. It rose, ac- 
cording to our estimate, 600 feet above the water ; and, from the point we 
viewed it, presented a pretty exact outlifie of the great pyramid of Cheops. 
The accompanying drawing presents it as we sawit. Like other rocks 
along the shore, it seemed to be incrusted with calcareous cement. This 
striking feature suggested a name for the lake; and [ called it Pyramid 
lake; and though it may be deemed by some a fanciful resemblance, I can 
undertake to say that the future traveller will find a much more striking 
resemblance between this rock and the pyramids of Egypt, than there is 
between them and the object from which they take their name. 

The elevation of this lake above the sea is 4,890 feet, being nearly 700 
feet higher than the Great Salt lake; from which it lies nearly west, and 
distant about eight degrees of longitude. The position and elevation of this 


* The label attached to a specimen of this rock was lost ; but I append an analysis of that which, 
from memory, I judge to be the specimen. 
Carbonate of lime - | - 


- - - - - - 77.31 
Carbonate of magnesia = - ° - - - - ° 6.25 
Oxide of iron - - : - - - - - 1.60 
Alumina - - - - - - . - - 1.05 
Silica - . - ° - - - - -" - 8.55 
Organic matter, water, and loss . - - - - - - - 6.24 


f 174 J 218 


lake make it an object of geographical interest. It is the nearest Inke to 
the western rim, as the Great Salt lake isto the eastern rim, of the Great 
Basin which lies between the base of the Rocky mountains and the Sierra 
Nevada ; and the extent and character of which, its whole cireumference 
and contents, it is so desirable to know. 

The last of the cattle which had been driven from the Dalles was killed 
here for food, and was still in good condition, 

January 15.—A_ few poor-looking Indians made their appearance this 
morning, and we succeeded in getting one into the camp. He was naked, 
with the exception of a tunic of hare skins, He told us that there was 4 
river at the end of the lake, but that he lived in the rocks near by. From 
the few words our people could understand, he spoke a dialect of the Snake 
language ; but we were not able to understand enough to know whether 
the river ran in or out, or what was its course ; consequently, there still 
remained a chance that this might be Mary’s lake. 

Groves of large cottonwood, which we could see at the mouth of the 
river, indicated that it was a stream of considerable size ; and, at all events, 
we had the pleasure to know that now we were ina country where human 
beings could live. Accompanied by the Indian, we resumed our road, pass- 
ing on the way several caves in the rock where there were baskets and 
seeds ; but the people had disappeared. We saw also horse tracks along 
the shore. 

Early in the afternoon, when we were approaching the groves at the 
mouth of the river, three or four Indians met us on the trail. We had an 
explanatory conversation in signs, and ther moved on together towards the 
village, which the chief said was encamped on the bottom. 

Reaching the groves, we found the inlet of a large fresh-water stream, 
and all at once were satisfied that it was neither Mary’s river nor the 
waters of the Sacramento, but that we had discovered a large interior lake, 
which the Indians informed us had no outlet. It is about 35 miles long ; 
and, by the mark of the water line along the shores, the spring level is about 
12 feet above its present waters. Bhe chief commenced speaking in a loud 
voice as we approached ; and parties of Indians armed with bows and ar- 
rows issued from the thickets. We selected a strong place for our encamp- 
ment—a grassy bottom, nearly enclosed by the river, and furnished with 
abundant fire wood. The village, a collection of straw huts, was a few 
hundred yards higher up. An Indian brought in a large fish to trade, 
which we had the inexpressible satisfaction to tind was 2 salmon trout; we 
gathered round him eagerly. The Indians were amused with our delight, 
and immediately brought in numbers ; so that the camp was soon stocked. 
Their flavor was excellent—superior’,in fact, to that of any fish I have ever 
known. They were of extraordinary size—about as large as the Columbia 
river salmon—generally from two to four feetin length. From the infor- 
mation of Mr. Walker, who passed among some lakes lying more to the 
eastward, this fish is common to the streams of the inland lakes. He sub- 
sequently informed me that he had obtained them weighing six pounds 
when cleaned and the head taken off; which corresponds very well with 
the size of those obtained at this place. They doubtless formed the subsist- 
ence of these people, who hold the fishery in exclusive possession. 

1 remarked that one of them gave a fish to the Indian we had first seen, 
which he carried off to his family. To them it was probably a feast ; being 
of the Digger tribe, and having no share in the fishery, living generally on 


rest Inke to 
bf the Great 

the Sierra 
cumference 


8 was killed 


aranee this 
was naked, 
there was a 
by. From 
bf the Snuke 
w whether 
» there still 


outh of the 
tall events, 
here human 
r road, pass- 
baskets and 
racks along 


roves at the 
We had an 
towards the 


ter stream, 
ver nor the 
terior lake, 
miles long ; 
vel is about 
ng in a loud 
Ws and ar- 
ur encamp- 
nished with 
was a few 
sh to trade, 
n trout; we 
our delight, 
on stocked. 
I have ever 
e Columbia 
n the infor- 
nore to the 
»  Hesub- 
six pounds 
y well with 
the subsist- 
ion. 

| first seen, 
past ; being 
enerally on 


219 [ 174 J 


seeds and roots. Although this wasa time of the year when the fish have 
not yet become fat, they were excellent, and we could only imagine what 
they are at the proper season. These Indians were very fat, and appeared 
to iive an easy and happy life. They erowded into the camp more than 
was consistent with our safety, retaining always their arms; and, as they 
made some unsatisfactory demonstrations, they were given to understand 
that they would not be etc to come armed into the camp; and strong 
uards wore kept with the horses, Strict vigilance was maintained among 
the people, and one-third at a time were kept on guard during the night, 
There is no reason to doubt that these dispositions, uniformly preserved, 
conducted our party securely through Indians famed for treachery. 

In the mean time, such a solmon-trout feast us is seldom seen was going 
on in our camp; and every variety of manner in which fish could be pre- 
pared—boiled, fried, and roasted in the ashes—was put into requisition ; 
and every few minutes an Indian would be seen running off to spear a 
fresh one. Whether these Indians had seen whites before, we could not 
be certain; but they were evidently in communication with others who 
had, as one of them had some brass buttons, und we noticed several other 
articles of civilized manufacture. We could obtain from them but little 
information respecting the country, They made onthe ground a drawing 
of the river, which they represented as issuing from another lake in the 
mountains three or four days distant, in a direction a little west of south ; 
beyond which, they drew a mountain ; and further still, two rivers; on one 
of which they told us that people like ourselves travelled. Whether they 
alluded to the settlements on the Sacramento, or to a party from the Unit- 
ed States which had crossed the Sierra about three degrees to the south- 
ward, a few years since, | am unable te determine. 

I tried unsuccessfully to prevail on some of them to guide us for a few 
days on the road, but they only looked at each other and laughed. 

The latitude of our encampment, which may be considered the mouth 
of the inlet, is 39° 51' 13" by our observations. 

January 16.—This morning we continued our journey along this beau- 
tiful stream, which we naturally called the Salmon Trout river. Large 
trails led up on either side ; the stream was handsomely timbered with large 
cottonwoods ; and the waters were very clear and pure. We were getters. 
along the mountains of the great Sierra, which rose on our right, covere 
with snow ; but below the temperature was mild and pleasant.. We saw a 
number of dams which the Indians had constructed to catch fish. After 
having made about 18 miles, we encamped under some large eottonwoods 
on the river bottom, where there was tolerably good grass. 

January 17.—This morning we left the river, which here issues from the 
mountains on the west. With every stream I now expected to see the great 
Buenaventura; and Carson hurried eagerly to search, on every one we 
reached, for beaver cuttings, which he always maintained we should find 
only on waters that ran to the Pacific ; and the absence of such signs was 
to him a sure indication that the water had no outlet from the great basin. 
We followed the Indiap trail through a tolerably level country, with small 
sage bushes, which brought us, after 20 miles journey, to another large 
stream, timbered with cottonwood, and flowing also out of the mountains, 
but running more directly to the eastward. 7 

On the way we surprised a family of Indians in the hills; but the man 
ran up the mountain with rapidity ; and the woman was so terrified, and 


[174 J 220 


kept up such a continued screaming, that we could do nothing with her, 
and were obliged to let her go. 

January \8.—There were Indian lodges and fish dams on the stream, 
There were no beaver cuttings on the river; but below, it turned round 
to the right; and, hoping that it would prove a branch of the Buenaventura, 
we followed it down for about three hours, and encamped, 

I rode out with Mr, Fitzpatrick and Carson to reconnoitre the country, 
which had evidently been alarmed by the news of our appearance. This 
stream joine¢ with the open valley of another to the eastward ; but which 
way the main water ran, it was impossible to tell. Columns of smoke rose 
over the country at scattered intervals—signals by which the Indians here, 
as elsewhere, communicate to each other that enemies are in the country. 
It is a signal of ancient and very universal application among barbarians, 

Besmining into the condition of the animals when [ returned into the 
camp, I found their feet so much cut up by the rocks, and so many of 
them lame, that it was evidently impossible that they could cross the coun- 
try to the Rocky mountains. Every piece of iron that could be used for the 
purpose had been converted into nails, and we could make no further use 
of the shoes we had remaining. 1| therefore determined to abandon my 
eastern course, and to cross the Sierra Nevada into the valley of the Sacra- 
mento, wherever a practicable pass could be found. My decision was heard 
with joy by the people, and diffused new life throughout the camp, 

Latitude, by observation, 39° 24' 16", 

January 19.—A great number of smokes are still visible this morning, 
attesting at once the alarm which our appearance had spread among these 
people, and their ignorance of us. If they knew the whites, they would 
understand that their only object in coming among them was to trade, which 
required peace and friendship; but they have nothing to trade—conse- 
quently, nothing to attract the white man; hence their fear and flight. 

At daybreak we had a heavy snow; but sat out, and, returning up the 
stream, went out of our way in a circuit over a little mountain; and en- 
camped on the same stream, a few miles above, in latitude 39° 19’ 21” by 
observation. 

Januury 20.—To-day we continued up the stream, and encamped on it 
close to the mountains. The freshly fallen snow was covered with the 
tracks of Indians, wio had descended from the upper waters, probably 
called down by the smokes in the plain. ° 

We ascended a peak of the range, which commanded a view of this stream 
behind the first ridge, where it was winding its course through a somewhat 
open valley, and [ sometimes regret that I did not make the trial to cross 
here ; but while we had fair weather below, the mountains were darkened 
with falling snow, and, feeling unwilling to encounter them, we turned 
away again to the southward. In that direction we travelled the next day 
over a tolerably level country, having always the high mountains on the 
west. There was but little snow or rock on the ground ; and, after having 
travelled 24 miles, we encatnped again on another large stream, runnin 
off to the northward and eastward, to meet that we had left. It ran through 
broad’ bottoms, having a fine meadow-land appeararice. 

Latitude 39° 01' 53”. 

January 22.—We travelled up the stream for about 14 miles to the foot 
of the mountains, from Which one branch issued in the southwest, the 
other flowing from SSE. along their base. Leaving the camp below, 


=j25R% Re wzs2zRnRstzce 


—- = 


am = sft wf 


ae Ls ae a 


g with her, 


the stream, 
rned round 
onaventura, 


he country, 
ance. This 
; but which 
smoke rose 
dians here, 
he country, 
barbarians, 

ed into the 
80 many of 
$8 the coun- 
used for the 
b further use 
abandon my 
( the Sacra- 
n was heard 
‘amp, 


is morning, 
among these 
they would 
trade, which 
ade—conse- 
id flight. 

‘ning up the 
in; and en- 
°19' 21” by 


amped on it 
ed with the 
8, probably 


‘this stream 
a somewhat 
rial te cross 
‘e darkened 
we turned 
he next day 
ains on the 
fter having 
im, runnin 

ran through 


s to the foot 
thwest, the 
imp below, 


221 [ 174 ] 


we ascended the range through which the first stream passed, in a cafion ; 
on the western side was a okeelar valley, about 15 miles long, through 
which the stream wound its way, issuing from a gorge in the main moun- 
tain, which rose abruptly re md, The valley looked yellow with faded 
grass ; and the trail we had foll. wed was visible, making towards the gorge, 
and this was evidently a pass; but again, while all was bright sunshine on 
the ridge and on the valley where we were, the snow was falling heavily 
in the mountains, | dete :inined to go still to the southward, and encamp- 
ed on the stresm neay the forks; the animals being fatigued and the 
grass tolerably good. 

The rock of the ridge we 'a1 ascended is a compact lava, assuming a 
granitic appearance ond structure, anc! containing, in some places, small 
nodules of obsidian. so far as compos:‘ion and aspect are concerned, the 
rock in other parts o! the vidge appears to be granite; but it is probable 
that this is only a compact form of lava of recent origin. 

By observation, the elevation of the encampment was 5,020 feet ; and 
the latitude 38° 49' 54”, 

January 23.—We moved along the course of the other branch towards 
the southeast, the country affording a fine road, and, pester. some slight 
dividing grounds, descended towards the valley of another stream. There 
was a somewhat rough-looking mountain ahead, which it appeared to issue 
from, or to enter—we could not tell which ; and as the course of the valley 
and the inclination of the ground had a favorable direction, we were 
sanguine to find here a branch of the Buenaventura ; but were again dis- 
appointeu. Siding it an inland water, on which we encamped after a day’s 
journey of 24 miles. It was evident that, from the time we descended into 
the plain at Summer lake, we had been flanking the great range of moun- 
tains which divided the Great Basin from the waters of the Pacific; and 
that ihe continued succession, and almost connexion, of lakes and rivers 
w hich we encountered, were the drainings of that: nge. Itsrains, springs, 
and snows, would sufficiently account for these lakes and streams, numer- 
ous as they were. 

January 24.—A man was discovered running towards the camp as we 
were about to start this morning, who proved to be an Indian of rather ad- 
vanced age—a sort of forlorn hope, who seemed to have been worked up 
into the resolution of visiting the strangers who were passing through the 
country. He seized the hand of the first man he met us he came up, out 
of breath, and held on, as if to assure himself of p: ‘ection. He brought 
with him in a little skin bag a few pounds of the see:': of a pine tree, which 
to-day we saw for the first time, and which Dr. Torrey has described asa 
new species, under the name of pinus monophyllus ; in popular language, 
it might be called the@ut pine. We purchased them all from him. The 
nut is oily, of very agreeable flavor, and must be very nutritious, as it 
constitutes the principal subsistence of the tribes among which we were now 
travelling. By a present of scarlet cloth, and other striking articles, we 
prevailed upon this man to be our guide of two days’ journey. As clearly 
as possible by signs, we made him understand our object ; and he engaged 
to conduct us in sight of a good pass which he knew. Here we ceased to 
hear the Shoshonee language ; that of this man being perfectly unintelli- 
gible. Several Indians, who had been waiting to see what reception he 
would meet with, now came into camp; and, accompanied by the new 
comers, we resumed oup journey. 


F 
y 
| 


f 
a | 
| 
i 


[ 174] 222 


The road led us upthe creek, which here becomes a rather rapid moun- 
tain stream, filty feet wide, between dark-looking hills without snow ; but 
inmmediately beyond them rose snowy mountains on either side, timbered 
principally with the nut pine. On the lower grounds, the general height 
of this tree is twelve totwenty feet, and eight inches the greatest diameter ; 
it is rather branching, and has a peculiar and singular but pleasant odor, 
We followed the river for only a short distance along a rocky trail, and 
crossed it at a dam which the Indians made us comprehend had been built 
to catch salmon trout. The snow and ice were heaped up against it three 
or four feet deep entirely across the stream. 

Leaving here the stream, which runs through impassable caions, we con- 
tinued our road over avery broken country, passing through a low gap be- 

een the snowy mountains. The rock which occurs immediately in the 
pass has the appearance of impure sandstone, containing scales of black 
mica. This may be only a stratifed lava; on issuing from the gap, the 
compact lava, and other volcanic products usual in the country, again oc- 
curred. We descended from the gap into a wide valley, or rather basin, and 
encamped on a small tributary to the last stream, on which there was very 
good grass. [It was covered with such thick ice, that it required some labor 
with pickaxes to make holes for the animals to drink. The banks are 
lightly wooded with willow, and on the upper bottoms are sage and Fre- 
montia with ephedra occidentalis, which beginsto occur more frequently. 
The day has been a summer one, warm and pleasant ; no snow on the trail, 
which, as we ave allon foot, makes travelling more agreeable. The hunt- 
ers went into the neighboring mountains, but found no game. We have 
five Indians in camp to-night. 

January 25.—The morning was cold and bright, and as the sun rose the 
day became beautiful. A party of twelve Indians came down from the 
mnountains to trade pine nuts, of which each one carried alittle bag. These 
seemed now to be the staple of the couatry ; and whenever we met an In- 
dian, his friendly salutation consisted in offering a few nuts to eat and to 
trade; their only arms were bows and flint-pointed arrows. It appeared 
that, in almost all the valleys, the neighboring bands were at war with each 
other ; and we had some difliculty in prevailing on our guides to accompany 
us on this day’s journey, being at war with the people on the otlier side 
of a large snowy mountain which lay before us. 

. The general level of the country appeared to be getting higher, and we 
were gradually entering the heart of the mountains. Accompanied by all 
the Indians, we ascended a long ridge, and reached a pure spring at the 
edge of the timber, where the Indians had waylaid and killed an antelope, 
and where the greater part of them left us. Our pacific conduct had quieted 
their-alurms ; and though at war among each othgr, vet all confided in us. 
‘Thanks to the combined effects of power and kindness—for our arms in- 
spired respect, and our little presents and good treatment conciliated their 
confidence. Here we suddenly entered snow six inches deep, and the 
ground was a little rocky with volcanic fragments, the mountain appearing 
to:be composed of such rock. The timber consists principally of nut pines, 
(pinus monophyllus,) which here are of larger size—12 to 15 inches in 
diameter ; heaps of cones lying on the ground, where the Indians have 


gathered the seeds. 


The snow deepened gradually as we advanced. Our guides wore out 
their moccasins; and, putting one of them onahorse, weenjoyed the.unusual 


rapid moun- 
ut snow ; but 
de, timbered 
pneral height 
est diameter ; 
leasant odor, 
ky trail, and 
nd been built 
ainst it three 


ons, we con- 
low gap be- 
liately in the 
ales of black 
the gap, the 
ry, again oc- 
er basin, and 
re was very 
lsome labor 
he banks are 
ge and Fre- 
frequently. 
yon the trail, 
The hunt- 
We have 


sun rose the 
wn from the 
bag. These 
Ye met an In- 
to eat and to 

It appeared 
var with each 
0 accompany 
e other side 


ther, and we 
vanied by all 
pring at the 
an antelope, 
had quieted 
nfided in us. 
our arms in- 
siliated their 
ep, and the 
‘0. appearing 
of nut pines, 
5 inches in 
ndians have 


es wore out 
the. unusual 


ae 


223 [ 144] 


sight of an Indian who could not ride. He could not even, guide the ani- 
mal, and appeared to have no knowledge of horses. The snow was threc 
or four feet deep in the summit of the pass; and from this point the guide 
ointed out our futur: road, declining to go any further. Below us was a 
ittle valley ; and beyond this, the mountains rose higher still, one ridge 
above another, presenting a rude and rocky outline. We descended rap- 
idly to the valley ; the snow impeded us but little; yet it was dark when 
we reached the foot of the mountain. 

The day had been so warm, that our moccasins were wet with melting 
snow; but here, as soon as the sun begins to decline, the air gets suddenly 
cold, and we had great difficulty to keep our feet from treezing—our moc- 
casins being frozen perfectly stiff. After a hard day’s march of 27 miles, 
we reached the river some time after dark, and found the snow about a foot 
deep on the bottom—the river being entirely frozen over. We found 
a vomfortable camp, where there were dry willows abundant, and we soon 
had blazing fires. A little brandy, which [ husbanded with great care, 
remained, and I do not know any medicine more salutary, or any drink 
(except coffee ) more agreeable, than this in a cold night after a hard day’s 
march. Mr. Preuss questioned whether the famed nectar even possessed 
so exquisite a flavor. All felt it to be a reviving cordial. 

The next morning, when the sun had not yet risen over the mountains, 
the thermometer was 2° below zero; but the sky was bright and pure, and 
the weather changed rapidly into a pleasant day of summer. I remained 
encamped, in order to examine the country, and allow the animals a day 
of rest, the grass being good and abundant under the snow. 

The river is fifty to eighty feet wide, with a lively current, and very 
clear water. It forked a little above our camp, one of its branches com- 
ing directly from the south. At its head appeared to be a handsome 
pass; and from the neighboring heights we could see, beyond, a compara- 
tively low and open country, which was supposed to form the valley of the 
Buenaventura. The other branch issued from a nearer pass, in a direction 
S. 75° W., forking at the foot of the mountain, and receiving part of its 
waters from a little lake. I was in advance of the camp when our last 
guides had left us; but, so far as could be understood, this was the pass 
which they had indicated, and, in company with Carson, to-day I set out 
to explore it. Entering the range, we continued in a northwesterly direc- 
tion up the valley, which here bent to the right. It was a pretty, open bot- 
tom, locked between loity mountains, which supplied frequent streams as 
we advanced. On the lower part they were covered with nut-pine trees, 
and above with masses of pine, which we easily recognised, from the darker 
color of the foliage. From the fresh trails which occurred frequently during 
the morning, deer appeyed to be remarkably numerous in the mountain. 

We had now entirely left the desert country, and were on the verge of 


‘aregion which, extending westward to the shores of the Pacific, abounds 


in large game, and is covered with a singular luxuriance of vegetable ‘life. 

The little stream grew rapidly smaller, and in about twelve miles we 
had reached its‘ head, the last water coming immediately out of the moun- 
tain on the right; and this spot was selected for our next encampment. 
The grass showed well in sunny places; butin colder situations the snow 
was deep, and began to occur in banks, through which ‘the horses found 
some difficulty in breaking a way. 

To the left, the open valley continued in a southwesterly direction, with 


[74 ] 224 


a scarcely perceptible ascent, forming a beautiful pass; the exploration of 
which we deferred until the next day, and returned to the camp. 

To-day an Indian passed through the valley, on his way into the moun: 
tains, where he showed us was his lodge. We comprehended nothing of 
his language; and, though he appeared to have no fear, passing along in 
full view of the camp, he was indisposed to hold any communication with 
us, but showed the way he was going, and pointed for us to go on our road. 

By observation, the latitude of this encampment was 38° 18' 01”, and 
the elevation above the sea 6,310 feet. 

January 27.—Leaving the camp to follow slowly, with directions to 
Carson to encamp at the place agreed on, Mr. Fitzpatrick and myself con- 
tinued the reconnoissance. Arriving at the head of the stream, we began 
to enter the pass—passing occasionally through open groves of large pine 
trees, on the warm side of the defile, where the snow had melted away, 
occasionally exposing a large Indian trail. Continuing along a narrow 
meadow, we reached in a few miles the gate of the pass, where there was 
a narrow strip of prairie, about fifty yards wide, between walls of granite 
rock. On either side: rose the mountains, forming on the left a rugged 
mass, or nucleus, wholly covered with deep snow, presenting a glittering 
and icy surface. At the time, we supposed this to be the point into which 
they were gathered between the two great rivers, and from which the 
waters flowed off to the bay. This was the icy and cold side of the pass, 
and the rays of the sun hardly touched the snow. On the left, the moun- 
tains rose into peaks; but they were lower and secondary, and the country 
had a somewhat more open and lighter character. On the right were sev- 
eral hot springs, which appeared remarkable in such a place. In going 
through, we felt impressed by the majesty of the mountain, along the huge 
wall of which we were ridivg. Here there was no snow; but immedi- 
ately beyond was a deep bank, through which we dragged our horses with 
considerable effort. We then immediately struck upon a stream, which 
gathered itself rapidly, and descended quick; and the valley did not pre- 
serve the open character of the other side, appearing below to form a 
canon. We therefore climbed one of the peaks on the right, leaving our 
horses below ; but we were so much shut up, that we did not obtain an 
extensive view, and what we saw was not very satisfactory, and awakened 
considerab!e doubt. ‘The valley of the stream pursued a northwesterly 
direction, appearing below to turn sharply to the right, beyond which fur- 
ther view was cut off. It was, nevertheless, resolved to continue our road 
the next day down this valley, which we ii\sted still would prove that of 
the middle stream between the two great 1: ers. Towards the summit of 
this peak, the fields of snow were four or live feet deep on the northern 
side ; and we saw several large hares, which had on their winter color, 
being white as the snow around them. . 

The winter day is short in the mountains, the sun having but a small 
space of sky to travel over in the visible part above our horizon; and the 
moment his rays are gone, the air is keenly cold. The interest of our 
work had detained us long, and it was after nightfall when we reached 
the camp. 

January 28.—Ts-day we went @hrough the pass with all the camp, and, 
afiter'a hard day’s journey of twelve miles, encamped on a high point where 
the smow had been bilown off..and the exposed grass afforded a scanty pas- 
ture tor the animale. Snow and broken country together made our trayel- 


———— 


ling d 
the hi 
other 

Dut 
shoes, 
in spe 
sut do 
ing up 
they v 
off ove 
thinki 

To 
was tl 
and di 
had st 
eclips 
whieh 
of lons 

Jan 
below 
show. 
being 
a few 
lowed 
being: 
descet 
botton 
They | 
indisp 
log on 
though 
when | 
of pine 
few pr 
went ¢ 
still ru 
which 
which 
meado 
and ro 
ficult t 
ween 
parts c 
appeat 
come | 
a cotin 
we we 
beens 
the gre 

We 
across 
to see 


exploration of 
amp. 

ito the moun- 
ed nothing of 
ssing along in 
nication with 
0 on our road. 
> 18’ O17", and 


directions to 
d myself con- 
am, we began 
3 of large pine 
melted away, 
long a narrow 
ere there was 
alls of granite 
2 left a rugged 
ng a glittering 
dint into which 
om which the 
de of the pass, 
eft, the moun- 
nd the country 
‘ight were sev- 
ace. In going 
along the huge 
; but immedi- 
ur horses with 
stream, which 
y did not pre- 
elow to form a 
ht, leaving our 
not obtain an 
and awakened 
northwesterly 
ond which fur- 
tinue our road 
prove that of 
the summit of 
the northern 
winter color, 


ng but a small 
izon; and the 
interest of our 
n we reached 


the camp, and, 
h point where 
d a scanty pas- 
nde our travel- 


225 [ 174 ] 
ling difficult ; we were often compelled to make large circuits, and ascend 
the highest and most exposed ridges, in order to avoid snow, which in 
other places was banked up to a great depth. 

During the day a few Indians were seen cireling around us on snow 
shoes, and skimming along like birds ; but we could not bring them with- 
in speaking distance. Godey, who was alittle distance from the camp, had 
sut down to tic his moccasins, when he heard a low whistle near, and, look- 
ing up, saw two Indians half hiding behind a rock about forty yards distant ; 
they would not allow him to approach, but, breaking into a laugh, skimmed 
off over the snow, seeming to have no idea of the power of fire arms, and 
thinking themselves perfectly safe when beyond arm’s length, 

To-night we did not suceced in getting the howitzer into camp. This 
was the most laborious day we had yet passed through ; the steep ascents 
and deep snow exhausting both men and animals. Our single chronometer 
had stopped during the day, and its error in time occasioned the loss of an 
eclipse of a satellite this evening. It had not preserved the rate with 
which we started from the Dalles, and this will account for the absence 
of longitudes along this interval of our journey. 

January 29.— Krom this height we could see, at a considerable distance 
below, yellow spots in the valley, which indicated that there was not much 
snow. One of these places we expected to reach to-night ; and some time 
being required to bring up the gun, | went ahead with Mr. Fitzpatrick and 
a few men, leaving the camp to follow, in charge of Mr. Preuss. Wee fol- 
lowed a trail down a hollow where the Indians had descended, the snow 
being so deen that we never came near the ground ; but this only made our 
descent the easier, and, when we reached a little affluent to the river at the 
bottom, we suddenly found ourselves in presence of eight or ten Indians. 
They seemed to be watching our motions, and, like the others, at first were 
indisposed to let us approach, ranging themselves like birds on a fallen 
log on the hill side above our heads, where, being out of reach, they 
thought themselves safo. Our friendly demeanor reconciled them, and, 
when we got near enough, they immediately stretched out to us handfulls 
of pine nuts, which seemed an exercise of hospitality. We made them a 
few presents, and, telling us that their village was a few miles below, they 
went on to let their people know what we were. The principal stream 
still running through an impracticable cation, we ascended a very steep hill, 
which proved afterwards the last and fatal obstacle to our little howitzer, 
which was finally abandoned at this place. We passed through a small 
meadow a few miles below, crossing the river. which depth, swift current, 
and rock, made it dithicult to ford ; and, aftera few more miles of very dif- 
ficult trail, issued into a larger prairie bottom, at the farther end of which 
we encamped, in a position rendered strong by rocks and trees. The lower 
parts of the mountain were covered with the nut pine. Several Indians 
appeared on the hill side, reconnoitring the camp, and were induced to 
come in; others came in during the afternoon ; and in the evening we held 
acouncil. The Indians immediately made it clear that the waters on which 
we were also belong to the Great Basin, in the edge of which we had 
been since the 17th of December ; and it became evident that we had still 
the great ridge on the left to cross before we could reach the Pacific waters. 

We explained to the Indians that we were endeavoring to find a passage 
across the mountains into the country of the whites, whom we were going 
to sec; and told them that we wished them to bring us a guide, ‘o whom we 

15 


[174 ] 226 


would give presents of scarlet cloth, and other articles, which were shown 
tothem. They looked atthe reward we offered, and conferred with each 
other, but pointed to the snow on the mountain, and drew their hands 
across their necks, and raised them above their heads, to show the depth; 
and signified that it wat impossible for us to get through. They made 
signs that we must go to the southward, over a pass through a lower range, 
which they pointed out; there, they said, atthe end of one day’s travel, we 
would find people who lived near a pass inthe great mountain ; and to that 
point they engaged to furnish us a guide. They appeared to have a con- 
fused idea, from report, of whites who lived on the other side of the moun- 
tain; and once, they told us, about two years ago, a party of twelve men 
like ourselves had ascended their river, and crossed to the other waters, 
They pointed out to us where they had crossed ; but then, they said, it 
was summer time ; but now it would be impossible. I believe that this 
was a party led by Mr. Chiles, one of the only two men whom | know to 
have passed through the California mountains from the interior of the Ba 
sin—Walker being the other ; and both were engaged upwards of twenty 
days, in the summer time, in getting over. Chiles’s destination was the ba 

of San Francisco, to which he descended by the Stanislausriver; and Walk- 
er subsequently informed me that, like mysell, descending to the southward 
on a more eastern line, day alter day he was searching for the Buenaven- 
tura, thinking that he had tound it with every new stream, until, like me, 
he abandoned all idea of its existence, and, turning abruptly to the right, 
crossed the great chain. ‘These were both western men, animated with 
the spirit of exploratory enterprise which characterizes that people. 

The Indians brought in during the evening an abundant supply of pine 
nuts, Which we traded from them. When roasted, their pleasant flavor 
made them an agreeable addition to our now scanty store of provisions, 
which were reduced to a very low ebb. Our principal stock was in peas, 
which it is not necessary to say contain scarcely any nutriment. We had 
still a little flour left, some coffee, and a quantity of sugar, which [ re- 
served as a defence agailist starvation. 

The Indians informed us that at certain seasons they have fish in their 
waters, which we supposed to be salmon trout; for the remainder of the 
year they live upon the pine nuts, which form their great winter subsist- 
ence—a portion being always at hand, shut up in the natural storchouse 
of the cones. At present, they were presented to us as a whole people 
living upon this simple vegetable. 

The other division of the party did not come in to-night, but encamped 
in the upper meadow, and arrived the next morning. ‘They had not suc- 
ceeded in getting the howitzer beyond the place mentioned, and where it 
had been left by Mr. Preuss in obedience to my orders ; aud, in anticipation 
of the snow banks and snow fields still ahead, foreseeing the inevitable de- 
tention to which it would subject us, I reluctantly determined to leave it 
there for the time. It was of the kind invented by the French for the 
mountain part of their war in Algiers ; and the distance it had come with 
us proved how well it was adapted to itspurpose. We left it, to the great 
sorrow of the whole party, who were grieved to part with a companion 
which had made the whole distance from St. Louis, and commanded re- 
spect for us on some critical occasions, and which might be needed for the 
same purpose again. 

January 50.—Our guide, who was a young man, joined us this morn- 


ing 
whi 
ling 
stra 
the 


our 
tom 
lon, 
low 
east 
the 

J 
ridg 
te 
to s 
usu 
left 
dre: 
to g 
diffi 
said 
shiv 
him 
a hi 
tigh 
Intl 
and 
timh 
abur 
befo 
stret 
whi 
fied 
tain 
had 
the 
we | 
rive 
We 


were shown 
ed with each 
their hands 
w the depth ; 
They made 
lower range, 
’s travel, we 
1; and to that 
y have a con- 
of the moun- 
twelve men 
other waters. 
they said, it 
eve that this 
om | know to 
ior of the Ba 
rds of twenty 
yn was the bay 
“13 and Walk- 
the southward 
1e Buenaven- 
antil, like me, 
y to the right, 
inimated with 
people. 
supply of pine 
nleasant flavor 
of provisions, 
< was in peas, 
ent. We had 
‘+, which [ re- 


re fish in their 
iuinder of the 
vinter subsist- 
‘al storchouse 
whole people 


but encamped 
; had not suc- 
, and where it 
in anticipation 
inevitable de- 
ed to leave it 
rench for the 
ad come with 
it, to the great 
a companion 
mmanded re- 
eeded for the 


us this morn- 


“Doane 


227 [174] 


ing ; and, leaving our encampment late in the day, we descended the river, 
which immediately opened out into a broad valley, furnishing good travel- 
ling ground. Ina short distance we passed the village, a collection of 
straw huts; and a few miles below, the guide pointed out the place where 
the whites had been encamped before they entered the mountain. With 
our late start we made but ten miles, and encamped on the low river bot- 
tom, where there was no snow, but a great deal of ice ; and we cut piles of 
long grass to lay under our blankets, and fires were made of large dry wil- 
lows, groves of which wooded the stream. ‘The river took here a north- 
easterly direction, and through a spur from the mountains on the left was 
the gap where we were to pass the next day. 

January 31.-—We took our way over a geutly rising ground, the dividing 
ridge being tolerably low; and travelling easily along a broad trail, in 
twelve or fourteen miles reached the upper part of the pass, when it began 
to snow thickly, with very cold weather. The Indians had only the 
usual seanty covering, and appeared to suffer greatly from the cold. AH 
left us, exceptour guide. [Talf hidden by the storm, the mountains looked 
dreary ; and, as night began toapproach, the guide showed great reluctance 
to go forward. 1 placed him between two rifles, for the way began to be 
difficult. Travelling a little farther, we struck a ravine, which the Indian 
said would conduct us to the river; and as the poor fellow suffered greatly, 
shivering in the snow which fell upon his naked skin, | would not detain 
him any longer ; and he ran off to the mountain, where he said there was 
a hut near by. He had kept the blue and scarlet cloth | had given him 
tighly rolled up, preferring rather to endure the cold than to get them wet. 
In the course of the afternoon, one of the men had his foot frost bitten ; 
and about dark we had the satisfaction to reach the bottoms of a stream 
timbered with large trees, among which we found a sheltered camp, with an 
abundance of such grass as the season afforded for the animals. We saw 
before us, in descending from the pass,a great continuous range, along which 
stretched the valley of the river ; the lower parts steep, and dark with pines, 
while above it was hidden in cloudsofsnow. This we felt instantly satis- 
fied was the central ridge of the Sierra Nevada, the great California moun- 
tain, which only now intervened between us and the waters of the bay. We 
had made a forced march of 26 miles, and three mules had given out on 
the road. Up to this point, with the exception of two stolen by Indians, 
we had lost none of the horses which had been brought from the Columbia 
river, and a number of these were still strong and in tolerably good order. 
We had now 67 animals in the band. 

We had scarcely lighted our fires, when the camp was crowded with 
nearly naked Indians; some of them were furnished with long nets in ad- 
dition to bows, and appeared to have been out on the sage hills to hunt 
rabbits. These nets were perhaps 30 to 40 feet long, kept upright in the 
ground by slight sticks at intervals, and were made from a kind of wild 
hemp, very much resembling in manufacture those common among the 
Indians of the Sacramento valley. They came among us without an 
fear, and scattered themselves about the fires, mainly occupied in ratifying 
their astonishment. I was struck by the singular appearance of a row of 
about a dozen, who were sitting on their haunches perched on a log near 
one of the fires, with their quick sharp eyes following every motion. 

We gathered together a few of the most intelligent of the Indians, and 
held this evening an interestmg council. I explained to them my inten 


( 174 ] 228 


tions. | told them that we had come from a very far country, having been 
travelling now nearly a year, and that we were desirous simply to go across 
the mountain into the country of the other whites. There were two who 
appeared particularly intelligent—one, a somewhat old man. He told me 
that, before the snows fell, it was six sleeps to the place where the whites 
lived, but that now it was impossible to cross the mountain on account of 
the deep snow ; and showing us, as the others had done, that it was over 
our heads, he urged us strongly to follow the course of the river, which he 
said would conduct us to a lake in which there were many large fish. 
There, he said, were many people ; there was no snow on the ground ; 
and we might remain there until the spring. Irom their descriptions, we 
were enabled to judge that we had encamped on the upper water of the 
Salmon Trout river. It is hardly necessary to say that our communication 
was only by signs, as we understood nothing of their language ; but they 
spoke, notwithstanding, rapidly and vehemently, explaining what they con- 
sidered the folly of our intentions, and urging us to go down to the lake. 
Tah-ve, a word signifying snow, we very soon learned to know, from its 
frequent repetition. 1 told bim that the men and the horses were strong, 
and that we would break a road through the snow ; and spreading be- 
fore him our bales of scarlet cloth, and trinkets, showed him what we 
would give fora guide. It was necessary to obtain one, if possible ; for I 
had determined here to attempt the passage of the mountain. Pulling a 
bunch of grass from the ground, after a short discussion among themselves, 
the oldman made us comprehend, that if we could break through the snow, 
at the end of three days we would come down upon grass, which he 
showed us would be about six inches high, and where the ground was en- 
tirely free. So far, he said, he had been in hunting for elk ; but beyond that, 
(and he closed his eyes) he bad seen nothing; but there was one among 
them who had been to the whites, and, going out of the lodge, he returned 
with a young man of very intelligent appearance. Herc, said he, is a 
young man who has seen the whites with his own eyes; and he swore, 
first by the sky, andthen by the ground, that what he said was true. With 
a large present of goods, we prevailed upon this young man to be our 
guide, and he acquired among us the name Mélo—a word signifying friend, 
which they used very frequently. He was thinly clad, and nearly barefoot ; 
his moccasins being about worn out. We gave him skins to make a new 
pair, and to enable him to perform his undertaking to us. ‘I'he Indians re- 
mained in the camp during the night, ard we kept the guide and two others 
to sleep in the lodge with us—Carson Iving across the door, and having 
made them comprehend the use of our fire arms. The snow, which had 
intermitted in the evening, commenced falling again in the course of the 
night, and it snowed steadily all aay. In the morning I acquainted the 
men with my decision, and explained to them that necessity required us to 
make a great effort to clear the mountains. I reminded them of the beau- 
tiful valley of the Sacramento, with which they were familiar from the de- 
scriptions of Carson, who had been there some fifteen years ago, and who, 
in our late privations, had delighted us in speaking of its rich pastures and 
abounding game, and drew a vivid contrast between its summer climate, 
Jess than a hundred miles distant, and the falling snow around us. I in- 
formed them (and long experience had given them confidence in my ob- 
servations and good instruments) that almost directly west, and only about 
710 miles distant, was the great farming establishment of Captain Sutter—a 


aving been 
to go across 
re two who 
He told me 
the whites 
account of 
it was over 
r, which he 
y large fish. 
ie ground ; 
riptions, we 
vater of the 
‘munication 
»; but they 
at they con- 
to the lake. 
ww, from its 
vere strong, 
reading be- 
m what we 
sible ; for I 
Pulling a 
themselves, 
th the snow, 
s, which he 
und was en- 
reyond that, 
one among 
he returned 
aid he, is a 
d he swore, 
true. With 
n to be our 
fying friend, 
‘ly barefoot ; 
nake anew 
b Indians re- 
1 two others 
and having 
, which had 
ourse of the 
juainted the 
Pquired us to 
of the beau- 
rom the de- 
ro, and who, 
astures and 
er climate, 
dus. I in- 
in my ob- 
d only about 
n Sutter—a 


229 [ 174 } 


gentleman who had formerly lived in Missouri, and, emigrating to this 
country, had become the possessor of a principality. [| assured them that, 
from the heights of the mountain before us, we should doubtless see the 
valley of the Sacramento river, and with one effort place ourselves agait 
in the midst of plenty. The people received this decision with the cheer- 
jul obedience which had always characterized them ; and the day was im- 
mediately devoted to the preparations necessary to enable us to carry it into 
effect. Leggings, moceasins, clothing—all were put into the best state to 
resist the cold. Our guide was not neglected. Extremity of suffering 
might make him desert; we therefore did the best we could for him. Leg- 
gings, moccasins, some articles of clothing, and a large green blanket, in 
addition to the blue and searlet cloth, were lavished upon him, and to his 
great and evident contentment. He arrayed himself in all his colors; and, 
clad in green, blue, and scarlet, he made a gay-looking Indian; and, with 
his varfous presents, was probably richer and better clothed than any of 
his tribe had ever been before. 

I have already said that our provisions were very low; we had neither 
tallow nor grease of any kind remaining, and the want of salt became one 
of our greatest privations. The poor dog which had been found in the 
Bear river valley, and which had been a compagnon de voyage ever since, 
had now become fat, and the mess to which it belonged requested permis- 
sion to kill it. Leave was granted. Spread out on the snow, the meat 
looked very good; and it made a strengthening meal for the greater part 
of the camp. Indians brought in two or three rabbits during the day, 
which were purchased [rom them. 

The river was 40 to 70 feet wide, and now entirely frozen over. It was 
wooded with large cottonwood, willow, and grain de bauf. By observa- 
tion, the latitude of this encampment was 38° 37' 18", 

February 2.—It had ceased snowing, and this morning the lower air 
was clear and frosty ; and six or seven thousand feet above, the peaks of 
the Sierra now and then appeared among the rolling clouds, which were 
rapidly dispersing before the sun. Our Indian shook his head as he pointed 
to the icy pinnacles, shooting high up into the sky, and seeming almost im- 
mediately above us. Crossing the river on the ice, and leaving it imme- 
diately, we commenced the ascent of the mountain along the valley of a 
tributary stream. The people were unusually silent; for every man knew 
that our enterprise was hazardous, and the issue doubtful. 

The snow deepened rapidly, and it soon became necessary to break a road. 
For this service, a party of ten was formed, tounted on the strongest 
horses ; each man in succession opening the road on foot, or on horseback, 
until himself and his horse became fatigued, when he stepped aside ; and, 
the remaining number passing ahead, he took his station in the rear. Leav- 
ing this stream, and pursuing a very direct course, we passed over an inter- 
vening ridge to the river we had left. On the way we passed two low 
huts entirely covered with snow, which might very casily have escaped 
observation. A family was living in each; and the only trail I saw in the 
neighborhood was from the door hole to a nut-pine tree near, which sup- 
plied them with food and fuel. We found two similar huts on the creek 
where we next arrived ; and, travelling a little higher up, encamped on its 
banks in about four feet depth of snow. Carson found near, an open hill 
side, where the wind and the sun had melted the snow, leaving exposed 
sufficient bunch grass for the animals to-night. 


[174 J 230 


The nut pines were now giving way to heavy timber, and there were 
some immense pines on the Bottoms, around the roots of which the sun had 
melted away the snow; and here we made our nie and. built huge fires, 
To-day we had travelled sixteen miles, and our elevation above the sea 
was 6,760 feet. 

February 3.—Turning our faces directly towards the nain chain, we as- 
eended an open hollow along a small tributary to the river, which, accord. 
ing to the Indians, issues from a mountain to the south. The snow was 
so deep in the hollow, that we were obliged to travel along the steep hill 
sides, and over spurs, where wind and sun had in places lessened the 
snow, and where the grass, which appeared to be in good quality along the 
sides of the mountains, was exposed. We opened our road in the same 
way as yesterday, but made only seven miles; and encamped by some 
springs at the foot of a high und steep hill, by which the hollow ascended 
to another basin in the mountain. The little stream below was entirely 
buried in snow. The springs were shaded by the boughs of a lofty cedar, 
which here made its first appearance; the usual height was 120 to 130 
feet, and one that was measured near by was 6 feet in diameter. 

There being no grass exposed here, the horses wer? sent back to that 
which we had seen a few miles below. We occupicd the retmainder of the 
day in beating down a road to the foot of the hill, a mile or two distant; 
the snow being beaten down when moist, in the warm part of the day, and 
then hard frozen at night, made a foundation that would bear the weight 
of the animals the next morning. During the day several Indians joined 
us on snow shoes. These were made of a circular hoop, about a foot in 
diameter, the interior space being filled with an open network of bark. 

February 4.—I went ahead early with two or three men, each with a 
led horse, to break the road. We were oblized to abandon the hollow en- 
tirely, and work along the mountain side, which was very steep, and the 
snow covered with an icy crust. We cut a footing as we advanced, and 
trampled a road through for the animals; but occasionally one plunged out- 
side the trail, and slided along the field to the bottom, a hundred yards be- 
low. Late in the day we reached another bench in the hollow, where, in 
summer, the stream passed over a small precipice. Here was a short dis- 
tance of dividing ground between the two ridges, and beyond an open ba- 
sin, some ten miles across, whose bottom presented a field of snow. At 
the further or western side rose the middle crest of the mountain, a dark- 
looking ridge of volcanic rock. 

The summit line presented a range of naked peaks, apparently cestitute 
of snow and vegetation; but below, the face of the whole country was 
covered with timber of extraordinary size. Annexed you are presented 
with a view of this ridge from a camp on the western side of the basin. 

Towards a pass which the guide indicated here, we attempted in the af- 
ternoon to force a road; but after a laborious plunging through two or 
three hundred yards, our best horses gave out, entirely refusing to make 
any further effort ; and, for the time, we were brought to a stand. The 
guide informed us that we were entering the deep snow, and here began 
the difficulties of the mountain; and to him, and almost to all, our enter- 
prise seemed hopeless. I returned a short distance back, to the break in 
the hollow, where I met Mr. Fitzpatrick. 

The camp had been all the day occupied in endeavoring to ascend the 
hill, but only the best horses had succeeded. The animals, generally, not 


there were 
1 the sun had 
ilt huge fires, 
bove the sea 


chain, we as- 
hich, accord. 
he snow was 
the steep hill 
lessened the 
lity along the 
in the same 
ved by some 
ow ascended 
was entirely 
a lofty cedar, 
ns 120 to 130 
bter. 

back to that 
ainder of the 
two distant ; 
the day, and 
r the weight 
idians joined 
bout a foot in 
rk of bark, 

, each with a 
1e hollow en- 
eep, and the 
dvanced, and 
plunged out- 
red yards be- 
yw, where, in 
sa short dis- 
d an open ba- 
f{ snow. At 
ntain, a dark- 


ntly cestitute 
country was 
ire presented 
the basin. 

ted in the af- 
ough two or 
sing to make 
stand. The 
1 here began 
il, our enter- 
the break in 


o ascend the 
enerally, not 


other and a better way across the mountain. 


231 [174 J 
having sufficient strength to bring themselves up without the packs; and 
all the line of road between this and the springs was strewed with camp 
stores and equipage, and horses floundering in snow. | therefore imme- 
diately encamped on the ground with my own mess, which was in ad- 
vance, and directed Mr. Fitzpatrick to eneamp at the springs, and send all 
the animals, in charge of Tabeau, with a strong guard, back to the place 
where they had been pastured the night before. Ilere was a small spot 


of level ground, protected on one side by the mountain, and on the other 


sheltered by a little ridge of rock. It was an open grove of pines, which 
assimilated in size to the grandeur of the mountain, being frequently six 
feet in diameter, 

To-night we had no shelter, but we made a large fire around the trunk 
of one of the huge pines; and covering the snow with small boughs, on 
which we spread our blankets, soon made ourselves comfortanle. The 
night was very bright and clear, though the thermometer was only at 10’. 
A strong wind, which sprang up at sundown, made it intensely cold ; and 
this was one of the bitterest nights during the journey. 

Two Indians joined our party here; and one of them, an old man, im- 
mediately began to harangue us, saying that ourselves and animals would 
perish in the snow; and that if we would go back, he would show us an- 
He spoke in a very loud 
voice, and there was a singular repetition of phrases and arrangement of 
words, which rendered his speech striking, and not unmusical. 

We had now begun to understand some words, and, with the aid of signs, 
easily comprehended the old man’s simple ideas, * Rock upon rock—rock 
upon rock—snow upon snow—snow upon snow,” said he; “even if you 

et over the snow, you will not be able to get down from the mountains.” 

fe made us the sign of precipices, and showed us how the feet of the 
horses would slip, and throw them off from the narrow trails which led 
along their sides. Our Chinook, who comprehended even more read. 
than ourselves, and believed our situation hopeless, covered his head wit 
his blanket, and began to weep and lament. ‘+I wanted to see the whites,” 
said he; “J came away from my own people to see the whites, and I 
wouldn’t care to die among them; but here”—and he looked around into 
the cold night and gloomy forest, and, drawing his blanket over his head, 
began again to lament. 

Seated around the tree, the fire illuminating the rocks and the tall bolls 
of the pines round about, and the old Indian haranguing, we presented a 
group of very serious faces. 

February 5.—The night had been too cold to sleep, and we were up 
very early. Our guide was standing by the fire with all his finery on; 
and seeing him shiver in the cold, I threw on his shoulders one of my 
blankets. We missed him a few minutes afterwards, and never saw him 
again. He had deserted. His bad faith and treachery were in perfect 
keeping with the estimate of Indian character, which a long intercourse 
with this people had gradually forced upon my mind. 

While a portion of the camp were occupied in bringing up the baggage 
to this point, the remainder were busied in making sledges and snow shoes. 
‘I had determined to explore the mountain ahead, and the sledges were to 
+e used in transporting the baggage. 

4 he mountains here consisted wholly of a white micaceous granite. 


earnest nts AEN" BOI i 


a ele ak sg 


il 
4 
i 
ij 


[174 J 232 


The day was perfectly clear, and, while the sun was in the sky, warm 
and pleasant. 

By observation, our latitude was 38 42' 26"; and elevation, by the 
boiling point, 7,400 feet. 

February 6,.—Accompanied by Mr. Fitzpatrick, | sat out to-day with » 
reconnoitring party, on snow shoes. We marched all in single file, tramp- 
ling the snow as heavily us we could, Crossing the open basin, in a mareh 


of about ten miles we reached the top of one of the peaks, to the left of 


the pass indicated by our guide. Far below us, dimmed by the distance, 
was a large snowless valley, bounded on the western side, at the distance 
of about a hundred miles, by a low range of mountains, which Carson 
recognised with delight as the mountains bordering the coast, “ There,” 
said he, “is the litthe motntain—it is 15 years ago since J saw it; but I 
am just as sure as if | had seen it yesterday.”” Between us, then, and this 
low coast range, was the valley of the Sacramento; and no one who had 
not accompanied us through the incidents of our life for the last few months 
could realize the delight with which at last we looked down upon it. At 
the distance of apparently 30 miles beyond us were distinguished spots of 
prairie; and a davk line, which could be traced with the glass, was im- 
agined to be the course of the river; but we were evidently at a great 
height above the valley, and between us and the plains extended miles 
of snowy fields and brokea ridges of pine-covered mountains. 

It was late in the day when we turned towards the camp; and it grew 
rapidly cold as it drew towards night. One of the men became fatigued, 
and his feet began to freeze, and, building a fire in the trunk of a dry old 
cedar, Mr. Fitzpatrick remained with him until his clothes could be dried, 
and he was in a condition to come on, After a day's march of 20 miles, 
we straggled into camp, one alter another, at night lall; the greater num- 
ber excessively fatigued, only two of the party having ever travelled on 
snow shoes before. 

All our energies were now directed to getting our animals across the 
snow ; and it was supposed that, after all the baggage had been drawn with 
the sleighs over the trail we had made, it would be sufficiently hard to 
bear our animals. At several places, between this point and the ridge, we 
had discovered some grassy spots, where the wind and sun had dispersed 
the snow from the sides of the hills, and these were to form resting places 
to support the animals for a night in their passage across. On our way 
across, we had set on fire several broken stumps, and dried trees, to melt 
holes in the snow for the camps. Its general depth was 5 feet; but we 
passed over places where it was 20 feet deep, as shown by the trees 

With one party drawing sleighs loaded with baggage, 1 advanced to-day 
about four miles along the trail, and encamped at the first grassy spot, where 
we expected to bring our horses. Mr. Fitzpatrick, with another party, re- 
mained behind, to form an intermediate station between us and the animals. 

February 8.—The night has been extremely cold; but perfectly still, 
and beautifully clear. Before the sun appeared this morning, the ther- 
mometer was 3° below zero; 1° higher, when his rays struck the lofty 
peaks; and 0° when they reached our camp. 

Scenery and weather, combined, must render these mountains beautiful 
in summer ; the purity and deep-blue color of the sky are singularly beau- 
tiful; the days are sunny and bright, and even warm in the noon hours; 

and if we could be free from the many anxieties that oppress us, even now 


we 
Slei 
here 


pat 
wag 
hea 
larg 
mel 


dark 
ane 
130 
here 
nific 
as 8 
tape 
seer 
brol 
(pin 
alor 
cipa 
time 
fron 

1 
now 
and 
of s 
anil 
Thi 


ture 


the sky, warm 
vation, by the 
t to-day with o 


gle file, tramp- 
sin, in a mareh 


4, to the left of 


y the distance, 
at the distance 
which Carson 
st, “ There,” 
} saw it; butl 
, then, and this 
» one who had 
ist few months 
nupon it, At 
uished spots of 
glass, was im- 
ntly ata great 
xtended miles 
15. 
»; and it grew 
pame fatigued, 
k of a dry old 
ould be dried, 
h of 20 miles, 
greater num- 
r travelled on 


als across the 
en drawn with 
iently hard to 
the ridge, we 
had dispersed 
resting places 
On our way 
trees, to melt 
feet; but we 
the trees. 
vanced to-day 
y spot, where 
ther party, re- 
d the animals, 
erfectly still, 
ng, the ther- 
ck the lofty 


ains beautiful 
gularly beau- 
noon hours; 
us, even now 


233 c 174 J 
we would be delighted hore ; but our provisions are getting fearfully seant, 
Sleighs arrived with baggage about 10 o'clock ; and leaving « portion of it 
here, we continued on for a mile and a half, and encamped at the foot of 
a long bill on this side of the open bottom, 

Bernier and Godey, who yesterday morning had beew sent to ascend a 
higher peak, got in, hungry and fatigued, They confirmed what we had 
already seen, ‘T'wo other sleighs arrived in the afternoon; and the men 
being fatigued, | gave them all tea and sugar. Snow clouds began to rise 
in the SSW.; and, apprehensive of a storm, which would destroy our 
road, | sent the people back to Mr, Fitzpatrick, with directions to send 
for the animals in the morning. With me remained Mr, Preuss, Mr. Tal- 
bot, and Carson, with Jacob. 

Elevation of the camp, by the boiling point, is 7,920 feet. 

February 9.—During the night the weather ehanged, the wind rising to 
a gale, and commencing to snow belore daylight; before morning the trail 
was covered, We remained quiet in camp all day, in the course of which 
the weather improved, Four sleighs arrived toward evening, with the 
bedding of the men, We suffer much from the want of salt; and all the 
men ate becoming weak from insufficient food. 

February 10.— Taplin was sent baek with a few men to assist Mr. Fitz- 
patrick ; and continuing on with three sleighs carrying a part of the bag- 
gage, we had the satisfaetion to encamp within two and a balt miles of the 
head of the hollow, and at the foot of the last mountain ridge. Here two 
large trees had been set on fire, and in the holes, where the snow had been 
melted away, we found a comfortable camp. 

The wind kept the air filled with snow during the day ; the sky was very 
dark in the southwest, though elsewhere very clear. The forest here has 
a noble appearance: the tall cedar is abundant; its greatest height being 
130 feet, and circumference 20, three or four feet above the ground ; and 
here I see for the first time the white pine, of which there are some mag- 
nificent trees. Hemlock spruce is among the timber, occasionally as large 
as 8 feet in diameter four feet above the ground; but, in ascending, it 
tapers rapidly to less than one foot at the height of 80 feet. 1 have not 
seen any higher than 130 fect, and the slight upper part is frequently 
broken off by the wind. The white spruce is frequent; and the red pine, 
(pinus colorado of the Mexicans,) which constitutes the beautiful forest 
along the flanks of the Sierra Nevada to the northward, is here the prin- 
cipal tree, not attaining a greater height than 140 feet, though with some- 
times a diameter of 10. Most of these trees appeared to differ slightly 
from those of the same kind on the other side of the continent. 

The elevation of the camp, by the boiling point, is 8,050 feet. We are 
now 1,000 feet above the level of the South Pass in the Rocky mountains ; 
and still we are not done ascending. ‘The top of a flat ridge near was bare 
of snow, and very well sprinkled with bunch grass, sufficient to pasture the 
animals two or three days; and this was to be their main point of support. 
This ridge is composed of a compact trap, or basalt, of a columnar struc- 
ture ; over the surface are scattered large boulders of porous trap. The hills 
are in many places entirely covered with small fragments of volcanic rock. 

Putting on our snow shoes, we spent the afternoon in exploring a road 
ahead. ‘The glare of the snow, combined with great fatigue, had rendered 
many of the people nearly blind ; but we were fortunate in having some 
black silk handkerchiefs, which, worn as veils, very much relieved the eye. 


[ 174 J 234 


February 11.—Uigh wind continued, and our trail this morning was 
nearly invisible—here and there indicated by a little ridge of snow, Our 
situation became tiresome and dreary, requiring a strong exercise of pa- 
tience and resolution, 

In the evening | received a message from Mr. Fitzpatrick, acquainting 
me with the utter failure of his attempt to get our mules and horses over 
the snow—the half-hidden trail had proved entirely too slight to support 
them, and they had broken through, and were plunging about or lying half 
buried in snow. He was occupied in endeavoring to get them back to 
his camp; and in the mean time sent to me for further instructions, | 
wrote to him to send the animals immediutely back to their old pastures; 
and, after having made mauls and shovels, turn in all the strength of lis 
party to open and beat a road through the snow, strengthening it with 

ranches and boughs of tue pines, 

February \2.—We made mauls, and worked hard at our end of the 
road allthe day. The wind was high, but the sun bright, and the snow 
thawing. We worked down the face of the hill, to meet the people at 
the other end. Towards sundown it began to grow cold, and we shoul- 
dered our mauls, and trudged back to camp. 

February 13.--We continued to labor on the road; and in the course 
of the day had the satisfaction to see the people working down the face of 
the opposite hill, about three miles distant. During the morning we had 
the pleasure of a visit from Mr, Fitzpatrick, with the information that all 
was going on well. A party of Indians had passed on show shoes, who 
said they were going to the western side of the mountain after fish. This 
was an indication that the salmon were coming up the streams; and we 
could hardly restrain our impatience as we thought of them, and worked 
with increased vigor. 

The meat train did not arrive this evening, and I gave Godey leave to 
kill our little dog, (‘Tlamath,) whicli he prepared in Indian fashion ; scorch- 
ing off the hair, and washing the skin with soap and snow, and then cut- 
ting it up into pieces, which were laid on the snow. Shortly afterwards, 
the sleigh arrived with a supply of horse meat; and we had to-night an 
extraordinary dinner—pea soup, mule, and dog. 

February 14.—Annexed is a view of the dividing ridge of the Sierra, 
taken from this encampment. Witn Mr. Preuss, | ascended to-day th 
highest peak to the right; from which we had a beautiful view of a n.oun- 
tain lake at our feet, about filteen miles in length, and so entirely surround- 
ed by mountains that we could not discover an outlet. We had taken with 
us a glass; but, though we enjoyed an extended view, the valley was half 
hidden in mist, as when we had seen it before. Snow could be distin- 
guished on the higher parts of the coast mountains ; eastward, as far as the 
eye could extend, it ranged over a terrible mass of broken snowy moun- 
tains, fading off blue inthe distance. The rock composing the summit con- 
sists of a very coarse dark volcanic conglomerate ; the lower parts appeared 
to be of a slaty structure. The highest trees were a few scattering cedars 
and aspens. From the immediate foot of the peak, we were two foots in 
reaching the summit, and one hour and a quarter in descending. The day 
had been very bright, still, and clear, and spring seems to be advancing 
rapidly. While the sun is in the sky, the snow melts rapidly, and gushing 
springs cover the face of the mountain in all the exposed places ; but their 
surface freezes instantly with the disappearance of the sun. 


3H1i NI SSY¥A 


ilwd 30 wQaAWAIN vwuuais 


vin¥O 


8 Morning was 
of snow. Our 
exercise of pa: 


ck, acquainting 
ind horses over 
light to support 
ut or lying half 
t them back to 
instructions, | 
ir old pastures; 
strength of his 
thening it with 


yur end of the 
, and the snow 
tthe people at 
and we shoul- 


id in the course 
own the face of 
sorning we had 
rmation that all 
ow shoes, who 
fter fish. This 
reams; and we 
m, and worked 


Godey leave to 
ashion ; scorch- 
, and then cut- 
rtly afterwards, 
wd to-night an 


» of the Sierra, 
ided to-day th 

iew of a n.oun- 
tirely surround- 
had taken with 
valley was half 
yuld be distin- 
rd, as far as the 
n snowy moun- 
he summit con- 
parts appeared 
attering cedars 
re (wo hours in 
ling. The day 
0 be advancing 
ly, and gushing 
aces; but their 


ssva 


'1v¥2 30 YQWAIN WHHYFTS 3H1I NE 


vIN¥YO 


| obtaine 

ws made dt 

n5' 67", an 

| Februar, 
frst grassy 


| expedition 
| ridges, ex! 
from whicl 
erably goo 
down by v 
in a deep | 
water of a 
The nig 
animals, W 
lover durir 
to our sen 
We star 
| breadth of 
below the 
miles belc 
halted to 
farther, 
] was! 
Mr. Sutte 
cfmp at ¢ 
57 in nut 
| also, we 
Some of 
discover 
_ the India 
tain ; the 
On the 
| the bagg 
encampe 
of the F 
the Dall 
The } 
peak to 
The t 
ment 9, 
This 
and sev: 
the extr 
seen of 
themsel 
shows t 
OVEr a! 
Nevad: 
_ longitu 
Thu: 
of Sno 
of the 


235 [ 174 J 


I obtained to-night some observations ; and the result from these, and oth- 
rs made during our stay, gives for the latitude 38° 41' 57", longitude 120° 
N5' 57", and rate of the chronometer 25".82. 

February 16.—We had succeeded in getting our animals safely to the 
first grassy hill; and this morning I started with Jacob on a reconnoitring 
expedition beyond the mountain. We travelled along the crests of narrow 
ridges, extending down from the mountain in the direction of the valley, 

irom which the snow was fast melting away. On the open spots was tol- 
erably good grass; and | judged we should succeed in getting the camp 
down by way of these. Towards sundown we discovered some icy spots 
in a deep hollow ; and, descending the mountain, we encamped on the head 
water of a little creek, where at last the water found its way to the Pacific. 

The night was clear and very long. We heard the cries of some wild 
animals, which had been attracted by our fire, and a flock of geese passed 
over during the night. Even these strange sounds had something pleasant 
to our senses in this region of silence and desolation. 

We started again early in the morning. The creek acquired a regular 
breadth of about 20 feet, and we soon began to hear the rushing of the water 
below the ice surface, over which we travelled to avoid the snow; a few 
miles below we broke through, where the water was several feet deep, and 

halted to make a fire and dry our clothes. We continued a few miles 
farther, walking being very laborious without snow shoes. 

I was now perfectly satisfied that we had struck the stream on whicu 
Mr. Sutter lived ; and, turning about, made « hard push, and reached the 
c‘mp atdark. Here we had the pleasure to find all the remaining animals, 
57 in number, safely arrived at the grassy hill near the camp; and here, 

also, we were agreeably surprised with the sight of an abundance of salt. 
Some of the horse guard had gone to a neighboring hut for pine nuts, and 
discovered unexpectedly a large cake of very white fine-grained salt, which 
_ the Indians told them they had brought from the other side of the moun- 
tain ; they used it to eat with their pine nuts,and readily sold it for goods. 

On the 19th, the people were occupied in making a road and bringing up 
the baggage ; and, on the afternoon of the next day, February 20, 1844, we 
encamped with the animals and all the materiel of the camp, on the summit 
of the Pass in the dividing ridge, 1,000 miles by our travelled road from 
the Dalles of the Columbia. 

The people, who had not yet been to this point, climbed the neighboring 
peak to enjoy a look at the valley. 

The temperature of boiling water gave for the elevation of the encamp- 
ment 9,338 feet above the sea. 

This was 2,000 feet higher than the South Pass inthe Rocky mountains, 
and several peaks in view rose several thousand feet still higher. Thus, at 
the extremity of the continent, and near the coast, the phenomenon was 
seen of a range of mountains still higher than the great Rocky mountains 
themselves. This extraordinary fact accounts for the Great Basin, and 
shows that there must be a system of small lakes and rivers here scattered 
over a flat country, and which the extended and lofty range of the Sierra 
Nevada prevents from escaping to the Pacific ocean. Latitude 38° 44’; 

: longitude 120° 28". 

Thus this Pass in the Sierra Nevada, which so well deserves its name 
of Snowy mountain, is eleven degrees west and about four degrees south 
of the South Pass. 


———— 


es 
en aoe 


| 
i 
4 


¥ 


a 
y 
| 


[ 174 ] 236 


February 21.—We now considered ourselves victorious over the moun. 
tain ; having only the descent before us, and the valley under our eyes, we 


felt strong hope that we should force our way down. But this was a eas 


in which the deseewt was not facile. Still deep fields of snow lay between, 
and there wasa large intervening space of rough-leoking mountains, through 


which we haa yet to wind our way. Carson roused me this morning with | 


an early fire, and we were all up long before day, in order to pass the sno 
fields before the sun should render the crust soft, We enjoyed this morn. 
ing a Scene, al sunrise, which even here was unusually glorious and beaut). 
ful. Immediately abov ¢ the eastern mountains was re peated a cloud-forme¢ 
inass of purple ranges, bordered with bright yellow gold ; the peaks sho 
up into a narrow line of crimson cloud, above which the air was filled with 
a greenish orange ; and over all was the singular beauty of the blue sky, 


, 
Passing along a “ridge which commanded the lake on our right, of which} 
we began to discover wn outlet through a chasm on the west, we passed | 


over alternating open ground and hard-erusted snow fields whieh support: 
ed the animals, and encamped on the ridge alter a journey of 6 miles. The 
grass was better than we had yet scen, and we were e neamped in a clumy 
of trees twenty or thirty feet high, resembling white pine. With the excep: 
tion of these small clumps, the ridges were bare; and, where the snow found 
the support of the trees, the wind had blown it up into banks ten or fifteen 
feet high. It required much care to hunt out a practicable way, as the 
most open places frequently led to impassable banks. 

We had hard and doubtiul labor yet before us, as the snow appeared to 
be heavier where the timber began further down, with few open spots 
Ascending a height, we traced out the best line we could discover for the 
next day’s march, and had at least the consolation to see that the mountain 
descended rapidly. The day had been one of April ; gusty, with a few oc: 
casional flakes of snow; which, in the afternoon, enveloped the upper 
mountain in clouds. We watched them anxiously, as now we dreaded a 
suow storm. Shortly afterwards we heard the roll of thunder, and, lookgng 
towards the valley, found it all enveloped in a thunder storm. For us, as 
connected with the idea of summer, it hada singular charm; and we wateh- 
ed its progress with excited feelings until nearly sunset,w hen the sky clear- 
ed off brightly, and we saw a shining line of water directing its course to- 
wards another, a broader and larger sheet. We knew that these couid be 
no other than the Sacramento and the bay of San Francisco; but, after our 
long wandering in rugged mountains, where so frequently we vhat met with 
disappointments, and where the crossing of every ridge displayed some un- 
known lake or river, We were yet almost aftaid to believe that we were at 
last to escape into the genial country of which we had heard so many 
glowing descriptions, and dreaded again to find scme vast interior lake 
whose bitter waters would bring us disappointment. On the southern shore 
of what sppeared to be the bay could be traced the gleaming line where 
entered another large stream ; and again the Buenaventura rose up in our 
minds. 

Carson had entered the valley along the southern side of the bay, and re- 
membered perfectly to have crossed the mouth of a very large stream 
which they had been obliged to raft ; but the country then was so entirely 
covered with water from snow and rain, that he had been able to form no 
correct impression of watercourses. 

We had the satisfaction to know that at least there were people below. 


Cd 


Fires w4 
our®; al 
camp. 
ber of s¢ 
day alte 
that had 
the bay, 
Amo 
flax. || 
Febr 
vantage 
to-day ¢ 
out the 
the har« 
much la 
us a ha 
snow fi 
across 5 
again th 
mule— 
Wes 
tween t 
encamp 
descent 
We ¢ 
beautilt 
could s¢ 
the sea, 
Palerm: 
The 
Febr 
ridges | 
the mor 
forded 
with st 
our Wa 
misfort 
not ke 
mauls 
ahead 
tiver \ 
a plac 
sole of 
river. 
rent, i 
an icy 
in the 
after 
We a 


sover the moup. 
der our eyes, we 


it this Was a ease 
ow lay between, | 


ountains, through 
his morning with 
lo pass the snow 
joyed this morn. 
rious and beauti. 
da cloud-lorme: 
; the peaks sho 
r was filled with 
of the blue sky, 


right, of which} 
if 
West, we passed | 


s Which support: 
of G6 miles. The 
nped in a clum; 
With the excep. 
e the snow found 
ks ten or fifteen 
ible way, as the 


ow appeared to 
ew open spots, 
discover for the 
at the mountain 
', With a few oc: 
pped the upper 
Vy we dreaded a 
er, and, lookgng 
tm. For us, ag 
; and we watch- 
n the sky clear- 
gz its course to- 
t these couid be 
»; but, after our 
'e had met with 
layed some un- 
that we were at 
heard so many 
st interior lake, 
southern shore 
ing line where 
rose up in our 


he bay, and re- 

large stream, 
vas so entirely 
ble to form no 


people below. 


237 [ 174 ] 


Fires were lit up in the valley just at night, appearing to a “ oe 
ww; and these signs of life renewed, in some measure, the gayety of t 
am They appeared so near, that we judged them to be among the tim- 
bert some of the neighboring ridges ; but, oe —_ is 
day alter day, and night after night, we alterwards is = 

that had been ane by the Indians among the fulares, on the 
’ iles distant. 
git a a - sont an i here, was the common blue 
P To-night, a mule was killed for food. . 
gg toned breakfast was over long belore anil a e nest 
vantage of the coolness of the early morning to ra : : zp 
to-day oceurred in very deep banks among the tim ori Senge. tues 
out the coldest places, and the animals passed success! ly wi : i i a 
the hard erust. Now and then, the delay of aren — ~ 
much labor and loss of time. In the after part ot thex« ay, - ng refore 
us a handsome grassy ridge point ; and, making a oh ~— ithe 
snow field 10 to 15 feet deep, we happily succeedec in dati ee 
across ; and enevmped on the ridge, alter a march of i ied br 
again the prospect a thunder ree Hvis to-night we killec 
—now our only resource from starvation. 

as sitghuk ommealves during the day that the lake had an “ile ag 
tween two ranges on the right; and with this, the creck - He ich =. 
encamped probably effected a junction below. Between these, we vy 

> ’ . 
ial to enjoy the same delizhtful weather ; the sky of the suave 
beautiful blue, and such a sunset and sunrise as on our ee oh os 
could scarecly imagine. And here among the mountains, a —s yt 
the sea, we have the deep-blue sky and sunny hatte bs ib seo a 
Palermo, which a tittle map before me shows are in the same ihe ude. 

The elevation above the sea, by the boiling point, is 8,565 fee A m7 

February 23.—This was our most diffieult day: we w He ge Bs i 

ridges by the quantity of snow among the timber, and ee iver to a a6 1 
the motintain sides, where, occasionally, rocks and a southern pe se 
forded us achance to scramble along. But these were steep, and s ippery 
with snow and ice; and the tough evergreens of the mountain le ei 
our way, tore our skins, and exhausted our patience. Some of ne ike " 
misfortune to wear moccasins with parjléche soles, so slippery that re som - 
not keep our feet, and generally crawled across the snow beds. _ sre 
mauls were necessary to-day, to make a road through the suow. ons 
ahead with Carson to reconnoitre the road, we reached in the afternoon t 1€ 
river Which made the outlet of the lake. Carson sprang es sik ey 
a place where the stream was compressed among rocks, a ne pe 
sole of my moccasin glanced from the icy rock, and precipita ae ‘ 
river. It was some few seconds before I could recover myse id te 
rent, and Carson, thinking me hurt, jumped in after meee ae pe ie 
an icy bath. We tried to search a while for my gun, which ha oa ie 
in the fall, but the cold drove us out ; and making a large fire on eg ank, 
after we had partially dried ourselves we went back to meet the pad 
We afterwards found that the gun had been slung under the ice whic 

ined ks of the ercek. 

eT ai caval plan of breaking the road with alternate horses, we reached 
the creek in the evening, and encamped on a dry open place in the ravine. 


CU SS 


22 seer: 


eee 


— 


. =. = 


4 
4 
j 


[ 174 ] 238 


Another branch, which we had followed, here comes in on the left ; and 
from this point the mountain wall, on which we had travelled to- -day, faces 
to the south along the right bank of the river, where the sun appears to 
have melted the snow; but the opposite ridge is entirely covered. Here, 
among the pines, the hill side produces but little grass—barely sufficient 
to keep life in the animals. We had the pleasure to be rained upon this 
afternoon ; and grass was now our greatest solicitude. Many of the men 
looked badly ; and some this evening were giving out. 

February 24.—We rose at three in the morning, for an astronomical ob- 
servation, and obtained for the place a latitude of 38° 46' 58" ; longitude 
120° 34' 20". The sky was clear and pure, with a sharp wind from the 
northeast, and the thermometer 2° below the treezing point. 


We continued down the south face of the mountain; our road leading | 


over dry ground, we were able to avoid the snow almost entirely. In thé 
course of the morning, we struck a foot path, which we were generally able 
to keep; and the ground was soft to our animals’ feet, being sandy or cover- 
ed with mould. Green grass began to make its appearance, and oceasion- 
ally we passed a hill seatteringly covered with it. The character of the 
forest continued ‘the same; and, among the trees, the pine with sharp 
leaves and very large cones was abundant, some of them being noble trees. 
We measured one that had 10 feet diameter, though the height was not 
more than 130 fect. All along, the river was a roaring torrent, its fall 
very great; and, descending with a repidity to which we bad long been 
strangers, to our great pleasure oak trees appeared on the ridge, and soon 
became very frequent ; ; on these | remarked unusually great quantities of 
mistletoe. Rushes began to make their appearance ; and at a small creek 
where they were abundant, one of the messes was left with the weakest 
horses, while we continued on. 

The opposite mountain side was very steep and continuous—unbroken 
by ravines, and covered with pines and snow ; while on the side we were 
travelling, innumerable rivulets poured down from the ridge. Continuing 
on, we halted a moment at one of these rivulets, to admire some beautitul 
evergreen trees, resembling live oak, which shadedt he little stream. They 
were forty to filty feet high, and two in diameter, with a uniform tufted top; 
and the summer green of their beautiful foliage, with the singing birds, and 
the sweet summer wind which was whirling about the diy oak leaves, 
nearly intoxicated us with delight; and we hurried on, filled with excite- 
ment, to escape entirely ftom the horrid regiou of inhospitable snow, to the 
perpetual spring of the Sacramento. 

When we had travelled about ten miles, the valley opened a little to an 
oak and pine bottom, through which ran rivulets closely bordered with 
1ushes, on which our half- starved horses fell with avidity ; and here we 
made our encampment. Here the roaring torrent has already become a 
river, and we had descended to an elevation of 3,864 feet. 

Along our road to-day the rock was a white granite, which appears to 
constitute the upper part of the mountains on both the eastern and western 
slopes; while between, the central is a voleaniec rock. 

Another horse was killed to-night, for food. 

February 25.—Believing that the difficulties of the road were passed, 
and leaving Mr. F itzpatriek to follow slowly, as the condition of the ani- 
mals required, I started ahead this morning with a party of eight, consist- 
jog (with myself) of Mr. Preuss and Mr. Talbot, Carson, Derosier, Towns, 


Proue 
tentio 
and re 
Co 
throug 
we Iné 
a fishi 
ciduot 
hill née 
tults 
here ; 
them, 
unace 
The 
of th 
aboun 
the gr 
mate. 
west. 
Fel 
either 
river 
our hd 
It: 

to th 
spur | 
right. 
oceur 
gilia. 
Th 
large 
to fin 
but a 
rain, 
Fe 
whic 
expo 
our | 
and | 
cleat 
the ¢ 
W 
was 
peo} 
B 


cen 
bect 
ellit 
stee 
had 
kee 
will 
as t 


on the left; and 
ed to-day, faces 
P sun appears to 
hovered. Here, 
barely sufficient 
ained upon this 
wny of the men 


istronomical ob. 

58"'; longitude 
wind from the 
int. 


e generally able 
sindy or cover. 
e, and occasion- 
haracter of the 
bine with sharp 
‘ing noble trees, 
height was not 
torrent, its fall 
bad long been 
ridge, and soon 
‘at quantities of 
ita small creek 
ith the weakest 


ous—uubroken 
e side we were 
se. Continuing 
some beautiful 
>stream. They 
form tufted top; 
ging birds, and 
hy oak leaves, 
ed with excite- 
sle snow, tothe 


ed a little to an 
bordered with 
; and here we 
eady become a 
ich appears to 
ro and western 


l were passed, 
ion of the ani- 
eight, consist- 
rosier, Towns, 


ur road leading | 
ntirely. Inthe | 


239 [ 174 ] 


Proue, and Jacob. We took with us some of the best animals, and my in- 
tention was to proceed as rapidly as possible to the house of Mr. Sutter, 
and return to meet the party with a supply of provisions and fresh animals. 

Continuing down the river, which pursued a very direct westerly course 
through a narrow valley, with only a very slight and narrow bottom land, 
we made twelve miles, and encamped at some old Indian huts, apparently 
« fishing place on the river. The bottom was covered with trees of de- 
ciduous foliage, and overgrown With vines and rushes. On a bench of the 
hill near by, was a field of fresh green grass, six inches long in some of the 
tufts which I had the curiosity to measure. The animals were driven 
here ; and J spent part of the afternoon sitting on a large rock among 
them, enjoying the pauseless rapidity with which they luxuriated in the 
unaceustomed food. 

The forest was imposing to-day in the magnificence of the trees : some 
of the pines, bearing large cones, were 10 feet in diameter ; cedars also 
abounded, and we measured one 284 feet in circumference four feet from 
the ground. ‘This noble tree seemed here to be in its proper soil and cli- 
mate. We found it on both sides of the Sierra, but most abundant on the 
west. 

February 26.—‘Ve continued to follow the stream, the mountains on 
either hand increasing in height as we descended, aud shutting up the 
river narrowly in precipices, along which we had great difficulty to get 
our horses, 

It rained heavily during the afternoon, and we were forced off the river 
to the heights above ; whence we descended, at night-fall, the point of a 
spur between the river and a fork of nearly equal size, coming in from the 
right. Here we saw, on the lower hills, the first flowers in bloom, which 
occurred suddenly, and in considerable quantity ; one of them a species of 
gilia. 

The ecvrrent in both streams (rather torrents than rivers) was broken by 
large boulders. It waslate, and the animals fatigued ; and not succeeding 
to find a ford immediately, we encamped, although the hill side afforded 
but a few stray bunches of grass, and the horses, standing about in the 
rain, looked very miserable. 

February 27.—We succeeded in fording the stream, and made a trail by 
which we crossed the point of the opposite bill, which, on the southern 
exposure, was prettily covered with green grass, and we halted a mile from 
our last encampment. The river was only about sixty feet wide, but rapid, 
and occasionally deep, foaming among boulders, and the water beautifully 
clear. We encamped on the hill slope, as there was no bottom level, and 
the opposite ridge is continuous, affording no streams. 

We had with us a large kettle ; and a mule being killed here, his head 
was boiled in it for several hours, and made a passable soup for famished 
people. 

Below, precipices on the river foreed us to the heights, which we as- 
cended by a steep spur 2,000 feet high. My favorite horse, Proveau, had 
becoine very weak, and wasscarcely able to bring himself to the top. Trav- 
elling here was good, cxcept in crossing the ravines, which were narrow, 
steep, and frequent. We caught a glimpse of a deer, the first animal we 
had seen ; but did not succeed in approaching him. Proveau could not 
keep up, and I left Jacob to bring him on, being obliged to press forward 
with the party, as there was no grass in the forest. We grew very anxious 
as the day adyaneed avd no grass appeared, for the lives of our animals 


4 
j 
t 
| 
| 
a | 


[ 174] 240 


depended on finding it to-night. They were in just such a condition that 
grass and repose for the night enabled them to get on the next day. Every 
hour we had been expecting to see open out before usthe valley, which, from 
the mountain above, seemed almost at our feet. A new and singular shrub, 
which had made its appearance since crossing the mountain, was very fre- 
quent to-day. It branched out near the ground, forming a clump eight to 
ten feet high, with pale-green leaves of an oval form, and the body and 
branches had a naked appearance, as if stripped of the bark, which is very 
smooth and thin, of a chocolate color, contrasting well with the pale green 
of the leaves. The day was nearly gone ; we had made a hard day’s march, 
and found no grass. ‘Towns became light-headed, wandering off into the 
woods without knowing where he was going, and Jacob brought him back. 

Near night-fell we descended intothe steep ravine of a handsome creek 
thirty feet wide, and } was engaged in getting the horses up the opposite 
hill, when I heard a shout faba Carson, who had gone ahead a few hun- 
dred yards—* Life yet,” said he, «s he came up, * lile pet ; | hawe found a 
hill side sprinkled with grass enough for the night.”” We drove along our 
horses, and encamped at the place about dark, and there was just room 
enough to make a place for shelter om the edge of the stream, Three 
horses were lost to-day-—Proveau ; a fine young horse from the Columbia, 
belonging to Charles ‘Towns ; and another Indian horse which carried our 
cooking utensils ; the two former gave out, and the latter strayed off into 
the woods as we reached the camp. 

February 29.—We lay shut up in the marrow ravine, and gave the ani- 
mals a necessary day ; and men were sent back alter the others. Derosier 
volunteered to bring up Proveau, to whom be knew | was greatly attach- 
ed, as he had been my favorite horse on both expeditions. Carson and | 
climbed one of the nearest mountains ; the forest land still extended ahead, 
and the valley appeared as far as ever, ‘The pack horse was found near 
ihe camp, but Derosier did not get in. 

March 1.—Derosier did not get in during the night, and leaving him to 
follow, as no grass remained here, we continued on over the uplands, eross- 
ing many small streams, and camped again on the river, having made 6 
miles. Here we fownd the hill side covered (although lightly) with fresh 
green grass; and from this time forward we found it always improving 
and abundant. 

We made a pleasant camp on the river hill, where were some beautiful 
specimens of the chocolate-colored shrub, which were a foot in diameter 
near the ground, and filteen totwenty feet high. The opposite ridge runs 
continuously along, unbroken by streams, We are rapidly descending into 
the spring. and we are leaving our snowy region far behind ; every thing is 
getting green ; butterflies are swarming ; numerous bugs are creeping out, 
wakened {from their winter’s sleep ; and the forest flowers are coming into 
bloom. Among those which appeared most numerously to-day was dode- 
catheon deniatwin. 

We began to be uneasy at Derosier’s absence, searing he might have 
been bewildered inthe woods. Charles Towns, who had not yet recovered 
his mind, went to swim in the river, as if it were summer, and the stream 
placid, whenit was a cold mountain torrent foaming anong tocks. We 
were happy to see Derosier appear inthe evening. He came in, and, sitting 
down by the fire, began to tell us where he had been. He imagined he 
had been gone several days, and thought we were still at the camp where 


ee 


ine 


he h 
appe 
joi 
craze 
extre 
read 
muri 

A 
in prq 
on a 
grass 
unaw 
arriv 
pene 

Mc 
«lon 
strea 
no al 
deter 
cable 
the c 
oaks | 
tree \ 
livea 
aa lon: 
wen 
of thi 
two O 
about 
sat do 
repeu 
an an. 
when 
some 
we hi 
decel 
aston 
old a 
path. 
Cause 
we b 
ing O 
creat 
The 
ning 
to it, 
the o 
still | 
but b 
the f 
sprin 
in ar 


condition that 
xt day. Every 
y, which, from 
ingular shrub, 
was very fre- 
Jump eight to 
the body and 
which is very 
he pale green 
| day’s march, 
ig off into the 
ght him back. 
ndsome creek 
» the opposite 
ada few hun- 
have found a 
ove along our 
was just room 
eam. Three 
he Columbia, 
th curried our 
rayed off into 


gave the ani- 
rs. Derosier 
reatly attach- 
Carson and | 
tended ahead, 
s found near 


leaving him to 
plands, eross- 
wing made 6 
ly) with fresh 
‘s improving 


me beautiful 
in diameter 
ite ridge runs 
scending into 
avery thing is 
reeping out, 
coming into 
ay was dode- 


might have 
et recovered 
d the stream 
tocks. We 
, and, sitting 
imagined he 
camp where 


wee ot 


241 [ 174 ] 


he had left us; and we were pained to see that his mind was deranged, l¢ 
appeared that he had been lost in the mountain, and hunger and fati ue, 
joi to weakness of body, and fear of perishing in the mountains, had 
crazed him. ‘The times were severe when stout men lost their minds from 
extremity of suflering—wiien horses died—and when mules and horses, 
ready to die of starvation, were killed for food. Yet there was no mur- 
muring or hesitation. 

A short distance below our encampment, the river mountains terminated 
in precipices, and, alter a fatiguing march of only a few miles, we encamped 
on a bench where there were springs and an abundance of the freshest 
grass. Inthe mean time, Mr. Preuss continued on down the river, and, 
unaware that we had encamped so early in the day, was lost. When night 
arrived, and he did not come in, we began to unde stand what had bap- 
pened to him; but it was too late to make any searen, . 

March 3.—We followed Mr. Preuss’s trail for a considerable distance 
along the river, until we reached a place where he had descended to the 
stream below and eneamped. Llere we shouted and fired guns, but received 
no answer; and we coneluded that he had pushed on down the stream. = [ 
determined to keep out from the river, along which it was nearly impraeti- 
cable to travel with animals, until it should form a valley. At every step 
the country improved in beauty ; the pines were rapidly disappearing, anc 
oaks became the principal trees of the forest. Among these, the prevailing 
tree was the evergreen oak, (whieh, by way of distinction, we shall call the 
live oak ;) and with these, occurred frequently a new species of oak bearing 
u long slender acorn, from an inch to an inch and a half in length, which 
we now began to see formed the principal vegetable food of the inhabitants 
of this region. Ina short distance we crossed a little rivulet, where were 
two old huts, and near by were heaps of acorn halls. The ground round 
about was very rich, covered with an exuberant sward of grass; and we 
sat down fora while in the shade of the oaks, to let the animals feed. We 
repeated our shouts for Mr. Preuss ; and this time we were gratified with 
ananswer. ‘Ihe voice grew rapidly nearer, ascending from the river; but 
when we expected to see him emerge, it ceased entirely, We had called up 
some straggling Indian—the first we had met, although for two days back 
we had seen tracks—who, mistaking us for his fellows, had been only un- 
deceived on getting close up. It would have been pleasant to witness his 
astonishment; he would not have been more frightened had some of the 
old mountain spirits they are so much afraid of suddenly appeared in his 
path. Ignorant of the character of these people, we had now an additional 
cause of uneasiness in regard to Mr. Preuss; he had no arms with him, and 
we began to think his chance doubtful. We followed ona trail, still keep- 
jng out from the river, and descended to a very large creek, dashing with 
great velocity over a pre-eminently rocky bed and among large boulders. 
The bed had sudden breaks, formed by deep holes and ledges of rock run- 
ning across. Even here, it deserves the name of Rock creek, which we gave 
to ii, Ve succeeded in fording it, and toiled about three thousand feet up 
the opposite hill. The mountains now were getting sensibly lower; but 
still there is no valley on the tiver, which presents steep and rocky banks 
but here, several miles from the river, the country is smooth and gras. , ; 
the forest has no undergrowth ; and in the open valleys of rivulets, or around 
spring heads, the low groves of live oak give the appearance of orcherds 
in an old cultivated country. Occasionally we met deer, but had not the 

16 


IE ae 


3 SSS es 


= 


2» 


ti 


'{ 174] 242 


necessary time for hunting. At one of these orchard grounds, we encamped 
about noon to make an effort for Mr. Preuss, One man took his way along 
a spur leading into the river, in hope to cross his trail; and another took 
our own back. Both were volunteers ; and tothe successful man was prom- 
ised a pair of pistols-—not as a reward, but as a token of gratitude for a 
service which would free us all from much anxiety. 

We had among our few animals a horse which was so much reduced, 
that, with travelling, even the good grass could not save him; and, having 
nothing to eat, he was killed this afternoon, He was a good animal, and 
had made the journey round from Fort Hall, 

Dodecatheon dentatum continued the characteristic plant in flower; and 
the naked-looking shrub already mentioned continued characteristic, begin- 
ning to put forth a small white blossom. At evening the men returned, bav- 
ing seen or heard nothing of Mr. Preuss; and | determined to make a 
hard push down the river the next morning, and get ahead of him. 

March 4.—We continued rapidly along on a broad plainly-beaten trail, 
the mere travelling and breathing the delightful air being a positive enjoy- 
ment. Our road led along a ridge inclining to the river, and the air and 
the open grounds were fragrant with flowering shrubs; and in the course 
of the morning we issued onan open spur, by which we descended directly 
to the stream. Here the river issues suddenly trom the mountains, which 
hitherto had hemmed it closely in; these now become softer, and change 
sensibly their character; and at this point commences the most beautiful 
valley in which we had ever travelled. We hurried to the river, on which 
we noticed a small sand beach, to which Mr. Preuss would naturally have 
gone. We found no trace of him, but, instead, were recent tracks of bare- 
footed Indians, and little piles of muscle shells, and old fires where they 
had roasted the fish. We travelled on over the river grounds, which were 
undulating, and covered with grass to the river brink. We halted to noon 
a few miles beyond, always under the shade of the evergreen oaks, which 
formed open groves on the bottoms. 

Continuing our road in the afternoon, we ascended to the uplands, where 
the river passes round a point of great beauty, and goes through very re- 
markable dalles, in character resembling those of the Columbia river, and 
which you will find mentioned on the map annexed. Beyond, we again 
descended to the bottoms, where we found an Indian village, consisting of 
two or three huts; we had come upon them suddenly, and the people had 
evidently just run off. The huts were low and slight, made like beehives 
in a picture, five or six feet high, and near each was a crate, formed of in- 
‘tetfaced branches and grass, in size and shape like a very large hogshead. 
Each of these contained from six to nine bushels. These were filled with 
‘the long acorns already mentioned, and in the huts were several neatly 
waade baskets, containing quantities of the acorns roasted. They were sweet 
and agreeably flavored, and we supplied ourselves with about half a bushel, 
teaving one of our shirts, a handkerchief, and some smaller articles, in ex- 
change. The river again entered fora space among hills, and we followed 
a ¢cail leading across a bend through a handsome hollow behind. Here, 
while engaged in trying to circumvent a deer, we discovered some Indians 
oa a hill several hundred yards ahead, and gave them a shout, to which 
they responded by loud and rapid talking and vehement gesticulation, but 
enade no stop, hurrying up the mountain as fast as their legs could carry 
tiem. We passed on, and again encamped in a grassy grove. 


| 
war 
seat 
at W 
toa 
this 

C 
n lit 
The 
sma 
cove 
Jam 
sped 
plar 
was 
the 
We | 
hors 
here 
the. 
ing ( 
stan 


shor 
over 
‘wate 
lyin; 
day 
prot 
the } 
the 
notl 
min 
‘sary 
‘tain 
viey 
ito lo 
and 
colle 
it bd 
mus 
ness 
was 
cipa 
onio| 
eral 
onl 
whi 
had 


we encamped 
his way along 
| another took 
lan was prom- 
rratitude for a 


uch reduced, 
1; and, having 
d animal, and 


in flower; and 
eristic, begin- 
returned, hav- 
ed to make a 
of him. 

y-beaten trail, 
ositive enjoy- 
nd the air and 
| in the course 
ended directly 
untains, which 
ar, and change 
most beautiful 
iver, on which 
naturally have 
tracks of bare- 
es where they 
is, which were 
halted to noon 
ev oaks, which 


iplands, where 
rough very re- 
bia river, and 
yond, we again 
e, consisting of 
the people had 
like beehives 
b, formed of in- 
arge hogshead. 
ere filled with 
several neatly 
ey were sweet 
bt half a bushel, 
articles, in ex- 
d we followed 
ehind. Here, 
bd some Indians 
shout, to which 
stizulation, but 
pgs could carry 
ve. 


243 [ 174 ] 


The absence of Mr. Preuss gave me great concern ; and, for a large re- 
ward, Derosicr volunteered to go back on the trail, | directed him to 
search along the river, travelling upward for the space of aday and a hall, 
at which time I expected he would meet Mr, Fitzpatrick, whom [ requested 
to aid in the search; at all events, he was to go no farther, but return to 
this camp, where a cache of provisions was made for him. 

Continuing the next day down the river, we discovered three squaws in 
a little bottom, and surrounded them before they could make their escape. 
They had large conical baskets, which they were engaged in filling with a 
small leafy plant (erodium cicutarium) just now beginning to bloom, and 
covering the ground like a sward of grass. These did not make any 
lamentations, but appeared very much impressed with our appearance, 
speaking to us only in a whisper, and offering us smaller baskets of the 
plant, which they signified to us was good to cat, making signs also that it 
‘was tobe cooked by the fire. We drew out a little cold horse meat, and 
the squaws made signs to us that the men had gone out after deer, and that 
we could have some by waiting till they came in. We observed that the 
horses ate with great avidity the herb which they had been gathering ; and 
‘here also, for the first time, we saw Indians eat the common grass—one of 
the squaws pulling several tufts, and eating it with apparent relish. See- 
ing our surprise, she pointed to the horses; but we could not well under- 
stand what she meant, except, perhaps, that what was good for the one was 
good for the other. 

We encamped in the evening on the shore of the river, at a place where 
the associated beauties of scenery made so strong an impression on us that 
we have given it the name of the Beautiful Camp. ‘The undulating river 
shore was shaded with the live oaks, which formed a continuous grove 
over the country, and the same grassy sward extended to the edge of the 
water; and we made our fires near some large granite masses which were 
lying among the trees. We had seen several of the acorn caches during the 
day; and here there were two which were very large, containing each, 
probably, ten bushels. Towards evening we heard a weak shout among 
the hills behind, and had the pleasure tosee Mr. Preuss descending towards 
the camp. Like ourselves, he had travelled to-day 25 miles, but had seen 
nothing of Derosier. Knowing, on the day he was lost, that I was deter- 
mined to keep the river as much as possible, he had not thought it neces- 
sary to follow the trail very closely, but walked on, right and left, cer- 
tain to find it somewhere along the river, searching places to obtain good 
views of the country. Towards sunset he climbed down towards the river 
‘to look for the camp; but, finding no trail, concluded that we were behind, 
and walked back until night came on, when, being very much fatigued, he 
collected drift wood and made a large fire among the rocks. The next day 
it became more serious, and he encamped again alone, thinking that we 
must have taken some other course. To go back would have been mad- 
ness in his weak and starved condition, and onward towards the valley 
was his only hope, always in expectation of reaching it soon. His prin- 
cipal means of subsistence were a few roots, which the hunters call sweet 
onions, having very little taste, but a good deal of nutriment, growing gen- 
erally in rocky ground, and requiring a good deal of labor to get. as he had 
only a pocket knife. Searching for these, he found a nest of big ants, 
which he let run on his hand, and stripped them oif in his mouth; these 
had an agreeable acid taste. One of his greatest privations was the want 


[ 174 ] 244 


of tobacco; and a pleasant smoke at evening would have been a relief 
which only a voyageur could appreciatu. He tried the dried leaves of the 
live ouk, knowing that those of other oaks were sometimes used «5 a sub- 
stitute ; but these were too thick, and would not do. On the 4th be made 
seven or eight miles, walking slowly slong the viver, avoiding as mueh as 
possible to climb the hills, [n litthe  ools he caught some of the smallest 
kind of frogs, which he swallowed, pot so much in the gratification of hun- 
ger, as in the hope of obtaining some str nuth. Seattered along the river 
were Old fire-places, where the (indians had roasted museles and acorns : 
but theugh he searehed diligently, ho did not there succeed in finding 
either. He had collected fire wood for the night, when he heard at some 
distance from the river the barking of what he thought were two dogs, and 
walked in that direction as quickly as he was able, hoping to find there 
some Indian hut, but met enly two wolves ; and, in his disappoiotment, the 
gloom of the forest was doubled, 

Travelling the next day feebly down the river, he found five or six In- 
dians at the buts of which we have spoken; some were painting them- 
selves black, and others roasting acorns. Being only one man, they did 
not run off, but received him kindly, and gave him a weleome supply of 
roasted acorns. He gave them his pocket knife in return, and stretched 
out bis hand to one of the Indians, who did not appear to comprehend the 
motion, but jumped back, as if he thought he was about to lay hold of him. 
They seemed afraid of him, not certain os to what he was. 

Travelling on, he came to the place where we had found the squaws. 
Here he found our fire still burning, and the tracks of the horses. The 
sight gave him sudden hope and courage ; ind, following as fast as he 
eould, joined us at evening. 

March 6.—We continued on our road, through the same surpassingly 
beautiful country, entirely unequalled for she pasturage of stock by any 
thing we had ever seen. Our horses had now become so strong that they 
were able to carry us, and we travelled rapidly—over four miles an hour; 
four of us riding every alternate hour. Every few hundred yards we came 
upon a little band of deer ; but we were too cager to reach the settlement, 
which we momentarily expected to discover, to halt for any other thana pass- 


ing shot. Ina few hours we reached a large fork, the northern branch of 


the river, and equal in size-to that which we had descended. ‘Together 
they formed a beautiful stream, 60 to 100 yards wide ; which at first, igno- 
rant of the nature of the country through which that river ran, we took 
to be the Sacramento. 

We continued down the right bank of the river, traveiling for a while over 
a wooded upland, where we had the delight to discover tracks of cattle. To 
the southwest was visible a black column of smoke, which we had fre- 
quently noticed in descending, arising from the fires we had seen from the 
top of the Sierra. From the upland we descended into broad groves on 
the river, consisting of the evergreen, and a new species of white oak with 
a large tufted top, and three to six feet in diameter. Among these was no 
brushwood ; and the grassy surface gave to it the appearance of parks in 
an old settled country. Following the tracks of the horses and cattle in 
search of people, we discovered a small village of Indians. Some of these 
had on shirts of civilized manufacture, but were otherwise naked, and we 
could understand nothing from them ; they appeared entirely astonished at 
secing Us. 


\V 
witl 
forn 
grec 
amo 


ma 
roe 
peat 
plac 
thie 
ith 
into 
ship 
rou 
hicth 
nov 
mnad 
quir 
rive 
mile 
amo 
is ay 
ansy 
the 
him 
rich 
hou: 
if W 
read 
fort 
(aN 
disti 
and 
und 
men 
the 
mor 
then 
de l 
edc 
ema 
The 
slipy 
and 
thes 
Fort 
with 
of tt 
patr 
little 
was 
and 


been a relief 
leaves of the 
sed a bub- 
40h) be made 
gas mueh as 
‘the smallest 
ation of hun- 
ong the river 
sand acorns : 
sd in finding 
ecard at some 
wo dogs, and 
to find there 
ojotment, the 


ive or six In- 
sinting them- 
nan, they did 
me supply of 
ind stretehed 
oprehend the 
y hold of him. 


| the squaws. 
horses, The 
as faust as he 


surpassingly 
stock by any 
ong that they 
iles an hour; 
ards we came 
¢ settlement, 
er thana pass- 
ern branch of 
1. Together 
at first, igno- 
ran, we took 


ya while over 
of cattle. To 
» we had tre- 
seen from the 
dad groves on 
hite oak with 
these was no 
fe of parks in 
and cattle in 
Some of these 
oked, and we 
astonished at 


245 c 174] 


Wo made an acorn meal at ooon, and hurried on; the valley being gay 
with flowers, and some of the banks being absolutely golden with the Cali- 
fornian poppy, (eschscholtzia erocea,) Llere the grass was smooth and 
green, and (he groves very open; the large oaks throwing a broad shade 
among sunny spots, Shortly afterwards we gave a shout at the appearance 
na little bla of a neatly built adobe house with glass windows, We 
rode up, but, to our disappointinent, found only Indians, ‘There was no ap- 
pearance of cultivation, and we could see no eattle, and we supposed the 
place had been abandoned, We now pressed on more eageyly than ever; 
the river swept round in a large bend to the right; the hills lowered down 

atively; and, gradually entering « broad valley, we came unexpectedly 
into a large Indian village, where the people looked elean, and wore cotton 
shivts and various other articles of dress. They immediately erowded 
round us, and we had the inexpressible delight to find one who spoke a 
(ithe indilferent Spanish, but who at first confounded us by saying there were 
no whites in the country , but just then a well-dressed Indian came up, and 
inade his salutations in very-well spoken Spanish. In answer to our in 
quiries, he iniormed us that we were upon the Rio de los Americanos, (the 
river of the Americans, ) aud that it joined the Sacvamento river about 10 
miles below. Never did « name sound more sweetly! We felt ourselves 
among our countrymen; for the name of American, in these distant parts, 
is applied to the citizens of the United States. To our eager inquiries he 
answered, * lama vaguero (cow lieid) inthe service of Capt. Sutter, and 
the people of this rancheria work for him.” Our evident satisfaction made 
him communicative; and he went on to say that Capt. Sutter was a very 
rich man, and always glad to see his country people. We asked for his 
house, Ihe answered, that it was just over the hill before us; and offered, 
if we would wait a moment, to take his horse and conduct us to it. We 
readily accepted hisecivilotfer. In a short distanee we came in sight of the 
fort; and, passing on the way the house of a settler on the opposite side, 
(a Mr. Sinclair, ) we forded the river; and in a few miles were met a short 
distance from the fort by Capt, Sutter himself. He gave us a most frank 
and cordial reception——conducted us immediately to his residence—and 
under bis hospitable roof we bad a night of rest, enjoyment, and refresh- 
ment, which none but ourselves could appreciate. But the party left in 
the mountains with Mr. Fitzpatrick were to be attended to; and the next 
morning, supplied with fresh horses and provisions, I hurried off to meet 
them. On the second day we met, a few miles below the forks of the Rio 
de los Americanos; and a more forlorn and pitiable sight than they present- 
ed cannot well be imagined. ‘They were all on foot—each man, weak and 
emaciated, leading a horse or mule as weak and emaciated as themselves. 
They had experienced great difficulty in descending the mountains, made 
slippery by rains and melting snows, and many horses fell over precipices, 
and were killed ; and with some were lost the packs they carried. Among 
these, was a mule with the plants which we had cullected since leaving 
Fort Hall, along a line of 2,000 miles travel. Out of 67 horses and mules 
with which we commenced crossing the Sierra, only 33 reached the valley 
of the Sacramento, and they only in a condition to be led along. Mr. Fitz- 
patrick and his party, travelling more slowly, had been able to make some 
little exertion at hunting, and had killed a few deer. The scanty supply 
was a great relief to them; for several had been made sick by the strange 


and unwholesome food which the preservation of life compelled them to . 


~rtEse 


i 


t 


40 i 
e » 
Me 
S atenneomestiiihegeiconeeeel 
— A 


IMAGE EVALUATION 
TEST TARGET (MT-3) 


hse 


1.4 
| 


23 WEST MAIN STREET 
14580 
(716) 872-4502 


WEBSTER, N.Y. 


Civ] | 246 


use. We stopped and encamped as soon as we met ; and a repast of good’ 
beef, excellent bread, and delicious salmon, which I had brought along,, 
were their first relief from the sufferings of the Sierra, and their first intro- 
duction to the luxuries of the Sacramento. It required all our philosophy 
and forbearance to prevent plenty from becoming as hurtful to us now, as 
scarcity had been before. 

The next day, March 8th, we encamped at the junction of the two riv- 
ers, the Sacramento and Americanos; and thus found the whole party in 
the beautiful valley of the Sacramento. It was a convenient place for the 
camp; and, among other things, was within reach of the wood necessary 
to make the pack saddles, which we should need on our long journey 
home, from which we were farther distant now than we were four months. 
before, when from the Dalles of the Columbia we so cheerfully took up. 
the homeward line of march. 

Captain Sutter emigrated to this country from the western part of Mis- 
souri in 1838-°39, and formed the first settlement in the valley, ona large 
grant of land which he obtained from the Mexican Government. He had, 
at first, some trouble with the Indians ; but, by the occasional exercise of 
well-timed authority, he has succeeded in converting them into a peaceable 
and indnstrious people. The ditches around his extensive wheat fields ;. 
the making of the sun-dried bricks, of which his fort is constructed; the 
ploughing, harrowing, and other agricultural operations, are entirely the 
work of these Indians, for which they receive a very moderate compensa- 
tion—principally in shirts, blankets, and other articles of clothing. Inthe 
same manner, on application to the chief of a village, he readily obtains as 
many boys ‘and girls as he has any use for. There were at this time a 
number of girls at the fort, in training for a future woollen factory; but 
they were now all busily engaged in constantly watering the gardens, 
which the unfavorable dryness of the season rendered necessary. The oc- 
casional dryness of some seasons, I understood to be the only complaiut of 
the settlers in this fertile valley, as it sometimes renders the crops uncer- 
tain. Mr. Sutter was about making arrangements to irrigate his lands by 
means of the Rio de los Americanos. He had this year sown, and alto- 
gether by Indian labor, three hundred fanegas of wheat. 

A few years since, the neighboring Russian establishment of Ross, being 
about to withdraw from the country, sold to him a large number of stock, 
with agricultural and other stores, with a number of pieces of artillery and 
other munitions of war ; for these, a regular yearly payment is made in grain. 

The fort is a quadrangular adobe structure, mounting 12 pieces of artil- 
lery, (two of them brass,) and capable of admitting a garrison of a thou- 


sand men; this, at present, consists of 40 Indians, in uniform—one of 


whom was always found on duty at the gate. As might naturally be ex- 
pected, the pieces are not in very good order. The whites in the em- 
ployment of Capt. Sutter, American, French and German, amount, per- 
haps, to 30 men. The inner wall is formed into buildings comprising the 
common quarters, with blacksmith and other workshops; the dwelling. 
house, with a large. distillery house, and other buildings, occupying more 
the centre of the area. 

It is. built upon a pond-like stream, at times a running creek commuricat- 
ing with the Rio de los Americanos, which enters the Sacramento about two 
miles below. The latter is here a noble river, about three hundred yards 
broad, deep and tranquil, with several fathoms of water in the channel, and 


> sie ir 


repast of good! 
rought along,, 
eir first intro- 
ur philosophy 
to us now, as 


f the two riv- 
vhole party in 
, place for the 
ood necessary 

long journey 
e four months. 
rfully took up. 


n part of Mis- 
ley, ona large 
ent. He had, 
val exercise of 
to a peaceable 
wheat fields ;. 
structed; the 
e entirely the 
ate compensa- 
thing. Inthe 
dily obtains as 
at this time a 
1 factory ; but 
the gardens, 
sary. The oc- 
y complaint of 
e crops uncer- 
e his lands by 
pwn, and alto- 


of Ross, being, 
mber of stock, 
of artillery and 
made in grain. 
bieces of artil- 
son of a thou- 


aturally be ex- 
les in the em- 
amount, per- 
tomprising the: 
the dwelling. 
cupying more 


commuricat- 
pnto about two 
hundred yards 
e channel, and 


iform—one of 


2 tie Be 


ow 


-_"7 >= wen- 


7 Ww anv Pin ees wwe re Pe 


yrrwwe 


--7 rt 


*e 


“e--°7 


wot 


NUEVA‘ HEL 


Why 
iN t 
4 ta 
oe 
. 
tN mw 
ry 
“o,f 
Ohs 
ht 
. 
ANH 
* 
Pi 
"ns 
ST 
WW 
s 
a* 


Nii 
Wy! 
WWiff 


7 
Ma iy 
Dy 


SCALE 


see 


tt! 


Mas, 


o> MILES 


Lath by be Weber a | 


TO ONE 


talinmore Ma 


INC Hf 


WAM eg 
ATI 
FINS aS ANG 


\\! 


Oleg 
: ‘\S 
Ot N f \\ae 
oe 


W 
wee 


TA LN 
LAKE 


J 


Wy 


wlll 


¢ 
/ 


a) 


its banks c 
Capt. Sutt 
and the ot 
Fort Vane 
Since h 
tablished t 
much kin 
de los Am 
lished hi 
agricultur 
troduce th 
reason to 
average p 
for one so 
Sefior Va 
tured, 80 
places, a 
An im} 
we were 
lected ; t 
the black 
bitts ; anc 
ments of 
The de 
situation 
ney, was 
with Mr. 
Sacrame! 
which he 
ernment. 
It will 
and that 
party of 
tains to ( 
design, ¢ 
mouth o 
Sacrame 
settleme 
mitted 
south, a 
On th 
ment of 
dischar; 
and an 
very gr 
offered 
self, hi 
tained | 
and ah 
proved 
ticular! 
their o 


247 [14 y 


its banks continuously timbered. There were two vessels belonging to 
Capt. Sutter at anchor near the landing—one a large two-masted fighter, 
and the other a schooner, which was shortly to proceed on a voyage to 
Fort Vancouver for a cargo of goods. 

Since his arrival, several other persons, principally Americans, have es- 
tablished themselves in the valley. Mr. Sinclair, from whom I experienced 
much kindness during my stay, is settled a few miles distant, on the Rio 
de los Americanos. Mr. Coudrois, a gentleman from Germany, has estab- 
lished himself on Feather river, and is associdted with Captain Sutter in 
agricultural pursuits. Among other improvements, they are about to in- 
troduce the cultivation of rape seed, (brassica rapus, ) which there is every 
reason to believe is odenirably adapted to the climate and soil. The lowest 
average produce of wheat, as far as we can at present know, is 35 fanegas. 
for one sown ; but, as an instance of its fertility, it may be mentioned that 
Sefior Valejo obtained, on a piece of ground where sheep had been pas- 
tured, 800 fanegas for eightsown. The produce being different in various 
piaces, a very correct idea cannot be formed. 

An impetus was given to the active little population by our arrival, as 
we were in want of every thing. Mules, horses, and cattle, were to be col- 
lected ; the horse mill was at work day and night, to make sufficient flour ; 
the blacksmith’s shop was put in requisition for horse shoes and bridle 
bitts ; and pack saddles, ropes, and bridles, and all the other little equip- 
ments of the camp, were again to be provided. 

The delay thus occasioned was one of repose and enjoyment, which our 
situation required, and, anxious as we were to resume our homewnrd jour- 
ney, was regretted by no one. In the mean time, I had the pleasur«: io meet 
with Mr. Chiles, who was residing at a farm on the other side of ti: river 
Sacramento, while engaged in the selection of a place for a settlement, for 
which he had received the necessary grant of land from the Mexican Gov- 
ernment. 

It will be remembered that we had parted near the frontier of the States, 
and that he had subsequently descended the valley of Lewis’s fork, witha. 
party of 10 or 12 men, with the intention of crossing the intermediate moun- 
tains to the waters of the bay of San Francisco. In the execution of this. 
design, and aided by subsequent information, he left the Columbia at the. 
mouth of Malheur river; and, making his way to the head: waters of the 
Sacramento with a part of his company, travelled down that river to the 
settlements of Nueva Helvetia. The other party, to whom he had com- 
mitted his wagons, and mill irons and saws, took a course further to the 
south, and the wagons and their contents were lost. 

On the 22d we made a preparatory move, and encamped near the settle- 
ment of Mr. Sinclair, on the left bank of the Rio de los Americanos. I had 
discharged five of the party: Neal, the blacksmith, (an excellent workman, 
and an unmarried man, who had done his duty faithfully, and had been of 
very great service to me,) desired to remain, as strong inducements were 
offered here to mechanics. Although at considerable inconvenience to my- 
self, his good conduct induced me to comply with his request ; and I ob- 
tained for him, from Captain Sutter, a present compensation of two dollars 
and ahalf per diem, with a promise that it should beincreased to five, if be 
proved as good a workman as had been represented. He was more par- 


ticularly an agricultural blacksmith. The other men were discharged with. - 


their own consent. 


SE RS se 


_ 
ts 


ee ere 


" 
4 


—— 


SS at 


[ 174] 248 


While .we remained at this place, Derosier, one of our best men, Whose spikes i 
steady good conduct had won my regurd, wandered off from the camp, and light an 
never returned to it again; nor has he since been heard of, On tl 


March 24.—We resumed our journey with an ample stock of provisions tributar 

and a large cavalcade of animals, consisting of 130 horses and mules, and betwee 
about thirty head of cattle, five of which were milch cows. Mr. Sutter with op 
furnished us also with an Indian boy, who had been trained as a vaquero, bloom ; 
and who would be serviceable in managing our cavaleade, great part ot grow tl 
| which were nearly as wild as buffalo ; and who was, besides, very anxious are gre 
to go along with us. Our direct course home was eust; but the Sierra in Calif 
would force us south, above five hundred miles of travelling, to a pass at vine wi 

1 the head of the San Joaquin river. This pass, reported to be good, was and wh 
discovered by Mr. Joseph Walker, of whom I have already spoken, and bay, we 


| whose name it might theefore appropriately bear. ‘To reach it, our course ground 
lay along the valley of the San Joaquin—the river on our right, and the lofty Mar 
ny wall of the impassable Sierra onthe left. From that pass we were to move with ou 
Cie southeastwardly, having the Sierra then on the right,and reach the “Spanish five mil 


trail,” deviously traced fromone watering place to another, which constitut- over a 
ed the route of the caravans from Puebla delos Angeles, near the coast of separat 
the Pacific, to Santa Fé of New Mexico. From the pass to this trail was 150 which 
miles. Following that trail through a desert, relieved by some fertile plains melting 
indicated by the recurrence of the term vegas, until it turned to the right surface 
to cross the Colorado, our course would be northeast until we regained the the Jo 
latitude we had lost in arriving at the Eutah lake, and thence to the Rocky among 
mountains at the head of the Arkansas. ‘lhis course of travelling, forced FF  blue-flo 
upon us by the structure of the country, would occupy a computed distance cated tl 
of two thousand miles before we reached the head of the Arkansas ; nota shrub ir 
settlement to be scen upon it; and the names of places along it, all being or four 
Spanish or Indian, indicated that it had been but little trod by American feet in 
feet. Though long, and not free from hardships, this route presented some spikes ¢ 
| points of attraction, in tracing the Sierra Nevada—turning the Great Basin, . of natu 
perhaps crossing its rim on the south—completely solving the problem of floweri 
any river, except the Colorado, from the Rocky mountains on that part of | We cor 
Hh our continent—and sceing the southern extremity of the Great Salt lake, [grove c 
bi of which the northern part had been examined the year before. we had 
{ Taking leave of Mr. Sutter, who, withseveral gentlemen, accompaniedus [ground 
I | a fewmiles on our way, we travelled about eighteen miles, and encampedon J figure, 
a | the Rio de los Cosunmes, a stream recciving its name from the Indianswho = The 
Wy live in its valley. Our road was through a level country, admirably suited J) Elk an 
to cultivation, and covered with groves of oak trees, principally the ever- ; Our 
green oak, and a large oak already mentioned, in. form like those of the | among 
white oak. ‘lhe weather, which here, at this season, can easily be changed / = groves 
rt from the summer heat of the valley to the frosty mornings and bright days / peaks” 
tk nearer the mountains, continued delightful for travellers, but unfavorable * — we ca 
if to the agriculturists, whose crops of wheat began to wear a yellow tinge ford, b 
i from want of rain. F tain sr 
1} March 25.—We travelled for 28 miles over the same delightful country We 
| as yesterday, and halted in a beautiful bottom at the ford of the Rio. de los | cable te 
| Mukelemnes, receiving its name from another Indian tribe living on the -  eateh | 
| river. The bottoms on the stream are broad, rich, and extremely fertile ; packe: 
and the uplands are shaded with oak groves. A showy lupinus of extra- Unc 
ordinary beauty, growing four to five feet in height, and covered with rium | 


men, Whose 
ne camp, and 


of provisions 
mules, and 
Mr. Sutter 
8 A vaquero, 
reat part ot 
ery anxious 
t the Sierra 
» 10 0 pass at 
be good, was 
spoken, and 
t, our course 
and the lofty 
‘ere to move 
he “Spanish 
ch constitut- 
the coast of 
rail was 150 
ertile plains 
to the right 
regained the 
o the Rocky 
lling, forced 
ted distance 
ansas ; nota 
it, all being 
y American 
‘ented some 
rreat Basin, 
problem of 
that part of 
t Salt lake, 


mm panied us 
ncamped on 
ndians who 
ably suited 
ythe ever- 
lose of the 
be changed 
right days 
nfavorable 
sllow tinge 


ul country 
Rio. de los 
ing on the 
ly fertile ; 
s of extra- 
ered with 


at Noemie 


249 [ 174 ] 
spikes in bloom, adorned the banks of the river, and filled the air with a 
ight and grateful perfume, 

On the 26th we halted at the Arroyo de lax Calaveras, (Skull creek,) a 
tributary to the San Joaquin—the previous two streams entering the bay 
between the San Joaquin and Sacramento rivers, This place is beautiful, 
with open groves of oak, and a grassy sward beneath, with many plantsin 
bloom ; some’ varieties of which seem to love the shade of the trees, and 
grow there in close small fields, Near the river, and replacing the grass, 
are great quantities of ammo/e, (soap plant,) the leaves of which are used 
in California for making, among other things, mats for saddle cloths. A 
vine with a small white flower, (melothria ?) called here la yerba buena, 
and which, from its abundance, gives name to an island and town in the 
bay, was to-day very frequent on our road—sometimes running on the 
ground ov climbing the trees. 

March 27.—To-day we travelled steadily and rapidly up the valley ; for, 
with our wild animals, any other gait was impossible, and making about 
five miles an hour, During the earlier part of the day, our ride had been 
over a very level prairie, or rather a succession of long stretches of praitie, 
separated by lines and groves of oak timber, growing along dry gullies, 
which are filled with water in seasons of rain; and, perhaps, also, by the 
melting snows. Over much of this extent, the vegetation was sparse ; the 
surface showing plainly the action of water, which, in the season of flood, 
the Joaquin spreads over the valley. About 1 o’clock we came again 
among innumerable flowers ; and a few miles further, fields of the beautiful 
blue-flowering Lupine, which seems to love the neighborhood of water, indi- 
cated that we were approaching a stream. We here found this beautiful 
shrub in thickets, some of them being 12 feet in height. Occasionally three 
or four plants were clustered together, forming a grand bouquet, about 90 
feet in circumference, and 10 fect high; the whole summit covered with 
spikes of flowers, the perfume of which is very sweet and grateful. A lover 
of natural beauty can imagine with what pleasure we rode among these 
flowering groves, which filled the air with a light and delicate fragrance. 
We continued our road for about half a mile, interspersed through an open 
grove of live oaks, which, in form, were the most symmetrical and beautiful 
we had yet seen in this country. The ends of their branches rested on the 

round, forming somewhat more than a halfsphere of very full and regular 
figure, with leaves apparently smaller than usual. 

The Californian poppy, of a rich orange color, was numerous to-day, 
Elk and several bands of antelope made their appearance. 

Our road was now one continued enjoyment ; and it was pleasant, riding 
among this assemblage of green pastures with varied flowers and scattered 
groves, and out of the warm green spring, to look at the rocky and snowy 
peaks where lately we had suffered so much. Emerging from the timber, 
we came suddenly upon the Stanislaus river, where we hoped to find a 
ford, but the stream was flowing by, dark and deep, swollen by the moun- 
tain snows; its general breadth was about 50 yards. 

We travelled about five miles up the river, and encamped without being 


.able to find a ford. ‘Here we made a large coral, in order to be able to 


eatch a sufficient number of our wild animals to relieve those previously 


packed. 
Under the shade of the oaks, along the river, I noticed erodium cicula- 
rium in bloom, eight or ten inches high. This is the plant which we had 


dee 
——S = 
= — 
eee ee ne 


, SSS 


tt 
Ai) i 


C174) 250 
seen the squaws gathering on the Rio de los Americanos. By the inhabit. 
ants of the valley, it is highly esteemed for fattening cattle, which appear 
to he very fond of it. Here, where the soil begins tu be sandy, it supplies 
to a considerable extent the want of grass. 

Desirous, as far as possible, without delay, to include in our examination 
the San Joaquin river, | returned this morning down the Stanislaus for 17 
miles, and again encamped without having found a fording place. After 
following it for 8 miles further the next morning, and finding ourselves in 
the vicinity of the San Joaquin, encamped in a handsome oak grove, and, 
several cattle beingkilled, we ferried over our baggage in their skins, Here 
our Indian boy, who Mrpery 4 had not much idea of where he was going, 
and began to be alarmed at the many streams which we were rapidly put- 
ting between him and the village, deserted. 

Thirteen head of cattle took a sudden fright, while we were driving them 
across the river, and galloped off. I remained a day in the endeavor to 
recover them ; but, finding they had taken the trail back to the fort, let them 
go without further effort. [lere we had several days of warm and pleasant 
rain, which doubtless saved the crops below. 

On the Ist of April, we made 10 wiles across a prairie without timber, 
when we were stopped again by another large river, which is called the 
Rio de la Merced, (river of our Lady of Merey.) Here the country had 
lost its character of extreme fertility, the soil having become more sandy 
and light ; but, for several days past, its beauty had been increased by the 
additional animation of animal life ; and now, it is crowded with bands of 
elk and wild horses ; and along the rivers are frequent fresh tracks of griz- 
zly bear, which are unusually numerous in this country, 

Our route had been along the timber of the San Joaquin, generally about 
8 nfiles distant, over a high prairie. 

In one of the bands of elk seen to-day, there were about 200; but the 
larger bands, both of these and wild horses, are generally found on the other 
side of the river, which, for that reason, [| avoided crossing. I had been 
informed below, that the droves of wild horses were almost invariably found 
on the western bank of the river; and the danger of losing our animals 
among them, together with the wish of adding to our reconnoissance the 
numerous streams which run down from the Sierra, decided me to travel 
up the eastern bank. 

April 2.—The day was occupied in building a boat, and ferrying our 
baggage across the river; and we encamped on the bank. A large fishing 
eagle, with white head and tail, was slowly sailing along, looking after sal- 
mon ; and there were some pretty birds in the timber, with partridges, 
ducks, and geese innumerable in the neighborhood. We were struck with 
the tameness of the latter bird at Helvetia, scattered about in flocks near 
the wheat fields, and eating grass on the prairie ; a horseman would ride by 
within 30 yards, without disturbing them. 

April 3.—To-day we touched several times the San Joaquin river—here 
a fine-looking tranquil stream, with a slight current, and apparently deep. 
It resembled the Missouri in color, with occasional points of white sand ; 
and its banks, where steep, were a kind of sandy clay ; its average width 
appeared to be about eighty yards. In the bottoms are frequent ponds,’ 
where our approach disturbed multitudes of wild fowl, principally geese. 
Skirting ap the timber, we frequently started elk ; and large bands were 
seen during the day, with antelope and wild horses. The low country and 


| 


the timb 
evening 
mouth. 
durin 
growt » 
reminded 
we foun 
of grass 
The f 
weather 
we wa 
Apri 
rise. W 
Joaquin. 
the timb 
which w 
Here th 
and are 
about a 
with isl 
but its n 
towards 
ing arou 
there go 
with imt 
day ate 
the rive 
April 
a lacustt 
surrount 
lows. 
fields of 
tle pond 
cording 
of high v 
the upp: 
rt 
Here ell 
around | 
of snow 
rains in 
and enc 
latitude 
April 
early hé 
Joaquin 
ing our 
to ra(t tl 
where | 
Columr 
southw: 
there w 


y the inhabit. 
hich appear 
y, it supplies 


examination 
islaus for 17 
lace. After 
ourselves in 

grove, and, 
skins, Here 
© was going, 
rapidly put- 


driving them 
endeavor to 
fort, let them 
and pleasant 


thout timber, 
is called the 

country had 

more sandy 
eased by the 
vith bands of 
acks ot griz- 


nerally about 


200 ; but the 
| on the other 

I had been 
ariably found 
; our animals 
\oissance the 
me to travel 


ferrying our 
large fishing 
ing after sal- 
1 partridges, 
2 struck with 
1 flocks near 
ould ride by 


river—here 
rently deep. 
white sand ; 
erage width 
juent ponds,” 
pally geese. 
bands were 
country and 


251 [ 174 J 


the timber rendered it dificultto keep the main line of the river; and this 
evening we encamped on a tributary stream, about five miles from its 
mouth, On the prairie bordering the San Joaquin bottoms, there occurred 
during the day but little grass, and in its place was a sparse and dwarf 
growth of plants; the soil being sandy, with small bare places and hillocks, 
reminded me much of the Platte bottoms; but, on approaching the timber, 
we found a more luxuriant vegetation; and at our camp was an abundance 
of grass and pea vines, 

The foliage of the oak is getting darker; and every thing, except that the 
weather is a little cool, shows that spring is rapidly advancing ; and to-day 
we had quite a summer rain, 

April 4.—Commenced to rain at daylight, but cleared off brightly at sun- 
rise. We ferried the river without any difficulty, and continued up the San 
Joaquin. Elk were running in bands over the prairie and in the skirt of 
the tinber. We reached the river again at the mouth of a large slough, 
which we were unable to ford, and wade a cirenit of several miles around, 
Here the country appears very flat; oak trees have entirely disappeared, 
and are replaced by a large willow, nearly equal to it in size. The river is 
about a hundred yards in breadth, branching into sloughs, and interspersed 
with islands. At this time it appears sufficiently deep for a small steamer, 
but its navigation would be broken by shallows at low water. Bearing in 
towards the river, we were again forced off by another slough ; and, pass- 
ing around, steered towards a clump of trees on the river, and, finding 
there good grass, encamped. The prairies along the left bank are alive 
with immense droves of wild horses; and they had been seen during the 
day at avery opening through the woods which afforded us a view across 
the river. Latitude, by observation, 37° 08' 00"; longitude 120° 45' 22," 

April 5.—During the carlier part of the day’s ride, the country presented 
a lacustrine appearance ; the river was deep, and nearly on a level with the 
surrounding country ; its banks raised like a levee, and fringed with wil- 
lows. Over the bordering plain were interspersed spots of prairie among 
fields of tulé (bulrushes,) which in this country are called tulares, and lit- 
tle ponds. On the opposite side, a line of timber was visible, which, ac- 
cording to information, points out the course of the slough, which, at times 
of high water, connects with the San Joaquin river—a large body of waterin 
the upper part of the valley, called the Tulé lakes. The river and all its 
dees: are yery full, and it is probable that the lake is now discharging. 
Here elk were frequently started, and one was shot out of a band which ran 
around us. On our lett, the Sierra maintains its snowy height, and masses 
of snow appear to descend very low towards the plains ; probably the late 
rains in the valley were snow on the mountains. We travelled 37 miles, 
and encamped on the river. Longitude of the camp, 120° 28' 34", and 
latitude 36° 49’ 12". 

April 6.—After having travelled 15 miles along the river, we made an 
early halt, under the shade of sycamore trees. Here we found the San 
Joaquin coming down from the Sierra with a westerly course, and check- 
ing our way, as all its tributaries had previously done. We had expected 
to raft the river; but found a good ford, and encamped on the opposite bank, 
where droves of wild horses were raising clouds of dust on the prairie. 
Columns of smoke were visible in the direction of the Tulé lakes to the 
southward—probably kindled in the tulares by the Indians, as signals that 
there were strangers in the valley. 


c 174 


We made, on the 7th, a hard mareh in a cold chilly rain from morning 
until night—the weather so thick that we travelled by compass. This was 
a traverse from the San Joaquin to the waters of the Tulé lakes, and our 
road was over a very level prairic country. We saw wolves frequerl y 
during the day, prowling about after the young antelope, which cannot run 
very fast. These were numerous during the day, and two were caught by 
the people. 

Late in the afternoon we discovered timber, which was found to be 
groves of oak trees on a dry arroyo, The rain, which had fallen in fre. 
quent showers, poured down ina storm at sunset, with a strong wind, 
which swept off the clouds, and left a clear sky. Riding on through the 
timber, about dark we found abundant water in small ponds, 20 to 30 yards 
in diameter, with clear deep water and sandy beds, bordered with bo 
rushes (Juncus effusus,) and a tall rush (scirpus lacustris) 12 feet high, 
and surrounded near the margin with willow trees in bloom ; among them 
one which resembled sa/ix myricoides. ‘The oak of the groves was the 
same already mentioned, with small leaves, in form like those of the white 
oak, and forming, with the evergreen oak, the characteristic trees of the 
valley. 

April 8.—After a ride of two miles through brush and open groves, we 
reached a large stream, called the River of the Lake, resemiling in size the 
San Joaquin, and being about 100 yards broad. This is the principal trib- 
utary to the Tulé lakes, which collect all the waters in the upper part of 
the valley. \Vhile we were searching fora ford, some Indians appeared on 
the opposite bank, and, having discovered that we were not Spanish sol- 
diers, showed us the way to a good ford several miles above. 

The Indians of the Sierra make frequent descents upon the settlements 
west of the Coast Range, which they keep constantly swept of horses; 
among them are many who are called Christian Indians, being refugees 
from Spanish missions. Several of these incursions occurred while we 
were at Helvetia. Occasionally parties of soldicrs follow them across the 
Coast Range, but never enter the Sierra. 

On the opposite side we found some forty or filty Indians, who.had come 
to meet us from the village below. We made them some sinall presents, 
and invited them to accompany us to our encampment, which, alter about 
three miles through fine oak groves, we made on the river. We made a 
fort, principally on account of our animals. The Indians brought otter 
skins, and several kinds of fish, and bread made of acorns, to trade. Among 
them were several who had come to live among these Indians when the 
missions were broken up, and who spoke Spanish fluently. They informed 
us that they were called by the Spaniards mansitos, (tame, ) in distinction 
from the wilder tribes of the mountains. They, however, think themselves 
very insecure, not knowing at what unforeseen moment the sins of the 
latter may be visitedonthem. They are dark-skinned, but handsome and 
intelligent Indians, and live principally on acorns and the rgpts of the tule, 
of which also their huts are made. 

By observation. the latitude of the encampment is 36° 24' 50", and lon- 
gitude 119° 41' 4u". 

April 9.—For several miles we had very bad travelling over what is 
called rotten ground, in which the horses were frequently up to their knees. 
Making towards a line of timber, we found a small fordable stream, beyond 
which the country improved, and the grass became excellent ; and, crossing 


5 


t 


a 


a number 
oak grove 
running ¢ 
announce 
nearer to 
masses 0 
on the C 
April } 
through ¢ 
soil, in W 
evening 
up towar 
hidden at 
cottonwo 
seed vess 
Severa 
them sup 
promised 
April 
‘“ Buen ce 
inquired 4 
tifully th 
wise, We 
present Ss 
ground. 
with e70a 
and beau 
low place 
two and | 
of aridity 
willow, ¢ 
In the 
noticed | 
the mira 
April 
vegetatic 
neighbor 
course 0 
the close 
tics into 
wide, W 
crossed 
well tin 
several | 
grass. 
rare and 
Along 
which n 
elliptica 
der, an 
willow. 
the plac 


rom morning 
ss. This was 
kes, and our 
8 frequenk y 
th cannot run 
ere caught by 


found to be 
fallen in fre. 
strong wind, 
| through the 
0 to 30 yards 
red with bog 
2 feet high, 
among them 
ves Was the 
of the white 
trees of the 


1 groves, we 
gin size the 
rincipal trib- 
pper part of 
appeared on 
Spanish sol- 


settlements 
t of horses; 
ing refugees 
ed while we 
m across the 


ho had come 
all presents, 
, alter about 
We made a 
‘rought otter 
ide. Among 
13 when the 
i¢y informed 
n distinction 
< themsclves 

sins of the 
andsome and 
3 of the tulé, 


0", and lon- 


ver what is 
their knees. 
am, beyond 
nd, crossing 


253 [ 174] 


a number of dry and timbered arroyos, we travelled until late through open 
oak groves, and encamped among a collection of streams. These were 
running among rushes and willows; and, as usual, flocks of blackbirds 
announced our approach to water. We have here approached considerably 
nearer to the eastern Sierra, which shows very plainly, still covered with 
masses of snow, which yesterday and to-day has also appeared abundant 
on the Coast Range. 

April 10.—To-day we made another long journey of about forty miles, 
through a country uninteresting and flat, with very little grass and a sandy 
soil, in which several branclies we crossed had lost their water. In the 
evening the face of the country became hilly ; and, turning a few miles 
up towards the mountains, we found a good encampment on a pretty stream 
hidden among the hills, and handsomely timbered, principally with large 
cottonwoods, (populus, differing from any in Michaux’s Sylva.) ‘The 
sced vessels of this tree were now just about bursting. 

Several Indians came down the river to sce us in the evening: we gave 
them supper, and cautioned them against stealing our horses; which they 
promised not to attempt. 

April 11.—A broad trail along the river here takes out among the hills. 
“ Buen camino,” (good road,) said one of the Indians, of whom we had 
inquired about the pass; and, following it accordingly, it conducted us beau- 
tifully through a very broken country, by an excellent way, which, other- 
wise, we should have found extremely bad. Taken separately, the hills 
present smooth and graceful outlines, but, together, make bad travelling 
ground. Instead of grass, the whole face of the country is closely covered 
with erodium cicutarium, here only two or three inches high. Its height 
and beauty varied ina remarkable manner with the locality, being, in many 
low places which we passed during the day, around streams and springs, 
two and three feet in height. ‘The country had now assumed a character 
of aridity; and the luxuriant green of these little streams, wooded with 
willow, oak, or sycamore, looked very refreshing among the sandy hills. 

In the evening we encamped on a large creek, with abundant water. I 
noticed here in bloom, for the first time since leaving the Arkansas waters, 
the mirabilis Julapa. 

April 12.—Along our road to-day the country was altogether sandy, and 
vegetation meager. Ephedra occidentalis, which we had first seen in the 
neighborhood of the Pyramid lake, made its appearance here, and in the 
course of the day became very abundant, and in large bushes. ‘Towards 
the close of the afternoon, we reached a tolerably large river, which emp- 
ties into a small lake at the head of the valley ; it is about thirty-five yards 
wide, with a stony and graveily bed, and the swiftest streain we have 
crossed since leaving the bay. The bottoms produced no grass, though 
well timbered with willow and cottonwood ; and, after ascending it for 
several miles, we made a late encampment ona little bottom, with scanty 
grass. In greater part, the vegetation along our road consisted now of 
rare and unusual plants, among which many were entirely new. 

Along the bottoms were thickets consisting of several varieties of shrubs, 


‘which made here their first appearance; and among these was Guarrya 


elliptica, (Lindley,) a small tree belonging to a very peculiar natural or-. 
der, and, in its general appearance, (growing in thickets,) resembling 
willow. It now became common along the streams, frequently supplying 
the place of salix longifolia. 


( 174 J 254 


_ April 13.—The water was low, and a few miles above we forded the up the r 
river at a rapid, and marched ina southeasterly direction over a less broken and hans 
country. ‘The mountains were now very near, occasionally looming out other tr 
through fog. In a few hours we reached the bottom of a creek without y acer’ 
water, over which the sandy beds were dispersed in many branches. Im. dentalis 
mediately where we struck it, the timber terminated; and below, to the collecte 
right, it was a broad bed of dry and bare sands. ‘There were many tracks | with = 
of Indians and horses imprinted in the sand, which, with other indications air. Ge 
informed us was the creek issuing from the pass, and which on the nap pes 
we have called Pass creek. We ascended a trail for a few miles along the the alr 
creek, and suddenly found a stream of water five feet wide, running with garden ; 
a lively current, but losing itself almost immediately. This little stream covered 
showed plainly the manner in which the mountain waters lose themselves Our Jou 
in sand at the eastern foot of the Sierra, leaving only a parched desert and and flor 
arid plains beyond. The stream enlarged rapidly, and the timber became just left 
abundant as we ascended. A new species of pine made its appearance frowned 
with several kinds of oaks, and a variety of trees; and the country chang. of pleas 
ing its appearance suddenly and entirely, we found ourselves again travel: with hu 
ling among the old orchard-like places. Here we selected a delightful en- the sere 
campment in a handsome green oak hollow, where, among the open bolls and obt 
of the trees, was an abundant sward of grass and pea vines. In the even was the 
ing a Christian Indian rode into the camp, well dressed, with long spurs The dis 
and a sombrero, and speaking Spanish fluently. It was an unexpected ap. had an 
parition, and a strange and pleasant sight in this desolate gorge of a moun. Sierra J 
tain—an Indian face, Spanish costume, jingling spurs, and horse equipped a little 
after the Spanish manner. He informed me that he belonged to one of the it migh 
Spanish missions to the south, distant two or three days’ ride, and that he gitude | 
had obtained from the priests leave to spend a few days with his relations J distant. 
in the Sierra. Having seen us enter the pass, he had come down to visit c09 trot 
us. Ile appeared familiarly acquainted with the country, and gave me We | 
definite and clear information in regard to the desert region east of the upon th 
mountains, I had entered the pass with a strong disposition to vary my henen 
route, and to travel directly across towards the Great Salt lake, in the view range G 
of obtaining some acquaintance with the interior of the Great Basin, while broad « 
pursuing a direct course for the frontier; but his representation, which de- of Ores 
scribed it as an arid and barren desert, that had repulsed by its sterility all range; 
the attempts of the Indians to penetrate it, determined me for the present | Coast | 
to relinquish the plan; and, agreeably to his advice, after crossing the | Franci 
Sierra, continue our intended route along its eastern base to the Spanish | tnento 
trail. By this route, a party of six Indians, who had come from a great BSC 
river in the eastern part of the desert to trade with his people, had just Sandal 
started on their return. He would himself return the next day to San cbr tenate 
Fernando; and as our roads would be the same for two days, he offered base o| 
his services to conduct us so far on our way. His offer was gladly accepted. of Rio 
The fog, which had somewhat interfered with views in the valley, had en- Nevac 
tirely passed off, and left aclear sky. That which had enveloped us in of the 
the neighborhood of the pass proceeded evidently from fires kindled among of the 
the tulares by Indians living near the lakes, and which were intended to No riv 
‘warn those in the mountains that there were strangers in the valley. Our § lofty t 


position was in latitude 35° 17’ 12”, and longitude 118° 35’ 03”. ; Senn 
_ April 14.—Our guide joined us this morning on the trail; and, arriving AMead 
in a short distance at an open bottom where the creek forked, we continued J Sierra 


ve forded the 
ra less broken 
r looming out 
creek without 
branches. Im. 
below, to the 
e many tracks 
- indications, 
on the snap 
jiles along the 
running with 
s little stream 
se themselves 
ned desert and 
imber becaine 
S$ appearance, 
ountry chang. 
Ss again travel: 
delightful en- 
the open bolls 
In the even: 
th long spurs, 
nexpected ap- 
‘ge of @ moun. 
orse equipped 
d to one of the 
e, and that he 
h his relations 
down to visit 
and gave me 
n east of the 
on to vary my 
ce, in the view 
t Basin, while 
ion, which de- 
its sterility all 
or the present 
' crossing the 
o the Spanish 
> from a great 
ople, had just 
xt day to San 
ys, he offered 
adly accepted. 
alley, had en- 
veloped us in 
cindled among 
‘e intended to 
> valley. Our 
3", 
and, arriving 
we continued 


255 [ 174 ] 


up the right-hand branch, which was enriched by a profusion of flowers, 
and handsomely wooded with sycamore, oaks, cottonwood, and willow, with 
other trees, and some shrubby plants. In its long strings of balls, this 
sycamore differs from that of the United States, and is the platanus occi- 
dentalis of Hooker—a new species, recently described among the plants 
collected in the voyage of the Sulphur. The cottonwood varied its foliage 
with white tufts, and the feathery seeds were flying plentifully through the 
air. Gooseberries, nearly ripe, were very abundant on the mountain ; and 
as we passed the dividing grounds, which were not very easy to ascertain, 
the air was filled with perfume, asif we were entering a highly cultivated 
garden ; and, instead of green, our pathway and the mountain sides were 
covered with fields of yellow flowers, which here was the prevailing color. 
Our journey to-day was in the midst of an advanced spring, whose green 
and floral beauty offered a delightful contrast to the sandy valley we had 
just left. All the day, snow was in sight on the butt of the mountain, which 
frowned down upon us on the right; but we beheld it now with feelings 
of pleasant security, as we rode along between green trees and on flowers, 
with humming birds and other feathered friends of the traveller enlivening 
the serene spring air. As we reached the summit of this beautiful pass, 
and obtained a view into the eastern country, we saw at once that here 
was the place to take leave of all such pleasant scenes as those around us. 
The distant mountains were now bald rocks again; and below, the land 
had any color but green. Taking into consideration the nature of the 
Sierra Nevada, we found this pass an excellent one for horses ; and with 
a little labor, or perhaps with a more perfect examination of the localities, 
it might be made sufficiently practicable for wagons. Its latitude and lon- 
gitude may be considered that of our last encampment, only a few miles 
distant. ‘The elevation was not taken—our half-wild cavalcade making it 
too troublesome to halt before night, when once started. 

We here left the waters of the bay of San Francisco, and, though forced 
upon them contrary to my intentions, I cannot regret the necessity which 
occasioned the deviation. It made me well acquainted with the great 
range of the Sierra Nevada of the Alta California, and showed that this 
broad and elevated snowy ridge was a continuation of the Cascade Range 
of Oregon, between which and the ocean there isstill another and a lower 
range, parallel to the former and to the coast, and which may be called the 
Coast Range. It also made me well acquainted with the basin of the San 
Francisco bay, and with the two pretty rivers and their valleys, (the Sacra- 
mento and San Joaquin, ) which are tributary to that bay ; and cleared up 
some points in geography on which error had iong prevailed. It had been 
constantly represented, as I have already stated, that the bay of San Fran- 
cisco opened far into the interior, by some river coming down from the 
base of the Rucky mountains, and upon which supposed stream the name 
of Rio Buenaventura had been bestowed. Our observations of the Sierra 
Nevada, in the long distance from the head of the Sacramento to the head 
of the San Joaquin, and of the valley below it, which collects all the waters 
of the San Francisco bay, show that this neither is nor can be the case. 
No river from the interior does, or can, cross the Sierra Nevada—itselt more 
lofty than the Rocky mountains; and as to the Buenaventura, the mouth 
of which seen on the coast gave the idea and the name of the reputed great 
river, it is, in fact, a small stream of no consequence, not only below the 
Sierra.Nevada, but actually below the Coast Range—taking its rise within 


a a eS 


= 


Cee oe 
Sores 


eens ee 


scons 


— aioe rege 


[ 174] 256 


half a degree of the ocean, running parallel to it for about two degrees, 
and then falling into the Pacific near Monterey. ‘There is no opening from 
the bay of San Francisco into the interior of the continent. The two 
rivers Which flow into it are comparatively short, and not perpendicular 
to the coast, but latcral to it, and having their heads towards Oregon and 
southern California. ‘They open lines of communication north and south, 
and not castwardly ; and thus this want of interior communication from 
the San Francisco bay, now fully ascertained, gives great additional value 
to the Columbia, which stands alone as the only great river on the Pacific 
slope of our continent which leads from the ocean to the Rocky mountains, 
and opens a line of communication from the sea to the valley of the Mis. 
sissippi. 

Four comparterogjoined our guide at the pass ; and two going back qt 
noon, the others continued on in company. Descending from the hills, we 
reached a country of fine grass, where the erodiwm cicutarium finally dis. 
appeared, giving place to an excellent quality of bunch grass. Passing by 
some springs where there was a rich sward of grass among groves of large 
black oak, we rode over a plain on which the guide pointed outa Spot 
where a refugee Christian Indian had been killed by a party of soldiers 
which had unexpectedly penetrated into the mountains. Crossing a low 
sierra, and descending a hollow where a spring gushed out, we were struck 
by the sudden appearance of yucca trees, which gave a strange and south. 
ern character to the country, und suited well with the dry and desert re- 
gion we were approaching. Associated with the idea of barren sands, their 
stiff and ungraceful form makes them to the traveller the most repulsive 
tree in the vegetable kingdom. Following the hollow, we shortly came 
upon a creek timbered with large black oak, which yet had not put fortha 
leaf. There was a small rivulet of running water, with good grass. 

April 15.—The ludians who had accompanied the guide returned this 
morning, and I purchased from them a Spanish saddle and long spurs, as 
reminiscences of the time ; and for a few yards of scarlet cloth they gave 
me a horse, which afterwards became food for other Indians. 

We continued a short distance down the creek, in which our guide in- 
formed us that the water very soon disappeared, and turned directly to the 
southward along the foot of the mountain ; the trail on which we rode ap- 
pearing to describe the eastern limit of travel, where water and grass ter- 
minated. Crossing a low spur, which bordered the creek, we descended to 
a kind of plain atnong the lower spurs; the desert being in full view on 
our left, apparently illimitable. A hot mist lay over it to-day, through 
which it had a white and glistening appearance ; here and therea few dry- 
looking butfes and isolated black ridges rose suddenly upon it. * There,” 
said our guide, stretching out his hand towards it, “there are the great 
llanos, (plains;) no hay agua ;no hay zacaté—nada: there is neither water 
nor grass—nothing ; every animal that goes out upon them, dies.” It was 
indeed dismal to look upon, and hard to conceive so great a change in so 
short a distance. One might travel the world over, without finding a valley 
more fresh and verdant—more floral and sylvan—more alive with birds 
and animals—more bounteously watered—than we had left in the San Joa- 
quin : here, within a few miles ride, a vast desert plain spread before us, 
from which the boldest traveller turned away in despair. 

Directly in front of us, at some distance to the southward, and running 
out in’an easterly direction from the mountains, stretched a sierra, having 


at the e: 
by the i 
QOure 
possible 
solitude 
latitude 
a moun 
two wil 
mixture 
heard a 
Spanish 
composi 
the flan 
horned | 
along ot 
belonge 
Wee 
as to all 
and sing 
a ZYgory 
sometim 
is rathel 
substan 
but very 
many vi 
for a lor 
miles to 
ing, whi 
ing the 
of an ow 
we had 
colored 
Reachin 
and whe 
in the mi 
to know 
reached 
ravine, ¢ 
wheat, 
notice as 
some la 
mule w 
hide its¢ 
By ou 
118° 20 
Apri 
eral dee 
vallon | 
Buena 
rounded 
inded 
nd eld 


wo degrees, 
opening from 
t. The two 
erpendicular 
| itt he and 
h and south, 
ication from 
itional value 
n the Pacific 
y mountains, 
‘of the Mis. 


ing back at 
the hills, we 
n finally dis. 
Passing by 
ves of large 
d out a spot 
y of soldiers 
ossing a low 
were struck 
e and south- 
d desert re- 
| sands, their 
st repulsive 
shortly came 
t put fortha 
grass, 
eturned this 
ny spurs, as 
h they gave 


ur guide in- 
rectly to the 
we rode ap- 
id grass ter- 
escended to 
ull view on 
ay, through 
ea few dry- 

** There,” 
‘e the great 
either water 
s.? It was 
hange in so 
ing a valley 
» with birds 
lie San Joa- 
1 before us, 


nd running 
tra, having 


257 [ 174 | 


at the eastern end (perhaps 50 miles distant) some snowy peaks, on which, 
by the information of our guide, snow rested all the year. 

Our cavalcade made a strange aud grotesque appearance; and it was im- 
possible to avoid reflecting upon our position and composition in this remote 
solitude. Within two degrees of the Pacific ocean; already far south of the 
latitude of Monterey; and still forced on south by a desert on one hand, and 
a mountain range on.the other; guided by a civilized Indian, attended by 
two wild ones from the Sierra; a Chinook from the Columbia; and our own 
mixture of American, French, German—all armed; four or five languages 
heard at once; above a hundred horses and mules, half wild; American, 
Spanish, and Indian dresses and equipments intermingled—such was our 
composition. Our march was a sort of procession. Scouts ahead, and on 
the flanks; a front and rear division; the pack animals, baggage, and 
horned cattle, in the centre; and the whole stretching a quarter of a mile 
along our dreary path. In this form we journeyed; looking more like we 
belonged to Asia than to the United States of America. 

We continued in a southerly direction across the plain, to which, as well 
as to all the country so far as we could see, the yucca trees gave a strange 
and singular character. Several new plants appeared, among which was 
a zygophyllaceous shrub (zygophyllum Culifornicum, Torr. & Frem.) 
sometimes 10 feet in height; in form, and in the pliancy of its branches, it 
is rather a graceful plant. Its leaves are small, covered with a resinous 
substance; and, particularly when bruised and crushed, exhale a singular 
but very agreeable and refreshing odor. This shrub and the yucca, with 
many varieties of cactus, make the characteristic features in the vegetation 
for a long distance to the eastward. Along the foot of the mountain, 20 
miles to the southward, red stripes of flowers were visible during the morn- 
ing, which we supposed to be variegated sandstones. We rode rapidly dur- 
ing the day,and in the afternoon emerged from the yucca forest at the foot 
of an ouédier of the Sierra before us,and came among the fields of flowers 
we had seen in the morning, which consisted principally of the rich orange- 
colored Californian poppy, mingled with other flowers of brighter tints, 
Reaching the top of the spur, which was covered with fine bunch.grass, 
and where the hills were very green, our guide pointed to a small hollow 
in the mountain betore us, saying, “deste piedra hay agua.”? He appeared 
to know every nook in the country. We continued our beautiful road, and 
reached a spring in the slope, at the foot of the ridge, running in a green 
ravine, among granite boulders; here nightshade, and borders of buck- 
wheat, with their white blossoms around the granite rocks, attracted our 
notice as familiar plants. Several antelopes were seen among the hills, and 
some large hares. Men were sent back this evening in search of a wild 
mule with a’valuable pack, which: had managed (as they frequently do) to 
hide itself along the road. baie ae 

By observation, the latitude of the camp is 34° 41' 42"; and longitude 
118° 20'00". The next day the men returned with the mule. 

April 17.—Crossing the ridge by a beautiful pass of hollows, where sev- 
eral deer broke out of the thickets, we emerged at a'small salt lake ina 
vallon lying nearly east and west, where a trail from the mission of San 
Buenaventura comesin. The lake is abont 1,200 yards in diameter; sur- 
rounded on the’ margin by a white salty border, which, by the smell, re- 
sniniiay us slightly of Lake Abert. Therearesomecottonwoods, with willow 

nd elder, around the lake; and the water is a little salt, although not en- 
17 


ieee a 


= 


ee ee, 


ees 


f 174] 258 


tirely unfit for drinking. Here we turned directly to the eastward, alon 
the trail, which, from being seldom used, is almost imperceptible; and, 
after travelling a few miles, our guide halted, and, pointing to the hardly 
visible trail, “aqui es camino,” said he, “no se pierde—va siempre.” He 
pointed out a black butle on the plain at the foot of the mountain, where 
we would find water to encamp at night; and, giving him a present of knives 
and scarlet cloth, we shook hands and parted. He bore off south, and in a 
day’s ride would arrive at San Fernando, one of several missions in this 
part of California, where the country is so beautiful, that it is considered a 
paradise, and the name of its principal town (Puedblu de los Angeles) would 
make it angelic. We continued on through a succession of valleys, and 
came into a most beautifil spot of flower fields: instead of green, the hills 
were purple and orange, with unbroken beds, into which each celor was 
separately gathered. <A pale straw color, with a bright yellow, the rich red 
orange of the poppy mingled with fields of purple, covered the spot witha 
floral beauty; and, on the border of the sandy deserts, seemed to invite the 
traveller to gono farther. Riding along through the perfumed air, we soon 
after entered a defile overgrown with the ominous arlemisia tridentata, 
which conducted us into a sandy plain covered more or less densely with 
forests of yucca. 

Having now the snowy ridge on our right, we continued our way towards 
a dark dbudte belonging to a low sierra in the plain, and which our guide 
had pointed out for a landmark. Late in the day the familiar growth of 
cottonwood, a line of which was visible ahead, indicated our approach to 
a creek, which we reached where the water spread out into sands, anda 
little below sank entirely. Here our guide had intended we should pass 
the night; but there was not a blade of grass, and, hoping to find nearer 
the mountain a little for the night, we turned up the stream, A hundred 
yards above, we found the creek a fine stream, 16 feet wide, with a swift 
enrrent. A dark night overtook us when we reached the hills at the foot 
of the ridge, and we were obliged to encamp without grass; tying up what 
animals we could secure in the darkness, the greater part of the wild ones 
having free range for the night. Here the stream was two feet deep, swift 
and clear, issuing from a neighboring snow peak. A few miles before 
reaching this creck, we had crossed a broad dry river bed, which, nearer 
the hills, the hunters had found a bold and handsome stream. 
: April 18.—Some parties were engaged in hunting up the scattered horses, 
‘and others in searching for grass above; both were successful, and late in 
the day we encamped among some spring heads of the river, in a hollow 
which was covered with only tolerably good grasses, the lower ground 
being entirely overgrown with large bunches of the coarse stiff grass, 
{curex sitchensis.) 

Our latitude, by observation, was 34° 27'03"; and longitude 117°13'00". 

Travelling close along the mountain, we followed up, in the afternoon 
of the 19th, another stream, in hopes to find a grass patch like that of the 
‘previous day, but were deceived; except some scattered bunch grass, there 
was nothing but rock and sand; and even the fertility of the mountain 
seemed withered by the air of the desert. Among the few trees was the 
mut pine, (pinus monophyllus.) 

. Our road the uext day was still in an easterly direction along the ridge, 

over very bad travelling ground, broken and confounded with crippled 
trees and shrubs; and, after a difficult march of 18 miles, a general shout 


annou 
“TRAIL: 
course 
ber we 


now W 
which 
therefa 
wards, 
solatio 
Reliev 
and in 
and w 
‘had su: 
to allo 
favora 
were a 
water, 
60 mil 

Alth 
‘trail, 
greatel 
hoods, 
particu 
other | 
with sc 
found 
and wv 
imals ¢ 


a trave 
and al: 
Lati 


The 
southy 
we cro 
of wit 
which 
rious s 
a stran 
eye, hd 
the sw 
its cou 
dled a 
the old 
‘Us, hac 
horses 
wateri 
tain sv 
‘directi 


f 
' 


tward, alon 

eptible ; and, 
to the hardly 
mpre.” He 
ntain, where 
ent of knives 
uth, and in a 
ssions in this 
considered a 
igeles) would 
valleys, and 
een, the hills 
ich celor was 
ry the rich red 
e spot witha 
| to invite the 
J air, we soon 
a tridentala, 
densely with 


way towards 

ich our guide 
iar growth of 
' approach to 
sands, anda 
e should pass 
to find nearer 
A hundred 

, with a swift 
lls at the foot 
ying up what 
the wild ones 
et deep, swift 
miles before 

which, nearer 


ittered horses, 
al, and late in 
r, in a hollow 
lower ground 
rse stiff grass, 


2 117°13'00". 
the afternoon 
ke that of the 
+h grass, there 
the mountain 
trees was the 


ong the ridge, 
with crippled 
general shout 


259 C 174 ] 


announced that we had struck the great object of our search—tTue Spanisn 
‘pratL—which here was running directly north. ‘The road itself, and its 
course, were equally happy discoveries tous, Since the middle of Decem- 
ber we had continually been forced south by mountains and by deserts, and 
now would have to make six degrees of northing, to regain the latitude on 
which we wished to cross the Rocky mountains. The course of the road, 
therefore, was what we wanted; and, once more, we felt like going home- 
wards, -A road to travel on, and the righ? course to go, were joyful con- 
solations to us; and our animals enjoyed the beaten track like ourselves. 
Relieved from the rocks and brush, our wild mules started off at a rapid rate, 
and in 15 miles we reached a considerable river, timbered with cottonwood 
and willow, where we found a bottom of tolerable grass, As the animals 
had suffered a great deal in the last few days, ['vemained here all next day, 
to allow them the necessary repose; and it was now necessary, at every 
favorable place, to make a little halt. Between us and the Colorado river we 
were aware that the country was extremely poor in grass, and scarce for 
water, there being many jornadas, (days’ journey,) or long stretches of 40 to 
60 miles, without water, where the road was marked by bones of animals. 

Although in California we had met with people who had passed over this 
‘trail, we had been able to obtain no correct information about it; and the 
greater part of what we had heard was found to be only a tissue of false- 
hoods. The rivers that we found on it were never mentioned, and others, 
particularly described in name and locality, were subsequently seen in an- 
other part of the country. It was described asa tolerably good sandy road, 
with so little rock as scarcely to require the animals to be shod; and we 
found it the roughest and rockiest road we had ever seen in the country, 
and which nearly destroyed our band of fine mules and horses. Many ane 
imals are destroyed on it every year by a disedse called the foot evil; and 
a traveller should never venture on it withuvut having his animals well shod, 
and also carrying extra shoes, 

Latitude 34° 34' 11"; and longitude 117° 13'00". 

The morning of the 22d was clear and bright, aud a snowy peak to the 
southward shone out high and sharpiy defined. As has been usual since 
we crossed the mountains and descended into the hot plains, we had a gale 
of wind. We travelled down the right bank of the stream, over sands 
which are somewhat loose, and have no verdure, but are occupied by va- 
tious shurbs. A clear bold stream, 60 feet wide, and several feet deep, had 
a@ strange appearance, running between perfectly naked banks of sand. The 
eye, however, is somewhat relieved by willows, and the beautiful green of 
the sweet cottonwoods with which it is well wooded. As we followed along 
its course, the river, instead of growing constantly larger, gradually dwin- 
dled away, as it was absorbed by the sand. We were now careful to take 
the old camping places of the annual Santa Fé caravans, which, luckily for 
‘us, had not yet made their yearly passage. A drove of several thousand 
horses and mules would entirely have swept away the scanty grass at the 
watering places, and we should have been obliged to leave the. road to ob- 
tain subsistence for our animals. After riding 20 miles in a northeasterly 


‘direction, we found an old encampment, where we halted. 


By observation, the elevation of this encampment is 2,250 feet. 

April 23.—The trail followed still along the river, which, in the course 
of the morning, entirely disappeared. We continued along the dry bed, 
in which, after an interval of about 16 miles, the water reappeared in 


REPRE EY ie ga Te 


| 
| 

a i 
a. 
a it 
f 

, i 


[ 174 J 260 


some low places, well timbered with cottonwood and willow, where was 
another of the customary camping grounds, Here a party of six Indians 
came into camp, poor and hungry, and quite in keeping with the character 
of the country. Their arms were bows of unusual length, and each had 
a large gourd, strengthened with meshes of cord, iu which he carried water, 
They proved to be the Mohahve Indians mentioned by our recent guide; 
and from one of them, who spoke Spanish fluently, I obtained some inter- 
esting information, which I would be glad to introduce here. An account 
of the people inhabiting this region would undoubtedly possess interest for 
the civilized world. Our journey homeward was fruitful in incident; aud 
the country through which we travelled, although a desert, aflorded much 
to excite the curiosity of the botanist; but limited time, and the rapidly ad. 
vancing season for active operations, oblige me to omit all extended de- 
scriptions, aud hurry briefly to the conclusion of this report, 

The Indian who spoke Spanish had been educated for a number of years 
at one of the Spanish missions, and, at the breaking up of those establish- 
ments, had returned to the mountains, where he had been found by a party 
of Mohauhve (sometimes called 2muchaba) Indians, among whom he had 
ever since resided. 

He spoke of the leader of the present party as “ i amo,’ (my master.) 
He said they lived upon a large river in the southeast, which the “ soldiers 
called the Rio Colorado;”’ but that, formerly, a portion of them lived upon 
this river, and among the mountains which had bounded the river valley 
to the northward during the day, and that here along the river they had 
raised various kinds of melons. They sometimes came over to trade with 
the Indians of the Sierra, bringing with them blankets and goods manufac- 
tured by the Monquis and other Colorado Indians, They rarely carried 
home horses, on account of the difliculty of getting them across the desert, 
and of guarding them afterwards from the Pa-utah Indians, who inhabit 
the Sierra, at the head of the Rio Virgen, (river of the Virgin.) 

He informed us that, a short distance below, this river finally disappear- 
ed. The two different portions in which water is found had received from 
the priests two different names; and subsequently I heard it called by the 
Spaniards the Rio de las “tnimas, but on the map we have called it the 
Mohahve river. 

April 24.—We continued down the stream (or rather its bed) for about 
eight miles, where there was water still in several holes, and encamped. 
The caravans sometimes continue below, to the end of the river, from which 
there is a very long jornada of perhaps sixty miles, without water. Here 
a singular and new species of acacia, with spiral pods or seed vessels, made 
ts first appearauce; becoming henceforward, for a considerable distance, 
a characteristic tree. It was here comparatively large, being about 20 feet 
in height, with a full and spreading top, the lower branches declining to- 
wards the ground.’ It afterwards occurred of smaller size, frequently in 
groves, and is very fragrant. It has been called by Dr. Torrey spirolobium 
odoratum. The zygophyllaceous shrub had been coustantly characteristic 
of the plains along the river; and here, among many new plants, a new 
and very remarkable species.of eriogonum (eriogonum inflatum, Torr. & 
Frem.) made its first appearance. 

Cur cattle had become so tired and poor by this fatiguing travelling, that 
three of them were killed here, and the meat dried. The Indians iad now 
an occasion for a great feast, and were occupied the remainder of the day 


and all 
for whi 
we wer 
cans—e 
and the 
They b 
being t 
Giacon 
horses, 
under t 
to trav 
far inte 
at the . 
from 0 
cient g 
Severa 
day or 
took th 
begat t 
a party 
wards 
mind t 
their c: 
Pablo 

ing to 
dians ' 
surrou 
drove 
and, a 
plain. 
makin 

on for 
the tra 
rest, th 
ered m 
promis 
Apr 
in, a fe 
selves 
throug 
broad 

there 
mo ind 
water 
whose 

They 
please 

Th 
taino 
destit 
ridges 
large 


where was 
six Indians 
e character 
d each had 
rried water, 
vent guide; 
some inter- 
An account 
interest for 
cident; aud 
orded much 
p rapidly ad. 
xtended de- 


hber of years 
se establish- 

by a party 
hom he had 


y master. ) 
he “ soldiers 

lived upon 
river valley 
er they had 

trade with 
ds manu fac- 
arely carried 
s the desert, 
who inhabit 


. 

y disappear- 
eceived from 
alled by the 
called it the 


d) for about 
| encamped. 
from which 
ater. Here 
essels, made 
yle distance, 
bout 20 feet 
leclining to- 
equently in 
spirolobium 
haracteristic 
ants, a new 
um, Torr. & 


velling, that 
ans iad now 
tof the day 


261 [ 174) 


and all the night in ray be and eating. There was no part of the animal 
for which they did not find some use, except the bones, In the afternoon 
we were surprised by the sudden appearance in the camp of two Mexi- 
cans—a man anda boy. The name of the man was Andreas Fuentes ; 
and that of the boy, (a handsome lad, 11 years old,) Pablo Hernandez. 
They belonged to a party consisting of six persons, the remaining four 
being the wife of Fuentes, the father and mother of Pablo, and Santiago 
Giacome, a resident of New Mexico, With a cavalcade of about thirty 
horses, they had come out from Puebla de los Angeles, near the coast, 
under the guidance of Giacome, in advance of the great caravan, in order 
to travel more at lvisure, and obtaip better grass. Having advanced as 
far into the desert as was considered consistent with their safety, they halted 
at the rchilet/e, one of the customary camping grounds, about 80 miles 
from our encampment, where there is a spring of good water, with suffi- 
cient grass ; and concluded to await there the arrival of the great caravan. 
Several Indians were soon discovered lurking about the camp, who, in a 
day or two after, came in, and, after behaving in a very friendly manner, 
took their leave, without awakening any suspicions. Their deportment 
begat a security which proved fatal. Ina few days afterwards, suddenly 
a party of about one hundred Indians appeared in sight, advancing to- 
wards the camp. It was too late, or they seemed not to have presence of 
mind to take proper measures of safety ; and the Indians charged down into 
their camp, shouting as they advanced, and discharging flights of arrows, 
Pablo and Fuentes were on horse guard at the time,and mounted, accord- 
ing to the custom of the country. One of the principal objects of the In- 
dians was to get possession of the horses, and part of them immediately 
surrounded the band; but, in obedience to the shouts of Giacome, Fuentes 
drove the animals over and through the assailants, in spite of their arrows ; 
and, abandoning the rest to their fate, carried them off at speed across the 
plain. Knowing that they would be pursued by the Indians, without 
making any halt except to shift their saddles to other horses, they drove them 
on for about sixty miles, and this morning left them at a watering place on 
the trail, called Aguade Tomaso.’ Without giving themselves any time for 
rest, they hurried on, hoping to meet the Spanish caravan, when they discov- 
ered my camp. | received them kindly, taking them into my own mess, and 
promised them such aid as circumstances might put itin my power to give. 

April 25.—We left the river abruptly, and, turning to the north, regained 
in a few miles the main trail, (which had left the river sooner than our- 
selves,) and continued our way across a lower ridge of the mountain, 
through a miserable tract of sand and gravel. We crossed at intervalsthe 
broad beds of dry gullies, where in the season of rains and melting snows 
there would be brooks or rivulets ; and at one of these, where there was 
mo indication of water, were several freshly-dug holes, in which there was 
water at the-depth of two feet. These holes had been dug by the wolves, 
whose keen sense of smell had scented the water under the dry sand. 
They were nice little wells, narrow, and dug straight down, and we got 
pleasant water out of them. 

The country had now assumed the character of an elevated and mour- 
tainous desert; its general features being black, rocky ridges, bald, and 
destitute of timber, with sandy basins between. Where the sides of these 
ridges are washed by gullies, the plains below are strewed with beds of 
large pebbles or rolled stones, destructive to our soft-footed animals, accus- 


ae 


ae) 
a | 
| 
id | 
fl ‘Ne 
He 
\) 
1a ie 
t it TE 
Nh i 

1 if 

| 

f 1 ii 
f aS) 
ij 


[ 174 ] 262 


tomed to the grassy plains of the Sacramento valley. Through these 
sandy basins sometimes struggled a scanty stream, or occurred a hole of 
water, which furnished camping grounds for travellers, Frequently in our 
journey across, snow was visible on the surrounding mountains; but their 
waters rarely reached the sandy plain below, where we toiled along, op- 
pressed with thirst and a burning sun. But, throughout this nakedness 
of sand and gravel, were many beautiful plants and flowering shrubs, 
which occurred in many new species, and with greater variety than we 
had been accustomed to see in the most luxuriant prairie countries; this 
was a peculiarity of thisdesert Even where no grass would take root, 
the naked sand would bloom with some rich and rare flower, which found 
its appropriate home in the arid and barren spot. 

Scattered over the plain, and tolerably abundant, was a handsome legu- 
minous shrub, three or four feet high, with fine bright-purple flowers, It 
is a new psoralea, and occurred frequently henceforward along our road, 

Beyond the first ee our road bore a little to the east of north, to- 
wards a gap in a higher line of mountains; and, after travelling about 
twenty-five miles, we arrived at the gua de Zomaso—the spring where 
the horses had been left; but, as we expected, they were gone, A brief 
examination of the ground convinced us that they had been driven off by 
the Indians. Carson and Godey volunteered with the Mexican to pursue 
them; and, well mounted, the three set off on the trail. At this stopping 
place there were a few bushes and very littlegrass, Its water was a pool; 
but near by was a spring, which had been dug out by Indians or travel- 
lers. Its water was cool—a great refreshment to us under a burning sun. 

In the evening Fuentes returned, his horse having failed; but Carson 
and Godey had continued the pursuit. 

I observed to-night an occultation of a? Caneri, at the dark limb of the 
moon, which gives for the longitude of the place 116° 23' 28"; the lati- 
tude, by observation, is 35° 13' 08". From Helvetia to this place, the po- 
sitions along the intervening line are laid down with the longitudes ob- 
tained from the.chronometer, which appears to have retained its rate re- 
markably well; but henceforward, to the ‘end of the journey, the few lon- 
gitudes given are absolute, depending upon a subseguent occultation and 
eclipses of the satellites. 

In the afternoon of the next day, a war-whoop was heard, such as In- 
dians make when returning from a victorious enterprise ; and soon Carson 
and Godey appeared, driving before them a band of horses, recognised by 
Fuentes to be part of those they had lost. Two bloody scalps, dangling 
from the end of Godey’s gun, announced that they had overtaken the In- 
dians as wellas the horses. They informed us, that after Fuentes left them, 
from the failure of his horse, they continued the pursuit alone, and towards 
nightfall entered the mountains, into which the trailled. After sunset the 
moon gave light, and they followed the trail by moonshine until late in the 
night, when it entered a narrow defile, and was difficult to follow. Afraid 
of losing it in the darkness of the defile, they tied up their horses, struck no 
fire, and lay down to sleep in silence and in darkness. Here they Jay from 
midnight till morning. At daylight they resumed the pursuit, and about 
sunrise discovered the horses; and, immediately dismounting and tying up- 
their own, they crept cautiously to a rising ground which intervened, from 
the crest of which they perceived the encampment of four lodgesclose by.. 
They proceeded quietly, and had got within thirty or forty yards of their ob- 


ject, Wi 
giving ¢ 
number 
with a 
throug! 
rifles u 
the gro 
capture 
process 
feet, th 
howl. 
the mo 
frightfe 
human 
They Vv 
mounte 
prepari 
place t¢ 
the des 
skinne 
into the 
them. 
horse b 
indicat 
the bo 
of the 
as soot 
Their « 
fifleen 
the aft 
the pu 
and nu 
siderec 
advent 
ert, pu 
an unl 
and de 
desert. 


tentio 
the dé 
elled : 
the be 
of the 
rectly 
twee} 
cordi 


ough these 
da hole of 
ently in our 
; pat their 
along, op- 
nakedness 
ng shrubs, 
y than we 
ntries; this 
take root, 
hich found 


lsome legu- 
lowers, It 
R our road, 

north, to- 
ling about 
ing where 
». «6A brief 
iven off by 
to pursue 
is stopping 
vas a pool; 
or travel- 
Iruing sun. 
ut Carson 


mb of the 
's the lati- 
ice, the po- 
ritudes ob- 
ts rate re- 
ie few lon- 
tation and 


ich as In- 
on Carson 
gnised by 
, dangling 
2n the In- 
left them, 
id towards 
sunset the: 
late in the 
v. Afraid 
struck no 
y Jay from 
ae about 
tying up. 
ned, | 
close by.. 
’ their ob- 


263 [ 174} 


ject, When a movement among the horses discovered them to the Indians; 
giving the war shout, they instantiy charged into the camp, regardless of the 
number which the /owr lodges would imply. The Indians received them 
with a flight of arrows shot frou their long bows, one of which passed 
through Godey’s shirt collar, barely missing the neck; our men fired their 
rifles upon a steady aim, and rushed in. ‘Two Indians were stretched on 
the ground, fatally pierced with bullets; the rest fled, except a lad that was 
captured. ‘The scalps of the falien were instantly stripped off; but in the 
process, one of them, who had two balls thredel his body, sprung to his 
feet, the blood streaming from his skinned head, and uttering a hideous 
howl, An old squaw, possibly his mother, stopped and looked back from 
the mountain side she was climbing, threatening and lamenting. The 
frightful spectacle appalled the stout hearts of our men; but they did whae 
humanity required, and quickly terminated the gzonies of the gory savage, 
They were now masters of the camp, which wa, a pretty little recess in the 
mountain, with a fine spring, and apparently sue from all invasion, Great 
preparations had been made to feast asjarge party, for it was a very proper 
place for a rendezvous, and for the celebration of such orgies as robbers of 
the desert would delight in. Several of the Lest horses had been killed, 
skinned, and cut up ; for the Indians living in inountains, and only coming 
into the plains to rob and murder, make no other use of horses than to eat 
them. Large earthen vessels were on the fire, boiling and stewing the 
horse beef; and several baskets, containing filty or sixty pairs of moccasins, 
indicated the presence, or expectation, of avousiderable party. They released 
the boy, who had given strong evidence of: the stoicism, or something else, 
of the savage character, in commencing his breakfast upon a liorse’s head 
as soon as he found he was not to be killed, but only tied as a prisoner. 
Their object accomplished, our men gathered up all the surviving horses, 
fifteen in number, returned upon their trail, and rejoined us at our camp in 
the afternoon of the same day. ‘They had rode about one hundred tiles in 
the pursuit and return, and all in thirty hours, ‘The time, place, object, 
and numbers, considered, this expedition of Carson and Godey may be con- 
sidered among the boldest and most disinterested which the annals of western 
adventure, so full of daring deeds, can present. Two men, in a savage des- 
ert, purstie day and night an unknown body of Indians into the defiles of 
an unknown mountain—attack them on sight, without counting numbers— 
and defeat them in an instaut—and for what? To punish the robbers of the 
desert, aud to avenge the wrongs of Mexicans whom they did not know. 
Lrepeat: it was Carson and Godey who did this—the former an 4merican, 
born in the Boonslick county of Missouri; the latter a Prenchman, born in 
St. Louls—and both trained to western enterprise from early life. 

By the information of Fuentes, we had now to make a long stretch of 
forty or fifty miles across a plain which lay between us and the next possi- 
bie camp; and we resumed our journey late in the afternoon, with the in- 
tention of travelling through the night,and avoiding the excessive heat of 
the day, which was oppressive to our animals, For several hours we trav- 
elled across a high plain, passing, at the opposite side, through a cafion by 
the bed of a creek running nor/hwardly into a small lake beyond, and both 
of them beingdry. We had a warm, moonshiny night; and, travelling di- 
rectly towards the north star, we journeyed now across an open plain be- 
tween mountain ridges; that on the left being broken, rocky, and bald, ac- 
cording to the information of Carson and Godey, who had entered here im 


eC 


= 


— a 


<r 


[174] 264 


pursuit of the horses. The plain appeared covered principally with the sygo- 
phyllum Californieum already mentioned ; and the line of our road was 
marked by the skeletons of horses, which were strewed to a considerable 
breadth over the plain, We were afterwards always warned, on entering one 
of these long stretches, by the bones of these animals, which had perished 
before they could reach the water, About midnight we reached a consider. 
able stroam bed, now dry, the discharge of the waters of this basin, (when 
it collected any,) down which we descended in a northwesterly direction, 
The creek bed was overgrown with shrubbery, and several hours before 
day it brought us to the entrance of a cafion, where we found water, and 
encamped, ‘This word carton is used by the Spaniards to signify a defile 
or gorge in a creek or river, where high rocks chee in close, and make a 
narrow way, usually difficult, and often impossible to be passed, 

In the morning we found that we had a very poor camping ground: a 
swampy, salty spot, with q,little long, unwholesome grass ; and the water, 
which rose in springs, being useful only to wet the mouth, but entirely too 
salt to drink. All around was sand and rocks, and skeletons of horses 
which had not been able to find support for their lives. As we were about 
to start, we found, at the distance of a few hundred yards, among the hills 
to the southward, a spring of tolerably good water, which was a relief to 
ourselves; but the place was too oy to remain long, and therefore we 
continued on this morning. On the creek were thickets of spirolobium 
odoratum (acacia) in bloom, and very fragrant. 

Passing through the cafion, we entered another sandy basin, through 
which the dry stream bed continued its northwesterly course, in which di- 
rection appeared a high snowy mountain, 

We travelled through a barren district, where a heavy gale was blowin 
about the loose sand, and, after a ride of eight miles, reached a large fiden J 
of salt and bitter water, running in a westerly direction, to receive the stream 
bed we had left. It is called by the Spaniards A@margosa—the bitter water 
ofthe desert. Where we struck it, the stream bends; and we continued in 
a northerly course up the ravine of its valley, passing on the way a fork 
from the right, near which occurred a bed of plants, consisting of a remark- 
able new genus of crucifere. 

Gradually ascending, the ravine opened into a green valley, where, at 
the foot of the mountain, were springs of excellent water. We encamped 
among groves of the new acacia, and there was an abundance of good 
grass for the animals. 

This was the best camping ground we had seen since we struck the 
Spanish trail. ‘The day’s journey was about 12 miles. 

April 29.—To-day we had to reach the Archiletle, distant seven miles, 
where the Mexican party had been attacked; and, leaving our encamp- 
ment early, we traversed a part of the desert, the most sterile and repulsive 
that we had yet seen. Its prominent features were dark sierras, naked and 
dry; on the plains a few straggling shrubs—among them, cactus of several 
varieties. Fuentes pointed out one called by the Spaniards disnada, which 
has a juicy pulp, slightly acid, and is eaten by the traveller to allay thirst. 
Our course was generally north; and, after crossing an intervening ridge, 
we descended into a sandy plain, or basin, in the middle of which was the 
grassy spot, with its springs and willow bushes, which constitutes a camp- 
ing place in the desert, and is called the rchilette. The dead silence of 
the place was ominous; and, galloping rapidly up, we found only the 


corpses 
mutilated 


with des 
shelteres 
it, from 
off. Gi 
of the 
be foun 
lap-dog, 
bodies, 
with gri 
Mi pad. 
pitiable 
off by 8 
alive In 
to give 
murder 
We w 
spired, t 
pass the 
account 
spring, t 
In com 
Hernan¢ 
Apri 
the day 
another 
tains. | 
termina 
After 
stream { 
holes, 
not yet 
for the | 
slightly 
and gre 
flowers 
last two 


rich fre 
encam} 
Here v 
spring, 
very sl 
among 
dental 

lains’ 

he ec 
our m 


th the 2 R0- 
ur road was 
considerable 
entering one 
ad perished 
i a consider. 
asin, (when 
direction, 
ours before 
water, and 

nify a defile 
and make a 
round: a 

i the water, 
entirely too 
ns of horses 
were about 
ng the hills 
8s a relief to 
ierefore we 
pirolobium 


sin, through 
n which di- 


vas blowin 

large cree 

e the stream 
bitter water 
ontinued in 
way a fork 
if a remark- 


y, where, at 
3» encamped 
ce of good 


struck the 


even miles, 
ur encamp. 
d repulsive 
naked and 
s of several 
ada, which 
allay thirst. 
ning ridge, 
ch was the 
es a camp- 
d silence of 
1 only the 


4 


q 


265 ( 174] 


co of the two men: every thing else was gone, They were naked, 
mutilated, and piegced with arrows, Hernandez had evidently fought, and 
with desperation. He lay in advance of the willow half-faced tent, which 
sheltered his family, as if he had come out to meet danger, and to repulse 
it, from that asylum, One of his hands, and both his legs, had been cut 
off, Giacome, who was a large and strong-looking man, was lying in one 
of the willow shelters, pierced with arrows. Of the women no trace could 
be found, and‘it was evident they hed been carried off captive. A little 
lap-dog, which had belonged to Pablo’s mother, remained with the dead 
bodies, and was frantic with joy at seeing Pablo: he, poor child, was frantic 
with grief; and filled the air with lamentations for his father and mother. 
Mi padre! Mi madre !—was his incessant cry. When we beheld this 
pitiable sight, and pictured to ourselves the fate of the two women, carried 
off by savages so brutal and so loathsome, all compunction for the scalped- 
alive Indian ceased ; and we rejoiced that Carson and Godey had been able 
to give so useful a lesson to these American Arabs, who lie in wait to 
murder and plunder the innocent traveller. 

We were all too much affected by the sad feelings which the place in- 
spired, to remain an papers moment. The night we were obliged to 
pass there. Early in the morning we left it, having first written a brief 
account of what had happened, and put it in the cleft of a pole planted at the 
spring, that the approaching caravan might learn the fate of their friends. 
In commemoration of the event, we called the place 4gua de Hernandez— 
Hernandez’s spring. By observation, its latitude was 35° 51' 21". 

April 30.—We continued our journey over a district similar to that of 
the day before. From the sandy basin, in which was the spring, we entered 
another basin of the same character, surrounded every where by moun- 
tains. Before us stretched a high range, rising still higher to the left, and 
terminating in a snowy mountain, 

After a day’s march of 24 miles, we reached at evening the bed of a 
stream from which the water had disappeared; a little only remained in 
holes, which we increased by digging ; and about a mile above, the stream, 
not yet entirely sunk, was spread out over the sands, affording a little water 
for the animals. ‘The stream came out of the mountains on the left, very 
slightly wooded with cottonwood, willow, and acacia, and a few dwarf oaks; 
and grass was nearly as scarce as water. A plant with showy yellow 
flowers (Stanleya integrifolia) occurred abundantly at intervals for the 
last two days, and eriogonum in flatum was among the characteristic plants. 

May 1.—The air is rough, and overcoats pleasant. The sky is blue, and 
the day bright. Our road was over a plain, towards the foot of the moun- 
tain; zygophyllum Californicum, now in bloom with a small yellow flower, 
is characteristic of the country ; and cacti were very abundant, and in 
rich fresh bloom, which wonderfully ornaments this poor country. We 
encamped at a spring in the pass, which had been the site of an old village. 
Here we found excellent grass, but very little water. We dug out the old 
spring, and watered some of our animals. The mountain here was wooded 
very slightly with the nut pine, cedars, and a dwarf species of oak ; and 
among the shrubs were Purshia tridentata, arlemisia, and ephedra occi- 
dentalis. The numerous shrubs which constitute the vegetation of the 
eet now in bloom, with flowers of white, yellow, red, and purple. 

he continual rocks, and want of water and grass, begin to be very hard on 
our mules and horses; but the principal loss is occasioned by their crippled 


[ 174] 266 


feet, the greater part of those left being i excellent order, and scarcely a 
day.passes without some loss; and, one by one, Fuentes’s horses are con- 
stantly dropping behind. Whenever they give out, he dismounts and cuts 
of their tails and manes, to make saddle girths; the lust advantage one can 
gain from them. 

The next day, ina short but rough ride of 12 miles, we crossed the 
mountain; and, descending to asmall valley plain, encamped at the foot 
of the ridge, on the bed of a creek, where we und good gras in suflicient 
quantity, and abundance of water in holes, The ridge is extremely rugged 
and broken, presenting on this side @ continued precipice, and probably 
affords very bw passes. Many digger tracks are seen around us, but no 
Indians were visible. 

Muay 3.—After a day’s journey of 18 miles, in a northeasterly direction, 
we encamped in the midst of another very large basin, at a camping ground: 
called dus Vegas—a term which the Spaniards use to signify fertile or 
marshy plains, in contradistinction to ddanos, which they apply to dry and 
sterile plains. Two aarrow streams of clear water, four or five feet deep, 
gush suddenly, with a-quick current, from two singularly large springs; 
these, and other waters of the basiu, pass out in a gap to the eastward, 
The taste of the water is good, but rather too warm to be agreeable; the 
temperature being 71° in the one, and 73° in the other. They, however, 
afforded a delightful bathing place. 

May 4. We started this morning earlier than usual, travelling in a north- 
easterly direction across the plain. ‘The new acacia (spirolobium odoralum) 
has now become the characteristic tree of the country; it is in bloom, and 
its blossoms are very fragrant. The day was still, and the heat, which 
soon became very oppressive, appeared to bring out strongly the refreshing 
scent of the zygophyllaceous shrubs and the sweet perfume of the acacia. 
The snowy ridge we had just crossed looked out conspicuously in the 
northwest. In about five hours’ ride, we crossed a gap in the surrounding, 
ridge, and the appearance of skeletons of horses very soon warned us that we 
were engaged in another dry jornada, which proved the longest we had 
made in all our journey—between fifty and sixty miles without a drop of 
water. 

Travellers through countries affording water and timber can have no 
conception of our intolerable thirst while journeying over the hot yellow 
sands of this elevated country, where the heated air seems to be entirely 
deprived. of moisture. We ate occasionally the disnada, and moistened 
our mouths with the acid of the sour dock, (rumez venosus.) Hourly ex- 
pecting to find water, we coiitinued to press on until towards midnight, 
when, after a hard and uninterrupted .march of 16 hours, our wild mules 
began running ahead; and in a mile or two we came to a bold running 
stream—so keen is the sense of that animal, in these desert regions, in 
scenting at a distance this necessary of life. 

According to the information we had received, Sevier river was a tribu- 
tary of the Colorado; and this, accordingly, should have been one of. its 
affluents. It proved to be the Rio de los Angeles (river of the Angels) —a 
branch of the Rio Virgen (river of the Virgin.) 

May 5.—On account of our animals, it was necessary to remain to-day 
at this place.. Indians crowded numerously around us in the morning; 
and we were obliged to keep arms in hand all day, to keep them out 
of thecamp. They began to surround the horses, which, for the. conve- 


nience o 
immedia 
In the 
fires bein 
ing, we h 
times dug 
being oul 
on the ba 
scattered 
a dialect 
prehend 
the Mexi 
were we 
naked; t 
man car 
Besides t 
Their ar 
opal, nea 
most as é 
expressio 
actions a 
there is ¢ 
impulse, 
A mar 
self into 
contrary. 
said he c 
ing the | 
which w 
number, 
mountair 
bow, “Ww 
particula 
been giv 
he; “dot 
lish 5 anc 
fore he n 
Severs 
night; al 
several r 
easy at t 
driven o. 
short dis 
In the e1 
and the » 
made lot 
these In 
ing out | 
they occ 
people wv 
I have 
people... 


id scarcely a 
rses are con- 
nts and cuts 
tage one can 


Crossed the 
at the foot 
s in sufficient 
mely rugged 
nd probably 
d us, but no 


rly direction, 


ping ground 


fy fertile or 
y to dry and 
e feet deep, 
ge springs; 
he east ward, 
reeable ; the 
y, however, 


g in a north. 
2 odoratum) 

bloom, and 
heat, which 
le relreshing 
of the acacia. 
ously in the 
surrounding, 
2d us that we 
gest we had 
yut a drop of 


san have no 
e hot yellow 
) be entirely 
J moistened 
Hourly ex- 
s midnight, 
wild mules 
old running 
regions, in 


was a tribu- 
n one. of its 
Angels)—a 


nain to-day 
2 morning ; 
) them out 
the. conve- 


267 [ 174 J 


nience of grass, we were guarding a little above,on theriver. These were 
immediately driven in, and kept close to the camp. 

In the darkness of the night we had made a very bad encampment, our 
fires being commanded by a rocky bluff within 50 yards; but, notwithstand- 
ing, we had the river and small thickets of willows on the other side. Several 
times during the day the camp was insulted by the Indians; but, peace 
being our object, I kept simply on the defensive. Sovne of the Indians were 
on’ the bottoms, and others haranguing us frem the bluffs; and they were 
scattered in every direction over the hills. Their language being probably 
a dialect of the U¢ah, with the aid of signs some of our people could com- 
prehend them very well. They were the same people who had murdered 
the Mexicans; and towards us their disposition was evidently hostile, nor 
were we well disposed towards them. They were barefooted, and nearly 
naked; their hair gathered up into a knot behind; and with his bow, each 
man carried a quiver with thirty or forty arrows partially drawn out. 
Besides these, each held in his hand two or three arrows for instant service. 
Their arrows are barbed with a very clear transluceut stone, a species of 
opal, nearly as hard as the diamond; and, shot from their long bow, are al- 
most as effective asa gunshot, In these Indians, I was forcibly struck by an 
expression of countenance resembling that in a beast of prey ; and all their 
actions are those of wild animals. Joined to the restless motion of the eye, 
there is a want of mind—an absence of thought—and an action wholly by 
impulse, strongly expressed, and which constantly recalls the similarity. 

A man who appeared to bea chief, with two or three others, forced him- 
self into camp, bringing with him his arms, in spite of my orders to the 
contrary. When shown our weapons, he bored Iris ear with his fingers, and 
said he could not hear. “ Why,” said he, “ there are none of you.’’ Count- 
ing the people around the camp, and including in the number a mule 
which was being shod, he made out 22. “So many,” said he, showing the 
number, “and we—we are a great many ;’’ and he pointed to the hills and 
mountains round about. “If you have your arms,” said he, twanging his 
bow, “we have these.” I had some difficulty in restraining the people, 
particularly Carson, who felt an insult of this kind as much as if it had 
been given by a more responsible being. ‘ Don’tsay that, old man,” said 
he; “don’t you say that—your life’s in danger”’—speaking in good Eng- 
lish; and probably the old man was nearer to his end than he will be be- 
fore he meets it. 

Several animals had been necessarily left behind near the camp last 
night; and early in the morningybefore the Indians made their appearance, 
several men were sent to bring them in. When I was beginning to be un- 
easy at their absence, they returned with information that they had been 
driven off from the trail by Indians ; and, having followed the tracks in a 
short distance, they found the animals cut up and spread out upon bushes. 
In the evening I gave a fatigued horse to some of the Indians for a feast; 
and the village which carried him off refused to share with the others, who 
made loud complaints from the rocks of the partial distribution. Many of 
these Indians had loug sticks, hooked at the end, which they used in haul- 
ing out lizards, and other small animals, from their holes. During the day 
they occasionally roasted and ate lizards at our fires. These belong to the 
people who are generally known under the name of Diggers ; and to these 
I have more particularly had refereace when occasionally speaking of a 
people. whose sole occupation is to procure food sufficient to support ex- 


htt 
{ 
Wigiid 
Hog. ¢ 
wy 
} 
| 
eb | 
be 


[ 174 J 268 


istence. The formation here consists of fine yellow sandstone, alternat. 
ing with a coarse conglomerate, in which the stones are from the size of 
ordinary gravel to six or eight inches in diameter. This is the formation 
which renders the surface of the country so rocky, and gives us now a road 
alternately of loose heavy sands and rolled stones, which cripple the ani. 
mals in a most extraordinary manner. 

On the following morning we left the Rio de los v2ngeles, and continued 
our way through the same desolate and revolting country, where lizards 
were the only animal, and the tracks of the lizard eaters the principal sign 
of human beings. After twenty miles’ march through a road of hills and 
heavy sands, we reached the most dreary river I have ever seen—a deep 
rapid stream, almost a torrent, passing swiftly by, and roaring against ob. 
structions. The banks were wooded with willow, acacia, and a frequent 
plant of the country already mentioned, (Garrya elliptica,) growing in 
thickets, resembling willow, and bearing a small pink flower. Crossing it, 
we encamped on the left bank, where we found a very little grass. Our 
three remaining steers, being entirely given out, were killed here. By the 
boiling point, the elevation of the river here is 4,060 feet; and latitude, by 
observation, 36° 41' 33". The stream was ruyning towards the southwest, 
and appeared to come from a snowy mountain in the north. It proved to 
be the Rio Virgen—a tributary to the Colorado. Indians appeared in bands 
on the hills, but did not come into camp. For several days we continued 
our journey up the river, the bottoms of which were thickly overgrown 
with various kinds of brush; and the sandy soil was absolutely covered 
with the tracks of Diggers, who followed us stealthily, like a band of 
wolves; and we had no opportunity to leave behind, even for a few hours, 
the tired animals, in order that they might be brought into camp after a 
little repose. A horse or mule, left behind, was taken off in a moment. 
On the evening of the 8th, having travelled 28 miles up the river from our 
first encampment on it, we encamped at a little grass plat, where a spring 
of cool water issued from the bluff. On the opposite side wasa grove ot 
cottonwoods at the mouth of a fork, which here enters the river. On 
either side the valley is bounded by ranges of mountains, every where high, 
rocky, and broken. The caravan road was lost and scattered in the sandy 
country, and we had been following an Indian trail up the river. The 
hunters the next day were sent out to reconnoitre, and in the mean time 
we moved about a mile farther up, where we found a good little patch of 
grass. There being only sufficient grass for the night, the horses were 
sent with a strong guard in charge of Tabeau to a neighboring hollow, 
where they might pasture during the day; and, to be ready incase the In- 
dians should make any attempt on the ‘animals, several.of the best horses 
were picketed at the camp. Ina few hours the hunters returned, having 
found a convenient ford in the river, and discovered the Spanish trail on 
the other side. . 

I had been engaged in arranging plants; and, fatigued with the heat of 
the day, I fell asleep in the afternoon, and did not awake until sundown. 
Presently Carson cxme to me, and reported that Tabeau, who early in the 
day had left his post, and, without my knowledge, rode back to the camp 
we had left, in search of a lame mule, had not returned. While we were 
speaking, a smoke rose suddenly from the cottonwood grove below, which 
plainly told us what had befallen him; it was raised to inform the sur- 
rounding Indians that a blow had been struck, and to tell them to. be on 


their gua 
down th 
man. 
was the 
evidentl 
made b 
self, sta 
and left 
found, i 
beau’s t 
the dark 
turned t 
May 
tracks, I 
Tabeau 
been seé 
died. B 
got his v 
gled for 
arrow. 
been dr 
had bel 
ment. 
World. 
Tabe 
gloom c 
sufferin 
To defe 
to aven 
and rep 
tribe w 
camp. 
themse! 
not one 
longed 
Our 
feet de 
where 
lost in 
crossec 
visible 
for ou 
countr 
mount 
cedar | 
come 
Des 
before 
still. 
a sing 
count! 


one, alternat. 

the size of 
the formation 
is NOW a road 
ipple the ani. 


And continued 
where lizards 
principal sign 
d of hills and 
seen—a deep 
g against ob. 
d a frequent 
») growing in 
Crossing it, 
B grass. Our 
ere. By the 
d latitude, by 
he southwest, 
It proved to 
pared in bands 
we continued 
ly overgrown 
utely covered 
e a band of 
a few hours, 
camp after a 
in 2 moment. 
iver from our 
here a spring 
asa grove of 
ie river. On 
y where high, 
In the sandy 
river. The 
2 mean time 
ittle patch of 
horses were 
ring hollow, 
case the In- 
e best horses 
rned, having 
lish trail on 


h the heat of 
il sundown. 
early in the 
to the camp 
ile we were 
elow, which 
fm the sur- 
m to.be on 


269 [ 174] 


their guard. Carson, with several men well mounted, was instantly sent 
down the river, but returned in the night without tidings of the missing 
man. They went to the camp we had left, but neither he nor the mule 
was there. Searching down the river, they found the tracks of the mule, 
evidently driven along by Indians, whose tracks were on each side of those 
made by the animal. After going several miles, they came to the mule it- 
self, standing in some bushes, mortally wounded iu the side by an arrow, 
and left to die, that it might be afterwards butchered for food. ‘they also 
found, in another place, as they were hunting about on the ground for Ta- 
beau’s tracks, something that looked like a little puddle of blood, but which 
the darkness prevented them from verifying. With these details they re- 
turned to our camp, and their report saddened all our hearts. 

May 10.—This morning, as soou as there was light enough to follow 
tracks, I set out myself, with Mr. Fitzpatrick and several men, in search of 
Tabeau. We went to the spot where the appearance of puddled blood had 
been seen; and this, we saw at once, had been the place where he fell and 
died. Blood upon the leaves, and beaten down bushes, showed that he had 
got his wound about twenty paces from where he fell, and that he had strug- 
gled for his life. He had probably been shot through the lungs with an 
arrow. From the place where he lay and bled, it could be seen that he had 
been dragged to the river bank, and thrown into it. No vestige of what 
had belonged to him could be found, except a fragment of his horse equip- 
ar Horse, gun, clothes—all became the prey of these Arabs of the New 
World. 

Tabeau had been one of our best men, and his unhappy death spread a 
gloom over our party. Men, who have gone through such dangers and 
sufferings as we had seen, become like brothers, and feel each other’s loss, 
To defend and avenge each other, is the deep teeling of all. We wished 
to avenge his death; but the condition of our horses, languishing for grass 
and repose, forbade an expedition into unknown mountains. We knew the 
tribe who had done the mischiet—the same which had been insulting our 
camp. They knew what they deserved, and had the discretion to show 
themselves to us no more. The day before, they infested our camp; now, 
not one appeared ; nor did we ever atterwards see but one who even be- 
longed to the same tribe, and he at a distance. 

Our camp was in a basin below a deep cafion—a gap of two thousand 
feet deep in the mountain—through which the Rio Virgen passes, and 
where no man or beast could follow it. The Spanish trail, which we had 
lost in the sands of the basin, was on the opposite side of the river. We 
crossed over to it, and followed it northwardly towards a gap which was 
visible in the mountain. We approached it by a defile, rendered difficult 
for our barefooted animals by the rocks strewed along it; and here the 
country changed its character. From the time we entered the desert, the 
mountains had been bald and rocky; here they began to be wooded with 
cedar and pine, and clusters of trees gave shelter to birds—a new and wel- 
come sight—which could not have lived in the desert we had passed. 

Descending a long hollow, towards the narrow valley of a stream, we saw 
before us asnowy mountain, far beyond which appeared another more lofty 
still. Good bunch grass began to appear on the hill sides, and here we found 
a singular variety of interesting shrubs. ‘The changed appearance of the 
country infused among our people a more lively spirit, which was heightened 


rns 


ee 


ee aie eee 


te 


= 


— 
— 


a renew 


— 


eg ey ae 2 
se = 


asain. 


sae Tega tT TT 


C174) 270 


by finding at evening a halting place of very good grass on the clear waters 
of the Santa Clara fork of the Rio Virgen. 

May \1:—The morning was cloudy and quite cool, with a shower of 
rain—the first we have had since entering the desert, a period of twenty. 
seven days; and we seem to have entered a ditferent climate, with the usual 
weather of the Rocky mountains,’ Our march to-day was very laborious, 
over very broken ground, along the Santa Clara river; but then the coun. 
try is no ‘longer so distressingly desolate. ‘The stream is prettily wooded 
with sweet cottonwood trees—some of them of large size; and on the hills, 
where the nut pine is often seen, a good and wholesome grass occurs fre 
quently. This cottonwood, which is now in fruit, is of a different species 
from any in Michaux’s Sylva. Heavy dark clouds covered the sky in the 
evening, and a cold wind sprang up, making fires and overcoats comforta- 
ble... : 

May 12.—A little above our encampment, the river forked ; and we con- 
tinued up the right-hand branch, gradually ascending towards the summit 
of the mountain. As we rose towards the head of the creek, the snowy 
mountain on our right showed out handsomely—high and rugged with 
precipices, and covered with snow for about two thousand feet trom their 
summits down. Our animals were somewhat repaid for their hard marches 
by an excellent camping ground on the summit of the ridge, which forms 
here the dividing chain between the waters of the Rio Virgen, which goes 
south to the Colorado, and those of Sevier river, flowing northwardly, and 
belonging to the Great Basin. We considered ourselves as crossing the 
rim of the basin; and, entering it at this point, we found here an exten: 
sive mountain meadow, rich in bunch grass, and fresh with numerous 
springs of clear water, all refreshing aud delightful to look upon. It was, 
in fact, that das Vegas de Santa Clara, which had been so long presented to 
us as the terminating point of the desert, and where the annual caravan 
from California to New Mexico halted and recruited for some weeks. It 
was a very suitable place to recover from the fatigue and exhaustion of a 
month’s suffering in the hot and sterile desert. The meadow was about a 
mile wide, and some ten miles long, bordered by grassy hills and moun- 
tains—some of the latter rising two thousand feet,and white with snow 
down to the level of the vegas. Its elevation above the sea was 5,280 feet; 
latitude, by observation, 37° 28' 28"; and its distance from where we first 
struck the Spanish trail about four hundred miles, Counting from the time 
we reached the desert, and began to skirt, at our descent from Walker’s 
Pass in the Sierra Nevada, we had travelled 550 miles, occupying twen- 
ty-seven days, in that inhospitable region. In passing before the great 
caravan, we had the advantage of finding more grass, but the disadvantage 
of finding also the marauding savages, who had gathered down upon the 
trail, waiting the approach of that prey. This greatly increased our labors. 
besides costing us the life of an excellent man. We had to move all day in 
a State of watch, and prepared for combat—scouts and flankers out, a front 
and rear division of our men, and baggage animals in the centre. At night, 
camp duty was severe. Those who had toiled all day, had to guard, by 
turns, the camp and the horses all night. Frequently one-third of the whole 
party were on guard at once ; and nothing but this vigilance saved us from 
attack. We were constantly dogged by bands,and even whole tribes of the 
marauders ; and although Tabeau was killed, and our camp infested and in- 
sulted by some, while swarms of them remained on the hills and mountain 


. sides, th 


the ques 
gas de 
of the d 
yelaxati 
are indi 
we ret 
Afte 
mous h 
tioned, 
great ca 
was a ji 
self fro 
the des 
and suc 
countr 
brough 
Ma, 
ment; 
scendeé 
The ne 
the rig 
Basin. 
the sys 
Salt Ja 
wards 
several 
little st 
the ch 
desert, 
Rocky 
in adv 
Ma: 
broad, 
little | 
the ba 


road, 
throu 
crossi 
foot ¢ 
ed its 
rock} 
Sevi 
prin 
entel 
the 1 
grow 
its b 


e clear waters 


a shower of 
od of twenty. 
vith the usual 
ery laborious, 
hen the coun. 
ettily wooded 
d on the hills, 
Ss occurs fre. 
ferent species 
the sky in the 
Dats comforta. 


; and we con. 
s the summit 
ek, the snowy 
rugged with 
et trom their 
hard marches 
, Which forms 
n, Which goes 
hwardly, and 
crossing the 
re an exten. 
ith numerous 
pon. = It was, 
3 presented to 
nual caravan 
le Weeks, It 
haustion of a 
Was about a 
ls and moun. 
e with snow 
as 5,280 feet; 
here we first 
rom the time 
yn Walker’s 
pying twen- 
fe the great 
lisadvantage 
wn upon the 
d our labors. 
ve all day in 
3 out, a front 
re. At night, 
to guard, by 
of the whole 
ved us from 
tribes of the 
sted and in- 
d mountain 


271 [ 174 J 


sides, there was manifestly a consultation and calculation going on, to decide 
the question of attacking us. Having reached the resting place of the Ve- 
gas de Santa Clara, we had complete relief from the heat and privations 
of the desert, and some relaxation from the severity of camp duty. Some 
relaxation, and relaxation only—for camp guards, horse guards, and scouts, 
are indispensable from the time of leaving the frontiers of Missouri until 
we return to them. 

After we left the Vegas, we had the gratification to be joined by the fa- 
mous hunter and trapper, Mr. Joseph Walker, whom I have before men- 
tioned, and who now became our guide. He had left California with the 
great caravan; and perceiving, from the signs along the trail, that there 
was a party of whites ahead, which he judged to be mine, he detached him- 
self from the caravan, with eight men, (Americans,) and ran the gauntlet of 
the desert robbers, killing two, and getting some of the horses wounded, 
and succeeded in overtaking us. Nothing but his great knowledge of the 
country, great courage and presence of mind, and good rifles, could have 
brought him safe from such a perilous enterprise. 

May 13.—We remained one day at this noted place of rest and refresh- 
ment; and, resuming our progress in a northeastwardly direction, we de- 
scended into a broad valley, the water of which is tributary to Sevier lake. 
The next day we came in sight of the Wah-satch range of mountains on 
the right, white with snow, aud here forming the southeast part of the Great 
Basin. Sevier lake, upon the waters of which we now were, belonged to 
the system of lakes in the eastern part of the Basin—of which, the Great 
Salt Jake, and its southern limb, the Utah lake, were the principal—to- 
wards the region of which we were now approaching. We travelled for 
several days in this direction, within the rim of the Great Basin, crossing 
little streams which bore to the left for Sevier lake; and plainly seeing, by 
the changed aspect of the country, that we were entirely clear of the 
desert, and approaching the regions which appertained to the system of the 
Rocky mountains. We met, in this traverse,a few mounted Utah Indians, 
in advance of their main body, watching the approach of the great caravan. 

May 16.—We reached a small salt lake, about seven miles long and one 
broad, at the northern extremity of which we encamped for the night. This 
little lake, which well merits its characteristic name, lies immediately at 
the base of the Wah-satch range, and nearly opposite a gap in that chain 
of mountains through which the Spanish trail passes; and which, again 
falling upon the waters of the Colorado, and crossing that river, proceeds 
over a mountainous country to Santa Fé, 

May 17.—After 440 miles of travelling on a trail, which served for a 
road, we again found ourselves under the necessity of exploring a track 
through the wilderness. ‘The Spanish trail had borne off to the southeast, 
crossing the Wah-satch range. Our course led to the northeast, along the 
foot of that range, and leaving it on the right. The mountain present- 
ed itself to us under the form of several ridges, rising one above the other, 
rocky, and wooded with pine and cedar; the last ridge covered with snow. 
Sevier river, flowing northwardly to the lake of the same name, collects its 
principal waters from this section of the Wah-satch chain. We had now 
entered a region of great pastoral promise, abounding with fine streams, 
the rich bunch grass, soil that would produce wheat, and indigenous flax 
growing as if it had been sown. Consistent with the general character of 
its bordering mountains, this fertility of soiland vegetation does not extend 


[174] 272 


far into the Great Basin. Mr. Joseph Walker, our guide, and who has 
more knowledge of these parts than any man I know, informed me that all 
the country to the left was unknown to him, and that even the Digger 
tribes, which frequented Lake Sevier, could telf him nothing about it. 

May 20.—We met a band of Utah Indians, headed by a well-known 
chief, who had obtained the American or English name of Walker, b 
which he is quoted and well known. They were all mounted, armed wit 
rifles, and use their rifles well. The chief hada fusee, which he had car. 
ried slung, in addition to his rifle. They were journeying slowly towards 
the Spanish trail, to levy their usual tribute upon the great Californian cara- 
van. They were robbers of a higher order than those of the desert. They 
conducted their depredations with form, and under the color of trade and 
toll for passing through their country. Instead of attacking and killing, they 
atlect to purchase—taking the horses they like, and giving something nomi- 
nal in return. ‘The chief was quite civil tome. He was personally ac- 
quainted with his namesake, our guide, who made my vame known to him, 
He ‘knew of my expedition of 1842; and, as tokons of friendship, and 
proof that we had met, proposed an interchange of presents. We had no 
Breat store to choose out of; so he gave mea Mexican blanket, and I gave 

iim a very fine one which I had obtained at Vancouver. 

May 23.—We reached Sevier river—the main tributary of the lake of 
the same name—which, deflecting from its northern course, here breaks 
from the mountains to enter the lake, It was really a fine river, from eight 
to twelve feet deep; and, after searching in vain for a fordable place, we 
made little boats (or, rather, rafts) out of bulrushes, and ferried across, 
These rafts are readily made, and give a good conveyance across a river. 
The rushes are bound in bundles, and tied hard ; the bundles are tied down 
upon poles, as close as they can be pressed, and fashioned like a boat, in being 
broader in the middle and pointed at the ends. ‘The rushes, being tubular 
and jointed, are light and strong. ‘The raftswims well, aud is shoved along 
by poles, or paddled, or pushed and pulled by swimmers, or drawn by ropes. 
On this occasion, we used ropes—one at erch end—and rapidly drew our 
little float backwards and forwards, from shore to shore. The horses swam. 
At our place of crossing, which was the most northern point of its bend, the 
latitude was 39° 22' 19". The banks sustained the character fo: fertuity 
and vegetation which we had seen for some days. The name of this river 
and lake was an indication of our approach to regions of which our people 
had been the explorers. It was probably named after some American trap- 
per or hunter, and was the first American name we had met with since 
leaving the Columbia river. From the Dadles to the point where we turn- 
ed across the Sierra Nevada, near 1,000 miles, we heard Indian names, 
and the greater part of the distance none; from Nueva Helvetia (Sacra- 
mento) to das Vegas de Santa Clara, about 1,000 more, all were Spanish; 
from the Mississippi to the Pacific, French and American or English were 
intermixed ; and this prevalence of names indicates the national character 
of the first explorers. 

We had here the misfortune to lose.one of our people, Francois Badeau, 
who. had been with me in both expeditions; during which he had always 
been one of my most faithful and efficient men. He waskilled in drawing 
towards him a gun by the muzzle; the hammer being. caught, discharged 


the gun, driving the ball through his head. We burried him on the banks 
of the river. 


gome 


Cros 


wards 
our rig 
constit 
Colora 
of the 
which 
rounc 
. Earl 
to the 
ing tov 
which 
with ri 
them, 
lake. 
we re 
fertile 
the Gr 
tembe 
marka 
of foo 
use fo 
traordi 
rience 
dians. 
we obt 
much | 
son fol 
ectin: 

? We 
Dalles 
but by 
ficient 
isa la 
resort 
to the 
This i 
while 
is a p 
by me 
whict 


' river 


grand 
tains, 
be, th 
sation 
that t 
rally 

whic 
desc 


and who has 
ed me that al) 
1 the Digger 
about it, 
L well-known 
f Walker, b 
d, armed wit 
h he had car. 
owly towards 
ifornian cara. 
lesert. They 
of trade and 
d killing, they 
nething nomi- 
ersonally ac- 
nown to him, 
iendship, and 
We had no 
st, and I gave 


f the lake of 
, here breaks 
er, from eight 
ble place, we 
srried across, 
cross a river, 
are tied down 
boat, in being 
being tubular 
shoved along 
wn by ropes, 
dly drew our 
horses swam. 
fits bend, the 
r for fertuity 
2 of this river 
+h our people 
nerican trap- 
t with since 
ere we turn- 
idian names, 
yvetia (Sacra- 
ere Spanish; 
“nglish were 
nal character 


cois Badeau, 
had always 
1 in drawing 
t, discharged 
mn the banks 


273 [174] 


Crossing the next day a slight ridge along the river, we entered a hand- 


some mountain valley covered with fine grass, and directed our course to- 


wards a high snowy peak, at the foot of which lay the Utah lake, On 
our right was a bed of high mountains, their summits covered with snow, 
constituting the dividing ridge between the Basin waters and those of the 
Colorado, At noon we fell in with a party of Utah Indians coming out 
of the mountain, and in the afternoon encamped on a tributary to the lake, 
which is separated from the waters of the Sevier by very slight dividing 
grounds. . ° ee 

Early the next day we came in sight of the lake; and, as we descended 
to the broad bottoms of the Spanish fork, three horsemen were seen gallop- 
ing towards us, who proved to be Utah Indians—scouts from a village, 
which was encamped near the mouth of the river. They were armed 
with rifles, and their horses were in good condition, We encamped near 
them, on the Spanish fork, which is one of the principal tributaries to the 
lake. Finding the Indians troublesome, and desirous to remain here a day, 
‘we removed the next morning farther down the lake, and encamped on a 
fertile bottom near the foot of the same mountainous ridge which borders 
the Great Salt lake, and along which we had journeyed the previous Sep- 
tember. Here the principal plants in bloom were two, which were re- 
markable as affording to the Snake Indians—the one an abuudant supply 
of food, and the other the most useful among the applications which they 
use for wounds. These were the kooyah plant, growing in fields. of ex- 
traordinary luxuriance, and convolluria stellata, which, from the expe- 
rience of Mr. Walker, is the best reinedial plant known among those In- 
dians. A few miles below us was another village of Indians, from which 
we obtained some fish—among them a few salmon trout, which were very 
much inferior in size to those along the Californian mountains. The sea- 
son for taking them had not yet arrived; but the Indians were daily ex- 
pecting them to come up out of the lake. 7: a 

We had now accomplished an object we had in view when leaving the 
Dalles of the Columbia in November last : we had reached the Utah lake; 
but by a route very different from what we had intended, and without suf- 
ficient time remaining to make the examinations whieh were desired. It 
is a lake of note in this country, under the dominion of the Utahs, who 
resort to it for fish. Its greatest breadth is about 15 miles, stretching far 
to the north, narrowing as it goes, and connecting with the Great Salt lake. 
This is the report, and which I believe to be correct 5 but it is fresh water, 
while the other is not only salt, but a saturated solution of salt; and here 
is a problem which requires to be solved. It is almost entirely surrounded 
by mountains, walled on the north and east by a high and snowy range, 
which supplies to ita fan of tributary streams. Atong these, the principal 


' river is the Timpan-ogo—signifying Rock river—a name which the rocky 


grandeur of its scenery, remarkable even in this country of rugged moun- 
tains, has obtained for it from the Indians. In the Utah language, og-wah- 
be, the term for river, when coupled with other words in common conver- 
sation, is usually abbreviated to ogo ; timpan signifying rock. It is probable 
that this river furnished the name which on the older maps has been gene- 
rally applied to the Great Salt lake; but for this I have preferred a name 
which will be regarded as highly characteristic, restricting to the river the 
descriptive term Timpan-ogo, and leaving for the lake into which it flows 


e EB capper in CT A nt a 


ce dee Ai Maal ee 


[174] 274 


the name of the people who reside on its shores, and by which it isknown 
throughout the country. 

The volume of water afforded by the Timpan-ogo is probably equal to 
that of the Sevier river; and, at the time of our visit, there was only one 
place in the lake valley at which the Spanish fork was fordable. In the 
cove of mountains along its eastern shore, the lake is bordered by a plain, 
where the soil is generally good, and in greater part fertile; watered bya 
delta of prettily timbered streams, This would be an excellent locality 
for stock farms ; it is generally covered with goo@ bunch grass, and would 
abundantly produce the ordinary grains, 


In arriving at the Utah lake, we had completed an immense circuit of 
twelve degrees diameter north and south, and ten degrees east and west; 
and found ourselves, i May, 1844, on the same sheet of water which we 
had left in September, 1843, ‘The Utah is the southern limb of the Great 
Salt lake ; ia. we had seen that remarkable sheet of water both at its 
northern and southern extremity, and were able to fix its position at these 
two points, ‘The circuit which we had made, and which had cost us eight 
months of time, and 3,500 miles of travelling, had given us a view of 
Oregon and of North California from the Rocky mountains to the Pacific 
ocean, and of the two principal streams which form bays or harbors on the 
coast of that sea. Having completed this circuit, and being now about to 
turn the back upon the Pacific slope of our continent, and to recross the 
Rocky mountains, it is natural to look back upon our footsteps, and take 
sone brief view of the leading features and general structure of the coun- 
try we hadtraversed. These are peculiar and striking, and differ essentially 
from the Atlautic side of our country. ‘Nhe mountains all are higher, more 
numerous, and more distinctly defined in their ranges and directions; and, 
what is so contrary to the natural order of such formations, one of these 
ranges, Which is uear the coast, (the Sierra Nevada and the Coast Range,) 
presents higher clevations and peaks than any which are to be found in the 
Rocky mountains themselves. In our eight mouths’ circuit, we were never 
out of sight of snow; and the Sierra Nevada, where we crossed it, was 
near 2,000 feet higherdhan the South Pass in the Rocky mountains. In 
height, these mountains greatly exceed those of the Atlantic side, con- 
stantly presenting peaks which enter the region of eternal snow ; and some 
of them volcanic, and in a frequent state of activity. They are seen at 
great distances, and guide the traveller in his courses, : 

The course and elevation of these ranges give direction to the rivers and 
character to the coast. No great river does, or can, take its rise below the 
Cascade and Sierra Nevada range; the distance tu the sea is too short to 
admit of it. The rivers of the San Francisco bay, which are the largest 
after the Columbia, are local to that bay, and lateral to the coast, having 
their sources about on a line with the Dalles of the Columbia, and running 
each in a valley of its own, between Coast range and the Cascade and Sierra 
Nevada range. The Columbia is the only river which traverses the whole 
breadth of the country, breaking through all the ranges, and entering the 
sea. Drawing its waters froin a section of ten degrees of latitude in ‘the 
Rocky mountains, which'are collected into one stream by three main forks 
(Lewis’s, Clark’s, and the North fork) near the centre of the Oregon valley, 
this great river thence proceeds by 2 single channel to the sea, while its 
three forks lead each to a pass in the mountains, which opens the way into 


the int 
region 
inlet a 
the ma 
Pacifi 
comme 
This g 
injury 
side of 
waters 
their d 
cation 
The 
coast 
sounds 
chann 
trary, i 
the hea 
iron ba 
tains, § 
to get t 
fended. 
tains, Vv 
imment 
pregna 
Difle 
mounta 
and siti 
often sy 
to asce) 
and hu 
Sierra | 
observe 
those p: 
success 
connex 
fornia. 
stream: 
in the | 
underst 
lishes a 
whiripc 
nable. \ 
The. str 
for the 
Sierra | 
the Col 
of whi 
This -w 
Great § 
many s 
falling i 


tisknown 


- equal to 
only one 
» In the 
»y a plain, 
ered bya 
nt locality 
and would 


circuit of 
and west; 
which we 
the Great 
both at its 
mn at these 
tus eight 
1 view of 
ie Pacific 
ors on the 
Vv about to 
ecross the 
and take 
the coun- 
essentially 
gher,more 
ions; and, 
e of these 
st Range,) 
und in the 
vere never 
rd it, was 
tains. In 
side, con- 
and some 
e seen at 


ivers and 
below the 

short to 
ve largest 
st, having 
d running 
hnd Sierra 
the whole 
ering the 
de in ‘the 
nain forks 
on valley, 
while its 
way into 


275 C174] 


the interior of the continent. This fact in relation to the rivers of this 
region gives an immense value to the Columbia, Its mouth is the only 
inlet and outlet to and from the sea; its three forks lead to the passes in 
the mountains; it is therefore the only line of communication between the 
Pacific and the interior of North America; and all operations of war or 
commerce, of national or social intercourse, must be conducted upon it. 
This gives ita value beyond estimation, and would involve irreparable 
injury if lost. In this unity and concentration of its waters, the Pacific 
side of our continent differs entirely from the Atlantic side, where the 
waters of the Allegany mountains are dispersed into many rivers, having 
their different entrancds into the sea, and opening many lines of communi- 
cation with the interior, 

The Peeific coast is equally diflerent from that of the Atlantic. The 
coast of the Atlantic is low and open, indented with numerous bays, 
sounds, and river estuaries, accessible every where, and opening by many 
channels into the heart of the country. The Pacific coast, on the con- 
trary, is high and compact, with few bays, and but one that opens into 
the heart of the country. The immediate coast is what the seamen call 
iron bound. A little within, it is skirted by two successive ranges of moun- 
tains, standing as ramparts between the sea and the interior country; and 
to get through which, there is but one gate, and that narrow and easily de- 
fended. This structure of the coast, backed by these two ranges of moun- 
tains, with its concentration and unity of waters, gives to the country an 
immense military strength, and will probably render Oregon the most im- 
pregnable country in the world, ‘ 

Differing so much from the Atlantic side of our continent, in coast, 
mountains, and rivers, the Pacific side differs from it in another most rate 
and singular feature—that of the Great interior Basin, of which I have so 
often spoken, and the whole form and character of which I was so anxious 
to ascertain. Its existence is vouched for by such of the American traders 
and hunters as have some knowledge of that region; the structure of the 
Sierra Nevada range of mountains requires it to be there; and my own 
observations confirm it. Mr. Joseph Walker, who is so well acquainted in 
those parts, informed me that, from the Great Salt lake west, there was a 
succession of lakes and rivers which have no outlet to the sea, nor any 
connexion with the Columbia, or with the Colorado of the Gulf of Cali. 
fornia. He described some of these lakes as being large, with numerous 
Streams, and even considerable rivers, falling into them. In fact, all concur 
in the general report of these interior rivers and lakes; and, for want of 
understanding the force and power of evaporation, which so soon estab- 
lishes an equilibrium between the loss and supply of waters, the fable of 
whirlpools and subterraneous outlets has gained belief, as the only imagi-. 
nable way of carrying off the waters which have no visible discharge. 
The. structure of the country would require this formation of interior lakes; 
for the waters which would collect between the Rocky mountains and the 
Sierra Nevada, not being able to cross this formidable barrier, nor to get to 
the Columbia or the Colorado, must naturally collect into reservoirs, each 
of which would have its little system of streams and rivers to supply it. 
This ‘would be the natural effect; and what I saw went toconfirm it. The 
Great Salt lake is a formation of this kind, and quite a large one; and having 
many streams, and one considerable river, four or five hundred miles long, 
falling into it. This lake and river I saw and examined myself; and also saw 


| 
A 
| 


[ 174] 276 


the Wah-satch and Bear River mountains which enclose the waters of the 
lake on the east, and constitute, in that yaa hy the rim of the Great Basin, 
Afterwards, along the eastern base of the Sierra Nevada, where we trav- 
elled for forty-two days, I saw the line of lakes and rivers which lie at the 
foot of that Sierra; and which Sierra is the western rim of the Basin. In 
going down Lewis’s fork and the main Columbia, I crossed only inferior 
streams coming in from the left, such as could draw their water from a 
short distance only; and I often saw the mountains at their heads, white 
with snow; which, all accounts said, divided the waters of the desert from 
those of the Columbia, and which could be no other than the range of 
mountaius which form the rim of the Basin on its nérthern side. Aad in 
returning from California along the Spanish trail, as far as the head of the 
Santa Clara fork of the Rio Virgen, I crossed only small streams making 
their way south tothe Colorado, or lost in sand—as the Mo-hah-ve ; while 
to the left, lofty mountains, their summits white with snow, were often visi- 
ble, and which must have turned water to the north as well as to the south, 
and thus constituted, on this part, the southern rim of the Basin, At the 
head of the Santa Clara fork, and in the Vegas de Santa C.ava, we crossed 
the ridge which parted the two systems of waters, We entered the Basin 
at that point, and have travelled in it ever since, having its southeastern 
rim (the Wah-satch mountain) on the right, and crossing the streams which 
flow down into it. The existence of the Basin is therefore an established 
fact in my mind; its extent and contents are yet'to be better ascertained. 
It cannot be less than four or five hundred miles each way, and must lie 
peincionly in the Alta California, the demarcation latitude of 42° proba- 
ly cutting a,segment from the north part of the rim. Of its interior, but 
little is known. It is called a desert, and, from what I saw of it, sterility 
may be its prominent characteristic; but where there is so much water, 
there must be some oasis. The great river, and the great lake, reported, 
may not be equal to the report; but where there is so much snow, there 
must be streams; and where there is no outlet, there must be lakes to hold 
the accumulated waters, or sands to swallow them up. In this eastern 
part of the Basin, containing Sevier, Utah, and the Great Salt lakes, and 
the rivers and creeks falling into them, we know there is good soil and 
good grass, adapted to civilized settlements, In the western part, on Sal- 
mon Trout river, and some other streams, the same remark may be made. 
The contents of this Great Basin are yet to be examined. That it is 
peopled, we know; but miserably and sparsely. From all that I heard and 
saw, I should say that humanity here appeared in its lowest form, and in 
its most elementary state. Dispersed in single families; without fire arms; 
eating seeds and insects; digging roots, (and hence their name)—such is 
the condition of the greater part. Others are a degree higher, and live in 
communities upon some lake or river that supplies fish, and from which 
they repulse the miserable Digger. The rabbit is the largest animal known 
in this desert; its flesh affords a little meat; and their bag-like covering is 
made of its skins. The wild sage is their only wood, and here it is of ex- 
traordinary size—sometimes a foot in diameter, and six or eight feet high. 
It serves for fuel, for building material, for shelter to the rabbits, and for 
some sort of covering for the feet and legs in cold weather. Such are the 
accounts of the inhabitants and productions of the Great Basin; and which, 


though imperfect, must have some foundation, and excite our desire to know 
the whole. 


T 
coun 
their 
in Ag 
with 


justi 
tions 
only 
cult 
be it 
whil 
grazi 
an el 
valui 
front 
it is 
name 
Wes 
bune 
both 
thou: 


lie at the 
asin. In 
ly inferior 
er froma 
ds, white 
eserd from 
) range of 
Aad in 
ead of the 
ns making 
‘ve; while 
often visi- 
the south, 
n. At the 
ve crossed 
the Basin 
utheastern 
ams which 
sta blished 
scertained, 
d must lie 
42° proba- 
terior, but 
it, sterility 
ich water, 
» reported, 
1ow, there 
ces to hold 
his eastern 
lakes, and 
d soil and 
rt, on Sal- 
r be made. 
That it is 
heard and 
rm, and in 
fire arms; 
J—such is 
ind live in 
om which 
al known 
overing is 
it is of ex- 
feet high. 
s,and for 
ch are the 
nd which, 
e to know 


277 [14] 


The whole idea of such a desert, and such a people, is a novelty in our 
country, and excites Asiatic, not American ideas. Interior basips, with 
their own systems of lakes and rivers, and often sterile, are common enough 
in Asia; people still in the elementary state of families, living in deserts 
with no other occupation than the mere animal search for food, may still 
be seen in that ancient quarter of the globe; but in America such things 
are new and strange, unknown and unsuspected, and discredited when 
related, But I flatter myself that what is discovered, though not enough 
to satisly curiosity, is sufficient to excite it, and that subsequent explorations 
will complete what has been commenced. 

This account of the Great Basin, it will be remembered, belongs to the 
Alta California, and has no application to Oregon, whose capabilities may 
justify a separate remark, Referring to my journal for particular descrip- 
tions, and for sectional boundaries between good and bad districts, I can 
only say, in general and comparative terms, that, in that branch of agri- 
culture which implies the cultivation of grains and Staple crops, it would 
be inferior to the Atlantic States, though many parts are superior for wheat; 
while in the reafing of flocks and herds it would claim a high place. Its 
grazing capabilities are great; and even in the indigenous grass now there, 
an element of individual and national wealth may be found. In fact, the 
valuable grasses begin within one hundred and fifty miles of the Missouri 
frontier, and extend to the Pacific ocean, East of the Rocky mountains, 
it is the short curly grass, on which the buffalo delight to feed, (whence its 
name of buffalo,) and which is still good when dry and apparently dead. 
West of those mountains it is a larger growth, in clusters, and hence called 
bunch grass, and which has a second or fall growth. Plains and mountains 
both exhibit them; and I have seen good pasturage at an elevation of ten 
thousand feet. In this spontaneous product, the trading or travelling cara- 
vans can find subsistence for their animals; and in military operations any 
number of cavalry may be moved, and any number of cattle may be driven; 
and thus men and horses be supported on long expeditions, and even in 
winter in the sheltered situations, 


Commercially, the value of the Oregon country must be great, washed 
as it is by the north Pacific ocean—fronting Asia—producing many of the 
elements of commerce—mild and healthy in its climate—and becoming, as 
it naturally will, a thoroughfare for the East india and Ching trade. 


Turning our faces once more eastward, on the morning of the 27th we 
left the Utah lake, and continued for two days to ascend the Spanish fork, 
which is dispersed in numerous branches among very rugged mountains, 
which afford few passes, and render a. familiar acquaintance with them 
necessary to the traveller. The stream can scarcely be said to have a vale 
ley, the mountains rising often abruptly from the water’s edge; but a good 
trail facilitated our travelling, and there were frequent bottoms, covered 
with excellent grass, The streams are prettily and variously wooded; and 
every where the mountain shows grass and timber. 

At our encampment on the ‘evening of the 28th, near the head of one 
of the branches we had ascended, strata of bituminous limestone were 
displayed in an escarpment on the river bluffs, in which were contained a 
variety of fossil shells of new species. 

It, will be:remembered, that in crossing this ridge about. 120 miles to the 
northward in August last, strata of fossiliferous rock were discovered; which 


j 
‘ 
' if 
, ’ 
¢ i 
t 
- 
Hf 
f i 
' 
} 


[174] 278 


have heen referred to the oolitic period; it is probable that these rocks also 
belong to the same formation. 

A few miles from this encampment we reached the head of the stream; 
and crossing, by an open and easy pass, the dividing ridge which separates 
the waters of the Great Basin from those of the Colorado, we reached the 
head branches of one of its larger tributaries, which, from the decided color 
of its waters, has received the name of White river. The snows of the 
mountains were now beginning to melt, and all the little rivutets werd 
running by in rivers,and rapidly becoming dilticnlt to ford. Continuing a 
few miles up a branch of White river, we crossed a dividing ridge between 
its waters and those of the Uintuh. ‘The approach to the pass, which is 
the best known to Mr. Walker, was somewhat diflicult for packs, and im- 
practicable for wagous—all the streams being shut in by narrow ravines, 
and the narrow trail along the steep bill sides allowing the passage of only 
one animal atatime. From the summit we had a fine view of the snowy 
Bear River range; and there were still remaining beds of snow on the cold 
sides of the hills near the pass. We descended by a narrow ravine, in 
which was rapidly gathered a little branch of the Uintah, and ‘halted to 
noon about 1,500 feet below the pass, at an clevation, by the boiling point, 
of 6,900 feet above the sea, 

The next day we descended along the river, and about noon reached a 
point where three forks come together, Fording one of these with some 
difficulty, we continued up the middle branch, which, from the color of its 
waters, is named the Red river, ‘The few passes, and extremely rugged 
nature of the country, give to it great strength, and secure the Utahs from 
the intrusion of their enemies, Crossing in the afternoon a somewhat 
broken highland, covered in places with fine grasses, and with cedar on 
the hill sides, we encamped at evening on another tributary to the Uiniah, 
called the Duchesne fork. The water was very clear, the stream not being 

et swollen by the melting snows; and we forded it without any difficulty. 

t is a considerable branch, being spread out by islands, the largest arm 
being about a hundred feet wide; and the name it bears is probably that 
of some old French trapper. 

The next day we continued down the river, which we were twice obliged 
to cross; and, the water having risen during the night, it was almost every 
where too degp to be forded. After travelling about sixteen miles, we en- 
camped again on the left bank. 

I obtained here an occultation of 8 Scorpii at the dark limb of the moon, 
which gives for the longitude of the place 112° 18' 30", and the latitude 


40° 18' 53". 


June 1.—We left to-day the Duchesne fork, and, after traversing a broken 
country for about sixteen miles, arrived at noon at another'considerable 
branch, a river of great velocity, to which the trappers have improperly 
given the name of Lake fork. The name applied to it by the Indians sig- 
nifies great swiftness, and is the same which they use to express the speed 
of a race horse. It is spread out in various channels over several hundred 
yards, and is every where too deep and swift to be forded. At this season 
of the year, there is an uninterrupted noise from the large rocks which are 
rolled along the bed. After infinite difficulty, and the delay of a day, we 
succeeded in getting the stream bridged, and got over with the loss of one 
of our animals, Continuing our route across a broken country, of which 
the higher parts were rocky and timbered with cedar, and the lower parts 


cover 
Uinta 
fork 
cult a 
to be 
very 
sittial 
the ri 

By 
occult 
56' 4s 

Itl 
with 
sugar 
copla 
past. 
Archa 
Carso 

On 
contit 
additi 
agai 
taine 
Al 
27'0 

In 
after t 
we fe 
A ne 
upon 
this fp 
Color 
cipiel 
the G 

On 
little 
verge 
hole. 
caiol 
valle 
yard: 
man 
had | 
posit 
tah | 
most 
whic 
rive! 


» rocks also 


he stream; 
1 separates 


ows of the 
rulets werd 
putinuing a 
ze between 
8, Which is 
ks, and im- 
Ww ravines, 
ige of only 
‘the snowy 
on the cold 
y ravine, in 
1 ‘halted to 
iling point, 


) reached a 
with some 
of its 
ely rugged 
Utahs from 
somewhat 
h cedar on 
he Uintah, 
1 not being 
y difficulty. 
argest arm 
ybably that 


ice obliged 
most every 
les, we en- 


‘the moon, 
he latitude 


g a broken 
nsiderable 
mproperly 
ndians sig- 
| the speed 
al hundred 
this season 
‘which are 
a day, we 
Oss of one 
,of which 
wer parts 


279 C174 J 


covered with good grass, we reached, on the afternoon of the 3d, the 
Uintah fort, a trading post belonging to Mr, A, Roubideau, on the principal 
fork of the Uintal: river, We found the stroam nearly as rapid and diffi- 
cult as the Lake fork, divided into several chanuels, which were too broad 
to be bridged. With the aid of guides from the fort, we succeeded, with 
very great difficulty, in fording it; and encamped near the fort, which is 
sittiated a short distance above the junction of two branches which make 
the river, 

By an immersion of the Lst satellite, (agreeing well with the result of the 
occultation observed at the Duchesne fork,) the longitude of the post is 109° 
56' 42", the latitude 40° 27' 45", ‘ 

It has a motley garrison of Canadian and Spanish engagés and hunters, 
with the usual number of Indian women, We obtained a small supply of 
sugar and cotlee, with some dried meat and a cow, which was a very ac- 
coptuble change from the pinodi on which we had subsisted for some weeks 
past. I strengthened my party at this place by the addition of Auguste 
Archambean, an excellent voyageur and hunter, belonging to the class of 
Carson and Godey, 

On the morning of the Sth we lett the fort* and the Uintah river, and 
continued our road over a broken country, which afforded, however, a rich 
addition to our botanical colleetion; and, after a march of 25 miles, were 
again checked by another stream, called Ashley’s fork, where we were de- 
tained nutil noon of the next day. 

An immersion of the 2d satellite gave for this place a longitude of 109° 
27' 07", the latitude by observation being 40° 28' 07", 

In the afternoon of the next day we succeeded in finding a ford; and, 
after travelling fifteen miles, encamped high up on the mountain side, where 
we found exgellent and abundant grass, which we had not hitherto seen. 
A new species of e/ymus, which had a purgative and weakening effect 
upon the animals, had occurred abundantly since leaving the fort, From 
this point, by observation 7,300 feet above the sea, we had a view of the 
Colorado below, shut up amongst rugged mountains, and which is the re- 
cipient of all the streams we had been crossing since we passed the rim of 
the Great Basin at the head of the Spanish fork. 

On the 7th we had a pleasant but long day’s journey, through beautiful 
litle valleys and a high mountain country, arriving about evening at the 
verge ofa steep and rocky ravine, by which we descended to “ Brown’s 
hole,” ‘This is a place well known to trappers in the country, where the 
cafions through whisk the Colorado runs expand into a narrow but pretty 
valley, about sixteen miles in length. The river was several hundred 
yards in breadth, swollen to the top of its banks, near to which it was in 
many places fifteen to twenty feet deep. We repaired a skin boat which 
had been purchased at the fort, and, after a delay of a day, reached the op- 
posite banks with much less delay than had been encountered on the Uin- 
tah waters. According to information, the lower end of the valley is the 
most eastern part of the Colorado; and the latitude of our encampment, 
which was opposite to the remains of an old forton the left bank of the 
river, was 40° 46' 27", and, by observation, the elevation above the sea 


—— i ti a rn rE 


* This fort was attacked and taken by a band of the Utah Indians since we passed it; and the 
men of the garrison killed, the women carried off. Mr. Roubideau, a trader of St. Louis, was ab- 
sent, and so escaped the fate of the rest. 


[ 174] 280 


5,150 feet. The bearing to the entrance of the cafion below was south 20° 
east. Here the river enters between lofty precipices of red rock, and the 
country below is said to assume a very rugged character; the river and 
its affluents passing through cafions which forbid all access to the water. 
This sheltered little valley was formerly a favorite wintering ground for 
the trappers, as it afford d them sufficient pasturage for their animals, and 
the surrounding mountaius are well stocked with game. 

We surprised a flock of mountain sheep as we descended to the river, 
and our hunters killed several. The bottoms of a small stream called the 
Vermillion éreek, which enters the left bank of the river a short distance 
below our encampment, were covered abundantly with F. vermicularis, 
and other chenopodiaceous shrubs. From the lower end of Brown’s hole 
we issued by a remarkably dry cajion, fifty or sixty yards wide, and rising, 
as we advanced, to the height of six or eight hundred feet. Issuing from 
this, and crossing a small green valley, we entered another rent of the same 
nature, still narrower than the other, the rocks on either side rising in nearly 
vertical precipices perhaps 1,500 feet in height. These places are men- 
tioned, to give some idea of the country lower down on the Colorado, to 
which the trappers usually apply the name of a cafion country. The cafion 
opened upon a pond of water, where we halted to noon. Several flocks of 
mountain sheep were here among the rocks, which rung, with volleys of 
small arms. In the afternoon we entered upon an ugly, barren, and broken 
country, corresponding well with that we had traversed a few degrees 
north, on the same side of the Colorado. The Vermillion creek atforded 
us brackish water and indifferent grass for the night. 

A few scattered cedar trees were the only improvement of the country 
on the following day; and at a little spring of bad water, where we halted 
to noon, we had not even the shelter of these from the hot rays of the sun. 
At night we encamped in a fine grove of cottonwood trées, on the banks of 
the Elk Head river, the principal fork of the Yampah river, commonly 
called by the trappers the Bear river. We made here a very strong coral 
and fort, and formed the camp into vigilant guards. The country we were 
now entering is constantly infested by war parties of the Sioux and other 
Indians, and is considered among the most dangerous war grounds in the 
Rocky mountains; parties of whites having been repeatedly defeated on 
this river. 

On the 11th we continued up the river, which is a considerable stream, 
fifty to a hundred yards in width, handsomely and continuously wooded 
with groves of the narrow-leaved cottonwood, (populus angustifolia ;) 
with these were thickets of willow and grain du beuf. The characteristic 
plant along the river is F. vermicularis, which generally covers the bot- 
toms ; mingled with this, are saline shrubs and artemisia. The new variety 
of grass which we had seen on leaving the Uintah fort had now disap- 
peared. The country on either side was sandy and poor, scantily wooded 
with cedars, but the river hottoms afforded good pasture. Three ante- 
lopes were killed in the afternoon, and we encamped a little below a branch 
of the river, called St. Vrain’s fork. A few miles above was the fort at 
which Frapp’s party had been defeated two years since ; and we passed 
during the day a place where Carson had been fired upon so close that one 
of the men had five bullets through his body. Leaving this river the next 
morning, we took our way across the hills, where every hollow had a 


spring: of running water, with good grass. 


Yest¢ 
which ¢ 
among 
began 
but the 
of the 
ofa lu 
buffalo 
as if th 
noon o 
mounta 
showe 
safe to 
ets, we 
grove, 
fine co 
antelop 
herds a 
more V’ 
we had 
und its 
Juné 
ing wa 
rectly t 
and le 
we ent 
the gro 
toward 
saw ou 
little st 
the Ple 
a prett: 
some y 
Issui 
valley 
of the 
obscur 
We 
home 
grounc 
excite 
wit: t 
Platte 
gulf o) 
remar' 
One of} 
and a 
Rocky 
all, w 
tain it 
the ris 
tain p 
est, a 


as south 20° 
ock, and the 
ie river and 
» the water, 

ground for 
inimals, and 


to the river, 
m called the 
ort distance 
ermicularis, 
srown’s hole 
2, and rising, 
Issuing fram 
of the same 
ing in nearly 
28 are men- 
Colorado, to 
, The cajion 
eral flocks of 
1 volleys of 
yand broken 
few degrees. 
ek afforded 


the country 
‘e we halted 
s of the sun. 
the banks of 
, commonly 
strong coral 
try we were 
x and other 
nds in the 
efeated on 


able stream, 
isly wooded 
ide ele A) 

aracteristic 
ors the bot- 
new variety 
now disap- 
‘ily wooded 
[Three ante- 
bw a branch 
the fort at 
we passed 
ose that one 
rer the next 
llow had a 


281 [ 174 ] 


Yesterday and to-day we have had before our eyes the high mountains 
which divide the Pacific from the Mississippi waters; and entering here 
among the lower spurs, or foot hills of the range, the face'of the country 
began to improve with a magical rapidity. Not only the .iver bottoms, 
but the hills, were covered with grass; and among the usual varied flora 
of the mountain region, these were occasionally blue with the showy bloom 
ofa /upinus. In the course of the morning we had the first glad view of 
buffalo, and welcomed the appearance of two old bulls with as much joy 
as if they had been messengers from home; and when we descended to 
noon on St. Vrain’s fork, an affluent of Green river, the hunters brought.in 
mountain sheep aud the meat of two fat bulls. Fresh entrails iv the river 
showed us that there were Indians above ; and, at evening, judging it un- 
safe to encamp in the bottoms, which were wooded only with willow thick- 
ets, we ascended to the spurs above, and forted strongly in a small aspen 
grove, near to which was a spring of cold water. The hunters killed two 
fine cows near the camp. A band of elk broke out of a neighboring grove; 
antelopes were running over the hills; and on the opposite river plains, 
herds of buffalo were raising clouds of dust. ‘The country here appeared 
more variously stocked with game than any part of the Rocky mountains 
we had visited ; and its abundance is owing to the excellent pasturage, 
und its dangerous character as a war grotind. 

June 13.—There was snow here near our mountain camp, and the morn- 
ing was beautiful and cool. Leaving St. Vrain’s fork, we took our way di- 
rectly towards the summit of the dividing ridge. The bottoms of the streams 
and level places were wooded with aspens; and as we neared the summit, 
we entered again the piney region. We had a delightful morning’s ride, 
the ground affording us an excellent bridle path, and reached the.summit 
towards midday, at an elevation of 8,000 feet. With joy and exultation we 
saw ourselves once more on the top of the Rocky mountains, and beheld a 
little stream taking its course towards the rising sun. It was an affluent of 
the Platte, called Pul/am’s fork, and we descended to noon upon it. It is 
a pretty stream, twenty yards broad, and bears the name of a trapper who, 
some years since, was killed here by the Gros Ventre Indians. 

Issuing from the pines in the afternoon, we saw spread out before us the 
valley of the Platte, with the pass of the Medicine Butte beyond, and some 
of the Sweet Water mountains; but a smoky haziness in the air entirely 
obscured the Wind River chain. 

We were now about two degrees south of the South Pass, and our course 
home would have been eastwardly ; but that would have taken us over 
ground already examined, and therefore without the interest which would 
excite curiosity. Southwardly there were objects worthy to be explored, to 
wit: the approximation of the head waters of three different rivers—the 
Platte, the Arkansas, and the Grand River fork of the Rio Colorado of the 
gulf of California; the Passes at the heads of these rivers; and the three 
remarkable mountain coves, called Parks, in which they took their rise. 
One of these Parks was, of course, on the western side of the dividing ridge; 
and a visit to it would require us once more to cross the summit of the 
Rocky mountains to the west, and then to re-cross to the east ; making, in 
all, with the transit we had just accomplished, three crossings of that moun- 
tain in this section of its course. But, no matter. The coves, the heads of 
the rivers, the approximation of their waters, the practicability of the moun- 
tain passes, and the locality of the rureE Parxs, were all objects of inter- 
est, and, although well known to hunters and trappers, were unknown to 


AS 


a 
1 
it 
i 
f 
f 


[ 174] 282 


science and to history. We therefore changed our course, and turned tp 
the valley of the Platte instead of going down it. 

We crossed several small aftluents, and again made a fortified camp in 
agrove. The country had now become very beautiful—rich in water, 
grass, and game; and to these were added the charm of scenery and pleas. 
ant weather. 

June 14 —Our route this morning lay along the foot of the mountain, 
over the long low spurs which sloped gradually down to the river, forming 
the broad valley of the Platte. The country is beautifully watered. In al. 
most every hollow ran a clear,cool mountain stream; and in the course of 
the morning we crossed seventeen, several of them being large creeks, forty 
to fifty feet wide, with a swift current, and tolerably deep. ‘These were 
variously wooded with groves of aspen and cottonwood, with willow, 
cherry, and other shrubby trees. Buttalo, antelope, and elk, were frequent 
during the day ; and, in their abundance, the latter sometimes reminded 
us slightly of the Sacramento valley. 

We halted at noon on Potter’s fork—a clear and swift stream, forty yards 
wide, and in many places deep enough to swim our animals; and in the 
evening encamped on a pretty stream, where there were several beaver 
dams, and many trees recently cut down by the beaver. We gave to this 
the name of Beaver Dam creek, as now they are becoming suiliciently rare 
to distinguish by their name the streams on which they are found. In this 
mountain they occurred more abundantly than elsewhere in all our journey, 
in which their vestiges had been scarcely seen. 

The next day we continued our journey up the valley, the country pre- 
senting much the same appearance, except that the grass was more scanty 
on the ridges, over which was spread a scrubby growth of sage ; but still 
the bottoms of the creeks were broad, and afforded good pasture grounds, 
We had an animated chase after a grizzly bear this morning, which we 
tried to lasso. Fuentes threw the lasso upon his neck, but it slipped off, 
and he escaped into the dense thickets of the creek, into which we did not 
like to venture. Our course in the afternoon brought us to the main Platte 
river, here a handsome stream, with a uniform breadth of seventy yards, 
except where widened by frequent islands. It was apparently deep, with 
a moderate current, and wooded with groves of large willow. 

The valley narrowed as we ascended, and presently degenerated into a 
gorge, through which the river passed as through a gate. We entered it, 
and found ourselves in the New Park—a beautiful circular valley of thirty 
miles diameter, walled in all round with snowy mountains, rich with water 
and with grass, fringed with pine on the mountain sides below the snow 
line, and a paradise to all grazing animals. ‘Phe Indian name for it signi- 
fies “ cow lodge,” of which our own may be considered a translation ; the 
enclosure, the grass, the water, and the herds of buffalo roaming over it, 
naturally presenting the idea of a park. We halted for the night just within 
the gate, and expected, as usual, to see herds of buffalo; but an Arapahoe 
village had been before us, and not one was to be seen. Latitude of the 
encampment 40° 52' 44"". Elevation by the boiling point 7,720 feet. 

Itis from this elevated cove, and from the gorges of the surrounding 
mountains, and some lakes within their bosoms, that the Great Platte river 
collects its first waters, and assumes its first form; and certainly no river 
could ask a more beautiful origin. 

June %6.—In the morning we pursued our way through the Park, follow- 


q 


| 


ny 
4 


ing a pri 
ones, a't 
sues fror 
ing we e 
tude of 
June ' 
foot hills 
surprised 
made b 
of she 
a pass 
led amo! 
carried 1 
The a 
weather 
from the 
to noon 
which is 
of Califa 
we foun 
coming ¢ 
desirous 
on a ‘sm 
through 
Old Par 
stead of 
surrounc 
quaking 
Jrene' 
morning 
about 3( 
men for 
encampe 
through 
they ap] 
village. 
into the 
being us 
time to” 
defende 
We had 
peared ¢ 
“We pla 
truce, w 
Sioux v 
friendly 
cil had | 
attackin 
been ca 
some fe 
plains, ‘ 
ple'toa 


nd turned Up 


‘ified camp in 
ich in water, 
sry and pleas. 


the mountain, 
river, forming 
atered. In al. 
1 the course of 
e creeks, forty 

These were 
with willow, 
were frequent 
nes reminded 


m, forty yards 
$; and in the 
everal beaver 
'e gave to this 
uliciently rare 
ound. In this 
| our journey, 


) country pre 
s more scanty 
age ; but still 
ture grounds, 
ng, which we 
it slipped off, 
ch we did not 
le main Platte 
eventy yards, 
tly deep, with 


erated into a 
e entered it, 
alley of thirty 
ch with water 
ow the snow 
1e for it signi- 
nslation ; the 
ming over it, 
ht just within 
an Arapahoe 
atitude of the 
120 feet. 
surrounding 
ut Platte river 
uinly no river 


Park, follow- 


263 [ 174 ] 


ing a principal branch of the Platte, and crossing, among many smaller 
ones, a'bold stream, scarcely fordable, called Lodge Pole fork, and which is- 
sues from a lake in the' mountains on the right, ten mileslong. In the even- 
ing we encamped ona small stream, near the upper end of the Park, Lati- 
tude of the camp 40° 33’ 22", 

June 17.—-We continued our way among the waters of the Park, over the 
foot hills of the bordering mountains, where we found good pasturage, and 
surprised and killed some buffalo. We fell into a broad and excellent rail, 
made by buffalo, where a wagon would pass with ease ; and, in the course 
of she morning, we crossed the summit of the Rocky mountains, through 
a pass which was one of the most beautiful we had ever seen. The trail 
led among the aspens, through open grounds, richly covered with grass, and 
carried us Over'an elevation of about 9,000 feet above the level of the sea. 

The country appeared to great advantage in ‘the delightful summer 
weather of the mountains, which we still ‘continued to enjoy. Descending 
from the pass, we found ourselves again on the western waters; and halted 
to noon on the edge of another mountain valley, called the Old Park, in 
which is formed Grand river, one of the principal branches of the Colorado 
of California, We were now moving with some caution, as, from the trail, 
we found the Arapahoe village had also passed this way. As we were 
coming out of their enemy’s country, and this was a war ground, we were 
desirous to avoid them. After a long afternoon’s march, we halted at night 
ona ‘small creek, tributary to a main fork of Grand river, which ran 
through this portion of the valley. The appearance of the country in the 
Old Park is interesting, though of a different character from the New; in- 
stead of being a comparative plain, it is more or less broken into hills, and 
surrounded by the high mountains, timbered on the lower parts with 
quaking asp and pines. | | 

June 18.—Our scouts, who were as usual ahead, made from a butte this 
morning the signal of Indians, and we rode up in time to meet a party of 
about 30 Arapahoes. They were men and women going into the hills—the 
men fot game, the women for roots—and informed us that the village was 
encamped a few miles above, on the main fork of Grand river, which passes 
through the midst of the valley.’ I made them the usual presents; but 
they appeared disposed to be unfriendly, and galloped back at speed to the 
village. Knowing’ that we had trouble to expect, I descended immediately 
into the bottoms of Grand river, which were overflowed in places, the river 
being up, and made the best encampment the ground afforded. We had no 
time to build a fort, but found an open place among the willows, which was 
defended by the river on‘one side‘and the overflowed bottoms on the other. 
We had scarcely made our few preparations, when about 200 of them ap- 
peared on the verge of the bottom, mounted, painted, and armed for war. 


‘We planted the American flag between us; and a short parley ended ina 


truce, with something more than the usual amount of presents. About 20 
Sioux were with them—one ‘of them an old chief, who had always been 
friendly to' the whites. He informed me that, before coming down, a coun- 
cil had been ‘held at the village, in which the greater part had declared for 
attacking us—-we had come from their enemies, to whom we had doubtless 
been carrying assistance in arms and ammunition ; but his own party, with 
some few of the Arapahoes who had seen us the previous year in the 
plains, opposed it. It will be'remembered that it is customary for this peo- 
ple to attack the trading parties which they meet in this region, considering 


— 
Sess HAS 


a tee i 


Sie, ipnisig bi 
ws he “ 


c 174) 284 


all whom they tneet on the western side of the mountains to be their ene. 
mies. They deceived me into the belief that [ should find a ford at their 
village, and I could not avoid accompanying them ; but put several sloughs 
between us and their village, and forted strongly on the banks of the river, 
which was every where rapid and deep, and over a hundred yards in breadth, 
The camp was generally crowded with Indians; and though the baggage 
was carefully watched and covered, a number of things were stolen. 

The next morning we descended the river for about eight tiles, and 
halted a short distance above a caiion, through which Grand river issues 
from the Park. Here it was smooth and deep, 159 yards in breadth, and 
its elevation at this point 6,700 feet. A. frame for the boat being very soon 
made, our baggage was ferried across ; the horses, in the mean time, swim. 
ming over. A southern fork of Grand river here makes its junction, nearly 
opposite to the branch by which we had entered the valley, and up this we 
continued for about eight miles in the afternoon, and encamped in a bottom 
on the left bank, which afforded good grass. At our encampment it vas 
70 to 90 yards in breadth, sometimes widened by islands, and separated into 
several channels, with a very swift current and bed of rolled rocks. 

On the 20th we travelled up the left bank, with the prospect of a bad 
road, the trail here taking the opposite side ; but the stream was up, and no- 
where fordable. A piney ridge of mountains, with bare rocky peaks, was 
on our right all the day, and a snowy mountain appeared ahead. We 
crossed many foaming torrents with rocky beds, rushing down to the river; 
and in the evening made a strong fort in an aspen grove. The valley had 
already become very narrow, shut up more closely in densely timbered 
mountains, the pines sweeping down the verge of the bottoms. The cay 
de prairie (tetrao europhasianus) was occasionally seen among the sage, 

We saw to-day the returning trail of an Arapahoe party which had been 
sent from the village to look for Utahs in the Bayou Salade, (South Park;) 
and it being probable that they would visit our camp with the desire to te. 
turn on horseback, we were more than usually on the alert. 

Here the river diminished to 35 yards, and, notwithstanding the number 
of affluents we had crossed, was still a large stream, dashing swiftly by, 
with a great continuous fall, and not yet fordable. We had a delightful ride 
along a good trail among the fragrant pines; and the appearance of buffalo 
in great numbers indicated that there were Indians in the Bayou Salade, 
(South Park,) by whom they were driven out. We halted to noo under 
the shade of the pines, and the weather was most delightful. The country 
was literally alive with buffalo; and the continued echo of the hunter’s 
rifles on the other side of the river for a moment made me uneasy, thinking 
perhaps they were engaged with Indians; but in a short time they came 
into camp with the meat of seven fat cows. 

During the earlier part of the day’s ride, the river had been merelya 
narrow ravine between high piney. mountains, backed on both sides, but 
particularly on the west, by a line of snowy ridges ; but, after several hours’ 


ride, the stream opened out intoa valley with pleasant bottoms. In the | 


afternoon the river forked into three apparently equal streams ; broad buffalo 
trails leading up the left hand, and the middle branch indicating good passes 
over the mountains; but up the right-hand branch, (which, in the object of 
descending from the mountain by the main head of the Arkansas, Iwas 


‘most desirous. to follow,),thers was no. sign of a buffolo trace.. Apprehend- 


ing from this reason,.and the character of the mountains, which are known 


to be extr 
ceeded uw 
timbered 
in large 4 
esting; a 
where we 
growth 0 
montana 
been ach 
waters. 
straw berr 
At dark 
side of the 
port of a 
those of t 
were foul 
niountains 
which the 
but a few 
him alone 
As they 
encampm 
diminishe 
At our no 
to start fr 
ed by a p 
covered a 
large war 
who were 
‘body had 
than the | 
that we n 
too far ah 
dians we 
our eleva 
grass was 
In the 
pines, wit 
the shade 
crack, as 
of an hot 
MIT ‘OF T 
of 11,200 
heading 1 
diately be 
distance « 
peaks of 
diately bi 
rivér—m 
which ga 
of the ru 


sas, whic 


o be their ene. 
a ford at their 
several sloughs 
ks of the river, 
urds in breadth, 
h the baggage 
re stolen, 
ight miles, and 
nd river issues 
u breadth, and 
eing very soon 
an time, swim. 
unction, nearly 
and up this we 
ved in a bottom 
mpment it was 
| separated into 
J rocks, 
spect of a bad 
vas up, and no- 
‘ky peaks, was 
d ahead. We 
n to the river; 
he valley had 
isely timbered 
oms. The cog 
long the sage, 
rhich had been 
(South Park;) 
re desire to te 


ng the number 
ing swiftly by, 
delightful ride 
ance of buffalo 
Bayou Salade, 
to noow under 
|. The country 
f the hunter’s 
leasy, thinking 
me they came 


been merelya 
oth: sides, but 
‘several hours’ 


toms, 
; broad buffalo 
ng good passes 
n the object of 
rkansas, [was 
>. Apprehend- 
ich are known 


In the | 


285 [ 174] 
to be extremely rugged, that the right-hand branch led to no pass, I pro- 
ceeded up the middle branch, which formed a flat valley bottom between 
timbered ridges on the left and snowy mountains on the right, terminating 
in large buéées of naked rock. - The trail was good, and the country inter- 
esting; and at nightfall we encamped in an open place among the pines, 
where we built a strong fort. ‘The mountains exhibit their usual varied 
growth of flowers, and at this place I noticed, among others, ¢hermopsis 
montana, Whose bright yellow color makes it a showy plant. This has 
been a characteristic in many parts of the country since reaching the Uintah 
waters, With fields of iris were aquilegia cerulea, violets, esparcette, and 
strawberries. 

At dark, we perceived a fire in the edge of the pines, on the opposite 
side of the valley. We had evidently not been discovered, and, at the re- 
port of a gun, and the blaze of fresh fuel which was heaped on our fires, 
those of the strangers were instantly extinguished. In the morning, they 
were found to be a party of six trappers, who had ventured out among the 
nountains after beaver. They informed us that two of the number with 
which they started had been already killed by the Indians—one of them 
but a few days since—by the Arapahoes we had lately seen, who had found 
him alone at a camp on this river, and carried off his traps and animals. 
As they were desirous to join us, the hunters returned with them to their 
encampment, and we continued up the valley, in which the stream rapidly 
diminished, breaking into small tributaries—every hollow affording water. 
At our noon halt, the hunters joined us with the trappers, While preparing 
to start from their encampment, they found themselves suddenly surround- 
ed by a party of Arapahoes, who informed them that their scouts had dis- 
covered a large Utah village in the Bayou Salade, (South Park,) and that a 
large war party, consisting of almcst every man in the village, except those 
who were too old to go to war, were going over to attack them. The main 
‘body had ascended the left fork of the river, which afforded a better pass 
than the branch we were on; and this party had followed our trail, in order 
that we might add our force to theirs. Carson informed them that we were 
too far ahead to turn back, but would joM them in the bayou; and the In- 
dians went off apparently satisfied. By the temperature of boiling water, 
our elevation here was 10,430 feet; and still the pine forest continued, and 
grass was good. 

In the afternoon, we continued our road—occasionally through open 
pines, with a very gradual ascent. We surprised a herd of buffalo, enjoying 
the shade at asmall lake among the pines; and they made the dry branches 
crack, as they broke through the woods. Ina ride of about three-quarters 
of an hour, and having ascended perhaps 800 feet, we reached the sum- 
MIT OF THE DIVIDING RIDGE, Which would thus have an estimated height 
of 11,200 feet. Here the river spreads itself into sma! branches and springs, 
heading nearly in the summit of the ridge, which is very narrow. Imme- 
diately below us wasa green valley,through which ran a stream; and a short 
distance opposite rose snowy mountains, whose summits were formed into 
peaks of naked rock. We soon afterwards satisfied ourselves that imme- 
diately beyond these mountains was the main branch of the Arkansas 
rivér—most probably heading directly with the little stream below us, 
which gathered its waters in the snowy mountains near by. Descriptions 
of the rugged character of the mountains around the head of the Arkan- 


sas, which their appearance amply justified, deterred me from making any 


a 


[ 174] 286 


attempt to reach it, which would have involved a greater length of time 
than now remained at my disposal, 

In about a quarter of an hour, we descended from the summit of ithe Pass 
into the creek below, our road having been very much controlled and inter. 
rupted by the pines and springs on the mountain side. Turning up the 
stream, we encamped on a bottom of good grass near its head, which gath- 
ers its waters in the dividing crest of the Rocky mountains, and, according 
to the best information we could obtain, separated only by the rocky, wall 
of the ridge from the head of the main Arkansas river. By the observa. 
tions of the evening, the latitude of our encampment was 39° 20' 24", and 
south of which, therefore, is the head of the Arkansas river. The stream 
on which we had encamped is the head of either the Fontaine-qui-bouit, 
a brauch of the Arkanso:, or the remotest head of the south fork of the 
Platte; as which, you will find it laid down on the map, But descending 
it only through a portion of its course, we have not been able to settle this 
point satisfactorily. 

In the evening,a band of buffalo furnished a little excitement, by charging 
through the camp. 

On the following day, we descended the stream by an excellent buffalo 
trail, along the open grassy bottom of the river. On our right, the bayou 
was bordered by a mountainous range, crested with rocky aud naked peaks; 
and belaw, it had a beautiful park-like character of pretty level prairies, in- 
terspersed among, low spurs, wooded openiy with pine and quaking asp, 
contrasting well with the denser pines which swept around on the moun- 
tain sides. Descending always the valley of the stream, towards noon we 
descried a mounted party descending the point of a spur, and, judging them 
to be Arupahoes—-who, defeated or victorious, were equally dangerous to 
us, and with whom a fight would be inevitable—we hurried to post our- 
selves as strongly as possible on some willow islands in the river. We had 
scarcely halted when they arrived, proving to be a party of Utah women, 
who told us that ou the other side of the ridge their village was fighting 
with the Arapvhoes. 
filled the air with cries and lamentations, which made us understand that 
some of, their chiefs had been killed. 

Extending along the river, directly ahead of us, was a low piney ridge, 
leaving between it and the stream a small open bottom, on which the 
Utahs had very. injudiciously placed their village, which, according to the 
women, numbered about 300 warriors. Advancing in the cover of the 
pines, the Arapahoes, about daylight, charged into the village, driving off 
a great number of their horses, and killing four men; among them, the 
principal chief of the village. They drove the horses perhaps a mile be- 
yond the village, to the end of a hollow, where they had previously forted 
at the edge of the pines. Here the Utahs had instantly attacked them in 
turn, and, according to the repgrt of the women, were getting rather the 
best of the day. . The women pressed us eagerly to join with their people, 
and would immediately have provided us with the. best horses at the vil- 
lage; but it was not for us to interfere in such a conflict. . Neither party 
were our friends, or under our protection ; and each was ready to prey 
upon us that could. But we could not help feeling an unusual excitement 
at.being within a few hundred yards of a fight, in which 500 men were 
closely engaged, and hearing the sharp cracks of their rifles. _We were in 
a bad position, and subject to be attacked in it. Either party which we 


As soon as they had given us this information, they, 


might 'me 
ing up in 
between 
us notice 
was imm 
of people 
who wer 
crossing 
fifteen mi 
short dist¢ 

During 
and, froi 
familiar o 
were the 
it were tl 
smooth pl 

The n 
Pike’s Pe 
crossed a 
involved ¢ 
prairie pli 
very inter 
river, and 
in the up 
after a fey 
which thie 
trails we | 
the more ¢ 

During 
by its stee 
the Wind 
bottom, w 
little strea 
riance of 
on the cre 
ulus angi 
circumferc 
shrubby t 

After s 
ourselves 
immediate 
In the afte 
be'toms, | 
camped n: 
Arkausas 
had recen 
and drivit 
mouth of 
a number 
thriving c 
éstablishe 

June 3 


ugth of time 


it of the Pass 
ed and inter. 
rning up the 
,» Which gath- 
nd, according 
e rocky: wall 
the observa. 
20' 24", and 

The stream 
ne-qui-bouit, 
n fork of the 
t descending 
to settle this 


by charging 


allent buffalo 
it, the bayou 
naked peaks; 
| prairies, in 
quaking asp, 
n the moun- 
ds noon we 
udging them 
langerous to 
to post our- 
yer. We had 
itah women, 
was fighting 


erstand that 


piney ridge, 
b which the 
rding to the 
over of the 
, driving off 
g them, the 
sa mile be- 
ously forted 
ed them in 
P rather the 
heir people, 
s at the vil- 
either party 
dy to prey 
excitement 
)men were 
ye were in 
which we 


vation, they, 


287 [ 174] 
might ‘meet, victorious or defeated, was certain to fall upon us; and, gear- 
ing up immediately, we kept close along the pines of the ridge, having it 
between us and the village, and keeping the scouts on the summit, to jive 
us notice of the approach of Indians, As we passed by the village, which 
was immediately below us, horsemen were galloping to and fro, and groups 
of people were gathered around those who were wounded and dead, and 
who were being brought in from the field. We continued to press on, and, 
crossing another fork, which came in from the right, after having made 
fifteen miles from the village, fortified ourselves strongly in the pines, a 
short distance from the river. ' 

During the afternoon, Pike’s Peak had been plainly in view before us, 
and, fromm our encampment, bore N, 87° E. by compass, This' was a 
familiar object, and it had for us the face of an old friend. At its foot 
were the springs, where we had speut a pleasant day in coming out, Near 
it were the habitatious of civilized men; aud it overlooked the broad 
smooth plains, which promised us an easy journey to our home, 

The next day we left the river, which continued its course towards 
Pike’s Peak ; aud taking a southeasterly direction, in: about ten miles we 
crossed a gentle ridge, and, issuing from the South Park, found ourselves 
involved among the broken spurs of the mountains which border the great 
prairie plains, Although} broken and extremely rugged, the country was 
very interesting, being well watered by numerous affluents to the Arkansas 
river, and covered with grass and a variety of trees. ‘The streams, which, 
in the upper part of their course, ran through grassy and open hollows, 
after a few miles all descended into deep and impracticable caiions, through 
which they found their way to the Arkansas valley. Here the buffalo 
trails we had followed were dispersed among the hills, or crossed over iato 
the more open valleys of other streains, 

During the day our road was fatiguing and difficult, reminding us much, 
by its steep and rocky character, of our travelling the year before among 
the Wind river mountains; but always at night we found some grassy 
bottom, which afforded us a pleasantcamp. Iu the deep seclusion of these 
little streams, we found always au abundgnt pasturage, and a wild luxu- 
riance of plants and trees. Aspens and pines were the prevailing timber; 
on the creeks, oak was frequent ; but the narrow-leaved cottonwood, (pop- 
ulus angustifolia,) of unusually large size, and seven or eight feet in 
circumference, was the principal tree. With, these were mingled a variety of 
shrubby trees, which aided to make the yavines almost impenetrable. 

After several days’ laborious travelling, we succeeded in extricating 
ourselves from the mountains, and on the morning. of the 28th encamped 
immediately at their foot, on a handsome tributary to the Arkansas river. 
In the afternoon we descended the stream, winding our way along the 
be'toms, which were densely wooded with oak, and in the evening en- 
camped near the main river. Continuing the next day our road along the 
Arkausas, and meeting on the way.a war party of Arapahoe Indians, (who 
had recently been committing some outrages at Bent’s fort, killing stock 
aud driving off horses,) we arrived before sunset at the Pueblo, near the 
mouth of the Fontuine-qui-bouit river, where we had the pleasure to find 
a number of our old acquaintances. The little settlement appeared in a 
thriving condition ; and in the interval of our absence another had been 
éstablished on the river, some thirty miles above. ' 

June 30.—Our cavalcade moved rapidly down the Arkansas, along the 


[174] 288 


broad road which follows the river, and on the Ist of July we arrived at 
Beunt’s fort, about 70 miles below the mouth of the Fon/faine-qui-bouit, 
As we emerged into view from the groves on the river, we were saluted 
with a display of the national flag and repeated discharges from the guns 
of the fort, where we were received by Mr. George Bent with a cordial 
welcome and a friendly hospitality, in the enjoyment of which we spent 
several very agreeable days. We were now in the region where our 
mountaineers were accustomed to live ; and all the dangers and difficulties 
of the road being considered past, four of them, including Carson and 
Walker, remained at the fort. 

On the 5th we resumed our journey down the Arkansas, travelling along 
a broad wagon road, and encamped about twenty miles below the fort. 
On the way we met a very large village of Sioux and Cheyenne Indians, 
who, with the Arapahoes, were returning from the crossing of the Arkan- 
sas, where they had been to meet the Kioway and Camanche Indians, 
A few days previous they had massacred a party of fifteen Delawares, 
whom they had discovered in a fort on the Smoky Hill river, losing in the 
affair several of their own people. They were desirous that we should 
bear a pacific message to the Delawares on the frontier, from whom they 
expected retaliation ; and we passed through them without any difficulty 
or delay. Dispersed over the plain in scattered bodies of horsemen, and 
family groups of women and children, with dog trains carrying baggage, and 
long lines of pack horses, their appearance was picturesque and imposing. 

Agreeably to your instructions, which required me to complete, as far as 
practicable, our examinations of the Kansas, I left at this encampment the 
Arkansas river, taking a northeasterly direction across the elevated dividing 
grounds which separate that river from the waters of the Platte. On the 
7th we crossed a large stream, about forty yards wide, and one or two feet 
deep, flowing with a lively current on a sandy bed. The discolored and 
muddy appearance of the water indicated that it proceeded from recent 
rains; and we are inclined to consider this a branch of the Smoky Hill 
river, although, possibly, it may be the Pawnee fork of the Arkansas. Be- 
yond this stream we travelled oveg high and level prairies, halting at small 
ponds and holes of water, and using for our fires the bois de vache, the 
country being without timber. On the evening of the 8th we encamped 
in a cottonwood grove on the banks of a sandy stream bed, where there 
was water in holes sufficient for the camp. Here several hollows, or dry 
ereeks with sandy beds, met together, forming the head of a stream which 
afterwards proved to be the Smoky Hill fork of the Kansas river. 

The next morning, as we were leaving our encampment, a number of 
Arapahoe Indians were discovered. They belonged to a war party which 
had scattered over the prairie in returning from an expedition against the 
Pawnees. 

As we travelled down the valley, water gathered rapidly in the sandy 
bed from many little tributaries; and at evening it had become a hand- 
some stream; fifty to eighty feet in width, with a lively current in small 
channels, the water being principally dispersed among quicksands. 

Gradually enlarging, in a few days’ march it became a river eighty 
yards in breadth, wooded with occasional groves of cottonwood. Our road 
was generally over level uplands bordering the river, which were closely 
covered with a sward of buffalo grass. 

Qn the 10th we entered again the buffalo range, where we had found these 


animal 
numer 
us tot 
A fe 
river 
the wis 
ous ra 
floodi 
in bret 
from t 
so sud 
coliect 
destro 
On 
moutl 
Readi 
Pawn 
who r 
rectly 
who 
had n 
with 
fail to 
The | 
prove 
delay 
from 
Th 
Arka 
succe 
dure 
strag: 
bega 
and | 
innu 
the 1 
rive! 
A 
itsel! 
beat 
mos 
oy 
try 
sude 
sens 
T 
wit 
am 


arrived at 
e-gui-bouit, 
ere saluted 
bm the guns 
th a cordial 
h we spent 

where our 
id difficulties 
Carson and 


velling along 
ow the fort, 
me Indians, 
f the Arkan. 
che Indians, 
Delawares, 
losing in the 
t we should 
whom they 
by difficulty 
Drsemen, and 
baggage, and 
imposing. 
ete, as far as 
ampment the 
ated dividing 
tte. On the 
e or two feet 
scolored and 
from recent 
Smoky Hill 
causas. Be- 
lting at small 
fe vache, the 
e encamped 
where there 
lows, or dry 
tream which 
iver, 
| number of 
party which 
against the 


1 the sandy 
me a hand- 
nt in small 
nds. 

iver eighty 
. Our road 
vere closely 


found these 


289 [ 174] 


animals so abundant on our outward journey, and halted for a day among 
numerous herds, in order to make a provision of meat suflicient to carry 
us to the frontier. 

A few days afterwards, we encamped, in a pleasant evening, on a high 
river prairie, the stream being less than a hundred yards broad. During 
ihe night we had a succession of thunder storms, with heavy and continue 
ous rain, and towards morning the water suddenly burst over the banks, 
flooding the bottoms, and becoming a large river, five or six hundred yards 
in breadth. The darkness of the night and incessant rain had concealed 
from the guard the rise of the water; and the river broke into the camp 
so suddenly, that the baggage was instantly covered, and all our pevishable 
coliections almost entirely ruined, and the hard labor of many months 
destroyed in a moment. 

On the 17th we discovered a large village of Indians encamped at the 
mouth of a handsomely wooded stream on the right bank of the river. 
Readily inferring, from the nature of the encampment, that they were 
Pawnee Indians, and confidently expecting good treatment from a people 
who receive regularly an annuity from the Government, we proceeded di- 
rectly to the village, where we found assembled nearly all the Pawnee tribe, 
who were now returning from the crossing of the Arkansas, where they 
had met the Kioway and Camanche Indians. We were received by them 
with the nnfriendly rudeness and characteristic insolence which they never 
fail to dispsay Whenever they find an occasion fur doing su with impunity. 
The little that remained of our goods was distributed among them, but 
proved entirely insuflicient to satisfy their greedy rapacity; and, after some 
delay, and considerable diiliculty, we succeeded in extricating ourselves 
from the village, and encamped on the river about fifteen miles below.” 

The country through which we had been travelling since leaving the 
Arkansas river, for a distance of 260 miles, presented to the eye ouly a 
succession of far-stretching green prairies, covered with the unbroken ver- 
dure of the buffalo grass, and sparingly wooded along the streams with 
straggling trees an occasional groves of cottonwood; but here the countr 
began perceptibly to change its character, becoming a more fertile, wooded, 
and beautiful region, covered witha profusion of grasses, and watered with 
innumerable little streams, which were wooded with oak, large elms, and 
the usual varieties of timber common to the lower course of the Kansas 
river. 

As we advanced, the country steadily improved, gradually assimilating 
itself in appearance to the northwestern part of the State of Missouri. The 
beautiful sward of the buffalo grass, which is regarded as the best and 
most nutritious found on the prairies, appeared now only in patches, being 
replaced by a longer and coarser grass, which covered the face of the coun- 
try luxuriantly. The difference in the character of the grasses became 
suddenly evident in the weakened condition of our animals, which began 
sensibly to fail as soon as we quitted the buffalo grass. 

The river preserved a uniform breadth of eighty or a hundred yards, 
with broad bottoms continuously timbered with large cottonwood trees, 
among which were interspersed a few other varieties. 


* In a recent report to the department, from Major Wharton, who visited the Pawnee villages 
with a military force some months afterwards, it is stated that the Indians had intended to attack 
our party during the night we remained at this encampment, but were prevented by the interposition 
of the Pawnee Loups. 

19 


[174] 290 


While engaged in crossing one of the numerous creeks which frequently 
impeded and checked our vie sometimes obliging us to ascend them tor 
several miles, one of the people (Alexis Ayot) was shot sir hg the leg by 
the accidental discharge of a rifle—a mortifying and painful mischance, 
to be crippled for life by an accident, afier having nearly accomplished jn 
safety a long and eventful journey. [He was a young man of remarkably 
good and cheerful temper, and had been among the useful and efficient 
men of the party, 

After having travelled directly along its banks for two hundred and 
ninety miles, we left the river, where it bore suddenly off in a northwesterly 
direction, towards its junction with the Republican fork of the Kansas, dis. 
tant about sixty miles; and, continuing our easterly course, in about twenty 
miles we entered the wagon road from Santa Fé to Independence, and on 
the last day of July encamped again at the little town of Kansas, on the 
banks of the Missouri river, 

During our protracted absence of fourteen months, in the course of which 
we had necessarily been exposed to great varieties of weather and of climate, 
no one case of sickness had ever occurred among us. 

Here ended our land journey; and the day following our arrival, we 
found ourselves on board a steamboat rapidly gliding down the broad 
Missouri. Our travel-worn animals liad not been sold and dispersed over 
the country te renewed labor, bui were placed at good pasturage on the 
frontier, and are now ready to do their part in the coming expedition. 

On the 6th of August we arrived at St. Louis, where the party was 
finally disbanded; a great number of the men having their homes in the 
neighborhood, . 

Andreas Fuentes also remained here, having readily found employment 
for the winter, and is one of the men engaged to accompany me the present 

ear. 

Pablo Hernandez remains in the family of Senator Benton, where he is 
well taken care of, and conciliates good will by his docility, intelligence, and 
amiability. General Almonte, the Mexican minister at Washington, to 
whom he was of course made known, kindly offered to take charge ot 
him, and to carry him back to Mexico; but the boy preferred to remain 
where he was until he got an edncation, for which he shows equal ardor 
and aptitude. 

Our Chinook Indian had his wish to see the whites fully gratified. He 
accompanied me to Washington, and, after remaining several months at 
the Columbia college, was sent by the Indian department to Philadelphia, 
where, among other things, he learned to read and write well, and speak 
the English language with some fluency. 

He will accompany me in a few days to the frontier of Missouri, whence 
he will be sent with some one of the emigrant companies to the village at 
the Dalles of the Columbia. 

Very respectfully, your obedient servant, 


J. C. FREMONT, 
Bt. Capt. Topl. Engineers. 


July 


291 


lich frequently = a sine 

ugh the leg by 

‘ul mischance, aLowe 

complished in " BOA ‘RAVELLED BY THE EXPEDITION IN 1843 AND 184, 
of remarkably TUE KOAD TR 


| and efficient 


hundred and OUTWARD JOURNEY, 
northwesterly ; 
he Kansas, dis. From Kansas Landing to Fort Vancouver. 
jabout twenty 
dence, and on 
Cansas, on the 


Locolities. 


from 
5 lardime- 


urse of which 
and of climate, 


Iistance trave!- 
led vs 
| Kansas | 


ella el Ne j 1843, | Miles. | Miles. 
7 3. A a. M les. | is ”, | 4 t we \4 
wn the broad 1343, Miles. | Miles ; 


’ 7 7 
dispersed over 


sturage on the 
‘pedition. 

he party was ! 
‘homes in the | | ‘ North fork. 


Medicine Bow river. 


1 employment 
ne the present 


' Junction of Smoky | 9! 26 | Sweet Water. 
| Hill and Repub- 
1, Where he is liean forks. 


J 
elligence, and ms, 1,162 | South Pass. 
Yashington, to : 9 oe 
ike charge ot | | 1,221 | Green river, or Rio 
red to remain & | Colorado. 
rs equal ardor 5 | 1,247 
1,268 
1,300 
1,328 
1,358 
1,384 
1,421 
1,433 
1,455 
1,463 | Beer Spsings. 
1,484 
1,505 
1,532 
1,549 
1,568 
South fork. 1594 
1,616 
| 1,633 
St. Vrein’s fort. ‘ 1,636 | Mouth of Bear river. 
1,642 
1,669 
| 1,694 


tratified. He 
ral months at 
Philadelphia, 
ell, and speak 


Crossing of the Re- || 


souri, whence publican. 


the village at 


LONT, 
Engineers. 


292 


Tuble of distances—Continued, 


Localities, Localities. 


1843, ‘les, Miles, 
Shore of the Salt | Oct. 9 3,954 
lake. 2 9,256) Port Bois, 
Teland in the Salt 2,276 | 
lake, 2,503 
4,929 
2,346 | 
2,71 
2,584 | 
2,405 | 
2,425 
1,883 | | 2,446 
1,906 Fort Hall. | 2,468 | 
1,018 | 2,463 | 
1,928 | American fulla on 2,470 | 
Lewis's fork. 2,407 
1,941 | 2,515, 
| 1,968 | 2,518) Fort Nes Peres, ut 
1,978 | the mouth of Ww 
2,008 | lahwalah river. 
2,027 | 0 2,697 
| 2,053 | 2,556 | 
2,069 | | 2,577 | 
| 2,098 | | | 2,603 | 
12,014 | 3 2,626 
2,133 | 2,615 
2,662 
2,676 | Dalles. 
. 2,766 | Fort Vancouver. 


earoaverwe 


HOMEWARD JOURNEY. 


From the Dalles to the Missouri river. 


2| Bs 


Localities. Localities. 


Distance travel- 
led each day. 
Distanee travel- | 
led each day. | 


1843, anes Miles. 


Tlamath lake. 


293 


Tuble of distances—Continued, 


. ——S— 


r 


Localities. 


7 24 


— e SO I | TS TT | ST 


1949, Miles, Miles. 1344, | Miles, Miles, 
Dee. 14 "1 Pil || Feb, 20 3 1,001 | Summit of the Sierra 
1b 4i | JOY | Nevada, 
16 MT) ole | Summer lake, | 21 5 | 1,006 


del dy | tel 
Date. i! i Localities. Date, |! i Localities, 


ort Boiss, 


7 6 B84 | a2 8 1,008 : 
18 20 bt 33 5 1,014 
i gt | 865) 24) 12 1,026 ( 
20, 26 | SOL | Lake Abert, 25 6141, O40 
ai) 6 | aor! 26 14 | 1,084 
23 89 | 426 | 37k 41,086 
2) 7 | 433 28 «610 | 1,065 
24 13-446 | Christmas lake, | March! | 6 | 1,071 
a 4 460 | 2&3 10 1081 
26 at | 481 | 4 4 1,089 
37| 24 | 505 } 5) 90 1,108 
28 O16 521 6 34 1,142) Nueva Helvetia. 
20 646 | 66 | 24 16 1,168 
3O| 17 | 658 25 Im | 1,176 
prt Nez Pered, x 31} Ie | 571 ’ 2600 21 1,197 
the mouth of W,. 2 42 | 1,239 
lahwalah river, 1844, | 28 17 | «1,256 
Jon. 1 | 20 591 | 20 @ | 1,264 
2) 25 616 | April 1 | 10 | 1,274 
3/ 7 | 623 22 «1,296 


4 7 | 630 4 1s 1,314 
5 2 632 5 87 1,351 
6) 15 647 | Great Boiling spring. 6 15 | 1,866 

7 

8 

ot) 


) Il | 658 50 | «1,416 
10 10 668 


lles. 6 | 1,422 


rt Vancpuvor, 


— 
pas 


11 | 10 | 678 | | 1,453 
12 «6 | 684 | Pyramid lake. | 10 40 | 1,493 


13 12 696 11 24 «1,517 


— 14) 9 | 705 12 | 16 | 1,592 
15 | 12 | 77 13 27 =~ «1,659 |} Pass in the Sierra 
16| 18 | 735 | | Nevada. 
17} 22 | 757 | 14| 32 | 1,591 
18| 8 | 765 ‘| 15 | 32 | 1,623 
ere 19| 18 | 783 17| 39 | 1,662 
20; 5 | 788 | 18 | 3 | 1,665 
21, 24 | B12 | 19 15 | 1,680 
ie 22) 14 | 826 | 20 | 33 | 1,713 | Spanish trail at Mo- 
Localities, 23 | 25 | 851 | | hahve river, 
24! 20 871 | 22 20 | 1,733 
25 | 25 | 896 23 33 | 1,766 
27| 12 | 908 a4 | 8 | 1,774 
—— 28 | 12 | 920 25 | 25 | 1,799 
29/ 7 | 927 27 | 43 | 1,842 
30} 11 | 938 28 | 12 | 1,654 
31 | 26 | 964 29| 7 | 1,861 
Feb. 2/| 16 980 30 | 24 | 1,885 
3; 7 | 987 May 1]! 15 | 1,900 
4| 3 | 990 2/ 12 | 1,912 
7| 4 | 994 3, 18 | 1,930 
ath lake, 8} 1 | 995 4| 67 | 1,987 
1a0| 3 | 998 6' 18 | 2,005 | Rio Virgen. 


1844. 
May 7 
8 


9 
10 
il 
12 
13 


15 | 


16 
17 
19 
20 
2 
22 
23 
24 
25 


j 
' 
' 


istance travel- | 
led each day- 


| 


Miles. 


10 


2,015 
| 2,033 
| 2,034 | 
2,058 

| 2,070 

2,084 | 
| 2,099 

| 2,120 | 
2, 137 | 
2,154 
2,181 | 
2,203 

2,234 | 
2,257 | 
2,269 
2,292 


| 
| Localities. 


Miles. | | 


294 


Tuble of distances—Continued. 


a oe 
Localities. 


1844. | Miles. 


Miles. 


Bayou Salade, (South 
Park. ) 


Vegas de Santa Clara. | 


| 3,063 | Pueblo, on the Ar- 


H kansas. 
3,100 

| July 3 | 3,133 
5 3,153 
3, 184 

3,215 
3, 243 | Head water of Smoky 
Utah lake. | Hill fork of the 


Bent’s fort. 


Sevier river. 


Kansas. 
3,270 
3,298 
3,322 
| 3,352 
3,362 
3,385 
3,417 


| 
\ 
| 


Uintah fort. 


Green river, (Brown’s 
hole. ) | 


} 


New Park. 


Old Park. 


Kansas landing 
Missouri river. 


Nalure 4 
and 
direct 
State 


The 
vegetab 
So univ 
try, wit 
formatiq 
than co 
jects. 
at the s 

and foss 
ders the 
to opin 

The 

tion; b 

ersed t 

west fi 

varies 
mens | 

tion e 

of the 

west 
the ) 


alities, 


lade, (South 


bn the Ar. 


t of Smoky 
of the 


g 


293 [ 174 ] 


APPENDIX. 


A. 
GEOLOGICAL FORMATIONS. 


Nature of the geological formations occupying the portion of Oregon 
and North California included in a geographical survey under the 
direction of Captain Fréimont: by James Hall, pulwontologist to the 
State of New York. 


The main geographical features of every country, as well as its soils and 
vegetable productions, depend upon the nature of its geological formations. 
So universally true is this, that a suite of the rocks prevailing in auy coun- 
try, with their mineral and fossi! contents, will convey more absolute in- 
formation regarding the agricultural and other capabilities of that country, 
than could be given by a volume written without referciuce to these sub- 
jects. Indeed, no survey of any unknown region should be made without 
at the same time preserving collections of the prevailing rocks, minerals, 
and fossils. The attention given to this subject in the foregoing report ren- 
ders the information of the highest value, and perfectly reliable in reference 
to opinions or calculations regarding the resources of the country. 

The speciineus examined present a great variety of aspect aud composi- 
tion; but calcareous rocks prevail over a large portion of the country trav- 
ersed between longitude 98° and the mouth of the Columbia river, or 122° 
west from Greenwich. ‘That portion of the route embraced in this notice 
varies in latitude through seven degrees, viz: 38° to 45° north; and speci- 
mens are presented in nearly every half degree of latitude. Such a collec- 
tion enables us to forma very satisfactory conclusion regarding this portion 
of the country, 7° in width and 24° in length; having an extent east and 
west equal to the distance between the Atlantic coast of New York and 
the Mississippi river, and lying in the temperate latitudes, which extend 
from Washington city to the northern limit of the State of New York. 

Although we are far from being able to fix the minute or detailed geol- 
ogy, this collection presents us with sufficient materials to form some prob- 
able conclusions regarding the whole region from this side of the Rocky 
mountains westward to the mouth of the Columbia river. But it is not 
within my province to dwell upon the advantages opened to us in the vast 
field which the researches of Captain Frémont have made known. _I there- 
fore proceed toa description of the specimens as they occur, taking them in 
the order from east to west. This, in connexion with the section of alti- 
tudes on which the rocks are marked, will show the comparative extent of 
different formations. 

Longitude 963°, latitude 383°; O¢/er creek.—The single specimen from 
this locality is a yellowish, impure limestone, apparently containing organic 
remains, whose structure is obliterated by crystallization. from its posi- 


[ 174 ] 296 


tion relatively to the formations farther east, I am inclined to refer it to the 
cretaceous formation. 

Longitude 98°, latitude 39°; Smoky Hill river.—The specimens from this 
locality are numbered 26, 29, 31,33,and88, They all bear a similar char. 
acter, and the fossils are alike in each. The rock is an impure limestone, 
pretty compact, varying in color from dull yellowish to ashy brown, and 
abounding in shells of a species of Inoceramus. (See description.) 

This rock probably: belongs to the cretaceous formation; the lower part 
of which has been indicated by Dr. Morton as extending into Louisiana, 
Arkansas, and Missouri. 

Although the specimens from this locality bear a more close resemblance 
to the upper part of the formation, I do not feel justified in referring them 
to any other period. This formation evidently underlies large tracts of 
country, and extends far towards the base of the Rocky mountains. 

Longitude 105°, latitude 39°.—The specimens from this locality are a 
somewhat porous, light-colored limestone, tough and fine grained. One 
or two fragments of fossils from this locality still indicate the cretaceous 
period; but the absence of any perfect specimens must deter a positive 
opinion upon the precise age of the formation. One specimen, however, 
from its form, markings, and fibrous structure, I have referred to the genus 
inoceramus. 

It is evident, from the facts presented, that little of important geological 
change is observed in travelling over this distance of 7 degrees of longi- 
tude. But at what depths beneath the surface the country is underlaid by 
this formation, I have no data for deciding. Its importance, however, must 
not be overlooked. A calcareous formation of this extent is of the greatest 
advantage to a country; and the economical facilities hence afforded in 
agriculture, and the uses of civilized life, cannot be overstated. 

The whole formation of this region is probably, with some variations, 
an extension of that which prevails through Louisiana, Arkansas, and 
Missouri. 

The strata at.the locality last mentioned are represented as being verti- 
cal, standing against the eastern slope of the Rocky mountains, immediately 
below Pike’s Peak. 

Longitude 106°, latitude 41°.—At this point, although only one degree 
west of the last-named specimens, we find a total change in the geology 
of the region. The specimens are of a red feldspathic granite, showing a 
tendency to decomposition ; and, from the information accompanying the 
same, this rock overlies a mass of similar granite, in more advanced stages 
of decomposition. The specimens present nothing peculiar in their ap- 
pearance; and the only apparent difference between these and the ordinary 
red feldspathic granites of more eastern localities, is their finer grain and 
dingy color. 

Longitude 1079, latitude 414°.—The specimens from this locality are of 
crystalline feldspathic granite, of a flesh-red color, apparently not acted on 
by the weather, and presenting the common appearance of this kind of 
granite in other localities. 

No. 95, “above the third bed of coal, in the lower hill, North fork of the 
Platte river,” is a siliceous clay slate, having a saline taste. 

Longitude 110°, latitude 414°; Nos. 99 and 104.—No. 99 is a fine- 
grained, soft, argillaceous limestone, of a light ash color, evidently a modern 
formation; but, from the absence of fossils, it would be unsatisfactory to 


assign it 
104, is a ¢ 
from the ¢ 
limestone 
Longit 
very pec 
calcareou 
to the at 
Jersey; b 
second sp 
green li 
attracted 
which ap 
cidental, 
appeared 
decompos' 
Longit 
yellowish 
rock is 2 
tinguished 
quite crys 
stance, th 
conclusio! 
jon with t 
lish oolite 
of the pre 
from this 
which wo 
A few | 


» AS 
' serieS of : 
| destitute | 


are proba 
specimen 
of N. 65° 
that the 1 
sociated 1 
fering in 


Sandston 
Coal 
Coal 
Indurate 
Clay 
Coal 
Clay 
Coal 
Clay 
Coal 


The s 
. it are ty 


ar it to the 


3 from this 
nilar char. 
limestone, 
rown, and 
n.) 

ower part 
,ouisiana, 


emblance 
ring them 
) tracts of 
ins, 

lity area 
ed. One 
retaceous 
A positive 
however, 
he genus 


reological 
of longi- 
erlaid by 
ver, must 
» greatest 
forded in 


rriations, 
sas, and 


g verti- 
ediately 


e degree 
geology 
owing a 
ing the 
d stages 
leir ap- 
rdinary 
ain and 


are of 
ted on 
kind of 


of the: 


a fine- 
nodern 


ory to 


297 [174] 


assign it any place in the scale of formations. The other specimen, No. 
104, is a compact serpentine, having the aspect of a greenstone trap; and, 
from the account given, is probably interstratified with the limestone. The 
limestone is more friable and chalky than any specimen previously noticed. 

Longitude 1104°, latitude 414°—The specimens from this locality are 
very peculiar and remarkable. The first is a friable or pulverulent green 
calcareous sand, unctuous to the touch, but remaining shattered on exposure 
to the atmosphere, Its character is very similar to the green sands of New 
Jersey; but it is of a brighter color, and less charged with iron, The 
second specimen is of similar composition, but quite solid—being, in fact, a 
green limestone. The singularity of the specimen, and that which first 
attracted my attention, was the efflorescence of a salt upon its surface, 
which appears to be, in part, chloride of sodium: Supposing this to be ac- 
cidental, | broke a specimen, and, after a day or two, a similar efflorescence 
appeared from 1: fresh fracture ; leaving no doubt but the salts arise from 
decomposition stances within the stone itself. 

Longitude 1! |’ ‘stitude 414°; Muddy river.—These specimens are of a 
yellowish-gray oolitic limestone, containing turbo, cerithium, &c. The 
rock is a perfect oolite; and, both in color and texture, can scarcely be dis- 
tinguished from specimens of the Bath oolite. One of the specimens is 
quite crystalline, and the oolitic structure somewhat obscure. In this in- 
stance, the few fossils observed seem hardly sufficient to draw a decisive 
conclusion regarding the age of the formation; but, when taken in connex- 
ion with the oolitic structure of the mass, its correspondence with the Eng- 
lish oolites, and the modern aspect of the whole, there remains less doubt 
of the propriety of referring it to the oolitic period. A further collection 
from this interesting locality would doubtless develop a series of fossils, 
which would forever settle the question of the relative age of the formation. 

A few miles up this stream, Captain Frémont has collected a beautiful 
serieS of specimens of fossil ferns. The rock is an indurated clay, wholly 


| destitute of carbonate of lime, and would be termed a “fire clay.” These 


are probably, geologically as well as geographically, higher than the oolite 
specimens, as the rocks at this place were observed to dip in the direction 
of N. 65° W. at an angle of 20 degrees. This would show, conclusively, 
that the vegetable remains occupy a higher position than the oolite. As- 
sociated with these vegetable remains, were found several beds of coal, dif- 
fering in thickness. The section of strata at this place is as follows: 


ft. in. 
Sandstone - - - ° s ‘ P eee ee 
Coal - - : . a : ” a 3.8 
Coal - ‘. - * . : ‘ < -$ 8 
Indurated clay, with vegetable remains - . - - 20 0 
Clay - - - - - : “ - 5 0 
Coal - - - ‘ 7 a ‘ 
Clay : : . - . : - 5 0 
Coal - - - - : ‘ ‘ 
Clay : - - - - - - - 5 0 
Coal - - - : < je . A 


The stratum containing the fossil ferns is about 20 feet thick ; and above 


| it are two beds of coal, each about 15 inches. These are succeeded by a 


( 174 J 998 


bed of sandstone. Below the bed containing the ferns, there are three dis- 
tinct beds of coal, each separated by about 5 feet of clay. Before examin- 
ing the oolitic specimens just mentioned, I compared these fossil ferns with 
a large collection from the coal measures of Pennsylvania and Ohio, and it 
was quite evident that this formation could not be of the same age. There 
are several specimens which I can only refer to the Glossopteris Phillipsii, 
(see description,) an oolitic fossil; and this alone, with the general charac- 
ter of the other species, and the absence of the large stems so common in 
the coal period, had led me to refer them to the oolitic period. 1 conceive, 
however, that we have scarcely sufficient evidence to justify this reference; 
and though among the fossil shells there are none decidedly typical of the 
oolite, yet neither are they so of any other formation; and the lithological 
character of the mass is not reliable evidence. Still, viewed in whatever 
light we please, these fossil ferns must, I conceive, be regarded as mostly 
of new species, and in this respect form a very important addition to the 
flora of the more modern geological periods. 

In passing from this locality westward to the Bear river, Captain Frémont 
crossed a high mountain chain, which is the dividing ridge between the 
waters of Muddy river flowing eastward, and those of Muddy creek flow- 
ing into Bear river on the ‘vest. The gap where the ridge was crossed is 
stated to be $,200 feet above the level of the sea. In this ridge, 115 miles 
to the southward of the locality of the fossils last mentioned, were collected 
the specimens next to be named. These were obtained near the summit 
of the ridge, and probably higher than the point where Captain Frémont’s 
party crossed. 

The collection from this locality (longitude 111°, latitude 40°) consists 
of several specimens of an argillaceous, highly bituminous, and somewhat 
slaty limestone, loaded with fossils, It is very brittle, and easily shivered 
into small fragments by a blow of the hammer. Its natural color is a light 
sepia, but it bleaches on exposure to ihe atmosphere. In structure, it is not 
unlike some of the limestones of the lias or oolite formations. The fossils 
are chiefly one species of Cerithium and one of Mya; and besides these 
another species of Cerithium and a Nucula can be identified. So far as I 
am able to ascertain, these fossils are undescribed, and will therefore be 
regarded as new species. 

It may be considered premature to decide upon the geological position of 
this mass. It may belong to the same period, though far higher in the 
series than those in the same longitude, which have just been described. 
In the locality of the fossil plants, the strata dip W. by N.; but, from the 
structure of the country, it is evident that there is a change in the direction 
of the dip before reaching the high ridge from which the specimens under 
consideration were taken. Further examination, I have no doubt, will set 
this question at rest. 

I may here notice the interesting fact of the wide extent of these forma- 
tions, showing the existence, in this longitude, of these calcareous beds, of 
a nature precisely like those of the modern formations of western Europe. 

A few miles south of the locality of these fossils, Captain Frémont de- 
scribes the occurrence of an immense stratum of fossil salt; and the same 
ridge is represented as bounding the Great Salt lake. There would there- 
fore seem no doubt that the salt in question is associated with the strata of 
this period, and probably coeval with the same. 

I may remark, in the same connexion, that the surfaces of the specimens 


_ is, in its p 
an altere 


containin 
ride of so 
this dista 
naturally 
formation: 
This re 
its econo} 
yield to g 
Ihave be 
which ar 
nuinber. 
they have 
and the n 
fields of t 
unbroken 
parison W 
Again: 
of country 
accumula 
coal beds 
interest t 
perhaps t 
plored as 
Longit 
limestone 
of Septem 
gray colo 
and remo 
general | 
rock,.but 
Longitt 


preserved 
stone last 
The char: 
a degree 
condition 
Longit 
The colle 
These sp¢ 
1 Ab 
2. Obs 
3. Vit 
4, Av 
5. Ali 
6. Bro 
These 
tion of N 
altered b 
“ashes;”” 
pumice s 


‘e three dis- 
re examin- 
| ferns with 
Ohio, and it 
age. There 
is Phillipsii, 
eral charac- 
common in 

1 conceive, 
is reference; 
pical of the 
lithological 
in whatever 
d as mostly 
lition to the 


ain Frémont 
between the 
creek flow- 
is crossed is 
e, 115 miles 
ere collected 
the summit 
n Frémont’s 


40°) consists 
d somewhat 
sily shivered 
olor is a light 
ture, it is not 

The fosils 
besides these 

So far as I 
therefore be 


al position of 
higher in the 
en described. 
but, from. the 
the direction 
imens under 
oubt, will set 


these forma- 
eous beds, of 
tern Europe. 
Frémont de- 
hnd the same 
would there- 
the strata of 


he specimens 


is, in its present state, “ granular quartz.’’ 
/ an altered sedimentary rock, with the lines of deposition quite distinctly 


7 
: 
4 
it 


299 C 174 J 
containing the fossil ferns also effloresce a salt, which is apparently chio- 
tide of sodium. ‘This fact seems to indicate the presence of fossil salt at 
this distance north of he known locality, and is a circumstance which we 
naturally appropriate as part of the evidence of identity in the age of the 
formations. 

This region is unquestionably one of the highest interest, both as regards 
its economical resources, and equally so in the contributions which it will 
yield to geological science. In the specimens from the vegetable locality, 
Ihave been able to indicate seven or eight species of fossil ferns, most of 
which are new. Further researches will doubtless greatly multiply this 
number. Besides these, as new species probably peculiar to our continent, 
they have a higher interest, inasmuch as they show to us the wide extent 
and the nature of the vegetation of this modern coal period. In the broad 
fields of the west, we shall have an opportunity of tracing it over large and 
unbroken areas, and many highly interesting results may follow its com- 
parison with the vegetation of the true carboniferous period. 

Again: since these deposites have evidently been made over large tracts 
of country, it is not unreasonable to suppose that the quantity of materials 
accumulated will be very great, and that we may expect to find profitable 
goal beds in the rocks of this age. This subject, besides being of high 
interest to science, is of some prospective economical importance, though 
perhaps too remote to dwell upon, while the country remains so little ex- 
plored as at present. 4 

Longitude 112°, latitude 42°—The specimen No. 72 is a grayish-blue 
limestone, efflorescing a salt upon the surface, “from the Hot Salt Springs 
of September 13, 1843.”? No. 108 is a siliceous limestone of a brownish- 
gray color; where exposed, the surface becomes porous, from the solution 
and removal of the lime, while the siliceous particles remain. From the 
general lithological characters of the specimen, it is probably a modern 
rock,.but its precise age cannot be decided. 

Longitude 112°, latitude 414°—The single specimen from this locality 
It is, however, very evidently, 


preserved. This rock probably comes out from under the siliceous lime- 
stone last described, both haviug been altered by modern igneous action. 
The character of the specimens from the next locality—three-quarters of 
a degree farther west—may perhaps throw some light upon the present 
condition of those last named. 

Longitude 1122°, latitude 422°; at the American Falls of Snake river.— 
The collection from this point presents the following, in a descending order. 
These specimens are numbered 94, 96, 97, 101, 102, 106, and 107: 

1. A botryoidal or concretionary lava, No. 94. 

2. Obsidian, No. 102. 

3. Vitrified sandstone, No. 106. 

4, A whitish ash-colored chalk or limestone, No. 107. 

5. A light ashy volcanic sand, No. 97. 

6. Brown sand, volcanic. (?) 

These are all apparently volcanic products, with, probably, the excep- 
tion of Nos. 106 and 107, which may be sedimentary products; the first 
altered by heat. The two lower deposites are evidently volcanic sand or 
“ashes;” the upper of these, or No. 5, has all the characters of pulverized 
pumice stone, and is doubtless of similar origin. 


[ 174 J 300 


No. 107 is an impure limestone, but little harder than common chalk; 
and, but for its associations, would be regarded as of similar origin.” 

No. 106 is apparently a vitrified sandstone, the grains all rounded, and 
the surfaces of the mass highly polished. 

No. 102 is a beautiful black obsidian. 

No. 94 is a mammillary or botryoidal lava ; the concretions having a ra- 
diated stricture, the mass is easily frangible, and readily separates into small 
angular fragments. 

The whole of this series, with the exception of No. 107, may be regard. 
ed as of volcanic origin; for the apparently vitrified sandstone may be, in 
its composition, not very distinct from trap or basalt, though it is more vit- 
reous, and its fracture fresher and brighter. 

Longitude 1144°, latitude 424°—The specimens marked No. 3 are of 
light-colored tufaceous limestone and siliceous limestone. The speci- 
mens appear as if from sone regular formation, broken up and thinly coat- 
ed by calcareous matter from springs. From the fact observed by Captain 
Frémont, that these fragients enter largely into the composition of the soil, 
we may presume that the same is highly calcareous. 

The specimen No. 12, from the same locality, consists mainly of small 
fragments of the crust, claws, &c., of some crustacean—probably of fresh- 
water origin. There are also some vertebrae and ribs of fishes. The 
whole is so unchanged, and of such recent appearance, as to induce a belief 
that the deposite is of frésh-water origin, and due to the desiccation of some 
lake or stream. Should such a deposite be extensive, its prospective value 
to an agricultural community will be an important consideration. But, as 
before remarked, there is evidently a preponderance of calcareous matter 
throughout the whole extent of country traversed. 

Longitude 115°, latitude 43°.—The specimens from this locality are num- 
bered 16,21, and 39. Nos. 16 and 21 are angular fragments of impure 
limestone of some recent geological period, and No. 39 consists of an ag- 
gregation of pebbles and gravel. The pebbles are of black siliceous slate, 
which are represented as forming a conglomerate with the limestone frag- 
ments just mentioned. The limestone specimens are probably broken frag- 
ments from some stratum in situ in the same vicinity, and the conglom- 
erate is one of very recent formation. The slate pebbles are from a rock 
of much older date, and worn very round and smooth, while the limestone 
bears little evidence of attrition. 

The gray siliceous limestone specimens contain a species of Turritella, 
and a small bivalve shell. (See descriptions and figures.) 

Longitude 1154°, latitude 434°.—The two specimens from this locality are 
of volcanic origin. No. 46 is a reddish compact trap or lava, with small 
nodules or cavities filled with analcime and stilbite. No. 52 isa coarse 
and porous trap, or ancient lava. 

Longitude 116°, latitude 434°.—The single specimen from this place is 


* Since this was written, a specimen of No. 107 has been submitted to the examination of Pro- 
fessor Bailey, who finds it highly charged with ‘‘calcareous polythalamia” in excellent preserva- 
tion. He romarks, that ‘the forms are, many of them, such as are common in chalk and cretaceous 
marls; but as these forms are still living in our present oceans, their presence does not afford con- 
clusive evidence as to the age of the deposite in which they occur. I have, however, invariably 


found that in our tertiary deposites, the chalk polythalamia are accompanied by large species of 


genera peculiar to the tertiary. Now, as these are entirely wanting in the specimen from Captain 
Frémont, the evidence, as far as it goes, is in favor of the view that the specimen came from & 
cretaceous formation.” 


a whit 
mica i 


opinid 
Lor 
basalt 
This 1 
Lo 
basal 
rock 
Lo! 
locali 
pear | 
mica. 


on chalk; 
igin.* 
unded, and 


having a ra- 
s into small 


be regard. 
may be, in 
is more Vit- 


fo. 3 are of 
The speci- 
thinly coat- 
by Captain 
1 of the soil, 


ily of small 
ly of fresh- 
ishes. The 
luce a belief 
ion of some 
ective value 
yn. But, as 
eous matter 


ty are num- 
s of impure 
ts of an ag- 
iceous slate, 
estone frag- 
roken frag- 
1e conglom- 
from a rock 
e limestone 


’ Turritella, 


locality are 
with small 
}is a coarse 


his place is 


1ination of Pro- 
cellent preserva- 
< and cretaceous 
not afford con- 
ever, invariably 
large species of 
n from Captain 
en came from & 


301 [ 174 ] 


a white feldspathic granite, with a small proportion of quartz, and black 
mica in small scales, The specimen contains a single garnet. The struc- 
ture is somewhat slaty, and from appearances it is rapidly destructible 
from atmospheric agency. 

Longitude 117°, latitude 444°.—These specimens from Brulé river are 
numbered 4, 19, 41, and 48, 

No, 4 is a slaty limestune, partially altered, probably from the proximity 
of igneous rocks. 

No. 41 is of similar character, very thinly laminated, and of a dark 
color. 

No. 19 is of similar character, but more altered, and partiaily crystalline. 
The lines of deposition are, however, preserved. 

No, 48 has the appearance of a compact gray feldspathic lava ; but there 
are some apparent lines of depos...un still visible, which incline me to the 
opinion that it is an altered sedimentary rock. 

Longitude 11749, latitude 45°.—The specimen is a compact, dark-colored. 
basalt, showing a tendency to desquamate upon the exposed surfaces. 
This rock forms the mountains of Brulé river, 

Longitude 1174°, laiitude 454°.—The specimen No. 110 is a fine-grained 
basalt or trap, with a few small cells filled with analcime. This is of the 
rock forming the Blue mountain. 

Longitude 118°, latitude 45°°—The single specimen (No. 43) from this 
locality is apparently an altered siliceous slate. It is marked by what ap- 
pear to be lines of deposition, the thin laminz being separated by layers of 
mica. 

Longitude 119°, latitude 384°.—The specimens Nos. 14, 23, 45, and 51, 
are all from this locality. 

No. 14 appears to be a decomposed feldspar, having a slightly porous 
structure ; it is very light, and adheres strongly to the tongue. 

No, 23. A friable’ argillaceous sandstone, somewhat porous upon the ex- 
posed surfaces, : 

No. 45. A compact lava of a sienitic structure, containing obsidian. 
This specimen appears much like some of the porous portions of trap dikes 
which cut through the sienitic rocks of New England. 

No. 51. Feldspar, with a little black mica. The specimen is probably 
from a granite rock, though its structure is that of compact feldspar. 

Longitude 120°, latitude 453°.—The single specimen (No. 20) from this 
locality is a compact, fine-grained trap, or basalt, with a few round cavities 
of the size of peas. ; 

Longitude 1203°, latitude 383°.—The specimens are numbered 91, 109, 
and 117. 

No. 91 has the appearance of a porous trap, or basai, though possibly 
the production of a modern volcano. It is thickly spotted with crystals of 
analcime, some apparently segregated from the mass, and others filling ve- 
sicular cavities. 

No. 117 is a compact basalt, the specimen exhibiting the character of the 
basalt of the Hudson and Connecticut river valleys. 

No. 109 is a fine-grained granite, consisting of white quartz and feldspar, 
with black mica. Captain Frémont remarks that this rock forms the east- 
ern part of the main California mountain. From its granular and rather 
loose structure, it is to be inferred that it would undergo rapid decomposi- 

tion in a climate like ours. 


(174 J 302 


Longitude 121°, latitude 444°--The specimens from this locality are 
numbered 53, 54, 55, 56, 57, 58, 59, 60, and 61, These are characteristic 
specimens of the strata composing a bluff 700 feet high, and are numbered 
in the descending order, . 

The specimens 59, 60, and 61, are three specimens of what appear to be 
very fine clay, perfectly free from carbonate of lime, and nearly as white as 
ordinary chalk, These three nissan which are understood to be from 
three distinct strata, vary but slightly in their characters-—No. 61 being of 
the lightest color. 


No. 58 is a specimen of grayish volcanic breccia, the larger portion con- 
sisting of volcanic sand or ashes, 

Nos. 55, 56, and 57, are of the same character, being, however, nearly 
free {rom fragments or pebbles, and composed of light volcanic sand, or 
scoria, with an apparently large admixture of clay from the strata below, 
The whole is not acted on by acids, and, so far as can be judged, is of 
voleanic origin. . 

No. 58 is of similar character to the preceding three specimens, but con- 
tains more fragments, aud has a generally coarser aspect.” 

Longitude 121°, latitude 45°.--These specimens are numbered 7, 35, 40, 
47, and 49, 

No, 7 is a siliceous sinter, coated externally with hydrate of iron. 


* The specimens Nos, 59, 60, and 61, which ave trom three different but contiguous strat, 
have since been examined by Professor J. W. Bailey, of West Point, who finds them charge 
with fluviatile infusoria of remarkable forms. 

Below are descriptions (accompanied by a plate) of some of the most interesting forms, which 
were sketched by him with a camera-lucida attached to his microscope. It has not been considered 
necessary to distinguish, particularly, to which of the strata the individuals figured belong, as no 
speces occur in one, which are not present in the others. They are evidently deposites of the 
same epoch, and differ very slightly in their charucters, 

Figs. 1, 2, and 3. Side views of Kunotia librile of Ehrenberg -'Che species is figured ant 
veseribed by Ehrenberg, who received it from Real del Monte, Mexico. It resembles Lunotiu 
Westermannt, (Ehr.,) but differs in its granulations, The three figures are from individuals of 
different age. 


Figs. 4 and 5. Lunotia gibba, (Ehr.)—Identical with acommon fresh-water species now living 
at West Point. 


Fig. 6. Pinnulavia pachyptera? (Ehr.)—Ehrenberg's figure of P. pachyptera from Labrador 
is very similar to the Oregon species here represented. 

Figs. 7, 8, and 9. Cocconema cymbiforme? (Ehr.)—These are probably merely varieties of 
the sane species. Fig. 8 is rather larger than C. cymbiforme usually grows at West Point. 

Fig. 10. Gomphonema clavatum? (Ehr.)—Front view. 

Fig. 11. Gomphonema clavatum? (Ehr.)—Side view. 

Pig. 12. Gomphonema minutissinum, (Ehr.)—A cosmopolite species. 

Fig. 13. Gallionella (new species, a.)—This is evidently identical with a large species which 
I have described and figured as occurring at Dana’s locality. (See Silliman’s Journal for April, 
1845. 

Fig. 14 and 15, Gallionella, new species? 5 (a—edge view ; b—side view. )—This species 
presents remarkably compressed frustules, which are marked on their circular bases with radiant 
lines. It is pe abundant in Nos. 59 and 61. 

Fig. 16. Gallionella distane?—This very minute species constitutes the chief mass of No. 60, 
but also abounds in Nos. 59 and 61. 

Figs. 17 and 18. Cocconeis preetexta, (Ehr.)—Appears to agree with a species from Mexico 
figured by Ehrenberg. 

Fig. 19. Fragillaria ——. 

Fig. 20. Surirella ——.—A fragment only. I have seen several fragments of beautiful 
Surirelle, but have not yet found a perfect specimen to figure. 

Fig. 21. Fragillaria rhabdosoma?—Pragment. 

Figs. 22 and 23. Spicule A pecpate sponges. —Spongilla. 

Fig. 24, Four-sided crystal of —— ’ 

Fig. 25, Scale = 10-100the of millimetre magnified equally with the drawings. 


lis locality are 
8 characteristic 
are numbered 


t appear to be 
rly as white as 
ood to be from 
0. 61 being of 


er portion con. 


pwever, nearly 
Icanic sand, or 
r strata below, 

judged, is of 


r1ens, but cor. 
ered 7, 35, 40, 
of iron. 


contiguous strat, 
finds them charged 


“sting forms, which 
not been considered 
gured belong, as no 
tly deposites of the 
cies is figured and 
resembles Aunotiu 
from individuals of 
species now living 
era from Isubrador 


merely varieties of 
West Point. 


arge species which 
Journal for April, 


w.)—This species 
bases with radiant 


f mass of No. 60, 


ecies from Mexico 


ents of beautiful 


FOSSIL PRESH 


pL 


WATER INFUSORIA FHOM OREGON 


=" 


i en Mm wil ei ma ia 


sittin, ae 


Nyy 


— mm Ti 


Sal NTT 
iff) TRITATR 


fia Ee 


hae 


Wad 


oe" 


- 
TTD ANAS ta 
ett 


os a 
ye 


\\ ; 


mn ATI 
SST ICMAT 


Lith by E Weber & Co. Balt® 


—s 


i 
4 


f a 
Ai. 
i; 
mi 
fi 
i 
i 


—s 
ie eal 


> 


—— 


this 7 
36, 9 
0 


sion 
N 


retal 

Né 
matt 
of p 
» N 


(For 
N 
tion 


303 C174] 


No, 35, A reddish, rather compact lava. The color is owing to the 
presence of iron, which hastens its decomposition on exposure. 

No. 40. A reddish brecciated feldspathic lava, embracing fragments of 
light-colored siliceous sandstone or lava, 

No. 47, Compact trap, or basalt, with a few rounded cavities, This 
specimen is precisely like No, 20, longitude 120°; and, from the deserip- 
tion given, appears to be a prevailing rock along the valley of the Colum- 
bia river, 

No. 49, An imperfect striped agate, with the centre of siliceous sinter, 
This, with Nos, 7 and 40, is doubtless associated with the basalt, No. 47, 
which is the prevailing rock, 

Longitude 122°, latitude 454°; Cascades of the Columbia river.—From 
this place are the specimens numbered 9, 10, 13, 17, 18, 22, 24, 25, 27, 30, 
36, 37, 38, aud 44, : 

Of these specimens, Nos. 13 and 24 are indurated clay, with impres- 
sions of leaves of dicotyledonous plants. . 

No. 17 is a fine argillaceous sandstone, with stems and leaves, which stiil 
retain their fibrous structure, 

No. 30 is a specimen of dicotyledonous wood, partially replaced by stony 
matter, and a portion still retaining the fibrous structure and consistency 
of partially carbonized wood. 

Nos, 10, 25, 27, and 38, are specimens of coal from the same locality, 
(For further information of these, sce analysis of specimens appended. ) 

No. 22, Carbonaceous earth, with pebbles, evidently a part of the forma- 
tion to which the previous specimens are referred, 

No, 18 is a compact trap, apparently having a stratified structure. 

No. 36. A porous basaltic lava, with crystals of analcime, &c. 

No. 37. Two specimens—one a porous or rather scoriaceous lava of a 
reddish color; and the other a compact gray lava, with a few small cavities. 

No. 44. A brown scoriaceous lava. 

No, 44a. A small specimen of compact lava, 


Miscellaneous specimens. 


No. 62. A coral in soft limestone; the structure too much obliterated to 
decide its character. (From the dividing ridge between Bear creek and 
Bear river, at a point 8,200 feet above tide water.) 

‘ No, 71. Valcareous tufa, containing the remains of grasses, twigs, moss, 
iC, 

No. 81. Calcareous tufa stained with iron, 

No. 98. Ferruginous calcareous tufa, containing remains of twigs, &c. 

_ These three last-named specimens are evidently the calcareous depoxites 

irom springs holding carbonate of lime in solution, ’ 


[ 174 J 304 


Bb, 
ORGANIC REMAINS, 


Descriptions of organic remains collected by Captain J. C, Frémont, in 
the geographical survey of Oregon and North California: by Jama 
Hall, palwontologist to the State af New York. 


Piatres I anv Il. 
Fowsil ferns, ete 


The specimens here described are all from one locality, in longitude 111°, 
latitude 414°. They occur in a light-gray indurated clay, which isentirely 
free from calcareous matter, very brittle, and having a very imperfect slaty 
structure. Nearly all the species differ from any described in Brongniarts 
“ Hist, Veg. Foss.,” in Goppert’s “Systema Filicum Fossilium,” or in Phil. 
lips’s “ Geology af Yorkshire.”’ 


1, Spuenoprents Fremont. Pl, 2, figs. 3, 3 a. (No. 118 of collection, | 
Compare sphenopleris crenulata ; Brong. Hist. Veg. Foss. i, p, 187, ¢. 56,1. 3, 

Descriplion.—Frond bipinnate, (or tripinnate ?) rachis moderately strong, 
striated ; pinnae oblique to the rachis, rigid, moderately approximate, aller. 
nate; pinnules subovate, somewhat decurrent at the base, about three or 
four lobed; fructification very distinct in round dots (capsules) of carbona. 
ceous matter upon the margins of the pinnules, 3a, a portion twice mag. 
nified. 

I have named this beautiful and unique species in honor of Captain Fri. 
mount, and asa testimony of the benefits that science has derived from his 
valuable explorations on the west of the Rocky mountains. 

2, SpueNnoprents TRILOBA. PI, 1, fig. 8. (Nos, 65, 79, and 80, of collec 
tion.) 

Description.—Frond bipinnate, or tripinnate ; rachis slender, flexuous, 
+ pinnae long, flexuous, distant, opposite, perpendicular to the rachis; pin- 

nules oblong, sub-trilobate, opposite or alternate, narrow at base, distant, 
perpendicular. | 
he distant, long, and flexuous pinne, with the small trilobate pinnules, 
distinguish this species. In general features, it approaches somewhat the 
sphenopteris rigida, (Brong.,) but differs essentially in the smaller pinnules, 
which are usually nearly opposite, and in never being more than sub-trilo- 
bate, while in 8. rigida they are often deeply 5-lobed. 


3. Spoenoprentis (?) pAuciFoLia PI. 2, figs. 1, 1 a, 1 6, 1 c, 1d, (No. 
118 of collection.) 

Description.—Frond tripinnate ; rachis rather slender, with long, lateral, 
straight branches, which are slightly oblique; pinne slender, nearly at right 
angies, alternate and opposite ; pinnules minute, oval-ovate, somewhat dis 
tant, opposite or alternate, expanded or attenuate at base, sometimes deeply 
bilobed or digitate; midrib not apparent. 

This species was evidently a beautiful fern of large size, with slender, 
sparse foliage, giving it a peculiarly delicate appearance. In some of its 
varieties, (as figure 1 3,) it resembles Sphenopteris digitata; Phillips’s Geol 


~ 


» Frémont, in 
ja: by Jame 


ongitude 111°, 
hich isentirely 
mperfect slaty 
n Brongniar’s 
m,”’ or in Phil. 


of collection.) 
187,t, 56,f. 5, 
erately strong, 
Ximate, alter. 
bout three or 
8) of carbona. 
n twice mag. 


f Captain Fri. 
ived from his 


| 80, of collec. 


Jer, flexuous; 
2 rachis; pin- 
base, distant, 


bate pinnules, 
omewhat the 
aller pinnules, 
han sub-trilo- 


c, 1d. (No. 


1 long, lateral, 
1early at right 
omewhat dis- 
etimes deeply 


with slender, 
1 some of its 
hillips’s Geol 


FOSSIL FERNS 


OHRPOUON AND NOR TH CALLPORMNETA 


Yorks 
Veg. 
tion, | 
and p 
In 
whicl 
pinuu 


4, 
De 
rowit 
ceme 

Fis 
appal 
and g 
descr 


5. 


and § 
Veg, 
York 
De 
the bd 
subin 

Th 
pl. 61 
SO as 
of thi 
stallc 
same 
be re 
the si 
been 
appei 
in the 
paras 
many 
had t 
beins 


305 [ 174 ] 


Yorkshire, p. 147, pl. 8, figs. 6 and 7; Sphen. Wilhiumsoni, Brong. Hist. 
Veg. Foss., i, p. 177, t. 49, figs. 6, 7,and 8. The fossil under considera- 
tion, however, is quite a different species. In the figure 1 a, the branches 
and pinuules are more lax; figure 1 dis a magnified portion. 

In its general aspect, this fossil resembles the genus Pachypleris, to 
which I had been inclined to refer it, but for the digitate character of the 
pinuules manifested by some specimens. 


4, SpreNoPrTERts (?) TRIFOLIATA. PI. 2, figs. 2,2 a. (No. 86 of collection.) 

HMescriplion.—¥rond bipinnate; pinnw trifoliate ; pinnules elliptic, nar- 
rowing at the base; rachis slender, flexuous; fructification terminal, ra-' 
ceme-like, from the piunules graduaily becoming single aud fructiferous. 

Fig. 2 e—part of the fructiferous portion enlarged, showing the capsules, 
apparently immersed in a thickened pinnule, This is a most beautiful 
and graceful species, approaching in some respects to the S. paucifolia just 
described. 


5. Giossoprenis Puiwipsi? Pi. 2, figs. 5,5 4,5 4,5¢. (Nos. 69, 82, 
and 86, of the collection.) Compare Glossupleris Phillipsii, Brong. Hist. 
Veg, Foss., p. 225, t. 61 bis, fig. 2; Pecopleris paucifolia, Phillips’s Geol. 
Yorkshire, p. 119, pl. viii, fig. s. 

Description.—* Leaves linear lanceolate, narrow, narrowing towards 
the base and apex; nervules oblique, dichotomous, lax, scarcely distinct, 
subimmersed in the thick parenchyma.”’? Brong. wt sup., p. 225. 

The specimen fig. 5 corresponds preciscly with the figure of Brongniart, 
pl. 61 bis, fig. 5, both in form of the leaf and arrangement of the nervules, 
so as to leave little doubt of theiridentity. Figure 5is a nearly perfect leat 
of this species; fig. 5 @ is the base of another specimen, having a long foot- 
stalk ; fig. 5 6 is the base of another leaf with fructification (?); fig. 5 ¢ the 
same magnified. This structure is so partial, that it can only with doubt 
be referred to the fructification of the plant ; and it is not improbable that 
the same may be some parasitic body, or the eggs of an insect which have 
been deposited upon the leaf. Whatever this may have been, it does not 
appear to have been calcareous; and the total absence of calcareous matter 
in the rock is an objection to referring the same to flustra, or any of the 
parasitic corals, ‘The ferns are abundant in the rock at this point, and 
mauy of them unbroken, and evidently not far or long transported, which, 
had they been, would have given support to the supposition of this body 
being coral. 

I have reterred this species to the Glossopteris Phillipsii, as being the 
only description and figure accessible to me, to which this fossil bears any 
near resemblance. The geological position of that fossil is so well ascer- 
tained to be the schists of the upper part of the oolitic period, that, relying 
upon the evidence offered by a single species, we might regard it as a strong 
argument for referring all the other specimens to the same geological period. 

The two following species, or varieties of the same species, have been 
referred with doubt to the genus pecopéeris ; but a close examination shows 
the midrib only partially distinct, and in some cases scarcely visible, while 
the nervules radiate from the base. In other cases, the midrib appears well 
marked at the base, but disappears in numerous ramifications before reach- 
ing the apex. ‘The character, therefore, given by Brongniart, of “ nervo 
medio valde notuto, nec apice evanescente,” is inapplicable to these species; 

20 


[174 J 306 


but the same feature may be observed in some figured by Brongniart him- 
self. 

6. Pecorreris uNDULATA. PI, 1, figs. 1,1 a. (Nos, $3 and 118 of col- 
lection.) 

Descriplion.—Frond bipinnate ; rachis slender ; pinnie long, slightly ob- 
lique to the rachis, opposite and alternate; pinnules oblique, oval-ovate, 
broad at the base, and the lower ones sometimes lobed, gradually becom. 
ing coadunate towards the extremity of the pinnw. 

The pinnules have often an apparently continuous smooth outline ; but, 
on closer examination, they appear undulated, or indented upon the mar- 
gin; and many of them are obviously so. 


7. PecorTeris UNDULATA; var. PI. 1, figs. 2, 2.@, 2. (No. 78 of col- 
lection.) 

Description.—Frond bipinnate ; rachis slender; pinnae numerous, long, 
and gradually tapering, oblique to the rachis; pinnules oval-ovate, broad 
at base; midrib evanescent ; nervules strong, bifturcating towards the apex; 
margins lobed or indented, particularly in those near the base of the pinne, 

This species may be regarded as a variety of the ast. though the pin- 
nules are longer and less broad proportionally; but the general aspect is 
similar, and the habit of the plant precisely the same. 

The specimen fig. 2 4 can only be regarded as an extreme variety of the 
same species, which is approached in some of the enlarged pinnules, as 
fig. 2 a. 


8 Pecorrenis (?) oponropreroipes. Pl. 1, figs. 3 and 4. (Nos. 78 and 
118 of collection.) 

Description.—Frond bipinnate? pinnwe long and slender; secondary 
pinne sub-distant, gradually tapering, nearly perpendicular ; pinnules sub- 
rotund, obtuse, small, approximate, oblique, alternate, and coadunate at 
base ; nervules strong, diverging from base 3 uo distinct midrib. 

Fig. 4. A few of the pinna near the termination of a frond. 

The arrangement of the pinnules and nerves in this species strongly re- 
minds one of the Odontopleris Schlotheimii, Brong. Hist. Veg. Foss., p. 
256, t. 78, fig. 5—a fossil fern of the Pennsylvania coal measures ; but this 
is essentially different. 

The aspect of the three last-named plants is more like that of the true 
coal-measure ferns than any of the others ; but the whole association, and 
their fossil condition, demand that they should be referred to a very modern 
period. 


New gentts—TnhiCHOPTERts. 


Character.—Frond slender, flexuous, in tufts or single, branching or 
pinnate ; branches long, very slender. 


9, TRICHOPTERIS FILAMENTOSA. PI]. 2, fig. 6. (No. 78 of collection.) 
Compare Fucoides zqualis, Brong. Hist. Veg. Fors., p. 58,t. 5, figs. 3 and 4. 

Description.—Frond pinnate er bipinnate; rachis long, and almost equal- 
ly slender throughout; branches numerous, regular, alternate, simple, 
elongated, very slender, and flexuous. 

The branches are frequently folded bac& upow themselves, aud undulated, 
lying lilse the finest thread upon the surfawe of the stome. ‘Tis species 
very delicate and graceful, and can searce!y be examined witlout the aide 


FOSSIL *“ERNS PHadl 


“OREGON AND NONTH CALIFORNIA 


t 


Dngniart him. 


hd 118 of col- 
wea 
B, Slightly ob- ny -\ 
» Ooval-ovate, 
ually becom. 


outline ; but, 
pon the mar. 


vo. 78 of col- 


erous, long, 
-ovate, broad 
rds the apex; 
of the pinnae, 
ugh the pin- 
pral aspect is 


variety of the 
pinnules, as 


(Nos. 78 and 


3 secondary 
pinnules sub- 
coadunate at 
ib. 

l. 

s strongly re- 
‘eg. Foss., p. 
res; but this 


t of the true 
ociation, and 
very modern 


ranching or 


f collection.) 
figs. 3 and 4. 
most equal- 
1ate, simple, 


d undulated, 
ls Species ms 
nut the aid.ot 


Hl 
| 
| 


2 SRR NRE eR I Poa 


eg Tees ethan ie era 


a mag 
(from 
10. 
De 
brane 
Thi 
to the 
fern s 
branc 
the pe 
nan 
ll. 
Th 
remal 
of lea 
12, 
17, an 
Des 
rib str 
nate 
Thi 
proacl 
ris of 
and H 
satisfa 
Loc 
fossils, 
von. 
very U 


13. 
nus; I 
lectior 

Des 
the ex 
marke 
promi 

The 
of a s 
specin 
with t 

Loc 


2 TT 


307 [ 174 J 


a magnifier. This fossil is very similar to the Fucoides equalis of Brong., 
(from the lower chalk,) except that the branches are longer and undivided. 


10. Tricnoprenis GRActuis. Pl, 1, fig. 5. (No. 84 of collection.) 

Description.—Slender, stems numerous, flexuous, in a tuft, branched ; 
branches numerous, slender, oblique, stronger than in the last species, 

This species is more robust than the first described, but evidently belongs 
to the same genus. I had first supposed that this might be a collection of 
fern stems, stripped of their foliage; but their slender structure, lon 
pranches, and peculiar arrangement, with the appropriate proportion of all 
the parts, forbid its reference to any thing of this kind ; it is therefore placed 
in anew genus, 

11, Srems or FERNS. PI. 1, fig. 7. 

The stems of ferns, denuded of leaves, and portions only of the branches 
remaining. Great numbers of these stems occur, mingled with fragments 
of Jeaves and other portions of ferns still perfect. 

12, LEAF OF A DYcoTYLEDONOUS PLANT. (?) Pl. 2, fig. 4. (Fr. Aug. 
17, and No, 201 of collection.) 

Description.--Leaf ovate-lanceolate, lobed, lobes acute, mucronate; mid- 
rib straight, distinct, dichotomous; principal divisions going to the mucro- 
nate points. 

This leaf has the aspect of the leaf of a dicotyledonous plant, and ap- 
proaches remotely only to the character of species of the genus PAlebopte- 
ris of Brongniart, which are regarded as such by Phillips, and by Lindley 
and Hutton. ‘The specimen was not observed soon enough to make a 
satisfactory comparison. 

Locality, in the neighborhood of the specimens containing the preceding 
fossiis, and regarded by Captain Frémont as belonging to the same forma- 
tion, The rock containing thei is a soft or very partially indurated clay, 
very unlike the hard and brittle mass containing the other species. 


Prare Ill, 
Fossil shells, &c. 


Figures 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, and 7, are from longitude 111°, latitude 40°. 
Figures 11, 12, and 13, are from longitude 111°, latitude 414°, 
Figures 8, 9, and 10, are froin longitude 115°, latitude 43°. 

Figures 14 and 15, leaves, from longitude 1229, latitude 453°. 

13, Mya reniinowEs.” Pl. 3, figs. 1 and 2, Compare unio peregri- 
nus; Phillips’s Geol. Yorkshire, pl. 7, fig. 12. (Nos. 8, 28, and 32, of col- 
lection. ) 

Description.--Ovate, posterior side extended, slope gentle, rounded at 
the extremity; anterior side regularly rounded; surface nearly smooth, or 
marked only by lines of growth; beaks slightly wrinkled; moderately 
prominent. 

The specimen fig. 1 is an entire shell; fig. 2 is a cast of the two valves 
of a smaller specimen, retaining a small portion of the shell. Another 
specimen, larger than either of these, presents the inside of both valves, 
with the hinge broken. 

Locality in longitude 111°, latitude 40°, in slaty bituminous limestone. 


> The species, where no authority is given, are regarded us new, and will be so understood. 


A ID 
eae. - 


a 
on 


——— ae 


LPL LS EE OE EY IN I ta 


f i174 J 308 


» Nucusa IMpressa (?) G. PL 3, tig. 3, (No, 32 of collection.) 

De seription.-—Subh-elliptical 3 posterior extremity somewhat expanded; 
surface smooth. A few of the teeth are still visible on the anterior hinge 
margin, but the greater part of the hinge line is obscured, 

Locality | in longitude 111°, latitude 10%, in slaty bituininous limestone. 


15, Cyruenra parvuia, Pl. 3, figs. 10 and 10 a (No. 21 of collec. 
tion. ) Compare fsocurdia angulata?  Piullips’s Geol. Yorkshize, pl, 9, 
fig. { 

De dindanO Gite trigonal; umbones elevated ; beaks incurved ; sur. 
face marked by regular concentric lines of growth; umnbones and api 
with a few stronger wrinkles, The umbones of this slicll are scarcely di. 
verging or involute enough to place it in the genus ssocardia, where it 
would otherwise very naturally belong. 

Locality in longitude 115°, latitude 48°, in gray argillaceous limestone, 
Two other specimens of the same shell were noticed. 


16, PLeuROTOMARIA UNIANGULATA. VIL. 3, figs. d and 5, (Nos, 8 and 
32 of collection.) 

Deseriplion-—Turbinate; whorls, ubout six, gradually etilarging ; con- 
vex below, aud angular above ; tive plain ; surface marked by fine lines 
of growth. Aperture round.oval; shetl thin, lragile. 

The specimens are all unperfect, and more or less crushed; the figures, 
however, are good representations of the fossil, It is readily distinguished 
by its fine lines of growth, resembling a species of Helix, and by the an- 
gular charactor of the upper part of evel whorl, 

Locality in longitude 11, latitude 40°, in a dark slaty bituminous 
limestone, 

17. CeniraiuM TENERUM. PI. 3, liga. 6,6 a, (Nos. 8, 32, and 34, of 
collectioi.) 

Deseription.—Vilongated, subulate; whorls, about 10, marked with 
strong ridges, Which are again erossed by finer lines in the ‘lire ction of the 
whorls. ‘The strong vertical ridges aie often obsolete on the last whorl, as 
in fig. 6 v, and the spiral lines mueh stror ngor. 

This shell is very strongiy marked, and its external aspect is sutficient to 
distinguish it: it is easily fractured, and, from the wature of the matrix, it 
has been impossible to obtain a specimen exhibiting the mouth pertectly, 

Locality, same as the preceding. 


is. Ceniritum Fremonri. Pl. 3, figs. 7,70. (No. 28 of collection.) 

Deseription.—Shell terete, ovate, acute; whorls, about nine, convex ; 
sumimil of each one coronated ; surface marked by regular rows of pustu- 
lar knobs, often with smader ones between; beak small, sharp; mouth not 
visible in the specimen. 

This is a very beautifully marked shell, with the sumunit of cach whorl 
crowned wiih a cow of short spines, 

Locality, same as the preceeding. 


Narica (7) occipentanrs. Pl. 3, figs. 8,8 a. (Nos. 16 and 21 of 
collection. ) 

Description. —De pressed, conical, or sub-globose ; spire short, consisting 
of about five whorls, the last one comprising the greater part of the shell ; 
aperture semi oval, rounded at both extremities; utmbilicus small. Surface 
marked by lines of growth. 


lection.) 
ut expanded; 
iterior hinge 


is limestone. 
21 of collec. 
rkshize, pl. 9, 


eurved ; sur. 
s and beaks 
B scarcely (i- 
Jia, Where it 


iS iuimestone, 


(Nos. 8 and 


urging; con: 
by fine lines 


: the figures, 
distinguished 
1 by the an- 


y bituminous 


2, and 34, of 


narked with 
rection of the 
last whorl, as 


s sutlicient to 
he matrix, it 
th perfectly. 


of collection.) 
ine, convex ; 
ws of pustu- 
>; mouth not 


feach whorl 


16 and 21 of 


rt, consisting 
of the shell; 
ll. Surface 


FO SSIL SHELLS 


OREGON AND NOTE CAE TROND 


Th 
shell. 
was f 
umbi 


Lo 


20. 

De 
edb 

Th 
main 


Lo 


Q1 
of cu 
De 
about 
mark 
grow 
Th 
it is 
Fis 
of th 
part, 


» 4 


stone 


22 
De 
mout 
arche 
A 
but i 
oolite 
semb 
Lo 
: 23 
Tt 
long 
Le 


24 
and 
tab. 

D 
by n 
shor 

I 
the 
ticul 
and 


209 [ 174 ] 


There is a single perfect specimen and several casts of this delicate little 
shell, The mouth is not eutirve, but enough remains to show that the lip 
was a littl expanded; but whether the columella covered a part of the 
umbilicus is uneertain, 

Locality in longitude 115°, latitude 43°, in a gray siliceous limestone, 


20, Tunnirecsa winineara, PI, 5, fig. 9. (No. 2b ofeollection,) 
Deseriplion.—-kiongated, subulate,spive rapidly usceuding; whorlsmark- 
ed by a doubie, elevated, spiral line, whieh is notched in the lower whorls. 
The specimen figured is imperfect, only the upper part of the shell re- 
maining, Several casts of the same species occur in the specimens, 
Locality, same as the preceding, 


21, Cenirutum Nopvtosum. PI, 3, figs, LL and 12, (Nos, 64, 68,and 74, 
of collection.) 

Deseription,—Elongated, subulate; spire rapidly ascending; whorls 
about seven; the sutures marked by a sviral band; surfaee of whorls 
marked by curved striw, or elevated lives, i the direetion of the lines of 
growth. Whorls carinated with « row of protuberanees along the centre. 

The arched lines of growth are more distinet upon the last whorl, and 
itis marked beneath by a few spiral lines, 

Fig. 11 isa perfect specimen. Fig. 12. The left-hand figure is a cast 
of the same species; the right-hand figure retains the shell upon the upper 
part, while it is removed from the lower part. 

Locality in longitude 111), latitude 414°, in yellowish gray oolitic lime- 
stone. 


22, Turso pALupinurormis. Pl, 3, fig. 13, (No. 64 of collection. ) 

Description.—Whorls, about four, rapidly enlarging, convex, smooth ; 
mouth round-oval; columella slightly reflected; volutions marked by fine 
arched strive in the direction of the lines of growth. 

A small portion ouly of the shell remains upou the specimen figured, 
but it is retained in the matrix. This fossil occurs in gray or yellowish 
oolite, associated with Cerithium nodulosum, and other shells. It re- 
sembles Padudina in torm. 

Localily, same as the preceding. 


23, LeAvVEs or DICOTYLEDONOUS PLANTS. Pl. 3, figs. 14 and 15. 

The specimens have not been satisfactorily identified, but doubtless be- 
long to a very modern tertiary deposite. 

Locality, Cascades of the Columbia river. 


Piate LV. 


24, INocERAMUS ? Pl. 4, figs. land 1 a, (Nos. 26, 29, 31, 33, 
and 38, of collection.) Compare Znocerumus mytiloides, Sow. Min, Con., 
tab. 442. 

Description.——Inequavalved, depressed, and clongated ; surface marked 
by numerous waved lines and ridges ; convex towards the beaks; beaks 
short and obtuse, somewhat obsolete in old specimens; hinge line oblique. 

In the old specimens, the shell appears much flattened, except towards 
the beaks; while in the younger specimens it is more convex, and par- 
ticularly so towards the beaks. ‘I'he youngest specimens are finely lined, 
and the whole surface of one valve quite convex, 


[ 174] 310 


This fossil apparently exists in great numbers, as in the specimens ex. 
amined there were individuals in all stages of growth, though mostly 
broken or separated valves. The same species was collected by the late 
Mr, Nicollet, near the Great Bend of the Missouri. 

Locatity, Smoky Iiill river, longitude 99°, latitude 38°, in yellowish and 
gray limestone of the cretaceous formation. 

25. InocunAmMus ————? PI. 4, fig, 2, (No. 42 of collection.) Compare 
Inoceramus involutus, Sow. Min. Con., tab, 583, 

Description.—Semicircwlar; surface flat, with the margin detlected ; 
marked by strong, regular concentri¢ ridges, which become attenuated on 
either side, and are uearly obsolete towards the beak; beak of one valve 
small, not elevated; hinge line nearly rectangular, 

The strong concentric ridges distinguish this fossil from any other species, 
The specimen figured is probably the flat valve, as a fragment of a large 
and much more convex valve accompanies this one, from the same locality, 
The shell, particularly towards the margin, is very thick and fibrous, 

Locality, near the easiern slope of the Rocky mountains, in longitude 
105°, latitude 39°, in light yellowish-gray limestone, probably of the creta- 
ceous formation, 


Nore.—Thie specimens figured on plate III, Nos. 1, 2, 4, 5, and 6, have 
the appearance of fluviatile shells, and would have been so regarded but 
for the occurrence of fig, 3, which appears to be a Nucula, and fig. 7, in 
the same association, the sculpturing of which is unlike any of the Melania 
known to me. It is not improbable, however, that this may prove a fresh- 
water deposite of vast interest, as it appears to be of great extent, and oc- 
curs at a great elevation. The researches of Capt. Frémont, in his future 
explorations, will doubtless set this question at rest, by a larger collection 
of fossils from the same region. 


4 


\ 


\\ 


~ 


cimens ex. 
ugh mostly 
by the late 


llowish and 
) Compare 


detlected ; 
enuated on 
"one valve 


her species, 
it of a large 
iné locality, 
brous, 

n longitude 
bf the creta. 


aud 6, have 
garded but 
nd fig. 7, in 
he Melania 
ove a fresh. 
nt, and oc- 
i his future 
Y collection 


: 
: 


ast 


FOSSIL SHELLS 


epee ck UN EE NOPE EE UNEP ePhENE 


i 


// 


/\ 


NOT? 


Whe 
other re 
we shou 
1,400 aj 
COnmOq ME 


the party 
borders 


he reach 
many in 
cient tin 
hia colle 
the plan 
whieh I 

The k 
be partl 


again, a 


collectio 
nies the 
tion will 
are empl 


Deseri 
tuin 


Jor 


Bra 
style f 

An 
in the 
the lea 
above 
upper 
than tl 
lanceo 
exsert 
Ovary 

On 
are ne 
to be: 


afl 
“4 


311 c 174] 


C, 


NOTE CONCERNING THE PLANTS COLLECTED IN THE SECOND EXPRDI- 
TION OF CAPTAIN PREMON'T, 


When Captain Promont set out on hin second expedition, he was well provided with paper and 
other means for making extensive botunieal collections; and it wae understood that, on hie return, 
we shoul, conjointly, prepare a full neeount of his plants, to be appended to tie report, About 
1,400 apecien were collected, many of them in regions not before explored by any botanist, In 
consequence, however, of the wreat length of the journey, and the numerous accidents to whieh 
the party were exposed, but expecially owing to the dreadful flood of the Kanan, which deluged the 
borders of the Missourt and Missieippi rivers, more than half of his specimens were ruined before 
he reached the border of civilization, Even the portion saved was greatly damaged; ao that, in 
many instances, it has been extremely diMeult to determine the plants, As there was not puffle 
cient time before the publication of Captain Promont’s report for the proper study of the remaina of 
his collection, it has been deemed advisulle to reserve the greater part of them to incorporate with 
the plants which we expect he will bring with hin on returning from his third expedition, upon 
which he has just set out. 

The loss sustained by Captain Prémont, and, [ may say, by the botanical world, will, we trust, 
be partly made up the prevent and next seasons, ax much of the same country will be passed over 
again, and some new regions explored. Arrangements have also been made, by which the botanical 
collections will be preserved, at least from the destructive effects of water; and a person accompa- 
nies the expedition, who is to make drawings of all the most interesting plants. Particular attens 
tion will be given to the forest trees and the vegetable productions that are useful in the arts, or that 
are employed for food or medicine. 


JOHN TORREY, 


Descriptions af some new genera and —— of plants, collected in Cap- 
tuin J. C. Frémont’s exploring eapedition lo Oregon and North Cali- 
Jornia, in the years 1843-'44; By John Torrey and J. C. Frémont. 


CLEOMELLA (?) ontusiFoLIA. Torr. and Frém, 


Branching from the base, and dittuse; leaflets cuneate-obovate, obtuse ; 
style filiform. 

Annual, stem smooth, the branches spreading, about a span long, hairy 
in the axils. Leaves, or petioles, an inch or more in length ; the lamina of 
the leaflets 4—6 lines long, apiculate with a deciduous bristle, nearly smooth 
above, sparsely strigose underneath. ® Pedicels solitary and axillary, in the 
upper part of the branches, longer than the petioles. Calyx much shorter 
than the corolla ; the sepals lacerately 3—5-toothed. Petals yellow, sear A 
lanceolate, obtuse, about 3 lines in length. Stamens 6, unequal, a little 
exserted ; anthers linear-oblong, recurved when old. ‘Torus hemispherical, 
Ovary on a long slender stipe, obovate ; style longer than the ovary. 

On the American fork of the Sacramento river; March. The specimens 
are notin fruit, so that we cannot be certain as to the genus ; but it seems 
to be a Cleomella. 


[ 174 J 312 


Meconecira Carrronrnica. Torr and Fréim. 


Leaves obovate-spatnlate ; stamens 11—-12, 

On the American fork of the Sacramento river, 

This species is intermediate betwecn Meconella aud Platystigma, It is 
a slender annual, 3—4 inches high, with the radical leaves in rosulate elus. 
ters, and more dilated at the extremity than in WZ Oregana. The flowers 
also are much larger, ‘The torts, which is like that of Eschschotzia, is very 
distinct, 


Arcromecon. Torr. and Frém.—n, gen. 


Calyx of 3 smooth imbricated caducous sepals, Petals 1, obovate, reg. 
ular. Stamens nuinerous ; anthers obloug-lincar: the cells opening iongi- 
tudinally. Ovary obovoid, composed of 6 carpels, with as many narrow 
intervalvular placenti: styles none: stigmas coalescing into a small hem- 
ispherical 6-angled s essi! le he rad, the a zles of which are opposite the pla- 
cent, not forming a projecting disk, Capstle (immature) ovoid, the pla- 
cent almost filiforns, opentug “at the stumuit by 6 valves, which separate 
from the persistent placenta. Seeds ovlous, suuooth, strophiolate.x—-A pe- 
rennial herb, with a thick woody root. Leaves numerous, mostly crowded 
about the root, tlabelliform-cuneate, densely clothed with long gray up- 
wardly barbellate hairs, 3—5 lobed at the summit; the lobes with 2—3 
teeth, which are tipped witha rigid pungent upwardiy scabrous bristle. 
Stem scape-like, about a foot igh, furnished about the middle with oue or 
two small bract-like leaves, smooth above, rough towards the base. Flow- 
ers in a loose, somewhat uinbellate, simple or somewhat compound panicle ; 
the peduncles elongated, erect. Petals about an inch long, yellow, 


Arcromecos Cautrornicem. VZorm and L’rém, 


This remarkable plant was found in only a single station in the Califor 
nian mountains, on the bauks of acreek; flowering early in May. The 
soil was sterile and gravelly. Altheugh very near Papaver, it diflers so 
much in habit aud in the stro nhiolate seeds, as well ay in other characters, 
that it must be a distinct geutis, 


KRAMERIA, 


A shrubby species of this genus was found on the Virgen river, in Califor- 
nia. It seems to be A. parvifolia of Bentham, described in the vor ge of 
the Sulphur. His plant, however, was only in fruit, while our spec.:nens 
are only in flower. Ours grows in thick bunches 1—2 feet high, of a gray 
aspect, with numerous very straggiiug aud somewhat spine scent branches. 
Leaves scarcely one-third of an ee long, obovate-spatulate. The flowers 
are scarcely more than half as large as in A. lanceolata. Sepals 5, un- 
equal; claws of the 3 upper petals ynited into a colu;nn below; lamina 
more or less ovate; the two lowcr petals short and truncate, Stamens 
shorter than the upper petals; the filaments united at the base with the 
column of the petais: anthers one-celled, with a membranaceous summit, 
the orifice of which is somewhat dilated, and finally lacerated. Ovary 
hairy and spinulose ; style rigid. declined. 


Oxystyiis. Zorn. and Frém—n. gen. 


Sepals linear ; petals ovate, somewhat unguiculate ; ovary 2-celled; the 
cells subglobose, each with two ovules ; style pyramidal, much larger than 


oa —-z eS TTR 


igma, It js 
rstilate clus. 
The flowers 
(Zia, is very 


bovate, reg. 
ning iongi- 
any narrow 
small hem. 
site the pla. 
id, the pla- 
ch separate 
litle, — A pes 
tly crowded 
ig gray up- 

With 2—3 
‘ous bristle. 
with one or 
jase. Flow. 
nd panicle ; 
‘low. 


the Califor. 
May. The 
it difiers so 
characters, 


yin Califor- 
e vor ge of 
' spec. mens 
h, of a gray 
it branches. 
I'he flowers 
2pals 5, un- 
wy; lamina 
. Stamens 
ce with the 
us suminit, 
od. Ovary 


celled ; the 
larger than 


“Ay 


S 


C00! 
7 


Of) ae 


BOTANY Plate 7. 


; 
i 
¥ 


the ova 
(or rarel 
tent sub 
somewh 
and fles 
placenti 
petioles 
merous | 


On th 
but abu 
ane wet 

A vat 
a little I 
of lowe 
shorter | 
Petals a 
carpels, 
pointed 

This» 
The clu 
styles, } 


Flow 
petalled 
ina dot 
of a sti 
stigma 
united | 
Seeds ¢ 
inferior 


A sh 
simple, 
dark pt 
matic 0 
though 
grows | 
Califor 


Bran 
nex a si 
what ec 
rolla th 
twisted 

A tre 
branch 


renee er aes 


313 [ 174 J 
the ovary. Silicle didymous: the carpels obovoid-globose, one-seeded, 
(or rarely two-seeded,) indehiscent, separating from the base of the persis- 
tent subulate spinescent style: pericarp erustaceo-coriaceous. Seed ovate, 
somewhat compressed ; testa membranaceous, the lining much thickened 
and fleshy. Cotyledons incumbent, linear-oblong; radicle opposite the 
placenti.—A smooth annual herb, Leaves ternately parted, on long 
petioles ; the leaflets ovate or oblong, entire petiolulate. Flowers in nu- 
merous axillary crowded short capitate racemes, small and yellow. 


Qeystytis Lurba. Tor and Prem. 


On the Margozga river, at the foot of a sandy hill; ouly seen in one place, 
but abundant there. The specimens were collected on the 28th of April, 
and were in both flower and fruit. 

A rather stout plant ; the stem erect, a foot or 15 inches high, simple or 
a little branching below, leafy. Leatlers 1—14 inch Iqng, obtuse. Heads 
of flowers about half an inch in diameter, not elongating in fruit. Calyx 
shorter than the corolla; the sepals acute, yellowish, tipped with orange. 
Petals about two lines long. Fruit consisting of two roundish indehiscent 
carpels, which at maturity separate by a small base, leaving the indurated 
pointed style. The epicarp is thin, membranaceous,ana slightly corrugated, 

This remarkable plant seems to connect Crucifert with Capparidacew, 
The clusters of old flower stalks, with their iumerous crowded spinescent 
styles, present a singular appearaiice. 


) 
! 
i 


Tnamnosma. Torr. and Frem.—n. gen. 


Flowers hermaphrodite, (or polygamous?) Calyx 4-cleft. Corolla 4- 
petalled, much longer than the calyx; the mstivation valvate. Stamens S, 
in a double series, all fertile. Ovaries 2, sessile and connate at the summit 
of a stipe, each with 5 or 6 ovules in 2 series; styles united into one; 
stigma capitate. Capsules 2, sessile at the summit of the stipe, subglobose, 
united below, (one of then: sometimes abortive,) coriaceous, 1—3-seeded. 
Seeds curved, with a short beak, black and minutely wrinkled; the radicle 
inferior. HKmbryo curved ; cotyledous broadly linear, incumbent. 


THAMNOSMA MONTANA. Yorr. and Frém. 


A shrub of the height of one or two feet, branching from the base, with 
simple, very small linear wedge-shaped leaves. The flowers are apparently 
dark purple, in loose terminal clusters. The whole plant has a strong aro- 
matic odor, and every part of it is covered with little glandular dots. Al- 
though nearly allied to Nanthoxylum, we regard it as a peculiar genus. It 
grows in the passes of the mountains, and on the Virgen river in Northern 
California. The greater part of it was already in fruit in the month of May. 


Prosopis oporaATa. VYorr, and Frém. 


Branches and leaves smooth; spines stout, mostly in pairs, straight ; pin- 
nx a single pair; leaflets 6--8 pairs, oblong-linear, slightly falcate, some- 
what coriaceous, rather obtuse ; spikes elongated, on short peduncles ; co- 
rolla three times as long as the calyx ; stamens exserted; legume spirally 
twisted into a compact cylinder. 

A tree about 20 feet high, with a very broad full head, and the lower 
branches declining to the ground ; the thorns sometimes more than an inch 


[ 174 ] 314 


long. Leaves smooth ; the common petiole 1—2 inches long, and terminated 
by a spinescent point; leaflets from half an inch to an inch long, and 1~ 
lines broad, somewhat coriaceous, sparingly but prominently veined un. 
derneath. Spikes 2—4 inches long, and about one-third of an inch in di- 
ameter. Flowers yellow, very fragrant, nearly sessile on the rachis. Calyx 
campanulate, somewhat equally 5-toothed, smooth. Petals ovate-oblong, 
hairy inside, Stamens 10, one-third longer than the corolla. Anthers tipped 
with a slightly stipitate gland. Ovary linear-oblong, villous ; styie smooth; 
stigma capitate, concave at the extremity. Legumes clustered, spirally 
twisted into a very close rigid cylinder, which is from an inch to an inch 
and a half long, and about two lines in diameter, forming from ten to thir- 
teen turns, many seeded. Sarcocarp pulpy; the two opposite sides of the 
firm endocarp are compressed together between the seeds, forming a lon- 
gitudinal kind of septum, which divides the pulp into two parts. Seeds 
ovate, kidney-form, compressed, very sinooth and hard. Embryo yellow. 
ish, surrounded with a thin albumen. 

A characteristic tree in the mountainous part of Northern California, 
particularly along the Mohahve and Virgen rivers, flowering the latter part 
of April. 

This species belongs to the section strombocarpu of Mr. Bentham," 
which includes the cacia strombulifera of Wildenow. In the structure 
of the pod it is so remarkable that we at one time regarded it as a distinct 
genus, to which we gave the name of Spirolobium. 

There are numerous other Leguminose in the collection, including, as 
might be expected, many species of Lupinus, Astragalus, Oxytropis, and 
Phaca, some of which are new; also, Thermopsis rhombifolia and mon- 
tana, and a beautiful shrubby Psoralea (or some allied genus) covered 
with bright violet flowers. 


Cowania piicara. DD. Don. (?) 


Specimens of this plant, without a ticket, were in the collection ; doubt- 
less obtained in California. It may prove to be a distinct species from the 
Mexican plant, for the leaves are more divided than they are described by 
Don, and the flowers are sinaller. The genus Cowania is very nearly al- 
lied to Cercocarpus and Purshia, notwithstanding its numerous ovaries. 
The lobes of the calyx are imbricated, as in those genera, and not valvate, 
as in Eudryadez, to which section it is referred by Endlicher. 

Purshia tridentata formed a conspicuous object in several parts of the 
route; not only east of the mountains, but in Oregon and California. It is 
covered with a profusion of yellow flowers, and is quite ornamental. Some- 
times it attains the height of twelve feet. 

Spirza arizfolia, var. discolor, was found on the upper waters of the 
Platte, holding its characiers so well that it should perhaps be regarded as 
a distinct species. 


CENOTHERA CLAVEFORMIS. Torr. and Fréem. 


Leaves ovate or oblong, denticulate or toothed, pinnatified at the base, 
with a long naked petiole; scape with several small leaves, 8—12-flowered; 
segments of the calyx longer than the tube; capsules clavate-cylindrical, 
nearly twice as long as the pedicel. Flowers about as large as in @. pu- 
mila. Grows with the preceding. 


* In Hooker’s Journal of Botany, iv, p. 351. 


nd terminated 
bng, and 1~g 
ly veined un. 
an inch in di. 
rachis. Calyx 
ovate-oblong, 
Anthers tipped 
style smooth; 
ered, spirally 
ch to an inch 
bm ten to thir- 
te sides of the 
orming a lon- 
parts. Seeds 
ibryo yellow. 


rm California, 
the latter part 


r, Bentham," 
the structure 
t as a distinct 


including, as 
xytropis, and 
lia and mon- 
nus) covered 


ction ; doubt. 
cies from the 
» described by 
ery nearly al- 
TOUS OVaries. 
1 not valvate, 
i, 

| parts of the 
fornia. It is 
ental. Some- 


waters of the 
e regarded as 


at the base, 
-12-flowered; 
e-cylindrical, 
as in Gt. pu- 


BOTANY) late I 


see ee 


eet 


—— 


aR. a Rs lei, 


te 
ee 


This n 
Gr. Fl. 


Annua 
repandly 
short ster 
tals entire 
long, fixe 

Allied 
the secti 


Strigos 
ly dentic 
der, thre 
ments ; 

This s| 
It belong 
called Gs 
tube of 1 
and no it 
testa mel 

Beside 
which m: 
Ssourrers? 
ing abou 


The pl 
aminatio: 
era) in tl 
since asc 
concur w 
I, N. Nic 
tered by: 
United 8 
sources 
the botar 
an intere 
Geyer, 0 
ing is the 


“ Heac 
ulate, cor 
base caly 
late, Cx 
terminat 
canescen 
the exte) 


315 [174 J 


This new species belongs to the section Chylismia of Nutt. ( Torr. and 
Gr. Fl. N. Am. 1, p. 506.) 


(MNornHera pELTOoIDES. Torr. and Frém. 


Annual ; canescently strigose; stem low and stout; !eaves rhombicovate, 
repandly denticulate, acute ; flowers (large) clustered at the summit of the 
short stem ; tube of the calyx nearly twice the length of the segments ; pe- 
tals entire, one-third longer than the slightly declined stamens; anthers very 
long, fixed by the middle; style exserted ; capsules prisimatic-cylindrical. 

Allied to Gi, Jamesii, Torr. and Gr., and belongs, like that species, to 
the section Euayoruera and sub-section Onagra. 


(ENOTHERA CANESCENS. Torr. and Frém. 


Strigosely canescent ; leaves narrowly lanceolate, rather obtuse, remote- 
ly denticulate; flowers in a leafy raceme; tube of the calyx rather slen- 
der, three times as long as the ovary, and one-third longer than the seg- 
ments; petals broadly ovate, entire. 

This species was collected (we believe) on the upper waters of the Platte. 
It belongs to the section Eucenothera, and to a sub-section which may be 
called GAvropsis, and characterized as follows: Perennial diffuse herbs ; 
tube of the calyx linear; capsule obovate, sessile, with 4-winged angles 
and no intermediate ribs, tardily opening ; seeds numerous, horizontal ; the 
testa membranaceous ; leaves opaque. 

Besides these new species, many other (inothera were collected ; among 
which may be mentioned 2, albicaulis, alyssvides, montana, and Mis- 
souriensis. Also, Gayophytum diffusum, (from the Snake country, grow- 
ing about 2 feet high,) Stenosiphon virgatum, and Gaura coccinea. 


ComrosiT»®. 


The plants of this family were placed in the hands of Dr. Gray for ex- 
amination; and he has described some of them (including four new gen- 
era) in the Boston Jowrnal of Natural History for January, 1845. He has 
since ascertained another new genus among the specimens; and we fully 
concur with him in the propriety of dedicating it to the late distinguished 
I. N. Nicollet, Esq., who spent several years in exploring the country wa- 
tered by the Mississippi and Missouri rivers, and who was employed by the 
United States Government in a survey of the region lying between the 
sources of those rivers. This gentleman exerted himself to make known 
the botany of the country which he explored, and brought home with him 
an interesting collection of plants, made under his direction, by Mr. Charles 
Geyer, of which an account is given in the report of Mr. N. The follow- 
ing is the description of this genus by Dr. Gray: 


NiIcoLLeTviaA. ~ Gray. 


“Heads heterogamous, with few rays, many flowered. Involucre campan- 
ulate, consisting of about 8 oval membranaceous scales in a single series ; the 
base calyculate, with one or two smaller scales. Receptacle convex, alveo- 
late. Corolla of the disk flowers equally 5-toothed. Branches of the style 
terminated by a subulate hisped appendage. Achenia elongated, slender, 
canescently pribescent, Pappus double, scarcely shorter than the corolla ; 
the exterior of numerous scabrous, unequal bristles; the inner of 5 linear- 


——— 


— 
Se ee 


CS Sam 


ce ners 
FE 
RSE: TESS 


a 
Sige epee, 


eS 
te 


mee ut Saeperme 


iret Spa 
= 


— 


| : 
i ) i, 


SIE oot SAY SEAT iv 


ete os a aaa i a 


[ 174 ] 316 


lanceolate chaffy scales, which are cutive, or 2 toothed at the summit, and 
furnished with a strong central nerve, whieh is produc ed into we short sea. 
brous awi.——A humble, branching (and apparently annual) herb. Leaves 
alternate, pinuatified, and somewhat dleshy, (destitute of glands?) ; the lobes 
and rachis linear, Eleads terminal, solitary, nearly sessile, large, (about an 
ine!) loug,) with one or two involuerate leaves atthe base, Corolla yellow,” 


NICOLLETIA OCCIDENTALIS. Gray. 


On the banks of the Mohalve river, geowing in naked sands; tlowering 
Ww April. The plant has a powerful aud rather agreeable odor, This in. 
teresting gens (Which is described from imperfect materials) belongs to 
the tribe Senrcronipe., and the sub-tribe Tagiring. It lias the habit of 
Dissodia, and exhibits both the chatly pappus of the division Zuye/ew, and 
the puppus pilosus of Porophydum.—Gray. 


Fraxsenta pumosa. Gray. 


Shrubby, much braneued ; leaves pinnatified, canescent ou both sides, as 
are the branchlets; the cdivisious S—7, oval, entire, and somewhat lobed: 
heads rather loosely spiked; involucre of the sterile ilowers 5—7 cleft, 
strigosely canescent; of the tertile, ovoid, 2-celied, x- lowe red, 

A shrub, 1—2 feet high, with divaric ate rigid branehes. Leaves scarce 
ly an inch long. Fertile (immature) involuere clothed with straight soft 
lanceolate subulate prickles, whic! ave short and seale-like. 

On the sandy uplands of the Mohave river, aud very common in all 
that region of North California, Floweiing in April, 


AMSONIA TOMENTOSA. Torr and Frém. 


Suifrutescent; clothed with a dense whitish pubescence ; leaves lanceolate 
and ovate-lanceolate, actite at each end ; segments of the calyx lanceolate: 
subulate ; corolla slightly hairy externally 

Stems numerous, erect, 12 to 1S inches high, woody, below simple or 
branching. Leavesalternate ; the lowest small aud s spatul ite, or redticed to 
scales; the others about 2 inches long, and varying from 4 to 8 lines in 
breadth ; entire, acuminate at the base Flowers in rather dense, some- 
what fastigiate terminal clusters, nearly three-fourths of an ineh long. Ca- 
lyx about one-third the length of the corolla, 5- parted to the base ; thie seg: 
ments narrow and hairy. Corolla with the tube ventricose above ; the seg: 
ments ovate-oblong, Stamens included; filaments short; anthers ovate- 
sagittate. Ovaries oblong, united below, distinet above, smooth; style 
slender ; stigma capitate, With a membranaceous collar at the base. 

The specimens of this plant were without tickets; but they were prob- 
ably collected west of the Rocky mountains. They were without fruit. 


Ascciertas speciosa. Torr. in ednn. Lyc. New York, ii, p. 218. 


This (as was stated in the first report) is 2. Douglasii of Hooker, well 
figured in his Flora Boreali aneecani: 2,t.142, Ithasa wide range, be- 
ing found on both sides of the Rocky mountains, and from the sources of 
the St. Peter’s to those of the Kansas and Canadian. The fruit was collected 
from specimens on the banks of the Suake river. It is almost exactly like 
that of 2. Cornuti, being inflated, woolly, and covered with soft spines. 


—~ ———-——$—— 


, ‘Tt should be stated here, th: it the notice of this genus by Dr. Gray was drawn up in Latin ; but 
we have given it in English, that it may be uniform with our own description. 


e summit, and 
to & short sea. 
herb, Leaves 
(ls?) ; the lobes 
Irge, (about an 
roll yellow,” 


ils; tlowering 
dor, This in. 
als) belonas to 
is the habit of 
1 Zayelew, and 


| both sides, as 

Wewhat lobed: 
crs 5—7 cleft, 
d. 

Leaves scarce. 
1 straight soft 


ommon in all 


ives lanceolate 
ly x lanceolate: 


ow simple or 
, or redticed to 
4 to § lines in 
r dense, some- 
nen long, Ca- 
base ; the segs 
hove: the seg: 
iuthers ovate- 
smooth; style 
e bese. 

ey were prob- 
ithout fruit. 


li, p. 218, 


Ilooker, well 
ide range, be- 
he sources of 
was collected 
t exactly like 
soft spines. 


| up in Latin ; but 


BOTANY I'late mn 


hath Wwok Weber & Oo) Baltimore 


— 


_Iemenlte veiw vel bed 


Stem st 
with asm 
peduncle, 
lanceolate 
yaul r obt 

On Gre 
spat hia 
vide. I" 


Smoot! 
divisious 
branched 
ered, Si 

The sy 
which a 
joint of ¢ 
ward, ‘J 
which ar 
mous, Ww) 
a line in 
examined 
lower pa 


Wit 
hoary lo 
nd near 
er, 
nearly C 
Orn the 
A sinall 


Annu 
very ob 
slender, 
involue) 
the teet 

With 
its leavi 

Maw 
Snake « 
the nex 


This 
sphere 
ture of 
fornia. 

, the dot 


rw ree 


ward, ‘This divides inte three or more branches, the t 


317 [ 174 } 


AcrRarns LAtivoLIA. TZorr. and Prim, 


Stem simple, erect, synooth ; leaves roundish-ovate, nearly sessile, obtuse, 
with a small muero, sinooth on both sides; cmbel solitary, on a terminal 
peduncle, few -jlowered ped ier ly slender: segments of the corolla ovate. 
ate colate; lobes of the crown semilanar-ovate, as Jang as the column, 
rather obtuse, ee tillate, 

niet gg river, a tributary of the Colorado of the West; June, Abouta 
span hia! Leaves about an iveh avd a half long, and more than an ineh 
vide. - flawars low, very large, ‘yop rently yellowis Mrenit not seer 


Ad 


RIOGONUM INFLATUM Lorn. and Lvem, 


Smooth, bi-trichotomons: the lowe poet nd sometimes the two prinary 
divisions of the steuy. muel tuthited oy Wale; peduneles divari ately 


branched, the ultimate: divisions filiforim ond solitary ; involuere few-ilow. 
ered, smooulrs the teoth equal, ereet, 
The specinetis of this plaut are iny et, being destitute of leaves, 


Itis« foot or inore high, Uhe first 
remarkably dilated and fistular up 
Oo primary ones of 
which are sometimes inilated like the first: the subdivisions are dichoto- 
mous, With a pedicellate invelucre in each fork, Phe involueres are about 
a line in diameter, smooth, 5—6-ilowered ; and, in all the specimens that I 
examined, only 5-toothed, ‘The plaut was found on barren hills in the 
lower part of North Califoruia 


which are probah Wholly radical, 
joiut of the stem, or rather seape, i 


‘ ae me ' }  » 
PRIOGONUM KENIFORME. ver and Prim. 


\onuals leaves radieal, on loug petioles reniform,. clothed with a dense 


hoary tomentuin ; stem seape-live, naked, 3- fork ed from the base, glaveous, 
nd Ne arly smooths the divisions divaricately 2——3-torked : involucres 2—4 
ier, ou slender peduneles, smooti, ¢ sorenil ita, S-toothed, the teeth 
nearly equed, obtuse ; perigomium smooth, 
On the Sacramewuto river; Mareh. Allied to 2. e/netnewie of Bentham, 
A sinall specics, with very minute lowers, 


vos 
vid ra PUN be 


Annual; leaves all radical, on loug petioles, roundi-ti-ovate, cordate, 
very obtuse, slightly pubescent above, hairy underneath; scape naked, 
slender, smooth and ‘alane ‘ous, divaricately branched, the divisions sleuder; 
involucres solitary, on filiform peduncles, campanulate, smooth, 5-toothed, 
the teeth nearly equal, rather obtuse ; perigonium hairy, 

With the preceding, from which it is easiiy Cistinguished by the form of 
its leaves and color of the pubescence. 

Many other species of this gentis were colleeted in California and the 
Snake country, some of which are probably new, and will be deseribed iu 
the next report. 


eriogoNnumM CorpALuUM. Torr ¢ 


Fremonria verMicuLarts. Zorr.in Frém. ist report. 


This curious ar is always found in saline soils, or where the atmo- 
sphere is saline, Its greatest height is eight feet. Itis a characteristic fea- 
ture of the vegetation throughout a great part of Oregon and North Cali- 
fornia, About Brown’s Hole p, on Green river, it occupies almost exclusively 
the bo//oms of the neighboring streams. It is abundant also on the shores 


4b ¢  o€ 
S “ ee 


aes 

Wd 

tig 

te 
Ms, Me 


yrs 
Sa 
ed 
— 


125 


40 
l.| b 
——— 


ir 
Or 
ze 
<i 
> & 
GAs 
wi 
— 
Oo. 
qu 
=u 


| 

l 

l 
Sciences 


eS 5 _ 
rn st aR Sta lat nde INNO ne 


> ph eee SG a Ga RAN = 


a 


[ 174 ] 318 


of a salt lake in lat. 38° and long. 113°; and constantly occurs in the desert 
region south of the Columbia, and between the Cascade range and the 
Rocky mountains, as far south as lat. 34°. The branches, when old, be- 
come spiny, as in many other plants of this sean 

Since the description of this genus was published in the first report, 
(March, 1843,) Nees has given it the name of Sarcoparus; and Dr. Seu- 
bert has published an account of it, with a figure, in the Bolanische Zei- 
tung for 1844. ‘This we have not yet seen; but, from the remarks of Dr, 
Lindley, who has given a note on the genus in Hooker’s Journal of Botany 
for January, 1845, it would seem that soine doubt existed among European 
botanists as to its affinities, as they had not seen the ripe seeds. These we 
have long possessed, and unhesitatingly referred it to Chenopodiaciw. We 
regret that our sketches of the staminate flowers were mislaid when the 
artist was engraving the figure. 


OBIONE-CONFERTIFOLIA. Torr. and Frém, 


Stem pubescent, much branched, erect ; leaves alternate, ovate, rather 
obtuse, petiolate, much crowded, entire, somewhat coriaceous, white with 
a mealy crust; bracts broadly ovate, obtuse, entire, and the sides without 
appendages or tubercles. 

A small shrub, with rigid crooked and somewhat spinescent branches, 
and of a whitish aspect. Leaves varying from one-third to half an inch in 
length, abruptly narrowed at the base into a petiole, thickly clothed with a 
white mealy substance. | 

Flowers apparently diccious. Sterile not seen. Bracts of the fruit 3—4 
lines long, united about half way up, distinct above, indurated at the base. 
Styles distinct. Pericarp very thin. Seed roundish ovate, rostellate up- 
ward ; the testa coriaceous. Embryo two-thirds of a circle. 

On the borders of the Great Salt lake. From the description of O. cori- 
acea, Moq., our plant seems to be a near ally of that species. 


Prerocuiron. TZorr. and Frém.—n. gen. 
5 


Flowers diwcious. SramMINATE:. . . . Pisriutare. Perigoninm 
ovoid-tubular, 4-winged, 2-toothed at the summit. Ovary roundish; style 
short; stigmas 2, linear. Ovule solitary, ascending from the base of the 
ovary,campulitropous. Fruetiferous perianth indurated, broadly 4-winged, 
closed, minutely 2-toothed at the summit; the wings veined and irregularly 
toothed. Utricle very thin and membranaceous, free. Seed ovate, some- 
what compressed ; the podosperm lateral and very distinct, rostrate up- 
ward. Integument double, the exterior somewhat coriaceous, brownish, 
the inner one thin, Embryo nearly a circle, surrounding copious mealy 
albumen. 


Torr. and Frém. 


An unarmed shrub, 1—2 feet high, with numerous slender branches, 
which are clothed with a grayish nearly smooth bark. Leaves alternate 
or fasciculate, linear oblanceolate, narrowed at the base, flat, entire, covered 
with a whitish mealy crust. flowers somewhat racemose, on short pedi- 
ceils. Fructiterous calyx, with the wings 2—3 lines wide, semi-orbicular, 
coriaceo-membranaceous, mealy like the leaves, strongly veined ; the mar- 
gin more or less toothed. Utricle free from the indurated cavity of the 
perianth, extremely thin and transparent. Seed conformed to the utricle, , 


PrEeROCHITON OCCIDENTALE. 


in the desert 
nge and the 
hen old, be. 


first report, 
and Dr, Seu. 
anische Zei. 
marks of Dr, 
hal of Botany 
ng European 
These we 
diaciw. We 
id when the 


OVate, rather 
» White with 
ides without 


nt branches, 
If an inch in 
othed with a 


le fruit 3—4 
at the base, 
stellate up- 


n of O. cori- 


Perigonium 
ndish ; style 
base of the 
y 4-winged, 
| irregularly 
vate, some- 
rostrate up- 
3, brownish, 
vious mealy 


tr branches, 
S alternate 
ire, covered 
short pedi- 
i-orbicular, 
|; the mar- 
vity of the 
the utricle, , 


VOTANY Plate 


MnO) 


‘ LO mee nifelhy leas 


The Nut Pine’ 


the consp 
liquely u 

This is 
family, tl 
the west. 
was illegi 
It is allie 
which w 
often in g 


I 


Leaves 
and rigid 
pyramid 

A tree 
about thi 
two and 
terete, (e 
semi-cyli 
13 inch 
thick ; t! 
out any 
wing ; 0 
nel is of 

This t 
leaves, Is 


from lon; 
is allude 

The C 
most of t 
describe 
from £. 
Mohahv 


Plate 
fig. 2,a 
jig. 4, th 
fig. 6, p 
ity ofa 

Plate 
mag.; f 

Plate 
flower, 
Mags J 
of the « 
horizon 

Plate 
and 5, 
tion of 
the out 


319 [ 174 ] 


the conspicuous podesperm passing along its side; the beak pointing ob- 
liquely upward, 

This is one of the numerous shrubby plants of the Chenopodiaceous 
family, that constitute a large part of the vegetation in the saline soils of 
the west. The precise locality of this plant we cannot indicate, as the label 
was illegible ; but it was probably from the borders of the Great Salt lake. 
It is allied to Grayia of Hooker and Arnott, a shrub of the same family, 
which was found in several places on both sides of the Rocky mountains, 
often in great abundance. 


Pinus monopnyiius. Torr, and Frém. (The nut pine.) 


Leaves solitary, or very rarely in pairs, with scarcely any sheaths, stout 
and rigid, somewhat pungent; cones ovoid, the scales with a thick obtusely 
pyramidal and protuberant summit, unarmed ; seeds large, without a wing. 

A tree with verticillate branches and cylindrical-clavate buds, which are 
about three-fourths of an inch in length. The leaves are from an inch to 
two anda half inches long: often more or less curved, scattered, very stout, 
terete, (except in the very rare case of their being in pairs, when they are 
semi-cylindrical,) ending in a spiny tip. Cones about 24 inches long, and 
1} inch broad in the widest part. The scales are of a light-brown color, 
thick ; the summit obtusely pyramidal and somewhat recurved, but with- 
out any point. The seeds are oblong, about half an inch long, without a 
wing ; or rather the wing is indissolubly adherent to the scale. The ker- 
nel is of a very pleasant flavor, resembling that of Pinus Pembra. 

This tree, which is remarkable amoug the true pines for its solitary 
leaves, is extensively diffused over the mountains of Northern California, 
from long. 111° to 120°, and through a considerable range of latitude. It 
is alluded to repeatedly, in the course of the narrative, as the nut pine. 

The Conifer of the collection were numerous, and suffered less than 
most of the other plauts. Some of thein do not appear to have been hitherto 
described. ‘There was also an Ephedra, which does not differ essentially 
from #2. occidentalis, found in great plenty on the sandy uplands of the 
Mohahve river. 


Description of the plates. 


Plate 1, ArcTomrcon Canivornicum. Fig. 1, a stamen, magnified; 
Jig. 2,an ovule, mag.; fig. 3, capsule, nat. size; fig. 3, (a,) stigma, mag.; 
Jig. 4, the same cut horizontally, showing the sutures; fig. 5,a seed, mag.; 
fig. 6, portion of a hair from the leaf, mag.; fig. 7, bristle from the extrem- 
ity of a leaf lobe, mag.; figs. 8 and 9, leaves, nad. size. 

Plate 2. Prosopis oporara. Fig. 1, a flower, mag.; fig. 2, pistil, 
mag; fig. 3, cluster of ripe legumes, nad. size. 

Plate 3. Fremonrra verMicuLanis. Fig. 1, a very young fertile 
flower, mag.; fig. 2, an ove, may.; fig. 3,a fertile flower more advanced, 
mag.; fig. 4, 4 fertile flower at maturity, showing the broad-winged border 
of the calyx, muy; fig. 5, the same cut vertically; jig. 6, the same cut 
horizontally; fig. 7, a seed, mag.; fig. 8, embryo, mag. 

Plate 4. Pinus monopnyxiius. /%g. 1, a bud, nal. size; figs. 2, 3, 4, 
and 5, leaves, nad. size; fig. 2, (a,) scction of a single leaf; fig. 5, (a,) sec- 
tion of a pair of leaves; fig. 6,a cone, ned. size; fig. 7,a scale, as seen from 
the outside; fig. 8, inside view of the same. 


ani aes 


: 
4 
4 
a 


The. 
on a sci 
paigns ¢ 
pend up 
and the 
have bee 

In the 
the cam 
Arictis, 
bright li 
tive con 
it have | 
eneving 
which 4 
observat 
bouit, o 
the mou 
an oppo 
shall tot 
we shall 
general 
thing as 
cilitated 

To th 
Nueva 
noiskane 

The 
San Fr. 
of Mr. 


ASTRONOMICAL OBSERVATIONS. 


The map which accompanies this report is constructed upon Flamsteed’s modified projection, 
on a seale of 1; 2,000,000, and based upon the astronomical observations made during the came 
paigns of 1842 and 1845-"44, ‘The longitudes are referred to the meridian of Greenwich, and de- 
pend upon eighteen principal stations ; four of which are determined by occultations of fixed stars, 
and the remaining fourteen by eclipses of the satellites of Jupiter. All the longitudes on the map 
have been chronometrically referred to these positions, 

In the course of the last exploration, it became evident that the longitudes established during 
the campaign of 1843 were collectively thrown too far to the westward, by the occultation of a# 
Arictis, to which they had been referred by the chronometer. ‘This occultation took place at the 
bright limb of the moon, which experience has recently shown to be deserving of little comparas 
tive confidence. ‘This position has therefore been abandoned, and the longitudes depending upon 
it have been referred chronometrically to those established in 1843 and 1844. The course of the 
ensving expedition will intersect the line established by our previous operations, at various points, 
which it is proposed to correct in longitude by lunar culminations, and such other absolute 
observations as may be conveniently obtained. Such a position at the mouth of the Fontaineequi+ 
bouit, on the Arkansas river, will be a good point of reference for the longitudes along the foot of 
the mountains. In passing by the Utah, to the southern portion of the Great Salt lake, we shall hava 
an opportunity to verify our longitudes in that quarter ; and as in the course of our exploration we 
shall touch upon several points previously determined along the western limit of our recent journey, 
we shall probably be able to form a reasonably correct frame on which to base the construction of a 
general map of the country. In that now presented, we have carefully avoided to lay down any 
thing as certain which may not be found in the field books of our surveys, which were greatly fa- 
cilitated by the character of the country in which we were operating. 

T’o the kindness of Captain Wilkes Iam indebted for the longitudes of Fort Vancouver and 
Nueva Helvetia, which were furnished to me before the publication of his map. Our recon- 
noiskance is connected with his surveys by those positions. 

The coast line of the Pacific is laid down according to the survey of Vancouver ; and the bay of 
San Francisco is reduced from the copy of a manuscript map of a detailed survey, in the possession 
of Mr. Sutter. 


J. C. FREMONT. 


[174 J 


322 


Table of latitudes and longitudes deduced /rom the annexed observations, 


| 


Date. | Latitudes, Lonygitudes, | 


1843, 
May 30 | 


ua? 4 at’ 
June 1} i 16 
4) 
5 
10 


12 
15 


\7 


Localities. 


Elm grove, 


| Sinall tributary to the Kansas, 


Buck creek, tributary of the Kansas. 


Elk creek, tributary of the Kansas. 

Incampment on the Smoky Hill fork, half a mile 
from its junction with the Republican. 

Tributary to the Republican fork. 


Tributary to the Republican fork. 


| ‘Tributary to Solomon's fork of the Republican. 


| ‘Tributary to Solomon's fork of the Republican. 


| Tributary to Republican fork. 


' Prairie Dog river, Republican fork, 


| Small tributary to the Republican, 


Eneampimnent on a small lake in the sandy plain 
hetween the Republican and South fork of the 
Platte river. 


| South fork of the Platte river. 


| South fork, 9 miles above mouth of Beaver fork. 


South fork, near Cherry creck. 


Junction of Arkansas and Boiling Spring rivers. 


| eee . ’ 
Boiling Springs. 


South fork. 
St. Vrain’s fort. 


High prairie, broken by buttes and boulders, with 
scattered cedars, forming dividing grounds 
between Laramie and Cache & la Poudre 
rivers. 


| Near the preceeding. 

_ Larainie river. 

| Stream discharging into a luke. 
| Fork of Jaramie river. 


Medicine Bow river. 


| ‘ributary to the North fork. 


_ North fork of the Platte river. 


Date 


1843, 
August 


rhservations, 


Nnsis, 


MAS. 


fork, half a mile 
ublican, 


he Republican. 


he Republican, 
k. 


the sandy plain 
outh fork of the 


of Beaver fork. 


r Spring rivers, 


boulders, with 
riding grounds 
> i la Poudre 


Date. 


1845, 


August 


Se pt. 


") 


323 


[174] 


Table of latitudes and longitudes—Continued. 


Latitudes, 
42° 02’ 03” 
42 20 O06 
42 31 #17 
42 19 S38 
42 18 O8 
42 16 11 


41 46 54 
41 37 38 
41 29 53 
41 26 O8 
41 34 24 
41 39 45 
41 53 55 
42 03 47 
42 10 27 
42 29 05 
42 36 56 
42 39 57 
42 07 18 


41 59 31 
41 30 21 
41 30 22 
41 15 50 
41 ll 26 
41 10 42 
41 14 17 


Longitudes, 
107° 60’ 07” 
109 25 55 
110 #05) «(05 
110 10) 28 
110 25 06 
110 45 58 
lll 10 53 
lll 42 O8 

| lll 46 00 
112 15 46 
112 19 30 
112 06 48 
112 1) 30 
112 21 05 


— ~= Pe ee tee oe es 


ee 
Localities. 


et TS 


! 
High plateau between the waters of the Atlantic 
and the gulf of California. 
Gap in the Sweet Water mountains, 


Sweet Water river. 
Sweet Water river. 
Near South pass, on a small affluent to the Sandy 


_ fork of Green river. * 
Sinall stream, tributary to the Little Sandy river. 


Little Sandy river. 


Green river, lett bank. 

Green river, near old trading post, at point whero 
the road to the Columbia leaves the river, 

Black's fork of Green river, 


lack’s fork. 


Small stream, tributary (o Ham’s fork. 


Muddy river of Ham's iv k. 
Muddy river. 
Bear river. 


Bear river. 


| Bear river, above ‘Thomas's fork, 


| ‘Tullick’s fork of Bear river. 


Bear river. 


Beer springs. 


| Entrance of the beautiful 


pass with the remarks 
able rock. . 


Branch ot Roseaux or Reed river, 


Swampy place, a little distance from Roseaux 


creek, 


' Bear river, near the mouth, 


Mouth of Bear river. 

Weber's fork. 

Weber's fork, very near the mouth, 
Island in the Great Salt lake. 


Halt in the Mud, 


324 


Tuble of latitudes and longiltudes—Continued, 


Date. Latitudes, Longitudes, Localitics, 


a 


* ' 1845. 
Sop, 18 112° O85’ | Bear river, south of the gape a jain 


12 OL Roseaux or Reed river. 
Pannack river, 
| Port Hall 
Snake river, above the American tall 
Spake river. 
Roek creek, of Snake river, 
Snake river, opposite to the River spring, 
| Snake river, 2 miles below Fishing fall 
Snake river, 


Ford where road crosses the Snake rive 


Big Wood river, or Riviere Boise 

Big Wood river, or Riviere Boise. 

Fort Boisée, 
| Snake river, below Birch ereek, 
| Head water of Burnt river, (Riviere Beuloe.) 
| Old bed of Powder river. 
Powder river. 
| Grand Rona, 
Blue mountains, cast of the summit. 
Walahwalah river, foot of the mountains. 
Fort Nez Perce. 
Noon halt—left bank of the Columbia. 


Left bank of the Columbia. 


Left bank of the Columbia. 

Missionary station at the Dalles of the Columbia. 
Station on hills in rear of the mission. 

Right bank of the Columbia, 15 miles below the 


cascades, 
Large branch of Fall river, (Riviere aux Chutes.) 


Mar. 10,22 


325 c 174 Y 


Table of latitudes and longitudes—Continued, 


— 


—_—_—_—-—- --— - - aD 
Date. | Latitudes, | Longitudes, Localities, 

oe —_—— —— a canes) tania Geummaal Gondimneiaeiieeenume OO 
184, 


Tea tae ita 


Nov. 27 | 459 O06’ 45” | 121° 02’ 43’ | South end of Taih prairie. 


10 44635 & 12) 10 25 Main branch of Fall river. 


Dec 5} 43 65 20 | - Fall river, (Union Palla.) 
6 | 43 44 15 - Fall river, (Union falls.) 
a fait 7 | 43 30 36 | 121 33 60 | Fall river, (Union Falls.) 
x, 43 17 49 - Cump in a pine forest, ‘ 
1) | 42 66 5) - Tlamath lake. 
biel shan 139 | 42 51 26 | 121 20 4% | Tributary to the lake and head water of the 
ng fall Tlamath river, 
16 | 42 57 22 - Summer lake. 
, 18 | 42 42 37 - Summer lake. 
mene 24 | 42 23 25 ° Christmas lake. 
26 | 42 00 09 - Desert valley among black rocky hills. 
ne 29 41 27 60 - Camp of the 29th to 30th. 
31 4) 19 55 - New-year’s Eve camp. 
1844, " 
oro Brulde.) Jan. 3. 40 48 15 - Camp near the Mud lake. 
6! 40 39 46 - Camp near Great Boiling spring. 
15 39 51 13 - Pyramid lake, mouth of Salmon Trout river. 
18 39 24 16 - Camp on a river of the Sierra Nevada, 
mit. 19 39 19 2) - | Camp on a river of the Sierra Nevada, 
untainse 21 39 O1 83 - Camp on a river of the Sierra Nevada. 
22 | 38 49 54 - Camp on a river, near a gap. 
nbia, 23 38 36 19 - Camp on a southern branch of stream of encamp- 
| ment of 22d to 23d. 
24 | 38 24 28 - Head waters of’ a stream. 
26) 38 18 01 - Camp on a large stream. 
te Colum od Ghigo trp rete ms 
Loh. Fel). 5 | 38 42 26 - First camp in the pass of the Sierra Nevada. 
sea alse the 14, 19 | 38 41 57 | 120 25 57 | The Long camp. 7 
aua Chutes.) 24 | 38 46 58 | 120 34 20 | Rio de los Americanos, (high in the mountain.) 
Mar. 10, 22 | 38 34 42 - Nveva Hetvetia. 


[174] 326 


Tuble af latitudes and longitudes—Coninued, 


Date, Latitudes. | Longitudes, | Localities, 


——— ° ——— 


1a, 
March 25 23” | 191° 23’ 03” | Rio de los Mukelemnes. 


2) ¢ 2 48 ist 16 Rio de las Calaveras, 
QA % 26 121 07 Stanislaus river, 
31 r AS 120 46 Stanislaus river, 
120 568 Large tributary of the San Joaquin, (no name.) 
120 45 San Joaquin river, 
120 28 San Joaquin river, 
110 41 Lake fork, (of the Tulares. ) 
119 Sinall stream affluent to the lake, (‘Tulares. ) 
118 { Small stream affluent to the lake, (Tulares, ) 
Near Pass creek in the mountains, (Sierra Ne- 
vada.) 
Small stream cust of the Sierra Nevada. 
Rock spring. 
Spring heads of a stream among foot hills of the 
mountain, 
Mohuhve river, on the Spanish trail from Pueblo 
de los Angeles to Santa Fé. 
Mohahve river, on the Spanish trail from Pueblo 
de los Angeles to Santa Fé, 
Agua de Tomaso, on the Spanish trail. 
Hernandez spring. 
Deep Spring hole on a river which loses itself i 
| the sands, 
Las Vegas, (the plains. ) 


Branch of the Rio Virgen. 


Rio Virgen. 


Rio Virgen. 
| Rio Virgen. 
| Vegas de Santa Clara. 
A fine rolling prairie at the spring head of a tribu- 
tary to Sevier lake. 
Sevier river. 
First stream of Utah lake. 


Right-hand branch of Spanish fork. 
Head of Spanish fork. 


327 


Table of latitudes and longitudes—Continued, 


Latitudes, Longitudes, | Localities, 


— 


A0® OO’ O7" | - Head of Uintah river 
18 113? La’ Duchesne fork, 
27 oo AG Uintah fort. 


a8 100-87 «07 | Ashley's fork. 


in, (no name.) 46 - | Brown's Hole on Green river, 

46 2 Cireen river in Brown's Hole, 

a Elk Head river, 

Elk Head river, 
, (Tulares. ) ‘ Valley of the North fork of Platte, (foot of the 
mouwtains. ) 
(Tulares, ) Valley of the North fork of Platte, (higher. ) 

ny, (Sierra No- ( New Park. 


yevada. ' New Park. 


Old Park, fork of Grand river, 
foot hills of the ¢ Bntrance of bayou Salade—head of Fontaine-qui- 
houit’? South fork of the Platte ? 
rail from Pueblo ob Small affluent to the Arkansas. 
rail from Pueblo ‘ ‘ | A larger affluent to the Arkansas. 
: trail. é 2 | Junction of Arkansas and Fontaine-qui-bouit 
rivers, 
| Near Bent’s fort on the Arkansas river. 
ch loses itself i : | Sinoky Hill river. 
| Smoky Hill river. 
| 
Smoky Hill river. 


| Smoky Hill river, below Pawnee village. 


Smoky Hill river. 


| ‘Three miles south of Smoky Hill fork. 
Between Smoky Hill fork and the Santa Fé trail. 
+ head of a tribu- Santa Fé road. 


Black jack on the Santa Fé road. 


i ac 


THE EXPEDITION OF 1843-44. 


M 
Z 
=) 
| 
= 
< 
- 
j= 
= 
M 
ra ; 
° 5 
a 
= : 
= 
hema 
— 
—) 
7, 
fo) 
on 
7 
M 
a 


[174 J 330 


ENCAMPMENT AT THE KANSAS LANDING. 
Determination of time, May 18, 1843—altiludes of the sun. 


OBSERVATIONS.” 
FINST SERIES, SECOND SERIES, 
Double altitudes of the | Time of chronometer. || Double altitudes of the e| Time of chronometer. 

sun’s lower limb. sun’s lower limb. | 

Deg. min. sec. h. min. — sec. Deg, min. sec. ha. ys min, — sec. 
58 12 20 4 45 20.0 66 45 = 00 49 07.0 
57 =664 10 46 07.5 56 7 50 49 49.0 
67 32 40 47 = 04.0 56 13 25 50 27.0 
57 17 40 47 420 || 55 59 00 fl 04.7 
67 03 45 48 17.4 || 65 46 30 51 37.0 


= 


Index error = -- 22sec. 


RESULT OF CALCULATION. 


t Mean time. Advance. 
he = min. — see. he = omine — see. 
4 29 50 0 18 49.3 


Determination of time, May 19, 1843—altitudes of the sun. 


OBSERVATIONS. 


FIRST SENIES. \| SECOND SERIES. 


| 
\| 


Time of chronometer. || Double altitudes of the | ‘Time of chronometer. 
sun’s lower limb. 


Double altitudes of the | 
sun's lower limb. 


\} e 
Deg. min. sec. h. min. sec. || Deg. min. sec. h. min. Sec. 
51 44 30 % 27 17.0 | 53) «58830 7 $333 05.0 
52 22 60 28 68.3 = | 54 33 00 34 ° 36.8 
62 50 35 30. «10.5 | ° «54 57 50 35 =. 440.0 
63 19 05 3l 24.2 || 65 25 20 37 16.3 
y 56 Ol 50 38 8 8=.25.0 
| ; 
Index error = + 20 sce. 
RESULT OF CALCULATION. 
Mean time. , Advance. 
he min. — see. he. = min, — sec. 
7 13 59 0 18 39 


* The “observations” in these tables are given in civil time. 


ee 


—— 


Doubl 
sun 


De: 
y 
y 
y 
" 


_— 


331 [ 174 ] 


ENCAMPMENT AT THE KANSAS LANDING. 


he sun, 
Determination of time, May 19, 1843—altitudes of the sun. 


41 57 30 27 = 45.4 


OBSERVATIONS. 
ie Ee ee a= | : a 
a — FIRST SERIES. ! SKCOND SERIES, 
chronometer, er Se OT Se eT, | a ee io 
| 
Double altitudes of the | ‘Time of chronometer. Double altitudes of the | Time of chronometer. 
a one sun’s lower limb, 1 sun's lower limb, 
min. — sec, i | Se laeclinseatricaiat Si cca 
49 07.0 . . | ; . 
19 49.0 Deg. min. sec. h. min. — see. Deg. min, sec. h. min, — sec. 
50 27.0 43 OL 08 5 24 595 || 41 35 35 5 28 43.0 
51 04,7 42 44 40 25 41.0 | 41 22 40 29 17.3 
37.0 42 31 55 26 140 | 41 08 2 29 53.0 
42 11 10 27. 09.3 | 
| 
| 


Ee a a ounce — onan eee e ES ce 


Index error = + 15 sec. 


RESULT OF CALCULATION. 


Mean time. Advance. 


A. min. — sec. he = mine see. 


| 
| 
| Pesce tata cates Neate css rae ch ees 
| 


5 09 652 0 18 = 21.6 
SUN, a 
Determination of time, May 21, 1843—allitudes of the sun. 
cata: OBSERVATIONS, 
Saas de FINST SERIES. SECOND SERIES. 
hronometer, | a: anna acer ania a occ 
Double altitudes of the | Time of chronometer. | Double altitudes of the | Time of chronometer. 
eee sun’s lower limb. | sun’s lower limb. 
Nn. See. ae ee ea Oe eT ay, 
cane Deg. min. sec. h. min. sec. | Deg. min. sec. h. min. sec. 
erin: | 71 45 50 8 17 020 ” 
mre 70 43 © 20 8 14 210 | 7 17 50 18 25.6 
| His 70 58 40 15 010 | 72 36 00 19 11.0 
0 71 #15 20 15 43.7 | 72 53 00 19 56.0 
Pe 71 #29 45 16 20.5 | 73 #05 40 20 29.0 
~Tndex error = + 1 min. 30 sec. : : 
me RESULT OF CALCULATION. 
ae Mean time. Advance. 


h. = min. see. he. = =min. — sec. 
Se 7 59 28 0 17 42.9 


r174) 332 
ENCAMPMENT AT THE KANSAS LANDING. 


Determination of time, May 22, 1843--alliludes of the sun. 
OBSERVATIONS. 


| 
\) 


FIRST SERIES, SECOND SERIES. 


Double altitudes of the | Time of chronometer. || Double altitudes of the | Time of chronometer, 
sun’s lower limb. | sun’s lower limb. 
Deg. min. see. he min. — see. Deg. min. see. he min, see. 
66 08 40 8 Ol 33,3 67 47 20 8 05 49.3 
66 34 50 02 40.5 68 O02 10 06 28.0 
66 52 30 03 27.4 68 17 +00 07 05.0 
67 29 50 05 04.6 69 15 20 09 38.0 


67 05 40 04 = 02.0 | 68 41 00 0s 08.0 


Index error = + 1 min. 12 sec. 


RESULT OF CALCULATION. 


Mean time. | Advance. 


Eee EEEEEEEEEERIEEEEEEneeneme 


he min. — see. | h. = min. — see. 
7 48 06 | 0 17 17.9 


Determination of time, May 22, 1843—altitudes of the sun. 


OBSERVATIONS. 


FIRST SERIES. SECOND SERIES. 


Double altitudes of the | Time of chronometer. || Double altitudes of the | Time of chronometer. 
sun‘s lower limb. sun's lower limb. 


» Deg. min. sec. h. min. — see. Deg. min. sec. h. min. sec. 
53 42 30 4 657 62.5 52 19 20 5 Ql 28.5 
53 29 30 4 658 26.7 62 05 40 02 02,6 
53 10 10 4 59 15.5 61 52 10 02 39.2 
52 49 50 5 00 10.2 51 40 50 03 = 06.7 
52 34 40 6 00 49.0 61 28 55 03 39.3 
‘Index error erat 10 sec. —— 
RESULT OF CALCULATION. 
Mean time. Advance. 
he min. see. he = =min. sec. 


4 43 53 0 17 3.8 


_ 


Double al 
sun’s 


Double a 
sun’s | 


Deg. 
63 


63 
63 
64 
64 


——— 


SUN. 


ee 


chronometer, 


tn. 


ronometer. 


333 [ 174 ] 


ENCAMPMENT AT THE KANSAS LANDING. 
Determination of time, May 23, 1843—altitudes of the sun. 


OBSERVATIONS, 


FINST SENIES. | SECOND SERIES, 
——————|——__———_—__+-—-———- 
Double altitudes of the | Time of chronometer. | Double altitudes of the | ‘Time of chronometer 
sun’s lower limb. sun’s lower limb. 
| ” 
eee ee PP pa ——— 
Deg. mine see. h. min. wee. II, Deg. mine see. he mine see 
5S 43 40 7 41 31.3 | 60 25 30 7 45 56,u 
59 05 30 2 27.2 | 60 30 50 16 32.0 
59 28 00 | 4313.3 | 60 55 00 47%) 09.8 
69 40 10 | Ae 56.7 61 12 20 | 17 66.0 
60 OL 50 44 63.0 ‘| BL 27) («5S 4935.8 
| | 
Index error == +- Ll min. 10 sec. 
RESULT OF CALCULATION. 
eS ee LE —_—_—_—— Tt etic 
Mean time. Advance. 
h. mine See. ; h. mine « See. 
q 28 21 0 16 52.27 


ree Se 


Determination of time, May 24, 1843—allitudes of the sun. 


OBSERVATIONS. 


\| 
| 
FINST SERIES. | 


SECOND SERIES, 


\{ 
Double altitudes of the | ‘Time of chronometer. || Double altitudes of the | 'Time of chronometer 


sun’s lower limb. | | sun’s lower limb. 
(See —————_—_—___-- —_—-— 
Deg. min. sec. he. min. see. 1 Deg. min. sec. he min. — see. 
63 22 10 7 52 44.0 i] 64 26 8620 7 65 29.4 
63 34 40 53 15.5 | 64 36 20 55 = 4.5 
et * aa aeee dt eee ie, Coun ae 
64 = 02 55 a 0 | 9) 56 = 50.7 
64 15 20 65 = 00.5 } 65 11 20 57 =. 25.0 


Index error = -- | min. 17 sec. 


RESULT OF CALCULATION. 


Mean time. Advance. ° 
en ag ee ER ee ee ne) 
he min. — see. he min. — see. 

q 38 = 34 0 16 33,4 
a a a I a aa a 


[ 174] 334 


ENCAMPMENT AT THE KANSAS LANDING. 
Determination of time, May 25, 1843—allitudes of the sun. 
OBSERVATIONS. 


FIMST SERIES. | P SECOND SERIES, 


cates nd! etka i ese 


| 
| 

Double altitudes of the | ‘Time of chronometer. } Double altitudes of the | Time of chronometer, 

sun’s lower limb. | sun’s lower limb. 

i | 

| | 


| | 
Deg, min. (oe min, see. | Deg. min. see. | he min, — see. 
43 5 5 2b 225 || 2 38 40 5 27 520 
| 25 02.0 4 92 95 | 28 33.5 
25 46.3 42 08 30 | 29° 11.0 
25 220 | 4) 54 15 29 47.0 
26 540 | 41 39° 15 3026.0 


Index error = — 4 see. 


RESULT OF CALCULATION. 


| 
Mean time. | Advance. 
| 


min. — See, min, — SEC 


it 1] 16 14.8 


Determination of time, May 26, 1813—alliludes of the sun. 


OBSERVATIONS. 


FIRST SERIES. SECOND SERIES, 


| 


Double altitudes of the Time of chronometer. |) Double altitudes of the | Time of chronometer. 
sun’s lower limb. | sun's lower limb. 


Double alt 
sun’s lo 


Deg. 
41 
40 


min, A. min. 
43 7 57 
ol 58 
14 58 40 
24 59 40 
38 59 40 


Index error =- + Ll omin. 5 sec. 


RESULT OF CALCULATION. 


Mean time. Advance. 


min. See. - min, sec. 
7 40 51 0 16 14.8 


aa " eaemee eer TT rrr ere ree ert © Se Sas Vee eee men oes eee 


oy 
e 


lhe sun. 


of chronometer, 


min, see. 
27 52.0 
28 33.5 


29 «11.0 

2947.0 

JO 26.0 
8 


he sven. 


t’ chronometer, 


min, — see. 
57 36.3 
58 22.0 
58 56.4. 
59 24.0 
59 56.7 


335 [ 174 ] 


ENCAMPMENT AT THE KANSAS LANDING. 
Determination of latitude, May 26, 1843—altitudes of Polaris. 


OBSERVATIONS. 
Double altitudes of Polaris, Time of chronometer, 
Deg, min, — see. he ming — see. 
75 31 00 10 45 47 
75 34 40 50 54 
715 34 20 52 26 
75 35 00 §3 61 
75 35 35 56 233 


Index error — — 4 sec, 


RESULT OF CALCULATION. 


ee - —— - : _~ — 


| 
True altitude. Mean time. | Latitude. 


seta 


Deg. min. see. he min, see. | Deg. min. see. 
37 45 46 10 35 «642 | 39° OT 85 


a ° —= 3 


ee 


| 

} 

; 
4 
Be 
4 

q 

tz 


ENCAMPMENT AT ELM GROVE, 
Determination of longitude, May 30, 1843—allitudes of the sun. 


OBSERVATIONS. 


FIRST SERIES. SECOND SERIES, 


Double altitudes of the | Time of chronometer. || Double altitudes of the | ‘Time of chronometer. 
sun’s lower limb. sun’s lower limb. 


ess 
Deg. min. see, h. min, — gee. } Deg. min. see. he mine — see. 
41 05 15 5 34 12.0 | 39 48 20 5 37 ~=633.0 
40 48 v0 34 56.38 39°37 55 3801.0 
40 32 55 35 35.0 || 39 «2405 38 =. 36.7 
40 lv 930 36 15.5 | 39 ol 55 39 10.0 
40 03 30 36 52.2 |! 39 sO 50 39 =: 86.6 
Index error =: — 10 see. 
RESULT OF CALCULATION. 
teh ee } a = a eee es 
Mean time. | Advance. Longitude. 
| 
es ——-> —_ ae ee 
he min, see. h. min. sec. Deg. min. — sec. 
5 2) 2l | 0 15 44.1 4 825 BI 
| 
ES TTS I I 


onteeetienemeeee eee 


4 


ee 


[174 ] 336 


ENCAMPMENT AT ELM GROVE. 
Determination of longitude, May 30, 1843—alltitudes of a Lyra, 


OBSERVATIONS. 
ouauenaae 7 i oe 
FINST SERIES, SECOND SERIES, 
scmamiianchesatinciai Si | am 
Double altitudes of « | Time of chronometer. Double altitudes of « | Time of chronometer, 
Lyra, Lyrw, 
Deg. min see. he min, — see, | Deg. min. see. he mine see, 
65 12 10 y ll 22.5 
65 42 60 12 50.0 67 40 Ov 9 18 22.0 
66 10 00 It 05.0 6s 20 00 20 38.5 
66 «4 Av 15 35.0 “oO OO 00 22. 08,0 
67 «=6—OR8 O00 16 = =49,0 
—_—-— _- - | a 
Index error «= — 10 see, 
RESULT OF CALCULATION, 
Mean time. | Advance. 
fe ee eee Ee — | uso ns wien op i Semen omaeadib 
he. mine — see. | A. ming — see. 
9 l ot 0 15 41.2 


| 
| 


Determination of Tailiads, May 30, 1843—allitudes ea Polaris. 


OBSERVATIONS. Det 
| 
Double altitudes of Polaris. 4 ‘ime of chronometer. 
SS re ee Sieedsbigaigitcaitneihatbia 
Deg. min. — see. | he mine see. 
74 41 10 9 27 4) 7 
43 lu 30 12 os 
Al 00 | 3L 28 
A2 50 34 06 
43 10 37 4 
43 00 E 38 43 
43 50 ’ 40 49 
4340 4239 a. 
44 30 | 44 34 
45 10 46 2 


— 


Index error = — 10 see. 


RESULT OF CALCULATION. 


True altitude. Mean time. Latitude. 
es A. 
; 9 
Deg. min. sec. he min. sec. Deg. min. sec. 
37 20 14 9 21 43 38 49 41 


. 
SSS SS SSS SSNS? 


337 [14]. 


ENCAMPMENT ON A SMALL TRIBUTARY TO THE KANSAS RIVER. 


fia Lyra, Determination of latitude, June 1, 1843—allitudes of Polaris. 
OBSERVATIONS. 
Double altitudes of Polaris, ‘l'ime of chronometer. 

of chronometer, P| et) age ey a> a ‘ : as: a, 
Deg. min, see. he mine see 
75 07 40 i) 40 f4 
— 75 0s 10 42 30 
min, — see, 75 oo 10 44 52 
75 op 20 46 38 
18 22.0 75 10 00 48 33 


20 38.5 
22 08.0 ne _ - ; - — _ - ee 


Index error «= — 10 sec, 


RESULT OF CALCULATION, 


- ) 


a True altitude. Mean time. | Latitude. 
— a EE) | pe aN einen 
Deg. min, — see. he min, — see. Deg. min. see. 
CRE aay 37 33 05 i] 26 53 | 39 Ol 16 
Cc. ee TS 
» 
Polaris. 
Determination of longitude, June 1, 1843—altitudes of « Lyre, 
—————— 
er. OBSERVATIONS, 
: Double altitudes of a Lyra. | Time of chronometer. 
| 
a — re nego ITS 
; | 
Deg. min. — see, he min. see. 
76 01 50 9 35 12.5 
76 36 50 36 55.0 
77 ~=00 40 37 59.5 
| 
Index error = — 10 sec. 
RESULT OF CALCULATION. 
. 
Mean time. Advance. Longitude. 
de. ” 
he min. see. h. min. Bee. Deg. min. see. 
9 18 49 e 0 17 53 95 ll 09 = 
m., sec. M wat? 5 . 
oe 64 22 aaa 


[ 174] 338 


ENCAMPMENT ON BLACK CREEK, A TRIBUTARY TO THE KANBAB, 


Determination of latitude, June 4, 1843—alltitudes of Polaris. 


OBSERVATIONS, 
Double altitudes of Polaris, Time of chronometer. 
~ min, see, h. = omin, — see, 
7 28 45 9 32 00 
75 28 00 35 13 
75 30 00 37 00 
76 30 00 38 56 
Index error =m — 15 sec, 
RESULT OF CALCULATION, 
True altitude. | Mean time. | Latitude. 
-~- min. see. | he min, see. | Deg. min. see. 
3 41 13 9 16 10 39 1) 17 


| | — 


7 
| De 
Determination of longitude, June 4, 1843—altitudes of o Lyre. 
R | OBSERVATIONS. 
ih ER Ee i an ey Pe ee RP eee Soaimaoeeee 
: 
i { Double altitudes of a Lyre. Time of chronometer. 
a 
; -_ 
| 4g min, see. he min. see. 
8 46 50 9 43 32.5 
84 8616 = 20 4741.0 
’ 
i Index error = — 15 sec. 
RESULT OF CALCULATION. 
" 


ANSAS. 


laris, 


8€Ce 


339 [ 174 J 
ENCAMPMENT ON ELK CREEK, A TRIBUTARY TO THE KANSAS. 


Determination of longitude, June 5, 1843—allitudes of the sun. 
OBSERVATIONS, 


A NE ee ee -- 


} 
PIRAT BERIKA, | 


ee - . . - | oe oe a ome —_- . me 


SKCOND SENIKG, 


Double altitudes of the | ‘Time of chronometer, | Double altitudes of the | ‘Time of chronometer, 
aun’s lower limb. sun's lower limb. 


Deg. min, see. h. min, — see. Deg. min, see. h. min. see. 
4406«(3siO 6 93 140 | 42 43. 90 6 37 97.0 
43 68) «8h 4 #195 || #42 87 60 38 (10.4 
43 43° «(00 36 600.0 «||: 488 39 02.5 
43 32 (80S sCS 36 27.8 | 41 52 40 39 «61.6 
43° 21) 60 35 «67.6 | 41 42 10 40 21.5 


Index ‘error as tae 15 sec. 


RESULT OF CALCULATION, 


SE NR ee on a os 


Mean time. | Advance, Longitude. 


oe re ne ae eee 


| 
h. min. — see. | A. min. see. ; 
5 17 00 0 19 847 96 06 02 
> 


eee ee ae 8 ee — a r--- os 


Delermination of latitude, June 5, 1843—altiludes of Polaris. 


OBSERVATIONS. 
Pa ee Oe ee re eee — ate ak esa 
Double altitudes of Polaris. Time of chronometer. 

Deg. min. sec. | h. min. see. 

75 55 40 | 10 56 28 

75 66 60 | 58 63 

715 57 20 1] 01 16 

75 8 65 02 62 

75 69 00 04 63 

76 00 30 06 62 

76 «01-10 | 0s 42 

16 01 45 | 10 04 

Index error = — 15 sec, 
RESULT OF CALCULATION. ( 


True altitude. Mean time. Latitude. 


he. min. see. 
10 43 50 


Deg. min. sec. 
37 68 16 


[174 J 340 


, , , F ENCA 
Determination of latitude, June 9, 1843—altiludes af Polaris, 
D 
OBSERVATIONS, 
Double altitudes of Polaris. Time of chronometer, 

Deg. min. — see, A, min, see, Doubl 
75 a4 Ay LO ty) 18 wun’ 

75 uh i) 22 A 

i) 6 An 24 42 

75 3S 00 20 07 
7% 39 40 a2 46 a 
7% 40 oS 34 53 4 
qumentbemes 53 
43 
Index error = — 15 see, 52 

RESULT OF CALCULATION, 
True altitude, Mean time. Latitude, ——— 
ae | 
Deg. min, — see. h. min, — gee, | Deg. min, — see = 
374788 | 10 = ORs 39 0=— 03s 

L 


Determination of longilude, June 9, 1843—alliludes of the sun. 


OBSERVATIONS. 


Double altitudes of the sun’s lower limb, Time of chronometer, 
Deg. min. see. | h, mine see, 
29 51 15 \ 6 23 05.5 
31 24 10 27 19,0 
32 00 80 28 «5.0 
32 21 ts) 29 51.0 
32 43S 300 89.0 


Index error es — 15 sec. 


RESULT OF CALCULATION. 


Mean time. Advanee. ‘tude. 


he. min. — see. h. = min. sec. 
- 6 08 39 0 19 21.6 I 


ee ee 


341 [ 174] 


ENCAMPMENT ON THE SMOKY HILL FORK, HALP A MILE FROM [Ts JUNC. 
olaris. TION WITH THE REPUBLICAN, 


Determination of longitude, June 10, 1843—altitudes of the sun. 
OWSERVATIONS, 


Filta’ ShAthe, | SRCOND SERENA, 
| 


| 
Double altitudes of the | Time of chronometer, || Double altitudes of the | Time of chronometer, 
wun'’s lower limb, | wun'w lower limb, 


he min, » min, 
5 O07 

oo 

lo 

1 

12 


| 
} 
| 
| 
| 


Index error e — 10 see, 


RESULT OF CALCULATION. 


Mean time. Advance, | Longitude, 


he min, — wee, » min, — see, Dey, min, — see, 
4 53 3O 19 04,5 6 24 66 


Determination of latitude, June 10, 184S—altiludes of Polaris. 


OBSERVATIONS. 


1@ Sunn. 


Double altitudes of Polaris. | Time of chronometer. 


~ T/T 


Deg. min, — see, he min. 
75 9 
75 

75 

75 

75 

75 

75 

75 

75 

75 


Index error — — 10 sec. 


RESULT OF CALCULATION. 


True altitude. Mean time. Latitude. 


Deg. min. see, h. min, see. min, see. 
37 40 50 9 30 03 03 38 


342 


ENCAMPMENT ON THE SMOKY HILL FORK, HALF A MILE FROM ITS JUNC. 
TION WITH THE REPUBLICAN, 


Determination of longitude, June \0, 1848—altitudes of « Cygni. 
OBSERVATIONS. 


Double altitudes of a Cygni. 


Deg. min, sec. 
71 47 50 
72 36 00 
73 05 20 
73 40 00 
74 16 15 


Index error = — 10 sec. 


RESULT OF CALCULATION. 


Mean time. | Advance. Longitude. 


ENCAMPMENT ON A TRIBUTARY TO REPUBLICAN FORK. 


Determination of latitude, June 12, 1843—altiludes of Polaris. 
OBSERVATIONS. 


Double altitudes of Polaris. | 


aed 


Time of chronometer. 


min. see. | 
09 00 
10 00 | 
30 
50 
20 
30 
50 


Index error = — 12 sec. 


RESULT OF CALCULATION. 


True altitude. Mean time. Latitude. 


Deg. min. sec. h. min. — sec. Deg. min. 
38 04 18 9 47 51 39 22 


eS eee 


ITS JUNC. 


Cygni. 


sec, 
[2 


343 C174 4 


ENCAMPMENT ON A TRIBUTARY TO REPUBLICAN FORK, 
Determination of longitude, June 12, 1843—altitudes of « Aquilz. 


OBSERVATIONS. 


eee 


Double altitudes of a Aquile. Time of chronometer. 


Deg. min. sec. h. = =min, see. 
54 29 00 | 10 33 54.5 
55 30 30 36 35.4 
66 15 20 | 3835.0 


Index error = — 12 sec. 


RESULT OF CALCULATION. 


qapeeaientnecanneecceneneoroenvens ey) 
s 


Mean time. Advance. Longitude. 
h. min. sec. min, — see. Deg. min. set. 
10 15 29 0 20 52,6 97 06 32 
| 


SECOND ENCAMPMENT ON THE TRIBUTARY TO REPUBLICAN FORK. 
Determination of longitude, June 15, 1843—allitudes of the sun. 


OBSERVATIONS. 


FIRST SERIES. SECOND SERIES. 


Double altitudes of the | Time of chronometer. || Double altitudes of the | Time of chronometer. 


sun’s lower limb. ; sun’s lower limb, 
cee — ee ee nee | enesas-evesjnsnsesieeennnenisise-agheennnenynassaGinD 

Deg. min. sec. h. min. — sec. Deg. min. sec. | h. min. sec. 

52 48 25 5 665 —_29.5 51 06 30 5 59 58.0 

562 33 35 56 = 06.0 50 53 30 | 6 00 29.6 

51 57 35 57 44.0 50 40 45) | 01 04.0 

51 32 20 58 48.0 50 30 = 15 | Ol 323 

6l 20 = 55 59 =-:18.0 50 19 00 02 02.6 

| 


| i 


nt a tg ng ce a gn ne me es a rr 


Index error — — 18 sec. 


RESULT OF CALCULATION. 


Mean time. Advance. Longitude. 
h. min. sec. he min. sec. Deg. min. see. 
4 59 33 0 59 44.6 98 ll 4l 


2 


LA SPOOR 


eR me i mc Sie, 


ol etaeaned 


st 
" 
i 


ear ewS 


RES Se 


. Oe lla 


f 174) - 344 


SECOND ENCAMPMENT ON THE TRIBUTARY TO REPUBLICAN FORK, ENCAMF 
Determination of latitude, June 15, 1843—altitudes of Polaris. De 
OBSERVATIONS. 
Double altitudes of Polaris. Time of chronometer. —— 
Deg. mine — see. he min. — see. es 
76 21 30 10 07 00 
_' 76 22 00 os 2 
76 22 25 09 51 
76 23 20 11 15 
76 23 40 2 15 
76 25 30 oT 17 
76 24 00 14 44 
76 25 00 17 37 
76 25 25 19 19 ah re 
76 27 10 21 31 


Index crror = — 12 sec. 


RESULT OF CALCULATION. 


True altitude. Mean time. Latitude. b: = 
(re eee eS a eee ts aa EED 0 STS SEE 
Deg. min. sec. h. = min. — see. Deg. min. — sec. 
38 10 34 9 13 50 | 39 «82—C—t«* A tg 
ENCAMPMENT ON A TRIBUTARY TO SOLOMON’S FORK OF THE REPUBLICAN, SE( 
¢ 
Determination of latitude, June 17, 1843—altitudes of Polaris. D 
OBSERVATIONS. 
Double altitudes of Polaris. | Time of chronometer. 7 
aoe Se a = ——_ —E —_ in ee ee 
Deg. min. sec. | ' h. = =min. — see. 
76 37 50 10 16 56 Double a 
76 38 20 18 41 sun’s | 
76 38 30 20 25 a 
76 39 20 22 33 
76 ©6389 ~=—«50 | 23 40 Deg. 
76 40 10 | 25 46 42 
76 40 40 26 50 42 
76 41 20 | 28 ll 41 
76 42 00 | 29 41 4] 
76 42 10 30 50 4) 


EE 


Index error — — 14 sec. 


RESULT OF CALCULATION. 


| | 


True alt..ude. | Mean time. Latitude. 
a aca ie eeaeaeacesieas | Fercaicnr bendahara e 
Deg. min. sec. h. min. sec. Deg. min. _ sec. 
38 18 39 y 23 32 39 37 38 
‘| 
~ 


TE a 


AN FORK, 
Polaris, 


+ Sec. 
54 


/PUBLICAN, 
Polaris. 


Sec. 


345 [ 174 ] 


ENCAMPMENT ON A TRIBUTARY TO SOLOMON’'S FORK OF THE REPUBLICAN. 
Determination of time, June 17, 1843—altitudes of « Aquile. 


OBSERVATIONS. 


Double altitudes of a Aquila. Time of chronometer. 


Deg. min. sec. « h, min, sec. 
61 10 50 | 11 12 46.5 
61 40 00 14 07.5 
62 57 50 17 35.5 
63 19 20 18 35.0 
63 51 50 | 20 02.5 
64 25 00 2 34.0 
| 
Index error = — 14 sec. 


RESULT OF CALCULATION. 


Mean time. Advance. 
he min. — see. he mine — see. 
10 16 36 1 00 60.4 


SECOND ENCAMPMENT ON THE TRIBUTARY TO SOLOMON’S FORK. 


Determination of time, June 19, 1843—altitudes of the sun. 


OBSERVATIONS. 


| 


FIRST SERIES. SECOND SERIES. 


| } | 


Double altitudes of the | Time of chronometer. || Double altitudes of the | Time of chronometer. 

sun’s lower limb. | sun’s lower limb. | 

Deg. min. see. | h. min. sec. | Deg. min. sec. | hh. min. see. 
42 24 05 | 6 26 54.5 41 05 10 6 30 22.5 
42 08 10 27 = 36.5 40 652 40 30 =—-59.0 
41 54 50 | 28 #130 | 40 40 45° | 31 31.5 
41 42 30 28 646.3 40 14 50 | 32 40.0 
4) 31 15 | 29° 15.0. 40 04 10 3308.5 


RESULT OF CALCULATION. 


Mean time. Advance. 
h. = min. — sec. hh. = min. see. 
5 27 46 1 02 10 


s haeeeaeaiiehietineninnaeeddenieieaaned 


f 174 J 346 
SECOND ENCAMPMENT ON THE TRIBUTARY TO SOLOMON’S FORK. 


Determination of latitude, June 19, 1843—altifudes of Polaris. Dete 
OBSERVATIONS. 
Double altitudes of Polaris. Time of chronometer. ’ 
Deg. min. sec. h. min, — sec. 
76 43 35 * 10 01 60 
76 46 40 08 48 
76 48 40 14 36 
76 50 00 19 28 
76 61 20 22 14 


ae ee a 
+ 


Index error =: — 10 sec. 


RESULT OF CALCULATION. 


True altitude. Mean time. | Latitude. T 
Deg. min. — sec. h. min. — sec. Deg. min. sec. Deg. 
38 22 42 9 11 13 39 42 35 38 


ENCAMPMENT ON A TRIBUTARY TO REPUBLICAN FORK. 


Determination of time, June 22, 1843—allitudes of a Aquile. ENCAMP! 
OBSERVATIONS. Det 
FIRST SERIES. | SECOND SERIES. 
Seaacaes oa aS ee D 
Double altitudes of « | Time of chronometer. || Double altitudes of a | Time of chronometer. 
Aquila. Aquile. 
| 
Deg. min. sec. h. min. sec. |; Deg. min. sec. | h. min. see. 
49 29 10 10 26 37.0 54 32 10 | 10 38 68.0 
60 18 50 28 48.0 65 18 20 42 02.0 
61 41 00 32 =. 24.0 56 15 50 | 44 34.5 
———- + = —_ _ a a —— 
Index error = +- 1 min. 25 sec. 
: RESULT OF CALCULATION. 
Mean time. Advance. 
h. min. — see. h. min. see. 
9 30 42. l 05 01.5 


a eee ENERO R ESTE LTT I TT TES 


N’S FORK. 


Polaris. 


‘ter. 


— ae wae aes 


pf chronometer. 


min. set. 
39 = 8.0 
42 02.0 
44 934.5 


347 [ 174] 
ENCAMPMENT ON A TRIBUTARY TO REPUBLICAN FORK. 


Determination of latitude, June 22, 1843—altitudes of Polaris. 


OBSERVATIONS. 
Double altitudes of Polaris. Time of chronometer. 
Deg. min. sec. h. min. see. 
77 30 00 10 50 14 
77 30 30 52 05 
77 32 20 53 24 
77 32 30 54 27 
77 33 20 56 10 


ee ee = es 


Index error == + 1 min. 25 sec, 


RESULT OF CALCULATION. 


ae ce 


True altitude. Mean time. Latitude. 
-_--- -- | a= e | Seana i 
Deg. min. sec. h. min. sec. | Deg. min. see. 
38 45 22 9 48 15 39 53 59 


ENCAMPMENT ON PRAIRIE DOG RIVER, TRIBUTARY TO REPUBLICAN FORK. 
Determination of time, June 23, 1843—altitudes of a Cygni. 


OBSERVATIONS. 


Double altitudes of a Cygni. Time of chronometer. 


ee a 


Deg. min. — sec. h. min. — see. 
64 20 00 10 09 43.0 
64 48 50 11 12.5 
65 20 50 12 49.7 
65 51 30 14 25.0 
66 24 40 16 10.0 


Index error = — 10 sec. 


RESULT OF CALCULATION. 


Mean time. Advance. 


h. min. sec. he. min, — see. 
9 07 02 1 05 50.5 


£55 E SLT SLITS I eT 


[1744 348 


ENCAMPMENT ON PRAIRIE DOG RIVER, TRIBUTARY TO REPUBLICAN FORK, 


Determination of latitude, June 23, 1843—alliludes of Polaris, 


OBSERVATIONS. 

Double altitudes of Polaris. Time of chronometer. 
ee bas cabanas emp giennsenicmtnnecsas 
Deg. min, — see. | h. min. 8ee. 

77 = lS | 10 «44 83 
17 21 30 | 45 45 
77 22 45 A6 59 
77 23 40 48 65 
77-2540 | 52 (05 
77-2600 | 5359 
77 28 10 55 30 
77 28 10 | 57 Ag 
77 30 00 59 58 
77 30 00 ll ol 40 
Index error = — 10 see, 

RESULT OF CALCULATION. 

wich ciecma ——, 5 a Ss 
True altitude. | Mean time. | Latitude. 
; | ; ’ 
Deg. min. — sec. | he min, — see. | Deg. min. — sec. 
38 41 34 | 9 46 53 


| 39 49 28 


ENCAMPMENT ON A SMALL TRIBUTARY TO THE REPUBLICAN FORK. 
Determination of time, June 25, 1843—altitudes of « Cygni. 


OBSERVATIONS. 


Double altitudes of a Cygni. Time of chronometer. 


ree a eee ree eae ene we 


| 
ee | = 
Deg. min. — sec. he min. see. 
75 11 45 10 36 28.0 
75 40 00 37 66.0 
76 14 00 39 39.5 
Index error = — 10 sec. 
RESULT OF CALCULATION. 
Mean time. i Advance. 
as aE ae Serer are en ea oe SS 
h. min. — see. | h. min. _ see. 
9 30 09 1 07 61.8 


ee ae nae 


ENCAMP! 
R 


Dete 


De 


BLICAN Fork. 


Polaris, 


bmeter, 


eS 


titude. 


CAN FORK, 


1 Cygni. 


‘ 


349 [174 J 
ENCAMPMENT ON A SMALL TRIBUTARY TO THE REPUBLICAN FORK. 


Determination of latitude, June 25, 1843—altitudes of Polaris. 


OBSERVATIONS. 
Double altitudes of Polaris, Time of chronometer, 
Deg. min, — sec. h. min, — see, 
78 10 00 | 1] 10 03 
78 10 40 | 12 02 
78 ll 50 | 14 o2 ° 
78 14 20 15 50 
78 15 30 18 36 
Index error = — 10 see. 
RESULT OF CALCULATION. 
True altitude. Mean time. Latitude. 
Deg. min, set he mine — see, Dex. min. — sec. 
39 04 57 10 06 15 40 05 Os 


SEEDS 


ENCAMPMENT ON A SMALL LAKE IN THE SANDY PLAIN BETWEEN THE 
REPUBLICAN AND SOUTH FORKS OF THE PLATTE RIVER. 


Determination of time, June 28, 1843—allitudes of « Aquile. 


OBSERVATIONS. 
Double altitudes of a Aquila. | ‘Time of chronometer. 
oon [eoseeeene eerie ner tee eer eee 
Deg. min. — see. | he = min. see. 

59 35 00 | 10 36 = 08.0 
60 28 50 \ 38 | 34.0 
61 615 LO | 6 40 42.0 
62 06 10 43 01.0 
63 01 40 45 33.0 


Index error = — 2U sec. 


RESULT OF CALCULATION. 


Mean time. Advance. 
h. min. see. h. min. see. 
9 30 15 ! 10 32 


ae ce 


eS Se es 
ee age cee mre 


t 


i 

; A 
e a 

pi} 
an} 
i t 
oe 
A? ae 
7 ie 
; 

| 


[174] 350 


ENCAMPMENT ON A SMALL LAKE IN THE SANDY PLAIN BETWEEN THE 
REPUBLICAN AND SOUTH FORKS OF THE PLATTE RIVER. 


Determination of latitude, June 28, 1843—altitudes of Polaris. 


OBSERVATIONS. 
Double altitudes of Polaris. Time of chronometer. 
a a nr ee — a _ _ ° . _ ee ne eee 
| 
Deg. min. see. h, min. sec 
78 52 00 10 60 44 
718 53 40 | 63 06 
78 «©6565 20 | 54 = 49 
78 86 00 | 5633 
78 56 30 58 56 
78 57 30 11 01 07 
78 «5900 02 «36 
78 «659 = 20 | 04 11 
79 #01 «10 | 06 24 
79 01 25 07 33 


Index error = — 20 sec. 


RESULT OF CALCULATION, 


——— nee oe om eetremeee oe orcmvencanenaes 


True altitude. | Mean time. Latitude. 
Deg. min. see. h. min, sec. Deg. min. see. 


3 27 15 9 49 04 40 29 04 


| 


_-- 


Determination of latitude, June 28, 1843—meridian altitude of « Aquile. 


Double altitude of a Aquila. @ True altitude. Latitude. 
Deg. min. see. Deg. min. eee, Deg. min. sec. 
116 01 5u 58 00 30 40 27 24 


Det 


Doub! 


ee ee 


D 


Double al 


Deg. 
115 


: 
if 
361 [ 174 J 
ENT ON THE SOUTH FORK O RIVER. 
TWEEN THE ENCAMPM E H F F PLATTE RIVER 
ow Determination of time, June 30, 1843—altitude of the sun W. 
Polaris. 
OBSERVATION. 
——. Double altitude of the sun’s lower limb. Time of chronometer. 
ter. —_— OS 
cm Deg. min. see. h, min, see, ‘ 
50 25 25 6 18 34.0 
‘i ciniemabnino es wenseiaansGtesaeimnssasnicesat ae 
Index error = -+- 1 min. 27 sec, 
( 
} RESULT OF CALCULATION, 
ee es a eee eee 
, Mean time. | Advance, 
— —_— —_—-— —— ———__-——-- | So 
ie h. min, sec, he min, see, 
6 06 28 ] 12 05.9 
tude. ° ° ° J ° J e 
a Determination of latitude—meridian altitude ofa Aquile. 
in, see. ’ . 
9 04 OBSERVATION 
Double altitude of a Aquila. | True altitude. Latitude. 
| 
— ————————— NN Ee 
Deg. min. see. | Deg. min. see. Deg. min, sec. 
of « Aguile. 1155480 | 57 66% 40 31 02 
tude. ° 
Rn. Bee. 
7 24 


Ay 
i | 
ot 
i 
4 


¥ 
te 
’ 


sn 


ee 


eR Pa TH 


SSM ae 


a 


ACY SANTANA TNELD 


[ 174 ] 352 


ENCAMPMENT ON THE SOUTH PORK OF THE PLATTE RIVER, NINE MILES 
ABOVE THE MOUTH OF BEAVER FORK, 


Determination of time, July 1, 1843—altiludes of a Aquila. 
; OUSERVATIONS. 


Double altitudes of a Aquilw, Time of chronometer, 
Deg, min, — see, | homing ose, 
63 16 on 10 a7 45,0 
63 56 30 nO 22.0 
64 21 25 40 73.6 
64 532 00 4l e.0 
65 47 45 14 30,5 
Index error — JA sec. 
RESULT OF CALCULATION, 
wis ccesisninsuinmmmacadeinid | ee eee a 
Mean time. | Advanee, 
ee a ee ee ae 
he ming are. he omin. see, 
9 26 47 l 14 00,6 
Determination of latitude, July 1, 1843—allitudes of Polaris. 
OBSERVATIONS. 
Double altitudes of Polaris, Time of chronometer, 
Deg. min, — see. he min, see. 
78 33 10 | 10 52 OY 
78 35 50 | 53 48 
78 36 25 55 30 
e 78 38 fo { 57 62 
78 39 #830 5) 4d 
78 42 00 { 11 02 53 
78 #42 #00 @ 05 33 
78 43 10 | 0% 17 
78 44 30 t Os 66 
vi.) 46 10 | ll 35 
Index error == — 34 sec. 
RESULT OF CALCULATION, 


ar a | 
True altitude. | Mean time. | Tutitude. 
aaa Bc a cs a A 
Deg. min. — sec. | he. min. — see. e mine geC. 
39 18 37 | 9 47 31 ; V4 2k 
e 


FURL PARR Near ZENE ren enemnns mer te 


Double al 


sun's | 


ENCAM 


De 


+ eee 


353 
NINE MILES ST. VRAIN'S FORT, 


Determination af longitude, July 4, \8A3—allitudes of the sun. 


ONSERVATION®, 


quile, 


PIMAT Shh, SLCOSD SEATS, 


| | 
Double altitudes of the | Time of chronometer, Double altitudes of the | Thine of ehronometer. 
sun's lower limb, | sun's lower tinh, 


a —— — 


Deg. ming see | h, min, see. Deg, ming see | he min, 
“O00 6 45,0 fl 42 50 | 6 19 
oy 20 | 20.5 hi 20 (00 | Iw 
io 0 ) O85 ho 87 80 21 
26 Hi) 04.0 5 OO OO 23 
ee i 41.0 4g 66 40 25 


Index error == — 47 see, 


RESULT OF CALCULATION, 


Mean time. Advance. Longitude, 


Oe 


MIN, 80, he mine see Deg. min, see. 
67 50 ! ly 05.9 10g 2 23 


Polaris. = me ciciaadaeaiee PRC ier ea eed 


ENCAMPMENT ON THE SOUTH FORK OF PLATTE RIVER, NEAR CHERRY 
CREEK, 


Determination of latitude, July 7, 1843—altitudes of Polaris. 
OBSERVAIONS. 


i a a 


ae te ee ee + te ee ee 


Double altitudes of Polaris. Time of chronometer. 


Deg. min. — see, 
77 14 30 
77 15 OU 


he = omin, — gee. 
10 07 56 
09 62 


me ee ee eee 
iY 


a a ere re re Gee ene ween = ee we cena carer ee eee 


Index error =: — 2 min. 13 sec. 


RESULT OF CALCULATION. 


True altitude. Mean time. Latitude. 


Deg. min, see. min. see. Deg. min. see. 
38 36 = «(09 52 54 39 «643 O63 


23 


fim4) 354 
ENCAMPMENT ON THE SOUTIL PORK OF PLATTE RIVER 
Determination of longitude, July &, WAS—allitudes of the sun 


OUSEAVATIONS, 


Fitter ane 
— 


Double altitudes of the > Thue of elronometer, le altitiides of 
suiie lower limb ’ Lower bits 


ee a re ween 


Dew. min, 
L7 Li 
7 65 
is AS 
iv O45 
A nu 


RESULT OF CALCULATION, 


} 
| 
Mean time | ) ', | Lotrituils 
| 
| 


Determination of longitude, July Wy WAs—allitudes of the sui 


OBSERVATIONS. 


PINST SEUILS, LEOND SEULIM. 


Double altitudes ot the | Time of chronometer, Double altitudes of the | Tine of chronumete 


sun's lower limb. sun's lower limb, 


ee —— 


Deg. min, see. Ae omin, ., Li “fe WD. SOs he min. 
AA 85 50 } su 2, 41 iy) ‘ uN 
444 OBO 3) 447; 11S 
V4 00 40 31 Ws 41 Ov 
43 18 =O 32 17 | 10 V4 
43 26 30 J i, | 10 ol 


Index error == — 37 sec. 


ee 


RESULT OF CALCULATION. 


Mean time. Advance. Longitude. 


| 
Parte 
| 


———— Or 


355 [ 174 J 
- Determination of latitude, duly V5, 1843—allitudes of Polaris. 


the Sta 
ODS EAVATIONS, 


Double altitudes of Polaris. ot chronometer 


oO wo 

By AR 

a. | " 

++ iied- RESULT OF CALCULATION, 

AO 29, 

on ! } 

True altitude Moan time Latitude, 
| 
tite 
Determination of /ongilude, July 15, IS iS—allitudes of a Cygni. 

Pdhe sui OBSERVATIONS, 


Double altitudes of a Cyani. 


Time of chronometer, 


Deg, mine see, h. min, see. 


| 4 
x4 22 10 9) £ 65.0 


of chronomete 85 18 fo 8&7 32.0 
ah 56 10 69 7.5 
gb 32 40 | 10 v0 69.0 


87 et) 


Mine — BLE 


is Int 

At ee DT) Index error es — 830 sec, i 
Jo 19.5 

40 33.4 

i 7 { RESULT OF CALCULATION, 


Mean time. Advance. | Longitude. 


[ 174] 356 


JUNCTION OF ARKANSAS AND BOILING SPRING RIVERS, 
Determination of longitude, July 15, 1843—altitudes of the sun. 


OBSERVATIONS, 


FIRST SERIES. SECOND SERIES. 


Double altitudes of the | Time of chronometer. || Double altitudes of the | ‘lime of chronometer. 
sun’s lower limb. sun's lower limb, \ 


Deg. min. sec. he mine — see. Deg. min. : he. min. — see. 
41 51 15 7 48 03.0 43 ‘ 8 Ol 50.2 
42 14 00 59 01.0 | 4: ‘ 02 28.4 

00 69 37.6 || 4: 3 O83 07.2 
20 00 18.0 | ‘ ‘ 03 50.5 
30 00 62.0 | é 04 30,3 


Se + 


Index error = ++ 2 min. 9 see. 


RESULT OF CALCULATION. 


eee ee ee a 
| 
| 
{ 
| 
| 


h. min. sec. mine see. 
10 13.5 


Mean tine. Advance. Longitude. 


—$ 


Deg, min, see. 
104. 5880 


| 
| 
> 
| 


ENCAMPMENT AT BOILING SPRINGS, 


Determination of longitude, July 18, 1843—altitudes of the sun. 
OBSERVATIONS. 


in aincasioesiiowne _ 9 ar ene ne enn mene heey 


Double altitudes of the sun’s lower limb. | Time of chronometer. 


min. ; min, 
00 32 
21 32 
05 f 34 
20 35 
34 | 36 


Index error = -+ 1 min. 50 sec. 


RESULT OF CALCULATION. 


Mean time. Advance. Longitude, 


h. min. sec. fh. min, see. Deg. min, sec. 
9 18 35 1 09 58.5 105 «22 45 


Deters 


8, 


he sun. 


ooo 


anrOnpRneMT, 


in, see. 
01 50.2 
(2 28.4 
():3 07.2 
03 50.5 
04 30.3 


eens 


ude. 


Ne 80. 
> SL 


the stun. 


357 [ 174 ] 
ENCAMPMENT AT BOILING SPRINGS, 


Determination of longitude, July 18, 1843—distance from the moon’s 
second limb to the sun. 


OBSERVATIONS. 

Time of chronometer. Apparent distance. 
he mine see, Deg. mine — see, 
10 49 10 99 45 50 

50 44 | 99 45 30 
52 OL | 99 44 20 
63 10 99 44 00 
54 2 99 4 25 
55 55 } 99 2 45 
57 03 99 42 15 
58 31 ' 99 42 10 
59 32 99 4l 20 
Il 00 42 99 40 55 
02 04 99 40 25 
03 16 99 40 00 
04 39 99 39 = 30 
06 05 99 38 50 
07 45 99 38 10 
08 50 99 37 55 
10 05 99 37 05 
10 59 99 37 20 
11 58 99 36 35 
13 17 99 35 40 


Index error = ++ 1 min, 30 sec. 


RESULT OF CALCULATION, 


True distance. Mean time at Greenwich. Longitude. 
Deg. min. sec. | h. min, sec. 
99 26 33 16 650 47 


Hy 
i 


ae 


[174 j 358 
ENCAMPMENT AT BOILING SPRINGS, 
Determination of longitude, July 18, 1843—allitudes of the sun. De 


OBSERVATIONS, 


Double altitudes of the sun’s lower limb. Time of chronometer. 


Deg. mine see. | he min see, 
136 48 10 | 2 10 30.0 
136 28 50 | ll 49.5 
136 ll 40 12 59.0 
135 58 50 | 13 51.0 
135 48 8h | 1433.0 
—_—_—_—_—————————_——_——_ -—--- --—-- ---—— Re ree a a Mek el see} 
Index error = +- 1 min. 80 sce. 
RESULT OF CALCULATION. a 
| Pag ee eR ee 
Mean time. | Advance. Longitude. eran 
he min. see. he min. — see. Deg. min. see. ae 
l 02 49 1 09 55.3 105 22 45 
D 
= ae Sa re sc sell a a A ce 
Dete? 
Double 
AY 
Deg. 
89 
88 
87 
87 
86 
h. 
1! 


the sw. 


359 c 174] 
ENCAMPMENT AT BOILING SPRINGS, 
Determination of latitude, July 18, 1843—alliludes of Polaris. 
OBSERVATIONS, 


Double altitudes of Polaris. Time of chronometer. 


— — one erenneesons = ee 


min, 


Deg, mins — see. 


R 
a) 39 10 


76 40 00 
76 41 50 
76 40 10) 
76 45 20 
16 47 30 
76 51 50 
76 51 50 
76 53 20 


Index error = — 20 sec. 


RESULT OF CALCULATION. 


| . 
True altitude, Mean time. Latitude. 


ao eee ae ene 


mine SCC. ‘ Deg. min. — see. 
21 22 38 52 10 


Determination of longitude, July 18, 1843—allitudes of Arcturus. 


OBSERVATIONS. 


FIRST SERIES. | SECOND SERIES. 


| eae nese int 


Double altitudes of | Time of chronometer. || Double altitudes of | Time of chronometer. 
Arcturus. | Arcturus. 


Deg. min. see. 


73° ©=«50 
73 18 
72 «44 


Index error = — 30sec. 
RESULT OF CALCULATION. 


Mean time. | Advance. Longitude. 


A. min, 8c. 
11 08 14 


[174] 360 


ENCAMPMENT AT BOILING SPRINGS. 
Determination of longitude, July 19, 1843—dislance from the moon's 
second limb to Jupiter. 


OBSERVATIONS, 


Time of chronometer. | Apparent distance. 
he ming — see. Deg. min. see. 
5 39 03 59 41 30 

42 27 | 69 43 40 

44-26 59 «44 (30 

48 24 59 45 30 

50.0% | 59 46 8 10 

51 Al | 59 45 50 
Index error = — 30 sec. 


RESULT OF CALCULATION. 


True distance. Mean time at Greenwich. Longitude. 


| 


| 
| 


ENCAMPMENT ON SOUTH FORK OF PLATTE RIVER. 
Determination of latitude, July 21, 1843—allitudes of Polaris. 


OBSERVATIONS. 
Double altitudes of Polaris. Time of chronometer. 
Deg. min. — sec. h. = min. see. 
78 18 10 10 48 27 
78 19 20 19 50 66 
78 20 20 10 62 22 
78 21 40 10 54 27 
78 22 50 10 55 18 
78 24 10 10 57 43 
78 26 50 10 59 Lt 
78 27 00 ll Ol 59 
78 29 50 11 05 07 
78 30 40 11 06 06 
Index error = — 30 sec. 


RESULT OF CALCULATION. 


True altitude. Mean time. Latitude. 
Deg. min. sec. h. min. see. Deg. min. sec. 
39 10 36 9 48 52 39 4l 45 


—— 


— ae 


Dete 


eee 


Double 
Arc 


the moon's 


ttt ere 


olaris. 


e sec. 


361 r 1744 


ENCAMPMENT ON SOUTH FORK OF PLATTE RIVER. 
Determination of longitude, July 21, 1843—altitudes of Arcturus. 


OBSERVATIONS. 


FIRST SERIES. | SECOND SERIES. 


| 
an nnn ———— en ee 
| 

| 


Double altitudes of | Time of chronometer. | Double altitudes of | Time of chronometer. 


Arcturus. Arcturus. 

Deg. min. sec. h. min, see. Deg, min. sec. he min. sec. 
74 41 40 lt 09 = =652.0 71 #53 #840 tl WW 078 
73 «#461 =~ «00 12 00.2 ‘71 063545 17 = (57.7 
73 26 15 13. 07.5 71 12 30 18 65.5 
73° 04 = «20 14 05.3 | 70 49 «50 19 55.0 
72 #40 50 15 =03.6 | 70 28 465 20 853.0 

Index error = — 30 sec. 
RESULT OF CALCULATION. 
Mean time. Advance. Longitude. 
h. min. — see. | h. min, — see. Deg. min, sec. 
10 07 36 if 08 17.7 105 25 38 


rr ce 


LEME MEY Te 


t-. 
} 
{ 
| 
| 
FF 
eg 
hit 
‘i | 
Hag 
‘ 


[174] 362 
ST. VRAIN’S FORT, 
Determination of latitude, July 23, 1843—altitudes of Polaris. 


OBSERVATIONS. 


Double altitudes of Polaris. Time of chronometer. 
Deg. min, sec. he min, — see, 
vA!) 49 20 ll Ot 32 
vis) 49 50 | 06 31 
719 49 oo 07 44 
vat) 5] 30 10 30 
vat] 2 30 | 2 21 
val) 56 40 15 57 
79 A9 15 18 06 
80 00 00 20 40 
80 01 50 22 39 
80 02 25 24 00 


Index error — — 37 sec. 


RESULT OF CALCULATION. 


True altitude. Mean time. Latitude. 
Deg. min. — see. h. min, see. Deg. min. see. 
39 56 09 10 07 44 40 17 12 


Determination of latitude, July 23, 1843—meridian altitude ofa Aquile’ 


OBSEKVATION. 
Double altitudes of a Aquila. True altitude. Latitude. 
Deg. min. sec. Deg. min. — sec. Deg. min. _ sec. 


116 22 35 58 11 06 40 16 33 


De 


Double | 
Are 


——$__—— 


Double alt 
sun’s Ic 


Deg. 3 
53 
53 
54 
54 
54 


363 [ 174 | 


ST, VRAIN’S FORT, 
Determination of time, July 23, 1843—altiludes of Arcturus. 


OBSERVATIONS, 


—— a EN a 


| 


FIST SERIES. | SECOND SEMIES. 


' Polaris, 


—— 


| 
Double altitudes of | Time of chronometer, Double altitudes of Time of chronometer. 
Arcturus, | Arcturus. 


he mine see, Deg. ming see. min, sec. 
Il 2% «659 37 40 
20 «34 ¢ : 38 = 30 
3st 16 f : 39387 
33° «06 ¢ 40 27 
3444 


ce a 


Index error = + | min. 30 see, 


RESULT OF CALCULATION. 


——-— ED 


Mean time. Advance. 


ttt CC CCT 


h. min. — see. 


A. min, gee. 
1 06 34." 


10 28 40 


= 


Ivtermination of time, July 24, 1843—allitudes of the sun. 


OBSERVATIONS. 


FIRST SERIES. | SECOND SERIES. 


Double altitudes of the | Time of chronometer. || Double altitudes of the | Time of chronometer. 


sun’s lower limb. sun’s lower limb. 
| 


. . i} ° 
Deg. min. see. h. min. sec. || Deg. min, see. 
53 


29 50 8 28 164 | 54 42 50 
53 44 50 28 54.0 || 54 57 50 
54 00.20 29 35.5 || 55 07 50 
54 11 «50 30 05.0 | 55 «16 «50 


54. 29.25 30 = 51.6 55 28 15 


Index error =-++- 1 min. 30 sec. 


RESULT OF CALCULATION. 


Mean time. Advance. 


he min. sec. he min. — see. 
7 24 51 1 06 10.5 


———— 


os 


ee 


g 


[ 174] 364 
ST. VRAIN’S FORT.°* 
Determination of time, July 25, 1843—altitudes of the sun. 


OBSERVATIONS, 


——— -———--—--- nn ee en ee 


FINAT SENTES. | 


SECOND SERIES, 


Double altitudes of the 


Time of chronometer. || Double altitudes of the | Time of chronometer, 
sun’s lower limb. | 
| 


sun’s lower limb. 


ee Eee 
—— 


Deg. min. sec. | he min. see. || Deg. min. see. he min. see, 
43 33 45 8 O02 03,2 44 34 50 8 O04 45.0 
43 48 30 02 42,0 44 45 40 05 = 14.0 
44 ol 00 03 = =16.0 44 «58 10 05 47.0 
44 10 50 03 42.0 45 Ul 50 06 22.0 
44 21 30 04 08,0 45 22 15 06 49.5 


Index crror = -+- 1 min. 30 sec. 


RESULT OF CALCULATION. 


Mean time. Advance. 
h. min. — sec, he min, see. 
6 58 57 1 05 31.8 


ee 


* The daily losing rate of the chronometer, obtained from the observations at this place, is 33’.723. 


ENCAMP! 
WITH 8 
LARAM 


Delern 


Double a 


Aret 
Deg. ml 
47 5( 
46 fe 
46 s 


fhe sun. 


» of chronometer, 


min, see, 


04 45.0 
05 = 14.0 
05 47.0 
06 22.0 


ey 


eC. 
1.8 


—————— 


place, is 33’’.722, 


365 [ 174 J 


ENCAMPMENT ON A HIGH PRAIRIE, BROKEN EY BUTTES AND BOULEERS, 
WITH SCATTERED CEDARS, FORMING THE DIVIDING GROUNDS BETW EEN 
LARAMIE AND CACHE-A-LA-POUDRE RIVERS, 


Determination of longilude, July 30, 1843—allitudes of Arcturus. 


OBSERVATIONS, 


FINST SENERS. SECOND SERIES, 


Oe ee ee ae re 


| 
| 


Double altitudes of | ‘Time of chronometer, Double altitudes of | ‘Time of chronometer. 
Arcturus, Arcturus. 
— a =| - ———— 
Deg. min. see. h. mine see. | Deg, min, see. he amin, — see. 
47 50 00 1! 40 89.5 | 45 46 30 11 46 07,0 
46 56 40 | 43 00.5 | 45 O05 40 47 55.5 
46 237 «40 AA 15.5 | 44 A419 20 48 60.0 
Index crror = + 1 min. 30 see, 
RESULT OF CALCULATION, 
Se ee ea ee a | ae slice eee 2 
Mean time. Advance. Longitude. 
he mine — see, he min, see, Deg. min. — see, 
10 41 18 1 03 53.2 105 35 17 


ee a en a ee 


Determination of latitude, July 30, 1843—allitudes of Polaris. 


OBSERVATIONS. 
Double altitudes of Polaris. Time of chronometer. 
Deg. min, bee. he ming see. 
82 20 OU 11 55 14 
82 21 00 57 39 


oe---2 ——- 


nr ne ee eee oe Ee 


Index error = -+- 1 min. 30 sec. 


RESULT OF CALCULATION. 


— 0-0 ee eee 
——— ne ee 


True altitude. Mean time. 


Latitude. 


—- 


ET 


he min. — see. 
10 §2 33 


Deg. min. see. 


Deg. min. sec. 
41 10 00 


41 02 19 


{174 J 366 
ENCAMPMENT NEAR THE PRECEDING, 
Determination of latitude, July 31, 1843—meridian altitude of the sun, Deter 


OUSERVATION, 


Double altitude of the aun'w | True central altitude, Latitude, 
lower lim), 
nina aes m = Double 
Deg, ming — see, Dege iniine see Deg. min, ui Are 
Lou fo uo } Ge td 27 } | O4 Ub 
™ me aa a Deg, mi 
ov 
ov 
ON 
ENCAMPMENT ON LARAMIE RIVER, 68 3 
63 { 
Determination of latitude, July 31, 1843—altitudes of Polaris, dateiainencee 
OBSERVATIONS. 
| 
Pins? SERIES, SECOND SERIES. 
| 
Double altitudes of | Time of chronometer. | Double altitudes of | Time of chronometer. Qo 
Polaris, ! Polaris. 
| \| h. 
_——--- - Q 
Deg, ming see Ayoming see. 1 Deg. mine see. /, mins gee, 
8 | 30 30 lo Li 25 | S| Al Lv LO 28 bl 
81 380) «00 15) 38s 81 41 45 | 20 48 
si 3206056 li 57 | 8! 42 00 30 «82 
sl 32 50 | iv 25 SI 43 00 ul 40 
81 35 00 21 Od \| Sl 46 10 a4 35 
| | Delerm 
Index error == — 30 sve. 
t 


RESULT OF CALCULATION, 
Double : 


et NS 


True altitude. | Mean time. Latitude, —— 
; | = mcs nr einen Seen Deg 
. ‘ 2 
Deg. min. — see. | he mine — see. Deg. = mir e 
5 | AH a. sec. 
40 47 22 9 19 19 41 15 02 — 
| 


(ees ee 


le of the sun, 


tude, 


SS 


ns ny 
v4 Ub 


Polaris, 


of chronometer 


mine Sle, 


28 «Ol 
2U 43 
30 Be 
wl 40 


ed 35 


nin, BEC. 
15 02 


367 C174) 
ENCAMPMENT ON LARAMIE RIVER 
Determination of longilude, July 31, 1845—altitudes of vlreturus. 


OBSERVATIONS, 


PInAT SEUTES, | A COND Shes, 
| 
a | 
Double altitudes of | Time of chronometer, Double altitudes of | Time of chronometer. 
Arcturus Avetucus, | 
Dew, ming see he omin ae | Deu, ming wees | he mine — ee. 
i) iy) 40 } lo 40 16.5 oy He Ww | io 5 27.3 
69 it 60 dt iR0 “oH Ay = 36,3 
ON 1. fo 2 {6,0 on 28 yu | 1s 35.0 
68 20 50 48955 «|| 65 46 Wo | n0 870) 
68 oo 0) | a4 Boot | 54 ai BD Bt H0.6 


fides error ae — JO eee, 


RESULT OF CALCULATION, 


Advanee. | 


he omine — see, | he min, yee, | Deg. mine — see, 


if) A0 26 | ! Os O77 L106 t6 SA 


Mean time. Longitude, 


NOON HALT ON A STREAM DISCHARGING INTO A LAKE, 
Delerminalion of latitude, dugust 1, t843—meridian allilude of the sun. 


OBSERVATION, 


ee 


Double altitude of the sun’s 


‘True central altitude, Latitude. 
lower limb. . 
Deg. min, — sec. Deg. mine sec. | Deg. min. — gee. 
132 49 45 66 41 03 41 23 0s 


a ee — - 


Index error = + | min. 30 sec. 


[174 J 368. 


NOON HALT ON A PORK OP LARAMIE RIVER, 


Determination of latitude, Mugust 2, 1\849—meridian altitude af the sun, 


Deter 
ONSERVATION, 


oe 


Double altitude of the sun's 


True central altitude Tatitude 
lower limb, 


Deg. mine — vee, Deg, mine see. Deg. min, 
131 as 20 in 04 50 4) 46 


Double alf 


Index error em + | min, 30 see, 


ENCAMPMENT ON MEDICINE BOW RIVER. 
: Determination of latitude, August 2, 1843—allitudes of Polaris. 


OBSERVATIONS. 


Double altitudes of Polaris. ‘Time of chronometer, 


Deg. min 
83 43 
83 56 
ag wid} 
oF 
58 
00 


see, 


oe nee a 


Index error == — 30 sec, 


RESULT OF CALCULATION, 


rr = ane 0 ert nn ee 5 a ee 8 te em ae 0 re ee 


True altitude. Mean time. Latitude. 
Deg. min. see. h. min. pee. Deg. min. gee. 
41 58 12 11 14 34 


41 37 16 


—— ee e e 


369 [ 174 J 
ENCAMPMENT ON MEDICINE BOW RIVER, 


le af the sun, Determination of longitude, dugust 2, 1849 —allitudes of Arcturus, 


OMSERVATIONS, 


brie Bhuthe ebro abana, 


ee! 
Double altitiudos ot Are. line of hvorometer, Double altitudes ot 

nin,  S#e, titi, Areturts, 

46 9 


| ‘Time of chronometer, 


Dew, min, , vee, 
‘ai DM, 3 gt 


1h 7 Oa. f : a7 | 40 
At Mi ' a ‘ ' 7 Jo 


AO An | ’ 6 , a" ; 28 
4s 20 f hh, 2% / 22 


mo oa 


‘ Polaris. Ludex error -_ DO see, 


RUSULT OF CALCULATION, 


Mean time. Advance. Longitude. 


he ming see. he ming see. 
10 =A Hu l ob HTL 


Lmmersion af the first satellile of Jupiter. 


ee a 


‘ | 7 ‘ 
Observed time. Mean time. Longitude. 


ee ee 


he min. see. hb, min, see. Deg. min. sec. 
tt OL 28 9 64 $l 106 48 2 


ee ete en LL LS er; 


ae ag EF 
SS ow eae 


=> 


[1744 370 
NOON HALT ON A TRIBUTARY TO THE NORTH FORK OF PLATTE RIVER, 


Determination of latitude, August 3, 1843—sun’s meridian altitude, 


Double altitude of the sun's True central altitude, Latitude, 


lower limb. 


Deg. min. see. Deg. min. see. Deg. min. see. 
131 23 #800 65 57 40 | 41 35 48 


oem - —-_-__—- 


Index error = + 1 min. 30 sec. 


ENCAMPMENT ON THE NORTH FORK OF PLATTE RIVER. 


Determination of longitude, August 5, 1843—altitudes of the sun. 


OBSERVATIONS. 


ene etenmenemene 
i 

FIRST SERIES. \| SECOND SERIES. 

\| 


[oe 


Double altitudes of the | Time of chronometer. || Double altitudes of the | ‘Time of chronometer. 
sun’s lower limb. sun’s lower limb. 


i| 
Deg. min. sec. he mine sec. || Dege win. see. h. min. sec. 
50 32 45 8 30 39.0 ol 26 00 8 33 06.3 
50 46 = 55 3l 12.0 51 39 10 33 333.5 
50 57 40 31 403 i 51 51 20 34 05.0 
51 09 #410 32 12.5 52. OO 20 34 32. 
51 19 50 32 «41.0 52. 10—S 80 34 §=©56.0 


ooo 


Index error = -+ 1 min. 47 see. 


RESULT OF CALCULATION. 


En —<—$— $< — 


Mean time. Advance. Longitude. 
h. min. sec. h. min. see. Deg. min. sec. 
7 4 5) 1 08 01.3 107. 22 «27 


Determination of latitude—meridian altitude of the sun. 


Double altitude of the sun’s True central altitude. Latitude. 
lower limb. 
Deg. min. sec. Deg. min. sec. Deg. min. see. 


130 #18 45 65 2% 37 41 35 59 


N¢ 


Determ 


Double 


TTE RIVER, 


n altitude, 


ude, 


ER. 


‘the sun. 


ee 


of chronometer. 


min, sec, 


33s «06.3 
33 333.6 
34 §©05.0 
34 32.0 
34 56.0 
tude. 
2. SC 
27 

SUN. 

de. 

- set. 


371 [ 174] 


NOON HALT ON A HIGH “PLATEAU BETWEEN THE WATERS OF THE AT- 
LANTIC AND THE GULF OF CALIFORNIA. 


Determination of latitude, August 8, 1843—meridian altitude of the sun. 


eee - ey 


| 


* ° ’ i ’ | ‘ 
Double altitude of the sun’s True central altitude. } Latitude. 


lower limb. 


quncieigahoenmmaanae — en oem ce-cesenereceneeintnes sce an a a ee 


Deg. min. see. Deg. min. sec. 


| 
| £ Deg. min. see. 
17 475 | 64 O09 38 


42 O02 O07 


ns — 2 0 ee a —_— 0 eec en eeEESESIN——+ we eae we eneneewenpesranenenon: 


Index error = -+- 1 min. 42 see, 


NOON HALT A'’ THE GAP IN THE SWEET WATER MOUNTAINS. 


Determination of latilude, August 9, 1843—meridian altitude of the sun. 


ee ee cre ene ao enna 


Double altitude of the sun’s ‘T'rue central altitude. | Latitude. 


lower limb. 


— a 


oe 


Deg. min, see. Deg. min. sec. 


63 34 30 42 20 06 


sl 
Deg. min. sec. | 
126 36 35 | 


ee erent ene 


Index error = -+- ! min. 40 sec. 


r 174 J 372 
ENCAMPMENT ON THE SWEET WATER RIVER 


Determination of longitude, August 9, 1843—allitudes of Jupiter. 


ORSERVATIONS, 


FIRST SERILS. SLUOND SERIES, 


| 
Double altitudes of | ‘Time of chronometer. Double altitudes of 


Tine of chronometer 
Jupiter. | Galle 


Deg. ming see. | he mine — see. Deg. min, see. he mine gee. 
51 06 10 | 11 3800 23.6 | 52. «18 BO ti 86 TL 
61 2 50 | Bl 66.5 52 32 30 \ Sy ee 
51 40 00 33 05.0 52 45 10 | 338 24.9 
51 53 30 \ Jd {2.0 52 58 30 3a 28.5 
62 O07 50) 35 18,0 53 Li 00 | 40 33.3 

! ' 
Index error = — 30 sec. 
RESULT OF CALCULATION. 
Mean time. | Advance. Longitude, 
A. mins see. Ae mine see. 
10 2823 | L o7 141 
Immersion of Jupiter's first satellite. 
as 3 cine | 7 Sn i ea 
Observed time. | Mean time, i Longitude 
h. min. See. h. min. see. Deg. min. sec. 
12 82 = 33 | 11 45 il 107) BOs 
| 


oe etn 


Deter 


a 


Determ 


Double 

T 

Deg. 
63 


Jupiter. 


chronometer 


TT 
36 
34 2 
338 2 
39 = 28.! 
40 K) 


Rn. She. 
OF 


373 [174 J 


ENCAMPMENT ON THE SWEET WATER RIVER. 
Determination of longitude, August 9, 1843—altiludes of a Aquila. 


OBSERVATIONS, 


Double altitudes of « Aguile, | Time of chronometer. 
OO i eS a | - a er re 
Deg, mins see. A, min, — see, 
11 22 40 ll 59 5s 
11] 03 20 12 04 33 
Index error -- — 30 sec. 
RESULT OF CALCULATION. 
si are | - a 
van time. | Advance. | Longitude. 
ae see ew eee 7 
| | 
| 


NOON HALT ON THE SWEET WATER RIVER. 


Determination of latitude, 4ug. 10,1843—meridian allitudes of the sun. 


OBSERVATIONS. 
Double altitudes of the sun’s lower limb. Time of chronometer. 
pores a a ea tat es ee 
Deg. min. sec. ‘ A. min, — see. 
125 40 10 ] 12 52 
125 40 25 13 43 
125 39 50 14 26 
125 39 25 Fs) 20 
125 38 Q 16 12 
125 38 10 16 51 
125 37 2 17 37 
125 37 00 18 07 


EE ER Re Or tne 


Index error = -+- 1 min. 40 sec. 


RESULT OF CALCULATION. 


— eee — . eee ee soow-seea- one's > troeniniines ns tsinasinicencndsdentdestimamaiasiensetia nein 
True altitude. Mean time. | Latitude. 
Deg. min, sec. | h. min. — see. Deg. min. see. 
63 65 55 1 14 0) | 42 31 17 
| 


if 


| 
j 
A 
}> 
a 
if 


374 


NOON HALT’ NEAR THE SOUTH PASS, ON A SMALL AFFLUENT TO THE 
SANDY FORK OF GREEN RIVER. 


ENCAM 


Determination of latitude, August 13, 1843—meridian altitude of the Dele 


SUN. 


a 0 eeqeeREe- o> EseeDEe a nw = oe ee an tn re rc 


Double altitude of the sun’s True central altitude, | Latitude. 
lower limb. 


ee an ee nc | rene nr rte en oe a nee -- _ <a ae omens 


Deg. = min. SCC. Deg. = min. + see. Deg. min. — see, 
124 14 45 | 42 19 53. 


ENCAMPMENT ON A SMALL STREAM TRIBUTARY TO THE LITTLE SANDY 
RIVER. 


Determination of longitude, August 13, 1843—altitudes of Arcturus: 


OBSERVATIONS. 


FINST SERIES. SECOND SERIES. 


Double altitudes of | Time of chronometer. || Double altitudes of | Time of chronometer. 
Arcturus. Arcturus. 


er eer enecneenaeine mabieteremece 


Deg. min. : h. min, sec. | Deg. er (i » min 
69 9 656 15.0 | 67 i 00 
68 67 10.0) |) 67 01 
68 68 = 01.6 66 
68 568 562.3 66 
67 59 40.0 66 


Index error = — 30 sec. 


RESULT OF CALCULATION. 


| dances ca as Kacctac i 


Mean time. Advance. | Longitude. 


min, see. | hh. min. sec. Deg. min. sec. 
48 39 | 1 11 : | 109 25 55 


375 [174] 
ENCAMPMENT ON A SMALL SPREAM TRIBUTARY TO THE LITTLE SANDY 
T TO THE RIVER. 
: Detern..nalion of latitude, August 13, 1843—alliludes of Polaris. 
tude of the f one ’ f 
OBSERVATIONS. 
ide. Double altitudes of Polaris. | Time of chronometer, 
eee? ER EO ee a a ES CE a | — 2 - ————————— 
; Deg. min. — sec h. min. see. 
. aa 83 46 8 10 | 9 Al 35 
: 83 45 40 | A3 10 
83 47 00 44 38 
83 47 10 46 04 
83 48 30 | 47 15 
83 49 50 48 22 
, ae 83 51 «50 50 05 
rLE SANDY 83 51 50 50 58 
83 62 40 51 43 
A 
t Beatipun 83 53 30 | 52 39 
Index error = — 30 sec. 
cassie cmsedieicntataae RESULT OF CALCULATION. 
— True altitude. Mean time. Latitude. 
’ chronometer, a ee ee Bes 
: Deg. min. sec. h. min. — sec. Deg. min. _ see. 
—aene 41 53 23 8 36 12 42 18 08 
min, 8€c. 
00 =30.0 
01 23.5 
02 13.2 
03. 05.5 
04 03.0 
a» 
ude. 
in. sec. 


25 55 


i 
‘ 
it 
| 
I 


174 J 376 
NOON HALT ON THE LITTLE SANDY RIVER, 


Determination of latitude, Qugust 14, 1843—meridian altitudes of the 
sun. 


OBSERVATIONS. 


| 


Double altitudes of the sun’s lower limb. | Time of chronometer, 

Deg. mine see. he ming — see. 

123 39 10 l Ob 46 

123 41 00 07 57 

123 42 05 | oy 06 

123 44-30 | 10 2 

123. 4600 | 114 

123 46 50 12 55 

123 46 45 | 13 33 

123 48 10 | 14 25 

123 47 55 15 2 

123 48 (00 16 10 

123 47 25 17 08 

12380 47 15 | 18 08 

123 45 30 20 03 
e 123 45 t0 | 21 00 

123 44 25 | 21 57 

123 «43035 | 22 42 
PE TE YO Eee eT LR a Cn 

Index error = ++ 1 min. 40 sce. 
RESULT OF CALCULATION. 
| | ee | 
True altitude. | Apparent time of transit, | Latitude. 
e ee ern a eR, ee Tne a 
Deg. min. sec. he min. — see. Deg, min. — see. 
62 09 52 1 16 36 42 18 11 


Determi 
Double ¢ 
Are 
leg. n 

58 

57 

57 

56 

56 


De 
4 


udes of the 


377 


[ 


ENCAMPMENT ON THE LEFT BANK OF GREEN RIVER. 


174 J 


Determination of longitude, Mugust 15, 1843—allitudes of Arcturus, 


Double altitudes of 


PINST SRITES, 


4 


Arcturus, 
Deg. mine see. 
58 13 40 
57 35 10 
57 13 10 
56 46 30 
56 0206«13—O«0 


Mean time. 


he min, 
9 12 


Determination of latitude, August 15, 1843—altitudes of Polaris. 


OBSERVATIONS. 


Double altitudes of Polaris. 


Deg. 
83 
83 
83 
83 
83 
83 
83 
83 
83 
83 


ore. 


18 


min. 
44 
46 
47 
49 
50 
51 
52 
53 
55 
65 


True altitude. 


“Deg. min. sec. 


41 53 


59 


h. 
10 


min, 


19 


‘Time of chronometer, 


| 


| 
| 
| 
| 


see, 


24 
09 
07 
16 
46 


OBSERVATIONS, 


SLCOND SERIES. 


Double altitudes of | Time of chronometer, 
Arcturus. 


Deg. min. see, 


55 
55 
54 
54 
54 


40 
16 
50 
29 
09 


Index error «=: — 28 sec. 


00 
00 
30 
50 
50 


RESULT OF CALCULATION. 


| 


8€Cc. 


40 
40 
10 
00 
00 
45 
10 
320 
20 
45 


h. 
1 


Advance. 


min. 


12 


Sec. 


56.8 


Index error — — 28 sec. 


10 


RESULT OF CALCULATION. 


| 
| 


| 


Mean time. 


9 


Saas 


A. 


min, see. 


31 


03 


| 
| 


10 


, 


he. min. 


26 
27 
28 
29 
30 


Longitude. 


Deg. min, see. 
11005 


36 29 
38 17 
39 51 
42 23 
43 36 
44 49 
46 27 
47 54 
49 42 
50 36 
Latitude. 


05 


Deg. min. sec. 
41 538 


54 


[ 174 ] 378 
ENCAMPMENT ON THE LEFT BANK OF GREEN RIVER. 


Determination of longitude, Mugust 16, 1843—altitudes of the sun. 


OBSERVATIONS, 


\\ 
FIRST SERIES, | 


SKCOSD SENTKS, 


| | 
Double altitudes of the | ‘Time of chronometer. |} Double altitudes of the | Time of chronometer, 
sun’s lower limb. sun's lower limb. 


NS 


~” min. sec. he min. — see. || Deg. min. see. he mine — see. 
18 28 20 7 18 004 20 06 2 #| 7% 2 932.8 
18 64 40 19 #170 || 80 18 30 | 23 09.4 
19 O98 10 20 000 | 80 23 2 | 23 (97.7 
19 32 00 | 21025 || 20 48 10 | 24 30.4 
19 48 50 | 2106492 «| 81 00 50 | CC, 25 05.4 


Index error = + 1 min, 44 see. 


rT) RESULT OF CALCULATION. 
seats tonatioeneimis rp 
Mean time. Advance. Longitude. 
he min. see. | h, min, — see. 


6 O09 O02 l 12) =«51.8 
a 


Determination of longitude, Mugust 16, 1843—distances from the second 
limb of the moon to the sun. 


OBSERVATIONS WITH THE CIRCLE, 


a ne, 


Apparent distance. Time of chronometer. 


—_——. ——— ee 


Deg. min, — see. he min. — see. 

63 32 35 8 16 10 
503 0940 | 20 03 
449 40 00 ut 30 «19 
503 18 40 | 37 19 


-RESULT OF CALCULATION. 


———_—__-—_—_-——- ee enn 


True distance. | Mean time at Greenwich. Longitude. 
—— ——_ -- -- -— ee ee | oe ee ee 
Deg. min. sec. . h. min. sec. 
108 22 29 2 29 22% ‘ 
jp ec cee pe Rh hac ac 


NOON H 


Determi 


Double 


i 


Deler: 


the sun, 


a 


f chronometer, 


mins see, 


22 32.3 

23 = 00.4 

230 97.7 

24 =30.4 

25 05.4 
TS 
ude, 


. the second 


—————-- 


379 C174] 


NOON HALT ON GREEN RIVER, NEAR THE OLD TRADING HOUSE, WHERE 
THE ROAD 'TO THE COLUMBIA LEAVES THE RIVER, 


Determination of latitude, Mug. 16,1843—meridian altitudes ofthe sun. 
OBSERVATIONS. 


Double altitudes of the sun's lower limb. | ‘T'ime of chronometer, 


ee eT 


| 
! 
Deg. min, see, | he mine — gee, 


123 i rs) 1 o8 4) 
123 20 34 08 80 
123 «24—Sts«OO 10 =. a3 
123 «26 12 OR 
123 26 = 60 i3—sOB 
123 27 45 14 ~—soBB 
123 27 ~)©6385 17 19 
123-26 Lh | 19 = 335 
12% 240 «45 | gl 30 
123 23 25 | 22 «48 
2300 tt 80 | 24 © 05 


Index error == -+- | min, 42 sec. 
RESULT OF CALCULATION. 


eee ere er ce 2a renee ene ae: sete ee —erees = os 


True altitude. Apparent time of transit. Latitude. 


Deg. min, sec. he min, — sec, Deg. min. — see. 
62 00 28 l 12 37 | 41 46 54 


a oe —_—- - on — a ee 


ENCAMPMENT ON BLACK’S FORK OF GREEN RIVER. 
Determination of latitude, August 17, 1843—-altiludes of Polaris. 


OBSERVATIONS. 
Double altitudes of Polaris. Time of chronometer. 
Deg. min. sec. h. min, — see. 
86 15 40 5 30 45 a. m. 
86 14 30 36 08 


Index error = — 30 sec. 


RESULT OF CALCULATION. 


ee 


True altitude. “Mean t time. Latitude. 
Deg.,,min. see. h. min. — see. Deg. min. sec. 

43 06 15 4 1g 52 4l 37 31 
Determination of longitude August 17, 1843—emersion of Jupiter’ $ 
Jirst satellite. 

Observed time. Mean time. | Longitude. 


hk. -min. set. h. min. — see. 
5 03 1l a. m. 3 50 35 


ss ee 
- TS 


<a 
Se 


i 


~ 


| 
if 


[ 174] 380 


ENCAMPMENT ON BLACRK’S FORK OF GREEN RIVER. 
Determination of longitude, August 17, 1843—altitudes of the sun, 
OUSERVATIONS, 


—_— ———--—— . - —— —— 


S 


Deters 


PRAT SRUTHS. SHECOND SEARLES, 


Double altitudes of the | ‘Tine of chronometer, | Double altitudes of the Tine of chronometer, 
sun's lower limb, sun's lower limb, 


Double alti 
wenn’ be 


Deg. min. see, kh, mén, — vee, Dew. mine see. he mine = ee 


19 68 55 | 7 8s O87 210620 OO 7 26 40,7 Deg. 1 
20 2 40 4 (00.0 22 8 8! 27 «82.0 50. 
20 34 24 42.0 a1 46 fo | 27 56.8 An 
20 48 «(05 2 174 | (88 O88 28 416 58 


2 10 25 Ary 22 5 =O 20 15,5 


fe 


57 


Index error — 30 Kee, 


RESULT OF CALCULATION. 


Mean time. | Advance. Longitude, 
he min, — see. A, mine — see. | Deg. min, — see. 
6 i) AG | 1 12 33,2 110 it) 28 


SECOND ENCAMPMENT ON BLACK’S FORK OF GREEN RIVER, 


Dele 
Determination of longitude, ugust 17, 1843—altitudes of the sun. 
OBSERVATIONS. 
FIRST SERIES, | SECOND SERTES, —EE 
riistientaien — sensinesninpeeanecenee —— P= — 
Double altitudes of the | Time of chronometer. {| Double altitudes of the Time of chronometer. 
sun’s lower limb. | sun's lower limb, | 
ee Ee, | | ee 
Deg. min. sec. homing see. | Deg. min. see. h, min. — see 
44 45 25 6 03 08.5 | 43° 43 40) | 6 O05 63.4 
44 30 40 03 467 | 43 31 55 | 06 26.6 
44 18 50 04 20.6 | 4: 21 00 06 55.0 
44 06 10 04 540 | 43 12 40 07 17.2 
43 55 00 05 225 | 43 O1 00 | 07 49.4 
\ insistence 
Index error == + 2 min. 7 sec. 
RESULT OF CALCULATION. 
See 
Mean time. | Advance. | Longitude. 
he min. — see. | he min. — see. L 


52 20 13 


381 [ 174 ] 


; SPCOND BNCAMPMENT ON BLACK'S FORK OF GREEN RIVER 
/ the sun, : : : , : 
Determination af longitude, lugust 17, 1813—alliludes af Arelurus. 


ORSERVATIONS, 


Piha yh SehreeS, SECONE GRAELKS, 


f chronometer, 


Double altitudes of the | ‘Tine of chronometer Double altitudes of the | Thine of chronometer. 
sun's lower limb, sun's lower tinh, 


Deg, min, ' ain, ee, Dew, min, ’ ° min, wee. 

oo Ww 7 ‘ } hi nD 20 07,0 
na oo { ON, f 1) yal O70 
fs ot § ff 27 | It 47.6 
fa  O8 f Hh, f 02 22 10.4 
57 Al : ‘ bs 12 23 13.2 


Indes evvor —= i$! ace, 


RESULT OF CALCULATION. 


Mean time. Advance, Longitude, 


Ae mine see, he mine sees Dew, ming see, 
i) os | 13 11.3 lo 62506 


VER. 
Delermination af latitude, dugust 17, 1843—allitudes of Polaris. 


OBSERVATIONS, 


the sun. 


Double altitudes of Polaris, Time of chronometer. 


a aaa Deg, min, 
82 h5 
82 57 
82 58 
——_——— 82 59 
82 59 
83 00 
83 01 
83 03 
83 04 
83 04 


chronometer, 


nin, see, 
63.4 
26.6 
55.0 
17,2 
49,4 


Index error = — 30 sev, 


RESULT OF CALCULATION. 


True altitude. Mean time. Latitude. 


—- -—-—-. oe 


Deg. min. sec. » min, sec. Deg. min, see. 
41 28 46 9 20 08 41 29 653 


ee EERSTE NORTE nA lS Ie PO DC A SE ISIS OLE 


[174 J 382 
SECOND ENCAMPMENT ON BLACK'S PORK OF GREEN RIVER, 
Determination of longitude, August 18, 1843—allitudes of « Aquila, 


ONSERVATIONS, 


Double altitudes of a Aquile, Time of chronometer, 


mins ’ » min, 
Sl 
gy 
57 
22 
64 


Index error ee — 30 see, 


RESULT OF CALCULATION, 


Mean time, | Advance, Longitude, 


Determination of latitude, August 18, 1843—altitudes of Polaris. 


OBSERVATIONS. 


Double altitudes of Polaris. Time of chronometer. 


Index error —- — 30 sec, 


RESULT OF CALCULATION. 


True altitude. Mean time. Latitude. 


———— 


IVER, 


fa Mquila, 


or. 


itude, 


Polaris. 


de. 


383 C174] 
ENCAMPMENT ON A SMALL STREAM TRIBUTARY TO KAM'R PORK, 
Determination of longitude, August 18, 1843—altitudes of Jupiter. 


ONUSENVATIONS, 


Double altitudes of Jupiter Time of ebrone eter, 


ee: eee — - 


Deg, min, Me, A, ming nee, 

wo mm Se |e | a ’ 
60 20 ao Ag 03, 

60 41 40 4’ 20.0 


60 453 oo 
ol 02 Ww 


4 


) 
tH 70 
Index error « — U2 wee, 


RESULT OF CALCULATION, 


Mean time, Advance, Longitude, 


Determination of longitude, August 18, 1843—allitudes af'o Andromeda. 


OBSY RY ATIONS, 


| 


Double altitudes of « Andromede, | Time of chronometer, 
Deg. min. — see, he min 80. 
90 19 a0 | ll 53 62.0 
91 00 20 | 55 26.0 
91 32 00 56 56.4 
91 55 20 | 57 55.0 
92 21 00 | 59 05.0 


Index error w= — 32 sec. 


RESULT OF CALCULATION. 


Mean time. Advance. Longitude. 


h. min. sec. h. min. see. Deg. min. sec. 
10 42 49 4 13 49.4 110 45 58 


mr | ED 


cr 


[ 174 J 384 
ENCAMPMENT ON A SMALL STREAM TRIBUTARY TO HAM’S FORK, 


Determination of latitude, August 18, 1843—allitudes of Polaris. 


OBSERVATIONS, 


Double altitudes of Polaris. Time of chronometer. 


Deg. mine see . men, 
84 04 \ ‘ O2 
84 06 O4 

08 O48 
1l OR 
10 Ov 
i3 14 
15 14 
16 é 19 
20 22 


21 2 


Index error == — 32 see. 


RESULT OF CALCULATION. 


True altitude. Mean time. Latitude. 


Deg. min. see. he min, see. Deg. min, see. 
42 05 05 10 58 59 | 4l 26 0S 
ae Determ 
Determination of longitude, Mugust 19, 1843—altiludes of the sun. 
OBSERVATIONS. Double 
Double altitudes of the sun’s lower limb. | Time of chronometer. 7 ee 
Dey. min, — sec. . mine — see. 
21 33 40 29.6 
2L 47 04.6 
21 59 | 37.3 
22 «16 | 22.3 
22 32 | 06.5 
Index error = — 30 sec. 
RESULT OF CALCULATION. 
Mean time. Advance. Longitude. ; 
T 
h. min. sec. h. min. sec. | i a 
6 7 87 1 13 46.9 | Deg. 
60 


a + eS SR 


ei Ril oath Ee aN Las Nh LE 


’'S FORK, 


f Polaris. 


ler, 


tude. 


in, See. 
6 0S 


bf the sun. 


oe ee ne 


385 [174] 
NOON HALT ON THE MUDDY RIVER OF HAM’S FORK. 


Determination of latitude, Aug. 19, 1843—meridian altitudes of the sun. 
OBSERVATIONS, 


Double altitudes of the sun’s lower limb. Time of chronometer. 


Deg. min. see. he min, — see, 
121 57 10 1 12 01 
121 57 30 12 57 
121 57 50 13 38 
121 58 15 14 53 
121 58 00 15 44 
121 58 05 16 36 
121 57 50 18 43 
121, 56 10 21 34 
121 54 45 22 44 


Index error = -+ 1 min. 20 sec. 


RESULT OF CALCULATION. 


| 
True altitude. | 


eee 


Apparent time of transit. Latitude. 


Deg. min. — sec. 


| 
| 
1 414% v0 | 41 34 «5 


Deg. min. — see. h. min. — see. 
61 15 19 


NOON HALT ON MUDDY RIVER. 
Determination of latitude, Aug. 22, 1843—meridian altitudes of the sun. 


OBSERVATIONS. 


Double altitudes of the sun’s lower limb. Time of chronometer. 


Deg. min. — see. | h. min. — see. 
121 06 10 1 ll 55 
21 0655 | 13 08 
121 07 30 13 58 
121 08 00 | 14 53 
121 08 10 15 48 
121 08 30 16 52 
121 0s 40 17 33 
121 08 30 18 31 
121 07 40 | 19 44 


Index crror = +- 1 min. 22 sec. 


RESULT OF CALCULATION. 


True altitude. Apparent time of transit. Latitude. 


Deg. min. sec. h, min. sec. Deg. min. sec. 
60 50 08 1 17 02 4l 39 45 


[a ae 


= eee ~— 


} 
YY 
#4 
uf 


PSUR 


r 174] 386 


NOON HALT ON BEAR RIVER. 
Determination of latitude, Aug. 21, 1843—meridian altitudes of the sun, 
OBSERVATIONS. 


Double altitudes of the sun's lower limb. | Time of chronometer. 

: Deg. mine see. h, min. — see. 
119 57 20 l il 4% 
119 53 10) ! 13 00 
119 | 89 45 I4 Ol 
120 OU 15 iG £2 
120 00 35 7 2 
120 00 20 7 56 
119 59 bu 20 8 
119 58 ‘a 21 26 
119 57 3) 22 41 


Dy 


Index error = +- | min. 20 see. 


RESULT OF CALCULATION. 


(Pace a ce cra a _— te 


True altitude. Apparent tine of transit. Latitude. 


| 

| 

{ 

| 

| | 
res 

| 


ee 


Deg. min, — sec. he mine see. |: De 


tg min. 0, 
60 16 15 | | 17 02 41 53 55 


ee eNO SRO Sk Ae ee TOES A 
ENCAMPMENT ON BEAR RIVER. 
Determination of longitude, Aug. 21, 1843—allitudes of Arcturus. 


OBSERVATIONS. 


| 


FIRST SERIES. | SECOND SERIES. 
Double altitudes of | Time of chronometer. |) Double altitudes of | Time of chronometer. 
Arcturus. | | Arcturus. 

—_—— |} pcan an Src Reves aie 

Der, min. sec. ho mine sees |i Deg. mine see. A. min. © see. 

$$ 53 10 9 55 055 |} St 43° 15 10 06 ISF 

57 33 00 57 50.0 \] 54 07 10 OF 56.6 

53 22 30 59 11.9 | 53 28 20 09 41.u 

5h 34 20 10 01 22.0 52 44 2 11 36.0 

6 44 20 03 34.0 i 61 53 5) 13 64.9 


Index error = — 30 sec. 


RESULT OF CALCULATION. 


pete ness 


Mean time. Advamee. Longitude 


a 


ANERRRENE NLA LINE AEE TORN A 


Deter 


Tr 


Deg. 
42 


Determir 


Do 


Tru 


Deg. 
56 


387 [ 174 ] 


ENCAMPMENT ON BEAR RIVER. 


8 Of the sun, : ar 
yan tin Determination of latitude, Qugust 21, 1848—altitudes of Polaris, 


oommneneemeen—¢ OBSERVATIONS. 


er. — | 
Double altitudes of Polaris. Time of chronometer. 


aaa 


13) 64.0 


Deg. mine sees h. Mine — 8lCe 
S4 08 20 it Lg 25 
S4 19 30 21 22 
84 10 20 22 23 
84 12 fu 23 24 
84 13 10 25 07 
84 14 OO 26 13 
84 16 10 27 46 
84 17 00 28 54 
ee 84 617s 800 290 (54 
84 {8 20 31 47 
; ———~ 
Index error = — 380 sec. 
ude RESULT OF CALCULATION. 
—— 
ii ak True altitude. Mean time. | Latitude. 
il. SEL ah 27 
3 «BS | . | 
Ane - Deg. mine — sec. he mine see. Deg. rine — see. 
eae 42 05 ot | i) il 42 2 0:3 47 
ADys yy . 
dreturus. Determination of latitude, August 21, 1843—meridian altitudes of a 
” Aquile. 
OBSERVATIONS. 
ae ee Double altitudes of a Aquilz. | ‘Time of chronometer. 
bf chronometer. ee TN A I I SC 
Deg. min. see. | h min, sec 
—— 2 5110 | 10 58 «18 
ets: 112 «6384 | 55 OB 
Ne 1a 12 «©5310 | 57S 
Oy. BBG 112 «BL 00 | 5905 
09 AL. ' 112 61 55 Il 00 47 
11 36.0 112 51 0) 04 55 
nea 112 47 20 07 21 


Index error = — 30 sec. 


RESULT OF Sepa aasacncbenenn ° 


] 
- True altitude. Apparent time of transit. | Latitude. 
pas \— 
. r Deg. min. sec. A. min. — see. 
> on 56 2606 10 67 «4 


I SSS, 


[ 174 J 388 


NOON HALT ON BEAR RIVER, ABOVE THOMAS'’S FORK. 


Determination of latitude, ugust 22, 1843—meridian altitudes of the 
suns 


OBSERVATIONS. 
| ssid 


Double altitudes of the sun's lower limb. Time of chronometer. 


Deg. min. see. | h, min, — see. 
118 46 25 ! 16 03 
118 47 80 17 02 
118 47 10 | 17 38 
118 46 20 { 18 31 
118 46 2! 19 11 
118 46 05 19 57 
118 45 2! 2 51 
118 44 40 21 53 


43 


RSS REESE GEER Nene een ee eS aeeneeeses eae ons 


Index error = + 1 min. 25 see. 


RESULT OF CALCULATION. 


| 7 _ | 


True altitude. | Apparent time of transit. Latitude. 


Deg. min. — see. he mins — see. Deg. min. — see. 
59 39 38 1 16 19 42 10 27 


| 
Phen cieiiag atone eiosutoe zs | we 
| 


NOON HALT ON TULLICK’S FORK OF BEAR RIVER. 


Determination of latitude, August 24, 1843—meridian altitudes of the 
sun. 


OBSERVATIONS. 


Double altitudes of the sun’s lower limb. Time of chronometer. 


a oo 


Deg. min. see. he min, — sec. 
116 48 35 ] 14 52 
116 48 40 16 3 
116 48 20 18 18 
116 47 30 19 44 


116 30 


Index error = -- | min. 22 sce. 


RESULT OF CALCULATION. 


True altitude. Apparent time of transit. Latitude. 


Deg. min. see. h. min. — see. Deg. min. see. 
58 40 17 1 16 13 42 29 05 


EY A RA MNT TEE PT 


Determi 


Double alt 
Arctu 


Deg. mi 
52 OB 
25 = 1] 
51 3 


K. 


'udes of the 


cr. 
bee ts oe os 
ude. 
m. See. 
9 05 


389 


ENCAMPMENT ON BEAR RIVER. 


[ 174 ] 


Determination of longitude, August 24, 1843—altitudes of Arcturus. 


OBSERVATIONS. 


FINST SERIES. SECOND SERIES. 


| 
| 
ne Ct, 


Double altitudes of | Time of chronometer. Double altitudes of | Time of chronometer. 


Arcturus, Arcturus, 
————e SS SSN || - —EE — iia cc, all tt 
Deg. min, see. he min, see, Deg. min see. h. min, see. 
62 57 60 9 59 48 dl 03 40 10 304 56.5 
25 11 40 10 Ol 41 | 50 40 00 06 00.0 
61 35 ~§600 03 30 | 60 19 10 06 58.0 


| 


Index error = — 30 sec, 


RESULT OF CALCULATION, 


Mean time. Advance. | Longitude. 

: ee one, 
he min. see. he mine See Deg. min. sec, 
8s 49 29 l 1421.9 Ut 42 05 


Determination of latitude, August 24, 1843—altitudes of Polaris. 


OBSERVATIONS. 
nati 


Time of chronometer. 


Double altitudes of Polaris. | 
: | 
Deg. min. — see. | 

| 

| 


85 17 20 10 10 = 29 
85 18 50 ll 45 
85 18 40 2 54 
85 20 00 | 13 45 
85 19 20 14-35 
85 2 10 | 16 51 
85 22 20 18 19 
85 24 30 20 07 
85 2 20 | 20 58 


85 26 00 | 22 05 
Index error —= — 30 sec. 


RESULT OF CALCULATION. 


True altitude. Mean time. Latitude. 


Deg. min. see. h. = min. sec. Deg. min. sec. 
42 39 28 9 01 50 42 36 56 


[174] 390 
ENCAMPMENT AT BEER SPRINGS, 


Determination of latitude, August 25, 1843—meridian altitudes of the 
SUN. 


OBSERVATIONS. 


nin nn cee ene a - 


Double altitudes of the sun’s lower limb. Time of chronometer. Double a 
sun’s | 


Deg. min, see. he mine 80, 
115 3. 20 ol 42 Deg. 
115 15 mt 26 34 
115 10 2 27 33 
115 30 13 08 33 
115 50 | 13. AT 

115 20 14 43 

115 00 15 Q2 

115 f 55 16 13 

115 20 16 55 

115 § 05 17 35 

115 00 18 14 

115 ‘ 30 19 24 

115 15 20 09 

115 ‘ 25 21 06 


Index error = -- 1 min. 20 sec. 


ee oe 


RESULT OF CALCULATION. 


— —o - on — ne ert 


True altitude. Apparent time of transit. Latitude. eh 
NOON 


( 
| 
| 


Deg. min. sec. » min, — see, » min, — sec. 
58 08 46 16 20 2 39 57 Determ: 


Double 


tudes of the 


tude. 
nN. Sel. 
9 57 


391 [ 174 ] 
ENCAMPMENT AT’ BEER SPRINGS, 


Determination of longitude, ugust 25, 1843—alliludes of the sun. 


OBSERVATIONS, 
PINST SERIES, | SECOND SERIES. 
| 
. | = 
Double altitudes of the | T'ime of chronometer. | Double altitudes of the | Time of chronometer, 
sun’s lower limb. ’ sun’s lower limb, 

Deg. min. see. he mine — see. Deg. min, see. | he min, vee. 
34 25 35 6 20 345 | 33 OF 20 | 6 g& 230 
33° «5940 21 44.6 | 32 80 25 24 653.6 
33 «4380 22 © 8631,0 | 32 «38 «80 25 26.5 
33 32 40 22 68,0 32 25 20 26 02.2 
33 17 50 23 38,5 32 12 40 26 36.2 

Index error = ++ 1 min. 20 sec. 
RESULT OF CALCULATION. 
Mean time. Advance. Longitude. 
| 
A. min, — see, he min. Set, Deg. min. see. ‘ 
5 09 44 l 14 09,1 11 46 00 


NOON HALT AT THE ENTRANCE OF THE BEAUTIFUL PASS WITH THE 
REMARKABLE ROCK. 


Determination of latitude, ug. 29, 1845—meridian altitudes of the sun. 


OBSERVATIONS. 


Double altitudes of the sun’s lower limb. Time of chronometer. 


Deg. min. — see. hk. min. — see. 
114 02 50 1] 18 23 
114 02 20 19 26 
—_ - Index error = a 1 min. 20 sec. 
RESULT OF CALCULATION. 
True altitude. Apparent time of transit. | Latitude. 


Deg. min. sec. 


57 17 16 


aerate 
| 42 07 18 


h. min. — see. | Deg. min. see. 


ee 


wo oe ner 


| 


392 


NOON HALT ON A BRANCH OF ROSEAUX, OR REED RIVER. 
Delermination of Jatitude, Mug. 30, 1843—meridian altitudes of the sun. 


OBSERVATIONS. 


‘Time of chronometer. 


Deg. min. — see, | he mine — gee. 
1305S | L 12 08 
1130630 12 41 
113 05 20 | 13 17 
113 05 20 13 53 


Index error = - 1 min, 82 see, 


RESULT OF CALCULATION. 


oer ceene — eee eee — - a ee a ee a 


True altitude. 


Deg. min, sec. h. min. — sec, Deg. min. — see. 
66 48 46 l N1 55 


NOON HALT AT A SWAMPY PLACE, A LITTLE DISTANCE FROM ROSEAUX 
CREEK. 


Determination of latitude, 4ug.31,1843—meridian altitudes of the sun. 


OBSERVATIONS, 


Double altitudes of the sun’s lower limb. Time of chronometer. 


eS aN Sar 


Deg. min, see. he min. — see. 
12 «BO | 1 12 10 
112 5l 15 | 13 07 
112 51 20 | 14 12 
112 50 50 15 21 
112 50 10 16 21 
112 49 35 17 29 
112 48——COW) | - 18 34 
112 19 


Index error = ++ | min. 20 sec. 


RESULT OF CALCULATION. 


| 
True altitude. Apparent time of transit. | Latitude. 


Deg. min. sec. he min. sec. Deg. min. sec. 
56 42 03 1 11 35 41 59 31 


anne 


SEELSI PLEED PE 


Dete 


-_——-—-- — 


Double alt 
sun’s lo 


Deg. ni 
4 | 
41 
4 
414 
40 


h. 


Deg. 
43 


R. 


of the sun. 


ao me ee ee 


~ ROSEAUX 


f the sun. 


sec. 


393 [ 174 ] 
ENCAMPMENT ON 'THE ROSEAUN. 
Determination of longitude, Sept. 1, 1843—altitudes of the sun. 


OBSERVATIONS. 


VINST SENIES. SECOND SERIBS. 


ne rT 


Double altitudes of the | Time of chronometer. 
sun’s lower limb. 


Double altitudes of the | Time of chronometer 
sun's lower limb. 


—————— 


Deg. min, see. h. min, gee, * Deg. min, see. h. min. see. 
41 39 35 56 48 08.5 
41 25 15 48 45.4 40 31 10 5 6t Its 
41 11 = 60 49 = 23,0 3903880 54 O10 
41 00 50 49 62.7 
40 48 50 60 24.5 


Index error «: + 1 min. 25 sec. 


RESULT OF CALCULATION. 


Mean time. Advanee. Longitude. 
he min. sec. h. min, see. 
4 39 02 ! Ll 55.1 


Determination of latitude, Sept. 2, 1843—allitudes of Polaris. 


OBSERVATION. 
Double altitudes of Polaris. Time of chronometer. 
Deg. min. see. h. min. — see. 
86 17 50 3 28 03 a. m. 


Index error = — 28 sec. 


RESULT OF CALCULATION, 


True altitude. Mean time. Latitude. 
Deg. min. sec. h. min. sec. Deg. min. see. 
43 07 39 2 16 21 41 36 10 


~~ 


= 


| 
i 
Ty 
1 
it 
i | 
me) 


alll - 


[ 174 ] 394 : 


ENCAMPMENT ON BEAR RIVER, NEAR ITS MOUTH, 
Detern nation of latitude, Sept, 2, 1843—altitudes of Polaris, 


OBSERVATIONS, 


ooo —— ee ne 


-_——-—- ee ee a rere me 


Double altitades of Polaris. Time of chronometer. 


re 


Deg, mine — gee. h. min, see, 

8) 25 Av lo Ol 45 

85 pi) 0 02 hs 

CH 27 50 OB hs 

83 28 2) OS By 

a3 20 , 06 19 

Index error e& — 30 see, 
RESULT OF CALCULATION. 
True altitude. | Mean time. Latitude, 

Deg. mine — ete. h, =omin. — gee. Deg. min, — gee, 
41 42 23 | Rg 42 24 41 30 27 


Netermination of longitude, Sept. 2, 1843—altitudes of o Andromeda. 


OBSERVATIONS. 


ee ee 


FIRST SERIES. SECOND SERIES. 


Double altitudes of a | ‘Time of chronometer. | Double altitudes of a | Time of chronometer, 
Andromede. Andromed. 

Deg. min. see. | h. min. see. || Deg. min, sec. he min. — see. 
79 37 40 | 10 24 «©6040 || 8] 08 20 10 28 06.0 
80 19 10 25 63.6 || sl 31 10 29 06.5 
80 43. 40 27 03.0 || 81 48 20 29 62.5 

Index error — +- 1 min, 25 see. 

RESULT OF CALCULATION. 

Mean time. Advance. | Longitude. 
| 
h. min, see. h. min. sec. | 
9 15 39 1 Il 39.4 


= | 


Deter 


De 


395 [174 J 


' ENCAMPMENT ON BEAR RIVER, NEAR ITS MOUTH. 
olaris, Determination of latitude, Sept, 2, \843—meridian altitudes of « Aquila. 
ONSERVATIONS, 
jie - . - aa 
Double altitudes of « Aquila. | Time of chronometer. | 
re \ 
2° Deg. mine see i, somin, see. 
1h Su 50 it) 4 17 
MY 6 20 16 12 
113 5 10 17 ge i 
13630 19 00 
113 50 40 
Index error = — 30 see, 3 
RESULT OF CALCULATION, | 
: siete 
—— True altitude, | Apparent time of transit, Latitude. | 
le, Se ne iui sails ee ee ee 
toa Deg. ming — see. h, min. — see, 
= 57) 0038 10 808) «64 
27 . ee en - ee 
Determination of longitude, Seplember 2, 1843—emersion of Jupiter's 
third satellite. 
dromeda. Steen nner TID 
Observed time, Mean time. Longitude. . j 
' 
$$ $$$ $$ $$ $$} -.§ ; 
A, min. — see. he min. — see. | 
10 54 56 9 43 M4 
—o Se eee es a a ra TEE | ot a DM castiasiieiatatchatiteetaahl adh and mina ieabiabiemeemas ; 
chronometer, 
Emersion of Jupiter’s fourth satellite. | 
ee ee ae Lire eee MANE LAS LE i ee a oy Ee n= saan 
. ono Observed time. Mean time. Longitude. 
, 06.5 
9 62.5 P 
. min, } 
1) 03 29 9 51 47 i 
: Emersion of Jupiter’s second satellite. 
e. SSS ar SNS ——o~ -—— — ——— 


Observed time. | Mean time. | Longitude. 


h. 
12 


min. gee. he min. sec. 
00 17 


[ 174 J 396 


ENCAMPMENT ON BEAR RIVER, NEAR ITS MOUTH, 
Determination of longitude, September 3, 1843—altitudes of the sun, 
ONSERVATIONS, 


awe -— - a eo —_ —_ 


. 
PInAT SENTES. | SROONT SBULEDA, 


\] 
Double altitudes of the | Time of chronometer, Double altitudes of the | ‘Time of chronometer, 
sun's lower limb. | wun's lower limb, 


Deg. min, see. homing wee, |) Deg, ming wee, he mine see. 
at 40 =o “4 so 050 Aq AY 4 24.6 
46 55) BO 50 467  & O83 bo 53 688 
47 oo 10 61 22.0 1s 1h ws fa 22.9 
47 27 15 52 15 } AS 24 Hs) ha 48,0 
47 42 40 S246 48 37 OS h5 25.3 


Index error «© = | min, 25 wee. 


RESULT OF CALCULATION, 


Ce aEEEEEE REESE EEE ——— _- 


Mean time. Advance, | Longitude. 
—_ since imetenieaaaiiasinaiale 
h. min. — see. he mine see. Deg. min, — see. 
vi Al 27 I 11 28.6 lls i) 46 


ENCAMPMENT AT THE MOUTH OF BEAR RIVER, 
Determination of latitude, Sept. 3,1843—merjlian altitudes of the sun. 
OBSERVATIONS, 


Double altitudes of the sun’s lower limb. | Time of chronometer. 


he min, — see. 
1 07 46 


Deg. min. — see. 
lll 40) 35 


111 4l 10 og iT) 
111 Al 35 LO Ol 
111 4l 35 10 57 
111 40 40 2 1% 


111 40 25 


| 

| 

| 

} 

| 
ll 40 40 | 13 03 
lil 39 30 | 


Index error = + 1 iin. 25sec. 


RESULT OF CALCULATION. 


True altitude. Apparent time of transit. Latitude. 
Deg. min. — sec. h. min. — see. Deg. min. see. 
66 06 37 ! 10 39 41 30 17 

,@ 


Deter 


the sun. 


shronometer, 


397 [174 J 


INCAMPMENT AT THE MOUTH OF BEAR RIVER, 


Determination of latitude, September 3, 1843—meridian altitudes of « 
Aguile, 


ONSERVATIONS, 


Double altitudes of a Aquile, 


Dee. min, 
oo 
oo 
Su 
o7 
Wi) 


Index error e* + | min, 35 sec, 


RESULT OF CALCULATION, 


True altitude, | Apparent time of transit. | Latitude. 


eens <oae: a TTT 


Deg. min, — see, he ming 9ee, 
57 00 48 Wo O4 03 


Determination of latitude, September 3, 1843—altitudes of Polaris, 


OBSERVATIONS, 


Double altitudes of Polaris. Time of chronometer, 
9 —— 

Deg. min, — see, min, 
833 39 40 15 
83 41 15 17 
3 42 10 18 
R83 43 00 20 
83 44 40 21 


os — 


Index error = + 1 min. 25 see. 


RESULT OF CALCULATION. 


‘True altitude. Mean time. Latitude. 


| 
| 
Deg. min. — see. min. . Deg. min. — see. 
41 50 42 07 41 30 22 


[ 174] 398 
ENCAMPMENT AT THER MOUTH OF BEAR RIVER. 
Determination of longitude, September 3, 1848—allitudes of Arcturus, Dete 


OBSERVATIONS. —— 


Double altitudes of Arcturus. Time of chronometer. Se 
‘ sis lee Se ces |e ee Pee ere Double alt 
sun’s Id 
Deg. min. — see. he omine see. 
38 21 50 3) 65 15.0 
37 48 20 7 47.0 D 
eg. om 
37 24 40 68 ‘50.0 39 ‘ 
36 56 20 10 00 05.5 39 
36 84 | OL 05,0 39° 
36 00 80 | Ov 39.0 40 ( 


an Ee Ce Pe inten a tcc 40 


Index error = ++ | min. 25 sec. 


RESULT OF CALCCLATION. 


Mean time. | Advance. | Longitude. 
a ee ee UTS po eo on 0. h 
he min. — see. he mine see. Deg. min. — sec. vi 
8 48 04 1 tL 232 112 «Qt 0 
Bee eg Bee ea ee rs gee et ee _—- 
Determ 
Emersion of Jupiter’s first satellite. 
SRE Ae Sr ee Doub! 
Observed time. | Mean time. | Longitude. 
| 
| 
h. min, — see. he min. — see. Deg. min. — see. 
4) 37 40 8 26 16 112 17 40 
| — eee es 


Mean longitude 1129 19’ 30”. 


AAT LTT IT ee , 
+ 


Mrelurus. 
je. 
sec. 
20) 
e. 
sec. 
40 


399 C174 J 
ENCAMPMENT ON WEBER'S FORK. 


Determination of longitude, Sent. 7, 18438—alliludes of the sun. 
5 9 NE) ’ 
OBSERVATIONS. 


FIRST SERIES. SECOND SERLES. 


re - eee 
oe — 


Double altitudes of the | Time of chronometer, | Double altitudes of the | ‘Time of chronometer 
sun’s lower limb. sun’s lower limb. 


Deg. min. see. | he min, see, Deg. mins see. he mins — see. 
397 20 | 8 3 25.0 40 30 10 8 34 13.4 
39 «640-00 sl 59,2 40 40 20 bd 43.0 
39 63 45 3234.5 40 51 40 | 35 12. 
40 09 00 33 «16.0 41 03 25 | v5 44.8 
40 19-00 33 © «44.2 41 13 «BO 35 L1.6 


Index error = -+- | min. 40 see, 


RESULT OF CALCULATION. 


Mean time. | Advance. 


| 
| Longitude. 
as s win eset Tce neu cenreneriers Were eee: 
if 
Ae omin, 80. he oinin, SéC. | Deg. Un, SeC, 
q 25 22 ! U8 32.4 | 12 06 43 
| 


Determination of latitude, Sept. 7, 18438—meridian celtitudes of the sun. 
OBSERVATIONS. 


Time of chronometer. 


Double altitudes of the sun’s lower limb. 


Deg. mine — gee. A. mine see. 
109 i) 10 1 02 a4 
109 09 35 03 52 
109 09 30 05 58 
109 09 55 06 56 
109 OY 30 03 03 
109 Oe) 24 OS 44 
109 03 55 09 28 
109 03 20 10 il 
109 O07 50 Il U2 
109 07 00 Il 56 


Index error = + | min. 32 sec. 


RESULT OF CALCULATION. 


True altitude. | Apparent time of transit. Latitude. 
Deg. min. sec. h. min. — sec. Deg. min. — sec. 
54 51 01 | 1 06 14 41 15 50 


oy [ee 


=a 


[ 174 ] 400 


ENCAMPMENT ON WEBER'S FORK, 
Determination of longitude, Sept. 7, 1843—altitudes of the sun. 
OBSERVATIONS. 


FIRST SERIES. BECOND SERIES. 


Double altitudes of the | Time of chronometer. | Double altitudes of the | Time of chronometer, 
sun’s lower litteb. | sun's lower limb, 
! 

Deg, min see. % min, se. | Deg. min. see he min, — see. 
41 36 15 5 34 58.5 | 40 37 50 § 87 ac 
41 18 30 35 46.0 | 40 27 45 38 04.4 
41 O07 10 260 «16.7 40 19 10 38 =. 28.2 
40 56 40 36 «46.4 =| 40 08 35 | 38 56.8 
40 46 30 37 «13.6 | 40 0050 39 «17.5 


Index error — +- ] min. 32 see. 


RESULT OF CALCULATION, 


| 


Mean time. | Advance. Longitude. 
, he ming SC, he mine gee. 
4 29 06 1 08 14.4 
| Determ 
. ENCAMPMENT ON WES8ER’S FORK, VERY NEAR THE MOUTH, os er 
Determination of longitude, Sept. 8, 1843—allitudes of the sun. Doubl 


SSERVATIONS,. —— 


FIRST SERIES. SECOND SERIES. 


*Double altitudes of the | Time of chronometer. | Double altitudes of the ‘Time of chronometer. 


sun’s lower limb. | | sun’s lower limb, 

Deg. min. see. h. min. secew Deg. mins see. h. min, — see. 
44 07 50 | 5 26 14.0 43 13 50 +9) 28 41.5 
43 54 55 26 49.5 43 02 55 29 10.0 
48 42 50 | 27 21.7 | 42 52 45 29 38.0 
43 33 Oo 27) 0 49.0 42 48 30 30 02.8 
43 23 55 28 13.3 | 4X 29 10 30 42.5 


Index error — -+ 1 min. 40 see. 


RESULT OF CALCULATION. 


4 20 27 } 08 00.9 112 ll 30 


| | y 
Mean time. | Advance. | Longitude. i 
| ae 
—— | eee — — ee 
— | ; | D 
1. min. — s€e. | he min. see. | Deg. min. sec. 5 
| | 


nn ee ane 


ss ee 


401 [ 174 J 


ENCAMPMENT ON WEBER'S FORK, VERY NEAR THE MOUTH, 


he sun. 
Determination of latitude, September 8, 1843—altiludes of Polaris. 
asec eecasersaseeenttiinnens ' OBMERVA TIONS, 
Double altitudes of Polaris. | ‘Time of chronometer. 
chronometer, ; . 
Deg. imine — see. he ming see. 
| a 12 \\) | 10 «O48 
— 83 i 20) | 06 37 
nin see SB 5) Ou | Os 2 
‘ SéC, - 
37 37.4 83 17 UD) 1”) 11 
38 04.4 33 188 12 2 
38 28.2 mi i ; Sin Soaccece acon eneaneemencnaeteereeeaeeeeEnD 
38 56.8 fndex error = + L min. 40 sec. 
39 17.5 
RESULT OF CALCULATION, 
True altitude. Mean time. Latitude. 
- Deg. min, see. he min, see, Deg. min. see. 
ude. AL 87 28 9 00 35 41 Il = 26 


ON THE ISLAND IN. THE GREAT SALT LAKE. 
Determination of latitude, Sept. 9, 1843—meridian altitudes of the sun. 


OBSERVATIONS, 


UTH. a Areneeree ——- Se Ae ana LTO TT © 
| 
he sun. Double altitudes of the sun’s lower limb. ‘Time of chronometer. 
— | Soe 

SS, Deg. min, — see. | A. min. — sec. 

107 46 10 | 0 59 23 

107 47 35 l 00 18 

107 48.20 01 48 

107, 49 10 | 02 4Y 

chronometer. 107 4g 15 | 03 29 
10749 20 | 04 821 

eee 107 49-80 | 05 08 

; 107 AY 10 | 06 00 
Witt. SEC. 107 49 00 | 06 56 
28 41.5 107. 4845 | 07 ~«=+5i1 
ae. te 07 4845 08 43 
ao) Dew 107 47,30 09 28 
3002.8 107 47s 10 42 
50 48.5 7 45 40 1144 


Index error = ++ 1 min. 40 see. 


es 


RESULT OF CALCULATION. 


de True altitude. | Apparent time of transit. Latitude. 
sec Deg. min. sec. h. min. see. Deg. min. see. 
30. 54 10 51 1 05 23 41 10 42 
26 ED EE LETTE 


[174] 402 
ON THE ISLAND IN THE GREAT SALT LAKE, 


Determination of longitude, September 9, 1843—altitudes of Arcturus, 


OBSERVATIONS, 


a ii = ee ee 
| 
FIRST SERIES, SECOND SERIES. 
, a : ; 5 late . 
Double altitudes of Time of chronometer. || Double altitudes of | lime of chronometer, 
Arcturus. | Arcturus, | 
Deg. min. sec. he min. see. Deg. min. see. | he min. — see. 
68 58 50 8 33 53.0 f4 58 50 | & 44 47.0 
58 05 10 36 18,5 | 54 22 50 | 46 04.6 
67 2 40 37 50.5 | 58 59 00 | 47 = 09.2 
656 53 40 a, itt 39 29.6 | 43 28 Ov | 48 33.0 
56 20 20 | 40 54.0 52 40 50 | 50 13.0 
Index error = -- | min. 40 see. 
RESULT OF CALCULATION. 
Mean time. | Advance. Longitude. 
| 
; | ; ; 
he mine — 8ee. | Ae omine — S€e. | Dew, mine — see. 
7 34 29 l 08 02.6 | lle 21 05 


NOON HALT IN 'THE MUD. 


Determination of latitude, Sept. 10,1843—meridian altitudes of the sun. 


OBSERVATIONS. 


Double altitudes of the sun's lower limb. Time of chronometer. 
Deg. mins — see. he ming see. 
106 56 50 1 61 43 
106 57 20 02 55 
106 57 15 0; 14 
106 56 50 05 24 
106 56 50 06 3l 
106 55 55 07 40 
106 54 10 10 04 
106 53 20 10 42 


Index error == 1 min. 40 sec. 


RESULT OF CALCULATION. 


ooo ee — ———$_$___— = 


True altitude. | Apparent time of transit. | Latitude. 
Deg. min. — sec. | he min. see. | Deg. min. — see. 
53 44 42 | 1 04 16 | 41 14 \7 
| ‘ | 


i bg phenalee bere errernernaceeprapennas fate eR eT MI PBT eae cee 
v " ‘ 
r i) ® 


3 


‘ @ 
“a 


Dete 


Double al 


eun's | 


Deg, 
Y 
59 
38 
38 
8 


Deter 


Double alt 


sun's lo 


Deg. 3 
438 , 
49° 4 
49 

49 

49 


The daily 
seconds, 


Arcturus. 
chronometer, 
iN. See. 
4 47.0 
6 04.6 
7 09,2 
8 33.0 
(0) 13.0 
ude 
n SC. 
l 05 

of the sun. 
de. 

. sec. 

17 


403 [ 174 ] 


ENCAMPMEN'D OF SEPTEMBER 7. 
Determination of time, September 11, 18413—altitudes of the sun. 
OBSERVATIONS. 


en 


FIRST SUENLES,. SECOND SERIES. 


| 
Double altitudes of the | Time of chronometer, | Double altitudes of the | Tine of chronometer. 
eun's lower limb sun’s lower limb. 


| 


Deg. tine see. he min, ee, Deg. iiine see. he = min, sec. 
1y 19 10 5 32 (05.6 38 17 ~—s «50 5 34 48,4 
89 05 20 32 «641.5 38 03 50 | 35 26.7 
38 868 80 38: 197 37 #53 «20 | 35 55.0 
38 40 50 33. 46.5 37 64310 | 36 22.5 
8 29 10 34 N77 37.29 0 | 37 02.3 


Index error — + ] min. 40 sec. 


RESULT OF CALCULATION. 


Advance. 


i, “ile 80OO A. mine See. 
4 28 35 | \ 05 59.1 


Determination of time, September 12, 1843—altitudes of the sun. 


OBSERVATIONS, 


FIRST SERIES. | SECOND SERIES. 


Double altitudes of the | Time of chronometer. | Double altitudes of the | Time of chronometer. 
sun's lower limb. sun’s lower limb. 


SE se aoe 
Deg. mine sec. | hy ming see. Deg. min. sec. h. min. see. 
4u 5040 s 59 39.5 | 49 42 00 9 OL 59.4 
49 (3 45 9 60 14.0 49 50 00 02 22.0 
49 14 20 00 43.2 49 57 80 02 44.6 
49 23 GO | o) 06.4 50 «608~—(OO0 03 «12.4 
49 323 40 | G1 84.5 | 50 17 35 03 «40.3 
| 


Index error = -b 1 min. 40 see. 


RESULT OF CALCULATION. 


Mean time. Advance. 
Ah. mtn. — see. A. min. sec. 
7 56 C2 ] C5 41.7 


The daily losing rate of the chronometer, obtained from the observations at this place, is 33.72 
seconds. 


, 
I 
t 
' 
j 
i 


LL 


F 174 7 


404 


ENCAMPMENT ON BEAR RIVER, SOUTH OF THE GAP--A MAIN STATION, 


Determination of longitude, Sept. 13, 1843—alliludes of « Aquile. 


OBSERVATIONS. 


Double altitudes of a Aquila. Tine of chronometer. 


Deg, min — see, he oming se 
88 10 15 Lt At to 
87 52 50 42 35 
87 32 30 12 42 
87 07 40 AS 07 
86 48 00 46 U8 


ae eS F RIES. PARE EIS TT EF 


Index error = + L min, 40 see. 


RESULT OF CALCULATION, 


ereen en eenemene eer een eee eee se anette cReNeNED en <0 — 


| 
| 


Mean time. Advance. Longitude 


Immersion of + rietis at the moon's bright limi, 


Observed time. Lonwitude. 
h. min, cee he min. SPC. 
12 30 43 7 31 LoS 


Emersion of t' rielis. 


Observed time. Longitude. 
A. min. sec. | ho min. — gee. 
12 17 39 | ri 28 20.8 


To this station, as determined by the emersion of r’ Arietis, are referred, by chronometric differ- 
ences, the longitudes from St. Vrain’s fort to the Dalles of the Columbia. 


ENCA! 


Determ 


——————— 


Determi 


Double altit 
sun’s lov 


Deg. ™ 
42 1 
41 4 
41 ] 
41 ( 
40 4 

M 


405 [ 174 ] 


STATION, ENCAMPMENT ON BEAR RIVER, SOUTH OF THE GAP—A MAIN STATION, 
Aquile. Determination of longitude, September 13, 1843—altitudes ofa Lyre. 


OBSERVATIONS, 


a Double altitudes ofa Lyre, Time of chronometer. 
Meg. min, 8ee, A, mins See. 
80 49 00 12 3) 49.5 
gO Of 20 33 51.6 
79 12 00 36 27.0 
7 Index error = -—- ! min, 40 sec. 
RESULT OF CALCULATION. 
: ese ac eal ia 
ide Mean time. | Advance. Longitude. 
| 
Determination of longitude, September 14, 1843—altitudes of the sun. 
OBSERVATIONS. 
PInsST SERIES. | SECOND SERIES. 
a Double altitudes of the | Time of chronometer. | Double altitudes of the | Time of chronometer. 
sun’s lower limb. | | sun’s lower limb. 
Deg. min. sec. h. min, — see | Deg. min, sec. | he min. see. 
snp 42 2 «600 5 16 18.5 40 24 15 5 2 21.3 
4} 48 30 17 24.7 40 10 20 | 21 59.7 
41 18 05 Is 503 | 39 59 15 || 22 29.2 
41 04 00 19 28.0 39 = 48 10 | 23 00.4 
40 48 25 20 12,4 39 37 30 23 30.4 
| 
| 
Index error = ++ 1 min. 39 sec. 
y ic differ- 
ometeic dia RESULT OF CALCULATION. 
Mean tine. | Advance. | Longitude. 
| | 
| | 


[174] 406 
ENCAMPMENT ON ROSEAUN, OR REED RIVER 


Determination of longitude, Seplember 15, 1843—altiludes of the sun. 
OBSERVATIONS. 


oo - --- no — ——— . LL ty 


PINST SENILS, SLLOND SERIES, 


Double altitudes of the | ‘Time of chronometer. | Double altitudes of the | ‘lime of chronometer 
sun’s lower limb. sun's lower limb, 


Deg. ' + ming see. | Deg, mine see. he mine gee. 
47 5S HA. 16 10 5 O28 56.0 
47 69 30, 45 30 08 33,3 
47 ‘ { 00 14, ASB 20 04 09.8 
46 OO BS. 45 10 05 10.0 

OL 69. 45 50 05 66.0 


o 


a 


-— = 
I 


o 


| 


Index error ss =~ | inin. 38 sec, 


RESULT OF CALCULATION. 


Mean time. Advance. Longitude, 


ee -- - — 


h. min. —8€c. » min, See. » mine — sec. 


3 58 00 04 21.8 ne 15 O4 


Determination of latitude, Sept. 15,1843—meridian allilude ofa Aquile. 


OBSERVATIONS. 


Double altitudes of a Aquile, ‘Time of chronometer, 


Deg, min. see. he min, 
112 22 : Hu] Ot 
112 24 03 
112 26 { 05 
112 23 08 
112 27 10 
112 23 Li 
112 27 13 
112 26 14 
112 24 16 
112 22 ‘ 7 


Index error == -+- ] nin. 34 sec. 


RESULT OF CALCULATION. 


True altitude. Apparent time of transit. Latitude. 


Deg. min. sec. . mine — see. Deg. min. — set. 
46 15 20 08 51 42 13 26 


ee 


Double alti 
sun’s lo 


Deg. 1 
47 
AZT 
46 
46 
46 


o> 


f the sun. 


‘hronometer 


t] Pe on 
2 56.0 
3 33.23 
4 09.8 
5 10.0 
) {6.0 


le. 
8c. 
04 
a Pguile, 
Set. 
26 


407 [ 174] 
ENCAMPMENT ON ROSEAUX, OR REED RIVER, 


Determination of latitude, September 15, 1843—altitudes of Polaris, 


OBSERVATIONS. 
Double altitudes of Polaria, ‘l'ime of chronometer, 
Deg. min. — see. he mine gee, 
85 03 ho HT) 20 41 
85 05 20 22 09 
85 06 30 } 23 L7 
85 O07 00 24 48 
85 09 00 Q6 12 
Index error == -- | min. 34 see, nas 
RESULT OF CALCULATION, 
Sica aecasas : SS 
True altitude, | Mean time. Latitude. 


oD 


Deg. min. — see. he min, see. Deg. min. — see. 
42 32 Stl | 8 19 ~=—«10 42 12 5&7 


ENCAMPMENT ON PANNACK RIVER. 
Determination of longitude, September 17, 1843—altitudes of the sun. 


OBSERVATIONS. 


a 
| 


FIRST SERIES, | SECOND SERIES. 


seit Fae ries Seaways 
| 
Double altitudes of the | ‘Time of chronometer. || Double altitudes of the | ‘Time of chronometer. 
sun’s lower limb. || sun’s lower limb. 
_ |—____—_—_— —|| = 
| 
Deg. min. sec. | he mine see. | Deg. min. see. h. min. sec. 
47 20 40 4 $4 22.0 | 46 23 00 4 57 07.4 
AY O07 50 64 68.3 | 46 12 20 57 39.4 
46 656 2 | 55 332.5 45 59 10 58 15.6 
46 46 50 55 58.2 45 48 00 58 48.0 
46 38 15 66 = 22.0 
| 


Index error = ++ 1 min. 35 sec. 


RESULT OF CALCULATION. 


Mean time. Advance. Longitude. 
h. min. see. h. = min, _ see. Deg. min. see. 
3 52 28 l 04 14,1 112 29 52 


i 


vei 
i 
| | | 
} 
| \ | 
' | 


pea 


<< ta ee <i 


- a paar 
Ate mipecane ES Ra ees ae 9 SES 


[ 174 ] 408 


ENCAMPMENT ON PANNACK RIVER, 
Determination of latitude, Sept. 17, 18438 —allitudes af Polaris, 


Determ: 
OUSERVATIONS. 
Double altitudes of Polaris. Fime of chronometer 
min, se, he mine — see, 
RS 37 1) 8 N4 5S 
85 8 20 a6 @) 
85 na 10 a7 28 
85 39 30 38 5) 
85 41 10 39 a 
85 8641 | 4) 20 
a5 43 10 AY 57 
85 44 If A 5S 
85 4S 20 44 fa 
85 46 00 46 3 
| 
Index error «= -4- 1 min, 36 see, 
RESULT OF CALCULATION, 
True altitude. | Mean time, Latitude. 
Deg. min. — see. | he min, see. Deg. min, — see. 
42 5080 | 7 36 37 | 42 44—~—i h, 
So : : = ee 0 
Determination of latitude, Sept. 17,1843—meridian allitudes of Aquile. -— 
ORSERVATIONS. ‘ 
Double altitudes of a Aquila. ‘Time of chronometer. _-— ‘ 
——-- a —————- ~---- oe Ob 
Deg. min. see. he min, — see. — 
111 12 50 8 49 41 
lil 61750 51 Al h. 
lll «6210 5 18 ! 
11] «63210 55 40 _ 
‘ 111 23 50 57 10 
111 25 20 9 00 08 
111 26 00 02 33 
111 25 15 04 06 
M11 25 10 05 34 
111 24 00 07 13 


111 


—_——— ee —™ 


Index error = +- 1 min. 36 sec. 


RESULT OF CALCULATION. 


a 


True altitude. Apparent time of transit. Latitude. 


Deg. min. — sec. h. min. — see. Dez. min. sec. 
55 42 02 9 01 41 42 44 45 


arr rn 


ee an 


TERNS TERE LE EE TE I ee 


li ris, 


ec. 
2! 
a Aguile, 


sec. 
45 


409 3 C174 ] 
ENCAMPMENT ON PANNACK RIVER 
Determinatli of longitude, Seplember 18, 1843—allitudes afa Lyra, 


OBSERVATIONS, 


Double altitudes of a Ly Time of chronometer, 


Deg. min, e/( h. min, see. 


Nb Sl ati) g1 44.0 a m. 
55 24 20 33 04,2 
4 fa LO 4 40,0 
“4 26 30 | a6 00.4 
3 oz 10 37 64.0 
3 32 50 3y 22.0 
Index error +- 1 min. 39 sec, 
RESULT OF CALCULATION, 
| 
Mean time. Advanee. Longitude. 
he min. — see, he = ominw * see 
0 dl 15 ! 04 12.8 


®’ 
Emersion of Jupiter’s first satellile. 
} ae ‘ -—-~-- 4 ee 
Obser\ ed time, Mean time. Longitude, 
he min. — see. A. min, — see, Deg. min, — ste. 
| 20 21 | 0 16 08 112 32 21 


ORAS aE ee eI ok 


ve || 


ee nm 


z 
Oo 
_ 
< 
a | 
=i 
<= 
=> 
er] 
aad 
© 
<{ 
= 


TEST TARGET (MT-3) 
22 WA, WLS. 


4 + 


[ 174] 410 


AT FORT HALL. 


Determination of longitude, September 21, 1843—altitudes of the sun. 


OBSERVATIONS. 


eS tt ne ee tee ae nee ae ee ee 


FIRST SERIES. SECOND SERIES. 


— 


Double altitudes of the | Time of chronometer. || Double altitudes of the | Time of chronometer, 
sun’s lower limb. sun's lower limb. 


Deg. min. sec. h. min, sec. Deg. min. see. h. min, 
66 29 00 9 34 22.0 57 16 00 9 

56 40 00 34 5.5 57 4 

66 51 50 35 «31.4 67 — 3 

67 Ol 35 3601.2 57 39 

57 O07 15 360 21.4 67 47 


Index error = +- 1 min. 37 sec. 


RESULT OF CALCULATION. 


Mean time. Advance. 


| 


Longitude. 


h. min. sec. h. min, — sec. Deg. n.in. 
8 34 20 1 02 11.5 112 «29 


Delerm 


of the sun. 


a 


f chronometer, 


—_— 


min, sec. 


36 047.2 
37 11.0 
37 = (34.3 
37 = 69.4 
38 =. 24.3 
ude. 
in. sec, 
54 


411 [174] 
AT FORT HALL. 


Determination of latitude, September 21, 1843—meridian altitudes of 


the sun. 
OBSERVATIONS. 
Double altitudes of the sun’s lower limb. ‘Time of chronometer. 
Deg. min. see. h. = min, — see. \ 
9 45 00 0 43 26 
94 45 55 44 04 2 
94 47 20 44-58 oie 
94 47 50 45 37 ; 
94 48 20 46 08 ie 
94 49 30 46 51 tt 
94 50 00 475 ia 
94 51 00 4802 i 
94 61 20 48 40 a. 
94 52 00 49 33 Aa 
94 53 40 51-26 Le 
9% 53 30 51 = 68 a 
94 53 40 523 ce 
94 54 20 6312 
94 54 00 53 50 my 
94 54 10 54 45 
94 53 55 55 2 
94 63 65 56 12 
94 64 00 56 43 
94 53 40 57 21 
94 53 00 68 52 
94 2 25 59 3l 
94 61 45 1 00 29 
94 51 20 ol 09 
94 50 50 01 58 
94 49 40 02 45 
94 48 50 03 35 


94 47 50 04 13 


Index error = -- 1 min. 37 sec. 


RESULT OF CALCULATION. 


ene: Ss 


SPR pT EES SS EAE EI ER IL MET ST 


True altitude. Apparent time of transit. Latitude. 
Deg. min. sec, h. min, sec. Drg. min. _ sec. 
47 43 08 0 55 11 43 01 30 


[ 174 ] 412 


ENCAMPMENT ON SNAKE RIVER, ABOVE THE AMERICAN FALLS, ENG 


Determination of latitude, September 24, 1843—meridian altitudes of Delermi 


the sun. 


OBSERVATIONS. 


Double altitudes of the sun's lower limb. Time of chronometer. 


Deg. min, ; he. min, 
92 57 0 45 
92 57 46 
92 58 47 
92 59 48 
93 00 49 

00 50 
00 51 
00 52 
00 53 
00 53 
59 55 
00 
59 
49 
58 
57 


Index error == + 1 min. 47 sec. 
Detern 


RESULT OF CALCULATION. 


True central altitude. Apparent time of transit. Latitude. 


Deg. min. — sec. he min. — see. 
46 46 22 0 53 00 


FALLS, 


altitudes of 


OBSERVATIONS. 


FINST SERIES. | SECOND SERIES. 
= ——_————_ —_—_—. ——_ | 7 sseicesaitcclisies 
Ts Double altitudes of the | ‘Time of chronometer. || Double altitudes of the | Time of chronometer. 
_ sun’s lower limb. sun’s lower limb. | 
) Deg. min, sec. | he min, — see. || Deg. min. see. | h. min. see. 
35 07 ~=50 | 6 12 228 | 3306460 «6000 | 518 
340-6200 13. 06.4 | 33° 270 17~=—(08.0 
8439 5 13 445 | 338 10 40 | 17 56.5 
34625000 14240 | 33 00 50 | 18 26.0 
34 0025 | 165 360 | 32 47 OO | 19 04.2 
Sa tia clan at pencacas acces iret aes dtcconte 
Index error = + 1 min, 47 sec, 
RESULT OF CALCULATION. 
a {oo acetate. 
Mean time. Advance. Longitude. 
h. min. see. Ah. min. — sec. Deg. min. sec. 
ssiasnielneaiad 4 14 58 1 00 50.7 112 40 «13 
Determination of latitude, September 24, 1843—meridian altitudes of 
a Aquilx. 
OBSERVATIONS. 
le. ore 7 : aaale = pois 
Double altitudes of a Aquila. Time of chronometer. 
J sec. ~ i a ial ; ~ ars = 7 
02 Deg. min. — sec. h. min. — sec. 
Itl 18 10 25 2 
_ M11 19 20 26 50 
111 20 25 28 28; 
111 20 50 30 14 
111 20 20 32 03 
lll 20 20 34 05 
11k = 1820 35 24 
111 17 50 36 37 
Mt 16 00 38 43 


True altitude. 


cen eaten nn ne as tren 


Deg. min. — sec. 
55 40 41 


RESULT OF CALCULATION. 


413 


ENCAMPMENT ON SNAKE RIVER, ABOVE 'THE AMERICAN FALLS. 


[174 J 


Determination of longitude, September 24, 1843—altitudes of the sun. 


eee 


Index error == -- 1 min. 45 sec. 


Apparent time of transit. | 


he = omin. — see. 
8 30 


a rs nce SA 


Latitude. 


teen oe ee aan 


| Deg. min. see. 
08 | 42 47 05 


eee ne 


eR nd BMI maT A Tom Te 


ab ST et 


[ 174 J 4i4 
ENCAMPMENT ON SNAKE RIVER, ABOVE THE AMERICAN FALLS, 
Determination of latitude, September 24, 1843—altitudes of Polaris. 


OBSERVATIONS. 


Double altitudes of Polaris. Time of chronometer. 


Deg. min. see. + min, — gee. 
86 16 00 46 21 
86 17 20 48 22 
86 18 20 49 35 
8&6 19 40. 51 49 
86 21 40 54 11 


Index eciror — + 1 min. 45 sec. 


RESULT OF CALCULATION. 
| 
| 
| 


True altitude. Mean time. Latitude. 


ee ee — ee — ee 


Deg. min. — see. | ‘ | Deg. min, sec 
43 09 08 42 47 05 


NOON HALT ON SNAKE RIVER. 
Determination of latitude, Sept. 28, 1843—meridian altitudes of the sun. 


OBSERVATIONS. 


Double altitudes of the sun’s lower limb. Time of chronometer. 


Deg. min. see. 
89 42 50 
89 43 15 
89 43 00 
89 42 40 
89 42 10 
89 41 50 
89 41 10 
8y 40 00 
89 37 45 
89 35 20 


Index error = +- 1 min. 45 sec. 


RESULT OF CALCULATION. 


True central altitude. Latitude. 


Deg. min. sec. ; . Deg. min. — sec. 
45 07 24 j 42 29 56 


FALLS, 
of Polaris, 


er. 


eA? Cate 


ide. 
Re 8CCs 
| 05 


fCe sec. 


415 [174] 


ENCAMPMENT ON ROCK CREEK OF SNAKE RIVER. 


Delermination of latitude, September 29, 1843—altitudes of Polaris, 


OBSERVATIONS. 

Double altitudes of Polaris. Time of chronometer. 
Deg. min, — see, h, min. — see. 
86 05 40 9 09 453 
86 07 10 11 27 
86 08 00 12 25 
86 08 50 13 22 
86 10 40 14 42 
86 10 40 15 44 
86 11 25 ; 16 50 
&6 13 50 18 43 
8 8613.50 | 19-8 
6 1S 10 21 31 


Index ciror «= + 1 min. 45 see. 


RESULT OF CALCULATION. 


ee — SS a — 


| 
True altitude. Mean tine. Latitude. 


Deg. mine see” he mine — see. Deg. min. — see. 
43 05 06 8 } 40 42 26 21 


Determination of longitude, Sept. 29, 1843—altitudes of « Andromede. 


OBSERVATIONS. 


Double altitudes of a Androinede. Time of chronometer. 


| 
| 
| 
Deg. min, — see. he =min. — See. 
0 61610 9 25 33 
| 
| 
| 


100 45 40 26 53 
101 17 50 28 21 
Index error = +- 1 min. 45 sec, 
RESULT OF CALCULATION. 
Mean time. Advance. Longitude. 
he min. see. h. mine — see. 
8 23 08 1 03 47,0 


| 


OO he IEE TELE TIN ESSE TT 


[174] 416 
ENCAMPMENT ON SNAKE RIVER, OPPOSITE TO THE RIVER SPRINGS. NCA 
Determination of longitude, Seplember 30, 1843—altitudes of the sun. Dete 
OBSERVATIONS, 
—— EERE lin ictaiaaclasgaaian ee 
Double altitudes of the sun's lower limb. | Time of chronometer. 
Deg. min, — see. | A. omine see. 
25 30 00 | 8 \4 58.4 
25 57 50 16 16.0 
26 15 40 V7 07.0 
27 08 30 19 39.0 
27 46 00 21 24.5 
ee ssssotanedenanesettcadatind ee ce ae co 
Index error = + 1 min. 45 see. 
RESULT OF CALCULATION, 
pecans | | =e 
Mean time. | Advance. | Longitude, ‘ 
h, min, — see. | he min. — see. | Deg. min. — see. h. 
7 14 16 l 03 = -87,.3 | 114 hts«éA v 
| 
F ° ’ y * ENCAM 
’ Determination of latitude, September 30, 1843—altitudes of Polaris. 
OBSERVATIONS. Deter 
Double altitudes of Polaris. | Time of chronometer. = 
D 
Deg. min. sec. | he min, sec. 
86 58 40 | 9 48 33 
87 00 25 4955 
87 00 50 | 61 Ol 
87 ol 5u 62 33 
87 02 30 53 42 
87 03 20 | 55 02 
87 04 00 | 56 02 
87 05 25 57 23 
87 05 20 58 27 
87 07 30 | 10 00 7 
Index error — + 1 min. 40 sec. 7 ene cree 
RESULT OF CALCULATION. 
True altitude. Mean time. Latitade. T 
I 
Deg. min. sec. h. min. — see. Deg. min. see. 
43 31 18 8 49 651 42 38 44 Deg 
Sea eee nae i 


‘PRINGS, 


f the sun. 


ee eo omen 


) 
) 
) 
ude, 

sec. 

04 
Polaris. 

ne, 

sec. 

44 


» Ot C174 J 
INCAMPMENT ON SNAKE RIVER, OPPOSITE TO THE RIVER SPRINGS, 
Determination of longitude, Sept, 80, \8AS—allitudes ofa Lyra. 


OBSERVATIONS, 


Double altitudes of a Lyre, Tine of chronometer, 


Deg mine see, h, belie Bee 
lot uo a) li yj HO.5 
tol oy wo QY oes 
Loo aH 1) uu 4 


hilex error ee + Lomin, 40 see, 


RESULT OF CALCULATION, 
Mean tine, Advance, Longitude 


Ae ming see, he omin, see, ' 


Hf] S4 53 | 4 Bos 


ee + ee oe ete eee mer * 


ENCAMPMENT ON SNAKE RIVER, TWO MILES BELOW FISHING FALLS, 
Delermination af latitude, Oclober 1, USA3—altiludes of Polaris. 


OBSERVATIONS. 


Doulile altitudes of Polaris. Time of chronometer. 


ee ° — ——--- A a ee cee 


Deg, mine see. eee 
87 20 AY | IQ) 13 44 
87 21 lo 15 O45 
87 22 10 16 48 
R87 23 10 | {8 Q0 
87 24 80 19 24 
87 25 Ww 21 06 
87 26 00 2 23 

7 26 40 28 Q7 
8&7 27 34) 24 42 
87 27 50 25 4. 


Index error = -- ] min. 30 sec. 


RESULT OF CALCULATION. 


True altitude. Mean time. Latitude. 
Deg. min. _ sec. h. min. — see. Deg. min. see. 
43 42 00 9 15 28 42 40 ll 


RA Ge a OE I TT TI ED SGI ASTID TE LTE ES ITER ETE EE SY 


27 


; 
' 


[174 J 418 


ENCAMPMENT ON SNAKE RIVER, TWO MILES BELOW FISHING FALLS, 
Determination of longitude, October \, 1843—altiludes of « Lyra. 
ONSERVATIONS, 


PInAT SRAIEA, SECOND SERTBRS, 


Double altitudes of | Time of chronometer. | Double altitudes of | Time of chronometer, 
a Lyra, a Ly rm, 
| 
Deg. min. seee | he ming seer |) Des ming see | he mine see, 
90 21 30 | 10 uO 24.0 7 28 i) 10 Ht] 42.0 
98 56 00 SL 6.00 | 7 O08 BO | oh 4N8 
98 395 32.0CO0 96 43 Bo | 34 45.0 
98 18 10 | ag 23.0 v6 V7 a0 JS S10 
97 68 380 | st 15.4 05 50 fo | 40 14,0 
Tnidex error ee + 1 min, 30 see, 
NESULT OF CALCULATION, 
, | ; 
Mean time, Advance. Longitude, 
{ 
ee _ ae 
he mine — see, he oming see, | Deg. mine — see. 
9 30 20 l O4 37.7 Li Bh 12 
ENCAMPMENT ON SNAKE RIVER. 
Determination of latitude, October 2, 1843—altiludes of Polaris. 
OBSERVATIONS. 
Double altitudes of Polaris. ‘Time of chronometer, 
sicaceitcaamiatone ae — 
Deg. min, — sete. | h. min. — see. 
87 56 10 10 25 48 
87 57 40 27 28 
87 58 10 28 38 
87 59 10 29 47 
87 59 25 | 31 03 
88 01 05 | 32 37 
88 01 00 33 43 
88 01 30 35 08 
88 02 50 | 36 28 


88 03 20 | 37 39 


a on ee 


é se btn nD aOR SINS ees 


Thermometer 50°, 
Index error == + 1 min 30 sec. 


RESULT OF CALCULATION. 


True altitude. Mean time. Latitude. 
; . | . 
Deg. min. sec. h. min. see. | Deg. min. sec. 
43 59 46 9 26 35 | 42 53 40 


Det 


Double 


Deg, 
ay 
QQ 

41 

7 

| 


ENCA 
Det 


419 [ 174 J 


G PALL&, ENCAMPMENT ON SNAKE RIVER, 
a Lyre. Determination of longitude, October @, \8A3—allitudes af « Lyra. 


OBSERVATIONS, 


thet Sh mibe, ShLOOND SERIES, 
| chronometer, Double altitudes of | Time of chronometer, Double altitudes of Time ot chronometer, 
i Lyre, | 1 Lyre, 

anes _ | ma ee ee 
min, — Sees Deg, mine see he mine see Dee. mine see A. ming see, 
35 42.0 03 Bb 18 | 10 450 84 ow 88 40 Tes) 0) 
a “. 26 Qo | 45 49.0 “wo 20 40 62 (19,0 
a7 45.0 ob 59 40) | 48 07,0 10 06 80 53 24.7 
us BLO ol 36° 50 | 40 10,0 89 46 IS 54 = 22.0 
40 14,0 | 50 05.38 80 24s OO 55 31,0 

| 


Thermometer 48°. 5, 
Index erroe « + L min, JO ace, 


NESULT OF CALCULATION, 
tude, = 


Advance, Longitude, 


-actiapeasiaaaiaimuiaiiian Mean time, 


ee a ee eee 


A, mine 860. | A, ming See. Deg. min. see. 
sai gael i y 45 Hd | | ! 05 15.9 114 53 04 
Polaris. ENCAMPMENT AT THE FORD WHERE THE ROAD CROSSES SNAKE RIVER. 


Determination of latitude, October 3,1843—altitudes of Polaris. 
OBSERVATIONS, 


Tr, - -- ee 


! 


-—— Double altitudes of Polaris. Time of chronometer. 


ee 


a ee 


lhe, ining see. he min. — see. 
87 Yt) 10 10 04 19 
&7 Sl BY) 05 52 
S7 §3 AO 07 14 
a7 63 Ad) | 09 03 
&7 Ad } 10 3l 
7 55 20 ll 58 
Si 56 45 13 38 
87 57 30 | 15 24 
87 58 30 | 17 08 
——_———_—_—_——— 87 59 25 18 54 


Index error = + 1 min. 30 sec. 


RESULT OF CALCULATION, 


de. | 


True altitude. Mean time. Latitude. 
de yr Deg. min. see. h. min, sec. Deg. min. see. 
9 43. 87. «15 9 05 57 42. 55 68 


erence a 


i 
{ 
{ 
5 
a 
f 
i 
d 
; 
5 
: 


f 174) 420 
ENCAMPMENT AT THE FORD WHERE THE ROAD CROSSEs SNAKE RIVER 
Determination of longitude, Oclober 3, 1VSAbGRealiifudes af a Lyra 


OBSERVATIONS, 


FitteT OhiTLS SLi OND abhtite 


_—-- —_ 


nd i j ‘ 
Double altitudes of | Time of chronometer Vouvle altitudes of Vin Lormeter, 
Ly rh, ‘ Las ra 


eee ee Le 


Deg, mine see. : , ( we mie ve A, min, 
9 OF Ww aD AM, Ws § ‘i aD) {| 
4 no sO : ot AJ ' I 
4 12 Ww 4 2, ) i 
05 fo wo i vt Al ' 4/5 
W3 24 60 of | 6 1) 


ccaseinementiiinensenetinentnamenentinmemeenaaaiatatineanaee 


Intex error we fe boi 


P CALCULATION, 


Mean time. Advanet onritude, 


ee nw cern te en a a eee 


fe omins see. ming ,, Deg. inin. see 
+ 85 Shere a Oo Ah Lie vt 16 


a0 ee aS remem en ee nner pene ae re 2 RS eA ONE ——e 


Emersion of the first satellite of Jupiter. 


RESULT OF CALCULATION, 


Observed time. | Advanee. 


oe 


h. min, see. ; , | er, mine — see, 
ll 31) 42 5 20.3 19 24 


ers en ne ~ RE 


BE RIVER 


Lyra 
hy Lormetor, 
UL 
th 1.0 

4 fav 
1 Lo. 
1, li 
i) 30.¢ 
he 

Nb 

de, 
vt fee. 

) 24 


421 f 174] 
ENCAMPMENT ON BIG WOOD RIVER, OR RIVIERE BOER 
Determination of longilude, October 7, \8A9—allitndes of the sun 


ONSERVATIONS, 


riner ah rns areoVn abate, 


Double altitudes of the | Time of chronometer, Double altitudes of the | ‘Time of chronometer. 


oun’ tower Timb, | eun'« lower timb, | | 

Deg. ming see Ae min wee, Dez, mine sev he min we 

a a) a eT A i a8 fw 4 49 tho 
oe Wy O88 oO wo os 40 foes 
AU) ul On 47 Jt.0 uO oo be 50 35.9 
So 48 BO 1s 08,9 At es ee ft OS 


AH} mM QS 18) BTN a4 i =n . fb who 


Index error ef 1 min, 30 see, 


RESULT OF CALCULATION, 


—— . aa re i 
Mean tine | Advance Longitude, aa 
e — - a | — — - i 
ho mine gee. A, ming see. | Deg, min. see. 
“ 12 lt ) OO ARS | 115 «64 46 
Determination of latitude, October 7, 18AS—altiludes of Polaris, (with 
the sextant.) 
OBSERVATIONS, 
Double altitudes of Polaris, ‘Time of chronometer. | 
Deg. ming see. he mine — see. } 
a 40 8 386 ' 
8 22 30 | 40 49 } 
88 24 20 42 49 
S8 25 25 44 14 
a8 26 10) 45 15 i 


ee ee 


Index error == -~ | min. JO see. 


RESULT OF CALCULATION, 


i 


| 
Mean time. 


True altitude. Latitude. 


Deg. min, sec. h. min, see. | Deg. min. sec. 
44. 11 49 7 85 48 | 43 35 33 
| 


[174 ] 422 


ENCAMPMENT ON BIG WOOD RIVER, OR RIVIERE BOISEE. 
Determination of latitude, October 7, 1843—altitudes of Polaris, (with 
the circle.) 

OBSERVATIONS. 


_— ee tee eee ergy neeepeeen aoe <a - a ee ECE 


Cirele readings. Time of chronometer, 


a 


Dig. min, 
664 38 
177 ws 
104 03 
354 52 
281 43 
532 33 


RESULT OF CALCULATION. 


True altitude. Mean time. Latitude. 


Deg. min. see. » ming see. Deg. min. sec. 
44 21 45 8s O02 Ol 35 (08 


Mean latitude 43 deg, 35 min. 21 sec. 


SECOND ENCAMPMENT ON BIG WOOD RIVER. 


Determination of latitude, October 8, 1843—altitudes of Polaris, (with 
the sextant.) 


OBSERVATIONS. 


Double altitudes of Polaris. Time of chronometer. 


min, Set. 
39 50 
37 00 
38 20 
39 40 
4l 10 
42 10 
43 20 
44 40 
46 10 
46 20 
| 
Index crror == -- 1 min. 30 sec. 
Thermometer 50°. 


RESULT OF CALCULATION. 


True altitude. Mean time. Latitude. 


Deg. min. sec. h. min, — sec. Deg. min. sec. 
44 20 29 7 40 34 43 51 05 


is, (with 


ris, (with 


Altitudes of Polaris, (with the circle,) October 8, 1843. 


423 


SECOND ENCAMPMENT ON BIG WOOD RIVER. 


Deg. 


1%7 


min, 


True altitude. 


Deg. min. sec, 


44 


29 


53 


sec. 


50 


Time of chronometer. 


he = =omin. see. 


RESULT OF CALCULATION. 


Mean time. 


A. min, 
8 08 


sec. 
26 


Mean latitude 43 deg. 40 min, 53 sec. 


9 O4 35 
09 Q5 
12 038 
14 0s 
15 29 
17 05 
19 2 
20 38 
23 45 
26 44 

Latitude. 


Deg. min. sec. 


43 40 


42 


4 
ee 
| 
i 
.. 


424 


SECOND ENCAMPMENT ON BIG WOOD RIVER. 


Determination of longitude, October 8, 1843—altitude of « Lyra, 


OBSERVATIONS. 
Double altitude of — Time of chronometer. | Double altitude of Time of chronometer. 
a Lyre. a Lyre, 


Deg, min. see. Ae min, see {| ge min, see, he min, 
lll 6140 «660 OI 9 +t 06 5 64 00 10,17 
interrupted by ‘clouds. 
| 


(a a an rn + + 


Thermometer 479.5. 


Determination of longitude—altitudes of « viquilx. 


OBSERVATIONS. 


Double altitudes of « Aquila. | Time of chronometer. 


Deg, min. — see. » mine — see. 
80 3l 00 | 24 05.0 
80 12 20 25 O4.4 
79 52 20 26 09.0 


a 


Index error == -- 1 inin. 30 sec. 


RESULT OF CALCULATION. 


Te 


Mean time. | Advance. | Longitude. 


min, sec. | . mine — See, Dez. min. see. 
17 16 O7 49.7 116 22 40 


(me es — ee = 


a Lyre, 


ee, 


‘ chronometer, 


min, See, 
17 09.5 


r. 
nde 

n. See. 
2 40 


425 [ 174 J 
AT FORT BOISEE. 
Determination of latitude, Octoher 10, 1843-—allitudes of Polaris, (with 


the sevtunt.) 
OBSERVATIONS. 


ES SA A - - -- . 2 ee nee ere cre een eee 


Double altitudes of Polaris, Time of chronometer. 


Deg. mine — see, A, min, — see, 
gy 17 40 a) 10 55 
sy 18 30 12 07 
89 19 50 13 55 
i) 21 20) | Bs) 48 | 
i) 22 20 17 22 ; 
89 B10 18-28 
ay Qt 20 19 56 | i 
RY 25 30 22 14 | 
ag 27 00 | 23 57 ) 
89 87 50 | 25 15 | 


Index crror = 


= + Linin. 80 see, 
RESULT OF CALCULATION, 


True altitude. Mean time. Latitude. 


Deg. min. sec. | he mine — sec. Deg. min. — s€e. 
a 4\ 09 8 09 44 43 48 54 
| 


viltitudes or Polaris, (with the circle,) October 10, 1843. 
OBSERVATIONS. 


nn 


Circle readings. | Time of chronometer. 
| 
| 
| 
| 


Deg. imine — see. he min, — see. 


9 40 22 


i797 | 42 2 
| 44. 55 

359 01 20 | 45 55 
| 47 50 

538 28 00 | 49 13 
51 50 

713 it) 50 | 56 05 
58 02 


59 


Thermometer 50°. 
RESULT OF CALCULATION. 


True altitude. | Mean time. . Latitude. 
Deg. min. — see. _—-s 1. = omin.e — ger, Deg. min. — sec. 
44 51 59 : 41 26 43 49 51 
| 


Mean latitude 43 deg. 49 min. 22 sce. 


426 


AT FORT BOISEE. 


Determination of longitude, October 10, 1843—allitudes af a Lyre, 


OBSERVATIONS. 


TINST SERIES. i 


SECOND SERIES. 


| 
Double altitudes of | Time of chronometer. Double altitudes of 
a Lyra. t Lyre, 


Deg. min, . he min, — see, Deg. min, see. he min. 
9 32 10 : 44.0 o2 34 00 10 19 
94 07.5 | 92 15 =60 

00.0 91 57 380 

58,0 91 37 40 

16.6 || 91 19 40 


Index error = + 1 min. 30 sec, 


RESULT OF CALCULATION. 


Mean time, Advance. Longitude. 


h. min. — see. he anin. see. Deg. min. — sec. 
9 10 17 1 03 16.8 116 47 ov 


Emersion of Jupiter's first satellite. 


Jupiter about 10° high; moon bright; night very clear; the planet a little yellow, with a 
the horizon; observation good. 


Observed time. Mean time. Longitude. 


he = min. — sec. . mine — see. 
l 23 12 a. m. 14 59.6 a. m. 


ENCAMPMENT ON SNAKE RIVER, BELOW BIRCH CREEK. 


ime of chronometer. 


sec. 

21.0 
12.7 
05.0 
02.0 
52.7 


es 


mist of 


Determination of longitude, October 12, 1843—emersion of the first 


satellite of Jupiter. 


RESULT OF CALCULATION. 


Observed time. Mean time. Longitude. 


h. min. — sec. h. min. sec. . min. 
7 50 23 6 42 25.1 10 


fo L. yre, 


a 


f chronometer. 


min, gee. 


19 21.0 
20 12.7 
21 05.0 
22 02.0 
22 62.7 

itude. 

im. «SEC. 

7 ot 


v, With a mist of 


‘itude. 


EK. 
of the first 


tude. 


427 C174] | 
ENCAMPMENT ON SNAKE RIVER, BELOW BIRCH CREEK. 
Determination of latitude, October 12, 1843—altitudes of Polaris. 


OBSERVATIONS. 


Double altitudes of Polaris, Time of chronometer. 


Deg. min. — see. h. min, — see, 


90 IL 40 8 56 58 

9 12 WO 5319 q 
90 13 BO 59 «63 i 
90 It 00 9 OL O85 | 
90 15 15 02 09 i} 
90 16 30 03. 4t t 

9 17 20 05 38 1 | 
90 17 50 06 BA - 
90 19 20 08 35 | 


90 Lo 


Index error = -- 1 min. 28 sec, 


RESULT OF 


CALCULATION, 


True altitude. | Mean time. Latitude. 


he min, — see. Deg. min. — see. 
45 07 42 7 55 25 44 17 36 


| 
Deg. min, see, | 
! 


Determination of longitude, October 12, 1843—altitudes of a Lyre. 


OBSERVATIONS. 


FIRST SERIES. SECOND SERIES. 


Double altitudes of | Time of chronometer. 
a Lyrm. 


Double altitudes of | Time of chronometer. , 
a Lyra. \ 


Deg. min. sec. h. = min, see. Deg. min. sec. h. min. see. 
87 8602 ~—(OOU 10 27 = 47.0 85 17 30 10 32 49.5 
86 36 10 29 = 01.7 84 59 25 3341.0 
86 14° 30 30 «(04.0 | 84 42 00 34 = 34.0 
85 52 50 31 (07.3 84 23 40 35 =. 26.0 
85 34 30 32 = 00.0 84 06 20 36 =: 16.0 


| 
\ 


Thermometer 40°. 
Index error = -+- 1 min. 28 sec. 


Sate cts SS 


> antec iC ES; 5 IU an. 


RESULT OF CALCULATION. 


Mean time. Advance. Longitude. 


[ 174 J 428 


ENCAMPMENT AT THE HEAD WATERS OF BURNT RIVER. 
Determination of latitude, October 14, 1843—alltitudes af Polaris, 


OBSERVATIONS, 


Double 


altitudes of Polaris. Time of chronometer. 


LN eee -_— —- — — oan 


Deg. min, see, h, mins — she, 
al 07 10 y th) 21 
o1 08 iy) 15 22 
v1 Og 50 14 03 

4 Ol 1a So [8 13 
1 ll 20 19 13 
Gl | +5 20 17 
gi 13 10 21 47 
91 13 30 22 44 
v1 lt 10 23 41 
9) 15 10) | 25 00 


= a 


Index error == —~ 1 min. 28 see 


RESULT OF CALCULATION, 


True altitude. Mean time. Latitude. 


coerce ate eee emcee. 


Deg. mine — see. | he min, ste. Deg. min, see, 
45 35 37 | 8 11 58 41 37 34 


Determination of longitude, October 14, 1843—altiludes ofa Aquila, 


OBSERVATIONS. 


FIRST SERIES. SECOND SERIES, 
Double altitudes of | Time of chronometer. Double altitudes of | Time of chronometer. 
a Aquile. 5) a Aquile. | 
Deg. min, see. | he min. see. | Deg. mins see. h. min. sec. 
88 18 10 +] 29 03.0 } 87 00 15 | 9 33 65.4 
87 59 20 300 12.0 | 864210 35 00.5 
87 45 15 | 31 06.0 S86 27 10 | 35 55.2 
87 32 00 31 56.3 | 86 12 00 36 52.0 
87 15 50 32 56.0 85 57 30 37 45.0 
| iH { 


Thermometer r 44°, 
Index error = -+ 1 min. 28 see. 
RESULT OF CALCULATION. 


ee ee — es nee 


| | 
, | . 
Mean time. | Advance, Longitude. 


' 
he mins see. | h. min. — See. Deg. min. — sec. 
8 25 46 | 1 07 41.9 | 117, 09—s«49 
| ' 


Dete 


ER. 
Polaris, 
', 

ide, 

wen ec. 
7 34 


p Aquila. 


chronometer. 


min. ee. 


33 65.4 
35 00.5 
35 55.2 
36 52.0 
37 45.0 
de. 
n. See. 
: 49 


[ 174] 
ENCAMPMENT ON THE OLD BED OF POWDER RIVER 


Determination of longitude, October 15, 1SA8—immersion of the third 
satellite of Jupiter, 


a ee eee 


Observed time. | Mean time, Longitude 


ieee ee 


A. mii, see. he oming see. 
vi ov Ot f fs 54 


epee ene =a“ © — 


Emersion of the third satellite of Jupiter 


RESULT OF CALCULATION, 


Observed tine. Mean time Loneitude, 


A. min, 8eC. h. nun, ere, 
10 ou 02 9 bu 46 


Determination of latitude, October 15, \8AS—alliludes of Polaris. 


OBSERVATIONS. 


Double altitudes of Polaris. Fime of chronometer. 


Deg, mine sees 


vt 36 10 | . 4 
yt 38 1) | 16 35 
9] 33 50 14 57 
91 89 Th) | 19 Py 
91 40 10 Q1 34 
91 42 10 | Q2 55 
91 42 49 | 2 43 
91 44 Tp 25 884 
9 44 10 27 09 
91 45 Bu 29 06 


rene te ne > SR ne  erenee 


Index error = -+ | min. 26 sec. 


RESULT OF CALCULATION, 


Latitude. 


| 
True altitude. Mean time. | 


| 

| 
Deg. min. _ sec. h. min, — see. Deg. min. — sec. 
45 50 18 8 13 54 44 50 82 


_ op eee TS 


c 174 J 430 


INCAMPMENT ON THE OLD BED OF POWDER RIVER. 
Determination of longitude, October 15, 1843—allitudes of o Lyre, 


OBSERVATIONS, 


FIRST SERIES, SECOND SENTRA, 


Double altitudes of | Time of chronometer, | Double altitudes of | Tine of chronometer, 
a Lyrw, ! Lyre. | 


Deg. min, see » ming see) Dew min, ; bh, min. — see, 
YY 13 10 o! 57.38 90 28 10 07 O1,0 
9) 50 30 03 00.0 00 O06 OS O45 
gy JO 45 03 47.6 80) 40 4. | 09 00,7 
91 ld v0 04 47.0 eu) 26 10 00,0 
90 50 Qh 05 54.6 80 04 1) 05.0 


Index error == + 1 min. 26 sec. 


RESULT OF CALCULATION. 


Advance, 


me 


min, 
OS 


fC, 
06,0 


Longitude, 


117 24 


| 
| Deg, min, 


ENCAMPMENT ON POWDER RIVER, 
Determination of longitude, October 16, 1843—altiludes of the sun. 


OBSERVATIONS. 


Double altitudes of the sun’s lower limb. Time of chronometer. 


Deg. min. sec. he ming sec, 
0s 00 | 10 29 45.5 
17 40 | 30 28.0 
28 30 31 14.0 
37 40 31 52.5 


45 30 | 32 20.4 


Index error = + 1 min. 25 see. 


RESULT OF CALCULATION. 


—— 


Mean time. Advance. Longitude. 


h. min. see. . min. : Deg. min, sec. 
9 23 14 07 . 117 29 = 22 


aR, 
ofa Lyre, 


of chronometer, 


» mine — see, 
) 07 OL.O 
OS 04.5 
09 00.7 
10 00.0 
1) 05.0 


vitude, 


min, 80, 
24 Q1 


gitude. 


nin, sec. 
29 22 


etunininiaminenarateemamame 


431 [174 J 
ENCAMPMENT ON POWDER RIVER, 
Determination of latitude, October 16, 18A3—allitudes of Polaris, 


OBSERVATIONS, 


a . a - ee TTS 
oe 


Double altitudes of Polaris. Time of chronometer. 


Deg, niine — eters Ae omin, fe, 
fle Oo 20 S a) 05 
a1 lv 40 66 3g 
"1 Il Oo 07 2 
} 11 ho as 27 
91 1 10 10 18 


[ndex error = + 1 min. 20 see. 


RESULT OF CALCULATION, 


eee crerenney nee eee = ners = one ee ee eee ee - er ° — eens ee nmes 


True altitude. Mean thie, Latitude, 


a eee 


Deg, min, — see. | A, ming 8% Deg, min — see. 
45 35 22 | 6 5Y 38 44 59 29 


Determination of longitude, October 16, 1843—altitudes of 4 Andromede. 


OBSERVATIONS, 


Double altitudes of a Andromeda. Time of chronometer. 


a  ————— a 


eee ene 


oem ot ae cng ee. . a ny 


ai it 
Dege min. — see. he mine — see, 4 
97 «638650 | 8 16 58.0 ‘i 
98 06 40 18 23.0 i 


98 42 00 | 20 04.0 


Ca ne tne en 


Index error == + 1 min. 26 see. 


RESULT OF CALCULATION. 


a . . - - a LLL TT 


| 
Mean time. | Advance. Longitude. 


A. 


Min, CC. 
07 ~3=55.3 


min, gee, A. 
10 33 ! 


TORRES NEN ee ER cea TI Ma 


432 


ENCAMPMENT IN THE GRAND ROND 


Determination of latitude, October 18, 18A8—altétudes af Polaris 


OUSERVATIONS, 


Double altitudes of Polaris, ‘Time of elronometer 


Seer err ee ree ee ee 


De ge min, are, 
br] “oO 25 
ws 1 
9 Ov 
u% 0? 
oy on 


Index erroy eh | nin, 23 Kec, 


RESULT OF CALCULATION, 


err + 3 ee — = - 


True altitude, Mean time. Latitude 


Deg. min, » min, ' mine see, 
AG 30 ‘ 1 15 26 ti 


Determination of longitude, October 18, 1SA8—allitudes of a Lyre. 


OBSERVATIONS, 


Double altitudes of a Lyra, ‘ime of chronometer. 


Deg. min. — see. » amin, 

98 37 60 30 
06 30 | 32 
42 40 33 


Index error =< ++ 1 min. 23 see. 


RESULT OF CALCULATION. 


Mean time. Advance. Longitude. 


he min. sec. | h. min. — sec. Deg. min. see. 
8 25 36 1 06 


42.8 117) 2886 


Palaris 


er 

} 

) 

} 

} 

) 

tude, 

in, see, 
of 47 


e+ toe. 


fa Lyre, 


itude. 


in. sec. 
RSs 26 


[ 174] 


ENCAMPMENT ON THE BLUE MOUNTAINS, BAST OF THE SUMMIT, 


Determination of longitude, October 19, 1843—altitudes ofa Lyra. 


OBSERVATIONS, 


ee ee a | - tee 


PInST AENTKA, SECOND SeRifa, 


Time of chronometer, Double altitudes of Time of chronometer, 
1 Lye, 


Double altitudes ot 
a Ly rm. 


—— OE SE ES — 


Deg. min, see. he mine see. Deg. min, see. he mine — gee. 
67 Ww 40 lL OO 04,5 4 8h fO It Of «698.0 
66 53 10 | ol 30,0 “4 12 40 Oh] 51.0 
66 30 lo | 02 41.0 UH] 50 40 | Il 00,0 
6 fo 60 CS! O4 46,5 63 Blo 12 O84 
64 659 vO | OF 27.6 TY eens || es 139 «64 


en - ————— - -_—_———— . - ee a ce 


Index error ae -- 1 min, 25 see, 


RESULT OF CALCULATION, 


rs en ee eee = -- 2 re cee ce ence ne — Se ee oe eee ee 


Mean time. Advance. Longitude, 


-_ re : cemcenini _ SS 


he min, — see. homing see. Deg. min, see. 
10 01 03 l 06 08.0 Wh? 28 34 


Se - ° _ - Se ee + SSRN 
° = 


Emersion of Jupiter's first satellite. 


—— 


Observed time. Mean time. Longitude, 


ee ee 


A. 
9 


min, —- 8s h. min. — bee. 
Al 04 


[ 174 ] 434 


ENCAMPMENT ON THE BLUE MOUNTAINS, BAST OF THE SUMMIT, 
Determination of latitude, October 19, 1843—altitudes of Polaris, 
ONSHRVATIONS, 


eee LSS Se re - . a ee aS 
Double altitudes of Polaris, Time of ehronometer, 
eee - 


Deg, mine see h, mine see, 
iM 1 20 1 =o 
ot Ww 20 20 43 
it MW 40 an Ol 
04 1 50 1S 
"4 15 20 43 
Ot 1h 00 56 
04 1 50 24 
oA i) 30 ‘ 00 
ot hy) 50 sv 20 
4 1S 50 4 69 


ee - ee cee eee 5 


Index error = - | min, 25 see, 


RESULT OF CALCULATION, 


istemeeneeneeneee - — - " . ed 


True altitude, Mean time. Latitude, 


© qm nee ———— ae ee ee eee coer eNO 


Deg. min, see. he ming see, Deg. mine — see. 
47 07 07 10 21 18 46 38 07 


ENCAMPMENT ON acta ata yt AT THE FOOT OF THE MOUN.- 
TAINS, 


Determination of latitude, October 23, 1843—allitudes of Polaris. 


OBSERVATIONS. 


Double altitudes of Polaris. Time of chronometer. 


ee a — — — ~— — — —EE 
— ee. 


Deg. min. see. » min, 
93 ‘ i 
93 
93 
93 
93 


Index error = + | min. 22 sec. 


RESULT OF CALCULATION. 


True altitude, Mean time, Latitude. 


| 
| 
LER TED See eee Etre PPE 
| Seas 


min. see. h. min. see. Deg. min. see. 
49 52 7 31 21 45 53 35 


EE RT ee - ES 


435 [ 174 J 


ENCAMPMENT ON WALAHWALAH RIVER, AT THE POOT OF THE MOUNTAINS, 


Determination of longitude, October 25, 1843—alliludes of « Lyra, 
OBSERVATIONS, 


‘UMMIT, 
" Polaris. 


ve Double altitudes of a Lyre, Time of ehronometer, 


Deg. 
108 ‘ ™ an val) 


107 47 10 a a6 
107 a0 w 4h 47 
106 33 00 48 on 


106 


Index error = = | inin, 22 see, 
RESULT OF CALCULATION. 


Mean time, | Advanee, Longitude, 


er i a ee = 


he min, yee, he = min, see, 
7 40 Os l 06 06,3 


AT FORT NEZ PERCE, 
Determination of latitude, Oct, 26, 1843—meridian allilude of the sun. 


OBSERVATIONS, 
Double altitudes of the sun's lower limb, | Time of chronometer, 


— ene nee wee oe ee ~- _ nee ~ ee ee 


31 29 56 0 50 54 46 03 46 


Deg. min, see, he min, — see, 
THE MOUN.- 64 20 20 0 37 43 
62 21 50 38 35 
62 23 30 39 33 
Polaris. 62 45 40.049 
62 2h 10 4l 35 
62 26 45 2 26 
62 26 40 43 14 
62 27) (85 45 10 
_ 62 38 30 4818 ta 
62 82835 49s It ' 
een 62 29 10 49 44 : 
62 8315 5089 ) 
62 8S 5188 i 
62 28 30 52 21 ie 
62 28 30 5 10 " / 
62 288 54 (00 ® 
62 28 00 55 16 = 
62 27 20 56 14 
62 26 30 56 59 
62 26 00 57 56 
Index error = + 1 min. 24 sec. 
RESULT OF CALCULATION. 
ude. i= 7 4 ge oo ee 
True altitude. | Apparent time of transit. Latitude. 
oe | chains tniceatneadtes Cooma 
in, see. 
5 Deg. min. — see. | h. min. see. Deg. min. see. 


[ 174 ] 436 


NOON HALT ON THE LEFT BANK OF THE COLUMBIA. 


Determination of latitude, Oct, 28, 1843—meridian altitudes of the sun. 
OBSERVATIONS. 


Double altitudes of the sun's lower limb. | Time of chronometer. 
Deg. min, — sec. | h. min. — see. 
61 18 = 20 | 12 647 CO * 
61 19 00 48 00 
61 19 10 H 48 41 
61 18 20 50 00 
61 18 20 | 61 28 
61 1810 | 5209 


Index error = -+ | min. 24 sec. 


RESULT OF CALCULATION, 


True altitude. Apparent time of transit. Latitude. 


ao socemanesee as | a= ROSNER 


ENCAMPMENT ON THE LEFT’ BANK OF COLUMBIA RIVER. 
Determination of latitude, October 30, 1843—altitudes of Polaris. 


OBSERVATIONS. 
Double altitudes of Polaris. Time of chronometer. 
Deg. min. — sec. h. min. see. 
94 08 00 9 14 46 
94 08 60 16 09 
94 09 30 17 17 
94 10 30 18 42 
94 VW 20 20 Ol 
94 ll 40 2 27 
94 12 10 22 19 
94 12 30 23 32 
94 13 15 25 24 
94 13 40 26 42 


Index error = + ! min. 23 sec. 


RESULT OF CALCULATION. 


ee 


True altitude. Mean time. Latitude. 
Deg. min. sec. h. min, sec. Deg. min. — sec. 
47 05 21 8 12 58 45 50 05 


A, 
8 Of the sun, 


er. 


tude. 


VER. 
of Polaris. 


437 [ 174 ] 
ENCAMPMENT ON 'T'HE LEFT’ BANK OF COLUMBIA RIVER. 
Determination of longitude, October 30, 1843—altitudes of « Lyre. 


OBSERVATIONS, 
FIRST SERIES, } SECOND SERIES, 
Double altitudes of | Time of chronometer. Double altitudes of | Time of chronometer. 
a Lyre. | | a Lyre. 
Deg. min. sec. h, min. — sec. | Deg. min, see. h. min. sec, 
8331 10 | 9 29 33.0 | StL 47 50 9 34 43 
83 08 650 | 30. 42.3 | 81 30 2 35 37 
82 46 00 31 48.0 | 8t 12 30 36 30 
g2 25 10 | 32 63.0 | 80 54 10 375 
82 05 (30 33 51.0 | 80 36 50 38 «18 
| 
Index error = + 1 min. 23 sec. 
RESULT OF CALCULATION. 
Mean time. | Advance, | Longitude. 
ene = = 
he min. sec. h. min. sec. | Deg. min. sec. 
8 26 29 1 07 391 | 119° 2218 


SECOND ENCAMPMENT ON COLUMBIA RIVER. 
Determination of latitude, October 31, 1843—altitudes of Polaris. 


OBSERVATIONS. 
Double altitudes of Polaris. Time of chrqnometer. 
Deg. min. sec. . he min. sec. 
94 09 10 9 40 54 
94 10 10 42 59 
94 10 40 44 00 
94 11 30 45 48 
94 ll 40 47 02 


Index error = -+ 1 min. 22 sec. 


RESULT OF CALCULATION. 


True altitude. Mean time. Latitude. 
Deg. min. sec. h. min. see. Deg. min. sec. 
47 05 06 8 35 32 45 44 23 


ae Dn 


[ 174 J 438 
SECOND ENCAMPMENT ON COLUMBIA RIVER. 
Determination of longitude, October 31, 1843—allilude of a Lyre. 


OBSERVATION. 


Double altitude of a Lyra, | Time of chronometer. 


h. =omin. — see. 


Deg. min, — sec. 
9 36 34 


80 07 40 


Spe em 


a rn A a 


Index error = -- 1 min. 22 sec. 


: 
4 
of 
i 


RESULT OF CALCULATION. 


Mean time. | Advance. | Longitude. 
\ 
h. min. sec. kh. min, — see. Deg. min, sec. 


8 27 57 1 08 97.8 119 45 09 


== 


MISSIONARY STATION AT THE DALLES OF THE COLUMBIA. 


Determination of longitude, November 5, 1843—altitudes of the sun. 


OBSERVATIONS. 
FIRST SERIES. SECOND SERIES. 
Double altitudes of the | Time of chronometer. || Double altitudes of the | Time of chronometer. 
sun’s lower limb. sun’s lower limb. 
“|t _ 

Deg. min. sec. h. min. sec. Deg. min, sec. h. min. — sec. 
30 13 40 9 44 52.0 30 56 50 9 47 41.3 
30 =—25 10 45 36.8 | 3) 04 20 48 10.6 
300333 20 46 11.0 | 31 13. 20 48 45.0 
30 42 50 46 45.0 31 19 465 49 13.5 
30 49 30 47 11.0 3l 28 00 49 45.7 


Index error = -+- 1 min. 23 sec. 


RESULT OF CALCULATION. 


YS 


Mean time. Advance. Longitude. 


| 
{ 
h. min. sec. he min. see. 
8 37 ll 1 10 14.1 


tude, 


Rt 


hin. sec, 
15 = 9 


BIA. 


of the sun. 


f chronometer. 


ide. 


439 [174] 
STATION ON THE HILLS IN THE REAR OF THE MISSION. 
Determination of longitude, November 5, 1843—altitudes of the sun. 


OBSERVATIONS. 


Double altitudes of the sun’s lower limb. Time of chronometer. 


- a a 


Deg. min. see. he min. see, 
49 25 40 11 17 20.5 
49 42 30 19 14.0 
49 47 30 19 45.5 
49 52 50 20 20.0 
49 58 00 20 55.0 


Index error == -+- 1 min. 22 sec. 


RESULT OF CALCULATION. 


ane c een ree nnn ie a a ne a ES OS 


Mean time. Advance. Longitude. 
h. = min. see. h, min. see. Deg. min. see. 
10 09 43 1 10 07.4 120 63 51 


[ 174] 440 
STATION ON THE HILLS IN THE REAR OF THE MISSION. 


Determination of latitude, November 5, 1843—meridian altitudes of the 


San. 
OBSERVATIONS, 

Double altitudes of the sun’s lower limb. Time of chronometer. 
Deg. min. sec. he min, ee. 
56 44 00 0 37 38 
56 44 35 38 25 
56 46 40 39 29 
56 49 25 41 22 
56 51 05 42 59 
56 —Ss 51 50 42 07 
56 53 15 4h 13 
56 53 45 45 51 
56 55 30 47 40 
56 56 00 48 49 
56 56 20 51 04 
56 56 25 52 29 
56 56 35 53 59 
56 56 15 54 50 
56 55 50 57 07 
56 55 40 57 49 
56 55 20 58 20 
56 54 30 59 19 
56 54 10 1 00 09 
56 53 40 | 00 49 


a a nec rene ong oe ene ee 


Index error = -+- 1 min, 22 sec. 


RESULT OF CALCULATION. 


True central altitude. Apparent time of transit. Latitude. 


Deg. min. sec. h. min, sec. | Deg. min. see. 
28 43 33 0 53 49 45 35 21 
| 


7 eB 


BION, 


iludes of the 


a eee, 


ter. 


SE OCSCSNSSCSR SCSOHKONSONSADS 


— 


441 [ 174] 


MISSIONARY STATION AT THE DALLES OF THE COLUMBIA. 


Determination of latitude, November 5, 1843—allitudes of Polaris. 


OBSERVATIONS. 
aula aa 
Double altitudes of Polaris, | Time of chronometer. 
Deg. min. sec. | h. min. — sec. 
93 53 00 9 26 3] 
93 54 20 28 08 
93 54 15 29 31 
93 54 20 30 33 
93 55 20 31 48 
93 55 20 32 37 
93 56 10 33 50 
93 56 25 34 51 
93 57 20 35 45 
93 57 30 36 53 
Index error = -+- 1 min. 22 sec. 
RESULT OF CALCULATION. 
True altitude. Mean time. Latitude. 

Deg. min. sec. h. min. see. Deg. min. see. 
46 57 29 8 22 02 45 35 38 
Emersion of Jupiter’s second satellite. 

Observed time. Mean time. Longitude. 
h. min. see. h. min. — see. Deg. min. sec. 
10 43 32 9 33 40 120 55 00 


| 
\ 
} 
| 


[ 174 J 


MISSIONARY STATION AT THE DALLES OF THE COLUMBIA, 


442 


Determination of longitude, November 5, 1843—altitudes of o Lyre. 


FIRST SERIES. 


Double altitudes of 


Time of chronometer. || Double altitudes of 


OBSERVATIONS, 


ee 


SECOND SERIES. 


Time of chronometer. 


a Lyre. a Lyra. 

Deg. min. sec. h. min, sec. |; Deg. min. sec he min. sec. 
72 #38 10 9 40 35.5 7 10 60 9 45 02.0 
72 #19 00 41 32.4 70 50 20 46 05.0 
72 Ol 30 A2 27.0 70 22 45 47 29.6 
71 43 60 43 21.0 7 OO 40 48 36.5 
7l 27 = =«=640 44 10.0 69 45 40 49 22.7 

Index error == -+ 1 min, 22 sec. 
RESULT OF CALCULATION. 
Mean time. Advance. Longitude. 
h. min. — see. h min, —- see, 
8 34 59 l 09 53.3 


ENC 


Deté 


443 [ 174] 


MBIA. ENCAMPMENT ON THE RIGHT BANK OF THE COLUMBIA, 15 MILES BELOW 
THE CASCADES, 
s of a Lyre, » ° ’ 2 ; 
Determination of longitude, November 11, 1843—altitudes of Jupiter. 
OBSERVATIONS. 
Double altitudes of Jupiter. ‘Time of chronometer. 
b of chr Deg. min, see. he min, see. 
picts! 32. «42~—«*O 10 «1308.6 
32 (08) 40 15 29.5 
_ . - 3l 30 40) 18 01.0 
min, $ec. Ne ee ee 
45 02.0 Index error == -- 2 min. 6 sec. 
46 05.0 
47 29.6 RESULT OF CALCULATION. 
48 36.5 7 —_ Fe ae A SEES IGE PEP RS a OD 
49 22.7 
Mean time. Advance. Longitude, 
h. min. sec. 
9 O04 41 
tude. Emersion of Jupiter’s first satellite. 
Observed time. Mean time. Longitude. 
ee h. min. see. h. min. sec. Deg. min. see. 
9 45 19 8 34 60.2 122 OG 15 


= 


Determination of latitude, November 11, 1843—altitudes of Polaris. 


OBSERVATIONS. 
Double altitudes of Polaris. Time of chronometer. 
Deg. min. — sec. he = min. see. 
94 07 50 10 38 08 
94 08 10 41 13 
94 09 10 42 43 


Index error ae of. 2 min. 6 sec. 


RESULT OF CALCULATION. 


True altitude. Mean time. Latitude. 


9 nn 


Deg. min. — sec. h. min. see. Deg. min. sec. 
47 04 00 9 30 16 45 33 09 


i ' 
} 
| 
1} 
| 
a if 
i 
ie he 
Bi tt 


Sey ee ee 


Sig ee gna 


paige 6s ~ - 


[ 174 J 444 


ENCAMPMENT ON THE RIGHT BANK OF THE COLUMBIA, 15 MILES BELOW 
THE CASCADES, 


Determination of longitude, November 12, 1843—altitudes of the sun, = 
OBSERVATIONS. 

ote Dout 
Double altitudes of the sun's lower limb. ‘Time of chronometer, s 
Deg. min, see. h. min, see, L 

33 28 40 10 13 08,0 

33 46 20 14 28.0 

34 00 30 15 32,5 

34 1) 10 16 24.0 

34 24 00 17 18.0 


ee cee ene — — a : : 


Index error == -+- 2 min, 6 sec. 


RESULT OF CALCULATION. 


Mean time. Advance. | Longitude. ; 
he min. — see. h. min. see. | 
9 0 WwW, 1 10 123 | 

| 


Determination of latitude, Nov. 12, 1843—meridian altitudes of the sun. 


OBSERVATIONS. 
Double altitudes of the sun’s lower limb. Time of chronometer. 
Deg. min. — see. he min, — sec. 
52 58 00 0 51 40 — 
52 67 40 52 53 
52 58 10 53 56 
52 56 50 58 33 
52 54 00 1 02 51 = 
52 58 60 03 30 
62 §3 30 04 ll 
62 62 25 05 00 _ 


ee Tn a a + 


Index error mn oe 2 min. 6 sec. 


RESULT OF CALCULATION. 


True central altitude. Apparent time of transit. Latitude. 
Deg. min. see. h. min. see. Deg. min. see. 
26 44 24 0 54 25 45 33 19 


(Fp 


445 (174 J 


MISSIONARY STATION AT THE DALLES OF THE COLUMBIA, 
Determination of time, November 20, 1843—altitudes of the sun. 


lavas OBSERVATIONS. 
es Of the sun, —--———— - a 
VINAT SERIES, SECOND SENMIRS. 


MILES BELOW 


} 


Double altitudes of the | Time of chronometer. | Double altitudes of the | Time of chronometer 


meter, sun's lower limb. | | gun's lower limb. 
—————_ saeaiciltaaiiacanl ae 
50s Deg. min, gee | he min, see. Deg. min, see, he min. — see. 
08.0 3 630 0} HOO | HO 10 38 «(25.4 
28.0 36 00 20 | 36 6265 060 36 3854.7 
2.5 36 05 (86 36 64.7 | 36 338 10 39 22,3 
4.0 36 Il 1b | 37 «35.0081 a9 «494 
18.0 367: 37 668 «| = 364340 40 20,0 
i Index error = + Qmin.6sece 
° RESULT OF CALCULATION, 
, 
i | 7 
. Mean time, Advance. i 
ngitude. 
_ ee ee —_ _ : j 
| 
he min. — see. he min. gee. Ht 
9 36 I 1 OL 57.9 TER 
Delermination of time, November 20, 1843—altitudes ofa Aquile. ay 
OBSERVATIONS. ‘ 
- He A 
| 
les of the sun. Double altitudes of a Aquilw. | Time of chronometer. 
ais ide tase hi 
Deg. min. — sec. | h. mine see, | 
89 41 00 | 6 46 41.6 Beh | 
eter, 89 19 00 48 98.0 Hy 
89 05 40 | 49 02.5 bat 
eins 88 5120 | 50 03,4 " 
C. 88 37S 80 | 50 54.0 i} 
0 Se ee eee ae { 
4 Index error = -+- 2 min. 6 sec. Lie 
; 8) 
3 RESULT OF CALCULATION. f 
| acetone Sten cee = 
) ; 
l Mean time. Advance. 
) EE FREER APES, TERT AE! ATL ES, ee eee ecsetes e 
TS h. min. see. A. min. see. 
5 47 24 1 ol 34.3 
Emersion of Jupiter’s third satellite. 
aneeneeneeenemeeneeene ed ea a eupsinilanebtliiiceneard 
tude. Observed time. Mean time, 


— on a! 
—— nD 


nin. see. h. =-‘min. see. h. min. — see 
33 19 6 27 48 5 26 13 


[ 174 J 446 
MISSIONARY STATION AT THE DALLES OF THE COLUMBIA,’ 


Determination of latitude, Nov, 21, 1843—meridian altitudes of the sun, 


OBSERVATIONS, 
Double altitudes of the sun's lower limb, | Time of chronometer, 
Deg, min see. he mine see 
AN 25 40 | 0 46 56 
48 26 10 47 56 
48k 80 | 4845 
4a 850 | 50 ON 
48 25 40 50 64 
4N 25 25 | 51 4% 
48 25 O45 52 40 
48 «634 40 | 53 32 
Index error == +- 2 min. 6 see, 
RESULT OF CALCULATION. 
True central altitude, Apparent tine of transit. | Latitude, 
fetiiladadatneiened sacsateegeneansiacal 7 
Deg. min, see. he min, see, Deg. min, see. 
240629088 0 47°28 45 35 55 


oo eee ee 


Determination of time, November 24, 1843—altitudes of a Lyre. 


OBSERVATIONS. 
Double altitudes of a Lyre. Time of chronometer, 
Deg. mine see. he min, see. 
sl = 32s 7 48 23.0 
81 607)~— 30 | 49 40.5 


Index error = + 2 min. 


RESULT OF CALCULATION. 


Mean time. Advance. 
he = =min. sec. he = min. see. 
6 49 4l 0 59 20.7 


* The daily losing rate of the chronometer, obtained from the observations at this place, is 33.13: 


LUMBIA,* 


udes af the sun, 


ometer, 


42 
32 


satitude, 


min, see, 
35 55 


sofa Lyre. 


meter, 


SED 


see. 


20.7 


TT 
is place, is 33/’,13- 


447 C 174 J 
ENCAMPMENT ON A LARGE BRANCH OP PALL RIVER, (RIVIERE AUX CHUTES, ) 
Determination of longitude, November 26, 1843—altitudes of a Lyra. 


OBSERVATIONS, 


FIRST AEMIES, | SRCOND SERIES, 


= | ie 
Double altitudes of | Time of chronometer, | Double altitudes of | ‘Time of chronometer. 


a Lyre, a Lyre, 
| om 
Deg. mine see, | he ming see, Deg. mins see, h. min, see, 
a2 16 oO vi HI) 96.7 so 64000 7 oo A7A 
al 33 10 37) 086 90.5 a0 a3 (OOO 40 3=95.5 
Dn | a || 38 43.5 80 #17) (80 Al 21,2 


Index error wm» -- 2 min, 4 see, 


RESULT OF CALCULATION, 


Mean time, | Advance. Longitude, 
he min, see h, mine see. 
6 41 83 | 0 57 06.0 


Determination of latitude, November 26, 1843—altiludes of Polaris, 


OBSERVATIONS. 
Double altitudes of Polaris. Time of chronometer. 
Deg. mine — see. he min, — see. 
93 07 50 7 45 24 
93 O08 20 46 32 
93 08 40 47 28 
93 09 10 48 24 
93 ag 10 49 10 
93 oy 50 50 09 
43 10 15 51 29 
93 10 2 52 23 
93 ll 15 53 15 
93 Vl 35 54 15 


ee 
- 


Index error = -+- 2 min. 4 sec. 


RESULT OF CALCULATION, 


ee  - 


ee eee ee 
| 
' 


True altitude. Mean time. Latitude. 


mow Ce - es — -_—- 


Deg. min. see. h. min. sec. Deg. min. see 
46 34 56 6 §2 45 \ 4s 14 24 


[ 174 J 448 


ENCAMPMENT AT THE SOUTH END OF TAIH PRAIRIF, 
Determination of longitude, November 27, 1843—altitudes of « Lyre, 


ONSERVATIONS, 
| 
Pinar BEATERS, SROOND GPATRA, 
Double altitudes of | Time of chronometer, Double altitudes of | Time of chronometer 
a Lyre, | a Lyrw, 

Deg, min. see. | h. min, — gee. | Deg. min. see, he min, we 
oo 04 LO N 10 44.0 67 40 lv 4 16 06.0 
68 36 «(40 12 11,5 67 oa 20 16 50.0 
68 18 3 IS (07.6 66 46 40 17) BOO 
68 «600 C80 I4 04.6 66 oO 8) 45.0 
67 45 ~=#OS 4) 50.6 66 618 OOO ph) a 


Index error = + 2 min, 4 see, 


RESULT OF CALCULATION, 


| | . 
Mean time. Advanee, Longitude. 
he min, — gee, A, oming see, 
7 18 3 | 0 56 50,1 | 


Determination of latitude, November 27, 1843—allitudes of Polaris. 


OBSERVATIONS, 


Double altitudes of Polaris, Time of chronometer. 
Deg. min. — sec. | h. min, — see. 
93 04 20 } 4 24 11 
93 05 00 26 47 
Hh 05 10 28 09 
93 05 10 29 13 
93 06 30 30 38 
03 06 00 3t 39 
93 06 30 32 58 
93 06 00 34 28 
03 07 00 35 39 
93 07 40 36 61 


oe a ——~ es —- ——-- _ 


Indox error cx 4- 2 min. 4 sec. 


RESULT OF CALCULATION. 


rn nr er er ser at eee ere eee ae ee 


True altitude. Mean time. Latitude. 
Deg. min. eee. kh. = min. see. Deg. min. — sec. 
4 36 02 7 34 13 4 06 45 


ED 


IRIE, 
es of o Lyre, 


hae 


me of chronometer 


16 600 
17 60.0 
18) (45.0 
10 na,7 

ongitude, 

les af Polaris, 

ymeter, 

sec. 

Il 

47 

09 

Lk 

38 

39 

58 

28 

39 

61 

Latitude. 

min, sec. 
06 45 

SE EEE) 


449 


f 174] 


ENCAMPMENT AT THE SOUTH END OF TAIH PRAIRIE 


Determination af longitude, November 27, 1843-—immersion of Jupiter's 
third satellite. 


Observed time 


A, mo se, 
6 oo 2 


Mean time 


h mins 
oe ‘6 


wee, 


Longitude 


| 
| 


. . — 


Kmersion af Jupiter's first satellite, 


Observed time 


Mean time, 


4 min, 
6 O49 


see, 
34.6 


Longitude, 


Dew. min, — wee. 
ig} Og 483 


ENCAMPMENT ON 'THE MAIN BRANCH OF FALL RIVER. 


Determination of latitude, November 39, 1843—altiludes of Polaris, 


Double altitudes of Polaris. 


Dey. maine — 8ee, 


91 AG 50 
Gt 57 15 
G1 5k 2 


OBSERVATIONS, 


Time of chronometer, 


Index error = ++ 2 min, 


RESULT OF CALCULATION, 


| 


True altitude. 


ee _ mo se mene 


a 
Deg. min. 
oO 88 


#9 


Mean time. 


. min, 
53 


h. min. — gee 
7 AT 37 
49 23 
51 09 
Latitude, 
=- Se —_ - a 
Deg. min, see. 
44 35 23 


see. 


35 


BE 
| 


: 

j 
ig 
q 
54 

j 
oy 
| 
. 
We 
-y 


ENCAMPMENT ON THE MAIN BRANCH OF FALL RIVER. 
Determination of longitude, November 30, 1843—altitudes of Capella. 
OBSERVATIONS. 


Double altitudes of Capella. Time of chronometer. 


 —  - 


Deg. min. see. » ming see, 
69 30 30 ( 54 
69 65 15 | 55 


a 


RESULT OF CALCULATION. 


Mean time. Advance. Longitude. 


min, — see. 


59 21 


| 
| 
| 
| 
| 
| 
| 
| 
| 


Emersion of Jupiter’s second satellite. 


gree eee eee 


Observed time. | Mean tiie. | Longitude. 


he min. — see. | » mine see. Deg. min. see. 
7 36 11 6 40 22.6 | 121 10 25 


ENCAMPMENT ON FALL RIVER, (UNION FALLS.) 
Determination of longitude, December 5, 1843—altitudes of « Lyre. 
OBSERVATIONS. 


FIRST SERIES. SECOND SERIES. 


Double altitudes of | Time of chronometer. || Double altitudes of 
a Lyre. | a Lyre. 


—- 


he. min. © see. 
7 25 37.0 
26 50.5 
27 43.4 
28 33,2 
29 37.0 


mJ 
ba) 


Deg. min. . he min. 
72 #55 7 2i 
72 38 22 
72 20 23 
72 02 23 
71 46 24 


Arnwna®? 


FP oosc— 
SUHSHE 


Index error = ++ 1 min. 32 sec. 
RESULT OF CALCULATION. 


Mean time. Advance. Longitude. 


VER. 
es af Capella. 


meter, 


i A 


ngitude. 


longitude, 


min, see, 


10 25 
) 
sofa Lyrz. 
|ES. 


1¢ of chronometer. 


1 min. — see, 


¢ 25 37.0 

26 ©=—50.5 

27) 43.4 

28 33.2 

29 = 37.0 
SS 
ngitude. 
LS 


451 [ 174 ] 
ENCAMPMENT ON FALL RIVER, (UNION FALLS.) 


Determination of latitude, December 5, 1843—altitudes of Polaris. 


OBSERVATIONS, 


— - -- A Le ett nent 


—_——--—-——_- eee - oocecnm oe es eee, 


Double altitudes of Polaris, | Time of chronometer. 


ee ave — - ao 2 0 eeeenene. 
- ——’ 


| 


Deg. min. see. homing — see. 
90 34 40 7 09 09 
90 34 40 10 59 
90 36 10 Il 56 
90 36 10 13-00 
90 37 00 14 00 
90 36 50 15 00 
90 37 15 15 49 
90 38 00 16 42 
90 38 40 l 17 45 
90 38 20 18 42 


Index error — -+ 1 min. 32 sec. 


RESULT OF CALCULATION, 


True altitude. | Mean time. Latitude. 
. | . . 
Deg. min. — sec. he min. — see. Deg. min. — see. 


45 16 39 | 6 20 42 43 55 20 


SECOND ENCAMPMENT ON FALL RIVER. 
Determination of longitude, December 6, 1843—altitudes of a Lyre. 


OBSERVATIONS. 


Double altitudes of a Lyre. Time of chronometer. 


een a EE 


Deg. min. see. h. min. — see. 
54 14 10 8 13 42.4 
53 38 15 15 33.0 
53 06 30 17 14.3 


Index error =-- 1 min. 30 sec. 


RESULT OF CALCULATION. 
—_— oe  OoOoqzq i 4oUAcoo—oonn—-——o—s——— 
Mean time. Advance. Longitude. 


—__ 


h. min. — sec. he min. — see. 
V 22 43 0 52 46.9 


om ce nee te et SR Rp TT LF RE TEESE 


L | 


Bie i 
{i 


[ 174 ] 452 


SECOND ENCAMPMENT ON FALL RIVER. 
Determination of latitude, December 6,1843—altitudes af Polaris. 
OBSERVATIONS. 


Double altitudes of Polaris. Time of chronometer. 


Deg. mine — xec, » min, see, 
90 20 00 20 5) 

90 29 15 22 OF 
90 29 15 24 00 
90 29 10 26 00 
90 2 05 28 00 


Index error = + Lo inin, 30 see, 


RESULT OF CALCULATION, 


True altitude. Mean tine. Latitude. 


Deg. min, — See. » MN SPE, uw, mun, 
45 14 22 j 31 25 ‘ 44 


THIRD ENCAMPMENT ON FALL RIVER. 
Determination of longitude, Dec. 8, 18145—immersion of , Geminorum. 


Observed time. | Longitude. 


~ 


mint, see, Deg. min, — see. 
2 O8 a. ui. I2t 39 50 


Determination of longitude, December 8. 1843—alltiludes of Rigel. 
OBSERVATIONS. 


Double altitudes of Rigel. Time of chronometer. 


Deg. = min. sre. | . mtn, see. 
70 i4 30 2 12 32.0 a. 
69 56 30 14 30.0 
69 43 00 16 00.0 
69 27 40 17 36.5 
69 10 00 19 36.5 


ummm. na ns ans 8 nt ee ane rnemncr ee renen pe ne eee ae eer en 


Index error «= -- 1 min, 32 see. 


RESULT OF CALCULATION. 


rs 


res en es es 


| 
Mean time. Advance. | Longitude. 


ree nen ne mes et am cts | ene ener ere ene enemas | 


h. min. — sec. he min. see. 
1 23 25 0 62 37.7 


ete oss ee rt een ds mee: es 


453 [174 J 


THIRD ENCAMPMENT ON FALL RIVER. 


of Polaris. ‘ : , ; , 
uv Determination of latitude, December 8, 1843—altitudes of Polaris. 
OBSERVATIONS. 
meter. poe ; | ; = 
Double altitudes of Polaris. ‘Time of chronometer. 
—_ { ee 
as | 
SCC. P | ‘ 
5] Deg. min. — see. | homing see. 
07 87 49 10 I 47 44 4, m. 
00 87 47 30 | 4949 
00 87 46 40 50 §2 
00 87 45 20 | 51s 
87 44 40 | 53 08 
87 44 25 | f4 00 
87 43 °—OOW 55 08 
87 42 25 | 56 2 
87 41 00 | 57 «18 
87 40 45 | 58 13 
atitude. — er eer ee 
Index error = -- | min. 32 sec. 
min, see, RESULT OF CALCULATION. 
44 15 a -—- - ep ee 
True altitude. Mean time. | Latitude. 
| Riese: Siete Prererenn 
; | ; 
Gent mt. ' Deg. min. — sec. he min, — see. Deg. min. sec. 
0 43. «62—t« 0038 43. 30. 36 
y 


CAMP IN A PINE FOREST. 
Determination of latitude, December 8, 1843—alliludes of Polaris. 


see. 
50 OBSERVATIONS. 
. Double altitudes of Polaris. Time of chronometer. 

des of Rigel. 

Sects creibas d Deg. min. — sec. h. min. — sec. 

‘ 89 10 00 6 42 25 p. m. 

meter. : 89 IL 00 4324 
yc i 89 11 45 44 Ih 

etc ces } 89 12 3 45 12 
see. 89 12 30 46 07 
32.0 a. m. ¥ 89 13 10 47 (14 
30.0 4 89 1315 48 23 
00.0 89 13 40 49 2) 
36.5 ; 89 13 50 50 02 
36.5 89 14 30 50 46 

~~ : Index error = -+ 1 min. 32 sec. 
RESULT OF CALCULATION. 

mgitude. True altitude. | Mean time. Latitude. 

semeren wean é oe oe eg = a 7 = a ree ae Le ae IT, 

' Deg. min. sec. | h, min. see. Deg. min. see. 
44 36 05 | 5 53 57 43 17 49 


[ 174 J 454 


CAMP IN A PINE FOREST. 
Determination of longitude, December 8, 1843—altitudes of « Lyre. 


OBSERVATIONS. 


Double altitudes of a Lyra. | ‘lime of chronometer. 


Deg. min. — see. he mine — see. 
717 55 10 6 53 09.0 
77 31 50 54 i7.0 

7 ~=14— 30 5504.5 
76 65 00 56 03.4 
76 38 15 56 52.5 


Index error = + | min. 32 sec. 


RESULT OF CALCULATION. 


Mean time. Advance. Longitude. 


a (a - —_ ey 


he min. © sec. he min. — see. 
6 02 19 0 52 46.3 


Determination of longitude, December 8, 1843—altitudes of Capella. 


OBSERVATIONS. 


Double altitudes of Capella. Time of chronometer. 


Deg. min. 
62 23 
62 44 
63 00 
63 20 

01 


Index error = +- | min. 32 sce. 


RESULT OF CALCULATION. 


Mean time. Advance. Longitude. 


h. min. — sec. he min. — see. 
6 10 39 0 52 44.5 


A SS 


of « Lyre. 


eter. 


cee, 
9.0 
i7.0 
4.5 
3.4 
p2.5 


ngitude. 


s of Capella. 


neter,. 


ngitude. 


455 [ 174 J 


ENCAMPMENT AT’ TLAMATH LAKE, 


Determination of latitude, December 10, 1843—altitudes of Polaris. 


OBSERVATIONS, 
Double altitudes of Polaris, | Time of chronometer, 
Deg. min. — see. | he min, — bee, 
8s 56 10 8 25 07 
88 56 10 26 27 
88 55 40 27 17 


Index error = + 1 min. 30 sec. 


RESULT OF CALCULATION. 


True altitude. | Mean time. Latitude. 
5 uses Pe ne en ee 
Deg. min. — sec. | h. min. — sec. Deg. min. see. 
44 27 46 | 7 35 27 42 56 51 


——— —_ 


Determination of longitude, December 10, 1843—altitudes of Capella. 


OBSERVATIONS. 


———.--——.- - — ~ - ee 


Double altitudes of Capella. Time of chronometer. 


| 

i} 

| 

Deg. min. — sec. | 

| 
| 


he. min. sec. 
92 56 30 


8 30 05.5 


93 17 30 31 11.0 
93 38 40 32 16.0 
ia ree ar a 
Index error = +- 1 min. 30 sec. 
RESULT OF CALCULATION. 
Mean time. Advance. Longitude. 


he min. see. he. min. see. 
7 39 52 0 51 18.5 


456 
SNCAMPMENT AT TLAMATH LAKE 


. 
Determination of latitude, December 11, 1843-—meridian altitudes a 
the sun. 


OBSERVATIONS. 


Double altitudes of the sun's lower limb. Time of chronometer. 


Deg. min. . min. 

47 24 32 

47 25 33 

AZ 27 | 34 

47 28 26 

47 29 38 

47 30 40 

47 30 3h { 4l 24 

47 30 { 43 05 

47 3! 43 §7 

47 31 44 54 

47 sl iL 

47 31 46 56 

47 30 AT 49 

47 48 55 

44 49 56 

47 52 08 

47 53-20 
; 54 36 


Index error = -- 1 min. 32 sec. 


RESULT OF CALCULATION. 


oe —o ee 


True central altitude. Apparent time of transit. Latitude. 


on on 


min, 


44 


Deg. min. sec. 
24 00 33 


| 
| 
\ 


‘ 


an altitudes oj 


ometer. 


— ee 


6 es ee ne ee 


Latitude. 
min. see 
58 23 


457 


ENCAMPMENT AT 'TLAMATH LAKE, 


[ 174 ] 


Determination af latitude, December 11, 1848—allitudes af Polaris, 


OBSERVATIONS, 


Double altitudes of Polaris, Time of chronometer. 


Deg. min. — see, he min, see. 
88 4 30 7 00 45 
88 41 20 02 00 
88 41 30 02 59 
88 41 35 04 2 
8H 42 «10 05 42 


} 


ee -_—- oe te ene a ee on 


Index error «: + 1 min, 32 sec, 


RESULT OF CALCULATION, 


(eee ee 


True altitude. Mean time. 


Latitude. 


Deg. min. — see, 
44 20 35 


hb. min. — see. Deg. min, — see. 
6 12 53 42 56 Av 


| 
ope ae ee - : oo a re ee 
! 


oo eee — — 2 en ae renee, 


Determination of longitude, December 11, 1843—altitudes of « Lyre. 


OBSERVATIONS. 


SECOND SERIES. 


| 
| 

Double altitudes of | Time of chronometer. | Double altitudes of | Time of chronometer. 

a Lyre. | | | 


66 56.5 20 


17 35.8 


, a Lyre. 

Pi | rs ” ric petty Se eg ee ee 
' Deg. min. sec. | hh. min. sec. || Deg. min. sec. hy min. see. 

ie 67 34 00 7 O09 05.6 65 58 45 7 13 47.3 

} 67 06 10 10 25.7 65 35 00 14 56.6 

i 66 47 40 11 = 22.0 65 19 20 15 44.8 

% 66 32 40 | 12 07.5 | 65 038 20 16 34.5 

| 


Index error = + | min. 32 sec. 
RESULT OF CALCULATION. 
Sa EEEEEanEEEEEe nine Lee”, a iP Rocce i 
Mean time. e Advance. Longitude. 
f he min. sec. h. min. see. 
, 6 22 44 {0 50 43.5 


TT | A 


[ 174 ] 458 


ENCAMPMENT ON A TRIBUTARY TO THE LAKE AND HEAD WATER op 
THE TLAMATH RIVER, 


Determination of longitude, December 13, 1843—altitudes ofa Lyre, 


OBSERVATIONS, 


FIRST SELES. SECOND SERIES, 


Double altitudes of | ‘Time of chronometer. | Double altitudes of ‘Time of chronometer’ 
a Lyra. | a Lyre, 


Deg. min, see. » ming see. ~ mine seer oe ming see. 
63 40 10 10 -336.5 67 = 00 7 

63 «13 10 1) =56.5 3750 

62 50 40 1304.0 19 35 

62 34 40 13 54.0 } Ol 40 

62 11 45 15 308.7 414 00 


Index error = ++ | min. 32 sec. 
RESULT OF CALCULATION. 


Mean time. Advance. Longitude. 


h. min. see. 
0 48 41.0 


Emersion of Jupiter’s first satellite. 


Observed time. Mean time. Longitude. 


he min. sec. he somin. see. . min. — gee. 
6 07 04 5 18 21.6 20 42 


459 [ 174 ] 


EAD WATER op ENCAMPMENT ON A TRIBUTARY TO THE LAKE AND HEAD WATER OF THE 
TLAMATH RIVER, 


ides ofa Lyre, Determination of latitude, December 13, 1843—altitudes of Polaris. 


OBSERVATIONS. 


_——-- ——— ne 


Double altitudes of Polaris. Time of chronometer, 
LRTES, ——— ——————————EEEe 
Deg. min. kee, he min. see, 
nie ola Y 88 380 7 2 09 
ime of chronometer’ a8 a9 30 25 Al 
88 39 10 26 53 
> a 88 39 25 28 18 
s8 40 = 20 29 «(34 
he min. sec. g8 40 50 300 «87 
¢ 15 49.8 ss 40 20 31 46 
16 44.4 ss 40 30 3204S 
1740.6 ss 4 10 33° 
18 36.0 ss 40 35 34s 
19 30,0 | 
———_—_-——_—-——— _< Index error =» -- 1 min, 32 see. : 
RESULT OF CALCULATION. 
iss sniasienteniadin 
True altitude. Mean time, | Latitude. 
aa Deg. min. see. he min. — see. | Deg. min. sec. 
Longitude. 44 19 46 6 41 10 | 42 51 26 
=” ° a ~ _| oy — — ——- -——ee 
ENCAMPMENT ON SUMMER LAKE. 
a Determination of latitude, December 16, 1843—altitudes of Polaris. 
OBSERVATIONS. 
Longitude. Double altitudes of Polaris. I'ime of chronometer. ; | 
eee — — eee ey uN 
P Deg. min. — sec. he min. — sec. bat 
F048 88 46 30 6 48 50 ie 
88 46 20 50° 88 i | 
— 88 46 40 51 53 aie: | 
88 47 00 52 59 


Index error = ++ 1 min. 35 sec. 


RESULT OF CALCULATION. 


ne 


True altitude. Mean time. Latitude. 
: Deg. min, sec. h. min. sec. Deg. min. sec. 
| 4¢ 93°07 6 06 48 42 57 22 ; 


f 174 J 460 


ENCAMPMENT ON SUMMER LAKE, 


Determination of longitude, December 16, \843—allitudes of o Lyre, 


OBSERVATIONS, 


Double altitudes of a Lyra, Time of chronometer, 


Deg. ming see, » min, 
67 50 20 ) 42 
67 08 50 44 
66 27 BTs) 46 


Index error « + | min. 35 see, 


RESULT OF CALCULATION, 


Mean time. Advance. Longitude, 


A. min. see. . min, gee. 
5 59 50 Ad 11,2 


Determination of longitude, December 16, 1843—altitudes of Capella. 


OBSERVATIONS, 


Double altitudes of Capella. Time of chronometer. 


Deg. min. 
73 29 
73 53 50 


7A 16 20 


Index error e -+ | min. 35 see, 


RESULT OF CALCULATION, 


ee 


ae 
Mean time. | Advance. Longitude. 
| 


461 [ 174 J 


SECOND ENCAMPMENT ON SUMMER LAKE, 


Determination of longitude, December 18, 1843—altitudes of Capella, 


tudes af o Lyrw, 


OUSERUATIONS, 


ronometer, Double altitudes of Capella Time of chronometer, 
Deg. min, 
00.6 4 10 no 7 AY 24,0 
11.0 | 4 io oO 07.0 
j 1.5 Ts) 10 wo hi 24.0 
: Thy st ww fe 27.5 
= 05 . 
Triden error + | min. OF see, 
RESULT OF CALCULATION, 
Longitude, ; 
——— Mean time \deance, Longitude, 
Ae omine see. A, omin. Sees 
7 14 Bo it) Ax 30.0 
iludes of Capella. Determination of longitude, December 18, 1843—alliludes of a Cygni. 
OBSERVATIONS. 
te Double altitudes of a Cygui. ‘Time of chronometer, 
onometer. 
B Deg. mine see, A. min, see, 

i ae { 79 08 50 8 19 24.0 
46.0 4 is 40 30 20 «87.2 
04.5 Tn) ee 1) 2) (35.4 
17.7 78 OAS 22 «29.2 

eS 7 «45S 23 © 27.0 
Index error « + 1 min, 37 see. 
RESULT OF CALCULATION. 
— ~ —— — \ - - - — 
Longitude. Mean time. Advance. | Longitude. 

hk. min. see. he min. see. | 

7 38 57 0 42 33.1 | 

\ 


[ 174 J 462 


SECOND ENCAMPMENT ON SUMMER LAKE, 
Determination of latitude, December 18, 1843—altitudes of Polaris, 
OUSERVATIONS, 


Double altitudes of Polaris, Time of chronometer, 


min, gee, , min, 
oo 
40 
nis) 
40 
0 
lo 
wo 
AS 


or 
a 


AO 


Index error eo fb min, 37 see. 


RESULT OF CALCULATION, 


True altitude, Mean time. | Latitude. 


Deg. mine — wee » mine see. Deg, min, — see. 
At 13 s4 25 32 AY A2 37 
\ 


ENCAMPMENT ON CHRISTMAS LAKE. 
Determination of latitude, December 24, 1843—allitudes of Polaris, 
OBSERVATIONS. 


Double altitudes of Polaris, Time of chronometer, 


Dig. i see. 
87 
87 
87 
87 
87 
87 
87 
87 
87 
87 


Lote 


go 28 


Index error’ = -+- 1 min. 37 sec. 


RESULT OF CALCULATION. 


i 


True altitude. Mean time. Latitude. 


Deg. min. sec. h. min. sec. Z min. see. 
43 53 17 6 17 12 23 25 


463 [ 174] 


cE. ENCAMPMENT ON CHRISTMAS LAKE 


] J 
udes of Polaris, Determination af longitude, December 21, 1SA3—allitudes of o Lyra. 


‘ _ OUSEAVATIONS, 
roronwter, 
” PIMST AERA, SRCOND SHAERS, 
nt, ee, 
2 2 | 
; ro Double altitudes of a | Time of chronometer, Double altitudes of a | The of chronometer, 
5 15 Lyrm, Lyre, 
7 a8 
4 665 | 
0 il Deg, min, see. | oh. min, see, Deg, mine meee | he ming see, 
i 17 6 42 80 | 6 WM Hos Sh 43 80 6 40 MO 
% 2b 6 ik 1 029 Mw 00 1h 4 
4 49 56 56 20 47) (O83 ft OOF 16 | ‘3 62.4 
655 687) 8 (00.5 fh 43 Qh | 44 00.0 
ios -~ | i ee uo «10,0 8 2 go | 44 54.0 
: | 
Index error e= - Ll min, 97 see, 
Latitude. 


RESULT OF CALCULATION, 


ey. min, — see. Mean time, | Advance, Longitude, 
AY 42 37 
| 
=a he =somin, — see. | homing see, 


: 6 oOo 44 | 0 36 157 | 


| 


tudes of Polaris, 


ee) 


( 
INCAMPMENT IN DESERT VALLEY, AMONG BLACK ROCKY HILLS, 


hronometer, 
ees Determination of longitude, December 26, 1843—altitude of a Lyre. 
ee sn ar A? » 
8 02 OBSERVATION. 
9 39 et os _ a : 
() 44 | ee = er 
2 04 Double altitude of a Lyra. Time of chronometer. 
‘ 18 
4 12 i = a i ee cm ee en ee RINT, 
5 32 i Deg. min. — see. he mins sec. 
6 38 46 49 00 6 55 18.5 
7 43 # 
8 45 : we 
_ Index error == -- 1 min. 40 sec. 
RESULT OF CALCULATION. 
Latitude. i Mean time. Advance. Longitude. 


. he min. sec. h. min. — see. 


Deg. min. see. A 
6 21 13 0 34 05,5 


42 23 25 


nasprentiepamnmnenenemensemeiinmmnieens a ey ee ee en ee He ee RE 


[174 J 464 


ENCAMPMENT IN DESERT VALLEY, AMONG BLACK ROCKY HILLS, 
Delermination of latitude, December 26, 1843—altitude af Polaris. 


OBSERVATION, 


Double altitude of Polaris. Time of chronometer, 


Deg. nin. . min, CC. 
87 01 ) 09 30 


Index error = = Lainin, 40 see, 


RESULT OF CALCULATION 


True altitude. Mean time. Latitude. 


Deg. min, — see. 


Deg, min. — see. 
te 00 09 


43 80 44 


CAMP OF DECEMBER 29-30, 
Determination af lautifude, December 29, 1843—altitudes of Polaris. 


OBSERVATIONS. 


Double altitudes of Polaris. Time of chronometer. 


Dep, min, — see. main, 
85 57 50 7 Mt 
85 67 20 13 
85 57 20 18 
85 ds 00 16 
85 58 10 17 


Index crror . + 1 min. 40 sec. 


KESULT OF CALCULATION, 
{ ee eee 
True altitude. Mean time. Latitude. 


Cn ee oe 


min. — gee. 
27 50 


‘Deg. min. — see, : in, : Deg, 
42 58 39 41 


CKY HILLS, 


le af Polaris, 


lometer, 


get. 
30 


Latitude. 


min, 8€C. 
Ov 09 


ites of Polaris. 


nometer, 


en 


Latitude. 


. min. — gee. 
27 50 


Pe sa Ee ORE ote NRA ok Thao 


465 


CAMP OF DECEMBER 29-30. 


c 174] 


Determination of longitude, December 29, 1843—altiludes of a Cygni. 


Double altitudes of a Cygni. 


Deg. 


19 
79 
79 
78 
78 


min, 
50 
27 
07 
33 
ll 


Mean time. 


OBSERVATIONS, 


a ne ee en a 


Time of chronometer. 


sec, he mins — see. 
50 7 20 12.5 
00 | 21 25.0 
40 22 21.0 
20 24 08.0 
10 25 16.0 
Index error — +~ 1 min. 40 sec. pe some aes 
RESULT OF CALCULATION. 
Advance. | Longitude. 


a eee 


NEW YIAR’S EVE CAMP. 


Determination of latitude, December 31, 1843—altitudes of Polaris. 


Double altitudes of Polaris. 


Drg. 


85 
85 
85 
85 
85 
85 
85 
85 
85 
85 


min, 
39 
39 
38 
38 
38 
38 
38 
37 
37 
37 


True altitude. 


Deg. min. 
42 48 


sec. 
58 


OBSERVATIONS. 

Time of chronometer. 
sec. | he min. — see. 
20 | 7 32 49 
00 34 s«18 
50 | 35 44 
25 36 45 
40 37 54 
30 39 27 
20 40 29 
50 41 4l 
10 43 03 
30 44 34 


Index error = -+- 1 min. 40 sec. 


RESULT OF CALCULATION. 


Mean time. Latitude. 
h. min. — see. Deg. min. see. 
7 09 34 4l 49 55 


<oweeererwmene cpapee nee <a-sneanen 


ce oa aed 
28 SL _ = 


time 
> eS Ae 


Bi é 
i 


c 174 4 466 


NEW YEARS EVE CAMP. 
Determination of longitude, December 31, 1843—altitudes of « Cygni. 


4) OBSERVATIONS. 

! _ 

\ FIRST SERIES, SECOND SERIES. 

Ii mae ! | | 

Wt Double altitudes of =| ‘Time of chronometer. Double altitudes of — | Time of chronometer, 

\ a Cygni. a Cygni. 

i ' 

i oo | 

| | 
“ Deg. min. see. | he mine see. Deg. mine see. he mine see. 

} 76 32 40 i WW 3L.O | 74 14 50 vi 26 37.2 

| 75 44 10 } 22 OL. 13 54 50 ' 27 38.0 

! 756 19 00 | 23 16.5 73 BB AO ; 28 33.0 
Wg “4 59 40 24 0«1%0 7 ee fs Ts) 29 = 30.5 
We 4 37 385 2 845 | Fs 8 30 21.6 

\ sities | 

if Index error = + lamin, 4 


RESULT OF CALCULATION. 


Mean time, Advance. Longitude. 
h. min. see. hein see, 
6 56 37 0 20 O63 
. 


CAMP NEAR THE MUD LAKE, 
Determination of longitude, January 3, \84A—ollitudes of aiCyeni. 


OBSERVATIONS. 


Double altitudes of a Cygni. Time of chronometer. ; 
4 
Deg. min. see. he min. see. ‘ 
“A 4440 ; + 088.0 { 
74 22 00 10 07.0 4 
73° «5450 1129.0 ; 
73 33 40 12 34.0 


73 ll lo 13 43.0 


Ne eee EN SO Re Ee ee Ce 
Index error e= + 1 min. 45 see. 


RESULT OF CALCULATION. 


ower nn = es ee i ee 
| 


Mean time. Advance. Longitude. : 
\ { 
Remenser cere eee ane | 2 = ue ; 7 ss a Lae 
h. min. sec. h. min. see. | 
43 47 | 0 27 34.8 | 
! 


! 


oa 


\ 
(ee <n eras mane a wn saneervee HANG © SE TECNEIETES TS: Uwe 9 tS er ea SONOS 


es of » Cygni. 


nS 


me of chronometer. 


he mine — see. 

7 26 37,2 
27 38.0 
28 33.0 
29 30.5 
30 21.6 


songitude, 


ometer. 


sec. 

48.0 
07.0 
29.0 
34.0 
43.0 


songitude. 


s of alCygni. 


ie Toa cea Re ie 


467 [ 174 J 
CAMP NEAR THE MUD LAKE. 


Determination of latitude, January 3, 1844—altitudes of Polaris. 


OBSERVATIONS, 
Double altitudes of Polaris. Time of chronometer. 
Deg. ming see, h. min. — see. 
84 85 7 8 18 
84 35 i) | 20 06 
84 36 50 "22 4 
84 35 15 i 24 40 
84 35 LW } 25 26 
Index error =: ++ 1 inin, 45 see. 
RESULT OF CALCULATION, 
e 
dei : wenn Siete : ; ies tance laces 
True altitude. Mean tine. Latitude. 
Dey. mine see. he imine see. Deg. min. — see. 
42 7 30 6 AY) 31 LO 48 15 


CAMP NEAR THE GREAT BOILING SPRING, 


Y 


Determination of longitude, January 6, 18t4—allitudes of a Cygni. 


OBSERVATIONS, 


Double altitudes of a Cygni. | Time of chronometer. 


Deg. min, — see, Ay min. see. 
70 21 40 ! 7 10 04.0 
70 03 50 | 10 56.0 
Hy AZ 30 | VI 45.6 
69 28 20) 12 47.0 
69 Ga 40 1%} 47.5 


| 


Index error = +--+ | min, 48 sec. 


RESULT OF CALCULATION. 


. 
\ 
Mean time. | Advance. | Longitude. 
| | 
cate ee sa | paces nsec cael oes a 
he min. — see. | he = min. gee. | 
66 44 =. | 6 27° 23.7 


rn en ie en tt ene e 0 een: er er ee 


ee 


f 174 J 468 


CAMP NEAR THE GREAT BOILING SPRING. 


Determination of latitude, January 6, 1844—alti'udes of Polaris. 


OBSERVATIONS. 


Double altitudes of Polaris. 


17 10 

17 20 

17 00 

16 50 | 


min. see. | 


16 30 


Index error == -- 1 min. 48 sec. 


RESULT OF CALCULATION, 


| Be 
True altitude. | Mean time. | Latitude. 


(erro 20010 One aero neem nee re _ ———— 


Deg. min. sec. he min, see. Deg. min. sec. 
42 08 19 6 52 O2 40 39 44 


Determination of latitude, January 8, 1844, (same station)—meridian 
altitude of the sun. 


Double altitude of the sun’s | True central altitude. Latitude. 
lower limb. 


Deg. min. sec. | Deg. min. see. Deg. min. sre. 
53 35 = 35 27 «603 —«(OW 40 39 49 


Mean latitude 40 deg. 39 min. 46 sec, 


neh RG SRS aR oe. 


469 [174] 


ENCAMPMENT ON PYRAMID LAKE. 


° | ° ° . . * 
of Polaris. Determination of longitude, January 12, 1844—alliludes of « Cygni. 
OBSERVATIONS. 
sac eo 5 canteen ipeaeannenetem a besics r ; a asicnasecmiesiamtmams 
oe i FIRST SERIES, | SECOND SERIES. 
eter eee — — -_ ESeGEeEesem — : | - 
| 
- sy. Double altitudes of Time of chronometer. Double altitudes of | Time of chronometer, 
ec. a Cygni. a Cygni. 
41 ere v1 es i | es ae 
ag aoe = | cRNA 
32 Deg. min. sec. h. min. — see. Deg. min, see. h. min, — see. 
54 63 59 00 6 45 14.5 62 03 25 { 6 51 08.5 
56 628 34 00 46 31.0 61 44 00 | 62 05.5 a e 
Rance 63 1550 47 24.0 Hl 28 45 | 52 «53.0 a: 
Saas I 62 39 45 49 14.5 61 O07 380 | 53 69.0 oy 
62 20 25 50 14.0 60 48 10 | 54 569.0 ; % 
| ae — 4 ia 
. ‘encincememanasarasiati : : eG 
Index error = -+- 43 sec. ha 
titude. { ei iB 
: RESULT OF CALCULATION. i \ 
ws 44, Mean time, Advance, | Longitude. 
i] 
n)—meridian eA Ee See eee, mee a siaseneaes esate 
Determination of latitude, January 12, 1844—altitudes of Polaris. 
atitude. | OBSERVATIONS. ; 
ee ; aes mae ee 
pe a AA | Double altitudes of Polaris. | Time of chronometer. 
7 | 
min. sre. q faa, oa Sn ee 
3949 | Deg. min. sec. | h. = =min. see. 
- : 83 22 © 50 | 7 00 20 
83 22 40 | 01 39 
83 22 30 | 02 29 
83 22 25 | 03 19 
83 21 40 | 05 33 
83 21 15 | 06 42 
i 88 21 00 07 46 
88 21 00 | 08 46 
j : 10 37 
83 20 25 ll 31 


83 20 20 | 


Index error = + 43 sec. 


gn NT 


RESULT OF CALCULATION. 


f | 


i True altitude. | Mean time. Latitude. 


f 174 J 470 
ENCAMPMENT ON SALMON TROUT RIVER. 
Determination of latitude, January 16, 1844—altitudes of Polaris. 


OBSERVATIONS. 


| 


' 


ey 


Double altitudes of Polaris. 


Deg. min, , ; in, see. 
17 21 : 29 a, m. 
77 20 13 
V7 19 32 
17 18 43 
17 18 AS 
77 18 59 
17 18 | 12 
V7 17 37 
77 «16 | 45 
77 15 | H Ol 


Index error =: + 44 sec, 


RESULT OF CALCULATION. 


True altitude. Mean time. Latitude. 


oe en a + ee - - — 


Deg. min. — sec. he min. — see. Deg. min. — see. 
33 383 2 55 O¢am 390«OSLL 


Determination af longitude, January 16, 1844—allitudes of Arcturus. 


OBSERVATIONS. 


Double altitudes of Arcturus. Time of chronometer. 


min, — see. | . min, sec. 
00 | 41 23.6 a. m. 
00 42 35.8 
50 43 43.0 
35 45 38.0 
50 | 47 01.0 


{ 


Index error = + 44 sec, 


RESULT OF CALCULATION. 


(ne care reer a ee a ee 


Mean time. _ Advance. 


Sense eee > nt as na RO ce ae 


| 
iT 
| 
| 
he min. — sec. . min. | 
3 Ql 42a. m. 22 | 


of Polaris. | 


soSs 
4 


— 
a i 


re] 


- 


titude, 


min, see, 
51 13 


of Arcturus. 


eter. 


ngitude. F 


ra cena ened 


471 
ENCAMPMENT ON SALMON TROUT RIVER. 
Determination of'longitude, January 16, 1844—altitudes of Procyon. 


[ 174 J 


OBSERVATIONS. 


PIRST SERIER, SECOND SRULES. 


—— 


Double altitudes of ‘Time of chronometer. Double altitudes of Time of chronometer. 


Procyon. Procyon, | 
Deg. min, see. , Ae mine see. Deg. min, see. h. min, — see. 
69 45 00 3 26 SL2am, 67 Ww 50 | 8 383 15.4 
69 16 20 276 662.0 0=—S | tsi iC 4 «15.0 
68 45 25 20 20.5 66 «39 10 35 =. 22.0 
68 16 40 3044.0 66 #13 «50 3631.5 
67 49 «55 32.02.0002) 65 37 -42,0 
Index error = + 44 sec, 
RESULT OF CALCULATION. 
Mean time. Advance. Longitude. 
h. min. sec. h, min. — see. 
3 #10 02a. m. 0 22 20.0 


CAMP ON A RIVER OF 'THE SIERRA NEVADA, 
Determination of latitude, January 18, 1844—altitudes of Polaris. 


OBSERVATIONS. 


Double altitudes of Polaris, Time of chronometer. 
Deg. min. — see. h. min. — see. 
75 51 60 6 20 39 a. m 
75 51 45 22 25 
75 5t 50 : 24 07 
75 53 00 25 39 
75 52 50 27 10 
vis) 53 00 } 28 3l 
i 
Index error == + 44 sec. 
RESULT OF CALCULATION. 
ae ees ; aan ceca 
True altitude. | Mean time. Latitude. 
are En een oe eee One kere 
Deg. min. — sec. | h. min. — sec. Deg. min. — see. 
37-55 BR | 6 05 


17 a.m. | 39 24 16 


fe ime ET a RS 


=: 


Pe 
i; 
& 
i] 
‘pe 
Be 
a 


a 


[174 J 472 


CAMP ON A RIVER OF THE SIERRA NEVADA, 
, Determination of longitude, January 18, 1814—altitudes af o Leonis, 


OBSERVATIONS, 


Double altitudes of a Leonia. ‘Time of chronometer. 


Deg. min. — see. . min, see, 
62 12 30 32 13.0 a, m. 
61 31 00 34 05.0 
60 28 30 36 48.5 


Index error w + 44 sec. 


RESULT OF CALCULATION, 


Mean time. Advance. 


—— —_ 


h. min. see. 


min, — le. 
6 13 59 a. m. 


20 23.0 


Se 


Determination of longitude, January 18, 1844—altitudes of o Lyre. 


OBSERVATIONS. 


es 


Double altitudes of a Lyre. Time of chronometer. 


Deg. min. — sec. he mine — see. 
80 39 60 6 41 50.0 a. m. 
81 37 40 44 31.56 
82 15 45 46 14.0 


ern ese re 3 e+ 


Index error = ++ 44 sec. 


RESULT OF CALCULATION. 


| Bk ae 


Mean time. Advance. 


he min. — see. h. min. 
6 23 46 a. m. 0 20 


cr nr 


8 af « Leonis, 


ometer,. 
see, 
13.0 a, m. 
05.0 
48.5 


ae ee ee 


songitude. 


les of o Lyre. 


ometer, 


{ 
} 


473 


[174 J 


SECOND ENCAMPMENT ON A RIVER OF THE SIERRA NEVADA, 


Determination of longitude, January 19, 1844—altitudes of « Cygni. 


OBSERVATIONS. 


Double altitudes of a Cygni. | 


60 64 50 
60 27 25 
60 10 20 
59 52 35 
59 32 30 


Deg. min, see. | 


Index error «= + 45 sec, 


Time of chronometer, 


he mine — see. 
6 35 59.0 


37 23,5 
38 18.0 
39 15.0 
40 18,0 


~ . ne eee 


RESULT OF CALCULATION. , 


Mean time. Advance, 
he min, — see, he min, sec. 
6 18 46 0 19 28.5 


| Longitude. 


Determination of longitude, January 19, 1844—allitudes of a Orionis. 


OBSERVATIONS. 
o- ne — 
Double altitudes of a Orionis. | Time of chronometer, 
ae nee is _ saaateameuhaseboes 
Deg. min. — sec. | h. min. see. 
73 24 00 7 01 01.6 
73 #62 60 | 02 «22.0 
74 22 50 | 03 347.0 
74 «648 ~—«O00 | 04 ~=—-58.0 


Index error = + 45 sec. 


RESULT OF CALCULATION. 


Mean time. Advance. 


h. = min. — sec. 
6 43 32 


Longi. de. 


A 
} 
a. 
7 

} 
1f 
; 


a Se ° J 
Pim OE - — 


STs 
ee 


toate 
ees 


[ 174 ] 474 


SECOND ENCAMPMENT ON A RIVER OF THE SIERRA NEVADA, 
Determination of latitude, January 19, 1844—allitudes of Polaris, 


OBSERVATIONS, 


Double altitudes of Polariv ‘Time of ehronometer. 
Deg. min, — vee, h. min, = 8es 
al J2 10 6 An 20 
81 32 00 44 An 
81 Ho | 20 Ab 06 
sl ol uh Al 26 
8l 0 45 445 Hii 
Sl 40 20 60 iW 
81 2 45 ht 24 
sl 20 25 fit 10 
SI 28 45 | 56 
Sl 20 oo Ho 10 
Index error «= + 45 see, 


RESULT OF CALCULATION, 


True altitude. Mean time, Latitude. 
Deg. min, see, hb. omin. see. Deg. min, see. 
40 A4 33 ti 30 14 Hi) nD 21 


THIRD ENCAMPMENT ON A RIVER OF THE SIERRA NEVADA, 
Determination of latitude, January 21, 1844—allitudes of Polaris. 


OBSERVATIONS, 


Double altitudes of Polaris. Time of chronometer. 
Deg. min, — sec. he min. — see. 
a0 32 00 | q 43 27 
80 29 45 45 03 
80 30 00 A6 38 


80 Ol 25 


80 Ol 20 38 29 
80 00 20 40 03 
79 59 50 41 29 


79 59 10 


Index error = + 50 sec. 


RESULT OF CALCULATION. 


Deg. min. — sec. h. min. — see. 


Deg. min. see. 
40 03 0! 7 54 12 


True altitude. Mean time. Latitude. 
| 39 ol 53 


ne a as + 2 orn Se a tn ee ca ee a ee ET 


Dele 


475 [ 174 ] 


A NEVADA. | THIRD ENCAMPMENT ON A RIVER OF THE SIERRA NEVADA. 
,) y ’ , , ‘ ; 
des of Polaris, Determination of longitude, Jan vary 21, i844—alliludes af Procyon, 
-_ j OWSERVATIONS, 
hronometer, = | 
o Double altitudes of Procyon Time of chronometer, 
ne HC | 
20 Deg. min, — ee h min, see, 
AN i1)) fe vil) } 7 M 16,0 
06 
26 7A 20 hw | 4 An 10.0 
rH 74 Ag 0 | 46 32.6 
24 ' _o 
10 Index crror «= + 50 wwe, 
56 
10 RESULT OF CALCULATION, 
Mean time. Advance, Longitude, 
io ore ete ’ h, min, — ste, he mine see, | 
Latitude, 8 Ol 45 0 18 10.0 
(ge. min, see. 
HH) 9 21 FOURTH ENCAMPMENT, NEAR A GAP. 


Determination of latitude, January 22, 1844—allitudes of Polaris. 
A NEVADA. 


; OBSERVATIONS. 
udes af Polaris. = a ‘aarp eilacpieniepitceibeainclines 
: Double altitudes of Polaris. Time of chronometer. 
— | 
| Se ne ee ae ae ee ee ea 
ronometer. i Deg. = min. — sec. he min. — see. 
sia seniticchaaaicaacamctness \ 80 i220 7 2 Al 
4 80 1! 15 90 (05 
i so 1 80 «61045 5) 
of ; 80 10 1 "32 48 
03 80 10 15 33 48 
38 , 80 09 40 | 35 (OO 
. 80 09 Ww 360s 
13 . 80 «608 ~~ 40 37:30 
29 80 «= O80 3889 
0: 80 07 = 10 | 40 = 40 
29 
30 ——_——— ———$——$ 


Index error = + 50 sec. 


RESULT OF CALCULATION, 


jee __ 


Latitude. True altitude. | Mean time. Latitude, 
. Deg. min. — see. ' he = min, see. Deg. min. _ sec. 
leg. min. sec. y : 
39 ol 53 } 40 04 09 | 7 16 35 38 49 54 


eT 


—— a 


b, 
i 


SS 


x 


ee = oe ee 


—— 


C174 J 


476 


POURTH ENCAMPMENT, NEAR A GAP, 


Determination af longitude, January 22, 1844—allitudes of Procyon, 


Double altitudes of Proeyon. 


Deg. min, 
56 67 
57 a4 
58 13 


Mean time, 


h. min, 


ec. 


7 36 01 


ONSERVATIONS, 


Nee, he min, 
80 | 7 62 
20 Ws} 
25 | 65 
Index error = + 50 see, 

RESULT OF CALCULATION, 

| Advance, 

| 

2 

h. =omin, — see. 

| 0 17 52.8 


Tine of chronometer, 


Longitude, 


CAMP ON A SOUTHERN BRANCH OF THE STREAM OF ENCAMPMENT 0} 


22d TO 23d. 


Determination of latitude, January 23, 1844—altitudes of Polaris. 


Double altitudes of Polaris. 


OBSERVATIONS, 


| Time of chronometer. 


ee 


Deg. min. vee. he min, — see. 

79 44 50 7 23 58 

79 44 40 25 27 

79 43° 45 27 00 

79 42 45 28 04 

79 42 3h 29 Ol 

79 AQ 40 30 07 

79 4l 35 31 28 

79 Al 10 32 35 

79 40 30 33 49 

79 40 25 34 54 

eR Nl Se aeeeaciugereas 

' Index error == + 50 sec. 
RESULT OF CALCULATION. 
nae : is * a-Si 
True altitude. Mean time. | Latitude. 

Deg. min. see. h. min, see | Deg. min. sec. 
39 50 30 7 13 Ol 38 36 19 


a ew 


427 [ 174 ] 


P, CAMP ON A SOUTHERN BRANCH OF ‘THE STREAM OF ENCAMPMENT OF 
22d TO oad, 


udes of P . ; ; 
tudes af Procyon Determination of longitude, January 23, 1844—allitudes af Procyon. 
OBSERVATIONS, 
bhronometer, rine e ARRERM, ! SKEOND SHHERA, 
sage | | 
4in. see, Double altitudes of Tine of chronometer. || Double altitudes of Time of chronometer, 
58 12 Procyon. Proeyon, 
08 } hl | 
65 uo 
Deg, min, see. he mon ee Dey, min, see, h, min, — see, 
so OT % OF Abb o> 4b oto 7 4S 160 
64 24 so a0 iia ih ha ho 44 02,2 
i446 80 40 49,0 | M 09.5 
55 oa 25 | Al B64 oa 1| Ww 46 66.4 
655 OHO 2 8631.6 | fa ‘¥ 20 46 «38.0 
Longitude, nee 
‘ Index error = + 50 nee, 
| 
‘ RESULT OF CALCULATION, 
— ii Mean time, Advanee. Longitude, 
F ENCAMPMENT 0? — | | - 
homing vee. he ming — see. 


26 12 0 16 37,0 | 
tudes of Polaris, J | _ | 


~~ a en re —— 


: ENCAMPMENT ON THE HEAD WATERS OF A STREAM, 

———————= FY Determination of longitude, January 24, 1844-—altitudes of Procyon. 
ee } OBSERVATIONS, 
: ° ry a Double altitudes of Procyon. Time of chronometer. 
43) 27 - — 
H ri k Deg. min. see, 
9 Ol | 53 07 20 
0 07 Md 53 35 15 
$1 28 i 63 858 8645 
3 (O88 : 54 «16 «40 
3 AD i 54 40—Ss«B0 
_ i Index error = -+- 48 sec, 

RESULT OF CALCULATION. 
ian Mean time. Advance. Longitude. 
Latitude. ; 

, 4 h. min. see. h, = min. see. 
Deg. min. sec. , 7 18 16 0 15 578 
38 36 19 | 


et 


f 174 J 478 


ENCAMPMENT ON THE HEAD WATERS OF A STREAM. 
Determination of latitude, January 24, 1844—altiludes of Polaris, 


OBSERVATIONS. 


Double altitudes of Polaris. ‘Time of chronometer. o 
aoe a 

Dey. min, — see. he mine — see. 

vat) Il aw 7 40 13 

79 1 on | 42 14 

79 Ww 00 4336 

7 Ox 2h DS) 03 

WW 07 3B5 47 13 

79 OF 20 } 48 232 

val) U6 AQ 4 55 

79 05 4S H ht 18 

19 (ih it) 5 36 

79 04 BTu) } Ay ab a 


fudex error «2 +b 48 see. 


RESULT OF CALCULATION, 


True altitude. Mean time. Latitude. 
Deg. min. see. { he mine see. | Deg. min, — see. i 
39 8B 7 Stoo | 38k 88 | Dete 
| 
- _ { r 
CAMP ON A LARGE STREAM. } 


Determination of longitude, January 26, iS i—altiliades af the sun 
OBSERVATIONS. 


FIRST SERIES, SECOND SERIES. 


Double altitudes of the | ‘Tine of chronometer, (Double altitudes of the | ‘Tine of ehronomete. 


sun's lower Jimh. ;  stli’s lower tinh { 
Doe. min. sec. | A, min. see. Deg. min. see. A. min. — see. 
385k o 33-465: |] 39° «50 80 9 37 2837 
39 5 50 i 34 36.4 oo dS O% ‘ 37 53.0 
39 15 30 i bo Pa) | 40 07 10 } 3S 28.3 
39 85 50 36 SLO || 16 385 39° (OLS 
39 3y HT) | 3G 14.2 | 10 20 dh 39 36.2 
Siig eae dina ee Line | 
Index error -- -b 50 see, { 
: 
RESULT OF CALCULATION, x 
Mean time. Advance. Longitude. . 
he min. see. ho min. see. } 
9 20 44 | 0 16 07.5 } 
+ — 
! 


479 


[ 174 ] 


CAMP ON A LARGE STREAM. 
Determination of latitude, Jan. 26, 1844—meridian allitudes of the sun. 
OBSERVATIONS. 


STREAM. 


iludes of Polariy, 


ee 
Ste gS 


Double altitudes of the sun's lower din), ‘Time of chronometer, 


chronometer. 


ag I at 


re = Deg. mine gee, he ming — gee, 
: —™ iF of Is 50 () 9; 14 
ne gee, 18) i) wo 25 00 
0 13 65 20 15 bo vf 27 10 
2 14 65 20 15 28 19 
3 36 65 20 00 29004 
oa 608 65 9 50 | 3l 4 4 
7 13 65 19 30 32 3l 
8 22 65 Is 1S 34 03 
+] 55 O65 7 O45 ai) 07 
\ 18 65 16 15 i 36 21 
3 36 
3 56 ap 
Index ertor ++ 50 see. 
RESULT OF CALCULATION, 
True central altitude, Apparent tie of transit. Jratitude. A a 
Latitude. Deg. mine see, he omen. ee. 
, 32 55 20 0 28 bo 


» Determination of loagitude, January 26, 1844—distance from the moon's 
} Sirst limb to Fenus. 


OBSERVATIONS WOTSE 


Deg. mine — see. 
38 24 28 


THE CIRCLE. 


filiates af the sun 


Time of chronometer. Cirele reading, 


h. Min, — SOC. Dey. min. — see. 
ND SERIES. 6 58 05 
5Y 57 
7 ol 20 
he. ‘Pine of chronometer. or o7 
‘ 03 oA 
3 OF os 
06 1S 
A. min. — see. 07 06 
9 37 33.7 as 17 
' 37 53.0 1) 19 
| 3S 28.3 10 18 ' 
BY O1.5 It 2%) 
' 39 36.2 1 3l . 
' 13 ol 80 35 40 


‘ 


RESULT OF CALCULATION. 


at ne ene 


Bohs 


True distance. Mean time at Greenwich. Longitude. 
Longitude. \ 
- a a 
Deg. min. — see. | h. min. see. Deg. min. — see. 
57 55 18 14 57 48.8 121 49 52 
| 


ae. | 


i LT NT eR An oy seen ee eae ae Ba EN 


a ene eS 


[ 174] 480 


CAMP ON A LARGE STREAM. 


Determination of latitude, January 26, 1844—allitudes of Polaris, 
OBSERVATIONS. 


ET 


Double altitudes of Polaris. Time of chronometer. 


Deg. min. sec. h. 
78 53 30 7 
78 53 45 
78 52 10 
78 51 50 
78 51 15 


RESULT OF CALCULATION. 


! 
True altitude. Mean time. 


Deg. min. sec. he min, sec. Deg. min. see. 


39 25 29 7 27 «20 | 38 «18 


— 


Determination of longitude, January 26, 1844—altitudes of Procyon. 


OBSERVATIONS. 


Double altitudes of Procyon. Time of chronometer. 


A. min. 

7 31 
33 
34 
35 
36 


Index error —= + 50 sec. 


RESULT voi CALCULATION. 


cement etpmiitaneenietaee 


Mean time. Advance. Longitude. 


——___—__—_—_,—___— 


h. min. sec. he. min. — sec. 
7 18 30 0 15 53.2 


les of Polaris, 


sec. 
59 


08 


a ee 


Latitude. 


g. min. sec. 
s 18 Ol 


des of Procyon. 


nometcr. 


Longitude. 


481 [ 174 ] 


CAMP ON THE SAME STREAM AS ON THE NIGHT OF JANUARY 18-19. 
Determination of longitude, Junuary 30, 1844—altiludes of Procyon. 


OBSERVATIONS, 
| 
FIRST SENTES, i SECOND SERTES, 


dae —-— . \ -- 


Double altitudes of — | ‘Time of chronometer, 


Double altitudes of Time of chronometer. 


Procyon. Procyon. 
’ | ° ’ \ 

Deg. min, seew  ) he min. see, Deg. min. sees + oh, ming — see. 
61 13300 | 7 O88 09.0 683 06 (00 7 13 11.0 
61 44 20 09 33.0 \| 63 2h 380 14 03.4 
62 08 «45 10 «637.0 || 638) 4400 14 56.5 
62 26 40 1) 26,2 | 64 (0700 lo O14 
62 45 40 12 18.3 64 25 4h 16 52.0 

y 
Index error == + 52 sec. 
RESULT OF CALCULATION. 
Mean time. Retard. Longitude. 
he min, — see. | h. min, see. : 
7 18 35 | 0 05 52.6 { 


Determination of latitude, January 30, 1844—altitudes of Polaris. 


OBSERVATIONS. 
Double altitudes of Polaris. | Time of chronometer. 
he Sahn Pn Be oe ie 

Deg. min. — sec. | he min S€0. 

79 22 40 H 7 19 55 

79 22 50 | 2 38 

79 22 00 22 45 

79 20 40 24 0} 

79 20 30 \ 25 23 

7 19 40 | 26 27 
KI 79 #18 50 2785 
4 7Y 18 10 2 37 

19 18 10 | 2 26 
19 7 45 | 30 2 
i Index error — -+- 52 sec. 
; RESULT OF CALCULATION. 
Bebe 7 ST na a et Sa stan Mitte 
4 True altitude. Mean time. Latitude. 
" Deg. min. — sec. h. min. — sec. Deg. min. see. 
. 39 39 20 7 31 31 38 37 18 


31 


482 


FIRST CAMP IN THE PASS OF THE SIERRA NEVADA. 


Determination of latitude, Feb, 5, 1844—meridian allitudes of the sun, 
OBSERVATIONS. 


Double altitudes of the sun's lower limb. ‘Time of chronometer. 


min, — see, . min, 

35 | ) 00 48 
30 Ol 

25 4 34 
40 05 

15 06 OS 
An | 06 59 
40 07 44 
20 08 25 
20 09 «54 
00 10 57 
35 12 03 
50 | 13 02 

| 


Index error — + 52 see. 


RESULT OF CALCULATION. 


True central altitude. Apparent time of transit. Latitude. 


Deg. min. sec. | h. min, — see. Deg. min. — see. 
35 \7 49 0 06 49 38 42 26 


Determination of longitude, February 5, 1844—altitudes of the sun. 
OBSERVATIONS. 


_ FIRST SERIES. SECOND SERIES. 


| 
| 
| 


| 
| 
| 
| 


Double altitudes of the | ‘Time of chronometer. |; Double altitudes of the | Time of chronometer. 
sun’s lower limb. | | sun’s lower limb. 


min. sec. | he min. — see. rr, min, sec. h. min. — see. 
28 630 52 40.0 | 46 50 55 13.0 
20 15 53° 11.3 || 41 15 55 37.4 
09 =30 53 48.7 | 3355 56 01.4 
15 54 19.2 | 27 ~=—50 56 23.7 

64 47.3 22 35 56 44.5 


——$—— 


Index error = -{- 52 sec. 


RESULT OF CALCULATION. 


Mean time. | Retard. Longitude. 


———- 


he. min. — see. 
3 02 20 


EVADA. 
iludes of the sun, 


onometer, 


be sec. 


52 


1y 
08 
59 
25 
54 
57 


02 


Latitude. 


Deg. min. — sec. 
38 42 26 


‘tudes of the sun 


SERIES. 


a 79 05 30 57 09 
| § 79 #03 80 | 58 33 
>| Time of chronometer. F™ 79 03 20 59 43 
2 79 02 00 | 7 OO 59 
F  _ 79 «Ol 35 ol 51 
ir ae x 79 OO 50 | 02 ~=—«58 
h. min, sec. Fe 79 0U 10 03 58 
; 2 55 130 FF 79 00 00 04 53 
55 = 37.4 58 35 
56 O14 | 
56 9.23.7 Bae Taye = Se Pe 7 Sy Cahir ee : ate ge eee 
56 44.5 = Index error = -+ 52 sec. 
—— -- = —_— RESULT OF CALCULATION. 
4 pe oN es = 
Truc altitude. Mean time. | Latitude. 
a i 
. - To | 
Longitude. k Deg. min. — sec. | h. min. — see. | Deg. min. — sec. 
———___—_—_—_—__—_——] 39 30 22 | 7 12 46 | 38 41 03 


483 [ 174 J 


THE LONG CAMP. 


Determination of longitude, February 14, 1844—altiludes of Procyon. 


OBSERVATIONS, 


Double altitudes of Procyon, | ‘Time of chronometer, 


| a ret 


he somin, sec. 
6 


Index error == + 52 sec, 


RESULT OF CALCULATION. 


F | | : 
Mean time. Retard. | Longitude, 


——— - -- a — 


he = mine — see. he ming see, Deg. min. see. 
i 7 02 00 | 0 Ll 36,1 | 120 25 57 


———_ 


Determination of latitude, February 14, 1844--altitudes of Polaris. 


OBSERVATIONS. 


Double altitudes of Polaris. Time of chronometer. 


no | 


Deg. min. _ see. h. min. 
79 06 20 6 55 48 


a ene oe TET RTO CTE ee NN AES OE 


SE rn a ene 


[174] 484 


THE LONG CAMP.* 


Determination of time, February 19, 1844—altiludes of the sun, 


OBSERVATIONS, 


FIRST SHRIES,. SKCOND SEREBS. 


ee 


Double altitudes of the | Time of chronometer. | Double altitudes of the | Time of chronometer, 
sun’s lower limb. sun's lower limb. 


Deg. min, see. » mine see. Deg. min, see, » mine — see, 
48 45 15 { 00 808.4 AQ BH 10 ( 02 56.0 
49 O02 10 Ol 04,3 49 43 00 03 = 23.0 
AQ 09 40 ol 29.2 AY 49 30 03 46.2 
49 17 40 Ol 56.5 , 49 58 50. | 04 «18.4 
49 26 O05 02 26.4 50 08 OBO 04 51.0 


On ee 


Index error «= -+- 50 sec. 


e 
RESULT OF CALCULATION. 


Mean time. Retard. 


h. min, — 8€t. A. somin. sec. 
9 16 21 0 13 42.8 


The daily losing rate of the chronometer, obtained from the observations at this place, is 25,3! 
seconds, 


485 


THE LONG CAMP. 


[ 174] 


des of the sun, ) Determination of latitude, February 19, 1844—meridian altitudes of 


| the sun. 
| 


OBSERVATIONS, 


SERIES. 


SS a i 
Double altitudes of the sun’s lower limb. | Time of chronometer, 
Time of chronometer, ee es ee —- shes sie aE 
Deg. min. — see. | he min. — see. | 
mee —s 7 17 20 lt 50 58 i} ae ge 
he mine — see. 79 «1G 50 | 51 BA i ’ 
9 O2 56.0 79 61910 52 44 | 
03 23.0 79 19 05 53 
03 46.2 79 19 40 5410 
04 18.4 79 20 55 65 al 
04 51.0 79 «21 80 5615 
79 21 20 57 2 
79 21 50 58 25 
79 21 55 69 15 
, 79 22 05 0 00 17 
; 79 22 00 ol 14 
; 79 «21 45 02 09 
| 79 21 35 02 59 
: 79 21 20 | 03 55 
tard. i 79 20 15 | 05 14 
79 20 00 | 06 09 
07 
in. sec. 
3 42.8 a a a a TRE te + pt ee 


Se = Index error = + 50 sec. 
ons ut this place, is 25.3! 


RESULT OF CALCULATION. 


Sicha cicero 


True central altitude. Apparent time of transit. Latitude. 


———- - a eee 


Deg. min. — sec. h. = min. — see. Deg. min. _ sec. 
39 56 36 Il 59 30 38 4l 51 


geR be ibh: eeduisaeee coke 


[1744 486 


CAMP ON THE RIO DE LOS AMERICANOS, (HIGH IN THE MOUNTAIN,) 
Determination of longitude, February 24, 1844—altiludes of o Lyre, 


OBSERVATIONS, 


‘lime of chronometer. 


mins | j min, see, 
00 H 62.4 a. 
36 | 30.0 
01 40.6 
25 46.3 
659 d 18.6 


Index error m= -- 50 sec, 


RESULT OF CALCULATION. 


Mean time. Retard. Longitude. 


we —--— — 


h. min. — sec. » min, sec. Dey. min. — see. 
4 00 55 a. m. 15 17.2 120 34 20 


ee 


Delermination of latitude, February 24, 1844—altitudes of Polaris. 


OBSERVATIONS. 


—_———-— — 


Double altitudes of Polaris. Time of chronometer. 


Deg. min, sec. he. = min. 
74 44 20 3 54 
74 45 10 56 
74 46 00 58 
V4 45 45 59 
74 46 00 


SPs 3 GOON URE a a nen ee 


Index error = ++ 50 sec. 


RESULT OF CALCULATION. 


ee 


True altitude. Mean time. Latitude. 


a — —— 


| 
| 
| 
| 


8eC. » min, — S€C. Deg. min. sec. 
56 13 00am. | 38 46 58 
| 


} MOUNTAIN.) 


udes ofo Lyre, Ff 


onometer. 


’ 8éc. 
652.4 a.m. 
30.0 
40.6 
46.3 
18.6 


Longitude. 


ey 


yr, min, see. 
34 20 


udes af Polaris. 


ironometer. 


sec, 
08 a. m. 
00 


; 
: 
1 


51 


Latitude. 


Muthieiein. alae scee 


ad 


leg. min. sec. 
38 46 58 


487 [ 174 J 
NUEVA HELVETIA, 
Determination of time, March 10, 1844—allitudes of the sun. 


OBSERVATIONS, 


PInRST SERHIRS, SECOND SERRA. 


Double altitudes of the | ‘Time of chronometer. 


Double altitudes of the | Time of chronometer, 
sun's lower limb, 


sun’s lower limb, | 


Deg. min, see. h. min, — see. Dey. min, see. h, min, see. 
37 40 1h 7 45 33.0 Ht 48 00 vi) 49 06.7 
38 00 50 46 32.0 3o 16 Wi 4y 59.0 
38 «(14 50 4708.0 39 27) «645 560 —s 330.5 
gai 10 47 59.5 j 39 = 40 00 51 04.4 
3s 45 45 48 33.6 | 30 53 50 61 43.0 
RESULT OF CALCULATION, 
Mean time, Retard. 
h. min. see. | he mine — gee. 
8 06 28 T) 17 38.9 


Determination of latitude, March 14,1844—meridian altitudes of the sun. 


OBSERVATIONS. 


| 


Double altitudes of the sun’s lower limb. | Time of chronometer. 


Deg. min. — sec. | h. min, — see, 
96 49 40 11 2 36 
97 05 05 25 22 
97 17 50 29 59 
97 3l 00 | 33 28 
97 37 00 35 56 
97 40 40 | 37 33 
97 41 30 | 38 © «35 
97 51 50 46 58 
97 52 30 | 47 58 
97 52 15 | 52 00 


Index error =- — 6 sec. 


RESULT OF CALCULATION. 


| GeReeErRE 


| Latitude. 
| 


| 


True central altitude. Apparent time of transit. 


om ae reremeroee enemas eee 


mad 
a 
= - 


OER ett x 


TK a 


[ 174 J 488 


NUEVA HELVETIA 
Determination of latitude, March 14, 1844—altiludes af Polaris, 
OBSERVATIONS, 


rrr i et ys a se a er ee ee @ ae = 


Double altitudes of Poturia., ‘Time of chronometer, 


Deg, min. e, » min, 
a po Doul 
77 Ue 
77 06 
77 OS 
77 01 
77 02 
V7 Ol 
77 Ol 
77 00 


Index error == —~ 4 sev 


RESULT OF CALCULATION, 


——- 


he min, — wee. Deg. = min. see. 


Deg. min. — se. 
7 37 v2 38 34 45 


38 3I ol 


| 

‘True altitude, | Mean time. | Latitude, 
| 
{ 


Determination of latitude, March, 15, 1844—meridian altitudes of 
the sun. 


OBSERVATIONS. 


Double altitudes of the sun's lower limb. Time of chronometer 


Deg. min, h. min, 
OR 35 1! 42 
98 37 43 
98 38 \ 

98 38 
98 39 
98 39 
98 39 
98 39 
98 39 
98 38 
98 38 
98 37 
98 36 


cero is aris 


ont 


sige illite Ss at ae ete 


Index error = — 4 sec. 
RESULT OF CALCULATION. 


| 
| 
True central altitude. | Apparent time of transit. Latitude. 


Deg. min. sec. A. min. See. | . mine — see. 
49 35 01 49 04 | 34 40 


es Of Polaris. 


ee ee 


hometer, 


Latitude, 


a. min. ee 
8 34 45 


an altitudes of 


nometer. 


Latitude, 


7. min. see. 
34 40 


a 


See te ee See 


489 


NUBVA HELVETIA,. 


[174 7 


Determination af time, March 16, 1844—al/itudes of the enn, 


ONSERVATIONS, 
| 


ViIneT SBRIRS. | ShOEONT SERIES, 


Double altitudes of the Time of chrowometor. 


Time of chronometer, | Double altitudes of the 
, aun’s lower limb, 


sun'e lower limb, 
1} 


Deg. min. see, | h. 


| 
min, see, | Deg. min, see | he mings see 
3 27 40 «| 7% 48 232 | M2 7 60 65.2 
43 «40 Ut) | 4N 58.5 4A th 35 hl 20.4 
49 60) (00 40 27.4 | 44 42 ct 680 
44 06«(00-s«d100 49 564.0 | 44 56 30 62 «304 
4 61k 40 | SO 28.6 45 O77 BOO 53 (00.6 
| 


Index wore — 5 see, 


RESULT OF CALCULATION, 


Mean time. Returd. 


h. = omine — gee. he min. see. 
8 10 39 0 1g 58.0 


—ae -< een ee —o en 


Determination of latitude, March 20, 1844—meridian altitudes of the 


sun. 
OBSERVATIONS, 
a :, / — — 
Double altitudes of the sun’s lower limb. | Time of chronometer. 
| ; 
Deg. min, see. | he ming gee. 
102 35 00 11 44 52 
102-350 | 45 52 
102-35 | 46 = 44 
102 35 10 47 34 
102 34 50 } 48 2 
102-34 40 | 4914 
102 33 35 50 57 
102 32 00 51 58 
Index error = + 8 sec. 
RESULT OF CALCULATION. 
True central altitude. | Apparent time of transit. | Latitude. 
Sores = an sail oo ere ne 
Deg. min. see. | he min. see. | Deg. min. sec. 
61 32 —S O58 ll 46 55 | 38 3515 
| ‘ 


Mean of latitudes taken at thie station between the 10th and 22d of March = 38° 34/ 42", 


490 


NUEVA HELVETIA,* 
Determination of time, March 22, \844—allitudes af the sun, 
ONSENVATIONS, 


Pray’ Shuine, BRCOND BRHERS, 


Double altitudes of the Time of chronometer Double altitudes of the Time of chronometer, 
sun's lower limb, sun's lower limb, 


Deg. min, see. he mine wee. Deg, min, vee, . min, 
46 «Bl 4 49) B86 i 8h BO 45 
46 41: ‘ 00.0 4; 4b 
46 = 60 22.5 47 3 16 
47 ‘ 04.0 47 AO A6 
47 | 5 32.0 47 55 47 


Index error = > 8 see, 


RESULT OF CALCULATION, 


Mean time. Retard, 


he min, — wee. » mine pee, 
8 08 23 22 50.2 


INCAMPMENT ON THE RIO DE LOS MUKELEMNES, 
Determination of longitude, March 25, 1844—altitudes of the sun. 


OBSERVATIONS, 


FINST SERIES. | SECOND SENETES, 


Double altitudes of the | Time of chronometer. | Double altitudes of the | ‘Time of chronometer. 
sun’s lower limb. | sun's lower limb. | 


Deg. min. see. » ming sees || Deg, ming see. h. min. — see. 
52 16 «25 ‘ 30 49.5 St 19 10 3 33 21.4 
52 05 15 31 20.6 51 11 40 33° 42.5 
51 52 10 31 64.6 61 50 34 11.6 
51 41 10 32. 26.0 50 2 650 34 33.4.0 
51 30 40 321.0 50 35 34 = 556.0 


| 
| 


Index error == —+- 10 see. 


RESULT OF CALCULATION, 


Mean time, Retard. | Longitude. 


h. min, sec h. min. see. Deg. min. sec. 
3 58 39 O 25 23.7 121 23 03 


il lnc eT SIE dP ee atte ae, 


Bh i 


ota PI — He ag — 


of the sun, 


Hehe, 


ime of chronometer, 


h. min, gee. 


7 45 62.0 

46 12.4 

46 36.0 

46 66,4 

47) 20.6 
are. 
60.2 
INES, 


les of the sun. 


WEES, 


‘ime of chronometer. 


he min. — gee. 
3 33 21.4 
33 42.5 


34 11.6 

34 = 34.0 

34s 556.0 
Longitude. 


Ze min, sec. 
21 62308 


this place, is 25/’ 7 


: 
i 
7 
a7 
* 
: 


Tne oe 


491 


ENCAMPMENT ON THE RIO DE LOS MUKELEMNES 


[174 J 


Determination of latitude, March 25, \844—-altitudes af Polaris, 


ONSERVATIONS, 


Double altituces of Polaris, Time of chronometer, 


Deg. min, see, he min, wee, 
i) BY nO 7 23 2: 
76 at a5 a0 8 
7 20 wo Ph) lo 
75 20 26 26 07 
16 28 40 27 22 
75 27 AO a8 gl 
i) 26 Oo 20 ht 
75 26 40 a 4 
76 24 45 32 21 
76 29 4S ug 10 


Index error am -+- 10 see, 


RESULT OF CALCULATION, 


True altitude, Mean time. Latitude, 


—- ne ae ee me te 


Deg, min, see, h. min, see. Deg. min, see. 
37) 42H 7 558 2 38) (O08: 83 


ENCAMPMENT ON THE RIO DE LAS CALAVERAS, 
Determination of longitude, March 26, 1844—altitudes of the sun. 


OBSERVATIONS. 


FIRST SERIES. SECOND SERIES, 


Double altitudes of the ‘Time of chronometer. 


sun’s lower limb. 


Double altitudes of the | Time of chronometer. 


sun’s lower limb. 


———— 


Deg. min. see. h. mine see. || Deg, min, see. | h. min. — see. 
54 06 00 $ 26 20 | 53 04 (O00 3. 29 = (03.5 
53) BL 45 | 26 ©6894 52 68 30 29 = 22.5 
53° 37 ~—B0 27 «(34.4 | 52 48 35 29 «(48.7 
53 26—Cs 80 28 = 03.6 | 52 39 10 | 30. s«:14.0 
638 15 10 28 36.7 52 26 10 30 = 49.4 


Index error == + 12 sec. 


RESULT OF CALCULATION, 


aRacarEn cca ane Eine 
Mean time. | Retard. | Longitude. 
egrets 
h, min, sec | he min. see. | Deg. min. see. 
3 64 58 | 0 26 16.3 121 16 22 


neces 


[174 J 492 


ENCAMPMENT ON THE RIO DE LAS CALAVERAS, 
Determination of latitude, March 26, 1844—allitudes of Polaris. 


OBSERVATIONS. 
Double altitudes of Polaris. Time of chronometer. 
Deg. min. — see. h. min. — see. 
75 14 35 7 23 33 f 
75 14 10 24 44 
75 13 15 26 07 
75 12 40 27 30 
75 11 00 29 07 
75 09 50 30 32 
75 08 25' 32 20 
75 O07 40 33 31 
75 05 30 35 31 
75 04 35 | 37 23 
Index error — -++ 12 sec. 
RESULT OF CALCULATION. 
‘sition een ace elneuias 
| 
True altitude. | Mean time. Latitude. 
einai | ie aia oad 
| 
Deg. min. — sec. | he ming see. | Deg. min. — sec. 
37 = 333——Cts«*S | 7 56-22 38 =602—Ss« 48 
ENCAMPMENT ON STANISLAUS RIVER. 
A Determination of latitude, March 28, 1844—altitudes of Polaris. 
: OBSERVATIONS, 
| Double altitudes of Polaris. | ‘Time of chronometer. “ 
—_— ae rt at cs scceepeieeelits 
a Deg. min. — sec. | h min. sec 
i 74 07 00 | 7 55 3 
74 8600620 | 56 «52 
, | 74 806 ~=600 | 57 = 49 
H 74 «86005 ~—00 59k i 
i 74 «6004-~—siL0 8 00° 18 : 
; 74 ©6003 0 OL 37 4 
j 74 02 00 0% 22 
i 74 01 00 | 05 03 
i 73 59 50 | 06 22 
73 «58 = 20 | 08 =. 38 
Index error = + 12 sec. : 
‘Y RESULT OF CALCULATION. ; 
True altitude. Mean time. Latitude. i es 
eR CTE e RAN Rear E eR One Eee : a 
Deg. min. — see. h. min. — see. Dig. min. — see. F 
37 00 28 8 28 02 | 37 42 26 ' - 
4 


(linen cpeinentyancaoerstinioestrsoverr entire severe aacnaeatitaate weemniesiniinsines-iesieerasssits bnew eee ene fa penetrates 7 , 


0 lian ate ED 


493 


[174] 


ENCAMPMENT ON STANISLAUS RIVER. | 
of Polaris. Determination of longitude, March 28, 1844—~—altitudes of Capella 
‘ OBSERVATIONS, 
meter. FIRST SERTES. | SECOND SENRTES, 
ena | 
| 
ee. Double altitudes of | Time of chronometer. | Double altitudes: of Time of chronometer. 
33 ' Capella. | Capella. | 
4 ; 
7 - 
80 Deg. min. sees | oh. mine see, | Deg. mine seee | he mine — see. 
07 91 02 46 | 8 IW 315 | 88) 48) 50 8 18 05.0 
2 90 34 20 | 12 54.0 | 88 27 50 | 19 06.5 
m 90 O01 40 | 14 300 | ss it oo 19 67.5 
31 89 39 20 16 935.5 | 87 47 10 zl (08.0 
31 89 1580 16 46.0 | 86 33940 21 26.5 
23 ' | » 
Index error == -- 12 sec. 
ii 
RESULT OF CALCULATION. 
atitude. Mean time. i Retard, { Longitude. 
ithe bea: he min. — see. { he. min. vee. Deg. min. — see. 
02 48 8 44 41 | 0 27 16.9 ee ne 
. SECOND ENCAMPMENT ON STANISLAUS RIVER, 
of Polaris. : om 
Determination of longitude, March 31, 1844—altitudes of the sun. 
OBSERVATIONS. 
neter, Gin ee inn MS: oo on he ate _ 
So ee Double altitudes of the sun’s tower iimb. Time of chronometer. 
eC. 
2 ciltameabarerian tne 
bd Deg. = min. — sec. h. = min. — see. Pe Ay 
9 if 52 ky «46 | 3 34 30.0 
. 52 15 35 35 00,5 
8 ‘ 52 00 35 42.6 
7 7 51 bl 00 36 05.4 
2 51 40-50 36 =. 33.4 
3 b ! ‘ 
2 ee ee eee 
8 7 Index error —~ + 10 sec. 
; RESULT OF CALCULATION. 
i ; ; 
—-— _~—— i Mean. time. Retard. Longitude. 
titude. Sone See, ree pees | ase race Soca 
- nt he min. see, h. min. see. Deg. min. sec. 
. | 4 05 59 0 30 25.1 12 46 30 
min. sec. 
2 26 Baap else rial dae te caclale Nike Mla tee 2 iio cot haeieaamerllaata gas cao 


[ 17# ] 494 


SECOND ENCAMPMENT ON STANISLAUS RIVER. 


Determination of latitude, March 31, 1844—altiludes of Polaris, 
OBSERVATIONS. ; 
Double altitudes of Polaris, ‘Tune of chronometer. 
Deg. min. — see. h. min, see. 
13 #46 #8 00 8 04 57 
73 44 50 06 42 


73 44 25 O8 ao 

i 73 A3 25 09 15 
: 73 43 10 V1 23 

73 11 15 12 23 

73 40 40 13 45 

"3 39 40 15 16 

i 73 39 00 16 18 

73 38 10 li 37 


Index error = -- 10 sec. 


RESULT OF CALCULATION. 


True altitude. Mean time. Latitude. 
Deg. min. see. he min. see. Deg. min, sec. 
4 36 49 46 8S 42 20 | 37) 15 48 
| 
| SNCAMPMENT ON A LARGE TRIBUTARY TO SAN JOAQUIN RIVER. 
| Determination of latitude, April 3, 1844—altiludes of Polaris. 
i | 
| OBSERVATIONS. 
} 


Double altitudes of Polaris. Time of chronometer. 


en 


Deg. min. — see. he min. — see. i 
‘ 73 35 30 7 09 09 
73 34 30 10 14. 
73 33 45 ll 27 
73 32 00 12 55 
73 3200 | 1407 
73 3l OU 15 12 
73 30 15 16 14 
73 29 30 | 17 31 
73 28 25 19 14 
73 27 20 20 23 


ar a ECR see 


On ee 


Index error = + 15 sec. i 


RESULT OF CALCULATION. 


———— enemas cine cree 


- ne ee aS, 


® True altitude. Mean time. | Latitude. ; 
Deg. min. sec. h. min, — sec. Deg. min. sec. 3 
36 44 32 7 AY 45 37 22 05 : 


I A 


rR. 
»s Of Polaris, 


495 


ENCAMPMENT ON A LARGE TRIBUTARY 
Determination of longitude, vipril 3, 


[ 174 ] 


TO SAN JOAQUIN RIVER. 
18S44—allitudes of Arcturus. 


OBSERVATIONS, 


ometer. 
FIRST SERIES. SRCOND SERIES, 
sec, ‘ . Th . 4 
57 Double altitudes of [ime of chronometer. Double altitudes of Time of chronometer. 
42 Arcturus. Arcturus. 
ao . 
15 ; 
23 Deg. min. see. | A. min. — see, Deg. min, see. h. min, — see. 
23 62 43 50 8 O00 48.5 54 44 00 | 8 O05 62.5 
AD 5 12 25 O2 02.0 55 0B 0 | 06 64.0 
16 53 3800 03 = 06.0 55 BA i) | OT 58.6 
18 f4 01 00 4 04,4 55 56 30 08 56.0 
37 ht 22 «00 Ot 58.4 56 86 80 10 10.5 
° Index error = ++ 15 see, 
RESULT OF CALCULATION, 
~ a7 | ‘ 
Tatitude. Mean time. Retard. | Longitude. 
Ss gaat as he min. see. he. min. — see. Deg. min. see. 
, 15. 43 8 36 36 0 3l 07.3 | 120 58 03 


QUIN RIVER. 


sap Polamts Determination of latitude, April 4, \814—-altiludes of Polaris. tt i 
OBSERVATIONS. i 
. Double altitudes of Polaris ‘Time of chronometer. y 
nometer. ip it 
Pata | | Li 
Deg. min. — see. he. min. — see. : Ai; 
sec. 72 53 20 7 26 28 eM 
09 72 «53 OO 27048 ian ee 
14 72 «8651 ~~ 50 | 30.29 hia 
27 72 ©8650) 40 | 31 «BY . 
55 72 56 00 33 24 p, 
07 72 48 45 35 15 ‘ 4 
12 72 @ WwW 36 «52 aa |i 
14 72 46 10 | 38 8-33 m7] 
31 72 45 00 | 39-39 i 
14 72 44 = 20 | 41 27 Ee 
23 | . 
—_—_—_—_--—_-—- i ——— - SnEaEEERemeaT anna anaes os 
aruee Index error = rs 20 sec. #4 
RESULT OF CALCULATION. a 
5 wo aen ea eke TA a Oe ES 
= Pee t True altitude. Mean time. Latitude. 
Latitude. : So Be ee ee — 
: 
i p 
(pede Ra eg ee B Deg. min. — sec. min. see. Deg. min. sec. 
7. min. sec, ¥ 36 23 22 : 06 27 37 08 00 
4 22 05 } | 
y 
LL i 


SNCAMPMENT ON SAN JOAQUIN RIVER, 


} 


i 
1 
i 
; 
{ 


Ss PSEA ie Se Tne sh ME ar Sr ARE SO eee ES 


[174 J 496 
ENCAMPMENT ON SAN JOAQUIN RIVER, 
Determination of longitude, April 4, 1844—altitudes af lreturus, 


OBSERVATIONS. 


Double altitudes of Arcturus. ‘Time of chronometer 
Dez. min, — see. he min, see. 

fl 35 00 r 52 57.6 

by 4 Lo 40 dt 26.7 

52 45 40 55 550 

Y3 17 40 57 16.2 

53 46 50 OB 27.7 


Index error == + 20 see. 


RESULT OF CALCULATION. 


Mean time. Retard, Longitude. 
he omine sev, } he. min. see, Deg. min. — see, 
S 28 O6 7) 32 17.7 120 45 22 


SECOND ENCAMPMENT ON SAN JOAQUIN RIVER, 
Determination of latitude, vlpril 5, 1844—allitudes af Polaris, 


OBSERVATIONS. 


Double altitudes of Polaris. ‘Time of chronometer. 

Deg. mine — see. A. min. 8€e, 
qi 58 30 7 44 18 
71 58 00 45 50 
71 od 20 47 25 
ql 56 50 48 53 
71 55 20 50 34 
71 54 00 52 it 
val 52 20 53 56 
gil 52 20 55 09 
7) 51 15 56 14 


fnidex error == + 20 sec. 


RESULT OF CALCULATION. 


| 


True altitude. Mean time. Latitude. 
{ 
sneer amnsarmmee - ~ a nec a rn ALN | acre eee emniomenainsn 
} 
Deg. min. see. h. min. — sec. Deg. min. — sec. 


35 56 23 8 24 20 { 36 49 12 


es et Ne AREER 8 FR 


Se ETD 


Dout 


» of vIrcturus, 


nometer 


Longitude. 


Le min, sec, 
) 45 22 
"p> 
ER, 


of Polaris. 


iometer. 


8c, 
18 
50 
25 
53 
34 
Il 
56 
09 
14 


Latitude. 


. min. sete 
49 12 


pa een a Te 


497 


SECOND ENCAMPMENT ON SAN JOAQUIN RIVER. 
Determination of longitude, April 5, 1844—altitudes of Arcturus. 
OBSERVATIONS. 


[174] 


————e ee 


TIRST SERIES, i! SECOND SERIES, 
a) 


Double altitudes of | Time of chronometer. Double altitudes of | Time of chronometer. 


Arcturus. Arcturus. 
. | | : a 
Deg. min. see. he min, — see. Deg. mine sec, | he min. — see. 
567 «646-00 8 08 05,0 | 62 26 LO | 8 14 43.5 
68 38 30 05 15.5 | 62 62 45 15 850.0 
69 O04 15 Of 21.0 | 63 16 10 16 49.2 
69 80 45 OF N70 4 63 47 20 is 06.4 
60 12 35 Ov 10.6 | 64 28 00 | i) 48.4 
Index error == + 20 sec. ane 
RESULT OF CALCULATION, 
Mean time. Retard. | Longitude. 
h, min. — see. he min. sec. | Deg. min. sec, 
8 45 35 0 33 55.1 | 120 28 34 
—— = — a sequen RETEEERseEDeO Ean | see TSO ASESERTAS NGOS 
ENCAMPMENT ON THE LAKE FORK, (OF THE TULARES.) 
Determination of longitude, April 8, 1844—allitudes of the sun. 
OBSERVATIONS. 


FLIUST SERIES. SECOND SERIES. 


, i 
Double altitudes of the | Time of chronometer. “Double altitudes of the | Time of chronometer. 
sun's lower limb. | sun’s lower limb. 


: Deg. min. see. | hh, min. — see. Deg. min, sec. h. min. — see. 
59 12 55 | 3 16 3930.0 57 26 10 3 21 02.4 
58 39 «50 | 17 53.0 || 57 08 15 21 48.0 
58 23 OO | 18 360 |; 56 45 20 | 22 46.6 
68 08 20 i9 15.5 | 56 23 50 | 23° 41.7 
57 58 50 | 20° 03.4 56 07 «40, 24 22.6 
ia areata fect Nh ali ed eect ee oR al 
Index error = ++ 35 see. 
4 RESULT OF CALCULATION. 
i —-—- -— + - _—--— — — — ° ——_ es ] ee RS 
i Mean time. Retard. Longitude. 
cae pe Seach ot eee eae 
i‘ ee ee ee — 
h. = min. — sec. kh. min. — sec. Deg. min. — sec. 
i 3 59 01 0 38 = 06.5 119 41 40 
a ; { 


ee — 


= 


a RE a ae atte 


Determination of latitude, vipril 8, WAd—altitudes of Polaris. 


498 


ENCAMPMENT ON THE LAKE FORK, (OF THE TULARES.) 


OBSERVATIONS, 


Deg, min & 
7} 1S LS 
7! 12 ait) 
Zi 1! 1) 
Ii) 
RESUL’ 
» altitucl 


min. 


14 


ALCULA 


Time of chronometer, 


PION, 


Longitude. 


SOCs 
23 
OF 


. 
Hi) 


wetatude. 


499 f 174 J 


LARES.) ENCAMPMENT ON A SMALL STREAM, AFFLUENT TO THE LAKE TULARES. 


3 . * . ‘ J " . 
: Determination of latitude, April 9, 181A—altitudes of Polaris. 
of Polaris. 
ONSERVATIONS, 
poh Double altitudes of Polaris, Time of ¢ hronometer 
nometer. LE ———_———_— ee Se ee ae 
Dew, nn ny ae 
i” 0 ae it) tA 
SOC. ) 19 a0 AJ | 
os} s 11) 11 
07 70 i 0 55 31 
09 () 14 0 ’ 16 
fraiche eri ate SU) 06 
4 RESULT OF CALCULATION, 
- | t Weir trine Poatitede 
Lettude. - 
] ben / iD wal ( 
z - ) ~ (is i2 
} } a0 - — 


S Of e frcefurus 


| u Lretun Pisa ch nete 
/ Ta SPR, 
Ot, 
D {) bod 
0 G.7 
i. ha IS.5 
us ) ) Os 10.0 
0 
() 
Pie 
Indlex « Yost OU see, 


RESULT OF CALCULATION, 


] : io = 
é Mean time. Retard. | Longitude, 
; | 
I itud MIN, SC he min. see. Dew. inin, sv 
JON SITUA. 8 17 57 ) Ay 60.5 { 119 22 2 


te A EET 


[ 174 ] 500 


SECOND ENCAMPMENT ON A SMALI, STREAM, APFLUENT 'TO THE LAKE 
TULARES, 


Determination of latitude, April 10, 1844—altitudes of Polaris, 


OBSERVATIONS, 


Double altitudes of Polaris. Time of chronometer 


Deg, min, see min, 
69 32 Ho 
69 Bl 0) 
69 «80 0: 
69 a8 
69 28 
69 26 
69 25 
69 25 
69 23 
69 23 


Index error = = 3) see. 


RESULT OF CALCULATION, 


True altitude. Mean tune. Tatitude 


Deg. min, see. | ming 8 Dez. ming — sve 
34 42 35 50 bo 49 Lib 


Determination of longitude, April 10, 1844—altitudes of Arcturus. 
OBSERVATIONS, 


| 
FIRST SERIES. | SECOND SERIES 


Double altitudes of | Time of chronometer. Double altitudes of Time of chronometer. 
Arcturus. Arcturus. 


Deg. mi ; h. min. — see. Deg. mine see. Ah. min. see. 
82 8 37 02.0 {| 85 OR 45 3 42 47.0 
82 37 45.0 | 85 27 600 43 50.5 
83 39 03.0 85 57 30 45 05.0 
8: 40 00.5 | 86 «28 (30 46 21.9 

84 40 55.0 86 48 30 47 «610.6 


Index error = -+- 30 sec. 


RESULT OF CALCULATION. 


Mean time. Retard. j Longitude. 
5 


| 
h. min. sec. he min. sec. | Deg. min. — see. 
9 24 09 0 42 08.9 118 56 34 


or ee ee 


TO THE LAKE 


9 of Polaris, 


1ormeter 


Latitude 


ex. min, — $e 
i) 4y Lo 


es of Arcturus. 


ERIS. 


Time of chronometer. 


A. min. see 

3 42 47.0 
43 50.5 
45 05.0 
46 21.9 
47 10.6 


Longitude. 


gy. min, see. 
8 56 34 


ASSN tbs may 


501 [ 174} 


ENCAMPMENT NEAR PASS CREEK, IN THE SIERRA NEVADA MOUNTAINS. 
Determination of latitude, April 13, 1844—altitudes af Polaris. 


OBSERVATIONS, 


Double altitudes of Polarix, Time of chronometer, 


tesa aeiidtuaemiescaaiaisesiaaaisaosaii 

Deg, mine — ste. he mine — see, 
6s 4 20 7 24 4 
6s 40 15 25 40 
os 39 25 | 27 25 
6S 3a 00 | 8 42 
6a 38 15 40 3 
os N6 50 31 42 
68 46 00 | 33 30 
os 35 00 5 » 4 
OS JA 00 iO 2 
68 3% 25 37 41 


Index error «= + 30 sec. 


RESULT OF CALCULATION, 


a 


True altitude. Mean time. Latitude. 
Deg. min. see. | he min, — see. | Deg. min. — see. 


34 17 12 | 15 53 | 35 17 12 


Determination of longitude, April 13, 1844--altitudes of Arcturus. 


OBSERVATIONS. 


FIRST SERTRS. | SECOND SERIES. 


Double altitudes of —— Time of chronometer. 1 Double altitudes of | ‘Time of chronometer. 
Arcturus, \ Arcturus, 
—_—- os ~ ES a fee 
Deg. min, sec. h. min. — see. Deg. min. sec. | hk. min. see. 
65 57 50 7 41 Qa. 68 19 50 7 47 09.0 
66 31 45 42 440 | 68 45 00 48 10.0 
66 58 00 43 49.7 69 Il 10 49 14.0 
67 26 40 44 59.5 | 69 34 25 50 =-:10.7 
67 40 00 45 55.7 1 70 00 00 51 13.4 
\ | \ 
Index error = + 30 sec. 
RESULT OF CALCULATION. 
ar eee se SSI SR SRR 
Mean time. Retard. | Longitude. 
h. min. see. he min, — see | Deg. min. sec. 
8 31 20 @ 44 517 | 118-8508 


on | 


ama ssrrelebr eee 


[ 174 } A02 


ENCAMPMENT ON A SMALL STREAM, BAST OF THE SIERRA NEVADA, 


Determination of latitude, Mpril 14, 1844——addi/vdes of Polaris 


OVSERVATIONS, 


Double altitudou Time of cloonometer 


Deg, min. ‘ h, min, ¢ 


A8 i) ih ‘ ! On 
ON i) ; {2 } 
68 Le ) 4 7 
63 [5 | 14 

’ 68 iy 
68 12 lv y { 
68 i hu \4 5% 
68 ) i” 40 | 
68 oo 25 21 AY 
68 2 ' 


Index error 


+ JO see, 


RESULT OF CALCULATION, 


| 
True altitude. | Mean time. Latitude, 
Deg. min. see min, see. Deg, min. see. 
34.0=Co05 ass 05 2h 35 86003 (OO 


Determination of longitude, April 14, (844—allitudes af ircturus. 


OBSERVATIONS, 


FIRST SERIES, SECOND SERIES. 
Double altitudes ot | ‘Time of chronometer. Double altitudes of | Time of chronometer. 
Arcturus. | Arcturus. | 
| | 
bones | 
Deg. min. see. he mine ser | Doge min. see. he mine see. 
62 16 15 7 26 590 | 64 42 40 7 32 53.7 
62 54 20 28) 30.0 | 6 26 BO | BL ARO 
63 24 (00 29 41.00 | 65 48 oO | 35 = 33.5 _ 
63 48 30 30 42.0 66 09 45 | 3626.0 
64 11 50 31 39.0 56 32 30 } 37 22.0 


Index error = ++ JC sec. 


RESULT OF CALCULATION, | 
Mean time. | Retard. | Longitude. 
| gs a aS ep Sl ao eee 
; ; | , Be 
h. min. — see. he mine see. | Deg. min. sec. F 
8 18 62 0 46 24.9 | lls 18) 09 
{ 


503 C174] 


INCAMPMENT AT ROCK SPRING, 


RRA NEVADA, 


of Polaris Determination of latitude, April 15, \844—allitude. af Polaris. 
OUSERVATIONS, 
peter 
Double altitudes of Polaris, Thue of chronometer, 
0%) Deg mine — see, he ming yee 
} 67 no p45) ‘ 2 or 
wo 67 uO om \4 to 
f 07 28 2h | lf Pa 
iw 07 N7 a0 18 7 
if ly Qh ou Yo hl 
64 
= cmamaies 
1 Index error of 20 see, 
Ou 
RESULT OF CALCULATION, 
True altitude, Mean time Latitude 
Latitude. Deg. min, ser hh. min, See, Deg. min, Sec. 
33 42 fi 4 oO lh 1 tl 29 


Os ou 


sof Ircturus Determination of longitude, April 15, 1844—altitudes of Arcturus. 
¢ . 


OBSERVATIONS. 


LIES. Double altitudes of Arcturus. | Time of chronometer. 
| 
‘ime of chronometer. Deg. min, — see. | h. min, sec. 
63 32 25 | 7 26 56.5 
fi4 12 5 27 31.0 
65 04 oO 29 © 36.0 
he min. — see. 65 50 Ov | ol 26,5 
7 32 53.7 66 Lt 20 | 32 23.0 
34 42.0 
35 33.5 as = =o = ae op eS arene eae eae 
36 26.0 : Index error == + 20 see, 
3722.0 
RESULT OF CALCULATION. 
poanee dae ada eicamnaa EE RE ee ee eae er 
Mean time. | Retard. Longitude. 
vongitude. h. mins See. he min, SECs Deg. min, — sec. 
eee ee. 8 16 07 | 0 46 43.4 118 20 00 
4 
min. see. ts = a aaa ee Se ee ee 
18 09 


nen 


a tahoe 


- 


48 


— 


— 
—_— 


/ 


ae 


-~ 
TT a i I I an, ett lee ree tt a a EU. 


ee ae 


IMAGE EVALUATION 
TEST TARGET (MT-3) 


MAZE Wid, Ws. 


[ 174] 504 


ENCAMPMENT AT ROCK SPRING. 
Determination of longitude, April 16, 1844—alliludes of the sun. 


OBSERVATIONS, 


ne 


FIRST SERIES, SECOND SERTES, 


es 


. . . | . . . 
Double altitudes of the | Time of chronometer. | Double altitudes of the | Time of chronometer, 
sun’s lower limb. sun's lower limb. 


Oa 


Deg. min. sec. he. mine see. || Dege min, see. h. min. — see. > 
69 09 40 7 $34 27.6 | 70 10 35 7 936 57.2 f 
69 23 40 35 = «01.0 70 20 35 37 =. 23.2 \ 
69 36 v0 35 33.2 7 31 15 37 «50.5 
69 47 60 36 02.3 70 45 10 38 24.6 4 
69 58 45 36 29.5 | 70 58 08 38 57.4 ) 


Index error — — 2 sec. 


} 
RESULT OF CALCULATION. 4 
eddie | —_—_—--——- 
Mean time. Retard. Longitude. _ 
in snc asc aeSemcle Cette oi leaden eee i 
h. min. see. h. min. — see. ; * 
8 23 39 | 0 46 56.3 il 
4 
—— ———— Fe 
Determination of latitude, April16, 1844—meridian altitudes of the sun. : 
OBSERVATIONS. % 
eg RAS aI ai 

_ Double altitudes of the sun’s lower limb. | Time of chronometer. 
Ho aa canara” a 
Deg. min. see. | h. = min. — see. 4 

130 44 00 | VW 06 03 — 
130 647 ~—«50 07 834 Fi 
130 50 30 | 10 03 a 
130 50 45 11 56 Wl 

130 50 45 | 13 07 . 7 
130 50 30 | 1412 ‘4 
130 50 00 | 15 2 ® 
130 49 20 | 16 06 
130 48 45 16 50 % 
130 47 40 17 36 ia 
130 45 30 18 = 558 id 

130 43 45 20 06 it 


. 


Index error == — 2 sce. 


se See ET 


- RESULT OF CALCULATION. 


ie 
5 
=. 
Comal 
ij 
a 
2 


True central altitude. Apparent time of transit. 


————— 


Deg. min. sec. h. min. see. 


Deg. min. sec. 
65 40 58 ll 613) S85 


34 41 56 


Mean latitude at this encampment 34 deg. 41 min. 42 sec. 


505 [174 ] 


ENCAMPMENT AT THE SPRING HEADS OF A SMALL STREAM AMONG THE 


FOOT HILLS . MOUNT: A 
udes of the sun, LLS OF THE MOUNTAIN 


Determination of longitude, Ipril 18, 1844--altitudes of the sun. 


OBSERVATIONS, 
SERIES. 


ee eee sere + eee ate — or — Ano ce ee cee ne ERS 


a 


Time of chronometer, 


| 

FIRST SERIES, | SECOND SERIES. 
| 
| 


Double altitudes of the 


Time of chronometer. | Double altitudes of the | Time of chronometer. 
sun’s lower limb. | 


sun’s lower limb, 


he. min. — see. 


7 36 57.2 | ae 
37 23.2 : ; | : ; 
37 50.5 q min. sec. | h. min. — see. Deg. min. sec. h. min. — see. 
38 24.6 5 58 06 40 «| % 16 44.0 56 3625 3 20 23.0 
38 57.4 ‘ 57 46 55 | 17 92.4 56 16 50 21 11.8 
57 31 50 | 18 09.0 | 56 04S 21 41.2 
ERE ee ts Sete ee 57 19 00 18 39.4 55 52 30 22 11.3 
57 04 20 19 143 55 39 ~=«50 22 43.0 


ee EE 


Index error = — 18 sec. 
Longitude. 


sac hater cients recto Res ears 


RESULT OF CALCULATION. 


| 
ey Mean time. | Retard, | Longitude. 
—— ff | eres . ecasasciae ands 
TH A h. min. sec, . min. sec. eg. min. sec. 
Utitudes af the sun. ‘ 4610) (14 0 50. 93.0 | We? 48) (8h 
iu | 
hronometer. r or ; . : ; 
sate { Determination of latitude, April 18, 1844—altitudes of Polaris. 
y 
Ne SC. a OBSERVATIONS. 
) 03 EES 
f 34 | want 
) 03 Double altitudes of Polaris. | Time of chronometer. 
| 56 uc 
3 07 ies | 
12 * Deg. min. — sec. | h. min. sec 
yd a 66 58 50 7 02 2 
; 06 3 66 58 10 03 59 
; 50 66 58 10 Of 8 
f 86 66 56 
} 53 
) 06 TO a OG. ae ag jo eg e. g < e 


Index error = — 18 sec. 


RESULT OF CALCULATION. 


Latitude. True altitude. Mean time. Latitude. 


Deg. min. sec. 


Deg. min. sec. h. min. sec. Deg. min. sec. 
34 41 56 


33 (27 22 7 55 00 34 = 27 03 


[174 J 506 
ENCAMPMENT ON THE MOHAHVE RIVER, ON THE SPANISH TRAIL FROY 
PUEBLO DE LOS ANGELES TO SANTA FE. 
Determination of longitude, April 21, 1844—altitudes of the sun, 

OBSERVATIONS. 


- a 


FIRST SERIES. | SECOND SERIES, 


Double altitudes of the | ‘Time of chronometer. | Double altitudes of the | ‘Time of chronometer, 


sun’s lower limb. (| sun's lower limb. 
sinister || ceniennaseatisiaisiasiniininetiigs 
| | 
Deg. min. see. he min. — see. Deg. mine seee | hy min, see. 
41 55 50 3. 64 47.5 | 40 40 45 | 3 57 SLB 
4l 37 30 65 31.0 || 40 28 15 | 58 19.8 
41 24 20 } 56 (OL. | 40 14 10 58 53.5 
41 12 00 56 33.0 || 39 36 10 | 59 37.2 
40 59 00 57 04.3 =| = 89 2920 ) 4 90 4% 
| 
|] Pn ey (eee eae 
Index error = — 15 sec. 
RESULT OF CALCULATION. 
ee . m deere 
Mean time. Retard. | Longitude, 
sos (iia pacman 
he min. sec. hb, amine — see. Deg. min. sec. 
4 5l 25 | 0 53 50.3 114 13 «OU 


Determination of longitude, April 21, 1844—allitudes of Arcturus. 


OBSERVATIONS. 


FIRST SERIES. SECOND SERIES. 
Double altitudes of | Time of chronometer. | Double altitudes of | Time of chronometer. 
Arcturus. Arcturus. 
| 
; ; ; | 
Deg. min. sec. h. min. — see. Deg. min. sec. he. min. — sec. 
65 23 10 6 59 49.0 67 27 00 | qT 04 49.0 
66 00 00 q Ol 15.7 67 49 25 05 42.4 
66 21 25 02 08.0 68 09 25 | 06 30.0 
66 41 45 02 57.4 | 68 28 45 | 07 16.7 
67 04 650 03 55.0 | 68 51 55 | 08 15.0 
| 
Index error = — 15 sec. 
RESULT OF CALCULATION. 
Mean time. Retard. Longitude. 


he = min. — see. 


7 58 02 


| 
| 
A. min. sec. 
0 53 45.9 


ner ee 


ENC 


Det 


\ISH TRAIL FROM 


ae 


les of the sun, 


| 
SERIES, 
TE 


Time of chronometer, 


he min. — see. 
3. «OT 61.3 


58 19.8 
58 53.5 
9 37,2 
4 90 425 


a eS, 


Longitude. 


po. min, sec. 
Wi 1 


es of Arcturus. 


SERIES. 


Time of chronometer. 


h. min. — sec. 
q 04 49.0 
05 42.4 
06 30.0 
07 16.7 
08 15.0 


Longitude. 


507 [ 174 ] 


ENCAMPMENT ON ‘THE MOHAHVE RIVER, ON THE SPANISH TRAIL FROM 
PUEBLO DE LOS ANGELES TO SANA FE, 


Determination of latitude, April 21, 1844—alliludes of Polaris. 


OBSERVATIONS. 


po eer on 


Double altitudes of Polaris. Time of chronometer. 


a a + ee | 


66 59 00 7 11 13 


| 
* | P 
Deg. mine see. h. min, Se. 
| 
| 


66 658 50 12 46 
66 57 50 | 14 43 
66 57 20 16 =02 
66 56 00 | ly 16 
66 55 LO | 19 = 02 
66 S54 380 | 20 32 
66 4 00 | 22 OL 
66 52 45 | 23. «35 
66 52 30 | 2 06 


ee nn —— ee ee ee 


Index error = — 10 sec, 


RESULT OF CALCULATION. 


True altitude. Mean time. Latitude. 


Deg. min. sec. h. min. — see. Deg. min. — see. 
33 26 21 8 j1 59 34 34 11 ‘ei 


Determination of longitude, April 21, 1844—dislance from moon’s first 
limb to Regulus. 


OBSERVATIONS WITH THE 


CIRCLE. 


Time of chronometer. Circle reading. 


he min. — see. Deg. min. — see. 


| 
| 
8s ol 2 | 135 34 50 


ae eS Ce nnURENE NS osc ea eon nn se en eS TED 


RESULT OF CALCULATION. 


i True distance. Mean time at Greenwich. Longitude. 


Deg. min. sec. he min. — sec. 
: 66 48 51 16 21 35.5 


[ 174] 508 


ENCAMPMENT ON SAME RIVER AS ON THE 21st. 


Determination of latitude, April 24, 1844—allitudes of Polaris, 


i ] 
OBSERVATIONS. ; 
Double altitudes of Polaris. ‘Time of chronometer. -— 
Deg. min. — see. he = omine — see. _ 

67 32 45 7 15 07 [ 
67 32 00 16 40 
67 31 10 18 09 

67 30 2 19 4l — 

67 30 00 2 08 
67 20 20 22 12 
67 2845 | 2387 
67 27 55 | 24 4l 
67 27 10 27 39 
67 26 15 28 46 


: Index error = — 10 sec, 
RESULT OF CALCULATION. 
True altitude. Mean time. Latitude. a 
Deg. min. — sec. h. min. sec, Deg. min. — sec. wens 
33 43 16 8 19 40 34 56 00 


Determination of longitude, April 24, 1844—allitudes of Arcturus, 


OBSERVATIONS. 

FIRST SERIES. SECOND SERIES. . 

Double altitudes of | Time of chronometer. Double altitudes of | Time of chronometer. J 

Arcturus. Arcturus. { 
Deg. min. see. he min. sec. Deg. min. sec. h. min. see. 
85 15 30 7 8 08.0 87 06 45 7 36 39.0 
85 46 45 33 24.0 87 28 10 37 33 
86 08 25 34 = 15.0 | 87 8648 = (25 38 =—-:19.6 
86 27 40 35 = 04.0 88 13 50 3922.5 
86 46 25 35 = 49.5 88 33 45 40 12.0 


hate 


Index error = — 10 sec, 


RESULT OF CALCULATION. 


1s Po remaster ncaa 


Mean time. Retard. Longitude. 


h. min. sec. h. min. — see. Deg. min. see. 
8 34 15 0 57 58.8 116 29 19 


21st, 
des af Polaris, 


ronometer, 


Latitude. 


————— 


leg. min, 
4 56 


sec. 
00 


ides of Arcturus, 


|) SERIES. 


Time of chronometer. 


h. min. see. 

7 36 39.0 

37s 3133s 

38 19.6 

39° 22.5 

40 12.0 

Longitude. 

eg. min. see. 
16 29 19 


eo ee 


509 


SCALP CAMP, ON THE SPANISH TRAIL. 


[174 ] 


Determination of longitude, «April 25, 1844—altitudes of Arcturus. 


OBSERVATIONS, 


pa ——— 


FIRST SURIRS. | SECOND SERIES, 


Double altitudes of | Time of chronometer. 
Arcturus, | 


Double altitudes of | Time of chronometer. | 


Arcturus. 


_—_—— 


Deg. min, see. | he min. — see Deg. min, see. | h, min, + see. 
78 #43 50 7 14.5 |! 80 47% (85 | 7 16 14.7 
79 «#17 10 12 344 | sl It 8600 17 13.6 
79 #41 45 13 33.7! SL 42 15 18 30.0 
80 03 45 14 28.0 | 82 10 30 19 40.0 
80 24) 15 1 «19.0 | 82 30 50 20 26.7 , 
|| tl 
—-! M 
[Index error == — 7 sec, ° i 
RESULT OF CALCULATION, \e 
= | : ah re we P 
Mean time. Retard, Longitude. i 
h. = min. — see. h. min. see. y 
8 15 ol 0 59 05.9 | A 


Immersion of « Cancri. 


ee ne eet a ee _ nee ee a 


Observed time. Longitude. 
he = min. — see. Deg. min, sec, 
10 57 41 116 =. 23 28 


} 


PEs EE A a I ar SO a ae ER sR ae a SS : 
- * . . ; ey . v a - 7 ae : s _— ~ 2 - 


f 174 J 


SCALP CAMP, ON THE SPANITSHE TRAIL, 


510 


Determination of latitude, April 25, 1844—allitudes af Polaris, 


Double altitudes of Polaria, 


Deg. min. 
OS 00 
67 49 
67 48 
07 a7 
67 AY 
7 56 
67 55 
67 55 
7 Nv 
iw) Wi} 


Delerminution af longitude, vipril 25, 184 


Double altitudes 


| 
' 
& a 
3h 4 
&5 ) 
x6 | 


Mean time. 


he min. 
12 14 


Sec. 


eee 


OBSERVATIONS, 


gee, h, 
ou 7 
30 

Ju 

20 

1 

40 

30 

10) 

no 

i) 


— 7 eee. 


Index error 


RESULT OF CALCULATION, 
! 
Mean time | 
| 
h. min, 9h 
Ss 30 1H 


GBSERVATIONS. 
of a Lyre, 


ia h, 


Index ero = — vi sec. 


RESULT OF CALCULATION. 


| 


Retard, 


| 
| he min, 
0 59 


| 
$eCs | 


14,4 


‘Time of chronometer. 


mins eee. 
24 Bb 
26 21 
yi) 02 
24) | 7 
40 6 
33 g5 
33 51 
fy) Oo 
B6 An 
us on 
Latitude, 
Dew. mein, 
34 13 


ime ol chronometer. 


“lial see 
12 ul.é 
13 L000 
14 5 
15 42.0 
Ls LL0 


Longitude. 


80. 


() 


2 


I—alliludes of « Lyre. 


EE 


a ee nn TS 


ee — 


v 


(les af Polaris, 


ronometer, 


ls eee. 


Latitude, 


les of a Lyre. 


ronometer. 


Longitude. 


511 [ 174] 


ENCAMPMENT AT HERNANDEZ SPRING, ? y { 


Determination of longilude, April 29, 1844—allitudes of Ireturus. 


OBSERVATIONS, 


Pinar SEUEHS, SECOND BEUTNS, 


Double altitudes of | Time of elronometer. Double altitudes of — ‘Time of chronometer, 
Aveturus, | Aveturus, 


Deg. mine sees | hi, min, see, Dove, mene wee. he ming see, 
oo 10 oo ‘ 33 R45 OY lh 8h 4 88 95.7 
96 36 WS 34 B06 | oy 387 BO | 30° BBS 
46 O08 30 BS 4h! us O02 oO | 10 35.2 
96 30 AO U6 And OS 20 40 AL 46,0 
G6 HTS) lh O47 Is.0 "8 Wi) no ie 51,6 


= 
_ 


Tides erro “+ LO see, 


Pes as 


RESULT OF CALCULATION, 


ee | 


4 LB 
‘ - i] 
Mean time. Retard. Lonvitude. a f 
eat 
=. SS a a = . iiainioaea Se ent ae it it 
i 
, , P aa \2 
he Meiibe eC. he Mine NEC. =e 
+ a he 
s 10 Le | OY 02.0 Hi i 
| 


{ 
j 
‘ 
—anneee 
Sac 
= son Semone 


Determination of latitude, April 29, US il-alliludes af Polaris. 


—— 


etal 


OBSERVATIONS, 


" 


Double altitudes of Polaris. Vime of chronometer, 


Lh Lv, 


mils 


GS 5S 45 j 1 14 
U8 ANT 1 51 2! ; 
i's aT a) i] 20 

ih : 


5G 


(is 


Tudex error = +- 10 see. 


RESULT OF CALCULATION, 


Mean time, Latitude. 


| 
‘ | 
True altitude. 


e | . 
Deg. min. — see. | he ming see. Deg. min, See. 


3k 27 38 8 55 O04 | 35 51 21 


wees 


Sat 


f 174 J 512 


INCAMPMENT AT DEEP SPRING HOLE, ON A RIVER WHICH LOSES ITSELP 
IN BANDS, 


Determination of latitude, May 1, 1844—altitudes of Polaris, 
OUSERVATIONS, 


Double altitudes of Polaris, Time of chronometer, 


Deg. mine — pee, 
6 wl 25 
69 30 40 
6v 30 i) 
6u 20 50 


| 
| 
| 
| homing — gee. 
| 

69 8 15 56 SOtC«O 


6 Au Os 


ow 27 ty) 
60 26 40 
69 25 45 
6v 25 20 
60 2 A0 


~~) 
- 
-_ 
= 
= 
z 


oe 


Index error = - 10 see, 


RESULT OF CALCULATION, 


| 
True altitude. | Mean time. Latitude. 
Deg. min. — see, | h. min. — see. Dig, min. — gee. 
34 437 | 8 ool BS 3 OSD 


Determination of longitude, May 1, 1844—alliludes of Arcturus. 
OBSERVATIONS. 


FINST SENTES. SECOND SERIES, 


Double altitudes of | ‘Time of chronometer. Double altitudes of =| Time of chronometer. 


Arcturus, Arcturus. 

Deg. min. see. he min, see. Deg. min. see. h. min. — see. 
89 07 30 7 0% 15.8 91 25 2 7 12) «67.0 
89 52 50 09 07.5 91 48 35 13 54,2 
90 15 00 10 (03.7 92 10 30 14 «49.5 
90 38 20 ll 00.6 | 92 3t 45 15 51.0 
9t OO 15 ll 65.5 | 92 59 0 | 16 2.0 

| 1 
— - ' - - . oe 
Index error = -- 10 sec. 
RESULT OF CALCULATION. 
Mean time. Retard. Longitude. 
PAS See eee ee Sant Cee [ Foe ak Nee Sea eee 
h. min. — see. h. min. see. 


8 17 45 1 05 22.5 


is 
' 


; 
— |_——__—_____ i 
| 


CH LOSES ITsetp 


sof Polaris, 


onometer, 


——-— 


Latitude. 


‘go mine — gee, 
35 58 io 


Ss Of Arcturus. 


SERIES, 


Time of chronometer. 


ae ence 


he min. — sec. 
7 12) «67.0 


13 54,2 
14 49.5 
15 51.0 
16 =§2.0 
i 
Longitude. 


ne ee ae ee 


EE TS 
ee —o 


ee. 


hy RRL CO SOOT re 


513 c 174 J 
ENCAMPMENT AT LAS VEGAS, (THE MARSHES.) 
Determination of longitude, May 3, 1844—altitudes of the sun. 
ONDSERVATIONS, 


oe et cee = 


Piney BHATKA, SKOOND GRATRA, 


ee 


| 
Double altitudes of the | Time of chronometer, | Double altitudes of the Time of chronometer. 
sun's lgwer limb. wun's lower limb, — | 


es Boe ocunenian = pineal ; — 


| 


Dex. mine see, | he mine tee, Deg. mine ser |) he min, tee, 
66 —S OO 45 3 12 O40 55 dd 00 3 15 51.0 
5606 10 | 12 6,2 55 17 80 | 16 11,0 
66 «#617 )~=—(«5O | 16) 40 55 U4 4S 16 = 42.6 
56 0300 1418S M4 40 40S 17-20 
65 38648 u5 | lt = =54.0 aA HH) 10 18 01.0 

cae s nepeniiteaned tampmanimd ema a Naa ee ee eee 
Index error = -- 10 seg, 
RESULT OF CALCULATION, 
Mean time, Retard. Longitude. 
qqEeeeece ce ee-oae--ee-e — a s _ ° | ——— a Y 

Ah, omin. ate, | hh. omin. gee. | 

4 22 68 | 1 07 48.2 | 
| 
' 


a - _ _ a ee oe 


Determination of latitude, May 3, 1844—altitudes of Polaris. 


OBSERVATIONS. 
| 
Double altitudes of Polaris, | Time of chronometer, 
Deg. min. — see. h. min, eee, 

69 40. ~—00 | an er | 
69 39 50 H 18 51 
69 39 56 20 04 - 
69 38 50 22 08 
69 38 20 | 23 22 
69 37 30 A «45 
69 37 2 26 27 
69 37 15 | 27 33 
69 36 10 29 19 
69 36 10 30 34 


Index error = +- 10 sec. 


RESULT OF CALCULATION. 


~ 


a ee ee ee 


True altitude. | Mean time. Latitude. 
Deg. min. sec. h. min. — sec. Deg. min. eee. 
. 8 47 46 8 31 60 10 20 


33 


— 


i 
Be 
a 


alg TH MIO 


apace 


as - 


= 


‘eave lies 
Pape 


am 


—— 


er 


[174 J 514 


ENCAMPMENT ON A BRANCH OF THE RIO VIRGEN, 
Determination of latitude, May 5, \844—<altitudes of Polaris. 


OBSERVATIONS. 
te ———EE -= 
Double altitudes of Polaris, Time of chronometer, 
Deg, mine see, | h. ming see, 
70 4M 20 6 40 24 
70 43 45 6 5 10 
70 42 Av 6 63 26 
7” 41 40 6) Mh BS 
70 43 00 | 6 56 21 
70 40 30 } 6 58 06 
70 3g 40 7 00 10 
70 8©=—89 10 | 7 oF 43 
70 38 30 7 O4 | 
70 3a 20 7 05 15 
nT it A TT 
Index error = + 10 sec. 
RESULT OF CALCULATION, 
a ———— ssiatiniaeeesiiaainani 
True altitude, Mean time, | Latitude. 
Deg. min. see. | h. mine see. | Deg. min, see, 
3 «(1918 | 8 O08 36 | 36388 


Determination of longitude, May 5, 1844—altitudes of « Virginis. 


OBSERVATIONS. 
Double altitudes of a Virginis. Time of chronometer. 
Deg. min. — sec. | h. min, — See. 
7 14 45 7 13 09.0 
71 38 10 14 49.6 
71 59 50 16 15.5 
72 19 20 | 17 A4.0 
72 37 35 | 19 05.0 
Index error = +- 10 sec. 
RESULT OF CALCULATION. 
Mean time. Retard. Longitude. 


he min. sec. he = min. sec. 
27 07 


| 
| 
i 
| 


sry ps Lean ea a 


GEN, 
Polaris, 


Latitude. 


» min, — see, 
38 56 


Yo Virgins. 


jometer, 
TS 


see. 
09.0 
49.6 
15.5 
44.0 
05.0 


SO ee a = 


en 


ssieddabaiias 
,ongitude, 


LT 


515 -  EIMy 
ENCAMPMENT ON THE RIO VIRGEN, 


Determination af longitude, May 6, 1844—allitudes of Arcturus. 


OBSERVATIONS. 
Double altitudes of Arcturus, Time of chronometer, 
Deg. ming ee, he ming see, 
a6 06 10 6 us 23.0 
a6 41 oO 34 650.0 
a7 10 00 uo 01,5 


Index error = + 10 see, 


RESULT OF CALCULATION, 


ee a ee —— + mee. - eR 


Mean time, Retard, Longitude, 
he mine — see, he mine — see, 
7 47 15 ! 12 30.5 
— a tee et ED 


Determination of latitude, May 6, 1844—allitudes of Polaris. 


OBSERVATIONS, 
, = iiss einpiiniaiaiaaticenie 
Double altitudes of Polaris. | Time of chronometer. 
Deg. min, — see, | h. min, see, 
70 41 30 6 54 30 
70 40 15 56 12 
70 39 45 57 55 
70 40 on 59 03 
rm!) 39 10 7 00 35 
40 38 40 02 48 
70 37 15 04 23 
70 37 20 06 24 
i0 «©3610 | 08 03 
70 35 55 09 21 


Index error = = 10 sec. 


RESULT OF CALCULATION. 


— 


True altitude. Mean time. Latitude. 
————$—$____+—___—— } 
Deg. min. sec. h. min. — sec. Deg. min. see, 


3 18 vl 8 14 24 36 39 33 


c 174) 516 
; ENCAMPMENT ON THE RIO VIRGEN. 
Determination of longitude, May 7, 1844—allitudes of the sun. 


OBSERVATIONS, 


FIRST SERIES. SELOND SERIES. 


Double altitudes of the 


Time of chronometer. |; Double altitudes of the | 'Time of chronometer. 
sun’s lower limb. 


sun’s lower limb. 
i 


| 
| 
aa}: ad PED, | SER ee eee SRR Fee eee Se Le 
[ 
| 


Deg. min, see. h. min, see. Deg. ming see. h. min, — see. 
43 34 50 5 44 23,2 45 00 00 5 47 = «55.4 
43 50 00 45 01.4 45 Ii 15 48 24.3 
44 10 00 & 60.5 45 26 15 49 02.2 
44 24 -10 | 46 27.0 | 45 38 10 49 31.8 
44 41 45 j 47 10.0 45 49 35 50 00.0 
Mais es en erica Sed esc ecnh 
Index error == -- 10 sec. 
RESULT OF CALCULATION. 
Mean time. Retard. Longitude. 
h. min, sec. h. min, sec. 
6 59 58 l 12 15.5 


er a — rn a wenn ee oo ee tenn 


SECOND ENCAMPMENT ON THE RIO VIRGEN. 


Determination of longitude, May 8, 1844—altilude of Arcturus. 


OBSERVATION. 
Double altitude of Arcturus. | Time of chronometer. 
Deg. min. — see. he min. see. 
103 15 10 | 7 07 02 
Index error = +- 10 sec. 
RESULT OF CALCULATION. 
Mean time. | Retard. | Longitude. 
he min. — see. Ah, min. sec. | 
8 21 43 1 4 41.3 | 


oR EES 


rl ease etn as gd tg FAR met 


yt Series 


vt iar le aR ta 


| 517 [ 174 ] 


baie. SECOND ENCAMPMENT ON THE RIO VIRGEN. 


Determination of latitude, May 8, 1844—altitudes of Polaris. 


OBSERVATIONS, 
oneness ——— ee ee ee i. S — 
aa Double altitudes of Polaris. | Time of chronometer. 
chronometer. 5 eS ae oo = | oo Se a Sh 
; | 
Deg. min, see. h. min, — see. 
<a 70 58 50 | 7 11 36 
’ 70 58 40 | 13 08 
"a? (85.4 70 5850 | 14387 
49 02.2 7 8658 = 10 | Ve 8 | 
49 31.8 ite arches Acai saa a ana aoe ee es 
50 00.0 Index error = -- 10 sec. 
RESULT OF CALCULATION. 
True altitude. | Mean time. Latitude. 
a | ra seca teaitaceestten| Sataasaadehgiinebes nical 
ude. i Deg. min. sec. | h. min. — see. Deg. min.” see. 
| 35 «27 BR | 8 29 09 | 36 «5308 
—_—-- | | 
e e J e 
meneame Determination of longitude, May 9, 1844—altitudes of the sun. 
pH OBSERVATIONS. 
cturus. fi FIRST SERTES. SECOND SERIES. 
: —|-——----—- a 
4 Double altitudes of the | Time of chronometer. |; Double altitudes of the | Time of chronometer, 
; sun’s lower limb. sun’s lower limb. 
i Deg. min. sec. h. min. see. Dez. min, sec. h min. sec. 
4 54 44 10 6 O08 27.4 65 ~=sb 1 10 6. Il 12.8 
4 54 59 26 09 04.0 56 02 30 11 42.0 
s 55 13 10 09 37.8 66 11 55 12 04.4 
sinaie ieee aaes 3 55 27 35 10) 17.0 56 21 20 12 29.4 
|} 55 39 40 10 47.0 66 29 40 12 = 51.3 
: | . -- _ 
a Index error = — 2 sec. 
a 
: . a RESULT OF CALCULATION. : 
de. ; a eer sate! 
- % Mean time. Retard. Longitude. . 
t 
5 
le 
‘ h. min. sec. h. min. sec. ? 
F 7 2% 2 1 14 29.3 
| 
{ 


518 


, THIRD ENCAMPMENT ON THE RIO VIRGEN. 
Determination of latitude, May 9, 1844—alltitudes of Polaris. 


OBSERVATIONS. 
Double altitudes of Polaris. Time of chronometer. 
Deg. min. sec. h. min. see. 5 
1 55 10 7 25 42 
70 55 15 26 66 
70 55 50 28 12 
70 55 00 29 42 
70 64 30 | 30 = BA 
70 54 30 3158 
70 54 30 33 17 
70 #54 10 340 87 
70 53 10 | 36 ll 
70 63 20 | 37 2 
| - 
Index error = — 2 sec. 
RESULT OF CALCULATION. 
True altitude. | Mean time. Latitude. ! 
| 
Deg. min. sec. h. min. — sec. Deg. min. sec. 
35 25 53 8 45 59 36 53 40 


ENCAMPMENT ON SANTA CLARA FORK OF THE RIO VIRGEN. 
Determination of latitude, May 10, 1844—altitudes of Polaris. 


OBSERVATIONS. 


Double altitudes of Polaris. Time of chronometer. 


eee. 


| . CCe 
71 29 45 | 7 16 36 ; 
71 29 20 | 17 38 5 
71 "29 40 | 19 49 
7 2 30 20 56 YF 
71 28 50 23 06 j 
71 28 30 24 39 | 
71 27 45 25 49 hi 
71 27 30 27 0s 
71 27 += 30 28 26 


50 


RESULT OF CALCULATION. 
OO rr 


True altitude. Mean time. Latitude. 


. 


os TI i ii age’ Leo cha 


’ Polaris. 


a 


noter. 


Latitude. 


— aa 


min.  &8€C. 
53 40 


O VIRGEN. 
s of Polaris. 


pnometer. 


Latitude. 


TS er ae Se 


519 [ 174] 
ENCAMPMENT AT SANTA CLARA FORK OF THE RIO VIRGEN. 


Determination of longitude, May 11, 1844—altitudes of the sun. 
OBSERVATIONS. 


Double altitudes of the sun’s lower limb. Time of chronometer. 


Deg. min. see. he min. — see. : 
67 10 15 3 08 24.6 
56 27 40 10 12.2 
66 06 55 ll 02.0 


RESULT OF CALCULATION, 


ne ana 


Mean time. Retard. 


—__e_—_—_—_—_—_————— ee | 


Longitude. 


ENCAMPMENT AT VEGAS DE SANTA CLARA. 
Determination of longitude, May 12, 1844—altitudes of the sun. 


OBSERVATIONS. 


| 
| 


FIRST SERIES. | SECOND SERIES. 


Double altitudes of the | Time of chronometer. 


Double altitudes of the 
sun’s lower limb. 


sun’s lower limb. 


\ 
| Time of chronometer. 
| 


Deg. min. sec. h. min. sec. Deg. min. sec. 


55 20 45 3 #13 11.0 54 09 00 3 16 11.3 
55 05 10 13 50.2 | 53 58 30 16 39.3 
54 5) 26 14 24.8 53 49 10 17 02.2 
54 38 20 14 57.4 53 39 15 1% 27.5 
54 24 50 15 29.4 53 27 40 17 ~=—-57.0 


Index error = -++- 15 sec. 


RESULT OF CALCULATION. 


Mean time. Retard. Longitude. 
h. min. sec. h. min. — sec. 
4 32 22 { 16. 38.0 


2 See 


ee a 


f 1744 520 
: ENCAMPMENT AT VEGAS DE SANTA CLARA. 


Determination af latitude, May 12, 18144—alliludes of Polaris, 


OBSERVATIONS. 


Double altitudes of Polaris. Time of chronometer. 


ne ~- 


Deg. min, — see. 
72 05 30 
05 
Of 


Index error = + 15 sce. 


RESULT OF CALCULATION. 


aoe eases swan enenceeeneetine 


| 
True altitude. | Mean time. Latitude. 
eee | ee 


Deg. min. sec, A min, see. Deg. min. sec. 
36 00 45 8 33 33 37 28 28 


Determination of longitude, May 14, 1844—altitudes of the sun. 


OBSERVATIONS. 


1] % ” ae 


'| 
FIRST SERIES. , | SECOND SERIES. 


Double altitudes of the | Time of chronometer. | Double altitudes of the | Time of chronometer. 
sun’s lower limb. |} sun’s lower limb. 


Deg. min. sec. h, min. sec. 
47 27 ~=630 5 32.0 
47 42 30 10.5 48 45 00 46 49.0 
47 55 45 13.2 48 66 15 47 16.7 
48 08 00 13.7 | 49 07 00 47 43.6 

48 19 40 44.5 49 19 20 48 14.8 


| 
| 
| 


Deg. min. see. Ah. min. see. 
48 33 10 5 46 17.4 


| 
| 
| 
| 
| 
| 
| 
| 


—————_—_-—- 


Index error = + 7 sec. 


RESULT OF CALCULATION. 


Mean tine. Retard. Longitude. 


. 


of Polaris, 


Se ee one ete 


ometer, 


Latitude. 
eset Se 


min, see. 
28 28 


sof the sun. 


IES. 


ime of chronometer. 


h. min. see. 


5 46 17.4 
46 49.0 
47 16.7 
47 43.6 
48 14.8 


ES 


ngitude. 


—— 


es 


Sct Ai ee th EC 


521 [ 174 ] 


ENCAMPMENT ON A FINE ROLLING PRAIRIE, AT THE SPRING-IEAD OF A 
TRIBUTARY TO SEVIER LAKE, 


Determination of latitude, May 19, 1844—altitudes of Polaris. 
OBSERVATIONS. 


ee EE — 
—— er ae —- a ae eso 


Double altitudes of Polaris. Time of chronometer. 


ee ees 


Dee, wine ste. \ he mine see. 
V u5 45 7 43 07! 
73 36 00 44 26 
W3 35 50 


73 36 KO 51 11 
73 36 30 52 55 
73 36 50 55 09 
73 36 35 57 45 
73 36 40 59 27 
73 37 10 8 02 53 
ee ee es ee = es ! - - -_ - - — - — ~-— _ eee ee 
Index error =: -+- 10 sec. 
RESULT OF CALCULATION, 
True altitude. Mcan time. Latitude. 
| 
cnn aie inatipoaraesoaia seatesntaameacestee — | —————-$ vaapeassctcnaneaiaaniallomnal 
Deg. min. see. he min. sec. | Deg. min. sec. 
36 47 —( 9 15 654 | 38 «18 20 


Determination of longitude, May 19, 1844—altitudes of « Lyre. 
OBSERVATIONS. 


FIRST SENIES. SECOND SERIES. 


Double altitudes of | Time of chronometer. Double altitudes of Time of chronometer. 


a Lyre. a Lyre. 

Deg. min. sec. h. min. see. Deg. min. sec. h. min. see. 
62 36 50 8 06 59.0 64 33 50 8 12 31.0 
63 00 20 0s 05.0 64 53 30 13 =. 27.0 
63 23 =v 09 09.6 (5 12 60 14 22.0 
63- 48 10 1021.0 65 33 10 15 17.0 
64 11 35 11 (27.5 65 51 50 16 10 

Thermometer 40°. 
"ndex error = -+- 10 sec. 
RESULT OF CALCULATION. 
Mean time. Retard. Longitude. 
h. min. see. h. min. see. 


1 22 44.3 


rr RR CR SE PP ES DST 


C174 3 522 
ENCAMPMENT ON SEVIER RIVER. 
Determination of latitude, May 23, 1844—altitudes of Polaris, 


OBSERVATIONS. 
Double altitudes of Polaris. Time of chronometer. 

Deg. min. — sec. h. min. — sec. 

7 45 10 7 46 13 

75 45 20 48 20 

75 45 20 | 50 07 

75 44 50 Sl 32 

75 44 20 | 54 13 

Index error «= +- 7 sec. 
RESULT OF CALCULATION. 
True altitude. Mean time. Latitude. 

Deg. min. sec. h. min. see. Deg. min. sec. 
3 51 18 9 15 30 39 22 19 


Determination of longitude, May 23, 1844—altitudes of « Lyrez. 


9 26 58 


OBSERVATIONS. 
. 
FIRST SERIES. | SECOND SERIES. 
| Eee reEee 
Double altitudes of | Time of chronometer | Double altitudes of | Time of chronometer. 
a Lyre. | a Lyre. 

Deg. min. sec. h. min. sec. | Deg. rin. sec. h. min. see. 
67 15 26 7 58 17.0 | 68 16 = =610 8 01 08.5 
67 37 20 69 175 | 68 36 15 02 05.0 
67 56 20 8 00 11.0 68 55 10 02 58.4 

\| 
ragga a as ae 
Index error = ++ 7 sec. 
RESULT OF CALCULATION. 
Mean time. Retard. | Longitude. 
| a 
he. min. _ see. he. min. _ see. | 


Del 


, 
| 
{ 
* 
F 
4 
: 
i 


a 


ship aiamtiege oS 


523 c 174 J 
‘ ENCAMPMENT ON THE FIRST STREAM OF UTAH LAKE. 


es OS Polaris, 
> Delermination of latitude, May 24, 1844—Spica Virginis in the me- 
‘ ridian, 
wnometer, OBSERVATIONS. 
a 
+ Bee, 
t 13 Double altitudes of Spica Virginis. Time of chronometer. 
20 a 
»D = 07 Sr. 
32 oe: min, see. h. min. see. 
13 7 34—Ss«d 7 20 38 
79 #37 #800 21 
——.., ™ 389 10 22 «54 
79 #42 05 Dy a | 
79 44 10 25 23 
79 #45 50 26 86.26 
79 «#47 = «(16 27049 
79 #49 30 29 «(12 
Latitude. 79 50 50 30 22 
i 79 #52 30 3207 . 
es 79 658 30 3325 
. min. 1% 64 15 34 «36 
i ae 79 54 30 35 49 
79 54 2 36 559 
79 55 10 3380s 
79 «#55 = 05 39S 4 
79 #64 40 40 654 
79 54 10 42 ol 
2s 0, ‘ 719 53 15 4315 
Yo Lyre, 79 62 05 44 29 
79 «8681 )~—(00 46 1 
———— A cr = 7 
RIES. Index error = + 5 sec, 
acct Strt, 


ime of chronometer, RESULT OF CALCULATION. 


True altitude. Apparent time of transit. Latitude. 


Deg. min. sec. he min. — see. Deg. min. sec. 
02 58.4 39 66 21 7 388 27 39 4237 


ngitude, ¥ 
eae 


EE Sine rere EEL 2 
a aie 


Pee Bee a 


~ as 


C 174) 524 


ENCAMPMENT ON TILE FIRST STREAM OF UTAH LAKE, 


Determination of latitude, May 24, 1844—allitudes of Polaris, 


OBSERVATIONS, - 
Double altitudes of Polaris, Tune of chronometer, 
ee een . - LL | Oe _ ee Doubl 

Deg. min, — see, he ming see. 

76 24 40 7 60 41 

76 25 00 52 07 

76 24 = 26 53 61 

76 «35S | 54 CCD 

76 25 15 | 57 03 


| 


ee 
Index crror w= + 5 see, 


RESULT OF CALCULATION, 


e True altitude. Mean time. Latitude. 
Deg. min. see. h. min. — gee. Deg. min. see. 
38 ll 4 9 20 64 39 41 52 


7 scale seaidbcaieiciiseenchtib citeiahanin scans papel isin asemeeatesieatepe beanie ho tageetengttaiad eencinipgimaesisiaauniiasamijeaatotia 
| 


Mean latitude 39 deg. 42 min. 15 sec. 


, - Determination of longitude, May 24, 1844—altitudes of « Lyre. De je 
: OBSERVATIONS. 
= 
PIRST SERIES. | SECOND SERIES. : I 
Se ae ee eee esinaiig  Daige a c | 
: , lec : -_--- 
Double altitudes of a | Time of chronometer. || Double altitudes of a | Time of chronometer. ’ 
Lyre. | Lyre. 4 
| i 
—|j— lRevenerarenncnen arsueeie 
Deg. min, sec. h. min, see, Deg. min. sec. h. min. see. i 
710 08 25 8 00 54.4 71 10 00 8 03 48.5 ‘ 
70 31 10 o 590 || v1 30. 35 04 47.0 : 
70 49 50 02 50.7 | 71 #49 «45 05 41.2 
Sean 40°, ryt Ls 
i Index error == -+- 5 sec. ‘ 
2 RESULT OF CALCULATION. 


a oe — 


metianes @ 


Longitude. 


525 [174] 


, ENCAMPMENT ON A RIGHT-HAND BRANCH OF SPANISH FORK, 
rAH LAKE, 


des of Polaris Determination of longitude, May 27, \844—allitudes Of o Lyra. : ; 1 i 


OBSERVATIONS, 


- es 


° : —_—— | as - PR) 
FINST OERIES, | AKLCOND SEATS, , 7 8 | 
‘hronometer, i ‘ i 
ae SS eee nea meee . . -- - - oe ESE Care’ 
| ay 
ee F ie 
. : Double altitudes of | Time of chronometer, | Double altitudes of | ‘Time of chronometer. 2a i 
iis see, a Lyre. | a Lyre. ae | ' 
11) 41 } 
52 07 | = s rc | - — ‘ i 
+ 61 Deg. min. see. he mine see. || Deg, min, wee, | oe oming ee, . ik 
+ 59 57. 04s 7 O07 4756 | bs 30 45S 7 12 26.6 
03 57 26 60 08 600 | 59 00 00 13 27.4 
: 67 «647 —~=—20 09 51.0 59 16 40 | 4 14.6 
68 6003~—=(«B0 10 = 40.0 659 32 00 15 00.0 
68 19 45 1k 287.4 |! 59 «6560 hO15 15 §=65.0 i 
teeth tees peace arena Berea NEPATE RE Oe 
_ ae Index error we -- 5 sec. a 
Latitude, RESULT OF CALCULATION. 
TT eee " nivtaaliaiphatseesqstnantl enisiaiabamnnciaioaaiobes sissies isetbeaeecbalaaetiiaaainiatiginaniniay 6 4 ; ] 
‘ke. min. — gee. ; | : mY 4 
9 41 58 Mean time. Retard. | Longitude. i | 
eee q a if 
kh. min. sec, | h, min, sec. y 
1 29 41.6 ( 
les of a Lyre. 
, OBSERVATIONS. 
ERIES 7 Sat at eee te ae oe 


Double altitudes of Spiea Virginis. Time of chronometer. ; 


Time of chronometer. 


Deg. min. — sec. h. min. see. 
79 10 10 7 20 34 od 


i ri. i i 


oe 79 #10 810 22 05 » 
h. min. see. 79 = 10 15 | 23 = .20 § 
8 03 48.5 79 10 35 | 24 49 i 
04 «47.0 79 09 #50 | 26 48 qd 
05 41.2 79 09 2% | 28 04 t 
Le ee ee } ; 
Index error = -+- 5 sec. a 
RESULT OF CALCULATION.  e 
a sie aoa ate Sc oe | 
ee True altitude. Apparent time of transit. Latitude. i 
Longitude. dl EPR RON Da ee rr es Path MERSIN Re es on 
$$$ Deg. min. sec. h. min. see. Deg. min. see. ¥ 
39 «384 (06 7 2&4 06 40 04 58 F 


es RR RESETS One: eR ee A EERE AOE = RR RSS nN OE ENR ED 


mS 
— Se ee 
a a o aia 

_ 


a 


eer 
‘ 


C174) 526 
ENCAMPMENT ON A RIGHT-HAND BRANCH OF SPANISH FORK, 


Determination of latitude, May 27, 1844—altitudes of Polaris, 
OBSERVATIONS. 


| 


ee, 


Double altitudes of Polaris. | Time of chronometer, 


ree wees ee ae | oe ee ee eee ee ee 


Deg. min. see, | Ah. min, see, 
77 09 1S 7 35 38 
77 08 40 | 36 58 


17 08 40 38 06 
77 09 10 39 20 
77 09 20 40 26 


| 
| 


‘Thermometer 40°, 
Index error « -}- 5 sec, 


RESULT OF CALCULATION, 


enn _-—- adn oo - - —o 


Mean time. pete 


(a a a a 


True altitude. | Latitude. 


— --—— -- a ee oe ee, 


| 

| 
Deg. min, — see. | h. min, — vee. Deg. min. — see. 
38 33 21 | i) 07 47 40 04 03 


me ne —--— -+---— —EEEE 


Mean latitude 40 deg. 4 min. R75 sec, 


ENCAMPMENT AT THE HEAD OF SPANISH FORK. 
Determination of latitude, May 28, 1844—altiludes of Polaris, 


OBSERVATIONS. 


Double altitudes of Polaris, Time of chronometer. 


a ND 


Deg. mine — see. he min. — See. 


76 50 10 7 08 30 
76 50 00 Ov 40 
76 50 10 10 51 


76 50 00 
76 50 00 
76 49 50 
76 50 20 
76 50 20 


| 
| 

762 49~—C(«*O | 1287 
| 

76 «50—(«10 


eee ree 


Index error «= -- 8 sec. 


RESULT OF CALCULATION. 


True altitude. Mean time. Latitude, 


—_ 


Deg. min. — sec. he min. — see. Deg. min. — ste. 
38 23 52 8 45 32 39 55 11 


a 


— eee 


PANISH FORK, ENCAMPMENT AT 'THE HEAD OF SPANIBH FORK, 
Determination of longitude, May 28, 1844—allitudes of « Lyra. 
des of Polaris, ONSERVATIONS. 
Ee vIneT senIEO, HECOND SERIES, 
hronometer. a incest caning a } 
Nc, Double altitudes of — Timo of chronometer. | Double altitudes of | Time of chronometer. : 
P a a Lyre. a Lyre, 5 { 
: n, ° 
1 38 | —_—_—— ee i] 
36 a Deg. mine s0e h. mine — see. Deg. min, see. he min, see. 
ae 64 hi 65 39 «30 7 8 16.0 ' 
o>. oe 64 5080 26° (M4 65 69 40 29 «13,0 Me 
40 65 20 00 2718.5 66 18 46 30 «10,0 4 
TT | 
saeeaeelaat tied tdci Ee ae eee eee 
Thermometor 42°, { 
Index error « + 8 sec, 
— — RESULT OF CALCULATION, : 
4 d . oy 8, - : - Ts A 
anata Mean time. Retard, Longitude, 
Deg. min, See : rn i oo. = f 
40 04 03 min, see. he mine see, | 
t 


SH FORK. 


tudes 


ee een ee 


of chronometer. 


———— 
Le ee 


min. 
08 
ov 
10 
12 
13 
15 
17 
19 
20 
21 


Deg. min, see. 


39 55 11 


527 [174] 


8 58 24 I 30 44.4 


eee — — —— a ee a em egp © 


' 
ENCAMPMENT AT THE HEAD OF UINTAH RIVER. , 


of Polaris Determination of latitude, May 29, 1844—altitudes of Polaris. 


*) OBSERVATIONS, 


AI 
a nn ee j 


Double altitudes of Polaris. | Time of chronometer, 


ee 


ce en eee ne a ee ee 


Deg. min, see. | h. min, see. ; 
47 00 10 7 

V7 00 00 12 17 
{ 10 


a ER Se a 
Thermometer 46°. 
Index error = -+ 5 sec, 


RESULT OF CALCULATION. 


ee wees oe ae eee eee 


enema see ae ae 


Latitude. True altitude. Mean time. Latitude. 


meet 5 
mids! a= 


Deg. min. sé h. min. — sec. Deg. min. — sec. 
38 385 8 50 24 40 00 07 


<figeete st 
e ees 


— 


C174] 528 
ENCAMPMENT AT THE HBAD OP UINTAH RIVER. 


Determination of longitude, May 29, 1844—allitudes af « Lyra, 


ONSERVATIONS, 


Pinhet sn nine, I ARCOND HERRERA, 
imei | 
Double altitudes of | Time of chronometer, | Double altitudes of | Time of chronometar, 
a Lyrm, a Lyre, 

ere ee =- - — ——y 

Deg. min, see. he min, see. | Dig, ming nee | he min, — we, 

57) 38S 6 68 44,0 OF 16 7 #O8 11S 

57) 6680 69 5 | 509 «44 OW 06 10.0 

68 430 7 OF 120 || oo 806) (1S on 12.0 


| 
'\ 


Index error ee ++ 5 wee, 


RESULT OF CALCULATION, 


A 


<0 aa | | 
Mean time. | Retard, Longitude, 
= | 
he = =omin, see. | he omin, nee, | 
8 35 02 | 1 98 27.6 | 


| 
| | 
—— a a eS TR TD 


ENCAMPMENT ON DUCHESNE FORK. 


Determination of latitude, May 30, 18441—allitudes of Spica Virginis, 


near the meridian. - 
OBSERVATIONS, 

lai es 

Double altitudes of Spica Virginis. Time of chronometer, 
a ee —| sista 

Deg. min. see. h. mine — eee. { 
78 36 30 7 16 44 
78 a4 45 | 18 06 


' 
ee 


Index error = -+- 5 sec, 


RESULT OF CALCULATION, 


True altitude. Apparent time of transit. | Latitude. 
qme oar eoeETenD aapens~oa 00 a eee ete eee cee apenemenenee aaa rane eer! i 
Deg. min. sec. h. min. see. | Deg. min. sec. | 
39 200 7 08 6&2 | 40 18 47 | 
inane idaeasncapeacies ate cae aegis Eero cerns © i 


ree TT 


529 [ 174] 


VER. ENCAMPMENT ON DUCHESNE PORK, 
des af « Lyra, Determination of longitude, May 30, 1844—altitudes of « Lyrw, 
OBSERVATIONS. , | 
“a _—_ - - ——— ; : 
OP RIRS, FIRST SHATES, FRC OND SRUTES, : 
| Time of chronometer, Double altitudes of Time of chronometer, Double altitudes of ‘Time of chronometer, . ' 
a Lyre, a L fr, $ ‘ 
: ye 
| h. min, see, Deg. min, we. | A, min, ote Dew. mine see, Ah, mine gee, ' 
| 7% O08 Th a L) 7 2 Mo} 660 6M BO i; 8 2870 ad 
06 10.0 oo «6080 23 «66.5 70 oO OO 2 8 6a10 i 
| on $190 66 «5S 25 «618.6 70 2he 60 30s 42,0 i 
68 «(65 OO 26 © 860 7 42 O08 *" at 9h Pi 
nats 69 14 80 27194 7 8 4 8 a2 10,3 " 
| | ' I 
Index Ci2OF ae 5 nec, ' 
Longitude, RESULT OF CALCULATION, 
>< + —— ne ee ee - - - . - _—— - - A . 
Mean time. Retard, Longitude. ; 
} 
= he min, — see. he min, gee, 
9 oO 57 1 34 07,9 bad i 
of Spica Virginis Immersion af 5 Seorpii. a 
saianescitciasinlicandloatsictn . ————— — 
Observed time. Longitude, 
hronometer, he min. — see, Deg. min. see. 
9 00 39 112 18 30 


n. eee, 
5 44 
} 06 


Sr 
Latitude. 
Sr cna . 


leg. min. sec. 
40 18 47 


lee 


oes 


eee 


OE TT — 
SS Se a 


4 


i 
if 
iq 
| 
| 


ne eee 


[ 174 J 530 


ENCAMPMENT ON DUCHESNE FORK. 
Determination of latitude, May 30, 1844—altiludes of Polaris. 


OBSERVATIONS. 
Double altitudes of Polaris. Time of chronometer. 

Deg. min. see. he min. — see, 
77 41 00 7 36 32 
77 40 50 37 58 
77 40 25 39 27 
77 41 15 41 2 

77 40 50 2 39 
77 41 30 44 04 
77 41 50 45 30 
77 42 15 46 37 
77 41 40 47 48 
77 42 20 49 01 

os ~Fhhennometer 48°, 
Index error = +- 5 sec. 
RESULT OF CALCULATION. 
True altitude. Mean time. | Latitude. 
Deg. min. — sec. he min. — see, | Deg. min. — see. 


38 49 32 9 16 14 | AU 18 58 


1 


Mean latitude 40 deg. 18 min. 52sec, 
AT UINTAH FORT. 
Determination of longitude, June 3, 1844—allitudes ofa Lyre. 


OBSERVATIONS. 
FIRST SERIES. SECOND SERIES. 
Double altitudes of | Time of chronometer. Double altitudes of | Time of chronometer. 
a Lyra. a Lyre. 

Deg. min. sec. he min. sec. || Deg. min. see. he min. — see. 
65 58 30 6 57 ~ 55.0 67 31 40 7 O2 26.0 
66 20 30 59 00.0 |) 67 49 00 03 14.0 
66 41 10 59 59.6 68 07 25 04 08.2 
67 00 20 7 OO 54.5 68 24 15 04 56.4 
67 15 10 | Ol 37.6 | 68 52 2 06 18,0 

| | 
Index error = + 6 gec. 
RESULT OF CALCULATION. 
aap acacia ce mees ei oe ices Seen eee 
Mean time. Retard. Longitude. 


| 
ees 


he min. sec. h. min. sec. 
8 39 08 ] 37 «05.5 


of Polaris, 


ometer. 


ee 


Latitude. 


min. — see. 
18 58 


s ofa Lyre. 


LIES. 
TS 


ime of chronometer. 


eS 


he min. — see. 


7 O02 26.0 
03 14.0 
04 08.2 
04 56.4 
06 18,0 


A 


ongitude. 


S$ $$ ee 


53 1 


AT UINTAH FORT. 


[174] 


Determination of latitude, June 3, 1844—altiludes of Polaris. 


OBSERVATIONS. 


ee lee 
| 


Double altitudes of Polaris. Time of chronometer. 
Deg. min. — see, h, min. — see. 
77 55 20 7 09 58 
77 55 30 11 17 
77 55 45 12 27 
77 55 40 13 43 
77 55 45 14 46 
77 55 20 15 49 
77 56 20 16 53 
77 55 50 17 57 
77 56 10 18 54 
77 56 00 19 47 


Thermometer 58°. 


Index error = -- 6 sec. 


RESULT OF CALCULATION. 


True altitude. Mean time. Latitude. 
Deg. min. — sé. h. mins — see. Deg. min. see. 
38 56 44 8 52 14 40 27~— 45 


a a en = oe ee 


22S 


en 


ce a 


E 174 ] 532 
AT UINTAH FORT. 
Determination of longitude, June 4, 1844—altitudes of the sun. 


OBSERVATIONS. 


ree —-~ — —_ - - eee, 


FIRST SERIES, | SECOND SERIES. 


_ eee wc ED 


Time of chronometer. Double altitudes of the | Time of chronometer, 
sun’s lower limb. 


Double altitudes of the 
son’s lower limb. 


mre a ne | ne 


Deg. min. sec. | he min, see, | Deg. min. see. h, min. — see. 
52 18 65 | 6 25 390 53 30 00 h 28 48.5 
52 34 8hCSd 26 20.3 53 «4600 29° 30.4 
62 46 00 26 8 ©=663.5 53 57 25 30 01.0 
62 59 35 277.0 54 16 §=50 30) 48.5 
53° 16 = 45 28 1160. 54. 2 30 3k 25.3 

Index error = -+- 5 sec. 
RESULT OF CALCULATION. 
Mean tine. Retard. | Longitude. 
he min. sec. | hk. min. see. | : 
7 #05 43 | 1 87 16 | 
ie +  e a See ae Cm eee 
Immersion of Jupiter's first satellite. 
Observed time. | Mean timo. Longitude. 


en 


{ 
h. min. — see. | h. min. — see. Deg. min. — see. 
0 57 05.540. m. | 2 34 14.2a.m. 109 56 42 


Of the sun. 


IES. 


ey 


ime of chronometer, 


ne eee Qe ee 


h. min. — see. 


5 28 48.5 
29 30.4 
30 01.0 
30 48.5 
3k =. 25.3 
ongitude. 
Longitude. 
min. see. 
56 42 


533 [ 174] 
ENCAMPMENT ON ASHLEY’S FORK. 
Determination of longitude, June 5, 1844—allitudes of a Lyre. 


OBSERVATIONS. 
LLL LL LLL 
FINST SERIES. { SECOND SERIES, 
‘ . | ogve 
Double altitudes of | Time of chronometer. Double altitudes of Time of chronometer. 
a Lyre. H a Lyre, 

R = i 
Deg. min. sec. | hy min. sec. || Deg. min. see. h. min, — see. 
67 O09 30 6 51 19.0 i 69 49 30 6 58 59.7 
67 31 20 2 21.6 | 70 09 30 59 58.2 
67 49 40 53 15.7 | 70 27 10 7 00 48.4 
68 10 335 54 15.2 70 46 45 01 44.7 
68 29 15 55 09.0 71 07 05 02 42.0 

| 


Index error = =} 5 sec. 


RESULT OF CALCULATION. 


Mean time. Retard. enone ee Longitude. 
A. min. see. he min. — see. 
8 36 17 1 39° 14.0 eee ee 


Determination of latitude, June 5, 1844—altitudes of Polaris. 


OBSERVATIONS. 
Double altitudes of Polaris. | Time of chronometer. 
‘ | : 3 
Deg. min. — see. he = min. see. 
77 «65840 | 07 +00 
77. «58-550 | os 18 
77 58 30 09 35 
77 59 30 ll 26 
77 59 50 13 10 
78 00 00 | 14 34 
78 00 15 16 03 
78 00 15 17 08 
78 00 30 18 59 
78 #00 = 10 | 19 56 


Thermometer 60°. 
Index error = -+ 5 see. 


RESULT OF CALCULATION. 


True altitude. Mean time. = Latitude. 


Deg. min. sec. 


| 

| 

| h. min. see. Deg. min. see. 
38 58 42 | 


‘ g 52 57 | 40 28 07 
| 


ot 


SPL TER SRS ES 


a a sSaag aae y O 


t 
: 
et 
4 
.| 


[ 174 ] 534 
ENCAMPMENT ON ASHLEY’S FORK. 


Determination of longitude, June 6, 1844—altitudes of Arcturus. 


OBSERVATIONS. 
Double altitudes of Arcturus. Time of chronometer. 
Deg. min. — sec. he min, See. 
61 31 50 0 20 37.0 a. m. 
5l 09 50 21 34,5 
50 50 40 22 25.0 
50 34 00 23 08,5 
50 15 15 23 57.7 


Thermometer 46°, 


Index error = -- 8 sec. 


RESULT OF CALCULATION. 


Mean time. Retard. Longitude. 
he min. sec. he min. — see. 
2 ol 43 a. m. 1 39 22.4 


Immersion of Jupiter’s second satellite. 


Observed time. Mean time. Longitude. 
| 
a 
he. = min. — see. h. min. — see. | Deg. min. sec. 
0 38 39 a. m. 2 18 02am | 109 27 07 
| 


eee eeeerenl 


of Arcturus. 


ometer. 


sec. 
37.0 a, m. 
34.5 
25.0 
08,5 
57.7 


Longitude. 


Longitude. 


: 535 [ 174 J 
ENCAMPMENT AT BROWN’S HOLE, ON GREEN RIVER. 
Determination of longitude, June 7, 1844—altitudes of a Lyre. 


OBSERVATIONS. 


FIRST SENTES. SECOND SERIES. 


Double altitudes of Time of chronometer. Double altitudes of | Time of chronometer. 


a Lyra. a Lyre. 
| ee 
Deg. sec. h. min, see. Deg. min, sec, he min, see 
70 20 6 60 21.0 76 818 15 7 05 42,6 
71 17 = 20 61 23.0 76 =A 35 06 46.5 
71 385 30 52 14.0 76 #69 00 07 36.0 
71 665 10 6310.0 77 ~=«16 «(40 08 25.0 
72 #17 40 64 =14.0 77 «=637~—Sti«OD 09 27.0 
Index error = -- 8 sec. 
RESULT OF CALCULATION, 
Mean time. ' Retard. | Longitude. 
h. min. see. he mine see. | 
8 42 27 1 42 31.1 | 


Determination of latitude, June 7, 1844—allitudes of Polaris. 


OBSERVATIONS. 
Double altitudes of Polaris. | Time of chronometer. 
Deg. min. sec. | h. min. see. 
78 38 50 | 7 13 57 
78 38 45 15 19 
78 38 30 17 05 
78 39 15 18 26 
78 39 10 19 59 
78 40 25 21 23 
78 40 05 22 36 


Thermometer 61°. 


Index error = -+- 8 sec. 


RESULT OF CALCULATION. 


True altitude. Mean time. Latitude. 


| es 


Deg. min. sec. h. mine — see. Deg. min. see. 
39 18 3l 9 00 56 40 46 27 


a 


—— 


Se ee aie Te 


eae Im 


) 
i : 
1m | 
i | 


~ 


ed 


Oi ASS ih REPRE 
ee eee 


= 


Sy en Si eee Sea een oe 


aes 


Se ae ae 


‘ 


c 174 4 536 


ENCAMPMENT AT BROWN'S HOLE, ON GREEN RIVER. 
Determination of longitude, June 8, 1844—allitudes af the sun. 
OBSERVATIONS. 


ae ete ene a eee a - ne ee ee eee eo 
| 


| 


FIRST SERIES, SKCOND SERIES, 
Double altitudes of the | Time of chronometer, || Double altitudes of the | ‘Time of chronometer, 
sun's lower limb. sun's lower limb, 
Saas | es ED, eae eS TS 
Deg., min. sec. h. min. sec. Deg. min. see. h. min. — see, 
59 50 3-25 5 30 34.0 | 61 Ol 35 6 4 43.4 
60 06 00 40 16.5 61 18 55 . 28.3 
60 19 45 40 §2.3 61 33 00 05.6 
60 33 20 4l 27.0 | 61 46 10 44 41.2 
60 48 40 42 07.3 | 61 56 55 45 09.4 
- ete 


Thermometer 89°. 
Index error = + 8 sec. 


RESULT OF CALCULATION, 


————————— + -- -. 


Mean time. | Retard. Longitude. 
aes cee 

he min. — see. | he = omin. — see, 

7 24 58 | | 42 32.3 


ENCAMPMENT ON ELK HEAD RIVER. 
Determination of longitude, June 10, 1844—allitudes of o Lyre. 


OBSERVATIONS. 
FIRST SERIES. | SECOND SERIES. 
ee eee Senne ssc aieacias : 
Double altitudes of Time of chronometer. || Double altitudes of Time of chronometer. 
a Lyre, a Lyre. 

Deg. min, sec. | he min. — see. Deg. min. see. h. min, — sec. 
75 2 15 6 46 44.0 | 76 56 50 6 50 59.0 
75 44 20 47 33.3 77 14 00 51 48.0 
76 06 10 48 350 || 77 35 OO 52 48.4 
76 21 50 49 20.2 | V7 52 15 53 36.4 
76 37 = «640 50 «05.0 "Ff 78 O98 50 54 =26,0 


| 


Index error = + 4 sec. 


RESULT OF CALCULATION. 


—— 
Mean time. Retard. Longitude. 

h. min. see. h. min. — sec. 

8 37 18 1 46 49.6 


oo Correct this longitude on map. 


RIVER, 
of the sun. 


ee ae 


ime of chronometer, 


ee, 


h. min. sec. 


5 43.4 
28.3 
05.6 


44 41.2 
45 09.4 
Longitude. 


ee 


Ss Of a Lyre. 


6 50 59.0 

51 48.0 

52 48.4 

53 36.4 

54 =. 26.0 
Longitude. 


A 


37 [ 174 ] 


ENCAMPMENT ON ELK HEAD RIVER, 
Determination of latitude, June 10, 1844—allitudes of Polaris. 


OBSERVATIONS, 
Double altitudes of Polaris, Time of chronometer. 
a es 1 <a eeees = + - — = _ ewe - 

Deg. mine see, he mine see. 

79 02 30 6 57 57 

79 02 45 59 24 

79 03 40 7 00 2 

79 03 00 01 41 

79 04 10 03 46 

79 04 20 \ 04 48 

79 OF 230 06 34 

79 04 50 | 08 05 

79 05 35 09 18 

79 05 30 10 35 
sa 7 Thermometer 57°, . 

Index error = -+- 4 sec. 
. 
RESULT OF CALCULATION. 
True altitude. | Mean time. Latitude. 
Deg. min. — see. | he mine — gee. Deg. min. — see. 
39 30 63 
| 


8 50 59 40 58 37 


(CP Correct this latitude on map. 


SECOND ENCAMPMENT ON ELK HEAD RIVER. 
Determination of latitude, June 11, 1844—allitudes of Polaris. 


OBSERVATIONS. 
Double altitudes of Polaris. Time of chronometer. 
Deg. min. — sec. | h. min. — see. 
79 14 40 7 19 47 
79 15 40 2 14 
79 16 25 24 01 
79 16 40 | 2 19 
79 17 30 | 2 02 
79 18 00 | 29 07 
Index error = -+ 6 sec. 
RESULT OF CALCULATION. 
True altitude. Mean time. Latitude. 
¥ 
Deg. min. _ sec. h. min. — see. Deg. min. sec. 


39 37 07 9 14 42 4l ol 11 : 


1| 
a) 
| 


CS a acl 


[ 174 J 538 


SECOND ENCAMPMENT ON ELK HEAD RIVER. 
Determination of longitude, June 11, 1844—allitudes of a Cygni. 


OBSERVATIONS. 
ssi eee aaah ‘aii 
Double altitudes of a ‘Cygni. Time of chronometer. 
Deg. min. sec. he min. see. 
57 21 40 7 32 31,0 
57 5l 40 JA 08.0 
58 13 00 35 17.5 


ee So —— 


Bad observations. 
Thermometer 53°, 


Index error == -+- 6 sec. 


RESULT OF CALCULATION. 


Mean time. Retard. Longitude. 
h. min. sec. he min. see. 
9 23 46 1 49 47.1 


ENCAMPMENT IN THE VALLEY OF THE NORTH FORK OF THE PLATTE, 
AT THE FOOT OF THE MOUNTAINS, 


Determination of latitude, June 13, 1844—allitudes of Polaris. 


OBSERVATIONS. 
Double altitudes of Polaris. ‘Time of chronometer. 
Deg. min. sec. he = =min. see. 
19 56 40 vi 3] 46 
79 57 40 33 02 
79 58 10 34 16 
79 59 00 36 08 
79 59 15 37 25 
79 59 40 38 31 
80 00 35 | 40 06 
80 00 15 41 12 
80 01 15 42 18 
80 0l 20 43 25 


Index error = -+ 10 sec, 


RESULT OF CALCULATION. 


True altitude. Mean time. Latitude. 


Deg. min. sec. h. min. — see. Deg. min. — see, 
89 58 36 9 29 10 41 18 48 


ENC 


539 [ 174 ] 


ER. ENCAMPMENT IN THE VALLEY OF THE NORTH FORF « THE PLATTE, AT 
es of « Cygni. THE FOOT OF THE MOUNTAINS, 
Determination of longitude, June 13, 1844—allitudes of « Aquila. 
ees 
onometer, OBSERVATIONS. 
ale Double altitudes of a Aquila. Time of chronometer. 
08.0 - —— 
17.5 Deg. min, sec. he min, — see. 
sieaumisietbeatase 43 3350 7 47 56.0 
44 09 40 49 33.6 
44 37 40 60 49.5 
en a esentEe-seneRENGE—~ — 
Index error == + 10 sec, 
RESULT OF CALCULATION. 
Longitude, 
Mean time. Retard, | Longitude, ei 
————————— — —- ' 
h. min. — sec, h. min. — see. | in ie) 
9 40 47 l bl 21.0 ' 
| 


\F THE PLATTE, 
Determination of longitude, June 13, 1844—altitudes ofa Cygni. 


les of Polaris. 
OBSERVATIONS. 
— ii 

ee Double altitudes of «a Cygni. Time of chronometer, H: 
——-. Wie 

sec, P , 24 

Deg. min. — see. h. min. © sec. HY 

08 68 02) 40 7 655 22.0 fy 
16 68 26 00 56 33.0 iy 
68 47 40 57 40.7 Af 9 

08 Bh 
25 A a ES if 
aA Thermometer 54°. bh ; ; 
06 AEH 
12 abt 
18 Index error = + 10 sec. rth 
25 Hi Li, 
renee RESULT OF CALCULATION. ! Bi 
a nei 

Mean time. Retard. Longitude. ; ie iy 

SS eRe M4 ot 
Latitude. he | 
h. min. — sec. he = min. sec. | #3 


9 47 63 1 51 21 6 Te 
min. see, t 
18 48 


[ 174] 540 


ENCAMPMENT IN THE SAME VALLEY A8 ON THE 13th, BUT HIGHER, 


Determination of latitude, June \4, 1844—allitudes of Polaris, 


OBSERVATIONS. 


Double altitudes of Polaris. Time of chronometer, 
Deg. min, — see, | he min, see, 
79 36 25 ° 7 28 28 
79 «#93785 2908 
79 38 00 30 21 
79 7 30 St 26 
79 28 20 32 21, 
79 39 30 33 16 
ee ee = a seni tu ecinbacgno oleae Mae 
Index error = -- 7 sec, 
RESULT OF CALCULATION. 
a — a ee ee ee 
True altitude. Mean time. Latitude. 
Deg. min. see. h. min, — see. Deg. min, — see. 
39 47 49 Ht] 23 46 4l 08 16 


an eee ee 


Determination of longitude, June 14, 1844—altitudes of « Cygni. 
De 
OBSERVATIONS. 
Double altitudes of a Cygni. Time of chronometer, 
Deg. min. — see. he. min. — See. 
63 30 ~~ »38650 7 86 05.0 
631 30 37 10.0 
63 O08 40 38 ~—s«07.0 
63 26 50 39 03.0 
63 43 30 : 39 ©: 6.0 
65 601 00 40 51.0 


Thermometer 56°. 


Index error = -+- 7 sec. 


RESULT OF CALCULATION. 


Mean time. Retard. Longitude. 
he min. see. h. min. — Bee. 
9 3l 26 | 1 62 54.1 | 


BUT HIGHER, 
9 of Polaris, 


——— ap 
onometer, 
nas ——e 
a. See. 
28 
23 


Latitude, 


a  , 


‘ min, — see, 
08 16 


les of a Cygni. 


‘onometer, 


Longitude. 


a 
sc liniiniiiiaaimeimmmmmeimmnste eeuaeneeeetes ae) 


54l 


ENCAMPMENT AT NEW PARK, 


[ 174 J 


Determination of latitude, June 15, 1844—altitudes of Polaris, 


OBSERVATIONS, 
Double altitudes of Polaris. Time of chronometer, 
Deg. min, — see. Ae oming gee, 
70 03 it) 7 it 37 
79 03 30 16 16 
79 04 Oo 7 34 
79 03 50 18 42 
79 O05 00 20 20 
70 O05 30 2! 55 
79 O56 ° 45 23 00 
79 06 00 24 05 
79 06 40 25 18 
79 7 25 26 37 
Index error « + 7 sec, ita aan ie 
RESULT OF CALCULATION, 
——— sabieenieoesnteeess 
True altitude. Mean time, | Latitude, 
. To | Ss ee ee ~- -_ | a a TT 
Deg. min, — see, he min, see. Deg. min, — see. 
398k 9 16 18 | 40 62 44 


Determination of longitude, June 15, 1844—altitudes ofa Cygni. 


OBSERVATIONS. 
Double altitudes of a Cygni. Time of chronometer, 
Deg. min. see. kh. min. see. 

63 08 50 j 30 25.0 
63 32 45 3 42.0 
63 50 00 32 36.0 
64 05 10 33 24.2 
64 21 30 34 15.0 


Thermometer 44°, 


Index error = -- 7 sec. 


RESULT OF CALCULATION. 


Mean time. Retard. | Longitude. 
he min. see. h. min. sec. 
9 26 61 l 64 22.6 


(e-em eee 


C174] 542 
BECOND ENCAMPMENT AT NEW PARK, 
Determination of latitude, June 16, 1844—allitudes af Polaris, 


OBSERVATIONS, 
Double altitudes of Polaris, Time of chronometer, 
S eenetetantinmnetemantnoniaee —_ OSe 2 +a eee ee _ OO ————E 
| 
Deg, min, see, h. min, see, 
7 9000 7 #27 2 
78 30 10 28 a8 
| en.) PT en) | 


78 St 30 30 53 


78) Ott a (8S 
7 a) | | 3 00 
a | PT 
78 jo Bil) v4 St 
78 33 30 36 o4 
78 u4 20 v7 35 
Index error «= = 10 see. 
RESULT OF CALCULATION. 
ee | | | | 
True altitude, | Mean time, Latitude. 
ee ne Cane a 
| ’ , 
Deg, mine see, he ming — sees Deg, mine ste, 


39 14 56 | 9 26 0 AU 33 22 


Determination of longitude, June 16, 1844—altitudes of « Cygni. 


OBSERVATIONS. 


; ; | a 
Double altitudes of a Cygni. T'ime of chronometer. 


a 


- 2+ ee 


Deg. min, — see, he mine — See, 
69 = 84 40 | 7 48 20.0 
69 53 25 49 17.5 
70 16 25 50 29.3 


70 4 #30 | 51 24.6 
62 ©: 35,0 
| 


RESULT OF CALCULATION. 


a 


———e 


Mean time. Retard. Longitude. 


_-—--- OC Ct 


he min, — see, hh. min. — see. 
9 44 19 l 53 54.1 


——--< 


les af Polaris, 


ronometer, 


eee 


sec. 
2A 
38 
51 
53 
55 
00 


——$———— 


Latitude. 
Deg. min — see. 
Av 33 22 


des of “a Cygni. 


a 


1ronometer, 


Longitude. 


ED 


543 


SECOND ENCAMPMENT AT NEW PARK, 


C 174] 


Determination of longitude, June 16, 1844—allitude of o Lyra. 


OUSERVATION, 
Double altitude of « Lyrm, Time of chronometer, 
Deg. mine see, he mine mee, 
tt 10 10 7 55 11.5 
ats ‘Thermometer 98°, 
Index error = -- 6 see, 
RESULT OF CALCULATION, 
Mean tine, Retard, | Longitude. 
a ———— | ——— _— — ee 
he min, see, | he ming see, | 
H) 49 07 1 563 65.2 | 


ENCAMPMENT ON OLD PARK, AT THE FORK OF GRAND RIVER. 


Determination of latitude, June 19, 1844—altiludes af Polaris. 


OBSERVATIONS. 
Double altitudes of Polaris. Time of chronometer, 

em ee ec cee aes eee = « «eee —— ee - - - a —_ 

Deg. mine — see. he min, — see. 

77 25 LS 4 33 28 

17 27 00 | a4 50 

77 27 00 35 54 

17 28 00 | 36 54 

i738 | 38 08 

77 20 20 39 38 

Vi 29 10 } 40 38 

v7 30 25 | 41 47 

77 30 20 | 43 06 

77 3} 20 44 14 

Index error = -- 5 sec. 
RESULT OF CALCULATION. 
= | ‘ . | ; 
True altitude. Mean time. ! Latitude. 

en naiwiesducaal pitas temnaiaieinssascr ae stains aioe ae sascha 

. | . 

Deg. min. see. h. min, see. | Deg. min. see. 
a8 43 13 i] 33—Cis«*OD 39 «66786 

RS Tn . 


[ 174 ] 544 


ENCAMPMENT ON OLD PARK, AT THE FORK OF GRAND RIVER, 


Determination of longitude, June 9, 1844—altitudes of o Aquila, 
OBSERVATIONS. 
q a eee ee | ee aD 
ha FIRST SERIES. | SECOND SERIES. _ 
i So eae eae a ee 1 eel ion Shanasraanena 
7) | 
i oe Double altitudes of Time of chronometer, || Double altitudes of | Time of chronometer, om 
Ki a Aquilw. | a Aquile. | 
i $$ | | | | —— eSeaats 
! Deg. min. see. h. min, — sec. || Deg. min. seer hy mins see. —~ 
54 07 20 7 47 «38.5 | 56 ll 8635 7 & 09.5 
54 36 30 48 55.6 | 56 38 #45 | 5422.0 
4 65 00 00 49 68.5 67 O00 20 55 =. 20.0 
65 27 50 | 51 11.7 57 37 ~~ ~#850 57 —s OO 
55 648 8 50 5209.0 | 57 =657-~—80 7 54.0 
eae nl sccm inenaninnns eno ESAS, 
Thermometer 48°. 
Index error = —+- 5 sec. cam 
RESULT OF CALCULATION. 
Mean time. | Retard. Longitude. _ 


ms ee 


he omin. — see. h. min, ec, 
9 47 45 1 64 68.8 | 


ENCAMPMENT AT THE ENTRANCE OF BAYOU SALADE, HEAD OF FON. 
TAINE QUI-BOUIT >? SOUTH FORK OF THE PLATTE ? 


Determination of latitude, June 22, 1844--altitudes of Polaris. 
. OBSERVATIONS. 


Double altitudes of Polaris. . Tire of chronometer. 


ee) 


Deg. min, — see. he min. sec. 


| 
76 «15 20 7 25 09 
76 #15 50 | 26 39 
76 16 30 | 27 048 
76 #16 45 28 «BL 
76 16 40 29 «58 
76 «1785 | 31 03 
76 «#418 10 3205 
- 76 18 50 33 «12 
76 19 40 34 OO 
76 «#619 ~=«50 34047 


| 
| 
Index error = -+- 10 sec. 


RESULT OF CALCULATION. 


True altitude. Mean time. Latitude. 


Deg. min. see. hk. min. see. Deg. min. sec. 
38 07 36 9 27 21 39 20 24 


RAND RIVER. 
8 Of o Aquila, 


na nD 


SERIES. 


a me a 


- Time of chronometer, 


A | er 


h. min. — see. 


7 53 09.5 

| 54 22.0 
55 20.0 

57 OLD 

67 54.0 


rn , 


an 


Longitude. 


JATTE ? 
des of Polaris. 


hrorometer. 


PP Wwe S On OVS 
i) ) 
2) 


Latitude. 


Deg. min. sec. 
39 20 24 


545 [174 ] 


ENCAMPMENT AT THE ENTRANCE OF BAYOU SALADE, HEAD OF FON- 
TAINE-QUI-BOUIT >? SOUTH FORK OF THE PLATTE? 


Determination of longitude, June 22, 1844—altitudes ofa Aquile. 


OBSERVATIONS, 
FIRST SERIES. SECOND SERIES. 
Thsinssiasacetectacanticletenntnal sasecaaS<fule Se ee Nd 
Double altitudes of | Time of chronometer. | Double altitudes of | Time of chronometer. 
a Aquila. | | a Aquile. | 
ae aT TET | IE Ie EE NS EE | aR 
| 
Deg. min. sec. | h. min, see. Deg. min. sec. | h. min. see. 
65 30 20 | % 37 00.6 57 1! 35 7 41 26.3 
65 55 40 38 05.58 57s 3l 35 42 20.0 
56 15 00 38 58.0 57 51 10 43 13.2 
56 33 40 39 46,7 | 58 10 00 44 03.0 
66 62 00 \ 40 35.5 | 68 36 30 45 12.4 


ee 


Thermometer 38°. 
Index error = --+ 10 sec. 


RESULT OF CALCULATION. 


Mean time. Retard. | Longitude. 
h. min. — see. he min. see. | 
9 37 53 1 56 48.7 


ENCAMPMENT ON A SMALL AFFLUENT TO THE ARKANSAS. 
Determination of latitude, June 26, 1844—altitudes of Polaris. 


OBSERVATIONS. 
Double altitudes of Polaris. Time of chronometer. 

Deg. min. — sec. h. min. — sec. 
74 40 15 6 37 29 
74 4l 10 39 42 
74 42 40 41 03 
74 43 20 42 24 
74 43 30 43 16 
74 44 00 44 20 
74 44 10 45 29 
74 44 45 46 56 
74 45 20 47 58 
74 45 50 « 49 07 

Index error = -+ 7 sec. 
RESULT OF CALCULATION. 
True altitude. Mean time. Latitude. 


Deg. min. — sec. he min. see. Deg. min. sec. 


37 20 34 8 45 08 38 39 22 


[174 J 546 
ENCAMPMENT ON A SMALL AFFLUENT TO THE ARKANSAS, 


Determination of longitude, June 26, 1844—altiludes of a Cygni, 


‘ OBSERVATIONS. 
Double altitudes of a Cygni. Time of chronometer. * 
Deg. min, see. he mine — see, 
66 13 45 6 57 33.5 
66 59 00 | 5951.6 
67 18 20 7 00 51.0 
67 38 50 01 53.4 


——— ee oe es 


Thermometer 38°, 


Index error = -+- 7 sec. 


RESULT OF CALCULATION. 


sakcinneate cummemmonntesres=eatitins —— ie ae — — 2 oe STS 


Mean time. Retard. Longitude. 
he min, see. A, min, — see. 
9 01 24 2 01 21.6 


ENCAMPMENT ON A LARGER AFFLUENT TO THE ARKANSAS, 


Determination of latitude, June 28, 1841—altitudes of Polaris. 


OBSERVATIONS. 


Double altitudes of Polaris. | Time of chronometer, 

Deg. min. sec. | he min. — see. 
74 28 10 7 08 48 
74 29 10 10 29 
74 29 10 ; 11 32 
74 29 20 H 13 00 
74 30 35 14 23 
74 31 40 16 2 

V4 32 15 | 17 38 
74 «-82—Ss«B0 18 51 
74 34 00 | 20 24 
74. 34 . 45 | 2 33 


Index crror = + 8 sec, 


ScennEnenantnmmeneeeeereesed 


RESULT OF CALCULATION. 


| 
True altitude. Mean time. | . Latitude. 
| 
Deg. min. 8c. h. min. see. | Deg. min. sec. 
37 14 24 9 18 05 | 38 23 48 


ty 


ARKANSAS, 


es of a Cygni, 


nometer. ® 


EL , 


SFC. 
33.5 
51.6 
51.0 
53.4 


A 


Longitude. 


ee 


, ARKANSAS. 


les of Polaris. 


1ronometers 


~ 
~ 
a 
a 
ao 


KH ODN RUWrHODD> 
a 
wo 


nee aeereal 


Latitude. 


Deg. min. sec. 
38 23 48 


547 [ 174 ] 


ENCAMPMENT ON A LARGER AFFLUENT TO THE ARKANSAS. 
Determination of longitude, June 28, 1844—allitudes of « Aguile. 
OBSERVATIONS, 


1| 
FIRST SENTES. \| SECOND SERIES. 
1! 


_—$—— 


a a ee, 


Double altitudes of | Time of chronometer. | 


a Aquile. 


Double altitudes of 
a Aquile. 


Time of chronometer, 


Deg. min, see. he mine see, || Dege mins see. he mine see 
62 28 30 7 24 395 | 64 49 10 7 38 50.0 
6. 01 20 26 04.3 ! 65 28 25 32 36.5 
63 22 40 | 27 01.0 66 00 10 33 58.0 
63 55 30 | 28 266 |) 66 35 35 01.6 
64 23°«15 ss 29 414 66 53 00 3621.8 


Thermometer 56°, 
Index error = -+ 8 sec. 
RESULT OF CALCULATION, 


ooo 


| gee a ene 
Retard. 


—_— 


Mean time. Longitude. 


-__ 


A. min, SECs bk. min, 60. 
9 33 15 2 02 46,9 


ENCAMPMENT AT THE JUNCTION OF THE ARKANSAS AND FONTAINE-QUI- 
: BOUIT RIVERS. 
Delermination of latitude, June 29, 1844—altiludes of Polaris. 
OBSERVATIONS. 


Double altitudes of Polaris. Time of chronometer. 


ee 


Deg, min — see. kh. min. — see. 
74 09 00 6 59 05 
74 09 15 60 20 
74 10 35 61 23 
74 10 20 62 30 
74 11 40 63 51 
74 11 50 64 55 
74 13 00 66 00 
74 12 50 67 = 00 
74 13 50 | 68 06 
74 4 00 | 69 22 


gn nr a a 


Index error = +- 10 sec. 
RESULT OF CALCULATION. 


True altitude. Mean time. Latitude. 


Deg. min. — sec. he min. — ser. Deg. min. sec. 
37. 04.87 9 os 49 38 1h 


ee i a 


[ 174 ] 548 


' ENCAMPMENT AT THE JUNCTION OF THE ARKANSAS AND FONTAINE.QUt. 
BOUIT RIVERS. 
Determination of longitude, June 29, 1844—altitudes of Altair. 
OBSERVATIONS. 


| 


FIRST SENIES. SECOND SERIES. _ 
1} : = is e- 
Double altitudes of | Time of chronometer. |, Double altitudes of Time of chronometer —_ 
Altair, | Altair. 
sSicciigsnintanaarsin aici a sixedaccessasmcaae ee 
| 
Deg. min. see. h. min. — see. | Deg. min. see. he mins — see. an 
7i 38 8650 7 4 14.00 |, 74 12 30 7 650 08.0 
72 #05 10 44 22,7 || 74 32 45 61 03.0 J 
72 26 30 45 21.0 || 74 62 10 51 56.6 
72 #662 = ©=6930 46 = 29.5 75 13 10 52 53,2 
73° #16 00 47 = 34.5 75 37 45 64 O10 


’ Index error = + 10 sec. 


eee 


RESULT OF CALCULATION, 
Mean time. Retard. | Longitude. 
ae Sa | ons 
he min, sec. he min. see. | 
9 63 16 2 04 933.7 | 


ENCAMPMENT NEAR BENT'S FORT, ON THE ARKANSAS RIVER. 
Delermination of latitude, July 2, 1814—allitudes of Polaris. 


1) OBSERVATIONS. 


Double altitudes of Polaris. Time of chronometer. 


if Deg. min. — sec. h. = =min. — sec. 
4 73 «5840 7 ~©606-~—Ss 88 
73 #59 10 ! 08 09 

¥ 73. 61 ~~ 30 1064 
i 73 62 «(10 12 05 
By 73 62 50 | 13 03 
i | 73 «©6663 )~—(00 li 57 
4 73 «6t OO | 1805 
73 64 30 16 IL 

73 6515 17 20 


73 


Index error = +- 7 sev. 


RESULT OF CALCULATION. 


True altitude. Mean time. Latitude. 


Deg. min. sec. h. min. sec. Deg. min. sec. 
37 00 07 9 28 28 38 02 #408 


) FONTAINE.-QU. 
les of Altair. 


ERIES. 
ee 


Time of chronometer, 


h. min. — see. 


7 50 08.0 
61 03.0 
51 56.6 
52 53.2 
64 =O1.0 


Longitude. 


NSAS RIVER. 
es of Polaris. 


ronometer. 


Latitude. 


Deg. min. sec. 
38 02 08 


549 


ENCAMPMENT NEAR BENT's FORT, 


[ 174 } 
ON THE ARKANSAS RIVER. 
Determination of longitude, July 2, 1844—altitudes of Altair. 


OBSERVATIONS, 


FIRST SERIES, SECOND SERIES, 


LL LLLLLLLLLL LLL | CCL LLL: ttt ttt ttt 


Double altitudes of Time of chronometer. Double altitudes of Time of chronometer. 
Altair. . Altair. 
ee —| 
Deg. mins see. he min. see, Deg. min. see. | oh. min. see. 
72 12 20 7 21 47.0 } 74 11 10 | 7 27 07.4 
72 30 30 | 22 35.0 74 35 20 28 «13.6 
72 50 00 | 23 27.7 74 57 10 29 10,0 
73 12 30 | 24 27.5 | 75 20 20 30 13.6 
73° «41 =. «10 | 2 45.0 | 75 837 40 31 04.5 
Index error = -+- 7 sec. 
RESULT OF CALCULATION. 
e | pe eee gee ee ile ee 
Mean time. Retard. | Longitude. 
eae CR Fee 
| 
he min. — sec. | he min, sec. 
9 41 40 coy ore ee 2 15 17.2 


ENCAMPMENT ON SMOKY HILL RIVER. 7 
Determination of latitude, July 9, 1844—altitudes of Polaris. 


OBSERVATIONS. 


Double altitudes of Polaris. Time of chronometer. 


EE: 


Deg. min. sec. A. mine — See. 
75 39 10 3 58 57 
75 58 50 4 14 10 


RESULT OF CALCULATION. 


True altitude. Mean time. Latitude. 
| 
Deg. min. — sec. ‘ h, min. — see | Deg. min. sec. 
37 53 15 | 9 15 03 | 38 51 15 


c 174 4 550 


ENCAMPMENT ON SMOKY HILL RIVER. 
Determination of longitude, July 9, 1844—allitudes of « Aquila. 


OBSERVATIONS. 


Double altitudes of a Aquila. Tine of chronometer. 


— eee 


nai ee 
Deg. min. — see. | he mine — see. 


72 36 45 4 03 43,0 
73 39 60 06 36.0 
RESULT OF CALCULATION. 
Mean time. | Retard. Longitude. 
| 
h. min. sec. | h. min, — see. 
9 13 40 5 08 30.3 


SECOND ENCAMPMENT ON SMOKY HILL RIVER. 
Determination of latitude, July 10, 1844—allitudes of Polaris. 


OBSERVATIONS. 


Double altitudes of Polaris. Time of chronometer. 


Deg. min. sec. 
75 52 00 00 55 
75 55 00 05 51 


| 
| he min. — see. 
| 

75 54 60 | 06 «59 
| 
| 


75 56 10 07 53 
75 57 00 09 lt 
75 =6-58tC«OOO - 10 5 
75 =6«63—s«O0 | Il 44 
RESULT OF CALCULATION, 
True altitude. Mean time. Latitude. 
Deg. min. sec. h. min. sec. Deg. min. sec. 


37 «666— 36 9 Is 09 ‘ 38 52 22 


of a Aquila. 


moter. 


Longitude. 


R. 


of Polaris. 


ometer. 


Latitude. 


1. mine sec. 
62 22 


SRERSEEEEEEnEEEnteamemenene nae eel 


551 [174] 


SECOND ENCAMPMENT ON SMOKY HILL RIVER. 


Determination of longitude, July 10, 1844—altitudes of « Aquila. 


OBSERVATIONS. 
Double altitudes of a Aquila. | Time of chronometer. 
| 
Deg. min, — sec. he ming see. 
79 25 20 4 16 4l 
79 45 20 7 30 
80 16 45 19 06 
80 38 40 20 09 
81 02 40 | 2! 17 
SS a LLL die. 


RESULT OF CALCULATION, 


Mean time. Retard, | Longitude. 


em 


he. min. see. 
5 10 35.8 


h. min. — see. 


| 
| 
| 
9 29 34 | 


THIRD ENCAMPMENT ON SMOKY HILL RIVER. 


Determination af latitude, July 13, 1844—allitudes of Polaris. 


OBSERVATIONS. 
Double altitudes of Polaris. | Time of chronometer. 
; | 
Deg. min. see. | he min. — sec. 
75 42 30 3 50 20 
75 42 50 52 00 


RESULT OF CALCULATION. 


a FR a aR 
1 


True altitude. Mean time. Latitude. 
Deg. min. see. | h. min, sec. Deg. min. — sec. 
37 50 05 9 06 07 38 45 57 


= = ae 


2 ae ——— 


552 
THIRD ENCAMPMENT ON SMOKY HILL RIVER, 
Determination of longitude, July 13, 1844—altilude ofa Aquila. 


OBSERVATION. 


Double altitude of « Aquila. Time of chronometer, 


a a 


Deg. min, — see, he min, see, 
77 51 20 3 55 61,5 


2 em nence oe eee eee 


RESULT OF CALCULATION. 


Mean time. | Retard. Longitude. 


h. min. see. | » min, gee. 
] 10 50 | 14 58.3 


ENCAMPMENT ON SMOKY HILL RIVER, BELOW THE PAWNEE VILLAGE, 


Determination of longitude, July 17, 1844—allitudes of « Aquile. 


OBSERVATIONS. 


Se tee a ee 


Double altitudes of a Aquila. Time of chronometer. 


at 

| 
5 
Vs 
‘ 
; 
f 
¥ 
| 
{ 


Deg. min. sec. he = min, 
75 10 3 26 
75 : 15 27 
75 45 28 
76 20 29 
76 ‘ 10 30 
76 40 31 


RESULT OF CALCULATION. 


Mean time. Retard. Longitude. 


h. min. sec. 
5 20 48.4 


fo Aquile. 


ngitude, 


dans, "__—,H~~--_, 


VEE VILLAGE, 


of a Aguile. 


i 


ngitude. 


SUnEEEREREneeneeeeneeepeeeeeeeol 


553 [ 174 ] 


ENCAMPMENT ON SMOKY HILL RIVER, BELOW THE PAWNEE VILLAGE, 
Determination of latitude, July 17, 1844—altitudes oY Polaris. 
OBSERVATIONS, 


eR 


Double altitudes of Polaris, Time of chronometer, 


—— eee 


a 


Deg. min, see. h. min, see, 
ma) 39 00 3 34 07 


7h 40 } 35 26 j 
75 40 10 36 30 
75 41 30 38 01 , 
75 4642 ~—OO 397 f 
75 42 40 o 40 23 


RESULT OF CALCULATION. 


True altitude, Mean time. Latitude, | 


Deg. min. see. h. min, see. Deg. min. see. 
37. 4918 8 658 04 38 «642 )— 43 


RN 


FIFTH ENCAMPMENT ON SMOKY HILL RIVER. 
‘Determination of longitude, July 19, 1844—allitudes of « Aquile. 
OBSERVATIONS. 


Double altitudes of e Aquila. Time of chronometer, 


Deg. min. — sec, h. min. — see. 
73 16 35 3 09 43.6 
73 42 45 10 54.0 
74 04 10 11 52.0 
74 24 00 12 48.0 
74 45 10 13 45.5 


30 


RESULT OF CALCULATION. 


Mean time. Retard. Longitude. 


h. 
8 


min. see. he min. sec, 
37 04 5 24 45.5 


Immersion of Jupiter’s first satellite. 


Observed time. Mean time. Longitude. 


h. min. sec. h. = min. sec, Deg. min. sec. 
10 15 36 15 40 29 98 17 31 


554 


FIFTH ENCAMPMENT ON SMOKY HILL RIVER. 


c 1744 


Determination of latitude, July 19, 1844—altitudes of Polaris, 


OBSERVATIONS, 


—_ —_—_——_—— 


Double altitudes of Polaris, Time of chronometer. 


— 


(ee ee. ee ee 


see, 


see, h. min, 
00 


3 18 


19 
20 
21 
23 


16 
26 
38 
04 


er ee eS eee eee 


RESULT OF CALCULATION, 


| 


True altitude. “Lean time, Latitude, 


a 


see. 
32 


min, 
43 


Deg, 
38 


min, see. 
45 13 


see, 
25 


min, 


Deg. 
ad 48 


37 


ENCAMPMENT.THREE MILES SOUTH OF SMOKY HILL FORK. 
Determination of longitude, July 21, 1844—altitudes of « Aquilz. 


OBSERVATIONS. 


Double altitudes of a Aquila. Time of chronometer. 


sec, 
38.0 
58.0 
02.5 


min,  8ec. he = min, 

45 10 3 13 
40 14 
45 16 


Deg. 
78 

79 13 
79 36 


RESULT OF CALCULATION, 
ee ge Ee ER ee ge ae gg ee ge ee ee ne ge ee 
| 


Mean time. Retard. Longitude. 


eC. 
38.3 


min, 
o~ 
wi 


sec. 
31 


mine 
42 


R. 
of Polaris, 


— re ee 


nometer, 


| 


Latitude. 


min, —8ee, 
43 32 


LL FORK. 


Of a Aquilz. 


nometer. 


sec, 

38.0 
58.0 
02.5 


Longitude. 


, 555 [ 174] 
ENCAMPMENT THREE MILES SOUTH OF SMOKY HILL PORK, 


Determination af latitude, July 21, 1844—altitudes af Polaris. 


OUSERVATIONS, 


Double altitudes of Polaris. Time of chronometer. 


ec ne a ee A TTT 
Deg. min, — see. he somin, se, 
q M4 45 3 10 ot 
75 16 60 20 61 
76 18 10 22 26 
75 18 LO 24 07 
75 20 40 26 Ol 


RESULT OF CALCULATION, 


TTT 


Ee 


True altitude, Mean time, Latitude, 
AREY eA ER seen, 
Deg. min. — see. he mine — see. Deg. min, — bee, 
4) 35 8 50 (07 380 388 


eee 


ENCAMPMENT BETWEEN SMOKY HILL FORK AND THE SANTA FE ROAD. 


Determination of latitude, July 22, 1844—allitudes of Polaris. 


OBSERVATIONS. 
Double altitudes of Polaris. Time of chronometer. 
Deg. min. — see. | he ming see. 
75 51 40 | 3 55 57 
75 638 40 | 4 00 59 
75 56 00 4 03 39 


EEE 


RESULT OF CALCULATION. 
Tne eeeeneneeneers een aaaeaaaaaascccaaaaaaat 


True altitude. Mean time. Latitude. 


Deg. min. sec. 
38 31 38 


he. = min. — see. 
9 29 40 


TT 


Deg. min. sec. 
37 55 38 


| 
| 
| 


2a aoe 
| 
| 


c 174) 556 


ENCAMPMENT BETWEEN SMOKY HILL FORK AND THE SANTA PE ROAD, 
Determination of longitude, July 22, 1844A—alliludes of « Aquila, 


OBSERVATIONS, 


mm ee ee ee - - 


ee 


Double altitudes of « Aquilm, Time of chronometer, 


—- te -_ 


Deg. 
a 
"] 
02 


min, 
26 
a7 
a7 


see, 
50 
50 
20 


ae. 
oo 
47 


RESULT OF CALCULATION, 


ee es ee 


Mean time, | Retard. 


rr a ee ee 


A. min, 
9 15 


see, 
03 


h. 


min, 


ee 


ENCAMPMENT ON THE SANTA FE ROAD, 


Determination of longitude, July 23, 1844—allitudes of « Aquila. 


OBSERVATIONS, 


—_ ee eee ———--— 


Double altitudes of a Aquila. Time of chronometer. 


ea ee ee 


Deg. 
80 
81 


min, 
57 
20 
39 
59 
22 
40 


SCC. 


h. min, 
3 


sec. 
14,6 
22.0 
14.0 
11,0 
16.0 
07.0 


a 


RESULT OF CALCULATION. 


Retard. Longitude. 


min, 
32 


8éc. 


h. 
5 02,3 


a a 


NTA PE ROAD, 


fo Aquile, 


ngitude, 


ee 


fa Aquile, 


heter, 


gitude. 


557 [ 174 J 


ENCAMPMENT ON THE SANTA PE ROAD 
Determination of latitude, July 23, \8A4—altitudes af Polaris, 


OBSERVATIONS, 


A —— —— -_—-_-- - 


— 


Double altitudes of Polaris, Time of chronometer 


a ee ; ; . ‘i 
Deg, ming — see, A, omin, see, 
75 St 25 | 16 4g 
75 32 19 18 14 
75 43 30 20 09 
75 46 a5 we 02 
75 35 40 | a3 oo 


a en) | a | (80 


RESULT OF CALCULATION, 


— es a — -- ed — = — eee ee 


True altitude. Mean time, Latitude, 
Deg. min, — see. he =omin, see, Deg. min, — gee, 
37 45 46 s 62 46 38 33 223 


ENCAMPMENT AT “BLACK JACK,” ON THE SANTA FE ROAD. 


Determination of latitude, July 28, 1844—alliludes of Polaris. 
OBSERVATIONS. 


Double altitudes of Polaris, Time of chronometer. 


ee 6 ee ee. 


Deg. min, — see. h. min. — see. 

76 27 25 3 29 13 

76 29 40 | 3 08 

76 31 00 33 03 

76 832 40 34047 

76 33 00 | 35 55 

76 33 50 37 36 

76 35 40 40 01 

76 36 40 4l 06 

76 37 45 42 21 

76 38 10 5 30 

RESULT OF CALCULATION. 
True altitude. Mean time. Latitude. 

Deg. min. sec. h. = =min. see. = min, sec. 
38 15 33 9 18 30 3 46 50 


[174] | 558 


ENCAMPMENT AT “BLACK JACK,” ON THE SANTA FE ROAD. 
Determination of longitude, July 28, 1844—altitudes of Arcturus. 


OBSERVATIONS. 
(Fins senies. | SECOND SERIES. 
oo — zinta [ase BidascheSeneanse sealant 
Double altitudes of | Time of chronometer. | Double altitudes of | Time of chronometer, 
Arcturus. | Arcturus. 

ne 2 | 
Deg. mins sec. he min. see. | Deg. mins sec. h. min. see. 
75 59 30 3 46 33.6 73 55 10 3 51 52.0 
75 32 40 47 =41.0 73 «©6300 62 57.5 
75 09 30 1 48 40.5 | 73 03 10 54 07.0 
74 48 50 49 33.0 | 72 33 20 55 21.0 
74 23 = 330 50 40.0 72 «6038 20 56 = 39.7 


RESULT OF CALCULATION, 


a ee ee +a ee Ce a = 


Mean time. Retard. | Longitude. 
ae 7 
as | NA pene 
he mine — see, | he. min. free. 
9 33 02 | 6 41 37. 


Determination of longitude, decdily 28, 1844 1844—alliludes of niles ap guntiin. 


OBSERVATIONS. 


Double altitudes of Jupiter. Time of chronometer. 


ee 


| he mine see. 
| 6 50 20.5 
| 51 13.0 
5217.0 
62 40 40 | 53 12.0 
‘ 4 
| 


09.6 


a — i a 


RESULT OF CALCULATION. 


l 
. | . 
Mean time. | Retard. Longitude. . 
| 
he. min. — see. | he min. see. 
12 33 52 | 5 41 37.7 


Immersion of Jupiter’s first satellite. 


| 


Observed time. | Mean time. | Longitude. 
h. min. — see. | he min. see. Deg. min. sec. 
6 34 09 | 12 15 49.7 95 04 34 


u 


\ FE ROAD. 
8s of Arclurus, 


ERIES. 
| 


Time of chronometer, 


ey 


h. min. see. 


3 51 62.0 
§2 57.5 
64 07.0 
55 21.0 
56 39.7 


nes, 


Longitude. 


es of Jupiler. 


nometer. 


Sec. 
20.5 
13.0 
17.0 
12.0 
09.6 


Longitude. 


$$$ $$$ $$ 


Longitude. 


min. See. 
04 34 


METEOROLOGICAL OBSERVATIONS 


MADE DURING 


THE EXPEDITION OF 1843-744. 


METEOROLOGICAL OBSERVATIONS MADE DURING THE JOURNEY. 


i 

} ) i 

Comparison of barometers. . | | 

According to three observations made at the observatory of Paris, Lieutenant Frémont's barome r ap 
eter, constructed by Bunten, is 0.23 millimetres higher than the standard of the observatory. f | t 

The result of forty-three comparative observations of both barometers of Mr. Frémont with both | We 

my barometers, gives the following : | | 
Barometer E (English) = E (French) — 0.051 inch = Fr. (N. Y.) — 0.034 inch — Fr. } 


(Bunten) — 0.091 inch. ot 
Barometer E (French) == E (English) + 0.05; inch + Fr. (N. Y¥.) 4+ 0.017 inch = Fr We 
(Bunten) — 0.040 inch, Ph 
Barometer Fr. (Bunten) — Fr. (N. Y.) + 0,057 inch. 


Observations from May 1 to May 11, 1843. 


Range of barometer during the time, = 0°’.4. 
Range of thermometer, == 60° to 80° Fahrenheit. 


G. ENGELMANN. 
Sr. Lovis, May, 13, 1843. 


<s = 


a 


[174] 


Date. 


1843. 
June 10 


1} 


12 


13 


14 | 


15 


17 | 
e| 
| 


| 
| 
| 


562 


Table of meteorological observations. 


Time. 


Sunrise ° 
th. 41m. p.m. 
Sunset - 
Sunrise - 


Sunrise 
Noon 
Sunrise 
lh. p. m. 
Sunset 


Sunrise 


5h. 55m. 


4h. 47m. a.m. | 


Noon - 


Sunset 
Sunrise 
Sunset 


Sunrise 
Noon 
Sunset 
Sunrise 
Noon 
Sunset 


Sunrise 
Noon 
Sunset 


Sunrise 
Noon 
Sunset 
Sunrise 


Sunrise 


| Thermometer, | | 
| Duron, (a met 
| ‘Attached. | Free. : 


Remarks. 


Millim, Cent. | Fahrw Feet. 

733,74 5.0 | 39.4 900 Clear sky; fog; wind N, 
735.43 22.0 | 69.0 38 NEE. wind; clear, and fine cumuli, 
733,95 14.8 554 933 Slight breeze from NW.; clear, 


734,00 8.8 | 933 Clear; cumuli; slight breeze from 


SW. 
1,036) Wind 8.; clear; clouds in E. ho- 
| Tizons 
726,02 4.5 5, 1,331) Wind 8.; clear; few cumuli, 
15 5.6 ; 1,267 Wind N, 
V9 el) WG 1,320 Wind N.; clear; cumuli. 
24.96 | 0 | 67.0 1,406 Sky covered with scattered clouds; 
cabling bright sunset. 
23.79 | hee 60.0 1,406 Thunder and rains; rainbow jn 
| the W. 

67 | i 61.6 1,486 At sunset last night a very vio. 
lent and continuous rain com- 
menced, wind NW., with thun- 
der and lightning, for half any 
hour, and continued moderate 
all the night. his morning 
calm and cloudy. 

Gentle breeze trom NW. clear, 
and cumuli. 

Wind N, 60° E.; heavy rains du- 
ring the fore part of the day; 
clouds and sun in the afternoon; 
clouds, with the appearance of 
fair weather. 

60.0 347) Sky covered; aimisty rain; wind 
S. 60° E. 
0 Heavy squalls of rain during the 
morning; wind shifting from 
SE. to N., and settled SE. with 
clouds and sun. 

Clear, and some cumuli; slight 

breeze from N. 
| Clear; some clouds in W. hori- 
| zon; Wind slight from SE. 
| Wind NE.; sky nearly overcast 
with clouds. 

07 | . Clear; breeze moderate from NE. 

715.46 | 86. 18 | Clear; breeze SE. 

712.5% , 80. ¢ Clear; breeze SE. 

714,15 : Clear sky; wind SE.- 

714.29 | 88. 930 | Clear; few cumuli; wind 8. 
707.07 .0 2,135 | Clear; clouds in NW.; wind 8. 
25° E. 

708.49 ; 5 | Clear and cloudy; wind SE. 
703.23 3. Clear and clouds; wind SE. 
701.15 i]. 32 | Clear, and some clouds; slight 
breeze from NW. 

704.09 0 | 47. Sky partially overcast, wind N. 
70° W; clear in NW. 

703.04 Clear; wind N. 70° W. 

699.78 4 | Cleat and calm. 

698.49 Clear; light breeze from S, 60° 


Ww. 
689.19 Clear; wind S. 20° W. 


‘marks. 
Date. 

—_—_— 
uw; wind N, 1843. 
ear, and fine cumulj 1 Q5 
. wr ‘ June 4 
from NW.; clear. 
i; slight breeze from 

fe 26 
ur; clouds in E, ho- 
27 
vars few cunuli, 
ear, cumuli. 
vith scattered clouds; Q8 
it sunset, 
A rains; rainbow jn 
29 

t night a very vio 
yitinuous rain com. 
ind N W., with thun- 
thtning, for half an 
continued moderate 
vit. This morning 30 


loudy. 

¢ trom NW.; clear, 
\. 
° E.; heavy rains due 
we part of the day, 
sun in the afternoon; 
h the appearance of 


Bi tH, ; July 
; a anisty rain; wind 7 


Is of rain during the 
wind = shifting from 
and settled SE, with 
sun. 

some cumuli; slight 
LN. 

clouds in W. hori- 
slight from SE. 

sky nearly overcast 


» moderate from NE. 
SE. 

le SE. 

ind SE.: 

umuli; wind S. 

s in NW.; wind 8. 


udy; wind SE. 
uds; wind SE. 
some clouds; slight 
NW. 

overcast, wind N. 
ear in NW. 

N. 70° W. 

lm. 

breeze from S, 60° 


S. 20° W. 


3 


| 


| Thermometer, 
| 


Barom. | 


| Millim. 


Time. 
Noon . 
Sunset ” 
Sunrise - 
Noon (?) = 
Sunrise ° | 
Noon - 
Sunset - 
Sunrise - 
Sunset - 
Sunrise - 
lh. 26m. p. m. 
Sunset - 
Sunrise - 


3h. 48m. p.m. 


686.60 
685.00 
684.08 


681,02 
672,33 


670.97 | 


667,20 
667.75 


661.638 
659.73 
663.94 


650,92 
650.29 
647.75 
655.76 


657.39 


| 6638.74 


Sunset - | 
Sunrise - 
Noon - 
Sunset - 
| Sunrise - | 
Noon - 
Sunset - 
Sunrise - 
Noon - 
Sunset - 
Sunrise - 


, Th, 53m. p.m. 


| 3h. 53m. p.m. 


Sunset - 
Sunrise - 
7h. 53m. a. m. 


| Noon - 


1h. 57m. p. m. 


3h. 57m. p. m. 


5h. 3m. am - 


663.60 


| 


662.02 | 
661.75 | 
658.32 | 


654.05 
652.49 


649.91 
646.16 


646.19 
643,55 
612.69 
641.34 
642.85 


644.51 
645.41 


645.14 


643.96 
646,96 


| Attached, 


Cent. 


30,1 
21.1 


31.3 
17.4 


Free, | 
| 
| Lahr. Feet. 
90.5 | 3,087 
70.0 | 3,037 
59.5 | 3,037 
| 88.3 | 3,922 
53.5 | 3,486 
| 
83.0 3,732 
73.0 | 3,757 
52.0 | 3,757 
| 
77.0 | 4,070 
68.4 | 4,070 
| 
| 
85.2 | 4,532 
74.5 | 4,490 
66.7 | 4,562 
58.0 | 4,621 
76.0 | 4,402 
| 
69.4 | 4,089 
54.0 | 4,089 
70.0 | 4,015 
59.0 | 3,976 
43.0 | 3,976 
80.0 | 4,336 
72.0 | 4,419 
47.0 | 4,419 
87.5 | 4,771 
78.0 | 4,760 
51.5 | 4,760 
85.5 | 5,068 
92.2 | 5,143 | 
74.0 | 4,947 
53.0 | 4,947 
84.4 - 
85.0 | 4,947 
88.6 - 
88.2 | 5,027 
62.6 | 4,721 


Alti- 


Table of meteorological observations—Continued. 


| tudes, | 


Remarks. 


Clear; wind 8, 85° E, 

Clear; slight breeze from 8.5 2 
few clouds, 

Calm and clear. 

Clear; wind 8, 

Clear; overcast from NW. to 
NE.; slight breeze trom E. 
Overcast; breeze from N. 20° E. 

Clear and cumuli; breeze N 

Clear; slight breeze from W.; a 
1 w clouds. 

Clear; breeze from SE. 

Clear; breeze moderate from N. 
80° W. 

Clear; breeze moderate from N. 
sv? W, 

Clear; some clouds. 

Clear; light air trom E. 

Clear; slight breeze trom SW, 

Clear and clouds in the horizon; 
strony wind from NE. 

Heavy clouds arising since an 
hour; sky partially covered; ap- 
pearance of bad weather; gale 
of wind trom SE., and light- 
ning from the same quarter. 

Clear; some clouds; moderate 
wind from N. 

Clear; wind N.; modefite. 

Clear; wind NE.; moderate. 

Slight breeze from NE. 

Clear; strong wind from S.60°E. 

Clear; moderate breeze from 8. 
35° E. 

Calm and clear. 

Calm and clear. 

Slight breeze from NW.; sky 
covered with heavy clouds; a 
thunder storm passing by. 

Air SW.; clear and clouds. 

Moderate breeze from E.; clear 
and clouds. 

Moderate breeze from E.; clear 
and clouds. 

Calm; clear; clouds in horizon. 

Calm and clear; some clouds. 

Calm and clear; some clouds. 

Slight breeze from NW.; clear; 
clouds; big clouds over the 
mountains. 

Slight breeze from NW.; clear; 
clouds; big clouds over the 
mountains. 

Slight breeze from NW.; thun- 
der storm approaching. 

Cloudy; air from S,, 


Date. Time, 


July 6 6h. 58m. a.m. 
7 Noon . 


Th. 13m, p.m. 


5h. 43m, p.m. 


Ih. 29m, p.m, 


9 Sunrise . 
Oh. 451n. p.m. 


2h. 45m. p. m. 


' Sunset = 
10. Sunrise . 
Noon e 


Oh. 45m. p.m. 


0 5h. 30m. p.m. 


Sunset * - 


| Sunset . 

| 
1! | Sunrise - 
| 2h. Sm. p. m. 
| Sunset - 
12 |} Sunrise - 
Ih. 20m. p. m. 
3h. 20m. p.m. 
Sunset - 
13 | Sunrise ES 
Noon : 


Th. 28m. p.m. 


14 | Sunrise (’)  - 
Noon - 
Ih. 30m. p. m. 
4h. p.m. - 


{5 | Sunrise - 
8h. 50m. p. m. 


Noon - 


Sunset - 
S Sunrise - 
Noon « | 


Barom, 


{ Al 7 
Attached,’ Free, 
' 


647.91 
630.5! 


| 
Millin, | 
| 


6238.94 | 


635.93 
625 61 
651.43 
630,89 


623.05 
G01.64 | 


603,49 | 
H01.96 
600.59 
609,20 
6038.90 


615.86 


615,85 


615.85 


614.65 
589.80 
589.46 


588. Le 
611.99 
611.61 
620.79 


621.40 
633.51 


633.00 


639.60 
648.84 
648.20 
646.51 


647.85 
648.39 


648,08 | 


Thermometer, 


Cent, 
24.0 


22.0 


23.5 


564 


Table of meteorological observations—Continued. 


| Alte | 
tudes, 
| ahr.) Feet 
82.4 | 4,890 
~e | * 
13 0 Oy 103 
78.5 | 5,192 
| 
69,2 ' 6,305 ° 
64.0 5,203 
55.5 $5,203 
72.0 5,497 
73.5 5,531 
55,0 , 5,756 
70.1 6,759 


66.5 


| 57.0 


49.0 


68.0 
66,2 


74.0 


| 63.0 


| BLO 


63.0 


70.0 
' 65 0 


44.0 


89.5 
69.5 


" 


6,520 


6,238 


6,135 


| 6,135 


7,464 
7,305 | 


7,305 
6,544 


Remarks. 


Clear and clouds: slight dreege oe 
air from SW, 

Clear; clouds in horizon: moder. 
ute breeze (rom N, 

Clear; clouds in horizon; moder. 
ute breeze from N, 

Overcast with clouds; a fit 
rain; air from N, 

Clear over head; cloudy horizon, 


mountains covered with dark 


clouds. 

Air S.; eloar; cloudy horizon. 

Overcust; rainy appearance; stich 
breeze trom N. 60° W. 

Overcast; rainy appearance; slight 
breeze trom N. 60° W, 

Overcast; air trom EB. 

Clear and clouds; moderate breeze 
from N, 25° B, 

Overcast; moderate breeze trom 
N,. 25° E. 

Overcast; calms; moderate breeze 
from N, 25° K. 

Overcast with rainy clouds; wind 
Ss. 30° B. , 

Overcast, and some blue sky, 
wind moderate from EB. 

Overcast, and some blue sky, 
wind moderate from E. 

Clear; sume clouds; wind slight 
from E, 

Clear; some clouds; wind slight 
from EB. 

Clear; some clouds, wind slight 
from Ei. 

Wind SE.; clear. 

Overcast; moderate wind SE. 

Clear and clouds; slight breeze 
from SW, 

Clear; slight wind from NF. 

Clear; slight wind from NE. 


i Clear; moderate wind trom S. 


Clouds, and some clear sky; 
cal 

Clear; breeze from NW. 

Clear, and some clouds; wind 
SE. 

Clear, and some clouds; wind 
SE. 

Clear and cahn. 

Clear and clouds; calm. 

Fresh breeze trom E. 

Calm; thunder storm approach- 
ing. | 

Clear; a few clouds; calm. 

Clear and clouds; flaws of wind 
fron SW. 

Clear; ‘clouds; calm. 


ed, 


marks. 


ids: slight breeze or 
W, 

sin horizon; mover. 
trom N, 

:in horizon; m 
from N, 

th clouds; a fittle 
vom N, 

vad; cloudy horizon, 
covered with dark 


Nels 


; cloudy horizon. 
ny appearance; slirlt 
nN. 60° W. 

ny appearance; sligh! 
nN. 60° W,. 

r from Fi. 

muds; moderate breeze 
5° 1. 
oderate breeze from 
nts moderate breeze 
5? HK. 


h rainy clouds; wind 


nd some blue sky, 
erate from E. 

id some blue sky; 
erate from EB. 
clouds; wind slight 


clouds; wind slight 
clouds, wind slight 


clear. 
oderate wind SE. 
londs; slight breez 


t wind trom NF. 

t wind from NE. 
syate wind from 5S. 
do some clear sky; 


re from NW. 


some clouds; wind 


some clouds; wind 


jin. 

ouds; calm. 

trom E. 

der storm approach- 


clouds; calm. 
ouds; flaws of wind 


AS 5 calm. 


16 


18 


‘2h, 52m. p. 


‘th. 4m. p. 


‘2h, 20m. p.m. | 


565 


[174] 


Table of meteorological observations—Continued, 


Time. 


4h. 20m. p.m. | 


Sunset 


Sunrise 
Noon 


Ih. 50m. p. m. 


Sunrise 


Noon 


lh. 6m. p. m. 


Sunrise 


5h. 27m. a. 


10h. 50m, a.m, 


Noon 


Sunset 


Sunrise 


Noon 


Ih. 50m. p. 


Sunset 


Sunrise 


lh. 22m. p. 


Sunset 
Sunrise 


2h. 32m. p. 


Sunset 


| Sunrise 


| Oh. 37m. p. 


2h. 8m. p. 
Sunset 


m. 
m. 


Barom. | 


Millim. 


647,49 


646,69 | 


646.70 


646,36 
637.37 


637.37 
634,19 


625.37 


625.37 


617, 
617. 
615. 


88 
35 


17 


615.25 


613.90 


613,04 


614.04 


613.26 | 


606.80 


604.94 
608.56 


608. 16 


615.34 
614.60 
633.30 


632.57 


636.25 
634.50 
641.08 
641.03 
641.19 


29.2 


20,3 


13.6 


29.7 


26.0 


18.6 


Thermometer, 


Attached. Free, 


ahr. 


4.2 


78.5 


49.0 
54 0 
73.0 


78.6 


66.0 


86.0 


71.0 
44,4 
85.0 
86.0 


Alti- 


tudes, | 


6,020 
6,318 


6,35] 


6,260 


Remarks, 


Clear and clouds; flaws from 
Sw, 
Overcast; moderate breeze trom 
SW, 


Overcast; calm; dark clouds in 
k. 

Calm: clear: few cumuli. 

Strong wind from N, 20° Es 
squall of rain just passing over; 
masses of cumuli. 

Weather growing worse, 

Cloudy; some clear sky; calm. 

Wind K.; clears some cunuli;s 
dark clouds above the moun- 
tains, 

Wind E.; clear; some cumuli; 
dark clouds above the moun- 
tains, 


' Clear; slight breeze from W, 


6,260 | 


6,337 


6,391 | 


6,527 


6,647 


5,192 
5,161 
5,163 


73.0 | 4,974 


Clear; slight breeze from W. 

Clear and calm; temperature of 
upper spring = 69°.0 Fahr., 
lower spring — 609.5 Fahr, 

Clear; some cumuli; darkerclouds 
over the mountains; slight breeze 

SE. 

Cloudy; wind NW., but chang- 
ing every instant; temperature 
of upper spring = 619.0, lower 
spring == 58°.0 Pahr. 

Clear; a slight breeze trom NW.; 
temperature of upper spring 
57°.8, lower spring 54°.3 Fahr. 

Moderate breeze from N.; clouds; 
some clear sky; thunder storm 
in N. 

Cloudy over the mountains; clear 
in N.; breeze NE. 

Cloudy; thunder storm has pass- 
ed; clear above the mountains; 
breeze from S., but changing 
every moment to every quarter. 

Clear and calin. 


| Clear; few cumuli; slight breeze 


fron N. 
Clear; few cumuli; slight breeze 
trom N, 


' Cloudy; calm. 


Slight breeze from SE. ; clear. 
Clear; some cumuli; slight breeze 
from NW. 


| Thunder storm, with rain, ad- 


5,192 


vancing from NW. 
Cloudy; some clear sky; cali. 
Clear; air from SE. 
Clear; air from NW. 
Clear; air from NW, ° 


| Clear; slight breeze from E. 


[ 174 ] 566 


Table of meteorological obser vations—Continued, 


‘ye 
lhermometer, , 
Alti- 


Lime. | Barom, Remarks. 


| | 
tudes, 
Attuched,! Free, 


Millim, Cent, Mauhr. leet, 
Sunrise | 630,62 | iA 15.0  d,074 Cleary aie trom BE. 
Noon | 645,20 20.8 | 85.0 4,959 Clears slight breeze froin E. 
Zhe pe me 645.09 36 10.0 5,086 Cleary slight breeze from EB, 
Ih. ps ins Od 30 88.3 5,080) Cleary slight breeze from EB, 
Sunset 613,95 21, 14.0 4,940) Clear and ealm, 
Sh. Odin a. H12,05 13, 55.0 4,040) Clear; air from W, 
Zhe dm. pom 641.70 32,! 80.0 O,1493 ) Cloury air trom Wey clouds 
horizon, 
Mh. 4m. prom, | 610,05 | 8, 88.5 8,179 Clears wind from B. 
Sunrise | O19 13, 55.0 4,965! Clear and clouds; wind N, 
10h. Sm. a, im, | 643,74 27.7 41.5 4,90 Clear and clouds; wind N, 
2h. Sm. p.m. | 643,00 28, , 82.0 5,032) Clear and clouds; wind N, 
4h. Saw pei.) Gb248 | 87. 81.5 5,048) Clear and clouds; wind N, 
Sunset 643.50 20, 69,0 64,857) Clear and clouds; breeze fron s, 
Sunrise 614.35 14, 58.0 4,857 Overcast; air from N, 
Sunset 644,00 | 178 | 64.0 4,866 Clear and clouds; air from E, 
Ih. 16m. p.m. | 642,29 BL. 87.0 5,128 Clear and clouds; breeze from N, 
3h. p.m. -| G41.54 | BR, 87.2 5,170) Clear and clouds; thunder stor 
| coming up trom N. 
70.0 5,184) Clear and clouds; breeze trom N, 
58.8 $5,184) Overcast; ealin. 
71.0 5,210 Overcast; breeze 8, 25° W. 
68.2 Beginning to rain. 
53.0 336 Fine rains cali. 
55.5 5,557 Rainy. 
52.5 5,530 Misty; rainy appearance, eatin. 
O45 339) Clear and clouds; slight breeze 
from Si. 
lh. 26m. p.m. | 612.: 20,6 65.3 6,359 Clear and clouds; slight breeze 
from SE. 
Sunset 85.! [2.3 54.0 7,5 Clear; moderate breeze from 8, 
Sunrise 5h. | , 48.0 7,5 Clear; mist still in horizon; breeze 
W. 
Noon 29 | 22.6 69.0 784b Clear and clouds; wind N,24°W, 
Oh. 34m. p.m. | 2 : 69.5 847) Clear and clouds; wind N, 24° W, 
Sunset Z 61.0 778 Clear; cloudy in horizon; wind E. 
Sunrise 2.2 s AQ, Clear and calin. 
Noon Y | ‘. 72.0 382 Clouds; alittle rains a little clear; 
slight breeze from NE. 
Oh. 54m. p.m. | 592.06 | ‘ 741.0 408 Clouds; a little rain; a little clear; 
| ; slight breeze from NE. 
Sunset rE 3 2, Ark Clear and clouds; breeze from NE. 
Sunrise 0 51.6 7,7 Clear; wind W, 
Noon 579.70 2.2 73. 904) Clear; clouds; strong wind from 
Ww. 
' Th. 24in. p.m. | 579.40 22. 0.5 7% Clear; clouds; strong wind from 
W. 


Sunset -| 636.00 
Sunrise -| 643.01 
Noon -, 637.78 | 
Ih. 26m. pom, | 637.40 | 
4h. 26m. a m. | 681,85 | 
6h. 56m. pom.) 627.50 
Sh. lla. asim, 627.64 
Noon -; 612,53 


a 
on 


7 
- 


24 
a ae 


——2 
—— as 


ne 


Sunrise 
9h. 62m. a. 


9.37 : 3, 7,602 Clear and calm. 
3 


‘ 
572.37 ‘ 8.8 8,314 Sky covered with thin misty 
| clouds; breeze S. 709 W. 
Sunsct | 492.95 | ‘ . 7,143 Clear; clouds; moderate breeze 
| | from W. 

Sunrise 593.64 | . 38, 7,143 Clear; few cumuli; calm. 
| Oh. 32m. p. m. | 602.88 | A (9.5 , 6,951 | Cloudy; some clear sky; slight 
| breeze from S, 
| lh. 42m. p. m. | 602.88 .0 6,963 Cloudy; strong breeze from S. 
| 8h. 50m. a. m. | 604.71 | 6,727 | Clear and calm. 
| 9h. 50m. a. m. | 604.80 | 67.2 6,755 | Clear and calm. 
| 10h. 50m. a.m. | 604.60 .5 , 6,786 | Clear and calm. 


ed, 


emarks. 


mB. 

breeze frou E, 
breeze from E, 
breeze from EB, 

Wir 

vn W, 

rom Wey clouds in 


from EB. 

ods; wind N, 
ouds; wind N, 
ouds; wind N, 
ouds; wind N, 
ouds; breeze from 8, 
‘from N, 

oudsy; air from BE, 
oud; breeze from N, 
ouds; thunder storm 
fron N. 

ouds; breeze from N, 
lin. 

ceze 8, 25° W, 

0 rain. 

alin. 


appearance, calin. 
‘loudss slight breeze 


‘louds; slight breeze 


brate breeze from 8, 
till in horizon; breeze 


buds; wind N, 24° W, 
puds; wind N, 24° W, 
y in horizon; wind BE, 
lim. 

tle rains a little clear; 
ve from NE, 

tle rain; a little clear; 
from NE. 

uds; breeze from NE. 
W, 

8; strong wind from 


8; strong wind from 


Alm. 

1 with thin misty 
eze S. 709 W, 

1s; moderate breeze 


unuli; calm. 

ne clear sky; slight 
is, 

ng breeze from S. 
Im. 

Im. 

lm. 


Date. 


1845. 
Aug. 5 


‘ 


10 


11 


13 


14 


15 


16 


17 


] 
| 


| 


| 
| 
| 
| 


567 


[ 174] 


Table af meteorological observa tions—Continued. 


Time, 


ee 
won - 


buh. 50m, pe om 
50m. pom, | 


th. 
gh. 


3h. 


50m, | 
50m. p.m. 


Mh 50m, p.m. 
Sunset is 
Sunrise ° 
Sunset * 
Sunrise ° 


th. 500. pp. ma 


Sunset «| 


| Sunrise 7 


| Mh. 2S. pe mn. | 
| 603,84 


| Sunrise ° 
Noon ad 
Ih. 7m. p.m 

| Sunrise - 
Noon bd 
Sunset - 


Sunrise 


2h. Sin, pe me + 


Sunset - 


Sunrise | 


th. 20m, p.m. 


Sunset - 
Sunrise - 
10h. 2m. a. m. 


Noon - 
Oh. 40m. p. m, | 
Sunset - | 
Sunrise - 
10h. 50m. a. m. 
Noon - | 
Sunset - 
Sunrise - 


2h. p. m. 


3h. p.m. - 


Sunset zt 
Sunrise - 
Noon - 
Sunset - 
Sunrise - 


| 


Barom. 


Villim, 
604.605 
HOLE 
"04.45 
OO4AS 
OO0.85 


HO344 | 


603,00 


H02,70 


HAN | 


| H87.19 
597,59 
96.70 


596.40 
606,81 


; OLLI. 16 
610,77 
614,05 
610,80 
607.77 
605.56 
600,30 
| fOO.39 


600.1 


587.76 


587.74 | 


| 587.08 


592.92 
592.65 
595.20 


| 595.27 


| 602.45 
| 602,44 
| 602.52 
611.50 
| 611.28 
610.94 


610.36 
613.34 


613.31 


| 614.24 


4 
A37.415 | 


604.45 | 


Thermometer, 


Attuehed, 


I" 
ree, 


Cent, 
a4 
W565 
25.8 
26.0 
40.5 
25.8 
0.8 


10.3 


a 


as 
xz 


—a2 
x 


— 
—_ 
os 


ao 8 
a 
PS) 


a) 
Se se 
oO mae 


Fahr. 


75.0 
"t 
de 
78, 


‘ou 


77,5 
75." 
Ot 
VO 


a 


46.0 
| O85 


13.0 
79.5 


| 69.8 


| A2.0 
78.0 
51.0 


70 
| 78,0 
| 41,0 
| 78.0 
| 71.8 


\lti- 


tudes, 


beel, 
6,825 
68a 
O87) 
6,871 
6,988 


6,743 


6,743 
7, 190 


6,040 
7,106 
1,000 


7,000 


6,784 


6,594 


| 6,483 


6,517 
6,028 
6,502 
6,557 


7,22 


| 7,221 


67.0 


68.0 
67,2 
32.2 
75,2 
86,1 
75.0 
34.0 


84.2 | 


86.5 
65.2 


| 37.0 
| 82.0 


74.3 
38.4 


6,687 


| 6,516 


7,489 


7,242 
7,265 
6,951 
6,951 
6,846 
6,941 


6,667 
6,546 


6,238 | 


6,238 


6,399 


| 6,150 | 


6,150 


Remarks 


Cleary ealiny cloudy. 

Cleary calms cloudy, 

Clear; culing cloudy, 

Clear; calm cloudy, 

Clear; W. wind in squalls, 

Hree thermometer in the sun. 

Clear; some clouds; W. wind in 
aqualls, 

Clear and calm, 

Cloudy; thunder siorm approache 
ing; air from E.; temperature 
of spring, 46° Fahr, 

Air from W.; clear, 

Clear and clouds; breeze from W, 

Clear and cloudy; slight breeze 
from W, 

Cloudy; wind from E. 

Cloudy; wind from 8, 

Cloudy; rain last night; wind 
from N. 


| Clouds and clears wind NW, 


Clouds and clear; wind NW, 

Clear; some clouds; calm. 

Clear; squalls from all points, 

Moderate breeze from W.; clears 
horizon dirty. 

Clear; fresh breeze from W, 

Hazy; fresh breeze from W, 

Clear and clouds; moderate wind 
fron NW, 

Clear; calins white frost. 

Clear; calins moderate wind from 
NW. 

Calm and clear. 

Calm and clear; white frost. 

At the divide; moderate breeze 
fron NW, 

Moderate breeze from NW, 

| Moderate breeze from NW. 


Clear and calm. 

| Clear; airefrom NW, 

Clear; slight breeze from S. 

Clear; slight breeze from 8. 

Clear; slight breeze from NW. 

Clear; wind from N. 

Clear over head; dirty horizon; 
calm. 

Clear over head; dirty horizon; 
calm. 

Clear over head; dirty horizon; 
calm. 

| Clear and calm. 

Clear over head; horizon dirty; 
wind squally from N. 

Clear over head; horizon dirty; 

| slight breeze from N. 

| Clear; foggy horizon; air from 

| SW. 


f 174 J 568 


Table af meteorological vbservations—Continued, 


"Thermometer. 


j 
Date, | Barom. | | be | eeaie 
Attuched,|) Pree, tiles | 


oe . —_ = 


184g, Millim, Cent, ‘ahy. | Peet, 

Aug. 17 | 2h. Some pom 610.45 20.1 . 6,558 | Clowes fogey horizon; eal 

unset 10,08 18.1 A. 6,294 Clears horizon more purey cabin 

ia | Monrise 6tt.a3 5.3 6,294) Cleary aly from N, 80° W,) hazy 
horizon, , 

2h. pe me 607,04 2.60 | 6,795 | Cleary slight breeze from W, 

Sh, peu. OO7,0b 2.0 | 6,782 | Cleary wlight breeze from W, 

Sunrise 606,30 6 ‘ O,40b | Smoky horizon; calm and clear, 

Noon 608 8h { 0 | 6,840 |) Cleary few eunnuliy breeze in 

equals from sw, 

Oh. 46m. p, 608.54 | , 6,719 | Cleary few ecamully breeze in 

} ajdulls from SW, 

Sunset 602,75 25.0 ve 6,661 | Clewr and ealniy horizon not pure, 

| Sunrise 602,05 4.2 ‘ Clear, and dirty horizon; breeze 

from NW, 
Noon 606.33 | 27.7 : 7 | Moderate wind N. 60° W., hazy 

} mil, 

th. p.m. | $96,33 2, 7 \ Moderate wind N, 609 W.¢ haay 
sun, 

Dividing ridge, wmokys sun faint; 
scattered cunulis thunder storm 
some distunce in bys hich wind 
N. 60° W, 

Sunrise 607 06 1.6 43. 6,858 Smoky; eun faints camuliy air 

| SE, 

Noon 614.45 | 3h, 0 6,416) Smoky, sun taints calm, 

lh. 5m pe om.) 613.98 Sh. i. 6,425 > Smoky; sun (eints wind in squalls 

ae * Pee | from s, 

Sunset 612,41 ‘ 6,185) Cumuliy thunder storm at a dis. 

tances slight breeze from N. 

Sunrise 612,29 6 5 6,185) Sinokys scattered eumuli;y calm. 

Noon 616.50 | ; 4.8 6,281) Very smoky; sun faints eumuli; 

eal, 

Ih. 30m. p.m. | 616.02 27 79. 6,204) Very smoky: high wind from N, 

10° W..; rainy appearance. 

| Sunrise 616,03 ‘, 47, 5,989 | Smoky: clears cold breeze from 8, 

| Noon | 614,88 75,2 6,290 | Wind in squalls trom NW. 

| Oh. 45m. p. m. | 614,88 5, (4.5 ) 8,298 | Clears very smoky. 

| Sunset | 618.77 3.4 | 5,843 | Clear and calm; very smoky. 

| Sunrise O2@L,22 7) 45.4 | 5,843 | Clears lary s cold wind from SE. 
Noon 624,34 i, 72.2 5,841 | Cleary hazy; breeze in’ squalls 

| from SE. 

; Sunset 621,83 | je 12.5 f Clears hazy; cal; temperature of 

Biy Spring == 659.0 Fahr. 
Sunrise » 620.84 , 28.5 5,788 Cleary smoky: calm; temperature 
| | Big Spring = 56°.0 Fahr. 
of 4 Steam hole = 819.5 
¢ Steamboat 879.0 * 
Noon 23.64 83. yO Cleary smoky; moderate breeze 
| from S$. 25° BE, 
Sunset 638,67 22, 8,3 45 | Clear: sinoky; calm. 
Sunrise 637.64 A , 5,012 Clear; smoky; some cumuli; 
' calin. 
Noon 635.86 | 7.0 | 5,320; Cloudy; rainy appearance; not 
| quite so smoky; breeze 8, 70° 
W. 
5,347 Partly clouded sky. 


4h. lOm. p.m.) 675,87 


ned, 


emarke, 


¥ horton; ealni 
Aon More purey ealiy 
rom N, 80° W. hazy 


it breeze from W, 
it breeze from W, 
‘ivory calm and clear, 
y etumuliy breeze iq 
om SW, 
eurulls 
mm SW, 
wlniy horizon not pure, 
dirty horizon; breeze 


breeze in 


ina N. 60° W., hazy 
ind N, 60° W.; hay 


lire, wmokys sun faint; 
‘uinulis thunder storm 
tinea an Ih; hich win 


V, 
nm faints camuliy oir 


1 taints calm, 
p(uints wind in squalls 


under storm at a dis 
rit breeze from N. 
ttered cumuli; calm. 
; sun faint; eumuli; 


: high wind from N, 
rainy @ppearanee, 
r; cold breeze from 8, 
alls trom NW, 
smoky. 
ilm; very smoky. 
; cold wind from SE. 
: breeze in squalls 


, cals temperature of 
r= 659.0 FPahr. 

y: calm; temperature 
wing <= 66°.0 Fahr. 
hole = 81°.5 * 
hoat == 87°.0 « 
Ky; tmoderate breeze 
bY KB. 

y; calm. 
ky; some cumuli; 
ny appearance; not 
moky; breeze 8S, 70° 


1d sky. 


BS i 


Dute. 


Sept. 


30 


569 


[ 174 } 


Tuble af meteorological observations~Cominued. 


Murat 


Sunrine 


2h. pe ate 


Sunset 
Sulitine 


Noon 
th. Je my 
Sunrise 


Noon 
Lh. 8Om. | 
Sunset 


Sunrise 


Noon 


4h. 48m. p. 


Sunset 


Sunrise 


Sh. 30m. a. 


Sh. 50m. a. 


Oh, 50m. a 
| 10h, 50m, a. 


| Noon 
| 2h. p.m. 


6 | 


Sunset 
5h. 33m. a. 
Sunset 


Sunrise 


Sunset 


Sunrise 


Sunset 


(| Sunrise 


Larom, 


Villon. 
606,26 


OOS, 33 


~ 648,50 


» OAT.T7 
~ 646,70 


. O20, 42 
« 620.55 


- 625,40 
-| 697,20 
mn. 636,905 
- 644,49 
- 646,04 


-, 649,63 


m. | 659,55 


-| 658,91 
-| 659.04 


me | O58.80 | 


660,14 
m. 660.04 
m. | 660,15 
660,27 
650.28 
656.83 
655.78 
653.10 


-| 650.11 


652.03 


-| 656,25 


Thermometer, 


| Attached, 


Cent, 
ZU. 


14.6 


20,8 


18,8 


a 


15.7 


Pree, 


hake, 


Ov. 


An 
55.0 


78.0 


O50 
fio 


HLS | 


41.2 | 


45.5 
61.3 
66.0 
6.0 


55.0 


39.5 


Alti 


titles. 


Teel, 
§,t49 


5,142 


1,764 | 


1631 
1,681 


601 
6,505 


wr | 
5,570 


— 

- 
=} 
a 


4,723 | 


1,666 


4,189 
4,093 
093 
13 
70 


a 
- 


- ae ae) 
5 _ 
ne 

a 


ee 
: t. 
wwe 


oo) 


~~) 
5S ft > 
~Fsi 2 


ne 


4,496 


4,496 


4,173 


Renu ke, 


Dark clouds; very litte bhues 
alight breeze from &, 
Slight breeze from Ney linht 


clouds all ower the wkyy thu. 
lor storm last might, with mod- 
erate rain, Which haw made the 
air clea 

real breeve 8, 20° os cloar 
over heady clouds; rain in the 
horizon 

Calms clears eamull. 

Aiv from NW. dark rainy clouds 
moving on the horizon, ever 
head not so darks considera. 
ble rain lest night; thunder and 
wind, 

Clenr and eloudes wind from By 

Clear and clouds; whid fram EB. 

Clear; clouds in horizons; eon- 
stant thunder storms, with rain 
hawt nights eal, 

Wind SW, clouds aud blue sky. 

Strone wind SW.,; elouds and 
blue sky, 

Catling almoat o¢ 
clouds, 

Clear; slight breeze from 8, 70° 
WwW, 

Clear; clouds; eal. began to rain 
at stinsel, and continwed almost 
the whole night, 

Clear and clouds; 

from SS, 

Clear and eatin; few clouds. 

Clear and ealm. 

Cloury air from N, 

Clear; air from 8. 

Clear; air from 8. 

Clear; air from 8, 

Clear; slight breeze from S. 

Clear; slight breeze from 8. 

Clear and ealu. 

Clear and ealm. 

Calm; clear, and elouds in the 
horizon. 

Wind brisk from SE.; clouds; 
rainy appearance; there was @ 
thunder storm at a distance, and 
some rain last night. 

Clear over head; dark clouds in 
horizon; thunder storm, with 
rain in the afternoon. 

Clear and calm; some cumuli in 
the horizon. 

Clear and some cumuli; calm; 
thunder storm, with some rain 
and a gale this afternoon. 

Clear and calin. 


cast with heavy 


fresh breeze 


es 


dint = Minato 


ee SE 


— 


( 174 J 570 


Tuble af meteorological observations—Continued, 


Thermometer, | 
| 


\ituehed, Pree, | 


Fuhr. | 
7,0 — 


Date. Time, | Baron. 


—_—--- —— j- es 


Cent, 
af 
1M 


Millim. | 
H58.05 
OH0,44 
O50, a0 ho 
660,09 17.8 
H60, 10 6 


aad, 
Rept, 7 Oh. 50m. a. om, 
Th. 50m. a. m. 
Bh, SOm, a, 
Oh, 50m, a, 
10h, 50m, a, 


Noon O50, | “ 6 


Oh, 50m, 659, 23.9 
th. 60m, 650,66 | 7.0 
sh. 50m, 659, 
Sh. 50m. O59, 
dh. 50m 659, 
Sunwet 657, 
Sunrise 656, 
4h. p. m. 657.2 


Sunset O56, 


656, 
O58, 


Sunrise 
Oh. 18m. p. 


4h. 40m. p. 638, 


5h. 23m. p. 656, 


Sunrise 654, 


52m. p. O54. 


36m. p. 613,16 


» 50m. a. 


652.04 


58.0 
53.0 


» ai Mm, 
9h. a. m. 


10h. a. m. 653.01 55.0 


Ih. a. m. 653.60 | 


Noon 653.62 | 


654.06 


th. p.m. 


2h. p.m. 655,33 | 


, 4,363 | 


| 4,293 


| 
4,353 


Alti- 


Pt wl Remarks, 


Peet, 

1086 Clear ool calm 

Clear art eatin 

Clear and ealm 

Clear ond ealm, 

Clear, ancl aentle by 
25° bh, 

Clear, whl wine ba aqtialle fre 
mre quarter, 
Clear, and wind iy 

Ss, 25° W, 

Clear, and wind on 
B, 25° W, 

Clear, and wind in squalls from 
8, 34° W, 

Cloar, and some clouds tn the howe 
rizon, 

Clear, and «ome elouds in the hoe 
rizony 

Clone over heady light clouds in 
horizon, eal 

Cleary clouds in 
ents 

Clear over heads clouds in the ho» 
rizony air from SW, 

«, ver heady clouds in the hoe 

vir from SW.,5 calm, 

Clear and ealm, 

Clear over heads clouds in hori 
zony air from SE, 

On the peak of Crater island; 
trom SE. 

On the shore of the lakes air from 
SH. 

1,336) Cleary seattered cumuliy, a qule of 

| wind S, 65° B, 

4,508 | At the foot of the peninsula; very 

| violent gale. 

At the top of the peninsula; blue 
sky, with  seattered — flwey 
clouds; heavy near the hori 
zon; Wind 8. 20° EB. 

4,360 | 'The whole sky covered with rainy 
clouds; thunder, lightning, and 
rain almost all the night. 

Clearing up; calm. 

Strong wind from N. 
rainy clouds. 

Strong wind from N, 
rainy clouds, 

Strong wind from N. 
some blue sky. 

Sky covered with rainy clouds; 
strong wind from N. 25° KE. 
Sky covered with rainy clouds; 

some blue sky. 

More clear sky; sun; moderate 
wind from N. 25° E. Free 
thermometer in the sun. 


ae from N 


weptially irony) 


ills from 


al | 


the horizon; 


air 


1,836 


6,020 


4,354 25° E,; 


25° Ex 


4,324 


259 


4,313 E.; 


4,315 


temarke, 


ine 
ti 
im 
In, 
entle be ge from N 


irel baw mepeballe fro 
ter, 
Wine ie weptially irony 


vind hom colls fron 
vind in sepually fron 
ome clouds in the hoe 
ome clouds in the ho. 
eads light elouds in 


alin 
In in the horizon; 


vnly clouds in the hoe 
from SW, 

ols clouds in the hoe 
from SW. calm, 
Im, 

veads clouds in hori 
on SE, 

of Crater island; air 


Hof the lakes air from 


red cumulis, a gule of 
5° WK, 
f the peninsula; very 
C. 
P the peninsulas blue 
h = seattered — fhwey 
“vy near the hori 
Ss, 20° EB. 
ry covered with rainy 
inder, lightning, and 
t all the night. 
calm. 

from N. 25° E,; 
Is. 

fron N. 25° E.; 
Is, 

from N. 25° E.; 
sky. 

with rainy clouds; 
d from N. 25° 5, 
with rainy clouds; 
sky. 
‘ky; sun; moderate 
N. 25° BE. Free 
er in the sun. 


571 


Table af meteorological observations —Continved, 


| Thermometer, Nit | 
Date. Time, Barom. | | teales Remarks, 
\ttuched, Pree, 
14d, Willim. Cent, Pahr, | Peet. 
Rept. Il Sh. p.m ~, 655.88 W747 H4.0 4,280 | Cleary cloud scattered; moderate 


| wirnl from N, g8° &, 
4h. pom, «| 656,05 218 63.0 4,947 Cleary cloule scattered: suny 
moderate wind from N, 25° B, 


Sh. pom. ~| O70, 20,6 60.2 1,222 | Clear: clouds seatteved: suns 
| melerate wind from N, 26° B, 
| Munset «| 655.50 | 8 $2.2 | 4,080 | Clear, 
12 | Sunrise «| O57,50 | 2.3 33.0 | 4,080! Clear and calm, 
Sunnet «| 655.48 | AY | 47.2 | ALTO) Clear and elouday calm, 
13 | Sunrise »| 654,88 3.0 35.5 | 4,119 | Clear and eloudss calm, 
4h. 50m, pm OS57.51 27,2 82.0 | 4,280 | Cleary eeattered elouday  suny 
| eal, 
oer ~ 666,76 L4.8 O05 4,170) Clowes weattered clouds, sung 


{ ealm. 

14 Sunrise «| 655,12 | 8,2 16.4 4,079 | Cleary fow seattored clouday slight 
breeze from NW, 

O51L.08 30.0 80.0 4,564 | Cleve and clouds; sun; moderate 
| | breeze from SE. 


Sh. 50m, p.m, 


| Sunset ~ 650,25 20.6 67.5 | 4,444 | Cleary moderate breeze from SE. 
15 | Sunrise -| 648.2 3.5 87.5 | 4,444 | Clones horizon partly covered with 
eurmuliy air from NW, 
3h. 43m. p.m, | 640,15 80.3 83.0 | 5,081 Clear and seattered clouds; suns 
| frewh wind from §, 
| Sunset ~| 638,80 22.6 74.0 | 6,028 Clear and seattered cloudas sung 
fresh wind from &, 
16 | Sunrise «| 637,07 Ih1 52.0 5,028 Calm and clear, 
3h. 56m. p.m, | 604,04, 14.6 9.0 | 6,280 Dividing ridge, 70 feet helow the 
| summits Violent gale from N, 
| 65° W., cumull in same quar. 
ter, 
6h. 20m. p.m. | 630,79 LI,l 50.5 | 5,144) Ina valley below the divides sky 
| clear; cold wind from NW. 
17 6h. Omi am. | 631,97 5 —5.5 21,5 | 5,144 Sky elear and calm, 
3h, 56m. p.m. | 642.85 20.0 65,2 | 4,849 Sky clear; wind from W. 
Sunset -, 642,35 15.0 58.6 4,667 Sky clears wind from W. 
18 | Sunrise -| 643,439 —2.9 25.1 4,667 Cleary ealmy bank of fog in N. 
| Sunset -; 643.31 16.4 60.5 ° 4,779 Port Halls clear and calm. 
19 | Sunset -| 645.12 ) 6.3 43.0 4,764 Sky covered with rainy dark 
| clouds; sttong wind from 8, 


| ZA° W, 
20 | & ise «| 645.81 3.7 34.0 | 4,764 Rain and show during the whole 
night; wind N. 


Oh. 13m. p.m. | 649,12 8.6 44.8 4,434 Wind N.; sky covered with 
| clouds. 
21 | Sunrise -| 651.48 | —0.2 29.5 4,239 Clear and calm; rain last night. 
9h. 50m. a.m. | 652.48 12.0 60.2 | 4,342 Clear and calm; clouds in horizon. 
| 10h. 50m. a.m. | 652.59 17.2 55.6 4,387 Almost cloudy all over; air SE. 

Sunset -| 649,94 9.5 48.0 4,504 

22 | Sunrise -| 646.00 5.6 | 41.0 4,504 Wind 8.; overcast with rainy 
| | | clouds; begins to rain. 

Sunset -| 646.39 | 6.0 | 42.5 4,519 | Moderate wind from 8. ; sky part- 
| | | ly clear; partly covered with 
| rainy clouds for the greatest 

| | part of the day, 
23 | Sunrise -| 647,69 0.8 32.0 4,519 | Calm; overcast; snow falling 
| 


\ 
| 
| 
| 
| 


| | thick. 
| | 

32.0 | 4,487 | Calm; overcast; snow falling 
| | thick. 


7h. a.m. -| 647.76 


1843. 


Sept. 23 | 


Time. 


8h. a. m. 
, 9h. a.m. 


10h. a. m. 
Ih. a.m. 
Noon 
lh. p.m. 
2h. p.m. 
3h. p.m. 
| 4h. p. m. 
| Sh. p.m. 
Sunset 
7h. p.m. 
8h. p.m. 
| 9h. p.m. 
10h. p. m. 
1lh. p. m. 


Midnight 


Sunrise 


' Noon 


Sunset 
| Sunrise 
2h. p.m. 
3h. p. m. 
| 4h. p. m. 
| 5h. p.m. 
Sunset 


6h. 20m. a. m. 


Noon 
t 
| Sunset 
| 
| Sunrise 
| 
| Sunset 


Sunrise 


| Sunset 


Barom. 


Millim. 


649,12 | 


648.90 


| 
| 
| 
\ 


| 


648.31 


649,29 


649.16 


648.95 | 


648.65 


649.44 


649.43 | 


649.50 


649.99 ! 


649.80 
649.80 


651.14 
650.88 
650.94 


653.60 


654.85 
655.96 
655.25 
654.69 
653.99 
653.62 
6F3.07 
653.39 


650.84 


651.46 


646.16 


| 654.60 


572 


Table of meteorological 


Thermometer. 


| Attached. 


Cent. 
12.8 
10.2 

8.8 
18.3 
17.8 
20.2 
16.4 
18.6 
17.8 
18.2 


19.8 


ahr. 


46.8 


| 57.0 


| 

 Altie | 
tudes. 

Free. | | 
| 

| leet, | 
4,463 | 
| 4,380 | 


32.0 
35.0 


40.0 4,511 


43.0 | 4,531 


43.0 4,534 | 


4,566 | 


observations—Continued. 


Lr r 


Remarks. 


Calm; overcast; snow falling thick, 
Calm; overcast; snow falling 
thick. 


| Air from N. 20° W.; snow fall 


ing not so thick. 

Heavy wind trom N.; snow turn- 
ed into rain. 

A little rain; somewhat clearer 
in the N. and B. horizon. 

More clearing up in that corner; 
a little blue spot. 

More moderate; no rain; more 
clear sky in N. 


ite 
| More moderate; no rain; more 


clear sky in N. 


' More moderate; no rain; more 


clear sky in N. 


Wind N.; sky improving from 


35.0 | 
53.2 | 


54.0 | 4,240 


| 
| 
| 
| 
| 
if 


64.0 
61.5 
60.0 


4,297 
4,205 
4,324 
4,319 
4,252 


| 4,252 


55.0 


40.2 
4,310 
4,045 
| 4,045 | 
| 4,367 


4,367 | 


3,990 | 


NW. to NE. 

Nearly calm; clear over head; 
clouds scattered. 

Moderate wind from N.;_ sky 
cloudy; clear spots between. 

Air from N.; sky cloudy; some 
clear spots. 

More clear. 

Cloudy; a few stars peeping out. 

Air from NE.; sky bright, ex- 
cept in E. 

Air from NE.; southern sky 
nearly overcast; northern sky 
partly bright, partly covered 
with scattered clouds. 

Calin; overcast; clear in the W. 
horizon. 

Breeze from S.; sky clear; some 
scattered clouds. 

Clear; breeze from 8. 

Clear; gale from S. 

Clear and clouds; sun; wind S. 

Clear and clouds; wind Ss. 72° E. 

More clouds. 


, More clouds; dark in the W. 


Almost overcast. 

Cloudy; clear; rain last night; 
wind 8. 25° W, 

Cloudy; rainy appearance; fresh 
wind from SW, 

Clouds and clear; wind sharp 
tron SW. 

Clear and calm; white frost last 
night. 


| Overcast with clouds; cold wind 


from SE. 

Ove cast with rainy clouds; slight 
breeze from 8. 

Gale from S. 70° W.; clouds 
and clear; thunder in N. 


ued. 


—— a se, 


Remarks, 


ast; snow falling thick, 
reast; snow falling 


» 20° W.: snow fall. 
thick. 
! from N.; snow turn. 
he 
ny somewhat clearer 
and E. horizon. 
1g up in that corer; 
€ spot. 
rate; no rains more 
nN. 
rate; no rain; more 
nN 
rate; no rains; more 
iN, 
sky improving from 
a i 
1; clear over head; 
tered. 
ind from N.; sky 
ar spots between, 
; sky cloudy; some 


W stars peeping out, 
Kio; sky bright, ex- 


southern sky 
recast; northern sky 
ht, partly covered 
ed clouds, 

st; clear in the W, 


Ea. § 


3.3 sky clears some 
ruds. 

from 8, 

om S, 

ouds; sun; wind 8. 
uds; wind S, 72° BE, 


dark in the W. 
ist. 
';_rain last night; 


y appearance; fresh 
Ww 


clear; wind sharp 
m; white frost last 
clouds; cold wind 
rainy clouds; slight 
S 


70° W.; clouds 
under in N, 


Oct. 


18 
19 
20 


21 


| 
| 


| 


Time. 


Sunrise - 
Sunrise - 
Sunset - 
Sunrise - 
Sunset - 
Sunrise - 
Sunset - 
Sunrise - 
Sunrise - 
Sunset ° 
Sunrise - 
Sunset - 
Sunrise - 
Sunset - 
| Sunrise - 
Sunset = 
Sunrise - 
Sunset - 
Sunrise - 
Sunset - 
Sunrise - 
Sunset - 
| Sunrise - 
Sunset - 
| Sunrise “| 
Sansct - 
Sunrise - 
Sunset - 
Sunrise -| 
Sunset - 
Sunrise - 
Sunset - 
Sunrise - 
Sunset - 
Sunrise - 
Sunset - 
Sunrise - 
Sunset - 
Sunrise - 


Oh. 44m. p. m. 
Sunset - 
Sunrise - 


8h, 26m. a. m. 
Sunset - 
Sunrise - 


Barom. 


Millim, | 


660,54 


663.35 
632.21 


677. 
688, 
HRY, 
684, 
684, 


89, 


179.09 
Ol 
85 


702,65 


Oy, 
Te. 


21 
44 
85 


706. 
706. 
706. 


104.78 
709.438 


76 | 
26 5 


704.11 | 


Attached. Free, 


709.08 | 


743.46 
705.46 
684.68 
685.25 
678.00 
674.73 
676.85 
677.66 
682.34 


684.65 | 


690.40 


683.72 


688.72 | 
657.20 | 


659.61 | 


636.82 | 


628.54 | 


628.65 


573 


Table of meteorological observations—Coutinued. 


Thermometer, 


Cent. | Fahr. 


4.2 | 36.4 
12.0 28.5 
18.6 | 65.5 
19.5 | 55.5 
21.8) 74.0 
16.0 | 48.0 
20,5 ) 70.0 
20,2, 42.0 
4.2 47.0 
13.0 57.5 


0.2 ) 32.0 
9.2 | 47.0 


2305 
20.6) 68.5 
8.3 | 43.0 
' 
17.3 | 62. 
0.8 | 33.0 
19.2 | 64.0 
— 4,3 23.0 
17.2 | 62.0 
—().8 | 28.8 
15.5 | 59.0 
9.0 | 46.0 
10.8 | 50.0 
5.0 | 40.0 
16.2 | 61.0 
—6.6 | 16.0 
16.0 60.8 
—2.3 | 25.0 
17.0 | 62.5 
18.6 | 48.0 
10.0 | 47.0 
3.5 | 35.0 
12.4 | 52.0 
7.6 | 46.5 
4.3 | 37.5 
10.6 47.6 
2.8 | 36.3 
0.8 | 30.0 


2,902 


[ 174 ] 


Remarks. 


Feel. | 
3,990 ; Cloudy and clear overhead; wind 
8.709 W. 
Light clouds; air from SE. 
Clear; few clouds; wind squally 
from W. 
Clear; wind from W, 
Clear and calm, 
Clear and eal. 
Clear and eabn, 
Air trom 3. 65° E.; light clouds 
and clear. 


3,727 
3,173 


3,173 
2,761 
2,761 


2,902 


2,649 Calm; eumuli; clear. 
3,172 Cloudy; gale from NW, 
3,172 ' Calm and clear. 
3,226 Overcast; wind NW. 
3,226 Overcast; rainy appearance; win! 
from NW. 
3,061 Clear; some seattered cumuli; 
sun; wind NW, 
3,061 Clear; wind NW, 
2,302 Clear; breeze from NW, 
2,302 Calm and clear. 
2,197 Calm; clear, but cloudy in the 
horizon. 
2,197 Cleat and calm. 
2,192 Clear and scattered cumuli; calin. 
2,192 Clear over head; cumuli in the 
' horizon; calm. 
1,998 | Clear and cal. 
1,998 Clear; air from EB. 
2,000 Clear and calm; few scattered, 
cumuli. 
2,000 Clear and calm. 
} 1,879 | Clear and calm. 
11,879 | Clear; few cumuli; air from W. 
| 2,144 | Clear and light clouds; calm. 
2,144 | Clear and calm. 
| 2,802 | Clear and calm. 
2,802 | Clear; few light clouds; calm. 
3,100 | Clear, and some cumuli; calm. 
3,100 ' Calm; clear, with few cumuli. 
| 3,092 | Wind E.; clear and clouds. 


3,092 | Clear and clouds; calm. 
, 2,940 ; Cloudy; wind SE. 
2,940 | Overcast; rain began an hour be- 
| fore sunrise; calm. 
2,607 , Cloudy; rain in the morning; air 
from N. 
| 2,607 | Misty; dew point = 329.5 Fahr.; 
| calm. 
| 2,700 | At the foot of Blue mountains. 
| 3,831 | Blue mountains. 
| 3,831 | Clear and calm; a bank of clouds 
| in SE. horizon. 
| Blue mountains. 
4,989 | Blue mountains; clear and calm. 
| 4,989 | Blue mountains; clear and ca!m. 


| | 


4,766 


ee 


Sad 


pone oe 


—— 


74 


Table of observations with the thermometer. 


Time. | Thermometer, | Remarks, 
Deg. Fahr, 
7 | Sunrise - Fort Walahwalah. 
| Sunset 66.0 
| Sunrise 62.0 
| Sunset 59.0 
Sunrise 38.0 
| Sunset 50.0 
Sunrise 28.0 
| Sunset 53.0 
Sunrise 24.0 
Sunset . 54.0 
| Sunrise 34.0 
Sunset 66.3 
Sunrise 36.0 
Sunset 46.0 
Sunrise 32.0 
Sunset 44.0 
; Sunrise 30.0 
Sunset 52.0 
; Sunrise 36.0 
Sunset 50.0 
Sunrise 34.0 
| Sunset 49.0 
| Sunrise 42.0 
Sunrise 44,0 
Sunset 50.0 
Sunrise 42.0 
Sunset 51.5 
| Sunrise 36.0 
Sunset 
Sunrise 
| Sunset 
Sunrise 
26 | Sunrise 
27 | Sunrise 
Sunset 
| Sunrise 
Sunset 
Sunrise 
Sunrise 
Sunset 
Sunrise 
Sunset 
Sunrise 
Sunset 
Sunrise 
Sunrise 
Sunset 
Sunrise 
Sunset 
Sunrise 
Sunset 
Sunset 
Sunrise 
Sunsct 
Sunrise 
Sunset 
Sunrise 
Sunset 
Sunrise 
Sunset 
Sunrise 


—7™_™ 


Date. 


184 
Dec. 


3. 
12 
13 


14 


9 


10 


575 [ 174] 


Tuble of observations with the lhermomeler—Continued, 


rn ED 


| ee 
Time, | Thermometer, | Remarks. 


| Deg. Fahy, 


Sunset = | 39.5 | 
Sunrise - | 0.0 
Sunset - | 26.0 
Sunrise - 10.0 
Sunset - | 32.0 
| Sunrise - | 25.0 
Sunset - | 36.0 
Sunrise ° | 32.0 
Sunrise - | 39.0 
| Sunset - | 52.0 
Sunrise - 34.0 | 
Sunset - 48.0 | 
Sunrise = | 29.0 | 
Sunset “| 46.0 | 
Sunrise - | 36.0 
Sunset - | 39.0 
Sunrise - | 33.0 
Sunset - 43.0 Spring 619; brisk SE. wind all day. 
Daylight - | 39.0 | Wind 38.5 overcast. 
Daylight - | 38.0 
Sunset - 39.0 Cloudy; little rain. 
| Daylight : 31.0 
Sunset - | 37.0 | Fair day; light breeze trom 8, 
Daylight - 32.0 . 
Sunset - | 33.0 | Wind S.; fair. 
| Daylight - | 22.0 ' Clouds rising around the horizon. 
» Sunset - 30.0 Cloudy; light SE. wind. 
Daylight - | 20.0 Clear; wind SE. 
Sunset - | 23.0 Calm; sun faint. 
Daylight - | 18.0 Calm; reddish clouds. 
Sunset - 34.0 Gentle SE. breeze. 
| Daylight - | 33.0 Light snow falling. 
| Sunset -! 19.0 Clear; wind WSW. 
| Daylight $c) 14.0 
Sunset - 19.0 Fair; wind 8, 80° W. 
' Daylight wt 17.0 
| Sunset - 27.0 Fair; moderate SW. wind. 


Daylight - | 24.0 Fair; light clouds in E. 
Sunset - 28.0 

| Daylight =| 26.0 Thick snow falling. 
Daylight - | x0.0 Heavy mist. 
Sunset - | 23.0 Still misty. 
th. 12m. a.m. | 20.0 
Sunset - | 24.0 Dense mist all day. 
6h. 25m. a. m. 12.0 
Sunset - 22.0 Wind NE.; dense mist as on the two previous days. 
Sunrise - 8.0 Mist breaking away; clear bright sunshine. 
Sunset - | 21.0 i Clear; nearly calm. 
th. 12m.a.m. | 6.0 Slight mist. 
Noon - 31.0 

; Evening - | 24.0 Clear sunset. 
wh. 45m. a.m. | 20.0 Brisk NE. breeze; bright clouds in W. 
Noon - 35.0 : 
Evening - 30.0 Clear; wind from SW.— Temperature of the main 

spring at its edge 206°; the centre is doubtless 
at the boiling potnt. 

7h. 25m. a. m. 23.0 
Sunset - 33.0 A little snow falling. 
wh. 15m, a. m. 22.0 


Sunset - | 29.0 Overcast. 


—————— 
. By ee ee ~ 
ES 


= = “3 = = > 


= 


ate 


- 
—— 


et 


wert 
— Same 


— ee 


ae oe 


Jan. 


Feb, 


| Date. 


1844. 


11 
12 
13 


14 


[ 174] 


576 


Tuble of observations with the thermometer—Continued, 


Time. 


Sunrise 
Sunset 
Sunrise 
Sunset 
Sunrise 
Sunset 
Sunrise 


Sunset 
Sunrise 
Sunset 
Sunrise 
Sunset 
Sunrise 
Sunset 
Sunrise 
3h. 
Sunset 
Sunrise 
Sunset 
Sunrise 
Oh. 44m, 
Sunset 
Sunrise 


Sunset 
Sunrise 


4h. 5in. 


Sunset 
; Sunrise 
Sunset 
Sunrise 
Sunset 
Sunrise 
Sunrise 


Sunset 
; Sunrise 
Sunset 


4h. 25m. p.m. 


| 
| 

' * . 
Sunrise 
| Sunset 
| Sunrise 
' Sunrise 
Sunset 
| Sunrise 
| Sunrise 
| Noon 

| Sunset 
| 
1 
| 


Sunrise 
| Sunset 


6h. 15m. p. m. 


Sunrise 
| Sunset 


3h. 45m. p. m. 


| Sunrise 
| Sunset 
9h. p. m. 


11h.15m. a.m. 


| 


l4din. peime | 


\'T isieiiaanat ter. | 


Deg. ahr. 


15.0 
20.0 
33,0 
28,0 
29.0 
31.0 
26.0 
28.0 
26.0 
31.0 
34.0 
34.0 
35.0 
17.0 
42.0 
28.0 
AY.5 
39.0 
37.0 
35.0 
14.0 
41.0 
32.0 
30,0 


29.0 
30.0 


37.0 


36.0 
40.0 
42.0 
45.0 
36.0 

2.0 

2.0 
30.0 
47.0 
12.0 
33.0 
34.0 


27.0 
40.0 
34.0 
31.0 
39.0 
25.0 
27.0 
40.0 
24.0 
24.0 
35.0 
31.0 
14.0 
26.0 
28.0 
20.0 
40.0 
12.0 


EE 


Remarks. 


Day fair; bright sun. 


Partially overcast; wind SW, 


| Overcast; wind 8, 20° EB. 


Snow falling thick; wind variable. 
Nearly clear; wind N. 10° W, 


| Temperature of boiling water 2049.4; wind N, 6°W, 


| Cloudy; snow falling; 


wind W, 


Clear; fair. 


Mair; light wind N. 50° W, all day. 
Calas sun bright. 
Reddish clouds in EB. 


Temperaturcuf bo ling water 3039.7; wind 8.209 W, 


Snow falling from 9h. till Lith. a. ams sun faint. 


| Temperature of boiling water 204°.3; wind W. 


| Overcast; 


wind SW, 

Snow falling fast from SW.; snow ceased at 10h. 
a. me: sun shone out. 

Calm; clear sky. 

Wind 8. 20° W.; clouds rising in horizon; light 
snow falling from 9h. a.m. to th. p.m. 

Temperature of boiling water 204°.2; wind high 
fron SW, 

Sky clear; high SW. wind, 

Moderate W. wind; dark clouds in N. 

Calin; sky nearly clear. 


Sky clear; sun bright. 
Mawr day; nearly calin, 
Perfectly clear; calm. 


Temperature of boiling water 2029.2; cali. 
S ’ 


Sky unclouded all the day. 
Temperature of boiling water 202°; light breeze 
from NW, 


Clear; sun bright; moderate SE. wind. 

Reddish clouds in horizon to KE. and N.; wind SE. 
Calm and cloudy. 

Clouds breaking away. 

Cumuli in SE. and N, 

Overcast; snow falling. 

Snowing all day. 


Calm; clear; bright sunshine. 

Temperature of boiling water 201°.5; calm. 
Nearly clear; culm. 

Overcast. 

Temperature of boiling water 201°.5; nearly calm. 
Light white clouds in E. 


Strong SW, wind. 


ntinued, 


a enn 


lable. 
V. 
204°.4; wind N, 6°W, 
Ww, 


i] 

all day. 

303°.7; wind S.20°W, 
h. a. ms; sun faint. 


r 204°.3; wind W. 


; snow ceased at 10h, 


sing in horizon; light 
to Lh. p.m. 
er 2049.2; wind high 


ids in N. 


» 2029.2; cali. 


iter 202°; light breeze 


SE. wind. 
KE. and N.; wind SE. 


or 201°.5; calm. 


7 201°.5; nearly calm. 


WE hae tt 


WiDr 


9 


577 


Tible af observations with the thermome/er—Continued. 


Time, 


| Sunriso 
Noon 

Sunset 

Sunrise 


| Noon 


Sunset 
Oh. 25m. p.m, 
Sunrise 
| Sunset 
Sunrise 


| Sh. 40m. p.m. 


Sunset 
Sunrise 
| Noon 


| Sunset 

| Sunrise 
Noon 

| Oh. 55m p. m. 


| Sunset 
| Sh. p. m. 


11 | Sunrise 


12 


Noon 
Sunset 
Sunrise 
Sunset 
8h. p. m. 


Sunrise 
Sunset 
Sunrise 
Sunset 
Sunrise 
Noon 
Sunset 
Sunrise 
Sunset 
Sunrize 
Sunset 
Sunrise 
Sunset 
Sunrise 
Sunset 
Sunrise 
Sunset 


th. 41m. p.m. 


Sunrise 
Noon 


Sunset 


37 


| Thermometer, 


SS 


ese 8 8 e¢ 8 © &§ @ # 8 8 


Deg. Fahr. 
10.0 


& 2 et 
SS2o 


| Remarks. 
| 


| Clear ; moderate 8. wind. 


| Sky unclouded; light breeze SW. 
| Sky unclouded ; calm. 


| Temperature of boiling water 200°.5; calm. 
| Sky perfectly clear the whole day ; light variable wind. 


| 

| Sun shining full on high peaks. 

| Sun shining full on valley; sky cloudless; calm. 

| Vemperatureof boiling water 199°.7; light easterly 

breeze; nearly clear. 

| Wind E.; whitish clouds rising in the horizon. 

| Just before sunrise. 

Strong SW. wind; light scud, driving rapidly. 

| Moderate WSW. wind; nearly clear; a few wind 
clouds in W. 

Wind variable; nearly clear; a few wind clouds in W. 

| 30m, befure sunrise. 

Nearly calm; cloudy in SW. 

Wind SE.; white clouds in W. 

| Temperature of boiling water 199°.5; moderate 

SE. wind; sky nearly clear. 
Moderate SE. wind; sky partially overcast 


Entirely overcast; wind shifting. 

Clouds breaking away; violent gusts of wind from W, 
Clearing off; moderate wind N. 80° W. 

Calm; sky nearly clear. P 

Sky clear; gentle W. breeze. 


30m. before sunrise. 

Calm; cumuli in E.; sun faint. 

Overcast; calm. 

Sky clear; moderate westerly wind. 

Calm; sky nearly clear. 

Calm; clouds in SW.; sun faint. 

Calm; watery clouds moving from SW. to NE. 

Calm; sky nearly clear. 

Wind SW.; rain clouds in E. 

Clear; moderate 8. wind. 

Entirely cléar; calm. 

Entirely clear; calm. 

Sky very clear; nearly calm. 

Calm; rain clouds in W. 

Cloudless sky; calm. 

Cloudless sky; gentle breeze 8. 60° E. 

Clear; calm. 

Sky clear; brisk wind S. 70° W. 

Temperature of boiling water 1979.5; moderate 
wind S. 68° W. 

Moderate W. wind;. scattered watery clouds. 

Cumuli all over the heavens; nearly calm; snow 
falling on the mountains behind; rain on the edge 
of the valley beyond. 

Sky still cloudy; strong breeze N. 65° E. 


c 1744 578 


Tablé of observations with the thermometer—Continued. 


Date. "lime. | ‘hermometer. | Remarks. 
| _—— - - 
~Ta44._ | 7 De ’ Fahr. 
Fen 38 | Sunrise - *9.0 Sun faint; moderate wind N. 55° E. . 
| Noon - 40.0 | Light watery clouds in 8.; wind N, 40° E, 
Ih. 15m, p. m. 87.5 Temperature of boiling water 198°.7; watery 
| | glouds in S.; calm. 
| Sunset 31.0 Sky nearly clear; wind N, 50° E, 
93 | Sunrise 26.0 Cumuli around the horizon; moderate 8S. wind. 
| Sunset 18.0 | Sky clear; calin. 
24 , Sunrise 27.0 | Sky clear; wind E. 
2h. 45m. p.m. 60,0 ' Temperature of boiling water 206°; sky clear; ligh 
| breeze from N, 
March 9 Sunset - 62.0 | Light grayish clouds in 8.; moderate SE. wind. 
10 | Sunrise - 34.0 | Light grayish clouds; sky clear; calm. 
| Sunset - 63,0 | Sky cloudy; wind SW. 
| 4h. 20m, p. m. 64.0 Temperature of boiling water 2119.6; brisk 8, 
| wind; sky nearly clear. 
1i | Sunrise - 45.0 Sky partially overcast; slight rain falling. 
Sunset 66.0 Sky clear;. no air stirring. 
12 | Sunrise 31.0 Sky unclouded; calm. 
Suneet 63 0 Clear sky; brisk SW. wind. 
13 | Sunrise 35.0 No clouds visible; calm. 
| Noon 75.0 Strong weaterly breeze. 
| Sunset 68.0 Light watery clouds floating in hor.; wind from NW, 
14 | Sunrise 45.0 Moderate wind N, 10° W.; unclouded. 
| Sunset 76.0 Clear; perfectly calm. 
16 | Sunrise 44.0 Calm and cloudless. 
| Sunset 74.0 Reddish clouds around the setting sun. 
16 | Sunrise 40.0 No wind; sky clear, 
/ Noon 84.0) 
| Sunset 68.0 No air stirring; clear. 
17 | Sunrise 46.0 Sky clear; calm. 
| Sunset 63.0 Slight haze in N.; calm. 
18 ,| Sunrise 38.0 Clear; calm. 
Sunset 64.0 Clear; calm. 
19 + Sunrise 41.0 Sky unclouded; no wind. 
Sunset 63.0 Few scattering clouds in W. 
20 | Sunrise 40.0 | Calm; unclouded. 
Noon 81.0 In shade; white clouds in E. 
Noon 96.0 In sun; slight breezo N. 10° E. 
Sunset 70.0 Clear sky; no wind. 
Sunrise 41.0 Sky cloudy; calm. 
| Sunset 64.0 Dark clouds in E.; wind N. 70° W. 
Sunrise | 36.0 | Scattered wind clouds; wind W. 
| Sunset | 64.0 | Very cloudy; wind S. 10° E. 
| Sunrise 44.0 | Sky nearly clear; moderate SW. wind. 
Sunset ‘63:0 Reddish clouds in W.; wind SW. 
Sunrise 42.0 | Sky clear; calm. 
Sunset 54.0 Clear; wind S. 80° W. ‘ 
Sunrise 45.0 Cloudy in E.; sun faint; calm. 
Sunset 63.0 Cloudy in horizon; gentle westerly breeze. 
Sunrise 36.0 Sun faint; partially overcast. 
Sunset 58.0 Calm; nearly clear. 
| Sunrise 45.0 | Sky overcast: no wind. 
Sunset 60.0 Very cloudy; appearance of rain; high W. wind. 
44.0 Calm; clear. 
36.0 | Few dark clouds in E.; calm. 
60.0 | Cloudy; sun faint. 
53.0 | Overcast; slight rain falling. 
55.0 | Incessant rain; moderate wind S, 16° W. 
56.0 | Sky clouded; wind SW. 
oS | Heavy rain; wind 8. 80° W. 
0 


. s 8 J ' , ' ' 7 e s v J ' ' ‘ 


ontinued, 


V. 56° EB. 

wind N, 40° EF, 
water 1989.7; watery 
50° E, 

; moderate 8. wind, 
7 206°; sky clear; light 


moderate SE. wind. 
lear; calm. 


ater 2119.6; brisk 8, 


it rain falling. 


in hor.; wind from NW, 


; unclouded. 


etting sun. 


alm. 
westerly breeze. 


! rain; high W. wind. 
m. 


nd 8. 16° W. 
v. 


6 wa Pi Bc 


479 


cima) 


Table af observations with the thermometer—Continued, 


ire oe SERS 


Date: ‘Time. 
1844, | 
Mar. 3! | Sunset 
April 1 Sunrise 
; Sunset 
2. Sunrise 
Noon 
Sunsct 
3 Sunrise 
Sunset 
1 Sunrise 
Sunset 
5 Sunrise 
Sunset 
6 | Sunrise 
Noon 
Noon 
Sunset 
7 Sunrise 
8  Sunriée 
| Sunect 
9 | Sunrise 
, Sunset 
10 Sunrise 
Sunset 
{1 Sunriee 
' Sunset 
L2 | Sunrise 
Sunset 
13 Sunrise 
Sunset 
i4 | Sunrise 
| Sunset 
{5 | Sunrise 
| Sunset 
{6 | Sunrise 
| Sunset 
17 | Sunrise 
i383 | Sunrise 
| Sunset 
{9 | Sunrise 
| 
Sunset 
20 | Sunrise 
21 | Sunrise 
| Noon 
| Noon 
| Sunset 
22 | Sunrise 
, Sunset 
| Sunset 
23 | Sunrise 


| Sunset 


! 


58.0 
52.0 
60.0 
48.0 
62.0 
54.0 
43.0 
66.0 


41.0 
60.0 
37.0 
68:0 


Thermometer. ‘Wet bulb. 
| Deg. Fahr. 


——e 


- —_ at eee Ce ee 


Remarks, 


oe — = a ae eee 


Clearing off; wind SW, 

Sky nearly clear; calm. 

Dark clouds coming up in W., calm. 

Cloudy; light easterly wind. 

Rain from SW. overcast. 

Brisk wind 8, 15° E.; clearing off. 

Sky nedrly clear; wind E. 

Few cloudsin SE., strong breeze N. 
60° W. 

Slight rain falling, wind 8. 609 W. 

Raining; wind from SW. 

Sky clear, calm. 

Sky clear, calm. 

Sky cloudless; no wind. 

Tn shade, 

Tn sun; sky nearly clear; light SE. 
breeze. 

Wind 8, 40° E.; cloudy in NE, 

Raining; overclouded. 

Wind N. 60° W.,; sky nearly clear. 

Heavy clouds in W.; moderate wind S. 
80° W. 

Sky clear and calm. 

Derk cumuli in W.; light breeze N. 55° 
Ww 


Perfectly clear; no air stirring. 
| Nearly clear; calm. 
| Sky overcast; calm. 
| Cloudy in horizon; high wind in N. 45° 


| Smoky; sun faint; calm. 
| Dense smoke; sun obscured. 
| Smoky appearance continues; sun faint. 
| Sky nearly clear; calm. 
Clear and calin. 
| Moderate wind N. 80° W.; tear: 
| Clear sky; no wind. 
| High wind 8. 15° E ; unclouded. 
| Clear; moderate wind 8S. 20° E. 
| Brisk breeze 8. 30° E.; clear. 
| Moderate wind 8. 30° E.; cloudy in E. 
| Masses of clouds o er the sity; light 
breeze S, 60° W. 
' Clouds over setting sun; wind S. 80° W. 
| Moderate wind 8. 80° W.; sky nearly 
clear. 
Sky overcast; clouds in NW.; wind 8, 
| 60° W. 
Dark cumuli in E.; moderate wind S. 
, 70° W. 
| Dense mist greater part of the day; cold 
| SW. wind. 
| Hazy; sun faint; strong wind N. 80° W. 
| In shade. 
In sun; sky clear; wind N. 80° W. 
Sky clear; brisk wind N. 80° W. 
Perfectly clear; gentle westerly breeze. 
Bright sunset; moderate west wind. 


Temperature of boiling water 208°.5. 
Clear except in E.; cold wind N. 70° W. 
Sky covered with watery cl’ds; wind W. 


580 


Tuble of observations with the thermomeler—Continued. 


— —_——---—— ee oe : eee ee eee. _ 


Date. | ‘Time. Thermometer. | Wet bulb. | Remarks. 


1844, | Dey. Fuhr. Deg | 
April 24 Sunrise : 45.0 45.0 | Clouds in E., moderate W, wind. 
Noon - 76.0 69.0 | Clear; brisk wind 8. 80° W, 
Sunset : 66.0 58.5 | Clouds breaking away after a sprinkling 
| of rain. 
Sunrise 61.5 48,0 Nearly clear; calin, 
Sunset 62.0 67.0 | Clouds in N.; calm. 
Sunrise 42.0 43.0 Perfectly clear; calm. 
Noon 90.0 85.0 Sky clear; shifting breeze. 
Sunset 80.5 71,0 Dark clouds in the N.; calm. 
Sunrise 44.0 45.0 | Clear; calm. 
Noon 90.5 | 78.0 Thin white clouds in horizon; southerly 
| | breeze at intervals, 
Sunriso 66.0 59.6 Nearly clear; calm. 
Sunset 62.0 | 48.5 Heavy clouds in NE.; strong wind § 
e 16° W, 
Sunrise 46.0 | Scattered clouds; calm, femperature of 
spring used 66°, 
Noon 69.0 , Clouds; wind brisk 8. 30° W, 
Sunset | 57.0 | , Cloudy; moderate wind 8, 20° W, 
| Sunrise 44.6 ' Cloudy in E.; cold wind 8. 80° E. 
Sunset 60.6 , Bright sunset; calm; cumuli on near 
| mountains. 
Sunrise : 40.5 . Very clear; calm. 
| Sunset : 56.0 . Calui; brilliant sunset. 
Sunrise 32.0 | 35, Clear; calm. 
Sunset 565.5 | ; Clear; calm. 
| Sunrise 30.0 ’ Clear; cali. 
Sunset 67.0 | 3. | Clear; calm. 
Sunrise 88.0 ’ | Clear; light breeze N. 70° W. 
6 " arge spri 73°, 
52.0 Temperature of § Snallet apres 71°. 


| Sunrise 42.0 Al. Clear; calm. 
Noon 104.0 | ; Clear; breeze at inter: als. 
Sunset - 56.0 ' Clear; shifting breeze. 
Sunrise | 41.0 | ; Clear; calm. 
6h. 20m. p m. | 70.0 Temperature of boiling water 25°.7, 
| Sunset - 70.5 
Sunrise . * 42.0 | . Light white clouds in E.; calm. 
Sunset - 76.0) | 37, Clear; calm. 
Sunrise - 42.6 ; Calm; slight haze, 
’ Sunset . 76.0 F Clear; moderate wind 8, 40° W. 
| Sunrise 68.0 : Clouds in E.; ¢alm. 
| 70.0 | Temperature of spring 76°. 
| Noon 91.0 5. Large masses of white cloud in NE.; 
| high wind 8S. 70° W. 
Sunset . 70.0 30.0 Clear; slight breeze 8. 75° W. 
Sunrise 35.0 4}. Clear; calm. 
35.0 | | Temperature of river 48°. 
Sunset 56.0 2, Clear; nearly calm. 
Sunrise 53.50 ; Sky mottled with dark purple clouds; 
moderate wind N. 80° W.; shower of 
rain between 6h, and 7h. a. im. 
Sunset 53.0 ‘ Dark clouds over the sky; brisk wind N. 
10° E. 
Sunrise 44.0 Eastern sky clouded; breeze N. 15° E. 
70.0 Temperature of boiling water 203°.8; 
fuw white clouds on blue sky; moder- 
ate wind N. 40° E, 
Sunset 46.0 5 Clear; calm. 
Sunrise * 31.5 : Sky perfectly clear; ¢alm. 
Sunset 56.0 . Bright sunset; southerly breeze. 


581 [ 174 ] 


ontinued, 
rere eee — a ——————— ee ——E eo ee ee reer. Se ; 
marke Dato. Time. Thermometer. \Wet bulb. Remarks. 
= - or —_ — . — 
ig a ase 1844, ; Deg. Fahr, Deg. 
: fhe Pea May !4 Sunrise . 42,0 41.5 Clear; moderate wind 8, 90° W, 
away after a sprinkling Noon . 83,0 | 68.5 White bank of clouds in N.; strong wind 9, 
| | 30° W, 
i; Sunset . 55.0 50.0 Sky nearly clear, wind high, 8. 30° W, 
o 15 | Sunrise ~ » 4b5 41.0 Scattered clouds; calm. 
. or Sunset . 41.0 68.0 Cloudy in horizon; moderate 8, wind. 
8 apg 16 | Sunrise . 92.0 92.5 Nearly clear; wind 8, * y! | 
e N.; calm. Sunset - 62.0 | 48.0 Very cloudy; few drops of rainy high N. ; 
P a Y wind. 
le in horizon; southerly 17 | Sunrise : 33,0 | 96.0 Cloudy in horizon; cal, i 
nny Sunset . 62.0 48.0 Very a appearance of rain, wind 8, 
7 70° W, | 
NE. strong wind 8 18 Sunrise . 45.0 42.5  Overcasts heavy rainy wind 8, 65° W. 
Noon , 48.0 ——=«62.0 Heavy and incessant rainy wind 8. 66° W, Hit 
calms femperature of | Sunset : 63.0 | 50.6 — Clearing off; wind N, 30° B. 
6°. ‘ 19. Sunrise . 29.5 | 82.0 Nearly clear; wind N. 20° BE. i | 
sk 8. 30 Ww. Sunset . 60,0 48.0 | Cloudy in horizon; calm, , 
e wind 8. 20 ww. 20 Sunrise ° 39.0 | 39.0 Perfectly clear; calm. : 
pid wind 8. 80 E. | Noon . 88,5 - Temperature of boiling water 203°, sky 
calm; cumuli on nee | clear; breeze 8, 30° W, ; : 
' Sunset . 48.5 47.5 — Neurly clear: calm. / 
; 21 | Sunrise ° 45.6 | 46.5 | Clear; calm. : 
unset. Sunset - 70.0 | 61.0 + Very cloudy; mild 8. wind. 
' 22 | Sunrise - 56.0 | §2.0 | Reddish clouds in E.; brisk 8, wind. 
‘ Sunset 65.0 50.0 | Cloudy; wind 8, 
23 | Sunrise . 44.0 43.5 | Cloudy in horizon; cold 8. wind. 
F a Sunset . 45.0 41.0 | Scattered clouds; calm. 
zo N. 70° W. 24 | Sunrise : 41.5 42.5 | Sky overcast, few drops of rain. 
| 5 Large spring 73°. Sunset : 47.5 48.0 | Sky nearly clear; calm. 
) Smaller apring 71°. 25 | Sunrise - 80.5 36.0 | Perfectly clear; calm. 
; Sunset - 65.0 62.0 | Sky clear; calm; Utah lake. | 
inter als, 26 | Sunrise ° 44,0 45.5 | Sky overcast; calm. { 
nreeee. Sunset : 84.0 60.0 | Very cloudy; high wind N. 20° E. y 
rar 27 | Sunrise ° 44.0 46.0 | Clouded; appearance of rain; calm. {/) 
boiling water 25°.7, Sunset ° 45.0 46.0 | Bright sunset; clear. 
, 28 | Sunrise ° 35.0 39,5 | Clear; calm. | 
ads in E.; calm. Sunset - | 46.0 46.5 | Sky very clear; cali. 
29 | Sunrise | 29.5 33.0 | Clear and calm. 
mae Oh. 15m. p.m. | 66.0 - Station on Uintah waters, 1,500 feet below 
wind 8, 40° W. the pass in the dividing ridge between the 
im. waters of White and Uintah rivers; /em- 
spring 76°. perature of boiling water 201°.3; sky very 
‘white cloud in NE.; clear and calm. 
70° W. Sunset - 45.0 45.5 Perfectly clear; calm. 
eze 5. 75° W. 30 | Sunrise | 36.0 35.0 | Sky clear; calm. 
: Sunset - | 58.0 54.5 | Clear; no air stirring. 
river 48°. i . 81 | Sunrise «| 31.5 | ,36.0 | Clear; calm. 
Im. ) Sunset -| ~ 64.0 53.5 | Clear; calm. 
th dark purple clouds; } June 1 | Sunrise - | 48.5 49.0 | Clouded in E.; calm. 
1N. 80° W.; shower of fy Sunset -| 62.0 50.0 | Very cloudy; sprinkling of rain; brisk wind 
6h. and 7h. a. in. / | N. 70° W. 
r the sky; brisk wind N. 2 | Sunrise ° 46.0 45.0 | Scattered clouds; calm. 
Sunset «| 64.0 58.0 | Clouds in horizon; moderate wind N, 30° W. 
ded; breeze N. 15° E. 3 | Sunrise . 42.0 41.0 | Clear and calm. 
F boiling water 203°.8; 4 | Sunrise ° 43.0 | 42.0 | Clear and calm. 
uds on. blue sky; moder- | Sunset - | 66.0 62.0 | Bright sunset; calm. 
10° E. 5 | Sunrise - | 48.0 47.0 Clear; calm. 
| Sunset «| 68.0 62.0 | Clear; cal. 
var; calm. 6 Sunrise °« -| 44,5 44.5 | Clear; calm. 
outherly breeze. | Sunset - | 72.0 61.0 | Clear; moderate wind N. 45° E. 


[ 174 ] bx2 
Table af observations with the thermome/er—Coutinued, 


Time. ''Ihermometer. Wet bulb Remarke. 


Dey. Falr Deg. : 
| 7h, 45m, p.m. 71.0 Temperature of boiling water 200°.7) shy 
| clear; moderate wind N, 45° B, 
Sunrive . 52.0 50.0 = Siey clear, moderate wind N, 46° E 
| Sunset 75.0 73.0 Tereperature of botling water 24°, very 
cloudy, 
Sunrise 415.0 48.0 Very clear; calm, 
Noon . 80.0 750 Sky nearly clear; mederate wind 8, 80° W, 
Sunset 70.0 68.0 Dark heavy clouds over the eky, 
Sunrise . 44,5 44.0 Cleary calm 
; Sunset 72.0 63.0 Dark clouds in the western horizon, hwht 
breeze 8, 70° W, 
Sunrise 43.0 80 Sky eleary calm. 
Sunset , 65.0 650.0 Clouds in horizon, moderato wind N, 40° 
Ei. 
Sunrise 32.0 37.5 | Sky nearly clears calm. 
Sunset . 40.0 57.0 sky mottled with clouds; moderate wind 4, 
65° W, 
Sunrise 40.0 42.0 Sky eleary calm. 
Sunset . 60.0 57.0 Few clouds in W.; moderate wind 8, 40° 
| Ww, 
| Sunrise . 56.0 38.0) Sky clears eal 
Yh. pm. ° 76.6 Tt mperature of boiling water 199°. 6; calm, 
| thin white clouds in horizon. 
14 | Sunrise ( | 45.0 | Sky very clear; calm 
Sunset : 66.0 Bright sunset; calm. 
15 | Sunrise 42. 48,5 Sky clear; calm. 
| Sunset 4. 53.0 Temperature of otal water 200°; sky 
clear; slight westerly breeze. 
16 | Sunrine 34 | 36.0 Clear; calm. 
Sunset , 52.0 Bright sunset; calm. 
17 | Sunrise 2Y, 36.0 — Perteetly clear; calm. 
18 | Sunrise 2.¢ 42.5 | Sky eleur; calm. 
° am s3,E - Temperature of boiling water 201 ©.6, clear, 
slight westerly breeze. 
| Sunset 63.0 64.0 | Sky nearly clear; calm, 
Sunrise 30.0 36.0 | Clear; calm. 
Sunset 49.5 48.5 | Bright sunset; calm. 
Sunrise . 40.0 | 39.0 | Slight mist; southerly breeze. 
Sunset 60 5 | Sky mottled with clouds; shifting breeze. 
Noon 76.0 Fork of Grand river, 1,600 feet below the 
divide; temperature uf boiling water 
| 195°,8; clear; southerly breeze. 
Sunset | 49.0 Masses of white clouds; wind variable. 
| Sunrise -| 33,0 | 34, Sky perfectly clear; calm, 
| Sunset 46,0 Clear; calm. 
Sunrise 33.0 | Clear; calm. 
Sunset 62.0 Bright sunset; calin. 
Sunrise - 42.0 | Cloudless sk¥; calm. 
Sunset : 74.0 | Nearly clear; calm. 
Sunrise 44.0 | Sky clear; calm 
Sunset 74.5 Clear; shifting breeze. 
Sunrise | 56.0 Clear; calm. 
Sunset | 78.5 ; Clouds in NE.; moderate wind N. 60° E. 
July 1 { Sunrise 61.0 j | Sky clear; calm. 
Sunset | 81.0 | Sky cleay, southerly breeze. 
2 | Sunrise | 60.0 Clear; calm. 
Noon 85 0 | Nearly clear; calin. 
Sunset 84.0 | Dark threatening clouds in W.; high wind 
| S. 50° E. 
3 | Sunrise 66.0 }.5 | Masses of clouds over the whole sky; calm 


583 C174 J 


tinued, Table of observations with the thermometer—Continued. 


—- —— - 


Date. Time. Thermometer, Wet bulb Remarks 


Deg, Fehr, Deg. 


water 200°.7; why July @ , Supset . 40,0 76.5 Sky cloudy: thunder and lightning 
N, 45° B, 4 | SBuntive 70.6 70.6 Clouls in Buy ealin 
nd N, 46° Suraoet 82.0 77.0 Pew drops of rainy calm 
me water WA, very 5 , Sunrise 66.0 660 Clear and calm, 
Suraet ~ Heavy rainy NW, wind 
G Sunrise - 62.0 03.0 Sky overcast; calm, 
rate wind S, 809 W, Sunset Th.0 74.6 Clouds in horizon; calm 
the eky, 7 Sunrise - 64.6 65.6 Very cloudy; ealm, 
Sunset . 80,0 78.0 Western sky clouded; calm 
estern horizon, hwht g Sunrise . 64.56 O45 — Pairy calm. } 
» Noon ° Ob.0 89.0 Sky elear and calm 
; Sunset ; 81.0 80.0 Sky partially overcast, calm; thunder and 
wlerete wind N, 40° lightning, with heavy rain between 10h, 


and the p.m, 


9 Sunrise . 68.0 66.6 Nearly clear; cali. 
iy moderate wind A, Sunset . 79.6 76,0 Clear; no air stirring, 
10 — 83.0 61.0 Few clouds; calm. 
unset $2.5 80,0 Clowls passi ’ afte 
vlerate wind 8, 40° 11 | Sunrise : 68.0 70.0 Sky pg ‘co omar © thunder chower, 
| ar . ae 76,6 ei coming up frem westward, 
12 | Sunrise : 70.0 70.0 | Thin watery clo Ww 
water 199°. 6; calm, NE; neem pon mai ere 
horizon. Sunset - 84.0 86.0  Cumuli in W; wind 8. 10° B, 
13 | ane - 73,0 72.0 | Sky nearly clear; moderate wind 8, 30° FE. 
unset - 80.0 79.5 | Seattered clouds; ewlm. 
14. Sunset . 82.0) 80.0  Clowded every where except in the zenith: 
{ water 290°; sky . | slight breeze 8, 40° EB, 
COZ. 15 | Sunrise - 72.0 70.0 | Sky cloudy; sun faint. 
Noon : 79.0 78.5 | Sky entirely overcast; calm. 
| Sunset . 76.0 76.0 Sun and clouds; oq; 
16 | Sunrise - 70.5 70.0 | Cloudy; appe@rance of rain. 
| Sunset . 73,6 74.0 Cloudy every where except around the eet- : 
mater 201°.6; clear, ting sun; drops of rainy calm. 
17 | Sunrise . 68.0 68.0 | Partially overcast; calm. ‘| 
Sunset - 80.0 79.0 | Sky clear; moderate wind 8. 25° W, | 
19 Sunrise . 68.6 68.0 | aoe in horizon; moderate wind 8, 
recze. Sunset ° 72.0 71.6 | Clouds rising in eastward; high wind 8, 40° ) 
4; shifting breeze. WwW. 
1,600 feet below the 19 Sunrise . 60.0 61.6 Sun faint; partially overcast; cold wind 8. 
of boiling water 46° E. 
ly breeze. | Sunset - | 69.0 66.0 | Sky nearly clear; calm. y 
wind variuble. 20 | Sunrise - 63.0 54.5 Sky clear, except in horizon; calm. 


n, | Sunset - 73.5 71.0 | Sky nearly clear; slight breeze 8. 36° E. 
21 Sunrise - 60.0 61.0 | Sky clear; calm. 
| Sunset - | 78.0 76.0 | Sky almost clear; calm. 
22 , Sunrise =| 68.0 69,0 | Cloudy, except in the zenith; calm. 


; | Sunset - | 80.0 78.0 | Wind clowdsin W.; moderate windS., 30° B. 
23 | Sunrise - | 65.0 64.0 | Clear and calm, 
| Sunset «| 74.0 74.5 | Low dark clouds in N.; high wind 8, 46° E. 
- 24 | Sunrise | 64.0 64.0 | Sky clear; calm. ; 
Sunset (?) «| 82.0 81.0 | Few clouds; moderate wind 8. 
ite wind N. 60° E. 25 | Sunrise - 68.0 67.0 | Overcast; shifting breeze. 
| 2h. p. m. - 83.0 
20, 26 | Sunrise - 70.0 70.5 | Very clouded; calm. 
2h. p. m. - 82.0 - | Clear; slight breeze. 
27 |Sunrise © «| 70.0 71.0 | Very much overcast; calm. 
in Wo: hi 2h. p. m. - 84.0 | 
ee ee ee 28 | Suntise - 70.0 70.5 ered and calm. 
. . 2h. p. m. < | 100.0 - lear; no breeze. 
ohare: es <a 29 | Suntise ~| 72.0 71.0 | Clear; calm. 


Tn ER, 


ASTRONOMICAL OBSERVATIONS 


MADE DURING THE 


EXPEDITION TO THE ROCKY MOUNTAINS 


IN THE YEAR 1842, 


[ 174] 


ST. LOUIS—RESIDENCE OF COLONEL J, 


586 


B. BRANT. 


Determination of time, May 24, 1842—altitude of the sun. 


Double altitude of the lower limb of the sun, 


Deg. = min, 
ae 
41 12 
40 30 


ee ———$ $$ —$ 


Mean time. 


he min. — see. 
+5 13 40 


OBSERVATIONS. 


see, 


10 


30 


lu 


RESULT OF CALCULATION, 


Advance. 


A. min. 


L 22 35 


sec. 


Time of chronometer. (Brockbank. ) 


muons Sel 

2 5k 
ab 55 
38 54 


Longitude. 


Determination of longitude, May 27, \S42—allitude of Vega. 


FIRST SERIES. 


Double altitude of Vega. | Time of chronometer. 


OBSERVATIONS. 


SECOND SERIES, 


Double altitude of 


Time of chronometer. 


No. 7,810. Vera. No. 7,810, 
Dez. min. sec. | h. min. sec. — Dege mine sec. he. min. sec. 
8% 03) 20 3. 57 48 90 43 30 4 06 41 
88 04 £50 | 3. «59 31 91 17 20 t O08 LO 
88 50 10 4 Ot 31 92 «Ol 50 4 10 = 09 
89 22 20 H 4 03 Ol 92 39 40) 1 lL + 62 
89 54 20 | 4 OF 25 93 22 10 4 13 46 

Thermometer 669. 
RESULT OF CALCULATION. 
Mean time. Advance. Longitude. 
he min. — sec. h. min. — sec. Deg. min. — sec. 
10 16 35 5 49 0! 90 15 61 


rrr i a rn 


a eee 


Do 


20" 

53% [ 174 ] 
WNT. ST. LOUIS—RESIDENCE OF COLONEL J. B. BRANT. 

E the sun. Determination of latitude, May 27, 1842—altitude of Polaris, 


OBSERVATIONS, 


Bee eeiaceutec Double altitude of Polaris, Time of chronometer, 
. (Brockbank. ) ——— TT a — —_— —— 
ae eee ee Deg. ming — see. ‘i. omins — see. 
7A 38 20 4 30 Q7 
Ah TA BH) 10 t 32 41 
ph id 40 10 { 35 20) 
ade 
F t — ~- ~ + ——- ——— 
Index error — — 20 se 
RESULT OF CALCULATION, 
True altitude. Mean time. Latitude, 
Longitude. ee © a | ee a 
Deg. min, see h. MIN, Sle. | Deg. min. — see. 
37 18 12 Lv 43 4s 38 37 24 


ENCAMPMENT AT CHOUTEAU'S LOWER TRADING HOUSE, RIGHT BANK OF 
THE KANZAS RIVER, 700 FEET. ABOVE THE LEVEL OF THE GULF OF 
MEXICO. 

[From this date, up to the 24th of August, the Brockbanis pocket chronometer was used in not- 
ing time. | 


Determination of longitude, June 9, 1842--allitude of the sun. 


le of Vega. 


RIES. OBSERVATIONS. 
7% FIRST SERIES. SECOND SERIES. 

ime of chronometer. 

No. 7,810, j Se ——_______—— : aa ce Ea 

Double altitude of the | Time of chronometer. | Double altitude of the Time of chronometer. 
sun’s lower limb. (Brockbank. ) sun’s lower limb, (Brockbank. ) 

he min. see. | © 

4 06 41 me | 

t 08 = 10 Deg. min. sec. hh. min, see. Deg. inin. see. h. min. sec. 

ee EO 208 53 19 #00 | 6 29 32.5 SL LBD 6 34 39.5 

4 ll : 52 52 »=«#Bd 50 | 6 30 36.0 5 02 2 6 35 ~~ 30.0. 

4 13 46 52 «3935 | 6 31 15.6 50 45 50 6 36 12.3 

ee eae 52 2285 6 32 O1.0 50 24 00 | 6 387 10.0 

52 02 50 | 6 32 51.0 50 «10 00 6 37 45.7 
Index error == — 26 sec. 
RESULT OF CALCULATION. 
| . 

Longitude. Mean time. Advance. | Longitude. 
re min. sec. h. min. see. } h. min, see. Deg. min. sec. 

15 OBL 4 57 22 1 36 25 94 39 a 


SELLE ELL LORNA OD 


[ 174 J 588 


ENCAMPMENT AT CHOUTEAU’S LOWER TRADING HOUSE, RIGHT BANK op 
THE KANZAS RIVER, 700 FEET ABOVE THE LEVEL OF THE GULP op 


MENICO. 


Determination of latitude, June %, 1812—altitude of Polaris. 


OBSERVATIONS. 


Double altitude of Polaris. 


Dey. min, 
21 


’ 
—orw 


=} <} a} «3 =} a} «3 O23 as o 
wo tr SA ot iw 


aa 


\ | 
J a 


‘Thermometer 55°. 


Time of chronometer. 


mins 
29 
él 
33 
35 
37 
38 


42 


44 


RESULT OF CALCULATION, 


True altitude. Mean time. 


Deg. mine: n/a 
sl 43 


Double altitude of Antares. True altitude. 


Deg. min. sec. Deg. min. see. 
49 42 50 24 49 17 


| 
pe cl cae lel pple eet alg 
| 


Latitude. 


min, 
05 


Latitude. 


Deg. min. see. 
39 «= 06-00 


sec. 


RIGH'T’ BANK Or 
* THE GULP OF 


of Polaris. 


589 [174] 


ENCAMPMENT ON THE LEFT BANK OF THE KANZAS RIVER. 


Determination of longitude, June 16,1842—allilude of the sun. 


OBSERVATIONS. 


PInST 


SURTES. 


Double altitude of the 
lower limb of the sun, 


nometer. 


see. 


a) 


SECOND SELES. 


Time of chronometer. 


| 


|| Double altitude of the 


lower limb of the sun. 


ee cone 


| 
; Time of chronometer, 


oY Deg. mins see. h. min. sec. |) Deg. min. see. | h, mine — see. 
50 66 40 00 6 26 31.5 | 43 37 50 6 34 26.0 
35 66 13 55 6 27 ALLS } 53 21 45 | 6 35 07.7 
22 5 53 1h 6 28 34.0 || 53 08 Ou 6 35 47.0 
00 55 B45 20 6 2H 22.0 || 52 49 55 6 36 32.7 
14 55 16 h5 6 30 10,0 | 52 30 30) | 6 37 23.0 
42 } | 
05 vib pe tee ste ee “ok, ES aoe ce 
Pl RESULT OF CALCULATION, 
7 
Lee a ? | . = a — 
eS Mean time. | Advance. | Longitude. 
ae ees & liom see Ropes | nie laevis ovum cilicLiciicls 
| 
eee | | 


Latitude. 


eg. mine — see. 
sy 05 53 


wdian. 


Latitude. 


i. MIN, Se. 
9 O06 00 


Determination of latitude, June 16, 1842—allitude of Polaris. 


OBSERVATIONS. 


Time of chronometer. 


he min. — see. 
10 53 1() 


min,  8€C. 
75 31 20 


75 32 50 10 56 14 
v6) 34 20 10 58 42 
75 34 20 11 00 39 
75 34 55 11 02 30 


75 37 OU Il 06 16 
75 37 30 11 OS 16 
75 37 55 11 09 43 


| 
1 
45 ©686—Ss«* | il 04 30 
| 
| 
7% 39 40 | ll 2 59 


CALCULATION. 


RESULT OF 


True altitude. 


| 
i 
| 


Mean time. 


Latitude. 


——————— 


Deg. min. sec. h. min, sec. Deg. min. sec. 
37 46042 | 9 22 30 39° 06 = 40 
¢ 


590 


ENCAMPMENT ON THE LEFT BANK OF THE KANZAS RIVER. 
Determination of longitude, June 16, 1842—allitude of a Aquila, 


OBSERVATIONS, 


—— —-t———— i a —— 


FIRST SENIES, SECOND SERIES, 


a 


Aquila. Aquila. 


i Double altitude of a | Time of chronometer. Double altitude of a | Timeof chronometer, 
| 


oe 


Deg. min. sec. | he mine see. Deg. min, see. h. min. see, 
50 14 0O | Il 26 O08 52 48 40 1L 3246 
51 ll = 20 ll 28 42 53 29 00 Il 34 42 


51 52 20 ll 30 28 54 17 40 11 36 49 


Oeeneeen sees eens ee . SSNS 


RESULT OF CAL( 


‘ULATION. 


_——-—-.---- meneen ae ee oe SOE 


Mean time. Advance. Longitude. 


———— —E | 


he mine — see. he min, see. Deg. min, — see. 
4 9 50 47 l 10 18 96 10 06 


an —- . - 0 ae ee 


ENCAMPMENT ON LITTLE VERMILLION CREEK. 
Determinaiion of longitude, June 18, 1842—allitude of the sun. 


OBSERVATIONS. 


F/RST SERIES, SECOND SERIES. 


| 
Double altitude of the | Time of chronometer. | Double altitude of the | ‘Time of chronometer. 
lower limb of the sun. lower limb of the sun. | 


Deg. min. see. h. min. — see. | Deg. min. see | he min. see. 


40 41 00 7 10 41.0 39°05 «(20002=«| 0 OT) (1458.0 
40 19 20 7 11 38.0 38 43 50 | 7 15 52.5 
40 O01 00 7 12 265 | 38 30 10 | 7 16 30.0 
39 44 10 7 #189 +46 4 38 13 50 7 17% 14.0 
39 «19 y 1.5 38 «6000)~=—(00 y 50.0 


Index error = — 35 sec. 


RESULT OF CALCULATION. 


! 


Mean time. Advance. | Longitude. 


| 
{ 
eee —-|— 


h. min. see. h. min. see. | Deg. min. see. 
5 32 18 | l 42 10 | 96 36 40 


AS RIVER, 
Of «a Aquila, 


1k 324g. 


Longitude. 


LT 


min, see, 


10 06 


EK. 
€ of the sun. 


RIES, 


ime of chronometer. 


he min. see. 
7 14 5a.o 
7 15 52.5 
7 16 30.0 
7 17 14.0 
7 17 ~~ 50.0 


ene 


ongitude, 


min. see. 
36 40 


591 


ENCAMPMENT ON LITTLE VERMILLION CREEBK. 


Determination of latitude, June 18, 1842—altilude of Polaris. 


OBSERVATIONS, 


_———— 


—- ene 


Double altitude of Polaris. Time of chronometer. | 


———__ ——- + ew 


Deg, min, see h, min, sec. iy 
75 4900 10 444 
75 50 20 10 48 08 
75 OBL 10 =6SL4B 
75 f2 20 10 53 34 | 
75 43 20) 10 55 09 


RESULT OF CALCULATION, 


Latitude. 


True altitude. Mean time. 


Deg. min. — see. he ming + see. Deg. mins — see. 
37 54 12 | i) OS 46 39) 15 18 


| 


te 


" BNCAMPMENT ON A TRIBUTARY OF THE BIG VERMILLION CREEK, 1,350 
FEET ABOVE 'THE LEVLS. OF THE GULF OF MENICO. 


Determination of longitude, June 19, 1842—altitude of the sun. 


OBSERVATIONS, 


_ FIRST SERIES. SECOND SERIES. il 


Double altitude of the | Time of chronometer. | Double altitude of the | Time of chronometer. 
lower limb of the sun. lower limb of the sun. 


Deg. min, sec. he mine — sec. | Deg. min. see. h. min. — sec. 
38 160 400 | HIB 16.0 

37. «5988027 7 19 02.4 | 86 «16. 40 7 23 39.0 
37 643 O45 7 19 45.0 35 46 50 7 %24 69.6 
37 =—24 ° 35 7 20 36.0 | 35 27 40 7 %25 60.6 
36 45 20 “7 2% 220-0 | 


Index error = — 42 sec, 


RESULT OF CALCULATION. 


Mean time. | Advance. Longitude. 


A. min, ste. | he mine see. Deg. min. sec. 
3) 39 43 1 42 41 96 48 05 


od 


er es ee 


[1% J 


Ht * ENCAMPMENT ON A TRIBUTARY OF THE BIG VERMILLION CREEK, 1,42 - 
| ] FELT ABOVE THE LEVEL OF THE GULF OF MEXICO , 2 
} 


t| Determination of latitude, June 19, 1842—altilude of Polaris 


OBSERVATIONS, - 
. , pom = 
Double altitude of Pola Cie of chronomet 
| ictiniecanaiomacice 
lheg. min, sec. | Y min see 
76 Ly 30 10 40 62 
76 21 oo Lo Al F 
76 23 Ou {0 18 f 
16 | 10 in 5 or 
76 24 20 ) BG 14 
76 2f} 5 ’ a | 
76 i a0 | au 2! 
: 76 8 Bi 0) AY 
16 24 0 | 04 ub _ 
ris} P45] ’ Of F2 
, 
RESULT OF CALCULATION, _ 
True altitude. Mean time. Latitude 
| 
Deg. min. — see, he min. — see. Deg, mine — see 
38 ll 07 a 13 1! au 30 4() 


et 


593 [ 174] 


ENCAMPMENT ON THE LITTLE BLUE RIVER, 1,600 FEET ABOVE THE LEVE! if 
OF THE GULF OF MEXICO, Wa ait 


ION CREEK, 1,409 
LEXICO 


e of Polaris Delerminulion of latitude, June 25, 1842—altilude of Polaris, 


OBSERVATIONS, 


P . F } 
Double altitude of Polaris, Time of chronometer, HW 
nomete -7- - ’ Soe ; is 
Deg. min. vee, h. mine ee 
Sater 7s 1h 20 10 36 14 | 
2 78 lb 15 lo 40 50 
pee 78 17 aD) 10 43 36 
ey 73 61) 8H 10 454 
- 78 20) 15 10 46 Si 
- vi) 20 20 10 48 25 
ye 7s 20 50 | 10 49 45 
Nd 78 21 25 | 10 5) 23 
st 7s 22 15 | 10 fh2 40 
a 7s 23 lo 10 54 17 i 
ah —_-- - _ — _— —_——— - ---——-- ay 
§2 Index error = + 25 see { 
RESULT OF CALCULATION, 
scncesisiahienito = ) : ee singin ihm 
True altitude. | Mean time. Latitude. 
eae EE, a 
Latitude Deg. min, see. he mine see, Deg. min. — see. 
_ ae 39 0900 8 57 19 4 82686 
, min. Sec ~ = 7 aI ties eee 
D 30 A() ; ‘ ; , ‘ ; 
Determination of longitude, June 25, 1842—alltitude of « Aquila. 
OBSERVATIONS. 
| 
FIRST SENTES. 1 SECOND SERIES. 
Double altitude of | ‘Time of chronometer. Double altitude of Time of chronometer. 
a Aquile. | a Aquile. t 
a) 4 
pas |! ee ae ih 
‘ | ; ii} 
Deg. min. sec. | he min. see. in, Ssée. h. min, — see. f 
50 34 40 11 Ol 45 U6 20 | 11 08 34.0 i 
51 19 «10 ~—C*S 03 4 100 O7 | Il 10 05.5 i 
52 ll 15 06 0) 2715 1) 12 11.0 i 
| i| ' ; 
RESULT OF CALCULATION. ti} 
7 — ose ha 
Mean time. Adv e | Longitude. vat 
| 6 
EE Luts 
. ; ‘ hieey a 
he. min. — sec. he mine see. Deg. min, sec. 
9 17 26 1 49 39 | 98 54 07 
‘ | } 


ra ee a 


[174 J 594 
ENCAMPMENT ON THE LITTLE BLUE RIVER. 


Determination of latitude, June 25, 1842—allitude of Antares near the 
meridian, 


OBSERVATIONS, 


— ae 


Double altitude of Antares, 


Deg. min. A. = min, 

45 ] 18 
46 l 19 
46 2 l 26 
46 l 27 
46 l 30 


RESULT OF CALCULATION. 


True altitude. | Mean time. Latitude. 


min, — See. Deg, mine — see, 
28 33 40 26 43 


R. 


Antares neap the 


Latitude, 


ne 


ig. mine — gee, 
lO 26 43 


[174] 


FIRST ENCAMPMENT ON THE RIGHT BANK OF PLATTE RIVER 1,970 FEE’ i 
ABOVE THE LEVEL OF THE GULF OF MEXICO, : aid 


Determination of latitude, June 26, 1842—allitude W Polaris. 


OBSERVATIONS, 


rr rr a ee 2 ee ee = 


Double altitude of Polaris, 


= a ee ee —---— 


Dey, min, — see. he ming — sees 
79 06 1h 1) 20 50 


19 07 10 il 23 20 

19 09 20 1! 25 51 

i9 09 35 11 27 28 

79 10 45 lI 30 ov 

79 IL 30 It 880 o | 

i) 12 30 lt 34 00 i 

79 14 20 ll 35 h2 

"9 14 35 | 11 37 00 || 
15 38 


Index error =» + 25 sec. 


RESULT OF CALCULATION, 


See _—— 


True altitude. Mean time. | Latitude, 


Deg. min, — see, he mine — see. | Deg. min. — see. 
3984 9 39 34 | 40 41 10 


ere 0 i ec ence . _ —o - - SE oe SNES SD 
- _ 


Determination of latitude, June 26, 1842—altiltude of Antares near the | 
meridian. 


OBSERVATIONS. 


Double altitude of Antares. Time of chronometer. 


ee, 


Deg. min. — sec. h. = mine — see. i!) 
46 31 20 11 48 834 i 
46 32 20 11 «65108 Hi 
| i 

a i) y 


RESULT OF CALCULATION. 


True altitude. | Mean time. | Latitude. Haya 


OO — 


Deg. min. — sec. Deg. min. sec. 
23 14 «13s 40 41 03 


[ 174 J 596 


ries’ ENCAMEYVENT ON THE RIGHT BANK OF PLATTE RIVER, iO PRET 
AVOVE THE LEVEL OF THE GULF OF MENTCO 


Determination longitude, June 26, 184.—allitude of « Aguila 


OMSERY ATIONS, 


Fittee SEHTES, sheowp SLATS, 


| 
Double altitude of Tine « romet Doul’e altitude of =| Time of chronome 
a Aquila, + Aquilte. 


es cinta 


Deg. ain, P, , Ree, Dew, milivs 8s » mene 

74 } 

vis) j i is a His) Lj 4 
75 : 7 te An tu 20,0 
76 ; j 70 Bt uu 20 WORD 
val) 


RESULT OF CALCULATION, 


Mean time, Advanee, Lonvitude. 


a 


h. min, — see Ae min, — see, Deg. min, 
10 23 Ob | l 50 Hf uy 17 


eof 


RIVER, 
feo 


LAtKS, 


iin. 
12 lj 
12 1a 
12 20 


Lonvitude. 


min, 


17 


eA 


47 


. ly ila 


Time of chrono: 


[ 174 ] 


* PLATTE RIVER, 


(pt 


SECOND ENCAMPMENT ON THE RIGHT BA 


rmination of longitude, June 27, \S42—altifude of « Aquila, 


Li 


OUSHRVATIONS, 


SLeCoso sbhntifta 


Pike’ SL MTEA 


Time of elyronometer, 


Thin Wouble alt tude al ' 


Aijuile, 


ltitude oft ot chronometer 


juuilin 


eiihy 


RESULT OF CALCULATION, 


Longitude, 


Advan P 


8CCs 


Deg, min, 


Determination of latitude, June 27, 1842—altitude of Polaris. 


OBSERVATIONS, 


| 
| 


Double altitude of Polaris, Time of chronometer. 


2 a ee a ee 


| 


Deg. ming see, h, min, se. 
78 59 45 M1 13 038 
79 v1 30 tl 16 46 
79 04 i) 1) 20 40 
79 05 fh 1] 24 12 ‘ \h 


a7 26 


CALCULATION. 


RESULT OF 


True altitude. Latitude. 


Deg. min. sec. h. min. sec. Deg. min. see. 
30 50 9 28 36 40 39 32 


| 
| 
| 
| 
a SCONCE =| 
| 
| 
| 


S| 
x xi 
- ——— 
i all 
a: — 
a 
BLE pon 
te 
=u 


( 174] 


598 


THIRL)Y ENCAMPMENT ON THE RIGHT BANK OF PLATTE RIVER. 


Determination of latitude, June 28, 1842—altitude of Polaris. 


ee a 


Double altitude of Polaris. 


Deg. min. 


78 
78 
’ 79 
79 
79 
79 
79 
79 
79 
79 


59 
59 
00 
ol 
Ol 
03 
04 
05 
05 
06 


sec. 
20 
35 
25 
15 
50 
30 
35 
20 
55 


40 


Index error = — 20 sec. 


OBSERVATIONS. 


Se 


Time of chronometer. 


A. 
11 
ll 
Ll 
lt 
11 
1] 
11 
1l 
11 
ll 


RESULT OF CALCULATION. 


True altitude. 


Deg. min. — sec. 
39 30 13 


Mean time. 


min, SEC. 


c 
20 25 


min, 
05 
07 
08 
10 
13 
14 
16 
18 
19 


20 


Deg. 
40 


sec. 
05 
32 
46 
02 
08 
49 
42 
09 
11 
56 


Latitude. 


min. 
39 


a 


sec. 
50 


Dele 


599 C 174 ] 
E RIVER. FIFTH ENCAMPMENT ON THE RIGHT BANK OF PLATTE RIVER. 


Polaris, 


Determination of latitude, June 30, 1842—altitude of Antares near 
the meridian, 


OBSERVATIONS, 


meter. 
ices SO . 
do Double altitude of Antares. Time of chronometer. 
05 acai aN ee ee : ~spretnsh anoalaaicuabiasa aaa 
32 
46 Deg. min: — see. h. = ming — see, 
02 46 15 50 lL 3638 
08 46 17 50 Il. 40 89 
49 46 «15 «50 ll 44 18 
42 en a ee Ee — = a Sa ao 
09 _ 
11 Index error = — 20 sec. 
56 
RESULT OF CALCULATION. 
True altitude. Mean time. Latitude. 
ai [| 
,atitude. . | 
petealaecieas ear 
min. — sec. es, cee eg et ss pg STE eee ee ee 
39 50 , 
eRe Determination of longitude, June 30, 1842—altitude of « Aquilz. 


OBSERVATIONS. 


‘Double altitude of a Aquila. | Time of chronometer. 
Deg. min. sec. | h. mine — see. 
61 12 40 | ll 17 05.5 


61 48 30 
62 2220 
68 10 40 
63 59 50 


RESULT OF CALCULATION. 


er nn = — renee 


Mean time. Advance, Longitude. 

| Mae wince 
h. min. sec. | he min. see. Deg. min. sec. 
9 25 20 1 55 24 109 38 10 


“ 


EN ae NN 


[174] 600 


FIFTH ENCAMPMENT ON THE RIGHT BANK OF PLATTE RIVER. 


Determination of latitude, June 30, 1842—altitude of Polaris. 


OBSERVATIONS. 


Double altitude of Polaris. wt Time of chronometer. 


a ne eens, 


Deg. min. see. homing see” 
“9 40 | 0 57 Ol 
25 10 «6569 
00 11 ol 20 
35 11 02 56 
40 | 11 0k) 44 
10 11 06 09 
50 | 11 07 1) 
40) ll ov 19 
00 11 10D 
AQ 11 12 56 


NS 


RESULT OF CALCULATION. 


eee ene <a - a ee 


True altitude. Mean time. Latitude. 


Deg. min. see. nh. =omins — see. Deg. min. — see. 
39 39 04 09 51 40 49 45 


601 [ 174} 


ENCAMPMENT AT THE JUNCTION OF THE NORTH AND SOUTH FORKS OF 
THE PLATTE RIVER, 2700 FEET ABOVE THE LEVEL OF THE GULF OF 
of Polaris, MEXICO, 


Determination of longitude, July 2, 1842—sun’y altitude. 


TE RIVER, 


OBSERVATIONS, 


FIRST SENTES, SECOND SERIES. 


meter. | 


eee ne eee ne, | 
sec, Double altitude of the | ‘Time of chronometer. | Double altitude of the — ‘I'ime of chronometer. 
OL. sun’s lower limb. | sun's lower limb, 

13 _ stneapis atoms occa 

2 

56 Deg. min, see. » min, see. Deg. mine see, h, min. 

44 35 21 30 ‘ 32 13 7 53 

09 34 54 00 46 ve ‘ Oo v 54 

50 34 24 50 | 47 32, i| ‘ 48 54 

19 33° 46 (15 9 19.6 31 Bf 

59 33 Ol 50 23. 14 56 

56 | 

ela eee Index error == — LS sec. 


RESULT OF CALCULATION. 


re ree \ a i 


atitude. Mean time. Advance. | Longitude. 


_—$$—$—_—. 


pine’ cabs: min, See. » mine see. Deg. min. — sec. 
49 55 53 34 57 50 101 22 i) 


Determination of longitude, July 2, 1842—altitude ofa guile. 


OBSERVATIONS. 


FIRST SERIES. SECOND SERIES, 


Pe Ce _ — - omens ‘ " pein — 


Double altitude of | Time of chronometer. | Double altitude of Time of chronometer. 
a Aquila. a Aquile. 


———_ $$ $$$ —— = es SS, ee —s* 


Deg. min. sec. he min. seee Deg. min. see. h. min. — sec. 
73° 2540 11 46 4l |! 75 36 25 11 68 03 
74 10 30 |; lL 48 51 76 18 40 ll 55 06 


74 49° 20 ' 1k 50 42 76 43 10 ll 56 18 


RESULT OF CALCULATION. 


Mean time. Advance. Longitude. 


Deg. min. sec. 
101 22 00 


[ 174 ] 602 


ENCAMPMENT AT THE JUNCTION OF THE NORTH AND SOUTH FORKS of EN 
At RIVER, 2,700 FEET ABOVE THE LEVEL OF THE GULF oF 
MENICO, 


Determination of latitude, July 2, \842—allilude of Antares in the 


meridian. 
\ , - ; Fs ; 
Double altitude of the star, | True altitude. | Latitude. 
Do 
ae eal 
Deg, mine see | Deg, mine sees Deg. min, see. aimee 
15 44 15 23 49 Ts) 41 05 22 
] 
es —EE 
Determination of longitude, July 3, WA2—altilude of the sur. 
OBSERVATIONS. 
FIRST SERIES. SECOND SERIES. 
Double altitude of the Time of chronometer. | Double altitude of the | Time of chronometer. 
sun's lower limh. sun's lower limb, ane 


a an - - a ee ee ee ee 


Deg. iaine secre | he mine see. Deg, mine sen 5 hy mine — see, 
| i 53 50) 50 Y O68 22.0 | 5% 06 5 it) 17 ~— 65.5 
| 5i 09 8 ; 9 O98 045 57 36943 (05 9 18" 44.5 
55 (050 9 11 435 58 15 40 | 9 80. 12.7 

55) 8820 9 13 11.0 58 41 6400—6«d4| CQ 22.0 

56 0920 9 14 35.3 59 11 25 | 9 82 41.5 


RESULT OF CALCULATION. 


SED 


| 
| 


Advance. Longitude. 
| 


! 
| 


Mean time. 


Ae mtn. SEC. 
1 57 4l 


hk, mine — Ste. 
7 18 01 


rr 


Time did not permit us to wait at some of the most important geographi- 
cal positions for favorable weather, and I have occasionally referred to these 
the observations taken at less marked localities. By the chronometric dif- 
ference, the lunar distance of September 16, observed about forty miles 
below, is referred to this place. 


UTH FORKS oF 
* THE GULF oF 


Intaves in the 


Latitude. 


min, ee. 
05 22 


of the suit. 


TRIES. 


oy 


‘ime of chronometer. 


A, mine — see, 
y 17 05.5 
y Ik * 44.5 
Ht] 20 12.7 
Y 2 22.0 
i) 22 41.5 
Longitude. 


ortant geographi- 
ly referred to these 
-chronometric dif- 
about forty miles 


Pee. weal PF ese 


603 [ 174] 


ENCAMPMENT ON THE LEFT BANK OF THE SOUTH FORK OF PLATTE RIVER. 
Determination of longitude, July 4, 1842—allitude of the sun. 


OBSERVATIONS, 


FINST SENieS, SECOND SERIES, 


- ao ee + ee eee 


| 
Double altitude of the | Time of chronometer, | Double altitude of the | ' 


lime of chronometer, 
sun's lower limb. | 


sun's lower limb. 


Deg, min. see. he min, 


SEC. Deg. min. see. he mine see. 
55 AY 40 6 62 22 | 53 Hy | 15 6 HY, 05 
5 2 10 6 63 O05 63 8k Ow 6 BY 59 
4 57 10 ny | 17 63 200 6 5 35 
54 x0 50 6 545 25 53 02 3o 6 69 23 
HA MM 50 6 46 10 §2 44 30 q 00 11 


RESULT OF CALCULATION. 


Se 


Mean time. | Advance. Longitude, 


certian 
& 


ee ae 


a 


| 
| 


[ 174 J 604 


ENCAMPMENT ON AN [SLAND IN THE SOUTH FORK OF THE PLATTE RIVER 
Determination of latitude, July 5, \8A42—altitude af Polaris. 


OBSERVATIONS, 


Double altitude of Polaris | Time af chronometer, 
— CE 
Deg. min, se / min ere 
79 63 40 LI be 2 
79 59 00 Lt 3 at 
Index error a. + 15 sec 
RESULT OF CALCULATION, 
True altitude, Mean time. Latitude 
es , ase | iat 
Deg. min. see. | ho omin. — gee Deg. min. — see 
39 57 21 | 1) A 30 AY 51 17 


Determination of longitude. July 6, 1842—altitude of a Aquile. 


OBSERVATIONS. 


Double altitude of « Aquila. Time of chronometer. 
Re Se a 
Deg. min, sec. he amin. see. — 
80 53 20 Le 00 14 
Cy rr C1 | : 12 064 
RESULT OF CALCULATION. 
aaa PERI ai “- on saa 
Mean time. » Advance. be Longitude. 
h. min. see. Ah, mine — see. | Dez. min, sec. 
‘9 657. 3i 2 05 43 . | * 108 85 04 
‘ | 
rrr 8 + | ee 


LATTE RIVER, 


Polaris. 
heter, 
we 
2 
a 
atitude 
min, ser 
51 17 


Pa Aquila, 


neter, 


ngitude. 


min, sec. 
35 = 04 


———— 


605 [ 174] 


ENCAMPMENT ON THE SOUTH FORK OP PLATTE RIVER. 


Determination of longitude, July 7, \S42—altitude Of a Aquila. 


OBSERVATIONS, 


Double altitude of a Aquile, Time of chronometer, 
Deg, ming — see, h min 
» ming — see, 
83 29 20 12 04 45 
4 16 10 12 07 O07 
ah 19 fis 12 10 fia 
86 01 20 12 12 32 
86 4) 30 12 14 37 
Index error = — 15 sec, —_ 
RESULT OF CALCULATION, 
Mean time. | Advance, Longitude, 

‘ |) = siiusieee 
he min, Bee, he mine see, Deg. min. see. 
10 02 42 2 O77 2 1040218 
Determination of latitude, July 7, 1842—altitude of Polaris. 

OBSERVATIONS, 
te Soe LD ~— 79 ee 
Double altitude of Polaris. | Time of chronometer. 
Deg. min. — see. | h. min. set. 
79 43 40 12 18 37 
7 4450 | 12 «21~—Ss«39 
79 «48 ~=—(00 ! 2 24 28 
79 51 00 2 29 54 
79 «65240 12 33 19 
RESULT OF CALCULATION. 
True altitude. Mean time. Latitude. 
Deg. min. sec. h.. min, see, Deg. min, sec. . 
39 53 B| 10 18 17 40 33 26 


C174] 606 


ENCAMPMENT AT &T, VRAIN'S FORT, SOUTH PORK OF PLATTE RIVER, 6,410 
FEET ABOVE THE LEVEL OF THE GULP OF MEXICO 


Determination of longitude, July V1, W8i2—altitude of the sur. 


OUSERVATIONS. 


PInST SENERS } SECOND SERIES, 
= 
acacia = 7 haa 
Double altitude of the | ‘Time of chronometer. | Doub le altitude of the | Time of chronometer, 
sun's lower limb. / #un'e lower limb, | 
| 
Deg. min, see. | he ming see. | Dey, min, see, | h. min. see = 
60 «OL 0 0 I @ 53° (0000 | 9 96 170 
50 «3h BO 9 9 68 53 36 (O58 ttC<i*#*‘ OC 
61 Ol 05 | o i 02 SA 17 20 HM] 29) 40.0 
51 28 (10 9 2 13 | 4 48 Ih | 9g BL 02.0 
62 02 «6hCUd|CCU 8 65 621) fo | 9 32 300 
| | 
Index error == + 15 sec. 
RESULT OF CALCULATION, ee 
Mean time. Advance. | Longitude, — 


| 
he mine — see. | he min, — see. Jig, min. — see 
7 Il 54 | 2 13 92 1 ne ne 


Determination of longitude, July 12, 1842—allilude of the sun. 


OBSERVATIONS. 


a — TT 


FIRST SENLES- SECOND SERIES. 


Sy 


Double altitude of the ir ‘ime of chronometer. | Double altitude of the | ‘Time of chronometer. 
sun’s lower limb. | sun's lower limb. 


nr = a 


Deg. min. sec. | hb. min. see. Deg. min, see. he min. — see. 
62 33 lO | 9 5 Sl 66 08 80 10 Ol 20.0 
63. 27 20 | 9 564 138 6% 09 80 10 Of 65.5 
63 57 00 | 

| 


48 00 


607 [ 174] 


'E RIVER, 6.110 ENCAMPMENT ON CROW CREEK 
Ico 


Determination of latitude, July \2, WA2—allitude af Polaris, 
of the sun. 


OWSERVATIONS, 


“" Double altitude of Polaris, Time of chronometer, 
ths Se eednennaliinediimen cnet ed 
ts Deg. mine — we, hy min, fe 
ime of chronometer, rh) oy ATT) i1 PY 28 
70 Al 40 Li BI) 2) 
me 4560 40 1h 48 
he min. see =. 7 : — 
0 26 7.0 , ones 
9 97 «B38 Index error aw + 7 sec, 
) 20 40.0 
09 3 02,0 serry —. “9 F 
rd 33 20.0 RESULT OF CALCULATION, 
True altitude, Mean time. Latitude, 
| emergence eS RESSSEREEEEEER _ ee 
. | 
Deg. min. see, | h, ming gee, | Deg. mine see. 
erase 39 50 13 | Ht) 25 31 40 42 v0 
Longitude, — _-—-— - a —— | cmeainiageinamias — 
min, — see Determination of longitude, July 12, 1842—altitude of « Aquile. 
15 13 
~ = OBSERVATIONS. 
le af the sun. ee ” =e on 
FINST SERIES. SECOND SERIES. 
aN ME Teen Cerone ee Senora 
_ Double altitude of « =| ‘Time of chronometer. || Double altitude of a | ‘Time of chronometer. 
Aquile, | Aquila, | 
RIES. — __ | | ee ee ae 
ee ae Deg. min, see. he ming see. | Deg. min. see. he min. see. 
Time of chronometer. 838 15 20 11 49 47 85 6036) 80 11 57 Ol 
84 38 30 Ll 53 «68 | 86 26 10 11 59 36 


Ae mine — see. 


10 ol 20.0 RESULT OF CALCULATION. 
10 Ot = 65.5 


Mean time. Advance. | Longitude. 
bi he min. see. h. mins see. | Deg. min. see. 
» 9 42 63 2 12 12 | 105 33 = 87 
| 
‘ EE See Seve eee eee eee Nee Se ee 


f 1744 608 


ENCAMPMENT ON A FORK OF LODGE POLE CREEK, 5,450 PRET ABOVE THE 
’ GULF OF MENICO, 


Determination of latitude, July 13, 1842—allitude of Polaris, 


ODF ERVATIONS, 


Double altitude of Polaris Time of chronometer, 


Doub 


A a ee 


Tee. min — see, h, mine 8G 


80) 87 0 1! 695 as 
a0 a9 50 1! 38 10 Deg. 
a0 43 00 1! 41 24 I 


Index error - 15 see, 


RESULT OF CALCULATION. 


= 


i 1, 
True altitude. Mean time. Latitude, 
7. —_— 
i. — —— ——— 
vi Deg. min, — see, h. min, — see, Deg, min, — see. 
40 19 12 9 28 50 4) os 34 


Determination of longitude, July 13, 1842—altitude of « Aquila. 


OBSERVATIONS. 


Double altitude of a Aquila. Time of chronometer. 


Deg. min, see. | h, = min, see. 
83 36 30 e | 46 45 ; 
84 21 20 Ml 49 06 
85 05 40 } 51 22 
85 41 10 1 53 14 — 
86 34 50 1] 56 0) 
‘ 87 12 10 1) 58 05 


——--—- 


RESULT OF CALCULATION. 


Mean time. Advance. Longitude. 


h. min. — see. h. min. see. Deg. min. see. 
9 41 47 2 10 38 105 13 38 


609 


ENCAMPMENT ON HORSE CREEK, 


[ 174} 


ET ABOVE THp 


Determination of longitude, July VA, 1842—altitude of « Aquile. 


Polaris, 
OBSERVATIONS, 
FIney SERIES, SPCOND Shatha, 
bineter, ; 
Double altitude of a © ‘Time of ehronometer, Double altitude of « | ‘Time of chronometer, 
Aquilm, Aquilm, 
fee. 
16 
10 Deg, mine see, | A, min, see, Dew. min, see, h, min, see 
24 0 ee ik 607) O04 m 2 4 ee ee 
72027 30 } il oo ow 74 16 ho th 16 Ol 
Index error «= + 15 see, 
RESULT OF CALCULATION, 
Mean time. Advanee. Longitude, 
Latitude, 


—_ en re ne ———. - 


he =o min. See, he mine — see. Deg, min, — see. 


min, — see, 9 0} 29 2 oo go 104 59 23 


08 3A 
ofa Aquila. Determination of latitude, July 14, 1842—altitude of Polaris. 
OBSERVATIONS. 
~~~ —__———_—- Double altitude of Polaris, Time of chronometer. 
ymeter. a a 
Deg. min. — see, h. min, — gee. 
82 05 30 12 0609 
ree 82 09 80 2 1) 09 
46 82 ol 80 12 18 «87 y 
06 82 15 «30 12 #19 «16 | 
22 
14 ec 
01 
05 ' RESULT OF CALCULATION, 
{ 
True altitude. Mean time. | Latitude. pe 
eect ances | : i 
Deg. min. see. h. min. see. | Deg. min. sec. : 
ee 4. 048 10 0310 | 41 40 13 
ongitude. a. Sg ee i tei inion ai 


min, sec. 
13 38 


a a 


SOD eee 


a teaiecet ne 
a a 


A ESS 


aes ea 


g 


SES 
, ‘ 
ee a 


ee SE 


C174 J 610 


ENCAMPMENT AT FORT LARAMIE, 4,470 FEEY ABOVE THE LEVEL OF THE 


GULF OF MENICO, ENCAM 
Determination of longitude, July 16, 1842—altitude of the sun, De 
OBSERVATIONS. 
FINST SERIES, SECOND SERIES. =~ 
Double altitude of the | Time of chronometer. Double ultitude of the | | Time of chronometer, == 
sun’s lower limb. sun's lower limb. | 
| | 
—---—- | EE L— 

Deg. min. see. | h. min, see. | Deg. min. sec. | he min. — see. 

58 3l 20 9 40 21.0 60 12 20 | i] 44 62.5 

58 68 40 9 41 33.5 60 37 50 i] 46 OLO 

59 18 30 | 9 42 29.0 60 49 50 | 9 46 9340 
69 2 10 | 9 42 54.0 60 59 0 9 46 69.0 = 

59 45 00 9 43 40.4 61 11 00 “it 9 47 G25 

Thermomete r 81°, 3. 
Index error = + 25 sec. 
RESULT OF CALCULATION. 
| 
Mean time. Advance. Longitude. 
he min. see. he min. — see. Deg. min. — see. 


4 26 17 2 10 35 105 20 13 


Determination of longitude, July 18, 1842—altitude of « Aquile. 


OBSERVATIONS. 


FIRST SERIES. SECOND SERIES. 


Double altitude of a | Time of chronometer. || Double altitude of « | ‘Time of chronometer. Double 


Aquile. | Aquila. ain 


| cee erenenememmmmmmemenceeneummscmmmmmmes | | 2 eee AES | <ensnnenet pe 


| 
Deg. min. sec. he min. see. | Deg. min, see. he min. sec. De 
79 31) 10 | Lk 17 (04.5 a 55 40 IL 2 29 4G 
79 «#657 = ~=60—00 11 18 8 25.5 re 40 11 «23 (00 Aq 
80 32 30 11 20) «18.0 20 11 24 ©6110 4 
| | 4 
4 


RESULT OF CALCULATION. 


Mean time. Advance. ~ | Longitude. 
: | 
h. min. sec. h. min. sec. 
9 10 46 2 09 58 | 


LEVEL OF THE 


of the sun, 


‘ime of chronometer, 


nen 


he. min. — see. 


9 44 62.5 
y 46 O10 
9 146 34.0 
9 46 69.0 
9 47 32.5 
Longitude. 


ED 


r min, See, 


) 20 13 


0 Of a Aquila. 


ERIES. 


lime of chronometer. 


A. min. sec. 


lL Qt = 29 
11 23 ©00 
11 24 10 


SS 


Longitude. 


611 [ 174 ] 


ENCAMPMENT AT FORT LARAMIE, 4,470 FEET ABOVE THR LEVEI OF THE 


GULF OF MENIUO, 


Determination of latitude, July 18, 1842—allitude of Polaris. 


Double altitude of Polaris. 


Deg, mine see. 
82 59 10 
83 00 50 
83 02 30 
83 04 50 
83 06 00 


[ 


OBSERVATIONS, 


an eee —E 


Time of chronometer 


he omins — see. 
11 36 2 

11 39 i) 
ll 41 34 
11 43 5 
11 45 31 


Thermometer 63°, 


ndex error = + 25 sec. 


RESULT OF CALCULATION. 


. 


—_————. 


True altitude. 


| 
Deg. min. — sec. 
41 30 38 


————— 


Mean time. Latitude. 


| 
he. min. — see. | 
9 31 14 


Deg. min. see. 
42 12 10 


Determination of longitude, July 20, 1842—altitude of the sun. 


FIRST SERIES. 


} 


Double altitude of the | 
sun’s lower limb. 


Time of chronometer. 


OBSERVATIONS. 


SECOND SERIES. 


| Double altitude of the | Time of chronometer. . 


sun’s lower limb. 


rrr | | 


| 
Deg. min. sec. Pk mie a h. min. see. | Dez. mins sec. h. min. sec. 
40 13 20 8 52 08.0 ii 4l 56 40 8 56 51.0 
40 41 00 8 53 25.5 tl 42 08 30 8 57 23.6 
41 02 55 8 54 25.0 42 20 20 8 57 56.0 
41 23 30 8 65 21.0 Ij 42 33 40 8 58 33.0 
41 40 650 8 66 08.0 ea ead 42 2 20 8 59 25.0 
| 


Thermometer 65°. 


Index error = -+ 25 sec. 


Os eran ea 


eas oe 


= 
Te. 


ge TE I SELES ER A a ST 


ES oe 


| 
| 


[ 174 ] 612 


ENCAMPMENT AT FORT LARAMIE, 4,470 FEET ABOVE THE LEVEL OF Tp 
GULF OF MEXICO, 


Determination of longitude, July 21, 1842—allitude of the sun. 


OBSERVATIONS. 


. ao —— 


FIRST SERIES, | SECOND SERIES. —— 


| 


meee iaipdibstnacis neural cehaaie pelapuaeataieal ‘ : : af Double 


Double altitude of the | Time of chronometer. | Double altitude of the | ‘Time of chronometer, 


lower limb of the sun. ' lower limb of thesun, = 
fancies tarts SRE De eee ne ea | eee . Oe ee een a Deg. 
; : 73 
Deg. min. see. h. min. see. Deg, min, set h. min. — see. 79 
39 45 20 8 = 51 23.0 | 41 24 50 8 55 57.0 79 
40 22 50 8 53 -05.5 | 41 42 10 8 56 44.0 80 
40 36 | 8 & 43.0 | 41 f4 20 8 57 16.4 R0 
40 54 10 ' 8 54 32.5 | 42 07 30 8 57 52,3 
41 05 OO | 8 55 O10 «| 42 22 40 8 58 34.3 =< 
| 
Thermometer 66°. 
, . 
Index error —.-+ 25 see. 
RESULT OF CALCULATION. 
Sea eteetmctis nape acs h 
Mean time. Advance. , ' Longitude. 8 
h. min. — sec. ‘he min. — see. 
6 46 00 2 09 25 


Meat camp is referred to this place.. 


613 [ 174 ] 


IE LEVEL OF Typ ENCAMPMENT ON THE NORTH FORK OF PLATTE RIVER 
Determination of longitude, July 23, 1S12—allitude of a Aquile. 
le of the sun. 
OBSERVATIONS. 


FINST SENIES. | SECOND SERIES 


| 


es 


ERIES. ae NRE aR) UR SSSR TR eC Oates 
Double altitude of a Time of chronometer. || Double altitude of a Time of chronometer 
Aquila. | Aquila, 


Time of chronometer, 


aes - — | 


. ee Deg. min. see. he min, — sec. | Deg, mine see. he min. see 
“a: 03 30" 10 55 54.5 | 8l 35° 40 1h 6007) (02.0 
he min. — see. 79 22, 45 ‘11°00 0 (200.07 | 8210.00 it «608 )=652.0 
8 55 570 79 48 60 eS e)) ey 82. 27 Ww 11 O09 50.5 
8 56 44.0 80 11 25 ll. 02 ° 36.5 33°. «07. «00 IL ott) 7.0 
8 57 16.4 a0 }6383)—Cts«éOHO | 03 48.0 {| 
8 57 523 \| 
8 58 34.3 TT ag ce ee ee eer Ma Pen eee es 
- —— Index error == +4 25 sec 


RESULT OF CALUULATION. 


——— 
oe 


Mean time. a Advance. | Longitude. 


ne ° " ' ; . 
min. see. A. min. — sec. 


Longitude. 


bserved at Dried 


[ 174 ] 614 


ENCAMPMENT ON THE NORTH FORK OF PLATTE RIVER. 


ENCA} 
Determination of latitude, July 23, 1842—allitude of Polaris, D 
OBSERVATIONS, 
— ‘ 
Double altitude of Polaris. Time of chronometer. 
eaenenevecee sci tag noe cael age aan <4 
Deg. mine — see, he min, — ste. , 
s4 0 10 11 29 © O8 saint 
a4 01 20 1} 31 34 : 
R4 2 20 1 32 45 ale 
‘ &4 oJ 15 1} 33 47 
i) 840k 1) 350 De 
84 05 5 1! 360 OBO 48 
81 07 20 1 38 57 48 
84 807) 5 1b = 4002 ae 
84 lo 00 1 43 04 ae 
84 1150 11 45 «(44 47 
RESULT OF CALCULATION. 
True altitude, Mean time. | Latitude. 
a ee | 
Deg. min, see. A, min. see. | Dee. min, see. 
42 01 54 9 23 39 | 4Q 39 25 


Determination of longitude, July 23, 1842—altilude of trcturus. 


OBSERVATIONS. 


Double altitude of Arcturus. Time of chronometer, 


Deg. min. see. h, ming see. 
75 1840 | 12 01 (08.0 
74 51 10 12 02 23.0 
74 04 20 04 


RESULT OF CALCULATION, 


Mean time. | Advance. Longitude. 


h. min. see. he min. sec. 
01 ll 39 


615 [ 174 ] 


E RIVER, : 7 2 iN PORK 
ENCAMPMENT ON THE N. FORK OF PLATTE RIVER—DRIED MEAT CAMP. 
€ O& Polaris, Prati . : ( , 
of Determination of longitude, July 25, 1842—altitude of the sun. 
OBSERVATIONS, 
| 
onometer. 
FIRST SERIES, | SECOND SERIES. 
| ee ee . 
SCC. ‘ ’ " ' re | ee | 
08 Double. altitude of the | ‘Time of chronometer, | Double altitude of the | Time of chronometer. 
34 sun's lower limb, | sun's lower limb, 
57 , , 
a0) Deg. min. sec. h, min. see. Dex. mins see. | he min, — see. 
50) 48 24 00 | 7 16 26.0 46 42 40 7 21 04.4 
57 48 10 50 | % 17 OLO 46 27) «40 7 21 45.5 
02 47° «4980 7 1% 58.5 46 1) 50 | % 22 270 
04 : 47 24 40 7 19 07.0 | 45 55 4 vi Q3 11.6 
44 47 02 00 7 20) OU.U 45 37 45 | 7 Qh 02,0 
| | 
eres na ee 
Thermometer 879, 
RESULT OF CALCULATION. 
Latitude. Mean time. | Advance, Longitude. 


SN | 


Jez. min, see. 
49 39 25 


min, See. | he mine — see. Deg. min. — see. 
5 07 44 2 12 35 ' 106 24 09 


le of «Arcturus. Determination of latitude, July 25, 1842—altitude of Polaris. 


OBSERVATIONS, 


eee eens > 


ne a ee a 


SEEEDneeeeeee 


Double altitude of Polaris. Time of chronometer. 


ronometer, 
Deg. min see. | h. min, see. MN 
Be si 18 20 | 11 12 BR 
23.0 84 19 25 | 11 61516 a 
29.5 8t 20 40 1l 616 ~~ 32 
84 21 2% | 17) BS 
81 23 20 11 =620—s«i5B 


f 


mane’ True altitude. | Mean time. Latitude. iva 
- Deg. min. — sec. | he = =-min. see. Deg. min. — sec. wa 6 
42 09 35 | 9 02 6&8 42 5185 


616 
ENCAMPMENT ON THE N, FORK OF PLATTE RIVER—DRIED MEAT CAvp 
Determination of longitude, July 25, 1842—allilude of Arcturus, 


OBSERVATIONS, 


FIRST SERIES, 


SECOND SERIES. 


Double altitude of Tine of chronometer. Double altitude of .; ‘Time of chronometer, 


Arcturus, Areturus. 


Deg. min. sec. he min, see. Deg. min. see he min. see. 
86 16 «15 11 23° «43 84 49 80 1 2746 

85 41 25 IL (25 2 S4 13 40 ll 29 «(7 

85 16 11 3l be | 11 3l 387 


26 


Thermometer 72°. 5, 


RESULT OF CALCULATION. 


Mean time. Advance. Longitude. 


he min. — See. | A. = omin. — sec. 
9 14 48 2 12 36 


ee = een 


Determination of longitude, July 25, 1842—distance from the second 
limb of the moon to Jupiter. 


OBSERVATIONS. 


Time of chronometer. 


| 
| 
| 


he min. — see. Deg. min. — sec. 
11 45 04 58 33 50 
ll 47 2 58s 84 50 
11 49 2 58 36 30 


ll 50 55 58 37 40 
52 ‘ 38 25 


Index error = -- 15 sec. 


RESULT OF CALCULATION. 


True distance. Mean time at Greenwich. | Longitude of the place. 


Deg. min. sec. he = min. — see. Deg. min. — sec. 
58 04 42 16 42 11 106 26 ll > 


IED MEAT CAyp 


» Of Arclurus, 


ERIES. 


Time of chronometer, 


he min. — gee. 


11 2746 

ll 29 27 

11 3l 37 
Longitude. 


from the second 


et, 


tude of the place. 
, min. sec. 


26061 


aE 


617 


ENCAMPMENT ON THE NORTH FORK OF THE PLATTE RIVER, MOUTH OF 
DEER CREEK, 


Determination of latitude, July 26, 1842—altitude of Polaris. 


OBSERVATIONS, 


Double altitude of Polaris. 


min, see. ; h min. see. 
a4 22 40 it 147 
84 25 ov It 15 36 
84 27 10 Ll 19 06 
84 27 0) im 20 10 
84 29 00 lt 22 LL 
84 30 10 Li 23 67 
84 32 50 al 28 06 
84 34 20 Lt 29 3 
84 34 50 Lt 30 2 
84 37 00 il 33 32 


Index error = -- 15 sec. 


RESULT OF CALCULATION, 


| 
True altitude. | Mean time. Lutitude. 
: set eee ks haan 
Deg. min see. hb. min, — see. | Deg. min. see, 
42 14 16 9 10 02 | 42 52 24 


a TS 


618 


ENCAMPMENT ON THE NORTH FORK OF THE PLATTE RIVER, MOUTH op EN! 
DEER CREEK. 


Determination of longitude, July 26, 1\8A2—altitude of the sun. 


OBSERVATIONS. 


Double altitude of the lower limb of the sun, Time of chronometer, 
1 
! 3 # 
, Deg. mine ste he ming see, : 
f 46 a7 45 7 21 03,0 
46 31 40 7 21 45.5 I 
Interrupted by ciouds, Interrupted by clouds, 
As 34 1S 7 24 14.5 
45 22 10 r 24 56.6 
45 0! 10 7 25 54.0 
44 37 30 7 27 00.0 


Thermometer 83°, 


RESULT OF CALCULATION, 


SS a se 


Mean time, Advance, | Longitude. 


he min, see. h. min, see. | Deg. mine — see, 
5 09 54 2 13 33 106 43 1h 


=z: -- - -- 


SS SS ee err 
’ 
' 
{ 


Determination of longitude, July 26, 1842—allitude of Arcturus. 


OBSERVATIONS. 


' 


FINST BEKIES. SECOND SERIES. 


sages Te 


=z 


see © Ss -—— a 
‘ - 


Double altitude of | Time of chronometer. Double altitude of | Time of chronometer. 
Arcturus. | Arcturus. 
=, Si ee | Peonecaeacen ye cee eer ene See Rea 
Deg. min. see. | he min. see, Deg. min. sec. h. min. — see. 


= 
| 

80 29 50 11 36 47 79 #18 #30 | WL 40 = 16.5 
| 
| 


79 59 #10 | 11 38 «12 | 78 &2 00 1) 41 17.0 
79 34 2 | 11 $9 20 78 32 30 11 642 «11.0 


ee sa = re sr ae a nee eee ere ree 


Thermometer 71°. 


SSS eRe a 


RESULT OF CALCULATION. 


Advance. Longitude. 


a Se ey 


he min. sec. 
2 13 


619 [ 174] 


ENCAMPMENT ON THE NORTH FORK OF PLATTE RIVER, UPPER CACHE 
CAMP, 


Determination of longitude, July 28, 1842—altitude of the sun. 


R, MOUTH OF 


Uf the sun, 


ONSERVATIONS, 


PIRST SERIES, SECOND SERIES, 


ee 


neter, 

Double altitude of the | Tine of chronometer. Double altitude of the | Time of chronometer. 

- sun's lower limb, sun's lower limb, 
see, 
03,0 ‘ : 
45.5 Deg. min, sees | he min, — see, Deg. min. see. he min, — see. 
‘louds, 45 12 55 | 7 25 21.6 43° 46 20 7 2 17.7 
14.5 44 56 th) | 7 2600 OOK. 49 385 bh 7 2 ARO 
56.6 4445 BT 8B 86.8 43 7 15 7 80 87.0 
54.0 44 30 2 | 7 87 17.6 13 05 OS 7 3) 1h 
00.0 44 15 20 | 7 27 58.6 42 Al AU 7 3! 41.7 
Thermometer 809.5, ~ 
Index error e + 12 sec, 
RESULT OF CALCULATION. 

ongitude. Mean time, Advance. Longitude, 


Deg. mine see. 
84 31 30 
84 32 45 
84 35 10 


mins — see, min, — see, mine see, Deg. min, see. 
49H 5 13 2&7 | 2 15 09 107 15 5S 
of Arcturus. Determination of lalitude,'July 28, 1842—allitude of Polaris. 
OBSERVATIONS, 
es 5 oe 
pes Double altitude of Polaris. | Time of chronometer, 
con enencesiien i caenennene pe aeinnanneasee annsiianarane er] - 
| 
| 


me of chronometer. 


h. min. — see. 
ll 40 16.5 


1) 41 17.0 
J) 0 642 0©«11.0 
RESULT OF CALCULATION. 
’ | 
ongitude. True altitude. | Mean time. Latitude. J 
qecccere cap eee etn an OCEDS A000 SAOSGRS OD —| canon se GDS TUN EET | ASRS SRD ener telay she 
Deg. min. sec. | h. min. see. Deg. min. see. Has 
42 


17 54 . 9 15 59 42 50 &3 


<i 


SS ee 2 OT 


=— = ae 


re 


[ 174 


J 


620 


ENCAMPMENT ON THE NORTH PORK OF PLATTE RIVER 


Determination of latitude, July 29, 1842—allitude of Polaris, 


Double altitude of Polaris 


True altitude. 


Deg. min. see. 


42 


00 


OBSERVATIONS. 


min, ee 
63 40 
hi i) 
47 0 
50 46 
00 40 | 
03 00 
04 LO 
05 00 
06 40 
08 10 
Thermometer 60°, 
Index error ms + 12 see 
RESULT OF CALCULATION, 
| | 
| Mean time. 
| 
h. min, see. | 
ol 8 58 58 


8 ee ae eT. 


Time of chronometer, 


I 
min, wee 
05 oo 
“7 ? 
oo 10 
13 tf 
4 L8 
16 “oo 
18 21 
20 O8 - 
2) A2 
23 05 
Latitude. as 
L 


Deg. min, see. 
42 38 Ol 


VER 


Polaris. 


tude, 


(eee ee 


in, #8. 
386 = COOL 


ee emer ee 


621 [174] 
ENCAMPMENT ON, THE NORTH FORK OF PLATTE RIVER 
Determination of longitude, July 29, 1842—altitude of « Aquile. 


OBSERVATIONS, 


oe re 


Double altitude of « Aquilw, Time of chronometer, 


Deg. min, see, he min, — nee, 


81 29 00 ' 10 47 19.0 
82 04 50 10 Av 11.0 


BY 35 JO 10 50 h0.6 


a 


RESULT OF CALCULATION, 


Mean time. | Advance. | Longitude. 


’ h. min, see, Deg. min. see. 
8 33 13 | 2 15 54 107 29 On 


Determination af longitude, July 29, 1842—allitude of Arcturus. 


OBSERVATIONS. 


Double altitude of Arcturus, 


Deg. min. see. 

91 57 20 | 

91 17 50 | 

90 44 10 | 10 59 05,0 
( 


RESULT OF CALCULATION. 


onal i aenoe Si Pees . — - nee oF 


Mean time. Advance. Longitude. 


a _ = ciciietagtiimeta — ee = a eee 


he min. — see. he min, See. 
8 41 30 | 2 15 57 


GOAT ISLAND, &e 


Favorable weather enabled us to observe here an oceultation of + Arietiy, 
which occurred at the moon's bright limb, at 0/4, 05' 40" of the 31st of 
July, (civil time.) In order that it might be calculated with the advantage 
of correspondent observations, and the correction of the errors of the tables, 
the observation was sent to Mr. 8S, C, Walker, at Philadelphia, ‘The fol. 
lowing is the result from Mr, Walker's computation, without any correc. 
tion for errors of the tables, 


July 30, 1842—aslronomical lime, 


d' a h ¢ 


eee =, ee eee a el sl On 


oi _ 
Im. « Arietis 12A, 5' 40" — 7A. 10' 32".01 + 1.896 + 1.611 + 2.488. 


By the estimated difference of longitude, thirty-two seconds, (32'',) the 
lunar distance observed at the mouth of the Sweet Water on the 23d of 
August, is referred to this place, for the longitude of which we have 
adopted the mean from chronometer, lunar distance, and occultation, re- 
sulting as follows : 

he min, gee. 
Longitude of Goat island, by lunar distance 10 07,91 
Longitude of Goat island, by chronometer 10) 51,66 
Longitude of Goat island, by occultation 


Mean longitude of Goat island : 


Some of the observations made at this place were lost in the accident in 
the Platte river on the 24th of August. 


mn of + Arietiy, 
of the 3}st of 
he advantage 

of the tables, 
hia. ‘The fol. 
it any correc. 


¢ 
a el 


ll of 2.488, 


nds, (32'',) the 

on the 23d of 
hich we have 
occultation, re. 


he min, — gee. 
-7 100 07,91 
-7 10 51,66 

7 10° 32.01 


-7 10 30,53 


the accident in 


623 { 174 ] 
ENCAMPMENT ON GOAT ISLAND, N. PORK OP THE PLATTE RIVER 


Determination af latitude, July 30, \Sia—altitude af the sun in the 


meridian, 
Double altitude of the sun's "True eentyal altitude, Latitude 
lower limb, 
Deg, mine see, Jeg, mine gee, Deg, min, gee 
ol 23 wo Hs Na 52 2 oo 37 


Index error > 13 nee, 


Determination af longitude, July 31, 1842—altitude of « Aquile 


ODSERVATIONS, 


Double altitude of a Aquile, Time of chronometer, 


Deg, mine see, Ae ming — gee, 
ov Sh 50 3 Ol 02 
vo oo 30 4 Ot OY 
vs 45 50 u 05 42 


RESULT OF CALCULATION, 


Mean time, Advanee, Longitude, 
| - 
h. min, — see | he mine see. 


0 46 5 2 16 36 


a ed 


Determination of longitude, July 31, 1842—allitude of « uriga. 


OBSERVATIONS, 


Double altitude of a Auriga. Time of chronometer. 


a _ _ - oy 


min, sets 


Deg. min, see. h. 
4 13 40 


48 38 20 


RESULT OF CALCULATION. 


+ ere 


Mean time. Advance. Longitude. 
h. min. see. h. min. — see. 
1 57 09 2 16 3 


rr ee 


| 
| 
| 
| 


[ 174 ] 624 


ENCAMPMENT ON THE SWEET WATER RIVER, ONE MILE BELOW ROCK 
INDEPENDENCE. 


Determination of latitude, August 1, 1842—altitude of Polaris, 


OBSERVATIONS. 


Double altitude of Polaris. Time of chronometer. 
Deg. min, see h. ming — See. 
84 04 20 Il 29 33 
84 8605 | It 12 
84 05 00 | ll 32 15 
84 07 50 ll 33 42 
84 600900 11 35 ~~ 0 
84 10 00 1! 36 37 
84 1] 40 | 11 38 18 
84 13 00 1 39 38 
84 13 10 | 11 40 48 
84 14 00 | ll 42 14 
\ 
Thermometer 47°, 
RESULT OF CALCULATION. 
EES ee ee ee teeta —- ; See 
Truce altitude. Mean time. Latitude. 
| 
Deg. min. — s8€e. h. ming see. Deg. min, — sec. 
42 03 54 Ht) 18 40 42 29 56 


Index error = -+ 12 sec. 
Determination of longitude, August 1, 1842—altitude of .@rcturus. 


OBSERVATIONS. 


FIRST SERIES. SECOND SERIES. 


Double altitude of 
Arcturus. } 


a ee 


Time of chronometer. 


Double altitude of 
Arcturus. 


he min, 


Deg. min. sec. 


Time of chronometer. 


h. min, — sec. 


Deg. min. sec. | sec. 
66 41 OO | 11 54 55.0 64 00 00 12 02 10.0 
66 16 20) | ll 56 03.0 | 63 22 50 12 03 52.0 
65 50 30 11 57 10.0 | 62 46 30 12 05 29.6 
65 24 10 | 11 58 19,5 62 14 10 12 O06 57.0 
64 49 20 ; Il 59 55.5 | 61 48 50 12 08 06.0 
| Us oe coe Neos eee 
RESULT OF CALCULATION. 

Mean time. Advance. Longitude. 

h. min. see h. min. — see. Deg. min. — sec. 

9 44 00 2 1% 18 107 55 00 


Det 


BELOW ROCK 


f Polaris, 


atitude. 


min, 
29 


net 


sec, 
56 


of .Ircturus. 


ie of chronometer. 


min, — sec. 

02 10.0 

03 52.0 

05 29.6 

06 57.0 

0s 06.0 
igitude. 


625 [ 174 ] 


ENCAMPMENT ON THE SWEET WATER RIVER. 


Determination of latitude, August 5, 1842—altitude of Polaris. 


OBSERVATIONS, 


| 
Double altitude of Polaris. Time of chronometer. 


min, see. 


@ 
@ 
—] 
= 
eo 
ou> 


18 55 
88 03 20 22 15 
&8 2 00 5 23 39 
88 02 40 5 26 Ol 
88 03 30 5 27 32 


Thermometer 57°, 


Index error = + 25 see. 


RESULT OF CALCULATION, 


——_——_—__ -——- --- ———-- _~— —_ et TT 


True altitude. Mean time, Latitude. 


en ~- - | + - — a nee 


44 00 35 3 02 49 42 32 31 


Deg. min. — sec. h. min. — sec. | Deg. min. sec. 


Determination of longitude, August 5, 1842—altitude ofa Lyre. 


OBSERVATIONS, 


Double altitude of a Lyre. Time of chronometer. 


Se ENON G ee en a = eee 


Deg. min. — sec. | h. min. — see. 

67 38 30 

66 58 40 

66 35 = 30 | 5 O07 ~~ 32.0 
| 


Sky very misty. —Observation indifferent. 


RESULT OF CALCULATION. ‘ 


CE 


Mean time. Advance. Longitude. 


h. min. — sec. he. min. — sec. 
2 45 14 2 20 53 


ne ee. 


[174 J 626 
SNCAMPMENT ON THE SWEET WATER RIVER. 
Determination of longitude, August 7, 1842—alltitude of Arcturus, L 


OBSERVATIONS. 


Double altitude of Arcturus. Time of chronometer. 
sable ; - | = _ 
eg. mine see. h. =o min. = 8 ee, 
st 460 | 12 «sO te 
50 A230 12 20 856 . 
H 49 «5480 Iz 38s cia 
a i Seneesesmmanee saeresiniesaatsncacanes rene neice De. 
t Index error = -+ 25 sec. : 
| 4 
te RESULT OF CALCULATION. 4 
i See eee ee a ARE ae ee siaidgaeieeemuiailetmaniees 4 
Mean time. | Advance. Longitude. — 
' 
j owes = tae aut - | CU Fa A a acta a nate ee aad = | 
h, = min, — see. | h. = min. — see. Deg. min. — see. 
| yg 57 Ol 2 23 3Y | 109 51 29 
es ee, ee 
{ 
| Determination of latitude, August 7, 1842—altilude of Polaris. — 
OBSERVATIONS. 
} 
ann ane ee ee ore — 
' Double altitude of Polaris. | Time of chronometer. 


| 


Dg. = min. see, he min. see. 
84 59 25 12 30 38 ~ 
85 00 00 12 32 19 
85 ol 20 12 33 25 
Hi 85 02 30 12 84 OY = 
ih 8 03 20 12 36 2 


37 


Thermometer 36°. 


RESULT OF CALCULATION. 


True altitude. Mean time. Latitude. 


us | 
| 


Deg. min. sec. h. = min. — see. 
42 30 18 10 ll 25 42 27 15 


terete nomena ea, ne mee enemas - en 


627 [ 174 ] 


ENCAMPMENT ON LITTLE SANDY CREEK. 


RIVER, 


ude of Arctur ; . ; 
uf we Determination of longitude, lugust 8, 1842--altilude of the sun. 


OBSERVATIONS, 


chronometer, 


FIRST SERIES, | SECOND SERIES. 
= = = Se — eee 
min. see. oni , , | ons , 
1802 Double altitude of the | ‘Time of chronometer, || Double altitude of the | Time of chronometer. 
20 56 sun's lower limb. | sun's lower limb. 
2 O4 | Siectiidetaesias aitciana 
——— — Deg. min, sec. he min. — see. | Deg. mins sec. he min. — see. 
44 Gl 50 7 24 45.5 | 43 29 30 } 7 2% 6.5 
44 33 00 7 256 34.0 | 43 16 «50 | % 29 O20 
44 $16 50 | 7 26 180 || 43 06 30 7 29 29,4 
44 04 00 | FT 26 535 | 42 62 25 7 30 06.5 
ciienpieiascheieatineaataneimnan nines 43 50 50 7 27% 20 | 42 38 10 7 30 47.0 
Longitude. _— 
Thermometer 63°, 


Index error = + 25 sec. 


Deg. min. — see. 
109 51 29 


RESULT OF CALCULATION. 


= 


Mean time. Advance. 


Longitude. 


lude of Polaris. 


| 


h. min. — sec. he min, — see. Deg. min. — see. 
5 03 23 2 24 30 110 07 46 


a er nee pars an ——— 
———- - a —— ee ~ a ee 


' ck ter. . ° . . 
eg ake Determination of longitude, August 8, 1842—altitude of Arcturus. 


min. Sec. OBSERVATIONS. 


30 38 
32 19 
33 25 FIRST SERIES. SECOND SERIES. 
34 57 
36 21 | 
37 48 Double altitude of | Time of chronometer. | Double altitude of Time of chronometer. 
Arcturus. | Arcturus. | ii 
| 
| | 
Deg. min. sec. | he min. sec. | Deg. min. sec. h. min. sec. 
17 19 05 11 05 38 75 = l 20 ll 11 03 
76 39 40 11 07 «#231 1} 75 00 40 11 11 58 
SaunEEASSEEEEE DE 76 09 30 | 1! Os 49 74 39 2 1k 12 (58 
Latitude. peu SO ee nese 


Thermometer 45°. 


Deg. min. — see. 


SULT OF CALCULATION. 
4227.15 ae © . 


Mean time. ! Advance. Longitude. 


| 
| 
| | 
| | 
| 
| 


h. min. see. | h. min. sec. 
8 45 07 | 2 24 31 


i 
| 


— 


[ 174] 628 


ENCAMPMENT ON LITTLE SANDY CREEK. 


Determination of latitude, August 8, 1842—altitude of Polaris, 


OBSERVATIONS, 
gaia aaron = Se a 
Double altitude of Polaris. Time of chronometer. 
vances pnp innini nice Sees . ee EE ee a Ce 

Deg. min. see. he min. sec. 

3 38 40 10 41 26 
83 41 20 10 44 41 
83 42 30 10 47 lo 
&E 45 20 | 10 49 48 
88 46 00 | 10. 51 16 
83 48 30 | 10 54 33 
83 50 40 | 10-56 14 
83 50 40 | 10 58 08 
&3 52 20 | 10. 59 51 
83 53 25 11 01 08 

RESULT OF CALCULATION. 
mete: eran —— Ee 
True altitude. Mean time. Latitude. 
| 
Deg. min. sec. | h. min. — sec. Deg. min. — sec. 
41 52 50 | 8 27 54 42 27 34 


Se 


Dete 


Tr 


Deg. 
42 


Deter 


Arct 


K. 

ide af Polaris, 
ae 

ronometer. 


Latitude. 


eee ERNE 


eg. min. — sec, 
2 27 34 


ee 


629 c 174 7 


ENCAMPMENT ON THE FIRST NEW FORK 
Determination of latitude, ugust 9, 1842—allitude of Polaris. 


OBSERVATIONS, 


Double altitude of Polaris. Time of chronometer. 
Deg. min, see. A, min, see 
84-330 1 103 
84 34 10 at 12 19 
84 35 30 11 1s 45 
84 35 50 Lt I4 57 
838780 | lo 16 18 
84 38 ov I 17 22 
84 39 10 It 19 00 
81 10 00 | tl 2 34 
84 40 50 | il 53 
84 12 30 1 23 29 
= Se et—see SE neteeESEEOTESemn oe — — = 
Index error == + 25 see. 
RESULT OF CALCULATION. 
True altitude. | Mean time. Latitude. 
= 
— --— - __ ae | = aecmntn pacman 7 ae — ema 
Deg. min. — sec. | he min, see. Deg. min. — see. 


42 18 12 8 51 00 42 42 46 


ee canara — — CS SESE OSS Oe 


Determination of longitude, August 9, 1842—alltitude of Arcturus. 


OBSERVATIONS. 
FIRST SERIES. SECOND SERIRS. 
—_-_----—- —_--—— |- -—— RATER R REE RETO Rel manana emcmn — 
Double altitude of | ‘Time of chronometer. || Double altitude of | ‘Time of chronometer. 
Arcturus. | Arcturus. 
| 
——-—--—--— a nn = ee | | en ee -——| ae etereenee eset 
Deg, min. sec. h. min, see. Dege min. see. | h. min. see. 
68 383 40 ll 26 O37 66 37 35 | 11 =631 0 =654.0 
68 02 25 11 28 04 65 56 15 ll] 33 48.0 
67 27 00 1t 29 «41 | 65 1400 | It 35 40.8 
Thermonyter 44°. 
RESULT OF CALCULATION. 
Mean time. Advance. Longitude. 
= ae | nn a rr en ee 
| J 
he min. see. | h. min. — see. Deg. min, see. 
9 O08 15 2 2 42 11 39 (oF 


[ 174] 


ENCAMPMENT AT MOUNTAIN LAKE, 7,200 FEET ABOVE THE LEVEL op 


630 


THE GULF OF MEXICO, 


ENCA! 


Determination of latitude, August 10, 1842—allitude of Polaris, Det 


Double altitude of Polaris. 


Deg. min, 


True altitude. 


Deg. min, — see. 
4% 27 25 


OBSERVATIONS. 


see. 
20 
50 
30) 
60 


Index error = — 12 sec. 


RESULT OF CALCULATION. 


Mean time. 


ee 


| h. = min. 
8 51 


min, 


Time of chronometer. 


see. 
55 
00 
28 
56 


Latitude. 


Deg. min, — see. 


42 


50 08 


631 [ 174 


ENCAMPMENT AT MOUNTAIN LAKE, 7,200 FEET ABOVE THE LEVEL OF 
THE GULF OF MEXICO, 


VE THE LEVEL op 


bude of Polaris, Determination of latitude, August 11, 1842—altitude of Polaris. 


OBSERVATIONS. 


_— a re ee i ee ae a EE 


thronometer. Double altitude of Polaris, 


Time of chronometer. 


1in, = BLL Deg, min, — see, h. min, — see, 
15 55 84 43 20 10 56 56 
17 00 84 44 20 10 58 a2 . 
18 28 84 46 10 Il 00 33 
19 56 84 46 — 80 1 01 38 
a4 48 40 ll 03 «37 
84 49 30 11 04 43 
84 49s «BO 11 05 = 
Ri 5! 50 li 07 ~=Ol 
84 52d 11 0s 29 
a4 f2 50 11 09 24 
Latitude. 


Thermometer 54°, 


Deg. min, — see. 


42 50 08 Index error «= — 12 sec. 


RESULT OF CALCULATION. 


True altitude. | Mean time. Latitude. 


a ee RE 


Deg. min. — sée. h. min, — 8ee. Deg. min. see. 
12 23 19 8 37 54 AR 49 55 


ee nrc 


[ 174 ] 632 


ENCAMPMENT AT’ MOUNTAIN LAKE, 7,200 FEET ABOVE THE LEVEL op 
THE GULF OF MEXICO, 


Determination of longitude, August 11, 1842—altitude af the sun, 


OBSERVATIONS, 


a — — Ce. 


FIAST SERIES. SRCOND SERIES, 


Double altitude of the |'Time of chronometer, | Double altitude of the | Time of chronometer, 


sun's lower limb, sun's lower limb, 
a —eee . 
Deg. min. sec. | he min, — see. Deg. min. see. | he mine gee. 
44 «0A 00 9 36 16.5 y 45 23 00 9 39 53.0 
44 15 30 9 36 476 || 45 33 10 | 9 40 204 
44 30 15 9 37 28.0 | 45 42 40 9 40 46.0 
44 46 30 9 38 2.3 45 Sl 15 ) 41 09.0 
45 00 40 9 38 51.0 | 46 OS 45 9 41 43,3 
RESULT OF CALCULATION. 4 


Mean time. Advance, Longitude. 
ee er a | P tsaaainia’ . paieiesiicwy 
he min, see. | he. min, — see, Deg. min. see. 

7 139 | 2 2 49 | 110 37 


— — 


During my absence from this place, and between the 12th and 16th, the 
chronometer stopped. 


BING 


E THE LEVEL op 


flude af the sun, 


= Le T 


SRATES, 


Time of chronometer, 


he min, — gee, 
| BH 53.0 
| 9 40 20.4 


9 40 46.0 

Y 4l 09,0 

9 41 43.3 
° 
Longitude. 


leg. min, see, 
10 37 2! 


— 


12th and 16th, the 


633 [ 174 J 


BNCAMPMENT AT MOUNTAIN LAKE, 7,200 PEBT ABOVE THE LEVEL OF 
THE GULP OF MEXICO, 


Determination of longitude, August 17, \842—~altitude of the sun. 


OBSERVATIONS, 


PIMAT FERIKS, SLOOND REMINS, 


-_ 


i] 


Double altitude of the | ‘Time of chronometer, 


- Double altitude of the | Time of chronometer. 
sun's lower limb, 


sun's lower limb, 


ss see | —_ -——— — . ° -_- 


| 
Deg. min. — se. h, min, — see, | Deg. min. se he min, see. 
40 O28) OS 5 64 480 | 41 46 SO 5 59 314 
40 20 00 5 65 363 | 42 of 20 | 6 OO 12.0 
40 35 1G 65 66 17.0 2 #18 OF | 6 OO 67.7 
40 48 35 5 56 564.0 | 42 a8 20 6 OL 53.0 
4) 17 20 i) 5s 10,5 42 HT) i) 6 U2 26.3 


"hermometer 64°, 


Index error « —— 32 we, 


RESULT OF CALCULATION, 


Mean tine. Retard, | Longitude. 


_- -- omnes a —) 


elugust 17, 1842—allitude of the sun in the meridian, 


OBSERVATIONS, 


ooo 


Double altitude of the sun's True central altitude. Latitude. 


| 
lower limb. 
| 


‘ 


Deg. min. se. Deg. min. see. 
120 38 18 60 34 22 


| 


or reer gan oneness te 


174 J 


634 


Maal 


ENCAMPMENT ON THE SWEET WATER RIVER, 


flelermination auf latitude, dy gsi il, LStiewallidude af Polaris 


OUSERVATIONS, 


Double altitade of Polaris Tine of chronometer 


Deg, min 


DH 
is) 
83 
a4 
Sl, 


Ys) 
6 
ha 
oo 
2 


ome th) ne 


Index error 


RESULT OF CALCULATION, 


True altitude. Mean ume, Latitude. 


Teg, min, — sre, » min, 
Ane 


4h 5s 07 12 bt 


Determinalion of time, August 19, 8te—aitilude of Areturus. 


OBSERVATIONS. 


FIRST SERIES, SECOND SERIES, 


| 
Deaatte altitude of | Time of chronometer. 
‘Arcturus. 


Double altitude of | Time of chronometer. 


Arcturus. 
{ 


yin. nr min, gee! min, min. gee, 
51 12 03.5 15 19 03.0 
33 y 15 300 | 39 20. 37.5 
Ol 16 87.5 15 2t 8641.0 


RESULT OF CALCULATION, 


Mean time, Retard. 


ee 


Dou! 


—_—-- 


Deg. 
53 
52 
fi 
60 
49 


af Polaris 


wicter 


Latitude, 


if MJretu 


RIES. 


rus. 


‘ime of chre 


A. min. 
7 19 
7 20 
7 2 
Longitude. 


ynometer, 


see, 
03.0 
37.5 
41.0 


635 ( 174] 


ENCAMPMENT ON ‘THE SWEET WATER RIVER, 


Determination of lime, Mugust 20, 42—a/ inde of Arcturus, 


OBSERVATIONS, 


PIRAT SRW, SECOND ehiting 


— — — . . a 


. vee > | 
Double altitude of lime of chronometer, | Double altitude of 


Time of chronometer, 
Areturus, 


Arcturus 


. mine see, he ming gee, Dew, min. see he ming gee 
65 «658 00 7 1 AGO 468 8D oD 7 O64 15.0 
i) en het 7 1 1.0 | 48 YN OAD 7 5S 38S 
fl 17 40 7 iy ODO | 47 1) a) 7 OF B40 
60 36 80 i es 0 47 VW a0 7 68 62.6 
49 3 40 7 ht 57.0 | 16 (M 10 4 vg 02.0 


Index error ee — 40 see, 


RESULT OF CALCULATION, 


Mean time. | Retard, Longitude, 
| 


’ ' ’ 
min, see, h. min, see, 


Ov On 16 3 


h. 
9 


Determination of latitude, August 20, 1842—altitude of Polaris. 


OBSERVATIONS, 


Double altitude of Polaris. Time of chronometer. 


Deg. mine — see, he. min, gee. 
8) a) 00 8 L7 06 
85 26 30 8 it} 52 ' 
85 27 55 8 20 47 
85s 31 4) 8 2 56 
85 32 00 8 26 32 
85 33 55 t 8 27 50 
85 34 40 | 8 20 18 
85 3A 15 8 3l 19 
85 37 30 8 32 44 ' 
85 38 50 8 34 39 


| 


— ee a Te = 


RESULT OF CALCULATION. 


| 
| 
| 
| 


True altitude. Meantime. ¢ 


h. min. sec. | Deg. min. sec. 


Deg. min. sec. 
9 43 2 | 42 31 46 


42 45 05 


LCS orc 
— 


636 


ENCAMPMENT ON THE BIG BLUE RIVER, ENC 
Determination of longitude, June 2\, 1842—altitude af the sun, L 


OWSERVATIONS, 


PIRST SERIES, SLO OND SEATRS, 


Double altitude of the Time of ehronometer, Double altitude of the | Time of chronometer, 
lower limb of the aun. | lower limb of the sun, . 


Deg. min. see. A. mine weer, Deg, min, see. he min, — wee, 
42 08 «640 s 20 16,0 is 644 OO 8 WW wW5 
42 36 «10 | u ooh 37.0 48 OF OO 8 25 089 
4° hl lo ys 2 O45 4 12 1/5 y 25 44,9 
43 OS 40 M 23 54.0 4 Pal) 10 4 26 27.0 
48 626 xy 2 40.0 4 6460 «60 N 27 120 
Index error ws — 42 wee 
RESULT OF CALCULATION, 
Mean time, Advance, Longitude, 7 
- | 
he min. see, h, min, — vee, Deg. min. eee. = 


6 40 27 | l 43 28 07 OO he 


NOON HALT ON THE SWEET WATER RIVER. 


Determination of latitude, August 22, 1812—allitude of the sun in the 
meridian, 


OBSERVATIONS. 


Double altitude of the sun's Truc central altitude. Latitude. 


lower limb. 


: Deg. min. — see, | Deg. min. see. 
118 08 05 | 59 19 10 42 26 16 


Index error x= — 40 sec. 


le af the sun, 


SA REDS, 


Time of chronometer, 


he min, wee, 
4 uw V0.5 
x 25 03,9 
n 2h 448 
~ 26 27.0 
| 27 12.0 
Longitude, 


Deg. min. eee. 
01 oO HY] 


PER. 


of the sun in the 


Latitude, 


637 [ 174 ] 
gNCAMPMENT ON THE SWEET WATER RIVER, AT ROCK INDEPENDENCE, 
Determination of latitude, August 2, 1842—altitude of Polaris, 


OWSERVATIONS, 


Double altitude of Polaris, Time of chronometer, 


min, ee, 


m4 iT) wo “ Aj w7 
a4 20 50 | “ 50 15 
M4 28 10 6 S| 7 
La} a0 40 “ 54 50 
at 2“ 16 6 ha 40 
M4 25 40 7} (6 4 
M4 27 45 6 Sj Av 
mA 28 40 t 1) 16 
M4 20 0 7 Th) a1 


v0 10 


RESULT OF CALCULATION, 


True altitude, | Mean time, Latitude, 


. — - — - ee — 


Deg. min. — see. | h. min, see, Deg. min. — see. 
42 tl 8O 8 16 33 42 29 = 36 


- . - - 


Se RS 


a 


ae 


aes > 
RAAT SLB SA UREN RIN tL ADIT AAT 


[ 174] 638 
ENCAMPMENT ON THE SWEET WATER RIVER, AT’ ROCK INDEPENDENCE, ENCA’ 


Determination of time, August 22, 1842—altitude of Arcturus, 


OBSERVATIONS, 
FIRST SERIES. | SECOND SERIES, 
ee ee ee oe 
| 
Double altitude of Arc- | Time of chronometer. || Double altitude of | Time of chronometer, bl 
turus. | Arcturus. Doub 
| sun 
Deg. min. sec. | he min, — sec. || Dey. min. seer | he mine see. 
61 32 50 | 7% Ov 420 ! 68 06 «100 | 7 (1700.0 Des 
60 58 25 7 09 #146 || 57 88 OO | 7 18 59.5 44 
60 28 20 7 10 350 || 56 48 50 | 7% 20 30.0 a 
59 45 50 7 12 305 | 55 47 40 | 7 283 15.0 
59 17 00 7 13 49.5 | 55 18 30 | 7 84 343 re 
Index error <= — 22 sec. — 
RESULT OF CALCULATION, 
. | | . : 
Mean time. | Retard. | Longitude. 
| | 
h. min, — see. he min, — see. | 
8 37 06 ( 1 21 17 | 
Determination of time, August 23, 1842—altitude of the sun. D 
OBSERVATIONS. 


— --— - — a 


FIRST SERIES. | SECOND SENIES. 


er peep nee nee en 


Double altitude of the | Time of chronometer. | Double altitude of the | Time of chronometer. 
lower limb of the sun. || lower limb of the sun. 


Deg. min. sec. A. min. sec. 1 Deg. min. sec. h. min. — see. 
32 «18 ~~ «35 5 28 06.0 | 33.0 3550 5 31 36.0 
32 34) «(10 5 28 18.7 || 33 4835 5 32 10.0 
32 40 30 56 29 33.0 33. «6825 5 32 37.0 

5 33 05.0 


33 15 20 40.0 34 


| 
33 00 30 5 30 00.0 | 34 08 30 
| 


‘DEPENDENCR, 


Arclurus., 


me of chronometer, 


A. 


15.0 
34.3 


es eens 


min. 
7 17 
7 18 
7 20) 
7 23 
7 24 
,ongitude. 


IES. 


me of chronometer. 


Aoanaaxs 


min. 
31 
32 
32 
33 
34 


See. 
36.0 
10.0 
37.0 
05.0 
18.5 


639 [ 174 J 


ENCAMPMENT ON THE NORTH FORK OF PLATTE RIVER, MOUTH OF SWERT' 
WATER RIVER, 


Determination of time, Iugust 23, 1842—altitude of the sun. 


OBSERVATIONS, 


— ————_—___-_. _ — —s 


FIRST SERIES, 


SECOND SERIES, 


Double altitude of the — Time of chronometer, — Double altitude of the Time of chronornwaer. 
‘ g ‘ . | 
sun's lower limb, sun’s lower limb. 


Deg. min, sec. he min. see, Deg. min see. he min. see 
44 21 05 3 19 43,0 43 O01 30 | 8 23 lve 
43 55 50 3. 20 515 42 52 10 | 8 28 434 
43 42 30 3 2! 23.3 42 39 «55 3 24 IBS 
43 30 50 3 21 5&5 42 27 380 | 8 24 502 
43 17 30 ‘ 22 35.0 42 8 50 | 8 25 27.4 


Index error = — 22 sec, 


RESULT OF CALCULATION. 


ES | ne re ews 


Medan time. | Retard. Longitude. 


min, — SFC, 


4 45 24 l 22 35 


er ett oe nema 


Determination of latitude, Qugust 23, 1842—allitude of Polaris. 


OBSERVATIONS, 


ooo _ ey 


Double altitude of Polaris, Time of chronometer. 


rae ee re 


Deg. min. see. he min. — sec. 
84 20 00 6 49 54 
84 21 30 6 52 20 
84 22 15 6 53 04 i 
84 24 20 6 55 14 
84 25 20 ! 6 56 32 
84 26 © 30 6 57 56 
84 28 10 6 59 28 
84 28 25 7 00 59 
84 30 20 7 02 29 
84 31 10 7 04 21 


RESULT OF CALCULATION, 


| 
True altitude. Mean time. | Latitude. Kit 
Deg. min. see. h. min. — see. | Deg. min. see. 
42 12 50 ’ 8 22 08 | 42 27 18 


| i 
err OL ET, 


[174 J 640 


ENCAMPMENT ON THE NORTH FORK OF PLATTE RIVER, MOUTH OF SWEET 
WATER RIVER. 


Determination of longitude, August 23, 1842—distance from the second 
limb of the moon to Jupiter. (With the circle.) 


OBSERVATIONS. 


Time of chronometer. | Apparent distances. 


min. ‘ Deg. 
43 
52 
56 
01 
05 
11 
14 
20 
24 
29 


anawewenwneanaerreirtt> 


RESULT OF CALCULATION. 


{ 
Truc distance. Mean time at Greenwich. Longitude. 


| 


A. min, sec. 
16 4l 21 


rea ARTEL TS 


NOON HALT ON HORSESHOE CREEK. 


Determination of latitude, August 30, 1842—altitude of the sun in the 
meridian. 


OBSERVATIONS. 


Double altitude of the sun’s True central altitude. Latitade. 
lower limb. | 


ee NE ee | 


Deg. min. sec. | Deg. min. sec. Deg. min. see. 
112 38 =35 | 56 33 57 42 24 24 


Fe nae en PRO rE IE RE Oe EC IT OT ~~ —— pectin 


Rs a I a DM REET IE PAELLA ALE ALE IELTE TE 


Index error «: — 1 min. 30 sec. 


)UTH OF BWERT 


Jrom the second 
ole.) 


stances, 


see. 


Longitude. 


of the sun in the 


Latitude. 


641 [ 174 ] 
ENCAMPMENT ON THE LEFT BANK OF THE N. FORK OF PLATTE RIVER. 


Determination of latitude, September 4, 1842—allilude of a Aquile in 
the meridian. 


113 08 30 56 32 56 41 54 38 


OBSERVATIONS. 
— ; sinlsnin Sospocato personae 
Double altitude of a Aquile. | True altitude. | Latitude. 
= = | | enuiiidacibibnenens dimen ditidapseiaitatiadie 
Deg. min. — sec. Deg, min, — sec. | Deg. min. — see. 


Index error = — 1 min. 30 sec. 
ENCAMPMENT ON THE RIGHT BANK OF THE N. FORK OF PLATTE RIVER, 
FIVE MILES ABOVE CHIMNEY ROCK, 


Determination of latitude, September 5, 1842—altitude of Polaris. 


OBSERVATIONS. 


Time of chronometer. 


Deg. 
84 
84 14 50 
84 17 20 


84 18 50 
84 


- 
_ 
— 
tL) 
a 
ao 


Index error = — 1 min. 30 sec. 


September 5, 1842—altitude of « Aguile in the meridian. 


OBSERVATIONS. 


rent 


Double altitude of a Aquile. True central altitude. Latitude. 


a) 


Deg. min. see. Deg. min. sec. Deg. min. see. 
3 30 40 56 44 00 4l 43 36 


—_—_—_—_———— 
peer AES rere te 9 


[ 174 ] 642 


ENCAMPMENT ON THE RIGHT BANK OF THE N. FORK OF PLATTE RIVER, ENCAD 
MOUTH OF ASH CREEK. ° 


Determination of latitude, September 8, 1842—altitude of Polaris, Dete 


OBSERVATIONS, 


oe — ~ ep —_—_——" 
Double altitude of Polaris. ‘Time of chronometer, 
; See ee 
Dey. min. — see. h. min. see. 
&3 42 00 1 16 29 
83 4l 10 ll 18 59 
83 44 50 ’ | 11 21 O07 
83 45 30 | It 23 20 
83 46 50 Il 24 57 
83 48 10 1} 26 56 
g3 49 50 | lt 28 30 ae 
83 50 00 ll 20 11 
83 51 40 11 3l 41 
&3 53 40 | 11 33 28 
| 
Thermometer 70°.3. 
Index error = — 1 min. 32 sec. 
D 
4 


RESULT OF CALCULATION. 


True altitude. Mean time. | Latitude. 
Deg. min. — sec. he min. see. | Deg. min. sec. 
41 50 57 yg 19 51 41 18 19 


September 8, 1842—ualtitude of « viquilw in the meridian. 


OBSERVATIONS. 


Double altitude of a Aquila. True central altitude. Latitude. 


Deg. min. _ sec. Deg. min. sec. Deg. min. — see. 
114 25 10 57 11 15 41 16 19 


PLATTE RIVER, 


le of Polaris, 


iometer, 


Latitude. 


min. sec. 
18 19 


neridian. 


Latitude. 


min. see. 
16 19 


643 [ 174] 


ENCAMPMENT ON THE NORTH FORK oF PLATTE RIVER—LOWER CACHE 
‘AMP, 


Determination of atitude, September 9, 1842—allitude of Polaris. 


OBSERVATIONS, 


a : j 


Double altitude of Polaris, | Time of chronometer, 


Deg. min, — see. | he mine — See. 
&3 36 55 ll ld 52 
8° 38 10 Il 16 39 


83 40 20 | 1} 20 ol 
83 43 20 11 23 13 
46 11 


dee CLL Ct tte a aS A AS — a ome 


Index error = — 1 min. 32 sec. 


RESULT OF CALCULATION, 


en — a a RE 


True altitude. Mean time. Latitude. 


Deg. min. see, h. min. — see. | Deg. min. — sec. 
41 48 40 9 17 42 | 41 14 44 


September 9, 1842—altitude of the sun in the meridian. 


OBSERVATIONS. 


. 


STIS 


Double altitude of the sun’s True central altitude. Latitude. 


| 

lower limb. | 
Deg. min. — sec. Deg. min. sec. Deg. min. — sec. 
107 36 00 54 02 37 41 14 17 


cnn eee cuantitntmseansnsenttaeacnattnsne termined 
Thermometer 94°. 


C174 J 644 


ENCAMPMENT AT 'THE JUNCTION OF THE NORTH AND SOUTH FORKS op ENC 
THE PLATTE, 2,700 FEET ABOVE THE GULF OF MEXICO, ; 


Determination of latitude, September 12, 1842—altitude of « Aquile in, D 
the meridian. 


OBSERVATIONS, 


Double altitude of a Aquilw. True central altitude, Latitude. Do 
{ 
| | | | cialis 
Deg. min. sec. Deg, min, — see. Deg. min. see. 
114 48 50 57 23 09 Al 04 26 
Index error = — 1 min. 20 see. 
Delerminatlion of lutitude, September 13, 1842—allit de of the sum in 
, the meridian. 
‘eisai | — —_ 
Double altitade of the sun’s True central altitude. Latitude. 
lower limb. | 
Deg. min. sec. Dey. min. ace. Deg. min. — see. 
104 5) 25 52 40 22 4l 05 07 
ised aca a einen va - ; 


Thermometer 70°. 


Doub 


645 [ 174 ] 


ENCAMPMENT AT THE JUNCTION OF THE NORTH AND SOUTH PORKS OF 
THE PLATTE, 2,700 FEET ABOVE THE GULF OF MEXICO. ? 


‘COUTH FORKS Or 
MEXICO, 


le of @ Aquila in, Determination of lalitude, September 13, 1842—callitude of the sun. 
OBSERVATIONS, 
Latitude. Double altitude of the lower limb of the sun, + Time of chronometer. 


: Deg. min, — sec. he oming — wee, 

» min. ate. 104 42 20 j Ati 17 
04 <6 104 45h | 48 16 
104 49 ft 19 

104 KF ! 53 23 

104 KOs } ! 5440 

. 104 25 1 6 37 

de of the sum in 104 | 1 58 49 
10400 } 6985 

104 4045 { 2 OL  oB 

si 104 4880 2 O28 B5 
104 7 8 2 O08 14 
Lutitude. 1044500 | 2 06 16 
94 = 4350 2 O06 O02 

sca tna 104 43H | » 06 50 

104 4S 3 OY 8 


ry min. see, 
05 07 


Determination of time, September 14, 1842—allilude of the sun. 


OBSERVATIONS. 


FIRST SERTES. SECOND SERIES. 


i 
Double altitude of the | Time of chronometer. 
sun’s lower limb. 


Double altitude of the | Time of chronometer, 
sun’s lower limb. | 


i] 


2 


Deg. ming seco | he mine kee. | Deg. min. asec. |; he mine see. 
a7 83s tia KH SH HL | RD 80.4 ‘i 
37 — sO 10 6 27 14.3 | 35 675 6 30 18.5 
36 «60 = «30 6 27 63.5 35 43040 | 6 30 56.0 
36 36 «400 CGS 80,5, 
i | a || 2 UL | Interrupted by clouds. 


nn enema a ave puemmaranare - 


Thermometer 60°, 


RESULT OF CALCULATION, 


2 oe errs cocci n a e on ee nt ce a ET ED 


Longitude. 


[ 174 J 646 
NOON HALT ON THE LEFT BANK OF THE PLATTE, 


Determination of latitude, September 16, 1842—altitude of the sun in the 
meridian. 


OBSERVATIONS, 


Double altitude of the sun's True central altitude, Latitude, 
lower limb, 


Deg. min, see. Dew om he See, Deg min. see, 
102 54 ty) 51 41 44 | 4) 4 31 


— -  — == ee — = ey 


Index error «= — 1 min, 17 see. 
ENCAMPMENT ON THE LEFT BANK OF PLATTE RIVER. 
Determination of latitude, Seplember 16, 1812—altitude of Polaris, 


OBSERVATIONS. 


Double altitude of Polaris ; Time of chronometer. 
Deg. min, — see, A. min, see. 
83 08 aD) Ll 04 35 
83 10 40 Ll O7 41 
83 2 25 It 10 44 
83 14 35 | 1k =612)—S—(«O 
83 15 40 Ll 14 4l 
83 17 15 | Ll 16 21 
83 17 30 at Ls 04 
83 19 40 Il 20 26 
83 21 40 It 24 07 


35 
| 


Index error == — J min. 17 see. 


RESULT OF CALCULATION. 


Mean time. Latitude. 


True altitude. 


{ 
| 
Deg. min. — sec. | h. min. — see. Deg. min. _ see. 
41 36 23 9 16 55 40 §2 34 


| 
en a i om ee: 


Seetpeseemeeeemeen oe 


Dele 


Doul 


647 
ITE. ENCAMPMENT ON THE LEFT BANK OF PLATTE RIVER 
of the sun in the Determination of longitude, September 16, \812—altitude Of Arcturus. 


OUSERVATIONS, 


VINST SKRIES, SECOND #EMIRS, 
Latitude, 
; wre Double altitude of — | Time of chronometer, Double altitude of — | Time of chronometer. 
<= Arcturus, | Arctugas. | 
min, se 
54k a ad Wane meniere mana 
oe Deg. min. see. he min, — see. | Deg. min. see. | he min, — see. 
50 59 Av Ht] 17 24.5 \ AG 55 40 9 248 12.2 
Ag OS 40 ° 22 18.3 | 16 Ov 15 | +1] 30 35.0 
/ f ‘ 4] 25 26,5 | 45 2 { 32 St, 
RIVER. AY = =—«7 40 | 25 15 15 10 0 | ) 51.8 


een = no ee eee — es 


— 


de of Polaris, 


RESULT OF CALCULATION. 


en 


Mean time. Advance, | Longitude. 


a ne ee me 


nometer. 


he min, see. he min. — gee. 
7 27 27 1 58 41 


sec. 


Latitude. 


[ 174] 648 
INCAMPMENT ON ‘THE LEPT BANK OF PLATTE RIVER, 


Determinction of longitude, Seplember 16, 1842—distance from the firy 
limb af the moon to Jupiter. 


OBSERVATIONS, 


(With the eirele, ) 


Time of chronometer, Apparent distance, 


min, Ms Deg. min, — see. 
o6 
42 
46 


52 


58 
03 
06 
10 
14 
18 
21 
25 
28 
30 
33 
3h 
37 
40 
A2 | 
AD 


‘Thermometer 55°.5, 


RESULT OF CALCULATION, 


True distance, Mean time at Greenwich. Longitude. 


A. min. gee. Deg. inin. — see, 
14 56 30 100 23 45 


min, set. 
07 42 


| 
' 
! 
| 
| 
-—- vote ere se ee -- ~ <2. -- a 


RIVER, 


ce from the firy 


wtanee, 


afe, 


HIN) 


Longitude. 


» anin, = ee, 
23 45 


649 


ENCAMPMENT ON THE LEPT BANK OF PLATTER PIVER 
Determiniiion of lime, September V7, (8A2—altitude of Areturus, 


OBIE UVATIONS, 


riitel 


Double ultituicte wt Vinee of chwvonometer Douwls Hittile « ry 
Aretiriins Veoturus 


Deg mir, see bh. omwtne see Dew, min. ove es er 
| % 49 BAO oY en ee Bh) o BY 83.7 
wo 4 | bo " Ai} Ha un (se Al 4 an 171.0 
ot in a) ihe 


HESULE 


OF CALCULATION, 


Moan tine Advaneo, Longituce 


mit, Ate, h, min, Nee, 


Os il 


ay 46) 


Determination af latitude, Seplember 17, Vi2—altitude of Polaris 


OUSERVATIONS, 


Double altitude of Polarte: Time of chronometer 


, t , 
Deg. irae see, A. min, = BPC, 
SY 14 Wu | 1) 4 36 
82 16 m0 iO Mh 57 


10 19 35 
19 21 55 


8% 17 40 
82 9 TD) 


———— 
_ 
c 


82 21 45 2h 12 
82 24 4h 10 27 i 
NQ 27 25 19 3h 18 t 
82 30 00 ( i) ot bl 
82 $4 AO 16 40 50 
SQ 39 50 a) t7 44 


‘Thermometer 55°. 


Index error = — 1 min. 18 see. 


RESULT OF CALCULATION. 


| 


True altitude. Mean tine. Latitude. 


Deg. min. — see. h. min. see. Deg. min. see. 
at 10 36 8 30 41 40 42 38 


nena semen eee ee ee weer see 


42 


[ 174 ] 650 
NOON HALT OF BEPTEMBER t*, ON THE LEPT BANK OF PLATTE Rivep, 


Determination of latitude, September 18, 1842—altitude af the sun in 
the meridian, 


ODSERVATIONS, 


Double altitude of the sun's True central altitude, Latitude, 
lower limb, ' 


Dee. mine we ' Dew. min nee. | min, = #ee, 
101 0 ho ; hi au Qu 40 21 


Index error es — t min, S82 « 


Thermometer 00° 


NOON HALT OF FOPTEMBER IY, ON THE LEPT BANK OF PLATTE RIVER, 


a LL = 


—~ “tie —— 


Determination of latitude, September 19, 1842—allilude of the sun in 
the meridian. 


~ 
gs 


OBSERVATIONS, 


Double altitude of the sun's True eontral altitude. Latitude, 
lower limb, 


_— - - . - . 


beg. mine see. Deg. mine see fe ee 
10! v4 Bi) ho at 40 ) 3” 44 
| 


Index error «+ — | min, 32 Kee, 


Thermometer 80°, 


NOON HALT OF SEPTEMBER 20, ON THE LEFT BANK OF PLATTE RIVER. 


Determination of latitude, Seplember 20, 1842—altitude of the sun in 
the meridian. 


OBSERVATIONS. 


——<+ oe ee - - - - . - ~——+ 


4 


“<7 | 
Double altitude of the sun's | True central altitude. Latitude. 
lower limb. 


40 48 


Deg. min. ee. Deg. min. see. ] Deg. min, 


| 
| 

100 «00 45 | 50 1486 
| 


a ee 


Index error «<« — | min. 82 see. 


Thermometer 77°. 


PLATTE RIVER, 


€ Of the sun in 


Latitude, 


min, see, 


40 21 


PLATTE RIVER 


le of the sun in 


Latitude, 


- e ° — 


+ dite ree, 


3” 44 


_— 


PLATTE RIVER. 


de of the sunin 


~_—+ i 


Latitude. 


651 


INCAMPMENT ON THE LEPY BANK OF PLATTE RIVER, 


Determination of lime, September 20, 18 tmmalifude of Arclurs 


OBSERVATIONS, 


Double altitude of Areturus, Time of chronometer, 


Deg. min, Nee, A man we 
46 au AT) m) 04 a! 


. Rete & 


Index error = — | rin, B2 see, 


Determination of latitude, Seplember 20, 1842—altilude of Polaris. 


OMNSERVATIONS, 


Double altitude of Polaris, Time of chronometer, 


Deg, min, eee, h min, Sbe, 
&v 05 10 0 19 49 
82 U8 2 9 24 02 
Lied 1h Mh 0 Jl 51 
82 7 0 9 3 3 
eB. 20 40 ] 49 35 


2 ——— . - - -_—— en) 


Therinometer 56°, 


RESULT OF CALCULATION. 


— SS ee — —- se o= —_——— 


Mean time, Latitude. 


True altitude. 


~ — es ee ee 


Deg. min. — see. | he min, — 886. Deg. min. see. 
41 04 o4 7 35 23 40 54 02 


_ 


C174 J 


SNCAMPMENT ON THE LEFT BANK OF PLATTE RIVER, TEN MILES BELOW 


652 


GRAND ISLAND 


Determination af time, Seplember 21, 1842—altitude of vlrelurnes, 


FINST SERIES, 


Double altitude of Time 
Arcturus, 


They, min, see 
by 03 HA 
49 1d 8380 
is Ol 50 


Mean time. 


Oeg. min, 
{ 0% 


Determination of latitude, September 21, 1842 


Double altitude of Polaris, 


Deg. — min. 


25 


27 
29 
31 
34 
35 


37 


True altitude. 


notes saevenananansses — 


Deg. min. — sec. 
ai 15 i 


OBSERVATIONS. 


AKCOND SPHERES 


! 


of chronometer, Double altitude ot Time ot 


e ' 
CHLONO Meteo, 
Arcturus, 


min, Deg. min. sec. A. oman. spe, 
45 17 (055 03 03.47 
a7 | 46 16 55 05 15.0 
1) i 80638 50 Ov =Ol.o 


ULT OF CALCULATION, 


i] 
| 


Advance Louitude. 


2—altitude af Polaris, 


OBSERVATIONS. 


Time of chronometer. 


main 
LO 
12 
es) 


Thermometer 51°, 


RESULT OF CALCULATION, 


Mean time. letitade. 


kh. min. see. 


men 
v 27 51 41 6 


Doub 


V MILES BELOW 


of vIrcturns, 


me of chronometer, 


Fougitude. 


le af Polaris. 


lometer. 


letitade. 


[ 174} 


NOON HALT AT THE MOUTH OF A SMALL CREEK ON THE LEFT BANK OF 
THE PLATTE RIVER, 


Determination of latitude, September 23, 1842—altitude Of the sun in 
the meridian, 


OFSERVATIONS, 


Double altitude of the sun's True cerntra! altitude. 
lower limb. 


Latitude. 


Deg. min. — see. Deg. min. see Dey. min. — see. 
96 37 05 | 48 33 (4 \ 41 20 20 


Index error «= — 1 min. 


Thermometer 80°, 


ENCAMPMENT ON THE LEFT BANK OF THE PLATTE RIVER, NEAR THE 
LOUP FORK. 


Determination of latitude, September 23, 1842—altitude of a Aquilx in 
the meridian. 


OBSERVATIONS. 


Double altitude of a Aquila. True altitude. Latitude. 


Index error = — 1 min. 32 sec. 


i 


a 


ae 


$i ee 
fenrsits E 


ana TE 


Sawin acebiaiad 


a a pe a 


a 


c 174 7 654 


ENCAMPMENT ON THE LEFT BANK OF THE PLATTE RIVER, AT THE a 
MOUTH OF THE LOUP FORK. 
Determination of time, September 26, 1842—allilude of the sun. Deters 
OBSERVATIONS. 
FIRST SERIES. | SECOND SERIES. 
Dou 
i. | Se ea oe ot | 
Double altitude of the | Time of chronometer. || Double altitude of the | Time of chronometer, 
san’s lower limb. sun’s lower limb. 
\| 
ee te | — — ee ence, 
Deg. min. see. h. min. see. | Deg. min. sec. | he min. see. 
40 12 50 | 9 38 =24.6 H 42 Ol 45 9 48 39.7 
40 27 25 9 39 080 | 42 12 50 | 9 44 100 f 
40 38 35. ' 9 39 #402 | 42 2 0 | 9 44 490 ' 
40 &2 26 9 40 19.5 | 42 36 55 9 45 20.0 ¥ 
&i 04 00 9 40 528 42 49 25 9 45 56.0 
Index error = — 1 min. 32 sec. - 
Thermometer 73°. 
Observation indifferent. SS 
RESULT OF CALCULATION. 
Mean time. Advance. Longitude. 
A. min. _ see. h. = =min, sec. 
7 50 14 L 52 00 
es ne eer - ere +s — Se - - — aoe = —— o — — —) Di 
4 


VER, AT THE 


of the sun, 


h. min. see. 
9 43 39.7 
9 44 10.0 
9 44 49.0 
9 45 20.0 
9 45 56.0 
Longitude. 


655 [ 174 ] 


ENCAMPMENT ON THE LEFT BANK OF THE PLATTE RIVER, AT THE 
MOUTH OF THE LOUP FORK. 


Determination of latitude, September 26, 1842—allitude of the sun 
near the meridian. 


OBSERVATIONS. 


ee ae ee eae oe 
Double altitude of the sun’s lower limb. 


LLL TOD SOOO I a A TTT 


Deg. min. — sec. h, min. — gee. 
93 858 845 ; 1 2 17 
94 00 30 1 30 13 
94 Ol 456 1 30 4: 
94 O02 15 1 31 47 
94 04 00 1 32 04 
Interrupted. | Interrupted. 
94 08 30 ! 35 58 
94 10 00 } 1 37 19 
94 ll 55 1 39 34 
94 «12 35 | 1 40 49 
Interrupted. Interrupted. 
94 09 25 l 48 38 
94 06 25 1 51 39 
94 05 50 | l 52 22 
Thermometer 81°, 
Index error == — 1 min. 32 sec. 
RESULT OF CALCULATION. 
cleat Se Oars eae (re 
True altitude. | Advance. Latitude. 
jee | 
Deg. min. see. | h. min. see. | Deg. min. sec. 
AT 20 48 | 1 51 56 | 41 22 03 


ne a en ne a I os err 
ee 


“ 
[174 J 656 
NOON HALT ON THE LEFT BANK OF THE PLATTE RIVER, 


Determination Wf latitude, September 28, 1842—allitude Of the sun in 
the meridian. 


OBSERVATIONS, 


Double altitude of the lower limb of the sun. | Time of chronometer, 


—o _ 


Deg. — min. ; » min, 
92 29 
92 31 
92 38 
92 35 
92 36 
92 38 
92 41 
92 42 
92 43 
92 45 
92 46 
92 47 
92 49 


meee ee es ee 


Thermometer 76°. 


Index error = — 1 min. 32 sec. 


RESULT OF CALCULATION. 


, True altitude. | Mean time. Latitude. 


IVER, 


of the sun in 


eter, 


see. 
09 
33 
42 
35 
55 
50 
29 
32 
33 
10 
18 
51 


51 


atitude. 


on 


ENCAMPMENT ON THE LEFT BANK OF 'THE PLATTE RIVER, AT THE 
MOUTH OF ELK HORN RIVER, 


L termination of latitude, Seplember 28, 1842—altitude af Polaris. 


OBSERVATIONS, 


Double altitude of Polaris. Time of chronometer, 


Deg. mine see. h. min, — see, 
a4 05 25 10 4 47 


a4 07 30 10 44 02 
84 09 20 10 46 57 
84 10 40 10 48 45 
84 09 50 10 50 24 
84 1} 15 10 52 29 
84 12 55 10 54 RQ 

84 16 20 10 57 OR 
84 15 55 10 58 53 


84 15 55 1 00 37 


Thermometer 54°, 


Index error = — 40 sec. 


RESULT OF CALCULATION. 


Mean time. Latitude. 


True altitude. 


Deg. min. sec. h. min. sec. Deg. min, sec. 
42 00428 | 9 02 17 41 09 34 


c 174] 658 


ENCAMPMENT ON THE LEFT BANK OF THE PLATTE RIVER, AT THR 
MOUTH OF ELK HORN RIVER. 


Determination of time, September 28, 1842—altitude of « Lyra, 


OBSERVATIONS. 


Double altitude of a Lyre. | Time of chronometer. 


SEE 


Deg. min. — see. . min, — see. 
99 10 20 24 36.0 
98 32 10 26 23.7 
97 48 20 28 23.0 
96 52 40 30 58.0 
96 09 30 | 3256.0 


SR TTT 


‘Thermometer 54°. 


Index error «= — 40 sec. 


RESULT OF CALCULATION. 


Mean time. Advance, Longitude. 


oe a ree 


h. min. sec. min. see. 
9 39 25 49 15 


rrr ae rr en eee ee ee 


659 [ 174] 


IVER, A’ 
BR, AT THE ENCAMPMENT ON THE LEFT BANK OF THE PLATTE RIVER. 


of « Lyre Determination of latitude, Seplember 29, 1842—altitude of Polaris. 
OBSERVATIONS. 
meter. Double altitude of Polaris. Time of chronometer. 
ra eee a ciate ini miias iets 
Deg. min, . 
ea0 83 «4030 | 10 at 87 
93.7 838 42 10-8420 
23,0 n3 4410 10 «8687 
58.0 83 455 10-2846 
56.0 88 46 = 00 10 «©6380 AL 
83 420 10 «6383s 
scaliiiaestaaiaiauield 33 «560 40 | 10 «3584 
83 52 45 10° 39 41 
33 «630 10 «4188 


83 «5440 | 10 «64318 


————————— 


Thermometer 40°, 


Index error == — | min. 38 sec. 


RESULT OF CALCULATION. 


ES SR a 


en nm 


True altitude. : Mean time. Latitude. 


————————— En suai 


: Deg. min. see. h. min, — sec. Deg. min. see. 
41 52 05 8 43 56 41 02 15 


en ne A 


aN I 


f 174 J 660 


ENCAMPMENT AT BELLEVUE, ON THE RIGHT BANK OF THE MIssorp 
RIVER, AT THE TRADING POstT OF THE AMERICAN FUR COMPANY, 


Determination of longitude, October 2, \SA2—altitude af’ the sun, 


OBSERVATIONS, 


PIRST BENT, SRCOND SEILER, 
| 
' 


Double altitude of the | Time of chronometer. | Double altitude of the | Tine of chronometer, 
lower limb of the sun, lower limb of the sun, 


| 
Deg. min. : . men, see, Deg. min, | He mine — see, 
48 29 OF OF5 || 49 AR f lo 49,8 
48 O8 010 i] 52 1o 18.6 
09 09 06.6 50 05 , 10 00,4 
20 ou AQ.8 50 15 th) 30.4 


| 
30 lv 10.5 hO 24 ' to ‘ 00,0 
| 


Index error = — | inin, 38 sec. 


RESULT OF CALCULATION. 


Mean time. Advance. | Longitude, 


min, see. he min. see. Dey. min, see. 
2) 41.5 1 48 41.6 95 47 46 


oe 


Determination of latitude, October 2, 1842—aillitude of the sun in the 
meridian. 


OBSERVATIONS. 


Double altitude of the sun’s lower limb. 


min. 
32 
33 
34 
36 
36 
38 
39 
40 
41 
42 


. 


ot et eet eee ee et et ee ee 


45 


Double al 


Double 
sun's 


t COMPANY, 


Of the sun, 


nie of chronometer, 


is =o miins — gee, 
10 10 49.8 
ho Il 18.6 
LO 12 00,4 
0 2 30.4 
Lo 13 00.0 


longitude, 


min, gee. 
47 46 


eee 


the sun in the 


nt 


ymeter. 


THE MIssorp 


661 


[ 174 J 


pNCAMPMENT AT BELLEVOEE, ON THE RIGHT BANK OF ‘THE MISSOURI 
RIVER, AT THE TRADING POs’ OF THE AMBRICAN PUR COMPANY 


Determination of longitude, October 3, 1842—allitude of the sun. 


PLUS BEUIRS, ALCON D aentns, 


Double altitude of th Tune of elhronometer, 
sun's lower limb, 


Double altitude of the ‘Time of elivonometer, 


sun's lower limb, 


Dew. mine see. Ae omin, #00, Dew. mine see. hh. min, see 
au a Ou Hs) sa bau Os ot ano f 6 3.0 


ou 20 40 A ut as} NN pH | val) iH) 7 Y58 
30 0% 20 fh a5 16,2 38 a Ou fh IM O88 
PS os v0 f 5 4,5 N47 7 9 b ie Loo 
Qn An ho i) ob 1.0 37 tt) lu h ov L467 


Index error =. Lomin. 38 see 


Kes LT OF CALCULATION, 


Mean tine, Advanee, Longitude. 


eee. 
38.5 


Determination of longitude, October A, 18412--allitude of the sum. 


OBSERVATIONS, 


VHIST SEUTES,. ! SECOND SEMIRG. 


‘| « 
i} 


Double altitude of the | ‘Time of chronometer. || Double altitude of the | Time of chronometer. 
sun’s lower limb, | sun's lowerlimb, | 


Deg. min, see | he mine sees Deg, min. sete | he many ate 4 
48 11 1 | 10 10 200 | 49 16 50 | 10 td 42.0 
18 28 (30 ee © Oe | 419 238 46 | 10 14 04.4 
48 42 50 | WoO TL 5738 | 49 800 3000, 10 14 88.6 
49 00 10 | 10 12 5LO | 49 87 00 10 14 = 46.0 
49 09 05 10 618) 61900«d| 4 4H GK 


i | 


Index error == — | min, 35 see. 


RESULT OF CALCULATION, 


{ 
| 


Mean time. Advance. Longitude. 


A. min, Sec. he min. 900. Deg. min. sea 
8 23 17.6 1 49 = 53.2 9 47 46 cha 


On a ee EE TN LT Et RE 


[174] 662 


ENCAMPMENT AT BELLEVUE, ON THE RIGHT BANK OF THE Missoun 
RIVER, AT’ THE TRADING POST OF THE AMERICAN FUR COMPANY, 


Determination of latitude, Oelober 4, \842—sun's allitude in the me. 
ridian. 


OBSERVATIONS, 


Double altitude of the sun's lower limb, ‘Time of chronometer, 


min, — 8€e, 
"0 
26 
25 
26 
26 
27 
L6 
26 
25 
24 
22 
21 


RESULT OF CALCULATION. 


True altitude, Mean time. Latitude. 


THE MI8soy 
t COMPANY, om 


ude in the me. 


oeneter, 


Latitude. 


663 C 174) 


ENCAMPMENT ON THE LEFT BANK OF MIBSOURT RIVER, OPPOSITE TO THE 
RIGHT BANK OF THE MOUTH OF THE PLATTE RIVER, 


Determination of latitude, October 4, 18412—-allitude of Polaris. 


OUSERVATIONS, 


Double altitude of Polaria, Tie of chronometer, 


Deg, min, see 
a4 l 


Thermometer 63°, 


Index error « — 1 min, 21 see, 


RESULT OF CALCULATION, 


True altitude. Mean time. Latitude, 


ee - — ~re - - 


Deg. min, , » min, see, Deg. min, 
42 07 ‘ 13 17 41 02 


664 
ENCAMPMENT ON THE RIGHT BANK OF THE Missouri RIVER, 
Determination of latitude, October 5, \A2—altitude of Polaris 


OUSERVATIONS 


Double altitude of Polar [ine of chronometer, 


rain, We. 


dD le pee 
sy vt s7 os 

82 0 0 hb — 
sg ; oO wy 
tb uo t 4° st 
42 7 51 19 


Lherimionieter 60°, 
Sudex error ~~ timin. Sb aos 


RESULP OF CALCULATION, 


True altitude Mean tine. Toatitude, 


Deg, min, — see min, pee Dew, min, 


At 4 37 ? iv a0 10 uA 


NUON HALT AV PERTHOLET'S ISLAND, MISSOURL RIVER 


Determination of latitude, October 6, 18S42—altitude of the sun in the 
meridian, 


Double altitude of the sun's ‘rue central altitude. Latitude. 
lower limb, 


Deg. min. — see, Deg. min, . (gc. min. 9 


88 16 Ob 44 22 27 08 


Index error «= — 1 min. 35 eee, 


665 [ 174 J 


ENCAMPMENT ON THE LEPT BANK OF THE MISSOURI RIVER, MOU 
THE NISHNABATONA RIVER. SOUTH OF 


Ri RIVER, 


f Pola ris 
Determination of time, October 6, \842—altitude of « Aquila. 


OWSERVATIONS, 


yyeter, 
FIMWT ABER, *sKOONT SBAIRG 
ie. ree eee | —— - a aaa 
ro Double altitude of a | Time of chronometer, || Double altitude ao | Pio of chronometer. 
KG Aquilee \quil 
st a ee — aecesiianinapiiaiestatai 
; min, sees he mine vee, | Deg, mine oo h. min ve 
wo «607 10 Wo 66 04,8 | a7) OS it 608° (4d 
ao OD ei) oO 66 40.0 | ay. UO 7 of 52.0 
ay 6009 1h it) fh 06,0 wel JO r iy) It 06 26.0 
wR O48 11 lo 66 87.0 ee LY A 1! 6 OF) O4h 
8 us ao Hl ol 20.0 ah ua 40 1 ov 18,6 
0 | ee en er 
NESULT OF CALCULATION, 
abitude, ee — —— — eS eS 
Mean time. Advance. Longitude. 
min, wae 
a) a) ; R 
Ae min, see, he mt fe 
- 9 1) 50 ! 5 4 
IVER 
he sun in the 


atitude. 


mir. 10. 


27 08 


TR ye eS ln cee ee eso : a : 
. silencing sssBipeales pe agapEnanne a 


[174] 666 


ENCAMPMENT ON THE LEFT BANK OF THE MISSOURI, QUARTER OF A MILE 
BELOW THE MOUTH OF NISHNABATONA RIVER. 


Determination of latitude, October 6, 1842—altilude of Polaris, 


OBSERVATIONS. 


Double altitude of Polaris. Time of chronometer. 
tT, 


Deg. min. min. 
82 


82 
82 


| 
{ 
{ 
| 
| 
! 


Thermometer 47°. 


Index error = — 1 min, 35 sec. 


RESULT OF CALCULATION. 


Latitude. 


a 


Deg. min. see. 
40 16 40 


667 [ 174] 


ER OF A MILE ENCAMPMENT ON THE LEFT BANK OF THE MISSOURI RIVER. 


Determination of latitude, October 8, 1842—ualtitude of Polaris. 
f Polaris, 


OBSERVATIONS. 


Double altitude of Polaris. 


‘ Time of chronometer. 
neter. 


min, see, 
46 30 
49 00 
50 45 
51 2 
52 
56 
57 
57 
00 
03 


Thermometer 36°, 


Index error = — 1 min. 21 sec. 


RESULT OF CALCULATION, 


atitude. True altitude. Mean time. Latitude. 


— ee 


min. sec. Deg. min. sec. h. min. see. Deg. min. sec. 
16 40 40 25 29 8 O07 10 39 «636 «602 


[174] 668 


HALT AT THE MOUTH OF THE KANZAS RIVER, 700 FEET ABOVE THE 
LEVEL OF THE GULF OF MEXICO. 


Determination of longitude, October 10, 1842—altitude of the sun. 


OBSERVATIONS. 


a NSE SRS SOLARIS 
| 


FINST SERIES. | SECOND SERIES. 


| 
Double altitude of the | Time of chronometer. | Double altitude of the | Time of chronometer. 
lower limb of the sun. lower limb of the sun. 


| 
Deg, min. see. » mine see. - Deg. min. sec. » min, — see. 
08 t 44 35.0 40 21 35 ‘ 48 06.0 
27 45 = 331.0 403i 
44 | f 46 17.5 40 41 
57 9 16 59.0 | 40 51 
09 § 9 47 31.0 | 41 00 
| 


Index error == — | min. 7 sec. 


RESULT OF CALCULATION. 


Mean time. Advance. Longitude. 


he min. see. . mine — see. Deg. min. — sée. 
q 59 09 48 28 94 32 54 


669 [ 174 ] 


HALT AT THE MOUTH OF THE KANZAS RIVER, 700 FEET ABOVE THE 
LEVEL OF THE GULF OF MEXICO. 


BOVE THE 


f the sun. 


Determination of latitude, October 10, 1842—sun’s altitude in the me 
ridian. 


OBSERVATIONS, 


— LOL tt tt ee ttt et ne ent eeetiben eens fe 


Double altitude of the lower limb of the sun. 


: Time of chronometer. 
chronometer. 


ee ED 


ae Deg. min. — sec, » min, see. 
; 41 10 21 
min, SC. 44 15 22 
06.0 46 50 24 
49 50 26 
51 20 27 
55 15 32 
55 30 34 
54 30 
53 10 
bl 15 
49 05 
46 15 
43 20 
30 


RESULT OF CALCULATION. 


| —— LD 
fr ‘ P 
True altitude. | Time of transit by chronometer. Latitude, 


Deg. min. sec. 
1 35 = 42 39 06 = 03 


Deg. min. sec. | h. min, see. 
| 
} 


44 12 24 
tint ti tr sp en ee 


The foregoing observations are given in civil time. 


—E ee 


METEOROLOGICAL OBSERVATIONS. 


The 
report 
scarcel 
The ba 
Louis, 
The fol 
romete 
Range 

Baro 


Ran 2 


Mean E 

Minimum 
Maximum 
Range 


In th 


designa 
vations 
observa 
perhap: 
month : 
Bessel : 


REMARKS. 


The elevations which have been given in the course of the preceding 
report are founded upon the annexed barometrical observations, and, it is 
scarcely necessary to say, are offered only as the best indications we have. 
The barometers were compared with those of Dr. G. Engelman, of St. 
Louis, Missouri, whose observations are given for a corresponding period. 
The following is the result of forty comparative observations of three ba- 
rometers instituted by him from May 22d to May 29th, 1842, at St. Louis. 
Range of barometers during that period 0''.400, temperature 60° to 75°. 
Barometer E, as observed for and noted in the journal of the academy : 


= Frémont’s Troughton (T.) — 0.136 2 Frémont’s Carey (C.) — 0/.178. 
Range in the differences : 


Mean E = Frémont’s Troughton (‘T.) — 0.136 — Frémont’s Cary (C.) — 0.178. 
Minimum == do do — 0.116 — do do 0’’.167. 
Maximum == edo do — 0.150 = do do 0/’.190. 


Range = do do 0.034 w= do do 0/023. 


In the annexed observations, the barometers, Troughton and Cary, are 
designated respectively by the letters T. and C. In calculation, the obser- 
vations at the upper stations were referred to the single corresponding 
observation for the relative period of time at the lower station. It would, 
perhaps, have been better to refer to the mean of the observations for the 
month at the lower station. In calculation, the tables used were those of 
Bessel and of Oltmanns, as given in Humboldt. 


oe F 
‘Wd O€ ZI 
‘WV 


“Aa PUTA, “SPnop> aura WEN pozoaco Lag | 
“WOTLOY By} UI Sphop sym may WY “IEIIS) 
-syeasaymt ye uns pus ‘Apnop “we 


gI—9T oung jo dures) 


S 
| oI 


—_—_—————— 


026-8z 
¥L6 8s 
330°63 
FEO 6% 
296 °83 
010°6% 
000°63 
$F0°6% 
SE0°6% 
000°6% 
06°83 


S 
BBS 
RHOGCAKVMHMBOSOHOSHORNWS reOove roacdsd 


-_ 


- 


9I—FI oune jo dues 


| 
| 


ad ft 


-Apnop pue wey 
“AA Ulouy peasy ye azI01q WYSys * uns WSUg 
“MN Wo pura 34377 


| bI—E1 eune jodurey 
“MAN Wouy Ysouy puta >282{2) | 

| 

| 

| 


- - Wey WOON 


-~_ 


“N UF Spnop may * eI) eI—ZI aung jo dueg 
“N oOT “AA Pulm ¢ popnojs Ajanug 

“Sumnysy put sapuny [suorse200 Tim 
‘uozU0Y Iq) UI Sphop> puw “‘peaysaac sseys * wITeD 
“gg woy Suoys Spqes2joy pure * Zea pus WsUg 


roreocorvooon 


RSSBRESSEEE 


sa ss ss 5 
<p, 


<n 


 Ceeeery tie 
RK 


RRR & 


FI8'8s 
36L°83 


1 19 
© 
* 
er 
a x 
oo 

~ 


Be 


ZI—I11 aun jo durey 
- - eq WOON 


= 


= 
an 4 sa 


“Surujyysy pue zapunty jeuorse200 tai ‘oZ20Iq 14ST] 
“ANG puts * Apnojyy 


£86°8% 
%G0°6% 
£90°6% 
060°63 
040°6% 
ZLB'6S 
113°6% 
02°62 
£8363 
BSS 6S 
28163 
$S1°6% 
1¥ 16% 
| OSI'6% 
| 08363 


rrrris 


“Maj PUE Te] SINT | 


z= 


“eID . 


© 
Ps 
pa 
ri 
ee 


“MAS Woy az202q yueseayd + reap A220 | 
“M. 209 °S Woy szeIq Ysauy Azan * seaj> Spreyied | 
| 


enesoorne 


4 OF 1 1 1) E> 8 
ris raw 


+ 


“SPROj> M25 DUIOS | 
yseoiaa0 Apimnug 
“Spnojs A194 


| 


| 11—o1 aungsodureg 
! 


| 
| sare ayy Jo | ‘IajaUIOULIEy) “JaYWOULIIAD , 
| ampuadmay,| pypeny | “9 Ppny | *L ; -areq 


i | i 


SSERSEE 
onwnnonhoonn 


SOrnowacs 
frHugraesagaasce 
SSRSRERSR ISS 


D» 
Yr) 


O1—8 eunr jo dug 
"C81 


3L1°66 


2 OD 


| 
| 


‘aUDAD'Y 740,J 0] svzuny ay} fo yynou ayz wosf poos ay} UG 


“N oq) Woy purm pjoz | 
“Apnojpo 


Swsys NC PUM “Que -Aysa—yusprop | 

jo Ssse}t “Psuns jusyUG = «Ni Woy pum WYySrT] | 

“A¥S 3tp [J J0a0 Peaey Oo} Surmaes ‘ponunuocs 
Suey pue juenhbay szepunyy, -aouezeadde uapto] 

wuogrun © jo <3q -Ajrpeays Sutures Suyed Apreayy | 

‘S Woy aerspout pur yy “wep pur Asvoqy 

SPP%D “AN OP Ut aopunyy, | 

‘spnop Aasvay yyta pazascs Aqg | 

“azaalq JaSuo0ns *spnojg | 

“dH 00S “gS Mol] az207q Suong -spnop pue ung | 


goenne 
Z£SESss 
-@eO oO 


“AA PUL «= “SpHop ayym YIM pazaace A"G 
“HOZHOY 2Uy Ul Sphop aga may “IBID 
“sfeaioyut ye uns pus “Apnop ‘ayen 


OHDDS 


81—9T oung jo dures 


eOotoooe 
$S5ESSE 


- I—FI eung jo dura 
: “Apnop pue uyeDy 
AA Hoy speaisjul ye az200q WYSys * uns zySUg 
“MN Woy pura 343r7 
a wOsy YSaij pu > 


I—€1 eunr joduren 


w ay pura Hp] 


“yy Mogg ate ET “APNOt) 
‘Ss egore BErE Je 1D 
“aye pue Saad - 


Seeceeuegeieg peer so—eeeerege Anwetg “teres Bee “Ete selene 


NN Terr Serene PW “Spree ys peer tetas 


“prey po Freq © ar ps uN “eS pur BeegrD | 


“WNT Gregg pure 1ySy yam ‘MHD | 
“UN Wey syesspoul pur yy = “FIL 
"A oO1 CN Oay WYSY py “swag 


“SH of 1 (N Utegy oza07q WuseaE “IPI 
“Mp 
speep Aaseqy “quer ut ep AEC BSA | OE “S PULA 
“‘popmop Ajtrapy 
“d off *S Wer Suons put yy | 
epTsta UES Magy -Apnop * Ysa “ged puty | 


“d 06 *S Moy sped v SuLnoig | 

“MAN POL “Hes jo aouravadde yum “<pnoy7y 
‘STEAJIIM Je uns WSU | 

“ApRojyy “gy wes pram ys 


“APROL “S Tors purm YSry | 
“ures yo aomeexhiy - 44 (8 “S OU Ysouy anh pur yy 


VyFuq Uns “A Woy SuoNs pars | 
; "A of “SPM “ApRop pur ung | 
“S95 OL MOge PPPs spneps sya UNET “Ss PUT AR 


“a off ‘Ss tog yoy pury =F pue uray 


i 
“N PSS ws UI spnops mag -yESUq UN “¢ MOI 3Z321q 14S] | 
} 


“MAN oy az1q WR] -reIj9 Apooyag | 


~ oo 
oes 
oo 
ace 
ev 
<"9% 


F118 
OL6 3 
£86 43 
030°83 
S10°8S 
200°82 
$00°Ss 


CL8"Le 
OST Se 
161 °8e 
0838s 
OSE 8s 
000°Sc 
LP 8% 
EIS 8S 
SIE 8s 
PRE Ss 
£9E°SS 
=9E "8S 
1LE°S83 
1ES°8s 
€19°8% 
$69 °8e 
TIL°83% 
PES SZ 
065°8s 
Est 8s 
OS"S8S 
$98 8s 
6868 
T68°82 
cps 8c 


yasung 
nN '¥9 
asuung 
“HK ‘d O1 


"W ‘d AE 9 | 


KH ds 
“NV ME 9 


"W ‘d M8 ZI | 
‘WV AE 9 
"WY AE S | 

‘W ‘d AE O1 


"Wd 0€ 2 

“Wed 
"Wd AE 1 
"NV SE 9 


“Wd Ot | 
"Wed Z | 
“Wd M83 | 


“WV ME 9 


Lz—9z eung jo dureg 
ez eungs jo Wey UOONT 


95—Gz eune jo duren - 
Sz eune jo yey UooNy 


C3—bS sung jo dug 


bS—EL% unr jo dure-y 
3 eung jo yey UCON 
€%—2z aune jo durey 
2% aung Jo Wey UOON 


ZZ—12% sung jo dureg 
13 ung Jo yey UCeN 


13—0z aun jo dura 
0% suns jo Wey UOONy 


0zZ—61 euNe jo due, 
61 suns jo yey WOON 


6I—8I eunr jo dues 


“Te ay jo =| *raj2NIOTTI0q} 
amyeaduay, | = petpeny “L 


“POMUNUG)—stwunsvT 7407 Of spzuny ay} fo yjnous ay} woLf poos ay72 UQ 


~Sgours PE tems *- 44 NT BOAT Sons Apqesaqoy put 44 b61°2s -"W ‘dz - & Ang jo yey uooNy 

“4 Weg se pysy poe “yor © Yno np Ke Seerys Wis *ATS04 TLI-23 -"W'vV9 

f S91 °Le "WV AMES 

-Aaseq *wyEH | E91°LS -"A'VS 

“ap? pue wpe) | €61°L% "W ‘d ME 6 : 

-zeqjs pou Sys suns “mye: 00Z°2z - Jsung - g—1 Anz jo dwey 

-Spmojd azo ‘puma aumeg OSH Le -“W'V9 

“MA CS “S ‘THeuy purm Ssphnopo quia pepou Ay Fung OSP'LS ‘(WV MES 

= j e6P Le j ‘Wd € OI 

“uns Jun { 

-p>" Jit} a0 spmop mag t plone “sea NE Mey puis qSIT €1¢ Lz - Jasuny 
“AA 20 “N, MOUy YSauy pu 428) 1zS"Lz "W ‘d 0c 9 | - I Sing pus og aun jo dure 

“<pnop put ums ** 44 (85 “Ni “SU0ns PUA | £ES°LS -"Wi'ds 
“<pmop) pwr ums *-44 (0c “N “Suggs pury | BCC°LZ - “WGI sq WOON 

“S OOF “AA Pulm Ssphop pur UNS | T19°23a -"W'V9 

papnep Ay wpses “ES OOF “Ay Meas ezeig NAYS | P6S°L% - slung 

“po suutap *-44 yy weuy pun SUCLIS | i £622 - "Adi 

“44 Ut wdooxe Sapmoy- > i 5 A ae | - yWsuas 

“mes yy 

“VA off “XN Grog ayes pspela Mol + SURSTQ29UT puTm SApney) | : i ELE Le -"NW'd9 
“gq Muy POG pury :  TSELE -"W'dZ | oe —6z euns jo dures 
ynums pue Sys omgy Sums S-gq pur4y 1 S9E LZ - “‘W3I 6% aune jo Wey WOONT 

VU be “N wey wySYy para > {pnoj.y £789 SLELE -"N'V9 

*S puis -uczu0y 

sys oy; Go sprep> SC UF Samysy =yueZ oy UE IED S69 | BOELS "Wd OL 
“aO7TLAOY yA Ut WdaoKe *It2];) - . FELT - jasung | 62-8 aun jo dureg 

= pS i S€9-2e “WV 6 

“Ni Ubuy szoang YSt"] 0-69 “ss 099°2z ““W'V9 

“myes “yg Ns “14s any] © UO EPROP WYySY HER ore 5 1¢9°Le ~ Ssuns 

+] woo pure ySy SoA We Sey fGezLEY oy) UT ApNes:) orca me €89°LS ‘Wd ME OT | 
“4 Ul pmep pe syey = pesuRs iysuy > Apnop “ute ~ . OZL'L3 - yasung | 
“= Wo ses pout 

peryy aeage Ayered Aye pure “Summy= uns ‘postoo wiry - “08 TLR-L& -"Wdz. &%Z—LZ ung jo dues 
“mE - £E6 Lz - “Wil | Lz aung jo WBY UOONT 

Ss Woy parm WySIy “Apne|cy = e¢9 ZLG LZ “W-V8 

ocs oes 136 L% “WV EL 

“N Wegy are YET “Apnoyyy 0-29 og OS8°Le “N'V9 

“S Weg are BSE e245) wee aree 216 23 ‘Wed It 


“mye pur req.» er) bEG"2z - jyasug L£o—9z oung jo dures 
Seaveseegaieg peewee ogerererge A xweetg Sees per <qp ited <r & ; tco-ss - "Wat ee eunr jo Wey WOON, 


Al theres Bree wee “Spreeyy pter Tete ‘eo } ] -R> - 
bs Ident Fed r4 eg = io pan omer en pane males | rie | prt ah er gen 
aan aan ae “TOD | o-18 SAL £86 Lz = WN ‘d = 96-—Gz ouns jo dure 
<b mor, ELIE -Jrai -_ -~< z rl ° 
“A o@E ON MtOay WY oe a “aman 0'68 030°83 : ‘Wd&j- ouny yo yeq & N 
. } Jel Ply = -swayg ool 6 ¢y 21083 - “WwW v9 = se aaa 
: a e149 | 8'E9 200° - “W'V Ae 
FM “N tiny sz20m jesea4y -re94;5 | pL . -00°8z WV Aes 
3 MD ono a 00° - "HWS 
ant St9 | F008 KWS 


spmeq? AaSagy = o-tpyetsaz wt rem Swe o-tremars Seer * em... oe 


8) 
~~ 
S 


art *,! ae ee | 
= Ss 


en ee 


-ponunu0ceg—sunsvy 740.q 07 SUZUDY 247 fo ymow ay, wosf pvos 34} UO 


S C1 | pete “Suarez weeq <q ‘spmop uaamjeq uro7y ung 
“NT UEeuy WYSy purm ‘Ags auieg 
“yr Wows apezspom: puim *Ay< Ayours aurey 

c—p Ajng jo dures 

“M of 
“¢ Saeug Saougs Spyesrqen pom ‘pozaseo Apunue fy *Ayourg # Aja Jo yey Uooyy 
“= phy 
© ySeonp se ‘pes Suma ums *- 4 Sf “SN MIO SY PUT 
‘= Maeyy 1G5qy parm *Apnoj pur Lyoug 
“S Woes eespour pura ‘yours ; o—e Ang jo dure 


: $ Aig Jo yoy woo 
“Ss og HPFy pum *Ayous Asa ‘ures * yours any put ung 


“MAN Stouy pets wysy *7e3{<) 
“seas Mtaseqyo -aozueq Lyurp Saupe) 
“Ni Woy TERM pur yy ; 3 ‘Weds e—z Aine so dure 


“2Te Sy jo “Ig3;mMOUl 


“pouunuej—stunsvy 740.4 07 spzuny ay} fo yynow ay] wosf pnos ay} UG 


ga AE ION TOILET: LOTTE LY 


“SA PUTA «OTLEY ~ 44 OG) UT Spmop may © *IFIIE 
“MA cOL (S MOU) GSauy puls “sphop pues UNS | 
‘ad OSE (SS WU aeHpeu | 
PR MA AY Ot sono wep daeeq pur ‘igs oq ssc Ye sprop yer] . ha yng Jo dure 
: “S Wow ayesspoul puis ‘sphop pur ung | br Aime Jo a4 TOON 
7 ‘Seg Yay pul yy «0 “weTUEY ay) UI spnep maj ¥ tung | 
i's rem oe SB Sey pare Gay 2%) vI-—sI Ayng yo dures) 
+} maou, Pui Pg | sprep pue ays ong - [uns oat kng jo dares 
a1 Ang Jo yey WOON 


91 Ainge yo dure 


a 
=f: 


i 


im idx fa ae 
© 


“9c Unouy guys pause 9g ut pdaoxe Zep) | 
‘Spacy? pus ang | 
“Ty Wnogy ayezspoul puis “sphop> pue ung | 
“Y Mey srepour puis ‘spocp put ung | 
“ oS9 “N Woy aesspour pum *Apaojs | 
“9 09 “NX Wey aeezspour pum ‘spnop pur ung | 
“sphop pue uns ‘mpeg | 
“sphop> par uns Super) 


7RRdda 
eoo@mn 


az 
“2 casas 
Canad 


11 4jnp Soy surez4 3g 
01 Aine yo yey BOON 
8 Aire Jo Weg BOON 


R< 


“Spoop pue uns ayes) | 
Spaep aye Suoy fq pomsqo SEINIwes “ures Ju E UNS | 
“seap pus wyL> Sung | 
‘Speop? may © pue ums °F QOS (S OY YOY PUL | 
Spmep po s=sem - “gy 0s “S Wary Sues purgy ' 
FEED OM of 1S Meus ae eS A SEED Apeoy | 
‘wre: Gum ‘porn Gory pur “Syenby =~ 4ys Woy Yery pura 2203] ) 
“MA Udoy apes © SApnoyy | 
‘S wey purm Ysry *zeap> AX | 
“A of “S pute ‘sea Agg | 


Ral 
ot 28 


Z 
aaa 
© 


+ ee 


s—z Ajng jo dures 
2 Aqng jo yey woony 


a 
«4 
hos 


L—9 Aine jo dures 
9 Ajng jo yey UoONy 


9—s Ang yo dues 


rie 
i] 


oi 
i 


ol 
~ 


| 
pa REM ieee ecient [ieee en tame ree woe 


“ponunu0egj—sanswy 740.4 07 suzuny ay; fo yynow ayz woLf pvos BY} UG 


-Sunnysy pue zapuny)) “wey 
dueys ‘3a1y) aouts syenbs ur Sutures Sysoy Asan “AS PULA, 
sutwa yo gouvivadde ‘-q wioay ysouy A194 pul A, 

-Apnoyp *-q wos Ysady pul Ay 

“Apne ‘pura -q wsry 

Ty Wloly PUTA YSTH] 

“ApNOP 5° COL “S ‘oe1epoul pul jy 

“Ty “Ysoa Azaa pura tsqenbs ur urey 

“sphop pue uns f-y SYST] pur ay 


“sphoy> pue uns Sysogy pul “gq 


“VII puB LaTes) 

“ry Wl, PUIA IYSTT 

“WUE 

“ayerapour = °] PUTAL 
*ayelapoul Sy Pury 

“d of€ “S “ovesapourt pul Ay 
. “S WOIJ IBS] PUTA 
“ApNopD 5° 4A g WOTy Ie yyy] 


“SUTUIGSY pue sopunty WIM ‘siamoys +44 PUTA syeIpOy 
“Wed = ApPNo]y 


“SUNS pue wpungy S-4q UT UTeL S- O9 CN PUL 
“d 099 °N PUTA 


“WYyst Sump “gs wey wes yA NY YS pun SAPNOTY) 
“Wet SuuMp sy Wey ves + Aq Ny ITY purn ‘Apropg 
“AA of “SN ‘Pulm oyeJopoUr tpapnoy> Apomnug 

"M o8 ‘S ‘PUIM vyeIOpour ‘papnoyo Ajpounug 

"S oOT “AL SPUTM 143T] Sspnojs pue ung 

“pum jsom Suosys ¢Apnopg 


g¢cg 


_- 


Cy 
09 
¢c9 


IL 
1°99 


66 


; 
| se sy JO | c1aJaMIOTNITY 


*qynq yo 
Pd WMA | aanjesodus 7 paypeny 


960°9% 
C0193 
020°9% 
£08°S% 
09L°S% 
S08 "Ss 
C9L°Ss 
CLLS3Z 
9b8 Cz 
LL8°CS 
OFS Sz 
€08°SZ 
O1S"SS 


S61°S% 
908°S3 
S08 "cz 
1g8°¢% 
£E8°SS 
YS8"°SS 
08 "SZ 
29L°SS 
C8L°Ss% 
EFL'SS 
GhL Ss 
08'S 
1€8°s% 


“2ULDADT PLOT ; 


s°é9 
G02 

6L 
21°98 
8°16 
€°9L 
VSL 
LQe 
ces 
BSL 

68 
G48 


PSL'SS 
ESL°SS 
16L°S3 
GPS Ss 
T18°C3 
0S8°Ss 
E18°Cs 
318°S3 
068°S3 
€16°C% 
$06°S% 
098°S% 
298 GS 
Ov8 "Se 
SEB'SS 
GE8 "CS 
Eb8 SZ 
006°S3 
188°S3 
£98 SZ 
1Z8°SZ 
008 °S% 
€08°E% 
o8L GS 
1LL°S3 
OF8'°SS 
SG38 Ss 
ZP8 "Ss 
19L°S3 
VEL‘*SS 
PYL SS 
¥8L°SS 
108°S% 


-_ 


~~ — 


-_ 


WMSARVHOSKMS OCHSRGHMAGCANH 


“1d OUIOWUIIYY 
pepeny 


a es 


ea anal 


“OSLiuNns pus 
“op | 1¢9°0% WAAcp usomjag | gT ‘Suny jo ‘axe] puvys] 7 dug 
“NUNS Iwapo aos * Ny purAd | SPO 0% - yasung | GT “Sny jo aye] purysy 3e duey 
“oP Be “od | $6381 od Zi oe A ‘od 
‘eT jsnsny jo Surry 
“sphoyp> pur rea] 5°44 5SE “S PUTAL OZE'8I ‘urd | | aaaty puraa oy) Jo yutod ysoystH 
| | "G{ ysn3 
“PNUIND amos fed]D f+ AT PUT AA “0: OCPh'0% ‘ut "e Fg | -ny jo GIuruins 9q} MOfeq BB] 
od : 3L9°0% Cee to “ep ‘op “od 
| ‘osliuns pue 
‘yer Laney AYyS 299'°0% | WWSyArp usaayag | ey “Buy Jo ‘oyR] pues] re dweg 
“NY tue SUTBEJUNOUL IY] dA ated TRAINS ayy 1G “SS puryy | 190 |= yOSUNG | = ‘op “op ‘od 
“qnims jo sasseut Kaway PLM pazsaos yonut ‘Lys anyq fg Ulogy TYR pur yy £49 0% - ‘utd g | pp “SNYy jo ‘aye, puvysy ye dares) 
| “pl jsnsny 
“spnop TPM BPSuq Aq COPS PETAL | 10f 61 woo , Jo SuteYD [e1jU90 at Jo dv3 & uy 
; | casuuns pue | = 
“WypSug AYS Sg puryy ELC'0% | WySipAep usaajog | }] ysusny jo faye] purjsy 


npn ayy UL REL TU pantinwos © 4yQ Woy apes e fysup ie tg puray | ZOO “Oz jo qesung - ‘op 0d 
“S¥s awapo fg pur yy BEC OS | - urd “moe “yg EL snsny jo ‘ayC] purjsy 


“SYIVUTIY | “JOJIULOWIIT T, AL | “InoH ‘ayep pue uoyeIg 


ee pue zapunyy) mye s | | | 
4eYs Quy} Jus syyenbs ur Sutures sysouy Azan “og pur “a = a | 960°9% | L18 ; 
sO ; oe A OES PUL ; . . | : | DSL'GS 
ured jo aoursvadde S-q way ysouy Aron puryy | ve = : =. <01 ‘9% «02 | €GL°C% ; 
ee puryy | 69 6! ick j pa A T6L°S3 3l 
7 2 Spuna “gq wary ez = idl | &b8°SS 6 
; “J woy pum ys | ie 9 bo | 09L"G% c19 | Lissa |g 0% 
= . RPnO*nw ae. j pt os 5 oe 


a td b oh aes | j asuung | 9 
8212 a’ : 01 
-Aputma *‘1e3]c MNN 


“od “MNN 18 186% | 
~yurey uns :Azepy | "“MNN | G64 SE°6% | SI 
-aurysuns ‘spnoja “N QL E°6S | 6 
“papnopjJIAQ N OL = asung 
“yo0po.0 [][ 78 URL pue WIOjs JapUnyA ‘papnopiIaad 18 1°63 6 
“Spnoyo yYySy Sway ApwaNy “ISS £6 €1°63 € 
“op “0g | “as 18 LI6% oI 
“op "0g "AS cs €3'63 6 
“Azey apy B fava Ajwany . "aS G9 = | aslung 
“VIO - 4 81°63 6 
“Ivapd APIVaN “MWNM 18 | 11°63 & 
‘guTysuns ‘spno[g “WN GL j 21°63 ol 
“Od "“MNM 89 | S166 6 
“papnhoysi2.Q "MSM 99 | 5 asutng 
“sopunyy JURIST] = It 92 06°83 6 
jsed wu0ys Japuny y, “AAS OL LL 8°83 


¥ 
“Gs SepUl gy ‘Susy Yy 7# euUeTUMY SSviuuISoeq U0 Arvazy “MSS - LL 82°8% fp 


“spnepo aay fivapo Apva yy Ss es LL | 6L°8% & 
*pepnopraso *{u0jyg “dss 08 cL 16°8Z | 
-autysuns ‘spnojy) GL ZL 10°63 6 

“zapunyy Surer Avvapyy cy 14 80°63 §9 
*JSUIIIAGQ “s 99 > = asuUuNg 

“da Suueajy | 19 eL €1°6% 6 

“iapunyy Surer 0} Suruuisag GL gL L6°6% & 
0d 18 | cL 83°63 oI 

“od - OL tL 1°66 6 
“IVIJD ApIVOYy O1'a y¢ =. = dSHUNG 


“dal J | “patpeny 
“pully, “1gGMOIV 


“1JIWOULIY_ J, 


“OOTXSPY JO FNS) Vy aa0ge yooy FHP ‘suoNeasasgo sjyajjootNT “AJY 0) Surpsosse ‘10 “iddississtyy ay} JO YeUT JazVM-MO] aaoge yaaj QQ (-q) 13}0UIOING 


“qenossypy “sIno7] “Ig jp ‘uuvwmyasug “Dy ‘iq fg apo suorizoasasgo JonSojvL0qjau fo La]srFagy 


“TB3]f) | "MN 
op od | “MN 
‘Spnojo May £1B3ID) | “AAN | 
“IB3IQ | “MN | 
“IBID | “MN | 

“Apnolg | & 
“ure apy e SApnoyg ! at 
“yurey uns ‘Azepy 6 

“1va]9 APWIN 

‘eat 

“spnop> aulog 
“reap Apwwagy , 

“AB31T) 

“spiop t1espo ATRayy ssHungS 
“1k Ol 

“ika[2 ApiwaN | 8F'6S & 

“<phoj> may t1ea]O . 9F 6S _SI 

“oO Gh 63 76 
“od asiung 

“eID CEES i ol 

“du Suuvajg Y) &E 6% € 

-<qjus tourysuns ‘spno[p J £E°6S | al 

da Suuksj> Sul0ys sapuny yz S'6% 6 
“aurysuns tspnoyg ¢ = ASLUNG 
“rea | 3 GE°6S a | 

‘sphoja aay tdn Sunes) ; : 9&°6% is 
“0g : | LE°6S Sl 

“0d , 8°66 6 
- astting 


| 
} 
01 | 


6 


asuung 
ol 
& 
ol 


6 


a 


SAoaas 


QO OP Se 


iy wm i tH 


uu ate a 


Ney 


“JSVIIIAG) : 
*popnop1aaQ ; ¢ L366 01 
"eq “7 S363 c 
“‘Surjzzuqg 93°63 sl 
“UNBI OF SUTUEIZIq tpepnoloaAg / 68°63 6 
og - asuung 
0g 8E°6% Ol 
og | 68°63 € 
“reaps APVIAT 1? 66 aI 
-Apuim ‘7vapC) 3 eh 6S ostrtii 
“1ea) ’ rs ws 
- <putaa pea ; | $8°6S OI 


“od | - - “MNN 18s | 08 x | = 
"yurey uns + Azepy = - “MNN, G64 6L cE-68 | - 5 
‘aurysuns ‘spno[g - - “N GL 6L ZL'6S ie 
“PapnojJ9ACO - = AT as ie 
“SPop,o [|] 78 Ulel pue w0js JapunyA Spapnop2Ag - = = ni €8 Z1°6Z | : i ani Si 
“SpRoys yysy Swaps Apa - = “aASs £6 | cs ere | : : 
op od - - ate 18 | 88 L062 2~O ~1 


on. pe. ig 


se an, 
~ age 1 bdadeeteate~ ) 


PRO; Vo 
“dn duties] SApNo[yy 


epnop? ys feats) - ee 9£°66 | or 
od 2. J 16°63 € 
sphop May feayg 12°63 oI 
od 263 6 
“IRAO - ; = | esuung 
“Od io FI 6% ot 
“Apnoysy £0°6% & 
“apunty emos SuUTeI JUIOg 10°66 el 
-auiysuns *Apnoyy) 80°66 6 
-uter jo sdoip ‘Apnojg = @suung 
auTysuoout Sspno[s) 11°63 Or 
ourysuns ‘spnop SaBay E163 € 
od 61 “62 rat 
outysuns =spno] “gs 8 Ce 66 6 
“Od | “AN - esHUNng 
“Ray “MSM | T€°63 OL 
avajo APPIN - “MSM 63 °6% & 
“od “MS | 1€ 6% a1 
euiysuns ‘Apnoj;) : “MS E63 6 
“IBII) “MS | - S| 
“Spnoyy 
-jasuns ye utes jo sdorp ‘papnopuaag ‘as 
“reayo Apa 1 “ds 
“od “MS | 
aurysuns “spno[g “MS | 
“spnep sapunyy *Apno[g : 
‘auTysuns Sspnoyg "AS 
“vay Apean t “MS | 
“AzeH | ‘ds 


oa MS) 8 - | 
“Tea "MN - tL OF 6% i Ol. ET sung 


"$9949 ‘ShR1 


D 


ti~ 


Nr 
@D 


— 


836% 
63°63 
ZE'6S 
CE 6% 6 | 

— ssuUuNng | 
zE°6S Ol 
bE 6S € 
98°63 rd 
6°63 6 | 

_ aslung | PI 


~_— 
y i i 


rt~ se Dw 
Cet 
tf~ 0 


i~ tt te & 


boar) 


“sayouy 


“paypeny 


“1ayQUOIV | “MOR i ayeg 


“PPURICWUIIL wey | pur ay : See 
*JSPUMOWLTIY, J, 


es AANM | asuung 
“spnoyo May SBI MM ee 
“IR9],» | - TOl 
-suTYsUNS fspNO]zy | “MINA | € 
“popnoj2z93@ | | “MNAA = ol 
“sVapD APIVINT | . ae 
“PAPNOPIAD | | eee 
“ULIOS PIV | 80°6% itt 
“PapnogopPs7rQ | , i 91°66 6 
gO} / HtOdy ULIO}S Japunt,L 
“sphop) Jopunt,y ET 6G LS 
“od | bl 6 161 
“spnoj> YS Moy £489], ) - 81°63 6 
“od J. - astUng 
eID 2! 81°66 _O1 
-gurysuns fApnoyy | are Te 
i) A) APPIN . , hae ited % 
“od t L i 86°63 6 
“pepnop9As¢— = OST 
“Apnoyy 9% 6S aI 
“od 'S "6% 
yoy fdn sure : E365 
“uTer SApnopy . : S263 
“pepnoepsarAG) F - 
“saMoY INOJ LOY UTeI AavatT] “19yFe Toes Spnoyy , Ox 62 
“yoop).o G 7e tues JopuNy) SouTysuNs omlos + ApPNo[D : . PEG 
sauiysuns SApnopy 4% we : 1% °6% 
-yooj.o FPP ww ures Aaxway ‘spneyy ; ; 1k 6% 
“Hoops Oo Re Wiel = PIpPNOPHIIrAG) } - OSLO 
j -<avy fanayoa Apa < ! 2°62 rs 
“od i: -* “62 & 
sphoj) May t1ReTQ ‘ Os 6£°63 iGl 
“od a: : £P'6sS 6 
“Od “f - ASHUNS 
“od GE 6S OT 
°d : 6E°6% 
“od , EP '6s 
“aB9TS) : £b 6G 6 
‘du Sutivsa SApnoyy _ asHUng 


spnop 144 ‘aeayyy 
“od 
spnop Ma] SID 

-od 31 

“IEND | 
: . esuung 

; 6 | a! 

“Apo; . ‘ 

e 


Or 
€ 


=~ Oo 
ty & ft} is 


“yeaa Apeany 
-op “od 


aurysums *Azeyy 
‘pepnopIAag 


Sb'6% at 

| £F'6S 6 

omrgsuns *Azeyy | "MS - ssHnng 
o”d ‘Ss LE °6% OL! 

“oa | “MSS E66 € 


mon 


~ 
~~ ¢ 


i~ OM ®D 


og 
D 


“°d “MSS LE-6% ot 
od “MS 866% #8 
ed “MS 7 — 
“IBID | “M LE 6c 01 
“papnopi3sg | "MN CE'6S & 
“Sururey | “A 8£°6% él 
“mins JO Sutpyuuds “A LE6% 6 
‘HINT Ques = papnopsAG “MA : = esHUNG 
WS ayy UT ured S33] /) “MN bebe 01 
“paey Sumres ‘papnops2aQ ; “MANM 4 0€ 6% € 
“Sanne turer so Suyyurdg : "AA c ra ral 
“dn Sunray “MASS 6 
-Apnoyo turer au0eg : - ‘ SUING 
“VYA ye 1epunyp Arvey ures ou ‘uapuny 7 - 01 
“wapo ApwaN . o’es ¢ 
pura Saurysuns *Apnoyg * ‘ £8 ai 
“auTYSsUNS *spnoj;) *¢ ; GR 6 
“purey uns © Agee : > - esuung 
“Unp sItIS tS or 
“SPROJS B10, “MSS g8 & 
“Epnop owes ‘weap ApRaN ‘S es zh | 
“AZEY TETMITMIOE, | ‘Ss 08 6 
“uray Aptay “MS | ¢ - asuung gz 
“od = | “MN M | is OT 
“PTD = “AANM eS GS Le & | 46 eune 
“sayouy ‘Saat “SIIMTICT | | SPRI 


QANQAaAa 


wh 


a 


G 
Le" 
e 


<M et 
ary 


| “patpeny 


“EpURIONI}Y “UuRYy I | ‘ajaMIOINg | “mo 
“29}9ULOUTI9Y] J, 


6 
oa . Oe |” tees 
“od | ores. | e 


“ayy 9F6% & 
op og 05°62 31 

“spnop May ei) te | - OF 6% 6 
Oo" - asUIUNg 
“sea Gh'6% Or 

-o"g ) 9F 6% & 
og “AN 6°62 1 

amiysuns SApnopy “aN J 0S °6% 6 
“ea “MNN - astUnNg 
-papnop2aQ - 1t 62 ol 

“od "MN _ $863 & 
“Apnoly) "MN ‘ | $86 a 

ures jo Stnpyundg “MN Of 6% 6 
‘anysuns ‘Apnoyp "MN AM 92 °6% ssLIUNS 
“apa pue ures Aavapy - = Fr 
“yeaa Apieany _ | LI'63 Or 

‘aurysuns auies :Apnopg “Iss | G&'6S & 
od “ds 83°62 él 

‘og “as } 9E°63 6 
“sPay2 ApPVaN “qs ! - IsHIMG 

"SILIC “da ¢ Eb °6% o1 

ies) Pal! ‘aN bh'6% € 

“rap Apmeau $Azepy “AN 9b°6% I 

od “4N RE'6s 6 
-guTysuns + Azep "IN 7 aSHIUNS 
“PIPNO|SIZAO “NI 66°62 OI 

“7g “MNN 1£°6% & 

"WSBII9AC) “MAN 7 GE"6S % 

“MITE BIOS Spapno]Iarqg “M } >| 0f°62 6 
“MOIS JapNY !papnopsaag ‘ = asHUNS 
“suvys gulos ‘AzeqzT ZS 6S | li 

“‘papropi2ag “MS 63°63 & 
“op “od bE 6S aT 

urey uns ‘Azegy 66°63 6 
“ystp woyad e uns *Azexy f = SSHEUS 
ee £b°6% il 


j 
ae a tres € | 


ouTysuns *Azeyy 


‘Pspnopmag a 


“AA 
“MS 


eumrysuns *Azepy . 
od ; 

“og . S 

be MSS 

a “MSS 

“MS 


-3eaj2 ApPeaAN | 


“od 


“od 

“0d 

“od 

“IPI ) 

“sphop WS tag 
“od 

“oO 

“og 

“0 

“od 

“od 

“o( 

“og 

“0d 

“og 
“IBID 

“spNopP May 21KIED 
“O] 

“IED 

“SIYSUNS “spnoyg 
“Mey JIpuNYy ‘AULIOIY 

“op “od 

“‘sphoys ‘ourysung 
“oq 

“UID 

Spuoj> yyst] Maj -1aje) 
og 

“od 

“od 

“og 

i 8) 


“epueioulsyy 


“sayouy 


“Urey 


I8 

#8 

é8 
“SIILTICT 


201] ‘papeny 
PUM 
“Ig}sulol ®ILL 


“‘ponuju0g—sino7z “jg 7D sUuolzvAasLISgO 1DIITZO0L0I JAP 


6F°6¢ 
bS°63 


€S°63 
€9°66 
8¢°66 
19°63 


96°63 
CC°6% 
66°63 
19°63 
r¢e6s 
GG 63 
EC°6S 
Po°6% 
ob 63 
68°6% 
6E 66 
6°63 


8E° 66 


“19j9WIOILY 


SI 

6 
OSHUNG 
or 

€ 
aI 

6 
vsSHUNg 
Il 

£ 
Gl 

8 
oSHUNG 
OI 

& 
el 

§6 
JSHUNG 
Or 

£ 
SI 

6 
asHUung 
OL 

£ 
ZI 

6 
ASHUNG 
OI 

€ 


oI 


“INO, 


| 
} 
| 


Tr Aug 
“SPSI 


-Szey apy ‘aeap Apron 


od 


“reap ApRaN 


“ouTtsuns tspnojg 
-gurysuns * Apnoy) 


-seay> Apeay 


od 


“APNOTD | 


w -S Wie; pun *sHIGSUns JOU *spnoj,) 


“A pro] 0 


‘PEPROPIA | 


“ony. uns SAzeyy 


“spre 


“evap 
“op 
: spre oad Maj 


“Sphep ay 


“op q 


“sphop 7qsq ‘ieap 


jure] uns 


Speen 


“od 


aealy | 


“IPQ 

*IB3]C) 
°a 
APLWAN 


‘Agee | 


of 
“Oo 
“0 
“od 
“ed 

“IBID 


“PEpPNopPsIAGCY 
“ued pue Jopuny 7, 
Apray | 


eB 


“1829 


“Sphoyps WysT] 


“ol 
od 


“IID | 


Apeanr 
og 


“og 
og 
“og 

“PIS 

eaAD 
“o" 

“od 
-0¢ 


“MN AA 
“M 
“MSM 
“MSM 
“M 


8S°6% 


L¢ 63 
bS°63 
9¢°66 
66°66 
6F°6% 
bP 6% 
8b '636 
60°6S 
vb'GS 
Eb 63 
946% 
866 
6b°6% 
60°63 
tS°6S 
CC’6S 
vo66 
$S°63 
Co"6% 
9¢°6% 
sf 6% 


VP6s 


1F'6% 
tE'66 
VP 66 


6€°6% 
OF 66 
1h 63% 
£63 


EP 6% 
€b 6% 


6F°6% 
bS°63 
€S°6% 
€O°6S 
8¢°6% 
19°62 


6 
asuUng 
II 
€ 
Sl 
6 
asHung 
OT 
€ 


~ 
G 


6 
ISHUNG 
Or 
£ 
ol 
6 
ssUUNg 
Il 
£ 
él 
Ot 
JSHUNG 
01 
€ 
ol 
6 
JSHUNG 
Ol 
T8 
& 
oI 
6 
JSHUNG 
OL 
€ 
rae 
6 
asuUNng 
Or 
€& 


~ 
© 


6 | 
ssHUNG | LY 
or | 
€ 
rai 
6 


' — - ut 
“sayntttet snag © 209 Uses Aatag “TP Ara Loo 


“pepo <= Ww UIs ‘pepnoples— zoo 


¥6 


“Ass ‘sphop aloe } nin 


“Apacs S { 
“pyar ye ures *Apneyp | 6 
(i Waagy wIFZ SuL207s ZapuNY) Aarozy | ¢ 
“papno}219,g ‘ 7 € 
Popo 
¢ ye WEE pers Ly pumqy ‘QS sprele sapungy davoy 
SpRop West t yeas APRA 
od 
“ApRoy) 


ol 
6 
asuung 


shah. ad 


<2 ptr Wuo;s sepumEy woys mq Areopy 
“pop_o = pue | /o9Mjeq urer pue sapuny.y, 
-aunystms SApnop.) 

og 
“PRApPTROPITIA() 
“yurey sueps * Apnoy) 
“sptim “pophop7aay) 


« fad fad fad fa) 
BHAA ARADDE 


Li-- Qe. 


—m is te i Ot ie 


~ 
ae] 


“a wo ures pue 
~ TH ey *‘pataraye ue * pune: re spRop Jepunip *sUTYSUNS 
“Spnop May -Ieaps Aptay 
“itajo SPTRON 
“od Ot 
“od ¥ 
“pepnops»4) ~ ra. 1 
PoP. 1] Te Guo iopIMNm -sprof’) £6 3 6 
-seago Apreau *Azeyy 7 “TS LL asuing 
"yurey uot *Aze Hy €8 i 
‘oy uns ‘Azey ‘Apnopo weymauiog - 26 
“<pnoys wey mauIcg - &6 
“Say 2} "$9945 MT 


sl 
6 
esaung 


eG t 
DL 


~ 


© 
Bite 


“ered “PUUM “owed 


| 
' 
“Ja VUIOULIIY, J, | 


a | f ¢ | Se6e asuung | 1 
ea 68°63 ol 
reap Apeay | | 1b 66 € 
oUTYSUNS “spno]c oF 62 = 
reap Apeey - H | LF 6s 
‘ied aren ica 
“od < ; L¥66 
rap Apray . 6h 6% 
“sprog 4 | £S°E3 
aurqsuns * Azeq ‘spneqy . | 9C°6s io 
“ATEY Ssprety . - asuung ' ¢ 
SIF]S “spnoyp? ame cc ’6s | 01 
~aungsums jurey ‘Arey 8¢°6s | t 
paery uns *Azey | popnopazaac 9°66 él 
od 69°63 6 
spnop 137] - esuung | > 
“a | 976% 
og ; L9°6¢ 
“od “RL 1L°6% 


© 


MI t& 


| t& t= ts ty 


oq | BL°6S Og 


od 


asuung | § 


i~ 


99°63 
C9°6% 
69°6% 
12°62 
19°6% 
6S°62% 
19°6 
29°63 


oMin a 
tiv t* te 


~_ 


i 0S 6e 
“Spuim “Bap cv'6s 
{puis ‘reap Spray CP'6s 
“Og FF'63 
SEQIIAO i ak 
vp Area SAput ay ' S266 
“sauna aay © 20g ures Aatag ‘yep Ara, - 
*paphopses¢g S166 
“IPep.c z i ums pepnopuesg 11°63 


_ 


Ro Ss 
eee ree 

~ 

” 


*Asyns ‘spnop amog | ’ 4 
-Apnoyg > ¥6 
“yysra ye ures * sprog \ esuung | oF 
MEME Gasyy WIT SuL20}s zapUnYy Aaeapy 
“Papne]219,g 
Pop, 

PUNT “VS sphops sapungy <avozy 
SPRoqp> WySh > FRapD Apreay 


< 
>, 


et €} 


14 


125 


5° 

= 

<= 

> 

am 

ae 

a == 
Oo, 

qn 

=u 


-Suruey | 
“UII BUIOG | 


sotiea|$ v0 3 


“sort FE ULE 


‘od on st 
*poepno]z12aQ ! & 
-op ‘og | SI 
“op ‘oq =| 6 
*UITI DUIOS £48CI12AC € dsLUNG 
*Papnojrz29a¢ | 
“JSCIIIAOC 
“prey Sururey 
“Sururey 
*JSBIIIAO SUTEI BULOG | | asLIUung 
“Oo” IT 
“Sulurey : € 
‘urer Jo Suypyuudg | aI 
“Oo 6 | 
“pepnop19a;C | dsHUNG 
“ae9TX) Sz ro) 
“op “od | 08 € 
“spnops reays Aprea yy LL ral 
-dn surg) cL 6 
*Apnoypo SAzeyyT - dSHUNG 
“IeaD T | | tL Or 
“dn Suuvaty N | GL | | € 
Has, EL | ‘ ol 
“od ‘a | WW 6 
*JSCIIIAC | | - | osLiung 
“od j NI | 08 OT 
*xea]d ATIVINT | 18 | g 
“PEPNOIIAO | = | 6L 3I 
*Papnoprzs9ag | - NI | | LL | fs | g,isnsny 
)  ssayouy *saanSaqy | =| *SaaBa(T | ‘SPST 


*d01,J | ‘payppeny 


“RPUurIOUIIW . | uley “puT AL 7 “NOP 
“19 IUIOWIY, I, | 
| 


“aye 


“ponuluo)—szno7 “7g 7Y suoIMALaSgoO JDIISOpOLOIJ ITY 


“1B212) | 


-autysuns ‘ Aze Fy 


Apnoya ‘Azeqy 


-Azey UOZUIOY SIRT | 


“op 


0d 
od 
“eID 
°d 


“AzeYy EY MTHOS {1Ba]9 Ayjarayy 


-yurey uns *Azepy 


“yeP,0 ¢ pue fF UaNjeq UTFI ‘{purm =]002 


“yuTey uns 


“IBID 
tpapnopa1349 
tpapnopsi2aG 

‘oad 

*FSBIIIAG) | 
“papnoprsaaQ) | 


“spnojo guaros + Apul Aq 


op 

“UTEI JUIOS 

faqs 
‘op 

* Aay[Ns 


-aurysuns jo sasdunys ‘ures 
-yseaaao Sulede Urey | 


“spnop WET 
“oq 
oq 

“IRQ | 

od 

tpapRo]s12,Q 
tpapno]s124Q9 
tf 

txeaja Apreayy | 

jo Suypyauds |) 


-ouitysuns pue urey 4 


-op 
-op 


"ysv2190Q) ) 
“ys ye UTeY 


“UII BUIOG 


od 
*Suiury 


“od [ 
“Pepnoyssaag | 


oa |S 


“ulti DUOS $3S82194GQ 


“PIpNOpIIIaAg | 
*JSCIIIAO 


“prey Sururey | 2 


> o1o 


coo 
6£°0 
FIO 


Pret 


“MS 
“MS 
“MS 
“MS 
“MS 
“MNM 
“MNM 
“MNM 
“M 

“M 
“MSM 
“MSM 
“MSM 
“MS 
“MS 
“MS 
“AA 
“MS 
“MS 
“MS 


“M 


“MSS | 


“MSS 
“MSS 


ie 
al 
6 | 
OSIIUNG | 
or 

£ 
al 


6 
astiung 


asuUung 
I 
¥ 
rat 
6 

asuung 
oI 
& 
él 
rag 

aslIung 
ia 
€ 
9 | 


6 
osHUNg 


SI 
€ 
SI 


6 
asuUUng 
