- Arco Diftiliat


A Treatife or v oih Spaz


Preparations , Experiments, and Curiofities ,
performed by way of DistTILLATION,


Together with the Defcription of the choice


Furnaces and Vessurs ufed by
Ancient and Modern Cur MISTS.


Andthe Anotomy of Go x pand $1 x v s r; withthe chiefe
Preparations and Curiofities thereof; together with cheir Virtues.


In SIX BOOKS.

Op fale Emenee bee Py. |
To which is added in this Third Impreffion B
Calcination and Sublimation: “4


in TWO BOOKS,


As ALSO,


TheL0 ACDO ACADISTIL LER


Exa&ly and truly fhewing the way (in words at length,and


- not in myfterious Characters and Figures ) to draw all forts o£
SPIRITS and STRONG-WATERS,
-.. Together with their /értwes,and other Excelent Waters, `


LONDON: 4
kd by E: Cotes for T. Williawes at the Bible in ‘Bittle Britain, id E


aiae: paaa a eM Re a


p A, Then Hur heirs 01d P Hen do £^

3 We X From the cold hand the mighty book, YON DSL E AOA
© With iron claspedy-and with iron bound’ eomm) Baa E
rii lle teolc it; "the dead. mis fontti


| ur x : -. Seottg ut; of the Last Minitzel, 5l BA
_ eeldmz a i us Das noi gile A dot


LN vh Tt: Hz =


Pes m ERR T


qoa nokia d wh Od (ou


pum acc EE PUEDE a MEN OL C MM


Y x EN. =
BS VENTE S


Ani ~
iini


A A a t A a. D Wc JÄ d e bis € UE i
wks ae "arm o brine dio 21v


o a us o ¥


To my ^much Honoured Friend itas | :

TOBIAS GARB RAND, ji

«Docromn. ofP HYSTCK, and, Piincipak- í |
of of eie ai: in 9 X F OR pis


^ oda > m re
x


men is my anibition tolet“ the world
à Rubi upon what [core'it is that E
2 do efpecially jbonotr men. It is
“not Sir! as they are bigh born
-Heirs of the. great Potentates >
SS S55 08 > for which moft honour them; and.
tipim bitis account I aljo fhal vot deny them their due)
but as they excel in honefty, and are friends to Arts
That poor Philofophers fhould take no delight in riches,
and rich men [bould take great delight 4 in Philofopby,
is to me an argument; that there is more delight, ho-
nour, and fatisfaction in theone'then in the enjoyment
wf the otherz; once reud of a noble mans Porter that
let in all that were rich apparelled, but ‘excluded ; pat
jon k but 1 fhould, if bad beh a qm d e
as place, ~


; The en i oM
| place, have rather let inthe P bilofopber , without the
gay clothes, than the gay clothes without the Philofo-


pher. As long as 1 bave Jenfe or reafon I [hall i improve:


- them tothe honour of Art , tfpecially that of Alchymie.
In the perfettion thereof. there are riches , bonbur ,
bealth;and length of dayes: by it Artefiusiived 1900
fears, Flammell £uilt 28 Hofpitals with large re-
. venues tothem; befides (Churches and:Chappels 5 for
it, both they: and divers more were accounted Phi-


lofophers, and wife men, which founds more bonoura-


bly in my ears, than all the ratling and empty titles
of honour, whatfoever hefides.. In the perfection of this
| Art; F mean the .accomplifbing of the Elixir, #& th.
Sulphur. of. Philofophers ftt at liberty, which gratiz.
fies the releafers thereof with three Kingdoms , viz.


Vegetable, Animal, and Mineral, and What cannot


they do., and how bonourable are they, that have the
agana of thefe 2 Theymay, command. Lead into
Gold ,. dying plants into fruitfuluefs , the fick into
bealebyold age into youth darkne/s into light,and what
not? A moneth would fail to give you an account of their,


power and dominations. Now for the effecting of this,


I. fhall befides. what I have advifed in the Epiftle to
the Reader, fay only this 3, Court the Mother, and you
win the Daughter; prevail with Nature, ‘and the fair
Diana of the Tbiolephers is at your fagvice. 3

à 0».


her nar cH


Oo RRIF OETA aW E^ osi" Wars


The Epifil Define.


Nov if. if you cannot frevail with Nature for the
faireft of her daughters, viz. the Mercury of -£.hilofos
phers yet [he bath other daughters of wonderful. beana


ty alo, as are the Bffences, and Magifleries of Philos
fophers, which alfoare endowed with riches,bonowr and;
health, and. any of thefe you may more .eafily prevail


with their Mother Nature for. This Art of. Alchymie


is that Solary Art, whichis more noble than ‘all: the


other [ix Arts and Sciences and if it did once through-
ly fhine forth out of the clouds whereby it is: ecclipfed,
would darken. all ther eft; (as-the Sun-doth; the other


fix Planets) or at leaft wallow up their lights This is
that true natural philofopby which moft accurately ane


tomizeth. Nature and natural things, and ocularly de-


mon/trates the. principles and operations of them:
That empty natural philofophy which is. read. in tbe:
— Muiverfities, is [carce the meaneft hand-maid to this


Queen of Arts. It is pity there is [uob great. encou-


ragement for many empty, and unprofitable Wris,. -
and none for this, and [uch like ingenuitus 5 which if
| promoted; would rehder an Univerfity far more flou-


rifbing, than the former. I once read or beard, of a


- famous Univer fity beyond Sea, that was faln into des
‘cay through what caufe I kno not: but there wat a.
general counfel held by the learned bow to reftoreit to.


its isis glor :. The Medien at laf agreed


43. ^ os


AMO Le
f ari 1


ah am e TEESE EEC IEA URSI E SCR TT T REEF E ELE T D S TD
D . E ydo. : ;
U ` ^


* ^163591D5KJ Se. 9rd 4
The Epiftle Dedicatory. :
upon, Dh ale promoting of Alcbymie and. encouraging
the Artifts: themfelvess But 1 never expect to fee neh.
rational aétings. in this nation till (hadows peri
: fubftances flouri[h, and truth prevail » which time I
hope: sat hand and défired. by all true’ artifis, and
tomy knowledge, efpecially by your Jelf, upon which ace
[ON count d truly bonour you.’ Now to your felf therefore
EN I crave leave to: adumbrate fomething of that Art
a which 1: know you will be willing for the publick
E S  geod'to promote: I dedicate this Treatife to yon, not `
ET that it is worthy of your acceptance, but that it may
a S receive worth by your accepting of it. I prefent it to
you (as men bring lead to Philofophers to be tinged
. into gold.) to receive the ftamp of your favour, and
X approbation, that it may pafs cnrrant, with acceptance
- a~ among[? tbe fons of Art, OR d os Mice d


ne us isa na abe is


E X LONDON,
1 Never, ü eni


Mud


| Yout mof did Servant,
Jod

pi fih French.
$ ee i P» 2. Zu


gi PA
LP a


aem
So the Read, 00


SESH Here is a glut of Chymical bocks, but a [carcity of Chymi-
Ne cal truths: Nature and Art cffords variety of Spagiri-
M i D b
uA Pa cub Preparations; Luttboy are as yeb partly undifzvuered;.
ey Wewi partly difperfed in mam) locks, and thife of divers Lan~
7 | guages, and partly referued in: private mens: bandss
When therefore I confidered what need there is of, and how acceptable a
general Treatife of Diftillations might be, efpecially to our English
Nation (and the rather fince Baker upomDiftillations. ts by reafin-of
the defcription of afew’ Furnaces, and Veffels therein, befides which
there ài {mall variety either of Preparations, or Curiofities, foldat fuch
k ahighrate) I thonght T eculd do them no better fervice then to pre=
E Sent them with Jach aT reatife of that [ubjett, which [Lonld contain in:


| modern, and thefe of feveral languages; and which 4 have attained by
my owh long and manual experience, together with {uch.as I pave by
way of exchange purchafed out of the hands of private men, which they
kad monopolized as great: fecrets Bat onthe other band, when 4 cons
fidered what a multitude of Artifts there arein this Nation,from viam)
of which more and Vetter things might beexpetted, then frcm my felf 3

Tab at a nonplus in myrefolarions, fearing it meightbeacconsted-an:


d unpardonable pre[emmptionin mt to wndertzke, that’ which might be

i better performed by others > But for the wvoiding-of this oper fn, be

si pleafed to nnilerfl and, that I prefent not thes to tbecworld. under-any

ie other notion than ef arough: Wagt (whichindeèdzs the work. of ihe -

ü more unskilfal, end therefore of my [elf withoutexception) dole por
ES Lifhed by the more expert Artif- I vejoyce- as at the. break: of the: day
Bt after along tedions night, to fee how this folitary Art of Archymie-

a begins for to fhine forth ont of the clouds of reproach, which it hath a

f long time undefervedly layen under. There are two things which have:

l a long time teclip(ed it, Viz then fts of Are nd ‘ther fpecios :


ESO


Taper) body of deett Arif O Sno of srurhyand difpel thefe vant
AAT GA XS DANA COS QN 3 5 XD WI Ogs,


it the choife/? preparations of the feletteft Authcrs, koth ancient and..


-To the Reader. l
fogs, that tke Queen of Arts ryt dn fplendcur 1 Tf men did:
believe what this Art could eff él, and what variety there win it, they —
would be no longer feraightened by, nor bound up to cr jurare in verba
Galeni, vel Ariftotelis; byt ordd now VACUA new engagement to
_ be true and faithful tothe principles of Hermes, and Paracelfüs, as

they fLand eff ablifred without Aviftotle their Prince, and Galen, and
. Hippocrates, their Lords and Mafters. They would uo longer fiand
dreaming forth, Sic dicit Galenus; but Ipfe.dix t Hermes. J defire
aot tobemiflaken as if I did deny Galen his. due, or Hippocrates
what is bis right, for indeed they wrote excellently in: many things
and deferyied well therely y. That which I cannot allow of im them ts
their fitit. obfirvation of the quadruplicity of humours (which
inthe School of Paraceltus , and writings of Helmont, where the
anatimy of humours hath been mre rationally und. fully, difcuffed,
hath: been fufficiently confmted. )..' and their confining themfelves. to
fish crede! Medicines, which are: more fit-to be put. into. Spagyrical
ve[fels fur a further. digeflion y «then into.mens bodies to be fermented
thetein. Certainly if men were le(s. ignorant they would. pre-
férre. Cordial Effences before Crude Juices Balfamical Elixirs bez
| fore Flegmatick, Waters, the Mercary of Philofophers before. comain
Quick filver. Bub many men have: fo little. infight in this Art,
that they fcarcebelieve any thing. init beyond. the. Diffilling of, Wa-
ters, and Oils, and extratting of Salts ; nay many that pretend to Phi-
lofophy, and would be accounted: Philofophers , are fo unbelieving ,
that, as faith Sandivogius, although be would, have intimated the -
Eros Irt tothem sword. by würd y. yet. they. would by no, means. #n-
derfandorbelievethat.there was. any water in the Philofophers. fed.
And as he in this cafe, fo: I in another know divers that will not
believe that common Quick-filver can of it felf be. turned wholly
into a Tran{parent Water, or. that glafs can be reduced, into. Sand
and Salt (of which itis made, faying that fulio, vitrificatoria. eft
ultima fafio, or thatsan-bearb may. be :mude.to grow in two ours,
and the Idea. of a plant to appear in aglaffe ; as if the very. plant it fel
were there, and. this frome the. Effie thereof y And. fuch like pre-
parations as.thefe: the. two, former. whereof na) be, done in. half an
hours; Lut the latter requiras as longer: time bab yet pofille.. And
for thepoffibility of the Elixirs Yon. [ball as f per]gptte them tà. be~
Beve they know nothing (which w very bard , M) an impoffible

; thing


Sy


À
1
:
|
F


t


man that catricth alwaies about bim 1 0000, pounds marth of femel
and gold, travel. every where, up. and. deny. faf eyand iat be robbed. 2
Having manyrich money:mongers been tortured. into, a, onfeffun —.
where their money was concealed? Did you. never hear of avapouring -
fellow in London; that pretending to. tbe: kuowledgeof this Adfreryy
mas ona fudden'caught afide by ygmonty-thir Per ss. and. by them torr
agented with tortures little.le(zkhem.thofe of, bells being. forced therely
Cif be had kgown-ig) intoadifcouery.of te so faymathing: of being
dn. danger of being fubjetted, and.enflavid. to. the pleafareof'..Princes
and. of becoming inftrumental,-to, their luxury, amt. tyeannys eae


_ being deprived of all liberty, as once, Raimundus, Lullius.; Lhe trib


aut. cared to baut. their daies [Lorkted, (although by the vertue. of their
medicine they could have Ap d them) for. avery Philofipher hath
she life to. come f Sta te ri 148, thy: fac is [een pe
MS DAC com gc A 3 ` efe.


i]


5 Toxkeé Reader, T
afse Tha winch by waty of. reply to the frivolan oljoltióur of. ibi fe
S irtetiosgo pedet? ifii Arty and nor only fos tut will not be~


lieve ite Jf yon [Fcu'd difcover to them: the process of. the Philofophirs.


Stone, they would langh dt yen Jonplicity amt T lE swarrhnkyón: te»
vir malt Sec iot GAMBA PNN woke grijtlion before thems,
thay mowld think voihin shut therewere a fallacy, fo wnbelieving afè
they: fo Y find thm, nd [ol leave then, “and fall for ever find them
ihe H t S x Suv RE VCORE Na ATURE xS Án y K M - c


< Thepcù another (oer of wen tywhom this ‘art bath been mach fea
dali od, and they indeed pave brought d gebat Odium whin ts by car
vying abiat) nad vending their whites; and reds, thew fophifficared
- oyls tind falesstheir dangerous and ill prepared Tarbithes,and Aurum
vite s. And indeed it were morth while; and T might dogod fervice for,
the Nation, todifevwer theie cheats, ai their fophifticating of Chyra
&alüylr wibb fpibitof \T urpentines and [alts swith fale extracti. ‘ome
of Liwood dikes afeh Vike s Lut bere ds wot place for [o Large a
Hijene the would amiant vo: — Y baltonly wt tbis vise relato
giv bow Peho axa chénted with 2 fophiffiexted Oil if gold; fur
faithbeyTigavengs ducheis for the price(s of an Nurütm Potabile
shied aa DABE ed wb dnd ayh ab Paane, baba: Mae ie
proved vo We nopbinig bal a asischacke of iof Comiplirey Cloves, Fennel
eds ahd uf PK ‘singed with Thoedees of Gold: knon T (bull m
aie i e of Jore, bar they are Draenen
esüntelanks, whbindéed deferve tobe bonnd Yor y Petanfo pz-

| pn Jett, “thr og their me

ees


j | Tei menni yo iw danger xf their
“Betton es Ahar their srotty fhowhd Te detected, then t ni-
‘BRR thy ongh huita te clouded; and Vapper feos we
NDS pP iP Eon ier Phat there abe degrees in this APs for there


t 1


he ER Uf the Elixir it felf, anid there debe lifevwirine


afany exelent e ffevizes magiferies, nnd [piriti yr) which bwi-
Wiraily Popen thé BIEVER ABO bof DAE pa ISk N ee


ibe Ts nit Paraceltas bs Ludns) thie wiper ses he Poise; vend iil
BIPÜRsipsaRIP In the bb) ato v Tigor wir th hens hid Ye nophis-


” Mea Seatüra iof hobe Wfdicine Hire Hirn) erhoak preter
diera beatin Hie bolj th a wiment e Teno his Altahelt d Famine
Hafield- ab bag Pan in an in Pins difoh | ae HEART Du
“ples; wi ithal 1j wfpecitew aps afl Mi femper dfi Vivere
“Who ind: vitale patie: meike the qns fence of Hae a
2 (ns) ^ Phile-.


TOFU NETS ANTE


^
EHE UE iw ^ni t SITE


Cd.
Dae.


SZ:


—— cc ans


i


fetsdomn, whichindecd all


 issheRealtt:


— Phihfa iphical Spiritof mmo are cordial dud bal(antieal vcn. to


iratian. 2: pale ‘ail to écho. upsell the excellent;
ND vdriti.e tbat..by thi A vien. Art. aid be brought ta
light ; in nti t ee aay aot how se (alf ak
Laftbe attained into: Esth nak rthemtbàt paft thr ie
Philp ophinal preperationss ied ANE the Riddlésy and Hier
phicks of the Philofophers 2; ais REKE: bey. all, meer: P; brane Hes a ja


there no fundamentum in-e:for: this Kenkas. Isth soiree dn


old.. Jeip.nnt ife eA far, meeleiplication Suds bett nó, enix
1 i (AS. e perd * a prea uon vl reifen
bars which is difgerfd in ell. things-*. hat datis thatubich P. enckttgold
incorruptible 2: ebat induced the Philofophers fetdanine gad. forthe
matter of their medicine ? Warna v gold gncediving 2, Me.theyé none.
of this living, grise of Phoilo(ophenss tobe Pad? Did: Sanr
divoging thella/tiof known Philofipherts pend itiall.2 Surely there is
veter enough for Philofi A b AAA fo fore Pbilofapherssatthis. day
for the matter: alihough they, areunkawontoss:. There ares faith
Sandivogius, ‘thors doubt many mon of 4 Good séanfeienice both: of
kiak and dow dieren, iee oisi Aion Mo rici :
it feeretly.s. 05 vet n CONTIAGRR profesution of
e the fon. Koger obice Nellice


e ly if hetake along mith:
fier he e ee Spl mi mi acci quite pe ef
1507.
d enar ir ica A EAT A A lt mu figi fe


f alvus ibit nit ibas for lapin. far iouss end.


nitable, rgverpent . Gf ike: TAA OS Ags RT Ay 338 ka Si UC an re > WIS N
ks edes létakefh shy fef tothe M proportnid 20 $0 thy felf
she Hoe [eekef? fürs und enter not aponihe prattiok till thog art fif
well ver fed inthe theory y fur. Sox to learn ith thy brains
and iemegindtiony then, ee cir shandssand veflesarid.efpecially jindy eee
ware kell,and fee if thy proprfals agreeable to the; RU pet ares
à 3eeDiligently read. thè f'ayings. nie «Philo(opber spread —
again and again, and eneditate onthi: and take Nini tbofi def not
read the writings of iropnftersin peal. of the. Books af the true Philifz-
quete: Gampore their [oyinige smith the poffilility of Natures and oh


foire placis be apti ridi a Rule ad


hve erence wellithe: Philofopherss and


Weed Salong <thillthe setae” ec inthe dinge


, vafthem 4. Imagine


TUUM ee ARTE


wor difcover how it zs made} yet may certife. yor, to the faving of a


winted if im errr is n grek fiep to wbe frarbi TP Ripley: Haid teen


Dy ny Tare conin of thife smanyerrimrs before he had" bonght his


Sodod aw a friendly tutor in thisy fo in all (pay yrical: prepiirations
buit deed oM e aad tul adlanir
Hofler will touch thee irt inthe miete vf Ahyi in a quarter vf
"oed, then by thine own JPadios and chargeable operations thin Malk
learn in {even years. In the firff place therefore, and bove wl things
‘apply thy felf to'unexpert, rela and communicative Arif; and
actuant it'd great gain; if chore dinje pör hafe bis freon; choagh with
„4 good gratuity,to lead thee through the manual practice of ghe chiefeft
nd alie yrepratis.- fal apply Wy JOP v ior BRA for

"tBireis fecarch aay prorefa in all Chymiftry fo enipe that: he that sncver
fait done will not be tà feck, andcommitfomeerrinsin the doing of it.
Lf aid expertytbatbe may beable to inftrutt: thee: aright; ere E
that as be ipe he may faithfully perform whut be promiferh Sand
“communicative, that he »y-be fresin difcovering Pizifelf ant. his
"wrbto thee The taths mif Arsifistefervethat to themfelves,


which they knows either ont of a defiretobe admired the wore for their


-amdifeeuered féeretsyor ont of. envie to.others khowledge i But howsf ir
« this: humonrssapprovable in then) Tlewveit others do judge Mand ws
Sfor pay part Thade here:cimmunicutedApon the account of abari ñe-
"eeptanee enl what T Deve withiniany gest» Pigs; month reading and


SRL A


reat:


`


i
[
|


paring uf that, is indeed a Ei worthy of any ones knowing) and hich


"To the Reader. T :


abounding with love and miérty and füurifring in pact which duy X
ore Sunt Pup t&v s Mia ossis of xix 52


‘thers s (confpdtring thab I wrote thefefar Hem that kn ^thens:mit)
if mo, accept of the endeavors of thy Friend. eo


IR


C TES: 1
QE oe
c ; ks vis 3j "ne
: a F208 D : voz
eR c hakita] e. JOHN. ERENGMI
f Bye Ven aia : A ak : € VS: 560 89 ttes


Fe Es) 2b» A 5dr: aT


>.
CREE Slope


T1 x1 i LY? T <
An Alp beca Table of the Dieates mi Fifiemisies for which
~ Cures oF Samat cata inthe Sg Books.


Ayiki


E i i en ias Es m
PONES e IZE) Crook- RR o: cul
dde Quartan-Ague, 76 RURA a ae 3 S T :
“intl pie guided x» 122.
An excellent Anodine .
lestie... 4145320 peer eae
Aim ast dette m Digeffion i to help — ` 26,56,70
9 pa Fansat ue d DH eales incurable s = Mee
Sad iq se vici ied r aE deii
Font ‘to continue till extream old puirid and. epidemic, SE
ge, Cin Qe Difeafes i inthe joynts’ - 773
‘Belly todoofén ride ofa caufed.| Cold diffempers. D IDPUE2d
again ft griping of the Belly 58. Diffentery > 238,247


Birds dead toreftora to life ...139.| Dente 255. #15891 DEA, ra


Bladder obftraitedto cure. 223.) - 123,20
Bonels to. vieih im 1A. 26 Bari 26, 384253 DOS 123,
Bleeding. to ftanch - 45,126 Spe 1 5 35265,
Blogd. congealed... 179: E jet
SELullitionof Blond... a8. ETE Has Eas ED
Blond fo purifies 27, 92,121 84 Epilpe, 4525 727907 197% 113,
Bruinto frengthen; 161215245] . 114 31612 5124,:08
Obffvattions of f rhe Breafty 2654.5: Blemiffes à án the Eyes “70
Againft Burnings 125 | Film inthe Eyes © © 122,33.
Eyes inflamed 115,230
C, Eryfipelas 79
anter; z y. 205 F.
T unter e mdi Z fores 8 Face to clear and {mooth 159
Carbunkle z eue Againft Painting 37,5433 5)160,


Collick, Falling-ficknef$, vide Epilep/ie,


Feautrs 2553654597437 7,80, 82

Pre I4,124,20 51321132; 241
Feavers putrid, 81, 85,126; 15.4
| Flegms to attenuate. 57
Forgetfulnefs


79, 80


Conval fron 44557;114,116
. Cordials, 30,66, 92, 117, 1 325

144,160,161
Natural Coloni revived | 2


.79
Freckles


TUE The Alptiaberi Table —


: Berkle and Mr ME pag. 2 239 L


jg Life, to cant... 25305
pn n^ E een a QUO
A gaa


Galled places i in children 2.830].


Gangnohe > ' 79]. p difemperely 44

Gold to diffolve su | 4 ferengtlen gs 3
Gonorrhea v 41,249 |. NO sca your
jag 47) 538,75,100, 114,1165.]. aedes enhn ers 4s


 Adteftes

aMiegrim A
Y agelanchaly...

| Mill to increa : RAPA
Mother. vide hie aK
“Sore Mouth. de Seis uel


Difrafes of » nerves 5 se


121,125, 126,155].
H.


nh Pedes frog gray Hairs,70,
ANA 138:

ber et Weal. E 69
Semrf inthe Head. ante?
Wind inthe Head — 55,57,59.
Health preferved. .. 27208
Paffons of the end. 64,31
Natural ‘Heat nouri[Fed 2 6].
Hydropical.Difeafss vide Drago
Hifter, epaffions, 44,57,64,68,82 3 8; 569,114,155 I 62, 183
Pbpocondriscal diffpmpers 38
Palfio, 14660 0,116,120

Piffing yee ar z4 giis 492


Lmpoft.toripen & clean[ey42,1 183
FAASA parts ' amfarted tes SS


Ii rand Impoftumes,205. foret
Ed 83,184
Veperiienf thelody..... X60 Pn frrergóca, = à RHS


afetias g4,55,61,6. apte i Dikata 7O
Pimeaniom - Voss i "7a Papi Aspire qaod
harvard Inflammation: 384. Pleno 1365745205
Istetd gg. oto efla Tta. Balard ER ct aod, bhat
Beh 152 afin rgelled y 234, French-Poxs
d Kei ott a bt Kener difeas Small Pox%,8Q
Xi Bie "or I lub de. 184) È en da S Pø: sofa
Seele, edo 12393265] 5i, cto Bon 86
NM CREE oar ilii. giro SANS


ign ane. (1924249


Prope | 30,46,X2352051885| Te Pure Choller 161. Molat-
Liven jy amd 36,108. to ffreng- | g Ole. det
then 26,16,58,183 7 | Vin iid ll krenas aae


Nolime = eot
te open n» “Ol prattions, 2b


»Pe
: Wah di (à Nadas Painted. $ RIR
deodice aaea 316125]


Ta enetrating liquor " Sa t6 ;


cy pod


= 9


a c ty 0 Purge or Vomit, 159 S affcatiun of the Marise 7
wrge withoat o irpo “POE | feit, c 35 dcs
To Purge the ftomath `“ 160 2 welling i5
To Purge water = a ,IÓt foveo
TiPurgeper feceffum ^'^ 241 TN priesh 5 GNO cf deo
FO ur p e - 107^
R. | lou A cda uc 69
Radical üeoiff ure nho "120 yes tees ots oT
` Reins inflamed SUA eh 25 Veri dif-mpers | &c. 1 5 45
Ref canfed ™ t 36,98, Tòg |) ESED OA a :
Excellent Haeo 119, 138 | Noxious vapours - 10g
Rheume dryed “i ; 225 | Vertigo 4559735 B82
Ring-worm = 10275125 cers, 63, 7438551 18,185,184;
. Rapture Tu ae) aiii gi 0H Weers' to iéatriah. 265153;
APERTA DM "51995247
Bulls] DV 127,22 55219 Viii cfe 68, 228, 219;
Seinticz €U? 75 ! 23 2
Scurvy URBEM E sop? UR sue
Skinto iphrifie © 121 3255155, bese ibe bell ..59.
- Bletptó AA vaknefs in the parts © “55075,
_ Spirits to compofe 56, to vefrelh Webin the Eye^ °°. ibid.
7^ and fire Wpthén ` 26337199 | Wind vr 730
‘Stitches XU pute yo Dpprec s 20


Thé Alpfiabetical Table, GE


70$ pas m "page 384]


humors


E. ng did vmi Qi o> 46)


Grid for the ftomacks se


ie SALLE windine/s, &c.5 25555565 |.


$7,58,59,82; 114,1 19,1 83
s Monah inflamed, |. 5308
Hard es to diffolve, 515.525


eu EPO, TIS S


Prev to diola nSt 52,1 55


Stone in Bladder’, ‘Kidaoie and


` Rant, 45558562,7 51100110
V? 118 ASIE
Sidi» TM
Swctour to the body s '^30


Supp 25; 36,5 59, 60; ix
s I $e


ATO
e


-24| dau b as
[ril rej? "70,569,198,


^169jrt4,121,123;t 245 F545
1155419952 21,229,232


Women in trii: to be détioipel


thoutpain | ib? 45,206
Womb Strangulated , syt
White flax in Women: ibid,
Perret 453 57; 7458058 2jt ied
Wounds in the E ye Ha
Green Wounds’ I 125,1 29;


Waonhds outward and inward, 29,


65701858229,


Ji


Wha DISTILLATION w, —
and the kinds thereof. © o5


ye "Diüillation hadits originals as p a Nees RoE
` eafily to be proved; and Tf known, yet . litdle- condu-
cing to our enfuing Difcourfe. Bor ler us unc
BAFRA Nand what Dilillation is, oree or are-
principal and chief definitions, or defcriptions.

1, Diftillationis a certain Arc of extracting Se Liquor, or.
the humid part of things by vertue of hear (as the matter fhall -
require) being firk refolved into a vap@ne and then condeníed -
again by cold. i

2. Di(üllation is the art of extraBing the. Cid dd
effencial humidity from the flegmatick, or of the flegmatick,
from the fpiritual,

3. Diftillacionis the ‘changing of grofs thick bodes into à
thinner, and liquid fubftances or feparation of the pure diquor


“from the impure feces. ':


1 fhalltreatof Difillation. according to all thefe three ac~
ceptions, and no otherwife : hence I fhall exclude Sublimation, 3
and Calcination, ligh are oF dry fubltances; beingparticulady = -~


eu x B- . treated o. «


I NERA UE ULTIO Owe NUN eos y eS CS TOMBE TN Coe CST e


2 Of the Art of Diflillaim. —. BooxI.
a treated of hereafter, unlefs I (hall by the way make ufe of
either, in relation to the perfe&ing of any Kind of Diflillations
Now becanfe all;or moít ofthefe Diftillations-are to be per-
ormed by heic; it will be neceflary to underftand how many de=
grees of heat there are; and which are convenient for every
operation: and they are principally four,

The firftis only a warmth, as is that of Horfe dung, of the
Sun, of warm water, and the vapour thereof, which kind of heat
ferves for putrefaction, and digeltion.

2, The fecond is of feething water, and the vapour thereof,
as alfo of afhes,.and ferves to diftill chofe things which
are fubtile, and moift, as alfo for the re&ifying of any Spirit,

~ or Oil. :

3. Thethird is of fandand filings of Iron, which ferves to:
diftill things fubtle, and dry; or erofs and moitt.

4. The fourth is of a naked fire, clofe, open, or with a blat -

= — which ferves to diftil Metals and Minerals, and hard gummy

—  - things, as Amber, cc. Ido not fay fervesonly to difil chefe ;.

= J Si many of the former Diftillations are performed by this heat,

“as the diftilling of Spiritsand Oils, cc. ina Copper-ftill over a

naked fire; butthefe may be diftilled by che two former degrees;

- of heat ; but Minerals and (üch like cannot but by this fourth de-
gree alone.


pet eon. Of the matter and: form of Furnaces.


He matter of Furnaces is various, for they may be made
either of brick and clay, or clay.alone with whites of Eggs,
hair, and filings of Iron, (and of thefe, if the clay be fat, are
made the beft, and moft durable Furnaces) or of Iron, or Cop-
per caft or forged. The forms alío' of Furnaces are varions..
The fitceftform for Difüllation is round; for fo the heat of
the fire being carryedup equally, diffufeth ic felf every way,
Which happens not in a Furnace of another figure, as four-
fquare or triangular, for the corners difperfe and feparare the
force of the fire. Their magnitude muft be fuch as fhall be fit
for the receiving of the veflel ; their thicknefs fo great as ne-
ceffity fhall feem to require ; only thus much obferve;that if they
; be


-— s a DET NIS, qT a


be made of forged Iron or Copper, they muft be coated with-
in fide, efpecially if you intend to ufe them for atirong fire,
They mutt be made with two bottoms diftingnifht, asit were;
into two forges, the one below which may receive the afhes,
the other above to contain the fire. The bottom of this upper
muk either be an Iron grate, or elfe an Iron plate perforated
with many holes, that fo the afhes may the more eafily fall
down into the bottom, which otherwife would pnt out the


nace for Reveiberation, and the Regifter Furnace. In the
firk and loweft, the afhes arereceived; in the fecond, the fire
is put ; and; in the third, ofthe Furnace for Reverberation, che


a femicircular Cover, that fo the heat may be reflected upon the
Contained matter, The bottom of the third and uppermoft
partition of the Regifter Furnace muft be either a plate of Iron,
or a fmooth ftone perforated with holes, having ftopples of
ftones fitted thereunco, which you may take out or put in,as you
would have the heat increafed or decreafed. In the top or upper
part ofall the(e Furnaces where it (hall (eem mok fit,chere muft
be two or three holes made, that by chem the fmoak may more
freely país out, and the air let in to make the fire burn the
flronger, if need require, or elfe which are to be fhut with fop-
» ples made fit to chem. The mouths of the forementioned parti-
s tions mult have fhutters, juft like an Ovens. mouth, with which
you may fhut them clofe, orleave them open if you would

- havethefire burn ftronger. But in defe&t ofa Furnace, or fit mat-

$ ter to make one, we may ufe a Kettle, ora Por, fet upon a Tre-
foot; as we fhall fhew when we cometo give you a defcription
pi of the Furnace and Veffels. The truth is,a good Artik will make
ü any fhift, yea, and in halfa daies time make a Furpace;or fome-


j thing equivalent to it,for any operations.

i m

3 j Of Velfels fit for Diftillation. P

f Effels for Diftillation, are of various matter, and form. For

j they may be either of Lead, which Ialtogether difapprove

f of, for that they turn the Liquors into a white and milky. fnb-

l ftance, befides the malignity they give tothem ; or, they may
i : B2 be


Booxl Ofthe Artof Diftillation. © z


fire. Yet fome Furnaces have three partitions, as the Fur- ~


.fnatter which isto be reverberated, This third ought to have -


|
"|


ee E MEE ETTE EES


| ' Of the Art of Difülain. Booxl
ne be of Copper, Iron) or Tin, which are better then the former 5

" . or of Jug-metal, or Potters-metal glazed, or Glafs, which

are the beft of all, where they may be ufed without fear of -
breaking or melting... Some make them of Silver, but chey are :
very chargeable, - They that are ableand willing may have din |
benefit of them,- 1


of Lutes for coating of Glaffes, and for Clofures, as alfo Several
Wages of flopping Glaffes.


, |
He beft Lute is made thus; viz. Take. of Loam and Sind -
tempered with falt water (which keeps it from cleaving) |

to thefe add the Caput Mortuam of Vitriol; or Aqua fortis, and |

{caling of Iron, and temper chem well together, and this ferveth |

to coat Retorts,or any Glafs veflels that muk endure'a moft |

fttorg fire, and "will never fail if well made, Some add Flax; `
beaten Glafs, and Pots; and Flint, érc.

Take unflaked Lime,and Linfeed Oil, mix them well together,
and make thereof a Lute, which will be fo hard, that no fpirie

; . will pierce it; and this "Bom for the clofure of Glaffes..


= Take Loam and the nine of an Egg, mix them into a Daft.
and fpread it ona SIS This alfo is a good clofure.


.'Moiften an Ox Bladder i in the white of an Egg beatento wa- .
ter, or in defc& of a Bladder, ufe Paper, and bind them round. `
- where the Veffels are joyned together; one over another two or
thiee times. Ors
Ifthe fpirits in the Glafs be exceeding corrofive, then ufe
the Caph Mortaum of Aqua fortis; Linfeed Oil, and Chafk minced
together
"If a Glafs be cracked, then wet a linnen clothiin the white: òf
Ee an Ego beaten to water, and lay upon it, and upon that, prefently
- whileft it is wèt, fift fome unflaked Lime, and prefs it clofe with
your hand ; when that is dry, Jay on another cloth thus wet, as
before; and on it fft more Lime.
LA veflel may be Ropt fo clofe with Quick- filvery hae no
/ Spirit can breath forthe by which means athe Glafs wall be pos
ve d


S MP et giao Oe eo


TTA epe ay Oe


SAGE a aN ie E Le e d noe a bel edi. er i anis

Booxl Ofthe Art of Diftilation — — §
ved from breaking by the inclofed Spirits, (for the head will.
firt yield before the Glafs breaks) the Veffel muft be made
shis. This alfo isa good way to preferve Spirits already diftil-
led fromthe air.


Ben
NE


M
3


Jj Ay Signifiés the head or
cover.


dc B,T belady or velfel it felf. <


C, The littlé Glafs to take
out the Liquor that isin
the Velfel becau/e it can= T
not well be poured out» ae |
byreafon of the Quick-
filver which will be ape
to be loft, fo by reafon of
the form of the Velfel it
felf.
D; A falfe bottom where -
the Quick-filver muft
lies into Which the head
muft be fet upon the
Quick: filversthat fo the —
Quick filver may come.
above the bottome of the
Head.


"Weg,


2 B3 ; Alfo


1 rias r -ge EEEE ee” gd aiite Te N ~ Mert NOE E. TN Saal ee att ieee 2


Of the Art of Diftillation, BooxT, -

Alfo you may make &oples of Glaffes ground fo (mooth;
the ftopples being faftened in a Tourne and moyftned wich
Emery and water and fo turned in che mouth of the bottle tilt
‘it be fic, chen wipe offthe Emery, and (meer over the ftopple-
with a liniment, made with fine wafhed Earth and Oil, and fo
pollifh it, chatno vapour can get forth by them, as you may
fee by bthispatterp. es


1
- 2
E á " D Sand
ee


A, Signifies the ffopple of Glas
ground very [mooth and fit to
mouth of the Veffel, :


B, The Glafi-Body.


SADA E unm arms OF a A aa os te al


But the beft way is to have a Crooked Pipe, which may have
, Quick-filver in ic, and be well luted tothe body that no Spirit
— tanget forth : and by this means the Glafs will never break, for —
the Quick-filver will fit yield. — E R


E C vut ae AT


mpl c s cu EUN LLL
Rook I. : Of the drt of Diftillation: \ ; Co


A; The crooked pipe.


B, The Glafs-body,
Or upon the top of a Glafs-ftopple there
way be faftned fome lead, that if the
{pirit be too fProng it will only heave up
the Stopple and let it fall down again.


. C, Thee lafs-flopple with lead on the tope
D; The mnih of the-velfel it felf-


Now theWoay to, nip up a gla[ss or-feal it up Hermisioally;
i after this manners ds


pu what matter you pleafe intoa bolt-head with a long
neck or pipe, put this pipethrougha pan that hath a little
hole made in the bottome thereof, that the top. of it may be
three or four inches above the pan,clofeupthe holeronpdaboug ~-
the pipe with clay ; then put coalsinthe pan, and kindle firft
thofe that are fartheft off from the pipe, chat the heat may come.
by degrees to the pipe (for otherwife a fuddain heat will break
ir) when the pipe is hot; blow the coals about it tillicmelt,then -
with a pair of fhears cut it off where itis melted, and then. with:
a pair of tongues, made hot, clofe ic together, ;
Note, that after yon have clofed it, you mufi put the pues k
\ Y z rose zs coa $


cb e Of the Art of Diftillation. Booxl.


^ tainly crack in the place where it is nipped.


A RU Uy. is a CUN or ‘corroding ie Wille


coals upon thetop thereof, and let ic chus Rand till all be cold
which muft be done by degrees ; for otherwile che glafs will cer-


Note, that the pan muk Rand upon fome frame, or (ome hol-
low place, that there.may be a paflage for the Pipe 1 to come
through it.

Alío the Bolt-head muft Rand upon a Trefoot, or (ome ophet
fim plage according to this Figure.


y
I


yp


77^
ON


M


fi
|


il
f


i
\ “
VRBE T UMS. os ONL SNC NR


dAn Be a a of Ha hard ade and tearms of art,
which: are ad in this enfuing Treatife. eR e


Qutc&-fülgery 2nd it is done. hus :  Takeany y fetal except
Trop beateninco thin leaves,or eye fmall pene mixtit wich —
j EM eum.


"d A


Boox Te of the Art f Difillation. x '


about 8 parts of Quick-filver (which may the better be done if

both be heated firit) chat chey may become one uniform maffe ;

evaporate: the Quick-filyerover the fire, and the metal will be

left in the bottom asa thin calx. :

< Calcination, is areducing any ny thing i into à Calx, and making it
aes and it may be done


By reducing into afhes.
By Firing
By reverberating.


6
Two wayes -- By Amalgamation, |
Precipitation,
Fumigation or Váporitionij
Cementation or Stratification. —


eg LAS is when any liquor is fo placed in digeftion, chat
it fhall rife up and fall down, rife up and fall down, and fo do.
continually, and thereby become more digefted, and mature, for,
which ufe for che moft part we ufea Pellican. =
Clarification, is the feparating of the grofs feces from any de-
cottion or juice, and itis done
By che white ofan Egge,
Three wayes 2 By Dige(lion;
By Filtration.
CAUSAS is the reducing of any liquid thing to. à thicker
fubftance by evaporating the ‘humidity.
Cobobation;is the frequent abftraction of any liquor, poured .


By Corofion


oft-times on the feces from whence i it was Diftifled, by Diti. a


lation,

Congelation, is eui any liquor being deco&led to the height,
is afterward, by fetling into any cold place;tumed i into a tranfpa-
rent fübítance like unto Ice,

Corrofion, is the Calcining of bodies by corrofive chine s


N is "m pouring off. of any liquor which hath a fet- 3
E by inclination.

Deliquinm, is the diffolying of a hard body into a fiqior,

* c ay


Rid. ^ : 2
z


as (alt or the powder of any calcined mitter; dc. ina moift,cold
lace,
E Defcenfion, is When che effentia] juice diffolved from the mat-
ter to be diftilled doth defcend, or fall downward.
Defpumation, ts the taking offthe froth chat floats on ‘thie top
with fpoon or feather, or by percolation.
Diftillation, is the extracting of the humid part of things by
vertue of heat; being fir(t refolved into a vapout; and then Con-


_denfed again by cold. Thus it is generally taken ; but how more


particularly, I fhall afterward fhew.—

Digeftion, is'a contracting, or ‘Maturation of crude things by.
an ealie, and gentle beat.

Diffolutizmj is the turning of bodies i into a liquor by the additi-
on offome humidity, =-

Dulcorationy or dulcificationis either the walhing off the fale
from any matter that was calcined therewith, with warm water,


. in which the falc is diflolved, and che matter dulcified: orit isa


fweetning of things with fugar,or Roper or MU


E
Elevation is the riGng of any matter in manner of fume, or vå-


pour by vertue of heat.
Evaporation, or Exhalation, is the vaponring away of any -


moi(ture.
Exaltation, is when any matter doth by diveltion attain to. a


.. greater purity.


Expreffion, is the extracting of any liquor by the hand; or by
a prefs.


Extraélion,is the drawing forth of aneflence froma corporal
_ fnatter by fome fit liquors, as fpirit of wine, the feces remaining


in a the bottom,


` Fermentation i is when any thing í is refo[ved into it felf, and is
ratified, andripened, whether it be done by any ferment added


. to it, o: by digeftion only.


Filtration is the feparation of any liquid batter frott its feces
by making ic run through a brown paper made like a tunnel; ora
Mo go of wollen clothyoz chorengh fhreds.

haere tie.


E fi Avtof Diftilation. Boor


how of he tm y Difillation. yi

Fixation, is the making of any volatile, fpiritual body endure’

' the fire, and not fly away; whether i it be done by often reiterated -
Diftillations, or Sublimations, or by the adding of fome fixing
thing to it,

Fumigation’ is the calcining of bodies by the fume of fharp -
fpirits, whether vegetable or mineral,the bodies being laid over
the mouth of the veffel wherein the fharp fpirits are.

H.

Humettation ot Irrigation, isa {prinkling of moiíture upon
anything. -- é


4


Imbibition is when any dry bade drinks in any moifture that |


a is put upon it,
MN "Impregnation is when any dry body hath drank i info much
m moifture chat it willad mit of no more,


TA
Tu


0705 Incorporation; is a mixtion of a dry and moift body cogerhet,fo
as to make an uniform niafle of them,

Infufien; is the putting of any hard matter into ben for the -
We . ;Nertue thereof to be extracted.

2 Infolation, is digelting of things inthe Sun;


E

© Levigation is the reducing of any hard matter into a mof fine
powder.

ee een a melting; or making any ching fluid.

"Lutation, is either che flopping of the orifices of veffels chat
no vapour país out; or the coating of any veffel to Hem it
from breaking in the fire. - i

M.

Maceration, is the fame as Digeftion. S

Matdrationy is the exalting of a fubftance that i is immature 'and
crude; to be ripened and conco&led. j

Menftruumy, is any Liquor abate ferves for the: ‘exeradting! the


i effence ofa apy, thing. .

b] iP a ili

x ""Piecipitarion, i is when bodies corroded by doriai (piste ei-
Hm ther iby! the evaporating of the Spirits remain in thé Li P

Hn by poutine fomecthing upon the Spiste, jas O; aii of Tara, 3


Bee - good quantity of water, do, fall. to Ei adde: 1x
os Cz DUC, :


CSP a T RENS LL ee MUN pra LL. se RNC


12 C Ofthe Artof Difilltim. Book I,


Purification, is a (eparation of any Liquor from its feces, whe-
ther it be done by Clarification, Filtration, or Digeftion..

Putrefattion, is the refolution of a mixt body i into it felf by a
re gentle heat, E

Quintefeucey isan abfolute; pure and well digefted medicine ,
drawn from any fubftance, either ee s DE or mi-
neral. l


: #1

Reflification i is ds the drawing of the flegm from: the’ Spi-
rit, or of the Spirit from the fleem, or the exaltation of any- Li-
quor:by a reiterated Difilation.

Reverberation, 1s the reducing of bodies into a Calx by a refle-
&ing flame, "

S.. ud

Solution, is a diffolving or attenuating of bodies, ke

Stratification, is a ftrewing of corroding powder on plates of
metal by courfe.

Sublimation, isan elevating, or raifing ofthe matter to the: up-
per part of the veflel by way “of afubrle : powder.

Subtiliation, is the turning ofa bodyinto a Liquor, or into a
fine powder. =


T.
Tran[mutatica, is E changing of a thing in fubfance, colour, :
and, quality.


A
Volatile, is chat which flyeth the bie.


Rules to Zr Meena he in i


2


‘Make choyceof a fit place i in avait ary fr the TANS fo
that it may neither hinder any thing, nor be in danger of the.
falling of any thing into it chat Mall "lye over it: for a forcing
furnace; it will be beft to fecitir'a ^ehitmny, becanfe 3 | rong
heatis t ufed to dt,-andmany times" there are ufed brands ‘which
will {moak, and the fire being eréat, thé danger theteof may be
prevented, and of things of a | maligne venepate ba led

- difülled-


oy


Boox I. Of the " y pigitliin. 4 ae

ditlled in fuch a furnace, the fame, or vapour, if the glafs fhould

-break,may be carryed up into the chimnys which orherwile eR k
3 fiye about theroom to thy poe.


In all kinds of Diflillation, rd yeflels are not to be filled too
Full: for if you diftil Liquors,they will run over ; if other folider
things, the one part will be burnt before the other part be at all
wo'ked upon, but fill the fourth part of gourds, the Half of Ré-
torts, the third partof copper veffels, and in rectifying of fpirits
fill che veffel half full. ;


3:
Ler thofe things Winch are flatulent, as wae. bi nao T RUN
like; as alfo thofe things which do eafily boyle up; as honey, be
| putina leffer quanticy, "and be diftilled i in pees with the’
addition of falt, fand; or fuch like) "^ :


4.

There be fome things which require a ftrong fire; yet you mif ee
have a care that the fire be not too vehement for fear their nirore.
fhould be dettroyed.


tin
(20 AN


You muft. have acare that the ici sint hidi veffels are clo-
fed do riot give vent, and alter che nature of the Eiquorefpecial-
ly whena firong fireisto be e s
£ pi] Ls, vibii ost

i Aci Lion have this ee property ji the weáker-part
goes forth firlt, and the ftronger laft; but in fermented and Jis —
quots, the Spirit goeth firft, then the Phlegm, whe:


< Ifthe liquorretaina ola Empyreuma,or etie of en. fite;
thon fhalt help it by putting it into a glaffe.clofe ftopt;and fo ex.
pofing it to the heat of che fun; and ‘now .and then opening the
elafe | that the fiery impreffion may d or elfe a is glais
fandi ina cold moift place. ^


When youpat water intoa s/fcething Bassin ied thole
ate glaffes, let itbehot or. ran ie wilt abner m ED
of die T ecl jv To novia :


t
e! -
2 d


piter c ee


T 7 Ofthe of Diflilldim. Boord.


Y


9-
- When thov takeft any earthen, or glafs veffel from the fire,
expofe it not tothe cold airg too fudáeoly. for fear it (bould


~ break,


10.


Ifthon moulded have a Balneum as s hotas mi ont fand or .


fawduft into it, that the heat. of the water may be- therewith
kepri iis and made more inrenfe.
LI.

‘Ifyou would make a "heat with horfe-dung, the manner: is
this, viz.make a hole in the ground,then lay one courfe of horfe-
dunga foor thick, then a courfe of unflaked time half a foot
thick, then another of dung, as before, theníer in your velfel.,


andlay. round i ic Jime.and horfe-dung mixt together; prefs it —
down very hard; you mutt fpzinkle it every other day with wa- `
ter, and wheni it ceafeth'to be hot; then take it out and put in ,


more, d
12.
Note, that Meroe the fand or afhes muft be well fifted, for


otherwife: a coal or ftone mee may break yours glafs.


The time for MESA UE of thines is various : for if the
thing to be putrefied be vegetables and; green, le(s time is requi-
red; ifdry,a longer ; if Minerals; the longe of all. Thus much
pore,thus thing S ait poner Ryastieds in slondy weather then i in


faihs bongs? ci


14.

If chou wouldeft Keep Vesbc es frefh and green all the year,
gather themina dry day; and put.them into en earthen. veffel ,
which you muft Gop clofe, ged;(et inia cold place: and en
anil asdaipb eati keep freflra: whole year 11913
2 zs ag.

Do not exped to eia the effence ati any Weaeubienier
by making ufe of the feces, left after diflillation : for if you take


. thofe fecesyas for exatnfile; of asNeule; andimake a decoction


thereof, and (train irand fer itiivchesfroft, ie will bé congealed
andin it will appear a thonfand leaves of Nettles with- heir
paletes, which when the decoction i is again refolved by heat,

. vaniíh


Booxl ofthe Artof pila - -s5


vinih away, which Mews that the eflence of the Vegerables’
lies inthe falc thereof. ? :


DA IOA E PETTEN
In all your operations, diligently obfervethè procefles whith
you readkedd vary not a little fromtrhem, for fome:imes a (mall
miftake Gf heglect: fpoils the whóle operation, and fruftratés
your expget}tion. "o * eye y
i T i MUS T "n bs
Try not t firik a EI great coft; or great difficulty;
forit will bE great difcoura gement to thee; and thon wilt be
very apt tó| miltake, mS


ai 18. j RE j í ¢
If any ote would enter upon the pra&ices of Chymiftry; lec


~ himapplylhimfelf td fome expert artiftfor to be infe in -
Hearn


]


the manualloperation! of things: for by this means he w
morein two moneths, than hé can by his practife and fludy in
feven year$; as alfo avoid much pains aid coft; and redeem much
time which elfs of neceffity he will lofe,


Enter not uponany operation, unlefs it be confiftent with rhe


poffibility of miture, which therefore thou muft endeavour, as -


much as.poffibl y may be, to underftand well.


9s j t o$6; 2: ST AOR ONE RONY
Do notinterpretall things thou readeft according to the» li-


-tetal fenfe; for Philofophers when they wtote any thingtoo ex-


ceilent for the vulgar to know, exprefled it enigmatically, that
the fons of Art only might underftand ir. : à
In all thy operations, propofe a good end to thy felf,: as not


to ufe any excellent experiment that thou fhaledifcoyer,:to any —


ill end, butfordiepablickgood. — — . u n a>


Te will behecéffary that chon knowelt alt fuch inftra-


ments that thon fhalt. ufe about thy Furnace and Glaffes, |


M o


: is | whereof


PIS


Ü m r^ o NU


a6 —— Of the Artof Difillation, ~ Boox Is
- whereof fome are already exprefied, and (ome more fhall be.
here de(cribed. d um


cis xf :


A, Signifies an iron vod with twd iron rings at the ends thereof, Which
muft be heated ved bots and applyed tothat part of the glafs which
thou wouldeft break off. When thou haft held it there fo long till the

-il gldfs be very bot, then take it offs and drop (ome cold waters where

- «thon wouldeft have it break off, and it will prefently crack in fun-

ders Thefe rings are for fach glaffes as will go into them: T bou
mult have divers of this fort even of al fixes. i... ES

B, An iron hook. which muft be heated hot and applytd to any great
glafs that Will not go into a ving» this hook hath a Wooden handle.

Xy A. pair.of tongswhich are for divers ufcs. REPE

D; M crooked ivonto rake betwixt the grates to clear them,

E, An iron Rake to rake the afbes out e( the alh holes.


A thread diptin melted brim@ene and tyed abont a elafs, and
«then fired, may ferye in ftead of thé iron rings; and the hook.


1981 1 i ; f - Common


—


f VADE TUE


-Boexl. Ofthe Art of Difllation. © 7 —
Common Diffilled fimple waters) are made thi. -


' Ake what heatbs or flowers you pleafe, put them Into 2
common cold Srill;and let chem diftil gently.


This is the ferm of a common cold Still, Son


But nore, that this kind of water is but the flegm of the Vege-
table which you diftil, and hath very litle’ vertue or odour in its
only rofes and mints, and two or three more,have an odour; but
all befides, have as little vertue as common diftilled Water, —

Ido not deny, but that it may be fo ordered, that thefe kinds
of waters may partake borh of the (mell and ftrength oftheir Ve-

getables in a good meafure, and it is chus: -


To make waters in a cold Still that fball bave the vid fmelland |
vertue of the Vegetable,


^ Ake what hearbs, lowers, or roots you pleafe (fo that they

be green) bruife them and mix wich themfomé leaves; and.
let them ftand clofe covered for four or five dayes: then diti
them after the manner aforefaid.


D : Anii, : :


LN - ws


` Another way to make Water taft and e
Strong of its Vegetable.


Hen y yeh have Diditled any Vegetable ina cola ‘Stitt,

after the nfual manner (fo that-j youtake heed you dry
not the hearbtoo much} which you may prevent by putting a
brown. paper in the bottom of. the Still, giving ita gentle fire,
and turning the cake before it be quite dryed ) take the cakes
that remain inthe bottom of the Still, and the water that is
ditülled from thence (having a good quantity thereof ) and put
them into a hot Still, and let them Rand warm for the fpace of
2.4 hours; then diftil them, Then if yon would have the water


a£ 0 Ofthe Artof Dfilation. ^ Booxk |


ftrong , put the faid water into more frefh cakes, cafting away —


the other, anddo as before. Thisis the trueft and beft way to
have the Water of any Vegetables. Alfo, thou fhalt by this way.
purchafe fome Oyl, which is to be feparated and to. be kept by.
X felf, ! : *


To nike water, at any time of the yearina -cold Stills witbont green:
hearbs, fo that the Water foal (mell. rong of the hearb.


Ph fair water into the body of the cold Still, then hang a bag-


fullofthathearb that thou wouldeft have the water : (meli
of, being firk dryed, or (eed or root thereof firk bruifed, then.


1 make a rong fire under the Still,’


‘Note, that thofe Vegetables;of which the water is made after
this 4nd. the former manner, mutt be of a fragrant fmell; for fuch
as have but little or no Tells cannot yield-a water of any confi t4
derable odour.. elis
Another way to make a water tafte, and (mel

Frrgng. of its. Hegtodiee 3


“Ake of thedty hearb; or feed, or root, bruifed; to.a pound:
of each, put 12. pints of Spring. water, dittil them i in a hot
Still or Alembick-; and the warer that is diftilled off, put upom-


: “more. of the frefh. hearbs, feeds, ox roots ; do this three or four


times.


BooxL - Af Bem of Diui. D
times, and thon fhalt have a water full of the vertue of the Vege”
table, being simo as ftrong as a fpirit. 3
To na the Water of Rofess or other: Flowers, of a. PINE
and pleafant fmell and that fhalt barn jike
unto-fpirit of Wine. -


Soutof all other things; and efpecially nourifhing chings,.
may be had, by the help of Fermentation, a burning and
fragrant Spirit; fo alfo; may be had out of Roles, whichare com-
monly accounted cold,
- Therefore take Damask Rofes, gathered ina cleer air, after
- the dew is off, beat them very fmall; put them in a glafs-veflel,
. and fer them clofe ftept in a Cellar;that there they may ferment;
and when they:fmell or taft four, cake of the faid: Flowers as
much as you pleafe,anddiftill chemin. Zalpeo Marie ; and the
` Water thence diflilled, pour oñ another part of the faid Rofes;
and diftill it again, and fo proceed upon another part of the
Rofes, untillall che whole quantity of the fermented Rofes be
diftilled, alwayes keeping the feces thacremain in the bottom.
Then take all the water that carne from the Rofes, and diftill ic
in Balneo Maria, and diftil thence a twelfth part or thereabouts;
which, if you pleafe, you may rectifie : So have you a moft grate-
full and moft odoriferous waten, which We ‘like unto Tpitit
„of Wine; :


ae


» 3 rH 508 7
— dts Vertues. d


- Jt exceedingly teviveth the hearc and refrefheth the spirits
Ic is alfo much ufed externally fot ‘its odoriferous Nature,


Ti BE the water of the Juni df fal; Honey- uckless à
Woodbine, Violets, Lilies, &C. retain —
- the [mell of their flowers.


The reafon why thefe flowers, in che common way of Diflil- :

` lation yield a water of no fragrancy at all, although they them-

felves are very odoriferous, are, either becaufe, if. a ftronger jns :
D2. be


20 — -' Ofthe Art of Diflillation. Booxt.
; be made inthe diftilling of them, the grofler, and more earthy
Spirit cometh out with the finer, and cronbleth ic, as iris in cafe
the flowers be crufhed or bruifed ( where the odour upon the
` fame account is loft ) or becaufe the odoriferous Spitit thereof
being thin, and very fubtle riferh with a gentle hear, but for lack
of body, vapours away. . The art therefore that is here required
is; To prevent the mixtion of the groffer {pirit, with the finer,and
to give fucha body to the finer chat fhall not embafe it : and it is
thus: jon T j
—.. Take of either of the aforefaid flowers, gathered frefh, and
at noon in afair day, let them nor at all be bruifed. ; Intufe'a
handful of them in two quarts of white-wine (which muf be
. very good; or elíe you labour in vain) for the fpace of half an
hour;then take them forth, andinfufe in the fame wine, the
fame quantity of frefh flowers: this do eight or ten times; but
Tull remember that they be not infüfed above half an hour, (for,
according to the rule of infufion, a fhort flay of the body that
ath a fine Spirit. in the liquor receiveth the Spirit: buta longer
{tay confoundeth it, becaufe it draweth forth the earthly part
withal, which deftroyeth the finer :) then diftil this liquor Ë all
the flowers being firít taken out) in a glaffe-gourd ina very.
gentle Balneo, or overa vapour of hot water, the joynts of the
glafs being very well clofed, and thou fhalt have a water of
a moft fragrant odour. By this means the Spirit of the wine
which ferves to body the fine odoriferous Spirit of the flowers
arifech as {oon as the fine Spirit it felf, without any earthinefs
mixed with ir.

Note, that in defect of Wine, Agua vite will fervesalfo ftrong-
beer; but not altogether fo well, becaufe there is more grofls.
earthinefs in it than in wine. trit

The water of either of thefe flowers is a moft fragrant per-
fume, and may beufed asa very delicate {weet water, and is
no fmall Secret.


Beokl — Ofthe drt of Diftllation. —— 0m


A Furnace With bis ve[fele, to diftill liquors with the


A team of boyling water. |
ZEE Ay Sheweth the head

yr @ * SS if the Alembick <
> - B, The body thereof ,

(n € b> placed in a brafs ;
YZ, TE veffel made for that ;
q cH parpo[e. :

C, A brafs veffel per- E


forated in many
places to receive
the vapour of tbe
water. This veffel
foall contain the
Alembick. compaf-

- fed about with faw-
duft; not only that `
it may the better
and longer retain
the heat of the va-
pour, but alfo left
it foould be broken
by the hard touch
of the brafen ve[-
felt.

D, Shewes the bra(s ve[[ell containing the Water as it is plact in the —
Furnace. $ :

Ey The Furnace containing the ve[fell. ENG
F, A Funnel by which you may now and then powre in Waters in fread

^o ofthat which is vanifot and diffipated by the heat of the fires :

G, The Receiver. ng ee


¢


sae |
ag
RA


TS SD
use


|


IN


Il


"=D: s. | ; The.


= "Ofte Art of Dipillation, Boox I.


Thi delineation of ; 4 Bilneum Mariz poe may alfo ferve
Hie . for-to difil with afbes.


A, Shews the Fur-
nace, with the hole to
take forth the Afbes.

B, Shews another far-
nace» OS it were [et in

. the other 5. now it is

^ ef Brafs 5 and runs

` through the maft of


Ü


CMAPS cee OMG pa LP Pe S Ne NE STI


‘the kettle made alfo i

of brafs, that fo the 1

contained water or |

a afbes may be the more i

; ji eafily heated. ;
2 K C, The kettle wherein P


- the water, afbesy or
fand are contained.
D; The Alembick fet
in tbe waters afves,
or fand , with the
A verde S mouths of the recei-

— Vers.
3 É ; 7 E, The bottome of the
Saas ONG = 2| JEZ brafs furnaces
as e 23 A whofe top is marked
with B, which contains the fires


de Shan isan


A water ont of Berries, K made thus:


E ETET im noia os RS 23-5 Ate En A Wb. i VE acudir 4- rre MP tei A E ig


"pe ‘of what berries you pleate being full ripe; put them into
acoutd-olafs, Rrewing upon thema good quantity of pow-
dered { fugar, cover them clofe, let them fand three: weeks or a
moneth, then difil them in Balneo.
_ . After this manner Strawberries, Rafpberries, Elderberries, and
- Black.cherries, may be diftilled: But note, that fuch as haye
tones muf firk be bruifed togetheř wich their fones.
: =


Booxl. Ofthe Art of Difäillation : 23
; A fweating Water madeof Elder-berrics. DOM


Ake of Elder-berries as many as you please, prefs ont the juice

thereof ; to every gallon thereof, put a piat of. Whitewine-
vinegars of the lees of White-wine a pint: let chemftand in a
wooden veffel which thou muft then fer in (ome warm place —
deer the fire fide for the fpace of a week,then diftil them ina hot -~


Srill, or Alembick.


The Furnace far a Balneum Mariæ, with the Alembicks-
and their Receiverss :


(Ga? SS < E


G BQ ou
a


Ve
I
SL T


As Shews the brafs "kettle full of water. =e ids sere AN
B,The cover of the kettle perforated in two places,to give pa[[age forth tothe veels,
C, A pipe or Chimney added to tbe kettle, wherein the fire ws contained to heat the-

water. f
Dy The Alembick confifting of its body aad bead. i , oret F
E; The Receivers, wheveiato the diflilled liquor ruis. : Thes ~


Ct Ske d


24 ` Ofthe Art of Diftillarion. ` BookL-
The effigies of another Balnčum Mar 2, not fe eafie, to be
removed asthe former:


A; Shews the vffel or
Copper that contains
the water.

B, The Alembick fet in:


water.


Bat left the bote
tome of the Alem-
bick being half full,
fhould float up and
down in the water,
and: fo {trike againft
jy the fides of the Ket-
tle; I have thought
good to fhew youthe


EET ee AS
=e =e SA
(7-8 ESE


A; Shews
the Veffe]
or glafs A-
L mb ck.
B, A plate
of Lead
whereog it
fiaads.
C, Strisgs
that bind
the Alem-
bick to the
plate.
D, Rings
through.
which the
firings ave
put, to fae
flea the A-
: : lembick.
3 PE eh 2 : Ta


Boor I. Of the Art of Difi lation Sc s n


In defe of a Furnace for a Balneum, yoz may wale " f
-> apot fet upon a trefoot, after this manners


An ounce or two of this witer of Elder-berries i isa very excel. -
fènt Sudorifick,and is very good in all iuc: that require neag
as alfo in Hydropical difeafes, d ee d,


k Water out of rotten Apple à id thus.


Tate as many rotten Applesas you pleafe, ruts them, and -
diftil them eicher i ina common cold-Still, or gourd glaffes i m ke.
Balneo.
This water is ati greater ufe ip feavers,and hot diftempers, dab.
the common diftilled waters of any cold Vegetables. ^
ı Itis very goodin any hot diftemper of the reins, and fharpnefs
of Urine. ^^ ?
Icis very good in the inflammations of ihe: dyes: AE.


c MA The fi mple Water of Succo i £ made thus..


Tite the hearb and roots of So , oachianse bone o mið
dle of May, twelve pounds, pownd it or cut it (mall, to which ,
pour twenty pounds of Common water, and then macerate it
s E Pues :


MS A


do | - of tbe rof Diflülatn. © Booxl :


-~ three dayes; out -of iso you may. difti eight pounds, in a


hot Still? -
a its uertit oos
It isa very celat water for the Liver, opening, drerit
attenuating, and fomewhat refrigeraring.


~The water of Fennel..


T Fennel-feeds brnifed Pee four aiid: common water
24 pound ; to which add, Tartar of common Salt 2 ounces:
macerate ir ina cold place ; then diftilit in acopper Still, with
its Refrigeratory; So have’ you both the Water and jon which-


"4 muft be feparated from the water.


In vertues.
Fennel-water is ja good Reftorative, its Diuretick, encreafeth
Milk, it cleanfeth the Breft from the abundance of evils procee-
ding from thick humours.


ede make Cinnamon waters


; dee Cinnamon erofly PEE pound;to Nh pour Rofe


water and Whitewine, of each three pound, macerate the
fame in afit place of warm dung or fuch like, as long as is ne-
ceffary (or about 14 dayes, every, day firring it) then ‘diftil the
fame in, Balnco Marie. Separate. the. firt water, which is the
Deft; ‘alfa; the fecond water, and then the third waterskeepeach
apart; the fecond being fit to be ufed inthe Menftruum for
the: Maceration ; the third, is an upprabraDle Flegm to be-
eut BAS

$1 ots vertues. ‘

"By its penetrating opening power, itremoves all Siion
ofthe inward parts; it nourifhech the natural heat, and- helpeth
digeftion ; for which reafon it is frequently ufed in the reftoring
of decayed Natures in the renewing of the Spirits and firength-
ning of the Bowels, The Dofe isa Spoonful, either per fe or fixt:


wich other things.


vile


The Acid waters of Oak» Funipers Guajacum
Box, &C. is made thus.


[Ake the Sawdult of Oak; the Rafping of Juniper, Guajacum,

' or che fmall bits of Box, diftill them in a Glafs Retort in
Sand until che matter be dry; afterwards feparate the Oyl from
the water, with filtring paper (the black oyl remaining in the
paper) rectifie. che water in Sand; either from-Colcothar, or
Seaxfalt, or its own ‘Afhes; afterwards feparate the Fleom by
Diftiflation (in Balneo Marie ) from the Acid Liquor, about .
a pare whereof, (thar which cometh laft over) is to be
kept =


(c Forthefe ufert


To diffolve Cotals and Pearl, and to extra& Tintures ; Efpe-
cally, that of Guajacum, for that it evidently helpeth thofe
that have need thereof, in Scabineffes, the French Pox, Ring-
worm, and other putrifying difeafes of the bloud. The Dofe is .
halfadram,oradram. = ` os


-- » È D 3
How to make Aqua vitz, and /pirst of wine out of Wine.


TAtk of what wine you pleafe, putit into a Copper Still, two
 7* parts of three being empty, diftil ic wich a worm ; until
no more fpiric come off, than this Spirit will ferve for the
making ofany Spirits out of Vegetables: but if chou wouldeft
-have ic ftronger, diftil it again, and half will remain behind as an
infipid flegm: and ifthou wouldeft have ic yet ftronger; ditit —
it again » for every Diftillation will leave behindone moity of
 flegm or thereabout ; So fhalt thou havea moft pure and ftrong


Spirit of wine. .


MUTARE SS RETE


Of the Art of Diftilation. Boox1 3


— 4 hot Still ;


A; Sheweth the bot-
tome which ought `
to be of Copper. -

B, The Head. :

' © Cy The barrel- filled

with cald: water. to

refrigerate and Cona

~  denfate the water
and oyi that vua
through the pipe ov
worm that i put
through it.

D, 4 pipe ef brafs or
pewter, ov rather a
worm of Tin vun-

mis. ning through the

; barrel. ker

E. The Alembick fet
in the furnace with
the fire wader ite


N $ D
Nm.


ga cM
db NUT en
LI


Hiw to make Aqua vitz out of Beer.
"Tate of ftale-ftrone-beer, orrather;tbe grounds thereof, put
Z5- dtipro-a copper Still witbia worm: difil ir gently (er other:
wife ic will make the head of tbe Still fy up)and there will'come
. -fortha weak Spirit; whichis called, low Wine : of which, when
thon haft a good quantity, thou maift diftil it again of it felf, and
— —.- there will come forth a good Agra vita. And if then diftilleft it
two or three times mores thon fhalt baveasfiropg a Spirit as ore
SS ef Wine ; and indeed, beewixt which, and the Spirit of Wine,
~~ thou fhalt perceive none or very little difference.. »
— a » x ] «i Hor. :


\


WS CUT SAISIR le i ls
>


t Pd 1


Boox L f ihe art d Difilcin, ; 29 |


How to vell ifie Spirit of Wines or Aqua vitz,


De it in Balneouncil the lak drop that comes. off be Lot,
and full of Spirit.
Notesthat every time there will remain in thebottom a quán-


. tiy as weak as water,


Note alfo, that every time thou diftillet it, when thon per-
ceivelt that a very weak water comes over, thou fhalt then end
that Dillillation. ; |


To make the Magiftery of Wine which will be one of the greateft
Cordials, ana moft odoriferons Liquor in the World. `:

" Ake goodoldrich Canary Wine, put it into a glafs-veffel

that it may fill the third part thereof, -nip it up and fet ic ina


„continual heat of Horfe-dung for the fpace of four months : thën ^
in frofty weather fer it forth into the coldeft place of the air you


can, for the {pace of a month, that it may be congealed: And fo


‘the cold will drive in the true Spirit of the Wine into the Center


thereof, and feparate it perfectly from its egm,” That: which is
congealed, caft away ; bat that which is not congealed, efteem as
che true Spirit of Wine. Circulate thisin a Pellican; with a mo.
derate heat; for the {pace of a month, and thou fhalt have the true ©
Magiflery or Spirit of Wine, which, ‘as it is moft cordial; fo alfo


, molt Balfamical exceeding all Balfoms for the cure of Wounds...


i The form j 4 Tum


T be matter muft be put in at "he i
which a[terwards muft be clofed up.


N


f tbe Art of Diflillation. — Book 1. - ©
= -` To make another Magifter) of Wines ‘that a few drops thereof foal
; turn Water into perfet Wine '


- Exc


n e


: Tåke ofthe bet Canary Wine, asmuch as you pleafe, let ie 7
-""ufland in putrefadion forty dayes,then diftibic in Balneo and
there will come forth a Spirit; and, at laf, an Oyl; feparate the
one from che other,and rectifie che Spirit. Sec che Oy! again in
putrefaction forty dayes,and then ditiil it, The feces that are left

. after the firk Diftillation, will yielda volatile Salt, which muft
be extracted without Calcination, with the flegm of che Spirit, -
purifie it well, chen impregnare che Sale with its Spirit, and di-
-geftchem ; chen add the Oyl; and digeft them together till they

‘become a red powder: which you may ufeas it is, orelfefet it in

> & cellar till.ic be diffolved into a liquor, anda few drops thereof
will do as. aboyelaid,


To make an Oyl of Wine.


Tak weak Spirit of Wine; diftil ic in a veffel of along neck,
P -~ then pouron this Spirit againupon the flegm, diftil it again;
do thisfeveral times, and you fhall fee the Oyl of the Wine
{wim on the legm; which flegm you muft feparate from the Oy!
byatunnel. ` i Sat
. If this OyL beafterward circulated for a monthjit will chereby
become moft odoriferous, and of fingular vertue, and good being
both very Cordial, and Balfamical. ;


To extraét the Spirit ont of Wine by the Spirit of Wine. :


‘Puc Spirit of Wine well rectified upon Canary or Rhenifh -
X4 Wine,ífo cautioufly that it may not mix wich, but {wim up-
onthe Wine; let them ftand- without ftiiring, the fpace of 48
hours. Then will the Spiiit,c hat is inthe Wine, rife up, and join
At felf co the Spirit that fwims on the top, which you fhall per-
ceive by the weaknefs-of the flegm, which youmuft let run out
ata tap, which muf be made in the bottom of the veffel for chat
purpofe, and fo be feparated from the Spirit, fe
ACER : 2 E k 0


- OF the Art of Difilation, a


— BooxT.
To makea very (ubtil Spirit of Wine at the firft diftilling.


Ake’ white or wheaten bread as foon as it comes forth of the.

Oven, break ic in the middle (z e.) the upper fide fromethe

lower fide, and hang ichot ina Glaís-veffel over Canary Wine,

but fo that it touch nor che Wine; then cover the yeflel, and lec

it fo ftand until the bread fwell and be fufficiently impregnated

with the Spirit of Wines which ic will attract from the Wine:

then take out that bread and put in more, till you have aconfi-. -

- derable quantity of bread thus moiftened. -Then put this bread

into a Glafs-body, and diftil it in Balzeo,and you fhall havea very
fubtile Spirit; which you may yet. rectifie by Circulation.

By Furnaces and V effels made after this infuing figure, there

may be made four vetlifications of any Spirit at once. > ~

T befe we[fels may.

either ftand.in afbesy


or in Balneo, `


The manner of Diftilling in Wooden Veffels.
. * A, Signifieth -the veffel:
N wherein. the | coppee
veffel lyeth. e i
B, Ihe copper vef el, part
of which is inthe Fur-
S nace, and part in: the
SANSA -voffel-of Wood.


NAT
Y 1
al o


SS C, The veffel of Woods
1 5 PAE “wherein the -` matter
: EZ


we mul be that is Diftil-
CA Bat ESE

D; The cooling veffet:

d wilthe worm, +

E, The Receiver,


S p PH
E = = Abe veffel flandeth. -.
Note! .


F, The Trefoot mbtvton- ——


Of the Art of Diftillation. | BookY. |

>- Note, duc the greater the copper veffel is, and the le(s che-
woodden is, the fonen will the Liquor boil. 3

. This Furnace (hows how to draw forth Spirits and Warcra
out of Ma cm and Anis) with little cott and in fort


A JAM auda büiling Velfel made of Wood.


:Note, that on: the right hand, thefe veffels have a copper vel-
fel hanging forth, which muft be fet into a Furnace, as is a-
.. bove fhewed ; and onthe left handisa Cock or Tap to let out
the water.

The veffel on the left hand is fora Balneum, the holes in the
cover thereof are either to fet in veflels over che fume of che wa-
tet, or.for the necks of the glaffes fet in the Balue to pafs


E through.


` The veffelon your: right handi is to boil water in for any ufe,
alfo to brew i in. ete.


The Spirit. 7 any Vegetable ts made. this.


Ake of what Vegetable you pleate, two ome macerate it -
in ix Gallons of Agua vite, orlow Wines, or Sack, forthe
pace of 24 hours; chen fet them be dittilled by an Alembick; or
hot Scill,puccing to every pound of the Spirit two ounces of mof
pure Sugar. }
Note, that the two firft pints. may be called the Rronger: Spi-
ritand the reft the weaker Spirit; or indeed the water, but if they
i j be


casn we av. DI RR LU


Book ofi ld. Mt F Diffilation. a ES :


be both mixed together, they will make an excellent midling
Spirit, for the former hath more of the Spirit of Wine; and the
latter mote of the vertue and odour of the Vegetable.
After chis manner may be made the Spirit of
Hearbs,
Flowers,
the DAR tof Vegetables x
Berries;
> Barks,
Rinds, and


Spices.


Nore, that Hearbs and Elawers muft be cut fmall, the ret |


bruifed. .


Jf you would make it tronger, thentakealltheforefaidSpirit, — |
andas much more Sack or low Wines, and put them upon the _


fame quantity o£frefh Vegetables, and diftil them ; repeat =
three or four times if thou | pleafeft. —.

Note alío;that the Vegetable niuft be dryed; becaufe elfe the
Spirit will not be fo good, as if otherwife.


The Form of an Alembick.. -—


A, Signifes the ve[fel which muft be
“of Copper, ia which the matter is
contained, aud ef Hi muft be fet
ever a naked

B, Sigaifies the Belly that is faftened
"to the Neck, that the Neck may the
more commodionfly be applyed to the


the upper veffel aad. lower vefet

may be fo fitted that they (ba not

=a need this Belly.

= . C The long Neck of the upper veffels
whereby the Spirit. or Water n iaig
is [omewhat cooled. :

Ds The: Head. i j

i} Ey: The veffel that cafe zii the

=: Head, into which cold: water i-con-

; tinually poured after, the heating.
F, The long Rectiver, < G, The top or Mu letting ont tbe water when it is bot.


iUos Tre


large mouth of the veffel. But it~
~ may be fo ordered that the mouth of .


eee A Se UE COUN ne S IS Re ERE T TRE IE DM RD WT Sov S ders 3-5 5 PG


O g& Ofthe iaf Difilatio. Booxl.


F
14


iim Spirit of ary Vegetable may fadainly, at any time
-of the Jear be made thus.


Take of what Hear, Flower, au or Roots you pleafe. Fili
the head of the Still therewith, then cover the month thereof -
with a coorfe Canvas and fet it on the Still, having firft put into
it, Sack orlow Wines. Then give it fire,

If at any time thou wouldft have che Spirit be of the colour of
its Vegetable,then put of the flowers thereof dryeda good quan-


tity in 1 the nofe of the Still, A


To make any Vegetable yield its Spiri quickly. ei


- Take of what Vegetables you pleafe, whether it be the feed,
flower, root, fruit, or leaves thereof, cut or bruife chem {mally
then put them into warm water, put yek or barmto them, and
cover them warm, and let them work three dayesas doth Beer,
then diftil them: and they will yield their Spirit eafily.-


To reduce the whol Hearb intoa Liquor which "my wel
be called the Effence thereof.


; Take the whole Hearb with flowers, and roots, make it very
clean: then bruife it in a Stone Morter, put it into a large Glafs
veffel, fo that two parts of three may be empty : then cover
it exceeding clofe , and let it ftand in putrefactton in a modes -
rate heat, the spats of halfa year, and it miii be all curned into:
à waren


E To makean E [fence of any Eib which being put into aGlafts


and held over a gentle fires the lively fermand Idea
of the Hearb Will appear in the shee


Take the foregoing water, and di(tiLitin a gourd: at (the.
joyntsbeing. well clofed Jin afhes, and there will come forth a
Waterand an Oil, and in the upper part of the veffel will hang a
volatile. Salt, The Oyl iens fromthe Water, and keep by. it

i 2


Y


Booxh Of the it of Difillation. ae

felf ; wich the water purifie the volatile Salt by diffolving gfiltring,
and. coagulating, The Silt being thus purified, imbibe with the
faid Oy], until ir will imbibe no more, digeft chem well together
fora month in a veffe] hermetically faled. And by this means
you fhall havea moft fubtil effence;which béing held overa gen-.
tle heat will fly up incoche Glafsyand reprefent thë- perfe& Idea

of that Vegetable whereof it is the eflence.


The true effences or rather Quintelfences of any Hearbs is made thun


When thou ha made the Waterand Oil of any Vegetable,
firft calcine (i.¢,),burn co afhes the remainder of the Hearb ; with
the Afhes make a Lye by pouring its own water thereon ; "when
thou haft.drawn our allthe firenech ofthe Ahes, chen rakelall
the Lye,being firt filtred; and vapour it away;and at che bottom -
thou fhalt find a black Salt: which thou mut take and pac into à
Crucible, and melt it in aftrong fire (covering che Crucible alf
the cime it is melting) after it 1s melted, let ic boil half an hour
_ or more, then take it out, and beat ic (mall, and fetitin a Celler
ona Marble ftone, or in a broad Glafs, and it will all be refolved
into a Liquor ; this Liquor filter, and vapour away the: humidity
till it be very dry, andas white as fnow, Then let.chis Saft ims
bibeas much of the Oil of the fame Vegetable asit can, but no
more, left thou labout in vain. Then digeft chem together till the
Oyl will not rife from the Safe, but both become a a fixed powder
melting with.an eafie heat,


To extrati the Quaintelfence of all Ve sradha:


.. Take of what Spices, Eloweis; Seeds, Hearbs, Woods: yew
pleafe, puc them into a rectified Spirit of Wine; let the Spiritex- -
tract in digeftion, till no more feces fallto the bottom; but all
their effence is gone into the Spirit of Wine, upon which, being
thus impregnated, poura flrone Spirit of Sale, and dige@ icin
Balseo till an Oyl fwim above; “which feparate with a Tunnel; of
draw of the Spirit of, Wine in. Balneo; and the Oy! will remain’
clear at the bottom, but before the Spirit of Wine is: abttracted;
zi I is bloud red, and a trme Quinteffence, "s pre 8

E 2 : Ae


E. e. fie Art of Dill. EX


An excellent E. fence of any Vegetables may be mad thas


Take of the diftilled Oyl of any Vegetable;with ic imbibe the
` bef- Manna, being very well depurated; untill ic will imbibe no


more, then diget them a month, and chou fhalt have the crue
balfom and excellent Effence of any Vegetable.


- This hath the vertues of che Vegetable, whereof i it was made, l
“but in a more eminent manner.. ;


The depuration of Manna for this u uleisa great Secret
Water or Spirit ef Manna, is made thus:

Take of the beft Manna one pare, of Nitre two parts, put them
into-an Ox Bladder, and tying ic clofe, pur it into warm water to
be ditlolved., Diftil this water in an Alembick, and. there will
come forth an infipid water, fudoiifical and laxative,

The Tintlure ef dryed Rofes, ts thus made.


Put one once of Red-Rofes dryed, in four pound of warm


. water, to which add two drams, or thereabouts, of Spirit of Vi-
triol, or Sulphur, and within three or four hours the water will


be very red; which filter or decant, and sias therein twelve |


ounces of Sugar,


So have yona true cooler ef the Livers in Fevers and other un-


` patural hears, when ic firit feizech them, i its ule is great ; ic is


alfo a great comforter of the Liver, by reafon of the Spirit of
Vitriol ; i of the Ventice,. ae. it bringeth a good di-
gelion’:

The Tinélure of Violets.


Take the odi of Violets bruifed, macerate them in their


own Water, or in the Oy! of Sugar (hereafter defcribed)’ then


prefs in, and ftrain io nnrilthe Tinéture be according co your de?


fire. You may ao. add SB of Vitiols as before in the TinGture
= ciat h


c $ r Or


TU TON T TR NER iori ESTY es et — BN.


Booki | -Ofthe Art of Difillation. 37
Or, you may put flowers inthe pipe of the Alembick, when
| you cit'il is own water, which will take a tin&ure with it

Or, you may havea bellyed pipe, between the pipe of the
Alembick and the Receiver, in which put your frefh Violet
flowers ; in the body of the Alembick put your bruifed flowers
. to diftil, which water pafling through, rhe other flowers carryeth

‘the tin&üre with it,


The Tistiure of Saffron.


It is thade wich fpirit of Winé, being powred thereon fo ó efti
until it hath attracted the whole tinéture, and that which is left
remain whitifh : Fil erthetin&ure; and abftra& he Spiri; of
Wine, witha gentle heat in Balneo Maria. ;


; dts ufe,

eet hath various and excellent faculties, and wonderfully res
` frefheth and reftoreth the Spirits, efpecially in-fwooning fits,
ifone cedes thereof be given inbsoth or white wine.


The T intluvé of Khubarb. |


TELLUS


/


Take Moncks-Rhubarb cut in pieces, one ounce, pour thereon _


the Oyl of bitter Almonds, about three fingers high; or four
` ooncés; ferin the heat ofthe Sun a Philofophical month, org2
diyes. and fo the Oyltakesthe Effenceof the Rubarb to its felf;
then prefs it; an ‘to that which is exprefled; add fpirit of Wine
rectified, and leave itfor fome dayes in Balneo Maries fo the
fpirit of Wine doch attra& unto ic the whole Effence of the


Rhubarb; then put the remaining Rhubarb again with more.


‘Opl; to digef until it betinged; and again extra& the Tin&ure
with fpirit of Wine; which repere fo ofen tll che Rhubaib5ield
no moretincture : Then dittil off half the tinged (pit of Wine,

which récurn again and again diflil off halt, which work 'epeat
four t: mes, then at lalt diftil off che whole. Thenis the Tin&ure
brought over,per Alembicum with the fpirit of Wine. Afterwards.
you muft fep»rate it, and bring itto be lik: hony, or Re form of

a Balfum,in Balneo Vaperefo.
F 3. : Ics


NOH VEA bu eet ged 7e TI


P » | . Of inde of Dipiiltaion, - oat E
- . Its Doíeis ro or 12 drops in fome Conferve or Convenient
‘Liquor. Sees


casa oo The Tintura of Sugar _.


Take white Sugar pul verifed, one pound, put ir in aglafs-body
with two fpoonfuls of ditlilled Vinegar, digeft it upon n hor afhes
for 6 hours; then pour thereon re&ified . Agna Vae, that it be
two fingers above i it, digeft it untilit be tinged ; then decane of
E: the tinged Spirit, and pour on more, until it will extract no
|" moie tincture ; then diftil off the AZen/trnnm in Balneo Maria,
j ' -and the Tinéture or Effence will remain red in the bortom,

which ought to be circulated with Cordial Waters,


; 2 The Tinttare of Salt of yin.


Take the puret Salt of Tartar, that hath been prepared by of-
ten Calcinations, Solutions;Coagulations, and Fufions;as.much
as you pleafe, put it'in a firong Crucible, and melt it fo long up-

- oncoals, until is change from a 2 greenifh colour to a blew, and -
be fo fharp, that a lirle: Quantity thereof laid on the tongue;
burnech it like fire. Then put it into a Glafs-body, and pour
thereon, by little and little, fo much Spirit of Wine, tifl it be

: three fingers high above the matter, fer in the cold for an hour,

t - . thettfet icin a fand farnáceyand lecic gently boyl, until che fpiric -

be well Tinged; which feparate; and put on more; until all che
Tin&ure be extra&ted x: "Afterwards diftil offthe fpiric of Wine,
and fo will the cin&ure remain in the bottom redas bloud,and of

- a ey Piet favour, SHV EAD anu

E [dre afe. ty ideis:
` The dofe is from 5) bs to 8 drops in 'White-wine; or opening

broth; to provoke Urine, and expel che reliques of. the French __


“pox; and other inverterare difeafes; Its very good alfo in asy..


Hypocondriack diftempers ; it openerh all kind. of. Obfttuétir
ons, and they that ule AMENS it. aya di sie n laxative
and open, ity He yaya eats) ote -

awed alt dori sn


i TS


BooxT - -of the Ari of Difillation = = 39.
Tho > Cie 0yl F the Hearb or Flower of any
Vegetable, & made this. . VETE MAE

Take of the hearb ot. flower dryed; one isa of Spina was
ter cvrenty four pints, diftil them in a great Alembick, wich its
cooler-or copper Still wirh a. worm paffing through a veflel of
cold water. Let the Oy! that is drawn with ché Water be fepara-

-ted with a Tunnel or feparating Glafs, and let the Waer that! is
feparated be kept fora new dittillation.

Note, thatif this Water beufed two or three times in the
drawing of the Oil, ic will be an excellent water of that Vegeta-
ble from which it is diftilled, and asgood as moft that : fhall =
drawn any other way.

After the fame manner are made Oyls of the diy aad OF

Orenses, z
Citrons, y
x. Lemons,-, .

But note;thir thefe Rinds mutt be frem; and (the: iiwang White.

nels being feparated) be bruifed. Sade


TT


~The oyl commonly called the Spiri a Reis


‘Take of Damask, or red Rofes, being frei : as many ds "yeh
pleafe,infufe chem in as much warm Water? às is fufficient for the
fpace of twenty fourhours. Then (train and'ptefs them, and re-
peat the infufton feveral times with preffing, until the liquor be»
. come fully impregnated, which then muft be diftilledinan Aleni-
bick with a refrigeratory or Copper Still with a worm, let the
Spirit which fwims on the Water be feparated, and the water
kept for a new infuon.. _

This kind of Spirit may be made by broiing the Rofes with:
Salt; or laying a lane of Rofes and another of Salt, and fo keeping
them half a year ormore, which then muft be diftilled in as much
Common-water, or Rofe-warer asis fufiicient. ~~


m yis


iik. ER AIRE ETC UNIES SUA EE ATE OA RT Pus: o iat LY


; 40 | T B | 0f the Art of Difillation. Boox I : 3


Oyls are e made ont of feeds TD


` Take of what feeds you pleafe, bruifed, two vetta of fpring-


- water, twenty pints; lec chem be macerated for the {pace of 24


hours, and chen be diftilled ina Copper Still with a worm, or
Alembick with its refrigerating. The oyl extracted. with the |


|. Water, being feparated with a tunnel, keep the water for a new


Difüllatiop. | .

| This water after three or four diftilations, is a very excellent
water, and better then is drawn any way out of that Vegetable
whereof thefe are feeds ; 1 mean for vertue, thopgh not alwayes
for (mell.

After che fame manner are made Oyls out of Spices, and aro-
matical woods, $


-Ojls are made out of Berries thus.


-Take of what Berries you pleafe, being beth, 45 pound,bruife
them,and put them into a wooden velfel with 12 pints of fpring-


. water, and a pound of the ftrongeft leaven; let chem be putina == ^


celler ‘(the veffel being clofe topped) for the fpace of three
months, then let them be diftilled in an Alembick, or Copper
Still wich their refrigeratory, with as much fpring water as is fuf-
ficient.. After the feparation of the Oyl, let che water be kept
for anew Difüllation.. Note, that the water being ufedin two
of three Diftillations, isa very: excellent water, and full a the
sertue of the Berries.


Oyl ts made ott ofany [olid Wood thus.


Take of what Wood you pleafe, made into grofls powder, as


- muchas you will,let ic be put inro.a Retort, and |diftilledin fand.


The Oyl which rft di Ails,as being the thinner, and (weeter,mutt
be kept a part; which with rectify ing with much water yet maybe
made more pleafant ; the acid w iter or Spirit; which in diftilling
comes forth, being fepazated.; which alfo- (being rectified from
the flegi with the hear ofa Balneum ) may be kept for nfe, be- .


‘ing fail of the vertue of the wood, . After


J


Boon]. Ofthe Art of Difillation. ^— ^ 4i
| Afterthe fame manner are made the Oyl and Spirit of Tartar;


but thus.much note, that both are more pure and pleafant, being
. z o
made out of the Cryftals, than out of the crude Tartar. — -<


To make a moft excellent Oy! out of any Wood, or Gums)
in a fhort time, without much coffe


Take of what wood you pleafe,or Gum, bruifed fmall; put it
into a veflel fit for it,then pour on fo much of fpirit of Salt as will
cover your matter, then {et-itin Sand with an Alembick, make
the fpirit boyl; fo all the Oy! flyeth over wich a little phlegm;
for, the fpirit of Salt, by its fharpnefs; freeth the Oyl, fo that it
flyeth over very eafily. dis
-~ > The fpirit of Salt being rectified may ferve again,


To make Vegetables yield their Oyl eafily.


Difiil them, being firft bruifed, in falt water for Salt freeth
the Oyl from its body; Let them firt be macerated three or
four dayes in the faid water. :


The [pirit of Turpentine ts made thus.


- Take of cleer Turpentine, as much as you pleafe, putitin a
Copper-Still with its Refrigerarory, near full ; fo fhall you di-
Rill a fpirit which will fwim onthe water, which you may reĝi-
fie in Balneo Marie, and by often diftillations, exalt ic to the-
height of fpirit of Wine. E


Another more excelent way.


Take of fimple Venice Turpentine, as muchas you pleafe,
diftill it per (e; in à gentle Balneo Vaporofo, having very well en- .
clofed all the Joynts; and chat fpirit will diftil fo very (übtil,that
it will vapour away in ones hand: Out of one pound of Turpen-.
tine you will fcarce have half an ounce, The other part thereof
keep for other ufes, :

This Spirit is an excellent Remedy in the Gonorrhea and is à

G notable -


42 ` Ofthedrtof Diflillatio. Booki. -
notable Diuretick ; itcleanfeth;itripenerh Impoflhumes; iris — |
Narcotick, and equalleth the vertnes ofthe true Balfam,


(0  Oylor Spirit of Turpentine ts made thus.
Take of Venice Turpentine, as much as you pleafe, of Spring-
water four times as much, let them be put into an Alembick, or -

` copper-Stilt with its refrigeratory,then put fire under it : fo there
will diftil a thin white Oyl like water, andin the bottom of the
yeflel will remaina hard gum called Colophonia, which is cal«
led boyled Turpentine : That white Oyl.may be better and freer
from the fmell of the fire if it be drawn in: Balneo, witha gourd, -
and glafs head, .
Common Oy! Olive may be diftilled after chis manner,andbe ~
' — * made very pleafant, and {weet, alfo moft unctuous things, as
Sperma Ceti, Storax liquid, and alfo many Gums,


Another way to make the Oyl of Turpentine,


Take the matter chat is left.in che Diftillation of the Spirit of
Turpentine (fo that the fpirit be not drawn with too ftronga _
fire): And diftil ic per fe ina glafs Retort, in AfhesorSand; fo — |
fhall you have firk a yellow Oyl, called, The true Oyl of Turpen- |
tine; then a thick and red Oyl, called, The Balfam of Turpen-
tine; Then there remains in the bortom.of the Retort, the Colg-

/ phonia, improperly fo. called, the former matter being properly
Colophonia, this beingfo very black and dry. If you dicet che Oy!
ib Balneo Maria, it will take away its evil Savour.

Its virtues.

Ithealeth, ic diffo]vetbit openeth,cleanfech, and comforreth,
and may be outwardly ufedin fead of a true Balfam; it may alfo
be.ufed in all. wounds incurable and {tincking Ulcers, Boyls ,
Fractures, Contra&ures, refrigerated members; Chilblains, ec»
But it is not alwayes to be ufed per fe, or 21one ; but there is fur-

ther required, that it be conveniently mixed with other-chings
fit for the cwe intended,


yi


et RA VERT]


Ofthe Art of Difillation, 43


- Oylof Gums, Refines, fat and oyly things may
fol - be drawn thus. Lae


Booxl,


/ Take of either of chefe which you pleafe; being melted, a
pound ; mix it wich three pound of the powder of tiles, or un-
flakedlime; put them into a Retort, and extract an Oyb which

. With plenty of water may be rectified,

Nore,- that the water from whence the Oyl is feparated, is of
-excellent vertüe, according to the nature of the matter from
whence it is drawn, ; l pu


Oylof Champhire is made thus,


+ Take of Camphire fliced thin, as much as you pleafe; put it in-
to à double quantity of Agua fortis, or fpirit of Wine, let che
glafs)having a narrow neck,be fet by the fire, or on fand or afhes,
the {pace of five or fix hours, fhaking the glaís every half hour,

. and the Camphire will all be diflolved, and {wim on the 44454
fortis, ot fpirit of Wine, like an Oyl. ; z
Note, that íf you feparate ip it will all be hard. again prefent-
ly, but not other wife; Je


Ansther way to make Oyi of Camphirey that it [ball git.
i be reduced again.” >:


. Take of Camıphire powdered, as much as you pleafe, put ic in-
to a glaffe like a Urinal, put npon it another urinal-glafs inver-
ted, the joynts being clofe fhutten;{ublime ic inafhes, inverting
thofe urinals fo.often till the Camphire be turned into a0 Oyle
then circulate it for che fpace of a month; and it will be fo fubrle, '
that ic will all prefently vapour away.in the air, if the olafs be
open. . ; HOM. i


Another Way to make Oyi of Camphire.


Take two ounces of Camphires diffolve it in four otinces of
pure Oyl Olive; then put chem into four pints of fair water,
BUS G2 - diftit


X


-— 7


ee Sk NEUE


gg. Ost iiin.


MAS ee ees eres


T RES


- Booxl, |


difil themall together in aglafs gourd, either in ofhes or Balneo —
- and there will diftil both Water, and Oyl, which feparate and —


month, - Pas


keep by it felf, : ae
All thefe kinds of Oyl of Camphire are very good againít pu- _
trefaction, fits of the Mother, paffions of the heart, ec. A few
drops thereof may be taken in any liquor, or the breft be anoin-
tedtherewith: Alfo the fume thereof may be taken in at che


po Ol of Sugar.
Take of the beft white Sugar-candy, imbibe it with the beft


— fpirit of Wine ten times; after every time drying it again, then


hang it in a white filken bag in a moift cellar, overa glafs veffel,,

that ic may diflolve, and drop into ic’*Evaporate the water

in Baígto; and inthe bottom will the Oyl remain. '
This is very excellent in all diftempers of the Lungs.


Oy of Sage.
Take a great quantity of Sage, fet it in the fhade for tWo or.


three weeks, ina large Glafs-veffel; clofe fhut; then diflil it in:
a Copper-Scil, with its Refrigeratory ; and there have yon the


. water, which youmay re&tifie : and alfo the yellow:Oyl. Ic


is good in all difeafes of the ‘Nerves, the Palfe, Apoplexie;Con-
vullions, and fuch like,


Oyl of Amber is made thus,


Take of white Amber; one part, of the powder of flints cat


'cined»or the powder of tiles; two parts; mingle them) and put


themintoa Rétort, and diflil them in Sand; The Oyt which:
is white and clear, which firft diftilled off , keep by it felf, ĉon-


- tipning the diftillationas long as any Oyl diftils off,


. Thefalt of Amber, which adberes to the neck of the Retort.
within fide,being gathered, let be purified by folution, filtration, -
and coagulation, according to ait, and be kept forufe; ^


After `


Boox d «ofthe the ui mr puo. : 4$.


After che difillation i is ended, and all be cold, let there be a


.. rectification and feparation of the clear Oyl from the foerid Oyl,
X after chis manner; Pur the diftilled Liquors into a elafs-body,
"and diflil it in Bathe AMariay, witha fire ttrong enough, and ficit


the Plegm, or {piritual part; will diftil-over; and alfo the Golden
Oyl {wimming on that Liquor, which is then to be feparared.
witha feparacing-elafs, and kept for its ufe. But the flinking
blackifh Oyl remains i in the body; take that. and keep | it -by it


i E as a Balfom of Amber.


Its vertues.


The yellow Oyl of Amber was once efteemed Sacred for its


excellent Vertues; which either by it felf, or compounded with -


other things, it is effectual inthe Epilepfie, Apoplexie, Melan-


_ €holy, Cramp; Vertigo; Peltilence, Stone, Cold defluxions in —
the head, Palpitation “of the heart, forfuch that are troubled in .
— Mind, in the Jaundies, difficulty of Breathing, difficulty of


üüney /hard Travel, Strangulation of the Womb, retention of
the Menftruums, the white Efax in Women, Worms and Fevers,
The Dofe is from two grains to fonr grains. But the Balfom of
Amber is feldom ufed inwardly, unlefs i it be one or two grains
in the Suffocation ofthe Matrix: Bur externally its ufed to
fmell to, aeaintt the Suffocation of the Matrix; or elfe for Em--
platters i ih clofing of wounds, and ftanching of bloud; for the
fame purpofes ferves che yellow Oyl.
After the fame manner may be made Oyls ont of any Gums:
which may be powdered. ;


Oyl of Myrrhe is made thus.


Take of Myrrhe bruifed; or Bay-falt, of each fix pound, jac
them beliffol ved in fixty pints of fpring-water, and be diftilled


in an Alembick, or Copper Stilaccording: to Art,


onsec ao e i c e


Cam aie Df the Art of Diftillation.


EE


b.


. good fo long as otherwife,


—- Spirit of Wine, until they begin to be Oyly; then warm them


 Booxl 3


| Oylf Myrrbe per deliqniumsor by diffolutionzia made thus.


` Take Hen-egs, boyled hard, and cut in the middle length-


wayes;take out the yelks, tben fill up the hollow half way with
powder of Myrrhe, and joyn the parts together again, binding
them with a thread, and fo fet them upon a grate betwixt two
platters, in a cold moift place;fo the liquor of the Myrrhe diffol-
ved will diftil into the lower platter.


Oylof Tartar pet deliquium (1.) £y diflolution.


_ Take of the beft Tartar, calcined white; according to Art ; put
it inro a Cotten bag, hang ic in the cellar or fome moik place;
putting under a Receiver.


Oyles by cxpreffion are made thus.


Take of what things you pleafe, fuch as will afford an Oyl by
expreffion, bruife them,then put chem into a bag; and prefs chem
ftrongly, putting a veffe] under to receive the O yl.

Note, that they mutt ftand in the prefs fome hours, becaufe
the Oyl dropsby little and little.

- Note alfo; chat if you warm them before you put chem into
the prefs, they will yield more Oyl, but then it will: not keep
After this manner are made Oyls of
Nutmegs,
‘Mace,
` _ Almonds, 4
‘Linfeed, and fuch fike,


A vomiting, and purging oyl made by expreffiona —
Take of che Berries of Ebulus or Dwarfe Elder, as many


as you pleafe, let them be dryed but not over. much, then
bruife chem, and in bruiGing them, moiften them with the beft


by


Rare Ree tre ae


"BookL Ofthe Art of Diftillation -——— Az
by the fire, and prefs forth che Oyl, and feritin the Sin to be
purified, 5 E

Ten drops of this Oyl taken inwardly worketh upward and
downw: rd; andis very good againft the Dropfie,and all waterifh
difeafes. 2 |

The belly being therewith anointed, is made thereby foluble, .

Any part that is much pained wich the Gout,or any fuch grief,
is prefently eafed by being anointed with this Oyl.


Oylof Fafmine is made thus.


Take of flowers of Jafmine, as many as you pleafe, put them
into. as much fweet mature Oyl,as you pleafe ; put them into a
glafs.clofe topt, and fet them into the Sun to be infufed for the
fpace of twenty dayes; then take them our, and frain the Oyl
from the flowers: and ifthou woulde{thave the Oy! yet flropger;
putin new flowers, and doas before,

This isa pleafant perfume, ard being mixt with Oyls and .
Oincments, givesthem a grateful fmell. It is alfo ufed in the
- perfuming of Leather.,

After this manner may be made Oy! of any flowers : but be-
canfe I fhall keep my felf co the Art of Diftillation only, I (hall
not fo far digrefs as to {peak of thefe kinds.of Oyls; only I
thought geodto fet down the Oil of Jafmine becanfe by reafon
of its fragrapcy it hath fome analogy with Chymical Oyls thae
are mace by Diftillation. ;


To make any Oyb vr Water) per defcenfum..


Take an eaithen gourd, fill ic full with wood or hearbs, or
what you pleafe, being cuc {mall, then invert it (5. e, ) turn it up-
fide: down, and fet itinthe furnace, lute ic well thereunto, chen
fet another gourd of earth under it, with a wider mouth, that
the uppermoit may go into it, before you put che one into the
other, youmuft have a little veffel or inftrument of Tin with .
brims: round about on the top, by which ic muft hang into
the lower gourd, che body thereof being 2 or 3 inches deep, :
and full of holes, that the Cil or Water may drop rhrorgh, and

not.


4% “Of the Art of Dippillacion.


not the Vegetable it felf, Into this Inllrument; being firft fec in~.


ESIS


Booki:


to the lower gourd,put the mouth of the upper gourd; then make
thy fire on thetop, and keep it burning as long as any liquor
will drop,


The figure of this Furnace ts thus.


— A Si ignifies the Gourd containing the matter to be diflilled.


B, T he Furnace containing the Coals, fo that they (urround the upper
Gourd. T

C, The ower Gourd or Recipient fet upon [lraw-rings.

D, The velfelof Tin With holes, and brims which muft be fet in the


Recipient.
“How to make an Oy! and Water out of Seot,


This may be dittilfed per deftenfum; or by Retort, as thus, viz,
Take of the bett Soor (which fhines like jear;) All with ira Glafs


Retort coated, orearthen Retort to che Neck, diftil/ic witha -


ftrong fire, by degresinro a large Receiver, and there will come
forth a yellowifh Spirit witha black Oyl, which thou maift fe-
parate and dige??. .


- How


SEDE


ee Set ERR ge ee Ne ee c1


Booxl Of the Areof Diftilation, = 4g
| “How-to rettifieS, sinite


You muh fet them in the fun in glaffes well topped, and half
filled, being fet in fand to the third part oftheir height, that the
water waxing hot by the heat of the fun, may feparaté it fel£
fromthe fleem mixed therewith,w will be performed in twelve

' orfifteen. dayes. There is another better way co dothis, which
isto diflil them again in Ba/neo with a gentle fire; orif you will; .
pucthem into a Retort furnifhed with its Réceiver,and fet them 1
upon cryftal or iron bowls,or in an iron morter, dite&tly oppofite sd

. tothe beams of the fun, as you may learn by thefe enluing figss. |


A Retort with its receiver ^ Another Retort vii its reco-
handing upon Cryftal : ver [Landing in a Marble or
bowlssinft oppofste to the Iron Mortar, direttly oppo-
Sun-beams, fiteto the Sup. —


AZ
ae z -


Ay Shews the Retort. A, Shews dia Retort. :
B, The Receiver. B; T be Marble or Irop Mortar. i
C, The Cryflal Bowls. ; C, The Receiver.

š : H How


= 6 "n


‘How to reétifie all finking, thick black Oils that are made by H
Retort, and to take away their fiuk,


T


‘the Art of Diftiltion. Boork |


"Take Oyl of Amber, or any fuch ftinking Oyl, put it into a
glaís Retort, the fourth part only being full, pour onic drop by
drop the fpirit of Salt; (or any other acid Spirit) and they will
boyl together; and when (o much of the fpirit is poured on,that
it boyleth no. more, then ceafe and diftil ic. Firft cometh over a
flinking water; then a clear white, well fmelling Oyl, and after


-thata yellow. Oyl, which is indifferent good : but the fpirit of


Salt hath loft its fharpnefs : the volatile Sale of the Oyl remain-


. eth coagulated wiih the fpirit ofSalr, and is black, and cafteth


like fale Armoniack;and hath no fmell being füblimed from it,
Now the reafon of all this is, becaufe the volatile Salt of the —
Oyl, which is the caufe ofthe fink thereof, is fixed by the acid


 fpirit ofthe Salt: for acid Spirits;and volatile Salts, are contrary


the one to the other, and fpirit of Urine, or any volatile falc,will


, precipitate any metal as well as fale of Tartar.


Thefe Oyls will remain clear, and have far more vertue, than
the ordinary fort of Oylshave, — — UM =
As for common ordinary diftilled Oyls, they need not, if they
be well feparated fromthe Water with which they were diftilled,
any Rectifying at all; and if you go about to rectifie them, you


- wiil lofe a good part of them, and make that which remainsnot ~ *


at all the better. But ifthere be any better than another for re-
&ifying of them, itis by digetlion, by which means there will be
a feparation of what is flegmarick, which you may feparate after-
wards, and by this means you fhall lofe none of the Oyls, -


——-—— C


Fr — 9


acp
e


SESS TR
Eoo o d
Of compound Waters, Oyls, aud § pirits. -


: BUORKET E


l A diffolving Menfirunm.
Te Cypr us Turpentine, and the bek fpirit of Wine; of


. each two pound ; dittil them in a Gla{s-gourd eitherin

Balueo or Athes. Separate che Oyl from the Spirit with

a tunnel or feparating gla{s, diftil the Spirit again, and fo often

until it favour no more of the Oylof Turpentine, and then it is
fufficientl y. prepared,

This Menftruom diffolvés any hard Rones prefently, and ex-


tras the tincture of Coral.


A Glafi-Gourd adn Head.


H 2 | Another .


52 - Of the Art of Diftillation.  Booxll. .—
Another diffolving Menfiruum, or acetum Philofophicum. V


Take Hony, Salt melted, of eacha pound, of the firongeft Spi-
rit of Vinegar, two poend ; digeft chem for the {pace of a fort-
‘night, or more; then diftil them in Afhes, cohobate the Liquor
upon the feces three or four times, then rectifie the Spirit.
| Note, that they muft be done in a large Glafs-gourd.
.. "Thisis ofthe fame vertue as the former, if not more power--
fall, : n


i
ta


Another di folvin g Menfiruum


Take of the beft re&ified fpirit of Wine, with which imbibe
the ftrongeft unflaked Lime; until they be made into a paft ; then
put them into a Glafs-courd,and diftil off the fpiritin Afhes: This
Spirit;pour on more frefh Lime, and do as before ; do this three
or four times, and thon fhalt have a very fubtile Spirit able to dif-
folve moft things, and to extra& the vertue out of them,


Paracelfus his Elixir Sabrilitatz.


"Take Oyl Olive, Honey; rectified fpirit of Wine, of each a
pint, diftil chem all together in afhes, then feparate all the flegm
from the Oyls,which will be diftinguifhed by many colours, put
-all chefe colours intoa Pellican,and add to them the third part. of
the Effence of Balm,and Sallendine, digeft them for the fpace.of

a month; Then keepit for nfe. :
This Liquor is fo fubtile that it penetratech every thing,-


' Qfque-Batb, or Irib Aqua vites is made thus.


à Takea Gallon of fmal! Aqua vita, put it into a Glafs-veffel ;
puttherero a quart of Canary Sack, two pound of Railins of
_ the Sun ftoned but noc wafhed, two ounces of Dates floned,
and the white skins thereof pulled out, two ounces of Cinna-
- mon groffely bruifed, four good Nutmegs bruifed, an ounce of
the beft Englifh Licorifh fliced, and bruifed; ftop the vcffels t
í : €ioje;


$


EET T E 623 eii Mn Me Ted 0 V^ «e


Boox lI.

let the Liquor run through a bagcalled Manica Biperati made
of white Cotten,
. This Liquor is commonly ufed in fuifeits 5 being” a good
Stomach water,


Atos Caleflis, is made thus


Take of Cinnamon Rofemary


Cloves Xu Marjoram

Nutmegs Mints :

Ginger ; Penny-royal

Ledoary : - Stechados

- Galangal the flowers of Elder

Long-Pepper Rofes red

Citron-pill  white-
| Spicknard: ofthe leaves of Scabious
| Lignum-aloes . Rue
| Cububs: . the leffer dee ee
i Cardamums `- . Egrnimony.
Í _, Calamus aromaticus- Centory-
| ` Germander Fumitary

Ground-pine . Pimpernel- — ^

Mace Sow-thiflle

White Frankincenfe _ Eye-bright RET.

Tormentil: Mayden-hair. ;

Hermodaétyls - Endive "V

. the pith of Dwarf-elder Red Saunders
| Juniper berries Aloes, of each two ounces;
Bay berries - Pure Amber -


the feeds and flowers. the beft Rhubarb, of each two


of Motherwort -. Dramss;:
the feeds of Smallage  dryed Figs-
Fennel. Raifns of the Sun:
Anife Dates :{toned ;
the leayes-of Sorrel’, Sweet Almonds `
Sage Grains of the Pine; of each an)
= Fel. "Wort. ounce, |
SIE H3 ; QF.


“Ofte Art of Dipillation. d "m


clofe, and let them ipfule in a cold place fix or eight ae then


^ M f the Art W Difilaton. Booxlf. |
| Ofthe be " Aqua vite, to the quantity of them all; of the bett |
hard Sugara pound, cf white Honey halfa pound, then add :
"the root of Gentian ^ therootof Briony -
flowers of Rofemary — Sowbread
Pepperwort; - Wormwood) of each half 4 an
ounce.
Now before thefe are diftilled, quench gold, beige made red
hot, oftentimes in the forefaid water; put therein oriental Pearls
beaten fmall, an ounce; and chen dittil ibafter twenty four hours -
infufion,
This is a very Cordial water, ‘good againft faintings and in-
fection, :


Aqua Imperialis, is made thus. »


Take of tha tind of Citrons dryed
Oranges; ]
Nutmeg
Cloves. å
Cinnamon, of each two ounces; —
the roots of Flower-de-luce
oe Cyprus
Calamus aromaticus
Zedoary
" Galingal
Ginger, ofeach halfa pound,
Of T tops of Lavender +
Rofemary, ofeach two handful 5
the leaves of the Bay-tree =
Marjoram i c. ac
> Balm 0d]
~~ Mints
Sage
Thyme Ed A
flower of Rofes white ; !
Damask, of each haf an handful j*
` Rofe-water four pints
the beft White: -wine a gallop,
Bruife


i le aa Rah a PU eA D


Boor I. Ofthe Art of Difällation — 55, E à


Bruife what mufi be brnifed, then infufe them all twenty four
hours, after which diftil chem,
"Tis is of the fame vertue. as the former.


Aqua Mirabilin is made thus.


< Fake of Cloves . Nutmegs
Galingal - Ginger, sof eacha Dram; :
Cububs the juice of Salendine, halfa pint,
Mace ` Spirit of Wine a pint, ;
Cardamoms Whire-Wine three pints.


Infufe all thefe twenty four hours,and fos difil off two pints
* by an Alembick.

` This water is m good againft wind in the Stomach and
Head,


Dr. Es es is made pas


' Take a gallon of Gafcoin wine Sage Te


Ginger - Red Mints
Galingale ‘Red Rofes 0
Cinnamon Thyme

Nutmegs — Pellitory

Grains Rofemary
Annifeeds . Wild Thyme
Fennel feeds |; Camomil


Carroway feeds. Lavender, ofeach a hand-


5 ~of eacha dram. full.
Beat the Spices fmall, and bruife the Bib letting them ma-


cerate twelve hours, ftirring them now and then, diftil- chem by


an Alembick or Copper- Still with its reftigeratory; keep the firk
pint by it felf, and the fecond by it felf.

Note, that the fri pint will be che hotter, but the fecond the
ftronger ofthe ingredients.

This Water is well known to comfort all the Principal:
parts, ;


-*


- Afamus


That


TENA
RN A a ca E JUAN hl Re re Pa


4


£^ - of the Art of Diftillation,


4 (amens: Surfer Water. E


Take of red Poppy-cakes (after the Water hath been diftilled
from chem in a cold Still) not over dryed,two pound ; pour upon
them ofthe Water of red Poppy; ajgallon and half; Canary-
Wine three pints ; add to them of Coriander-feeds brüifed, four
ounces, of Dill feed bruifed two-ounces, of Cloves bruifed half
an ounce, of Nutmegs fliced an ounce, of Rofemary a - handful,
three Orenges cut in the middle; difil them in a hot Still ; to the
Water put the juice of fix Orenges, and hang in it half an ounce
of Nucmegs fliced, and as much Cinamon bruifed, two drams of
Cloves, a handful of Rofemary cut. (mall; {weet Fennel-feeds |
bruifedan ounce, of Raifins in the Sun {toned half a pound, being
all putintoa bag, which may be hangedinthe Water (the vef- .
fell being clofe ftopt) the fpace ofa month, and then be taken
out, and caft away, the Liquor thereof being firit preffed out into
the forefaid Water. : ? i

This Water is of wonderful yertue in Surfets, and Plurifies,


compofeth the Spirits, caufech reft, helpeth dige(tien if two or.


three- or four ounces.thereof bedrunk, andthe patient. compofe


himfelf torek.


A Peétoral Water.


-Biflil green Hyfop in a cold Still till you have a gallon and
half of che Water, to this put four handful of dryed Hyfop, a
handful of Rue, as much of Rofemary, and Horehound, Elecam-
pany-root bruifed, and of ‘Horfe-radifh-roor, bruifed, of each
four ounces, of.Tobacco in the leaf three ounces, Annis-feed
brüifed two ounces, two quarts of Canary-wine, lec them all
ftand in digeflion two dayes, chen difil them, and in the Water
that is diftilled put halfa pound of Raifins of the fun fioned, of
Licorifh two ounces, {weet Fennel-feeds biuifed two ounces
anda half, Ginger fliced an ounce and athalf, and lecchem be in-
fufed in Frégido chefpace of cen dayes, chen take them out.

This Water {weetned with Sugar-candy and. drunk to the
quantity of three or four ounces twice in.a day, is very am

: - or


2


T. es =
BooxlL G


s


[MS


M


D


E


f
l
l
:


Boox IL


for thofe that are ptifical, it frengthneth the Lungs , attenu-
ates thick flegm, opens obftructions, andis very good to com-
fort the (tomack, . -


A very excellent Water againft the Worms.


Take of Worm-feed bruifed eight ounces, the fhavings of
Harts-horn two ounces, of Peach-flowers dryed an ounce, of
Aloes bruifed half an ounce, pour on thefe the water of Tanfie,
Rue; Peach-flowers,and of Worm-wood of eacha pint and half;
let. themybeing put into a glafs veflel, be digefted the {pace of
three dayes, then diftill chem; cohobate this Water three
times,


This Water is very excellent againft the Worms; it may be `


given from half an ounce to three ounces, according to the age
of che patient. iret Sy?


A Water againft the Convulfions, :


Take of Ros Vstrioli (which is that water that is diftilled from
Vitrio! in the calcining thereof) two quarts, in this put of Rue
a handful, of Juniper-berries bruifed an ounce, of Bay-berries
bruifed half an onnce, Piony-berries bruifed fix drams, Cam-
phire two drams, Rhubarb fliced an ounce ;:digeft thefe fout


dayesin a temperate Balneo, then diftil them in a glafs veffel -
in afhes, and there will come over a water of no {ngall ver-


cue. à


It cures Convulfions, in children efpecially; ithelps alfo the


Vertigo,the Hyfterical paffion, and Epilepfie; it is very excellent
againít all offenfive vapours, and wind that annoyes the head and
ftomach. M

Jemay be taken from two dramsto two ounces. -


As H; Iydropical »ater.


Take of Worm. wood, Broom-bloffoms, of each alikeiquane
tity, bruife chem, and mix with them fome leaven, and lét
them ftand in fermentation in a cold place, the {pace of a

ccr Week;


"Oft RAP = Y.


t game ge.
E ww of pe dn " Diffillatio.. Boox Il.
F- week ; then difil chem ina Cold-Still, ti they be very dry: —
Take a gallon of this water, and half a gallon of the Spirit of

Urine, pour chem upon two pound of dryed Broom-blofloms, '

| ^. halfa pound of Horfe-radifh-roors dryed; three ounces of the ~
| * bet Rhubarb fliced, two ounces of fweet Fennel-feed bruifed,
andan ounce and half o. Nutmegs : let them digeft a week, be-
ing put into a glafs veflel, in a temperate Balseo; "then prefs che
liquor hard from the feces; pnt this liquor in the faid veffet a-

: gain and to it put three ounces of {weet Fennel-feeds bruifed,
Licorifh fliced two ounces, digeft them in a gentle heat the -
Ipace ofa week, then pour it oftfrom the feces; and keepitclofe —
Ilopt. `

This water being drank from the quantity of an ounce to four
ounces every morning, andat four of che clock in the afternoon;
doth feldom fail in curing the Dropfie; it ftrengtheneth alfo the
Liver, is very good againit gravel in the back, | ftone, cures che

- - Scurvy, Gour, and fach difeafes as proceed from the heed
and ebivosion: ofthe Liver.


me


SY


A water againft the Golick


Take of Anifeed three ounces LR
Cummin-feed three drams UR PRSE
.5Cinramon half anoune  — j
, Mace ` oos "Tini:
*& Gloves ^ vo :


Nutmeg, of each a dram,
E Galangal three drams,
Calamus Aromaticus, dryed, half a in ounce,
The dryed rind of Oranges, two ounces ^ — ^ 1
Bayberries, half an ounce,
Let allthefe, being bruifed, be macerated in fix pints af Malla.
ge -wine 48 Hours, then be diftilled in Balneo, till all be dry.
This Water being drank to the quantity of an ounce or two
at à time» doth eafe the gripings of the belly, and Romack


very much, Mec:


A Water agant the Vertigo, and Convulfiens.


Take of Black- cherries bruifed with their kernels, a gallon, of


the flowers of Lavander three handful, half an ounce “of white
Muftard-feed brnifed, mix thefe together ; then put fome ferment
‘to chem, and let chem ftand clofe covered, the fpace of a week,
then difil them in Badneo till all be dry.
"This Water being drank to the quantity of an ounce or twe
or three, doth much relieve the weaknefs of the head, and helps


the Vertigo thereof, as alfo ftrengthens the finews, ‘and expels .


windinefs out of the head and Romach,
A compound Water of Burre-root ca ing [weat.


"E the root of the great Burre, frefh;

Swallow. wort; frefh,
: the middle rind of the root of the Afh-tree, ofeach two
` pound; cut chem fmall, and infufe them 24/honrs: in the beft


, White-wine, and Rue vinegar, of each five pints, then diftil chem —


in Balneo till all be dry, putto the Water as much of the Spirit
of Sulphur Per Campanam, as Will giveic a pleafant acidity, and
to évery pint ofthe water put a fcruple and half of Camphire
cut fmall, and cyed up ina bag, which fiy Continually hang in
the water.

This wasa famous water in Germany agang the Plague , petti-
fential and Epidemical difeafes ; it caufeth fweat wonderfully, if


two or three ounces thereof be drank, andthe patient compofe :


himfelf to {we i
eAnother excellent Sedeifick and e V ater.


Take of the beft Spirit of Wine a gallon; i
Andromachus Treakle, fixe ounces; :
Myrrhe, two ounces;
The roots of Colts-foot 3 diree ounces,
Sperma Citi
T erra figillata, of each half an ounce; ipu
I2 The


7 ae ee P WITHIN S EN


Book ij Of the Art of Diftillation. T gn :


-do  . OfthedrtofDiflilation. Boor Il,


The root of Swallow- -WOrt; an ounce,


Dittany - 2 ene i


Pimpernel
— Valerisn-root; of each two drams
: Camphire;a dram ;
Mix allthefe together in a glafs veffel; and let them ftand
- clofe Ropt che fpace of eight dayes i in the Sun,
` Letche Patient drink of this a fpoopful or two» and compofe
hinnfelf. to fweat,


Dr. Burges his Plague water.
Take three pints of Mufcadine, and boy! init Sage, and Rue,
-of eacha handful, till à pint be wafted ; then ftrainit ; and fec it
over the fire again, put thereto a dram of long- Pepper, Ginger,

. and Nutmeg, of each half an ounce; being all bruifed together : :
. then boy! them a little, and put thereto half an ounce of Andro-


` machuüs-treakle, and three drams of Mithridate,and a quarter of


-a pint of rhe beít Angelica-water,
This Water (which, as faith che Author, muft be kept as your
life, and above allearthly trea(ure) muft be takento the quan-
tity of a fpoonful or two morning and evening, if you be already


infected, and fweat thereupon : it you be not infected, afpoon- `


ful is fufficient; half in the morning and half at night; All the
Plague-time, under God (faith the Author) truíft to this, for


thére was never man, woman, or child, chat failed of their ex. ©


pectation i in taking of it ; This is alfo ot the fame efficacy not
only againft the Plague, but Pox, Meaftles; Surfets, eo


Crollius bis Treakle Water Camphorated.


Take of Andromachus Treakle, five ounces).
- The bet Myrrhe, two-onnces, and half,
The beft Saffron, halfan ounce,
Camphire, two drams :


Mix them together, then pour upon them ten ounces of the-


beft fpirit of Wine; and let them ftand 2 4 hours in a warm place
then diftil them in Balneo with a gradual fire, cohobate thefpi-
ric three times, This


D SR


- priare Liquor.


an wt


Boon i. x ofie Wf Difillations 6i


This fpirit caufeth feat wonderfully, and refifts all manner
of infection,
Ir may be taken from a dram to an ounce in fome appro=


EA diftiled Treakle me


Take. of the roots of Biftort
Gentian
Angelica .
: Tormentil
. Pimpernel, of each ten drams,
Bay-berries
Juniper-berries, of each an ounce,
Nutmeg, five drams,
The fhavings of Saflafras, two ounces;
Zedoary, half. a dram;
White Sanders, three drams,
The leaves of Rue
Wormwood
- Scordium, of each half a handful;
The flowers of Wall-flower: F :
: Buglofs, of eacha handful and half;
Andromachus Treakle
Mithridate, of each fix drams...

Infuse them all in three inis of thebeft White-wine vinegar,
the {pace of eight dayes in Frigido in glafs veffels;then diftil them
in Balneo.

This Spirit is very good to prevent them that are free, from
infe&ion, and thofe that are already infected, from the danger .


«thereof, if two or three fpoonful thereof betaken once in a day
‘with fweating after for thofe thac:are infe&ed, but without fweas.


ting for others. ;


Tp e Ap.


62 . ~ Ofthe Art of Diftillation. | Boox Il.
An excellent Water againft the Stonein the K Hired :
Take ofthe middle rind of the root of Afh bruifed,2 pound,
Juniper-berries bruifed, three pound,


Venice. turpentine that is very pure, two pona and
half.


Put thefe into twelve pints of Spring-water in a glafs vef- .


fell well clofed, and there let them patrifie in horfe- “dung for
the. {pace of three moneths, then diftill them in afhes, “and
there will come forth an Oyl anda Water; feparate the one
from the other.

Ten or twelve drops ofthis Oyl being sie every morning
in four or fix fpoonfuls of the faid water, diflolves the gravel and
ftone in the ORI moft wonderfully.


D ade. Water for the fame afe.


Take the j juyce of Raddifh, Lemmons, of each a à pound xt
half: Waters of Betony, Tanfey, Saxifrage, and Vervin, of each
a pint ; Hydromel, and Malmefey, of each two pound : In thefe
Liquors mixed together, infufe for the fpace of four or five dayes.
ina gentle Balico, Juniper. berries, ripe and newly gathered, be-
ing bruifedsthree ounces, the feed of Gromel, Bur- -dock,Radith,
Saxifrage, Nettles, Onyons, Annife and Fennel, ofeach an ounce
and half, the four cold feeds, the feed of great Mallows, of each
three drams ; ; the Calx of Eggs-fhels, Cinkinion, of each three
drams, of Camphire two drams; let ali be well Rrained and di-
'fülled in afhes.

“<. Two ounces of this Water taken every morning doth won-


\derfully cleanfe the Kidnies, provoke Urine,and expel the (tone, .


*éfpecially i£ youcalcine “the feces and extract the falt thereof
with the (aid water.


Tomake an excellent W cund-water.
"Take Plantain, Rib-wort; Bone-wort, wild Angelica, Red-


mints, Betony, Egtimony, Sanace Blew- bottles, White-bottles,
$ : ^... Scabius;


JIOR


-Boox I. `- Ofthe Art of Diftillation. 6
Scabinus, DanciyonAvens Hone uckle. leaves,Bramble-buds;
Hawthorn-buds, and leaves; Mugwort, Dafie-roors, leaves, acd
flowers; Wormwood ,Southernwood, of each one handful : Boyl
all chefe in a pottle of White-wine, ~and as much Spring-water,
. tilkone half be walted ; and when 1 itis thus boyled, {train ic
from. the hearbs, and put toit half a pound of Honey, and let
it boyl a little after ; then put ic into bottles, and deep d it for
your ufe.

Note, that thefe hearbs muft be gathered in p only;
but you may keep them dry, and make your. water at any
time.

This Water is very famous in many Counties, and it hath
done fuch cures in curing outward and inward Wounds, Im-
poftumes, and Uleers, chat you would fcarce believe it, if I
fhould recite them to. you: alfo. it is very good to healafore
mouth.

The Patient muft take three or four fpoonfuls thereof
morning and evening , and in a fhort time he fhall find eafe,
and indeed a cure; unles he be fo far declined as nothing almoft
can recover him, -

‘Ifthe wound be outward it muft be wafhed therewith, and
tinnen clothes wet in the fame be appl yed thereto.


Dr. Mathias his Palfie waters made thus.


Take of Lavender flowers, a gallon ; pour upon them of


the beft Spi: it of Wine,three gallons: the veftel being clofe (top-
ped, let them be macerated together in the Sun. for the fpace.


of fix dayes, thendiftil them in an Alembick wih its refrige-


ratory, then.
Take the flowers of Sage iot
Rofemary
Betony, of each a handful.
. Borage
Buglofs
Lilly of the vally :
io ‘Cowflips, ofeach two handfuls, ^
let all che flowers be frefh, and feafonably gathered, iid mas.
e $e  cerated.


=


IR


s


64  . Ofihe Art of Diftillation. Booxll.—
cerated ín a gallon of the beft Spiri;s of Wine, and mixed yich; Pe
the aforefaid: fpirit of Lavender; adding then s

che leayes of Balm ; ‘
Motherwore m
Orange tree; newly gathered Em
the flowers of Stechados
Oranges,
Bay-berries, of each an ounce, P.
After 4 convenient digeftion; let them be diftilled again, then. j
-add the outward rinds of Citrons,
the feed of Piony husked, of each fix drams
Cinnamon
Nutmegs
Mace
Cardamums
Cububs
Of Yellow-Sanders; of each half an ounce;
Lignum Aloes, one dram)
the beft Jujubs, che kernels taken ont, half a pound.
Let them be digefted for the {pace of fix weeks,then ftrainand ` |
pirer the: Liquor, to which add of prepared Pearl two drams.
Prepared Emrald,a fcruple;
Amber Gryfe
‘Musk | S
Saffron
Red Rofes
Sanders, ofeach an ounces
Yellow Sanders
Rinds Citrons dryed, of eacha dram,
Let all thefe fpecies be tyedin a filken bag, and hanged i inthe
aforefaid. Spirit.


A Scobbucical wire or a Compound-Wwater of Horfee
Radifb, is made thus.


Take di leaves of both forts of Scurvy-grafs, being made very ~
_ clean;of each fix pound : let thefe be broifed, and the juyce pref-


fed forth, to pet add =


Juyce


Be) TI HER


BOOI! Ofthe Ldreof Diii. — 5 :


Juice of Brook-line; > —
rm P Minenatadlenpobexch half a und.
ofthe beft Whice Wine eight pints,
twelvewhole Lemmons cut, i
of che fte(h tootsof Briony four pounds,
Horfe-radifh 2 pound,
of the barkof Winteran half a pound,
of Nutmegs four ounces, :
""Xet them be rhacerared three days, and diftilled.
| Three or four fpoonfuls of this water taken twice ina day;
cures the Scurvy prefently. .


Spirit of Capris vade tha | ga e


Take of freh Caftoreun two RE
; flowers of Lavender frefh half an ome,
- Sage i3 E
Rofemary; bf eachewo dinis £
Cinnamon three ge Jd
. Mace, ; = Se. ye
Cloves; of each a. damy shies pe
the belt rectified Spirit of Wine three jung
Let them bedigefted in a Glafs, (two patts of three being
. empty ) ftopt cloie with a Bladder, and Cork; two days in warm
afhes ; then diftil the Spirit in Badneo, and keep» it In'a eláfs« clofe


ftopt, If you would make it fttonget;' take a pint ‘of tt this Spirit. -


and an ounce of che powder of Caforülip, put them into a elafs;
and diget them in acold place for the pace of ten days, and
then Rain out the Spirit.

ThisSpirit is very good agdal fits of the Mother palftions of
the heart which arife from vapours, &c.
5 Bexoar Water is made thus. VRAC Rate

;Tue ofthe leaves of the greater Sallandine ; coger Lg
the roots tuereof, rhrse handiulsanda haff, —

Of Rue two hindfnis,
Scordinm four handful, ©) 05009

K - Dictany.


pL ao rtt ss [Heg AI uiia Sa e a -—
" T TONS T 2


66 OfWeAnofDifiluin; ^ Booxlh


xir dd Carduus, of each a handful and a half. -
ay £ TheRoots of Zedoary.
<: Angelica, of each three drams..
The ontward rind of Citrons, `
Lemmons, of each fix drams.
The flower of Wall-gilly-flower,an ounce and half,
Red-rofes,
The lefler Centory,of each two drams.
Cinnamon, vee se Sd:
Cloves, of each three drams..
Andromachus his Treacle three ounces, .-
Mithridate an ounce and half,
~- Camphire two fcruples,
Trochifces of Vipers two ounces,
Mace two drams,
Lignum-Aloes halfan ounce,.
`- Yellow Sanders a dram and half,
The feeds of Carduus an ounce».
he d Citrons fix drams.

_ Cut thofe things that are to be cut ; and let.them be maces.
rated three days in thebeft Spirit of Wine, and Mofcadine,
of each three pints and half, Vinegar of Wall-gilly-flowers,and
the juice of Lemmons, of each a pint ; let them be diftilled in a.
glazed veffelin Balneo.

After half the liquor is diftilled off, let that which remains in,
the veffel be ftreined through a linnen cloth, and vapoured, away.
to the thicknefs of Honey, which may be called

j A Bezoard extrato

>. This Water is.a great Cordial;and good againft any. Infeion..


= — TomakeaSpecifical Sudorifich, .


Take of Ginger a pound, Long-pepper, and Black-pepper, of
each half an ounce , of Casdamoms three. drams ,  of- Grains-an -
;. ounce y powder them, and put them intoa glafs with half an
.. ounce of thebe(t Camphire, diftilled Vinegar two pound; diget

hem a moneth ; then feparate the Vinegar by rre
aie “ 3 ; mutt .


Boox II. - Of the the ule ri of Diflilaion. a : 67


mult putrefie amoneth; and then be circulated for the fpace ofa.


week;then filterit; and thou haft as powerful a Sudorifick as ever
was or can be made,


- The dofe is from a.dram to half: anounce, and to be drank i ip


a dráughr of Potfet-drink,
“Treakle-Water i ís made dd;


Take of dict juyce of the green fhales of Walnuts four pound,
the juyce of Rue three pints,
Carduus, |
Mary-gold,
Balm, of each 2, pints.
The root of Bucter-burre frefh, a d and half,
Burre,
Angelica, |
Malter-wort fre(h, of each halta a pound, -
The leaves of Scordium 4. handful,
Old Andromachus Treakle,
Mithridate; ofeach 8. ounces.
. The beft Canarie, 12. pints,
- The fharpeft Vinegar 6, pints. —
The juyce of Lemmons 2. pints. .
Digeft chem two days in Horfe-dung, the veffel being clofe
ftopped ; then diftil chem in fand,


- Aqia Maria is made thusy ^


Take of Sugar candid one pound,
Canatie Wine 6. ‘ounces,
“~~ Rofe-water 4. ounces.
- Make ofthefe a fyrup, and boy] ic well, t to which adde
1 of Aqua-Imperialis 2. pints)
- Amber-griefe,
. Musk, ofeach 18, grains, -
~~ Saffron 15. grains,


 Xellow-Sandess "nfufed in Mua Imperiali P "E


drams,


-—


: dn Balori ;


“soot, ofeach bruifed 2. parts, ó


gud T n te dreof ifia 'Boosil.


Th portau commonly called HyffricaL Waters is made thus À
."Takeof dini jüyce of the:root: lof: Briony: 4. pound,
. leaves of Rue,
: Mugwort, ofeach i pound, -
Savimdryed 3. handful; ;
Mother-worr, j ; a
| cudNeppes : I -
Penny-royall, ar Ae 2: sandal D.
Garden- Bafil
Cretenfian-Dittany;of cadis handful and half, -
~- TheRindofyellow- Oranges; froth, 4. ounces;
| ^c Myrrhe:2. ounces, [i230
Caftroreuman ounce; |... r :
The beft Canarie Wine.1,2. pints, b
Let ithem-be Migehss fonrHayes ina oe sevi, then diftil B n.


ed vomitring Me tater imade p gir


Take of the beft Tobacco in leaves, cut fall, 4.ounces, Squils 4
2, ounces, Nutmegs fliced half an onnce, put thefe into: 3. pints:
af Spring-water,,a pinte of. White-Wine-vinegar , ; diftil shemi in
~ a hot Scillor Alembick.

If thou wouldeft have it ftzonger, ‘thou mail put ‘this: water on
_ freth Ingredients and.difüil it again.

A little quanticy of this water isa iot dre, and effectual Vo-
~ mit, and may be taken from, the.eldeft.to;the. youngefhif fo-be-
you proportion the quantity to shestrengchs of the Patient. |

bese my MU it eatin er Sygupo ifyou pleafe. i


sti 1 } 3o 23 ISM
eA Vinisirg nr mabedj Platerus,


Take’ green Walnnts ganhere ‘about, Midiammer , Radifh-
giBilled Wine-vineger 4. parts -
- digell them. days, then difilkcheptin Zalar 7


This being e to the JUNE of enon, or 3.cauferh T


Sag vomiting, EO d «dis


\


Bo oox. - -Ofthe drt of: Difilaio:


4 diftilled 4 ater that pial wiskont. ta pain er gri. j


aG of Scammony an ounce; Hermodidtyls 2, Qunces ; othe!
feeds ‘of Broom, of lefler. Spurge,. of Dwarf-elders of each
half ap ounce;the juyce of Dwart-eldar,of wild Affes.Cucumber;
of black Hellebore, the frefh flower of Elder, of each an ounce `
and;half, Polypodium 6.05nces;: o£ Sene 3. ounces ; pudo im

$. ounces, common diftilled Water 6 pints. . 00 ;

Tetallrhefe bebrnifed 5. and infnfed i in the water 24. honis; ,
then be diliilled in Balneo. o o 3

This Water may be giyen from 2 drams to 3 ounces, and it.
.purgeth all manner of humors; opens all obftructions and is
plea(ant to be taken; andthey whofe ftomachs loach alliother ;
Phyfick, may take:this without any offence,

Afteritis diftilled chere may be hanged a litelebag : of Spices
in it, asal(oitmay ‘befiveetped with Sugar, orany opening DE i
pup. | ;

E [pecifical Daun againft the Toothach - Doy


« Take of Oil of Cloves well rectified half anounce 5 init dif-
folve half a drani of Camphite , add co them of the [Spirit of
Turpentine four times rectified 5 in which half a dum of eam p
hath. been infufes; half anounce: iisi Lr

! A dropor two of chis Liquor; put: into a hollow: 00th: with
fome Lint, gafeth the: Toothcach iiss aes bi : ^ $ b 5yisis


visde Ter Waser uf: dendi: appo ae asec t: ibo.


: called the deriex of Balfom g oylqge
Také Tutpéntine, . - sS Datnes tcalagtes ad.
Toa Ae. s

Olibanum,of each five ounces 5 Ss o viowalt sd; ls
_ Cinnamon,


- Lilly-leaves, of each half a am omes; E
Peppet-wort, - et
Balfom, of each two Onfiteg.o iN

Mix them well together) andcdittil them (coi to Arc


ET A | iz K- 3 es in s nE


No,


yO Of the Artof Dif.  Boox ll.


in a gentle fire, and there will come a clear water , good in -


all difeafes ; wherein the Balfom is ufually applyed.
1. It cakes away the Pimples in.the face, 2. It cakes away all


. blemííhesin the eyes, 3. It comforteth a cold hzad, and help-
.ettithe memorarivefaculty, — 4. Ic. retardeth, gray-hairs, 5. It
- Cleareth the Spirits, 6. Ic (trengtheneth the digeftive faculty.


7. Ichealeth the Nerves, 8. Ic "preventeth the Palhe. 9. Ic
expelleth all wind out of the body, and giveth a good favour to


-the whole body.


When you fee no more white and yellow water, to afcend
the Alembick, or Diftil; then increafe the firea litcle , until it
leave diftilling, This water keep apart ; for it is of infinite- vete
tues, which Lam not able to comprehend,

a. It purgeth the wholebody; andpreferveth it from putre-
faction, like the true natural Bilfom, 2. After a manis dead,


- ic admitteth not of any corruption, | 3. Ic cureth Leprofie, 4. It


is goodin the Epilepfie, $.Itisgood in an old deafne(s. 6. Ic.
removerh Rheume, 7-lc fuffereth not gray-hairs, 8.1c prefervech
youth, cc.


When this wacer hath done diftilling, then increafe the fire, _


_and chere will diftil a red water.

1, f you put one drop of this water in your hand, it willim-
mediately penetrate it, whereby ic fheweth its vercuesin Cone
xra&ures. 2,It is a very good remedy in the Falling-ficknels,if che
inward parts are alfo comforted with convenient medicins. 3. It


preferveth e dead body for everfrom corruption. 4. It taketh |


away forgerfulne{s,proceeding from any infirmity; and comfort-
eth che Memory, ja Ic curech the Crook-back, if ic be HEME
applyed


— An excellent Sanative Oyl for Wounds and Burften-belies


Take the flowers of Rofemary,
Borrage,
: Bug! lois.
Camomile;
Violets, .
Rofes, of each a. handful.
$teca-


m


.. Book II,
- Stzcados, or Cotten-weed, halfa handful, -
Bay-leaves,
Marjoram),
Sage, of each half a handful,
Let them be cut very (mall, and let them fand two days with
. the beft Wine, then difülit. In this diftifled Liquor put ~
Turpentine half a pound, —
of the beft Frankincenfe,
Mattick,
Bdellium,
Anacardium, of each 2. An
Beat them together, and macerate them in the faid water for
two days » then difil them together, andadd to it-
Nutmegs,
Gilly-flowers,
Cubebs; s
Mace,
Ginger,
Cardamoms, of each 2 S mia
Lignum Aloes, halfa dram. -
Amber,
Musk, of each halfa fcruple.


Powder them all; and digeft chem in the sforetaid water in


heat for two days, then diftilchem ; and at laft encreafe the


fire; and yon will have a moft excellent Oyl, which yon may.


ufe with very profperous fuccefs, ..


A notable Water againft the Kat tpe iaei :
Take Joniper-berries fix ounces, -
Zedoary;
Gallingal, of each fix diams,-
- Saffron 2. drams, .

Layender,

Sage, of each one —
Powder of Gems, DD
Diacakoreum; of eacha dram andan halfe —

; pr ther for a moneth in a Glafs with Nue. three times


refi


X* 1 E


Ofthe Art of Diflillation.. Een ü DA


Ofthe Art of Difil ion.


i redifedis che: ‘Sun; then'diftilic in: an Alembick , the dofe is
evening and morning half an Egg-fhel full,


7 4 moft Excellóté Water veviving the natural and fee
volonr, ae pene spe health ef E


Take Cihalfion


Gilly-flowers SET Dato y
Ginger zd a SN Pe s
Saffron n


4 UT Cabebse. ^ ME
“Ol 9) Gains of Parádi(ey of on two dram; e
- The Powdet of Did-margaritum :
b. of. Gems
|— 5 2... ef Pearls; of each one dram;
E the fhels of Grains
Zedoary
Galingal, of each a'dram and a half;
Lavender £ ; :
Bay-berries cs ce sas m U
Bay-leaves
; Musk 3 ; d
AL ISOC Abers of each half a ‘drain. 3
"Pówdér them,and add Rofe-warer z pounds, Hou recti- ij
fied 4 pounds, ptit'chiem in a Glafs veffel well clofed, and digeft:
them in the Sun;or other convenient heat 14.days,then difül it,”
Drink this Water gvery morning, and wafh your face with it,


i CET Anni Epilprick Water. AA


EC Take Venice Turpentine 18, ounces, . {>
Sane Male-Frankincenfe 4 6imces, 9 77^ 77

E _ »Lignum-Paridife 6. dams.

E Vv choife Matick | POSU


E - « Rolemary-flowers
* Nn tmeges E ur
Ne E
fils athe tbh, ‘OF: ‘edd one ovite a Se ee

= Qticntal Safir on five dr Anus i E à T Fennel d ;


Lu


Book cb “Of the. hi Pili T7 n


- Fennel-feeds;
Bay-berries, of each one ounce,
the beft fpirit of Wine eight pounds.
Let them ftand together four days and then be diftilled per
"Alembicum.
How effe&ual this Water is inthefe following A ler
them teflifie , that for thefe many years have made- experience
thereof, to their great benefit, viz.


.. Forthofethat are out of their mind, andi in all difeafes RE fiche


head; ag the Epilepfie
Apoplexy haisas hae g
Palfie
Vertigo
TN Trembling
' Lethargy, "and fuch HA a6. mal iod « as
outwardly adminiftred,


4 Water effettual in any difeafes in tho Foynts, wif mien
cold Rhenmes > or Any other CAES ie

jj ;D0065?t3] ,.6

Take Hungarian Vitriol 2. pounds, W SUDEN s
White Tartar one ounce and a half,. Du
Mummy d pe Ia

Mattick ; . 503153


;Frankincenfe 1135 23 3E dac


Myrrhe, of each 2 ounces, LM Re
Ammoniack . woes ES
^ . Bdellium uM RUIT

Qpopanax, ofeach one ounce anda half, , aii
Hony 2. pound;
rectified fpirit of Wine 6. pound...

- Dil itin Balnes Marie, and cohobate it oe times.

Its ufe is, heat it a little in a filver Spoon; and anoint he


place grieved with old linnen rags dipped in it» `
The oji of the Phiten Heb common 56 Sit i
3 o Tels pue fine Wax 12s ounces,


cfr nie


. Of the Art of Diftillation. Boox I, —
Venice-Turpentine 18, ounces, E
Benjamin 2. drams,
rectified Spirit of Wine 30. ounces,

Common Afhes 6, ounces.
Mixthem, and diftil them in a Retort according to Att, and
there will firft come the Phlegm, then che Water; and laftly, che


Oyl; which yon shall feparate every one apart, and fo keep.
them for thefe ufes ;


The Phlegm being applyed to painful Ulcers, immediately —


mitigateth the pain,

The Water is good againft the Peftilence, andalío the Pin.
and Web in the Eye.

But the Oyl is of infinite vertues,.

1. If any one be wounded, let him anoint the wound with
‘this Oyl, and take every morning and evening three drops in: |
warm Wine, and he fhail be ‘cured without any other medi-
cine,

2. If any one be troubled with the Strangury, or obfira&ion
of the Urin, lechimtake three or four drops. >

3, It is good againít the pain of. the fide, or : Plenrifie;

4. It killeth Worms.

5. Itremoveth the Cough and Rheins’

. 6. Ic isa remedy not to be neglected in Fevers..

` 7. Itcomforteth all che weaker parts.

8, It per thofe fick of the Pettilence, even toa Miracle.


Oleum Benedittums. ^


Take the whites of Eggs boyled 12. ounces,
Venice-Turpentine I4, ounces, - —
Myrthe- 3. ounces; zu
. ?Cámplüre 2. ounces: ‘
°° Mixchem,and.diftit thém ina Glas i éco with a gentle fire;
encteafing the fire by degrees, and the Oyl will difit.


I. This Oyl wonderfully cureth the wounds ofthe head, con- - :


folidarethic, and taketh away the: paths, and preferveth ic from
fubfequent fymptems.


2. In other perifhing and commenting wounds, injettwoor —


three


Book He : | Of the Art if Difillation: : Bs


cure che wound,
‘An Artificial Ballot, |


Take Turpentine 2, pound,

. Oyl of Bays 4. ounces,
Galbanum 3. ounces,
Gum-Arabick 4, ounces,
Olibanum
Myrthe
Gum-Hedera, of eich 3, Ounces;
Lignum-Aloes
Galingal
Gilly-fowers _ iA
the Greater and Leffer- Kom Y
Cinnamon -
Nutmegs
Centaury
Ginger
White-Dittany, of each 1. ounce;

Musk
Ambergreife, of each 2 drams;
of Rectified Spirit of Wine 6, pound,

Difil chem by Retort, and there will come a White water
witha yellow Oyl, affoon as it inclineth to à blacknefs,increafe
the fire until no more proceed,

T. This water is good for the Sight; and prefetveth the
Members. | x

2, Ic breaketh the Stone; and prevoketh Urine, —

3. It cureth all wounds ; if chey are wafhed therewich; and
Tow moiftned with it applyed.

4. It is good inthe Sciatica and Gont.

s. It taketh away the Congh, and ftoppeth ib

9. It eafeth all painsin an inftant,


Le : The


EXJE


giis


three drops, andit immediately mitigateth che pains, and will


m a


Ee v LS. NR. A eo PRESE MEO S ERE TUO UTR TT S NR IAN M wey eee EY TIS
T. ? 7 eRe NEN MEET 7 ny wi
i


76. OftbiartofDifitaims Books d


Le The 0l is efettual againft S


1, Baldnefs, - "at
2, Poyfonous corroding Ulcers.
3. The Leprofie.
4. It preferveth the Brain and Stomach |
5$. It plainly refolveth all Tumors.
6, kc curech. Quartane-Agues,


A Componnded Oyl aguinft the Megrim.


‘Take Rue one handful; boylit ina pound of Oy of Olives,in:


‘anew pot for half an hour, then put it in a Retort, to which
add Venice-Turpentine 12, ounces; Colophonia 4. ounces: Di-
fil them in Sand, feparate rhe fith water chat comes, being of


no Worth; thenincreafethefirs by degrees , and the Oyl "will:


difil, which keep by it felf:. which you muft ufe at the time of


the Fit,warm a little of it at the fire, and with Cotton moiflned: ——
in ic, anoint the Fore-head and Temp e the parts grieved, . i


when the Patient i is lying down...
A Compoimd Oyl for the Sufraton of the Matris,


T E ye Powder of Rusia little eyes gt one tomé,
/ 2:535: €aftoreum 25 ounces, . C
Olibanum
Myrrthe, ofeach-4-ounces; -
Linfeed Oyl one pound anda half,


Let them be digefted 4. days , in Ventre Eqaino, Or füch fke m


- heat 5: afterwards diftilit by a Retort in.a clofe Reverberatory,
- With this Eiuorsngane the “al morning ane eentagi v viot


em cet} fuer
07i i


1
JÉp t : i : ;
d AE {tf rot fe os Oe T a
i d ; dB A [i281 we
esl sak ETE MC Muwilw wh s 4:
j '


MW TTS


|. Beori.


ix Of the Art of Diftillation. © ; pL ME


. 2 >


 SESUERSSRUSCUSCUNUN TES
cu. acd |


` Of MINER ALS.


B 0-0 K IL


X d t iJ andi PE m URN
Spirit of Salt à made thus,


Pee Ake of the beft Bay-falt as much as you
4 pleafe, lecicbediffolved in Spring-wa-
‘ter, and filtred ; mix with this Brine
in a Coppet-veffel,. of the powder of
Bricks or Tiles, cwice or thrice as much
as the Salt, before its diffolucion, was in
weight; let the water vapour away ^
over the fire (continually firring of it)
s ; until itbe dry; Then put this Powder.
| into a Glafs Retort well luted, or an Earthen Retort, and
e put into a Furnace (a large Receiver joyned to it accord-
Ing tö Ar) “then eive fireto it by-degreés, until it will bear
: an.open fire, for the fpace of 12, hours, Thou fhalt haye a
"very-acid'Oyl'ot'Spirit in the Receiver : That Liquorbeing put
iioa Retotcin'Sand, may berectified'by the-vapouring! away ——
. of the flegm ;then keep it for ufe in a Glafs very welloftopr,
that no air going o oo Y vocet ends 39527


i Spiti of Saltis very good im Feayers putrid, as in Hydro. -
py - jd a


; semis. AR S.


Zè Ofthe Areof Diffiation, Box ly


A Rotors and ifs Receiver before thzy be fet on work,


e&


s Take one part of Salt ; and three parts of powder of Bricks
or Tiles, se} mixthem together, and put them into a Retort;
.. either of Glafs, or Earth; to which put fireas before. ;
After this manner you may make Oyl, or Spirit of
; Nicre : :
Salt Gem
: Alum.


vem


Note


Note, that thefe Salts muft firft be calcined, which is done by
exhaling their flegm. gt


How to make a Whiteacidy aud a ved volatile Spirit,out of
Salt- Nitre. ` tat =


Take two parts of Allome; and one of Salt-Nitre; make
them both into powder, mix them well together, and caít into
the Still a little and a little thereof , as above in che making
of other fpirits hath been taught; and there cometh over an acid


- fpirit; cogecher with the volatile fpirit; and fo many pounds ag
there is of the materials, which are to be caftin, fo many pounds.


of water mult be putinto the Receiver ; to the end that the vo- |
latile fpirits may fo much the better be caught and faved. And
when the diftillation is performed, the two fpirits may be fepa-
rated by che means of a gentle reCtificationmade in Balneo s and —
you muft take eood heed, that you get the volatile fpirit pure,

by changing the Receiver ina good time , fo that no flegm be
mixed with the red fpiritwhereby it will be weakened and turn
white. The mark whereby you may perceive, whether the fpi-
ricfor the flegm doth go forth, isthis: when the volatile fpirit
goeth, then the Receiver looketh of a deep red : and afterward
whenthe flegm doth come, the Receiver looks white again :
and laftly, when the heavy,acide fpiric goeth, thenthe Receiver
to be red again; but not fo as it was; when the firft volatile fpirit
came over,


Of the ufe of the ved volatile Spirit.


. This Volatile Spirit ( which being quite freed from flegm
remaineth: alwayes red; and doth loek like blound;) in all occa-
fions may be accounted like in vertue unto the former fulphu-
reous fpirits ; efpecially in extinguifhing of inflammations, and
Gangrenes,it isa great treafure, the clothes being dipt init; and `
Jaid upon the grieved place: Alfo ic-goeth almoft beyond ali
‘other medicines in the Eryfipelaes and Colick : andif there be
any congealed blond in che body ( which came by a fall. or
blow) this fpirit outwardly applyed with fuch waters as are
EK ri proper `


— A" TEN AT VIRES YER


Boox III. i Ofthe Art of Diftillation,. 789 |


Bò . Of the Art of Diflillatin. Boox I. —
proper for the gtief, and alfo taken inwardly, doth diffolve and -
expel ic: and being mingled with the volatile fpirit of Urine ig —
doth yield a wonderful kind of Sale, as hereafter (hall be taught, . ~~


T be ufe of the white acid Spirit of Salt- -Nitre.


The heavy and corrofive Spirits of Salt-Nicre is not much ufed ~

in Phyfick, though ir be found almoft inal Apothecaries fhops,
and there is kept for fuch ufe, as above hath been mentioned in :
the fpirit of Vitriol ; viz. to make their conferves and cooling-
drinkstaft fowtifh. Alfo it is ufed by fome in the Colick ; butit ^

-is too great a corrofive;and too grofs to be ufed for that purpofe ; $3
and althongh i its Corrofivenefs may be mitigated in fome mea-
fure ;- by adding of water thereto, yet in goodnefs and vertue it
is not comparable at all to the volatile fpirit > but is as far diffe- .
rent from it, as black from white, and therefore the otheris fit-
tetto beufedin Phyfick; butthisin dealing with metals and

minerals, for to reduce chem into vitriols; calxes » flores, and

crocus, . Í


© TotursS ali-piteri into a Water by a meer digeftion.


Take of Salt-peter powdered very (mall, with ic fill che fourth
part of-a Bolc-head, clofeic well, and let it ftand in the heat of
afhes, or fand, the fpace of fix weeks, and you fhall fee good
part of it turned into water : Continue ic. in the faid heat, till ic
be all diffolved,

Thisisof incomparable ufe in Feavers , and againft Worms;
orany putrefaction | in the body, and indeed, a moft rare fecret,


Spirit of Sali- - Armoniack. wate ie


© Diffolye Sale» Armoniack in diftilled Spirit of Urine over a
moderare heat ; in chis Spirir let Bricks beaten into (mall pieces,
aiid: made red-hot be quenched, till they haye imbibed all-the
Pe) ‘then hes dittillacion i ina Retort in fand, or ina naked

Cc.

ae Spirit is of greater Areneth then that of other Salts:


a WTCC WENNS ta) ET


E Bookll: Ofthe Art of Dipilacon, j de


Another way,


Take of Salt-Armoniack one part, o£ Lapis Calaminaris two
parts, beac chem (mall and mix chem well cogecher ; and difit
them ia a Gla(s Retort in Sand ; firit'wich a very gentle fire,and
the flegm will come over; which (i£ you will have your Spirit
very ftrong) youmay take away: : Then increafe the fire by
degrees; aad you have the true Spirit of Sale Armoniack, very
powerful and effectual in many operations. 5 > 7


ae d Oyl or Spirit of Vitriol made thus. ieu


Take o£ Hungarian, or the beft Engli(h Vittiol as much as
you pleafe, let itbe melted inan earthen veffe] glazed, witha
toft fire, chac all che moifture may exhale, continually firring
ofi it; until it be brought into a yellow powder, which muft be
putinto a Glafs Retort well luted;oranearthen Retort that will
endure the fire: Fit alarge Receiver to the Retort, and clofe `
the joynts well together; then giveit fire'by degrees, till the fe»
cond day; then. make the "ftrongett heat you can, till che Receiver
(which before was dark wich fumes)be clear again;let che liquor
that is diftilled off be pur into a liccle Retort, “and the flegm be
drawn off in (and; fo willthe Oyl be re&ified, which. is moft
ftreng, and ponderous, and mult be kept hy it fel. "Hes
Many call that flegm, which is drawn off i in re&ifying the
Spirit of Vicriol.

This Oyl(or Spirit Jis very excellent in piti Feavers;refifting
putrefadtion ; alfo itopens all obftructions, and is. Nu. diureti-


cal.
A ridasd heavy Oplof Vi Vitrioh — LES


Take of calcined Vitriol one part ;- Flints gróffety powdered ;
2. parts; of chefe with Spirit of Wine make a Pafe , diftili icina
Retort, and there will come forth a red heavy Oyl.

This is co be ufed rather about metals then in the body, only,
if the fcurfeon the head be anointed therewith two ot three
times in a week, it will fall of, and p head be cured. ss


To


P| T2
z


\


| Ofthe dre of Difilation, Book Wh


— Loduleifie the Spirit of Vitriol, and of Salt.


Take the. Spirit of Vicriol, or of Salt, che beft Spirit of Wine,
of each half a. ponnd; diftil them: inia Retort together, three:
or four times, and:they will be united infeparably, and become '
{weet J abs.

Some put 8.ounces.of the bef Sugar.candy to. thefe Spirits
before they: be thus diftilled,..— - |

"Tenor twenty drops-of this compound Spirit (being taken in:
any appropriated Liquor) is very good in any putrid or Epidemi-
cal difeafe, . wt chitin uis is


<- Gila T. beophráftis or a mof- delicate: vomitting Liquor:
ex 1 OSS HF? VSS made. of Vitriols.- H 90351 q


Take, of Cryftalsimade.out of. Copper, or Iron, diffolve chem:
ip the acid flegm thar. firlt, comes forth in the diftilling off corn--
fnon Vitriol circulate chem 8. days. inb ign
, chis Lignor.muft beitaken in. Wine , and ig caufes vomiting’ -
inftantly, and is;moft excellent to. cleanfe and firengthen the fto ^
Mack, andtocureall fuch diftempers that arife'from. thence, as.
Salt-defluxions, Feavers, Worms; Head: ach; and Vertigoes; the-


- Hyfterical paffion, and fuch like.


The dole is from afcruple to two fcruples:: -

—— Oglef Sulphur per Campanam, .

Take a large Iron Veffellike a, Platter; over it hang a Glas:
bell, that hath. a nofe like the head of a cold. Still; fill che:
lower veffel, being: narrower then. the. compa(s of the Bell, or
Head, with Brimftone, or Sufphur, inflame it; fo will the
fume which arifech. fromithencebe: condenfed in the Bell into -
a. liquor, which. will; drop.down.through the Nofe into. the-
Receiver, iui a 55] ; j 025:
Nore, thap the Bell. muft: hang ac fucha diftance-frem:the -
other veflel, rhat.che flame ofthe Sulphur toucli it;not;according:


If. j
^ is » EK


to tliis following examples.


| Boor III. Of the Art of Diftilation.


N IEETNUNNSTNSSSNSSSSS


E
=
if
j -
i


If (in ftead:ofthis broad veffel) you take a targe Crucible ‘and —
melcicinSalc-Peter; and caft Sulphur upon it thus melted, yon
fhall make a great deal quicker difpatch. hend i

This Spiricis ofthe fame nature, and hath the fame operati-
ons as OyLof Vicriol: i ce eet inde le 7

; There is lately difcovered’by an Ingenious Tralas Chimift,
living in Fan-chøreh-freet >a better way of drawing this Oyl Gf
Sulphur;which is by à'Campane, or Bell; which hath a Pipe per-
pendicnlar and open at the top for the Flowers of che Sulphür to
fly away: which hinder the Condenfation of the. pae By
which: meanis’afarr' greatet quanticy of Spirit may bedrawn in à
le(s cime chan the other 3. and foconfequently much more effes
Gualin the care of difeaíes, EOL ani MONEE


| Ash Spier etd O of Sn ioar ding i Chat,
| To reduce Silphiui iat a (owre Spirit or Oybharh been fought
hitherto by many; but found by F Moft of them made it —
c ; Ms : ig


sss "y dose TOT E AE ERRA Te TENET TT PEU TG ^N
| wR4 0 Of the Art of Diftillation, | Boox MI,
2 in Glafs-bels, but got very little chat way; forthe Glafles bee
ing quickly hot , could not hold the Oyl,-fothatitwent away
in a ímoak. Some thought tó get it by diftilling, others by dif-
folving, buenone of all chefe would do the feat : Which is the
reafon why now adayes it is found almolt no where right: In the
Drugfters and Apothecaries fhops, they ufually fell Oyl of Vi-
triol inftead of it,which by faris not to be compared in vertue to
the Oyl of Sulphur : For this fs not only ofa.far pleafanter fowr
tafte,buc (in efficacy alto much) exceeds the other, And there-
fore being of fo great nfe both in Phyfick and Alchymie ; as in
all hot difeafes, mingling the Patients drink therewith, till it
get a pleafant fowr take, for to quench the intolerable drowth,
to firengchen the Stomach, to refrefh che Lungs and the Liver e
Alfo externally for to cure the Gangrene : Alfo for to cryftallife
fome Metals thereby,and to reduce them into pleafant Vitriols,

- ufeful as well in Alchymie as Phylick ; I thought good to fet
down the preqestinn, though it be not done in this eur diftil- |
ling Furnace, but in another way by kindling and burning it as

©. folloWetb, -2
vache ond Furnace with a grate, above which a ftrong
‘Crucible muft be faftned, refting on two Iron-bars; and itis to be
“ordered fo, that the {moak be conveighed. (not above: by the
‘Crucible; but) through a Pipe at the fide ofthe Furnace: the
Crucible muft be filled with Sulphureven to the top; and by a
colé-fire without flame be brought to burn, and kept burning,
Over the burning Sulphur , a veflel.is to beapplyed of goodfto-
"Dy earth, like unto a flat difh with a high-brims wherein:is af-
` Ways cold water to.be kept, and wherevnto.the, burning Sul-


puur dork flame : Which thus burning its fatnefs confumeth;and
"the acid Sale is freed and füblimed tothe cold v«fel.; where iit

1$ diflolved by che air,and(in the form of a fharp.Qyl)sunsfrom —
the hollow veffel into the Receiver ; which mvft-be raken off -
fometime, and more Sulphur fupplyed in fead of that: which
hath been confumed, to the end chat the Sulphur may. fill burn

in the crucible , and beat with the flame to the. cold heads and
within few days you will geta great quantity of Oyl, which
ha by the: (campana) Glafsbe]J)in many weeks -cobld not be
EOBE nonsi da Holt wot vd bino tid ceu qd 073228
Ecce Hoe T EE


SEIS ks VT : TUNI T is Sate SE: ere A à DA T 3
Boox Ul. -Ofthe Art of Diftillation.
-N.B. Such a fowr Spirit (or Oyl) may alfo be got by diftil-


lation,togerher with the flores, viz. thus: If you take, pieces `
of Sulphur,as big as Hens-eggs, and carry them (one after ano-
ther) into the hot diflilling veflel, a fowr Oyl together with -


flores will come over into the Receiver, which mutt wich wa-
ter be feparated ont Of the florés and the water abftracted fromit


again,in a Cucurbit zand in the bottom of your Glafs-body you


will find the Oyl, which in vertue and tafte is equalto the for-
met; but you getnothing neer fo much in quantity by this


way $3. andif you do not look for the Oyl, you may.leaveit with ©


` the Flores, which by reafon of their pleafant acid cafte are much
toothfomer to take then the ordinary ones.


The Oyl of Sulphur cs made after a more. Philofophicat.
manner thus. abi

Take of crude Sulphur as muchas. you pleafe, put it. into:
melting veffel; to be diffolved over the fire: being diffolved;
pour it forth into feething hot water(this do ten or more rimes,
remembring that the water mult be alwayes feething hot )
- and thou fhal! fee that:che Sulphur. will be. like Butter, then put
ir into a Retort, pouring'onit the beft Spirit of Wine; then di-
fill ic with a-foft fire , and there will come forthan .Oyl ofa
golden colour, of a good tafté and fmell; which is the true Bal-


fome of Sulphur. The Oy! that (wims on the Spirit muft be fe- -


operated, v i p ik YLS is01to15 E
“This Oyl for che cure of all diftempers of the Lungs, ; for all
Beavers, Whether putrid or peftilential, and the cure of Wounds
and Ulcers; is {carfe to be equalled,
“aldas 5 The E ffence of Sulphur. : Es : M :


) *


= Take of Süfphut-vivap; as much as you pleafe , diffolye it as .


-wellas youcan in Agua-forti (made of Vitriol,and Salt-peter; )


xhen'evaporate the Aqwaefortis, and then reverberate the matter,


till it become very red; Extract the Tin&ture with Spirit. of Wine,


then digeft them tilt rhe effence be feparated from the Spirit like — — —
$ 3 S
M3 p Thi


sp Oyl, and fink to the bottom,


Me tt ee
ETAS i. P |
3$ i:
oye]


X


(B6 7 Of the Aref Difilaim. Booklk —
. "This Effence alfo is of wonderful vertue againtt all putrefa-
&ionboth inward, and one agreat prefervative againft the

- Plague, andis wonderful balfamical, and cureth all fores both

‘oldandnew, even to admiration,


The Oyl of Arfenick is made thus.


~~ “Take of Cryftalline Arfenick (being firft fublimed with ‘Colce-
- ‘ghar alone) as muchas you pleafe, mix ic with an equal weight
of the Salt of Tartar, and Salt-peter ; and let them ibe betwixt
‘ewo little pots‘or crucibles (whereof the upper hatha hole)
calcined, until no fume afcend, The matter being thus calcined,
diffolye in warm water, chat you may draw a Salt from thence ;
the powder which fals :to the bottom imbibe with the liquor of
Tartar, and dry ic by che fire, and thisthoy muf do three times ;
then diffolve che matter in warm water,that thou mailt draw out
‘the Salt thereof, and there will remain a moft white powder, and
. “fixed, which ina moift place ; will be diflolyed into a liquid
‘matter like Oyl; or Barter,


Of the Nitrows Spirit of Arfenick,


` A you take white-Arfenick and pure Salt-Nitre of each a
“like quantity , ground into fine powder, and diftil them; you
-Will get a blew Spirit; which is very ftrong; but no water
,muft be put into the Receiver, elfe it would turn white: for
"Arfenick, from which theblew cometh, is precipitated by the
"water. This Spirit diffolverh ‘and graduateth the Copper -as
white as Silver , and maketh ic malleable, but not fix, The re-
.maipine Capat mortuum: maketh the Copper white, if it be ce-
mented therewiths but. very bittle sand unmalleáble; bnt
how to get good Silver out of Arfenick, and with profit, you
Shall find in the-fourth ‘ part. In ‘Phyfick the blew Spirit fer-
verh for all ‘coftoding cancrous fores which if they bs: a-
'moynted therewith, will be killed thereby, -and nade:
for healing ^ ..—' irf 37 Sito


op.


Boon Ill,  - Ofthe Artof Diflillation.. 7
To make a Spirit of Sulphur, Crude-Tartar and Salt-Nitre..


c Ifyou grinde: together one pare of Sulphur, two parts of |
Cmd Tartan and four parts-of Salc-Nitre, and difti it Philofo-
pher-like, you will get a moft admirable Spirit; which can play
his part both in Phytick and Alchymie, .I will not advife any
body to diftil it in a Retort; for this mixture, if it groweth
warm from beneath. it falminateth like Gunpowder; “but if it
be kindled from above; it doth not fulminare, but only burn-
éthyaway likea quick fite: metalsimay bemelted M Tediced


thereby. : T :
To make Spirits and F lores of Nive and Coals.


If you difil Nitre ( well purified from its fuperfluous Salt)

mixed with good:Coals, the Egyptian-Sun-bird.doth burnaway,

. and out of ir doth fweat a fingnlar water, ufeful for meh and me-

- tals. It’s burne-afhes ate: dike ünto. Moo bes Geor and for. the
purging metals notto be defpifed. — ^ SD XS


« Aquitonis; ora ftrong Spirit, (that will s Api Sir

` andbafer metals) i$ made thim, 2n

RS oł

Take of Virrial calcined’ 2, parts of Nitre one’ part; grind ‘and

-mixithem well together, and: put them into: a Glafs’ Retort

coated), or earthen Recort that will endure the fire, and fet them

into-the Fürnace in anopenfire, and then having fitted alae

Receiver, diftil ic by degrees the fpace: of 24. NONE diem di
fie the Water or Spirit in Sand;


Aqua-tegia, or Stygia» or a Prong Spirit that will di iive pss
Gold, ss made thus: ;


“Fake e Nitre 2: parts, SaltcAmmoniadit one part, the powder
of Flints 3. parts, put chem into a Glafs Retort coated, or eara
then Retort cha t will endure the fire ,diftil them by degrees over
a naked fire for the {pace of 12. hours, take it our and rectifie ir,

‘This Water m AE Gold, | à Another,

e
gi


Another Aqua-regia is made thue.


g-


45 Take of Spirit of Nitre, as much as you pleafe, pnt a-dram of


~~ €rudé Salt-Armoniack to every ounce ofic, and it will be as


ftrong as any Aqua-regid.
This water will diflolye Gold,


To make.amoftftrongiand vehement .qua-Regia,

— Take of the ftrongelt eAqna-fortis that you canget, and well
re&tified, a pound, of Mercury fublimed four ounces, falt-Armo-
niack cwenty ounces, mix all chefe cogether, and diftil them.

Oyb or Butter of Antimony, is made thus.


-. Take of crude Antimony as much as you pleafe; of fublimed
*- Mercury alikequantity; make chem both into a very fine pow-


der, and mix thems and put them into a Glafs-Retort. Give -


fireby degrees ina clofe Reverberatory, orlet che Diftillation
be made in Sand. There willdiftilinte che Receiver a:fatnefs ;
part whereof (ticking co che neck of the Retort)will melt bya


light fire being put toit. That fatnefs may be rectified ina Re-


tort, and either be kept by ic felf as itis, or fecin a Cellar or
. moiftplace; and bere(olved into a Liquor,

This Oyl might be wafhed in good ftore of water, and:then
there will fettle to the bottom a white powder, which being oft
wafhed in fair water, till all the (harpne(s is gone; is then called
Marcurins vita,ix ox feven grains whereof is an excellenc-vomit-
ting medicine, — —


ete


(a8. Ofthe Artof Diflilaion. Boos lI.


Ofthe Art of Dipillation — 39 —


A Furnace fora clofe Reverbirationsfurnifued With its
Retort and Receiver. ee


Boor lll.


A. Shews the —


z < Furnaces
2 B The Re
Corks :
4 L———— => th ELA h
pe A = = C; ‘The Rer
v Y


O99 Gebers *
Jj 4 de


m Aree


nD. The Vefe
: = _ fd: filed
za : Zz Seps with cold :
qua E EEE 7o ‘water.


How to make a Water ont of eAntimonys whereof a few drops foall
purge, or fweaty and which bath neither fmelly or [carce any taft.


Take flowers of Antimony, fublime them with falt-Armoni-
ack fix or feven times, then wath away the Salt with warm wae
ter, and dry the powder, which then Jay thin on a- Marble in. a
Cellar till ic bedifolved, (which will be in fix weeks time).
This water, if it be taken to the quan ity of cwenry drops ; Will
purge, if ina leffer quantity; it will fweat.., i c beo


. To make anOil,or Quinteffeuce, of Metals `v


Diffolve what Metal, or Mineral you pleafe, ina ftrong Spirit
of Sale, (except filver, which mult be diffolved in: Aqua-fortis)
draw offthe flegm in Ba/nco, pour on rectified Spirit of Wine; di-
get chem (o long till a red-Oil {wim above » which ische Quin-
teffence of Metals; and Minerals, and is avery great fecret:


E TN BI


J
f


ge Of the Ark of Diftilation, i Boox II.
Du aan 4 fitt and ved Oyl of Metals and Minerals: |


; ...Diffoclvé a Metal, or Mineral, in fpirit of Salt s diflolyealfo an
equal weight of Salt.ef Wine effentificated ; mix thefe diffoluti- —.—
ons, and difil thet by-Retertin a gradual heat; and there will
come. outan Oyf fweetjand- ted as bloud, together. with the


Spitieo£ Salt: and fomietitné|the'neck of che Retort, and Recei-. `
ver will be colowredtike a Pea s-tail with divers colours,and '
fémetiined wi |. colon: á i ;


And becaufe Isduld without any difference comprehend alf.


Metals and MiBerals under one certain general. proceís ;. let him
c5 that would make tie Effence of Silver, fake che Spirit of Nitre;
*and proceed in all chinos as was {poken of the other'Metals.
Concerning the:nfe of thefe: Effences ; I need not {peak much
thereof’; fór to him chat knows the preparation fhall be difco-
wered the ufe thereof, — — cs cm em ee
hi BIN or eb ae nee peo — ge
aue Lhe true Spirit of Antimony is made thuss —
1. Take of the fubtile powder of che Regal of Afitimony as
much as:you pleafe; fublime ie of it felf till tc will füblime no
more(ftill putting what is fublimed to that which remains at;the
bottom) or with falt-Ariioniack fig-or'feven times (remem. — -
brimg that theti you mult dülcifie it with warm water, by diffol-
ving therewith che Salt) and dry the Precipicate afterwards, | Set
this fixed powder in 4 cellar fayine ic very thin upon a Marble-
fone; ‘and about fix weeks!’ or two months, it will all be. dif.
folved into water, which nwn be Bltred, ^ Thén evapótate
part of this water, and let it ltand two or three days in the cel-
lar to cryftallize-: Thefe Cryftàls. purifie, “and dry: Mix them -
with three times the quantity of the grofs powder of Tiles, and
diftilthem in a Retort, and there will come forth firka white


Spirit; and then ated, which you may re&tifie in Balutosic wii
$i Hive Hanes au 109g ANA ARGA v Spine
Po Doce aene: adm, sey xir. eiva Obss Hin «nol pl tati 59g
up Tue ine Oy oF Elfekce Wf Antimony is? desh ieee e
> iaat LE. ^ai A xs 37/9609 Q^ Ir En 3.
: -.— Take of the forefaid'Cry(tals ;’ diffolve then i good re ifed
; Spirit of Wine, digeftthemtwe months in Balneo, ot poop


iD "ui (x 4


-Béoxilk: Ofthe Are of Diffillation 91
dung: then evaporate the Spirit of Wine,and there will remain
in the bottom the true Oy! or Eflence of Antimóny, ^ "^^ ^
1- Them:takenew Cryttals of Antimony;and ‘lec them imbibe ei-
ther this Oyl, or che forefaid Spirit; till they wil inibibe ‘no
more, then dige(t them two months in fand, and they will. bes


come aflowing fixt Salt; and of excellent verte «°°!

_ The aforefaid Spirit; this Oyl; and Effence of Antimony, may
be equallized to Agram potabile) to all intents and pitpoles , ac-
cording to a medicina] nic, {pecially the fixe Eflence, Thé dois


is five or fix grains.”
od Miwa tiing


A burning Spirit made ont of Lead; mft fragrant and Bal[amical,


cs Take che Calx of Saturn, or elfe Minium, pour upon it fo
. wich Spit of Vinegar, that may Cover itfour fingers breadth ;
diget them ina warm place the fpace of twenty four hours, of
ten ftirrifig them,chac the matter (ett le not too thick in the bote
tom : then decant the ZZe»ffruum, and pour on more, digeft it
as before, and this da fo often, until all che faltne(s be extracted.
Filter and clarifie all the AZenfranm , being put together, the
. eváporacé it half away, and fét the other part in a cold placé dil
iccryttallize. Thefe Cryftals diffolve again in freth Spirit of Vi-
"megar; filter and coagulate che Liquor again into Cryftals , and
this do fo often; until they be (ufficiently impregnaied with.che
fait! Armoniack ofthe Vinegar as with their proper ferment, Dis
- gelt hemin atemperate Balneo, that they. may be refolved into
- a Liquor like Oyl, ‘Then diftil this Liquor in fand, ina Recorts
with a large Receiver annexed toit, and well clofed, ebat no `
fpirits evaporate’, together with the Obferyations of the de-
.. gteeSof the fire; then there will difil forth a fpirit of fuch 4
fragrant [rell that che fragrancy of all flowers, and compound-
ed pérfuntes are not ro be compared to ic, After; Difillation,
When all chibesare cold, take out, and calt'away che black feces
whichis of no ufe': “Then feparace the yellow Oybwhich fwims
on the cop of the Spirit, andthe bloud red Oy! which finks: to
she'bortom of its Seperate the fleom from the Spirit in. Balneoe
Thon fhalt by this means have a moft fragrant Spirit. that. eyen
fayiheth ‘the feples, and io Palanan that. it cures all old :
ES TT Na an


pa ——- Of the. Artof Difllation; Booxdy '
_and new fores:inward and outward,.and fo cordial,that the dying
_ are with admiration revived withit. | - jadi!
They. that have this medicine need fcarce ufe any other either
for inward, or outward criefs, i- 3 nio E
How to turn Quick-filver into a Water Without mixing any
os thing with stand to make thereof a good Purgative and.
Jet wien bas Diaphoretick, Medicine. B
.. Take an ounce of Quick-Glver nor purified, put it into a bole:
head ofglafs, which you mutt nip'up, fet it over a ftrong fire; in
Sand, for the fpace of two months, and the Quick-filver will be
. turned into a red fparkling Precipicare.. Take this powder, and |.
lay'it thin on a Marbfe ina Cellar for the fpace of two months,
and ic will be turned into.a water, which may be. fafely taken
pent will Work a little upward and downyard,but chiefly
wear... iub d E ; zen di 3l eib
` Nore, that yot may fer divers Glaffes with the fame matter
in the fame Furnace, that fo you may make the greater. quantity
at a time, 5g io Chabad hos
` T fuppofe it is the Sulphur which is, in thé Quick-filyer » and
takes it fo black, ‘chat being flirted up by the heat of rhe, fire
Fiech ele Melde D T LA


DIM (A fragrant Oyl of Mercury.

-` Take of Mercury feven times fublimed , and as often revived

with nnflaked Lime,as much as you pleafe, diffolve it in Spirit of

Salt iti a moderate heic ; then abftract the Spirit of Salc,and edul-

corate ic very wel! by boyling ic ip Spirit of Vinegar : then. ab-

ftra& the Spirit of Vinegar, and wath it again wich diftilled rain-

- water : then dry wand digeft it tWo montbs in a like quantity of
the beft rectified Spirit of Wine you canger. Diftil,them by Re:
tote, making your fire moderate at the beginning, afterwards in- -
creafing it; then evaporate the Spirit of Wine Ip. Balneoyand there.
will remain in the bottom a moft fragrant Oy! of Mercury. _.

This Oyl fo purifies the bloud by fweat;and urin,thac it cures
all diftempers that arife from the impurity thereof, asthe vene-

raldifeate, Gc. 707 Maur RR oe ta E e

- ©-The'ttuth is,chey that have this medicine Welma peed, bue
few other medicins : the.dofe is four or five drops, 4?


Boox A


Of theatro of Dipillation..


B
Mts » To make the Water. "d Mercury d

"Take Mercury. fublimate , "and Sal Armopi ck», and roble.
them together ;. ‘thengtind that ned is fublimed » with that,
which remained aft er fublimation , and puri to fub lime ag Bia,
and there will remain more in. th e. “bottom ; of th the Sub blim: to WR
than there did ‘the Bra times. which Work repeat fo fo often, tilt a
remain in thé bottom, and look black,and melt lik € wax; which.
take and bruife fmall, and ferin a cold Cellar on a Marble- ohe |
and it will diflolveinto;a "Water of. PETE AMEE your may.


coagnlace an diffo]ve til ie be pure, | loys erin tiplamego sid


io; de tuin Mercury intoa, "ater b ^y Jai dm d
Set this ROI DUE id made Of Iron, "nto ifa
BOR three bowles thereof be. within the, Furna e, and thes
Mipeana Receiver be without, ‘N Make you. Furnace { o x ast ac
there bea great hole left opep at the top, Where you mul put
in your coals,(hutting i It afterward with a cover of ftone made fic
thereunto:;. onthe rop.alfo muh be holesto letin airs. 3 iy
The Psi this Operations: 50 16 110 2191-001 5 3d
A 10 süidb ed 5 na: poio 5d Hum of belliw "Asi Vist
101 tiig noil. shotion ; Jis WR E PE bab sedi etki
,ditoldsy 602 ont snot cgnid3 15030


eii


liv atli so). dodi BG vas Jn uoy seis |
(3221 i He v ohilbns sin m Si cao bel sd. ni bel
"25702 SOY OG LO; ARS firn: goidw ;


rot
t2 DOS elliri pon
WA

Xj


ln aisoldw «3400850:100 p srd ozgi
: 110105 023 smeion sisi] anglad 1
3o sd furm di a fii Sco sdy 531 trot asd¥
SOR ni3uq.nsri


:
?nebro»b5ds Ara oike


Ois


^ Sadao
ti HOY q Ew èid T
Xon: NEUD 2958978
[SW DTE iy
reidi


:
‘ne vera nov


wsarqubssies
15234111 10 Ag


51 mov i
Svib virt m5 09 STO


Often ec


ərli oalgers =


AMI DE EORPA rej oirin onie
od iI5w ct tom 10 ber (IR) tees
anio-enst 1 ciis T 20 ,2le220 pilaige


D


OY N


«93!


9o Of the Arto A  Bóox Ill
| Firft make your Iton VeGeras ied lot as poflibly it can be
made; (i or elfe Jondo nothing), ei it apnexed an earthen
well’ ae tothe SE of Fic the pur halfan ounce
of Quick iver 4t a time iit’ Pikes te X which petet Mogwai
clay) “ahd peii he Weer jn il conte over, "pat 2th
Libs i id page às crüde 41 Mey agit Was be fore; 2] piel S | you
En tin jagyin iff it be. sauder to water,” oi
ore; the Enplefs the Quick-filver give a gréat ctack preteni y
after icis put inj ic is 4 figa that che venel was nor hot ‘enonsh.
This operation being well nane ay | produce a’ quedicin.
with which none Pande he P taut oer E[ixif may compare, -


Hs Udiflit ‘Spirits, UT oy Ee out of Minerals, Vegersblet, Binti, ‘
Pita iion n and ina a kreater qnantit] jn one | boners than fh i


Com a A tent igre E
: ES sbsm s10l 10487935 ule e iret k 2i ito-


1 The Furnace’ tilt bé dido fo' baa as videi the Pipe nt
bea foor-long out of che Furnace;

The Veflel walled in muk be of earth fot c ditiling of An-

` &imony;Sulphur, and fuch things as will corrode. Iron zah

other things, Ironis moft convenient..

` Before you make any Dittillation, let the veffel which

ledin be red hot, chen by fictie and little, caft in yel $

which mutt be cut;or powdered (mall , and clap d

- into the falfe botcom above which is zm :


When you fee che fumes i in gh Recetas
Glafs) co ceafe , and condenfed into £i

| , matter, 95. j

By this way you may mdke atar greater difpatch, and diftil a

greater quantity ouf o fe ie proportion of bed chen“ by.

. the common way) e


Sd begin | when y you "e an tty ned experi:


P


ments in on ae and cannot make the fire too ftrong, and may
make the fpiritssaf (uch things as can hardly or not fo well be
made byd Bete the Spirits of Salt, of Tartar Harts-horn;


"uu Dg. 2i
ahve G


Bob Hc


Furnace asthi 607


io deor c omuft be diea fuck a


FAUT TIED


P unn MEN
TINY
— A


a IA G
WHE:


UMMM ID
ZA.


2 i | E


SUREN DEE; Di 419012182 DAL” ARR Se aa VIIJ Sie Saad

A Sigufies the Eucpace with tts Iroa; loy earthen diftilling Deffel walled in s; 10

cha very Large Rectpieat ts joyned. . By -tbe Difliler., vob rth: Vis lefttoand
Mec UR geri sind with his right cafteth ia bis prepared marrer with at Fok
- iaku Cp tbe form of the dipilling vefe Dj rhe fame, as ir appeavéth inward,
Todhe form of the veffeluntavalled iia bit Banding onthe aoals.fox' aber ufus. 3 di
gaias E . : ait


4


96  OftheArtof Diftillation. Boox Il.

Salt and fuch things as will flow mult have bole, or powder of

Brick mixed wich them before they be caft into the veffel, or

- if you pieafes-you may-firtt.dillolve v what-Salt you pleafe , and

with ted hot gtofs, powder of Brick ; imbibe the water, then

caft in chis powder by little and little into the ditlilling veffel,

and the Salt by this means will yield ics -Spirit quickly and

in aboundance. By either of thefe two wayes you make

‘ pound of che: =a of Nite i in ap’ hour 3 and of Saltintwo
ours,

Now whereas Tome lines yield a Spirit , and a thick and
heavy Oyl, they may be rectified thus: viz. by putting chem ine -
to a Retort; and diltiiting them in fand; or afhes, witha gradual |
heats! there will come forth the flegm of (ome Liquors firit; and
then the Spitic, and of otherfome the Spirit; and then the deem
but of atl.th (athe heavy thick Oylacla&; which by ditillng of
becomes far? clearer than before, which may again be rectified by:

` Spirit;of Salts: bae hweg before, and therefore need not
here: ian it» ——
Nie, ire
Het 15 ke. oia volatile 8 pirit " Vi tricl.


ee ee UII VT s TIPENmP US T3


E your veflel being gmade fed ka » With an “Won dlidte cat -
in one or tWo ounces of j your Vitriol at once, put on the lid, and
prefently the Spirics cog&ther wich the phlegm will come over

.' into fhe Receiver, like. r hice cloud or mit; Which being
vanifhied, and the Spi frie:  fecfed , {Carry in more Vitriol,
and Continue this foj on out veffel be fall: Then un-
covet your.veflel; and with a pair of Tongs s-or-an Iron-ladle,
take out tlie. Capui-Mirtunm. ‘and calt more in; and continue -
this, proceeding as long as you pleafe; ftill emptying the ve el.
when itis filled, and then cating in more matter ,. and fo. pro~:
ceeding until you conceive chat y you have got Spirits enough,
Then let the fire goiout, and let the Furnace cool ; ; takeoff the

; Receivery


T Book HI. Of the Art of Diffillation. :


Receiver, and pour that which is come over into a Retorts


and lay the Retort in Sand, and by a gentle fire difil the vo- `-


latile Spirit from the heavy Oyl ; having firft joyned to the Re-
tort the Receiver, whichis to receive the yolatile Spuic, wich
à good lute. “i ;

All che volatile Spirit being come over; which you may know
by the falling of bigger drops, then take off the Receiver and
clofe it very well with wax, that the Spiric. may not make an
€fcape ; then apply another (without luting it) and fo receive
the phlegm by icfelf, and there will remain in the Retort a
black and heavy correfive Oyl, which if you pleafe, you may
rectifie, forcing it over by a ftrong fire, and then it will be clear ;
if not, let all cool chen take out your Retort together wich the
black Oyl, and pour uponic the volatile Spirit, which in the


reCtifying went over firft; put che Retort into che Sand, and ap- —
ply a Receiver, and give ita very gentle fire, and the volatile .


Spirit will come over alone, leaving its phlegm behind wich the
Oyl, which by tea(on of its drynefs doth eafily keepit. Thus
-the Spirit being freed from the phlegm,is becomeas {trong as a
meer fire,andyet not corrofive. And if this Spirit be not re&tified


from its own Oyl, it will not remain good,bne there doth preci-


pitate a red Powder after ic hath ftood for fome {pace of cime;
«and the Spirit loofeth all its vertue , in fo much chat itis not to
be: difcerned from ordinary water, which doth not happen
When itis reCtified. The reafon of this precipitation is no
' other then the weaknefs of the Spirit ,, whichis accompanyed
with too much water; and therefore not (trong enough for to


keep its Sulphur, but muf lec ic fall; but after it is re&i-


fied by its own Oyl, it can keep its Sulphur well enough;
becaufe then it is freed from its fuperfluous moifture, . How-
ever the red Powder is not to be thrownaway 5 but. ought to


be kept carefully ; becaufe it is of no. lefs vertue than the:


Spirit it felf. And ie is nothing elfe but a volatile fulphur
of Vitriol. Tt hath wonderful vertues » fome of which fhall


be related,


D. sior: TM


97


(98 — Of de Art of Difillation?


‘The Ufe and Dofe of the Narcotick, Sulphur of Vitriol:


^ Of chis Sulphur r,2.3.4. or more grains(according tothe cop-


dition of the Patient) given at once, mitigates all pains, cauferh


quiet fleep ; not after the manner of Opium, Henbane; and |


ether the like medicines, which by ftupefying and benum-
ming caufe fleep,but it performeth ics operation very gently and
fafely, without any dangeratall; and great difeafes may be
cured by che help thereof, Paracel/us held it in high efteem, as
you may fee, where he doth write of Sulphur embrionatum. ——


To make an Oyl of Lapis Calaminaris.


“Take of Lapis Calaminaris powdered as much as you pleafe,
pour on it five or fix times as much of rectified Spirit of Salt;
fhake them together contianally, or elfe it will be congealed
into a hard mafs, which can hardly be mollified again: when


no more will diffolve;; frigido ; put itin warm Sand fo long; till. -


BooxI i


the Spirit of Salt be of a high yellow colour, then pour it off - —
and put on more, rillall be diffolved that will; caftaway the. ——


feces, put the folition into a Glafs-body ; and diftilit in Sand :
aboue the third part of the Spiric of Sale cometh over as inl-


pid'as common water, though the Spirit were well rectified bes. .
fore, for the dryne(s of ehe Lapis Calaminora (whichis the drys `


elt ofall Minerals and Metals except Zink) retaineth the Spirit :,
_ after‘the flegm is come over, lecthe Glafs cool; andthon fhalt,
findat the bottom a thick red’ Oyl very fac, éven as Oyl-Oliyes.


andmor very corrofive ; keep it from the air, or elfe it turneri»


Into. Water, |


ole is of wonderful vertie for inward; and outward griefs ;. for


ithathinirapuresoldénSulphu, S — —— ^ 50 2.
"Common. Sulphur mixed with this Oyf; and: melted- ina.
 fiong fite fwimimeth like Water above; and is tranfpa-.
fent. | xa

This Oyl diftilled in a Retort with pure: Sand in a firong:
firey: yieldetha Spirit like fire, (carce to be contained in any S
ir See els;


Boon MI - “Of di p of Dif tation: | 799
fel; sod diffolveth all metals, except Silver; and reduceth purè
Spirit of Wine into an Oyl withina few days. :


To make Oyl of Talks
Take of tbe beft Talk reduced into’ very dii flakes ,


make them red hot, and then quench them in the firongett.-..


—áLixivium that Sope-boylers ufe; do this fifteen times , and
it will become. as white as Snow : then powder it very
{mall , and Calcine ic by fumigation, (3.) by the fume of


fome very fharp Spirit, as of e&/Zgua-fortzs, of the like: when .


it hath’ been thus calcined for the fpace of a Fortnight, it
will become fomewhac mucilaginous ; then fetit in any heat
of putrefaction, as it is ( for it hath imbibed enough of the
. {harp Spirit co moiften and ferment it ) for rhe [pace of
two months in a bolt-head nipt up: then evaporate the
acid Spirit, and dulcifie it with diftilled Rain-water,-. After


this, extra&- what thou canft out of ic with the bet resti- -


fied Spirit of Wine ; pour offthe folution and evaporate the
Spirit of Wine, and at the bottom will be a moft beautiful qd
The Oylisthe moft glorious fucms or pint in the World.


Fi 0 make Oy if Talk another 7 wap a
= Take of die: forefaid powder of Talk after ie^hath ee
putrified ; and again dulcified as much as yon pleaíe; put


four times as much of the beft: circulated Oyl of Camphire


. toit; digeftchem in Horfe-dung till all the powder be diffolved,


and the Oyl become mucilaginous, which will be wichin two


months, i XO :
This is for the fame ufe as the former; PCE SET m
"There is required a great deal of pains, and caresend no ee

coft in the Preperadion ‘of thefe Oyls.:


pe: is made of Bole- Arnika i Teiti andi j "m ie
kind of Clay-carths, thus:


"Take of either of thofc Earths as muchas jon pleafe ; pat
o Seas 02. ity


A
^A.


100 Of the Anf D iflillation: Boox III. hs


icinto {mall pieces, and put it into a Retort over a naked fire
for the {pace of twelve hours, and there will difil into the Re-


ceiver (whith muft be large) the flegm; then.white Spirits ina :


little qase yetofa grateful rafte : and fmell.
Oyl out of thefe hinds of Earth ss made better thus.


Tike of either of thefe Earths which you pleafe, as much
as you will; pour upon it diftilled Rain-water, fet it in fome
warm place for a month, or more; andthe Oylinefs will fepa-
rate from its body, of its own accord, and {wim upon che wa-
* ger. Separate the water by a Tunnel, and difil the. Oyl with five


parts of che Spirit of Wine well re&ified , and there will comè-
forth an Oyl ofa golden colour, iwimming on the Spirit, which i


isa moft excellent Balfom,


Spirit of unflaked Lime ts made thus-


Take ofunflaked Lime as much as thou pleafeft ; ede itine |
to a fubtle. Foch imbibeirwith Spirit of Wine moft highly


re&ified, (which muft be pure from allits legm , or elfe you
labourin vain) as much as it can imbibe ; draw off the Spirit
‘of Wine with a gentle heat, cohohate it 8. or ro. times, fo will
the fiery vertue ofthe Lime be fortified, — Take of this leviga-
ted Lime 1o. ounces; pure Salt of Tartar one ounce; the feces of


Tartar after the Salt is extra&ed 1x. ounces; mix thefe well |


together, put them into a Glafs-Retort coated, fee that 2. parts
of 3. be empty ; difil chem inro two Receivers, the phlegm into
ene; the Spirit into the other, which muft have. a little. of reĝi-
fied Spirit of Wine in it to receive the Spirit.

If thou wilt feparate the Spirit of Wine, then put fire to it;and
the Spirit-o£. Wine will burn away, andthe Spirit of the, Lime
ftay behind, which ts a kind.ef a fixed Spirit.

This is a very rare fecret for che confuming the Stong i in. ae

Bladder; and the. curing: of PS Gale.


ares n


Booxlll © Of the Art of Difiillation. .— 1ei
Oyl nad out of T ile- flones called the Oilof Phi Lefop Di».


Take of Bricksor Tiles as many as you pleafe, break them in-
to {mall pieces, make them red fire hot; then quench them in
pure old Oyl Olive (in which let them lie till they be cold)
then take chem out and grind them very fmall; let the powder
be put into a glafs Retort, coated, a fit receiver being put there-
to and diftil off the Oyl ina naked fire by degrees, which being


. diftilled off keepin a viol clofe ftopr. :


This Oylis wonderful penetrating; and is good again all


Cold-diftempers whatfoever,


The Liquor or Water of Goral, is made thus.


"Fake Salt-Armoniack well purified by fublimation, of red
Coral finely powdered, of eacha like quantity ; fublime chem ,
` fo often till the Coral will no more rife up, then take che Calx


of Coral that remains in the bottom ofthe fublimatory and put
it ona marble or glafs in the cellar to be ;diflolved ; thac which


will not be diffoived;fublime again, and doasbeforetillall be.


diffolved.:-and fo thou haft the Liquor of Coral,
Note, that if thou will have the true tipcture: of Coral, eva-
porate the humidity of the forefaid Liquor, then extra& the-


tin&ure out of the powder with Spirit of Wine, which Spirit:


evaporate to the confiftency of Hony : And thou hafta moftrare -
medicine, . i ix ) ie Sid

This Medicine firenetheneth all the parts im the body, and:
cures all diftempers that arife from the weaknefs thereof, -


—fomakea Water out of Lapis Armenus that fhail have seither =:


taft nor [mell, a few drops whereof all purges ^ 264 01:


Take of Lapis Armeni powdered fmall; and calcined,as much Ü


as you pleafe, fublime it with Salt: Armoniackuntil it will fub:


lime no more, but remain in the. bottom of the fnblimatory,

then take.it out, and lay it very thinupona marble in: a cellar, -

and there let ic lie two months;andit will be almoft all diffolved
93 - ne Opr


into 1 liquor, .


bik ole ht iis ale »
"


at


Or this.


"Take of Lapi Armenu powdered (mal1 and calcined;as mich
as you pleafes,pour nponitofdiflilled Vinegar; as much as will |


go. Oftthe drt of Difillation, Boox Uy —


Hr eem


coyer it four fingers breadth, then fecit overa gentle hear ftir -


ringit2 or.3 mes inan hour; for the {pace of 6 hours or there.


abouts ; then the Spirit being tinged very blew withthe powder
filter of from the feces, then pour more Spiricof Vinegar on the


feces, and do as before , till the: Spirit be tinged no more ;)


_ then‘teke-all che blew-{piricsand vaponr it away, and atthe bor-
‘tom you fhall have a falt, which you muft put into a calcining:


pot, and calcine fo long in the fire till no more vapour will arife,


and it become darkred powder, then put it upon a marble in ©


the cellar for the fpace of two moneths, and it will be diffolved
purge delicately.


How to make 4 Baiiia that fhail of it fells without any veffels
paper contain the matter, being put into ity [ublime
| Minerals, and diftil all masner of Oyles and Spirits out
of Minerals» Vegetabless and Animals, and that
-oin a wir) great quantity ». ina very [ort
c time, and with (mall coft.


- The Furnace is made as followeth : ‘Tt may be made of one


piece by a Potter, or of brick, round, or four-fquare, g ereater or


leffer as you pleafe: iftheinfide beone {pan broad in a the mid-
dle, it mutt be four high; one for the Afh-holes another above
the grate to the middle Coal- hole, and two above the Pipe;


this pipe beirig made of earth, ern, imuk- be. a (pan long be-


twixt the Furnace andthe. Receiver,and, a third part as wide as the -
Furnace within.

i The Recipients muftbe made ofelafs;or very good cah well
hued Mesue e greater the bercer, i


A AO a a et


ipto a Liquor,a few drops whereof put into a glafs of beer will


|
|


The Second Figures...


Geom = i


blaty ə i


Cs Bigrifits rh Afrcholo whith mufF bà as wide sha Frenne aid?


Y eT


re almayes open that. the fire may burn the ftrongers.


Sh &


ae a TS
Tae ROBT ANT ar


Receiver,


des E the dn f Difällation? Boox M: "


B, 7! he middie hole of the F urnace for the putting im of coals.

C The fropple made of frone.

D, The upper hole of the Furnace with a 1 fafi e bottom wherein faud
Iyeths which is there Taid that the cover may lie theclofer, and keep
in the-fumes the better.

E» The Couerswhich muft prefently i elapt onralfoon as the matter to
be diftilled isiput in.

E, The pipe which d ont of che Furnace, and to which the Receiver

2 fitted.

G,” The firft Recipient for flowers T

H; The fecond, d

1, The third. ` :

K, A Stool whereon the firft Recipient refteth) in the midh whereof i
a hole, through which goeth the neck of the Recipient to Which anoe `
ther gla[s 15 fitted.


: L, The glafs fitted.tothe Recipient far the auniting-tbe Spirits shat


drop down.
M, Another Recipient united to the former Glas, and into Which the

united Spirits do ran. à
N, A freol through the middle whereof goeth a feri% for the vaifing


of that h, ic. D im under the mt Recipients “higher, o —


S an e VV


X The Grate vida two 1h) er bith lie m upon which
fonr or five. thinner. are [en en may beira wx the Furnace
fa made clam = =, di ^ :


Thus far the firft of F the "figures. i is Sai. by which you
may fee how (ublimation. and. diftillation-ismade at one time,
viz, of thofe chings which will yield both flowers, and fpirits;


(the flowers ftickingá in the three upper Recipients, : and the Spi-


rits dropping down into the’ lower) ..
Now follows the explanation of che fecond: figure, which is


the fame with che former in- refpe& of the Furnace it felf, but
, differing i in refpe& of the Recipients, which ferve for the re- `
-ceiving “of che Spirits and Oyles of fuch things as yield, no


flowers: Therefore I thal begia with the Fata idt ofthe -
VITE, NC eG Cd he


um"


“Boor III.


G, The firt crooked-pipe as it is fitted to the pipe that comes out of the


‘Furnace: i


H, The Recipient with its cover, in which zs one hole for one crooked -
|, pipe to; go through, as you may fee in the firft Hy and two holes


. for two pipes to go through, as you may fee in the fecond H, and


in HH,


Note, that thefe pipes may either be faftesed to the cover,
being all o£ one piece, or they mult be well, luted, that no va-
pours may pafs through. Now you muft conceive that in the
lower Receivers the vapour that goeth out ofthe firft pipe goeth
firk into the Receiver, then ont of that into the next Pipe; and
fo forward tillit cometh into the laft Receiver, by which means
it is much cooled (for indeed fuch vapours that come out of the
Furnace, efpecially when fome. materials are: diftilled, if there


` were not fome fitch art to cool them, would break all Reci-


pients.)


J, A Tub of water, wherein the Recipient ftands to cool the- vapours ;


and condenfe them. B i
K, The firft crooked pipe asst goeth into.the Recipient: ;
L, The fecond erooked pipe, whereof one end goeth into one Receivery and

another end into another. -

M» The laff crooked pipe, to.which you muft annex a Receivers


Now the manner of diftilling is thus: Let the Furnace be


full ofcoals well kindled, then caft on your matter,and ftop your
Furnace clofe : This Furnace needs no Retort, or other veflels to
be fet into it, neither can-you do any hurt by too much or too
little fire ;and you may finifh your operation when you pleafe,


andin one hour try. divers experiments, It.faveth very much


time, and coft; and in one hour will do as much as can be doné


in another Furnace in 24. In one hour you may make a .


pound of Spirit of Salt with four or five pound of coals, and as
much flowers of Antimony. ina: like fpace of time,and with as
If your materials be vegetables, or horn, or bones cut them


=


OPED voy


xX


fmall; |


106
falc, lec them firk be'diffolved in water 5 which water muf be


imbibed with red hot coals,until all the liquor be imbibed : then
Caftin chofe coals into che Furnace.


Of the Art of Diflillation: É Boox III. E


{mall ; if hard Minerals, let them be powdered very fmall, if


^^ $f you would by this means procure the Spirit of hard Mine- —


rals, as of Antimony, you muftcake them as they comefrom the
Mine, before they have pafled the fire.

By chis Furnace you may make che Spirits of fuch- things,
which will not yieldchem in any other way.


. Noté thae fuch Oyls and Spirits as are drawn by chisFurnace,.


muf be rectified in Spirit of Salt;as I have above fhewed,
The way to make Spirit of Salt by this Furnace.


Mix Saft, and Vitriol or Allome together, grinding them very
well in'a Mortar, (for by how much the better they are ground,
the more fpirit they yield.) Then caft this mixture into the
fire with an Iron-ladle,viz. fo much of it as will be fufficient to
cover the coals, and then with a great fire the Spirits come forth
into the Receivers, where being coagulated, chey difit down
into a dih, and thence into another Receiver. And if thou
Xknoweft how to workaright , theSpirits.will like water contie
nually run out throngh the pipe the chicknefs of a fraw ; and thou
mayeft eafily every hour make a pound of the Spirit. Now the
seafon why thou (halt by this way have more Spirits than by the


other, is this, viz. becaufe the Vitriol, and Allom,which is mix- -.


éd with the Salt, makes it flow quickly,by which means itis pre-
vented from falling down through the Coals to the lower part of
the Furnace, but flicking to the coals is almoft.all of it turned into


fpirits. The Caput Mortuus which is reddifh, eafily falls with:
the afhes through the grate; and can. no more be diftilled, but


yields by-éxco&tion à white fixed Salt, which ferves for the flow-


pon metals; and being diflolved in warm water ferves alfo for.
a Glyfter againft the Wortns, which it kills, and purgeth alfo che:


-Bowels.


*' Thou wilt objed, thatthe fpirit made after this manner is not:
the true fpirit of Salt, by realon. of the mixture of Vitriol and


Allom, but mixed, and compounde d, I anfwer ; There nm
: : NM


EN


E


( opum iat asa
E. =


Art of Diftillation. 107
this way diftil no fpirit of Vitriol, and Allom,. being that which
I often tryed, cafting Vitriol; qr Allom into the Furnace; where
I received no Spiritat all ; thereafon of chisis, becaufe thefé
fpirits are far more heavy thenthe fpirit of Salt, neither can


they afcend fo great a height, viz. e£ three fpans, but are barnt,
whence uolefs phlegm, nothing diftils, Wherefore the fpirit of


-. Salt that is made after this manner is not mixed, but pure and


meer fpirit of Salt; of the fame taft, and vertue asthar is of; chat
is made by it felf; becaufein this Furnace the fpiricof Allome;


" and Vicriol, cannot be made, unle(sa pipe go out of the Fur-


nace neer the grate, as you may fee by the delineation of the
Furnace, for otherwife it cannot be made,


Of the ufe f the Spirit of Salt


The Spirit of Saltis by moftaccounted.a moft excellent medi-
cine, and fafely to be ufedas well inwardly,as outwardly: It ex-
tinguifheth a preternatural thir& in hot difeafes, abftergeth, and
confumeth flegmatique humors in the (tomach , exciteth, che
appetite, is good for chem that are hydropical, have the Stone;
and Gout, d». Ic isa Adenfrunm diffolving metals; excelling
all other therein: For ic diffolveth all metals and minerals,
(excepting filver) and almoft all ftones, (being rightly prepared)
and reduceth them into excellent medicaments, : uE


^ Teclear Oyl of Maftick. » and Frankincenfe. >


Take of Frankincenfe; or/Maftick, powdered fmall,as much as
will ferve to fill the third part ofa cornutes (which muft be coat-
ed) upon which pour a fufficient quantity of che fpirit of Salt,
taking heed that theRetort be not filled too full; or elfe che fpi-
rit when it boyls, flows overit, then place it in Sand, and give
fire by degrees , and there will pee out fome phieom,after


which. clear cranfparent Oyl, together with the (pirit of Salt; -~


which mutt be keptbyit felf, after this certain yellow: Oyl, - |
-which-muft be received byit felf: and latofat chere follows -


` "ated Oyl, which although it is not to becaftasyay, yet it is vety :


PEE d


‘unlike to the fist, ferving for outward ules ,-agd to be mix
cima P2 with


108 Of the Art of Diftillation. Bóbr H..
wich Oyntments and Emplafters ;. for ic doth wonderfully con-
folidate, and therefore good in new and old wounds, The firt-
being weil rectified is 1n its fübrilty, and penetrating faculty ;
not ünlike ro fpiritof Wine., and may profitably be nfed in-
watdly, and outwardly; viz. in cold affects , but efpecially in .
the fliffnefs ofthe Nerves caufed by cold humors, upon which
follows a contraction; but then you muk firt rub the mem-
ber. contracted. with a linnen. cloth; that ic may be well
warmed‘, into which then the Oyl muti be‘ chafed -with a
warm hand: For it doth do wonders in füch likeaffects of the
Nerves.

Afcer the fame mannet may Oyls. be made outof all Gums,
The red; tenacious, and ftinking Oyls of Tartar, Hartfhorn; Am-
ber, ec. diftilled after the common way by Retort are alfo
rectified with fpirit of Salt, fo as to become tranfparent, and to
lofe the de uia contracted by diftillation. 2


Ros Vitriol á ís made "m


Take of che bel Danfick-Vitrioh; as mie as you Wat un-
calcined; put it into a Glafs-gourd5ind difil icin Sand, andthere
` Will come over a water fomewhat fharpifh,
This Water or Ros is of greater ufe then the Spirit or Oyl
thereof.
` Tt helpeth all inward inflammations, as of the Liver, Kid. |
neys, Stomach, helps the ebullition of blond, and all diftempers
that come from thence.
This is that phlegm,which moft vapour amp. en it is upele
hey know not the vertues thereof. )


“igi fied A fieri green oyi f Viris made: ibm. dauid "


Take as many Copporasí ones as you pleatesbeat them final,
and lay them in acool Cellar, and in rwenty or thirty days they
will attra& theair, and look black: andiafter-fonrteen days be-
: come whitifh; and (weetifh ; then diflolyechem in diftilled rain-


Water ; then filter and evaporate the; water; and they will fhoor


into green Cryftals ; which you.may. diffolye in a cellar per


i "


delis Je


Se EI LAPSEEAS) ACRES


Büak Hn ; OF the ut of Diffillaon: iog ;


deliquium» being firft beaten {miall, and laid on à Marble-ftone: .


"This Liquor is ‘chat famous medicine of Paracelfus for the Fal-
Ting-fickne(s,. a few drops thereof being taken in any approptie
ated liquor.

Take heed that it come at no ftrong fire, for then faith Di:
celfus, it lofeth its greennefs, and as much as it lofeth of chats fo
much alfo of its vertue...


VERWVU FAR
o


A Spirit may be drawn from hence by an ingenuous Artis :


Mes will fmell like Musk; or Amber, >
‘The Sulphur y Vitriol may with $ pirit of Wine be éxtratled M:


Takeofthe beft Danfick-Vitriol half a pound, dry ic by a
gentle fire till it be whitifh, then pour onic of the bett rectified
Spirit of Wine thirty ounces, (Note, that there muft.come.to it
no other moifture than the Spirit of Wine, the Glafs alfo muft
‘be very dry, elfe you labour in vaip)then digeft it in Horfe-dung,
the fpace ofa month ; then decant from the feces the Spirit of
Wine without any troubling of it; thenin Balneo evaporate the
Spirit; and at the bottom you will haye a velar liquor of a moft
wonderful fipticity.

' This liquor is a famous Anodynum, fuppreffing all. noxious
vapours whatfoever,and.caufing telt,

-—Afew bos thereof may be. skeni In any fpecifical denen


E “eA Suderifical Water te de ned autwardiy. nod di es


Take of füblimed Meicug very finely powdered an ounce. cand
half, of Euphorbium powdered afcruple,, Spirit of Wine well


re&ifiedjand Rofe-water, of eacha pound;digeft ciem rhem.two


ot thtee hours ina gentle’ Ba/neo, che neck of the veffel which
mutt be very. long;being well ftopt; then Jet. them boil a: quarter
ofan hour : when the liquor is cold, pour it from the feces, and
keep it in a Glas,


If the: Back-bone: be, bathed: with. this Waters or the


writ of thofe that be weak, ic cauferh {weat Seleny ;
dfiic bexdone-ià ithe: bed. By: which means. difeafes thaere-
shs {wear may be cured, Alfo us pained. place by be-

3 ing


iro “Of the Art of Diflillation. Boox We —
ing bathed with this Water is in a little time eafed.
Note, that you. muft not bath any place above three or —
oe times with'it; for by being too often ufed, it contracts
the skin, . 3 Isid


How an acid Spirit, or Vinegar, may be diftilled out of all Vege-
tables, as Herbs, Woods, Roots, Seeds, &C,


Firft put a few living coals into the Furnace, then pne upon:
«them wood that isto be diftilled, chat it may be burnt: out of


which whileft itis burning goesforththe acidSpirit thereof ine ^ —


the Receiver, where being condenfed; it falls down into ano-
ther Receiver, refembling almoft common Vinegar in its fmell,
wherefore alfo ic is celled the Vinegar of Woeds.

And after this manner you may draw forthan acid fpirit out.
of any wood, or vegetable, and that ina great quantity without -
Cofts, becaufe'che wood ro be diftilled is put buc upon a very few
livingcoals, and upon that another, for one kindles the other ;
and this fpiric requires no more charges chen ofthe wood to be
iftilleds which is a great difference betwixt this, and che come
mon way of diftilling, where befides Retorts is required ano». .
ther firé ; and out ofa great Retort fcarce a pound of Spirit is
drawn in the {pace of five or fix hours; whereas in ours; in the

` {pace of one day,-and that without any coft or labour may be ex-
trated cwenty or thirty pounds, becaufe che wood is immediate-
ly to be caft into the fire to be diftilled;andthat nor in pieces,buc
whole: Now this fpirit (being rectified ) may commodionfly
be ufed in divers Chymical operations, for it doth eafily diffolve
animal tones, as the eyes of Crabs, the ftones of Perches, and
Carps, ‘Corals alfo'and Pearl, ec. as doth Vinegar of Wine; By

-means tlieréofalío are diffolved the Glaffes of Merals; 380 f Tins.
Pu Antimony ; and are ‘extraéted, and reduced into {weet


Whe Spirits, Eliers tid Salesof Minerals and Stoves, |
"By this way Spities thapbie taifed from any Mineral or: Stone,
"and that without the addition oFany other thing z: yetfo, as that
cnm | the


Boox lll. Ofthe Artof Diflilation. — omi


the Minerals , as Stónes, as Flints , Cryftal, Talk, Lapis-Calae -
minaris, Marcafite, Antimony, being eround with an Iron-ladle

cat upon the coals, and there will arife together with a certain: |
acid Spirit). fome Salt and Flowers, which are to be wafhed off: -


. from the Recipients, and filtred, and the flowers will remain in
`- Charta bibula, for the water together with the Spirit; and the:


Salt paffeth through the filter,all which may be feparated, recti-
fied and be kept by theriifelves forthéir proper ufes, Now this:
you mult know, that you mult choofe fuch Minerals which.


.- have not been touched by che fire, if you defire to-have their
` Spirit.


How to rettifie Oils and Spiritsof Minerals.


»«Patthe Liquor thar is diftilled from Minerals into the Rerorr;.
to which give fire by degrees, and the Spirit will rife up into the:
upper Receiver, and the heay Oyl will go into the middle Re--
ceiver, which is the bigeft of alls. and into the little Receiver an-
nexedto the end of the middle, will país (ome of the Spirit; -
which though ic paffeth.into the middle Receiver, will not fay.
there, but goeth beyond it becaufe it finds vent: Y


OW 0 Ofthe det of Difilatins  BooxlV.


cae


i : dif ANI MALS.


SSSA USSO Ge O


588 0.0 K IV.


Waters, Spirits, and Oyls, fimple. and compound
i ont of Animals.


Oyl and Water ont of Bloudys made thuse


ra Ake of bloud as much as you pleafe, fet it

@ ftand in putréfa&ion in a Glafs-veflel

. clofecoveted the (pace of forty dayes,

then diftil ic. in-afhes ; and there will

. come forth a Waterand Oyl:extra& che

Salt out of the feces with the faid water,

calcine the Salt in a Crucible, and chen

: 2. dilfolve it inthe faid water; and chen di-

^.. ftil offthe water (which will be a good

.:ge&difying of the Water) and dry the Salt very well, which

then mixed withthe forefaid Oyl , being firft redified , and
digeft them both together for the fpace of a month.


D


` To makethe Magiffery of Bloud.


Take ofthe pureft Bloud as much as you pleafe, putit into a


Péllicap, chat three parts of four may be empty, and digeft it a
z ; ? : : . month


AM ANE RE ote) LS


Boox IV. Of the Mit of Dipl el fü |


month in Horfe-dung (in which time it will (well and become as-


much more as it was whenit was put in) then difil off the flegm
in Balneo,andin the bottom will remain the Magi(tery of Bloud,
which muf be diftilled, and cohobated nine times in à Retort i in
afhes, and then. itis perfected,


This Magiftery isof excellent vertue ; which being taken in-
wardly, and applyed outwardly, curech moft difeafes, ‘and cece


pain, being very Balfamical.


Elixir of Muminie is vida iln;


Take of Minus (viz.of Mans-flefh hardened) cut fmall four.


ounces, Spirit of Wine terebinthinated ten oünces;put them ine
- toa glazed veflel, (three parts of four being empty). which, fet


in Horfe-dung to digeft for the fpace of a month; then takeit out -


and expres it. let the expreffion be circulated a month, then let
it run through Manica Hippocratis ; then evaporate: the Spirit;
till that which remainsin the bottom belike an O yl; which is
the true Elixir of Mummie.

This Elixir is wonderful luba againit all Infc&iontal-
fo very Balfamical. E


The E fence of Mait-bráint,


Take the Brains of a young man that hath dyed a violent


death; together with the Me mbranes, Arteries; Veins, Nerves;


and all the pith of the Back ; bruife thefe in a Stone-mortar till -


they becomea kind of pap, “then put as much of the Spirit. of


Wine, as will cover it three or four fingers breadth : then put it


into a large Glafs; that three parts of four be empty ,.being Hera
metically j clofed, then digeftit half a year in Horíe-dung ; then


take it out and diftil icin Balneos and cohobate the water till the


greateft.part of the Brains be diftilled off,

A fcruple or two of this Effence taken in fome fpecificil
water once ina day is a moft infallible medicine againtt the Eal-
ding-ficknels; .


2


aoee a


14 Of the Art of Diftillation.  Boox IV; |
‘A Famous Spirit made out of Craniüm-humanum.


Take of Craninm-humanum as much as you pleafe,break itin- .
to {mall pieces, which put into a Glafs-Retort well coated, with
a large Receiver well luted, then put a ftrong fire to it by de<
grees, continuing of it till you fee no more fumes come forth;
and you (hall have a yellowi(h Spirit; ated Oyl, anda volatile _
Salt. er

Take this Salcand the yellow Spirit; and digeft them by cir-
culationtwo or three months in Balneo, and thou fhalt have a :
moft excellent Spirit. - Co

This Spirit is of affinity with, ifnot the fame asthat famous, |
Spirit of Dr. Goddard’s in Holborn.

Ithelps the Falling-ficknefs, Gout, Dropfie, infirm Stomach ;
and indeed ftrepgthens all weak parts, and openeth all obftrudti-
Ons and isa kind of Panacza.


Another excellent Spirit made ont of Craniums Harts-horny or T Vorga


Take of either of thefe; (ifyou take Craniam, it need not be
brnifed at all,only broke into little pieces ; if Harts-horn or Ivo-
ry, you muft cut them in thin pieces) lay it piece by piece upon-a `
. met fpread upon any veffel, being almoft full of water, cover th's

net with another veffel very clofe , then make the water boil,
and keep it boiling three days and three nights, andin that time
the Bones, or Horns, will be as foft as Cheefe ; then pound them,
and to every pound thereof, put half a pound of Hungarian Vitriol
u5calcined; and as much Spirit of Wine as will make them into
a thin pafle, This Pafte digeft ina veffel Hermetical feal'd the ~
fpace of amoneth in Za/nel; then diftil it in a Retort in Sand
tillall be dry, and you fhall have a molt excellent Spirit,

This Spirit is of wonderful ufe in the Epilepfie-Convulfions;:
all Feavers putrid or peftilential; paffions of the heart; and is a
very excellent Sudorifick,. inl pot

This Spirit may be taken from the quantity of halfan ounce to
av ounce in fome fpecifical liquor.


Awa


; à
ELE ee PARERE TCR ee ne


oe P EN


Boox XIV. of the Art of. Difüllatim; - Mg
É A Water gad Oyl made out of Hair.


Fill an earthen Retort with Hair cut (mall, fec ic over the fire,
and fira Receiver to it; and there will come overa very ftinking -
Water and Oyl.

This Water and Oylis ufed-in Germany to be fprinkled upon
fences and hedges, to keep wild and hurtful Cattle from coming
to do harm in any place ; for fuch is the {tink of this liquor, that"
ic doth affright them from coming to any place near it,


Water of Milk i is made thui, s


Take of ie Milk thou pleafefta Gallon, in it diflolve half
a pound of Salt ; and put to it two handful of Plantain, and
„an ounce of Licori(h fliced , then diftilic in a hot Still with @
gentle fire.

This water is of excellent ufe in hot diflempers of the Lungs
and Kidneys,-

You may putin other ingredients, according to the ufe jos
would have it for. «


An excellent compound water of Milk for any Talimi sq
tions 3n the eyes.


Take of Womans-milk a pint, of white Copperas a pound;
diftil them inafbes. Note, that affoon as thou perceiveft any
fharp to come off, then ceafe.

Let inflamed eyes be wafhed three or four times ina day with
this water, and ic helpech them wondeifully.


phat of Urine ts made ibus


Take of the Urine of a young mari drinking much Wine; as
much as you pleafe, let ic{tandin Glafs- veiels i in putrefaction
40. days, then pouring it from its feces; di(til it in a Glafs-gourd
... InSand, till all be diy ; ; then cohobate the faid Spiricon the Cas

: put-dMoriunm three times; then dittil it; in a Gouid ofa long
4 Q.2 “neck,


c


nó Ofthe Art of Diftillation:. BooxIV,
neck, and there willafcend, befides the Spirit, a Cryftalline
Salt; which thou maitt either keep by it felf, being calledthe
. .Wolatile Salt of Urine, or mix it with ics Spirit. which will -
` thereby become very penetrating ; ifthey be digefted for fome
days together. - i i ;

Note, that the pipe of the head muft be wide;or elfe the Vo-
latile Saltwillfoon ftop it, —

Note, that this Salt 1s fo penetrating, that it penetrateth che
body of the Glas, |
This Spirit. by rectification may be made fo pure, and fub-
tle, that it will burn as fire, and diffolve Gold, and precious. —

Stones. s
This being often applyedto any place pained with the Gout,
eafeth it prefently ; 1t alfo quickensany part that is benummed,
À The Salt Volatile is Helmont s famous medicine for the Jaun-
iaig ilise sody :
: A compound Spirit of Urine.


"Take of Hungarian Vitriol a pound, the Urine of a Boy
that is healthy, four-pints: :put-chefe into a Glafs-veffel well
clofed, that three parts of four may be empty; digeft chem in
pu for the fpace ofa month, then diftil them in aíhes till all

e dry. i
. This Spirit is of great vertue inthe Epilepfie, Gout, Dropfie,
Convulfions, being cakenfromtwo drams.to half an ounce in


Some fpecifical liqour, `
on To make a Spirit of Honeys
Take good ftrong ftale Meads otherwife called Metheglin ; as
-much as thou pleafeft, diftilitina Copper Still , or Alembick,
with its Refrigeratory,atid it will yielda Spirit like Aqua-vite..


-© The Quintiffence of Honey ts made thus.


B T "p Sri fas St s MANT S HD le Pn is 14
BooxklV. -OftbezrtofDifilatin. —— Wy

-it inco a Glafsy four parts of the five being empty; clofe it well,
and fet ic in digeftion a whole year, and thou fhalt have the Efe
fence of Honey {wimming on the top,in the form of an Oybbe-
ing ofas fragrant a fmell.as any ching in che-world; the phlegm
will be in the middle; and the feculent matter in che bottom, | of
a dark colour, and ftinking fmell,


8 ome make the Quintelfence fH oney after this manner:


Take as much Honey as thou pleafeft, of the belt, put ic into
a Gourd of Glafs ; firft dinil off the phlegm in Balneo, then ex-
tra& the tin&ture out from what remains, with the faid Water,
then calcine the remaining feces, and extract from thence the
Salt with the forefaid Water, being diftilled off from the Tine -
&ure; calcine the Salt, and melti it ina Crucible, thenlet itdi
- folve in à Cellar ; ; then again evaporate it away, and thou Malt
hayea moft white Salt; which letimbibe as much of the Tin-
Cure as it will; digeft them for three months ; Eee thoy fhalt
haye an Effence of Honey. :


— An Effence of Honey-may be made dua. id


Take of Honey well defpumated as much as you plate pour
uponit as much of the beft rectified Spirit of Wine as will cover -
it five or fix fingers breadth; diget chem in a Glafs-veffel well -
clofed (the fourth part only being full) in a temperate Balneo,
the fpace ofa fort-night, or till che Spirit be very well tinged,
then decant off the Spirit, and put ón more till all che tincture
be extracted ; then put all chefe tin&tures together , and evapo-
rate the Spirit till what remains begin to be thickifh at the bot-
tom; and ofa golden colour,

This is a very excellent Effence of Honey, andis ‘of fo plea
fantan odour} that {carce any thing is like to it.

- Ttisfo:cotdial, that it even tevivesthe dying, iftwoorthree:
drops thereof be taken in fome Cordial Water, .


mI firong S. yiri J the Vinegar of Honey:


Take a pound of Honey, put to it'of the beft Whicd orbes.
IR vinegar


E


vinegar fix pints, an ounce of white Pepper bruifed fmall, of the

ftrongeft Muftard-feed bruifed three ounces; put théfe into a
. Glafs-veffel, that three parts of four may be empty ; digeft chem
in a temperate Balneo, ot fet che Veflel inthe Sunfor the {pace
of a fortnight , then diftil chem in Balneo, and thou fhalt have a
Spirit far {harper chan the common Spirit of Vinegar.

This Spirit is ronger, and better than any common diflilled
Vinegar for the diffolving of hard things, and extracting the
tinctures ont of things. ;


Oyly or Quinteffence of W, ax.


Take of the beft Wax a pound, asmuchof pure Sand well
wafhed from all its impurity and again dryed; Firft mele che
Wax, and then mix the Sand with ic very exactly ; then put them
‘into a Glafs-Retort well coated, fit a (trong Receiver to it; and
fet itin Sand, giveitfire by degrees, continuing it four dayes,
which at lat muft be very ftrong, and there will come off a fpiri-
tuous Oyl, which muftbe re&ified, feven timesin a Glafs-Re-
tort, every time changing the Retort, and you íhall have a fubrle

Oil of a golden colour,
^. This Oyl extra&s the vertues out of all Flowers prefently, be-
. Ing fet inthe Sun, ic is wonderful Balfamical for the cure of


~ . wounds or ulcers, both inward, and outward ; it alfo being ap-


Of the Art of Diftillaton. -BooxIV;


Es
M


plyed outwardly, eafeth all pains, quickens any dead member, as `


in che Palhe,
Water ts made out of any fefe thus.
Take what flefh you pleafe, the bloudieft part thereofunwa-


fhed;being cut very fmall;and then brnifed (or if it be a feathered
fowl, takeit being chafed up and down, until ic be wearied, and


then fuddenly ftrapeled, the feathers being plucked off without.


putting of icinto water, and being thus plucked bare , and the
bowels taken out, -cut the fle(h; bones, gizard, liver;heart;) and
pour upon it as much water as will be fufficient, with what {pices
and herbs thou pleafeft,then fet it over a gentle fire in an earthen


veflel glazed the fpace of 24. hours., then put the head upon. it


and


Book IV. Ofthe Art of Diftillation. = 119
and luce itclofe, and there will diftil off a comfortable reftora-
tive Water, . : E


; Water, or Liquor, is made out of flefo thus.


Take off what flefh you pleafe, or feathered fowl preparedas
before, bruife it (mall, and pucit into a Copper veffel tinned
within fide, without any water being put to it, put a cover
to it, and luce it clofe, and fer it Balneos or over the vapour of
feething water, and if the flefh be render, it will be turned in-
to a Clear liquor the fpace of twelve hours, if harder, it will

. require aloüger time : You may put in what {pices or hearbs
you pleafg, to give ita good relifh and odour; after all is
done, yóu may (train ic and keep ic for ufe, being yery re- ~
ftaurative and good for weak ftomachs, that cannot concoct
hard fear. jg Y IA

If this be digefted in a Pellicans or Bolt-head 4 fortnight , ic
will be farr better. Aro taped

After chis manner may be preferved Snails, Worms, c^ c, and
fach like; which are very medicinable.


A very excellent Reftorative Liquor:


Take of the heart, lungs, and liver of a Calf, the fame part: of
a Fox new killed cut chem fiall, put to them à quart of Shell-
Snails well fcouted in (alt-water; letthefe be pur into a Copper
- veffel tinned within fide,and covered clofe, that no vapour come:
forth ;' fet this veffel over the vapour of feething-water, and in
24.hours or thereabouts, they will be for the moft part of.
them ‘turned ipto-a liquor of themfelves; then cake opt this li-
quor, and put it into a large Pellican, or Bolt-head; putting to
them a quart of old Malligo-wine, Rofemary-flowers, Betony-
flowers, Matygold-Howersy Marfh-mallow-flowers; of each a’
handful,halfa pound of Raifins of the Sun'ftoned, Mace and Nut-

- meg, ofeach two drams ; digeftall thefe together the fpace of a
fortnight, then'pour off that which is clear from the: feces , and
{weeten it with Sugar, or Syrup of Gilly-flowers, and ler the Pa-

ne: take thereoffive or fix fpoonfuls, three oy four times Em ;
: BE E s : 7 . " x AM AS;


wo Of the Art of Difiillations "BOAR. We
"This liquor recovereth the decaying ftiength wonderfully
they that by reafon of their weaknefs can neither eat , or digeft
any manner of common meat, will ina fhort cime be fentbly "
firengchned, if they drinka quarter ofa pint ofthis: morning and
-eyening,
— kis very good in Confumptions, and repairs the radical moi-
fure marvelloufl y.


44 Balfom made of Bears-fat.


Take of Bears-fat a pound, dita itin a Retort, ps re&ifie ic
three ot four times: to this thus reétified, put the tinctnre of
Rofemary and Sage, made with Spiric of Wine, of each three
Ounces, mix chem: well together; in thefe infufe Cloves, Cinna-
mon, Saffron, Nutmegs, of each three drams, in warm afhes the

{pace of a night, then frain them,and put to ‘the Oyl four ounces
of the beft Wax melted; and mingled well together.

This is amoft incomparable Balfom for the Consens Palfie,


The Oyl of. Snakes and Adders,


Take Snakes, or Adders, when they are fat, which will be in
Fune, or Fuly; cut off their heads, and cake off their skins > and
unbowel them; and put them into a.Glafs-gourd; and pour on
fo much of the pure Spirit of Wine well rectified » > that ic may
cover them four or five fingers breadth, ftop the glafs well, and
fet icin Balneo till all their fubfance be turned into an Oyl
which keep well topt for your ufe,

This. Oyl doth wonderful cures in recovering hearing in.
thofe that. be deaf, if a few drops thereof be put warm into
the Ears,

A Noble-man of Germany » that was Sarl for curing the:
deaf, ufed this as his chiefeft PES ner by which they d he cus
red thofe that were born deaf, :


The: Quintelfence of Saakin dert, or Kiper: l


"Take of the biggeft and: fattelt Snakes > Adders or Vipers; -
which,


BooxIV. Ofthe At of Diflllatn. | at
which you can get in Fane, or July, cut off their heads, take off
their skins and unbowelthem, chen cut them into {niall pieces, .
and put them into a Glafs of a wide mouth, and fet chem in a
warm Balneo; that they may be well dryed, which will be done
in three or four days : then take chem out, and put them into a.
Bolr-head, and pour on them of the bet alcolizated Wine as


‘muchas will cover chem fix or eight fingers breadth. Stop the


Glafs Hermetically, and digeft them fifteen days in Balneo, or fo
long till the Wine be. fufficiently covered, which pour forth;
then pour on more of the forefaid Spirit of Wine till all che
Quinteflence be extracted : Then put all the tinged Spirits toge-
ther: and draw off the Spirit ina gentle Balneo, till it be thick ae
the bottom ; on this pour Spirit of Wine cariophyllated ; and
ftir chem well together, and digeft-them in a Circulatory ten
dayes, then ablira& the Spirit of Wine, and the quinteflence
remaineth at the bottom perfec. . i 1

: This Quinteffences of extraordinary verene: for che purifying


of the blond, flefh and skin , and confequently of all difeafes


therein, - Ic cures alfo the Falliug-ficknefs , and frengchens the
Brain, Sight, and Hearing; and preferveth from Gray-hairs res
neweth Youth, preferveth Women from Abortion, cureth the
Gout, Confumption, caufeth fweat is very good in, andagaintt
Peftilential infections. - . Bia : |


t


Viper-Wine is made thur i


Takethe bet &tY iperscus of their heads,take off their skins;


and unbowel them,then put chem into the bet Canary-Sack;four


or fix , according to their bigneís into a gallon: Lec chem ftand
two or three months;then draw:off your Wine as'you drink it.
Some pùc them aliverinto the Wine, and: cherefiffocace -
them, and afterwards take them out, and cut off their heads,take -
off their skins, and.unbowel chem, and then put them into the
faid Wine again, and do as before, — ;
-n This Wine hath the fame vertues. asi the fote-going Quintef-
fence s. iral(o provoketh.to Venery and curesthe Leprofie; and -
fuchdike,cosruption of blonde: oi > ed) Se po vi} 009


R cd Kuryath'e


x


ENNIUS SSA IS vr m ita IE NU Nal SHUT NS REIR.


uaz Ofthe Art of Diftillation, ` Boox IV..


Kunrath’s famons Water, called Aqua-Magnanimicatis.


Take of Pifmires, or Ants, (the biggeft that have a fowrith
fmell, are che belt) two handfuls, Spirit of Wine a Gallon;


-diget them ina Glafs-veffel clofe (hut the fpace of a month,
in which time they. will be difolved intoa Liquor; thendiftil —


them in Balneo, till all be dry : Then pnt the fame quantity of
Ants as before; digeft;and diftil them in the faid Liquor as before :
do this three times > then- aromatize the Spirit with fome Cin-
namon:

Norte; that upon the Spirit will float an Oyl, which muft be
feparated, -


This Spiricis of excellent ufe to Rir up the Animal Spirit: in -


Somnch, that John Cafmire Palfgrave of the Rhene, and Seyfrie
of Gollen, General againft the Turks! ,, did alwayes drink of ic


when they went to fight, to increafe Magnanimity and Courage, —


. which it did evento admiration.


- This Spirit doth alfo porani irticare them that are forh:
£ni ro Venery.
- Ttalfo provoketh Urine even to admiration, ©


It doth alfo wonderfully irritare the Spirits that ate' di


led, anddeaded with any cold diftemper.


This Oy! doth the fame ee and indeed more power- e


- fully.


This Oyl doth befides act is fpoliét: of the Spirit, help
deafneís exceedingly , two or tliree- drops ‘being dróppedi into
the Ear; after i itis well fyringed > once in dày; far à week
together.


- dr lielpeth alio the Eyes thathave any fra growisgoh dem; i |


‘being noweand then dropped i into thems: zi


sywiic
^4


i Matar. Aqua- Magoaninicatis pre T "sind o


"^ Také of Ants; or Pi(fmires;'a ‘handful, of ihéic Be sai ‘tWo kin:


dred of Millepedes; (.) Woodlice ohe hüridred; of Bees ne hüti-


- dred and fifty ; digeft all thefe in two pints of: 'Spiatét Wihejbe-


dngy In Well impregnated with the bent Soot : Digent them.
t toges h


cens


BooklV. Ofthe Art of Diftillation. az}
together the {pace of a month, then pout off che clear og


and. keep it fafe,
‘This Water or Spirit; is of the fame vertue as che former,


Water uf Dusg 5 wid shies


Take of any sm as muchas thou pleafeft, whilft it is frefh;
putit into a common cold Still, and with a foft fire diftil ic of ;
it willbe beft if chebo:tom of the Still be fec over a. vapour;
if thou wouldft haveit be ftronger, cohobate the faid water
over its feces feveral times : for we fee there is great vercue
indung, ic makes ground pun and many tone thereof are ve
ry medicinable,


eus ! dd Waterif Dovesedung t vs made thie


Take of Doves-dung dryed as muchas you pleafe 5 » to every
pound put a.pint of Rhenifh-wine; in which let itfteep all night
1n a gentle Ba/nco , then diftil it in a Glafs-gourd in afhes : Co-
hobate this Liquor three times; if chere be any Volatile Salt,
~ mix ic with water.

This Water is very excellent againít all obario “of the
Kidneys, Bladder ; ic helpeth the > Jaundice prefently ,: two or
three {poonfuls. thereof being: drank once every morning’ =
evening. :j l
A Water made of Horfe-dung. neta


< Take of me dung of à Horfe, that is fed in the Bable, : as much

as you pleafe; lec it ftand:two dayes ont. ofthe Sun; and ont of
the Wet; to every pound of this pour a pint of White-wine; Iet
-them fand in a warm Banes a fortnights: chen diftil chem: an: a


Glafs-gourd in Sand, cohobate this three or four times ; if as


there be any volatile Salc, mix ic with the water. l
This Water is very excellent againft the: Baftard- pinrife,
Stitches; Wind, obftrnction of tlie: Reins; Bladders: véry good in
-a Dropfies Jaundice, Scurvy» @c. If three or four fpoosfuls be
taken every morning in the Water of Juniper-berries; it alfo

canfeth fweat,
Ro. A Wa-


d iude Cre EAE ^ re ELS ue i ee gn fy ee ee is a "e e cC EE


n4 Ofthe Artof Diflilitim. BooxlV.:
‘A Water fanelling like ember made by Paracelfus out of Cov-dung.


Take of Cow-dung » and diftil ir in Bali and the water
thereof will have the fmell of Amber-griefe:
This bd is very excellent in all inward inflamations,


An extillor Sudorifick, made of the young buds of Harts-hora»


Take of the young buds of Harts-horn, whilft they are full
ef bloud and moiít; bruife chem into a paftey then mixas much
Canary-wine as will make a | very thin pafte, diftil them in afhes _
till they be very dry.

This is an excellent Sudorifick in all burning Feavers and Epi-
demical difeafes ; if a fpoonful be taken by ic felf, or in any -
appropriated Liquor.


„Oyl out of Bones, and Horns s made thus.


E Taks of what Bones you pleafe , reduce them to’ a grofs |
"powder; put them into. a Retort. putting. a (trong fire by 2
degrees thereunto; and there will come forth an Óyl > and |.
` volatile. Salt ; both which thou mayft mix together ; and di-
geft- them into: an Effence ; the on being fr reGtified with
Spirit of Wine..


The Water ef Swallows T he Falisg-f -frehsefso.—


Take of Swallows, cut: into pieces wichouc feparating any
thing: from therm fix onuces; of Caforewm'cat {mall an ounce ;
mix them:cogerher,: infufe chem twelve hours in half a pint (o
of Canary-wine, then put them into a. Glafs-gourd, and di-
Ril chemin Sand till allbe dry; then coho bate the Liquor three
simes,

This Water being drank tothe quanticy of two fpoonfals eye-
"y morning, cureth chem that have/che Falling-ficknefs,


Oji


BooxIV. © — gus
Onl ont of Eggs madeit.


' "Take of the’ yelks of. Eggs boyled: very hard ,. tub: them in
pieces with yoar fingets,then fry them in a pan overa gentle fire,
continually ftirring them with a fpoon till they become red , and
the Oyl be refolved, and flow from them; then put them into
a hair-cloth, and fo prefs forththe Oyl..

This Oylcleanfeth the skin from any Glthinefe contracted by
heat ; -Et cnrech Puflules, Chaps, Excoriations; Ring-worms, but
efpecially all burnings. ;


A Water of the Whites of Eggs that willcure a Wond-
Without any ao ble Scar.


Take as many Egg sas you pleafe, bev Ae very hard, then
cut them in the middle, and take our the yelks, filling. üp the
cavities, with fome of thofe whites. being firft bruifed into a
|^» patte; then put:both fides of the Eggs together as before, and
tye them rogether witha thred , and with a ftring hang them
in the middle of a Gourd-glafs, that they touch not the fides,
fop this Glafs very clofe, ‘and fet it in Balneo, and you fhall
fee thofe whites which were bruifed drop down intoa Liquor :
which: you mult gather xP out of the poe óf he no


— .énd keep.:


You will haye very fale of iis Liga

This Liquor applyed to any greenwound with a auker; cures :
it prefently , wherefoever it be, wichone any vifible fcar, Ir
cures moft ae al woundsi in the ix


b sA Waur of Crabuis maile es 151715 sda E
5 i feet
Tue Cubs; or Craw-fifh y. as many às. yon Pais break
wie to pieces, then macerace chem: im water of Sengreen
for the-fpace of aday y $ then? ditt themi; jéBobate the ware
three cities. == PANO]
This Water is of fingula veituein all: manner of infami
ons ayar and outwards. nsu ERIEN
: R 3 po


uy


3


dió Ofthe Artof Difillaton. Box Vs


An Oji, or Eitur, is made ost of Crabr-syes thuss


5 Take of :Crabs-eyes; very finely powdered, five parts; Oyl
of Tartar ‘per Deliguiam (ix parts : (This Oyl of Tartar
muft be made of Salt of Tartar after it hath flowed: in the
fire;) digeft:them in Horfe-dang thefpace of a month, then -

Que /the Liquor , and make an extraction ‘with rhe. bekt

fied Spirit of Wine that can be made, ( or elfe.you lofe -
your labour) then evaporate the Spririt of Wine; and therere- -


` mains an Oyl at the bottom.


This Oy! is of wonderful vertue in putrid Feavers, and fuch like
diftempers, alfo in all obftructions: efpecially of the Kidneys.


Water f Spawn of Frogs ts made thus.


Takeofthe Spawn of Frogs gathered in March» as M as
you pleafe,put a handful of Saltto every quart,and put them in-
to a common cold Still, gud with a gentle fire di(til off dis3 Wa-
ter pea no more will diftil,:: i


ney bn camjonnd Water nf the Sperm if B vof s.

Take of the Sperm of Frogs gathered in AZarchy about the
new. wE thé Moon: four pound ».0f Cow-dung frefh fix pound;
mix chem well. together, and let them fland the fpace of a; day,
then difil chem in aíhes, i

This Water allayes all hot pains oh inward, and outward,
spell of the Gout, hw ;


Motion compound Water r ihe ee f “Frogs.

Take of the Sperrn o£ Frogs\ gathered in ZMarch , two pans
and half; the Urine of a young man three pints, new Treacle two
ounces and à half, white Vitriol, Salt, Allum,of each four onnces, ©
then diftilickem 5:and putto the Water an ounce and half at; the
Salt o£ Viiol; Camphire; abd Saffron; of each an ounce, =:

This Water being applyed outwardly, helpeth all pains, e
Cially of the Gont, and: fuch: like s- alfo: allayeth hot, or cold
dwellings; Italfo Rancheth bleeding = bi

A (0 A Mil-


Box V. file " of Diplo’ i uz |


SUSERUENNUCURC ME NRENR
Eum oO


A Mifcelany of. Spagirical Bet
ments, and C uriofii ties


/$00K Vo eth


u$ e an he be Spatial eAnatonne of Wattle cu "i


; > A ; S
5v at ri M ve riei 2-


Sy Arter feems tobera body fo very: Hooi

2. geneal, asif neither Nature or Art could -
Q difcover any Heterogeneity in the parts
iD thereof 2) Thus indeed'it íeems to the

Ņ eye ofi the Vulgar;cbut tosbat ofa. Phi-
lofopher far: othetwifey asd fhall £ndea-
> "'vobr.to make:credible;:by prefenting.to _
'''yourconfiderationa 'twafold proces of +
Sy f : the difcovering the diffimilary: parts

thereof ; pibus ie one is natural only; andthe other arrifi-.
cial j aBut before I (peak of: either; ic müftbe .prémi(ed,-rbar in.
theelémetit of Water there-isi great. plenty-of-the {Spiric:of che:
World, whichis more: predominant i in/itythan:inany other eles
€ for the ufe, e bencfitiof Bener Narre, rae and shat this:


heat, )


N


118 Of the Art of Diftillation. Boox V.
heat, or vivifying fire; containing in it felf the bezinning of mo.
tion »-by Mercury, a fubltance abounding with ridical moifture,
with which the Sulphur of life, or viral fire is cheifhed, and pre-
ferved. Now chefe fubltances which are in the Spirit of the
World, make all Fountains, and Waters , but with (ome diffe-


rence, according to the predominancy: of eithe, “This: feverat


predominancy therefore is ground of the variety of productions;
J fay, of productions, beeaufe all things are procuced out. of wa-
ter: fon Water isboth the Sperm , and the disflraum o£ the
. World; the formets becauíe'it'includes-the,íeed of every


thing; the lattér, becáufe che Spermof Natureis putrefied in |


it, that the feed included in it íhould be adtuatel; andcake up-
on itthe divers forms. of things ; and becaufe, by ic che feed it
felf; and all things produced of feed grow, and are increafed :
Now this being premifed, 1 fhall (hew you whatthe natural pro-
cels is, which I. (hall make plain by inftancing n three feveral
[DU NU. fpawn of Frogs;of Stones; and'of Ve-
getables,

3 The fpawn of Frogs is produced. after this manner; viz. The
Sulphur, whichis in the Water, being by the heat of che Sün re-
folsed;and:ditlolved,isgreedily; and with delight conceiyed:by
tlié-elémenc of water’, evenas the fperm ofa Male is by the


matrix of che Female; and that upon thisaccomt. The wartet ~


wants ficcicy, which che ful phur hath, and cher¢ ore exceedingly


défiring it; doth greedily attra& itro it felf: Suphur allo wants


humidity; and: therefore attra&s. che. humidity of the’ water:
Moreover the humidity ofthe water: hath the tumidicy of the
falt laid up oceultly init: alfo the Sulphur cherfheth the ficci-
ty of the fire; and:defires nothing more than the humidity of
the Sales thacis'inthe water. : Sulphuralfo. comains the :(iccity


of che Sale, whence it!is thar Salm requires a liccity from the


Sulphur.’ And thus dothefe attractive vertues mutually act npon
each others fubje&, | Now: by this meanstbereis a Conception
made in the water, which now begins to be: tagid, puffed up»
and troubled) as alfoto be.eroffer, and more limie s: until out
ofthe fpermatick velfels thei fpermsibe -ca(t upward, ini which
ems after! awhile appear blatk (pecks, »which are the feed of
the Frogey and by che heat of theSun; are in a faort tinge turned


t Cat


“into


` b


2
ES


Bóox V. Ofthe Art of Diflillation. - Um
into the fame; by which i ic appears rhere are Giada parts
ingwater..

552, Scones are: moa out of water that. hath sumucilaginonq

Mercury; which the Salty with which it alfo abounds, fixech i dns
to ftones ; This you may fee cleared by putting (tones'into wa-
ter, for they will after a time Contracta mucilaginous flimie mats


' ger, which being taken out of the water, and fet in the Suny bes '


comes tobe of a lony nature: And'whence come thofe (tones,
gravel; and fand; which we fee infprings?, They are not wafhed
dowm® out of the mountains and hills (as fome:thipk ) from
whence the watets fpring; neither were they in the earth before
thefprings brake forch (as fome imagine) and now appear by
wafhing away. ofthe earthfrom them ;^for if you dig round a-


bout the fprings; even beyond the: heads of chem; you fhall find.


no ftones at all inthe earth, only in the veins thereof through
which the water ruris : Now the reafon‘of the (maltiefs o£ thefe
{tones is the continual motion of water which hinders them from
being united into a continued. bignefs..I (hall make a further con-
firmation of this inthe: artificial T proce(s of manifefting the hete-
rogeneity of water.T (hall bere'only add the affertion: of Helmont,
faying sythat with his Altaheft all fton:s, andindeed, allichings
may be curned into water : If fo,then you know what the Maxim
is, viz. Allthings may berefolyed into chat from whence they
had their beginning.


1 34 “Vegetables are produced out: ofi watery as you mhayicleanty


{ee by the waters fending forth plants that. have no roots fixed án
"the bottom: of which foit isthelheatb called Duck-weed, which
putcech fotch a little ftring inrothe water, which is:as it were
the root thereof. For the confirmation of this thatothis hetb
_ my be produced out of meer water,there is »Geneletaaniat this
time in the City, of no {mall worth, that faith he hadifair water
ftanding imGlafs divers years, and at lafta plarit fp ptang out of ir,
‘Alfo: 1f you putfome plants, as Water-mint, ec. into a Glafs
‘of fair Watér, ic will germinate,and fhoot out into a grear length,
and; alfo:take root in i thé water, ‘which root will in: à; [bort dime
be: fosinereafeds and extended, e$ to fill: up thé: Glafs : -biy yon
_amud.tentembers, chad you pur fre fh waterinto the Glafs 'onceán


th hates days. Hei eunto alfoy may bs adhd the He De,


=


go — OfüeAnofDifillaim. Boor Vs


"eof Helmst, Concerning the growth ofatree; For (faith he) I
took two hundred pound weight of earth dryed in an oven, and
- püritintoa veffel; in which Ifeta Willow-tree which weighed
five pound, which by the addition of water to the earth, did in
five years time grow to fuch a bignefs, as that it weighed 169.
pound; at which time I alfo dryed and weighed cheearth , and
within two ounces it retained its former. weight. Befides, the


Ancients have obferved , Shat (ome hearbs have grown out of.


fnow, being purified: and do not we fee that all Vegetables are
nourifhed, and increafed with an infiped water , for what elfe i;


their juyce? If you cut a Vine in the month of Z4arcbjit will dro»:


divers gallons of infipid water ; which water, if ithad remained
in the trunk of the Vine, would in a littlecime have been di
gefted into Leaves, Stalks, and Grapes, which Grapes alfo by


a further maturation would have yielded a Wine, out of whidt~


you might have extracted a burningSpiric: Now I fay, although
this infiped water be by che fpecifical Sulphur and Salt of tle
Vine, fixed into the Stalks, Leaves, and Grapes of the Vine,


yet thefe give it not a corporificative matter ; for that ic hid `


„before, and an aptithde and potentialicy to become whit
afterwards it proves to be: for indeed, Stalks, Leaves, asd
Grapés, were potentially in it before, all which now it be-
comes to be actually; by vertueof the Sun; and of the aforefad
Sulphur-and Sale, whereof the two latter were originally inne
fmall feed ; and thereforeas I faid, could not add any bulk to:
them,


Moreover, Do not we fee, that when things are burnt and p- ——
trefied, they afcend upinto air by way ofvapoursand fume, ad: -


- then defcend by way of infipid dew, orrain? Now what do ilk
thefefipnifie, but that from water,are all things producedjancia
dt are diffimilary parts ? à 5 h

2. The artificial proce(s.isthis: Take of what water youple:fe,.
whether Well-water, Fountain, River, or Rain-warer, as mich
~ as you pleafe ; let it fettle three orfour hours ; until: the fine
whereof feparatésit (elf: thendigeftit che fpace of amonth ; af-.
ster which time'evaporate the. i part; by a very genrleticat,-
'andcaftitaway, Being butthe phlegm;, chen: ditti] off rhe re-


‘mainder of the water , till the. feces-only be feft, whichfees -


vill


NE


Of the Art of Doflillation. sji
will bea flimie faltifh fubRance: This middle fubfance diftil
again as before, cafling away every time the fourth part, as
phlegm, and keeping the feces by chemfelves for further ufe ; and
this do feventimes, Nore, thatafter the fourth or fifth difil-
lation, the water will difil over like Milk , colouring the head
of your Still, fo that is can hardly be wafhed or fcoured off;
This pure water after the feventh aiftillation will leave no feces
Behind: andif you digeftit three months, it will be coagula--


' ted into Stones and Cryftals, which (ome magnifie very much:
forthe cure of inward, and outward putrefactions ; ott of which
alfo may be made a diffolving Spirit- Nore, that asthis water --


ftands in digeftion, you may fee divers curious colours, Now as
for the feces, which I fpake of, (which indeed; all waters, ever
the (weeteft leave at che bottom) being as I faid, a falcifh (limes
and intaft, asit were, amsedium betwixcSalt; and Nitre; cake
them, and diftil them in a Retort in Sand, and there will
firk come. forth a white fume, which being condenfed


defcendeth in aftraight line to the bottom; next will come

, over a red Oylof great efficacy , exceeding the vertues of the
Spirit of Salt; or Nitre. For confirmation of part of this pros ~
ceís, take May-dew gatheredin a morning, (when it hath not -


rained the night before) and putit into a. Glafseveffel, covered
witha Parchment pricked full ofholes, and fetit in the heat o£


the Sun for thefpaceof four months, and there will tore of.


green feces fall to the bottom, the refidue of che water beiug
white and clear. Now by all this, you may conclude, what man.
ner of diffimilarity there is in che parts of water, I hall add. buc:
one obfervation more, and fo conclude this fubject.

Take a flint of River-water,and put it into a Gourd-glafs,pour
upon it as much River- water as will fill the Glafs,evaporate this
water till the flint be dry, then pour on more frefh water; do ^
this fo long till che flint will fill up the Glefs, ( forin a licele:
time ic will fillicup, and become co be of the form or figure of
the Glafs) forit attracts to it fell the mucilaginonfnefs of the


water, which indeed, is a flimie (altifh matter, and che true mate —


ter of Stones. And thus thou fhalt have that done by Art in few
days, which Nature would have been perfecting many years;and
indeed jut fuch a Flint as is produced in the Rivers, Any one that

dads S 2 fbouid


E


t


AM. ü Of the Art of Diflillaion E “Boox V.


‘Should fee this Flint in the Glafs, would wonder how it fhould
‘Hine inthere, You may break. your Glafs , and take out mr
- lint. iu
-1 There are;divers: fuch proceffes which miy bé ied, but in
‘effect, they demonitrate but little more’ concernisg fhe poren-
-tal ‘heterogeneity: of water; and thefefore to “avoid tedi-
oufnefs, I fhall bere:end with the Anatomny of water, con.
cerning which, if any one can make a further illuftration; let
him be: candid. and impart it, and Ifall be'gt:d to eam

of him and inthe mean cime, "lt bim: accept of thefe my ene
- deavours,:


psi cute UT he Spagyrical Anatomy f Wines,


IT fall not fpeak here of the j juyce of Grapes; as itin natural:


hi dividediinto Wine, Tartar, and Lees ; but of Wine as Sartific HE


ally divided into pure Spirit, Phlegm; and Feces.
cs. TheSpiritisthat hot; fabtle, pure; clear, cordial, and bil


fatnical fubfance which arifeth wich a amt heat after four or .


five:xdiftillations; being indeed , but the twentiech part of the


Wine): This Spiritis sot that’ inebriating fabfance ofthe Winey .


asmoft think ;; fora man may drink the Spirit chat is excra&ted
. ontoften pints: of Wine, without diflemperipg of his brain at


all, whenas perhaps, he would be dittempered with drinking Lae


 pintortwoofthe Wine.


-Now this Spirit contains in ita fübre Átmófiiáckt án ames.
tial Sulphur infe parably conjoyned, which indeed, are the Tite:


of the Spirit., and may be feparated from the Mercurial, Or Was
rery part thereof, which after feparation-of them, remains in-


fipid $ -butayet of wonderful fubtilry. They may be feparated' l
thus ; Eirftsre&tifiesthe Spiritas high as you canthe ordinary Way ; P


dini kettle it Qned: ot twice in hele abhi dedos Se


HL i HII : p V vs
4 as wie * A . H i
p pil: ys Soe : 183 } oo otpe-^
Naini nA vd.snop a [ : CT Note;
á T H oy pe 7A ee T p 3^ vs om y


- Noris — iile: Be! e rena remáining in "bes Spinel)
it Will bo fo further then ché middle Receivers» efpeciall yrithe:


fecond time. “By thismeans'thou fhalt have fo fubtie a Spirit; ;
that unlefs ir be kept ina veffel clofe lope it will fie away im.


the air?! "Then ráke' of this Spirit;tWwo-ouncés; and pour it
upon fix ounces of calcined Tartar, béforerhe: falt beextraóted;
and mingle them well together y then: diftileit: in. Balnto | arid’.


d diete will come: over an: anfipid watet»which) as I faid before; is!


mie a ea


2


Bor V Ofthe Art of Diflillation: Po:


334 Ofthe Art of Diftillation,
very fübtle; them put on a like quantity of the faid Spirit as be-
fore, and di(til it off, and thus do fo lopg till the water that
comes over; is not infipid, but the Spirit comes over again hor
as it was poured on: for by thistime the fixed matteris glue


ted with the fale Armoniack, and fulphurofthe Spirit, Then put '


this dryed matter into a glafs fublimatory, and put fire co irand
there will fublime a falt from thence, even as Camphire is fub-
limed, This falt is che true eflence of Wine indeed, and ics ver-
.- (ues are wonderful, for there is no difeafe, whether inward or
outward, that can withftand it, 1 his is that effence of Wine of
che Philofophers, which is fo penetrating; a wonderful cordial,
‘and balfamical, which ifthoudoft once obtain, thou fhalt need
but few other medicines. ; tip

Now chis Spitie or Agua-vite is.in all Vegetables, as you


may fee in Malt; and Vegetables that are purrefied before they


be diftilled, which then yield a borning Spirit; yet it is in
Wine more than in any other Liquors; 1íay Liquors, for if you


take eight gallons of Sack, andas much Wheat, which is folid.
body, the Wheat being malced will yield more Agqua-vite than.


~ othe Sack. T
2. The flegm is that which remains aftec the Spirit is di-


` * filled off , and isa putrid, infipid, cold, narcotick, and inebria-


ting Liquor; debilitating the tomach, and offending che head.
A few fpoonfuls of this will prefentlymakea man drunk, nay
the flegm of halfa pint of Wine will make a man drunk, when
ag cwo pintsof Wine ic felf would hardly do it: whence you


may colle& what a great corre&or of Malignant Spirits , and -


‘vapours the Spirit of Wine is; which, whileftic is mixed. with
the flegm before diflillation doth temper and corre& this ine-
briating quality thereof, and as it doth thus, fo alfo being given
(I mean the pure dephlegmated Spirit ). to them that are alrea-


dy inebriated, doth much allay their diftemper, This flegme


therefore being of fo narcotick a quality is the caufe of Palfies,
and fuch like diftempers.
Moreover, it is tobe obferved that when this flegme is diftil-


led off, there remains at che bottom a. vifcous corrofive matter `
which, by reafon of its vifcotiry isthe caufe of obftrustions, and —


- by reafon of its corrofiveness the caufe of the gout, colick, tone;
€. ` 3. This


iP ce IAE
Book V.


BookV. Ofthe drt of Diftillation. .—— ay

^g. This feces being diftilled, yields a fharp Spirit ) and fe-

tid Oyl, whichleave behind them a faltith fubftance , ont of
s whenthe Salt is e&tra&ted, there remains an infipd -
-Parthi co Ga ; 1
Now, ifany fhall object againft what I have afferted, and fay,
that Aqna-vite, or Spiris of Wine, are inebriating, the caufes of
Palhe, Gout, Stone, Colick, weak Stomachs; and'fuch like, as
we fee by daily expetiencein chofe that are given co che drinke
ing of thefe Liquors : to which. anfwer, Itis true : but then T
muk diftinguith of e4qua-vite,and Spirit of Wine; forthere is
2 common 4q#a-vite, and Spirit of Wine , of which alfo chey
make Anifeed-water, by putting a few Anifeeds thereunto,and
other fuch like Waters, as Clove, Angelica,Lemmon,@c. With
. which this Nation is moft abominably cheated; and cheir health
impaired, But thefearenot rectified chronghly, and three parts
of four of chem are infipid Narcotick phlegm , containing 1n it.
the feces Ifpake o£ , all which; Ican ina day feparate from the
true pure Spirits which Spirit rather prevents, than caufes fuch
diftempers » And the cruthis,allthe goodnefs of the Wine is-
from this pure Spirit. : Gio


Fhe famous Arcanum,or Reforative Medicament of
Paracelfus, called his. Homunculus, 2) 3d


Firft, we muftunderfiand, that thereare three acceptions“of" .
the word ‘Homunculus in Paracel/us, Which are chefes: 153 ER AMO
t. Homunculus is a (uperftitious Image made inthe place;


OF >.
name of any one;that it may contain an aftraland invifible dc <


wherefore it was made fora fuperftitious nfe. :

"zs Homenculesistaken'for an artificialiman, made of Sperma
bumana 7Ma[culinum,: digefted into'the fhape of a man, and.
then nourifhed and increafed wich theeflence of mans bloud ;.
and this is not repugnant to the poffibility of Nacure, and. Art..
But is ‘one :of che greateft wonders of God which 'he: eyer-did
füffermortal map to know,. 1 fhallinot;herefet down the full:
procefs; becaufe I’ think it usfitico: be done; ‘at' eft to be di-.
Valged + <belidesy neitherchis,..norche former; is formy pre--
fentpurpofe 0 < s " x Hs


913. nHomuncsilus is taken for an excellent Arcanum) ot Medica-
."Imeor; extracted by the fpigyrical Are, from the chüefeftftaffa of
the:naturaldife in. man; and according to this acceprion, I: fhall
here fpeak of ic: Büt before I (hew you the procefs, I fhall'ewe
n accoupntiwhy chis Medicament is called Homunculus; nd
$Wiscsthis, Sv erie oit gerit VV 3o ei qoo dinh d
2: No wife man will deny; thit the ftiffe o£ life is the nutrimerit
thereof; and rhac the chiefeltnutrimentis Breadand Wine; bes
ing.ordained by,God, and Narufe; above allocher things;for the
fültenráriob thereof. -Befides;Paracelfus preferred this mutriment
for thegenetation of the blondand ipiritsapd che forming thence
the Sperm o£ bis-Homgaculi. Now by (utablealluionthe nur
triniégc is taken for chelife-of man, and efpecially becavfe-iris '
tfanfrinted into life: And ag3in;the life istaken¢for the man for
unlefs aman be-alive, hes not: á'mamybutthe carkafs only.of a
, ~~ Mapjand che bafe(l part ithereof;which:;cannorc perfetl y be;cáken
fót:the whole, man,as the.nobleft part may. Inasmuch therefore
as, che nutrimenrsoraliment oflitesmay be called che life of many
and the/ife of man:be calledfnin ;*thisnntriment extracted out,
` ‘of Bread, and Wine, and being by digeftioniexalredinto the — |
* ~ higheft purity of a nutritive fubftance, and confequently becom-
by ing the Herel tian, being fo Potentially, may Metaphorically
be called Hemuncudusumio®) Ga Wes 9 s
"The procefs, whichin part shall be fet down allegorically, is
thu$«o Xakerhe belt Whearj: and thé beft Wines: of each^alike
i quantity, pntichem intvà Glafs ; which you muft-Hetmerically
. . 6lofes;then letthém putrefié in Horfe-dung three days; or until
x the Wheat begin: co germinate, or to fproutforth-,; which then
muf be taken forth j:and;bruifed ina Mortar . and be preffed.
E theoughia libnen cloth; andithere will.come:forth a white juice
. -like Milks you mu(tcaf away.the feces: Lecthisjnyce.be put, -
ito à; Glafs » ,which) muft nor be above thalf full; ftop-it
Clofe,Land-feticvin: Horfe-ding; -as before, for the {pace of fifty
" dayes;;.Tftthie;heat:be temperate, and. mot; ezceeding * rhe d
| datpralsheatof asmamyithe macrer wikk-benturned into a-fpagys -
TiGalyj Dloudyandsfleths like am Ee bryouiThisi i$ the; prinerpalg
| apdmesmateet, out/ó£wbich is eenerated a swofoldifgerm» vise
= A^ father aud mother, generating the Homunculs sawithout
ae ` i $ à which;
| J e. ;


Ss aay c


ES


Book V: Of tbe drt of Diftillation. j 1 137


Which; there cán-be made no generation, wnether.hümanes of

animal.

` From the bloud jand flefla of this acces let the w waterbe fe-

paratedi in; Batneo, andiche air in ahes, and both be kept by chem-
ielves.. Then co che feces of che latter dittillations let che water.
ofthe former diftillacion be added both whichmult (the.Giafs
being clofe Ropt) puttefie in Balneo thc f| Ípace-of ten days; after

this duttil che water che fecond time, (whichis thenthe -webicu=

Jum of the fire)cogether wich the fite,in afhes:; then diltil off this
water. ina gentle Balseo, and in’ the bottom remains the-fire

which muf be diftilled in athes. Keep both thefe apart; And

thus you have che four Elements piae from che Chaos Gf che


' Embryo.


..Xhe.feculent earth is ;tó be:reverberated in aclofe velfel fot


the Ípace.o£ four days: Inthe interim diftil off che fourth’ part of


che firk. diftillation in Za/geoy amd caft it away ; the Ocher three


-parcs difil in:afhes;and pour it upon the reverberared eaith’, "and


dillilitina flrone fire ; cohobate it four times, and fo you fhall
have a very clear water, which you muft keep by it'felfs Then


| -pour the air on the fame earth; and dittil itin a {trong fire 3 and
there will come over a Clear, fplendid; odoriferous water; which
mult.be kepta part :;'After chis, pour the fire upór the firt water}


and putrefie chem togecheri in Balneo the f fpace of three days,then


put, them into a Retort, and diflil them in Sand, and chere will


Come overa water ta(ting of che fire : Jecchis wacerbe diftilledin


Balneosand whar di(tils off; keep: by ic felfjas al(o Wha remains in
thebottom, which is the fire; keep by it fel." This falt diftilied


water pour again upon its earth;and let them be macerated toge-


ther in Balueofor the {pace of three days; and then Tet alf the wa-


ter be diftilled in Sand, and. let whae will arife be féparated' in


Balneo; and the refidence-remaipine inthe bottotii bé referved
wich the;former refidence; - Let the water be agai poured upon


the earth, be abftra@edsand feparacedias before; until nothing re>


main in the bottom;which isnot feparated'in Ba/gzo; This being


done; lec, the water which was/laft feparated be mixed with thé
re(idue.ofits fire, & be macerated in Bane three or four days, and
all be itilledi ip. Balves, that can afcend with:-that heats ‘and let
what remains be diftilled in afhes from the firey and what fhall


SN T m


133 Of the Art of Diflillation.
be elevated is aerial ; and what remains in the bottom is fiery.
Thefe.two laft Liquors are afcribed to the two firft principles,
the former to Mercury, andthe latter to Sulphur , andare ac-
counted by SParácelfur, mot as elements s buttheir vital parts,
being, as it were;the natural Spirits and Soul, whichare inthem
 bynature, Now:both areto be rectified, and reflected into their
center: with a circular motionstliat this Mercury may be prepared


Book V.


with its water, being kept clear, and:odoriferonsin the upper — ~


place, but the Sulphur by.itfelf.: Now icremains, that we look
into-the third principle ::lec the reverberated earth;bemng ground
npón a Marble, imbibe its own water; which did above remain,
after the daft feparation of the Liquors made in Balneo, fo that


this be the fourth part of the weight of its earth, and-be con- <
gealed by the heat of. afhes into its earth, and lerthis be done -


fo oft, the proportion being obferved, mnit the earth bath drunk
up.all irs warer. | And laftly, let this earth be füblimed into a
white powder, as. white as (now; the feces being caft away. This
eatrh being foblimed; andfreed from. its. obfcurity is the true
Chaos. of the;Elements,) foric contains thofe things occult, fee-
ing 1t is the Salt. of Nature; in which they 1ye hid; being ; às it
Mere, reflexed in their center. This is che third principle of Pa-
racelfus, and the. Salt; which is the matrix, in which thetwo: fói-


mer, (perms, viz. Of the mans» apd woman; the. Parents: of the


Homuscalus viz... of Mercury, and Sulphur are to be put yand to


e.clofed uptogetheriua glazenwomb;fealed with Hermes feals


for rhe true. generation: of the: Homunculus produced fromthe
fpagyrical Embryo: and chis is the Homunculas; Yor preae Arin-
aum,otherwife called the nutritive Medicament of Parácelfss-
.. This, Homunculuts.. or nutritive Medicament is of {uch ‘vertie;


thar. prefently. after it is taken into tlie body it is ‘turned into-


: blond, and fpirics. If then difeafes prove:mortal 5 becáufe: chéy
eltroy the Spirits, what mortal diíea(e can withftand füch 4 me-


Litt ak


gEctmm o


foalfo youth ig renewedyand:gnay hairs prevented, 7


es


Boon V.


Ofthe drt of Difillation. — ong
An artificial Way to make Fin. f


Take of the Crams of the bet Wheaten-bread aoon as ic
comes forth ont of the Oven, being very hot y:as; much: as! you
pleafe; pur ic inco à Glas-vellel; which you mult prefencly- Hers
meticallyclofe. Then (et itin digeftion in a temperate a/»eo
os of two months, and ic will be-curned-into-a fibrous
‘Yeany Arci pleafe to exalcit toa higher! perfection ;; accord;


- ing to the rules-of Arc, he may find out, how great à nobrifher!


and reftorative Wheat is, and what an excellent medicine it may
make, Wt Sh «pcan aD TRO ribat
“-Noté;that there muft be no other moifture pit into the /Glafs,
Befides what isin thé breadicfelf...;. sai: os nob ener soq
P283, IU DET iS v ; 4 l > : T gordi bere?
Parácelfüs bis way for the raifing of a dead Bird to lifes and for the
` Generating many Serpents of one» both which are pers
(ous -formed by putrefaction. age


-A Bird is reftored to fife thus;vis.Take a Birdiputátalive into


& Gourd-slafs, and feal it up Hermetically;. burn it, to afhes in
thethird degree of fire,then putrefie it in Horfe-dung into 4 mne
cilaginous phlegm, and fo by a continued dige(tion;thar phlegm
mutt be brought to a further maturity (being taken out, and put
into an oval veffel of a juft bignefs to holdit) by an exa& dige-


- Rion, and will fo become à renewed Bird: which faith Paracel-


fus is one of the.greateft wonders in Nature, and fhews the great

vertue of putrefaction. —— E: ff
: 2.. Cut a Serpent inro fmall pieces; which: put: into-à Gourd.

glafs, which you mult Hermetically feal wp, then putrefie chem


‘in Horfe-dung, and the whole Serpent will become living again:


inthe Glafs, inthe formeither of worms; or Spawnof Piíhes 5:
Now if chefs worms be ina fitting manner brought but of putre:
fation ; and noprifhed; many hundred Serpents -willicbe bred:
Out of one Serpent ;. whereof every one will be as: big as:
the itf, And -as it is faid of the Serpent, fo alfo many other: ,

living creatures may be raifed, and iefered again, 2 :


340 bis Of te d of Diplo JBagg V- LE.


gi make an artificial Mallags iat.


i Firt take a Wihebartel well hobped, : and deled, with à one
end being open,to which clofe cover 'mufi be well fitted, which
mult be to take off ánd put on at pléafure, Set icin a warm place
Winter or Summers and fill it full with clear and pure water , to
each threegallons 5 “pnt fix pound of che belt Mallago Railins,
which you muft bruife in a Stone-mortar ; and chen, {trow. upon
" rhewater;'mpon each twenty Gallons of which, you muft caft a
handful: of Galx-vivey then cover the veflel clofe with the. Covers
andicaftclothes upon it co keep it warm, and let it Rand four or.
five daysto work as Wine or Beer do, when they be new ; then
feei£the Raifins be rifep np tothe top of the waters. if. fo» then
put them down again, and cover it again as before; ét them thus


ftand three weeks or a month together, the Raifins being every,


fourth or fifth. day put down in cafe they rife up. Then putatap
into the veffel three or four fingers above the bottom , and try
if it be good, and raft like Wine ; “if not let ic fland a while
longer; butiffo, draw it off into another Wine-veffel , and. to
every twenty gallons that'you Have'drawn off, put a pint of the
beft Agqua-vite, two new laid Hens-eges , and a quart of Alli-
gant beaten well together; and let it fiand ina cellar DE piben
Wine mig tilli it be rear es fic to be drunk.


y ib jas E T sake an i artiftal Claret-Wine. n


Take fix gallons of water; two gallons of the belt Cidar, ‘put’


thereunto eight pound of the belt. Mallago-Raifins bruifed ip a
Mortar; Jerthem flandiclófé covered in a warm place the fpace,
ofa fortnight every two days firring them well together ; then:
prefs out the Raifins and put the liquor i into the faid veflel again,
to which add:a quart ofthe juyce of Kafp-berries, anda pint of
the juyce of Black-cherries, cover this Liquor with Bread fpread.
thick with ftrone Muftard;the Muftard- fide being downward, and,
fo.lec it work by the fire-(idethree orfour days; ; them tup it Ups,
and let it ftand a week; and then-borrle it up. And it will tafteas
quickas bottle Beer; and cus become a very pleafant pe
EN an


=


of Wine, Note; that you m


Book Ve. Of the\drt of Diflillation) . T4 >
and indeed fair better, and wholfomer than our commoti Claret,
ng: sr i ss An artificial Malmfey.- wi i ne d ; zR j


Take two gallons of Englifh Honey;: pur it into eight galions


- of the beft Spring-water, fet thefe ina veffel over a gentle fire,


when:they have boyled gently an hour; take them off,and when ’
they:be cold, put them ipto a fmall Barrel; or Runler, hanging in
the veffel a bag of Spices, and fet it inthe Cellar; andin half a
year you may drink thereof. :


-To make an excellent:arematical Hypocrat.

Take of Cinnamon two ounces; Ginger an ounce, Clovesand
Nutmegs; of each two drams; of white Pepper half adram , of
Cardamums two drams; of Musk- Mallow-féed; threeounces.Les
all thefe be bruifed, and put into a bag, and hangedin (ix gallons

uft puta weight in the bag to make
it fink, gu | Ses :

Some boyl thefe Spices in Wine y-which they then fweeten
with Sugar;and then let run Hp iy pocras-bag , and after-
wardsbottleit up, and ufe wh th they. pleafe.


A fingls Hypooras-bags or Mabica Hippocratis,- j


F4


ig Ofibiderif Diflilais — Book Vi


: When yon would have chis: or any other Liqhor to be very


clear, youmay ule the triple Hypocras bag, for what feces


paffeth the firit will Ray in che fecond, and what in the fecond
will (tay in che laf.


.. Note that chefe bags mut be made of White: Cotton; 3A


A triple Hyparas bag i is only one banging shov antis
after this manner.


Tomake excellent Hyfüggas Wine iwan infant.


Take of Cinnamon two ofa
_ half an ounce, Cloves two dE


-them with as much Spirit of Wine: as will make them into a


-Nutmegs, Ginger, of each


palle, lec them ftand clofe covered in a glafs the {pace of |
ape s out the Liquor, and keepit' _


fix dayesi in a cold place; che
in a glas.


Afew drops ofthis Lass. it into any Wine giveth ita
gallant relifh, and odour, and maketh ic as good as any Hypocras
Whatfoever, and that in infant. — yew
. Note; that ifthe Wilde of gl haríb, i it will not be a» -
mifs co fweeten ir witk Sugar, forthereby 1 “is made farr more

grateful. CY ETE
zr ng 5 fi V s


pi TOT C TET


uife thefe fmall, then mix


aii


r


BooxV. -Ofthe Art of Diftillation: — — "n
This alfo being put into Beer will make it ier ig ee and
aromatical, ix


$ ia Wag to make H Iypocr as, “OF to aka, any Wi ine to nam f
- an) vegetable in an inftant, —- ©


i Take un Wine you pleafe, and acbcsid AEE
haye it taft of this or that Ipice; or any other vegetable, of one
or more together, you may drop a few dtops of the diftilled:Oil
of the faid f {pices, or vegetables into the Wine, and' brew. them
welltogether, and you may make. in an inftant: all forts of Hys
pocras or other Wines: as for example; if yon. would have
Wormwood Wine, two orthree drops of Oy! of Wormwood
ut into good Rhenifh-wine, being wellbrewed together, wili -
make a Wotmwood Wine exceeding aipe that hey aa: imest ;
withal in the Rhenifh-wine houfes. oY


To make good Rafpberiy-wine.


Take a gallon of Sack, in which lec two gallons of Rafp-
berries Rand fleeping the {pace of twenty ‘four honrs, then ftfain


" them; and put tó the: Liquor three pound offRaifins of the fun ~


floned ;: let themftand togetberfouror five dayes; being fome-
times: fitted’ together: T hen pour offthecleareft, and: put icup
in bottles, and fet it in a cold piace. Ifit be. not c feet enough
you may-add fome Sugar to i ag ioa iqoibas rige aw}


Vi aia omi


_ 212 S Wo other Wayes to ate it tall the year atian aninfjants 1 xc


oak of tbeijnice of Rafpberries, put. i icintoia bottle which
you muft flop clofe, and fet ima‘cellar; and ic ill become: clear; -
and keep allche year, and become very fragrant.

A few fpoonfuls of this put into a pint of Wine fweetned well `


- with Sugar gives ic an excellent and full taft ofthe Rafpes.


= lyon pit tio orzhree oünces ofthe: Symp of -Rafpes to a
sof Waneit will do as well, boo then you need ufe no other
pie D vili fweeten i itc i fufficiegl ye 0 6 steal 20


"Nw vista Ofthe Art of Diflilatim. Box V. M


T. 0 egi Mead or Methzglinthat it fal raf fales, and
- e (quick; Within a fortnight, and be fit to drinks


Toevery three gallons of water; put one gallon o£ the puret
Honey, put what hearbs and {pices you pleafe, boyl ir; and skim
ic well, now and then putting in fome water: Waen it is fuf-
ciently boyled, take ic of, and when it is almott cold, put

-itinto a Wooden ve(fel, and fet ic by the fire fide, cover: it
over with Bread {pread chick wich the (trongeft Muftard , che


Müttard fide being dowawards,and fo let it ftandchree dayes,and .


it will work, only put acloch over it: Then tün ic! up, and after
a week;draw it forth into bottles, and fer ic inco a. cellar; and
after a week more you may drink of ic, for ic will ca(tas quick as
' bortlebeer chat isa forenight old, and indeed: as ttale as s other
Me willinhalfa year, — ;


T. 0 make a Spiritof Amber-griefes thata few drops thereof [hall


perfume 4 pig of Wine moft richly, ;


Take ef. Amber-gtiets two disas Muska odfa hý cuc them
fall; and put them into'a pint of the bett rectified Spirit of


Wine, clofe up.che glafs Hecmetically, and dige(t chem in a.


very gentle heat:cill you Pis -— are diffolved : Then dy
may makeufe: ofir.:o 2.

Two or three drops or more if you pleafe of this Spirit pat
intoa pint of Wine, give it a rich odour.


Or if you put two orthree drops round the brims ofthe glafs,  '


it will do as well.


Half af{poonfulf ivtaken either of ic felf,or mine wich fome |


^ fpecifica Liquor, — rich. Cordial. The qoft fiui


iS


"NOM


RC iHa eicelent fover Waser Tfi


; Bakes disioof Oranpé: lower Waters: as ine Rofe-water, P"


add thereto ‘of ‘Musk:willowleeds groffely brnifedont ounces;


of Benjamin two ouncés;:of'Storax an ouncey ofi Labdanum
fix drams, of Lavender flowers two pugils , of inier Majoram .—
$E as


Boox V. - -Ofthe Art of Diftillation. :
.. a$much,of Calamus Aromaricas a dram, difil all thefe in a
Glafs-ftillin Ba/yeo, the veflels being very well clofed, that no
yapour breath forth. =
Note, that you may make a {weer Water in an inftant by
putting a few drops of fome diftilled Oyls together into fom
Rofe-water, and brewing them well together. ae


To purifie and to give an excellent [melland taft unto oyl-Olive,
`` that they that loath it, may delight to eat it. dod


"Take of a good fort of Oyl-Olive, though not of the belt,
put the fame into a veflel of earth or copper, that hath a
little hole in thé bottom thereof, which you may ftop with
Wax ora cork, to open at your pleafure, In this veflel for
every quate of Oyl addfour quarts of fair water, and with a
wooden-fpatle, or fpoon, beat them well together for 4
quarter of an hours fpace ; and when you have fo done, open
the hole inthe bottom, and {fet out the water, for cie Oy! doth -
naturally fleet above, as being the lighter body: and as foon
as the water is paffed away, {top the hole, and put in other cold
water, and begin a new agitation as before, and work in the like
manner divers times as you did at the firk, till in che end
the Oyl be well cleanfed, and clarified. Jf the laft rime you
work it with Rofe-water it will befo much the better; then
hang in che midt of the Oyl à courfe bag full of Nutmegs
fliced, and Cloves bruifed, and the tinds of Orenges and Le-
mons cut fmall, and fet the veflel-in Balneo for two or three
hours, and I fuppofe he that loaths Oyl will be eafily by this
means drawn to a liking of it. ; >


- eAnither Ways è


Set Oyl-Olive in the fun in fummer-time üntil there fertle —
good ftore of foul, and grofs Lees, from thé which by de-
Clination pour outthe clear Oyl, and keep it till the next
winter, and after the fame hath been congealed with (ome
d petes the Oyl will be moft {weet, and delectable to
the talte ——


u : After >


‘


: worked from the ferous part thereof, mix with the faid Buta


- After this manner Ln may "clafife all thick Oyls,. and all _
kinds of Breafe 5 but then yon muft ufe warm water in fead. ;
of cold; s ; RM


T, Varta pae iati it foall keep frel and fwect a long times
and be mh wonderful. (weet in tafte


- Diffolve Butter in a clean glazed or filver veflel, and in
a pan or kettle of water, with a flow. and gentle fire; then
pour che fame fo diffolved, into.a bafon that- hath fome fair.
water therein, and whenit is cold; take away the curds, and
the whey that rémaininthe bottom, Andif you will be at the
. charge thereof, yon may the fecondtime (for ic muft betwice — —
_ diffolved ) diffolve the Butter. in Rofe-water, working them. |
wel together: the Butter thus clarified will be as fweet in taft '
as che marrow of any bealt, by reafon of the great impurity that |
isremoved by this manner of handling; the fift part thereof :
being drofs, which makes the-Butter many times offenfive to the:
omack, >


T 6- "i mik Butter taft of any vegetable k a.
the colour thereof.


: When the Buttér is taken out of the chern, and well


ter as much of che Oyl of that Vegetable which you like beft;
till the fame be {trong enough in cat to your liking, then tem-
per them well together.

If you do in “the moneth of May mix fome Oy! of Sage ee
with your Butter it may excufe you from eating’ Sage with f
, your butters -

If you mix the Oyl with the aforefaid clarified Butter, it
will be far better; and ferve for a ds dainty. difh, and indeed
à gteatrarity,.


| Of the Art of Diftillation. i Die


To mke Cheefe taft e of any vegetable without
, asfcolouring ef $ ite


You may mix the diftilled Oylof what vegetable you would
have the Cheefe tafte of, with the curd, before the whay be pref-
fed out ; but be fure you mix them very well,that all places may
tafte alike ofits you may make ic tafe ftronger or weaker of it, ..
as you pleafe, by putting in more or Ies of the Oyl. i


To purifie and refine Sugar.


Make a ftrong Lixivium.of Calx vive ; wherein diffolve as
much courfe Sugar asthe Lixivinm will bear, then pnt in the
White of Eggs (two to every quart of thé Liquor) being bea-
ten into an Oyl, Stir chem well together , and let them boyla
little; andthere willarife a fcum , which mutt be taken off as
long as any will arife; then pour all the Liquor through a
ereat Woollen cloth bag; and fo the feces will remain behind in
the bag; then boyl thel Liquor again fo long, till fome dropsof
it being put upon a cold plate, will when they be cold, be con-

; ealed a as hardas Salt. Then pour out the Liquor into pots, or
moulds made for that purpofe ; having a hole in the narrower
endthereof ; which mult be (topped for one night after, and af-
ter that night be opened, and there will a moift fnbflance drop,
forth, whichi is called Molofles, or Treakle ; then with Pot-
ters-Clay cover the ends of the Por; and as ‘that clay finketh

‘down by reafon of the finking of the Sugar, fill chem up with


|». mote clay,repeating the doing thereof tili the Sugar fhrink no


more. Then takeit out till it “be bern dryed, then bind it up
in Papers.


To make à Vegetable grow and become more glorina then-

E any of its fpecies...

Reduce any Vegetable into its three fit principles, and then
joyn them together acain,being well purified, and putche fame
into a rich earth, and you fhall ‘have i it produce ; a Vegetable far
more glorious than any of its fpecies. :

I2. x - Now


deo Lob, NIST ALT DURS NE I.P Le AR MIS


348 — Ofthe Art of Diftillation. — Book V. —
Now how to make fuch an Effence, look into the firt Book; . |
and there you fhall fee the procefs thereof. B


Tomake a Plant grow in two or three hours. .


Take the afhes of Mofs, moiftenthem with the juyce of an
old dunghil; being firft prefled forth, and (treined ; then dry
them a little, and moiftenthem as before: do this four or five
times ; put chis mixture, being neither very dry; nor very moift,
into fome earthen, or metalline veffel ; and in it fet che feeds of
Lettice, Purflain, or Parfly, (becaufe they will grow fooner.than
other Plants) being firk impregnated with the Effence of a ye-
‘gerable ofits own fpecies, (the pracefs whereof you fhall find
- Book 1. page 32, 33.) till they begin to fprouc forth; then, I
fay, put chem in the faid earth with that end upwards which
fpronts forth : Then put the veflel into a gentle hear, and
MEUS beginsto dry, moiften it with fome of the faid Juyce
of dupg.
^ Thou maift by this means have a Sallec grow whileft {upper is
making ready. :


^ Fo make the Idea of any Plant appear in aGla[s, as if the
; very Plant it felf were there,


" The procefs of this thou maift fee; page 32. and therefore t —
need not here againrepeatit ; only remember, tharif you put”
the flame of a Candle ro the bottom of the Glafs, where the Ef-
fence is, by which ic may be made hot , you will fee, that thin
fubftance,, which is like impalpable Afhes, or Salt, fend forth :
from the bottom of the Glafs, the manifeft form of a, Vege- |
table, vegetáting and growing by little and little, and putting 3
on fo fully the form of flalks, leaves, and flowers,in fuch perfect, —
and natural wife in apparent fhew,. that any one wonld believe-
verily. the fame to be naturally cotporal;. when asin trothig is
the fpiritual Idea,endued wich a fpiritual Effence ; which ferveth.
- for no other purpofe, but to be matched with its fitting earth; ~
. thatfoit may take unto it felfa more folid body. This fhae ———
dowed figure, affoon as the Veffel is taken from the fire, returns —
a d à to-


Puy F ofthe al Difillation | 349.
toits A(hes again, and espe inpia a Chaos; and
en matter,


To make Firre-tvees appear in SESS NUNT


Take as much Turpentine as you pleafe put. itinto a Retort,
diftilic by degrees, when all is diftilled off, keep the Retort :
fill if a teafonableheat, that what humidity is {till remaining .
fray be evaporated; and it become dry +° Then take this off from 1
the fire, and hold yonr hand to the bottom of the Retortand the’
Turpentine thatis dryed: (which is called Co/opbonja) will crack’
` afunder in feveral places, andin thofe cracks, or chaps, you fhalt’

fee the perfe& effigies of Firte-trees which will there, continue
many months, |


efo make. Harts pansy to sie inaG ape


“on ake Harts- hor Ren into fmall pieces, and put chem into
a Glafs-Rerort to be diftilled, ‘and you fhatl fee the Gláfs to be
feemingly full of Horns, which will continue there fe Tong dit
the volatile Salt come over


To make Golden Mountains sas it were, Appear in a Glafs. ier


Take of Adders Eggs halfa pound, put them into a Clafs: Re-
toit; diftil chem by degrees; when all is dry; you shall fee the
feces at the bottom turgid, and puffed up and feem ro be, as ic
were, Golden Mountains; being very e glorious to behold,-


To make the reprelent tion of the whole bus in a Glafs.


- "Take of the pureft Salt-Nitre as much as you pleafe , of
Tin half fo much; mix them together, and calcine them.
Hermetically ; then put them into a Retort, to which annex
a Glafs-Receiver) ‘arid luce them well together, ler there be
- leaves of Gold putinto the bottom thereof » then put fire to.
the Retore, until vapours arife that will cleave to the Gold:

augment the fig till no more fumes afcend: then take away |
av us the:


(oh


| ie 0f fs pe of Difilaim, j Baon in
the Receivers andclofeic Hermérically, and make a Lamp-fite
under it;and you will (ee reprefented in it the Sun Moon, Srarrs; s-


_ Fountains, Flowers, Trees, Fruits, andindeed , even all things,


which i is a glorious fight to behold,


*


- To make the four Elements appear in a Glaf.


- - Take of the fubrle powder of Jeat, an ounce and half of the |
Oyl of Tartar made per deliqusum(in which there is not one drop
of water, befides what che Tarter icfelf contracted) two ounces;


which you muft colour with.a lighe green with Verdegreafe » of


the pure(t Spirit of Wine tinged ‘with a lighe blew wich Indico, -
two ounces of the beft rectified Spirit | of Torpentine coloured
with a light red with Madder 2. ounces, Putall thefe into a -
Glafs, and fhake them together, and you fhall (ee che Jeat which.


is heavy and black, fall co the bottom and reprefent the earth ;

next che Oyl of Tarcar made green, reprefenting the element of
water,falls : upon that {wims che blew Spirit of Wine which will
not mix with the Oylof Tartar, and reprefents che Element of


"Air: uppermoft. will fwim the fübtle red Oyl of Turpentine,


which reprefeuts the Element of Fire,
-Teis (trange ro fee, how after fhaking all thefe together > they


will be diftinly feparated the one from the other, If itbe well -


done, asit is ealie enough to do: it is a mok glorious fight.
-Tomake 4 perpetual motionin a Glafs.


Take feyen ounces of Quickfilver, as much Tin, grind a
"Well together with fourteen ounces of Sublimare, diflolved in a
cellar upon a Marble the fpace: of four days, and it will become
like-Oyl-Olive, whichdiftil in Sand, and there will fublime a


dry fubltance; chen put the water which-difiils off,back upon the `


earth in che bottom of the Still; and diffolye what you can; filter
it, and difil it again, and this do four or five times ; and chen that


atoms thereof will move. hip. and. down forever. i
. Note, that the Viol; or Glifs, mnftbe clofe Ropt, and kept.
ina te places); ..:


Ta


' earth will be: fọ » fübile ;.- that. being put into a Viol , the fuble ——


4 Of the Art of Difillation. j


>


Boor.
eT, 0 make. a Lumino Water that n give light by vigo.


Take the tails of Glo-worms; put them into a Glafs-Stilj pond c es
difil them in Balneo ;. pour the faid water upon more frefh tails Zn co j
-of Glo-worms ; do this four or five times, and thou fhalt have |. 4
amoft Luminous Water, by which thou maift fee to: read in the < S dc
darkeft nighr.. >
Some fay this Water may be made. of the: sins of dir £3.
and for ought I know, it may be probable enough :'for I have 7
heard, that a fhole.of Herrings coming by a Ship i in. the nieht; 7.82
have given a great light to all the Ship.
It were worth the while; to know the true reafon, why Clo-
worms; and Herring, and fome other fuch like things, fhould be
luminous i in the night.


To make a vapiur in a chambers that be Hat entert into it with
a candlesfaall think.the room to be on- fires


Diffolve Camphire in rectified Aqua-vite ; and evaporate
them ina-very clofe chamber,where no air can getin;and he that
firftenters the chamber with a lighted candle will be much-afte- `.
nifhed, forthe chamber will feem tobe full of fire, very fubtle, —
but ic will be of little continuance.

You mult note, thát it is the combuftible vapour, with which
the chamber is filled, that takes flame from the candle.

‘Divers fuch like experiments as this may be done, by putting
fucha combuftible vapour into a Box, or Cubboard, or fuch like,
which will afloon as any-one (hall open them, having a candle i in:
his hand, take fire, and burn, E


To make Powder that by [pitting spon pall be inflamed, ——,


. Take aLoad.{tone, powder it,and put it into a Rrobg calcining
pot. cover it all over with a powder made of Calx-vive,and Co-
lophonia, of each a like quantity ; put alfo fothe of this. Powder
underit; when the Pot is full, cover it; and Jace the clofures
With Potters-earth, put. themi into a Furnace, and there let them...

; : boyi, hi


boyl; then take them ont and put them into another por, and ..
fet them in che Furnace again, and this do till they becomea ve-
~ ry white and dry Calx. Take of this Calx one part, of Salt-Nitre,
being very well purified, four parts, and as much Camphire, Sul-
phur-vivum, the Oyl of Turpentine, and Tartar ; grindall thefe
ro a fübtle powder, aud fearfethem, and put them into a Glafs-
-xeflel ; chen put as much Spirit of Wine well rectified; as will co-
ver them two fingers breadth ; then clofe chem up » and fet the
vefiel in Horfe-dung three months; andin that time they will all
 becotnean uniform pafte: evaporate all che humidity, until the
- whole maís becomea very dry (lone : then take it out and pow-
der it, and keep it very dry. HAS
If you take a little of chis Powders and fpit upon it ; ot pour
fome water upon it, it will rake fire prefently;fo that thou maift
light a match; or any fuch thing by ir,


- To fertifie a Load-flones that it foall be able to draw a
: Nail out of a piece of Wood. i


- Take-a Load.ftone, and heat it very hot in coals, but
fo, that it benot fired, then prefently quenchiit: in the Oyl of
Crocus Martis made of the beft Steel, chat it may imbibe as
much as it can. gi 3
Thou fhalt by chis means make the Load-ftone fo very trong
and powerful, that thou maift pull out nails out of a piece of
wood with its and do fo wonderful things with it , that the
common Load-ftone can never do. :
Now the reáfon of this (as Paracel/m faith) is, becanfe the Spis
rit of Iron is the life ofthe Load-ftone,and this may be extracted
from, or increafed in the Load-ftone; :


"fo make Quick-filver Malleable in [even hours,


‘Take of the beft Lead, and melt it; and pout it into a hole,
and when itis almoft congealed make a hole in ir, and prefently.
fill np the hole with Quick-filver, and it will prefently be con. _
gelared into a friable fubftance » then beat it into a powder,
and puc it again into a hole of frefh melted Lead, as before ; he

1 : thi$


Book Y. of "m Art of Diflluio. ` 53°


this three’ or four times, then boylic, being all in a piece in Lin
"feed-Oyl the {pace of fix hours ; then. take it out and i it will be
come malleable. —

Note, that after this, ic may by being melada over she fue be
reduced into Quick-filyer again. |
A thin plate ofthe {aid Mercury laid upon an inveterate ul- :
cet,takes away the malignity of it in a great meafure, abd rendeis
:


‘it more curable than before.

A plate of the faid Mercury laid.upon cumors,wouldbe a great
deal better tepercuflive chan plates of Lead 3 Which Chiturgeons
ve in fuch cafes,

The powder of the friable fubftance of Mercury before it be z
boyledi in the Oyl, is very good to be ftrewed upon old ulcers; for
itdoth much correct the NRhiegen of them.


ud get Gaja into sts ‘firft Principles, viz. Sid; and Salti


Take bits; or powder of Glafs, as much.as you pleafe; as s mach
of the Salt which Glafs-men ufe in the making of Glafles t mele
thefe together in a ftrong fire; Thendiffolve all rhe fnelted mals
in warm water; then pour off the water; and you (hill fee nó — :
Glafs > bue only Sand in the bottom, which Sandis thát which um y
was in the Glaís before, j
. This confutes the vulgar opinion; viz. that the fion of Gms
is pL fu(ion, and beyond all a e

n 0 write on engrave upon an are, ar pili with
Wax, er. Grea és


Make what fn or figures you pleafe wich Wax, or Gréafe,
uponan Egge; or Pibbie ; , pat them nto the ftrongeft Spirit of
Vinegar, and there let them lye two or three days » and you
fhall "(ee every place about the lectérs, or figurës, eatet or cone,
fumed away, with.the fame Spirit; bue the place where the Wax -
or. Greafe, was, notat all touched ; the reafon-wheréofis; be-.
caule; that the Spirit ise not be epit pus the (aid olesgi-
agus mater; 1904989) i* Ex


TH


X Ae Te


154 | m the de d Difiluia. ; Book V.


di make artificial. Pearl, as Glorious as any Orientals.


Diffolve Mother of Pearl in Spirit of Vinegars. then DEUS
tate it with Oyl of Sulphur per campanam , (. and not with, ;Oyl
-OF Tattar, forthat takes away the fplendour of. it) whieh: addsa
luftte to át s when it is thns precipitated, dry it, and mix ic, with
whites of Eges, and of chis maís you may make Pearls of what
bignefs or fafhion you pleafe: before they be dryed they. will
motatall;-or very hardly be difcerned from true and natural
Pearls. i rbi:


"To mak a Mineral Pelik n
Diffolve Antimony,ot Sulphur, i in the Liquor or Oyl of Flits,
or Pebles, ot Cryttals, or Sand ; coagulatethe folution intoa
- red mafs , pour thereon the Spirit of Urine, and dige& chem till —
the Spiric: ‘be tinged ; then pour it off ; and pour more on; till ©
all the tincture be extracted ; put all che tinctures together, ‘and
evaporate: the Spirit of Urine in Balneo, and’ there wifl remain -
a bloud:red: Liquor at the: bottom ; üpon which pour Spirit
of Wine, and you (hall extraa purer tindture which‘ fmel-.
leth like Garlick; dige(t it three or four weeks, and ic will
fmelhhke Balms; digeli it longer, ai ic will fmell like Müsk;or.
Amber-eriefe. i
Befides che {mell sees it bec it isan x i oid Sudorifick,and
cures all difeafes that require: {weats\as the Plague;putrid Feayers,
Lues- venerea and fuch like as thefe.


The Oyl or Liguor of Sandy Flints, Pebless or Cryftals, for the.
io 1:562 415: acaferefaid preparation 2 thus made: king E,


A of. ‘the bet Salt of Tartar being: et Well 592% two, or
three diflolutions, and coagulations, purified; and powdered in
a hot Mortar, one part; of Flints; Pebles, or Cryftals, being pow-
. dered, or mall; Sand, well washed, the fourth part; mingle
them welltogether; put as much of this compofition ‘as will
fill an Egge-fhell,into a Crucible,fetin the earthen Furnace, (ex-
prefled


yb


Boox A Oft the Art of: Diftillation. cg


'greffed p page 84.) and made red hot, and. prefently there will
come over a thick and white Spirit, this do till you have
enough ; chen take ouc che Crucible whileft it is- -growing hor,

and thac which is in it is like cranfparent Glafs, which keep from
the air.

The Spirit may be rectified by Sand in a Glafs.Retort.

The S Spirit is of excellent ufe in the Gout, Stone, -Prifick,
and indeed, in all obftru&tions , 'provoketh Sweat, and Urine, -
and cleanfech the Stomach, and by confequence effe&uali in mok
difeafes.

Ic being applyd externally, cleareth the skin, and makes i ic
look very fair,

"Take that which remains at the bottom inthe Crucible, ,and
beat it to powder, and lay it ina moik place; andío it diffolveth
- into athick fat Oyl: And this is chat which is called the Oy! of
Sand, of Flints, Pebles, or Cryftals.

This Oyl is of wonderful ufe in medicine, as alfo in the prepa-
ration of all forts of Minerals,

This Oyl being caken inwardly infome appropriated Liquor,
diffolves tartarous coagulations in che body,and fo Opera all d
ftructions.

It precipitates metals, and makes the Calx thereof more
weighty than Oylof Tartar doth.

Itisofa golden nature; it extrads colours from all metals,
is fixed in all fires, maketh fine Cry(tals,and Borax, and maturifi-
eth imperfect metals into Gold.

If you put ic into water, there will precipitate. a molt fine
white earth, of which you may make as clear yeflels as are Chi-
nà-difhes,

Note, thatall Sand, Ffints, and Pebles, even the whiteft have
in them ‘a golden Sulphur, or Tincture ; and if a prepared Lead
be for à time digefted in this Oyl, ic will feem, as ir were, gil:
ded, becaufe of the Gold that will hang uponit, which may be
wafhcd away in water.Gold alfo is found in Sand and Flints, ec.
And if yon put Gold i into this Oyl, ic will bepoms more. pon-
derous thereby. in


X2 ae Ts.


156 Of the drt of Difllation. — E 24


cod; (os Tomake Steel grey in a Glas like a Trees ; iano!


1


piffoNe Steel in a rectified Spirit of Salt, fo fhall you hase
green and (weet folution, which fmels like Brimftone, filter it,
and abftra@ all che moifinte i inthe Sand with à gentle heat; and
chere’ will diftil overa Liquor as {weer as Rain-water (for Steel
by'teafon of its drynefs detains the corrofivenefs of the. Spirit of
Salt; “which remaineth in the bottom like a blond red mafs,
j which as hoton the tongue as fire; diffolve chisred maís. in Oil
of Flints, ot of Sand, and you fhall (ee it grow up in Wo or three
hours; like a Tree witha ftem, and branches; prove this Tree at
tlie teft; andit yieldeth g good Gold, which. this Tree hath drawn
fromthe aforefaid Oy! of f Sand, er Fines | which. path ai colden
JSulphurinit ^ C


To melt à metal in ones hand without burnin £g of. a hands.


‘OTake a tittle Caltining-Pot i in your hand, make icin edd or
courfe of the powder of : any metal, then upon it lay a lane of
Sulphur; Salt-peter and Saw-duft; of each a like quantity, mixed
togethers put a coal of fire to it, and forthwith the metal will
E pou into a mafs.. i

Wn aos spon the beams ud p Suny and "eta dn bias
bow they s add Weight to Minerals ana, Metalline Bodies.


1; Take any Mineral Liquor,and fet it in an open veflel in the
Sun for a good fpace, and. it will be augmented 1n quantity, and
weiche." Bat fome will fay; chat this proceedeth from theirs, ta
the WhichP ain(wer, ánd demand. ; whether the -air. had not. chis
impréenationfrom the Sun; and what the air hath in it fel£ , thag
proceedech not fromthe Sun and Stars,

«^9. PurthisTiquorina cold cellar, or in. a i. airy and yon
. fall find chat 3t increafeth not in weight, as it doth- in, the Suns
orinthe fire; (which hath in this refpect fome Analogie with
the Sun) Ido not fay, but haply ic might attract fome little moi-.
ftue which is foon exhaled by any fmaltheat,


3. Diffolve:


Boos V. mom af Diii. | Cy
°° 34 Diffolve any fulphureous, and imperfect’ tdetal, as Iron,
Copper, di Zink, in Agua-fortys, ot any ochiet acid Spitit 5 ;rhen
abhac the Spiticfroth it, ‘make ic Slowitig Bor, yer: Hot NT
Hot hat tHe Spirit riay only sapeurGwdy, ' then Westi t his -me-
talfine CabáandTetit ina crüciblé over the Rte; but irt it nor,"
only let it darkly glow; let it (tànd fo three or Tout weeks; then
pod it off, “and weigh i it again, and you fall findi it heavier than
ote oii
HII See ay filphireons neva) as fron! of logi no^ "wid (i i:
teen’ or eighteen pitts of Lead on 4 velt rade: ‘with afhes of
Wood; or Bones, i in aprobatory Furnace.: Fir Weigh the Téft,
Copper; and'Lead; before you put them into, the” Eirbict er
the ‘Iron or Copper fly away withithéLead, yet not wg £00
firong a heat ; then take the Teft out, and weiglrit, a you
Íhall find i it MO the metals be Sope) wheni it is cold to be


s. ore à (qun Ww reals ‘or cables it iie di m Md à
- concave” Glifs thire the Beatus of the Sun, and let them fall
on thé cenrer of the Métal ; Bold the’ concave Glafs in your
- handiandfet your Felt peki becold; arid this Will be as welt
dose'inthé Sup; as in'the Fire; But! ine concave mult be two
foot in Diameter, and not too hollow or deep 3 But about the
eighteenth or twentieth part of the circle, thatit may the
berer cabits: beams fort; "and i ic mug be very Well po-
lifhe

6. Calcine Foret wich a Bupinp.Chiys and yon fhall
fee ic frmoak, and fume, and be made dryer than beforesyet y Weigh
it 'akd'it will be heavier chan before.

: T'fralitake in, for ju confirmation of all this; a relation
of: AG Kendle Di by. coticeming the precipitating. "of the Sun
beats, T Meri “(faith he)’ a rare experiment that anoble
man of much fincerity ;' and a fingular friend of mine told rie:
he had feen,which was, that by means of Glafles made'in a ve-

X 3 m


the


-[


" 1 AN
18. | Of the. Art of Diftilation. Boox V.
ty Garit minner and artifi; ially placed ons by another, he
had feen ‘the Sun-beams gathered cogecher; and precipitated
down into à brownifh, or patplith red powder, There (faich he)
could be no fallacy in this operation: For nothing whatfoever,
, was in the Glas, when they were placed, and difpofed for this
intent; andit mü(tbe in the hor time o£ the year, elfe the ef-
fe&t would not follow, And ofthis magittery he could gather -
{fome dayes neer two ounces ina day, and it was ofa trong YOu
Facile vertue, and would impre(s ics:f{piricual qualicy into Gold
ic fel£ (the heavieft and moft fixed body we converfe. withal) in
a very fhort time.

I leave ic now to the Reader to judge whether the beams
of che Sun, and heat o£ the. fire adde. weight to. Minerals;
id Medls | 700. :


Xo nr a white" Millie ‘fubftance from: the
rasesof the Moon,


Take a. Concave-Glats, and hold it againkt the Moon when.
fhe is at the full in a clear evening, and let the raies thereof, be-
ing united, fall upon a Sponge, and che Sponge will be fll of a
cold Milkie fübitance; Which: yo nna y prefs out wich your hand,
dnd gather more. De-La-Brofs is 0 f opinion, that this fubftance
is of the fubftance of rhe Moon : .but I.canpor; aflent.co, him in,
that; only this L fay, if this; experiment were well profecuted;;
it might produce, for. ouglic I; know ». fuch - a difcovery Psi


; might be che, Key t tono fmall fecrets.


Lo Eom the Air inthe heat of Ss Summers and in.
the beat ef: the de. into Water.


Fill ap earthen Vetfel d ree PME ed downwatd,and
fill ic with Snow-water, (which. mutt be kept all the year) in
which is diffolved as much. Nitre as the water would diffolve :
Let the Veflel be clofe opt. Hold chis Veffel again the. Sum
and the Air will be (o condenfed by the coldnels. -of the ees
-£hat ic will din Sowa by the fides thereof, -


i Bow


ucc ee a 2
MeV. W Ofthe rf Difiilation. “igg


Tar two Joris, sf. 2 Salts. wil be fixed m
joyning them. together. t


Take a fos Lixivium. made 2i unflaked lime; and, evaporate
ity and whereas you would expect to finda Sale at the bottom,
theteisnoné;. for all che. Sale in the Lizivism is evapoured a-
way, and the. more the liquor is evaporated, tbe weaker the.
Lixivium becomes, which is\contrary to other. Lisiviumss Al-
1o if you take Spirit of Vinegar, ‘and evaporate it, you Halld find
no Salt at the bottom. Now, if yoy take the clear Lixiuium of
Lime, and Spirit of Vinegar , of each alike quantity, mix them
together, and-evaporate the humidity thereof, you fhall find
a good quantity of MS at the bottom;which, tafis partly hot» and
parcly add a i au

This Sale bug fec ina Vin dert ona. "Mates ne 35d


diffolved into an Oyl, is as good asany Lac-virginis to Cleapand —


fmooth the face,and dry up any hot puftules in. sae skin, as alfo :
againftthe Tes and eld Ulcers to Wy them up. .


d DU an unguent pe 4 fev. grains qua being abplyedo ont 2
i wardly, will. canfe SIUE, ar hufenefes as yondleafe. < *


~ Take Lapis ‘infernalis mix therewith of diftilled Oytof To-
qm as much as, will make: an i Ointment : “Keep. it in. a diy

aces MAE
" Tf you would provoke vomiting, anoint the pit of the flo
mach with five or (ix grains thereof, and the party will prefently
vomit, andas much as with taking of a vomit.

‘IF you would ‘provoke to loofenefs ; anoint about the navil
therewith, and the Patient will prefencly fall into a loofenefs. '
. Note; that you muft give the Patient (ome warm fuppings all
the time this medicine is working.

Note alfo, and that. efpecially > that you let. not, the
Ointment. lye fo. long as to cauterize the. past to which i icis.


"Bate Een SOME
To


160 . Ofthe Art of Dilation. Boox V.


To ub medicine that half a grain thereof res
taken every morning, will keep the
body foluble. A


Také of the-diftilfed Oyl of Tobacco; of which let the
effencial falc of Tobacco imbibe as much asic can; Then with
this compofition make fome: Lozenges, by adding fuch things

“asare fitting for fuch a form of medicine ; Note;t that yon put. -
but fuch a c quantity ofthis Oily fale, ashalf a grain only may be
in one Lozenge, -

One of thefe AE being eaten every Morning, or every
other morning, keepeth the body foluble, and is good for them
as are apt to be very coftive in their bodies;

. ^ Note, that you may put fome atomatical ingredient i into the
Lozen i that, may qualifie the, offenfive odour of the Oyb if
there ff | be any. :


To make a Cordials Jlomachicab, and purgative tinklaree o


Make a tincture of. Hiera picra With Spirit of Wine well sedi.
fied, and aromatizéd with Cinamon or Cloves.

Two or three fpoonfuls of this tin@ure being taken in a
morning twice in a week wonderfully helps thofe- that have
weak and foul {tomachs, it openech obftructions, and purgeth,
vifcofities of rhe ftomach and bowels,cureth all inveterate head.
ach, Aillech wormss and indeed leaveth no, impurities in thé bo:
dy, andi is very Cordial : for it exceedingly helps them that are
troubled with faintings, There is nothing offenfive in this medi-,
cine bur the bitteraels thereof which. the DUE mrisoiiney
vertues Sues then ballance,, jili sexo isi Hy:


ils pute ff


E E ; : z x


.Diffolve Scátimony i in. $ iie “of Wine, évaporate the one
moity ; ; then precipicateit by putting Rofe-water-to ic; and
it will become moft white „forthe black. and fetid matter ‘will lie

on


 -—— M a


. BeokV. Ofthe Art of Difidation) ` 161


onthe top of the precipitated matter which you muft wa(h
away with Rofe-water. Then take. that whice gum being


very well wafhed, and dry it (if you pleafe you may powder.


icand oufe it; for indeed ic hath ieithér fmell nor taf, and
purgech withont any offences and’ may be gen to children , _
of to any that diftalt phyficky in cheir milk ör brorhowichout
any difterning of ity and indeed it^ doth: ` pùrge Without es
niánner of! igtipings. Twas wonttomake it &p.into pills wit
Oyl of Cinamon og Cloves, which gave it a gallant fmell, and
of which I: pave-a fcrüple y: which wrought moderately and
withont any manner ófgripings?) chen difolve itgan in Spi-
rit T being aromatized with what pee e plea, and
this keep. -. i

*This Taare} isfo. pleafant; fó genilé; to: noble , a purgative,
that there is fcarce the like in the World, for it purgeth with-
out any offence, is taketi without any fiaufedting; and pütgeth all
manner of! humours, ctpecially choler, and melancholy, and is .

‘Cordial, = =?

ie begiven to hok dac abhor | any medicines es asto ed
diem or thofe thacaré‘oF a nanfeons Romach: ^ ià

"fh deleig fron halfa ponm tó two. Bree? - hd

- "Note; tt mut be cakenof it felf, for itr Be E int: rins
other Liquor, the Scammony will precipitate and fall to the
bottom,

After this manner you may prepare Jollap by extra&tibg


"the gumme therefore and then diffolying it in Spirit of


Wine.
By this.means Jollap would not be F offenfive to the


‘ftomach, as ufually itis, for itis the gnmme that is purgative,
and the earthlinefs thar is fo naufeous.


Jollap being thus prepared, is a moft excellent medicine a-
eani all hydropick difeafes, for it purgeth water away without
any naufeoufnefs or giping at all.


Aet
t


UTC. dix. ad


fe THEM HOY GANL 912501 Souq DS 19 D i
| 4 Loveduce diftiled Turpentineinto its body again.
‘ ay ner y , mar} al : r "S E d 4


Próg vam ree Aag vor ir) Dic best a8.
i Take the Oyl of Turpentine, and the Colophonia thereof
( whichis that fübance. which remains;in the; bottom after
' diftillation;), which you muft: beart powder, : Mix; thefe. to-


gether and;dige(t them, and yon fhall have a Turpentine of —


the, fame, confiftency, as--before,,.-but-.of a fiery.fubtle: na~
ture. Lso.asesiito 53i 93 LN. 0971.3 30 MORES IT CO

Pills made ofthis. Turpentine, are of excellent uferin obrus
Gions of the brea; kidneyes, and the; like... pas apes)


[:


ice , dttaninflanty without any. furnace... >
diy tipo 2510]. blioYV. 304.01 gall 264 551591 22 95d r Hr
1 Mou muft have a long, pipe made of tins which. mutt. have a
bowlipthe middle, with a hole in iras big as you can put you fin-


TUM


ah ^ Of theAreof Biflilation. —Boox V.


To make the diftilled Oyl ont of any hearb; feed or flowers 7


ger into it; by which you muf pnt your mattersthat you would _


have the Oyl of. Set this mater on fire witha candle or coal of


fire, chen put one end of the pipe into a bafon of fair water, and -


blow at the otber end, and the {moak will come into the water,
and chere will an Oyl {wim up
parate with a cupped, s go 1s
id quiet. enang vert uo 226080. ayn


a PME Mt : ROW OL rr Pode, 2^ »
2O EUOG: UL 3b-900lylo:tD (19(11- 03h. c21013220] SANTOR


onthe.water ; which you may fe. -


v".
\ d 1 Hn
& E Sols E i r
24195910Lf , 2H : ; i
w€- tod s
- LT XN a ý " ý » -
^I 121i 212 maak EG2q enn] Le ]5ir0 Y
3345 * i: n apeta ` ET. s Te
i S3 3T Z ! 9.
E SW 3 es
i ,
i


Boon V. | f the Are of Difilin m " i 4g


To pex gn water, pu the Dads of any Vegwabler ‘at the 4.20
Same time, Which: tan excellent 374) ito: diram TEIG
ue daz at mh the, vertu thettifs vs str vod rersony elds:


EE This mut be performed by. thefe following Vellei 5m T


"t


N
jm.
mites


D m


A, Signifiesthe Furnace it Asa M

. By The Retort which flands in Water "vm the matter to be
diffilled is put» inftead whereof if} Joe P4, Jon may put a gourd
glafs with ahead toite -$ acy =

C, The Pipe. 3

D; Another we[fel;voleve is more freja matterjout of which the tinture
is to be drawn, and which [Lands apon td with E under ite

\ E, The Furnace with a pan ofalon i bslbuq diw sáq 34559 11] 1
E; Tbe Recover. ia ~ ud ;
a The hole din " F wanes te n in pii to 1s the ie patie.


x (or muc EA stew a


iab à 9a


Take a Cio with. a great aid: en cévet 5 ilti
. a beak or nofe, fet it upon a trefoot, and under it put fire.
let.this be filled with falt water, m. there zu prefently si

2 Rid


" Mi did: bias A DAL UL T
iba. OfibéArtof Diftillation. Boox V.
ftill of a good quantity of frefh water into a Receiver;which mutt |
be joyned.tó the nofe of the aforefaid cover,
This is of good.ufe for Sea-men that want frefh water; for by
this means they may diftill a good qnantity in 24 hours, efpeci-
` ally ifthey have any confiderable number of the aforefaid veflels,


"


a figure whereof is this which follows, =~-


Away to purge and parifie troubled and muddy vupy |


Fill a great pot with pudled water, pura fofr and gentle fire

` ander it, lay fome Ricks acrofs on the pot brims, and npon che

fticks lay clean wooll, or a fpung well wafhed ; Now the wooll

- drinks np the vapoursthat afcend, which then you muft wring

. eut, and lay on the woollagzin, and this you may. do till you |
have as much clean water as yondefire, The manner of chis di-
flillation is defcribedchus. — — ; id


ee hy Sig


- BeoxV.. : ofa F Pili : 38$ 5


zc
A, Signifies the} Pot, a C The Sticke. i
> By The Fire. y 1 en ü


^ "This i is of ufe fis: therm that cancomeat no other waters $ bur
Whar are OD Ee: asi it fals out maye times in fome eee e


oe way to purifie any thick» A o ko i
feculent- Liquor. e


This is performed by fhreds of any white woollen cloth i in:
. Neffels;as: you ne Wes io copies


366 — Ofthedet of Difilatim? Book V. -


"fis the
5 The foreds »


Na. that ro» (bred mih be Ân wet. in Lir water, ‘and the
- feculent matter be put into the uppermoft veffel.

- Note alfo; Whereas: hein ne two Receivers, that i in many cafes
ope may be fufficient.

This way ferves for ite bist of ion. juices, or
diffolutions of fales from, their feculency., for. that which i is
diftilled by thefhreds is as clear as Cryíial ;' when what remains
is vee pron i
ich


ie 0 keep fee ina lie that bile " Mas ys: Pw sint 1 Mw


burn, bat as [oon as it is openca Wil be inflamed.


Fir extta@ che burning fpitit of the falt of tin in a glafs


Retort well coated 5. when the Retort is cold, take it out
and break it, andas "Toon as the matter in it, which remains
in che bottom thereof after ditillation , comes into the air, it


- will prefently be inflamed, Put this matter into a glafs viol; and


keep it aes Rope i
: à EEE : i. This


`


Book Vs] OfthedrtofDifilan. 7 =
This fire will keep many thoufand years and not burn unlefs p

the glafs be opened :, bur at; what time foevérthatis opened it =

will burn, - ie iu dod : :

Ic isconceived that fucha kind of fire as this was found in
Vaults when they were opened; which many conceived to be
a perpetual burning Lamp, when as indeed ic was inflamed
atthe opening of the Vault, arid the letting in air thereby,
which before: it lacked, and*therefore could not burn: For ic
isto beconceived, that there is no. fire burns longer then its
mare endures, and there isto combultible ‘matter can endure
Or ever. T 360 | NX eae :
` There may be many vfes of fu ha fire às this, for any man
may carry it about with hit andlerit butn on a fuddain, when
he hath any occafien forfire, = fe i

|o2ro WC 3D N


"


Mon


* »
————


sets ab sci
A


te So a ttis y Rf BORRAR C x es AEN
if À
Lu


TTE anser m


wamere Nee me


eat 3
iaa ee eg at foc t A E E apa 00200 ME


we E the vi ef Dita Bà OK y. |


A Lon Pinta D: vide: thi


: x
d e1ba7190565 i E i d
D3tris Hiat envy HIST su 479 ;
jr1o dud es Rh CARN Eotib DEPT
eH fod pane uer Iud d BU ee eR 223
oxy \ m ES. t. ,
aum y ded. i ls ood: s
RoW ARDOU Bt pei iis T ES
Uu
E
j
| SH


dio rns : E
A; Signifies the Canalcflick: which muft » hollow, and full f Wae
- ter,
B; The top of the Candleftick which maft beide to contain good ftare
f water for to fill up theGandleftick, as the candle rifeth up:
OV The Candle, which mut be as long asthe TAB =
D, The 5


Boor V.- “Ofte à Aet r Difilitim- d ibs
D, The vefet that contains either Waters fand; or afbes, for any vefet —
i tobe fet into; alfotocontain any matter it felf ». that is to be di»
gefted. Rees

E; A glaffevelfel fLanding in diffios. : esie

F, A narrow mouthed flopple to be put into the Candlefick. t to keep the
Candle upright, and that put be made of Tin, with holes init.


G, The Cover for the vefet Da, which is to be put upon it When any
"thing à ts decoéled, or kept bardin it.

H, 44 Still bead to put space valet D > when 3x Wond diftill any
thing in it. EN
Note, that if you iie all thefe figs -large, you'may do

many confiderable things without much labéiitr, or trouble.

In the veflel D, if iube large; you may Rew meat, which if you
put icin at night, and coyerit clofe; you may have it ready for
your break fat i in the morning, and fo accordiug to the time you -
put it in,yon may bave is for dinner or fupper. Alfo you may keep
any thing warm in the night; and at all times and divers fuch ules `
as thefe it may be ufed for. 3

Nore, that the Candle will fill rife up; ullit be quit@burned
out, andan ordinary, Candle willlatt twice as long. this Way as it


will out ofthe water.


If you would have one Candle lat along time, as twelve or.
twenty hours, you mult eitber make your Candiefiick yery, long.
that it may contain a- long Candles. or. make your, Candie, big :
and the wick Imall, or make your Candle of fuch matter as wit
not prefently be confumed,

Note alio, that if you wonld have a great heat, your Candle
mutt be great, and al(o the wick here area bat if hr de let
yout Candle be fmail $303 :


WollaT sci 2:y:19151a 2:808
in uy M


4


we Ofthe Artof Diam Boor V,


Another. Lamp-F HrHACC.


There is another foit of Lamp. Furnace ; with three Candles;


after this manner.


"The ufe dE this is, sei you ust have a confánt fire vie
fhould give a (tronger heat chan one Candle inthe former Fur-
nace. And the. eruth i is, that if your Candles be big; (as you may
make them as big as you will) you may have as lirong à heat
this way as by. Afhes i in an ocdinary Furnace.


To vals 4 Candle that fal laf linge


~ Take unflaked Lime;powder itand mix it with your Tallow,
- and fo make your candle of that ; or elfe you may make. Can-
dles of Cafile-fope, which will ferye for fach ufes as thefe, vizi


to burn in fuch a Lamp-furnace,
Nore, that it is the Salt that is in che Lime, and Sope


that. prelerves the Tallow from burning out fo- faft as otherwife


it would,


: Lo.


nels to the Oi


“BooxV. Ofthe At ofDiftillation sym


To make a lafting and i durable 051.


Take‘unflaked lime, Bay-fale, Oyl-Olive, of each alike quan-


ipo mix them vielltogétber » and diftil chem, in Sand >, coho-


bate the Oyl upon the fame. quantity of frefh Lime, and Sale:
and this.do..four. or five. times.:_ By. this: -means-will-the Oy! be
clears Ü impregnated wich wüiat. alc Was volatile in: the lime,


and (a Ex
t TE ith gives 4 durable-


Now-that eine impregn
I1
Note, that chis O91, whileft ic is diftilli eis of a Imon fra-
grant [mell : I have fome o£ ic which: ditiitedfeven t times, and
it is as, püres-fübtle and Lodoriferous,. as many commen diftilled
Oylsof Vegetables: 9
This Oyl; “befides the dusblenefs of iis alfo: goo E
inveterate ach in the limbs. l ;
A Lamp made with this Oyl, will continue sp fix
times as long as a.Lamp made of other Oyl, as alfo ic burns


againk any


“very {weeter sa Jp Y S


There muft besa great ‘deal of care ufed in making. ofiit, or elfe
you will quickly break your Glaffes;alfo you mult rake yery


` fttonglime, fuchas the  dyers u ule, and call: alf-cauk, -


^


pute hoa AO A $4. toa tin A


172 Of dhe Art of Diftillutions Boor Y:
°° \philepiphical Bellows, —
There be here fec down three figures of thefe kinds of Inte-


“thébts; Which belong ro ‘feveral fes, qu


jd


(


B, Signifies that which blows a fire for the melting of any metal, or
fuch like operation, and it blows moft forcibly With a terrible noife-
B, That which blows a Candle to make the flame thereof very frrongy
-fok the melting «f Glaffess and mipping them up. i
C, T bat which any ene may bold in their baud» to blow the fire fRrongly.


upin any occa [ion.


Now. the manner of the ufing them is this: you muf fit

leat them very hot,then put the nofes thereof (which-muft have

a very fmall.hole in them, no bigger chen that a pins head may

go in) intoa veffel of cold water, and they will. prefently

fuck in the water, of which then being full, rurnthe nofes

thereof toward the candle;or fire , which you would have blown:

Mo
:


 PooxV. -Ofthe Art of Diftillation.

As fot the fioure C, it matt have amouch drawn up round; and
‘hanging out an inch from che face, which mouth ( the whole
compafs of the face being heated firt) you muftdipin cold wà-
ter, and ic will fuck in water, as thenofes ofthe former did,


This then-you mufthold clofe'ro the fire that it may be heated, _


and it will blow exceedingly, as otherwile it will not , viz. if
PpeCgIa, SSO HOM satov d 1 not,


If you pot {weet water into fich à veffet; you may perfumea ^


"Chatilber'exceedingly, for a little quantity thereof willbe a long
tiie breathitie forth, ^ — 1 700 6 yo bak


! Noté; thàt thefe kinds of veffels muft be made of Copper, —-


“ahd beexteeding well clofed, that they may ‘have no vent but
- *by~chetrhofes, 5 1^ JAGGE -bus a ne


An excellent invention to make a Fire


Take three parts of rhe beft New-caftle coals beaten {mall one


part of lcam; mix chefe well together into a mafs with water; -


‘Make thereof Bills, which you mutt dry very well.


SAI


HAG WG
4 AN (
( S


This fire is durable, {weer , not offenfive by reafon of the-
fmoak; or cinder, as other coal-fires are; beautiful in fhape, and
- is not fo coftly as other fire; burns as well in a Chamber even as:
Char-coal..
: £3 This-


T


see EOM LN T |


EC cdm Of | the Art of D med Boc ox Y i
; This fire may either ferve for fuch Diftillations as require
- .& ftrong ; and lafting heat or ior; o; SURA, giao eitherinthe
Kitchen, or Chambers, (fiit boacod datád spe ad io sd


1


5 ed. new invention for j l
Seeing Ui bathing ae fweating moft difeafes are cured,
r sieecielly fuch as proceed from wind, hot, and diftempered: hu-
_mours, of cold and congealed humors, -becanfe all thefe are ra-
tified, and evaporated by cránfpiration i in (Weating, or bathing,
I thought it a. thing much, conducing to mans health > to fet
~ — „down fuch a way of bathing and fweating that might be ve-
; . ` ry effectual, and appropriated to any particular difeafe or
EC diftemper.
3 ` I {hall therefore here commend to you a way of bathing by
: geom the manner of Eun YORTOAY fee by thefe enfuing
vellels,


.  eoxX. OftedrefDifüluim, agg


La UDU RS
pue +


Ee REA ee TMSNETOT Eg xe T T EN vi ACY JN
cee E heb APA —— 15 dA
= ow Of the Art of Difillation. Boor Vi

A, Siguifies a bot Still with to pipes going into two Wooden ve[fels ;
inthis Still you may put either hearbsyor (pices, With watersor with

- Spiritsyand diftil them;-by which means, tkey that ane in the veffels

will prefently be forced into a-fmeat by vertue-cf the [wbtlery of the -
vapours. And this indetd is as good. and effedtwal a may for [wearin g
as an) can be invented: You may by this means appropriate your
ingredients to the nature ofthe difeafese 3 D

B, oA veffel wherein a man fitsin the bath: Now this"veffel. bath in
it a door for poe cafier going sito jt which falinta Jar betters and

= more conveniènt than to. bt opan only at the de ||
C» A long velfel where aman thas i weak, and not able to fit up lies
and bathed. SM RU THESE i


m 77d


Now you muft noté s-ibát thefe vapours muk: wot be hotter
than the Patient can beár: alfo if the vapour come forth too hor . -
upon the body of che Patient, he may by putting a pipe upon
the end of the pipe that comes into the veflel, divert the
hot'vapour from his body, and fo rt will not offend him

-~ thatway. ES oet T qo
Nore, that the Patient, affoon as he begins to be faint , mutt
come forth, or elíe/fíé will {uffer more prejudice than good by.
-his bathing ; andalfo to prevent him from fainting; let him take
fome Cordial, orceld Beer, which will much revive him ;"and
|. make him endure his bating longer, as alfo make him [weat the
more. Mui. lle esempi ion ll
Affoonasthe Patient comes forth, let him go into a warm bed,
and fweat as heis able robearit, and take (ome Poffet-drink,
or Broth, or fuch like warm fuppings, as alfo (ome good Cordi-
al if he be very faint. - sor. dH
The Patient may.according as his firenzth willbear ; and his
difeafe require, bath, more feldom or oftnen


An artificial hot Bath; made fromthe fame princip Toe
the natural Bath is. :


Before I fet down the proces of making afi artificialdtot i
Bath, I fhall premife fomethings concerning the true nature,
and original of a hot Bath. Now the clearelt and beft account
s à that


Book V. p the on f Difilaton 197 :
that Lever heard or read; of the caufe of the heat in Bathes is thae
which is given by Mounfieur dé Rochas & that in a demonftrative
Way; His words are thefe : As I was (faith he) wich fome of my
companions wandring in Savas I tound in the Valicy of Lu-
' gerne becwixe the Alps ahot fpring; I began to’ confider- the
Caule of this heat, and whereas: the vulgar opinion is; that the
heat of Fountains is from Mountains fired within, I faw reafon
to think the contrary 5 becaufe I faw Snow upon a Mountain
from whence this hot Spring came, unmelted, which could.
not poffibly but have been: diflolved by the hot fumes of the
Mountains, hadthey been fired, Whereupon being unfatisfied,
I with my companions and other labourers (whom Icould ve-
ry hardly perfwade to undertake fuch a bufinéfs ; by reafon they
were afraid that fire would theréupon break forth out-of the '
ground and confume us) got tools and fet upon digging to
find oucrhe true caufe ot the heat of this Fountain. After we
had dieged 15. dayes (having before perceived the water to be
hotter and hotter by degrees as we came neerer, to the fource)
we cameto the original of the heat; where was a great ebulli-
tion: In three hours more, we dig gged beyond this place. of
ebullition, and perceived the water to be cold, yet ip the fame,
: continued fiream with the other that was hot : upon this I be-
gan to wonder much at the reafon of thefe things. Then I
carryed co my lodging fome of this hot water (which was both
faltith 5 and acid). and evaporatedit; and of forty ounces I
had in the bottom five drams of faitifh matter ; which I then
yet farther purified, and extracted thence three drams of pure;
nitrous Hermetick Salt, the other cwo ounces being a flimie fut-
phurous fubftance : Yet with this I was. not fatisfied, but wich
my labourers went again to the place, and digged cwelve days:
more, and then we came to a water which was “inipid 4S ordi--


nary. Fountain Water, yet fill in a continned füream with the —


faltifh and hot water, Ac this I wondred much, . whereupon L
digged up fome of the earth where the cold, and faltifh ftream,
did run,and.carried it home wich me;and, out of a hnndred weight
thereof, I extracted a good quantity of nitrous Salt; which was
_almoft-fluxile. When I had. extracted as mach as I could; } laid.


the Earth afide, and in 24 hours it was all, ‘covered: over;
LY. . With


. 178 Of tbe Art of Difilation. Book Vs —
With Salt, which Lextra&ed, and out ofa hundeed weight of this
Barth, whichIcall Virgin-earch, Thad four pound of shis kind
of Salt which it contracted in the aforefaid 24, hours : and (o it
would do conftandy. Now this fatished me concerning one
doubt: For, before J was unfatisfied how therecould be a con:
ftaut füpply ‘of thatfalt which made the water faltifh, feeing
there was but a little diftance betwixt the infipid water and the
hot water, and the conftant ftream of water wafhed away the
Salt which was in that litcle fpace : for J perceived that this kind
of Earth attracts this univerfal Salt in the World, partly from the
airin the cavities of the Earth;and partly from the vapours that
conftantly pafs thtough the Earth. After this, I took fome of
that Earth where the ebullition was, and carried ic home, and
prouedic, ánd I perceived it to be a Sulphur-mine , into which
the Formeracid faltifh water penetrating caufed an ebullition, as
do'Salt of Tartar, and Spirit of Vitriol being mixed together,and
alfo water poured on unflaked Lime. After this, I began to que- .
Rion, how it was,that chis Sulphur-mine was not confumed,iee-
ing fo much mattter paffeth from it daily : but when I began to
underftand, how all chings in the eatth did affimilate to rheni-
felves what(oever was of any kind of affinity to them , as Mines
convec the Tools of Miners into their ‘own fübltance in a little
time, and fich likeexperiments of thar nature, I was fatisfied.
And aftet ali this, 1 nnderftood how this ‘univerfal Salt of the
World was to be had, ind I could at any time mix it wich waters
. dird pourthac Water npon Sul phar,and fo make an-arrificial hot
Bath'as°good as any natural Bach whitfoever: Note;'that no
Sait in the World bur this Nitrous Saft willdo it, as I often try-
éd ;' And this Salt isto be found in all hor Bathes, and to
. be prepared artificially, This atr AZownfenr de Rochas: Something
like üpto this Helmont feerhs to hold forth, faying thar there isa
Primum ins falinm, Ot femina [alinm which are all feated inwa-
ters dnd vapours) and givethem an acidity; but as yetháveno <
faline tafte until they meecwith fuch principles, and'be received
into certain Matrizes inthe Earth, which may ‘make them
pur forth this potential falttiefs ito ay and according to this
 üiverfity of plates, that'chis water ot Vapoirs, being impregna
ted with thofe feeds of Salt, ‘gothrorich. ariféch the diverfity of

; ort A det Salts,


*


Boon V.
Salts, as Alum, Sea-falt, Nitre, œc. Then upon this account
thé Earth through which the cold, acid; faltifh water abovefaid,
doth rua , did fpecíficate chat potential Salt which was both
in the waters and vapours) into a nitrous Salt, (by which means
was that kind of Salt in that place)! but whether this primam ens
faliam be fo unfpecificated ; or guid’ Hermapbroditicum, as he
afletts, or no, 1t matters not much co my parpoíe ; it fuf-
ficeth , if chat Earth through which thae acid ‘nitrous’ ‘water
Inns; attracts and multiplies an acidnicrous Salty with which
the water being impregnated’, and rnnning through 2^ felpha-
rous Mine, caufeth an ebullition, Atl this being premifedy Y
fhall now endeavour to: illuftrare how Nature ‘may in this bé
imitated, as char an artificial hot Bath may be made by? fuch
like principles, as the natural hot Bach confilts of, being artifici:
ally prepared. Ag RS T MORET CHEM aS
Now thefe principlesare the Sulphur:mine; and the acid ni-
trous Salt; the former requires no furcher preparation (2s faith
Meunfenr de Rochas, ) if it be pure : the latter isto be prepared


two manner of wayes : for either ic isto be excracted’, as faith .


the forefaid Author out of the waters of the Bathiby evapora-


ting chem away, or by condenfing the nitrous air (for indeed, as -


many judicious Philofophers are of opinion, the Air is wholly
nitrous, as it appears by the condenfation of it incold places in-
to Nitre), which his Virgins-Earth did'do , into a Salt, which
was acid: and almoft Aloxil. Now, when] fay, ‘that the nitrous
Salcis to be thus prepared; Ido not fay, that this is che fúll pre-
paration thereof; forindeed, iris yer further to be prepared;
and that is by giyine ir a greater acidity. 1 queftion much, whe-
ther or no,the Salt being prepared after the aforefard wayes, do
retain that acidity which isrequired for that ebullion T fpake* of,


and which the nitrous acid water had beforeit cáme to the Mine --


of Sulphur : For indeed, the aforefaid Author, when he affirmed,
that he could at any time make an artificial hot Bath; did. not
fay > heufed' Sale prepared only after the two former wayes,
viz. by extradting it out of the waters of the Bath, and making
ic with his Virein-Earth which did attrac, and Condenfe the ni-
troufnefs of che Air; but withal , by making it fo acid; chat
it might caufean ebullicion when it came to be joyned with a

QUARE B3 — ' Sulphur-


LT,


| Of the Art of Diflillatión: l Bo


—— MÀ - e " ga a ih ts i a
4 ! z ssa vx 1
180 Ofthe Artof Diftillation. |^ Book V.

' Sulphur-Mine, Now then how to givethis Nitre a fufficient aci-
dicy,is the great queftion. Forthe better effecting of this, we
muft: confider whence that nitrous water (above mentioned) in ,
the earth had che greateft part ofits acidity. As to char, it muft
be. remembred, that the Virgin-earth through which thé acid ni-
trous water did run,did condenfe the nitrous air or vapours into à
nitrous Salr,ind withal ic is to be confidered, that before this ni-
trous air or vapour, before ic be condenfed, even when it is neer
- unto.condenfation is acid, and pare of ic before condenfation is


mixed with the water,.and fo renders it acid. Now that waters |


have great part of their acidity from the acid vapours of acid Mi=
nerals, both Henricus ab Heers, and Jordan, upon Mineral waters
affirm: and that Salts unbodyed, are farr more acid than when
they have affumed a body , is clearly manifeft in this, vizs that
Spirits of Salts, which I call Salts unbodied , becaufe they have
lofttheir body,are become very acid, becaufe unbodied ; if fo in
Spirits chat have loft their bodies, why not after fome proportion
in thoféthat have not yet aflumed a body, as vapours of Nitre, or
nitrous air being neer to congelation, and bodying, and impreg-
nant With Spirits of Nitre.
.... Now I fay, that nitrous vapours, or nitrous airbeing a Salt
nnbodyed are not fo acid as Spirits of Nitre ; becaufe they are
more phlegmatick and crude, which phlegm they lofe by be-
ing congealedinto a Salt: yet forallthis, they. are farr more
acid than the body of Salt: and this is that which Helmont un-
derftands when he faith, that the efurine Salt being incorpo-
rficated is farr more active, in giving tat and odour, than
when it hath received its body, by becoming a fpecificated Salt.’
"Furthermore ; how Nitre fhal! become fufficiently acid for
the aforefaid operation, is the great matter to be enquired
into. We muh therefore confider, which way we may un-
body Nitre (feeing it is {carce poffible to get ic before ic hath
received its body) and that is done two wayes either by forcing
of it into a moft (harp Spirit, which is too acid for our intenfion,
or by digefting the whole fubftance-of Nitre into a liquor mo-
derately acid, which indeed feryes for our purpofe, and the.
procefs is this. , ' ip mte euo La


Take


q


 BooxWV. © Of the Art of Diftillation. 181
Take the pureft Nitre you can get, diffolve it in Rain -water,
fo as that. the water imbibeasmuch of it asic cap, Then put
this nitrous. Water into a common earthen vellel unglazed,
which you muft fet in acellar, You fhall fee this veffel in `
a fhort time to be white all over onthe ontfide as with a. hoar
frok, which whitenefs is partly the floures of che Nitre. being
the purek patt thereof penetrating the veffel, and partly che ni- -
trous air condenfed into Nitre by the coldnefs of the. veffel , as
alfo aflimilated to the Nitre that penetrated che veffel. Ifaid
by the coldnefs of the veffel, Dbecanfe. fuch is che coldnefs of an-
Earthen-vefle] wherein is Nirre; diffolved in water, that it. will
being fet in Snow by the fire-fide forthwith be freezed, This
Nitre you mft frike off with a’ feather ; and when you have a
fufficient quantity thereof, as three or four pounds, put this, or
the nitrous Salt extracted from Bath-waters into a bolt-head of
Glafs .(a pound in each Bolt-head) that two parts of three be
empty, nipitup, and fetirinafhes, and give it a reafonable
{trong tire, viz. that tbe upper part of the boul of the bolt-head
be as hor, as that you can but, well fuffer your hand vponit, and
you fhall fee that che Nitre will be diffolved every day -a-little,,
and in two or three months time be wholly diffolved ; and be-
come acid, but not fo acid as the Spirit thereof s then put itinto
a. Glafssgourd witha head , and difil it off, and in the bottom
you fhall findanacid nitrous Salt, almoft fluxil, not unlike the
Salt which Mounfeur de Rochas, found in. the evaporating of his.
Water. Then pour the diftilled Nitre-water upon. the faid Salt;
and then it is for your ufe. ;

The ufe of chefe principles or ingredients is this, viz. make
Fountain-water fufficiencly acid with this nitrous Liquor, then
ponr it upon a fufficient. quantity of che-beft Sulphur-Mine , or
Sulphur-vivum in a large wooden veffel where che Patient is to
be bathed, and you willíee the. water prefently heated fo hot as.
the Patient is able to bear.

. Theinward ufe of thefe Bath-waters, is by reafon of the: Ni-

. trein them, to diffolve grofs humors, open obftructions,cleanfe

the Kidneys and Bladder; and by reafon of the Sulphur to: dry,

mollifie,difcufs,and glutinate, and to help all uterine defects pro.
ceeding from cold and windy.humors. j
: Aa 3 " Notes.


3


St Ae ee ee ee a NIE DIM. a


fe
Nore? thar they-muft be drunk warm, andina good quantity,
or elfe they Will do more hurt than good, i


' "Fhe outward ufe of this is for fuch ill effects‘as atean- the habit . d


of the body , and ‘out of the veins; as of pilfies; contractions;
fheums, cold‘humors, affects of the skinand aches , for they re-
.  folve, difcufs, cleanfe, mollifie, ec.


' Now for rhe mapner of bathing T fhall not prefcribe any thing,


bue leave this tothe difctecion of che Phyfitian, who is to: give -


o:der and direGions forallithé circumttances about’ ie + for in:
deed'every oneistiocto bathe; whenand how ‘he pleafetb-; bie
mutt apply himíelfto an able Phyfician,and fubmit himfelf co his


judgment and experience; or elfe may receive either prejudice;


orno benefic thereby, < ^


A


An artificial Tunbridge, and Epfome W attr.


*- ‘Tcis granted by all, that Tunbridge Water proceeds from an -


‘Tron: mine, but how it contracts chat acidity, and that ironifh
and vicriolated tafte-and odour, feeing upon’ évaporation there-
of; there remains lictle‘or ho Vitriol or Sale of Iron ac the bot-
tom, isthe-great queftion: Now forthe folution of this, we
mutt confider how many wayesa fubterraneal mineral, or metal;
may communicate itsacidity'to waters; and that faith Henricus


-ab Heers, upon Spaw-waters, icdoth three ways; one; when the


water paffing through the Mines , carryeth along with it fome
ofthe diffoluble parts of the Mine’, to which is confonant the


faying of Ariffotle :. Such are Waters as ts the nature of thofe Mines


through which they pals, a8 alfo of Galen, when he faith, that pure
- waters palfing through Mineral Mises, carry with them fome of thè
(ubfhance of the Minei. The fecond way is, when the vapours
árifing from fermented Minerals and Metals, are mixed with
waters. Now that eapours retain the odour, and tate of thofe
things,, from whence they are raifed, <Ariffor/e in his fourth
Book S4/limium affirms, and alfo, Helmont, when he faith; That
fime parts of the Ion- Mines being by fermentation ‘turned into a
vapoue , retain theodaur and taft of the Mine, by vertue of the
acid efurine Salts and ave not prefently reduced’ into a body , and
alfo artificial vapours of the Iron- Mines lave more vertue ana


alive M


- OfiheArtofDifibüps. Boos M.


5M


Book V. Ofthe Artof Diftillation.. —— 38y
attive ( I mean thofe parts that are vaifed by a rong fire in a
nace from the Mine of Iron) than Iron it felf when it is melted, —
The thirdis, whena great quantity of vapours arifibg from the
- aforefaidfermented Mines is elevated; and’by the: coldnets of the
ambient earth is turned into an acid water , which as it paffech
through the earth meereth with fome {prings of water, and'mix-.
ing with.chem gives then a pleafant acidity, And thisis the bent
of all acid: waters being clearand very pure.’ -

This being ‘premifed, I (hall now proceed to the — of
making artificial waters, like to thofe of T'wabridgeand Ep/ome:
‘of the former, oiz T. nnbridge chus,

‘Take of the Mine, or Ore of Iron, beat it very fmall; and purir-
into the furnace expreffed page 84. and therewill-come forth an
acid Spirit, and Floures, which you mult mix together cill the
acid Spitit extract the Salt out ofthe Flonres; then decant off
the clear Liquor, which will have a ftrong tafe and fmell: off
‘ron. |

.. A few drops of this ye put into a Glafs full of Fountain-

water, give it the odour and taite of Tunbridge-watet , and ‘com-
municates the fame operations to it.
^ Tr openeth all obitrufhions; pargetli by Uine ; cleanfeth the
Kidneys,and Bladder, belpeth the piffing of blond, the flopping
of the Urine, and dificulty of making water, it allayeth all Tharp
huniors, cureth inward Ulcers, and Tmpoftornes ;: cleantech and
ftrenetheneth the Stomach; and Livers@re.

‘Notes: that Fonntain-water being made moderately T erit :
this acid ironifh Liquor ; may be taken ‘froma ‘pint "to fix *
piots, bnt by degrees; and after the taking of it ; moderare
exercife i5 £o be ufed ; :andpfafting ito beobferved;: till alf tlie
water. bé:gone ont of the body’; " which wal bei iB feyenor eight
honis: i< : M

pferne- Water: is senate attificially hits. “Take af dé Milie of
Allnm; or Allum-ftones;: powder it'veryfmall; ‘and difti] itin
the: Furpsceiexpreffed:] page toz and chere 'willdliftil over acét-
taim acidiallarinit water,’ which mutt be mixed with a double
quantity: ofciNitrezwater y" (the: prepitation: whereof 13 "fer
down in the: procels iof making ihe: artificial ‘hot’ Batty). ‘Now
You: mutt know; chit! Fpfigpé qvater hath’ a’ceitain Rusa "
wera aci
x»


c


184


acid take, which is partly alluminous and partly nitrous;


SORS Ne ee ee EUR AS


Of the Art of Difiillati


n. Book V.
which proceedeth from nitrous air, and vapours arifing from


the fermentation of alluminous Mines; being firtt mixed to-
gether, and then mixed with the Fountains paffing through the


Earth,


If you put a few drops of this Liquor into a Glafs full of Foun-


tain-water, it will give ic the odour, and taft of Epfome-water,


that you {hall fcarce difcern them afunder either by that odour ;


-or operation,


This water is purgative, and indeed purgeth efpecially all
fharp burning hamors;cools an inflamed, and opens an ob{truct.


ed body ; cleanfeth the Kidneys and Bladder, cureth inward Ul- ~~


cers, and Impoftumes ; is a very good Prefervative againít che
Confumption, cc. j

Fountain-water made acid wich this Liquor, may be taken
froma pint to fix or eight; but by degrees, and after i£ moderare
exercife multbe ufed, and fafting till the water be out of the
body ; only fome thin warm fuppings may be taken to help che
working thereof, Some take this water warm. H


Tomake artificial Precious-ftones of all forts of colours,


Take Cryftalline white Pibble-ftones that are very white.
throughout, and haye no mixture of any other colour, which
you fhall find in Fountains; and on the Sands of the Sea, Put
them into a Crucible, make them glowing hot. (covering the
Crucible) then caft them into cold water, by which means they
will crack and be eafily reduced into a powder; Take the
powder thereof, and put the like quantity-of pure Salt of Tar-
tar-thereto, which Sale mult not.be made in any -metalline but
Glafs-veffels, chat it may hive no mixture of any other colour,
To this-mixture you may add what colour you pleafe s: which
mutt be of a mineral or a metalline nature; chen put them in-
to a very firong Crucible, which muf be buc half full, andithen '
covered, and there melt them ina; ftrong firé, till they become `
like Glafs. Nore, that when this mixture is in melting; you muft
putan Iron-rod.into it;and take up fome of it,and if there appear


- no corns of grayel init, icisenough; If otherwife; you muf °


melt


Boox V. Of the drt of Diftillation. UM
melt itlonger. The efpecial Minerals and Metals that give co-
lours are thefe, viz, Copper, Iron, Silvery Gold; Wifmues Mig-
nefia; and Granats. :

Common Copper makes e Sea-green,; Copper made ont of —
Irona Grafs-green ; Granats, a Smaraedite-green ; ;lronyellow, ~
ora Hyacinthecolour ; Silver, whice, yellow, g green, and granat-
colour, Golda fine skie-colour, Wi(mut common blew; mag-
neíia; an ametbyít colour: And if: you will mix two or three
of thefe together chey will give other colours. For Copper and -
Silver mixed together givé an Amethyft. colour : Copper , and
Irona pale-green ; Witmut;and Magnefiaya purple colour; Silver;
and Magnefia divers colours like as an Opal. -If you would have
this maís nor to be tranfparent but Opac, you may adde the
Calx of Tin to it when it is in: melting: as if you wonld make
Lapis-luzali ; then to your mixture coloured with Wifmat adde
the Calx of Tin,and chis mixture when icis almoft ready to con-
geal caltinto a mould, where fome powder of gold hath been
fcattered, and by this means it will become full of Golden-veins
very like true Laps-/azuli,which is very plefant to behold, You
may by thefe forefaid preparations caft what forms of figures
you pleafe, of what colour you pleafe.

The Metals; and Minerals for the making of colóng ought. to
be thus prepared, viz.

Plates of Copper muft be made red hot,and then quenchedi in
- Cold water, of which then take five ot fix grains, and mix them
with an ounce of the aforefaid mixture; and mele them all coge-
ther, and they will colour it Sea-green. . 4

Iron muft be made into a Crocus iri à Reveiberitory Bie and
then eight or ten grains thereof will tinge the mixture into-
a yellow, or hyacinth colour. >

Siver isto be; diflolved in Aqua- darti and precipitated with
Oyl of Flints, then dulcified with water, and afterward dryed ;
of this five or fix grains give a mingled colour,

Gold mult be diffolved in p» arogis and precipitated. with
the Liquor of Flints, then fweetned, and .dryed , and five or fix
grains thereof giveth the fineft Saphir coour to anonce of the
> mixeure, ss bans


cb If


— - — 9 e T gi SEEI ERA T d RY
v 2 D a : a Ne’ 51 S um 3
- 386 OftbedrtofDiflillaiw. —  Boox V,
If Gold be melted with zegalm martis nitro[us five or Gx grains
_ thereof give to an ounce of the mafs a moft incomparable rubine
colour.

Magnefia may be powdred only,and then ten or twelve. grains
thereof make anamethyft colour.

Wifmut muft be diffolved in Agua-regis ; and precipitated
with Liquor of Flints, then fweetened, and dryed; and
then of this four or five grains turn an ounce of the mafs in:o a
Saphir-colonr , but not fo natural as Gold doth,

Granata may be powder only , and then ten or fifteen grains

— thereof tinge an ounce of the mafs into a fine green colour nor
unlike to the natural Smaragdine.


To prove what kind of metal there is in any Orealtbougb you have bar
avery few grains thereof. (o a that you cannot make proof
thereof the ordinary Way with Lead.


Take two or four grains (if you have no greater quantity) of
any Ore that you have, put it to half an ounce of Venice- -
glafs,and melt them together i ina Crucible, (the Crucible being
covered) and according | tothe tincture that the'Glafs receiveth
fromthe Ore,fo may you judg what kind of meral there is in the
Ore ; for if it bea Copper- Ore; then the. Glafs will be tinged
with a Sea-green colour,
If Copper. and Iron, a Gra(s-green,
J£ iron, a dark yellow.
If Tin, a pale yellow. s;
-If Silvera whiti(h yellow. CFO
If Gold, a fine skie-colour.
If Gold and Silver together, a Smaragdine-colour. -
i Xf Gold, Silvers Copper and hen EORR HUNE an amethyft cos
our.) 5


ed pretty servation npon the melting of Copper and Tin bye. :


. -Firft make two Bullets. of red Gomer of the fame magni-
-gude, make alfo two Bullets of the pureft Tin in che fame: mould;
3$ the others were pde TH all four Bullets, and A
: the


\


Boox V. E di Art of Dilation! 3 T
the weight well: then melt the Copper-bullets firft ; upon them
- being melted put che Tin-bullets; and melt them together, but

* havea care that the Tinfume noraway Then caftthis molten
mixture in the (ame Moulds as before, and it will fcarce make
three Bullets, but-yet they weigh as heavy as the four did, be-
fore they were melted together.

lfuppote the Copper condenfeth the body of the Tin; which
before was very porous, which condenfation rather adds shan
diminifheth the weight thereof, :


A remarkable obfervation upon the melting of Salte
Armoniack , and Calx-vive together,


Take Salt-Armoniack, and Calx-vive; of each a like quantity,
mix, and melt chem together. Note, that Calx of it felf will not
melc in le(s than eight. hours with the ftrongeft fire that can be
made; but being mixed with this falt melts in halfan hour, and
lefs, like a metal, with an indifferent fire,

This mixture being thus melted; becomes a hard fone; out of
which you may frike fire as out ofa Flint,’ which if you diffolve
again in water, you fhall have a Salt-Armoniack à in the fame
quantity as before, but fixed. ——

Note, thac hard things: have their congelation from Salt-Ar-


a moniack, as horns, bones, and fuch like; >for little fixed Salt can


be extractedfrom them; only Volatile and Armoniack.

An ounce of any of thefe Volatile-falts; (as of Horns, Bones;
Amber,and fuch like) reduced into an acid Liquor by ditillacion,
condenfeth, aud indurateth a pound of Oily-matter, .


An cafie and cheap powder like #nto Aurum fulminans.


Take of Salt of Tartar one part; Salt-peter three parts, Sol- ,
phura third part ; grind thefe well together, and dry them. A
, few grains of this powder being fired; will give as oi: a clap: as

a musket when it is difcharged..--.


"ct


Ea i sem


^ RM Of-the rt of Diflillation,


wet. a. ar


To make an Antimonial Cup, and to caf divers
1 figures of e Matimony.: : `


`- Take the beft crude Antimony very well powdered, Nitre, of


. each a pound, of crude Tartar finely powdered two pounds, mix


them well together, and pur them inco a Crucible ; cover the
Crucible, and: melt them,and the regu/us will fall to the bottom;


and be like a melted metal ;.then pour it fourth intoa Brafs-


mortar, being firft{meered over with Oy —


Take two parts.of powdered Antimony, and four parts of
> powder of crude of Tartar, melt thefe as aforefaid.


This regulus you may (when you have made enough of it )
melt again and caft it into:what moulds you pleafe, you may ei-
ther make Cups,or what Pictures you pleafe, and of what figures
you pleafe.You may caft it into forms of fhillings,or half-ctowns,


- either of which; if you putitinto two or three ounces of Wine


in an Earthen-glazed veífel;or Glafs , and ipfufeit in a modetate
heat all night, you may havea Liquorin the morning which


will vomit : of which the dofe is from two dramsto two ounces


and half,


Note,that inthe Wine you may pnta little Cinamon, to cor-


re&t and give a more grateful relifh to it. ies
It is the cuftom co fill the Antimonial-cup with Wine, and to


put as much Wine, round about, beewixe thae and the little-
Earthen-cup where it ftands, and foinfufe it all night, and then.


drink up all chat Wine t buc I fear, that fo much Wine will ba

too much as being three or four ounces, whenas we feldom ex-

ceed the quantity of two ounces of the infuion of Antimony.
Thefe Cups, or Pictures will laft for ever, and be as effectual


after a thonfand times infufion, asat frh : and if they be broken-


at any time; (as ealy chey may, being as brittle as Glafs ) they
may be caft again into what forms you pleafes =-
Note, that he that cafts them. muft be skilful’ in making his


{pawde, as alfo in {couring of them; and making them bright a£- .


terwards : for if they be carefally handled they will look even as
bright as filyer.. i ae


"nam
N, Y


Boox WE 3


The


P2 Ofibe Art of Difillatin, 189


eec o ae


E NOSE ST ERSE


POR O A


The Spa» yrical Anatomy of Gold , and
—. Silver, together with tbe Curiofi-
ties therein, and chiefeft prepara-
tions thereof.


BOOK VL


Shall fir endeavour to fhew whence
Gold had its original,and what the mat- -
ter thereof is, As Nature (faith San--
divoriu)is in the will of Ged,and:God .
created her: fo Nature made for her
felf a feed: (i.) her will inthe elements, .
Now fhe indeed is one, yet fhe brings.
forth divers things ; but fhe. operates .
d . nothing wirhout a Sperm; whatfoever
the Sperm will; Nature operates, forthe is, asit were, thein- `
ftrument of amy Artificers, The Sperm therefore of every thing: _
is better, and more profitable than Natureher felf: for thou
fhalt. from. Nature without a Sperm do as much as a Gold-
fmith without fire , or a Husbandman: without erain or feed, .
Now the Sperm of any thingis the Elixir, the Balfom of Sul-
phur, and the fameas Humidem-Radicale is in metals: but to
- proceed ro.what concerns our purpofe. Four Elements gene-
Bb3 -. 7 HM.


TOWRM > Ae a


190 —— Ofthe Ait of Diftillation. Boor VI.


rate à Sperm , by the will of God, and imagination of Na-
rure : For as'the Sperm of a man hath its center, or the
veflel of its feed inthe Kidneys ; fo the four Elements by their
indefinent motion (every ome according to its quality) caft
forth a Sperm into the center of the Earth , where it is dige-
fted, and by motion is fent abroad, Now the center of the
Earth is a certain empty place, where nothing can reít: and
-the four-Elements fend forth their qualities ipto the circum-
ference of the center. «As a male fends forth his feedinto the
- womb of the female, which'after it hath received a due porti-
on Cafts out the reft, fo it happens in the center of thé Earth,
that the magnetick power ofa part of any place attracts fome-
thing convenient to it felf, for the bringing forth of fome-
thing ; and the reft is caít forth into ftones and other excre-


ments: For every thing hath its original from this Fountain, .


and there is nothing in the world produced but by this Foun-
tain: as for example, fet upon an even Table a veífel of water,
which may be placed in the middle thereof, and round a-
bout it fet divers things, and divers colours alfo ; Salts, ec. eve-
£y thing by its felf ; chen. pour che water into.the middle ;- and
you fhall fee water to run every way, and when any fiream
roucheth the red colour, it will be made red by ic, if the
fale, it. will contra& che tafe of falt fromit, and fo of the reft :
Now the water doth not change the places, but che diverfity of


places changeth ché water. In like manner the feed or fperm.


being caít forth by the four Elements from the center of the
earth unto the fuperficies thereof, paffeth through various places,
and according to the nature of the place is any thing pro-
duced : if it come to a pure place of earth, and water a pure thing
is made, : à

The feed, and fperm of all-things is but one, and yet
it generates divers things, as itappears by the former exam-
ple. The fperm, whileft ic isin the center, is indifferent to
all forms; but when it is come into any determinate place;
. it changeth no more its form, The fperm whilefticis ip the
center, canas eafily produce a tree, asa metal, and an hearb as


a ftone, and one more precious than another, according to the -


purity of the place, Now this fperm is produced of Ele-


ments.


being equally, and ftrongly mixed per minima in the caverns of


Boox VI. Ofthe Art of Di/tillation. 191 .
ments thus. Thefe four Elements are never quiet but by
reafon of their contrariety mutually act one upon another;
and every one of its felf fends forth its own fübtilty, and they
agree inthe center. Now in this center is the frcbaas, the
fervant of Nature, which mixing thofe fperms together, fends
them abroad, and by diftillation füblimes them by the heat of
. à continual motion unto the fuperficies of the earth: For the
earth is porous; and this vapour (or wind, as the Philfophers
callit) is by diftilling through the pores of the earth refoived
into water, of which all things are produced. Let therefore; -
as Ifald before, all fons of Art know, that the {perm of me- . .
tals is not different from che {perm of all things being; vize
a humid vapour: Therefore in vain do Artifts endeavour the
reduction of metals into their firft.matter, which is only a
vapour. Now faith Bernard Trevi/an, when Philofophers fpeak:
of a firk matter, they did not mean this vapour, bur the fe-
cond matter, which isan unctuous water, which tous is the
firft, becaufe we never find the former, Now the fpecification
of this vapour into diftin&: metals, is chus. This vapour paf-
feth in its dillillation. through the earth, through places ei-
ther cold, or hot ; if chrongh hot; and pure; where the fatneís
of Sulphur fticks to che fides thereof ; then that vapour (which.
Philofophers call the Mercury of Philofophers) mixeth, and
joyneth it felf unto that fatnefs, which afterwards ic fub-
limes; with ig felf, and then it becomes, leaving the name. of
a vapour, an un&nofity, which afterwards coming by fublima-
tion into other places, whichthe antecedent vapour did purge,
where the earth is fübtle; pure » and humid, fills the pores,
thereof, and is joyned to it; and fo it becomes gold: and
where it i$ hot; and fomething impure, filyer:. Buc if that fat-
` pels comes.to impure places, which are cold, it is. made. lead s.
and if that place be pureand mixed wich Sulphur, ic becomes: `
| Copper: for by how much the. more pure and warm. the
place is, fo much che more’ excellent doth ic make the me.
tals. ; i ji ` : ) tL BTEÉ 40215
Now this firft matter of metals is a humid, vi(cous ; incom-
buflible; fnbrle fubfance, incorporated with an; earthy, fubülity,


the.


tie, im eee


. theearth. Butasin many things thereis a twofold un&uofity


P


(whereof oneis;asit were; internal, retained in the center of


the thing left it fhould be deftroyed by fire, which cannot be


"without chédeftruQion of the fubftance it felf wherein it 15:


the other; as it were, excernal, feculent, and combultible):fo ip


-all metals, except Gold, there is a twofofdunétuofity : the one


Which is external, fulphurous, and inflamable; which is Joyn-


ed toit by accident, and doth not belong to the total uni-


on, with the cerreí(trial parts of the ching: che other is internal, — -
and very fubtfe, incombuftible, becaufe ic is of the fubfancial —
- compolition of Argent-vive, and therefore cannot be deftroyed


by fire, unlefs wich the deftru&ion of the whole fubftance,
whence ic appears whatthe canfe is , chat metals are more or
lefs durable in the fire : For chofe which abound with that
internal unctuofity are lefs confumed, as it appears in. Silver,
and efpecially in Gold. Hence Rofarius faith, the Philofo-


` phers could never by any means find out any thing chat could


- fined Gold. !


endure the fire; butchac unctuous humidity only which is per-


‘fect, and incombu(üble. Geber alfo afferts the fame, when he


faith, that imperfect bodies have fuperfluous humidities, and
fulphureity generating a combuttible blacknefs in them, and
corrupting chem ; they have alfo animpure, feculent and com-
buftible cerreftriety fo grofs, as that it hinders ingreffion ; and
fufion: but a perfe& metal, as gold, hath neither this fulphu-
tous or terreftrial impurity; I mean, when it is fully matu-
raced, and melted, for whileft it is in conco&tion, it hath both


joyned to it; as you may feeinthe golden Ore, but then they-


do not adhere to ít fo, but chat it may be purified from them,
which other metalscannot, but are both deftroyed togethe:, if
you attempt to feparate che one fror the other : Befides:Gold
hath fo little of thefe corruptible principles mixed with ic, that
the inward fulphur or metalline fpirit doth fometimes ; and in
fome places overcome them ofit felf, as we may feein the Gold
which is found very pure fomecimes in the fuperficies of the
earth; andinthe Sea-fands, andismany times as pure as any re-
< Now this Gold'whichis foundin Sands and Rivers, isnot ge-
nerated there, ag faith Gregors Agricola, in his third Book de


Re


492 Of the Art of Diftillation. Book VI. — —


Boon VI; Ofthe At ofDifiillation: — — agr
Re Metallicay but is wafhed down from the Mountains with
Fountains that run from thence. There is:alfoa flaming Gold
-found (as Parace/fausfaith) in the tops-of Mountains, which is
indeed feparated of ic felf from: allampurities, andis ás pure
as any refined gold whatfeever., So thac: you fee; that gold als
though ir hadan exttinfecal Sulphur and earch mixed witb it;
yeti itis fometimes feparated fromit,of it felf viz. by that fie-
Ly fpirit thavis in it. Now this pure gold. ( as faith Sandivogins)


nature would have. perfected into an elixir, but’ was hindred . —


by the:crude air; which crude air is indeed nothing elfe but
that eXtrinfecal Sulphur which ic meets: with; and is Jeyned to
in thel-earth, and which fills with its: violence: the pores
thereof; and hinders the activity of the Spirit thereof ;
and this is that prifon which the Sulphur (as faith the-as
` forefaid Author) is locked'up in; fo thar it cannor-a& upon its
bodys viz. Mercury, and conce& it into the feed of gold, as
. otherwife it would do » atid this is that dark “body (as faith
Penotus.) cthat.is.interpofed betwixt the: Philofophical Sun
and Moon , and keeps eff the influencies of tbe one fromthe
other. “Now if any skilful Philofopher | could: wittily fepa-
rate this adventitious imputicy from gold; whileft it is yer li-
vino; he would fet Sulphur at Liberty , and for this his fervice
he fhonld be gratified with three Kingdoms; viz. Vegetable; .
` Animal, and Mineral, I mean, he could remove that great, ob-
ftruétion which hinders gold from being digefled into the Elixir;
For as faith Suadivegim , tne Elixir, or tincture of Philo-
fophers, is nothing elíe but gold digefled into the higheft
decree: for the gold of the vulgaris as an hearb without feed;
buc when ‘geld (4. ) living: gold (for common gold :nevet
can, by reafen that the Spirits are bound ‘up; and indeed::as
good as dead; and riot poffibly.to be reduced to thac á&ivity
which às réquired for the producing of the fperm-of gold): is
ripened;it gives a feed; which mulciplies even ad infinitum. Now
the rezfon ‘of! this barrennefs of gold that it producethv mot a
feed;is-the afore(aid crude‘air, oie) ithpürities » Yonmay fee chis
illuftrated bythis examplé. 20 ^00 (5405 203 Som rci aids
ee that Oreüge-tieés ^in Polinia do:grow: like other
trees; alfo in 7/z4/j5 and pled where cheit native foil -
X Cc 185


E j
m Bic


394 Oftbe Art of Difiillation. Boox VI


is, and yield fruit ; becaufe they have fufficient heat, bue. in
thefe colder Countries they are barren and never yield any
fruit, becaufe they are opprefled with cold: bucifatany time
- pature be wittily and íweetly helped; then Art can perfec


What Nature could not, Afrer the fame manner it is inime-


tals; for Gold would yield fruit, and feed in which it. might
multiply ic felf, if it were helped by the induftry of the
skilful Artit, who knéw-how to promote: Nature: (7.) to fe-
parate thefe Sulphurous and Earthly impurities from. Gold:
For there is a fufficient -heat in living Gold, if it were
 fürred up by extrinfecal heat, to digett it into afeed. By ex-
trinfecal heat; I do not mean the heat of the celeftial Sun,
but that heat-which is inthe earth and ftirs up the feed, (i)
the: living fpirit that is in all fübrerraneal fperms to multi-
ply» and indeed makes Gold become Goid, Now this is a heat
‘of putrefaction; occafioned by acid fpirits fermenting in the
earth, as you may fee by this example related by Albertus Mag-


nus, but co-which the. reafon was given by Sandivogius. There.


was, faith the former Author, certain grains of: Gold found
betwixt. the teeth of a dead man in the grave : whetefore he
‘conceived there was a power:in the body of a man to make
and fix gold: bnt the reafon is farr otherwife ;. as faith the
latter. Aüthor; for, faith he, Argent vive Was by fome Phy-
frian conveyed iatothe body -of this man, when -he was alive,
either by unction, or by curbich, or fome fuch way as the cufiom
was; andiristhe nature of Mercury to afcend to the mouth
of the- patient ; and through the excoriation of the month ro
be avoided with the flegm. Now chen, if in fucha cure the
fickman; dyed, that Mercury, not: having paffage ovt, remained
- berwixt :theteeth in the mouth, and that:carkaís becarrie che
natural veffel of Mercury; and fo for along timebeipe fhuc
up was. congealed by its proper Sulphut into Gold by the natu-
ral heat of putrefa&ion. being purified by. the coriofive fleem
ofthe .carkafs; but if the Mineral. Mercury had nor. been
brought inthither ; Gold had-never been produced there; And
this is a mof true example, that as Mercury is: by. the: proper
"Sulphur that is in it felf, being ftirred np and. helped. by an
extrinfecal heat; coagulated into Gold, unlefs ice dips


Boex VI;


- Of the Art of Diftillation: 195
by any accident, or have not a requifire excrinfecal heat, or
a convenient place; fo alfo that nature doth inthe bowels of
the earth, produce of Mercury only Gold and Silvery and other:
metals according to the difpofition of the place, and matrix 5:
which aflertion is further cleared by the rule of reduction, for
itit be true, that all things confit of that which they may be
reduced into ; then Gold confilts of Mercury, becaufe (as moft:
grant, Paracelfusaffirmes, and many at this day profefs they
can do») ie may be reduced into it,  Thereisa way by which
the cinture of Gold, which is the foul thereof, and fixeth ity
may, be fo fully: extracted, that the remaining fubítance will
be fublimed like Arfenick, and may beas eafily reduced into
Mercury as Sublimate. Iffo, and if all Mercury may be redu-
ced-into a tran(parent water, as ic may (according to the
procefs, fet: down page 94. and as I know how another better
andeafier way to turma. pound of Mercury, of it felf,intoa clear
water in half an hour, which is one of the greatelt fecrets, -
I know, or careto know, together with what may be produced
thence, and fhall crave leave to befilent in ) why may nor that.
water,infome fenfe, if it be well rectified, be called a kind
of living Gold, out of which you may perhaps make a medi-
Cine, and a Adenffraum unit for the valgit to know. It aps
pears now, from what is premifed; that the immediate matter.
of Gold is probably. Mercnry, and not certain Salts,and I know
not what, as many dream of 3 and. that, che.extrinfecal heat. is
from within the earth ;: and not the heat o£ the Sün, as fone:
imagine (becaufe in the hotteft. countreys. there is all, or almoft
all Gold generated ).. who if they confidered, that in cold Coun-
treysalfo are; andas in Scotland were Gold mines in King fames
his. cime, would .be of another mind, then, to chinky,that. che
celeftial Sun could: penetrate, foas to heat the earth fo deep as
moft geld ESV anie Is 39 worl. « aft aft

I now having; in fome meafore ; difcovered, what the in-


 trinfecal;, and excrinfecal heat , and the matter of Goldis :.1


fhall next. endeavour -to-explain ‘what. thofe; three, principles


| ares vias. Salty Sulphur: and. Mercury.» of. which: Argent, vites


and Gold confift : Know thetefore;that after Nature had received
from the moft High God the priviledge of all things spen
M Cca : the


WA


ANE SPE


UC


SAT.


(in whofe will Nature is placed) might be fulfilled, ordained


thar’ they fhould a& upen ‘one another inceflantly, The fire


therefore began to a& upon the air, and produced Sulphur:
The ‘air alfo begin to act upon the water and produced
Mercury: the 'water: alfo. began’ to a& upon the earch and


. produced Salt.: Now the earth not having whereon to a&;


produced nothing , but became the fubject of what was pro-
- duced. So then there were produced three principles, but our
ancient Philofopers not fo ftriétly confidering the matter, de-
. fcribed only two acts of the elements; and fo named but two
principles, viz. Sulphur and Mercury: or elfe they were
willing to be filent in the other ; {peaking only to the fons


' of Art.


- The Sulphur therefore of Philofophers ; ( which indeed is
the Sulphur of metals, and of all things ) is not,as many think,


. that common combuftible Sulphur which is fold in fhops, but


is another‘thing farr differing from that; and is incombuftible, not
burning, nor heating, bnt preferving; and reftoring all things
which itis in; and ic is the Calidum Innatum of every things
the fire of nature; the created light, and of the nature of the
Sin, and is called ‘the’ Sun ; fo that whatfoever in any thing
isfierys and airy] is’ Sulphur ; not that any thing is wholly


füfphureous; but whariniris moftthin, and fübtle, having the


effence of the natural fire, and the nature of the created light’,
which indeed’ is that Sulphur which wife Philofophers have in
áll'ages with great diligence 'endeavotited to extract, and ‘with
its propèr ‘Mercury to fix, and fo to perfect'the great Magi»
ftery of nature. Now of all things in the World ) theré is
nothing hath more “of this Sulphur in ic, chen gold and fl-
vet, butefpecially gold, infomuch that. oftentimes it is cal-
fed) Sulphur,’ (4) becaufe Sulphur is’the molt predominanc,and
ee principle in it, and being in it fiore then is all things:


i


; Mercury


Of the Art of Diftillation: Boo Vli
the Monarchy of this world; fhe began to diftribate places,
and provinces to every thing, according to its dignity ; and

- it che firk place did conftirace the four elements to be the’
Princes of the world, and that the will of. the moft High’


TA TM


a


BooxVI. Of heart of Difüllation- tor

| Mercury is not here taken for common e4rgent vive s but
itis the Humidum Radicale of every thing, chat. pure aqueous;
unétuous,and vifcous humidity of the matter, and it is of the
 fatute of the Moon ,'and'it is.called the-Moon% and that: for
this reafon, via. becaufe it. is humid ; as. alfo; becanfe it is ca-
pable of receiving the inflnence and light of the Sun, viz.
Sulphur, :

Saltis thae fixt permanent earth which is in the center of
every thing that is incorruptible,“ and! inalterable; and it 1s
the fupporter and nourfe of the Humidum Radicale; with which
it is ftronely mixr, © Now this Salchath in it afeed , viz. its
Calidum Innatum, which is Sulphur, andits Hamidnm Radicales `
whichis Mercury y:and yet thefe three. are not diftin&, or to
be feparated, but are oné Homogeneal thing, having upon a
different account divers names: for'in tefpeat of its heat,
and fiery {ubfance, it is called $/pbuy. in refpe&t of its hnmiz
dity, it 1s called Azercary; andin refpe&t of its terreftrial ficcity;
itis called Sale ; all which arein Gold perfealy united, appe
rated, and fixed,

Gold therefore is moft noble;' and folid of all metals, of ia
yellow colour, compacted of. principles digefted to: the uemoft
hight, and therefore fixed,

‘Silver is in the next place -of dignity to Gold, and differs from
it in digeftion chiefly: I faid chiefly, becaufe | chere i is fome fmall
im pärity befides adhering to filver,

“Now having given fome früall account of the original matter,
firft, and fecond', land: manner of the growth: of Gold, Ifhall,
In thé next places fet down fome curiofities therein; and prepa-
rations thereof. ‘The preparationsare chiefly three; wiz. Aurum
Porabile; Which ;is the mixion thereoPwith: other Liquors: Oil
6f Gold, which is Gold ‘liquid by it elf; withoue the mixture of
aiy other Liquor’! ‘and the’ tinctute, which is keen a of
the colour thereat. >


198 Of the Art of Diftillation: Boor VI;


Dr. Anthony’ s famous Aurum Potabile, and Oil of Gold.


- Diffolve purefine Goldin Aguai regis, according to art ( the
Aqua.regis being) made of a pound of Aqua forts, and four ounces;
of Sale Armoniack , diftilled together by Retort in Sand)
which clear folution put into a large glafs of a wide neck,and


vponit pour; drop by drop; Oyloef Tartar made per deliquium; .
. until the Agua regis which before was yellow, become clear,and


white; for, chatisa-fien that all. Calx of Goldis fetled to the


bottom :. then let ititand all night, and'in rhe morning pour


off the clear Liquor, and wafh the Calx four or five times with
common Spring-water, being warmed, and diy ic with a moft
gentle heats; | | saini 125: ) ;

- Note, and that well; "that if che heat be too great, the Calx
rakes fire prefentl y like Gun-powder, and flies away to thy dan-
gerand lofs ;therefóre it is beft co dry it in the Sun,or ona ftone,


flitting It diligently with a wooden fpatle: To this Calx add


half a part of che powder of Sulphur, mix them together, and in
amoperi Crucible, let ché Sulphur burn àway in the fire, putting
a gentle: fireto it at tlie firft; and in theend a molt {trong fire for


- the fpace of ap hour, that the Cilx may in fome manner. be re-


verberated, and become moft fubtle, which keep in à yiol clofe
Ropt for yourufe. | 0d osi bi ;


Then make a fpiritof.LIrine after. this manners via. Takethe |
Hine of a: healthy mans drinking Wine moderately; put.ic into


a gora, which you'muft ftop clofe, and fet in-horfe-dung for che
fpace of forty dayes ; then diftilic by Alembick. in fand, into -a


large Receiver, until all the humidicy-be diftilled off ::Rectifie .


this Spirit by cohobationchree times; that che Spirit only may,
rife::: Then diftilisinfand; by sglafs wichjadong-neck, having a


Jarge Receiverannexéd, and clofed very, well toit ; ‘andthe fpie


fit will be elevated into the top of the veffel like Cryital, with-
out any aqueous humidity accompanying ofic. Let this diftilla-
tion be continued, until all the Spirits berifen. Thefe Cryftals
Myf be diffolved in dilead rain-water, and be diftilled as be-
fore, this muft be done fix times; and every time you muft take
frefh rain-water diftilled : Then put thefe Cryftals into a glafs

; ; | bolt-head,


I


Mem m ru


UT RM


Boox Vi. | ofi the drt of Diii. 199


bolc- kedd wliich clofe Hermetically,and fet in the moderate heat
of a Balnenm for the {pace of fifteen days, that they may be redu- -
ced into a moft clear Liquor. To this Liquor, add an equal
weight of Spirit of Wine, very well rectified, and lec them be
digefted i in Balneo the fpace.of twelve dayes, in which time they
will be united: Then take the Calx of Gold abovefaid, and pour
Upon it, of thefe nnited Spirits, as much as will cover them three ©
fingers breadth, and digelt them ina gentle heat, until the Li-
quor be tinged. as redas bloud ; decant off the tin@ture, and puc
on more of the aforefaid Spirits, and do as before till all thecin- `
Gure be extracted ; then put all the tin&ed Spirits together, and
digeft chem ten or twelve dayes; after which time, ; abliract the,
Spirit wich a gentle hear, and cohobate it once; and then the.
Calx.will remain in the bottom like an Oyl as redasblond, and
-of a pleafant odour, which will be diffolved jn any Liquor : 2
Wherefore this Oyl may bethe Szuccedaneum of true Gold. If
you diftil the fame folution, by Retort in fand, there will come.
over, after the firt part of the AZenftruum, the tin&ure with the
other part thereof, as red as bloud, the earth which is, left in the.
bottom of the veffel being black, dry, fpongionsand light ; The
Menfirnum muk be vapoured away; and the € Oyl of gold will re-
main by it felf, which mu(tbe keptas a great treafure; and this,
is Dr. Anthonys Aurum Potabile. e
Four oreight grains of this Oil taken in what manner fo-
ever, wonderfully refrefheth the Spirits, ane works iexetal my, ;
efpecially by fwear. ; ! ; Stk 36 54


The true yl. eft ag a


e Tolea an ounce of leaf-gold, diffolye i it, in, four. onncés of the
rectified water of Mercury, expreffed page 94. digeft them in
horfe. dung the {pace of. two. months ; then evaporate | the Mere
curial water, and at the bottom you falf have the true Oyl of,
Gold, which.is radically diffolved, ` x

> Another decas jan you may, {ee e pags 89.


easi V


~


tod Ofthe re of Diffillation. Boon Viv
rie t A T inclure of Gold. * an


““‘Diffelye-pare Goldin’ Agua regis, precipirate it with the’
Oil of fand, into a yellow powder, which you muft dulcifie
with warm water, and then dry ic (this will not be fired as
Aurum fulminans). This powder is twice as heavy asthe Gold
that was putin, the caufe of which is the falt ef the flints
precipitating it felf with che’ Gold. Put this yellow pow-
. dér into à Crucible, and mike ic glow alittle’, and it will

bé turned ihro the higheft, and faireft purple thar ever you

- Saw; but ifie ftand longer, ic will be brown: Then powre
"upon it che ftrongeft Spirit of Salt ; (for it will diflol ve ic bet-
ter then any Aqua regis) on-which diffolution poure ‘on’ the
bett rectified Spirit of Wine, and diget them togethef , and
by a Jong diee(lion ; fome part of the Gold will fall tothe
bottom, like a white fnows and may with Borax, Tartar, and
Salc-Nirte’ be melted into a white metal as’ heavy as Gold,
and ‘afterwards “with Antimony , may" recover its yellow
Colour again ; then evaporate the Spirit of Salt, and of Wine,
and the Gold Tin&ure remaineth at.the bortom,and is of great


VOTIS A UO
P Another Tinthure of Gold. =


Take of the aforefaid yellow Calx of ‘Gold precipitated
wich Oil of Sand, one part ; and three or four parts of the
Liquor of Sand, or of Cryftals;-mix them well together, and
pur chem into a Crucible, in a gentle heat at firt, chat. the
moifture of the Oil ‘fay vapour away (which it’ will ‘not do
pet (Pada drynefs of the Sand retains the moiftire there-
of, fo charit flyéth away like’ molten Allim, or Borax ) when
no more will vapour away 5 encréafe yourfire, till théctucible
be red hot; and the mixture ceafe bubling; then put it’ into a
Wind Furnace and coverit chat no” afhes falfanto it, ‘and make
a ftrong fire about ic forthe {pace of an hour, and the mixture
will be turned into a tranfparent Ruby : Thentake it ont, and
beat it; and extract the tincture with Spirit of Wine, which will

become


Boox VI.
may be melted into a white metal as the former, `
Another Tinkure of Gold.


Hang plates of Gold over the fume of Argent-vive, and they

will become white; friable ,-and fluxil as wax. This is called

. the Magnefia of Gold, as faith Paracel/ws; in finding out of

which (faith he) Philofophers, as Thomas edquinasyand Rø-

pefciffa with their followers, took a great deal of pains, but in

vain, and ic is a memorable fecret, and indeed very fingular
for the melting of metals that are not eafily fluxil, Now then


Gold being thus prepared, and melted together with the Mete-


cuty-, is become a brittle fubftance,. which muft be powdered


and out of it a tindure may be drawn for the uanfmuting .


of metals, :
Another Tin&lure, -


Take half an ounce of pure Gold, diffolse it in Agqua-regss,
precipitate ic with Oyl of Flints , dulcifie che Calx with warm
water, and dry it, and fo itis prepared for your work; Then
take Regulus Martis powdered) and mix it with three parts of
Salt-Nitre , both which put into a Crucible, and make them
glow gently at firk. then give a {trong melting fire; and then this
mixture will become to be.of a purple colour , which then take


out , and beat to powder, andaddeto three parts of this; one -


part of the Calx of Gold prepared as before; pnt them into a
Wind-furnace in aftrong Cruciblé,and make them melt as a me-
tal , fo will.the Nitram-antimoniatum inthe melting take che
Calx of Gold to it felf, and diffolve it, and the mixture will be-
come to be of an Amethyft colour. Let this ftand flowing in the


- fire till the whole ma(s be as tranfparent asa Rubine, which you `


“may try by taking a little out and cooling o£it: If the mixcure do


not flow well ,.caft in fome more Salc-Nitre.: When it is‘com- ~~


- pleatly done, caft it forth; being flowing into a brazen-mortar,
.. andicwill belike to an oriental Rubine; then powder it before it -
í T > Dd : be


Of the Art of Diftillation.” — 204


become like thin bloud , and that which remains undiffolved


$01 0f the Art of Diftillation.
be cold , then put it into a Viol,and with the Spisic of Wine ex-
tract the tincture, x : Meche
This is one of the beft p'epirations of Gold ; and of mof ex-
cellent ufe in medicine... i :


4 nother Tintiure,


Firft make a Furnace fit for the purpofe, which muf be clofé
at che top, and have a Pipe to which a Recipient with a. flit bot-
` tom mult be fitted: When this Furnace ts thus fitted, put in

three or four grains (not above)at once, of Marion fulminansy
which afloon as the Furnace is hot,flyethaway into the. Recipi-
-ent throveh the pipe likea purple coloured fume, and is tuned


anto a purple coloured powder, then put in three or four grains `
more, and do as before, till you have enough flowers of Gold .
(ihat which flyeth not away, but remainech ai the botrom, may .


with Borax be mefted into good Gold) then take chem out; and
pour upon them rectified Spirit of Wine rartarizited , and digeft
them In afhes til the fpirit be coloured blondered , which you
malt then evaporate, and at the bottom will be a bloud redtin-
Gure of no fl] vertue, :


Asrum-fulminans.


© Take the pureft Gold you can get ; pour onit four times as
much Agua-regia ; flop your Olafs with a piper, and fet ic in

warm afhes,fo will the /424-regia in an hour pr two take upthe

Gold, and become a yellow water ; ifit be trong enough: (be

fire that your Gold hath no Coppér in ic, (forthen your labour

willbe loft) becaufe the Copper will be precipitated with the

Gold,and hinder the firing thereof)then pour on this yellow wa-

ter drop by drorspure Oyl of Tartar made per deligsigm ; fo will

the Gold be precipitated into a dark yellow powder, and the

‘water be clear. Note, that you pour not on more Oyl of Tar-
tar than is fufficientfor the precipiration, otherwife- it will dif-
Aolve part of the precipitated Gold tothy prejudice. Pour off
the clear Liquor by inclination; and. duléifie the Calx with di-
d. filled.


mn op K


Booc VE.


Boox VL. Of the Art of Diflillation. . 20}
filled Rain-water warmed. Then fet this Calx in the Sun, or .
fome warm placeto dry ; but take great heed, and fpecial care,
that youfetic notina placecoohor, forit will prefently take
fire, and flie away;like Thunder,not withont great danger to the
ftanders by, ifthe quantity be great. This is the common way
to make Zuram fulminans, and ic hath confiderable difficu:ties in
the preparation. Bat the beft- way isto precipitate Gold dil-
folved in e4qua-regis by the Spirit of Salt-Armoniack, or of U-
tine ; for by chis way the Goldis made purer than by the other;
and givetha far greater, crack ahd found, Note; that the Salt of
the Spirits which is precipitated wich the Gold mult be wafhed

away, and the Gold dulcitied as before, - —

A few grains of this being fired, give a crack and found as
great asa Musket whenitis difcharged ; and will blow up any
thing more forcibly farr chan Gunpowder, and it is a powder-
that will quickly and ealily be fired. ;
= 'fhisis of ufe for Phyfick asit isin powder, but efpecially ic
isufedin making the fore-going tinéture. ` E TA


To make Gald grow in a Glafs like a iret which iscaled `
the Golden-tree of the Philofophers. ;


Take of Oyl of Sand as much as you pleafe, pourupon it the -
fame quantity of Oyl of Tartar, per deliquism 5 fháke them well.
together that they be incorporated and become as one Liquor o£
a chin confiltence ; thenis your AZenffraum or Liquor, prepared,
Then diflolve Gold in Agugsregia, and evaporate the Men/traums
and dry the Calx in the D nus make it not too fier, for ic will -
thereby lofe its growing quality; then takeit out and break ic
into little bits , notinto powder; put thofe bits into the afore-
faid Liquor (that they may lye a fingers breadth the one from
the other) ina very clearglafs. Keep the Liquor from- the air,
and you fhall fee that thofe bits of the Calx will prefently be-
gin to grow; fir they will (well, then they wifl put forth one
or two ftems, then divers branches and twigs fo exactly, as rhat
you cannot chufe but exceedingly to wonder. This growing is ^

“real, and not imaginary only, Nore, thác the glafs muft fand-
fülljandnotbemoved. f : Y
: DNA oe 1 Ddż ` _ Another


PO


— E E RM cca —— AE
394 Of the Art of Diffillation. Book VI. i


Another Way. -


Calcine fine Gold in Agua-regis, that it become a Calx; which.
put into a Gourd-glafs, and pour upon it good and frefh Agua-re-
$ia»and the water of Gradation,fo that they cover the Calx four
fingers breadth ; chis. Meafruum abitract in the third degree of
fire until no more will afcend. This diftilled water pour on it
again, and abftract ir as before; and this do fo often till you fee
the Gold rifein the Glafs, and grow inthe form ofatiee, haying —
many boughs and leaves,


Bee make Gold grow and be increafed in the Earth. |


——Takeleaves of Gold; ind bury them in the Earth which looks
towards the Eaft, and let ic be often foiled with mans urine, and
doves-dung , and youfhall fee chat in a fhort time they will be -
increafed. — : i ; à
- The reafon of this growth; I conceive, may be.the Golds at-
cracting that univerfal vapour and fperm that comes from the `
' center through the earth (as hath been fpoken in the Anatomy
of Gold) and by the heat of putrefaction of the dung purifying
and affimilating it co it felf, z i


~ Aiimarkable obfervation upon a golden Marcafite,


_ There is found a'certainflone ingBagouia, which fome calla
golden Marcafite fome a folary Maenes that receives liefit
‘from the Sun in the day times and gives it forth in the dark :
“About this there have been much reafoning amonett Philo- ^
Tophers , as whether light be really a body, or any kind of
fübftance, or an accident only, and whether this ftone had
any Goldin it or no, and what it did confit of. He that firit
‘difcovered it , thought thar he had found a thing that would

AXfanfmutre metals into Gold, (by which it appears that there
eemed'to ‘be fomethine ofGoldinit; or fonrething more glo-
rious than Gold) but his hopes were fruftiated by a fruitlefs la-
bour, notwithftanding which; I conceive, there might be fome

; is : imma-


Boox VI. “Of the Art of Diftillation.. 405
immature or crude Goldin it ; for crude Gold isa fübje& (be-
ing there is fome life init) that is mok fit to receive the influ-
encies of ‘the Sun, according to. the unanimous! confeit of all
“Philofophers, and therefore is ‘by therri not Only’ caled Solary,
bue‘Sod. (i) the Sun it fern“ MIBOR SAI 10-0 vir deat

- It is«preparéd for the receiving of light thus: it is calcined.
two wayes; firk, itis brotight into a moft fubtle powder witha
"very ftrong fire ina crucible 5. fecondly,. being thus ‘brought’ in-
to a powder, is made up into Cakes as big asa doller, or apiece
‘of eight, ‘either With common Warer alone’: 6f With the-white
of an egge; put thofe Cakes/being' dryed by eremfelves, into'à
Winde-Furnace S $18; with coals, ‘and calcine thetnoin'a molt
.' firong fire, for the fpice of four of ‘five’ Tiours;: “When the
` Furnace is cold; tákethiem ont, "add iPthey be née fufficieritly

calcined the fit time’, (which is kno WB by thBif ^eivisg «but
little light;) then reiterate the calcination after cte darte man-
- ner as before; which is fométimés to be done rhrice; That -
is the beft whichis made of the choiceft (tones thar Are: clean,
"pure and diaphanous, and gives the beft light. With this 'be-
ing powdered , you May make ‘rhe: formis? of "divers Animals
‘of what fhapes you pleafe, which you tuft keepimboxes, ‘and
they will receiving light from the Sun inthe day time, give
light in the nighty or in a dark place, which light: Will vanil


by degrees!


dT logus vértaes of ‘the afirefaid preparations of Gala.


~ With’ the aforefaid: preparations the “Ancients did tot: only .
preferve the health and firetigth.of -theirsbodies , bat'alfo
profong their lives to d' very oldage>;: and nor’ chat only, buc
cured throughly the Epilepfie, A poplexie,Elephantiafis, Leprofie,
Melancholy Madnefs, the Quarraih the Gout, Dropfie; Plurifie,
all mariner of Feavers, che Jaindice, Laes-venérea, the Wolf,
Cancer, Noli me tangerc, Athma, Confumption, the Scone;'ftop..
ping of Urine, inward Impoftumes, and fuch like difeafes,
which moft menpaccount incurable ::: For there-is fuch a poe-
tent fire lying in prepared Gold, which dothnor only.con-
fume deadly ‘hythors', bur allo renews: the very. marrow of
Sl 4 os “Dd3 the


Tw


206 «Ofthe Art of Diftillation. Boox VI.
the bones, aud rai(eth pp the whole body of man being half
dead. <ii; - me ee dif Dein
t They that nfe any.of thefe preparations forany of the fore-
going’ difeafes, mult betake themfelves to their bed for the
{pace of two or three hours, and expect fweating to enfue, for
indeed ic will fend forth feat. plentifully, and with eafe, and.
leaye: no impurity or iupeifluity: in the whole body, | Note;
that they mult cake ic for ten dayes together in appropriated
Lidjor$e :-ibbs x sid ap pon oja ces qt

-Let-yaung men thatexpest-lono life, take any ofthe afotefaid
preparations once.in a month, andin che morning,but they mutt
abftain from meatand drink, till the evening of the fame day,for
dn that cime that matter will be digefted into the radical humor ;
whereby, the. Atrength.of | the body is wonderfully . increafed, -
beauty dothiflonrith mott wonderfully ; and: continnes till ex-
cream oldiage, 9:3 sd: jii

Let old men. take it twice in a month, for by. this

p will their old age be frefh till the appointed time of
deaths (vr Sai

Let. young woménand maids take it once in a. month after -
their wenfirsa’,. for by this means they will look frefh and beau-
tiful: - ; s
.. Let women that are in travel take it , atid it will. help and
ftrengthen them to bring forth without much pain, notwiths
ftanding many difficulties, i

Let ic be given to women that have paft the years of their
menftrua once or twice in a month;and ic will preferve chem very
&eíh, and many times caufe their menftrwa to return; and make
them capable again of bearing children: Ae

Jt cures the Plague, and expels the matter of a Carbuncle by
fweat moft potently i- i9 5

When I fay, that his, or it will do thus or thus, I mean, any
one of thefore-named preparations, viz, Anuram Potabiley Oyls,
or Tin&ure of Gold, i > ; Ut oai


The Prepdtations of Silver in generáli., y ;


~ All che feveral preparations of Gold may, except that of Au-
. 5 1 3 + asc AME


TORVT TS


Boox VI. ‘Of " i of Dipti. 107
rum fulminans, be applyed to filver;of which being thus prepared
the vercues are HRG thofe of Gold , yet come neerer to:
them than thofe of any other matter whatfoever ; or howloever
prepared, =?

Note, that Silver hath fome peculiar prebutarion’ which nei;
ther Gold or any other mecals are capable of, j


CA green T intlure of Silvers


“Take fine filyerjand diffolveit in twice fo much rectified oat
of Nitre, then abli idt half of the faid Spirit in (and, let it Rand a
diyortwoina cold place; and much of the Silyer will. fhooti in-
to Cry ftals, and in oft doing moft of it.

Thefe Cryftals are very bitter, yet may be made into” Pills;

_ and taken inwardly fróm three grains to twelve pthey purge very
fecurely, and gently, and colour the lips, tongue and moüuth
black, Ifin this dilfolution of Silver’ before ic be brought to
Cryftals, half fo much Mercury be diffoived and both foot to-
gether into Cryftals, you fhall have a {tone noc much unlike to
‘Allum. ‘This purgech fooner, and becters and is not fo bitter ; It
coloureth the nails, hair, skin, if ic be diffolved 15 Rain-water;
with a lovely brown, red; or black, according as yon ps more or
le(s thereof,

Take of the aforefaid Cryflals of Silver» mix ical them alike
quantity of pure Salt-peter well powdered, then put this mix-
ture intothe cifilling velfei exp:effed page os. at the: bottom
of which mofi be powdered Coalsto the chicknefs of two fingers
breadch ; then make ftrong fire, that the vellel and coals be
red hot, patina dram of the aforefaid: mixture; and it willspte-
. fenily “fublime in a filverfume, into: the Recipient ; which
being fetled, putin more; and fo do till you have enough, Take
^ out the lowers, and digeft them in the beft alcholizsted Spiric
„of Wine, that chereby the Tincture may. be exsratted s which. |
willbe green,


s A green.


)


208 Of the Ait of Diflillaion. Boox Vi.


A green Oyl of. Silver.


Take of the abovefaid Cryftals-of Silver one part, of Spirit of
Salt-Armoniack two or three parts, digeft them together in a
Glafs with'a long-neck, well (topt; twelve or fourteen days ; fo
will che Spirit of Salt-Armoniack be coloured with a very fpeci:
ous blew colour, pour it off, and filterit: then put it into a
{mall Retort,and draw off moft ofthe Spirit of Armoniack, and
there will remain in the boctom:-a grafs-green, liquor : Then .
draw off all che Spirit, and there will remain in thé bottom
a falt, which may be purified with Spirit of Wine, or be put in-


to a Retort, and then there will difil off afubtle Spiri; anda —


fharp Oyl. .


"This green Liquor is of great ufe for the gilding of all things -


, prefently. vod : t
If yowtake common Rain-water diftilled, and diffolve, and

digeft che aforefaid Cryftals of filver for a few days; you fhall
after the appearance of divers colouts,find aneflence at the bot-
tom, nót fo bitter asthe former, buc fweet , and in chis Liquor

- may all metals in agentle heat by. long digeftion be maturated;
and made fit for medicine; ` but note, that they muft firft be re-
duced into Salts, for then they are no more dead bodies’, but*
by this preparation have obtained a new life, and are the metals

- of Philofophers, ^. Ld


E make Oyl of Silver per deliquinm.


- Take of the aforefaid Salts , or Cryftals of Silver, aud rever-
berate them ina. very gentle fire, then put them into a cellar


on a Márble-flone ; and they will intwo months time be res


folved into a Liquor.


bind ed cs


“Boox VL — Ofthe Art of Difilations 209:


To make a id of Silor, that foall Hake the Glafs wherein -
, _ it info exceeding cold, tbat no man is able for the coldue(s .. ~ .
thereof to bold itin his band any long time.


P


Take the ato Salt of Silver pour upon it the Spirit cof
Salt Armoniack and diffolve it throughly; and it will do asa-.
bovefaid.

- W tha glafs being full of this Liquor, you may condenfe the
air into water, in the heat of che Summer; as alfo freeze water,


T, make fi Iver as white as (non.


"Take of the calx of Glver made by the diffolurios of icin Aqua s ;
fortis; dulcifieir;andboylitina Lixivium made. of Sopy
andit will beas whiteias any! {nowy 315 |


To pale the fi luer tree j tbe Plitfigho


^»"Take four ounces of Aqua iud sin o which diffolve an ounce:
of fine filver; then take two ounces of Agua fortis; in which is;
diffolved half an ounce’ of Argent vive; mix thele two Lie,
quors together ina clear glafs with 2 pint of pure water, ftop,
the: elafs very clofes ånd you fhall fee day. afrec day, a tree to;
stow by little and little, which is wonderful pleafant. te to, be.)


hold.


j


i I Have {et down (feveral vulgar preparations of Gold.and


Silver, and of almoftall things elfe ; I fhall now crave leave
to give an account of fome Philofophical preparations of the
Philofophers Gold and Silver : Forindeed the Art of preparing
of themisthe true Alchymy, in comparifon of which all che
Chymical difcoveries are but abortives, and found ont by acci-
dent, viz.by endeavouring after this. I would not have the world
believe that I pretend to the underftanding of chem; yet I would
have them know that I am nor incredulous as touching the po-
ffibility of that great Philofophical work, which many have fo
much laboured "after, and may have found, To me there is

pet nothing


E. jo ^" Of the Art of Difiillation. |


nothing isthe world feems more poffible, and whofoever-thall


without prejudice, read over the Book,enticuled he New Light


of Alchymies Shall, almott, whether he will or no, (unlefs he re- ~


folves not to believe any ching though never fo credible)be con-
vinced of thé poffibility of ic. What unworthinefs God faw, in
Gold, more then in otherchines, that hé fhould: deny the feed
of Multiplication (^ which is the perfection. of rhe creacures) to


- it; and give ir to all things befides, (eems to meto bea queftion,


as hard to be refolved; yea; and harder, chen the finding ont the
'Elixir it fel£;- in thé difcovering of whichy:the greateft difficulty
is, not to be convinced of the eafine(s thereof, Ifthe prepara-
tions were difficalt; many more would find it out then do (faith


Sandivogins ) ; for they caltthemfelves upon moft difficultope- `


. fations; andare very fubcle in diffioule=difcovaries , which. the
Philofophers never dreamed: of è Nayi faith :the-aforenamed


Author, if Hermes himfelf were. now-living; «together with ©


fubrle-witted Geber, and moft profound Raimund Lultie, they


would be accounted; by our Chymilis, pot for Phifofophers, but ^


rather for learners: They were ignorant of thofe fo many
Diftillarions , fo many:Circulations;fomany Calcimations,and
. femany other innumerable-Operations ‘of Artifls now a dayes.
ufed, which indeed men of this age,did findont end invented out
of their books = "Yet there is one thing wanting to ns which they
did;viz.to know how to make the: Philofophers ftoze, or Phy-
féal crue thé procefles of which, accoidng to. fome Phi.
lofophers are thefe, — — AUS -hlod

P T APIS


——————————— a


 BoexVL Of the Art of Difillations | Ly
PERILOLORERE LS ROE REV ET I


The Proce{s of the Elixir, according to Paracelfus,


Akethe mineral Elefrum, being immature, and
iB made very fubile; put it into its own fpbear;thatthe
impurities and füperflüities may be wafhed away then
purge it, as much as poflibly you can, with Sribiam, after
the Alchymiftical way, left by its impurity bou. fuffer
prejudice: Thenrefolve it in the ftomach ofan Eftridge,
which is brought forth in the earth,and through the fharp-
nels of the Eagle, is comfortated in itsvertuesi 0 €

Now when the E/ed?rum is confumed, and hathjafter
its folution , received the. colour of a Maty-gold, do not
forget to reduce it into a {piritual tranfparent’ effence,
which is like to true Amber; then add half fo much
as the Electrum did weigh before its preparation; of
the extended Eagle , and oftentimes abítra& from it
the ftomach ofthe Eftridge ; and by this means ithe £-
lecrum will be made more fpiritual: Now, when the
Romach of the Eftridge is wearied with labour; itwill be
neceffary torefre(h it, and alwayes to abftra&t it, Laftly,
when it hath again loft its fharpnefs, add the Tartatizated
Quinteffence ; yet fo, that it be fpoyledof its rednefs the
heightof four fingers, and that pafs over: with it’s this
do fo often till ic be of it felf white ; and when it is
enough, and thou feet that figa, füblime' it. So-will
the Elec#rum be converted into the wbitenefs of an exale
ted: Eagle,’ and, with a little more” labour , bé tranf-
muted into deep rednefs, and then ir ifie ‘or Medi-

cine. d Wa OMS uci


Rea ape


“ud Ofude Avtof Difillation.


The Proce[sof the Elixir, according 10 Divi Lefchi
| Genus Amo, ;


»Boox VI.


T. of our earth through eleaven degrees, eleaven
..&. grainssof our gold,and not of the vulgar;oue grain;
of our June,norof the vulgar,grains two ; but be thou ad-
mohifhed that thou take not the Gold;and Silver of the vul-
gar,for they are dead, but take ours which are living; then
put theminto our fire, and there: will thence be made a
dry Liquor: Firft the earth wilsbe refolved into water,
which is.called the Mercury of Philofophers;: and in that
- water it will refolve:the bodies ofthe Sun, and Moon, and
confume them that there remain but the tenth part, with
one part, and this will be the Humidum Radicale Metalli-
cum, Then takethe water ofthe Salt Nitreof onr earth,
in.which;there isa living ftream, if thou digeeft the pit
knee, deep;take therefore the warer of it, but take itclear;
and {et-over it that Humidum Radicale, and put it over the
fire of putrefactionand generation, but not fuch as was
that in the firk operation. Govern all things with a: great
dealio£ difcretion, until there: appear’ colours like to. the
. tailof a Peacock : govern it by digefting of it, and be not
- weary till thefe; colours ceafe, and there appear through-
out the whole;a green coloursandfo of the reft : and when
` thou (haltfee in the bottom; afhes of a- fiery:colour, and
the water almoft reds operi the veffel, dip in a feather,and
{meer over fome iron with it if it tingeyhaye in. readinefs
that water, which is the-Mezfiruumiof the world Cout of
the fphear of the Moon fo often ;re@ifieds, nntil it/can
calcine gold ) put in foxauch of that water-as.was the cold
air; which went in, boylit again with the former fire until
it tinge again, :
IR TUE E (o The


- whole work,becaufe it will putrefie,cotrupt,generate and -~


` Ofthe Art of Diftillation. ~ ay
The Preces of tbe Philofophers-Stene, according — :
Eu yo Pontanus... —— 7 -


‘Ake the matter, and grind it with a Phyfical contri-

tion, as diligently as may be, then fet it upon the
fire,and let the proportion of fre be known, viz. that it
only ftir upthe matter 5 andin a fhort time, that. fire,
without any other laying on of hands, will accompli(h the


perfect, and make to appear the three principal colours,
black, white,and red : “And by the means of our fire, the
medicine will be multiplyed, if it be joyned with the crude —
matter not only in quantity but alfo in vertue: Withal,they
might therefore fearch out this fire (whichis mineral e- .
qual, continual, vapours not away, exceptit be too much -
ftirredups partakes of Sulphur, is taken from elfewheré

then from the matter ; ‘puttcth down all things, diffolveth,

congcaleth;and calcines, and is artificial to find out, and

that by a compendious, and near way, without any coft,at
leaft very {mall,is not tranfmuted with the matter, becaufe `
it is notof the matter) and thou (halt attain thy wifhs be-
caufe it doth the whole work, and isthe key of the Philo-
fophers, which they never revealed. |


The Smaragdine table ‘of Hermes from whence
all Aichymie did arife.


Rue, without all fal(ty certain, and moft true.
That which isinferiour,is as that which is fuperiour;
and that which is fuperiaur,is as that which is inferiour,for
the accomplifhing of the miracles of one thing. And as all
Sad | Cee ELT things


gi4 «Of the Art of Difillation.
“things were from one, by the mediation of one ; fo all
things have proceeded from this one thing by adaptation :
The Father thereof, is fhe Sun 5. and the Mother thereof,
the Moons the Wind carryed it in its belly ; the. Nurfe


thereof isthe Earth, '


BEA i L.,


Book VI. ——


The Father of all the perfection of the whole worldis -


_ this: The vertue thereof is entire, if it be turned into earth,
“Thou fhalt feparate the earth from the fire,the fubtle from
the thick, {weerly, witha great deal of judgement, -It a-


fcends from the earth upto heaven , and again, defcends —


down tothe earth,and reccivesthe powers of fupctiours,
and inferiours.So thou haft the glory of the whole world:
Therefore let allobfcuricy fly from thee. This is the ftrong
fortitude of the whole fortitude, becaufe it (hall overcome
. every thing that is fubtle, and penetrate every folid thing,


as the world is.created : Hence fhall wonderful adaptati-


ons be,whereof this is the manner ; whereforeT am called
Hermes Trifmegi/t us having three parts of the Philofophy


ofthe whole world. Itiscompleat, what I have fpokenof .


the operation of the Sun,


lig ud preneren est mortas Of


isie


] Mies —— "à NT

r i ‘ MD tL ERS
F ee frees pl 2 gw
am 3o ge dg p GENIUM 5 S RE EY Py;


[D "m a soe


(NES
Of SUBLIMATION,


2 i D d


8 0.0.K. VIL


What eene te


TS qnasi isthe en of the pure,fabrile,
PO) dry panes; (from the impure, .grofs»- and fecu-
P, lent matter ) which, by the vertue of. the fire,,
Ae 3) is elevated. on high; fitcking to. the fides of
SS ANS PSY the veffels, dry like. Atoms; and. therein it
x: Bie differsfrom Di ftillations, VIDEANT :
j i 23 Sublimation: i is!;an operation , hereby
die vaporons body yor matter, is fo:ced to rife, by. the. ftrength..
ofthe fire, andthen condenfed by. the Ambient Colds r.i
It is called Sub/imatiom from the manner sf tbe- Operation,
beine SEE to: oe


[vam


What F nrnaces are ied inii Wark...

SRE to: the sarieui: et iic ufeful in this Arey you MN
them more generally defcribed in the former part; Jayo whereof
are pirciduletly-vfeful inSublifoation, wiz...) —
od An Iron Weflel imformzof:esher Poto, Ketrle(a: ag to: de Ana
(halb fers “good y well: placed in'a-Furpace of: brick. or fone s.
wid convenient’ Regilters’ 3 for the: sei increafe or uii)

of;


26 ` Of Sublimation. — E vir
‘ofthe fire, being very neceflary in this Operation ; ; in which
vefleLyou may ule either Sand or Afhes to pre. your Sublima-
cory in, according as yout matter requires. < <
Alfo, A Naked fire; thatis, when the Veffel or “Sublime tory.
containing the matter to be füblimed, ftandeth in the naked Ux
without either Sand or Afhes, !
For in Sublimation are required. various degrees of fire, accor- -
ding to thé diverfity of Spirits to be Sublitned : “As faith Gebers
Some Sublimations are performed by a very ftrong fires as Mar-
` chafites, Magnefia, Tutia, Antimony, cc. Some by amore mo-
derate fire; as Mercury, Arfenick; cc, Some by a more gentle.
heat, as Sniphur, ec.
Alfo, there are (everal Sublimatiohs Siriorined; by cafting
the matter co be fublimed into the naked fire: Thus are rhade
the flowers of cone "and (ttubborn-robuit-Minerals,;-ae-here-
after appearech.


What V. «feli are to be nfedi in s ablation


They are s made either of Glafs or Banh s earthen Velfels | are j
molt commonly ufed, by reafon that they are cheaper and en- [
` dure the fire better, and ferve very well for common operations ; 5
for in Sublimation, ufually, there is no neceflity of glafs or fuch E
Veffels that retain the fpirits)but it is fufficient that they be ftrorg
and made of good earthy that will endure the fire well, they may
be either glázed withinjor not, according as the matter to be:
fublimed is ‘either Liquefiable or not :

But in fele& operations, where the matter is: either precious,
ort very fubtileand fpiritual, che glafs Sublimatories are to. be
preferred, and are much more ufed by good Auiftsand? in choice:
preperations, than the orbier, oss Sa:

The form of the Veflels alfo vary; according to the matter
to be Sublimed’, they are fomerimes high » ” and. fometimes
low; as the ‘matter 1$ more’ or def wolatile 39 for if ic.-be
more Volatile, the- higher 'Süblimátories - awe: ito' be nfeds
if lefs Volarile; then lower. Sometimes: many Veffelsare co be
wfedi in Sublimation; ché ofie fet over the othetj and all;.of them
open at the top; faye only the upperrhoft, which mult be. x :

an p


"Baóx VII. r of TET)


and hath a pipe at the de, chat if any, moifture do arife it may
diftit.

Many , Veffzls are ater to this Ente that the more pure and —
volatile, may 'afcend into the higheft/ che 1e($ pure into! the
lower), and, that: the: giofs and: Sun pec imay. remain. in’ €
bottom...

Sometimes there i is only a bare Sublimatory irid with one
ly.a piece of Lure at the cop; witha {mall yent to: preferve the:
Sublimatory from breaking 5; fometimes “there? is a blind”
head added co receive the more: volatile? ‘part. of ‘the «matter
fublimed. . Sometimes an AJembick-head with its Receiver is
added at the top of the Sublimatory 5; not only to preferve
the Spirits char: dillil. before- che Sublimation ;^ bur co receive
in, che neck of the head the matter füblimed: becaufe itcan-:
not eshily ftick to the fides of the veflel; as in Sulphur» [ord


‘Sublimation i zs thus per] formed.


Fi piepats the: matter that is €o' be fublimed » either by
waihings, calcining, burning, boyling, orthelike; as the matter
requires ;. then either: by, it felf, or mixed swith óthér materials, '
put itin your Sublimatory made round or flat in the bottom,
that one third pate thereof only may be full; which place;either-
- in your Sand-Farnace,that the fand may berhreefingers thick;in’
! the bortom.. andi fides of, the .Sublimatory sonin“ "ue staked

fire 5, chen fallen, with good lute the head or: blind-head, (with a!
hole on the fide) : and fo Inte it that no fpirits may breach out; `
. fave only at the hole for that purpofe,
Then give fire by degrees, ánd when yon: perceive that all
` the moifture is vapoured forthat the hole in the head (which
may be. known-by-holding, therero:; etcher arpiece of Glafs) or
"polifht Steel »,:10fee whether: it mioiftens the fame or not) 5:
then lute fft che fame hole; that che dry fpirirs exhalenors chén
increaís the fire untilyon have elevated a the arate and: -
fectedthe Sublimation, —


BRI How.


Hoy Sulphur is Jublimed.


Take. the -beft and cleareft yellow Sulphur ibij of com’


mon Sale and Hungarian: Vicriol,. a little calcined; of each halt
a pound; powder them all a part, and mix them well together;

. then. pue chem into your Sublimatory ; and put on its head; add

to it fire of the firft degree; untilall its moilture be vipoured a-


way; thenclofethe pipe above, and proceed with the fire by


degrees, until all che Sulpliurbe fublimed very fübtle, This Sul-


phur (Ghymically called che Flowers of Sulphur) take out ofthe.


Alembick 5 and reiterate the faid (üblimation , the fecond or
tbird time ; every time adding a fourth part of fale and Vitriol,
calcinedas before , and then have you very fine flowers of Sni-


M


phur; refifling many di(eafes. Rhemanus.
eAncther way thus


Mix equal parts of Sulphur and Colcothar of Vitriol per-,
fectly rubified and: dryed. put ir rofublime ( which operation
is. performed:in eight hours, neither is need of any very great
fire); then take the flowers fublimed, and fublime them again
with Suear-Candie only, to the end that ic may. the better cure
the Athma, andotherdifeafes of che Lungs: Neither need y ou


> fear here that the melting of the Sulphur, will hinderthe fübli- .


mation; for whacloever way Sulphur is fublimed, either by it
fglf,, or with addition, it alwayes melrech.


\


Another. way to fablime Sulphar.


Take Sulphur one part, and-common Salt two pares, and
put it to fablime ima füblimarory well feed in the naked

€; but with a moderate heat: this way are fublimed the
faireft flowersiof Sulphur, without tlie reiteration of fublima-
tion, Serie uon


: p :


 BooxVH,


Another way thus.


Bàpx. VIL. '


"fake che yéllowsft Sulphur tj. of common Salt melted in
a Crucible, thescaftinto à Mortar, and whenit is cold pow.
dered, half a pound, of Hungarian Vitriol purified and calcined,
. half a pound; powder them aud mix chem together, and fet
them cofublimein Sand, put thereon alargehead with its Re-
ceiver, bur let nov ehe fand betoo high, léaft the heat thereof
mele the flowers in the head; give ac firt gentle fire, after
three houts the plilegm begins co difil, and that laits About four
orfive hours’; Then incréafe the fire, until the bottoni of thé
Velfel containing the fand be ted hot: The flowers. are at fe-
veral times to be caken out of the head, but you mult alwayes —
fita Paper to preferve chem ftom fallinginto the fand, whileft
you remove the head , andaffo Rop the mourh of rhe Subli-
matory, lettrhe Salphur take fire from che Air, which other-
wile would happen ; chen pur on the head again and proceed, and
let che fire Continue cea hours ; then ler ic cool, and add the
flowersin the head'to the former, The Caput ALortuum is po-
rous and brittle , if yon tày ir on hor coals, dnd it will sor burn,
then is all that is good fublimed. ich
Mix thefe flowers again with other Salt and Vitriol in tbe
fame proportion, and proceed as before ; (o do the third time ;
che oftner you reiterate the fame ; the Flowers do acquire the
greater rennity, andare the more pute; bucthen you. will hive
the fewer flowers, for ef three pounds, three times fublinied,
_ you have at laft but 20, ounces, .


To Sublime the Flowers of Benjamim

"Take Benjathity and braile ic grofly; and put it into 4 Subli-
matory ; then clofe the cop thereof with a double Paper, rolled
about like Hypocrates his(lseve, and afterwards give fire by de-
grees , till ic (ublimerh then have ‘you the puré fnow-white

owets’, which are no other than the {weer effencisl falt, which
oftentimes collect, SERTOLI ER
Ffa 0 Thir:

[3 ~


EP Of Sublimation.)  Boox;VIE
why ie, Ofer ;


Es


.; They.are: alesul i the Afibma. sand all .difeafes-of
ths. Lungs; the, dole i is. halfa fcruple. i in Liqagrs ». or fit-$y-


rups: But they-are uae San againft Lh Fupplssar and


tedne[s of the. Hte


“Za Sublime Salmi. j 5 aceh


Ji J


oe Baluas mach s -you think fit.» "en illa en E


cining Por therewith- and cover it; leaft coals and afhes fall
thereunto ; fet the pot onthe ground, and cover the fame wich
coals not Burpipg ; ; then kindle the coals, till they be all.on fire,
and the por be red hor +. “wheni itis cold, then have. you the Salt
calcined and prepared...

Then take Sal-Armoniack. Es to: “powder. one pound: >
fcales or filings of Iron one pound, (orten ounces ; ) mix them
and fublime them witha ftrong fire ; then take that which is.fubs
limed, (andif you pleafe;, füblime; itagain per fe) and ir is now
fi to be foblimed with the Sale ‘prepared.

Therefore rake what Sal-Armoniack you have iets > and
twelye ounces of the Salc.calcined ; mix them well rogether,and

ptt them to. fublime ;. which laft fublimation repeat five or feven
fides, every rime, adding; new Salt ca wis and prepared, and
then have you Sal- Armoniack, fins fit for any ule where it
As to. be ated. . HR as.


it Beton tp to the preparation of other date acas that it
hath its fingular vertues in feveral difeafes,. -—.— ;

giis à With this Salt is extracted the Sulphur of. Mars, Venu, An-
š timony, and other Metals, Stones. and Minerals. >

~ 2, A Wateris made thereof ona. dMsreie-onss ina cellas nfe-
"fal for the Reftauration of Metals, $jsftaz eotititisih


is : 53. oe


Y


an


BONM.  OfSublimarim —
| e134: This Salt fablimed is of great. ufe: ir
-Mercury-vives .. f vats!


ocn ic radically
- ,expelleth: Feavers)s.and, isoa udoribck s if16be


hall be freed rom the Feaver 5, the dole is from o» grai


> to thofe chat are of full age 7 or 9 grains; every day for pine’ a
dayes, and it will a littleproyoke fweat,, and the fick fhall be -
perfectly cured, $ 2 :
Sanh ei


dio vubsM sdil9 -vingisi beso ibl.
Ms ai boss eS eblimation of Mengsry 14 f á |
gs oipit vd : i : } 7


20 aibbs «19039503 madi bano) = esodgo .Q 1571084

“rake. Mireng, (tsedi with Salepieparedand Vine aud o
prefledithrough Learher) Vitriol calcined rillitbeted, Salț prer ———
pared of each ofthem,one pound ; Salt-Rerre fonr ounces grind 3
them and: minglerrħem together ina Rone-mottarwithalite ——
Vinegarw {oJong unt} rhe Mercury, appear no more alive 1
when-they.areall well mixed pucthem.in a-füblimatory, well -
lured. on which place an Alembick-head with a (hort Pipe ; give
fire by degrees, according to Att » for 8, or 16, hours ; the Aguas :
fortis that diftills over let char. be, kept, for che fecond. fublima- |
tión y; &o-one.pound of Meu, piam ad, add of SSH DE.

pared twelve ounces, and of the ctu ounces B

for the third Sublimation, let it be done with Saltalone. —.


i yb S ds


, A


A more perfet way of E ubliming Mercury.


`


Sublimatory, with an Alembick-head thereon, or.elie into à


22 OF Sublimation, — .Boóox VI.


very (trons body with'a aree neck; that rhe fir! Fumes may: che
better go out (otherwife che body may be in danger; if the Revi-
mentof the fire bé noc cautioully and prudently obfetved) ; sive
fire by degrees util the neck of tlie body» begin to be white; -
then clofe up ché motithi;: thereof with Papet j and increale the
fite for five,orfix hours; and by this means Have youa very beau-
tiful Cryftaline fublimed Mercury, which being cold, you’ may
feperate from the glafs;andic 1$ much more fic for Medicine than
the förmer, ; 0g 232 REI R OT € GIRIS. üuzioidJ O0) avis


1 5 H 7
"m YA an? ove sacle « >: ee
eit 572 M I$ IRF OL


C 4$ make Mercure Diiis ^


A xs! Medo p


Sublimatory is cold," cut the Glafs about thé place between che
matter fublimed and tHe feces with an Iron-ritig red'fiot, & take
out the matter (ubiimed ; and powder it ; and fublitie ir4pgain
without addition, (often fublimation add much toits puritica-
tion) fo have you it fufficiently prepared for its happy atwell in-


ternal as extemal effects, ^
Its Fi ertutt,


This Sublimate is the, Panchymagogon or Panacea of Quera
citane, which he reduced ‘into Pills; and were then called the
Pills of Mounfieur de la Violette, and were very finch in ufe;
éfpecially in the French-Pox. Itiseiven in all difeafes : andat
fo to prevent difeafes at afl times, Main spi ai

“Teg dore is from 12. grains to.20.or 30 gins made up with
4. Or $4. grains, of Scammiony rightly prepared’, “or it may be
mixed with any other purging medicine; and formed into one.
or more Pills, ~ ; ^

e


TBéseVHs Of Sw) =a


‘The bef vay to prepare” Mercury from Mesals for the
elles BUTS ` forefaid Proce[s. E aed as gen
"T dke/Crode'Aptimony 2; pound, Tin and Leld, ofeach three
ounces, firit mele che metals together , they being melted; add
thé'Antimony by degrees, and fo et all flow together ; then
add of pulverifed Tartar 12. ounces, of Salt Peter 8, ounces ;
mix thefe together, and caft this mixture by litrle and little up-
on the melted matter: which done; take tt out of the fre, and
you fhall find in the bottom 8, or 10. ounces of Regulus, which
.  meltaeain by irs felf, and you fhill have a Regulus impregnated
. with ché qualities o£ Saturn and Jupiter; you may alio inftead
of Tin and Lead add Silver, Copper, anda little Se? : To which
Regulus add of Mercury fublimate 2. parts , and you hall diftil


by Retorta Quick Mercury;forthe Pinacedafotéfaid.; rhere will


alfo come forth a certain buttery mattet,very fitto make Merca- ~
rie vite thereof. re aa


SoH ai


UP" 80 St
Make Regulus che common way with Iron; whereof take one
poundanda Half; melt it iia crucible, and add thereto fix
dianis of Copper , 2. ounces of Tin, 2. ounces and a. half of
Lead, Silver and Gold of each ond ounce, and fo make an.
Eleétrum. z ; er OE
Take one part of that E/eGrsm, and two parts. of Mercury.
fublimed ; diftilic by Retorraccording to Art; and fo have you
a great quantity of quick Mercury,to make the fore(aid Panacea,
and'Utiiverfal Medicines out of the ‘Burret much whereof alfo.
. isdifiifed) ‘you make a^ véry excellent Zfereuria vite, as iti


the former parrofthisBookisdeícribed. ^ ^ -
zu Te preparëski Manna if Mercury the white Eagle,
Take’ purified a ae difolve itin 4gu4- ferit thd pre `
cipitate it with Séx(orSea-Salt) Water, which precipitate diMi in.
a body in Sandsincreafing the firexcill artat thie Mercury füblime


ds


War


ncs Me


with alike quantity of Regulus Martis Stellatus s chen. when:
they. are cold, powder them very fubrilly in an, Iron Mortaty-.-
and make an, Amalgama with fix ounces of Mercury, feven times:
fublimed,, and fo oftén revived, which putin litcle Retort, and.
fet it in Sand „ and give a moderate fire between the fecond and
third degree for three dayes; which being ended, diflil it with a
gentle fire of foppreflion, and add thereto a Receiver , half
full of water, fo the Mercpry, bringeth over with it part of the
Gold, andis animated by the Tincture of che Srellate Regulus,
which Mercury-vive is then to be ground. with Mercury. feven
times fublimed, and fublimed into the Celeftial-Eagle as afore- -
faid ; whole effects fo farr exceed the, effects of cheyordinary
preparation » as t'ie Philofophical operation i$ more laborious. ;


than the ordinary. ^ aste Tal


M 10


the veffel, and fublime it three or four times ».to wit; until
yaad. Qd vé d) i basse lla vi E $ ' miii rn * DO"


BóorVIL - of. Sublinaios: ^o Ma


no gtain of the Mercury afcend quick, which in- every Sublima-
tion ought to be feparated. , :
Its dofe isto 10. grains, it purgeth very eafily , yeathe next
E after the in dapos Its As mig in all — dif-
cafes. i ;


Th Diaphorerick, Ruby P Auripigmentum.


Take of fhe belt and clearelt Auripigmentum c one tice; grind
it into a very fubtle powder, and fublime ic in a Sublimatory
with a ftrong fire ; until the bottom of the veffel be) red hot ,
and you fhall have in half an hour moft das. sepes DRM
about the neck oft the Veilel, | ul vifiro ats


` Ius Ufe ; ic rdi T


They are given. (from fix grains to eikit gt grains in TER or
. Coníetve of Ginger, to provoke fweat i in Venerial cena
Scab, and fuch. like. f

Thefame Rubies, ground with amequal: weight of: AENEA :
of Sulphur ; and digefted in:a. bólt-head: in fand or afhes in 2
fire of the fecond degree for:18. or 20, do wonderfully dry’ ùp
Rheumes.

Its: dofe is from 8.to 12. grains ;'in cit aoe of the Lungs
givenin Conferve of Roles, nadi i

The fame powder alfo moveth fweat, vEnvairbsrotsssdiy bns


nth Diaphoretick Ruby ra Arfenicke 1
s - Sublime nsrbenielted ina body : sevice: ofthtice in Sand, for
| five or fix hours , until itazife purely Cry(ialline; always caft-
ing away the-light powder, that fticks like flower about'the
neck of the body » for that is the poyfonous part of. the An-
fenick ; then powder the Cryftaline pare and: well mix it with
as much of the flowers: of Sulphur, vand fublime them toge-
ther into a red mafs, which isa dcm manapa in che dif:
eales of the Lungs. |. ; ;


Gg: Tre


^15 NEUE


926 . E illain. * Boox-VII.


du Ufa d > nito 90G O03 3


deter viiga aima Or ore:


Ss yiithümshel lio dy 4 it: idiglesitom Tix ingit ‘eight apne’ to


' move fweat : Outwardly ufed ic cureth all ulcers, malignant


and difficult to be cured.,


Hu Mineral and Morali ms may be sédiseds into F lovers ak
! angi 92nüe Shc amd of their verter.” ;


allthera: the flowersat Metals, Janü Minerals have not beer


in ufé excepting the lowers of Antimony, and Sulphur, which .


are eafily (üblimed : for Chymilts have nor dared to attempe
the fublimation of other metals, and fixed minerals, being cons


tent with the folution of them with 4qua-fortis, and cor rrofive


Waters, precipitating them with the liquor of the Salt of Tar-
tar ; and'afterward edülcorating; and drying them ; and bine fo


_ prepared, ‘they have called them their flowers : but by whitch


*


flowers I underftand the fame matter which is by! the help of fire
without the addition of anyother thing füblimed,and tured'in--


toamoft (ubtle powder;not co be perceived by the teeth r eyes. -
which indeed is (in my judgment) to-be accoubted. for the trüe-


flowers ; when as the flowers which others make are more’ cor+
poreal ;. ‘and cantor be fo well edülcorated;but retain fome falc-


nefs in them,as.may be perceived by the increafe of cheir weights.


and therefore-hurtfulto.che eyes, and other parts. à
But onr flowers being by the force of the fire fublimed by


themfel ves „år: Bot onl y without falenels} but'are alfo fo fubtle;.


that being taken inwardly prefently operate, and put forththeir


. powers; oix. according to the pléaidre of rhe ePhyfician ie ‘Nei:


shieris theit prepátárion. fo coftly asxhe others arero 77 197

Merals alfosand minetalsiare mat urated, and'amended in thesi
fublimation; that they: may be the more fafely taken; but ino?
cher preparations they are rather deftroyed,iand! /corsapted; as ex:
perience witnefféch : how thefe kind of:flowersare fo be'tnadé
Dfhallkhow reach jid indeed; ofeachitietal by it fel£/wiiereby
che Artift in the preparation cannot ei; and fuit thus, ^


e


Ay:


Böök vit a Sissi. )


‘oth aan e SVO Sotho SUA oF horis ftoi seu A
us í x (sss s OS t eli |
salisi ipn Dgg ody ban ples side efi g tnd oo

EE O -
OF:
B si OST.


oh SUY Nos wol


i
TAPET SRY


BD 15h91
€ üdo919 TOTS


2 i f 9diflg 83.361
Ys 5 eS 1u5i3H That
NUS) is thé iSo nU APER ios ba^ the Faq 5 dd
4 "ie ‘Open Hát tha Bre mày iy " 4323 bas d i
B, THe middle bei he Puits fot ibe? Pig BP et iw ba
G The ‘topple Wsadé of Ponts > 9v -
D, The sheer Beep UE Ena th a a ihe "Ei


"3 where],
| oer A ert ou cu


9 AM LE]
det jefe A a His Hr ‘alo a 4E Vall Wh


E The pipe which goeth one ef. fthe E Furnace, and to which the Receiver
t is fitted. 2: X AN SX Y: AN K ay


G, T R
G ih frh scipient for flow Hist ndia subst jon b am wo


TYjThe ibd Hoy maltond so sig vdoosid &i 355 5d wor Yie da
K err tes ip o Hp

- Ala holes thpbugh whi f

a a Moe ick if V Rep piine i Ta


Ist m) He
YT [i
"ww ante ime IE oe Sk he


Cus Bw
- -Gg 2 M, Another


Ax | Of Siili Bdbk Vll ;
M, “Another Recipient united to the former Gla[sy and into Which the
aid Spirits do run.


N, A flool through the middle whereof see [crew for the vaifing
of that glass which = ndeg the ffe 1 Recipient, ics er


lower. 3 Im QW
ó, "TC
P, The Grate with two ich TroncDarrs, which lie faft, dos piel
four or five thinner arg laid) which wap. ag kg when the Furnace
ia made clame) =


ah
od op)
Take of the filife a8 ‘Iron or "We: a5 mich as you pleate,
caft chem le nie on toes le » viz. Ícat-


X ceringly, and thee vill ari
Coppera green , ancavill bé
fels. As che firea > abanesyntt m üt
the cafting imefthele tilings be tered wi you haye gor a

fufficient c quantity j of flowers, and then;you may let all cool :
diis heinerioneate «off the fablimerory,veffels s. take: Qut;the
owers, and keeps or.they,are very. Zo oodi£t yate
ed with Upguents » end.Emplaiflers ;,and'.being u fed.inwasdly
Bi vomiting ; therefore they are betterin Chirargery, where
ps an TERRE au ascia. Copper. qeu. dif
LEE pitated swich: Oyog VÀ He
elds; lowers , ww
edinto.sgreen.b buon aja mod velie.


cora Ae o. ut ublimed ,.y1e|
ure p eimong te amo I peau treafure...


M st JER d ES ysig st
NM dde Eon Lodadim eats [te T
{gh x0} aye eg

* Youneed not dés tole thefe: metals "nto hits ja RUE
ficient if they be ca(t in piece by piece, but then you.muft under -
a id Ru EI EEN endis nun water, to
s down melte paier 15:9 be.token guts


de e fire, and this f d alb che. $^

be tucned.into flows i gagal e yefiels

imt > LA Mete t he fc weg
^£ Sa DE HES =


aan T rb


 BeooxMH. Of Sublimation, — . a9

Mars and Venus. And thefe flowers are moft excellent, being
mixed with Plailters and Oyntments in old and green wounds, ~
for they havea greater power to dry, then metals calcined ; as
experience canteftine, ; hii cp VC aisi E


of Mercury, —


>< Fhis is.ea6ly redixed into flowers, becaufe it is very volatiles.
but not fór. the aforefaid reafon, becaufe it leaps in the fire; and
feeks to defcend. And if you defire to have the flowers thereof;
mix it fir& with Sulphur that you may pulverize it, and.caftic in.
mortified, Andif youcaftinto a red hot Crucible fet in the fur-
- nace, alittle quick Mercury, viz. by times with a ladle» pre-
fently.it will dy out, and fome part thereof will be refolved into.

' anacid water, which isto be preferred before the flowers in my
judgment 5 but the reft of the Mercury drops into a Recelyer,Duc
here;are required Glafs. veffels, becaufe the aforefaid warer is loft
inearthen, And this watet without doubt doth fomething ip Al-.
chymie, Icisalfo good being applyed outwardly, in, the fcab,
&udeneienL DICERE... Lors vini reise one’ ni eel


The Flowers of Zinck:


Teisa wonderful metal,and is fonnd in the fpágyrieal Abatomy
to be meer Sulphur, gólden,snd immature. Being put upon burn- -
ing coals doth suddenly fly away wholly .5 itisinflamed alfo and


partly. burns like common Sulphur , with a flame of another.
colout viz. golden, purple + and yields molt gallant white, and,
Fight Bowen. ius i “ghey toidwi ^, Vasrtrsscdéng


bus ESOR sd src idw o tosmeb iG
RUNI elt dened X RRR EE bots SP a PR TU UM. x
CHIMING SHI newoini { Dg zi enim 3
5 ; 2 ^d he Ces. © ik
tom 303 .1Unglu? shousqo "21-10 Summed


E Pe SEE Toy SAA aco Oe ager ty Gs eo Vet Tes ui
~ Being ge from 4, 5. 6. grains to 12. they provoke fweat
' wonderfully, and fomecimes yomit,and fools according to thè-
fending matter, The vertues thereof being exterpallyufedare ,—
alfo wondeitl,. (o thele dte nor found better flowers ; for they’
do not only {péedity confofidare fref wounds, but alfo old,
fuch asalwayes drop Water, invhich cafej they excel all other.


fi "Gg: medi


ij OF Silimition? ^ Boóx WIE


medicaments’: “For they are of fuch drynets,, which hath joyned
With it a confoliditing veitue, as that they do even things incre:
dible. They máy be ued divers Wayes;as co be ftrewed by them-
` felves, patting over them a ftiptick Plaiftér, or being b*orght
intoan Unguent with Honey to, be put into wounds ; which
 Unguents in 3 deep wounds thay be boyled to a hardnefs for the
making of fmall Suppofitories, which are to be put into. the
wounds, which mutt aiterwards, be. covered with fome Pliifter,
and prefervedtrom the air: Being applyed after this manner they
cure fundamentally, being mixed with Plaiters a mey do
~ wonderful things, ~~
Tf they bé mixed with Rofe, or Rain-water, fo aso ; be ida
together, and afterwards fome of this mixture be fomettmies eve-
ry ‘day dropt into red eyes that waren yielding : Bot to other opti:
thalmicks, do reftore, and heal them,
Thefe flowers being taken upin lint; and firewed upon thofé


places of Children that are galled with their urine (chofe places |.


being fir wafhed with water) heal chem quickly. They heal

alfo quickly an excoriation’ which i$ “conttaéted by lying
long in any fickne(s ww is re Lon ^e lg ER be ftréwed
thereon, k


-Ta make. Moalica - n | Flores by 1 the, help "s Salto. ;
Mc < Nitre aud. Linnen- -elothe ap^ -
“T alë te diffowvedin their’ Abico »sieiitadihg aia
-inthe folucion (wherein à due proportion of. Salé-Nitre. mult
-be diffolved )' fine linnen Tags be dipe and Gt yed; you hive^a
prepared metal , which may “be kindled , and (a$ ic was men-
tioned above concerning the. faweduft) through the burning
away and confuming of their füperflneus Sulphur, the mer-
curial. fubftance of. the meral is, manifefted z, And after che
dittillation, is ended, ; ‘you will find à- -fingulat TUE ‘Calx
which by tubbing cofonreth orher metals, ag Ha of Gold
dorh gild es er, that, of BN ver Qver-hl Ayee Coni
. Copper- Caly malt Tron look like. Copser Pe okra?
ring, t ough ir Cannot. bring any great. profes Tit "eit e
eng thé mM sT FRonght F not amits to defcribe it : -
and


m — ORE Y
-and perchance fomething more may. be is in ib Midi is not
— to Buy one to know. i iB .


Tomake "i F loser of alatine adig d Gabe. ES y


E ake of Crude Antimony: powdered as. sod as. you pleafe;
and firit make your Furnace red-hots ‘then’ cat in at/once à
pound of Antimony, or thereabouts;: viz fcatteringly upon che
coals$/and prefently-te will flows and-mixed with ehe coals
by the force of the fire: willbe füblimed through’ the “air,
into Receivers like a-cloud; which will there be coagulated
into: white flowers. Note, that when the firn coals. are bürnt
up; moie muít be^put in to: continne the fublimation , and
thofe mutt be firltckindled before they:are pnt. ing e(t. the
Bowers; be by the duftof the coalscarifing together: with che -
flowers difcolonred , and contrast thencé a eray colour i: buc it
matters. not i£ you will not ufe them by themtel ves: to. provoke
vomiting , becaufe there is no danger thereby ; for that éoloüt
comes: only: ‘from the (moak of. coals wherefore you need
not beaftaid of them: Buc let him thar°diflikes this colours
firfhkibdle the coals before he put them" into the Furnace 5 “and
then he (hall have white flowers, Alfo you muft notfhue°the
middie: hole rhrough which the coals, and Antimony are caft.
ip, thát thereby the fire. máy burn the more freely «« for elfe the
flowers ofthe {uperior pors willbe yellow and red, by feafon
dfs che: Sulphur of rhe’ Áprimóny ; = whichis fublimed Bisher
thani the: reguli, Now yonmay by- this way make @-pound'of
the flowers: with 3545 5. pound of coals. Iris little ‘that: goes

_awayfrom che Antimony, viz. the:combuftible Sul phar, which

isitburne;sailiche reft going intó: flowers: You “mutt have: gi
..care/to! provide a fafficienc quantity of ‘fubliming pots. by’
reafow that a-large {pace is required for the’ fablimation of tie!
flowers,? 6 >"


=.) bffhe flowers that are prepared afrerchis way are fold at a


lowetsrace: foo that: one ‘pound thereof is cheaper, chan half)
anlounce! of thofe: charare made after che other mapper “ALO:
they are (afer;-as being! made with‘an‘opensand free flárae:
a the! fire, "for diy do-not provoke vomit: fo- vehemently +
mores-


a ee A S n


1232 Of Sublimation. Boox VII.
moreover the flowers of the lower pots are not vomiting: bac
diaphoretical, as if they had been prepared with Nitre, for thús ;
they are corrected by the fire; And by this way at one and
the fame operation divers; flowers of divers operations may
be made for the flowers of the lower; pots are diaphore-
tical,, of che middlea little vomitive ; but of tHe uppermoft ve-
hemently vomitive. For by how much the morethey have -
endured the fire, by fo. much the better. are they. corrected ;
from whence the diverfity of their power proceeds : Where.
fore eaeh of thém are to be kept by chemfelves; and the upper- `
moltare for Plaifters or Battery or Oyl; and thofe to be made
{weet or corroáve thereby; The middle for purging, and vomi-
ting, but thedowermoftfor (weat being more excellent than


- Bexoardicum Mineraley-ot Antimoninm Diaphoreticum made with


Nitre. Truly I do not believe that there is an eafier way of
making vomiting, and diaphoretical flowers than ours, Now


for the ufe of them, you mutt know; chat thofe that are vomi-


ive .are.to be adminiftred to thofe that are ftrong, and ac-
€uftemed to yomit s but. to children, and. old. men wich dif-
cretion» ashathbeen faid above of the Butter of Antimony:
but chofe chat are diaphoretical may begiver without: danget
to old and yoüng; tothofe that are in health , and&o the fick ;.


- inany-.affeQion that requires fweat ,-as inthe Plague, Morbus


 arebecoms fixed, and diaphoretical ;- Although they had before


Gallicus, Scorbute, Lepiofie, Eeavers, c&c.. The Dofe of them is
from3..6, 9.13. grains to 24. With proper vehicles to: fweat:
in the hed: for they do.expel as well by (west, as by uriné all
evil humors: And -becanfe they chat are vomitive are in a
greater quantity chan thofe chat are diaphoretical, and not fo
neceflary.as the(e,: and there may be many more dofes ont. of
themi io is; neceflary-to. fHew you how thofe that are vomi--
tive may,be turned into diaphoretical ; andthat may be:done; .
lee wayes, he cwo former. whereof I have before fhewed'con-
cornig the Butter of Antimony made of flowers with Spirit of
Salt, the third is this, via. pot: flowers: in a Crucible covered
Gwithout luting) Jett any thing fall into ic, fo fecchem by: them-:
{elves ina gentle fitesthat they melt not,but be made only darkly
glow for the {pace.of fomehours, then. let them cool ; forsthe


cone


Boox VII. - of — | E
contra&ed. fome;yellownefs or afh-colour;: yeesby ithismeans -
they are made white and gallant; fixed, and diaphoretical : Alfo
chefe flowers are uled in Riptick Plaiftets,by. diui of! their d
nature, with which they are endued.
3: :Alfothey.are melted into a yellow: tekitab Glifaneshet
is.thete- taught an eahier way; ofteducing Antimony. by it felf int
to a yellow, traníparent Glafs, where crude AREA is fia fub»
limed;and being fublimed is melted into.Glafs;. «i 5
JE his Sublimation ferves in.flead of Pinme by thse: help
a ae: 20;ppunds are-more eafily: fublimed thai: by: the: dp
ofthe other one pound i isbrought into Calx, so su
jither is there here. any danger of the afcénding: Laden y bez
- caute when the-Antimony is calt into the fire. youmaybe gone,
which isa (afe; and eafie: Calcination, whereas the common way
jequites the: continual prefence of the Actilt fixing che! matter,
who alloy takes out the mattei: wheni icis once "grown. Itogether;
and grinds.ic again ; by which means hehath much todo; before
the matter.come ro a whitenefs);) butiby our wàys ‘the matter is
acthe firft cime made. fofficiently- whites and«more than by thag
common way of calcination and agitation. I fuppofe therefore;
that [have fhewed-co him'thac will make Gli(s:of Antimony,
the-beftand hitherto Unknown way 5: which being tanght,I hope;
there is no man will hereafter; like a fool; gothat tedious way
of the Ancients, but rather follow my fkeps: For by this way
may any Phyfitian, moft eafily be able to. prepare for him-
felf vomitive and diaphoretical flowers; and alto Glafs of Anti-
mony per fes-

Of thofe flowers may be made Oyls both (meet and corrofive,
and other medicaments’, as hath been abovefaid of the Spirit
of Salt; and (hail afterwards be (poken in the fecond part.

(bec him that will make flowers of the zegal fairer than thofe

A ep are made of crude Antimony, caft it being powdered,inro
the fire, and in all proceed as hath been faid, and he fhall have
them; ec. forthey are eafily fublimed. The fcory alfo ate fub-
-limed, foas nothing is loft: Bat he that will make flowers th. e
- thalt be diffolved in the airinto a liquor muftadd fome calcined
“Tartar, or fome-other fixt vegetabie Salcy and he fhall have
flowers that will be diflolved in any dna but he that wilt

; Hh , make


234 Of Sublimation, ^ .Büox VIL
make red flowers aswell chofe: thar ‘are dibphorevicatoas’ chole
“chat are purging, mult mix Iron, and he fhall have flowers ‘like
to Cinnabar: Let him that —: emas mix ‘Copperyif purple;
ge ke ges pil i doigye aly « etii
Anpd.thüsbncofany Mineral may ence He wees “whether ic
be fixed, or volatile, for icisforced co fly’6n high being cafvinro.
che fire. Andthefe: maybe ufed divertly*in Chigtürsel y^, iein
Plafters and Unguents ; for they dryyandaltringe: potently, eéfpe-
cially thofe thatare made of Lapis Calamiinaris, Neither are they
tobe, flighted: ihar are madelof ithe goldeny and filve? mareafite.
Tho(e that are made of Arfenick and: Aaripigmicniam ae poy
- fonotis,bac are ufeful for Painters: Arfenick and? ‘Aatipigmentum:
being calcined wich Nicre, and'then füblimed, yield flowers that -
are (ately to be taken inwardly ; expellingiall: poyfons by fwe t
and ftool:For they are córre&ted two Wiss; viz. fifty the Nitre;
fecondly by the fire: in che’ fubliming’ they ‘are tior ?therefore
too be feared’, becaufe chát ‘Antimony’ was: :poyfonouis before
the prepirátion thereof : For by how much the greater poyfon.
 ie/was before Propararions 1 to much: the: greater Medicine af-
terwardsi Sic is 0913 "Dio: IOVEW ROMO
Sorallo: Rones being pepáéturb ‘btdtighelinto® flowers J asd
many écher things! of which we need trot en rbot
itis aioe ise A chara Hivr eri rm


213 i:


j eed 22 18 VY 3! fil zd 5nswaln
110 219W.OP. sAm ii ive apeli 1 iss E
sia Acobwia to shears) ada
0»3291g H RE bri

J V 101 49 was
Ji crx Hawes of obs i
d i bowled dle fi ;
3 iodo Smol 40- esr T


F ait yad liwgar: éiswol


"sy


«344


“OF CALCINATION.


£ "LX Af ^ ~ s:
TOL 4 ELEN 3€-5 2:130 2^ Qii3 $2: es Apu
} e eog i
BOOK VITE, nba oae
sido siz galin qa- eels bsrato1:5q s

i "e LB bun Ap ge tyes T 134


Dar + = HE s


| bwaog 503 19 Sri l i 3e gs


V bil! Calcitiarih ii anid tbe feverdl waves thereof.


1) 02252


~O79 Qi


| ninitik ia the” reducing of & Body into à
S Cam o dc nt il c DE MT

UR ^ 2. By Geber, it isthus defined, Iris thete-
jj duting ofa thing into powder by fire;
SESS through the deprivation of the humidity of
eR V' the folid parts, in burning ofits — joy
_ 3. By Calx,, Chyrhifts wunderftand, any. thing: made into à
fine powder, by taking away its fuperfluous hurhigity, Cefpeci-
ally Minerals). >. Alfo, when the powder or Calx is plainly made
impalpable, very fubtil to the fenfe, like fine meal, then itis cal. -
led Alcobol; which word alfo they ule for the. very fobtil fpirir
of Wine, re&ified with often reiterated. Diftiflations, calling of


it the Alcobol of Wide, Sy ah dang Hl] villa
Calcination is either by Gottofion 5 vor by heat, of. Fire


only. ^. ISRAR, —- ou Mud ua vd xo u$

- .. Corrofion is the Coleination, of the, shatter by: Corrofives,
andis done divers wayes;but efpecially four. 5. gx» by. Amalga--
Petion, Precipit ti, Sinaia abd Fumiga Seas. i


Hhá a, Amalgé>


236 - Of Calcination. ^ Boox VIII.
I. Amalgamation, i isthe Corrofion of aMettal by Mercury or
QaickGlver ;-and is when any metal (except Iron) is made into
— thin plates; and: mixed with eight parts, more or lefs,of Mercury,
. and madeiato a mafs, alike throughout, that the metal be per-
fe&ly diffolved ; and. when the. Mercury i is evaporated away over
the fite, the Mettáli i$ left behind like a thin Calx.-

2.. Precipitation, is the corroding of the matter by Aqua fortis,
and other acrid Spirits... and is»when Mineral and Mettaline
bodies are infufed in a-corrofive or other acid: water, and there-
by corroded and diffolved; either by -abftraction of the water,
or after fome other way are reduced into a Calx. ;

$.' Stratification s is TUR Carrot ion of Metals by corrofive
powders:

And 1s performed, n 5 "By" Alling, rA Crucible, Box, or
Calcining..por,.with.chelaminated-Metaland-corrofive powders-5
Stratum fuper (Iratum 5 thatis, by laying fome of the powder in
the pot, andthen fome of the thia laminated Metal, and fo pro-
ceed till the Veffel be full; afterwards put coals round about it. -
and give it areyerberatory í fire, increafing of it by: degrees as the
matter requires. e

Sometimes you.may call it Cemeutationi. theres bring but lite
difference between them. — .

‘Commixtion 1 is alfo when the matter to. be corroded i is ; mixed
with the tdrtofive pawdets, : and after ard tp the firesi¢ reduced
into, Calix»

C 4. Fumigation is the Cotiofio on: “Of a Métal by Fume m Va-
our, / ;

E Andis done divers wayes: Th giti this thall fallicesthat the

Méttaline body be reduced into thin plates, and that i it be hanged

to be calcined;over the fume of: ‘Aqui fortis, Vinegar, or t the vapour

of melted Lead, or of Mercury, or any other. fharp. måtter, as

afwally they prepare Cerufe..


Ignition or Cilcination by the fire: onlyji is eitlier by Cindati-
en or by Reverberation, `

^r. Cinéfatiion, is the reducing of Vegetabte or: r Aail Bodies
- 3pto*afhes, bythe violence of fire. -
.— 25. Reverberation; is the Calcining of bodies in the: naked fie

in a Reyerberatory F Farnaces. . To.


B8Ux;VIIL. E Calcinaton’; y oe " E


To this alfo belongs, the Deficcation of the humidity that is
ufually in V itriol, Salt, Allome, Poe gary


jw & 3


- iA «for ghe Furnaces: and Veffels, |S $ epee i


fhall-finde them. mentioned and de [cr
gib tg which they, properly. belong, $


i


The Calcinaiton f Corio Sali,


E Put common Salt in a Crucible, or other, Earthen Veffel and
whenit is almoft full, cover it, and fet it on ‘burning coals, and
there letsit fand. until. it, be throughout red. hot, and.no


190i; REA then let it cools and. it is £n to ifipive


da von of Best. b. ty


Sale La ^ bilam s siai


ait ms icd HB


“phate ait aa in + Bart and ga [a ‘througtl


2.


JG per, to cleanfe it from its, ee oyl it in a elafed vet-
el, and, before. it coagulate, fcm aii i parce oan Ae
then, put it ina pot, and i fire E hou By‘ d legrees, m 1
when it is melted, to one pound of Nitte, cait in one oun ce "d
the flowers of Sulphur, by little and little, as long asit will ffatne,
(the. blew flame is co. be avoided.) This. olution, Filtration,
Déco&iob, Defpumation; Coagulation, Lique factiori, and De.


flagration of the Salt-peter,ifit be three times prd it is fufa


ficiently prepared for Phyfick, it‘is hereby. mage more sity, pe. -


netrative, aba and lefs corroli ve.


^ 43 [5n
ar Gn


écrhad tm Celtitiaticn DR Viti. - Vahi b


Pte the vici be Calne’ till it bé whe dn an’ y àiditós


veftel unglafed, in a moderate firé; alwayes frirringt the fame 7
then increafethe fire tilt it be fed : and then à ii. called the
Cofcolbag f, Vini afl


EX. ET EL


E Calcinaia i PTR ie oi1 V ab vnde


“oike Pites hone a Apd hei? üezch "1t Four or Mive
‘ed Wine Vini gér, "fe lta VENT Rees out qiiem
ching; fo is it very Mor de into Calg und iw chen
ufeful for the extraction of she tinctures of Mettals and Mi»
nerals. ;


s lata V aata, f! ise
dE wae) guint D y. pi E |

“get. Cry al. hours’ im à Od d in He Balled’ Pat ‘ha
vid itto a fine powder, dud mix with its like: quüihtity of -
Salt- Peter; and then Reverberate it, in à ftrong fire, 18 honts;
when it is melted, cal ‘icinto tain WALET OE, mU: dew, and that
which remaineth undiffolved, dry ài


“dry and redüte it into Alcohol ;
then, withth ine Aa until it be as thick as. honeys :
and fay it ‘in th je üpon RA eu it be dam thee ‘ag n re-
d tH d co ua fegt yo p) wil oui Add n,a mof.
Q.


diff dfi at ndiffotved. repeat tli
EXE na bg "s dunt P shovel, ium is sti
Dole pen t drops, with the like quantity’ of óyl
iis ME ck, BASS againtt, she Stone: of the


*amls 92209 3d siii 198-1! gi


290 AREA) CUIR
a Vila 210? $ bois :


Rohr v. way ‘to Calin Coal. i i HH


Take cleer and ponderous Cryftal, heat it, ui giaet it in
diftilled ME fo KER na Ji the leait toùch, it fall n.
. . pow it wit the like quantity of Salt Petet, an
ent or 18 hours, even fill ae be ay ab: Sets then
with. ipie, extract ehe. fix Salt ofthe Nitre, and dry the
remaining Cryftal; and reduce itinto Alcohol. ..
Its Dofe is ron half a fcruple, to 4 fertiple "ind" P
It is goodinthe Stone, p ficknefs, Difentéty, and want


: wen


ai Bus


Book VINA = Ofifwenatph —— — agg
Bor if you will makéchis perspire fubrile; digeht it: infpitit of
Wine 24 hours, and Diftilic by Retort,ahdXháp which remain
eth fixt, reverberate itas before; Digeft it and Difili it fo often».
until the greases: partidicénd spin thie fpicitoof Wine ; then
Di(til of the fpirit of Wine, and that which remaineth
in the ‘Wefel gaan pst eel d ctus akan ru or
S Sf 15. 22 202.1 HIDI xim bas mod: SOWO GTH i
ilàvr tdi iud ge todo iod 1 8.8 AIW ot q SINT
i5 pide end beter aye Cale Erftaks ioo uls
idv nigimsx vaotnüná »d1 bns, Snimul svesl Ji Linu 219m
^ -Fiet the Cryftal red: hotimaSinghle, abd.dücicbir in cold’
srater) tliat ie may eafily: be reduced. dato: powders ior (being
powdered.) burnit ivan: open Ctugible per Ignem Rete; witana.
like quantity of ay rue ac ha pe 4
Bradualfiveybe burncatway:;: elem wath che Coles with :water;
anid adioys ad, bath Vhizowithy it ia Tike:idantigy of. purified: Salts
Pecerss:ithen Calcine: that ta hen Rote till iti fnelt'; when itis
cold. powder: inand boyl: it-jà rain; waner' y. nd: proceed as-
bafartn2iiO bns awisi Sd io noimisqe2 «obspId gd 3i
:1928VI Ieib10 diw

The Galcination of the’ Silver Marchafi te or Wifnuth.

51129 wind. stigla e$

Reduce the Silver Mirchafite into fübtle powder, and wath
away pin ons acu a Eo often imiti dhs! grater! flow
` dwag leet then idry ibcanch diffolerit in sdfqna fortis, Diftifhed
fróm Sait «PedemandoAM lom Whenitbe»folottbibis cleer; pots
_ thereomd pirit iof; Wine fojir Aimomenowillicibe precipitated
into: an Ad colo 25 w hite as indy) which covght tobe :cleared
Fiomiitsi&curhon y and:drytdi:;arid again for halfan hour ground
with: commen Salo prepared 3. nor sericis in the

fhade-ondpiper.s95n:0 nuislom s ni »1diou1O «niai 10
- diod fesis ágainfoabe Defolrmitiescof she dkiny, fas)! freckles),
fab-burn) 8ce nisisd 3i 3niggtb bos nosi ns dsiw svoig vi m uy
ol bar gnomi Aap mialam 3i Aal niegs omg »rd1 Onision
ž dios: 10 elev 2 c3 7o Galtinet timo d: (sw iens nh yx k
soil taii. oda gov ved $T9d1 bas ; monod sdini 16h osy
fake aAilompüt ic: inánumplbfebesrthen:pabs andfetit m, a
gentle fire that it mele 3oainds{ouinopeate dei y gie
alli


"— - "d eee BOK VUR
“all cual evaporatedsiand the:Allom remain: a! bsc
dryyfpongy tighi Caix. 1o? 3i | d snif bes 009 ps oni


420 oat fut C bns 3131258 BiG: Í j 25085 97 nia I¥S1 Iz


ro NU Calcino p ‘pith Bult prepared: " odi. 1. T !


ot daidw. ned bas e oniW lo miigh sdi 1o

o Také ef thebet/Aümony fone pounds; of Salt přepired fed
preni powder them and mix them together, and in a brodd
earthen pan with a fl it bottom upon the fire; ftirthem well to-
gether continialig with an Iron;Spatalafor fiveohfix hours or
more, until it leave fuming, and the Antimony remain white


and,yeliowifha(but be catefalthaniic meltmnot; and alfo:of'the |


` fume); thengrind it to powdersand waf away che Silc;-firft
with hot watery:then^With!icold' that» which remains dry, which


| powder fubliie prt! fein'a/Snolimatoryforizo or 12:hoursór _


morei: Refervethe flowers, andigrind: the: Capt Mortiim; and
reverberate ity godayesttilbirbelred jina iclofe'V effc thatthe fire
be not hindered: in the operation; afterawhich) Calcinatiorí;


|. extraébothe tincture «with: Radicated Vinegar ;;then finifh


. it by Filtration, Separation ofthe Menfur; and Circulation
with Corda AAT


Aus We e av aulia ads Ao aniio 2 iil
: E? Calcine Antimony per fe.
bhr3bwoq 5l:doY osm satintogt M. iyli? sai senha


Ruhe the beft and choicefto Antimony; od it; very fine, |


and frit ina broglleart hempán unglafed: over æ gentie>fres of.
Char-colej; and there! costinndlly icit witlbeam Iron Spáralaj
increafing the fire by degrees, till ic burn: no moreblew; nor fume
- ho mote; butremiinsofia: pale afh-colour 5: let thefire be fo mo
derate that it méle not) or ifit fhouid happen to melt, cake icoff.
and powderi iitzand foproceed as before) T a itiake thisoincoiia
Vitrum, put itin a Crucible ina melting Furnace, and chere Tec i£
ftand:melted until iibeiconvertedihtó. a pure sed. itrum (which
you may prove with an iron rod dipping it therein, andquitkly:
retracting the fame again, left it melt in the Antimony, and fo
_a Regulus precipitate ) theneaieoférthsihto a brafs or copper.
pan flat inthe bottom; and therehave youthe Vitrum Antimonii
made without addi lods;;accofding to Bafilii Kalentij e, menti-


; oned alfo by Zmelferus Schradermyiandsotberss Ji 15113 ni: snep `


Out


"a


Boox Vill. — OF Calcination ae iyi
Out of which is extracted the true Tin&ure of Anti-
mony.. VAR


Crocus Metallorum, or, The liver y Antimony. ^


Take Crude, Antimony: and Salt-Peter, ofeach a like quantity,
‘beat chem fmall, mix them, and puc them. into an Tron Mortar,
‘inclining fideway ; then kindle the powder witha quick Char-

cole, or a red hot iron rod, and fo will the Antimony be fixed,
and deprived of its Arfenical Sulphur; then feparate the
Salt-Peter, and. edulcorate the Hepar or Crocus Metalle-


rum.
Iis ufe.


From 12to 20 grains thereof are given, being infufed in the
water of Carduus Benedifius, or other convenient liquor, or in
fome Conferves ; in all Feavers, and Peftilences, and- fuch like
Me wherein you would have it gently purg.


To Calcine Antimony, that it fhal purge my pet Seceffum:


Take of the bett and choiceft Mnemone s and of Salt decre-
pitated, of each one pound, grind and mix them together;
and reverberate themina Crucible, well luted and clofed; for
12 hours; increafingthe fire by degrees ;- then wath away the
Salt with | water, fo often, until all the ‘Acrimony be taken away;
then dry it and grind it.

- The Dofeis from 25 grains to 35 grains: or, froma feruple
anda half, toa fcruple.


E Of Calcination: -


Box VII,


PRPRPRRPRRRRIDIMRPERR
| “The Calcination óf Mettals,


To Calcine Gold by Amalgamation,

Ake Gold purified by Cementation, and Amalgamate it

with fix parts of Mercury, thus, Take laminated Gold, and
cut it into (mall pieces, and put it into a clean Crucible in the
fire, that the Gold may be red hot ; then heat the Mercury in
another Crucible, and pour it on the Gold, and mix them with a
ftick that they may unite together; then caftit into cold wa-
ter, and wash it very well, and prefs out the fuperfluous Mercury
through Leather, chat it may remainasa hard. mafs, which muft
be ground well with half its weight of prepared Salt, ina glafs
Mortar, tbat nothing of the Amaigame appear: This put in a
Crucible covered and luted, with only a {mali hole on the top;
and reverberate ita natural day, but let-not the Gold melt;
this done, you fhall finde the Gold calcined, but the Mercury


and Salt fümed away, ifthe Salt were rightly prepared, and the -


degrees of the fire rightly obferved ; otherwife fome of the
Salt remains, which muft be wafhed away, and the Calx dryed :
"Then Amalgamathe Gold again, and prefs ic through the Lea-
ther, asbefore; and mix therewith half its weight of Sulphur
vive, or flowers of Sulphur, grind them very well together, and .
put them ina glafed earthen pan, and pour thereon the beft
fpirit of Wine without Phiegm,andburn it; after the fpirit of -


- Wine and Sulphur are burnt away, you fhall find the Gold very
. Ípongy and light, efpecially if you twice or thrice repeat the ope-


ration. Some grind the Amalgama with flowers of Sulphur, and
putitin the firein a Crucible, continually ftirring it si an
! à ron.


Book VIL ^ Of Calcination. - E
Iron-rod, untilthe Mercury be fumed away: And this is che
Calcination of Gold, which may very well ferve in the preparing
of edurum potabile and fuch like Chymical operations,


The Calcination of Gold by Cementation, 5

.. Before the Gold be amalganied and calcined as aforefaid, '
it ought to be cemented ; either with the Common or Royal

Cementation, :

~The Common Cementation.


Take the powder cf Tyles eight ounces, Salt prepared four
ounces, white Vitriol two ounces, Salt-Peter and Verdigreece
of each half anounce ; mix them, :


The Royal Cements /


Take the powder of Tyles four parts, Sal-Armoniack , Sal-
gemme;and common Salt prepared, of each one part ; mix chem
well alcogether, and moiften it with utine (fome neal the Plates
of Gold in the fire before they ufe chem wich the cement, chat
whatfoever filth fticketh to it be burnt off, chat che cement
may have the better impreffion).. All things being rightly pre-
pared, equally lay a part of thé powder of the Cementing-
pot or box, abonta fingers thicknefs, then lay the Plates moift-.
‘ped with Urine in that o:der and manner that they neither —
touch one the other, norche fides of the Veffel : Having chus.
Jatd che firft order of Plates, lay more of the Cementing pow-
der about halfa fingers thicknefs, and then more plates , and
more powder, and fo proceed till che Box be either full, or
all yout Plates ufed; and at'laftlet there be' of the powder a.
fingers thicknefs acthetop; then lute on a cover if it bé a cóm:
mon Cement, without leaving any vent or hole; but if it be:
Cementum Regale, then let chere be a {mall hole in the cover;
give fire for 24. hobrs y fo that the Cementing-pot or Box be al-
wayes red-hot; when the work is ended , take rhe Plates and.
wipe off the Powder flicking to them; with a Hares-foot , and


wafh them with urine, and dry them.
š I 12: : ^ The 2


244 00 OfCddwns..  Boox IH.


The mof perfect Cementation “of Gold is that which: follows


Mel Gold with twice its weight of the beft Copper reduce


-it into plates as thin as papers which cement for 40. or 50.
hours ina rong fire, by laying Stratum fuper Stratum (as bz-
- foreis faid). withthe powder of Tyles, common Sale , Colco-
char, Verdigreece, and a little Sal-Armoniack , all mixt with
ftrono Vinegar; in this Examen, all the Copper is confumed, its
incombuftible Sulphur, and tincture remaining in the Subfance
ofthe Gold, as Geber teltifieth in bis 18. Chapter of Furnaces»
that ont of Copper is extracted a moft pure tinging and fixt
Sulphur. . >


The Calcination of Gold 1 Aqua-Regis,


` That your labour be not too tedious , and chat your Goldbe
moft perfectly purified, diffolve an ounce of Hungarian, or other
choice Gold in Aqua-Regia, made of pure Nitre and Sal-armo-
niack. of each a like quantity, according to Arc; then gently
decant what is diflolved, that the white earth which remains in
the bottom undiflolved may be feparared (which reduce with
Borax, andit isa white metal, that will be diffolved in com-
mon. Aqza-fortis) then put your Gold diffolved into a large
Glafs with a (hort neck, and add thereto five or fix times fo
much common water, and heat rhe (ame in Sand till ic boyl ;
then add thereto two ounces of Mercury firt made hor; and if
in two hours the Agua-Regia wherein the Gold is diffolved, be
notílrong enough ro diffolve the Mercury, add of common
"Aqua-fortis as much as is fufficient co. diflolve the fame; then
add other two ounces of Mercury, which likewife diffolve, un-
, til you fee all the Gold precipitated into a fpongy mafs in the
bottom of the veffel, and the Mercury diffolved into a clear


and tranfparent water ;. which you muft decant While ic is hoc,


and gently wath the Gold with warm water, until it be deprived.

of its acidity», which will be much. more putihed, and with le(s

labour and.coft, than with Cement or Antimony : I have fome-

times purified Gold by Antimony, which was very penia
. an


`


BooxVHL Of Calcination. -245
and exceeding fplendid, yer when I diffolved it, I feparated
from it a little white earch, whence ic appears >that this Fxa-


menis much more exa&, than thar which is made either by Cee
ment, or by Antimony, 1i y:ó


The Calcination ur Silver by Aqua-fortis.


Diflolve. Silver in Agua-fortis pour thereon Salt-water, and
the Silver will pre: ipitate,co the bortom of the body, intoa pure —
white Calx,. which muft be edulcorated by; often wafhing the
fame with common water,and then dryed:I£to one ounce of this
Calx, you add of Salt prepared two ounces , and Sal-armoniack
two drams; mix them well cogetherin a Glafs-mortar ; and re-
verberate them 8, dayes; you may extract the Tin&ure with the —
Alcohol of Wine, and circulate its Ivis good againft Madnefs
and other difeafes of the Brain,


U


To Calcine Silver by Fumigation.


Lay the Plates of Silver over a Crucible wherein Sulphur i is
. burning ; let chembe often turned, and chat whichis burned and


calcined, feparate with a Spatula, tillall be calcined ; then re-
verberate the Calx. dem ;


` TheCalcination of Copper by Aqua fortis,


Diffolve Copreri in Aak horsi » and add dicta warm was
ter, with a little Iron or Silver, and it will be precipitated to. the
bottoms then abftra&t again che Aqua-fortas by Dsdalétiem


Another "e to: C. pie Copper,


Take the Plates of Copper, and reverberate themina Boris
Furnace, where they are eafily reduced into a Galx.
Ors
Take the Plates of. Copper, and lay them in a Ciucible Sira-
tum fuper Stratum, with an equa] part of the powder of Sulphur;
- .and let them be reverberated three or four hours intoa Croce
. ventris, : li 3 Another


346 .  OfCaliati. ^. Boox VIII.
‘Anothit way to wake Crocus Veneris,


Take the thin Plates of Copper , and láy them Stratum fuper |
firatum in a firm Earchen or Iron-pot with prepared Salt, and
by little and little heat the Pot of a gentle red heat; then
-cat chem into a veffel full of cold water, and cleanfe the
Plates. ftom their blackneís; and the Salt very well with
Iron 'Spatulses; Them when they are dry 5 calcine them with
Salt as before, and caft them into cold water’, and fo pro-
ceed as. you did-with che other; thiet let the Water (where-
in the Plates were quencht) be mixed with hot-Water ;
to take away all ics faltnefs, and the Crocus Veneris will be
left in the bottom Very red, like unto blond, which being
carefully cleanfed by:wafhing away its falenefs, dryed and
ground; Skilful Chyrurgeons diligently preferve it to make
their Stiptick Emplattriums withal, which they call Opo-
deldoch. " ;


‘


o nis Fhe Caltidation’ of Iren. >”


Take the thin Plates or filings of Steel, very well cleanfed
from their filth, take thereof two pounds , of Salt prepared
three pounds; mix them well together, and reverberate
- them inan Earthen vefiel, fora patural day ; take out the Mifs,
and grind it,diflolve it in hot-water, and wafh it fo often, until ic. |
be fréed from all'its faltnefs and earthlinefs ; then let it be dryed ;
and reduced into a fubrile powder by grinding and fearcing it ;
then reverberate itfor eight or cen days , until the fuperficies ~
thereof, beelevated into a very redimpalpable Crocus, which
take off; and reverbéface rhe reft (o often, nd: until the whole be
rednced into a Crocus :: Let che Earthen veffel containing the-
matter, havea Cover , leftafhes fallonthe Crocus, yet high e-
novgh, that the fame may have its free paflage between the vef. -
fel and cover. clon | i i ^
-E But the ‘belt Crocus Martis ; and that which is nioft excel-
lent for Phyfical ufe i$; when only the filings of “Steel,
"Without the addition of Salt, of any other masto ou
ASS : E ing».


TOY E p


Boox x VIE OF Galiniai eee |

thing, is converted intoa fine flower, by only a teverberatory
fire, and afterward cleaníed from its impurities, by wafhing of it
in water 3) for that which is made with Corrofives, as Salt, ^c.
is not without fome hurtful quality: Buwthe operation ‘by Rie-
verberation is better and fpeedilyer performed, if before it be
put in the Reverberator y; the feel filings be fometimes fprink-


led with boyesurine; for, by this means. as it Reverberateth;it. -


dayly arifeth into a very fine red flowre, which is dayly to be ;
taken off, left you loofeit by the fwiftnefs of the reverberatin ing
flame, or left it loofe its red colour, and change it intcoablackith `

The ufe of Crocus Mattis, is ufuslly internal; to ftop the flux
of the belly, Diarrhea, and Difentery; bnt muft be cautionfly
ufed ; for oftentimes fuch Aftringents not diferetly adminiftred;
bring greater evils ; wherefore, they thatmme -it; ought firk co
be purged by medicines attenuating and cleanfing the belly. Its.
external ufe is, in drying up Ulcers and Wounds. -


To make Crocus Martis Ly Aqui Fortis.


Diffolve the filings of Steel one odnee; in eight ounces of Aqua
Forti, digeftitfor a night: chen diftil off the Aqua fortis in fand;


and you have'an ounce and ‘halfof very red Cross which; thae '


it may acquire its aftringent vertue, it muft be Reverberated


three orfour hours ; fo may i it aly be ufed, as well within, a as —


without the body.


"Io make Crocus Mirtis by Cétniatioiz


Take freth Cal vive, as much as you need; and moyften tlie
fame with mans urine, until it belike-pap ; then cover the Bot-
tom ‘of the Cementing-pot therewith about a finger thick 3then .-
lay thereon the filings of Steel, ‘and fo, Stratum fuper firatum;
fill the Veffel, and firmly inte it; when all is ready, place it
inthe Cementing-Furnace, and adminifter ‘thereto a continual
fire, from the third to the fourth degree, 1 for 24 hours; then
take out che" Véffel, and Beat the matter ‘well in a Mortars and
fearce it that it bé rade : avery fubtile powder; and when you
have wafhed away all the Gp vive from the Steel, with hot

water,


248 — Of Calcination... Boox VHK
water, and dsyed the. remaining matter, then have you smo
excellent Crocus Martigo ~:

After the fame manner may be mede Crocus Veneri wich may E
ferve for many operations. á i


Another »3.


Take filings of Steel and Sulphur, of each equal pirts, grind
‘them together, and fprinkle them with water; until ic be a-fofe
mafs, then dry the fame ; afterwards put ic in a large Crucible;
in a moderate fire, co. ntinually ftirring the fame with an Tron
rod, until alf the Sulphur be confumed; then abftra&t the red


Crom with rain wat
` Its dofe i is one din.
` The Calcination of Satura: or Lead.


Mele Lead.in-an Earthen or Iron Veffcl, and cleanfe it from
its Scoria or filth arifing thereon; chen increafe the fire that
the. Veffel be red hot, and by continual: flirringiit withan tron
Spatula, reduce it into,a° Cala; which. afterwards fearce::
But if you. will. then ireverberate ic». it. will. be converted into.
Minium,


The Calcination of Tin.


Take of Englifh. Tin; not fophifticaced (which is known by
the weight and malleablenefs thereof) foür pounds, melt ic
inia pan ofa flat bottom, and purge it from its Scoria; then cait :
therein a little Salt armoniack, and increafe the fire that the pars ^
he red hot; thenadd thereto.one pound and a half of prepared
Sale, and ftir itfolong with an Iron Spatula, tillit be reduced:
' into a Calx :. which, by a ftrong fire, you mayredace again into.
a body, whereby it is cleanfed from its impurity and blacknefs z,
Then Calcine itas aforefaid again, with, one pound of prepa-. -
red Salt, and wafh che Calx from its. falenefs.,, and re-
verberate it eight. dayes, and. it will be converted: into. Al-.


I; af
coho y


&


Book VIIL - Of, (aleination’ P 7 ae


Tc may alfo be Calcined without the addition of Sale,asbefore |
is faid of Lead, which feemeth to be the better way.


Tb: Galeination of Mercury. `


Diffolve Mercury įp Aqua fortis, and by the adding
thereto of Sale water, it will. precipitate into a white
powder ; ; the diffolvenr pour off by inclination; and that which
is precipitated; cleanfe it from all its falenefs and é ‘crimony, by


, many ablutions and by digeftion ; then dry it and wafh it with


Rofe water, and dry it again,


Its inward Dofe isfrom 8 grains to ten, ef pecially i in hides


diftempers, It purgeth only downwards. ` Z


„Red Precipitat of Mercy


E Diffolve Merc in Aqua fortis, and after che diffolution,
evaporate the Agua fortis in a ftrong. fire, till it be dry , and in
thebottom of the Veffel will remain the Precipitace in a red
powder.


It is generally ufedin outward adminiftrations, but feldom ue


never ufed inwardly.
The beft way to Precipitate Mercury.


Take purified Mercury 4 ounces, Oylof Sulphur rectified 8
ounces, mix and digeft them two dayes in fand ; then diftilit by
Retort, with three Cohobations 5 at laft, with a very ftrong fire,
that the Retort may be red hot; take ont the white mafs, and
grind it, and wafh it oftentimes with hot diftilled water, until
the Precipitate turn to a very yellow powder; upon which burn
fpirit of Wine three times.


This may be fafely given within the body, from 3 or 4 grains -


toó, in purging extracts or conferves of Rofes, It is good in a
Virnlent Gonorrhea, French- Pox, 6v,


Kk E


38 Of (Calcination?) ` Book VIIE
l ET Precipitate Mercury án a moment.. 5p


Put Emery powderedintoa Crucible,in a very ftrong fire,
for four hours,until it begin to vitrifie and flick tothe fides of rhe
Crucible; thentake it off from the fiig, and grind itto a very
fubril powder, and put intoa glafs bo
regir te&ified; and digeftit inheat forza hours; then pour off


tbe tinged -water, and add more until you have extrscted all the


tincture; then.diftil off the tinged waters to an oylinefs; of
which Oyf take one ounce, and pourit upon 4 ounces of crude
Mercury; and fo the Mercury willima moment be Precipitated,
and notadhere to the Oyl:. Then if you diflil ic wich a ftrong
fire, after the exbaftion of the Oyl, fome of the Mercury will
fublime, but the greate(t part will remain fixt, —

Its ufeisin the Augmentation of Sol, and to make red Vtrum,


mi bas vo ad 1t hy 38-3301
: GERE E L
EU A EU E a UŘ IM
aT siniidxowid ctvbut Y j
al ihiga SVILA *
dit Ys 055 jd
PETTA IS
nth 9j). o3 2453 ;308 bor 5 g
IDRA LI j ) iH i i ilia
Ap M \s ] i
d:
z^ oer Ü
g ni bodes tl q310/] 29 $5371 è xs:
oU 3 i 9i? de 1


y; to which pour Aqua:


E UNE


IO]


METEEN
an a
The CONTENTS.


i $a


BOOK. L


AS ID


Y jS He «Dij lati i 2 zr the "m hour. UTE T
Be. 2


4 Of the matters and form of F nrnacis.

| Of velfels fit for Diftillation

: Of Lutes, for coating of glalfes and E Miu a all
[Several wayes of Popping Ghalfese ubt ae 4


The maan? of nipping; or fialing up a glafs. hermetically, ILE 7 |


An explanation of [uch hard words, and rears of art as are D in

this enfuing Treatife oe oh te ec di:
Rales to bé confidered in Diffillation <= ^ A ahs Sa ELA
The making of common diftilled waters


To make waters ina cold Still that Jun M the : fl m ? wld


- tafte ofthe vegetables. Abid,
Another Way to make water tafte is femel Brong of its vegetable 18
To make Water at any time of the year, in-acold S till itbont reen
| dbearbss fo that the water foall fall bring of the hearh Ai
eAnother wayto make a water tafte,and [mell freni; ofi ils aux
wv bids
To make water of Rofes, or other flowers of a gradi and. eren
Cu Smell, and that foal burn like to [pirit ef Wine uo
To make the water of the flowers of Jafminy Hovey Ey [nc dass. er. oe
bind, Violets, Lillies 8c. retain the [mell thar flowers —. ibid.
How water ont of Berries is made hae
Kkz 3 A


a NIMTERMNS


The Contents.


‘A fiyeating Water made of Elder-berriesy, page 23
How to make aveater of rotten Apples; > : E A
The fimple water of Succory N - ibid.
The water of Fennel "oid 26
Cinnamon water ; ibid.
The acid water of Oak," Juniper, Gúaiacum, Bux, &c. 27
How to make Aqua-vite, and Spirit of Wine out of Wine . ibid.

: How to make Aqua-vite ont of Beer 2 s


How to vethifie Spirit of Wines or Aqua-vite

To make the Magiftery of Wines which will be one of the greateft Car.
_ dials,and moft odoviferous liquor in the world ibid.

To make another Magiftery of Wineythat afew drops thereof [b all turn


water into Wine s c 29.
To make an Oyl of Wine ibid. `
TLoextratt the [pirit of Wine by tbe fpivit.of wine ~~~ Bids
To make a very [ubtle {pirit of Wine at the firft diftilliing 31
— She manner of diftilling in wooden veffels ibid.


The manner of making the fpivit of any vegetable 32

The manner of making the [pirit of any vegetable [uddenly, or at-any
time of the year

To make any vegetable yield its [pirit quickly — a wa

To reduce the whole Le into à Liquor which may. Well be called the

^ Effence thereof “ibid.

To make an Effence of any bearbywhicb being put into a a glafs and held
over a gentle fire, the lively form and Idea of the hearb will appear


— $n the glafs ibid,
How the true E fence 2 oF rather Quinrefence of any hearb “
ade be "
Toextrakt the iet of all Vegetables ‘ibid.
To make an excelent Effence of any Vegetable — Hei a
To make the waters or Spirit of “Manna s.s ibid.
Fo make the Tinttuve of dryed Rofes vides ibid,
The Tinkture of Violet des x ibid.
The Tincture of Saffron . d SL
ST be Tintture of Roubarb . pu ibid.
he Tintlure of Sugar huie iuc cS
The, Tintkare ef. he of Tartar. ME pe:
The


"Ehe Contents: a
The manner of making the Chymical Oji of hearbs and flowers:


3 E age

T he Oyl commonly called the [pirit of Rofes c = ‘bi
To make Oyls out of feeds *
Oyls ont of Berries. Egat) S AR "a
Oyl ont of any folid wood —— ibid,
To make amoft excellent OyLout of any sid er gimme à in a fhort.

time; without much cof 4r
To make vegetables yield thet? Oyl cafily. STA. bid.
To make the Jpirit of Turpentine iol! xis Sla dans, DIM.

- Another more excellent way 7 s ibid. `

Lo makeoylof [pirit of Turpentine. s M 42
Another Way to make the Oyl of ` arponjre- cu E ud Bis} Soules
To make Opl of gums rofins, fat, aud oily things i -43
Oyl of Camphire sq Abid.
eAnother way to make Oyl of Camphire that fal never rh fern a-

gain . ibid.
Another way to make Oyl of Camphire. 4i insidias Abid,
AtrueOylof Sugar : Tas 44
Oylof Sage — ; Taner aso Dig,
Oyl of Amber ` EC is Nada’ vid uli 3945 | Abid,
Oylof Myrrhe soared $4 dcos. vati cie
Oyl of Myrrbe per deliquium dice hei v 46
Oyl of Tartar per deliquium IES « 435, ibid,
How 0jls by expreffion are made... cos ss dbid.
A vomiting and purging, oyi made Ly. extis Ios. se bunot Ad,
Oylef Jafmine E XL ous WEAR
T o. make Oyls per deícenfum- RHE sengdond rsoirdDids
To make Oyl aud water out of Soop... gS
How to rellifie Spirits 49
How to retlifie all inking thick. black, exe dis an ade " Ret

and to take away their Bink (58

bic 4 SSS and ist ARDS IES 4 a ex


Eis 2 Pc


The Gontents


BIW Kee


. BOOK. II.
os Of Compound Waters; Oyls, and Spirits,- im
A Diffolving Menftruum - ; m 5
Another aiffolving Meatteaum: oF Acetum Plilotopbtum,

E diffelving Menüruum 7 os bn ibid,
Paracelfus bis Elixir fübtilitatis. © e ibid.
Ojque-bachs or rife Nqua-vire ^ > 0v Six.
3Aqua- Coeleffis AN SR dices’ ; AM [$4
Agaa Tapiata" M adds E dO sw od qt fe HRA Te
Ajaa- Mirabilis RM. EE S “bid,
` Dr. Stephen’s water STNG Se SARA 03 0 NUS
zd famous Surfet water SOR ISAS SHE”
A’ pettoral water 310^ abidy
Avery excellent Water againft the Worms SS A |
Awater againft the Convulfions Ju SEE YE QUREN
An Hydropical water AIDUHDISO 190 SNS thie
« A Water againft the Colick, UD os DM
Awater againft the Vertigo, and Comvulfons >= ^ | $9
eJ compound water of* TEPEN canfing feat. LAUR DS ibid i
Hüother excellent Sudorifick s and Plagne Water 2 NULLIS P
Dr: Borges bi-Plague water 9 dep UO NG.
Ciollius his Treakle water camphorated * SAAT NAD EY ie
Adiftilled Treakle Vinegar . X RE Ls
PAINE Ap. one in Mibi AUR OZ
Mitother water for the fame nfe -> i ih taat aid;
Tomakean excellent wound water ibid.

_ Dr. Matthias bi Palfie water . ^63
AS&Wiaical water, KC. SAD u COTES RH
Spirit of Caftor : .65
Bezoard water 527 i ps
ed fpeeifical (udorific ; ^ NR

: (rated Saas ^ j Treakle i


‘ ji
"d 2 "m


-- The Coie I
— Treakle water 0000s os ow ewigootfapeisy


‘Aqua Marie «ibid,
Hifferical water i to j£ 19q «acqui VSB
A vomiting Water <> AAMAS T: CERES "^: dbid,
Another of *Platerus e * ibid,
A diftilled purging water that Works vehthout any Zriping 69
eA [pecifick Liquor againff the Toothach ibid, -


A water of wonderful m nok ania edly called ake: Moher iud
Bal[ame I TV ji i MR os 1 :
Milliccellont Sandee Oyi Yo "ii nd buften Bellies > “70


A noble water againft the F alling- Sicksefs 1 Fc


7
A moft excellent water reviving the natural T da colours he
` Preferving the health of man ME S


A viry excellent Anti-Epileptigk, wurers\ N X» Nb
A Water effectual in any difeafes uf thoes ts s annt from cold
` Rheumes) or any other canfes 73
The Oy of the Philofophers sot common. Tean at no 6s bid,
Olewm Benedictum apti Ma Sat SED wr)
An Artificial Balfame^ e ds Via qe YOM ane Sec
: Acompounded Oyl againft the oni Ui LUE E
A Code Oy! agenfe the M AW NC cU. c
4BO00K Hb 7.5.
Of Minerals. yes s :
Miis of , common Salt en page 77:
Another Way to nw i5 wW Spiris af Nimes: Sal begins and
RENE Villam o sioe 78
Haw. to make a wwhite,acidyand řed guit Spirit iif Satenitreo
Tornrn Salt-nitre into a Water Pw meer ar lads ii UES RENE
Spirit of Salt-Armeniach— = fa? cig Rd ia VO RR AgNO,
Another way Ai DIOS


OSTA ‘and. [pirit of Vitriol ` iss
A ved, and heavy Onl of Vitriol 195m
To s the: i of eon uud vf Sale


SRT, Rae ee ws.


The Cien SOUS


Gilla Theophrati, or a moft delicate vomiting Lig madi of Vis

. triol page 82 =
Oyl of falphur per Campanam Pre A ur
Of the [pirit ov acid Oyl of Sulphur icd to Glauber, $9] as
Lhe Oyl of Sulphur made after a more Philefephical manner 9g


The Effence-of S#/pher ibid.
The Oyl of Arfenick, Rad Steg 13
"Of the Nitrous Spirit of. dua: ‘ibid,
To make a Spirit of Sulphur, crude fae Ph Salt-Nitre 58;
To maké the: fpirit and flowers of Nitre m Coals ibid,
ezdaqua-fartis ibid,
Aqua-régia^ 0s : ibid.
Another A qua-regia M Vds uideri 88
To'make a firong. ^ dre Aqua-regia it ato ibid,
Oyl or Butter of Auflnony ibid. -
A Water of Antimony, whereof a few drops foal purge and nd fnccBiand ;
which hath neither [mellor [carce any tafte : 89
Oyl or quinte[fence of Metals ibid.
A [weet and red Oy of Metals and dope een ak HOS
The true [pirit of Antimony « olf AAi VO hkat abid,
Thetrue Oyl or Effence of Antimony . ibid.
T burning [pirit made out of Leads moft fragrant » , and balfamical
gr


How to tarn Quick-lvers into Water withontimixing any thing with ;


it» and to make theredf a good — diaphorttick, n


A fragrant Oy! of Mercury ii
‘To make the water of Mercury:
d'oturn Mercury into a water by it hif i ‘in? ibid.


How to diftil Spirits and Qylsout of. Minerals » Ve Vegetables Bonés»
— Horns, &c. fafter > and in a greater quantity iu one hour thanin


. the common Wa) in 24. 94
To make the acid Oyl and volatile fpirit of Vitre 96
To make an Oyl of Lapis Calaminaris Ee (6 594948;
To di Oy! of Talk, È 499. i
vnither Wa) | ibid.
Ol of Bole-armoniack, terra-(ioillatas and oe kind ^. Hee ibid.
Another and better way to mahe thofeOyts 100

: Spirit


pne


The Contes; bue


` Spirit of unflaked lime " | page roe

* Oyl of Tile-ftones, called the Qyl of Philefghers E eee laa

- The liquor or water of Coral ; m "ibid.

"T'omake a water out of Lapis Armenus; that [hall baue PS tafte

` nor (mill afew drops Whereof fall purge : CAT NBI: -
"Another Way ; ; ns TOR


How to make a Furnace that [ball of it felf Without Ang ve[felsy which
«^ C flonld contain-the matters being put into ity [ublime minerals, and
fiil all manner of Oils) and Spirits of Minerals, Vegetables y and
~ Animals, and that in a Very great quantity » ma avery BY, times


- and with [mall cof, we. Ind.
-The way to make [pivit of Salt by this Furnace | Bd vEO6
“To clear Oyl of Maftivkand cc Cane Bee ie. die yi
‘Ros Vitriol : d 108.
A {weet green oyl of Vitviol » which i is Paracel Ick medicine.
-` fer the Epilepfie ; oS IM,
The [niphur of Vitricl : 4.99
A (adorifich water tobe ufed out ardh.. ibid,


How an acid Spirit or Vinegar may be. aiftibed Ht. i all V egeat,
ds hearbs, woods, roots, feeds GcC.

Tomake the S piritsy Flowersyand Salts of Minerals and Sei.

‘How to iden pes and S. ee a Minerals- — o3 uud


ot Aulas,


Water Spicitssand Oyls, hs and compan of etwas
YI and water out of bloud . a Sree CASES TS
The- Magiftery of blond — | p^ TUS MR oi
Eligir of Mummie Laudo asco eoe meg BAS
T he E (fence of Mans Brains ° S TEA, «:dbid
A fainous [pirit made out of Cranium hurianur kg
Antler excellent dpi fade om of Cranium, Harts-born, ov ee
ibi


2 t 1 A water -


!


The:Cóbteni$;


` AL Water and oyl made ont of Hair. Gel ce ier ^
` Water of Milk, Bahii ibid,
A compound water ont.of. Milk, b et .: ibid.
- . Spirit of Urine VA No i. lg: a ibid.
A compound Spirit of Urine iy . 116
Spirit of Honey : ibid.
~The quintelfence of Honey KRE ; - ibid.
Another way of making of it ae a IT.
An Effence of Honey n ; Eíabid. —-—
A moft firovg [pë ít of vinegar af Hong < we" ADEE. Fine
The cyl or quintejfence of Wax ^ 25 TS
Water of fief: iw Lic BOI
Another way to make it i TUNER E 1G
A very excellent reftorative LL ar ibid.
"eA Balfame made of Bears fat, - eias MERO
O3lof. Snakes and Adders oe icd. 7
Quinreffence of Snakes, Adders, or Vipers ~x - bid. -
Viper Wine ' sail RAE
Kuhraths famous water called ga Magnanimicatis : i22
eAnoiher Aqua: Magnanimitatis = , oo abid.
Water of dung low it is made or rw CO seas S
“AA Water of Doves dung > 0007 S et Did.
VA waterof Horfe-dung ` ; ~- ibid.
á Water [melling like Bye made-by Paracelfus ic Cos dung
124
An excellent Judi e ef. she ‘young buds ef Harts horn ibid.
-Oyl out of bones, and horns ibid.
ah Water xs Swallows: Are, the F, valling fi =ficknefs = ibid:
Oyl of Egg. 125
A Water F shi whites r E, i sich yit ene a UM wiskont any
vifible fear ; XA PIDE IO
Awater of Crabs C7 ARE TEE
i en oyl or liquor made jac. "yp c Dieci oque i01;
; Water of [pawn of Frogs - ko. If.
A compound water ef the fien of Frage E ee
mes IR acu d


Lu $ i Sle “BOOK


"The Contents.


BOOK V. .


A Mifcellany of Spagyrical Experiments and Curiofities.


id aux fpagyricat Anatomy of Watep oco page 127


T he fpagyrical anatomy of Wine 7


132
A famous Arcanum; or reftorative medicament f Paracelfus caked


‘his Homunculus : ;
An artificial way to make fle
Paracelfus his way for the raifing of a dead Bird to lifes and y 7
generating many Serpents out of one, both which are rie by


pumefatl ion ibid.
Tomake an artificial Mallago-wine » 149:
Tomake anartificial Caret-wint — 1 ibid,
An artificial Malmfoy = $ 0-0 00- E C IgE
To make an excellent aromatical Hypocras z . ibid.
To wake excellent Hypocras-wine in an infant ~ rw! kA


Another way toinake Fypocr as, or to make Wine bd of any s


in aninftant 7 14 a3
To make a good Resberry-wine 3 ORR
Two other wayes to make it all the year at an inftant ibid,


To make Mead, or Metheglinthat foall be ftaler and tafte quick witha —
in a fortnight, and be fit to drink -


4
Tomake à Spirit of Amber-greifes that a fes drops thref feat p


fume a pint of Wine moft richly


eA excellent (weet water ibid,

To purifies and to give aa excellent finet dnd tafte into Ojl-olive that
they that loath it may delight to eat ee diues

‘Another Way : ibid,


To purifie Butter that it hall keep fref, and [wett a long time and be
moft wonderful [weet in taf


; 146
To make Buster taft of any Vegetable Witbows alrering: the wis
“thereof C ‘ibid,


Tomake Chere net Strong of any Vegetable sion di ifeajonring of of


is | 34).
nis n.


The  Coient& | de


o purifie and refine: Sugar page 147.
To make a vegetable gn and become more mdi than any of its
fpecies —- ibid,
` Tomake a plant grow in tWoor three. Beth. se 14h
T o make the Idea of any plant appear iua gis qin the E plant it
Self were there. ‘ibid.
T; make Fir-trees appear i in Tarpentine 149
Tomake: Harts- -horns feemingly to grow ina. laf. ; ' ibid.
Ta make golden monntdins, as. it were, ta appear in aglafè ibid.
To make'the repréfentation: ofthe whole: worldina glafs «s Abid.
Lo make four Elements appear in a glafs r 150:
Tomake a perpetual motion in a gla/s. «Mone Ibid,
To makea luminous Water that foall give light by night. Ist
Tomakea. vapour in a chamber 5 that. he that enters into it witha
vesndle fhall think the room to be on fire R A


‘Tomake a powders that by [pitting upon frall be inflamed .. ..1. ibid.
Lo fortifie a Load]hnesthat it foall be able to draW à pid out of a piece
~~, 6f wood EUN ks 2
Lomake Quick filver malleable in feutn hours> <5 s dbid.
To; reduce gla[s into its firf principl.s, viz. (aud, and falty. 0353
To write or engrave. upon an eg geror pebble with wae. ange eala: ibid..


do make artificial pearl as glorins a5 any oriéptal saai i 154
To make a Mineral perfume en Kathe ORD
Lhe oyl or liquor of Sandy Flints, Pebbles, ar c afe, e theafore-
x fid and divers other preparations iyi 4 hadi:
ripis Steel growin a gla]s libe atree y RFS S
Tomelta Herl uine band without: burning the oh K ibid.


An obfervation upon the beams of the um». und heat of. the fire, bow.


shey add weight to mineral, and metalline bodies... ibid,
fa aeutrachawhite milki t UEM from i the: raytt of the moon, ..158
Ta! condenfe the asr in the heat of, ithe (ummer andi in the heat af the day
into water ibid,.


How Yo fart? d volatile Salts will be iru rs ene them, Mieres


ied


v deg t ie js body pi is
i * Ae E ; 2 Ts.


*


Fhe Contents. ae
To make a Cordial flomachicaland purgative tind tnu page 160°


Another o — ibid, —

To reduci diftilled turpentine into irony et | ; 162

To make the diftilled Oyl ont of any hearb, [etd or fliwer in an infant
without any Furnace ~. eee big


To make the water and tindture of 4 any ‘vegetable at the fame times :
t which zs an excellent. way to draw ontthe vertue thereof- ^ 163°
A way to por frefowater from fate’ ipit abe or aed


» trouble
AA way to purge xod purifie troubled, aA nme waters s Ga
Ansther way to purifie any thick» muddie, or fecrilent ligia 7 68
‘To keep fire ina gla(s, that vebileft the glafs ts fonts will nor ins bur
affoon as it i&opened. will be inflamed — - 7166
Howto diftil with a Lamp, with alee other’ fei esf 368
Another Lamp-furnace MOET
Lo make a Candle that foall laft long rnirin mabid.
To make a. laftings and durable di (S s e i IN S Vary
Philofophical Bellows ` VAG OLS SAE Quan
„An excellent invention to make a oe à M S CV


cA


A new invention for Baths... 354
An hrtificial bot Bath. made freti Ha fame principis di. TT ev


13 bot Bathis : : SONG RRI toit awit 1 po 1$ E
Anartificial Tunbridge, and E pfome: mater vec
To make artificial flones of all forts of colours os a s pa


To grove what. kind of metal there is in any Orchid invi
cd very few grains thereof » fà as ‘bat Fed cannon wake ; sof rer eof -


« the ordinary way withleads.\\ OUS DEP rry
ed pretty cbferuatiomupon tbe: woe f Copper: and: Ti» Apre i:
i

4 TORUNTE obfervation pon he woking of Salar mink “nd
-Calx-vive together M pnr awh io: Agy

An eafie and cheap powder liket baie a Aum folmiah a: du. sonics

T a take the: npe ics “alk and to aie din een eke
| MON) ie 188:

Athe. aie ue cH e Say sek sous dbi i 1


iein iniia a aai Ain i


ee
—— VN T à T -
:


The Contents - f


BOOK VL


d PN Y \ 7 È
i 1


He osse eee " Gold, je Silvers hoo with the
s eutiofitéts therein, aud chiefeft preparations thereof, page 189
—€— si Famm Dai Porto. eie fam M of Gold;


198

The tra: L ‘Gold VES. AT gt mony Og

ed Tantun ddl. ey ede Tee S 4200

, Another tin&lure of Gold + Ana (ip us os ibid:

Another tinktsre of Gold ^ — Wt ao A 5 want

Another tinflure -o..202
Auram fulminans gi aa ibid. `

Toi make Gold grow ina gla[s ike a pa which M called the golden

< bree of the Philofopbers «^ 203

- Another way 204

` Tomake gold grow, and be increafedin theearth «ibid,

A vemarkableob[érvation upon a golden CMarcafito = ` v jbid,
The vertues of the afarefaid preparations of Gold 205

The preparations of silver in general ; 206

A green tintlure of Silver jd 2. 207

A green OyLof Silver. = je 5:208

To make Oyl of Silver pet deliquium i ibid,


Tomak: a Liquor of Silver, that foal make theG lafs wherein it & fo
exceeding cold, that ‘no man ts able for the coldne[s thereof to bold is


^ 5 in bis band any long time ` | 209
To make filuer as white aa [no i Ay isddbit,
-Tomake the filver tree of Philofophers 5 ibid.

The procefs of the Elixir according to Paracelfus 2 2Tp `


T he procefs of the Elixir according to Divi Lefchi Genus Amo;212 1


« Lhe procefs of the Philofophers fione according to Pontanus — 213.
The neum table of Hermes, from whence all Alchymie E^ a
EEUN i i bid,


aber


The Contents,  — —


Mid


BOOK VILI


Tn
x Of Rabain) : ;
Hat Sublimatten is Mee 215
What Furnaces are neceffary i inthis work o.
Wat Ve els are to be ufed in Sublimation | aS
: -- How Sublimation is performed — S ; : 4
- Tofublime igi n LOL ee E ame aus
Another. H4 i sso Conc i-o RUE o BMC MM
Another way dis a AU di "ibid.
eo Amither way., pee du ae 219
To fublime the Flowers D iu ; eae pete
To: fublimeSal. Armoniack eum Mp n
. The. _fublimation OP cies C CT ce OR, Chto)


A nore perfect way of si Mei T RID i: ‘bide:
‘To make Mercurius Dulcis — ™ 122-
The best way to prepare Mercury fmi Metals fa the fei piii 223

: ibid.


‘Another aay


To prepare the Mating of Merciry or the white Bagle, Sie * ; ibid.


Mercurius Sublimatus effentified Veit MY
Tbe Imperial Bagle 7-9 vio Ed E
The Diapboretick Kubie of OEE PE un tacite Ad
The Disphorctich Rubie of Arfenick ^ — 7 Pe ou
How Minerals and Metals maybe reduced i wn owes and ‘of their a dee
"ques ; Erw vps Ane wk
Flowers of Tron aliti (ies) 0 S E Ras ^ re a iam 228.
` Flowers of. Lead and Tin ` bep ouais NE AR thas 28 ibid.: ‘
Flowers of Mertiry ` adi UE EN QUEUE E


Flowtrs of Zinck `
To make metallic Spirits Y the bai if sett end rani ao:


To tag tbe Flowers of Atiro) according. Glauber * Cms M
jefe tes BOOK


: ‘Thee con


"Ehe Gontents


BOO RVOH. Lo MENS


Of Calcination’


be Niet he |
. 4


` feweral ways thereof, : 3357


: S- : :
Tbe calcination of common falt, 2 37 | d beca naronof. Silver by


The calcination of Sabt-Petre ibid.
The calcination of Vitriol
The, calcination of the Pumex-ftone,


‘the Calcination of Cryftal ibid.


| Pug
Hat Caleination à is, 2 Jie Cella of ¢ Gani by. Aqua-


E Y > inant’


iMH s.
"Regi ‘ibid,


Fortis


245-
ibid. | Zo calcine Silver b Fipigam,


.238. | The calcinacion of Copper by Agu


Fortis, . ibid.


Another way to calcine Cryftal , ib. | Another Body. tà. calcine [eun


uo d batter Way to calcine |.
svu839:

etm of ihe filver Mar-
ius cafi eof Wifmuth
da ogee Alme oo
To calcine Antimony with Sal} i pre-
pared 240
Jo calciné Antimony, per fe. ibid.
Crocus merallorum;or the Liver |
of Antionny. .. cay 04H

; do calcine “Antimony that “st foal
peze ofily per fecefum ibid.
cine gold by Amalgamat, 242

is canam of gald by merr.


The Roy


emeng


The vail perfec cinta ian of |


| wae Oa


+ 4l


ibid. | The ale nahin of Iron.
ibid. | To make Crocus Martis, by. aque


roe auton iff. Bie t


nother way
nother. way, to make. Apne I


"neris .
ibid.


fartis- suje 247.
| Zo make Carik Marr b Cen
„tentation: : ibid.
‘Aitother-way.: “ian age
The calcination 45. Sei er. Lead,


ibid.

| The cdleingtionsf Tin. +~. ibid;
The calcination of. i. rcury. 249

Red precipitate n: Mercury. . ibid.


3 | The Hf way to precipitate, Mon


| Ti cow à frümenty
«1290


Ag


Aqu B


Ae


An m Table of all is Oils |


Waters; ; Experiments , and. Cusiofities
pon uM in.the eight foregoing uir d o at


ETC ows


Ae


e Vof Addefs.:^ * pageia2o
Quintefence " Addeis; "ib.


Air in the beat of Summer, aud tbe
beat of the day to condenfe into
pater, 15 8

Thefoom of an Alembick $133


(mI


eas of Art Explained 1 ge e8


Oilof Arfenick

Aurum Potabile of Dr, Aio:
ny EE 198

Aurum Faltinans ia 202


VES


b
se


Oilof Amber Wega eli
Spirit of Ambergreife:: 144. T* Dihed ig Balnenm .
Oil or Butter of Antimony- 588 Mariæ, di. 23
Water of Antimony. + sibu: -Fo | Ahotber rui hii 23
Spirit of Antimony. “£ we go Another OR eos Nagy
Effence of pude dC sisibid. | a Baladeur of vod | ^ “> 32
An Aütimonial Gup to make ano- | Artificial Ballam ^'^^ 797
-ther way Si 188 | Balfam of Bears Fat . ° 120
Water of rotten Apples J 0825 | For Baths a new Invention 4.74


Aqua viteeiof, Wine. Soo ong
a vitz of Beer) ivo 2B
Aqua vitæ 70 me /; 49


Aqua vitz Jrifb iaa
“Agua fortis. Ad ) 87
Aqua we 2301 -edit Ibid)
Anitber: - nuit Oe 3088


Amft Seong ahd: vébement Aqua


“ibid, i


á Hor Bach Artificial “frons tbe —
fame Principles a the Natural.


“Bath is V 176
Bellows ‘tote bu C.
Water of B erries ” te ` A 22
Oil Of Berries” mh A49
Bezoard Water °°" 77 765
Bezoard ENa ^" ^ | "66
A dead Bird soraifeto dfe i 95


Mo


Oy! S ; i
Water M Bloud I1X|:
Magiftery
Oil of Bale. Armoniack , terra |:
figillata, &c.- 99
Another and better way. Yoo
Qil of Bones 124]
Effence of mans Brains. 113,


Dor Burgeffe Plague water Gol ~
So.


Bur-root water compound
To purifie Butter, and to make
Butter tafle of any Vegetable


without altering its colsur 146


shal


€;
Hat Calcination #, and
U U the ways thereof 235
Calcination of Alome 239].
~~ Antimony with Salt 240
Antimony. per fe ibid.


„Antimony te make it purge only


per feceffum 241
Cryftal 238
Cryftal another way ibid.
. another and better way 23:0
. Copper by Aqua fortis 245 |.
.. another may ibid. |-:
oes, anther way. ibid.
xd rogus 1 Martis, by Aqua. for-
is O5, S 47
0B Cementation „ibid
` another ma) iac 248
. €rocus Metallorum ,, or ps
~~ diver of Animus. aa 241
-3 ‘Crocus veneris ni p248
` Gold by Amalgamation. 242
2. ty Aquaregis, 0244


The Table.


MENU |,


by Cementation page 243
Comon Cement ^ ^ ibid,
` Royal Cement ibid.
: moft perfe Cementation,


244

Iron 246
Mercury: 249
red precipitate thereof. ibid..
eft way precipitated ibid,
Another way “in a^ moment,
250-

Pumese Stone 238


Salt Petre and common M


ze è 237

Saturnor Lead j CAM
Silver by Aquafortis 245,

by fumigation ibid.
Silver Marcafite. or Wifmutb,
(17239

Tim i3 248

>. Vitriol 237


Oilef Camphire feveral vj to
make ii 43
ACandle that fhail last long: "oh


Spirit of Caitar 65


‘Tomake Cheefetaff frong vf any
weil without difcolouring it;
"^

"Agna Coleflis;
Water again[t. tbe: Golick, ' 24
Water againft e iie int 57-
: "155
Water of Coral, 10r
Water of Crabs 126


Oilef Crabs-Eyes ~ ae os:


| Spirit of Cranium Haman. 114
Another excellent fpirit of Cravi-


um, Hertr-borp,C c. < ibid,
' p.Difü-


The Table.

D. ; Another way to make i it pag. t 19

TNilfation, and it hinds, p.t | Flefh tomake artificialy, 139

Vefels for D'killaron" 3 | Water of pawn of Frogs : «fimple

Ralis for D. ftilfation ^" 124 and compound 126

Common diftilled waters — 17 | Another — n}, Ibid.

Diftilling in wooden Vefelt © 31 Farnaces: fi tbe Matter and F we
To Dittil Spirits of Minerals s Ve.

getabler, Bones, Hornp ére. ,94 | 4 Furnace to difil liquor Al di


Wal ler of Dung | | fleam of boyling water «2
: Dove Ding? 125  Furaaces for, four [EUREN «

Horfe Dusg$ | ome S
Cows Dang 124 | 4 Furnace to ‘dftil per die
CHuCERS iNOS 47
E. . * | A Furnace for Reverberation, 89
IlofEggs - .— — tos] ÆA Furnace that fhall of it felf
Water of Eggs ibid.| (without any V'effels to fae
To engrave upon an Egge or Peble| the matter boing put into it ) fub-
with wax or grease, 153| lime Minerals, and distil all
The four Elements to make appear | ` manner of Oyls and Spirits 102
ina Glafs 150| 4 lamp Furnace AaB: me


Water of Elder Berries = 29
Elixir Subtilitatus of Paracelfus,


52
The Procefi of the Elixir according cally imu 9
to Paracelfus —.. 211| 4Glafs Gowd |... $i
The Procefi of tbe Blixir according | Toreduce Glafs into fand and alt,
te Divi Lechi Genus Amo 212 153
Oil of Gold 199
F. Tinéture of Gold 200,201,202,
Fis: to keep Fire i in a Glafs, :
A” that whileft the Glafs is fhut | To make Gold grow in a Glafss


will not burm, but as foon as it is Page 2035204.
opened, will be enflamed -166 | To make Gold icreafe in rhe
For Fire an excellent invention ,| Earth ibid.
a 173 Obfervations upon. a Golden Mare

To make Fitre-trees appear in|. - chafite ibid.
Turpentine 149| The vertues of the preparations of
Gold 20$


WeterofFlefh — i18


Cm to Es or feal Hermaii- us


Mm2 oit.


The Table.


0 ms. . age n ah
9 Ea a Tis Ires of Lapis. Ariende,
pO H: V without {mellor tafi, i and,
CX; "dier and. p TN gis: a few drops to purge page.1or
: Bic Another way. yi abide
Spi of Harts- hormec 114| Qilof Lapis Cilaminaria 11698:


A fudorifick of the young buds of Spirit of Lead; i. iso pag


* Harts-horn,.. ,. 124 Spirit of Lime unflaked "e rer
us horn feemingly d quos. in a| Liquor refforatiue e
RGlaís Seay 149 Liguor (XR qua ruddy to be
Toridue thè whole fib. we a} ome ig LOA
` liquat; 4 | Another way to purge any Liquor,
T? make the Idea of any Hearb X & 16
vopear in a Glafr,.— ibid. | To dontifie a Loadftone . that :
Ti bcd Quintefente df à any) fpail be able to dram aNd
:35| i of. apiece of Wood. < g
iiano ihi aracel{ns) 135 | Lutes of Glaf — .—. ne


. Quinte[fence of Honey `- iiu vi i
After another maniter. ` dis ry


Ha Y G He “ibid. |
nefaPof Honey" “ibid. |”


TTE ED


cae
^u Negrini ts. f


Kunrath. pese age ox
An cgo ane 57 fous M: agnánimitatis anstbel ib.
Hypocras Arumatical -~ < 141 Malmiey Artificial : “Tg
Hypocras Wine miade i mn "E in; | Spirit of Manna, detainee’ 3$
© ftant ^ "qi ha Marie 7.7 M. 07
Hypocras, or to make Wine’ D of Mead or -Methegtin to make. fale
© “any Vegetable in an-inftant 45 | - “th a fortnight. See add


Hifterical water |... . ,68| 4A Med: cine tha? balf a prain Ta-
SSA Vibes hen d morning, wil keep a
ine 28. Ox S jpior J į? WER: body | foluble .. :


QEF Jafmine. |. 47 Diffolving énflrougis | | ‘5 ‘sigh
Qi bine c MS E» il ie age 7944.
“Spirit of eel T My To tum. ‘Mercury j uar .93
ik | Hi Segit DORI SAM “89


Heap : K. i An Metal h s s in anes? Ehud
Kurt ach’p diui Mj, © without burning o Abe bans, 155
En QUT ane “E21, | Fo prove what kin of Metal iz m

to aient aff to Bute oak
So A ceed Eep Art valoa 186
Water


» Zum d ania i le UE wood fe La


! - Eh Tatte.


Waterof Milk: . :paget 1s! Smect-red, Oilout of Meials and
Aqua Mirabilis ios 95 $$ s Minerāls? oani page 73
From the rays of the: Moon fo.rx- Excellent fanative Oil for wounds
: tract a millie. {ubftance.... 489 o! tend — gerer D "ge
Mother mater. abn) ibidi- i3r1g015 Uae onini
A perpetual Motion Pall a 3 P ERNS
Golden Mountain to. make. appear W A gb aA Mb (65
ing Glaft. i eei oseta Kis Pearlartificiali 9? 0154
- Eliit of Mummie)., vitas 314]. Pe&toral water 56
Oitof Mytrhe, tui acit adi | The fornnof a Pellican:2 >s ce
: ou tah Magie Per diim 46 | 4 Perfume mineral... wi 154
1 sd ideae 4n excllent dude Plague
i d Ou: EY “water. eM Q9
NES Benedi&lum.. 74, | Plague water. th ise 960
) Oils ofi Berries: 40| | To make a Platt gn. in. dijo or
Zi rhe manner..of. making... ‘Chimical | ` i > three hours; . ase 4S c
. Oil out. of bearbs and flowers 59 Tomake the Idea ie 4 r plant: appear
The Oil, S called. fri of |- in a glafs - rose? bid,
 Rofes~ o| 4, Food that, by. ving upon
Olax of deeds M 3M X ibd. | < fhall be inflamed.... wis « ETT
Oils Ly exprefft? tj. aside 46 Acheap Pome sto UE
Oils vomitive P EPUM A fulminans < wae rye NIB
Oil per defcenfume «us 7 |Purging. water preti without
Toclear Oyl.of, Freien, ^ ai kata Qai» S89
Mafi flick ^ een uw Se M
Oils thick, hlaska, ed M 1 P. m  Qaicktiier mawa-
c velliffe ux 50 parahia REIT. vis sut
Q.ls of Minerals: to tow. NIIT o); ae MRE euis
or Ol H pes Snell and taf To vu Quickfi Le: paler ia
ixi SEA M Hie air


e à at uh of y pero. seal
erc, in an infant without @ Fur-
nace, Yaita ma 162

Q Em An ' 171

Compound O | againft. the  feffocati- | 00

saon Of tbe Matris o 36 | ip make sate Asin gad

Comp. Oil apaing the. mein ib. | flowers out ofminerali-.Xio
eut Phibfiphirs not common 73 |! Spirit of S Salty los: ai 7I
ie Ma m 5 OO Another


Retorts


(i ‘Rolin, Hs
Spirit PROS \ SURE ae D


o bT Ele,


ent bir Way tomake it pig.78|- likeaTree > spay. 195
Spirirof Nitre, Sak’Gems*and | Doctor Stephens Water 56
» Allan (oso ibid. | Stone i» the Kidneys, 8c. 62


Spirit & water of Salt-mitee: 80 | Prétionm Rones artificial &C. 184
Spirit of Saltarmoniack ibid. | The precefs of the Philofophers
Another way 7 -o 81|" Stone accórdisg to Pont, 215
Spirit of Sale by Furnace 106 | Sublimation whar it 41 aad far-
il and Spirit of Vitriol to dalot: | maces neceff ary in the work) 215
efie at ibid. | Veffels to be ufed therein o 216
Spirit of Saltand vitriol’ ibid. | How it is performed’ 217
How two volatitefales wil be fired | To Sublime Antimony flowers
5 by joyning them together, Y$9 | according to Glauber. 231
An obfervation upon the melting | The Diaphboretick, Rubie of


The preparation of Silver ^^^ 206 |‘
A green tintlure of SMvet ^ 207 |:
eA Green Oil of Silver 208]!
Oil of Silver per delignivm’ ibid.
— A liquor of Silver thar fhall make
the gla[s wherein it is [o cold; | >


= of Lead and Tin ibid.
Manna of Mercury, or the
white Eagle ^ ^ . 223 ^
Mere > 221
Mercurius Dulcis 222
“Mercury from metals for the


» cof Salt Armoniacky and Calx |^ | Atfenich?\ > “£2 3s
oowivetógetbery * 77 387 Of Auripigmentums ib.
Oil of Sand, Flints Gts 334|" Flower’ of Binjamin ^ 219
Scorbutical water ` (64). The Imperial Eagle 224
Oil of Seeds 40 | Flowers of Coper & Iron 228


that no man s able to hold bis; `>" forefaid procefs. 223

~ Band on it any long time 209 | ' Mer. fublimar. effentified 224.

Tomake (idv. as whit Te as [now Ab, | ' Mercury into flowers 229
The Silver-tree of Philofoph. ib.| Metalsand minieals into flow-
x Cosa TER ers and other vertues 226
Mot Sill —— Ce VS | C Metallick fpirits by the help of
Fhe Smaragdine tab. of Hermes | falt nit. linnen cloth,230


from whencé all Alth. &c, 213| Sal Armoniack, 220
Oil of Snakes O 120|. Sulphur four feveral wafer,
Sguintefence of Snakes ^ ibid. $ ) 218,219
Oilof Soot, ^... 48|- Zink flowers = 229
Water of Soot " ` ibid. | Æ fpecial Sudotifick, 66


Spirits to yectifte ©


49) ASnudorifical water. 169
Tomake Steel grew in a Glafs


Oil of Sugar er


Sugar te refine. ~ 19) Page IA,
eii of Sulphur per. Compson


P
Ox


Spirit or acid. Oil of Sulhan Pe
<- cording to Glauber ibid.


Effence of Sulphur and the oil | 3
made after a more Philofi phi- |


1 pi manner 85


An cbfervation upon. the beets afl: jJ:


^ the Sun,and of the fire, bow they
add Weight ro the. Metalline


and Mineral bodies 155
Surfeit water uà 56 |:
Water of Swollows.. 124
4 o make /pirit of Sulphit Grade |

c Tartar, and Salt Nitre _ 87

Spiri of Wwe aud: fair: Dig

i TU £^ Ca ment |.

o! of Talk i199
Oil of Tartar per deliqiiam, |
w4,


Sinir of Trotta 4!
Gil of {pitt of. Turpentine 42.


. Qid of Tiles-flones; iiih hor
"FincturessCardiab Sementicdls
and purgative 160
Tin&ure of dryed aoe 15.96
bdo of Rhebarbn 3:872]
sh 4 i o atl VE ex E
xf Sugars 38
+ b'CI of Vidlets:: : 36
An obfer ation Aprika: melting
\ Tin aud Copper together 186
Liquor againft thé Falnshach,69
Treacle Waters 67


Treacle water iem 4|
‘Crollins.


‘The Table.


a vr Spirit of Vitriol:


dq o£


Treacle Vinegar: Pgeór-
To reduce diffilled Turpentine
dito its im Apes) X68
(essit ne Nus
^O: make a Vapout ji» æ
Chamber , shat he that
z enters.into it With a Candles ~
\ foall think the oom of fire, 1 şi
Any Vegetable fféíriz to makes
32
Spirit of Veget. fo make fudden-
_ ly arany timeof the'year 34
To make a Vegetable" yield se
Spirit: quickly ibid. —
How the Quinte[fence of any a
sgetable made ^^
To extract eb Quinte ence d: al
cane T
To make an rns fis. $ 2
Sany Vegetable ">
Clywirgt Oil. Of any Veeutics
veretber flowers: > 8
To shake Vegetables y jeld: air
ES Oils efi ly. Ww Way 34141
Pi make a Vegerablè become
‘sonore glorious: thew “any of Sts:
Species — Srba
Wrater-ukd Tone uve: f. any Ve:
'getable. to, makat, thè ame;
timer DIETE NO


piace opata ebe argo "sg:


Qui: nte|Jence of Vi pets


bu. 4
“Wiper wine o0 2r
193! OF


Arid: and'heav) Orb of: Virriol; -
pil Mu des kd
o | Spiris of vitriol to dulcifie® *


TheTubes


Simple Water 2j Suite Eer
Warênagainf Wormsi => 0587
Watér e for wounds — 62
SAGA gis Water: ree

dus IEZ 9$ iik 2 27
yi Waser agilae E swag


Liquor of Sy vonitivejp: 182;
Ros: Vitcioli ns v5553* BOS!
Green Oil ofMitsioks Tibe saiid.
Sulphur of Vitriol 109!
An Ungunenpyrhat outwardly
-applyed will. cavfevomiting

or: oofene[s, bá 3d pleafes’

x OUR ED QU 3i 08 EDE
Vomiting materii 3« ait bad 68)
Vomiting: Water of dise


"night SSRHRNIRIST
T; EET Pda War les


VESS ATSE ae


“Spiie of Utine frmple TY. 1 Ady |
Spirit of Urine, coment (216) |
-Mfgne bách isiag9V & ue $B


92 Artificial siec 719.983
w ácer of wonderful’ tachi wor-


-bidi oietaik tp Caled Misher of Haljamas
32V enn ie yang ws o. desi ‘69
"0 make Water 3n: cold | Oil sr quintifoner: if Wax 1g
R74 which fall: have. the | Spirit of Wine torcthifie — 29
m land vertuesifi tlozVege- | Magiftery of Wise. ee big:
à ikha susllengsssn shawi] Another aces


Oilof Wine #9 12161 "ibid,
Spirit of Wises to entrail by Spi-

brit of Wine ingsu T dbid,
Spirit of Wine’ e ube er d
‘fin dikili


adnoth er way elds JOD
ts La make Water, at Mum afi
gear in 4 cob ls Without

: reti. Hearbtsefeslat the, Was
2 uo Shall {melt 4trong ef the
rids s1999V 8 Sii sibi


Water dt apo dud of 2 Fennel, |
isq26 pr Wire Artificial. ‘240


Nove Water gainftthe Hale | Claret Wine Artificial ibid,
sulPagsdiekpefa.ss ox idag 1 | Rafpberry Wine ^." às 143
Lomake Water of Fa/minerVior | To other wayes to bike it all the
3 funde viraitshe Une a “the
egi 9 | Oif of any folia Wood" 4o

Water per bo M A 347 71 make Oil n amy Wood wiih-
Water of Rofes aud ethetE[mwtrt]| omi -mucbicifo Asn AE
ifs ay ‘Bratelels aid pleefant, |The repre[entatiom eg the sh
Smell, loak, burn like Spirit of | » Wosids dn ag Info 7 T E 49
cinta bk g( LOLI! iV Yost. c


QC


Luminomi: Waterto give lighe by.


63.
To pavipe maddie Water ` l iio;
K anbridge and Epfome- Water :


d: 2
d; Andy d df Wine Sp sura,
132


D tjedr at dn inflánt^ o AIDIg; +: ;


Nn


b


| London-Diftiller *


Exadly and truly fhewing `


| The: way Gn words at length , and not


in myfterious C HARACTE R $ and
FIGURES) to draw all Sorts of


SPIRITS


AND


To which is added
Their Vertues, with Additions of many ole |
WATERS <
LONDO N ;


"Printed by E. Cotes, for Thomas Wiliams, 2 at
the Sign of the "Bible in Litile- Britain,
I6 64.


Strong-Waters: B


^


| ASWA Hereas fome of the Profeffors of Diftillation, in and


*


D
r eN : x s

eri 1 à a^ a s

i i, ATUS ERES "Y.

St a ee Saeed sass CON, X


mpm
I Bg


THE


LONDO N-DISTILLER;


OR, - "UN


Ruiles and Directions. for extracting "m


and drawing of Low-Wines and Spirits,
to be Re-diftilled into RichSpirits ,
Strong Waters, Ot Aqua-vite, -


AC fe. about London have heretofore ufually drawn Strong-
SNVANVZN. waters, and Agqua-vite,@c, out of Wines, Low-wines>


ey and {mall Spirits, &c. by one alone immediate extra-


fo opinionated of their own hereditary erroneous ways,thát they
have efteemed the manner and order here taaght , to be altoge-


ther unneceffary and improvident, in that there is here required `


Re-diffilation, which they have ever thought to be fuperfluous ¿
Not confidering,that what they fave by their feeming thrift they


-lofe double in the excellency of their Wares, and otherwile,.


Wherefore that fuch may not only acquit themfelves of an afper-

fion of ignorance (not undefervedly caft.upon them) but alfo
vindicate both their own, and the Companies reputation, for
time to come: The directions following are henceforth by them `


and every Member of the Company; and their Succeffors, duly
„and exactly to be obferved and practifed from tithe to time for


ever hereafter. — Aaa ". -.... Aha


Es XY Aion, operation , or diftillation, ( contrary to thes .
moft approvedform of working in thisour Art) and have been


/


Va


"T
4


P] -. The London-Diftiller..
That all Wines, Lees of Wines, Low-Wines, and Spirits 5, un-
der proof whatfoever (intended for making of rich or high Spi-
rits, Strong-Waters:, or Aqua-vites &e.) be firik diftilied ex-
. tra&ed, on drawn into ftrong Proof-Spirit;, whereby they may
"be corredéd and cured of their/naturals: harfh; diftafteful 5. nifa-
vory, or evil qualities, before they be compounded witli ingredi-
ents, or extracted and drawn into rich or bigh Spirics, Strong-
waters, or di -vite ; according to Art, and asis required inthe
ecl


daie] nimita &bficdities, Haye Been’ frequently.
vw) in adulterating fome, and-abufing others; Ofthe mate-


. fials uled in Diftillation , and,ótlíerwife by Diftillers, by fach as


‘enly pipet their Ehhe particular, UR regarding neither the
pro: ofit ovéredito? Di iftillers thdoliay. been neceflitated<toifpake

ule of fach. rheit. Hicosci qae apes Veit gbele
griefances “may bet removed for ume to come, the Diredtions
following arè (Gy! to Gérobíérved add pradifed bPAll tbe
Members of this. Company and chein Sacceflons, from time to
time for ever.

¿That no Afcer-worts or Wath (made by Brewers. Y EE
Bleso Fikri, nor matty’ P ulifavory,,’ ot, ónwholefomé Tilts; or
Dregs of Beer or Ale; nor unwholefome or adulterated Wines ,
or Lees of Wines ;' nor Unwholefome Sugar-waters; mufty, un-
fivoury, or” unwholefome returned Beer or Ale; 5p DOr rotten,


corrupt, ot unfayory Früits, Drugs, Spices > ‘Hears . ; Seeds, nor .
any other ill-conditined matérials of what hind foever, Mall -


henceforth ‘be’ diftilled j } extra@ed°or drawriinto fmall- -Spirits,
, or Low-wines, or be any other” wayes ufed, dire&dly or, indi-


re@ily, by any the Members of this Company > or their Succel-'-


fors, at any time hereafter for ever.
“And whereas of fte i times ‘the Smali. Spirits or ‘Low-Wines,,
made and fold, as well inandabout Lindon, as ‘elféwhere i 15 this.
Common-wealch, Have been generally complained of ; > for their


mean, weak , and: poor condition ; whereby many inconveni- -


ences ‘have, faln upon moft of the Disfilers in ‘general; and that.
not 'throbgh the alone practifes offüch, as have no jokt title to,
of intereft ih this.corporation 5 but even by fome of the Difiillers
diémíelies; > who (hot withflanding. their pretences of being ne-


weeflitared:


>


Th Londos-Difilr ` >
eeffitatedthereunto ) have juftly deferved: reproof for. yielding:
to be ACors ina thing: ‘of fuch ill confequence to Diflillers. in: ge=:
neral. Wherefore; that thofe abufcs and diforders may now Ibe
taken away, andthe like prevented for time co.come, the enfaitig
Rulei is duly to be obferved and practifed. i

That no Small-fpirits; or Low-wines, fhall henoefartl be dis
filled; extracted, or made, and beallowed to.be fold, put to fale;
er ufed by any of the Members of the Company, ot their Suecefs
fors: but facivonly; as'out of which; by: one alone re-diftillations:
_ extraction, of operation; may be. produced in quantity y at le: i
one third: part thereof, of good (trong Proof-fpirit ; foch a
reqüited in che Rules eufüisg, for making rich, or bigh Sp lie.
-. Strong-waters, or Zqua-vite; Oc. under fuch pains, penalties. and:
, paüifhmeots;as by the Laws ofthe Common: wealth.jO:diíancery
or Orders ofthe Company, or-otherwife, may be impofgd. or -
infli&ed'on the.contemners » heglecters,. or Pigs. of a
Directions. Mti


PRRLERRRR Fri * PRRRPRRGdd |


Rules Au Directions fie the’ Coni:


94 of Diftillers of London in - general:


But more efpecially for fuch of them; ashow 7 i
dQ, or hereafter ihalhmale Vinegars, OG, i,


x7 Hereas upon due examination it; hath plainly oou d
VV That many infufferable inconveniences have of late falo
upon this: ‘Company, and'their Trade; in general ; by reafon:o£
_ .thedilorderly and abufive expence and imployment of Brewers.
After- worts (called Wáfli ;') Infomauch; thatthereby: not only:
thofe of this Company that have had no hand herein, but even the
Diftillérs themfelves that have been thé Delinquents, have iGtos-
lérablv füffered' both in their Reputation and great decay of;
their Trades;by théfe their alone inconfiderate practifes,For Re-
formation of the prefent diforders and abufes, and future: ipres
: As aa 3 .— vention.


t


PENES TNI


yc 1h London-Difiller: »
vention ofthe like, thefe enfuing Admonitions and Dirc&ions
are ftridtly to be obferved and practifed, viz. —

That no Member or Members of this Company; or their fuc-
ceffors, nor any of them, at any time hereafter, for ever, by any:
way or means whatfoever (directly or indirectly). fhall or mays
ufe, difpofe, convert or itaploy,any After-worts (or Wath,made


by the Brewers, or others) into Vinegar, Beer-eager, or Ále-ea- ,


ger, or either of them; or to or forany other ufe or imploy-
ment whatfoever, except only to diftil che fame into Low-wines,
or Spirits to be rediftilled into Proof fpirit for the ufes aforefaid,
acc ding to the true intent and meaning of chéfe Directions,


n they were apie frees and received into this Incorpora-
tion; ) And will undergo the penalties provided, or to be prox
vided, by the ordinances of this Company, or otherwife, to be.


impofed or infli&ted on che Contemners, Pepai or Oppofers i


- hereof, `


Rule 1.
Provide three vet Tuns(or fmaller Casks ) place ilem ore
decly on fcantlings ; provide good found white Rape, and fuch
well conditioned liquid Materials as are proper for thisufe, what:


fofficeth (not mufty inany cafe.) Then number your Tuns 1,2;3.


Fill Tun, 1, with Rape within fix inches of the Bungue Rop the
Bungue, with Cork or Wood very clofe, and let it Rand , and.in
few dayè it will gather heat ; then being conveniently hot, jfill up
the veffe] within three fiche oftop fall, wich .your liquid ma-


‘~ ‘terials without Dregs; ftopit clofeagain. Andat that inftant,


in like manner as befere, fill Tun 2, with Rape, after a few days,
that will be hot asthe former was 5 ” then finding it conveniently
hot, draw off Tun t, and put it into Tun 2,and ftop both clofe :

Acthe prefent fill Tun 3, with Rape, and ‘order it in every re-
fpect, as:you did the former, And when Tuns, 1 and 3 , have
gathered heat fufficient, fillup Tun 1; with frethliquor ( as at


firft)and draw off Tun 25ind put it into Tun 3,and fo let Tus 2512
gather fufficient heat again ; then draw off Tun 1, and put it in=;


. to Tun 2. Andat that prefent, youmay draw off Tuna, and -
uem itinto a flore-Cask ; for having paffed pe umes through


the
\


LI


they. and every of them refpe&t their Oaths by them taken —


i


v4 The London-Diftiller. pe


- "the Ripe, itis thereby become to be good merchantable Ware.
And fo in like order, fapply-one Veffel from anothers till you
have finifhed your work according to Art.
When all your liquid Materials are fpent , fo that you have
no.more to Continue your work ; chen befuré your Tuns ftand
meer full, till-youare provided “of more Liquor, to put upon
vour Rape; for if your Rape (flanding dry) thould wax hobyou -
haying nothing proper to fupply the fame, your Rape will foon
decay, and be utrerl y-fpoyled, ;
‘In Summer or warm weather, the Rape will gather fafficient
_ beatintwo or ds days; bat in AV inter it will equite
time. : i


~ exo Rale ig I 2
Take 20 Quee of good found Mault, convert it’ into 100
Barrels of good ferviceable Ware ; (at. the mot) you muft allow
| to this quantity, good fweet Hops. at leaft $6 pound. And be- .
ing well' wroüght according to Art; putitinto fweec Casks,
({weet Oyl-Buts are beft ) fill chem within 8 inches of the .
Bungues; (being laid upon Scantlings in the Sun) let not the head |
work over at the Bungues, and it will fink to the bottom ; Pre-
pare little covers of wood fit to cover the Bang ues, and larger co-
vers to lay over them, to defendit from Rain falling into the :
Cask, Let the Bungues ftand open only, when the Sun fhines.
hot upon the Cask ; bat in clofe or wet weather, and miBüpe let
both coversbealwayes kept on. | 4:
‘When the firft Head of the, Liquor is fala, then draw it from
. the Lec, into another clean {weet Cask ; and fo afterward from
Cask to Cask, as.there fhall be caufe still it’come to perfection ::
Then draw it off into another found Cask, and fo honfe it for
ufe. E
The largeft Cask are the fitteft to honfe, and keep Wares i in
for fore, - t
Af your Wares grow long and copy, then put a fit quantity of
Allumintoit, work it well. genita biden Ama And it
‘will. grow fhortagtinr; i E ERAS OMEN


| THe


eA


p
BM ae


Ad UM Bg
LONDO IGDISTILLER
OS Ed Directions for Preparing,


" Compofing , Diflilling., Extracting, and -
1 Heind of rich: Spirits, ap rong aig ak
Aqua. vitzs,-&c. i iue


3EH KP. I. OfAana vitæ smem fe


Be


Theightater quantity.
T MBI Proof- fpirit ro'Gallons ; Anifeeds bruida one
A pound 5 diftil- them into Nod Prodf fpirit bcp is to
"Art.

The leffer quantity. a
; Take fuh Proof-fpirit 1 gallon; Kilesdsbeaited E ginek
'4 drams ; difti them intó firong Proof-{pitic according to Ait


me HA P. AT. Acqua-viteesthe econ eee 9 Cer dae )
1 D uer 3


The greater quantity. — T
; Take ftrong Proof-fpirit what fufficeth , Anifceds à pond,
Carraway-feeds, Coriander-feeds, ana 4 ounces ; difil them B into.
trong Pregt-fpititaccording to Art. "n
j^ T Be leffer qautity, ^
Take ftrong Proof-fpirit 1 gallon , A rifesds 3 outices: hda
Quarter, Caraway-feeds , Coriander-feeds , three drams ; difil —
‘them into ftrong RU according tó Art. -


í


CHAP.


CHAP. IIL. Of appa i
i The greater. quantity. à
` Take ftrong Proof-f. pirit 10 gallons; Anifeeds the beft itd
five pound ; diftil them into ftcong Proof.fpirit; dulcifie it ac-
cording to Art with five pound of white Sugar.
The leffer quantiy,

"Take ftrong Proof-fpirit what fulliceth ; Anifeeds the bet.
bruifed 8 ounces, diftil them into ftrong Proof fpivits ; dulcifieic
according to Art ‘with 8 ounces of white Sugars.
^ Anifeed water Arewgtbenesh the Stomach; breaketh flegm , ond tla
digeffion. i.
yr is alfo excelent againft the Tiftck , and putet of! breath 5 and a=
gainft wind i in the S tomacla arid Body.


CHAP. IV. Of Angelica H Water. E


The greater quantity,

Take ftrong Proof-fpirit what fufficech, Angelica roots 4
pound and a half, or Angelica, hearb green 7 pound and a half ,

. Anifeeds 16 ounces; flicethe roots thin, orbruife them and the
feeds, diftil them into ftrong Proof-fpirits; SEE "s five
pound of white Sugar, i

The leffer quantity.

Take ftrong Proof-fpirit 8 pound, Angelica roots 2 ounces
and a quarter, or Angelica hearb green 12‘ounces; Anifeeds
1 0unce 5 drams ; flicethe roots chin, orbruife chem and the
feeds ; diftil them into ftrong Proof-{piric ; dalcifie with 8 ounces?
of Sugar.

Angelica water is Pe cordial, flrengtbeneth the Stomach andina
waod parts y and i a good prefervatiue againft the Plague aud other ine

-fegins z


CHAP, V. 0f. Wormwood ey,
The greater quantiij.


Take ftrong Prooffpirit zo gallons, Anifeeds bruifed one
l Bbb- pound


‘The London-Difig; — T y E


gs
ko TH dbohdei DA |
. pound, Wormwood common , leaves and feeds, fiript, and dry
-. 2 pound; d:ftil chem; into ftrong Pelee to Art;
dulcifie with white Sugar 5 pound.
The legen quantity.


-


bTikej ficóng (Pho of: :foizie vihat father " ofadftedi bruifed -


ronnce aid: $ drams s "Wioriiwood: common y leaves and feeds!


ftripr, and dry 3. ouncesand:an ‘half; difil them into’ ftrong’


Proof iris according to uis dukifie with white ugar p a.
pound: | itardw 3i oU n


Wüisinbd valet pE g ani breaketh winds Mlle Yir: “bine


deretb Vomiting, provoketh appetitéy and firengiherieth the Stomach; 25:


proceeding of d we easfe.


b AH. «


"CHAP. vL Ld dn


WE brggeater quantity, | ^ 112
Take firong Brook: fpirit what fufficeth ; es Bg d 3
pound, Anifeeds 1 pound; :diftil'them: into ftrong Proof-fpiric
i xm tmb dalasini b white: Sugar what: Jj eg
á EE aa b c Ühelefferiguantiiy. ó 2 c
ianari 8'pound» Hearb beter di 4 ounces-
ep hem Apigtedex once diams; diti] cheii into m
Piobf[oirit according to Art; dulcifie pitti wte Sugar eight.
ounces. SAT usb
, Balpeoeatercje goed. utin Ariki: of tbe Mia; UE viry
` confortable fou yomen i inthe: stime of their painat xn a n ipe , ug
the fooney. and. fafer provoking of a fgeedy delivery:^ i


ee ig alfo a Cordial and firengtbenthrtlia eant 17 ei mda T ib abs
M VS B Gor 19 CHAR: Ms «T R Df Mix ater: T wi

adh sese T edt Ruinga setis: Sarg leen bit vade n a 4

© The greater quantity. "


Take ftrong Proof-fpirit 10 gallons, Spear- Mint dry 3 es
Anifeeds bet 1 pound; 5. diftil.tliemünto rong Proof-fpitit ; dul-
cifie with white Sugar $ pound.

"Tbe leffer'quaxti
5 prinio Preise i ` Spear vane iy four


i ounces
$


‘alfo a great Cordial. ; and" ia very. de HAN pains of tbe bead-


*


E)


Ti Xndoh«Djpil: SEL xe

ounces and three quarters , -Anifeed 1 ounce ands drams y diftif

thers into Trong: Proof-rpirit ; dikifie with white Sugar what

. fnffcech.
Mint water comfortetl ind firengibeneth the Stomach, Heart, Liver,

and. UR Mijas Vang Mode gn, egumft voiitingi DN


He boa wn CHA p. VII Of tefie m.
3 The. prelo gants 22299000 $ oa
Take ber Proof: fpirit whac: foficethi oR ately eave
. and dry 300unces, Anifeeds of che beft. 16 ounces; ‘diftilthe
into (trong oor Ed 5 dubeifie ND me Sogar, Mon uos
Sun. : j
o The leffer eee loabsatta A CP atoot
“Take frodi Tooti 8: pound; "Rofendry. ftripe and dry ;
3 ounces, Anifeedsof the beftt ounce g drams; diftil chem MO
ftrong Proof-fpirit ; dulcifie with white Sugár Bounces. © ^^
Rofemary water is very good apainft Dyfertter y or Blondy fius paid.
ing of a cold caufe, either drunk, ‘or three fosonfuls thereof ‘adminifired
in a convenient Glifter. d
Tt alfo preferveth from vomiting , firengtheneth t the Stomach , quick-
neth the Sp ll; andi pues the Brain. $7


C H A P. dx sof Limon or Orange Wee,
` The greater quantity, 0 at Wi ssi

Take trong: Broof-fpiti ‘what fofficeth;; ‘Limon or Orange
-pils dry 30 ounces; Anifeeds of che beft 16 ounces ; *brüife the pils -
and feeds 5 diftil chem into ftrong Proofs apirit ctofdisig; to Att,
‘dulcifie with white Supar's pound: : ai M RASE
Duc e pfer aane ti LV W ma opa = <
- "Take strong Proof-fpiric 1 gallon; Limoa or’ O-ange 'gifs dry
gouncess Anifeeds of the beft 1 ounce y ‘deaths; brüife the pils
and feeds ; difti chem into fttong Proof-fpitit according t to ‘Art NO X
-duicifie wich: white Sugar 8 ounces) ^. ^ ; (0301

© Einoh water firengphenetl and revive ie — Spirits Lid niet
the Stomach, and à a gredi Copdiah > 1

wh alfo vpenetb ‘eb frictions, exceedingly breaketh vindi the Stiinach
“is ap am healing Bal farn io all theintwatd Parts, and wa gréat-eftoritive
to mans Nature, ^ Bbb2 C HAP.


The London-Diffiller.
SRA P. X. of dis d Water the left.
ovo The greater gudntity, T
“Take rane Proof-fpirit what tufficeth, Spear-Mint ài Lo-
vagerootsdry, Anifeeds of each 1 pound, Calamus Aromaticus,
Ginger, {weet Fennel feeds, Imperatoria roots, Wormwood dry:
and itript, of ech 8,ounces; Caraway feeds, Coriander feeds,of
each 6 ounces;Cummin feeds,Cloves, of each three ounces; bruife:
|..them that are to be bruifed :: diftilchern into ftrong Proo[-fpirit
Sedes to Art; dulcifie with white Sugar 5 pound.
+ Fel fer quantity.

"Take ftrong Proof-fpi.it 8 pound , Spear-Miats dry, Lovage
toots.dry, Anifeeds of «ach 1 ounce 5 drams ; Calamus Zromaticuw,
„Ginger, {weet Fennel feeds, Imperatoria roots, Wormwood dry
- and fiript, of each 7-drams; Caraway feeds, Coriander feeds, of
each 5 dram:;Cummin feeds, Cloves;of ec ch 2 drame and an he if;
bruife chem that are to be bruifed, diftil chem into ftrong
‘Proof-fpirit, according to Art; dülcifie with white Sugar $.

ounces.


e AP. XI. Stomach Water e greners


oe Tbe greater. quantity,
Take ftrong Proof-fpirit. 10 gallons» Calams Aromaticus fix.
ounces 3, Guaiacum green Bark, Aven roots dry, Gal ngale o£
each 4 ounces; Citron pils dry; Orange pils dry , wbite Cina-
mon, of each threeounces ; Wormwood Common dry , Worm- A
- ‘wood Roman dry, Spear-Mint, Rofemary cops, Colilmar y,Sweez
Marjoram, Wild Thyme, all dry; of each 20unces ; Nutmegs,
Cinamon, of each, 2 ounces and an half; Cubebs , Catdamums,
of each tounce and. an half; {weet Fenncl. feeds, Coriander
- feeds, of each.5 ounces; Anifeeds a pound and half; bruife
them all that are to'be bruifed ; . diffil them into trong Proof-
Spirit ;..dulcifie with white Sugar ten pound according to Att.
The. leffet. quansity.
Take firong Proof- fpirit what fufficechy Calamus p es $
drams, Guaiacum, green Bark, Aven roots. dy, 3 Gilde of


ip E
E


The London:Bifihe: i n
-each 4 ounces ; Citron pils dry, Orange pils dry, white Cina-
mon, of esch E drams ard a quarter; Wormwood Common `
. dry , Wormwood Roman dry, Spesr-Mint, Rofemarytops, ~
Coltmary , fweet M:rjoram , Wild Thyme, all dry , of each à
dram and half; Nutmegs, Cinamon, of each 2 drams; Cubebs,
Cardamums, ofeach adram and a quarter ; fweet Fennel feeds,
“Coriander feeds, of each halfan ounce ; Anifeed 2 ounces three
drams: Bruife them all that areto bebruifed, diftilthem into
ftrong Proof-fpirit ; dulcifie with white Sugar 16 ounces accor-
ding to Art, -


*


$ : x HAP. XI L Marjoram Waler


The greater quantity,
Take rong Proof-fpirit what fufficeth, fweet RA «mE
3 pound, Anifeeds 16 ounces, Caraway 4 ounces, Calamus Aro-
` ` maticis 6 ounces; bruife them , diĝil and dulcifie with white Su-
; ` gar what fufficeth according to Art,
The leffer quantity.

Take rong Proof-fpirit 1 gallon, {weet Marjoram dry five
ounces, Anifeeds 1 ounce y drams; Caraway 3 drams and a quar-
ter, Czlamus Aromaticus y drams, bruife them , diftil and dul-
cifie with white Sugir 8 ounces according to Art. ;

Marjoram water is good againft the infirmities of the Liver and
Spleen, caufeth freenefs breathing, and firengtheneth: tke Stomach and
ix ward parts.


€ H n p, XII I. Batok.
The greater quantity,

Take ftrong Proof-fpirit ‘ro gallons ,. Anifeeds E pound,.
Cloves 2 ounces, Nutmeg, Ginger, Caraway feeds, of each
four ounces difil them into ftrong Proo(-fpirit according to
Att; then addtothe diftilled water Licorice Spanifh , Riifins .
folis of each 2 poünd; bruife the Licorice'and. Raifins; dulcifie
with brown Sugar s pound; ftir chem well together, ‘and fo fet
it ftand ten daycs.,; andthen (being ne drawi it off abd keep.


it for ufe :


ih bondei Di ifii:


The Jeffer quantity.

Ad dig EORR what fufüiceth , Anifeeds I ounce
$ drams, Cloyes a dram and half x Nutmeg.. Ginger, Caraway -
feeds, o gach. 3 drams, difil chem into krong Preof-fpirit, ac-
cording to Art 5 thenadd to the diftilled water Licorice Spanifh,
Rohn folis; ot each 3 ounces a dram and half; bruife the Liro-
rice and Raifin$; dulcifie with brown Sogar Ogre ftir.tliem-
well together, and fo leti ic ftand tea dayes, | and hen (being fine)
draw it off and keep ic for ufe;

Jquebacb cureth the infirmities of the Lungs, warmeib the $ imacb
and Dii expectoration.


C HAP. XIV Balin Water ER


The greater quantity,

"Take ftrong Pont {pirit what fufficeth , Balgenine fa two
pound, Anifeeds beft 1 pound, Caraway feeds 40unces , Limon
pils dry Bounces; bruife chem that are to be bruifed , diftil
them into Proof- igi dalcifie with white apre e» pound
aeeoe Arbi s T sto:

fe befer quantit Ja [2555]

+ Take flrong Bhat rgallon.s Baifamint dry 3 ounces a
hi es half, Anifeeds beft one.ounce 5.dramss Caraway. feeds
3 drams; Liman pilsdry fix drams andan half; bruife, them that
-nare to be bruifed.;. difti chem into. proot-fpirit , salcifie with
white Sugar 8 ounces according to Art.
Balfamint water coriforterb T TD and ee wind, °


CHAD. xV. "Réf fli.


A ON, Lhe greater. quantity. qn 3
Jit Rrong ig Proof fpirit 10.gallons. Camda of ds be 8
en Cloves 2 ounces, Nutmegs, Ginger, Caraway feeds , of
fd ounces, „Marigold; flowers, Anifeeds ipf each 16 ounces
uife.them, jai them.into; rong; Proof.fgirit accordingito
thén add:to. the, aitulied wate Licoried So ani thy? pound,
ui olig, M a Sugars of each. 5. Pendd HIR ed Sandens four
“Ounces; bruife the Sy and Raifins , ftir them well, toge-


ar $. c her
r^ | cdd s : t >


Li


$
+


The Éosdonbpofit à


ther, and let tthenj fand: aa diens: eee beige iy be
driwn for nfe, 2% tafliorb 11403 :
The Mf quai.
Take krong Proof-fpirit. wat! fofficeth , Cinamon, of the
beft 6 drams and a half, Clovesa dramand half, Nutmegs, Gin-


. ger, Caraway feeds of.eách:3 drams,: Marigold flowers, Ani-


feeds, of-eachim-ounce dnd § dams bruife theni diftil/them in- —
to krong Proof-fpiritaccordingtó.Art; then add co the diffil=’ _
zh :water;dLicorice. Spadifh; air ounte sl dears ; :Rafifis- folis j'

Browm Sagatyi\ofeach Sonndes): Red Sanders 3 dránis 2 braife
the Licorice and Raifins, ftir them well together, and lettheni?
fand twelve preh puhoi boing clear'i it may. be drawn for
ufe : f


D nai


s This Rola falls is ae ‘ageing cal nfs of the Som, belpetb ?


digi dnd expellett wind. ¢ JINEN 09 191 ES : ams uo oz sau?
ArÉ 012231519278 diiwo1 E. ub bas ie qna iios
SCHA PS XV. Aiboa i Vip maaa


ATI a


das. 42, ts F pate entity. vista Als gi
"Take pna win ha nt aC hivediofehe ben i
yo ounces» Anifeeds 16 ounces , diftil them into uu Proof:
fpirit dulcifie with wibite Sägen y pouad] % UA HZ
The leffer quanntity.
Take ftrong Proof-fpirit t gallons Gjoves of the bek 1 ounce,


- -Anif&cds: 3: ouncela ash yy deg ras:i (difti cherg! deo fao;
- fpiri.]a dulici f ewi ce Ssiga A8 ouncess 2209! EWIE bnaód
- Glove water helpetb digeftct bree swirls pletikets Orin y Shad i


forteth the Heart, and firimpàtneismigeb) Liver and al the inward


padasi lanna Tasow RN 2808 apaadi gao
it bns 93nfüo dsshssliaA ceras ‘bg abegi yawa1a0 e not.’
AEQG i233 JQHAPs OWI se ge che mania lib t panes
299000 8
TON. i The greatenghantify.\: v3 nog Ui THe Vitis


Take i Proofi ropahlons’ AC itciuihof the Barry
pound, Anifeeds 10 ounces; diftil them into Proof-fpirit accor--


: ding to Att, dulcifie with white Sugar 7 pound and a half.


The le ffer quanity. -
Take iren Proof- fpirit what fufficetb; Cinamon of dé bet
8 ounces


Peete ET Ss ee ee 4 NES


E 4 j The: London-Difliler.-


8 ounces, Anifeeds 1 ounce; diftil them into Proof-fpirit accor-
ding. ta Arc ducifie with white Sugir 12 ounces.


iof HAP, XV i IN: Cinamon water Proper,
s Tbe greater quantity,

Take ‘rong Proof fpirit what foficeth Cinamon beft po
tempounds 5; diftil them into Proof-fpirit according to Art, take
white: Sugar 12. pound:and a half ; Ro(e-water four pound;
make; phem: intog: à a Syrups and dulcifie therewith, according
foc AES: basis]

quer leffer quantity. j

Take ftrong Proof-fpirit 1 gallon Cinamon beft large 16
ounces; difti them into Proof fpirit according to Art, take white
Sugar 20 ounces, Rofe water 6 ounces 3 drams ;- make. them in» `
to fyrup ; and dulcifie therewith according to Art. -

Cinamen water is good againft loathing ef the Stomach, and a fiinking
breath.

It alfo firengebencth the Heart, Liver, mock. and Spleet and en.
bib eh the Preemie Sines i


we H A P. X I X, Sweet Fennel fe Water. jli |


T be greater quantity. :

Take Es Proof-fpirit xo:.gallons > fweet Fennel i feeds five
. pound, Caraway feeds 4 ounces, Anifeeds 16 ounces; difti] them
: into Proof-fpirit ;: dulcifie with white Sugar s pound.

The leffer quantity.

Take {trong Proof-fpirit what fufficeth, fweet Fennel feeds —
8 ounces, Caraway feeds 3 drams, Anifeeds an ounce and five
dram; ; diftil them into Proof-fpirit; dulcifie with white Sugar `
8 ounces.

Fennel water is good againfi the naufeoufnefs of the Stomach end eafeth
the pain eon digefteth F legm and expelleib wind. 3


-


CHA P.


The! Lodo Difi;


CHAP. XX. Mangli Wae, 2


die Breater quantity.

Take rong Proot.ipine what fufficeth , ;Mareold- dotes
new gathered, pickt clean; 2 pecks heaped; ‘bruife them,‘ fweee -
Fennel feeds, Anifeeds,of each 10 ourices; diftil them into ftrong
Proof-fpirit, dulcifie with white fagar five pound.

T be leffer qeantity.

Take ftrong Proof-fpirit'r gallon, Marigold flowers new ga-
thered, pickt clean, what fufficeth ; bruifetliet; feweet Fennel
feeds, Anifeeds of each 1 ounce ; diftil théti into: trong Proof-
fpirit, dulcifie with white fugar 8 ounces. ;
fain water "e iai ^ inwards parts; nd ir "pred againft in it- :

dg cw


-CHA P. XXI. — Wer. dba


di t i


The ghontir quantity. x
“Take ftrong Proof-f pirit ro gall ons,Garaway feeds 30 ounces,


Anifeeds 16 owaees ; Rofemary dry 4 ounces, Limon pile drys —


Cloves of each 3 ounces ; diftil them into ftrong Proof fpirit a ace
E © Art » dalcifie with white fugar five pound.
Ho Thelefer quantity...

Take ftrong Proof-fpitit what füfficeth, Caraway feeds three
ounces, Anifeeds 1 ouncé, ; Rofematy dty 3 drams,Limon pils dry,
Cloves of each 2 dramsand an half’ diftil them into” Proof-fpi-
rit according to Art, dulcifie with white fugar 8 ounces. ^" ~”

‘Caraway water is profitable againft the-cold grief oft the Stomach , and
Bons € them and breaketh wind, - e : Te


“CHAP, XXIL Ming ae a


(JU VU


i232 50


(019 The gredter quantity.
Take tong Prostfpire what füfficerh ; Nütieg 20 iiie
Anifeeds” 10 ounces 5 bruife them, diftil them’ into g PRERE
pido to Ait, difcifie with white fugit j pound,


Ccc Sos The


a LR LLLA lite EN SEE E GAA N a : NS ias
46 The London-Difiller.:
The leffer quantity, — -

Take ftrong Proof-fpirit 1 galion,Nutmegs belt 2 2 ounces, Ani-
feeds 1 ounce; bruifethem, diftil them into Proof-fpirit accore
ding to Art, dulcifie withiwhice Sugar 8 ounces,

„Nutmeg water comforteth the Spirits. difcuffeth wind, aha the
Stomach; caufeth a jweet breath, and preveketb Urine.


Sài HA P. XXI i I,  Fretiom paters.


` Tihe greater quantity.
` Take flcong. Proof-fpirit ten gillons;
the roots of Enula Cmpana Cyprus
... Ayens Calamus Aromaticus:
. Angelica.” Saffafras ofeach 5 ounces s


E Zedoarj, Galingale; of eàch four ounces, Caffa lignea , Ligna.


Rhodium, Yellow Sanders of each 3 ounces, Citron pils dry, O-
range pils dry , of each 6ounces, ‘Cinamon White, Natmegs,
Mace, Ginger, of each five ounces, Cinamon beft 20 ounces.
Cloves, Cardamums, Cubebs, of each 2 ounces and a half , Sweer
 Chervile feeds, Bafil feeds, of each.3 ounces andan half; Cori-
ander feeds, {weet Fennel feeds. of each. ten ounces», Anileeds 20
ounces; -bruife them, diftil them into Proof: dpirit., and dulcifie
with fine Sugar 15 pound according to Art : Let it ftand.tillic be
fine, then draw it off, and add Musk one dram : qoo Die 4,
) drams; s then leti it. iy and. draw i it for ufescccc-
Take ftrong Proof. ips what fofficech,
. the roots of Enula Campana, . Cyprus
Avens.. os 2 Calamus Aromaticus: «w.

;  Angelica- bs Saffafras, of each half an ounce 5
Zedoary; Galingale, ofeach 3 drams,Cafiia lignea,Lignum Rho-
dium, Yellow Sanders, of each x drams and ap half, Citron pils-
dry , Orange pilsdry, of each 4 drams and 3 quarters; Cina--
mon | White, Nutmegs, Mace., Ginger,,of each half an ounce,
Cinamon bella ounces, Cloves; Cardamums, Cubebs, of each 2
drams, {weet Chervile feeds, Bafil. feeds x of each, three drams,
Coriander feeds, {weet Fennel: feeds. 5, of, each x.ounces Anifeeds.
A o REARS bruile them, diti them i into proof-fpirit ; and “ar:

, ane:


The London-Diftiller:
«ifie with fine Sugar 24 ounces according to Art, Jet it Rand tilt
it be fine; then draw it off, and add Mask fix grains; Ambergriefe
24 grains; then let it clear and draw it for ufe.

-Pretiou weter is gcod againft the Plague and Malignant Feaveys: It
alfo ccmforteth the Spirit, firengtb.netb the Heart, preferveth the id
and relievetb languifbing Nature.


‘CHAP. XXIV. Wind Water


The greater quéntity ioi

Take Roig Proof-fpiric what fufficeth , Enülà Giana
roots dry Anifeeds of each 1 pound, CHAN roots, Bark ofthe
roots of Day tree, or as much leaves, Saffafras with the Bark,
Cinamon white; of each-6 oütitess C iüs Aramaticus, Orange
pils, dry of each 4 ounces, Clary, Red Mints, ‘Calamint, Ele
der flowers; Camomile flowers of each s ounces, {weet Fennel
feeds, Caraway feeds, Angelica feeds of each 3 ounces and an
“half, Coriander feeds, Cardamums, Cubebs, Grains of Para-
dife,.Cloves, Ginger, of each 2 ounces anda half, Pepper long
and whice of each xo drams ; bruife ‘them all’ groffely, “diftil
them into ftrong Proof-fpitit according £o Art, dulcifie with -
white Sugar 10 pound, draw it for ufe when it is perfectly

clear.
; Thel ffe gnantity,

Take ftrong Proóf-fpirit 1 gallon, Enula Campana roots dry, .
Anifeeds,of each 1 ounce § drams, Cyprus roots, Barks of the
root of Bay tree, or asmuch leaves, '"Siffafras wich the Bark, Ci-
namon white, of each 4 drams 3 quarters, Calamus Aromaticus,
Orange pils dry, of each 3 drams, Clary, Red Mints, Calamint,
Elder flowers, Camomile flowers; of each half an ounce , fweee
Fennel feeds, Caraway feeds, Angelica feeds, of each 3 drams, Co-
riander feeds, Cardamums,Cubebs, Grains of Páradife , Cloves,
Ginger, of each 2 drams, Pepper long and white, of each 1 dram,
bruife them all groffely ; ; diftil them into ftrong Proof-fpirit ace
cording to Arc, dulcifie with white Suen m ounces, ee it
for ufe when it is perfectly dear? o1 13


` T Coens? CHAP.


Ld The. ayo
CH AP, XXV, Water to procure: Smet.


\ Thegreater quantity. 3

"Tale; dan. Prootapiri: 10 gallons.; Batter-bur-roots drys.

2 pound, Valerian, (common) roots, Anifeeds, of each one -
pound, Vincetoxicum roots, Saffafras roots , with the Bark of ;
each 8-ounces, Angelica hearb dry; Carduus Benedi&ns , Great
Valerian Hearb and Roots, all dry; Scordium, of each twelve
ounces, Cowflip flowers, Marigold flowers, of each 10 ounces;
Juniper Berries-20 ounces; bruife them ‘all,’ diftil them into
: Proof-fpirit according to Art 3. dulcifie with het Sofar ten .


pound. ail
B The leffer quantity...
“Take. frong Proof. {pirit what fufficech, Botter- Sur see i
3 ounces a dram and half , Valerian (common) roots Anifeeds, .
of each 1.ounce. 5: drams, Vincetoxicum roots; Saffafras roots .
with the Bark, of each 6 drams anda half; Angelica hearb dry,
Carduus Benedi&us. sb Great Valerian. hearb and Roots, all drys.
 Scordiutm, of sach.one ouncea dramand half; Cowflip flowers,
Marigold flowers, of each: one ounce , Juniper Berriesz ounces 3
bruife them afl, di&il them into Proof-fpirit according to Art 5 .
dulcifie with white Sugar 16 ounces. _


Vib 21007 i eBay: XVL. | Safaira


Thee ita quantity,
"Take. rong Proof-fpirit what fufficeth pest berries two-.
pound, Enula Campana roots dry.1 pouad, Calamus Aromati- . -
cus, Galingale, of each 4 ounces Wormwood, Spear Mint, Red -
Mint all dry,of each 2 ounces andan half; Caraway fées, Ange-.
lica feeds „Of each 2 ounces, Saffafras roots with the Bark, white -
Cinamon, of each. 3 ounces.,-Nutmegs, Mace, Cloves, Ginger, of;
each 1 ounce, Red Popy. flower 4 pound, Anifeeds 2 pound and `
an half, bruife them all, difti them i into M ie a :
dulcifie with white Sugar 1o pound...
o Tbe leffer rise ide
| Fake rong Proof-fpirit I ellon, Juni per berries 3 meas
ram


J
Y


fh Londoa-Difiile: T FS


dram and haff, Enula Campana roots dry 1 ounce $ drams,Ca-
lamus Aromaticus , Galingale of each 3 drams , Wormwood,
Spear Mint, Red Mint, all dry, of each 2 drams, Caraway feeds,
Angelica feeds, of each a dram and a half, Saffatras Roots with
the Bark, White Cinamon,.of each two drams and an half, Nut-
megs, Mace, Ginger, Cloves of each 3 quartersof a dram, Red
Poppy flowers 6 ouncesand a half, Anifeeds 4 ounces ; bruife
them all; diftil them into ftrong Proof pirit,dulcifie with white:
Sugar 16 ounces.


>» GHAR, mars Scorbuical Waters:


The greater quaniiy.
"Take ftrong Proof-fpirit 10 gallons , Horle Raddith roots-
dry 2pound, Esula Campana roots: dry.» Anifeeds of. each :
3 pound, Water E

Winter ¢ Creffes,

Garden
Taragon, Balfamint, Scurvigtafs < ( Garden) Wormwood
Brookelime ; Trefoile ("Water ) Sweet had « ha it fix ..

Sunce, Arfmart 8 ounce,
à "Muftard
RO deb c ad of each 5:0unces,. `
ba AD Silvii ad
nore RFO
p Onge ¢ pils ay ; pt
Cinamon White. Mace, of each 4 ounces: bruife them all; difil
them into flrong Proof-fpirit according to Art, dulcifie with-
white Sugar what fufficeth for ules take 7 parts of this Spirit,
and i part of jüyce of Limons (or more) mingle ther together, F
and dulcifie with white Sagar what fufficeth, -
©" The leffer quantity, °°
Take Rrong Proof-fpirit what fufficeth ; Horfe Raddiffrroots ř:
dry, 3 ounces a dram and half, Enula: EC Epit roots drys Mie:
feeds, of each 1 once $ drams, at ag
' Water A eT ES
Winter bouts.
^. Garden


35


Cc; Tas


-


os CONNMSANE —


Tarragon,;Balfamint,Scurvygrats(Garden) Wormwood, Brook-


dime, Trefoi! (Water) Sweet Chervile , of cach half an ounce
‘and three quarters of a dram, Arfmart three e “ge an ounce


and | 'half a dram,


- Muftard Lena |
Eu of each 2 drams and an half;
Raddith
Citron

i Orange pits dry,


Cinamon White Mace, of each 3 drams and à quarter; bruife
them all ; diftil them into ftrong Proof. fpi:it, according to Art s
dulcifié with white Sugar 1 pound for ufe ; take 7 parts of this
fpirit, and 1 part of juyce of Limons(or more) mingle them to-
gether, and dulcifie with white Sugar what fofficeth.


CHAP. XXVIII. Plague Water.
$ Tbe greater quantity.

Take ftrong | Proof-fpirit what füfficetl Batter-bur-roots
dry 1 pound, Garden Valerian roots dry; Compion Valerian
roots dry , Angelicaroots, Imperatoria; Gentian, Enula Cam-


pana, Snakegrafs roots, of each fix ounces, Contra Yerva,


Zedoary , Galingale, of each 4 ounces, Rue leaves dry,
White Horehound, Scordium , Garduus Benedictus, of each
5 ounces, Elder-Aowers Lavender, Maces of each.3 ounces , Ci-
tron pils dry , Juniper berries , ofeach 8 ounces, Green Wal-
nuts wich the husks 1 pound Verus Triacle, Mithridates of each
2.ounces ; Anifeeds bet a pound and half, Camphiré 1 ounce ;
diflil them into. trong Proof-fpirit according to Art dulcifie
with white Suecr. 10 pounds: for ufe; let the party infected. take .
of this water 1 ounce, mingled with. warm. Poffet drink , (or.
any water proper in that cafe) and be kept very warm and fweac
well thereon, «
The lafen. quantity: 5 ;
"Take frrong Proof-fpirit 1 gallon, Batterbur. roots. dry one
ounce and § drams, Garden Valerian roots dry, Common Vale-
rian roots dry » Angelica roots» Imperatoria , Gentian, Enula
1 Campana»


The London-Diflbr. | — tk
Campana , Snake-grafs roots, of each half an ounceand three
. quarters ofa dram; Contra Yerva, Zedoar y; Galingale, of each.
3 dramsanda quarter, Rue leaves dry, White Horehound, Scor-
dium, Carduus Benedictus, of each halfan ounce, Elder fow-
ers, Lavender; Mace, of each. two drams and an half, Citron
pils dry , Juniper berries, of each 6-drams and a half, Greer,
Walnuts with the husks 1 ounce 5 drams, Venus Triacle, Mithri-
date , of each a dram and half, Anifeeds beft 2° ounces 3 drams
andan half, Campbire 3.quarters of a dram ; diftil into ftrong
Proof-fpirit aecording to Art; dulcifie with white Sugar what
fufficeth ; for ufe ; Jet the party infected take of this water one
eunce mingled with warm Poffer drink, (or any water
proper in that cafe) and be kept very warm , and fweat well
thereon.


CHA P. XXIX Lavender Water,


The greater quantity. $
Take flrong Prodfsfpirit ro gallons,Lavender leaves dry three
pound, Lavender flowersidry 2 pound., Mace half apound, on
Nutmegs 1 pound, Lavender Cotten dry 2 pound, Stcachados
halfa pound ; bruife themthat are to be bruifed, diftil them
| into Proof- fpicit according to Art , dulcifie with ‘white Sugar
what fufficeth..
The leer quenity. :

- "Fake ilcpog Proof. ee what fufficeth Lavender "ois: UR
4,ources 3 quarcers and half a dram; Lavender flowers dry,three
ounces a dram and half. Mace 6-drams and a half, Nutmeg one

ounce $- drams, Lavender Cotten dry 3 ounces a dram and half,
Steechados 6 drams and a half; bznife chem-thatare to be bruifedy
dittil them iato Proof-fpitic according toArt sduleifie with white:
Sugar 15 ounces.

Lavender water belpeth the pains of the Herb sr am dpi à
pin and petis the fpeech lofts: A


y:


o> CBAR.


ere 7 ee d T Y "ny |
A The Londòn-Difhiler.
Ke oH AP, RX. Sage n alera


4 The greater wantitj. itia :
l Take Boris risas what fufficerh,® Lees s lude
pound, Red Sage dry 2 pound, Lavender flowers,'Sage flowers,
of éackt 1: pound; Lavender Cotten dry, Southernwood dry ; of
each $ ounces., Nutmegs ten.oünces; bruife or beat. them as
“ismok proper; diftil chem ‘into Proof. fpirit. accorditig to Att;
une n white Sugar what fuificeth.
“The leffer. quantity.

Take: trong "Proof-fpirit y gallon; Great Sage dry 4 ounces.
$ quarters and half aidram, Red Sage dry 3 ounces a dram and a
half, Lavender flowers, Sage flowers, ofeach 1 ounce a halfiand
-3 dram, Lavender Cotten dry, Soutliern wood dry, of each fix
drams anda half, Nucmegs'what fufficeth: Bruife or beat them
as is moft proper ; diftil them into Proof-fpirit according to Art,
dulcifie with white Sugar t6 ounces...
^ Sageipwater ir good for fech as are of acold: and fieghhatique confit
le Cs Hn fach as are — and: dull of firin PN


a HAP, XXXI. Ros folis Pipe


The greater quantity, PW

"Take -— Proof-fpirit 10:gallons, Ros folis aredi in due
feafon, and clean picke 4 pound, ‘Juniper berries 3 pound, Saffa-
fras roots with the Bark , Caraway feeds; of each'four‘ounces,-
‘Marigold flowers 1 pound, Anifeeds Y pound and an half ; bruife
them thatare to be bruifed ; diftil- them into ftrong: Proof-
Spirit ‘according to^ Art; Take: hereof 7' pounds add there-
- to one; pound of water treated of inthe23 Chapter, dulcified,
Licorice bruifed one pound, dulcifie with white Sugar ten
pounds Xf yon add none of the aforefaid water , then in ftead
thereof take Musk x dram , Ambergriefe 3 drams; ‘colour it with
‘the tinĝure of July flowers, or Rofes what fufficeth, according

^to Art : i
f The leffer quantity. i

Take ftrong Proof- fpirit what faficeth, Ros felis gathered i in

due


Te XndohsDiffili: pan 33


dae feafon and, clean pieke; fixipunces 5 drams anda quarters
Juniper berties 4. ounces éedrams aod \achaify+Saffsfras roots
with the Bark j| Caraway feeds; of-each: 3 dramà- anda quare
ter; Marigold flowers 1:01nde ahalf and sdram, -Anifeeds 2
ounces:3 drams and athalf;; braife chem chat are to be bruifed y
- difil chem -intosfirong Proof fpirit according to Art ; ‘Take
heteof cen ounces. 1 dram: and: a half 5; add thereto 1.0unce. g
drams of the water treated of inthe 23 Cha prer,dulcified, Lico-
rice bruifed x ounce § drams; dulcifie with white Sugar: what fuf-
ficeth ; If you add none of, “the aforefaid water , then in ftead
thereof, take Musk fix:grains , "Ambergriefe 8. grains ;^ colour
it: with the tin@ure of Jaly flowers, or Rofes what papi roohi ‘aca
cording to Are.’

Ros foli proper, opencth obfirualión, relievezb: deiig Natuye'y y come
forteth the Stomach,quickneth Appetite; 4nd is wS the: em


foknefs. mae
tf exp CHA P. XXXIIL Water of a s


{
i The greater shiantity,

Take ftrong Proof-fpint what fufficeth , ‘and: puted it into à
wide mouthed Pot, (or other Veffel ) fope very ;clofe
Take thofe feveral flowers following in their feafons ; and ‘being
clean pickt, pu: them to’the fpirit in the Pot, viz. Coweflips,
Wood-bind Stone an POOR of all three forts
Damask )
Musk gRofes, Mats age A
Sweet Brier flowers , “Clove tors. “Lito Conlin
Jafmine, Citron í

«o. Oran es aero or Pils de ba
-Tillig PAR yii ads 61]
Garden: siii abad carus 1 s5baeis
Limon, Lihyme fonen =: Atoga ig ro wettadit.lis
Wild S 0533 Glib , Boultous vitob1o Ton
Lavender | 523597 Dalli sit OVD! d en Qi 9nibht1023
‘Marigold.


Chamomile > Flowers, of eich bal a pound 4 ve eut


L


“Dda EM "Being


Onda es ‘a. ee UU TMNE S.


m Th ck Gndoh- Dif.


^ Being furnifhed with allyourflowersds above; when: you! would


diftilthent; add to them:Anifeeds:2 pound, ‘Coriander 1 pound;
bruife tlie feeds; it wetebefb to-bruife all the: flowers jas ‘you
put them &pinto the fpiri: y for their; more orderly workings:
diftil them: intoxtnong Proof-fpirid according to Art y; themadd
roi the diftihedwaterRofes, July flowers; ‘Biderflowers; ofeach ~
y ponad: rafter twelve daysinfifion: itmay ‘be drawn vff;theh. .
dulcifié it with wie Sugar 19: ap id and RE: fine, át uie -be
drawn forufes< ad dii
bron of nai eJoJsw:l biThe: afe sida d bbs uoq M i us x
ocTake; Grong Proof:fpiritrt'gallon;, ee put iw intola aid

UE pot (otvotber welfe) topt véry clofex; cake thofe: fe.
` veral flowers following in their fcafons, and being’ clean picker, -
- put them £ó the fpirit in the pot siz, Ve i hern
Stok Gilly flowgrsof chieg fortege. 0o) dose ai deus]
Damak Assn
Musk $Rofes;

Sweet Brier flawerst5Clowe.Jüly Mowers, Lilium Convallium, Jat

mine, Citron
Orange $ lowers, Sin Bis s t

Tillis: flowersyos (1:57 tg! -30011- 5n03]l 934


Garden, V 1301 Ji ClohsV- 49830 yO Y 308 bod: nom hiv’
. ddimdinn Thyeliows > aive Toi gweoh lety i31 slo draist
- Wild»: FTO $198 e 4 Hi jigi srj ij 93 m: A 3 AJ t592
Tae de 3.0201 95:0 ifs Jo 19408 vili g73320: dae nid boo VA
Marigold | era.
Chamomile Flowers, of cach 6 drams and a mio Ani
Meliton d moii „awoh (iol, avo! ID uy 15 i d iwe-
Elder " iO enis. .
"Being furnifhed with all gode lodos WA eared, on Ape


diftil them , add to them Anifeeds 3 ounces a dramundtialh, Co-
‘riander 1 ounce $ drams: bruife the feeds; it were beiro bruife
all the flowers, as you put them up dito Phe Spirie,2fdrothelr
more orderly working, diftil chem into ftrong Prooféfpirit’ s
cording to Art; then add to thediftilled water Rofes Joly flow-
ers, Elder-flowers,of each 1 ounce $ drams : after 1 P jw iüfüfion
it may bé drawn off then düleifie i6 wich white! peor gosnd,.
and being fine i it may.be drawn for ufe t 1o

Sug a BET d C HÀ P.


E ode Dip


131gw3loJi *Ag T FIOR etis

OCHA. Xxxur.- Wane of Fruits À yas

10 quive JO d eStH 122 A 10 591:231103 93515112 ops
biLaszew be grédiey quantita: ^ droog Tewe R


‘Take dang? Proofi piriana gallons, Juniperiberries 4 pound,

: Quince parings dry, Pippin pacingsdryy of each 2; pounds; Li-
mon pils , Orange pils dry, of each 1 pound; Nutmegs four
ounces > Anifeeds ‘mpdundsy Gfoves: 2 Qunees ; "ditti them inte
Proof: lpisiokedording tolAre to the fpirit? add Straw berries,
Rafpices brüifed;: ofeach s pound}: ftir chem well together; and
after cendaysit being clear, may: be'drawn off ; then dulcifie with
Íyrup matelas is hereafter caught; aud fö let x rs Pe it be
puc andthen draw ít offfor ufeli3ro.1o «abs gn £s
1 bs1.d252 8 dL osd T He lvffoe A booWroVy emos
sig! BrongProof- fpirit: x gallon: 5 poche Bounces

3 3 dram and a qüazter, ‘Quince parírigs déy5/ P. ppid: spárings dt y,
ofeach 5. ounces a dram and'a ‘half Limon: pile; Orange pils dry,
of each vounce 5 :dramsy Nutmegs-3 datis and: la quattér ; > ‘Ani-
„feeds 5 oniices acdram:and half, Cloves didim and ‘half’ diftil
rlieminto:Proofsfpiticaccordi iss tà Arts co'tlié fpirié add State
berries, Riafpicés: bruifed: "ofeach 8 oce?) (Ht tiet Well td-
gether; and after: t0 days; it b:ing’ ‘clears may be diwn. nof then
duléifie it witbr(yrnp made'as ‘is’ ceca ble Blea; Mit and” fo ‘fet? îr
. starid.til] ibe clear) and'ttén dédw tortor tile; <> n ? ied
satu JU 1013! 493 a


dioko t SOR A po MHI! wipe} War Li bis t&qr Vaso


A ERN : T ima). do 4 aise: MW s Sq ni adt Ys


The greater Quantity; 0099 \ Wathen

— Take ftrong Proof-fpirit what fufficech, Aven x pent
Orris roots, Nutmeg Yellow Sanders, Mace, of each 2 ounces,
Lignum Rhodium, Saffron, Scorax, Benjamine, of each 1 ounce,
Aügelicá. roots 3 ounces, Limon pils green half a pound,
Sweet Fennel feeds, Anifeeds, of each 1 pound, Cloves 10 drams,
Roman Wormwood, Mint dry 5 of each 3 handfuls; Red“
Rofes, Stoichas flowers, of each 4 handfuls, Sweet Marjoram,
Balm , Burnet , Thyme, -àll dey, of each 6 handfuls, Alkermes
berries 2 ounces ; bruife them all that are tobe bruifed, diftil
them into Proof-fpirit according to Art, puluis with ilum

i Ddda thus


46 Fhe London-Difillers —
thus mide; Take Rofewater 4 pound, white Sugar 10 pound,
boil it to a fycupsbeighesthien ftraimicjand put ic to the fire again;
add thereto confection of Alkermes 4 ounces, Syrup of Gilly
flowers r pound, Ambergriefe (diffolved in Rofe water) 1 drar« ;
and fo let thefe boilalitcles tillthey. be incorporated with the
Syrup, ando keep itforufes =; it ni ie
‘ budo, The leffer quantity.


Take trong: Proof fpirito x gallon; Aven reots:6 ounces 3
drams/and;a quarter, Orris roors, ANarmep: Yellow Sanderss
Mace-ef-each a-dram ,andibalfi, Lignuai Rhodium, Saffron, Stor
rax; Benjamin of each 3 quarters of adram y Angelica roots 2
rams and.a half; Limon pls green 6 drams anda half y Sweet
Fennel feeds, Anifeeds, of eacht ounces drams, Clóves x dram,

Roman Wormwood;Miat dry; of eàch what fu ficeth,Red Rofes,
Steechas flowets:yof eich, what fufficstflis- Sweet: Matjoram).
Balm, Burnet, Th yme;all.dry; -of each whar fufficetb; Alkermes
berries adram and helt; bruife them all;thab are-to.ibe bruifed 5

- diftil them into Proof-fpirit according tq Art; dulafie wich, Sya
rups thus mide; Lake; Rofe water 6:oufées;rdrams andia quarter),
his Sugar.4-pounda; boil'it toa: Syrap:height.o chem train: it;
and pur acto tbe fire-again g eddxbereto.Confetiori Alkermes 5
drams-and a half»! Syrup of Gilly fowers x ounce s, drams, Am-
bergriefe: (.diffolved 1n-Ro(e water):6 grains; and: fo: let thefe
boila little, tillthey bejincorpozated with, che Sycup j anid: fo

keepit for ufe. . ' `
Avens water is a. preat Goxdial; fyeugtbegeib (he Spirit, comforteth-
all the inward paits , and preferveth from Confumptions, and Me»


lancholy fadaefi .. <Stit apt sius ten i
Besar v nav J acf apnu 311
bnruoq b i290119vÀ elais 131g
ATE Te ar Y 2; à DOE IE MEE T
(939800 $ (355710 SIEM e e€12D0 EO WO: :
adido i Hoss to! smm:qnsB 26103 moths
"au Asin ba Al) nt VT ^ e
s Hird risio t nomid © enw
$6 TCR i nz
IN iP irc
vad ~ é * ; 5i
J ) cf e JA
1 i a "ng
rar s L4 n ri LEE |
Lid f é z
ye Tr $rrnd
IET 203


The — * au nd


kms


LO to Ti defe sd
PARIS to which (by Numbers )


thefe. are referred,


Ut


“Additions tothe fir and fécond SM. wea. di


b b^


ye. Ake July Mowers, Rofes, Poppy and Sanders; or any
SUR i of them feverally, what fufficech ; andinfufe them


Ade!


 ufeit, take 8 ounces itest to? A usada and a half of this ter?
and you will.give ic a fufficient colour ; or you may, take; more at:
plea(ure without inconveniency. i
„Additions to be third hs inq us

un i 37517 93456] ^

ieu carpe “greater een 292 fU O Semen
E Aaron onte Sugars of each five send or a i
ficeth, according to Art," ^;


The ‘efer quanti! ly:
HA Raifeeds; White Sugar, 8: ouiüces y^ ‘according to Arn? ;


J


danau) , Additions 'to the foueth Capea iB eH | ib ad


~~ AS $35.


The pir quantity. tsb

Take Caraway feeds, Coriander feeds, of ie z Nr Cala:

` mus Aromaticus,Zedoary of each 4. ounces, Anifeeds, Caffia lig.

nea’, of each 8 ounces, Angelica Roots 8 ounces,(or Hearb Ange-
lica 2. sik white Sugar.2 pound and half, or what fufficeth..

Ddd3: . The:


34 . c0 le oodon-Difil:
The leffer quantity —

Take Caraway feeds, Coriander feeds, of each 2-drams: andes
haley’ Calamus Aromaticus "Zidoarys. of. each. We drams. and. 3
qaarrers; AnifeedsjCsffia lignea; of each drains. Janda half, Bae
gélica roots 6drams anda hal’, or Hearb ‘Angel € cà 3 ounces a


dram and half, White Sugar 4 quaces, Or d gud prs
ter yc " ac ori i "TH % i Faba AA
‘ Fi 1121 ODIA 3 fi j L. Q3 Í nR DO P
the h X -
( 2d a iiam o b ish Ch NPE ogi dD
Jbégrialér quantity.


Take Cinamon, Cubebs of each 4 ounces, Sweet Fennel feeds,


Anifeeds of each 8 ounces, Cloves, Caraway feeds, Nutmeps, of
each 3 ounces, Wormwood dry 10 ounces, White Sugar 2 pounds


and a half, (or what füfficech)..
i c A he effer quantity, n
CIE ke t rope Cubs bs, of Rori three NAE anda quatter
Sweet Fennel, feeds, Ani [ceds, of each &drams and a half; Gloves,
Caraway. feeds». -Nutmegs , of each .2. drams. and a, half,


Vigne od dry guncesw hite Sugar 4 onnces, (9r what a


S TEUR isd $6 fis bü io S 0] 10: 15d3 29008 i


Gg 44 3 T 191J


WETAN to the fixih Chapter. a lli | sa i


i Bhe greater quantity,
Take Garden diu Penny-royal of e 3 fiandfuls, Candee


mums 2 ounces, Sweet Fennel feeds. Anifeeds ; of each eight

onüices; Balm dry; pound; Nutmeg, inate unius Mgmuie

cus, Galingale, Cinámon, of each 4 ouucess, , Se a
os Thedeffer quantity...

Take Gatden-Tbym »Penaye royale of each. m (fi pda
Cardamums a dram ndi half, Sweet Fennel feeds, . Ailede , of
each 6 drams and an hall Bal dey 1. ounce 4; drams, Nutmegs
Ginger, Galamus Aromaticus; Galingele, Cinamon, of each 3
drams and a quarter, MUP ttis
~6160 «953100 ¢ Hoss 30 bos? tba:
-3i silted absslin Aw 9 UO p d51230.Y cu

«oun A dyesH : 10) &329nuo0 0 230 p agil? anA: pas s


^
Hia TET

IM » ane 1

405321 1940 ish! TEC


à


T " 7%
ait ain p


Thlohdon-iflél ` a9


Additions to the-feventh Chapter,


The greater quantig. : :
Take Spear Mint dry, Anifeeds; of each one pound, —
Aromatcus4 ounces, Wine deere 2 pound and a half. .
The leffer quantity.
>. Take Spear Mint dry, Anifeeds, of each 10unce 5 drams; ;
Calamus Aromaticus 3 drams and a quarter ,. White Soganfour
ounces. :


z Additions to the eight Cha pter,


" The greater. quantity. :

Take Sweet Fennel feeds, Cinamon, of each 8 Misa. A
Rofemary dry of each x pound; Caraway 2 ounces, Spear Mint
drya: handfuls, Whice'Sugar 2 pound and a half: - me NY

The le ffer quantity,

Take Sweet Fennel feeds, Cinamon of each 6 gains anda
_ half, Anifeeds, -Refemary dry, of each 1.0unte five drams, Ca-
raway 1 dram and a py aes ae iM p toate white
ee 5 doum ia died sisal ods-o7 She bits sted


"M iid à VV to: he xn Chapret i.


: e
i354 07 Saibicacs


`The greater quantity.

Take Carawayfeeds unces, Anifeeds, Limon si dry, of
each 1 pound, White Sugar 2 pound and a half; in like manner
and quantity make yous fompalitians ots Plc pils dry ace `
cording to Attest 11 dors 1 A CRM aT
-o& MRO sai “The affer. guentity.... 15 bss: 150 1i
ve Take: Caraway feeds 3 dreams and Eaves Cee Anifeeds Limon:
pils dry, of ich -ounce s drams» white Sugar’ ounces In Jike
manner and.quantity,: make your, karma with Orange pils -
dty,according to Art. Sti T6135


sgk


i ait sdmA 2 M ditione:
> pide nominoO Yo psf ni vb D


30 ‘The Londoni-Dipiller:


Additions to the twelfth Cha pter.


dbegredterquamity. ——- i-
c "Take Cinamon ounces, Cloves 2 ounces , R ‘Limore pils Ey
5 ounces, Sugir 2 pound'and a half.
The leffer quantity.
"Take Cinamon half an ounce, Cfovcs a dram and half Limon
vit dry, 2 drams and a half) Sugar 4 ounces. A 3n.


Additions to the uer Chapter,


; The greater quintity.
` Take Sweet Fennel, Cínamon; ofeach 5 quntes, Nutmeg
3 Rance Sugar 2 pound and'á half..
3 sc Pheleffer quantity, Dto nh m
Také Sweet Fennel , Cinamon of each 4 danie; Nicturde
A reca anda half, Sugar 4 outice.


xi geet S to the fifteenth Chpir b: ; in
"fake adl add to the foit half as múch as the vane a every
particular Ingredient therein expreffed, and in ftead of Sanders -


' _ give it thetin&ute of Rofes, Jaly: flowers;or Poppy, what faificeh


according to Art.
unes T 7C Mdiiüons to the eighteen tiie 2


; O° The" greater quantity.”

“Take N Mack, + Ater tiele, of each half a dram; White: Sus
gar Candy in ftead of common white Sugar, what fufficeth ac-
cordiig to Art. là refpect that” Musk‘ in: fome cafe, may
- give offence to the receiver: Te is requifice to’ omit the ufe
^ thereof ii fome ‘of your waters of this kiad; to ferye. for fuch
fpecial ufes.

The leffer quantity;
"(Take Mask, Ambergriefe of each 3 grains, White Sugar
| Candy i in ftead of Common white Sugar, what fufficeth ios :
ing


i


ral


“Brcellent Waters for feveralf g
“ding .to "Ast. In repe that Musk. for fome p RR give
offence to the receiver, it is requifite to omic the ule thereof
in fome of your waters gi this kind tos ferve fog dis sss
ales dan Lor pee


bolts} T)


tq


enm bri to. ‘the ainteenth dise


The TAA quantity. >
. Take Sweet Fennel feeds $pounds, Caraway feeds ilio ounces,
Anifeeds 1 pound, Cinamon eight ounces, Cloves 2 ounces Sugar.
2 pounds and a half.
The leffer quantity.
Take Sweet Fennel feeds 8 ounces,Caraway feeds 3 drams and.
a quarter, Anifeeds 1 ounce 5 drams, Cinamon 6 drams and
a half, Cloves a dram and half Sugar 4gunces.
ies


 Addifons to the twentieth Chapter.


Theg greater quantity.
oo Take: Cinamon;: Sweet Fennel, cuo 5 Ounces, hiy,
“Cloves of each 2 ier Mauro i NE P iu
anda half,


4 ounces.


Additions tothe twenty third Chapters


2:8 The Syrup for dileifying the water de thus to be udo:

Take Apricecks, Quinces,Cherries, Englifh/Currants, of éach
what fufficech, all full rige, and of equal weight; v when they are
thus prepared. ás followeth.

Prepare the Quinces and Apricoks,and take out the Ronci and
kernels; and (lice them very thin, ftonethe Cherries and bruife
them and the Currants; then lay them into a flat Bafon; or
Pan thus: a lane of fruit of a fingers thicknefs : and then à

"lah of White powder Sugar of like thicknefs; and fo prò-
Eee ceed


i


ys PARP aad "1
‘ceed in order fahe upon lane ditt all be iid “into the Baton’: then


pouron good Aqua vite pently,cill ‘all be covered therewith, and.
fo "let ‘it ftand 2 noms; then bruife or pofh'them all together,


linnen bag : n ake the reach 2 it and till it be fetled


^ clear, which juyde


O


he Furnace
unfed inthe drow-


—Bpirits.and waters,


A, Shtweib- the-
botrome which
ought t0. be of
Copper.


zonanitbooodd water,
to rêfrigerdter €
conden{ate ` the
wutorsand Oy!
pp cni d

d.
D; 4 pipe of bra $
Lor Pewter,or ra-/
ther a worm
esso] x imi running


iO 2435 pagan


* cel; 7
; DES The sodlembick
L08,02002] 2dpano Sitybreedoyinas bns 225077 ofeindlefimmace-
ip: bes erred adi soft , mish tbe fireddor ft
ng E Pi "e e RM Y cwn d 13 DOS I
5 AA bic i5 iq tiun lo gasi s 7:009 asd
: 1216 IM ia U^u2 hy jq. 3 "dh acolat ;


"ing eff tbepreceding:


GjThe barel filed.


Ei


di adve iib Ns 3j


e . ws wt an : I p diss Si E Seri :
3 oder k TUER ties.


€ H A P. L AWaterio ewe Hair fain y go agaito: ie]

é iugud selpibsad se
Ts Monntéja: “fife pis Viflontaid «Calamtine s; Jeaves pn
Southernwood; ot cà cli wo-haridfuls ; Gapary: Wine, Urine,
Hony, Milk, of each two pound. Maftard feed -half a pound ;
bruife what js tobe bruifed, magerate them en cda then jis
ftil them in Balneo, 2930led.28 31 91191 [sss


Cc Re Pi T cAwatertoeafe LEPE CEA Mo. <>
gom again.


ae feeds of Heaberictnwrftd 2 dois lapi ita awhilei ia fois
moik place; then add great Sroneicrop: halfia pounds difit it
according to Art.
Schein water LF) GARI 7
Take blond of Frogs, Terre Sigillat , Samach, Roles, Sor-
rel; Houlleek, what is ‘fuificient.; macerate lira. 7 mh 24,
hours hes ditt them: id Bali) o 5


"d imm —— EWE


C H A Pi IH 4 waa tó take aipa Spa in the Fhe, row


Take Affes Milk fhr polir white Wine i pound, the infide
Dwe tiew loaves, ra Eggs withthe m Coady rein
"mik them well tópetliér and dift den? ^ Wen cues


Beca T OAT


3 c Exelent Waters for fever,


Be: H AP. AY V. A pater asaini Sears


cU Tak Y ROT Dinner, Rofe 4 i$
ter, of. dc 4 uice ns ‘Limons 2 ounces,’ Lytharge


' 6 ounces, Cerufe, Sublimate, of each half.an ounce, Sol.


phure vive, 3 drams; bruife them that are to be bruifed;


chen “iyo ghem 24 hones 52 and: after. difti them according .


val


to Art.


mad ‘CHAP, ve A-water topreferve-the Sight: eer


Take Fennel, Veérvaine; Eyecbrighty Endive’, ‘Betonie , Red 4


Rofes, Venus Hair , of each three handfuls; bruife the Hearbs,


‘and macerate then 2 24 hours in White Wine; bends i ašis T ;


cient) then diftit them i in s limbeck im Balneo, 00v usdisor
LHadnofber:-c 1


"Take Fennel, (Gelandioes Supe Rofemrj; V Verrin; I et


bes equa] parts: Prepareit as before. él lis


“CHAP Vi D ro-raperbibe pm


Take Fennel, Celandine, Ero Rue, Leaves of Enula,Ful-: ^
‘fers Tafel; Milfoil, of each one handful Caci pord half adim; 55,
- byüifetbémand difiltheminanAlembieks nsii ; sig fie


« «1 A 03% Tis demit ob.


j _ CHAP. VI ater ageinf be Gant, 3

: Take Licorice halfa ced Anifctds I Soni Gio ea
ounces, Galingale, Ginger, Rootsofireos!s IEribla Cara pand,
` Seeds of Fennel, Caraway, Amomum, Ammi Piony, Bafil, Sa-
vory, Mirjoratm: ofeach. one.ounce, sjoni per Berries! 2:0unces,
Ground Ivie half ahandful, Long Pepper, Calamus, Spikenard,
Mace, of eách.5 drams; V alerian 1dram, Rootsiof Angelica- half


:an once. Cyprus.4-ounces, Lignum. Aloes;half, an ounce, Sugar -
-qomnces, Malaga wine, onftrong:Ale 32 pounde; prepare anddi- .


il them according to Att, i


S A HO


Thi


Excellnt Waters p pu dais Iu
This water taken inward’ y firengthens cold and weak pune and
breaks the Stone.
-t Ourwardly applyed it ea|eth the Gout, enlarger enit thata are fhrunks
dnd i good: ea all a and paffi ons TANT pi e aibei and.
told, ~ ;


c H A P. VII, 4 water rfar the web and Spots iu the Byes: =


m. Pak Rue, Plantairy Red Báfes, Red Poppies, Verine ; Cez
landiné leaves, ofeach rounce; Red Rofe water 1 pound, Rich
white Wine 1 pound andan half, Tutia prepared 1 dram, Aloes
Hepatick an ounce and an half , Cloves 1 eunce,Powder, prepare
and diftil chem erred, to aded redd the water into. the Eyes
morning and evening: oy. x.qASS


: CH A p. I x A mater for Town, Fifulser Ganlers;&c,


Take fro white; Wine Vinegar 8 pounds, Wood Afhes one
pound, Infufe them 3 dayes natural; and ftir them twice a day; .
ther! puc thereto unfl;ked lime x pound; let it ftand otherithree.
dayes , and ftir it as before, when itis well fetled, - Filtre offi the
clear Lee, and put thereto Sal Gemme, Salt Alkali, Salt Armoni
acksSalt of Tartar, Of each one dram ; Calx of Egge-fhels , Calz
vive, of éacti t. dtam ;;grind all. thefe togetlierg and temper them
with the. faid Lee; put them into a Glafs lembick , and diftil .


them in -Bálneo s -give itj the-firft. 24-hours; qo more heat, than
will make ir; and keep it warm: after that diui it off, acconting
toxirts A ( : 1 AGS (ITE.


ài es A
C H A p. Xe “A vier xin vedo. of ah Edo» and, j38
to beantifie the biog


. Take Wild Porlsio, Maflows, Nightfhade, astu with the |
feeds; of each three, bandfuls ;;. the Whitesof 12 Eggs; Limons .
nuxibér 12; Roch Ajlnm 4,ounces s Pipe, and, ati ARR


sordifg Ac. ; dizi do am $8 du D ctia T dS bM
v ì tA on d 1318 5 heria "E {3


Eees: ei mM.


* aie Bei Wate m -

i os adnethbers c0

` Take Calx o Egge fhels, White Coral pr tey of each.
2jounces;Salé calcinated, and Boras of each é ounces, Gum.Tra-
gaganc 4 ounces, Roots of white Lillies number. 6, White Sape 8.
pounds, Styrax, Calamita, Belzoin ofeach 4ounces; mix anddy,
fil them by Alembick.

Another of the fame: were, i!

` Take Wine Vinegar half a pound, Lytharge of gold 1 ounce

end a half, Cerufer ounce ; Sal Gem 6 drams; Roth! Alum


— halfan:ouace; Borax; Sulphur vive, Salt Nitce, of. each three


drams , Camphice half a dram‘; prepare and dikit them saig

to Art;

so CHAP. XL dde agape the Ms jin
Flux of Tear,


Take ripe Siere as many as you pléäfe, fet them to dis
— in Horfe- — 15 ned ; chen diffi them: in Balneo, ;
bus, :


rt
> hake Blowers: af the whire Thorn: "ym or " tps: of tlie |
Willow: Bye-bright > of — What fufficeth ^ dili them as
bn git LEC di


irs 3 P H n xm Awater ageinf tbe Rete of the Eyes; > u
i wD Das aid ist xir 1» =
osake juyce of Celandinies Rue; Vervain, Feinel, of each —
Güter? tops and leaves of Rofes of each what füfficeth , Sugar
Candy 3 ounces, of the beft Tutia , Sanguis Draconis, of eacli
four ounees ; - bruife them that are to is ru € ie them
accor t6 Art, Men Me e


€ H A P. XI 4 valer to i and ay 4 [ha js Üleer.


on Cil M fef soi ces, whites of Egge vrbe is. Juice

ti; Plantain Night fhade; Nicotian; Honlleek:, Water -

of SIciaN ter Trinity Grafs, Roles of each 4 ounces’; "Eébour

them well together; and draw off the Water by an Alembick of |
Gfafs in Balneo:

CHAP,


p ats for eles. W


'€ H A P. uy. A water to make the Teeth mile. j ‘ey at


"Take Allum 6 ounces, be cna Sale 3: ounces, Myrrhe Ma.
ftick , Cloves, of each 6 drams ; ; mix, bruife and difil them accor --
ding to Art. KEA N :


GHAP, XV. A Waterto aie fi i
i “marks of tbe S. mall Pox, 3


Take Matick, Myrthe, Aloes Hepatick, Nod, Seok Des
conis; Olibanum; Opopanaz, Bdelium; Carpobalíamum, Saffian,
Gum Arabick; Liquid Storax, of each 2 drams and a half;
Beat what. isto’be beaten; then add thereto of clear ‘Turpentine

-«qual weight: diftil them according to Art.


HE


CHAP, XVI. AWeater.to Bicet Ulcers. fe 5 b 371


Takered Wine'2 pound, Plantain water half a.pound, Role -
water four ounces, Juice -of Plantain, 'Vervain:, Shepheards |
Parfe, Knotgraís, Gentanry the'lefs , Comfery the greater arid
deffer, of each 2 ounces; Crude Allum a-pound, Cyptrefs Nuts
3 ounces, Pomgranate flowers half an ounce , Pomgranate pils.
‘ounces, Gals half anouncc, Bark of the Ouk, Sumach, of each
five drams, Turpentine 3:ounces, Grude Honey half a "pound,
Maftick, Olibanum; of each ten drams, Sarcocol two ounces,
Burnt Vitriol; Burnt :Lead 4. ofeach t dram; Bole.;Armióni-
_ BCk.3 ounces, Caffia lignea Irilf an;ounnce, Round Bitthwott

Srouncese Powder ahati isto be: pond dis then mix &hd:diftil
€ smildi issu sale had ,s$3ü80
init. tide sib
idi Také Matick jut ah peaa un Mammie af sàcb
3:dtams; Brownie ones enaa Gloves Ei -
bebs ofieach'aidrams;C; Cyprus Nuts balfan:onnce;flowers of Roni-
-grantes Barksigf Pomgeanates,of «achor dram ;: Bole! Armo--
_ piack 1:ouace;; Red Rolesi3:drams, RochsAltim! pound, Miori-
Og drams; Clarified, Honey: ayonncey nfequa vitera poundvent
Sana Wine zpound, T of Pliptain;NiglitfhadejGom-
frey,


pco a ee N MONETE TUNE Qe RST m NO OR


$98 Excillent Waters for: sever vin


fery of the greater and leffer, of each 4 ounces, Water wherein
Tron hath been quenched-4 pounds ;' “powder w what is to be'pow-
dred , and infufe chem all night in Aqua ues in the uos
“draw fotk ifie water’ by: Alembick, d


738 MI
d H A P. XVII. AVater for Ulcers.
Take White Wine-4 potinds, | Plantain water 2 pounds, Allum
halfa pound, White Copperas 5 ounces, Crude Honey 1 pound,
Licorice Rafped t pound, Bole Armoniack 5 ounces, Camphire
an'óuüce and half,’ "Mercury fablimated 2 drams; Bruife what i is
tobe S and diftil them by Alembick.


"CHA P. pates A Water for hollow: Wlers.


Take Fountain water,Red Wiae, of each 2 pounds du a half,
Red Rofesfout ourices;F lowers & Rinds of Pomegranates, of each `
two ouncesand a half,Sumach 2 ounces,Sage a handful, Comfery
thé greater and leffer of each halfa handful , > Sarcocol 3 ounces,
Maftick 2 ounces; Olibanum'1 ounce, Honey 1 pound, water of
Turpentine a pound and.a half; bruife what is to: be bruifed,
Lr diftil ehem rae a Lembick of Glafs with a gentle

re.


:di | CHAP, XIX; A Gicatrizing Water.


jak waked wherein Iron hath beer quenched four ‘pounds,
Aqui] Balfami veri four pouhds, Turpentine a pound and half;
‘GrudeHoney 1 pound, Allum 10 ounces , white Coperas five
ounces , Bole Armoniack 7 ounces , Mercury fublimated half a
“dram 5 leaves of Plantain, ' Se yo mfery the greater, middle and
deffer., Teafil; Knorgrafs, St, Johns Wort; of each a handfal
end a half, "Frankincenfe 2 ounces, ‘Olibanum , White Sari-
ders, of each half an ounce, Red Rofes a handful anda half,
€affia Ligdea, Cinamon, of "each 3 drams; for the firit diftil-
Jatioh ; then take Turpentine 1 pound , 'Maftick 3 drams’, “pure -
Rozen. bounces, Cinamon Cloves; of each 2 drams; Pomgra-
"nate rinds half a&rounce ; Cy pras Nuts 1 ounce and a half, White
yaa Coperas :


TIO  NEREERN, Tape. ME S mh ve a Ment


— Betcellent Waters far feveral "s ie E


Coperas two ounces, Allum 3 ounces, Olibanum 4 ounces, San-
guis Draconis an ounce and a half, Aqua Balfam,: veri 1 pound
for the fecond diftillation : Afterwards,
o> Take Flowers of St. Johns Wore, Sige, ‘Raltmaey! 3 Carduus
$ Benedictus, Centaury, of each 1 ounce;: Maftick , Red Sanders,
of each 3 dramy Wood of. Aloes 2 {cruples, Cubebs otie dram,A-
_ qua vite half a pound, Burnt Allum; White Tarrar, of each an
ounce anda half, Myrrhe. half an ounce, Earth Worms in powder
1dram;the middle bark of the Oak 6 ounces,Caffia lignea 3 drams-
White Copperas. x ounce, Rindes of Pomgratates halfan ounce,
Cinamon 2 drams, Flowers of Pomgranates 1 dram, Guaiacum 4.
ounces; Carpobalfamum, Xylobafamum; ofeach 1. dram , Myr-
„tles; Mummie, of each 2 drams, Borax half an ounce, Glaved two
drams; Tormentil Gentian Round Birth-wort;of each two drams
anda hal: ; This i is for the laft diftillation; afterwards add Burnt
Alfum half an ‘ounce, White Copperas 2 drams; Maftick 1 ounce
in fine poa and then kepi it for nfe,


€ H = P. one E water que ege Wounds.


3. ‘te Mice ounces, Olibanom. I: “pune ‘Haney, E t


water of Thr "penine a Pes diit d half, ae Ingredients


. according to
lembick with a gentle fire, we
of. HA P. XXL. A Water for: yeas and [277


E €x vivé tili in Foi Water. 8 i pounds, y» Piantaia


RF aen , CHA».


ee m. aer ici: sila m


| E Biel Wis fij ye vend T :
bon (CH A P. XX: I; Avi to make te Teh white,”


OF


Take the firft diflilled water’ of Holes? etáctis ds white, one
pound, Allnm falfa pound; Sal Nitre, WhitéSalt, óf each one
„ounce, Water of Lentiskieaves 1 pound; Mullick two ounces,
White Vinegar, White Wine, of each z:'ounces," Mix and ditti
them according’ to Art, and TONS the ‘water.


CETIRI,


CHAP. XXIII. Arai ageing she Cil,


Take Mufcadel, or Malmfey four pound, Nutmegs;. Gills, vet
each 1 dram, Cinamon, Cloves, Grains, ofeach 2 drams, Pow-
‘der the ingredients grofily » and infufe them ‘inthe Wiue 24
AoT then een loft fire draw off the water aS to

Ite


CHAP. AIV. 4^ mater 22 a. told Stomach.


Take Citron d Orange pils devel » of each 2 ounces, Rofes
mar y, ‘Mints, of each one handful , Cinamon , Cloves, Cubebs,
-Cardamums, Nutmegs, Ginger, of each a dram and ahalf, Sage,
Peonyroyal, Thyme, of esch'one handful , Cárawayfeeds, Ani-
feeds; Fennel feeds,of each 4 drams : Bruife what i is tobe bruifed,
and infafe them alt che {pace of 24 hours in Canary wine four
pints; d diftit chem i in Balneo according to Art, I


me HA P. xxv. Water of Sage Compound.


Take Sage; Mirjoram; Thyme, Lavender, Epithymum, Be:
tony, of each 1 ounce, Cinamon half an ounce, Ireos, Roots of
Cyprus, Calatias Aromaticus, ofeach x ounce , Storax, Benja-
min, of each a dram and a half; infufe them four days. in four
pounds: of Spirit of Wine ; then difil them i in Balneos `


C H A 9 RAVE Laver ‘water Combis <. Ns


E flowers of Lavender Lilly of the Valley, of each ug
~ handfuls


Excellent Waters forJfeveralwes. — “gy
handfuls, Piony,Tillia, Flowers of Rofemary, Sage;of each halfa .
handful,  Cinamón, Ginger, Cloves, Cubebs, Galingale, Cala-
mus Aromaticus, Mace Meffelto of che Ouks of each adramanda `
half Piony roocs one ounce and a half , o£ the beft Wine what
fufficeth, 1nfufethem in Win& two diyes; then difil them i in
Balnes Marie.

T be water e good againft tbe. Faling- medo Conf fits, and
the infirmities of the Brain.


C HA pr xiv. 4 Pedra nan.


Take lees of a Calf, the Lungs ofa Fox; of eich dif F
LiverwortsLong wort, Sage, Rue, Hy fop, of each one handful,
Roots of Esula, Gladidl, of each half ari ounce., Seeds of Anife,
Caraway, P eel. ofeach half ih odite; Powers of Borage and
Buglofs', of. each) 2 drams; infufe them the {pace of 24 libürs
in rich old Wine what fufficeth-: Water of Scabias, Carduus Be-
nedi&tus; of each su Gtariges se 2 ounces; edd dil i it in
Balnto Matias d : seen

5513108  Mntbysic doce lo vista 4 3

Take [eass p" Statice: Veronicas of és cocoa Vel
Hair, Sage, Hyfop, Horehoands Liverwort, Licorice; of each:
one handful ; Flowers of Bora ge, Buplofs; Violets,’ of each half
a handful, Roots of Enula Gampana, Licorice, Flowers of Ireos;
of each halkat ouficess Aaifeeds; Fennel feéds ; of ésch 1 dram»
Choy(e Cinamon, Oriental Saffron, of cach ‘half a dram; lee
théni be beuifàd and cut; let chem be dipefted two days tn iwà-
 ter:of, Séabias Veronica; of each one pound , water of Hyfop-

half a ‘pound white Wine-3 pounds, and be diftlled i ip Balnew
Mie, and Sugar Candy svhatfofficech: ^ 2
-il Phisieater Miro ohm mh Lier Lai, en pei
heneb them, i833 9 15vi.2


y


CHAP, XXVIII. P an pes


| Take roots of Fern'z ónncebyroóte 6E Pat (fey; Ly pody, of each:
an ounce and a half, roots of round Birthwort , Lovage» Cala-
aes ctia Acorns of. tbe water; of Each. £ ounce; ;ehofen-
"on Fffz Rhubarb E


Pom.


At Fee ghar fon fe Voli ufes .


Rhubarb , shanks of Tamarisk, Copperas, Afh; ofeach half añ


ounce, Lovage, Seeds of Caraway, Cummin, Anife,of each two `


drams, Scolopendria, tops of Wormwood, Fümitary; Dodder,
Jeayes of Agrimony, Ceterach;of euch a: handful and a; half : Rich
‘Wine 8 pounds. lec chem be digeftcd two days.» andi thën dittil
them in Baineo Marie. — 3
This water firengtbencth the Spleen, openeth anpra Urine,


CH A P, XXIX, | Aqua F ebifuge


Take roots of Vipers orate. Cinquefoil, Tormentil , Di@es
mum, ofeach 6:drams, Seeds of Citron, excorticated, Carduus
Benedi&us, Carduus Mariz, Sorrel, of each half an ounce, of all
the Sanders. ofeach 1 dram, of the Cordial flowers of each one
handful, Goats Rue 1 handful, Harts-horn Rafped half an ounce,
pour upon them brüifed;wáter of Tormentil; Cychorie, Carduus
Benedi&ns,Carduus Marie, Wild Poppy of each what fufficeth ;
le them be macerated three days ina glafs clofe fhut , afterward
"add Citrons bruifed number fix, Juyce of Endive, Carduus Bene-
di&ns, Plantain of each one. pound, Borage, Scordium, of each
halfa pound.; let.them be diftilled in Balzeo Maria, ':

This water is convenient in Feavers y è pecially malignant Feautri 5
Mende itdriveth away the matignity, and refifteth intrejaertum.


; E CH AP, XXX, Aqua Damafoena Odorifera.


Take Ireos Ei ec Cloves), Cubeb;, Ciim Grats of Pa
radife, Calamus Aromaticus,. of each one oiínce, Mitjoram ,
Thyme, Bay-leaves Rofemary Flowers,. Red Rofes, of each a
fando ; Lavender-flowers three drams ; of the-beft Wine.3 meas


` "Würess let them. be macerated, and: diftilled. tito-the ‘diftilled lis


quor add Musk halfa fcruple, Civet 6 grains.


This water heateth, dryethy iod di Heeb and diy firgtbm: |


eth the Heart and. Head.


Fake foots of Didsnmum feeds of Daucus;of. ura one: fiia :
dine Cinamon


QBAPOXL, Agia Heri. S 0.27003 s4ET5 p;


Excellent Waters for feveral ufes. 4
Cinamon, Caffi lignea; Balm, of each two fcruples, Oriental Saf
front fctuple, New Caftorium x.fcruple and a half; of all-thefe
mixt makea powder, to which let be poured water of Rue two
pounds anda half: let them:ftand in infufion four days; and then


i.


., diftil them in Balneo Maria.


CO GHA PIKKZIL Aqua Napbrelicas 507


Taketootsof Enuls Campana, Cammock Pimpernel Radifh;
of each one ounce, Parfley, Lovage, of each ? drams, leaves of
-Lovage, Parfley, of each one handful, Saxifragc eum toto two-
ounces, Flowers of Brooms, Balm; Rofemary, of eech half a
handful, Elder one handful, Berries of Juniper, Myrtle, Alcaken-
gie, Anifeeds, of each 2 ounces ; cut them and infufe chem, the
{pace of 8 days in x2 pounds of the beft white Wine; cben let

This water opencth and pesvoketb Urine : the dofe is one spoonfuls...

CHAP. XXXUüI. Aqua Aperitiva,

Take roots of Eringo, Vipett-grafs,Fern, the greater Centau+
ty,of each halfan ounce, roots rf Fennel, Barks of Capparis, Ta=
marisk, Afh, of each three drams , Barks of Citrons two drams
anda half: Seeds of Carduus Benedi&tus, Cichorie , of each
half an ounce: Seeds of Endive, Creffes, Citrons, Scariohs:.of
each two drams, Polytricon, Adianthum, Ceterach, Dodder,Sco-
Jopendria, Betony, Endive; of each a handful and a half, "Topsof
Thyme, Epithymum, Hops, Flowers of St. Johns Wort, Broom,

Borage,Balm, of each t bandfn}, Smal! Raifins 1 ounce s-Cina-
mon i dram, anda half Spec. Dialacca half a dram,Garduus Bene-
di&us, Watérdf Hops, Scolopendria, Pauls Betony,'of each one
pound, Rhenifh Wine two pounds and a half ; lec them fand.
two dayes in a warm placein a veffel clofe topped :: afterward
diftil chem in Balneo, | j cates.

Th water openeth the obfirattiows of the whole body, but efpecially of
the Liver, Spleen, ane peste oe | xem ;


ffs : -A Catalogue


- — TUO T T " mee ee i svete UU i£:


` x x $ T 5 S oh $
DES ^ m 3 = ;
! š naia T EA p AE Bek LIBERIS
4A : 2 PSE HASS Mo eee 153 in ANS NA jas


— npn


A Catalogue of the. Materials ad


ferina pied in ^ ihr prscsdeni, Bales, e


AX Mia 1o cnemuo n
Mop i

Buiter! Br 20s oo nds
Calais y aw disc

C pers, long
Contra yerva
Exula campana. :
Galingal ASUISR. REGO.
Gentian

Gy 172195 301,023 Deni
Here Radifa—
dmpetitria: cc 10 FAIA Y
ioia . Dodo eguo 23835. y


Ww OO Ds,
Ign eget s


“Sanders dn m ve lu.


‘BARKS and PILS:
Ay- tree Roots
Caffta Dignéa


i DITOR


PUR HEARS saa ap Bib
che A Nyelicá! 151 ,Druoq
dmm ci ov bow


Bay-leaves scis ni mado liiib
ott lo gBdln Op Barts wae srk
Iurnet: ii ony ess? Qosid aut
 LBrooklime


x Me Balfamiat:


vos


E amt 5
FLOWERS: . eem


Balfamint or Cofimary


enu gt editos d P
emi[gt — 050. (C YOsfp. = s
AES ae c $ oro
Calamint POT Camomile” = S
UIS COMPE gom Ns Eua tii CASIA
Ue Jade 7o | Giliflowets, Che o Y!
Crefless inter : | Gillifwers; ied three di ioi
Bak. amm — 0
- Coftmary ot Balfamiut Lavender —.— LEE
Horebouudygbite | Lilium Convallium. ^.
- Lavender leaves Marigold — —— j^
Lavender Gotton 3 | Melilot Bea uti E S
2S Spear - st.) | Orange F SUSE NNA
Mint ped 1 o bim Red VAN A
- Marjoram, Summer MF Rel STANO
Penny Royal i amak = uus
Rofemary Raa a ga 5 s
Rocket | Bryer AERTS
Ros Jolis - Safron
Rue Sage 3
$ jon Stechas
A Great a illia or Lindentreé- ^ ^
Commons | Garden. Mi
- Scarwygrafs: Garden VUTT | Thymes Lime _ 0989
Stechados © 9958 Y V oJ Wilde O°, oe
Southernwood C d Woodbind (or Honey: fickle)
Scordium. i
Thyme Garden Et WEN SEEDS, "o
-Limem ` Ae Nife med
Tarragon TT E HANS Angelica, wath
Trefoil, Water Ow. Bafil
Valerian, great 3 ^E Craen
Gommon — Cardamums
Worms Romane Creffe, Bank —
us Chervil; fweet
Coriander


ummin .


Cummin - à
Fennel, fieek 501001.
Grains of adr or
 Muftard EREN ur
Radifb - disons. JUICES.
Rocket eT Inns -
Scuray-graft, Gaden 7 il Walnuts green rt ib ke.
Wormood, common. oro | 4


`


ig) U?


sies] | Others ofdivets kinds. "
ERUITS.. cat | Mbergric[é. ..


Pricicks — blokine! lg Allum.

Alkeims Berries. || Benjamin FECHA
Barley, Maulted sts | Campbire M
€ardamums is || Gomfettion of MESS, og wily
Cherries i WA, ‘| Mithridate : E

orain Fes f « | Musk Í :
Curam? Englifb. i | Treakles Venice sq pe
Cubebs ph ix | Syrup of Gilli flower s. age
Gloves i Storax kei
Grapes — $32 Sugar of divers forts. p
Hops wee i U i er
Guniper Berries. uiia a t
25. IE ; bas. Mash
VU megs foistiA Creed T] W= ‘ald Rinds ^2
Pr per. seeing’ iu he di Ale RERE
PPT: Long... Deut pAfter-Ports, or Wala arani a
Quinces ` ; | Sugar Waters nive dias
EXT Pe coc Huh DregnLe s, er Grounds 4
Reyfint, fol. > cr 32 [| Beeror Ale e CL eom
Strawberries. , sul a Lees of Wines ^ Am ee S V »
Saffron. axem 7 Spirits of Wine. es
"Stage Foffemater. Kaia
2 e AWN


Eye Waters t E


: E i t Led 2. : +
p dtp JA UK
ARS. oldest {£323 prof ril A mA


Be

ass

An AtphaBetical Table T im Wien
| and Spirits treated of in the Mime ee


A. DONT
 Nified water p2ge 7 | Gont a water for page 34
Angelicawater - | Did, peip Hv ls
Agia Apcritióa EELGIQIU: Hakak ICE TIAS
Aquavite ss. 6| Aqua Hyflerica y: 3., 545
even: water e ARE e OT Y CEA RTT be.

Mee is à ‘| Lavender water: 21
Balm water 9 | Lavender water another 4t
Balfamint Water... t2 | Limmmater ` (749

; Gc Marjoramwater = © IE

- ^ Caraway Water ` I5 | Marigold water 1$
Cicatrixing Water : 58. Mint Water IT

Cinnamon water common 13 See ele uc
Cinnamon proper — 14] Aqua Nephretica Put MN
Clove water, . 7... 13| Nutmgpwater = 1$ —

Colick water s 42 Q Seres


Limon and Orange Water. 9
(Aqua Damen edorifera. E gg . | R ‘
eloralwater =, GE
Plagne Water `, "20
| Marks of the Small fus a Water


Face water for => 3235 ‘for, a dm ee
Aqua Febrifuga 42, Previous water ETE sae
. Fennel feed water :; 14. IM d MEI
Flowers waterof 23 os fli rover t5. een
Fruits E clit OT 25 a Rape MT L|
` ; í T g g : ` Rofe-


DE “page 94. MS. X. SEN d
SS eo RES is Tonboters for 5 37,40. > |
Sage water BS BSF Y Testers. 4 MAH ^ 8»
Sage water another) > 49, V AGAS Co os Glia
| Scabs a Water for 0934 lees MAOS 36337 3%
| Scorbutical Water I9 f farthach II
Aqua Splentica .— dM. UL PA ANE E pA
Stomach water ~ ~ ~ r0 Wind water“ ~*~ 17
Stomach water anakina 140] Zormnzoodapgter. 5 5/0057
Surfeit water 18 | Wound Waters ae


1


Sweat to P A water ibid. |,


An Alp habetical Table of the Difeates


“for i de Cures orRemedies are prefcribed `
: in the: fontgoing Treatife. $


Concoétion to help


adl
Confumption to PRA Jui p Gim 3


Convalfion fits
Cordials.
Cramp:


D.
AS Rus , CO page 21 Pigdfion tohelp ^ ~ page 7,12-
areen to jeere. ; E Dyfentery 9
Bludy 2 9 | Eje fpots in. them. UB.
Body windis — .. “7 | Eye web $5. “ibid,

. Bowels cold grief of... 15 | Bye reda?[s T. PESU.
Brain tocomfort ^ m: t QM Sugary
Brain infirmities of | 56 Face [pots hs j to take 4 away 3 3 -
Breath fhortnefs of - Ths Face redne/s afit c. Se peo
Breath flinkizg to E 14 | Falling fi ckuejs ` S 23.41
Breath [weet to "Rna -16 Feaverg? - Ee ey

nos $ VI Fifula VT aoas
Cankers. S rectos 133] Pierw to break 2 07777 5
Click `


(3o | Fle HAEC ruis dd


H. 13 y le 3

3 bid Hur faln to cau[e. to pe ipi
jd

Har.


at


3 An Alphabetical Table,ere


Hair taken off to chafe never to


grow again pig. 33
Head pain of 8
Head to ftrengehen 42


Heart to firengthen 8,953 4,17,42.

Heart to com, ort 15

Heart paffions of ZI
1


Infeétion prefervat.agaings Tis
Inward parts to ftrengtheny7: Xt,
L ~ 14575, 26


- Liver toftrengthen


914,41

Liver Infirmities of Ik
Liver chftvattions ~ 43
Lungs infirm to cure 12
Lungs to ftreagthen 14.41

d M.

Adilancholick fadnefs 26

`. AMefentery obftruttions- 43
Mother PiE tinie ef 8
Nature to reffore 10


AN ture languifbing to relieve 17
Oo


ObfiruẸions to ofai 9323
P..
Palfie 21
` Plagne 20.


-Plague prefervat..againft 7,17
Small Pox marks to. rake away 25


Scabs 34
Scurvy 19
Senfes to preferve. -17
Sight to preferve — 34
Sight to quicken — gu
Sight decayedto reffore


34
FINIS,


Sinews to comfort Dag.1
Shin to beantifiz T £ »
Speech loft toveflore 21
Spirits infeebledto revive 5
Spirits to comfort 17:26.
Spleen to comfort . 9
Spleen infirmities of 11 42
Spleen to frrengthen 14542
Stomach toftrengthen — 7, 1O»11
Stomach wind of 7
Stomach to Aromatize 10,15
Stomachto warm . 12,40
Stomach to comfort _- 13,23
Stomach loathing of ae
Stomach pain of. ibid.
Stomach naufeon[uefsof — ibid.
Stomach cold grief of Eg
Surfeit 13
Sweat to procure ibid,
Tears inordinate flux of. 36
Teeth to make White -.— 37340
‘Tetters 35 Tifick:
u.. `
| Ulcers ~ 32539
‘Ulcersto clenfe 36
Olcers to Cicatrize - 37038
Ulcers hells ` 33
Vomiting to fay. $9 -
Urine to provoke | 13,16,41543.—


W.
Windto breaks — 8,123145 X Cy
Women in labour to canfe eafily to
be delivered. 8


Worms. ibid,
Wounds 38
Wounds hollo, ibid, .


d ne diss ESETERE l
Ap bate Bante Carte SARS as tng havea 2m
ies va Saas? vim Misi co 23 E
ian


eee en


m i s


Fm E aay $ Ut


E


oi^ » PE E vm MCA b
Xt oue assit: eo :


y iuo E cda.
SEU ae sus


OChapro — Di&hrise of Orig


Pray Sir, be pacified, thereisno harm done. As Ibavetold
you before,fo 1 fay again, leavé it ro God to reconcile his own.
wiils;and let us follow that which he bath revealed in his Word. -
But you fay, The voice of this dejfrayeth all the teflimonies
which God giveth of bimfelf. What pali we do with thofe Seripa.
tures Where be faith, he alters not, if there be a fecret Will of bis

z that contronls bis revealed? page 81.. Inthisalfo you may hold

3 your felf content, for the Scriptares which fay God alters nor, .


L = areunderfteod concerning his will of Decree; which for the E
2 moft partis fecret to ur. But for his revealed will, in the de-
1 claration of merciesand judgments, he doth many times and
i upon fundry occafions alter his promifes or threats, Forthsfe P:


ate not madeaccording to hisabfolureand eternal Decrees,
but are fufpended upon outward conditions, asin the cafe ofthe
Ninevites,& Hezekiah forealledgediln this cafe the outward res
velations of the will of God are but fübférvient. co his eternal
Decree. And though they fcem to our underftanding to differ, F
yet they do excellently agree among themfelves. Now faft of all à
. you come to your chiefelt argoment, Yos canwor fee fay you,bow
fuch a wil can agree withthe death ofCbrift and the general tenders
of grace. V hefe are your words; 7 fear me too many have a bandin
nourifbing and maintaining this opiniongand then no marvail that
_  fomany cannot beleeve the record that God gave of bis Son. So
| - “When Ged fweareth by bimfelf, as be livethjbe defirethnot the
acath of him that dyeth, and that be would have no man to
perih, but that he gave bis Son a light auto the world that all
=. men thorough him might beleeve, far which parpofe he tafted
.  déath for every many and not for the Saints onely, but alfo for the
finnes: of the whole world. Bat thefe fayings are but the ree —
|. vealed will, andthe [ame people that bold this revealed will to —
- be a gnide to themfelves,do yer hold a contradiction in the Wills
-` of God, faying, it is true, God faith fo, but bis, meaning is nat
fo. Now. this fort of people honid not beleewe the revealed will
at-all if they bold bis fecret will to be the Superior pag 81.82.
I fay the fame as formerly, though the fecret will of God be the
Superiour, yet. we are tolooktothat whichis revealed. As
for thofe who affirme that the Lord hath chofen a peculiar num-
ber. -of people: fropythe beginning to falvation, IF you goto,
_ them man by man, chink you will fcarce finde any one of pi RU
> judg-


EUN


“il you we mult begin at the knowledge of —
Lof God. They allfay, that you muft begin fire — —
ith the general threats and the general promifes; and when
mea are "once bronght thorough che convictions ofthe fpirit _
^ £o fee their miferable and loft condition, then they fay they are :
"fir auditors of the dodcine of che Gofpel inthe tenders.and the ib
offers of grace... When the promileis apprehended by atrue — —
“and a lively faitht;he next work they fay is to attain the zuigozoe/a
. and fullaffurance of faith, And chen laftofall after manyex- =~
perieaces cometh the aflurance of election. In this method they —
- proceed inthe difcovery of this myftery,and not otherwife.
— . (Tho.g^ eleGion be firft in the Lords intention, yet they hold
a that the affurance thereof is and ought to be the laft in our feel-
` ing. And fothey expound the words of the Apoftle, give all
- diligence to make your calling and election fu e, 2 Pet. 1. to.
And -forther, though they maintain an affurance ofele@ion, ~
yet they do not hold an abfolute certainty, but fach a one asis
— Jyableto many temptations, defertions, and eclipfes. Neither
- dothey hold fuch an immediate affurance as though the elect
_ by intuition did look.ínto che Decrees of God;onely they ftand
-— for a mediate and difcurfive knowledge of the grace of election
~ . bythe neceffary effects and fruits thereof. » ‘Ais you know the ris
‘fing of the Sunne by. the dawning of theday. What other.
^ knowledgeisthisof the fecret willofGod, but that whichhe
_. himfelf hath firft made difcovery of by the fruits?
_. As for the fecret will of God in che Decree of non-ele&ion,
though they do beleeve according to the Scriptures that chere
“are a great multitude of men that the Lord doth intend to paffe
— by, yerif you come to fingulars, neither you.nor any mandli- ` ;
ving can {hew who they are in fpecial, -If you hall fay that fuch
and fuch a one is a notorious evil doer, and therefore arepro- -
bate. | Ananias thought but little betcer of Panl, Lord J have
heard of tbis man how much evil he bath done. But the ane
| fwer was, go thy way 1 have made bim a chofen velfel unto
me, AS&t.9.14, Ii fucha one hach continued many years under
- the means of grace,and doth -yet fand out in impenitency and -
- hardncfle of hearc: this is no infallible argument of non-e-
. Je@ion, for men may come into the Vineyard at all houres. So”
Uh Sas uuu ee ee ; RR CEDAR f


*


their courfes are damnable, and as long as they fo continue


they are in the way to damnation: yet we cannot abfolutely .


pronounce concerning the. perfons .themfelves, it belongeth
onely.to God to judge of their. final and eternal condiion


And forthat place which you alledg,thatGo4 jweareth that be de- |


fin eth not the death of bim that dye1b,\ pray you now telus the par-
ticular man in our method and way of teaching hat is not a cap-
able hearer of this doctrine,  Whatfoever God doth iatend in.
his fecret Decrees concerning the eternal tate of men what is
that to us ? We muft make the tenders,propofals and offers of
grace according to the termes fer downin the Golpel. Indeed,


as men do fubmitto the promile and do take Chrift for their -


-Head,fo God doth bring about that which he hath determined
in his fecret will. And therefore when you {peak concerning this


fort of people, That they fhould not beleeve his revealed will —


at all, if they bold bis fecret will to be the Superiour, what


good reafon can you (hew for that ?- for though the fecret will —


of God touching the falvation of. his ele& be the Superiour,
yet all the tenders of grace, all faith in the promifes are but the
ordinary way to bring usto falvation, Here is no contrariety:
of will againft will, butan excellent fubordination. Becaufe
the Lord had many people in the City of Corinth that did belong
to him in the determination of his fecret will, therefore tbe A-
poftle had a command to preach the Gofpelin that City, and
he did continue there the fpace of a yearand fix moneths, 4és
18, ver.10,11. But if itbe further objected, bow can you pray


for the falvation of all,feeing thar the Lord duh. determine to -


pafe by a great number of men? I anfwer, though it be fo,
we aretodotheduty. ‘Pawldidknow that a greater part of
the Jewes fhould be hardened, and that a remnant onely fhould
` be faved; yet for all this he did preach the Gofpel, and ufe all
means that he might fave fome of them, Rom, 11. 7,8, 9, Io.
Auguffine, one of the greateft affcrtors of the prerogative of


free-grace, in his book de correptione c? gratiahath thele words, |


We not knowing Who belong to the number oj rhe predeftinate,,
` aud. who not, ought fo to £e moved with the affection of cha-
K 3 riy


x


VPN S EN
d raso En ins


Rr EU


ai-


AM pulp to 2 faved. Arid fo far as
siwa "dee not able ta diftingnixh the
tla ave not predefinste; for this very


who are now alive, though the greater part éf them fhould be
greprobaied, [ecing this is not known tò us, there is nothing doth
binder but we may make [applications for all, ` Vindic. grate
Jib. 2. Crimin 4. Se. 9 Pagegt. Many more teftimonies
“might bring ofthatkind of people as you call them who
aintain the fecret will of God tobe the more prevailing, yet
iii Order to our underftandingthey fhew that. we are to look
=, ,onely unto that. which is revealed.: They do with one heart
dj and with One mouth declare that you muft begin atthe lower |
y. end of the ladder before you can cometo thetop." As for the -
© fecret atid the revealed willofGod;though this feem tous to be -
contradiGory,there i0 contradiction. Theriver that in appea»
stance feemeth to go another way if you follow it by divers ma-
"zes & turnings it will bring you to the Sea atlaft, But if you fur-
ther urge,how can the fending ofChrift into the world to.dy for
_ the loft fonues of men ftand with the Decree of election, where
& fome onely are chofen to falvation? “Aa/w, This poincis folidly
~ bandled by Dr. Davenant; in- his anfwer to that book chat
‘Pears the title Gods love fo mankind; and in another Treatife
“of the death of Chrif ^ Fhe fcope and tenor of the whole dit
< courfe is to hew that the non-ele& may be ‘partakers of many
Fruits of the death of Chrift, though they are not partakers oF
that grace which will certainly and infallibly bring chem to falz
MC. yation;and fo he doth concord the general attonement with the
< peculiar Decree of election. But becaufe this point! is'exceed-
< ingly controverted in thefe times, and is asit were tlie very rock
of offence, I will particularly fhew "how farre Ycan go along.
with you. ` Firft, Ido agree that by his death che Somhatli ret
moved the bar out of the way that hinders the falvation of man.
^ ForGod having once made a Law, is the day thar thia eate]?
“thereof thou [balt dye the death, according to the rigour of the
_. Covenant of works and the ftrictaeffe of divine juftice there
Mig ases?


Aw


pasc eet


cce


n TARP T ETE EN
