Source note (Tower of Babel staging): Jean Froissart, Chronicles of England, France, Spain, and the Adjoining Countries, translated by Thomas Johnes (London: William Smith, 1844), Vol. II. Text from Internet Archive item chroniclesofengl02froi_0 (OCR).
Public domain work. This file was produced from a public scan; OCR imperfections may remain.

Getty  Research  Institute


CHRONICLES


ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  SPAIN,

AND

atyotntng  (JTountries,

FROM  THE  LATTER  PART  OF  THE  REIGN  OF  EDWARD  II.  TO  THE  CORONATION  OF

HENRY  IV.

BY  SIR  JOHN  FROISSART.


CrandlatctJ  from  tije  jFrmrfj

WITH  VARIATIONS  AND  ADDITIONS  FROM  MANY  CELEBRATED  MSS.

BY  THOMAS  JOHNES,  ESQ.


TO  WHICH  ARE  PREFIXED,


A LIFE  OF  THE  AUTHOR,  AN  ESSAY  ON  HIS  WORKS,  AND  A CRITICISM  ON  HIS  HISTORY.


IN  TWO  VOLUMES.
VOL.  II.


LONDON :

WILLIAM  SMITH,  113,  FLEET  STREET.


MDCCCXLIV.


LONDON :

BRADBURY  AND  EVANS,  PRINTERS,  WRITEERLARS.


CONTENTS  OF  VOLUME  II.


chap.  BOOK  II. — Continued.  page

139.  The  English  and  Ghent  men  make  a sharp  at-

tack on  Ypres  ; but,  learning  that  the  king  of
France  had  marched  an  army  into  Artois,  they
instantly  break  up  the  siege  . 1

140.  Duke  Frederick  of  Bavaria  arrives  at  the  army

of  the  king  of  France. — Count  Guy  de  Blois,
notwithstanding  his  ill  health,  comes  to  Arras
attended  by  his  men-at-arms  . 2

141.  The  van  of  the  French  army  takes  Cassel  and

Trughen.  The  English  abandon  Bergues,  and
retire  to  Bourbourg,  wherein  the  king  of  France
besieges  them  . . 3

142.  Francis  Atremen  surprises  Oudenarde  in  the

night-time  . . . .7

143.  Amerigot  Marcel,  an  English  Captain  on  the

borders  of  Auvergne,  takes  by  stratagem  the
castle  of  Marquel. — The  countess  Dauphine
ransoms  it  for  five  thousand  francs  . . 8

144.  The  king  of  France  orders  Bourbourg  to  be  at-

tacked.—It  i9  surrendered  to  him  by  capitula-
tion, when  the  English  quit  Flanders. — He
then  disbands  his  army  . . .10


145.  The  bishop  of  Norwich  and  those  who  accom-

panied him  in  his  expedition,  are  badly  received
on  their  return  to  England. — Certain  great
personages  are  deputed  to  negotiate  a peace  or
truce  between  the  kings  of  France  and  Eng-
land.— The  duke  of  Bavaria  dies  . . 12

146.  During  these  conferences,  the  Ghent  men  insult

Tournay.— A truce  is  concluded  between  the
kings  of  France  and  England  and  their  allies  . 13

147.  The  earl  of  Flanders  dies. — The  ceremony  of  his

funeral  . . . . .14

148  The  earls  of  Northumberland  and  Nottingham
raise  a body  of  English  to  make  an  excursion
into  Scotland. — Ambassadors  are  sent  from
France  to  Scotland,  to  notify  the  truces  which
had  been  made  between  France  and  England  . 18

149.  The  barons  and  knights  of  Scotland,  in  conjunc-

tion with  some  French  knights,  undertake  an
expedition  into  England  without  the  knowledge
of  the  king  of  Scotland,  who  sends  a herald  to
make  his  excuses  to  the  king  of  England  . 19

150.  The  truces  which  had  been  made  between  the

French,  the  English,  and  their  allies,  are  pro-
claimed in  Scotland. — The  French  knights,  on
their  return  from  Scotland,  are  in  great  danger
from  the  Zealanders  . . .21

151.  The  lord  Destournay  assembles  forces  to  retake

Oudenarde. — He  conquers  it  by  stratagem  . 23

1 52.  Tiie  duke  of  Anjou  dies  at  a castle  near  Naples.

— His  widow  is  advised  to  solicit  the  Pope  for
the  possession  of  Provence  • .24

153.  Preparations  are  made  in  France  for  the  renewal

of  the  war  with  England. — The  duchess  of
Brabant  succeeds  in  forming  a marriage  between
the  children  of  Burgundy  and  those  of  Hainault  25

154.  The  king  and  the  nobles  of  France  and  Hainault

lay  in  great  provision  of  stores  at  Cambray. —


CHAP.  PAGE

The  duke  of  Lancaster  sends  ambassadors  to  the
earl  of  Hainault. — The  marriages  of  the  chil-
dren of  Burgundy  and  Hainault  are  concluded  27

155.  The  duke  of  Berry  betrotbs  his  daughter  to  the

son  of  the  count  de  Blois. — The  duke  of  Bour-
bon and  the  count  de  la  Marche  issue  their
summons  to  invade  Limousin  . . 28

156.  Sir  John  de  Vienne,  admiral  of  France,  sails  to

Scotland,  to  carry  on  the  war  against  the  Eng-
lish at  the  expiration  of  the  truce  . . 29

157.  The  pillagers  of  Ghent,  surnamed  Porkers,  com-

mit much  mischief. — Francis  Atremen  defeats
some  French  troops  near  Ardembourg  . 30

158.  The  duchess  of  Anjou  urges  her  claim  to  the

possession  of  Provence.  — Galeas  Visconti,
count  de  Vert  us,  orders  his  uncle,  Barnabo
Visconti,  to  be  imprisoned  . . .31

159.  William  de  Lignac,  seneschal  of  Saintonge  for

the  king  of  France,  conquers  from  the  English
the  castle  of  Aigle. — The  army  of  the  duke  of
Bourbon  takes  Montlieu,  and  the  bridge  of
Taillebourg,  while  besieging  that  place  . 32

160.  Sir  John  de  Vienne,  admiral  of  France,  arrives

in  Scotland  with  his  army. — He  meets  with
bad  treatment  there  . . .35

161.  The  town  of  Ardembourg  narrowly  escapes

being  taken  by  surprise  by  Francis  Atremen
and  his  Ghent  men  . . .37

162.  Lewis  of  France,  brother  to  king  Charles  VI.,

is  married  by  procuration  to  Margaret  of  Hun-
gary.— Madame  de  Brabant  causes  the  daugh-
ter of  duke  Stephen  of  Bavaria  to  come  to


France  to  marry  king  Charles  . . 38

163.  Francis  Atremen  takes  Damme. — Those  of

Bruges  attempt  to  retake  it  . . .41

164.  King  Charles  espouses  the  Lady  Isabella  of  Ba-

varia  He  besieges  Damme  . . 42

165.  Some  citizens  of  Sluys  are  beheaded  for  treason

to  the  French. — The  duke  of  Burgundy  ac-
quires Sluys  from  sir  William  de  Namur,  by
an  exchange  for  the  lands  of  Bethune  . 43

166.  Francis  Atremen  and  his  men  abandon  Damme.

— The  town  is  destroyed  by  the  French  : they
also  ruin  the  country  of  the  Quatre  Mestiers  . 44

167.  The  king  of  France  leaves  Flanders,  and  dis-

bands his  army. — During  the  time  he  is  at
Paris,  treating  with  ambassadors  from  Hun-
gary, news  arrives  that  the  Marquis  de  Blanc-


quefort  had  forcibly  married  the  heiress  of
Hungary  . . . . .45

168.  The  duke  of  Bourbon  takes  Verteuil  in  Poitou,

and  returns  to  the  king  of  France  at  Paris  . 47

169.  The  Scottish  army,  with  that  of  the  admiral  of

France,  enter  Northumberland  ; but  the  Eng-
lish being  on  their  march  to  meet  them,  they
retreat  within  the  borders  . . . ib.

170.  Sir  John  Holland  kills  lord  Ralph  Stafford.- —

The  earl  of  Stafford  demands  justice  from  the
king  . . . . .50


VI


CONTENTS.


CHAP.  PAGE

171.  The  king  of  England  destroys  the  abbey  of  Mel-

rose in  Scotland. — The  barons  of  France  and
Scotland  invade  Cumberland  . . 52

172.  The  king  of  England  destroys  Edinburgh,  and

great  part  of  Scotland. — The  French  and  Scots
do  the  same  on  the  borders  and  in  Northum-
berland . . . . .53

173.  The  earl  of  Suffolk  prevents  the  king  of  Eng-

land from  pursuing  the  French  and  Scots  who
had  invaded  England. — The  English  army
return  home  the  same  way  they  had  entered
Scotland. — The  French  and  Scots  return  in  a
similar  manner  . . . .54

174.  The  Scots  treat  the  admiral  of  France  and  his

men  very  harshly.' — They  return  to  France  . 55

175.  The  state  of  Flanders. — Two  honest  burgesses

of  Ghent  negotiate  secretly  a peace  with  the
duke  of  Burgundy,  with  the  assent  of  Francis
Atremen  . . • . .57

176.  The  two  citizens  fix  on  a day  to  assemble  their

friends,  to  accomplish  their  plan All  Ghent

are  unanimous  for  peace,  notwithstanding  the
attempts  to  prevent  it  by  the  governor  for  the
king  of  England  and  Peter  du  Bois  . 60

177.  Sir  John  d’Elle  brings  letters  patent  of  peace

and  pardon  to  the  men  of  Ghent,  from  tho
duke  of  Burgundy. — This  peace  is  confirmed
at  Tournay  by  other  letters  patent  on  each
side  . . . . .61

] 78.  The  treaty  of  peace  between  duke  Philip  of  Bur-
gundv,  earl  of  Flanders,  in  right  of  his  wife,
with  the  town  of  Ghent  and  its  allies  . 62

179.  Peter  du  Bois,  after  the  conclusion  of  the  peace,
retires  to  England  with  the  lord  Bourchier,
governor  of  Ghent  . . . .66

BOOK  TII.

1.  Froissart  gives  his  reasons  for  visiting  the  count

de  Foix  . . . . .68

2.  A short  repetition  of  what  is  contained  in  some

of  the  preceding  chapters,  for  the  better  under-
standing the  history  of  the  war  between  king
John  of  Castille  and  the  bastard  of  Portugal,
brother  to  the  late  king  don  Fernando  . 69

3.  The  count  de  Foix,  at  the  entreaty  of  tho  prin-

cess of  Wales,  remits  the  count  d’Armagnac
sixty  thousand  francs  out  of  his  ransom  of  two
hundred  and  fifty  thousand.  — The  English
garrison  at  Lourde  governs  the  adjoining
country  . . ' . .73

4.  Sir  John  Froissart,  in  his  journey  towards  Bearn,

is  accompanied  by  a knight  attached  to  the
count  de  Foix,  who  relates  to  him  how  the
garrison  of  Lourde  took  Ortingas  and  Le  Pal-
lier,  on  the  renewal  of  tho  war  in  Guycnne,
after  the  rupture  of  the  peace  of  Bretigny  . 75

5.  Sir  John  Froissart  and  the  knight  of  Foix  arrive

at  Casseres,  where  the  knight  relates  to  him
the  capture  of  the  town  by  the  Armngnacs,
and  also  the  recapture  of  it  by  the  count  de
Foix;  and,  as  they  journey,  they  converse  on
different  feats  of  arms  between  the  Armagnacs
and  Foixiens  . . . .78

6.  Froissart  continues  his  journey  with  the  knight

of  Foix,  who  relates  to  him  several  particulars
relative  to  the  sieges  of  Brest  and  Derval,  and
how  the  duke  of  Anjou  recovered  Malvoisin
and  Trigalet  from  the  English  . . 81

7.  Froissart  continues  his  journey. — In  travelling

from  Tournay  to  Tarbes,  the  knight  relates  to
him  how  the  garrison  of  Lourde  had  a sharp
rencounter  with  the  French  from  the  adjacent


CHAP.  PACK

garrisons,  with  several  particulars  touching  the
siege  of  Lourde,  and  the  death  of  the  governor,
who  would  not  surrender  it  to  his  relation  the
count  de  Foix  . . . .85

8.  During  the  journey  from  Tarbes  to  Morlens  the

knight  of  Foix  relates  to  Froissart  the  quarrel
and  reconciliation  between  the  duke  of  Berry
and  the  count  de  Foix, — and  also  the  cause  of
the  war  between  him  and  the  count  d’Armagnac  90

9.  Sir  John  Froissart  arrives  at  Orthes. — An  old

squire  relates  to  him  the  sruel  death  of  the
only  son  of  the  count  de  Foix,  and  how  strange
dreams  affected  sir  Peter  de  Bearn,  bastard-
brother  of  the  count  . . .94

10.  The  count  de  Foix  holds  solemn  festivals  on  the

feast  of  St.  Nicholas  and  at  Christmas  ; dur-
ing which  Froissart  becomes  acquainted  with  le
Bastot  de  Mauleon,  who  relates  to  him,  among
other  things,  how  several  of  the  captains  of  the
free  companies  were  defeated  before  the  town
of  Sancerre, — how  he  surprised  the  town  of
Thurie  in  the  Albigeois,  and  how  one  of  the
name  of  Limousin  revenged  an  outrage  com-
mitted against  him  by  Louis  Raimbaut  . 100

11.  A short  recapitulation  of  what  has  been  before

said  of  the  war  betw'een  king  John  of  Castile
and  John  of  Portugal. — This  subject  continued  109

12.  The  inhabitants  of  Santarem  rebel  against  some

of  the  men-at-arms  of  Castille. — The  king  of
Castille,  having  raised  the  siege  of  Lisbon,
marches  towards  that  town,  when  it  makes  its
peace  . . . . .112

13.  The  Spaniards  are  jealous  of  the  French  and

Beamois. — Five  hundred  English  arrive  to
serve  the  king  of  Portugal  . . .114

14.  The  king  of  Portugal  issues  his  orders  for  the

army  to  march  towards  Santarem. — The  king
of  Castille  quits  that  place  to  meet  him  . 116

15.  The  Portuguese  fortify  themselves,  near  the

church  of  Aljubarota,  by  the  advice  of  the
English. — King  John  of  Castille,  through  the
counsel  of  the  French  and  Beamois,  resolves  to
fight  them. — The  hatreds  and  jealousies  of  the
Castillians  still  continue  against  the  foreigners  . 118

16.  The  battle  of  Aljubarota,  in  which  the  French

and  Bearnois,  in  the  interest  of  Castille,  are
defeated  and  slain  by  the  Portuguese,  from  not
being  properly  supported  by  the  Castillians,
who  were  jealous  of  them. — They  afterwards
meet  the  same  fate  . . . .121

17.  Tbe  king  of  Castille,  after  his  defeat  at  Aljuba-

rota, retreats  to  Santarem. — The  king  of  Por-
tugal returns  to  Lisbon. — A truce  is  concluded
between  them  . 124

18.  The  count  dc  Foix  is  rapidly,  and  in  a secret

manner,  informed  of  what  had  happened  at
Aljubarota. — Froissart,  in  consequence  of  this,
relates  a story  which  had  been  told  him  of  a
familiar  spirit,  called  Orthon,  who  served  the


lord  de  Corasse  in  the  like  manner  . . 126

19.  Siege  is  laid  to  Brest. — St.  Forget,  and  several

other  English  garrisons  in  the  environs  of  Tou-
louse, are  recovered  by  the  French  . .129

20.  The  castle  of  Convalleis  stormed  by  the  French.

— Some  other  fortresses  turn  to  the  French
interest  ....  . 134

21.  A short  digression  on  the  manners  of  the  Eng-

lish and  Gascons  in  the  time  of  Froissart  . 136

22.  The  arrival  of  Leon,  king  of  Armenia,  in  France,

on  which  occasion  Froissart  describes  the  state
of  Genoa  in  his  time,  and  relates  the  death  of
the  king  of  Cyprus  . . . 137


CONTENTS.


vii


CHAP.  PAGE

23.  The  king  of  Armenia  relates  maay  stories  of

the  Turks  and  Tartars  . . . 139

24.  Continuation  of  the  intelligence  wh  eh  the  king

of  Armenia  relates  to  the  barons  of  France  . 141

25.  During  these  wars  of  the  Turks,  dissensions  con-

tinue between  the  two  popes,  Urban  VI.  and
Clement  VII. — Friar  John  de  la  Roche-Tail-
lade  delivers  a good  apologue,  respecting  tho
papacy,  to  the  cardinals  . . .144

26.  The  reasons  why  the  Portuguese  prefer  the  Grand

Master  of  Avis  for  their  king  to  don  John,
king  of  Castille,  who  had  married  Beatrice,
daughter  of  don  Ferdinand,  late  king  of  Por-
tugal .....  147

27.  F.  oissart  travels  to  Middleburgh  in  Zealand,  to

make  inquiries  from  a knight,  who  is  going  to
Prussia,  of  the  affairs  of  Portugal  . .148

28.  The  Portuguese,  after  the  battle  of  Aljubarota,

send  ambassadors  to  England  to  inform  the
king  and  his  nobles  of  that  event  . . 149

29.  Lawrence  Fongasse,  one  of  the  ambassadors  from

Portugal  to  England,  relates  to  the  duke  of
Lancaster  the  events  which  had  happened  in
Portugal  since  the  earl  of  Cambridge  had  left  it  152

30.  The  ambassadors  from  Portugal  return  with  satis-

factory answers. — The  duke  of  Lancaster  em-
barks on  an  expedition  to  recover  Castille  . 165

31.  Many  French  knights  and  squires  offer  their  ser-

vices  to  the  king  of  Castille  . . .167

32.  The  duke  of  Lancaster,  in  his  voyage  to  Castille,

attacks  the  French  before  Brest,  and  forces
them  to  raise  the  blockade  . . . 168

33.  The  duke  of  Lancaster  arrives  at  Corunna  in

Galicia. — The  French,  in  the  service  of  Spain,
enter  the  castle  to  oppose  him. — They  shortly
after  defeat  a party  of  his  foragers  . . 169

34.  The  duke  of  Lancaster,  after  remaining  before

Corunna  upwards  of  a month,  marches  his  army
to  Sant  Jago,  which  surrenders  on  capitulation  171

35.  The  French  knights  leave  Corunna,  and  join  the

king  of  Castille. — They  acquire  much  wealth
by  plundering  the  country,  in  order  to  frustrate
the  English  . . * . .173

36.  Great  preparations  are  made  throughout  France

for  the  invasion  of  England.  — The  death  of
Francis  Atremen  . . . .174

37.  The  French  put  themselves  to  useless  expense  on

their  marine. — The  English  make  judicious
preparations  to  oppose  them  . . 177

38.  The  king  of  Portugal,  when  informed  of  the  duke

of  Lancaster’s  arrival  at  Sant  Jago,  writes  him
friendly  letters. — The  king  of  Castille  demands
succours  from  France. — The  town  of  Rouelles
in  Galicia  taken  by  the  English  . .180

39.  The  marshal  of  the  duke  of  Lancaster’s  army

attacks  and  gains  by  treaty  the  town  of  Ville-
clope  in  Galicia. — The  duke  sends  ambassadors
to  the  king  of  Portugal  to  arrange  an  interview
between  them  . . . .182

10.  The  duke  of  Lancaster  has  an  interview  with  the
king  of  Portugal. — A marriage  is  agreed  upon
between  the  king  aud  the  lady  Philippa,  daugh-
ter of  the  duke  . 186

41.  The  duke  of  Lancaster’s  marshal  gains  for  him

several  places  in  Galicia. — The  conduct  of  the
king  of  Castille  ....  189

42.  The  king  of  France  goes  to  Lille,  with  the  intent

to  invade  England. — Sir  Simon  Burley  advises
the  removal  of  the  shrine  of  St.  Thomas  a
Bccket  from  Canterbury  to  Dover  castle,  for
fear  of  the  French  . . . 195

43.  The  king  of  France  visits  his  fleet  at  Sluys. — The


CHAP.

king  of  Armenia  crosses  to  England  to  attempt
a reconciliation  between  the  two  kings. — The
answer  he  receives  ....

44.  Tho  duke  of  Berry  leaves  Palis  for  Sluys. — Tho

constable,  after  suffering  many  delays  from
contrary  winds,  at  length  joins  the  king  of
France  .....

45.  The  lord  dc  Guistelles  appeases  an  insurrection  of

the  men  of  Bruges  against  the  French. — The
invasion  of  England  is  given  up  on  account  of
contrary  winds,  tho  near  approach  of  winter,
and  in  conformity  with  the  advice  of  the  duke
of  Berry,  which  causes  great  rejoicings  in  Eng-
land .....

46.  Two  champions  tilt  at  Paris  for  life  or  death

47.  The  death  of  Peter,  king  of  Arragon. — His  suc-

cessor, king  John,  detains  prisoner  the  arch-
bishop of  Bordeaux,  who  was  negotiating,  for
the  duke  of  Lancaster,  the  payment  of  certain
sums  which  he  claimed  as  due  to  him  from
Arragon  ....

48.  The  duke  of  Lancaster  makes  war  on  Arragon.

— The  archbishop  of  Bordeaux  is  released

The  viscountess  of  Castle-Bon,  suspected  of
having  admitted  the  English  into  her  castle,
appeases  the  king  of  Arragon,  through  tho  in-
terference of  the  count  de  Foix

49.  Those  companions  who  had  conquered  Duren,

are  defeated  and  slain  by  a stratagem  of  Ray-
mond de  Bachez,  cousin  to  the  king  of  Arragon

50.  An  achievement  of  arms  performed  before  the

seneschal  of  Bordeaux,  between  a knight  attached
to  France  and  one  attached  to  England

51.  Sir  Oliver  de  Clisson  delivers  John  of  Blois,  son

of  the  late  lord  Charles  of  Blois,  from  Lis  long
imprisonment  in  England,  and  gives  him  his
daughter  in  marriage,  to  the  great  displeasure
of  the  duke  of  Brittany

52.  France  makes  preparations  to  assist  king  John  of

Castille The  duke  of  Bourbon  is  appointed

commander  in  chief  of  the  French  army  .

53.  The  English  fleet  defeats  that  of  sir  John  de

Bucq,  admiral  of  Flanders  for  the  duke  of  Bur-
gundy.— The  English,  after  doing  much  mis-
chief to  Sluys,  and  that  part  of  the  country,
return  to  London  .

54.  The  king  of  Portugal  sends  ambassadors  to  the

duke  of  Lancaster  to  conclude  his  marriage
with  the  lady  Philippa. — Sir  Barrois  des
Barres  is  ordered  by  the  king  of  Castille  to  the
castle  of  Noya  ....

55.  The  duke  of  Lancaster  sends  a reinforcement  to

the  siege  of  Ribadavia. — On  that  town  being
taken  by  storm,  Maures  instantly  surrenders  .

56.  The  lady  Philippa  of  Lancaster  is  married,  by

procuration,  to  the  king  of  Portugal.  — The
ceremony  is  again  performed  with  great  mag-
nificence and  feastings  at  Oporto

57.  The  duke  of  Lancaster  marches  his  army  to

Entenja. — The  Inhabitants  send,  with  the  con-
sent of  the  duke,  to  the  king  of  Castille  for
succour  .....

58.  The  duchess  of  Lancaster  and  her  daughter  visit

the  king  and  queen  of  Portugal The  inha-

bitants of  Entenja,  receiving  neither  answer
nor  succour  from  the  king  of  Ca3tille,  surrender
to  the  duke  of  Lancaster,  according  to  the
terms  of  their  treaty

59.  The  count  de  Foix  permits  the  French  captains

to  pass  through  his  territories,  on  condition  they
pay  for  whatever  they  take.  — They  arrive  at  St.
Jean  Pied  de  Port,  at  the  entrance  of  Navarre


PAGR

198

201

201

203

206

207

208
209

ib.

214

215

217

219

221

222

223

225


Vlli


CONTENTS.


CHAP.  PAGE

60.  Sir  John  Holland  and  sir  Reginald  De  Roye  per.

form  a tilt,  in  the  town  of  Entenya,  before  the
king  and  queen  of  Portugal  and  the  duke  and
duchess  of  Lancaster  . . . 228

61.  The  king  of  Portugal  promises  to  enter  Castille

while  the  duke  of  Lancaster  finishes  the  con-
quest of  Galicia,  and  then  to  unite  their  forces  23 1

62.  Sir  William  de  Lignac  and  sir  Walter  de  Hassac

traverse  the  kingdom  of  Navarre  with  their
army,  and  arrive  at  Burgos,  where  they  meet
the  king  of  Castille  ....  232

63.  Many  plans  are  offered  to  the  king  of  Castille  for

carrying  on  the  war  : he  is  determined  by  the
commanders  of  the  French  force  to  delay  an
engagement  until  the  arrival  of  the  duke  of
Bourbon,  and  to  make  excursions  from  the  dif-
ferent garrisons  ....  233

64.  The  constable  de  Clisson  makes  great  preparations

to  invade  England. — Much  murmuring  and  dis-
content in  England  against  king  Richard  and
his  council  .....  236

65.  The  constable  of  France  with  several  others

make  preparations  to  invade  England. — The
duke  of  Brittany  practises  to  prevent  this  ex-
pedition .....  239

66.  The  duke  of  Brittany  summons  his  barons  and

knights  to  a council  at  Vannes. — Sir  Oliver
de  Clisson  and  the  lord  de  Beaumanoir  are
made  prisoners  in  the  castle  of  Ermine,  and  in
great  danger  of  their  lives  . . .241

G7.  The  constable  de  Clisson,  through  the  exertions
of  the  lord  de  Laval,  obtains  his  liberty,  by
paying  a large  sum  of  money,  and  delivering
up  to  the  duke  of  Brittany  some  of  his  castles  243  I

68.  The  lord  de  Beaumanoir  is  set  at  liberty  by  the

duko  of  Brittany,  that  he  may  collect  the  ran-
som for  the  constable,  who  obtains  his  freedom
on  surrendering  the  places  agreed  on. — The
imprisonment  of  the  constable  is  known  at  the
court  of  France  ....  245

69.  The  duke  of  Brittany  dictates  the  terms  of  the

treaties,  for  the  surrender  of  different  places  by
the  constable.  — The  expeditions  from  Tie-
guier  and  Harfleur  are  broken  up. — The  con-
stable, on  his  deliverance,  makes  his  complaint
to  the  king  of  Franco,  and  resigns  to  him  his
office  of  constable  ....  246

70.  The  duke  of  Gueldres  sends  a challenge  to

France,  in  favour  of  England  . . 249

7 1 . Two  Breton  captains,  having  valiantly  defended

the  town  of  Orense  against  the  duke  of  Lan-
caster, capitulate  on  terms  offered  by  the
English  .....  250

72.  The  king  of  Portugal,  being  repulsed  in  his  at-

tempts to  storm  the  castles  of  Santarem,  burns
the  town. — He  marches  to  Ferrol  in  Galicia  . 254

73.  The  king  of  Portugal,  not  being  able  to  take

Ferrol  by  storm,  gains  it  by  an  ambuscade,  and
puts  it  under  the  obedience  of  the  duko  of
Lancaster  .....  255

74.  The  army  of  the  duke  of  Lancaster  come  before

Noya  in  Galicia. — The  English  are  received,  at
the  barriers,  by  Barrois  des  Barrcs  and  his
companions  ....  256

75.  The  king  of  France  sends  some  of  his  nobles  to

demand  from  the  duke  of  Brittany  the  reason
of  the  insult  offered  to  him  in  the  person  of  his
constable,  sir  Oliver  de  Clissoa  . . 258

76.  Froissart  mentions  the  person  from  whom  he

learnt  the  arrest  of  the  constable  de  Clisson :
who  likewise  informs  him  that  sir  Bertrand  du
Guesclin  ought  to  be  called  Du  Glay-Aquin  . 258


77.  Ambassadors  from  the  kiug  of  France  wait  on  the

duke  of  Brittany  respecting  the  arrest  of  his
constable. — The  duke,  having  heard  them,
gives  them  his  answer  . . .261

78.  The  dukes  of  York  and  Gloucester,  uncles  to  the

king,  confederate,  with  other  barons,  against
him  and  his  council. — The  people  are  discon-
tented with  the  duke  of  Ireland. — The  Lon-
doners, through  the  means  of  the  duke  of
Gloucester  and  his  friends,  obtain  from  the  king,
that  a day  should  bo  fixed  for  those  who  had
managed  the  finances  to  render  an  account  of
them  . . . . .263

79.  The  commissioners  of  accounts  condemn  sir

Simon  Burley  to  be  imprisoned  in  the  Tower
of  London. — Sir  Thomas  Trivet  is  killed  by  a

fall  from  his  horse Sir  William  Elmham  is

acquitted  of  having  taken  money  for  the  surren-
der of  Bourbourg  and  Gravelines  . . 267

80.  The  king  of  England  having  left  London,  sir

Simon  Burley  is  beheaded,  to  the  great  dis-
pleasure of  the  king  and  queen. — A change  of
the  ministry  . . . .269

81.  W bile  the  council,  on  the  state  of  the  nation,  is

sitting  at  London,  king  Richard,  by  the  advice
of  the  duke  of  Ireland,  determines  to  wage
war  against  his  uncles  and  the  principal
towns  .....  271

82.  The  king  of  England  issues  his  orders  for  all

capable  of  bearing  arms  in  the  neighbourhood
of  Bristol  to  march  to  London. — Sir  Robert
Tresilian,  sent  thither  as  a spy,  is  discovered,
and  beheaded  by  command  of  the  king’s
uncles  .....  273

83.  When  the  news  of  the  death  of  sir  Robert  Tre-

silian i3  brought  to  the  archbishop  of  York  and
sir  Nicholas  Bramber,  they  confirm  the  king  in
his  intention  of  making  war  on  his  uncles. —

The  duke  of  Ireland,  as  Lieutenant-General,
leads  the  army  to  Oxford  . . . 275

84.  The  duke  of  Ireland  sends  three  knights  to

London  to  learn  intelligence. — The  dukes  of
York  and  Gloucester  take  the  field  against  the
duke  of  Ireland  and  his  army  . . 277

85.  The  king’s  uncles  gain  a victory  over  the  duke

of  Ireland,  who  saves  himself  by  flight  with
others  of  his  army  ....  278

86.  The  duke  of  Ireland  with  some  of  his  companions

escapes  into  Holland.  — The  archbishop  of
Canterbury  is  sent  by  the  dukes  of  York  and
Gloucester  to  treat  with  the  king. — He  conducts
him  with  honour  to  London  . .279

87.  The  king,  by  the  advice  of  his  uncles  and  council,

summons  the  nobility  and  commoners  of  the
realm  to  a parliament  at  Westminster,  and  to
renew  their  homage  to  him  . . . 281

88.  The  king  of  Portugal  and  duke  of  Lancaster  unite

their  forces. — When  distressed  to  cross  the
river  Duero,  a Galician  squire,  prisoner  of  war,
directs  them  to  a ford  . . . 282

89.  Sir  Walter  de  Passac  and  sir  William  de  Lignac

advise  the  king  of  Castille  not  to  risk  a battle
before  the  arrival  of  the  duke  of  Bourbon.  — A
party  of  the  English  skirmish  with  the  garrison
of  Vilalpando. — The  duke  of  Lancaster  is  dis-
pirited by  his  own  ill  health  and  the  great
sickness  of  his  army  . . . 285

90.  The  duke  of  Lancaster  disbands  his  army. —

Three  English  knights,  having  obtained  pass-
ports, wait  on  the  king  of  Castille,  to  nego-
tiate a retreat  for  the  men-at-arms  through  his
kingdom  . ...  . 287


CONTENTS.


IX


CHAP.  PAGE

91.  The  English  ambassadors  obtain  passports  from

the  king  for  their  sick  to  pass  in  safety  through
Castillc,  or  to  remain  there  to  recover  their

health. Many  knights  and  squires  die  in

Castillc. — The  duke  of  Lancaster  danger-
ously ill  at  Sant  Jago  . . . 289

92.  Sir  John  Holland  takes  leave  of  the  duke  of

Lancaster,  and  returns  with  his  lady  through
Castillc,  Navarre,  and  Bayonne,  to  Bordeaux.

Sir  John  d’Ambreticourt  goes  to  Paris,  to  ac-
complish a deed  of  arms  with  the  lord  Bou-
cicaut  . . . . .291

93.  The  duke  of  Bourbon,  on  leaving  Avignon,  con-

tinues his  march  to  Burgos,  where  lie  meets
the  king  of  Castille. — The  duke  of  Lancaster,
being  informed  of  this,  addresses  himself  to
the  king  of  Portugal. — The  duke  of  Bourbon,
after  a short  stay,  takes  leave  of  the  king  of
Castille,  and  returns  to  France  . . 293

94.  The  count  de  Foix  receives  the  duke  of  Bour-

bon most  magnificently,  and  makes  him  hand-
some presents. — The  men-at-arms  who  were
under  sir  Walter  de  Passac  and  sir  William  de
Lignac  sack  the  town  of  St.  Phagon,  on  their
departure  from  Castille. — The  king  is  very
wroth  for  this  against  the  two  captains,  who
had  remained  with  him  . . 293

95.  The  duke  of  Lancaster  leaves  Saint  Jago  for

Coimbra,  and  thence  goes  to  Bayonne  . 296

96.  The  count  d’Armagnae  takes  great  pains  to  pre-

vail on  the  free  companies  to  give  up  their
forts  for  a sum  of  money. — The  count  de
Foix,  underhand,  prevents  his  success  . 298

97.  A digression  on  the  quarrel  between  the  houses

of  Brabant  and  Gucldres The  life  of  count

Reginald  of  Gueldres  and  his  successors,  until
the  reign  of  Charles  VI.  of  France. — The
duke  of  Gueldres,  being  an  ally  of  England,
sends  his  challenge  to  France. — The  cause  of
this  challenge  ....  300

98.  Froissart  returns  to  the  quarrel  between  the

houses  of  Brabant  and  Gueldres,  which  he  had
left  unfinished  in  the  preceding  chapter,  and
continues  the  history  of  the  dukes  of  Gueldres
to  duke  William,  who  sends  his  challenge  to
Charles  VI.,  king  of  Franee  . 304

99.  A continuation  of  the  history  of  the  quarrel  be-

tween Brabant  and  Gueldres. — On  the  death
of  duke  Wenceslaus,  the  young  William  of
Juliers,  duke  of  Gueldres,  endeavours  by  every
means  to  regain  the  three  castles. — He  allies
himself  to  the  king  of  England,  because  France
supports  the  rights  of  the  widow-duchess  of
Brabant  ....  309

100.  The  duchess  of  Brabant  sends  ambassadors  to

France  for  assistance  against  the  duke  of  Guel-
dres.— They  arrive  at  the  same  time  the  duke’s
challenge  is  brought,  and  receive  favourable

answers  . 311

101.  Concerning  the  rumours  of  the  signs  of  sanctity

which  were  manifested  by  the  cardinal  de  Lux-
embourg after  his  death. — The  extraordinary
end  of  the  king  of  Navarre  . . . 312

102.  The  duke  of  Berry  besieges  Ventadour  . 314

103-  The  duke  of  Burgundy  sends  four  hundred  spears

to  the  duchess  of  Brabant. — They  surprise  and
burn  the  town  of  Seaulle  in  Gueldres  . 315

104.  Geronnet  de  Maudurant,  one  of  the  captains  of
Perrot  le  Bearnois,  having  been  made  prisoner
by  John  Bonne-Lance,  at  Montferrant  in  Au-
vergne, finds  means,  after  his  ransom  was  paid,
to  putle  Bearnois  in  possession  of  Montferrant  316


CHAP.  PAGE

105.  Perrot  lc  Bearnois  and  his  companions  detorminc

not  to  keep  possession  of  Montferrant. — They
make  a sally  on  some  troops  from  Clermont,
who  had  advanced  to  the  barriers  of  the  cap-
tured town,  and  instantly  defeat  them  . 323

106.  Perrot  le  Bearnois  and  his  companions  having

plundered  Montferrant,  retreat  to  their  forts.

His  answer  to  the  Dauphin  of  Auvergne,  who
complains  of  his  having  surprised  this  town
during  the  time  treaties  were  in  agitation  for
his  leaving  the  country  . . . 325

107.  The  Lord  Lewis  of  Blois  marries  the  lady  Mary

of  Berry,  and  the  lord  John  of  Berry  the
princess  Mary  of  France,  who  dies  shortly  after.

— The  death  of  the  lady  Jane  of  Armagnac,
duchess  of  Berry  ....  326

108.  While  the  council  of  Franco  is  in  deliberation

whether  or  not  to  march  an  army  against  the
duke  of  Gueldres,  the  duke  of  Berry  sends  the
count  d’Estampes  to  the  duke  of  Brittany,  to
endeavour  to  win  him  over  to  the  party  of
France,  after  having  alienated  himself  from  it
by  the  arrest  of  the  constable  . . 326

109.  The  Castillians  and  French,  after  the  departure

of  the  duke  of  Lancaster  fr  om  Galicia,  re-con-
quer,  in  a very  short  time,  all  the  towns  and
castles  he  had  won The  English  abuse  Cas-

tille, when  in  their  own  country. — The  king
of  France  and  his  council  invite  the  duke  of
Ireland  who  had  fled  from  England,  to
Paris  .....  329

110.  The  council  of  France  disagree,  as  to  the  king’s

going  into  Germany,  on  account  of  the  state  of
the  realm. — The  duke  of  Brittany  strengthens
his  garrisons,  and  forms  alliances  with  England
and  the  king  of  Navarre. — The  English  raise
a large  army  ....  332

111.  The  Brabanters  lay  siege  to  the  town  of  Grave.

— The  constable  of  France  gains  the  towns  of
Saint  Malo  and  Saint  Matthieu  de  Fine  P0-
terne,  and  garrisons  them  with  his  men  . 334

112.  The  duke  of  Lancaster  has  intentions  of  marry-

ing his  daughter  to  the  duke  de  La  Touraine,
brother  to  the  king  of  France. — The  duke  of
Berry  proposes  himself  for  her  husband. — The
duke  of  Lancaster  is  much  satisfied  thereat  . 335

113.  The  lord  de  Coucy  and  other  barons  of  France

are  sent  to  the  duke  of  Brittany. — Before
their  arrival,  he  had  restored  to  the  officers  of
the  constable  the  places  he  had  taken  from
him  .....  337

114.  While  Helion  de  Lignac,  ambassador  from  the

duke  of  Berry  to  the  duke  of  Lancaster,  is
negotiating  the  marriage  with  his  daughter,  the
king  of  Castille  sends  ambassadors  privately  to
break  it  off,  and  to  demand  the  lady  in  mar-
riage for  his  son. — Helion  de  Lignac  is  sent
away,  the  day  of  their  arrival,  with  some  truces
respecting  the  frontiers  of  Aquitaine  . 340

115.  The  dukes  of  Berry  and  Burgundy  leave  Paris

for  Blois,  to  hold  a conference  with  the  duke
of  Brittany,  who  meets  them  there. — They
persuade  him,  against  his  inclination,  to  come
to  Paris  . . . 343

1 16.  Lewis  of  Anjou,  son  to  the  late  duke  of  Anjou,

uncle  to  king  Charles  VI.,  makes  his  public
entry  into  Paris  as  king  of  Sicily. — The  duke
of  Brittany  comes  there  shortly  after. — Thomas
Harpurgan,  an  Englishman,  and  John  Des
Barres,  a Frenchman,  perform  a deed  of  arms
before  the  king  of  France  at  Montereau  sur
Yonne  . . . 344


X


CONTENTS.


CHAP.

117.  Perrot  Le  Bearnois  takes  the  field  by  command

of  the  earl  of  Arundel,  who  lands  his  forces  at
Marans,  near  La  Rochelle

118.  The  Rochellers  skirmish  with  the  English  near

Marans. — The  English,  after  pillaging  the
country  round,  retire  with  their  booty  to  their
fleet. — Perrot  le  Bearnois  does  the  same  to
his  fort,  with  a great  deal  of  plunder

119.  The  Brabanters  press  Grave  hard  by  their  siege.

— The  Gueldrians  burn  a bridge  the  Brabanters
had  thrown  over  the  Meuse,  to  enter  Gueldres

120.  The  Brabanters,  having  passed  through  Raves-

tein,  enter  Gueldreland,  and  are  defeated  by
the  duke  of  Gueldres. — The  siege  of  Grave  is
raised  in  consequence

121.  The  duke  of  Gueldres,  after  the  defeat  of  the

Brabanters,  returns  to  Nimeguen — On  the
news  of  this  victory,  the  king  and  council  of
France  send  ambassadors  to  the  emperor  of
Germany,  the  more  securely  to  carry  on  the
war  against  Gueldreland

122.  The  king  of  France  and  his  council  permit  the

duke  of  Brittany  to  return  home. — The  states
of  Brabant  send  excuses  to  the  king  of  France,
for  not  allowing  his  army  to  pass  through  their
country. — The  success  of  the  ambassadors  with
the  emperor  ....

123.  The  count  de  Blois  sends  two  hundred  lances

to  serve  the  king  in  his  expedition  to  Gueldres.
— The  ambassadors  bring  favourable  answers
from  the  emperor  of  Germany. — The  king  of
France  continues  his  march  towards  the  forest
of  Ardennes. — Sir  Helion  de  Lignac  makes  his
report  to  the  duke  of  Berry,  touching  his  mar-
riage with  the  daughter  of  the  duke  of  Lan-
caster .....

124.  The  principal  barons  of  Scotland  assemble  in  arms

to  make  war  on  England. — They  learn  from  a
spy  whom  they  take  prisoner  that  the  English
are  acquainted  with  their  intentions

125.  The  Scots  form  their  army  into  two  divisions;

one,  under  the  command  of  sir  Archibald
Douglas,  marches  to  Carlisle,  and  the  other
to  Newcastle  on  Tyne,  commanded  by  the  earl
of  Douglas,  at  the  barriers  of  which  place  he
conquers  the  pennon  of  sir  Henry  Percy

126.  The  earl  of  Douglas,  when  encamped  before  Ot-

terbourne,  is  attacked  by  sir  Henry  Percy,  to
re-conquer  his  pennon,  and  a general  battle
ensues  .....

127.  The  earl  of  Douglas,  in  rallying  his  men  who

were  retreating,  is  mortally  wounded. — Sir
Ralph  Percy,  badly  wounded,  surrenders  to  sir
John  Maxwell,  who  puts  him  in  the  hands  of
the  earl  of  Moray  . .

128  The  earl  of  Douglas,  though  mortally  wounded,
orders  his  banner  to  be  raised,  as  the  bearer
bad  been  slain,  and  forbids  hia  lamentable  state
to  be  made  known  to  his  men,  urging  them  on
to  the  combat,  by  which  they  defeat  their  ene-
mies, and  make  sir  Henry  Percy,  with  many
more,  prisoners

129.  The  bishop  of  Durham  is  anxious  to  succour  the

English  and  rescue  sir  Henry  Percy,  but  is  so
badly  supported  by  his  men,  that  he  is  forced  to
retreat. — He  makes  sir  Henry  Lindsay  prisoner,
who  had  taken  sir  Matthew  Redman

130.  The  bishop  of  Durham  marches  on  the  morrow

of  the  battle  to  the  Scots  camp,  but  retires
without  daring  to  attack  it. — The  Scots  return
to  their  own  country.

131.  The  king  of  France  enters  the  duchy  of  Luxem-


CHAP.  PACE

bourg,  on  his  march  to  Gueldres. — The  duke
of  Juliers,  father  of  the  duke  of  Gueldres,
makes  excuses  for  his  son  to  the  king  of
France. — He  is  graciously  received,  and  has
the  territory  of  Vierson  restored  to  him,  for
which  he  pays  homage  to  the  king  . , 377

132.  King  Charles  VI.  quarters  his  army  on  a friendly

footing  in  the  duchy  of  Juliers. — A squire  of
Auvergne  is  murdered  by  a wood-cutter  whom
he  is  leading  away  as  his  prisoner  . . 379

133.  The  duke  of  Juliers  and  archbishop  of  Cologne

leave  the  king  of  France,  and  go  to  the  duke
of  Gueldres  at  Nimeguen. — By  their  remon-
strances and  negociations,  he  obtains  peace  with
the  king  of  France  and  duchess  of  Brabant  . 38

134.  The  earl  of  Arundel  and  his  fleet  are  driven  by

storms  to  La  Palice,  near  La  Rochelle. — The
lord  Lewis  de  Sancerre,  having  had  information
of  this,  chases  them  at  sea,  but  in  vain. — The
duke  of  Lancaster  marries  his  daughter  to  the
heir  of  Castille  ....  383

135.  The  king  of  France,  while  on  the  frontiers  of

Juliers,  has  part  of  his  camp  surprised,  and
several  prisoners  made,  by  some  German  pil-
lagers.— The  king,  being  twenty-one  years  of
age,  takes  on  himself  the  government  of  his
kingdom. — He  sends  to  the  king  of  Castille,  on
hearing  of  the  marriage  of  his  son  with  the
daughter  of  the  duke  of  Lancaster,  to  remon-
strate with  him  not  to  enter  into  any  treaties
that  may  be  prejudicial  to  him  or  to  his  king-
dom .....  384

136.  The  duke  of  Berry,  being  disappointed  in  his

marriage  with  the  daughter  of  the  duke  of
Lancaster,  sends  to  the  count  do  Foix  to  de-
mand the  daughter  of  the  count  de  Boulogne,
whom  he  had  in  wardship  . . . 385

137.  Geoffry  Tdte-noire  is  wounded  in  the  head,  at  a

skirmish,  and  commits  excesses  which  cause

his  death He  makes  a will,  and  substitutes

two  governors  of  Ventadour  in  his  room  . 387

138.  The  duke  of  Gueldres  is  made  prisoner  in  Prussia:

and,  though  delivered  by  the  knights  of  the
Teutonic  order,  he  returns  to  keep  his  faith  to
the  person  who  had  taken  him  . . 388

139.  Sir  John  de  Vienne,  having  received  his  answer

from  the  king  of  Castille,  returns  to  France. —

The  duke  of  Lancaster  proceeds  in  the  mar-
riage of  his  daughter  to  the  infant  of  Castille.—

The  earl  of  Arundel,  having  made  some  cruises
on  the  coasts  of  Normandy,  returns  with  his
fleet  to  England  ....  390

1 40.  The  lord  Lewis  de  Sancerre  visits  the  count  de

Foix  at  Orthfes. — A deed  of  arms  is  performed,
before  the  duke  of  Lancaster  at  Bordeaux,  be-
tween five  French  and  five  Englishmen  . 391

141.  The  duchess  of  Lancaster  carries  her  daughter  to

Castille,  to  marry  her  to  the  infant. — Having
found  the  bones  of  her  father,  she  has  them  con-
veyed to  Seville,  and  buried  with  regal  obsequies  393

142.  The  duke  ofBcrry  negotiates  so  successfully  with

the  count  de  Foix,  that  he  sends  to  him  his
cousin  of  Boulogne,  whom  he  instantly  marries  394

143.  Certain  prudent  men  negotiate  a truce,  for  three

years,  between  the  French  and  English,  and
all  their  allies  ....  395

BOOK  IV.

1.  Froissart  relates  his  travels  after  he  had  left

Orthes  .....  397

2.  Queen  Isabella  of  France  makes  her  public  entry

into  the  city  of  Paris  . . . 398


page

346

348

350

352

354

356

358

361

364

366

368

370

372

374


CONTENTS.


xi


cH*r.  Piop.

3.  Sir  John  de  Chatel-Morant  brings  from  England

the  truces  for  three  years,  sealed  by  king  Richard
and  his  allies.  — Lewis  of  Anjou,  king  of
Sicily,  is  betrothed  and  married  to  a daughter
of  the  king  of  Arragon  . . . 405

4.  The  king  of  France  is  desirous  of  visiting  the  dis-

tant parts  of  his  kingdom. — At  the  request  of
tho  lord  de  Coucy,  he  orders  the  duke  of
Ireland  out  of  Prance  . . . 407

5.  King  Charles  of  France  visits  his  uncle  the  duke

of  Burgundy,  and  pope  Clement  at  Avignon  . 408

6.  The  king  of  France  sends  the  dukes  of  Berry

and  Burgundy  to  their  homes,  to  their  great
dissatisfaction,  and  continues  his  journey  from
Avignon  to  Languedoc  . . .410

7.  During  the  time  king  Charles  of  France  is  at

Montpelier,  three  of  his  chamberlains  under-
take to  hold  a tournament  near  to  Calais,
against  all  comers  . . . .411

8.  During  the  king  of  France’s  residence  at  Beziers,

accusations  are  made  against  Bethisao,  trea-
surer to  the  duke  of  Berry. — Thinking  to  be
sent  to  the  pope  and  escape  punishment,  he
confesses  himself  a heretic  and  sodomite,  but
is  transferred  over,  b.y  the  official  at  Beziers,
to  the  secular  power,  and  burnt  . . 416

S.  When  the  king  of  France  is  at  Toulouse,  he
summons  the  count  de  Foix,  who,  on  his
arrival,  pays  him  homage  for  his  county  of
Foix  .....  421

10.  The  king  of  France  and  his  brother,  the  duke  of

Touraine,  wager  which  shall  arrive  the  soonest
at  Paris,  from  Montpellier,  each  attended  by
only  one  knight  ....  424

11.  The  death  of  pope  Urban  at  Rome,  called  the

anti-pope. — Pope  Clement  writes  to  the  king
of  France,  his  uncles,  and  the  university  of
Paris,  on  the  occasion. — The  election  of  pope
Boniface  by  the  Roman  cardinals  . . 426

12.  The  surrender  of  the  strong  castle  of  Ventadour

in  Limousin,  that  had  been  the  chief  residence
of  Geoffry  Tdte-noire  . . . 428

13.  Three  French  knights  hold  a tournament  at

Saint  Inglevere,  near  Calais,  and  defend  the
lists,  for  thirty  days,  against  all  comers,  from
England  and  elsewhere  . . . 434

14.  The  duke  of  Bourbon  is  appointed  chief  if  an

expedition  to  Africa,  that  is  under  taken  by
several  knights  of  France  and  England  at  the
solicitation  of  the  Genoese  . . . 446

15.  Aymerigot  Marcel,  captain  of  the  pillaging  com-

panies, having  fortified  La  Roche  de  Vandais,
on  the  borders  of  Limousin  and  Auvergne,  is
besieged  by  the  viscount  de  Maux,  by  com-
mand of  the  king  of  France  . . 449

16.  Aymerigot  Marcel  endeavours,  hut  in  vain,  to

raise  the  siege  of  La  Roche  de  Vandais,  by
letters  and  messages  to  the  king  of  England,
the  duke  of  Lancaster,  the  viscount  de  Meaux,
and  even  to  the  duke  of  Berry  . . 455

1 7.  Aymerigot  Marcel  having  left  La  Roche  de  Van-

dais, to  seek  succour  from  other  pillagers,  his
lieutenant,  Guyot  du  Sel,  is  surprised  by  an
ambuscade,  and  the  fort  surrenders  on  capitu-
lation .....  460

18.  The  messengers  from  England,  hearing  of  the

surrender  of  La  Roche  de  Vandais,  take  leave
of  the  duke  of  Berry. — Aymerigot  retires  to
the  house  of  a relation,  called  Tournemine,
who  betrays  him  to  the  king  of  France. — He
is  carried  to  Paris,  and  there  beheaded,  and
his  body  quartered  . . .462


CHAP.

19.  The  Christian  lords  weigh  anchor,  and  leave  the

island  of  Comino,  in  order  to  lay  siege  to  the
town  of  Africa. — The  manner  in  which  they
conduct  themselves

20.  The  conduct  of  the  Saracens  during  tho  siege  of

the  town  of  Africa. — They  send  to  demand
from  the  French  the  cause  of  their  making  war
against  them  ....

21.  Some  miracles  are  shown  to  the  Saracens,  as

they  attempt  to  attack  the  camp  of  the  Chris-
tians— Several  skirmishes  during  the  siege. —
The  climate  becomes  unwholesome,  and  other
accidents  befal  the  besiegers  .

22.  A challenge  is  Bent  by  the  Saracens  to  offer

combat  of  ten  against  ten  Christians. — The
Saracens  fail  in  their  engagement. — The  town
of  Africa  is  stormed,  but  unsuccessfully,  and
with  the  loss  of  many  worthy  men

23.  A grand  tournament  is  holden  at  London. —

The  king  of  England  gives  splendid  entertain-
ments during  the  siege  of  the  town  of  Africa

by  the  Christians The  count  D’Ostrevant

receives  the  Order  of  the  Garter,  which  dis-
pleases the  king  of  France  .

24.  The  siege  of  Africa  is  raised The  cause  of  it.

— The  knights  and  squires  return  to  their
own  countries  •

25.  King  Charles  of  France  proposes  to  march  to

Italy,  to  form  a union  of  the  Church  by  force,
and  thence  to  Barbary. — Ambassadors  from
England  offer  proposals  for  a peace  between
him  and  king  Richard. — The  death  of  John,
king  of  Castille. — He  is  succeeded  by  his  son
Henry,  who  is  crowned  king,  though  but  nine
years  of  age  ....

26.  Of  the  expedition  of  count  John  d’Armagnac

into  Lombardy. — His  death  at  the  siege  of
Alexandria  ....

27.  The  king  of  England  is  anxious  to  make  a peace

with  France. — The  duke  of  Gloucester  throws
obstacles  in  the  way.  — Sir  Peter  de  Craon,
formerly  the  favourite  of  king  Charles  and  his
brother  the  duke  of  Touraine,  incurs  their
hatred,  and  takes  refuge  with  the  duke  of
Brittany  ....

28.  The  death  of  the  young  count  Lours  de  Chas-

tillon,  son  to  count  Guy  de  Blois. — The  sud-
den death  of  Gaston  count  de  Foix

29.  Sir  Evan  de  Foix,  bastard-son  to  the  late  count,

intending  to  carry  away  privately  the  treasure
of  his  father,  is  discovered  by  the  townsmen  of
Orthos,  who,  however,  promise  every  assistance
to  him  and  to  his  brother  that  is  not  incompa-
tible with  the  true  heir  to  the  count  de  Foix,
the  viscount  de  Chastelbon

30.  The  corpse  of  the  count  de  Foix  is  brought  from

Rion  to  Orthos. — The  king  of  France  sends
the  bishop  of  Noyon  and  the  lord  de  la  Riviere
into  the  county  of  Foix,  to  make  arrangements,
according  to  the  decree  of  the  council

31.  The  viscount  de  Chastelbon,  heir  to  the  count

de  Foix,  attends  his  funeral  at  Orth&s. — He
is  advised  to  send  to  the  before-named  com-
missioners from  France,  to  demand  possession
of  the  succession  which  had  fallen  to  him  by
the  death  of  the  count  de  Foix  : He  afterwards
sends,  to  the  same  purport,  to  the  king  of
France  • . . . .

32.  The  king  of  France  and  the  duke  of  Brittany

meet  at  Tours,  to  settle  their  differences. —
Ambassadors  from  England  come  thither  also
to  negotiate  a peace  . .


PAOS

465

470

472

474

477

481

484

488

495

498

500

502

503
507


CONTENTS.


xii

CHaP.

33.  Sir  Roger  d’Espaign  and  sir  Espaign  du  Lyon,

ambassadors  from  the  viscount  de  Chastelbon,
practise  so  successfully  with  the  court  of  France,
that  he  is  declared  heir  and  successor  to  the
count  de  Foix  by  letters  patent  from  the  king
of  France  ....

34.  During  the  residence  of  the  king  of  France  and

duke  of  Brittany  at  Tours,  their  differences
are  partly  accommodated  by  means  of  the
marriages  of  the  duke’s  son  with  a princess  of
France,  and  a son  of  John  of  Brittany,  son  to
the  late  Lord  Charles  de  Blois,  with  a daughter
of  the  duke  of  Brittany

35.  The  count  de  Blois  and  Mary  of  Namur,  his

countess,  sell  to  the  duke  of  Touraine  the
county  of  Blois  with  other  lands.  — The
viscount  de  Chastelbon  takes  possession  of  the
inheritance  of  the  late  count  de  Foix

36.  A grand  assembly  at  Amiens,  of  the  king  and

lords  of  France  and  England,  to  treat  of  a peace
between  the  two  kingdoms

37.  The  French  and  English  lords,  not  being  able  to

agree  on  the  terms  of  peace,  prolong  the  truce
one  year. — The  English,  on  their  return,  are
accompanied  by  the  lord  de  Chasteau-Morant,
to  bring  back  the  king  of  England’s  final
answer  . ...

38.  The  first  illness  of  king  Charles. — Count

Bernard  d’ Armagnac  docs  homage  to  the  king.
— The  lord  de  Chastelmorant  returns  from
England  with  an  answer  respecting  peaco
3<J.  Sir  Peter  do  Craon,  through  malevolence,  way-
lays sir  Oliver  de  Clisson,  beats  and  severely

wounds  him The  king  and  council  are  greatly

angered  thereat  ....

40.  The  king  of  France  sends  his  own  physicians  and

surgeons  to  visit  the  constable  during  the  night.
— He  orders  the  provost  of  Paris  to  pursue  sir
Peter  de  Craon,  who  had  fled  for  refuge  to  the
duke  of  Brittany. — Some  of  his  men,  having
remained  at  Paris,  are  executed

41.  The  king  of  France  summons  the  duke  of  Brit-

tany to  deliver  up  sir  Peter  de  Craon. — His
answer  not  being  satisfactory,  the  king  declares
war  against  him. — Tho  king’s  uncles  murmur
at  the  great  riches  of  the  constable,  which  were
disclosed  by  his  will

42.  The  duke  of  Touraine  is  created  duke  of  Orleans

— The  constable  of  France  being  recovered,  tho
king  of  France  advances  to  Mans,  with  the
intention  of  continuing  his  march  to  make  war
on  the  duke  of  Brittany  . . .

43.  The  king  of  France,  during  his  stay  at  Mans,

again  sends  some  noble  personages  to  the  duke
of  Brittany,  with  orders  to  dismiss  sir  Peter  de
Craon. — The  king  is  informed  that  sir  Peter
is  arrested  at  Barcelona  by  command  of  the
queen  of  Arragon

44.  The  king  having  left  Mans  to  cany  on  h'S  war

against  Brittany,  is  ordered  to  return  by  an
unknown  person. — This  same  day',  his  mind  is
deranged,  and  he  is  brought  back  to  Mans
45  King  Charles  VI.  of  France,  continuing  de-
ranged in  mind,  is  removed  from  Mans  to  Creil,
on  the  Oise,  the  regency  of  the  kingdom  is
given  to  the  dukes  of  Berry  and  Burgundy  by
the  throe  estates  ....

46.  The  lord  de  Coucy  introduces  the  great  physician,

master  William  de  Harseley,  to  cure  the  king
of  France. — Various  causes  assigned  for  this
disorder  . . . .

47.  The  dukes  of  Berry  and  Burgundy  ruin  those


CHAP.  page

W'ho  had  been  the  confidential  servants  of  the
king. — The  duke  of  Burgundy  treats  rudely
the  constable  de  Clisson  . 539

48.  Sir  Oliver  de  Clisson,  after  the  harsh  answer  of

the  duke  of  Burgundy,  retires  to  Montlehery.

— Being  pursued  thither,  he  has  time  to  make
his  retreat  to  Chasteau  Josselin  . .541

49.  The  lord  de  la  Riviere,  the  principal  minister  of

the  king  of  France  before  his  illness,  is  made
prisoner  by  orders  of  the  dukes  of  Berry  and
Burgundy. — The  duchess  of  Berry  intercedes
for  him  with  her  lord  . 542

50.  After  many  adjournments  and  delays,  the  con-

stable de  Clisson  is,  by  judgment  of  the  court
of  parliament  of  Paris,  banished  the  realm  of
France,  condemned  to  pay  a fine  of  one  hun-
dred thousand  francs,  and  declared  incapable
of  holding  the  office  of  constable  of  France  . 545

51.  King  Charles  recovers  his  senses  through  the

mercy  of  God,  and  the  diligent  attention  of  his
physician,  master  William  de  Harseley  . 546

52.  The  truce  is  prolonged  between  France  and  Eng-

land.— Tho  viscount  de  Chastelbon  does  homage
for  the  county  of  Foix  to  the  king  of  France  548

53.  The  king  of  France  is  in  great  danger  of  his  life

at  a masked  dance  of  men  dressed  like  savages.

— Pope  Boniface  and  his  cardinals  at  Rome
send  a learned  friar  to  the  king  . . 550

54.  The  duchess  of  Berry  supports  the  lord  de  la

Riviere,  in  opposition  to  the  duchess  of  Bur-
gundy . ...  553

55.  The  lord  de  Coucy  refuses  to  accept  the  sword

of  constable  in  the  room  of  Clisson. — The  dukes
of  Berry  and  Burgundy  invest  the  lord  Philip
d’Artois,  count  d’Eu,  with  it,  in  consideration
of  his  marriage  with  the  lady  Mary  of  Berry,
widow  of  the  lord  Louis  do  Blois  . . 554

56.  The  constable  de  Clisson,  during  his  absence

from  France,  wages  war  on  the  duke  of  Brit-
tany . . 556

57.  A treaty  of  peace  concluded  between  the  kings

of  France  and  England,  through  the  mediations
of  their  uncles  . .558

58.  The  treaty  of  peace  is  nearly  broken  off  by  pope

Boniface,  and  by  the  king  of  France  relapsing
into  his  former  illness  . . . 562

59.  The  death  of  pope  Clement  at  Avignon. — The

election  of  pope  Benedict. — A learned  clerk
in  the  archbishopric  of  Rheims,  supports  the
right  of  the  see  of  Avignon,  by  his  speeches
and  preachings  . . 563

60.  The  king  of  England  is  advised  to  make  a jour-

ney to  Ireland,  and  to  settle  on  the  duke  of
Lancaster  and  his  heirs  for  ever  the  duchy  of
Aquitaine  with  all  its  dependencies  . . 565

61.  The  death  of  the  lady  Anne  of  Bohemia,  queen

of  England.  The  duke  of  Lancaster  lands  in
Aquitaine,  and  the  king  of  England  in  Ireland  566

62.  Sir  John  Froissart  arrives  in  England,  and  is

presented  to  king  Richard  by  the  duke  of  York,
uncle  to  the  king  ....  568

63.  The  information  Froissart  gains  in  England,

touching  the  opposition  of  the  inhabitants  of
Aquitaine  to  the  gift  the  king  of  England  had
. made  of  it  to  his  uncle  the  duke  of  Lancaster.

— The  commissioners  sent  to  remonstrate  on
the  matter  with  the  king  cannot  obtain  a de-
cisive answer  relative  thereto  . .571

64.  Froissart  presents  his  Book  of  Love  Poems  to

king  Richard  of  England. — He  relates  what
he  had  heard  of  the  last  expedition  of  the  Eng-
lish to  Ireland  . . • .577


PAGE

509

511

513

516

519

520

521

524

527

529

530

532

535

537


CONTENTS.


CHAP.  PAGE

65.  The  duke  of  Lancaster  is  ordered  back  from

Aquitaine. — King  Richard  receives  a friendly
answer  to  the  proposals  his  ambassadors  had
made  to  the  king  of  France  for  a marriage
between  him  and  the  lady  Isabella,  princess  of
France  .....  582

66.  A squire  of  Normandy,  called  Robert  the  Her-

mit, having  declared  ho  had  seen  a vision,
while  at  sea,  ordering  him  to  interfere  in
making  a peace  between  France  and  England,
is  sent  to  king  Richard  and  his  uncles  to  this
effect  .....  584

67.  The  lord  de  la  Riviere  and  sir  John  le  Mercier

are  delivered  out  of  prison  . . . 588

68.  The  duke  of  Brittany  and  sir  Oliver  de  Clisson

are  reconciled. — The  dowager  queen  of  Sicily
institutes  a law-suit  in  the  courts  of  Parisagainst
sir  Peter  de  Craon  ....  589

69.  The  king  of  Hungary  writes  to  the  king  of  France

his  situation  in  respect  to  the  6ultan  Bajazet. —

John  of  Burgundy,  eldest  son  to  the  duke  of
Burgundy,  marches,  as  commandcr-in-chief,  an
army  to  the  succour  of  the  Hungarians  . 593

70.  The  count  d’Ostrcvant,  brother-in-law  to  John

of  Burgundy,  being  desirous  to  march  to  Hun-
gary, is  advised  by  his  father  to  attempt,  in  pre-
ference, the  re-conquest  of  Friesland,  which
belonged  to  them  ....  596

71.  John  of  Burgundy,  count  of  Nevers,  leads  an

army  into  Hungary  against  the  Turks. — The
negotiations  for  the  marriage  of  king  Richard
of  England  with  the  eldest  princess  of  Franceare
continued  .....  597

72.  The  queen  of  Naples,  widow  to  the  late  duke  of

Anjou,  obtains  judgment  in  parliament  against
sir  Peter  de  Craon  . . . 598

73.  The  marriage  is  concluded  between  king  Richard

of  England  and  the  lady  Isabella,  eldest  daughter

to  Charles  VI.  king  of  France The  duke  of

Lancaster  marries  again. — Sir  Peter  de  Craon
is,  after  some  time,  delivered  from  prison,  at  the
entreaty  of  the  young  queen  of  England  . 599

74.  John  of  Burgundy,  count  of  Nevers,  passes  the

Danube  with  his  army. — After  the  capture  of
several  places,  the  town  of  Nicopoli  is  besieged  60 1

75.  A digression  from  the  principal  history  to  ex-

plain why  John  Galeas  of  Milan  was  moved  to
give  the  Turk  information  of  the  expedition
intended  against  him  . . . 604

76.  While  Bajazet  is  raising  a great  army  to  oppose

the  Hungarians  and  French,  the  lordde  Coucy,
during  the  siege  of  Nicopoli,  defeats  a large  body
of  Turks  with  an  inferior  force  . . 607

77.  The  duke  of  Gueldres  prevents  the  earl  of  Derby

joining  the  counts  of  Hainault  and  of  Ostrevant
in  their  expedition  against  Friesland Negotia-

tions for  peace,  between  France  and  England
are  continued  until  king  Richard  crosses  over  to
Calais,  to  conclude  them,  with  the  duke  of
Burgundy  .....  609

78.  The  counts  of  Hainault  and  of  Ostrevant  raise  a

large  army  of  men-at-arms, knights  and  squires,
to  invade  Friesland. — The  king  of  France
sends  them  assistance,  under  the  command  of
count  Walleran  de  Saint  Pol  and  the  lord
Charles  d’Albret  . . . .612

79.  The  earl  of  Hainault  lands  with  his  army  in

Friesland. — He  defeats  the  Frieslanders  in
battle,  but  is  nevertheless  forced  to  retire  to
Holland,  to  pass  the  winter,  without  having
gained  anything  in  Friesland  . . . 615

80.  The  ceremony  of  the  marriage  of  the  king  of


ciur.

England  witli  a princess  of  Franco. — The  king
of  France  delivers  her  to  tlio  king  of  England,
in  his  tent  between  Ardres  and  Calais

81.  The  Christians  arc  forced  to  raise  the  siege  of
Nicopoli,  by  tbe  arrival  of  Bajazet  in  Turkey.
— They  are  defeated,  and  the  Hungarians  put
to  flight,  through  the  presumptuous  folly  of  the
French  .....
8'2.  The  Turks,  after  the  battle  of  Nicopoli,  put  to
death  all  their  prisoners,  except  the  count  de
Nevers  and  some  other  great  lords

83.  The  French  and  others  who  bad  been  in  Turkey

suffer  great  hardships  on  their  return  home,
after  having  escaped  frem  tho  battle  of  Nicopoli.
— Sir  James  de  Helly  brings  certain  intelligence
of  this  defeat  to  tho  king  of  France

84.  Sir  Jamcsde  Helly,  having  received  his  despatches

from  tho  king  of  France,  arrives  in  Hungary,  in
his  way  to  Turkey. — The  king  sends  sir  John
de  Chastelmorant,  with  presents  to  Bajazet,  and
his  recommendations  in  favour  of  the  French
prisoners  — The  manner  in  which  they  are
treated  .....

85.  Sir  James  de  Helly,  on  his  return  to  Turkey,  ob-

tains his  liberty,  and  carries  a passport  from  tho
sultan  to  sir  John  de  Chastclmorantin  Hungary.
— Sir  John  de  Chastelmorant  is  forced  to  send
a messenger  to  the  king  of  France,  to  inform
him  that  the  king  of  Hungary  will  not  allow
the  presents  to  be  carried  to  the  sultan

86.  The  duchess  of  Orleans  is  suspected  of  causing

the  king’s  illness  .

87.  The  duke  and  duchess  of  Burgundy  diligently

exert  themselves  to  find  means  to  ransom  the
count  de  Nevers,  their  son,  and  his  fellow-
prisoners  in  Turkey. — The  king  of  Hungary,
through  the  persuasion  of  the  grand  master  of
Rhodes,  permits  the  ambassador  from  the  king
of  France  to  pass  through  his  kingdom  with  the
presents  for  the  sultan  Bajazet

88.  Tbe  duke  of  Gloucester  plots  the  destruction  of

his  nephew  the  king  of  England. — The  king,
having  information  of  his  practices,  has  him
arrested  by  the  earl  marshal  .

89.  The  lord  de  Coucy  and  the  count  d’Eu,  constable

of  France,  die  in  Turkey,  before  the  treaty  for
their  deliverance  is  arranged. — A ransom  is
agreed  on  for  the  other  prisoners  who  were
taken  at  the  battle  of  Nicopoli

90.  The  French  lords  who  had  been  prisoners  in

Turkey  return  by  sea  to  Venice

91.  The  lord  Louis  de  Sancerre  is  made  constable  of

France,  in  the  room  of  the  count  d’Eu,  who
had  died  in  Turkey. — Boucicaut,  during  his
absence  with  the  count  de  Nevers,  is  appointed
marshal  of  France  in  the  place  of  the  lord
Louis  de  Sancerre. — The  French  lords  who
had  been  prisoners  in  Turkey  return  to  France

92.  The  deaths  of  the  duke  of  Gloucester  and  the  earl

of  Arundel. — The  manner  in  which  the  dukes
of  Lancaster  and  York,  and  the  Londoners,
take  the  matter  ....

93.  A great  assembly  holden  at  Rheime,  by  the  em-

peror of  Germany  and  king  of  France,  on  the
schism  in  the  Church,  and  on  the  means  of
uniting  the  two  parties

94.  The  earl  marshal  challenges  the  earl  of  Derby,

son  to  the  duke  of  Lancaster,  in  the  presence
of  the  king  and  his  council  .

95.  King  Richard  of  England  banishes  the  earl  of

Derby  from  England  for  ten  years,  and  the
earl  marshal  for  his  life


xiii

PAGE

618

622

625

627

629

631

633

634

635

644

649

653

655

659

661

6C6


xiv


CONTENTS.


CHAP.  PAGE

96.  The  earl  of  Derby,  in  consequence  of  his  banish-

ment, leaves  England  for  France. — The  earl
marshal,  in  obedience  to  his  sentence,  goes  to
Flanders,  and  thence  into  Lombardy  . 667

97.  The  count  d’Ostrevant  sends  ambassadors  to  the

earl  of  Derby. — The  earl  arrives  at  Paris  . 668

98.  The  emperor  and  the  king  of  France  pursue  the

plans  they  had  settled  at  Rheims,  for  a union
of  the  church. — The  bishop  of  Cambray  is
Bent  by  them  to  the  pope  at  Rome. — The  an-
swer that  is  made  him  . . . 669

S9.  The  king  of  France,  in  conformity  to  the  advice
of  his  nobles  and  the  university  of  Paris,  sends
the  bishop  of  Cambray  to  pope  Benedict  at
Avignon,  on  the  subject  of  a union  of  the
church,  and  also  his  marshal  Boucicaut  thither
to  constrain  the  pope  to  obedience  by  force  of
arms,  should  there  bo  occasion  670

100.  In  consequence  of  the  anstver  of  pope  Benedict,

the  marshal  Boucicaut  obliges  him  by  force  of
arms  to  submit  himself  to  the  will  of  the  king
of  France  respecting  a union  of  the  church  . 672

101.  The  marshal  Boucicaut  returns  to  Hungaryagainst

the  Turks.— The  earl  of  Derby  sends  to  re-
quest permission  of  the  duke  of  Lancaster  to
accompany  Boucicaut  in  this  expedition. — The
king  of  England  is  solicited  by  the  king  of
France  to  engage  his  subjects  to  a neutrality
between  the  two  popes,  until  a new  election
shall  take  place  ; but  they  refuse  compliance
with  their  monarch’s  request  . .674

102.  The  answer  the  duke  of  Lancaster  gives  the

knight  who  had  been  sent  to  him  by  the  earl
of  Derby,  to  request  his  permission  to  join  the
expedition  against  the  Turks. — Tho  death  of
the  duke  of  Lancaster  . . .675

103.  The  king  of  England  makes  the  king  of  France

acquainted  with  the  death  of  the  duke  of  Lan-
caster, but  does  not  notice  it  to  the  earl  of
Derby,  though  son  to  the  late  duke  . 676

104.  The  treaty  of  marriage  between  the  earl  of  Derby

and  the  daughter  of  the  duke  of  Berry  is  broken
off  by  the  king  of  England,  through  the  means
of  the  earl  of  Salisbury  . . . 677

105.  King  Richard  of  England  proclaims  a tournament,

which  is  attended  by  very  few  persons. — On
setting  out  for  Ireland,  he  banishes  the  earl
of  Northumberland  and  his  son  the  kingdom  . 681

106.  The  English,  and  particularly  the  Londoners,

rise  in  favour  of  the  earl  of  Derby  against

king  Richard  . . . 682

107.  The  archbishop  of  Canterbury  is  sent  to  France

by  the  Londoners,  and  others  of  their  party  in
England,  to  bring  back  the  earl  of  Derby  . 684

108.  The  earl  of  Derby  takes  leave  of  the  king  and

lords  of  France,  to  visit  his  cousin  the  duke  of
Brittany  .....  685


CHAP.

109.  The  earl  of  Derby  sails  from  Brittany  to  England.

— His  reception  by  the  citizens  of  London  .

1 10.  The  earl  of  Derby,  now  duke  of  Lancaster,  un-

dertakes the  government  of  England,  and,  by
the  aid  of  the  Londoners,  determines  to  seize
the  throne. — He  marches  in  arms  against  king
Richard  at  Bristo.  ....

111.  King  Richard  is  informed  that  the  earl  of  Derby

is  marching  against  him  with  a powerful
army. — He  retires  to  Flint  castle  .

1 1 2.  King  Richard  surrenders  himself  to  the  earl  of

Derby,  to  be  conducted  to  London

113.  The  lady  of  Coucy  is  taken  awa^from  the  young

queen  of  England,  and  a new  household  ap-
pointed for  her. — King  Richard  is  confined  in
the  Tower  of  London

114.  The  earl  of  Rutland,  constable  of  England,

hearing  the  king  has  surrendered,  dismisses  his
men-at-arms. — Four  knights  of  the  king’s
chamber,  having  been  put  to  death  by  the
Londoners,  he  is  advised  by  those  who  were
imprisoned  with  him  to  resign  his  crown  to
the  duke  of  Lancaster

115.  King  Richard  of  England  resigns  his  crown  and

kingdom  into  the  hands  of  the  duke  of  Lan-
caster

116.  A parliament  meets  at  Westminster,  when  the

duke  of  Lancaster  is  publicly  acknowledged

king  of  England The  great  magnificence  of

his  coronation  ....

117.  Intelligence  of  the  imprisonment  of  king  Richard

is  carried  to  France  by  the  lady  of  Coucy. —
King  Charles  is  much  displeased  thereat. —
The  duke  of  Bourbon  attempts  in  vain  to
reduce  Bordeaux,  and  other  towns  in  Aqui-
taine, to  the  crown  of  France

118.  The  council  of  France,  by  permission  of  king

Henry,  send  over  persons  to  visit  Isabella,
queen  to  Richard  II.

119.  The  earls  of  Huntingdon  and  Salisbury,  and

some  others,  having  failed  to  murder  treache-
rously king  Henry  of  Lancaster,  rise  in  arms
against  him.  — They  are  defeated  and  be-
headed, and  their  heads  sent  to  the  king

120.  On  the  death  of  John  of  Montfort,  duke  of

Brittany,  the  Bretons  undertake  the  wardship
of  the  young  duke,  and  to  be  friendly  to
France. — The  French  king,  distrusting  the
sentiments  of  the  new  reign  in  England,  makes
provision  against  any  sudden  change

121.  The  death  of  king  Richard. — The  truces  are

renewed  and  kept  betrveen  France  and  England.
— The  earl  marshal,  who  had  been  banished
England,  dies  at  Venice

1 22.  Fiance  preserves  a neutrality  between  the  popes

of  Rome  and  Avignon. — The  election  of  the
emperor  Robert  ....


PAGR

687

689

690
690

693

694
696

698

701

703

704

707

708
710


THE


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  SPAIN,

&c.  &c.


CHAPTER  CXXXIX. THE  ENGLISH  AND  GHENT  MEN  MAKE  A SHARP  ATTACK  ON  YPRES  ;

BUT,  LEARNING  THAT  THE  KING  OF  FRANCE  HAD  MARCHED  AN  ARMY  INTO  ARTOIS,
THEY  INSTANTLY  BREAK  UP  THE  SIEGE.

T always  happens,  that  in  war  there  are  gains  and  losses  : very
extraordinary  are  the  chances,  as  those  know  well  who  follow
the  profession.  The  siege  of  Ypres  was  pushed  on  with
unwearied  force ; and  it  was  fully  the  intention  of  the  bishop

Among  the  many  assaults,  there  was  one  much  severer  than  the
rest ; for  it  lasted  from  morning  until  almost  night.  Many
valiant  actions  were  done  by  several  on  both  sides,  and  the
English  and  Flemings  made  vast  exertions  to  conquer  it.  The
besieged  created  that  day  four  knights,  John  de  St.  Pi,  nephew
to  the  governor,  Frantjois  Belle,  George  Belle,  and  John  Belle,
who  showed  themselves  good  knights  in  this  first  display  of  their  knighthood.  An  English
squire,  called  Lewis  Lin,  was  killed  * at  this  attack,  which  was  very  sharp  ; and  numbers  were
wounded  on  each  side,  who  too  rashly  exposed  themselves.

The  English  archers,  posted  on  the  ditches  of  the  town,  shot  so  expertly  and  rapidly  that
scarcely  any  dared  to  appear  on  the  battlements  to  defend  the  place.  There  were  collected
that  day  in  Ypres  two  tons  f of  artillery,  especially  arrows,  which  were  shot  into  the  town,
so  that  none  ventured  to  pass  through  those  streets  near  the  walls  where  the  attack  was  made,
for  fear  of  being  killed,  if  not  well  armed  and  shielded.  This  attack  lasted  until  night,  when
the  English  and  Flemings,  who  had  fought  the  whole  day  in  two  battalions,  returned  to  the
camp  quite  tired,  as  were  likewise  those  in  the  town.

The  English  and  Flemings,  finding  they  could  not  take  the  town  by  storm,  and  having
expended  much  of  their  artillery,  resolved  to  have  quantities  of  faggots  made  and  collected,
with  which  and  earth  they  could  fill  up  the  ditches,  so  that  they  might  advance  to  fight  hand
to  hand  with  the  garrison,  undermine  the  walls,  and,  by  throwing  them  down,  win  the  place.
Workmen  were  instantly  employed  to  procure  and  cut  down  as  much  wood  as  possible  in
the  neighbourhood  of  Ypres,  which  was  to  be  placed  withinside  of  the  ditches,  and  covered
with  earth  : but  this  was  not  so  soon  done,  nor  could  they  accomplish  their  intentions  ; for
the  king  of  France,  having  a great  desire  to  raise  the  siege  and  fight  with  the  English  at  all
events,  hastened  his  preparations,  set  out  from  Compiegne  and  marched  to  Arras.

The  constable  of  France,  with  many  barons  who  formed  the  van  of  the  army,  had  already
arrived,  and  were  quartered  in  Artois.  The  duke  of  Brittany  came  with  two  thousand

* “ D’un  traict  du  canon  by  a cannon  ball,  according  to  D.  Sauvage. — Ed.

f “La  valeur  de  deux  tonneaux  pleins  d’artillerie as  much  as  two  tuns  full,  not  two  tons  weight,  of  artillery. — En.

VOL.  II.  B


of  Norwich,  the  English,  and  Peter  du  Bois,  to  conquer  lpres
by  storm  or  otherwise,  as  the  vigour  of  their  attacks  showed.


2


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


lances,  as  lie  was  anxious  to  assist  Ins  cousin  the  earl  of  Flanders  on  this  occasion.  Indeed
he  was  much  bounden  so  to  do,  for  he  had  found  him,  in  former  times,  eager  to  befriend  him
in  his  distress.  All  the  lords,  both  from  far  and  near,  were  on  their  march  and  at  hand.
The  count  of  Savoy  and  the  count  of  Geneva,  came  with  seven  hundred  honest  Savoyards.
Duke  Frederick  of  Bavaria  was  hastening  with  a strong  body  of  men  at  arms,  and  had
arrived  in  Ilainault.  He  resided  at  Quesnoy  with  his  uncle  duke  Albert,  his  aunt,  the
duchess  Margaret,  and  with  his  cousins.

The  dukes  of  Lorraine  and  Bar  arrived  with  a large  body  in  Artois.  Sir  William  de
Namur,  not  having  attended  the  former  war,  as  the  earl  had  excused  him,  came  with  two
hundred  good  lances  to  serve  the  king  of  France  and  duke  of  Burgundy.  He  had  passed
through  Hainault,  and  fixed  his  quarters  in  the  country  round  Tournay.  It  was  wonderful
to  see  what  bodies  of  men  different  lords  brought  to  serve  the  king  of  France.  The  count
Guy  de  Blois  lay  ill  at  Landrecy'  during  the  whole  time  these  warlike  preparations  were
making,  and  neither  himself  nor  his  people  knew  if  he  would  be  able  to  bear  the  fatigues  of
this  campaign  with  the  king.  He  was  carried  in  a litter  to  Beaumont  in  Hainault,  and  was
somewhat  better,  for  that  air  was  more  agreeable  to  him  than  that  of  Landrecy.  Notwith-
standing lie  was  very  unwell  and  feeble,  he  made  ample  preparations,  as  did  his  dependants
in  the  country  of  Blois,  such  as  the  lord  de  Montigny,  the  lord  de  Yresin,  sir  Vilhennes  de
St.  Martin,  sir  Waleran  de  Doustienne  governor  of  Remorentin,  and  other  knights  and
squires  who  came  to  serve  under  the  young  king  of  France.

News  was  brought  to  the  bishop  of  Norwich,  sir  Hugh  Calverley  and  the  English
besieging  Ypres,  that  the  king  of  France  was  hastening  by  forced  marches,  with  an  army  of
upwards  of  twenty  thousand  men  at  arms,  knights  and  squires,  and  sixty  thousand  other
men.  This  intelligence  was  repeated  from  so  many  quarters,  that  at  last  it  was  thought  to
be  true,  for  at  first  they  would  not  believe  it.  They  heard  for  certain  that  it  was  so,  and
that  if  they  remained  where  they  were,  they  ivould  have  to  fight  with  them.  They  also
learnt  that  the  duke  of  Brittany  was  with  the  king  of  France,  and  coming  against  them,
which  astonished  them  much.  They  called  a council  on  this  information,  to  consider  what
line  of  conduct  to  pursue.  Having  weighed  every  circumstance,  and  not  finding  themselves
in  sufficient  strength  to  wait  for  the  whole  force  of  the  king,  they  judged  it  to  be  more  prudent
for  Peter  du  Bois,  Peter  lc  Nuitre  and  the  Ghent  men  to  return  to  their  town,  and  the
English  to  retreat  towards  Bergues  and  Bourbourg,  which  they  were  to  garrison  : and  if
any  force  should  come  from  England,  or  if  king  Richard  or  his  uncles  should  cross  the
sea,  they  would  send  them  advice  of  it.  This  resolution  was  adopted,  and  they  broke  up
their  camp.  The  Ghent  men  set  out  on  their  return  home,  where  they  arrived.  The
English  retired  to  Bergues  and  Bourbourg,  and  entered  the  forts  which  they  had  conquered.

The  day  that  the  English  began  their  retreat,  Thomas  lord  Percy,  son  to  the  earl  of
Northumberland,  arrived.  He  came  from  Prussia,  and  hearing  on  his  road  that  the  kings  of
France  and  England  were  to  engage  in  the  plains  of  Flanders  or  Artois,  each  at  the  head  of
his  army,  the  knight  was  so  much  rejoiced,  and  had  so  great  a desire  to  be  present  at  the
battle,  that  the  journey,  which  at  a moderate  rate  of  travelling  would  have  taken  forty  days,
lie  performed  in  fourteen,  leaving  his  equipage  and  servants  behind,  and  frequently  changing
horses.  He  afterwards  learnt  that  his  baggage  had  arrived  in  less  than  twenty  days  in  the
town  of  Ghent.  Such  good  will  and  gallantry  deserve  much  praise.


CHAPTER  CXL. DUKE  FREDERICK  OF  BAVARIA  ARRIVES  AT  THE  ARMY  OF  THE  KING  OF

FRANCE. COUNT  GUY  DE  BLOIS,  NOTWITHSTANDING  HIS  ILL  HEALTH,  COMES  TO  ARRAS

ATTENDED  BY  HIS  MEN  AT  ARMS.

Intelligence  was  brought  to  the  king  of  France,  in  the  city  of  Arras,  and  to  the  lords
with  him,  that  the  English  and  Ghent  men  had  raised  the  siege  and  decamped  from  before
Ypres.  The  king  was  eager  to  hurry  matters  and  pursue  them,  so  that  they  should  not
escape.  He  set  out  from  Arras,  and  came  to  Mont  St.  Eloy,  a very  handsome  abbey,  where

* “ Landrecy,” — a strong  town  in  Hainault,  diocese  of  Courtray.


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


3


he  remained  four  days  waiting  for  the  arrival  of  the  duke  of  Berry.  The  army  was
continually  increased  by  those  who  came  to  it  from  all  parts,  and  it  was  known,  through  the
constable,  the  marshals  and  sir  Guiscard  count  dauphin,  master  of  the  cross-bows,  that  the
king  had  with  him  upwards  of  one  hundred  thousand  men.

The  king  departed  from  Mont  St.  Eloy,  following  the  road  to  St.  Omer,  and  came  to
Aire,  of  which  place  the  viscount  de  Meaux  was  governor.  lie  tarried  there  two  days,  the
army  still  increasing.  The  constable  with  the  van  were  advanced,  and  quartered  in  the
town  of  Cassel.  The  king  went  to  St.  Omcr,  where  he  stopped  for  the  arrival  of  his  people,
who  were  coming  to  him  from  every  quarter.  When  duke  Frederick  of  Bavaria  arrived  at
the  army,  the  great  barons  of  France,  in  order  to  do  him  honour,  went  out  to  meet  him,  as
he  had  come  from  such  a distant  country  to  serve  the  king,  who  entertained  him  handsomely,
and  was  thankful  for  his  ari'ival.  lie  caused  him  to  be  quartered  as  near  to  himself  as
possible  during  the  whole  expedition,  as  was  but  just.

In  the  army  were  full  three  hundred  thousand  horses  : and  it  was  wonderful  where
provisions  could  come  from,  or  be  found  to  supply  such  an  army.  At  times,  indeed,  there
was  a scarcity ; at  others,  they  had  abundance.  The  count  Guy  de  Blois,  who  resided  at
Beaumont  in  Hainault,  notwithstanding  he  was  not  yet  recovered  from  the  long  illness  he
had  been  visited  with  during  the  summer,  thought  it  would  not  be  for  his  honour  to  remain
idle,  when  so  many  great  and  powerful  princes  and  lords  were  in  the  field  ; besides,  inquiries
had  been  made  after  him,  as  he  was  one  of  the  leaders  of  the  rear-ward.  It  was  therefore
better  for  him  to  join  them,  trusting  to  the  will  of  God,  than  to  remain  behind  under  a
supposition  of  dissembling.

This  gallant  lord  began  his  journey ; but  as  he  was  unable  to  ride,  he  oi’dered  his  litter,
and  took  leave  of  the  lady  his  wife,  and  of  his  son  Lewis.  Several  of  his  council,  on  account
of  the  great  heat  and  closeness  of  the  weather,  looked  on  this  journey  as  a wrong  measure,
whilst  others  who  heard  of  it  thought  it  a great  proof  of  his  courage.  He  was  accompanied
from  Hainault  by  the  lord  de  Sanzest,  the  lord  de  Hanzelles,  sir  Gerard  de  Warrieres,  sir
Thomas  de  Distre,  the  lord  de  Doustrenent,  John  de  Ghisnelle,  who  was  created  a knight  on
the  road,  and  several  more.  He  passed  through  Cambray,  and  came  to  Arras,  and  the
longer  he  travelled  the  better  was  his  health.  His  vassals  from  Blois,  hearing  of  his  journey,
went  to  meet  him.  On  his  arrival  at  Arras,  his  people  collected  together,  to  the  amount  of
more  than  four  hundred  lances,  and  always  followed  him.  He  had  his  provisions  from
Hainault,  and  in  this  respect  was  most  abundantly  supplied.  Let  us  return  to  the  king  of
France.


CHAPTER  CXLI. THE  VAN  OF  THE  FRENCH  ARMY  TAKES  CASSEL  AND  TRUGHEN. THE

ENGLISH  ABANDON  BERGUES,  AND  RETIRE  TO  BOURBOURG,  WHEREIN  THE  KING  OF
FRANCE  BESIEGES  THEM.

The  king  of  France  continued  his  march  to  St.  Omer,  where  he  halted  and  refreshed
himself.  The  van,  with  the  constable  and  marshals,  advanced  to  Cassel,  which  was  in  the
hands  of  the  English.  The  town  was  attacked,  taken  by  storm,  and  all  in  it  put  to  the
3word.  Those  who  could  escape  retreated  to  Bergues,  where  was  sir  Hugh  Calverley  with
full  three  thousand  English.  The  bishop  of  Norwich  was  not  there,  having  retired  to
Gravelines,  to  be  the  sooner  at  Calais  should  there  be  occasion.  The  English  had  burnt  and
pillaged  all  the  country  near  to  Cassel.  The  king  of  France,  on  his  arrival  at  St.  Omer,
was  lodged  at  an  abbey  out  of  the  town,  on  the  road  to  Bergues,  called  Ranombergues,
where  he  remained.  He  came  there  on  a Friday,  and  on  the  following  day  the  constable,
the  marshals,  with  the  lord  de  Coucy  and  a great  number  of  good  men  at  arms,  took  the  field
and  came  before  the  castle  of  Trughen,  wherein  were  about  three  hundred  men  at  arms,  who
had  formed  a garrison  of  this  place  the  whole  season.

They  made  a vigorous  attack  on  the  castle,  and  exerted  themselves  very  much  : indeed,
they  were  forced  to  do  so  if  they  wished  for  conquest,  as  the  English  within  defended
themselves  so  valiantly  that  it  was  marvellous  to  think  of  their  prowess.  However,  by

b 2


4


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


continued  attacks,  and  gallant  deeds  of  arms,  the  castle  was  taken,  and  all  within  put  to
death,  for  the  constable  would  not  show  mercy  to  any  one.  In  the  lower  court  was  found
the  most  beautiful  white  horse  that  had  been  seen  for  years,  which  was  presented  to  the
constable,  who  instantly  sent  it  to  the  king  of  France.  The  king  willingly  accepted  the
horse,  and  was  so  pleased  with  it  that  he  rode  it  all  Sunday.

The  count  de  B'lois,  at  this  period,  arrived  at  the  army  with  his  company.  He  was
appointed  to  the  rear  division,  as  he  had  been  last  year  at  the  battle  of  Rosebecque,  in
company  with  the  count  d’Eu,  the  count  de  Harcourt,  the  lord  de  Chatillon  and  the  lord  de
la  Fere.  Mc.n  at  arms  were  constantly  coming  in  from  all  parts.  It  was  a fine  dry  summer,
otherwise  it  would  have  been  bad  for  the  horses  near  the  sea-shore  and  impossible  for  them
to  have  advanced  into  the  country.  All  the  English  except  the  bishop,  who,  quite
thunderstruck,  was  gone  to  Gravelines,  had  retired  into  the  town  of  Bergues,  which  was
only  inclosed  by  a palisade  and  ditches : he  sorely  repented  having  undertaken  this
expedition,  for  he  saw  that  all  he  had  done  would  now  be  turned  with  shame  against  him,
and  was  still  more  sorry  for  the  words  he  had  uttered  which  had  been  repeated  through
France.  lie  had  boasted  during  the  time  he  was  besieging  Ypres,  that  he  would  there  wait
for  the  king  of  France  and  his  army,  and  offer  them  combat.  He  now  felt  how  suddenly  he
had  been  forced  to  raise  the  siege  and  fly,  for  his  army  could  not  resist  that  of  the  king.

The  English  at  Calais  found  great  fault  with  him,  saying  he  had  very  ill  employed  the
pope’s  money.  In  truth,  the  duke  of  Lancaster,  who  had  been  prevented  by  this  expedition
of  the  bishop  from  carrying  his  own  into  execution,  did  not  wish  it  would  turn  out  otherwise.
The  principal  barons  of  England  were  of  the  same  sentiment ; for  when  sir  William  Windsor,
their  marshal,  sent  to  tell  them,  whilst  before  Ypres,  that  if  they  wished  for  reinforcements,
they  should  have  very  numerous  ones,  the  bishop  answered,  as  did  sir  Thomas  Trivet  and
sir  William  11  elm  on*,  that  they  had  strength  enough,  and  more  than  they  wished,  to  combat
the  king  of  France  and  the  army  he  could  bring  against  them.  But  sir  Hugh  Calverley,
who  had  seen  more  service  than  any  of  the  others,  had  always  held  a different  language,  and
said  during  the  siege  of  Ypres,  when  he  heard  of  the  offer  from  the  barons  in  England, —
“ Gentlemen,  you  seem  to  have  great  confidence  in  your  strength  : why  should  we  refuse
the  assistance  of  our  countrymen,  when  they  offer  to  come  to  us  and  the  country  consents
to  it  ? A day  may  come,  perhaps,  when  we  shall  repent  of  our  refusal.”  But  these  words
were  not  attended  to,  as  they  said  they  had  men  sufficient.  Things,  therefore,  continued  as
they  were,  and  in  the  end  they  lost  more  than  they  gained  by  it.

Sir  Hugh  Calverley,  on  his  arrival  at  Bergues,  quartered  himself  and  his  men  in  the
different  hotels  and  houses  of  the  town  : they  were  in  the  whole,  including  archers,  more
than  four  thousand  men.  Sir  Hugh  said, — I am  determined  to  keep  this  town ; it  is  of
good  strength,  and  we  are  enough  to  defend  it.  I expect  we  shall  have,  in  five  or  six  days,
reinforcements  from  England  ; for  they  will  learn  our  situation,  and  also  the  force  of  our
enemies.”  All  replied,  “ God  assist  us!”  Upon  this  he  made  very  prudent  regulations  :
on  dividing  his  men  under  pennons  and  into  companies,  to  mount  the  walls  and  guard  the
gates,  he  found  he  had  numbers  sufficient.  He  ordered  all  the  ladies  and  women,  children
and  lower  classes  of  inhabitants,  to  retire  into  a church,  whence  they  were  not  to  stir.

The  king  of  France  was  at  the  abbey  of  Ranombergues,  and  learnt  that  the  English  had
rotreated  to  Bergues.  A council  was  held  on  the  occasion,  when  it  was  ordered  that  the
van,  with  the  constable  and  marshals,  should  advance  beyond  the  town  and  encamp  on  one
of  its  sides  ; and  the  king  of  France,  with  the  dukes  of  Berry,  Biu’gundy  and  Bourbon,
would  follow  with  the  main  army ; that  the  count  de  Blois  and  the  count  d’Eu,  with  the
rear  division,  should  lodge  themselves  on  the  other  side  of  the  town,  and  thus  surround  the
English.  This  plan  was  executed  ; and  the  king  set  out  from  Ranombergues,  attended  by
his  whole  army.  It  was  a beautiful  sight  to  behold  these  banners,  pennons  and  helmets
glittering  in  the  sun,  and  such  numbers  of  men  at  arms  that  the  eye  could  not  compass
them  : they  seemed  like  a moving  forest,  so  upright  did  they  hold  their  lances.  Thus  they
marched  in  four  divisions  towards  Bergues,  to  inclose  the  English  in  that  town.

About  eight  o’clock  in  the  morning,  an  English  herald  entered  the  town,  who,  by  the
* “ Sir  \Y.  Helmon.”  Elmham,  according  to  Carte.


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


r>


courtesy  of  the  lords  of  France,  had  passed  through  their  army : he  waited  on  sir  Hugh
Calverley  in  his  hotel,  and  spoke  so  loud  that  every  one  heard  him.  “ Herald,  whence  dost
thou  come?”  “ My  lord,”  replied  the  herald,  “ I come  from  the  French  army,  where  I have
seen  the  finest  men  at  arms,  and  in  such  vast  numbers  that  there  is  not  at  this  day  another
king  who  can  show  the  like.”  “ And  these  fine  men  at  arms  which  thou  art  speaking  of,”
said  sir  Hugh,  “ what  number  are  they  ?”  “ By  my  faith,  my  lord,  they  are  full  twenty-six

thousand  men  at  arms  : handsomer  nor  better  armed  were  never  seen.”  “ Ila,  ha  !”  replied
sir  Hugh,  who  was  much  provoked  at  the  latter  part  of  his  speech,  “ thou  art  a fine  fellow
to  come  and  mock  us  with  this  pompous  tale.  I know  well  thou  hast  lied  ; for  many  a time
have  I seen  the  armies  of  France,  but  they  never  amounted  to  twenty-six  thousand  ; no,  not
even  to  six  thousand  men  at  arms.”

As  he  said  this,  the  watch  of  the  town,  who  was  at  his  post,  sounded  his  trumpet,  for  the
van  of  the  enemy  was  about  passing  near  the  walls.  Sir  Hugh  then,  addressing  the  knights
and  squires  present,  said  ; “ Come,  come  : let  us  go  and  see  these  twenty-six  thousand  men
at  arms  march  by,  for  our  watch  blows  his  horn.”  They  went  on  the  walls  of  the  place,
and,  lean  in  a-  on  them,  observed  the  march  of  the  van,  which  might  have  consisted  of  about
fifteen  hundred  lances,  with  the  constable,  the  marshals,  the  master  of  the  cross-bows  and
the  lord  de  Coucy.  Next  came  the  duke  of  Brittany,  the  earl  of  Flanders  and  the  count  de
St.  Pol,  who  had  under  their  command  about  fifteen  hundred  lances  more.  Sir  Hugh
Calverley,  who  thought  he  had  seen  the  whole  army,  said, — “ Now  see  if  I did  not  say
truth  : where  are  these  twenty-six  thousand  men  ? Why,  if  they  be  three  thousand  men  at
arms,  they  are  ten  thousand.  Let  us  go  to  our  dinner,  for  I do  not  yet  see  such  a force  as
should  oblige  us  to  surrender  the  town.  This  herald  would  frighten  us  well,  if  we  were  to
believe  him.”

The  herald  was  much  ashamed,  but  he  said, — “ My  lord,  you  have  as  yet  only  seen  the
van-guard  : the  king  and  his  uncles  are  behind  with  the  main  army,  and  there  is  besides  a
rear  division,  which  consists  of  more  than  two  thousand  lances.  You  will  see  the  whole  in
four  hours,  if  you  remain  here.”  Sir  Hugh  paid  not  any  attention  to  him,  but  returned  to
his  house,  saying  he  had  seen  every  thing,  and  seated  himself  at  table.  He  had  scarcely
done  so,  than  the  watch  again  blew  his  horn,  and  so  loud  as  if  he  would  burst  it.  Sir  Hugh
rose  from  table,  saying  he  would  see  what  was  the  cause  of  this,  and  mounted  the  battle-
ments. At  this  moment,  the  king  of  France  marched  by,  attended  by  his  uncles,  the  duke
Frederick,  the  duke  of  Lorraine,  the  count  of  Savoy,  the  dauphin  of  Auvergne,  the  count  de
la  Marche  and  their  troops  : in  this  battalion  were  full  sixteen  thousand  lances.  Sir  Hugh
felt  himself  much  disappointed,  and  said  to  the  herald,  who  was  by  his  side,  “ I have  been
in  the  wrong  to  blame  you  : come,  come  : let  us  mount  our  horses  and  save  ourselves,  for  it
will  do  us  no  good  to  remain  here.  I no  longer  know  the  state  of  France  : I have  never
seen  such  numbers  collected  together  by  three-fourths  as  I now  see  and  have  seen  in  the  van:
besides,  the  rear  division  is  still  to  come.”  Upon  this,  sir  Hugh  Calverley  left  the  walls  and
returned  to  his  house.  All  the  horses  being  ready  saddled  and  loaded,  they  mounted,  and,
having  ordered  the  gates  to  be  opened  which  lead  to  Bourbourg,  they  set  off  without  any
noise,  carrying  with  them  all  their  pillage.  Had  the  French  suspected  this,  they  could
easily  have  stopped  them  ; but  they  were  ignorant  of  it  for  a long  time,  so  that  they  were
nearly  arrived  at  Bourbourg  before  they  heard  of  it.

Sir  Hugh  Calverley  halted  in  the  plain  to  wait  for  his  rear  and  baggage.  He  was  very
melancholy,  and  said  to  sir  Thomas  Trivet  and  others  who  had  come  to  meet  him  ; “ By
my  faith,  gentlemen,  we  have  this  time  made  a most  shameful  expedition  : never  was  so
pitiful  or  wretched  a one  made  from  England.  You  would  have  your  wills,  and  placed  your
confidence  in  this  bishop  of  Norwich,  who  wanted  to  fly  before  he  had  wings  : now  see  the
honourable  end  you  have  brought  it  to.  There  is  Bourbourg  ! if  you  choose  it,  retire
thither ; but  for  my  part  I shall  march  to  Gravelines  and  Calais,  because  I find  we  are  not
of  sufficient  strength  to  cope  with  the  king  of  France.”  The  English  knights,  conscious
they  had  been  to  blame  in  several  things,  replied  ; “ God  help  us ! we  shall  return  to
Bourbourg  and  wait  the  event,  such  as  God  may  please  to  ordain.”  Sir  Hugh  on  this  left
them  ; and  they  threw  themselves  into  Bourbourg.


G


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


The  king  of  France  heard  that  the  English  had  marched  from  Bergues  and  retreated  to
Bourhonrg,  leaving  Bergues  quite  empty  ; the  gates  of  which  were  opened  to  him,  when
the  king  entered  with  all  who  wished  it.  The  first  who  did  so  found  enough  to  pillage,  for
the  English  had  not  been  able  to  carry  away  every  thing.  The  women  were  saved  and  sent
to  St.  Omer,  but  almost  all  the  men  were  put  to  death  and  the  town  set  on  fire.  The  king
marched  on  to  lodge  at  a village,  on  account  of  the  greatness  of  the  fire.  This  happened  on
a Friday  ; and  the  lords  encamped  themselves  separately  in  the  fields  as  well  as  they  could.
It  was  fortunate  for  them  that  it  was  dry  weather,  for  it  could  not  be  a finer  season  ; had  it
been  cold  and  rainy,  they  could  not  have  foraged.  Indeed  it  was  wonderful  where  they
found  forage  for  such  numbers  of  horses,  as  well  as  provision  for  so  large  an  army.  But  on
the  day  on  which  they  came  before  Bourbourg  great  quantities  of  stores  arrived,  of  which
the  lords  of  France  were  duly  informed.  They  resolved  to  surround  the  town  and  attack  it.
The  Bretons  were,  from  avarice,  eager  to  take  it,  on  account  of  the  great  booty  they  expected
to  find  there.

On  the  Saturday  morning  it  was  clear  weather,  and  the  army  made  itself  ready  to  march
to  Bourbourg.  The  van-guard,  the  duke  of  Brittany,  the  earl  of  Flanders,  the  count  de  St.
Pol,  the  constable  of  France,  with  about  three  thousand  lances,  marched  on  the  outside  of
the  walls,  and  halted  opposite  to  the  king’s  division,  which  consisted  of  the  finest  men  at
arms  that  could  be  seen  or  imagined.  They  advanced  to  a large  plain  before  Bourbourg,
where  the  different  lords  drew  up  their  men ; and  it  was  for  a long  time  their  intention  to
storm  the  place.  Banners  and  pennons  were  flying  in  the  wind,  and  each  lord  under  his
own  banner.  The  lords  of  France  made  a splendid  show,  and  had  not  been  sparing  of  any
expense  in  exhibiting  appearances  suitable  to  their  rank.  The  lord  de  Coney  and  his  state
were  particularly  noticed,  for  he  had  led  coursers  richly  caparisoned,  and  ornamented  with
housings  with  the  ancient  arms  of  Coucy  mixed  with  those  he  now  bore.  He  himself  was
mounted  on  a beautiful  horse,  on  which  he  rode  from  side  to  side  in  a most  graceful  manner,
to  the  delight  of  those  who  saw  him  : all  praised  him  for  the  agreeable  manner  with  which
lie  addressed  every  one.  The  other  great  lords  kept  up  a state  suitable  to  their  dignity.
More  than  four  hundred  knights  were  this  day  created.  The  heralds  mustered  the  knights
who  were  before  Bourbourg  with  the  king,  and  they  amounted  to  from  seven  to  nine
thousand.  In  the  army  were  upwards  of  twenty-five  thousand  men  at  arms  and  squires.

The  English  were  at  their  posts  in  the  town  of  Bourbourg,  and,  seeing  this  immense  force
of  the  king  of  France  before  them,  expected  an  assault : they  were  pleased  at  the  thought ;
but  when  they  found  themselves  shut  up  in  a town  which  was  only  defended  by  palisadoes,
they  were  not  so  well  satisfied  : however,  like  men  of  courage,  they  had  posted  themselves
in  companies  round  the  town.  The  lord  Beaumont*  (who  is  an  earl  in  England,  and  his
name  Henry)  commanded  one  hundred  men  at  arms  and  three  hundred  archers,  to  guard
one  part  of  the  town  : sir  William  Elmham,  with  as  many  men,  guarded  another  part.
Sir  John  de  Chateauneuf,  with  the  Gascons,  had  another  quarter  to  defend  as  far  as  the
tower,  opposite  to  the  quarters  of  the  constable.  The  lord  Ferrers,  an  Englishman,  was  with
forty  men  at  arms  and  as  many  archers  at  another  part,  so  that  the  whole  place  was  well
guarded  with  men  at  arms  and  archers.  Sir  William  Farrendon,  sir  Matthew  Redeman,
and  sir  Nicholas  Tracton  t,  with  two  hundred  men  and  as  many  archers,  were  posted  in  the
square  before  the  church.  They  had  appointed  a body  of  men  to  watch  and  extinguish  any
fires  that  might  happen  ; for  the  English  were  much  afraid  of  the  town  being  burnt,  as  the
houses  were  only  covered  with  thatch.

In  this  situation  were  the  English.  I must  now  relate  the  gallant  action  which  Francis
Atremen  performed  this  same  Friday  in  the  evening,  when  the  king  of  France,  after  having
taken  Bergues,  continued  his  march.

* “ Lord  Beaumont.” — Froissart  mistakes  : Ire  was  a baron,  and  his  name  was  John  : his  son’s  name  was  Henry. —
See  Dugdalc.

t Q.  If  not  Drayton,  or  Tresham.


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


CHAPTER  CXLII. FRANCIS  ATREMEN  SURPRISES  OUDENARDE  IN  THE  NIGHT  TIME.

Francis  Atremen,  Peter  du  Bois,  Peter  le  Nuitre  and  the  other  captains,  after  their
return  to  Ghent  from  the  siege  of  Ypres,  were  daily  and  nightly  imagining  how  they  could
annoy  their  enemies.  Francis  Atremen  found  out,  that  the  governor  of  Oudenarde,  sir
Gilbert  do  Lieneglien  and  the  men  at  arms,  had  left  Oudenarde,  by  orders  from  the  earl  of
Flanders,  and  were  with  the  army  of  the  king  of  France  before  Bergues  and  Bourbourg.
He  also  learnt  that  the  town  was  carelessly  guarded,  and  that  the  ditches  in  the  meadows
on  the  road  to  ITamme  were  dry,  as  they  had  emptied  them  of  water  to  get  the  fish,  so  that
the  walls  of  the  town  might  be  approached  on  foot,  and  might  be  entered  with  ladders.
Such  was  the  intelligence  the  spies  of  Francis  Atremen  had  brought  to  Ghent,  who,  at  their
leisure,  had  examined  the  town  ; for  the  guards  held  the  Ghent  men  very  cheap,  and,  as  it
were,  had  forgotten,  or  were  quite  indifferent  concerning  them.

When  Francis  Atremen  had  heard  all  this  from  his  spies,  he  went  and  related  it  to  Peter
du  Bois,  and  said  ; “ Peter,  such  is  the  situation  of  Oudenarde : I am  resolved  to  risk  the
chance  of  taking  it  with  scaling  ladders  : there  never  can  be  so  good  an  opportunity  as  the
present,  for  neither  the  governor  nor  the  men  at  arms  are  in  it,  but  with  the  king  of  France
uear  St.  Omer,  and  they  have  not  the  least  fear  or  suspicions  of  any  one.”  Peter  du  Bois
instantly  assented  to  the  proposal,  and  said ; “ Francis,  if  you  succeed  in  this  expedition,  no
man  will  ever  have  behaved  better,  and  every  one  will  praise  you  for  so  gallant  an  action.”
“ I do  not  know,”  replied  he,  “ how  it  may  turn  out,  but  my  courage  does  not  fail  me,  and
my  heart  tells  me  that  this  night  I shall  gain  Oudenarde.”

Francis  Atremen  then  chose  four  hundred  men  in  whom  he  had  the  greatest  confidence,
and,  towards  night-fall,  set  out  on  his  road  to  Oudenarde.  It  was  in  the  month  of
September,  when  the  nights  are  tolerably  long,  and  such  beautiful  weather  that  it  was  a
pleasure  to  be  out  in  it.  About  midnight  they  arrived  in  the  meads  of  Oudenarde,  having
ladders  with  them.  As  they  were  traversing  the  marshes,  there  was  a poor  woman  gathering
grass  for  her  cows,  who,  hiding  herself,  heard  their  conversation,  and  knew  from  it  that  they
were  Ghent  men  going  to  surprise  the  town,  for  she  saw  them  carrying  ladders.  She  was
at  first  much  frightened,  but  recovering  courage,  said  to  herself,  that  she  would  hasten  to  the
town  and  inform  the  guard  of  what  she  had  heard  and  seen.  She  made  for  the  town  by  a
short  path  she  was  acquainted  with,  and  arrived  at  the  ditches  before  the  Ghent  men,  when
she  began  to  moan  and  complain,  so  that  one  of  the  night-guard  going  his  rounds  heard  her,
and  asked  who  she  was,  she  said  she  was  a poor  woman  who  had  come  to  tell  them  that  a
body  of  Ghent  men  wrere  close  at  hand  ; and  that  she  had  seen  them  carrying  many  ladders
to  surprise  Oudenarde ; but  now  she  had  given  this  information  she  must  get  away,  for
should  they  meet  her  she  would  be  a dead  woman.  The  poor  woman  departed,  and  the
watch  remained  perfectly  astonished.  He  determined  to  keep  quiet  where  he  was,  to  see  if
this  woman  had  told  truth.  The  Ghent  men,  without  horn  or  trumpet,  were  silently
advancing  to  begin  their  enterprise  : they  made  not  any  noise  except  by  talking.  Francis
A tremen  sent  forward  four  of  his  men,  ordering  them  to  reconnoitre  without  making  the
least  noise  by  coughing  or  otherwise,  and  report  to  him,  should  they  observe  anything.

They  obeyed  their  orders,  and  Francis  Atremen  remained  hid  in  the  marshes  with  his
men,  very  near  this  poor  woman,  who  heard  and  saw  them  distinctly ; but  they  did  not
notice  her.  The  four  men  advancing  up  to  the  ditches,  neither  saw  nor  heard  anything.  It
was  very  unlucky ; for,  if  they  had  but  seen  a lighted  candle,  they  would  have  thought  there
had  been  a good  watch  kept.  They  returned  to  Francis  telling  him  they  had  not  seen
anything,  nor  heard  the  least  noise.  “ I believe  the  watch  has  gone  his  rounds,”  said
Francis,  “ and  is  now  retired  to  bed:  come,  let  us  take  this  upper  road  which  leads  to  the
gates,  and  enter  the  ditches.”  The  good  woman  heard  these  words ; and  what  did  she  do  ?
Why,  she  instantly  returned  by  the  same  way  as  before,  and  came  to  the  man  who  was
listening  on  the  walls  and  told  him  all  she  had  heard,  begging  of  him,  for  God’s  sake,  to  be
on  his  guard  and  go  to  the  Ghent  gate  to  see  if  his  companions  were  in  a proper  state,  for


8


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


very  shortly  the  Ghent  men  would  be  at  their  post.  “ I must  now  return,”  said  the  woman,
“ as  I dare  not  stay  longer,  hut  I have  told  you  all  I have  seen  and  heard : pay  proper
attention  to  it,  for  I shall  not  again  come  to  you  this  night."  On  saying  which,  she
departed.  The  man  now  remained  alone,  hut  did  not  treat  the  information  he  had  received
with  indifference.  He  went  to  the  gate  leading  to  Ghent,  where  he  found  the  guard  playing
at  dice.  “ Gentlemen,"  said  he,  “ have  you  well  fastened  your  gates  and  your  barriers?  for
a woman  came  to  me  this  night,  and  gave  me  notice  of  her  having  seen  a body  of  Ghent  men
marching  hither.”  “ Yes,”  replied  they:  “ our  gates  are  fast  enough:  but  may  a scurvy
night  befal  this  woman,  who  has  thus  alarmed  you  at  such  an  hour.  There  probably  were
cows  and  calves  that  had  oot  untied,  and  these  she  fancied  to  have  been  Ghent  men  coming
hither:  they  have  not  any  such  intentions."

While  this  conversation  was  passing  between  the  constable  of  the  watch  and  the  guard  at
the  gate,  Francis  Atremen  and  his  companions  were  executing  their  plan  : they  had  got
into  the  ditches,  which  were  dry,  as  they  had  fished  them  this  week,  and  had  broken  down
a little  of  the  palisades  near  the  wall,  against  which  they  had  placed  their  ladders  and  had
entered  the  town.  They  marched  to  the  market-place  without  any  noise,  and  continued  so
until  they  were  all  collected,  when  they  met  a knight,  called  sir  Florens  de  Halle,
lieutenant-governor,  who  was  there  on  guard  with  about  thirty  men  at  arms  of  the  town.
The  Ghent  men  began  to  shout  “ Ghent,  Ghent!”  and  to  attack  the  guard,  whom  they  slew,
as  well  as  sir  Florens  de  Halle.  Thus  was  Oudenarde  taken.  You  may  suppose  that  the
inhabitants,  who  were  sleeping  in  their  beds,  were  exceedingly  astonished  when  they  heard
these  shouts  and  saw  the  town  taken  by  scalado  without  having  any  remedy  for  it.  Their
houses  were  forced  open,  and  those  within  slain  ; for  they  were  so  suddenly  surprised,  there
was  not  any  help  for  it.  Those  who  could  escape  did,  leaving  their  houses  in  a state
of  nakedness,  and  leaping  over  the  walls,  saved  themselves  by  the  ponds  and  ditches  of  the
town.  None  of  the  rich  men  could  carry  any  part  of  their  wealth  with  them,  but  were
happy  if  they  saved  their  lives.  This  night  great  numbers  were  killed,  or  drowned  in  the
ponds ; and  thus  ended  this  expedition.

In  the  morning,  when  the  Ghent  men  saw  themselves  masters  of  the  town,  they  sent  out
of  it  all  the  women  and  children  in  their  shifts,  or  in  the  meanest  dress  they  had.  In  this
plight  those  who  had  escaped  got  to  Mons,  Arras,  Conde,  Valenciennes,  or  Tournay,  in  the
best  manner  they  could.  News  was  spread  everywhere  of  the  capture  of  Oudenarde.  The
inhabitants  of  Ghent  were  greatly  rejoiced  at  it,  and  said  that  Francis  Atremen  deserved  to
be  highly  prized  for  his  valour.  Francis  Atremen  remained  governor  of  Oudenarde,  where
he  gained  great  riches,  with  all  sorts  of  stores,  which  was  .a  fortunate  circumstance  for  the
captors,  such  as  corn  and  wines  of  all  sorts.  Everything  fell  into  their  hands,  and  all  the
wealth  which  was  there  from  France,  Flanders,  and  Tournay ; hut  whatever  belonged  to
Hainault  was  saved,  nor  was  any  part  of  that  taken  but  what  was  duly  paid  for.


CHAPTER  CXLIII. — AYMERIGOT  MARCEL,  AN  ENGLISH  CAPTAIN  ON  THE  BORDERS  OF-

AUVERGNE,  TAKES  BY  STRATAGEM  THE  CASTLE  OF  MARQUEL.  THE  COUNTESS

DAUPIIINE  RANSOMS  IT  FOR  FIVE  THOUSAND  FRANCS.

In  the  same  week  an  almost  similar  adventure  happened  in  Auvergne,  where  the  English
held  several  castles  bordering  on  the  territories  of  the  count  dauphin,  and  on  those  of  the
bishops  of  St.  Flour  and  of  Clermont.  The  English  garrisons  knew  the  country  of  Auvergne
had  been  drained  of  men  at  arms,  for  the  greater  part  of  them  were  with  the  king  of  France
in  Flanders  : they,  in  consequence,  began  to  lay  plans  for  surprising  some  of  the  strong  places
of  Auvergne.  Aymerigot  Marcel,  governor  of  Aloise,  a handsome  castle  situated  a league
distant  from  St.  Flour  #,  set  off  from  his  castle  at  day-break,  attended  only  by  thirty  picked
men.  He  marched  silently  for  the  lands  of  the  count  dauphin,  having  formed  his  plan  to
take  by  scalado  the  castle  of  Marquel  (which  the  count  dauphin  bears  for  his  arms),  and  rode
through  woods  and  a close  country.  Aymerigot  and  his  men  took  up  their  lodgings  early
* St.  Flour,’’ — a city  of  Auvergne,  situated  on  a mountain,  generality  of  Riom.


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE.  &c.


9


in  a small  wood  near  the  castle,  where  they  remained  until  sun-set,  and  the  garrison  had
retired  into  the  castle  : while  the  governor,  whose  name  was  Girardon  Buissel,  was  at  supper,
the  English,  who  knew  well  what  they  were  to  do,  affixed  their  ladders  and  entered  the  castle
at  their  ease.

Those  passing  through  the  court  saw  them  climbing  over  the  walls,  and  instantly  cried  out,
“ Treason,  treason  !”  On  Girardon  hearing  this,  he  had  not  any  hopes  of  saving  himself  but
through  a private  passage  which  led  from  his  apartment  to  the  great  tower,  and  which  served
as  the  dungeon  of  the  castle.  Thither  he  instantly  retired,  taking  with  him  the  keys  of  the
gates,  and  shut  himself  in,  whilst  Aymerigot  and  his  companions  were  otherwise  employed.
When  they  discovered  that  the  governor  had  escaped  into  the  great  tower,  which  they  were
unable  to  take,  they  said  they  had  done  nothing,  and  repented  greatly  having  thus  inclosed
themselves  ; for,  the  gates  being  fastened,  they  could  not  get  out.  Aymerigot  having  mused
a little,  came  to  the  tower,  and,  addressing  the  governor,  said,  “ Girardon,  give  us  the  keys
of  the  castle-gate,  and  I promise  you  we  will  leave  it  without  doing  any  mischief  to  the
castle.”  “ Indeed,”  replied  Girardon,  “ but  you  will  carry  off  all  my  cattle  : how  can  I
believe  you  ?”  “ Give  me  thy  hand,”  said  Aymerigot  to  him,  “ and  I swear  to  thee,  on  my

faith,  that  thou  shalt  not  suffer  the  smallest  loss.”  Upon  this,  he,  like  a fool,  came  to  a small
window  in  the  tower,  and  offered  his  hand  for  him  to  pledge  his  faith  on  ; but  the  moment
Aymerigot  got  hold  of  it  he  pulled  it  to  him,  squeezing  it  very  hard,  and  called  for  his  dagger,
swearing  he  would  stick  his  hand  to  the  wall  unless  he  gave  up  all  his  keys.

When  G irardon  saw  himself  thus  caught,  he  was  stupified,  as  indeed  he  had  reason ; for
Aymerigot  would  not  give  up  his  hand  without  nailing  it  to  the  wall,  unless  he  received  the
keys.  With  his  other  hand,  therefore,  he  gave  the  keys,  for  he  had  them  near  him.  “ Now,
see,”  said  Aymerigot  to  his  companions,  when  he  had  got  the  keys,  “ if  I have  not  well
cheated  the  fool : I am  equal  to  many  such  feats  as  this.”  They  opened  the  tower  gate,  and,
being  the  masters,  put  out  of  the  castle  the  governor  and  all  who  were  in  it,  without  doing  them
any  other  harm.  News  was  carried  to  the  countess  dauphine,  who  resided  at  a strong  castle
in  the  good  town  of  Zaides,  a league  distant,  how  the  English  had  won  Marquel.  The  lady
was  much  surprised,  and  because  her  lord,  the  dauphin,  was  not  in  the  country,  she  immediately
sent  to  all  to  the  knights  and  squires  who  were  at  home,  to  request  they  would  assist  her  in
recovering  possession  of  her  castle.  Knights  and  squires,  on  hearing  this,  instantly  waited
on  the  lady  and  laid  siege  to  the  castle  ; but  the  English  were  not  alarmed  and  held  the  place
for  fifteen  days.  During  this  time  the  lady  entered  into  a treaty,  and  Aymerigot  received
five  thousand  francs  in  hard  money,  for  which  he  and  his  men  surrendered  it  and  returned  to
his  garrison.

In  another  part  those  of  Caluisel,  of  which  Perrot  le  Brenois  was  captain,  harassed  much
the  countries  of  Auvergne  and  Limousin.  The  English  had  at  that  time  upwards  of  sixty
strong  castles  on  the  borders  of  Auvergne,  Limousin,  and  Q uercy,  and  they  could  march  from
fort  to  fort,  even  unto  Bordeaux.  But  the  castle  which  harassed  the  country  most  was
Ventadour  one  of  the  strongest  castles  in  the  world  : the  captain  of  it  was  a Breton,  called
Geoffry  Tete-noir.  This  Geoffry  was  a wicked  man,  showed  mercy  to  none,  and  would  just
as  soon  put  to  death  a knight  or  squire  as  a peasant : he  held  all  men  so  cheap,  and  was  so
much  feared  by  his  soldiers,  that  they  dared  not  anger  him.  He  maintained  in  this  castle
full  four  hundred  men,  whom  he  paid  regularly  every  month  ; and  the  whole  country  was
under  such  subjection  and  awe  of  him,  that  none  dared  to  ride  over  his  lands.  His  castle  of
Ventadour  was  more  largely  supplied  with  every  sort  of  store  than  that  of  any  lord.  There
were  warehouses  of  Brussels  and  Normandy  cloths,  of  furs,  merceries,  and  other  articles,
which  he  sold  to  his  people,  deducting  the  prices  from  their  pay.  He  had  stores  of  steel,  iron,
wax,  spices,  and  every  necessary,  in  as  great  plenty  as  at  Paris.  Sometimes  he  made  war  on
the  English  as  well  as  on  the  French,  in  order  to  be  the  more  dreaded : and  his  castle  of
Ventadour  was  always  provided  for  a siege  of  seven  years.  We  will  now  return  to  the
affairs  of  Flanders.

* “ Ventadour,” — a castle  in  the  diocese  of  Limoges,  near  Tulles.


10


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


CHAPTER  CXLIV. THE  KING  OF  FRANCE  ORDERS  BOURBOURG  TO  BE  ATTACKED. IT  IS

SURRENDERED  TO  HIM  BY  CAPITULATION,  WHEN  TnE  ENGLISH  QUIT  FLANDERS.— HE
THEN  DISBANDS  HIS  ARMY.

When  the  king  of  France  came  before  Bourbourg  there  were  never  seen  such  fine  men  at
arms  nor  such  numbers  as  be  had  with  him.  The  lords  and  their  men  were  all  drawn  up,  and
eager  for  the  attack.  Those  who  had  reconnoitred  the  place  said,  it  could  not  hold  out  long ;
but  that  it  would  cost  dearly  in  men : and  several  wondered  why  the  attack  was  delayed.
Some  said,  that  the  duke  of  Brittany  and  the  earl  of  Flanders,  who  were  on  the  other  side  of
the  town,  were  treating  with  the  English  to  surrender  without  waiting  for  the  assault.  On
this  the  Bretons,  Burgundians,  Normans,  Germans,  and  others,  who  knew  there  was  much
wealth  in  the  place,  which,  if  taken  by  storm,  would  probably  fall  to  their  share,  were  much
exasperated  at  the  thoughts  of  a capitulation,  and  began  to  skirmish  with  the  infantry  at  the
barriers,  without  waiting  for  orders  from  the  constable  or  marshals  of  the  army  : indeed,  they
were  not  forbidden  to  assault  it.  This  skirmish  increased  so  much  that  the  French  set  fire  to
the  town  by  means  of  fire-arrows  and  cannons,  so  that  such  a flame  and  smoke  came  from  the
houses  of  Bourbourg  as  might  have  been  seen  forty  leagues  off.  The  attack  then  began  with
shouts  ; and  sir  William  de  Namur,  who  with  his  men,  was  in  the  front  ranks,  fought  valiantly.
Many  gallant  deeds  were  done,  and  the  assailants  leaped  cheerfully  into  the  mud  of  the  ditches
above  the  knees,  when  they  engaged  with  the  English  at  the  palisade  and  barriers.

The  garrison  defended  themselves  handsomely  : indeed  they  had  need  of  their  exertions,  for
they  knew  not  on  which  side  to  turn  themselves.  They  were  attacked  on  all  parts  : and  the
houses  of  the  town  were  blazing  with  fire,  which  more  confounded  the  English  than  anything
else.  This,  however,  did  not  throw  them  off  their  guard,  nor  cause  them  to  quit  their  posts.
Sir  Matthew  Redman  and  sir  Nicholas  Drayton,  with  their  men,  in  the  centre  of  the  town,
endeavoured  to  check  the  progress  of  the  fire  ; but  it  was  such  a dry  season,  that  the  smallest
spark  set  the  houses  in  flames.  It  is  certain,  that  if  the  attack  had  begun  earlier,  or  had  not
the  night  come  on  soon,  the  town  must  have  been  taken  by  storm,  but  the  approach  of
night  put  an  end  to  it.  Sir  William  de  Namur’s  division  had  thirty-six  killed  and  wounded  ;
and  the  army  lost,  according  to  the  report  of  the  heralds,  upwards  of  five  hundred.  On  the
attack  ceasing,  the  French  retired  to  their  quarters,  to  attend  the  sick  and  bury  the  dead.
They  said,  that  on  the  morrow  they  would  renew  the  attack,  and  it  should  be  irresistible.
The  English,  all  this  Saturday  night,  were  employed  in  repairing  the  palisadoes  which  had
been  broken,  in  putting  all  things  in  a good  state,  and  in  extinguishing  the  fires  in  the  town.
They  were  in  a most  perilous  situation,  being  surrounded  on  all  sides,  without  means  of
escaping  by  flight.

On  the  Sunday  morning  when  the  king  had  heard  mass,  it  was  proclaimed  through  the
army,  that  whoever  should  bring  a faggot  to  the  king’s  tent  should  receive  a halfpenny,  and  as
many  faggots  so  many  halfpence.  These  faggots  were  intended  to  be  thrown  into  the  ditches,
so  that  they  might  resolutely  pass  over  them,  and  engage  with  the  English,  on  the  Monday
morning  at  the  palisadoes.  Upon  this  all  the  lower  ranks,  and  the  servants,  began  to  make
faggots  and  carry  them  to  the  king’s  tent,  insomuch  that  a very  large  heap  of  them  was
made  there.  Sunday  passed  without  any  attack.  Some  say  that  on  this  day,  and  appearances
confirmed  it,  the  duke  of  Brittany,  who  was  on  the  opposite  side  of  the  town  to  the  king,
entered  into  negotiations  with  the  English,  aware  of  the  peril  they  were  in.  He  advised  them
to  surrender  the  town,  on  their  lives  and  fortunes  being  spared.  This  they  were  very  willing
to  do,  and  they  entreated  the  duke,  through  love  of  God,  and  in  honour  of  his  gentility,  to
undertake  the  business.

The  duke  sent  information  of  what  he  had  done  to  the  king,  his  uncles,  the  constable  of
France,  the  count  dc  St.  Pol,  and  to  the  council.  Having  considered  how  advisable  it  was
to  gain  all  the  strong  places  in  Flanders,  in  whatever  manner  they  were  offered  to  be
surrendered,  and  that  to  win  Bourbourg  they  must  renew  the  attack,  which  would  cost  them,
probably,  numbers  of  lives  ; besides,  they  should  at  last  only  conquer  a handful  of  men,  who
would  defend  themselves  until  they  dropped  ; the  king  of  France  and  his  uncles  replied,  that,


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


11


in  God’s  name,  they  would  willingly  agree  to  a treaty,  if  the  duke  of  Brittany  and  the
constable  of  France  would  undertake  it.  In  this  manner  Sunday  passed,  without  anything
being  done.  I heard  that,  in  the  evening,  on  a promise  of  safety,  John  de  Chateauneuf,
a Gascon,  and  Remonnet  de  St.  Marc,  came  to  the  tent  of  the  lord  Guy  de  la  Tremouille  to
play  and  amuse  themselves,  where  they  staid  all  night.  On  the  Monday  morning  they
returned  to  Bourbourg ; and  at  their  departure  the  lord  Guy  said  to  them,  “ John  and
Iiemonnet,  ye  shall  both  be  my  prisoners  this  evening.”  They  replied,  they  would  prefer
being  his,  than  belonging  to  any  other  knight.

Intelligence  arrived  this  Sunday  of  the  capture  of  Oudenarde,  which  much  vexed  sir  Gilbert
de  Lieneghien  the  governor,  as  it  had  been  lost  through  his  absence ; but  he  was  exculpated
from  all  blame  by  his  lord  the  earl  of  Flanders,  who  had  sent  for  him.  The  count  de  Blois
commanded  the  king’s  guard  this  Sunday,  and  every  one  thought  the  attack  would  be  renewed
on  Monday : but  in  the  morning  it  was  proclaimed  through  the  army,  that  the  king  forbade
any  attack  until  further  orders.  This  proclamation  made  every  one  quiet ; and  several  lords
guessed  that  the  English  would  escape  by  means  of  a treaty,  as  the  attack  was  forbidden.
After  dinner,  those  who  were  to  negotiate  came  out  of  the  town,  such  as  sir-  William  Elmham,
sir  Thomas  Trivet,  sir  Nicholas  Drayton,  sir  Matthew  Redman,  and  others,  to  the  number  of
fourteen  knights  and  squires,  whom  the  duke  of  Brittany,  the  constable  of  France,  and  the
count  de  St.  Pol,  conducted  to  the  tent  of  the  king.  The  king  was  much  pleased  thereat,  as
he  had  scarcely  seen  any  English  except  sir  Peter  Courtenay,  who  had  come  to  Paris  to  fight
with  the  lord  Guy  de  la  Tremouille,  but  the  king  and  his  council  had  made  up  the  quarrel.
Now,  as  the  English  had  been  much  renowned  for  gallantry  and  deeds  of  arms,  the  young-
king  of  France  wished  to  see  them  : and  their  treaty  was  much  the  better  for  it.

On  the  Monday  this  negotiation  was  carried  on  in  the  king’s  tent,  and  in  bis  presence.
There  were  also  present  the  dukes  of  Berry,  Burgundy,  Bourbon,  Brittany,  the  earl  of
Flanders,  and  the  constable  of  France,  and  no  more.  The  duke  of  Brittany  was  very  active
in  this  business  : and  it  was  settled,  that  the  English  should  depart  from  Bourbourg  and
Gravelines,  and  carry  away  with  them  as  much  of  their  wealth  as  they  could.  Several  of
the  Bretons,  French,  Normans,  and  Burgundians  were  much  vexed  at  this  treaty,  for  they
thought  of  partaking  of  the  spoils  ; but  the  king  and  his  council  had  ordered  it  otherwise.

After  the  treaty  had  been  signed,  the  English  took  leave  of  the  king  of  France,  his  uncles,
the  duke  of  Brittany,  and  the  constable,  and  went  with  the  count  de  St.  Pol,  who  carried
them  to  supper  at  his  house,  where  he  entertained  them  as  handsomely  as  he  could  in  such  a
situation.  After  supper  he  had  them  conducted  to  the  gates  of  Bourbourg,  for  which  they
testified  to  him  their  thanks.  The  whole  of  Tuesday  they  employed  in  shoeing  their  horses,
and  in  packing  up  all  their  wealth,  of  which  they  had  much,  and  in  making  preparations  for
their  departure.  On  the  Wednesday  morning  they  loaded  their  baggage-horses  and  began
their  march,  passing  through  the  army  with  passports  from  the  king.  The  Bretons  were
much  exasperated  when  they  saw  them  so  loaded  ; and  they  treated  very  indifferently  a few
who  tarried  behind.  Thus  the  English  marched  to  Gravelines,  where  they  halted.  On  the
Thursday  morning,  when  they  left  it,  they  set  fire  to  the  place,  burned  it  to  the  ground,  and
arrived  at  Calais  with  all  their  pillage.  They  stopped  there  to  refresh  themselves,  and  to
wait  for  a favourable  wind  to  return  to  England.

The  king  of  France,  and  all  the  lords  of  his  army,  with  their  attendants,  entered  Bourbourg
on  the  Thursday  morning,  when  the  Bretons  began  to  plunder  it,  without  excepting  even  the
church  of  St.  John  : in  which  church,  a pillager  having  mounted  on  an  altar,  with  the  intent
of  forcing  out  a precious  stone  that  was  in  the  crown  of  an  image  made  to  represent  the  person
of  our  Lady,  the  image  turned  about,  and  the  pillager  in  his  fright  fell  from  the  altar  and  was
instantly  struck  dead.  This  is  a certain  truth,  for  many  persons  were  witnesses  of  it.
Shortly  afterwards,  another  pillager  came  with  a similar  intent  of  robbing  the  image  ; but
all  the  bells  began  a peal  without  any  one  touching  them,  for  no  one  could  have  rung  them,
the  bell-ropes  being  drawn  up  and  fastened.  On  account  of  these  miracles,  the  church  was
visited  by  crowds.  The  king  made  a handsome  present  to  it,  as  did  all  the  lords,  so  that  the
amount  of  their  gifts  was  upwards  of  three  thousand  francs.

On  Tuesday,  the  army  began  to  decamp,  and  the  king  and  constable  gave  permission  to


12


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


several  of  the  men  at  arms  to  return  home.  The  king  thanked  those  who  had  come  from
distant  parts,  and  in  a particular  manner  the  duke  of  Bavaria  and  the  count  of  Savoy,  who
had  come  from  such  a distance  to  serve  him.  Each  lord  now  returned  home,  and  the  king
went  to  France  ; but  the  duke  of  Burgundy  staid  a short  time  with  his  father-in-law  the  earl
of  Flanders,  to  regulate  his  affairs,  and  resided  at  St.  Omer.  The  lord  de  Coucy,  with  many
knights  and  squires  from  Ponthieu,  Vimeu  and  Picardy,  entered  Gravelines  when  the  English
Bad  left  it,  repaired  and  greatly  strengthened  it,  and  made  it  a garrison  as  a frontier  to  Calais.

The  countries  of  Furnes,  Dunkirk,  Dixmude,  and  Nieuport  were  by  degrees  re-peopled.
They  had  lost  everything  by  this  war,  but  they  now  began  somewhat  to  recover  themselves.


CHAPTER  CXLV. THE  BISHOP  OF  NORWICH  AND  THOSE  WHO  ACCOMPANIED  HIM  IN  HIS

EXPEDITION  ARE  BADLY  RECEIVED  ON  THEIR  RETURN  TO  ENGLAND. CERTAIN  GREAT

PERSONAGES  ARE  DEPUTED  TO  NEGOTIATE  A PEACE  OR  TRUCE  BETWEEN  THE  KINGS
OF  FRANCE  AND  ENGLAND. THE  DUKE  OF  BAVARIA  DIES.

You  must  know  that  the  duke  of  Lancaster  was  not  very  sorry  this  expedition  of  the
bishop  of  Norwich  had  failed,  for  by  it  his  intended  voyage  to  Spain  and  Portugal  had  been
frustrated.  When  these  knights  returned  to  England,  they  were  attacked  by  the  common
people,  who  told  them  they  had  behaved  very  badly  in  their  expedition,  for,  from  the
prosperity  they  had  been  blessed  with  at  the  beginning,  they  ought  to  have  conquered  all
Flanders.  Sir  Thomas  Trivet  and  sir  William  Elmliam  were  more  blamed  than  the  rest  ;
but  sir  Hugh  Calverley  was  not  any  way  found  fault  with,  either  by  the  king’s  council  or
the  populace,  for  they  well  knew,  that  if  they  had  paid  attention  to  what  he  had  advised,  the
event  would  have  been  more  to  their  honour.  They  laid  to  their  charge,  that  they  had  sold
Bourbourg  and  Gravelines  to  the  king  of  France,  which  exasperated  the  people  to  a great
degree,  and  they  were  at  one  time  in  danger  of  their  lives.  The  king  ordered  these  two
knights  to  be  confined  in  the  tower  of  London,  and  during  the  time  of  their  imprisonment  the
country  was  quieted  : on  their  liberation,  they  threw  themselves  on  the  king’s  mercy*.

At  this  time,  negotiations  were  set  on  foot  to  conclude  a truce  between  England  and
France,  in  which  the  Ghent  men  were  to  be  included,  to  the  great  displeasure  of  the  earl  of
Flanders  ; but  he  could  not  help  it.  When  the  army  decamped  from  Bourbourg,  the  duke  of
Brittany  remained  with  his  cousin  the  earl  of  Flanders  at  St.  Omer,  and  was  desirous  that  a
long  peace  or  truce  should  be  established  between  his  lawful  lord,  the  king  of  France,  and
the  king  of  England.  In  order  to  make  a beginning  to  such  business,  he  had  mentioned  the
subject  to  some  of  the  English  knights,  on  the  Monday,  when  they  were  in  the  king’s  tent
before  Bourbourg  ; which  knights  had  promised,  on  their  arrival  in  England,  to  propose  it  to
the  king,  his  uncles,  and  his  council.  However,  to  show  that  this  matter  was  quite  agreeable
to  him,  and  that  lie  was  anxious  about  it,  he  sent  two  of  his  knights  to  England  under  good
passports.  These  knights,  the  lord  de  la  Lloussaye  and  the  lord  de  Mailly,  managed  matters
so  well  that  the  duke  of  Lancaster,  the  earl  of  Buckingham,  the  bishop  of  Hereford,  the  lord
John  Holland,  brother  to  the  king,  the  lord  Thomas  Percy,  and  others  of  the  king’s  council,
were  ordered  to  Calais,  having  full  powers  from  the  king  of  England  to  conclude  a peace  or
truce,  according  to  their  pleasure.  On  the  other  hand,  there  came  to  Boulogne  the  duke  of
Berry,  the  duke  of  Burgundy,  the  bishop  of  Laon,  and  the  chancellor  of  France,  having  also
full  powers  from  the  king  of  France  and  his  council  to  conclude  either  a peace  or  truce.

When  assembled  at  Calais  and  Boulogne,  they  were  delayed  a short  time  by  the  non-
arrival of  the  deputies  from  Spain  ; for  the  French  would  not  enter  into  any  treaty  that  did
not  at  the  same  time  include  the  Spaniards.  At  last,  a bishop,  a dean,  and  two  knights
arrived  on  the  part  of  the  king  of  Spain.  As  they  were  not  empowered  on  either  side  to  grant

* Writs  were  issued  to  tlie  sheriffs  of  London,  Somer-  no  mention  is  made  of  the  Tower  of  London.  Robert  de
set,  Dorset,  Essex,  Norfolk,  and  Suffolk,  to  levy  on  the  Foulmer,  clerk,  treasurer  to  the  bishop  of  Norwich,  was
goods  of  sir  W.  Elmham,  for  3080  golden  francs, — sir  also  imprisoned,  and  5000  golden  francs  levied  on  his
W.  de  Farndon,  1400  ditto, — sir  Thomas  Trivet,  1400  goods.  Dated  6th  March, — pardoned  14th  May. — Ilymer,
ditto, — sir  Henry  de  Ferrers,  6080  ditto, — Robert.  Fitzrauf,  ann.  1384,  ann.  7 Ric.  II.

300  ditto.  They  were  also  to  be  taken  into  custody ; but


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  Ac.


13


passports,  that  the  negotiators  from  France  might  come  to  Calais,  or  the  English  go  to
Boulogne,  it  was  settled  between  them,  that  the  conference  should  be  transferred  to  a village
that  had  a church,  half  way  between  these  two  towns,  above  Buissem  *,  called  Bolinges  t.
Thither  all  the  parties  went,  and  the  lords,  with  their  council,  were  together  for  many  days.
The  duke  of  Brittany  and  the  earl  of  Flanders  were  present,  and  the  great  tent  of  Bruges  was
pitched,  wherein  the  earl  entertained  at  dinner  the  duke  of  Lancaster,  the  earl  of  Buckingham,
and  the  other  English  lords.  Each  negotiator  kept  up  a grand  state  ; but,  notwithstanding
there  were  many  conferences  holden,  yet  they  could  not  agree  upon  a peace,  for  the  French
wanted  the  English  to  give  up  Calais,  Guines,  and  all  the  fortresses  which  they  possessed  in
Normandy,  Brittany,  Poitou,  Saintonge,  and  La  Rochelle,  as  far  as  the  river  Garonne.  But
the  English  would  not  any  way  listen  to  such  a proposal;  nor  would  they  ever  consent  to
give  back  such  places  as  Calais,  Guines,  Cherbourg,  or  Brest.  These  conferences  lasted  three
weeks,  in  which  they  or  their  councils  discussed  these  matters  daily.

At  this  period,  the  gallant  duke  Winceslaus  of  Bohemia  departed  this  life,  in  the  town  of
Luxembourg:  he  was  in  his  time  magnificent,  blithe,  prudent,  amorous  and  polite^;  and,  when
he  died,  it  was  said  that  the  prince  of  the  highest  birth,  of  the  most  noble  blood,  and  most
numerously  and  honourably  connected,  was  gone.  God  have  mercy  on  his  soul ! He  lies
buried  in  the  abbey  of  Vaucler,  near  Luxembourg.  The  lady  Jane,  his  duchess,  remained  a
widow,  and  never  had  any  inclination  to  marry  again.  All  who  loved  the  duke  were
exceedingly  concerned  at  his  death.


CHAPTER  CXLVI. DURING  THESE  CONFERENCES  THE  GHENT  MEN  INSULT  TOITRNAY. A

TRUCE  IS  CONCLUDED  BETWEEN  THE  KINGS  OF  FRANCE  AND  ENGLAND  AND  THEIR
ALLIES.

We  will  now  return  to  the  conferences  which  were  holding  between  the  lords  of  France
and  England,  half-way  between  Calais  and  Boulogne,  at  the  before-mentioned  village.
Neither  side  seemed  willing  to  accommodate  the  other.  Some  said  it  was  owing  solely  to
the  earl  of  Flanders,  at  the  instigation  of  the  town  of  Bruges,  who  would  not  consent  that
the  Ghent  men  should  be  included  in  the  treaty.  This  the  English  resented,  and  of  course
the  treaty  was  stopped  ; for  they  had  formed  so  strong  a connection  with  Ghent,  that  they
would  not  conclude  a peace  unless  that  place  were  included.  They  had  sworn  to  observe
this  during  the  time  they  were  together  at  Calais,  and  this  compact  frequently  interrupted
the  negotiations.

Since  there  seemed  no  probability  of  a solid  peace  being  made,  they  proposed  a truce,  and
on  this  ground  the  conferences  were  continued.  The  earl  of  Flanders  would  willingly  have
had  Ghent  excluded,  and  remain  in  a state  of  war,  but  the  English  absolutely  refused  to
consent,  so  that  a truce  was  made  to  comprehend  Ghent,  and  every  thing  was  to  remain  in
its  present  situation,  without  any  surrender  of  forts : Oudenarde  and  Gravelines  therefore
belonged  to  Ghent.  Notwithstanding  the  conferences,  the  Ghent  men  in  garrison  at
Oudenarde  marched  to  Tournay,  burnt  the  suburbs,  and  returned  back  in  safety  with  their
pillage.  About  Christmas  the  Ghent  men  went  and  received  the  rents  of  the  lord  d’Estournay
in  his  own  town,  which  made  him  very  melancholy  ; and  he  swore  to  God,  that  if  he  would
be  pleased  to  assist  him,  whatever  treaty  or  agreement  should  be  made  between  the  country
of  Flanders  and  these  men,  he  would  never  pay  any  attention  to  it,  but  would  continue  the
war  against  them  to  the  utmost  of  his  power,  for  they  had  robbed  him  of  his  inheritance.
Ho  was  ignorant  how  he  should  live,  if  his  friends  in  Brabant  did  not  assist  him,  so
completely  had  they  plundered  him.

With  some  difficulty,  the  lords  who  had  held  so  many  conferences  at  Bolinges  concluded  a
truce  between  the  kings  of  France  and  England  and  their  allies.  On  the  part  of  France
was  included  all  Spain,  as  well  as  Scotland.  The  king  of  France  bound  himself  to  send

* Probably  what  is  now  Haut  Buisson.  i?  Q.  If  not  Bollinghem,  now  a village,  near  Boulogne.

I Noble,  joli,  frisque,  sage,  armeret  et  amoureux, — noble,  handsome,  lively,  wise,  valiant,  and  amorous Ed.


14


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


notice  of  this  truce  to  the  king  and  barons  of  Scotland  as  speedily  as  possible ; and  the
bearers  of  this  information  were  to  have  passports  for  their  safety,  in  going  to  and  returning
from  Scotland  through  England.

On  the  part  of  the  English  were  included  all  their  allies  and  adherents,  wheresoever  they
might  bo.  Ghent  was  expressly  mentioned  in  all  their  deeds,  to  the  great  displeasure  of  the
earl  of  Flanders.  This  truce  was  to  last  until  the  Michaelmas  of  the  year  1384  : and  these
commissioners  were  to  see  that  the  articles  were  duly  observed,  having  full  powers  to  enforce
them.  Public  acts  were  made  of  each  different  article  for  the  better  observance  of  them ;
and  the  lords  present  swore  they  should  all  be  loyally  kept,  and  in  no  way  infringed.


CHAPTER  CXLVII. — THE  EARL  OF  FLANDERS  DIES. — THE  CEREMONY  OP  IIIS  FUNERAL.

On  the  conference  breaking  up,  the  French  lords  returned  to  France,  and  the  English
lords  to  Calais.  The  duke  of  Brittany  went  back  to  his  duchy,  and  the  earl  of  Flanders  to
St.  Omer.  Shortly  after,  he  was  taken  so  ill  that  he  died*.  It  was  ordered  that  he  should
be  buried  in  the  church  of  St.  Peter  in  Lille.  The  earl  departed  this  life  on  the  20th  day  of
January,  in  the  year  1383,  and  his  body  was  carried  to  Los,  an  abbey  near  to  Lille.  The
body  of  the  countess  his  lady,  who  had  died  five  years  before  in  the  county  of  Bethel,  was
also  brought  thither,  and  from  thence  to  Lille,  where  they  were  interred  together  in  the
church  of  St.  Peter  f.

I will  now  relate  the  arrangement  of  this  ceremony,  and  the  manner  in  which  it  was
conducted,  and  describe  the  order  of  procession  at  the  funeral  of  the  carl  and  countess  of
Flanders,  whose  bodies  had  been  carried  to  Los,  an  abbey  near  Lille.  • When  they  were
about  to  enter  Lille,  a great  number  of  lords  from  France,  Flanders,  Hainault  and  Brabant,
who  had  arrived  there  the  eve  of  the  funeral,  were  to  meet  the  body  at  the  gate  of  the
Invalids,  and  to  carry  it  through  the  town  to  the  church  of  St.  Peter.  They  were  to  be
armed  as  for  war,  as  well  as  their  squires  who  supported  them.

Sir  John  Haluin  was  nearest  the  body,  supported  by  Enguerrand  de  Volemie,  and  Roger
de  l’Espierre : then  the  lord  de  la  Marque,  supported  by  John  de  l’Espierre,  and  the  lord
Sausee  de  Fretin ; the  lord  de  Mauvis,  supported  by  Godfrey  de  Noille,  and  Henry  de  la
Vacquerie.  The  names  of  those  appointed  to  the  convoy  were,  sir  Peter  de  Bailleuf,  near
the  body,  supported  by  Guyot  de  Lompre,  and  John  Louis  lord  of  Lamberticourt : sir  Sohier
de  Gand  advanced  before  sir  Peter  de  Bailleuf,  supported  by  Hugart  de  Quinghen,  and  by
Michael  de  la  Quarrie  : sir  John  du  Moulin  advanced  before  sir  Sohier  de  Gand,  supported
by  John  de  Quinghen  and  Ilaubequin  le  mareschal.  Next  followed  the  banners  of  the  bier  ;
first,  sir  Francis  de  Hasurquerque  and  sir  Goussain  le  Sauvage  in  front ; sir  Lancelot  de  la
Personne  before  sir  Goussain,  and  sir  John  de  la  I Idle  before  sir  Lancelot  de  la  Personne.
Those  who  bore  the  banners  of  the  bier  and  convoy  came  next,  sir  Matthew  de  Hunieres,
and  before  him  sir  John  de  Helles  lord  des  Aveaux,  and  sir  Cierchelart  de  la  Barre  before  the
above  named  lord  des  Aveaux  ; and  sir  John  de  Paris  before  Cierchelart.  The  names  of
those  barons  who  assisted  to  carry  the  corpse  of  the  earl  from  the  gate  of  the  Invalids,  in
procession  through  the  town  of  Lille,  to  the  church  of  St.  Peter  : first,  sir  John  de  Yicnne,
admiral  of  France,  on  the  right,  and  the  lord  de  Guistelles  on  the  left ; sir  Valeran  de
Ravenal  on  the  right,  the  castellan  de  Disquenieu  on  the  left ; the  lord  d’Estournay  on  the
right,  and  sir  Ansel  de  Salins  on  the  left.

Those  barons  who  assisted  in  bearing  the  corpse  of  the  countess  of  Flanders  from  the  gate
of  St.  Ladre  to  the  church  of  St.  Peter  were,  the  lord  de  Sully  on  the  right,  and  the  lord  de
Chatillon  on  the  left  side  of  the  body  ; sir  Guy  de  Pontalliers,  marshal  of  Burgundy,  on  the

* Some  authorities  state  that  he  was  stahhed  by  the  Margaret  of  Flanders,  his  sole  heiress;  but  he  had  eleven
duke  of  Berri,  because  he  insisted  on  receiving  the  homage  illegitimate  children,  the  eldest  of  whom  was  Louis,  bt’foie-
of  the  latter  for  the  earldom  of  Boulogne,  held  by  him  in  mentioned,  called  the  Haze,  Anglich  Hare  of  Flanders,
right  of  his  wife. — Ed.  The  origin  of  this  title  is  uncertain. — Ed.

f The  earl  of  Flanders  left  only  one  legitimate  child,


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


15


right,  sir  Guy  do  Guistelles  on  the  left ; then  sir  Ilenry  du  Going  on  the  right,  and  the
castellan  of  Furnes  on  the  left.

I shall  now  mention  the  regulations  on  the  day  of  the  obsequies,  which  were  performed  in
the  church  of  St.  Peter,  the  names  of  those  present  as  well  as  of  the  squires  who  supported


Funeral  of  the  Earl  of  Flanders. — Bearing  tlie  body  into  the  Church,  with  an  array  of  Priesthood,  &c.


the  shields  during  the  whole  mass,  until  the  offertory : first,  the  duke  of  Burgundy  by
himself,  and  the  first  shield  was  borne  before  him,  which  shield  was  supported  by  the  lord  de
Ra venal,  by  the  lord  de  la  Gouneuse,  by  Labequin  de  la  Coutre,  and  by  John  de  Pontalliers
brother  to  the  marshal  of  Bui’gundy.

The  second  shield  was  borne  before  my  lord  John  of  Artois,  count  d’Eu,  and  the  lord
Philip  de  Bar,  by  Valeran  de  la  Sale  and  Lesclaus  d’Annequin.  Next  followed  the  count
de  la  Marche  and  the  lord  Philip  d’ Artois ; the  shield  was  borne  by  Gillon  de  Labert  and
Robin  de  Florigny.  Then  came  sir  Robert  de  Namur,  and  with  him  his  nephew  sir  William
de  Namur  : the  shield  was  borne  by  Chaux  Bernard  and  Girard  de  Stern  aille.

The  shields  of  the  convoy  : the  lord  d’Anghien,  and  with  him  sir  John  de  Namur ; the
shield  carried  by  Aillart  de  Ponthees  and  Ilenry  de  Moucy.  Next  followed  sir  Esne  de
Chatillon,  and  the  lord  de  Fere;  the  shield  supported  by  John  de  Heluin  and  Edward  de
Castron  ; then  the  lord  d’Ancoing  and  the  lord  de  Guistelles  : the  shield-bearers  were  Tristan
de  Landres  and  John  du  Beart ; then  the  lord  de  Moriennes  and  the  lord  de  Silly  : the
shield  borne  by  Fresingue  and  by  Damas  de  Bucy.

Then  came  those  who  were  to  make  offerings  of  the  war-horses  of  the  earl : first  my  lord
de  Chatillon  and  sir  Simon  de  Lalain,  bailiff  of  Hainault.  These  lords  were  on  foot,  and
the  horse  was  armed  and  caparisoned ; with  the  secona  horse  were  sir  Valeran  de  Ravenal
and  the  castellan  de  Dixmude  : with  the  third,  sir  Hugh  de  Melun  and  the  lord  d’Aucy  :
the  lord  de  Burnel  and  the  lord  de  Brumeu  were  with  the  fourth  horse.  Then  came  those
who  were  to  offer  the  steeds  of  the  convoy  : first,  sir  Henry  d’Ancoing  and  sir  Gerard  de
Guistelles  ; with  the  second,  the  lord  de  Montigny  and  the  lord  de  Rasenghien  ; the  lord  de
la  Haui’ade  and  the  castellan  de  Furnes  were  with  the  third ; and  the  fourth  had  the  lord
de  Saugmelles  and  sir  Rowland  de  la  Clicque.


16  CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.

Next  came  those  who  were  to  offer  the  earl’s  swords  of  war;  my  lord  admiral  of  France
bore  the  first,  the  lord  de  Rary  the  second,  the  marshal  of  Burgundy  the  third,  the  lord  de
Saint  Py  the  fourth.  The  names  of  those  who  offered  the  swords  of  the  convoy • sir  William
do  Pontlneu  hore  the  first,  sir  William  de  la  Trimouille  the  second,  the  castellan  of  Ypres
the  third,  and  sir  Guy  de  1100001111;  the  fourth.  Then  came  those  who  offered  the  war-
helmets  of  the  earl;  the  lord  de  Mailly  bore  the  first ; the  second  was  borne  by  sir  William
de  Hornes  and  sir  Ansel  de  Salins  : sir  John  Doppem  and  the  castellan  of  St.  Omer  had  the
third  ; and  sir  Guy  de  Guistelles  and  le  Galois  d’Aunoy  the  fourth.


Placing  tlie  body  before  the  Altar.


The  helmets  of  the  convoy  were  borne  and  offered  as  follows : the  first  by  sir  Josse  de
Hallain  and  sir  Oliver  de  Guffy  ; the  second  by  the  lord  d’Ysebobecque  and  the  lord  de
Lalain  * ; the  fourth  by  sir  Tristan  du  Bois  and  sir  John  de  Jumont.  Then  came  those  who
offered  the  banners  of  war  : the  lord  de  Listrenaille  offered  the  first,  sir  Leoncel  d’Airainnies
the  second,  sir  Giles  de  la  Gouneuse  the  third,  and  sir  John  de  Luisolom  the  fourth.  The
banners  of  the  convoy  were  next  offered:  the  first  by  sir  Orengois  de  Rely,  the  third  + by
sir  John  de  Disqueniue  and  the  fourth  by  sir  Yilaines  de  la  Cheque.

Those  who,  after  the  obsequies  were  ended,  laid  the  body  of  the  earl  of  Flanders  in  the
earth  were,  sir  John  de  Vienne  admiral  of  France,  the  lord  de  Guistelle,  sir  Valeran  de
Ravenal,  the  castellan  de  Dixmude,  the  lord  de  Ray  and  sir  Ansel  de  Salins.  Those  who
interred  the  body  of  the  countess,  consort  to  the  earl,  were,  sir  Guy  de  la  Trimouille,  the
lord  de  Chatillon,  the  seneschal  of  Burgundy,  the  lord  Gerard  de  Guistelles,  sir  Henry
d’Antoing  and  the  castellan  of  Furnes.

It  should  be  observed,  that  all  who  officially  had  entered  the  church  of  St.  Peter  at  Lille,
with  the  corpse  in  the  evening,  remained  there  until  the  mass  of  the  morrow,  as  well  those
knights  who  were  armed  as  those  who  bore  the  banners  and  the  squires  who  led  the  horses.
There  were  about  four  hundred  men,  clothed  in  black,  appointed  to  carry  the  body  of  the
earl  and  countess  of  Flanders,  through  Lille,  to  the  church  of  St  Peter,  and  each  of  them


* The  third  is  not  mentioned  in  any  of  my  editions.


f The  second  is  forgotten.


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


17


bore  a torch  in  his  hand.  These  four  hundred  men  held  their  torches  on  the  morrow  in  the
church  during  mass,  and  they  were  all  of  them  officers  in  the  principal  towns  or  of  the  earl’s
household.

The  archbishop  of  Rheims  celebrated  the  mass,  assisted  by  the  bishops  of  Paris,  Tournay,
Cambray  and  Arras,  and  likewise  by  five  abbots.  There  were  in  the  church,  during  the
obsequies,  seven  hundred  candles  or  thereabouts,  and  each  candle  weighed  one  pound.  On
the  catafalque  were  five  banners  : in  the  centre,  the  banner  of  Flanders  ; on  the  right,  that
of  Artois  ; on  the  left,  lower  down,  that  of  Boulogne ; the  fourth  of  Nevers,  and  the  fifth  of
Rethel.  The  catafalque  was  emblazoned  on  the  right  side  with  the  scutcheons  of  Flanders,
and  on  the  left  witli  those  of  Flanders  and  Brabant.  Down  the  church  were  twelve  hundred
and  twenty- six  candles,  similar  to  those  around  the  bodies.  There  was  not  any  lady  or
damsel  present  on  the  part  of  the  duke  or  duchess  of  Burgundy  except  .the  lady  of  the
governor  of  Lille.


A magnificent  dinner  was  provided,  and  every  knight  and  squire  were  gratuitously
entertained  the  day  and  night  of  the  obsequies ; and  all  the  black  cloth  they  had  worn  was
given  to  them.  After  this  ceremony  they  all  returned  to  their  homes.

The  duke  of  Burgundy  placed  in  the  garrisons  and  towns  in  Flanders,  knights  and  squires,
notwithstanding  the  truce  which  had  been  made  between  France  and  England,  and  between
their  allies,  for  every  one  was  on  his  guard.  The  duke  of  Burgundy  then  returned  to  France,
but  the  lady-duchess  remained  a considerable  time  in  Artois.


von.  ii.


c


18


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  Sec.


CHAPTER  CXLVIII. — TIIE  EARLS  OP  NORTHUMBERLAND  AND  NOTTINGHAM  RAISE  A BODY  OP

ENGLISH  TO  MAKE  AN  EXCURSION  INTO  SCOTLAND. AMBASSADORS  ARE  SENT  FROM

PRANCE  TO  SCOTLAND,  TO  NOTIFY  THE  TRUCES  WHICH  HAD  BEEN  MADE  BETWEEN
FRANCE  AND  ENGLAND.

You  have  before  heard  how  the  lords  of  France  who  had  attended  the  conferences  in
Bolinge  had  engaged  on  their  departure  to  notify  the  truces  that  had  been  made  between
them  and  the  English,  to  the  Scots  and  to  the  king  of  Scotland,  so  that  any  misunderstanding
should  be  prevented  between  the  two  countries.  The  council  of  France,  however,  to  say  the
truth,  did  not  use  all  the  diligence  they  should  have  done  ; for  they  were  to  have  sent  instant
information  of  this  truce,  which  they  did  not  do.  I know  not  how  this  happened,  except  it
were  owing  to  the  duke  of  Burgundy  being  so  much  engaged  by  the  death  of  his  father-in-law
the  earl  of  Flanders,  and  taken  up  with  the  business  of  his  obsequies,  as  you  have  heard
related.  lie  likewise  did  not  imagine  the  English  would  have  acted  as  they  did ; for,  soon
after  Easter,  the  carls  of  Northumberland  and  Nottingham,  and  the  barons  of  Northumberland,
collected  a body  of  about  two  thousand  lances  and  six  thousand  archers,  with  which  they
marched  by  Berwick  and  Roxburgh,  and  entered  Scotland.

They  burnt  all  the  lands  of  the  earl  of  Douglas  and  of  the  lord  Lindsay,  and  left  nothing
unmolested  as  far  as  Edinburgh.  The  barons  of  Scotland  were  not  apprised  of  this  invasion,
and  took  the  affair  much  to  heart,  saying  they  would  revenge  it  to  the  utmost  of  their  power.
They  added  that  the  English  ought  to  have  been  at  peace  with  them  according  to  what  had
been  reported  of  the  truce ; but  they  knew  not  this  for  certain,  as  in  fact  it  had  not  at  that
time  been  notified  to  them ; and  they  well  knew  that  they  had  not  entered  into  any  treaty
with  the  English.  The  war  was  thus  begun  ; and  they  had  suffered  in  the  first  instance
from  it,  which  greatly  displeased  them.  Intelligence  soon  spreads  abroad ; it  was  known
in  Flanders,  particularly  at  Sluys,  from  some  merchants  who  had  sailed  from  Scotland,  that
the  English  had  invaded  that  country,  and  that  king  Robert  and  his  barons  "were  collecting
a numerous  force  to  engage  the  English.  It  was  also  known  in  France  that  the  English  had
taken  the  field,  and  they  said  among  themselves  that  a battle  must  be  the  consequence.

The  dukes  of  Berry  and  Burgundy,  and  the  king’s  council,  hearing  this  news,  said  it  was
foolishly  done  not  to  have  notified  the  truce  to  Scotland,  according  to  their  promise.  It
was  then  ordered  by  the  king,  his  uncles  and  his  council,  that  sir  Iiemart  de  Masse,  a very
prudent  knight,  should  go  to  Scotland,  properly  authorised,  and  with  him  sir  Peter  de  Flamel ;
and  a serjeant  at  arms  of  the  king,  who  was  of  the  Scots  nation,  and  called  Janequin
Champenois,  was  likewise  ordered  to  attend  them,  because  he  was  acquainted  with  the
country  and  understood  the  language.  While  these  ambassadors  were  making  their
preparations,  and  the  English  overrunning  Scotland,  the  news  of  which  was  spoken  of  every
where,  several  men  at  arms  from  France  who  had  fixed  their  residence  at  Sluys,  not  knowing
where  to  offer  their  services,  as  a truce  was  now  established  between  France  and  England,
resolved  to  go  to  Scotland.  They  heard  the  news  of  this  war  between  Scotland  and  England  ;
and  it  was  confidently  said  at  Sluys,  that  an  engagement  must  very  soon  take  place.  These
men  at  arms,  such  as  sir  Geoffry  de  Charny,  sir  John  de  Plaissy,  sir  Hugh  de  Boulon,  sir
Sainge  de  Villiers,  sir  Gamier  de  Libourne,  sir  Gamier  de  Gussangin,  sir  Odin  de  Motin,
sir  Robert  de  Campignen,  James  de  Montfort,  John  de  Ileluin,  John  de  Mellez,  Michael  de
la  Barre,  William  Gobart,  heard  this  information  with  pleasure  : they  might  amount  to
about  thirty  men  at  arms,  knights  and  squires.

In  order  to  advance  their  renown,  they  had  determined  among  themselves,  since  they  knew
not  where  to  offer  their  arms,  to  hire  a vessel  and  seek  for  adventures  with  the  Scots.  This
resolution  they  followed,  and  having  embarked  all  their  arms  and  baggage,  they  themselves
went  on  board  and  set  sail  from  Sluys  as  soon  as  the  wind  became  favourable.  They  left
their  horses  behind,  on  account  of  the  dangers  of  the  sea  and  the  length  of  the  voyage  :
besides,  the  mariners  who  conducted  them  knew  they  could  not  land  at  Edinburgh,  Dunbar,
nor  any  of  the  adjoining  ports,  on  account  of  the  English  fleet,  with  the  purveyances  which
followed  the  army,  being  masters  of  all  the  havens.


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


19


About  this  time  the  ambassadors  from  France  arrived  in  England,  and  waited  on  the  king
and  bis  uncles,  who  entertained  them  handsomely.  They  dissembled  a little  the  first  day,
because  they  knew  a war  was  carrying  on  in  Scotland  : but,  on  hearing  their  people  had
finished  the  business,  they  hastened  the  messengers  from  France,  sir  Hemart  de  Masse  and
the  others,  and,  for  their  greater  security,  ordered  some  of  the  king’s  heralds  to  attend  them
through  England,  and  to  have  all  towns  and  castles  opened  to  receive  them.  This  being
arranged,  they  set  out  on  their  embassy.  The  French  knights  who  had  sailed  from  Sluys,  by
coasting  the  shores  of  Holland  and  England,  and  carefully  avoiding  the  English  fleets,  arrived
safely  at  a small  sca-port  in  Scotland  called  Monstres*.  The  Scots  who  lived  in  the  town,
hearing  that  the  passengers  were  Frenchmen  come  thither  to  seek  for  deeds  of  arms,  showed
them  great  kindness,  and  supplied  them  with  every  necessary  to  the  utmost  of  their  power.
When  these  knights  and  squires  had  refreshed  themselves  for  two  days,  and  had  gained
sufficient  intelligence,  they  set  out  mounted  on  hackneys,  and  rode  to  Dundee,  from  whence,
continuing  their  journey  as  well  as  they  could,  they  came  to  Perth,  a handsome  town.  The
river  Tay  runs  by  it : there  is  a good  sea-port,  from  whence  one  may  sail  to  any  part  of  the
world.  On  their  arrival  at  Perth,  they  learnt  that  the  English  had  retired,  and  that  the
king  and  all  the  nobility  of  Scotland  were  assembled  in  parliament  at  Edinburgh.  Upon
this  they  resolved  to  send  sir  Gamier  de  Cuissangin  and  Michael  de  la  Barre,  to  Edinburgh,
to  have  a conference  with  the  king  and  the  nobles,  to  know  if  they  could  be  employed,  and
to  testify  their  good  will,  at  least,  in  coming  from  Flanders  to  Scotland  : sir  Geoflfy  de
Charny  and  the  rest  were  to  remain  at  Perth,  until  they  heard  how  they  had  been  received.

As  they  had  resolved,  so  was  it  executed : the  ambassadors  set  out  from  Perth  and  came
to  Edinburgh,  where  the  king  was.  The  earl  of  Douglas  was  there,  whose  name  was  James,
for  sir  William,  the  present  earl’s  father,  was  lately  dead : there  were  present  also  the  earls
of  Moray  and  Orkney,  the  lords  de  Versi,  Sutherland,  Lindsay  and  his  six  brothers,  who
were  all  of  them  knights.  These  Scots  lords  entertained  very  handsomely  the  knights  of
France.  Sir  Gamier  explained  to  the  king  and  his  barons  the  intentions  of  his  companions,
and  their  reasons  for  coming;  to  Edinburgh.  The  ambassadors  from  France,  sir  Ilemart  de
Masse,  sir  Peter  de  Flamel  and  Janequin  Champenois,  arrived  with  copies  of  the  truces
entered  into  between  the  kings  of  France  and  England ; but  the  Scots  having  no  inclination
to  accept  of  them,  dissembled,  by  saying  that  they  had  come  too  late,  and  that  they  should
not  now  pay  any  attention  to  them,  for  the  English  had  just  made  a grievous  war  on  the
country.  King  Robert  did  every  thing  he  could  for  their  being  accepted,  saying,  that  in
truth,  since  they  had  been  notified  to  them,  they  had  not  any  pretence  for  a refusal : this
caused  a difference  between  the  king  and  the  knights  of  his  country.

The  earl  of  Douglas,  the  earl  of  Moray,  the  children  of  Lindsay,  and  such  knights  and
squires  of  Scotland  who  wished  for  war,  held  a secret  meeting  in  the  church  of  St.  Giles  at
Edinburgh,  where  the  French  knights,  sir  Gamier  and  Michael  de  la  Barre,  were  desired  to
attend.  The  Scots  barons  said  they  would  enter  into  a treaty  with  their  companions,  and
they  should  soon  hear  good  news  from  them,  but  it  must  be  kept  secret.  Upon  this  they
returned  to  Perth,  and  related  all  they  had  seen  and  heard.


CHAPTER  CXLIX. TIIE  BARONS  AND  KNIGHTS  OF  SCOTLAND,  IN  CONJUNCTION  WITH  SOME

FRENCH  KNIGHTS,  UNDERTAKE  AN  EXPEDITION  INTO  ENGLAND  WITHOUT  THE  KNOW-
LEDGE OF  THE  KING  OF  SCOTLAND,  WHO  SENDS  A HERALD  TO  MAKE  HIS  EXCUSES  TO
THE  KING  OF  ENGLAND.

Sir  Geoffry  de  Charny  and  the  other  knights  and  squires  were  much  pleased  at  this
intelligence.  Leaving  Perth,  they  continued  their  march  until  they  arrived  at  Edinburgh.
They  gave  not  the  smallest  hint  of  their  expectations,  and  had  not  remained  there  twelve
days  when  the  earl  of  Douglas  gave  them  a secret  invitation  to  come  to  him,  and  at  the

*“  Monstres.”  M p.  D.  M'Pherson,  in  his  excellent  calls  it,  “ nn  petit  port."’  From  what  follows  it  must  he
Geographical  Illustrations  of  Scottish  History,  translates  some  small  port  near  to  Dundee  ; and  I should  suppose  it
it  Melrose  ; but  I think  it  must  be  a mistake,  as  Froissart  to  mean  Montrose.

c 2


20


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


same  time  sent  horses  to  conduct  them  to  his  castle  of  Dalkeith.  On  the  morrow  after  their
arrival,  he  carried  them  to  where  the  barons  and  knights  of  Scotland  were  mustering  their
men.  In  three  days’  time  they  amounted  to  upwards  of  fifteen  thousand  on  horseback,  all
armed  according  to  the  usual  manner  of  the  country.  When  the  whole  were  collected,  they
said  they  would  make  an  inroad,  and  revenge  themselves  on  the  English  for  the  mischiefs
they  had  done.

They  began  then’  march  through  the  woods  and  forests  of  their  country,  and  entered
Northumberland,  on  the  lands  of  the  lord  Percy,  which  they  pillaged  and  burnt.  They
advanced  further,  and  then  returned  through  the  estates  of  the  earl  of  Nottingham  and  the
lord  Mowbray,  to  whose  lands  they  did  much  damage.  They  passed  by  Roxburgh  : for
they  had  a very  large  booty  with  them,  as  well  in  men  as  in  cattle,  and  returned  to  their
own  country  without  any  loss  ; for  the  English  had  been  some  time  disbanded,  and  could  not
be  reassembled  in  time  to  oppose  them  : they  were,  therefore,  obliged  to  suffer  this  insult,  as
they  had  before  given  a similar  one  to  the  Scots.  The  king  of  Scotland  could  easily  excuse
himself  for  this  inroad,  as  he  had  been  kept  entirely  ignorant  of  their  assembling  and  march.
Since  the  country  was  so  inclined,  it  was  not  material  that  he  should  know  any  thing  about
it ; but  supposing  he  had  known  it,  and  there  had  been  no  other  treaties  than  those  which
existed  between  the  two  countries,  they  would  not  have  acted  otherwise  for  him.

Notwithstanding  the  barons  of  Scotland,  with  the  French  knights,  had  thus  invaded
England,  sir  Hemart  de  Masse  and  sir  Peter  de  Flamel  continued  to  reside  at  Edinburgh,
near  king  Robert : they  allowed  the  Scots  to  act  as  they  pleased,  that  it  might  not  be  said,
nor  the  English  suppose,  that  it  was  through  their  fault,  or  those  of  their  country  who  had
come  with  them,  that  the  treaties  had  been  infringed  which  had  been  concluded  at  Bolinghen
by  the  nobles  and  council  of  France,  England  and  Castille.  The  king  of  Scotland  and  the
ambassadors  sent  each  a herald  to  England  fully  instructed  what  they  were  to  say.  When
the  heralds  arrived  in  England,  they  found  the  whole  country  in  motion,  and  eager  to  renew
the  war,  by  marching  into  Scotland.  The  duke  of  Lancaster  and  earl  of  Cambridge  were,
however,  anxious  to  go  to  Portugal  and  Castille  in  the  course  of  the  year,  with  a large  body
of  men  at  arms  and  archers,  under  the  power  of  one  or  both  of  them ; for  they  considered
themselves  as  heirs  by  their  ladies  to  all  Castille,  and  they  wished  to  renew  the  war  between
the  kino-  of  Portugal  and  the  kino;  of  Castille.  Kino;  Fernando  was  dead,  and  the  Portuguese
had  crowned  his  bastard  brother  don  John,  a valiant  man  who  wished  for  a war  with  the
Spaniards,  but  not  without  having  succours  from  England.  Of  this  the  duke  of  Lancaster
was  well  informed,  but  dissembled  his  knowledge  as  well  as  he  could,  and  endeavoured
through  his  friends  to  prevent  any  forces  being  collected  to  carry  on  a war  with  Scotland.
It  was  asserted,  that  the  king  of  Scotland  had  refused  to  authorise  the  war  which  the  French
and  Scots  knights  wished  for,  and  that  the  late  expedition  had  been  made  without  his
knowledge.

The  Scots  herald  on  his  appearance  before  the  king  of  England  and  his  uncles,  well  knowing
his  duty,  threw  himself  on  his  knees,  and  requested  that,  as  herald  from  the  king  of  Scotland,
he  might  deliver  his  message.  The  king  and  the  nohles  granted  his  request : he  then
declared  why  he  had  been  particularly  sent  by  the  king  and  the  ambassadors  from  France,
atid  excused  them,  by  saying,  that  the  king  of  Scotland  had  graciously  received  the  embassy
from  France,  and  having  assented  to  the  treaties  which  the  king  of  France  had  made,  should
conform  to  the  truce : that  he  had  ordered,  as  strongly  as  lay  in  him,  his  vassals  to  do  the
same  ; but  that  the  borderers  of  Scotland,  on  the  lands  of  the  lord  Percy  and  the  earl  of
Nottingham,  such  as  the  earl  of  Douglas,  the  earl  of  Mar  his  uncle,  sir  Archibald,  sir  Rame,
sir  Peter,  sir  William  and  sir  Thomas  Douglas,  all  the  brothers  of  Lindsay  and  Ramsay,
with  sir  William  Seton,  would  not  attend  the  parliament  in  which  this  treaty  was  agreed  to,
nor  would  they  accept  it ; for  they  said  there  had  been  such  damage  done  to  their  lands  as
was  disagreeable  to  themselves  and  friends,  which  they  would  revenge  the  very  first
opportunity.  These  lords,  whom  I have  just  named,  collected  their  forces  to  invade
England,  but  they  never  mentioned  it  to  the  king,  nor  to  any  of  his  household,  for  they  well
knew  he  would  not  have  consented  to  it.  “ They  say,  however,  in  Scotland,  that  England
first  began  hostilities ; that,  my  lords,  you  knew  well  a truce  had  been  concluded  beyond


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


21


sea ; and  that  on  your  return  from  Calais,  it  ought  to  have  been  signified  to  us.  They  say
likewise,  that  the  ambassadors  from  France,  when  they  passed  through  this  country,  were
detained  from  coming  to  us  as  they  were  bound  to  do,  and  that  you  kept  them  too  long  here
with  your  entertainments  : on  which  accounts,  this  misunderstanding  has  happened  between
Scotland  and  England,  urged  on  by  those  who  had  long  meditated  it,  and  under  shadow  of
dissimulation  the  greater  part  of  it  has  been  effected.  But  my  most  redoubted  and  sovereign
lord,  the  king  of  Scotland,  and  the  ambassadors  from  the  king  of  France,  who  reside  at
present  with  him,  exculpate  themselves  from  any  knowledge  of  the  last  expedition  which
the  barons  and  knights  of  Scotland  made  into  England,  having  been  completely  ignorant  of
it.  Therefore,  to  redress  all  complaints  and  place  things  on  a proper  footing,  I am  ordered
to  say,  that  if  you  will  conform  to  the  treaties  concluded  beyond  sea  through  the  discretion
and  wisdom  of  the  counsellors  of  the  king  of  France  and  your  own,  and  will  agree  that  the
truces  last  the  time  such  truces  have  been  agreed  to  with  my  very  redoubted  and  sovereign
lord  the  king  of  Scotland,  he  and  his  council  will  confirm  them,  and  swear  to  keep  and
maintain  them,  out  of  respect  to  the  king  of  France  and  his  council,  as  well  by  himself  as  by
his  vassal ; and  upon  this  subject  you  will  be  pleased  to  give  me  your  answer.”

The  king  of  England  and  his  uncles  paid  attention  to  the  herald  while  he  was  speaking,
and  willingly  heard  him.  The  duke  of  Lancaster  told  him,  that  indeed  he  should  have  an
answer.  They  ordered  him  to  remain  in  London,  where  he  had  had  his  audience,  to  wait
the  answer  from  the  king  of  England.


CHAPTER  CL. THE  TRUCES  WHICH  HAD  BEEN  MADE  BETWEEN  THE  FRENCH,  THE  ENGLISH

AND  THEIR  ALLIES,  ARE  PROCLAIMED  IN  SCOTLAND. THE  FRENCH  KNIGHTS,  ON  THEIR

RETURN  FROM  SCOTLAND,  ARE  IN  GREAT  DANGER  FROM  THE  ZEALANDERS.

At  the  end  of  two  days,  the  council  agreed  on  an  answer.  Sir  Simon  Burley,  chamberlain
to  the  king,  drew  it  up  : and  by  these  means  all  disputes  were  settled.  To  say  the  truth,
the  lords  of  England  who  had  been  at  the  conferences  at  Bolinghen  had  not  acted  very
honourably  when  they  had  consented  to  order  their  men  to  march  to  Scotland  and  burn  the
country,  knowing  that  a truce  would  speedily  be  concluded  : and  the  best  excuse  they  could
make  was,  that  it  was  the  French,  and  not  they,  who  were  to  signify  such  truce  to  the  Scots.
The  herald  was  told,  that  in  God’s  name  he  was  welcome,  and  that  it  was  the  intention  of
the  king  of  England,  his  uncles  and  council,  to  keep  and  maintain  what  they  had  sealed  and
sworn  to,  and  that  they  would  no  ways  infringe  it,  but,  on  the  contrary,  would  preserve  it,
for  those  who  had  been  most  active  had  lost  the  most.  The  herald  demanded  all  this  to  be
put  in  writing,  that  he  might  the  more  readily  be  believed.  They  made  him  rich  presents,
and  in  such  quantity  that  he  was  well  contented,  and  greatly  thanked  the  king  and  his
nobles.  Having  left  London,  he  continued  his  journey  until  he  arrived  in  Scotland,  where
the  ambassadors  from  France  were  waiting  to  know  his  answer,  for  they  were  anxious  to
learn  how  the  English  would  conduct  themselves.  When  they  saw  the  answers  from  the
king  and  his  uncles,  in  the  sealed  letters  which  were  delivered  to  them,  they  were  well
satisfied  and  much  rejoiced  thereat.  Thus  was  the  truce  continued  for  this  year  between
England  and  Scotland,  and  for  greater  security  it  was  proclaimed  throughout  the  two
kingdoms.

The  French  ambassadors  returned  to  their  own  country,  through  England,  without  any
accident,  and  related  to  the  king  of  France  and  his  uncles  what  they  had  done,  and  the
opposition  they  had  met  with  : in  short,  they  recounted  every  thing  you  have  just  heard.
When  sir  Geoffry  de  Charny  and  the  French  knights  in  his  company  found  that  the  truce
was  to  be  established  between  Scotland  and  England,  they  took  their  leave  of  the  barons  of
Scotland,  more  especially  of  the  earls  of  Douglas  and  Moray,  who  had  shown  them  much
kindness.  These  barons  of  Scotland,  as  well  as  3ome  other  knights,  said  to  them,  joking, —
“ Gentlemen,  you  have  seen  the  condition  and  manner  of  our  country,  but  you  have  not
seen  its  whole  strength  and  power.  Know  that  Scotland  is  the  country  of  the  world  most
dreaded  by  the  English  ; for  we  can,  as  you  have  seen,  enter  England  at  our  pleasure.


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  See.


22

without  any  danger  from  the  sea:  if  we  were  in  greater  numbers,  we  should  do  them  more
mischief  than  we  are  now  able  to  do.  Be  so  good  therefore,  when  you  are  in  France,  to
tell  this  to  your  knights  and  squires,  who  shall  be  eager  for  renown,  to  excite  them  to  come
hither  in  search  of  deeds  of  arms.  We  can  assure  you,  that  if  we  had  a thousand  lances
from  France,  with  the  good  people  here,  we  would  give  such  a considerable  blow  to  England
that  it  should  be  visible  for  forty  years  to  come.  Have  the  goodness  to  remember  this  when
you  shall  be  on  the  other  side  of  the  water.”

The  French  knights  replied  they  would  not  fail  to  do  so,  for  it  was  not  a thing  to  be
forgotten.  Upon  this,  they  embarked  on  board  a vessel  they  had  engaged  to  carry  them  to
Sluys ; but  they  had  contrary  winds  when  at  sea,  which  obliged  them  to  run  for  a port  in
Zealand  called  la  Yirille*.  When  they  landed  there,  they  thought  they  were  in  a place  of
safety,  but  were  disappointed,  for  the  Normans  had  lately  visited  that  coast,  and  had  done,
as  it  was  said,  much  mischief  to  the  Zealanders.  These  knights  and  squires  were  in  great
danger  ; for,  while  a different  language  was  held  in  the  town,  their  vessel  was  seized,  their
trunks  broken  open,  and  their  arms  taken  away,  and  they  themselves  in  risk  of  losing
their  lives.

At  that  time  there  was  in  the  town  a squire  of  the  count  de  Blois,  whose  name  was  Jacob,
an  agreeable  man,  who  assisted  them  in  all  things.  He  talked  with  the  principal  people  of
the  town,  and  with  such  good  effect  that  a part  of  their  baggage  was  restored  to  them.  In
order  to  save  them  from  their  peril,  for  he  knew  the  people  were  much  enraged  against  them,
and  had  intentions  of  attacking  them  on  the  sea,  as  they  had  sent  notice  of  their  plans  to
the  neighbouring  towns,  and  were  in  sufficient  force  to  do  so,  he  showed  them  much  courtesy,
and,  out  of  affection  to  them,  explained  how  greatly  the  country  was  exasperated  against
them,  but  that,  out  of  regard  to  his  lord  and  the  realm  of  France,  he  would  counteract  it.
They  warmly  thanked  him  for  his  kind  intentions.  Well,  what  did  Jacob  do  ? He  went  to  a
mariner  and  hired  a vessel  to  carry  him  and  his  company  wherever  he  pleased,  saying  his
intentions  were  to  go  to  Dordrecht.  The  mariners  having  agreed  to  this  proposal,  he  and
his  company  embarked  on  board  the  vessel,  and  at  first  made  for  Dordrecht ; but,  when
Jacob  saw  it  was  time  to  alter  their  course,  he  said  to  the  sailors,  “Now,  mind  what  I
am  going  to  say  : I have  hired  with  my  money  this  vessel  to  carry  me  whithersoever  I shall
please  : turn,  therefore,  the  helm  for  Strueghene  f,  as  I want  to  go  thither.”  The  sailors
refused  to  do  so,  saying  they  had  been  only  engaged  to  sail  to  Dordrecht.  “ Attend  to
me,”  replied  Jacob  : “ do  what  I have  ordered  you,  if  you  do  not  wish  to  be  put  to  death.”
The  sailors  dared  not  make  any  reply,  for  they  were  not  the  strongest ; so  they  at  once
turned  the  helm  and  set  the  sails,  and  made  for  the  town  of  Estrimohee  £,  where  they
arrived  without  fear  of  danger,  for  it  belonged  to  the  count  de  Blois.  After  they  had
refreshed  themselves,  they  departed  and  returned  through  Brabant  and  Hainault  to  their
own  country,  thanking  Jacob  for  the  kindness  he  had  done  them.

When  sir  Geoffrey  de  Charny,  sir  John  de  Plaissy  and  the  other  knights  and  squires  who
had  been  in  Scotland,  returned  to  France,  they  were  interrogated  as  to  news  from  that
country.  They  related  all  they  had  seen  and  heard  from  the  barons  and  knights  of  Scotland.
Sir  John  de  Yienne,  admiral  of  France,  conversed  on  the  subject  with  sir  Geoffry  de  Charny,
who  was  surprised,  as  well  as  other  barons  of  France,  to  hear  that  the  French,  through
Scotland,  could  gain  an  easy  entrance  into  England.  Sir  Hemart  de  Masse  continued  the
conversation,  and  added,  the  Scots  could  not  any  way  love  the  English ; and  he  had  been
directed  to  say  this  by  order  of  the  Scots  council,  that  the  king  of  France  and  his  uncles
might  have  information  of  it.  The  French  instantly  determined,  as  soon  as  the  truces  should
be  expired,  to  send  a powerful  army  to  Scotland  to  lay  waste  England.  This  was  planned
by  the  dukes  of  Berry  and  Burgundy,  who  at  that  time  governed  the  realm  at  their  pleasure,
and  the  constable  of  France ; but  the  whole  was  kept  very  secret.


* “ La  Virille.” — Q.  if  not  la  Brille.
X “ Estrimohee.” — Q.


f ‘ Slrueghene.” — Q.  Gertruydenbergh.


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


23


CHAPTER  CLX. THE  LORD  DESTOURNAY  ASSEMBLES  FORCES  TO  RETAKE  OUDENARDE. HE

CONQUERS  IT  BY  STRATAGEM.

You  have  before  heard  how  Francis  Atremen  took  by  scalado  the  town  of  Ondenarde,
while  the  treaties  for  a truce  were  negotiating  before  Bergues  and  Bourbourg,  to  the  great
surprise  of  Tournay  and  the  adjacent  towns.  The  garrison  of  Oudenarde,  during  this  time,
had  overrun  the  country:  and  done  much  mischief  to  the  territories  of  Tournay  : the  whole
estate  of  the  lord  Destournay  was  under  their  subjection.  They  had  at  the  feast  of  Christinas
collected  his  rents  and  duty-fowls,  from  the  towns  belonging  to  him,  for  their  own  use,  which
displeased  him  and  his  friends  exceedingly.  He  therefore  declared,  that  whatever  truce  or
respite  there  might  be  between  the  kings  of  France  and  England  witli  the  Flemings,  he
should  not  pay  any  attention  to  it,  but  would  exert  himself  in  doing  them  as  much  damage
as  he  was  able,  for  they  had  so  grievously  oppressed  him  that  he  was  become  a poor  man.

The  lord  Destournay  turned  his  whole  attention  to  retake  Oudenarde,  and  succeeded
through  the  friendship  of  some  knights  and  squires  from  France,  Flanders  and  Hainault,
who  assisted  him  in  it.  When  he  sent  to  these  friends,  several  were  ignorant  of  his  intentions.
The  expedition  was  undertaken  on  the  17th  day  of  May  1384;  fertile  lord  Destournay  learnt
by  his  spies,  that  Francis  Atremen  was  gone  to  Ghent,  trusting  to  the  truce  which  had  been
made  with  the  French  : by  so  doing  he  committed  a fault,  and  was  no  longer  attentive  to
guard  Oudenarde,  as  I shall  relate.  The  lord  Destournay  formed  a considerable  ambuscade
of  four  hundred  knights,  squires  and  good  men  at  arms,  whom  he  had  entreated  to  assist
him.  These  he  posted  in  the  wood  of  Lart,  near  to  the  gate  of  Oudenarde.  There  were
among  them  sir  John  du  Moulin,  sir  James  de  la  Trimouille,  sir  Gilbert  and  sir  John
Cacquelan,  sir  Roland  de  l’Espierre,  sir  Blanchart  de  Calonne,  and  the  lord  d’Estripouille,
who  was  created  a knight.

I will  now  relate  their  stratagem,  and  how  those  of  Oudenarde  were  deceived  by  it.  They
filled  two  carts  with  provision,  which  they  put  under  the  charge  of  four  hardy  and  determined
men  dressed  as  carters,  clothed  in  grey  frocks,  but  armed  underneath.  These  carters  drove
the  carts  to  Oudenarde,  and  gave  the  guards  to  understand  that  they  had  brought  provision
from  Hainault  to  victual  the  place.  The  guards  not  thinking  but  all  was  right,  drew  up
the  portcullis,  and  allowed  them  to  advance  on  the  bridge.  The  carters  knocked  out  the
pins  which  held  the  traces  of  the  horses,  and  flung  them  into  the  ditch.  Upon  this,  the
guards  cried  out  to  them,  “ Why  do  not  you  drive  on  ?"  and  taking  hold  of  the  horses,
drove  them  before  them,  and  thus  left  the  carts  standing,  for,  as  I said,  they  were  unharnessed.
The  guards  then  found  out  that  they  had  been  deceived  and  betrayed,  and  began  to  strike
the  carters,  who  defended  themselves  ably : for  they  were  well  armed  under  their  frocks,  and
were  men  of  tried  courage.  Having  killed  two  of  the  guards,  they  were  instantly  reinforced;
for  the  lord  Destournay  followed  them  so  close  with  his  men,  that  the  guards  fled  into  the
town,  crying  out,  “ Treason,  treason  !”  but,  before  the  townsmen  could  be  awakened,  the
men  at  arms  had  entered  it,  and  killed  all  who  put  themselves  on  their  defence,  shouting  out
as  they  came  to  the  square,  “Victory!”  Thus  was  Oudenarde  won.  Of  the  Ghent  men,
full  three  hundred  were  killed  or  drowned.  A large  sum  was  found  in  the  town  belonging
to  Francis  Atremen,  which  I heard  amounted  to  fifteen  thousand  francs.

News  was  soon  spread  abroad,  that  Oudenarde  had  been  taken  during  the  truce,  which
angered  the  Ghenters  much,  as  was  natural,  for  it  nearly  affected  them.  They  held  a meeting-
on  this  subject,  and  resolved  to  send  to  the  duke  of  Burgundy  to  remonstrate  with  him  on
the  capture  of  Oudenarde  during  the  truce,  and  to  say,  that  if  it  were  not  delivered  back  to
them  they  should  consider  the  truce  as  broken.  But  the  duke  excused  himself,  declaring  he
had  not  interfered  any  way  in  the  business,  and  that  as  God  might  help  him,  he  was  entirely
ignorant  of  this  expedition  of  the  lord  Destournay  : he  added,  that  he  would  willingly  write
to  him,  which  he  did,  and  order  him  to  give  back  Oudenarde,  for  it  was  neither  honourable
to  him  nor  agreeable  to  the  duke  to  capture  any  towns,  castles,  or  forts  during  a truce.

The  lord  Destournay  acknowledged  the  letters  from  the  duke,  and  in  answer  said,  that  the
garrison  of  Oudenarde  had  always  made  war  on  his  lands,  whether  truce  or  no  truce,  and  had


24


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


seized  on  his  inheritance,  and  that  he  had  never  consented  to  any  truce  with  them  ; that  he
had  conquered  Oudenarde  in  fair  war,  and  that  he  would  keep  possession  of  it  as  his  own
proper  inheritance  until  Flanders  and  Ghent  should  be  completely  re-united,  for  his  other
property  had  been  ruined  by  the  war.  Things  remained  in  this  sto,te,  for  nothing  better  could
be  done.

Francis  Atremen  was  very  much  blamed  for  not  having  better  guarded  the  place,  and
especially  by  the  lord  de  TIarzelles,  insomuch  that  Francis  was  wroth  with  the  knight,  and
high  words  ensued,  adding,  whatever  he  might  have  done  in  regard  to  Oudenarde,  he  had
always  acquitted  himself  loyally  towards  Ghent.  This  provoked  answers,  and  the  lie  was
given  on  both  sides.  Shortly  after,  the  lord  de  Harzelles  was  killed ; and  some  say  that
Francis  Atremen  and  Peter  du  Bois  were  the  authors  of  it.  About  this  time,  the  Ghent  men
requested  the  king  of  England  to  send  them  a valiant  man  for  governor,  and  one  who  was
connected  with  the  crown  by  blood.  In  consequence,  the  king  sent  to  Ghent  one  of  his
knights,  a gallant  man  of  sufficient  prudence  to  govern  the  town  : his  name  was  sir  John
Bourchier  *,  who  remained  governor  of  Ghent  upwards  of  a year  and  a half.


CIIAPTER  CJLII. — THE  DUKE  OP  ANJOU  DIES  AT  A CASTLE  NEAR  NAPLES. HIS  WIDOW

IS  ADVISED  TO  SOLICIT  THE  POPE  FOR  TnE  POSSESSION  OF  PROVENCE.

You  have  before  heard  how  the  duke  of  Anjou,  who  styled  himself  king  of  Sicily  and
Jerusalem,  had  marched  into  la  Puglia  and  Calabria,  and  had  conquered  the  whole  country
as  far  as  Naples  : but  the  Neapolitans  would  never  turn  to  his  party,  and  continued  the
support  they  bad  always  given  to  the  lord  Charles  Durazzo.  The  duke  of  Anjou  remained
on  this  expedition  three  whole  years  ; you  may  suppose,  therefore,  that  his  expenses  were  very
great,  for  there  is  no  treasury,  however  rich,  but  men  at  arms  will  drain  it : whoever  is
desirous  of  their  services  must  pay  them  well,  if  they  expect  any  advantage  from  them.  It
must  certainly  have  cost  the  duke  immense  sums  of  money  ; but  those  who  sunk  his  treasury
the  deepest  were  the  earl  of  Savoy  and  the  Savoyards.  That  earl,  however,  and  a great  many
of  his  knights,  died  on  this  expedition,  which  weakened  the  duke  of  Anjou  in  men.  It  was
on  this  account  that  he  sent  to  France  to  implore  the  assistance  of  his  brothers  the  dukes
of  Berry  and  Burgundy , who  did  not  fail  him  in  his  necessities,  but  replied  that  they
would  support  him  with  men  and  money.  These  two  dukes  considered  who  wmuld  be  the
proper  persons  to  send  on  this  expedition.  After  having  maturely  weighed  everything,  they
thought  they  could  not  fix  better  than  on  the  gallant  lord  de  Coucy  and  the  lord  d’Anghien,
count  de  Conversano  f , whose  earldom  is  situated  in  la  Puglia.

These  two  lords,  having  been  solicited  to  undertake  the  business  by  the  king  of  France  and
his  uncles,  cheerfully  complied,  for  it  was  highly  honourable  to  them.  They  instantly  began
their  preparations,  and  set  off  as  speedily  as  possible  with  a handsome  company  of  men  at
arms  : but  when  they  arrived  at  Avignon,  and  were  busily  employed  in  forwarding  their
troops  and  other  business,  certain  intelligence  was  brought  them  of  the  death  of  the  duke  of
Anjou  at  a castle  near  Naples  J.  The  lord  de  Coucy,  on  hearing  this,  advanced  no  further,
seeing  that  the  expedition  was  at  an  end  ; but  the  lord  de  Conversano  continued  his  march,
for  lie  had  many  things  to  settle  in  his  own  country,  in  la  Puglia  and  in  Conversano.  This
intelligence  was  soon  known  in  France  to  the  king  and  his  uncles,  who  supported  the  death
of  the  king  of  Sicily  as  well  as  they  could.

When  madame  d’ Anjou,  who  resided  at  Angers,  heard  of  the  death  of  her  lord,  you  may
imagine  she  was  greatly  afflicted.  The  count  Guy  de  Blois  her  cousin-german,  who  lived  at
Blois,  on  receiving  the  news,  set  out  with  all  his  equipage  to  visit  her  at  Angers,  where  he
remained  a considerable  time  comforting  and  advising  her  to  the  best  of  his  abilities.  From

• “ Sir  John  Bourchier.”  Lord  Bourchier  of  Essex.  J He  died  at  Biselia  near  Bari,  the  20th  or  21st
See  Dugdale.  September,  1384. — Art  de  Verifier  les  Dates.

•f  Conversano  is  a town  in  the  Neapolitan  dominions,  The  authors  of  the  Nouveau  Dictionnaire  Historique,

near  Bari : its  bishopric  is  suffragan  to  Bari.  by  mistake,  have  placed  his  death  at  Paris,  but  with  the

same  date.


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


tlience  the  queen  came  to  France  (for  she  styled  herself  queen  of  Naples,  Sicily,  la  Puglia,
Calabria,  and  Jerusalem)  to  wait  on  the  king  and  the  dukes  of  Berry  and  Burgundy,  to  have
their  advice  and  comfort : she  was  accompanied  by  her  two  sons,  Louis  and  Charles.  The
lady  was  advised  by  the  nobles  of  her  blood  to  go  to  Avignon,  and  entreat  of  the  pope  that
she  might  have  possession  of  Provence,  which  is  a territory  dependent  on  Sicily.  The  queen
approved  the  advice,  and  made  preparations  for  her  journey,  carrying  with  her  her  eldest
son  Louis,  who  was  everywhere  on  the  road  called  king,  from  being  heir  to  the  king  his
father;  but  these  affairs  were  not  so  speedily  terminated  as  I have  pointed  them  out.


CHAPTER  CLIII. PREPARATIONS  ARE  MADE  IN  FRANCE  FOR  TIIE  RENEWAL  OF  THE  WAR

WITH  ENGLAND. THE  DUCHESS  OF  BRABANT  SUCCEEDS  IN  FORMING  A MARRIAGE

BETWEEN  THE  CHILDREN  OF  BURGUNDY  AND  THOSE  OF  HAINAULT.

During  the  winter,  the  French  were  busily  employed  in  preparations  to  send  forces  to
Scotland ; but  the  truces  were  prolonged  between  the  French  and  English,  and  their  allies,
from  Michaelmas  to  the  ensuing  first  day  of  May.  They,  however,  continued  their  pre-
parations by  sea  and  land,  for  it  was  the  intention  of  the  council  of  France  to  carry  on  the
war  with  vigour  in  the  course  of  the  next  summer  ; and  the  admiral  of  France  was  to  sail  for
Scotland  with  two  thousand  spears,  knights  and  squires.  On  the  other  hand,  the  duke  of
Bourbon  and  the  count  de  la  Marche  were  ordered  into  Languedoc,  Limousin,  and  Auvergne,
with  two  thousand  men,  to  recover  certain  castles  which  the  English  and  pillagers  held,  and
which  did  much  mischief  to  the  country.  Great  numbers  of  battle-axes  were  ordered  to  be
made  in  Picardy  and  Hainault  for  the  expedition  into  Scotland  ; and  in  Artois,  Lille,  Douay,
and  Tournay,  much  biscuit  was  made,  and  various  other  stores  got  ready  along  the  coast  from
ITarfleur  to  Sluys,  which  was  the  principal  harbour  whence  this  armament  was  intended  to
be  embarked.

The  duchess  of  Brabant,  widow  of  Winceslaus  duke  of  Bohemia,  by  whose  death  she  had
lost  a companion  and  much  comfort,  which  had  caused  her  great  grief,  resided  with  her
attendants  at  Brussels.  She  was  much  hurt  at  the  troubles  which  existed  in  Flanders,  and,
if  she  had  possessed  the  means,  would  most  cheerfully  have  put  an  end  to  them  ; for  she  was
daily  hearing  how  the  Ghent  men  were  strengthening  themselves  by  an  alliance  with  the
English,  who  promised  them  great  support.  She  also  saw  that  her  nephew  and  niece  of
Burgundy,  who  were  in  truth  her  heirs,  and  among  the  greatest  princes  of  the  world,  as  well
by  their  own  heritages,  as  by  what  they  had  in  reversions,  were  very  uneasy  at  these
disturbances  in  Ghent.  She  knew  that  duke  Albert,  regent  of  Hainault,  had  two  fine  sons
and  two  handsome  daughters,  neither  of  whom  were  yet  married ; but  she  had  heard  that  the
duke  of  Lancaster  was  very  desirous  to  accomplish  the  marriage  of  his  daughter  Philippa,
who  had  been  borne  to  him  by  the  lady  Blanche  his  first  wife,  with  the  eldest  son  of  duke
Albert,  who,  by  his  own  right,  was  heir  to  the  countries  of  Hainault,  Holland,  and  Zealand.

This  lady  foresaw,  that  if  such  an  alliance  should  take  place  between  Hainault  and
England,  the  French  would  be  much  hurt,  and  the  fair  country  of  Plainault  harassed  either
secretly  or  openly,  by  all  those  who  should  pass  and  repass  from  France  to  Flanders.  In
addition  to  this,  the  Hollanders  and  Zealanders  who  bordered  on  the  sea  assisted  the  Ghent
men  in  various  ways,  of  which  the  duke  of  Burgundy  and  his  council  had  been  informed.  He
did  not  love  duke  Albert  the  better  for  this  ; not,  however,  that  he  was  any  way  to  be  blamed
for  it ; for  with  regard  to  the  Hollanders  and  Zealanders,  as  the  war  in  Flanders  no  way
concerned  them,  he  could  not,  neither  ought  he  to  have,  forbidden  the  free  course  of  commerce.

The  good  lady  having  considered  all  these  things,  and  the  dangerous  consequences  which
might  ensue,  resolved  to  bring  the  duke  of  Burgundy  and  duke  Albert  to  a good  under-
standing, and  offered  herself  as  guarantee  of  all  the  treaties.  She  was  determined  also  to
prevail  on  the  duke  of  Burgundy  to  receive  the  men  of  Gheht  into  his  mercy.  Clerks  and
messengers  were  immediately  set  to  work  : and  she  managed  so  well  that  a conference  was
fixed  to  meet  at  Cambray  on  the  part  of  the  two  dukes.  They  both  assented  to  it,  as  well
as  their  council,  though  neither  of  them  knew  the  subjects  this  conference  was  to  treat  of.


26


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  & c.


To  this  conference,  which  they  had  under  their  seals  appointed  to  he  holden  at  Cambray  on
the  twelfth  day  in  the  ensuing  January,  the  two  dukes  came,  attended  by  their  councils.
The  duchess  of  Brabant  came  thither  also,  who  was  the  mover  in  the  business.  She  first
addressed  the  duke  of  Burgundy,  saying,  “ He  was  the  greatest  prince  on  earth,  and  had
very  fine  children  : she,  however,  would  he  more  happy  if  they  were  placed  in  a different
situation  from  what  they  actually  occupied,  which  would  increase  their  worth  ; and,  for  the
present,  she  could  neither  see  nor  point  out  any  better  place  than  Hainault,  Holland,  and
Zealand,  which  would  unite  the  whole  country  together,  and  give  greater  fear  and  alarm  to
its  enemies  ; for,  ‘ fair  nephew,’  added  she  to  the  duke  of  Burgundy,  ‘ I know  for  a truth,
that  the  duke  of  Lancaster,  who  is  so  powerful  in  England,  is  extremely  anxious  for  his
daughter  to  espouse  my  nephew,  William  of  Hainault,  and  I certainly  wish  such  good  fortune
may  fall  to  your  children  rather  than  to  the  English.’”  “ My  good  aunt,”  replied  the  duke
of  Burgundy,  “ I return  you  my  thanks,  and,  as  a proof  that  I believe  you,  I shall  allow  you
to  unite  my  daughter  Margaret  with  the  youth  of  Hainault.”  Upon  such  good  success,  she
instantly  began  to  treat  of  this  marriage.  Duke  Albert,  to  whom  the  proposition  was  quite
new,  replied  very  courteously,  but  said,  he  had  not  with  him  those  whom  he  wished  to
consult  on  the  subject.  “ And  what  advice  do  you  want?”  answered  the  duchess,  “ when
it  is  a question  to  act  properly,  and  keep  your  country  in  peace.”  “ My  wife,”  replied  the
duke  ; “ for  without  her  I shall  do  nothing  : she  is  as  much  interested  in  my  children  as  I
am  ; and,  besides,  fair  aunt,  it  will  be  proper  that  the  nobility  of  the  country  he  apprised  of
it.”  The  duchess  answered,  “ Well,  God’s  will  be  done.”  She  thought  the  best  she  could  now
do  was  to  let  them  separate  in  good  humour  with  each  other,  and  desire  they  would  permit
her  to  call  them  again  together  in  the  same  city  during  Lent,  and  that  they  would  bring  the
duchess  of  Burgundy  and  madame  de  Hainault,  with  their  councils,  along  with  them.

The  lady  acted  in  all  this  so  secretly,  that  very  few  persons  knew  anything  of  the  matter,
nor  why  this  conference  had  been  holden.  In  this  state  the  two  dukes  left  Cambray  : the
duke  of  Burgundy  wTent  to  the  city  of  Arras,  where  his  lady  was,  and  duke  Albert  returned
to  his  duchess  in  Holland.  The  duchess  of  Brabant  returned  to  her  own  country,  and
continually  wrote  to  each  party,  but  secretly.  She  had  great  difficulty  to  bring  them  and
their  ladies  to  Cambray,  and  laboured  hard  at  it ; for  she  was  very  eager  this  marriage  should
take  place,  to  confirm  the  union  and  friendship  of  Flanders,  Brabant,  and  Hainault.  The
duchess  managed  so  well  that  the  different  pai’ties  and  their  councils  met  her  and  her  council
at  Cambray,  where  was  a grand  display  of  pomp,  for  each  was  anxious  to  do  honour  to  the
other.  The  duchess  Margaret  of  Burgundy  and  the  duchess  Margaret  of  Llainault  were
present,  and  the  last  very  active  in  this  business.  She  said,  that  if  they  wished  to  marry  their
son  with  Margaret  of  Burgundy,  John  of  Burgundy  must  marry  her  daughter,  by  which  the
ties  of  affection  would  be  the  more  strengthened.

It  was  much  against  the  inclination  of  the  duke  of  Burgundy  to  marry  his  children  at
once  and  to  the  same  family.  He  thought  it  sufficient  for  his  daughter  to  marry  the  heir  of
Llainault,  and  excused  himself  for  not  agreeing  to  the  marriage  of  his  son  John,  on  account
of  his  youth.  The  duke’s  intention  was  to  marry  him  to  Catharine  of  France,  sister  to  his
nephew  the  king  of  France.  These  treaties  and  conferences  were,  therefore,  on  the  point  of
being  broken  ; for  the  duchess  of  Bavaria  declared,  a marriage  should  never  take  place  with
her  children,  unless  they  were  both  married  at  the  same  time  ; and  this  resolution  she  kept,
notwithstanding  all  they  could  say  to  make  her  alter  it.  The  duchess  of  Brabant  took  great
pains  in  going  from  one  to  the  other,  and  in  preventing  the  treaties  from  being  broken  off :
she  at  last  succeeded,  by  reasoning  properly  with  the  duke  and  duchess  of  Burgundy,  to
bring  the  affair  again  under  consideration  : and  it  was  then  agreed  that  the  marriages  should
take  place  between  the  children  of  the  duke  of  Burgundy  and  those  of  duke  Albert.

This  business  had  been  delayed  four  or  five  days  by  an  obstacle  which  had  arisen  from  the
council  of  the  duke  of  Burgundy,  who  stated  that  duke  Albert  had  only  a reversionary
interest  in  Hainault,  for  his  elder  brother  William  was  then  alive,  though  dangerously  ill  at
Quesnoy,  and  he  might  survive  his  brother,  and  if  that  should  happen,  it  was  clear  his  other
brothers  would  have  the  government  of  Hainault,  and  the  children  of  duke  Albert  be  driven
from  thence.  This  obstacle  delayed  the  marriages  a short  time,  which  was  employed  in


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


7


proving  that  duke  Albert  had  no  other  brother  hut  William,  and  that  the  country  of  Ilainault
must  descend  to  him  and  to  his  children.  When  all  this  was  cleared  up,  there  was  not  any
longer  delay,  but  the  marriages  were  concluded  and  sworn  to  for  William  of  Hainault  to
have  for  his  wife  Margaret  of  Burgundy,  and  John  of  Burgundy  to  espouse  Margaret  of
Hainault.  They  were  all  to  return  to  Cambray  the  octave  of  Easter,  in  the  year  of  grace
1385,  to  perform  the  ceremonies  of  the  marriages.


CHAPTER  CLIV.  — THE  KING  AND  THE  NOBLES  OF  FRANCE  AND  HAINAULT  LAY  IN  GREAT

PROVISION  OF  STORES  AT  CAMBRAY. THE  DUKE  OF  LANCASTER  SENDS  AMBASSADORS

TO  THE  EARL  OF  HAINAULT. — THE  MARRIAGES  OF  TOE  CHILDREN  OF  BURGUNDY’  AND
HAINAULT  ARE  CONCLUDED.

Things  were  in  this  state  when  they  all  left  Cambray.  The  duke  of  Burgundy  returned
to  the  king  in  France  ; the  duchess  to  Arras.  Duke  Albert  and  his  duchess  went  to
Quesnoy  in  Hainault ; and  the  duchess  of  Brabant  to  her  own  country.  Carpenters  and
masons,  and  all  sorts  of  workmen,  were  instantly  sent  to  prepare  hotels  in  the  city  of
Cambray,  and  purveyors  were  also  ordered  thither  to  lay  in  vast  quantities  of  provision ; it
was  proclaimed,  that  every  store  was  to  be  delivered  into  the  city  the  week  before  the  octave
of  Easter.  When  the  king  of  France  heard  of  this,  he  said  that  he  would  be  present  at  the
marriages  of  his  cousins  ; and  commanded  his  maitres-d’hotel  to  lay  in  there  such  provisions
as  was  befitting  him.  The  palace  of  the  bishop  had  been  retained  for  the  duke  of  Burgundy,
and  was  already  preparing  for  him ; hut  it  was  necessary  to  give  it  up  to  the  king,  and
workmen  were  set  to  embellish  it  in  a royal  manner,  as  it  appears  at  this  day:  for  never
was  there  a feast  in  the  memory  of  man,  nor  for  these  last  two  hundred  years,  that  had  such
grand  preparations  made  for  it.  The  nobility,  in  order  to  appear  with  the  most  pomp  and
magnificence,  were  no  more  sparing  of  their  money  than  if  it  had  rained  gold  on  them  : and
each  endeavoured  to  outshine  the  other.

Intelligence  of  these  marriages  was  carried  to  England,  and  how  the  dukes  of  Burgundy
and  Albert  intended  uniting  their  children  together.  The  duke  of  Lancaster  (who  had
nourished  the  hope  that  William  of  Ilainault  would  choose  his  daughter,  at  least  he  had  so
been  given  to  understand)  was  pensive  and  melancholy  at  this  news  ; in  order  to  be  better
assured  of  it,  he  determined  to  send,  as  ambassadors,  knights  and  squires  of  his  household  to
Ghent,  with  instructions  to  talk  with  duke  Albert  on  the  subject.  When  they  arrived  at
Ghent,  they  found  there  the  lord  Bourchier,  Francis  Atremen  and  Peter  du  Bois,  who
entertained  them  handsomely  for  two  or  tliree  days.  They  then  departed  and  went  to
Mons  in  Hainault  ; from  thence  to  Quesnoy  where  duke  Albert  resided,  and  waited  on  him.
The  duke,  the  duchess,  and  their  children,  in  honour  of  the  duke  of  Lancaster  received  the
English  very  politely,  and  the  duke  entertained  them  well,  as  did  the  lord  de  Gouvingen.

The  master  of  the  wool-staple  of  all  England,  being  one  of  the  envoys,  delivered  his
credential  letters,  and  spoke  first.  He  strongly  recommended  the  duke  of  Lancaster  to  his
cousin  duke  Albert,  and  then  began  on  the  subjects  with  which  he  had  been  charged.
Among  other  topics,  as  I have  been  informed,  he  asked  the  duke  if  it  were  his  intention  to
persevere  in  the  proposed  union  of  his  children  with  those  of  the  duke  of  Burgundy.  This
speech  moved  a little  the  duke's  choler,  who  replied,  “ Yes,  sir,  by  my  faith  do  I : why  do
you  ask  ?”  “ My  lord,”  said  he,  “ I mention  it  because  my  lord  of  Lancaster  has  hitherto

had  hopes  that  the  lady  Philippa,  his  daughter,  would  have  been  the  wife  of  my  lord  William
your  son.”  Upon  this,  duke  Albert  said, — “ My  friends,  tell  my  cousin,  that  when  he
marries  any  of  his  children,  I shall  never  interfere  : he  therefore  need  not  trouble  himself
about  mine,  nor  how  I marry  them,  nor  with  whom,  nor  when.”  This  was  the  only  answer
the  English  had  from  duke  Albert.  The  master  of  the  staple  and  his  companions  took  leave
of  the  duke  after  dinner  and  went  to  Y alenciennes,  where  they  lay  that  night : on  the  morrow
they  returned  to  Ghent.  More  of  them  I know  not,  but  I believe  they  returned  to  England.

Easter  was  the  time  fixed  for  the  king  of  France,  the  dukes  of  Burgundy,  of  Bourbon,
the  duke  Albert  with  the  duchess  his  lady,  the  duchesses  of  Burgundy  and  of  Brabant,  sir


28


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


William  and  sir  John  de  Namur,  to  be  at  Courtray.  The  king  resided  in  the  bishop’s
palace,  and  each  lord  and  lady  at  their  own  hotels.  You  may  easily  imagine,  that  where
the  king  of  France  was  and  so  many  of  his  nobles,  there  would  also  be  the  flower  of  his
knighthood.  The  king  arrived  at  Cambray  on  the  Monday  by  dinner-time.  All  the  nobles
and  ladies,  having  preceded  him,  went  to  meet  him  out  of  his  city  ; into  which  he  was
escorted,  and  conducted  to  the  palace,  to  the  sound  of  numerous  trumpets  and  minstrels.  On
Monday,  the  contracts  of  marriage  were  signed  in  the  presence  of  the  king  and  his  nobles.
The  lord  William  was  to  possess  from  thenceforward  the  county  of  Ostrevant*,  and  the  lady
Margaret  his  wife  was  to  have  the  whole  territory  and  castlewick  of  Arquet  in  Brabant :
the  duke  of  Burgundy  gave  besides  to  his  daughter  one  hundred  thousand  francs.  Thus
were  the  portions  settled.

On  Tuesday,  at  the  hour  of  high  mass,  they  were  married,  in  the  cathedral  church  of  our
Lady  in  Cambray,  with  great  solemnity,  by  the  bishop  of  Cambray,  whose  name  was  John,
and  a native  of  Brussels.  There  was  a very  magnificent  dinner  at  the  palace,  to  which  were
invited  many  of  the  great  nobles.  The  king  of  France  had  the  bridegrooms  with  their  brides
seated  at  his  table.  Several  of  the  principal  lords  served  the  king  and  his  guests,  mounted
on  large  war-horses.  The  constable  and  the  admiral  of  France  were  seated  at  table.  Sir
Guy  de  la  Trimouille  and  sir  William  de  Namur  served,  with  many  other  great  barons  of
France.  There  had  not  bean,  for  five  hundred  years,  so  magnificent  or  renowned  a solemnity
seen  in  Cambray  as  wTas  that  of  which  I am  now  speaking.

After  this  noble  and  grand  dinner,  great  numbers  of  lords  and  knights  armed  and  made
themselves  ready  for  the  tournament.  It  was  held  in  the  market-place,  and  there  were  forty
knights.  The  king  of  France  tilted  with  a knight  from  Hainault  called  sir  Nicholas
d’Espinoit.  This  tournament  was  very  handsome  : the  tilts  were  well  performed  and  lasted
a considerable  time : a young  knight,  called  sir  John  Destrenne,  from  near  Beaumont  in
Hainault,  won  the  prize.  This  knight  tilted  to  the  satisfaction  of  the  lords  and  ladies,  and
received  as  the  prize  a clasp  of  precious  stones,  which  the  duchess  of  Burgundy  took  from
her  breast;  and  the  admiral  of  France  and  sir  Guy  de  la  Trimouille  presented  it  to  him.
These  feasts  and  amusements  continued  until  Friday,  when  they  took  leave  of  the  king  after
dinner ; and  the  king,  the  lords  and  the  ladies,  departed  from  Courtray.  The  duchess  of
Burgundy  carried  with  her,  to  Arras,  Margaret  of  Hainault,  her  daughter-in-law : and
madame  de  Hainault  carried  madame  Margaret  of  Burgundy  to  Quesnoy.  Thus  ended  all
this  business.


CHAPTER  CLV. THE  DUKE  OF  BERRY  BETROTHES  HIS  DAUGHTER  TO  TIIE  SON  OF  THE

COUNT  DE  BLOIS. THE  DUKE  OF  BOURBON  AND  THE  COUNT  DE  LA  MARCHE  ISSUE

THEIR  SUMMONS  TO  INVADE  LIMOUSIN.

About  this  time  there  was  a treaty  of  marriage  between  Louis  de  Blois,  son  of  the  count
Guy  de  Blois,  and  the  lady  Mary  de  Berry,  daughter  of  the  duke  of  Berry.  The  count  de
Blois  carried  his  countess  and  his  son  Louis,  well  attended  by  lords  and  ladies,  to  Bourges
in  Berry,  where  the  duke  and  duchess  were  waiting  for  them,  who  received  them  and  their
company  most  magnificently.  Every  thing  was  there  settled  respecting  this  marriage,  and  the
archbishop  of  Boui'ges  betrothed  them  in  the  presence  of  a large  company  of  nobility  of  both
sexes.  The  marriage  was  not  solemnised  at  that  time,  because  both  were  very  young ; but
all  the  contracts  and  engagements  were  signed,  as  to  its  future  completion,  in  the  presence  of
several  great  barons  and  knights.  There  were,  at  this  betrothing,  great  feasts  of  dinners,
suppers,  dancings  and  carollings  ; after  which,  the  count  and  countess  returned  with  their
son  to  Blois.  The  young  lady  remained  with  the  duchess  her  mother,  at  a handsome  castle
in  Berry  called  Mehun  sur  YevreJ.

At  this  time,  the  duke  of  Berry  set  out  for  Auvergne,  Languedoc  and  Avignon,  to  visit
pope  Clement.  It  had  been  before  determined  that  the  duke  de  Bourbon  and  the  count  de

* Ostrevant,  or  island  of  St.  Arnand.  This  was  formerly  + Q.  if  not  Ath.

a part  of  the  country  of  Valenciennes.  It  lies  on  the  J “ Mehun  sur  Yevre," — four  leagues  from  Bourges.

borders  of  Flanders  and  Artois. — Baudrand.


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


29

la  Marche  should  enter  Limousin,  with  two  thousand  men  at  arms,  to  free  the  country  from
the  English  thieves,  who  were  pillaging  it ; for  there  were  still  some  castles  in  Poitou  and
Saintonge  whose  garrisons  did  much  mischief;  and,  complaints  of  them  having  been  made,
the  duke  of  Berry  was  desirous  of  providing  a remedy  for  them.  He  had  therefore  entreated
his  cousin  the  duke  of  Bourbon  to  undertake  it,  and  not  to  quit  Limousin  or  Saintonge  until
he  should  have  conquered  the  castle  of  Yertucil : for  it  was  from  that  garrison  the  country
had  suffered  the  most.  The  duke  de  Bourbon  accepted  the  command,  and  issued  his
summons  for  the  assembling  of  his  vassals  at  Moulins  in  the  Bourbonnois,  the  first  day  of
June.  From  thence  they  marched  towards  Limoges,  and  were  met  by  several  bodies  of
men  at  arms.  The  duke  de  Bourbon  had  at  that  time  for  his  squire  an  amiable  gentleman
called  John  Bonne  Lance*,  master  and  captain  of  his  men  at  arms.  Of  all  the  flower  of  his
knights  and  squires,  certainly  this  squire  was  well  worthy  of  such  a command.

The  count  de  la  Marche  was  to  accompany  the  duke  do  Bourbon  in  this  expedition,  and
made  his  preparations  in  the  town  of  Tours.


CHAPTER  CLVI. SIR  JOHN  DE  VIENNE,  ADMIRAL  OE  FRANCE,  SAILS  TO  SCOTLAND,  TO

CARRY  ON  THE  WAR  AGAINST  THE  ENGLISH  AT  THE  EXPIRATION  OF  THE  TRUCE.

At  this  period,  those  men  at  arms  who  had  been  fixed  on  to  accompany  sir  John  de
Vienne,  admiral  of  France,  to  Scotland,  arrived  at  Sluys  in  Flanders.  He  was  to  have
under  his  command  a thousand  lances,  knights  and  squires,  and,  I believe,  they  were  all
there  : for  such  was  the  ardour  of  those  who  wished  to  advance  themselves,  that  several  went
with  the  admiral  though  they  had  not  been  summoned.

The  fleet  was  ready  prepared  at  Sluys,  and  the  stores  in  great  abundance  and  good.  They
embarked  arms  sufficient  for  twelve  hundred  men  from  head  to  foot.  These  they  had  brought
from  the  castle  of  Beaute,  near  Paris,  and  they  were  the  arms  of  the  Parisians,  which  had
been  ordered  to  be  deposited  there.  With  the  admiral  were  plenty  of  excellent  men  at  arms,
of  the  flower  of  knighthood.  It  was  the  intention  of  the  admiral  to  give  these  arms  to  the
knights  and  squires  of  Scotland,  the  better  to  succeed  in  their  enterprise ; for  sir  Geoftry  de
Charny  and  the  others  had  told  the  king,  on  their  return  home  last  year,  that  the  Scots
were  very  poorly  armed.

I will  now  name  some  of  those  lords  of  France  who  went  into  Scotland.  First,  sir  John
de  Vienne,  admiral  of  France,  the  count  de  Grand-pre,  the  lords  de  Verdenay,  de  Sainte
Croix,  the  lord  de  Montbury,  sir  Geoffry  de  Charny,  sir  William  de  Vienne,  sir  James  de
Vienne,  lord  d’Espaigny,  sir  Girard  de  Bourbonne,  the  lord  de  Iletz,  sir  Florimont  de
Quissy,  the  lord  de  Marnel,  sir  Valeran  de  Rayneval,  the  lord  de  Beausang,  the  lord  de
Wainbrain,  the  lord  de  Rinolle,  baron  d’Yury,  the  lord  de  Coucy,  sir  Perceval  d Ameual,
the  lord  de  Ferrieres,  the  lord  de  Fontaines,  sir  Bracquet  de  Braquemont,  the  lord  de
Grandcourt,  the  lord  de  Landon,  a Breton,  sir  Guy  la  Personne,  sir  William  de  Courroux,
sir  John  de  Hangiers,  sir  Bery  de  Vin3elin,  cousin  to  the  grand  master  of  Prussia,  and  many
other  good  knights  whom  I cannot  name : there  were  a thousand  lances,  knights  and
squires,  without  reckoning  the  cross-bows  and  sturdy  varlets.

They  had  favourable  winds  and  a good  voyage ; for  the  weather  was  very  fine,  as  it
usually  is  in  the  month  of  May.  The  truces  had  expired  between  the  French  and  English,
the  Ghent  men  and  the  Flemings,  and  in  all  other  parts.  War  was  sought  for,  as  it  seemed,
in  every  quarter ; and  those  knights  and  squires  who  went  to  Scotland  gallantly  wished  for
it,  as  they  said,  with  the  assistance  of  the  Scots  they  wTould  make  a good  campaign,  and  carry
on  a successful  war  against  England.  However,  the  English,  who  had  received  intelligence
of  this  expedition,  very  much  suspected  whither  it  was  bound.

* “ Bonne  Lance.”  I suspect  this  is  a non  de  guerre , for  no  mention  is  made  of  him  under  this  name  in  the  life
of  the  duke.


GO


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  <ic.


CHAPTER  CLVII. THE  PILLAGERS  OP  GHENT,  SERNAMED  PORKERS,  COMMIT  MUCH  MISCHIEF.

FRANCIS  ATREMEN  DEFEATS  SOME  FRENCH  TROOPS  NEAR  ARDEMBOURG.

The  lord  Bourcliier,  who  had  the  government  of  Ghent  by  order  of  the  king  of  England
and  the  captains  of  the  commonalty,  Francis  Atremen,  Peter  du  Bois  and  Peter  le  Nuitre,
had  made  every  preparation,  knowing  the  war  was  to  be  renewed.  They  had  been  very
busily  employed  during  the  truce,  in  strengthening  and  victualling  the  town  of  Ghent,  as
well  as  the  castle  of  Gauvre  and  all  other  places  under  their  obedience.

At  this  period,  there  were  a set  of  vagabonds  who  had  taken  refuge  in  the  wood  of  la
Respaille,  and  had  fortified  themselves  in  a house  so  strongly  that  it  could  not  be  taken.
They  had  been  driven  out  of  Alost,  Grammont  and  other  towns  in  Flanders  : having  wasted
their  all,  and  not  knowing  how  to  live  otherwise  than  by  plunder,  they  robbed  and  pillaged
any  one  who  fell  in  their  way.  The  subject  of  universal  conversation  was  these  Porkers  of
la  Respaille,  which  wood  is  situated  between  Regnais,  Grammont,  Anghien,  and  Lysines.
They  did  much  mischief  in  the  castlewick  of  Atli,  and  on  the  lands  of  Floberge,  Lysines  and
Anghien  ; and  these  pillagers  were  supported  by  Ghent.  Under  their  countenance  they
committed  many  murders  and  robberies : they  entered  Idainault,  from  whence  they  dragged
people  out  of  their  beds,  and  carried  them  to  their  fort,  when  they  ransomed  them,  and  thus
made  war  on  all  mankind.  The  lord  de  Baudrius  and  de  la  Morte,  castellan  of  Ath,  watched
them  several  times,  but  he  could  never  catch  them,  for  they  were  too  well  acquainted  with
the  means  of  escaping.  They  were  so  much  dreaded  on  the  borders  of  Hainault  and  Brabant
that  none  dared  to  travel  those  roads,  nor  through  that  part  of  the  country.

The  duke  of  Burgundy,  in  consequence  of  the  renewal  of  the  war,  had  reinforced  the
garrisons  of  his  towns  and  castles  in  Flanders  with  men  and  stores.  The  lord  de  Guistelles
was  commander  in  Bruges,  and  sir  John  de  Jumont  in  Courtray  : for  sir  William  de  Namur
was  at  that  time  lord  of  Sluys  : sir  Roger  de  Guistelle  governed  Damme,  and  sir  Peter  de  la
Sieple  Ypres.  Men  at  arms  were  stationed  in  all  the  frontier  towns  of  Flanders  by  order  of
the  duke  of  Burgundy.  Sir  Guy  de  Pontarlicr,  marshal  of  Burgundy,  remained  in  garrison
in  the  town  of  Ardembourg,  with  sir  Rafflart  de  Flandres,  sir  John  de  Jumont,  sir  Henry  du
Going,  the  lord  de  Montigny  in  Ostrevant,  the  lord  de  Longueval,  sir  John  de  Bernecte,  sir
Peter  de  Bailleul,  Belle-Fourriere,  Phelippot  Ganey,  Raoullin  de  la  Folie,  and  several  more,
to  the  amount  of  two  hundred  combatants.  They  determined  among  themselves  to  make  an
excursion  into  the  Quatre  Mestiers  and  ravage  that  country,  for  much  provision  was  carried
from  thence  into  Ghent.  They  therefore,  having  fixed  on  a day  for  this  enterprise,  armed
themselves  and  marched  thither.

The  same  day  that  the  French  had  fixed  on  for  their  expedition,  about  two  thousand
determined  men  had  sallied  out  of  Ghent  under  the  command  of  Francis  Atremen:  accidentally
they  found  themselves  in  a village  in  the  midst  of  the  French.  When  they  had  reconnoitred
each  other,  they  saw  a battle  was  unavoidable.  The  French  instantly  dismounted,  and,
grasping  their  lances,  advanced  on  the  enemy : the  Ghent  men,  who  were  as  numerous,  did
the  same.  The  combat  began  sharply  ; but  the  Ghent  men  advanced  into  a pass  which  was
much  to  their  loss,  where  the  battle  was  more  severe  : many  gallant  deeds  were  done,  and
many  beat  down.  Sir  Rafflart  de  Flandres  in  that  place  showed  the  greatest  courage;  and
the  knights  and  squires  engaged  the  Ghent  men  with  determined  valour,  as  indeed  it  behoved
them  to  do,  for  quarter  was  given  to  none.  At  last  the  Ghent  men,  by  having  superior
numbers,  gained  the  field,  and  the  French  were  obliged  to  mount  their  horses  or  they  would
have  been  slain,  for  their  opponents  much  outnumbered  them.  In  this  encounter  were  killed
sir  John  de  Bernecte,  sir  Peter  d'e  Bailleul,  Belle-Fourriere,  Phelippot  de  Ganey,  Raoullin  de
la  Folie,  and  many  others  : the  more  the  pity.  The  rest  were  obliged  to  fly  and  re-enter
Ardembourg,  or  they  must  inevitably  have  been  killed.

After  this  event,  the  viscount  de  Meaux  was  sent  with  all  his  men  at  arms  to  garrison
Ardembourg,  which  he  repaired  and  strengthened.  He  had  with  him  several  knights  and
squires  who  were  good  determined  soldiers.  At  this  time  sir  John  de  Jumont  was  great
bailiff  of  Flanders,  and  had  been  so  for  the  two  preceding  years.  He  was  much  feared


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


3]


through  all  that  country  for  his  great  prowess,  and  the  deeds  he  had  performed.  Whenever
he  got  hold  of  any  Ghent  men  he  put  them  to  death,  or  had  their  eyes  tlirust  out,  or  their
hands,  ears  or  feet  cut  off,  and  in  this  state  sent  them  away  to  serve  as  an  example  to  their
fellow-citizens.  He  was  so  renowned  throughout  all  Flanders  for  Ins  pitiless  justice  in  thus
cruelly  punishing  the  Ghent  men,  that  no  one  was  talked  of  but  him  in  the  whole  country.


CHAPTER  CLVIII. THE  DUCHESS  OF  ANJOU  URGES  HER  CLAIM  TO  THE  POSSESSION  OF

PROVENCE. GALEAS  VISCONTI,  COUNT  DE  VERTUS,  ORDERS  HIS  UNCLE  BERNABO

VISCONTI  TO  BE  IMPRISONED.

Thus  was  there  confusion  in  all  parts  of  the  world,  as  well  between  the  kings  of  France  and
England  as  between  John  king  of  Castille  and  the  king  of  Portugal,  for  the  war  there  had
been  renewed.

Madame  d’Anjou,  who  retained  the  title  of  queen  of  Naples  and  Jerusalem,  went  to
Avignon,  where  the  pope  resided,  and  there  kept  her  state  with  her  son  Lewis,  who  styled
himself  king  of  Sicily,  which  his  father  had  conquered.  The  queen  had  intentions  to  make
war  on  the  Proventjals,  if  they  did  not  acknowledge  her  as  their  sovereign  lady  and  put
themselves  under  her  obedience.  Sir  Bernard  de  la  Salle  had  already  entered  Provence  and
declared  war  in  her  name.  At  this  time,  the  lord  de  Coucy  was  also  at  Avignon  ; for  he  had
been  confined  to  his  bed  for  fifteen  weeks  from  a bruise  he  had  received  on  his  lee:  during  an
excursion  on  horseback.  On  his  recovery,  he  often  visited  the  queen,  and  comforted  her
much,  as  he  was  well  able  to  do.  She  was  expecting  the  duke  of  Berry,  who  was  on  his
road  to  Avignon  to  hold  a conference  with  the  pope,  to  assist  her.

The  king  of  France  and  his  uncles  had  sent  the  lord  Louis  de  Sancerre,  marshal  of  France,
to  Provence,  with  five  hundred  men  at  arms,  to  make  war  on  the  Provencals,  if  they  did  not
submit  to  the  queen.  Some  had  done  so,  but  not  all : however,  the  city  of  Marseilles  and
the  greater  part  had  surrendered  themselves  to  her;  but  the  cities  of  Aix  and  Tarascon,  and
some  knights  of  the  country,  refused  to  admit  her  claim  to  the  county  of  Provence,  until  she
had  been  peaceably  acknowledged  as  queen,  and  her  son  as  king,  of  la  Puglia,  Calabria,  Naples,
and  Sicily ; and  they  said,  that  when  she  should  be  in  quiet  possession  of  the  above,  all
Provence,  as  was  just,  would  obey  her.  The  count  de  Conversano  and  his  son  sir  John  de
Luxembourg  made  war  for  her  in  those  distant  parts,  against  the  lord  Charles  Durazzo.  Sir
John  de  Bueil  remained  with  the  queen,  at  Avignon,  as  her  counsellor.

At  this  period,  another  marvellous  event  happened  in  Lombardy,  which  was  the  subject
of  general  conversation.  The  count  de  Vertus,  whose  name  was  John  Galeas  Visconti  *,  and
his  uncle  were  the  greatest  personages  in  all  Lombardy.  Sir  Galeas  and  sir  Bernabo  were
brothers,  and  had  peaceably  reigned  and  governed  that  country.  One  of  these  lords  possessed
nine  cities,  and  the  other  ten  ; the  city  of  Milan  was  under  their  government  alternately,  one
year  each.  When  sir  Galeas,  the  father  of  the  count  de  Arertus,  died,  the  affections  of  the
uncle  for  his  nephew  were  much  weakened ; and  sir  Galeas  suspected,  that  now  his  father
was  dead,  his  uncle  Bernabo  would  seize  his  lordships,  in  like  manner  as  sir  Galeas,  his  father,
and  uncle  Bernabo  had  done  to  their  brother  sir  Matthew,  whom  they  had  put  to  death.
The  count  de  Vertus  was  very  suspicious,  and  plainly  showed  that  he  had  his  fears  of  this
event  taking  place.  However,  by  his  actions  and  the  capture  he  made,  he  proved  himself
the  more  subtle  of  the  two.  I will  relate  the  circumstance.

Sir  Bernabo  heavily  oppressed  that  part  of  Lombardy  of  which  he  was  lord,  and  taxed  his
vassals,  two  or  three  times  a-year,  a half  or  a third  of  their  wealth ; but  none  dared  to
murmur  against  him.  Sir  Galeas,  count  de  Vertus,  to  acquire  popularity  and  praise,  did  not
levy  any  taxes  on  his  possessions,  but  simply  lived  on  his  rents.  This  mode  he  had  followed
for  five  years,  ever  since  the  death  of  his  father,  which  gained  him  so  much  the  love  of  the
Lombards,  that  they  all  praised  him,  and  lived  happily  under  him  ; whilst,  on  the  contrary,
they  abused  underhand  sir  Bernabo,  who  would  not  leave  them  anything.  The  count  de

* John  Galeas  Visconti,  count  of  Vertus,  succeeded  h'S  father  Galeas  in  the  government  of  one-half  of  Lombardv  in
1378.— Ed.


32


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


Vertus  (who  had  formed  his  plan,  and  was  acting  accordingly,  from  the  suspicions  he  had  of
his  uncle,  and,  as  some  said,  from  appearances  having  been  manifested,  that  confirmed  them)
issued  a secret  summons  to  those  in  whom  he  confided  the  most : to  some  of  whom  he
revealed  his  plan,  but  not  to  all,  lest  it  should  be  made  public.  A day  had  been  appointed
by  sir  Bernabo  to  make  an  excursion  of  pleasure  from  one  of  his  castles  to  another.  Upon
this,  his  nephew  placed  three  ambuscades  on  the  road  sir  Bernabo  was  to  take  ; so  that  it
was  not  possible  but  he  must  fall  into  one  of  them.  He  had  ordered  that  he  should  be  made
prisoner,  and  on  no  account  killed,  unless  he  made  too  obstinate  a defence.

Thus  as  sir  Bernabo  was  riding  from  one  town  to  another,  mistrusting  no  evil,  nor  any
way  thinking  of  his  nephew,  but  considering  himself  as  perfectly  safe,  he  entered  one  of  the
ambuscades,  when  the  men  planted  in  ambush  instantly  advanced  to  him  full  speed  and  with
lances  in  their  rests.  Sir  Bernabo  had  a German  knight  with  him,  who  cried  out,  “ My  lord,
save  yourself ! for  I see  people  of  a bad  mien  coming  towards  you,  and  I know  them  to  be
persons  belonging  to  your  nephew  sir  Galeas.”  Sir  Bernabo  replied,  that  “ he  was  not
acquainted  with  any  place  where  he  could  save  himself,  if  they  had  any  evil  intentions  against
him,  and  that  he  was  unconscious  of  having  done  anything  against  his  nephew  that  should
make  him  fly.”  Those  who  had  been  placed  in  ambuscade  continued  advancing  towards
sir  Bernabo.  When  the  German,  who  was  a man  of  honour  and  knight  of  the  body  to  sir
Bernabo,  saw  them  thus  approaching  his  lord,  having  the  sword  of  his  master  before  him,  he
instantly  drew  it  out  of  its  scabbard  and  placed  it  in  the  hands  of  sir  Bernabo  (which  was
seen  by  those  who  were  pressing  forward)  ; and  then  the  knight  drew  his  own  sword,  like  a
valiant  man,  and  put  himself  on  his  defence.  This,  however,  did  not  avail,  for  he  as  well  as
sir  Bernabo  were  instantly  surrounded,  and  the  knight  was  slain  under  pretence  that  at  the
commencement  he  meant  to  defend  himself ; for  whose  death  sir  Galeas  was  afterwards  sorely
vexed.

Sir  Bernabo  was  made  prisoner  without  any  defence  made  by  him  or  his  attendants,  and
carried  to  a castle  where  his  nephew  was,  who  much  rejoiced  on  his  arrival.  That  same
day  his  wife  and  children  that  were  marriageable  were  also  arrested,  and  confined  by  the  lord
of  Milan,  who  took  possession  of  all  the  lordships,  castles,  towns,  and  cities  which  sir
Bernabo  held  in  Lombardy.  His  uncle  died  shortly  after ; but  I know  not  by  what  means,
though  I believe  it  was  from  being  bled  in  the  neck,  for  in  Lombardy  they  are  accustomed
to  make  such  bleedings  when  they  wish  to  hasten  the  death  of  any  one  #.  News  of  this
was  soon  spread  abroad  : some  were  pleased  at  it,  others  vexed  ; for  sir  Bernabo  had  in  his
time  done  so  many  acts  of  cruelty,  and  without  reason,  that  few  pitied  him,  saying,  he  had
well  deserved  it.  Tins  was  the  end  of  sir  Bernabo  Yisconti,  who  had  reigned  most  powerfully
in  Lombardy.


CHAPTER  CLIX. WILLIAM  DE  LIGNAC,  SENESCHAL  OF  SAINTONGE  FOR  THE  KING  OF  FRANCE,

CONQUERS  FROM  THE  ENGLISH  THE  CASTLE  OF  AIGLE. THE  ARMY  OF  THE  DUKE  OF

BOURBON  TAKES  MONTLIEU  AND  THE  BRIDGE  OF  TAILLEBOURG,  WHILE  BESIEGING
THAT  PLACE.

We  will  now  return  to  the  army  which  the  duke  of  Bourbon  and  the  count  de  la  Marche
conducted  into  Poitou  and  Limousin.  The  duke  left  Moulins  in  the  Bourbonnois,  and
marched  with  a handsome  company  of  knights  aud  squires  to  accomplish  his  expedition,
attended  by  John  de  Harcourt  his  nephew.  The  duke  of  Bourbon  had  issued  his  special
summons  for  those  of  Berry,  Auvergne,  Poitou,  Rouergue,  Saintonge,  and  Limousin,  to
assemble  at  Niort,  twelve  leagues  from  Poitiers.  While  this  army  was  assembling,  sir
William  de  Lignac,  a valiant  knight  and  seneschal  for  the  king  of  France  of  Saintonge,  and
governor  of  Millaut,  resided  in  that  country.  He  advanced  into  the  Angoumois  with  all  his
men  at  arms,  to  the  amount  of  two  hundred  combatants,  and  halted  before  the  castle  of  Aigle,

* Bernabo  was  seized  by  his  nephew  on  the  6tb  of  May  and  died  on  the  18th  December,  1385. — Ed.

•f  “ Millau.”  Q.  if  not  Millac  ; which  is  in  those  parts.


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


33


which  the  English  possessed,  and  from  this  place  during  the  winter  and  the  preceding  summer,
they  had  exceedingly  harassed  the  country.

Sir  William,  on  his  arrival  at  the  castle,  dismounted,  and  ordered  his  men  to  do  the  same,
when  they  instantly  began  the  attack.  It  was  very  severe  and  of  long  continuance,  for  those
within  it  fought  for  their  lives.  Sir  William  performed  such  gallant  deeds  as  proved  him
worthy  of  being  their  leader.  He  did  not  spare  himself,  and  showed  how  they  ought  to
attack  it.  The  place  was  at  last  taken  by  storm,  and  the  French,  entering  it  by  ladders,  made
prisoners  of  all  that  were  found  there,  or  put  them  to  the  sword.  This  first  conquest  this
season  was  made  by  sir  William  de  Lignac,  as  he  was  waiting  for  the  duke  of  Bourbon  and
his  army.

On  the  duke’s  arrival  at  Niort,  he  found  plenty  of  men  at  arms  impatient  for  his  arrival.
His  cousin  the  count  de  la  Marche,  with  a large  body,  the  viscount  de  Tonnerre,  sir  Henry
de  Thouars,  seneschal  of  Limousin,  the  lords  de  Pons,  de  Partenay,  de  Tours,  de  Pousanges,
and  many  other  barons  of  Poitou  and  Saintonge  were  there.  Sir  William  de  Lignac  came
thither  to  wait  on  the  duke,  having  conquered  the  castle  de  l’Aigle,  for  which  the  duke  felt
himself  obliged  to  him.  When  all  these  men  at  arms  were  mustered,  they  amounted  to  full
seven  hundred  lances,  not  including  the  Genoese  and  the  lusty  varlets  : in  the  whole,  two
thousand  combatants.  They  then  held  a council  whither  they  should  turn  their  arms ; to
Bertueil,  Taillebourg *,  or  Montlieut.  After  having  well  considered  each  situation,  they
determined  to  march  to  Montlieu,  because  it  was  a strong  castle  near  the  moors  of  Bordeaux  ;
and,  if  they  should  succeed  in  taking  it,  the  others  would  be  weakened,  and  none  able  to  quit
Bordeaux  without  their  knowledge.

They  marched  through  the  Angoumois,  and  on  arriving  at  Montlieu,  prepared  for  the  siege.
Sir  James  Poussart  and  John  Bonnelance  were  the  leaders  of  the  duke  of  Bourbon’s  men
at  arms,  and  of  the  whole  army.  They  were  not  long  besieging  Montlieu  before  they
made  ready  their  ladders  and  other  tilings,  necessary  for  an  attack.  They  surrounded
the  castle  and  began  the  assault,  but  those  within  defended  themselves  vigorously.  The
combat  was  very  sharp,  long  continued,  and  many  gallant  deeds  were  done ; for  the  French
mounted  their  ladders  with  rapidity,  and  fought  hand  to  hand  on  the  battlements  with  their
daggers  : in  short,  they  exerted  themselves  so  much  that  the  castle  was  fairly  won  by  storm,
and  most  within  perished.

When  the  lords  of  France  had  got  possession  of  Montlieu,  they  reinforced  it  with  a new
garrison  and  stores,  and  then  took  the  road  to  Taillebourg  on  the  Charente.  Dinandon  de
la  Perate,  a Gascon,  was  governor  of  this  fortress,  an  able  man  at  arms,  who  held  the  French
cheap.  When  they  came  before  Taillebourg,  the  duke  of  Bourbon  and  his  company  took
two  small  forts  which  had  much  harassed  the  borders  of  Poitou  and  Limousin,  la  Froncette,
and  Archac  : the  garrisons  were  slain,  and  the  castles  given  up  to  those  of  the  adjacent
countries,  who  instantly  razed  them  to  the  ground.

The  siege  of  Taillebourg  was  now  formed,  and  four  block-houses  were  erected  before  it.
Near  Taillebourg  was  a bridge  over  the  Charente,  which  the  English  and  Gascons  had  fortified,
so  that  no  vessels  from  la  Rochelle  or  Saintonge  could  pass  without  great  danger,  unless  by
paying  toll.  The  French  lords  determined  to  gain  this  bridge,  to  facilitate  their  other  attacks,
and  to  be  in  greater  security  in  their  block-houses.  They  ordered  vessels  ready  prepared
and  armed  to  ascend  the  Charente  from  la  Rochelle,  in  which  they  had  placed  large  bodies  of
cross-bowTs  and  Genoese,  to  skirmish  with  those  at  the  bridge.  The  attack  was  severe,  for
the  English  and  Gascons  had  well  fortified  the  bridge,  and  they  defended  it  with  spirit,  as  it
behoved  them  to  do,  for  they  were- vigorously  attacked  by  land  and  water.  The  eldest  son
of  the  count  de  Harcourt,  named  John,  was  made  a knight  at  this  assault,  by  his  uncle  the
duke  of  Bourbon,  and  displayed  his  banner.

This  attack  on  the  bridge  of  Taillebourg  was  long  continued : many  gallant  actions  were
performed  ; but  the  cross-bows  and  Genoese  in  the  vessels  shot  so  ably,  that  those  on  the
bridge  scarcely  dared  to  appear  and  defend  themselves.  Why  should  I make  a long  tale  of
this  ? The  bridge  was  carried  by  storm,  and  all  found  there  slain  or  drowned  : not  one

* “ Taillebourg,” — a town  in  Saintonge  on  the  Charente,  three  leagues  from  Saintes.

•f  “ Montlieu,”— a village  in  Saintonge,  election  of  Saintes.

YOL.  II.


D


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,


34


escaped.  Thus  did  the  French  gain  the  bridge  of  Taillebourg.  Their  siege  was  carried  on
more  eagerly  for  this.  Taillebourg  is  situated  three  leagues  from  St.  Jean  d’Angely,  and  two
from  Saintes,  in  the  finest  country  in  the  world.

Dinandon,  and  those  in  the  castle,  were  much  astonished  and  vexed  at  the  capture  of  the
bridge  ; and  they  had  reason,  for  they  lost  by  it  the  passage  of  the  river.  However,  they
would  not  surrender ; for  they  felt  themselves  in  a strong  place,  and  expected  succours
from  Bordeaux,  as  it  had  been  currently  reported  on  the  borders  of  the  Bordelois,  and
confirmed  by  all  the  English  and  Gascon  garrisons,  that  the  duke  of  Lancaster  or  the  earl  of
Buckingham,  was  to  arrive  at  Bordeaux  with  two  thousand  men  at  arms  and  four  thousand
archers,  to  combat  the  French  and  to  oblige  them  to  raise  all  their  sieges  : in  this  they  placed
great  hopes,  but  it  turned  out  otherwise,  as  I shall  tell  you.


Genoese  Crossbowmen  attacking  the  Bridge  of  Taillebourg.  The  Archers  taken  from  contemporary
Illumination,  and  from  Specimens  of  their  Costume  and  Weapons,  in  Sir  Samuel  Meyrick  s
Collection,  Goodrich  Court.


In  truth,  before  the  army  under  the  command  of  the  admiral  of  France  was  prepared  to  sail
for  Scotland,  it  had  been  ordered  in  England  that  the  duke  of  Lancaster,  sir  John  Holland,
brother  to  the  king,  sir  Thomas  Percy,  sir  Thomas  Trivet,  the  lord  I itzwalter,  sir  AA  illiam
Windsor,  sir  John  Silbain,  and  other  barons  and  knights  to  the  amount  of  a thousand  lances
and  three  thousand  archers,  should  sail  for  Bordeaux,  and  remain  there  the  whole  summer,
to  reinforce  Mortaigne,  Bouteville,  and  those  castles  which  held  out  for  them  in  Gascony  and
Languedoc  : they  were  to  fight  with  the  French,  should  they  find  them  in  the  country  ; and,
after  having  remained  there  a season,  they  were  to  march  to  Castille  by  way  of  Bayonne  and
Navarre,  for  there  was  a treaty  between  them  and  the  king  of  Navarre.  All  this  had  been
settled  in  the  imaginations  of  the  English,  but  it  proved  a disappointment : for,  when  they
learned  for  a truth  that  the  admiral  of  France  with  a thousand  lances  of  chosen  knights  and
squires  were  preparing  to  sail  for  Scotland,  their  counsels  were  changed,  and  none  dared  to


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


35


think  of  quitting  their  country,  nor  of  weakening  their  forces  : for  they  much  dreaded  the
consequences  of  this  junction  of  the  French  with  the  Scots.  There  was  also  a report  at  this
time,  that  England  was  to  be  attacked  in  three  different  parts  by  the  French.  One  expedition
was  from  Brittany,  as  it  was  said  that  the  duke  of  Brittany  was  become  a good  Frenchman  ;
another  from  Normandy,  where  the  constable  of  France  was  making  his  preparations  at
Harfleur,  Dieppe,  and  all  along  the  coast  as  far  as  St.  Valery  and  Crotoy  ; the  third  from
Scotland.  From  fear  of  this,  the  government  of  England  would  not  allow  any  knights  or
squires  to  quit  the  country,  but  attended  to  the  fortifying  of  their  harbours.  At  this  season
Richard,  carl  of  Arundel,  admiral  of  the  English  sea,  was  cruising  with  sixty  or  fourscore
largo  vessels,  armed  and  fitted  with  men  at  arms  and  archers : he  had,  besides,  nine  light
vessels  off  Normandy  to  gain  intelligence.

We  will  leave  for  a while  the  duke  of  Bourbon  and  the  siege  of  Taillebourg,  which  lasted
upwards  of  nine  weeks,  and  relate  how  the  admiral  of  France,  with  the  army  under  his
command,  landed  in  Scotland,  and  what  a handsome  reception,  in  appearance,  they  met  with
from  the  country.


CHAPTER  CLX. SIR  JOHN  DE  VIENNE,  ADMIRAL  OF  FRANCE,  ARRIVES  IN  SCOTLAND  WITH

HIS  ARMY. HE  MEETS  WITH  BAD  TREATMENT  THERE.

The  French  army  that  was  bound  for  Scotland  had  very  favourable  winds,  for  it  was  in
the  month  of  May,  when  the  weather  is  temperate  and  agreeable.  They  coasted  Flanders,
Holland,  Zealand,  and  Friseland,  and  advanced  until  they  approached  so  near  Scotland  as  to
see  it ; but  before  they  arrived  there  an  unfortunate  accident  befcl  a knight  of  France  and
an  expert  man  at  arms,  named  sir  Aubert  d’Angers.  The  knight  was  young  and  active,
and  to  show  his  agility  he  mounted  aloft  by  the  ropes  of  his  ship  completely  armed  ; but,
his  feet  slipping,  he  fell  into  the  sea,  and  the  weight  of  his  armour,  which  sunk  him  instantly,
deprived  him  of  any  assistance,  for  the  ship  was  soon  at  a distance  from  the  place  where  he
had  fallen.  All  the  barons  were  much  vexed  at  this  misfortune,  but  they  were  forced  to
endure  it,  as  they  could  not  any  way  remedy  it.

They  continued  their  voyage  until  they  arrived  at  Edinburgh,  the  capital  of  Scotland,
where  the  king  chiefly  resides  when  he  is  in  that  part  of  the  country.  The  earls  of  Douglas
and  Moray,  from  the  information  they  had  received,  were  waiting  for  them  in  Edinburgh
and  as  soon  as  they  were  come,  hastened  to  meet  them  at  the  harbour,  and  received  them
most  amicably,  bidding  them  welcome  to  their  country.  The  Scots  barons  instantly
recognised  sir  Geoflry  de  Charny,  for  he  had  resided  full  two  months  with  them  last  summer
in  Scotland.  Sir  Geoffry  made  them  acquainted,  as  he  very  well  knew  how,  with  the
admiral  and  the  barons  of  France.  At  that  time  the  king  was  not  at  Edinburgh,  but  in  the
Highlands*  of  Scotland : his  sons  received  them  handsomely,  telling  them  the  king  would
shortly  be  there.

They  were  satisfied  with  this  information,  and  the  lords  and  their  men  lodged  themselves
as  well  as  they  could  in  Edinburgh,  and  those  who  could  not  lodge  there  were  quartered  in
the  different  villages  thereabout.  Edinburgh,  notwithstanding  it  is  the  residence  of  the
king,  and  is  the  Paris  of  Scotland,  is  not  such  a town  as  Tournay  or  Valenciennes  ; for  there
are  not  in  the  whole  town  four  thousand  houses.  Several  of  the  French  lords  were  therefore
obliged  to  take  up  their  lodgings  in  the  neighbouring  villages,  and  at  Dunfermline,  Kelsonj-,
Dunbar,  Dalkeith,  and  in  other  villages.

News  was  soon  spread  through  Scotland,  that  a large  body  of  men  at  arms  from  France
were  arrived  in  the  country.  Some  began  to  murmur  and  say,  “What  devil  has  brought
them  here  ? or  who  has  sent  for  them  ? Cannot  we  carry  on  our  wars  with  England  without
their  assistance  ? We  shall  never  do  any  effectual  good  as  long  as  they  are  with  us.  Let
them  be  told  to  return  again,  for  we  are  sufficiently  numerous  in  Scotland  to  fight  our  own
quarrels,  and  do  not  want  their  company.  We  neither  understand  their  language  nor  they

t*  “ Kelson” — Q.  Kelso  would  have  been  too  far  distant.

D 2


* “En  la  sauvage  Escosse.”


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


30


ours,  and  we  cannot  converse  together.  They  will  very  soon  eat  up  and  destroy  all  we  have
in  this  country,  and  will  do  us  more  harm,  if  we  allow  them  to  remain  among  us,  than  the
English  could  in  battle.  If  tire  English  do  burn  our  houses,  what  consequence  is  it  to  us  ?
we  can  rebuild  them  cheap  enough,  for  we  only  require  three  days  to  do  so,  provided  we
have  five  or  six  poles  and  boughs  to  cover  them.”  Such  was  the  conversation  of  the  Scots
on  the  arrival  of  the  French  : they  did  not  esteem  them,  but  hated  them  in  their  hearts,  and
abused  them  with  their  tongues  as  much  as  they  could,  like  rude  and  worthless  people  as
they  are.

I must,  however,  say  that,  considering  all  things,  it  was  not  right  for  so  many  of  the
nobility  to  have  come  at  this  season  to  Scotland : it  would  have  been  better  to  have  sent
twenty  or  thirty  knights  from  France,  than  so  large  a body  as  five  hundred  or  a thousand.
The  reason  is  clear.  In  Scotland  you  will  never  find  a man  of  worth  : they  arc  like  savages,
who  wish  not  to  be  acquainted  with  any  one,  and  are  too  envious  of  the  good  fortune  of  others,
and  suspicious  of  losing  any  thing  themselves,  for  their  country  is  very  poor.  When  the
English  make  inroads  thither,  as  they  have  very  frequently  done,  they  order  their  provisions,
if  they  wish  to  live,  to  follow  close  at  their  backs;  for  nothing  is  to  be  had  in  that  country
without  great  difficulty.  There  is  neither  iron  to  shoe  horses,  nor  leather  to  make  harness,
saddles  or  bridles  : all  these  things  come  ready  made  from  Flanders  by  sea;  and,  should  these
fail,  there  is  none  to  be  had  in  the  country.

When  these  barons  and  knights  of  France,  who  had  been  used  to  handsome  hotels,
ornamented  apartments,  and  castles  with  good  soft  beds  to  repose  on,  saw  themselves  in  such
poverty,  they  began  to  laugh,  and  to  say  before  the  admiral,  “ What  could  have  brought  us
hither?  We  have  never  known  till  now  what  was  meant  by  poverty  and  hard  living.  We
now  have  found  the  truth  of  what  our  fathers  and  mothers  were  used  to  tell  us,  when  they
said, — 1 Go,  go  thou  shalt  have  in  thy  time,  shouldst  thou  live  lone-  enough  hard  beds  and
poor  lodgings  all  this  is  now  come  to  pass.”  They  said  also  among  themselves,  “ Let  us
hasten  the  object  of  our  voyage,  by  advancing  towards  England  : a long  stay  in  Scotland
will  be  neither  honourable  nor  profitable.”  The  knights  made  remonstrances  respecting  all
these  circumstances  to  sir  John  de  Vienne,  who  appeased  them  as  well  as  he  could,  saying, —
“ My  fair  sirs,  it  becomes  us  to  wait  patiently,  and  to  speak  fair,  since  we  are  got  into  such
difficulties.  We  have  a long  way  yet  to  go,  and  we  cannot  return  through  England.  Take
in  good  humour  whatever  you  can  get.  You  cannot  always  be  at  Paris,  Dijon,  Beaune  or
Chalons  : it  is  necessary  for  those  who  wish  to  live  with  honour  in  this  world  to  endure  good
and  evil.”

By  such  words  as  these,  and  others  which  I do  not  remember,  did  sir  John  de  Vienne
pacify  his  army  in  Scotland.  He  made  as  much  acquaintance  as  he  could  with  the  Scottish
barons  and  knights:  but  he  was  visited  by  so  very  few  it  is  not  worth  speaking  of ; for,  as
I have  said  before,  there  is  not  much  honour  there,  and  they  are  people  difficult  to  be
acquainted  with.  The  earls  of  Douglas  and  Moray  were  the  principal  visitants  to  the  lords
of  France.  These  two  lords  paid  them  more  attention  than  all  the  rest  of  Scotland.  But
this  was  not  the  worst,  for  the  French  were  hardly  dealt  with  in  their  purchases;  and
whenever  they  wanted  to  buy  horses,  they  were  asked,  for  what  was  worth  only  ten  florins,
sixty  and  a hundred  : with  difficulty  could  they  be  found  at  that  price.  When  the  horse
bad  been  bought  there  was  no  furniture  nor  any  housings  to  be  met  with,  unless  the
respective  articles  had  been  brought  with  them  from  Flanders.  In  this  situation  were  the
French  : besides,  whenever  their  servants  went  out  to  forage,  they  were  indeed  permitted  to
load  their  horses  with  as  much  as  they  could  pack  up  and  carry,  but  they  were  way-laid  on
their  return,  and  villanously  beaten,  robbed,  and  sometimes  slain,  insomuch  that  no  varlet
dared  go  out  foraging  for  fear  of  death.  In  one  month  the  French  lost  upwards  of  a hundred
varlets:  for  when  three  or  four  went  out  foraging  not  one  returned,  in  such  a hideous  manner
were  they  treated.

With  all  this  the  king  required  many  entreaties  before  he  would  come  forward:  the  knights
and  squires  of  Scotland  were  the  cause  of  this,  for  they  declared,  they  would  not  at  this
season  wage  war  with  England,  that  the  French  might  pay  more  dearly  for  their  coming.
Before  the  king  would  come  to  Edinburgh,  it  was  necessary  to  pay  him  a large  sum  of


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  Ac.


37


money  for  himself  and  his  courtiers.  Sir  John  de  Vienne  engaged,  under  his  seal,  that  he
would  never  quit  Scotland  until  the  king  and  his  people  were  perfectly  satisfied  : for,  had  he
not  done  so,  he  would  not  have  had  any  assistance  from  the  Scots.  lie  was  obliged  to  make
this  bargain  or  a worse  ; hut  however  advantageous  it  was  for  them,  and  whatever  affection
he  gained  by  it,  they  made  the  war  solely  profitable  for  themselves,  as  1 shall  relate  in  this
history.  At  present  I wish  to  return  to  what  was  passing  in  Flanders,  and  to  speak  of  the
marriage  of  the  young  king  of  France,  which  happened  at  this  period.


CHAPTER  CLXI. TnE  TOWN  OF  ARDEMBOURG*  NARROWLY  ESCAPES  BEING  TAKEN  BY  SUR-

PRISE BY  FRANCIS  ATREMEN  AND  II IS  GHENT  MEN.

After  the  defeat  of  the  detachment  of  sir  Rafflart  de  Flandres,  which  he  had  led  into  the
Quatre  Mestiers,  sir  Robert  de  Bethune,  viscount  de  Meaux,  came  to  Ardembourg,  whither
lie  had  been  sent  to  garrison  it.  lie  found  there  sir  John  de  Jumont  and  his  companions  :
he  had  also  brought  with  him  about  forty  knights,  who  were  eager  to  meet  with  adventures.
On  the  viscount’s  arrival,  he  began  to  repair  and  strengthen  the  fortifications  of  the  town.
Francis  Atremen  and  thoso  of  Ghent  were  constantly  devising  plans  to  annoy  their  enemies,
and  do  them  mischief.  Their  attention  was  particularly  directed  to  places  in  their
neighbourhood,  such  as  Oudenarde,  Dendremonde,  Ardembourg,  Damme,  Bruges  and  Sluys.
It  behoved  those  towns  to  keep  a strict  guard  and  watcli  well ; for  in  regard  to  storming
and  scaling  towns,  and  such  like  subtleties,  these  Ghent  men  Avere  very  skilful  and  alert.

About  the  end  of  May,  Francis  Atremen,  with  seven  thousand  armed  men,  sallied  out  of
Ghent,  with  the  intent  to  take  Ardembourg  by  surprise,  and  to  make  all  the  knights  and
squires  there  in  garrison  prisoners.  They  were  more  desirous  to  take  the  governor,  sir  John
de  Jumont,  than  all  the  rest;  for  he  had  done  them  much  mischief,  by  slaying  and  taking
their  people,  thrusting  out  their  eyes,  cutting  off  their  hands  or  ears,  so  that  they  could  not
loAre  him.  For  this  purpose,  they  came  on  Wednesday  at  day -break  to  Ardembourg,  having
with  them  their  ladders  ready  prepared.  Now  observe  what  great  peril  they  were  in  : the
viscount  de  Meaux,  sir  John  de  Jumont,  sir  Rafflart  de  Flandres,  the  lord  de  Daymart,  sir
Tiercelot  de  Montigny,  sir  Perducas  de  Port  St.  Marc,  the  lord  de  Longueval  and  sir  John
his  son,  sir  Hugh  Desnel,  the  lord  de  Lalain,  sir  Reginald  de  Lommie  and  several  more,
were  sleeping  quietly  in  their  beds,  trusting  to  the  watchfulness  of  the  guard  : but  the
guards  of  the  night  were  almost  all  retired,  and  the  watchman  was  mounting  his  post,  when
Francis  Atremen  and  his  Ghent  men,  with  their  ladders  on  their  shoulders,  had  crossed  the
ditches  and  fixed  their  ladders  to  the  walls,  which  the  foremost  had  begun  to  mount.

By  accident,  the  lord  de  St.  Aubin  and  a squire  from  Picardy,  called  Enguerrand
Zendequin,  were  at  this  moment  parading  the  town  close  by  the  walls  : they  had  with  them
three  picards  armed  with  pikes.  I believe  they  had  been  on  guard  this  night,  and  were
then  retiring.  To  say  the  truth,  if  they  had  not  been  where  they  were,  Ardembourg  must
infallibly  have  been  taken,  and  all  the  knights  in  their  beds.  When  the  lord  de  St.  Aubin
and  Enguerrand  Zendequin  perceived  the  Ghent  men  mounting  by  ladders  to  the  battlements,
and  that  one  of  them  was  actually  putting  his  leg  over  the  wall  to  enter  the  town,  they  were
very  much  alarmed,  but  not  so  much  as  to  prevent  them  defending  the  place : they  saw
clearly,  that  if  they  fled,  the  town  must  be  conquered  ; for  the  Ghent  men  had  arrived  there
so  opportunely  that  they  were  entering  it  just  between  the  time  of  the  dismissal  of  the  night-
guard  and  the  Avatclnnan  mounting  his  post.

“ Forward,  forAvard !”  cried  sir  Enguerrand  to  the  pikemen  : “here  are  our  enemies:
let  us  defend  ourselves  and  our  town,  or  it  is  taken.”  They  then  advanced  to  the  place
where  they  had  fixed  their  ladders  and  intended  entering.  The  pikemen  attacked  him  who
was  about  to  enter  so  vigorously  Avith  his  pike,  that  he  tumbled  into  the  ditch.  At  this
time,  the  Avatcli  Avas  at  his  post,  who,  noticing  the  large  battalion  in  the  ditches  and
thereabouts,  sounded  his  horn,  crying  out,  “ Treason,  treason  !”  The  town  Avas  in  motion,


* Ardembourg,  ten  miles  N.  E.  from  Bruges.


38


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


and  the  knights  heard  in  their  beds  the  noise  and  confusion,  and  also  how  the  Ghent
men  wanted  to  surprise  their  town.  They  were  very  much  astonished,  and  having  armed
themselves  as  speedily  as  they  could,  sallied  forth  against  them.  Notwithstanding  they
were  discovered,  the  Ghent  men  laboured  hard  to  enter  the  town  ; but  those  five  men  held
out  valiantly  against  them  for  upwards  of  half  an  hour,  and  performed  wonders  in  arms,  for
which  they  were  highly  praised.

The  lords  now  advanced  in  handsome  array ; the  viscount  de  Meaux  with  his  banner
before  him,  sir  John  de  Jumont  with  his  pennon,  sir  Rafflart  de  Flandres  and  all  the  others,
shouting  their  war-cries,  and  found  the  knight  and  squire,  with  the  three  pikemen,  defending
the  walls  most  gallantly.  When  Francis  Atremen  and  the  Ghent  men  found  their  scheme
had  failed,  they  called  back  their  men  and  retreated  in  a handsome  manner  into  the  Quatre
Mestiers.

The  garrison  were  more  attentive  in  guarding  their  town  for  the  future,  and  in  posting
their  sentinels.  They  honoured  greatly  their  five  defenders ; for,  if  they  had  not  been  there,
Ardembourg  had  been  lost,  and  all  their  throats  cut.


CHAPTER  CLXII. LEWIS  OP  PRANCE,  BROTHER  TO  KING  CHARLES  VI.  IS  MARRIED  BY  PRO-
CURATION TO  MARGARET  OP  HUNGARY. MADAME  DE  BRABANT  CAUSES  THE  DAUGHTER

OF  DUKE  STEPHEN  OP  BAVARIA  TO  COME  TO  FRANCE  TO  MARRY  KING  CHARLES.

You  have  before  heard  how  the  duke  of  Anjou,  who  styled  himself  king  of  Naples,  Sicily,
and  Jerusalem,  had  carried  on  a war  for  three  years  in  la  Puglia,  Calabria  and  Naples,
against  Charles  de  Durazzo,  and  that  during  that  war  he  had  died*.  His  opponent  was
dead  also.  It  was  said  he  was  killed  in  Hungary  with  the  consent  of  the  queen ; for,  after
the  death  of  the  king  of  Hungary,  being  the  son  of  his  brother,  he  wished  to  maintain  that
the  kingdom  had  devolved  to  him,  as  the  king  of  Hungary  had  left  no  male  issue.  The
queen,  suspecting  his  intentions  to  disinherit  her  daughter,  had  him  put  to  death  *f*.  This
event  caused  much  wonder  everywhere  ; and  the  war  of  the  queen  of  Naples  and  her  son
Lewis,  who  resided  in  Avignon,  was  more  strenuously  carried  on  in  Provence.

During  the  lifetime  of  the  late  king  of  Hungary,  the  great  barons  and  prelates  had  advised
that  the  eldest  of  his  daughters,  the  lady  Margaret  J,  who  was  very  handsome,  and  was
likewise  heiress  to  the  kingdom,  should  be  given  to  Lewis  count  de  Valois,  brother  to  the  king
of  France,  because  they  thought  he  would  reside  in  Hungary,  and  the  king,  had  he  lived,
would  have  followed  this  advice.

After  the  decease  of  the  king  of  Hungary,  ambassadors  were  sent  to  France,  to  the  king
and  his  uncles,  to  notify  the  wish  of  the  queen  of  Hungary  to  unite  the  count  de  Valois  with
her  eldest  daughter.  This  seemed  to  the  king  and  the  barons  of  France  as  if  it  was  very
desirable,  except  that  it  would  separate  and  place  at  too  great  a distance  the  count  de  Valois
from  his  family  and  the  powerful  kingdom  of  France.  On  the  other  hand,  they  considered
it  was  a grand  as  well  as  a profitable  offer  for  the  count  de  Valois  to  be  king  of  Hungary,  which
is  one  of  the  greatest  realms  in  Christendom.  The  Hungarians  sent  by  the  queen  were
magnificently  received,  and  large  presents  were  made  to  them.  The  bishop  de  Maillerets  and
John  de  Personne,  returned  with  them  as  ambassadors  from  France,  who,  on  their  arrival  in

* At  the  castle  of  Biseglia,  near  Bari.  ants  were  massacred.  Charles  survived  his  wounds,  but

"f  The  Hungarian  nobles,  tired  of  the  government  of  he  was  imprisoned  at  Visgradi,  and  on  the  3d  of  June  1386
two  women  (Elizabeth  the  wife  of  Louis,  and  Mary  his  poison  completed  the  work  left  unfinished  by  the  sword,
daughter)  and  their  favourites,  secretly  called  in  Charles  Sismondi’s  Italian  Repub. — Ed.

of  Durazzo,  who  in  spite  of  the  entreaties  of  his  wife  This  is  a mistake  ; the  lady’s  name  was  Mary , not

Margaret,  whom  he  appointed  regent  of  the  kingdom  of  Margaret ; Froissart  appears  to  have  been  also  misinformed
Naples,  set  sail  on  the  4th  September  1385,  for  Signa  in  regarding  the  proposed  alliance  between  her  and  the  count
Sclavonia,  and  was  proclaimed  king  by  the  nobles  unani-  de  Valois,  for  she  had  already  been  betrothed  to  Sigis-
mously,  in  a diet  held  at  Alba-Royal.  He  was,  however,  mond,  marquis  of  Brandenburg,  whom  sho  afterwards
in  February,  1 385,  old  style,  or  1386  new  style,  set  on  by  married,  and  no  mention  is  made  of  it  by  other  historians,
assassins  employed  by  the  queen’s  favourites,  and  brought  — Ed.
to  the  ground  by  a sabre  cut  on  the  head  ; all  his  attend-


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


89


Hungary,  espoused  by  procuration,  in  the  name  of  the  count  de  Yalois,  the  princess  Margaret.
J ohn  de  la  Personne  courteously  lay  on  a bed  beside  hers.  They  then  came  back  to  France,
and  showed  their  letters  patent  and  other  public  instruments,  which  gave  great  satisfaction
to  all  France  ; and  the  count  de  Valois  signed  himself  king  of  Hungary  for  a long  time.

You  have  before  heard  how  the  duke  of  Burgundy  and  duke  Albert  of  Bavaria,  lord  of
Hainault,  Holland,  Zealand,  and  Friseland,  had  intermarried  their  children  in  the  city  of
Cambray,  at  which  marriage  the  king  of  France  had  assisted  with  great  magnificence.  Some
seemed  to  say,  as  I was  then  informed,  that  the  same  week  the  king  and  all  his  nobles  were
at  this  marriage,  there  was  a secret  negotiation  for  a marriage  between  the  young  king  of
France  and  the  lady  Isabella,  daughter  of  duke  Stephen  of  Bavaria,  chiefly  through  the  means
of  the  duchess  of  Brabant.  The  late  king  of  France  had  on  his  dying-bed  ordered,  that  his
son  should  be  married,  if  possible,  to  a princess  of  Germany,  to  strengthen  the  union  of  France
with  that  country ; for  he  had  seen  that  the  king  of  England,  by  marrying  tbe  sister  of  the
emperor  of  Germany,  had  gained  by  it.  The  duchess  of  Brabant  was  a lady  of  a very  active
mind ; she  conversed  with  the  king’s  uncles  and  his  council,  while  in  the  city  of  Cambray,
on  this  subject,  explaining  to  them,  that  as  this  young  lady  was  the  daughter  of  a great  lord
in  Germany,  and  the  most  powerful  in  Bavaria,  through  him  great  alliances  might  be  made
in  that  country  ; that  duke  Stephen  was  so  potent,  he  could  well  break  the  purposes  of  the
great  lords  of  the  empire  ; for  he  was  as  powerful,  if  not  more  so,  than  the  emperor.  This
object  made  the  council  of  France  listen  more  readily  to  the  proposal : it  was,  however,
carried  on  with  the  utmost  secrecy,  and  very  few  knew  anything  of  it  until  it  was  settled.
The  reason  for  this  you  shall  hear.  It  is  customary  in  France,  for  the  lady  destined  to  be
married  to  the  king,  however  high  may  be  her  birth,  to  be  examined  quite  naked  by  ladies,
whether  she  be  well  made,  and  have  no  apparent  hindrance  to  her  bearing  children.  As  this
lady  was  to  come  from  so  distant  a country  as  Bavaria,  they  were  ignorant  if  she  would  be
agreeable  to  the  king,  for  otherwise  every  thing  would  be  broken  off.  These  were  the  reasons
why  this  affiiir  was  kept  so  secret.  About  Whitsuntide  the  young  lady  was  brought  to  the
duchess  in  Brabant,  who  received  her  very  cordially,  and  accustomed  her  to  the  usages  in
France.  She  was  accompanied  by  duke  Frederick  of  Bavaria,  her  uncle,  by  whom,  in  truth,
this  marriage  was  first  moved,  for  the  causes  which  I will  explain  to  you.

When  duke  Frederick  was  before  Bourbourg,  in  the  service  of  the  king,  he  was  much
feasted  by  the  king’s  uncles,  and  the  other  nobles,  for  having  come  two  hundred  leagues  to
serve  France.  They  considered  his  services  as  very  great ; and  he  always  quartered  near  the
king,  out  of  affection  to  him,  and  had  the  greatest  respect  paid  him.  When  he  left  Bavaria,
he  thought  that  there  must  be  a pitched  battle,  between  the  kings  of  France  and  of  England,
either  in  France  or  Flanders,  for  such  had  been  the  current  report  in  Germany.  The  king
of  France  and  his  uncles  were  very  thankful  for  his  coming.  It  happened,  that  during  the
expedition  to  Bergues  and  Bourbourg,  the  king’s  uncles  and  other  nobles,  in  amicable
conversation,  had  asked  him  if  he  had  no  daughters  to  marry  ? for  they  wanted  a wife  for  the
king  of  France  ; and  they  would  prefer  marrying  him  to  Bavaria  than  elsewhere,  Bavaria
having  formerly  been  in  the  councils  of  France.  Duke  Frederick,  in  reply  to  this  speech,
said  he  had  none  himself,  but  that  his  brother,  duke  Stephen  of  Bavaria,  had  a very  handsome
one.  “ And  how  old  is  she  ?"  demanded  the  king’s  uncles.  “ Between  thirteen  and
fourteen,”  replied  the  duke.  Then,  said  the  uncles,  “ This  is  what  we  want.  Do  you,
on  your  return  to  Bavaria,  talk  with  your  brother,  and  conduct  your  niece,  as  if  in  pilgrimage,
to  St  John  at  Amiens,  and  the  king  shall  be  placed  beside  her.  Should  he  find  her
handsome,  we  hope  he  will  be  desirous  of  her,  fur  he  loves  beauty ; and  if  he  appear  eager  for
her,  she  shall  be  queen  of  France.”  This  was  the  beginning  of  the  business,  and  neither  more
nor  less  was  said  on  the  subject.  The  king  of  France  was  ignorant  that  anything  had  been
mentioned  respecting  bis  marriage.

Duke  Frederick,  on  his  return  to  Bavaria,  repeated  these  words  to  his  brother,  who
pondered  some  time  on  them,  and  thus  answered,  “ Fair  brother,  I believe  such  speeches  have
been  made  to  you,  and  that  my  daughter  would  be  very  fortunate  if  such  a high  honour  as
to  become  the  queen  of  France  should  fall  to  her  lot ; but  the  distance  is  great  from  hence,
and  it  is  a matter  of  great  consideration  to  attempt  the  making  a queen.  I should  be


40


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


exceedingly  vexed  if,  after  having  carried  my  daughter  to  France,  she  should  be  returned  to
me  : and  I would  rather  marry  her  at  my  leisure,  nearer  home.”  Such  was  the  answer  duke
Stephen  gave  his  brother,  with  which  he  was  contented  : and  he  wrote  the  substance  of  it  to
the  uncles  of  the  king,  to  his  own  uncle,  duke  Albert,  and  to  madame  de  Brabant,  to  whom
he  had  communicated  the  business  on  his  return  home.  They  thought  he  had  been  too
indifferent  about  it,  and  had  made  overtures  elsewhere,  on  the  subject  of  the  king’s  marriage.
A match  was  shortly  after  proposed  between  the  king  and  the  daughter  of  the  duke  of
Lorraine : she  was  a very  handsome  lady,  and  neai'ly  of  his  own  age : of  high  birth,  being  of
the  family  of  Blois.  The  duke  of  Lancaster’s  daughter,  afterwards  queen  of  Portugal,  was
also  talked  of,  but  this  could  not  be  brought  about  on  account  of  the  war  : the  affair  was
therefore  at  a stand.

The  duchess  of  Brabant,  when  at  these  marriages  at  Cambray,  and  the  king  and  his  court
present,  brought  this  subject  again  on  the  carpet,  saying,  that  a union  with  Bavaria  was  the
most  desirable  for  the  king,  on  account  of  the  alliances  that  might  be  formed  with  the
Germans.  “ It  is  so,  indeed,  lady,”  replied  the  king’s  uncles  ; “ but  we  now  hear  nothing
of  it.”  “ Be  you  silent,”  answered  the  duchess,  “ and  I will  make  such  advances  that  you
shall,  without  fail,  have  certain  intelligence  of  it  in  the  course  of  the  summer.”  The  promises
of  the  duchess  were  verified  ; for  she  managed  so  well,  that  duke  Stephen  allowed  his  brother,
duke  Frederic,  to  conduct  his  niece,  as  you  have  before  heard  : and  it  was  given  out  on  the
road,  that  they  were  going  on  a pilgrimage  to  St.  John  at  Amiens.  Every  body  believed
it ; for  the  Germans  are  fond  of  performing  pilgrimages,  and  it  is  one  of  their  customs.  After
duke  Frederick  and  his  niece,  the  lady  Isabella  of  Bavaria,  had  been  three  days  at  Brussels,
they  took  leave  of  the  duchess  : it  was,  however,  her  intention  to  be  at  Amiens  as  soon,  if  not
sooner,  than  they  were.

They  went  through  Ilainault  to  Quesnoy,  where  they  found  the  duke  and  duchess,  and
William  count  of  Ostrevant  and  his  wife ; by  all  of  whom  they  were  most  graciously
received,  for  duke  Albert  was  his  uncle.  They  were  much  surprised  at  their  coming,  and
enquired  the  reasons  of  it.  “ Certainly,”  said  duke  Frederick,  “ I have  had  much  difficulty
to  persuade  my  brother ; but,  as  you  see,  I have  at  last  brought  him  to  consent  that  I should
conduct  his  daughter  hither.  On  taking  leave,  he  called  me  aside  and  said,  ‘ Now,
Frederick,  my  fair  brother,  you  are  carrying  away  Isabella,  and  upon  no  certain  conditions ;
for  if  the  king  of  France  refuse  her,  she  will  be  for  ever  ruined : therefore,  consider  well  this
business,  for  should  you  bring  her  back,  you  will  never  have  a more  bitter  enemy  than  me
and  you  see,  my  good  uncle,  the  dangerous  situation  I am  in.”  “ Dear  nephew,  do  not  be
alarmed  ; for,  if  it  please  God,  she  shall  be  queen  of  France,  and  you  stand  acquitted  of  blame,
and  retain  the  affections  of  your  brother.”  They  remained  at  Quesnoy  for  three  weeks,
during  which  time  the  duchess,  who  was  very  able,  tutored  the  young  lady  of  Bavaria,  as  to
her  manners  and  appearance  ; and  did  not  allow  her  to  keep  the  clothes  she  then  wore,  as
being  too  plain  and  simple  for  the  French  fashions,  but  had  her  dressed  up  and  adorned  as  if
she  had  been  her  own  child.  When  all  had  been  properly  prepared,  the  duchess  and  her
daughter,  the  future  duchess  of  Burgundy,  set  out  in  great  magnificence  for  Amiens,  with  the
young  lady,  where  the  duchess  of  Brabant  was  already  arrived,  as  were  the  king,  the  duke
and  duchess  of  Burgundy,  and  the  council.

The  lord  de  la  Riviere,  sir  Guy  de  la  Trimouille,  with  many  barons  and  knights,  went  out
of  the  city  of  Amiens  to  meet  the  company  from  Ilainault,  whom  they  escorted  into  town
with  many  honours,  and  they  visited  each  other  out  of  love  and  affection.  But  the  king
could  hardly  close  his  eyes  that  night  from  the  desire  of  seeing  her  who  was  afterwards  his
spouse.  He  asked  the  lord  de  la  Riviere  when  he  should  see  her.  This  question  much
amused  the  ladies.  And  on  the  Friday  when  the  young  lady  was  dressed  for  the  occasion,
the  three  duchesses  presented  her  to  the  king.  She  instantly  kneeled  down  very  low,  but
the  king  directly  raised  her  up  by  the  hand,  and  continually  kept  his  eyes  upon  her : so  that
from  that  time  love  and  pleasure  pierced  his  heart.

The  constable,  observing  what  passed,  said  to  the  lord  de  Coucy,  “ By  my  faith,  this
lady  will  remain  with  us : the  king  cannot  take  his  eyes  off  her.”  When  the  ladies  had
remained  some  little  time  with  the  king,  they  took  leave  of  him,  and  carried  back  the  damsel.


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


41


But,  as  the  intentions  of  the  king  were  not  known,  the  duke  of  Burgundy  charged  the  lord
de  la  Riviere  to  sound  him  when  he  retired  to  his  closet,  which  he  diligently  did,  hy  saying,
“ Sire,  how  do  you  like  this  young  lady?  will  she  remain  with  us?”  “ Yes,  by  my  troth,
will  she,”  replied  the  king,  “ for  she  pleases  ns,  and  you  will  tell  my  good  uncle  of  Burgundy
to  hasten  the  business.”

When  the  lord  de  la  Riviere  had  heard  these  words,  he  repeated  them  to  the  duke  of
Burgundy,  who  announced  them  to  the  ladies  ; and  they  were  so  well  pleased  thereat,  they
began  carolling.  The  whole  court  were  joyous  on  the  occasion  ; and  it  was  intended  hy  the
king’s  uncles  to  celebrate  the  feast  at  Arras,  hut  it  did  not  please  the  king  to  go  further.
He  entreated  his  uncle  to  make  every  haste,  for  he  assured  him  that  he  wished  no  delay,  but
was  anxious  to  have  the  business  completed  in  the  good  city  of  Amiens.  “ Very  well,  my
lord,”  replied  the  duke,  “ it  shall  be  done  as  you  order.”

The  duke  of  Burgundy,  in  company  with  the  constable,  sir  Guy  de  la  Trimouille  and
several  others,  waited  on  madamc  de  Hainault,  and  found  her  niece  seated  beside  her.  The
duke  related  all  that  had  passed,  adding,  that  the  king  had  made  him  alter  his  intention  as
to  the  place  where  the  marriage  ceremony  was  to  be  performed  ; for  he  was  so  deeply  smitten,
that  he  had  owned  he  could  neither  sleep  nor  take  any  repose  on  account  of  her  whom  he
wished  for  his  wife,  but  on  the  morrow  they  would  cure  all  his  ailings.  The  duchess  went
out  in  a fit  of  laughter,  and  they  separated  from  each  other  with  much  joy  and  satisfaction.


CHAPTER  CLXIII. FRANCIS  ATREMEN  TAKES  DAMME. THOSE  OF  BRUGES  ATTEMPT

TO  RETAKE  IT.

On  a Saturday  night,  Francis  Atremen  marched  with  seven  thousand  men  from  the  Quatre
Mestiers,  whither  he  had  retreated  after  the  failure  of  his  attempt  on  Ardembourg : he  had
promised  his  townsmen,  on  his  departure,  that  he  would  never  return  until  he  had  taken  some
good  town.  The  Ghent  men  were  desirous  of  finding  the  French  employment,  so  that  they
should  be  unable  to  send  more  men  to  the  admiral  in  Scotland,  to  make  war  on  the  English  ;
for  it  was  currently  reported,  that  the  constable,  together  with  a large  body  of  men  at  arms
and  cross-bows,  was  about  to  embark  to  reinforce  those  sent  to  Scotland.

Francis  Atremen,  being  an  expert  man  at  arms,  sallied  out  one  Saturday  evening  from  the
country  called  Quatre  Mestiers,  and  when  it  was  dark,  advanced  to  the  walls  of  Bruges,  in
hopes  of  taking  it,  but  could  not.  When  he  found  he  could  do  nothing,  he  marched  towards
Damme,  and  met  his  spies  whom  he  had  sent  thither  and  round  that  neighbourhood  : they
told  him  he  would  do  well  to  advance  to  Damme,  for  sir  Roger  Guistelles  had  left  it,  and
only  women  were  there.  This  was  true ; for  he  had  gone  to  Bruges,  thinking  the  inhabitants
were  able  to  defend  themselves,  but  in  this  he  was  disappointed.  When  Francis  Atremen
heard  that  sir  Roger  de  Guistelles  was  not  in  Damme,  he  divided  his  men  into  two  divisions,
and,  taking  the  smallest,  said  to  the  other,  “ You  will  advance  to  that  gate,  and  make  no
attack  until  you  hear  our  trumpets  sound : then  attempt  the  barriers,  and  cut  down  and
destroy  all,  and  on  the  side  we  will  break  down  the  gate,  for  we  shall  never  enter  the  town
by  ladders.”

His  orders  were  punctually  obeyed.  He  advanced  with  the  smaller  division,  leaving  the
other  behind  him : the  foremost  marched  with  ladders  through  the  ditches,  where  they  met
with  no  resistance,  and,  having  passed  the  mud,  fixed  their  ladders  to  the  walls : on  entering
the  town,  they  sounded  their  trumpets  and  made  for  the  gates  without  opposition,  for  they
were  masters  of  the  place,  the  good  people  being  still  in  their  beds.  It  was  the  17th  day  of
July  when  Damme  was  thus  surprised.  They  advanced  to  the  gate,  and  broke  all  the  bars
of  it  with  strong  axes  : those  without  destroyed  the  barriers,  and  thus  all  sorts  of  people
entered  the  town.

The  inhabitants  began  to  be  in  motion ; but  it  was  too  late,  for  they  were  made  prisoners
in  their  houses,  and  those  whom  they  found  armed  were  slain  without  mercy.  Thus  was  the
good  town  of  Damme  taken,  wherein  they  found  much  wealth  : in  particular,  cellars  full  of
Malmsey  and  other  wines.  I heard  also  that  those  of  Bruges  had  brought  thither  great


42


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


riches  for  fear  of  a rebellion  of  the  populace  whom  they  suspected.  Francis  Atremen  was
much  rejoiced  on  being  master  of  Damme,  and  said,  “ Now  I have  well  kept  my  promise  to
Ghent : this  place  will  enable  us  to  conquer  Bruges,  Sluys,  and  Ardembourg.”  He  instantly
issued  a proclamation,  that  not  the  smallest  harm  or  insult  should  be  offered  to  the  noble
ladies  in  the  town  ; for  there  were  seven  ladies,  the  wives  of  knights,  who  had  come  thither
to  visit  madame  de  Guistelles,  who  was  with  child  and  near  lying-in.  After  having  pillaged
the  town  and  put  to  death  those  who  would  not  join  their  party,  they  began  to  repair  it.

When  those  in  Bruges  heard  of  this,  they  were  much  enraged,  and  not  without  cause  : they
instantly  armed  and  marched  to  Damme,  and  began  to  skirmish  and  attack  it  : but  it  was  of
no  avail,  for  they  lost  more  than  they  gained  : they  therefore  marched  back  to  Bruges.  You
may  suppose,  when  this  news  reached  Ghent,  they  were  much  pleased,  and  considered  it  as
a valiant  enterprise,  and  also  looked  on  Francis  Atremen  as  a gallant  soldier.


CHAPTER  CLXIV. KING  CHARLES  ESPOUSES  THE  LADY  ISABELLA  OP  BAVARIA.

HE  BESIEGES  DAMME.

We  will  return  to  the  marriage  of  king  Charles  of  France,  and  relate  how  it  was
concluded.  The  duchess  Margaret  of  Hainault,  who  had  the  young  queen  under  her  care,  on
the  morning  of  the  wedding  dressed  her  out  handsomely,  as  she  knew  well  how  to  do,  when
the  duchesses  of  Brabant  and  Burgundy  came  thither  grandly  attended  by  ladies  and  damsels.
These  three  ladies  conducted  the  lady  Isabella  of  Bavaria  in  the  richest  covered  cars  ever
seen,  with  a crown  on  her  head,  that  was  worth  all  the  wealth  of  the  country,  and  which  the
king  had  sent  to  her  a little  before.  The  bishop  of  Amiens  performed  the  marriage  ceremony
in  the  presence  of  the  lords  and  ladies  before  mentioned*.  After  the  mass  and  other
ceremonies  thereto  appertaining,  the  king,  with  the  lords,  ladies,  and  damsels  went  to  dinner,
which  was  very  sumptuous  and  magnificent,  and  that  day  the  counts  and  barons  served  at  it
in  grand  array.  After  dinner,  they  amused  themselves  in  different  manners,  which  continued
with  great  enjoyment  until  evening,  when  the  king  retired  with  his  bride.

The  feasts  were  continued  until  the  Tuesday  following,  when  news  was  brought  to  the
king  and  to  his  council  that  Francis  Atremen  had  taken  the  town  of  Damme.  A herald
arrived  at  the  same  time  from  the  duke  of  Bourbon,  who  brought  letters  that  Taillebourg,
with  its  castle  and  bridge,  had  been  subdued,  and  that  the  duke,  with  his  army,  was  on  full
march  to  besiege  Verteuil,  having  already  conquered  back  again  in  Poitou  and  Limousin,  six  _
fortresses.  This  news  rejoiced  somewhat  the  court,  and  made  them  indifferent  as  to  the  loss
of  Damme : but  it  was  determined  the  king  should  not  undertake  any  thing  until  he  had
marched  to  Flanders  and  re-taken  Damme.  He  declared  he  would  enter  the  Quatre  Mestiers,
from  whence  this  mischief  had  sprung,  and  would  not  leave  any  house  undestroyed.  Messengers
were  immediately  sent  over  the  kingdom  with  summons  for  every  man  at  arms  to  be  in
Picardy  by  the  first  of  August,  to  march  to  Damme.  This  was  soon  spread  through  France,
and  all  knights  and  squires  made  their  preparations  for  waiting  on  the  king  as  they  had  been
commanded.  This  same  day,  duke  Frederick  of  Bavaria,  duke  Albert,  and  the  other  barons
took  leave  of  the  king  and  departed  for  their  homes,  leaving  behind  the  lady  Isabella  of
Bavaria,  now  Queen  of  France  as  you  have  heard.  The  king  of  France,  who  had  sent  his
summons  through  the  realm,  declared  he  would  not  return  to  Paris  before  he  had  been  at
Damme.  On  the  twentieth  day  of  July  he  set  out  from  Amiens,  with  the  constable  and
many  lords,  and  came  to  Arras,  where  he  slept  one  night.  On  the  morrow  he  went  to  Lenst,
in  Artois  : men  at  arms  were  daily  coming  to  him  from  all  quarters.  He  continued  his
march  until  he  arrived  at  Ypres,  so  that  by  the  first  of  August  he  was  before  Damme,  and
quartered  himself  so  near  the  town  that  the  arrows  flew  over  his  head.

Three  days  afterward  arrived  William  of  Hainault,  who  was  very  welcome  to  the  king,
and  to  my  lord  of  Burgundy.  The  siege  was  laid  to  Damme  in  a handsome  manner,  and
Francis  Atremen  was  enclosed  within  it.  He  behaved  very  gallantly,  for  every  day  there
were  attacks  and  skirmishes,  unless  prevented  by  short  truces.  The  lord  de  Clary,  master

* The  marriago  took  place  on  the  18th  July,  1385. — Ed.  f “ Lens,” — four  leagues  from  Arras.


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


43


of  the  ordnance  to  the  lord  de  Coucy,  was  hit  by  an  arrow  * from  the  town,  which  caused

his  death  : it  was  a pity,  for  lie  was  a gallant  knight.  Those  of  Bruges  and  Ypres  came  to

this  siege  ; and  there  were  present  upwards  of  one  hundred  thousand  men.  The  king  was

quartered  between  Damme  and  Ghent.  The  lord  de  St.  Py  and  the  lord  de  Guistelles  were

the  commanders  of  the  Flemings:  they  had  about  twenty-five  lances,  and  quartered  themselves

amono-  them  for  fear  of  dissensions.

©

An  attack  was  made  on  Damme  at  which  all  the  lords  were  present.  William  of  Ilainault
was  made  a knight  by  the  king’s  hand,  and  that  day  he  displayed  his  banner  : during  the
course  of  the  siege  he  showed  himself  an  excellent  knight.  The  French,  by  this  assault,  lost
more  than  they  won,  for  Francis  Atremen  had  with  him  some  English  archers  who  sorely
galled  the  assailants : he  had  also  many  pieces  of  artillery,  for  the  town,  before  it  was
surprised,  was  well  provided ; and  Francis  had  ordered  more  thither  from  Ghent  when  he
knew  it  was  to  be  besieged.


CHAPTER  CLXV. SOME  CITIZENS  OF  SLUYS  ARE  BEHEADED  FOR  TREASON  TO  THE  FRENCH.

THE  DITKE  OF  BURGUNDY  ACQUIRES  SLUYS  FROM  SIR  WILLIAM  DE  NAMUR,  BY  AN

EXCHANGE  FOR  THE  LANDS  OF  BETHUNE.

During  the  siege  of  Damme,  some  of  the  principal  citizens  of  Sluys  who  governed  it,
were  accused  of  high  treason  against  the  king  of  France  : they  wanted  to  deliver  the  town
to  his  enemies,  to  murder  the  governor  and  all  his  garrison  in  their  beds,  and  to  set  fire  to  the
numerous  fleet  of  France,  which  was  then  at  anchor  in  their  port,  well  filled  with  all  sorts
of  stores.  Before  the  expedition  to  Damme,  the  king  of  France  had  intended  to  follow  his
admiral  to  Scotland.  These  wicked  people  of  Sluys  also  meant  to  destroy  the  dykes  of  the
sea,  and  drown  all  or  the  greater  part  of  the  army.  This  had  been  bargained  for  by  those
of  Ghent,  and  it  was  all  to  have  been  done  in  one  night : it  would  have  been  executed  if  one
of  the  inhabitants  of  the  town  had  not  overheard  the  malice  they  were  devising.  Fie  directly
went  to  the  governor  and  told  him  what  was  intended,  and  named  the  greater  part  of  the
conspirators.  The  knight  was  much  astonished  when  he  heard  of  this,  and  taking  with  him
his  garrison,  which  consisted  of  about  sixty  lances,  went  to  the  houses  of  the  different
conspirators,  whom  he  arrested  and  sent  to  separate  prisons  under  a strong  guard.  lie  then
mounted  his  horse,  and  hastened  to  the  king’s  tent,  before  Damme,  where  the  duke  of
Burgundy  at  that  time  chanced  to  be.  He  related  to  them  all  that  he  had  heard  and  done  :
how  near  the  town  was  being  lost,  and  his  army  drowned.  The  king  and  his  nobles  were
much  surprised ; and  the  governor  was  ordered  to  return  to  Sluys,  and  to  keep  his  prisoners
no  longer  confined,  but  instantly  to  put  them  to  death,  that  others  might  from  them  take
example.  The  governor,  on  his  return,  had  them  beheaded,  and  thus  ended  the  business.

This  same  week,  the  duke  of  Burgundy,  by  the  advice  of  sir  Guy  de  la  Trimouille,  who  had
last  summer  resided  at  Sluys  with  a considerable  force,  resolved  to  open  a negotiation  with
his  cousin,  sir  William  de  Namur,  to  obtain  that  town  by  exchange  for  other  lands,  to  add
it  to  the  country  of  Flanders,  which  lands  were  equally  profitable  as  to  revenue.  Sir  William
de  Namur  was  much  displeased  when  he  first  heard  this  proposal  for  an  exchange  ; for  the
town  of  Sluys,  with  its  dependencies  and  sea-rights,  was  a noble  and  profitable  inheritance :
it  had  also  devolved  to  him  from  his  ancestors,  which  made  him  like  it  the  more.  Notwith-
standing this,  since  the  duke  of  Burgundy  was  desirous  of  it,  he  found  it  necessary  to
comply.  It  was  the  intention  of  the  duke,  when  in  possession  of  it,  to  erect  there  a handsome
and  strong  castle,  like  to  Calais  and  other  places,  which  should  command  the  harbour  of
Sluys,  and  garrison  it  with  men  at  arms  and  archers,  so  that  none  could  approach  his
territories  without  danger  from  them.  He  said,  he  would  build  it  high  enough  to  see  from
it  twenty  leagues  at  sea.  In  short,  sir  William  was  so  hard  pressed  by  the  duke  and  his
council,  that  he  consented  to  the  exchange  of  Sluys  for  the  whole  territory  of  Bethune,
which  is  one  of  the  fairest  inheritances  of  the  whole  country.  It  was  given  to  him  and  to
his  heirs.  Immediately  afterwards,  the  duke  set  workmen  on  the  castle  he  intended  to
build  at  Sluys.  We  will  now  return  to  the  siege  of  Damme,  and  say  how  it  prospered.

* D.  Sauvage’s  edition  says,  that  the  lord  de  Clary,  whilst  approaching  the  town  to  view  the  guns  on  the  walls  was
struck  by  a quarrel  from  one  of  them,  not  by  an  arrow. — Ed.


44


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


CHAPTER  CLXVI. FRANCIS  ATREMEN  AND  IIIS  MEN  ABANDON  DAMME. TnE  TOWN  IS

DESTROYED  BY  THE  FRENCH  : THEY  ALSO  RUIN  THE  COUNTRY  OF  THE  QUATRE

MESTIERS.

There  were  several  skirmishes  almost  daily  at  the  barriers  of  Damme,  where  many  were
wounded  and  slain.  The  walls  could  not  be  approached  because  the  ditches  were  filled  with
mud  and  filth  : and,  if  it  had  been  rainy  weather,  the  army  would  have  had  enough  to  do,
and  must  have  decamped  whether  they  would  or  not : but  for  the  space  of  one  month,  during
which  this  siege  lasted,  there  never  fell  one  drop  of  rain.  They  had  provision  in  great
abundance ; but  the  stench  of  the  beasts  killed  by  the  army  and  the  dead  horses  corrupted
the  air,  and  caused  many  kinglits  and  squires  to  be  so  ill  and  low  spirited  that  they  retired  to
Bruges  or  elsewhere  : the  king  was  wont  to  lodge  at  Marie,  notwithstanding  his  tents  were
left  standing  in  the  camp.  It  was  the  intention  of  Francis  Atremen  to  hold  out  this  siege
till  the  reinforcements  which  he  expected  from  England  should  arrive  to  raise  it : for  it  is
certain  that  Francis,  and  the  men  of  Ghent,  had  sent  to  England  for  assistance.  The  uncles
of  the  king  of  England  would  undoubtedly  have  carried  over  a sufficiency  of  men  at  arms
and  archers,  if  the  admiral  of  France  had  not  at  that  time  been  in  Scotland  with  so  large  a
force.  It  was  confidently  said,  that  the  constable  was  to  reinforce  the  admiral  with  a greater
body  : by  which  means  the  Flemings  were  not  assisted,  and  those  of  Damme  were  forced  to
make  a bad  bargain  of  it ; for  on  the  27th  day  of  August,  1385,  was  the  town  of  Damme
conquered  back  again.

When  Francis  Atremen  found,  after  the  king  of  France  had  besieged  him  for  a month,
that  he  was  not  to  expect  any  succour,  and  that  his  artillery  began  to  fail,  he  was  much  cast
down,  and  said  to  those  of  his  council, — “ I will,  that  all  of  us  from  Ghent  return  home  :
but  let  it  be  made  known  to  them  secretly,  so  that  none  of  the  town  be  informed  of  our
intended  departure,  and  attempt  to  save  themselves,  with  their  wives  and  children,  by
sacrificing  us.  They  would  obtain  peace,  and  we  should  be  slain  : but  I must  take  good
care  to  prevent  this  ; for  we  will  keep  in  a body,  and  go  round  the  town  to  visit  the  guard.
W e will  secure  all  the  inhabitants,  not  having  arms,  in  the  churches,  and  give  them  to
understand,  we  do  so  because  we  expect  a grand  attack  to  be  made  to-morrow,  and  do
not  wish  them  to  suffer  from  it.  We  must  tell  the  guard  of  the  night  that  we  intend  to  beat
up  the  enemy’s  quarters,  and  the  moment  we  are  in  the  plain  we  will  spur  for  the  fastest  to
Ghent.”  His  council  replied,  that  he  had  well  spoken.  Every  man  made  his  preparation
accordingly,  and  in  the  evening  packed  up  their  all,  and  put  the  women,  children  and  lower
sort  of  people  in  the  churches  : they  even  ordered  thither  the  ladies  of  the  knights  who  were
prisoners,  telling  them,  that  on  the  morrow  there  was  to  be  a grand  attack,  and  they  wished
them  not  to  be  frightened  : all  this  was  thought  very  proper.

The  first  hour  of  the  night  the  Ghent  men  went  their  rounds : there  were  none  of  their
townsmen  on  the  walls,  but  only  those  of  Damme.  Francis  Atremen  said  to  them, — “ Keep
up  a strict  watch  about  midnight  ; and  on  no  account,  whatever  you  may  see  or  hear,  quit
the  battlements,  for  in  the  morning  we  shall  be  attacked  ; but  I am  resolved  this  night  to
beat  up  their  quarters.”  His  words  were  believed,  for  they  thought  he  was  speaking  the
truth.  After  Francis  Atremen  had  arranged  all  his  business,  he  ordered  the  gate  to  be
opened,  and  sallied  forth  with  those  his  townsmen  from  Ghent.  They  were  not  half  a
league  from  the  town  when  day  appeared,  and  the  inhabitants  discovered  that  Francis
and  his  companions  were  gone  off : they  we  much  disheartened : but  their  leaders  began  to
negotiate  with  those  belonging  to  the  king,  and  said  they  had  killed  Francis  Atremen  the
preceding  evening.

Several  of  the  town,  understanding  that  Francis  Atremen  was  gone  away,  and  the  gate
still  open,  set  out  from  the  town  as  fast  as  they  were  able.  When  this  news  arrived  at  the
camp,  the  Bretons  and  Burgundians,  who  were  eager  for  pillage,  mounted  their  horses,  and
pursued  them  within  two  leagues  of  Ghent : several  were  slain,  and  upwards  of  five  hundred
made  prisoners  ; they  were  not  from  Ghent,  but  the  inhabitants  of  Damme  who  were  running
away.  Whilst  they  were  pursuing  them  on  all  sides,  the  town,  now  defenceless,  was


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


45


attacked  : the  French  entered  it  at  different  parts  by  ladders,  which  they  carried  over  the
ditches  with  much  difficulty.  When  they  had  entered,  they  imagined  they  should  roll  in
riches  ; hut  they  found  nothing,  except  poor  people,  women  and  children,  and  great  quantities
of  good  wines.  In  spite,  therefore,  they  set  fire  to  the  town  and  burnt  almost  the  whole  of
it.  The  king,  and  duke  of  Burgundy  were  much  vexed  at  this,  hut  they  could  not  prevent
it.  The  noble  ladies  were,  however,  saved,  hut  with  some  difficulty,  from  having  any  harm
done  to  their  persons.

After  Damme  had  been  thus  regained  hy  France,  the  king  was  advised  to  decamp  and  to
fix  his  own  quarters  at  a small  town  two  leagues  from  Ghent  called  Artavelle,  and  that,
during  the  time  he  should  he  there,  the  men  at  arms  should  scour  the  country  of  the  Quatre
Mestiers,  and  completely  destroy  it ; because,  in  former  times,  all  sorts  of  provision  were
sent  from  thence  to  Ghent,  and  more  assistance  given  to  that  town  from  those  countries  than
from  any  others.  The  king  of  France  and  his  army  marched  from  before  Damme : he  took
up  his  quarters  at  Artavelle  ; during  which  time  the  men  at  arms  destroyed  the  country,
burning  all  houses,  monasteries  and  forts  which  had  held  out  for  them.  They  left  not  any
house  whole,  and  killed  or  drove  into  the  woods  all  the  women  and  children.  When  the
French  had  completed  this  destruction,  they  were  ordered  to  march  and  lay  siege  to  the  castle
of  Gaure,  and  afterwards  to  do  the  same  to  Ghent.  But  all  this  ended  in  nothing.


CHAPTER  CLXVII. THE  KING  OF  FRANCE  LEAVES  FLANDERS,  AND  DISBANDS  niS  ARMY.

DURING  TnE  TIME  HE  IS  AT  PARIS,  TREATING  WITH  AMBASSADORS  FROM  HUNGARY,
NEWS  ARRIVES  THAT  THE  MARQUIS  DE  BLANCQUEFORT  * HAD  FORCIBLY  MARRIED
THE  HEIRESS  OF  HUNGARY.


Intelligence  was  brought  to  the  king,  while  at  Artavelle,  that  the  queen  of  Hungary
had  sent  the  bishop  of  Vassereul,  attended  by  several  knights  and  squires  as  her  ambassadors,
who  had  brought  credential  letters  to  say  that  they  were  come  to  seek  for  the  lord  Lewis  of
France,  count  de  Valois,  and  who  signed  himself  king  of  Hungary,  to  conduct  him  to  his
wife  in  Hungary,  whom  John  de  la  Personne,  a French  knight,  had  espoused  by  procuration
for  the  said  Lewis  count  de  Valois.  This  news  pleased  greatly  the  king  and  his  council,
■who,  being  desirous  of  properly  equipping  the  young  count  de  Valois,  resolved  to  return  to
France,  saying  they  had  done  enough  for  this  season.  The  king  set  out  from  Artavelle  the
12th  day  of  September,  and  disbanded  all  his  men  at  arms,  when  each  returned  to  his  home.
The  men  of  Ghent  were  much  delighted  at  this  event.

The  king  went  to  Cray  f,  where  the  queen  resided  ; for,  when  he  left  Amiens  to  go  to
Flanders,  she  was  sent  thither  to  hold  her  court.  I know  not  how  many  days  he  staid  there
with  her ; hut,  when  they  left  it,  the  king  came  to  Paris,  and  the  queen  went  to  Vincennes,
where  she  resided  a while,  for  they  were  busily  employed  in  the  equipment  of  the  young  count,
as  they  were  anxious  he  should  have  furniture  and  attendants  suitable  to  his  rank  as  king  of
Hungary  ; hut  things  in  a short  time  turned  out  differently  in  Hungary,  as  you  shall  hearj.


* This,  I suppose,  should  be  Brandenburgh.

t “ Cray.”  Q.  If  not  Craonne,  which  is  a town  in
Picardy.

J There  must  be  some  mistake,  or  perhaps  Froissart
was  misinformed,  for  I cannot  find  any  mention  of  the
crown  of  Hungary  being  offered  to  the  count  de  Valois.
Underneath  is  all  that  is  said  of  the  matter  in  the  “ Art  de
Verifier  les  Dates.”

Mary,  surnamed  King  Mary . — Marv,  daughter  of
Charles  the  Great,  was  crowned  in  Albe  Royale,  or  Stul
Weissemliourg,  in  the  year  1382,  under  the  name  of  King
Mary.  As  she  was  too  young  to  govern  the  kingdom,
the  regency  was  given  to  her  mother  queen  Elizabeth.
Nicholas  de  Gara  having  gained  the  confidence  of  the  two
prncesses,  ruled  despotically  in  their  names,  insomuch  that
it  excited  great  murmurs  among  the  Hungarians.  In  the
year  1385,  Charles  le  Petit,  king  of  Naples,  at  the  solici-
tations of  the  discontented  party,  arrives  at  Buda,  seizes


the  government,  and  caused  himself  to  be  crowned  king  of
Hungary  in  Albe  Royale  the  31st  of  September,  in  the
same  year.  On  the  5th  of  February  following,  he  is
assassinated  in  Buda,  by  order,  and  in  the  presence  of
Elizabeth. — On  the  1st  of  May,  1386,  John  Horwarh,
ban  of  Croatia,  surprises  the  two  queens,  attended  by
Nicholas  de  Gara,  while  on  a journey  : he  massacres  the
last  before  their  eyes,  drowns  Elizabeth  the  ensuing  night,
and  carries  off  Mary  prisoner  to  Croatia.  Sigismond,
marquis  of  Brandenbourg,  flies,  on  hearing  this,  to  deliver
Mary,  to  whom  he  was  betrothed.  He  joins  her  at  Albe
Royale,  whither  she  had  been  sent,  marries  her  at  that
town,  and  is  crowned  king  of  Hungary  on  the  10th  of
June,  Whitsunday,  being  only  twenty  years  old.  The
ban  of  Croatia  was  this  same  year  arrested  by  his  order,
and  expiated  his  crimes  by  tortures.  Mary  died  at  Buda,
1392.  Her  body  was  buried  at  Peter- Waradin.


46


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


True  it  is,  that  the  queen-mother  of  Hungary  took  great  delight  in  the  idea  of  Lewis  of  France
being  king  of  Hungary,  and  considered  her  daughter  as  married  to  him.  She  wished  not  for
any  other  but  him  for  her  son-in-law  ; and  with  this  intent  she  had  sent  the  bishop  of
Vassereul,  with  many  knights  and  squires,  to  conduct  him  to  his  queen.

It  happened,  that  while  these  ambassadors  were  on  their  road  to  France,  the  emperor  of
Germany,  who  styled  himself  king  of  the  Romans,  had  a brother  younger  than  himself,  called
Henry  de  Blancquefort*.  The  king  of  the  Romans  had  been  informed  of  the  state  of
Hungary,  of  the  treaties  which  had  been  entered  into  with  the  count  Louis  de  Valois,  and
that  the  before  named  ambassador  was  gone  to  conduct  him  to  Hungary.  The  king  of
the  Romans  loved  his  brother’s  interest  more  than  his  cousin’s,  had  long  considered  this
business,  and  had  already  arranged  it  in  his  mind  to  bring  it  cautiously  and  secretly  about
according  to  his  own  plan  ; for,  had  the  queen  of  Hungary  had  the  slightest  intimation  of  his
intent,  she  would  have  guarded  effectually  against  it : but  it  was  clear  she  had  not.

It  was  known  to  the  council  in  Germany,  that  the  queen  of  Hungary  and  her  daughter
were  gone  to  a castle  near  the  borders  of  Germany,  to  amuse  themselves : upon  which,  the
marquis  de  Blancquefort  set  off  with  a large  body  of  men  at  arms,  ten  thousand  at  least,  to
lay  siege  to  this  castle  and  enclose  the  ladies  within  it.  The  queen,  on  perceiving  her
situation,  was  thunderstruck,  and  sent  to  know  from  the  marquis  why  he  thus  kept  hereon-
fined,  and  what  he  wanted.  The  marquis  sent  for  answer,  “ it  was  done  solely  because  she
intended  marrying  her  daughter  to  the  brother  of  the  king  of  France,  who  was  a stranger,
and  from  whom  she  could  never  have  any  comfort adding,  that  “ it  would  be  better  and  more
advantageous  for  the  kingdom  of  Hungary,  if  he,  who  was  her  neighbour,  should  marry  her,
than  another,  who  came  from  such  a distant  country  as  Louis  de  Valois.”  The  queen
answered,  that  she  had  never  before  heard  one  word  of  his  pretensions,  and  for  that  reason
had  consented  to  her  daughter’s  union  with  the  brother  of  the  king  of  France  : besides,  the
king  of  Hungary,  during  his  lifetime,  had  ordered  her  so  to  do.”  To  this  the  marquis
replied,  that  “ he  paid  little  attention  to  what  she  said ; that  he  had  the  consent  and  good-
will of  the  greater  part  of  the  Hungarian  nation,  and  that  he  would,  by  fair  means  or
otherwise,  have  her,  now  she  was  in  his  power.”  The  lady  was  much  cast  down  at  these
words,  but,  notwithstanding,  held  out  as  well  as  she  could  ; and,  though  she  sent  to  her
subjects  to  come  to  her  assistance,  none  obeyed,  nor  did  they  make  the  least  movement
against  the  marquis,  which  plainly  showed  the  Hungarians  preferred  the  Germans  to 'the
French.

When  the  queen  found  she  was  not  to  expect  any  assistance  from  her  subjects,  she  began
to  listen  to  reason  ; for  the  marquis  threatened  her,  that  if  she  suffered  the  castle  to  be  taken
by  storm  he  would  confine  her  in  a tower,  where  she  should  have  only  bread  and  water,  as
long  as  she  lived.  These  menaces  frightened  her,  for  the  place  was  weak,  and  she  had  come
thither  without  enough  of  men  or  provision.  She  therefore  entered  into  a treaty  with  the
marquis  ; and  in  this  situation  she  gavo  him  her  daughter,  who  was  directly  married,  and  he
instantly  went  to  bed  to  her.

Thus  did  sir  Henry  of  Bohemia,  marquis  de  Blancquefort,  gain  the  inheritance  of
Hungary,  of  which  he  was  king  rather  through  force  than  love,  with  regard  to  the  consent
of  the  queen-dowager;  but  she  was  obliged  to  abide  by  this  bargain,  or  worse  might  have
happened.  News  of  this  was  soon  published,  and  it  was  sent  to  the  bishop  and  knights  of
Hungary  who  were  on  their  return  from  France;  for  the  count  de  Valois,  having  completed
his  arrangements,  had  proceeded  as  far  on  his  journey  as  Troyes.  He  was  much  enraged  when
this  event  was  told  him  ; hut  he  could  not  any  way  remedy  it.  The  Hungarians  departed
very  angry,  as  indeed  they  had  reason  ; and  the  young  count  de  Valois  returned  to  his
brother  and  uncles  at  Paris,  who,  having  never  depended  much  on  this  marriage,  said,  “the
count  de  Valois  was  fortunate  in  having  his  wife  taken  from  him,  for  Hungary  was  a distant
country,  and  out  of  reach  of  the  French,  from  whence  they  could  never  have  had  any

* Tlcis  should  be  Sigismond  marquis  of  Brandenburg;  his  infancy.  The  whole  story  concerning  the  count  do
he  was  a son  of  the  emperor  Charles  IV.  and  brother  of  the  Valois  is  very  apocryphal  ; no  other  historian  mentions
emperor  Wenccslaus,  and  had  been  betrothed  to  Mary  in  it. — Ed.


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


47


assistance.”  These  considerations  made  them  indifferent  about  it,  and  induced  them  to  think
of  another  connection  for  him.  This  was  the  duke  of  Milan’s  daughter,  heiress  of  Lombardy,
which  territory  is  more  valuable  than  all  Hungary,  and  nearer  at  hand  to  the  French.

We  will  leave  these  marriages,  and  speak  of  the  duke  of  Bourbon,  who,  having  taken
Taillebourg,  was  in  Poitou  besieging  Verteuil;  and  return  to  the  admiral  of  France  in
Scotland,  and  say  how  he  went  on.


CHAPTER  CLXVIII. THE  DUKE  OF  BOURBON  TAKES  VERTEUIL  IN  POITOU,  AND  RETURNS  TO

THE  KING  OF  FRANCE  AT  PARIS.

During  the  time  the  king  was  before  Damme,  the  duke  of  Bourbon,  with  a handsome
body  of  men  at  arms,  made  his  excursion  into  Poitou  and  Limousin,  where  he  took  many
English  castles  and  forts,  such  as  Archeac,  Garnate,  Montlieu  eight  leagues  from  Bordeaux,
and  Taillebourg  on  the  Charente  ; he  then  laid  siege  to  Verteuil,  a strong  castle  in  Poitou,
on  the  borders  of  Limousin  and  Saintonge.  Andrew  Prior  an  Englishman,  and  Bertrand
de  Montrinet,  a Gascon,  were  governors  of  Verteuil,  and  had  with  them  numbers  of  stout
companions.  There  were  skirmishes,  therefore,  almost  daily  at  the  barriers,  and  many  gallant
deeds  of  arms  done,  in  which  several  were  slain  or  wounded.  The  duke  declared  he  would
not  move  from  thence  until  he  was  master  of  the  castle,  for  to  this  effect  had  he  given  his
promise  the  last  time  he  had  conversed  with  the  duke  of  Berry.

It  happened  that  while  Bertrand  de  Montrinet,  one  of  the  governors,  was  planning  a ditch
to  be  made  within  the  castle  to  add  to  its  strength,  and  showing  his  people  how  to  bank  it,
a stone,  shot  from  a dondaine*  by  the  besiegers,  wounded  him  mortally,  and  caused  his
instant  death.  This  Bertrand  had  escaped  from  sixteen  very  dangerous  sieges.  Ilis
companions  lamented  much  his  death  ; but,  as  that  was  now  irretrievable,  Andrew  remained
sole  governor.  Fifteen  days  afterwards,  negotiations  were  opened,  and  a treaty  concluded,
that  the  garrison  should  surrender  the  castle,  with  all  its  provisions,  on  being  conducted  in
safety  to  Bouteville,  of  which  place  Durandon  de  la  Perede  was  governor.  Thus  did  the
French  gain  the  castle  of  Verteuil,  which  they  afterwards  repaired  and  reinforced  with  stores,
artillery  and  men  at  arms.  They  then  marched  to  an  adjoining  town  called  Cares,  and,
when  they  departed  thence,  came  to  Limoges,  where  the  duke  of  Bourbon  remained  full
eight  days.  He  was  advised  to  return  to  Paris,  which  he  did,  and  found  the  king  with  his
nephew  the  count  de  Valois,  who  received  him  with  great  jov.

We  will  now  return  to  the  affairs  in  Scotland,  and  speak  of  the  admiral  of  France.


CHAPTER  CI.XIX. THE  SCOTTISH  ARMY  WITH  THAT  OF  THE  ADMIRAL  OF  FRANCE  ENTER

NORTHUMBERLAND, BUT  THE  ENGLISH,  BEING  ON  THEIR  MARCH  TO  MEET  THEM,

THEY  RETREAT  WITHIN  THE  BORDERS.

You  have  before  heard  how  the  admiral  of  France,  with  a large  body  of  men  at  arms,
had  landed  at  the  port  of  Edinburgh,  and  that  they  found  it  a very  different  country  from
what  they  had  expected  from  the  accounts  of  the  barons  of  Scotland.  The  king’s  council
and  other  barons  had  told  those  knights  who  had  been  in  Scotland  last  year,  particularly  sir
Geoffry  de  Charny  and  sir  Amyard  de  Marse,  that  if  the  seneschal,  the  constable  or  the
admiral  of  France  would  cross  the  sea  to  Scotland  with  a thousand  good  lances  and  five
hundred  cress-bows,  with  armour  for  a thousand  Scotsmen  and  proper  equipments  for  the
leaders,  with  their  assistance  the  rest  of  Scotland  would  make  such  a fatal  irruption  into
England,  it  would  never  recover  the  blow.  With  this  expectation  had  the  French  crossed
the  sea,  but  had  not  found  these  promises  realised.  In  the  first  place,  they  met  with  savage
people,  bad  friends  and  a poor  country ; and  the  knights  and  squires  knew  not  where  to  send

* “ Dondaine,’’ — a large  machine  to  throw  stones  from.


48  CHRONICLES  OE  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  & c.

their  varlets  to  forage,  for  they  dared  not  do  so  except  in  very  large  parties  for  fear  of  the
wicked  people  of  the  country,  who  lay  in  wait  for  them,  attacked  and  killed  them.

At  last,  king  Robert  of  Scotland  arrived,  with  red  bleared  eyes,  of  the  colour  of  sandal-
wood, which  clearly  showed  he  was  no  valiant  man,  but  one  who  would  rather  remain  at
home  than  march  to  the  field : he  had,  however,  nine  sons  who  loved  arms.  On  the  kino-’s
arrival  at  Edinburgh,  the  barons  of  France  waited  on  him  to  pay  him  their  respects,  as  they
well  knew  how  to  do  : the  earls  of  Douglas,  Moray,  Mar,  Sutherland,  and  several  more,


King  Robert  of  Scotanld  and  his  Nine  Sons  who  loved  arms.  Designed  fiom  Contemporary  Illuminations.


were  at  this  interview.  The  admiral  requested  the  king  to  fulfil  the  terms  on  which  they
had  come  to  Scotland  ; for  that  on  his  part  he  was  resolved  to  enter  England.  Those  barons
of  Scotland  who  were  eager  to  advance  themselves  were  much  rejoiced  at  hearing  this,  and
replied,  that  if  it  pleased  God,  they  would  make  such  an  inroad  as  should  be  both  profitable
and  honourable.

The  king  issued  his  summons  for  a very  large  armament : on  the  day  fixed  for  their
assembling  at  Edinburgh,  there  were  thirty  thousand  men  on  horseback,  who  as  they  arrived
took  up  their  quarters  after  the  manner  of  the  country,  but  they  had  not  every  thing
comfortable.  Sir  John  de  Vienne  was  very  impatient  to  make  an  excursion  and  to  afford
his  men  opportunities  of  performing  gallant  deeds  of  arms  in  England : he  no  sooner  saw
the  arrival  of  the  Scottish  men  at  arms  than  he  said  it  w7as  time  to  march,  for  they  had
remained  idle  too  long.  The  departure  was  then  proclaimed,  and  they  took  their  march
towards  Roxburgh.  The  king  was  not  with  the  army,  but  remained  at  Edinburgh  :
however,  all  his  children  accompanied  it.  The  thousand  * complete  sets  of  armour  brought
from  France  were  delivered  to  the  Scottish  knights  who  were  badly  armed,  and  those  who
had  them  were  much  delighted.  They  began  their  march  towards  Northumberland,  which

* In  other  editions  the  number  is  stated  as  (wo  hundred , which  appears  more  probable. — Ed.


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  & o.


49

they  continued  until  they  came  to  the  Abbey  of  Melrose,  where  they  quartered  themselves
on  each  side  the  river  Tweed  : on  the  morrow,  they  advanced  to  Lambir  Law,  and  then  came
before  Roxburgh.

The  governor  of  the  castle  of  Roxburgh  for  the  lord  Mountague,  to  whom  it  belonged  as
well  as  all  the  circumjacent  lands,  was  a knight  called  sir  Edward  Clifford.  The  admiral  of
France,  with  his  whole  army,  as  well  as  the  Scots,  halted  before  it,  and,  having  reconnoitred
it,  thought  they  should  gain  nothing  by  the  attack,  as  the  castle  was  large,  fair,  and  well
provided  with  artillery.  They  therefore  continued  their  march  down  the  river,  towards
Berwick  and  the  sea,  until  they  came  to  two  square  towers,  tolerably  strong  ; in  which  were
two  knights,  father  and  son,  of  the  name  of  Strande.  A good  farm  of  fine  fields  of  grass,
w’ith  a country-house,  was  hard  by,  which  was  instantly  burnt  and  the  towers  attacked.
Several  feats  of  arms  were  performed,  and  many  of  the  Scots  wounded  by  arrows  and  stones  ;
but  the  towers  were  at  length  taken  by  storm,  and  the  knights  within  them,  who  had
valiantly  defended  themselves  as  long  as  they  had  been  able.

After  the  conquest  of  these  two  towers,  the  Scots  and  French  came  before  a very  strong-
castle  in  another  part  of  the  country,  which  is  called  Werley*  ; it  belonged  to  sir  John
Mountague.  Sir  John  Lussebourne  was  the  governor  for  him,  and  had  in  it  his  wife,  children,
and  all  his  family ; for  he  had  been  informed  that  the  Scots  and  French  were  advancing  that
way.  He  had,  in  consequence,  fully  provided  the  place  with  men  at  arms  and  artillery,  to
the  utmost  of  his  power,  in  expectation  of  the  attack.  The  army  soon  came  and  encamped
before  Werley,  situated  on  a handsome  river  which  runs  into  the  Tweed  below  it.  There
was  one  grand  assault  on  this  castle,  where  the  French  behaved  much  m ore  valiantly  than
the  Scots  : for  they  crossed  the  ditches,  though  with  much  difficulty  ; and,  having  fixed  their
ladders,  many  gallant  deeds  were  done,  for  the  French  ascended  to  the  battlements,  and  there
fought  hand  to  hand  and  dagger  to  dagger  with  the  garrison.  Sir  John  Lussebourne  showed
himself  a good  knight  and  powerful  in  arms,  by  engaging  the  French  knights  as  they  mounted
the  ladders.  At  this  attack  a German  knight,  called  sir  Alberis  Gastelain,  was  slain,  which
was  a pity ; many  others  were  killed  and  wounded.  The  enemy,  however,  were  so  numerous,
and  the  attack  so  often  renewed,  that  the  castle  was  taken,  and  the  knight,  his  wife,  and
children,  who  were  within  it.  The  French  who  first  entered  made  upwards  of  forty  prisoners  :
the  castle  was  then  burnt  and  destroyed,  for  they  saw  they  could  not  keep  nor  guard  it,  being
so  far  advanced  in  England.

After  the  capture  of  this  castle,  and  of  sir  John  Lussebourne,  the  admiral  and  barons  of
France  and  Scotland  marched  towards  Amith  f,  the  estate  of  the  lord  Percy,  and  quartered
themselves  all  around  it.  They  destroyed  several  villages,  and  marched  as  far  as  Boul  j,  a
handsome  and  strong  castle  on  the  sea-coast,  belonging  to  the  earl  of  Northumberland  : they
did  not  attack  it,  for  they  knew  they  should  lose  their  labour,  but  continued  their  march  to
half-way  between  Berwick  and  Newcastle-on-Tyne,  where  they  learnt  that  the  duke  of
Lancaster,  the  earls,  of  Northumberland  and  Nottingham,  the  lord  Neville,  with  the  barons
of  the  counties  of  Northumberland,  York,  and  Durham,  were  hastening  with  a large  force  to
meet  them§  . The  admiral  and  barons  of  France  were  much  delighted  at  this  intelligence,
for  they  were  desirous  of  an  engagement ; but  the  Scots  were  of  a contrary  opinion,  and
advised  a retreat  towards  Scotland,  on  account  of  their  stores,  and  to  have  their  own  country
in  their  rear  and  wait  for  the  enemy  on  their  own  borders.  Sir  John  de  Vienne  wished  not
to  act  in  contradiction  to  their  wishes,  and  followed  what  they  had  advised  ; they  did  not
therefore  advance  further  into  Northumberland,  but  made  for  Berwick,  of  which  place  sir
Thomas  Redman  was  governor,  and  had  with  him  a great  number  of  men  at  arms.  The
French  and  Scots  came  before  it,  but  made  no  attack,  and  continued  their  road  to  Roxburgh,
on  their  return  to  their  own  country.

News  was  spread  all  over  England,  how  the  French  and  Scots  had  entered  Northumberland,
and  were  burning  and  destroying  it.  You  must,  however,  know,  that  before  this,  the  arrival

§ Mr.  Redpath,  in  his  Border  History,  gives  a very  short
account  indeed  of  this  expedition,  and  of  these  places:  he
adds, — “ It  is  said,  they  took  and  destroyed  the  castle3  of
\Vark,  Cornhill,  and  Ford.”

E


* “ Werly.”  Q.  if  not  Wark.
t “ Amith.”  Q.  Alnwick.

J “ Boul."  Q.  if  not  Cornhill.
VOL.  II.


50


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


of  the  admiral  and  the  French  in  Scotland  was  known.  All  the  lords  were  therefore
prepared,  and  the  king  had  issued  his  summons : as  they  assembled,  they  took  the  road  to
Scotland,  threatening  much  the  Scots.  The  English  at  this  time  had  made  greater  preparations
than  ever  for  their  expedition  to  Scotland,  as  well  by  land  as  by  sea ; for  they  had  freighted
six  score  vessels,  laden  with  stores  and  provision,  which  followed  their  march  along  the  coast.
The  king  took  the  field,  accompanied  by  his  uncles,  the  earls  of  Cambridge  and  Buckingham,
his  brothers  sir  Thomas  and  sir  John  Holland.  There  were  also  the  earls  of  Salisbury  and
Arundel,  the  young  earl  of  Pembroke,  the  young  lord  de  Spencer,  the  earl  of  Stafford,  the
earl  of  Devonshire,  and  so  many  barons  and  knights,  that  they  amounted  to  full  forty  thousand
lances,  without  counting  those  of  the  duke  of  Lancaster,  the  earl  of  Northumberland,  the  earl
of  Nottingham,  the  lord  Lucy,  the  lord  Neville,  and  other  barons  of  the  marches,  who  were
in  pursuit  of  the  French  and  Scots,  to  the  number  of  two  thousand  lances  and  fifteen  hundred
archers.  The  king,  and  the  lords  who  attended  him,  had  full  fifty  thousand  archers,  without
including  the  varlets.  Lie  hastened  so  much  the  march  of  his  army  after  the  duke  of
Lancaster,  that  he  arrived  in  the  country  about  York  ; for  he  had  had  intelligence  on  the  road
that  there  was  to  be  an  engagement  between  his  men  and  the  Scots  in  Northumberland  ; and
for  this  reason  he  had  made  as  much  haste  as  possible.  The  king  lodged  at  St.  John  de
Beverly,  beyond  the  city  of  York,  in  the  county  of  Durham,  where  news  was  brought  him
that  the  Scots  had  returned  to  their  own  country.  The  army  therefore  quartered  themselves
in  the  county  of  Northumberland.  I will  relate  an  accident  that  happened  in  the  English
army,  which  caused  a mortal  hatred  between  different  lords.


CHAPTER  CLXX. SIR  JOHN  HOLLAND  KILLS  LORD  RALPn  STAFFORD. THE  EARL  OF

STAFFORD  DEMANDS  JUSTICE  FROM  THE  KING.

The  king  of  England  was  quartered  in  the  country  round  Beverley,  in  the  diocese  of  York,
with  numbers  of  earls,  barons,  and  knights  of  his  realm  ; for  every  one  tried  to  be  lodged  as
near  him  as  possible,  more  especially  his  two  uncles.  Sir  Thomas  Holland,  earl  of  Kent,  and
sir  John  Holland,  earl  of  Huntington,  his  brothers,  were  also  there  with  a handsome  company
of  men  at  arms.

With  the  king  was  a knight  from  Bohemia,  who  had  come  to  pay  a visit  to  the  queen  ;
and,  out  of  affection  to  her,  the  king  and  barons  showed  him  every  attention.  This  knight
was  gay  and  handsome  in  the  German  style,  and  his  name  was  sir  Meles.  It  happened  one
afternoon  that  two  squires  attached  to  sir  John  Holland  quarrelled  in  the  fields  of  a village
near  Beverley,  for  the  lodgings  of  sir  Meles,  and  followed  him,  to  his  great  displeasure,  with
much  abuse.  At  this  moment  two  archers  belonging  to  lord  Ralph  Stafford  came  thither,
who  took  up  the  quarrel  of  sir  Meles  because  he  was  a stranger  : they  blamed  the  squires  for
their  language,  and  added  : “ You  have  used  this  knight  very  ill  by  thus  quarrelling  with
him,  for  you  know  he  is  attached  to  the  queen  and  from  her  country : you  would  have  done
better  to  have  assisted  him  than  to  act  thus.”  “ Indeed  ! ” replied  one  of  the  squires  to  the
archer  who  had  first  spoken,  “ thou  villanous  knave,  thou  wantest  to  intermeddle  : what  is
it  to  thee  if  I laugh  at  his  follies  ?"  “ What  is  it  to  me  !”  answered  the  archer  : “ it  concerns

me  enough,  for  he  is  the  companion  of  my  master ; and  I will  never  remain  quiet  to  see  or  hear
him  abused.”  “ If  I thought,  knave,”  said  the  squire,  “thou  wouldst  aid  him  against  me,  I
would  thrust  my  sword  through  thy  body.”  As  he  uttered  these  words,  he  made  an  attempt
to  strike  him : the  archer  drew  back,  and  having  his  bow  ready  bent,  with  a good  arrow,  let  fly,
and  shot  him  through  the  body  and  heart,  so  that  he  fell  down  dead.  The  other  squire,  when
he  saw  his  companion  fall,  ran  away.  Sir  Meles  had  before  returned  to  his  lodgings,  and  the
two  archers  returned  to  their  lord  and  related  to  him  what  had  happened.  Lord  Ralph,  when
he  had  heard  the  whole,  said,  “ You  have  behaved  very  ill.”  “ By  my  troth,”  replied  the
archer,  “ I could  not  have  acted  otherwise,  if  I had  not  wished  to  have  been  killed  myself,
and  I had  much  rather  he  should  die  than  that  I should.”  “ Well,”  said  lord  Ralph,  “ go  and
get  out  of  sight,  that  thou  mayest  not  be  found  : I will  negotiate  thy  pardon  with  sir  John


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  Ac.


51


Holland,  either  through  my  lord  and  father,  or  by  some  other  means."  The  archer  replied,
“ he  would  cheerfully  obey  him.”

News  was  carried  to  sir  John  Holland,  that  one  of  sir  Ralph  Stafford’s  archers  had
murdered  his  favourite  squire ; and  that  it  had  happened  through  the  fault  of  the  foreign
knight,  sir  Meles.  Sir  John,  on  hearing  it,  was  like  a madman,  and  said  he  would  neither
eat  nor  drink  until  he  had  revenged  it.  He  instantly  mounted  his  horse,  ordering  his  men
to  do  the  same,  though  it  was  now  very  late,  and,  having  gained  the  fields,  he  inquired  for
the  lodgings  of  sir  Aides  : lie  was  told  that  he  was  lodged  at  the  rear-guard  with  the  carl  of
Devonshire  and  the  earl  of  Stafford,  and  with  their  people.  Sir  John  Holland  took  that  road,
riding  up  and  down  to  find  sir  Meles.  As  he  was  thus  riding  along  a very  narrow  lane,  he
met  the  lord  Ralph  Stafford  ; hut,  being  night,  they  could  not  distinguish  each  other.  He
called  out,  “Who  comes  here?”  He  was  answered,  “I  am  Stafford:”  “And  I am
Holland.”  Then  sir  John  added,  “Stafford,  I was  inquiring  after  you.  Thy  servants  have
murdered  my  squire,  whom  I loved  so  much.”  On  saying  this,  he  drew  his  sword  and  struck
lord  Ralph  such  a blow  as  felled  him  dead,  which  was  a great  pity.  Sir  John  continued  his
road,  but  knew  not  then  that  he  had  killed  him,  though  he  was  well  aware  he  had  strucken
him  down.  The  servants  of  the  lord  Ralph  were  exceedingly  wroth,  as  was  natural,  on
seeing  their  master  dead : they  began  to  cry  out,  “ Holland,  you  have  murdered  the  son  of
the  earl  of  Stafford  : heavy  will  this  news  he  to  the  father  when  he  shall  know  it.”

Some  of  the  attendants  of  sir  John  Holland,  hearing  these  words,  said  to  their  master,
“ My  lord,  you  have  slain  the  lord  Ralph  Stafford.”  “ Be  it  so,”  replied  sir  John.  “ I had
rather  have  put  him  to  death  than  one  of  less  rank  ; for  by  this  I have  the  better  revenged
the  loss  of  my  squire.”  Sir  John  hastened  to  Beverley,  to  take  advantage  of  the  sanctuary
of  St.  John’s  church,  whither  he  went,  and  did  not  quit  the  sanctuary;  for  he  well  knew  he
should  have  much  trouble  in  the  army  from  the  affection  it  bore  lord  Ralph,  and  he  was
uncertain  what  his  brother  the  king  of  England  would  say  to  it.  To  avoid,  therefore,  all
these  perils,  he  shut  himself  up  in  the  sanctuary.

News  was  carried  to  the  earl  of  Stafford,  that  his  son  had  been  unfortunately  killed.  The
earl  asked  who  had  done  it.  They  told  him,  “ Sir  John  Holland,  the  king’s  brother,”  and
related  why,  and  wherefore.  You  may  suppose,  that  the  father,  having  only  one  beloved  son,
who  was  a young,  handsome,  and  accomplished  knight,  was  beyond  measure  enraged.  He
sent  for  all  his  friends,  to  have  their  advice  how  he  ought  to  act  to  revenge  this  loss.  The
wisest  and  most  temperate  did  all  they  could  to  calm  him,  adding,  that  on  the  morrow  the
fact  should  be  laid  before  the  king,  and  he  should  be  required  to  see  law  and  justice  put  in
force.

Thus  passed  the  night.  In  the  morning,  the  lord  Ralph  Stafford  was  buried  in  the  church
of  a village  near  the  spot  where  he  fell : he  was  attended  by  all  the  barons,  knights,  and  squires
related  to  him  that  were  in  the  army.  After  the  funeral,  the  earl  of  Stafford,  with  full  sixty
of  his  own  relations,  and  others  connected  with  his  son,  mounted  their  horses,  and  went  to
the  king,  who  had  already  received  information  of  this  unfortunate  event.  They  found  the
king  attended  by  his  uncles  and  many  knights.  When  the  earl  approached,  he  cast  himself
on  his  knees,  and  thus  spoke  with  tears  and  anguish  of  heart  : “ Thou  art  king  of  all  England,
and  hast  solemnly  sworn  to  maintain  the  realm  in  its  rights,  and  to  do  justice.  Thou  art
well  acquainted  how  thy  brother,  without  the  slightest  reason,  has  murdered  my  son  and  heir.
I therefore  come  and  demand  justice : otherwise  thou  wilt  not  have  a worse  enemy  than  me.
I must  likewise  inform  thee,  my  son’s  death  affects  me  so  bitterly,  that  if  I were  not  fearful
of  breaking  up  this  expedition  by  the  trouble  and  confusion  I should  make  in  the  army,  and
the  defections  it  would  cause,  by  my  honour,  it  should  be  revenged  in  so  severe  a manner  that
it  should  be  talked  of  in  England  a hundred  years  to  come.  For  the  present,  however,  and
during  this  expedition  to  Scotland,  I shall  not  think  of  it ; for  I like  not  the  Scots  be  rejoiced
at  the  misery  of  the  earl  of  Stafford  The  king  replied,  “ Be  assured,  I myself  will  do
justice,  and  punish  the  crime  more  severely  than  the  barons  would  venture  to  do  ; and  never
for  any  brother  will  I act  otherwise.”  The  earl  of  Stafford  and  his  relations  answered,  “ Sir,


* The  earl  of  Stafford,  in  the  9th  Ric.  IT.,  made  a pilgrimage  to  Jerusalem,  probably  on  the  loss  of  his  son,  and
died  the  ensuing  year,  on  his  return,  at  Rhodes.


E 2


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


you  have  well  spoken,  and  we  thank  you.”  Thus  were  the  relations  of  lord  Ralph  Stafford
appeased.  He  performed  the  expedition  to  Scotland,  as  I shall  relate  to  you ; and,  during
that  whole  time,  the  earl  of  Stafford  seemed  to  have  forgotten  the  death  of  his  son,  in  which
conduct  all  the  barons  thought  he  showed  great  wisdom.


CHAPTER  CLXXI. THE  KING  OP  ENGLAND  DESTROYS  THE  ABBEY  OP  MELROSE  IN

SCOTLAND. THE  BARONS  OF  FRANCE  AND  SCOTLAND  INVADE  CUMBERLAND.

The  army  of  the  king  of  England,  which  consisted  of  seven  thousand  men  at  arms  and
sixty  thousand  archers,  kept  advancing  : none  had  remained  behind,  for  it  had  been  confidently
reported  through  England  that  sir  John  de  Yienne  would  give  them  battle.  Indeed,  such
were  his  intentions,  and  he  had  in  a manner  told  this  to  the  barons  of  Scotland,  when  he  said,
“ My  lords,  make  your  army  as  considerable  as  you  can  ; for,  if  the  English  come  as  far  as
Scotland,  I will  offer  them  combat.”  The  Scots  replied,  “ God  assist  us  !”  but  they  afterwards
changed  their  mind.

The  king  and  his  army  advanced  beyond  Durham,  Newcastle-on-Tyne,  and  through
Northumberland  to  Berwick,  of  which  sir  Matthew  Redman  was  governor.  He  received
him  with  all  due  respect ; but  the  king  did  not  stay  there  long  : he  continued  his  march,  and
the  whole  army  crossed  the  river  Tweed,  which  comes  from  Roxburgh  and  the  mountains  in
Northumberland,  and  took  up  his  quarters  in  the  abbey  of  Melrose.  This  monastery,  in  all
the  preceding  wars  of  England  and  Scotland,  had  been  spared,  but  it  was  now  burnt  and
destroyed  ; for  it  had  been  determined  by  the  English  to  ruin  everything  in  Scotland  before
they  returned  home,  because  the  Scots  had  allied  themselves  with  the  French.

The  admiral  of  France,  on  learning  that  the  king  of  England  and  his  army  had  crossed  the
Tyne  and  Tweed,  and  were  now  at  Lambir  Law,  said  to  the  Scottish  barons,  “ Why  do  we
remain  here,  and  not  reconnoitre  our  enemies  to  fight  them?  You  told  us,  before  we  came
into  this  country,  that  if  you  had  a thousand,  or  thereabouts,  of  good  men  at  arms  from
France,  you  would  be  sufficiently  strong  to  combat  the  English.  I will  warrant  you  have
now  a thousand,  if  not  more,  and  five  hundred  cross-bows  ; and  I must  tell  you,  that  the
knights  and  squires  who  have  accompanied  me  are  determined  men  at  arms,  the  flower  of
knighthood,  who  will  not  fly,  but  abide  the  event,  such  as  God  may  please  to  order  it.”  The
barons  of  Scotland,  who  well  knew  the  strength  of  the  English  army,  and  had  not  any  desire
of  meeting  it,  answered,  “ Faith,  my  lord,  we  are  convinced  that  you  and  your  companions
are  men  of  valour,  and  to  be  depended  on  ; but  we  understand  that  all  England  is  on  its  march
to  Scotland,  and  the  English  were  never  in  such  force  as  at  present.  We  will  conduct  you
to  a place  from  whence  you  may  view  and  consider  them  : and  if,  after  this,  you  should  advise
a battle,  we  will  not  refuse  it,  for  what  you  have  repeated  as  having  been  said  by  us  is  true.”
“ By  God,  then,”  said  the  admiral,  “ I will  have  a battle.”

Not  long  afterwards,  the  earl  of  Douglas  and  the  other  Scots  barons  carried  the  admiral
of  France  to  a high  mountain,  at  the  bottom  of  which  was  a pass  through  which  the  English
would  be  forced  to  march  with  their  baggage.  From  this  mountain,  where  the  admiral  was
stationed,  with  many  of  the  French  knights,  they  clearly  saw  the  English  army,  and
estimated  it,  as  nearly  as  they  could,  at  six  thousand  men  at  arms,  sixty  thousand  archers
and  stout  varlets.  They  allowed  they  were  not  in  sufficient  force  to  meet  them  in  battle,
for  the  Scots  were  not  more  than  one  thousand  lances,  with  about  thirty  thousand  others  badly
armed.  The  admiral  said  to  the  earls  of  Douglas  and  Moray, — “ You  were  in  the  right  in
not  wishing  to  fight  the  English ; but  let  us  consider  what  must  be  done,  for  they  are
numerous  enough  to  overrun  your  whole  country  and  ruin  it.  Since  we  are  not  able  to
combat  them,  I request  you  will  lead  us  by  unfrequented  roads  into  England,  and  let  us
carry  the  war  into  their  own  country,  as  they  have  done  here,  if  such  an  enterprise  may  be
practicable.”  The  barons  told  him,  it  was  very  practicable.

Sir  John  de  Yienne  and  the  Scots  barons  resolved  in  council,  to  quit  that  part  of  the
country  and  suffer  the  English  to  act  as  they  pleased  in  it,  and  to  make  an  inroad  on
Cumberland,  near  Carlisle,  where  they  should  find  a plentiful  country,  and  amply  revenge


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &e.


53

themselves.  This  resolution  was  adopted.  They  marched  their  men  in  an  opposite  direction
to  the  English,  through  forests  and  over  mountains,  and  laid  waste  the  whole  country  on
their  line,  burning  towns,  villages  and  houses.  The  inhabitants  of  Scotland  carried  their
provisions  to  their  retreats  in  the  forests,  where  they  knew  the  English  would  never  seek  for
them.  The  Scots  barons  marched  hastily  through  their  own  country ; and  the  king,  not
being  well  enough  in  health  to  accompany  them,  retired  into  the  highlands,  where  he  remained
during  the  war,  and  left  his  subjects  to  act  as  well  as  they  could.  The  French  and  Scots
passed  the  mountains  which  divide  Cumberland  from  Scotland,  and  entered  England,  when
they  began  to  burn  the  country  and  villages,  and  to  commit  great  devastations  on  the  lands
of  Mowbray,  belonging  to  the  earl  of  Nottingham,  on  those  of  the  earl  of  Stafford,  as  well  as
on  the  lands  of  the  baron  of  Grisop  * and  of  the  lord  Musgrave,  and  then  continued  their
march  to  Carlisle.


CHAPTER  CLXXII. THE  KING  OP  ENGLAND  DESTROYS  EDINBURGH,  AND  GREAT  PART  OF

SCOTLAND. THE  FRENCH  AND  SCOTS  DO  THE  SAME  ON  THE  BORDERS  AND  IN  NOR-

THUMBERLAND.

"While  the  admiral  of  France  and  those  with  him,  such  as  the  count  de  Grand  Pre,  the
lord  de  Sainte  Croix,  sir  Geoffry  de  Charny,  sir  William  de  Breune,  sir  James  de  Boenne,
the  lords  de  Peigny,  de  Hees,  de  Marnel,  sir  Yaleran  de  Rayneval,  the  baron  d’lvry,  the
baron  de  Fontaines,  the  lord  de  Croy,  sir  Braque  de  Bracquemont,  the  lord  de  Lendury,
amounting  to  a thousand  lances  at  least,  of  barons  and  knights  of  France,  with  the  lords  of
Scotland  and  their  army,  were  thus  overrunning  the  northern  parts  of  England,  burning  and
destroying  the  towns,  houses  and  country ; the  king  of  England,  with  his  uncles,  barons
and  knights,  had  entered  Scotland,  wasting  the  country  as  they  advanced.  The  English  had
quartered  themselves  at  Edinburgh,  where  the  king  remained  for  five  days.  On  their
departure,  everything  was  completely  burnt  to  the  ground  except  the  castle,  which  was
very  strong  and  wTell  guarded.

During  the  residence  of  king  Richard  at  Edinburgh,  the  English  overran  the  whole  country
in  the  neighbourhood,  and  did  great  mischief ; but  they  found  none  of  the  inhabitants,  for
they  had  retreated  into  forts  and  thick  forests,  whither  they  had  driven  all  their  cattle.  In
the  king’s  army  there  were  upwards  of  one  hundred  thousand  men,  and  as  many  horses : of
course,  great  quantities  of  provision  were  wanted ; but,  as  they  found  none  in  Scotland,
many  stores  followed  them  from  England  by  sea  and  land.  When  the  king  and  his  lords
left  Edinburgh  they  went  to  Dunfermline,  a tolerably  handsome  town,  where  is  a large  and
fair  abbey  of  black  monks,  in  which  the  kings  of  Scotland  have  been  accustomed  to  be  buried.
The  king  was  lodged  in  the  abbey,  but  after  his  departure  the  army  seized  it,  and  burnt
both  that  and  the  town.  They  marched  towards  Stirling  and  crossed  the  river  Tay  t,  which
runs  by  Perth.  They  made  a grand  attack  on  the  castle  of  Stirling,  but  did  not  conquer  it,
and  had  a number  of  their  met  killed  and  wounded  : they  then  marched  away,  burning  the
town  and  the  lands  of  the  lord  de  V ersy.

The  intention  of  the  duke  of  Lancaster  and  of  his  brothers,  as  well  as  of  several  knights
and  squires,  was  to  lay  waste  all  Scotland,  and  then  pursue  the  French  and  Scots  (for
they  had  had  information  of  their  march  to  Carlisle),  and  by  this  means  inclose  them  between
England  and  Scotland,  so  that  they  should  have  such  advantage  over  them,  not  one  would
return,  but  all  should  be  slain,  or  made  prisoners.  In  the  mean  time,  their  army  overran
the  country  at  their  pleasure,  for  none  ventured  to  oppose  them,  the  kingdom  being  void  of
defence,  as  the  men  at  arms  had  all  followed  the  admiral  of  France.  The  English  burnt
the  town  of  Perth,  which  is  on  the  banks  of  the  Tay,  and  has  a good  harbour,  from  whence
vessels  may  sail  to  all  parts  of  the  world.  They  afterwards  burnt  Dundee,  and  the  English

* “ Grisop." — Q.  Grevstocke.

f There  is  a mistake  in  geography  here,  for  the  Tay  does  not  run  near  the  road  to  Stirling.  I should  suppose  he
must  moan  the  Forth.


54


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


spared  neither  monasteries  nor  churches,  but  put  all  to  fire  and  flame.  The  light  troops  of
the  English,  and  the  van-guard,  advanced  as  far  as  the  city  of  Bredane#,  which  is  situated
on  the  sea,  at  the  entrance  into  the  highlands,  but  they  did  no  harm  to  it,  though  the
inhabitants  were  exceedingly  alarmed,  supposing  they  should  be  attacked,  and  that  the  king
of  England  was  coming.

Just  in  the  same  manner  as  the  English  conducted  themselves  in  Scotland,  did  the  French
and  Scots  in  Cumberland,  and  on  the  borders  of  England,  where  they  burnt  and  destroyed
large  tracts  of  country.  They  entered  Westmoreland,  passing  through  the  lands  of
Greystock,  and  of  the  baron  Clifford,  and  burnt  on  their  march  several  large  villages  where
no  men  at  arms  had  before  been.  They  met  with  no  opposition,  as  the  countiy  was  drained,
for  all  men  at  arms  were  with  the  king  in  his  expedition.  They  came  at  length  before
Carlisle,  which  is  well  inclosed  with  walls,  towers,  gates  and  ditches : king  Arthur  formerly
resided  here  more  than  elsewhere,  on  account  of  the  fine  woods  which  surround  it,  and  for
the  grand  adventures  of  arms  which  had  happened  near  it  t.

There  were  in  the  city  of  Carlisle,  sir  Lewis  Clifford,  brother  to  sir  William  Neville,  sir
Thomas  Musgrave  and  his  son,  David  Ilollgrave,  the  earl  of  Angus,  and  several  others  from
that  neighbourhood ; for  Carlisle  is  the  capital  of  that  part  of  the  country,  and  it  was
fortunate  to  have  such  men  to  defend  it.  When  the  admiral  of  France  and  his  army  arrived,
lie  made  a very  severe  attack  with  ordnance,  which  lasted  some  time,  but  there  were  within
those  capable  of  making  a good  defence,  so  that  many  handsome  feats  of  arms  were  performed
before  Carlisle.


CHAPTER  C'LXXIII. THE  EARL  OF  SUFFOLK  PREVENTS  THE  KING  OF  ENGLAND  FROM  PUR-
SUING THE  FRENCH  AND  SCOTS  WHO  HAD  INVADED  ENGLAND. THE  ENGLISH  ARMY

RETURN  HOME  THE  SAME  WAY  THEY  HAD  ENTERED  SCOTLAND. THE  FRENCH  AND

SCOTS  RETURN  IN  A SIMILAR  MANNER.

The  king’s  uncles  and  the  other  lords  supposed  the  admiral  of  France  and  the  Scots  would
continue  their  march,  and  that  they  would  do  as  much  mischief  as  they  could  on  the  borders
and  in  Cumberland.  They  therefore  thought  they  could  not  do  better,  when  their  stores
were  all  arrived,  than  to  follow  their  line  of  march  until  they  should  overtake  and  fight
them  ; for,  as  they  could  not  any  way  escape,  they  must  be  attacked  to  a disadvantage.  Of
this  opinion  was  the  duke  of  Lancaster,  his  brothers,  several  of  the  nobles  of  the  realm,  and
the  greater  part  of  the  army.  Their  stores  were  now  all  arrived  by  sea  or  land,  and  the
king  had,  in  the  presence  of  his  uncles,  ordered  this  plan  to  be  adopted.  But  in  one  night,
Michael  de  la  Pole,  earl  of  Suffolk,  who  at  that  time  was  the  heart  and  sole  council  of  the
king,  and  in  whom  he  placed  his  whole  confidence,  undid  the  whole  business.  I know  not
what  bis  intentions  were  for  so  doing ; but  I heard  afterwards,  he  should  say  to  the  king, —
“ Ah,  ah,  my  lord,  what  are  you  thinking  of?  You  intend  then  to  follow  the  plan  your  uncles
have  devised.  Know,  that  if  you  do  so,  you  will  never  return,  for  the  duke  of  Lancaster
wishes  for  nothing  more  earnestly  than  your  death,  that  he  may  be  king.  How  could  he
dare  advise  your  entering  such  a country  in  the  winter  ? I would  recommend  you  not  to
cross  the  Cumberland  mountains,  where  are  thirty  passes  so  narrow,  that  if  once  you  be
inclosed  within  them,  you  will  run  into  the  greatest  danger  from  the  Scots.  Never  engage
in  such  a perilous  expedition,  whatever  they  may  say  to  you ; and  if  the  duke  of  Lancaster
be  so  desirous  to  go  thither,  let  him,  with  that  division  of  the  army  under  his  command :
for  never,  with  my  consent,  shall  you  undertake  it.  You  have  done  enough  for  one  time:
neither  your  father,  nor  your  grandfather  Edward,  have  been  so  far  in  Scotland  as  you  have
now  been.  This,  I say,  should  satisfy  you.  Take  care  of  your  own  person,  you  are  young
and  promising  ; and  there  are  those  who  profess  much,  but  who  little  love  you.”

These  words  made  so  strong  an  impression  on  the  king,  he  could  never  get  them  out  of  his
head,  as  I shall  hereafter  relate.  On  the  morrow  morning,  when  the  lords  of  England  were


* Brcdane." — Q.  Aberdeen.


t Froissart  mistakes  this  place,  probably,  for  Carleon.


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  & c.


55


preparing  for  their  march  towards  Carlisle,  in  search  of  the  French,  and  to  fight  with  them,
as  had  been  resolved  in  council  the  preceding  night,  the  duke  of  Lancaster  waited  on  the  king,
ignorant  of  what  had  passed  between  his  nephew  and  lord  Suffolk.  When  the  king  saw  him,
being  peevish  and  choleric  from  the  preceding  conversation,  lie  said,  harshly, — “ Uncle,  uncle
of  Lancaster,  you  shall  not  yet  succeed  in  your  plans.  Do  you  think  that,  for  your  fine
speeches,  we  will  madly  ruin  ourselves  ? I will  no  longer  put  my  faith  in  you  nor  in  your
councils,  for  I see  in  them  more  loss  than  profit,  both  in  regard  to  your  own  honour  and  to
that  of  our  people  : therefore,  if  you  he  desirous  of  undertaking  this  march,  which  you  have
advised,  do  so,  hut  I will  not,  for  I shall  return  to  England,  and  all  those  who  love  me  will
follow  me.”  “ And  I will  follow  you,”  replied  the  duke  of  Lancaster  : “ for  there  is  not  a
man  in  your  company  who  loves  you  so  well  as  I do,  and  my  brothers  also.  Should  any
other  person,  excepting  yourself,  dare  say  the  contrary,  or  that  I wish  otherwise  than  well
to  you  and  to  your  people,  I will  throw  him  my  glove.”  No  answer  was  made  by  any  one.
The  king  was  silent  on  the  subject.  lie  only  spoke  to  those  who  served  him,  on  different
matters,  and  then  gave  orders  for  returning  to  England  by  the  way  they  had  come.  The
duke  left  the  king  quite  melancholy,  and  went  to  make  other  preparations ; for  he  had
concluded  they  were  to  pursue  the  French  and  Scots  who  had  advanced  beyond  the  borders  ;
but,  as  this  was  altered,  they  took  the  direct  road  to  England.

Thus  did  the  earl  of  Suffolk,  who  governed  the  king,  break  up  this  expedition.  Some
lords  said,  the  king  had  been  badly  advised,  not  to  pursue  the  Scots,  as  they  had  all  their
stores  with  them,  and  it  was  still  in  their  way  home.  Others,  afraid  of  the  difficulties,  said
that,  considering  all  things,  as  well  the  quantity  of  provision  necessary  for  so  large  an  army,
as  the  hardships  they  would  be  exposed  to  in  the  winter  season,  when  crossing  the  Cumberland
mountains,  they  might  lose  more  than  they  could  gain.  Thus  were  affairs  managed.  The
English  army  returned,  with  the  king  and  barons,  by  the  way  they  had  entered  Scotland,
but  not  before  they  had  destroyed  the  greater  part  of  that  country.

News  was  brought  to  the  admiral  of  France  that  the  English  were  retreating  homeward.
They  called  a council  to  determine  how  to  act,  when  it  was  resolved  that,  as  their  provision
began  to  fail,  they  would  return  to  Scotland,  for  they  were  now  in  a poor  country,  having
ruined  all  round  Carlisle,  and  the  lands  of  lord  Clifford,  lord  Mowbray  and  the  bishop  of
Carlisle  ; but  the  city  of  Carlisle  they  could  not  conquer.  The  French  said  among  them-
selves, they  had  burnt  in  the  bishopricks  of  Durham  and  Carlisle  more  than  the  value  of  all
the  towns  in  the  kingdom  of  Scotland.  The  French  and  Scots  marched  back  the  way  they
had  come.  When  arrived  in  the  lowlands,  they  found  the  whole  country  ruined ; but  the
people  of  the  country  made  light  of  it,  saying,  that  with  six  or  eight  stakes  they  would  soon
have  new  houses,  and  find  cattle  enow  for  provision  : for  the  Scots  had  driven  them  for
security  to  the  forests.  You  must,  however,  know,  that  whatever  the  French  wanted  to
buy,  they  were  made  to  pay  very  dear  for  ; and  it  was  fortunate  the  French  and  Scots  did
not  quarrel  with  each  other  seriously,  as  there  were  frequent  riots  on  account  of  provision.
The  Scots  said,  the  French  had  done  them  more  mischief  than  the  English  : and  when  asked,
“ In  what  manner  ?”  they  replied,  “ by  riding  through  their  corn,  oats  and  barley,  on  their
march,  which  they  trod  under  foot,  not  condescending  to  follow  the  roads,  for  which  damages
they  would  have  a recompense  before  they  left  Scotland  : and  they  should  neither  find  vessel
nor  mariner  who  would  dare  to  put  to  sea  without  their  permission.”  Many  knights  and
squires  complained  of  the  timber  they  had  cut  down,  and  of  the  waste  they  had  committed
to  lodge  themselves.


CHAPTER  CLXXIV. THE  SCOTS  TREAT  THE  ADMIRAL  OF  FRANCE  AND  HIS  MEN  VERY

HARSHLY. THEY  RETURN  TO  FRANCE.

W hen  the  admiral,  with  his  barons,  knights  and  squires,  were  returned  to  the  neighbour-
hood of  Edinburgh,  they  suffered  much  from  famine,  as  they  could  scarcely  procure  provision
for  their  money.  They  had  but  little  wine,  beer,  barley,  bread,  or  oats  : their  horses,
therefore,  perished  from  hunger,  or  were  ruined  through  fatigue  ; and,  when  they  wished  to


50


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  & c.


dispose  of  them,  they  could  not  find  a purchaser  who  would  give  them  a groat  either  for  their
horses  or  housings.  These  lords  remonstrated  with  their  commander  on  the  manner  in  which
they  were  treated,  a circumstance  well  known  to  himself.  They  said,  “ they  could  not
longer  endure  such  difficulties,  for  Scotland  was  not  a country  to  encamp  in  during  the  winter ;
and  that,  if  they  were  to  remain  the  ensuing  summer,  they  should  soon  die  of  poverty.  If
they  were  to  spread  themselves  over  the  country,  to  better  their  condition,  they  were  doubtful
if  the  Scots,  who  had  so  villanously  treated  their  foragers,  would  not  murder  them  in  their
beds,  when  they  should  be  divided.”

The  admiral,  having  fully  weighed  what  they  said,  saw  clearly  they  were  justified  in  thus
remonstrating  ; notwithstanding,  he  had  intentions  of  wintering  there,  and  of  sending  an
account  of  his  situation  to  the  king  of  France  and  duke  of  Burgundy,  who,  as  the  admiral
imagined,  would  hasten  to  him  reinforcements  of  stores,  provision  and  money,  wdth  which,
in  the  course  of  the  summer,  he  would  be  enabled  to  carry  on  an  advantageous  war  against
the  English.  But  having  considered  how  ill  intentioned  the  Scots  were,  and  the  danger  his
men  were  in,  as  well  as  himself,  he  gave  permission  for  all  who  chose  to  depart.  But  how
to  depart  was  the  difficulty,  for  the  barons  could  not  obtain  any  vessels  for  themselves  and
men.  The  Scots  were  willing  that  a few  poor  knights  who  had  no  great  command  should
leave  the  country,  that  they  might  the  easier  govern  the  rest.  They  told  the  barons  of  France
“ that  their  dependants,  when  they  pleased,  might  depart,  but  that  they  themselves  should
not  quit  the  country  until  they  had  made  satisfaction  for  the  sums  that  had  been  expended
for  the  use  of  their  army.”

This  declaration  was  very  disagreeable  to  sir  John  Yienne  and  the  other  French  barons.
The  earls  of  Douglas  and  Moray,  who  pretended  to  be  exasperated  at  the  harsh  conduct  of
their  countrymen,  remonstrated  with  them,  that  they  did  not  act  becoming  men  at  arms,  nor
as  friends  to  the  kingdom  of  France,  by  this  behaviour  to  its  knights:  and  that  henceforward
no  Scots  knight  would  dare  to  set  his  foot  in  France.  These  two  earls,  who  were  friendly
enough  to  the  French  barons,  pointed  out  the  probable  effect  their  conduct  would  have  on
their  vassals ; hut  some  replied,  “ Do  dissemble  with  them,  for  you  have  lost  as  much  as
we.”  They  therefore  told  the  admiral,  they  could  not  do  any  thing  for  him  : and,  if  they
were  so  anxious  about  quitting  Scotland,  they  must  consent  to  make  good  their  damages.
The  admiral  seeing  nothing  better  could  be  done,  and  unwilling  to  lose  all,  for  he  found
himself  very  uncomfortable,  surrounded  by  the  sea,  and  the  Scots  of  a savage  disposition,
acceded  to  their  proposals,  and  had  proclaimed  through  the  realm,  that  all  those  whom  his
people  had  injured,  and  who  could  show  just  cause  for  amends  being  made  them,  should
bring  them  their  demands  to  the  admiral  of  France,  when  they  would  be  fully  paid.  This
proclamation  softened  the  minds  of  the  people  ; and  the  admiral  took  every  debt  on  himself,
declaring  he  would  never  leave  the  country  until  everything  were  completely  paid  and
satisfied.

Upon  this  many  knights  and  squires  obtained  a passage  to  France,  and  returned  through
Flanders,  or  wherever  they  could  land,  famished,  and  without  arms  or  horses,  cursing
Scotland,  and  the  hour  they  had  set  foot  there.  They  said  they  had  never  suffered  so  much
in  any  expedition,  and  wished  the  king  of  France  would  make  a truce  with  the  English  for
two  or  three  years,  and  then  march  to  Scotland  and  utterly  destroy  it : for  never  had  they
seen  such  wicked  people,  nor  such  ignorant  hypocrites  and  traitors.  The  admiral  wrote  to
the  king  of  France  and  duke  of  Burgundy,  by  those  who  first  returned,  a full  state  of  his
situation,  and  how  the  Scots  had  acted  towards  him  : that  if  they  wished  to  have  him  back,
they  must  send  him  the  full  amount  he  had  engaged  to  pay  the  Scots,  and  for  which  he  had
bounden  himself  to  the  knights  and  squires  of  Scotland  : for  the  Scots  had  declared,  that  they
had  at  this  time  made  war  for  the  king  of  France  and  not  for  themselves ; and  that  the
damages  which  the  French  had  committed  must  he  satisfied  before  they  would  be  allowed  to
return,  which  he  had  promised  and  sworn  to  perform  to  the  barons  of  Scotland.

It  was  incumbent  on  the  king  of  France,  the  duke  of  Burgundy  and  their  councils,  to
redeem  the  admiral,  for  they  had  sent  him  thither.  They  had  the  money  instantly  raised,
and  deposited  in  the  town  of  Bruges,  so  that  the  whole  demand  of  the  Scots  was  paid  to  their
satisfaction.  The  admiral  left  Scotland  when  he  had  thus  amicably  settled  matters,  for


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


67


otherwise  lie  could  not  have  done  it ; and,  taking  leave  of  the  king,  who  was  in  the  highlan  ds
and  of  the  earls  of  Douglas  and  Moray,  was  attended  by  them  to  the  sea-shore.  He
embarked  at  Edinburgh,  and,  having  a favourable  wind,  landed  at  Sluys  in  Flanders.  Some
of  his  knights  and  squires  did  not  follow  the  same  road,  as  they  were  desirous  of  seeing  other
countries  beside  Scotland,  and  went  into  different  parts  ; but  the  greater  number  returned  to
France,  and  were  so  poor  they  knew  not  how  to  remount  themselves : especially  those  from
Burgundy,  Champagne,  Bar,  and  Lorrain,  who  seized  the  labouring  horses  wherever  they
found  them  in  the  fields.

The  young  king  of  Franoe,  and  the  duke  of  Burgundy,  feasted  the  admiral  splendidly  on
his  return,  as  was  but  just.  They  made  many  inquiries  respecting  the  situation  of  the  king
and  barons  of  Scotland.  He  told  them  “ the  Scots  would  naturally  incline  to  the  English,
for  they  were  jealous  of  foreigners  ; and  added,  that  as  God  may  help  him,  he  would  rather
be  count  of  Savoy  or  of  Artois,  or  some  such  country,  than  king  of  Scotland  : that  he  had
seen  the  whole  force  of  that  country  assembled  together,  as  the  Scots  had  assured  him,  but
there  were  never  more  than  five  hundred  knights  and  squires  together,  and  about  thirty
thousand  other  men,  who  would  be  unable  to  withstand  the  English  archers,  or  a thousand
men  at  arms."  The  admiral  was  asked,  “ if  he  had  seen  the  English  army.”  He  replied,
he  had ; “ for  when  I saw  the  manner  in  which  the  Scots  fled  from  the  English,  I requested
they  would  lead  me  to  a place  whence  I might  see  and  consider  them.  They  did  so,  and  I
saw  them  pass  through  a defile,  to  the  amount  of  sixty  thousand  archers,  and  six  or  seven
thousand  men  at  arms.  The  Scots  said,  ‘ that  this  was  the  whole  strength  of  England,  for
none  had  remained  behind.”'  The  company  paused  a little,  and  said,  “ Sixty  thousand  archers
and  six  or  seven  thousand  men  at  arms  is  a great  force.”  “ They  may  be  as  many  as  that,"
said  the  constable  of  France*  ; “ but  I would  rather  combat  the  whole  of  them  in  their  own
country  than  one-half  on  this  side  the  water,  for  this  was  the  doctrine  my  master  taught  me
in  my  youth.”  “ By  my  faith,  constable,”  replied  sir  John  de  Vienne,  u if  you  had  been
there  with  a good  command  of  men  at  arms  and  Genoese,  as  I proposed,  and  as  it  was  agreed
on  when  I undertook  this  expedition,  we  would  have  engaged  them  when  in  Scotland,  or
destroyed  them  from  want  of  provision.”

In  this  manner  did  the  constable  and  admiral  converse,  which  excited  a great  desire  in  the
duke  of  Burgundy  to  make  a powerful  invasion  of  England.  We  will  now  for  a while  leave
them,  and  return  to  the  affairs  of  Flanders.


CHAPTER  CLXXV. THE  STATE  OP  FLANDERS. TWO  HONEST  BURGESSES  OF  GHENT  NEGO-

TIATE SECRETLY  A PEACE  WITH  THE  DUKE  OF  BURGUNDY,  WITH  THE  ASSENT  OF
FRANCIS  ATREMEN.

In  truth,  the  duke  of  Burgundy  had  a strong  desire  to  undertake  a grand  expedition
against  England  in  the  ensuing  summer  of  1386,  and  did  all  he  could  to  urge  the  king  of
France  to  consent  to  it.  On  the  other  hand,  the  constable  of  France,  who  in  his  youth  had
been  educated  in  England,  and  was  a knight  of  gallant  enterprise  and  much  beloved  in
France,  advised  it  strongly,  as  did  sir  Guy  de  la  Trimouille  and  the  admiral  of  France.  The
duke  of  Berry  was  at  this  time  in  Poitou,  and  in  the  upper  parts  of  Limousin,  ignorant  of
these  councils  and  this  intended  expedition.  The  duke  of  Burgundy  was  the  greatest
personage  in  France,  next  the  king : he  had  many  designs,  and  knew  that,  as  long  as  the
war  continued  in  Flanders,  the  invasion  of  England  could  not  take  place  : he  was  therefore
much  softened,  and  more  inclined  to  enter  into  a treaty  with  the  town  of  Ghent ; for  they
had  allied  themselves  with  the  king  of  England,  who  had  sent  thither  a knight,  called  the
lord  Bourchier,  to  advise  and  govern  them.  The  citizens  of  Ghent  were  also  desirous  of
peace ; for  they  had  suffered  so  much  from  the  war  that  the  richest  and  principal  persons  of
the  town  were  no  longer  masters  of  their  property  : it  was  at  the  command  of  a few  wicked
soldiers,  who  governed  them  at  their  pleasure : the  wisest  foresaw  that  this  could  not  last
long  without  their  being  entirely  ruined.  When  they  were  talking  over  their  affairs  among

* Oliver  de  Clisson.


58


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


themselves,  some  wondered  they  had  been  thus  long  kept  together  in  unity;  but  others
knew  that  unity  to  have  been  the  effect  of  force,  and  more  through  fear  than  love,  for  Peter
du  Bois  would  not  desist  from  his  wickedness,  and  none  dared  before  him  to  speak  of  peace
or  of  treating  : the  moment  he  heard  of  any  one  thus  talking,  he  was  instantly  arrested,
however  respectable  he  might  be,  and  put  to  death.

This  war,  which  Ghent  had  carried  on  against  its  lord  the  earl  Lewis  of  Flanders  and  the
duke  of  Burgundy,  had  lasted  near  seven  years  ; and  it  would  be  melancholy  to  relate  all  the
various  unfortunate  events  which  it  had  caused.  Turks,  Saracens  and  Pagans  would  have
been  sorrowful  on  hearing  them,  for  all  commerce  by  sea  was  ruined.  The  sea-coasts  from
east  to  west,  and  all  the  north,  suffered  from  it ; for  in  truth  the  riches  and  merchandise  of
seventeen  kingdoms  were  sent  to  Sluys,  and  the  whole  was  unshipped  at  Damme  or  Bruges.
Now  consider,  that  if  these  distant  countries  suffered,  still  more  bitterly  must  those  nearer
have  felt  it.  No  means  of  peace  could  be  imagined.  It  was  first  thought  on  by  the  grace
of  God  and  divine  inspiration,  and  by  the  prayers  of  devout  people  to  the  Lord,  who,  at  their
request,  opened  his  ears,  and  took  pity  on  the  poor  people  of  Flanders.

I will  detail  how  a peace  was  made  between  them  and  the  duke  of  Burgundy,  as  minutely
as  1 have  before  related  the  cause  of  the  war,  which  originated  in  the  hatreds  of  Gilbert
Mathew,  John  Lyon,  and  their  accomplices,  and  I shall  beg  you  will  have  the  goodness  to
attend  to  me.  At  the  time  I am  now  speaking  of,  the  lord  Bourchier  governed  the  city  of
Ghent  for  the  king  of  England,  and  Peter  du  Bois  assisted  him  in  maintaining  his  authority,
and  retaining  the  affections  of  the  wicked.  There  were  several  prudent  men  that  were
disgusted  with  such  dissensions,  and  who  had  suffered  much  from  them:  they  dared  not  open
themselves  to  each  other  but  in  secret,  for  if  Peter  du  Bois  heard  that  any  person  was  desirous
of  peace,  he  was  put  to  death  without  mercy,  in  like  manner  as  he  and  Philip  von  Artaveld
had  slain  sir  Symon  Bete  and  sir  Gilbert  Gente,  and  lattei’ly,  in  order  to  frighten  the  town
of  Ghent,  they  had  destroyed  many  of  the  inhabitants.

When  Francis  Atremen  had  been  driven  from  the  town  of  Damme  by  the  king  of  France,
who,  having  totally  burnt  and  destroyed  the  Quatre  Mestiers,  was  returned  to  France,  as  it
has  been  before  related,  the  principal  persons  of  Ghent  supposed  the  king  would,  the  ensuing
summer,  return  before  that  town  with  a very  powerful  army.  Peter  du  Bois  and  those  of
his  party  were  unwilling  to  believe  it,  adding,  they  should  be  very  glad  to  see  the  king  come
thither,  for  tliev  had  formed  such  strong  alliances  with  the  king  of  England  as  to  be  certain
of  assistance.  At  this  time,  there  were  in  Ghent  two  valiant  men,  of  good  life  and  conver-
sation, of  moderate  birth  and  fortune,  neither  of  the  highest  nor  of  the  richest,  who  were  very
much  vexed  at  this  war  against  its  natural  lord  the  duke  of  Burgundy,  but  were  afraid  openly
to  declare  their  sentiments,  from  the  examples  which  had  been  made  by  Peter  du  Bois.  One
of  them  was  a mariner  ; the  other  the  most  considerable  butcher  in  the  market,  called  James
d’Ardembourg.  By  these  two  men  was  the  business  first  brought  about.  In  addition  to
them,  I must  include  a worthy  knight  of  Flanders,  named  sir  John  d’Elle,  a prudent
intelligent  man,  who  interested  himself  much  in  this  affair ; but,  if  it  had  not  been  through
the  means  of  the  two  aforementioned  persons,  he  would  not  have  interfered  in  it  so  happily ;
nor,  as  it  may  easily  be  believed,  could  all  the  knights  of  Flanders  have  succeeded.

This  sir  John  d’Elle  was  much  beloved  by  many  in  the  town  of  Ghent,  and  he  went  in
and  out  at  his  pleasure  without  being  suspected  by  any  one.  At  the  beginning  he  was  afraid
of  talking  either  about  war  or  peace ; nor  would  he  ever  have  done  so,  if  it  had  not  been
previously  mentioned  by  Roger  de  Cremin  and  James  d’Ardembourg,  and  I will  tell  you
how  it  happened.  These  two  were  much  displeased  at  the  continued  troubles  in  Flanders,
insomuch  that  they  conversed  together  on  the  subject,  when  Roger  said  to  James,  “ Whoever
could  interfere  between  this  our  native  town  of  Ghent,  which  is  so  much  oppressed,  and
the  duke  of  Burgundy  our  natural  lord,  would  do  a deed  of  great  charity,  and  acquire  by  it
grace  from  God  and  praise  from  men  ; for  the  differences  and  confusion  which  are  so
unbecoming  would  by  this  means  be  put  an  end  to.”

“ You  speak  truly,  Roger,”  replied  James ; “ but  it  will  be  a difficult  and  dangerous  thing
to  do,  on  account  of  Peter  du  Bois : no  one  dares  talk  of  peace  from  fear  of  him,  for  if  he
knew  of  it,  those  who  had  meddled  in  the  business  would  instantly  be  put  to  death.”


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


59


“ What !”  said  Roger,  “ shall  things  then  remain  always  as  they  are  ? There  must  he  an
end  to  it.”  “ Tell  me  how,”  answered  James,  “ and  I will  cheerfully  listen  to  you.”  Roger
replied,  “ You  are  the  principal  butcher  in  the  market,  the  richest  and  most  respected : you
can  talk  secretly  and  boldly  with  your  most  confidential  friends  and  brethren  in  trade  ; and
when  you  shall  find  they  understand  you,  by  degrees  you  can  draw  them  more  forward.
I,  on  the  other  hand,  who  am  a mariner,  and  well  beloved  by  all  such  sort  of  people,  whose
courage  I know,  and  who  hate  the  war,  for  they  have  lost  much  by  it,  will  remonstrate
with  some  of  them  on  the  subject,  and  they  will  induce  others  to  incline  the  same  way :
when  we  shall  have  gained  over  these  two  trades,  which  are  numerous  and  powerful,  the
other  trades,  and  honest  people  who  wish  for  peace,  will  join  us.”  “ Vei'y  well,”  said  James;
“ I will  sound  my  people  : do  you  the  same  by  yours.”

Each  of  them  performed  his  promise ; and  they  discoursed  so  prudently  with  their  friends
on  the  subject  that,  through  the  grace  of  the  TIoly  Spirit,  James  d’Ardcmbourg  found  all  his
brother  butchers  well  inclined  to  his  way  of  thinking.  Roger,  on  the  other  hand,  with  his
eloquence,  brought  the  mariners,  who  were  anxious  to  regain  the  pilotage  they  had  been  so
long  deprived  of,  to  the  same  opinion.  When  these  two  honest  men  were  conversing  on  the
business,  and  had  shown  how  desirous  they  had  found  their  people  to  obtain  peace,  they  said,
“ We  want  a proper  person  to  represent  our  situation  to  the  duke  of  Burgundy,”  and
instantly  thought  of  sir  John  d’Elle,  on  whom  they  determined  to  call,  as  he  was  then  in  the
town.  This  they  did,  and  loyally  told  him  their  whole  secret,  saying,  “ Sir  John,  we  have
so  effectually  worked  on  our  brethren  of  the  trade,  they  are  all  eager  for  peace ; but  on  condition
that  my  lord  of  Burgundy  will  engage  to  pardon  every  one,  and  keep  to  us  our  ancient
privileges,  for  which  we  can  show  sealed  charters.”  Sir  John  replied,  “ You  say  well,  and
I will  cheerfully  negotiate  the  matter  between  you.”

The  knight  waited  on  the  duke  of  Burgundy,  who  at  the  time  was  in  France  with  the
king,  and  related  to  him  all  lie  had  heard.  lie  demonstrated  so  well  the  advantages  of  the
business,  that  the  duke  willingly  listened  to  his  proposals.  In  truth,  he  was  desirous  of  peace
with  Ghent,  on  account  of  the  intended  expedition  which  he  wished  the  king  to  make  against
England.  Ilis  own  council  advised  it,  as  did  sir  Guy  de  la  Trimouille,  sir  John  dc  Vienne,
and  also  the  constable  of  France  and  the  lord  de  Coucy.  He  therefore  told  the  knight  he
would  assent  to  the  terms  proposed,  and  that  he  might  return  with  his  answer  to  those  who
had  sent  him.  The  duke  inquired  if  Francis  Atremen  had  been  present  when  this  matter
was  brought  forward  : he  said,  “ No,  my  lord  : he  is -governor  of  the  castle  of  Gaure  ; and
I know  not  if  those  who  have  sent  me  would  like  he  should  be  made  acquainted  with  the
business.”  “ Tell  them,”  answered  the  duke,  “ to  speak  to  him  boldly  on  the  subject : he
will  not  do  anything  in  opposition,  for  I understand  he  most  earnestly  wishes  to  make  his
peace  with  me.”  The  knight  returned  to  Ghent  with  this  good  news,  with  which  they  were
well  pleased.  He  then  went  to  the  castle  of  Gaure  to  Francis  Atremen,  when  he  opened
the  whole  matter  to  him,  but  under  secrecy.  Francis,  having  paused  a little,  replied  gaily,
• — “ Since  my  lord  of  Burgundy  is  willing  to  pardon  everything,  and  to  secure  to  the  town
of  Ghent  its  privileges,  I will  no  longer  be  a rebel,  but  endeavour  by  all  means  to  obtain
my  peace.”

The  knight  left  Francis  Atremen  in  Gaure,  and  returned  to  the  duke  of  Burgundy  in
France  with  the  account  how  matters  stood.  The  duke  heard  him  with  pleasure,  and  wrote
very  amicable  letters  to  those  of  Ghent,  sealed  with  his  seal,  and  on  this  issue  of  the  treaty
the  knight  went  back  to  Flanders  and  to  Ghent,  but  he  did  not  carry  thither  his  letters  : he,
however,  gave  such  assurances  to  Roger  Cremin  and  James  d’Ardembourg  that  he  had  them
to  produce,  as  to  lead  them  to  consider  the  affair  as  good  as  concluded.  Now,  consider  what
great  peril  these  men  and  the  knight  were  in ; for,  if  the  lord  Bourcliier  or  Peter  du  Bois
bad  known  of  it,  their  lives  would  have  paid  the  forfeit.


60


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


CHAPTER  CLXXVI. THE  TWO  CITIZENS  FIX  ON  A DAY  TO  ASSEMBLE  THEIR  FRIENDS,  TO

ACCOMPLISH  THEIR  PLAN. ALL  GHENT  ARE  DNANIMOUS  FOR  PEACE,  NOTWITHSTAND-

ING THE  ATTEMPTS  TO  PREVENT  IT  BY  THE  GOVERNOR  FOR  THE  KING  OF  ENGLAND
AND  PETER  DU  BOIS.

Roger  Cremin  and  James  d’Ardembourg,  by  whom  the  whole  business  was  managed,
9aid  to  sir  John  d’Elle  : — “ Come  hither  on  Thursday  morning  exactly  at  nine  o’clock,  and
bring  my  lord  of  Burgundy’s  letters  with  you  ; we  will  show  them,  if  we  succeed  in  our
intentions,  to  the  commonalty  of  Ghent,  and  have  them  publicly  read  ; by  which  means
they  will  put  greater  confidence  in  them,  for,  at  the  time  we  mention,  we  shall  be  masters  of
the  town,  or  dead  men.”  Sir  John  replied,  he  would  do  as  they  had  said  ; when  their  council
broke  up,  and  sir  John  left  the  town  to  consider  how  he  was  to  act.  These  two  citizens
were  very  active  to  complete  their  plans,  and  constantly  busy  with  their  principal  supporters,
the  deans  of  guilds.  By  their  assiduity,  they  had  gained  over  the  greater  number  of  the
populace  ; and  it  was  ordered,  at  eight  o’clock  on  Thursday,  they  should  quit  their  houses,
the  banner  of  Flanders  displayed  before  them,  and  shout,  “ Flanders  for  the  Lion  ! the  lord
of  the  country  grants  peace  to  the  good  town  of  Ghent,  and  pardon  to  all  evil-minded
persons.”

This  business  could  not  be  carried  on  so  secretly  but  that  Peter  du  Bois  knew  of  it : the
moment  he  had  the  information,  lie  went  to  the  lord  Bourchier,  who  was  governor-in-cliief
for  the  king  of  England,  and  said  to  him, — “ My  lord,  Roger  Cremin  and  James
d’Ardembourg  intend  assembling  the  inhabitants  to-morrow  morning,  at  eight  o’clock,  in  the
market-place,  with  the  banner  of  Flanders  in  their  hands,  and  are  to  shout  out  through  the
streets,  ‘ Flanders  for  the  Lion  ! the  lord  of  the  country  grants  peace  and  pardon  to  the  good
town  of  Ghent  for  all  misdemeanours.’  What  are  we  now  to  do  ? The  king  of  England
will  no  longer  be  obeyed  in  this  town,  if  we  be  not  beforehand  with  them,  and  drive  them
out  of  our  territories.”  “ How  shall  we  do  this  ?”  replied  the  lord  Bourchier.  Peter  said,
“ We  must  assemble  all  our  people  to-morrow  morning  in  the  town-house,  when,  after  we
have  armed  them,  we  will  march  through  the  town,  crying  out  also,  ‘ Flanders  for  the
Lion  ! the  king  of  England  for  the  country,  and  lord  of  the  town  of  Ghent.’  When
we  have  got  to  the  market-place,  those  who  are  our  friends  will  join  us,  and  then  we
will  kill  all  traitors  and  rebels.”  “Be  it  so,”  answered  lord  Bourchier : “you  have  well
imagined  it,  and  it  shall  be  done.”

God  was  wondrous  kind  to  these  two  honest  citizens;  for  they  had  intelligence  given  them
of  the  arrangement  just  mentioned.  On  hearing  it,  they  were  not  dismayed,  but  in  the  evening
visited  their  friends  the  deacons,  and  said  to  them,  “ We  had  fixed  to  be  in  the  market-place
to-morrow  at  eight,  but  we  now  must  change  it  to  seven  o’clock.”  This  they  did  to  break
the  measures  of  Peter  du  Bois,  who  was  on  the  watch  with  forty  others,  and  all  agreed  to
change  the  hour.  On  Thursday  morning,  the  lord  Bourchier,  with  sixty  of  his  men,  went  to
the  town-house.  Peter  du  Bois  came  thither  with  his  forty,  when  they  all  armed  and  put
themselves  in  good  array.

Roger  Cremin  and  James  d’Ardembourg  assembled  their  friends  at  the  place  they  had  fixed
on,  when  the  greater  part  of  those  who  had  been  deans  of  guilds  joined  them.  They  then
displayed  the  banner  of  the  earl,  began  their  march  through  the  town,  shouting  the  cry
before  mentioned.  Those  that  heard  it,  and  saw  the  deacons  of  their  trades  and  the  banner
of  the  earl,  mixed  with  their  companions  and  followed  the  banner  as  fast  as  possible.  They
arrived  at  the  market-place  on  the  point  of  seven  o’clock,  where  having  halted,  and  placed
the  banner  of  the  earl  before  them,  they  were  continually  joined  by  crowds  of  people,  who
drew  up  among  them.

News  was  carried  to  lord  Bourchier  and  Peter  du  Bois,  who  were  in  the  town-house
mustering  their  men,  that  Roger  Cremin  and  James  d’Ardembourg  had  taken  possession  of
the  market-place.  On  hearing  this,  they  marched  out  with  the  banner  of  England  displayed  ;
and,  as  they  advanced,  they  shouted  their  cry.  In  this  manner  they  arrived  in  the  market-


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


01


place,  and  drew  np  opposite  to  the  others,  waiting  for  more  to  join  them  ; but  very  few  did
so,  for  they  went  to  those  who  had  the  earl’s  banner,  insomuch  that  Roger  and  James  had
eighty  from  every  hundred  men  who  came  thither.  The  market-place  was  full  of  men  at
arms,  who  kept  silent,  eyeing  each  other.  Peter  du  Bois  was  thunderstruck  when  he
perceived  that  the  deans  of  guilds,  with  their  men,  had  united  with  Roger  Cremin  and  James
d’Ardembourg,  and  began  to  fear  for  his  life  ; for  he  saw  that  those  who  had  been  used  to
follow  him  now  avoided  him.  He  therefore  quietly  got  out  of  the  crowd,  and  went  to
hide  himself  for  fear  of  being  killed.

Roger  Cremin  and  James  d’Ardembourg  finding,  from  appearances,  that  almost  all  the
inhabitants  had  put  themselves  under  their  banner,  were  much  rejoiced,  and  with  reason,  for
they  then  well  knew  things  were  in  a good  train,  and  that  the  people  would  keep  peace  with
their  lord.  They  advanced,  with  a large  detachment  of  their  men,  leaving  the  main  body
behind,  with  the  banner  of  Flanders  carried  before  them,  towards  the  lord  Bourchier  and  the
English,  who  did  not  think  their  lives  very  secure.  Roger  halted  opposite  to  lord  Bourchier,
and  said,  “ What  have  you  done  with  Peter  du  Bois  ? We  wish  to  know  your  intentions,
and  whether  you  are  friends  or  enemies  ?”  The  knight  replied,  that  he  imagined  Peter  du
Bois  was  there  ; but,  when  he  found  he  was  gone,  said,  “ I know  not  what  is  become  of  him  :
I thought  he  had  been  with  me  : for  my  part,  I shall  be  steady  to  the  king  of  England,  who  is
my  right  natural  lord,  and  who  has  sent  me  hither  at  your  own  entreaties,  if  you  will  be  pleased
to  remember  it.”  “ That  is  true,”  they  answered  ; “ for  if  the  good  town  of  Ghent  had  not
sent  for  you,  we  would  have  put  you  to  death ; but  in  honour  to  the  king  of  England,  who
has  ordered  you  hither  at  our  request,  neither  you  nor  your  men  shall  run  the  smallest  risk.
W e will  save  you  from  all  danger,  and  conduct  you,  or  have  you  conducted,  as  far  as  the
town  of  Calais.  Retire  now,  therefore,  peaceably  to  your  houses,  without  stirring  thence  for
anything  you  may  see  or  hear,  as  we  are  determined  to  have  for  our  lord  the  duke  of
Burgundy,  and  no  longer  to  carry  on  the  war.”  The  knight  was  much  pleased  with  this
speech,  and  said,  “ My  fair  sirs  and  good  friends,  since  it  may  not  be  otherwise,  God  assist
you ! and  I thank  you  for  the  offers  you  make  me.”


CHAPTER  CLXXVir.- SIR  JOHN  d’eLLE  BRINGS  LETTERS  PATENT  OF  PEACE  AND  PARDON  TO

THE  MEN  OF  GHENT,  FROM  THE  DUKE  OF  BURGUNDY. THIS  PEACE  IS  CONFIRMED  AT

TOURNAY  BY  OTHER  LETTERS  PATENT  ON  EACH  SIDE.

The  lord  Bourchier  and  his  men  quietly  left  the  market-place,  and  those  of  Ghent  who  had
been  with  him,  slily  slipt  away  to  hide  themselves,  or  mixed  with  the  others,  under  their
banner.  Shortly  afterwards,  sir  John  d’Elle  entered  the  town  and  rode  to  the  market-place,
bringing  with  him  letters  patent,  couched  in  fail’  language,  and  properly  sealed,  from  the  duke
of  Burgundy  to  the  town  of  Ghent,  which  were  publicly  read  and  shown  to  all,  and  gave
universal  satisfaction.  Francis  Atremen  was  now  sent  for  from  the  castle  of  Gaure,  who
instantly  came,  and  agreed  to  the  whole  of  the  treaty,  saying,  “ It  was  well  done.”

Sir  John  d’Elle  now  returned  to  the  duke  of  Burgundy,  who  was  with  his  duchess  at
Arras  : he  related  to  him  all  that  had  passed  at  Ghent ; that  Peter  du  Bois  had  lost  all
power  there,  and  would  probably  have  been  killed  had  he  been  found  ; that  Francis  Atremen
had  behaved  gallantly  and  loyally  in  respect  to  the  peace.  The  duke  was  much  pleased  with
all  this,  and  signed  a truce  to  last  until  the  first  day  of  January ; and  ordered  a day  to  be
fixed  on,  in  the  meantime,  for  conferences  to  be  liolden  at  Tournay,  to  confirm  the  peace.
With  these  papers  properly  sealed  and  signed,  the  knight  returned  to  Ghent : which  gave
such  joy  to  every  one,  as  plainly  showed  peace  was  the  unanimous  wish.

The  lord  Bourchier,  the  English,  and  Peter  du  Bois,  still  remained  in  Ghent,  but  nothing
was  done  against  them.  Peter  du  Bois  continued  in  peace,  because  he  had  sworn  he  would
never  more  interfere  in  any  war  with  the  good  people  of  Ghent  against  their  lord  the  duke  of
Burgundy.  He  was,  however,  much  assisted  in  this  peril  by  Francis  Atremen,  who
had  spoken  handsomely  for  him  to  the  inhabitants  : and  for  this  reason  Peter  remained
unmolested  : besides,  they  knew  that  Peter  had  only  held  similar  opinions  to  their  own,  and


62


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


that  he  was  a good  and  loyal  captain.  During  the  truce  which  had  been  made  between  the
duke  of  Burgundy  and  the  town  of  Ghent,  they  elected  those  who  were  to  attend  the
conference  at  Tournay.  Francis  Atremen  was  chosen  as  principal,  because  he  was  well
mannered,  of  good  dispositions,  and  acquainted  with  the  lords  he  was  to  treat  with  : Roger
Cremin  and  James  d'Ardembourg  were  elected  with  him.  They  arrived  at  Tournay  during
the  octave  of  St.  Andrew,  escorted  by  fifty  horse,  and  lodged  altogether  at  the  Salmon  Inn,
in  the  street  of  St.  Brice.

The  duke  and  duchess  of  Burgundy,  with  madame  de  Nevers,  their  daughter,  came  thither
on  the  fifth  day  of  December,  and  entered  Tournay  by  the  gate  of  Lille.  The  Ghent  men
instantly  rode  out  to  meet  them,  on  handsome  horses  : they  did  not  dismount,  but,  bareheaded,
saluted  the  duke  and  tire  ladies.  The  duke  passed  hastily  through  the  town,  to  meet  the
duchess  of  Brabant,  who  came  that  same  day,  and  entered  it  by  the  Mechlin  gate : she  was
lodged  at  the  bishop’s  palace.  The  conferences  now  began,  relative  to  the  treaty  which  the
duke  had  granted  to  Ghent.  Sir  John  d’Elle  attended  them,  as  he  had,  with  much  difficulty,
brought  this  business  to  an  end  between  the  two  parties.  At  last,  at  the  entreaties  of  the
duchess  of  Burgundy  and  madame  de  Nevers,  the  duke  pardoned  everything  ; and  peace  was
proclaimed,  after  it  had  been  drawn  out  and  sealed  by  both  parties,  in  manner  following.


CHAPTER  CLXXVIII. THE  TREATY  OF  PEACE  BETWEEN  DUKE  PHILIP  OF  BURGUNDY,  EARL

OF  FLANDERS,  IN  RIGHT  OF  HIS  WIFE,  WITH  THE  TOWN  OF  GHENT  AND  ITS  ALLIES.

Philip  of  France,  duke  of  Burgundy,  earl  of  Flanders  and  Artois,  palatine  of  Burgundy,
lord  of  Salins,  count  of  Retliel,  and  lord  of  Mechlin,  with  Margaret,  duchess  and  countess  of
the  countries  aforesaid,  to  all  whom  these  presents  shall  come,  greeting  : be  it  known,  that
our  well-beloved  subjects,  the  sheriffs,  deacons,  council,  and  commonalty,  of  our  good  town
of  Ghent,  having  humbly  supplicated  our  lord,  the  king,  and  11s,  to  have  mercy  upon  them,
and  that  our  said  lord,  together  with  us,  having  had  compassion  on  them,  by  other  letters
than  these  present,  and  for  the  reasons  contained  in  them,  have  pardoned  and  forgiven  all
misdemeanours  and  offences  committed  by  them,  our  subjects  of  Ghent ; and  have  fully
confirmed  all  the  said  customs,  privileges,  and  franchises,  provided  they  place  themselves
wholly  under  the  obedience  of  our  said  lord  and  us.  Which  grace  and  pardon  the  aforesaid
subjects  of  Ghent  and  their  allies  have  very  humbly  received  from  our  said  lord  and  us,  by  their
letters  and  ambassadors,  which  they  have  sent  to  our  said  lord  and  us,  being  at  Tournay,  and
liav.e  renounced  all  wars  and  disputes,  being  returned  most  heartily  to  their  obedience,  to  the
said  lord  and  us,  promising  henceforward  to  be  good  friends  and  loyal  subjects  to  our  said  lord
the  king,  as  to  their  sovereign  lord,  and  to  us  as  their  natural  lord,  in  right  of  Margaret,  our
wife,  being  their  natural  lady  and  heiress.  For  which  cause  our  said  lord  and  ourselves,  have
received  our  said  subjects  of  Ghent  and  their  allies  into  our  favour,  and  have  granted  them
letters  of  remission  for  all  offences,  singly  and  absolutely,  with  the  restitution  of  all  their
franchises  and  privileges,  as  will  be  more  fully  apparent  in  these  our  letters.  After  which
grace  and  remission,  our  said  subjects  of  our  good  town  of  Ghent,  having  made  several
supplications  which  we  have  received,  and  have  had  maturely  considered  by  our  council,  and
they,  according  with  the  common  good  of  the  country,  in  order  to  put  a final  end  to  all
dissensions,  from  our  love  and  favour  to  our  good  subjects,  have  ordered  as  follows,  in  regard
to  these  said  supplications  :

First,  with  regard  to  their  request,  that  we  would  confirm  the  privileges  of  Courtray,
Oudenarde,  Grammont,  Meule,  Dendremonde,  Russelmonde,  Alost,  Atli,  Arclo,  Breuilles,
Deynse,  and  the  jurisdictions  of  these  towns  in  the  low  countries.  We  order  the  inhabitants
of  these  said  towns  to  wait  on  us  with  their  said  privileges  ; and,  after  examination  of  them
by  our  council,  we  will  so  act,  that  our  subjects  of  Ghent,  and  the  other  good  towns,  shall
be  satisfied  therewith  : and  should  any  of  the  said  privileges  be  lost  or  accidentally  destroyed,
after  strict  inquiry  made  on  the  subject,  we  will  provide  accordingly  as  it  has  been  before
mentioned.


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &e.


GR

Item, — as  to  their  requests  concerning  commerce,  we  consent  that  it  have  free  course
through  our  country  of  Flanders,  on  paying  the  usual  duties.

Item, — should  any  of  their  friends  or  allies  he  hereafter  arrested  in  any  foreign  country,
on  account  of  the  late  disturbances,  we  will  have  them  sent  home  in  safety.  We  likewise
consent,  that  if  any  of  them  be  thus  arrested,  we  will  assist  and  defend  them  to  the  utmost
of  our  power,  as  good  lords  should  do  to  loyal  subjects.

Item, — we  are  willing  that  all  prisoners  of  their  party,  supposing  them  to  have  agreed  for
their  ransom,  shall  have  their  liberty,  on  paying  the  stipulated  sum  And  other  reasonable
expenses  ; provided,  however,  that  if  any  of  the  said  prisoners,  their  relations  or  friends,  hold
any  fortresses  against  us,  such  be  first  given  up  : and  on  like  terms  shall  those  attached  to  us,
and  confined  by  our  subjects  of  Ghent  or  their  allies,  be  set  at  liberty.


Ghent. — The  Old  Maison  de  Ville.  From  an  Original  Drawing.


Item, — out  of  our  abundant  goodness  we  have  ordered,  and  by  these  presents  do  order,  that
all  those  who  may  have  been  banished  from  our  good  towns  of  Bruges,  Ypres,  or  other  places,
on  account  of  these  dissensions,  as  well  as  those  who  may  have  been  banished  by  law  and
justice  from  our  good  town  of  Ghent,  or  who  may  have  voluntarily  absented  themselves,  be
restored,  so  that  they  may  return  to  the  said  towns  and  reside  ; provided  those  who  have  held
for  the  party  of  Ghent  be  in  like  manner  restored  to  their  different  towns  or  country,  and
when  they  re-enter  the  towns  to  which  they  are  restored,  they  make  oath  before  our  officers
in  the  town  of  Ghent,  and  swear  to  keep  the  peace  in  such  towns,  and  not  commit  any  damage
either  in  a public  or  private  manner  on  any  of  the  inhabitants.  In  the  like  manner  will  those
swear  who  shall  re-enter  Ghent.

Item, — all  those  who  may  return  to  our  town  of  Ghent,  with  their  allies  and  other
inhabitants,  will  be  obedient  to  our  said  lord  and  to  us,  and  will  promptly  put  themselves
under  our  obedience.  With  regard  to  those  who  may  now  be  absent,  they  shall  be  restored,
in  time  hereafter  to  be  specified,  to  their  fiefs,  houses,  lands,  and  inheritances,  in  whatever


64


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


place  tliey  may  be,  notwithstanding  any  mischiefs  they  may  have  done  during,  and  on  account
of  these  disturbances,  in  as  full  a manner  as  they  enjoyed  them  previous  to  that  period.

Item, — should  any  of  the  inhabitants  of  the  said  town  of  Ghent,  or  their  allies,  be  in
Brabant,  Hainault,  Holland,  Zealand,  Cambresis,  or  in  the  bishopric  of  Liege,  and  should
they,  within  two  months  after  the  publication  of  this  peace,  put  themselves  under  the  obedience
of  our  said  lord  and  us,  and  furthermore  take  such  oaths  as  shall  be  hereafter  declared  before
us,  or  before  those  whom  we  may  appoint  to  receive  them,  they  shall  fully  enjoy  all  the
before-mentioned  pardons  and  graces.  And  those  who  may  be  in  England,  Frizeland,  or
Germany,  should  they,  within  four  months  as  aforesaid,  put  themselves  under  our  obedience,
shall  enjoy  the  like  privileges.  If  such  as  may  be  beyond  sea  at  Rome,  or  at  St.  Jago  de
Compostella,  should,  within  one  year  from  the  publication  of  the  peace,  without  fraud,  take
the  oaths  aforesaid,  they  shall  partake  of  the  same  privileges,  and  in  like  manner  all  those
banished  by  judgment  of  law,  or  such  persons  as  may  have  voluntarily  absented  themselves
on  account  of  the  dissensions,  shall  be  restored  to  their  fiefs,  houses,  lands,  and  inheritances
according  to  their  several  claims.

Item, — with  regard  to  movctble  property,  which  may  have  been  taken  on  both  sides,  no
restitutions  be  made,  but  each  party  remain  acquitted  to  each  other ; unless,  indeed,
restitutions  be  made,  to  discharge  the  consciences  of  those  who  may  have  taken  such  things.

Item, — those  now  in  possession  of  the  houses  which  are  to  be  restored,  as  well  on  one  side
as  on  the  other,  shall  not  carry  away  any  fixture  whatever  ; and  such  houses  shall  be  restored
with  all  their  appurtenances  and  rents  which  may  then  be  due  ; and  henceforward  all  rents
and  profits  shall  be  collected  peaceably  by  those  to  whom  they  legally  belong.

Item, — it  having  been  reported  to  us,  that  some  of  our  subjects  of  Ghent  or  their  allies,
have  done  homage  for  fiefs  which  they  hold,  to  other  lords  than  to  those  to  whom  they  legally
appertain,  and  by  such  means  have  forfeited  their  fiefs,  notwithstanding  which,  we  will,  out
of  our  grace,  that  such  fiefs  remain  to  them,  on  performing  homage  to  us,  for  what  had
been  ours,  and  of  our  vassals  holding  from  us ; and  we  acknowledge,  out  of  our  especial  favour,
any  leases  or  recognisances  as  legal  between  the  present  parties.

Item, — our  said  subjects  of  Ghent,  the  sheriffs,  deacons,  council,  commonalty,  and  their  allies,
by  our  orders,  and  their  own  freewill,  having  renounced  all  alliances,  oaths,  obligations,  acts
and  homages,  which  they,  or  any  of  them,  may  have  done  to  the  king  of  England,  to  his
commissioners,  deputies,  or  officers,  or  to  others  who  may  not  be  in  the  good  pleasure  of  our
said  lord  or  of  us,  do  now  make  oath  that  from  henceforward  they  will  be  good  and  loyal
subjects  to  our  said  lord,  and  to  his  successors,  the  kings  of  France,  as  well  as  to  us  ; and  will
perform  such  services  to  us  and  to  our  successors,  as  good  and  loyal  subjects  are  bounden  to
do  to  their  lord  or  lady,  to  defend  their  persons,  honour,  inheritances,  and  rights,  and  prevent
all  who  may  endeavour  to  invade  them,  by  giving  direct  information  to  our  officers,  saving
always  their  own  rights  and  privileges.

Item, — that  our  subjects  of  our  good  town  of  Ghent  may  remain  always  in  peace,  and  under
the  obedience  of  our  said  lord  the  king  and  us,  as  well  as  of  our  heirs,  the  earls  of  Flanders
our  successors,  and  that  disturbances  which  may  in  future  arise  be  prevented,  we  will  that  all
these  aforesaid  articles  be  strictly  maintained  without  any  infringement.  And  we  forbid  our
subjects,  however  ill  they  may  have  acted  towards  us  in  the  late  dissensions,  to  venture  in
any  way,  either  directly  or  indirectly,  by  word  or  deed,  to  offer  any  injury,  by  reproaches  or
insults,  to  the  aforesaid  men  of  Ghent.

Item, — if  any  one  act  contrary  to  these  our  orders,  and  injure  those  of  Ghent,  under
pretence  of  taking  our  part,  for  what  may  have  passed  during  the  late  disturbances,  such
offence  shall  be  brought  before  the  lord,  and  the  courts  to  which  it  may  belong;  and  such
criminal  act  shall  be  punished  by  corporal  punishment  and  confiscation  of  goods,  as  shall  in
like  manner  the  offences  of  their  accomplices,  abettors,  and  those  who  may  attempt  to  conceal
them,  after  having  been  convicted  of  infringing  the  peace,  as  well  by  the  justice  of  our  officers
or  of  other  lords,  as  by  the  laws  of  the  country  to  whose  jurisdiction  it  may  more  immediately
appertain : a reasonable  satisfaction  shall  be  made  to  the  injured  party,  from  the  criminal’s
effects,  and  the  surplus  be  paid  to  us,  or  to  whatever  lord  has  the  right  to  it,  saving  the
privileges  of  the  towns.


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


05


Item, — should  any  of  the  citizens  of  our  said  town  of  Ghent  be  banished  from  the  said
town  for  fraction  of  the  peace;  and  supposing  that  prior  to  this  peace,  by  the  privileges  of
the  town,  their  effects  could  not  be  confiscated  ; nevertheless,  for  the  better  preserving  this
peace,  they  shall,  for  such  cause,  be  confiscated,  and  from  such  effects  shall  reparation  be  made
to  the  party  injured,  as  has  been  before  stated,  and  the  residue  revert  to  their  legal  heirs,  just
as  if  such  persons  were  deceased,  saving  in  all  other  respects  the  privileges  of  our  good  town
of  Ghent : and  if  such  wicked  persons  cannot  be  ai’rested,  so  as  to  suffer  corporal  punishment,
their  effects  shall  be  confiscated  as  aforesaid.

Item, — if  any  abusive  language  shall  be  uttered,  and  come  to  the  ears  of  any  of  our  civil
officers,  against  this  our  order,  we  will  that  the  person  uttering  such  be  punished  by  arbitrary
fine,  so  as  to  serve  for  an  example  to  others,  by  the  legal  judges  of  such  places  before  whom
he  or  they  shall  have  been  brought,  saving  the  franchises  and  privileges  of  those  places.

Item, — if  any  churchman  be  guilty  of  any  acts  against  the  said  peace,  let  him  be  transferred
to  his  ordinary,  to  be  punished  as  an  infringer  of  the  peace,  according  as  the  case  may  require.

Item, — this  same  peace  shall  be  publicly  proclaimed  and  published  in  the  said  town  of
Ghent,  and  in  all  our  other  towns  in  Flanders.

Item, — should  any  doubts  or  obscurity  appear  on  the  face  of  the  said  articles  of  peace,  we
declare,  and  will  order  our  council  to  declare,  that  such  doubts  and  obscurities,  should  any
such  arise,  shall  be  interpreted  and  explained  in  such  manner  as  shall  give  satisfaction  to
the  complainants.

And  we,  the  deans  and  commonalty  of  the  town  of  Ghent,  do  by  these  presents  accept  for
ourselves  and  for  our  allies  these  acts  of  clemency,  pardon  and  grace  done  to  us,  by  king
Charles,  our  lord  paramount,  and  by  the  aforesaid  duke  and  duchess,  earl  and  countess  of
Flanders,  our  lawful  and  natural  lords  : and  we  thank  them,  from  the  bottom  of  our  hearts,
for  these  said  graces  and  pardons.  We  also  swear  obedience,  as  good  and  loyal  subjects
should  do,  to  them,  and  will  guard,  to  the  utmost  of  our  power,  their  persons  and  honour.

In  testimony  of  which,  we  the  duke  and  duchess  aforesaid  have  had  our  seals  put  to  these
letters ; — and  we  the  sheriffs,  deacons,  and  commonalty  of  the  town  of  Ghent  have  also
affixed  the  seal  of  the  town.

In  addition  to  which,  we  the  duke  and  duchess  aforesaid  have  entreated  and  do  entreat
our  very  dear  and  well-beloved  aunt  the  duchess  of  Luxembourg  and  Brabant,  and  our  very
dear  and  well-beloved  brother  duke  Albert  of  Bavaria.  And  we  also,  the  sheriffs,  deacons,
and  commonalty  of  Ghent,  entreat  the  very  powerful  and  puissant  princess  the  lady  duchess
of  Luxembourg  and  Brabant,  and  the  high  and  puissant  prince  duke  Albert  aforesaid.  And
also  we  the  duke  and  duchess  of  Burgundy,  and  we  the  sheriffs,  council,  and  commonalty
of  Ghent,  entreat  the  barons  and  nobles  of  the  country  of  Flanders,  hereafter  named,  from
the  good  towns  of  Bruges,  Ypres,  the  Franconate,  Mechlin,  and  Antwerp,  for  the  security
of  the  peace,  and  assurance  of  the  truth  of  the  above-mentioned  articles,  to  affix  their  own
seals,  and  the  seals  of  the  different  towns,  to  these  presents.

And  we  Jane,  by  the  grace  of  God  duchess  of  Luxembourg,  Brabant,  and  Limbourg ;
and  we  duke  Albert  of  Bavaria,  bailiff,  regent,  and  heir  to  the  countries  of  Ilainault,
Holland,  Zealand,  and  lordship  of  Frizeland : we  William,  eldest  son  to  the  earl  of  Namur
and  lord  of  Sluys ; Hugh  lord  d’Antoing  and  warden  of  Ghent,  John  lord  de  Guistelles  and
de  Harues,  Henry  de  Bruges,  lord  de  Dixmude  and  de  Havre,  John  lord  de  Gonuseberge
and  de  la  Jentoise,  Arnold  de  Jouste  lord  d’Estournay,  Philip  lord  d’Axalle,  Louis  de  la
Ilasle  bastard  of  Flanders,  Girard  de  Rasenlien  lord  de  Baserode,  Walter  lord  de  Halun,
Philip  de  Hamur  lord  d’Eque,  John  Villain,  lord  de  St.  Jean  d’Outre,  warden  of  Ypres,
Lewis  lord  de  Lambres  knight : and  we  the  burgomasters,  with  the  sheriffs  of  the  towns  of
Bruges  and  Ypres:  we  Philip  de  Redehen  and  de  Montferrant  sheriffs:  Montfranc  de
Montamar  knight,  sheriff  of  the  Franconate,  in  the  name  of  that  territory,  which  has  no
common  seal : and  we,  the  council  of  the  towns  of  Mechlin  and  Antwerp, — have  at  the
aforesaid  request,  for  the  good  of  the  peace,  and  for  the  greater  security  and  truth  of  all  the
fore-mentioned  articles,  and  every  one  of  them,  caused  to  be  affixed  our  seals  and  the  seals
of  the  aforesaid  towns  to  these  presents. — Executed  at  Tournay  the  18th  day  of  December,
in  the  year  of  grace  1885.

VOL.  II.  p


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


CC>


CHAPTER  CLXXIX. PETER  DU  BOIS,  AFTER  THE  CONCLUSION  OF  THE  PEACE,  RETIRES  TO

ENGLAND  WITH  TnE  LORD  BOURCHIER,  GOVERNOR  OF  GHENT.

When  all  tliese  ordinances  and  treaties  of  peace  had  hcen  engrossed  and  sealed,  they  were
published  before  the  parties : the  duke  of  Burgundy  had  one  part,  and  the  deputies  from
Ghent  the  other.  Francis  Atremen  and  the  deputation  with  him  most  humbly  took  leave
of  the  duke  and  duchess  of  Burgundy,  and  of  the  duchess  of  Brabant,  thanking  them
repeatedly,  and  offering  their  services  to  them  for  ever.  The  good  lady  of  Brabant  returned
their  thanks,  and  kindly  entreated  them  firmly  to  maintain  the  peace,  and  induce  others
to  do  the  same,  and  desired  them  never  to  rebel  against  their  lord  and  lady,  for  they  had
seen  with  how  much  difficulty  peace  had  now  been  brought  about.  They  thanked  her
heartily,  and  the  conference  broke  up,  and  each  retired  to  his  home.

The  duke  and  duchess  of  Burgundy  went  to  Lille,  where  they  staid  some  time,  and  the
deputation  returned  to  Ghent.  When  Peter  du  Bois  saw  peace  so  firmly  established  that
there  was  not  a possibility  of  any  future  disturbance  or  rebellion,  he  was  greatly  cast  down:
he  doubted  whether  to  remain  in  Ghent,  considering  that  now  everything  had  been  pardoned
under  the  seal  of  the  duke,  so  that  none  were  afraid,  or  whether  to  accompany  the  lord
Bourchier  and  the  English  to  England.  Having  paid  due  attention  to  all  circumstances,  he
did  not  think  ho  could  venture  to  trust  himself  in  Ghent.  True  it  is,  that  Francis  Atremen,
when  he  mentioned  his  intentions  of  quitting  Ghent,  said,  “ Peter,  everything  is  pardoned ;
and  you  know,  by  the  treaties  made  and  sealed  with  my  lord  of  Burgundy,  that  no  one  can
suffer  for  what  has  passed.”  “Francis,”  replied  Peter,  “real  pardons  do  not  always  lie  in
letters  patent  : one  may  pardon  by  word  of  mouth,  and  give  letters  to  the  same  effect,  but
hatred  may  still  lie  in  the  heart.  I am  but  a man  of  low  birth,  and  little  consequence  in  the
town  of  Ghent,  and  yet  have  done  all  in  my  power  to  maintain  its  rights  and  privileges.
Do  you  think,  that  in  two  or  three  years  hence,  the  people  will  remember  it  ? There  are
persons  of  high  birth  in  the  town  : Gilbert  Matthew  and  his  brethren,  who  were  enemies  to
my  master  John  Lyon,  will  return,  and  will  never  view  me  but  with  evil  eyes  ; as  will  also
the  relations  of  sir  Gilbert  Gente  and  sir  Symon  Bete,  who  were  slain  by  me  : never  can  I
trust  myself  safely  in  this  town.  And  will  you  venture  to  remain  among  such  traitors,
who  have  broken  their  faith  with  the  king  of  England  ? I swear,  that  you  yourself  will  in
the  end  suffer.”  “ I know  not  what  may  happen,”  answered  Francis ; “ but  I have  such
faith  in  the  treaty,  and  in  the  promises  of  my  lord  and  lady  of  Burgundy,  that  I shall
certainly  stay  here*.”

Peter  du  Bois  made  a supplication  to  the  sheriffs,  deacons,  council,  and  governors  of
Ghent,  saying,  “ My  fair  gentlemen,  I have  served  the  good  town  of  Ghent  to  the  very
utmost  of  my  power : many  times  have  I hazarded  my  life  for  it : and  for  all  these  services
the  oidy  reward  I ask  is,  that  you  would  have  me  and  mine,  my  wife  and  children,  escorted
in  safety  with  the  lord  Bourchier,  whom  you  have  ordered  to  England.”  Those  present
unanimously  complied  with  his  wish  ; and  I must  say,  that  Roger  Cremin  and  James
d’Ardembourg,  by  whom  the  peace  had  been  made,  were  more  glad  than  sorry  at  his
departure ; as  were  likewise  the  principal  persons  in  Ghent,  who  wished  peace  and  love
to  all.  Peter  du  Bois  made  his  preparations,  and  left  Ghent  in  company  with  lord  Bourchier
and  the  English,  carrying  with  him  his  whole  fortune  ; for,  in  truth,  he  was  well  provided
with  gold,  silver,  and  jewels.  Sir  John  d’Elle  escorted  them,  under  a passport  from  the  duke
of  Burgundy,  as  far  as  the  town  of  Calais,  and  then  returned  to  Ghent.  The  lord  Bourchier
and  Peter  du  Bois  made  as  much  haste  as  possible  to  England,  where  he  was  presented  to
the  king  and  his  uncles,  to  whom  he  related  everything  which  had  happened  in  the  affairs
of  Ghent,  and  the  means  by  which  peace  had  been  concluded  with  the  duke  of  Burgundy.
The  king,  the  duke  of  Lancaster,  and  his  brothers  entertained  him  handsomely,  and  were
well  pleased  that  he  had  come  to  them.  The  king  retained  him  in  his  service,  and  instantly


* Atremen  was  afterwards  assassinated. — Ed.


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


67


gave  him  one  hundred  marcs  yearly  revenue,  assigned  on  the  wool-staple  of  London.  Thus
did  Peter  du  Bois  remain  in  England,  and  the  good  town  of  Ghent  in  peace.  Roger
Cremin  was  appointed  deacon  of  the  pilots  of  Ghent,  which  is  a most  profitable  office  when
commerce  is  uninterrupted ; and  James  d’Ardembourg  was  made  deacon  of  the  small  crafts,
which  is  likewise  an  office  of  great  trust  in  the  town  of  Ghent.


Although  the  present  edition  is  divided  into  two
volumes  only,  such  being  the  most  convenient  arrangement
of  the  work  in  its  present  form,  yet  the  importance  of
retaining  the  original  divisions  of  the  Author  has  not  been
lost  sight  of,  and  they  have  accordingly  been  preserved.
Froissart  produced  each  of  his  volumes  at  some  consider-
able interval  from  the  preceding.  “ When,”  says  M.  de
St.  Palaye  in  his  life  of  our  author,  “our  historian  finished
one  of  the  parts  of  his  History,  he  brought  it  down  to  the
time  when  he  was  writing;  and  towards  the  end  he  re-
lated the  events  as  they  were  passing  : from  whence  it
happens,  as  it  seems  to  me,  that  there  is  much  confusion,
often  omissions  and  mistakes,  which  ho  has  been  obliged  to


correct  or  alter  in  the  following  parts.”  This  is  exempli-
fied in  the  third  volume,  which  was  not  begun  till  1390,  two
years  after  the  completion  of  the  second ; in  it  he  returns
to  events  which  had  happened  since  1382,  and  gives  a fuller
account  of  them  from  the  more  correct  information  he  had
subsequently  obtained.  It  would  cause  still  greater  con-
fusion if  the  separate  accounts  were  combined  in  an  undis-
tinguished train  of  chapters,  and  the  cause  of  such  repe-
titions was  thus  left  without  explanation.  The  third
volume,  which  was  finished  in  the  year  1392,  was  written
by  the  order  and  at  the  expense  of  the  celebrated  Gaston
Phoebus  Count  dc  Blois,  at  whose  court  Sir  John  Froissart
was  then  resident. — Ed.


END  OF  THE  SECOND  VOLUME  OF  THE  CHRONICLES  OF  SIR  JOHN  FROISSART.


THIRD  VOLUME


OF

THE  CHRONICLES  OF  SIR  JOHN  FROISSART.


CHAPTER  I. FROISSART  GIVES  HIS  REASONS  FOR  VISITING  THE  COUNT  DE  FOIX.

I nAVE  been  a considerable  time  without  speaking  of  the  affairs  of  distant  countries.
Those  nearer  home  were  at  the  moment  so  fresh  in  my  memory,  and  so  much  more  agree-
able, that  I have  delayed  mentioning  others.  Such  valiant  men,  however,  as  were  desirous
of  advancing  themselves,  whether  in  Castille,  Portugal,  Gascony,  Rouergue,  Quercy,
Limousin,  or  in  Bigorre,  did  not  remain  idle,  hut  employed  themselves  underhand  against
each  other,  in  the  wish  to  perform  deeds  of  arms  that  might  surprise  and  conquer  towns,
castles,  or  fortresses.  And  for  this  reason,  I,  sir  John  Froissart,  having  undertaken  to  indite
and  chronicle  this  history,  at  the  request  and  pleasure  of  the  high  and  renowned  prince,
Guy  de  Chatillon,  count  of  Blois,  lord  of  Avesnes,  Beauvois,  Estonnehonne,  de  la  Geude,
my  good  and  sovereign  master  and  lord,  considered  in  myself  that  grand  deeds  of  arms
would  not  fall  out  for  a long  space  of  time  in  the  marches  of  Picardy  and  the  country  of
Flanders,  since  there  was  peace  in  those  parts ; and  it  was  very  tiresome  to  me  to  he  idle,
for  I well  know,  that  when  the  time  shall  come,  when  I shall  be  dead  and  rotten,  this  grand
and  noble  history  will  be  in  much  fashion,  and  all  noble  and  valiant  persons  will  take  pleasure
in  it,  and  gain  from  it  augmentation  of  profit.  And  moreover,  since  I had,  God  be  thanked,
sense  and  memory,  and  a good  collection  of  all  past  things,  with  a clear  understanding  to
conceive  all  the  facts  of  which  I should  be  informed,  touching  my  principal  matters,  and
since  I was  of  an  age  and  constitution  of  body  well  fit  to  encounter  difficulties,  I determined
not  to  delay  pursuing  my  subject.  And  in  order  to  know  the  truth  of  distant  transactions,
without  sending  upon  the  inquiry  any  other  in  place  of  myself,  I took  an  opportunity  of
visiting  that  high  and  redoubted  prince  Gaston  Phoebus  count  de  Foix  and  de  Bearn ; for  I
well  knew,  that  if  I were  so  fortunate  as  to  be  admitted  into  his  household,  and  to  remain
there  in  quiet,  I could  not  choose  a situation  more  proper  to  learn  the  truth  of  every  event,
as  numbers  of  foreign  knights  and  squires  assembled  there  from  all  countries,  attracted  by
his  high  birth  and  gentility.  It  fell  out  just  as  I had  imagined.

I told  this  my  intention  to  my  very  renowned  lord  the  count  de  Blois,  and  also  the
journey  I wished  to  undertake,  who  gave  me  letters  of  recommendation  to  the  count  de  Foix.
I began  my  journey,  inquiring  on  all  sides  for  news,  and,  through  the  grace  of  God,
continued  it,  without  peril  or  hurt,  until  I arrived  at  the  count’s  residence,  at  Orthes  in
Bearn,  on  St.  Catherine’s  day  in  the  year  of  grace  1388.  The  count  de  Foix,  as  soon  as  he
saw  me,  gave  me  a hearty  welcome,  adding,  with  a smile  and  in  good  French,  that  he  was
well  acquainted  with  me,  though  he  had  never  seen  me  before,  but  he  had  frequently  heard
me  spoken  of.  He  retained  me  in  his  household,  and,  by  means  of  the  letters  which  I had
brought,  gave  me  full  liberty  to  act  as  I pleased  as  long  as  I should  wish  to  remain  with  him.
I there  learnt  the  greater  part  of  those  events  which  had  happened  in  the  kingdoms  of
Castille,  Portugal,  Navarre,  Arragon,  even  in  England,  in  the  Bourbonnois,  and  everything
concerning  the  whole  of  Gascony : he  himself,  when  I put  any  question  to  him,  answered


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c  C9

it  most  readily,  saying,  that  the  history  I was  employed  on  would  in  times  to  come  be
more  sought  after  than  any  other ; “ because,”  added  he,  “ my  fair  sir,  more  gallant  deeds
of  arms  have  been  performed  within  these  last  fifty  years,  and  more  wonderful  things  have
happened,  than  for  three  hundred  years  before.”


Froissart  at  the  Court  of  the  Count  de  Foix.  From  a MS.  Froissart  of  the  15th  century.

I was  thus  received  by  the  count  de  Foix  in  his  hotel,  and  entertained  according  to  my
pleasure.  My  wish  was  to  inquire  after  news  relative  to  my  history,  and  I had  at  my
option,  barons,  knights,  and  squires,  who  gave  me  information,  as  well  as  the  gallant  count
de  Foix  himself.  I will  therefore  illustrate,  in  good  language,  all  I there  learnt,  to  add  to
my  materials,  and  to  give  examples  to  those  worthies  who  wish  to  advance  themselves
in  renown.  If  I have  heretofore  dwelt  on  gallant  deeds,  attacks  and  captures,  of  castles,
towns,  and  forts,  on  hard-fought  battles  and  skirmishes,  many  more  will  now  ensue ; all  of
which,  by  God’s  grace,  I will  truly  narrate.


CHAPTER  II. A SHORT  REPETITION  OP  WHAT  IS  CONTAINED  IN  SOME  OF  THE  PRECEDING

CHAPTERS,  FOR  THE  BETTER  UNDERSTANDING  THE  HISTORY  OF  THE  WAR  BETWEEN
KING  JOHN  OF  CASTILLE  AND  THE  BASTARD  OF  PORTUGAL,  BROTHER  TO  THE  LATE
KING  DON  FERNANDO.

You  have  before  seen  in  this  history*,  that  Edmund  earl  of  Cambridge,  son  of  the  late
king  of  England,  had  departed  from  Portugal,  and  embarked  with  his  army  at  Lisbon,
notwithstanding  he  had  betrothed  his  son  John  to  the  lady  Beatrice,  daughter  of  don
Fernando  king  of  Portugal.  The  earl  was  discontented  with  Fernando,  because  he  had

Vol.  I.  P.  209.


70


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c


remained  for  fifteen  days  encamped  with  his  army  before  king  John  of  Castille,  without
any  engagement,  and  had  entered  into  a treaty  with  the  Castillians  against  his  opinion.  This
had  greatly  displeased  him;  and,  when  the  treaty  was  negotiating,  he  thus  spoke  : “ Sir  king,
take  good  heed  what  you  do  ; for  we  are  not  come  into  this  country  to  eat,  drink,  and  to  rob,
but  to  make  war  on  this  son  of  a bastard  who  calls  himself  king  of  Castille  and  count  of
Transtamare,  to  conquer  our  lawful  inheritance,  which  this  John  de  Transtamare  holds  and
possesses.  You  well  know,  that  by  marriage  with  the  heiresses  of  the  kingdom  of  Castille,
daughters  of  don  Pedro,  who  was  your  cousin-german,  my  brother  and  myself  have  the  claims
of  right ; and  you  have  offered  to  assist  in  the  recovery  of  this  kingdom  (for  every  good  lord
ought  to  lean  to  the  lawful  right,  and  not  to  its  opposite)  by  your  knight  who  here  stands,  and
whom  you  sent  to  England  to  say,  that  if  we  would  bring  into  this  country  two  thousand
lances  and  from  two  to  three  thousand  archers,  with  the  aid  you  would  give  us,  you  had  great
hopes  that  we  might  regain  our  inheritance.  I am  therefore  come  hither,  not  indeed  with  as
many  in  number  as  you  wrote  for ; but  those  I have  are  well  inclined,  and  bold  enough  to
abide  the  event  of  a battle,  if  joined  by  your  army,  against  the  force  which  the  count  de
Transtamare  has  at  this  moment : and  we  shall  he  much  dissatisfied  with  your  conduct  if  a
battle  do  not  take  place.”  Such  were  the  words  spoken  by  the  earl  of  Cambridge  to  the  king
of  Portugal,  before  his  departure,  who  distinctly  heard  them ; but,  nevertheless,  he  dared
not  offer  battle  to  the  Castillians,  although  they  were  within  sight  of  each  other.  There
were  none  of  his  council  who  did  not  say, — “ Sir,  the  army  of  the  king  of  Castille  is  at  this
moment  too  powerful ; and  if,  by  accident,  you  lose  the  day,  you  will  lose  your  crown,
without  any  chance  of  recovering  it : you  had  better,  therefore,  endure  much,  than  do  any
thing  wherein  is  such  great  peril  and  x-isk.”  The  earl  of  Cambridge,  finding  he  could  not  gain
any  thing,  returned  to  Lisbon,  ordered  his  vessels  to  be  made  ready,  and  took  leave  of  the
kino-  of  Portugal.  When  he  embarked,  he  would  not  leave  his  son  John  with  the  kins’  and
the  damsel  that  was  to  be  his  wife,  but  sailed  for  England,  leaving  none  behind.  Such  was
the  end  of  the  Portuguese  armament  at  this  season.

The  earl  of  Cambridge,  on  his  arrival  in  England,  represented  to  his  brother,  the  duke  of
Lancaster,  liow  the  king  of  Portugal  had  acted,  and  the  state  of  that  country.  The  duke
became  vei-y  thoughtful,  for  he  saw  that  the  conquest  of  Castille  was  very  distant  and
doubtful : besides,  his  nephew,  king  Richard,  had  in  his  council  those  who  were  unfriendly
to  him,  more  especially  the  earl  of  Oxford,  who  had  the  sole  management  of  the  king.  This
lord  did  every  thing  in  his  power  to  make  a breach  between  the  king  and  his  uncles.  He
said  to  him, — “ Sir,  if  you  wish  to  suppoi't  your  two  uncles,  my  lords  of  Lancaster  and
of  Cambridge,  in  their  war  with  Spain,  it  will  cost  you  the  whole  revenue  of  England,  and
they  will  not  at  last  gain  any  thing.  It  will  be  more  prudent  to  keep  at  home  men  and
money,  than  that  they  should  be  scattered  abroad  without  any  profit  to  yourself:  you  had
better  guard  and  defend  your  own  inliei-itance,  which  is  invaded  on  all  sides  from  France  and
Scotland,  than  employ  your  men  elsewhere.”  The  young  king  was  well  inclined  to  follow
this  advice  of  the  earl,  for  he  loved  him  with  his  whole  heart,  they  having  been  brought  up
together.  The  earl  of  Oxford  was  connected  with  several  English  knights,  and  never  acted
without  the  advice  of  sir  Simon  Burley,  sir  Robei’t  Ti-esilian,  sir  Nicholas  Bramber,  sir
John  Beauchamp,  sir  John  Salisbury  and  sir  Michael  de  la  Pole  : sir  Thomas  Trivet  and
sir  William  Elmham  were  also  named  among  his  advisers.  From  these  differences  between
the  king  and  his  uncles,  and  the  nobles  with  the  commonalty,  many  serious  ills  befel  England,
as  I shall  hereafter  relate  in  the  coui’se  of  this  history.

Not  long  after  the  departure  of  the  earl  of  Cambridge  from  Portugal  king  Fernando  fell
ill.  His  disorder,  after  oppressing  him  with  languor  for  a year,  caused  his  death.  He  had
no  other  children  but  the  queen  of  Spain.  The  king  of  Castille  received  information  that
the  realm  of  Poi’tugal  was  now  fallen  to  him,  as  the  rightful  successor  to  the  deceased
king.  Many  councils  were  holden  on  -this  occasion ; but,  when  they  spoke  to  him  on  the
subject,  he  replied,  “ The  Portuguese  are  an  obstinate  l'ace  : I shall  never  gain  them  but  by
conquest.”

The  Portuguese,  finding  themselves  without  a king  took  council  together,  and  resolved  to
send  a deputation  to  a bastard-brother  of  king  Fernando,  a valiant  and  wise  man  called


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  Si c.


71


Denis*;  but  he  was  a monk,  and  master  of  the  order  of  Avis.  They  declared,  they  had
much  rather  he  under  the  government  of  this  valiant  man,  than  of  the  king  of  Castille ; for,
in  the  eyes  of  God,  he  who  acted  well  was  no  bastard.  The  grandmaster  was  exceedingly
rejoiced  on  hearing  the  universal  good  will  the  four  principal  cities  in  Portugal  bore  him ;
and  that  the  affection  of  Lisbon  and  the  others  was  so  strong,  they  were  desirous  of  crowning
him  their  king.  He  secretly  wrote  to  his  friends,  and  went  to  Lisbon,  which  is  the  principal
town  in  Portugal.  The  townsmen  received  him  joyfully,  and  demanded,  should  they  crown
him  king,  would  he  be  good  and  loyal,  and  preserve  the  country  in  its  privileges  ? He
answered,  that  he  would,  and  be  the  best  king  they  ever  had.  Upon  this,  the  citizens  of
Lisbon  wrote  to  those  of  Coimbra,  Oporto  and  Ourique,  which  are  the  keys  of  the  realm,
that  for  their  mutual  advantage,  they  were  desirous  to  crown  king  the  grand-master  Denis,
who  was  wise  and  valiant,  of  good  conduct,  and  brother  to  king  Fernando  : for  that  the
kingdom  of  Portugal  could  not  longer  remain  without  a head,  as  well  for  fear  of  the  Castillians,
as  of  the  infidels  at  Granada  and  Bugia,  who  bordered  on  the  country.  These  four  principal
towns,  and  the  land  proprietors  of  Portugal,  excepting  a few  great  barons  and  knights,  were
inclined  to  favour  his  election ; but  some  barons  said,  it  was  not  right  a bastard  should  be
crowned  king,  if  he  were  not  of  the  best  dispositions.  The  towns  replied,  that  he  was  so
qualified,  and  that  it  was  a case  of  necessity,  for  they  had  no  other  choice  ; that  he  was  a
man  of  sense  and  of  courage  in  arms ; that  there  was  a precedent  in  Henry  of  Transtamare,
who  had  been  crowned  king  of  all  Castille,  by  the  choice  of  the  country,  for  its  common
advantages,  even  during  the  lifetime  of  don  Pedro.

The  election,  whether  the  nobles  would  or  not,  took  place  : and  Denis  was  crowned  king
in  the  cathedral  church  of  Coimbra,  with  the  unanimous  consent  of  the  commonalty  of
Portugal.  He  swore  to  administer  justice  honestly,  to  maintain  the  people  in  all  the  rights
and  privileges  which  they  had  enjoyed  from  former  times,  and  which  they  were  entitled  to
have  preserved  to  them.  This  gave  great  satisfaction  to  all.  When  news  of  this  was  carried
to  the  king  of  Castille,  he  was  wroth  for  two  reasons : one,  because  his  queen  was  the  legal
heiress  of  Portugal ; the  other,  that  the  people  had  crowned  a king  of  Portugal  by  election.
He  therefore  made  this  a pretext  for  war,  and  demanded  from  the  town  of  Lisbon  two
hundred  thousand  florins,  which  king  Fernando  had  promised  him  when  he  espoused  his
daughter.  He  sent  as  ambassadors  to  Portugal  the  count  de  Tierme  and  de  Rebede,  and
the  bishop  of  Burgos,  with  a grand  suite  of  attendants.  When  arrived  at  Santarem,  the  last
town  of  Castille  towards  Lisbon,  they  sent  a herald  to  the  king  and  citizens  of  Lisbon,  to
demand  passports  for  the  security  of  their  coming  and  returning.  These  were  instantly
granted.  The  council  of  the  town  were  assembled  to  bear  explained  the  cause  of  their
embassy:  at  the  end  of  their  harangue  they  said, — “You  Lisboners  should  properly
understand  this  matter,  and  not  be  surprised  if  our  king,  in  his  anger,  demands  so  large  a
sum  from  you,  which  you  are  bound  to  pay  him,  since  you  have  thought  proper  to  give  the
noble  crown  of  Portugal  to  a clerk,  a monk,  and  a bastard.  This  act  is  not  to  be  suffered  :
for,  by  rightful  election,  it  belongs  to  our  king,  as  the  natural  and  true  heir  : besides,  you
have  acted  contrary  to  the  opinion  of  the  nobility  of  the  kingdom  : therefore,  he  now  declares
by  us,  that  you  have  been  guilty  of  a high  misdemeanour,  and  if  you  do  not  hasten  to  make
every  reparation,  he  is  resolved  to  make  war  upon  you.”  Don  Ferdinand  Gallopes  de
Villasons,  a noble  citizen  and  of  great  weight  in  Lisbon,  thus  answered  : “ My  lords,  you
greatly  reproach  us  for  our  election,  but  your  own  is  in  the  same  predicament,  for  you  have
crowned  in  Castille  a bastard,  the  son  of  a Jewess.  The  fact  is  universally  known.  With
regard  to  the  justice  of  your  election,  there  is  none ; for  your  king  has  no  right  to  the  crown
of  Castille  : it  belongs  to  the  daughters  of  don  Pedro,  Constance  and  Isabella,  who  are
married  to  the  duke  of  Lancaster  and  the  earl  of  Cambridge,  to  their  children,  and  to  their

* Froissart  mistakes  one  brother  for  another.  Peter  king,  to  the  prejudice  of  Beatrice,  only  child  of  Ferdinand,
the  Severe  had  three  children  by  Intis  de  Castro  : Denis,  Pope  Urban,  by  dispensation,  freed  him  from  his  religious
the  eldest,  was  confined  at  this  time  in  the  prisons  of  Spain,  vows  in  1387.  He  married  Philippa,  daughter  of  John
John,  the  person  meant  in  the  text,  was  the  son  of  Peter  of  Gaunt  duke  of  Lancaster,  by  Blanche  of  Castille,  by
by  Theresa  Laurezzo,  and  surnamed  the  Father  of  his  whom  he  had  several  children. — Moreri — Art  de  Verifier
Country.  He  was  grand  master  of  the  order  of  Avis ; les  Dates.
and,  after  the  death  of  his  brother  Ferdinand,  was  chosen


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


husbands  for  them.  You  may,  therefore,  depart  when  you  please,  and  tell  him  that  sent  you,
that  our  election  is  good,  and  shall  be  upholden  ; for  that  we  will  not  have  any  other  king  as
long  as  the  present  one  shall  choose  to  be  so.  With  regard  to  the  sum  of  money  you
demand  from  us,  we  say  that  we  are  no  way  obliged  to  pay  it : you  must  therefore  call  upon
those  who  bound  themselves  to  the  payment,  and  who  had  all  the  advantage  of  it.”  The
king  of  Portugal  was  not  present  at  this  assembly,  though  he  well  knew  what  answer  his
people  were  to  make.  The  ambassadors  from  the  king  of  Castille,  perceiving  they  should
gain  nothing  more  from  the  Portuguese,  took  leave,  as  was  becoming  them,  set  out  and
returned  to  Seville,  where  they  had  left  the  king  and  his  council.  Having  related  all  that
you  have  just  heard  to  the  king,  he  summoned  a council  to  deliberate  on  what  was  to  be  done.
It  was  determined  to  send  defiances  to  the  king  of  Portugal  and  his  partisans,  and  that  the
king  of  Castille  had  just  reasons  for  declaring  war  against  them.  After  these  defiances  had
been  sent  to  Portugal,  the  king  of  Castille  issued  a special  summons  for  raising  an  army,
declaring  he  would  lay  siege  to  Lisbon,  and  not  depart  thence  until  he  had  gained  it,  for  the
insolent  replies  that  had  been  made  to  his  ambassadors,  so  that  they  should  pay  dearly  if  they
were  obliged  to  sue  for  mercy.  The  king  of  Castille  advanced  to  Santarem  with  his  whole
force,  that  being  the  place  of  rendezvous.  About  this  period,  a knight  of  Castille,  of  the  name
of  Navaret,  was  expelled  that  court ; and,  if  the  king  in  his  anger  had  caught  him,  he  would
have  had  him  beheaded.  The  knight,  however,  had  timely  notice,  for  he  had  friends  on  the
watch,  and,  quitting  the  kingdom  of  Castille,  came  to  Lisbon  to  the  king  of  Portugal,  who
was  much  pleased  at  his  arrival,  retained  him  in  his  service,  and  made  him  captain  of  his
knights.  lie  afterwards  did  much  harm  to  the  Castillians.

The  king  of  Castille  marched  from  Santarem  with  his  whole  army,  to  Lisbon,  which  he
besieged,  inclosing  within  it  the  king.  This  siege  lasted  upwards  of  a year.  The  count  de
Longueville  was  constable  of  the  army,  and  sir  Reginald  de  Limousin  marshal  of  it.  This
sir  Reginald  was  a Limousin  knight,  whom  sir  Bertrand  du  Guesclin  had  carried  into  Castille
during  the  ware  of  king  Henry ; lie  had  conducted  himself  so  faithfully  that  the  king  had
given  him  a fair  estate  and  a handsome  lady  to  his  wife,  by  whom  he  had  two  sons,  Reginald
and  Henry  : he  was  much  esteemed  throughout  Castille  for  his  prowess.  With  the  king  of
Castille,  at  this  siege,  were  Daghenes  Mandat,  sir  Digho  Pe^ement,  don  Peter  Ro5erment
and  don  Marich  de  Versaux*,  Portuguese,  who  had  turned  to  the  Castillians.  The  grand
master  of  Calatrava,  with  his  brother,  a young  knight  called  don  Dighemeres,f  Peter
Goussart  dc  Seville,  John  Radigo  de  Iloyex,  and  the  grand  master  of  St.  Jago.  The  army
before  Lisbon  amounted  to  upwards  of  thirty  thousand  men  : many  were  the  skirmishes  and
gallant  deeds  of  arms  performed  on  each  side.

The  Castillians  knew  well  the  king  of  Portugal  would  not  be  supported  by  the  nobles,  for
the  commonalty  had  elected  him  against  their  will ; for  which  reason  there  were  great
dissensions  between  them  J ; and  the  king’s  intentions  were  to  conquer  Lisbon  and  the  whole
country  before  he  returned,  for  no  assistance,  except  from  England,  could  come  to  them.
This  only  he  feared  ; but,  having  considered  that  the  English  were  at  a great  distance,  and
that  the  king  of  England  and  his  uncles  were  not  on  good  terms  with  each  other,  he  carried  on
the  siege  with  security.  The  army  was  so  plentifully  supplied  with  every  sort  of  provision,
there  was  not  a town  or  market  in  all  Castille  where  was  more  abundance  §.  The  king  of
Portugal  remained  with  his  people  in  Lisbon,  much  at  his  ease,  for  they  could  not  be
deprived  of  the  advantage  of  the  sea.  His  council  advised  him  to  send  able  ambassadors
to  England,  to  the  king  and  duke  of  Lancaster,  to  renew  the  alliance  which  had  subsisted
between  the  king  of  England  and  his  brother  Ferdinand ; to  charge  the  ambassadors  to
ask  his  daughter  Philippa  from  the  duke  of  Lancaster,  who  would  willingly  give  her  to  him
for  his  queen  ; to  offer,  under  the  strongest  terms,  a perpetual  alliance  between  the  two
countries,  and  to  declare  he  would  exert  himself  so  effectually,  if  the  duke  would  come
thither  with  two  or  three  thousand  combatants,  and  as  many  archers,  that  he  should  recover

* These  names  are  probably  very  much  disfigured,  but  f Don  Diego  Mcrlo — Ed.

I am  unable  to  rectify  them.  [Diego  Mendoza,  Diego  + i.e.  The  nobles  and  commonalty.

Perez  Sarmiento,  Don  Peter  Ruiz  Sarmiento,  Manriquez  § The  plague  broke  out  in  the  army,  and  obliged  them
D’Avcrsaula. } — Ed.  to  abandou  the  siege. — Ed.


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


73


the  kingdom  of  Castille,  which  was  his  lawful  inheritance.  Two  knights  of  his  household,  sir
John  Rodriguez  and  sir  John  Testedor,  with  a clerk  of  laws  called  Marche  de  la  Figgiere,
archdeacon  of  Lisbon,  were  nominated  to  go  as  ambassadors  to  England.  Having  provided
themselves  with  all  things  necessary,  they  embarked  with  a favourable  wind,  and  left  the
harbour  of  Lisbon,  steering  for  the  coasts  of  England.

On  the  other  hand,  the  king  of  Castille,  during  his  siege  of  Lisbon,  was  advised  to  write
to  France  and  to  Gascony  for  assistance  of  knights  and  squires,  as  the  Spaniards  naturally
imagined  the  king  of  Portugal  would  apply  to  England  for  succours  to  raise  the  siege : he
was  not  willing,  therefore,  to  be  unprepared,  nor  that  his  army  should  not  be  in  sufficient
strength  to  resist  the  united  force  of  the  Portuguese  and  English.  The  king,  in  consequence
of  this  advice,  sent  letters  and  messengers  to  many  knights  who  were  anxious  to  display  their
courage,  more  particularly  to  those  of  Bearn  and  the  county  of  Foix ; for  in  these  countries
were  many  good  knights,  who  wished  for  opportunities  of  showing  their  love  of  arms,  but  could
not  find  them,  as  the  count  de  Foix  at  this  period  was  at  peace  with  the  count  d’Armagnac.
These  looked-for  allies  of  the  kings  of  Spain  and  Portugal  were  not  so  soon  ready,  nor
near  at  hand.  Hostilities  still  continued  to  be  carried  on  in  Auvergne,  the  Toulousain,
Rouergue,  and  in  the  country  of  Bigorre.  We  will  now  leave  the  affairs  of  Portugal,  and
speak  of  others.


CHAPTER  III. THE  COUNT  DE  FOIX,  AT  THE  ENTREATY  OF  THE  PRINCESS  OF  WALES,

REMITS  THE  COUNT  D’ARMAGNAC  SIXTY  THOUSAND  FRANCS  OUT  OF  HIS  RANSOM  OF

TWO  HUNDRED  AND  FIFTY  THOUSAND. THE  ENGLISH  GARRISON  AT  LOURDE*  GOVERNS

THE  ADJOINING  COUNTRY.

Between  the  county  of  Foix  and  Bearn  lies  the  county  of  Bigorre,  which  belongs  to
France,  and  is  bounded  on  one  side  by  the  Toulousain,  and  the  other  by  Comminges,  and
Bearn.  In  this  country  of  Bigorre  is  situated  the  strong  castle  of  Lourde,  which  has  always
been  regarded  as  English  since  the  country  was  given  up  to  the  king  of  England  and  the
prince,  as  part  of  the  ransom  for  king  John  of  France,  according  to  the  treaty  of  peace  made  at
Bretigny  near  Chartres,  and  afterwards  ratified  at  Calais,  as  it  has  already  been  mentioned  in
the  former  part  of  this  history.  When  the  prince  of  Wales  left  England  to  take  possession  of
the  duchy  of  Aquitaine,  (which  the  king  his  father  had  given  him  to  hold  as  a fief  and
inheritance  under  him,  in  which  were  two  archbishopricks  and  twenty-two  bishopricks),
accompanied  by  the  princess  of  Wales,  they  resided  at  Bordeaux  about  a year.  They
were  entreated  by  John  count  d’Armagnac  to  come  to  the  handsome  city  of  Tarbes,  in  the
county  of  Bigorre,  to  see  and  visit  that  part  of  the  country,  which  the  prince  had  never  yet
done.  The  count  d’Armagnac  imagined  that  the  count  de  Foix  would  pay  his  respects  to  the
prince  and  princess  during  the  time  they  were  in  Bigorre ; and,  as  he  was  indebted  to  him
two  hundred  and  fifty  thousand  francs  for  his  ransom,  he  thought  he  would  try  to  prevail  on
them  to  request  the  count  de  Foix  to  release  him  from  a part,  if  not  the  whole  of  it.  The
count  d’Armagnac  managed  so  well  that  the  prince  and  princess  of  Wales  came  with  their
court,  which,  at  that  time,  was  very  numerous  and  splendid,  into  Bigorre,  and  fixed  their
residence  at  Tarbes.  Tarbes  is  a handsome  town,  situated  in  a champaign  country,  among  rich
vineyards  : there  is  a town,  a city,  and  a castle,  all  separated  from  each  other,  and  inclosed
with  gates,  walls,  and  towers  : the  beautiful  river  Lisse,  which  rises  in  the  mountains  of  Bearn
and  Catalonia,  and  is  as  clear  as  rock-water,  runs  through  and  divides  the  town.  Five  leagues
from  thence  is  situated  the  town  of  Morlans,  in  the  county  of  Foix,  at  the  entrance  into  Bearn
and  under  a mountain.  Six  leagues  distant  from  Tarbes  is  the  town  of  Pau,  which  belongs
also  to  the  count  de  Foix.  During  the  time  the  prince  and  princess  were  at  Tarbes,  the
count  was  in  his  town  of  Pau,  erecting  a handsome  castle  adjoining  to  the  outskirts  of  the
town,  and  on  the  river  Gave  f .

* “ Lourde/ ’ — capital  of  the  valley  of  Lavidan,  in  Gascony,  diocese  of  Tarbes,  near  Bagn^res.

+ “ Gave/’  in  the  patois  of  the  country  signifies  a river,  and  that  at  Pau  is  thus  called,  “ Le  Gave  de  Pau.” — Ed.


74


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


As  soon  as  he  was  informed  of  the  arrival  of  the  prince  and  princess  at  Tarbes,  lie  made
his  preparations  and  visited  them  in  great  state,  accompanied  by  upwards  of  six  hundred  horse
and  sixty  knights.  They  were  much  pleased  at  his  visit,  and  entertained  him  handsomely,  as
he  was  well  deserving  of  it,  and  the  princess  paid  him  the  most  engaging  attentions.  The
count  d’Armagnac  and  the  lord  d’Albreth  were  present,  and  the  prince  was  entreated  to
request  the  count  de  Foix  to  release  the  count  from  all,  or  part  of  what  he  was  indebted  to
him  for  his  ransom.  The  prince  being  a prudent  as  well  as  a valiant  man,  having  considered
a while,  said,  he  would  not  do  so,  and  added : “ Count  d’Armagnac,  you  were  made
prisoner  by  fair  deeds  of  arms,  and  in  open  battle  : you  put  our  cousin  the  count  de  Foix,  his
person  and  his  men,  to  the  hazard  of  the  fight ; and,  if  fortune  has  been  favourable  to  him
and  adverse  to  you,  he  ought  not  to  fare  the  worse  for  it.  Neither  my  lord  and  father  nor
rnyself  would  have  thanked  you  if  you  had  entreated  us  to  give  back  what  we  had  honourably
and  fortunately  won  at  the  battle  of  Poitiers,  for  which  we  return  thanks  to  the  Lord  God.”
The  count  d’Armagnac,  on  hearing  this,  was  quite  thunderstruck  : and,  notwithstanding
he  had  failed  in  his  expectations,  he  made  a similar  request  to  the  princess,  who  cheerfully
entreated  the  count  de  Foix  to  grant  her  a boon.  “ Madam,”  replied  the  count,  “ I am  but
a small  gentleman,  and  an  insignificant  bachelor  ; therefore,  I cannot  make  large  gifts ; but,
if  the  boon  you  request  do  not  exceed  sixty  thousand  francs,  I grant  it.”  The  princess  was
anxious  to  gain  the  whole  ; but  the  count,  being  a wary  man,  paid  much  attention  to  all  his
personal  affairs  : besides,  he  suspected  this  boon  regarded  the  ransom  of  the  count  d’Armagnac  :
he  therefore  continued,  “ Madam,  for  a poor  knight  like  me,  who  am  building  towns  and
castles,  the  gift  I offer  you  ought  to  suffice.”  When  the  princess  found  she  could  not  gain
more,  she  said,  “ Count  de  Foix,  I request  and  entreat  you  would  forgive  the  count
d’Armagnac.”  “ Madam,”  answered  the  count,  “ I ought  to  comply  with  your  request.  I
have  said,  that  if  the  boon  you  solicited  did  not  exceed  sixty  thousand  francs,  I would  grant
it ; the  count  d’Armagnac  owes  me  two  hundred  and  fifty  thousand,  and  at  your  entreaty
I give  you  sixty  thousand  of  them.”  Thus  ended  the  matter  ; and  the  count  d'Armagnac,
by  the  princess’s  entreaty,  gained  sixty  thousand  francs.  The  count  de  Foix,  shortly
afterwards,  returned  to  his  own  country.

I,  sir  John  Froissart,  make  mention  of  all  these  things,  because  when  I visited  Foix  and
Bearn,  I travelled  through  Bigorre,  and  made  enquiry  after  all  that  had  passed,  and  what  I
had  not  heard  before.  I there  learnt  that  the  prince  of  Wales,  during  his  residence  at  Tarbes,
had  a great  desire  to  see  the  castle  of  Lourde,  three  leagues  distant,  among  the  mountains.
When  he  had  fully  examined  that  castle  and  country,  he  was  much  pleased,  as  well  with  the
strength  of  the  place,  as  its  situation  on  the  frontiers  of  several  countries  ; for  those  of  Lourde
can  overrun  the  kingdom  of  Arragon  to  a great  extent,  and  as  far  as  Barcelona  in  Catalonia.
The  prince  called  to  him  a knight  of  his  household,  named  sir  Peter  Arnaut,  of  the  country
of  Bearn,  who  had  loyally  served  him,  and  in  whom  he  had  great  confidence  : he  was  an
expert  man  at  arms  and  cousin  to  the  count  de  Foix.  “ Sir  Peter,”  said  the  prince,
“ I nominate  and  appoint  you  governor  and  captain  of  Lourde,  and  regent  of  the  country  of
Bigorre  : now  guard  well  this  castle,  so  as  to  give  a good  account  of  it  to  my  lord  and  father,
and  to  myself.”  “ My  lord,”  replied  the  knight,  “ that  I will  cheerfully  do and  he
instantly  did  homage  and  pledged  his  faith,  when  the  prince  put  him  in  possession  of  it.

Now,  you  must* know,  that  when  the  war  was  renewed  between  the  kings  of  France  and
England,  as  has  been  before  related  *,  the  count  Guy  de  St.  Pol,  and  sir  Hugh  de  Chastillon,
master  of  the  cross-bows  in  France,  besieged  and  took  the  town  of  Abbeville,  and  the  whole
country  of-  Ponthieu  : about  the  same  time,  two  great  barons  of  Bigorre,  whose  names  were
sir  Marnaut  Barbasan  and  the  lord  d’Auchin,  turned  to  the  French  interest,  and  seized  the
town  and  castle  of  Tarbes,  for  they  were  weakly  guarded.  The  castle  of  Lourde  was  under
the  command  of  sir  Peter  Arnaut,  of  Bearn,  who  would  not  surrender  on  any  terms,  but
carried  on  a sharp  contest  against  France.  He  sent  to  Upper  Gascony  and  Bearn  for  some
knight  adventurers  to  assist  him  in  the  war  ; and  many  able  men  came  to  him.  He  had  six
captains,  each  of  whom  had  fifty  lances  or  more  under  his  command : his  brother,  J ohn  de
Bearn,  a gallant  squire,  Peter  d’Anchin  de  Bigorre,  brother-german  to  the  lord  d’Anchin,  who

* In  13G9. — Ed.


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


75


would  never  turn  to  the  French,  Ernauton  de  Sainte  Colombo,  Ernauton  de  Montagu,  do
Sainte  Basile,  and  le  bourg  de  Carnela.  These  captains  made  many  excursions  into  Bigorre,
the  Toulousain,  the  Carcassonois,  and  on  the  Albigeois  ; for  the  moment  they  left  Lourde  they
were  on  enemy’s  ground,  which  they  overran  to  a great  extent,  sometimes  thirty  leagues  from
their  castle.  In  their  march  they  touched  nothing,  but  on  their  return  all  things  were  seized,
and  sometimes  they  brought  with  them  so  many  prisoners,  and  such  quantities  of  cattle,  they
knew  not  how  to  dispose  of,  nor  lodge  them.  They  laid  under  contribution  the  whole
country  except  the  territory  of  the  count  de  Foix  ; but  there  they  dared  not  take  a fowl
without  paying  for  it,  nor  hurt  any  man  belonging  to  the  count,  or  even  any  who  had  his
passport ; for  it  would  have  enraged  him  so  much  that  they  must  have  been  ruined.

These  companions  in  Lourde  had  the  satisfaction  of  overrunning  the  whole  country
wherever  they  pleased.  Tarbes,  which  is  situated,  as  I have  said,  hard  by,  was  kept  in
great  fear,  and  was  obliged  to  enter  into  a composition  with  them.  Between  Tarbes  and
their  castle  is  a large  village,  with  a handsome  abbey,  called  Guvors,  to  which  they  did
much  mischief,  but  they  also  compounded  with  them.  On  the  other  side  of  the  river  Lisse
is  a goodly  inclosed  town  called  Bagneres,  the  inhabitants  of  which  had  a hard  time  of  it ;
for  they  were  much  harassed  by  those  of  Malvoisin,  which  is  situated  on  a mountain,  the
river  Lisse  running  at  the  foot  of  it,  in  its  course  towards  Tournay,  an  enclosed  town.
This  town  of  Tournay  was  the  common  pass  for  those  of  Lourde  and  Malvoisin,  to  which
they  did  no  harm,  because  they  had  a free  passage,  and  the  townspeople  had  good  bargains
of  their  pillage : they  were,  therefore,  forced  to  dissemble  with  them,  if  they  were  desirous
of  living,  for  they  did  not  receive  aid  or  succour  from  any  one.  The  governor  of  Malvoisin
was  a Gascon,  called  Raymonet  de  l’Espee,  an  able  man  at  arms.  Those  of  Lourde  and
Malvoisin  put  under  contribution  the  merchants  of  Arragon  and  Catalonia  equally  with
those  of  France.


CHAPTER  IV. — SIR  JOHN  FROISSART,  IN  niS  JOURNEY  TOWARDS  BEARN,  IS  ACCOMPANIED
BY  A KNIGHT  ATTACHED  TO  THE  COUNT  DE  FOIX,  WHO  RELATES  TO  HIM  HOW  THE
GARRISON  OF  LOURDE  TOOK  ORTINGAS  AND  LE  PALLIER,  ON  THE  RENEWAL  OF  THE
WAR  IN  GUYENNE,  AFTER  THE  RUPTURE  OF  THE  PEACE  OF  BRETIGNY.

At  the  time  I undertook  my  journey  to  visit  the  count  de  Foix,  reflecting  on  the  diversity
of  countries  I had  never  seen,  I set  out  from  Carcassone,  leaving  the  road  to  Toulouse  on
the  right  hand,  and  came  to  Monteroral,  then  to  Tonges,  then  to  Belle,  then  to  the  first  town
in  the  county  of  Foix;  from  thence  to  Maisieres,  to  the  castle  of  Sauredun,  then  to  the
handsome  city  of  Pamiers  *,  which  belongs  to  the  count  de  Foix,  where  I halted,  to  wait
for  company  that  were  going  to  Bearn,  where  the  count  resided.  I remained  in  the  city
of  Pamiers  three  days  : it  is  a very  delightful  place,  seated  among  fine  vineyards,  and
surrounded  by  a clear  and  broad  river,  called  the  Liege.  Accidentally,  a knight  attached
to  the  count  de  Foix,  called  sir  Espaign  du  Lyon,  came  thither,  on  his  return  from
Avignon  : he  was  a prudent  and  valiant  knight,  handsome  in  person,  and  about  fifty  years
of  age.  I introduced  myself  to  his  company,  as  he  had  a great  desire  to  know  what  was
doing  in  France.  We  wTere  six  days  on  the  road  travelling  to  Orthez.  As  we  journeyed,
the  knight,  after  saying  his  orisons,  conversed  the  greater  part  of  the  day  with  me,  asking
for  news ; and  when  I put  any  questions  to  him,  he  very  willingly  answered  them.  On  our
departure  from  Pamiers  we  crossed  the  mountain  of  Cesse,  which  is  difficult  of  ascent,  and
passed  near  the  town  and  castle  of  Ortingas,  which  belongs  to  the  king  of  France,  but  did  not
enter  it.  We  went  to  dine  at  a castle  of  the  count  de  Foix,  half  a league  further,  called  Carlat,
seated  on  a high  mountain.  After  dinner,  the  knight  said : “ Let  us  ride  gently,  we  have
but  two  leagues  of  this  country  (which  are  equal  to  three  of  France)  to  our  lodging.”
“ Willingly,”  answered  I.  “ Now,”  said  the  knight,  “ we  have  this  day  passed  the  castle


* “ Pamiers,” — three  leagues  from  Foix,  eighteen  from  Toulouse.


70


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


of  Ortingas,  the  garrison  of  which  did  great  mischief  to  all  this  part  of  the  country.  Peter
d’Ancliin  had  possession  of  it : he  took  it  by  surprise,  and  has  gained  sixty  thousand  francs
from  France.”  “How  did  he  get  so  much  ?”  said  I.  “ I will  tell  you,”  replied  the  knight.
“ On  the  feast  of  our  lady,  the  middle  of  August,  a fair  is  liolden,  where  all  the  country
assemble,  and  there  is  much  merchandise  brought  thither  during  that  time.  Peter  d’Anchin
and  his  companions  of  the  garrison  of  Lourde,  had  long  wanted  to  gain  this  town  and  castle,
but  could  not  devise  the  means.  They  had,  however,  in  the  beginning  of  May,  sent  two  of
their  men,  of  very  simple  outward  appearance,  to  seek  for  service  in  the  town : they  soon
found  masters,  who  were  so  well  satisfied  with  them,  that  they  went  in  and  out  of  the
town  whenever  they  pleased,  without  any  one  having  the  smallest  suspicion  of  them.

“ When  mid- August  arrived,  the  town  was  filled  with  foreign  merchants  from  Foix,
Bearn,  and  France : and,  you  know,  when  merchants  meet,  after  any  considerable  absence,
they  are  accustomed  to  drink  plentifully  together  to  renew  then-  acquaintance,  so  that  the
houses  of  the  masters  of  these  two  servants  were  quite  filled,  where  they  drank  largely,  and
their  landlords  with  them.  At  midnight  Peter  d’Anchin  and  his  company  advanced  towards
Ortingas,  and  hid  themselves  and  horses  in  the  wood  through  which  we  passed.  Fie  sent
six  varlets  with  two  ladders  to  the  town,  who,  having  crossed  the  ditches  where  they  had
been  told  was  the  shallowest  place,  fixed  their  ladders  against  the  walls : the  two  pretended
servants,  who  were  in  waiting,  assisted  them  (whilst  their  masters  were  seated  at  table)  to
mount  the  walls.  They  were  no  sooner  up,  than  one  of  the  servants  conducted  their
companions  towards  the  gate  where  only  two  men  guarded  the  keys : he  then  said  to  them,
‘ Do  you  remain  here,  and  not  stir  until  you  shall  hear  me  whistle ; then  sally  forth  and
slay  the  guards.  I am  well  acquainted  with  the  keys,  having  more  than  seven  times  guarded
the  gate  with  my  master.’

“ As  he  had  planned  so  did  they  execute,  and  hid  themselves  well.  Fie  then  advanced  to
the  gate,  and,  having  listened,  found  the  watch  drinking : he  called  to  them  by  their  names,
for  he  was  well  acquainted  with  them,  and  said,  ‘ Open  the  door : I bring  you  the  best  wine
you  ever  tasted,  which  my  master  sends  you  that  you  may  watch  the  better.’  Those  who
knew  the  varlet  imagined  he  was  speaking  truth,  and  opened  the  door  of  the  guard-room :
upon  this,  he  whistled,  and  his  companions  sallied  forth  and  pushed  between  the  door,  so
that  they  could  not  shut  it  again.  The  guards  were  thus  caught  cunningly,  and  so  quietly
slain  that  no  one  knew  anything  of  it.  They  then  took  the  keys  and  went  to  the  gate,
which  they  opened,  and  let  down  the  draw-bridge  so  gently  it  was  not  heard.  This  done,
they  sounded  a horn  with  one  blast  only,  which  those  in  ambuscade  hearing,  they  mounted
their  horses  and  came  full  gallop  over  the  bridge  into  the  town,  where  they  took  all  its
inhabitants  either  at  table  or  in  their  beds.  Thus  was  Ortingas  taken  by  Peter  d’Anchin  of
Bigorre  and  his  companions  in  Lourde.”

I then  asked  the  knight,  “ But  how  did  they  gain  the  castle?”  “ I will  tell  you,"  said
sir  Espaign  du  Lyon.  “ At  the  time  the  town  was  taken,  by  ill-luck  the  governor  was
absent,  supping  with  some  merchants  from  Cai’cassone,  so  that  he  was  made  prisoner,  and
on  the  morrow  Peter  d’Anchin  had  him  brouoht  before  the  castle,  wherein  were  his  wife  and
children,  whom  he  frightened  by  declaring  he  would  order  the  governor’s  head  to  be  struck
off,  if  they  did  not  enter  into  a treaty  to  deliver  up  the  castle.  It  was  concluded,  that  if
his  lady  would  surrender,  the  governor  should  be  given  up  to  her,  with  permission  to  march
unmolested  away  with  everything  that  belonged  to  them.  The  lady,  who  found  herself  in
such  a critical  situation,  through  love  to  him  who  could  not  now  defend  her,  in  order  to
recover  her  husband  and  to  avoid  greater  dangers,  surrendered  the  castle,  when  the  governor,
his  wife  and  children,  set  out  writh  all  that  belonged  to  them,  and  went  to  Pamiers.  By
this  means,  Peter  d’Anchin  captured  the  town  and  castle  of  Ortingas ; and,  when  they
entered  the  place,  he  and  his  companions  gained  thirty  thousand  francs,  as  well  in  merchan-
dise which  they  found  there  as  in  good  French  prisoners.  All  those  who  were  from  the
county  of  Foix  or  Bearn  received  their  liberty,  with  their  goods  untouched.

“ Peter  d’Anchin  held  Ortingas  for  full  five  years ; and  he  and  his  garrison  made  frequent
excursions  as  far  as  the  gates  of  Carcassone,  which  is  sixteen  long  leagues  distant,  greatly
ruining  the  country,  as  well  by  the  ransoms  of  towns  which  compounded,  as  by  the  pillage


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


77


they  made.  During  the  time  Peter  d’Anchin  garrisoned  Ortingas,  some  of  his  companions
made  a sally,  being  desirous  of  gain,  and  came  to  a castle  a good  league  off,  called  le  Paillier,
of  which  Raymond  du  Paillier,  a French  knight,  was  the  lord.  They  this  time  accomplished
their  enterprise,  having  before  attempted  it  in  vain  ; and,  by  means  of  a scalado,  they  took
the  castle,  the  knight  and  his  lady  in  bed.  They  kept  possession  of  it,  allowing  the  lady
and  the  children  to  depart,  but  detained  the  knight  four  months  in  his  own  castle,  until  he
had  paid  four  thousand  francs  for  his  ransom.  In  short,  after  they  had  sufficiently  harassed
the  country,  they  sold  these  two  castles,  Ortingas  and  le  Paillier,  for  eight  thousand  francs,
and  then  retired  to  Lourde,  their  principal  garrison.  Such  feats  of  arms  and  adventures
were  these  companions  daily  practising.

“ It  happened  likewise  at  this  time,  that  a very  able  man  at  arms,  one  of  the  garrison  of
Lourde,  a Gascon,  called  le  Mengeant  de  Sainte  Basile,  set  out  from  Lourde  with  twenty-
nine  others,  and  rode  towards  the  Toulousain  and  the  Albigeois,  seeking  adventures.  His
wishes  were  to  surprise  the  castle  of  Penne  in  the  Albigeois,  which  he  was  nearly  doing,  but
failed.  When  he  found  he  was  disappointed,  he  rode  up  to  the  gate,  where  he  skirmished,
and  several  gallant  deeds  were  done.  At  this  same  hour,  the  castellan  of  Toulouse,  sir
Hugh  de  Froide-ville,  had  also  made  an  excursion  with  sixty  lances,  and  by  accident  arrived
at  Penne  whilst  this  skirmish  was  going  forward.  He  and  his  men  instantly  dismounted,
and  advanced  to  the  barriers.  Le  Mengeant  would  have  made  off;  but,  as  that  was
impossible,  he  fought  valiantly  hand  to  hand  with  the  knight : he  behaved  gallantly,  and
wounded  his  adversary  in  two  or  three  places,  but  at  last  was  made  prisoner ; for  he  was
not  the  strongest ; and  of  his  men  few  escaped  being  killed  or  taken.  Le  Mengeant  was
carried  to  Toulouse  ; and  the  seneschal  had  great  difficulty  to  save  him  from  the  populace,
who  wanted  to  put  him  to  death  when  they  saw  him  in  the  hands  of  their  own  officer,  so
much  was  lie  hated  at  Toulouse.

“ Fortunately  for  him,  the  duke  of  Berry  chanced  to  come  to  that  city,  and  he  had  such
good  friends  that  the  duke  gave  him  his  liberty  in  consideration  of  a thousand  francs  being
paid  the  seneschal  for  his  ransom.  Le  Mengeant,  on  gaining  his  liberty,  returned  to  Lourde,
where  he  ceased  not  from  his  usual  enterprises.  One  time  he  set  out  with  others,  without
arms,  disguised  as  an  abbot  attended  by  four  monks  ; for  he  and  his  companions  had  shaven
the  crowns  of  their  heads,  and  no  one  would  have  imagined  who  saw  them  but  that  they
were  real  monks,  for  they  had  every  appeai’ance  in  dress  and  look.  In  this  manner  he  came
to  Montpelier,  and  alighted  at  the  hotel  of  the  Angel,  saying  he  was  an  abbot  from  Upper
Gascony  going  to  Paris  on  business.  He  made  acquaintance  with  a rich  man  of  Montpelier,
called  sir  Beranger,  who  was  likewise  bound  for  Paris  on  his  affairs.  On  the  abbot  telling
him  he  would  carry  him  thither  free  from  all  expense,  he  was  deliglued  that  the  journey
would  cost  him  nothing,  and  set  out  with  le  Mengeant  attended  only  by  a servant.  They
had  not  left  Montpelier  three  leagues  when  le  Mengeant  made  him  his  prisoner,  and
conducted  him  through  crooked  and  bye-roads  to  his  garrison  of  Lourde,  whence  he  after-
terwards  ransomed  him  for  five  thousand  francs.’’  “Holy  Mary!”  cried  I,  “ this  le
Mengeant  must  have  been  a clever  fellow.”  “ Aye,  that  he  was  indeed,”  replied  he  ; “ and
he  died  in  his  armour  at  a place  we  shall  pass  in  three  days,  called  Larre  in  Bigorre,  below
a town  called  Archinach.”  “ I will  remind  you  of  it,”  said  I,  “ when  we  shall  arrive  at
the  spot."


78


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


CHAPTER  V. — SIR  JOHN  FROISSART  AND  THE  KNIGHT  OF  FOIX  ARRIVE  AT  CASSERES,  WHERE
THE  KNIGHT  RELATES  TO  1IIM  THE  CAPTURE  OF  THE  TOWN  BY  THE  ARMAGNACS,  AND
ALSO  THE  RE-CAPTURE  OF  IT  BY  THE  COUNT  DE  FOIX  ; AND,  AS  THEY  JOURNEY,
THEY  CONVERSE  ON  DIFFERENT  FEATS  OF  ARMS  BETWEEN  THE  ARMAGNACS  AND
FOIXIENS.

Thus  rode  we  on  to  Montesquieu,  a good  inclosed  town  belonging  to  the  count  de  Foix,
which  the  Armagnacs  and  Labrissiens*  took  by  surprise,  but  held  it  only  three  days;  in  the
morning  we  left  Montesquieu,  and  rode  towards  Palaminich,  another  inclosed  town,  situated
on  the  Garonne,  and  belonging  to  the  count  de  Foix.  When  we  were  close  to  it,  and
thought  of  entering  it  by  the  bridge  over  the  Garonne,  we  found  it  impossible ; for  the
preceding  day  it  had  rained  so  heavily  in  the  mountains  of  Catalonia  and  Arragon,  that  a
river,  called  the  Saluz,  which  rises  among  them,  and  falls  into  the  Garonne  with  great
rapidity,  was  so  much  swelled  as  to  carry  away  one  of  the  arches  of  the  bridge,  which  was
of  wood.  We  were  therefore  forced  to  return  to  Montesquieu  to  dinner,  and  remain  there
the  whole  day.

On  the  morrow,  the  knight  was  advised  to  cross  the  Garonne,  opposite  the  town  of
Casseres,  in  a boat ; we  therefore  rode  thither,  and  by  our  exertions  the  horses  passed,  and
we  ourselves  afterwards  with  some  difficulty  and  danger ; for  the  boat  was  so  small  that
only  two  horses  and  their  men  could  cross  at  a time  with  those  who  managed  the  boat.
When  we  had  crossed,  wre  made  for  Casseres,  where  we  staid  the  whole  day.  While  our
servants  wTere  preparing  the  supper,  sir  Espaign  du  Lyon  said,  “ Sir  John,  let  us  go  and  see
the  town.”  “ Come  then,”  replied  I.  We  walked  through  the  town  to  a gate  which  opens
towards  Palaminich,  and,  having  passed  it,  went  near  the  ditches.  The  knight,  pointing  to
the  walls,  said,  “ Do  you  observe  that  part  of  the  walls?”  “ Yes,  sir  : why  do  you  ask  ?”
“ I will  tell  you  : because  it  is  newer  than  the  rest.”  “ That  is  true,”  answered  I.  “ I will
relate  to  you  how  this  happened  ten  years  ago.  You  have  heard  of  the  wars  between  the
count  d’Armagnac  and  the  count  de  Foix,  which  took  place  in  the  country  of  Bearn,  that
appertains  to  the  count  de  Foix : the  count  d’Armagnac  overran  it,  though  at  present  he  is
quiet  on  account  of  the  truces  made  between  them.  I must  say,  the  Armagnacs  and
Labrissiens  gained  nothing,  but  had  often  great  losses.  On  the  night  of  the  feast  of  St.
Nicholas,  in  the  winter  of  the  year  1362,  the  count  de  Foix  made  prisoners,  near  to  Mont-
marsen,  the  count  d’Armagnac  and  his  nephew  the  lord  d’Albreth,  and  many  nobles  with
them,  whom  he  carried  to  Orthez,  and  confined  them  in  the  tower  of  the  castle ; by  which
capture  he  received  ten  times  told  one  hundred  thousand  francs.

“ It  happened  afterwards  that  the  count  d'Armagnac,  father  of  the  present,  called  sir
John  d’Armagnac,  set  on  foot  an  armament,  with  which  he  came  and  took  Casseres  by
scalado : they  were  full  two  hundred  men  at  arms,  who  seemed  resolved  to  keep  the  place
by  force.  News  was  brought  to  the  count  de  Foix,  at  Pau,  that  the  Armagnacs  and
Labrissiens  had  taken  his  town  of  Casseres.  He,  who  was  a prudent  and  valiant  knight,
and  prepared  for  all  events,  called  to  him  two  bastard  brothers  whom  he  had  among  his
knights,  sir  Arnault  Guillaume  and  sir  Peter  de  Bearn,  and  ordered  them  to  march  instantly
to  Casseres,  telling  them  he  would  send  men  from  all  parts,  and  in  three  days  would  be
there  in  person.  “ Be  careful,  therefore,”  added  he,  “ that  none  get  out  of  the  town  without
being  fought  with,  as  you  will  have  strength  enough  ; and  on  your  arrival  at  Casseres,  make
the  country  people  bring  you  plenty  of  large  pieces  of  wood,  which  you  will  fix  strongly
round  the  gates,  and  completely  bar  them  up ; for  I am  resolved  that  those  now  in  the  town
shall  be  so  shut  up  in  it,  that  they  never  pass  through  the  gates : I will  make  them  take
another  road.”

“ The  two  knights  obeyed  his  orders,  and  marched  to  Palaminich,  accompanied  and
followed  by  all  the  men  at  arms  in  Bearn.  They  encamped  before  the  town  of  Cassere3 ;
but  those  within  paid  no  attention  to  them,  nor  observed  that  they  were  so  completely  shut


* “ Labrissiens,” — those  attached  to  the  family  of  Labretli,  which  we  call  Albreth D.  S.


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  & c.


79


in,  they  could  not  pass  through  the  gates.  On  the  third  day  the  count  de  Foix  came
with  five  hundred  men  at  arms,  and  on  his  arrival  had  the  town  encompassed  with  fortifica-
tions of  wood,  as  well  as  by  his  army,  that  no  sally  might  be  made  from  it  in  the  night.
In  this  state,  without  making  any  attack,  lie  blockaded  them  until  their  provisions  began  to
fail ; for  though  they  had  wine  in  plenty,  they  had  nothing  to  eat,  and  could  not  escape  by
fording  the  river,  which  was  then  too  deep.  They  therefore  thought  it  better  to  surrender
themselves  as  prisoners,  than  shamefully  perish  withhunger.  The  count  de  Foix  listened  to  their
offers.  lie  had  them  informed,  that  as  they  could  not  pass  through  any  of  the  town-gates,
he  would  make  a hole  in  the  wall  through  which  the  garrison,  one  by  one,  must  pass,  without
arms,  in  their  common  dress.  They  were  forced  to  accept  of  these  terms,  otherwise  the  business
was  at  an  end  : and,  if  the  count  de  Foix  had  not  been  thus  appeased,  all  within  were  dead
men.  He  had  a hole  made  in  the  wall,  which  was  not  too  large,  through  which  they  came
out  one  by  one.  The  count  was  there,  with  his  forces  drawn  up  in  battle-array  ; and  as
they  came  out  of  the  town  they  were  brought  before  him,  and  sent  to  different  castles  and
towns  as  prisoners.  He  took  there  his  cousin,  sir  John  d’Armagnac,  sir  Bertrand  d’Albreth,
sir  Manaut  de  Barbasan,  sir  Raymond  de  Benach,  sir  Benedict  de  la  Corneille,  and  about
twenty  of  the  most  respectable,  whom  he  carried  with  him  to  Orthez,  and  received  from
them,  before  they  gained  their  liberty,  one  hundred  thousand  francs,  twice  told.  For  this,
my  fair  sir,  was  this  wall  broken  down,  as  a passage  for  those  of  Armagnac  and  Albreth  :
afterwards  it  was  rebuilt  and  repaired.”  When  he  had  finished  his  history  we  returned  to
our  lodgings,  and  found  the  supper  ready.

On  the  morrow  we  mounted  our  horses,  and  riding  up  the  side  of  the  Garonne,  passed
through  Palaminich,  and  entered  the  lands  of  the  counts  de  Comminges  and  d’Armagnac.
On  the  opposite  side,  fronting  us,  was  the  Garonne,  and  the  territories  of  the  count  de  Foix.
As  w7e  rode  on,  the  knight  pointed  out  to  me  a town,  which  appeared  tolerably  strong,  called
Marteras  le  Toussac,  which  belongs  to  the  count  de  Comminges ; and  on  the  other  side  of
the  river,  two  castles  of  the  count  de  Foix,  seated  on  a mountain,  called  Montaural  and
Monclare.  As  we  were  riding  among  these  towns  and  castles,  in  a beautiful  meadow  by  the
side  of  the  Garonne,  the  knight  said, — “ Sir  John,  I have  witnessed  here  many  excellent
skirmishes  and  combats  between  the  Armagnacs  and  the  Foixiens;  for  there  was  neither
town  nor  castle  that  was  not  well  garrisoned  with  men  at  arms,  who  engaged  with  and
pursued  each  other.  Do  you  see  yonder  those  ruins  ? they  are  the  remains  of  a fort  which
the  Armagnacs  raised  against  these  two  castles,  and  which  they  filled  with  men  at  arms,
who  did  much  damage  to  the  lands  of  the  count  de  Foix,  on  the  other  side  of  the  river;
but  I will  tell  you  how  they  paid  for  it.  The  count  de  Foix  one  night  sent  his  brother,
sir  Peter  de  Bearn,  with  two  hundred  lances  and  four  hundred  peasants,  laden  with  faggots,
and  as  much  wood  as  they  could  cut  from  the  hedges,  which  they  piled  around  this  fort  and
set  on  fire,  so  that  the  fort  was  burnt  with  all  in  it,  for  none  received  quarter  ; and  since  that
time  no  one  has  dared  to  rebuild  it.”

With  such  conversation  did  we  daily  travel,  travelling  towards  the  source  of  the  river
Garonne,  on  each  side  of  which  were  handsome  castles  and  forts.  All  on  the  left  hand
belonged  to  the  count  de  Foix,  and  on  the  other  to  the  count  d’Armagnac.  We  passed
Montpesac,  a fine  strong  castle,  seated  on  the  top  of  a rock,  below  which  is  the  road  and  the
town.  On  the  outside  of  it,  at  the  distance  of  a cross-bow,  there  is  a pass  called  la  Garde,
with  a tower  between  the  rock  and  the  river,  and  an  iron  gate  : six  men  could  defend  this
pass  against  all  the  world,  for  only  two  persons  abreast  can  advance  between  the  rock  and
river.  Upon  seeing  this,  I said  to  the  knight,  “ Sir,  this  is  a strong  pass,  and  a difficult
country.”  “ It  is,  indeed,”  answered  the  knight ; “ but,  strong  as  it  is,  the  count  de  Foix
and. his  men  once  forced  it,  and  advanced  to  Palaminich,  Montesquieu,  and  even  to  Pamiers.
The  pass  was  very  strong,  but  the  English  archers  greatly  assisted  him  in  this  conquest.
Come  and  ride  by  my  side,  and  I will  tell  you  all  about  it.”  I then  rode  by  the  side  of  sir
Espaing  du  Lyon,  who  thus  continued  his  narration  :

“ The  count  d’Armagnac  and  the  lord  d’Albreth  invaded  the  country  of  Foix,  with
upwards  of  five  hundred  men,  and  advanced  into  those  parts  near  Pamiers,  It  was  in  the
beginning  of  August,  when  the  corn  was  harvesting  and  the  grapes  ripe : in  that  year  there


80


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


was  great  abundance  of  both.  Sir  John  d’Armagnac  and  his  people  were  encamped  before
the  town  and  castle  of  Sauredun,  a short  league  distant  from  Pamiers.  They  made  an  attack
on  it,  and  sent  word  to  Pamiers,  that  if  they  did  not  pay  a composition  for  their  corn  and
wines,  they  would  burn  and  destroy  all.  Those  of  Pamiers  were  afraid  of  waiting  the  event,
as  their  lord  was  at  too  great  a distance,  being  then  in  Bearn,  so  that  they  thought  it  more
prudent  to  pay  the  ransom,  which  was  settled  at  five  thousand  francs  ; but  they  demanded
a delay  of  fifteen  days,  which  was  granted  to  them.  The  count  de  Foix  heard  of  all  this,
and,  by  great  haste  and  sending  to  all  parts  for  aid,  he  got  into  Pamiers  through  this  difficult
pass.  Assistance  came  to  him  from  several  quarters,  so  that  he  found  himself  at  the  head  of
twelve  hundred  lances : he  would  have  given  battle,  without  fail,  to  sir  John  d’Armagnac,
if  he  had  waited  for  it ; but  they  retreated  into  the  country  of  Comminges,  leaving  behind
the  money  from  Pamiers,  as  they  had  no  time  to  stay  for  it.  The  count  de  Foix,  however,
did  not  hold  them  quit,  but  claimed  the  ransom,  as  he  said  he  had  deserved  it ; for  he  had
come  to  their  assistance,  and  to  drive  his  enemies  out  of  the  country.  He  paid  with  it  his
men  at  arms,  and  remained  there  until  the  good  people  had  harvested  their  corn,  finished
their  vintage,  and  put  all  their  effects  in  safety.”  “ By  my  faith,”  said  I to  the  knight,  “ I
have  heard  you  with  pleasure."  Thus  discoursing,  we  passed  near  a castle  called  la  Bretite,
and  then  another  castle  called  Bacelles,  all  in  the  county  of  Comminges.

As  I rode  on,  I saw  on  the  other  side  of  the  river  a very  handsome  and  large  castle,  with
a town  of  goodly  appearance.  I asked  the  knight  the  name  of  this  castle.  He  told  me  it
was  called  Montesplain*,  and  belonged  to  a cousin  of  the  count  de  Foix,  who  bears  the  cows
in  his  arms,  named  sir  Roger  d’Espaign.  He  is  a great  baron  and  land  proprietor  in  this
country  and  in  the  Toulousain,  and  at  this  moment  is  seneschal  of  Carcassone.  Upon  which
I asked,  “ What  relation  was  this  sir  Roger  d’Espaign  to  sir  Charles  d’Espaign,  constable  of
France  ?”  “ He  is  not  of  that  family,”  replied  the  knight ; “ for  sir  Lewis  and  sir  Charles

d’Espaign,  of  whom  you  are  speaking,  came  originally  from  Spain,  and  were  of  Spanish
extraction  ; but  by  their  mothers  are  of  French  also,  and  cousins-german  to  king  Alfonso  of
Spain.  I served  in  my  youth  under  sir  Lewis  d’Espaign,  in  the  wars  of  Brittany  : for  he
was  always  of  the  side  of  St.  Charles  de  Blois  against  the  count  de  Montfort.”

FI ere  ended  our  conversation  on  this  subject.  We  came  that  day  to  St.  Gouffers,  a good
town  belonging  to  the  count  de  Foix,  and  on  the  morrow  to  dinner  at  Moncuil,  a strong  town
also,  which  belongs  to  the  king  of  France  and  is  held  by  sir  Roger  d’Espaign.  After  dinner,  we
mounted  and  took  the  road  towards  Lourde  and  Malvoisin,  and  rode  over  heaths  that  extend
fifteen  leagues : they  are  called  Lane-bourg,  and  are  well  calculated  for  those  who  are  evil-
inclined.  Amid  the  heaths  of  Lane-bourg  is  situated  the  castle  de  la  Mesere,  belonging  to
the  count  de  Foix,  a good  league  above  the  town  of  Tom-nay  and  below  Malvoisin,  which
castle  the  knight  showed  me,  saying, — “ See,  yonder  is  Malvoisin  : have  you  not  inserted
in  your  history  (of  which  you  have  been  speaking  to  me)  how  the  duke  of  Anjou,  when  he
was  in  this  country,  advanced  to  Lourde,  besieged  and  conquered  it,  as  well  as  the  castle  of
Trigalet  on  the  river  befoi-e  us,  and  which  belongs  to  the  lord  de  la  Barde  ?”

I considered  a little,  and  replied ; “ I believe  I have  not  mentioned  it,  nor  have  I ever
been  informed  of  such  an  event.  I therefore  pray  you  relate  the  business,  to  which  I shall
attentively  listen  ; but  tell  me,  lest  I forget  it,  what  is  become  of  the  river  Garonne  ? for  I
can  no  longer  see  it.  “ You  say  truly,”  answered  the  knight : “ it  loses  itself  between
these  two  mountains.  It  rises  from  a spring  three  leagues  off,  on  the  road  to  Catalonia,
below  a castle  called  St.  Beart,  the  last  castle  of  France  on  the  frontiers  of  Arragon.  The
governor  of  it  and  the  surrounding  country  at  this  time  is  a squire  named  Ernauton,  who  is
called  the  Bastard  of  Spain,  and  cousin-german  to  sir  Roger  d’Espaign.  The  moment  you
see  him  you  will  say,  he  is  formed  for  a downright  man  at  arms.  This  bastard  of  Spain  has
done  more  mischief  to  the  garrison  of  Lourde  than  all  the  knights  and  squires  of  this  country
together  ; and  I must  say,  the  count  de  Foix  loves  him  well,  for  he  is  his  brother  in  arms.  I
will  not  say  more  of  him,  for,  at  the  ensuing  Christmas,  you  will  see  him  yourself  at  the  hotel
of  the  count ; but  I will  tell  you  what  the  duke  of  Anjou  did  when  he  was  in  this  country.”

* “ Montesplain.”  Montespan,  in  the  diocese  of  Comminges.


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  See.


ni


CIIAPTER.  VI. FROISSART  CONTINUES  HIS  JOURNEY  WITH  THE  KNIGHT  OF  FOIX,  WHO

RELATES  TO  HIM  SEVERAL  PARTICULARS  RELATIVE  TO  THE  SIEGES  OF  BREST  AND
DERVAL,  AND  HOW  THE  DUKE  OF  ANJOU  RECOVERED  MALVOISIN  AND  TRIGALET  FROM
THE  ENGLISH.

We  then  rode  gently,  and  he  began  his  narration  as  follows  : “ At  the  first  renewal  of
the  war,  the  French  conquered  back  again  from  the  English  all  their  possessions  in  Aquitaine,
and  sir  Oliver  de  Clisson,  having  turned  to  the  French  interest,  conducted  the  duke  of  Anjou,
as  you  know,  into  Brittany  to  the  estates  of  sir  Robert  Knolles  and  to  the  siege  of  Derval ;
all  which,  I dare  say,  you  have  in  your  history,  as  well  as  the  treaty  made  by  sir  Hugh
Broc,  cousin  to  sir  Robert,  to  surrender  the  castle,  for  which  he  had  given  hostages,  imagining
the  duke  of  Anjou  to  be  in  such  strength  that  the  siege  could  not  be  raised  ; and  you  probably
relate  how  sir  Robert  Knolles,  having  entered  the  castle  of  Derval,  refused  to  abide  by  this
treaty.”  “ Truly,  sir,  I have  heard  all  you  have  just  related.”  “ And  have  you  noticed
the  skirmish  which  took  place  before  the  castle,  when  sir  Oliver  dc  Clisson  was  wounded  ?"
“ I cannot  say,”  replied  I,  “ that  I have  any  remembrance  of  it.  Tell  me,  then,  what  passed
at  this  skirmish  and  at  the  siege  ; perhaps  you  may  know  more  particulars  than  I do  ; and
you  can  return  afterwards  to  the  history  of  Lourde  and  Malvoisin.”

“ That  is  true,”  said  the  knight : “ I must  tell  you,  however,  that  sir  Garsis  du  Chatel,
a very  valiant  knight  of  this  country  and  a good  Frenchman,  had  gone  to  seek  the  duke,  to
conduct  him  before  Malvoisin,  when  the  duke  had  issued  his  summons  to  march  to  Derval :
he  made  sir  Garsis  marshal  of  his  army  for  his  valour.  It  is  a truth,  as  I was  informed
afterwards,  that  when  sir  Garsis  found  sir  Robert  determined  not  to  keep  the  treaty,  and
the  castle  of  Derval  not  likely  to  surrender,  he  came  to  the  duke  and  asked,  ‘ My  lord,  what
shall  we  do  with  these  hostages  ? It  is  no  fault  nor  crime  in  them  if  the  castle  be  not
surrendered ; and  it  will  be  a great  sin  if  you  put  them  to  death,  for  they  are  gentlemen
undeserving  such  punishment.’  The  duke  replied,  ‘ Is  it  right,  then,  that  they  should  have
their  liberty?’  ‘ Yes,  by  my  faith,’  said  the  knight,  who  had  much  compassion  for  them.
‘ Go,’  replied  the  duke,  ‘ and  do  with  them  what  you  please.’  At  these  words,  as  sir
Garsis  told  me,  he  went  to  deliver  them,  but  in  his  road  met  sir  Oliver  de  Clisson,  who
asked  him  whence  he  came,  and  whither  he  was  going.  ‘ I come  from  my  lord  of  Anjou,
and  am  going  to  set  at  liberty  the  hostages.’  ‘ To  set  them  at  liberty  ?’  said  sir  Oliver  :
‘ stop  a little,  and  come  with  me  to  the  duke.’  On  his  return,  he  found  the  duke  very
pensive.  Sir  Oliver  saluted  him,  and  then  said,  ‘ My  lord,  what  are  your  intentions  ? shall
not  these  hostages  be  put  to  death  ? By  my  faith  shall  they,  in  spite  of  sir  Robert  Knolles
and  sir  Hugh  Broc,  who  have  belied  their  faith : and  I would  have  you  know,  if  they  do
not  suffer  death,  I will  not,  for  a year  to  come,  put  on  a helmet  to  serve  you  ; they  will  come
off  too  cheaply,  if  they  be  thus  acquitted.  This  siege  has  cost  you  sixty  thousand  francs,
and  you  wish  to  pardon  your  enemies  who  keep  no  faith  with  you.’  At  these  words,  the
duke  of  Anjou  grew  wroth,  and  said,  ‘Sir  Oliver,  do  with  them  as  you  list.’  ‘ I will,  then,
that  they  die  ; for  there  is  cause  for  it,  since  they  keep  not  their  faith.’  He  then  left  the
duke  and  went  to  the  square  before  the  castle  ; but  sir  Garsis  never  dared  to  say  one  word
in  their  favour,  for  it  would  have  been  lost  labour,  since  sir  Oliver  was  determined  upon  it.
He  called  to  him  Jocelin,  who  was  the  headsman,  and  ordered  him  to  behead  two  knights
and  two  squires,  which  caused  such  grief  that  upwards  of  two  hundred  of  the  army  wept.

“ Sir  Robert  Knolles  instantly  opened  a postern-gate  of  the  castle,  and  had,  in  revenge,  all
his  prisoners  beheaded,  without  sparing  one.  The  great  gate  was  then  opened,  and  the
drawbridge  let  down,  when  the  garrison  made  a sally  beyond  the  barriers  to  skirmish  with
the  French,  which,  according  to  sir  Garsis,  was  a severe  business  : the  first  arrow  wounded
sir  Oliver  de  Clisson,  who  retired  to  his  quarters.  Among  the  wounded  were  two  squires
from  Bearn,  who  behaved  themselves  well  : their  names  were  Bertrand  de  Barege  and
Ernauton  du  Pin.  On  the  morrow  they  decamped.  The  duke  marched  with  his  men
at  arms  from  Derval  to  Toulouse,  and  from  thence  to  this  country,  with  intent  to  destroy
Lourde,  for  the  Toulousains  made  great  complaints  of  it.  What  happened  there  I will  teli

VOL.  II.  G


82


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


yon.  The  duke  lost  no  time  in  marching  his  army  to  the  castle  of  Malvoisin,  which  we  see
before  us,  and  laying  siege  to  it.  lie  had  in  his  army  full  eight  thousand  combatants,
without  reckoning  the  Genoese  and  the  commonalty  from  the  principal  towns  in  that  country.

“ A Gascon  squire  and  able  man  at  arms,  named  Raymonet  de  l’Epee,  was  at  that  time
governor  of  Malvoisin.  There  were  daily  skirmishes  at  the  barriers,  where  many  gallant  feats
were  done  by  those  who  wished  to  advance  themselves.  The  duke  and  his  army  were
encamped  in  these  handsome  meadows  between  the  town  of  Tournay  and  the  castle,  on  the
banks  of  the  Lisse.  During  this  siege,  sir  Garsis  du  Chatel,  who  was  marshal  of  the  army,
marched  with  five  hundred  men  at  arms,  two  hundred  archers  and  cross-bows,  and  full  two
thousand  common  men,  to  lay  siege  to  the  castle  of  Trigalet,  which  we  have  left  behind  us.
A squire  of  Gascony  had  the  command  of  it,  for  his  cousin  the  lord  de  la  Barde,  and  was
called  le  Bastot  de  Mauleon  : he  had  about  forty  companions  with  him,  who  were  lords  of
Lane-bourg  ; for  no  one  could  march  through  these  parts  except  a pilgrim  to  the  shrine  of
St.  Jago,  without  being  made  a prisoner,  and,  if  not  ransomed,  put  to  death.  There  was
another  strong  place,  near  to  le  Mesen,  of  which  thieves  and  robbers  from  all  countries  made
a garrison,  called  le  Nemillcux  : it  is  very  strong,  but  always  in  dispute  between  the  count
d’Armagnac  and  the  count  de  Foix  ; and  for  this  reason  the  nobles  paid  not  any  attention  to
it  when  the  duke  of  Anjou  came  into  the  country.

“ Sir  Garsis,  on  arriving  at  Trigalet,  had  it  surrounded  on  all  sides  but  that  towards  the
river,  which  they  could  not  approach,  and  a sharp  attack  commenced,  in  which  many  of  each
party  were  wounded.  Sir  Garsis  was  five  days  there,  and  on  every  one  of  them  were
skirmishes ; insomuch  that  the  garrison  had  expended  all  their  ammunition,  and  had  nothing
left  to  shoot  with,  which  was  soon  perceived  by  the  French.  Upon  this,  sir  Garsis,  out  of
true  gallantry,  sent  a passport  to  the  governor  to  come  and  speak  witli  him.  When  he  saw
him,  lie  said,  ‘ Bastot,  I well  know  your  situation ; that  your  garrison  have  no  ammunition,
nor  anything  but  lances  to  defend  themselves  with  when  attacked.  Now,  if  you  be  taken  by
storm,  it  will  be  impossible  for  me  to  save  yours  or  your  companions’  lives,  from  the  fury  of
the  common  people,  for  which  I should  be  very  sorry,  as  you  are  my  cousin.  I therefore
advise  you  to  surrender  the  place,  and  even  entreat  you  so  to  do  : you  cannot  be  blamed  by
any  one  for  it,  and  seeking  fortune  elsewhere,  for  you  have  held  out  long  enough.’

“ ‘ My  lord,’  replied  the  squire,  ‘ anywhere  but  here  I would  freely  do  what  you  advise,
for  in  truth  I am  your  cousin  : in  this  instance,  I cannot  act  from  myself,  for  those  who  are
with  me  have  an  equal  command,  though  they  affect  to  consider  me  as  their  captain.  I will
return,  and  tell  them  what  you  have  said  : if  they  agree  to  surrender,  I shall  consent ; if  they
be  resolved  to  hold  out,  whatever  may  be  my  fate,  I must,  with  them,  abide  the  event.’
‘ This  is  well  said,’  answei’ed  sir  Garsis  : ‘ you  may  depart  whenever  you  please,  since  I
know  your  intention.’

“ The  Bastot  de  Mauleon  returned  to  the  castle,  and  assembled  all  his  companions  in  the
court-yard,  to  whom  he  related  what  sir  Garsis  had  said,  and  then  demanded  their  opinions,
and  what  they  would  do.  They  debated  for  a long  time  : some  said  they  were  strong  enough
to  wait  the  event : others  wished  to  withdraw,  saying  it  was  full  time  for  it,  as  they  had  no
longer  any  ammunition,  and  the  duke  of  Anjou  was  severe,  and  the  whole  country  of  Toulouse
and  Carcassonne  enraged  against  them  for  the  mischiefs  they  had  done.  Everything  having
been  considered,  they  agreed  to  surrender  the  castle,  but  on  condition  they  should  be  escorted,
themselves  and  baggage,  to  chateau  Cullie  which  their  friends  were  in  possession  of,  on  the
Toulousain  frontier.  Upon  this,  Bastot  de  Mauleon  returned  to  sir  Garsis,  who  granted  their
demand  ; for  he  saw  the  castle  was  not  easy  to  win  by  storm,  and  it  would  probably  have
cost  him  many  lives.  They  made  their  preparations  to  depart,  packing  up  everything  they
could.  Of  pillage  they  had  enough,  and  carried  away  the  best  part  of  it,  leaving  the  rest
behind  them.  Sir  Garsis  had  them  safely  escorted  as  far  as  chateau  Cidlie.  By  this  means
did  the  French  gain  the  castle  of  Trigalet,  which  sir  Garsis  gave  to  the  commonalty  of  the
country  who  had  accompanied  him,  to  do  with  it  wThat  they  chose.  They  determined  to
destroy  and  raze  it,  in  the  manner  you  have  seen,  which  was  so  completely  done,  that  no  one
since  has  ever  thought  of  rebuilding  it.

* A castle  in  Auvergne.


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  Arc.


83

“ Sir  Garsis  would  have  marched  from  thence  to  castle  Nautilleux  *,  which  is  situated  on
the  moors  near  the  castle  of  Lamen  f,  to  fi-eo  it  from  those  companions  who  had  possession  of
it ; hut  on  the  road  they  told  him — ‘ My  lord,  you  have  no  need  to  advance  further,  for  you
will  not  find  any  one  in  castle  Nautilleux  : those  who  were  there  are  fled,  seme  one  way,
some  another,  we  know  not  whither.’  Sir  Garsis,  on  hearing  this,  halted  in  the  plain  to
consider  what  was  best  to  he  done.  The  seneschal  de  Nobesen  happened  to  bo  present,  wdio
said,  ‘ Sir,  this  castle  is  within  my  jurisdiction,  and  should  be  held  from  the  count  de  Foix  :
give  it  me,  I beg  of  you,  and  I will  have  it  so  well  guarded  at  my  costs,  that  no  person  who
wishes  ill  to  the  country  shall  ever  enter  it.’  ‘ My  lord,’  added  those  from  Toulouse  who  were
by,  ‘ he  speaks  well : the  seneschal  is  a valiant  and  prudent  man,  and  it  is  better  he  should
have  it  than  another.’  ‘ I consent  to  it,’  said  sir  Garsis.  Thus  was  the  castle  of  Nantilleux
given  to  the  seneschal  de  Nobesen,  who  rode  thither,  and,  having  found  it  empty,  had  repaired
what  had  been  destroyed.  He  appointed  governor  a squire  of  the  country  named  Fortifie
de  St.  Pol,  and  then  returned  to  the  siege  of  Malvoisin  where  the  duke  was.  Sir  Garsis  and
his  men  had  already  related  to  the  duke  their  successful  exploits.  The  castle  of  Malvoisin
held  out  about  six  weeks ; there  wrcre,  daily,  skirmishes  between  the  two  armies  at  the
barriers,  and  the  place  would  have  made  a longer  resistance,  for  the  castle  was  so  strong  it
could  have  held  a long  siege  ; but,  the  well  that  supplied  the  castle  with  water  being  without
the  walls,  they  cut  off  the  communication  : the  weather  was  very  hot,  and  the  cisterns  within
quite  dry,  for  it  had  not  rained  one  drop  for  six  weeks  ; and  the  besiegers  were  at  their  ease
on  the  banks  of  this  clear  and  fine  river,  which  they  made  use  of  for  themselves  and  horses.

“ The  garrison  of  Malvoisin  were  alarmed  at  their  situation,  for  they  could  not  hold  out
longer  : they  had  a sufficiency  of  wine,  but  not  one  drop  of  sweet  water.  They  determined  to
open  a treaty ; and  Raymonet  de  l’Epee  requested  a passport  to  wait  on  the  duke,  which  having
easily  obtained,  he  said,  ‘ My  lord,  if  you  will  act  courteously  to  me  and  my  companions,  I
will  surrender  the  castle  of  Malvoisin.’  ‘ What  courtesy  is  it  you  ask  ?’  replied  the  duke  of
Anjou  : ‘ get  about  your  business,  each  of  you  to  your  own  countries,  without  entering  any
fort  that  holds  out  against  us ; for  if  you  do  so,  and  I get  hold  of  you,  I wall  deliver  you  up
to  Jocelin,  who  will  shave  you  without  a razor.’  ‘ My  lord,’  answered  Raymonet,  t if  we
thus  depart,  we  must  carry  away  what  belongs  to  us,  and  what  we  have  gained  by  arms  and
with  great  risks.’  The  duke  paused  a wdiile,  and  then  said,  ‘ I consent  that  you  take  with  you
whatever  you  can  carry  before  you  in  trunks  and  on  sumpter-horses,  but  not  otherwise  ; and,
if  you  have  any  prisoners,  they  must  be  given  up  to  us.’  ‘ I agree,’  said  Raymonet.  Such
w7as  the  treaty,  as  you  hear  me  relate  it ; and  all  who  were  in  the  castle  departed,  after
surrendering  it  to  the  duke  of  Anjou  and  carrying  all  they  could  with  them.  They  returned
to  their  own  country,  or  elsewhere,  in  search  of  adventures  : but  Raymonet  l’Epee  turned  to
the  French  : he  served  the  duke  of  Anjou  a long  time,  passed  into  Italy  with  him,  and  was
killed  in  a skirmish  before  the  city  of  Naples.

“ Thus,  my  fair  sir,  did  the  duke  of  Anjou  at  that  time  conduct  himself,  and  win  the  castle
of  Malvoisin,  which  gave  him  great  joy.  He  made  governor  of  it  a knight  of  Bigorre,  called
sir  Ciquart  de  Luperiere,  and  afterwards  gave  it  to  the  count  de  Foix,  who  still  holds  it,  and
will  do  so  as  long  as  lie  lives;  for  it  is  well  guarded  by  a knight  of  Bigorre,  a relation  of
his,  called  sir  Raymond  de  Lane.  The  duke  of  Anjou  having  gained  possession  of  Malvoisin,
and  freed  the  country,  and  all  Lane-bourg,  of  the  English  and  other  pillagers,  laid  siege  to
the  town  and  castle  of  Lourde.  The  count  de  Foix,  seeing  him  so  near  his  territories,  began
to  be  very  doubtful  what  his  intentions  might  be.  He  therefore  issued  his  summons  to  his
knights  and  squires,  and  sent  them  into  different  garrisons.  He  placed  his  brother,  sir  Amaut
William,  with  two  hundred  lances,  in  Morlens ; his  other  brother,  sir  Peter  de  Bearn,  with  the
same  number  of  lances,  in  Pau  ; sir  Peter  de  Cabesten,  with  the  like  number,  in  the  city  of
l’Estrade ; sir  Mouvant  de  Novalles  in  the  town  of  Hertillet,  with  one  hundred  lances ; sir
Crual  Geberel  in  Montgerbiel  with  the  like  number  ; sir  Fouquat  d’Orterey  in  the  town  of
Sauveterre  J with  the  same ; and  I,  Espaing  du  Lyon,  was  sent  to  Mont-de-marsen  with  tw'o

* “ Nautilleux.” — f “ Lamen.” — Denys  Sauvage  Froissart  calls  it  Natilleux  and  Nantilleux.

adds  a marginal  note  : “ Judge  whether  these  two  plates  J Situated  on  the  Gave  of  Oleron,  seven  leagues  from

may  not  be  what  he  before  cails  Nemilleux  and  Mesen.”  Pau.

a 2


84


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


hundred  lancet.  There  was  not  a castle  in  all  Bearn  that  was  not  well  provided  with  men
at  arms  : he  himself  remained  to  guard  his  florins  in  the  castle  of  Ortliez.”

“ Sir,”  said  I to  the  knight,  “has  he  a great  quantity  of  them  ?”  “ By  my  faith,”  replied

lie,  “ the  count  de  Foix  has  at  this  moment  a hundred  thousand  thirty  times  told  ; and  there
is  not  a year  hut  he  gives  away  sixty  thousand ; for  a more  liberal  lord,  in  making  presents,
does  not  exist.”  Upon  this  I asked,  “ To  whom  does  he  make  these  gifts  ?”  He  answered,
“ To  strangers,  to  knights  and  squires  who  travel  through  his  country,  to  heralds,  minstrels,
to  all  who  converse  with  him  : none  leave  him  without  a present,  for  he  would  be  angered
should  any  one  refuse  it.”  “ Ha,  ha,  holy  Mary  !”  cried  I,  “ to  what  purpose  does  he  keep
so  large  a sum  ? where  does  it  come  from  ? Are  his  revenues  so  great  to  supply  him  with  it  ?
I should  like  to  know  this,  if  you  please.”  “ Yes,  you  shall  know  it,”  answered  the  knight,
“ but  you  have  asked  two  questions : if  you  wish  them  answered,  I must  begin  with  the
first.  You  ask,  for  what  purpose  he  keeps  so  large  a sum  of  money  : I must  tell  you,  that
the  count  de  Foix  is  doubtful  of  war  between  him  and  the  count  d’Armagnac,  and  of  the
manoeuvres  of  his  neighbours  the  kings  of  France  and  of  England,  neither  of  whom  he  would
willingly  anger  ; and  hitherto  he  has  not  taken  any  part  in  their  wars,  for  he  has  never  borne
arms  on  either  side,  and  is  on  good  terms  with  both.  I tell  you,  (and  you  yourself  will  agree
with  me  when  you  have  made  acquaintance  with  him,  and  have  conversed  together,  and  seen
the  establishments  of  his  household,)  that  he  is  the  most  prudent  prince  living,  and  one  whom
neither  the  king  of  France  nor  king  of  England  would  willingly  make  an  enemy.  With  regard
to  his  other  neighbours,  the  kings  of  Arragon  and  Navarre,  he  thinks  but  little  of  them,  for  he
could  instantly  raise  more  men  at  arms  (so  many  friends  has  he  made  by  his  gifts,  and  such
power  has  his  money,)  than  these  kings  could  ever  do.  I have  heard  him  say,  that  when  the
king  of  Cyprus  was  in  Bearn  and  explained  to  him  the  intended  expedition  to  the  holy
sepulchre,  he  was  so  anxious  to  make  that  valuable  conquest,  that  if  the  kings  of  France  and
England  had  gone  thither,  he  would  have  been  the  most  considerable  lord  after  them,  and
have  led  the  largest  army.  He  has  not  yet  given  up  this  idea,  and  it  is  for  this  reason  also
he  has  amassed  such  wealth.  The  prince  of  Wales,  likewise,  when  he  reigned  in  Aquitaine,
and  resided  at  Bordeaux,  induced  him  to  collect  large  sums ; for  the  prince  menaced  him  in
regard  to  his  country  of  Bearn,  and  said  he  would  force  him  to  hold  it  from  him  : but  the
count  de  Foix  declared  he  would  not,  for  Bearn  was  free  land,  and  owed  no  homage  to  any
lord  whatever.  The  prince,  who  was  then  very  powerful  and  much  feared,  said  he
would  make  him  humble  himself ; for  the  count  d’Armagnac  and  the  lord  d’Albreth,  who
hated  the  count  de  Foix  for  the  victories  lie  had  gained  over  them,  poisoned  the  prince’s  mind.
The  expedition  of  the  prince  into  Spain  prevented  hostilities ; and  sir  JohnCliandos,  who  was
the  principal  adviser  and  much  beloved  by  the  prince,  strenuously  opposed  this  intended
war.  The  count  de  Foix  and  sir  John  Chandos  loved  each  other  for  their  gallant  deeds.

“ The  count,  however,  was  suspicious  of  the  prince,  whom  he  knew  to  be  powerful  and
warlike,  and  began  to  amass  large  sums  to  aid  and  defend  himself  should  he  be  attacked.
He  imposed  heavy  taxes  on  the  country  and  on  all  the  towns,  which  now  exist,  and  will  do
so  as  long  as  he  lives  : each  hearth  pays  two  francs  per  annum,  one  with  the  other ; and  in
this  he  has  found  and  finds  a mine  of  wealth,  for  it  is  marvellous  how  cheerfully  his  subjects
pay  it.  With  this,  there  is  not  any  Englishman,  Frenchman,  nor  pillager,  who  rob  his  people
of  a single  farthing : his  whole  country  is  protected  and  justice  well  administered,  for  in
matters  of  justice  he  is  the  most  severe  and  upright  lord  that  exists.”  With  these  words  we
found  ourselves  in  the  town  of  Tournay,  where  our  lodgings  were  prepared  : the  knight,
therefore,  ceased  speaking  ; and  I made  no  further  enquiries,  for  I had  well  remarked  where
he  had  left  off,  and  could  again  remind  him  of  it,  as  we  had  yet  to  travel  together.  We  were
comfortably  lodged  at  the  hotel  of  the  Star.  When  supper  was  served,  the  governor  of
Malvoisin,  sir  Raymond  de  Lane,  came  to  see  us,  and  supped  with  us  : he  brought  with  him
four  flagons  of  excellent  wine,  as  good  as  any  I drank  on  the  road.  These  two  knights
conversed  long  together,  and  it  was  late  when  sir  Raymond  departed  and  returned  to  his
castle  of  Malvoisin.


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


85


CHAPTER  VII. FROISSART  CONTINUES  HIS  JOURNEY  : IN  TRAVELLING  FROM  TOURNAY  TO

TARBES,  TIIE  KNIGHT  RELATES  TO  HIM  IIOW  THE  GARRISON  OF  LOURDE  nAD  A SHARP

RENCOUNTER  WITH  TIIE  FRENCH  FROM  THE  ADJACENT  GARRISONS, WITH  SEVERAL

PARTICULARS  TOUCHING  THE  SIEGE  OF  LOURDE,  AND  THE  DEATH  OF  TIIE  GOVERNOR,
WHO  WOULD  NOT  SURRENDER  IT  TO  HIS  RELATION  THE  COUNT  DE  FOIX.

In  the  morning,  we  mounted  our  horses,  set  out  from  Tournay,  passed  the  river  Lisse  at  a
ford  ; and,  riding  towards  the  city  of  Tarbes,  entered  Bigorre,  leaving  on  our  left  the  road  to
Lourde,  Bagneres,  and  the  castle  of  Montgaillard.  We  made  for  a village  called  in  the
country  Terra  Cimitat,  and  skirted  a wood,  which  we  afterwards  entered,  on  the  lands  of  the
lord  de  Barbasan  ; when  the  knight  said,  “ Sir  John,  this  is  the  pass  of  Larre  : look  about
you.”  I did  so,  and  thought  it  a very  strange  country,  and  should  have  imagined  myself  in
great  danger  if  I had  not  had  the  company  of  the  knight.

I recollected  what  he  had  said  some  days  before  respecting  the  country  of  Larre  and
Mengeant  de  Lourde,  and,  reminding  him  of  them,  said,  “ My  lord,  you  promised  that  wlier
we  came  to  the  country  of  Larre,  you  would  tell  me  more  of  Mengeant  de  Lourde,  and  the
manner  of  his  death.”  “ It  is  true,”  replied  the  knight : come  and  ride  by  my  side,  and  I will
tell  it  you.”  I then  pushed  forward  to  hear  him  the  better,  when  he  began  as  follows  :

“ During  the  time  Peter  d’Anchin  held  the  castle  and  garrison  of  Ortingas,  as  I have  before
related,  those  of  Lourde  made  frequent  excursions  at  a distance  from  their  fort,  when  they
had  not  always  the  advantage.  You  see  those  two  castles  of  Barbasan  and  Marteras,  which
had  always  considerable  garrisons  : the  towns  of  Bagneres,  Tournay,  Montgaillard,  Salenges,
Benach,  Gorre,  and  Tarbes,  were  also  full  of  French  troops.  When  they  heard  that  those  of
Lourde  had  made  any  excursion  towards  Toulouse  or  Carcassonne,  they  collected  themselves
and  formed  an  ambuscade,  to  slay  them  and  carry  off'  what  pillage  they  should  have  collected  :
sometimes  several  on  each  side  were  killed,  at  others  those  of  Lourde  passed  unmolested.  It
happened  once,  that  Ernauton  de  Sainte  Colombe,  le  Mengeant  de  Sainte  Corneille,  with  six
score  lances,  good  men  at  arms,  set  out  from  Lourde,  and  advanced  round  the  mountains
between  the  two  rivers  Lisse  and  Lesse,  as  far  as  Toulouse.  On  their  return,  they  found  in
the  meadows  great  quantities  of  cattle,  pigs,  and  sheep,  which  they  seized,  as  well  as  some
substantial  men  from  the  flat  countries,  and  drove  them  all  before  them.

“ It  was  told  to  the  governor  of  Tarbes,  a squire  of  Gascony,  called  Ernauton  Biffete,  how
those  of  Lourde  were  overrunning  and  harassing  the  country,  and  he  sent  information  of  this
to  the  lord  de  Benach  and  to  Enguerros  de  Lane,  son  of  sir  Raymond,  and  also  to  the  lord  de
Barbasan,  adding,  he  was  determined  to  attack  them.  These  knights  and  squires  of  Bigorre,
having  agreed  to  join  him,  assembled  their  men  in  the  town  of  Tournay,  through  which  the
garrison  of  Lourde  generally  returned.  The  bourg  d’Espaign  had  come  thither  from  his
garrison  of  St.  Beart,  and  they  were  in  the  whole  two  hundred  lances.  They  had  sent  spies
into  the  country  to  see  what  appearance  their  enemies  made  on  their  return.  On  the  other
hand,  those  from  Lourde  had  likewise  spies  on  the  watch,  to  observe  if  there  were  any  men
at  arms  out  to  intercept  them  : both  parties  were  so  active,  that  each  knew  the  force  of  the
other.  When  those  of  Lourde  heard  that  the  French  garrisons  were  waiting  for  them  at
Tournay,  they  began  to  be  alarmed,  and  called  a council  to  determine  how  to  conduct  their
pillage  in  safety.  It  was  resolved  to  divide  themselves  into  two  parties  : one,  consisting  of
servants  and  pillagers,  was  to  drive  the  booty,  and  take  bye  roads  to  Lane-bourg,  crossing  the
bridge  of  Tournay,  and  the  river  Lesse  between  Tournay  and  Malvoisin  : the  other  division
was  to  march  in  order  of  battle  on  the  high  grounds,  and  to  make  an  appearance  as  if  they
meant  to  return  by  the  pass  of  Larre  below  Marteras,  but  to  fall  back  between  Barbasan  and
Montgaillard,  in  order  that  the  baggage  might  cross  the  river  in  safety.  They  were  to  meet
all  together  at  Montgaillard,  from  whence  they  would  soon  be  at  Lourde.  This  plan  they
executed  : and  the  bastard  de  Carnillac,  Guillonet  de  Harnes,  Perot  Boursier,  John  Calemin
de  Bassello,  and  le  Rouge  Ecuyer,  collected  forty  lances,  with  all  the  servants  and  pillagers,
and  said  to  them, — ‘ You  will  conduct  our  plunder  and  prisoners  by  the  road  to  Lane-bourg,
and  then  descend  between  Tournay  and  Malvoisin,  where  you  will  cross  the  river  at  the


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


86


bridge  : follow  then  the  bye  road  between  Cimitat  and  Montgaillard  : we  will  go  the  other
road  by  Marteras  and  Barbasan,  so  as  to  meet  all  together  at  Montgaillard.’  On  this  they
departed  ; and  there  remained  with  the  principal  division  Ernauton  de  Resten,  Ernauton  de
Sainte  Colomhe,  le  Mengeant  de  Sainte  Corneille,  and  full  eighty  companions,  all  men  at
arms : there  were  not  ten  varlets  among  them.  They  tightened  their  armour,  fixed  their
helmets,  and,  grasping  their  lances,  marched  in  close  order  as  if  they  were  instantly  to
engage  : they  indeed  expected  nothing  else,  for  they  knew  their  enemies  were  in  the  field.

“ The  French,  in  like  manner  as  those  of  Lourde,  had  called  a council  respecting  their  mode
of  acting.  Sir  Monant  de  Barbasan  and  Ernauton  Biscete  * said  : ‘ Since  we  know  the  men
of  Lourde  are  bringing  home  great  plunder  and  many  prisoners,  we  shall  be  much  vexed  if
they  escape  us  : let  us,  therefore,  form  two  ambuscades,  for  we  are  enow  for  both.’  Upon
this  it  was  ordered,  that  le  bourg  d’Espaign,  sir  Raymond  de  Benach,  and  Enguerros  de  Lane,
with  one  hundred  spears,  should  guard  the  passage  at  Tournay,  for  the  cattle  and  prisoners
must  necessarily  cross  the  river ; and  the  lord  de  Barbasan  and  Ernauton  Biscete,  with  the
other  hundred  lances,  should  reconnoitre,  if  perchance  they  could  come  up  with  them.  They
separated  from  each  other,  and  the  lord  de  Benach,  and  le  bourg  d’Espaign,  placed  themselves
in  ambuscade  at  the  bridge  between  Tournay  and  Malvoisin.  The  other  division  rode  to
the  spot  where  we  now  are,  which  is  called  the  Larre,  and  there  the  two  parties  met.  They
instantly  dismounted,  and  leaving  their  horses  to  pasture,  with  pointed  lances  advanced,  for
a combat  was  unavoidable,  shouting  their  cries,  ‘ St.  George  for  Lourde!’  ‘ Our  lady  for
Bio'orre  !’

“ They  charged  each  other,  thrusting  their  spears  with  all  their  strength,  and,  to  add
greater  force,  urged  them  forward  with  their  breasts.  The  combat  was  very  equal ; and  for
some  time  none  were  struck  down,  as  I heard  from  those  present.  When  they  had  sufficiently
used  their  spears,  they  threw  them  down,  and  with  battle-axes  began  to  deal  out  terrible
blows  on  both  sides.  This  action  lasted  for  three  hours,  and  it  was  marvellous  to  see  how
well  they  fought  and  defended  themselves.  When  any  were  so  worsted  or  out  of  breath,  that
they  could  not  longer  support  the  fight,  they  seated  themselves  near  a large  ditch  full  of
water  in  the  middle  of  the  plain,  when  having  taken  off  their  helmets,  they  refreshed
themselves  : this  done,  they  replaced  their  helmets  and  returned  to  the  combat.  I do  not
believe  there  ever  was  so  well  fought  or  so  severe  a battle,  as  this  of  Marteras  in  Bigorre,  since
the  famous  combat  of  thirty  English  against  thirty  French  knights  in  Brittany-)-.

“ They  fought  hand  to  hand,  and  Ernauton  de  Sainte  Colombe,  an  excellent  man  at  arms,
was  on  the  point  of  being  killed  by  a squire  of  the  country  called  Guillonet  de  Salenges,  who
had  pushed  him  so  hard  that  he  was  quite  out  of  breath,  when  I will  tell  you  what  happened  :
Ernauton  de  Sainte  Colomhe  had  a servant  who  was  a spectator  of  the  battle,  neither
attacking  nor  attacked  by  any  one ; hut,  seeing  his  master  thus  distressed,  he  ran  to  him,  and,
wresting  the  battle-axe  from  his  hands,  said,  ‘ Ernauton,  go  and  sit  down  : recover  yourself :
you  cannot  longer  continue  the  battle.’  With  this  battle-axe  he  advanced  upon  the  squire,
and  save  him  such  a blow  on  the  helmet  as  made  him  stasser  and  almost  fall  down.

O oo

Guillonot,  smarting  from  the  blow,  was  very  wroth,  and  made  for  the  servant  to  strike  him
with  his  axe  on  the  head  ; but  the  varlet  avoided  it,  and  grappling  with  the  squire,  who  was
much  fatigued,  turned  him  round,  and  flung  him  to  the  ground  under  him,  when  he  said,

‘ I will  put  you  to  death,  if  you  do  not  surrender  yourself , to  my  master.’  ‘ And  who  is  thy
master?’  ‘ Ernauton  de  Sainte  Colombe,  with  whom  you  have  been  so  long  engaged.’  The
squire,  finding  he  had  not  the  advantage,  being  under  the  servant,  who  had  his  dagger  ready
to  strike,  surrendered  on  condition  to  deliver  himself  prisoner  within  fifteen  days,  at  the
castle  of  Lourde,  whether  rescued  or  not.  Of  such  service  was  this  servant  to  his  master  ;
and,  I must  say,  sir  John,  that  there  was  a superabundance  of  feats  of  arms  that  day  performed,
and  many  companions  were  sworn  to  surrender  themselves  at  Tarbes  and  at  Lourde.  Ernauton
Biscete  and  le  Mengeant  de  Sainte  Basile  fought  hand  to  hand,  without  sparing  themselves,

* “ Biscete,” — before  Biffete.  under  Beautnanoir,  at  the  oak  half  way  between  Ploermel

f This  celebrated  combat  took  place  between  thirty  and  Josselin,  in  the  year  1351. — Sec  note  in  the  first
English  under  the  command  of  Bembro  (who  seems  in-  volume,  page  191.
considerately  to  have  engaged  in  it)  and  thirty  French


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &<\


and  performed  many  gallant  deeds,  while  all  the  others  were  fully  employed  : however,  they
fought  so  vigorously  that  they  exhausted  their  strength,  and  both  were  slain  on  the  spot.
Thus  fell  Ernauton  Biscete  and  le  Mengeant  de  Sainte  Basile.

“ Upon  this,  the  combat  ceased  by  mutual  consent,  for  they  were  so  worn  down  that  they
could  not  longer  wield  their  axes  : some  disarmed  themselves,  to  recruit  their  strength,  and
left  there  their  arms.  Those  of  Lourde  carried  with  them  the  dead  body  of  le  Mengeant,  as
the  French  did  that  of  Ernauton  to  Tarbes ; and,  in  order  that  the  memory  of  this  battle
should  be  preserved,  they  erected  a cross  of  stone  on  the  place  where  these  two  knights  had
fought  and  died.  See,  there  it  is  : I point  to  it.”  On  this,  we  turned  to  the  right,  and  made
for  the  cross,  when  each  said  an  Ave  Maria  and  a Pater-noster  for  the  souls  of  the  deceased.
“ By  my  faith,”  said  I to  the  knight,  “ I have  listened  to  you  with  pleasure  ; and  in  truth  it
was  a very  severe  affair  for  so  small  a number;  but  what  became  of  those  who  conducted  the
pillage  ?”  “I  will  tell  you,”  replied  lie.  “ At  the  bridge  of  Tournay,  below  Malvoisiu,  where
they  intended  to  cross,  they  found  the  bourg  d’Espaign  in  ambuscade,  who,  on  their  arrival,
sallied  out  upon  them,  being  in  sufficient  force.  Those  of  Lourde  could  not  retreat,  and  were
obliged  to  abide  the  event.  I must  truly  say,  that  the  combat  was  as  severe  and  as  long,  if
not  longer  than  that  at  Marteras.  The  bourg  d’Espaign  performed  wonders : he  wielded  a
battle-axe,  and  never  hit  a man  with  it  but  he  struckhim  to  the  ground.  He  was  well  formed
for  this,  being  of  a large  size,  strongly  made,  and  not  too  much  loaded  with  flesh.  He  took
with  his  own  hand  the  two  captains,  the  bourg  de  Corn  iliac  * and  Perot  Palatin  de  Bearn.
A squire  of  Navarre  was  there  slain,  called  Ferdinand  de  Miranda,  an  expert  man  at  arms.
Some  who  were  present  say  the  bourg  d’Espaign  killed  him,  others  that  he  was  stifled  through
the  heat  of  his  armour.  In  short,  the  pillage  was  rescued,  and  all  who  conducted  it  slain  or
made  prisoners ; for  not  three  escaped  excepting  varlets,  who  ran  away  and  crossed  the  river
Lesse  by  swimming.  Thus  ended  this  business,  and  the  garrison  of  Lourde  never  had  such
a loss  as  it  suffered  that  day.  The  prisoners  were  courteously  ransomed,  or  mutually
exchanged  ; for  those  who  had  been  engaged  in  this  combat  had  made  several  prisoners  on
each  side,  so  that  it  behoved  them  to  treat  each  other  handsomely.”

“ Holy  Mary !”  said  I to  the  knight,  “ this  bourg  d’Espaign,  is  he  so  strong  a man  as  you
tell  me  ?”  “ Yes,  that  he  is,  by  my  troth,”  said  he,  “ and  you  will  not  find  his  equal  in  all

Gascony  for  vigour  of  body : it  is  for  this  the  count  de  Foix  esteems  him  as  his  brother  in
arms.  Three  years  ago,  I saw  him  play  a ridiculous  trick,  which  I will  relate  to  you.  On
Christmas-day,  when  the  count  de  Eoix  was  celebrating  the  feast  with  numbers  of  knights
and  squires,  as  is  customary,  the  weather  was  piercing  cold,  and  the  count  had  dined,  with
many  lords,  in  the  hall.  After  dinner  he  rose  and  went  into  a gallery,  which  has  a large
staircase  of  twenty-four  steps  : in  this  gallery  is  a chimney  where  there  is  a fire  kept
when  the  count  inhabits  it,  otherwise  not ; and  the  fire  is  never  great,  for  he  does  not  like
it : it  is  not  for  want  of  blocks  of  wood,  for  Bearn  is  covered  with  wood  in  plenty  to  warm
him  if  he  had  chosen  it,  but  he  has  accustomed  himself  to  a small  fire.  When  in  the  gallery
he  thought  the  fire  too  small,  for  it  was  freezing  and  the  weather  very  sharp,  and  said  to  the
knights  around  him,  ‘ Here  is  but  a small  fire  for  this  weather.’  Ernauton  d’Espaign
instantly  ran  down  stairs  ; for  from  the  windows  of  the  gallery,  which  looked  into  the  court,
he  had  seen  a number  of  asses  laden  with  billets  of  wood  for  the  use  of  the  house,  and  seizing
the  largest  of  these  asses,  with  his  load,  threw  him  over  his  shoulders,  and  carried  him  up
stairs,  pushing  through  the  crowd  of  knights  and  squires  who  were  around  the  chimney,  and
flung  ass  and  load,  with  his  feet  upwards,  on  the  dogs  of  the  hearth,  to  the  delight  of  the
count,  and  the  astonishment  of  all,  at  the  strength  of  the  squire,  who  had  carried,  with  such
ease,  so  great  a load  up  so  many  steps.”

This  feat  of  strength  did  I hear ; and  all  the  histories  of  sir  Espaign  du  Lyon  gave  me
such  satisfaction  and  delioht,  I thought  the  road  was  much  too  short.  While  this  was
relating,  we  crossed  the  pass  of  Larre,  and  leaving  the  castle  of  Marteras,  where  the  battle
was  fought,  passed  very  near  the  castle  of  Barbasan,  which  is  handsome  and  strong,  a league
distant  from  Tarbes.  We  saw  it  before  us,  and  had  a good  road,  easy  to  be  travelled,
following  the  course  of  the  river  Leschez,  which  rises  in  the  mountains.  We  rode  at  our

* Before  Carnilkt,


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


leisure,  not  to  fatigue  our  horses  ; and  he  pointed  out  to  me,  on  the  other  side  of  the  river,
the  castle  and  town  of  Montgaillard,  and  the  road  which  goes  straight  to  Lourde.  It  then
came  into  my  mind  to  ask  the  knight  about  the  duke  of  Anjou,  when  the  castle  of  Malvoisin
had  surrendered  to  him,  and  how  he  had  acted  on  his  march  to  Lourde.  He  very  cheerfully
told  me  as  follows :

“ When  the  duke  of  Anjou  marched  his  army  from  before  Malvoisin,  he  crossed  the  river
Leschez  by  the  bridge  of  Tournay,  and  lodged  at  Bagneres,  (where  there  is  a handsome
river  which  runs  by  Tarbes : for  that  of  Tournay  takes  a different  course,  and  falls  into  the
Garonne,  below  Montmillion)  in  his  way  to  lay  siege  to  Lourde.  Sir  Peter  Arnaut  do
Bearn,  with  his  brother  John,  Peter  d’Anchin,  Ernauton  de  Restin,  Emauton  de  Sainte
Colombo,  and  le  Mengeant,  who  was  then  alive,  Ferdinand  de  Miranda,  Oliver  Barbe,  le
bourg  de  Cornillac,  le  bourg  Camus,  and  the  other  companions  within  Lourde,  had  good
information  of  his  arrival,  and  had  much  strengthened  the  place,  in  all  respects,  against  his
coming.  Lourde  held  out,  in  spite  of  all  the  attacks  they  could  make  on  it,  for  sixteen  days
consecutively.  Many  gallant  deeds  were  done,  and  much  mischief  to  the  town  by  the
machines  which  the  duke  brought  to  bear  against  it,  so  that  at  length  it  was  conquered  ;
but  the  garrison  suffered  nothing,  nor  lost  man,  woman,  nor  child,  for  they  had  all  retreated
to  the  castle,  as  they  knew  well  the  town  could  not  always  hold  out,  being  only  fortified
with  palisadoes.

“ When  the  French  had  won  the  town  of  Lourde  they  were  much  pleased,  and,  having
fixed  their  quarters  in  it,  they  surrounded  the  castle,  which  was  impregnable  but  by  a long
siege.  The  duke  was  there  upwards  of  six  weeks,  and  lost  more  than  he  gained  ; for  the
besiegers  could  not  hurt  those  within  the  castle,  as  it  is  situated  on  a perpendicular  rock,
and  can  only  be  approached  by  ladders,  or  by  one  pass.  There  were  at  the  barriers  several
handsome  skirmishes  and  deeds  of  arms,  when  many  squires  of  France  were  killed  and
wounded  from  having  advanced  too  near.  The  duke  of  Anjou,  seeing  he  could  not  gain  the
castle  of  Lourde  by  force,  opened  a negociation  with  the  governor,  offering  him  large  sums
of  money  if  he  would  surrender  his  garrison.  The  knight  was  a man  of  honour,  and
excused  himself  by  saying,  ‘ the  garrison  was  not  his  ; and  that  he  could  neither  sell,  give,
nor  alienate  the  inheritance  of  the  king  of  England,  unless  he  were  a traitor,  which  he
scorned  to  be,  and  would  remain  loyal  to  his  natural  lord.  When  the  fort  was  intrusted  to
him,  it  was  on  condition  that  he  swore  solemnly  on  his  faith,  in  the  hands  of  the  prince  of
Wales,  to  guard  and  defend  the  castle  of  Lourde  until  death,  against  every  man  whatever,
unless  he  were  sent  to  him  from  the  kin"  of  England/  No  other  answer  could  be  had  from
him,  in  reply  to  all  the  offers  and  promises  they  made ; so  that,  when  the  duke  and  his
council  saw  they  could  not  gain  anything,  they  broke  up  the  siege  of  the  castle  of  Lourde  ;
but,  on  their  decamping,  they  burnt  the  town  to  the  ground.

“ The  duke  retreated  with  his  army  along  the  frontiers  of  Bearn  towards  Montmarsen  :
he  had  heard  that  the  count  de  Foix  had  reinforced  all  his  garrisons  with  men  at  arms.  This
did  not  displease  him  so  much  as  that  the  Bearn  men  should  hold  out  Lourde  against  him  ;
but  he  could  never  obtain  anything  satisfactory  on  this  head.  The  count  de  Foix,  as  I have
mentioned  before,  was  very  suspicious  of  the  intentions  of  the  duke,  who  did  him  no  harm,
though  the  count  d’Armagnac  and  the  lord  d’Albreth  wished  him  to  act  otherwise ; but  he
was  not  so  inclined.  While  he  was  encamped  between  Montmarsen  and  the  high  lands  of
Albreth,  he  sent  sir  Peter  de  Beuil  to  Orthes,  where  on  his  arrival  he  was  handsomely
received  by  the  count  de  Foix  and  lodged  in  the  castle.  Fie  entertained  him  splendidly,
and  presented  him  with  fine  horses  and  mules,  and  to  his  people  gave  other  gifts : he  sent
by  him  to  the  duke  of  Anjou  four  beautiful  horses  and  two  Spanish  greyhounds,  so  handsome
and  good  there  were  none  like  them.  Some  secret  negociations  passed  between  the  count
and  sir  Peter  de  Beuil,  of  which  we  knew  nothing  for  a long  time ; but,  from  circumstances
which  shortly  happened,  we  suspected  what  I will  now  tell  you,  and  by  that  time  we  shall
arrive  at  Tarbes.

“ Soon  after  the  duke  of  Anjou  had  ended  his  expedition  and  was  returned  to  Toulouse,
the  count  de  Foix  sent  letters  by  a trusty  messenger  to  his  cousin  sir  Peter  Arnaut  de  Bearn
at  Lourde,  for  him  to  como  to  Orthes.  The  knight  on  I’eceiving  these  letters  and  noticing


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


no


the  bearer,  who  was  a man  of  high  rank,  became  very  thoughtful  and  doubtful  whether  to
go  or  not : however,  on  full  consideration,  he  said  he  would  go,  for  he  was  unwilling  to
offend  the  count  de  Foix.  When  on  the  point  of  departure,  he  called  his  brother,  John  de
Bearn,  and  said  to  him,  in  presence  of  the  garrison  : ‘ My  lord,  the  count  de  Foix  has
sent  for  me ; on  what  account  I know  not,  but  since  he  is  desirous  I should  come  to  him,  I
will  go.  I suspect  very  much  that  I shall  be  required  to  surrender  this  castle ; for  the  duke
of  Anjou  has  marched  along  the  frontiers  of  his  country  without  entering  it,  and  the  count
de  Foix  has  Ions'  wished  for  the  castle  of  Malvoisin,  in  order  to  be  master  of  Lane-bouro-  and
the  frontiers  of  Bigorre  and  Comminges.  I am  ignorant  if  any  treaties  have  been  made
between  him  and  the  duke  of  Anjou ; but  I declare,  that  as  long  as  I live,  I will  never
surrender  the  castle  of  Lourde  but  to  my  natural  lord  the  king  of  England.  I therefore
order  you,  brother  John,  should  I appoint  you  to  the  command  of  it,  that  you  swear  to  me,
upon  your  faith  and  gentility,  you  will  hold  it  in  the  same  manner  as  I do,  and  that  you
will  never  fail  in  so  doing  for  life  or  death.’  John  took  the  oath  as  his  brother  required,
who  then  set  out  for  Orthes,  where  on  his  arrival  he  dismounted  at  the  hotel  of  the  Moon.

44  When  he  thought  it  was  decent  time  to  wait  on  the  count,  he  went  to  him  at  the  castle,
who  received  him  most  amicably,  made  him  sit  at  his  table,  and  showed  him  every  mark  of
attention.  Dinner  being  over,  the  count  said,  ‘ Peter,  I have  many  things  to  talk  with  you
upon : therefore,  you  must  not  go  away  without  my  leave.’  The  knight  answered,  ‘ My
lord,  I will  cheerfully  stay  until  I have  your  permission  to  depart.’  The  third  day  the
count  addressed  him,  in  the  presence  of  the  viscount  de  Gousserant,  his  brother,  the  lord
d’Anchin  in  Bigorre,  and  several  knights  and  squires,  and  so  loud  that  all  heard  him :
4 Peter,  I have  sent  for  you,  to  acquaint  you,  that  my  lord  of  Anjou  is  very  angry  with  me
on  account  of  the  garrison  of  Lourde  which  you  command.  Through  the  good  offices  of
some  friends  I have  in  his  army,  my  territories  have  narrowly  escaped  being  overrun ; and
it  is  his  opinion,  and  others  in  his  company  who  hate  me,  that  I support  you,  because  you
are  of  Bearn.  Now  I do  not  wish  to  incur  the  anger  of  so  powerful  a prince  as  the  duke  of
Anjou  : I therefore  command  you,  under  pain  of  my  displeasure,  and  by  the  faith  and
homage  you  owe  me,  to  give  up  the  castle  of  Lourde  to  me.’

“ The  knight  was  thunderstruck  on  hearing  this  speech,  and  thought  awhile  what  answer
to  make : for  he  perceived  the  count  had  spoken  in  a determined  manner.  Having  fully
considered,  he  said,  4 My  lord,  in  truth  I owe  you  faith  and  homage,  for  I am  a poor  knight
of  your  blood  and  country ; but,  as  for  the  castle  of  Lourde,  I will  never  surrender  it  to
you.  You  have  sent  for  me,  and  you  may  therefore  do  with  me  as  you  please.  I hold  the
castle  of  Lourde  from  the  king  of  England,  who  has  placed  me  there ; and  to  no  other
person  but  to  him  will  I ever  surrender  it.’  The  count  de  Foix,  on  hearing  this  answer,  was
exceedingly  wroth,  and  said,  as  he  drew*  his  dagger,  4 Ho,  ho  ! dost  thou  then  say  no  ? By
this  head,  thou  hast  not  said  it  for  nothing.’  And,  as  he  uttered  these  words,  he  struck  him
foully  with  the  dagger,  so  that  he  wounded  him  severely  in  five  places,  and  none  of  the
barons  or  knights  dared  to  interfere.  The  knight  replied,  4 Ha,  ha,  my  lord,  this  is  not
gentle  treatment : you  have  sent  for  me  hither,  and  are  murdering  me.1  Having  received
these  five  strokes  from,  the  dagger,  the  count  ordered  him  to  be  cast  into  the  dungeon,  which
was  done ; and  there  he  died,  for  he  was  ill  cured  of  his  wounds.”

44  Fla,  holy  Mary,”  said  I to  the  knight,  44  was  not  this  a great  act  of  cruelty  ?”  44  What-
ever it  was,”  replied  he,  44  so  it  happened,  and  ill  betide  him  who  angers  the  count,  for  then
he  pardons  none.  He  kept  his  cousin-german  the  viscount  de  Chateaubon,  even  though  he
is  his  heir,  eight  months  prisoner  in  the  tower  of  the  castle  of  Orthes,  and  then  ransomed
him  for  forty  thousand  francs.”  44  What,  sir,”  said  I,  “has  not  the  count  de  Foix  any
children  ?”  44  Eh,  in  God’s  name,  not  in  lawful  marriage ; but  he  has  two  young  knights,

bastards,  sir  Jenuain  and  sir  Gracien,  whom  you  will  see,  and  whom  he  loves  as  well  as
himself.”  44  And  was  he  never  married?”  44  Yes,  and  is  so  still,  but  madame  de  Foix  does
not  live  with  him.”  44  Where  does  she  reside?”  44  She  lives  in  Navarre,  for  the  king  of
Navarre  is  her  brother:  she  was  daughter  of  kintj  Louis  of  Navarre*.”  44  The  count  de

D O

* Ines  or  Agnes,  wife  of  Gaston  Phoebus,  count  de  Foix,  was  daughter  of  Joan  of  Navarre  and  Philip  YI,  king
of  France. — Ed.


90


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  Ac.

Foix,  had  he  never  any  children  by  her?”  “ Yes  ; a very  fine  son,  who  was  the  delight  of
his  father  and  of  the  country : through  him  the  country  of  Bearn,  which  is  in  dispute,
would  have  been  settled,  for  his  wife  was  sister  to  the  count  d’Armagnac.”  “ And  pray,
sir,  may  I ask  what  became  of  this  son?”  “Yes,”  replied  he;  “but  the  story  is  too  long
at  present,  for  we  are,  as  you  see,  arrived  at  the  town.”

At  these  words  I left  the  knight  quiet ; and  we  soon  after  entered  Tarbes,  where  we  were
very  comfortable  at  the  hotel  of  the  Star.  We  remained  there  the  whole  of  that  day,  for
it  was  a commodious  place,  to  refresh  ourselves  and  horses,  having  good  hay,  good  oats,  and
a handsome  river.


CHAPTER  VIII. DURING  THE  JOURNEY  PROM  TARBES  TO  MORLENS,  THE  KNIGHT  OP  FOIX

RELATES  TO  FROISSART  TIIE  QUARREL  AND  RECONCILIATION  BETWEEN  THE  DUKE  OP

BERRY  AND  THE  COUNT  DE  FOIX, AND  ALSO  THE  CAUSE  OF  THE  WAR  BETWEEN  HIM

AND  THE  COUNT  D’ARMAGNAC.

On  the  morrow,  after  mass,  having  mounted  our  horses  and  left  Tarbes,  we  came  to  Jorre,
a town  which  has  always  gallantly  defended  itself  against  the  garrison  of  Lourde.  We
passed  by  it,  and  entered  Bearn,  when  the  knight  stopped  in  the  plain,  and  said,  “ We  are
now  in  Bearn.”  There  were  two  roads  that  crossed  each  other,  and  we  knew  not  which  to
take,  whether  that  to  Morlens  or  to  Pau  : at  last,  we  followed  that  to  Morlens.

In  riding  over  the  heaths  of  Bearn,  which  are  tolerably  level,  I asked,  in  order  to  renew
our  conversation,  “ Is  the  town  of  Pau  near  us?”  “ Yes,”  said  he,  “ I will  show  you  the
steeple  ; but  it  is  much  farther  off  than  it  appears,  and  the  roads  are  very  bad  to  travel  on
account  of  the  deep  clays*,  and  it  would  be  folly  for  any  one  to  attempt  going  through
them  that  is  not  well  acquainted  with  the  country.  Below  are  seated  the  town  and  castle
of  Lourde.”  “ And  who  is  governor  of  it  now  ?”  “ John  de  Bearn,  brother  to  sir  Peter  de
Bearn  that  was  murdered,  and  he  styles  himself  seneschal  of  Bigorre  for  the  king  of  England.”
“ Indeed !”  said  I,  “ and  does  this  John  ever  visit  the  count  de  Foix?”  “ Never  since  the
death  of  his  brother  ; but  his  other  companions,  such  as  Peter  d’Ancliin,  Ernauton  de  Restin,
Exnauton  de  Sainte  Colombe,  and  others,  go  thither,  whenever  they  have  occasion.”  “ Has
the  count  de  Foix  made  any  amends  for  the  murder  of  the  knight?  or  has  he  ever  again
been  in  such  passions?”  “ Yes,  very  often,”  replied  the  knight;  “but  as  for  amends,  he
has  never  made  any,  except  indeed  by  secret  penances,  masses,  and  prayers : he  has  with
him  the  son  of  John  de  Bearn,  a young  and  courteous  squire,  whom  he  greatly  loves.”

“ Holy  Mary  ! ” exclaimed  I,  “ since  the  duke  of  Anjou  was  so  desirous  to  gain  Lourde,
he  ought  to  be  well  pleased  with  the  count  de  Foix,  who  could  murder  a knight  and  his
cousin,  to  accomplish  the  duke’s  wishes.”  “ By  my  faith,  he  was  so  ; for  soon  after  the  event
of  his  nephew  coming  to  the  crown  of  France,  he  sent  sir  Roger  d’Espaign  and  a president
of  the  parliament  of  Paris,  with  fair  letters  patent  engrossed  and  sealed,  of  the  king’s
declaration  that  he  gave  him  the  county  of  Bigorre  during  his  life,  but  that  it  was  necessary
he  should  become  liege  man  and  hold  it  of  the  crown  of  France.  The  count  de  Foix  was
very  thankful  to  the  king  for  this  mark  of  his  affection,  and  for  the  gift  of  Bigorre,  which
was  unsolicited  on  his  part ; but,  for  anything  sir  Roger  d’Espaign  could  say  or  do,  he  would
never  accept  it.  He  only  retained  the  castle  of  Malvoisin,  because  it  was  free  land,  and  the
castle  and  its  dependencies  held  of  none  but  God,  and  formerly  had  been  part  of  his
patrimony.  The  king  of  France,  to  please  the  duke  of  Anjou,  gave  it  to  the  count  de  Foix;
but  the  count  swore  he  would  only  hold  it  on  condition  never  to  admit  into  it  any  one  ill
inclined  to  France ; and  in  truth  he  had  it  well  guarded.  The  garrison  of  Malvoisin  would
have  been  as  much  afraid  of  the  English  as  any  other  French  or  Gascon  garrison,  but  they
dared  not  invade  the  territories  of  Foix.”

I was  much  pleased  with  this  history  of  sir  Espaign  du  Lyon,  which  I have  well  remem-
bered ; for  as  soon  as  we  dismounted  at  our  inns,  I wrote  all  down,  whether  it  was  late  or


Lcs  graves. — Places  situated  on  the  banks  of  rivers,  and  covered  with  moving  sands-. — Ed.


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  tkc.  91

early,  that  posterity  might  have  the  advantage  of  it,  for  there  is  nothing  like  writing  for  the
preservation  of  events.

We  rode  this  morning  to  Morlens  ; hut,  before  we  arrived,  I again  began  the  conversation
by  saying,  “ My  lord,  I have  forgotten  to  ask  you,  when  you  were  telling  me  the  history  of
Foix  and  Armagnac,  how  the  count  de  Foix  was  able  to  dissemble  with  the  duke  of  Berry,
who  had  married  a daughter  and  sister  to  the  counts  d’ Armagnac  ? and  if  the  duke  of  Berry
made  war  on  him,  how  he  behaved  ?”  “ IIow  he  behaved  ?”  said  the  knight ; “ I will  tell

you  : in  former  times,  the  duke  hated  him  mortally  ; but  at  this  moment,  by  means  which
you  will  hear,  when  at  Orthes,  they  are  very  good  friends.”  “ My  lord,  was  there  any
reason  for  the  duke’s  hatred  ?"  “ Father  of  God  ! no,”  replied  the  knight : “ I will  tell  you

the  cause  of  it.  When  Charles  king  of  France,  father  to  the  present  king,  died,  the  kingdom
was  divided  into  two  parties  respecting  its  government.  My  lord  of  Anjou,  who  was
impatient  to  go  to  Italy,  and  indeed  this  he  afterwards  did,  took  possession  of  it,  and  set
aside  his  two  brothers  the  dukes  of  Berry  and  Burgundy.  The  duke  of  Berry  had  the
government  of  those  parts  within  the  Langue  d’Oc,  and  the  duke  of  Burgundy  of  the  Langue
d’Ouy  and  all  Picardy*.

“ When  the  inhabitants  of  Languedoc  heard  that  my  lord  of  Berry  was  to  govern  them
they  were  much  alarmed,  especially  those  of  Toulouse  and  its  dependencies ; for  they
knew  the  duke  to  be  a spendthrift,  who  would  get  money  any  way  he  could,  without
caring  how  he  oppressed  the  people.  Some  Bretons  still  remained  in  the  Toulousain,
Carcassonnois  and  Rouergue,  whom  the  duke  of  Anjou  had  left,  and  they  pillaged  the  whole
country : it  was  reported  the  duke  of  Berry  supported  them,  in  order  to  be  master  of  the
principal  towns.  The  duke  himself  was  not  at  the  time  I am  speaking  of  in  Languedoc,  but
attending  the  king  in  the  wars  in  Flanders.  The  citizens  of  Toulouse,  who  are  a powerful
body,  perceiving  how  young  the  king  was  and  how  much  occupied  with  the  affairs  of  his
uncle  the  duke  of  Burgundy  in  Flanders,  and  that  they  were  perpetually  plundered  by
Bretons  and  other  pillagers,  so  that  they  knew  not  how  to  prevent  it,  sent  to  the  count  de
Foix  offers  of  paying  him  a certain  sum  monthly,  if  he  would  undertake  the  government  and
defence  of  their  city  and  the  other  neighbouring  towns.  They  entreated  him  very  earnestly
comply  with  their  request,  because  they  knew  him  to  be  an  upright  man,  a great  lover  of
justice,  fortunate  in  his  affairs,  and  much  feared  by  his  enemies.  The  inhabitants  of
Toulouse  have  always  borne  him  great  affection,  for  he  has  ever  been  a good  neighbour  to
them.

“ He  undertook  the  charge  of  their  government,  and  swore  to  hold  and  defend  the  country
in  its  right  against  all  who  were  ill  inclined,  with  the  reservation  of  the  rights  of  the  king  of
France.  Fie  instantly  ordered  considerable  detachments  of  men  at  arms  on  the  different
roads  the  pillagers  used  to  take  ; and  one  day  he  had  hanged  or  drowned  upwards  of  four
hundred  of  them  at  Robesten  in  the  Toulousain,  which  gained  him  so  much  the  love  of  those
of  Toulouse,  Carcassonne,  Beziers,  Montpelier  and  the  other  towns,  that  it  was  reported
Languedoc  had  revolted  and  chosen  for  its  lord  the  count  de  Foix.  The  duke  of  Berry,  who
had  the  government  of  it,  was  ill  pleased  at  this  intelligence,  and  conceived  a great  hatred  to
the  count  de  Foix,  for  interfering  so  much  in  the  affairs  of  France,  and  for  his  supporting  the
people  of  Toulouse  in  their  revolt.  He  ordered  men  at  arms  into  that  country,  but  they
were  severely  repulsed  by  the  partisans  of  the  count  de  Foix,  and  were  forced  to  retreat,  or
they  would  have  suffered  for  it.  This  angered  the  duke  still  more : he  said  the  count  de
Foix  was  the  proudest  and  most  presumptuous  man  in  the  world  ; and  he  would  not  suffer

* “ It  is  very  probable  these  two  denominations  had  about  14-10,  he  speaks  of  an  unknown  knight,  whom  he
been  in  use  before  the  ordinance  of  Philip  le  Bel  in  1304  supposes  from  Languedoc,  ‘ because  he  and  the  greater  part
and  1305.  It  is  in  another  ordinance  of  Charles  VI.  of  his  attendants  used  in  their  speech  Oc,  the  language
1394,  which  states  the  crown  of  France  to  be  divided  into  which  is  spoken  at  Saint-Jago  of  Compostella.’

Langue  d’Oc,  and  Langue  d’Oil.  The  word  Langue  was  “ All  these  general  distinctions  ceased  from  the  time  of
employed  anciently  for  nation  or  province  : in  the  order  of  Francis  I.  There  is  not  any  mention  after  that  period,  in
Malta,  this  term  is  preserved  at  present.  Guillaume  de  the  treasury  receipts,  of  the  Langue  d’Oc  nor  of  the
Nangis,  in  his  chronicle,  points  out  the  environs  of  Paris  Langue  d’Oil.  The  Langue  d’Oc  was  considered  as  the
by  the  name  of  Langue  d’Oil,  in  the  year  1343,  where  an  country  south  of  the  Loire,  and  the  Langue  d’Oil,  or
epidemical  disorder  began  to  desolate  the  country  towards  Picarde,  to  the  north  of  it.” — St,  Palaye,  Mem.  de
the  end  of  August.  In  la  Salade,  by  Anthony  de  la  Salle,  1'  Academic } vol.  xxiv.


92


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


his  name  to  be  mentioned  with  praise  in  his  presence  ; but  he  did  not  make  war  against  him,
for  the  count  had  all  his  towns  and  castles  so  well  garrisoned,  none  dared  to  invade  his
territories.

“ When  the  duke  of  Berry  entered  Languedoc,  the  count  resigned  the  government,  and
would  not  any  way  meddle,  in  prejudice  to  the  duke ; but  his  dislike  still  continued  as  great
as  ever.  I will  now  say  a word  of  the  means  that  established  peace  between  them.  About
ten  years  ago*,  Eleanor  de  Comminges  (at  present  countess  of  Boulogne,  a near  relation  to
the  count  de  Foix,  and  lawful  heiress  to  the  county  of  Comminges,  notwithstanding  the  count
d’Armagnac  was  in  possession)  came  to  the  count  de  Foix  at  Orthes,  bringing  with  her  a
young  girl,  three  years  old.  The  count  entertained  her  handsomely,  inquired  her  business,
whence  she  came,  and  whither  going  ? ‘ My  lord,’  said  she,  4 I am  going  to  my  uncle  and

aunt-in-law,  the  count  and  countess  de  Durgueil,  in  Arragon,  there  to  remain  ; for  I have
much  displeasure  in  living  with  my  husband,  sir  John  de  Boulogne,  son  of  the  count  de
Boulogne.  I expected  he  would  have  recovered  for  me  mine  inheritance  of  Comminges  from
the  count  d’Armagnac,  who  not  only  keeps  it,  but  has  confined  my  sister  in  prison ; but  my
husband  is  too  soft  a knight,  whose  sole  delight  is  eating  and  chunking,  and  enjoying  his
pleasures  ; and  the  moment  his  father  dies,  he  will  sell  the  greater  part  of  his  estates  to
multiply  his  luxuries  : it  is  for  these  reasons  I cannot  live  with  him.  I have  also  brought
my  daughter  with  me,  whom  I deliver  up  to  your  charge,  and  appoint  you  her  guardian,  to
instruct  and  defend  her  ; for  I well  know  that,  from  our  relationship,  you  will  not  disappoint
me  ; and  I have  the  greatest  confidence  in  the  care  you  will  take  of  my  daughter  Joan.  It
was  with  much  difficulty  I could  get  her  from  her  father’s  hands,  and  out  of  the  country ;
but  as  I know  the  Armagnacs,  your  adversaries  as  well  as  mine,  are  capable  of  carrying  her
off,  being  the  true  heiress  of  Comminges,  I deliver  her  to  you  ; therefore  do  not  fail  me  in
this  business,  I entreat  of  you  ; for  I firmly  believe,  that  when  my  husband  shall  know  I left
her  under  your  care,  he  will  be  pleased,  having  frequently  said,  that  this  girl  would  give  him
much  trouble.’

“ The  count  de  Foix  was  delighted  to  hear  his  cousin,  the  lady  Eleanor,  thus  talk,  and
thought  in  his  own  mind  (for  he  has  a very  fertile  imagination),  that  this  girl  was  brought
to  him  very  opportunely,  as  by  her  means  he  could  make  a stable  peace  “with  his  enemies,  or
marry  her  so  nobly  they  would  fear  him.  lie  answered, — 4 Madam  and  cousin,  I will  most
cheerfully  comply  with  your  request : I am  bounden  to  it  by  our  relationship.  With  regard
to  your  daughter,  I will  defend,  and  be  as  careful  of  her  as  if  she  were  my  own  child.

4 A thousand  thanks,  my  lord,'  said  the  lady.  Thus  did  the  young  lady  of  Boulogne  remain
with  the  count  at  his  house  in  Orthes,  which  she  has  never  since  quitted,  and  the  lady  her
mother  pursued  her  journey  to  Arragon.  She  has  returned  to  see  her  two  or  three  times,
but  has  never  asked  to  have  her  back ; for  the  count  acquits  himself  towards  her  as  if  she
Avere  indeed  his  own  child.  But  I must  tell  you  the  means  by  which,  if  formerly  he  was  in
the  ill  graces  of  the  duke  de  Berry,  he  is  now  on  good  terms.  The  duke  at  this  moment  is
very  desirous  to  marry  her ; and  from  what  I heard  at  Avignon  from  the  pope,  who  spoke
to  me  on  the  subject,  and  who  is  cousin-german  to  her  father,  the  duke  will  employ  him  to
ask  for  him,  as  he  is  determined  to  make  her  his  wife.”

44  By  holy  Mary,”  said  I to  the  knight,  44  your  history  has  given  me  much  pleasure  and
done  me  service  : you  shall  not  lose  a word  you  have  said,  for  they  shall  all  be  chronicled
with  every  thing  I say  and  do,  if  God  grant  me  health  to  return  again  to  Valenciennes,  of
which  place  I am  a native  ; but  I am  very  angry  at  one  thing.”  44  What  is  that  ?”  said  the
knight.  44  On  my  faith,  it  is,  that  so  noble  and  valiant  a prince  as  the  count  de  Foix  should
not  have  any  legal  heirs  by  his  wife.”  44  Please  God  he  had,”  replied  the  knight ; 44  for  if
his  child  were  now  alive,  lie  would  be  the  happiest  lord  in  the  world,  and  his  vassals  be
equally  rejoiced.  44  What !”  said  I,  44  will  his  estates  be  without  an  heir  ?”  44  Oh,  no  : the

viscount  de  Chateaubon,  his  cousin-german,  is  his  heir.”  46  Is  he  a valiant  man  at  arms  ?”
44  God  help  him  ! no  ; and  for  that  reason  the  count  de  Foix  cannot  bear  him.  He  will
make  his  two  bastard-sons,  who  are  young  and  handsome  knights,  his  heirs,  and  intends  to
connect  them  very  highly  by  marriage ; for  he  has  money  enough,  which  will  find  them

* This  took  place  in  1382. — Ed.


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


03


wives  to  uphold  and  assist  them.”  “ Sir,”  said  I,  “ all  this  is  very  well ; but  I do  not  think
it  just  nor  decent  that  bastards  should  inherit  lands.”  “ Why  not  ?”  added  lie,  “ if  proper
heirs  be  wanting.  Do  not  you  see  how  the  Spaniards  crowned  for  king  the  bastard  don
Henry  ? and  the  Portuguese  have  done  the  same  thing.  It  has  frequently  happened  that
bastards  have  gained  possession  of  several  kingdoms  by  force.  Was  not  William  the
Conqueror  bastard-son  of  a duke  of  Normandy  ! He  won  all  England,  as  well  as  the  king’s
daughter  who  then  governed,  and  was  himself  king,  and  from  him  all  the  kings  of  England
are  descended.”

“ Well,  sir,”  said  I,  “ all  this  may  be  well,  for  there  is  nothing  but  what  may  happen.
Surely  those  of  the  Armagnac  party  are  too  strong,  and  this  country  must  always  be  at  war.
Tell  me,  my  dear  sir,  the  first  origin  of  the  wars  between  Foix  and  Armagnac,  and  which
had  the  fairest  cause."  “ That  I will,  by  my  faith,”  answered  the  knight : — “ It  has,
however,  been  a wonderful  war,  for  each  thinks  he  has  justice  on  his  side.  You  must  know,
that  formerly,  I imagine  about  one  hundred  years  from  this  time,  there  was  a lord  of  Bearn
called  Gaston*,  a most  gallant  man  at  arms  : he  was  buried  with  great  solemnity  in  the
church  of  the  Freres  Mineurs,  at  Orthos,  where  you  will  find  him  and  may  see  of  what  a
size  he  was  in  body  and  limbs,  for  during  his  lifetime  he  had  a handsome  resemblance  made
of  him,  in  brass.  This  Gaston  had  two  daughters-)';  the  eldest  of  whom  he  married  to  the
count  d’ Armagnac  of  that  period,  and  the  youngest  to  the  count  de  Foix,  nephew  to  the
king  of  Arragon.  The  counts  de  Foix  still  bear  those  arms  (for  they  are  descended  from
the  kings  of  Arragon),  which  are  paly  or  and  gules ; and  this,  I believe,  you  know.  It
happened  that  the  lord  of  Bearn  had  a severe  and  long  war  with  the  king  of  Castille  of
that  timep,  who,  marching  through  Biscay  with  a numerous  army,  entered  Bearn.  Sir
Gaston  de  Bearn,  having  intelligence  of  his  march,  collected  people  from  all  quarters,  and
had  written  to  his  two  sons-in-law,  the  counts  d’Ai’magnac  and  de  Foix,  to  come  with  all
quickness  with  their  forces,  to  assist  him  in  the  defence  and  preservation  of  his  inheritance.

“ On  the  arrival  of  these  letters,  the  count  de  Foix  assembled  his  vassals  as  speedily  as
possible,  and  sent  for  assistance  to  all  his  friends.  He  exerted  himself  so  effectually  that
he  collected  five  hundred  knights  and  squires  and  two  thousand  footmen  armed  with
javelins,  darts  and  shields  : accompanied  by  these,  he  marched  into  Bearn  to  assist  the  lord
his  father,  who  was  much  delighted  therewith.  This  army  crossed  the  river  Bane  by  the
bridge  of  Orthes,  and  took  up  their  quarters  between  Sauveterre  and  l’Hopital.  The  king
of  Castille,  with  full  twenty  thousand  men,  was  encamped  not  far  from  them.  Sir  Gaston
de  Bearn  and  the  count  de  Foix,  expecting  the  count  d’ Armagnac,  waited  for  him  three
days : on  the  fourth  a herald  arrived  from  the  count  d’ Armagnac  wTith  letters  to  sir  Gaston,
to  say  he  could  not  come,  and  that  it  was  not  agreeable  to  him  to  arm  in  behalf  of  the  country
of  Bearn,  for  at  present  he  had  not  any  interest  in  it.  Sir  Gaston,  perceiving  he  was  not  to
have  any  assistance  from  the  count  d’ Armagnac,  was  much  astonished,  and  asked  the  count
de  Foix  and  the  barons  of  Bearn,  how  he  should  act : ‘ My  lord,’  replied  the  count  de  Foix,

‘ since  we  are  assembled,  we  will  offer  battle  to  your  enemies.’  This  advice  was  followed,
and  instantly  they  all  armed : they  might  be  about  twelve  hundred  men  with  helmets,  and
six  thousand  on  foot.

“ The  count  de  Foix,  with  the  van  division,  charged  the  king  of  Castille  and  his  army  in
their  quarters.  The  battle  was  very  severe  and  bloody : upwards  of  two  thousand  Castillians
were  slain.  The  count  de  Foix  made  prisoners  the  son  and  brother  of  the  king  of  Castille,
whom  he  sent  to  sir  Gaston  de  Bearn,  who  commanded  the  rear  division.  The  Castillians
were  completely  defeated.  The  count  de  Foix  pursued  them  as  far  as  the  gates  of  Saint
Andero  in  Biscay,  where  the  king  took  refuge  in  an  abbey,  and  put  on  a monk’s  frock,
otherwise  he  would  have  been  taken  : those  saved  themselves  who  could,  on  board  of  vessels.
The  count  de  Foix,  on  his  return  to  sir  Gaston  de  Bearn,  was  received  by  him  with  much
joy,  as  indeed  he  had  reason,  for  he  had  saved  his  honour  and  secured  the  country,  which

* Gaston  VII.  of  the  house  of  Mon?ada.  He  began  to  ried  the  infant  of  Arragon  ; Margaret,  who  married  Roger
reign  in  1232,  and  died,  April 22,  1290.  lie  built  the  Bernard,  count  de  Foix;  Amata,  who  married  the  count
castle  of  Orthos. — Ed-  of  Armagnac  ; and  Guillemette,  married  after  the  death  of

f Gaston  VII.  had  four  daughters,  and  no  heir  male,  her  father. — Ed.

Thesefour  daughters  were  Constance,  the  eldest,  who  mar-  £ This  was  probably  about  the  year  1283. — Ed.


04


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


otherwise  would  have  been  lost.  This  battle  and  defeat  of  the  Castillians,  and  the  capture
of  the  son  and  brother  of  the  king,  induced  him  to  accede  to  a peace  with  the  lord  de  Bearn
on  such  terms  as  he  dictated.

“ Sir  Gaston  de  Bearn,  on  his  return  to  Orthes,  in  the  presence  of  all  the  knights  of  Bearn
and  Foix,  took  the  count  de  Foix  by  the  hand  and  said : ‘ Fair  son,  you  are  indeed  my  son,
my  loyal  son,  and  have  secured  for  ever  my  honour  and  the  honour  of  my  country.  The
count  d’Armagnac,  who  married  my  eldest  daughter,  has  excused  himself  from  assisting  in
the  defence  of  my  inheritance,  in  which  he  was  so  much  interested.  I therefore  declare  that
he  has  forfeited  and  shall  lose  whatever  share  he  may  have  expected  from  it  in  behalf  of  my
daughter.  You,  count  de  Foix,  shall  inherit  the  whole  of  my  territory  of  Bearn  after  my
decease,  you  and  your  heirs  for  ever.  I entreat  and  command  all  my  subjects  to  agree  with
me,  and  to  seal  this  gift,  which  I present  to  you,  my  fair  son  of  Foix.’  All  present  answered
‘ My  lord,  we  will  most  cheerfully  do  so.’  Thus  did  the  former  counts  de  Foix  become  lords
of  Bearn  : they  bear  the  arms  and  the  name,  and  have  the  war-cry  and  profit.  However,
the  Armagnacs  have  not  the  less  urged  then-  claims  to  those  rights  they  say  they  are  entitled
to  ; and  this  is  the  cause  of  the  quarrel  and  war  between  Armagnac,  Foix  and  Bearn.”

“ By  my  faith,”  said  I to  the  knight,  “ you  have  perfectly  well  explained  the  matter.  I
never  before  heard  any  thing  of  it,  but,  since  I now  do,  I will  perpetuate  it,  if  God  grant  that
I return  to  my  own  country.  But  there  is  one  thing  more  I could  wish  to  know : what
caused  the  death  of  the  son  of  the  count  de  Foix  ?”  The  knight  became  pensive,  and  said
“ It  is  too  melancholy  a subject : I therefore  wish  not  to  speak  of  it ; but  when  you  are  at
Orthes,  if  you  ask,  you  will  find  many  there  who  will  tell  you  the  whole  history.”  I was
obliged  to  content  myself  with  this  answer;  so  we  continued  our  journey  until  we  arrived
at  Morlens.


CHAPTER  IX. SIR  JOHN  FROISSART  ARRIVES  AT  ORTHES. AN  OLD  SQUIRE  RELATES  TO

HIM  THE  CRUEL  DEATH  OF  THE  ONLY  SON  OF  THE  COUNT  DE  FOIX,  AND  HOW
STRANGE  DREAMS  AFFECTED  SIR  PETER  DE  BEARN,  BASTARD-BROTHER  TO  THE  COUNT.

On  the  morrow  we  set  out,  and  dined  at  Montgerbal,  when  having  remounted,  and  drank
a cup  at  Ercie,  wre  arrived  by  sunset  at  Orthes.  The  knight  dismounted  at  his  own  house  :
and  I did  the  same  at  the  hotel  of  the  Moon,  kept  by  a squire  of  the  count,  called  Ernauton
du  Pin,  who  received  me  with  much  pleasure  on  account  of  my  being  a Frenchman.  Sir
Espaign  du  Lyon,  who  had  accompanied  me,  w-ent  to  the  castle,  to  speak  with  the  count  on
his  affairs  : he  found  him  in  his  gallery,  for  a little  before  that  hour  he  had  dined.  It  was  a
eustom  with  the  count,  which  he  had  followed  from  his  infancy,  to  rise  at  noon*  and  sup  at
midnight.

The  knight  informed  him  of  my  arrival,  and  I was  instantly  sent  for ; for  he  is  a lord  above
all  others  who  delights  to  see  strangers,  in  order  to  hear  news.  On  my  entering,  he  received
me  handsomely,  and  retained  me  of  his  household,  where  I staid  upwards  of  twelve  weeks
well  entertained,  as  were  my  horses.  Our  acquaintance  was  strengthened  by  my  having
brought  with  me  a book  which  I had  made  at  the  desire  of  Winceslaus  of  Bohemia,  duke  of
Luxembourg  and  Brabant.  In  this  book,  called  le  Meliador,  are  contained  all  the  songs,
ballads,  roundelays  and  virelays,  which  that  gentle  duke  had  composed,  and  of  them  I had
made  this  collection.  Every  night  after  supper  I read  out  to  him  parts  : during  which  time
neither  he  nor  any  one  else  spoke,  for  he  was  desirous  I should  be  well  heard,  and  took  much
delight  in  it.  When  any  passages  were  not  perfectly  clear,  he  himself  discussed  them  with
me,  not  in  his  Gascon  language,  but  in  very  good  French.

I shall  relate  to  you  several  things  respecting  him  and  his  household,  for  I tarried  there  as
long  as  I could  gain  any  information.  Count  Gaston  Phoebus  de  Foix,  of  whom  I am  now
speaking,  was  at  that  time  fifty-nine  years  old  ; and  I must  say,  that  although  I have  seen
very  many  knights,  kings,  princes  and  others,  I have  never  seen  any  so  handsome,  either  in
the  form  of  his  limbs  and  shape,  or  in  countenance,  which  was  fair  and  ruddy,  with  grey  and
* “ Que  i!  sc  couchoit  et  levoit  a haute  nonne  that  is  to  say,  he  took  his  morning-meal  at  that  hour. — Ed.


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


95


amorous  eyes,  that  gave  delight  whenever  lie  chose  to  express  affection.  He  was  so  perfectly
formed,  one  could  not  praise  him  too  much.  He  loved  earnestly  the  things  he  ought  to  love,
and  hated  those  which  it  was  becoming  him  so  to  hate.  He  was  a prudent  knight,  full  of
enterprise  and  wisdom.  He  had  never  any  men  of  abandoned  character  with  him,  reigned
prudently,  and  was  constant  in  his  devotions.  There  were  regular  nocturnals  from  the
Psalter,  prayers  from  the  rituals  to  the  Virgin,  to  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  from  the  burial
service.  He  had  every  day  distributed  as  alms,  at  his  gate,  five  florins  in  small  coin,  to  all
comers.  He  was  liberal  and  courteous  in  his  gifts  ; and  well  knew  how  to  take  when  it  was
proper,  and  to  give  back  where  he  had  confidence.  He  mightily  loved  dogs  above  all  other
animals  ; and  during  the  summer  and  winter  amused  himself  much  with  hunting.  He  never
liked  any  foolish  works  nor  ridiculous  extravagancies ; and  would  know  every  month  the
amount  of  his  expenditure.  He  chose  from  his  own  subjects  twelve  of  the  most  able  to
receive  and  administer  his  finances  : two  of  them  had  the  management  for  two  months,  when
they  were  changed  for  two  others  ; and  from  them  he  selected  one  as  comptroller,  in  whom
he  placed  his  greatest  confidence,  and  to  whom  all  the  others  rendered  their  accounts.  This
comptroller  accounted  by  rolls  or  written  books,  which  were  laid  before  the  count.  He  had
certain  coffers  in  his  apartment,  from  whence  he  took  money  to  give  to  different  knights,
squires  or  gentlemen,  when  they  came  to  wait  on  him,  for  none  ever  left  him  without  a gift;
and  these  sums  he  continually  increased,  in  order  to  be  prepared  for  any  event  that  might
happen.  He  was  easy  of  access  to  all,  and  entered  very  freely  into  discourse,  though  laconic
in  his  advice  and  in  his  answers.  He  employed  four  secretaries  to  write  and  copy  his  letters ;
and  these  secretaries  were  obliged  to  be  in  readiness  the  moment  he  came  out  from  his  closet.
He  called  them  neither  John,  Walter,  nor  William,  but  his  good-for-nothings,  to  whom  he
gave  his  letters  after  he  had  I’ead  them,  either  to  copy,  or  to  do  any  thing  else  he  might
command.

In  such  manner  did  the  count  de  Foix  live.  When  he  quitted  his  chamber  at  midnight
for  supper,  twelve  servants  bore  each  a large  lighted  torch  before  him,  which  were  placed  near
his  table  and  gave  a brilliant  light  to  the  apartment.  The  hall  was  full  of  knights  and
squires  ; and  there  were  plenty  of  tables  laid  out  for  any  person  who  chose  to  sup.  No  one
spoke  to  him  at  his  table,  unless  be  first  began  a conversation.  He  commonly  ate  heartily
of  poultry,  but  only  the  wings  and  thighs  ; for  in  the  day-time,  he  neither  ate  nor  drank
much.  He  had  great  pleasure  in  hearing  minstrels,  as  he  himself  was  a proficient  in  the
science,  and  made  his  secretaries  sing  songs,  ballads  and  roundelays.  He  remained  at  table
about  two  hours ; and  was  pleased  when  fanciful  dishes  -were  served  up  to  him,  which  having
seen,  he  immediately  sent  them  to  the  tables  of  his  knights  and  squires.

In  short,  everything  considered,  though  I had  before  been  in  several  courts  of  kings,  dukes,
princes,  counts,  and  noble  ladies,  I was  never  at  one  which  pleased  me  more,  nor  was  I ever
more  delighted  with  feats  of  arms,  than  at  this  of  the  count  de  Foix.  There  were  knights
and  squires  to  be  seen  in  every  chamber,  hall  and  court,  going  backwards  and  forwards,  and
conversing  on  arms  and  amours.  Every  thing  honourable  was  there  to  be  found.  All
intelligence  from  distant  countries  was  there  to  be  learnt ; for  the  gallantry  of  the  count  had
brought  visitors  from  all  parts  of  the  world.  It  was  there  I was  informed  of  the  greater  part
of  those  events  which  had  happened  in  Spain,  Portugal,  Arragon,  Navarre,  England,  Scotland,
and  on  the  borders  of  Languedoc  ; for  I saw,  during  my  residence,  knights  and  squires  arrive
from  every  nation.  I therefore  made  inquiries  from  them,  or  from  the  count  himself,  who
cheerfully  conversed  with  me.

I was  very  anxious  to  know,  seeing  the  hotel  of  the  coimt  so  spacious  and  so  amply  supplied,
what  was  become  of  bis  son  Gaston,  and  by  what  accident  he  had  died,  for  sir  Espaign  du
Lyon  would  never  satisfy  my  curiosity.  I made  so  many  inquiries,  that  at  last  an  old  and
intelligent  squire  informed  me.  He  thus  began  his  tale  : —

“ It  is  well  known  that  the  count  and  countess  de  Foix  are  not  on  good  terms  with  each
other,  nor  have  they  been  so  for  a long  time.  This  dissension  arose  from  the  king  of  Navarre,
who  is  the  lady’s  brother.  The  king  of  Navarre  had  offered  to  pledge  himself  for  the  lord
d’Albreth,  whom  the  count  de  Foix  held  in  prison,  in  the  sum  of  fifty  thousand  francs.  The
count  de  Foix,  knowing  the  king  of  Navarre  to  be  crafty  and  faithless,  would  not  accept  his


OG


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


security,  which  piqued  the  countess,  and  raised  her  indignation  against  her  husband : she
said, — ‘ My  lord,  you  show  but  little  confidence  in  the  honour  of  my  brother,  the  king  of
Navarre,  when  you  will  not  trust  him  for  fifty  thousand  francs  : if  you  never  gain  more  from
the  Armagnacs  and  Labrissiens  than  you  have  done,  you  ought  to  be  contented  : you  know
that  you  are  to  assign  over  my  dower,  which  amounts  to  fifty  thousand  francs,  into  the  hands
of  my  brother : therefore  you  cannot  run  any  risk  for  the  repayment.’  ‘ Lady,  you  say
truly,’  replied  the  count ; ‘ but,  if  I thought  the  king  of  Navarre  would  stop  the  payment
for  that  cause,  the  lord  d’Albreth  should  never  leave  Orthes  until  he  had  paid  me  the  utmost
farthing.  Since,  however,  you  entreat  it,  it  shall  be  done,  not  out  of  love  to  you,  but  out  of
affection  to  my  son.’  Upon  this,  and  from  the  assurance  of  the  king  of  Navarre,  who
acknowledged  himself  debtor  to  the  count  de  Foix,  the  lord  d’Albreth  recovered  his  liberty  :
he  turned  to  the  French  interest,  and  married  the  sister  of  the  duke  of  Bourbon.  lie  paid,  at
his  convenience,  to  the  king  of  Navarre  the  sum  of  fifty  thousand  francs,  according  to  his
obligation ; but  that  king  never  repaid  them  to  the  count  de  Foix.

“ The  count  on  this  said  to  his  wife,  ‘ Lady,  you  must  go  to  your  brother  in  Navarre,  and
tell  him  that  I am  very  ill  satisfied  with  him  for  withholding  from  me  the  sum  he  has  received
on  my  account.’  The  lady  replied,  she  would  cheerfully  go  thither,  and  set  out  from  Orthes
with  her  attendants.  On  her  arrival  at  Pampeluna,  her  brother  the  king  of  Navarre  received
her  with  much  joy.  The  lady  punctually  delivered  her  message,  which  when  the  king  had
heard,  he  replied,  ‘ My  fair  sister,  the  money  is  yours,  as  your  dower  from  the  count  de  Fcix  ;
and,  since  I have  possession  of  it,  it  shall  never  go  out  of  the  kingdom  of  Navarre.’  ‘ Ah,  my
lord,’  replied  the  lady,  ‘ you  will  by  this  create  a great  hatred  between  the  count  de  Foix
and  me  ; and,  if  you  persist  in  this  resolution,  I shall  never  dare  return,  for  my  lord  will
put  me  to  death  for  having  deceived  him.’  4 I cannot  say,’  answered  the  king,  who  was
unwilling  to  let  such  a sum  go  out  of  his  hands,  ‘how  you  should  act,  whether  to  remain  or
return  ; but  as  I have  possession  of  the  money,  and  it  is  my  right  to  keep  it  for  you,  it  shall
never  leave  Navarre.’

“ The  countess  de  Foix,  not  being  able  to  obtain  any  other  answer,  remained  in  Navarre,
not  daring  to  return  home.  The  count  de  Foix,  perceiving  the  malice  of  the  king  of  Navarre,
began  to  detest  his  wife,  though  she  was  no  way  to  blame,  for  not  returning  after  she  had
delivered  his  message.  In  truth,  she  was  afraid  : for  she  knew  her  husband  to  be  cruel  when
displeased  with  any  one.  Thus  things  remained.  Gaston,  the  son  of  my  lord,  grew  up,  and
became  a fine  young  gentleman.  He  was  married  to  the  daughter  of  the  count  d’Armagnac,
sister  to  the  present  count  and  to  sir  Bernard  d’Armagnac ; and  by  this  union  peace  was
insured  between  Foix  and  Armagnac.  The  youth  might  be  about  fifteen  or  sixteen  years
old  : he  was  a very  handsome  figure,  and  the  exact  resemblance  to  his  father  in  his  whole
form.

He  took  it  into  his  head  to  make  a journey  into  Navarre,  to  visit  his  mother  and  uncle ;
but  it  was  an  unfortunate  journey  for  him  and  for  this  country.  On  his  arrival  in  Navarre,
he  was  splendidly  entertained  : and  he  staid  some  time  with  his  mother.  On  taking  leave,
he  could  not  prevail  on  her,  notwithstanding  his  remonstrances  and  entreaties,  to  accompany
him  back  ; for,  the  lady  having  asked  if  the  count  de  Foix  his  father  had  ordered  him  to
bring  her  back,  he  replied,  that  when  he  set  out,  no  such  orders  had  been  given,  which
caused  her  to  fear  trusting  herself  with  him.  She  therefore  remained,  and  the  heir  of  Foix
went  to  Pampeluna  to  take  leave  of  his  uncle.  The  king  entertained  him  well,  and  detained
him  upwards  of  ten  days : on  his  departure,  he  made  him  handsome  presents,  and  did  the
same  by  his  attendants.  The  last  gift  the  king  gave  him  was  the  cause  of  his  death,  and  I
will  tell  you  how  it  happened.  As  the  youth  was  on  the  point  of  setting  out,  the  king  took
him  privately  into  his  chamber,  and  gave  him  a bag  full  of  powder,  which  was  of  such
pernicious  quality  as  would  cause  the  death  of  any  one  that  ate  of  it.  ‘ Gaston,  my  fair
nephew,’  said  the  king,  ‘ will  you  do  what  I am  about  to  tell  you  ? You  see  how  unjustly
the  count  de  Foix  hates  your  mother,  who  being  my  sister,  it  displeases  me  as  much  as  it
should  you.  If  you  wish  to  reconcile  your  father  to  your  mother,  you  must  take  a small
pinch  of  this  powder,  and  when  you  see  a proper  opportunity,  strew  it  over  the  meat
destined  for  your  father’s  table  ; but  take  care  no  one  sees  you.  The  instant  he  shall  have


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  Ac.


1>7

tasted  it,  he  will  be  impatient  for  his  wife,  your  mother,  to  return  to  him  ; and  they  will
love  each  other  henceforward  so  strongly  they  will  never  again  he  separated.  You  ought  to
be  anxious  to  see  this  accomplished.  Do  not  tell  it  to  any  one : for,  if  you  do,  it  will  lose
its  effect.’  The  youth,  who  believed  everything  his  uncle  the  king  of  Navarre  had  told  him,
replied,  he  would  cheerfully  do  as  he  had  said ; and  on  this  he  departed  from  Pampeluna,
on  his  return  to  Orthes.  His  father  the  count  de  Foix  received  him  with  pleasure,  and
asked  what  was  the  news  in  Navarre,  and  what  presents  and  jewels  had  been  given  him  ;
he  replied,  ‘ Very  handsome  ones,’  and  showed  them  all,  except  the  bag  which  contained  the
powder.

“ It  was  customary,  in  the  hotel  de  Foix,  for  Gaston  and  his  bastard  brother  Evan  to
sleep  in  the  same  chamber  : they  mutually  loved  each  other  and  were  dressed  alike,  for  they
were  nearly  of  the  same  size  and  age.  It  fell  out,  that  their  clothes  were  once  mixed
together ; and,  the  coat  of  Gaston  being  on  the  bed,  Evan,  who  was  malicious  enough,
noticing  the  powder  in  the  bag,  said  to  Gaston,  ‘ What  is  this  that  you  wear  every  day  on
your  breast?'  Gaston  was  not  pleased  at  the  question,  and  replied,  ‘Give  me  back  my
coat,  Evan : you  have  nothing  to  do  with  it.’  Evan  flung  him  his  coat,  which  Gaston  put
on,  but  was  very  pensive  the  whole  day.  Three  days  after,  as  if  God  was  desirous  of  saving
the  life  of  the  count  de  Foix,  Gaston  quarrelled  with  Evan  at  tennis,  and  gave  him  a box  on
the  ear.  The  boy  was  vexed  at  this,  and  ran  crying  to  the  apartment  of  the  count,  who  had
just  heard  mass.  The  count,  on  seeing  him  in  tears,  asked  what  was  the  matter.  ‘ In  God’s
name,  my  lord,’  replied  Evan,  ‘ Gaston  has  beaten  me,  but  he  deserves  beating  much  more
than  I do.’  ‘ For  what  reason?’  said  the  count,  who  began  to  have  some  suspicions.  ‘ On
my  faith,’  said  Evan,  ‘ ever  since  his  return  from  Navarre,  he  wears  on  his  breast  a bag  of
powder : I know  not  what  use  it  can  be  of,  nor  what  he  intends  to  do  with  it ; except  that
he  has  once  or  twice  told  me,  his  mother  would  soon  return  hither,  and  be  more  in  your
good  graces  than  ever  she  was.’  ‘ Ho,’  said  the  count,  ‘ hold  thy  tongue,  and  be  sure  thou
do  not  mention  what  thou  hast  just  told  me  to  any  man  breathing.’  ‘ My  lord,’  replied  the
youth,  ‘ I will  obey  you.’  The  count  de  Foix  was  very  thoughtful  on  this  subject,  and
remained  alone  until  dinner-time,  when  he  rose  up,  and  seated  himself  as  usual  at  his  table
in  the  hall.  His  son  Gaston  always  placed  the  dishes  before  him,  and  tasted  the  meats.  As
soon  as  he  had  served  the  first  dish,  and  done  what  was  usual,  the  count  cast  his  eyes  on
him,  having  formed  his  plan,  and  saw  the  strings  of  the  bag  hanging  from  his  pourpoint.
This  sight  made  his  blood  boil,  and  he  said,  ‘ Gaston,  come  hither : I want  to  whisper  you
something.’  The  youth  advanced  to  the  table,  when  the  count,  opening  his  bosom,  undid
his  pourpoint,  and  with  his  knife  cut  away  the  bag.  The  young  man  was  thunderstruck,
and  said  not  a word,  but  turned  pale  with  fear,  and  began  to  tremble  exceedingly,  for  he
was  conscious  he  had  done  wrong.  The  count  opened  the  bag,  took  some  of  the  powder,
which  he  strewed  over  a slice  of  bread,  and,  calling  a dog  to  him,  gave  it  him  to  eat.  The
instant  the  dog  had  eaten  a morsel  his  eyes  rolled  round  in  his  head,  and  he  died.  The
count  on  this  was  very  wroth,  and  indeed  had  reason  : rising  from  table,  he  would  have
struck  his  son  with  a knife ; but  the  knights  and  squires  rushed  in  between  them,  saying,

‘ For  God’s  sake,  my  lord,  do  not  be  too  hasty,  but  make  further  inquiries  before  you  do  any
ill  to  your  son.’  The  first  words  the  count  uttered  were  in  Gascon ; ‘ Ho,  Gaston,  thou
traitor!  for  thee,  and  to  increase  thy  inheritance  which  would  have  come  to  thee,  have  I
made  war,  and- incurred  the  hatred  of  the  kings  of  France,  England,  Spain,  Navarre,  and
Arragon,  and  have  borne  myself  gallantly  against  them,  and  thou  wisliest  to  murder  me !
Thy  disposition  must  be  infamously  bad : know  therefore  thou  shalt  die  with  this  blow.’
And  leaping  over  the  table  with  a knife  in  his  hand,  he  would  have  slain  him : but  the
knights  and  squires  again  interfered,  and  on  their  knees  said  to  him  with  tears,  ‘ Ah,  ah  !
my  lord,  for  Heaven’s  sake,  do  not  kill  Gaston  : you  have  no  other  child.  Let  him  be
confined  and  inquire  further  into  the  business.  Perhaps  he  was  ignorant  what  was  in  the
bag,  and  may  therefore  be  blameless.’  ‘ Well,’  replied  the  count,  ‘ let  him  be  confined  in  the
dungeon,  but  so  safely  guarded  that  he  may  be  forthcoming.’  The  youth  was  therefore
confined  in  this  tower.  The  count  had  many  of  those  who  served  his  son  arrested,  but  not

VOL.  IT.  II


98


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


all ; for  several  escaped  out  of  the  country  : in  particular,  the  bishop  of  Lcscar'*,  who  was
much  suspected,  as  were  several  others.  He  put  to  death  not  less  than  fifteen,  after  they
had  suffered  the  torture ; and  the  reason  he  gave  was,  that  it  was  impossible  but  they  must
have  been  acquainted  with  the  secrets  of  his  son,  and  they  ought  to  have  informed  him  by
saying,  4 My  lord,  Gaston  wears  constantly  on  his  breast  a bag  of  such  and  such  a form.’
This  they  did  not  do,  and  suffered  a terrible  death  for  it ; which  was  a pity,  for  there  were
not  in  all  Gascony  such  handsome  or  well-appointed  squires.  The  household  of  the  count
de  Foix  was  always  splendidly  established.

“ This  business  went  to  the  heart  of  the  count,  as  he  plainly  showed  ; for  he  assembled  at
Orthes  all  the  nobles  and  prelates  of  Foix  and  Bearn,  and  others  the  principal  persons  of  the
country.  When  they  were  met,  he  informed  them  of  the  cause  of  his  calling  them  together,
and  told  them  how  culpable  he  had  found  Gaston  ; insomuch  that  it  was  his  intention  he
should  be  put  to  death,  as  he  thought  him  deserving  of  it.  They  unanimously  replied  to
this  speech, — 4 My  lord,  saving  your  grace’s  favour,  we  will  not  that  Gaston  be  put  to
death  : he  is  your  heir  and  you  have  none  other.’  When  the  count  thus  heard  his  subjects
declare  their  sentiments  in  favour  of  his  son,  he  hesitated,  and  thought  he  might  sufficiently
chastise  him  by  two  or  three  months’  confinement,  when  he  would  send  him  on  his  travels
for  a few  years  until  his  ill  conduct  should  be  forgotten,  and  he  feel  grateful  for  the  lenity
of  his  punishment.  He  therefore  dissolved  the  meeting  ; but  those  of  Foix  would  not  quit
Orthes  until  the  count  had  assured  them  Gaston  should  not  be  put  to  death,  so  great  wa3
their  affection  to  him.  He  complied  with  their  request,  but  said  he  would  keep  him  some
time  in  prison.  On  this  promise,  those  who  had  been  assembled  departed,  and  Gaston
remained  a prisoner  in  Orthes.  News  of  this  was  spread  far  and  near,  and  reached  pope
Gregory  XI.  wrho  resided  at  Avignon : he  sent  instantly  the  cardinal  of  Amiens,  as  his
legate,  to  Bearn,  to  accommodate  this  affair ; but  he  had  scarcely  travelled  as  far  as  Beziers,
when  he  heard  he  had  no  need  to  continue  his  journey,  for  that  Gaston  the  son  of  the  count
de  Foix  was  dead.  I will  tell  you  the  cause  of  his  death,  since  I have  said  so  much  on  the
subject.  The  count  de  Foix  had  caused  him  to  be  confined  in  a room  of  the  dungeon  where
was  little  light : there  he  remained  for  ten  days.  He  scarcely  ate  or  drank  anything  of  the
food  which  was  regularly  brought  to  him,  but  threw  it  aside.  It  is  said,  that  after  his
death,  all  the  meat  was  found  untouched,  so  that  it  is  marvellous  how  he  could  have  lived  so
long.  The  count  would  not  permit  any  one  to  remain  in  the  chamber  to  advise  or  comfort
him  : he  therefore  never  put  off  the  clothes  he  had  on  when  he  entered  his  prison.  This
made  him  melancholy  and  vexed  him,  for  he  did  not  expect  so  much  harshness  : he  therefore
cursed  the  hour  he  was  born,  and  lamented  that  he  should  come  to  such  an  end.  On  the
day  of  his  death,  those  who  brought  him  food  said,  4 Gaston,  here  is  meat  for  you.’  He
paid  not  any  attention  to  it,  but  said,  4 Put  it  down.’  The  person  who  served  him,  looking
about,  saw  all  the  meat  untouched  that  he  had  brought  thither  the  last  days : then,  shutting
the  door,  he  went  to  the  count  and  said,  4 My  lord,  for  God’s  sake,  look  to  your  son : he  is
starving  himself  in  his  prison.  I do  not  believe  he  has  eaten  anything  since  his  confinement;
for  I see  all  that  I have  carried  to  him  lying  on  one  side  untouched.’  On  hearing  this,  the
count  was  enraged,  and,  without  saying  a word,  left  his  apartment  and  went  to  the  prison
of  his  son.  In  an  evil  hour,  he  had  in  his  hand  a knife,  with  which  he  had  been  paring
and  cleaning  his  nails,  he  held  it  by  the  blade  so  closely  that  scarcely  the  thickness  of  a
groat  appeared  of  the  point,  when,  pushing  aside  the  tapestry  that  covered  the  entrance  of
the  prison,  through  ill  luck,  he  hit  his  son  on  a vein  of  his  throat,  as  he  uttered,  4 Ha,  traitor,
why  dost  not  thou  eat  ?’  and  instantly  left  the  room,  without  saying  or  doing  anything  more.
The  youth  was  much  frightened  at  his  father’s  arrival,  and  withal  exceedingly  weak  from
fasting.  The  point  of  the  knife,  small  as  it  was,  cut  a vein,  which  as  soon  as  he  felt  he
turned  himself  on  one  side  and  died.  The  count  had  barely  got  back  again  to  his  apartment
when  the  attendants  of  his  son  came  and  said,  4 My  lord,  Gaston  is  dead.’  4 Dead!’  cried
the  count.  4 Yes,  God  help  me!  indeed  he  is,  my  lord.’  The  count  would  not  believe  it,
and  sent  one  of  his  knights  to  see.  The  knight,  on  his  return,  confirmed  the  news.  The
count  was  now  bitterly  affected,  and  cried  out,  4 Ha,  ha,  Gaston ! what  a sorry  business
* “ Lescar,” — a city  in  Bearn,  about  one  league  from  Pan.


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  arc.


OU

lias  this  turned  out  for  tliec  and  me  ! In  an  evil  hour  didst  thou  go  to  visit  thy  mother  in
Navarre.  Never  shall  T again  enjoy  the  happiness  I had  formerly.’  He  then  ordered  his
barber  to  be  sent  for,  and  was  shaven  quite  bare  : he  clothed  himself,  as  well  as  his  whole
household,  in  black.  The  body  of  the  youth  was  borne,  with  tears  and  lamentations,  to  the
church  of  the  Augustin  friars  at  Orthes,  where  it  was  buried.  Thus  have  I related  to  you
the  death  of  Gaston  de  Foix : his  father  killed  him  indeed,  but  the  king  of  Navarre  was  the
cause  of  this  sad  event.”

My  heart  was  much  affected  at  this  recital  of  the  squire  of  Bearn  relative  to  the  death  of
Gaston ; and  I was  truly  sorry  for  the  count  his  father,  whom  I found  a magnificent,
generous,  and  courteous  lord,  and  also  for  the  country  that  was  discontented  for  want  of  an
heir.  I then  took  leave  of  the  squire,  after  having  thanked  him  for  the  pleasure  his
narration  had  given  me.  I saw  him  frequently  afterwards  in  the  hotel  de  Foix,  when  we
had  always  some  conversation.  I once  asked  him  about  sir  Peter  de  Bearn,  bastard-brother
to  the  count,  who  seemed  to  me  a knight  of  great  valour,  and  if  he  were  rich  or  married.
“Married  indeed  he  is,”  replied  he,  “but  neither  his  wife  nor  children  live  with  him.”
“ For  what  reason?”  said  I.  “I  will  tell  you,”  replied  the  squire.

“ Sir  Peter  de  Bearn  has  a custom,  when  asleep  in  the  night-time,  to  rise,  arm  himself,
draw  his  sword,  and  to  begin  fighting  as  if  he  were  in  actual  combat.  The  chamberlains
and  valets  who  sleep  in  his  chamber  to  watch  him,  on  hearing  him  rise,  go  to  him,  and
inform  him  what  he  is  doing : of  all  which,  he  tells  them,  lie  is  quite  ignorant,  and  that  they
lie.  Sometimes  they  leave  neither  arms  nor  sword  in  his  chamber,  when  he  makes  such  a
noise  and  clatter  as  if  all  the  devils  in  hell  were  there.  They  therefore  think  it  best  to
replace  the  arms,  and  sometimes  he  forgets  them,  and  remains  quietly  in  his  bed.”  I again
asked,  if  he  had  a large  fortune  with  his  wife.  “ Yes,  in  God’s  name  had  he,”  says  the
squire;  “but  the  lady  keeps  possession  of  it,  and  enjoys  the  profits,  except  a fourth  part,
which  sir  Peter  has.”  “ And  where  does  his  lady  reside  ?”  “ She  lives  with  her  cousin  the

king  of  Castille  : her  father  was  count  of  Biscay  and  cousin-german  to  don  Pedro,  who  put
him  to  death.  He  wanted  also  to  lay  hands  on  this  lady,  to  confine  her.  He  seized  her
lands,  and  as  long  as  he  lived  she  received  nothing  from  them.  It  was  told  her,  when,  by
the  death  of  her  father,  she  became  countess  of  Biscay, — ‘ Lady,  save  yourself ; for  if  don
Pedro  lay  hands  on  you,  he  will  put  you  to  death,  or  at  least  imprison  you,  for  he  is  much
enraged  that  you  should  say  he  strangled  his  queen,  sister  to  the  dulcc  of  Bourbon  and  the
queen  of  France,  in  her  bed  ; and  your  evidence  is  more  readily  believed  than  any  other,  for
you  were  of  her  bed-chamber.’  For  this  reason,  the  countess  Florence  de  Biscaye  quitted
the  country  with  few  attendants,  as  one  naturally  wishes  to  fly  from  death,  passed  through
Biscay  and  came  hither,  when  she  told  my  lord  her  history.

“ The  count,  who  is  kind  and  affectionate  to  all  ladies  and  damsels,  had  compassion  on  her,
detained  her  at  his  court,  and  placed  her  with  the  lady  de  la  Karasse,  a great  baroness  of
this  country,  and  provided  her  with  all  things  suitable  to  her  rank.  Sir  Peter  de  Bearn,
his  brother,  was  at  that  time  a young  knight,  and  had  not  then  this  custom  of  fighting  in
his  sleep,  but  was  much  in  the  good  graces  of  the  count,  who  concluded  a marriage  for  him
with  this  lady,  and  recovered  her  lands  from  don  Pedro.  She  has  a son  and  daughter  by  sir
Peter,  but  they  are  young,  and  with  her  in  Castille,  for  she  would  not  leave  them  with  their
father ; and  she  has  the  right  of  enjoying  the  greater  part  of  her  own  lands.”

“ Holy  Mary  ! ” said  I to  the  squire,  “ how  came  the  knight  to  have  such  fancies,  that  he
cannot  sleep  quietly  in  bed,  but  must  rise  and  skirmish  about  the  house  ! this  is  very  strange.”
“ By  my  faith,”  answered  the  squire,  “ they  have  frequently  asked  him,  but  he  knows  nothing
about  it.  The  first  time  it  happened,  was  on  the  night  following  a day  when  he  had  hunted
a wonderfully  large  bear  in  the  woods  of  Bearn.  This  bear  had  killed  four  of  his  dogs  and
wounded  many  more,  so  that  the  others  were  afraid  of  him  ; upon  which  sir  Peter  drew  his
sword  of  Bordeaux  steel,  and  advanced  on  the  bear  with  great  rage,  on  account  of  the  loss  of
his  dogs  : he  combated  him  a long  time  with  much  bodily  danger,  and  with  great  difficulty
slew  him,  when  he  returned  to  his  castle  of  Languedudon,  in  Biscay,  and  had  the  bear  carried
with  him.  Every  one  was  astonished  at  the  enormous  size  of  the  beast,  and  the  courage  of
the  knight  who  had  attacked  and  slain  it.  When  the  countess  of  Biscay,  his  wife,  saw  the

n 2


100


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


bear,  she  instantly  fainted,  and  was  carried  to  her  chamber,  where  she  continued  very
disconsolate  all  that  and  the  following  day,  and  would  not  say  what  ailed  her.  On  the  third
day  she  told  her  husband  ‘ she  should  never  recover  her  health  until  she  had  made  a pilgrimage
to  St.  James’s  shrine  at  Compostella.  Give  me  leave,  therefore,  to  go  thither,  and  to  carry
my  son  Peter  and  my  daughter  Adrienne  with  me : I request  it  of  you.’  Sir  Peter  too
easily  complied  : she  had  packed  up  all  her  jewels  and  plate  unobserved  by  any  one ; for  she
had  resolved  never  to  return  again.

“ The  lady  set  out  on  her  pilgrimage,  and  took  that  opportunity  of  visiting  her  cousins
the  kiim  and  queen  of  Castille,  who  entertained  her  handsomely.  She  is  still  with  them,
and  will  neither  return  herself  nor  send  her  children.  The  same  night  lie  had  hunted  and
killed  the  bear,  this  custom  of  walking  in  his  sleep  seized  him.  It  is  rumoured,  the  lady  was
afraid  of  somethin^  unfortunate  happening,  the  moment  she  saw  the  bear,  and  this  caused  her
faintivm ; for  that  her  father  once  hunted  this  bear,  and  during  the  chace,  a voice  cried  out,
thouoh  he  saw  nobody,  ‘ Thou  huntest  me  : yet  I wish  thee  no  ill ; but  thou  shalt  die  a
miserable  death.’  The  lady  remembered  this  when  she  saw  the  bear,  as  well  as  that  her
father  had  been  beheaded  by  don  Pedro  without  any  cause  ; and  she  maintains  that  something
unfortunate  will  happen  to  her  husband  ; and  that  what  passes  now  is  nothing  to  what  will
come  to  pass.  I have  told  you  the  story  of  sir  Peter  de  Bearn,”  said  the  squire,  “ in
compliance  with  your  wishes : it  is  a well-known  fact ; and  what  do  you  think  of  it  ?”

I was  very  pensive  at  the  wonderful  things  I had  heard,  and  replied,  “ I do  believe
everythin  o-  you  have  said : we  find  in  ancient  authors  how  gods  and  goddesses  formerly  changed
men  into  beasts,  according  to  their  pleasure,  and  women  also  into  birds.  This  bear,  therefore,
might  have  been  a knight  hunting  in  the  forest  of  Biscay,  when  he,  perchance,  angered  some
god  or  goddess,  who  changed  him  into  a bear,  to  do  penance,  as  Acteon  was  transformed  into
a stao.”  “ Acteon!”  cried  the  squire  : “ my  good  sir,  do  relate  it,  for  I shall  be  very  happy
to  listen  to  you.”  “ According  to  ancient  authors,  we  read  that  Acteon  was  a handsome  and
accomplished  knight,  who  loved  dogs  and  the  chace  above  all  things.  He  was  once  hunting
a stag  of  a prodigious  size  : the  chace  lasted  the  whole  day,  when  he  lost  his  men  and  his
hounds  ; but,  eager  in  pursuing  the  stag,  he  came  to  a large  meadow,  surrounded  by  high
trees,  in  which  was  a fountain,  where  the  goddess  of  Chastity  and  her  nymphs  were  bathing
themselves.  The  knight  came  upon  them  so  suddenly  that  they  were  not  aware  of  him,  and
lie  had  advanced  so  far  he  could  not  retreat.  The  nymphs,  in  their  fright,  ran  to  cover  their
mistress,  whose  modesty  was  wounded  at  thus  being  seen  naked.  She  viewed  the  knight
over  the  heads  of  her  attendants,  and  said.  ‘ Acteon,  whoever  has  sent  thee  hither  has  no
oreat  love  for  thee  : I will  not,  that  when  thou  shalt  go  hence,  thou  brag  of  having  seen  me
naked,  as  well  as  my  nymphs  ; and  for  the  outrage  thou  hast  committed,  thou  shalt  perform
a penance.  I change  thee,  therefore,  into  the  form  of  the  stag  thou  hast  this  day  hunted.’
lie  was  instantly  transformed  into  a stag,  who  naturally  loves  waters.  “ Thus  it  may  have
happened  with  regard  to  the  bear  whose  history  you  have  told  me,  and  the  countess  may
have  had  some  knowledge  or  some  fears  which  at  the  moment  she  would  not  discover  : she
therefore  ought  to  be  excused  for  what  she  has  done.”  The  squire  answered,  “ It  may
perchance  be  so  and  thus  ended  our  conversation.


CHAPTER  X. — THE  COUNT  DE  FOIX  HOLDS  SOLEMN  FESTIVALS  ON  THE  FEAST  OF  ST.
NICHOLAS  AND  AT  CHRISTMAS  J DURING  WHICH  FROISSART  BECOMES  ACQUAINTED  WITH
BASTOT  DE  MAULEON,  WHO  RELATES  TO  HIM,  AMONG  OTHER  THINGS,  HOW  SEVERAL
OF  THE  CAPTAINS  OF  THE  FPEE  COMPANIES  WERE  DEFEATED  BEFORE  THE  TOWN  OF
SANCERRE,— HOW  HE  SURPRISED  THE  TOWN  OF  THURIE  IN  THE  ALBIGEOIS,  AND  HOW
ONE  OF  THE  NAME  OF  LIMOUSIN  REVENGED  AN  OUTRAGE  COMMITTED  AGAINST  HIM
BY  LOUIS  RAIMBAUT.

Among  the  solemnities  which  the  count  de  Foix  observes  on  high  festivals,  he  most
magnificently  keeps  the  feast  of  St.  Nicholas,  as  I learnt  from  a squire  of  his  household  the
third  day  after  my  arrival  at  Orthes.  He  holds  this  feast  more  splendidly  than  that  of  Easter,


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


101


nnd  lias  a most  magnificent  court,  as  I myself  noticed,  being  present  on  that  day.  The  whole
clergy  of  the  town  of  Ortlies,  with  all  its  inhabitants,  walk  in  procession  to  seek  the  count  at
the  castle,  who  on  foot  returns  with  them  to  the  church  of  St.  Nicholas,  where  is  sung  the
psalm  “ Benedictus  Dominus,  Deus  meus,  qui  docet  manus  meas  ad  proelium,  et  digitos  meos
ad  helium,”  from  the  Psalter  of  David,  which,  when  finished,  recommences,  as  is  done  in  the
chapels  of  the  pope  or  king  of  France,  on  Christmas  or  Easter  days,  for  there  were  plenty  of
choristers.  The  bishop  of  Pamiers  sang  the  mass  for  the  day  ; and  I there  heard  organs  play
as  melodiously  as  I have  ever  heard  in  any  place.  To  speak  briefly  and  truly,  the  count  de
Foix  was  perfect  in  person  and  in  mind  ; and  no  contemporary  prince  could  be  compared
with  him  for  sense,  honour,  or  liberality.  At  the  feasts  of  Christmas,  which  he  kept  with
great  solemnity,  crowds  of  knights  and  squires  from  Gascony  waited  on  him,  to  all  of  whom  he
gave  splendid  entertainments.  I saw  there  the  bourg  d’Espaign,  of  whose  surprising  strength
sir  Espaign  du  Lyon  had  told  me,  which  made  me  more  desirous  to  see  him,  and  the  count
showed  him  many  civilities.  I saw  also  knights  from  Arragon  and  England ; which  last
were  of  the  household  of  the  duke  of  Lancaster,  who  at  that  time  resided  at  Bordeaux,  whom
the  count  received  very  graciously,  and  presented  with  handsome  gifts.


Bishop  of  Pamiers  singing  tlie  Ma99  at  the  Festival  of  St.  Nicholas,  held  by  the  Count  de  Foix.

The  Organ  drawn  from  Hail.  MS.  3469,  and  the  Costume  from  a MS.  Froissart  of  Fifteenth  Century.

I made  acquaintance  with  these  knights,  and  by  them  was  informed  of  several  things  which
had  happened  in  Castille,  Navarre,  and  Portugal,  which  I shall  clearly  detail  in  proper  time
and  place.  I saw  there  also  a Gascon  squire,  called  le  bastot  de  Mauleon,  an  expert  man  at
arms,  and  about  fifty  years  old,  according  to  his  appearance.  He  arrived  at  the  hotel  of  the
Moon,  where  I lodged  with  Ernauton  du  Pin,  in  grand  array,  having  led  horses  with  him
like  to  a great  baron,  and  he  and  his  attendants  were  served  on  plate  of  gold  and  silver.  When
I heard  his  name,  and  saw  how  much  respect  the  count  de  Foix  and  all  the  others  paid  him,
I asked  sir  Espaign  du  Lyon,  “ Is  not  this  the  squire  who  quitted  the  castle  of  Trigalet,
when  the  duke  of  Anjou  lay  before  Mauvoisin  ?”  “ Yes,”  replied  he  ; “ and  he  is  as  able  a

captain  and  as  good  a man  at  arms  as  any  existing.”  Upon  this  I besought  his  acquaintance,
as  he  was  lodged  in  the  same  hotel  as  myself,  with  a cousin  of  his,  a Gascon,  called  Arnauton,


102


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


governor  of  Carlat  in  Auvergne,  whom  I well  knew,  and  who  assisted  me  in  it,  as  did  also
the  bourg  de  Copaire  *.

One  night,  as  we  were  sitting  round  the  fire  chatting  and  waiting  for  midnight,  which  was
the  hour  the  count  supped,  his  cousin  began  a conversation  relative  to  his  former  life,  and
asked  him  to  tell  his  adventures  and  sirccess  in  arms,  without  concealing  loss  or  profit,  as  he
knew  he  could  well  remember  them.  Upon  this  he  said,  “ Sir  John,  have  you  in  your
chronicle  what  I am  going  to  speak  of?”  “ I do  not  know,”  replied  I ; “ but  begin  your
story,  which  I shall  be  happy  to  hear  ; for  I cannot  recollect  every  particular  of  my  history,
nor  can  I have  been  perfectly  informed  of  every  event.”  “ That  is  true,”  added  the  squire,
and  then  began  his  history  in  these  words :

“ The  first  time  I bore  arms  was  under  the  captal  de  Buch  at  the  battle  of  Poitiers  : by
good  luck  I made  that  day  three  prisoners,  a knight  and  two  squires,  who  paid  me,  one  with
the  other,  four  thousand  francs.  The  following  year  I was  in  Prussia  with  the  count  de  Foix
and  his  cousin  the  captal,  under  whose  command  I was.  On  our  return,  we  found  the
duchess  of  Normandy,  the  duchess  of  Orleans,  and  a great  number  of  ladies  and  damsels,  shut
up  in  Meaux  in  Brie.  The  peasants  had  confined  them  in  the  market-place  of  Meaux,  and
would  have  violated  them,  if  God  had  not  sent  us  thither  : for  they  were  completely  in  their
power,  as  they  amounted  to  more  than  ten  thousand,  and  the  ladies  were  alone.  Upwards  of
six  thousand  Jacks  were  killed  on  the  spot,  and  they  never  afterwards  rebelled.

“ At  this  time  there  was  a truce  between  the  kings  of  France  and  England,  but  the  king
of  Navarre  continued  the  war  on  his  own  personal  quarrel  with  the  regent  of  France.  The
count  de  Foix  returned  to  his  own  country,  hut  my  master  and  self  remained  with  the  king
of  Navarre  and  in  his  pay.  We  made,  with  the  help  of  others,  a severe  war  on  France  ;
particularly  in  Picardy,  where  we  took  many  towns  and  castles  in  the  bishoprics  of  Beauvois
and  Amiens  : we  were  masters  of  the  country  and  rivers,  and  gained  very  large  sums  of  money.
When  the  truce  expired  between  France  and  England,  the  king  of  Navarre  discontinued  his
war,  as  peace  had  been  made  between  him  and  the  regent.  The  king  of  England  crossed  the
sea  with  a large  army,  and  laid  siege  to  Rlieims,  whither  he  sent  for  the  captal,  who  at  that
time  was  at  Clermont  in  Beauvoisis,  carrying  on  the  war  on  his  own  account.  We  joined  the
king  of  England  and  his  children.  But,”  said  the  squire,  “ I fancy  you  must  have  written  all
this,  and  how  the  king  of  England  broke  up  his  siege  through  famine,  and  how  he  came  before
Chartres,  and  how  peace  was  made  between  the  two  kings.”  “ That  is  true,”  replied  I :
“ I have  all  this,  as  well  as  the  treaties  which  were  then  concluded.”  Upon  this  Bastot  de
Mauleon  thus  continued  his  narration  :

“ This  treaty  of  peace  being  concluded,  it  was  necessary  for  all  men  at  arms  and  free
companies,  according  to  the  words  of  the  treaty,  to  evacuate  the  fortresses  or  castles  they
held.  Great  numbers  collected  together,  with  many  poor  companions  who  had  learnt  the  art
of  war  under  different  commanders,  to  hold  councils  as  to  what  quarters  they  should  march,
and  they  said  among  themselves,  that  though  the  kings  had  made  peace  with  each  other,  it
was  necessary  for  them  to  live.  They  marched  into  Burgundy,  where  they  had  captains  of
all  nations,  Germans,  Scots,  and  people  from  every  country.  I was  there  also  as  a captain.
Our  numbers  in  Burgundy,  above  the  river  Loire,  were  upwards  of  twelve  thousand,  including
all  sorts ; but  I must  say,  that  in  this  number,  there  were  three  or  four  thousand  good  men
at  arms,  as  able  and  understanding  in  war  as  any  could  be  found,  whether  to  plan  an
engagement,  to  seize  a proper  moment  to  fight,  or  to  surprise  and  scale  towns  and  castles,  and
well  inured  to  war  ; which  indeed  we  showed  at  the  battle  of  Brignais,  where  we  overpowered
the  constable  of  France,  the  count  de  Forets,  with  full  two  thousand  lances,  knights,  and
squires.  This  battle  was  of  great  advantage  to  the  companions,  for  they  were  poor,  and  they
then  enriched  themselves  by  good  prisoners,  and  by  the  towns  and  castles  which  they  took
in  the  archbishopric  of  Lyons  on  the  river  Rhone.  They  carried  on  their  warfare  until  they
had  gained  tire  Pont  du  St.  Esprit : and  the  pope  and  cardinals  would  not  have  been  freed
from  them  until  they  had  destroyed  everything,  if  they  had  not  thought  of  a good  expedient,
by  sending  to  Lombardy  for  the  marquis  de  Montferrat,  who  was  a gallant  knight,  and  at
that  time  at  war  with  the  lord  of  Milan.  On  his  arrival  at  Avignon,  the  pope  and  cardinals

* i.  e.  he  assisted  him,


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE.  &c.


1.03


had  a conference  with  him  : and  lie  negotiated  witli  the  English,  Gascon,  and  German  troops
for  their  services,  for  sixty  thousand  francs,  which  the  pope  and  cardinals  paid  to  different
leaders  of  these  companies ; such  as  sir  John  Hawkwood,  a valiant  English  knight,  sir  Robert
Bricquet,  Carsuelle,  Naudon  le  Bagerant,  le  hourg  Camus,  and  many  more.  They  marched
into  Lombardy,  having  surrendered  the  Pont  du  St.  Esprit,  and  carried  with  them  six  parts
of  the  companies  ; but  sir  Sequin  de  Batefol,  sir  John  Jewel,  sir  James  Planchin,  sir  John
Amery,  le  hourg  de  Perigord,  Espiote,  Louis  Raimbaut,  Limousin,  James  Trittel,  and  myself,
with  several  others,  remained  behind.  We  had  possession  of  Ance,  St.  Clement,  la  Barrelle,
la  Terrare,  Brignais,  le  Pont  St.  Denis,  l’Hopital  d’Ortifart,  and  upwards  of  sixty  castles  in
the  Maconnois,  Forets,  Velay,  and  in  lower  Burgundy  on  the  Loire.  We  ransomed  the
whole  country,  and  they  could  only  be  freed  from  us  by  well  paying.  We  took,  by  a night-
attack,  la  Charite,  which  we  held  for  a year  and  a half.  Everything  was  ours  from  la
Charite  to  Puy  in  Auvergne  (for  sir  Sequin  de  Batefol  had  left  Ance,  and  resided  at  Brioude
in  Auvergne,  where  he  made  great  profit,  and  gained  there  and  in  the  adjacent  country
upwards  of  one  hundred  thousand  francs),  and  below  Loire  as  far  as  Orleans,  with  the
command  of  the  whole  river  Allier.  The  archpriest,  who  was  then  a good  Frenchman,  and
governor  of  Nevers,  could  not  remedy  this  ; but,  being  our  old  acquaintance,  we  sometimes
complied  with  his  entreaties  to  spare  the  country.  The  archpriest  did  great  good  to  the
Nivernois,  by  fortifying  the  city  of  Nevers,  which  otherwise  would  have  been  ruined  several
times ; for  we  had  in  the  environs  upwards  of  twenty-six  strong  places,  as  well  towns  as
castles,  and  no  knight,  squire,  nor  rich  man,  dared  to  quit  his  home  unless  he  had  compounded
with  us  ; and  this  war  we  carried  on  under  the  name  and  pretext  of  the  king  of  Navarre.
At  this  time  happened  the  battle  of  Cocherel  where  the  captal  de  Buch  commanded  for  the
king  of  Navarre,  and  many  knights  and  squires  went  from  us  to  assist  him : sir  James
Planchin  and  sir  John  Jewel  carried  with  them  two  hundred  lances.  I held  at  this  period
a castle  called  le  Bee  d’ Allier,  pretty  near  to  la  Charite,  on  the  road  to  the  Bourbonnois,  and
had  under  me  forty  lances,  where  I made  great  profit  from  the  country  near  Moulins,  and
about  St.  Poui^ain  f and  St.  Pierre  j;  le  Moustier.  When  news  was  brought  me  that  the  captal,
my  master,  was  in  Constantin,  collecting  men  from  all  parts,  having  a great  desire  to  see
him,  I left  my  castle  with  twelve  lances,  with  whom  I joined  sir  James  Planchin  and  sir  John
Jewel,  and  without  accident  or  adventure  we  came  to  the  captal.  I believe  you  must  have
all  this  in  your  history,  as  well  as  the  event  of  the  battle.”  “ Yes,  I have,”  said  I : “ how
the  captal  was  made  prisoner,  and  sir  James  Planchin  and  sir  John  Jewel  killed.”  “ That
is  right,”  added  he  : “ I also  was  made  prisoner ; but  good  luck  befell  me,  for  it  was  to  my
cousin  : he  was  cousin  to  my  cousin  now  by  my  side  the  bourg  do  Copaire  ; and  his  name  was
Bernard  de  Turide  : he  was  killed  in  Portugal,  at  the  affair  of  Aljubarrota.  Bernard,  then
under  the  command  of  sir  Aymemon  de  Pommiers,  ransomed  me  in  the  field  for  a thousand
francs,  and  gave  me  a passport  to  return  to  my  fort  of  Bee  d’Alliers.  Instantly  on  my
arrival,  I counted  out  to  one  of  my  servants  a thousand  francs,  which  I charged  him  to  carry
to  Paris,  and  to  bring  me  back  letters  of  acquittance  for  the  payment,  which  he  did.  At  this
same  season,  sir  John  Aymery,  an  English  knight,  and  the  greatest  captain  we  had,  made  an
excursion  down  the  Loire  towards  la  Charite  : he  fell  into  an  ambuscade  of  the  lords  de
Rougement  and  de  Yendelay,  with  the  men  of  the  archpriest.  They  were  the  strongest,  and
overpowered  him  : he  was  made  prisoner,  and  ransomed  for  thirty  thousand  francs,  which  he
instantly  paid  down.  Lie  was,  however,  so  much  vexed  at  being  captured,  and  with  his  loss,
that  he  swore  he  would  never  re-enter  his  fort  until  he  had  had  his  revenge.  He  collected,
therefore,  a large  body  of  companions,  and  came  to  la  Charite  on  the  Loire,  and  entreated  the
captains,  such  as  Lamit,  Carsuelle,  le  bourg  de  Perigord,  and  myself  (who  were  come  thither
for  our  amusement),  to  accompany  him  in  an  expedition.  We  asked  him,  ‘Whither?’
‘ By  my  faith,’  replied  he,  ‘ we  will  cross  the  Loire  at  port  St.  Thibaut,  and  scale  the  town
and  castle  of  Sancerre  §.  I have  made  a vow,  that  I will  never  re-enter  my  own  castle  until

* Battle  of  Cocherel,  ] 364.  t “ St.  Pierre  le  Moutier,” — a town  of  Nivernois,  seven

1 St.  Pounjain  de  Melcheres  and  St.  Pourqain  sur  leagues  from  Moulins,

Vesbrc,  villages  of  Bourbouois,  near  Moulins.  § “ Sancerre,” — an  ancient  town  in  Berry,  near  the

Loire,  eight  leagues  from  Bourgcs.


10-1


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


I shall  have  seen  the  boys  of  Sancerre  ; and  if  we  could  conquer  that  garrison,  with  the  earl’s
children  within  it,  John  Louis  and  Robert,  we  should  be  made  men,  and  masters  of  the  whole
country.  We  may  easily  succeed  in  our  attempt,  for  they  pay  no  attention  to  us,  and  our
remaining  longer  here  is  not  of  any  advantage.’  ‘ That  is  true/  we  answered,  and  promised
to  accompany  him,  and  went  away  to  make  ourselves  ready.

“ It  happened,”  continued  le  bastot  de  Mauleon,  “ that  our  plot  was  discovered,  and
known  in  the  town  of  Sancerre.  A valiant  squire  from  the  lower  parts  of  Burgundy,  called
Guichart  d’Albigon,  was  at  the  time  governor  of  the  town,  who  took  great  pains  to
guard  it  well.  The  earl’s  children,  who  were  all  three  knights,  were  with  him.  This
Guichart  had  a brother  a monk  in  the  abbey  of  St.  Thibaut  near  Sancerre,  who  was  sent  by
the  governor  to  la  Charite  with  the  composition-money  that  some  of  the  towns  in  the  upper
districts  owed.  They  were  careless  about  him,  and  he  discovered,  I know  not  how,  our
intentions  and  what  our  numbers  were,  as  well  as  the  names  of  the  captains  of  the  different
forts  near  la  Charite,  with  the  strength  of  their  garrisons,  and  also  at  what  hour  and  in
what  manner  we  were  to  cross  the  river  at  Port  St.  Thibaut.  Having  gained  this  informa-
tion, he  hastened  to  disclose  it  to  his  brother  and  the  young  knights  of  Sancerre.  They
made  instant  preparations  for  their  defence,  and  sent  notice  of  the  intended  attack  to  the
knights  and  squires  of  Berry  and  the  Bourbonnois,  and  to  the  captains  of  the  different
garrisons  in  the  neighbourhood,  so  that  they  were  four  hundred  good  lances.  They  placed
a strong  ambuscade,  of  two  hundred  spears,  in  a wood  near  to  the  town.

“We  set  out  at  sun-set  from  la  Charite,  and  rode  on  briskly,  in  good  order,  until  we  came
to  Prully,  where  we  had  collected  a number  of  boats,  to  pass  us  and  our  horses  over  the
river.  We  crossed  the  Loire,  as  we  had  intended,  and  were  all  over  about  midnight : our
horses  crossed,  also,  without  accident ; but,  as  day-break  was  near,  wTe  ordered  a hundred
of  our  men  to  remain  behind,  to  guard  the  horses  and  boats;  and  the  rest  advanced
with  a good  pace,  passing  by  the  ambuscade,  which  took  no  notice  of  us.  When  we  had
gone  about  a quarter  of  a league,  they  sallied  forth  upon  those  at  the  river  side,  whom  they
instantly  conquered,  for  all  were  slain  or  made  prisoners  ; the  horses  were  captured,  and  the
passage  of  the  river  secured,  when,  mounting  our  horses,  they  stuck  spurs  into  them,  and
arrived  at  the  towm  as  soon  as  we  did.  They  shouted  on  all  sides,  ‘ Our  lady  for  Sancerre  ! ’
for  the  count  himself  was  in  the  town  with  his  men,  and  sir  Louis  and  sir  Robert  had  formed
the  ambuscade.  We  were  thus  completely  surrounded,  and  knew  not  which  way  to  turn
ourselves : the  shock  of  lances  was  great ; for  those  on  horseback  instantly  dismounted  on
their  arrival,  and  attacked  us  fiercely ; but  what  hurt  us  the  most  was  the  impossibility  of
extending  our  front,  for  we  were  enclosed  in  a narrow  road,  with  hedges  and  vineyards  on
each  side,  with  our  enemies  before  and  behind  us.  They  knew  well  the  country,  and  had
posted  a body  of  their  men  and  servants  in  the  vineyards,  who  cast  stones  and  flints  that
bruised  us  much  : we  could  not  retreat,  and  had  also  great  difficulty  to  approach  the  town,
which  is  situated  on  a hill.

“We  had  very  hard  work : sir  John  Aymery,  our  captain,  who  had  led  us  thither,  was
dangerously  wounded  by  Guichart  d’Albigon,  who,  exerting  himself  to  save  him,  pushed
him  into  a house  in  the  town,  and  threw  him  on  a bed,  telling  the  master  to  take  great  care
of  his  prisoner,  and  make  haste  to  have  his  wounds  dressed,  for  his  rank  was  such,  that  if
his  life  were  saved,  he  would  pay  twenty  thousand  francs.  On  saying  this,  Guichart  left  his
prisoner  and  returned  to  the  battle,  where  he  showed  himself  a good  man  at  arms.

“ Among  others,  the  young  knights  of  Sancerre  had  come  to  defend  the  country,  with  sir
Guichard  Dauphin,  the  lord  de  Marnay,  sir  Gerard  and  sir  William  de  Bourbon,  the  lords
de  Cousant,  de  la  Pierre,  de  la  Palice,  de  Neutey,  do  la  Croise,  de  la  Sicete,  and  many  more :
I must  say  it  was  a very  hard-fought  murderous  battle ; we  kept  our  ground  as  long  as  we
were  able,  insomuch  that  several  were  slain  and  wounded  on  both  sides.  By  their  actions
they  seemed  more  desirous  to  take  us  alive  than  to  kill  us  : at  last  they  made  prisoners  of
Garsuelle,  Larnit  Naudon  le  bourg  de  Perigord,  le  bourg  de  l’Esparre,  Angerot,  Lamontgis,
Philip  du  Roc,  Pierre  de  Corthon,  le  Pesat  de  Pamiers,  le  bourg  d’Armesen ; in  short,  all
our  companions  who  were  in  that  neighbourhood.  We  were  conducted  to  the  castle  of
Sancerre  in  great  triumph : and  the  free  companies  never  suffered  such  loss  in  France  as


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  Sec.


105


they  did  that  day.  Guichart  d’Albigon,  however,  lost  his  prisoner  through  negligence,  for
lie  hied  so  much  that  he  died:  such  was  the  end  of  John  Aymery.  By  this  defeat,  which
happened  under  the  walls  of  Sancerre,  la  Charite  sur  Loire  surrendered  to  the  French,  as
well  as  all  the  garrisons  thereabout,  by  which  means  we  obtained  our  liberties,  and  had
passports  given  us  to  quit  the  kingdom  of  France  and  go  whithersoever  we  pleased.  For-
tunately for  us,  sir  Bertrand  du  Guesclin,  the  lord  de  Beaujeu,  sir  Arnold  d’Andreghen,  and
the  count  de  la  Marche,  at  this  moment  undertook  an  expedition  into  Spain,  to  assist  the
bastard  Henry  against  don  Pedro.  Before  that  time,  I was  in  Brittany  at  the  battle  of
Auraye,  where  I served  under  sir  Hugh  Calverley,  and  recovered  my  affairs ; for  the  day
was  ours,  and  X made  such  good  prisoners,  they  paid  me  two  thousand  francs.  I accom-
panied sir  Hugh  Calverley  with  ten  lances  into  Spain,  when  we  drove  from  thence  don
Pedro ; but  when  treaties  were  afterwards  made  between  don  Pedro  and  the  prince  of
Wales,  who  wished  to  enter  Castille,  I was  there,  in  the  company  of  sir  Hugh  Calverley,
and  returned  to  Aquitaine  with  him.

“ The  war  was  now  renewed  between  the  king  of  France  and  the  prince  : we  had  enough
to  do,  for  it  was  vigorously  carried  on  ; and  great  numbers  of  English  and  Gascon  com-
manders lost  their  lives : however,  thanks  to  God,  I am  still  alive.  Sir  Robert  Briquet  was
slain  at  a place  called  Olivet,  in  the  Orleannois,  situated  between  the  territories  of  the  duke
of  Orleans  and  the  country  of  Blois,  where  a squire  from  Hainault,  a gallant  man  at  arms,
and  good  captain,  called  Alars  de  Doustiennes,  surnamed  de  Barbazan,  for  he  was  of  that
family,  met  him,  and  conquered  both  him  and  his  company.  This  Alars  was  at  that  time
governor  of  Blois  and  its  dependencies,  for  the  lords  Lewis,  John,  and  Guy  de  Blois  ; and
it  chanced  that  he  met  sir  Robert  Briquet  and  sir  Robert  Cheney  at  Olivet,  when  both
were  slain  on  the  spot,  and  all  their  men,  for  none  were  ransomed.  Afterwards,  at  the
battle  of  Niort,  Carsuelle  was  killed  by  sir  Bertrand  du  Guesclin,  and  seven  hundred  English
perished  that  day.  Richard  Ellis  and  Richard  Heline,  two  English  captains,  were  also
killed  at  St.  Severe : I know  but  few,  except  myself  who  have  escaped  death.  I have
guarded  the  frontiers,  and  supported  the  king  of  England;  for  my  estate  is  in  the  Bordelois;
and  I have  at  times  been  so  miserably  poor  that  I had  not  a horse  to  mount,  at  other  times
rich  enough,  just  as  good  fortune  befell  me.  Raymonet  de  l’Espee  and  I were  some  time
companions : we  held  the  castles  of  Mauvoisin,  Trigalet,  and  Nantilleux,  in  the  Toulousain,
on  the  borders  of  Bigorre,  which  were  very  profitable  to  us.  When  the  duke  of  Anjou
came  to  attack  them  with  his  army,  Raymonet  turned  to  the  French  ; but  I remained  steady
to  the  English,  and  shall  do  so  as  long  as  I live.  In  truth,  when  I lost  the  castle  of  Trigalet,
and  was  escorted  to  castle  Cuillet,  after  the  retreat  of  the  duke  of  Anjou  into  France,  I
resolved  to  do  something  which  should  either  make  me  or  ruin  me.  I therefore  sent  spies
to  reconnoitre  the  town  and  castle  of  Thurie  in  the  Albigeois,  which  castle  has  since  been
worth  to  me,  as  well  by  compositions  as  by  good  luck,  one  hundred  thousand  francs.  I will
tell  you  by  what  means  I conquered  it.  On  the  outside  of  the  town  and  castle,  there  is  a
beautiful  spring  of  water,  where  every  morning  the  women  of  the  town  come  to  fill  their
pails  or  other  vessels ; which  having  done,  they  carry  them  back  on  their  heads.  Upon  this,

I formed  my  plan ; and,  taking  with  me  fifty  men  from  the  castle  of  Cuillet,  we  rode  all
day  over  heaths  and  through  woods,  and  about  midnight  I placed  an  ambuscade  near  Thurie.
Myself,  with  only  six  others,  disguised  as  women,  with  pails  in  our  hands,  entered  the
meadow  very  near  the  town,  and  hid  ourselves  in  a heap  of  hay ; for  it  was  about  St.  John’s
day,  and  the  meadows  were  mown  and  making  into  hay.  When  the  usual  hour  of  opening
the  gates  arrived,  and  the  women  were  coming  to  the  fountain,  each  of  us  then  took  his  pail,
and  having  filled  it  placed  it  on  his  head,  and  made  for  the  town,  our  faces  covered  with
handkerchiefs  so  that  no  one  could  have  known  us.  The  women  that  met  us,  said,  4 Holy
Mary,  how  early  must  you  have  risen  this  morning!’  We  replied  in  feigned  voices,  and
passed  on  to  the  gate,  where  we  found  no  other  guard  but  a cobler,  who  was  mending  shoes.
One  of  us  sounded  his  horn,  as  a notice  for  the  ambuscade  to  advance.  The  cobler,  who  had
not  paid  any  attention  to  us,  on  hearing  the  horn,  cried  out,  ‘ Ilola ! who  is  it  that  lias
blown  the  horn?’  We  answered,  ‘ It  is  a priest  who  is  going  into  the  country  : I know  not
whether  he  be  the  curate  or  chaplain  of  the  town.’  ‘ That  is  true,’  replied  he : ‘ it  is  sir


106


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  & c.


Francis,  our  priest,  who  likes  to  go  early  to  the  fields  in  search  of  hares.’  Our  companions
soon  joined  us,  when  we  entered  the  town  and  found  no  one  prepared  to  defend  it.  Thus
did  I gain  the  town  and  castle  of  Thurie,  which  has  been  to  me  of  greater  profit  and  more
annual  revenue  than  this  castle  and  all  its  dependencies  are  worth.  At  this  moment,  I know
not  how  to  act : for  I am  in  treaty  with  the  count  d’Armagnac  and  the  dauphin  d’ Auvergne,
who  have  been  expressly  commissioned  by  the  king  of  France  to  buy  all  towns  and  castles
from  the  captains  of  the  free  companies,  wherever  they  may  be,  in  Auvergne,  Rouergue,
Limousin,  Agen,  Quercy,  Perigord,  Albigeois,  and  from  all  those  who  have  made  war  under
the  name  of  the  king  of  England.  Several  have  sold  their  forts,  and  gone  away ; and  I am
doubtful  whether  or  not  to  sell  mine.” — Upon  this,  the  bourg  de  Copaire  said, — “ Cousin,
what  you  say  is  true ; for  I also  have  had  intelligence  since  my  arrival  at  Orthes,  from
Carlet,  which  I hold  in  Auvergne,  that  the  lord  Louis  de  Sancerre,  marshal  of  France,  will
soon  be  here  : he  is  now  incognito  at  Tarbes,  as  I have  heard  from  those  who  have  seen
him.”

They  now  called  for  wine,  of  which  when  brought  we  all  drank,  and  Bastot  de  Mauleon
said  to  me,  “ Well,  sir  John,  what  do  you  say  ? Have  I well  told  you  my  life  ? I have  had
many  more  adventures,  but  of  which  I neither  can  nor  will  speak.”  “ Yes,  that  you  have,
by  my  faith,”  added  I : and,  wishing  him  to  continue  his  conversation,  I asked  what  was
become  of  a gallant  squire,  called  Louis  Raimbaut,  whom  I had  met  once  at  Avignon.  “ I
will  tell  you,”  replied  he.  “ At  the  time  when  sir  Sequin  de  Batefol,  who  had  possession  of
Brioude  in  Yelay,  ten  leagues  from  Puy  in  Auvergne,  after  having  carried  on  the  war  in
that  country  with  much  success,  was  returning  to  Gascony,  he  gave  to  Louis  Raimbaut  and
to  a companion  of  his,  called  Limousin,  Brioude  and  Ance  on  the  Saone.  The  country  at
that  time  was  so  desolated  and  harassed,  and  so  full  of  free  companies  in  every  part,  that
none  dared  to  venture  out  of  their  houses.  I must  inform  you,  that  between  Brioude  and
Ance,  the  country  is  mountainous,  and  the  distance  from  one  of  those  towns  to  the  other
twenty-six  leagues.  However,  when  Louis  Raimbaut  was  pleased  to  ride  from  one  of  these
places  to  the  other,  he  made  nothing  of  it ; for  he  had  several  forts  in  Forets  and  elsewhere,
to  halt  and  refresh  himself.  The  gentlemen  of  Auvergne,  Forets,  and  Velay,  had  been  so
oppressed  by  ransoms  to  regain  their  liberty,  they  dreaded  to  take  up  arms  again ; and  there
were  no  great  lords  in  France  who  raised  any  men.  The  king  of  France  was  young,  and
had  too  much  to  do  in  various  parts  of  his  kingdom  ; for  the  free  companies  had  quartered
themselves  everywhere,  and  he  could  not  get  rid  of  them.  Many  of  the  great  lords  of  France
were  hostages  in  England ; during  which  time  their  property  and  vassals  were  pillaged,  and
there  was  not  any  remedy  for  this  mischief,  as  their  men  were  too  dispirited  even  to  defend
themselves.  Louis  Raimbaut  and  Limousin,  who  had  been  brothers  in  arms,  at  length
quarrelled,  and  I will  tell  you  why.  Louis  Raimbaut  had  at  Brioude  a very  handsome
woman  for  his  mistress,  of  whom  he  was  passionately  fond ; and,  when  he  made  any
excursions  from  Brioude  to  Ance,  he  intrusted  her  to  the  care  of  Limousin.  Limousin  was
his  brother  in  arms,  and  in  him  did  he  put  his  whole  confidence ; but  he  took  such  good  care
of  the  fair  lady  that  he  obtained  every  favour  from  her,  and  Louis  Raimbaut  had  information
of  it.  This  enraged  Louis  Raimbaut  against  his  companion ; and,  in  order  to  insult  him  as
much  as  possible,  he  ordered  him  to  be  seized  by  his  servants  and  marched  naked,  all  but
his  drawers,  through  the  town,  and  then  flogged  with  rods : at  every  corner  of  a street,
trumpets  sounded  before  him,  and  his  action  was  proclaimed : he  was  then,  in  this  state,  and
with  only  a plain  coat  on,  thrust  out  of  the  town,  and  banished  as  a traitor.  Louis  Raimbaut
thus  insulted  Limousin ; but  he  was  so  much  hurt  at  it,  he  vowed  revenge  whenever  he
should  have  an  opportunity,  which  he  afterwards  found.

“ Limousin,  during  the  time  he  was  in  command  at  Brioude,  had  always  spared  the  lands
of  the  lord  de  la  Y oulte,  situated  on  the  Rhone,  in  his  different  excursions  to  Ance,  and  in
the  country  of  Yelay,  for  he  had  been  kind  to  him  in  his  youth.  He  therefore  resolved  to
go  to  him,  entreat  his  mercy,  and  beg  he  would  make  his  peace  with  France,  for  that  he
would  henceforward  be  a loyal  Frenchman.  He  went  therefore  to  You] to,  being  well
acquainted  with  the  roads,  and  entered  a house,  for  he  was  on  foot : after  he  had  inquired
what  hour  it  was,  he  went  to  the  castle  to  wait  on  its  lord.  The  porter  would  not  at  first


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


1 07


allow  him  to  enter  the  gate  ; hut,  after  many  fair  words,  he  was  permitted  to  come  into  the
gateway,  and  ordered  not  to  stir  further  without  permission,  which  he  cheerfully  promised.
The  lord  dc  la  Voulte,  in  the  afternoon,  came  into  the  court  to  amuse  himself,  and  advanced
to  the  gate  : Limousin  instantlj  cast  himself  on  his  knees,  and  said,  ‘ My  lord,  do  you  not
know  me  ?’  ‘ Not  I,  by  my  faith,’  replied  the  lord,  who  never  imagined  it  was  Limousin  ;

but,  having  looked  at  him  some  time,  added  : ‘ Thou  resemblcst  very  much  Limousin,  who
was  formerly  my  page.’  ‘ On  my  troth,  my  lord,  Limousin  I am,  and  your  servant  also.’
He  then  begged  his  pardon  for  what  had  passed,  and  told  him  exactly  everything  that  had
happened  to  him,  and  how  Louis  Raimbaut  had  treated  him.  The  lord  de  la  Voulte  said,
‘ Limousin,  if  what  thou  hast  told  me  be  true,  and  if  I may  rely  on  thy  assurance  that  thou
wilt  become  a good  Frenchman,  I will  make  thy  peace.’  ‘ By  my  faith,  my  lord,  I have
never  done  so  much  harm  to  France  as  I will  from  henceforward  do  it  service.'  k I shall  see,'
replied  the  lord  de  la  Voulte.  From  that  time  he  retained  him  in  his  castle,  and  did  not
allow  him  to  depart  until  he  had  made  his  peace  everywhere.  When  Limousin  could  with
honour  bear  arms,  the  lord  de  la  Voulte  mounted  and  armed  him,  and  conducted  him  to  the
seneschal  de  Velay,  at  Puy,  to  make  them  acquainted  with  each  other.  He  was  there
examined  as  to  the  strength  and  situation  of  Brioude,  and  also  respecting  Louis  Raimbaut ;
at  what  times  he  made  excursions,  and  whither  he  generally  directed  them.  ‘ I know  by
heart  the  roads  he  takes,  for  with  him  and  without  him  I have  too  often  traversed  them  ;
and,  if  you  will  collect  a body  of  men  at  arms  for  an  expedition,  I will  forfeit  my  head  if
you  do  not  take  him  within  a fortnight.’  The  lords  agreed  to  his  proposal,  and  spies  were
sent  abroad  to  observe  when  Louis  Raimbaut  should  leave  Brioude  for  Ance  in  the  Lyonois.
When  Limousin  was  certain  he  had  left  Brioude,  he  told  the  lord  de  la  Voulte  to  assemble
his  men,  for  that  Raimbaut  was  at  Ance  and  would  soon  return,  and  that  he  would  conduct
them  to  a defile  through  which  he  must  pass.  The  lord  de  la  Voulte  collected  his  men,  and
made  him  the  leader  of  the  expedition,  having  sent  off  to  the  bailiff  of  Velay,  the  lord  de
Montclare,  sir  Guerrot  de  Salieres,  and  his  son,  sir  Plouserat  de  Vernet,  the  lord  de
Villeneuve,  and  to  all  the  men  at  arms  thereabout : they  were  in  the  whole  full  three
hundred  spears ; and  when  assembled  at  Nonnay,  by  the  advice  of  Limousin,  they  formed
two  ambuscades.  The  viscount  de  Polignac  and  the  lord  de  Chalencjon  commanded  one,  and
the  lords  de  la  Voulte,  de  Montclare,  de  Salieres,  and  sir  Louis  de  Toumon,  the  other.  They
had  equally  divided  their  men ; and  the  viscount  de  Polignac  and  his  party  were  posted
near  St.  Rambut  in  Forets,  at  a pass  where  Louis  Raimbaut  would  be  forced  to  cross  the
river  Loire  at  the  bridge,  or  higher  up  at  a ford  above  Puy.

“ When  Louis  Raimbaut  had  finished  his  business  at  Ance,  he  set  out  with  forty  lances,
not  expecting  to  meet  with  any  one,  nor  suspecting  anything  from  Limousin,  as  he  was  the
farthest  from  his  thoughts.  I must  tell  you,  that  he  was  accustomed  never  to  go  and  return
by  the  same  road : he  had  come  by  St.  Rambut.  On  his  return,  he  went  over  the  hills
above  Lyons,  and  Vienne,  and  below  the  village  of  Argental*,  and  then  straight  towards  le
Monastier,  three  short  leagues  from  Puy ; and,  after  passing  between  the  castles  of  Menestrol
and  Montfaucon,  he  made  a circuit  towards  a village  called  le  Batterie,  between  Nonnay
and  St.  Julien.  There  is  a pass  in  the  w’ood  there  that  cannot  be  avoided  by  any  of  those
who  take  this  road,  unless  they  go  through  Nonnay ; and  there  was  posted  the  ambuscade
of  the  lord  de  la  Voulte,  with  about  two  hundred  spears.  Louis  Raimbaut,  suspecting
nothing,  was  surprised  ; and  the  lord  de  la  Voulte  and  his  men,  knowing  what  they  were  to
do,  lowered  their  lances,  and,  shouting  their  cry  of  ‘ La  Voulte !’  instantly  charged  him  and
his  companions,  who  were  riding  much  at  their  ease.  On  the  first  shock,  the  greater  part
were  unhorsed : and  Louis  Raimbaut  was  struck  to  the  ground  by  a squire  of  Auvergne,
called  Amblardon,  who,  advancing  on  him,  made  him  his  prisoner ; the  remainder  were
either  killed  or  taken  ; not  one  escaped  ; and  they  found  in  a private  trunk  the  sum  of  three
thousand  francs,  which  he  had  received  at  Ance  as  the  composition  of  the  villagers  near,
which  gave  much  pleasure  to  the  captors,  for  each  had  a share.

“ When  Limousin  saw  Louis  Raimbaut  thus  caught,  he  showed  himself,  and  said
reproachfully,  — ‘ Louis,  Louis ! you  should  have  been  better  accompanied.  Do  you
remember  the  insult  and  shame  you  made  me  undergo  at  Brioude,  on  account  of  your
* “ Argental,” — a village  of  Forets,  diocese  of  Vienne.


108


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  & c.


mistress  ? I did  not  think  that  for  a woman  you  would  have  made  me  suffer  what  you  did  ;
for,  if  it  had  happened  to  me,  I should  not  have  been  so  angry.  To  two  brothers  in  arms,
such  as  we  were  then,  one  woman  might  have  occasionally  served.’  The  lords  laughed  at
this  speech,  but  Louis  had  no  such  inclination.  By  the  capture  of  Louis  Raimbaut,  those
of  Brioude  surrendered  to  the  seneschal  of  Auvergne ; for,  after  the  loss  of  their  leader  and
the  flower  of  their  men,  they  could  not  keep  it.  The  garrisons  at  Ance  and  in  the  other
forts  in  Velay  and  Forets  did  the  same,  and  were  glad  to  escape  with  their  lives.

“ Louis  Raimbaut  was  carried  to  Nonnay  and  imprisoned  ; information  was  sent  the  king
of  France  of  the  event,  who  was  much  rejoiced  thereat ; and  soon  after,  as  I have  heal’d,
orders  came  for  him  to  be  beheaded  at  Yilleneuve,  near  Avignon.  Thus  died  Louis  Raim-
baut : may  God  receive  his  soul ! Now,  my  fair  sir,"  said  Bastot  de  Mauleon,  “ have  not
I well  chatted  away  the  night  ? and  yet  all  I have  said  is  true.”  “ Indeed  you  have,”
answered  I,  “ and  many  thanks  for  it : I have  had  great  pleasure  in  listening  to  you,  and  it
shall  not  be  lost ; for,  if  God  permit  me  to  return  to  my  own  country,  all  I have  heard  you
say,  and  all  I shall  have  seen  worthy  to  be  mentioned,  in  the  noble  and  grand  history  which
the  gallant  count  de  Blois  has  employed  me  on,  shall  be  chronicled,  through  God’s  grace,
that  the  memory  of  such  events  may  be  perpetuated."

On  saying  this,  the  bourg  de  Copaire,  whose  name  was  Emauton,  began  to  speak,  and,  I
could  perceive,  would  willingly  have  related  the  life  and  adventures  of  himself  and  his
brother,  the  bourg  Anglois ; and  how  they  had  borne  arms  in  Auvergne  and  elsewhere,  but
there  was  not  time ; for  the  watch  of  the  castle  had  sounded  his  horn,  to  assemble  those  in
the  town  of  Ortlies,  who  were  engaged  to  sup  with  the  count  de  Foix.  The  two  squires
then  made  themselves  ready,  and,  having  lighted  torches,  we  left  the  inn  together,  taking  the
road  to  the  castle,  as  did  all  the  knights  and  squires  who  lodged  in  the  town.

Too  much  praise  cannot  be  given  to  the  state  and  magnificence  of  the  count  de  Foix,  nor
can  it  be  too  much  recommended ; for,  during  my  stay  there,  I found  him  such,  as  far  to
exceed  all  that  I can  say  of  him,  and  I saw  many  things  which  gave  me  great  pleasure.

On  Christmas  day  were  seated  at  his  table  four  bishops  of  his  own  country,  two  Clemen-
tists  and  two  Urbanists.  The  bishops  of  Panders  and  Lescar,  Clementists,  were  seated  at
top,  and  next  to  them  the  bishops  of  Aire  and  of  Rou,  on  the  borders  of  the  Bordelois  and
Bayonne,  Urbanists : the  count  de  Foix  sat  next,  then  the  viscount  de  Roquebertin,  a
Gascon,  the  viscount  de  Bruniquel,  the  viscount  de  Gousserant,  then  an  English  knight,
called  sir  TV  illiam  Willoughby,  whom  the  duke  of  Lancaster,  at  that  time  residing  at
Bordeaux,  had  sent  thither.  At  another  table  were  five  abbots  and  two  Arragonian  knights,
called  sir  Raymond  de  Montflorentin  and  sir  Martin  de  Rnane.  At  another  table  were
seated  knights  and  squires  from  Gascony  and  Bigorre:  first,  the  lord  d’Anehin,  then  sir
Gaillard  de  la  Motte,  sir  Raymond  de  Chateauneuf,  the  lord  de  Chaumont,  Gascons,  the
lords  de  Copaire,  de  la  Lanne,  de  Montferrat,  sir  William  Bernard,  sir  Peter  Courton,  the
lord  de  Valenchin,  and  sir  Aingale,  surnamed  le  Basele.  At  other  tables  were  many  knights
from  Bearn.  Sir  Espaign  du  Lyon,  sir  Siquart  du  Bois  Verdun,  sir  Nouvans  de  Nouvailles,
and  sir  Peter  de  Vaux,  in  Bearn,  were  chief  stewards  of  the  hall.  The  count’s  bastard-
brothers,  sir  Ernaut  Guillaume  and  sir  Peter  dc  Bearne,  waited ; and  his  two  bastard-sons,
sir  Evan  dc  1 Eschelle  placed  the  dishes,  and  sir  Gracien  served  him  with  wine.  There
were  very  many  minstrels  in  the  hall,  as  well  those  belonging  to  the  count,  as  to  the  strangers,
who,  at  their  leisure,  played  away  their  minstrelsy.  This  day  the  count  gave  to  the
minstrels  and  heralds  five  hundred  francs  among  them  ; and  he  clothed  the  minstrels  of  the
duke  de  Touraine,  who  were  there,  with  cloth  of  gold,  trimmed  with  ermine,  which  dresses
were  valued  at  two  hundred  francs.  The  dinner  lasted  until  four  o’clock  in  the  afternoon.

I willingly  like  to  talk  of  the  handsome  establishment  of  the  gallant  count  de  Foix,  for  I
was  twelve  weeks  of  his  household,  and  generously  treated,  in  all  respects.  During  my
residence  at  Orthes,  it  was  my  own  fault  if  I did  not  collect  information  from  every  country,
for  the  gentle  knight,  sir  Espaign  du  Lyon,  with  whom  I had  entered  the  country,  and  to  whom
I told  all  my  wants,  made  me  acquainted  with  such  knights  and  squires  as  were  well  able  to
mfoini  me  justly  of  all  the  things  I was  desirous  of  knowing.  I there  learnt  much  concerning
ortugal  and  Castille  : how  their  affairs  were  going  on,  and  the  battles  which  these  two


kings  and  their  allies  had  fought,  of  which  I will  give  a tr-


ue account.


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


109


CHAPTER  XI. A SHORT  RECAPITULATION  OP  WIIAT  HAS  BEEN  BEFORE  SAID,  OP  TOE  WAR

BETWEEN  KING  JOHN  OP  CASTILLE  AND  JOHN  OP  PORTUGAL. THIS  SUBJECT  CON-

TINUED.

You  may  remember,  tliat  I have  before  related,  how  don  John  of  Castille  bad  besieged
the  master  of  Avis,  whom  the  principal  towns  had  crowned  king  for  his  valour,  though  in
truth  he  was  a bastard,  in  the  city  of  Lisbon.  You  have  also  heard  how  this  king  had  sent
special  ambassadors  to  the  duke  of  Lancaster  and  earl  of  Cambridge  for  succour,  as  they  had
married  his  cousins.  These  ambassadors  were  two  knights,  sir  John  Radinghos  and  sir  John
Testa-d’oro,  with  a professor  of  law,  who  was  also  archdeacon  of  Lisbon : they  continued
their  voyage  with  a favourable  wind,  and  arrived  at  Southampton,  where  they  disembarked,
and  staid  a day  to  recover  themselves  : they  then  hired  horses,  for  they  had  not  brought  any
with  them,  and  took  the  great  road  to  London.  It  was  in  the  month  of  August,  when  the
king  was  in  Wales  hunting  and  taking  his  pleasure.  The  duke  of  Lancaster  and  the  earls  of
Cambridge  and  Buckingham  were  also  at  their  scats  in  the  country.  This  gave  the  ambassa-
dors the  more  pain  ; but  they  went  first  to  the  duke  of  Lancaster,  who  resided  at  Hertford,
twenty  miles  from  London.  The  duke  graciously  received  them  : he  opened  their  credential
letters,  and  read  them  over  three  times,  the  better  to  comprehend  them,  and  then  said, — “ You
are  welcome  to  this  country ; but  you  could  not  have  come  at  a more  unfortunate  season  in
the  whole  year  to  obtain  speedy  assistance,  for  the  king  and  my  brothers  are  all  scattered
abroad  in  different  parts,  so  that  you  cannot  have  any  answer  before  Michaelmas,  when  the
parliament  will  assemble  at  London,  and  the  king  return  to  Westminster.  But  as  this
business  more  particularly  affects  my  brother  and  myself,  I will  write  to  him  ; and  we  will
shortly  be  in  London,  and  then  consider  with  you  how  it  will  be  best  for  us  to  act  in  this
affair.  You  will  return  to  London,  and  I will  let  you  know  when  my  brother  and  myself
are  there.  The  ambassadors  from  Portugal  were  well  satisfied  with  this  answer,  and
leaving  the  duke  of  Lancaster  returned  to  London,  where  they  lodged  themselves  and
remained  at  their  ease.

The  duke  of  Lancaster  was  not  forgetful  of  his  promise,  and  instantly  'wrote  private  letters
to  the  earl  of  Cambridge,  containing  an  account  of  what  you  have  heard.  When  the  earl
had  perused  them  attentively,  it  was  not  long  before  he  set  off  for  Hertford,  near  Ware,
where  the  duke  of  Lancaster  resided.  After  consulting  on  this  business  three  days  together
they  came  to  London,  according  to  the  duke’s  promise  to  the  Portuguese,  where  on  their
arrival  they  dismounted  at  their  houses.  These  two  lords  had  many  and  long  consultations
with  the  Portuguese  ambassadors ; for  the  earl  of  Cambridge  was  very  ill-pleased  with  the
conduct  of  don  Ferdinand,  the  late  king  of  Portugal,  saying  he  had  carried  on  the  war  in
too  cowardly  a manner,  and  had  made  peace  with  the  Spaniards  contrary  to  the  will  of  the
English.  The  earl,  therefore,  very  much  doubted  if,  in  the  ensuing  parliament,  the  king’s
council  would  assent  to  an  expedition  to  Portugal ; for  the  one  that  had  been  sent  thither
had  cost  the  nation  a large  sum,  not  less  than  one  hundred  thousand  francs,  and  had  nothing
done.

The  Portuguese  ambassadors  readily  comprehended  what  the  earl  said,  and  replied,  “ My
lord,  those  times  are  passed,  and  it  is  now  otherwise.  Our  late  king,  God  pardon  his  soul !
was  marvellously  afraid  of  the  chances  of  war ; but  the  present  king  is  full  of  enterprise  and
valour,  for  were  he  to  meet  his  enemies  in  the  field  three  times  more  in  number  than  himself,
he  would  combat  them,  whatever  might  be  the  consequences  ; and  we  can  most  loyally  assure
you,  that  this  is  fact.  My  lords,  it  is  very  clear  that  you  are  interested  in  this  quarrel ; for
it  is  your  business  to  make  war  on  Castille,  and  conquer  it,  as  by  right  it  belongs  to  you  as
the  heritage  of  your  wives.  Now,  to  obtain  this  conquest,  you  cannot  have  any  entrance  into
Castille  like  that  through  Portugal : for  you  will  have  all  that  country  for  your  friends.
Therefore,  exert  your  influence,  that  one  of  you  may  go  thither  with  such  a powerful  force,
that  joined  to  those  you  will  find  there,  you  will  be  enabled  to  keep  the  field  !”

The  duke  of  Lancaster  replied,  “ It  does  not  depend  on  us,  but  on  the  king  and  the  nation,
and  you  may  be  assured  we  will  do  everything  we  possibly  can.”  Thus  ended  these


no


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


conferences.  The  Portuguese  remained  in  London  waiting  for  the  meeting  of  parliament,  and
the  duke  of  Lancaster  and  earl  of  Cambridge  went  to  their  estates  in  the  north  of  England.

About  Michaelmas,  when  the  parliament  was  to  meet  at  Westminster,  the  king  was  on  his
return  towards  London,  and  had  arrived  at  Windsor ; from  thence  he  came  to  Chertsey  and
to  Richmond.  He  was  accompanied  wherever  he  went  by  the  queen,  his  whole  court,  and
the  earl  of  Suffolk,  for  his  favour  was  such,  nothing  was  done  without  his  approbation.  At
the  period  I am  now  speaking  of,  the  wars  in  Flanders  were  going  on  between  the  duke  of
Burgundy  and  the  Ghentmen.  The  bishop  of  Norwich,  sir  Hugh  Calverley,  sir  William
Elmham,  sir  Thomas  Trivet  and  the  others,  were  just  come  back  to  England,  whom  the  king
of  France  had  surrounded  at  Bourbourg,  as  has  already  been  related  in  this  history.

Truces  had  been  concluded  between  the  Flemings,  French,  English,  and  Scots,  to  last  until
Michaelmas  1384:  notwithstanding  which,  the  English  had  so  much  on  their  hands  that  they
knew  not  which  way  to  turn  ; for,  besides  the  business  of  Portugal,  the  council  of  Ghent  was
in  London,  to  request  as  governor,  to  assist  and  direct  them,  one  of  the  king’s  brothers,  or
the  earl  of  Salisbury.  There  were  in  this  parliament  many  debates,  as  well  respecting  the
Flemings  as  the  Portuguese  and  the  Scots ; for  the  war  still  continued  in  those  parts  by  the
truce  not  having  been  proclaimed.  The  duke  of  Lancaster,  in  particular,  laboured  hard  to
obtain  the  command  of  a large  body  of  men  at  arms  and  archers  to  carry  to  Portugal,  and
explained  to  the  prelates,  barons,  and  commoners  of  the  realm,  how  they  were  bound  to  assist
him  and  his  brother  in  the  recovery  of  their  inheritance,  which  they  had  sworn  and  engaged
to  do  when  their  nephew  the  king  was  crowned,  as  was  apparent  by  deeds  then  sealed.  The
duke  complained  bitterly  of  the  wrongs  that  had  been  done  him  and  his  brother  by  delaying
the  matter ; and  that  in  truth,  when  the  earl  of  Cambridge  had  gone  thither  on  the  faith  of
their  promising  him  everything  necessary  for  such  an  expedition,  they  had  meanly  fulfilled
their  engagements  : he  was  to  have  had  two  thousand  lances  and  as  many  archers  sent  to  him,
but  they  never  were  ordered,  which  had  caused  the  settlement  of  the  dispute  for  their  just
rights  and  inheritances  to  be  so  much  the  longer  delayed.

This  speech  of  the  duke  of  Lancaster  was  attentively  heard,  and  some  of  the  most  able  in
the  council  declared  he  was  in  the  right ; but,  the  necessities  of  the  kingdom  being  more
pressing,  they  must  be  first  attended  to.  Some  were  for  instantly  agreeing  to  his  request :
others  remonstrated  by  saying,  it  would  be  wrong  to  weaken  the  kingdom  by  sending  two
thousand  men  at  arms  and  four  thousand  archers  to  such  a distance  as  Portugal.  Besides,
so  long  a voyage  was  dangerous,  and  the  climate  of  Portugal  hot  and  unhealthy  ; and,  if  such
a considerable  foi’ce  were  sent,  the  kingdom  might  suffer  an  irrecoverable  loss.  Notwith-
standing  these  arguments  and  doubts  of  what  might  be  the  consequences,  it  was  settled  that
the  duke  of  Lancaster  should  cross  the  sea  in  the  summer  with  seven  hundred  men  at  arms
and  four  thousand  archers,  and  that  they  should  all  receive  pay  for  one  quarter  of  a year  in
advance  : it  was,  however,  reserved,  that  should  anything  in  the  mean  time  fall  out  inimical
from  France  or  Scotland,  the  expedition  to  Portugal  was  to  be  deferred.  The  duke  of
Lancaster  assented  to  this,  for  he  could  not  gain  more.

You  have  before  seen  in  this  history,  that  after  the  duke  of  Lancaster  had  collected  his
men  and  stores  at  Southampton,  ready  to  embark  for  Portugal,  and  though  the  ambassadors
had  returned  thither  witli  information  of  the  speedy  arrival  of  the  duke  and  the  number  of
his  forces,  which  gave  the  Portuguese  much  pleasure,  an  event  was  found  to  have  happened
in  England  that  forced  him  to  retard  it  for  some  time.  The  admiral  of  France,  sir  John  de
Vienne,  with  a thousand  good  men  at  arms,  had  embarked  at  Sluys,  and  landed  in  Scotland  ;
from  whence  he  had  made  war  on  England,  which  obliged  the  whole  force  of  that  kingdom
to  march  against  him,  as  has  been  before  related.  I do  not  wish,  therefore,  to  mention  it
twice.,  but  return  to  the  siege  of  Lisbon  and  the  king  of  Spain,  that  I may  narrate  all  I have
heard.  While  the  king  of  Spain  was  before  Lisbon,  news  was  brought  him,  by  some  Spanish
merchants  returned  from  Flanders  and  Bruges,  of  the  large  armament  the  duke  of  Lancaster
was  collecting  to  raise  the  siege  of  Lisbon.  This  intelligence  was  believed  ; for  the  Spaniards
well  knew  how  anxious  the  duke  was  to  renew  the  war  with  Castille,  as  he  claimed  a share
ol  it.  Notwithstanding  this  information,  the  king  continued  the  siege,  and  sent  letters  and
messengers  to  France  for  assistance  : lie  had  in  particular  written  to  Bearn  ; so  that  from  the


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


Ill


territories  of  Foix  and  Bearn  there  came  to  him,  in  less  than  four  days,  upwards  of  three
hundred  lances,  the  flower  of  the  chivalry  of  that  country.  Sir  John  du  Ru,  a Burgundian,
and  sir  Geoffry  Ricon,  a Breton,  with  sir  Geoffry  de  Partenay,  had  already  passed  through
Ortlies  from  France,  in  their  way  to  Castille,  to  serve  the  king  ; each  of  whom  had  his  own
company.

I will  name  the  principal  knights  of  B6arn  who  prepared  for  this  expedition  : first,  a great
baron,  companion  to  the  count  de  Foix,  the  lord  de  Lingnach,  sir  Peter  Liex1,  sir  John  de
Leprcs,  the  lord  des  Bordes,  sir  Bertrand  de  Barege,  the  lord  de  Marciage,  sir  Raymond
d’Aussac,  sir  John  de  Sallegre,  sir  Mouvant  de  Sarmen,  sir  Peter  de  la  Robiere,  sir  Stephen
de  Valentin,  sir  Raymond  de  Rarasse,  sir  Peter  de  Hanefane,  sir  Ogcrot  de  Domcsson,  and
many  others.  Sir  Espaignolet  d’Espaign,  eldest  son  of  sir  Roger  d’Espaign,  cousin  to  the
count  de  Foix,  joined  this  company  of  Bearn  men.  These  barons  and  knights  fixed  their
rendezvous  at  Ortlies  and  in  that  neighbourhood  ; and  I heard,  from  those  who  saw  them
march  away,  they  were  the  handsomest  and  best  equipped  knights  who  had  for  a long  time
left  Bearn.

When  the  count  do  Foix  found  that  they  really  intended  to  go  to  Castille,  he  was  greatly
vexed  and  pensive,  though  at  the  first  he  had  consented  they  should  receive  pay  from  the
king  of  Castille,  for  he  was  afraid  his  country  would  be  too  much  weakened  by  their
departure.  He  sent,  therefore,  to  the  barons  and  knights  above-mentioned,  two  knights  of
his  household,  sir  Espaign  du  Lyon  and  the  lord  de  Cabestan,  to  request  they  would  come
to  the  castle,  for  he  was  desirous  to  give  them  a dinner,  by  way  of  wishing  them  a good
journey.  The  knights,  as  was  natural,  accepted  the  invitation,  and  the  count  de  Foix
received  them  most  graciously.  After  mass,  he  led  them  into  his  cabinet,  and  thus  addressed
them, — “ My  fair  sirs,  are  you  indeed  resolved  to  leave  my  country  and  assist  the  king  of
Castille  in  his  wars,  whilst  I have  on  hand  my  dispute  with  the  count  d’Armagnac  ? Your
departure  makes  me  very  uneasy.”  “ My  lord,”  replied  they,  “ it  is  really  so  ; for  we  are
obliged  to  it,  as  we  have  received  pay  from  the  king  of  Castille  ; but  this  war  between  Spain
and  Portugal  will  be  soon  ended,  when  we  hope,  if  it  please  God,  to  return  in  good  health  to
you.”  “ Soon  ended!”  exclaimed  the  count:  “ not  so  soon,  for  it  is  now  but  beginning.
There  is  a new  king  in  Portugal,  and  they  have  sent  to  England  for  support.  This  dispute
in  which  you  are  about  to  engage  is  of  a nature  to  last  a long  time,  and  keep  you  in  the
field ; for  you  will  not  be  fought  withal  until  the  arrival  of  the  duke  of  Lancaster  and  his
reinforcements,  so  that  your  pay  will  cost  you  dear  enough.”  “ My  lord,”  they  answered,
“ since  we  have  gone  so  far,  we  must  conclude  the  business.”  “ God  help  you,”  said  the
count ; “ but  come,  let  us  go  now  to  dinner,  for  it  is  time.”

The  count,  with  his  barons  and  knights,  entered  the  hall  where  the  tables  were  laid,  and
dined  magnificently  and  at  their  leisure,  for  they  were  served  with  all  things  becoming  such
a day.  The  count,  after  dinner,  conducted  his  knights  into  his  galleries,  where  he  was  used
to  solace  himself  in  the  afternoons,  and,  again  addressing  them,  said, — “ Indeed,  my  good
gentlemen,  I am  much  vexed  that  you  leave  my  country ; not  that  I am  sorry  for  your
advancement  and  honour,  for  on  every  occasion  I would  attend  to  it  and  exalt  it ; but  I am
sorry  on  your  own  account,  for  you  arc  the  flower  of  chivalry  of  Bearn,  and  are  going  into  a
foreign  land.  I will  advise  you,  and  have  before  said  so,  to  give  up  this  expedition  and  leave
the  kings  of  Spain  and  Portugal  to  fight  their  own  battles,  for  you  are  by  no  means  interested
about  them.”  “ My  lord,”  replied  they,  “ under  favour  of  your  grace,  we  cannot  thus  act,
and  you  know  it  better  than  you  say  : if  you  would  be  pleased  to  consider,  that  as  we  have
received  pay  from  the  king  of  Castille,  w’e  must  in  consequence  do  something  for  it.”
“ Well,”  answered  the  count,  “ that  is  true  enough,  but  I will  tell  you  what  will  happen  to
you  in  this  expedition  : you  will  either  return  so  very  poor  and  naked  the  lice  will  eat  you  up
and  grow  between  your  nails  (showing  them  by  his  gestures  of  rubbing  the  two  palms  of
his  hands  together  what  he  meant,)  or  you  will  be  slain  or  made  prisoners.”

The  knights  burst  out  into  laughter,  and  said,  “ My  lord,  we  must  indeed  try  our  fortunes.”
The  count  then  quitted  this  subject,  and,  conversing  with  them  on  the  manners  of  the
Spaniards,  said  they  were  nasty  and  lousy,  and  envious  of  the  good  fortune  of  others,  advising
them  to  be  on  their  guard.  After  some  other  conversation,  he  called  for  spices  and  wine,  of


112


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &e.


which  all  drank  who  were  present.  He  then  took  his  leave  of  them  shaking  each  by
the  hand,  recommended  them  to  the  care  of  God,  and  entered  his  closet.  The  knights
mounted  their  horses  at  the  gate  of  the  castle,  as  their  men  and  equipages  had  already  set
out  for  Sauveteref,  where  they  lodged  that  night.  On  the  morrow  they  departed,  entering
Biscay  ; and  following  the  road  to  Pampeluna,  they  passed  every  where  in  safety,  for  they
regularly  paid  for  whatever  they  had  occasion  for.


CHAPTER  XII.— THE  INHABITANTS  OP  SANTAREM*  REBEL  AGAINST  SOME  OP  THE  MEN  AT

ARMS  OF  CASTILLE. TI1E  KING  OF  PASTILLE  HAVING  RAISED  TnE  SIEGE  OF  LISBON,

MARCHES  TOWARDS  THAT  TOWN,  WHEN  IT  MAKES  ITS  PEACE.

During  the  time  the  king  of  Castille  lay  before  Lisbon  (and  he  had  been  there  about  a
year),  the  town  of  Santarem  rebelled  against  him  and  closed  its  gates,  declaring,  that  neither
Frenchmen  nor  Spaniards  should  enter  it,  for  the  great  oppressions  it  had  suffered.  Some  say  it
was  the  fault  of  the  party  under  the  command  of  sir  Geoffry  Ricon  and  sir  Geoffry  de  Partenay,
composed  of  Bretons,  who  took  or  destroyed  everything  they  could  lay  hands  on,  paying  no
attention  to  friends  or  foes.  The  citizens  therefore  possessed  themselves  of  the  town  and
the  two  castles,  declaring  they  would  defend  them  against  all  who  wished  to  harass
them.  On  the  day  they  rebelled,  they  killed  upward  of  sixty  Bretons,  who  were  pillaging  ;
and  would  have  slain  sir  Geoffry  de  Partenay,  but  he  escaped  over  the  wall  which  joined  his
house.  Upon  this  the  French  and  Bretons  there  quartered  fought  one  whole  day  with  those
of  Santarem,  and  made  a grand  attack  on  the  place,  but  they  lost  more  than  they  gained,
without  damaging  the  town.

Intelligence  was  brought  to  the  king  of  Castille  that  Santarem  had  turned  to  the
Portuguese,  and  was  ready  to  surrender  its  town  and  castles,  which  the  citizens  had  gotten
possession  of,  to  the  king  of  Portugal.  The  king,  on  hearing  this,  was  very  melancholy,  and,
calling  his  marshal,  sir  Reginald  de  Limousin,  said, — “ Take  one  or  two  hundred  spears,  and
see  what  they  are  doing  at  Santarem  : why  the  inhabitants  of  that  town  have  rebelled ; and
what  could  have  caused  them  to  act  as  they  have  done.”  Sir  Reginald  replied,  “ he  would
punctually  obey."  He  took  under  his  command  two  hundred  lances,  and,  following  the  road
to  Santarem,  arrived  there,  but  sent  before  him  a herald,  to  announce  his  coming,  who
parleyed  with  the  inhabitants  at  the  barriers,  and  delivered  his  message.  They  answered,
— “ We  know  well  sir  Reginald  de  Limousin  for  a gentleman  and  a valiant  knight,  and  that
he  is  marshal  to  the  king  : he  is  perfectly  welcome  hither,  and  may  enter  the  town,  but
unarmed.  ” This  was  the  answer  the  herald  brought  back  to  sir  Reginald,  who  said,  he  was
not  come  thither  to  do  them  any  harm,  but  solely  to  know  what  their  intentions  were.  It
is  indifferent  to  me  whether  I enter  armed  or  disarmed,  provided  I speak  with  them  and
learn  their  will.  He  quitted  the  place  where  he  then  was,  and  rode  on  unarmed,  ■with  five
others  only,  and  dismounted  at  the  barriers,  leaving  his  men  behind.  When  those  on  guard
saw  the  manner  in  which  he  had  arrived,  they  opened  the  barriers,  and  received  him  hand-
somely. The  inhabitants  were  assembled  in  a square  of  the  town,  when  he  thus  addressed
them, — “ Ye  men  of  Santarem,  listen  to  what  I am  about  to  say  : I am  sent  hither  with
orders  to  demand  from  you  the  reasons  why  you  have  rebelled,  have  shut  your  gates,  and
slain  the  king’s  allies  who  were  coming  to  assist  him.  Know  that  the  king  is  violently
enraged  against  you  ; for  he  has  been  informed  you  have  taken  possession  of  the  two  castles
of  the  town,  which  are  his  inheritance,  and  are  willing  to  surrender  them  to  his  enemies  of
Portugal.”  “ May  it  please  your  grace,  sir  Reginald,  we  wish  not  to  surrender  them,  nor
deliver  them  up  into  any  other  hands  than  those  of  the  king  of  Castille,  from  whom  we  hold
them,  but  let  him  govern  us  in  peace  and  with  justice.  What  we  have  done  has  been  caused
by  these  pillaging  Bretons  who  were  quartered  in  the  town,  and  from  their  outrages  ; for,
had  we  been  Saracens,  or  worse  people,  they  could  not  have  more  wickedly  behaved,  in

* “ Sauvetere,” — seven  leagues  from  Pau.

t “ Santarem,”  a handsome  town  on  the  Tagus,  thirty-five  leagues  from  Lisbon.


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  See.


113


forcing  our  wives  and  daughters,  breaking  open  our  coffers,  destroying  our  casks  of  wine,
and  ill-treating  and  wounding  us  whenever  we  complained  of  their  conduct.  You  ought
not,  therefore  to  he  surprised,  when  we  suffered  such  outrages  ourselves,  and  witnessed  the
same  on  those  whom  we  were  bound  to  defend,  that  we  were  much  enraged,  for  smaller
tilings  will  cause  that.  You  may,  therefore,  if  you  please,  tell  the  king  this,  and  that  we
have  unanimously  resolved,  whatever  may  bo  the  event,  never  to  acknowledge  nor  receive
any  Frenchman  nor  Breton,  nor  any  other  than  the  king’s  person  himself,  or  such  as  he  may
depute  hither  to  treat  us  kindly.”

When  sir  Reginald  heard  these  words,  lie  was  well  satisfied,  and  did  not  think  they  had
been  so  much  to  blame  in  driving  their  enemies  out  of  the  town.  lie  thus  replied : “ My
good  people,  I have  now  heard  what  you  had  to  say  ; and  you  shall  remain  quiet,  for  I will
return  to  the  king  and  tell  it  to  him,  and  in  good  truth  I will  do  every  thing  I can  to  serve
you.”  “ We  thank  you,  my  lord,  most  heartily ; and  we  trust,  that  whatever  wrong
information  concerning  us  may  have  been  given  the  king,  you  will  rectify  it.”  On  this  sir
Reginald  mounted  his  horse  and  departed  to  his  men,  who  were  waiting  for  him  in  the  plain,
and  then  rode  for  Lisbon.  After  dismounting  at  his  quarters,  he  waited  on  the  king,  and
told  him  all  he  had  seen  and  heard  at  Santarcm.  The  king;,  on  learning  the  truth  of  what
had  passed,  said, — “ By  my  faith,  they  have  acted  like  wise  men,  since  they  could  not  trust
these  pillagers.”  Sir  Geoffry  Ricon,  sir  Geoffry  de  Partenay,  and  their  companions,  finding
they  could  have  no  redress  from  Santarem,  and  that  the  king  was  dissembling  with  them,
were  much  angered,  and  said  among  themselves, — “ We  arc  well  used  for  having  left  France
to  come  to  this  country,  to  servo  the  king  of  Spain,  when  we  are  thus  debased  before  a set  of
low  fellows,  against  whom  we  cannot  obtain  justice.  There  will  come  shortly  a large  body
of  knights  from  Gascony:  we  will  not  notice  this  until  their  arrival,  when  we  will  inform
them  of  what  has  passed,  and  they  will  help  us  to  revenge  ourselves  for  those  companions
who  have  been  killed.”  Information  was  carried  to  the  king  and  his  council,  that  the
Bretons  threatened  much  those  of  Santarem,  boasting  that,  when  the  Gascons  should  arrive,
they  would  make  them  pay  dearly  for  what  they  had  done.  The  king  was  advised  to  break
up  the  siege  of  Lisbon,  and  march  to  Santarem,  to  recruit  himself  and  put  every  thing  on  a
proper  footing,  and  wait  there  for  the  Gascons,  who  were  on  their  march,  to  the  amount  of
about  four  hundred  spears,  good  men  at  arms.  He  did  not  wish  they  should  find  the  kingdom
in  confusion,  when  such  numbers  were  to  be  provided  for.

Orders  were  given  by  the  king  to  break  up  the  siege  and  march  to  Santarem,  which  were
instantly  obeyed.  When  the  town  of  Santarem  learnt  the  king  was  coming  thither,  they
deputed  twelve  of  the  principal  inhabitants  on  horseback,  to  meet  the  king  and  to  know  his
pleasure.  They  rode  on  until  they  met  the  army  about  two  leagues  from  Santarem,  and
learnt  that  the  king  was  dismounted  and  had  retired  from  the  great  heat  under  the  shade  of
some  olive-trees.  Sir  Reginald  de  Limousin,  marshal  of  the  army,  was  with  the  king  and
had  had  information  of  their  arrival,  who,  wrhen  they  were  come  near,  cast  themselves  on
their  knees  and  said, — “ Most  renowned  lord  and  noble  king  of  Castille,  we  are  deputed  hither
by  the  poor  commonalty  of  your  unhappy  town  and  castlewicks  of  Santarem,  who  have  been
given  to  understand  that  you  arc  much  angered  with  them ; and  should  this  be  true,  most
renowned  lord,  the  fault  has  not  been  in  them,  but  in  the  injuries  and  oppressions  they  have
suffered  from  the  Bretons  when  they  were  in  your  and  our  town.  Now,  as  all  their  evil
deeds  could  not  be  known,  we  do  not  blame  their  knights,  squires  and  captains,  but  only
such  as  have  committed  them  ; and  it  would  be  incredible,  were  all  the  infamous  acts  of
these  Breton  pillagers  told.  They  kept  for  a long  time  the  town  and  castlewicks  of  Santarem
under  their  subjection,  of  which  many  complaints  were  made  to  us  ; but,  in  spite  of  this,  they
broke  open  our  coffers  with  hatchets,  took  our  money,  and  violated  our  wives  and  daughters
before  our  eyes ; which  when  we  complained  of,  we  were  beaten,  wounded,  and  some
murdered.  In  this  miserable  condition  were  we  for  upwards  of  two  months ; for  which
reason,  most  redoubted  lord  and  noble  king,  we  supplicate,  that  if  we  have  angered  you  for
this  or  any  other  cause,  you  would  be  pleased  to  do  us  justice,  and  take  such  loyal  information
concerning  us,  that  we  may  be  judged  legally,  as  you  promised  and  swore  to  us  when  you
first  entered  Santarem  as  king,  and  the  possession  of  it  and  its  dependencies  devolved  and

YOL.  II.  1


Ill


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  & c.


rested  on  you.  You  will  do  an  act  of  charity  ; and,  since  you  are  coming  thither,  we  have
that  confidence  in  you  and  in  your  council,  that  you  will  find  the  gates  open.  Your  poor
people,  who  are  crying  for  redress  for  the  injuries  they  have  sustained,  beg  your  royal  majesty
will  grant  them  mercy  and  remission  of  all  offences.”

The  king  remained  for  a while  silent,  when  sir  Reginald  de  Limousin,  kneeling  before  the
king,  said, — “ Most  dear  lord,  you  have  heard  the  complaints  of  your  subjects  of  Santarem,
who  have  laid  before  you  all  they  have  suffered ; condescend  to  give  them  an  answer.”
“ Reginald,”  said  the  king,  “ we  see  they  have  had  just  cause  for  what  they  did  : go,  and
tell  them  to  rise,  and  return  to  Santarem  to  make  ready  every  thing  proper  for  us,  as  we
shall  sleep  there  this  night,  and  let  them  know  they  shall  be  carefully  defended  in  their
rights.”  Sir  Reginald  de  Limousin  arose  and  went  to  the  deputies  from  Santarem,  bidding
them  arise  : “ The  king,  our  lord,  has  favourably  heard  all  you  have  said  ; and,  understanding
you  only  desire  justice,  he  will  see  that  it  be  done  to  you.  Now  go,  and  make  ready  the
town  for  his  reception  ; and  let  it  be  so  well  done  that  he  may  be  pleased,  for  every  thing
will  turn  out  as  you  wish,  by  the  good  assistance  of  the  friends  you  have.”  “ My  lord,”
replied  they,  “ w'e  give  you  our  best  thanks.”  They  then  took  leave,  returned  to  Santarem,
and  related  all  that  had  passed  with  the  king,  and  the  answer  sir  Reginald  had  made  them
from  their  sovereign.  They  were  exceedingly  rejoiced  at  this  intelligence,  and  richly
decorated  their  town  against  the  king’s  arrival,  strewing  the  streets  with  fresh  herbs.  The
king  made  his  entry  at  Vespers : he  was  lodged  in  the  castle  called  the  Lion,  and  his  men  in
the  town ; that  is  to  say,  as  many  as  could,  but  the  greater  part  were  quartered  in  the  fields
and  in  the  adjacent  villages.

The  king  remained  there  a month  ; and  things  were  in  that  state  that  those  who  expected
to  gain  by  confusion,  were  greatly  disappointed.


CHAPTER  XIII. THE  SPANIARDS  ARE  JEALOUS  OF  THE  FRENCH  AND  BEARNOIS.“— FIVE

HUNDRED  ENGLISH  ARRIVE  TO  SERVE  THE  KING  OF  PORTUGAL.

During  the  residence  of  the  king  of  Spain  at  Santarem,  there  arrived  a handsome  company
of  men  at  arms  from  Bearn.  Sir  Reginald  de  Limousin  rode  out  to  meet  them,  and  received
them  very  politely,  as  he  knew  how  to  do,  and  conducted  them  to  the  king,  who  was  much
pleased  at  their  coming,  and  commanded  sir  Reginald  to  see  that  they  were  well  lodged,  and
at  their  ease,  for  such  were  his  wishes.  Sir  Reginald  acted  in  a manner  to  satisfy  them.
The  state  of  the  king’s  affairs  continued  the  same  during  the  time  he  remained  at  Santarem,
and  while  his  army  was  in  and  near  to  that  town,  which  consisted  of  four  thousand  men  at
arms  and  thirty  thousand  others.  He  called  the  barons  of  France  to  his  council,  to  consider
of  the  best  means  to  carry  on  the  war  ; for  he  had  lain  a long  time,  and  with  great  expenses,
before  Lisbon,  and  had  done  nothing.  It  was  imagined,  if  the  Gascons  had  not  by  their
arrival  encouraged  the  king  to  proceed,  he  would  have  retreated  from  Santarem  to  Burgos,
or  into  Galicia,  for  his  men  were  weary  with  being  so  long  in  the  field.

When  the  knights  of  France  and  Bearn  -were  admitted  to  the  council,  the  king  thus
addressed  them  : “ My  fair  sirs,  you  are  intelligent  and  active  in  war  : I therefore  wish  to
have  your  advice  how  I may  most  advantageously  continue  my  war  against  the  Portuguese
and  Lisboners  : they  have  maintained  their  ground  against  me  upwards  of  a year,  and  I have
done  nothing.  I was  in  hopes  to  have  drawn  them  out  of  Lisbon,  and  have  fought  them,  but
they  would  not  accept  my  challenge.  My  friends  have  advised  me  to  dismiss  my  army,  and
permit  every  man  to  return  to  his  home.  I therefore  wish  to  know  what  your  opinions  may
be  on  this  subject.”  The  knights  from  France  and  Bearn,  being  just  arrived  at  the  army,
were  eager  for  battle  ; for,  though  they  had  as  yet  been  idle,  they  were  desirous  of  deserving
the  pay  they  had  received ; and  replied,  “ Sir,  you  are  a great  and  powerful  prince,  and  it
little  matters  to  you  to  pay  the  expenses  of  your  army,  especially  when  it  is  in  its  own  country.
V e will  not  say,  but  that,  if  it  had  been  in  a foreign  land  and  deprived  of  provision,  the  advice
which  has  been  given  you  would  have  been  good  : we  see,  however,  that  it  is  as  comfortably
situated  here  as  if  every  man  were  at  his  own  home.  We  therefore  say  (not  indeed  as  a


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


115


resolution  of  council,  for  your  wisdom  and  prudence  will  enable  you  to  choose  the  best  opinion)
you  ought  to  keep  the  field,  which  may  easily  be  done  until  Michaelmas,  when  perhaps  your
enemies  will  march  out  to  meet  you  when  you  the  least  expect  them,  and  thus  they  may  be
combated.  We  are  very  anxious  for  conquest,  for  our  equipment  has  cost  us  very  considerably,
and  we  have  had  many  difficulties  before  we  could  come  hither : we  therefore  never  shall  be
of  the  opinion  of  your  counsellors,  for  we  wish  to  see  the  enemy.”  “ By  my  head,”  said  the
king,  “ you  speak  well  and  loyally,  and  in  this  and  on  other  occasions  I will  henceforward
take  your  advice,  for  my  late  lord  and  father  as  well  as  myself  have  always  found  your  opinions
fair  and  honourable.  May  God  have  pity  on  the  soul  of  sir  Bertrand  du  Guesclin  ! he  wa3
a good  and  loyal  knight,  and  through  his  means  we  gained  many  important  victories.”

This  conversation  between  the  king  of  Castille  and  the  foreign  knights,  as  well  as  the  advice
they  had  given,  was  soon  known  to  the  Spanish  barons:  they  wrere  much  vexed  for  two
reasons ; one,  because  they  imagined  the  king  had  greater  confidence  in  these  strangers  than  in
his  own  liege  subjects  who  had  crowned  him  ; and  because  the  French  knights  had  advised  the
king  to  keep  his  ground,  whilst  they  were  tired  of  the  war.  They  therefore  privately  caballed
together,  and  said,  “ The  king  knows  not  how  to  carry  on  a war  but  by  the  French,  as  his  father
did  before  him.”  They  now  conceived  a hatred  to  the  French,  which  their  servants  and  foragers
soon  made  manifest.  They  had  quartered  all  the  French  together,  but  wdien  they  sent  out
parties  to  forage,  the  Spaniards  being  more  numerous,  took  their  forage  from  them,  and  beat
and  wounded  several,  insomuch  that  complaints  were  made  to  the  king.  The  king  much  blamed
sir  Reginald  de  Limousin,  his  marshal,  for  not  having  prevented  this.  The  marshal  excused
himself,  by  saying, — “ As  God  might  help  him,  he  knew  nothing  about  it ; but  that  he  would
instantly  provide  a remedy,  by  ordering  men  at  arms  into  the  field,  to  attend  carefully  that
the  French  collected  their  forage  in  security.”  He  also  issued  a proclamation  for  ail  who  had
provision,  or  other  necessaries,  to  bring  them  to  the  army  at  Santarem,  when  a reasonable
price  would  be  given  for  them.  The  foreigners  were  amply  supplied,  for,  by  the  king’s  orders,
they  were  to  be  served  before  any  others,  which  increased  the  hatred  of  the  Spaniards.

It  happened,  that  the  same  week  the  king  of  Castille  broke  up  the  siege  of  Lisbon,  three
large  ships,  having  on  board  English  men  at  arms  and  archers,  entered  the  port : they  might
amount,  in  the  whole,  to  about  five  hundred ; but  three  parts  of  them  were  adventurers,
under  no  command  and  without  pay,  from  Calais,  Cherbourg,  Brest,  and  Mortaigne  in
Poitou,  who,  hearing  of  the  war  between  Castille  and  Portugal,  had  assembled  at  Bordeaux,
and  said, — “ Let  us  go  seek  adventures  in  Portugal : we  shall  find  some  one  there  to  receive
and  employ  us.”  Sir  John  Harpedane,  who  at  that  time  was  seneschal  of  Bordeaux,  had
strongly  advised  them  so  to  do ; for  he  was  not  willing  they  should  remain  in  arms  in  the
Bordelois,  as  they  might  do  more  harm  than  good,  being  adventurers  who  had  nothing  to  lose.

Of  all  who  thus  arrived  at  Lisbon  I heard  of  no  knights,  only  three  English  squires  who
were  their  leaders  : one  was  called  Northberry,  the  other  Morberry,  and  the  third  Iluguelin
de  Hartsel ; and  not  one  of  them  was  more  than  fifty  years  old,  good  men  at  arms,  and  well
accustomed  to  war.  The  Lisboners  and  the  king  of  Portugal  were  much  rejoiced  at  the
arrival  of  the  English.  As  he  wished  to  see  them,  they  were  conducted  to  the  palace,  and
received  handsomely  by  the  king,  who  asked  if  the  duke  of  Lancaster  had  sent  them.  “ By
my  faith,  sir,”  replied  Northberry,  “ it  is  a long  time  since  he  has  known  any  thing  of  us,  or
we  of  him  : we  are  people  from  different  countries,  who  come  to  seek  the  chance  of  arms  and
adventures : there  are  some  of  us  who  have  even  come  from  the  town  of  Calais  to  serve  you.”
“ On  my  troth,”  said  the  king,  “ you  and  they  are  very  welcome  : your  arrival  gives  us
much  joy ; and  know,  that  we  shall  very  shortly  employ  you.  We  have  been,  for  a time,
shut  up  here,  which  has  tired  us  much ; but  we  will  take  the  advantage  of  the  field,  as  the
Spaniards  have  done.”  “We  desire  nothing  better,”  answered  the  captains  ; “ and  entreat
we  may  speedily  see  our  enemies.”


i


q


1 1G


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  & c.


CHAPTER  XIV. TITE  KING  OP  PORTUGAL  ISSUES  HIS  ORDERS  FOR  niS  ARMY  TO  MARCH

TOWARDS  SANTAREM. TOE  KING  OF  CASTILLE  QUITS  THAT  PLACE  TO  MEET  HIM.

The  king  of  Portugal  had  these  new-comers  to  dine  in  the  palace  of  Lisbon,  and  ordered
them  to  be  well  lodged  in  the  city,  and  their  pay  to  be  advanced  them  for  three  months.
The  king  made  his  secretaries  draw  up  letters,  which  he  sent  throughout  the  realm,  com-
manding all  persons,  capable  of  bearing  arms,  to  come  instantly  to  Lisbon,  under  pain  of  his
displeasure.  Few  paid  any  obedience  to  these  letters,  and  too  many  remained  at  home ; for
three  parts  of  the  kingdom  were  on  bad  terms  with  the  Lisboners,  because  they  had  crowned
a bastard  for  king,  and  abused  them  much  behind  their  backs.  The  king  of  Castille  and  his
council,  knowing  of  this  difference  of  opinion  in  Portugal,  had  thus  advanced,  with  the
intent  of  conquering  it ; for  they  said  it  would  be  the  affair  of  only  one  battle,  when,  if  the
Lisboners  were  conquered,  the  rest  of  the  country  would  be  rejoiced,  and  the  grand  master
of  Avis  would  be  overpowered  and  slain,  so  that  the  kingdom  would  fall  to  Spain,  for  the
queen  was  the  right  heiress  to  it.  King  John  of  Castille,  however,  would  willingly  have
avoided  this  war ; but  his  subjects  would  not  permit  it,  as  they  said  he  had  just  cause  for
it,  and  thus  emboldened  him.

When  the  king  of  Portugal  found  his  summons  was  so  little  attended  to,  and  disobeyed
by  those  on  whose  services  he  had  counted,  he  was  very  pensive.  He  assembled  the  prin-
cipal persons  of  Lisbon,  and  the  knights  of  his  household  who  had  been  most  active  in
crownino-  him,  and  who  had  served  under  king  Ferdinand  ; such  as  sir  John  Radighos,  sir
John  Testa  d’Gro,  the  lord  de  la  Figuire,  sir  Gommc  de  Tarbeston,  Ambrose  Condrich,
Peter  Condrich  his  brother,  sir  Monges  de  Xavaret,  a knight  of  Castille  whom,  having  been
banished  from  thence  by  the  king,  the  king  of  Portugal  had  made  captain  of  his  knights.
At  this  council  the  king  explained  several  things,  and  said — “ My  fair  sirs  who  are  here
assembled,  I know  I may  depend  on  your  friendships,  for  you  have  made  me  king ; but  you
must  perceive  that  great  numbers  of  my  subjects  refuse  me  their  assistance  in  this  time  of
need,  and  will  not  take  the  field.  I must  own  I should  have  been  truly  happy  to  have  seen
them  as  well  disposed  as  myself  to  meet  our  enemies ; but  alas  ! it  is  otherwise,  for  they
draw  back  and  dissemble.  I solicit  your  advice  on  this  business,  how  I had  best  act,  and
beg  of  you  to  give  me  your  opinions.”  Sir  Gomme  de  Tarbeston,  a Portuguese  knight,
then  spoke  : “ Sir,  I advise,  for  your  own  honour,  that  you  instantly  take  the  field,  with  as
many  men  as  you  can  collect,  and  hazard  the  event : we  will  assist  you  until  death,  for  we
hold  you  king  and  lord  of  this  town  ; and  if  there  be  any  rebels  or  discontented  persons  in
Portugal,  it  is,  I say  (and  in  this  I am  joined  by  many  in  the  town),  because  you  have  never
yet  attacked  nor  showed  yourself  to  your  enemies.  You  have  had  hitherto  the  renown  of  being
a valiant  man  at  arms,  but  on  this  occasion  you  have  not  acted  like  one.  This  has  encouraged
your  enemies,  and  checked  the  ardour  of  your  subjects  ; for,  when  once  you  show  courage  and
resolution,  they  will  fear  you,  as  well  as  your  enemies.”  “ By  my  head,”  said  the  king,  “ sir
Gomme  you  speak  well : and  now  order  our  men  to  be  made  ready,  and  every  other  preparation
to  hasten  our  march,  for  we  will  meet  our  enemies,  and  gain  all  or  lose  all.”

“ My  lord,”  replied  the  knight,  “ it  shall  be  done  : if  God  send  you  good  success,  and  the
day  be  ours,  you  will  reign  king  of  Portugal,  and  be  prized  and  honoured  in  all  countries
wherever  you  shall  be  known.  You  can  only  have  the  complete  government  of  this  kingdom
by  a battle  ; and  I give  you  as  an  example  king  don  Henry,  your  cousin,  the  father  of
don  John  of  Castille.  He  gained  all  his  inheritances  by  the  sword,  and  would  never
otherwise  have  succeeded  ; for  you  know  how  the  power  of  the  prince  of  Wales  replaced
don  Pedro  on  the  throne,  when  afterwards  by  the  event  of  the  battle  before  Montiel,  he
forfeited  his  life,  and  don  Llenry  regained  possession  of  the  kingdom.  He  in  that  day
risked  his  own  person  as  well  as  that  of  his  friends ; and  you  must  do  the  same  if  you  wish
to  live  with  honour.”  “ By  my  head,”  said  the  king,  “ you  say  well ; and  I will  not  ask
other  advice,  but  follow  this,  which  is  much  to  my  advantage.”  The  council  now  broke  up  ;
and  orders  were  given  for  the  army  to  march  in  three  days’  time,  to  choose  a proper  position
to  wait  for  the  enemy.  The  gates  of  Lisbon  were  kept  so  closely  shut  that  no  person  what-


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  Ac.


117


ever  was  allowed  to  quit  the  town  ; for  the  king  and  the  inhabitants  would  not  that  the
Spaniards  should  know  their  intention  nor  their  numbers.

The  English  were  much  pleased  when  they  learnt  they  were  to  march  towards  Santarem,
where  the  king  and  his  army  lay.  Every  one  now  prepared  his  arms  ; the  archers  their
hows  and  arrows  each  according  to  his  x'ank.  On  a Thursday,  in  the  afternoon,  the  king
with  his  army  marched  out  of  Lisbon,  and  encamped  that  day  on  the  banks  of  a small  river
two  leagues  from  the  town,  with  their  front  towards  Santarem  : they  said  they  would  never
return  before  they  had  seen  their  enemies,  and  that  it  was  much  better  they  should  offer
battle  than  for  the  enemy  to  come  to  them.  They  had  remarked  the  difference  between
those  who  sought  and  those  who  waited  for  a battle,  and  that  inferior  numbers  had  frequently
gained  the  day:  for  in  almost  all  the  victories  the  English  had  obtained  over  the  French,  they
had  been  the  first  to  offer  battle ; and  they  observed,  that  an  attacking  army  is  naturally
more  courageous  than  one  on  the  defence.  This  was  the  opinion  of  the  inhabitants  of  Lisbon
when  they  marched  out  of  the  town,  and  they  thus  continued  their  conversation  : “ Some
of  us  were  with  the  men  of  Ghent  when  they  marched  to  Bruges  and  offered  battle  to  the
count  of  Flanders  and  his  army  in  that  town  ; and  we  well  know,  that  Philip  Yon  Artaveld,
Peter  du  Bois,  John  Cliqueriel,  Framjois  Atremen  and  Peter  le  Nuiiro,  the  leaders  of  the
Ghent-men,  had  not  under  them  more  than  seven  thousand  men  ; but  they  fought  the  battle,
and  defeated  eleven  thousand.  This  is  a known  fact,  for  there  was  not  any  treachery  :
fortune  was  favourable  to  Ghent  on  the  day  of  battle,  which  was  fought  on  a Saturday,  a
long  league  distant  from  Bruges,  as  we  were  informed  on  the  morrow  when  they  had
conquered  that  city.”  They  comforted  themselves  that  there  was  as  good  a chance  to  win
as  to  lose,  and  that,  if  they  wished  to  succeed  in  arms  they  must  act  boldly.  Such  were  the
conversations  of  the  Lishoners  among  themselves  on  the  Thursday,  as  they  continued  their
march.  When  the  king  heard  how  resolutely  they  discoursed,  he  was  much  pleased.

When  the  trumpets  of  the  king’s  army  sounded  on  the  Friday  morning,  all  made  them-
selves ready,  and  marched  on  the  right,  following  the  river  and  the  flat  country,  on  account
of  the  baggage  and  provision  which  followed  them,  and  advanced  four  leagues.  News  was
brought,  on  this  Friday,  to  the  king  of  Castille  at  Santarem,  that  the  Portuguese,  under  the
command  of  the  master  of  Avis,  whom  the  Lisboners  had  crowned  king,  were  advancing  to
meet  him.  This  intelligence  was  soon  spread  through  the  army  ; and  it  gave  the  Spaniards,
French,  and  Gascons  much  joy : they  said,  “ These  Lisboners  are  valiant  fellows,  thus  to
come  and  fight  with  us  : let  us  hasten  to  take  the  field,  and  surround  them  if  we  can,  that  we
may  prevent  their  return  : for,  if  we  can  help  it,  not  one  of  them  shall  see  Lisbon  again.”  It
was  proclaimed  through  the  army,  by  sound  of  trumpet,  for  every  one  to  be  ready,  both  horse
and  foot,  on  Saturday  morning,  as  on  that  day  the  king  would  march  to  combat  his  enemies.
Every  one  was  prepared  and  showed  great  joy  at  the  orders,  and  at  the  event  likely  to  happen.

On  the  Saturday  morning,  all  the  trumpets  in  the  Castille  army  sounded.  The  king  heard
mass  in  the  castle,  then  drank  a cup,  as  did  his  attendants,  and  mounting  their  horses,  they
marched  into  the  plain  in  handsome  order  : sir  Reginald  de  Limousin,  marshal  of  the  army,
led  the  van.  Scouts  were  ordered  to  examine  the  appearance  of  the  enemy,  where  they  were,
and  what  might  be  their  numbers.  Two  squires  were  ordered  on  this  duty  by  the  French  ;
one  a Burgundian,  and  the  other  a Gascon.  The  Burgundian  was  called  William  de
Montigny,  and  of  the  company  of  sir  John  de  Rue  : the  Gascon  came  from  Bearn,  and  his
name  was  Bertrand  de  Barege.  They  were  both  on  that  day  made  knights,  and  with  them
a lord  of  Castille,  an  able  man  at  arms,  called  sir  Pedro  Fernando  de  Medina  ; he  was
mounted  on  a light  genet  that  had  wonderful  speed.  While  these  three  knights  were
exploring  the  country  on  all  sides,  in  search  of  the  Portuguese,  their  main  army,  which
consisted  of  full  two  tliousaud  lances,  knights,  and  squires,  Gascons,  Burgundians,  French,
Picards  and  Bretons,  as  well  equipped  and  mounted  as  men  at  arms  could  he,  and  twenty
thousand  Spaniards,  all  on  horseback,  marched  at  a foot’s  pace,  and  had  not  advanced  the
distance  of  a bow-shot  when  they  halted.  The  king  of  Portugal  had  also  sent  three  scouts
to  observe  the  countenance  and  order  of  the  Spaniards,  two  of  whom  were  English  squires
and  expert  men  at  arms,  whose  names  were  James  d’Hartleberry  and  Philip  Bradeston,  and
with  them  a Portuguese  called  Fernando  de  la  Gresse.  They  were  all  well  mounted,  and


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  & c.


11R

rode  so  far  that  from  an  eminence  where  they  were  hid  by  the  leaves  of  the  trees  they  exa-
mined carefully  the  whole  Spanish  army.  They  then  returned  to  the  king  of  Portugal  and
his  army,  which  they  found  drawn  up  in  the  plain,  and  related  what  they  had  seen.  “ Sire,
we  have  advanced  so  far  as  to  have  fully  reconnoitred  your  enemies  : they  are  very  numerous,
thirty  thousand  horse  at  least : therefore  consider  well  the  business.”  The  king  asked,
“ Do  they  march  in  one  body  ? ” “ No,  sir  : they  are  in  two  battalions.”  The  king  turned

about,  and  said  aloud,  “ Now  all  of  you  attend  to  what  I say,  for  here  must  be  no  cowardice  :
we  shall  soon  engage  our  enemies,  who  are  on  their  march  and  eager  to  meet  us  : this  they
will  do,  for  we  can  neither  fly  nor  return  to  Lisbon.  We  have  left  that  town  : therefore
act  well  and  sell  your  lives  dearly.  You  have  made  me  your  king  : this  day  I shall  see
whether  the  crown  is  to  be  peaceably  mine  ; for  be  assured  I will  never  fly,  but  abide  the
event.”  They  replied,  “ God  assist  us  ! we  will  all  stand  by  you.”

Northberry  and  Hartsel  were  then  called,  with  others  the  most  experienced  in  arms,  and
men  who  had  seen  the  greatest  number  of  battles,  when  they  were  asked  their  opinions,  as
to  the  best  mode  of  acting,  to  wait  the  event  of  a battle  ; for  they  were  likely  to  be  forced  to
fight,  as  the  enemy  was  advancing  fast,  and  in  such  numbers  that  they  were  at  least  four  to
one.  The  Englishmen  said,  “ Since  we  must  have  a battle,  and  they  are  superior  to  us  in
numbers,  it  is  an  unequal  chance,  and  we  cannot  conquer  them  but  by  taking  advantage  of
the  hedges  and  bushes  : let  us  therefore  fortify  ourselves  in  such  manner,  and  you  will  see
they  will  not  so  easily  break  us  as  if  we  were  in  the  plain.  The  king  replied,  “ You  speak
wisely,  and  it  shall  be  done  as  you  recommend.”


CHAPTER  XV. — THE  PORTUGUESE  FORTIFY  THEMSELVES,  NEAR  THE  CHURCH  OF  ALJUBAROTA*',

BY  THE  ADVICE  OF  THE  ENGLISH. KING  JOHN  OF  CASTILLE,  THROUGH  THE  COUNSEL

OF  THE  FRENCH  AND  BEARNOIS,  RESOLVES  TO  FIGHT  THEM. THE  HATREDS  AND

JEALOUSIES  OF  THE  CASTILLIANS  STILL  CONTINUE  AGAINST  THE  FOREIGNERS.

The  Portuguese  and  Lisboners  approved  of  the  advice  of  the  English,  and  gave  their
opinion  whither  they  should  march.  They  were  then  near  Aljubarota,  a large  village,  to
which  place  they  had  sent  their  stores,  sumpter-horses  and  baggage,  as  the  situation  in  which
they  had  intended  lodging  that  night,  battle  or  not.  About  a quarter  of  a league  without
the  village  is  a considerable  monastery,  whither  the  inhabitants  go  to  hear  mass.  The  church
is  on  a small  eminence,  a little  beside  the  road,  surrounded  by  large  trees,  hedges,  and  bushes,
which,  with  some  little  assistance,  might  be  made  a strong  post.  This  was  then  told  the
king  and  his  council : but  he  would  have  the  English  called,  for,  though  they  were  very  few
in  number,  he  wished  to  follow  their  advice.  They  said  : “ Sire,  we  know  not  any  spot  near,
more  favourable  than  the  monastery  of  Aljubarota,  situated  as  it  is  among  trees  : it  is  now
a strong  position,  but  may  be  much  strengthened  by  art.”  Those  who  knew  the  country
agreeing  to  the  truth  of  this,  the  king  said, — “ Let  us  march  thither,  and  form  ourselves  in
such  a manner  as  good  men  at  arms  should  do  ; so  that  our  enemies,  when  they  advance,
may  not  find  us  unprepared.”  This  was  instantly  done  : they  marched  slowly  to  Aljubarota,
and  came  to  the  square  before  the  church,  when  the  English  and  sir  Monges  de  Navaret,
with  other  valiant  Portuguese  and  Lisboners,  attentively  examined  the  place  and  the  environs.
The  English  said,  “ This  spot  can  be  made  sufficiently  strong,  and  wo  may  securely  wait  here
the  event.”  They  cut  down  the  trees  fronting  the  plain,  and  laid  them  across,  so  that  the
cavalry  could  not  pass  them,  leaving  one  entry  not  too  wide,  on  the  wings  of  which  they
posted  all  their  archers  and  cross-bows.  The  men  at  arms  were  on  foot  drawn  up  beside
the  church,  where  the  king  was : and  they  had  already  displayed  the  king’s  standard  and
banners.

When  they  saw  themselves  thus  drawn  up  they  were  much  contented,  saying,  if  it  pleased
God,  they  were  in  a situation  to  hold  out  for  a long  time  and  to  gain  the  advantage  by  it.
The  1 ling  addressed  them  : “ My  fair  gentlemen,  show  your  valour  this  day,  and  think  not
* “ Aljubarota,” — a village  of  Estremadoura  in  Portugal,  four  leagues  from  tlie  town  of  Lciria.


119


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.

of  flight ; for  that  will  be  of  no  avail,  as  you  are  too  distant  from  Lisbon ; and  besides,  there
is  no  safety  in  flight,  for  three  good  men  will  overpower  and  slay  twelve  run-aways.
Prove  that  you  are  men  of  courage  and  offer  yourselves  vigorously  to  your  opponents  :
consider,  should  the  day  be  ours,  which  it  will  be,  if  it  please  God,  how  much  we  shall  be
honoured  and  praised  in  the  different  countries  where  new's  of  it  shall  be  carried  ; for  the
victors  are  always  exalted,  and  the  conquered  abased.  Consider  also,  you  have  made  me
your  king,  which  should  strengthen  your  courage ; for  be  assured,  that  as  long  as  this  battle-
axe  in  my  hand  shall  hold,  I will  continue  the  fight  : and  should  it  break  or  fail  me,  I will
get  another,  and  show  I am  determined  to  guard  and  defend  the  crown  of  Portugal  for
myself,  and  for  the  right  I have  to  the  succession  of  my  lord  and  brother,  in  which,  on  my
soul,  I declare  and  say  they  oppose  me  wrongfully,  and  that  the  quarrel  is  personal.”

Those  of  his  countrymen  who  had  heard  him,  replied — “ My  lord  and  king,  you  have
graciously  admonished  and  greatly  advised  us  to  be  men  of  valour,  and  to  support  you  in
defending  what  we  have  given  to  you,  and  at  the  same  time  acknowledge  to  be  your  own.
Know,  then,  that  we  will  all  remain  with  you  steadily,  and  never  leave  the  field  alive,  until
we  gain  the  battle,  or  be  carried  away.  Have  it  proclaimed  to  your  men,  for  they  have  not  all
heard  you,  that  noone  dare, on  his  life,  think  of  flying;  and  if  there  sliouldbe  any  whose  courage
fails,  so  that  he  fear  to  await  the  battle,  let  him  come  forward,  and  he  shall  have  leave  to
depart  (for  one  faint  heart  discourages  a dozen  of  good  men  at  arms),  or  have  his  head  struck
off  as  an  example  to  others.”  The  king  said  it  should  be  done,  and  two  knights  were
ordered  by  him  to  examine  the  army  and  admonish  it,  and  see  if  any  symptoms  appeared
among  them  of  fear.  The  knights,  on  their  return,  reported  to  the  king,  that  wherever  they
had  visited,  and  they  had  examined  all  the  different  companies,  they  had  found  every  one
resolute  and  determined  to  wait  the  event  of  the  battle.  “ So  much  the  better,”  said  the
king.  He  issued  orders  to  the  army,  if  any  persons  were  desirous  of  knighthood,  to  come
forward,  and  he  would  confer  on  them  the  order  of  knighthood  in  the  name  of  God  and  St.
George.  From  the  information  I had,  it  seems  that  sixty  new  knights  were  created,  which
pleased  the  king  much ; and  placing  them  in  front  of  the  army,  he  said, — “ My  fair  sirs,  the
order  of  chivalry  is  more  exalted  and  noble  than  imagination  can  suppose  ; and  no  knight
ought  to  suffer  himself  to  be  debased  by  cowardice,  or  any  villanous  or  dirty  action  ; but
when  his  helmet  is  on  his  head  he  should  be  bold  and  fierce  as  a lion  when  he  sees  his  prey ;
and  because  I wish  you  to  show  your  courage  this  day,  where  it  will  be  needful,  I order  you
to  the  front  of  the  battalion,  where  you  must  exert  yourselves,  that  we  may  both  obtain
honour,  otherwise  your  spurs  will  not  become  you.”  Each  new  knight  answered  in  his  turn,
as  he  marched  by — “ Sire,  we  will,  with  God’s  grace,  do  so,  that  we  shall  gain  your  love  and
approbation."  In  this  manner  were  the  Portuguese  drawn  up,  and  fortified  near  the
church  of  Aljubarota.  None  of  the  English  were  desirous  to  be  knighted  this  day : they
were  requested  by  the  king  to  be  so,  but  excused  themselves  for  that  time.

We  will  now  return  to  the  king  of  Castille,  and  to  the  knights,  squires  and  men  at  arms
from  France  and  Gascony  with  him,  and  speak  of  the  appearance  of  the  Spaniards,  and  how
they  were  drawn  up.  The  knights  they  had  sent  out  to  reconnoitre,  had  returned,  and  said,
— “ Sir  king,  and  you  barons  and  knights  present,  we  have  leisurely  examined  our  enemies  :
we  do  not  believe  that  their  whole  amount  is  more  than  ten  thousand  men  : they  have
marched  to  the  abbey  of  Aljubarota,  where  they  have  halted,  and  are  drawn  up  in  order  of
battle  ; and  there  they  may  be  found  by  whoever  chooses  to  seek  for  them.”  Upon  this  the
king  summoned  a council,  to  which,  in  particular,  the  barons  and  knights  of  France  were
invited  : they  were  asked,  what  was  best  to  be  done,  when  they  instantly  replied, — “ Sir,
it  is  proper  they  should  be  fought  with : we  see  nothing  else  to  be  done ; for,  from  the
report  of  our  scouts,  they  are  alarmed  for  the  event,  as  they  find  themselves  distant  from  any
fortresses  whither  they  may  retreat,  and  Lisbon  is  six  leagues  off ; they  cannot,  therefore,
easily  run  thither,  even  if  they  should  take  advantage  of  the  night,  without  being  overtaken
on  the  road.  We  therefore,  sir,  advise,  since  we  know  where  they  are,  that  we  be  drawn
up  in  battle  array,  and  march  to  combat  them,  wdiile  your  men  are  in  a good  disposition  to
behave  well."

The  king  then  asked  his  countrymen  tlieir  opinions,  such  as  Don  Gonzales  Nunez  de


120


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


Gusman,  don  Diego  de  Mendoza,  Peter  Gonzales  de  Mendoza,  Peter  Lopez  d’ Ayala,  and  the
grand  master  of  Calatrava  wlio  replied, — My  lord,  we  have  well  heard  the  French  knighta
advise  you  to  march  instantly  against  your  enemies ; but  we  wish  you  and  them  to  know,
that  before  we  can  arrive  thither  it  will  be  night,  for  the  sun  is  now  on  the  decline,  and  we
have  not  yet  arranged  our  order  of  battle.  It  would  be  better  to  wait  until  morning,  and
approach  them  so  near  that  we  may  discover  by  our  scouts,  whom  we  can  spread  over  the
plain,  in  what  manner  they  have  posted  themselves  ; and  if  they  should  incline  to  march
away  during  the  night,  we  might  also  decamp,  when  they  cannot  escape,  for  the  country  is
quite  open,  and  there  is  not  any  strong  place  except  Lisbon,  so  that  they  must  fall  an  easy
prey  to  us.  This  is  the  advice  we  give.”

The  king,  on  hearing  this,  was  silent,  and  looked  first  on  the  ground  and  then  on  the
foreigners  ; when  sir  Reginald  de  Limousin,  marshal  of  the  army,  thus  spoke  (in  order  to
please  the  French)  in  Spanish,  that  he  might  be  heard  and  understood  by  all,  for  he  spoke
that  language  fluently,  so  long  had  he  resided  among  them,  addressing  himself  to  the
Spaniards  who  were  near  the  king,  and  who  had  given  him  the  last  advice  : — “ How  can  you,
my  lords,  (calling  each  of  them  by  their  name,  for  he  was  well  acquainted  with  them  all)
pretend  to  have  more  knowledge  of  battles  or  more  experience  in  war  than  the  valiant  knights
and  squires  here  present  ? how  can  you  imagine  you  can  devise  any  plan  supei’ior  to  theirs,  or
even  that  could  be  of  any  value  ? For  their  whole  life  has  been  employed  in  travelling  from
one  kingdom  to  another,  in  search  of  adventures.  How  can  you  dare  offer  any  other
opinion,  or  thus  detract  from  what  they  have  so  nobly  said,  in  the  defence  of  the  honour  of  the
king  and  country  ; in  which  you  are  more  interested  than  they  are,  for  you  have  therein  your
properties  as  well  as  your  persons,  whilst  they  have  only  their  persons.  They  have  offered
a proof  of  their  attachment  by  requesting  of  the  king  to  be  posted  in  front  of  the  battalions,
which  his  majesty  has  disapproved.  Consider  how  disinterested  they  must  be,  when  they
made  this  offer.  It  would  appear  to  some  persons  as  if  you  were  envious,  and  wished  not
that  any  honour  or  profit  might  accrue  to  them,  or  that  the  king  should  gain  the  victory
over  his  enemies.  Honourable  men  at  arms,  who  seek  perfection,  should  be  above  low
jealousies  and  such  base  passions,  and  always  be  of  one  and  the  same  way  of  thinking.
Besides,  through  your  advice,  has  the  king  been  thus  long  and  expensively  kept  at  the  siege
of  Lisbon,  without  having  any  opportunity  of  a battle,  until  now  when  the  master  of  Avis
(who  signs  himself  king  of  Portugal,  though  he  can  have  no  such  right,  being  a bastard)  has
taken  the  field.  He  is  at  Aljubarota  at  this  moment  with  all  the  force  he  can  muster,  but  it
is  not  any  way  great : if  it  should  therefore  happen  that  he  make  his  escape  from  us,  and
avoid  a battle,  you  will  run  the  risk  of  the  people  rising  and  slaying  you  ; or  the  king,  con-
sidering you  as  traitors,  will  have  you  beheaded,  and  your  estates  confiscated.  I therefore
see  no  better  means  for  you  than  being  silent,  and  agreeing  with  those  who  have  been  actors
in  more  matters  of  this  sort  than  you  ever  have  been  engaged  in,  or  ever  will  be.”

As  sir  Reginald  ended  this  speech,  the  king  raised  his  eyes  from  the  ground,  and  seemed
highly  pleased  with  what  he  had  heard : the  Spaniards  on  the  contrary,  were  thunderstruck,
and  thought,  at  the  moment,  they  had  done  worse  than  they  really  had  ; for,  notwithstanding
the  marshal  had  thus  opposed  and  reproved  them,  they  had  wisely  and  prudently  advised
the  king,  for  lie  could  not  have  had  better  counsel ; but  his  valour  and  frankness  made  him
speak  as  follows  in  compliance  with  the  French  and  the  strangers  present,  who  were  eager
for  battle.  Every  one  was  silent,  when  the  king  said, — “ In  the  name  of  God  and  my  lord
St.  James,  I will  that  we  combat  our  enemies,  and  that  those  who  desire  knighthood,  may
advance,  and  receive  the  order  of  chivalry  in  honour  of  God  and  St.  George.”  Many  squires
of  France  and  Bearn  came  forward,  and  were  knighted  by  the  king’s  hand  ; such  as  sir  Roger
d’Espaign,  and  his  son  Edmund  : from  the  county  of  Foix,  sir  Bertrand  de  Barege,  sir  Peter
de  Salbiere,  sir  Peter  de  Yalentin,  sir  William  de  Quer,  Sir  Angiers  de  Sollenaire,  Sir  Peter
de  Yaud,  Sir  William  de  Mondigy,  with  many  more ; in  all,  one  hundred  and  forty,  who
willingly  accepted  the  order  of  knighthood.  Some  barons  of  Bearn  first  displayed  their
banners  with  several  of  Castille  and  Sir  John  de  Rue.

You  might  have  seen  these  young  knights  full  of  vigour  and  gallantry,  carrying  themselves
so  handsomely  that  it  was  a pleasant  spectacle  to  see ; and  they  were,  as  I have  said,  a large


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


121


battalion  of  themselves.  The  lord  do  Lingnach  then  approached  the  king,  accompanied
by  all  those  who  had  come  from  different  countries,  and  whom  the  Castillians  called
indiscriminately  Frenchmen,  completely  armed  except  their  helmets,  and  said — “ My  lord
king,  we  arc  come  from  distant  countries  with  the  best  dispositions  to  serve  you : grant
us,  we  beg  of  you,  that  we  may  form  the  van  battalion.”  “ I grant  it,”  replied  the  king,
“ in  the  name  of  God,  St.  James,  and  my  lord  St.  George,  and  may  they  be  with  you  ! "
Upon  this  the  Spaniards  whispered  one  to  another, — “ See,  for  God’s  sake  ! sec  how  our
king  confides  wholly  in  these  foreigners  : he  has  not  any  trust  in  others.  They  have  obtained
the  honour  of  the  van,  and  hold  us  so  cheap  they  will  not.  invite  us  to  make  a part.  They  are
now  drawing  themselves  up  separately.  Well,  we  will  do  the  same  on  our  part,  and,  by
God,  let  them  combat  and  fight  by  themselves.  Have  they  not  already  boasted  they  are
sufficient  to  vanquish  the  Portuguese?  Be  it  so,  then:  we  are  contented;  but  it  will  be
right  wc  ask  the  king  if  he  choose  to  remain  with  us,  or  go  with  the  Frenchmen.”  They
were  murmuring  a long  time,  whether  they  should  put  such  a question  to  the  king  or  not,
for  they  were  much  afraid  of  the  reprimands  of  sir  Reginald  de  Limousin.  Having  fully
considered,  they  thought  there  would  not  be  any  harm  in  asking  the  question.  Six  therefore
of  the  principal  nobles,  employed  about  his  person,  advanced,  and,  with  many  obeisances,  thus
spoke  : “ Most  noble  king,  we  perceive  plainly  that  this  day  there  will  be  an  engagement  with
your  enemies.  God  grant  you  may  have  the  victory  and  honour  ! as  wc  sincerely  wish  it ;
but  we  are  anxious  to  know  your  pleasure,  whether  you  will  remain  with  us  or  march  with
the  Frenchmen?"  “By  no  means,”  replied  the  king:  “my  fair  sirs,  if  I have  deter-
mined on  battle,  in  consequence  of  the  advice  of  the  knights  and  squires  from  France  who
have  come  to  serve  me,  and  who  are  men  of  great  valour  and  abilities,  I do  not  renounce  you,
but  will  remain  among  you,  and  you  will  therefore  help  in  defending  me.”  The  Castillians
were  delighted  with  this  answer ; and  said,  “ That,  my  lord,  will  we  do,  and  never  fail  you
as  long  as  we  live ; for  we  have  sworn  to  do  so,  and  pledged  our  faith  on  the  day  you  were
crowned  : we  had  besides  so  great  an  affection  for  the  good  king  your  father,  that  nothing
shall  ever  make  us  desert  you.”  The  king  of  Castillo  remained  with  his  Castillians,  who
amounted  to  full  twenty  thousand  horse  all  covered  with  armour.  Sir  Reginald  de  Limousin
was  in  the  first  battalion,  that  post  being  his  right  as  marshal.


CHAPTER  XVI. TnE  BATTLE  OF  ALJUBAROTA,  IN  WHICH  THE  FRENCH  AND  BEARNOIS,  IN

THE  INTEREST  OF  CASTILLE,  ARE  DEFEATED  AND  SLAIN  BY  THE  PORTUGUESE,  FROM

NOT  BEING  PROPERLY  SUPPORTED  BY  THE  CASTILLIANS,  WHO  WERE  JEALOUS  OF  THEM.

THEY  AFTERWARDS  MEET  THE  SAME  FATE.

This  Saturday  had  been  a fine  clear  day,  but  the  sun  was  now  declining,  and  it  was  about
the  hour  of  vespers,  when  the  first  battalion  of  the  Castillian  army  came  before  Aljubarota,
where  the  king  of  Portugal  and  his  men  were  drawn  up  in  battle  array.  The  French  knights
amounted  to  two  thousand,  as  gallant  lances  as  could  be  seen.  The  moment  they  perceived
the  enemy  they  formed  in  close  order,  like  men  of  resolution  who  knew  their  business,  and
advanced  within  bow-shot.  This  attack  was  very  sharp ; for  those  who  were  eager  after
glory,  and  to  perform  feats  of  arms,  assaulted  the  place  which  the  English  had  fortified.
The  entrance  having  been  made  narrow  caused  a great  pressure  of  the  assailants  against  each
other,  and  much  mischief  was  done  by  the  English  archers,  who  shot  so  vigorously  and  quick
that  the  horses  were  larded,  as  it  were,  with  arrows,  and  fell  one  on  the  other.  The  few
English  men  at  arms  and  the  Lisboners  now  came  forward,  shouting  their  cry  of  “ Our
Lady  for  Lisbon  ! ” They  were  armed  with  well  steeled  Bordeaux  lances,  with  which  they
pierced  through  every  thing,  and  wounded  knights  and  squires.  The  Lord  de  Lingnach  of
Bearn  was  unhorsed,  his  banner  taken,  and  himself  made  prisoner,  and  numbers  of  his  men
slain  or  taken.  On  the  other  hand,  sir  John  de  Rue,  sir  Geoffry  Ricon,  sir  Geoffry  de
Partenay,  with  difficulty,  had  entered  the  fort  with  their  men  ; but  their  horses  were  so
wounded  by  the  archers,  they  fell  down  under  them.  The  men  at  arms  on  their  side  were  in
great  danger,  for  one  could  not  assist  the  other,  nor  could  they  gain  room  to  exert  themselves,


122


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


while  the  Portuguese,  seeing  the  ill  success  which  had  attended  the  first  assailants,  were  as
fresh  and  as  active  as  ever  for  the  combat.  The  king  of  Portugal  was  mounted  on  a tall
courser  decorated  all  over  with  the  arms  of  Portugal,  and  his  banner  set  up  before  him  : he
was  much  pleased  at  seeing  the  defeat  of  his  enemies,  and  to  encourage  his  men,  and  for  his
own  pleasure  he  laughed  aloud,  crying  out, — “ Go  on,  my  good  fellows  : defend  yourselves
well,  for,  if  there  be  no  more  than  what  I see,  we  shall  not  make  much  of  them  ; and  if  I
have  any  knowledge  of  war,  these  men  must  remain  with  us.”

Thus  did  the  king  of  Portugal  encourage  his  men,  who  fought  valiantly,  and,  having
inclosed  the  first  comers  within  their  fort,  they  were  putting  numbers  of  them  to  death.
True  it  is,  that  this  first  battalion  of  which  I am  speaking,  under  the  command  of  knights
from  France  and  Bearn,  expected  to  have  been  more  quickly  and  better  supported  by  the
Castillians  than  they  were  ; for  if  the  king  of  Castille  with  the  main  army,  which  consisted
at  least  of  twenty  thousand  men,  had  advanced  to  check  the  Portuguese  in  another  quarter,
the  day  must  have  been  theirs ; but  they  did  nothing,  for  which  they  suffered  much  loss  and
blame.  It  is  also  true,  that  the  battle  began  too  soon  ; but  they  did  so  to  acquire  greater
honour,  and  to  make  their  words  good  which  they  had  said  in  the  presence  of  the  king.  On
the  other  hand,  as  I have  heard,  the  Castillians  made  no  great  haste  to  advance,  for  the
French  were  not  in  good  favour  with  them,  and  they  had  said, — “ Let  them  begin  the  fight,
and  tire  themselves  : they  will  find  enough  to  do.  These  Frenchmen  are  too  great  boasters,
and  too  vainglorious,  and  our  king  has  not  any  perfect  confidence  but  in  them.  Since  he
wishes  that  they  should  have  the  honour  of  the  day,  it  shall  be  so ; for  we  will  have  it  our
own  way,  or  not  at  all.”  Conformably  to  this  resolution,  the  Spaniards  kept  in  a large  body,
twenty  thousand  at  least,  in  the  plain,  and  would  not  advance,  which  vexed  the  king  much  ;
but  he  could  not  help  it,  for  they  said,— “ My  lord,  it  is  all  over,  (though  none  had  returned
from  the  battle)  : these  French  knights  have  defeated  your  enemies  : the  honour  and  victory
of  the  day  are  theirs.”  “ God  grant  it  may  be  so  ! ” replied  the  king  ; “ but  let  us  advance
a little.”  They  advanced  about  a bow-shot,  and  halted  again.  It  was  truly  a fine  sight  to
view  their  appearance,  so  well  and  handsomely  were  they  armed  and  mounted.  During  all
this  time  the  French  were  fighting ; and  those  knights  and  squires  who  had  been  able  to
dismount  performed  many  gallant  deeds,  for,  when  their  lances  were  broken,  they  used  their
battle-axes,  and  with  them  gave  such  desperate  blows  on  the  helmets  of  all  who  opposed  them,
that  wounds,  if  not  death,  were  the  consequences.  Whoever  is  engaged  in  such-like  combats
as  this  at  Aljubarota  must  abide  the  event,  if  safety  be  not  sought  in  flight : but  in  flight
there  is  more  danger  than  in  the  heat  of  the  battle,  for,  when  any  one  flies  a pursuit  is  made,
and,  if  overtaken,  he  is  slain  : when  in  a battle,  if  the  chance  turn  unfortunate,  he  surrenders,
and  is  well  taken  care  of  as  a captive.

It  cannot  be  denied  but  that  the  knights  and  squires  from  France,  Brittany,  Burgundy  and
Bearn,  fought  valiantly  : they  were  overpowered  at  the  first  onset,  from  the  advice  the
English  had  given  to  fortify  the  place : besides,  in  this  attack,  the  Portuguese  were  superior
in  numbers.  They  therefore  were  at  their  mercy,  and  all  were  slain  or  taken,  for  few  escaped.
At  this  beginning  they  made  a thousand  knights  and  squires  prisoners,  which  gave  them
much  joy.  They  did  not  expect  any  further  battle  that  day,  and  entertained  their  prisoners
handsomely,  saying  to  them, — “ Do  not  be  cast  down : you  have  valiantly  fought  and  have
been  conquered  fairly  : we  will  behave  to  you  as  generously  as  we  should  wish  to  be  dealt
with  ourselves,  were  we  in  your  situation.  You  must  come  and  recruit  yourselves  in  the
good  city  of  Lisbon,  where  you  shall  have  every  comfort.”  Those  to  whom  such  speeches
were  made,  replied  by  returning  thanks.  Some  were  ransomed  on  the  spot,  and  others  said
they  would  wait  the  event,  for  they  did  not  imagine  things  would  remain  as  they  then  were,
but  that  the  king  of  Spain  would  come  with  the  main  army  and  deliver  them.

As  the  king  of  Castille  and  his  people  were  drawing  near  to  Aljubarota,  news  of  what  had
happened  speedily  came  to  them  from  the  runaways  (for  unfortunate  indeed  is  the  battle
whence  no  one  escapes),  who  cried  aloud  and  with  much  fear — “ Sir  king,  advance ; for  your
whole  van  battalion  are  either  slain  or  made  prisoners,  and  there  is  no  hope  of  deliverance
but  from  you.”  When  the  king  heard  this  he  was  much  enraged,  and  with  reason,  for  it  too
nearly  concerned  him  : he  instantly  gave  orders  to  march,  saying,  “ March,  banners,  in  the


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &rc.


123


name  of  God  and  St.  George  : let  us  hasten  to  the  rescue  of  our  friends  who  have  been
captured,  for  they  have  need  of  us.”  The  Castillians  began  to  quicken  their  march  in  close
order : it  was  now  past  vespers,  and  the  sun  was  setting,  when  some  of  them  said,  it  would
be  better  to  wait  for  the  morning,  as  it  would  soon  be  night,  when  they  would  be  unable  to
perform  any  good  deeds  of  arms.  But  the  king  was  determined  to  advance,  and  was  in  the
right ; for  he  said, — “ IIow  can  we  think  of  thus  deserting  our  friends,  who  are  fatigued  and
in  distress  ? whoever  gives  such  advice  neither  loves  me  nor  regards  my  honour.”  They
continued  therefore  to  advance,  with  trumpets  sounding  and  drums  beating,  and  making  a
great  noise  to  frighten  their  enemies.

I will  now  relate  how  the  king  of  Portugal  and  his  army  had  employed  themselves.  As
soon  as  they  had  defeated  the  van  division  and  taken  care  of  their  prisoners,  as  has  been  before
said,  they  did  not  confide  in  this  first  victory,  though  they  saw  not  any  appearance  of
reinforcements,  but  ordered  six  men  at  arms,  the  best  mounted,  to  reconnoitre,  and  bring
them  intelligence,  if  they  were  to  expect  another  battle.  Those  who  had  been  sent  on  this
expedition,  saw  and  heard  the  army  of  the  king  of  Castille,  which  was  at  least  twenty
thousand  men  on  horseback,  and  approaching  very  near  to  Aljubarota : they  returned  full
gallop  to  their  friends,  and  said  aloud — “ My  lords,  take  care  of  yourselves,  for  hitherto  we
have  done  nothing  : the  king  of  Castille  is  advancing  with  his  whole  army,  of  twenty
thousand  horse,  for  not  one  has  remained  behind.”  On  hearing  this  they  held  a short  council,
as  the  necessity  of  the  case  obliged  them,  and  came  to  a pitiless  resolution  ; for  it  was
commanded,  under  pain  of  death,  that  whoever  had  taken  a prisoner  should  instantly  kill
him,  and  that  neither  noble,  nor  rich,  nor  simple,  should  be  exempted.  Those  barons,  knights
and  squires,  who  had  been  captured,  were  in  a melancholy  situation,  for  entreaties  would
have  been  of  no  avail.  They  were  scattered  about  disarmed  in  different  parts,  considering
themselves  in  safety,  for  their  lives  at  least ; but  it  was  not  so,  which  was  a great  pity.
Each  man  killed  his  prisoner,  and  those  who  refused,  had  him  slain  before  their  eyes : for
the  Portuguese  and  English,  who  had  given  this  advice,  said, — “ It  was  better  to-kill  than  to
be  killed;  and  if  we  do  not  put  them  to  death  they  will  liberate  themselves  while  we  are
fighting  and  then  slay  us,  for  no  one  ought  to  put  confidence  in  his  prisoner.”  By  this  order
there  were  killed  the  lord  do  Lingnach,  sir  Peter  de  Salbiere,  the  lords  de  Lespre,  dc  Bearn,
des  Bordes,  sir  Bertrand  de  Barege,  the  lord  de  Moriane,  sir  Raymond  Donzack,  sir  John
Afolege,  sir  Manaut  de  Saremen,  sir  Peter  de  Salibieres,  sir  Stephen  de  Valentin,  sir  Raymond
de  Courasse,  sir  Peter  de  Hausane,  with  full  three  hundred  squires  from  Bearn.  Of
Frenchmen,  there  were  sir  John  de  Rue,  sir  Geoffry  Ricon,  sir  Geoffry  de  Partenay  and
many  more.  This  was  a very  unfortunate  event  to  the  prisoners,  as  wTell  as  to  the  Portuguese ;
for  they  put  to  death,  this  Saturday,  as  many  good  prisoners  as  would  have  been  worth  to
them,  taking  one  with  another,  four  hundred  thousand  francs.  When  they  had  thus  cleared
the  place,  by  putting  every  one  to  death,  (for  none  escaped  but  those  who  had  been  carried
to  the  village  of  Aljubarota,  where  the  baggage  and  stores  were)  they  again  formed
themselves  in  the  same  position  and  place  as  when  the  van  battalion  commenced  their
attack.

The  sun  was  now  setting,  when  the  king  of  Castille  advanced  in  puissant  array,  with  banners
displayed,  and  on  barded  horses,  shouting  out  “ Castille  ! ” and  entered  the  fortified  pass.
They  were  received  with  lances  and  battle-axes,  and  the  first  flight  of  arrows  grievously
wounded  their  horses,  threw  them  into  confusion,  and  many  were  wounded  or  slain.  The
king  of  Castille,  ignorant  of  the  unfortunate  fate  of  the  van,  imagining  they  were  only
prisoners,  was  anxious  to  deliver  them,  as  you  have  heard.  The  battle  raged  with  violence :
many  were  thrown  to  the  ground,  and  the  Portuguese  had  not  the  advantage  : they  were
forced  to  fight  most  valiantly,  or  they  would  have  been  overpowered  : they  owed  their  safety
to  the  impossibility  of  being  attacked  but  in  one  place.  The  king  of  Portugal  dismounted,
and,  taking  his  battle-axe,  placed  himself  at  the  pass,  where  he  performed  wonders,  knocking
down  three  or  four  of  the  stoutest  of  the  enemy,  insomuch  that  none  dared  to  approach
him.  I must  not  omit  to  notice  the  manner  in  which  the  Spaniards  generally  act  in  war.
It  is  true  they  make  a handsome  figure  on  horseback,  spur  off  to  advantage,  and  fight  well
at  the  first  onset ; but  as  soon  as  they  have  thrown  two  or  three  darts,  and  given  a stroke


124


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


with  their  spears,  without  disconcerting  the  enemy,  they  take  alarm,  turn  their  horses’
heads,  and  save  themselves  by  flight  as  well  as  they  can  : this  game  they  played  at  Aljuba-
rota ; for  they  found  their  enemies  obstinate,  and  as  fresh  as  if  they  had  not  had  an  engage-
ment, which  astonished  them  much  ; and  their  surprise  was  increased  by  not  hearing  anything
of  the  van  battalion.

The  Spaniards  had  a hard  afternoon’s  work,  and  the  fortune  of  war  was  greatly  against
them : all  who  through  courage,  or  a wish  to  distinguish  themselves,  had  entered  the  fort  of
the  Lisboners,  were  cut  to  pieces  ; for  they  would  not  ransom  any,  whether  poor  or  noble,
(such  had  been  their  orders)  nor  encumber  themselves  with  prisoners.  Yery  many  of  the
nobles  of  Castille  were  there  slain  : among  the  greatest  barons  who  suffered  were  sir
Dangommes  Neudrich,  sir  Diego  Parsament,  don  Pedro  de  Rourmont,  sir  Marc  de  Yersaux,
the  grand  master  of  Calatrava,  and  his  brother,  who  was  that  day  created  a knight,  and
called  sir  Diego  Moro,  sir  Peter  Goussart  de  Modesque,  don  Pedro  Goussart  de  Seville,  don
John  Rodrigo  de  la  Rousselle,  with  upwards  of  sixty  barons  and  knights  of  Spain.  There
were  not  even  at  the  battle  of  Najara,  when  the  prince  of  Wales  defeated  the  king,  don
Henry,  so  many  nobles  of  Castille  killed,  as  at  this  battle  of  Aljubarota,  which  was  on  a
Saturday,  the  feast  of  our  Lady,  in  August  1385.


CHAPTER  XVII.- — THE  KING  OP  CASTILLE,  AFTER  HIS  DEFEAT  AT  ALJUBAROTA,  RETREATS
TO  SANTAREM. — THE  KING  OF  PORTUGAL  RETURNS  TO  LISBON. — A TRUCE  IS  CONCLUDED
BETWEEN  THEM.

WnEN  king  Ilenry  perceived  that  his  army  was  defeated,  the  van  battalion  having  been
totally  destroyed,  that  sir  Reginald  de  Limousin,  his  marshal,  was  slain,  and  that  the  flower
of  his  own  chivalry,  as  well  as  that  of  France,  which  had  come  so  willingly  to  serve  him,
were  dead  or  disabled,  he  was  mightily  cast  down,  and  knew  not  how  to  act.  He  saw  his
men  flying  in  all  directions,  and  heard  them  crying  to  him, — “ My  lord,  march  away : it  is
time  for  you  : the  battle  is  over  : you  alone  cannot  conquer  your  enemies,  nor  repair  your
losses:  your  men  are  running  away  on  all  sides,  for  every  one  now  looks  to  himself : you
know,  also,  it  will  be  prudent,  at  this  moment,  to  follow  their  example,  and  if  fortune  is
now  against  you,  another  time  she  may  be  more  favourable.”  The  king  of  Castille  followed
this  advice : he  changed  his  horse,  and  mounted  a fresh  one  that  had  not  been  rode  that
day,  and  which  had  great  speed.  The  king  stuck  spurs  into  him,  turned  his  back  to  his
enemies,  and  made  for  Santarem,  whither  all  the  runaways,  who  wished  to  save  themselves,
followed.

The  king  of  Castille  had  that  day  ordered  a knight  of  his  household,  called  sir  Peter
Harem,  to  bear  his  helmet.  This  helmet  was  encircled  with  gold,  and  might  be  worth
twenty  thousand  francs.  The  king  intended  wearing  it  at  the  battle,  and  had  so  ordered  it
the  morning  he  marched  from  Santarem,  but  did  not  do  so  ; for,  when  the  army  was  forming,
there  was  so  great  a crowd  round  the  king,  the  knight  could  not  come  near,  and,  not  hearing
himself  called,  he  ceased  to  attempt  it.  Shortly  afterwards,  he  heard  that  the  Portuguese
had  gained  the  day,  and  saw  his  own  army  flying  in  all  directions : fearful  of  losing  so  rich
a jewel  as  the  king’s  helmet,  that  was  valued  so  highly,  he  put  it  on  his  own  head,  not  to
lose  it  nor  have  it  stolen  from  him  by  meeting  the  enemy,  and  fled  : he  did  not  follow  the
road  to  Santarem,  but  took  another,  which  led  to  the  town  of  Yille  Arpcnt.  Thus  did  they
disperse,  some  one  way,  some  another,  like  to  people  thunderstruck  and  discomfited  ; but
the  greater  part  made  for  Santarem,  where  the  king  arrived  in  the  evening,  confounded  and
cast  down.

After  the  defeat  of  the  Spaniards  at  Aljubarota,  the  Portuguese  and  Lisboners  kept  the
field  of  battle  : the  slaughter  was  great,  and  would  have  been  more  if  they  had  pursued  the
enemy  ; for  the  English  seeing  the  enemy  turn  their  backs,  called  aloud  to  the  king  of
Portugal, — “Sir  king,  let  us  mount  our  horses,  and  set  out  on  the  pursuit,  and  all  these
runaways  shall  be  dead  men.” — “ I will  not,”  replied  the  king : “ what  we  have  done  ought
to  satisfy  us.  Our  men  are  fatigued,  and  have  fought  hard  this  evening  : it  is  now  so  dark


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &e.


125


vve  shall  not  know  whither  wo  arc  going,  nor  how  many  are  flying.  Their  army  was  very
numerous,  and  perhaps  this  may  be  a stratagem  to  draw  us  out  of  our  fort  and  the  more
easily  conquer  us.  We  will  this  day  guard  the  dead,  and  to-morrow  call  a council  and
consider  how  we  shall  next  act.”  “ By  my  faith,”  replied  Hartsel,  an  Englishman,  “ the
dead  arc  easily  guarded : they  will  do  us  no  harm,  nor  shall  we  have  any  profit  from  them,
for  we  have  slain  our  rich  prisoners.  We  are  strangers,  come  from  a distance  to  serve  you,
and  would  willingly  gain  something  from  these  calves  that  are  flying  without  wings,  and
who  drive  their  banners  before  them.”  “ Fair  brother,”  said  the  king,  “ all  covet,  all  lose  :
it  is  much  butter  that  we  remain  on  our  guard,  since  the  honour  and  victory  are  ours,
through  God’s  grace,  than  run  any  risk  when  there  is  no  necessity  for  it.  Thanks  to  God,
we  have  enough  to  make  you  all  rich.”  Nothing  more  was  said  on  the  subject.  Thus,  as  I
have  related,  happened  the  battle  of  Aljubarota,  which  the  king  of  Portugal  completely
gained.  There  were  slain  about  five  hundred  knights,  and  full  as  many,  if  not  more,  squires,
which  was  a great  pity,  and  six  or  seven  thousand  other  men : God  have  mercy  on  their
poor  souls !

The  king  of  Portugal  and  his  men  remained  all  night  under  arms,  at  their  post  without
stirring,  until  about  six  o’clock  on  Sunday  morning.  They  ate  a morsel  standing  or  sitting,
and  quaffed  a cup  or  so  of  wine,  which  was  brought  to  them  from  the  village  of  Aljubarota.
At  sun-rise,  the  king  of  Portugal  ordered  twelve  knights  to  mount  their  horses,  and  scour
the  country,  to  sec  if  there  were  any  bodies  of  men  assembled  together.  When  they  had
rode  far  and  near,  on  their  return,  they  said  they  had  seen  nothing  but  dead  men.  “ Of
them  we  have  no  fear,”  said  the  king,  who  gave  orders  for  the  army  to  march  to  the  village
of  Aljubarota,  where  they  were  to  halt  the  rest  of  the  day  and  that  night  until  Monday
morning.  Upon  this  they  decamped,  leaving  the  church  of  Aljubarota,  and  quartered  them-
selves in  the  village  the  whole  of  Sunday  and  the  following  night.

On  the  Monday  morning,  it  was  ordered  in  council  that  they  should  return  to  Lisbon,  and
the  trumpets  sounded  to  decamp.  They  then  formed  themselves  in  handsome  array,  and
took  the  road  to  Lisbon.  On  the  Tuesday,  the  king  entered  the  city,  amid  an  immense
concourse  of  people,  with  great  glory  and  triumph,  and  was  conducted  by  a numerous
company  of  minstrels,  and  a long  procession  of  churchmen,  who  had  come  out  to  meet  him
as  far  as  the  palace.  As  he  rode  through  the  streets,  all  the  people,  and  even  children,  paid
him  the  greatest  respect  and  reverence,  shouting  out,  “ Long  live  the  noble  king  of  Portugal!
to  whom  God  has  been  gracious  in  giving  victory  over  the  potent  king  of  Castille,  the  gain
of  the  field  and  discomfiture  of  his  enemies.”  By  this  fortunate  victory  which  the  king  of
Portugal  had  over  don  John  of  Castille,  as  I have  just  related,  he  won  so  much  the
affections  of  all  Portugal,  that  those,  who  before  this  battle  had  dissembled  their  sentiments,
now  came  to  Lisbon,  took  the  oaths,  and  paid  their  homage  to  him,  saying,  he  was  worthy
to  live,  and  God  must  love  him  when  he  gave  him  the  victory  over  a king  more  powerful
than  himself,  and  that  he  deserved  to  wear  a crown.  Thus  did  the  king  acquire  the  love  of
his  subjects,  more  especially  of  the  whole  commonalty  of  the  kingdom.

We  will  now  say  something  of  the  king  of  Castille,  who,  after  his  defeat,  retreated  to
Santarcm,  regretting  and  bewailing  the  loss  of  his  men,  and  cursing  the  hard  fate  he  had  had,
when  such  numbers  of  noble  knights  of  his  kingdom,  as  well  as  those  from  France,  lay  dead
on  the  field.  At  the  time  he  entered  the  town  of  Santarem,  he  knew  not  the  greatness  of
his  loss,  but  was  made  acquainted  with  it  on  the  Sunday,  when  he  sent  his  heralds  to
examine  the  field  of  battle,  having  imagined  the  greater  part  of  those  barons  and  knights
whom  they  found  lying  dead  had  been  prisoners  to  the  Portuguese.  He  was  so  much
enraged  when  the  heralds  returned,  on  learning  the  names  of  those  who  had  fallen  and  the
certainty  of  their  deaths,  that  he  could  not  be  appeased  or  comforted.  He  declared  with  an
oath,  he  should  never  again  taste  joy,  for  the  loss  of  so  many  noble  knights,  who  had
perished  through  his  fault.

At  the  end  of  the  three  days  the  king  had  passed  at  Santarem,  his  knight,  sir  Martin
Harene*,  came  into  the  town,  bringing  with  him  his  majesty’s  helmet,  which  was  estimated
at  twenty  thousand  francs,  on  account  of  the  rich  jewels  with  which  it  was  ornamented.

* His  name  is  not  mentioned  in  the  printed  copies  until  now,,  but  he  is  called  in  my  MSS.  Peter  Harem.


126


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


Much  had  been  said  on  this  subject  in  the  king’s  household,  and  some  had  declared  he  had
fraudulently  carried  it  off,  and  would  never  more  return.  When  the  knight  came  before
the  kin^,  he  cast  himself  on  his  knees,  and  made  such  fair  excuses  that  the  king  and  his
council  held  him  blameless.  Things  remained  in  this  state,  and  the  king  of  Castille
returned  to  Burgos  the  twenty-fifth  day  after  his  arrival  at  Santarem,  having  dismissed  his
whole  army.  Negociations  were  now  entered  on  between  the  kings  of  Castille  and  Portugal,
and  a truce  was  made  between  them  and  their  allies,  as  well  on  land  as  at  sea,  from
Michaelmas  until  the  first  day  of  May.  The  bodies  of  the  barons  and  knights  who  had
been  slain  at  Aljubarota,  were  buried  in  that  and  in  the  neighbouring  churches  : the  bones  of
many  were  carried  by  their  servants  to  their  own  countries.


CHAPTER  XVIII. TnE  COUNT  DE  FOIX  IS  RAPIDLY,  AND  IN  A SECRET  MANNER,  INFORMED

OF  WIIAT  HAD  HAPPENED  AT  ALJUBAROTA. — FROISSART,  IN  CONSEQUENCE  OF  THIS,
RELATES  A STORY  WHICH  HAD  BEEN  TOLD  HIM  OF  A FAMILIAR  SPIRIT,  CALLED  ORTIION,
WHO  SERVED  THE  LORD  DE  CORASSE  IN  THE  LIKE  MANNER.

A fact  I am  about  to  relate  will  astonish  my  readers,  if  they  consider  and  pay  attention
to  it.  It  was  told  me  in  the  hotel  of  the  count  de  Foix  at  Orthes,  and  by  the  same  person
who  had  informed  me  of  the  battle  of  Aljubarota,  and  the  event  of  that  day.  I will  there-
fore narrate  it ; for,  ever  since  the  squire  related  it  to  me,  I have  much  thought  on  it,  and
shall  do  so  as  long  as  I live.  It  is  a fact,  as  the  squire  assured  me,  that  the  count  de  Foix
was  informed,  the  day  after  the  battle  of  Aljubarota,  of  everything  that  had  there  happened,
the  same  as  I have  related  it,  which  surprised  me  exceedingly  how  this  could  possibly  have  been.

The  whole  days  of  Sunday,  Monday,  and  the  following  Tuesday,  he  was  in  his  castle  of
Orthes,  and  made  such  poor  and  melancholy  meals  that  not  one  word  could  be  drawn  from
him  ; nor  would  he,  during  that  time,  quit  his  chamber,  nor  speak  to  knight  or  squire,
however  nearly  they  were  related  by  blood,  unless  he  had  sent  for  him  ; and  it  also  happened,
that  he  even  sent  for  some,  to  whom  he  never  opened  his  lips  during  these  three  days.  On
the  Tuesday,  in  the  evening,  he  called  his  brother  Arnold  William,  and  said  to  him  in  a low
voice, — “ Our  people  have  had  a desperate  battle,  which  has  vexed  me  very  much,  for  it  has
happened  to  them  just  as  I had  foretold  at  their  departure.”  Arnold  William,  who  was  a
wise  man  and  a prudent  knight,  well  acquainted  with  the  temper  of  his  brother,  was  silent.
The  count,  anxious  to  cheer  up  his  courage,  for  he  had  too  long  nurtured  in  his  breast  this  sad
news,  added,  “ By  God,  sir  Arnold,  it  is  just  as  I have  told  you  ; and  very  soon  we  shall  have
news  of  it.  Never  has  the  country  of  Bearn  suffered  so  severely  for  these  hundred  years  past,
as  it  has  now  at  this  battle  in  Portugal.”  Many  knights  and  squires  who  were  present,  and
heard  the  words  of  the  count,  were  afraid  to  speak,  but  commented  within  themselves  on  them.

Within  ten  days,  the  truth  was  known  from  those  who  had  been  in  the  battle,  and  they
first  told  the  count,  and  all  who  wished  to  hear  them,  everything  relative  to  their  disputes
with  the  Castillians  and  the  event  of  the  battle  at  Aljubarota.  This  renewed  the  grief  of
the  count,  and  of  those  persons  belonging  to  the  country  who  had  lost  brothers,  relations,
children,  or  friends.  “Holy  Mary!”  said  I to  the  squire,  “how  was  it  possible  for  the
count  to  know,  or  even  to  guess  at  it,  on  the  morrow  after  it  had  happened?”  “By  my
faith,”  replied  he,  “ he  knew  it  well  enough,  as  it  appeared  afterwards.”  “ Is  he  a wizard,
then,”  said  I,  “ or  has  he  messengers  who  ride  on  the  winds  ? for  he  must  have  some  secret
art.”  Upon  this,  the  squire  began  to  laugh,  and  said,  “ In  truth,  he  must  have  known  it
by  means  of  necromancy.  We  indeed  are  ignorant  in  this  country  how  he  manages,  but  we
have  our  suspicions.”  Upon  this,  I said  to  the  squire,  “ Now  do  have  the  goodness  to  tell
me  what  your  suspicions  are,  and  I shall  be  very  much  obliged  to  you.  If  it  be  necessary
to  keep  it  secret,  I will  be  silent,  and  never  open  my  mouth  on  the  subject  as  long  as  I live
or  remain  in  this  country.”  “ I must  entreat  that  of  you,”  replied  the  squire,  “ for  I would
not  have  it  known  that  I had  told  it  to  you  ; for  we  only  speak  of  it  secretly  when  among
our  friends.”  Upon  this,  he  drew  me  aside  to  a corner  of  the  vault  of  the  chapel  of  Orthes,
and  thus  began  his  tale  :


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c


127


“ About  twenty  years  ago,  tliere  lived  a baron  in  this  country,  called  Raymond,  lord  of
Corasse.  You  must  understand,  that  Corasse  is  a town  seven  leagues  distant  from  Orthes.
This  lord  of  Corasse  bad  a suit  at  Avignon,  before  the  pope,  for  the  tythes  of  bis  church,
against  a priest  of  Catalonia  : this  priest  was  very  learned  who  claimed  these  tythes,  which
were  worth  a hundred  florins  a year.  He  proved  his  right  so  clearly  that  pope  Urban  V.  in
full  consistory,  gave  a definitive  judgment  in  favour  of  tbe  priest,  condemning  the  knight  to
costs  of  suit.  The  priest  obtained  a copy  of  this  sentence,  and  hastened  to  Bearn,  where
showing  it,  and  his  bulls  from  the  pope,  he  obtained  possession  of  the  tythes.  The  lord  do
Corasse,  being  doubtful  of  the  priest  and  of  his  designs,  went  to  him  and  said, — ‘ Master
Peter,  or  master  Martin,  (accoi’ding  as  he  was  called)  do  you  think  I will  lose  my  inheritance
through  the  papers  you  have  brought  hither  ? I do  not  believe  you  will  be  bold  enough  to
collect  anything  belonging  to  me ; for  if  you  do,  your  life  shall  pay  for  it.  Go  elsewhere
and  seek  for  benefices,  for  you  shall  not  have  anything  from  my  estates ; and,  once  for  all,  I
forbid  you  to  take  any  tythes.’  The  clerk  was  fearful  of  the  knight,  as  he  knew  him  to  be
a cruel  man,  and  dared  not  persevere,  but  resolved  to  return  to  Avignon,  which  he  did.
Before  ho  set  out,  he  came  again  to  the  lord  de  Corasse,  and  said  to  him, — ‘ By  force,  and
not  by  justice,  you  deprive  me  of  the  rights  of  my  church,  for  which,  in  conscience,  you
behave  exceedingly  ill.  I am  not  so  powerful  in  this  country  as  you  are ; but  know,  that
as  soon  as  I possibly  can,  I will  send  you  a champion  that  you  will  be  more  afraid  of  than
you  have  hitherto  been  of  me.’  The  lord  de  Corasse,  not  alarmed  at  his  menaces,  replied —
‘ Go,  in  God’s  name  go  : do  what  thou  canst : I fear  thee  neither  dead  nor  alive  ; and  for
thy  speeches  I will  not  lose  my  property.’  The  clerk  then  departed,  and  went  I know  not
whether  to  Catalonia  or  to  Avignon,  but  did  not  forget  what  he  had  told  the  lord  de  Corasse
on  leaving  him  ; for,  about  three  months  after,  when  the  knight  least  thought  of  it,  and  was
sleeping  in  his  bed  with  his  lady,  in  his  castle  of  Corasse,  there  came  invisible  messengers,
who  made  such  a noise,  knocking  about  everything  they  met  with  in  the  castle,  as  if  they
were  determined  to  destroy  all  within  it ; and  they  gave  such  loud  raps  at  the  door  of  the
chamber  of  the  knight,  that  the  lady  was  exceedingly  frightened.  The  knight  heard  it  all,
but  did  not  say  a word,  as  he  would  not  have  it  appear  that  he  was  alarmed,  for  he  was  a
man  of  sufficient  courage  for  any  adventure.  These  noises  and  tumults  continued,  in  different
parts  of  the  castle,  for  a considerable  time,  and  then  ceased.  On  the  morrow,  all  the  servants
of  the  household  assembled,  and  went  to  their  lord,  and  said, — ‘ My  lord,  did  you  not  hear
what  we  all  heard  this  night  ?’  The  lord  de  Corasse  dissembled,  and  replied,  ‘ What  is  it
you  have  heard  ?’  They  then  related  to  him  all  the  noises  and  rioting  they  had  heard,  and
that  the  plates  in  the  kitchen  had  been  broken.  He  began  to  laugh,  and  said,  ‘ it  was
nothing : that  they  had  dreamed  it,  or  that  it  had  been  the  wind.’  ‘ In  the  name  of  God,’
added  the  lady,  ‘ I well  heard  it.’

“ On  the  following  night,  the  noises  and  rioting  were  renewed,  but  much  louder  than
before : and  there  were  such  blows  struck  against  the  door  and  windows  of  the  chamber  of
the  knight,  that  it  seemed  they  would  break  them  down.  The  knight  coidd  no  longer
desist  from  leaping  out  of  his  bed,  and  calling  out,  ‘ Who  is  it  that  at  this  hour  thus  knocks
at  my  chamber  door  ? ’ He  was  instantly  answered,  ‘ It  is  I.’  ‘ And  who  sends  thee

hither?’  asked  the  knight.  ‘The  clerk  of  Catalonia,  whom  thou  hast  much  wronged:  for
thou  hast  deprived  him  of  the  rights  of  his  benefice : I will,  therefore,  never  leave  thee
quiet,  until  thou  bast  rendered  him  a just  account,  with  which  he  shall  be  contented.’

‘ What  art  thou  called,’  said  the  knight,  ‘ who  art  so  good  a messenger  ? ’ ‘ My  name  is

Ortlion.’  ‘ Ortlion,’  said  the  knight,  ‘ serving  a clerk  will  not  be  of  much  advantage  to
thee ; for,  if  thou  believest  him,  he  will  give  thee  great  trouble  : I beg  thou  wilt  therefore
leave  him  and  serve  me,  and  I shall  think  myself  obliged  to  thee.’  Ortlion  was  ready  with
his  answer,  for  he  had  taken  a liking  to  the  knight,  and  said,  ‘ Do  you  wish  it  ? ’ ‘ Yes,’

replied  the  knight ; ‘ but  no  harm  must  be  done  to  any  one  within  these  walls.’  ‘ Oh  no,’
answered  Ortlion : ‘ I have  no  power  to  do  ill  to  any  one,  only  to  awaken  thee  and  disturb
thy  rest,  or  that  of  other  persons.’  ‘ Do  what  I tell  thee,’  added  the  knight : ‘ we  shall  well
agree ; and  leave  this  wicked  priest,  for  he  is  a worthless  fellow,  and  serve  me.’  ‘ Well,’
replied  Ortlion,  ‘ since  thou  wilt  have  it  so,  I consent.’


128


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


“ Orthon  took  such  an  affection  to  the  lord  de  Corasse  that  he  came  often  to  see  him  in
the  night-time ; and,  when  he  found  him  sleeping,  he  pulled  his  pillow  from  under  his  head,
or  made  great  noises  at  the  door  or  windows  ; so  that,  when  the  knight  was  awakened,  he
said,  ‘ Orthon,  let  me  sleep.’  ‘ I will  not,’  replied  he,  ‘ until  I have  told  thee  some  news.’
The  knight’s  lady  was  so  much  frightened,  the  hairs  of  her  head  stood  on  end,  and  she  hid
herself  under  the  bed-clothes.  ‘ Well,’  said  the  knight,  ‘ and  what  news  hast  thou  brought
me  V Orthon  replied,  ‘ I am  come  from  England,  Hungary,  or  some  other  place,  which  I
left  yesterday,  and  such  and  such  things  have  happened.’  Thus  did  the  lord  de  Corasse
know  by  means  of  Orthon  all  things  that  were  passing  in  different  parts  of  the  world  ; and
this  connexion  continued  for  five  years  ; but  he  could  not  keep  it  to  himself,  and  discovered
it  to  the  count  de  Foix,  in  the  manner  I will  tell  you.  The  first  year,  the  lord  de  Corasse
came  to  the  count  de  Foix  at  Orthes,  or  elsewhere,  and  told  him,  ‘ My  lord,  such  an  event
has  happened  in  England,  in  Scotland,  Germany,  or  some  other  country  ; and  the  count  de
Foix,  who  found  all  this  intelligence  prove  true,  marvelled  greatly  how  he  could  have
acquired  such  early  information,  and  entreated  him  so  earnestly,  that  the  lord  de  Corasse
told  him  the  means  by  which  he  had  acquired  his  intelligence,  and  the  manner  of  its  com-
munication. When  the  count  de  Foix  heard  this,  he  was  much  pleased,  and  said,  ‘ Lord  de
Corasse,  nourish  the  love  of  your  intelligencer : I wish  I had  such  a messenger : he  costs
you  nothing,  and  you  are  truly  informed  of  everything  that  passes  in  the  world.’  ‘ My
loi'd,’  replied  the  knight,  ‘ I will  do  so.’  The  lord  de  Corasse  was  served  by  Orthon  for  a
long  time.  I am  ignorant  if  Orthon  had  more  than  one  master ; but  two  or  three  times
every  week  he  visited  the  knight,  and  told  him  all  the  news  of  the  countries  he  had  frequented,
which  he  wrote  immediately  to  the  count  de  Foix,  who  was  much  delighted  therewith,  as
there  is  not  a lord  in  the  world  more  eager  after  news  from  foreign  parts  than  he  is.  Once,
when  the  lord  de  Corasse  was  in  conversation  on  this  subject  with  the  count  de  Foix,  the
count  said,  ‘Lord  de  Corasse,  have  you  never  yet  seen  your  messenger?’  ‘No,  by  my
faith,  never  ; nor  have  I ever  pressed  him  on  this  matter.’  ‘ I wonder  at  that,’  replied  the
count ; ‘ for  had  he  been  so  much  attached  to  me,  I should  have  begged  of  him  to  have
shown  himself  in  his  own  proper  form  ; and  I intreat  you  will  do  so,  that  you  may  tell  how
he  is  made,  and  what  he  is  like.  You  have  said,  that  he  speaks  Gascon  as  well  as  you  or  I
do.’  ‘ By  my  faith,’  said  the  lord  de  Corasse,  ‘ he  converses  just  as  well  and  as  properly  ;
and,  since  you  request  it,  I will  do  all  I can  to  see  him.’

“ It  fell  out,  when  the  lord  de  Corasse,  as  usual,  was  in  bed  with  his  lady  (who  was  now
accustomed  to  hear  Orthon  without  being  frightened),  Orthon  arrived,  and  shook  the  pillow
of  the  knight,  who  was  asleep.  On  waking,  he  asked  who  was  there  : Orthon  replied,  ‘ It
is  I.’  ‘ And  where  dost  thou  come  from  ?’  ‘I  come  from  Prague  in  Bohemia.’  ‘ How  far

is  it  hence?’  ‘ Sixty  days’  journey,’  replied  Orthon.  ‘And  hast  thou  returned  thence  in
so  short  a time  ?’  ‘ Yes,  as  may  God  help  me  : I travel  as  fast  as  the  wind,  or  faster.’

‘What,  hast  thou  got  wings?’  ‘ Oh,  no.’  ‘ How,  then  canst  thou  fly  so  fast?’  ‘ Thai
is  no  business  of  yours.’  ‘ No  ! ’ said  the  knight.  ‘ I should  like  exceedingly  to  see  what
form  thou  hast,  and  how  thou  art  made.’  ‘ That  does  not  concern  you  to  know,’  replied
Orthon  ; ‘ be  satisfied  that  you  hear  me,  and  that  I bring  you  intelligence  you  may  depend
on.’  ‘ By  God,’  said  the  lord  de  Corasse,  ‘ I should  love  thee  better  if  I had  seen  thee.’
‘ Well,’  replied  Orthon,  ‘ since  you  have  such  a desire,  the  first  thing  you  shall  see  to-morrow
morning,  in  quitting  your  bed,  shall  be  myself.’  ‘ I am  satisfied,’  said  the  knight ; ‘ you
may  now  depart : I give  thee  thy  liberty  for  this  night.’

“ When  morning  came,  the  knight  arose,  but  his  lady  was  so  much  frightened  she  pre-
tended to  be  sick,  and  said  she  would  not  leave  her  bed  the  whole  day.  The  lord  de  Corasse
willed  it  otherwise.  ‘ Sir,’  said  she,  ‘ if  I do  get  up,  I shall  see  Orthon ; and,  if  it  please  God,
I would  neither  see  nor  meet  him.’  ‘ Well,’  replied  the  knight,  ‘ I am  determined  to  see
him and,  leaping  out  of  his  bed,  he  seated  himself  on  the  bedstead,  thinking  lie  should
see  Orthon  in  his  own  shape ; but  he  saw  nothing  that  could  induce  him  to  say  he  had
seen  him.  When  the  ensuing  night  arrived,  and  the  lord  de  Corasse  was  in  bed,  Orthon
came  and  began  to  talk  in  his  usual  manner.  ‘ Go,’  said  the  knight ; ‘ thou  art  a liar  : thou
oughtest  to  have  shown  thyself  to  me  this  morning,  and  hast  not  done  so.’  ‘ No!’  replied


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


129


Ortlion  ; ‘ blit  I have.’  ‘ I say,  no.’  ‘ Aiul  did  you  see  nothing  at  all  when  you  leaped  out
of  bed  ? ’ The  lord  de  Corasse  was  silent,  and,  having  considered  awhile,  said,  ‘ Yes  ; when
sitting  on  my  bedside,  and  thinking  of  thee,  I saw  two  straws  which  were  turning  and
playing  together  on  the  floor.’  ‘ That  was  myself,’  replied  Ortlion,  ‘ for  I had  taken  that
form.’  The  lord  de  Corasse  said,  ‘ That  will  not  satisfy  me ; I beg  of  thee  to  assume  some
other  shape,  so  that  I may  see  thee  and  know  thee.’  Ortlion  answered,  ‘ You  ask  so  much
that  you  will  ruin  me  and  force  me  away  from  you,  for  your  requests  are  too  great.’  ‘ You
shall  not  quit  me,’  said  the  lord  de  Corasse ; ‘ if  I had  once  seen  thee,  I should  not  again
wish  it.’  ‘ Well,’  replied  Ortlion,  ‘ you  shall  see  me  to-morrow,  if  you  pay  attention  to  the
first  thing  you  observe  when  you  leave  your  chamber.’  ‘ I am  contented,’  said  the  knight ;
‘ now  go  thy  ways,  for  I want  to  sleep.’  Ortlion  departed.  On  the  morrow,  about  the
hour  of  eight,  the  knight  had  risen  and  was  dressed ; on  leaving  his  apartment,  he  went  to
a window  which  looked  into  tho  court  of  the  castle.  Casting  his  eyes  about,  the  first  thing
he  observed  was  an  immensely  large  sow ; but  she  was  so  poor,  she  seemed  only  skin  and
bone,  with  long  hanging  ears  all  spotted,  and  a sharp-pointed  lean  snout.  The  lord  de
Corasse  was  disgusted  at  such  a sight,  and,  calling  to  his  servants,  said,  ‘ Let  the  dogs  loose
quickly,  for  I will  have  that  sow  killed  and  devoured.’  The  servants  hastened  to  open  the
kennel,  and  to  set  the  hounds  on  the  sow,  who  uttered  a loud  cry  and  looked  up  at  the  lord
de  Corasse,  leaning  on  the  balcony  of  bis  window,  and  was  never  seen  afterwards ; for  she
vanished,  and  no  one  ever  knew  what  became  of  ber.

“ The  knight  returned  quite  pensive  to  his  chamber,  for  he  then  recollected  what  Ortlion
had  told  him,  and  said,  ‘ I believe  I have  seen  my  messenger  Ortlion,  and  repent  having  set
my  hounds  on  him,  for  perhaps  I may  never  see  him  more  : he  frequently  told  me,  that  if
I ever  angered  him,  I should  lose  him.’  lie  kept  his  word,  for  never  did  he  return  to  the
hotel  de  Corasse,  and  the  knight  died  the  following  year.  Thus  have  I related  to  you  the
history  of  Ortlion,  and  how  for  a time  he  supplied  the  lord  de  Corasse  with  intelligence."
“ That  is  true,”  said  I to  the  squire  ; “ but  with  what  intent  have  you  told  it  ? Does  the
count  de  Foix  make  use  of  such  a messenger  ? ” “ In  good  truth,  that  is  the  real  opinion  of

several  of  the  inhabitants  of  Bearn  ; for  there  is  nothing  done  in  this  country  or  elsewhere
but  what  he  instantly  knows,  when  he  sets  his  heart  on  it,  even  when  it  is  the  least  suspected.
Thus  it  was  respecting  the  intelligence  he  told  us  of  our  good  knights  and  squires,  who  had
fallen  in  Portugal.  The  reputation  and  belief  of  his  possessing  this  knowledge  is  of  great
service  to  him,  for  there  would  not  be  lost  a gold  or  silver  spoon,  or  anything  of  less  value,
in  this  country,  without  his  instantly  knowing  of  it.”  I then  took  my  leave  of  the  squire,
and  joined  other  company,  with  whom  I chatted  and  amused  myself.  However,  I kept  in
my  memory  every  particular  of  the  tale  he  had  told  me,  as  is  now  apparent.  I will  leave
for  a while  the  affairs  of  Spain  and  Portugal,  and  speak  of  those  of  Brittany,  Languedoc,
and  France.


CHAPTER  XIX. SIEGE  IS  LAID  TO  BREST. ST.  FORGET  AND  SEVERAL  OTHER  ENGLISH

GARRISONS  IN  THE  ENVIRONS  OF  TOULOUSE  ARE  RECOVERED  BY  THE  FRENCH.

During  the  time  these  matters  were  passing  in  Castille  and  in  distant  countries,  sir  Oliver
de  Clisson,  constable  of  France,  ordered  a block-house  to  be  built  before  the  castle  of  Brest
in  Brittany,  which  the  English  held,  and  had  done  so  for  a considerable  time,  and  would  not
quit  it,  neither  for  the  king  of  France  nor  for  the  duke  of  Brittany,  to  whom  it  belonged.
The  dukes  of  Berry  and  Burgundy,  and  the  king’s  council,  had  frequently  written  on  this
subject  to  the  duke  of  Brittany  ; for  at  that  time,  as  you  know,  the  young  king  of  France
was  under  the  government  of  his  uncles.  They  had  entreated  the  duke  of  Brittany  to
exert  himself  to  conquer  the  castle  of  Brest,  which  being  held  by  the  English  was  much  to
his  discredit.  The  duke,  in  compliance  with  their  entreaties,  as  well  as  knowing  himself  to
be  the  lord  of  Brest,  had  once  besieged  it,  but  had  not  pushed  it  forward  : when  he  marched
away,  he  said  nothing  could  be  done  : at  which  several  knights  and  squires  of  Brittany
murmured  behind  his  back,  saying  that  he  feigned  and  dissembled,  as  those  who  held  it
VOL.  II.  K


130


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


were  hi:?  great  friends,  and  that  he  would  not  on  any  account  wish  it  even  in  his  own
possession,  nor  in  that  of  the  king  of  France  ; for,  if  the  French  had  it,  he  would  not  be  the
master,  but  he  much  weakened  by  it ; and,  as  long  as  the  English  held  it,  the  French  would
not  dare  to  anger  him.

The  constable  of  France,  having  considered  the  whole  business,  thought  that,  if  the  duke
of  Brittany  were  indifferent  as  to  the  recovering  the  town  and  castle  of  Brest  from  the
hands  of  the  enemies  of  France,  it  would  be  dishonourable  to  him  and  to  the  nobles  of
Brittany.  He  therefore  ordered  it  to  be  besieged,  and  sent  thither  great  numbers  of  knights
and  squires,  under  the  command  of  the  lord  de  Malestroit,  the  viscount  de  la  Belliere,  Mor-
fonace,  and  the  lord  de  Rochederrien.  These  four  valiant  men  laid  their  siege  as  near  to
Brest  as  was  possible,  and  erected  a large  and  fair  blockhouse  of  wood,  surrounding  also  the
place  with  palisadoes  and  walls,  so  that  the  garrison  was  shut  up  from  all  communication  but
by  sea : on  that  side  it  was  not  possible  for  them  to  surround  them.  There  were  frequent
skirmishes  before  Brest ; for  those  companions  who  were  fond  of  arms  advanced  gaily  to  the
barriers,  where  they  called  out  the  garrison  and  fought  with  them  until  some  were  killed  or
wounded,  and  then  they  retired  : scarcely  a day  passed  without  some  warlike  deeds  being  done.

At  this  period  there  was  in  the  Toulousain  a valiant  knight  from  France,  called  sir  W alter
de  Passac  : he  was  an  expert  captain  and  excellent  man  at  arms,  and  born  in  Berry,
on  the  borders  of  Limousin.  Before  his  arrival,  sir  Hugh  de  Froideville,  seneschal  of
Toulouse,  and  sir  Roger  d’Espaign,  seneschal  of  Carcassonne,  had  written  to  the  king  and
council  of  the  state  of  Toulouse  and  Rabastens  * ; that  several  gallant  companions  from  the
garrisons  of  Lourde  and  chatel  Cuillet  had  made  war  successfully  for  the  English  ; and
having  possession  of  Saint  Forget,  la  Bassere  +,  le  Mesnil,  Pomperon,  Convallo,  Rochefort,
Jullians  J,  Navaret,  and  some  other  forts,  they  had  surrounded  the  good  city  of  Toulouse,  so
that  the  inhabitants  could  not  quit  it,  nor  the  farmers  labour  their  vineyards  or  gardens  but
with  great  risk,  for  there  was  neither  truce  nor  any  composition  entered  into  between  them.
They  were  commanded  by  an  able  man  from  Biscay,  called  Espaignolet,  who  performed
wonders  and  took  by  scalado  the  castle  of  Ermaille,  whilst  its  master,  sir  Raymond,  was
absent  at  Toulouse,  and  kept  possession  for  upwards  of  one  year.  During  this  time,  he  dug
a mine  that,  after  passing  under  the  apartments,  opened  to  the  fields,  which,  when  finished,
was  so  well  covered,  that  no  one  would  imagine  there  was  a subterraneous  passage  under
the  castle.  When  about  this,  the  lord  of  Ermaille  was  treating  with  Espaignolet  respecting
the  sum  for  which  he  would  surrender  to  him  his  castle ; and,  on  the  mine  being  completed,
he  yielded  the  castle  to  sir  Raymond  for  two  thousand  francs,  who,  having  again  possession,
had  it  repaired  and  strengthened.  Not  fifteen  days  passed  before  Espaignolet  advanced
with  his  men  to  the  mouth  of  this  mine,  which  they  entered  about  midnight,  gained  the
castle,  and  took  the  knight  in  his  bed,  whom  he  again  ransomed  for  two  thousand  francs,  and
then  allowed  him  to  depart ; but  Espaignolet  kept  possession  of  the  castle,  which  he  strongly
garrisoned,  and  much  harassed  the  country  from  thence  with  others  of  his  companions.

For  these  and  such  like  causes  was  sir  Walter  de  Passac  sent  into  Languedoc,  with  full
powers  over  all  the  troops  in  that  district,  and  to  free  the  country  from  these  pillagers  and
robbers.  Flaving  sent  letters  to  sir  Roger  d’Espaign  and  sir  Hugh  de  Froideville,  and  other
leaders,  they  came  to  serve  under  him  with  all  their  men.  Sir  Roger  brought  sixty  lances
and  one  hundred  men  with  shields ; and  the  seneschal  of  Rouergue,  with  sir  Hugh  de
Froideville,  joined  him  with  as  many,  if  not  more.  When  they  were  all  assembled,  they
amounted  to  four  hundred  spears,  and  upwards  of  one  thousand  armed  with  shields,
including  lusty  varlets.  The  son  of  the  lord  d’Esterach  was  there,  with  a handsome
company  ; and  also  the  lord  de  Barbasan,  sir  Benedict  de  Faignolles,  and  William  Conderom,
a Breton,  with  his  rout.  They  marched  from  Toulouse  straight  to  St.  Forget,  where  they
halted.  It  was  then  commanded  by  a Bearnois,  called  le  bourg  de  Taillesac,  a grand  ma-
rauder. When  these  lords  had  drawn  up  their  troops,  the  attack  commenced,  and  the  cross-
bowmen shot  so  briskly,  scarcely  any  of  the  garrison  dared  show  themselves  in  its  defence  for
fear  of  the  arrows  ; but  the  French  did  not  gain  it  at  this  first  assault.  In  the  evening  they

* “ Rabastens,” — a town  of  Upper  Languedoc,  nine  f 14  La  Bassere,” — a village  near  Tarbes.
leagues  from  Toulouse.  + “Jullians,” — a village  near  Tarbes.


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.  131

retired  to  repose  and  refresh  themselves,  as  they  had  brought  plenty  of  everything  with
them.

On  the  morrow,  the  trumpets  sounded  for  a renewal  of  the  attack,  when  the  lords,  with
their  men,  gallantly  marched  to  the  foot  of  the  ditches.  Whoever  had  seen  them  thus
advancing,  their  heads  covered  with  shields,  with  their  lances  measuring  the  depth  of  the
water  in  the  ditches,  would  have  had  much  pleasure.  When  the  first  ranks  had  passed
through,  the  others  did  not  delay  following,  or  they  would  have  been  greatly  blamed  for
remaining  behind.  This  second  party  carried  pick-axes  and  iron  crows  to  batter  the  walls ;
and,  in  so  doing  they  fastened  their  shields  on  their  heads  to  ward  off  the  stones  and  other
things  that  were  thrown  at  them  from  the  battlements  : but  they  suffered  little  from  this,  as
the  cross-bows  posted  on  the  banks  by  their  alertness  in  shooting  prevented  many  from
appearing.  They  shot  so  well,  as  hardly  ever  to  miss  what  they  aimed  at ; and  several  on
the  walls  were  mortally  struck  on  their  heads  by  the  small  bolts,  which  caused  many  in  the
garrison  to  dread  their  blows.  The  attack  was  so  long  and  successfully  continued  that  a
large  breach  was  made  in  the  wall.  This  alarmed  those  within,  who  offered  to  surrender  on
having  their  lives  spared  ; but  they  were  not  listened  to,  and  fell  into  such  good  hands  that
every  one  was  put  to  death,  for  sir  Walter  had  ordered  no  quarter  to  be  given.  Thus  did
the  barons  and  knights  of  France  regain  the  castle  of  St.  Forget,  which  sir  Walter  gave  up
to  its  proper  owner,  who  had  lost  it  last  year  from  neglect  of  well  guarding  it,  as  several
other  castles  in  France  had  been  formerly  lost  in  like  manner.  When  the  knight  was
repossessed  of  his  castle,  he  had  it  repaired  where  wanted ; for  the  French  had  done  much
damage  by  their  attack.

The  French  then  marched  to  the  castle  of  la  Bassere,  of  which  Ernauton  de  Batefol  was
captain.  He  had  strongly  fortified  it,  in  expectation  of  the  visit  the  French  intended  him.
On  their  arrival,  they  reconnoitred  it  on  all  sides,  to  see  where  they  could  the  better  make
their  attack,  and  with  the  least  loss  to  their  men  : having  carefully  examined  it,  they  posted
themselves  opposite  to  the  weakest  part.  The  cross-bowmen  were  ordered  to  advance
before  those  intended  for  the  assault,  and  they  did  their  duty  so  well  that  few  dared  to
appear  on  the  battlements.  Ernauton  de  Batefol  was  at  the  gate  where  the  attack  was  the
sharpest,  performing  such  wonders  in  arms  that  the  French  knights  cried  out, — “ Here  is  a
squire  of  great  valour,  who  becomes  his  arms  well,  and  makes  excellent  use  of  them ; it
would  not  be  amiss  to  treat  with  him  to  surrender  the  castle,  and  seek  his  fortune  elsewhere  :
let  him  be  informed,  that  if  sir  Walter  de  Passac  conquer  it  by  storm,  no  power  on  earth
can  save  him  ; for  he  has  sworn  to  be  put  to  death,  or  have  hanged,  all  whom  he  may  find
in  any  castle  or  fort.”  The  seneschal  de  Toulouse  then  charged  a squire  from  Gascony,
named  William  Aliedel,  who  was  well  acquainted  with  Ernauton,  they  having  formerly
borne  arms  together,  to  talk  with  him  on  the  subject.  He  willingly  undertook  it ; for  he
would  have  been  very  sorry  if  Ernauton  had  suffered  loss  of  honour  or  death,  as  other
things  could  be  remedied.

William  stepped  forward,  and  made  signs  to  Ernauton  that  he  wanted  to  speak  to  him  on
what  nearly  concerned  him,  to  which  his  friend  assented ; and  the  assault  was  at  that  place
discontinued,  though  not  elsewhere.  “ Ernauton,”  said  William,  “ you  are  risking  too
much  : our  leaders  have  compassion  on  you,  and  send  me  to  tell  you,  that  should  you  be
taken,  sir  Walter  de  Passac  has  strictly  ordered  you  to  be  instantly  put  to  death,  as  he  has
done  to  those  who  were  in  St.  Forget.  It  is,  therefore,  much  better  for  you  to  surrender
the  place,  as  I would  advise,  than  to  wait  the  event ; for  I can  assure  you,  we  shall  not
depart  before  we  be  masters  of  it.”  “ I know  very  well,”  replied  Ernauton,  “that,  although
you  now  bear  arms  against  me,  you  would  never  advise  anything  disgraceful  to  my  honour ;
but  if  I do  surrender,  all  who  are  with  me  must  be  saved  likewise  ; and  we  must  carry
away  with  us  as  much  as  we  can,  excepting  the  provisions,  and  be  conducted  in  safety  to
the  castle  of  Lourde.”  “ I am  not  commissioned,”  answered  William,  “ to  go  so  far,  but  I
will  cheerfully  mention  it  to  my  commanders.”  On  this,  he  returned  to  the  seneschal  of
Toulouse,  and  related  what  you  have  heard.  Sir  Hugh  de  Froideville  said,  “ Let  us  go
and  speak  with  sir  Walter ; for  1 know  not  what  his  intentions  may  be,  although  I have
advanced  so  far  in  the  treaty ; but  I fancy  we  shall  make  him  agree  to  it.”

k 2


132


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


When  they  came  to  sir  Walter,  they  found  him  engaged  in  assaulting  another  part  of  the
castle;  the  seneschal  addressed  him, — ■“  Sir  Walter,  I have  opened  a treaty  with  the  captain
of  the  castle,  who  is  willing  to  surrender  the  place  as  it  is,  on  condition  that  himself  and
garrison  be  spared  and  escorted  to  Lourde,  and  that  they  carry  away  everything  but  the
provision:  now,  what  do  you  say  to  this?  We  should  lose  more,  if  any  of  our  knights
and  squires  were  killed  by  arrows  or  stones : and  you  would  have  more  sorrow  than  profit,
even  should  you  win  it  and  put  all  to  death ; but  that  is  not  yet  done  ; it  will  cost  us  many
lives ; for  it  will  not  be  so  easily  conquered  as  St.  Forget.”  “ That  is  true,”  added  the
seneschal  of  Carcassonne,  who  was  present : “ it  is  impossible  but  in  such  attacks  there  must
be  many  killed  and  wounded."  Sir  Walter  de  Passac  then  said, — “ I am  willing  to  consent :
order  the  attacks  to  cease.  We  have  still  farther  to  march  ; and,  by  little  and  little,  we
shall  gain  all  these  castles  from  the  pillagers ; if  they  escape  from  us  cheaply  at  this
moment,  they  will  fall  into  our  hands  again  some  time  hence,  when  they  shall  pay  for  all.
Ill  deeds  bring  the  doers  to  an  ill  end.  I have  hanged  and  drowned  in  my  time  more  than
five  hundred  such  scoundrels,  and  these  will  at  last  come  to  the  same  fate.”

William  Aliedel  and  others  then  returned  to  the  gate,  where  Ernauton  was  waiting  for
them,  to  conclude  the  treaty.  “ By  my  troth,  Ernauton,”  said  William,  “ you  and  your
companions  ought  to  give  many  thanks  to  God  and  to  sir  Hugh  de  Froideville,  for  he  has
obtained  for  you  your  own  terms  of  surrender.  You  and  your  garrison  may  depart  hence,
taking  with  you  all  you  are  able  to  carry,  and  will  he  escorted  to  Lourde.”  “ I am
satisfied,”  replied  Ernauton,  “ since  it  cannot  be  otherwise ; but  know,  William,  that
I am  very  sorry  to  quit  my  castle,  which  has  been  of  infinite  service  to  me  since  my
capture  at  the  bridge  of  Tournay,  below  Mauvoisin,  by  the  bourg  d’Espaign,  who  made
me  pay  two  thousand  francs  for  my  ransom  ; indeed,  to  say  the  truth,  I have  more  than
repaid  myself  the  loss  since  I have  been  here.  I have  been  so  long  in  this  part  of  the
country  that  I like  it  well ; and  whenever  I wished  to  make  an  excursion,  I always  was
fortunate  in  meeting  with  prey,  that  fell  into  my  hands,  from  some  merchant  from  Rabastens,
Toulouse,  or  Rodais.”  “ Ernauton,”  answered  William,  “ I readily  believe  yon  ; but  if  you
will  turn  to  the  French,  I will  obtain  your  pardon,  and  put  a thousand  francs  into  your
purse  besides : and  will  pledge  my  honour  that  you  be  steady  to  the  French  interest,  when
once  you  have  sworn  so  to  do.”  “ Many  thanks,”  said  Ernauton ; “ but  I like  not  your
party,  and  will  remain  firm  to  the  English  ; for,  as  God  may  help  me,  I do  not  think  I can
ever  be  a good  Frenchman.  Return  now  to  your  army,  and  say  that  we  shall  employ  this
day  in  packing  up  ; but  we  will  surrender  the  place  to-morrow  and  depart : you  will  there-
fore order  an  escort  to  conduct  us  to  Lourde.”

The  attacks  on  la  Bassere  had  ceased,  and  the  French  retired  to  their  quarters,  where
they  refreshed  themselves  at  their  ease,  for  they  had  wherewithal  so  to  do.  On  the  mor-
row, by  eight  o’clock,  the  army  was  drawn  out,  and  those  who  were  to  escort  the  garrison
selected.  Sir  Walter  then  sent  the  seneschal  of  Toulouse  to  take  possession  of  the  castle,
where  he  found  Ernauton  with  his  companions  and  their  baggage  packed,  and  all  ready  to
set  out.  Lie  ordered  a knight  of  Lourde,  called  sir  Mouvant  de  Salenges,  to  escort  them,
which  he  undertook  to  do  safely  ; and  I believe  he  kept  his  word.  This  castle  was  given
to  Bertrand  de  Montesquieu,  a squire  of  that  country,  to  guard,  as  well  as  the  territory
adjacent.  The  army  then  marched  away,  and  came  before  a castle  called  Pulpiron  ; it  was
in  the  possession  of  marauders,  under  the  command  of  Angcrot  and  1c  petit  Meschin,  who  had
done  much  damage  to  the  country  round  about.

Sir  Walter  de  Passac  had  sworn  by  the  soul  of  his  father,  that  in  return  for  the  mischief,
they  had  done,  he  would  never  grant  them  mercy,  but  hang  them  the  moment  he  could  lay
hands  on  them.  The  army  laid  siege  to  this  castle,  which  is  seated  on  a rock,  whence  the
view  is  extensive  and  pleasant.  On  forming  the  siege,  sir  Walter  again  swore  he  would
never  depart  until  he  had  gained  it,  and  taken  all  within,  who  should  not  be  allowed  to
surrender  and  go  away,  if  they  even  wished  it.  Many  attacks  were  made : hut  the  French
failed  in  all,  as  it  was  ably  defended.  “ I know  not,”  said  sir  Walter,  “ how  things  may
turn  out ; the  king  of  France  is  rich  enough  to  keep  up  the  siege,  and,  if  I remain  here  a
whole  year,  I will  not  leave  it  until  I he  the  master.”  What  he  had  said  was  attended  to,
and  all  things  necessary  for  a long  siege  were  done.


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  Ac.


]33

The  two  captains  in  the  castle,  seeing  the  French  were  determined  not  to  depart  without
having  gained  it,  cost  what  it  would,  began  to  feel  alarmed,  and  thought  it  advisable  to
leave  it,  whether  their  enemies  would  or  not.  They  could  easily  do  so  at  their  pleasure,
for  there  was  a subterraneous  passage  that  had  an  outlet  half  a league  from  the  castle,  of
which  the  French  had  not  any  suspicion.  When  Angerot  noticed  how  the  besiegers  had
posted  themselves,  and  seemed  resolved  to  have  them  by  famine  or  otherwise,  he  said  to  his
companions, — “ Gentlemen,  I find  the  lord  de  Passac  hates  us  mortally,  and  that  by  a blockade
he  will  starve  us.  lie  may  easily  do  it,  if  be  erect  a small  fort  and  garrison  it  with  only
one  hundred  lances ; for  we  shall  then  be  prevented  quitting  the  castle.  I therefore  propose,
that  we  this  night  pack  up  all  we  can  carry,  and  sally  through  the  mine,  which  is  wide
enough,  and  opens  into  a small  wood  bard  by.  We  shall  thus  be  out  of  all  danger  before
any  one  knows  what  is  become  of  us  ; for  there  is  not  one  man  in  the  army  that  is  acquainted
with  this  mine."  Ilis  proposal  was  agreed  to  : and  that  same  night,  having  packed  up
their  all,  they  entered  the  subterranean  passage  with  lighted  torches,  and  issued  out  in  a
wood  half  a league  from  the  castle.  There  were  those  with  them  able  to  conduct  them
through  by-roads  to  other  fortresses  in  Limousin  and  Rouergue.  Some,  however,  the
moment  they  were  out  of  danger,  departed  different  ways,  saying,  they  would  not  carry  on
the  war  longer.  Angerot,  with  four  others,  went  to  a castle  in  Perigord,  called  Mont  Royal,
where  the  lord  of  it  received  them  handsomely ; for  he  and  his  dependants  wrere  entirely
English,  and  would  never  turn  French  when  others  did  so,  and  many  Avere  of  his  way  of
thinking.  Thus  did  the  garrison  of  Pulpiron  escape,  not  leaving  a single  varlet  behind  ;
and,  before  it  was  known  to  the  army,  they  had  arrived  at  the  different  places  whither  they
intended  croing.

On  the  third  day  after  the  garrison  were  gone  away,  the  commanders  of  the  army
ordered  an  assault.  They  had  made  a large  machine,  four  stories  high,  and  each  story  would
hold  twenty  cross-bows.  When  this  machine  was  completed,  which  they  called  a Passavant,
it  was  moved  to  what  they  thought  the  weakest  place  of  the  walls,  and  Genoese  cross-
bowmen were  posted  in  it.  The  cross-bows  began  shooting,  but  as  no  one  appeared  on  the
battlements,  they  imagined  the  castle  was  empty,  and  ceased  to  shoot,  for  they  were  un-
willing to  lose  their  bolts  and  arrows.  They  left  the  machine,  and  surprised  their  captains
by  their  sudden  return.  They  said, — “ My  lords,  the  garrison  have  certainly  quitted  the
castle  ; for  there  is  not  a man  within  it."  “ How  can  you  know  this?”  replied  sir  Walter.
“We  know,  that  notwithstanding  our  shooting,  not  one  showed  himself.”  Ladders  were
upon  this  ordered  to  be  affixed  to  the  walls,  and  lusty  varlets,  proper  for  the  business,  to
ascend  them.  They  mounted  without  opposition,  for  the  castle  was  empty ; and  having-
passed  the  walls  and  ascended  into  the  court,  they  found  near  the  gate  a large  bunch  of
keys,  among  which  was  that  of  the  gate.  They,  with  some  difficulty,  opened  it  and  the
barriers.

The  lords  were  much  surprised  ; but  more  especially  sir  Walter  de  Passac,  who  thought
it  must  have  been  by  enchantment  they  had  been  able  thus  to  escape,  and  asked  his  knights
how  it  could  have  been  done.  The  seneschal  of  Toulouse  replied, — “ That  if  they  were
gone,  it  must  have  been  through  some  subterraneous  passage.”  The  castle  was  searched,
and  this  passage  discovered  in  the  cellars,  with  the  door  wide  open.  The  lords  would
examine  it ; and  sir  Walter  said  to  the  seneschal  of  Toulouse, — “ Did  not  you  know  of  this
passage,  sir  Hugh  ?”  “ By  my  faith,”  he  replied,  “ I certainly  have  heard  that  such  a thing

was  in  this  castle  ; but  I forgot  it,  and  never  imagined  they  would  thus  have  made  use  of
it.”  “ But  in  God’s  name  they  have  done  so,”  answered  sir  Walter,  “ as  is  very  clear.
Have  all  the  castles  in  this  country  similar  mines  and  passages  ? ” “ Sir,”  said  sir  Hugh,

“ there  are  many  castles  which  have  been  built  in  the  same  manner,  particularly  all  those
that  belonged  to  Reginald  de  Montauban  ; for  when  he  waged  war  against  king  Charle-
magne of  France,  he  had  them  so  well  built,  by  the  advice  of  Maugis  his  cousin,  that  when
the  king  was  besieging  them  with  his  whole  power,  and  resistance  would  have  been  vain,
they  made  use  of  their  tunnels,  and  departed  without  taking  leave.”  “ By  my  troth,”  said,
sir  Walter,  “ I admire  the  thought.  I know  not  if  any  king,  duke,  or  neighbour  I have,
will  make  war  upon  me ; but  on  my  return  home  I will  have  instantly  built,  at  my  castle


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


1°4

of  Passac,  just  such  a passage.”  Here  ended  this  conversation.  They  took  possession  of
the  castle,  and,  having  placed  a good  garrison  therein  to  guard  it,  they  began  their  march
towards  the  town  and  castle  of  Convalle  *,  in  which  were  Espaignolet  de  Papercau,  a Bis-
cayan, and  a number  of  pillagers.


CHAPTER  XX. THE  CASTLE  OF  CONVALLE  IS  STORMED  BY  THE  FRENCH. — SOME

OTHER  FORTRESSES  TURN  TO  THE  FRENCH  INTEREST.

Sir  Walter  de  Passac,  with  his  army,  came  before  Convalle,  and  surrounded  it  on  all
sides.  Having  called  to  him  the  seneschal  of  Toulouse,  he  said, — “ Was  this  one  of  sir
Reginald  de  Montauban’s  castles  ? ” lie  answered,  that  it  was  one.  “ Then  it  has  a
subterraneous  passage  like  his  others.”  “ Ay,  in  God’s  name  truly  there  is  one  ; for  by
means  of  this  passage  did  Espaignolet  take  the  castle  a second  time  and  the  lord  within  it."
“ Order  the  knight  to  whom  it  belongs,  and  who  is  with  us,  to  come  hither ; for  it  will  be
proper,”  added  sir  Walter,  “ that  we  first  get  information  from  him.”  On  sir  Raymond  de
Convalle  appearing,  he  was  asked  concerning  the  strength  of  the  place,  and  if  there  were  a
subterraneous  passage  like  that  of  la  Bassere.  He  replied,  that  it  was  by  such  means  he
had  been  captured ; that  he  had  long  ago  stopped  it  up  as  useless  ; “ but  these  robbers  who
keep  possession  of  my  castle  have  repaired  it,  and  entered  the  castle  through  it.”  “And
do  you  know  its  issue  ?”  “ Yes,  my  lord  : it  opens  into  a wood  not  far  hence.”  “ It  is

well,  by  God,”  said  sir  Walter,  and  was  then  silent.  At  the  end  of  four  days,  sir  Walter
was  conducted  by  sir  Raymond  to  the  opening  of  the  mine  in  the  wood,  accompanied  by
two  hundred  of  the  country  peasants  well  armed.  When  arrived  at  the  entrance,  he  had
all  the  earth  and  thorns  cleared  away  from  before  it,  and  a number  of  torches  lighted,  and
said  to  those  with  him, — “ Enter  this  passage,  which  will  lead  you  to  the  hall  of  the  castle  :
when  you  come  to  the  door,  break  it  open,  for  you  ai’e  sufficiently  strong  to  do  it,  and  to
combat  all  you  shall  find  in  the  castle.”  They  replied,  they  would  cheerfully  obey.

Having  entered  the  passage,  they  came  to  the  steps  that  lead  to  the  door  of  the  hall,  and
began  to  make  use  of  their  axes  and  hammers  in  battering  tlie  door.  As  it  was  about
night-fall,  the  garrison  kept  a good  watch,  and  heard  them  working  in  the  mine  to  enter  the
castle.  They  instantly  informed  Espaignolet  of  it ; be  was  going  to  bed,  but  he  advised
them  to  place  benches,  stones,  and  other  things  in  the  doorway,  to  embarras  it  so  much  that
they  might  not  enter.  This  was  instantly  clone,  and  1I0  better  defence  could  have  been
made ; for  although  their  opponents  had  cut  the  door  into  a thousand  pieces,  they  found
their  difficulties  so  increase  upon  them,  they  gave  it  up,  and  returned  about  midnight  to  tell
their  lords,  how  the  garrison,  having  heard  them,  had  blocked  up  the  passage,  making  it
impossible  to  gain  entry  by  that  way.  Upon  this  the  passavant  was  ordered  from  la  Bas-
scre,  which  being  taken  to  pieces,  was  brought  on  carts  to  Convalle,  and  remounted  on  its
wheels,  fit  for  immediate  service.  When  all  was  ready,  sir  Walter  de  Passac,  impatient  to
win  this  castle,  ordered  his  trumpets  to  sound,  and  the  host  to  arm  and  advance  in  proper
array.  The  seneschal  of  Toulouse  was  on  one  side,  with  all  his  seneschalsbip  ; on  the
opposite  sir  Roger  d’Espaign,  in  like  manner,  with  his  men  from  Carcassonne  ; there  were
the  lord  de  Barbazan,  sir  Benedict  de  Faignolles,  the  lord  de  Benoch,  the  son  of  the  count
d’Estarac,  sir  Raymond  de  l’lsle,  and  the  knights  and  squires  of  the  country,  each  with  his
company,  drawn  up  in  good  array.  The  attack  and  defence  now  seriously  commenced  : the
garrison  defended  themselves  valiantly ; indeed  it  behoved  them  so  to  do,  for  they  found
themselves  hard  pressed  ; and  knowing  that  sir  Walter  would  show  them  no  mercy,  if  taken,
were  resolved  to  sell  their  lives  as  dearly  as  possible.  The  Genoese  cross-bows  behaved
well,  and  shot  so  truly  with  their  bolts,  that  the  boldest  was  afraid  of  them  ; for  whomso-
ever they  struck  on  the  head,  it  was  over  with  him.

Sir  Walter  de  Passac  was  in  the  front  acting  wonders  in  arms,  and  crying  out, — “ How,
my  lords  ! shall  such  a stinking  crew  keep  us  here  all  the  day?  If  they  were  good  men  at
arms,  I should  not  wonder ; for  in  them  is  much  more  vigour  than  in  such  fellows  as  we  are
* l’'”3  plafe  is  called  before  “ Ermaille.”  Sala  calls  it  “ Crimaille.” — Marginal  note , D.  Sauvage.


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


1J5


attacking ; it  is  my  intention  to  dine  in  the  castle,  and  it  will  depend  on  you  that  I accom-
plish my  purpose.”  Those  who  were  desirous  to  obtain  his  favour  advanced  eagerly  to  the
attack,  and  fixed  several  ladders  to  the  walls,  near  where  the  large  machine  was  placed,
which  they  mounted  under  protection  of  the  cross-bows,  who  prevented  the  garrison  from
showing  themselves.  The  French  thus  entered  the  castle  of  Convalle  sword  in  hand  ; they
pursued  their  enemies,  killing  great  numbers,  and  the  remainder  they  made  prisoners.  Sir
Walter,  having  entered  by  tbe  gates,  was  asked  what  he  would  have  done  with  the
prisoners.  “ By  St.  George.  I will  they  be  all  hanged.”  His  orders  were  instantly  obeyed,
and  Espaignolet  suffered  the  first.  The  lords  dined  in  the  castle,  and  the  men  at  arms  in
the  town,  where  they  remained  the  whole  day.  Sir  Walter  gave  to  the  lord  de  Convalle
his  town  and  castle,  and  then  made  preparations  to  continue  his  march.

After  the  conquest  of  Convalle,  the  army  marched  for  a fort,  called  Mastulle,  which  with
the  others  had  done  much  mischief  to  the  country.  On  their  arrival,  they  began  an  attack,
which  was  bravely  resisted  at  first ; but  it  lasted  not  long,  for  the  place  was  taken  by  storm,
and  all  within  slain  or  hanged.  When  those  of  Roix,  Rocheforte,  and  other  castles  in
possession  of  these  pillagers,  heard  that  sir  Walter  de  Passac  was  on  his  march,  and  that,
whatever  places  he  took,  he  had  hanged  the  garrisons,  they  were  doubtful  whether  they
might  not  come  to  the  same  end,  and  in  consequence,  left  their  forts  in  the  night  time,  by
subterranean  passages  or  otherwise ; for  Roix  and  Rochefort  have  mines,  having  formerly
belonged  to  sir  Reginald  de  Montauban,  so  that  when  the  French  arrived  they  found  them
both  empty.  Having  taken  possession,  they  re-garrisoned  and  re-victualled  them,  and  then
marched  towards  Toulouse  to  enter  Bigorrc,  for  there  were  in  that  country  two  castles  on
the  borders  of  Tarbes,  called  Jullians  and  Nazareth  *,  held  by  these  marauders,  who  much
harassed  Tarbes  and  its  neighbourhood,  as  well  as  the  territory  of  the  lord  d’Anchin.

Sir  Walter  de  Passac  and  his  army,  having  refreshed  themselves  in  Toulouse,  took  the
road  towards  Bigorre,  and  seated  themselves  before  Jullians,  saying  they  would  never  depart
until  they  had  delivered  the  country  from  its  oppressors.  Sir  Walter  was  joined  by  the
seneschal  of  Donnezan  f,  who  represented  the  count  de  Foix,  according  to  the  summons  of
sir  Walter  to  come  to  his  aid  in  driving  the  pillagers  out  of  the  country ; for  they  made,
when  opportunity  offered,  as  free  with  the  country  of  Donnezan  as  they  did  elsewhere.  It
was  for  this  reason  the  seneschal  had  come,  and  with  the  approbation  of  the  count,  otherwise
he  would  not  have  dared  to  have  done  it.

They  were  fifteen  days  before  they  could  gain  the  castle  of  Jullians,  for  it  was  strong,  and
the  captain  a Gascon  squire,  called  Bruyer  de  Brunemote,  of  great  skill  and  valour.  He
had  quitted  la  Bassere  in  the  manner  before  mentioned ; and  at  last,  finding  they  could  not
take  it  by  storm,  they  consented  to  a capitulation,  agreeing  to  spare  the  lives  of  the  garrison
and  to  conduct  them  to  Lourde.  A squire,  called  Bertrand  de  Montdighen,  escorted  them
thither.  When  the  French  had  possession  of  the  castle  of  Jullians,  they  debated  whether
to  keep  or  to  raze  it : at  last  they  determined  to  demolish  it  on  account  of  its  vicinity  to
Lourde,  for  that  garrison,  the  men  being  traitors,  might,  after  they  had  left  it,  regain  posses-
sion by  stratagem  or  open  force.  It  was  therefore  razed ; and  the  stones  to  this  day  remain
in  heaps,  without  the  expectation  of  its  being  rebuilt.

The  army  then  came  before  Nazareth,  a strong  place,  of  which  some  adventurous  com-
panions had  kept  possession  for  more  than  a year.  When  they  heard  that  those  of  Jullians
had  retreated,  they  also  withdrew,  having  obtained  a passport,  and  went  to  Lourde,  where
they  knew  they  would  not  seek  them,  unless  they  wished  to  lose  their  labour,  for  Lourde  is
so  strong  it  is  impossible  to  be  conquered.  The  French,  finding  Nazareth  empty,  razed  it
to  the  ground,  to  the  great  joy  of  the  inhabitants  of  Tarbes,  as  they  had  received  many
injuries  from  it.  They  then  marched  to  the  castle  of  Auch,  in  Bigorre,  situated  among  the
mountains  on  the  borders  of  Bearn.  They  remained  there  about  fifteen  days,  blit  only
conquered  the  lower  court  with  all  the  horses  within  it,  though  very  many  attacks  were
made  : the  great  tower,  being  seated  on  a high  rock,  they  could  not  win,  for  it  is  impregnable.

* “ Nazareth,” — a small  town  in  the  Condomis,  diocese  of  Condom.

t “ Donnezan,” — a small  country  in  the  government  of  Foix,  contiguous  to  Catalonia,  about  three  miles  square.
Querigut  is  the  chief  place.


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


336


T!  ie  lords  seeing  they  were  labouring  in  vain,  and  that  William  Morenton,  the  captain,
would  neither  surrender  nor  listen  to  any  treaty  whatever,  marched  away,  and  returned  to
Tarbes.  Sir  Walter  de  Passac  then  disbanded  his  army,  with  liberty  for  them  to  return  to
their  homes.  Those  who  had  served  in  this  army  received  their  pay  in  money  or  in  promis-
sory notes,  at  their  option  : he  himself  retired  to  recruit  himself  at  Carcassonne,  and  in  that
neighbourhood.

During  his  residence  at  Carcassonne,  he  received  orders  from  the  king  of  France  to  go  to
Bouteville  in  Saintonge,  on  the  borders  of  Poitou  and  the  Bordelois,  which  was  under  the
command  of  a Gascon  called  Sainte-Foy,  as  it  had  been  reported  that  sir  John  Harpedane,
seneschal  of  Bordeaux,  was  collecting  a large  force  at  Libourne  on  the  Dordogne,  to  march
thither  and  attack  such  forts  as  the  Poitevins  and  Saintongers  had  raised  before  it.  Sir
Walter,  as  was  natural,  obeyed  the  king’s  orders,  and  took  with  him  sixty  lances  and  one
hundred  Genoese  cross-bows.  On  leaving  Carcassonne,  he  marched  through  Rouergue  and
A gen,  skirted  Perigord,  and  arrived  at  Bouteville,  where  he  found  the  seneschals  of  la
Rochelle,  Poitou,  Perigord,  and  Agen,  with  numbers  of  men  at  arms.


CHAPTER  XXI. A SHORT  DIGRESSION  ON  THE  MANNERS  OF  THE  ENGLISH  AND  GASCONS

IN  THE  TIME  OF  FROISSART.

Foreign  countries  may  well  wonder  at  the  noble  realm  of  France,  bow  finely  it  is
situated,  and  what  numbers  of  cities,  towns,  and  castles  it  possesses,  as  well  in  the  distant
parts  as  in  the  heart  of  the  country.  There  are  in  travelling  from  Toulouse  to  Bordeaux,
the  underneath  rich  towns,  situated  on  the  Garonne,  called  Gironde  at  Bordeaux  : Grenade,
Verdun,  St.  Nicholas,  Auvillas,  Valence,  Leirac,  Agen,  Porte  St.  Marie,  Aguillon,  Tonneins,
Marmande,  St.  Basile,  la  Reole,  St.  Macaire,  Langon,  Cadillac,  Rions,  Castres.  Then
ascending  the  Dordogne,  which  falls  into  the  Garonne,  are  the  following  castles : St.  Andre,
Libourne,  Castillon,  St.  Foy,  Bergerac,  la  Linde,  Limeul,  St.  Cyprian,  Dommes,  Soulliac.
Some  of  these  being  English  and  others  French,  carried  on  a war  against  each  other : they
would  have  it  so  ; for  the  Gascons  were  never,  for  thirty  years  running,  steadily  attached  to
any  one  lord.  True  it  is,  that  the  whole  of  Gascony  submitted  to  king  Edward  and  to  his
son  the  prince  of  Wales,  but  the  country  afterwards,  as  has  been  clearly  shown  in  this
history,  revolted  from  those  English  masters.  King  Charles,  son  to  king  John  of  France,
gained  by  his  wisdom,  prudence,  kind  treatment,  and  great  gifts,  the  affections  of  their
principal  barons,  such  as  the  count  d’Armagnac,  the  lord  d’Albreth,  and  others,  whom  the
prince  of  Wales  lost  through  his  pride.

I,  the  author  of  this  history,  was  at  Bordeaux  when  the  prince  of  Wales  marched  to
Spain,  and  witnessed  the  great  haughtiness  of  the  English,  who  are  affable  to  no  other  nation
than  their  own  , nor  could  any  of  the  gentlemen  of  Gascony  or  Aquitaine,  though  they  had
ruined  themselves  by  their  wars,  obtain  office  or  appointment  in  their  own  country  ; for  the
English  said  they  were  neither  on  a level  with  them  nor  worthy  of  their  society,  which
made  the  Gascons  very  indignant,  as  they  showed  on  the  first  opportunity  that  presented
itself.  It  was  on  account  of  the  harshness  of  the  prince’s  manners  that  the  count  d’Armagnac
and  the  lord  d’Albreth,  with  other  knights  and  squires,  turned  to  the  French  interest.  King
Philip  of  France,  and  the  good  John  his  son,  had  lost  Gascony  by  their  overbearing  pride  ;
and  in  like  manner  did  the  prince.  But  king  Charles,  of  happy  memory,  regained  them  by
good  humour,  liberality,  and  humility.  In  this  manner  the  Gascons  love  to  be  governed.
King  Charles,  the  more  firmly  to  strengthen  the  connection,  married  his  sister,  the  lady
Isabella  de  Bourbon,  to  the  lord  d’Albreth ; by  whom  he  had  two  fine  children,  which
causes  love  to  endure  the  longer.

True  it  is,  that  when  I lived  among  these  lords  at  Paris,  I once  heard  the  lord  d’Albreth
use  an  expression  that  I noted  down.  I believe  it  may  have  been  said  in  joke  : however,
it  contained,  in  my  opinion,  much  truth  and  good  sense.  A knight  from  Brittany,  who  had
borne  arms  for  him,  inquired  after  his  health,  and  how  he  managed  to  remain  steady  to  the
French  : when  he  thus  answered, — “ Thank  God,  my  health  is  very  good  ; but  I had  more


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


137


money  at  command,  as  well  as  my  people,  when  I made  war  for  the  king  of  England,  than
I have  now ; for,  whenever  we  took  any  excursions  in  search  of  adventures,  we  never  failed
meeting  some  rich  merchants  from  Toulouse,  Condom,  la  Reole,  or  Bergerac,  whom  we
squeezed,  which  made  us  gay  and  debonair,  but  now  all  that  is  at  an  end.”  The  knight,  on
hearing  this,  burst  into  laughter  and  replied,  “ In  truth,  that  is  the  life  Gascons  love  : they
willingly  hurt  their  neighbour.”  On  hearing  this,  I concluded  that  the  lord  d’Albreth
heartily  repented  his  having  turned  to  the  French,  in  the  same  manner  as  the  lord  de
Mucident,  who,  when  made  prisoner  at  Yurac,  swore  to  the  duke  of  Anjou,  he  would  set
out  for  Paris  and  become  ever  after  a good  Frenchman.  He  did  go  to  Paris,  where  the  king
handsomely  received  him ; hut  he  was  not  treated  to  his  satisfaction,  so  that  he  slunk  away
from  the  king,  and  left  Paris  without  taking  leave,  to  return  to  his  own  country,  where  he
again  became  an  Englishman,  and  broke  all  his  engagements  with  the  duke  of  Anjou.  The
lords  de  Rosem,  de  Duras,  de  Langurant,  did  the  same.


English  and  Gascon  Lords  at  Bordeaux.  From  an  old  Black  Letter  History  of  Bertrand  du  Guesclin.


Such  are  the  Gascons : they  are  very  unsteady,  but  they  love  the  English  in  preference  to
the  French,  for  the  war  against  France  is  the  most  profitable  ; and  this  is  the  cause  of  their
preference.


CHArTER  XXII. THE  ARRIVAL  OF  LEON,  KI

OCCASION  FROISSART  DESCRIBES  THE  STi1
THE  DEATH  OF  THE  KING  OF  CYPRUS.
About  this  period  Leon,  king  of  Armenia,*
like  state,  but  as  one  driven  from  his  throne

* In  tom.  vii.  p.  494,  of  the  Foedera,  we  find  Richard
II.  had  settled  a pension  of  10001.  yearly  on  Ldon,  the
Christian  king  of  Armenia,  who  had  been  driven  from  his
kingdom  by  the  Turks.  In  former  reigns,  there  had  been
frequent  collections  made  in  England,  as  well  as  elsewhere,


NG  OF  ARMENIA,  IN  FRANCE  J ON  WHICH
lTE  OF  GENOA  IN  HIS  TIME,  AND  RELATES

arrived  in  France ; not  indeed  with  a king-
and  kingdom,  which  had  all  been  conquered

for  supporting  those  Christian  kings  against  the  Turkish
power,  which,  however,  at  length  swallowed  them  up. —
Anderson's  Hist,  of  Commerce,  &c.  vol.  i.  p.  213.
The  Grandes  Chroniques  de  France  place  the  arrival  of
the  king  of  Armenia  in  1385.


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


108


from  him  by  the  Turks,  except  a castle,  situated  on  the  sea-shore,  called  Courth.*  This
castle  is  the  key  or  entrance  into  Alexandria  and  the  territories  of  the  sultan.  The  Genoese
carry  their  commerce  everywhere,  by  means  of  the  duties  they  pay,  even  to  the  farther
India,  and  the  realm  of  Prester  John : f they  are  universally  well  received  on  account  of
the  gold,  silver,  and  rich  merchandize  they  bring  from  Alexandria,  Cairo,  Damascus,  or  from
the  Saracens.  It  is  thus  the  world  is  supplied,  for  what  is  not  in  one  country  is  in  another :
but  all  this  is  well  known.  The  Genoese  are  the  most  adventurous  navigators,  and  are
much  superior  to  the  Venetians  as  lords  of  the  sea,  being  more  feared  by  the  Saracens  than
any  others,  for  they  are  excellent  and  determined  seamen,  and  one  Genoese  galley  would
attack  and  probably  conquer  four  galleys  of  the  Saracens.

If  the  Turks  and  Tartars  have  frequently  hurt  Christendom,  the  Genoese  felt  it  not ; for,
being  masters  of  the  sea,  they  could  attack  the  infidels,  and  had  always  fifty  galleys  and
large  ships  guarding  the  islands  of  Rhodes,  Cyprus,  and  Candia,  and  the  shores  of  Greece,  as
far  as  Turkey,  where  they  possess  the  handsome  town  and  castle  of  Pera,  situated  on  the
sea-shore  opposite  to  Constantinople,  which  is  garrisoned  at  their  expense,  and  supplied  with
provision  and  stores  three  or  four  times  a year.  The  Turks  and  Tartars  have  often  attempted
to  win  it,  but  have  always  failed,  and  have  lost  more  than  they  gained  ; for  Pera  is  seated
on  a rock,  with  only  one  entrance,  and  this  the  Genoese  have  well  fortified.  The  Genoese
have  also  Jaffa,  which  is  a strong  place,  profitable  botli  to  them  and  to  all  Christendom  ; for
did  they  not  possess  Jaffa,  and  Rhodes,  the  infidels  would  invade  Naples,  and  attack
Gaietta  and  Rome : but  the  strong  garrisons  of  men  at  arms  in  these  two  places  and  their
galleys  on  the  sea,  hold  them  in  cheek.

These  reasons  prevented  the  infidels  making  any  excursions,  except  from  Constantinople,
towards  Hungary  ; but  if  that  noble  king  of  Cyprus,  Peter  de  Lusignan,  had  longer  lived,  he
would  have  found  the  Sultans  and  Turks  more  employment  than  they  had  met  with  since
the  days  of  Godfrey  of  Boulogne.  Having  conquered  the  cities  of  Alexandria  and  Satalia,
the  infidels,  knowing  his  prowess  and  enterprise,  and  fearful  of  further  losses  from  him,
bargained  with  his  brother  Jacquet  to  have  him  put  to  death ; who  himself  slew  the  gallant
king  in  his  bed.|  It  was  an  infamous  act  thus  to  assassinate  the  valiant  king  of  Cyprus,
whose  thoughts  were  solely  occupied,  day  and  night,  on  the  means  of  conquering  the  holy
land,  and  driving  out  of  it  the  infidels.

Philip  de  Mesieres,§  being  chancellor  to  this  king  of  Cyprus,  had  engraven  on  a monument
he  erected  to  him, 1 1 in  the  chapter-house  of  the  Celestins  at  Paris,  as  follows:  “ Peter  of
Lusignan,  fifteenth  Latin  king  of  Jerusalem,  since  Godfrey  of  Boulogne,  and  king  of  Cyprus,
by  his  magnanimous  prowess  and  enterprise,  conquered  in  battle,  with  an  army  supported
at  his  own  cost,  the  cities  of  Alexandria  in  Egypt,  Tripoli  in  Syria,  Layas  in  Armenia,
Satalia  in  Turkey,  with  several  other  cities  and  towns,  from  the  enemies  of  the  faith  of
Jesus  Christ.

“ Anima  cjics  requiescat  in  pace.”

When  the  Genoese,  who  were  much  attached  to  him,  and  with  reason,  heard  of  his
melancholy  end,  they  armed  seven  galleys,  and  sent  them  to  Famagousta,  which  they  took
by  storm  and  Jacquet  in  it.  They  overran  the  greater  part  of  the  island,  and  would  have
destroyed  the  whole  had  they  not  feared  the  consequences;  but,  the  towns  being  strong  and
on  the  frontiers  of  Turkey,  they  left  them  in  the  hands  of  the  natives.  They  kept  possession
of  Famagousta,  where  they  amassed  great  wealth  from  its  plunder,  which  they  carried  to


* “ Whatever  may  he  the  name  of  this  castle,  and
■wherever  situated,  I have  no  douht  but  those  who  are
acquainted  with  the  two  Armenias,  will  think  what
our  author  hereafter  says  very  strange.  It  is  not  for  me
to  gainsay  him  : I am  satisfied,  if  he  be  consistent  with
himself.” — Marginal  note  by  D.  Sauvage.

~'r  The  Dalai  Lamas  was  formerly  denominated  Prester
John  ; and  Thibet  was  the  country  of  Prester  John.

+ He  was  assassinated  by  two  lords  of  his  country  whom
he  had  offended.  Peter  tarnished,  by  his  debaucheries  and
cruelty,  the  last  years  of  his  life,  and  even  the  glory  he


had  acquired  by  his  former  exploits. — Art  de  Verifier  lee
Dates.

§ For  further  particulars  respecting  Philip  de  Mesiers,
see  a memoir  on  this  subject  by  M.  le  Boeuf,  in  the  17th
vol.  of  les  Memoires  de  1’ Acadfimie  des  Inscriptions,  &c.  and
also  the  first  vol.  pp.  460,  461,  of  les  Antiquites  de  Paris,
par  M.  Sauval.

||  i.  e.  The  king  of  Cyprus.  In  the  original  it  stands,
fist  ecrite  du  dit  Roy  de  Cipre  sur  sa  tombe  qui  cat  au
chapitre  des  Celestins,  &c.


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  See.


139


Genoa,  and  also  Jacquet,  who  had  murdered  his  brother,  that  the  state  might  determine  on
his  destiny.  The  late  king  of  Cyprus  had  a son,  whose  marriage  the  Genoese  procured,
after  which  they  crowned  him  king*.  Jacquet,  though  suffered  to  live,  was  closely  confined
in  prison.  They  did  not  yield  up  Famagousta ; but  I am  ignorant  if  they  have  it  at  this
day.  This  king  of  Cyprus  died  in  his  bed,  and  without  heirs,  to  the  great  grief  of  the
Genoese.  I know  not  who  now  reigns  thei’e ; but  the  year  I was  in  Bearn,  the  lord  de
Valenchin,  a knight  of  that  country,  told  me  the  Genoese  had  a great  share  in  its  govern-
ment, being  masters  of  Famagousta,  and  that  they  had  crowned  Jacquet  f king,  in  default
of  heirs.  I know  not  how  the  devil  he  escaped  from  prison,  nor  out  of  the  hands  of  the
Genoese.


CHAPTER  XXIII. THE  KING  OP  ARMENIA  RELATES  MANY  STORIES  OF  THE

TURKS  AND  TARTARS.

The  king  of  Armenia,  on  his  first  arrival  in  France,  was  well  entertained  by  the  king  and
his  lords,  as  was  proper,  for  he  had  come  from  a far  country.  They  gained  from  him  infor-
mation respecting  Greece  and  Constantinople ; for  he  was  well  questioned  concerning  the
power  of  the  Turks  and  Tartars,  who  had  driven  him  out  of  his  kingdom.  To  their  ques-
tions he  answered,  that  the  cham  of  Tartary  had  always  made  war  upon  him,  arid  had  at
last  overpowered  him.  “And  this  cham  of  Tartary,  is  he  so  powerful?”  “That  he  is
indeed ; for  he  has,  with  the  assistance  of  the  sultan,  conquered  the  emperor  of  Constanti-
nople.” The  lords  then  asked  if  Constantinople  were  under  the  law  of  the  Tartars.  “ Oh
no,”  replied  the  king : “ the  cham  and  sultan  having  continued  the  war  on  Constantinople
for  a long  time,  it  was  at  length  agreed,  (for  otherwise  the  emperor  would  not  have  had
peace)  that  the  emperor  of  Constantinople,  who  was  son  of  Hugh  de  Lusignan  and  Mary  of
Bourbon,  should  give  his  son  in  marriage  to  the  cham ; but  notwithstanding  this  union,  he
was  to  enjoy  his  own  laws  and  privileges  J.  Fie  was  then  asked  what  the  count  Yerd  de
Savoye  had  done  with  his  gallant  company  of  knights,  squires,  and  men  at  arms.  He
replied, — “ That  when  the  count  de  Savoye  had  come  to  Hungary,  he  had  carried  his  war
as  far  as  he  could  into  Turkey,  but  had  made  no  great  progress  into  the  country ; but  by  his
prowess  he  had  conquered  the  large  town  of  Gallipoli  and  Limonia  in  the  last,  he  left  a
sufficiency  of  men  to  guard  it,  and,  during  the  life  of  the  king  of  Cyprus,  he  had  always
kept  possession  of  it,  The  moment  the  sultan  and  cham  of  Tartary  heard  of  the  king’s
death,  they  were  no  longer  afraid  of  the  emperor  of  Constantinople,  but  raised  an  army  of
one  hundred  thousand  men,  which  they  marched  to  Constantinople,  and  from  thence  laid
siege  to  Gallipoli,  took  it  by  storm,  and  slew  all  the  Christians  within  it.  They  made  so
deadly  a war  on  the  emperor,  that  he  would  have  lost  everything,  if  it  had  not  been  for  the


* Peter  II.  or  Petrm,  ascended  the  throne  in  1 372,  when
twelve  years  of  age,  under  the  regency  of  his  uncles
James  and  John,  to  the  exclusion  of  his  mother.  The
day  of  his  coronation,  there  arose  a dispute  between  the
bailiffs  of  Venice  and  the  consuls  of  Genoa  for  precedency;
and,  the  court  having  declared  in  favour  of  the  Vene-
tians, the  Genoese  revenged  themselves  for  this  affront,
in  1373,  by  conquering  the  whole  island.  Only  two
places  made  any  resistance,  Famagousta  and  Chorines.
The  first  surrendered  the  10th  October,  and  was  pillaged
during  three  days  ; the  second  submitted  about  the  middle
of  March  following.  The  king  was  made  prisoner,  but
recovered  his  liberty  by  the  cession  of  Famagousta,  and
the  promise  of  one  million  of  ducats  to  the  Genoese.

In  the  year  1375,  at  thcsolicitation  of  his  mother,  he
caused  his  uncle  John  to  be  assassinated  in  bis  presence,
to  revenge  the  death  of  his  father,  in  which  this  prince
had  been  a principal  actor.  Peter  died  on  the  17th  of
October,  1382,  aged  twenty-six,  without  leaving  any
children  by  his  queen,  Valentine,  daughter  of  Bernabo
Visconti.


f James  I.  constable  of  Cyprus,  was  a hostage  at  Genoa
when  his  nephew  Peter  II.  died.  He  was  sent  home  at
the  demand  of  his  countrymen,  who  crowned  him  king.
He  died  in  1398,  aged  sixty-four,  leaving  children  by
Agnes  of  Bavaria,  bis  queen,  John,  his  successor  to  the
throne  of  Cyprus  ; Hugh,  cardinal  archbishop  of  Nicosia;
Philip,  constable  of  Cyprus  ; Henry,  prince  of  Galilee  ;
Mary,  married  to  Ladislaus,  king  of  Naples  ; Isabella,
married  to  Peter  of  Cyprus;  Civa  died  unmarried,  1393.
— Art.  de  Verifier  les  Dates.

t Froissart  must  have  been  misinformed ; for  I see  by
Anderson’s  Royal  Genealogies,  that  John  Paleologus
must  have  been  emperor  of  Constantinople  at  this  time.
He  was  routed  by  Cantacuzenus,  and  restored  by  the
Genoese,  to  whom  he  gave  Lesbos.  He  afterwards  made
peace  with  Cantacuzenus,  made  him  his  colleague,  and
married  his  daughter.  He  died  1386,  having  reigned
forty-six  years.

§ Limonia  is  a small  island  in  the  Archipelago,  near
Rhodes,  between  that  island  and  Stapalia.


140


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


attachment  the  son  of  the  cham  had  for  his  daughter,  whom  he  afterwards  married.  This
is  a melancholy  prospect  for  the  times  to  come,  for  the  officers  of  the  cham  are  already  in
Constantinople,  and  the  Greeks  only  live  there  as  it  were  by  sufferance  from  them  ; if  there-
fore, the  princes  of  the  west  do  not  apply  a speedy  remedy,  the  Turks  will  conquer  all
Greece,  and  bend  it  to  their  faith  and  laws.  They  already  boast  they  will  do  so ; and  only
laugh  at  the  two  popes,  one  at  Rome  and  the  other  at  Avignon,  saying,  ‘ The  two  gods  of
Christendom  are  waging  war  against  each  other,  by  which  their  government  is  weakened
and  easier  to  be  destroyed;’  adding,  ‘ that  those  who  ought  to  attend  to  this,  act  with  such
indifference  as  to  leave  it  to  its  own  ruin.’  ”

The  king  of  Armenia  was  next  asked  if  the  sultan  of  Babylon  and  the  cham  of  Tartary
were  t'he  most  powerful  princes  among  the  infidels,  known  to  the  Greeks,  on  the  other  side
of  the  mountains.  “ By  no  means,"  he  replied ; “ for  the  Turks  have  always  been  looked  to
as  the  most  wise  and  potent  in  war,  as  long  as  they  are  under  an  able  chief ; and  this  they
have  had  for  these  last  hundred  years  : although  the  cham  completely  governs  the  emperor
of  Constantinople,  the  Turkish  chief  keeps  him  also  under  subjection.  The  name  of  their
present  leader  is  Amurat,  a prudent  and  able  man  both  in  arms  and  council,  of  whom,  to
say  the  truth,  I have  not  any  cause  of  complaint,  for  he  has  never  injured  me,  having
carried  his  war  against  the  king  of  Hungary.”  “ This  Amurat,  of  whom  you  speak,  is  he
then  of  such  consequence  and  power,  and  so  much  renowned  and  feared?”  “ Yes,”  replied
the  king  of  Armenia ; “ and  even  more  than  I say  ; for,  if  the  emperor  of  Constantinople
and  the  king  of  Hungary  are  afraid  of  him,  the  caliph  of  Babylon  and  the  cham  of  Tartary
equally  dread  him.  It  was  supposed,  indeed  I have  heard  it  from  the  Tartars,  that  the
cham  would  have  been  more  hard  on  the  emperor  of  Constantinople  and  that  country,
had  he  not  been  afraid  of  Amurat.  He  is  well  acquainted  with  his  jealous  temper;  and
that,  the  instant  he  finds  any  one  more  powerful  than  himself,  he  never  rests  until  he  shall
have  lowered  him,  and  brought  him  under  his  subjection.  It  was  the  knowledge  of  this
that  prevented  the  cham  from  doing  all  he  could  have  done  against  the  emperor  of
the  east.”

“ Does  Amurat  keep  on  foot  a large  army?”  “ Yes;  he  was  not  thirty  years  of  age
before  he  had  an  army  of  one  hundred  thousand  horse,  which  he  always  kept  in  the  field,
never  quartering  himself  in  any  large  town  : besides,  he  had  ten  thousand  Turks  to  serve
and  defend  his  person.  Wherever  he  marches,  he  carries  his  father  with  him.”  “ How
old  is  he?”  “He  is  full  sixty  years  old,  and  his  father  is  ninety.  Amurat  loves  the
French  language,  and  those  who  come  from  France : he  says  he  would  rather  see  the
king  of  France  and  his  state  than  all  the  other  potentates  of  the  earth.  He  is  greatly
pleased  when  any  one  talks  to  him  on  this  subject,  and  in  favour  of  the  lords  of  that
country.”  “ Why  does  Amurat  remain  on  terms  with  the  cham,  since  he  is  so  great
a conqueror?”  “ Because  the  cham  is  afraid  of  him,  and  dares  not  make  war:  there
are,  also,  certain  ports  and  towns  in  Tartary  which  pay  Amurat  heavy  duties : they  are
both  of  the  same  faith,  and  will  not  destroy  their  law.  It  has  been  a great  matter  of
wonder  to  him  that  Christians  should  make  war  on  each  other ; and  he  has  frequently  had
an  inclination  to  enter  Christendom  and  conquer  all  before  him.  It  would  have  been  to
my  advantage  if  he  had  conquered  me,  rather  than  the  cham  of  Tartary.”  They  asked  the
king  of  Armenia,  why  it  would  have  been  to  his  advantage,  who  replied, — “ Amurat  is  a
man  of  noble  birth ; and,  were  he  thirty  ycai's  younger,  is  formed  to  make  great  conquests
wherever  he  should  please  to  march  his  army.  When  he  conquers  any  country  or  town,  he
only  insists  on  the  payment  of  a tax,  leaving  every  one  to  follow  his  own  religion ; and  he
has  never  taken  any  man’s  inheritance  from  him,  only  requiring  the  supreme  government  of
the  country.  It  is  for  these  reasons,  I say,  that  if  he  had  conquered  Armenia,  instead  of
the  Tartars,  he  would  have  left  me  my  kingdom  and  religion,  and  remained  in  peace,  on  my
acknowledging  him  as  lord  paramount,  like  other  great  barons  on  his  frontiers,  Greeks  and
Thracians,  who  thus  acknowledge  him,  to  free  themselves  from  all  danger  from  the  caliph  of
Babylon  and  the  grand  cham.”  “ What  are  the  names  of  these  barons?"  “ I will  tell  you,”
answered  the  king  : “ first,  there  is  the  lord  de  Satalia,  the  lord  de  la  Palice,  and  the  lord  do
Ilaute-loge : these  lords  and  their  territories,  by  means  of  the  tax  they  pay  to  Amurat,


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE.  &c.


141

remain  in  peace,  and  there  is  neither  Turk  nor  Tartar  that  dares  injure  them* * * §.”  They  then
asked  the  king,  if  Armenia  was  so  totally  lost  that  there  were  no  means  of  recovering  it.
“Yes,  indeed,”  he  replied,  “unless  a force  superior  to  the  Turks  and  Tartars  cross  the
mountains  and  conquer  Greece  ; for  excepting  the  town  of  Courth,  which  is  the  entrance  to
my  kingdom,  and  as  yet  remains  to  Christendom,  the  infidels  have  possession  of  all  the  rest :
and,  where  the  churches  used  to  he,  they  have  placed  their  idols  and  their  maliomets.”
“ And  this  town  of  Courth,  is  it  strong?”  “ Aye,  in  God’s  name  is  it,”  said  the  king  of
Armenia  : “ it  is  not  to  be  taken  unless  by  treachery  or  a very  long  siege  ; for  it  is  situated
in  a dry  spot  on  the  sea-shore,  and  between  two  rocks  that  cannot  he  approached.  Should
the  Turks  or  Tartars  gain  it,  and  another  good  town  not  far  distant,  called  Aldelphet,  all
Greece  must  inevitably  be  lost,  and  Hungary  besides  in  a short  time  afterwards.”  The  king
of  Armenia  was  asked  if  Hungary  were  on  the  frontiers  of  the  Turks  and  Tartars.  He
said  it  was ; but  nearer  to  the  Turks  and  the  territories  of  Amurat  than  to  any  other
potentate.  “ It  is  very  extraordinary,”  they  replied,  “ that  Amurat,  who  is  so  valorous,
and  such  a conqueror,  should  leave  so  near  a neighbour  in  peace.”  “ In  God’s  name,”
answered  the  king,  “ he  has  not  for  some  time  even  pretended  to  keep  peace  with  Hungary,
but  made  such  exertions,  to  the  injury  of  that  kingdom,  that  if  an  unfortunate  accident  had
not  befallen  him,  he  would  at  this  moment  have  been  far  advanced  in  that  country.”  “ And
what  was  that  accident  ?”  “ I will  tell  you,”  replied  the  king.


CIIAPTER  XXIV.J CONTINUATION  OF  TIIE  INTELLIGENCE  WHICH  THE  KING  OF  ARMENIA

RELATES  TO  THE  BARONS  OF  FRANCE.


“ When  Amurat  saw  that  all  the  adjoining  princes  feared  him,  and  that  the  shores  of  the
sea  as  far  as  Hungary  hounded  his  dominion,  he  determined,  as  the  kingdom  of  Hungary
had,  by  king  Frederick’s  death,  devolved  on  the  queen,  to  declare  war  and  conquer  it.  He
therefore  issued  a particular  summons  to  his  vassals  throughout  Turkey,  which  being  obeyed,
he  began  his  march  and  encamped  in  the  plains  of  Satalia,  between  la  Palice  and  Haute-
loge,  to  strike  more  fear  into  his  enemies.  It  was  his  intention  to  enter  the  kingdom  of
Hungary,  notwithstanding  it  is  a country  inclosed  with  high  rocks  and  mountains  which
make  it  so  much  the  stronger.  He  sent  before  him  ambassadors  and  heralds,  with  a mule
laden  with  a grain  called  millet,  telling  them  4 Go  you  into  Hungary,  to  the  count  de  Lazaran,§
whose  territories  lie  among  the  mountains  of  Meleabre  and  Robee,  through  which  we  mean
our  army  to  pass,  and  tell  him  we  order  and  command,  if  he  wish  for  himself  and  country  to
remain  at  peace,  that  he  come  and  render  us  obedience,  as  he  knows  the  lords  de  Satalia,  de
la  Palice  and  de  Haute-loge  have  done,  and  lay  open  his  country  for  us  to  passthrough.  If
he  should  refuse  to  obey  and  appear  rebellious,  tell  him  from  us,  that  we  will  pour  into  his
territories,  to  destroy  them,  as  many  heads  as  you  will  show  you  have  grains  of  millet  in  your
bags.’  The  ambassadors  instantly  departed  on  receiving  these  instructions,  and  arrived  in  the
territory  of  the  count  de  Lazaran  in  Hungary : they  found  him  at  one  of  his  castles  called
Archiforme.  He  received  the  ambassadors  from  Amurat  kindly,  and  handsomely  entertained
them,  but  was  much  surprised  when  he  saw  the  mule  enter  his  court  laden  with  he  knew  not
what.  He  at  first  imagined  it  might  be  gold  or  precious  stones,  which  Amurat  had  sent  to


* Sauvage,  in  a marginal  note,  says  he  would  willingly
tell  where  those  territories  arc,  but  he  has  not  been  able
to  find  them  out,  and  thinks  there  must  have  been  some
mistakes  in  their  names.

t “ Aldelphe.”  Q.  If  not  meant  for  Delphos.

£ Denys  Sauvage  complains  that  he  cannot  understand
this  chapter,  nor  the  accounts  from  the  Levant.  There
was  not  any  king  of  Hungary  at  that  period  of  the  name
of  Frederick.  Lewis  the  great  reigned  in  1342,  and  his
daughter  Mary  succeeded  him  1352.  I find  myself  there-
fore obliged,  like  Sauvage,  to  leave  it  as  I find  it.

§ Sauvage  says  in  a note,  “According  to  Paul  Jovius


and  father  Anthony  Geoffrai,  his  proper  name  was  Lazarus,
despot  or  lord  of  Servia,  formerly  called  by  the  Romans
Missia  Inferior.”

This  probably  is  the  person  called  by  Froissart  the  lord
de  Lazaran.

“ Servia  made  formerly  part  of  Mcesia,  Illyria  and  Pan-
nonia.  At  the  fall  of  the  Roman  empire,  it  belonged  to
the  Servians,  who  had  come  thither  from  Sarmatia  in  Asia.
It  had  afterwards  its  own  despots,  some  of  whom  depended
on  the  kings  of  Hungary.  The  last  had  the  misfortune  to
be  captured  in  battle,  and  hrs  army  cut  to  pieces  by  Amurat
I.  in  the  14th  century.”

See  Servie,  in  the  Encyclopedic  par  Ordre  des  Matidres.


142


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


seduce  him  to  his  party,  and  to  bribe  him  to  allow  a passage  for  his  army  through  his
country ; hut  he  had  resolved,  that  he  would  never  submit  to  be  corrupted  by  any  presents
whatever.

“ When  the  ambassadors  had  their  audience,  they  spoke  as  follows  : — ‘ Lord  de  Lazaran,
we  are  sent  hither  by  that  high  and  mighty  prince,  our  redoubted  sovereign,  Amurat,  lord
of  Turkey  and  of  all  its  dependencies  : and  we  tell  you  from  him,  that  he  orders  you  to  place
yourself  under  his  obedience  in  the  same  form  and  manner  as  you  know  the  lords  de  Satalia,
de  la  Palice  and  de  Haute-loge  have  done,  and  that  you  delay  not  coming  to  perform  your
homage  to  him,  in  like  manner  as  your  neighbours  have  done.  You  will  open  your  country
to  his  army  if  you  wish  to  have  peace,  and  by  so  doing  you  will  greatly  enjoy  his  good  favour :
but,  should  you  refuse  and  prove  rebellious,  we  are  commanded  to  say,  that  our  sovereign
lord,  Amurat,  will  pour  more  heads  into  your  country,  to  destroy  it,  than  there  are  grains  of
millet  in  this  bag.’  Having  said  this,  he  opened  the  bag  to  show  him  its  contents.  The
lord  de  Lazaran  was  advised  to  return  a temperate  answer,  and  not  discover  his  thoughts  at
once.  He  replied,  4 Tie  up  your  bag ; I see  what  is  within  it,  and  I have  heard  from  you
what  Amurat’ s intentions  are  : within  three  days  you  shall  have  an  answer,  for  these  demands
require  deliberation.’  They  replied,  ‘You  say  well;’  and,  in  confidence  of  having  an
answer,  they  tarried  three  days.  I will  now  tell  you  what  the  Count  de  Lazaran  did  during
these  three  days : he  got  collected  and  brought  to  his  castle  ten  thousand  head  of  poultry
of  all  sorts,  which  he  caused  to  be  shut  up  without  any  food  whatever.  On  the  day
appointed  for  the  ambassadors  to  receive  their  answer,  he  conducted  them  to  a gallery  which
overlooked  a court,  bidding  them  lean  over  the  rail,  and,  before  he  gave  them  his  answer,  he
would  show  them  something  new  : they,  not  thinking  what  he  was  about,  did  as  he  ordered.
Two  doors  were  instantly  opened,  when  all  his  poultry  who  had  been  starving  for  two  days
rushed  out ; and  the  millet  bag  being  opened,  and  its  contents  scattered  about,  the  whole  was
devoured  in  less  than  half  an  hour,  and  more  would  have  been  eaten  if  they  could  have  had
it.  The  count  de  Lazaran  then,  turning  towards  the  ambassadors,  said, — ‘ My  fair  sirs,
you  have  seen  how  the  millet  you  have  brought  hither,  from  your  master,  with  many  menaces,
has  been  destroyed  by  this  poultry,  who  would  have  destroyed  more  had  they  had  it  V ‘ Yes,’
replied  they,  ‘ but  wherefore  do  you  mention  it  ? ’ ‘ Because  you  have  your  answer  in

what  you  have  witnessed  and  in  the  fact  you  have  seen.  Amurat  threatens  that,  unless  I
obey  him,  he  will  pour  into  my  country  men  at  arms  without  number,  to  destroy  it : tell  him
from  me,  I wait  for  him,  and  that  with  whatever  force  he  come,  he  shall  be  destroyed  in  the
same  manner  as  the  fowls  have  devoured  your  millet.’  The  ambassadors,  on  receiving  this
answer,  became  quite  pensive.  They  took  leave  of  the  count,  and  travelled  by  short  days,
journeys,  until  they  came  to  where  Amurat  and  his  army  lay.  They  related  to  him  all  that
the  count  de  Larazan  had  done  and  said,  and  that  he  seemed  to  hold  his  menaces  very  cheap.
Amurat  was  very  wroth  on  hearing  this  answer,  and  swore  that  things  should  not  remain  as
they  were  ; but  that  he  would  enter  the  territories  of  the  count  whether  he  would  or  not,
and  lay  waste  all  his  lands,  in  revenge  for  his  insolent  answer.

“ I will  now  tell  you  what  the  count  de  Lazaran  did,  since  war  had  been  denounced
against  him,  which  he  knew  would  be  speedily  followed  otherwise  than  by  words.  He
instantly  made  preparations  of  stores  and  provision,  and  sent  expresses  to  inform  his  knights
and  squires,  and  all  those  capable  of  bearing  arms,  that  Amurat  was  about  to  invade
Hungary,  and  to  order  them  to  guard  valiantly  all  the  passes  into  the  country,  and  join
him  as  speedily  as  may  be,  for  there  was  no  time  for  delay.  Amurat  remained  with  his
army  on  the  plains  of  Haute-loge.  As  it  was  to  defend  Christendom,  all  the  knights  to
whom  the  count  had  written  obeyed  his  orders  and  came  to  him,  as  did  many  more  to  whom
he  had  not  sent,  but  who  had  heard  it  accidentally,  to  support  the  faith  and  destroy  the
infidels.  The  count  had  the  forests  cut  down  and  thrown  across  the  roads  Amurat  was  to
pass,  which  he  expected  would  have  a great  effect  in  checking  the  Turks  on  their  march.  The
count,  accompanied  by  ten  thousand  Hungarians  and  as  many  cross-bows,  entrenched  him-
self and  men  on  each  side  of  a pass  through  which  he  knew  Amurat  must  march.  He  had
also  with  him  two  thousand  peasants,  armed  with  axes  and  wedges,  to  fell  the  timber  and
block  up  the  road  on  a signal  given.  When  everything  was  prepared,  the  count  said, —


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


143


‘ Without  doubt  Amurat  will  come  liitlier,  for  lie  lias  sent  me  word  be  would  so  do  ; bo
therefore  steady  and  valiant  in  defending  this  pass,  for,  should  it  be  won  by  the  Turks,  all
Hungary  is  in  danger  of  being  conquered.  We  are  strongly  posted,  and  one  man  here  is
equal  to  four.  It  will  be  more  for  our  honour  to  perish  in  the  field,  defending  the  faith  of
Jesus  Christ,  than  to  live  in  bondage  under  these  dogs  of  infidels,  notwithstanding  the
courage  and  ability  of  Amurat.’  4 Sir,’  replied  they  unanimously,  ‘ we  will  with  you  abide
the  event : let  the  Turks  come  when  they  will,  we  are  ready  to  receive  them.’  The  Turks
were  quite  ignorant  of  all  this  ; for  the  count,  fearful  lest  his  plans  should  be  discovered  by
Anmrat’s  spies,  and  revealed  to  him,  had  posted  some  of  his  most  confidential  friends
between  him  and  the  enemy,  to  prevent  any  communication  whatever  between  the  two  armies.

44  Amurat  was  not  forgetful  of  his  menace,  but  declared  be  would  visit  the  territories  of
the  count  do  Lazaran,  in  such  a manner  that  he  should  remember  it ; for  lie  was  unwilling
to  be  thought  a liar  in  breaking  bis  promise.  Having  selected  sixty  thousand  men,  for  he
had  two  hundred  thousand  in  his  camp,  he  gave  the  command  of  them  to  four  captains
attached  to  his  household  and  faith  : their  names  were,  the  duke  Mansion  of  Mecca,  the
governor  of  Damietta,  Alphalory  de  Samarie,  and  the  prince  de  Corde,  surnamed  Brachin,
to  whom  he  said,  on  their  leaving  him, — 4 You  will  march  these  men  whom  I put  under  your
command,  a number  sufficient  to  open  a passage  into  Hungary,  to  the  lands  of  the  lord  de
Lazaran,  which  you  will  completely  destroy  by  fire  and  sword.  As  soon  as  I shall  be
informed  of  your  arrival  there,  I will  follow  with  the  remainder  of  my  army  ; for  I am
resolved  to  have  Hungary  under  my  obedience,  and  afterwards  the  empire  of  Gennany.
The  wizards  of  my  country,  and  the  diviners  of  Egypt,  have  pronounced  that  I am  destined
to  be  king  of  all  the  world ; but  the  place  I would  most  willingly  visit  is  Rome ; for,  in
ancient  times,  it  formed  part  of  cur  inheritance  : and  our  predecessors  have  conquered  and
governed  it  several  times.  I will  lead  with  me  le  Galifre  de  Baudas,  the  chain  of  Tartary,
and  the  sultan  of  Babylon,  who  shall  there  crown  me.’  The  captains,  who  were  on  their
knees,  replied,  they  would  cheerfully  obey  his  commands,  and  then  marched  off  with  the
sixty  thousand  men.  Among  them  were  twenty  thousand  of  the  most  able  and  best  armed
of  the  Turkish  army,  who  formed  the  van  battalion.  When  they  came  to  the  mountains
on  the  frontiers  of  Lazaran,  the  van,  finding  no  one  to  oppose  them,  entered  them,  under  the
command  of  the  duke  of  Mecca  and  the  governor  of  Damietta,  and  passed  the  ambuscade  of
the  count  de  Lazaran.  As  soon  as  the  count  and  the  Hungarians  saw  they  had  entrapped
their  foe,  they  began  to  work,  by  cutting  down  the  forest  trees  and  laying  them  across  the
road,  so  that  it  was  quite  impossible  for  the  Turks  to  retreat  or  to  advance,  for  the  passage
was  entirely  blocked  up.

44  Thus  were  twenty  thousand  Turks  inclosed,  who  were  so  vigorously  attacked  by  the
Hungarians  from  each  side  of  the  forest,  and  with  such  good  effect,  that  all  were  slain.  Not
one  escaped  death,  not  even  the  two  commanders.  Some  few  attempted  to  fly,  but  were
pursued  through  the  wood  and  killed.  The  rear  division,  unable  to  advance  through  the
fallen  forest,  returned  to  Amurat,  and  related  the  unfortunate  event  which  had  happened  to
his  army.  lie  was  very  pensive  on  hearing  it,  and  summoned  his  council  to  consider  what
was  to  be  done,  as  he  had  lost  the  flower  of  his  army.”  The  king  of  Armenia,  having  thus
finished  his  history  of  the  defeat  of  the  Turks,  resumed  the  account  of  his  own  melancholy
situation,  to  the  king  of  France  and  his  uncles.  They  took  compassion  on  him,  because  he
had  come  from  such  a distant  part  of  the  world  as  Greece  to  seek  aid  and  comfort ; and
being  a king  driven  out  of  his  realm,  without  any  means  of  keeping  up  his  state,  or  even
supporting  himself,  as  his  complaints  evidently  showed.  The  king  of  France,  young  as  he
was,  said, — 44  We  will  that  the  king  of  Armenia,  who  has  come  to  us  in  hopes  of  assistance,
have  allowed  him  wherewithal  to  maintain  his  dignity,  suitable  to  bis  rank,  as  he  is  a king
like  ourself ; and  when  we  are  able,  he  shall  have  men  at  arms  to  aid  him  in  the  recovery
of  his  kingdom ; for  we  have  a very  good  inclination  so  to  do,  being  bound  to  support  the
Christian  faith.”

The  speech  of  the  king  was  applauded  by  all.  His  uncles  and  council  were  willing  to
fulfil  these  commands  ; and  a proper  allowance  was  ordered  to  be  paid  the  king  of  Armenia
monthly,  from  the  chamber  of  accounts,  to  keep  up  his  state.  The  sum  allowed  was  six


144


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


thousand  francs  yearly ; and  he  had  five  thousand  presented  him,  to  provide  himself  with
plate  and  other  smaller  necessaries.  The  palace  of  St.  Ouen,  near  St.  Denis,  was  likewise
given  to  him  for  his  residence.  Such  assistance  did  the  king  of  Armenia  receive  on  his  first
arrival  in  France,  which  was  constantly  increasing.  He  was  at  times  much  with  the  king,
particularly  at  all  the  grand  festivals  *.


CHAPTER  XXV. DURING  THESE  WARS  OF  THE  TURKS,  DISSENTIONS  CONTINUE  BETWEEN

THE  TWO  POPES,  URBAN  VI.  AND  CLEMENT  VII. FRIAR  JOHN  DE  LA  ROCHE-TAILLARD

DELIVERS  A GOOD  APOLOGUE,  RESPECTING  THE  PAPACY,  TO  THE  CARDINALS.

About  this  period,  Otho  of  Brunswick  came  to  pope  Clement  at  Avignon,  to  receive  his
pay  for  the  war  he  had  carried  on  for  the  pope  and  church  against  the  Romans  and
Bartholomew  Prignano,  who  styled  himself  pope  Urban  YI.  as  you  have  before  seen  in  this
history.  He  remonstrated  with  the  pope  and  cardinals  on  various  topics,  to  which  they
attentively  listened  ; but,  as  for  his  pay,  he  could  not  obtain  one  penny,  the  treasury  being
so  empty  that  the  cardinals  were  unable  to  get  what  was  their  due.  Sir  Otho,  therefore,
left  them  much  discontented ; but,  before  he  set  out  from  Avignon,  they  gave  him  one
thousand  francs,  which  he  held  cheap,  and  the  war  of  the  pope  was  greatly  weakened,  for
sir  Otho  would  not  henceforward  concern  himself  about  it.  Besides,  Margaret  de  Duras,
duchess  of  Anjou  f,  who  resided  at  Gaietta,  sent  for  bis  assistance  against  the  Neapolitans.
Sir  Otho  balanced  for  a time,  not  knowing  which  side  to  take  ; some  of  his  council  advising
him  to  aid  Margaret  in  the  defence  of  her  realm,  and  take  her  to  wife,  as  she  had  not  any
objection  and  was  of  noble  birth,  and  by  this  means  they  told  him  that  he  might  become
king  of  the  country : but  others  advised  the  contrary,  lest  it  might  have  an  unfavourable
issue  ; for  her  children  by  the  duke  of  Anjou,  who  had  been  crowned  king  in  Bari,  were
young,  and  had  many  relations  and  friends,  especially  in  the  king  of  France  their  cousin-
german,  who  would  certainly  support  their  claims,  as  well  as  the  lady  Jane,  duchess  dowager
of  Anjou,  who  would  have  great  weight.  Sir  Otho  was  so  long  doubtful  between  the  two
parties  that  at  length  neither  had  him.

About  this  time,  the  forces  subsidized  by  pope  Clement,  under  the  command  of  the  lord
de  Moetroye,  a right  valiant  knight  from  the  country  of  Geneva  and  Savoy,  sir  Talebert,  a
knight  of  Rhodes,  and  sir  Bernard  de  la  Salle,  had  shut  up  pope  Urban  in  the  city  of
Perugia.  He  was  much  straitened,  and  on  the  point  of  being  made  captive.  I was  told


* Sauval,  in  his  Antiquities  of  Paris,  copies  Froissart  in
the  account  of  the  reception  of  the  king  of  Armenia  by  the
court  of  Charles  VI.  ; hut  adds,  from  Juvenal  des  Ursins,
that  this  prince  was  not  so  wretched  in  his  fortune,  having
saved  many  jewels,  and  even  some  of  his  treasure,  when
he  fled  from  the  Tartars.  He  was  a fruitless  negociator
of  peace  between  England  and  France,  and  was  sent  to
Boulogne,  with  others  on  this  subject.  He  died  in  1393,
in  the  palace  of  the  Tournelles,  situated  in  the  street
of  St.  Anthony,  opposite  the  royal  hotel  of  St.  Pol,
where  the  kings  of  France  usually  resided.  He  was  buried
in  the  church  of  the  Celestins,  after  the  manner  of  his  own
country,  his  friends  clothed  in  white,  carrying  torches  of
white  wax  : his  body,  dressed  in  royal  robes  of  the  same
colour,  was  laid  upon  a white  bed  of  state,  and  his  head
encircled  with  a crown  of  gold.  At  this  funeral  ceremony
many  of  the  princes  and  great  lords  assisted,  and  crowds  of
common  people. — Antiquites  de  Paris,  vol.  ii.  p.  251.

Holingshed  says,  Leo,  king  of  Armenia,  came  to  Eng-
land and  received  a pension  of  1 000/.  from  Richard  II. ;
the  object  of  his  visit  was  to  make  peace  between  the  two
countries  of  France  and  England.

f The  text  which  Mr.  Johnes  here  follows  is  essentially
different  from  that  of  D.  Sanvage  and  more  recent  French
editions,  and  Lord  Berners,  and  is  moreover  not  con-
sonant to  the  truth.  Margaret  of  Duras  was  not  duchess


of  Anjou,  but  widow  of  Charles  of  Duras,  king  of  Naples,
the  competitor  of  Louis,  duke  of  Anjou,  for  that  kingdom.
According  to  D.  Sauvage,  &c.,  the  passage  should  run
as  follows  : — “ Besides  Margaret  of  Duras,  who  resided  at
Gaietta,  and  was  opposed  to  the  queen  of  Naples,  widow
of  king  Louis,  duke  of  Anjou,  begged  his  assistance
to  make  war  on  the  Neapolitans.  Sir  Otho  balanced  for
a time,  not  knowing  which  side  to  take.  Some  of  his
council  advised  him  to  take  part  with  Margaret  of  Duras,
who  was  heiress  of  Naples  and  Sicily,  and  assist  her  to
defend  and  keep  her  heritage,  and  to  take  her  to  wife,  as
she  was  very  willing  to  have  him  for  a husband,  he  being
of  noble  biood  and  high  lineage ; and  he  would  thus
become  king  and  lord  of  the  countries  which  she  claimed.
Others  advised  him  to  the  contrary ; for  the  children  of
king  Louis,  who  had  been  crowned  in  the  city  of  Bari,
were  young  and  had  numerous  friends  and  relations,
especially  the  king  of  France,  who  were  willing  to  assist
them  ; and  their  lady  mother,  queen  Joan,  duchess  of
Anjou  and  Maine,  was  a woman  of  great  intrigue.  All
these  doubts  were  laid  before  him  by  his  council.  Sir
Otho  held  back  and  hesitated  so  long  that  he  lost  both
parties.”  We  should  here  observe  that  Margaret  of
Duras  was  not  heiress  to  the  kingdom  of  Naples,  but
regent  during  the  minority  of  her  son  Ladislas. — -Ed.


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  Ike.


14".


it  depended  only  on  the  payment  of  twenty  thousand  crowns ; for  count  Conrad,  a leader
of  a large  body  of  Germans,  would  have  delivered  him  up  to  pope  Clement  for  that  sum.
Sir  Bernard  do  la  Salle  was  sent  to  Avignon  to  inform  the  pope,  and  to  remonstrate  with
him  and  the  cardinals  on  the  subject,  but  in  vain  with  regard  to  the  money,  for  the  court
was  so  poor  that  lie  could  not  obtain  anything,  and  returned,  very  discontented,  to  the  siege
of  Perugia.  The  siege  was  slackened  on  both  sides,  and  Urban  escaped  from  this  danger  to
Rome,  where  he  remained.

I know  that  in  times  to  come,  these  things  will  be  wondered  at,  and  it  will  be  a matter
of  astonishment  how  the  church  could  fall  into  such  troubles,  and  those  of  so  long  a duration.
It  was  a punishment  sent  by  God  to  make  the  clergy  feci  and  consider  the  great  pomp  and
superfluities  they  possessed : but  many  paid  no  attention  to  it,  being  so  swollen  with  pride
and  arrogance,  that  each  would  imitate  his  superiors,  and  thus  was  religion  little  regarded  ;
and  if  the  Holy  Spirit,  who  enlightens  the  hearts  of  the  devout,  had  not  kept  them  steady,
and  in  unison,  it  would  have  been  severely  shaken,  if  not  lost.  The  great  proprietors  of
land,  who  at  the  first  were  such  noble  benefactors  to  the  church,  now  make  a joke  of  it,
even  at  the  time  I was  writing  and  chronicling  this  history,  in  the  year  of  grace  1390;  at
which  the  commonalty  were  much  surprised,  and  wondered  why  such  great  lords  as  the
kings  of  France  and  Germany,  and  the  other  princes  of  Christendom,  did  not  provide  a
remedy  for  it.  But,  to  satisfy  the  people  and  excuse  the  great  barons,  I may  say,  that  as
there  cannot  be  a yolk  of  an  egg  without  its  white,  nor  a white  without  the  yolk,  so  neither
the  clergy  nor  the  lords  can  exist  independently  of  each  other ; for  the  lords,  not  being
ruled  by  the  clergy,  would  degenerate  into  beasts.

I will  say,  that  in  my  time  I have  for  certain  seen  much  of  mankind ; whether  for  my
own  amusement,  or  in  travelling  to  learn  the  history  of  what  passes  in  the  world  relative  to
deeds  and  adventures  in  arms,  which  are  described  in  this  book  ; but  I have  never  met  with
any  lord,  except  the  count  de  Foix,  who  had  not  his  minions,  pages,  and  jesters,  most
honourably  entertained.  The  count  de  Foix  had  none  such  ; for  he  was  naturally  grave,  and
of  great  good  sense,  which  was  of  more  value  than  anything  they  could  have  afforded  him.
I do  not  say,  that  those  lords  who  arc  attended  by  minions  * arc  mad ; they  are  worse  than
mad,  for  they  are  blind  having  two  eyes.

When  information  of  this  disputed  choice  was  first  brought  to  king  Charles  of  France,  of
happy  memory,  lie  paused,  and  left  it  to  his  clergy  ; who,  having  considered  the  matter,
resolved  that  pope  Clement  had  been  truly  elected.  To  this  opinion  the  kings  of  France,
Castille,  and  Scotland  assented  ; and,  notwithstanding  the  schism  which  was  caused  in  the
church,  these  three  kings,  being  allied  together,  remained  steady  to  Clement ; but  the  kings  of
England  and  Portugal  were  of  a contrary  way  of  thinking.  The  earl  of  Flanders  had  formed
his  creed  as  you  have  heard  in  this  history ; for  he  would  never  acknowledge  pope  Clement,
because  he  had,  at  the  first  conclave,  voted  for  the  Cardinal  of  Bari,  and  because,  while
cardinal  of  Geneva,  he  had  written  to  the  earl  to  say  Urban  had  been  legally  elected  pope,
for  which  reason  the  ear1  of  Flanders  considered  his  as  the  true  one  as  long  as  he  lived.
The  emperor  and  all  Germany,  with  the  king  of  Hungary,  acknowledged  Urban.

While  writing  of  these  dissensions  that  happened  in  my  time  both  in  states  and  in  the  church
(which  was  somewhat  shaken  thereby),  and  it  is  to  be  understood  that  the  great  landed
proprietors  were  acting  like  hypocrites,  it  comes  to  my  remembrance  how  in  my  yonng  days,
during  the  reign  of  pope  Innocent,  at  Avignon,  there  was  confined  in  prison  a learned  clerk,
called  Friar  John  de  la  Roche-taillade.  This  friar,  as  I have  been  told  by  several  privately,
for  it  was  never  talked  of  in  public,  foretold,  while  in  prison,  many  of  the  great  events  which
would  happen  shortly  in  the  world,  more  especially  those  that  related  to  France.  He
prophesied  the  capture  of  king  John  of  France,  and  the  misfortunes  that  were  to  befal  the
church  from  the  pride  and  arrogance  of  those  who  governed  it.  It  was  said,  that  during  his
imprisonment,  he  was  brought  to  the  pope’s  palace,  when  the  cardinal  of  Ostia,  commonly
called  cardinal  of  Arras,  and  the  cardinal  of  Auxerre,  disputed  with  him  on  these  subjects.
Friar  John  gave  them  for  answer  the  following  apologue  : “ In  former  days  a bird  was  hatched
without  any  feathers.  When  the  other  birds  heard  of  this,  they  went  to  see  him,  for  he  was

* Marmousets.


VOL.  II.


L


146


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


fair  and  pleasant  to  look  on.  Having  considered  that  without  feathers  he  could  not  fly,  nor
without  flying  live — which,  however,  they  were  determined  to  assist  him  in,  for  he  was  a
prodigiously  handsome  bird — they  resolved  that  every  bird  should  give  him  some  of  his  feathers.
The  best  feathered  gave  most,  so  that  he  was  soon  enabled  to  fly.  The  other  birds  took
much  pleasure  in  seeing  him.  When  this  bird  saw  himself  thus  in  feather,  and  that  all  the
birds  paid  him  great  honour,  he  grew  proud,  and  not  only  held  those  cheap  who  had  made
him  so,  but  pecked  and  drove  them  from  him.  The  birds  held  an  assembly  to  consider  how
they  should  act,  in  consequence  of  the  treatment  they  received  from  this  bird  whom  they  had
clothed,  and  who  now  despised  them.  The  peacock  said,  ‘ He  is  too  finely  dressed  in  my
feathers  : I will  take  them  front  him.’  ‘ In  God’s  name,’  said  the  falcon,  ‘ so  will  I mine.'
The  other  birds  said  they  would  do  the  same,  and  'immediately  began  to  unfeather  him.
The  bird,  on  seeing  this,  humbled  himself  greatly,  and  acknowledged  the  honours  and
wealth  he  had  received ; and  that  his  fine  feathers  were  not  his  own,  for  he  had  come  into  the
world  naked  and  featherless ; and  those  who  had  feathered  him  might,  if  they  chose,  retake
them.  He  cried  out  for  mercy,  and  promised,  henceforward,  never  to  risk,  by  pride  or  pre-
sumption, the  loss  of  his  feathers.  The  gallant  birds  who  had  plucked  him,  seeing  him  thus
humbled  in  his  deportment,  restored  his  feathers  : but  said,  on  giving  them  back, — ‘ We  will
gladly  see  thee  fly  among  us,  as  long  as  thou  shalt  bear  thyself  meekly,  for  so  it  becometli
thee  ; but  if  ever  thou  shalt  act  arrogantly,  we  will  pluck  thee  bare,  and  leave  thee  in  the
naked  state  we  found  thee.’  Thus,  my  fair  sirs,”  said  friar  John  to  the  cardinals,  “ will  it
happen  to  you.  The  emperors,  kings,  and  princes  of  the  earth,  have  given  you  wealth,  and
power  and  possessions,  that  you  may  serve  God ; but  you  expend  it  in  pomp,  luxury  and
all  extravagancies.  Why  do  you  not  read  the  life  of  St.  Silvester,*  the  first  pope  who
succeeded  St.  Peter,  and  weigh  well  the  conditions  on  which  the  emperor  Constantine  gave
the  tithes  to  the  church  ? St.  Silvester  did  not  travel  with  two  or  three  hundred  attendants
on  horseback,  but  lived  simply  and  retired  at  Rome,  solely  with  his  churchmen,  when  the
angel,  through  God’s  grace,  appeared  to  announce  that  the  emperor  Constantine,  then  an
infidel  and  unbeliever,  had  sent  for  him.  It  had  likewise  been  revealed  to  the  emperor,  by
the  angel  of  the  lord,  that  Silvester  would  put  him  in  the  way  of  being  cured  of  his  leprosy ;
for  he  was  so  ill  of  that  disorder,  his  limbs  were  rotting.  On  his  arrival  he  pointed  out  to
him  his  cure,  by  means  of  baptism.  He  was  baptised  and  cured,  which  so  strongly  impressed
his  mind  with  the  goodness  of  God,  that  he  believed,  and  made  his  empire  believe  also.  He
gave  to  Silvester  and  to  the  church,  all  tithes,  which  he  had  before  held  himself,  with  many
other  rich  gifts  and  territories,  for  the  augmentation  of  our  faith  and  church.  It  was  his
intention  that  these  should  be  prudently  and  properly  governed,  and  not  with  pomp  and
pride  as  is  now  done ; for  which  the  Lord  is  wroth,  and  his  anger  will  be  much  increased
against  you  in  times  to  come.  Should  the  nobles  excuse  themselves  from  giving  support  to
the  church,  and  grow  cold  in  their  devotions,  and  perhaps  retake  what  they  have  given,  it
must  speedily  be  destroyed.”

Thus  spoke  friar  John  to  the  cardinals,  who  were  much  astonished  thereat,  and  would
willingly  have  put  him  to  death,  but  they  could  not  find  out  any  just  cause  for  it.  They
suffered  him  to  live,  but  confined  him  a close  prisoner  ; for  he  proposed  such  deep  questions,
and  examined  so  closely  the  Scriptures,  that  he  might  perhaps,  had  he  been  at  liberty,  have
led  the  world  astray.  However,  many  things  were  seen  to  happen,  which  he  had  foretold  in
prison,  and  which  he  proved  from  the  apocalypse.  His  proofs  saved  him  sometimes  from
being  burnt,  and  some  of  the  cardinals  took  compassion  on  him  and  did  not  oppress  him  as
they  might  have  done.

We  will  now  leave  these  narrations  and  return  to  the  principal  matters  of  this  history,  the
affairs  of  Spain,  Portugal,  France,  and  England,  and  say  what  events  were  passing  there
worthy  of  being  recorded.


* Silvester  was  the  thirty-second  pope,  reckoning  St.  Peter  as  the  first Art  (le  verifier  les  Dales.


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


147


CHAPTER  XXVI. THE  REASONS  WHY  TIIE  PORTUGUESE  PREFER  THE  GRAND  MASTER  OF

AVIS  FOR  THEIR  KING  TO  DON  JOHN,  KING  OF  CASTII.LE,  WHO  HAD  MARRIED  BEATRICE,
DAUGHTER  OF  DON  FERDINAND,  LATE  KING  OF  PORTUGAL.

You  have  before  heard  how  don  John,  son  of  don  Pedro,  king  of  Portugal,  and  bastard
brother  to  the  late  king,  had  gained  possession  of  the  crown,  through  the  boldness  of  four  of
the  principal  towns  in  Portugal  ; for  tho  nobles  and  knights  ought  not  to  be  inculpated  in
the  matter,  as  they  had  overborne  themselves  loyally  to  don  John  of  Castille,  who  had  married
Beatrice,  the  daughter  and  heiress  of  don  Ferdinand.  Many,  however,  were  of  opinion  she
was  a bastard,  being  the  daughter  of  a Portuguese  lady,  whose  husband,  a knight  of  Portugal,
was  still  living*.  The  king  of.Portugal  having  seized  his  wife,  married  her ; and  the  knight
left  the  country  and  resided  with  the  king  of  Castille  : he  never  returned  to  Portugal,  not-
withstanding his  noble  birth,  through  fear  of  the  king.

This  opinion  of  her  being  a bastard  was  the  more  extraordinary,  as  don  Ferdinand  consi-
dered her  as  legitimate,  having  received  dispensations  from  pope  Urban  VI.  to  that  purpose.
When  peace  was  concluded  between  the  kings  of  Castille  and  Portugal,  don  John  Ferdinand
Audere,  who  ruled  the  Portuguese  council,  proposed  a marriage  between  the  daughter  of  his
king,  and  don  John,  king  of  Castille,  who  was  at  that  time  a widower.  The  council  of  Castille,
when  this  union  was  proposed,  had  mentioned  their  doubts  of  the  legitimacy  of  the  lady’s
birth  ; and  to  satisfy  the  king  of  Castille,  don  Ferdinand  had  made  his  principal  barons  and
nobles  of  Portugal  swear,  that  after  his  decease,  they  would  consider  her  as  their  queen,  and
would  unite  their  kingdom  to  Castille.  He  had  also  forced  the  principal  towns  to  promise
the  same,  and  to  acknowledge  the  king  of  Castille  as  their  king,  under  a penalty  of  two
hundred  thousand  francs.  The  Lisboners,  having  put  to  death  don  Ferdinand  Audere,  because
he  had  interfered  in  this  business,  and  exerted  himself,  at  the  king  of  Portugal’s  death,  to
have  it  confirmed,  elected  the  master  of  Avis,  and  would  have  no  other  king.  They  said,
that  were  Portugal  to  be  turned  topsy-turvy,  they  would  never  submit  to  Castille,  nor  to  the
Castillians,  so  greatly  did  they  hate  each  other.  The  Lisboners  were  the  great  instigators
of  this  dispute  ; they  said  that  the  lady  Beatrice  could  not  be  their  queen,  for  she  was  a bastard,
a thorough  bastard  ; and,  during  the  life-time  of  don  Ferdinand,  and  now  when  he  is  dead,
Lorenzo  d’Acunha,  the  husband  of  her  mother,  still  exists.  For  this  reason,  the  four  cities
of  Lisbon,  Coimbra,  Ourique,  and  Oporto,  elected  don  John,  and  crowned  him  king  of  Portugal.
They  would  have  a king  from  among  themselves,  and  noticed  the  great  affection  tho
commonalty  had  for  the  master  of  Avis.

One  of  the  chief  causes  for  this  hatred  of  the  Portuguese  to  the  Castillians,  was,  that  after
the  marriage  had  been  concluded  between  the  king  of  Castille  with  don  Ferdinand’s  daughter,
and  it  had  been  agreed  that  Portugal  should,  after  the  death  of  don  Ferdinand,  revert  to
Castille,  wherever  the  Castillians  met  the  Portuguese,  they  mocked  them,  and  said,  they
should  return  under  their  obedience  whether  they  would  or  not ; that  they  would  keep  them
in  subjection  and  slavery,  and  teach  them,  like  Jews  and  slaves,  to  obey  their  wills.  The
Portuguese  replied,  they  would  never  be  under  theirs  nor  the  subjection  of  any  men  in  the
world.  Owing  to  such  reproaches,  they  elected  the  grand  master  of  Avis  king,  who  was
bastard  son  to  don  Pedro,  king  of  Portugal.  Don  Ferdinand,  during  his  reign,  paid  no
attention  to  his  brother,  nor  ever  imagined  the  Portuguese  would,  after  his  decease,  choose
him  their  king,  to  the  disparagement  of  his  daughter ; but  so  they  did;  and  don  Ferdinand
Audere  was  in  the  right,  when  he  advised  the  king  to  have  him  put  to  death,  for  the  people
had  too  great  an  affection  for  him.  The  king  would  never  consent  to  this,  saying  that  the
people  had  no  power  over  the  nobility  of  the  realm  ; and  that  his  son-in-law,  the  king  of
Castille,  was  powerful  enough  to  punish  any  rebellion  that  might  break  out ; that  he  had  no
just  cause  to  imprison  him  nor  put  him  to  death;  and  besides,  his  brother  was  of  a religious
order  and  possessed  of  great  wealth,  without  thinking  of  the  crown  of  Portugal.  These
were  the  reasons  why  he  escaped  death.

* Ferdinand,  at  the  conclusion  of  the  war  between  him  marry  Hcmy’s  daucditer.  This  ho  did  not  perform,  hut
and  Henry  de  Transtamare,  king  of  Castille,  engaged  to  married  Leonora  Tellez,  the  wife  of  Lorenzo  d’Acunha.

L 2


U3


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND.  FRANCE,  &e.


All  these  are  well-known  facts ; for  I,  the  author  of  this  history,  was  told  them  by  the
nobles  of  Portugal.  It  was  certainly  strange  they  should  choose  a bastard  for  their  king :
but  they  found  none  nearer  in  blood  to  the  crown ; for  they  declared  that  the  queen  of  Castille,
daughter  of  the  lady  Leonora  d’Acunha,  being  a bastard,  should  never  possess  the  crown  of
Portugal,  nor  should  any  of  her  descendants.  The  count  de  Foix  was  of  a similar  opinion,
as  he  told  the  knights  when  he  gave  them  an  entertainment  on  leaving  his  country  for
Portugal ; for  he  is  perfectly  well  informed,  though  he  resides  at  Orthes,  of  everything  that
passes  in  Castille  or  Portugal.  When  his  knights  departed,  he  said, — “ Gentlemen,  you  have
not  any  business  to  interfere  in  the  disputes  between  Castille  and  Portugal;  for  the  queen  of
Castille,  daughter  of  don  Ferdinand  king  of  Portugal,  has  no  claim  to  that  crown.  This
war  is  begun  foolishly,  and  with  much  bitterness  : you  may  therefore,  as  well  as  those  who
first  stirred  it  up,  heartily  repent  when  it  is  too  late.”  They  replied,  “ that  having  received
earnest  of  pay  from  so  great  a lord  as  don  John  of  Castille,  they  were  bound  to  serve  him.”
He  then  suffered  them  to  go  : but,  as  I have  before  related,  the  greater  part  never  returned
home  again.


CHAPTER  XXVII. FROISSART  TRAVELS  TO  MIDDLEBURGH  IX  ZEALAXD,  TO  MAKE  INQUIRIES

FROM  A KNIGHT,  WHO  IS  GOING  TO  PRUSSIA,  OF  THE  AFFAIRS  OF  PORTUGAL.

We  will  not  yet  quit  the  affairs  of  Portugal,  as  they  ought  not  to  be  forgotten  ; but  the
grand  feats  of  arms  which  took  place  there  should  be  chronicled,  that  those  who  come  after
our  time  may  find  them  related  and  written  down.  It  would  be  pity  they  were  anniliilated  :
and  it  was  by  means  of  clerks  of  former  days,  who  Unregistered  histories,  that  facts  are  now
known,  for  there  is  no  memory  equal  to  writing.  In  truth,  I must  say,  and  I wish  those
who  in  after  times  shall  come  may  know  the  fact,  that  I have  taken  infinite  pains  to  seek
out  the  truth  of  what  was  passing  in  my  day,  and  have  travelled  through  many  a kingdom
and  over  many  countries  for  this  purpose.  I have  been  personally  acquainted  with  many
valiant  men,  as  well  in  France,  England,  Castille,  Portugal,  as  in  the  duchies  and  countries
adjoining,  and  with  their  companions  in  war,  from  whom  I have  never  failed  asking  many
questions  for  my  information ; and  I have  never  willingly  neglected,  after  having  heard  any
fact,  making  every  possible  inquiry  to  know  the  truth  of  it.

During  the  time  I resided  with  the  gallant  count  Gaston  de  Foix  at  Bearn,  I heard  many
of  the  transactions  which  happened  in  Portugal ; but  on  my  return  home  to  Valenciennes
in  Hainault,  having  rested  myself  a while,  my  passion  for  the  history  I had  begun  was
renewed,  and  I bethought  myself  that  I could  not  impartially  continue  it,  having  only  heard
that  side  of  the  question  which  related  to  the  king  of  Castille.  It  was  proper  therefore,  if  I
wished  to  avoid  partiality,  to  hear  what  the  Portuguese  had  to  say,  as  I had  listened  to  the
Gascons  and  Spaniards  in  the  castle  of  Foix,  and  upon  the  road  in  going  thither  and  in
returning.  Indifferent  as  to  bodily  fatigue,  I set  out  for  Bruges  expecting  to  meet  some
Portuguese  and  Lisboners,  as  many  of  that  nation  are  generally  there  : I was  most  fortunate
in  my  journey,  for  it  was  told  me,  and  I since  found  it  true,  that  if  I had  considered  for  seven
years,  I could  not  have  come  more  opportunely  to  Bruges  than  at  that  moment.  I had  only
to  go  to  Middleburgh  in  Zealand,  where  I should  find  a valiant  knight  of  Portugal,  and  of
the  king’s  council,  called  don  Juan  Fernando  de  Portelet,  who  would  give  me  a true  account
of  the  events  that  had  passed  in  Portugal,  having  been  a party  concerned  in  all  of  them :
he  was  but  lately  arrived,  intending  to  embark  for  Prussia,  whither  his  valour  had  led  him.
This  intelligence  rejoiced  me  much,  and  I set  out  from  Bruges  in  company  with  a Portu-
guese well  acquainted  with  the  knight.  On  our  arrival  at  Sluys,  we  embarked,  and,  thanks
to  God,  arrived  safely  at  Middleburgh.  I made  myself  acquainted,  through  my  companion,
with  the  knight,  whom  I found  prudent,  honourable,  gracious  and  pleasant.  I remained
with  him  about  six  days,  and  might  have  done  so  longer  had  I pleased,  when  the  knight  told
me  all  that  had  happened  in  the  wars  between  Castille  and  Portugal,  from  the  death  of  king
Ferdinand  until  the  time  he  had  left  that  country.  He  related  it  so  clearly  and  fully  that
I had  great  delight  in  hearing  him,  and  in  writing  down  what  he  had  said.


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


no


When  I had  learnt  all  I had  wanted,  and  found  the  wind  to  he  favourable,  I took  leave  of
the  knight : he  accompanied  me  to  the  vessel,  as  did  several  rich  merchants  of  his  country
who  had  come  from  Bruges  hither  to  see  him,  as  well  as  other  good  people  of  Middleburgh,
In  his  company  was  the  son  of  the  count  de  Novaire*,  in  Portugal,  and  other  knights  and
squires  from  those  parts  : but  greater  respect  was  paid  to  don  Juan  than  to  any  of  the  others  :
and  certainly,  from  what  I saw,  he  was  very  deserving  of  it,  for  he  was  a handsome  well-
made  man,  formed  for  vigorous  exploits.  I returned  thence,  through  Bruges,  home,  where
I chronicled  all  I had  heard  from  don  Juan  Fernando  de  I'ortelet,  relative  to  what  had  passed
in  the  realms  of  Portugal  and  Castillo  until  the  year  of  our  Lord  1390.


CHAPTER  XXVIII. THE  PORTUGUESE,  AFTER  TIIE  BATTLE  OF  ALJUBAROTA,  SEND  AMBAS

SADORS  TO  ENGLAND,  TO  INFORM  THE  KING  AND  IIIS  NOBLES  OF  THAT  EVENT.

After  don  John  had  defeated  the  Spaniards  at  the  battle  of  Aljubarota,  which  took
place,  as  you  have  heard,  near  the  monastery  of  Alcoba9ar,  whereat  were  slain  such  numbers
of  knights  and  squires  from  France,  Gascony,  and  Castille,  he  returned  triumphant  to
Lisbon,  his  head  crowned  with  laurel,  like  to  the  Roman  conquerors  of  old.  The  Portuguese
highly  honoured  him  for  his  courage  and  victory;  and,  after  many  grand  festivals,  a par-
liament was  held  by  the  barons,  knights,  and  magistrates  from  the  principal  towns,  on  the
state  of  the  kingdom,  and  on  the  means  by  which  they  could  best  persevere  in  what  they
had  been  so  fortunate  in  commencing.  The  wisest  among  them  said,  now  was  the  time  to
strengthen  themselves,  so  that  they  might  be  enabled  to  withstand  the  power  of  the  king  of
Castille,  and  enjoy  with  honour  to  themselves  the  fruits  of  their  victory.  This  conference
was  holden  in  the  cathedral  church  of  St.  Dominick  at  Lisbon,  where  many  proposals  were
made,  but  not  such  as  were  worth  recording.  It  was  at  last  determined  to  send  to  the  duke
of  Lancaster,  who  claimed  the  crown  of  Castille,  in  right  of  the  lady  Constance,  his  duchess,
eldest  daughter  to  don  Pedro  the  Cruel,  and  indite  letters  to  him  in  such  words  as  these  : —
That  if  ever  he  wished  to  claim  the  kingdom  of  Castille,  and  not  surrender  his  right,  which
had  been  some  time  in  suspense  and  nearly  lost,  now  was  the  time  for  him  to  hasten  to
Portugal,  well  accompanied  by  men  at  arms  and  archers.

The  count  de  Novaire  t,  constable  of  Portugal,  thus  spoke  at  the  conference  : “ Since  we
have  determined  to  send  to  the  duke  of  Lancaster,  from  whom  we  hope  to  have  counsel  and
assistance,  and  it  is  the  wisest  measure  we  can  take  to  make  us  feared  by  our  enemies,  let
us  select  the  best  informed  and  properest  persons  to  carry  our  message  to  England,  so  that
the  duke  may  be  induced  to  come  hither  with  such  a force  as  may  enable  him,  with  what  he
receives  from  us,  to  oppose  and  conquer  his  enemy.  We  may  well  suppose  the  king  of
Castille  will  call  for  aid  from  the  king  of  France,  and  the  French,  as  they  know  not  where
to  seek  adventures,  for  there  is  truce  between  France  and  England  until  St.  John  tho
Baptist’s  day,  and  peace  is  now  established  between  France  and  the  Flemings,  who  have
found  them  full  employment  for  several  years  past.”

This  speech  of  the  constable  was  much  applauded,  and  his  advice  followed.  It  was  then
ordered  that  the  grand  master  of  the  order  of  St.  James,  in  the  kingdom  of  Portugal,  and
Laurence  Fongasse,  an  able  and  prudent  squire,  and  who  understood  and  spoke  the  French
language  well,  should  set  out  for  England ; for,  according  to  the  opinion  of  the  king’s
council,  there  could  not  be  found  abler  men  to  execute  this  business.  Letters  were  drawn
up  in  French  and  Latin,  addressed  to  the  king  of  England,  the  duke  of  Lancaster,  and  his
uncles  of  Cambridge  and  Buckingham.  When  they  had  been  fairly  engrossed,  they  were
read  to  the  king  and  his  council,  who,  finding  them  properly  done,  had  them  sealed  and
delivered  to  the  envoys,  the  grand  master  of  St.  James  and  Lawrence  Fongasse,  who
engaged  to  carry  them  to  England,  if  God  permitted,  and  if  they  should  escape  from  enemies
and  robbers ; for  there  are  as  many,  if  not  more,  on  the  sea  than  on  land.

* Nuno  Alvarez  Pereira. — Ed.  essential  services,  in  aiding  him  to  obtain  tho  crown.

t Nuho  Alvarez  Pereira.  He  was  created  constable  Nuno  Alvarez  is  celebrated  in  Portuguese  history  as  tho
of  Portugal  by  tho  master  of  Avis,  to  whom  he  rendered  hero  of  his  time. — Ed.


] 50  CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.

Having  freighted  a vessel  called  a lin,  which  keeps  nearer  the  wind  than  any  other,  they
took  leave  of  the  king,  the  bishop  of  Coimbra,  and  the  council  of  Portugal,  and  embarked
for  England.  The  wind  was  favourable,  and  they  were  three  days  without  seeing  anything
but  sky  and  water ; on  the  fourth  they  discovered  the  land  of  Cornwall.  By  God’s  aid,  and
favourable  winds,  from  which  their  mariners  knew  how  to  profit,  they  arrived  in  safety  at
Southampton,  where  they  anchored.  When  they  disembarked,  to  refresh  themselves  in  the
town,  they  were  summoned  before  the  bailiff,  who  demanded  whence  they  came  and  whither
they  were  going.  On  answering  that  they  were  from  Portugal,  and  sent  by  the  king  and
his  council,  they  were  made  very  welcome.  After  they  had  allowed  themselves  some  rest,
they  were  provided  with  horses  for  their  own  use  and  that  of  their  attendants,  and  with
guides  to  conduct  them  to  London,  for  they  were  quite  ignorant  of  the  country  and  roads.
On  leaving  Southampton,  they  continued  their  journey  until  they  arrived  in  London,
where  they  dismounted  in  Gracechurch,  at  the  hotel  of  the  Falcon,  kept  by  Thomelin  de
Winchester,  and  then  sent  back  their  horses  and  guides  to  Southampton.


Ambassadors  of  Portugal  (the  Grand  Master  of  St.  James  and  Lawrence  Fongasse)  presented  to  Richard  II.  by
the  Duke  of  Lancaster.  Designed  from  contemporary  sculptures  and  illuminations.

Fortunately  for  them,  the  king  and  his  court  were  at  the  time  at  Westminster,  which
rejoiced  them  much.  Being  arrived  at  London  about  nine  o’clock  they  sat  down  to  dinner ;
when  that  was  over,  having  selected  their  letters  for  the  duke  and  duchess  of  Lancaster,  they
waited  on  them.  The  duke  and  duchess  were  desirous  to  see  them,  as  they  were  anxious
for  news  from  Portugal.  They  had  indeed  heard  some  rumours  from  that  quarter,  but  had
not  believed  them,  as  they  had  not  received  any  letters  which  tended  to  confirm  the  report.
The  grand  master  of  St.  -James  and  Lawrence  Fongasse  were  conducted  into  their  presence,
and  the  latter,  on  account  of  his  facility  in  the  French  language,  was  the  spokesman.  After
his  salutations,  he  gave  the  duke  the  letters  he  had  brought  from  Portugal,  who,  opening
them,  gave  the  duchess  that  which  was  addressed  to  her.  Having  each  read  them,  the  duke
sard,  l ou  are  welcome,  gentlemen,  to  this  country  : we  will  to-morrow  attend  the  king,


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  & o.


151


and  you  shall  have  assistance,  as  it  is  hut  reasonable  you  should."  The  duchess,  taking
Lawrence  apart,  asked  the  news  of  Castille  and  Portugal,  and  what  was  going  on  in  those
parts.  Lawrence,  having  made  exact  answers  to  all  the  lady’s  questions,  the  duke  ordered
wine  and  spices,  of  which  the  envoys  partook,  and  then  returned  to  their  hotel.  On  the
morrow,  by  six  o’clock,  they  again  waited  on  the  duke,  who  had  heard  mass,  and  entering  a
large  barge,  rowed  up  the  Thames  to  Westminster,  where  the  king  and  the  greater  part  of
his  council  resided.

The  duke  of  Lancaster  made  them  enter  the  council-chamber,  and  addressing  the  king,
said,  “ My  lord,  here  is  the  grand  master  of  St.  James  in  Portugal,  who  brings  you  letters  :
will  you  please  to  see  them?"  “Willingly,”  replied  the  king.  Upon  which,  the  two
ambassadors,  kneeling,  presented  the  letters,  which  the  king  having  taken,  he  made  them
rise,  and  then  opened  and  read  them.  They  also  gave  letters  to  the  earls  of  Cambridge  and
Buckingham.

The  king  replied  very  graciously  to  the  ambassadors,  saying,  “ You  are  welcome  to  this
country,  and  your  coming  has  given  us  much  pleasure.  You  will  not  immediately  return,
nor  without  having  letters  to  your  satisfaction.  Make  my  fair  uncles  acquainted  with  your
business,  who  will  attend  to  it,  and  not  allow  it  to  slip  their  memories.”  They  answered  on
their  knees,  “ Very  dear  lord,  we  will  cheerfully  so  do.”  They  then  quitted  the  council
chamber,  and  amused  themselves  in  the  palace,  waiting  for  the  duke  of  Lancaster,  who
remained  in  conference  until  high  noon.  When  the  parliament  rose,  the  duke  carried  his
two  brothers,  with  the  ambassadors,  in  his  barge  to  dine  with  him.  The  earl  of  Cambridge
was  well  acquainted  with  the  grand  master  and  Lawrence  Fongasse,  as  he  had  known  them
in  Portugal.  After  dinner  he  began  a conversation  with  them  in  the  presence  of  his
brothers,  and  asked  about  the  marriage  of  the  lady  Beatrice,  who  was  to  have  been  his
daughter-in-law,  and  how  she  went  on.  The  ambassadors  gave  sucb  answers  as  satisfied  the
company.

Before  the  arrival  of  these  ambassadors,  the  duke  of  Lancaster  and  earl  of  Cambridge  had
held  frequent  conferences  respecting  Castille  ; for  the  earl,  as  you  have  heard,  was  greatly
displeased  with  the  late  king  of  Portugal  for  having  remained  fifteen  days  with  his  army  in
sight  of  that  of  Castille  without  coming  to  an  engagement.  The  earl  had  pointedly
remarked  this  fault  by  saying,  “ I have  only  with  me,  sir  king,  one  hundred  lances  and  a
thousand  archers;  but  I would  have  you  and  your  barons  know  that  we  have  unanimously
resolved  to  risk  a battle  with  our  enemies,  and  abide  whatever  be  the  event  God  may  please
to  ordain.”  King  Ferdinand  replied,  that  neither  himself  nor  council  thought  it  advisable
to  offer  battle.  Upon  this,  the  earl  of  Cambridge  left  the  country,  carrying  his  son  John
with  him  to  England*.  When  he  was  departed,  the  king  of  Portugal  offered  his  daughter
to  the  king  of  Castille,  to  strengthen  the  peace,  by  the  advice  of  don  Fernando  Audere,  in
whom  alone  he  put  confidence.  The  king  of  Portugal  asked  his  daughter  whom  she  would
prefer  for  her  husband,  the  king  of  Castille  or  John  of  Cambridge  : she  answered,  “ The
last.”  The  king  demanded,  “ Why  ?”  “ Because  he  is  a handsome  youth,  of  her  own  age,

and  because  she  wished  to  avoid  being  united  to  the  king  of  Castille,”  who,  she  plainly  said,
was  not  to  her  liking.  The  king,  notwithstanding,  to  preserve  peace,  as  their  kingdoms
adjoined  each  other,  married  her  to  the  king  of  Castille.

The  earl  of  Cambridge  was  also  much  dissatisfied  with  don  Fernando  Audere,  who  had
taken  great  pains  to  conclude  a peace  on  the  grounds  of  this  match.  Ho  had  told  his
brother  that  he  much  suspected  the  Portuguese  would  rebel  against  the  lady  Beatrice,  after
her  father’s  death  ; for  the  majority  of  the  people,  although  the  king  had  espoused  the  lady
Eleanora  d’Acunha,  considered  her  as  a bastard  ; and,  when  he  was  there,  great  were  the
murmurs  about  it,  and  this  is  one  reason  why  he  had  so  hastily  brought  his  son  thence.
The  duke  of  Lancaster,  whom  these  circumstances  affected  more  nearly,  having  married  the
elder  heiress  of  the  late  king  of  Castille,  by  wThom  he  had  a daughter  called  Constance,  was
anxious  to  learn  as  much  as  possible  respecting  the  affairs  of  Castille,  and  not  suffer  his
claim  to  remain  longer  in  a state  of  suspense.  He  perceived  that  he  never  could  have  a
more  convenient  entrance  into  that  country  than  through  Portugal ; more  especially  as  king

* In  October,  1382.  — Ed.


152


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &e


John  was  so  desirous  for  him  to  come  thither,  and  the  king  of  England  and  his  council  had
consented  thereto.  He  looked  on  don  John  as  valiant  and  wise,  and  honoured  him  much
for  the  victory  he  had  won  over  the  Castillians.  That  he  might  gain  more  information  as
to  the  real  state  of  Portugal,  together  with  the  claims  the  lady  Beatrice  had  on  that  crown,
and  the  reasons  why  the  commonalty  had  elected  the  grand  master  of  Avis  their  king,  he
invited  the  ambassadors  to  a private  dinner ; when  it  was  over,  he  ordered  all  the  attendants
out  of  his  apartment,  and  called  the  grand  master  of  St.  James  and  Lawrence  Fongasse
most  kindly  to  him,  and  began  to  converse  on  the  affairs  of  Portugal ; but,  as  Lawrence
spoke  French  so  fluently,  he  addressed  himself  to  him,  saying, — “ Lawrence,  I entreat  you
will  relate  to  me  everything  that  has  happened  in  Portugal  since  my  brother  left  it ; for  the
king  of  Portugal  writes  me  word,  that  no  one  can  give  me  such  exact  information  as  your-
self ; and  by  so  doing  you  will  very  much  oblige  me.”  “ My  lord,”  replied  the  squire,  “ your
pleasure  shall  be  obeyed ; ” and  he  immediately  began  to  this  effect.


CHAPTER  XXIX.— LAWRENCE  FONGASSE,  ONE  OF  THE  AMBASSADORS  FROM  PORTUGAL  TO
ENGLAND,  RELATES  TO  THE  DUKE  OF  LANCASTER  THE  EVENTS  WHICH  HAD  HAPPENED
IN  PORTUGAL  SINCE  THE  EARL  OF  CAMBRIDGE  HAD  LEFT  IT.

“ The  kingdom  of  Portugal  has  been  in  great  trouble  since  the  departure  of  the  earl  of
Cambridge  ; but,  thanks  to  God,  all  has  turned  out  well,  and  affairs  are  now  on  a steady
footing.  If  the  Lord  had  not  interfered,  matters  must  have  ended  badly,  and  all  from  the
fault  of  don  Fernando  our  last  king,  as  was  generally  reported  and  believed  by  the  more
sensible  part  of  the  nation.  King  Fernando  fell  desperately  in  love  with  the  wife  of  one  of
his  knights,  called  Lorenzo  d’Acunha,  and  was  so  much  enamoured  he  would  have  her  by
force  : the  lady  made  the  best  defence  she  could,  but  at  length  he  succeeded,  and  told  her  he
would  make  her  queen  of  Portugal,  for  that,  if  he  was  smitten  with  her  charms,  it  was  not
to  lower  her,  but  on  the  contrary  to  exalt  and  marry  her.  ‘ Ah,  my  lord  !’  replied  the  lady,
with  tears  and  on  her  knees,  ‘ I beg  your  grace’s  pardon  : I can  never  have  the  honour  of
being  queen  of  Portugal ; for  you  know,  as  well  as  all  the  world,  that  I have  a husband,  to
whom  I have  been  married  these  five  years.’  ‘ Leonora,’  said  the  king,  ‘ that  shall  not
prevent  it ; for  I will  never  have  any  other  woman  to  wife  since  I have  enjoyed  you  ; but  I
will  have  you  divorced  from  your  husband  before  I make  you  my  bride.’  The  lady  could
not  obtain  any  other  answer,  and  related  all  that  had  passed  to  her  husband.  The  knight,
on  hearing  it,  was  very  melancholy  and  bethought  himself  what  was  to  be  done  ; he  resolved
at  first  never  to  quit  his  wife ; but,  suspecting  the  king’s  designs,  be  set  out  from  Portugal
towards  Castille,  where  he  was  well  received  by  king  Henry  and  appointed  of  his  household,
which  appointment  he  held  during  his  life,  and  was  continued  in  the  same  by  his  successor
don  John.

“ The  king  of  Portugal,  to  gratify  his  foolish  passion,  sent  for  the  lady  and  her  husband  ;
but  the  knight  was  gone.  He  then  sent  for  the  bishop  of  Coimbra,  who  was  chancellor  of
the  kingdom  and  of  his  council,  and  told  him  his  intention  of  marrying  Leonora  d’Acunha.
The  bishop  was  silent  through  fear,  knowing  the  violence  of  the  king’s  haughty  temper ;
but  sir  Fernando  Audere,  who  was  the  king's  bosom  friend  and  counsellor,  in  order  to  please
the  king,  said,  ‘ Bishop,  you  may  very  well  do  it,  and  my  lord  will  make  atonement  once
for  all.’  The  bishop  united  them,  and  they  lived  together.  This  lady  was  crowned  queen
of  Portugal  with  as  much  pomp  and  magnificence  as  ever  queen  of  Portugal  was  ; and  the
king  begot  on  her  the  lady  Beatrice,  now  queen  of  Spain.  True  it  is  that  king  Fernando,
in  his  lifetime  (it  was  before  the  earl  of  Cambridge  came  with  his  army  to  Portugal),  sum-
moned all  the  nobles,  prelates,  principal  citizens  of  his  realm  to  Lisbon,  and  made  them  all
swear  obedience  to  his  daughter  Beatrice,  then  only  five  years  old ; and  pledge  themselves
that  they  would  acknowledge  her  as  heiress  of  the  kingdom  after  his  decease.  He  made
them  take  this  oath,  as  he  had  ordered,  whether  they  would  or  not.  The  greater  part  knew
well  this  daughter  was  a bastard,  and  born  in  adultery ; for  the  husband  of  her  mother,  don
Lorenzo  d’Acunha,  resided  in  Castille,  and  has  outlived  the  king  of  Portugal.  I believe,


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


1 53

my  lord,  that,  had  this  child  been  a boy,  the  commonalty  would  have  been  more  inclined
towards  him  ; for  they  declare  they  would  rather  die  than  live  under  subjection  to  Castille  :
Portugal  and  Castillo  can  never  be  thoroughly  united,  for  the  natives  of  both  countries  hate
each  other,  and  carry  on  their  wars  with  as  much  bitterness  as  the  English  and  Scots.”

The  duke  of  Lancaster  was  much  delighted  with  this  conversation,  and  with  Lawrence
Fongasse’s  manner.  He  said, — “ Lawrence,  at  the  time  you  were  talking  of,  where  was
don  John,  the  present  king  ?”  “ By  my  faith,  my  lord,”  answered  the  squire,  “ he  was  in

Portugal,  at  the  head  of  a noble  establishment  of  gentlemen,  who  bear  an  order  of  chivalry
from  beyond  sea.  There  are  full  two  hundred  knights  of  this  order,  who  are  dressed  in
white  mantles  with  a red  cross  on  them  ; he  is  the  chief,  and  called  the  Master  of  Avis.
The  king  gave  him  this  appointment,  but  thought  nothing  more  about  him  ; nor,  indeed,
did  he  any  way  concern  himself,  or  intermeddle  with  the  affairs  of  Portugal,  nor  ever  form
any  intrigues  for  the  crown.  Certainly,  had  the  king  guessed  that  he  could  have  been  what
he  is  now,  the  love  he  bore  the  lady  Leonora  and  her  daughter  would  have  made  him  put
him  privately  to  death  : but,  seeing  him  live  quietly  with  his  brother  knights,  without  inter-
fering in  anything  else,  he  suffered  him  to  go  on  without  interruption.

“ With  regard  to  the  quarrel  between  the  Castillians  and  Portuguese,  if  I say  the  truth,
I must  own  the  Castillians  have  been  alone  to  blame.”  “ How  so  ?”  asked  the  duke.  “ I
will  tell  you,”  replied  the  squire.  “ When  they  saw  the  king  of  Portugal  give  his  daughter
in  marriage  to  the  king  of  Castille,  it  seemed  to  them  as  if  he  had  done  so  by  way  of  buying
a peace  for  them,  and  that  wo  were  afraid  of  them.  Upon  this  they  grew  proud  and
arrogant,  and  made  use  of  such  speeches  as  follow,  which  the  Portuguese  were  forced  to
hear : ‘ Oh  now,  ye  Portuguese,  who  are  as  savage  as  beasts,  the  time  is  coming  when  we
shall  have  a good  bargain  of  ye,  for  ye  are  our  slaves.  We  will  treat  you  like  Jews,  who
only  exist  by  our  having  granted  them  a truce,  and  ye  shall  be  like  them  subjected  to  us.
This  ye  cannot  deny,  since  our  king  of  Castille  will  become  yours  also.’  With  such  like
speeches  did  the  Castillians  show  their  rancour,  whenever  any  of  the  two  nations  met,  during
the  reign  of  don  Fernando;  and  this  caused  so  great  a hatred  of  the  Portuguese  to  the
Castillians,  that  when  our  king  lay  at  the  point  of  death,  the  citizens  of  the  principal  towns
murmured  much,  and  said,  ‘ It  were  better  to  suffer  anything  than  be  under  the  subjection
of  Castille.’

“After  the  death  of  Fernando who  was  buried  in  the  church  of  St.  Francis,  by  the
religious  of  that  order  in  Lisbon,  the  chief  towns  and  castles  had  closed  their  gates.  The
Lisboners,  being  acquainted  with  the  intentions  of  the  other  three  towns,  Coimbra,  Oporto,
and  Ourique,  sent  for  don  John,  the  present  king,  and  said  to  him, — ‘ Master  of  Avis,  we
will  make  you  our  king,  although  you  be  a bastard  : we  think  the  lady  Beatrice,  your  niece,
and  queen  of  Castille,  is  more  of  a bastard  than  you ; for  the  first  husband  of  the  lady
Leonora  is  now  living.  Since  the  crown  is  fallen  between  two  bastards,  we  will  choose  the
one  who  will  be  to  our  greatest  advantage : the  more  sensible  part  of  the  nation  is  inclined
to  you  ; for  never  shall  a woman  bear  the  crown  of  Portugal,  nor  will  we  ever  be  under  the
obedience  of  Castille.  We  had  rather  give  up  all  to  you,  that  you  may  defend  us,  than  have
the  Castillians  our  masters.  Accept,  therefore,  this  crown  as  our  gift,  for  we  will  have  it  so.’
The  master  of  Avis  did  not,  however,  accept  it  at  this,  nor  at  a second  offer ; but  replied, —
‘ My  good  people,  I know  well  your  affection  for  me  : you  offer  me  the  crown  and  realm  of
Portugal — a noble  offer — by  declaring  I have  a better  right  to  it  than  my  niece  Beatrice  the
queen  of  Castille  ; in  truth  she  is  a bastard,  the  mother’s  first  husband  being  now  in  Castille:
but  there  is  one  point  you  have  forgotten,  which  is,  that  you  alone  cannot  act  in  this  matter:
it  is  necessary  that  the  nobles  of  the  kingdom  join  you.’  ‘ Ha,’  said  the  Lisboners,  ‘ we  are
sure  of  them ; for  several  have  opened  to  us  their  minds  on  this  subject,  as  well  in  this  city,
as  in  those  of  Coimbra,  Oporto,  and  Ourique.’  Don  John  replied, — ‘ Well,  be  it  so,  then ; I
am  willing  to  comply  with  your  desires.  You  know  that  the  lady  Leonora,  who  styles  her-
self queen  of  this  country,  is  in  the  town,  and  with  her  her  grand  adviser,  don  Fernando
Audere,  who  will  want  to  preserve  the  crown  for  the  queen  of  Castille  and  her  descendants  ;
for  he  broke  off  her  marriage  with  the  son  of  the  earl  of  Cambridge,  to  give  her  to  the  king

* He  died  22nd  Oct.,  1 303.  — Ed.


154


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


of  Castille,  and  patch  up  a peace.  He  will  send,  or  perhaps  has  already  done  so,  to  the
king  of  Castille,  to  hasten  hither  with  a sufficient  force  to  overpower  us.  I know  that  don
Fernando  has  in  part  acted  as  I say,  and  he  will  still  more  exert  himself  on  the  day  of  the
obsequies  of  my  late  king  and  brother,  which  will  shortly  be  performed  in  this  town,  when
all  the  nobility  of  the  kingdom,  unless  they  send  excuses,  must  be  assembled.’  Those  present
answered,  that  he  did  not  surprise  them  by  what  he  had  said,  for  they  well  knew  it  was  so ;
but,  should  they  hear  don  Fernando  say  anything  contrary  to  his  interest,  they  would  that
day  provide  a remedy  against  it.  Upon  this  the  meeting  broke  up.

“ Not  long  after,  the  obsequies  of  the  late  king  were  performed  in  the  church  of  the
Franciscans  at  Lisbon,  where  he  lies,  and  the  ceremony  was  attended  by  great  numbers  of
the  nobility,  according  to  the  invitations  they  had  received  from  the  queen,  and  don  Fernando
Audere  who  governed  her.  The  grand  master  of  Avis  was  present,  and  many  from  the
towns  of  Coimbra,  Oporto,  and  Ourique,  who  had  assented  to  what  had  been  proposed  at
Lisbon.  When  the  ceremony  was  over,  don  Fernando  Audere  entreated  the  nobility,  who
had  assisted  in  behalf  of  the  queen,  not  to  leave  Lisbon  for  a day  or  two,  that  he  might  have
a conference  with  them,  on  the  means  he  should  use  to  send  to  king  John  of  Castille,  as  his
queen  was  now  become  the  legal  heiress  of  Portugal.  Many  of  the  nobles  paid  no  attention
to  what  he  said ; for  they  were  afraid  of  the  people  then  present,  as  they  had  heard  them
declare  they  would  only  have  the  master  of  Avis  for  their  monarch  ; and  this  likewise  was
heard  by  don  Fernando.  He  begged  the  nobles  to  support  him  steadily  in  his  attempts  to
bring  the  people  to  his  way  of  thinking ; but  they  all  left  him.  As  soon  as  the  funeral  was
ended  and  the  queen  had  returned  to  her  palace,  they  called  for  their  horses,  which  the
majority  mounted,  and  set  out  from  Lisbon.  Some  few  attached  to  the  grand  master  might
remain,  but  they  retired  to  their  houses,  and  kept  within,  expecting  the  event  to  happen
which  I am  about  to  relate.

“ The  citizens  of  Lisbon,  Coimbra,  Ourique,  and  Oporto,  after  the  funeral,  went  to  the
cathedral,  which  is  dedicated  to  St.  Dominick,  instead  of  going  to  their  homes,  and  the  grand
master  with  them,  where  they  held  a short  conference.  ‘ My  good  people,’  said  don  John,
‘ If  you  wish  to  have  me  for  your  king,  which  I think  my  just  right,  and  are  resolved  to
persevere  in  it,  you  must  now  bestir  yourselves,  and  begin  by  acting  to  show  your  strength.
You  have  seen  how  Fernando  Audere  is  working  on  the  nobles  to  send  for  the  king  of
Castille,  to  whom  he  says  the  crown  of  Portugal  now  belongs  in  right  of  my  niece ; but  I
maintain  that  it  shall,  if  you  assist  me,  be  mine  ; for  I have  a much  better  claim  to  it  in
every  way.  I am  a man,  and  the  son  of  the  good  don  Pedro  who  so  gallantly  reigned  over
you.  My  niece,  the  queen  of  Castille,  it  is  true,  is  daughter  to  don  Ferdinand,  but  not  in
legal  marriage.’  The  Lisboners  replied, — ‘ What  you  say  is  true  : we  will  have  you  for  our
king ; no  one  else ; and  we  will  make  you  such,  let  who  will  urge  us  to  the  contrary.  Now,
swear  before  us  that  you  will  be  good  and  merciful,  and  maintain  strict  justice,  without
flattering  the  strong  more  than  the  weak  ; and  that  you  will  defend,  with  heart  and  hand,  in
conjunction  with  our  aid,  the  rights  and  privileges  of  Portugal.’  The  king  replied, — ‘ My
good  people,  I now  heartily  swear  to  follow  what  you  have  said ; but  let  us  hasten  to  the
mint,  where  John  Fernando  Audere  resides  with  Leonora  d’Acunha ; for  I must  have  him
put  to  death,  as  he  has  acted  contrary  to  our  interests,  in  supporting  the  claims  of  others
than  those  you  wish  well  to.’  ‘ We  will  do  so,’  they  answered;  ‘for  in  truth  he  has
behaved  to  you  like  a rebel,  and  shall  die  for  it,  that  those  who  are  your  enemies  may  take
example,’

“ On  saying  this,  the  Lisboners  left  the  church  of  St.  Dominick,  in  the  wdiole  about  fifteen
hundred,  headed  by  their  new  king,  and  marched  through  the  town  towards  the  mint,  where
the  queen  and  Fernando  Audere,  with  their  attendants,  lived.  On  their  arrival,  they  broke
open  the  doors,  and  entered  the  lady’s  apartment  by  force.  Leonora,  much  alarmed  on  seeing
this  crowd  enter  her  chamber,  threw  herself  on  her  knees  before  don  John,  and  with  uplifted
hands  begged  his  mercy,  for  that  she  was  not  guilty  of  any  misdeeds ; and,  as  for  the  crown
or  inheritance  of  Portugal,  she  had  never  made  any  claim  to  them,  as  many  present  knew,
if  they  would  be  pleased  to  remember.  ‘ I entreat,  therefore,  you  and  all  the  company  to
recollect,  that  it  was  contrary  to  my  will  and  wish  that  don  Ferdinand  exalted  me  to  be  his


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


155


wife  and  queen  of  Portugal.’  4 Lady,’  replied  don  John,  ‘ fear  nothing,  for  not  the  least
harm  shall  be  done  you  : we  are  not  come  hither  with  such  intent,  but  to  seek  that  traitor

I John  Fernando  Audere,  and  put  him  to  death  ; and  then  the  king  of  Castillo  may  revenge
it  if  he  can,  for  he  has  been  his  advocate  too  long  in  this  country.’  Those  who  had  been
ordered  to  do  so  sought  the  knight,  whom  they  discovered  and  slew : after  this,  no  person

!was  injured;  but  they  all  returned  peaceably  to  their  homes,  and  the  king  retired  to  the
palace.

“ After  the  death  of  Fernando,  the  lady  Leonora,  who  had  been  queen  of  Portugal,  was
desirous  of  quitting  Lisbon  and  retiring  to  her  daughter  in  Castille ; for  she  had  been  so
much  alarmed  by  the  murder  of  Fernando,  that  she  had  almost  died  through  fear.  She

! would  not  therefore  remain  longer  in  Lisbon,  where  she  had  neither  peace  nor  respect,  but
sent  to  ask  leave  of  the  king  to  depart,  who  readily  granted  her  request,  adding,  she  was  in
the  right  to  go  away.  The  lady  set  off  with  her  attendants,  and  continued  her  journey
until  she  came  to  Seville,  where  the  king  and  queen  of  Spain  resided.  She  found  almost  all

ithe  nobility  of  Spain  assembled  there  in  Parliament,  on  the  subject  of  Portugal ; for  king
John  declared  that  kingdom  was  now  fallen  to  him  by  the  death  of  don  Ferdinand,  who  had
so  settled  it  when  he  married  the  lady  Beatrice  ; and,  the  states  of  the  country  having  like-
wise agreed  to  it,  he  wanted  their  advice  how  to  act.

“ The  lady  Leonora  was  received  with  joy  by  the  king  and  her  daughter,  and  many
inquiries  were  made  relative  to  what  was  passing  in  Portugal.  She  told  them  truly  every-
thing she  knew,  and  added,  that  the  people  would  assuredly  crown  the  master  of  Avis  king,
if  not  prevented;  for  that,  don  Fernando  Audere  having  been  always  a zealous  friend  to  the
rights  of  Castille,  they  had  murdered  him.  They  readily  believed  what  she  said,  as  every
appearance  testified  its  truth.  Some  knights  and  barons  of  Portugal,  from  affection  to  the
daughter  of  their  late  king,  and  to  keep  the  solemn  engagements  they  had  entered  into  at
her  marriage,  quitted  their  country,  and  joined  the  king  of  Castille  at  Seville,  leaving  behind
their  wealth  and  properties.  Among  them  were,  don  Pedro  Alvarez  Pereyra,  grand  prior
of  St.  John,  don  Henriquez  Manuel,  count  of  Cintra,  Juan  Texeda,  chancellor  to  the  queen,
and  about  twenty  more,  which  emigration  at  this  time  greatly  weakened  Portugal,  and  much
pleased  the  king  of  Spain,  who  was  strengthened  thereby.

“ The  king  of  Spain  issued  a special  summons  throughout  his  realm  for  all  persons  capable
of  bearing  arms,  from  the  ages  of  fifteen  to  sixty,  to  hasten  to  Seville  ; for  he  was  determined
to  enter  Portugal  with  a force  sufficient  to  conquer  it  and  make  it  his  own.  His  commands
were  obeyed ; and  there  were  assembled  before  Seville  upwards  of  sixty  thousand  men  of
every  description.  Lorenzo  d’Acunha,  on  hearing  that  his  wife,  whom  the  late  king  of
Portugal  had  ravished  from  him  and  made  his  queen,  was  arrived  in  Castille,  waited  on  some
of  the  king’s  council  by  whom  he  was  beloved,  and  asked  their  advice  in  the  following
terms  : ‘ My  lords  and  assured  friends,  have  I any  means  to  obtain  possession  of  my  wife,
who  has  left  Portugal  and  is  now  in  Seville  ? I know  that  Ferdinand  took  her  by  force,  and
against  her  inclinations.  He  is,  as  you  know,  dead ; and  in  justice,  therefore,  I ought  to
have  back  my  wife ; tell  me,  then,  how  I should  act.’  They  replied, — ‘ Lorenzo,  there  is
not  any  chance  of  your  ever  having  her  again ; for  you  would  risk  too  much,  and  debase  the
honour  of  the  lady,  as  wTell  as  that  of  the  queen  of  Castille,  and  establish  her  bastardy.
You  see  that  our  king  is  determined  to  conquer  Portugal,  and  add  it  to  his  crown,  as  apper-
taining to  him  in  right  of  his  queen.  Take  care  not  to  muddle  more  by  your  claims  what
is  already  troubled  enough,  for  you  will  be  put  to  death  if  you  persevere.  You  may  judge
yourself  what  may  be  expected,  if  you  prove  the  queen  a bastard,  which  we  maintain  in  this
country  to  be  false,  and  that  she  was  born  in  legal  marriage  by  a dispensation  in  due  form
from  the  pope.’  4 What  had  I best  do,  then  ?’  said  Lorenzo.  4 The  best  way  for  you  to  act  is
to  set  out  instantly  for  your  estate  in  Portugal,  and  leave  the  lady  Leonora  with  her  daughter  :
we  see  no  other  means  of  safety  for  you.’  4 On  my  troth,  I believe  you  advise  me  like  real
friends,’  answered  Lorenzo.  He  only  staid  three  days  after  this  conversation  in  Castille,  and
having  secretly  packed  up  all  his  things,  rode  off  in  haste  to  Portugal,  where  he  waited  on
the  master  of  Avis,  saying  he  was  coming  to  serve  under  him,  for  he  acknowledged  him  his
king.  Don  John  was  rejoiced  at  this,  made  him  governor  of  Lisbon,  and  restored  to  him  all


]6G  CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.

his  property.  Thus,  as  I have  related  to  you,  my  lord,  was  the  fortune  of  Lorenzo  d’Acunha
restored  to  him.”

The  dulse  of  Lancaster  tools  great  pleasure  in  this  conversation  with  Lawrence  Fongasse,
for  he  spoke  French  well,  and  the  matter  concerned  him  nearly.  He  was  anxious  to  learn
as  much  as  possible,  and,  with  great  kindness,  said, — “ Lawrence,  speak  out  boldly:  I have
not  these  two  years  heard  any  foreigner  so  explicit,  and  all  you  say  appears  truth  itself.
Continue,  therefore,  I beg  of  you  ; for  the  king  of  Portugal  writes  me  word,  you  are  the
only  person  who  can  give  me  the  fullest  information  of  what  has  happened  in  that  country.”
“ My  lord,”  returned  the  squire,  “ there  have  been  few  deeds  of  arms  done  in  Castille  and
Portugal  but  on  occasions  when  I have  been  an  actor  in  them ; and,  since  it  pleases  you  that
I continue  my  narration,  I will  do  so.

“ King  John  of  Castille  assembled  his  forces  as  speedily  as  he  could,  and  marched  with  a
great  power  before  Lisbon,  prior  to  the  coronation  of  the  king,  in  order  to  alarm  the  inhabit-
ants and  make  good  his  claim  to  the  kingdom.  He  advanced  to  Santarem,  which  is  on  the
borders,  and  halted  there  two  days.  The  garrison  and  townsmen,  alarmed  at  his  numbers,
opened  their  gates,  and  surrendered  themselves  to  him.  When  he  had  taken  possession  and
re-garrisoned  the  place,  he  marched  to  Leyria*,  which  is  a very  strong  town,  and  surrounded
it.  Leyria  was  attached  to  the  Spanish  interest,  for  the  town  formed  part  of  queen  Leonora’s
dower;  and,  at  the  first  attack  of  the  king  of  Castille,  it  instantly  surrendered.  Having
left  there  a strong  body  of  men  at  arms,  he  advanced  to  Yalenza  d’ Alcantara,  and  laid  siege
to  it.  He  sent  to  tell  the  townsmen  to  humble  themselves  before  him  and  receive  him  as
their  lord.  The  citizens  replied,  by  advising  him  to  march  away  to  Lisbon,  adding,  that  as
soon  as  they  should  know  he  had  gained  that  town  by  affection  or  force,  they  would  send
him  the  keys  of  Yalenza.  This  answer  being  agreeable  to  the  king  of  Spain,  he  marched
away.  Another  town  called  Serpa,  wdiich  the  king  wished  to  gain,  made  a similar  answer.
Other  towns  did  the  same,  so  that  he  took  the  road  to  Lisbon ; for  he  imagined,  if  he  could
conquer  that  city,  he  would  soon  master  the  remainder  of  the  country.  Wherever  the  king
marched,  he  carried  his  queen  with  him,  to  show  the  Portuguese  that  it  was  in  her  right  he
claimed  the  crown,  and  that  he  had  a just  cause  for  so  doing.  Don  John  of  Castille  arrived
with  his  whole  army  before  Lisbon,  and  by  his  manner  of  forming  the  siege  plainly  showed
he  would  not  break  it  up  until  he  had  it  in  his  power.  He  menaced  the  master  of  Avis,
who  was  within  the  town,  that  if  he  could  take  him,  he  would  put  him  and  all  the  other
rebels  to  an  ignominious  death.

“ The  army  of  don  John  was  very  numerous ; and  the  Castilians  and  the  French,  who
had  come  to  his  assistance,  had  so  closely  surrounded  Lisbon,  that  no  one  could  come  out  or
go  in  without  danger  of  being  taken.  When  any  Portuguese  were  made  prisoners  by  the
Castillians  in  a skirmish  or  otherwise,  their  eyes  were  torn  out,  their  legs,  arms,  or  other
members  were  cut  off,  and  in  such  maimed  state  they  were  sent  back  to  Lisbon,  and  bid  tell
their  townsfolk  that  they  had  been  so  treated  in  despite  of  the  Lisboners  and  their  master
of  Avis,  whom  they  were  so  eager  to  crown  king ; and  that  they  would  keep  the  siege  until
they  had  won  the  town  by  storm  or  famine,  when  they  would  show  mercy  to  none,  but  put
all  to  death,  and  give  up  the  city  to  fire  and  flame.  The  Lisboners,  however,  did  not  revenge
themselves  so  cruelly ; for,  whenever  they  made  any  prisoners,  their  king  afforded  them
every  comfort,  and  did  not  send  them  back  with  hurt  of  any  sort.  This  made  many  of  the
army  say,  he  was  a gallant  fellow  thus  to  return  good  for  evil.

“ During  this  siege  of  Lisbon,  which  lasted  upwards  of  a year,  there  were  every  week
two  or  more  skirmishes,  in  which  many  were  killed  and  wounded  on  both  sides.  The  town
was  besieged  by  sea  as  well  as  by  land  ; and  the  besiegers  had  plenty  of  all  things,  for  pro-
visions came  to  them  from  different  parts  of  Spain.  The  Spaniards  made  one  course  up  to
the  very  gates  of  Lisbon ; when  Lorenzo  d’Acunha  sallied  forth  out  of  the  barriers  with  his
pennon,  having  the  arms  of  Acunha  borne  before  him,  accompanied  by  many  gallant  friends,
and  excellent  deeds  of  arms  were  then  done  with  lance  and  dart.”

* “ Leyria.”  Froissart  calls  it  Tuy  ; but  Tuy  is  a He  corues  to  Santarem  ; so  far  is  well  ; but  from  thence
town  of  Spain,  on  the  opposite  side  of  the  river  Minho  to  he  turns  off  to  Leyria  and  Valenza  d’ Alcantara ; and,
Valencia.  There  must  be  some  mistakes;  for  the  king  when  the  battle  of  Aljubarota  takes  place,  the  Portuguese
of  Spain,  on  leaving  Seville,  marches  to  besiege  Lisbon,  march  from  Guimareans  to  combat  the  Spaniarde


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


157


“ By  my  faith,  Lawrence,”  said  the  duke  of  Lancaster,  “of  all  the  arms  the  Castillians
and  your  countrymen  use,  I love  the  dart  the  host,  and  like  to  see  it  used  : they  are  very
expert  at  it ; and  I must  say,  that  whoever  they  hit  with  it,  unless  strongly  armed,  he  will
be  pierced  through.”  “ Indeed,  my  lord,  you  say  truly  : for  I saw  more  bodies  transfixed  at
these  assaults  than  I ever  witnessed  before  in  my  life.  Wc  lost  one  whom  wc  much  regretted.
Lorenzo  d’Acunha  was  struck  with  a dart  that  passed  through  his  plates,  his  coat  of  mail,
and  jacket,  though  stuffed  with  silk,  and  his  whole  body,  so  that  he  was  felled  to  the  ground.
The  skirmish  ceased  on  account  of  the  dead  knight ; and  thus  was  the  lady  Leonora  made  a
widow,  in  ono  year,  of  both  her  husbands.  Lorenzo  d’Acunha  was  much  lamented,  my
lord,  for  lie  was  valiant  in  arms,  and  prudent  in  council.  After  his  death,  his  cousin,  called
la  Pouvasse  d’Acunha,  was  appointed  governor  of  Lisbon.  lie  made  three  or  four  sallies  on
the  Spaniards,  in  which  lie  was  victorious.

“ The  siege  of  Lisbon  was  continued  to  the  great  dismay  of  the  inhabitants  ; for  no  succour
seemed  likely  to  come  to  them  from  any  quarter.  When  their  hopes  began  to  fail  of  help
from  England,  the  king  wras  advised  to  embark  for  that  country,  as  their  ambassadors  had
brought  intelligence  thence  that  assistance  would  be  sent ; and  that  your  grace  would  bring
reinforcements.”  “ In  God’s  name,  that  is  very  true,”  replied  the  duke  of  Lancaster  ; “ for
I was  on  the  point  of  sailing,  having  everything  prepared,  when  the  war  in  Flanders  broke
out.  The  men  of  Ghent  called  on  England  for  aid;  and  they  had  given  to  them  all,  or  at
least  the  greater  part,  of  those  troops  which  I was  to  have  led  into  Portugal.  The  bishop
of  Norwich  carried  them  with  him  beyond  sea,  and  thus  retarded  the  expedition  to
Portugal.”  “ I vow  to  God,  my  lord,”  said  the  squire,  “ we  in  Lisbon  thought  that  there
had  something  happened  in  England  to  prevent  your  coming  to  us.  We  managed,  however,
as  well  as  we  could,  and  bore  up  against  the  power  of  the  king  of  Castillo,  which  was  not
small ; for  he  has  upwards  of  sixty  thousand  men  on  sea  and  land,  and  menaced  daily  to
destroy  us  without  mercy,  and  burn  Lisbon  to  the  ground.  During  this  siege  of  Lisbon,  a
lord  of  our  country,  called  d’ Acosta,  did  us  a notable  piece  of  service,  and  gained  by  it  great
renown.  lie  freighted  and  armed  twenty  galleys  at  Oporto  with  good  men  at  arms  and
provision,  with  which  he  put  to  sea,  and  by  the  grace  of  God,  having  a favourable  wind  to
second  their  exertions,  passed  through  the  Spanish  fleet,  consisting  of  one  hundred  great
vessels,  that  were  lying  at  anchor  before  Lisbon,  so  opportunely  that,  whether  they  would
or  not,  he  arrived  in  the  port  with  all  his  galleys  unhurt,  carrying  with  him  four  of  the
enemy’s  vessels  which  he  had  conquered.  The  inhabitants  were  very  much  rejoiced  at  the
success  and  the  arrival  of  the  lord  d’Acosta.”

“ By  my  faith,”  said  the  duke,  “ this  lord  d’Acosta  did  you  indeed  a great  service.  Now,
Lawrence,  relate  to  me  how  this  siege  was  raised,  for  I am  well  satisfied  with  your  conver-
sation.” “ My  lord,”  replied  the  squire,  “ the  siege  lasted,  as  I have  said,  upwards  of  a
year,  for  the  king  of  Castillo  had  sworn  he  would  never  break  it  up  until  Lisbon  were  under
his  obedience,  or  until  some  more  powerful  prince  should  force  him  to  it.  Considering  what
happened,  the  king  of  Castille  religiously  kept  his  vow  of  not  breaking  up  the  siege,  unless
forced  to  it  by  a more  powerful  lord,  as  I will  explain.  A most  destructive  pestilence  burst
out  in  his  camp,  so  that  persons  died  suddenly  whilst  in  conversation  with  each  other.  Up-
wards of  twenty  thousand  were  carried  off  by  this  plague  ; which  so  much  alarmed  the  king,
that  he  was  advised  to  break  up  the  siege,  and  retire  to  Santarem  or  elsewhere,  and  disband
his  army  until  the  disorder  should  be  checked.  He  consented  to  this  very  unwillingly ; for
he  had  solemnly  sworn  he  would  never  leave  the  place  until  he  had  won  it  by  fair  or  foul
means;  but  he  was  forced  to  it  by  the  principal  lords  in  his  army,  who  pressed  him  to
march  to  Santarem.

“ Sly  lord,  we  Portuguese  have  always  thought,  and  have  publicly  said,  that  the
Almighty,  to  afford  us  assistance,  had,  out  of  his  grace,  sent  this  pestilence  among  our
enemies;  for  those  in  the  city  wherein  we  were  inclosed  never  felt  the  smallest  attack  from
any  such  sickness,  nor  did  we  lose  a man.  Our  king,  when  he  saw  the  Castillians  marching
away,  made  the  townsmen  and  garrison  of  Lisbon  arm,  and,  sallying  out  on  horseback,  fell
on  the  rear  of  those  who  were  not  in  good  array,  broke  their  ranks,  killed  and  wounded
great  numbers,  and  captured  many  of  their  stores.  lie  also  issued  a proclamation,  that  no


J58


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


one,  tinder  pain  of  death,  should  touch  or  carry  into  Lisbon  any  of  the  provisions  the
Spaniards  had  left  in  their  camp,  but  that  everything  should  be  burnt,  that  the  town  might
not  be  infected.  All  the  provisions  and  stores  were  given  up  to  the  flames ; but,  I believe,
wherever  any  money  and  plate  were  found,  better  care  was  taken  of  them.

“ The  king  of  Castille,  on  his  arrival  at  Santarem,  which  is  on  the  borders  of  his  realm,
remained  there  for  some  time.  He  made  the  most  earnest  solicitations  to  France  for  succour,
but  more  particularly  to  Gascony,  Bearn,  and  the  county  of  Foix,  whither  he  sent  three
horses  laden  with  nobles  of  Castille  and  florins,  as  an  advance  to  knights  and  squires,  for  he
well  knew  he  could  not  by  any  other  means  induce  them  to  quit  their  castles  or  country.
The  courage  of  the  barons  and  knights  of  Portugal  was  much  exalted  when  they  found  the
king  of  Castille  had  retired  from  Lisbon,  which  he  had  besieged  for  upwards  of  a year  *,
but  more  especially  the  commonalties  of  Oporto,  Ourique,  and  Coimbra.  They  took
counsel  together,  and  instantly  determined  to  crown  the  master  of  Avis  king ; for  they  had,
through  their  love  and  good  pleasure,  already  raised  him  to  that  honour,  saying  it  was  the
common  wish  of  the  country,  and  that  God  would  that  he  should  be  crowned,  for  he  had
displayed  his  virtues  to  the  Castillians.  It  was  proclaimed  throughout  the  country,  that  all
interested  should  be  at  Coimbra  on  a certain  day,  when  the  master  of  Avis  would  be
solemnly  crowned  king  of  Portugal.  All  those  of  his  party,  and,  considering  the  size  of
the  country,  it  was  a numerous  body,  attended  the  coronation,  which  was  performed  by  the
bishops  and  prelates  with  great  pomp,  in  the  cathedral  church  of  Coimbra,  dedicated  to  St.
Mary,  on  Trinity-day,  in  the  year  of  grace  1384  f.  The  king  on  that  day  created  sixty
knights,  as  well  of  his  own  as  from  foreign  countries.  There  were  magnificent  festivals  at
Coimbra,  which  lasted  for  two  or  three  days.  The  barons,  counts,  knights,  and  squires,  who
held  fiefs  of  the  crown,  renewed  their  homage ; and  the  king  swore  to  govern  the  realm  with
justice,  and  to  maintain  all  their  rights.  The  people  swore  to  obey  faithfully  the  king  and
his  heirs  after  him,  whether  male  or  female,  and  never  to  desert  him  until  death.  Thus
passed  the  coronation  of  the  king  of  Portugal.

“ The  king  of  Castille,  on  hearing  that  the  Portuguese,  and  particularly  the  commons,
had  crowned  the  master  of  Avis  king,  and  had  sworn  to  him  homage  and  fidelity,  was  more
pensive  than  before  ; for  he  did  not  imagine  they  would  have  been  in  such  haste  to  crown
him,  as  he  had  in  his  army  so  many  of  the  nobles  of  Portugal.  He  said  to  those  near  him,
— ‘ I see  clearly  that  by  fair  or  foul  means  I must  conquer  what  is  my  own,  if  I wish  to
possess  it ; for  there  never  will  be  any  peace  between  Castille  and  Portugal  until  the  Portu-
guese have  made  amends  for  what  they  have  done.’

“ After  the  coronation,  the  king  went  to  Lisbon,  where  he  remained,  and  attended  diligently
to  the  affairs  of  the  kingdom,  at  the  same  time  endeavouring  to  acquire  the  affection  of  his
subjects.  He  sent  knights  and  squires  to  all  his  garrisons  on  the  frontiers  of  Spain,  for  the
king  of  Castille  was  now  returned  to  Seville.  The  king  of  Portugal  ordered  sir  John  Fer-
dinand Portelet,  an  able  and  valiant  knight,  fidl  of  enterprise,  to  Treutouse  and  with  him
two  excellent  knights,  sir  Yasco  Martin  d’Acunha,  and  his  brother,  sir  Gil  Yasco  d’Acunba,
and  two  hundred  good  men  at  arms  well  mounted.  Sir  John  de  Pereira  was  sent  with  fifty
lances  to  the  castle  of  Leyria,  near  Aljubarota  ; sir  John  Gomez  da  Silva,  to  Yalen9a,  which
is  opposite  to  the  town  of  Tuy ; this  place  had  turned  to  the  Spaniards  when  they  marched
to  Lisbon,  and  it  was  a numerous  garrison  of  Castillians  and  French.  Sir  Mondech
Radigo  was  ordered  to  Serpa  with  fifty  spears  : to  Oporto,  Coimbra,  and  Ourique,  the  king
sent  none,  for  he  knew  the  loyalty  and  attachment  of  those  cities  to  his  cause.  Thus,  as  I
tell  you,  were  all  the  strong  places  garrisoned,  and  there  were  frequent  skirmishes  with  one
or  the  other ; in  which,  as  must  happen,  sometimes  one  side  gained,  sometimes  another.
There  was,  in  particular,  one  celebrated  skirmish  between  the  garrison  of  Trancoso  and  the
Castillians.”

“ Ah,  Lawrence,”  interrupted  the  duke,  “ do  not  pass  this  over  slightly,  but  tell  me  all

* It  did  not  continue  more  than  nine  months.  It  was  J “ Treutouse.”  It  is  thus  in  all  my  copies,  MS.  and
raised  in  the  month  of  November  of  the  same  year  in  printed  ; but  I cannot  correct  the  mistake  otherwise  than
which  it  was  begun. — Ed.  by  supposing  it  to  mean  Estremoy.

f 6th  April,  1385. — Ed.


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  Ac.


150


the  particulars ; for  my  greatest  delight  is  the  hearing  of  gallant  deeds  of  arms.”  “ My
lord,”  replied  the  squire,  “ it  is  but  right  I should  do  so ; for  I well  remember  everything
that  happened,  as  I was  banner-bearer  on  that  day  to  John  Ferdinand  de  Portelet,  governor
of  Trancoso,  who  began  the  skirmish.

“ You  must  know,  my  lord,  that  the  king  of  Castille  had  placed  good  garrisons  in  all  his
towns  on  the  frontier,  who,  by  collecting  at  times  together  in  one  body,  overran  and  much
harassed  the  country.  It  happened  that  seven  Spanish  captains,  of  high  birth  and  valour,
assembled  a body  of  three  hundred  lances,  well  mounted,  with  which  they  entered  Portugal,
and  made  a great  booty  of  pillage  and  prisoners.  They  might  have  returned  into  Castille
had  they  pleased,  but  their  pride  and  presumption  urged  them  to  boast  they  would  see  what
the  garrison  of  Treutouse  was  made  of.  The  whole  country  fled  before  them,  so  that  the
governor  was  apprised  of  the  invasion.  He  called  for  his  arms,  on  hearing  the  enemy  were
in  the  plain,  and  had  his  trumpet  sounded  to  alarm  the  knights  in  the  town.  All  armed  in
haste,  and,  mounting  their  steeds,  sallied  out  of  their  place,  when,  on  mustering  themselves,
they  amounted  to  full  two  hundred  spears.  They  drew  up  in  good  array,  and  showed
plainly  they  were  in  earnest  to  meet  their  enemies.  On  demanding  from  the  runaways,  who
were  hastening  to  save  themselves  in  Trancoso,  where  the  Castillians  might  be  found,  they
answered,  not  far  off ; as  they  were  only  marching  at  a foot’s  pace,  on  account  of  the
quantity  of  booty  they  had  with  them.  Sir  John  Ferdinand  Portelet  was  rejoiced  on  hearing
this,  and  said  to  his  companions,  the  brothers  d’Acunha, — ‘ My  lords,  let  us  advance,  I beg
of  you ; for  I will  never  enter  town  or  castle  until  I have  seen  our  enemies,  to  offer  them
battle ; and  by  every  means  attempt  to  recover  their  pillage  and  the  prisoners  they  are
carrying  away.’  He  then  added,  ‘ Lawrence,  display  my  banner ; for  we  shall  speedily  come
up  with  the  enemy.’  I instantly  obeyed  this  order ; and,  as  we  rode  on  at  a good  pace,  we
soon  saw  the  dust  the  Castillians  made.  We  took  advantage  of  the  sun  being  in  our  back,
and  overtook  them.

“ The  enemy,  perceiving  us,  halted  and  drew  up  in  good  array,  placing  their  prisoners  and
plunder  on  one  side.  We  were  so  near  each  other,  that  we  could  speak  to  them,  and
noticed  three  banners  and  four  pennons ; and  we  judged  they  were  full  three  hundred,  all
well  mounted.  I will  tell  you  the  names  of  the  captains:  there  were  sir  Juan  Rodriguez,
de  Castanheda,  a baron  of  Castille,  sir  Alvaro  Garcia  de  Albornoz,  sir  Adiantado  de  Toledo,
Pedro  Soarez  de  Toledo,  Adiantado  de  Cacjorla,  Juan  Rodriguez  Pereira,  and  Diego  Eanes
de  Tavora.

“ When  we  were  thus  near  to  each  other,  both  parties  dismounted,  and  the  horses  were  given
to  the  pages  and  varlets ; but  before  any  blow  was  struck,  there  was  a parley  held  by  the
leaders  of  each  troop ; and,  being  present,  I heard  everything  that  was  said.  Sir  John
Portelet  began  by  asking  them  why  they  had  thus  invaded  Portugal  ? Sir  Adiantado  de
Teledo  replied  that  they  had  a right  to  invade  any  country  they  chose,  to  chastise  rebels  ;
for  they  had  been  commanded  by  their  lord,  the  king  of  Castille,  who  was  the  true  lord  of
Portugal,  to  enter  that  country,  and  plunder  it ; and,  the  inhabitants  being  rebels,  they  were
carrying  them  away  as  prisoners.  ‘ You  shall  not  carry  them  away  nor  their  property
neither,’  said  sir  John  Portelet ; ‘ for  we  will  take  them  from  you,  as  you  have  not  any  right
thus  to  act.  Do  you  not  know  that  we  have  a king  of  our  own,  who  has  sworn  to  govern
justly,  and  punish  all  thieves  and  robbers  ? I therefore  order  you  in  his  name,  to  lay  down
all  that  you  have  pillaged  in  Portugal,  or  else  we  shall  fight  with  you,  having  justice  on  our
side.’  Sir  Adiantado  de  Toledo  answered, — ‘As  for  our  prisoners,  we  will  not  for  certain
yield  them  up  ; but  in  regard  to  other  matters,  we  will  consider  of  it.’

“ The  Castillian  chiefs  then  withdrew  to  hold  a consultation,  and  plainly  showed,  by
what  followed,  that,  although  they  had  thus  vauntingly  advanced  to  Trancoso,  they  readily
would  have  been  excused  a battle.  After  a short  delay,  they  said  that  in  regard  to  the
cattle,  they  had  determined  to  give  them  up,  as  well  as  the  horses,  and  other  things  which
would  embarrass  them  on  their  return,  but  that  they  would  keep  the  prisoners.  ‘ Oh  but,’
replied  the  Portuguese,  ‘ it  shall  not  be  so  : for  you  must  give  up  all,  or  fight.’  The  battle,
upon  this,  commenced  very  sharply,  for  neither  party  spared  itself : they  were  both  active,
and  the  field  of  battle  was  extensive.  Javelins  were  thrown  with  such  force,  that  whoever


160


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


they  struck,  unless  well  armed,  was  knocked  down.  Many  gallant  deeds  were  done ; and
sir  John  Fernando  Portolet  made  good  use  of  his  battle-axe,  as  did  the  two  brothers  d’Acunha
make  great  havoc  with  theirs.  The  Castillians,  on  their  part,  behaved  admirably ; and  their
fighting  and  pushing  lasted  upwards  of  three  hours,  without  either  side  being  shaken.  It  was
Wonderful  how  they  could  remain  so  long  a time  under  arms,  but  their  anxiety  to  leave  the
the  field  with  honour  supported  them  ; and  I must  say,  that  both  nations  are  hardy  in  fight,
more  particularly  when  they  feel  the  necessity  of  it.  They  were  so  long  and  so  equally
engaged,  that  any  one  who  had  seen  them  would  not  have  known  which  side  would  be  victor.
However,  thanks  to  God,  no  banner  nor  pennon  was  damaged  in  our  army;  but  those  of
our  adversaries  began  to  give  way,  which  greatly  encouraged  our  men,  who  were  now  as
fresh  as  ever,  and,  shouting  out  ‘ St.  George  for  Portugal ! ’ broke  through  the  ranks  of  the
Castillians,  and  began  to  knock  down  on  all  sides.  Such  deadly  strokes  were  given  with
battle  axes  and  leaden  mallets,  that  they  were  completely  defeated.  The  pages,  seeing  the
discomfiture  of  their  masters,  took  advantage  of  their  horses  and  galloped  off.  Of  the
seven  captains  only  one  escaped,  and  he  was  indebted  for  it  to  his  good  page,  who,  perceiving
him  hard  pressed,  brought  him  a horse,  and,  having  mounted  him,  led  him  out  of  the  battle,
so  that  Adiantado  de  Cacjorla  that  day  received  a most  essential  service  from  his  page.  All
the  rest  were  put  to  death,  for  quarter  was  shown  to  none.  Thus  were  the  Castillians  de-
feated by  sir1  John  Fernando  Portelet,  though  there  were  at  least  two  to  one  more  in
numbers,  on  a Wednesday,  in  the  month  of  October,  near  the  town  of  Trancoso,  in  the  year
of  our  lord  1384.

“ When  all  was  over,  and  the  field  clear,  our  men  mounted  their  horses,  and  gave  liberty
to  all  whom  the  Castillians  had  captured  ; they  also  allowed  them  to  carry  away  as  much  of
the  plunder  as  they  pleased  ; but  the  cattle,  which  amounted  to  more  than  eight  hundred,
were  driven  to  the  town,  as  a supply  for  the  garrison.  On  re-entering  Trancosa  we  were
received  with  so  much  joy,  that  the  inhabitants  could  not  make  too  much  of  us,  for  having
freed  the  country  of  its  enemies.  All  who  had  heard  of  this  battle  praised  us  most  highly
for  our  valour.

....  “ We  had  another  successful  engagement  in  the  plains  of  Seville : but  I will  first  relate  the
most  brilliant  success  that  has  for  these  two  hundred  years  ever  happened  to  a king  of
Portugal,  and  which  our  king  had  about  four  months  ago,  when  the  enemy  were  upwards
of  four  to  one,  all  of  them  excellent  men  at  arms  and  of  high  renown,  which  makes  our  victory
the  more  glorious.  But  I fancy,  my  lord,  you  have  heard  enough  of  this  battle  before  ; and,
being  now  sufficiently  tired,  I had  better  end  the  .conversation.”  “ Oh,  by  no  means,”  replied
the  duke  : “ continue  your  narrative,  for  I shall  cheerfully  listen  to  you.  In  truth,  I have
in  my  household  a herald  called  Derby,  who  was,  as  he  says,  present  at  this  battle,  and  tells
us  that  our  countrymen  performed  wonders  ; but  I doubt  it  much,  for  I cannot  conceive
that  any  numbers  could  have  been  there,  as  my  brother  Cambridge,  when  he  left  Portugal,
brought  back  all  the  English  and  Gascons  which  had  accompanied  him.  There  are  many
heralds  such  liars,  they  exaggerate  or  depreciate  according  to  their  affections  or  dislikes ;
and,  since  these  boasted  exploits  cannot  have  been  forgotten,  I shall  thank  you  to  be  parti-
cular about  them,  whenever  you  speak  of  that  part  of  the  battle.”  “ On  my  troth,  ’
answered  Lawrence,  “ there  were  not  with  our  king,  at  the  battle  of  Aljubarota,  more  than
two  hundred  foreigners,  including  English,  Gascons,  and  Germans.  The  ablest  captains
among  them  were  two  Gascons  and  a German  from  the  Duchy  of  Gueldres,  whose  names
were,  Sir  William  de  Montserrand,  and  Bernardon,  Gascons,  and  Albert  the  German.
There  were  a few  English  archers  : but  I never  heard  any  name  of  note  except  of
two  squires,  Northbury  and  IJartsel,  who  assisted  at  the  council  whenever  the  king  had  it
assembled.”

“ Now  relate  to  me  how  this  famous  battle  was  fought,”  said  the  Duke.  “ Willingly,”
replied  the  squire,  “for  it  was  for  this  I was  sent  hither.  I have  already  told  you,  that
before  the  coronation  of  our  king  at  Coimbra,  the  king  of  Castille  had  raised  the  siege  of
Lisbon,  on  account  of  the  great  mortality  in  his  army,  and  had  retired  to  Santarem.  He
was  greatly  mortified  when  he  heard  of  the  coronation  of  king  John,  in  opposition  to  his  claim
on  Portugal  in  right  of  his  queen,  and  was  advised  to  send  everywhere  for  men  at  arms,


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


101


especially  to  France,  as  the  French  had  before  been  their  allies  in  the  wars  of  his  father  the
late  king.  His  council  said  ; My  lord,  you  only  want  one  successful  battle  over  the  Portu-
guese to  have  them  under  your  subjection  ; for  that  kingdom  is,  as  you  know,  much  divided
in  regard  to  the  person  to  whom  the  crown  belongs.  You  have  now  with  you  its  principal
nobles,  who  have  acknowledged  your  I’ight,  which  is  assuredly  of  great  importance  to  your
war.  If  you  march  to  combat  this  bastard  of  Portugal,  whom  the  commonalty  have  crowned
king,  before  he  be  reinforced  by  the  English  you  will  conquer  him,  and  the  country  be  your
own ; for  it  is  not  of  that  extent  but  we  can  soon  overrun  it.  The  king  of  Castille  sent
envoys  to  France,  Poitou,  Brittany,  Normandy  and  many  other  places  where  he  thought  it
probable  men  at  arms  would  come  to  serve  him,  but  more  particularly  into  Bearn,  whence
indeed  numbers  of  gallant  knights  and  squires  did  come.  From  that  country  there  were
more  than  from  any  other ; and  the  army  amounted,  when  at  Santarem,  to  upwards  of
seven  hundred  lances  and  thirty  thousand  Spaniards,  all  well  mounted,  and  eager  to  do  us
mischief.

“News  was  soon  carried  to  Portugal  of  the  great  power  the  king  of  Castille  had  collected,
and  that  he  intended  to  renew  attain  the  siege  of  Lisbon.  The  king  held  a council  to  consider
how  he  should  act,  when  the  nobles  declared  for  marching  to  meet  their  enemies,  and  not
shutting  themselves  up  in  any  town  of  the  kingdom  ; for  if  they  were  inclosed,  they  must
remain  so,  and  the  Castillians  in  the  mean  time  would  overrun  the  country  at  their  ease,  and
in  the  end  starve  them  into  submission.  But  if  they  marched,  and  posted  themselves  advan-
tageously to  wait  the  enemy,  it  would  be  the  most  advisable  ; ‘ for,’  added  they,  ‘ we  know,
my  lord,  that  you  will  never  enjoy  peaceably  the  crown  we  have  placed  on  your  head  before
you  have  had  a battle,  and  have  once  or  twice  defeated  your  adversary,  the  king  of  Castille,
and  all  the  force  he  can  bring  against  you.  If  we  gain  the  victory,  the  kingdom  is  yours  ;
and,  should  we  be  overthrown,  it  will  still  remain  in  suspense.  It  is  by  far  more  honourable
to  seek  our  enemies  than  wait  to  bo  sought  for ; and  many  are  the  instances  where  the
first  have  had  the  advantage  over  the  latter.  We  therefore  advise  you  to  send  to  all  from
whom  you  expect  assistance.’  ‘ You  say  well,'  replied  the  king,  ‘and  I will  follow  what
you  recommend.'  He  issued  his  summons  for  his  subjects  to  meet  him  at  Oporto  on  a fixed
day.  But  you  must  know  that  those  to  whom  he  had  thus  written  neither  obeyed  nor  paid
any  attention  to  his  orders ; for  the  country  wTere  not  unanimous  in  their  choice  of  a king,
and  thus  dissembled  to  see  which  of  the  two  kings  would  be  victorious.  Indeed,  some  of
the  nobility  had  even  joined  the  king  of  Castille,  thinking  his  the  juster  cause.  Notwith-
standing this,  the  king  of  Portugal  assembled  all  the  forces  he  could  muster,  at  Coimbra.
To  say  the  truth,  those  of  the  highest  birth  and  of  the  greatest  weight  in  Portugal  were
attached  to  him  through  personal  affection  : he  had  full  five  and  twenty  hundred  knights
and  squires,  and  about  twelve  thousand  infantry.  He  appointed  the  count  de  Novaire  con-
stable, and  sir  Aleyne  Pereira*  marshal  of  the  army,  both  of  them  able  and  valiant  knights,
who  knew  well  how  to  lead  an  army  to  battle.

“ They  left  Coimbra  and  took  the  road  towards  Aljubarota  at  a gentle  pace,  on  account  of
their  heavy  baggage  following  them.  They  sent  forward  their  scouts,  to  observe  the  dis-
position of  the  enemy’s  army.  Sir  John  Fernando  de  Portelet  had  not  joined  the  king,  but
remained  in  the  castle  of  Ourem,  five  leagues  from  Aljubarota,  not  knowing,  I believe,  that
an  engagement  was  so  near  at  hand.  I can  readily  suppose  the  king  of  Castille  had  early
notice  of  our  march,  which  gave  him  and  his  army,  as  they  showed,  much  pleasure.  He
was  advised  to  hasten  to  meet  us  and  give  us  battle,  especially  by  the  Gascons,  who  were
eager  for  it,  and  requested  to  lead  the  van,  which  they  obtained.  Sir  William  de  Montfer-
rand,  who  was  on  our  side  with  forty  lances,  had  told  us  truly  when  he  said,  ‘ Be  assured
you  will  soon  have  a battle,  since  you  have  Gascons  opposed  to  you  ; for  they  like  nothing
better.’  The  king  lodged  on  the  morrow  with  his  whole  army  at  Leyria,  two  leagues  from
Aljubarota,  where,  on  the  next  day,  we  came  and  fixed  our  quarters.  The  Castillians
followed  us  .and  encamped  on  the  spot  we  had  left;  for  they  well  knew  by  their  scouts  our
line  of  march.

* My  lord,  the  Portuguese  have  always  had  great  confidence  in  God,  and  in  the  good
* Sir  Alvaro  Pereira,  brother  to  the  Constable  Nuiio  Alvares  Pereira. — Ed.

M


VOL.  II.


1G2


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


fortune  which  would  attend  them  at  Aljubarota  ; and  it  was  for  this  reason  they  had  now
there  encamped  themselves.”  “ Aye,”  said  the  duke,  “ pray  tell  me  why.”  “ Willingly,”’
answered  the  squire.  “ In  former  days,  Charlemagne,  who  was  king  of  France  and  emperor
of  Germany  and  Rome,  and  a great  conqueror,  overthrew,  at  Aljubarota,  seven  infidel  kings,
slaying  upwards  of  one  hundred  thousand  of  these  unbelievers,  as  it  is  fully  related  in  all  our
old  chronicles'*.  By  this  defeat,  he  won  the  city  of  Coimbra  and  all  Portugal,  which  he
turned  to  the  Christian  faith  : and  in  honour  of  this  victory  over  the  infidels,  he  erected  and
endowed  a large  monastery  for  black  monks,  the  revenues  of  which  they  were  to  receive  as
long  as  they  should  reside  in  Portugal.

“ There  was  also  another  celebrated  battle  at  this  place,  about  two  hundred  years  ago,
which  was  won  by  the  brother  of  a king  of  Castille,  called  the  count  of  Portugal  j* ; for  at
that  time  there  were  no  kings  of  Portugal.  There  fell  out  a deadly  hatred  between  these
two  brothers,  caused  by  a dispute  in  the  division  of  the  countries  ; so  that  there  was  not  anv
chance  of  peace  without  the  event  of  a battle  being  first  tried.  The  Portuguese  wrere  as
warm  in  the  matter  as  the  count,  and  declared  they  would  rather  be  put  to  death  than  become
subject  to  Castille.  They  therefore  marched,  in  battle-array,  to  meet  the  king  at  Aljubarota.
The  king  of  Castille  came  thither  in  such  force  that  his  army  amounted  to  more  than  ten
times  the  Portuguese,  whom  he  held  in  the  utmost  contempt.  The  battle  took  place  on  the
plains  of  Aljubarota,  and  w7as  very  bloody;  but,  in  the  end,  the  Portuguese  gained  the  day,
defeating  the  enemy  and  making  their  king  prisoner.  By  this  capture,  the  count  of  Portugal
obtained  whatever  terms  of  peace  he  desired,  and  the  boundaries  of  the  two  kingdoms  were
firmly  established.  The  Portuguese,  sensible  that  their  victory  was  owing  to  God’s  mercy,
in  enabling  so  few  to  overcome  such  numbers,  wex-e  desirous  to  illustrate  their  country,  and
had  their  count  crowned  king  by  the  nobles  and  prelates,  in  the  city  of  Coimbra.  They
carried  him  in  triumph  throughout  the  kingdom,  with  a crown  of  laurel  on  his  head,  as  a
token  of  victory,  like  to  that  which  kings  were  used  to  wear  in  former  times;  and  ever
since  that  day  Portugal  has  had  its  king  : and  know,  my  lord,  that  the  Portuguese,  sooner
than  be  under  the  subjection  of  the  Castillians,  would  look  for  the  most  distant  relation  of
any  of  their  kings  who  had  died  without  issue.

“ When  king  John  of  Portugal  was  arrived  at  Aljubarota,  all  these  old  stories  were  told
him.  While  the  constable  and  marshal  were  arranging  their  men,  Sir  John  Fernando  de
Portelet  arrived  with  his  forty  lancemen,  having  left  the  castle  of  Ourem  that  morning.
His  coming  gave  pleasure  to  all  ; and  lie  was  posted  in  the  division  near  the  king’s
person.  When  our  army  was  drawn  up  in  proper  array,  and  we  were  waiting  for  our
enemies,  whose  numbers  and  state  the  scouts  had  been  sent  to  observe,  the  king  advanced  to
the  centre,  and,  having  ordered  silence,  said — ‘ Gentlemen,  you  have  crowned  me  your  king  :
now  shew  your  loyalty ; for,  since  I am  on  the  plains  of  Aljubarota,  I will  never  l’etreat
until  I have  combated  our  enemies.’  The  army  unanimously  answered, — ‘My  lord,  we  will
remain  steady  to  you,  and,  be  assured,  will  never  turn  our  backs.’  The  two  armies
approached,  for  the  Castillians  were  desirous  of  battle,  as  they  plainly  shewed.  Our  scouts
were  ordered  to  examine  them  narrowly,  as  to  number  and  order,  that  we  might  take
measures  accordingly.  They  were  more  than  three  hours  returning ; and  we  began  to  fear
we  had  lost  them.  At  last,  they  came  back  with  particular  accounts  of  the  enemy’s  strength.
They  said  there  were  in  the  van  battalion  at  least  seven  thousand  men  armed  from  head  to
foot,  in  the  handsomest  manner  possible ; in  that  of  the  king,  thirty  thousand  horse,  and  all
well  armed.  When  our  men  and  their  leaders  heard  the  numbers  of  the  enemy,  and  how
they  were  marching,  the  van  battalion  being  two  leagues  in  advance  of  the  main  body  with
the  king — for  the  Gascons  and  foreigners  were  not  on  good  terms  with  the  Castillians  — they
resolved  to  keep  in  a compact  body  within  their  intrenchments,  and  to  form  two  wings
with  the  men  at  arms,  who  amounted  to  about  twenty-five  hundred,  in  the  rear  of  the  wings.
You  would  there,  my  lord,  have  witnessed  a fine  order  of  battle,  and  men  showing  great

* This  is  a mistake.  Charlemagne  never  approached  Aljubarota.  The  exploit  of  Alphonso  Henriquez,  the
founder  of  the  Portuguese  monarchy,  who  defeated  five  Moorish  Kings  at  the  battle  of  Ouriqua,  is  probably  the
origin  of  this  story.  — Ed.

t Count  Henry  of  Burgundy  married  Theresa,  natural  daughter  of  Alphonso  VI.  king  of  Castille  and  Leon.


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  & c.


103


courage.  The  king  commanded,  under  pain  of  death,  that  no  one  should  be  ransomed,  if  the
day  were  ours,  but  that  all  should  be  put  to  death.  This  was  wisely  done ; for  our  lords  said,
that  if  we  occupied  ourselves  in  making  prisoners,  we  should  think  of  nothing  else,  and  risk
the  loss  of  the  day : it  will  be  much  better  to  combat  vigorously,  than  attend  to  the  dictates
of  avarice  by  making  prisoners,  and  sell  ourselves  like  men  whose  all  is  at  stake.

“ Our  enemies  now  were  advancing  in  as  close  order  as  possible  just  before  us.  They  dis-
mounted, and,  driving  their  horses  away,  laced  their  plates  and  helmets  very  neatly,  and,
with  vizors  down  and  presented  lances,  marched  to  us  very  boldly : in  good  truth,  there
were  the  flower  of  chivalry  and  squireship,  as  was  very  apparent.  Between  us  was  a ditch,
not  so  wide  but  a knight  could  leap  over  it,  which  was  of  some  advantage  to  us ; for  our
wings  lanced  very  sharp  darts  as  the  enemy  attempted  to  pass  it,  which  wounded  several  so
sorely,  they  were  checked  in  the  attempt.  When  they  had  all  crossed  it,  the  battle  raged  ; for
they  imagined  the  king  of  Castille,  with  the  main  body,  were  close  behind  them  ; but  it  was
not  so,  and  they  were  all  slain  before  his  arrival.  The  manner  of  this  happening  Avas  as
follows :

“ They  were  surrounded,  as  it  were,  by  those  called  the  commonalty  of  our  country,  who,
coming  on  their  rear,  attacked  them  sharply  with  axes,  whilst  our  men  at  arms,  that  were
quite  fresh,  charged  them  in  front,  and  drove  them  back  into  the  ditch  they  had  crossed.  In
less  than  half  an  hour  the  business  was  over,  and  all  this  body,  of  four  thousand  good  men
at  arms,  were  put  to  death  : none  were  ransomed  ; for  whenever  any  of  ours  wished  to  show
quarter  to  his  prisoner,  he  was  slain  while  in  his  hands.  Thus  did  this  slaughter  befal  the
van  battalion  : not  one  escaped.  Shortly  after,  the  king  of  Castille  and  his  army,  consisting
of  thirty  thousand  men,  well  mounted,  came  up  ; but  it  was  now  night,  and  they  were  ignorant
of  the  loss  of  their  van.  They  were  desirous  of  displaying  their  horsemanship,  and,  by  way
of  gallantry,  more  than  five  hundred  leaped  over  the  ditch  ; but,  my  lord,  not  one  of  them
ever  returned  back  again.  Among  them  that  were  thus  slain  were  some  of  the  highest  rank,
the  most  anxious  for  deeds  of  arms,  and  several  of  those  noblemen  who  had  left  Portugal  to
serve  under  the  king  of  Castille.  Our  men,  on  seeing  the  enemy  thus  defeated,  advanced,
and  crossed  the  ditch,  now  nearly  filled  with  water,  from  the  number  of  bodies  which  had
choked  up  the  current ; they  then  mounted  their  horses  and  pursued  the  enemy,  who  had
taken  flight ; but  it  lasted  not  long,  for  it  was  soon  so  dark  they  were  afraid  of  following
them  rashly,  lest  they  might  fall  into  some  ambuscades  : besides,  they  were  not  so  well
mounted  as  the  Castillians.  Had  it  been  otherwise,  they  would  have  suffered  more,  and
their  king  been  either  slain  or  made  prisoner  ; but  the  obscurity  of  the  night,  and  the  badness
of  our  horses,  saved  them.

“ I will  now  mention  those  who  fell  in  this  battle  : and,  to  begin  with  the  Portuguese  who
had  changed  sides,  don  John  Alphonso  Tello,  the  grand  prior  of  St.  John  in  Portugal,  don
Alvares  his  brother,  with  several  more.  Of  Spaniards,  don  Pedro  of  Arragon,  son  to  the
constable  ; don  Juan,  son  to  don  Tello,  and  don  Fernando,  son  to  don  Sancho,  both  brothers-
in-law  to  the  queen ; Diego  Manrique,  president  of  Castille ; the  marshal  Carillo ; the
admiral  Juan  de  Fovar,  Pedro  Alvarez  Pereira,  grand  master  of  Calatrava  ; the  grand  master
of  St.  James,  with  others.  Of  French,  sir  John  de  Ris  ; sir  Geoffry  de  Ricon  ; sir  Geoffry
de  Partenay ; sir  Espaignolet  d’Espaign;  sir  Reginald  de  Soulier,  surnamed  Limousin,
marshal  of  the  king  of  Castille’s  army.  From  Gascony  and  Bearn  lay  dead,  the  lord  de
Bearn  ; the  lord  de  Mortan  ; the  lord  de  Brignolles ; sir  Raymond  d’Eurach ; sir  Berchand
de  Varuge ; sir  John  Asolme;  sir  Raymond  de  Valentin;  sir  Adam  de  Mourasse ; sir
Meuvent  de  Sarement ; sir  Peter  de  Sarembiere,  and  many  more,  to  the  amount,  in  all,  of
upwards  of  twelve  hundred  gentlemen,  knights,  and  squires.  I will  now  name  the  most
conspicuous  of  our  party:  first,  the  count  de  Novaire,  constable  of  Portugal;  Galopes  Portelet ;
Peter  Portelet,  and  Agalip  Fernando  Portelet  his  brother,  who  was  by  the  king’s  side,  at  his
bridle;  le  Pouuasse  d’Acunha ; Egeas  Toille  de  Podich  d’Assue ; Vasco  Martin  de  Melx;
his  son  Vasco  Martin,  who  was  killed  that  day  by  a dart  passing  through  his  body.  There
were  also  among  the  dead,  Gousselenas  de  Merlo  ; Alve  Porie,  marshal  of  the  army,  an
excellent  knight ; Radighos  Pereira  ; John  James  de  Salve ; John  Radigos,  cousin  to  the
king;  Daminondesque;  Radigo;  Radiges  de  Valeronceaux,  and  Mendignes  de  Valconsiaux.’*

m 2


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND.  FRANCE,  &c.


164

He  was  here  interrupted  by  a burst  of  laughter  from  the  duke  ; and  Lawrence  asked,
“ My  lord,  what  makes  you  laugh  so  heartily  V “ Why,  have  I not  sufficient  cause  ? for
I never  in  my  life  heard  such  a catalogue  of  strange  names  as  you  ai’e  repeating.”  “ On  my
faith,”  replied  the  squire,  “ these  are  all  proper  names  in  my  country  ; and  we  have  some  you
would  think  more  strange.”  “ I believe  it,”  said  the  duke  ; “ but,  Lawrence,  what  became
of  the  king  of  Castille  after  this  defeat  ? Did  he  never  attempt  to  rally  his  men  ? Did  he
shut  himself  up  in  any  of  his  towns  ? Did  not  the  king  of  Portugal  pursue  him  ?”  “ Ho,

my  lord,  we  remained  that  night  on  the  field  of  battle,  and  until  noon  the  next  day,  when
we  marched  to  Leyria,  and  from  thence  to  Coimbra.  The  king  of  Castille  fled  to  Santarem,
where  he  entered  a barge,  and,  followed  by  fourteen  others,  embarked  on  board  a large
vessel,  and  went  by  sea  to  Seville,  where  the  queen  was.  His  army  was  dispersed  in  all
directions,  so  that  it  was  impossible  to  rally  them,  for  their  loss  had  been  great.  They  will
be  long  before  they  recover  it : indeed  they  never  will,  unless  succoured  by  the  king  of
France  *.  It  is  to  counterbalance  this  alliance  that  the  king  of  Portugal  and  his  council
have  sent  us  hither,  to  renew  and  strengthen  our  connexion  with  the  king  of  England  and
your  lordship.”  The  duke  said,  “ Lawrence,  you  shall  not  leave  this  country  without
having  satisfactory  answers  to  carry  back  ; but  tell  me  about  the  engagement  you  hinted  at,
which  the  Portuguese  had  with  the  Spaniards  near  Seville  ; for  I love  to  hear  of  feats  of  arms,
though  I am  no  great  knight  myself.”

“ After  the  glorious  victory  which  king  John  had  gained  at  Aljubarota,  he  returned  in
triumph  to  Lisbon,  not  hearing  of  the  Castillians  or  French  collecting  in  any  bodies  to  con-
tinue the  war.  The  king  of  Castille,  with  his  queen,  left  Seville,  and  went  to  Burgos,  and
the  remains  of  his  army  shut  themselves  up  in  different  castles  and  towns.  The  garrisons  of
both  sides  frequently  made  war  on  each  other.  It  chanced  that  the  count  de  Novairet,
constable  of  Portugal,  entered  Castille,  not  far  from  Seville,  having  with  him  about  forty
spears : he  intended  riding  to  Yalverde,  having  heard  there  were  in  that  town  two  hundred
men  at  arms.  When  arrived  at  the  barriers,  lie  made  a display  of  his  strength,  as  a signal
that  he  wished  for  battle  ; but  those  within  remained  still,  and  seemed  to  pay  no  attention
to  him,  though  they  were  secretly  arming  and  preparing  themselves.

“ Our  people  having  paraded  before  the  place  some  time  in  vain,  turned  about  and  began
their  retreat  homeward  at  a foot’s  pace.  They  had  not  marched  a country  league  before  they
saw  the  whole  garrison  of  Yalverde  following  them  full  gallop.  They  were  led  by  a gallant
man  at  arms,  Diego  de  Padilla,  grand  master  of  the  order  of  St.  Jago,  who  brought  them
handsomely  to  the  charge.  The  constable  and  his  men  instantly  dismounted,  and  gave  their
horses  to  the  pages  and  varlets  : having  grasped  their  spears,  they  drew  up  in  a line.  The
Castillians,  who  were  very  numerous,  wanted  to  capture  their  horses  and  varlets,  saying,
‘ Let  us  seize  their  horses  : we  cannot  more  effectually  distress  them  than  to  make  them
return  on  foot but  the  grand  master  would  not  consent.  ‘ We  will  not  do  so,’  said  he  :
‘ if  we  have  the  horses,  we  will  have  their  masters  also ; for  we  will  fight  them  ; and  therefore
dismount : they  cannot  withstand  our  numbers.’  While  the  Castillians  were  thus  consulting,


* Don  John,  in  commemoration  of  this  event,  founded
the  beautiful  monastery  and  church  of  Batalha.  It  has
been  magnificently  described  by  Mr.  Murphy  ; and  I copy
a note  from  bis  publication,  page  28.

“ The  following  account  is  given  of  this  battle  by

Emanuel  de  Faria,  in  his  history  of  Portugal  : “ The

king  of  Portugal,  understanding  the  approach  of  the
Castillians,  drew  together  his  forces  from  Coimbra,  Oporto,
and  other  places,  and  marched  out  of  Guimaraens  to  give
them  battle.  On  the  morning  of  the  14th  August,  1385,
he  entered  the  plains  of  Aljubarota,  where  he  knighted
several  gentlemen.  The  Castillians  at  first  intended  to
march  directly  to  Lisbon  ; yet,  after  some  consultation,
they  resolved  to  engage.  The  forces  on  both  sides  were
Very  unequal  : the  Castillians  are  reported  to  have  been
thirty  thousand  strong,  and  the  Portuguese  but  six
thousand  five  hundred,  besides  having  some  local  disad-
vantages. The  sun  was  setting  when  these  two  unequal


armies  engaged.  The  Castillians,  at  the  first  charge,
broke  the  van-guard  of  the  Portuguese  ; hut  the  king
coming  up,  his  voice  and  example  sore-animated  his  men,
that  in  less  than  an  hour  the  multitudinous  army  were
put  to  the  route.  The  king  of  Castille,  who  headed  hi3
troops,  being  troubled  with  an  ague,  was  forced  10  take
horse  to  save  himself.  Most  of  the  Portuguese  who  sided
with  Ca6tille,  and  who  were  in  front  of  the  army,  were  put
to  the  sword,  for  no  quarter  was  given  them.  The  royal
standard  of  Castille  was  taken  ; hut  many  pretending  to  the
honour,  it  could  not  be  decided  by  whom.  The  number
of  the  slain  is  not  exactly  known,  though  very  great  on
the  part  of  the  Castillians.  Of  their  cavalry,  three  thousand
arc  supposed  to  have  perished,  and  many  persons  of  dis-
tinction. This  is  the  famous  battle  of  Aljubarota,  so
called,  because  it  was  fought  near  a village  of  that  name.”
Nunez  Alvarez  Pereira,  who  was  only  twenty-four
years  of  age  when  he  won  the  battle  of  Aljubarota. — Ed,


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


105


our  men,  without  paying  any  attention  to  their  horses,  seeing  a small  brook  in  their  rear,
crossed  it  quietly,  and  posted  themselves  on  its  bank.  The  enemy,  having  observed  this,
repented  not  having  instantly  made  the  attack  ; but,  thinking  they  could  soon  defeat  them,
they  began  the  combat  by  lancing  darts,  and  whatever  else  they  could  lay  hands  on,  so  that
it  lasted  from  noon  to  evening.  The  constable,  seeing  the  enemy  had  expended  all  their
artillery,  and  bad  not  wherewithal  to  fight,  crossed  the  rivulet,  with  his  banner  displayed,
and  attacked  them  with  lances.  They  were  soon  broken  and  in  disorder  ; for,  being  tired
by  the  weight  of  their  armour,  they  could  not  withstand  our  charge,  nor,  from  weakness,
assist  each  other.  They  were  speedily  vanquished  : the  grand  master,  with  sixty  more,  were
left  dead  on  the  field,  and  the  rest  took  to  flight.  We  recovered  our  horses,  and  many  others
which  the  Castillians  had  rode  thither.  What  is  your  opinion,  my  lord  ? did  not  our  men
behave  gallantly  ?”  “ That  they  did,  by  my  faith,"  replied  the  duke.  “ By  such  feats  of  arms
and  conquests  have  the  Portuguese  entered  the  career  of  glory,  since  the  accession  of  don
John  to  the  crown  of  Portugal.  They  say  God  is  with  them,  and  is  their  help  in  maintaining
their  rights.  Indeed,  my  lord,  they  never  fail  declaring  that  God  is  on  their  side ; for,  ever
since  the  death  of  king  Ferdinand,  in  all  matters  of  arms  they  have  been  concerned  in,  whether
of  consequence  or  not,  victory  has  been  for  them.  The  count  de  Foix,  who  at  this  day  is
one  of  the  most  potent  and  wise  lords,  says,  as  we  have  been  told  by  those  from  his  country,
that  fortune  sides  with  Portugal ; and  that,  if  his  knights  would  have  listened  to  him,  they
would  never  have  left  Bearn  to  fight  against  the  king  of  Portugal.

“ My  lord,  our  king  is  wise  and  prudent ; he  fears  and  loves  God,  and  has  an  affection  for
the  church,  which  he  exalts  as  much  as  in  his  power.  He  is  frequently  on  his  knees  in  his
oratory  and  hearing  divine  service,  and  is  very  strict  in  never  being  disturbed  whilst  at
prayer,  whatever  may  be  the  business.  He  is  a learned  man,  and  understands  some  little
of  astronomy  ; but,  above  all,  he  will  have  justice  administered  impartially  in  bis  dominions,
and  the  poor  maintained  in  their  rights.  I have  now,  my  lord,  told  you  everything,
according  to  your  request,  relative  to  our  king  and  country,  as  I was  charged  to  do  when  I
left  it ; and  you  will  give  me  such  answers  as  may  be  agreeable  to  you.”  “ Lawrence,  I
before  told  you,  and  I now  repeat  it,  that  your  coming  hither  and  your  conversation  have
given  me  great  pleasure.  You  shall  not  depart  without  having  every  point  of  your  demands
fully  answered.”  “ I thank  you,”  my  lord,”  replied  the  squire.  Upon  this,  the  doors  of  the
apartment  were  thrown  open,  and  wine  and  spices  were  brought  in,  of  which  the  ambassadors
having  partook,  they  departed  to  their  hotel  of  the  Falcon  to  repose  themselves.


CHAPTER  XXX.  THE  AMBASSADORS  FROM  PORTUGAL  RETURN  WITH  SATISFACTORY

ANSWERS. THE  DUKE  OF  LANCASTER  EMBARKS  ON  AN  EXPEDITION  TO  RECOVER

CASTILLE.

Not  long  after  this  conversation,  the  duke  of  Lancaster  had  a conference  with  his  brother,
the  earl  of  Cambridge,  on  the  affairs  of  Castille  and  Portugal.  The  earl,  who  had  been  in
the  latter  country  upwards  of  a year,  said,  that  during  the  reign  of  don  Ferdinand,  when  he
was  in  Portugal,  the  canon  de  Itobersac,  and  sir  William  Windsor  and  other  knights  whom
he  had  led  thither,  had  told  him  of  the  murmurs  of  the  common  people  relative  to  the
succession,  and  on  this  account  had  pressed  him  to  cany  away  his  son.  “ In  God’s  name,"
replied  the  duke,  “ the  Portuguese  squire  has  informed  me  most  circumstantially  of  all  this
matter ; and  we  cannot  gain  a more  convenient  entrance  to  Castille  than  through  Portugal.
Arragon  is  too  distant ; and,  besides,  the  king  of  Arragon  has  always  been  more  attached  to
France  than  to  us.  It  is  not  right,  since  Portugal  asks  from  us  assistance,  it  should  be
refused.”

A parliament  was  held  at  Westminster  on  this  subject,  when  it  was  determined  that  the
duke  of  Lancaster  should  have,  at  the  public  expense,  a thousand  or  twelve  hundred  lances.,
all  chosen  men,  two  thousand  archers,  and  one  thousand  lusty  varlets,  and  that  they  should
receive  half  a year’s  pay  in  advance.  The  king’s  uncles  were  well  satisfied  with  this  grant :
in  particular,  the  duke  of  Lancaster,  to  whom,  as  the  matter  more  nearly  concerned  him,  the


166


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


command  of  this  army  was  given.  To  expedite  the  ambassadors’  return  to  Portugal,  who
were  impatient  to  set  out,  the  king  of  England  wrote  very  affectionate  letters  to  the  king  of
Portugal,  declaring  the  strict  union  and  intelligence  he  wished  to  subsist  between  the  subjects
of  each  kingdom.  He  made  also  magnificent  presents  to  the  grand  master  of  St.  James  and
Lawrence  Fono-asse,  who  were  continually  with  the  duke  of  Lancaster  and  earl  of  Cambridge.
The  day  on  which  they  took  leave  of  the  king  and  his  council,  they  dined  with  the  duke  of
Lancaster  and  his  brother,  and  had  liberty  to  depart.  I believe  the  duke  mentioned  in  his
letters  to  the  king  of  Portugal,  as  well  as  to  his  ambassadors,  his  wish  that  seven  galleys,  and
from  eighteen  to  twenty  large  vessels,  might  be  sent  from  Portugal  to  the  port  of  Bristol,  on
the  confines  of  Wales,  where  the  duke  and  his  army  would  embark.

The  ambassadors,  having  promised  this  should  be  performed,  took  leave  and  set  out  for
Southampton,  where  their  vessel  was  waiting  for  them.  Having  embarked,  they  put  to
sea  with  a favourable  wind,  and,  crossing  the  Spanish  main,  arrived  in  five  days  at  Oporto,
where  fortunately  the  king  was,  and  much  rejoiced  at  their  return.  They  related  to  the  king
all  they  had  seen  and  heard  in  England  regarding  king  Richard  and  his  uncles,  and,  in
confirmation,  delivered  letters  from  them.  The  king  of  Portugal,  impatient  for  the  aid  of
the  English  to  retaliate  on  the  Spaniards,  did  not  delay  calling  his  council,  when  it  was
resolved,  that  don  Alphonso  Vietat,  high  admiral  of  Portugal,  should  get  ready  seven  galleys
and  eighteen  ships,  to  sail  to  England,  and  bring  back  the  duke  of  Lancaster  and  his  army.
Don  Alphonso  was  soon  ready,  and,  setting  sail  from  Oporto  with  favourable  winds,  arrived
in  six  days  at  Bristol,  where  he  anchored.

The  duke  was  much  rejoiced  on  hearing  of  his  arrival,  for  he  was  at  the  time  in  Wales,
where  the  king  and  all  his  court  were  : he  hastened  his  preparations,  as  his  knights,  squires,
and  archers  were  near  Bristol ; he  having  provided  at  Bristol  two  hundred  vessels  to  transport
them,  under  convoy  of  the  Portuguese  fleet,  to  the  continent.  It  was  intended  by  the  duke
that  his  duchess  and  daughters  should  accompany  him  to  Castille  and  Portugal,  where  he
proposed  nobly  marrying  them ; for  he  wished  not  to  return  very  soon,  and  with  reason,  as
he  perceived  affairs  in  England  were  badly  managed,  and  the  young  king  governed  by  wicked
counsellors.  This  made  him  the  more  desirous  of  quitting  the  country.  Before  his
embarkation,  and  in  the  presence  of  his  brothers,  he  appointed  his  son,  Henry  earl  of
Derby,  his  lieutenant  for  whatever  concerned  him  during  his  absence,  and  chose  for  him  a
set  of  able  advisers.  This  Henry  was  a young  and  handsome  knight,  son  of  the  lady  Blanche,
first  duchess  of  Lancaster.  I never  saw  two  such  noble  dames,  so  good,  liberal,  and  courteous,
as  this  lady  and  the  late  queen  of  England,  nor  ever  shall,  were  I to  live  a thousand  years,
which  is  impossible.

When  the  duke  of  Lancaster  had  arranged  his  affairs  in  England,  and  had  taken  leave  of
the  king  and  his  brothers,  he  came  to  Bristol,  where  he  tarried  fifteen  days,  until  his  horses,
to  the  amount  of  more  than  two  thousand,  and  his  stores,  were  safely  embarked,  with  ample
provision  of  hay,  straw,  oats,  and  fresh  water.  The  duke  then  entered  a handsome  galley,
having,  beside  it,  a large  vessel  for  his  household  and  the  duchess,  who  had  consented,  with
great  courage,  to  accompany  him  on  this  expedition  ; for  she  expected,  on  her  arrival  in  her
native  country,  or  at  least  before  her  return,  to  be  queen  of  Castille.  She  had  with  her  her
own  daughter  Catherine,  and  two  other  daughters  of  the  duke  by  his  former  marriage,  called
Isabella  and  Philippa.  Isabella  * was  married  to  sir  John  Holland,  constable  of  the  army.
The  marshal  of  the  host,  sir  Thomas  Moreaux,  was  also  married  to  another  daughter  of  the
duke  of  Lancaster ; but  she  was  a bastard,  and  mother  to  the  lady  Morielle,  Demoiselle  Marie
do  St.  Hilaire  de  Hauman  j-.  The  lord  Percy  was  admiral  of  the  fleet.

Among  the  knights  who  followed  the  duke  of  Lancaster  were  sir  Evan  Fitzwarren,  the
lord  Lucy,  sir  Henry  Beaumont,  the  lord  de  Pommiers,  sir  Richard  Burley,  the  lord  Talbot,
the  lord  Basset,  sir  William  Windsor,  sir  Thomas  Tresham,  sir  Hugh  Despenser,  the  lord


* Her  name  was  Elizabeth.  Sir  John  Holland  was
created  earl  of  Huntingdon  and  duke  of  Exeter.  She
was,  after  his  death,  married  to  sir  John  Cornwall,  lord
Fanhope,  but  had  no  issue  by  him.  By  sir  John  Holland
she  had  a son  (John)  who  succeeded  his  father.

t I cannot  explain  who  this  lady  is  : nor  can  I find


any  where,  but  in  Froissart,  mention  made  of  this  natural
daughter  of  John  of  Gaunt,  nor  of  the  marriage  with  sir
Thomas  Moreaux.

Stowe  says,  sir  Richard  Burghley  was  constable  of  the
duke’s  army,  and  after  him  sir  Thomas  de  la  Molerreaux.


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


107


Willoughby,  the  lord  Bradestoa,  sir  William  Farrington,  sir  John  d’Ambreticourt,  sir  Hugh
Hastings,  sir  Thomas  Worcester,  sir  Maubrun  de  Linieres,  sir  Lewis  Rochester,  sir  John
Sounder,  sir  Philip  Tickel,  sir  Robert  Clinton,  sir  Hugh  Calverley,  David  HolgravP,  Thomas
Allcry,  Ilobequin  Beaucester,  and  many  others  with  pennons,  without  including  the  banners.
There  were  more  than  one  thousand  lances  of  knights,  squires,  and  good  men  at  arms  ; two
thousand  archers,  and  one  thousand  stout  varlcts.  It  was  the  month  of  May  when  they
embarked  ; and  they  had  the  usual  fine  weather  of  that  pleasant  season.  They  coasted  the
isles  of  Wight  and  Guernsey,  so  that  they  were  distinctly  seen  from  the  Norman  shores  , and
a fine  sight  it  was,  for  there  were  upwards  of  two  hundred  sail.  It  was  delightful  to  observe
the  galleys,  which  had  men  at  anus  on  board,  coast  the  shores  in  search  of  adventures,  as
they  had  heard  the  French  fleet  was  at  sea.  In  truth,  they  were  out  before  they  showed
themselves  on  the  coasts  of  Carentan ; but,  when  they  perceived  them  approaching,  they
retired  into  the  port  of  Havre.


CHAPTER  XXXI. MANY  FRENCH  KNIGHTS  AND  SQUIRES  OFFER  THEIR  SERVICES

TO  THE  KING  OF  CASTILLE.

Nothing  happens  but  what  is  known,  more  particularly  if  relating  to  deeds  of  arms  ; for
knights  and  squires  willingly  converse  on  such  topics.  The  news  of  the  defeat  of  the  king
of  Castille  at  Aljubarota  was  soon  spread  abroad,  and  was  known  in  France  ; for  those  who
had  lost  their  friends  or  relations  loudly  lamented  them.  Castille  alone  offered  a field  for
deeds  of  arms,  as  it  was  rumoured  the  duke  of  Lancaster,  to  support  his  claim  on  that  crown,
had  assembled  a large  army,  and  would  march  thither  or  to  Portugal,  and  without  doubt
there  would  be  many  battles.  Some  knights  and  squires,  of  the  interior  part  of  France,
consulted  together  on  this,  and  which  was  the  best  road  to  Castille.  Several  were  of  opinion,
to  march  bv  land,  to  avoid  the  dangers  of  the  sea,  and  of  falling  into  the  hands  of  the  English
fleet ; but  others  said,  the  road  by  land  was  long,  and  the  intentions  of  the  king  of  Navarre
were  not  quite  clear ; for  he  was  not  much  attached  to  France : that  nation,  he  said,  had
robbed  him  of  bis  lands  in  Normandy  ; but  I know  not  if  his  complaints  were  just.  They
were  doubtful  what  road  to  take  ; for,  should  tney  go  round  Dy  Arragon,  tney  would  never
arrive  at  their  journey’s  end.  At  length  they  resolved  to  embark  from  la  Rochelle,  wdiere
they  freighted  eighteen  vessels,  with  their  baggage  and  stores,  but  did  not  take  many  horses
with  them.

When  all  was  ready,  and  the  wind  favourable,  they  put  to  sea,  and  made  for  the  coast  of
Bayonne  ; for  that  was  their  line  of  direction.  They  wTere  three  hundred  knights  and  squires
who  had  volunteered  on  this  expedition.  Among  them  were  the  lord  de  Coursy,  sir  John
IJandoye,  the  viscount  de  la  Verliere,  sir  Peter  de  Vellamines,  sir  Guy  le  Bavcux,  sir  John
de  Chatelmorant,  the  lord  de  St.  Liger,  sir  James  de  Fougeres,  the  lord  de  Bellanes,  sir
Tristan  de  Langurant,  the  lord  Barrois  aes  Barres,  with  many  more.  They  arrived  without
accident,  in  the  port  of  St.  Andero,  in  Biscay,  on  the  4th  day  of  May,  1386,  where  they  rested
themselves  two  days,  and  had  their  horses  and  baggage  disembarked.  When  they  had  laden
their  horses,  they  inquired  where  they  could  find  the  king  of  Castille,  and  were  told  that  he
w?as  then  at  Burgos,  holding  a parliament  on  the  affairs  of  tile  nation.  On  leaving  St.
Andero,  they  followed  the  road  to  Burgos,  and  waited  on  the  king,  who  was  truly  glad  to  see
them,  and  asked  the  news  from  France,  and  which  way  they  had  come.  They  replied,
“ By  sea  from  la  Rochelle,”  and  that  it  was  rumoured  in  France  the  duke  of  Lancaster  had
raised  a very  large  force  of  men  at  arms  and  archers,  to  lead  into  Castille  or  Portugal ; that
it  was  not  known  where  he  intended  to  land,  but  that  the  king  of  Portugal  had  sent  to  him
many  ships  and  galleys.

The  king,  cn  hearing  this,  became  pensive,  although  it  was  what  he  expected,  and  did  not
at  this  meeting  display  his  courage  ; for  he  perceived,  from  every  appearance,  he  should  have
a severe  war  made  on  him.  However,  he  entertained  the  knights  very  handsomely,  and
thanked  them  much  for  coming.  Addressing  himself  to  sir  Robert  de  Baquemont,  and  his
brother,  sir  John  de  Braquemont,  he  said,  “ I desired  you  both,  when  you  left  me  last  year,


168


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


that,  on  your  return,  you  would  bring  me  from  Paris  some  tennis  balls,  that  we  might  amuse
ourselves  at  that  game ; but  I believe  it  would  have  been  better  I had  desired  you  to  bring
good  helmets  and  armour ; for  I fancy  we  shall  soon  have  much  need  of  them.”  “ Sire,”
replied  the  lord  de  Braquemont,  “ we  have  brought  both  ; for  we  can  neither  fight  nor  play
continually.”  In  truth,  the  king  of  Castille  showed  great  attention  to  these  knights,  feasted
them  well,  and  liberally  supplied  them  with  everything  they  wanted.  Some  of  them  having
vows  to  perform,  wished  to  make  a pilgrimage  to  the  shrine  of  St.  James  at  Saint  Jago,  since
they  were  in  the  country  ; and  all  of  them  set  out  in  company,  having  armed  themselves  as
if  they  were  going  to  battle  : it  was  fortunate  for  them  they  had  done  so ; and  whoever  had
advised  them  showed  great  prudence,  as  you  will  see  hereafter  : but  I must  now  return  to  the
duke  of  Lancaster  and  his  fleet,  whom  we  left  coasting  Normandy.


CHAPTER  XXXII. THE  DUKE  OF  LANCASTER,  IN  HIS  VOYAGE  TO  CASTILLE,  ATTACKS

THE  FRENCH  BEFORE  BREST,  AND  FORCES  THEM  TO  RAISE  THE  BLOCKADE.

Just  as  pilgrim  falcons,  who  have  long  rested  hungry  on  their  perch,  are  desirous  of  flight
in  search  of  prey,  (if  I may  use  the  comparison)  were  those  English  knights  and  squires
impatient  to  try  their  arms  in  the  field.  As  they  coasted  Normandy,  they  said  to  each
other,  “ Why  do  not  we  disembark  in  some  of  these  Norman  ports,  where  we  shall  meet
with  knights  ready  to  offer  us  combat  ? ” At  last,  these  speeches  reached  the  ears  of  the  duke,
who  knew  well,  before  he  left  England,  that  sir  John  de  Malestroit,  the  lord  de  Malestroit,
the  lord  de  Cambor,  Morfonace,  with  a number  of  other  knights  and  squires  from  Brittany,
had  blockaded  Brest,  under  the  command  of  the  constable ; so  that  when  he  learnt  the
eagerness  his  knights  expressed  for  some  deeds  of  arms,  he  ordered  his  admiral,  the  lord
Thomas  Percy,  and  his  constable,  lord  John  Holland,  to  steer  the  fleet  towards  Brittany,  for
he  wished  to  visit  the  castle  of  Brest  and  his  countrymen  wdio  were  within  it.  This  order
gave  great  joy  to  the  English  ; and  don  Alphonso  Yietat,  who  was  admiral-in-chief,  and  well
acquainted  with  these  dangerous  seas,  took  the  lead,  for  the  rest  of  the  fleet  to  follow  him.
The  weather  was  now  delightful,  and  the  sea  so  calm,  it  was  a pleasure  to  be  on  it : the  fleet
advanced  with  an  easy  sail,  and  arrived  at  the  mouth  of  Brest  harbour,  where,  waiting  for
the  tide,  they  entered  it  in  safety.  The  clarions  and  trumpets  sounded  sweetly  from  the
barges  and  the  castle.  Sir  John  de  Malestroit  and  his  companions  were  seated  at  table
when  the  news  was  brought  them  of  the  arrival  of  the  English  fleet : they  instantly  leaped
up  and  armed  themselves.  They  knew  that,  as  soon  as  the  duke  of  Lancaster  had  landed,
they  should  have  an  engagement ; for  the  English  were  come  to  raise  the  blockade.

They  were  not  long  in  making  themselves  ready,  and  amounted  to  about  three  hundred
men  at  arms,  knights,  and  squires.  The  English  were  rejoiced  at  finding  themselves  in
Brest  harbour,  and  that  the  Bretons  were  still  guarding  their  blockhouse  ; for  they  were  aware
an  engagement  must  ensue,  and  they  were  thirsty  for  battle.  The  duke  of  Lancaster  and  his
men  landed  as  near  as  possible  to  the  castle,  but  left  their  horses  and  stores  on  board  their
ships.  The  ladies,  however,  went  on  shore  to  repose  themselves.  The  first  day  they  made
no  attack,  only  marched  out  of  their  quarters,  when  some  of  the  lords  fixed  their  tents  and
pavilions  on  the  harbour  side  and  near  the  castle,  where  they  remained  that  day  and  the
following  night.  On  the  morrow,  the  constable  and  marshal’s  trumpets  sounded,  for  the  army
to  make  ready  for  an  assault.  When  all  were  armed,  they  marched  in  good  array  towards
the  castle  and  blockhouse  which  had  been  raised  in  front  of  it.  This  was  so  solidly  built,  it
would  have  lasted  nine  or  ten  years  ; for  it  was  surrounded  with  ditches,  and  had  walls,
towers,  and  gates  of  strong  timber.

The  English  knights,  on  their  arrival,  began  to  skirmish  gallantly  at  the  barriers  of  the
blockhouse,  and  attempted  to  win  them.  The  knights  and  squires  within,  and  there  were
numbers  of  good  ones,  vigorously  defended  themselves  ; and,  in  order  to  gain  more  room,
they  took  away  the  palisades,  which  was  foolish  enough,  but  they  trusted  to  their  skill  and
valour.  Many  were  the  fine  deeds  of  arms  and  much  pushing  with  lances,  and  those  fared
the  best  who  could  the  longest  hold  their  wind.  The  English,  being  so  numerous,  gave  the


169


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.

Bretons  full  employment,  and,  by  dint  of  courage,  won  the  barriers  : within  the  court  of  the
blockhouse  were  upwards  of  one  hundred,  so  that  the  Bretons  were  on  the  point  of  losing
everything.  Sir  John  de  Malestroit  and  the  viscount  de  Cambor,  seeing  this,  shouted  their
cry,  and  said.,  “ How,  gentlemen,  shall  we  be  thus  overcome  ? Advance,  advance,  and  push
with  vigour,  for  there  must  be  no  sham-fighting  here : we  have  only  the  choice  of  death  or
victory.”  Upon  this  they  rallied,  and,  placing  the  ends  of  their  lances  in  the  ground,  made
an  obstinate  resistance  to  those  who  had  driven  them  within  the  barriers.  Hard  blows  were
given  on  each  side ; but  the  English,  whether  they  would  or  not,  were  forced  to  retire,  and
were  beaten  back  out  of  the  court,  so  that  during  the  day  they  could  not  regain  it.

On  the  other  side  of  the  blockhouse  was  a stone  tower  situated  on  a rock,  which  the  Bretons
had  garrisoned.  A severe  attack  was  made  on  it  by  the  English  ; for,  while  the  fight  was
going  on  at  the  banders,  they  had  crossed  a narrow  ditch,  and,  with  pick-axes,  advanced  up
to  the  walls,  where  they  began  to  work  and  force  out  the  stones.  Those  within  defended
themselves  well  with  what  they  could  lay  hands  on  ; but  the  archers  shot  so  sharply  that  none
dared  show  themselves  unless  strongly  shielded.  The  pick-axe  men  continued  their  work,
until  the  tower,  which  leaned  much  on  that  side  (for  they  had  undermined  the  foundation)
opened  in  two  parts.  The  garrison  saved  themselves  in  the  ruins  of  what  remained,  for  one
half  fell  to  the  ground.  On  this,  the  English  set  up  a grand  shouting  ; but,  it  being  now
late,  the  trumpets  sounded  the  retreat,  as  they  imagined  they  had  done  enough  for  one  day.
When  they  marched  away,  they  said  to  the  Bretons,  “ Gentlemen,  keep  a good  watch
to-night,  and  stay  where  you  are,  for  to-morrow  we  will  visit  you  again  : you  see  well  what
situation  you  are  in,  and  that  you  have  nothing  to  shelter  you  from  us.”

It  was  fully  the  intention  of  the  English  to  return  the  next  day  and  conquer  the  blockhouse
with  its  garrison,  for  it  was  in  their  power  ; and  in  this  idea  they  passed  the  night  comfortably,
as  they  had  wherewithal  so  to  do.  There  is  an  old  saying,  that  “ John  is  as  wise  as  his
master,”  which  I repeat,  because,  if  the  English  are  subtle  in  war,  the  Bretons  match  them  ;
for  they  were  equally  clear-sighted  as  to  what  was  to  their  advantage,  and  what  not.  They
saw,  if  they  wished  to  avoid  death  or  captivity,  there  was  no  time  to  be  lost  in  packing  up
their  baggage  and  leaving  the  blockhouse.  They  instantly  made  themselves  ready,  and,
mounting  their  horses,  rode  towards  Hennebon,  which  was  four  leagues  distant.  They  acted
wisely  ; for  they  were  not  afraid  of  a pursuit,  as  the  English  had  not  disembarked  any  of
their  horses.

Sir  John  de  Malestroit  and  his  companions  arrived  safely  in  Hennebon,  the  gates  of  which
they  found  open,  without  any  suspicion  of  the  English  being  so  near.  On  the  morrow,  the
trumpets  sounded  for  a renewal  of  the  attack,  and  they  were  anxious  to  make  up  for  their
forced  retreat  of  the  preceding  day  ; but  news  was  brought  that  the  Bretons  had  evacuated
the  blockhouse.  The  English  repented  sorely  not  having  laid  an  ambush,  to  have  prevented
the  loss  of  their  prey.  The  lords  sent  varlets  to  destroy  the  blockhouse,  and  set  it  on  fire.
Thus  was  the  siege  of  Brest  raised  by  the  duke  of  Lancaster.  The  duke,  sir  John  Holland,
and  some  of  the  other  knights,  went  into  the  castle  of  Brest,  carrying  the  ladies  with  them,
where  they  had  refreshments,  and  then  returned  to  their  quarters.  On  the  morrow,  being
the  third  day,  they  had  their  vessels  watered ; and  on  the  ensuing  day  they  embarked,  and
continued  their  voyage.


CHAPTER  XXXIII. THE  DUKE  OF  LANCASTER  ARRIVES  AT  CORUNA  IN  GALICIA. THE

FRENCH,  IN  THE  SERVICE  OF  SPAIN,  ENTER  TnE  CASTLE  TO  OPPOSE  HIM. THEY

SHORTLY  AFTER  DEFEAT  A PARTY  OF  HIS  FORAGERS.

Before  the  duke  sailed  from  Brest,  he  held  a council  to  determine  whether  they  should
steer  to  Lisbon,  Oporto,  or  Coruna.  To  this  council  the  Portuguese  admiral  and  his  captains
were  called,  and  it  lasted  some  time.  Don  Alphonso  Vietat  said,  that  he  had  been  ordered
to  England  for  their  service  by  the  king  of  Portugal,  by  whom  they  woidd  be  made  heartily
welcome,  should  they  land  in  his  country ; for  he  was  expecting  them,  and  would  be  much
gratified  by  their  coming.  Upon  this,  they  determined  to  make  for  Oporto,  which  is  but


170


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.

thirty  leagues  from  Lisbon  ; but  they  altered  their  mind,  saying  it  would  be  more  honourable
to  land  on  the  enemy’s  coast,  and  that  by  so  doing  they  should  the  more  alarm  them.  They
then  steered  for  Coruna,  and,  having  a favourable  wind,  were  not  more  than  five  days  sailing
thither  from  Brest : they  cast  anchor  in  the  road,  to  wait  for  the  tide,  as  it  was  too  low  water
when  they  arrived  to  approach  near  the  shore.

I will  now  speak  of  the  French  knights,  sir  Barrois  des  Barres,  sir  John  de  Chatelmorant,
the  brothers  de  Braquemon-t,  and  the  rest,  who  had  set  out  on  a pilgrimage  to  St.  Jago  de
Compostella.  After  they  had  made  their  offerings  and  prayers  to  the  shrine  of  St.  James,
and  were  sitting  at  their  inn,  news  was  brought  hy  those  who  were  guarding  the  coasts,  that
the  English  fleet  was  in  sight,  and  showed  a disposition  to  land  at  Coruna.  Before  their  baggage
was  unloaded,  or  the  saddles  had  been  taken  from  their  horses,  they  mounted  them  again,
saying,  they  must  hasten  back  to  Coruna,  to  defend  the  port ; for,  should  the  English
unfortunately  gain  the  castle  and  town,  they  would  be  masters  of  the  whole  country.  Some
of  the  knights  borrowed  horses  at  St.  Jago,  and  made  such  dispatch  as  to  arrive  at  Coruna
that  night,  though  it  was  fourteen  country  leagues  distant,  and  a difficult  road  to  find.  They
got  there  very  opportunely,  just  as  the  English  fleet  was  entering  the  harbour.  The  garrisons
in  town  and  castle  were  well  pleased  at  the  coming  of  the  French  knights,  whose  baggage
and  armour  followed  in  the  course  of  the  night.  It  was  a fine  sight,  on  the  morrow,  to  view
all  the  ships  and  galleys  enter  the  port  laden  with  men  at  arms  and  purveyances,  with
trumpets  and  clarions  sounding  ; and  those  signals  were  answered,  by  way  of  defiance,  by  the
trumpets  and  clarions  of  the  castle.  The  English  from  this  knew  there  were  good  garrisons
in  both  town  and  castle,  and  that  the  French  had  possession  of  the  castle.

The  lords  and  their  men  disembarked  on  the  shore,  but  did  not  approach  the  town,  as  it
was  too  well  fortified,  and  seemed  filled  with  men  at  arms.  They,  however,  took  up  their
lodgings  in  some  huts  of  fishermen  and  seafaring  men  on  the  outside  of  the  walls.  They
were  forced  to  build  other  huts,  as  they  were  so  numerous ; and  the  four  first  days  after  their
landing  they  were  thus  employed,  as  well  as  in  clearing  the  vessels  of  their  stores  and
purveyances,  which  were  in  great  quantities,  and  in  disembarking  their  horses.  They  had
been  fifteen  days  on  board ; and  though  they  were  plentifully  supplied  with  hay,  oats,  and
fresh  water,  yet  the  rolling  of  the  sea  had  as  much  affected  them  as  it  had  done  their  masters,
which  made  it  needful  to  walk  them  about  and  take  every  care  of  them.  When  the  ships
had  been  entirely  cleared,  the  duke  was  asked  his  pleasure  concerning  them.  He  replied,
“ Let  all  the  sailors  be  well  paid,  and  take  the  ships  for  their  pains  : I shall  dismiss  them,
for  I wish  all  the  world  to  know  that  I will  never  recross  the  sea  to  England  until  I be
master  of  Castille  or  die  in  the  attempt.”  These  orders  were  obeyed  ; and  the  sailors  being
paid  to  their  satisfaction,  made  sail,  some  to  Portugal,  Lisbon,  Bayonne,  Brittany,  or
England,  as  they  pleased,  but  none  remained  behind.  The  duke  of  Lancaster  and  his  army
were  lodged  in  huts  covered  with  leaves,  or  in  such  houses  as  they  met  with,  and  remained
before  Coruna  upwards  of  a month  amusing  themselves ; for  the  chief  lords  had  brought
hounds  for  their  pastime,  and  hawks  for  the  ladies.  They  had  also  mills  to  grind  their  corn,
and  ovens  to  bake ; for  they  never  willingly  go  to  war  in  foreign  countries  without  carrying
things  of  that  description  with  them.

The  foragers  went  daily  in  search  of  what  forage  they  could  find  : for,  as  they  were  in  a poor
deserted  country,  it  was  not  very  plentiful,  which  forced  them  to  seek  it  at  a distance.  The
French  knights  at  Coruna  were  eager  to  meet  their  enemies ; and  having  learnt  how
foolishly  unguarded  the  foragers  were,  said,  they  would  some  day  or  other  catch  them,  and
make  them  pay,  once  for  all,  for  what  they  had  pillaged.  They  armed  themselves,  to  the
number  of  about  two  hundred,  and,  mounting  their  horses,  were  conducted  by  guides,  at
night-fall,  through  woods,  and  over  mountains,  until  they  came  to  a mountain,  called  in  that
country  Espinete,  by  break  of  day,  where  they  halted  ; for  they  had  learnt  that  the  English
foragers  were  out  in  that  part.  The  foragers  had  been  absent  from  their  army  two  days,
collecting  as  much  as  they  could  carry,  and  were  on  their  return  to  Coruna  ; but  their  only
road  lay  over  this  mountain  of  Espinete.  The  instant  they  came  there,  the  French  knights
rushed  upon  them,  shouting  out,  “ Les  Barres  for  the  Barrois  ! ” The  foragers  were
thunderstruck  ; for  the  greater  part  were  unarmed  : there  might  be  six  score  archers,  who


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  & c.


171


gallantly  drew  themselves  up  in  array,  and  wounded,  with  their  arrows,  both  horses  and  riders.
When  they  had  expended  their  arrows,  they  flung  down  their  bows,  and  defended  themselves
as  well  as  they  could  with  the  other  arms  they  had : some  fled  and  hid  themselves,  in  hopes
of  escaping.  Why  should  I make  a long  story  ? Of  the  three  hundred  foragers,  full  two
hundred  were  slain  : the  rest  saved  themselves,  as  well  as  they  could,  among  bushes  and
racks,  where  no  horse  could  venture.  The  runaways  fled  to  Coruna  and  related  their
misfortune,  and  how  sir  Barrois  des  Barres  and  his  company  had  discomfited  them.

The  army  was  much  surprised  at  this  ; and  sir  Thomas  Moreaux,  the  marshal,  had  five
hundred,  or  more,  instantly  armed  and  mounted,  when,  taking  the  pennon  of  St.  George,  he
galloped  off  with  them  towards  the  mountain  of  Espinete,  to  meet  the  French.  When  there
arrived,  he  only  perceived  the  slaughtered  foragers  ; for  the  French  had  returned  by  the
road  they  had  come  ; but  had  they  not  had  good  guides,  they  would  never  have  found  it
through  the  inclosures.  The  English,  on  their  return,  when  within  half  a league  of  their
army,  saw  the  French  re-enter  the  castle  of  Coruna,  which  vexed  them  much  : but  help  it
they  could  not.  The  army  blamed  the  marshal  for  having  suffered  the  foragers  to  go  without
an  escort  of  men  at  arms,  when  the  enemy  was  so  near,  and  in  such  numbers.  The  constable
and  duke  of  Lancaster  were  so  sharp  with  him,  he  was  quite  ashamed  : he  said,  that  they
had  been  caught,  to  be  sure,  this  once,  though  they  had  foraged  ten  times  before  without  any
interruption.  “ Sir  Thomas,”  said  the  duke,  “ be  more  cautious  in  future ; for  such  things  may
fall  out  in  one  day  or  hour  as  may  not  happen  again  in  a century.”


CHAPTER  XXXIV. THE  DUKE  OF  LANCASTER,  AFTER  REMAINING  BEFORE  CORUNA

UPWARDS  OF  A MONTH,  MARCHES  HIS  ARMY  TO  SANT  JAGO,  WHICH  SURRENDERS  ON
CAPITULATION.

When  the  duke  of  Lancaster  had  remained  before  Coruna  upwards  of  a month,  as  I
have  before  said,  and  when  his  men  and  horses  were  quite  recovered,  lie  was  advised  to  march
towards  St.  Jago,  where  there  was  a richer  and  more  open  country  for  his  cavalry.  The
army  dislodged  from  before  Coruna,  and  marched  in  three  battalions.  The  marshal  led  the
van,  of  three  hundred  lances  and  six  hundred  archers  ; then  marched  the  duke  with  four
hundred  spears,  accompanied  by  all  the  ladies.  The  rear  was  composed  of  four  hundred  lances
and  seven  hundred  archers,  accompanied  by  the  constable  sir  John  Holland.  They  marched
very  slowly,  and  were  three  days  in  going  from  Coruna  to  St.  Jago.  You  must  know,
that  the  province  of  Galicia  was  much  alarmed  at  the  arrival  of  the  duke  of  Lancaster  ; for
they  remembered  his  power  well.  When  the  marshal  and  the  van  came  before  the  town  of
St.  Jago  de  Compostella,  where  the  body  of  St.  James  reposes,  and  which  many  make  such
long  journeys  to  visit,  he  found  the  gates  shut,  as  might  have  been  supposed.  There  was  no
other  garrison  but  its  inhabitants ; for  the  French  knights  refused  taking  upon  them  the
defence  of  it,  to  the  last  extremity,  as  it  was  not  strong  enough  to  withstand  the  force  under
the  duke  of  Lancaster.  The  marshal  sent  forward  a herald,  to  hear  what  the  townsmen
would  say.  The  herald  found  at  the  barriers  the  captain  of  the  guard,  called  don  Alphonso
Sene,  and  said  to  him,  “ A few  paces  hence  is  the  marshal  of  my  lord  of  Lancaster’s  army,  who
would  wish  to  speak  with  you.”  “ I am  very  agreeable  to  it ; let  him  advance,  and  I will
parley  with  him.”  The  herald  returned  to  the  marshal  with  this  answer.

The  marshal  left  his  army,  with  only  twenty  lances,  and  rode  to  the  barriers,  where  he
found  the  captain  and  some  of  the  townsmen  waiting.  The  marshal  dismounted,  with  twelve
others,  among  whom  were  the  lord  Basset  and  sir  William  Farringdon,  and  addressed  him
as  follows  : “Captain,  and  you  men  of  St.  Jago,  the  duke,  and  duchess  of  Lancaster  your
queen,  (she  being  the  eldest  daughter  of  Don  Pedro,  your  late  king)  send  me  to  know  how
you  mean  to  act : to  open  your  gates  and  receive  them  as  your  legal  sovereigns,  as  good
subjects  ought  to  do  ; or  force  me  to  assault  your  walls,  and  take  your  town  by  storm.  But
know,  that  if  you  suffer  the  place  to  be  stormed,  all  within  shall  be  put  to  the  sword,  that
others  may  take  warning.”  The  captain  replied, — “ We  wish  to  follow  the  dictates  of  reason,
and  acquit  ourselves  loyally  towards  those  to  whom  we  owe  obedience.  We  know  well  that


172


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


the  duchess  of  Lancaster  is  daughter  to  Don  Pedro  of  Castille ; and  if  that  king  had  reigned
peaceably  in  Castille,  she  was  heiress  to  his  crown  ; but  things  are  altered  ; for  the  whole
kingdom  turned  to  the  obedience  of  his  brother,  king  Henry,  by  the  success  of  the  battle  of
Monteil : we  all  swore  fidelity  to  him  ; and  he  was  acknowledged  king  as  long  as  he  lived  :
after  Lis  decease  we  all  swore  obedience  to  don  John,  his  son,  who  reigns  at  this  moment.
Tell  us  how  those  of  Coruna  acted  ; for  it  is  impossible  but  that,  during  the  month  you  lay
before  that  place,  some  negotiations  and  treaties  were  concluded.”  Sir  Thomas  Moreaux
answered, — “ You  speak  truly:  we  have  had  indeed  negotiations  with  those  of  Coruna,
otherwise  we  should  not  have  marched  hither,  though  that  town  is  double  the  strength  of
yours.  I will  tell  you  what  they  have  done  : they  have  entered  into  a composition  with  us,
by  declaring  they  will  act  in  the  same  manner  as  you  do  ; but,  if  you  force  us  to  the
assault,  they  will  not  follow  that  example.  If  Galicia  surrender  to  my  lord  duke  and  his
lady,  they  will  surrender  also ; for  which  they  have  given  us  such  pledges  as  are  satisfac-
tory.”

“ Well,”  replied  the  captain,  “ we  will  agree  to  this : there  are  many  large  towns  and
cities  in  the  realm  : ride  on,  therefore,  and  leave  us  in  peace ; for  we  will  act  as  they  shall,
and  give  you  good  security  for  our  performing  it.”  “ Oh,  this  will  never  do,”  said  the
marshal  : “ such  a treaty  will  by  no  means  please  the  duke  and  duchess ; for  they  are
resolved  to  reside  in  this  town,  and  keep  their  state  as  monarchs  should  in  their  own  kingdoms.
Answer  me  briefly  what  you  mean  to  do  : surrender,  or  have  yourselves  and  town  destroyed  ? ”
“ My  lord,”  said  the  captain,  “ allow  us  a little  time  to  consult  together,  and  you  shall  be
speedily  answered.”  “ I consent,”  said  the  marshal.  The  captain  then  withdrew  into  the
town,  and  assembled  the  inhabitants  at  the  usual  place  where  public  meetings  were  held,  and
related  to  them  the  conversation  that  had  passed  between  him  and  the  marshal.  I believe
the  townsmen  at  last  consented  to  l’eceive  the  duke  and  duchess  as  their  monarchs,  and  to
entertain  them  as  such  in  their  town  as  long  as  they  might  please  to  reside  there,  if  don  John,
king  of  Castille,  did  not,  with  his  power,  attack  them.  But  if  it  should  happen  that  after
they  had  made  St.  Jago  their  residence  for  a year,  or  a longer  time,  according  to  their  plea-
sure, and  should  depart  from  the  country,  for  England,  Bordeaux  or  Bayonne,  or  wherever
else  they  may  prefer,  the  duke  must  engage  to  leave  behind  a sufficient  force  of  men  at  arms
to  defend  them  against  their  enemies,  otherwise  they  would  surrender  the  town  to  don  John
of  Castille,  and  hold  themselves  acquitted  of  allegiance  to  the  duke.  Sir  Thomas  Moreaux
cheerfully  accepted  these  terms,  and  told  them  they  had  well  spoken,  and  to  the  purpose,
and  that  the  duke  and  duchess  wished  for  nothing  better.  The  marshal  returned  to  his
division,  and  to  the  duke  and  duchess.,  who  were  waiting  for  him  on  the  plain ; to  whom  he
related  all  that  had  passed,  and  the  treaty  he  had  concluded,  to  which  they  assented,  saying
it  was  well  done.

The  army  was  advancing  gaily  in  battle  array  towards  the  town  of  St.  Jago  : when  about
two  French  leagues  from  the  place,  they  were  met  by  a long  procession  of  the  clergy,  bearing
relics,  crosses  and  streamers,  and  crowds  of  men  women  and  children,  and  the  principal
inhabitants  carrying  the  keys  of  the  town,  which  they  pi’esented  on  their  knees,  with  much
seeming  good  will,  to  the  duke  and  duchess,  (but  whether  it  was  feigned  or  not,  I cannot  say)
and  acknowledged  them  for  their  king  and  queen.  Thus  they  entered  the  town  of  St.  Jago,
and  rode  directly  to  the  church  of  St.  James,  where  the  duke,  duchess,  their  children  and
attendants,  kneeling,  offered  up  their  prayers  to  the  holy  body  of  St.  James,  and  made  rich
gifts  at  the  altar.  It  was  told  me  that  the  duke,  duchess,  and  the  ladies,  Constance  and  Philippa,
were  lodged  in  the  Abbey,  and  there  held  their  court.  Sir  John  Holland  and  Sir  Thomas
Moreaux,  with  their  ladies,  were  lodged  in  the  town : the  other  barons  and  knights  as  they
could,  and  the  men  at  arms  on  the  plains  round  the  town.  Those  who  could  not  find
houses,  built  themselves  huts  covered  with  boughs,  of  which  there  were  plenty  in  the  country,
and  made  themselves  comfortable  with  what  they  could  get.  Meat  and  strong  wines  were  in
abundance ; of  which  the  archers  drank  so  much  that  they  were  for  the  greater  part  of  their
time  in  bed  drunk  ; and  very  often,  by  drinking  too  much  new  wine,  they  had  fevers,  and  in
the  morning  such  headaches  as  to  prevent  them  from  doing  anything  the  remainder  of  the
day  ; for  it  was  now  the  vintage.


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


173


CHAPTER  XXXV. THE  FRENCH  KNIGHTS  LEAVE  CORENA  AND  JOIN  THE  KING  OF  CASTILLE.

THEY  ACQUIRE  MUCH  WEALTH  BY  PLUNDERING  ‘THE  COUNTRY,  IN  ORDER  TO  FRUSTRATE

THE  ENGLISH.

Sir  John  cle  Chatelmorant,  le  Barrois  des  Barres,  and  the  other  French  knights  who  had
guarded  Coruna,  hearing  that  the  duke  of  Lancaster  had  been  peaceably  received  in  St.
Jago,  held  a council  on  what  they  should  do,  saying, — “ It  does  not  signify  for  us  to  remain
here  any  longer,  since  we  shall  meet  with  no  fortunate  adventures  : let  us  march  to  Burgos,
where  the  king  is,  and  learn  from  him  what  his  intentions  are  : perhaps  he  may  he  going  to
meet  the  English  ; for,  if  he  allow  them  quietly  to  establish  themselves,  by  degrees  they  will
be  lords  of  Castille.  It  will  be  more  for  our  honour  to  go  to  him  than  to  stay  here.”  They
accordingly  made  preparations,  and  leaving  the  castle,  procured  guides  to  conduct  them  to
Burgos ; otherwise  they  would  probably  have  fallen  in  with  their  enemies.  They  rode  through
Biscay,  and  skirted  Galicia  to  Leon,  where  the  king  and  queen  at  that  time  resided.  When
these  knights  waited  on  the  king,  he  received  them  very  kindly,  and  inquired  from
them  the  news,  although  he  knew  enough.  They  told  him  of  their  opportune  arrival  at
Coruna,  as  the  English  fleet  was  entering  the  harbour,  wherein  they  found  seven  galleys
and  ships  of  Biscay,  laden  with  wine,  of  which  the  English  took  advantage  ; for  the  merchants
were  soon  eased  of  the  whole.  “ It  is  thus  in  war,”  replied  the  king  : “ they  were  unwise,
when  they  heard  the  English  fleet  were  at  sea,  not  to  run  somewhere  else  for  safety.”  “ In
God’s  name,  sir,”  returned  the  knights,  “ they  had  come  thither  for  security  : they  said,  their
cargoes  of  wine  were  for  Flanders,  and  having  heard  from  the  sailors  of  Saint  Andero  that
the  English  were  in  the  bay  of  Biscay,  and  that  the  king  of  Portugal  had  sent  them  large
ships  and  galleys,  it  was  natural  to  conclude  they  would  have  steered  for  Portugal ; but  they
did  the  contrary,  as  it  appears,  and,  landing  at  Coruna,  have  entered  Galicia.”  Upon  this
the  king  said, — “ Now,  you  knights  from  France,  who  are  so  well  acquainted  with  arms,  and
know  more  about  warlike  matters  than  my  subjects,  from  being  so  long  trained  to  them,
what  are  your  opinions  of  the  English  ? how  do  you  think  they  will  act  this  season  ?”  “ By

my  faith,”  replied  some  (for  all  gave  their  opinions)  “ we  can  but  ill  judge  what  they  will
do,  for  the  English  are  very  reserved ; and  we  can  only  guess  how  they  will  act,  or  whither
they  will  march.  We  must  suppose  that  the  duke  of  Lancaster  will  remain  all  the  ensuing-
winter  in  St.  Jago,  and  his  army  thereabouts ; whence  he  will  overrun  Galicia,  conquer  some
small  forts,  and  lav  in  stores  of  provision,  until  the  return  of  summer,  when  treaties  will  be
formed  between  him  and  the  king  of  Portugal,  for  them  to  act  in  concert.  Perhaps  a family-
alliance  may  take  place;  for  you  will  observe  that  the  duke  has  brought  with  him  his  daughters,
those  that  are  married  as  well  as  the  others  : now,  as  there  are  two  unmarried,  we  imagine
the  king  of  Portugal,  your  adversary,  will  have  one  of  them.”  “What  would  you  advise  me
to  do  ? ” said  the  king.  “ W e will  tell  you,  sire,”  replied  the  knights order  all  your  strongest
castles  on  the  borders  of  Galicia  to  be  well  guarded,  and  destroy  the  smaller  ones.  We  learn
that  it  is  the  custom  of  this  country  to  fortify  churches  and  towers,  whereto  the  inhabitants  of
the  flat  countries  carry  their  wealth  and  stock.  This  will  turn  out  to  their  destruction  and
the  confusion  of  your  kingdom ; for  when  the  English  take  the  field,  these  churches  and  towers
will  prove  no  obstacle  to  them  : on  the  contrary,  they  will  be  recruited  from  the  victual  they
will  there  find,  and  continue  the  war  with  more  vigour,  and  conquer  the  remainder.  We  there-
fore advise  you  to  destroy  all  suchlike  forts,  while  you  have  time  so  to  do,  and  to  give  up  all,
that  is  not  secured  in  large  and  strong  towns,  by  Michaelmas,  or  at  the  latest  by  Andrew’s
day,  to  your  men  at  arms  ; for  it  is  better  they  should  have  the  advantage  and  profit  than
your  enemy.  We  advise  you,  in  particular,  to  send  some  well-informed  ambassadors  to  the
king  of  France,  and  to  his  uncles  of  Berry  and  Burgundy,  that  they  may  be  made  acquainted
with  the  real  state  o-f  your  country,  and  that  by  the  return. of  summer,  or  sooner  if  the  season
will  permit  us  to  take  the  field,  you  may  wage  such  a war  as  was  never  before  made  in  Cas-
tillo. Write  pressing  letters  to  the  king  and  his  uncles,  that  they  may  assist  you  in  this
necessity  with  such  numbers  of  men  at  arms  that  you  may  resist  your  enemies  and  preserve
your  kingdom.  There  is  a stroRg  connexion  between  you  and  the  king  of  France,  which


174


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


was  first  made  by  your  predecessor  and  father  ; and  you  may  be  assured,  that  in  your  distress
neither  the  king  nor  realm  of  France,  which  can  do  no  more  than  England  and  Portugal
united,  will  desert  you.  Believe  us,  that  as  soon  as  the  king  and  his  council  shall  learn
your  situation,  they  will  take  such  steps  as  will  prevent  you  from  receiving  any  loss  in  this
war  ; for  know,  that  those  French  knights  and  squires,  who  are  desirous  of  glory,  will,  at  the
slightest  word,  hasten  hither  to  seek  it ; for  at  this  moment  they  know  not  where  to  employ
their  arms.  We  mention  this,  because  there  is  now  a peace  between  the  French  and
Flemings,  and  a truce  with  the  English  and  French  on  the  other  side  the  Loire  until  St.  John
the  Baptist’s  day  ensuing.  You  will  therefore  see  men  at  arms,  knights  and  squires,  fly  hither
from  France  as  well  to  advance  their  own  honour  as  to  see  this  country  and  meet  the
English.  But,  sire,  we  particularly  recommend  the  destruction  of  these  small  forts,  if  you
wish  to  preserve  your  country.”

The  kingreplied,  “ You  have  advised  me  loyally,  and  I shall  instantly  follow  your  counsel,
and  order,  without  further  consultation,  all  such  forts  to  be  demolished  as  are  not  tenable,
and  make  you  a present  of  whatever  may  be  found  in  them.”  The  knights  said,  he  had
well  spoken,  that  they  would  attend  to  that  business,  and  assist  him  in  defending  and  pre-
serving his  realm.  This  gift  of  the  king  of  Castille  to  the  knights  from  France  and  those
about  his  person  was  worth  to  them  two  hundred  thousand  francs,  especially  to  those  first-
comers,  who  had  thrown  themselves  into  Coruna  when  the  duke  of  Lancaster  had  arrived,
and  pursued  his  march  to  St.  Jago.

All  the  small  forts,  churches,  and  towers,  which  had  been  embattled  in  Castille,  were
abandoned  and  destroyed,  and  the  poor  peasants  disappointed  in  their  expectations  of  having
therein  deposited  their  wealth  and  stock  in  safety  ; for  the  knights  and  squires  went  thither
with  their  men,  and  seized  on  all  the  wines,  corn,  and  cattle,  and  drove  them  to  their  quarters ;
but  the  gold  and  silver  which  they  found,  and  the  sums  they  made  the  peasants  pay  for
their  ransoms,  or  to  have  their  stock  back  again,  went  into  their  own  purses,  unknown  to
any  one  but  themselves.  Some  of  the  poorer  squires,  more  bold  and  cunning  than  the  rest
(for  there  are  always  some  of  that  sort),  who  had  left  their  homes  miserably  mounted  or  on
foot,  were  so  active  that  they  had  now  fine  coursers  and  genets  for  pleasure,  with  five  or  six
silver  girdles,  and  purses  with  a thousand  or  two  of  francs  in  them.  Thus  did  these
companions,  who  first  entered  Castille,  make  fortunes  which  the  flat  countries  paid  ; for
every  place  was  rifled  and  devoured  even  by  their  own  countrymen,  who  would  not  that
their  enemies  should  be  any  gainers  by  their  invasion.  When  it  was  told  in  France  how
poor  knights  and  squires  were  enriching  themselves  in  Castille,  where  they  spared  neither
the  lands  of  friends  nor  those  of  their  foes,  their  companions  were  more  eager  than  ever  to
leave  France,  in  the  hopes  of  being  sharers  with  them.


CHAPTER  XXXVI. GREAT  PREPARATIONS  ARE  MADE  THROUGHOUT  FRANCE  FOR  THE

INVASION  OF  ENGLAND. — THE  DEATH  OF  FRANCIS  ATREMEN.

The  king  of  France,  his  uncles,  and  council,  had  been  well  informed  of  the  intended
expedition  of  the  duke  of  Lancaster  before  he  had  sailed  from  England  (for  fame  spreads
all  things  abroad),  and  that  it  was  meant  against  Castille.  It  was  for  this  reason  the  duke
of  Burgundy  had  concluded  so  easily  a peace  with  the  Flemings,  and  in  order  that  the
king  of  Castille  might  have  assistance ; for  the  king  of  France  was  bound  to  aid  him,  as
he  had  always  succoured  France,  when  called  upon,  with  men  and  ships.  Add  to  this  the
great  desire  the  young  king  of  France  had  ever  shown  to  invade  England  with  a powerful
army  and  navy.  In  this  he  was  joined  by  all  the  chivalry  of  the  realm,  but  especially  by
the  duke  of  Burgundy,  the  constable  of  France,  and  the  count  de  St.  Pol,  although  he  had
married  king  Richard’s  sister,  as  well  as  by  the  lord  de  Courcy.

These  lords  said,  “ Why  should  not  we,  for  once,  make  a visit  to  England  to  see  the
country  and  its  inhabitants,  and  learn  the  way  thither,  as  the  English  have  done  in  France?
This  year,  therefore,  1386,  we  will  go  thither,  as  well  to  break  up  the  expedition  of  the
duke  of  Lancaster,  and  force  him  to  return  home,  as  to  give  alarm  to  the  English,  and  see


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  & c.


175


how  they  will  behave.”  Greater  armaments  were  made  in  France  than  had  hitherto  been
done.  Heavier  taxes  were  imposed  on  all  the  towns  and  country  than  for  one  hundred
years,  and  such  sums  had  never  been  raised,  nor  were  ever  greater  preparations  made  by  sea
and  land.  The  whole  summer,  until  September,  was  employed  in  grinding  flour,  and  making
biscuit  in  Arras,  Bethune,  Lille,  Douay,  Amiens,  St.  Omer,  and  in  all  the  towns  near  to
Sluys ; for  it  was  the  plan  of  the  king  to  embark  at  Sluys,  sail  for  England,  and  destroy  the
whole  country.  Many  of  the  rich  men  of  France  were  forced  to  pay  a third  or  fourth  of
their  property,  in  order  to  build  vessels  of  a sufficient  size ; and  the  poorer  sort  were  taxed
as  much  as  they  were  worth,  to  pay  the  men  at  arms.  There  was  not  a vessel  of  any  size,
from  the  port  of  Seville  to  Prussia,  that  the  French  could  lay  their  hands  on,  but  was  seized,
by  fair  or  foul  means,  for  the  king  of  France.  Provisions  arrived  from  all  quarters.  Very
great  quantities  of  wine,  salted  meats,  oats,  trusses  of  hay,  onions,  verjuice,  biscuit,  flour,
butter,  the  yolks  of  eggs  in  powder,  and  rammed  in  barrels,  and  every  other  necessary,  were
sent  from  Flanders ; so  that,  in  future  times,  those  who  have  not  been  eye-witnesses  will
never  believe  the  accounts.

Lords  and  knights,  at  great  distances,  were  written  to,  to  request  they  would  accompany
the  king  of  France  in  this  expedition ; even  as  far  as  Germany,  Savoy,  and  the  lands  of  the
count  d’Armagnac.  The  earl  of  Savoy  was  retained  with  five  hundred  lances  ; as  were  also
the  count  d’Armagnac  and  the  dauphin  of  Auvergne  ; and,  because  these  lords  were  so  distant,
they  sent  before  them  vast  provision  of  stores : and  it  was  wonderful  to  see  the  quantity  of
costly  articles  that  came  to  Flanders,  by  land  and  sea,  through  Damme,  Bruges  and  Sluys.

When  St.  John’s  day  was  come,  all  the  great  vessels  in  Holland,  Zealand,  Middleburgh,
Dordrecht,  Schoenhoven,  Leyden,  the  Brille,  and  other  places  near  the  sea,  were  sought  for,  to
carry  this  army  from  Sluys ; but  the  Hollanders  and  the  rest  said,  that  if  they  wanted  their
vessels  or  their  services,  they  must  pay  them  down  the  sums  agreed  on,  otherwise  they  would
not  stir.  They  were  wise  in  so  doing  ; for  they  were  instantly  paid,  before  they  would  leave
their  houses  or  harbours.  Never,  since  God  created  the  world,  were  there  seen  such  numbers
of  large  ships  as  filled  the  harbours  of  Sluys  and  Blanckenburgh  : for,  when  they  were  counted,
in  the  month  of  September,  this  same  year,  they  were  twelve  hundred  and  eighty-seven  ships.
Their  masts,  on  coming  from  sea,  appeared  like  a thick  forest.

The  constable’s  ship  was  building  at  Treguier,  in  Brittany  ; and  the  constable  had  there
constructed  a town  of  frame-work,  of  large  timber,  which  was  to  be  put  together,  on  their
landing  in  England,  for  the  lords  to  retreat  to  as  a place  of  safety,  and  to  be  lodged  therein,  to
prevent  any  danger  that  might  arise  from  nightly  attacks.  This  town  was  so  constructed,
that,  when  they  dislodged,  it  could  be  taken  to  pieces,  roofs  and  all ; and  many  carpenters
and  other  workmen,  who  had  been  employed  on  it,  were  engaged,  at  very  high  W7ages,  to
attend  the  properly  taking  it  to  pieces  and  erecting  it  again.  I never  heard  the  name  of  the
duke  of  Brittany,  nor  had  he  laid  up  in  Flanders  stores  of  any  kind,  nor  of  the  duke  of
Touraine,  the  king’s  youngest  brother,  nor  of  the  count  de  Blois,  as  among  the  number  of  those
who  were  to  accompany  the  king  on  this  occasion.  But  all  could  not  go  : it  was  necessary
some  should  remain  behind  in  France,  to  guard  the  realm.

Whoever  had  been  at  Damme,  Bruges  or  Sluys,  at  this  time,  and  had  seen  how  busily  all
were  employed  in  loading  the  vessels  with  hay  in  trusses,  garlic,  onions,  biscuit  in  sacks,
pease,  beans,  cheese-bowls,  barley,  oats,  rye,  wheat,  wax-candles,  housings,  shoes,  boots,
helmets,  spurs,  knives,  hatchets,  wedges,  pick-axes,  hooks,  wooden  pegs,  boxes  filled  with
ointments,  tow,  bandages,  coverlids  for  sleeping  on,  horseshoe  nails,  bottles  of  verjuice  and
vinegar,  iron,  stone-ware,  pewter  and  wooden  pots  and  dishes,  candlesticks,  basons,  vases,
fat  pigs,  hasters,  kitchen  furniture,  utensils  for  the  buttery,  and  for  the  other  offices,  and
every  article  necessary  for  man  or  beast,  would  have  been  struck  with  astonishment.  The
eagerness  and  pleasure  were  so  great  in  the  beholding  it,  that,  had  any  one  had  a fever  or
a toothache,  he  would  have  got  rid  of  them  by  running  from  one  place  to  another.  The
conversations  which  were  overheard  between  the  French  showed  they  considered  England
would  be  ruined  and  destroyed  beyond  resource,  the  men  put  to  death,  and  the  women  and
children  carried  in  slavery  to  France.

The  king  of  England  and  his  council  were  duly  informed  of  these  grand  preparations ; and


170


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


it  was  confidently  affirmed  and  believed  that  the  French  would  not  fail  to  invade  the  country,
as  they  had  sworn  they  would  do  so.  It  is  not  strange  that  such  formidable  preparations  should
require  the  utmost  attention,  nor  would  it  be  matter  of  much  surprise  if  the  English  were
at  first  much  alarmed  ; for,  immense  as  these  armaments  were,  they  were  greatly  magnified  ;
and  it  was  not  certain  whether  they  were  meant  to  invade  England  or  attack  Calais  by  sea
and  land ; for  the  English  knew  well  there  was  not  a town  the  French  were  more  desirous  of
regaining  than  Calais.  On  this  account,  great  stores  of  corn  and  other  grain,  salted  meat
and  fish,  wines  and  brandies,  were  sent  from  England  to  Calais.  Sir  Thomas  Holland,  earl
of  Kent,  sir  Hugh  Calverley,  Sir  William  Elmham,  the  earl  of  Angus,  sir  Walter  Warren,  sir
Walter  Paul,  sir  William  Touchet,  sir  Lewis  de  Montalban,  sir  Colars  d’Ambreticourt,  were
ordered  thither  to  defend  it,  and  with  them  five  hundred  men  at  arms  and  as  many  archers.
The  earl  of  Arundel  and  lord  Henry  Despenser  put  to  sea  with  forty  large  ships,  having
on  board  three  hundred  men  at  arms  and  six  hundred  archers  completely  armed.

It  was,  on  the  other  hand,  reported  in  several  places  in  France,  Hainault  and  Picardy,
that  this  armament  was  not  destined  for  either  England  or  Calais,  but  that,  when  it  was
completed,  it  would  invest  the  town  of  Ghent.  I was  told,  the  men  of  Ghent  were  seriously
alarmed  ; but  they  were  to  blame  if  they  showed  any  fear ; for  the  duke  of  Burgundy,  their
lord,  wished  them  nothing  but  prosperity,  although  Francis  Atremen,  shortly  after  the  peace,
was  slain  at  Ghent.  The  duke  was  no  way  implicated  in  his  death,  for  he  bore  him  no  hatred,
although,  during  the  war  of  Ghent,  he  had  performed  many  gallant  deeds  in  the  service  of
his  townsmen,  as  have  been  truly  related  in  this  history.  If  Francis  Atremen  came  to  such
an  end,  he  has  nobody  to  blame  but  himself ; for,  had  he  believed  Peter  du  Bois,  this
misfortune  would  not  have  befallen  him.  Peter  du  Bois  gave  him  notice  what  he  might
expect  at  the  conclusion  of  the  peace  between  the  duke  of  Burgundy  and  Ghent,  on  their
return  to  Ghent  from  Tournay.  When  Peter  was  making  his  preparations  to  accompany
the  lord  Bourchier  to  England,  he  said,  “ Francis,  what  do  you  say  ? will  you  not  go  to
England  with  us  ? for  now  is  the  time.”  “ No,”  replied  he,  “ I will  remain  in  Ghent.”
“ And  how,”  said  Peter,  “ can  you  suppose  you  will  live  there  in  quiet  ? for  there  are
many  who  mortally  hate  both  you  and  me.  I would  not  remain  there  for  any  sum  of  money  ;
for  there  is  no  dependance  on  the  populace.  Have  you  never  heard  how  they  murdered
Jacob  von  Artaveld,  who  had  done  them  much  service,  and  given  them  such  good  advice,
and  had  on  all  occasions  assisted  them  ? and  yet,  from  the  speeches  of  a linen- weaver  they
slew  him,  without  any  of  the  principal  inhabitants  interfering  in  his  behalf.  On  the  contrary,
they  dissembled,  and  in  their  hearts  were  rejoiced  at  his  death.  Now,  Francis,  just  so  it  will
happen  to  you,  and  to  me,  if  I stay ; but  that  I will  not,  so  I bid  you  adieu.”  “ It  will
not  so  happen,”  “replied  Francis,  “for  my  lord  of  Burgundy  has  pardoned  all,  and  offers
me,  if  I choose  to  reside  with  him,  to  be  equerry  of  his  stables  with  four  horses  at  my  com-
mand, and  shews  me,  as  well  as  the  lord  Guy  de  la  Tremouille  and  the  other  knights  of
his  household,  every  mark  of  affection.”  “ In  God’s  name,”  said  Peter,  “ I do  not  speak  of
my  lord  of  Burgundy,  nor  of  his  knights,  for  they  are  well  inclined  to  keep  peace,  but  of  the
Ghent  men.  There  are  some  to  whom  you  have  not  always  behaved  well  : have  you  forgotten
the  lord  de  Harzelles,  whom  you  caused  to  be  assassinated,  and  such  and  such  others?  Know,
that  the  revenge  of  their  relations  will  fall  on  you  within  a short  time,  if  you  remain  : take
my  advice : rather  than  live  here,  accept  the  duke’s  offer.”  “ I will  consider  of  this,”
answered  Francis ; “ but  I am  determined  not  to  go  to  England.”  Thus  the  conversation
ended.  Francis  Atremen  staid  in  Flanders,  and  Peter  du  Bois,  as  you  have  before  heard,
went  with  lord  Bourchier  to  England.  What  followed  you  shall  hear.  Soon  after  peace
had  been  proclaimed  throughout  Flanders,  an  edict  was  published  in  all  towns  dependant  on
the  duke  of  Burgundy,  forbidding  any  one  whatever  to  wear  armour  or  swords,  or  to  have
arms  carried  by  their  followers.

Francis  Atremen,  during  the  war  of  Ghent,  had  been  one  of  its  principal  rulers,  and  one
who  had  the  most  attention  paid  h-im.  Whenever  he  walked  the  streets,  he  was  followed  by
thirty  or  forty  varlets,  who  were  well  pleased  at  any  orders  he  chose  to  give  them.  He  had
kept  this  state  so  long,  that  he  was  loth  to  give  it  up,  and  was  desirous  of  being  followed  by
three  or  four  armed  with  swords  or  defensive  staves.  When  this  proclamation  of  the  duke


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c


177


of  Burgundy  was  made,  he  never  imagined  it  any  way  concerned  him,  so  much  did  he  fancy
himself  in  favour  with  the  duke  and  the  town  : but  he  was  mistaken  ; for  seven  or  eight  days
after  the  publication  of  the  edict,  the  duke’s  bailiff  came  to  him  and  said, — “ Francis,  you
seem  suspicious  and  afraid  of  our  lord’s  officers,  or  why  do  you  now  go  armed  through  the
town  of  Ghent,  followed  by  your  varlets,  armed  also  with  swords  as  in  times  of  war?  We
are  much  displeased  thereat,  and  command  you,  in  the  name  of  the  duke  and  duchess  of
Burgundy,  that  you  lay  them  aside.”  Francis,  who  in  fact  meant  no  ill,  but  kept  up  this
state  through  pomp,  replied, — “ Bailiff,  I shall  willingly  obey  your  orders,  as  is  right ; for,
thank  God,  I bear  no  malice  nor  wish  evil  to  any  one ; but  I thought  I was  so  well  considered
in  the  town,  that  I might  have  had  my  sword  and  armour  borne  after  me  without  its  being
objected  to.”  “You  are  mistaken,”  said  the  bailiff:  “it  is  the  townsmen,  to  whom  you
have  done  so  many  services,  who  have  interfered,  and  tell  me  they  are  surprised  how  I suffer
it ; for  it  seems  to  them  you  want  to  renew  a war,  for  which  they  have  no  inclination.  I
therefore  beg  of  you,  Francis,  that  you  will  so  act,  as  that  I may  hear  no  more  of  it,  for
if  you  do  not  observe  the  edict,  I shall  look  on  you  as  an  enemy  to  the  duke  and  duchess
of  Burgundy.”

The  bailiff  of  Ghent  departed.  Francis  Atremen  returned  to  his  house,  and  ordered  his
varlets  to  lay  aside  their  arms.  He  became  melancholy ; and,  for  the  greater  part  of  the
times  he  went  abroad,  it  was  alone,  or  having  one  varlct  or  a boy  attending  him.  Not  long
after  this  conversation  with  the  bailiff,  a festival  was  kept  at  the  monastery  of  St.  Peter,
without  Ghent,  whither  Francis  went  alone,  or  only  attended  by  a single  varlet,  neither
having  swords  nor  arms.  He  was  watched,  and  followed  by  a bastard  of  the  late  lord  de
Harzelles,  anxious  to  revenge  his  death,  in  which  common  fame  reported  Francis  Atremen  to
have  been  strongly  guilty.  The  bastard,  having  provided  himself  with  arms,  followed  him
out  of  the  town,  and  when  at  a proper  distance,  and  no  one  near,  he  called  out  to  him,
“ Francis,  you  are  a dead  man : you  put  to  death  my  father,  and  I will  do  the  like  to  you."
As  Francis  turned  round,  the  bastard,  who  was  a stout  fellow,  struck  him  so  violent  a blow
on  the  head,  that  it  split  his  skull  to  the  neck  and  felled  him  dead.  The  bastard  walked
quietly  away,  for  none  pursued  him,  and  no  more  was  said.  Francis  Atremen  came  by  his
death  for  not  following:  the  advice  of  Peter  du  Bois.  When  news  of  this  reached  England,
and  came  to  the  knowledge  of  Peter  du  Bois,  he  but  slightly  pitied  him,  saying,  “ Before  I
left  Ghent,  I truly  told  him  vvliat  would  happen ; but  he  would  not  mind  what  I said,  and
has  suffered  for  it.  See  if  any  one  will  meddle  in  the  matter : certainly  none  of  those  who,
during  the  war,  seemed  such  warm  friends  to  him,  and  honoured  him  so  much.  It  was  for
fear  of  such  events  that  I followed  the  advice  of  lord  Bourchier,  and  came  with  him  to
England.”


CHAPTER  XXXVII. THE  FRENCH  PUT  THEMSELVES  TO  USELESS  EXPENSE  ON  TIIEIR  MARINE.

THE  ENGLISH  MAKE  JUDICIOUS  PREPARATIONS  TO  OPPOSE  THEM.

We  will  return  to  the  preparations  going  forward  at  Damme  and  Sluys,  which  were  so
formidable,  that  the  like  wTas  never  remembered  in  the  memory  of  man,  nor  is  there  any
written  account  of  such.  Money  was  no  more  spared  than  if  it  rained  gold,  or  was  pumped
up  from  the  sea.  The  great  barons  of  France  had  sent  their  servants  to  Sluys  to  embark
everything  they  might  have  occasion  for  in  this  expedition ; for  all  were  impatient  to  cross
over ; and  the  king,  young  as  he  was,  showed  greater  impatience  than  any.  Each  lord
strove  to  have  his  vessel  the  best  supplied,  and  the  most  ornamented  with  painting  and
gilding,  with  their  arms  emblazoned  on  them  and  on  the  flags.  Painters  made  a good
harvest,  for  they  were  paid  whatever  they  asked,  and  even  with  this  there  were  not  a suffi-
ciency. The  masts  were  painted  from  top  to  bottom  ; and  some,  by  way  of  magnificence,
were  even  covered  with  sheets  of  fine  gold,  above  which  were  emblazoned  the  arms  of  the
different  lords  to  whom  the  vessels  belonged.  It  was  told  me,  particularly,  that  sir  Guy  de
la  Tremouille  expended  such  sums  in  ornamenting  and  painting  his  own  ship,  that  they
amounted  to  upwards  of  two  thousand  francs.  Their  banners,  pennons,  and  standards,  were

VOL.  II.  N


178


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


so  very  grand,  as  to  surprise  all  who  saw  them.  No  ornament  or  decoration  could  he
imagined  but  these  lords  employed  it  on  their  vessels.  The  poor  of  France  paid  for  all :
the  taxes  were  so  grievous  in  that  country,  that  the  rich  complained,  and  the  poorer  sorts
ran  away.

All  that  was  going  forward  in  France,  Flanders,  Bruges,  Damme,  and  Sluys,  was  known
in  England,  and  with  many  additions  to  the  real  truth.  The  people  in  several  places  were
exceedingly  alarmed,  and  generally  the  priests  made  processions  in  many  towns  three  times
a week ; where,  with  much  devotion,  they  offered  up  their  prayer  to  God,  to  avert  this
peril  from  them.  There  were  upwards  of  one  hundred  thousand  who  were  desirous  the
French  should  come  to  England,  saying,  to  comfort  the  weak-hearted,  “ Let  them  come:  by
God ! not  a soul  shall  return  back  to  tell  their  story.”  Such  as  were  in  debt,  and  had  not
any  intention  of  paying,  nor  wherewithal  to  do  so,  were  delighted,  and  said  to  their  creditors,
“ Hold  your  tongues : they  are  coining  florins  in  France,  and  we  will  pay  you  with  them
and  thus  they  lived  extravagantly,  and  expended  largely,  for  credit  was  not  refused  them.
Whenever  they  were  asked  to  pay,  they  replied,  “ How  can  you  ask  for  money  ? is  it  not
better  that  we  spend  it,  than  that  Frenchmen  should  find  it  and  carry  it  away?”  Thus  were
many  thousand  pounds  sterling  foolishly  spent  in  England.

The  king  of  England  was  during  this  time  in  Wales  with  the  earl  of  Oxford,  who  governed
England,  for  without  his  consent  nothing  was  done.  The  king’s  privy  council  consisted  of
sir  Simon  Burley,  sir  Nicholas  Bramber,  sir  Robert  Tresilian,  sir  Robert  Beauchamp,  sir
John  Salisbury,  sir  Michael  de  la  Pole,  and  also  the  bishop  of  Norwich  and  sir  William
Neville,  brother  to  the  lord  Neville.  These  counsellors  did  with  the  king  as  they  pleased,
and  carried  him  whithersoever  they  liked ; for  neither  had  his  uncles  of  Cambridge  and
Buckingham  been  able  to  retain  any  influence,  nor  could  they  act,  without  knowing  whether
it  were  agreeable  to  the  above-named  counsellors.  All  these  discords  were  the  topic  of
conversation  in  France,  and  incited  them  to  hasten  their  preparations.  They  wished  to  force
the  duke  of  Lancaster  to  return  from  Castille,  but  would  not  on  that  account  have  given  up
their  invasion.  The  lords,  prelates,  and  citizens  of  the  principal  towns  in  England,  having
obtained  exact  information  that  the  French  were  nearly  ready  to  put  to  sea,  held  an
assembly,  in  which  they  debated  what  was  proper  to  be  done.  The  king  was  written  to  by
his  uncles  to  return  to  London,  as  the  whole  country  was  much  dissatisfied  with  him  and  his
advisers.  The  king  and  his  council,  not  daring  to  refuse,  left  Wales,  where  he  and  his  queen
had  resided  a considerable  time.  On  his  arrival  at  Windsor,  he  staid  some  days,  and,  there
leaving  his  queen,  came  to  his  palace  of  Westminster.  Those  who  had  any  business  to
transact  went  thither  to  the  king ; and  before  the  parliament  was  holden,  a council  was  called
to  consider  how  they  might  appease  the  great  discontents  which  appeared  in  the  country.
In  this  parliament,  which  was  attended  by  the  king,  his  uncles,  and  all  the  nobles  and
prelates  of  the  realm,  the  earl  of  Salisbury,  a prudent  and  valiant  man,  spoke  as  follows : —
“ Your  majesty,  and  my  lords  present,  need  not  be  surprised  if  our  adversary,  the  king  of
France,  proposes  to  invade  us  ; for  since  the  deatli  of  the  most  potent  and  sagacious  prince,
Edward  of  happy  memory,  our  sovereign  lord,  this  realm  has  incurred  several  risks  of  being
destroyed  by  its  own  subjects  and  the  commotions  of  peasants.  It  is  also  perfectly  well
known  in  France  that  we  disagree  among  ourselves,  and  are  torn  by  faction,  which  makes
them  imagine  their  enterprise  cannot  fail  of  success.  The  danger  is  indeed  great,  for  he
must  be  weak  who  fears  not  his  enemy.  While  we  remained  united,  the  king  with  the
people,  and  the  people  with  the  king,  we  were  victorious  and  powerful,  and  there  were  none
able  to  do  us  any  essential  injury.  It  is  therefore  necessary  (and  never  was  anything  in
England  more  pressing)  for  us  to  act  in  unity,  and  reform  what  may  be  wrong,  if  we  wish
to  preserve  our  honour,  as  well  as  for  us  to  inquire  into  the  state  of  our  ports,  that  such
defence  may  be  made  that  the  kingdom  be  not  any  way  hurt,  nor  we  accused  of  neglect  by
the  country.  This  realm  has  been  long  in  its  flower ; and  you  know  that  what  is  in  flower
has  greater  need  of  attention  than  if  in  fruit.  We  must  therefore  act  as  if  it  was  in  flower;
for,  since  these  last  sixty  years,  those  knights  and  squires  who  have  gone  out  of  it  have
acquired  more  renown  than  any  others  of  what  nation  soever.  Let  us  exert  ourselves,  that
our  honour  be  preserved  untarnished  as  long  as  we  live.”


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


179


This  speech  of  the  earl  of  Salisbury  was  attentively  listened  to ; and  the  lords  said,  it
would  be  right  to  follow  his  advice.  I will  not  longer  dwell  on  what  was  debated  at  this
meeting,  for  I do  not  pretend  to  know  everything ; hut  I do  know,  that  after  proper  care
had  been  taken,  as  I have  already  noticed,  for  the  defence  of  Calais,  all  the  coast  of  England,
where  it  was  thought  the  French  would  land,  was  well  guarded.  The  earl  of  Salisbury,
because  his  estate  was  in  the  Isle  of  Wight,  which  lies  opposite  to  the  country  of  Caux  in
Normandy,  was  ordered  thither  to  guard  and  defend  it  with  the  men  at  arms  and  archers  of
that  country.  The  carl  of  Devonshire  was  sent  to  Southampton  with  two  hundred  men  at
arms  and  six  hundred  archers,  to  guard  that  haven.  The  earl  of  Northumberland  to  the
port  of  Rye,  with  the  same  number  of  men  at  arms  and  archers.  The  earl  of  Cambridge
was  sent  to  Dover  with  five  hundred  men  at  arms  and  twelve  hundred  archers.  His  brother,
the  earl  of  Buckingham,  to  Sandwich,  with  six  hundred  men  at  arms  and  twelve  hundred
archers.  The  carls  of  Stafford  and  Pembroke  to  Orwell,  with  five  hundred  men  at  arms
and  twelve  hundred  archers.  Sir  Henry  and  sir  Faulx  Percy  to  Yarmouth,  with  three
hundred  men  at  arms  and  six  hundred  archers.  Sir  Simon  Burley  was  appointed  governor
of  Dover  castle  only.

Every  port  and  harbour  from  the  Ilumber  to  Cornwall  was  well  provided  with  men  at
arms  and  archers,  and  watchmen  were  posted  on  all  the  hills  near  the  sea-coasts  opposite  to
France  and  Flanders.  The  manner  of  posting  these  watchers  was  as  follows  : they  had  large
Gascony  casks  filled  with  sand,  which  they  placed  one  on  the  other,  rising  like  columns ; on
these  were  planks,  where  the  watchmen  remained  night  and  day  on  the  look-out.  They
were  ordered,  the  moment  they  should  observe  the  fleet  of  France  steering  towards  land,  to
light  torches  and  make  great  fires  on  the  hills  to  alarm  the  country,  and  the  forces  within
sight  of  these  fires  were  to  hasten  thither.  It  had  been  resolved  to  allow  the  king  of  France
to  land,  and  even  to  remain  unmolested  for  three  or  four  days  : they  were  first  to  attack  the
fleet,  and  destroy  it  and  all  their  stores,  and  then  to  advance  on  the  king  of  France,  not  to
combat  him  immediately,  but  to  harass  his  army,  so  that  they  might  be  disabled  and  afraid
to  forage;  for  the  corn  countries  were  all  to  be  burnt,  and  England  at  best  is  a difficult
foraging  country ; by  which  plan  they  would  be  starved  and  easily  destroyed.  Such  was
the  plan  laid  down  by  the  council  of  England.  Rochester  bridge  was  ordered  to  be  broken
down,  for  a deep  river  runs  under  it,  which  flows  through  Sussex  and  Kent,  and  falls  into
the  Thames,  opposite  the  island  of  Sheppy.  The  Londoners  would  pull  this  bridge  down,  for
the  greater  security  of  their  town.

If  the  taxes  were  burdensome  on  towns  and  persons  in  France,  I must  say  they  were  not
much  lighter  in  England,  and  the  country  suffered  from  them  a long  time  afterwards  ; but
they  were  paid  cheerfully,  that  they  might  be  more  effectually  guarded*.  There  were  at
this  time  ten  thousand  men  at  arms  and  one  hundred  thousand  archers  in  England,  although
the  duke  of  Lancaster  had  led  so  large  a force  to  Castille.  I will  now  speak  a little  of
this  duke,  and  of  the  interview  between  him  and  the  king  of  Portugal,  and  then  return  to
England,  for  the  matter  presses,  and  I wish  to  speak  of  each  and  of  their  respective
transactions.


* The  dissensions  between  the  king  and  his  parliament
ran  high  at  this  period  ; the  parliament  refused  to  grant
supplies,  and  the  king  declared  that  if  they  were  denied
he  would  apply  to  the  king  of  France,  to  whom  he  would
sooner  be  obliged  than  his  subjects.  An  accommodation


was  at  length  effected.  Richard  consented  to  banish  his
favourite,  the  earl  of  Suffolk,  and  supplies  were  voted  to
maintain  the  war  against  the  king  of  France ; their  ad-
ministration was  however  confided  to  a body  of  thirty
commissioners. — Ed.


180


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


CHAPTER  XXXVIII. THE  KING  OP  PORTUGAL,  WHEN  INFORMED  OF  THE  DUKE  OF  LANCASTER’S

ARRIVAL  AT  SANT  JAGO,  WRITES  HIM  FRIENDLY  LETTERS. THE  KING  OF  CASTILLE

DEMANDS  SUCCOURS  FROM  FRANCE. THE  TOWN  OF  ROUELLES  IN  GALICIA  TAKEN  BY

THE  ENGLISH.

You  have  before  heard  of  the  arrival  of  the  duke  of  Lancaster  with  a large  army  at
Coruna  ; how  that  city,  hut  not  the  castle,  had  surrendered  to  him  on  terms  similar  to  those
which  were  imposed  on  the  other  towns  in  Castille,  by  which  means  the  city  was  neither
attacked  nor  hurt ; you  have  also  heard  how  he  and  his  family  had  taken  possession  of  Sant
Jago  de  Compostella,  where  he  intended  to  reside,  until  he  should  have  some  intelligence
from  the  king  of  Portugal.  Don  John,  as  soon  as  he  knew  the  duke  to  be  at  St.  Jago,  was
much  rejoiced,  thinking  that,  when  united,  they  could  carry  on  an  advantageous  war  against
Castille.  He  ordered  the  most  friendly  letters  to  be  written  to  the  duke  and  duchess,  and
to  be  forwarded  instantly  by  special  messengers.  The  receipt  of  such  letters  gave  much
pleasure  to  the  duke  and  duchess  ; for  they  had  great  dependence  on  the  king  of  Portugal,
and  knew  that,  without  his  aid,  they  would  never  be  enabled  to  do  anything  effectual  against
Castille.  They,  therefore,  made  rich  presents  to  the  messengers,  and  returned  the  warmest
answers.  The  duke,  in  his  answer,  gave  the  king  to  understand,  that  he  should  have  much
pleasure  if  an  interview  took  place  between  them,  as  he  wanted  to  have  some  conferences
with  him.

While  all  these  marks  of  affection  were  reciprocally  tendered  and  received  between  the
kinof  of  Portugal  and  the  duke  of  Lancaster,  the  king  of  Castille  was  strengthening  Jiimself
by  every  means  in  his  power.  He  frequently  stated  his  situation  to  the  court  of  France,  and
was  urgent  in  his  demands  for  assistance  to  defend  his  realm  ; for  he  expected,  when  the
season  would  allow,  that  there  would  be  a vigorous  war  made  on  him,  as  the  king  of
Portugal  and  the  duke  of  Lancaster  would  then  form  a junction,  and  would  be  in  such  force
as  would  overrun  all  Castille,  unless  he  could  raise  an  army  to  oppose  them.  The  king  of
France  and  his  council,  in  their  answer,  desired  the  king  of  Castille  not  to  be  uneasy  ; for,
before  the  month  of  January  was  passed,  they  would  give  the  English  so  much  to  do  at  home,
as  to  prevent  them  from  knowing  which  way  to  turn  themselves  ; that  when  England  should
be  completely  destroyed,  they  would  come  to  his  aid  by  sea,  through  Galicia  or  Portugal ;
and  if  their  enemies  still  remained  in  that  country,  they  would  drive  them  out  of  it  in  a
handsome  manner,  and  within  the  year  put  an  end  to  all  these  wars.  The  king  of  Castille
contented  himself  with  this  answer  as  well  as  he  could  : indeed,  he  could  not  help  himself ; for
none  came  to  him  from  France,  excepting  those  who  had  defended  the  castle  of  Coruna.  All
knights  and  squires,  however  great  their  distance  in  the  kingdom,  hastened  to  Paris,  Lille,
and  Douay  : and  the  whole  of  that  country,  to  the  extent  of  fourteen  leagues,  was  filled  with
men  at  arms  and  their  followers.  The  multitudes  were  so  great,  that  those  who  superintended
the  shipping,  notwithstanding  the  number  of  vessels,  declared  they  could  not  be  all  trans-
ported at  once,  by  at  least  forty  thousand  men.

It  was  ordered  that  no  one  was  to  be  received  on  board  the  transports  but  true  men  at
arms  : and  no  knight  was  to  have  more  than  one  varlet,  nor  any  great  baron  more  than  two
squires.  No  horses  were  to  be  embarked  but  those  of  the  principal  lords;  and  this  was  so
strictly  observed  at  Sluys  that  the  names  of  none  were  written  down  for  the  passage,  nor
received  on  board,  but  good  men  at  arms.  There  was  such  a rascally  crew  in  Flanders,  in  the
country  of  Tournay,  and  in  the  castlewicks  of  Lille,  Douay,  and  Artois,  that  they  devoured
and  plundered  everything,  to  the  great  loss  of  the  poor  inhabitants,  on  whom  they  lived,  though
they  dared  not  complain  for  fear  of  their  lives.  They  were  more  destructive  than  the  English
would  have  been  if  quartered  in  that  country.  The  king  of  France  and  his  lords  had  many
fears ; for,  should  they  leave  these  scoundrels  behind,  they  would  unite  and  master  the
country ; and  this  would  have  happened,  had  the  invasion  taken  place,  and  been  unsuccessful.

Durino-  the  residence  of  the  duke  and  duchess  of  Lancaster  at  St.  Jago,  several  of  their
knights  and  squires  made  excursions  into  the  country,  and  supported  themselves  in  the  best
manner  in  which  they  were  able,  on  whatever  they  could  find.  It  fell  out  that  sir  Thomas


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  & c.


181


Moreaux,  marshal  of  the  army,  in  company  with  sir  Maubrun  de  Linieres,  sir  John
d’Ambreticourt,  Thierry,  and  William  de  Soumain,  and  about  two  hundred  spears  and  five
hundred  archers,  when  in  Galicia,  came  before  the  town  of  Rouelles,  seven  leagues  from
Sant  Jago.  lie  had  heard  that  the  townsmen  would  not  acknowledge  the  duke  of  Lancaster
for  king  ; and  had  slain  his  foragers,  who,  on  their  return,  had  passed  by  their  barriers.
They  had  ruined  their  roads  so  much,  that  the  only  tolerable  one  was  close  to  the  town  •
and,  when  they  found  a good  opportunity,  they  rushed  out,  and,  like  thieves  as  they  were,
murdered  all  passers,  whether  foragers  or  not.  Complaints  had  been  made  of  their  conduct
to  the  marshal,  who  was  determined  to  apply  a remedy,  that  being  a part  of  his  official  duty.
He  and  his  companions  dismounted,  when  near  the  town.  The  watch  had  before  sounded
his  horn,  which  had  prepared  the  inhabitants,  and  they  had  closed  the  gates  and  mounted  the
battlements,;  for  it  would  not  have  fared  well  to  any  who  had  remained  without  the  wall.
The  marshal,  seeing  from  their  appearance  it  must  be  assaulted,  and  having  mused  a while,
said  to  sir  John  d’Ambreticourt  and  Thierry  de  Soumain, — “ Mount  your  horses,  and  ride
round  the  town  to  see  where  we  may  the  best  make  our  assault,  and  with  the  least  loss  of
our  men.”  Having  mounted  their  horses,  they  soon  rode  round  the  place,  for  it  was  of  no
great  circuit,  and  carefully  examined  every  part  of  it.  On  their  return  to  the  marshal,  who
was  waiting  for  them,  they  said, — “ Sir,  this  town  has  but  two  gates  : you  are  at  one,  and
the  other  is  directly  opposite  : these  are  the  two  places  which  seem  to  us  easiest  of  attack  ;
for  the  ditches  round  the  town  are  deep,  difficult  of  descent  and  ascent,  on  account  of  thorns
and  brambles.”  “ I believe  you  are  right,”  replied  the  marshal : “ I will  remain  here  with
a part  of  our  men,  and  you,  Maubrun,  shall  take  the  other  and  commence  the  attack.  I
know  not  what  may  be  the  event,  but  I with  joy  see  those  fellows,  who,  from  their  battle-
ments, observe  all  we  are  doing.  Look  at  them,  they  are  as  sulky-looking  as  monkeys  eating
pears,  which  children  want  to  take  from  them.”  His  companions  burst  out  a laughing  at
this  expression,  and  casting  up  their  eyes  to  see  the  villains  (which  they  had  not  before
thought  of),  went  away  with  Maubrun  and  his  pennon.  They  were  about  one  hundred
lances  and  three  hundred  archei's,  who  advanced  slowly  to  the  oupositc  gate  and  halted.

Attacks  were  made  on  both  gates  with  great  gallantry  ; but  the  men  of  Rouelles,  from
their  battlements,  defended  themselves  with  stones  and  darts,  so  that  the  archers  and  cross-
bowmen wTere  unable  to  act  with  success,  and  many  were  severely  wounded.  However,  as
the  banders  were  defenceless,  for  all  had  retired  within  the  walls,  the  English  destroyed  the
palisades  and  advanced  up  to  the  gates.  They  battered  theixi  so  as  to  make  them  shake  again  ;
but  the  inhabitants,  aware  of  the  mischief  which  might  ensue  from  their  gates  being  forced,
came  down  from  the  battlements,  and  placed  against  them  faggots  and  large  beams  of  wood.
"Women  and  others  brought  earth  and  stones,  with  which  they  filled  casks,  and  these  they
arranged  against  the  gates,  closing  up  the  whole  of  the  entrances.  While  this  was  going  on,
others  on  the  battlements,  over  the  gateways,  threw  down  large  stones  and  bars  of  iron,  so
that  none  dared  ventui'e  too  near  for  fear  of  these  things,  which  killed  whomever  they  hit.
Thus  did  these  peasants  hold  out  their  town  against  the  English,  who  suffered  indeed  no
loss  until  night ; but  they  were  foi’ced  to  retreat  to  a deserted  village,  a long  league  distant,
to  seek  for  lodgings,  where  they  remained  until  the  morrow.  The  spies  sent  after  them
brought  back  word  that  they  had  taken  up  their  quarters  at  the  village  of  Lyrias,  but  it
seemed  as  if  they  would,  on  the  next  day,  renew  the  attack.  The  townsmen,  on  hearing
this,  said  among  themselves,  “ The  shortest  follies  are  the  best : we  can  never  be  blanxed  for
surrendering  to  the  duke  of  Lancaster  or  to  his  marshal,  having,  ourselves,  held  out  one
whole  day  against  them,  without  advice  or  assistance  from  any  gentleman  whatever.  This
we  cannot  long  pei'sist  in,  and,  having  begun  the  attack,  the  enemy  will,  of  coui’se,  renew  it,
since  they  know  the  way.  It  will,  thei’efore,  be  better  to  surrender  before  they  begiix  an
assault ; for,  if  we  be  taken  by  storm,  we  shall  lose  our  lives  as  well  as  our  money.”

All  agreed  to  this : and  it  was  determined  that,  if  the  English  returned  on  the  morrow,
they  would  go  out  to  meet  them,  and  surrender  the  town  on  having  their  lives  and  properties
spared.  In  truth,  the  English  made  their  appearance  shortly  after  sun-rise,  fresh  and  eager
to  renew  the  attack.  When  they  were  observed,  four  of  the  principal  townsmen  were  sent
out  to  conclude  a treaty.  As  the  marshal  advanced  under  his  pennon,  casting  his  eyes


182


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


around,  he  perceived  these  four  men,  and  said,  “ I believe  there  are  some  from  Rouelles,
who  want  to  parley  with  us  : make  them  come  forward."  This  was  done ; and  when  they
were  near  the  marshal,  they  cast  themselves  on  their  knees,  and  said,  “ My  lord,  the  inhabit-
ants of  Rouelles  have  sent  us  to  parley  with  you  ; will  you  hear  us?”  “ Yes,”  replied  the
marshal ; “ what  have  you  to  say  ?”  “ My  lord,  we  come  to  offer  the  surrender  of  our  town,
if  you  will  take  us  and  all  we  possess  under  your  protection ; and  wc  will  acknowledge  the
duke  and  duchess  of  Lancaster  for  our  sovereigns,  in  like  manner  as  those  of  Coruna  and
Sant  Jago  have  done.”  “ I will  take  you,  and  all  that  belongs  to  you,  under  my  protection,”
answered  the  marshal ; “ but  I will  not  ensure  your  provisions,  for  men  at  arms  must  live.”
The  deputies  said,  “ that  was  reasonable  ; and  the  country  abounded  in  provisions  of
all  sorts ; but  wait  here  a moment,  that  we  may  return  to  the  town  and  relate  what  you
have  said,  for  we  will  keep  the  agreement,  and  we  trust  you  will  do  the  same.”  “ Yes,  on
my  faith  will  I,”  replied  sir  Thomas;  “but  make  haste  back.”  Upon  this  the  four  men
returned  to  the  town,  to  relate  how  sir  Thomas  had  agreed  to  accept  their  terms,  except  in
the  article  of  provisions.  They  said,  “ God  grant  it  may  be  so  ; for  you  have  succeeded
better  than  we  expected.”  They  then  disencumbered  the  gate  of  the  casks,  beams,  and
faggots,  and  opening  it  wide,  advanced  to  the  barriers  with  the  keys  in  their  hands.  When
the  marshal  approached,  ho  and  his  companions  dismounted  ; and  the  townsmen  on  their
knees,  presenting  the  keys,  said, — “ My  lord,  you  are  sent  hither,  we  learn,  by  the  duke
and  duchess  of  Lancaster : we  therefore  offer  you  the  keys,  and  surrender  our  town,  as
agreed  on  between  you  and  our  men.”  “ Upon  these  terms  I accept  the  keys,”  replied
the  marshal ; and  lie  and  his  men  entered  the  town,  where  they  quartered  themselves  here
and  there  in  the  best  manner  they  could.  Sir  Thomas  Moreaux  remained  there  the  whole
day.  On  the  morrow,  before  his  departure,  he  said  to  sir  Thomas  Maubrun  de  Linieres, —
“ I give  this  town  up  to  you  and  your  men  : you  will  make  a good  garrison  of  it.”  “ By
St.  George,  and  so  I will,”  replied  sir  Maubrun ; “ for  I like  it  well.”

Sir  Maubrun  de  Linieres  remained  in  garrison  in  Rouelles,  having  under  him  sixty  spears
and  one  hundred  archers.  Sir  Thomas  Moreaux  returned  to  the  duke  and  duchess  at
Sant  Jago.


CHAPTER  XXXIX. THE  MARSHAL  OP  THE  DUKE  OP  LANCASTER’S  ARMY  ATTACKS  AND  GAINS

BY  TREATY  THE  TOWN  OF  VILLECLOPE  IN  GALICIA. THE  DUKE  SENDS  AMBASSADORS

TO  THE  KING  OP  PORTUGAL  TO  ARRANGE  AN  INTERVIEW  BETWEEN  THEM.

Shortly  after  the  marshal’s  return  from  Rouelles,  he  assembled  a body  of  about  three
hundred  spears  and  six  hundred  archers,  and,  thus  accompanied,  advanced  into  Galicia  a
long  day’s  journey  from  Sant  Jago,  and  came  before  a town  called  Villeclope,  which  was
only  defended  by  the  common  people  of  the  place.  The  marshal  not  only  examined  it
himself  but  made  his  companions  do  so,  and  then  asked  if  they  thought  it  might  be  taken
by  storm.  After  some  consideration,  they  said  that  it  could.  Upon  this  they  all  dis-
mounted, and  gave  their  horses  to  the  servants  to  be  led  to  the  rear.  They  divided
themselves  into  three  divisions  and  gave  their  orders  like  able  men  at  arms.  Sir  Thomas
Moreaux  had  the  first : he  gave  the  second  to  sir  Evan  Fitzwarren,  and  the  third  to  sir  John
d’Ambreticourt.  Each  had  under  his  command  eighty  spears,  and  seven  score  archers,
which  was  thought  sufficient  for  the  attack  of  such  a place.

They  approached  the  town,  entered  the  ditch,  and  gallantly  made  themselves  masters  of
it,  for  it  was  dry,  and  ascended  to  the  walls  wel I shielded*  : the  archers  were  posted  on  the
banks  of  the  ditch,  and  shot  so  ably  that  scarcely  any  dared  show  themselves  in  its  defence.
Notwithstanding  this,  the  townsmen  fought  valiantly,  and  they  were  very  numerous:  some
lanced  darts,  others  stones,  and  used  long  poles  shod  with  iron,  which  gave  such  blows  that
on  whomsoever  they  fell,  unless  well  armed,  he  was  severely  wounded  or  slain.  The  knights
and  squires,  eager  for  renown,  were  busily  employed  in  loosening  the  wall  with  pick-axes
and  crowbars,  which  they  had  brought  with  them,  and  continued  their  work  in  spite  of  the

* Bicn  targes  et  p.rvisses.


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


183


stones  and  lime-pots  thrown  down  on  their  pavisses  and  basnets.  Many  gallant  deeds  were
done  ; and  in  particular  by  two  squires  from  Hainault,  Thierry  and  William  de  Soumain,
They,  with  their  assistants,  made  a breach  in  the  wall,  and  fought  hand  to  hand  with  those
within.  These  two  brothers  gained  seven  lances,  which  were  pushed  at  them  through  the
breach,  by  wresting  them  out  of  the  enemy’s  hands.  They  were  under  the  pennon  of  sir
Evan  Fitzwarren.

Sir  John  d’Ambreticourt  made  no  ooy’s-piay,  but  showed  himself  a true  knight:  he
posted  himself  at  the  foot  of  the  walls,  and  his  pennon,  with  his  arms  of  two  hamets  gules
on  a field  ermine,  fixed  in  the  ground  before  him  : he  had  a pick-axe  in  his  hand,  labouring
with  all  his  might  to  batter  the  wall.  One  may  be  surprised  the  townsmen  were  not
frightened  when  they  saw  themselves  thus  attacked  on  all  sides ; but  it  lasted  not  long,  for
there  were  too  many  able  men  employed,  and,  perceiving  what  must  happen,  they  resolved
to  surrender.  The  bailiff  of  the  town,  through  whose  means  the  place  had  held  out  for  the
king,  came  forth,  and,  having  demanded  who  was  the  commander,  said, — “ My  lord,  order
a cessation  of  arms,  for  the  inhabitants  wish  to  enter  into  a treaty  with  you.”  The  marshal
replied,  he  would  cheerfully  do  so,  and  sent  a herald  round  the  ditches,  who  thus  spoke  to
the  English, — “ Cease  assaulting  until  you  shall  hear  the  trumpet  of  the  marshal,  for  there
is  a treaty  going  forward  with  the  townsmen.”  On  this  speech  of  the  herald,  the  attack
was  suspended,  and  the  assailants  reposed  themselves  : indeed,  many  had  need  of  it,  for  they
had  laboured  hard  and  were  much  fatigued.  The  townsmen,  by  their  bailiff,  said  they  were
willing  to  yield  the  town  on  having  their  lives  and  fortunes  spared,  as  the  other  towns
in  Galicia  had  done.  “ Indeed  !”  said  the  marshal,  “ but  you  will  not  come  off  so  cheaply ;
for  you  have  given  us  much  trouble,  and  wounded  our  men.  You  see  plainly  you  cannot
hold  out  longer,  and  you  must  purchase  your  peace  from  us,  or  we  return  to  the  attack,  and
take  your  town  by  storm.”  “ And  what  is  the  sum  you  expect  for  our  ransom  ?”  “ In

God’s  name,”  said  the  marshal,  “ ten  thousand  francs.”  “ You  ask  too  much,”  replied  the
bailiff:  “ I offer  you  two  thousand,  for  the  town  is  poor,  and  has  been  heavily  taxed.”  “ I
will  not  accept  your  offer,”  said  the  marshal ; “ but  take  time  to  consider  of  it,  and  do  not
let  the  place  be  lost  for  three  or  four  thousand  francs,  for  all  must  be  ours.  I am  already
blamed  by  my  companions  for  having  entered  into  any  treaty  with  you : therefore  make
haste,  and  either  pay  a handsome  ransom  or  take  the  consequences.”  The  bailiff  returned
to  the  town,  and,  calling  the  inhabitants  together,  said,  “ What  will  you  do  ? If  you  suffer
the  English  to  renew  the  attack,  they  will  storm  the  town,  put  us  all  to  death,  and
plunder  our  wealth.  They  demand  ten  thousand  francs,  and  I have  offered  two,  which
I know  is  too  little,  and  they  will  never  take  them  : we  must  increase  our  offer  two  or  three
thousand  more.”  Some,  who  were  much  alarmed  for  their  lives  and  fortunes,  said — “ Bailiff,
do  not  fail  making  a bargain  with  them  ; for,  sooner  than  they  shall  renew  the  assault,  we
will  give  four  thousand  francs.”  “ It  is  well  said,”  answered  the  bailiff,  “ and  I will  again
treat  with  them.”

On  this,  the  bailiff  came  again  to  the  marshal,  who  was  waiting  for  him ; and  a ransom
was  agreed  on,  which,  if  I recollect,  was  six  thousand  francs.  The  gates  were  thrown  open
to  the  army,  who  quartered  themselves  in  the  town,  and  refreshed  themselves  there  two  days.
The  marshal  gavrn  the  place  as  a garrison  to  sir  Evan  Fitzwarren,  who  had  under  him  two
hundred  men  at  arms  and  four  hundred  archers  ; he  held  the  place  upwards  of  eight  months  :
but  the  ransom-money  went  to  the  duke  of  Lancaster,  the  marshal  retaining  one  thousand
francs.

After  this  surrender  of  Yilleclope,  the  marshal  returned  to  Sant  Jago,  which  was  his
head-quarters,  for  the  duke  was  desirous  of  having  him  near  his  person.  At  times,  he
marched  to  the  borders  of  Castillo,  to  alarm  the  French  : but  in  General  the  Enohsli  did  not
quit  Galicia,  whither  the  king  of  Castille  sent  none  to  oppose  them  for  he  was  advised  not
to  attack  them  with  a large  army,  but  to  harass  them  from  his  garrisons,  and  to  wait  for
succours  from  France.  The  duke’s  counsellors  said  to  him  as  follows : “ My  lord,  it  is
necessary  that  you  and  the  king  of  Portugal  should  have  an  interview  to  confer  together.
You  write  to  each  other,  but  that  is  not  enough  ; for  the  French  are  a subtle  race,  and  see
farther  into  affairs  than  most  other  nations.  Should  they,  underhand,  make  a peace  between


104


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


the  king  of  Portugal  and  the  king  of  Castille,  who  has  at  his  court,  as  we  have  been
informed,  several  of  the  great  barons  of  Portugal,  either  by  a marriage  or  otherwise,  so  as
to  prevent  you  from  having  any  assistance  from  him,  what  would  become  of  you  ? You
would  be  in  a much  worse  condition  than  ever  in  this  country,  and  the  Castillians
would  not  care  any  thing  for  us,  for  you  know  they  are  the  falsest  and  most  gloomy  people
in  the  world.  Do  you  imagine  the  king  of  Portugal  lias  not  thoroughly  examined  every-
thing that  concerns  him  ? and  if  the  king  of  Castille  would  agree  to  a peace,  allowing  him
for  his  life  to  reign  in  Portugal,  and  himself  to  be  unmolested  in  Castille,  we  doubt  not  but
he  would  turn  his  back  on  you,  notwithstanding  he  has  been  so  pressing  to  bring  you  hither.
Thus  will  you  be  completely  ruined.  You  are  well  acquainted  with  the  present  state  of
England,  that  it  has  enough  to  do  to  make  head  against  its  old  enemies  the  French  and
Scots.  Make  the  most,  therefore,  of  the  men  you  now  have,  and  push  on  the  war
vigorously ; for,  if  you  expect  any  reinforcements  from  England,  you  will  be  disappointed.
You  were  two  years  in  obtaining  what  you  now  have,  and  the  king,  your  nephew,  does  not
feel  for  the  interests  which  made  you  quit  the  country.  He  is  young,  and  confides  in  young
counsellors,  which  has  thrown  England  into  much  peril.  Have  an  interview,  therefore,  with
the  king  of  Portugal  as  speedily  as  may  be,  and  talk  to  him  yourself ; for  you  will  gain
more  in  one  conversation  than  by  four  months’  writing.”

The  duke  of  Lancaster  treasured  up  these  words  ; for  he  knew  they  were  the  truth,  and
that  they  had  loyally  advised  him.  He  answered,  “ What  would  you  have  me  do  ?”  “ We
wish  you  would  send  five  or  six  of  your  knights  to  the  king  of  Portugal,  and  we  advise  that
a baron,  at  least,  be  of  the  number,  to  remonstrate  with  him  on  public  affairs;  and  let  it  be
suggested  that  you  are  very  anxious  to  have  some  personal  conferences  with  him.  Those
whom  you  send  will,  of  course,  act  with  prudence ; but,  by  all  means,  let  them  press  for  an
immediate  interview.”  The  duke  consented  to  this  proposal ; and  the  lord  Poinings,  a great
baron  in  England,  sir  John  Bancel*,  sir  John  d’Ambreticourt,  and  sir  John  Sounder,
bastard  brother  to  the  constable  of  the  army,  were  ordered  to  go  to  Portugal.  These  lords
made  themselves  ready  to  set  out  from  Sant  Jago,  with  one  hundred  spears  and  two  hundred
archers  ; but  just  as  they  were  on  the  point  of  departure,  having  received  their  credential
letters,  there  arrived  from  Portugal  a knight  and  squire,  attended  by  twelve  lances.  The
knight’s  name  was  Yasco  Martin  d’Acunha,  and  the  squire  Fernando  Martin  de  Merlo  :
they  were  both  of  the  king’s  household,  and  the  nearest  about  his  person.  They  were
comfortably  lodged  in  Sant  Jago,  and  presented  to  the  duke  and  duchess,  by  each  of  whom
they  were  most  graciously  received.  They  delivered  their  letters  to  their  graces,  which
being  read,  they  found,  that  in  addition  to  the  strong  expressions  of  friendship  and  affection,
the  king  of  Portugal  had  sent  two  handsome  ambling  white  mules,  which  gave  them  much
pleasure.  The  English  embassy  was  not  for  this  laid  aside ; it  was  only  retarded  four  days.
On  the  fifth  day  they  set  out,  accompanied  by  the  Portuguese ; and  the  duke,  as  a token  of
friendship,  sent  the  king  of  Portugal  two  such  beautiful  pilgrim-falcons  as  had  never  been
seen,  and  six  English  greyhounds,  excellently  trained  for  hunting  all  sorts  of  beasts.

The  English  and  Portuguese  continued  their  journey  through  Galicia,  without  fear  of  the
Castillians,  for  they  were  at  too  great  a distance.  On  the  road  sir  John  d’Ambreticourt  and
Ferdinand  de  Merlo  commenced  an  acquaintance ; for  the  squire  had,  in  former  times,
served  with  sir  Eustace  d’Ambreticourt,  sir  John’s  uncle,  and  had  even  been  with  him
when  he  died  in  Carentan.  They  continued  in  conversation  until  they  arrived  at  the  gate
of  Coimbra,  where  the  king  of  Portugal  resided.  As  they  were  riding  gently  together,
behind  the  rest  of  their  company,  they  met  a herald  and  his  servant  from  Coimbra,  on  the
road  to  the  duke  and  his  lords  at  Sant  Jago.  He  was  attached  to  the  kino-  of  Portugal,
who,  at  the  time  of  his  coronation,  had  given  him  the  name  of  Coimbra.  The  herald  had
already  conversed  with  the  lords  who  were  advanced;  and  when  don  Ferdinand  saw  him,
he  said  : “ Here  comes  the  king’s  herald,  who  has  not  been  long  in  this  country  : I will
inquire  some  news  from  him.”  When  they  met,  the  squire  said, — “ Where  have  you  been
for  this  year  past,  that  I have  not  seen  you?”  “In  God’s  name,”  replied  the  herald,  “ I
have  been  in  England  to  the  king  and  his  uncles,  who  have  made  me  very  rich.  I went
* Q.  if  not  lord  Burnel.  In  the  latest  French  edition  it  is  Bitvrele ; anglice  Beverly. — Ed.


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


m

thence  by  sea  to  Brittany,  and  was  present  at  the  marriage  of  the  duke,  and  at  the  grand
feasts  he  gave  two  months  in  the  town  of  Nantes,  on  his  union  with  the  lady  Jane  of
Navarre*.  From  thence  I returned  to  Guerrande,  and  by  sea  to  Portugal.”

While  he  was  thus  speaking,  the  squire  kept  his  eyes  fixed  on  an  enamelled  scutcheon
that  luinof  on  the  herald’s  breast,  on  which  were  emblazoned  the  arms  of  the  king  of  Portugal
and  other  knights  of  Portugal.  Pointing  with  his  finger  to  a coat  of  arms,  lie  said, — “ Ah,
here  are  the  arms  of  a gallant  knight  of  Portugal,  sir  John  Portelet,  which  I am  happy  to
see  ; for  he  is  a valiant  knight,  and  was  once  of  great  service  to  me,  which  I ought  always  to
remember.”  When,  taking  out  of  his  purse  four  florins,  he  gave  them  to  the  herald,  who
returned  him  thanks.  Sir  John  d’Ambreticourt  examined  the  scutcheon,  and  remembering
the  arms,  told  me  some  time  afterward,  that  the  arms  were  two  chaudieres  sables  on  a field
argent,  with  an  endenture  gules.

When  the  herald  had  taken  his  leave  and  departed,  the  squire  thus  spoke  : “ Sir  John,

you  noticed  those  sable  chaudieres,  which  the  knight,  to  whom  I am  so  much  indebted,  bore

in  his  arms  ? ” “ Yes,  I did,”  replied  sir  John  : “ but  tell  me  the  cause  why  you  praise  him

so  much  : I shall  willingly  listen  to  you  ; for,  as  we  ride  on,  we  shall  be  at  a loss  for

conversation.”  “ That  I will  do,”  replied  he  ; “ for  such  a knight  is  worth  talking  of.  A

little  before  the  battle  of  Aljubarota,  as  the  king  of  Portugal  was  marching  through  the

country  from  Coimbra,  he  sent  me  to  seek  some  of  his  knights,  that  they  might  be  present

at  the  engagement.  I therefore  rode  off,  attended  only  by  a single  page.  In  my  way,  I

fell  in  with  twenty  Gascon  lances,  and  I was  suddenly  in  the  midst  before  I perceived  them,

when  I was  made  prisoner,  and  asked  whither  I was  going.  I said,  ‘ To  the  castle  du

Pont.  +’  ‘ What  to  do  there  ? ’ 4 To  seek  sir  John  Fernando  Portelet : for  the  kins  wishes

. ©

for  his  company  at  Aljubarota.’  ‘ What ! is  not  don  Ferdando  governor  of  Ront,  with
your  king  of  Portugal?’  ‘No,’  I replied,  ‘he  is  not;  but  he  will  hasten  thither  the
moment  he  hears  my  message.’  ‘ In  God’s  name,’  said  they,  ‘ he  shall  hear  it ; for  we  will
ride  thither.’  On  saying  this,  they  turned  about,  and  took  the  road  to  Ront.  When  they
were  within  sight,  the  watch  on  the  battlements  sounded  his  horn,  as  a signal  for  the
appearance  of  an  enemy.

“ Don  Fernando  asked  from  what  quarter  they  were  coming.  ‘ From  the  side  of  Oporto,’
replied  the  watch.  ‘ Ah,  ah,’  said  he,  ‘ they  must  be  Castillians  seeking  adventures,  and
on  their  road  to  Santarem.  I will  go  and  look  at  them ; for  they  may  possibly  tell  me
some  news,  and  where  the  king  is.’  Having  ordered  his  horse  to  be  saddled,  and  his
pennon  to  be  unfurled,  he  set  oft’  on  a gallop,  with  only  nineteen  more,  to  meet  the  enemy,
who  had  formed  an  ambuscade.  The  Castillian  party  had  sent  one  of  their  men  to  scour
over  the  plain,  mounted  on  a genet,  which  being  perceived  by  don  Fernando,  he  said  to  a
squire,  4 Gallop  thy  genet,  and  see  who  that  fellow  is  prancing  on  the  plain.’  The  squire,
sticking  spurs  into  his  horse,  soon  came  up  with  the  horseman,  who  suffered  himself  nearly
to  be  overtaken ; for  his  orders  were  to  return  instantly  to  the  ambuscade,  if  followed  by
any  one.  When  they  were  hard  by,  the  whole  party  sallied  forth  and  pursued  the  squire,
who,  being  well  mounted,  had  turned  back.  In  the  chase,  they  shouted  ‘ Castille  !’  which
convinced  don  Fernando,  who  had  halted  under  his  pennon,  to  wait  for  his  squire,  whom
they  were  closely  pursuing,  that  they  were  enemies ; and  he  said, — ‘ I am  now  sure  they
must  be  Castillians  : let  us  shout  “ Portugal !”  for  I am  resolved  to  meet  them.’  At  these
words  he  grasped  his  spear,  and  came  on  full  speed  up  to  them.  The  first  whom  he  met  he
struck  to  the  ground,  and  the  second  shared  the  same  fate.  Of  the  twenty-five  spears,  ten
were  already  lying  on  the  ground ; the  remainder  took  to  flight ; and  of  them  several  were
likewise  slain  or  wounded.  All  this  I witnessed  with  great  pleasure  ; for  I saw  in  it  my
deliverance,  and  in  a few  minutes  was  left  alone.  I then  advanced  towards  don  Fernando,
who,  on  seeing  me,  recollected  me ; for  I had  been  formerly  acquainted  with  him,  and  asked
from  whence  I came,  and  what  I was  doing  there : I then  related  to  him  my  adventure,  and
how  the  Spaniards  had  taken  me.  4 And  where  is  the  king  ? Do  you  know  nothing  about
him  ? ’ 4 On  my  troth,  sir,  to-morrow  he  will  give  battle  to  the  king  of  Castille  ; and  I was

* On  the  decease  of  the  duke  of  Brittany,  she  was  queen  of  England,  hy  her  marriage  with  Henry  IV.

•f  “ Castle  du  Ront.” — Q.  if  not  Ourem.


186


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


sent  to  tell  this  to  such  knights  as  were  ignorant  of  it.’  ‘ To-morrow  !’  said  don  Fernando.
‘ Yes,  on  my  faith  ; and,  if  you  doubt  me,  ask  these  Castillians  whom  you  have  taken.’

“ He  went  to  his  prisoners,  and  inquired  from  them  if  there  were  certainly  to  be  a battle
on  the  morrow.  They  said,  that  in  truth  there  would  be  a general  engagement  on  the
morrow  between  Castille  and  Portugal,  and  that  each  side  was  making  every  exertion.  The
knight  was  well  pleased  at  this  intelligence,  insomuch  that  he  said  to  them,  ‘For  the  good
news  you  have  told  me,  I give  you  all  your  liberties,  but  surrender  to  me  my  countryman.’
Thus  did  I regain  my  freedom ; and,  don  Fernando  having  taken  leave  of  those  who
captured  me,  they  went  their  way.  We  returned  to  Ourem,  where  the  knight  made  himself
ready,  and  set  off  together  about  midnight.  The  distance  from  Ourem  to  Aljubarota  may
be  about  six  leagues : but,  to  avoid  the  Castillians  and  their  parties,  we  lengthened  our
road.  W e heard,  long  before  we  saw  the  armies  drawn  up,  that  there  was  to  be  a battle  ;
and,  when  we  approached,  we  saw  the  king  of  Portugal  in  array,  and  the  king  of  Castille
opposite  to  him.  At  first,  the  knight  could  not  distinguish  the  Portuguese  from  the
Castillians,  but  said,  ‘ I should  imagine  the  largest  army  must  be  that  of  Castille.’  We  rode
so  near  that  we  plainly  distinguished  the  enemy  drawn  up  in  battle  array  : some  put  them-
selves in  motion,  in  pursuit  of  us  ; but  I fancy  they  were  foreigners,  from  Gascony.  Don
Fernando,  observing  them,  said,  ‘ Here  are  our  enemies:  let  us  hasten  away.’  The  enemy
advanced  full  gallop,  shouting,  ‘ Castille,  Castille ! ’ but  our  men,  seeing  our  situation,  came
to  our  assistance  : the  main  body,  however,  did  not  take  any  step  in  consequence.  The  king
received  don  Fernando  with  great  joy,  and  he  was  posted  at  the  bridle  of  the  king’s  horse,
for  he  was  one  of  our  bravest  knights.  I feel  myself  under  the  greatest  obligation  to  him
for  having  delivered  me  from  the  hands  of  mine  enemies ; otherwise  I should  not  have  been
present  at  this  famous  battle  of  Aljubarota.  Now,  did  he  not  do  me  a great  service  ?”
“ On  my  faith,  that  he  did,”  replied  sir  John  ; “ and,  from  what  you  have  said,  he  must  be
well  acquainted  with  his  business.”  “ Ay,  that  he  is,”  answered  the  squire.  Upon  this,
they  rode  on  a little  faster  to  overtake  their  companions ; and  they  all  arrived  that  night  at
Coimbra.


CHAPTER  XL. THE  DUKE  OP  LANCASTER  HAS  AN  INTERVIEW  WITH  THE  KING  OF

PORTUGAL. A MARRIAGE  IS  AGREED  UPON  BETWEEN  THE  KING  AND  THE  LADY

PHILIPPA,  DAUGHTER  OF  THE  DUKE.

The  king  of  Portugal  was  well  pleased  at  the  arrival  of  the  English  knights,  and
commanded  that  they  should  be  comfortably  lodged.  When  they  were  ready,  don  Martin
d’Acunha  and  don  Fernando  Martin  de  Merlo,  who  were  acquainted  with  the  king’s  habits,
introduced  them  to  him.  He  received  them  very  graciously  ; and  after  some  conversation,
which  they  knew  well  how  to  keep  up,  they  presented  the  falcons  and  greyhounds.  The
king  cheerfully  accepted  them,  .as  he  was  fond  of  the  chase.  They  returned  the  king
thanks,  on  the  part  of  the  duke  and  duchess  of  Lancaster,  for  the  handsome  mules  he  had
given  them.  The  king  replied,  these  were  trifles,  merely  tokens  of  affection,  such  as  lords
desirous  of  maintaining  love  and  friendship  ought  to  make  each  other ; but  he  should  soon
offer  more  splendid  presents.  Wine  and  spices  were  now  brought,  of  which  the  English
knights  having  partaken,  they  took  leave  of  the  king  and  returned  to  their  lodgings,  where
they  supped.  On  the  morrow,  they  dined  at  the  palace,  and  the  lord  Poinings  and  sir  John
Bancel  were  seated  at  the  king’s 1 table.  Sir  John  d’Ambreticourt  and  sir  John  Sounder
were  at  another  table  with  the  great  barons  of  the  kingdom,  among  whom  was  Lawrence
Fongasse,  squire  of  honour  to  the  king,  who  was  well  known  to  these  knights,  having  been
acquainted  with  them  in  England  ; on  which  account  he  made  them  the  best  cheer  in  his
power,  and  this  he  knew  well  how  to  do.

The  dinner  the  king  of  Portugal  gave  to  these  knights  was  very  handsome  and  well
served  : when  over,  they  adjourned  to  the  council -chamber,  and  the  knights,  addressing
themselves  to  the  king,  the  count  d’Acunha  and  the  count  de  Novaire  spoke  as  follows :
“ Sire,  with  all  the  compliments  the  duke  of  Lancaster  has  charged  us  to  pay  you,  he


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


187


ordered  us  to  say  that  he  is  very  desirous  of  having  a personal  interview  with  you.”  The
king  replied,  he  was  equally  anxious  for  it,  and  added,  “ I beg  of  you  to  hasten  everything
as  much  as  possible,  that  we  may  have  a conference  together.”  “ That  will  be  very  proper,”
said  the  barons  of  Portugal ; “ for  until  you  meet  you  will  never  understand  each  other.
You  may  then  confer  on  the  most  effectual  means  of  carrying  on  the  war  against  the  king  of
Castille.”  “ That  is  true,”  answered  the  knights.  “ Be  speedy  about  it,  then,”  said  the
king  ; “ for,  if  the  duke  wishes  to  see  me,  I want  also  to  see  him.”  They  then  entered  on
other  conversation  ; for  the  council  was  to  determine  when  and  where  this  meeting  should
take  place,  and  inform  the  English  knights  of  it.  This  was  done.  It  was  agi’eed  the  king
of  Portugal  should  go  to  Oporto,  and  the  duke  of  Lancaster  advance  along  the  borders  of
Galicia ; and  somewhere  between  them  and  Oporto  the  meeting  was  to  be  held.  When  the
English  knights  had  remained  three  days  at  Coimbra,  they  departed  and  followed  the  same
road  back  to  Sant  Jago,  where  they  related  to  the  duke  and  duchess  all  that  had  passed.
They  were,  with  reason,  well  satisfied  with  it,  for  then’  affairs  seemed  now  likely  to  be
attended  to.

When  the  day  of  meeting  approached,  the  duke  of  Lancaster  left  his  army,  under  the
command  of  his  marshal,  at  Sant  Jago,  and,  attended  by  three  hundred  spears  and  six
hundred  archers,  and  sir  John  Holland,  (who  had  married  his  eldest  daughter,)  with  many
knights,  rode  towards  the  frontiers  of  Portugal.  The  king  of  Portugal,  hearing  that  the
duke  was  set  out  from  Sant  Jago,  left  Oporto  with  six  hundred  spears,  and  went  to  a town
called  in  that  country  Mon$ao,  the  last  town  of  Portugal  on  that  side.  The  duke  came  to
a town  on  the  frontiers  called  Melga90.  Between  Moi^ao  and  Melgaijo  runs  a small  river
through  meadows  and  fields,  over  which  is  a bridge  called  Pont  do  More  *.

On  a Thursday  morning,  the  king  of  Portugal  and  the  duke  of  Lancaster  had  their  first
interview  at  this  bridge,  attended  by  tbeir  escorts,  when  they  made  acquaintance  with  each
other.  On  the  king  of  Portugal’s  side  had  been  built  a bower,  covered  with  leaves,  in  which
the  duke  was  entertained  at  dinner  by  the  king.  It  was  a handsome  one ; and  the  bishop
of  Coimbra,  the  bishop  of  Oporto,  as  also  the  archbishop  of  Braganza,  were  seated  at  the
king’s  table  with  the  duke,  and  a little  below  him  were  sir  John  Holland  and  sir  Henry
Beaumont.  There  were  many  minstrels,  and  this  entertainment  lasted  until  night.  The
king  of  Portugal  was  that  day  clothed  in  white  lined  with  crimson,  with  a red  cross  of
St.  George,  being  the  dress  of  the  order  of  Avis,  of  which  he  was  grandmaster  t.  When  the
people  had  elected  him  their  king,  he  declared  he  would  always  wear  that  dress  in  honour  of
God  and  St.  George,  and  his  attendants  were  all  dressed  in  white  and  crimson.  When  it
became  late,  they  took  leave  of  each  other,  with  the  engagement  of  meeting  again  on  the
morrow.  The  king  went  to  Momjao,  and  the  duae  to  Melgacjo,  which  places  were  only
separated  by  the  river  and  meadows.  On  the  Friday,  after  hearing  mass,  they  mounted
their  horses,  and  rode  over  the  Pont  de  More,  to  the  spot  where  they  had  met  the  preceding
day.  The  house  which  had  been  erected  for  this  occasion  was  the  fairest  and  greatest  that
had  been  ever  seen  there.  The  king  and  duke  had  each  their  apartments  hung  with  cloth
and  covered  with  carpets,  as  convenient  as  if  the  king  had  been  at  Lisbon  or  the  duke  in
London.

Before  dinner,  they  had  a conference  on  the  state  of  their  affairs,  how  they  should  carry
on  the  war,  and  when  they  should  commence  it.  They  resolved  to  order  their  marshals  to
continue  their  attacks  during  the  winter,  which  the  king  was  to  pass  in  Portugal,  and  the
duke  at  Sant  Jago  ; and  it  was  settled  that,  early  in  March,  they  would  unite  their  forces,
and  march  to  combat  the  king  of  Castille,  wherever  he  might  be,  and  whoever  he  might
have  with  him ; for  the  English  and  Portuguese,  when  united,  would  be  full  thirty
thousand  men.  When  this  had  been  determined,  the  king’s  council  introduced  the  subject
of  a marriage  with  their  king;  for  the  country  was  very  desirous  lie  would  marry,  as  it  -was
now  time ; and  by  it  they  would  be  much  strengthened ; and  they  thought  he  could  not
make  a better  choice  for  himself,  nor  one  more  agreeable  to  them,  than  by  intermarrying
with  the  house  of  Lancaster.  The  duke,  who  saw  the  attachment  the  king  and  the

* “Pont  de  More.” — Q.

f Froissart  mistakes  the  colour  of  the  cross  : it  was  green,  and  borne  on  the  left  side.


188


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


Portuguese  had  for  him,  and  that  he  had  need  of  their  assistance,  as  he  was  come  from
England  to  Portugal  to  regain  his  kingdom  of  Castille,  replied  with  a smile,  addressing  the
king : “ Sir  King,  I have  at  Sant  Jago  two  girls,  and  I will  give  you  the  choice  to  take
which  of  them  shall  please  you  best.  Send  thither  your  council,  and  I will  return  her  with
them.”  “ Many  thanks,”  said  the  king  : “ you  offer  me  more  than  I ask.  I will  leave  my
cousin  Catharine,  of  Castille  ; but  I demand  your  daughter  Philippa,  in  marriage,  whom  I
will  espouse  and  make  my  queen.”  At  these  words  the  conference  broke  up,  as  it  was
dinner-time.  They  were  seated  as  on  the  preceding  day,  and  most  sumptuously  and  plenti-
fully served,  according  to  the  custom  of  that  country.  After  dinner,  the  king  and  duke
returned  to  their  lodgings.

On  the  Saturday  after  mass,  they  again  mounted  their  horses,  and  retui’ned  to  Pont  de
More  in  grand  array.  The  duke  this  day  entertained  at  dinner  the  king  and  his  attendants.
His  apartments  were  decorated  with  the  richest  tapestry,  with  his  arms  emblazoned  on  it,
and  as  splendidly  ornamented  as  if  he  had  been  at  Hertford,  Leicester,  or  at  any  of  his
mansions  in  England,  which  very  much  astonished  the  Portuguese.  Three  bishops  and  one
archbishop  were  seated  at  the  upper  table  ; the  bishops  of  Lisbon,  of  Oporto,  of  Coimbra,
and  archbishop  of  Braganza.  The  king  of  Portugal  was  placed  at  the  middle,  and  the
duke  somewhat  below  him : a little  lower  than  the  duke,  the  count  d’Acunha  and  the  count
de  Novaire.  At  the  head  of  the  second  table  was  the  deputy  grandmaster  of  Avis : then
the  grandmaster  of  St.  James,  in  Portugal  *,  and  the  grandmaster  of  St.  John,  Diego  Lopez
Pacheco,  Joao  Fernandez  Pacheco  his  son,  Lopo  Vasquez  d’Acunha,  Vasco  Martin  d’Acunha,
Lopo  Diaz  d’Azevedo,  Vasco  Martin  de  Merlo,  Gonzalves  de  Merlo,  all  great  barons.  The
abbot  of  Aljubarota,  the  abbot  of  Saint  Mary,  in  Estremadoura,  sir  Alvarez  Pereira,  marshal
of  Portugal,  Joao  Rodriguez  Pereira,  Joao  Gomez  de  Silva,  Joao  Rodriguez  de  Sa,  and
many  other  Portuguese  knights,  were  there  seated ; for  not  one  Englishman  was  at  the
table  that  day,  but  served  their  guests.  There  were  numbers  of  minstrels,  who  played
their  parts  well ; and  the  duke  gave  them  and  the  heralds  one  hundred  nobles  each

When  this  festival  was  ended,  they  took  a most  friendly  leave  of  each  other,  until  they
should  meet  again.  The  king  returned  to  Oporto,  and  the  duke  to  Melg.aijo,  from  whence
he  journeyed  towards  Sant  Jago.  The  count  de  Novaire  escorted  him  with  one  hundred
Portuguese  lances,  until  he  was  out  of  all  danger,  when  he  took  leave  and  returned  to
Portugal.  The  duchess  was  very  impatient  for  the  duke’s  return,  to  hear  how  the  con-
ferences had  passed ; of  course,  you  may  suppose,  she  received  him  with  joy.  She  asked
what  he  thought  of  the  king  of  Portugal.  “ On  my  faith,”  replied  the  duke,  “ he  is  an
agreeable  man,  and  has  the  appearance  of  being  a valiant  one,  and  I think  he  will  reign
powerfully  ; for  he  is  much  beloved  by  his  subjects,  who  say  they  have  not  been  so  fortunate
in  a king  for  these  hundred  years.  He  is  but  twenty-six  years  old,  and,  like  the  Portuguese,
strong,  and  well  formed  in  his  limbs  and  body  to  go  through  much  labour  and  pain.”
“ Well,  and  what  was  done  in  regard  to  the  marriage  ? ” said  the  duchess.  “ I have  given
him  one  of  my  daughters.”  “ Which?”  asked  the  duchess.  “I  offered  him  the  choice  of
Catharine  or  Philippa  ; for  which  he  thanked  me  much,  and  has  fixed  on  Philippa.”  “ He
is  in  the  right,”  said  the  duchess  ; “ for  my  daughter  Catharine  is  too  young  for  him.”

The  duke  and  duchess  passed  the  time  as  well  as  they  could : winter  was  approaching,
though  in  Galicia  the  severity  of  that  season  is  scarcely  felt : for  it  is  always  there  so  warm,
that  some  fruits  are  eatable  even  in  March,  and  beans,  peas,  and  grass,  are  high  and
flourishing  in  February.  Their  hay-harvest  is  over  before  Midsummer-day;  and,  by  that
time,  their  corn  is,  in  several  places,  completely  ripe.


* Rodriguez  de  Vatsconceilos.


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


109


CHAPTER  XLI. THE  DUKE  OF  LANCASTERS  MARSHAL  GAINS  FOR  HIM  SEVERAL  PLACES  IN

GALICIA. THE  CONDUCT  OF  THE  KING  OF  CASTILLE.

Notwithstanding  the  duke  of  Lancaster  lived  quietly  at  Sant  Jago  with  his  duchess  and
children,  it  was  not  so  with  his  army ; for  the  commanders  made  frequent  excursions  over
the  country,  conquering  towns  and  castles,  of  which,  for  a time,  they  held  possession.  I will
faithfully  narrate  the  manner  in  which  they  did  this,  and  the  names  of  the  towns  they
gained  ; for  I was  told  all  the  particulars  of  the  campaign  by  those  English  knights  who  had
been  actors  in  these  conquests ; but  more  particularly  by  that  gallant  knight  of  Portugal
whom  I have  before  mentioned,  who,  in  the  most  friendly  manner,  entered  into  all  the
details  at  Middleburgh,  in  Zealand,  where  he  was,  on  his  way  to  Prussia.  I have  already
told  his  name,  but  I will  repeat  it : be  was  called  John  Fernando  Portclet,  who  informed
me  as  follows  : —

“ When  the  duke  of  Lancaster  was  returned  to  Sant  Jago,  from  the  frontiers  of  Portugal,
Sir  Thomas  Moreaux,  the  marshal  of  bis  army,  said  to  him,  that  he  was  unwilling  to  remain
in  idleness  ; and  that,  since  they  were  in  an  enemy’s  country,  he  would  make  some
excursions  to  conquer  towns  or  castles,  and  employ  the  army,  who  were  very  anxious  for  it.
He  gave  his  orders  accordingly,  and  declared  he  would  penetrate  into  Galicia  farther  than
he  had  hitherto  been,  and  would  not  leave  town  nor  castle  behind  him,  without  their
submitting  to  the  duke.  He  began  his  march  from  Sant  Jago,  with  six  hundred  lances  and
twelve  hundred  archers,  and  took  the  road  to  Pontevedra,  a good  town  of  Galicia,  which
held  out  for  the  king  of  Castille.  The  townsmen  were  well  aware  of  the  intended  attack  ;
for  all  the  inhabitants  of  the  flat  countries  fled  before  the  English,  to  different  towns,  to  save
themselves  and  fortunes.  When  the  marshal  came  before  the  place,  the  inhabitants  were
in  deep  consultation,  whether  to  surrender  or  to  defend  themselves,  but  they  were  not
unanimous.  The  lower  sorts  of  inhabitants  wanted  to  surrender  instantly  : the  bailiff  (who
had  been  ordered  thither  by  the  king  to  guard  and  defend  it),  with  those  who  were  the
richest,  wished  to  hold  out ; for  they  said,  that  an  instant  surrender  would  not  redound  to
their  honour  nor  profit.  They  were  still  in  debate,  when  the  watch  sounded  his  horn,  to
announce  the  arrival  of  the  English.  This  broke  up  the  assembly  ; and  every  one  ran  to
the  battlements,  armed  with  stones,  darts,  and  javelins,  with  a full  determination  to  defend
the  place,  and  not  to  surrender  it  until  pushed  to  extremities.

“ When  the  marshal  and  his  companions  arrived  at  Pontevedra,  tlieydismounted  and  gave
their  horses  to  their  servants.  They  drew  up  their  men  for  instantly  attacking  it.  The
archers  were  ranged  around  the  walls  with  bows  bent  for  shooting  ; and  men  at  arms,  well
armed  and  shielded,  descended  into  the  ditch.  On  the  marshal’s  trumpet  sounding,  the
assault  commenced  ; and  those  who  were  in  the  ditch  scrambled  up  to  the  walls,  witli  pick-
axes  and  iron  crows  to  undermine  them.  The  townsmen  showered  down  on  them  stones
and  flints,  to  their  great  annoyance : they  would  have  done  more,  if  the  archers  had  not
made  such  good  use  of  their  bows  : few,  after  some  time,  dared  to  show  themselves  on  the
bulwarks,  for  they  killed  and  wounded  many.  The  bailiff  of  the  town  was  so  severely
struck  by  an  arrow,  which  pierced  his  helmet  and  head,  that  he  was  forced  to  be  carried
to  his  house.  The  ill-intentioned  in  the  place  were  not  sorry  at  this,  because  he  would  not
consent  to  a surrender.  This  accident,  however,  did  not  cause  the  defence  to  be  weakened  ;
on  the  contrary,  they  were  the  more  active  ; and  the  attack  continued  until  night,  when  the
enemy  sounded  a retreat.  Many  were  wounded  on  each  side.  The  English  returned  to
their  quarters,  fully  determined  to  renew  the  attack  on  the  morrow,  and  to  gain  the  place
by  capitulation  or  storm.

“During  the  night,  the  inhabitants  held  a meeting,  and  said:  ‘ We  are  mad,  thus  to
suffer  ourselves  to  be  killed  and  wounded  for  nothing.  Why  do  not  we  act  like  the  other
towns  which  have  surrendered  ? They  have  yielded  themselves  up  to  the  duke  of  Lancaster
and  the  lady  Constance,  daughter  to  king  don  Pedro,  on  condition  that,  if  the  rest  of  the
towns  in  Spain  acknowledge  him  for  king,  they  will  do  the  same  : in  which  they  have  acted
wisely,  for  they  have  remained  unmolested.’  ‘ In  God’s  name,’  said  others,  ‘ wo  wanted  to


190


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


do  so,  but  our  bailiff  persuaded  us  to  the  contrary,  for  which  he  has  paid  severely ; for  there
is  a great  chance  if  he  will  ever  recover  from  the  wound  in  his  head.’  ‘ Let  us  go,’  said
some,  ‘ and  speak  with  him,  and  ask  how  we  had  best  act  now  ; for  the  English  will
certainly  return  to-morrow,  and  conquer  us  by  fair  or  foul  means.’  This  proposition  was
adopted,  and  twelve  of  the  principal  townsmen  went  to  the  bailiff’s  house,  whose  name  was,
I believe,  Diantale  de  Leon.  They  found  him  lying  on  a couch,  his  wound  having  been  just
dressed  ; and,  as  it  had  so  lately  happened,  he  did  not  suffer  much  from  it,  and  made  good
cheer  to  those  among  them  whom  he  knew,  and  had  come  to  see  him.  lie  inquired  how
the  attack  had  been  carried  on,  and  if  they  had  well  defended  themselves.  They  said, —
‘ Tolerably  well ; and,  thanks  to  God,  no  one,  excepting  himself,  of  any  consequence,  had
been  hurt ; but  to-morrow  will  be  the  day,  for  we  are  assured  we  shall  be  very  hard  pushed ;
and  such  ignorant  and  simple  persons  as  ourselves  will  never  be  able  to  withstand  their
attacks.  We  therefore  come  to  you  for  advice  how  to  act.  The  English  menace  us
greatly ; and,  should  they  win  the  place  by  storm,  they  will  put  all  to  the  sword,  and
plunder  the  town.’


Attack  on  the  Fortifications  of  Pontfvedra.  Composed  from  Harleian  MS.,  4425,  and  MS.  Froissart

of  the  J5th  century.

“ ‘ In  the  name  of  God,’  replied  Diantale  de  Leon,  ‘ you  can  never  be  blamed  for  surren-
dering ; but  treat  prudently,  and  manage  by  all  means  to  avoid  being  taken  by  storm.
Offer  to  put  yourselves  under  the  obedience  of  the  duke  and  duchess  of  Lancaster  on  the
same  terms  with  those  of  Corunna,  for  no  Englishman  ever  entered  that  town.  They  sent
out  to  them  provisions  for  money ; and,  if  you  will  follow  my  advice,  you  will  do  the  same.
I believe  they  will  be  glad  to  accept  your  submission,  for  there  are  many  other  towns  in
Galicia  to  conquer,  and  they  will  not  hold  out  for  trifles.’  ‘ You  say  well,’  replied  the
townsmen,  ‘ and  we  will  do  as  you  advise.’  They  then  left  him,  and  passed  the  night  as
well  as  they  could.  By  sun-rise,  on  the  morrow,  they  had  properly  instructed  seven  of  the
principal  inhabitants,  whom  they  sent  out  of  the  town  to  treat  with  sir  Thomas  Moreaux  :
they  met  him  on  his  march  to  renew  the  attack.  They  cast  themselves  on  their  knees,  and,
having  saluted  him,  said, — ‘ My  lord,  we  are  sent  hither  by  the  inhabitants  of  Pontevedra,
who  offer  to  place  themselves  under  the  obedience  of  the  duke  and  duchess  of  Lancaster,  on


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


1P1

the  same  terms  which  those  of  Corunna  have  obtained.  This  they  have  ordered  11s  to  tell
you,  and  also  that  you  may  have  provision  in  plenty  on  paying  a fair  price.  It  is  the  wish
of  those  who  have  sent  us,  that  you  push  them  no  farther,  and  that  neither  yourself  nor  any
from  you  enter  the  place  armed  and  by  force  ; hut  that  if  you  or  any  others  be  desirous  of
courteously  entering  the  town,  they  shall  he  welcome.’  The  marshal  had  with  him  one  who
understood  perfectly  the  Galician  tongue,  who  repeated  to  him  in  English  all  that  had  been
said.  The  marshal  replied, — ‘ Return  quickly  to  your  town,  and  let  those  who  have  sent
you  come  to  the  barriers.  I will  grant  them  a respite  until  to-morrow  at  sun-rise,  should
we  not  make  a satisfactory  agreement.1  They  promised  to  comply  with  his  command,  and
departed.  When  arrived  at  the  barriers,  they  found  there  the  greater  part  of  the  townsmen
waiting,  to  whom  they  told  all  that  had  passed  between  them  and  the  marshal ; adding,  ‘ The
marshal  will  soon  be  here  himself : therefore,  if  you  do  not  think  yourselves  of  sufficient
consequence  to  parley  with  him,  hasten  those  hither  whom  you  may  wish  for.’

44  As  the  principal  inhabitants  were  at  the  barriers,  they  saw  sir  Thomas  Moreaux,  with
about  forty  lances,  advancing,  who  on  his  arrival  dismounted  and  his  companions  likewise.
He  addressed  them  as  follows  : ‘ You,  the  inhabitants  of  Pontevedra,  have  sent  to  us  seven
of  your  brother  townsmen,  and  persons  in  whom  I am  satisfied  you  have  confidence  : they
have  told  us  that  you  are  willing  to  submit  yourselves  to  the  duke  and  duchess  of  Lancaster,
on  the  same  terms  which  those  of  Corunna  have  obtained,  but  that  you  wish  to  have  no
other  governors  but  yourselves.  Now  tell  me,  I beg  of  you,  what  sovereignty  my  lord  would
have  if  he  had  not  his  own  officers  in  the  town  ? When  you  pleased  you  would  acknowledge
him  for  your  king,  and  when  you  pleased  disavow  him.  Know,  that  it  is  my  intention,  as
well  as  that  of  those  around  me,  to  give  you  a wise,  valiant  and  prudent  governor,  who  will
defend  you  and  do  ample  justice  to  all  alike,  and  I mean  to  thrust  out  the  officers  of  the
king  of  Castille : let  me  hear,  therefore,  if  you  consent  to  these  terms,  for  such  are  our  fixed
resolutions.’  They  requested  leave  to  consult  together,  and  having  done  so,  replied  : ‘ My
lord,  we  have  the  fullest  confidence  in  you,  but  we  are  afraid  of  pillagers  ; for  we  have  for-
merly been  so  ill  treated  by  persons  of  that  description,  when  sir  Bertrand  du  Guesclin  and
the  Bretons  first  came  hither  : they  left  us  not  a rag,  and  we  are  in  dread  of  the  like  hap-
pening again.’  ‘You  need  not,’  said  sir  Thomas,  ‘for  no  pillager  shall  ever  enter  your
town.  You  shall  lose  nothing  by  us  : all  we  want  is  your  obedience.’  This  speech  settled
the  business,  and  sir  Thomas  and  his  company  entered  the  town,  his  army  taking  up  their
quarters  in  tents  and  huts  without  the  walls.  The  inhabitants  sent  them  twenty-four
horse-loads  of  wine,  as  much  bread,  and  poultry  in  abundance  for  the  principal  officers.

“ The  marshal  remained  the  whole  day  in  Pontevedra,  to  arrange  a government  for  the
duke  of  Lancaster.  He  appointed  an  honest  Galician  governor,  who  had  followed  the
duchess  to  England,  with  whom  the  inhabitants  were  satisfied.  On  the  morrow,  he  returned
to  his  army,  and  in  a council  determined  to  march  against  another  town  that  was  rebellious,
called  Yigo,  six  leagues  distant  from  Pontevedra.  They  instantly  began  their  march ; and,
when  within  two  leagues  of  the  place,  they  sent  forward  to  know  if  they  would  surrender,
as  Pontevedra  and  other  towns  had  done,  which,  if  they  refused,  they  might  rest  assured
they  should  be  attacked  in  the  morning.  The  inhabitants  paid  no  attention  to  this  menace,
and  said,  that  they  had  often  had  assaults,  but  had  never  been  the  worse  for  them.  When
this  answer  was  carried  to  the  marshal,  he  swore  by  St.  George  they  should  he  attacked  in
earnest.  4 What ! are  the  scoundrels  so  proud  to  send  me  such  an  answer  ?’  They  passed  the
night  comfortably  with  what  they  had  brought  with  them,  and  on  the  morrow  by  sunrise
were  on  their  march  to  Vigo.  It  was  near  ten  o’clock  when  they  came  before  the  town,  and
each  party  made  preparations  for  the  attack  and  defence.  Vigo,  though  not  a large  town,  is
sufficiently  strong ; and  had  there  been  within  it  some  knights  and  squires,  who  understood
their  profession,  I do  not  believe  the  English  would  have  gained  it  so  easily  as  they  did ; for
the  moment  the  inhabitants  felt  the  arrows  of  the  English  and  saw  many  killed  and  wounded
by  them,  for  they  were  badly  armed,  they  were  panic-struck,  and  said, — 4 Why  do  we  let
ourselves  be  killed  and  wounded  for  the  king  of  Castille  ? We  may  as  well  have  the  duke
of  Lancaster,  who  married  the  daughter  of  don  Pedro,  for  our  king,  as  the  son  of  don  Henry
of  Transtamare.  We  must  know,  that  if  we  be  taken  by  storm,  our  lives  will  be  forfeited


192


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


and  our  town  plundered,  and  there  does  not  seem  succour  coming  to  us  from  any  quarter.
A month  ago,  we  sent  a remonstrance  to  the  king  of  Castille  at  Burgos  on  our  situation,  and
the  peril  we  should  be  in,  if  the  English  marched  hither,  as  we  heard  they  intended  doing.
The  king  indeed  spoke  to  the  French  knights  who  are  with  him  on  the  matter,  but  no  orders
were  given  for  any  men  at  arms  to  be  sent  hither  as  a garrison,  any  more  than  to  other  parts
of  Galicia,  which  plainly  showed  it  was  indifferent  to  the  king  whether  we  were  won  or  not.
He  told  our  envoys  to  return  and  do  as  well  as  they  could.  This  proves  he  does  not  wish
us  to  be  slain,  nor  the  place  taken  by  storm.’

“ On  saying  this,  some  of  the  townsmen  mounted  over  the  gateway,  and  from  a window
made  signs  they  wished  for  a parley,  to  treat  of  peace.  They  were  observed ; and  the
marshal,  going  thither,  asked  what  they  wanted.  They  said ; ‘ Marshal,  order  your  men  to
retire  : we  will  submit  ourselves  to  the  duke  and  duchess  of  Lancaster,  on  the  same  terms
as  those  of  Coruna  and  other  towns  have  obtained ; and  if  you  want  provisions,  you  shall
courteously  have  them  from  us  ; but  we  will  not  suffer  any  one  to  enter  the  town  by  force  of
arms.  This  is  our  proposal,  and  by  this  we  mean  to  abide.’  The  marshal  was  advised  to
answer, — ‘ I agree  to  your  terms;  but  I must  appoint  an  able  governor,  to  counsel  and
defend  you,  should  there  be  any  need  of  it.’  They  answered,  they  would  also  admit  of  this.
Thus  was  the  treaty  concluded  ; and,  on  the  assault  ceasing,  the  army  retreated  from  before
it  into  the  plain.  The  marshal,  sir  Evan  Fitzwarren,  sir  John  Abnurelle  *,  the  lord  de
Pommiers,  and  sir  John  d’Ambreticourt,  entered  the  town  to  refresh  themselves,  where  they
remained  the  whole  day.  Those  without  the  walls  received  bread,  wine,  and  other  provision
from  the  town  in  abundance.

“ After  the  conquest  of  Vigo,  where  the  lords  had  availed  themselves  of  the  opportunity
to  refresh  themselves  at  their  ease,  for  it  is  situated  in  a rich  country,  and  had  nominated  as
governor  an  English  squire  called  Thomas  Albery,  a prudent  and  valiant  man,  to  whom  they
gave  twelve  archers  for  his  defence,  they  marched  from  thence,  skirting  the  mountains  and
borders  of  Castille,  towards  the  large  town  of  Bayona.  When  they  had  advanced  within
two  leagues  of  the  place,  they  halted  and  took  up  their  quarters  for  the  night.  On  the
morrow,  they  dislodged  and  marched  in  battle-array  to  Bayona.  When  near,  they  formed
themselves  into  two  divisions,  and  sent  forward  a herald  to  learn  the  intentions  of  the
inhabitants,  whether  they  would  surrender  without  being  assaulted.  The  herald  had  not
far  to  go ; and,  when  arrived  at  the  barriers,  he  found  plenty  of  common  people  there,  though
badly  armed,  to  whom  he  delivered  his  message  ; for  he  well  understood  their  language,  being
a Portuguese.  His  name  was  Coimbra,  and  attached  to  the  king  of  Portugal.  ‘ Y on  men
of  the  town,’  said  he,  ‘ what  are  your  intentions  ? Will  you  suffer  yourselves  to  be  attacked,
or  will  you  surrender  quietly  to  your  sovereigns,  the  duke  and  duchess  of  Lancaster  ? My
lord  marshal  and  his  companions  send  me  hither  to  know  what  you  mean  to  do.’  Upon
this  they  collected  together  and  began  to  talk  aloud,  saying, — ‘ What  shall  we  do  ? Shall
we  defend  ourselves,  or  surrender?’  An  old  man  who  had  learnt  experience,  from  having
seen  more  than  they  had,  addressed  them, — ‘ My  good  sirs,  in  our  situation  we  must  not
hold  long  councils  ; and  the  English  are  very  courteous  in  thus  allowing  ns  time  to  deliberate.
You  are  aware  that  we  have  not  any  hopes  of  succour;  for  the  king  of  Castille,  who  knows
our  situation  well,  and  has  done  so  since  the  arrival  of  the  duke  and  duchess  at  Coruna,  has
not  provided  any  resources  for  us,  nor  does  he  seem  inclined  so  to  do.  If  we,  therefore,
allow  ourselves  to  be  attacked,  the  town  is  so  large  and  ill  fortified,  we  cannot  guard  the
whole  ; and  the  English  are  subtle  in  war  : they  will  exert  themselves  to  conquer  us,  in  hopes
of  plunder ; for  they  are,  like  all  men  at  arms,  eager  to  enrich  themselves ; and  this  town  is
supposed  to  be  more  rich  than  in  fact  it  is.  I therefore  think  it  most  advisable  that  we
quietly  submit  to  the  duke  and  duchess  of  Lancaster,  and,  by  not  foolishly  resisting,  lose
more,  but  obtain  peace  on  advantageous  terms.  This  is  the  advice  I give  you.’  They
replied,  they  would  follow  it ; and,  as  he  was  a man  of  consideration  in  Bayona,  they
requested  him  to.  answer  the  herald.  ‘ I will  cheerfully  do  so ; but  we  must  give  him  some
money,  which  will  bind  him  to  our  interests,  and  induce  him  to  make  a favourable  report  to
his  lords.'  On  this  he  advanced  to  the  herald,  and  said  : ‘ You  will  return  to  your  lords,  and
* I imagine  tliis  must  be  intended  for  sir  Hugh  lord  Burnel.  See  Dugdale


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


193


assure  them  we  are  willing  to  put  ourselves  under  the  obedience  of  the  duke  and  duchess  of
Lancaster,  in  the  same  manner  other  towns  in  Galicia  have  done,  or  may  do.  Now,  go  and
do  our  business  well,  and  we  will  give  you  twenty  florins.’  The  herald  was  delighted  on
hearing  this  speech,  and  the  promise  of  twenty  florins ; and  said,  4 Where  are  the  florins  ?’
They  were  instantly  paid  down,  and  he  set  off,  gaily,  to  rejoin  the  English  army.

“ The  marshal  and  his  companions,  on  seeing  him  return,  asked  what  news  he  had
brought.  ‘ Do  the  townsmen  mean  to  surrender,  or  wait  the  attack?’  ‘ By  my  faith,
my  lords,’  replied  the  herald,  6 they  have  no  such  intentions.  They  desire  me  to  inform  you,
they  are  willing  to  submit  themselves  to  the  duke  and  duchess,  on  similar  terms  to  those
which  other  towns  have  obtained  ; and  if  you  will  go  thither,  they  will  gladly  receive  you.’
‘ Well,’  said  the  marshal,  ‘ it  is  better  we  thus  gain  the  place  than  by  assault ; for  our  men,
at  least,  will  neither  be  wounded  nor  slain.’  The  marshal  and  his  army  marched  at  a foot’s-
pace  to  the  town,  where  he  dismounted,  and  went  to  the  barrier  and  gate.  There  were
numbers  of  people  assembled,  but  their  whole  armours  were  not  worth  ten  francs,  to  see  the
English  ; and  the  person  who  had  given  the  answer  to  the  herald  was  there  also,  to  conclude  a
treaty.  The  moment  the  herald  perceived  him,  he  said  to  the  marshal, — ‘ My  lord,  speak  to
that  elderly  man  who  is  bowing  to  you,  for  he  has  the  greatest  weight  in  the  place.’  The
marshal  advanced,  and  said, — Now,  what  have  you  to  say?  Will  you  surrender  your-
selves to  my  lord,  the  duke  of  Lancaster,  and  to  his  duchess,  as  to  your  legal  sovereigns?’
‘ Yes,  my  lord,’  replied  the  old  man  : ‘ we  surrender  ourselves  to  you,  and  acknowledge  them
for  our  lords,  as  other  towns  in  Galicia  have  done  ; and,  if  you  and  your  companions  please
to  enter  the  town,  you  are  welcome  ; but  on  condition  that,  should  you  want  provision,  you  do
not  seize  it,  but  loyally  pay  for  whatever  you  may  take.’  ‘ I agree  to  this,’  said  the  marshal  ;
‘ for  we  only  desire  the  love  and  obedience  of  the  country  ; but  you  must  swear,  that  should
the  king  of  Castille  come  in  person,  or  send  hither  any  troops,  you  will  defend  yourselves
boldly  against  him  and  all  his  allies.’  ‘ We  willingly  swear  this ; and  should  he  come
himself,  or  send  any  troops,  we  will  shut  our  gates  against  him  or  them,  and  inform  you  of
it.  Should  you  prove  the  strongest,  we  will  remain  steady  to  your  interest;  for  you  will
never  find  any  deceit  in  us.’  ‘ I am  satisfied,’  answered  the  marshal,  ‘ and  do  not  require
more.  Before  the  expiration  of  the  year,  the  dispute  will  be  decided  ; and  the  crown  of
Castille,  Cordova,  Galicia,  and  Seville,  will  fall  to  the  strongest ; for,  by  the  end  of  August,
there  will  be  such  numbers  of  men  at  arms  in  Castille  as  have  not  been  seen  for  these
hundred  years.’  ‘ Well,  my  lord,’  answered  the  elder,  ‘ let  happen  what  may,  and  the  right
fall  where  it  ought,  we  of  Galicia  venture  to  wait  the  event.’

“ Upon  this,  the  holy  sacrament  was  brought,  and  those  who  governed  the  town  swore
upon  it  to  behave  loyally  and  faithfully,  like  good  subjects,  to  the  duke  and  duchess  of
Lancaster,  and  to  acknowledge  them  as  their  sovereigns,  in  the  same  manner  as  other  towns
had  done.  The  marshal,  in  the  name  of  the  duke  of  Lancaster,  received  them  as  his
subjects,  and  swore  to  defend  and  govern  them  in  peace  and  justice.  When  all  this  had
been  done,  the  barriers  and  gates  were  thrown  open,  when  all  entered  who  chose,  and
lodged  themselves  where  they  could.  They  remained  there  four  days,  to  recruit  themselves
and  horses,  and  also  to  wait  for  fair  weather  ; for,  during  these  four  days,  it  rained
incessantly,  and  the  rivers  were  much  swelled.  There  are,  in  Galicia,  many  rivers  which
are  so  greatly  increased  by  the  mountain-torrents,  that  they  are  very  dangerous  to  pass.
While  waiting  for  a change  in  the  weather,  they  held  a council,  whether  they  should  march
for  Betancos  or  Ribadavia,  which  is  a strong  town,  and  inhabited  by  the  most  insolent  and
treacherous  people  in  all  Galicia.  On  the  fifth  day,  the  English  dislodged  from  Bayona,
and  took  the  field.  The  weather  was  now  temperate,  and  the  rivers,  to  their  great  joy,
reduced  to  their  usual  size.  They  rode  towards  Ribadavia  without  any  opposition  ; and,
as  no  one  came  out  against  them,  they  thought  themselves  lords  of  Galicia.  They  arrived
near  the  town,  with  a large  train  of  baggage,  horses  and  victuallers,  and  encamped  in  a
grove  of  olive  trees  on  a handsome  plain,  about  half  a league  from  the  place.  They  resolved
to  send  a herald  to  parley  with  the  townsmen,  before  they  made  any  preparations  for  the
attack ; for  the  marshal  well  knew  they  were  the  falsest  and  worst  people  in  all  Castille,
VOL.  II.  o


194


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


extensive  as  it  is ; and  that  they  paid  no  regard  to  the  king,  nor  to  any  one  but  themselves,
depending  on  the  strength  of  their  town.

“ The  herald,  before  he  set  out,  was  charged  to  learn  their  intentions  ; but,  when  he  came
to  the  barriers,  he  found  them  and  the  gate  closed.  He  shouted  and  called,  but  received  no
answer  whatever.  lie  saw,  indeed,  several  pass  backwards  and  forwards  on  the  battle-
ments ; but  for  all  he  could  do,  not  one  would  come  and  speak  with  him,  though  he
remained  an  hour  thus  bawling  to  them.  Finding  he  could  not  obtain  a hearing,  he  said  to
himself, — ‘ I fancy  these  men  of  Ribadavia  have  had  some  communication  with  those  of
Bayona,  who  are  vexed  they  should  have  given  me  twenty  florins  for  so  little  trouble,  and
want  to  make  me  here  pay  for  it.  By  holy  Mary  ! I believe  they  wish  to  keep  me  until  it
be  late,  and  then  seize  and  hang  me.’  On  saying  this,  he  remounted  his  horse,  and  returned
to  the  marshal  and  his  army.  On  his  arrival,  he  was  asked  what  news,  and  whether  the
inhabitants  of  Ribadavia  would  surrender  as  the  other  towns  had  done,  or  force  them  to  the
attack  V ‘ By  my  troth,’  replied  the  herald,  ‘ I know  not  what  they  mean  to  do  ; for  they
are  so  proud,  that  though  I bawled  to  them  for  an  hour,  they  never  deigned  to  give  me  any
answer.’  Sir  John  Burned  then  said,  ‘Blast  thou  seen  no  one?  Perhaps  they  are  fled,
and  have  left  their  town  for  fear  of  us.’  ‘ Fled  !’  replied  the  herald  : ‘ begging  your  pardon,
my  lord,  they  disdain  to  do  such  a thing  as  fly ; and  before  you  conquer  them,  they  will
give  you  more  plague  than  all  the  other  towns  in  Galicia  together.  Know  that  there  are
plenty  of  men  within  it ; for  I saw  them  when  I called  out  “ Listen  to  me,  listen  to  me  !
I am  a herald,  whom  my  lord  marshal  has  sent  hither  to  parley  and  treat  with  you  but
they  gave  me  no  answer,  only  staring  at  me,  and  bursting  out  in  laughter.’  ‘ Ah,  the
insolent  scoundrels!’  said  the  marshal:  ‘by  St.  George,  they  shall  be  well  punished  for
this ; and,  unless  my  lord  of  Lancaster  shall  order  otherwise,  never  will  I quit  this  place
until  I have  reduced  it  under  his  obedience.  Let  us  now  eat  and  chink  to  refresh
ourselves,  and  then  march  to  the  assault ; for  I will  see  this  town  nearer,  and  what  is  its
strength,  that  makes  the  scoundrels  thus  insolent,  and  induces  them  to  hold  us  so  cheap.’

“ When  they  had  finished  their  repast,  they  mounted  their  horses,  and,  with  trumpets
sounding,  rode  gently  on,  for  the  weather  was  as  sweet  as  in  the  month  of  May.  On
coming  before  the  place,  some  knights  and  squires,  to  make  a display,  galloped  up  to  the
barriers,  where  they  found  a large  body  of  cross-bowmen  drawn  up  in  front  of  the  gate,
who,  by  their  shooting,  killed  and  wounded  many  horses.  The  archers  then  advanced,  and,
posting  themselves  on  the  banks  of  the  ditch,  and  at  the  barriers,  attacked  the  cross-
bowmen. The  assault  was  severe,  and  lasted  a considerable  time  ; for  the  town  was
tolerably  strong,  and  difficult  to  be  conquered.  One  side  is  situated  on  a perpendicular
rock,  impossible  to  be  mounted  : the  other,  indeed,  is  on  the  plain,  but  surrounded  by  wide
ditches,  which,  though  not  filled  with  water,  cannot  easily  be  crossed.  The  knights  and
squires,  however,  did  cross  them,  and  ascended  the  banks  to  the  walls,  with  targets  on  their
heads,  to  defend  themselves  from  the  arrows,  or  whatever  might  be  thrown  down  from  the
battlements.  The  archers  shot  so  well,  that  scarcely  any  dared  show  themselves  ; and  this
attack  was  long  continued,  many  on  each  side  being  killed  or  wounded.  Towards  evening,
it  ceased,  on  the  trumpets  sounding  the  retreat ; and  the  English  returned  to  their  camp,
where  they  made  themselves  comfortable,  and  attended  to  their  wounded.  Thierry  de
Soumain  was  so  badly  wounded  in  the  arm,  at  the  barriers,  by  a bolt  from  a cross-bow,
that  it  was  necessary  to  have  it  forced  through  the  arm  : he  was  upwards  of  a month
unable  to  use  it,  and  obliged  to  bear  it  in  a scarf.

“ While  the  marshal  of  the  duke  of  Lancaster’s  army  was  thus  overrunning  and  turning
Galicia  to  his  interest,  the  duke  and  duchess,  with  their  children,  resided  quietly  at  Saint
Jago.  They  heard  frequently  from  the  king  of  Portugal,  as  a continual  intercourse  was
kept  up  between  them  on  their  mutual  affairs.  King  John  of  Castille  held  his  court  at
Yalladolid,  attended  by  the  French  knights,  whom  he  frequently  consulted  on  the  state  of
his  kingdom  ; for  he  was  perfectly  acquainted  with  everything  that  was  passing  around
him.  He  said  to  them, — ‘ My  fair  sirs,  I greatly  marvel  that  no  succour  comes  to  me
from  France,  to  assist  me  in  my  distress ; for  my  country  will  be  lost,  if  no  reinforcements
arrive  to  prevent  it.  The  English  keep  the  field;  and  I know  for  truth,  that  the  duke


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  & c.


195


of  Lancaster  and  king  of  Portugal  have  had  an  interview,  and  that  the  last  is  to  marry  one
of  the  duke’s  daughters,  for  she  has  been  betrothed  to  him  ; and,  as  soon  as  this  marriage
shall  have  taken  place,  you  will  sec  them  unite  together  and  enter  my  kingdom,  and,  when
united,  they  will  prove  too  much  for  me.’  The  French  knights,  to  comfort  him,  replied,
‘Do  not  be  uneasy:  if  the  English  gain  on  one  side  they  lose  on  another.  We  have
certain  intelligence,  that  the  king  of  France,  with  upwards  of  an  hundred  thousand  armed
men,  has  at  this  moment  invaded  England,  to  conquer  and  destroy  that  whole  country.
When  that  shall  be  accomplished,  and  England  reduced  to  a state  of  subjection  from  whence
it  can  never  rise,  the  king  of  France  and  his  army  will  embark  on  board  their  navy,  which
is  so  considerable,  and  disembark  during  the  course  of  the  summer  at  Corunna.  He  will
re-conquer  in  one  month  more  than  you  have  lost  during  the  year,  and  surround  the  duke
of  Lancaster  in  such  manner  that  you  will  see  him  fly  to  Portugal.  Thus  will  you  be
revenged  of  your  enemies ; for  be  assured,  that  if  France  were  not  at  this  moment  occupied
with  the  conquest  of  England,  you  would  have  had,  some  time  since,  three  or  four  thousand
lances  from  thence.  The  king  of  France,  his  uncles  and  council,  have  a great  affection  for
you,  and  are  very  anxious  to  put  an  end  to  your  war.  Never  mind  if  the  English  keep  the
field,  and  borrow  from  you  a little  of  your  kingdom  : before  St.  John’s  day  shall  come,  they
will  be  forced  to  restore  the  whole  of  it  back  to  you.’

“ Such  were  the  conversations  that  frequently  passed  at  Valladolid  between  the  king  of
Castille  and  his  council,  with  the  French  knights.  The  king,  having  such  an  opinion  of
them,  believed  all  they  said,  and  took  comfort.  They  indeed  thought  what  they  had
said  was  truth  ; for  they  concluded  the  king  of  France  had  invaded  England,  according  to
the  rumours  spread  throughout  Castille.  You  must  know  that  the  duke  of  Lancaster  did
not  hear  from  his  people  one  quarter  of  what  was  told  them  by  pilgrims  and  merchants
from  Flanders ; and,  though  the  king  of  Portugal  wrote  frequently  to  inquire  after  the
duke’s  health,  these  rumours  prevented  him  from  hastening  his  preparations,  and  from
demanding  the  lady  Philippa  for  his  queen.  His  council  said,  that  as  all  the  intelligence
from  France  and  Flanders  agreed  England  to  be  in  a most  perilous  state  of  being  destroyed,
neither  the  alliance  nor  marriage  with  the  duke  of  Lancaster  or  his  daughter  would  be  of

o > o

any  advantage  to  him,  and  that  he  should  dissemble  his  thoughts,  but  still  preserve  an
outward  appearance  of  great  affection  to  the  duke  and  duchess,  by  letters  and  otherwise,
until  he  should  see  what  turn  affairs  would  take.”

We  will  now  for  a while  leave  speaking  of  Spain  and  Portugal,  and  return  to  France.


CHAPTER  XLII. THE  KING  OF  FRANCE  GOES  TO  LILLE,  WITH  THE  INTENT  TO  INVADE

ENGLAND. SIR  SIMON  BURLEY  ADVISES  THE  REMOVAL  OF  THE  SHRINE  OF  ST.  THOMAS

A BECKET  FROM  CANTERBURY  TO  DOVER  CASTLE,  FOR  FE^R  OF  THE  FRENCH.

At  this  period,  (1386,)  the  number  of  ships,  galleys,  and  vessels  of  every  description,
which  had  been  collected  to  carry  over  to  England  the  king  of  France  and  his  army,  were
so  great,  that  the  oldest  man  then  living  had  never  seen  nor  heard  of  the  like.  Knights
and  squires  were  arming  on  all  sides,  and,  when  they  quitted  their  homes,  they  said, — “ We
will  invade  these  cursed  English,  who  have  done  such  mischief  to  France,  and  now  avenge
ourselves  for  the  losses  they  have  caused  us  by  the  death  of  our  fathers,  brothers,  or  friends.”
It  was  twelve  weeks  before  all  the  purveyances  of  the  different  lords  were  ready  and
embarked,  so  grandly  had  they  provided  themselves.  The  report  was  kept  up  for  some
time  in  Flanders,  that  the  king  would  be  there  on  the  morrow,  to  hasten  them.  Men  were
continually  arriving  from  Gascony,  Armagnac,  the  Toulousain,  Bigorre,  Comminges,
Auvergne,  Berry,  Limousin,  Poitou,  Anjou,  Maine,  Brittany,  Touraine,  Blois,  Orleans,
Beauce,  Normandy,  Picardy,  and  from  every  province  in  France,  who  quartered  themselves
in  Flanders  and  Artois.

When  the  middle  of  August  came,  which  was  the  time  fixed  on  for  the  invasion  taking
place,  in  order  the  more  to  hasten  those  from  the  distant  parts  of  the  realm  ; and,  to  show
that  the  king  was  in  earnest  to  embark,  he  took  leave  of  queen  Blanche,  the  duchess  of

o 2


196


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


Orleans,  and  the  other  princesses.  He  heard  a solemn  mass  in  the  church  of  Notre  Dame
at  Paris,  and  it  was  his  intention,  when  he  should  quit  Paris,  never  to  re-enter  it  until  he
had  landed  in  England ; and  of  this  all  the  principal  cities  and  towns  were  persuaded.
The  king  of  France  went  to  Senlis,  whither  he  was  accompanied  by  his  queen  : the  duke  of
Berry  was  in  Berry,  though  Iris  purveyances  were  collecting  in  Flanders  and  at  Sluys,  like
the  others.  The  duke  of  Burgundy  was  also  in  his  own  country,  but  he  bade  adieu  to  his
duchess  and  children,  and  set  off  for  Flanders,  meaning  to  take  leave  of  his  aunt,  the
duchess  of  Brabant,  in  his  way  thither.  On  his  departure  from  Burgundy,  he  travelled  in
great  pomp  and  magnificence,  attended  by  the  admiral  of  France  and  the  lord  Guy  de  la
Trimouille,  unto  Brussels,  where  the  duchess  and  her  ladies  received  him  and  his  company
with  great  joy.  Lie  tarried  there  two  days,  and  then  went  to  Mons  in  Hainault,  where  he
found  his  daughter  madame  d’Ostrevant,  duke  Albert,  and  his  son  the  lord  William  of
Hainault,  count  d’Ostrevant,  who  entertained  them  handsomely,  and  conducted  the  duke  to
Valenciennes,  where  he  was  lodged  in  the  apartments  of  the  count,  and  duke  Albert  at  the
hotel  of  Vicongneras.  The  duke  of  Burgundy,  on  leaving  Valenciennes,  went  to  Douay
and  Arras,  where  the  duchess  was  waiting  for  him.  From  Senlis  the  king  of  France  came
to  Compiegne,  Noyon,  Peronne,  Bapaume,  and  Arras  ; and  there  were  such  numbers  of
men  at  arms  pouring  into  those  countries  from  all  quarters,  that  everything  was  destroyed
or  devoured  without  a farthing  being  paid  for  anything.  The  poor  farmers,  who  had  filled
their  barns  with  grain,  had  only  the  straw,  and,  if  they  complained,  were  beaten  or  killed.
The  fish-ponds  were  drained  of  fish,  and  the  houses  pulled  down  for  firing,  so  that  if  the
English  had  been  there,  they  could  not  have  committed  greater  waste  than  this  French  army
did.  They  said,  “ We  have  not  at  present  any  money,  but  shall  have  enough  on  our  return,
when  we  will  pay  for  all.”  The  farmers,  not  daring  to  speak  out,  cursed  them  inwardly,  on
seeing  them  seize  what  was  intended  for  their  families ; and  said,  “ Go,  go  to  England,  and
may  never  a soul  of  you  come  back

The  king  of  France  arrived  at  Lille,  with  his  two  uncles  of  Burgundy  and  Bourbon;  but
the  duke  of  Berry  still  remained  behind,  in  his  own  country,  arranging  his  affairs.  With
the  king  were  the  duke  of  Bar,  the  duke  of  Lorraine,  the  count  d’Armagnac,  the  count  de
Savoye,  the  count  dauphin  d’ Auvergne,  the  count  de  Geneve,  the  count  de  St.  Pol,  the
count  d’Eu,  the  count  de  Longueville,  the  lord  de  Coucy,  sir  William  de  Namur,  and  so
many  of  the  great  lords  of  France  that  I can  never  name  them.  It  was  said  that  twenty
thousand  knights  and  squires  were  to  embark  for  England,  which  was  indeed  a goodly
company,  with  about  the  same  number  of  cross-bows,  including  the  Genoese,  and  twenty
thousand  stout  varlets.

Sir  Oliver  de  Clisson  was  still  in  Brittany  making  his  preparations,  and  equipping  his
fleet  at  the  port  of  Treguier,  from  whence  he  intended  to  embark  his  wooden  town,  that
was  to  be  put  together,  and  erected  on  his  landing  in  England,  as  you  have  before  heard.
The  flower  of  Breton  chivalry  was  to  accompany  the  constable,  such  as  the  viscount  de
Rohan,  the  lords  de  Rays,  de  Beaumanoir,  de  Laval,  de  Rochefort,  de  Malestroit,  the
viscount  de  Combor,  sir  John  de  Malestroit,  the  lord  de  Dinant,  the  lord  d’Ancenis,  and  five
hundred  spears,  all  picked  men.  The  constable  had  always  declared,  that  no  one  ought  to
be  employed  on  this  expedition  if  he  were  not  a good  man  at  arms  and  such  as  could  be
depended  on.  He  had  said  to  the  admiral, — “ Be  careful  not  to  suffer  any  boys  or  servants
to  embark  on  board  the  fleet,  for  they  will  do  us  more  harm  than  good.”  And  the  knights,
unless  they  were  of  high  rank,  or  had  hired  vessels  for  themselves,  were  not  allowed  to  take
with  them  more  than  one  horse  and  one  servant.  To  say  the  truth,  their  arrangements
were  very  well  made : and  it  was  the  opinion  of  many,  that  if  the  army  could  have  been
landed  together  at  the  place  they  had  fixed  on  in  Orwell  bay,  the  whole  country  would  have
been  thrown  into  confusion.  Indeed,  I believe  there  was  little  doubt  of  it ; for  the  great
lords,  such  as  prelates,  abbots,  and  rich  citizens,  were  panic-struck,  but  the  commonalty  and
poorer  sort  held  it  very  cheap.  Such  knights  and  squires  as  were  not  rich,  but  eager  for
renown,  were  delighted,  and  said  to  each  other, — “ Lord,  what  fine  times  are  coming,  since
the  king  of  France  intends  to  visit  us ! He  is  a valiant  king  and  of  great  enterprise : there
has  not  been  such  a one  in  France  these  three  hundred  years.  He  will  make  his  people


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


197


good  men  at  arms  ; and  blessed  may  he  be  for  thinking  to  invade  us ; for  certainly  we  shall
be  all  slain  or  made  powerfully  rich  : one  or  other  must  happen.”

If  the  preparations  for  this  invasion  were  great  in  France,  those  in  England,  for  its
defence,  were  not  less  so,  as  I have  before  mentioned,  and  will  therefore  slightly  return  to  it.
The  taxes  in  England  were  equally  heavy  witli  those  in  France;  but  though  they  were
very  oppressive,  the  common  people  said  they  ought  not  to  complain,  for  they  were  raised
for  the  defence  of  the  country,  and  paid  to  knights  and  squires  to  guard  their  lands,  and
they  were  their  labourers,  who  provided  them  with  food,  and  the  sheep  from  whom  they
took  the  wool ; but,  if  England  should  be  conquered,  they  would  be  the  greatest  losers.
No  one  was  exempted  from  the  payment  of  these  taxes,  so  that  two  millions  of  florins  were
raised  for  the  defence  of  the  country,  and  paid  into  the  hands  of  the  archbishop  of  York,
the  earl  of  Oxford,  sir  Nicholas  Bramber,  sir  Michael  de  la  Pole,  sir  Simon  Burley,  sir  Peter
Gouloufre,  sir  Robert  Tresilian,  sir  John  Beauchamp,  sir  John  Salisbury,  and  others  of  the
king’s  privy  council,  who  were  appointed  receivers  and  paymasters  of  the  above  sum,  for
the  king’s  uncles  were  not  consulted  in  the  business.  They  would  not  interfere,  nor  by  so
doing  throw  the  kingdom  into  trouble,  but  exerted  themselves  to  the  utmost  in  putting  all
the  coast  in  a good  state  of  defence  ; for  they  most  assuredly  thought  the  king  of  France
would  attempt  to  land  his  army  in  England  during  the  course  of  the  summer.  The  before-
named  receivers  did  in  the  king’s  name  as  they  thought  proper  in  respect  to  this  tax ; but
the  earl  of  Oxford  was  the  most  active,  and  made  the  greatest  advantage  of  it.  Everything
was  done  by  him,  and  without  his  consent  nothing;  for  which,  when  this  alarm  was  over,
the  people  were  much  dissatisfied,  and  wTanted  to  know  what  had  become  of  the  large  sums
that  had  been  raised ; and  the  principal  cities  and  towns,  urged  on  by  the  king’s  uncles,
would  have  an  account  how  they  had  been  disbursed,  as  I will  relate  in  proper  time  and
place,  for  I wish  not  that  anything  should  be  forgotten  in  this  history.

Sir  Simon  Burley  was  governor  of  Dover  castle,  and,  from  his  situation,  received  frequent
intelligence  from  France  by  the  fishermen  of  the  town,  who  related  to  him  what  they  heard
from  the  French  fishermen,  as  they  were  often  obliged  to  adventure  as  far  as  Wissan  or
Boulogne  to  obtain  good  fish.  When  the  fishermen  from  France  met  them  at  sea,  they  told
them  enough,  and  more  than  they  knew ; for,  though  there  were  wars  between  France  and
England,  they  were  never  interrupted  in  their  pursuits,  nor  attacked  each  other,  but,  on  the
contrary,  gave  mutual  assistance,  and  bought  or  sold,  according  as  either  had  more  fish
than  they  were  in  want  of ; for,  if  they  were  to  meddle  in  the  national  quarrels,  there  would
be  no  fishing,  and  none  would  attempt  it  unless  supported  by  men  at  arms.  Sir  Simon
learnt  from  the  fishermen  that  the  king  of  France  was  absolutely  determined  on  the  invasion  ;
that  he  intended  to  land  one  division  at  or  near  Dover,  and  another  at  Sandwich,  and  that
his  forces  were  immense.  He,  as  well  as  the  rest  of  England,  believed  all  this  was  true ;
and  one  day  he  set  out  for  Canterbury  to  visit  the  abbey,  which  is  very  large  and  handsome  ;
near  it  is  Christ-church,  which  is  also  rich  and  powerful.

The  abbot  inquired,  “ What  news?”  and  sir  Simon  told  him  all  he  knew,  adding,  “that
the  shrine  of  St.  Thomas,  so  respectable  and  rich,  was  not  safe  in  Canterbury,  for  the  town
was  not  strong*  ; and  if  the  French  should  come,  some  of  the  pillagers,  through  avarice,
would  make  for  Canterbury,  which  they  would  plunder,  as  well  as  your  abbey,  and  make
particular  inquiries  after  the  shrine,  and  will  take  it  away,  to  your  great  loss.  I would
therefore  advise,  that  you  have  it  carried  to  Dover  castle,  where  it  will  be  perfectly  safe,
though  all  England  were  lost.”  The  abbot  and  all  the  convent  were  so  much  angered  at
this  speech,  though  meant  well,  that  they  replied, — “ How  ! sir  Simon,  would  you  wish  to
despoil  this  church  of  its  jewel  ? If  you  are  afraid  yourself,  gain  courage,  and  shut  yourself
up  in  your  castle  of  Dover,  for  the  French  will  not  be  bold  enough,  nor  in  sufficient  force,
to  adventure  themselves  so  far.”  This  was  the  only  answer  he  had  ; but  sir  Simon  persisted
so  long  in  his  proposition,  that  the  common  people  grew  discontented,  and  held  him  for  an
ill-inclined  person,  which,  as  I shall  relate,  they  afterwards  showed  more  plainly.  Sir  Simon
made  but  a short  stay  and  returned  to  Dover.

* The  walls  of  Canterbury  were  much  out  of  repair;  and  there  is  an  order  now  existing  for  their  reparation,  from
the  court  of  Chancery,  in  the  19th  year  of  Richard  II. — Hastecl’s  Kent.


193


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


CHAPTER  XLIII. THE  KING  OF  FRANCE  VISITS  HIS  FLEET  AT  SLFYS. THE  KING  OF

ARMENIA  CROSSES  TO  ENGLAND,  TO  ATTEMPT  A RECONCILIATION  BETWEEN  THE  TWO
KINGS. THE  ANSWER  HE  RECEIVES.

The  king  of  France,  to  show  his  impatience  for  the  invasion  and  his  dislike  of  being  at
too  great  a distance,  came  to  Sluvs.  The  report  was  now  daily  current  in  Flanders  and
Artois,  “ The  king  will  embark  Saturday,  Tuesday,  or  Thursday.”  Every  day  of  the
week  they  said,  “ He  will  embark  to-morrow,  or  the  day  after.”  The  duke  of  Touraine  *,
the  king’s  brother,  the  bishop  of  Beauvais,  chancellor,  and  other  great  lords,  had  taken  leave
of  the  king  at  Lille,  and  returned  to  Paris.  I believe,  indeed  it  was  assured  me  for  fact,
that  the  duke  was  appointed  regent  during  the  king’s  absence,  in  conjunction  with  the  count
de  Blois  and  other  principal  barons,  who  had  not  been  ordered  on  the  invasion.  The  duke
of  Berry  was  still  behind,  though  he  was  advancing  slowly,  for  he  had  no  great  desire  to
go  to  England.  The  king  of  France  and  duke  of  Burgundy  were  much  vexed  at  his  delay,
and  wished  his  arrival : however,  the  embarkation  of  stores  continued  at  a vast  expense  to
the  great  lords  ; for  what  was  worth  only  one  franc  they  were  made  to  pay  four ; and  those
who  were  hoping  speedily  to  cross  over  valued  not  their  money  in  making  preparations,
but  seemed  desirous  to  rival  each  other  in  expense.


General  View  of  Sluvs.- — From  an  old  plan,  in  Flandria  Illustrata,  by  Ant.  Sanderus.


It  the  principal  lords  were  well  paid,  those  of  inferior  rank  suffered  for  it,  as  there  was  a
month  s pay  due  to  them,  for  which  the  paymaster  of  the  forces  was  unwilling  to  account;
and  he  and  the  clerks  of  the  treasury  told  them  to  wait  another  week,  and  they  should  be
satisfied.  Thus  were  they  put  off  from  week  to  week  ; and  when  they  made  them  any
payments,  it  was  only  for  eight  days,  when  eight  weeks  were  due.  Some,  who  were  so
treated,  became  melancholy,  and  said  the  expedition  would  never  succeed  ; and  foreseeing
what  would  happen,  whenever  they  could  amass  any  money,  like  wise  men,  set  out  on  their
return  home.  The  poor  knights  and  squires,  who  were  not  retainers  on  the  great  lords,
had  expended  their  all ; for  everything  was  so  dear  in  Flanders,  they  had  difficulty  in

* Louis,  count  of  Valois,  the  king's  brother,  did  not  enjoy  the  title  of  duke  of  Touraine  till  the  return  of  this
fruitless  expedition.  He  was  afterwards  created  duke  of  Orleans. — Ed.


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &e.


191)


procuring  bread  or  wine.  If  they  wished  to  pawn  their  wages  or  arms,  they  could  not
obtain  a farthing  for  what,  when  new,  had  cost  them  large  sums.  There  were  such  crowds
at  Bruges,  Damme,  Ardembourg,  and  particularly  at  Sluys,  when  the  king  arrived,  that  it
was  difficult  to  find  any  lodgings.

The  lords  de  St.  Pol,  de  Coucy,  d’Antoing,  and  the  dauphin  of  Auvergne,  with  other
barons  from  France,  remained  at  Bruges,  to  he  more  at  their  ease,  and  every  now  and  then
rode  over  to  Sluys,  to  inquire  from  the  king  when  they  were  to  embark.  They  were  told,
within  three  or  four  days  ; or  wdicn  the  duke  of  Berry  should  arrive,  or  when  the  wind  was
favourable.  There  was  always  some  delay  ; hut  the  time  passed,  and  the  days  became
shorter  and  cold,  with  had  weather.  Many  of  the  lords  were  discontented  they  were  so
long  in  embarking,  for  their  provision  would  he  spoiled.

While  they  were  waiting  for  the  duke  of  Berry  and  the  constable,  the  king  of  Armenia,
who  resided  in  France,  on  a pension  from  the  king  of  six  thousand  francs,  desirous  to  make
a journey  to  England,  in  hopes  of  bringing  about  a peace,  or  at  least  a truce  between  the
two  kings,  left  his  hotel  of  St.  Ouen,  near  St.  Denis,  and,  with  few  attendants,  travelled  to
Boulogne,  where  he  hired  a vessel,  and,  having  a favourable  wind,  landed  at  Dover.  lie
found  there  the  earls  of  Cambridge  and  Buckingham,  with  a hundred  men  at  arms  and  two
thousand  archers  to  guard  the  place ; for  the  rumour  ran,  that  the  French  intended  landing
there,  or  at  Sandwich.  At  this  last  place  were  the  earls  of  Arundel  and  Northumberland.
At  Orwell,  the  earls  of  Oxford,  Pembroke,  and  Nottingham,  and  sir  Reginald  Cobham,
with  three  thousand  infantry.  The  king  and  part  of  his  council  remained  in  London,  where
he  had  intelligence  daily  from  the  different  ports.  The  king  of  Armenia,  on  his  arrival  at
Dover,  was  very  well  received,  and  conducted  by  some  knights  to  the  uncles  of  the  king,
who  entertained  him  handsomely,  as  they  knew  well  how  to  do.  At  a proper  opportunity
they  asked  him  whither  he  came,  and  what  were  the  reasons  of  his  visiting  England.  To
these  questions  he  answered,  that,  in  hopes  of  doing  good,  he  had  come  to  wait  on  the  king
of  England  and  his  council,  to  see  if,  by  any  means,  he  could  negotiate  a peace  between  him
and  the  king  of  France.  “ For  this  war,”  added  the  king  of  Armenia,  “ is  not  very
becoming  between  them  : the  long  continuance  of  it  has  greatly  emboldened  and  raised  tho
pride  of  the  Turks  and  Saracens.  No  one  now  makes  any  opposition  to  them  ; and  this
has  been  the  cause  why  I have  lost  my  crown  and  kingdom ; nor  have  I any  chance  of
recovering  them,  until  a firm  peace  be  established  in  Christendom.  I would  willingly
explain  this  matter,  which  so  nearly  touches  every  true  Christian,  to  the  king  of  England,
as  I have  done  to  the  king  of  France.”

The  English  lords  asked  him,  “ if  the  king  of  France  had  sent  him  ?”  He  said, — “ No
one  had  sent  him  : that  he  had  come  of  his  own  accord,  and  solely  with  a view  to  do  good,
to  see  the  king  of  England  and  his  council,  and  to  try  if  they  would  listen  to  terms  of
peace.”  They  then  asked  “ where  the  king  of  France  was.”  “ I believe  he  is  now  at
Sluys ; but  I have  not  seen  him  since  I took  my  leave  of  him  at  Senlis.”  “ How  can  you
then  think  of  forming  a treaty,  when  you  have  not  been  so  charged  by  him  ? Should  you
enter  into  any  terms  with  the  king,  our  nephew,  and  his  council,  and  the  king  of  France,  in
the  mean  time,  sail  from  Sluys,  and  disembark  bis  large  army  in  England,  you  would  be
much  blamed,  and  your  person  run  great  risks  from  the  people.”  The  king  of  Armenia
replied, — “ I have  the  greatest  confidence  in  the  king  of  France,  to  whom  I have  sent
messengers  to  entreat  he  would  neither  embark  nor  put  to  sea  until  I be  returned  to  Sluys ;
and  1 am  convinced  he  is  so  noble  and  considerate,  that  he  will  comply  with  my  request.  I
therefore  beg  of  you,  through  pity  and  love  of  goodness,  to  procure  me  an  interview  with
the  king  of  England,  that  I may  speak  to  him,  for  I desire  greatly  to  see  him ; or  if  you,
who  are  his  uncles,  and  the  most  powerful  of  his  subjects,  be  authorised  to  give  me  answers
to  my  demands,  I hope  that  you  will  instantly  do  so.”  Thomas,  earl  of  Buckingham,
said, — “ King  of  Armenia,  we  are  solely  ordered  here  by  the  king  and  his  council,  to  guard
and  defend  the  frontiers,  and  we  do  not  any  way  concern  ourselves  with  the  government  of
the  realm,  unless  we  be  specially  commanded  by  him.  Since  motives  of  goodness,  or  the
appearance  of  them,  have  brought  you  hither,  you  are  welcome ; but  you  must  not  expect
to  receive  from  us  any  definitive  answers  to  such  demands  as  you  may  make ; and,  though
we  are  not  now  of  the  king’s  council,  we  will  have  you  conducted  to  London  without  danger


200


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE.  &c.


or  expense.”  The  king  of  Armenia  replied,  “ That  he  greatly  thanked  them,  and  wished
for  nothing:  more  than  to  see  and  converse  with  the  king'  of  England.”

After  having  refreshed  himself  for  one  day  at  Dover,  and  held  many  conversations  with
the  king’s  uncles,  he  set  off,  well  escorted,  to  protect  him  on  the  road.  He  continued  his
journey  until  he  arrived  at  London,  where  he  was  much  stared  at  by  the  Londoners : the
better  sort,  however,  showed  him  every  honour  and  respect.  Having  fixed  on  his  lodgings,
at  a proper  time  and  hour  he  waited  on  the  king,  who  resided  in  a private  manner  at  the
wardrobe ; but  his  council  were  in  London,  each  at  his  own  house  ; for  the  Londoners  were
so  panic-struck,  they  thought  of  nothing  but  how  to  fortify  their  town.  When  the  arrival
of  the  king  of  Armenia  was  publicly  known,  the  king’s  council  assembled  at  the  wardrobe
to  learn  the  news,  and  what  could  have  brought  that  king,  at  this  time  of  trouble  and
alarm,  to  England.  The  king  of  Armenia  entered  the  presence-chamber,  and  the  two  kings
having  mutually  saluted  each  other,  the  king  of  Armenia  began  his  speech,  by  declaring,
the  causes  for  his  coming  were  principally  to  see  the  king  of  England,  which  he  had  never
before  done ; that  he  was  much  gratified  in  being  in  his  presence,  from  which  he  flattered
himself  good  would  arise ; and  also  to  attempt  to  avert  the  great  pestilence  that  was  ready
to  befal  England : not  that  either  the  king  of  France  or  his  council  had  sent  him  thither,
for  he  was  come  of  his  own  free  will,  to  endeavour  to  make  a peace  or  a truce  between  the
two  crowns.  He  paid  many  compliments  both  to  the  king  and  to  his  council.  He  was
briefly  answered  as  follows : “ Sir  king,  you  are  welcome  to  this  country,  for  our  king  and
selves  are  glad  to  see  you.  We  must  inform  you,  that  the  king  has  not  all  his  council  at
this  moment  with  him,  but  they  will  shortly  assemble,  as  he  had  summoned  them,  and  you
shall  then  have  an  answer.”

The  king  of  Armenia  was  contented  with  this,  took  his  leave,  and  returned  to  the  house
where  he  was  lodged.  Within  four  days,  the  king  was  advised  what  answer  to  make : I
believe  he  consulted  his  uncles  on  the  subject,  but  they  were  not  present  when  it  was  given.
The  king  went  to  Westminster,  where  his  council  was  assembled,  and  thither  the  king  of
Armenia  was  invited.  When  in  the  presence,  the  king  of  England  was  seated,  according
to  custom,  then  the  king  of  Armenia  and  the  prelates  and  lords  of  the  council.  The  king  of
Armenia  was  desired  to  repeat  what  he  had  before  told  the  king  and  a part  of  his  council.  He
did  so  in  an  elegant  harangue,  showing  how  Christendom  was  too  much  weakened  by  the
destructive  wars  of  France  and  England,  and  that  the  knights  and  squires  of  the  two  countries
thought  of  nothing  but  joining  one  party  or  other  : by  which  the  empire  of  Constantinople
would  be  destroyed,  where  formerly  the  gentlemen  of  France  and  England  used  to  take
pleasure  in  seeking  deeds  of  arms,  and  that  his  own  kingdom  was  already  lost.  He
therefore  entreated,  through  the  love  of  God,  they  would  listen  to  some  terms  of  peace
between  the  two  kings.  The  archbishop  of  Canterbury,  who  had  beforehand  been  ordered
by  the  king  and  council  to  deliver  the  answer,  replied : “ King  of  Armenia,  it  is  not  usual,
nor  has  it  ever  been  admitted,  that  in  such  weighty  matters  as  are  now  in  dispute  between
the  king  of  England  and  his  adversary  of  France,  the  king  of  England  should  have  requests
made  him,  with  an  army  ready  to  invade  his  country.  I will  therefore  declare  our  opinion,
that  yoi i return  to  the  French  army,  and  prevail  on  them  to  retreat  to  France ; and,  when
we  shall  be  fully  assured  that  every  man  has  retired  to  his  home,  do  you  return  hither,  and
we  will  then  pay  attention  to  any  treaty  you  shall  propose.”

This  was  the  answer  the  king  of  Armenia  received.  He  dined  that  day  with  the  king,
who  paid  him  every  possible  honour,  and  offered  him  handsome  presents  of  gold  and  silver ;
but  he  refused  them  all,  though  he  had  need  of  them,  and  would  only  accept  a single  ring,
worth  one  hundred  francs.  After  the  dinner,  which  was  splendid  and  good,  he  returned  to
his  lodging's,  for  he  had  received  his  answer,  and  on  the  morrow  set  out  for  Dover,  making
two  days’  journey  of  it.  He  there  took  leave  of  the  English  lords,  and  embarked  on  board
a passage-boat  to  Calais,  whence  he  went  to  Sluys.  He  related  to  the  king  of  France  and
his  uncles  the  journey  he  had  made  to  England,  and  what  answer  he  had  received : but  the
king  and  his  lords  paid  no  attention  to  it,  and  sent  him  to  France ; for  they  were  resolved
to  sail  the  first  fair  wind  for  England,  after  the  arrival  of  the  duke  of  Berry  and  the
constable.  Hitherto  the  wind  had  been  unfavourable  : it  would  never  have  served  them  to
land  in  those  parts  they  intended  to  attempt,  but  was  very  fair  to  carry  them  to  Scotland


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


20J


CHAPTER  XL1V. THE  DUKE  OF  BERRY  LEAVES  PARIS  FOR  SLUYS. THE  CONSTABLE,  AFTER

SUFFERING  MANY  DELAYS  FROM  CONTRARY  WINDS,  AT  LENGTH  JOINS  THE  KING  OF
FRANCE.

The  duke  of  Berry  arrived  at  Paris,  and,  after  hearing  mass  at  the  church  of  Notre
Dame,  took  Iris  leave,  making  it  to  be  understood  that  he  would  never  return  until  he  had
been  in  England,  although  his  intentions  were  quite  the  contrary ; for,  as  the  season  was  so
far  advanced,  he  had  no  desire  to  undertake  it.  On  his  road,  he  daily  received  letters  and
messengers  from  the  king  and  the  duke  of  Burgundy,  to  hasten  him,  and  to  say  they  were
only  waiting  for  his  coming  to  embark.  The  duke  of  Berry  continued  his  march,  though
by  short  days’ journeys.  The  constable  of  France  embarked  at  Treguier,  a town  on  tbe
sea-coast  of  Brittany,  with  a fine  body  of  men  at  arms,  and  ample  purveyances  on  board
seventy-two  large  vessels.  Some  of  them  were  freighted  with  the  wooden  town  that  was
to  be  erected  on  their  landing  in  England.  The  constable  had  a favourable  wind  when  he
left  the  harbour  : but,  when  he  approached  the  English  coast,  it  became  contrary,  and  the
farther  they  advanced  the  more  violent  it  blew.  When  opposite  to  Margate  at  the  mouth
of  the  Thames,  the  storm  was  so  violent,  it  dispersed  the  fleet,  whether  the  mariners  would
or  not,  and  there  were  not  twenty  sail  together.  Some  were  blown  into  the  Thames,  where
they  were  captured  by  the  English  ; and  among  them  was  one  that  had  two  or  three  parts
of  the  wooden  town  on  board,  and  the  workmen  who  were  to  erect  it.  They  and  the  town
were  sent  to  London,  which  much  pleased  the  king  and  the  citizens.  Seven  other  vessels  of
the  fleet,  laden  with  stores  and  provision,  were  driven  on  the  coast  of  Zealand,  and  seized ;
but  the  constable  and  his  lords,  with  much  difficulty,  arrived  at  Sluys,  where  they  were
joyfully  received  by  the  king  and  his  barons.  The  moment  the  king  saw  the  constable,  he
said, — “ Constable,  what  say  you  ? when  shall  we  sail  ? I have  for  certain  a great  desire  to
see  England.  I therefore  pray  you  to  hasten  the  business,  and  that  we  embark  as  speedily
as  possible.  My  uncle  Berry  will  be  here  instantly,  for  he  is  now  at  Lille.”  “ Sire,”  replied
the  constable,  “ we  cannot  sail  until  the  wind  be  favourable.  This  south  wind,  which  is
completely  against  us,  has  blown  so  long,  that  the  sailors  say  they  have  never  seen  it  so
constant  in  one  point  as  it  has  been  for  these  two  months.”

“ Constable,”  said  the  king,  “ on  my  faith,  I have  been  on  board  my  ship.  I like  the
sea  much,  and  I believe  I shall  be  a good  sailor,  for  I was  not  in  the  least  sick.”  “ In  the
name  of  God,”  answered  the  constable,  “ it  was  not  so  with  me,  for  we  were  in  great
danger  in  our  voyage  from  Brittany  hither.”  The  king  would  know  how,  and  in  what
manner,  which  the  constable  related  to  him,  adding,  “ By  ill  fortune  and  the  storm
which  blew  from  the  English  coast,  we  have  lost  our  men  and  vessels,  for  which  I am
exceedingly  sorry ; and  if  I could  make  up  their  loss  I would,  but  at  this  moment  it  is  not
possible.”


CHAPTER  XLV. THE  LORD  DE  GUISTELLES  APPEASES  AN  INSURRECTION  OF  THE  MEN  OF

BRUGES  AGAINST  THE  FRENCH.  — THE  INVASION  OF  ENGLAND  IS  GIVEN  UP,  ON
ACCOUNT  OF  CONTRARY  WINDS,  THE  NEAR  APPROACH  OF  WINTER,  AND  IN  CON-
FORMITY WITH  THE  ADVICE  OF  THE  DUKE  OF  BERRY,  WHICH  CAUSES  GREAT
REJOICINGS  IN  ENGLAND.

While  the  king  of  France  and  his  constable  were  thus  conversing  and  arranging  different
matters,  winter  was  begun,  and  the  lords  and  army  lay  exposed  to  the  cold,  and  to  some
danger ; for  the  Flemings  wished  them  away,  more  especially  the  lower  sorts.  They  said,
when  among  themselves,  “ Why  the  devil  does  not  the  king  free  us  from  them,  by  passing
over  to  England  ? Are  we  not  sufficiently  poor  without  these  Frenchmen  adding  to  it  ?”
Others  answered,  “ You  will  not  see  them  cross  over  this  year.  They  think  they  shall
instantly  conquer  England ; but  it  will  not  be  so  : it  is  not  so  easy  a matter,  for  the  English
are  made  of  other  stuff  than  the  French.  What  can  they  do  to  England?  When  the


202


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


English  invaded  France,  they  shut  themselves  up  in  their  castles  and  strong  towns,  and  fled
before  them  like  larks  before  a sparrow-hawk.”

It  was  more  particularly  in  Bruges,  where  the  greater  resort  of  the  French  was,  that  the
discontents  were  the  highest ; and  the  smallest  trifle  was  suflicient  to  set  them  by  the  ears.
At  length  it  became  serious,  and  was  begun  by  a few  French  varlets,  who  had  beaten  and
wounded  some  of  the  Flemings  : the  artificers  then  rose,  and,  having  armed  themselves,
assembled  in  the  market-place.  Not  one  French  knight  or  squire  would  have  escaped
death  ; for  many  of  the  Flemings  had  not  forgotten  the  battle  of  Rosebecque,  and  were
eager  to  revenge  themselves  for  their  fathers,  brothers,  or  friends  who  had  been  there  slain  ;
but  God,  providentially  for  the  French,  sent  thither  the  lord  de  Guistelles.  When  he  learnt
that  the  common  people  were  arming  themselves,  and  that  others  were  running  to  their
houses  to  do  the  same,  he  saw  the  town  would  be  infallibly  ruined : he  therefore  mounted
his  horse,  attended  by  no  more  than  four  or  five  others,  and  rode  up  and  down  the  streets ;
and,  whenever  he  met  any  of  the  townsmen  armed  going  towards  the  market-place,  he  said
to  them, — ‘ My  good  people,  what  are  you  about  ? whither  are  you  going  ? Would  you
ruin  yourselves  ? have  you  not  had  enough  of  war  ? are  you  not  every  day  prevented  from
following  your  trades?  You  may  so  act  as  to  cause  the  complete  destruction  of  Bruges;
for  do  you  not  know  that  the  king  of  France  is  now  in  the  neighbourhood  with  his  whole
army  ?”  Thus  did  the  lord  de  Guistelles  by  his  kind  speeches  calm  them,  and  make  them
return  to  their  homes ; but  this  would  not  have  been  so  easily  done,  had  he  not  fortunately
b°en  in  Bruges.  The  barons  and  knights  of  France  were  so  much  alarmed,  they  had  shut
themselves  up  in  their  quarters  to  wait  the  event.

On  the  arrival  of  the  duke  of  Berry  at  Sluys,  the  king  said  to  him, — “ Ha,  ha,  fair  uncle,
though  I was  so  anxious  to  see  you,  you  have  been  long  in  coming : why  have  you  made
such  delay,  when  we  ought  to  have  been  at  this  moment  in  England,  where  we  should  have
combated  our  enemies  ?”  The  duke  laughed  and  made  his  excuses  for  the  delay,  but  did  not
at  first  deliver  his  real  sentiments  : he  wished  to  examine  the  state  of  the  purveyances  and
the  fleet,  which  made  so  beautiful  a show  in  the  road  that  it  was  delightful  to  see  it.  He
had  been  at  Sluys  for  more  than  seven  days,  and  it  was  daily  rumoured  they  were  to  sail  on
the  morrow  ; but  in  truth  the  wind  was  quite  contrary  to  sailing  for  England.  As  it  was
now  St.  Andrew’s  tide,  the  weather  was  hazy  ; and  you  may  judge  if  this  were  a fit  season
for  so  many  noble  persons  to  put  to  sea  as  were  now  waiting  to  embark  at  Sluys,  whose
stores  and  provision  were  on  board.  Some  of  the  young  princes  of  the  blood-royal,  with  a
desire  to  display  tlieir  courage,  had  indeed  made  a few  cruises  near  the  harbour,  saying,  that
they  would  be  the  first  to  land  in  England,  should  none  others  venture  thither.  In  this
number  were  sir  Robert  and  sir  Philip  d’ Artois,  sir  Henry  de  Bar,  sir  Peter  de  Navarre,  sir
Peter  d’Albreth,  sir  Bernard  d’Armagnac,  with  many  more.  These  young  lords,  having
once  begun,  were  so  impatient  to  sail  in  earnest,  that  a council  was  held,  in  the  presence
of  the  king,  to  determine  how  they  should  proceed.  The  duke  of  Berry  broke  up  the  whole;
and  gave  such  well-grounded  reasons,  that  the  greater  part  of  those  who  were  the  most
forward  to  embark  were  discouraged  ; and  said  it  would  be  folly  and  madness  to  advise  the
king,  who  was  then  but  a child,  to  put  to  sea  in  such  weather,  and  to  make  war  on  a people
and  country,  whose  roads  no  one  was  acquainted  with,  and  a country  which  was  likewise
disadvantageous  for  warlike  exploits.  “ Now,  suppose,”  said  the  duke  of  Berry,  “ we  were
all  landed  in  England,  we  cannot  fight  the  English  unless  they  like  it,  and  we  dare  not  leave
our  purveyances  behind,  for  whoever  should  do  so  would  lose  the  whole.  But  if  any  one
wished  to  make  this  voyage,  though  of  no  great  length,  he  would  do  it  in  the  middle  of
summer,  and  not  in  the  heart  of  winter.  Summon  all  the  sailors  who  are  here,  and  they
will  tell  you  that  what  I say  is  true ; and  that,  notwithstanding  the  very  numerous  fleet
we  have  collected,  should  we  put  to  sea,  of  the  fifteen  hundred  sail,  there  would  never  be
three  hundred  together,  or  within  sight.  Now,  consider  what  risks  we  may  run  ; but  I do
not  say  this  out  of  any  desire  to  be  excused  from  being  of  the  pai’ty  myself,  but  solely  as  I
believe  it  sound  sense,  and  that  the  council,  and  the  majority  of  France,  are  of  my  way  of
thinking.  I am  willing,  brother  of  Burgundy,  that  you  and  I undertake  this  expedition,
but  I will  never  advise  the  king  to  do  so ; for,  should  any  accident  happen  to  him,  the


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


203


whole  hlame  would  be  laid  on  us  for  having  consented  to  it.”  “ In  God’s  name,”  replied  the
king  of  France,  “ I am  resolved  to  go,  should  no  one  follow  me.”  The  lords  laughed,  and
said  the  king  has  a strong  inclination  to  embark.

It  was  determined  in  this  council,  that  the  invasion  should  be  deferred  to  April  or  May  ;
and  that  what  stores  could  be  preserved,  such  as  biscuit,  salted  meat,  and  wine,  should  be
put  in  warehouses  : and  regulations  were  made  for  the  men  at  arms  to  return  to  Sluys  in
the  month  of  March.  All  this  was  soon  known  ; and  thus  was  the  grand  expedition  broken
up,  which  had  cost  France  one  hundred  thousand  francs,  thirty  times  told.  The  council  had
ordered  that  the  king  should  return  to  France,  and  the  different  lords  to  their  homes ; that
all  things  should  remain  on  the  same  footing  on  which  they  then  rested  until  the  spring,
when  every  one  should  be  prepared  to  obey  the  king’s  summons,  and  commence  their  voyage
under  more  fortunate  auspices  than  at  this  moment.  It  would  have  surprised  any  one  to
have  seen  the  rage  of  the  knights  and  squires  on  hearing  these  orders  : more  especially  those
who  had  come  from  distant  parts,  and  had  expended  all  their  money,  in  the  hope  of  amply
repaying  themselves  in  England.  Among  them  were  the  count  de  Savoye,  the  count
d’Armagnac,  the  count  dauphin  d’ Auvergne,  and  a hundred  great  barons,  who  departed
much  discontented  at  not  having  seen  England.  The  king  was  equally  vexed,  but  he  could
not  amend  it.  The  army  now  separated,  some  pleased  and  others  angry  ; but  the  servants
of  the  principal  lords  staid  behind,  for  the  benefit  of  their  masters,  and  to  sell  off  their  stores:
in  this,  great  losses  accrued ; for  what  had  cost  one  hundred  francs  was  disposed  of  for  ten,
and  even  under.  The  count  dauphin  d'Auvergne  assured  me  on  his  faith,  that  for  his  stores,
which  had  cost  him  ten  thousand  francs,  he  did  not  receive  one  thousand  when  resold : his
servants,  like  those  of  others,  suffered  every  thing  to  go  to  ruin.

When  news  of  this  reached  England,  those  who  were  afraid  of  the  French  coming  were
greatly  rejoiced ; while  others  were  sorry,  for  they  expected  to  have  made  themselves  rich
from  them.  A grand  feast  was  given  in  the  city  of  London  to  all  who  had  been  appointed
to  guard  the  different  harbours.  The  king  kept  his  Christmas,  in  a solemn  manner,  at
Westminster,  and  there  created  three  dukes  ; first,  the  earl  of  Cambridge,  duke  of  York  ;
his  brother,  the  earl  of  Buckingham,  duke  of  Gloucester ; the  earl  of  Oxford,  duke  of
Ireland*.  These  feasts  were  long  and  magnificently  continued,  and  the  people  of  England
thought  they  had  escaped  from  great  danger  ; but  others,  who  had  not  the  same  alarms,  said,
that  the  army  and  navy,  which  had  been  so  pompously  collected  at  Sluys,  were  only  to
frighten  England,  and  force  the  duke  of  Lancaster  to  return  from  Galicia,  where  he  was
conquering  towns  and  castles  at  his  pleasure.


CHAPTER  XLVI. TWO  CHAMPIONS  TILT  AT  PARIS,  FOR  LIFE  OR  DF.ATH.

About  this  period,  there  was  much  conversation  in  France  respecting  a duel  which  was  to
be  fought,  for  life  or  death,  at  Paris.  It  had  been  thus  ordered  byT  the  parliament  of  Paris,
wdiere  the  cause,  which  had  lasted  a year,  had  been  tried,  between  a squire  called  James  le
Gris  and  John  de  Carogne,  both  of  them  of  the  household  of  Peter,  count  d’Alencon,  and
esteemed  by  him  ; but  more  particularly  James  le  Gris,  whom  he  loved  above  all  others,
and  placed  his  whole  confidence  in  him.  As  this  duel  made  so  great  a noise,  many  from
distant  parts,  on  hearing  of  it,  came  to  Paris  to  be  spectators.  I will  relate  the  cause,  as  I
was  then  informed.

It  chanced  that  sir  John  de  Carogne  took  it  into  his  head  he  should  gain  glory  if  he
undertook  a voyage  to  the  Holy  Land,  having  long  had  an  inclination  to  go  thither.  He
took  leave  of  his  lord,  the  count  d’Alens;on,  and  of  his  wife,  who  was  then  a young  and
handsome  lady,  and  left  her  in  his  castle,  called  Argenteil,  on  the  borders  of  Perche,  and
began  his  journey  towards  the  sea-side.  The  lady  remained,  with,  her  household,  in  this
castle,  living  in  the  most  decent  manner.  Now  it  happened  (this  is  the  matter  of  quarrel)


* Robert  de  Vere,  earl  of  Oxford,  was  created  marquis  cf  Dublin  in  1385  and  duke  of  Ireland  in  138C.— Er».


204


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


that  the  devil,  by  divers, and  perverse  temptations,  entered  the  body  of  James  le  Gris,  and
induced  him  to  commit  a crime,  for  which  he  afterwards  paid.  He  cast  his  thoughts  on
the  lady  of  sir  John  de  Carogne,  whom  he  knew  to  be  residing  with  her  attendants,  at  the
castle  of  Argenteil.  One  day,  therefore,  he  set  out,  mounted  on  the  finest  horse  of  the
count,  and  arrived,  full  gallop,  at  Argenteil,  where  he  dismounted.  The  servants  made  a
handsome  entertainment  for  him,  because  they  knew  he  was  a particular  friend,  and  attached
to  the  same  lord  as  their  master ; and  the  lady,  thinking  no  ill,  received  him  with  pleasure,
led  him  to  her  apartment,  and  shewed  him  many  of  her  works.  James,  fully  intent  to
accomplish  his  wickedness,  begged  of  her  to  conduct  him  to  the  dungeon,  for  that  his  visit
was  partly  to  examine  it.  The  lady  instantly  complied,  and  led  him  thither ; for,  as  she
had  the  utmost  confidence  in  his  honour,  she  was  not  accompanied  by  valet  or  chambermaid.
As  soon  as  they  had  entered  the  dungeon,  J ames  le  Gris  fastened  the  door  unnoticed  by  the
lady,  who  was  before  him,  thinking  it  might  have  been  the  wind,  as  he  gave  her  to
understand.

When  they  were  thus  alone,  James  embraced  her,  and  discovered  what  his  intentions
were  : the  lady  was  much  astonished,  and  would  willingly  have  escaped  had  she  been  able,
but  the  door  was  fastened ; and  James,  who  was  a strong  man,  held  her  tight  in  his  arms,
and  flung  her  down  on  the  floor,  and  had  his  will  of  her.  Immediately  afterward,  he
opened  the  door  of  the  dungeon,  and  made  himself  ready  to  depart.  The  lady,  exasperated
with  rage  at  what  had  passed,  remained  silent,  in  tears ; but,  on  his  departure,  she  said  to
him, — “ James,  James,  you  have  not  done  well  in  thus  deflowering  me  : the  blame,  how-
ever, shall  not  be  mine,  but  the  whole  be  laid  on  you,  if  it  please  God  my  husband  ever
return.”  James  mounted  his  horse,  and,  quitting  the  castle,  hastened  back  to  his  lord,  the
count  d’Alemjon,  in  time  to  attend  his  rising  at  nine  o’clock  : he  had  been  seen  in  the  hotel
of  the  count  at  four  o’clock  that  morning.  I am  thus  particular,  because  all  these  circum-
stances were  inquired  into,  and  examined  by  the  commissioners  of  the  parliament,  when  the
cause  was  before  them.

The  lady  de  Carogne,  on  the  day  this  unfortunate  event  befel  her,  remained  in  her  castle,
and  passed  it  off  as  well  as  she  could,  without  mentioning  one  word  of  it  to  either  chamber-
maid or  valet,  for  she  thought  by  making  it  public  she  would  have  more  shame  than
honour ; but  she  retained  in  her  memory  the  day  and  hour  James  le  Gris  had  come  to  the
castle.  The  lord  de  Carogne  returned  from  his  voyage,  and  was  joyfully  received  by  his
lady  and  household,  who  feasted  him  well.  When  night  came,  sir  John  went  to  bed,  but  his
lady  excused  herself ; and,  on  his  kindly  pressing  her  to  come  to  him,  she  walked  very
pensively  up  and  down  the  chamber.  At  last,  when  the  household  were  in  bed,  she  flung
herself  on  her  knees  at  his  bedside,  and  bitterly  bewailed  the  insult  she  had  suffered.  The
knight  would  not  believe  it  could  have  happened ; but  at  length,  she  urged  it  so  strongly,
he  did  believe  her,  and  said, — “ Certainly,  lady,  if  the  matter  has  passed  as  you  say,  I
forgive  you,  but  the  squire  shall  die ; and  I shall  consult  your  and  my  relations  on  the
subject:  should  you  have  told  me  a falsehood,  never  more  shall  you  live  with  me.”  The
lady  again  and  again  assured  him,  that  what  she  had  said  was  the  pure  truth.

On  the  morrow,  the  knight  sent  special  messengers  with  letters  to  his  friends  and  nearest
relations  of  his  wife,  desiring  them  to  come  instantly  to  Argenteil,  so  that  in  a few  days
they  were  all  at  his  castle.  When  they  were  assembled,  he  led  them  into  an  apartment,
and  told  them  the  reasons  of  his  sending  for  them,  and  made  his  lady  relate  most  minutely
everything  that  had  passed  during  his  absence.  When  they  had  recovered  their  astonish-
ment, h.e  asked  their  advice  how  to  act : they  said,  he  should  wait  on  his  lord,  the  count
d’Alengon,  and  tell  him  the  fact.  This  he  did  ; but  the  count,  who  much  loved  James  le
Gris,  disbelieved  it,  and  appointed  a day  for  the  parties  to  come  before  him,  and  desired  the
lady  might  attend  to  give  her  evidence  against  the  man  whom  she  thus  accused.  She
attended  as  desired,  accompanied  by  a great  number  of  her  relations ; and  the  examinations
and  pleadings  were  carried  on  before  the  count  to  a great  length.  James  le  Gris  boldly
denied  the  charge,  declared  it  was  false,  and  wondered  much  how  he  could  have  incurred
such  mortal  hatred  from  the  lady.  He  proved  by  the  household  of  the  count,  that  he  had  been


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  & c.


205


seen  in  the  castle  at  four  o’clock  in  the  morning : the  count  said,  that  he  was  in  his  bed-
chamber at  nine  o’clock,  and  that  it  was  quite  impossible  for  any  one  to  have  ridden  three-
and-twenty  leagues  and  back  again,  and  do  what  he  was  charged  with,  in  four  hours  and  a
half.  The  count  told  the  lady  he  would  support  his  squire,  and  that  she  must  have  dreamed
it.  He  commanded,  that  henceforward  all  should  be  buried  in  oblivion,  and,  under  pain  of
incurring  his  displeasure,  nothing  farther  done  in  the  business.  The  knight,  being  a man
of  courage,  and  believing  what  his  wife  had  told  him,  would  not  submit  to  this,  but  went  to
Paris  and  appealed  to  the  parliament.  The  parliament  summoned  James  le  Gris,  who  replied,
and  gave  pledges  to  obey  whatever  judgment  the  parliament  should  give.  The  cause  lasted
upwards  of  a year,  and  they  could  not  any  way  compromise  it,  for  the  knight  was  positive,
from  his  wife’s  information,  of  the  fact,  and  declared,  that  since  it  was  now  so  public,  he
would  pursue  it  until  death.  The’ count  d’Alemjon,  for  this,  conceived  a great  hatred
against  the  knight,  and  would  have  had  him  put  to  death,  had  he  not  placed  himself  under
the  safeguard  of  the  parliament.  It  was  long  pleaded,  and  the  parliament  at  last,  because
they  could  not  produce  other  evidence  than  herself  against  James  le  Gris,  judged  it  should
be  decided  in  the  tilt-yard,  by  a duel  for  life  or  death.  The  knight,  the  squire,  and  the  lady,
were  instantly  put  under  arrest  until  the  day  of  this  mortal  combat,  which,  by  order  of
parliament,  was  fixed  for  the  ensuing  Monday,  in  the  year  1387  j at  which  time  the  king  of
France  and  his  barons  were  at  Sluys,  intending  to  invade  England.

The  king,  on  hearing  of  this  duel,  declared  he  would  be  present  at  it.  The  dukes  of
Berry,  Burgundy,  Bourbon,  and  the  constable  of  France,  being  also  desirous  of  seeing  it,
agreed  it  was  proper  he  should  be  there.  The  king,  in  consequence,  sent  orders  to  Paris  to
prolong  the  day  of  the  duel,  for  that  he  would  be  present.  This  order  was  punctually
obeyed,  and  the  king  and  his  lords  departed  for  France.  The  king  kept  the  feast  of  the
Calends  at  Arras,  and  the  duke  of  Burgundy  at  Lille.  In  the  mean  time,  the  men  at
arms  made  for  their  different  homes,  as  had  been  ordered  by  the  marshals  ; but  the  principal
chiefs  went  to  Paris,  to  witness  the  combat.  When  the  king  of  France  was  returned  to
Paris,  lists  were  made  for  the  champions  in  the  place  of  St.  Catherine,  behind  the  Temple  ;
and  the  lords  had  erected  on  one  side  scaffolds,  the  better  to  see  the  sight.  The  crowd  of
people  was  wonderful.  The  two  champions  entered  the  lists  armed  at  all  points,  and  each
was  seated  in  a chair  opposite  the  other  ; the  count  de  St.  Pol  directed  sir  John  de
Carogne,  and  the  retainers  of  the  count  d’Alencjon  James  le  Gris.  On  the  knight  entering
the  field,  he  went  to  his  lady,  who  was  covered  with  black  and  seated  on  a chair,  and  said, —
“ Lady,  from  your  accusation,  and  in  your  quarrel,  am  I thus  adventuring  my  life  to  combat
James  le  Gris  : you  know  whether  my  cause  be  loyal  and  true.”  “ My  lord,”  she  replied
“ it  is  so  ; and  you  may  fight  securely,  for  your  cause  is  good.”

The  lady  remained  seated,  making  fervent  prayers  to  God  and  the  Virgin,  entreating
humbly,  that  through  her  grace  and  intercession,  she  might  gain  the  victory  according  to
her  right.  Her  affliction  was  great,  for  her  life  depended  on  the  event ; and,  should  her
husband  lose  the  victory,  she  would  have  been  burnt,  and  he  would  have  been  hanged.  I
am  ignorant,  for  I never  had  any  conversation  with  her  or  the  knight,  whether  she  had  not
frequently  repented  of  having  pushed  matters  so  far  as  to  place  herself  and  husband  in  such
peril ; but  it  was  now  too  late,  and  she  must  abide  the  even-t.  The  two  champions  were
then  advanced,  and  placed  opposite  to  each  other ; when  they  mounted  their  horses,  and
made  a handsome  appearance,  for  they  were  both  expert  men  at  arms.  They  ran  their  first
course  without  hurt  to  either.  After  the  tilting,  they  dismounted,  and  made  ready  to
continue  the  fight.  They  behaved  with  courage  ; but  sir  John  de  Carogne  was,  at  the  first
onset,  wounded  in  the  thigh,  which  alarmed  all  his  friends : notwithstanding  this,  he  fought
so  desperately  that  he  struck  down  his  adversary,  and,  thrusting  his  sword  through  the
body,  caused  instant  death  ; •when  he  demanded  of  the  spectators  if  he  had  done  his  duty  :
they  replied  that  he  had.  The  body  of  James  le  Gris  was  delivered  to  the  hangman,  who
dragged  it  to  Montfaucon,  and  there  hanged  it.  Sir  John  de  Carogne  approached  the  king
and  fell  on  his  knees  : the  king  made  him  rise,  and  ordered  one  thousand  francs  to  be  paid
him  that  very  day  : he  also  retained  him  of  his  household,  with  a pension  of  two  hundred
livres  a-year,  which  he  received  as  long  as  he  lived.  Sir  John,  after  thanking  the  king  and


206


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


his  lords,  went  to  his  lady  and  kissed  her : they  went  together  to  make  their  offering  in  the
church  of  Notre  Dame,  and  then  returned  to  their  home.*

Sir  John  de  Carogne  did  not  remain  long  after  in  France,  hut  set  off,  in  company  with
the  lord  Boucicaut,  sir  John  des  Bordes,  and  Sir  Lewis  Grat,  to  visit  the  holy  sepulchre,
and  the  sultan  of  the  Turks,  whose  fame  was  much  talked  of  in  France.  Sir  Robinet  de
Boulogne  was  also  with  him : he  was  squire  of  honour  to  the  king  of  France,  and  had
travelled  much  over  the  world.


CHAPTER  XLVII. THE  DEATH  OF  PETER,  KING  OF  ARRAGON. HIS  SUCCESSOR,  KING  JOHN,

DETAINS  PRISONER  THE  ARCHBISHOP  OF  BORDEAUX,  WHO  WAS  NEGOTIATING,  FOR  THE
DUKE  OF  LANCASTER,  THE  PAYMENT  OF  CERTAIN  SUMS  WHICH  HE  CLAIMED  AS  DUE
TO  HIM  FROM  ARRAGON.

About  Candlemas  of  this  year,  (1387,)  king  Peter  of  Arragon  lay  on  his  death-bed.
When  he  found  there  were  no  hopes  of  his  recovery,  he  sent  for  his  two  sons,  John  and
Martin, f to  whom  he  said, — “ My  fair  children,  I leave  you  well  established,  and  the  affairs
of  my  kingdom  properly  arranged.  Live  peaceably  and  lovingly  and  you  will  gain  honour
and  renown.  With  regard  to  ecclesiastical  matters,  for  my  conscience’  sake  and  greater
safety,  I have  always  been  neuter  : do  you  do  the  same,  until  the  knowledge,  which  pope
is  the  true  one,  shall  be  more  apparent.”

His  two  sons  dutifully  replied,  that  they  would  do  so,  and  punctually  obey  whatever  he
should  order.  The  king  died  soon  after.);  lie  was  a valiant  man  in  his  time,  and  had
considerably  added  to  the  crown  of  Arragon  by  the  conquest  of  Majorca,  which  he  kept.  He
was  buried  in  the  city  of  Barcelona,  and  there  lies.  When  the  death  of  the  king  of  Arragon
was  known  at  Avignon,  the  pope  and  cardinals  instantly  sent  off  letters  to  the  king  of
France,  his  uncles,  and  to  the  duke  and  duchess  of  Bar,  who  were  his  supporters  and
parents  to  the  young  queen  of  Arragon,  the  lady  Jolante,  § and  to  the  queen  herself,  and
were  so  busy,  that  the  whole  court  of  Arragon  acknowledged  him  as  pope.  The  duke  and
duchess  of  Bar  wrote  pressing  letters  to  their  daughter,  as  did  the  king  of  France,  the
dukes  of  Berry  and  Burgundy,  who  sent  a cardinal  as  ambassador,  to  instruct  the  new
king,  his  brother,  and  subjects.  The  cardinal,  with  the  assistance  of  the  queen,  who  paid
too  much  attention  to  what  her  relations  had  urged,  gained  over  the  king,  who  had  before
determined  to  follow  the  example  of  his  father  in  preserving  a neutrality,  and  the  whole
kingdom  to  the  obedience  of  pope  Clement.

At  the  time  of  the  late  king  of  Arragon's  death,  the  archbishop  of  Bordeaux  was  at
Barcelona.  lie  had  been  sent  thither  by  the  duke  of  Lancaster,  and  I will  explain  the
cause  of  his  journey.  The  late  prince  of  Wales  (who,  though  only  duke  of  Aquitaine,  was
much  feared  by  his  neighbours,  the  kings  of  France,  Arragon,  Castille  and  Navarre,  and
even  by  the  king  of  the  Saracens,  who  had  heard  of  his  great  prowess  and  renown)  had
entered  into  a treaty  with  the  king  of  Arragon,  which  had  been  sworn  to,  and  sealed  br-
each party,  as  well  as  by  the  king  of  England,  that  neither  the  prince  nor  the  king  of
England,  nor  their  successors,  would  ever  wage  war  against  Arragon,  so  long  as  the  king  of
Arragon  and  his  heirs  should  serve  the  lord  of  Aquitaine  with  five  hundred  spears,  against
any  enemy  with  whom  lie  was  at  war  ; and  that,  if  he  chose  not  to  send  his  men,  he  bound
himself  to  pay  a certain  sum  of  money.  Ten  years  of  arrears  were  now  due  from  Arragon  :
for  the  king  had  never  paid  anything,  nor  done  any  service  to  the  king  of  England  nor  to

* This  was  the  last  judicial  combat  which  took  place  J Martin  was  king  of  Sicily,  and  on  the  death  of  John,
in  France  under  the  award  of  parliament.  The  combat  killed  by  a fall  from  his  horse  in  pursuing  an  enormous
was  claimed  in  England  a3  late  as  1819,  by  one  Thornton,  wolf,  succeeded  to  the  crown  of  Arragon.  John  did  not
This  man  was  tried  for  murder,  and  acquitted.  The  follow  his  father’s  counsels  with  respect  to  the  disputed
brother  of  the  person  murdered  (a  young  girl)  brought  an  tiara,  but  acknowledged  Clement  VII. — Art  de  Verifier
appeal,  and  Thornton  offered  to  justify  himself  by  single  les  Dates.

combat.  The  appellant,  however,  withdrew  his  appeal,  J The  Sth  January,  1387. — Ed.

and  an  act  was  immediately  passed  to  abolish  the  wager  § The  Lady  Jolante  was  his  second  wife.  He  was  first

of  battle. — Ed.  married  to  Jane,  daughter  of  John,  count  d’Armagnac.


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


207


his  deputies.  When  the  duke  of  Lancaster  left  England,  he  brought  with  him  letters-
patent,  sealed  with  the  great  seal  of  the  realm,  in  the  presence  of  the  king  and  his  council,
appointing  him  lieutenant,  for  the  king,  over  all  the  countries  of  Bordeaux,  Bayonne,  and
Aquitaine,  giving  him  regal  power  to  demand  whatever  might  be  owing  from  Arragon,  and
from  all  other  parts  dependant  or  allied  to  England.  They  also  gave  the  duke  power  to
retain,  for  his  own  use,  whatever  sums  might  be  due,  and  to  give  receipts,  which  would  he
acknowledged  as  legal.

While  the  duke  was  at  Saint  Jago,  he  bethought  himself  of  the  king  of  Arragon,  and  that
he  was  indebted  to  him  a very  large  sum  of  arrears,  by  virtue  of  his  commission,  and  that
it  would  come  now,  with  other  aids,  very  opportunely,  to  carry  on  his  war  against  Castille.
During  his  residence  at  Saint  Jago,  he  sent  some  of  his  council  to  Bordeaux,  to  the  arch-
bishop, and  sir  John  Harpedon,  the  seneschal,  ordering  one  or  both  of  them  to  set  out  for
Arragon,  and  remonstrate  strongly  with  the  king,  on  the  large  sums  he  had  long  owed
the  king  of  England,  as  duke  of  Aquitaine.  The  archbishop  and  seneschal,  having  weighed
the  orders  from  the  duke,  thought  it  best  for  the  seneschal  to  remain  at  Bordeaux,  and  the
archbishop  to  undertake  the  embassy.  He  therefore  set  out,  but  arrived  in  Arragon,
unluckily,  when  the  king  was  on  his  death-bed.  When  he  was  deceased,  the  archbishop
followed  the  princes  and  council  of  Arragon  to  the  interment  at  Barcelona,  and  then
remonstrated  so  strongly,  as  it  seemed  to  the  council,  that  he  was  ordered  to  prison  : though
not  closely  confined,  he  was  forbidden  to  leave  the  city  of  Barcelona.


CHAPTER  XLVIII. THE  DUKE  OP  LANCASTER  MAKES  WAR  ON  ARRAGON. THE  ARCH-
BISHOP OF  BORDEAUX  IS  RELEASED. THE  VISCOUNTESS  OP  CASTELBON,  SUSPECTED  OP

HAVING  ADMITTED  THE  ENGLISH  INTO  HER  CASTLE,  APPEASES  THE  KING  OF  ARRAGON,
THROUGH  THE  INTERFERENCE  OF  THE  COUNT  DE  FOIX.

When  news  was  brought  to  Bordeaux  of  the  imprisonment  of  the  archbishop,  the
seneschal  said,  “ I am  not  surprised  at  it : the  archbishop  is  too  hot-headed.  I believe  it
would  have  been  better  had  I gone  thither ; I should  have  spoken  more  calmly  ; and  there
is  a method  of  urging  claims  suited  to  different  persons.  The  seneschal  sent  information  of
what  had  happened  to  the  duke  of  Lancaster,  who  was  very  wroth  with  the  king  of
Arragon  and  his  council,  for  Having  imprisoned  such  a person  as  the  archbishop  of  Bordeaux
when  negotiating  his  business.  The  duke  wrote  orders  for  the  garrison  of  Lourde  instantly
to  invade  Arragon,  and  attack  Barcelona,  where  the  archbishop  was  confined.  The
governor,  John  de  Bearn,  who  styled  himself  seneschal  of  Bigorre,  Peter  d’Anchin,
Ernaulton  de  Resten,  Ernaulton  de  Sainte  Colombe,  and  the  whole  garrison,  were  much
delighted  with  these  orders,  and  overran  the  kingdom  of  Arragon,  as  far  as  Barcelona,  so
that  no  merchants  dared  venture  without  its  walls.  In  addition  to  this  mischief,  the
principal  towns  of  Arragon  would  not  consent  to  the  king’s  wishes  of  being  crowned,  unless
he  would  first  promise  and  solemnly  swear  that  no  taxes,  pay  for  soldiers,  or  other  impositions,
should  be  raised  in  the  country  ; and  unless  he  would  engage  for  a compliance  with  other
demands,  which  the  king  and  his  council  thought  very  unreasonable  and  unjust.  He
threatened  to  make  war  upon  them,  more  particularly  on  those  of  Barcelona,  who  lie
said  were  too  rich  and  presumptuous.

There  was,  at  this  period,  in  Languedoc,  on  the  borders  of  Rouergue  and  Auvergne,
towards  Pesenas  and  Uses,  a band  of  armed  men,  who  called  themselves  Routes,  that  were
daily  multiplying  to  do  evil.  Four  men-at-arms  were  their  leaders,  who  made  war  on  every
man  they  met  on  horseback,  caring  not  whom.  Their  names  were,  Peter  de  Montfaucon,
Geoffry  Chastelier,  Hainge  de  Sorge,  and  le  Goulet.  These  had  under  them  full  four
hundred  combatants,  who  ruined  all  the  country  wherever  they  haunted.  They  were
mightily  rejoiced  when  they  heard  of  the  archbishop  of  Bordeaux’s  imprisonment,  of  the
duke  of  Lancaster’s  making  war  on  the  Arragonians,  and  that  the  king  of  Arragon  was
dissatisfied  with  his  subjects  in  the  principal  towns;  for  such  people  always  love  mischief
in  preference  to  good.  They  therefore  resolved  to  march  towards  the  frontiers  of  Arragon


108


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  & c.


and  surprise  some  fort,  which  the  king  or  principal  towns  would  negotiate  with  them  to
regain.  They  set  out,  and  made  for  the  castle  of  Duron,*  which  they  had  planned  to
surprise.  This  castle  is  in  the  archbishopric  of  Narbonne,  between  France  and  Arragon,
and  situated  precisely  on  the  limits  of  the  two  kingdoms.  They  arrived  there  by
niglit-fall  undiscovered,  and,  finding  it  weakly  guarded,  soon  conquered  it,  to  the  great
dismay  of  all  the  country,  especially  of  Perpignan,  which  is  but  four  leagues  distant  from
this  castle.

The  garrison  from  Lourde,  this  same  week,  captured  likewise  a castle  in  Arragon,  four
leagues  from  Barcelona,  called  the  old  castle  of  Rolbais,  belonging  to  the  viscountess  of
Castelbon,  cousin-german  to  the  count  de  Foix.  The  lady  was  much  surprised  at  this  event,
and  went  to  her  cousin,  the  count  de  Foix,  to  beg,  for  God’s  sake,  he  would  get  her  castle
restored  to  her  ; for  those  who  had  won  it  were  from  his  country  of  Bearn.  The  count,  in
his  answer,  desired  her  not  to  be  alarmed ; for  that  her  castle  had  been  taken  solely  to
harass  Barcelona  from  thence,  as  the  archbishop  of  Bordeaux  was  in  confinement  there  for
a trifling  cause,  and  that  she  should  have  it  again  undamaged.  The  lady  was  satisfied  with
this  answer,  but  kept  it  secret,  and  went  to  reside  at  another  castle,  near  Roquebertin.
Those  of  Duren,  Rolbais,  and  the  garrison  from  Lourde,  kept  up  a severe  warfare  on  the
borders  of  Arragon.  The  king,  indeed,  winked  at  this,  that  the  towns  might  be  punished,
but  their  discontents  increased  ; for  those  of  Barcelona,  Perpignan,  and  other  towns,  could
not  carry  on  their  commerce  without  being  made  prisoners,  and  ransomed.  They  deter-
mined to  set  the  archbishop  of  Bordeaux  at  liberty,  but,  as  was  right,  to  consult  the  king-
on  the  subject.  They,  in  consequence,  negotiated  privately  with  don  Martin,  the  king’s
brother,  who  was  very  popular  in  the  country,  that  he  won  hi  interfere  between  them  and
the  king,  and  obtain  peace  with  those  of  Lourde  and  Rolbais.  In  order  to  encourage  their
loyalty,  he  engaged  to  do  what  they  desired,  and  prevailed  on  his  brother  to  give  the  arch-
bishop his  liberty,  and  send  him  back  to  the  Bordelois.

Shortly  afterward,  by  the  count  de  Foix’s  exertions,  the  viscountess  recovered  her
castle,  and  those  who  had  captured  it  departed,  in  return  for  the  service  the  count  had  done
to  the  duke  of  Lancaster  in  the  course  of  this  year.  The  king  of  Arragon,  seeing  the
viscountess  so  quickly  regain  her  castle,  sent  for  her,  and,  when  in  his  presence,  charged  her  with
having  admitted  the  English  into  her  castle  to  make  war  on  him,  for  which  she  had  been  very
criminal.  The  lady  clearly  exculpated  herself,  saying, — “ My  lord,  as  God  may  help  me  and
mine,  and  by  the  faith  I owe  you,  when  I heard  of  my  castle  being  taken,  I had  never  any
connexion,  nor  entered  into  any  treaty  with  the  English.  I instantly  informed  my  cousin,
the  count  de  Foix  of  it,  and  begged  of  him,  for  God’s  sake,  to  aid  me  to  recover  my  castle,
as  it  had  been  taken  by  the  garrison  from  Lourde,  who  are  his  subjects,  and  from  Bearn.
The  count  sent  me  word  not  to  alarm  myself,  for  that  those  who  had  conquered  it  had  only
borrowed  it,  to  make  a more  effectual  warfare  on  Barcelona.”  The  king  replied,  “ If  you
can  prove  this  answer  from  the  count  de  Foix,  I will  restore  your  castle.”  “That  I can
easily  do,”  answered  the  lady.  She  informed  the  count,  who  at  that  time  resided  at  Orthes,
in  Bearn,  of  this  conversation,  and  entreated  he  would  satisfy  the  king  of  Arragon.  The
count  sent  letters  to  the  king  of  Arragon  by  one  of  his  knights,  called  sir  Cicart  de  Saurelin,
to  request  he  would  hold  his  cousin  excused,  and  allow  her  to  possess  her  lands  in  peace,
otherwise  it  would  displease  him.  The  king  of  Arragon  acceded  to  this  request,  and  having-
well  entertained  the  knight,  said  to  him,  “ The  viscountess  has  acted  prudently,  in  thus
having  her  cousin  the  count  de  Foix  make  excuses  for  her.”

o


CHAPTER  XLIX. THOSE  COMPANIONS  WHO  HAD  CONQUERED  DUREN  ARE  DEFEATED  AND

SLAIN,  BY  A STRATAGEM  OF  RAYMOND  DE  BACHEZ,  COUSIN  TO  THE  KING  OF  ARRAGON.
Thus  affairs  remained  : the  viscountess  de  Castelbon  had  quiet  possession  of  her  castle  ;
but  the  merchants  were  not  the  less  harassed  by  the  garrison  who  had  come  from  Lourde.
Those  of  Barcelona  and  its  neighbourhood  were  frequently  pillaged  and  made  prisonei’3  by

9 " Daren.”  Q,  if  not  Duibau.


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


209


tliem,  unless  they  had  entered  into  a treaty  and  paid  composition-money  for  their  safety.
These  compositions  extended  over  many  parts  of  Catalonia  and  Arragon  ; and  the  garrison
of  Duren  was  desirous  of  adopting  the  same  plan,  which  they  would  have  executed,  or
perhaps  worse,  had  they  not  been  checked.  They  had  done  more  mischief  to  the  country
than  those  of  Lourde  ; for  they  were  poorer,  and  made  no  distinction  whom  they  attacked,
whether  officers  of  the  king  and  queen,  or  merchants.  The  king  at  length  assembled  his
council  on  this  business  ; for  the  great  towns  murmured,  and  said,  that  the  king,  who  ought
to  have  destroyed  such  wretches,  supported  them.  These,  and  such  description  of  speeches,
when  told  to  the  young  king,  gave  him  much  uneasiness,  and  he  was  vexed  that  his  subjects
should  thus  talk  of  him  respecting  Duren,  because  the  crown  of  his  father,  who  had  been  so
greatly  beloved,  was  hut  just  fallen  to  him.  He  called  to  him  a great  baron  of  Arragon  and
his  cousin,  named  sir  Raymond  de  Bachez,  and  said,  “ Sir  Raymond,  ride  towards  Duren,
and  learn  from  those  who  have  surprised  it  what  they  want  in  my  country,  and  make  some
treaty  with  them,  that  you  may  get  them  out  of  it,  by  fair  or  foul  means.”  The  knight
obeyed,  and  sent  a berald  to  the  garrison  of  Duren,  to  say  he  wished  to  negotiate  a treaty
with  them.  When  Montfaucon  and  the  other  captains  learnt  that  sir  Raymond  de  Bachez
wanted  to  treat  with  them,  they  thought  they  should  obtain  a large  sum  to  deliver  up  the
place,  and  said  to  the  herald,  “ Friend,  tell  your  master,  Sir  Raymond,  from  us,  that  he
may  safely  come  here,  for  we  will  not  do  him  any  injury.”  The  herald  returned  with  this
answer  to  sir  Raymond,  at  Perpignan,  who  instantly  left  the  place,  and  on  his  arrival  at
Duren  held  a parley  with  them.  He  asked  why  they  remained  so  long  on  the  borders
of  Arragon:  they  replied  they  were  waiting  to  join  the  army  from  France  that  was
coming  to  the  support  of  the  king  of  Ca6tille.  “ Ha,  my  gentlemen,”  said  sir  Raymond,
“ if  you  wait  for  that,  you  will  stay  here  too  long ; for  the  king  of  Arragon  will  not  allow
you  thus  to  plunder  his  country  and  its  inhabitants.”  They  replied,  “ that  since  the  king
would  not  suffer  them  to  support  themselves,  he  must  prevent  it,  for  live  they  would.  If
he  would  ransom  the  country,  they  would  march  away,  but  not  otherwise.”  “ And  what
do  you  ask  ?”  said  sir  Raymond.  “ Sixty  thousand  francs  : we  are  four  of  us,  and  each
must  have  fifteen  thousand  for  his  share.”  “ In  God’s  name,”  said  sir  Raymond,  “ that
is  money  enough ; but  I will  report  it  to  the  king  : it  is  better  for  him  to  pay  you  this
sum,  for  the  good  of  the  country,  than  to  allow  you  further  pillaging.”  He  added  this
to  keep  them  in  good  humour,  but  thought  the  contrary  to  what  lie  had  said.  On  taking
leave,  sir  Raymond  told  them  they  might  expect  the  sum  they  had  asked,  and  perhaps
more.  He  then  returned  to  Perpignan,  where  the  king  was,  and  related  to  him  all  that
had  passed.  The  king  said,  “ You  must  at  all  events  free  the  country  from  them,  and  pay
the  thieves  ; if  I could  get  hold  of  them,  I would  hang  them  all,  which  is  the  only  payment
they  deserve  : but  the  place  is  so  strong,  it  will  be  difficult  to  draw  them  out  of  it.”

“ Sir,”  replied  sir  Raymond,  “ I will  manage  it ; only  do  not  interfere.  “ Well,”  said  the
king,  “ do  so : I will  not  meddle  further  in  the  business ; but  see  that  the  country  be
delivered  from  them.”  Sir  Raymond  collected  a body  of  men  at  arms,  to  the  amount  of
five  hundred  spears,  which  he  placed  in  ambush,  and  gave  the  command  of  them  to  a squire
of  Gascony,  called  Naudon  Seighin,  who  was  valiant  and  expert  in  arms.  The  ambuscade
was  about  a short  league  from  Duren,  and  sir  Raymond  ordered,  that  as  soon  as  the  garrison
should  have  passed  by,  they  should  fall  on  them,  and,  if  possible,  put  all  to  death.  Sir
Raymond  wrote  to  the  garrison,  to  desire  they  would  mount  their  horses  and  advance  to
Perpignan,  making  a show  of  attacking  the  place,  to  alarm  the  inhabitants,  otherwise  he
should  never  be  able  to  raise  their  quota  of  the  money  he  was  to  pay  them.  They  were
much  pleased  to  receive  such  intelligence,  believing  it  true,  and,  mounting  their  Horses  the
same  day  the  ambush  was  posted,  rode  for  Perpignan,  galloping  up  to  the  barriers.  When
they  had  done  this,  they  began  their  retreat,  thinking  to  return  quietly  home ; but  they  had
scarcely  gone  half-way  before  they  met  Naudon  Seighin  and  his  troops,  who  instantly
charged  them.  They  now  perceived  they  had  been  tricked,  and  prepared  to  defend
themselves  : they  fought  well. during  the  time  the  combat  lasted ; but  that  was  not  long,  for
there  were  among  them  numbers  of  pillagers  badly  armed,  who  were  soon  defeated.  Among
the  slain  were,  Geoffry  Chastelier,  Hainge  de  Sorge,  Guyot  Moresque,  John  le  Geulant,  and

VOL.  IX.  p


210


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


many  more.  Peter  de  Montfaucon,  Amblardan  tie  St.  Just,  and  forty  others,  were  made
prisoners,  and  carried  to  Perpignan,  where,  as  they  passed  the  streets,  the  inhabitants  came
out  of  their  houses,  and  hooted  at  them,  as  they  would  have  done  at  a wolf.  Le  Geulant
and  Peter  de  Montfaucon  were  put  in  the  pillory,  and  the  rest  thrown  into  a dungeon.

The  duke  of  Berry,  about  this  time,  arrived  at  Carcassone,  from  a visit  to  Pope  Clement
at  Avignon.  Having  there  heard  that  Duren  was  regained,  and  the  garrison  slain  or
made  prisoners,  he  instantly  wrote  to  the  king  of  Arragon,  and  to  his  cousin  Jolante  de  Bar,
to  beg  they  would  give  up  to  him  Peter  de  Montfaucon  and  his  companions.  His  request
was  immediately  complied  with,  and  they  were  sent  to  the  duke  of  Berry.  They  were
indebted  to  him,  or  they  would  infallibly  have  all  been  put  to  death.


CHAPTER  L. AN  ACHIEVEMENT  OF  ARMS,  PERFORMED  BEFORE  THE  SENESCHAL  OF  BORDEAUX,

BETWEEN  A KNIGHT  ATTACHED  TO  FRANCE  AND  ONE  ATTACHED  TO  ENGLAND.

At  this  period  there  was  an  achievement  of  arms  performed  by  two  knights  at  Bordeaux,
in  the  presence  of  the  seneschal,  sir  John  Iiarpedon,  and  other  noblemen.  These  knights
were  the  lord  de  la  Itochefoucault,  son  to  the  sister  of  the  captal  de  Buch,  and  sir  William
de  Montferrant,  attached  to  the  English  interest.  As  this  tilt  was  to  be  made  before  all  the
lords  and  ladies  of  Bordeaux,  the  count  de  Foix  sent  thither  some  knights  of  his  household
to  advise  and  direct  the  lord  de  la  Itochefoucault,  who  was  the  son  of  his  cousin,  and  likewise
different  sorts  of  armour,  daggers,  battle-axes,  and  swords  well  tempered,  although  he  had
before  properly  provided  himself  with  all  things  necessary.  These  knights  armed  themselves
on  the  appointed  day,  and  were  attended  by  a numerous  body  of  chivalry.  The  lord  de  la
Itochefoucault  was  accompanied  by  two  hundred  knights  and  squires,  all  connected  with  him
by  blood  ; and  sir  William  de  Montferrant  by  as  many,  if  not  more.  Among  the  number
were  the  lords  de  Rohan,  de  l’Esparre,  de  Duras,  de  Mucident,  de  Landuras,  de  Curton,  de
Languran,  de  la  Barde,  de  Tarbe,  de  Mont-croyat  in  Perigord,  who  had  come  from  distant
parts  because  he  was  their  relation,  aud  to  be  spectators  of  the  feats  of  arms  of  two  such
valiant  knights.

When  they  were  mounted,  and  had  their  helmets  laced  on,  their  spears  and  shields  were
given  them.  They  instantly  stuck  spurs  into  their  horses,  and  met  each  other  full  gallop,  with
such  force  that  the  laces  of  the  helmets  burst  asunder,  and  their  helmets  were  knocked  off,  so
that  they  passed  each  other  bare-headed,  excepting  the  caps  which  were  under  the  helmets.
“ On  my  faith,”  the  spectators  said,  “ they  have  gallantly  performed  their  first  course.”  The
knights  now  had  their  armour  set  to  rights,  and  their  helmets  laced  again,  when  they  performed
their  second  and  third  courses  with  equal  ability.  In  short,  they  behaved,  in  every  attack,
most  gallantly,  and  to  the  satisfaction  of  all  present.  The  seneschal,  sir  John  Iiarpedon,
entertained  at  supper,  that  evening,  all  tho  lords  and  ladies  in  Bordeaux ; and  on  the  morrow
the  company  departed,  and  went  to  their  different  homes.  The  lord  de  la  Rochefoucault  made
preparations  for  his  journey  to  Castille  ; for  king  John  had  sent  to  him,  and  the  time  was
drawing  nigh  for  him  to  set  out.  Sir  William  de  Montferrant,  when  returned  home,  made  also
his  preparations  to  cross  the  sea  to  Portugal ; for  that  king  had,  in  like  manner,  written  to  him.


CHAPTER  LI. SIR  OLIVER  DE  CLISSON  DELIVERS  JOHN  OF  BLOIS,  SON  OF  THE  LATE  LORD

CHARLES  OF  BLOIS,  FROM  HIS  LONG  IMPRISONMENT  IN  ENGLAND,  AND  GIVES  HIM  HIS
DAUGHTER  IN  MARRIAGE,  TO  THE  GREAT  DISPLEASURE  OF  THE  DUKE  OF  BRITTANY.

In  such  a grand  and  noble  history  as  this,  of  which  I,  sir  John  Froissart,  am  the  author
and  continuator  until  this  present  moment,  through  the  grace  of  God,  and  that  perseverance
he  has  endowed  me  with,  as  well  as  in  length  of  years,  which  have  enabled  me  to  witness
abundance  of  the  things  that  have  passed,  it  is  not  right  that  I forget  anything.  During  the
wars  of  Brittany,  the  two  sons  of  the  lord  Charles  de  Blois  (who,  for  a long  time  styled  him-
self duke  of  Brittany,  in  right  of  his  lady,  Jane  of  Brittany,  who  was  descended  in  a


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND.  FRANCE,  &c.


211


direct  line  from  the  dukes  of  Brittany,  a3  has  been  mentioned  in  this  history  # ) were  sent  to
England  as  hostages  for  their  father,  where  they  still  remain  in  prison  ; for  I have  not  as  yet
delivered  them  from  it,  nor  from  the  power  of  the  king  of  England,  wherein  the  lord  Charles
had  put  them.

You  have  before  seenf  how  king  Edward  of  England,  to  strengthen  himself  in  his  war
with  France,  had  formed  an  alliance  with  the  carl  of  Montfort,  whom  he  had  assisted,  with
advice  and  forces,  to  the  utmost  of  his  ability,  insomuch,  that  the  earl  had  succeeded  to
his  wishes,  and  was  duke  of  Brittany.  Had  he  not  been  thus  supported,  the  lord  Charles
de  Blois  would  have  possessed  seven  parts  of  Brittany  and  the  earl  only  five.  You  have
read  how,  in  the  year  1347,  there  was  a grand  battle  before  la  Roche-derrien,  between
the  forces  of  the  countess  of  Montfort,  and  of  sir  Thomas  Hartwell  and  the  lord  Charles
de  Blois,  in  which  the  lord  Charles  was  defeated,  and  carried  prisoner  to  England.  He
was  handsomely  entertained  there ; for  that  noble  queen  of  England,  the  good  Philippa,
(who,  in  my  youth,  was  my  lady  and  mistress,)  was,  in  a direct  line,  his  cousin-german.
She  did  everything  in  her  power  to  obtain  his  freedom,  which  the  council  were  not  willing
to  grant.  Duke  Henry  of  Lancaster,  and  the  other  barons  of  England,  declared,  that  he
ought  not  to  have  his  liberty ; for  he  had  too  mighty  connexions,  and  that  Philip,
who  called  himself  king  of  France,  was  his  uncle : that  as  long  as  they  detained  him
prisoner,  their  war  in  Brittany  would  be  the  better  for  it.  Notwithstanding  these  remon-
strances, king  Edward,  through  the  persuasion  of  that  noble  and  good  lady,  his  queen,
agreed  to  his  ransom  for  two  hundred  thousand  nobles  ; and  his  two  sons  were  to  be  given
as  hostages  for  the  payment  of  this  sum,  which  was  very  considerable  to  the  lord  Charles,  but
would  not  now  be  so  to  a duke  of  Brittany.  The  lords  of  those  days  were  differently
situated  from  what  they  are  at  present,  when  greater  resources  are  found,  and  they  can  tax
their  people  at  their  pleasure.  It  was  not  so  then,  for  they  were  forced  to  content  themselves
with  the  amount  of  their  landed  estates  ; but  now,  the  duchy  of  Brittany  would  easily  pay
for  the  aid  of  its  lord  two  hundred  thousand  nobles  within  the  year1,  or  within  two  years  at
the  farthest.

Thus  were  the  two  young  sons  of  the  lord  Charles  de  Blois  given  up  as  hostages  for  the
payment  of  his  ransom.  He  had,  afterward,  in  the  prosecution  of  his  war  in  Brittany,  so
much  to  pay  his  soldiers,  and  support  his  rank  and  state,  that  he  could  never,  during  his
lifetime,  redeem  them.  lie  was  slain  in  the  battle  at  Auray,*  defending  his  right,  by  the
English  allies  of  the  earl  of  Montfort,  and  by  none  others.  His  death,  however,  did  not  put
an  end  to  the  war  ; but,  king  Charles  of  France,  ever  fearing  the  effects  of  chance,  when  he
saw  the  earl  of  Montfort  was  conquering  all  Brittany,  suspected,  should  he  wholly  succeed,
that  he  would  hold  the  duchy  independent  of  paying  him  homage  for  it ; for  he  had  already
held  it  from  the  king  of  England,  who  had  80  strenuously  assisted  him  in  the  war.  lie
therefore  negotiated  with  the  earl,  which,  having  been  already  mentioned,  § I shall  pass  over
here  : but  the  earl  remained  duke  of  Brittany,  on  condition  that  his  homage  should  be  paid
to  his  own  right  lord,  the  king  of  France.  The  duke  was  also  bound,  by  the  articles  of  the
treaty,  to  assist  in  the  deliverance  of  his  two  cousins,  sons  of  the  lord  Charles  de  Blois,  who
were  prisoners  to  the  king  of  England.  In  this,  however,  he  never  stirred  ; for  he  doubted,  if
they  should  return,  whether  they  would  not  give  him  some  trouble,  and  whether  Brittany,
which  was  more  inclined  towards  them  than  to  him,  would  not  acknowledge  them  as  its  lord.

For  this  reason  he  neglected  them,  and  they  remained  so  long  prisoners  in  England,  under
the  guard,  at  one  time,  of  sir  Roger  Beauchamp,  a gallant  and  valiant  knight,  and  his  lady
Sybilla,  at  another  under  Sir  Thomas  d’Ambreticourt,  that  the  youngest  brother,  Guy  of
Brittany,  died.  John  of  Brittany  was  now  alone  prisoner,  and  frequently  bewailed  his
situation  with  wonder ; for  he  was  sprung  from  the  noblest  blood  in  the  world,  the  advan-
tages of  which  he  had  been  long  deprived  ; for  he  had  been  thirty-five  years  in  the  power  of
his  enemies,  and,  as  he  perceived  no  appearance  of  help  coming  to  him  from  any  quarter,  he
would  rather  have  died  than  thus  have  existed.  His  relations  and  friends  kept  at  a distance,
and  the  sum  he  was  pledged  for  was  so  great,  that  he  could  never  have  procured  it,  without


* Vol.  i.  chap.  74


-j-  In  chap.  78,  and  the  following,  vol.  i.
§ Vol.  i.  chap.  229.


+ Vol.  i.  chap.  227.


r 2


212


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


a miracle ; for  the  duke  of  Anjou,  in  all  his  prosperity,  though  the  person  who  had  married
his  sister-german,  by  whom  he  had  two  fine  sons,  Lewis  and  Charles,  never  once  thought
of  him.

I will  now  relate  how  John  of  Brittany  obtained  his  liberty.  You  have  before  read  of
the  earl  of  Buckingham’s  expedition,  through  France,  to  Brittany,  whither  the  duke  had
sent  for  him,  because  the  country  would  not  acknowledge  him  for  its  lord.  The  earl  and  his
army  remained  the  ensuing  winter,  in  great  distress,  before  Nantes  and  Vannes,  until  the
month  of  May,*  when  he  returned  to  England.  During  the  time  the  earl  of  Buckingham
was  at  Vannes,  you  may  remember,  there  were  some  tilts  between  knights  and  squires  of
France  and  those  of  England,  and  that  the  constable  of  France  was  present.  There  was
much  conversation  kept  up  by  him  and  the  English  knights ; for  he  was  acquainted  with
them  all,  from  his  childhood,  having  been  educated  in  England.  He  behaved  very  politely
to  many  of  them,  as  men  at  arms  usually  do,  and  the  French  and  English  in  particular,  to
each  other ; but,  at  this  moment,  he  was  the  more  attentive,  as  he  had  an  object  in  view,
which  occupied  all  his  thoughts,  and  which  he  had  only  disclosed  to  a single  person,  who
was  squire  of  honour  in  his  household,  and  had  served  the  lord  Charles  de  Blois  in  the  same
capacity.  If  the  constable  had  made  it  more  public,  he  would  not  have  succeeded  as  he  did,
■through  the  mercy  of  God,  and  his  own  perseverance.

The  constable  and  duke  of  Brittany  had  for  a long  time  hated  each  other,  whatever
outward  appearances  they  might  put  on.  The  constable  was  much  hurt  at  the  length  of
the  imprisonment  of  John  of  Brittany,  and  at  a time  when  he  was  rather  on  better  terms
with  the  duke,  said  to  him, — “ My  lord,  why  do  not  you  exert  yourself  to  deliver  your
cousin  from  his  imprisonment  in  England  ? You  are  bound  to  do  so  by  treaty;  for  when
the  nobles  of  Brittany,  the  prelates  and  the  principal  towns,  with  the  archbishop  of  Rlieims,
sir  John  de  Craon,  and  sir  Boucicaut,  at  that  time  marshal  of  France,  negotiated  with  you
for  peace  before  Quimper  Corentin,  you  swore  you  would  do  your  utmost  to  liberate  your
cousins  John  and  Guy,  and  as  yet  you  have  never  done  anything ; know,  therefore,  that  the
country  does  not  love  you  the  more  for  it.”  The  duke  dissembled,  and  said,  “ Hold  your
tongue,  sir  Oliver  : where  shall  I find  the  three  or  four  hundred  thousand  francs  which  are
demanded  for  their  liberty  ?”  “ My  lord,”  replied  the  constable,  “ if  Brittany  saw  you  were

really  in  earnest  to  procure  their  freedom,  they  would  not  murmur  at  any  tax  or  hearth-
money  that  should  be  raised  to  deliver  these  prisoners,  who  will  die  in  prison  unless*God
assist  them.”  “Sir  Oliver,”  said  the  duke,  “my  country  of  Brittany  shall  never  be
oppressed  by  such  taxes.  My  cousins  have  great  princes  for  their  relations;  and  the  king
of  France  or  duke  of  Anjou  ought  to  aid  them,  for  they  have  always  supported  them  against
me.  When  I swore,  indeed,  to  aid  them  in  their  deliverance,  it  was  always  my  intention
that  the  king  of  France  and  their  other  relations  should  find  the  money,  and  that  I would
join  my  entreaties.”  The  constable  could  never  obtain  more  from  the  duke.

The  constable,  therefore,  when  at  these  tournaments  at  Vannes,  saw  clearly  that  the  earl
of  Buckingham  and  the  English  barons  and  squires  were  greatly  dissatisfied  with  the  duke
of  Brittany,  for  not  having  opened  his  towns  to  them,  as  he  had  promised,  when  they  left
England.  The  English  near  Hennebon  and  Vannes  were  in  such  distress,  that  they  frequently
had  not  wherewithal  to  feed  themselves,  and  their  horses  were  dying  through  famine : they
were  forced  to  gather  thistles,  bruise  them  in  a mortar,  and  make  a paste  which  they  cooked.
While  they  were  thus  suffering,  they  said  ; “ this  duke  of  Brittany  does  not  acquit  himself
loyally  of  his  promises  to  us,  who  have  put  him  in  possession  of  his  duchy ; and,  if  we  may
be  believed,  we  can  as  easily  take  it  from  him  as  we  have  given  it  to  him,  by  setting  at  liberty
his  enemy,  John  of  Brittany,  whom  the  country  love  in  preference.  We  cannot  any  way
revenge  ourselves  better,  nor  sooner  make  him  lose  the  country.  The  constable  was  well
informed  of  all  these  murmurs  and  discontents,  which  were  no  way  displeasing  to  him  : on
the  contrary,  for  one  murmur  he  wished  there  had  been  twelve  ; but  he  took  no  notice  of  it,
and  only  spoke  of  what  he  had  heard  to  this  squire,  whose  name,  I think,  was  John  Rolland.

It  happened  that  sir  John  Charlton,  governor  of  Cherbourg,  came  to  chateau  Josselin,
where  the  constable  resided,  who  entertained  him  and  his  company  most  splendidly ; and  to
obtain  their  friendship,  out  of  his  special  favour,  escorted  them  himself  until  they  were  in

* In  1381.


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


21 .1

safety.  During  tlie  time  of  dinner,  the  before-mentioned  squire  addressed  sir  John  Chariton,
saying,  “Sir  John,  you  can,  if  you  please,  do  me  a very  great  favour,  which  will  cost  you
nothing.”  “ From  friendship  to  the  constable,"  replied  sir  John,  “ I wish  it  may  cost  me
something  : what  is  it  you  wish  mo  to  do  ? ” “ Sir,”  replied  he,  “ that  I may  have  your

passport  to  go  to  England,  to  my  master  John  of  Brittany,  whom  I am  more  anxious  to  see
than  anything  in  the  world.”  “ By  my  faith,”  said  sir  John,  “ it  shall  not  be  my  fault  if
you  do  not.  On  my  return  to  Cherbourg,  I shall  cross  over  to  England  : come  with  me,
therefore,  and  you  shall  accompany  me,  and  I will  have  you  conducted  to  him,  for  your
request  cannot  he  refused.”  “ A thousand  thanks  ; my  lord,  I shall  ever  remember  your
goodness."  The  squire  returned,  with  sir  John  Charlton,  to  Cherbourg ; when,  having
arranged  his  affairs,  he  embarked,  and  made  straight  for  London,  attended  by  John  Rolland,
whom  he  had  conducted  to  the  castle  where  John  of  Brittany  was  confined.  John  of
Brittany  did  not,  at  first,  recollect  him  ; but  he  soon  made  himself  known,  and  they  had  a
long  conversation,  in  which  he  told  him,  that  if  he  would  exert  himself  to  procure  his
freedom,  the  constable  would  make  the  greatest  efforts  to  second  him.  John  of  Brittany,
desiring  nothing  more  eagerly,  asked,  “ By  what  means  ?”  “ I will  tell  you,  my  lord  : the

constable  has  a handsome  daughter  whom  he  wishes  to  marry,  and  if  you  will  promise  and
swear,  that  on  your  return  to  Brittany  you  will  marry  her,  he  will  obtain  your  liberty,  as
he  has  discovered  the  means  of  doing  it.”  John  of  Brittany  replied,  “ he  would  truly  do  so
adding,  “ When  you  return  to  the  constable,  assure  him  from  me,  that  there  is  nothing  I am
not  ready  to  do  for  my  liberty,  and  that  I accept  of  his  daughter  and  will  cheerfully  marry
her.”  They  had  several  other  conversations  together  before  the  squire  left  England  and
embarked  for  Brittany,  where  he  related  to  the  constable  all  that  had  passed.  The
constable,  eager  to  advance  himself  and  marry  his  daughter  so  nobly,  was  not  dilatory  in
searching  out  means  to  obtain  his  end.  He  considered  to  whom  lie  should  address  himself
in  England  ; and,  had  he  not  made  choice  of  the  earl  of  Oxford,  he  would  never  have
succeeded ; but,  notwithstanding  this  nobleman  had  the  complete  government  of  the  king,
matters  were  not  instantly  brought  about ; for  as  long  as  the  duke  of  Lancaster  remained
in  England,  he  never  mentioned  anything  concerning  it  to  the  king.  The  earl  of  Buckingham,
on  his  return  from  Brittany,  irritated  the  king  and  his  brothers  so  much  against  the  duke
that  it  was  publicly  said,  the  duke  had  acted  treacherously  towards  him  and  his  army  ; and
they  were  so  greatly  angered,  that  John  of  Brittany  was  summoned  before  the  king  and
council,  when  he  was  addressed  as  follows  “ John,  if  you  be  willing  to  hold  the  duchy  of
Brittany  from  the  king  of  England,  you  shall  have  possession  of  it,  and  be  married  in  this
country  as  nobly  as  the  present  duke  has  been  (for  the  duke  of  Lancaster  was  desirous  of
giving  him  his  daughter  Philippa,  who  was  afterwards  queen  of  Portugal.)  John  of
Brittany  replied,  “ that  he  would  never  consent  to  such  a treaty,  nor  be  an  enemy  to  the
crown  of  France  : he  would  willingly  accept  of  the  daughter  of  the  duke  of  Lancaster,  but
he  must  first  have  his  liberty.”  On  this,  he  was  remanded  to  prison.

When  the  earl  of  Oxford,  who  now  bears  the  title  of  the  duke  of  Ireland,  found  the  duke
of  Lancaster  was  landed  in  Castillo,  and  all  expectation  of  the  connexion  with  John  of
Brittany  broken  off  by  his  carrying  his  daughter  with  him,  he  resolved  to  solicit  the  king  to
give  up  to  him  John  of  Brittany,  as  a remuneration  for  past  services,  or  for  those  he  might
perform.  If  lie  succeeded,  he  could  then  treat  with  the  constable  of  France,  who  had  offered
him,  as  the  price  of  his  ransom,  six  score  thousand  francs  to  be  made  in  two  payments  of
sixty  thousand  each  : the  first  to  be  paid  at  Boulogne  on  the  arrival  of  John  of  Brittany  in
that  town,  and  the  second  in  Paris,  which  was  the  place  he  had  fixed  on  himself.  The  duke
of  Ireland  coveted  the  money,  and  was  so  pressing  with  the  king  that  lie  gave  up  John  of
Brittany  absolutely  to  his  disposal  • which  surprised  all  England,  and  caused  much  talking,
but  there  it  ended.  The  duke  of  Ireland  had  John  of  Brittany  conducted  to  Boulogne,
where  he  found  equipages  ready  which  the  constable  had  caused  to  be  prepared  for  him.
He  set  out  direotly  for  Paris,  where  he  was  kindly  received  by  the  king  and  his  other
relations.  The  constable  was  there  waiting  for  him,  and  carried  him  to  Brittany,  where  he
espoused  his  daughter  in  conformity  to  their  agreement.

When  the  duke  of  Brittany  learnt  that  John  of  Brittany  had  obtained  his  liberty,  and
was  returned  to  France,  through  the  aid  of  the  constable,  he  conceived  a greater  hatred


2 A


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  Ac.


against  sir  Oliver  de  Clisson,  and  said, — “ Indeed  ! does  sir  Oliver  think  to  thrust  me  out  of
my  duchy?  He  shows  some  signs  of  it  by  ransoming  John  of  Brittany,  and  marrying  him
to  his  daughter.  Such  things  are  very  displeasing  to  me  ; and,  by  God,  I will  tell  him  so
some  day  when  he  little  thinks  of  it.”  This,  in  truth,  he  did ; for  before  the  end  of  the
year,  he  spoke  to  him  very  sharply  on  this  subject,  as  you  will  hear  in  the  course  of  this
history.  But  we  must  now  say  something  respecting  the  affairs  of  Castille  and  Portugal,
and  of  an  expedition  which  the  English  made  against  Sluys.


CHAPTER  LII. FRANCE  MAKES  PREPARATIONS  TO  ASSIST  KING  JOHN  OF  CASTILLE. — THE

DUKE  OF  BOURBON  IS  APPOINTED  COMMANDER  IN  CHIEF  OF  THE  FRENCH  ARMY.

You  have  heard  how  the  grand  armament  of  the  king  of  France  at  Sluys  was  broken  up,
not  indeed  through  the  will  of  the  king,  who  was  eager  to  the  last  to  pass  over  to  England,
and  when  he  saw  it  could  not  be,  was  the  most  vexed  of  any.  The  whole  blame  was  laid
on  the  duke  of  Berry  : perhaps  he  saw  more  clearly  into  this  matter  than  others,  and  his
advice  of  not  attempting  the  invasion  of  England  was  for  the  honour  and  advantage  of
France ; for,  before  anything  of  this  sort  be  undertaken,  the  end  of  it  should  be  considered ;
and  the  duke  of  Berry  had  remained  so  long  in  England  as  an  hostage  for  king  John,  and
had  conversed  so  much  with  Englishmen,  he  probably  foresaw  the  event  would  be  unfor-
tunate : but  the  principal  reason  for  putting  it  off  was  the  season  of  the  year.  It  was,
however,  said,  that  the  constable  in  the  course  of  the  summer,  should  lead  thither  six
thousand  men  at  arms  and  as  many  cross-bows,  which  he  and  the  council  thought  would  be
fully  sufficient  to  combat  the  English.  The  constable  was  supposed  to  know  this  from  his
having  been  educated  in  England.

On  the  return  of  the  lords  to  France,  it  was  considered  who  should  be  sent  to  the  aid  of
king  John  of  Castille,  against  the  king  of  Portugal  and  duke  of  Lancaster : for  it  was  clear
there  would  be  deeds  of  arms,  as  the  English  kept  the  field.  None  could  be  sent  thither
without  much  cost ; for  the  distance  was  great,  and  there  was  not  any  money  in  the
exchequer,  nor  in  the  hands  of  the  receivers : the  immense  sums  which  had  been  raised  from
the  people  were  all  dissipated.  Recourse  was,  therefore,  had  to  a tax  that  should  be
instantly  levied,  and  published  as  being  for  the  assistance  of  the  king  of  Castille,  and  the
expulsion  of  the  English  from  that  country.  This  tax  having  been  proclaimed,  the  king’s
commissioners  came  to  the  different  towns,  and  said  to  the  principal  inhabitants, — “ Sirs,
this  city,  or  this  town,  is  taxed  at  such  a sum,  which  must  be  instantly  paid.”  “ Yery
well,”  they  replied,  “ we  will  collect  it,  and  send  the  wdiole  amount  to  Paris.”  “ That  will
not  do,”  said  the  commissioners : “ we  cannot  wait  so  long,  and  shall  act  more  expeditiously.”
On  saying  this,  they  ordered,  in  the  king’s  name,  which  protected  them  from  harm,  ten  or
twelve  of  the  richest  inhabitants  to  prison,  unless  they  should  find  the  money.  These,
being  afraid  of  the  king’s  displeasure,  soon  brought  the  sum  required,  which  they  afterwards
collected  from  the  townsmen.  The  taxes  were  so  frequent,  that  one  was  scarcely  paid  before
another  was  called  for.  Thus  was  the  noble  kingdom  of  France  governed,  and  the  poor
oppressed ; which  caused  numbers  to  sell  their  houses  and  lands,  and  retire  to  Hainault,  or
the  bishopric  of  Liege,  where  no  such  taxes  existed.

The  leaders  of  the  troops  destined  to  Castille  were  next  thought  of.  The  gallant  duke  of
Bourbon  was  chosen  commander  in  chief ; but,  before  he  left  France,  it  was  resolved  to
appoint  two  other  commanders,  to  attend  to  the  men  at  arms,  and  instruct  those  who  had
never  been  in  Castille.  The  duke  wus  to  have  two  thousand  lances,  of  knights  and  squires,
for  his  rear-ward,  of  as  good  men  as  could  be  found.  The  two  knights  appointed  to  lead
the  van,  and  to  command  the  first  division,  were  sir  William  de  Lignac  and  sir  Walter  de
Passac ; and,  on  receiving  their  orders,  they  made  every  preparation  suitable  to  their  rank.
Knights  and  squires  were  summoned,  throughout  France,  to  go  on  this  expedition : and  all
the  passes  into  Castille  were  thrown  open,  as  well  through  Arragon  as  through  Navarre.
•Many,  therefore,  came  from  all  the  different  provinces  of  the  kingdom,  and  took  the  road  to
Castille.  Sir  William  de  Lignac  and  sir  Walter  de  Passac  had  the  command  of  them,  and
set  out  in  grand  array.


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


215


CHAPTER  LIII. THE  ENGLISH  FLEET  DEFEATS  THAT  OF  SIR  JOHN  DE  BUCQ,  ADMIRAL  OF

FLANDERS  FOR  THE  DUKE  OF  BURGUNDY. THE  ENGLISH,  AFTER  DOING  MUCH

MISCHIEF  TO  SLUYS,  AND  THAT  PART  OF  THE  COUNTRY,  RETURN  TO  LONDON.

While  these  knights  and  squires  of  France  were  making  themselves  ready  to  march  for
Castille,  and  each,  as  soon  as  prepared,  set  off,  more  especially  from  the  distant  parts,  as  the
journey  was  long ; the  English  fleet  was  at  sea,  between  the  coasts  of  England  and  Flanders.
The  earl  of  Arundel  was  admiral  of  it ; but  lie  had  under  him  the  earl  of  Devonshire,  the
earl  of  Nottingham,  and  the  bishop  of  Norwich,  with  five  hundred  men  at  arms  and  one
thousand  archers,  and  they  were  cruising  about  in  search  of  their  enemies.  They  received
supplies  of  provisions  from  the  English  coast,  the  islands  of  Cornwall,  Brittany,  and
Normandy ; but  were  much  vexed  that  the  Flemish  fleet  had  escaped  into  la  Rochelle,  and
still  more,  that  the  constable  of  France  should  have  passed  Calais,  from  Treguier  to  Sluys,
without  their  having  met  him.  They  were  desirous  of  engaging  him,  though  he  had  as
many  vessels  as  themselves  ; but  lie  sailed  through  them  in  the  night,  with  a favourable  wind
and  tide.

The  fleet,  after  this,  anchored  in  Margate-roads,  at  the  mouth  of  the  Thames,  to  wait  for
the  return  of  the  Flemings  from  La  Rochelle,  which  they  knew  would  soon  happen.  The
merchants  from  Flanders,  Hainault,  and  several  other  parts,  who  had  sailed  in  a body  for
fear  of  the  English,  having  loaded  their  vessels  again  with  wines,  set  sail  from  the  port  of
La  Rochelle,  with  a favourable  wind,  for  Flanders  and  for  Sluys,  from  whence  they  had
come.  They  had  passed  the  Ras-St.-Matthieu*,  in  Brittany,  and  coasted  the  shores  of
Normandy  and  England,  until  they  came  to  the  mouth  of  the  Thames,  where  the  English
fleet  were  lying  at  anchor.  The  Flemings  descried  their  masts;  and  those  aloft  said, —
“ Gentlemen,  prepare  yourselves,  for  we  shall  meet  the  English  fleet : they  have  seen  us,
and  will  take  advantage  of  the  wind  and  tide  to  give  us  battle  before  night.”  This
intelligence  wTas  not  very  agreeable  to  several  of  the  merchants  from  Hainault  and  other
countries,  who  having  their  goods  on  board,  would  have  wished  to  have  sheered  off.  How-
ever, as  a combat  was  now  unavoidable,  they  made  preparations  for  it ; and  they  had,  of
cross-bows  and  other  armed  men,  upwards  of  seven  hundred,  under  the  command  of  a noble
and  valiant  knight  of  Flanders,  called  sir  John  de  Bucq,  who  was  admiral  of  the  Flemish
seas  for  the  duke  of  Burgundy,  and  who  had  done  much  mischief  to  the  English  at  sea.
Sir  John  de  Bucq,  having  ably  and  prudently  drawn  up  liis  vessels,  said  to  their  crews, —
“ My  fair  sirs,  do  not  be  alarmed,  for  we  are  enow  to  combat  the  English,  should  the  wind
be  in  our  favour ; but  remember  to  make  a running  fight  of  it,  and  make  for  Sluys ; if  we
can  draw  them  on  the  Flemish  coast,  we  shall  have  the  best  of  the  day.”  Some  were
comforted  by  these  words,  others  not ; but  they  continued  their  preparations  for  battle,  and
the  gunners  made  ready  their  bows  and  cannons.

The  two  fleets  now  approached  each  other.  The  English  had  some  light  galleys  in  which
they  had  embarked  archers ; and  these  galleys  advancing,  by  dint  of  oars,  began  the  combat
with  a shower  of  arrows,  which  were  lost ; for  the  Flemings  sheltered  themselves  in  their
vessels,  and  were  unhurt,  while  they  sailed  on  before  the  wind.  Some  of  the  cross-bows,
out  of  arrow-shot,  let  fly  bolts,  which  wounded  many,  and  prevented  those  in  the  galleys
from  being  of  any  service.  The  large  ships,  under  lord  Arundel,  the  bishop  of  Norwich,
and  others,  now  advanced,  and  ran  in  among  those  of  Flanders,  but  they  had  not  any
advantage;  for  the  cross-bow  men  defended  themselves  gallantly,  as  their  commander,  sir
John  de  Bucq,  had  advised  them.  He  and  his  company  were  well  armed,  in  a ship  equal
to  any  he  might  meet,  and  had  their  cannons  on  board,  which  shot  balls  of  such  a weight
that  great  mischief  was  done.  The  Flemings,  during  the  engagement,  made  as  much  sail  as
they  could  for  Flanders ; indeed,  some  of  the  merchant-ships  had  already  gained  the  coast,
and  had  run  into  shoal  water,  where  the  large  ships  could  not  follow  them  for  fear  of  the
sand-bank.  This  battle  was  very  long  and  obstinate,  for  it  continued  three  or  four  hours,

* Ras-St.-Matthieu,  I suppose,  must  mean  Ras-de-Blauquet,  which  is  a narrow  strait  of  the  sea  between  Alderney
and  Cape  la  Hogue.


216


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


and  many  of  the  vessels  were  sunk  by  the  large  bolts  of  iron,  sharply  pointed,  that  were
cast  down  from  the  tops,  and  drove  holes  through  them.  When  night  came  on,  they
separated  and  cast  anchor,  to  repair  their  damages  and  take  care  of  the  wounded  ; but,  on
the  return  of  the  tide,  they  set  their  sails  and  renewed  the  combat.  Peter  du  Bois  com-
manded a body  of  archers  and  sailors,  and  gave  the  Flemings  enough  to  do;  for,  having  been
a sailor  himself,  he  knew  how  to  act,  and  was  enraged  at  the  Flemings,  for  having  held  out
so  long.  The  English  continually  gained  on  the  Flemings,  and,  having  got  between  them
and  Blanquenberg  and  Sluys,  drove  them  to  Cadsand,  where  the  defeat  was  completed.
They  received  no  succour,  for  at  this  time  there  were  neither  men  at  arms  nor  vessels  in
Sluys  fit  for  sea.

Indeed,  a squire  of  Sluys,  called  Arnold  le  Maire,  when  he  heard  of  the  engagement,
embarked  on  board  a handsome  sloop  of  his  own,  taking  with  him  some  Serjeants,  and  about
twenty' cross- bows,  and  made  sail  for  the  fleet;  but  it  was  towards  the  end  of  the  defeat,
for  the  English  had  taken  the  greater  part  of  the  enemy’s  ships,  with  their  admiral,  sir  John
de  Bucq,  and  all  on  board.  Arnold  le  Maire,  perceiving  it  was  over,  made  his  cross-bows
shoot  thrice,  and  then  made  oft’ : he  was  chased  as  far  as  the  harbour  of  Sluys,  and  there
escaped,  from  the  large  vessels  being  unable  to  follow  him,  through  the  shoals  and  low
water.

The  inhabitants  of  Sluys  were  terrified  when  it  was  known  that  their  fleet  from  La
Rochelle  had  been  conquered  by  the  English,  and  every  moment  expected  to  be  attacked.
The  inhabitants  knew  not  how  to  act,  whether  to  fly  or  embark  on  board  their  laid-up
vessels,  to  wait  the  event  and  defend  themselves.  Had  the  English  suspected  the  state  of
Sluys,  they  might  have  been  lords  of  that  town  and  castle,  or  had  they  followed  the  advice
of  Peter  du  Bois,  who  strongly  recommended,  when  they  were  masters  of  the  fleet,  to  make
for  Sluys,  which  they  would  be  scire  to  gain.  The  English,  however,  thought  they  had  done
sufficient ; and  some  said,  “ We  shall  commit  a great  folly  if  we  enter  Sluys;  for  those  of
Bruges,  Damme,  and  Ardembourg,  will  shut  us  up  in  it,  and  we  shall  thus  lose  all  we  have
won.  It  is  much  better  that  we  keep  our  prizes,  and  make  war  with  prudence.”  The
English,  therefore,  did  not  disembark,  but  contented  themselves  with  attempting  to  burn
the  vessels  that  were  in  the  harbour.  They  selected  the  lightest  vessels  from  those  they  had
conquered,  and  filling  and  bedaubing  them  with  pitch,  oil,  and  other  combustibles,  let  them
float  with  the  tide  into  the  harbour  of  Sluys.  These  vessels  burnt  so  clear  and  Well,  that
the  English  hoped  they  would  set  fire  to  some  largy  ships  from  Castille  and  other  countries,
indifferent  to  them  which  ; but  they  did  not  the  smallest  damage  to  any.  The  English,  by
this  victory,  gained  great  wealth,  especially  in  wine,  as  they  captured  more  than  nine
thousand  tuns,  which  caused  wine  to  be  as  dear  in  Flanders  and  Hainault  all  that  year  as  it
was  of  course  cheap  in  England.  Thus  it  happens,  one  man’s  gain  is  another’s  loss.  The
English,  however,  did  not  sail  from  Sluys,  but  remained  at  anchor,  and  from  the  galleys  and
barges  landed  on  the  opposite  side  of  the  river  to  Sluys,  at  Tremue,  which  they  burnt,  with
the  monastery,  and  some  other  towns  on  the  coast,  whither  they  went  along  the  sea-shore,
or  on  the  dykes,  called  Turnliout  and  Moerdyck.  They  made  many  of  the  countrymen
prisoners,  and  lay  thus  at  anchor  upwards  of  ten  days ; during  which  time  they  formed
several  ambuscades  between  Damme  and  Sluys,  and  on  the  road  to  Coxye.  Sir  John  de
Launav,  a man  at  arms  from  Tournay,  was  there  made  a prisoner,  who,  in  company  with
the  lord  d’Estrinay  and  sir  Blanquart  de  Coulonge,  had  set  out  full  gallop,  with  forty  lances,
for  Sluys,  on  hearing  the  English  were  on  the  coast.

It  fortunately  happened,  that  sir  Robert  Marchand,  who  had  married  one  of  the  late  earl’s
bastards,  was  at  the  time  in  Bruges : he  instantly  hastened  to  Sluys,  and  flung  himself  into
the  castle,  which  he  found  weakly  guarded,  and  unprovided.  But  if  the  English  had  landed,
and  entered  Sluys  with  the  same  earnestness  they  had  done  at  Tremue  on  the  other  side  of
the  river,  they  must  have  gained  the  castle ; for  so  great  was  the  alarm  in  the  town  that  no
one  paid  attention  to  anything,  nor  thought  of  defending  themselves.  Sir  Robert  Marchand
encouraged  them,  by  saying, — “You  men  of  Sluys,  what  are  you  thinking  of?  It  would
seem  from  your  appearance  that  you  are  defeated  without  striking  a blow.  Men  of  valour
ought  to  show  a good  countenance  as  long  as  possible ; and,  should  they  be  taken  or  slain


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  Ac.


217


in  their  own  defence,  they  will  have  the  grace  of  God  and  praise  of  the  world.”  Thus  did
sir  Robert  harangue  those  of  Sluys ; notwithstanding  which,  the  whole  country,  as  far  as
Bruges,  was  under  the  utmost  alarm  as  long  as  the  English  remained  on  the  coast ; for  they
now  daily  disembarked,  and  foraged  far  in  the  country.  Not  having  horses,  they  were  always
on  foot : when  their  expeditions  were  ended,  they  slept  on  board,  and  on  the  morrow  renewed
their  excursions  to  the  east  and  west,  without  opposition.  They  burnt  the  town  of  Coxye,
and  another  large  village  on  the  road  from  the  coast  to  Ardembourg,  called  Hosebourg  :
they  would  have  done  more  if  they  had  known  the  state  of  the  country.  After  staying  as
long  as  they  pleased,  and  finding  no  attempt  made  to  regain  what  they  had  won  on  sea  and
land,  they  set  sail  with  a favourable  wind  for  England,  carrying  with  them  more  than  two
hundred  thousand  francs  of  wealth.  Having  entered  the  Thames,  they  landed  at  London,
where  they  were  joyfully  received  for  the  fine  wines  of  Poitou  and  Saintonge  they  had  on
board,  which  were  intended  to  have  been  drunk  in  Flanders,  Brabant,  Hainault,  Liege,  and
other  places.  They  were  dispersed  throughout  England,  and  the  prices  so  much  depressed
from  the  quantity,  a gallon  was  sold  for  fourpence.  The  English,  who  resided  on  the
frontiers  of  Flanders,  Holland,  and  Zealand,  were  too  enterprising  in  their  voyages  to
Dordrecht,  Zuric-zee.,  Middlebourg,  and  the  Brielle  in  Holland.  Some  of  the  merchants  of
Zuric-zee  had,  on  board  the  fleet  that  was  captured,  much  wine  from  La  Rochelle,  which
was  restored  to  them.  The  English  were  right  in  thus  courteously  treating  them  ; for
Zuric-zee  would  never  join  the  French  in  their  invasion  of  England,  nor  permit  them  to
have  any  vessels  or  boats  from  thence,  and  this  conduct  acquired  them  the  love  of  the
English.

Sir  John  de  Bucq  was  a prisoner  at  London,  on  his  word  : he  was  permitted  to  go  any-
where about  the  town,  but  at  sunset  he  was  to  return  to  his  lodging  ; nor  would  the  English
ever  listen  to  any  ransom  for  him,  though  the  duke  of  Burgundy  would  willingly  have
given  in  exchange  a bastard  brother  of  the  king  of  Portugal,  who  had  been  taken  at  sea  in
coming  from  Middlebourg:  had  he  been  within  the  limits  of  Zealand,  he  would  have
escaped.  I believe  sir  John  de  Bucq  remained  a prisoner  in  London  for  three  years,  and
there  died.


CHAPTER  LIV. TIIE  KING  OP  PORTUGAL  SENDS  AMBASSADORS  TO  TOE  DUKE  OF  LANCASTER

TO  CONCLUDE  HIS  MARRIAGE  WITH  THE  LADY  PHILIPPA. SIR  BARROIS  DES  BARRES

IS  ORDERED  BY  THE  KING  OP  CASTILLE  TO  THE  CASTLE  OF  NOYA*.

It  is  time  for  us  now  to  return  to  the  affairs  of  Castille  and  Portugal,  and  to  speak  of  the
duke  of  Lancaster,  as  to  the  prosperity  of  his  undertakings,  for  his  concerns  were  not
trifling;  and  likewise  to  mention  the  aid  France  sent  king  John  of  Castille,  for  otherwise
his  fortunes  would  have  made  a small  figure  : he  would  have  lost  this  year  his  whole
kingdom,  if  it  had  not  been  for  the  friendship  of  the  king  of  France.  Intelligence  is  soon
spread  abroad,  and  the  king  of  Portugal  was  as  quickly  informed  of  what  was  doing  in
France,  relative  to  the  great  armament  that  was  to  invade  England,  by  his  merchants  on
their  return  home,  as  the  duke  of  Lancaster ; for  the  king  resided,  at  that  season,  at  Oporto,
which  is  one  of  the  largest  cities  and  the  most  frequented  port  of  his  realm.  He  was  rejoiced
to  hear  it  was  at  an  end,  for  he  had  been  told  England  would  be  ruined ; and  this  had  made
him  hesitate  as  to  the  conclusion  of  his  marriage,  amusing  the  duke  and  duchess  with  fine
words  and  compliments.  When  he  learnt  for  certain,  that  the  king  of  France  and  his
nobles  were  returned  home,  he  summoned  his  council,  and  said, — “My  fair  sirs,  you  know
that  the  duke  and  duchess  of  Lancaster  are  in  Galicia : you  also  know,  a great  affection
subsists  between  us,  and  that  we  have  had  several  conferences ; in  one  of  which  it  has  been
proposed  by  our  councils,  that  I should  take  the  lady  Philippa  to  wife.  I mean  to  persevere
in  this  business*  and  to  make  an  honourable  demand  of  her,  as  is  becoming  two  such  princes
as  the  duke  of  Lancaster  and  myself;  for  I will  have  her  for  my  queen.”  “Sir,”  replied
those  to  whom  he  addressed  himself,  “ you  are  in  the  right,  for  so  you  have  solemnly
* Noya  is  an  ancient  town  in  Galicia,  five  or  six  leagues  to  the  westward  of  Saint  Jago.


218


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


promised  and  sworn.  Nov/,  whom  shall  we  send  to  conduct  the  lady  hither?”  The
archbishop  of  Braganza  and  sir  Joao  Rodriguez  de  Sa  were  named ; and  as  they  were  not
present,  they  were  sent  for,  and  informed  how  they  were  to  act.  They  undertook  the
business  with  pleasure,  and  were  escorted  going  and  returning  by  two  hundred  spears.

We  will  now  speak  of  Sir  Thomas  Moreaux’s  siege  of  Ribadavia,  and  relate  what  hap-
pened there.  I believe  the  inhabitants  expected  succours  from  the  king  of  Castille  and
the  French  knights  at  Yalladolid,  otherwise  they  would  not  have  held  out ; and  I know
not  how  such  peasants,  who  had  none  but  themselves  to  advise  with,  could  so  vigorously
have  opposed  the  flower  of  the  English  army,  and  how  it  happened  that  they  were  not
frightened,  for  every  day  there  were  skirmishes  and  assaults.  The  bravest  captains  of  the
army  said  to  Sir  Thomas, — “ Let  us  leave  this  town,  and  may  lightning  destroy  it,  and
advance  further  into  the  country,  towards  Mamez  Noya,  or  Betances  t : we  can  at  any
time  return  hither.”  “ By  my  faith,”  replied  Sir  Thomas,  “ such  peasants  shall  never  have
it  to  say  they  have  defeated  me,  were  I to  remain  here  these  two  months,  unless  the  duke
shall  otherwise  order.”  The  marshal  was  thus  obstinate  in  continuing  the  siege.

King  John  received  frequent  intelligence,  at  Valladolid,  how  the  men  at  Ribadavia  were
defending  themselves  valiantly,  and  would  not  surrender.  “ In  God’s  name,”  said  Barrois
des  Barres,  “ I am  much  vexed  I had  not  sent  thither  some  Frenchmen,  who  would  have
greatly  encouraged  the  inhabitants,  and  still  more  that  I did  not  go  myself,  for  I should
then  have  acquired  all  the  honour  which  these  peasants  will  now  have  ; and,  if  they  had
really  told  me  it  was  a town  of  such  strength,  and  that  it  required  such  a garrison,  I would,
without  doubt,  have  reinforced  it,  and  have  personally  risked  the  command;  and  God
would  have  given  me  grace  to  guard  and  defend  it,  as  he  has  done  to  these  peasants.”
Such  were  the  conversations  that  frequently  passed  between  the  king  of  Castille  and  the
French  knights,  who  were  eager  to  be  employed.  They  said  to  the  king, — “ It  will  be
right,  sir,  that  you  send  one  hundred  spears  to  the  castles  of  Noya  and  Corunna,  and  they
will  defend  those  parts  of  Galicia  situated  between  these  two  castles.”  “ And  whom  can
we  send  thither?”  Several  knights  instantly  offered  their  services,  sucli  as  sir  Tristan  de
Roye,  sir  Reginald  and  sir  Lambert  de  Braquemont,  sir  Tristan  de  la  Jaille,  sir  John  de
Chatelmorant,  and  sir  Barrois  des  Barres,  whom  the  king  heard  with  pleasure,  and  said  ; —
“ My  fair  sirs,  I give  you  many  thanks  for  your  willingness  ; but  you  cannot  all  go  : some
must  remain  with  me  in  case  of  accidents  ; and  for  the  present,  I shall  entreat  sir  Barrois
des  Barres,  if  he  please  to  undertake  this  business.”  The  Barrois  was  much  delighted
on  hearing  this,  for  he  had  too  long  remained  idle,  and  replied, — “ Sir  king,  I thank  you  :
I will  defend  them  to  the  utmost  of  my  power;  and,  when  I am  once  within  them,  I will
never  depart  without  your  special  order.”  “ By  God,”  said  the  king,  “ I believe  we  shall
soon  have  news  from  France.”  The  knights  were  ignorant  of  the  decampment  from  Sluys,
though  the  king  knew  it ; for  the  duke  of  Bourbon  had  written  to  him  the  whole  account,
and  what  was  going  forward  in  France;  how  he  was  to  come  to  Castille  with  three  thou-
sand spears  ; but  that  Sir  William  de  Lignac  and  sir  Walter  de  Passac  were  first  to  clear  the
passes,  with  an  equal  number  of  lances.  He  asked  the  knights  if  they  wished  to  hear  news.
“ Ah,  sire,  tell  us  some  from  France,  for  we  are  very  anxious  to  hear  from  thence.”  “ Wil-
lingly,” replied  the  king.  He  then  told  them  that  the  duke  of  Bourbon  was  appointed  by
the  king  of  France  and  his  council,  commander  in  chief  of  all  the  forces  sent  to  Castille,
which  amounted  to  six  thousand  spears;  that  sir  William  de  Lignac  and  sir  Walter  de
Passac  were  to  lead  the  van,  of  three  thousand  knights  and  squires,  and  were  then  on  their
march  ; that  the  invasion  of  England  was  deferred  until  May,  when  the  constable  of  France,
the  count  de  St.  Pol,  and  the  lord  de  Coucy,  should  there  land,  with  four  thousand  lances.
“ What  do  you  say  to  this  ? ” asked  the  king.  “ What  do  we  say,  sire  ? ” replied  the  knights,
who  were  rejoiced  : “ we  say  that  it  is  delightful  news,  and  we  cannot  have  better ; and,  in
the  course  of  the  summer,  many  gallant  deeds  will  be  done  in  your  country ; for,  if  they
have  ordered  six  thousand,  nine  thousand  will  come.  We  shall  certainly  combat  the
English,  who  now  keep  the  field;  and,  before  St.  John’s  day,  we  will  shut  them  up.”
“ On  my  faith,”  said  each  of  the  knights,  “ the  three  you  have  named  are  gallant  men,
* “Mamez.”  Q.  Muros.  f “Betances.”  Q.  Betan^os,  or  Entariqa.


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.  210

especially  the  duke  ot  Bourbon  : and  the  other  two  are  well  qualified  to  command  men
at  arms.”

The  news  of  this  army  coming  from  France  was  soon  known  in  Valladolid,  and  throughout
Castille ; and  that  it  had  been  ordered  to  arrive  by  the  first  of  May,  to  the  great  comfort  of
all,  and  joy  of  the  knights  and  squires.


CHAPTER  LV. TIIE  DUKE  OP  LANCASTER  SENDS  A REINFORCEMENT  TO  THE  SIEGE  OP

RIBADAVIA. ON  THAT  TOWN  BEING  TAKEN  BY  STORM,  MADRES  * INSTANTLY  SUR-

RENDERS.

Sir  Barrois  des  Barres  left  the  king  of  Castille  in  Valladolid,  and  accompanied  by  only
fifty  spears,  rode  towards  the  town  of  Noya.  News  was  brought  to  sir  Thomas  Moreaux's
army,  but  I know  not  by  whom,  that  the  French  were  on  their  march,  to  the  amount  of
five  hundred  lances,  to  raise  the  siege  of  Ribadavia.  Sir  Thomas  too  easily  believed  this
intelligence ; for  those  who  had  told  it  affirmed  it  for  truth,  and  that  they  had  seen  them  on
their  march,  on  this  side  the  river  Duero,  and  encamped  at  Villalpando.  The  marshal  was
advised  to  let  the  duke  of  Lancaster  have  information  of  this,  which  he  did,  by  sending  to
him  sir  John  d’Ambreticourt,  and  a herald  well  acquainted  with  the  roads  in  Galicia.  lie
himself  was  always  on  his  guard,  lest  he  should  be  surprised  in  the  night,  and  one  half  of
his  army  was  on  duty,  while  the  other  half  slept.  When  the  arrival  of  sir  John  and  the
herald  at  Saint  Jago,  where  the  duke  and  duchess  resided,  was  known,  the  duke  said,  “They
have  brought  some  intelligence,”  and,  sending  for  them,  asked  the  news.  “ Good  news,  my
lord  : the  marshal  sends  me  hither  to  know  how  you  would  wish  him  to  act ; for  he  has
learnt  for  certain,  that  the  French  have  assembled  a strong  body  in  Castille,  and  are  on
their  march  to  cross  the  river,  and  engage  with  our  men  before  Ribadavia.  This  is  the
news  I have  brought.”  “ In  God’s  name,”  replied  he,  “ it  is  news  enough,  but  we  will  soon
provide  a remedy.”  He  looked  at  sir  John  Holland  and  sir  Thomas  Percy,  his  constable
and  admiral,  and  said  to  them  : “ Take  three  hundred  spears  and  five  hundred  archers,  and
join  our  companions  before  Ribadavia,  who  are  looking  for  the  French  coming  to  attack
them.”  They  replied,  they  would  cheerfully  obey,  and,  making  themselves  ready,  set
out  with  the  above-mentioned  force,  and  arrived  before  Ribadavia,  to  the  great  joy  of  their
countrymen.

Sir  John  Holland  said  to  the  marshal, — “ What  do  these  fellows  of  Ribadavia  mean  ? will
they  not  surrender  ?”  “ No,  by  my  faith,”  replied  sir  Thomas,  “they  are  so  presumptuous  :
notwithstanding  they  have  seen  all  the  neighbouring  towns  do  so,  they  obstinately  follow
their  own  inclinations.  They  are  but  peasants ; for  not  one  gentleman  is  in  the  town.”
“ Say  no  more,”  answered  sir  John  : “ before  four  days  we  will  put  them  in  such  plight,  that
they  will  gladly  surrender  to  any  who  will  shew  them  mercy ; but  tell  the  admiral  and  me,
are  the  French  abroad  ? " “I  was  so  informed,”  said  sir  Thomas,  “ and  was  assured  there
were  upwards  of  five  hundred  in  one  body.  This  is  very  probable  : for  men  at  arms  are
continually  coming  from  France  to  Castille.  I afterwards  heard,  that  only  sir  Barrois  dcs
Barres  had  entered  the  castle  of  Noya  with  fifty  lances,  and  I know  nothing  more  of  them.”
The  conversation  now  ceased ; and  the  new  comers  were  lodged  among  them  as  well  as
circumstances  would  admit,  and  were  well  served  from  the  provision  which  had  followed
them.  Four  days  after  the  arrival  of  sir  John  Holland  and  sir  Thomas  Percy,  great  pre-
parations were  made  for  a general  assault ; and  a large  machine  of  timber  was  built,  and
mounted  on  wheels,  which  could  be  pushed  anywhere.  It  would  contain,  with  ease,  one
hundred  men  at  arms,  and  the  same  number  of  archers ; but,  for  this  attack,  it  was  filled
with  archers  only,  and  the  ditches  were  levelled  where  it  was  intended  to  pass.

Wb  en  the  attack  commenced,  this  machine  was  wheeled  up  to  the  walls  by  main  force  ;
and  the  archers,  being  well  provided  with  arrows,  shot  vigorously  on  their  enemies,  who
returned  it  by  throwing  darts  and  such  other  missile  weapons,  as  was  wonderful  to  behold.
The  roof  of  this  machine  was  covered  with  strong  ox-hides  to  shelter  them  from  the  effects

* “ Maures.”  Q.  Muros.


220


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


of  the  stones  and  the  darts  : underneath  were  men  at  arms  well  shielded,  that  with  pick-axes
Avorked  hard,  and  with  success  against  the  walls  ; for  the  townsmen  could  not  prevent
them  for  fear  of  the  archers,  who  gave  them  full  employment.  At  length  a large  breach
was  made  in  the  Avail,  and  a considerable  part  thrown  into  the  ditch  ; which  when  the
Galicians  perceived,  they  Avere  so  dismayed,  that  they  cried  loudly,  “ We  surrender,  we
surrender ! ” No  one  made  any  answer  ; hut  the  English  laughed  at  them,  and  said,
“ These  peasants  have  done  us  much  mischief,  and  mock  us  by  now  offering  to  surrender,
for  the  toAvn  is  ours.”  Some  of  the  English  replied,  “ If  you  wish  to  say  any  thing  to  us,
it  must  be  in  good  French  or  English,  for  we  do  not  understand  Castilian,”  and  kept
advancing  and  slaying  those  who  were  flying  before  them.  They  killed  them  in  heaps  ;
and  that  day  there  were  fifteen  hundred  put  to  death,  including  Jews,  many  of  whom  were
resident  in  the  toAvn.  Thus  was  Ribadavia  taken  by  storm  ; those  Avho  first  entered  it
gained  great  pillage,  especially  from  the  houses  of  the  Jews,  wherein  they  found  more
wealth  in  money  than  elsewhere.  After  the  toAvn  had  been  plundered,  the  marshal  Avas
asked  Avhat  he  intended  doing  Avith  it,  and  if  they  should  set  it  on  fire.  “Oh,  no,”  replied
he,  “ we  will  keep  it,  and  make  it  as  strong  as  any  town  in  Galicia.”

After  they  had  consulted  whither  to  go  next,  they  determined  to  march  to  Muros,  another
tolerably  good  town  in  Galicia.  The  garrison  of  Ribadavia,  consisting  of  twenty  spears
and  sixty  archers,  was  put.  under  the  command  of  sir  Peter  Clinton,  a valiant  knight  and
expert  man  at  arms.  The  army  carried  away  much  provision  from  the  town,  which  Avas
well  stored,  particularly  in  pork  and  wines : these  last  Avere  so  strong  and  fiery,  they  could
scarcely  drink  them  ; and  when  any  of  the  English  drank  too  much,  they  were  disabled  for
two  days.  On  their  departure  from  Ribadavia,  they  took  the  road  towards  Muros,  and
had  their  large  machine  taken  to  pieces  and  brought  after  them,  for  they  found  it  had
caused  great  alarm  to  many  other  toAvns.

When  the  inhabitants  of  Muros  heard  that  the  English  were  on  their  march  to  attack
them,  that  Ribadavia  had  been  stormed  and  numbers  put  to  death,  and  that  they  had  Avith
them  a devil  of  a machine,  so  great  and  wonderful  it  could  not  he  destroyed,  they  were
much  frightened  thereat,  and  were  apprehensive  AAdiat  the  English  might  do  to  them.
They  held  a council,  whether  they  should  defend  the  town  or  not,  and  thought  it  would  he
more  for  their  advantage  to  surrender ; for,  should  the  town  he  stormed,  they  wonld  lose
their  lives  and  fortunes,  and  they  saw  no  hopes  of  aid  from  any  quarter.  “ Consider,”  said
some  of  the  most  prudent,  “ what  has  been  the  consequence  of  the  defence  of  Ribadavia,
which  was  much  stronger  than  our  town ; they  held  out  for  near  a month,  but  no  reinforce-
ments were  sent  them.  The  king  of  Castille,  as  we  understand,  looks  on  all  Galicia,  as  far
as  the  river  Duero,  as  lost,  and  you  will  neA’er,  this  year,  see  any  of  the  French  enter  it.
Let  us,  therefore,  handsomely  surrender,  without  making  any  opposition,  in  the  like  manner
the  other  toAvns  of  Castille  have  done.”  “ It  is  well  said,”  the  hearers  replied,  and  they
unanimously  agreed  to  adopt  this  opinion.  “ But  how  shall  we  manage  it  ? ” said  some  of
them.  “ In  God’s  name,”  replied  those  who  proposed  the  surrender,  “ we  aauII  go  out  to
meet  the  English,  and  present  them  the  keys  of  our  town  ; for  they  are  a civil  people,  and
will  not  hurt  us : if  we  receive  them  kindly,  Ave  shall  have  their  thanks.”

Having  determined  on  this  plan,  fifty  of  the  principal  inhabitants  Avent  out  of  the  toAvn
as  soon  as  they  heard  the  English  were  approaching,  and  waited  on  the  road,  about  a quar-
ter of  a league  off.  News  was  brought  to  the  English  army,  that  those  of  Muros  had  come
out  of  their  town,  not  in  hostile  array,  but  with  the  intention  of  surrendering  and  offering
the  keys  of  the  place,  which  they  had  brought  with  them.  Some  of  the  lords  rode  forward
to  know  the  truth  of  it,  but  ordered  the  army  to  halt  until  their  return.  As  they  Avere
advancing,  the  townsmen  were  told,  “ Here  come  three  of  the  principal  lords  of  England,
sent  by  the  duke  of  Lancaster  to  conquer  the  country  : speak  to  them.”  On  Avhich,  they
cast  themselves  on  their  knees,  and  said ; “ My  lords,  behold  the  poor  inhabitants  of  Muros,
who  are  desirous  to  put  themselves  under  the  obedience  of  the  duke  and  duchess  of  Lan-
caster : Ave  therefore  entreat  you  to  receive  us  in  your  favour,  for  all  we  have  is  yours.”
The  three  lords,  having  consulted  together,  replied, — Good  people,  we  will  return  with
you  to  your  town,  and  enter  it  with  part  of  our  army,  but  not  all,  and  there  you  shall  take


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  & c.


221


such  oaths  as  good  subjects  ought  to  their  lord  or  lady.”  They  answered,  they  would
cheerfully  do  so.  “ Now,  then,”  said  the  lords,  “ go  back,  and  open  your  gates,  for  your
surrender  is  accepted.”  They  flung  open  the  gates  and  barriers  for  the  constable  and  other
lords,  who  might  amount  to  four  hundred  lances,  but  not  more;  the  rest  remained  without
the  walls,  but  had  much  provision  from  the  town,  wherein  the  leaders  were  lodged,  and
where  they  made  the  townsmen  take  the  usual  oaths  of  obedience.


CHAPTER  LVI. THE  LADY  PHILIPPA  OF  LANCASTER  IS  MARRIED,  BY  PROCURATION,  TO  TIIE

KING  OF  PORTUGAL. THE  CEREMONY  IS  AGAIN  PERFORMED  WITH  GREAT  MAGNIFI-

CENCE AND  FEASTINGS  AT  OPORTO.

On  the  morrow',  after  the  surrender  of  Muros,  when  the  knights  were  preparing  for  their
march  towards  Betantjos,  a messenger  from  the  duke  of  Lancaster  arrived  with  letters,
ordering  them  to  return  instantly,  whatever  might  be  their  situation ; for  he  was  daily
expecting  the  archbishop  of  Braganza  and  sir  Joao  Rodriguez  de  Sa,  ambassadors  from  the
king  of  Portugal,  who  wrere  to  marry  his  daughter  by  procuration,  and  conduct  her  to  that
king  at  Oporto,  where  he  was  waiting  for  her.  Sir  John  Holland,  the  marshal  and  admiral,
on  learning  this,  altered  their  plans,  and  said  it  was  proper  that  their  lord  the  duke,
when  he  received  ambassadors  from  the  king  of  Portugal,  should  have  all  his  council  with
him.  Having  placed  sufficient  garrisons  in  the  towns  they  had  won,  they  said  they  would
not  attempt  more  until  the  month  of  May,  and  returned  to  Saint  Jago,  whither  the  duke
had  sent  for  them.  Three  days  after  their  arrival,  came  the  archbishop  of  Braganza  and  sir
Joao  Rodriguez  de  Sa,  who  entered  the  town  of  Saint  Jago  with  two  hundred  horse,  where
they  were  all  lodged,  everything  having  been  prepared  for  them.

When  the  archbishop,  with  the  knights  and  lords  in  his  company,  had  refreshed  themselves,
they  waited  on  the  duke  and  duchess  of  Lancaster  in  grand  array,  who  received  them  most
graciously.  They  then  declared  the  motive  of  the  embassy,  which  the  duke  heard  with
pleasure ; for  he  was  rejoiced  at  the  exaltation  of  his  daughter,  and  the  connexion  with  the
king  of  Portugal,  which  was  very  opportune,  if  he  persevered  in  his  intention  of  conquering
Castille.  The  archbishop  explained,  to  the  satisfaction  of  the  duke  and  his  council,  that  by
power  of  the  king’s  procuration,  he  was  authorised  to  espouse  personally  the  lady  Philippa
of  Lancaster,  in  the  name  of  don  John,  king  of  Portugal.  During  the  residence  of  these
ambassadors  at  Saint  Jago,  the  ceremony  was  performed  by  virtue  of  the  above-mentioned
procuration ; and  the  archbishop  of  Braganza  and  the  lady  Philippa  were  courteously  laid
beside  each  other,  on  a bed,  as  married  persons  should  be.  This  being  done,  on  the  morrow
the  lady  and  her  attendants  were  ready  to  depart ; and,  having  bidden  adieu  to  her  father
and  mother,  she  mounted  her  palfrey,  as  did  her  damsels,  and  her  bastard  sister,  the  wife  of
the  marshal,  who  accompanied  her  to  Portugal.  Sir  John  Holland,  sir  Thomas  Percy,  and
sir  John  d’Ambreticourt,  were  ordered  to  escort  her,  with  one  hundred  spears  and  two
hundred  archers.  They  followed  the  road  to  Oporto,  and,  when  near,  were  met  by  the  king
and  his  court,  with  all  the  prelates  at  that  time  in  Oporto,  to  do  her  honour ; such  as  the
bishops  of  Lisbon,  Evora,  Coimbra,  and  Oporto : among  the  barons  were,  the  counts
d’Angouse,  de  Novaire,  de  l’Escalle,  Guadalupe  Ferrant  Pacheco,  Vasco  Martin  de  Merlo,
with  upwards  of  forty  knights,  and  great  crowds  of  ladies  and  other  persons,  and  the  whole
of  the  clergy  in  their  holiday  dresses.  Thus  was  the  lady  Philippa  conducted  to  the  king’s
palace  at  Oporto,  where  she  dismounted.  The  king  took  her  by  the  hand  and  kissed  her,
performing  the  same  ceremony  to  all  the  ladies  who  had  accompanied  her,  and  then  led  her
to  her  apartments,  where  he  took  leave  of  her  and  her  companions.

The  English  lords  and  their  men  were  lodged  in  the  town,  which  is  of  considerable  size  ;
and  this  night  they  kept  the  vigil  of  the  feast  by  carolling,  dancing,  and  other  amusements,
until  the  morrow’s  dawn.  On  Tuesday  morning  *,  the  king  of  Portugal,  the  prelates  and
lords  of  his  country,  were  dressed  by  eight  o’clock,  and,  mounting  their  horses  at  the  palace

* The  lltli  February,  1387,  the  day  of  the  Purification.  The  king  was  twenty-nine  years  of  age,  the  queen

twenty-eight. — Ed.


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &e.


222

gate,  rode  to  tlae  cathedral  called  St.  Mary’s  church,  where  they  waited  for  the  quern.  She
followed  shortly  after,  attended  by  her  ladies  and  damsels  ; and,  though  the  ambassadors
had  before  espoused  her  in  the  king’s  name,  the  ceremony  was  again  performed  ; which  done,
they  returned  to  the  palace,  where  were  grand  and  solemn  feastings.  In  the  afternoon
were  tilts  and  tournaments  before  the  king  and  queen  ; and  in  the  evening  the  prizes  were
distributed.  Sir  John  Holland  gained  the  one  destined  for  strangers ; and  that  for  the
natives  was  won  by  a knight  attached  to  the  king,  sir  John  Testad’oro.  The  day  and
night  passed  thus  jovially  in  various  amusements.  That  night  the  king  lay  with  the  queen  ;
and  it  was  reported  by  those  who  were  near  his  person,  that  lie  had  hitherto  been  perfectly
chaste,  and  had  never  known  woman.

On  the  morrow  the  feastings  and  joustings  were  renewed,  when  sir  Yasco  Martin  de
Merlo  gained  one  prize,  and  sir  John  d’Ambreticourt  the  other.  The  night  was  spent  as
before,  in  carollings,  dancing,  and  other  sports ; and  while  the  English  staid  at  Oporto,
there  were  tournaments  every  day.  With  such  rejoicings  was  the  queen  of  Portugal
received  on  her  arrival  at  Oporto.  They  lasted  upwards  of  ten  days  ; and  the  king  made
all  the  strangers,  on  their  departure,  such  gifts  as  satisfied  them.  The  English  lords,  having
taken  leave  of  the  king  and  queen  of  Portugal,  returned  to  Saint  Jago.  The  duke  and
duchess  of  Lancaster  made  great  inquiries,  and  were  told  all  that  had  passed  ; that  the  king
saluted  them,  and  that  the  queen  recommended  herself  to  their  love.  Sir  John  Holland  and
sir  Thomas  Percy  added,  “ My  lord,  the  last  words  the  king  said  to  us  were,  that  you  might
take  the  field  when  you  pleased,  for  that  he  would  join  you  and  enter  Castille.”  “ That  is
good  news,  indeed,”  replied  the  duke.

About  fifteen  days  after  the  return  of  the  lords  from  Portugal,  the  duke  of  Lancaster
ordered  them  to  prepare  for  conquering  the  remaining  towns  in  Galicia,  for  there  were
several  he  was  not  master  of.  It  was  settled  by  the  council  of  the  duke,  that  when  he
should  depart  from  Saint  Jago,  the  duchess  and  her  daughter  Catherine  should  visit  the
king  and  young  queen  of  Portugal,  at  Oporto.  The  town  of  Saint  Jago  was  placed  under
the  command  of  an  English  knight,  called  sir  Lewis  Clifford,  with  thirty  spears,  and  one
hundred  archers,  for  his  garrison.


CHAPTER  LV1I. — -THE  DUKE  OF  LANCASTER  MARCHES  HIS  ARMY  TO  ENTEN^A. THE  INHA-

BITANTS SEND,  WITH  THE  CONSENT  OF  THE  DUKE,  TO  THE  KING  OF  CASTILLE  FOR
SUCCOUR.

When  the  duke  of  Lancaster  marched  from  Saint  Jago,  he  left  no  more  in  garrison  than
those  already  mentioned.  He  rode  on,  in  company  with  his  duchess,  towards  the  city  of
Ente^a,  which  is  a good  town  in  one  of  the  extremities  of  Galicia,  and  the  last  on  the
borders  of  Portugal,  in  the  direct  road  from  Saint  Jago  to  Oporto  and  Coimbra.  They  had
taken  this  line  of  march,  because  the  duchess  and  her  daughter  were  to  visit  Portugal.
The  inhabitants  of  Entencja,  hearing  that  the  duke  and  his  army  were  advancing  against
them,  held  a council  to  consider  what  conduct  they  should  pursue.  After  many  debates,  it
was  at  length  agreed  that  they  should  send  six  of  their  principal  men  to  the  duke  and
duchess,  to  entreat  they  might  not  be  attacked  for  eight  days  only,  when  they  would  let
the  king  of  Castille  know  their  situation,  and  if  he  sent  them  no  aid  they  would  surrender
unconditionally.  The  six  citizens,  on  leaving  the  town,  took  the  road  the  English  were
coming,  and  first  met  the  van-guard  under  the  command  of  the  marshal,  by  whom  they
were  instantly  arrested.  They  said  they  were  deputed  by  the  inhabitants  of  Entemja  to
parley  with  the  duke.  Upon  which  the  marshal  said  to  Sir  John  Sounder,  who  was  by  his
side,  “ Conduct  these  men  to  my  lord ; for  it  will  be  necessary  to  escort  them,  or  they  may
be  slain  by  our  archers.”  The  knight  replied,  he  would  take  care  of  them  ; and  then  the
marshal  said,  “ Go,  go,  this  knight  will  conduct  you.”  They  all  departed,  and  rode
together  until  they  came  up  with  the  duke  and  duchess,  who  had  dismounted,  and  were
sitting  under  some  fine  olive  trees,  attended  by  sir  John  Holland,  sir  Thomas  Percy,  and
others.  On  seeing  sir  John  Sounder  approach,  they  eyed  him  well ; and  sir  John  Holland


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


223


said,  “ Fair  brother,  Sounder,  are  these  prisoners  thine  ? ” “ They  are  not  prisoners,  sir,

but  men  from  Entenija  whom  the  marshal  lias  ordered  me  to  conduct  to  my  lord ; and  from
what  I can  learn,  they  wish  to  treat  with  him.”  The  duke  and  duchess  heard  all  this  ; and
sir  John  Sounder  continued,  “ Come  forward,  my  good  people  : you  see  your  lord  and  lady.”
Upon  this  the  six  men  advanced,  and,  casting  themselves  on  their  knees,  thus  spoke,
“ Our  most  redoubted  lord  and  lady,  the  commonalty  of  the  town  of  Enten<ja,  hearing  you
were  marching  your  army  against  them,  have  sent  us  hither  to  entreat  you  would  delay
advancing  further  for  eight  or  nine  days  only,  in  which  time  they  will  send  to  the  king  of
Castille,  in  Valladolid,  an  account  of  the  great  peril  they  are  in  ; and  if,  during  those  nine
days,  they  be  not  reinforced  sufficiently  to  offer  you  combat,  they  will  put  themselves  fully
under  your  obedience.  In  the  mean  time,  should  you  or  your  army  be  in  want  of  provision
or  stores,  those  of  the  town  will  cheerfully  serve  you  with  both  for  your  money.”  The
duke  made  no  reply,  leaving  it  to  the  duchess,  as  she  was  from  that  country.  She  looked
at  the  duke,  and  said,  “ Well,  my  lord,  what  do  you  say?”  “ Lady,  what  do  you  say  ?
you  are  the  heiress  of  this  country,  and,  as  the  inheritance  comes  through  you,  you  must
reply.”  “ It  will  be  right  then,  my  lord,  that  their  offer  be  accepted  ; for  I do  not  believe
that  the  king  of  Castille  has  any  desire  to  combat  you  so  soon.”  “ I do  not  know  that,”
answered  the  duke  ; “ God  grant  it  may  happen  otherwise  : we  shall  the  sooner  put  an  end
to  the  business ; and  I wish  it  were  to  take  place  within  six  days ; but,  since  you  are
desirous  their  offer  be  accepted,  I consent.”  The  duchess  then  addressed  the  deputies,
saying,  “You  may  return,  for  your  offer  is  accepted;  but  you  must  deliver  up  to  the
marshal  twelve  of  your  principal  citizens,  as  pledges  for  the  due  performance  of  the  treaty.”
They  replied  they  would  do  so,  and,  rising  up,  were  given  to  the  care  of  sir  John  Sounder,
who  conducted  them  back  to  the  marshal,  and  told  him  what  had  passed,  which  gave  him
satisfaction.  The  deputies  returned  to  their  town  and  related  the  success  of  their  mission.
Twelve  of  the  principal  inhabitants  were  sent  to  the  marshal,  and  the  place  was  unmolested,
on  the  terms  mentioned.  In  another  council  they  resolved  to  send  the  same  six  men,  and
no  others,  to  inform  the  king  of  Castille  of  their  situation.  They  rode  to  Valladolid,  where
the  king  resided,  with  part  of  his  council,  and,  their  arrival  being  notified  to  him,  he  was
eager  to  see  them,  to  learn  the  news  and  talk  with  them  ; for  he  was  ignorant  of  the  treaty
they  had  entered  into,  and  that  the  English  were  before  Enten<ja.


CHAPTER  LVIII. — THE  DUCHESS  OP  LANCASTER  AND  HER  DAUGHTER  VISIT  THE  KING  AND

QUEEN  OF  PORTUGAL. THE  INHABITANTS  OF  EXTENSA  RECEIVING  NEITHER  ANSWER

NOR  SUCCOUR  FROM  THE  KING  OF  CASTILLE,  SURRENDER  TO  THE  DUKE  OF  LAN-
CASTER, ACCORDING  TO  THE  TERMS  OF  THEIR  TREATY.

"While  these  six  deputies  were  journeying  tow'ards  Valladolid,  the  duke  of  Lancaster
gave  directions  for  the  departure  of  his  duchess  and  daughter,  the  lady  Catherine,  to  visit
the  king  and  queen  of  Portugal.  On  their  setting  out,  the  duke  said,  “ Constance,  you  will
salute  from  me  the  king  my  son,  my  daughter,  and  the  barons  of  Portugal,  and  give  them
all  the  intelligence  you  can ; how  Entemja  has  entered  into  a treaty  with  me ; but  that  I
doubt  if  John  de  Transtamare,  your  adversary,  wTill  allow  them  to  keep  it,  or  whether  he
will  offer  me  battle ; for  well  I know  that  great  reinforcements  are  to  come  to  him  from
France,  and  those  who  are  eager  for  renown  will  hasten  to  Castille  as  speedily  as  possible.
It  will  be  necessary  for  me  to  be  daily  on  my  guard,  in  expectation  of  an  engagement,  which
you  will  tell  the  king  and  his  barons  ; and  that,  if  I shall  learn  any  thing  for  certain  of  a
combat  being  likely  to  take  place,  I will  instantly  signify  it  to  the  king  of  Portugal.
Desire  him  from  me,  to  be  well  prepared  to  come  to  our  assistance,  in  the  defence  of  our
right,  as  he  has  solemnly  sworn  to  do  in  the  treaties  concluded  between  us.  You  will
return  to  me;  but  leave  our  daughter  Catherine  with  her  sister,  the  queen  of  Portugal,  for
she  cannot  be  better  placed,  nor  more  in  safety.”  “ My  lord,”  replied  the  duchess,  “ all  this
I will  cheerfully  perform.”

The  duchess,  her  daughter,  and  the  ladies  and  damsels  who  accompanied  them,  took


224


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


their  leave  and  departed.  They  were  escorted  to  Oporto  by  the  admiral,  sir  Thomas
Percy,  sir  Evan  Fitzwarren,  the  lord  Talbot,  sir  John  d’  Ambreticourt  and  sir  Maubrun  de
Linieres,  with  one  hundred  spears  and  two  hundred  archers.  The  king  of  Portugal,  hearing
the  duchess  of  Lancaster  and  her  daughter  were  on  the  road,  was  much  pleased,  and  sent
some  of  his  principal  courtiers  to  meet  them,  such  as  the  counts  d’Angouses,  de  Novaire,  sir
Joao  Rodriguez  de  Sa,  sir  Joao  Ferrant  Pacheco,  sir  Vasco  Martin  de  Merlo,  sir  Egeas
Colle,  and  twenty  other  knights.  They  rode  two  long  leagues  before  they  met  the  ladies,
who  received  them  graciously  and  gaily.  The  duchess  politely  made  acquaintance  with  the
different  knights,  and,  as  they  rode  together,  she  conversed  with  much  affability  among
them  all.  Thus  did  they  arrive  at  Oporto,  when  the  duchess  and  her  ladies  were  conducted  to
the  palace.  The  king  was  the  first  who  waited  on  them,  and  kissed  them  all  round  ; then
came  the  queen,  attended  by  her  ladies,  and  received  her  lady-mother  and  sister  most  kindly
and  honourably.  The  whole  palace  was  rejoiced  at  the  arrival  of  these  ladies;  but  I will
not  pretend  to  speak  very  particularly  of  what  passed,  for  I was  not  there  : all  I know  was
from  that  gallant  knight,  sir  Joao  Ferrant  Pacheco,  who  was  present.  The  duchess  took
a proper  opportunity  to  deliver  the  duke’s  message  to  the  king  of  Portugal,  who  replied
with  prudence  and  friendship, — “ Lady  and  cousin,  I am  prepared,  should  the  king  of  Castille
take  the  field,  with  three  thousand  lances,  who  are  stationed  on  the  borders  of  Castille,
whom  I can  collect  in  three  days,  and  I shall  also  bring  with  me  full  twenty  thousand  men  from
the  commonalty  of  the  country,  who  are  not  to  be  despised,  for  they  were  of  the  greatest
service  to  me  at  the  battle  of  Aljubarota.”  “ Sir,”  said  the  duchess,  “ you  say  well,  and  I
am  greatly  thankful  to  you  ; and  if  my  lord  gain  any  further  intelligence,  he  will  instantly
let  you  know.”  Such  was  the  conversation  that  passed  between  the  king  of  Portugal  and
the  duchess  of  Lancaster.

We  will  now  return  to  Ente^a,  and  say  what  success  their  deputies  had  at  Valladolid.
On  their  being  introduced  to  the  king  of  Castille,  they  cast  themselves  on  their  knees,  and
said, — “ Most  redoubted  lord,  if  you  will  condescend  to  listen  to  us,  we  have  been  sent
hither  by  your  town  of  Entenqa,  which  has  been  forced  to  enter  into  a treaty  with  the  duke
and  duchess  of  Lancaster.  The  terms  of  which  are,  that  the  English  will  abstain  from  any
attack  for  nine  days  ; and  if,  within  that  time,  you  shall  come  in  sufficient  force  to  offer  them
combat  and  resist  the  duke,  the  town  will  remain  yours : but,  if  not,  the  town  has  given  up
hostages  to  surrender  it  to  them.  You  will  be  pleased,  most  redoubted  lord,  to  say  what
you  will  do.”  The  king  replied,  that  “ he  would  advise  upon  it,  and  they  should  have  an
answer.”  He  then  left  them,  and  retired  to  his  chamber.  I am  ignorant  if  lie  summoned
his  council  or  not,  or  how  the  matter  was  managed  ; but  these  six  men  were  there  for  eight
days  without  obtaining  any  answer,  nor  did  they  again  see  the  king.  The  day  came  for
the  surrender  of  the  town  before  any  of  the  deputies  returned.  The  duke,  therefore,  sent
his  marshal  to  Entenqa,  on  the  tenth  day,  to  say,  that  if  the  town  were  not  surrendered,
according  to  the  terms  of  the  treaty,  he  would  instantly  cut  off  the  heads  of  the  hostages.
The  marshal,  on  arriving  at  the  barriers,  whither  he  summoned  the  inhabitants,  thus
addressed  them, — “ My  good  people,  the  duke  of  Lancaster  sends  me  to  know  why  you
have  not  brought  him  the  keys  of  the  town,  and  put  yourselves  under  his  obedience,  as  you
were  in  duty  bound  ? The  nine  days  expired,  as  you  know,  yesterday.  If  you  do  not
instantly  comply,  he  will  order  the  heads  of  the  hostages  to  be  struck  off,  and  then  march
hither  to  storm  the  town,  when  you  will  all  be  slain,  without  mercy,  like  to  those  of
Ribadavia.”

The  men  of  Enten<;a,  hearing  this,  were  much  afraid,  not  only  for  themselves,  but  also  for
their  friends  who  were  pledged  for  the  observance  of  the  treaty,  and  replied, — “In  good
truth,  my  lord  marshal,  the  duke  has  reason  for  saying  what  you  tell  us  ; but  we  know  not
what  is  become  of  the  deputies  we  sent  to  the  king  of  Castille,  nor  what  can  have  kept  them
at  Valladolid.”  “ Sirs,  they  may  perhaps  be  confined,”  said  the  marshal ; “ for  the  news
they  carried  could  not  be  very  pleasant  to  the  king,  and  my  lord  will  not  longer  wait.
Consider  well  what  answer  you  make  for,  if  it  be  not  agreeable,  I am  ordered  to  commence
the  attack.”  They  answered  ; “ My  lord,  only  allow  us  time  to  collect  all  the  inhabitants
together,  that  we  may  know  their  determinations.”  “ I consent  to  it,”  said  he.  They


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


£25

entered  tlie  town  once  more,  and,  by  sound  of  trumpet  in  every  street,  the  inhabitants  were
summoned  to  the  market-place,  where,  when  assembled,  tbe  chief  citizens  told  them  ail  that
had  passed  between  them  and  the  marshal.  Having  agreed  to  surrender  the  town,  for  the
release  of  their  hostages  from  prison,  whom  they  were  unwilling  to  lose,  they  returned  to  the
marshal  and  said, — “ Marshal,  your  demands  are  reasonable,  and  we  are  ready  to  receive,  as
sovereigns,  the  duke  and  duchess  of  Lancaster  in  our  town,  of  which  here  are  the  keys.
We  will  accompany  you  to  the  duke’s  quarters,  if  you  will  have  the  goodness  to  escort  us."
“ I will  willingly  do  that,”  said  the  marshal.  There  came  out  of  Entciic-a  upwards  of  sixty
persons,  carrying  with  them  the  keys  of  the  gates  : the  marshal  conducted  them  to  the
duke,  and  obtained  for  them  an  audience,  where  they  were  well  received,  and  had  their
hostages  given  up.  The  duke  entered  Entencja  the  same  day,  where  he  was  lodged,  and
as  many  of  his  people  as  could  be  accommodated.

Four  days  after  the  surrender  of  Entemja,  the  six  deputies  returned  from  Valladolid.
They  were  asked  why  they  had  stayed  so  long;  which  they  answered,  by  saying  they  could
not  help  it.  They  had  indeed  seen  and  spoken  to  the  king,  who  replied  that  he  had  heard
them,  and  would  advise  on  what  answer  to  give;  “ but,  though  we  waited  eight  days  for  it,
we  are  come  back  without  any,  for  no  further  notice  was  taken  of  us.”  They  had  heard  in
Valladolid,  that  the  king  was  expecting  great  succours  from  France  ; that  numbers  of  men
at  arms  were  already  arrived,  and  quartered  up  and  down  the  country ; but  that  their
commanders,  sir  William  de  Lionac  and  sir  Walter  de  Passac,  were  still  behind  : that  the
mam  body  of  the  army,  with  the  knights  and  squires,  were  on  their  march  for  Castille,  but
that  those  who  had  been  retained  to  serve  under  the  duke  of  Bourbon  were  still  at  their
homes.


CHAPTER  LIX. TI1E  COUNT  DE  FOIX  PERMITS  THE  FRENCH  CAPTAINS  TO  PASS  THROUGH

HIS  TERRITORIES,  ON  CONDITION  THEY  PAY  FOR  WHATEVER  THEY  TAKE. THEY

ARRIVE  AT  ST.  JEAN  PIED  DE  PORT,  AT  THE  ENTRANCE  OF  NAVARRE.

Sir  William  de  Lignac  and  sir  Walter  de  Passac  passing  through  France,  assembled  theii
men  in  the  Toulousain,  Narbonnois  and  Carcassone,  where,  as  they  arrived,  they  quartered
themselves  in  the  richest  parts,  and  many  never  paid  anything  for  what  they  took.  News
was  brought  to  the  count  de  Foix  at  Orthes,  where  he  resided,  that  the  French  men  at  arms
were  advancing  near  his  country,  with  the  intent  of  marching  through  it  in  their  way  to
Castille.  Those  who  told  him  this  added, — “ But,  my  lord,  the  mischief  is,  that  they  pay
for  nothing  they  take,  and  the  people  fly  before  them  as  if  they  were  English.  The  captains
are  still  at  Carcassone,  and  their  men  overrun  from  thence  all  the  adjacent  countries.  They
cross  the  Garonne  at  Toulouse,  and  enter  Bigorre,  from  whence  they  will  soon  be  in  your
territories ; and,  if  they  do  there  what  they  have  done  on  their  march,  they  will  greatly
injure  your  domains  of  Bearn.  Consider,  therefore,  how  you  will  act.”  The  count  de  Foix,
who  had  instantly  formed  his  resolution,  replied, — “ I will,  that  all  my  castles,  as  well  in
Foix  as  in  Bearn,  be  well  garrisoned  with  men  at  arms,  and  that  all  the  country  be  put  on
its  guard,  as  if  an  immediate  battle  were  to  take  place ; for  I will  not  suffer  from  the  wars
in  Castille.  My  lands  are  free  ; and,  if  the  French  want  to  pass  through  them,  they  shall
truly  pay  for  whatever  they  may  want,  or  they  shall  be  shut  against  them.  This  I order
you,  sir  William  and  sir  Peter  de  Bearn,  to  see  obeyed.”  These  two  knights  were  bastard-
brothers,  valiant  in  arms,  and  able  to  support  the  count’s  orders.  They  replied,  they  would
undertake  the  charge  willingly.

Proclamation  was  made,  throughout  the  territories  of  the  count,  for  every  one  to  provide
himself  with  proper  arms,  and  to  be  prepared  to  march  on  instant  notice,  wdierever  sent  for.
Numbers  came  to  Foix,  Bearn,  and  the  stewartry  of  Toulouse,  prepared  for  battle.  Messire
Espaing  de  Lyon,  with  a hundred  good  lances  and  men  at  arms,  was  sent  to  the  city  of
Pamiers ; messire  Ricart  de  Saint  Leger,  to  Savredun ; Peter  de  Bearn  held  Mazeres  with  a
hundred  lances ; messire  Pierre  Cabestan  was  at  Bellepuich  at  the  entrance  into  the  county
of  Foix  ; messire  Pierre  Menaut  de  Noailles  with  fifty  lances,  at  Saint  Shibaut,  on  the

VOL.  II.  Q


22  G


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


Garonne  ; inessire  Pierre  de  la  Roche  at  Palaminich  ; the  bastard  d’Espaigne,  at  the  castle  of
Lamesen ; messire  Arnault  Guillaume,  with,  in  all,  a hundred  lances,  at  Morlans ; messire
Guy  de  la  Motte,  at  Pau ; messire  Raymond  de  Ohastel-Neuf,  at  Mont-de-Marsan ; messire
Evan  de  Foix,  bastard  son  to  the  count,  at  Sauveterre  ; messire  Berdruc  de  Nebosem,  at
Montesquieu;  messire  Jean  de  Saint  Marcille,  at  Aire;  messire  Elector  de  la  Garde,  at
Oron ; Jean  de  Chastel-Neuf,  at  Montgerviel ; Jean  de  Morlans,  at  Erciel.  Messire
Raymond  l’Aisne,  who  had  the  command  of  the  castle  of  Malvoisin,  was  ordered  to  be  very
attentive  to  the  whole  of  that  frontier,  and  sent  his  cousin,  sir  Arnaulton  d’Espaign,  to  St.
Gaudens.  In  short,  there  was  not  a town  or  castle  in  Foix  and  Bearn  unprovided  with
men  at  arms,  which  the  count  said  were  sufficient  to  oppose  double  their  numbers ; for  they
amounted,  in  the  whole,  to  twenty  thousand  picked  men  at  arms.

It  was  told  to  sir  William  de  Lignac,  who  resided  at  Toulouse,  and  sir  Walter  de  Passac,
at  Carcassone,  how  the  count  de  Foix  had  summoned  his  men  at  arms  and  reinforced  all  his
garrisons ; and  that  it  was  reported  he  would  not  suffer  their  army  to  pass  through  his
country.  The  two  knights,  on  hearing  this,  though  captains  of  the  others,  were  much
astonished,  and  appointed  a day  to  meet  and  confer  on  the  subject.  They  met  at  the  castle
of  Aury,  half  way  between  Toulouse  and  Carcassone,  when  the  following  conversation  passed
on  the  means  of  gaining  permission  from  the  count  de  Foix  to  march  through  his  territories  : —

“ I wonder,”  said  sir  William,  “ very  much,  that  neither  the  king  of  France  nor  his
council  have  written  to  him,  to  obtain  liberty  for  us  to  march  quietly  through  Foix  and
Bearn.  You  must  go  to  him,  sir  Walter,  and  amicably  explain  how  we  are  sent  by  the
king  of  France  to  continue  our  march  peaceably,  and  to  pay  for  whatever  we  may  want ; for
you  must  know,  that  the  count  de  Foix  is  so  powerful,  that  he  can,  if  he  please,  shut  up  the
passage,  and  force  us  to  go  round  by  Arragon,  which  would  be  too  long,  and  much  against  us.
In  truth,  I know  not  of  whom  he  is  suspicious,  nor  why  he  has  thus  strengthened  his  towns
and  castles,  nor  if  he  have  formed  any  connexion  with  the  duke  of  Lancaster ; but  I beg  of
you  to  go  thither,  and  learn  the  truth  of  what  we  have  heard.”  “ I will  willingly  do  so,”
replied  sir  Walter;  and  the  two  knights,  having  dined  together,  took  leave  of  each  other,
and  departed  different  ways  : sir  William  de  Lignac  returned  to  Toulouse  ; and  sir  Walter
de  Passac,  attended  by  only  forty  horse,  crossed  the  Garonne  at  St.  Thibaut,  where  he  met
sir  Menaut  de  Noailles,  who  entertained  him  handsomely.  Sir  Walter  asked,  where  he
could  find  the  count  de  Foix.  He  replied,  “At  Orthes.”  The  two  knights  having  passed
some  little  time  together,  conversing  on  different  matters,  separated  ; and  sir  Walter  went  to
St.  Gaudens,  where  he  made  good  cheer.  On  the  morrow  he  came  to  St.  John  de  Riviere,
and,  riding  through  Lane-bourg,  skirted  Malvoisin,  and  lay  at  Tournay,  an  inclosed  town  of
France.  The  next  day  he  dined  at  Tarbes,  and  stayed  the  whole  day  : having  met  the  lord
d’Anchin,  and  sir  Menaut  de  Barbasan,  two  great  barons  of  Bearn,  they  had  much  conver-
sation together  ; but,  as  the  lord  de  Barbasan  was  an  Armagnac,  he  would  not  say  anything
favourable  of  the  count  de  Foix.  Sir  Walter,  on  the  morrow,  left  Tarbes,  and  dined  at
Morlas  in  Bearn,  where  he  found  sir  Reginald  William,  bastard-brother  to  the  count,  who
received  him  kindly,  and  said, — “ Sir  Walter,  you  will  meet  my  lord  of  Foix  at  Orthes,  who,
you  may  be  assured,  will  be  glad  to  see  you.”  “ God  grant  it  may  be  so,”  answered  sir
Walter  ; “ for  I am  come  purposely  to  wait  on  him.”  They  dined  together,  and  sir  Walter
went  afterwards  to  Montgerbeil  where  he  lay.  On  the  ensuing  day  he  arrived  at  Orthes,
about  eight  o’clock  in  the  morning,  but  could  not  see  the  count  until  the  afternoon,  when  he
usually  left  his  chamber.  The  count  de  Foix,  hearing  of  the  arrival  of  sir  Walter  de  Passac,
hastened  to  leave  his  apartment  sooner  than  common  ; and  sir  Walter,  seeing  him  come  out
of  his  chamber,  advanced  to  meet  him,  and  saluted  him  very  respectfully.  The  count,  who
was  perfectly  polite,  returned  the  salute ; and,  taking  him  by  the  hand,  said, — “ Sir  Walter,
you  are  welcome  : what  business  has  brought  you  to  Bearn  ?”  “ My  lord,”  replied  the
knight,  “ sir  William  de  Lignac  and  myself,  whom  the  king  of  France  has  appointed  com-
manders of  the  force  which,  you  must  have  heard,  he  is  sending  to  assist  the  king  of
Castille,  have  been  given  to  understand  that  you  intend  to  prevent  us,  by  shutting  your
country  of  Bearn  against  us  and  our  men.”  The  count  replied, — “ Sir  Walter,  under  favour,
I never  mean  to  close  my  country  against  you,  nor  any  person  who  may  travel  peaceably


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


through  it,  and  pay  honestly  and  fairly  for  whatever  they  may  want,  to  the  satisfaction
of  my  people  ; for  I have  sworn  to  defend  arid  protect  them  in  their  rights,  as  good
landholders  ought  to  do,  for  upon  these  terms  do  they  possess  them.  But  I have  heard
that  you  have  a set  of  Bretons,  Barrois,  Lorainers  and  Burgundians,  who  never  think  of
paying.  It  is  against  such  I shall  close  my  country ; for  I will  not  have  my  people
harassed  nor  oppressed.”

“ It  is  the  intention  of  my  brother-commander  and  myself,”  replied  sir  Walter,  “ that  no
one  pass  through  your  lands  without  paying  for  all  things  peaceably  and  to  the  contentment
of  your  people,  otherwise  let  him  be  arrested  and  punished  according  to  your  laws,  and  make
restitution  for  the  damage  he  may  have  done,  or  we  will  make  satisfaction  for  him,  on  having
him  given  up  to  us;  and,  if  no  gentleman,  we  will  inflict  such  exemplary  justice  on  him,  in
the  presence  of  your  people,  that  all  may  take  warning.  Should  the  offender  be  a gentleman,
we  will  make  ample  restitution  for  what  he  may  have  done,  should  he  be  unable  so  to  do
himself.  This  order  shall  be  proclaimed  by  sound  of  trumpet,  in  all  our  quarters;  and  we
will  have  it  repeated  when  on  the  point  of  entering  your  territories,  so  that  no  one  may
excuse  himself,  by  pleading  ignorance,  and  in  consequence  act  otherwise  than  honestly.  Tell
me,  if  this  be  satisfactory  to  you.”  “Yes,  sir  Walter,”  replied  the  count,  “ I am  contented
with  what  you  say  ; and  you  are  welcome  to  this  country,  for  I see  you  with  pleasure  : but
come,  let  us  go  to  dinner,  it  is  now  time,  and  we  can  have  some  further  conversation.
Accursed  be  this  war  of  Portugal,  sir  Walter;  for  I never  suffered  so  much  as  I did  in  one
battle  between  the  kings  of  Castille  and  Portugal,  when  I lost  the  flower  of  my  men  at  arms
from  Bearn,  who  were  there  slain.  When  they  took  leave  of  me,  I forwarned  them  to  act
with  caution,  for  the  Portuguese  were  a hardy  race,  who,  whenever  they  had  the  upper
hand,  showed  mercy  to  none.  I advise  you,  therefore,  that  when  you  and  sir  William  de
Lignac,  who  are  the  commanders  of  the  men  at  arms  that  have  passed,  and  of  those  that  are
to  follow,  are  arrived  in  Castille,  and  the  king  asks  counsel  of  you,  you  be  not  too  hasty  in
recommending  a battle  with  the  duke  of  Lancaster  and  the  king  of  Portugal,  without
evident  advantage,  nor  with  the  English  and  Portuguese ; for  they  are  a hungry  race,  and
the  English  are,  for  two  reasons,  eager  to  fight.  They  have  not  gained  anything  for  some
time,  but  rather  lost,  consequently  are  poor : they  therefore  wish  to  hazard  an  engagement,
in  hopes  of  gain  ; and  those  who  are  bold,  and  anxious  to  obtain  the  property  of  others,  fight
valiantly,  and  are  commonly  fortunate.  The  other  reason  is,  that  the  duke  of  Lancaster
sees  clearly  he  can  never  succeed  in  winning  the  crown  of  Castille,  which  he  claims  in  right
of  his  wife,  but  by  a battle  ; and  that,  if  the  day  should  be  his,  and  the  king  defeated,  the
whole  of  Castille  would  surrender,  and  tremble  before  him.  For  this  he  has  landed  in
Galicia,  and  given  one  of  his  daughters  in  marriage  to  the  king  of  Portugal,  who  is  to  assist
him  with  all  his  might  in  his  claim.  I mention  this ; because,  should  matters  turn  out
unfortunate,  you  and  sir  William  de  Lignac  would  be  more  blamed  than  any  others.”

“ My  lord,”  answered  sir  Walter,  “ I return  you  many  thanks  for  the  advice  you  give  me.
I ought  to  follow  what  you  say ; for  you  are,  at  this  day,  the  wisest  of  Christian  princes,
and  the  most  fortunate  in  your  affairs.  But  my  companion  and  myself  are  under  the  duke
of  Bourbon,  who  is  our  commander-in-chief ; and,  until  he  be  arrived  in  Castille,  we  shall
not  hasten  our  march,  and  will  not,  for  what  any  person  may  say,  press  the  engaging  with
our  enemies.”  Other  conversation  now  took  place,  until  the  count  de  Foix  called  for  wine.
When  it  was  brought,  sir  Walter  and  all  present  drank  of  it,  and  took  leave  of  the  count,
who  re-entered  his  chamber.  Sir  Walter  returned  to  his  lodging,  accompanied  by  the
knights  of  the  count’s  household ; and,  at  the  usual  hour,  he  again  went  to  the  castle  and
supped  with  the  count.  On  the  morrow,  after  dinner,  sir  Walter  took  leave  of  the  count,
who,  among  other  gifts,  presented  him  on  his  departure  with  a handsome  horse  and  mule.  Sir
Waiter,  having  returned  him  his  thanks,  and  his  attendants  being  ready,  mounted  his  horse
and  quitted  Orthes  for  Erciel,  where  he  lay  that  night.  He  arrived  at  Tarbes  the  following
day,  for  he  had  ridden  hard  to  finish  this  day’s  journey,  where  he  halted,  that  he  might
write  to  sir  William  de  Lignac  respecting  the  success  of  his  visit  to  the  count  de  Foix.  He
told  him  he  might  order  the  army  to  advance,  as  they  would  find  the  country  of  Bearn  and
the  towns  open  to  them,  by  paying  for  whatever  they  might  want,  but  not  otherwise.  The

Q 2


228


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


messenger  delivered  this  letter  to  sir  William  de  Lignac  at  Toulouse,  who,  having  read  it,
communicated  the  contents  to  the  leaders  of  the  men  at  arms,  and  gave  them  orders  to  begin
the  march,  and  to  pay  for  whatever  they  might  want  in  Bearn,  or  they  would  be  called
upon  to  make  due  restitution.  This  order  was  proclaimed,  by  sound  of  trumpet,  in  all  their
quarters  ; and,  shortly  after,  the  men  at  arms  began  their  march  from  Toulouse,  Carcassone,
and  other  places,  towards  Bigorre.  Sir  Wiliam  de  Lignac  left  Toulouse,  and,  on  his  arrival
at  TarbeS,  found  his  brother-commander,  sir  Walter  de  Passac.  They  mutually  entertained
each  other  with  good  cheer,  as  was  natural,  while  their  men  at  arms  were  continually  passing
towards  Bigorre,  where  they  were  to  assemble  and  traverse  Foix  and  Bearn,  in  a body,  to
cross  the  Gave  at  Orthes.

The  instant  you  leave  Bearn  you  enter  the  country  of  the  Basques*,  where  the  king
of  England  has  large  possessions  in  the  archbishopric  of  Bordeaux  and  bishopric  of
Bayonne.  The  inhabitants  of  fourscore  villages  with  churches,  attached  to  England,  on
hearing  of  this  march  of  the  French,  were  greatly  alarmed  lest  their  country  would  be  over-
run and  spoiled ; for  at  that  time  there  were  not  any  men  at  arms  to  defend  it.  Those,
therefore,  counselled  together  who  were  of  the  most  influence  and  of  the  largest  properties,
and  determined  to  negotiate  with  the  French  for  the  ransom  of  their  country.  They,  in
consequence,  sent  four  deputies  to  Orthes,  empowered  to  treat  for  peace.  They  related  to
Ernauton  du  Pin,  a squire  of  the  count  de  Foix,  an  agreeable  and  discreet  man,  the  cause  of
their  coming,  and  entreated  him,  when,  in  two  days’  time,  sir  William  and  sir  Walter  should
come  to  Orthes,  to  assist  them  in  their  treaty.  This  Ernauton  readily  promised ; and  as
they  lodged  with  him,  he  aided  them  so  much  that  they  were  well  satisfied  to  pay  two
thousand  francs  to  save  their  country  from  ruin.  The  count  de  Foix  again  entertained  the
commanders  at  dinner,  and  gave  sir  William  de  Lignac  a beautiful  horse.  On  the  morrow,
they  marched  to  Sauveterre,  and  entered  the  country  of  the  Basques : and  though  it  had
been  ransomed,  they  seized  provision  wherever  they  found  any,  but  continued  their  march,
without  doing  further  mischief,  to  St.  Jean  Pied  de  Port,  at  the  entrance  of  Navarre.


CHAPTER  LX. SIR  JOHN  HOLLAND  AND  SIR  REGINALD  DE  ROYE  PERFORM  A TILT,  IN  THE

TOWN  OF  ENTEN9A,  BEFORE  THE  KING  AND  QUEEN  OF  PORTUGAL  AND  THE  DUKE  AND
DUCHESS  OF  LANCASTER.

You  have  before  heard  how  the  town  of  Entemja  surrendered  to  the  duke  of  Lancaster,
for  the  king  of  Castille  sent  thither  no  assistance  ; and  how  the  duchess  of  Lancaster  and  her
daughter  visited  the  king  and  queen  of  Portugal  at  Oporto,  when  the  king  and  his  court,  as
was  right,  received  them  most  honourably.  During  the  stay  of  the  duke  of  Lancaster  in
Enten9a,  a herald  arrived  from  Valladolid,  who  demanded  where  sir  John  Holland  was
lodged.  On  being  shown  thither,  he  found  sir  John  within;  and,  bending  his  knee,  presented
him  a letter,  saying,  “ Sir,  I am  a herald  at  arms,  whom  sir  Reginald  de  Roye  sends  hither :
he  salutes  you  by  me,  and  you  will  be  pleased  to  read  this  letter.”  Sir  John  answered,  he
would  willingly  do  so.  Having  opened  it,  he  read  that  sir  Reginald  de  Roye  entreated  him,
for  the  love  of  his  mistress,  that  he  would  deliver  him  from  his  vow,  by  tilting  with  him
three  courses  with  the  lance,  three  attacks  with  the  sword,  three  with  the  battle-axe,  and
three  with  the  dagger;  and  that,  if  he  chose  to  come  to  Valladolid,  he  had  provided  him  an
escort  of  sixty  spears ; but,  if  it  were  more  agreeable  to  him  to  remain  in  Enten9a,  he  desired
he  would  obtain  from  the  duke  of  Lancaster  a passport  for  himself  and  thirty  companions.

When  sir  John  Holland  had  perused  the  letter,  he  smiled,  and  looking  at  the  herald,  said,
— “ Friend,  thou  art  welcome ; for  thou  hast  brought  me  what  pleases  me  much,  and  I accept
the  challenge.  Thou  wilt  remain  in  my  lodging  with  my  people,  and,  in  the  course  of  to-
morrow, thou  shalt  have  my  answer,  whether  the  tilts  are  to  be  in  Galicia  or  Castille.”  The
herald  replied,  “ God  grant  it.”  He  remained  in  sir  John’s  lodgings,  where  he  was  made
comfortable ; and  sir  John  went  to  the  duke  of  Lancaster,  whom  he  found  in  conversation
with  the  marshal,  and  showed  the  letter  the  herald  had  brought.  “ Well,”  said  the  duke,
* Basques,  a small  country  near  the  Pyrenees,  hounded  by  Spain,  the  sea,  the  river  Adour,  and  Bearn.


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


220


“ and  have  you  accepted  it  ? ” “ Yes,  by  my  faitli,  have  I ; and  why  not  ? I love  nothing

better  than  fighting,  and  the  knight  entreats  me  to  indulge  him  : consider,  therefore,  where
you  would  choose  it  should  take  place.”  The  duke  mused  awhile,  and  then  said  ; “ It
shall  be  performed  in  this  town  : have  a passport  made  out  in  what  terms  you  please,  and  I
will  seal  it.”  “ It  is  well  said,”  replied  sir  John  ; “ and  I will,  in  God’s  name,  soon  make
out  the  passport.”  The  passport  was  fairly  written  and  sealed,  for  thirty  knights  and  squires
to  come  and  return  ; and  sir  John  Holland,  when  he  delivered  it  to  the  herald,  presented  him
with  a handsome  mantle  lined  with  minever,  and  twelve  nobles.  The  herald  took  leave  and
returned  to  Valladolid,  where  he  related  what  had  passed,  and  shewed  his  presents.

News  of  this  tournament  was  carried  to  Oporto,  where  the  king  of  Portugal  kept  his  court.
“ In  the  name  of  God,”  said  the  king,  “ I will  be  present  at  it,  and  so  shall  my  queen  and  the
ladies.”  “ Many  thanks,”  replied  the  duchess ; “ for  I shall  be  accompanied  by  the  king
and  queen  when  I return.”  It  was  not  long  after  this  conversation,  that  the  king  of  Portugal,
the  queen,  the  duchess,  with  her  daughter,  and  the  ladies  of  the  court,  set  out  for  Entenqa,
in  grand  array.  The  duke  of  Lancaster,  when  they  were  near  at  hand,  mounted  his  horse;
and,  attended  by  a numerous  company,  went  to  meet  them.  When  the  king  and  duke  met,
they  embraced  each  other  most  kindly,  and  entered  the  town  together,  where  their  lodgings  were
as  well  prepared  as  they  could  be  in  such  a place,  though  they  were  not  so  magnificent  as  if
they  had  been  at  Paris.  Three  days  after  the  arrival  of  the  king  of  Portugal,  came  sir
Reginald  de  Roye,  handsomely  accompanied  by  knights  and  squires,  to  the  amount  of  six
score  horse.  They  were  all  properly  lodged ; for  the  duke  had  given  his  officers  strict
orders  they  should  be  well  taken  care  of.  On  the  morrow,  sir  John  Holland  and  sir
Reginald  de  Roye  armed  themselves,  and  rode  into  a spacious  close  in  Eiitencpa,  well  sanded,
where  the  tilts  were  to  be  performed.  Scaffolds  were  erected  for  the  ladies,  the  king,  the
duke,  and  the  many  English  lords  who  had  come  to  witness  the  combat ; for  none  had  stayed
at  home.

The  two  knights  who  were  to  perform  this  deed  of  arms,  entered  the  lists  so  well  armed
and  equipped  that  nothing  was  wanting.  Their  spears,  battle-axes  and  swords,  were
brought  them  ; and  each,  being  mounted  on  the  best  of  horses,  placed  himself  about  a bow-
shot distant  from  the  other,  but,  at  times,  they  all  pranced  about  on  their  horses  most
gallantly,  for  they  knew  every  eye  to  be  upon  them.  All  being  now  arranged  for  their
combat,  which  was  to  include  everything,  except  pushing  it  to  extremity,  though  no  one
could  foresee  what  mischief  might  happen,  nor  how  it  would  end  ; for  they  were  to  tilt  with
pointed  lances,  then  with  swords,  which  were  so  sharp  that  scarcely  a helmet  could  resist
their  strokes ; and  these  were  to  be  succeeded  by  battle-axes  and  daggers,  each  so  well
tempered  that  nothing  could  withstand  thorn.  Now,  consider  the  perils  those  run  who
engage  in  such  combats  to  exalt  their  honour ; for  one  unlucky  stroke  puts  an  end  to  the
business.

Having  braced  their  targets  and  examined  each  other  through  the  visors  of  their  helmets,
they  spurred  on  their  horses,  spear  in  hand.  Though  they  allowed  their  horses  to  gallop  as
they  pleased,  they  advanced  on  as  straight  a line  as  if  it  had  been  drawn  with  a cord,
and  hit  each  other  on  the  visors,  with  such  force  that  sir  Reginald’s  lance  was  shivered  into
four  pieces,  which  flew  to  a greater  height  than  they  could  ha  ve  been  thrown.  All  present
allowed  this  to  be  gallantly  done.  Sir  John  Holland  struck  sir  Reginald  likewise  on  the
visor,  but  not  with  the  same  success,  and  I will  tell  you  why ; sir  Reginald  had  but  slightly
laced  on  his  helmet,  so  that  it  was  held  by  one  thong  only,  which  broke  at  the  blow,  and
the  helmet  flew  over  his  head,  leaving  sir  Reginald  bare-headed.  Each  passed  the  other,
and  sir  John  Holland  bore  his  lance  without  halting.  The  spectators  cried  out  that  it  was
a handsome  course.  The  knights  returned  to  their  stations,  when  sir  Reginald’s  helmet  was
fitted  on  again,  and  another  lance  given  to  him  : sir  John  grasped  his  own,  which  was  not
worsted.  When  ready,  they  set  off  full  gallop,  for  they  had  excellent  horses  under  them,
which  they  well  knew  how  to  manage,  and  again  struck  each  other  on  the  helmets,  so  that
sparks  of  fire  came  from  them,  but  chiefly  from  sir  John  Holland’s.  Lie  received  a very
severe  blow,  for  this  time  the  lance  did  not  break ; neither  did  sir  John’s,  which  hit  the
visor  of  his  adversary  without  much  effect,  passing  through  and  leaving  it  on  the  crupper  of


230


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  & c.


the  horse,  and  sir  Reginald  was  once  more  bare-headed.  “ Ha,”  cried  the  English  to  the
French,  “ he  does  not  fight  fair ; why  is  not  his  helment  as  well  buckled  on  as  sir  John
Holland’s?  We  say  he  is  playing  tricks  : tell  him  to  put  himself  on  an  equal  footing  with
his  adversary.”  “ Hold  your  tongues,”  said  the  duke,  “ and  let  them  alone  : in  arms  every
one  takes  what  advantage  he  can  : if  sir  John  think  there  is  any  advantage  in  thus  fastening
on  the  helmet,  he  may  do  the  same.  But,  for  my  part,  were  I in  their  situations,  I would
lace  my  helmet  as  tight  as  possible  ; and  if  one  hundred  were  asked  their  opinions,  there
would  be  fourscore  of  my  way  of  thinking."  The  English,  on  this,  were  silent,  and  never
again  interfered.  The  ladies  declared  they  had  nobly  justed ; and  they  were  much  praised
by  the  king  of  Portugal,  who  said  to  sir  John  Fernando, — “ In  our  country  they  do  not  tilt
so  well,  nor  so  gallantly  : what  say  you,  sir  John  ?”  “ By  my  faith,  sir,”  replied  he,  “ they  do
tilt  well  ; and  formerly  I saw  as  good  jiists  before  your  brother,  when  we  were  at  Elvas  to
oppose  the  king  of  Castille,  between  this  Frenchman  and  sir  William  Windsor  ; but  I never
heard  that  his  helmet  was  tighter  laced  then  than  it  is  now.”  The  king  on  this  turned  from  sir
John  to  observe  the  knights,  who  were  about  to  begin  their  third  course.  Sir  John  and  sir
Reginald  eyed  each  other,  to  see  if  any  advantage  were  to  be  gained,  for  their  horses  were  so
excellent  that  they  could  manage  them  as  they  pleased,  and,  sticking  spurs  into  them,  hit
their  helmets  so  sharply  that  their  eyes  struck  fire,  and  the  shafts  of  their  lances  were  broken.
Sir  Reginald  was  again  unhelmed,  for  he  could  never  avoid  this  happening,  and  they  passed
each  other  without  falling.  All  now  declared,  they  had  well  justed  ; though  the  English,
excepting  the  duke  of  Lancaster,  blamed  greatly  sir  Reginald  : but  he  said,  “ he  considered
that  man  as  wise  who  in  combat  knows  how  to  seize  his  vantage.  Know,11  added  he,
addressing  himself  to  sir  Thomas  Percy  and  sir  Thomas  Moreaux,  “ that  sir  Reginald  de
Roye  is  not  now  to  be  taught  how  to  tilt : he  is  better  skilled  than  sir  John  Holland,  though
he  has  borne  himself  well.”


Battle-axe  Fight  between  Sir  John  Holland  and  Sir  Reginald  De  Roye.  Fioni  cotemporaiv  MSS.,  assisted  by

several  cuts  in  Reiser’s  Maximilian.

After  the  courses  of  the  lance,  they  fought  three  rounds  with  swords,  battle-axes,  and  daggers,
without  either  of  them  being  wounded.  The  French  carried  off  sir  Reginald  to  his  lodgings,
and  the  English  did  the  same  to  sir  John  Holland.  The  duke  of  Lancaster  entertained  this
day  at  dinner  all  the  French  knights  and  squires  : the  duchess  was  seated  beside  him,  and


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &r.


231


sir  Reginald  de  Roye  next  to  her.  After  dinner,  they  entered  the  presence-chamber ; and
the  duchess,  taking  sir  Reginald  hy  the  hand,  led  him  thither : they  were  followed  by  the
other  knights,  who  conversed  on  arms  and  on  other  subjects  a long  time,  almost  until  wine  was
brought.  The  duchess  then  drew  nearer  to  the  French  knights,  and  thus  spoke  : — “ I wonder
greatly  how  you  knights  of  France  can  think  of  supporting  the  claims  of  a bastard  ; for  it
is  well  known  to  the  whole  world,  that  Henry,  who  called  himself  king  of  Castille,  was  a
bastard,  and  how  can  you  thus,  with  your  arms  and  counsel,  disinherit  the  right  heir  of
Castille  and  deprive  him  of  the  crown  ? for  this  I know,  that  myself  and  sister  are  the
legal  daughters  of  the  late  king,  don  Pedro ; and  God,  who  is  Truth  itself,  knows  that  our
claim  on  Castille  is  just.”  The  lady,  when  speaking  of  her  father,  don  Pedro,  could  not
refrain  from  tears,  as  she  doated  on  him.  Sir  Reginald  de  Roye  bowed  to  her,  and  thus
replied  : — “ Madam,  we  know  that  what  you  have  said  is  true  ; but  our  lord,  the  king  of
France,  holds  a different  opinion  from  yours ; and,  as  we  are  his  subjects,  we  must  make
war  for  him,  and  go  whithersoever  he  may  send  us,  for  we  cannot  disobey  him.”  At  these
words,  sir  John  Holland  and  sir  Thomas  Percy  handed  the  lady  to  her  chamber,  and  the
wine  and  spices  were  brought.  The  duke  and  his  company  drank  of  them,  and  the  French
knights  took  their  leave ; the  horses  being  ready  at  their  lodgings,  they  mounted  and  left
Ente^a.  They  rode  that  day  to  Noya,  which  was  attached  to  the  king  of  Castille,  where
they  reposed  themselves,  and  then  continued  their  journey  to  Yalladolid.


CIIAPTER  LXI. THE  KING  OF  PORTUGAL  PROMISES  TO  ENTER  CASTILLE  WHILE  TIIE  DUKE  OF

LANCASTER  FINISHES  THE  CONCIUEST  OF  GALICIA,  AND  THEN  TO  UNITE  THEIR  FORCES.

TnE  king  of  Portugal  and  the  duke  of  Lancaster  had  a long  conference  together  the  day
after  this  tournament,  when,  I believe,  their  plans  of  operation  were  settled.  The  king  of
Portugal  having  assembled  his  army  ready  to  take  the  field,  it  was  determined  that  he  should
enter  Castille,  while  the  duke  remained  in  Galicia,  to  conquer  such  towns  and  castles  as  had
not  acknowledged  him  for  king ; and  it  was  likewise  resolved  that  if  king  John  of
Castille  made  any  movements  which  showed  an  inclination  for  battle,  they  were  to  join
their  forces.  It  was  judged,  that  if  the  two  armies  were  always  united,  there  would  be
difficulty  in  procuring  forage  for  such  numbers.  Other  evils  might  arise  also  respecting  forage
and  quarters  ; for  the  English  are  hasty  and  proud,  and  the  Portuguese  hot  and  impetuous,
easily  angered,  and  not  soon  pacified.  But,  in  the  expectation  of  a battle,  they  would  agree
as  well  together  as  Gascons.

Having  determined  as  above,  the  king  of  Portugal  addressed  the  duke  of  Lancaster, —
“ Sir,  when  I shall  learn  that  you  have  taken  the  field,  I will  do  the  like ; for  my  men
are  ready  and  eager  for  battle.”  The  duke  replied, — “I  will  not  long  continue  idle:  but
as  I have  heard  there  are  some  towns  in  Galicia  still  in  rebellion,  and  that  the  people  will
not  acknowledge  me,  I must  first  conquer  them,  and  will  then  march  where  I may  the
soonest  meet  my  enemies.  Upon  this,  the  king  and  queen  of  Portugal  took  leave  of  the
duke  and  duchess,  as  did  the  lady  Catherine  their  daughter ; for  it  had  been  settled,  that
during  the  war  she  should  live  with  her  sister  in  Portugal,  as  the  place  of  greatest  security
for  her,  and  the  duchess  was  to  return  to  Saint  Jago.  Thus  were  these  matters  arranged,  and
the  king  of  Portugal  and  his  court  set  out  for  Oporto,  and  the  duchess  for  Saint  Jago,  each
party  well  escorted  by  knights  and  squires ; but  the  duke  remained  with  his  army  at
Enten9a,  or  in  the  neighbourhood.  They  were  very  eager  to  commence  the  campaign,  for  it
was  now  the  pleasant  month  of  April,  when  the  grass  was  ripe  in  the  meads,  the  corn  in  ear,
and  the  flowers  in  seed ; for  it  is  so  hot  in  that  country,  that  the  harvest  is  over  in  June  :
they  therefore  wished  to  perform  some  exploits  in  arms  while  the  weather  was  so  fine,  for  it
was  a pleasure  at  such  a season  to  be  out  in  the  fields.

We  must  now  speak  of  the  arrangements  of  the  French,  and  of  the  king  of  Castille,  as
fully  as  we  have  done  of  the  English.


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  Ac.


CHAPTER  LXII. SIR  WILLIAM  DE  LIGNAC  AND  SIR  WALTER  DE  PASSAC  TRAVERSE  TnE

KINGDOM  OP  NAVARRE  WITH  THEIR  ARMY,  AND  ARRIVE  AT  BDRGOS,  WHERE  THEY
MEET  THE  ICING  OF  CASTILLE.

You  have  heard  how  sir  Walter  de  Passac  obtained  permission  from  the  count  de  Foix
for  the  French  army,  intended  for  Castille,  to  pass  through  Bearn.  The  count  likewise  gave,
of  his  own  free  will,  (for  he  was  no  way  bounden  to  do  so,)  very  rich  presents  to  such  knights
and  squires  as  waited  on  him  at  the  castle  of  Orthes,  to  pay  their  respects,  and  tell  him  what
was  passing  in  the  way  of  news.  To  some  he  gave  two  hundred,  to  others  one  hundred,
fifty  or  forty,  florins,  according  to  their  ranks  ; and,  as  the  treasurer  assured  me,  the  passage
of  this  first  division  cost  the  count  de  Foix  one  thousand  francs,  without  including  the
presents  he  made  of  coursers  and  hackneys.  Now  show  me  the  prince  who  does  such  things,
or  who  has  the  inclination  to  do  them.  In  good  truth,  so  desirous  am  I of  speaking  to  his
advantage,  it  is  a pity  that  such  a one  should-ever  grow  old  and  die  ; for  he  is  not  surrounded
by  base  minions,  who  tell  him,  “ Take  this,  give  that  ; take  on  all  sides.”  No;  he  never  had,
nor  will  have,  any  such  about  his  person  : he  does  all  himself;  for  he  has,  by  nature,  abilities
to  know  to  whom  he  should  give,  and  from  whom  he  should  take,  when  required.  True  it
is,  that  the  large  presents  he  makes  oppress  his  people  ; for  his  revenue  is  not  equal  to
giving  every  year  at  least  sixty  thousand  francs,  and  keeping  up  his  establishments,  which
are  unequalled  by  any  one,  and  to  the  amassing  a treasure  to  serve  him  in  case  of  accidents.
Fie  has  been,  for  these  last  thirty  years,  laying  by  large  sums  ; and  they  say  there  is  in  the
tower  of  Orthes  one  hundred  thousand  francs,  thirty  times  told.  Flis  subjects  only  pray  to
God  that  he  may  have  long  life,  and  never  complain  of  anything  he  does ; and  I have
heard  them  say,  that  on  the  day  he  shall  die,  there  will  be  ten  thousand  persons  in
Orthes  who  would  wish  to  die  also.  Consider  that  this  must  be  the  effect  of  their  affection  ;
and,  if  they  have  such  great  love  for  him,  they  have  reason  for  it,  as  he  maintains
strict  justice,  and  his  subjects  enjoy  their  lands  free  and  in  peace,  like  to  a terrestrial
paradise.  Let  it  not  be  thought  that  I thus  speak  through  flattery,  or  my  love  to  him,  or
for  the  presents  he  has  made  me  ; for  I can  readily  prove  all  I have  said  of  the  gallant  count
de  Foix,  and  still  more,  by  a thousand  knights  and  squires,  if  called  upon.  Let  us  return  to
sir  William  de  Lignac  and  sir  Walter  de  Passac,  the  commanders  of  the  men  at  arms
destined  for  Castille.

Flaving  crossed  Basques,  and  the  pass  of  Roncesvalles,  which  took  them  three  days,  (for,
though  it  was  in  the  month  of  April,  the  snows  and  cold  were  so  deep  and  severe,  that  they
had  much  difficulty  in  the  passage  with  their  men  and  horses,)  they  arrived  at  Pampeluna,
the  kingdom  of  Navarre  being  open  to  them.  The  king  of  Navarre  was  unwilling  to
displease  the  king  of  Castille,  as  his  son  Charles  de  Navarre  had  married  his  sister ; and
when  the  last  treaties  were  concluded,  during  the  reign  of  the  late  don  Henry,  they  were  so
strong  as  bound  the  king  of  Navarre  to  peace.  Indeed,  he  can  never  withstand  the  king  of
Castille,  unless  he  have  the  kings  of  Arragon  and  England  for  his  allies.  The  king  of
Navarre  veiy  amicably  received,  at  Pampeluna,  the  leaders  of  this  force*,  and  had  them,
with  some  other  knights  that  accompanied  them,  to  dine  with  him  in  his  palace.  After
dinner,  he  led  them  into  his  council  chamber,  and  began  conversations  on  different  subjects,
(for  he  was  a wondrous  subtle  and  eloquent  man,)  and  at  last  turned  the  discourse  on  France,
and  harangued  on  the  wrongs  the  king  of  France  and  his  council  had  unjustly  done  him,  by
depriving  him  of  his  lands  in  Normandy,  which  had  descended  to  him  from  his  predecessors
the  kings  of  France  and  Navarre.  This  injury  he  should  never  forget ; for  he  had  lost,  by
the  seizure  of  lands  in  Normandy,  Languedoc,  and  in  the  barony  of  Montpensier,  about  sixty
thousand  francs  of  yearly  rent,  and  in  respect  of  this  grievance  he  knew  not  to  whom,  except
to  God,  to  apply  for  redress.  “ I do  not  say  this,  my  lords,”  added  he,  “ that  you  should
any  way  interfere  in  the  business ; for  I know  you  have  not  the  power,  nor  would  anything
you  could  say  be  listened  to.  You  are  not  of  the  king’s  council,  but  knights-errant  and

* This  was  in  1 386.  The  French  knights  returned  from  this  expedition  before  the  expiration  of  the  year.  The
king  of  Navarre  died  January  1,  1387. — Ed.


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


2 33

soldiers,  who  are  obliged  to  march  wheresoever  the  king  or  his  council  may  order  you.
This  is  fact ; but  I say  it  to  you,  because  I know  not  to  whom  I can  complain,  except  to  all
who  shall  come  from  France  through  this  country.”

Sir  Walter  de  Passac  replied, — “ Sir,  what  you  say  is  true  : nothing  will  be  done  by  any
recommendation  of  ours  ; for,  in  truth,  we  are  not  of  the  king’s  council.  Wre  go  whither  we
are  sent ; and  my  lord  of  Bourbon,  uncle  to  the  king,  is  our  commander,  and,  as  you  know,
is  to  follow  us  this  road  : you  may  lay  your  complaints  before  him,  either  when  coming  or
on  his  return;  for  he  has  much  influence,  and  your  wrongs  may  be  redressed.  May  God
assist  you,  for  the  honour  you  have  done  us  ! When  returned  to  France,  we  shall  praise
your  attentions,  to  the  king,  as  well  as  to  the  duke  of  Bourbon,  our  commander,  whom  we
shall  see  first.”  Wine  was  now  brought,  of  which  they  partook,  and  then  left  the  king,  who
parted  from  them  kindly,  and  sent  to  each,  at  their  lodgings,  a handsome  war-horse,  to  their
great  joy.  The  men  at  arms  thus  passed  Navarre,  and  arrived  at  Logrogno,  where  they
inquired  after  the  king  of  Castille.  They  were  told  he  had  resided  for  some  time  at  Valladolid,
but  that  he  was  then  at  Burgos,  making  great  preparations  of  stores  and  provision.  They
then  followed  the  road  towards  Burgos,  leaving  that  into  Galicia,  which  country  was  not
secure,  for  the  English  had  marched  far  into  it.  News  was  brought  to  the  king  of  Castille
that  great  succours  were  on  their  march,  to  the  amount  of  two  thousand  lances,  from  France.
This  delighted  him  greatly,  and  he  set  out  from  Valladolid,  accompanied  by  ten  thousand
horse,  for  Burgos,  where  the  French,  on  their  corning,  were  quartered  over  the  country.
They  were  daily  joined  by  others  from  France.


CHAPTER  LXIII. MANY  PLANS  ARE  OFFERED  TO  THE  KING  OF  CASTILLE  FOR  CARRYING

ON  THE  AVAR  : IIE  IS  DETERMINED  BY  THE  COMMANDERS  OF  THE  FRENCH  FORCE  TO

DELAY  AN  ENGAGEMENT  UNTIL  THE  ARRIVAL  OF  THE  DUKE  OF  BOURBON,  AND  TO
MAKE  EXCURSIONS  FROM  THE  DIFFERENT  GARRISONS.

Sir  William  de  Lignac  and  sir  Walter  de  Passac,  on  their  arrival  at  Burgos,  Avaited  cn
the  king,  at  his  palace,  who  received  them  kindly,  and  thanked  them  for  the  trouble  and
pains  they  had  taken,  out  of  affection  to  him,  and  for  coming  to  assist  him.  The  knights
bowed,  and  said, — “ that  if  they  could  do  anything  essential  for  his  service,  their  pains  and
trouble  would  soon  be  forgotten.”  Many  councils  were  holden,  to  consider  whether  to
march  against  the  enemy,  or  carry  on  the  Avar  by  excursions  from  the  garrisons,  until  the
duke  of  Bourbon  arrived.  The  tAvo  knights  said, — “ Send  for  sir  Oliver  du  Guesclin,  sir
Peter  de  Villaines,  sir  Barrois  des  Barres,  Chatelmorant,  and  the  other  companions,  who
are  better  acquainted  with  this  country  than  ourselves,  for  they  have  come  hither  before  us,
and  avo  will  then  confer  together ; and  if  it  please  God,  your  kingdom  shall,  from  our
counsels,  acquire  both  profit  and  renown.”  The  king  said,  they  had  spoken  openly  and
loyally,  and  he  Avas  willing  their  advice  should  be  followed.  Secretaries  were  instantly
employed  in  writing  pressing  letters  to  the  different  knights  and  others  whom  they  wished
to  see,  which  were  sent  off  by  messengers  to  the  different  parts  Avhere  they  resided.  When
it  wras  known  to  them  that  sir  William  de  Lignac  and  sir  Walter  de  Passac  were  come,  and
had  sent  for  them,  they  were  much  pleased.  They  left  the  towns  and  castles  in  which  they
were  garrisoned,  under  the  command  of  such  as  they  could  depend  on,  and  hastened  to
Burgos,  where,  in  a short  time,  good  part  of  the  chivalry  of  France  Avere  collected.

The  king  of  Castille  held  a grand  council  with  the  barons  and  knights  of  France,  on  the
manner  of  commencing  the  campaign,  for  they  knew  the  enemy  had  taken  the  field.  He
Avas  desirous  of  acting  in  a manner  becoming  the  honour  of  a king,  and  for  the  benefit  of  his
country.  Many  were  the  debates,  and  the  amount  of  the  force  in  Castille  Avas  estimated.
It  was  said,  that  the  king  could  summon  into  the  field  thirty  thousand  horse,  with  their
riders  armed,  according  to  the  custom  of  the  country,  with  darts  and  javelins,  and  thirty
thousand  infantry,  if  not  more,  Avitli  slings.  The  French  knights  considered  all  this,  and
said  it  was  certainly  a great  number  of  people,  but  it  was  useless  as  an  army  ; for  they  had
formerly  acted  in  so  cowardly  a manner  that  no  confidence  could  be  placed  in  them.  Through


234


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c


tlicir  cowardice,  the  prince  of  Wales  had  won  the  battle  of  Najarra;  and  the  Castillians  had
been  completely  defeated  by  the  Portuguese  at  Aljubarota.  The  count  de  Lerma  took  up
this  speech,  and  supported  the  Castillians.  By  way  of  excuse,  he  said, — “ W ith  regard  to
the  battle  of  Najarra,  I must  beg  leave  to  speak  to  that.  It  is  true  that  many  noble  knights
from  France  were  present  with  sir  Bertrand  du  Guesclin,  who  fought  valiantly,  for  they
were  all  slain  or  captured ; but  you  must  also  know  that  the  flower  of  knighthood  of  the
whole  world  was  under  the  command  of  the  prince  of  Wales,  whose  good  sense,  courage,
and  prudence,  were  unrivalled.  Such  is  not  now  the  case  with  the  duke  of  Lancaster.  The
prince  had,  at  tlio  battle  of  Najarra,  full  ten  thousand  spears,  and  six  thousand  archers  : and
among  the  chivalry  were  three  thousand  equal  to  the  Rolands  and  Olivers  ; such  as  sir  John
Chandos,  sir  Thomas  Felton,  sir  Oliver  de  Clisson,  sir  Hugh  Calverley,  sir  Richard  de
Pontcliardon,  sir  Garsis  du  Chatel,  the  lord  de  Raix,  the  lord  de  Rieux,  sir  Louis  de  Harcourt,
sir  Guiscard  d’ Angle,  and  hundreds  more  whom  I could  name,  who  were  then  present,  but
who  are  either  dead,  or  have  turned  to  our  side.  These  are  not  now  opposed  to  us,  nor  is
the  event  so  doubtful  as  it  was  in  former  times  : so  that  whoever  has  confidence  in  me,  will
join  my  opinion  for  an  instant  combat ; and  that  we  march  to  cross  the  river  Duero,  which
will  redound  to  our  honour.”

This  speech  of  the  count  de  Lerma  was  attentively  listened  to  by  the  council,  and  many
were  of  his  mind.  Sir  Oliver  du  Guesclin  next  spoke  : — “ Count  de  Lerma,  we  know  that
what  you  have  uttered  proceeds  from  the  good  sense  and  courage  you  possess ; and,  suppose
we  were  to  march  and  offer  combat  to  the  duke  of  Lancaster,  had  we  no  other  enemy,  we
should  do  well ; but  you  have  forgotten  the  king  of  Portugal,  whom  we  shall  have  on  our
rear,  and  whose  forces  consist,  as  we  have  been  informed,  of  twenty-five  hundred  lances,  and
thirty-thousand  other  men.  It  was  the  dependence  on  the  king  of  Portugal  that  made  the
duke  land  in  Galicia ; and  we  know  that  their  alliance  is  very  much  strengthened  by  the
marriage  of  the  king  with  the  duke’s  daughter.  Now,  let  us  hear  what  you  can  say  to  this.”
“ In  God’s  name,”  replied  the  count  de  Lerma,  “ the  French  being  four  thousand  lances,  are
more  than  a match  to  combat  the  duke  of  Lancaster ; and  the  king,  with  his  Castillians  to
the  amount  of  twenty  thousand  horse,  and  thirty  thousand  foot,  as  they  say,  may  surely  with-
stand the  king  of  Portugal : it  appears  to  me  so  clear,  that  I will  risk  the  event  with  them.”

The  knights  from  France,  seeing  themselves  thus  rebuffed  by  the  count  de  Lerma,  said, —
“ By  God,,  you  are  in  the  right,  and  we  in  the  wrong  ; for  we  ought  first  to  have  weighed
what  you  have  said : it  shall  be  so,  since  you  will  it,  and  no  one  seems  to  oppose  it.”  “ My
lords,”  said  the  king,  “ I beg  of  you  to  consider  well  the  advice  you  give  me,  not  through
haste  or  pride,  but  with  all  attention,  that  the  best  plan  may  be  adopted.  I do  not  look  on
what  has  been  said  as  decisive,  nor  approve  of  it : I will  that  we  meet  again  in  this  same
apartment  to-morrow,  and  particularly  that  you,  sir  William  de  Lignac,  and  you,  sir
Walter  de  Passac.  who  have  been  sent  hither  by  the  king  of  France  and  duke  of  Bourbon,
as  the  commanders  in  chief,  do  confer  together,  and  examine  carefully  what  will  be  the  most
honourable  and  profitable  for  my  kingdom  ; for  you  shall  determine  whether  we  march  to
offer  combat  to  our  enemies  or  not.”

They  bowed  to  the  king,  and  said  they  would  cheerfully  attend  to  his  orders.  The  con  -
ference then  broke  up,  and  each  retired  to  his  lodging.  The  French  knights  had  this  day  after
dinner,  and  in  the  evening,  much  conversation  on  the  subject.  Some  said, — “ We  cannot  in
honour  offer  battle  until  the  arrival  of  the  duke  of  Bourbon  ; for  how  do  we  know  what  will
be  his  intentions,  to  fight  or  not  ? Should  we  engage  and  be  victorious,  the  duke  will  be
highly  indignant  against  the  captains  from  France  : should  we  be  defeated,  we  not  only  ruin
ourselves,  but  Castille  also  ; for  if  we  be  slain,  there  can  be  no  hopes  of  recovery  to  the  Castil-
lians, and  the  king  will  lose  his  crown.  We  shall  be  blamed,  should  this  happen,  more  than
any  others ; for  it  will  be  said,  that  we  proposed  the  battle,  and  were  ignorant  advisers.
Besides,  we  know  not  if  the  country  be  unanimous  in  their  affection  to  the  king,  or  whether
they  may  not  have  sent  underhand,  for  the  duke  of  Lancaster  and  his  lady,  as  the  legal  heiress
of  Castille,  for  she  is  the  daughter  of  don  Pedro,  as  is  well  known  to  all.  Now,  should  the
Castillians  say,  on  seeing  the  duke  and  the  English  in  the  field,  that  his  is  the  justest  cause,
for  that  king  John  is  a bastard,  they  may  turn  about  towards  the  latter  end  of  the  day,  as


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  & c.


235


they  did  at  Najarra,  and  leave  us  to  be  slain  on  the  spot.  Tims  there  is  a double  danger  for
the  king  and  for  us.  They  must  be  mad  or  foolish  who  advise  a battle  ; and  why  have  not
those  who  ought  to  have  spoken,  such  as  sir  William  de  Lignac  and  sir  Walter  de  Passae,
delivered  their  sentiments?”  “Because,”  replied  others,  “they  wished  to  know  our
opinions  first ; for  it  is  not  possible  but  that,  when  they  left  the  council  of  France  and  the
duke  of  Bourbon,  they  were  well  instructed  how  to  act.  We  shall  all  know  to-morrow.”
There  was  much  disputing  this  evening  between  the  knights  from  France,  as  well  as  among
those  of  Castille.  The  well-wishers  to  the  king  would  not  advise  him  to  offer  battle,  for  the
reason  that,  if  they  should  be  defeated,  the  kingdom  was  infallibly  lost.  The  king  himself
■was  of  this  opinion  : he  dreaded  the  chances  of  war  ; for  he  was  ignorant  of  the  support  he
should  have,  and  whether  he  was  beloved  by  all  his  subjects  or  not.  The  matter  thus
remained  until  the  morrow,  when  they  were  again  assembled  in  the  presence  of  the  king.

In  this  conference  there  were  many  speakers,  for  all  were  desirous  to  offer  the  king  advice
to  the  best  of  their  abilities.  It  was  visible  the  king  was  against  the  plan  of  the  preceding-
day  ; for  he  had  not  forgotten  the  unfortunate  event  of  the  battle  of  A.ljubarota,  where  he
was  defeated  by  the  king  of  Portugal  with  such  loss,  that  another  similar  to  it  would  lose
him  his  realm.  When  all  had  delivered  their  opinions,  sir  William  de  Lignac  and  sir
Walter  de  Passae  were  asked  theirs;  for,  as  they  were  the  commanders  in  chief,  everything
should  bo  ordered  and  executed  by  them.  The  two  knights  looking  at  each  other,  sir
William  said, — “ Do  you  speak,  sir  Walter.”  “ Not  I,”  replied  sir  Walter : do  you,  for  you
have  been  longer  used  to  arms  than  myself.”  Sir  William,  having  paused  awhile,  thus
spoke  : — “ Sir  king,  you  ought,  methinks,  to  return  many  thanks  to  this  noble  chivalry  of
France,  who  have  come  so  far  to  serve  you  in  your  distress,  and  who  have  shown  you  such
affection  as  to  decline  shutting  themselves  up  in  any  of  your  castles  or  towns,  but  are  eager
to  take  the  field  and  combat  your  enemies  wherever  they  may  find  them  : which,  however,
saving  your  grace  and  the  good  will  you  show,  cannot  be  done  at  present  for  many  reasons ;
the  principal  of  which  is,  the  absence  of  my  lord  the  duke  of  Bourbon,  who  will  soon  arrive
with  a considerable  reinforcement  of  men  at  arms.  There  are  also  many  of  our  knights  and
squires  who  have  never  before  been  in  this  country,  and  are  ignorant  of  the  roads,  to  which
they  must  attend  ; and  things  which  are  hastily  concluded  never  end  well.  Instead,  there-
fore, of  attempting  a general  engagement,  we  shall  carry  on  the  war  for  two  or  three
months,  or  as  long  as  may  be  necessary,  from  different  garrisons,  and  let  the  English  and
Portuguese  overrun  Galicia,  or  other  parts,  if  they  can.  If  they  conquer  a few  towns,  it
will  be  no  great  loss : we  will  regain  them  before  we  quit  the  country,  for  they  shall  only
borrow  them  for  a time.  To  conclude : in  warfare  there  are  many  unforeseen  events,  and
the  English  during  the  hot  season  may,  in  their  various  excursions  through  Galicia,  meet
with  such  difficulties,  and  suffer  such  disorders,  as  may  make  them  repent  ever  having
undertaken  the  business ; for  they  will  not  find  the  climate  like  that  of  France,  nor  the
wines  so  good,  nor  the  water  so  pure,  as  in  our  country  ; but  the  rivers  muddy  and  cold
from  the  melting  of  the  snows  on  the  mountains,  which  will  chill  them  and  their  horses
after  the  burning  heat  of  the  sun  in  the  day-time,  and  be  the  destruction  of  both.  They
are  not  of  iron  or  steel,  and  must  in  the  end  suffer  from  the  heats  of  Castille,  but  like  to
ourselves ; and  we  cannot  any  way  more  easily  defeat  them  than  by  avoiding  a combat,  and
allowing  them  to  go  whithersoever  they  please.  They  will  find  nothing  to  pillage  in  the
low  countries,  nor  anything  to  comfort  themselves ; for,  I am  informed,  that  has  been  all
destroyed  by  our  people,  for  which  I praise  them  greatly ; and,  were  it  now  undone,  I would
have  given  them  such  orders.  Now,  if  any  person  can  give  better  advice,  let  him  do  so ;
for  sir  Walter  and  myself  will  cheerfully  listen  to  him.”

The  council  unanimously  replied : — “We  approve  of  what  sir  William  has  offered,  and
cannot  but  think  it  the  best  advice  for  the  king  and  kingdom  of  Castille.”  It  was  then
determined  to  wait  for  the  duke  of  Bourbon  and  the  stores  before  they  made  preparations
for  taking  the  field,  but  to  garrison  strongly  the  frontier,  and  suffer  the  English  and
Portuguese  to  overrun  Castille  at  their  pleasure;  for,  when  they  returned  from  their
excursions,  they  could  not  carry  away  the  land  with  them.  The  conference  ended,  all  left
the  chamber ; and  this  day  the  king  entertained  at  dinner,  in  his  palace  at  Burgos,  the


230


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


barons  and  knights  of  France  : it  was  magnificently  grand,  according  to  the  custom  in  Spain.
On  the  morrow,  before  noon,  all  the  men  at  arms  were  sent  off  to  -their  different  garrisons,
with  instructions  from  their  leaders  how  to  act.  Sir  Oliver  du  Guesclin,  count  de  Longue-
ville,  was  ordered,  with  a thousand  spears,  to  a tolerably  strong  town  on  the  borders  of
Galicia,  called  Ville-saincte * ; sir  Reginald  and  sir  Tristan  de  Rove  to  another  town,  ten
leagues  further,  but  on  the  frontier  of  Galicia,  called  Ville-d’Agillare-de-Champ  +,  with
three  hundred  lances ; sir  Peter  de  Belesme,  with  two  hundred  lances,  to  Benevente ; the
count  de  Lerma  to  the  town  of  Zamora ; sir  John  des  Barres,  with  three  hundred,  to  the
castle  of  Noya;  sir  John  de  Chatelmorant  and  sir  Tristan  de  la  Jaille,  with  others,  to  the
city  of  Valencia;  the  viscount  de  Besliere  to  the  town  of  Ribesda,  with  sir  John  and  sir
Robert  de  Braquemont.  In  such  manner  were  the  men  at  arms  divided  : sir  Oliver  du
Guesclin  was  nominated  constable,  having  the  largest  body  under  his  command ; and  sir
William  de  Lignac  and  sir  Walter  de  Passac  remained  near  the  king  at  Burgos,  and  attended
him  wherever  he  went.


City  of  Burgos. — From  La  Borde’s  Voyage  Pittoresque  en  Fspagne.

Thus  were  affairs  managed  in  Castillo,  waiting  for  the  duke  of  Bourbon,  who  was  still  in
France  making  his  preparations.  But  we  will  leave  the  armies  of  Castille  and  of  the  duke
of  Lancaster,  for  a short  time,  and  return  to  them  again  when  necessary,  to  speak  of  such
events  as  happened  in  France  and  England ; many  of  which  were  strange  enough,  and
dangerous  to  both  kingdoms,  but  particularly  displeasing  to  the  king  of  England  and  his
council.


CHAPTER  LXIV. — THE  CONSTABLE  DE  CLISSON  MAKES  GREAT  PREPARATIONS  TO  INVADE

ENGLAND. MUCH  MURMURING  AND  DISCONTENT  IN  ENGLAND  AGAINST  KING  RICHARD

AND  HIS  COUNCIL.

1 have  before  related  at  length,  how  the  grand  expedition,  which  was  preparing  at  Sluys
to  invade  England,  was  broken  up ; but  to  show  how  much  the  French  were  in  earnest,  and
that  it  might  not  be  said  they  had  given  it  over  through  cowardice,  but  were  still  eager  to
* “ Ville-saincte.”  Q.  Vilalpando.  t “ Ville-d’Agillare-de-Champ. ’’  Q.  Avila.


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


237


land  in  England,  it  was  ordered  that  the  constable  should  sail  thither  in  the  month  of  May,
when  the  weather  was  fine,  and  the  sea  calm.  His  force  was  to  consist  of  four  thousand
men  at  arms  and  two  thousand  cross-bows,  who  were  to  assemble  in  a town  of  Brittany
called  Treguier*,  situated  on  the  sea  coast,  and  opposite  to  Cornwall.  Ilis  preparations
which  were  very  considerable,  were  all  made  there,  and  the  horses  were  to  embark  at  that  port,
the  more  easily  to  overrun  England;  for  without  horses,  no  war  on  land  can  be  carried  on
with  effect.  In  this  harbour  were  numbers  of  vessels  of  all  descriptions,  which  were  laden
with  wines,  salted  meats,  biscuit,  and  other  things,  in  such  quantities,  as  might  serve  them
four  or  five  months,  without  requiring  anything  from  the  country ; for  the  constable  knew
that  when  the  English  should  hear  of  his  landing,  they  would  destroy  all  the  lowlands,  to
prevent  him  from  having  any  support ; and  it  was  for  this  reason  he  had  provided  such
immense  stores.  Another  large  fleet,  to  invade  England,  was  likewise  prepared  at  Harfleur,
by  the  lord  de  Coucy,  the  lord  de  St.  Pol,  and  the  admiral  of  France,  who  were  to  embark
on  board  of  it  with  two  thousand  spears ; but  it  was  said  that  this  was  solely  intended  to
force  the  duke  of  Lancaster  to  withdraw  himself  and  his  army  from  Castille.  The  duke  of
Bourhon  was  still  at  Paris ; for  lie  knew  the  duke  of  Lancaster  must  return  to  England,  and
it  would  be  unnecessary  for  him  to  take  so  long  a journey  to  Castille.  The  army  of  the
constable  consisted  of  Bretons,  Angevins,  Manceaux,  Saintongers,  and  knights  and  squires
from  the  adjoining  countries.  That  of  the  count  de  St.  Pol  and  the  lord  de  Coucv  was
composed  from  the  Isle  of  France,  Normandy,  and  Picardy.  The  duke  of  Bourbon  had  two
thousand  spears  from  Berry,  Auvergne,  Limousin,  and  lower  Burgundy.  Such  was  the
distribution  of  the  forces  in  France  ; and  every  man  knew  how  he  was  to  be  employed,
whether  in  England  or  Castille.

England  was,  at  this  period,  in  greater  danger  than  when  the  peasants,  under  Jack  Straw,
rose  in  rebellion,  and  marched  to  London ; and  I will  tell  you  the  cause.  The  nobles  and
gentlemen  were  unanimous,  at  that  time,  in  their  support  of  the  king,  but  now  there  were
many  serious  differences  between  them.  The  king  quarrelled  with  his  uncles  of  York  and
Gloucester,  and  they  were  equally  displeased  with  him,  caused,  as  it  was  said,  by  the  intrigues
of  the  duke  of  Ireland,  the  sole  confidant  of  the  king.  The  commonalty,  in  many  towns
and  cities,  had  noticed  these  quarrels,  and  the  wisest  dreaded  the  consequences  that  might
ensue  ; but  the  giddy  laughed  at  them,  and  said,  they  were  owing  to  the  jealousy  of  the
kino’s  uncles,  and  because  the  crown  was  not  on  their  heads.  But  others  said, — “ The  kino-
is  young,  and  puts  his  confidence  in  youngsters  : it  would  be  to  his  advantage  if  he  consulted
his  uncles  more,  who  can  only  wish  the  prosperity  of  the  country,  than  that  puppy,  the
duke  of  Ireland,  who  is  ignorant  of  all  things,  and  who  never  saw  a battle.”  Thus  were
the  English  divided ; and  great  disasters  seemed  to  be  at  hand,  which  was  perfectly  known
all  over  France,  and  caused  them  to  hasten  their  preparations  for  invading  the  country,  and
adding  to  its  miseries.  The  prelates  of  England  were  also  quarrelling;  the  archbishop  of
Canterbury  with  that  of  York,  who  was  of  the  house  of  Neville.  They  hated  each  other
mortally,  because  the  lord  Neville  had  been  appointed  lieutenant  of  Northumberland,  in
preference  to  the  sons  of  the  earl  of  Northumberland,  sir  Henry  and  sir  Ralph  Percy,  which
the  archbishop,  who  was  one  of  the  king’s  council,  had  obtained  for  his  brother,  through  the
duke  of  Ireland.

As  soon  as  the  English  learnt  that  the  camps  near  Slays  were  broken  up,  and  the  invasion
given  over,  great  murmurings  were  general  throughout  England.  Those  who  wished
mischief  said, — “ What  is  now  become  of  our  grand  enterprises  and  our  valiant  captains  ?
Would  that  our  gallant  king  Edward,  and  his  son,  the  prince  of  Wales,  were  now  alive!
We  used  to  invade  France  and  rebuff  our  enemies,  so  that  they  were  afraid  to  show  them-
selves, or  venture  to  engage  us ; and,  when  they  did  so,  they  were  defeated.  What  a
glorious  expedition  did  our  king  Edward,  of  happy  memory,  make,  when  he  landed  in
Normandy,  and  marched  through  France ! After  many  battles  and  other  fine  exploits,  he
defeated  king  Philip  and  the  whole  power  of  the  French  at  Creey,  and  took  Calais  before
he  returned  home.  Where  are  the  knights  and  princes  of  England  who  can  now  do  such
things  ? Did  not  likewise  the  prince  of  Wales,  son  of  this  gallant  king,  make  prisoner  the
* “ Treguier,” — ten  leagues  north-west  of  St.  Brieux,  and  twenty-three  north-east  of  Brest.


23B


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  Ac.


king  of  France,  and  defeat  his  army  at  Poitiers,  with  the  small  force  he  had,  compared  with
that  of  king  John  ? In  those  days  we  were  feared,  and  our  renown  was  spread  abroad,
wherever  chivalry  was  esteemed ; but  at  this  moment  we  must  be  silent,  for  they  know  not
how  to  make  war,  except  on  our  pockets  : for  this  they  are  ready  enough.  Only  a child
reigns  now  in  France,  and  yet  he  has  given  us  more  alarms  than  any  of  his  predecessors,
and  shows  good  courage  and  inclination  to  invade  us.  It  was  not  llis  fault,  but  that  of  his
advisers,  that  he  did  not  attempt  it.  We  have  seen  the  time  when,  if  such  a fleet  had  been
known  to  have  been  collected  at  Sluys,  the  good  king  and  his  sons  would  have  hastened  to
attack  it ; hut  now-a-days  the  nobles  are  delighted  to  have  nothing  to  do,  and  remain  in
peace  ; but  they  will  not  suffer  us  to  live  in  quiet,  as  long  as  we  have  anything  in  our  purses.
We  have  seen  the  time  when  conquests  were  made  by  us  in  France,  and  no  taxes  demanded;
but  every  one  was  made  rich  from  the  great  wealth  which  abounded  in  France.  What  is
become  of  the  immense  sums  which  have  been  raised,  as  well  by  taxes  as  by  the  current
revenue  ? They  must  have  been  wasted  or  purloined.  We  must  know  how  the  country  is
governed,  and  who  are  the  advisers  of  the  king : it  is  not  right  that  such  things  be  longer
unattended  to ; for  this  country  is  not  so  rich,  nor  able  to  bear  the  burdens  France  does,
which  abounds  in  all  things.  It  seems,  also,  that  we  are  weakened  in  understanding  and
activity  as  well  as  in  courage ; for  we  used  to  know  what  was  intended  by  France,  and
what  were  its  plans,  some  months  before  they  could  execute  them,  by  which  we  were
prepared  to  resist  them.  Now,  we  are  not  only  ignorant  of  what  is  going  forward  in
France  ; but  they  are  well  informed  of  all  that  passes,  though  under  the  seal  of  secrecy,  in
our  councils,  and  we  know  not  whom  to  blame.  But  a day  must  come  when  all  this  will
be  public  ; for  there  are  secret  traitors  in  the  council,  and  the  sooner  this  is  inquired  into
the  better : we  may  delay  it  so  long  that  it  will  be  too  late  to  provide  a remedy.”  Such
conversations  were  very  common,  not  only  with  knights  and  squires,  but  among  the
inhabitants  of  many  of  the  towns,  which  placed  the  realm  in  much  danger.

The  knights  and  squires  who  had  been  summoned  to  the  defence  of  the  kingdom,  now
demanded  tlieir  pay  ; and  other  large  sums  were  called  for,  to  defray  the  great  expenses  the
king  and  his  council  had  been  at  in  guarding  the  country  against  the  invasion  from  France.
A.  parliament  was  therefore  assembled  in  London,  of  the  nobles,  prelates,  and  commonalty,
to  consider  of  laying  a general  tax  throughout  the  country  to  answer  all  these  demands.
The  parliament  adjourned  from  London  to  Westminster,  when  those  summoned  attended,
and  indeed  many  others,  who  came  to  hear  news.  The  king  and  his  two  uncles  of  York
and  Gloucester  were  present ; and  the  parliament  was  harangued  on  the  subject  of  the
finances,  and  assured  that  there  was  not  in  the  royal  treasury  more  than  sufficient  to  support,
even  with  economy,  the  usual  expenses  of  the  king.  The  council  said,  there  was  no  other
means  than  laying  a general  tax  on  all  the  country,  if  they  were  desirous  of  paying  the
great  sums  the  defence  of  the  kingdom  had  cost.  Those  from  the  archbishopric  of
Canterbury,  the  bishoprics  of  Norwich  and  Warwick,  the  counties  of  Devonshire,  Hamp-
shire, and  Wiltshire,  readily  assented  ; because  they  knew  better  what  had  been  done,  and
were  more  alarmed  than  those  at  a greater  distance,  in  Wales,  Bristol,  and  Cornwall,  who
were  rebellious,  and  said, — “ We  have  never  seen  any  enemies  come  into  this  country : why
therefore  should  we  be  thus  heavily  taxed,  and  nothing  done  ?”  “ Yes,  yes,”  replied  others  :
“let  them  call  on  the  king’s  council,  the  archbishop  of  York  and  the  duke  of  Ireland,  who
received  sixty  thousand  francs,  for  the  ransom  of  John  of  Brittany,  from  the  constable  of
France,  which  ought  to  have  gone  to  the  general  profit  of  the  kingdom.  Let  them  call  on
sir  Simon  Burley,  sir  William  Elm  ham,  sir  Thomas  Brand,  sir  Robert  Tresilian,  and  sir
John  Beauchamp,  who  have  governed  the  king.  If  they  gave  a true  account  of  the  sums
raised  in  England,  or  were  forced  so  to  do,  there  would  be  more  than  money  enough  to  pay
all  expenses,  and  poor  people  might  remain  in  quiet.”

The  king’s  uncles  were  much  pleased  when  these  speeches  were  told  them  ; for  those  they
had  named  were  unfriendly  to  their  interests,  and  opposed  their  obtaining  any  favours  from
the  court.  They  encouraged  such  discourses ; and,  to  gain  popularity,  said, — “ The  good  people
who  hold  such  language  are  well  advised  in  wishing  to  have  an  account  of  the  management
of  the  finances,  and  in  refusing  to  pay  their  taxes ; for,  in  good  truth,  there  is  cash  enough


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


239


either  in  the  purses  of  the  king  or  of  those  who  govern  him."  By  degrees  this  discontent
was  much  increased  among  the  people,  who  declared  against  any  tax  being  laid  on,  and  who
grew  bolder  in  their  language  when  they  saw  that  the  king’s  uncles,  the  archbishop  of
Canterbury,  the  earls  of  Salisbury  and  Northumberland,  with  many  other  great  barons,
supported  them.  The  ministers,  therefore,  withdrew  the  tax,  and  said  that  nothing  should
be  done  in  the  matter  until  Michaelmas,  when  the  parliament  would  again  meet.

Those  knights  and  squires  who  were  expecting  their  pay  were  much  angered  against  the
king  and  his  council  for  their  disappointment,  and  the  ministers  appeased  them  in  the  best
manner  they  could.  When  the  parliament  broke  up,  and  the  members  went  different  ways,
the  king  did  not  take  leave  of  his  uncles,  nor  they  of  him.  The  king  was  advised  to  retire
into  AY  ales  for  a time  until  more  favourable  circumstances,  which  he  agreed  to,  and  left
London  without  taking  leave  of  any  one.  He  carried  with  him  all  his  council,  except  the
archbishop  of  York,  who  returned  into  his  diocese.  It  was  fortunate  for  him  he  did  so,
otherwise  it  would  have  happened  to  him  as  to  the  other  counsellors  of  the  king,  as  I shall
presently  narrate.  But  I must  speak  as  much  of  France  as  of  England,  when  the  matter
requires  it.


CHAPTER  LXV. THE  CONSTABLE  OF  FRANCE  WITH  SEVERAL  OTHERS  MAKE  PREPARATIONS  TO

INVADE  ENGLAND. THE  DUKE  OF  BRITTANY  PRACTISES  TO  PREVENT  THIS  EXPEDITION.

When  the  sweet  season  of  summer  and  the  delightful  month  of  May  were  come,  in  the  year
of  our  Lord  1387,  while  the  duke  of  Lancaster  was  making  conquests  in  Galicia,  and,  in
conjunction  with  the  king  of  Portugal,  overrunning  Castille  without  opposition  ; there  were,
as  I before  said,  great  preparations  making  in  France  for  the  invasion  of  England,  by  the
constable,  at  Treguier  in  Brittany ; and  by  the  count  de  St.  Pol,  the  lord  de  Coucy,  and  the
admiral  of  France,  at  Harfleur.  They  had  under  their  command  six  thousand  men  at  arms,
two  thousand  cross-bows,  and  six  thousand  lusty  varlets,  whom  they  intended  to  land  at
Dover  and  Orwell.  It  was  ordered,  that  no  one  was  to  embark  unless  he  were  provided
with  suitable  armour  and  provision  for  three  months.  They  were  the  flower  of  chivalry,
and  had  plenty  of  oats  and  hay  for  their  horses.  Their  leaders  had  appointed  a day  for
sailing,  which  was  now  almost  arrived  ; and  their  servants  were  as  busily  employed  as  at
Sluys  in  laying  in  all  stores  and  other  necessaries  at  the  two  ports  of  Treguier  and  Harfleur.
The  men  at  arms,  under  the  count  de  St.  Pol  and  the  admiral,  were  paid  fifteen  days  in
advance  ; but  they  were  still  on  shore,  and  those  in  the  more  distant  parts  were  daily
arriving.  All  things  were  now  in  such  forwardness,  no  one  could  have  imagined  it  would
not  take  place.  It  was  not,  however,  broken  up  by  the  captains,  but  by  a most  extraordinary
event  which  happened  in  Brittany.  The  king  of  France  and  his  council  were  sorely  vexed
thereat ; but,  as  they  could  not  amend  it,  they  were  forced  to  endure  it  as  well  as  they  could,
and  act  prudently,  for  this  was  not  the  moment  of  revenge.  Other  news  was  brought  to  the
king  from  Germany,  at  the  same  time,  which  I will  relate  in  proper  time  and  place ; but  I
will  mention  that  of  Brittany  first,  as  it  so  occurred  in  point  of  time,  and  was  the  most
unfortunate,  though  the  events  in  Germany  wTere  cause  of  greater  expense.

If  I were  merely  to  say,  such  and  such  things  happened  at  such  times,  without  entering
fully  into  the  matter,  which  was  grandly  horrible  and  disastrous,  it  would  be  a chronicle,
but  no  history.  I might,  to  be  sure,  pass  it  by,  if  I had  chosen  it : that  I will  not  do  ; but
relate  fully  the  fact,  if  God  grant  me  life,  abilities,  and  leisure,  to  chronicle  and  historify  the
matter  at  length.  You  have  before  seen,  in  different  parts  of  this  history,  how  sir  John  de
Montfort,  called  duke  of  Brittany  (who  indeed  was  so  by  conquest,  though  not  by  direct
descent,)  had  always  supported  the  English  to  the  utmost  of  his  power  against  France.
He  had  reason  to  attach  himself  to  them  ; for  they  had  made  war  for  him,  and  without  their
assistance  he  would  never  have  conquered  before  Auray  nor  elsewhere.  You  know  also,
from  this  history,  that  the  duke  of  Brittany  had  no  power  over  the  greater  part  of  his  nobles
nor  the  principal  towns ; more  especially  sir  Bertrand  du  Guesclin,  as  long  as  he  lived,  sir
Oliver  de  Clisson  constable  of  France,  the  lords  de  Beaumanoir,  de  Laval,  de  Raix,  de


240


CHRONICI.ES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  & c.


Dinaut,  tlie  viscount  de  Rohan,  and  the  lord  de  Rochefort,  refused  him  obedience  ; and
whichever  way  these  lords  incline,  the  whole  duchy  follow  their  example.  They  were
willing,  indeed,  to  support  him  against  any  power  but  France  ; and  truly  I must  say,  that
the  Bretons  have  ever  gallantly  defended  the  honour  of  France,  as  will  be  apparent  to  any
person  who  shall  read  this  history.  But  let  it  not  be  said,  that  I have  been  corrupted  by
the  favour  of  count  Guy  de  Blois,  (who  has  induced  me  to  undertake,  and  has  paid  me  for
this  history  to  my  satisfaction,)  because  he  was  nephew  to  the  rightful  duke  of  Brittany ;
for  count  Lewis  of  Blois  was  cousin-german  to  St.  Charles,  who  as  long  as  he  lived  was  the
true  duke.  It  is  not  so  ; for  I will  speak  the  truth,  and  go  straight  forward,  without
colouring  one  side  more  than  another,  and  that  gallant  prince  who  patronised  this  history
never  wished  me  in  any  way  to  act  otherwise.

To  return  to  my  subject.  You  have  read  how  the  duke  of  Brittany,  when  he  found  he
could  not  manage  his  subjects,  became  suspicious  of  them,  and  fearful  lest  they  should  arrest
him  and  confine  him  in  one  of  the  king  of  France’s  prisons.  Lie  left  Brittany  for  England,
with  his  household  and  the  lady  Jane  his  duchess,  daughter  of  that  good  knight  sir  Thomas
Holland.  After  staying  there  some  time,  he  went  to  Flanders,  where  he  resided,  with  his
cousin-german  count  Lewis,  upwards  of  a year  and  a half,  when  his  country,  being  more
favourable,  sent  for  him  back.  Some  of  the  towns,  however,  on  his  return,  continued  their
rebellion,  especially  Nantes  ; but  all  the  barons,  knights,  and  prelates,  submitted  to  him,
except  those  whom  I have  before  named.  In  order  to  put  them  under  his  obedience,  by
means  of  some  of  the  principal  cities  which  assented  to  his  plans,  and  for  the  purpose  of  giving
alarm  to  the  king  of  Fi'ance  and  his  council,  who  were  desirous  of  laying  taxes  on  Brittany
similar  to  those  of  France  and  Picardy,  which  he  and  the  country  would  never  suffer,  he
demanded  aid  from  the  king  of  England  of  men  at  arms  and  archers,  assuring  the  council  of
England,  that  if  the  king  or  one  of  his  uncles  would  come  to  Brittany,  in  sufficient  force,
the  whole  country  would  be  open,  and  ready  to  receive  them.

Ring  Richard  and  his  council  were  greatly  pleased  on  receiving  this  intelligence,  which
seemed  to  them  so  good,  that  they  could  not  do  better  than  accept  the  offer,  since  Brittany
was  so  well  inclined  to  receive  them.  They  ordered  thither  the  earl  of  Buckingham,  with
four  thousand  spears  and  eight  thousand  archers,  who,  having  landed  at  Calais,  marched
through  the  kingdom  of  France  without  meeting  any  opposition,  although  they  frequently
offered  battle,  as  you  have  before  read.  When  they  came  to  Brittany,  they  expected  to  find
all  ready  to  receive  them,  as  they  had  indeed  sustained  a long  march  : but  everything  was
contrary  to  what  had  been  promised ; for  the  duke’s  advisers  had  managed  with  so  much
prudence,  that  they  had  made  his  peace  with  the  young  king  of  France  : had  Charles  Y.
been  alive,  it  could  not  have  been  done,  for  he  hated  him  too  much.  The  duke  of  Burgundy,
who  was,  at  that  time,  at  the  head  of  the  government  of  France,  was  greatly  instrumental
in  bringing  this  accommodation  about  through  the  entreaties  of  his  duchess,  who  was  very
nearly  related  to  the  duke  of  Brittany.  He  was,  in  consequence,  forced  to  break  all  the
engagements  he  had  made  with  the  English,  from  the  impossibility  of  his  keeping  them  ; for
Bretons  will  never  firmly  join  the  English  in  making  war  on  France.  They  never  had,  nor
ever  will  have,  such  inclinations.  The  English  were  obliged  to  lodge  themselves  in  Yannes
and  its  neighbourhood,  and  to  suffer  the  greatest  distress  and  poverty,  which  destroyed  many
of  their  men,  and  all  their  horses.  When  they  left  Brittany,  they  were  greatly  discontented
with  the  duke,  more  particularly  the  earl  of  Buckingham,  who,  on  his  return  to  England,  made
such  heavy  complaints  against  him  to  the  king,  the  duke  of  Lancaster  and  the  council,  that
it  was  resolved  by  them  to  give  John  of  Brittany  his  liberty,  and  carry  him  to  Brittany,  to
wage  war  against  the  duke  under  his  name.  It  was  there  said, — “ Sir  John  de  Montfort
knows  well  that  he  owes  his  duchy  solely  to  us,  for  without  our  aid  he  never  could  have
gained  it ; and  a pretty  return  he  has  made  us,  by  wearing  our  army  down  with  fatigue
and  famine,  and  fruitlessly  expending  our  treasure.  We  must  make  him  feel  for  his  ingrati-
tude ; and  we  cannot  better  revenge  ourselves  than  by  setting  his  rival  at  liberty,  and
landing  him  in  that  country,  where  the  towns  and  castles  will  open  their  gates  to  him,  and
expel  the  other  who  has  thus  deceived  us.”

This  resolution  was  unanimously  adopted.  John  of  Brittany  was  brought  before  the


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


2il


council,  and  told  they  would  give  him  his  liberty,  regain  for  him  the  duchy  of  Brittany,  and
marry  him  to  the  lady  Philippa  of  Lancaster,  on  condition  that  Brittany  should  be  held  as  a
fief  from  England,  and  that  he  would  do  the  king  homage  for  it.  He  refused  compliance
with  these  terms.  He  would,  indeed,  have  accepted  the  lady,  but  peremptorily  refused  to
enter  into  any  engagements  inimical  to  France,  were  he  to  remain  prisoner  all  his  days.
The  council,  hearing  this,  grew  cool  in  their  offers  of  freedom,  and  replaced  him  under  the
guard  of  sir  Thomas  d’Ambreticourt.  This  I have  already  related,  but  I now  return  to  it
on  account  of  the  event  which  happened  in  Brittany,  as  being  the  consequence ; for  the
duke,  well  aware  he  was  in  disgrace  with  all  England,  was  greatly  alarmed  at  the  dangers
that  might  ensue,  from  the  treatment  the  earl  of  Buckingham  and  his  army  were  forced  to
put  up  with,  from  the  breach  of  all  his  engagements.  Neither  the  king  of  England  nor  his
uncles  longer  wrote  him  such  friendly  letters  as  they  were  used  to  do  before  the  earl  of
Buckingham’s  expedition.  His  alarms  were  much  increased  when  he  heard  that  John  of
Brittany  was  returned  from  England,  and  said,  the  English  had  given  him  his  liberty  in
revenge  for  his  late  conduct.

The  duke  upon  this  determined,  by  one  bold  stroke,  to  recover  the  favour  of  England,  and
to  do  it  so  secretly  and  opportunely  that  the  English  should  thank  him.  He  knew  there
was  not  a man  on  earth  whom  they  more  hated  and  dreaded  than  sir  Oliver  de  Clisson,
constable  of  France ; for,  in  truth,  his  thoughts  were  daily  and  nightly  employed  on  the
means  to  injure  England.  He  was  the  proposer  of  the  late  great  armament  at  Sluys,  and
the  chief  director  of  those  carried  on  at  Treguier  and  Harfleur.  The  duke,  therefore,  to
please  the  English,  and  to  show  he  had  not  much  dependence  on  nor  love  for  the  French,
resolved  to  prevent  the  intended  invasion  of  England  taking  effect : not,  indeed,  by  forbidding
his  subjects  to  join  in  this  attack  on  England,  under  pain  of  forfeiting  their  lands,  for  that
would  have  too  clearly  discovered  the  side  to  which  he  leaned.  He  went  to  work  more
secretly,  and  thought  he  could  not  act  more  to  his  advantage  than  to  arrest  the  constable,
and  put  him  to  death,  for  which  the  English  would  thank  him,  as  they  hated  him  much.
He  was  not  afraid  of  his  family,  as  it  was  not  powerful  enough  to  make  war  against  him  ;
for  he  had  but  two  daughters,  one  married  to  John  of  Brittany,  and  the  other  to  the  viscount
de  Rohar.  He  could  easily  withstand  them ; and,  as  there  would  be  but  one  baron  slain,
when  dead,  none  would  make  war  for  him.


CHAPTER  LXVI. THE  DUKE  OP  BRITTANY  SUMMONS  IIIS  BARONS  AND  KNIGHTS  TO  A COUNCIL

AT  VANNES. SIR  OLIVER  DE  CLISSON  AND  THE  LORD  DE  BEAUMANOIR  ARE  MADE

PRISONERS  IN  THE  CASTLE  OP  ERMINE,  AND  IN  GREAT  DANGER  OP  THEIR  LIVES.

The  duke  of  Brittany,  to  accomplish  his  plan,  appointed  a great  parliament  to  be  liolden
at  Yannes,  and  sent  very  affectionate  letters  to  his  barons  and  knights,  to  entreat  they  would
be  present ; but  he  was  particularly  pressing  with  the  constable  of  France,  adding,  that  he
was  more  anxious  to  see  him  than  all  the  rest.  The  constable  never  thought  of  excusing
himself,  for  the  duke  was  now  his  acknowledged  lord,  and  he  wished  to  be  in  his  favour  : he
came  therefore  to  Yannes,  as  did  great  numbers  of  other  barons.  The  assembly  was
numerous,  and  lasted  some  time  ; and  many  things  were  discussed  which  concerned  the  duke
and  the  country,  but  the  intended  invasion  of  England  was  never  touched  on,  for  the  duke
pretended  to  know  nothing  about  it,  and  kept  a strict  silence.  The  parliament  was  held  in
the  castle  de  la  Motte  at  Yannes,  where  the  duke  gave  a grand  dinner  to  the  barons  of
Brittany,  and  kept  them  in  enjoyment  and  affectionate  conversation  until  night,  when  they
returned  to  their  lodgings  in  the  suburbs  without  the  town.  At  this  dinner  were  the
greater  part  of  the  barons  of  Brittany,  towards  the  end  of  which  the  duke  showed  them  the
most  friendly  attention  ; but  he  had  other  thoughts  in  his  heart,  unknown  to  all  excepting
those  to  whom  he  had  confidentially  opened  himself.  The  constable  of  France,  to  please  the
knights  of  Brittany,  and  because  he  thought  his  office  required  it,  invited  all  who  had  dined
with  the  duke  to  dine  with  him  on  the  morrow.  Some  came,  but  others  went  home  to  take
leave  of  their  wives  and  families  ; for  it  was  the  intention  of  the  constable,  on  leaving  Vannes

VOL.  II.  R


242


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


to  make  for  Treguier  and  embark  on  board  bis  fleet,  which  was  ready  for  him.  All  this  the
duke  knew,  but  never  said  one  word  ; for  he  wished  to  have  it  believed  that  he  was  ignorant
of  it.  When  the  duke  entered  the  hotel  of  the  constable,  and  was  announced,  all  rose  up,
as  was  right,  and  kindly  received  him  in  the  manner  in  which  their  lord  should  be  accosted.
He  behaved  in  the  most  friendly  manner,  and,  seating  himself  among  them,  eat  and  drank,
and  showed  them  stronger  marks  of  affection  than  he  had  ever  before  done.  He  said, —
“ My  fair  sirs,  friends  and  companions,  God  send  that  you  may  ever  come  and  go  from  me
with  equal  pleasure,  and  that  you  may  perform  such  deeds  of  arms  as  may  satisfy  you  and
gain  you  profit  and  renown.”  “ May  God,”  they  replied,  “ render  you  the  same,  and  we
most  humbly  thank  you  that  you  are  thus  kindly  come  to  see  us  before  we  depart.”

You  must  know,  that  in  these  days,  the  duke  of  Brittany  was  building  a very  handsome
and  strong  castle  near  Vannes,  called  the  castle  of  Ermine,  which  was  almost  completed.
Being  eager  to  catch  the  constable,  be  said  to  him,  the  lord  de  Beaumanoir,  and  other
barons, — “ My  dear  sirs,  I entreat  that  before  you  quit  this  country,  you  will  come  and  see
my  castle  of  Ermine,  that  you  may  view  what  I have  done,  and  the  plans  I intend  executing.”
They  all  accepted  his  invitation,  for  his  behaviour  had  been  so  kind  and  open,  that  they
never  thought  he  was  imagining  mischief.  They  accompanied  the  duke  on  horseback  to
ibis  castle  ; and,  when  arrived,  the  duke,  the  constable,  the  lords  de  Laval  and  de  Beaumanoir,
dismounted  and  entered  within  its  apartments.  The  duke  led  the  constable  by  the  hand
from  chamber  to  chamber,  and  to  all  parts,  even  to  the  cellars,  where  wine  was  offered.
When  he  had  carried  them  all  over  it,  they  came  to  the  keep  ; and,  stopping  at  the  entrance,
the  duke  said, — “ Sir  Oliver,  there  is  not  a man  on  this  side  of  the  sea  who  understands
masonry  like  you  : enter,  therefore,  I beg  of  you,  and  examine  the  walls  well ; and  if  you
say  it  is  properly  built,  it  shall  remain,  otherwise  it  shall  be  altered.”  The  constable,  who
thought  nothing  ill  was  intended,  replied,  he  would  cheerfully  do  so,  and  desired  the  duke  to
go  first.  “ No,”  said  the  duke ; “ go  by  yourself,  while  I talk  a little  here  with  the  lord
de  Laval.”  The  constable,  desirous  to  acquit  himself,  entered  the  tower  and  ascended
the  staircase.  When  he  had  passed  the  first  floor,  some  armed  men,  who  had  been  there
posted  in  ambush,  knowing  how  they  were  to  act,  shut  the  door  below  them,  and  advanced
on  the  constable,  whom  they  seized,  and  dragged  into  an  apartment,  and  loaded  him  with
three  pairs  of  fetters.  As  they  were  putting  them  on,  they  said, — “ My  lord,  forgive  what
we  are  doing,  for  we  are  obliged  to  it  by  the  strict  orders  we  have  had  from  the  duke  of
Brittany  If  the  constable  was  alarmed,  it  is  no  wonder  ; but  he  ought  not  to  have  been
surprised,  for,  since  the  quarrel  which  he  had  had  with  the  duke,  he  would  never  come  near
him,  though  many  invitations  and  passports  were  sent.  He  was  fearful  of  trusting  himself
with  the  duke,  in  which  he  was  justified  ; for,  when  he  did  come,  you  see  the  consequences
of  the  duke’s  hatred,  which  now  burst  out.

When  the  lord  de  Laval,  who  was  at  the  entrance  of  the  tower,  heard  and  saw  the  door
shut  with  violence,  he  was  afraid  of  some  plot  against  his  brother-in-law ; and,  turning  to
the  duke,  who  looked  as  pale  as  death,  was  confirmed  something  was  wrong.  He  said, —
“ Ah,  my  lord,  for  God’s  sake  what  are  they  doing  ? Do  not  use  any  violence  against  the
constable.”  “ Lord  de  Laval,  mount  your  horse,  and  go  hence,  for  you  may  depart  when
you  please  ; I know  well  what  I am  about.”  “ My  lord,”  replied  the  lord  de  Laval,  “ I will
never  depart  without  my  brother-in-law,  the  constable.”  At  these  words,  the  Lord  de
Beaumanoir  (whom  the  duke  greatly  hated)  came  and  asked  where  the  constable  was.  The
duke,  drawing  his  dagger,  advanced  to  him  and  said,  “ Beaumanoir,  dost  thou  wish  to  be
like  thy  master  ?"  “ My  lord,”  replied  Beaumanoir,  “ I believe  my  master  cannot  be  in  a

good  plight.”  “ I ask  thee  again,  if  thou  wouldst  wish  to  be  like  him.”  “ Yes,  my  lord,”
said  de  Beaumanoir.  The  duke  then  taking  his  dagger  by  the  point,  said, — “Well,  then,
Beaumanoir,  since  thou  wouldst  be  like  him,  thou  must  thrust  one  of  thy  eyes  outt.”  The
lord  do  Beaumanoir,  seeing,  from  the  duke’s  countenance,  things  were  taking  a bad  turn,

* These  excuses  were  afterwards  of  no  avail ; for  the  constable  punished  them  according  to  their  deserts.  He  only
pardoned  a squire,  named  Bernard,  who  had  the  humanity  to  give  him  his  cloak,  to  preserve  him  from  the  dampness
of  the  place. — Hist,  de  Bretagne.

f Alluding  to  the  constable  having  but  one  eye.  Ho  lost  it  at  the  battle  of  Auray  ; notwithstanding  which,  he  never
quitted  the  field  of  battle.


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


243


oast  himself  on  his  knee,  and  said, — “ My  lord,  I have  that  opinion  of  your  honour  and
nobleness  of  mind,  that,  if  it  please  God,  you  will  never  act  otherwise  than  right.  Wo  are
at  your  mercy,  and  are  come  hither  solely  to  accompany  you,  and  at  your  own  request ; do
not  therefore  dishonour  yourself,  by  executing  any  wild  scheme,  if  such  be  in  your  thoughts,
for  you  may  hereafter  repent  of  it.”  “ Go,  go,”  replied  the  duke  ; “ thou  shalt  have  neither
better  nor  worse  than  him.”  He  was  then  arrested  by  those  who  had  previously  received
their  orders,  dragged  into  a room,  and  fettered  with  three  pairs  of  irons.  lie  was  much
alarmed,  as  you  may  suppose,  for  he  knew  the  duke  loved  him  as  little  as  he  did  the  constable,
but  he  could  not  then  help  it.

News  was  soon  spread  through  the  castle  and  town,  that  the  constable  and  the  lord
Beaumanoir  had  been  arrested  and  confined  ; but  it  surprised  many  that  the  lord  de  Laval
was  not  confined  with  them  ; and  that  the  duke  had  allowed  him  to  depart  when  he  pleased.
The  constable’s  imprisonment  astonished  all  who  heard  it ; and  not  without  cause ; for  it  was
said,  the  duke’s  hatred  was  so  strong,  he  would  have  him  and  his  companion  put  to  death.
The  duke  was  exceedingly  blamed  by  all  knights  and  squires  who  heard  of  this ; they  said, —
“ That  no  prince  had  ever  dishonoured  himself  so  much  as  the  duke  of  Brittany.  He  invites
the  constable  to  dine  with  him,  who  accepts  the  invitation,  goes  to  his  palace,  and  drinks  of
his  wine.  He  is  then  requested  to  view  his  buildings,  wherein  lie  is  arrested  : never  was  the
like  heard  of.  What  does  the  duke  think  to  do  with  him  ? He  has  rendered  himself  infamous,
for  never  was  there  a more  disgraceful  act ; and,  henceforward,  no  one  will  have  confidence
in  princes,  since  the  duke  has  thus  played  the  traitor,  and,  by  treacherous  means,  enticed
these  gallant  men  into  his  castle,  wherein  lie  imprisons  them.  What  will  the  king  of  France
say  to  this  ? and  especially  as  the  consequence  must  be  that  he  must  give  up  the  intended
invasion  of  England.  Never  was  such  wickedness  thought  of.  At  present  he  has  discovered
what  was  rankling  in  his  heart.  Did  any  one  in  Brittany,  or  elsewhere,  ever  hear  of  the
like  ? If  a poor  knight  had  done  so,  lie  would  have  been  for  ever  disgraced.  In  whom  can
any  man  place  confidence  but  in  his  lord,  who  is  bounden  to  act  uprightly,  and  redress  such
wrongs  as  his  vassals  may  complain  of  ? Who  can  take  upon  him  to  punish  this  deed,  or
who  is  capable  of  it,  but  the  king  of  France  ? The  duke  now  openly  shows  his  attachment
to  the  English,  and  that  he  means  to  assist  them,  by  thus  preventing  the  expedition  against
them  taking  effect.  What  ought  the  knights  and  squires  of  Brittany  at  this  moment  to
do  ? Why,  they  should  instantly  leave  their  homes,  and  hasten  to  lay  siege  to  the  castle  of
Ermine,  and  enclose  the  duke  within  it,  and  never  depart  until  they  have  taken  him,  dead
or  alive,  and  carried  him,  like  a false  and  disloyal  prince,  to  the  king  of  France,  for  him  to
punish  him  according  to  his  deserts.”  Thus  did  those  knights  speak,  who  had  been  at  the
parliament,  and  who  had  not  left  Vannes  and  that  part  of  the  country  ; but  they  were  much
afraid  lest  the  duke  should  put  them  to  death.  Others  said, — “ The  lord  de  Laval  is  still
with  the  duke,  and  will  prevent  it ; for  he  is  so  wise  and  prudent,  he  will  check  the  duke’s
rage.”  In  effect,  he  did  so  ; for,  had  he  not  exerted  himself  to  the  utmost,  there  is  not  a doubt
but  that  the  constable  would  have  been  murdered  that  night,  had  he  had  a thousand  lives.


CHAPTER  LXVII. THE  CONSTABLE  DE  CLISSON,  THROUGH  THE  EXERTIONS  OF  THE  LORD

DE  LAVAL,  OBTAINS  IIIS  LIBERTY,  BY  PAYTNG  A LARGE  SUM  OF  MONEY,  AND  DE-
LIVERING UP  TO  THE  DUKE  OF  BRITTANY  SOME  OF  HIS  CASTLES.

It  may  be  readily  believed,  that  the  constable  was  not  at  his  ease,  when  lie  found  himself
thus  entrapped  and  ironed.  Lie  was  guarded  by  thirty  men,  who  were  unable  to  comfort
him,  for  they  could  only  obey  their  lord’s  orders.  In  his  own  mind,  he  considered  himself
as  a dead  man  ; for  he  had  not  the  most  distant  hope  of  any  assistance  coming  to  him.  He
had  his  fetters  taken  thrice  from  him,  and  was  stretched  on  the  floor;  for  the  duke,  at  one
time,  would  have  him  beheaded,  at  another  drowned ; and  one  or  other  of  these  deaths  he
would  certainly  have  suffered,  if  it  had  not  been  for  the  lord  de  Laval.  When  he  heard  the
duke  give  orders  for  the  constable’s  death,  he  flung  himself  on  his  knees,  and,  with  uplifted
hands  and  tears,  said,  “ Ah,  my  lord,  for  God’s  mercy,  think  better  of  this  matter;  do  not

r 2


244


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  & c.


act  so  cruelly  against  my  brother-in-law  the  constable.  He  cannot  have  deserved  death.
Through  kindness,  tell  me  what  it  is  that  has  so  mightily  angered  you  against  him.  I swear,
that  whatever  may  be  his  crime,  he  shall  make  such  amends,  in  body  and  estate,  or  I for
him,  or  both  of  us  together,  as  shall  surpass  anything  you  may  imagine,  or  condemn  him
to,  excepting  death  or  imprisonment.  Remember,  for  God’s  sake,  my  lord,  how  you  were
educated  together  in  the  same  hotel  with  the  duke  of  Lancaster,  who  is  so  loyal  and  gallant
a prince,  none  ever  was,  nor  will  be  his  equal.  For  God’s  mercy,  remember,  my  lord,  how,
in  former  times,  before  he  had  made  his  peace  with  France,  he  had  always  served  you  loyally ;
he  assisted  you  in  the  recovery  of  your  duchy ; and  you  ever  found  him  ready  to  support
you  in  the  field  and  in  council.  If  you  have  not  any  very  just  cause  indeed,  that  moves  your
passion,  he  cannot  be  deserving  death.”  “ Lord  de  Laval,”  replied  the  duke,  “ allow  me  to
act  as  I please.  Clisson  has  so  frequently  angered  me,  that  it  is  now  necessary  I make
him  feel  it.  Go  your  ways,  I want  nothing  with  you  : let  me  show  my  cruelty ; for  I am
resolved  he  shall  die.”  “ Ah,  my  lord,”  replied  the  lord  de  Laval,  “ moderate  your  rage,
and  hear  reason.  If  you  thus  put  him  to  death,  no  prince  will  ever  so  completely  disgrace
himself ; and  there  will  not  be  a knight,  squire,  nor  honest  man  in  all  Brittany,  who  will
not  mortally  hate  you,  and  do  everything  they  can  to  drive  you  out  of  your  duchy.  Neither
the  king  of  England  nor  his  council  will  thank  you  ; and  would  you  thus  disgrace  yourself
for  the  life  of  one  man  ? For  the  love  of  God,  change  your  intention,  as  the  one  you  want  to
carry  into  effect  is  not  only  good  for  nothing,  but  dishonourable.  It  would  be  infamous  thus
to  put  to  death  so  great  a baron  and  so  gallant  a knight  as  the  lord  de  Clisson  ; and  should
you  do  so,  it  will  be  considered  as  traitorous,  and  a reproach  to  you  before  God  and  by  all
the  world.  You  invited  him  to  dine  with  you  : he  came.  You  then  seek  for  him,  in  the
most  friendly  manner,  and  desire  him  to  accompany  you  to  see  your  buildings  : he  does  so  :
he  obeys  your  every  command,  and  drinks  of  your  wine  ; and  is  all  this  affection  you  show
him  but  a veil  to  cover  your  treachery,  and  the  means  to  rob  him  of  his  life  ? Should  you  do
so,  no  lord  will  be  ever  so  disgraced  : all  the  world  will  detest  you,  reproach  you  for  it,  and
make  war  upon  you.  But,  since  your  hatred  is  so  violent  against  the  constable,  I wall  tell
you  how  you  shall  act : you  shall  give  him  his  liberty  for  a large  sum  of  florins.  This  you
may  compound  for  ; and,  should  he  hold  any  castle  that  you  claim  as  yours,  he  shall  deliver
it  up  ; and  I will  be  his  security  for  the  due  performance  of  whatever  you  may  agree  to.”
When  the  duke  of  Brittany  heard  the  lord  de  Laval  thus  address  him,  and  never  for  one
moment  quit  his  presence,  for  lie  followed  him  the  whole  night,  he  paused  awhile,  and,
being  somewhat  cooled,  said — “ Lord  de  Laval,  you  have  been  of  the  greatest  service  to
your  brother-in-law ; for  know  that  he  is  the  man  whom  I hate  the  most  in  the  world,  and,
if  you  had  not  been  here,  he  should  not  have  been  alive  to-morrow  morning : but  your
eloquence  has  saved  him.  Go  to  him,  and  ask  if  he  be  willing  to  pay  down  one  hundred
thousand  francs ; for  I will  have  no  other  security  but  the  money ; and  surrender  to  me
three  castles  and  one  town,  such  as  Chateau  Broc,  Chateau  Josselin,  Lamballe,  and  the
town  of  Jugon.  When  he  shall  pay  his  ransom,  and  put  me,  or  those  I may  send  thither,
in  possession  of  these  places,  I will  give  him  his  liberty  *.  “ My  lord,”  replied  the  lord  de

Laval,  “ I give  you  a thousand  thanks  for  having  so  graciously  listened  to  my  entreaties :
be  assured  that  all  you  ask  shall  be  granted : the  town  and  castles  shall  be  given  up,  and  the
money  paid  before  he  leave  this  place.”  The  lord  de  Laval  was  rejoiced  beyond  measure
when  he  found  his  brother  thus  freed  from  prison  and  death.  He  had  the  gate  of  the  tower
opened,  which  could  not  be  done  but  by  the  duke’s  order,  and,  mounting  the  staircase,  found
the  constable  much  alarmed  (for  he  was  expecting  every  moment  to  be  put  to  death),  and
chained  down  with  three  pairs  of  fetters ; but  when  he  saw  the  lord  de  Laval,  his  heart
revived,  for  he  imagined  some  treaty  had  been  entered  into.  The  lord  de  Laval  said  to  the
guards, — “ Unfetter  my  brother  Clisson,  and  then  I shall  talk  with  him and  addressing
himself  to  the  constable,— “ Dear  brother,  will  you  consent  to  whatever  I may  have  done  ?’*

* The  historian  of  Brittany,  dom  Morice,  mentions  the  Blcin,  Guingamp,  La  Rochederrien,  Chastellaudren,  Clis—
following  castles  and  places  which  the  duke  insisted  on  son,  and  Chateau-gui,  which  were  strong  places,  some
having,  with  the  hundred  thousand  francs,  for  the  ransom  belonging  to  the  constable,  and  others  to  John  of  Brit-
of  the  constable  : — Josselin,  Lamballe,  Broon,  Jugon,  tany,  count  de  Penthievro.


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


245


“ Yes,  brot'ner,”  replied  the  constable.  At  these  words  Ins  irons  were  taken  off.  The  lord
de  Laval  took  him  aside,  and  said, — “ Brother,  I have,  with  much  difficulty,  saved  your
life ; bat  it  is  on  condition,  that  you  pay  down,  before  you  leave  this  place,  one  hundred
thousand  francs,  and  surrender  to  the  duke  three  castles  and  your  town  of  Jugon,  otherwise
you  will  not  have  your  liberty.”  “ I agree  to  all  this,”  replied  the  constable.  “ You  are  in
the  right,  brother,”  said  the  lord  de  Laval.  “ But,”  said  the  constable,  “ who  will  go  to
Clisson  and  elsewhere  to  collect  the  money  ? I believe,  fair  brother  de  Laval,  you  must
undertake  this.”  “ No,”  replied  the  lord  do  Laval:  “ I will  never  quit  this  castle  until  I
have  you  with  me ; for  I too  well  know  the  duke’s  cruel  disposition ; and  he  may  repent  of
his  bargain  when  I am  gone,  by  some  foolish  conversation  he  may  hear  concerning  you,  and
the  whole  be  broken  off.”  “ And  whom  then  can  we  send  thither  ?”  asked  the  constable.
“ The  lord  de  Beaumanoir,”  replied  his  brother-in-law : “ we  will  send  him,  for  he  is  a
prisoner  like  yourself,  and  he  shall  undertake  to  collect  the  whole.”  “ W ell,”  said  the
constable,  “ go  down  stairs,  and  order  whatever  you  shall  think  for  the  best.”


CHAPTER  LXVIII. TnE  LORD  DE  BEAUMANOIR  IS  SET  AT  LIBERTY  BY  THE  DUKE  OP

BRITTANY,  THAT  nE  MAY  COLLECT  THE  RANSOM  FOR  THE  CONSTABLE,  WHO  OBTAINS

HIS  FREEDOM  ON  SURRENDERING  THE  PLACES  AGREED  ON. THE  IMPRISONMENT  OF

THE  CONSTABLE  IS  KNOWN  AT  THE  COURT  OF  FRANCE.

The  lord  de  Laval  lost  no  time  in  going  to  the  chamber  of  the  duke,  who  was  undressing
himself  for  bed,  as  he  had  not  slept  the  whole  night.  On  his  entrance  he  bowed,  and  said, —
“ My  lord,  you  must  set  at  liberty  the  lord  de  Beaumanoir,  that  brother  Clisson  may  talk
with  him  ; for  it  is  he  who  must  go  for  the  money,  and  give  your  people  possession  of  the
castles  and  town.”  “ Well,”  replied  the  duke,  “ let  his  irons  be  taken  off,  and  put  them  in
an  apartment  together : I shall  look  to  you  for  the  performance  of  the  treaty,  as  I do  not
wish  to  see  them ; and,  when  I shall  have  slept  a little,  return  to  me  again,  and  we  will  talk
more  on  the  subject.”  “Very  well,  my  lord,”  said  the  lord  de  Laval,  and  quitted  the
chamber,  accompanied  by  two  knights,  who  conducted  him  to  the  place  where  the  lord  do
Beaumanoir  was  confined.  He  was  in  hourly  expectation  of  being  put  to  death  ; and,  when
the  door  opened  (as  he  owned  afterwards),  he  thought  they  were  come  to  lead  him  to
execution.  On  seeing  the  lord  de  Laval,  his  spirits  were  raised,  and  still  more  when  he
said,  “ Lord  de  Beaumanoir,  rejoice : your  liberty  is  granted.”  On  this  his  fetters  were
taken  off,  and  he  was  led  into  an  apartment,  whither  the  constable  was  also  conducted,  and
placed  between  them.  Wine  and  plenty  of  provision  were  brought,  and  the  whole  of  the
household  were  much  pleased  when  they  heard  how  matters  were  going  on,  and  that  all
would  end  well.  They  had  very  unwillingly  witnessed  what  had  been  done  to  the  constable
and  the  lord  de  Beaumanoir ; but  they  could  not  help  it,  bound  as  they  were  to  obey  their
lord’s  orders,  right  or  wrong.  From  the  time  the  drawbridge  had  been  raised,  and  the  gates
shut,  no  person  whatever  had  entered  the  castle  (for  the  keys  were  in  the  duke’s  chamber)
until  he  was  awakened,  which  was  not  sooner  than  nine  o’clock,  when  he  arose.  This
alarmed  those  squires  and  varlets  who  were  waiting  without,  and  they  knew  not  what  to
think  of  it.  News  of  what  had  passed  was  already  carried  to  Treguier,  where  they  said, —
“ Do  you  know  what  has  happened  ? The  duke  of  Brittany  has  imprisoned,  in  his  castle
of  Ermine,  the  constable  of  France,  the  lord  de  Laval,  and  the  lord  de  Beaumanoir,  and,  it
is  supposed,  will  murder  them,  if  he  has  not  already  done  it.’  Knights  and  squires  were
astonished,  and  deplored  the  event,  saying, — “ Our  expedition  is  at  an  end,  for  we  shall
lose  the  fine  weather.  Ah,  constable  ! how  unfortunate  have  you  been  to  suffer  weak
counsel  to  deceive  you.  The  parliament  held  at  Yannes  was  purposely  to  entrap  you.  Your
opinion  formerly  of  the  duke  was  such  that  you  said,  if  he  were  to  send  you  five  hundred
assurances  of  safety,  you  would  never  trust  yourself  with  him,  so  strong  were  your  suspicions
then  ; but  now  you  simply  accompany  him  alone,  and  are  miserably  paid  for  it !”

The  whole  duchy  of  Brittany  bewailed  the  treatment  of  the  constable,  and  knew  not  how
to  act.  The  knights  and  squires  of  the  fleet  said, — “ Why  do  we  stay  here  ? why  do  we


240


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND.  FRANCE,  &c.


not  go  and  invest  the  duke  in  his  castle  of  Ermine  ? and,  if  he  should  have  put  the  constable
to  death,  confine  him : if  he  detain  him  in  prison,  why  do  we  not  remain  there  until  we
have  set  him  free ; for  Brittany  has  never  suffered  such  a loss  as  now,  by  the  capture  of  the
constable.”  Such  were  the  different  conversations  that  passed ; but  no  one  moved,  as  they
were  waiting  for  further  intelligence ; and  all  were  running  to  different  quarters  in  search  of
it.  Within  two  days,  the  king  of  France  and  his  uncles  were  informed  of  what  had
happened  to  the  constable,  to  their  great  astonishment.  The  duke  of  Bourbon  had  then  left
the  court  and  was  at  Avignon,  on  his  way  to  Castille,  as  he  was  desirous  of  first  seeing  the
pope.  He,  however,  heard  of  it  when  at  Lyon  with  the  count  de  Savoye.  The  count  de
St.  Pol,  the  lord  de  Coucy,  and  the  admiral  of  France,  were  on  the  point  of  embarking  at
Harfleur,  when  they  learnt  how  the  duke  of  Brittany  had,  by  a trick,  imprisoned  the
constable  and  the  lord  de  Beaumanoir;  and  that*  it  was  currently  believed  in  Brittany  he
had  put  them  to  death,  for  he  hated  them  mortally.  These  lords  were  so  astonished  at  the
intelligence,  that  they  said, — “ Our  expedition  is  at  an  end : let  us  disband  our  men  at  arms,
and  make  for  Paris,  where  we  shall  know  from  the  king  what  he  would  have  us  do.”  “ It  is
well  that  we  should  go  to  Paris,”  replied  the  admiral ; “ but  there  is  not  any  necessity  for
dismissing  all  our  men  at  arms.  Perhaps  they  may  be  wanted  elsewhere,  in  Castille,  whither
the  duke  of  Bourbon  is  gone,  or  in  Brittany  against  this  duke.  Bo  you  imagine  the  king
of  France  will  quietly  suffer  what  he  has  done  ? No,  by  God  : he  will  never  escape  without
losing  two  hundred  thousand  florins  at  least,  for  the  indignity  he  has  shown  a constable  of
France;  and  he  will  be  lucky  if  he  come  off  so  well.  Was  ever  anything  heard  or  seen
like  this  conduct,  which  has  ruined  the  king’s  expedition,  and  prevented  him  from  annoying
his  enemies  ? Let  us  stay  where  we  arc  for  two  or  three  days,  when  we  shall  hear  something
more  from  Brittany  or  Paris.”


CHAPTER  LXIX.- — THE  DUKE  OF  BRITTANY  DICTATES  THE  TERMS  OF  TITE  TREATIES,  FOR

THE  SURRENDER  OP  DIFFERENT  PLACES  BY  THE  CONSTABLE. TIIE  EXPEDITIONS  FROM

TREGUIER  AND  HARFLEUR  ARE  BROKEN  UP. THE  CONSTABLE,  ON  I1IS  DELIVERANCE,

MAKES  HIS  COMPLAINT  TO  THE  KING  OF  FRANCE,  AND  RESIGNS  TO  HIM  IIIS  OFFICE
OF  CONSTABLE.

I will  now  return  to  the  duke  of  Brittany.  When  he  had  reposed  a little,  he  arose,
dressed  himself,  and  sent  for  the  lord  de  Laval  to  his  chamber,  with  whom  he  held  a long
conversation.  A treaty  was  then  written  down,  as  the  duke  dictated,  to  bind  the  constable
to  the  complete  surrender  of  the  places  before  mentioned,  and  to  settle  them  on  the  duke  and
his  heirs,  absolutely  and  without  appeal,  which  treaty  was  to  be  sealed  by  the  constable.

The  lord  de  Beaumanoir  was  ordered  by  the  constable  to  go  to  his  castles  and  town  to
dismiss  all  his  officers,  and  give  possession  to  those  whom  the  duke  might  send  thither.
With  the  surrender  of  all  these  places,  it  was  necessary,  likewise,  to  pay  down  one  hundred
thousand  francs.  On  the  gates  being  opened,  the  lord  de  Beaumanoir  departed,  accompanied
by  some  of  the  duke’s  people,  to  fulfil  the  orders  of  the  constable,  who  entreated  him  to
make  all  speed  for  his  deliverance.  By  them  Yannes  and  the  country,  which  was  beginning
to  be  in  motion,  learnt  that  the  constable  was  not  in  danger  of  his  life,  having  been  ransomed.
All  those  attached  to  him  were  greatly  rejoiced  ; and  such  knights  and  squires  as  had  taken
it  up  the  most  warmly  remained  quiet ; but,  had  matters  been  otherwise,  they  were  deter-
mined to  surround  the  castle  of  Ermine  and  inclose  the  duke  within  it,  and  would  never  have
done  anything  with  more  willingness.  News  is  soon  spread  abroad,  on  wings  more  speedy
than  the  wind.  The  three  barons  of  Harfleur  were  informed  that  the  constable  was  out  of
danger  of  being  murdered,  but  that  he  had  very  narrowly  escaped  ; and  was  obliged,  to  save
his  life,  to  surrender  three  of  his  castles  and  a town,  besides  paying  down  as  a ransom  one
hundred  thousand  francs.  In  their  conversations,  they  said, — u Things  now  go  well,  since
his  life  is  safe : as  for  his  castles  and  ransom,  the  constable  will  soon  regain  them ; and  the
king  has  enough  for  him,  should  he  want  any  money.  It  is  over  : our  expedition  is  put  an
end  to  ; and  wo  may  now  disband  our  people  and  go  to  Paris,  to  learn  from  the  king  what  is


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


247


to  he  done  ; for  we  know  that  all  the  armaments  at  Treguier  are  countermanded,  which  is  a
sure  sign  that  nothing  will  he  attempted  this  season,  and  with  reason ; for  the  constable  will
he  solely  occupied  to  revenge  himself  for  the  insult  the  duke  of  Brittany  has  put  upon  him.”
These  three  lords,  having  dismissed  all  the  men  at  arms  and  cross-hows  that  were  in  and
about  Harfleur,  took  the  road  for  Paris,  where  the  king  resided.  The  lord  de  Beaumanoir
was  so  active,  that,  within  four  days,  he  put  the  duke’s  officers  in  the  possession  of  the  three
castles  and  the  town  of  Jugon,  to  the  satisfaction  of  the  duke.  lie  afterwards  collected  the
amount  of  the  ransom,  and  paid  it  according  to  the  duke’s  pleasure.  When  this  was  all
done,  the  lord  de  Laval  said  to  the  duke, — “ My  lord,  you  have  now  received  the  whole  of
your  demands  : the  three  castles  and  Jugon.  and  one  hundred  thousand  francs,  deliver  up  to
me,  therefore,  my  brother-in-law,  the  constable.”  “ Willingly,”  replied  the  duke : “let  him
depart : I give  him  his  liberty.”  The  constable  was  then  given  up,  and  instantly  set  out,
with  the  lord  de  Laval,  from  the  castle  of  Ermine*.


Loud  Beaumanoir  paying  the  Ransom  of  the  Constable  de  Clisson.  Designed  from  Hail.  MS.  34G9  and  a MS'.

Froissart  of  the  15th  century.

M lien  they  were  at  liberty,  the  constable  made  no  long  stay  in  Brittany,  but,  mounting
a good  courser,  and  attended  solely  by  a page,  made  such  haste,  as  to  arrive  at  Paris  in  two


* This  conduct  of  the  duke  of  Brittany  is  differently
related  by  dom  Moricc,  the  historian  of  Brittany,  by
which  it  appears  that  the  constable  very  narrowly  escaped
death .

1 he  duke  called  to  him  sir  John  dc  Bazvalen,  in  whom
he  had  the  greatest  confidence,  and  ordered  him  to  put  the
constable  to  death,  at  midnight,  as  privately  as  possible.
Bazvalen  represented  in  vain  the  consequences  that  would
ensue,  for  the  duke  said  lie  had  resolved  on  it,  and  would
have  it  done.  During  the  night,  his  passion  beingcalmcr,
he  repented  having  given  such  orders,  and,  at  day-break,
sent  for  Bazvalen,  and  asked  if  his  orders  had  been  obeyed.
On  being  answered  in  the  affirmative,  the  duke  cried  out,
“How,  is  Clisson  dead?”  “Yes,  my  lord  : he  was
drowned  this  night,  and  his  body  is  buried  in  a garden.”


“ Alas!”  replied  the  duke,  “ this  is  a most  pitiful  good
morrow.  Would  to  God,  sir  John,  I had  believed  what
you  urged  against  it.  I see  that  from  henceforward  all
comfort  is  lost  to  me.  Quit  my  presence,  and  never  again
let  me  see  your  face.”  After  the  knight  had  allowed  him
to  suffer  for  some  time  the  pains  of  his  remorse,  lie  returned
and  said, — “ My  lord,  as  I know  the  cause  of  your  misery,
I believe  I can  provide  a remedy  ; for  there  is  a cure
for  all  things.”  “ Not  for  death,”  replied  the  duke.
Bazvalen  then  told  him,  that  foreseeing  the  consequences
and  the  remorse  he  would  feel  if  his  orders,  then  given
from  passion,  were  obeyed,  he  had  not  executed  his  com-
mands, and  that  the  constable  was  alive.  The  lord  do
Laval  then  entered,  and  the  remainder  is  nearly  as
Froissart  relates  it.


£45


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


days.  He  dismounted  at  his  own  hotel,  and  instantly  waited  on  the  king  and  his  uncles  at
the  Louvre.  His  servants  and  equipage  followed  him  in  handsome  array.  The  court  had
already  been  informed  of  his  deliverance,  but  they  knew  not  that  he  was  so  near.  The
doors  of  the  king’s  apartments  were,  according  to  orders,  opened  to  him  ; and,  when  in  the
presence  of  the  king,  he  cast  himself  on  his  knees,  and  said, — “ Most  redoubted  lord,  your
father  (may  God  pardon  his  sins)  appointed  me  constable  of  France,  which  office  I have
truly  executed  to  the  best  of  my  abilities,  and  there  never  has  been  any  complaint  made
against  me.  If  any  one,  excepting  yourself  and  my  lords  your  uncles,  shall  say  to  the
contrary,  or  that  I have  acted  otherwise  than  most  loyally  towards  you  and  the  crown  of
France,  I will  throw  him  my  glove  for  him  to  prove  it.”  Neither  the  king  nor  any  other
person  made  reply  to  this  speech.  Upon  which  the  constable  added, — “ Most  noble  lord
and  king,  it  has  happened  in  Brittany,  that  while  I was  executing  the  duties  of  your  office,
the  duke  had  me  arrested  and  confined  in  his  castle  of  Ermine ; and  would  have  put  me  to
death,  without  any  other  cause  than  his  own  outrageous  will,  if  God,  and  brother  de  Laval,
had  not  assisted  me.  To  deliver  myself  from  his  hands,  I was  constrained  to  surrender  to  him
three  strong  castles  and  a handsome  town,  besides  one  hundred  thousand  francs  paid  down.
This  insult  and  loss,  which  the  duke  of  Brittany  has  put  on  me,  most  nearly  concerns  your
royal  majesty  ; for  the  invasion  of  England,  which  I and  my  companions  were  eager  to
attempt,  is  now  put  an  end  to.  I therefore  resign  into  your  hands  the  office  of  constable,  for
you  to  make  such  provision  in  the  matter  as  you  may  please : I will  not  longer  hold  what  I
cannot  gain  any  honour  by.”

“ Constable,”  replied  the  king,  “ we  have  before  heard  the  great  insult  you  have  suffered,
which  has  been  very  much  to  our  prejudice  as  well  as  to  that  of  the  country.  We  shall
summon  our  peers  of  France,  and  consider  how  we  should  act  in  such  a case.  Do  not  yon
trouble  yourself  about  the  matter ; for  you  shall  have  ample  justice  done  by  us,  whatever
may  be  the  consequences.”  He  then  took  the  constable  by  the  hand,  and  made  him  rise,
saying, — “ Constable,  we  will  not  that  you  thus  resign  your  office,  but  that  you  continue  to
exercise  its  functions  until  we  order  otherwise.”  The  constable  again  flung  himself  on  his
knees  and  said, — “ Dear  sire,  the  insult  and  disgrace  I have  suffered  from  the  duke  of
Brittany  oppresses  my  mind  so  much,  that  I am  unfit  to  hold  the  office,  which  is  so  con-
siderable, that  it  requires  the  utmost  attention.  I am,  besides,  obliged  to  give  answers,  and
converse  with  all  manner  of  persons  who  come  to  me  on  business ; and,  indeed,  at  this
moment,  I am  not  capable  of  giving  the  orders  I ought : I beg  of  you,  therefore,  to  accept
it,  and  appoint  another  for  a time ; for  I shall  be  always  ready  and  willing  to  obey  your
commands.”  “ Well,  sire,”  said  the  duke  of  Burgundy,  “he  offers  very  handsomely  : you
will  consider  of  it.”  “ That  I will,”  replied  the  king,  who  again  made  him  rise.

The  constable  advanced  respectfully  towards  the  dukes  of  Berry  and  Burgundy,  to
converse  with  them  on  public  affairs,  and  to  inform  them  more  particularly  of  what  had
passed  in  Brittany ; for  they  were  much  interested  in  it,  as  they  had  the  government  of  the
kingdom.  In  the  course  of  his  conversation,  the  constable  found  they  were  more  indifferent
about  the  matter,  than  the  king’s  answer  made  him  believe ; for  they  greatly  blamed  him
for  having  gone  to  Yannes.  He  replied,  he  could  not  offer  any  excuses  for  it.  The  duke  of
Burgundy  added, — “ Flow  could  you  think  of  going  thither,  when  your  fleet,  and  the
knights  and  squires,  were  ready,  and  waiting  for  you  at  Treguier  ? Besides,  when  you
were  at  Yannes,  and  had  dined  with  him,  why  did  you  not  return  ? for  you  had  no  business
to  remain  there  longer ; and  what  could  have  induced  you  to  attend  him  to  his  castle  of
Ermine  ?”  “ My  lord,”  replied  the  constable,  “ he  showed  me  so  many  attentions  that  I

could  not  refuse  it.”  “ Constable,”  said  the  duke  of  Burgundy,  “ such  attentions  are  always
deceitful : I thought  you  had  been  more  cunning.  You  may  now  go  : the  business  shall
have  a favourable  end ; and  we  will,  at  our  leisure,  attend  to  it.”  The  constable  next
addressed  himself  particularly  to  the  duke  of  Berry,  but  soon  discovered  that  these  lords
were  more  indifferent  about  him  than  the  king,  for  not  having  acted  according  to  their
expectations  : he  therefore  left  the  Louvre,  and  returned  to  his  hotel.  Many  great  lords  of
the  parliament  and  council  came  thither  to  visit  and  comfort  him  : among  the  number  were,
the  count  de  St.  Pel,  the  lord  de  Coucy  and  the  admiral  of  France,  who  said, — “ Constable,'


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


249


be  not  cast  down  : you  shall  be  amply  revenged  on  the  duke  of  Brittany,  for  he  has  now
committed  himself  so  strongly  by  the  insult  offered  France  that  he  may  pay  for  it  by  the  loss
of  his  duchy.  Go,  and  amuse  yourself  at  your  estate  of  Montlehery*,  while  we  act  for  you
here  : the  peers  of  France  are  summoned,  and  things  shall  not  remain  as  they  are.”  The
constable  followed  their  advice,  and  went  to  Montlehery,  having  for  a time  surrendered  his
office.  It  was  said,  that  the  lord  Guy  de  la  Tremouille  was  to  succeed  him  ; but  it  was  not
so  : he  was  too  prudent  and  wise  ever  to  have  accepted  it  over  the  head  of  sir  Oliver  de
Clisson.


CHAPTER  LXX. THE  DUKE  OF  GUELDRES  SENDS  A CHALLENGE  TO  FRANCE,  IN  FAVOUR

OF  ENGLAND.

The  same  week  in  which  the  news  came  to  Paris  of  the  constable’s  imprisonment,  there  was
intelligence  from  Germany  highly  displeasing  to  the  king,  his  uncles,  and  the  council.  The
duke  of  Gueldres,  son  to  the  duke  of  Juliers,  had  entered  into  an  alliance  with  England,  to
make  war  on  France,  and  had  accepted  of  a subsidy  of  four  thousand  francs  yearly.  This
pension  his  father,  the  duke  of  Juliers,  formerly  possessed,  but  had  renounced  it ; and  the  son,
who  was  young,  had  taken  it,  at  the  solicitations  of  the  king  of  England  and  his  council,  on
condition  he  should  send  his  challenge  to  the  king  of  France,  and  carry  on  a war  against  him
to  the  utmost  of  his  power.  lie  was  the  more  inclined  to  support  the  English  because  he
was  already  at  war  with  the  duchess  and  country  of  Brabant,  which  country  was  favourable
to  France,  for  the  reversion  of  it  would  fall  to  tire  duke  of  Burgundy  and  to  his  children.
The  duke  of  Gueldres,  to  show  he  was  in  earnest  and  determined  to  act  against  France,  sent,
during  the  time  the  news  of  the  constable’s  misfortune  was  fresh,  to  defy  the  king  of  France,
by  letters  sealed  with  his  seal,  that  were  very  bitter  and  wrathful.  They  were  not  accepted
with  pleasure  by  the  king  nor  his  uncles,  as  I shall  explain  hereafter  in  the  course  of  this
history,  when  I speak  more  fully  of  the  wars  of  Brittany  and  Gueldres.

The  king,  however,  showed  no  outward  signs  of  dissatisfaction,  but  handsomely  enter-
tained the  squire  who  had  brought  this  challenge.  He  had  been  very  much  terrified  at
Tournay ; for,  having  shown  the  challenge  to  the  provost  and  principal  inhabitants,  he
wanted  not  to  go  further,  saying  that  it  was  fully  sufficient  to  have  delivered  his  commission
at  so  grand  a city  as  Tournay.  This  did  not  satisfy  the  provost,  though  Tournay  belonged
to  France,  and  he  arrested  the  squire  and  had  him  closely  confined : he  then  wrote  to  the
duke  of  Burgundy,  to  say  what  he  had  done,  and  to  know  his  farther  commands  on  the
subject.  The  duke  ordered  the  provost  to  conduct  the  squire  to  Paris,  who  certainly  thought
that  now  he  could  not  escape  death.  It  fell  out  otherwise,  for  the  king,  his  uncles,  and  the
court,  graciously  received  him ; and  the  king  of  France  gave  him  a silver  goblet  weighing
four  marcs,  with  fifty  francs  within  it.  He  was  well  entertained,  and,  when  he  returned,
had  a good  passport  given  to  him.  The  king  and  the  whole  court  were  much  troubled  on
this  matter,  when  the  constable  arrived  to  make  his  complaints  against  the  duke  of  Brittany;
and  this  increased  it,  for,  it  was  now  apparent,  difficulties  were  arising  on  all  sides,  and
much  prudence  and  good  sense  would  be  necessary  to  meet  them.  The  king  and  his  council,
notwithstanding  this  vexation  from  Gueldres,  were  unwilling  that  the  constable,  who  had
so  faithfully  served  the  king  in  Flanders  and  elsewhere,  should  not  have  redress  for  the
wrongs  he  had  suffered  from  the  duke  of  Brittany,  by  confining  his  person  and  seizing  his
castles  and  towns  without  a shadow  of  right.  The  lord  de  Coucy  and  the  admiral  were
particularly  active  in  this  business.

We  will  return  to  the  duke  of  Lancaster  and  the  king  of  Portugal,  who  were  carrying  on
a prosperous  war  in  Galicia,  and  speak  of  their  operations.


* Montlehery, — a town  in  the  islo  of  France,  seven  leagues  from  Fails.


250


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


CHAPTER  LXXI. TWO  BRETON  CAPTAINS,  HAVING  VALIANTLY  DEFENDED  THE  TOWN  OF

ORENSE  AGAINST  THE  DUKE  OP  LANCASTER,  CAPITULATE  ON  TERMS  OFFERED  BY  THE
ENGLISH.

You  have  heard  that  the  king  and  queen  of  Portugal  were  present  at  the  tilt  between
sir  John  Holland  and  sir  Reginald  de  Roye,  at  Entemja.  The  king,  before  he  departed,  told
the  duke  of  Lancaster,  that  on  his  return  to  Oporto,  he  would,  within  six  days,  take  the
field,  for  that  his  men  were  now  quite  ready.  The  duke  ordered  the  lady  Constance,  his
duchess,  to  remain  at  Saint  Jago,  under  the  guard  of  the  lord  Fitzwalter,  a powerful  English
baron,  with  one  hundred  men  at  arms  and  two  hundred  archers,  saying,  on  his  quitting
Entemja, — “ Lady,  you  will  retire  to  the  city  of  Compostella,  while  the  king  of  Portugal,
myself,  and  army,  seek  our  enemies  in  Castille,  and  combat  them  wherever  we  may  find
them,  and  we  shall  then  know  if  ever  we  be  to  possess  any  part  of  Castille.”  The  lady
replied,  “ God’s  will  be  done,”  They  then  separated  for  the  present.  The  duchess  was
escorted  out  of  danger  by  sir  Thomas  Percy  and  sir  Evan  Fitzwarren,  with  two  hundred
spears,  who  then  returned  to  the  duke.  He  had  left  Enteiuja,  and  was  marching  towards  a
city  in  Galicia,  called  Orense,  which  would  not  acknowledge  his  claim  to  the  crown.  The
place  was  strong,  and  had  a garrison  of  Bretons,  who  had  undertaken  the  defence  at  their
own  risk ; and,  as  they  expected  the  duke  and  his  English  would  come  thither,  they  had
greatly  added  to  its  strength.  The  marshal  of  the  army  had  received  frequent  information,
that  those  of  Orense  had  refused  obedience  to  the  duke,  and  were  daily  increasing  the
fortifications  of  the  place  : he  therefore,  in  conjunction  with  the  constable,  sir  John  Holland,
advised  the  duke  to  march  thither.

When  the  army  was  tolerably  near,  it  was  halted  and  quartered  thereabout.  The  first
night  was  very  fine  and  so  wondrous  hot  (for  it  was  about  Ascension-day),  that  the  lords
had  their  tents  and  pavilions  pitched  in  the  plain,  under  the  beautiful  olive-trees  which  were
there.  They  remained  within  them  all  the  night  and  following  day,  thinking  the  town
would  instantly  surrender,  without  waiting  to  be  assaulted.  The  townsmen  would  willingly
have  done  so,  if  they  had  been  the  masters,  but  some  adventurous  Bretons  governed  it.  Two
gallant  captains  from  lower  Brittany,  one  called  the  bastard  d’Aulroy,  the  other  Pennefort,
were  the  commanders.  They  were  good  men  at  arms,  as  it  appeared,  when  they  undertook
to  defend  the  town  of  Orense,  without  other  assistance,  against  the  army  of  the  duke  of
Lancaster.  On  the  third  day,  the  English  having  well  examined  the  place,  to  choose  the
weakest  parts  for  their  attacks,  the  constable,  the  marshal,  and  the  admiral,  ordered  their
trumpets  to  sound  for  the  assault.  The  army  then  armed  itself  and  assembled  on  the  plain,
when  it  was  formed  in  four  divisions,  to  make  as  many  different  attacks.  They  marched
slowly  and  in  handsome  array,  with  trumpets  sounding  before  them,  as  far  as  the  ditches,
and  halted.  There  was  not  any  water  in  them  ; but  there  was  a strong  palisade  in  front  of
the  walls,  and  so  many  thorns  and  brambles,  that  no  man  at  arms  could  pass  through.  The
attack,  however,  commenced  at  four  places ; and  men  at  arms  and  lusty  varlets  crossed  the
ditches  with  hatchets  on  their  wrists,  with  which  they  cleared  away  the  thorns,  to  the
utmost  of  their  power.  The  Galicians  annoyed  them  with  lancing  darts ; and,  had  they
not  been  well  shielded,  numbers  must  have  been  killed  or  wounded ; but  those  men  at  arms,
who  entered  the  ditch,  were  defended  by  their  servants,  bearing  shields  before  them.  The
English  archers  made  such  good  use  of  their  bows,  from  the  top  of  the  ditch,  that  scarcely
any  dared  to  appear  on  the  bulwarks.

The  duke  of  Lancaster  came  to  view  the  attack,  mounted  on  a very  tall  horse,  which  the
king  of  Portugal  had  given  him,  and  to  notice  those  who  behaved  well,  and  was  so  delighted,
that  he  staid  upwards  of  three  hours.  All  the  thorns  and  brambles  were  cleared  away  by
this  first  attack,  so  that  the  palisades  might  be  approached.  The  retreat  was  sounded ; for
the  duke  said  to  the  marshal, — “ Our  men,  sir  Thomas,  have  done  enough  for  to-day  : let
them  retire,  for  they  must  be  now  fatigued.”  “ My  lord,  I am  willing  it  should  be  so,”
replied  the  marshal,  and  ordered  the  retreat.  The  army  returned  to  its  quarters,  carrying
with  them  the  dead  and  wounded,  and  there  passed  the  night.  They  had  plenty  of  wine,


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


251


but  it  was  so  bot  they  could  scarcely  drink  it ; and,  unless  mixed  with  a great  deal  of  water,
tnose  who  made  too  free  with  it  were  rendered  unfit  for  anything  the  ensuing  day.  On  the
morrow,  they  determined,  in  council,  that,  on  account  of  the  excessive  heat,  the  fatigues  the
army  had  suffered,  and  the  consequences  of  their  having  drank  too  much  of  this  wine,  there
should  not  be  any  attack  made  the  whole  day  ; but  that,  on  the  next  day,  they  woidd  renew
the  assault  from  before  sun-rise,  in  the  cool  of  the  morning,  until  eight  o’clock.  Orders  were
issued  for  the  army  to  remain  quietly  in  camp,  and  no  one  to  arm  until  the  trumpet  of  the
marshal  sounded.

The  duke  of  Lancaster  received  this  day  intelligence  from  the  king  of  Portugal.  He  had
left  Oporto,  and  was  on  Ids  march  towards  Santarem,  for  he  intended  to  enter  Castille  by
that  frontier,  and  the  armies  to  join  on  the  river  Duero,  and  besiege  Bencvente  or  Vilalpando.
Such  was  the  plan  of  the  king  of  Portugal,  if,  indeed,  the  king  of  Castille  and  his  French
allies,  who  were  daily  increasing,  did  not  march  to  oppose  him.  Should  they  make  no
opposition,  nor  show  any  signs  of  offering  battle,  it  was  necessary  the  junction  of  the  two
armies  be  made  as  soon  as  possible.  The  duke  was  so  well  pleased  with  this  news  as  to  give
the  bearer  of  it  ten  nobles.  On  the  appointed  day  for  the  renewal  of  the  attack,  the
marshal’s  trumpet  sounded  at  the  first  dawn  of  the  morning.  Knights  and  squires  made
instantly  ready,  and  posted  themselves  under  their  banners  and  pennons;  but  it  was  upwards
of  an  hour  before  they  were  all  drawn  up.  The  duke  remained  in  his  pavilion,  and  did  not
rise  thus  early,  for  there  was  not  any  need  of  it.  The  marshal  advanced  into  the  plain,
knowing  well  the  duties  of  his  office ; and  those  ordered  for  the  attack  placed  themselves
under  his  pennon.  News  was  spread  through  Orcnse,  that  the  English  were  marching  to
the  assault : for  the  Bretons  on  guard  had  discovered  it  from  the  sounding  of  the  marshal’s
trumpet.  The  men  and  women  of  the  town  were  on  the  alert ; and  the  Bretons  cried  to
them, — “ Hasten  to  the  bulwarks  : be  men  of  courage,  and  not  frightened  at  what  you  may
see ; we  are  not  frightened ; for  we  know  the  place  is  very  strong,  and  we  have  plenty  of
darts,  and  well-tempered  lances,  to  repulse  our  enemies,  besides  stones  and  flints  to  cast  down
on  them  : we  know,  also,  that  should  we  be  hard  pushed,  they  will  receive  us  favourably ;
and  that  is  the  worst  we  can  suffer."  “ By  God,”  said  the  captains  who  were  present,  “ we
have  been  in  many  weaker  places  than  this,  and  were  never  the  worse  for  it.”  The  Galicians,
whether  they  would  or  not,  took  courage  from  the  exhortations  of  the  Bretons.  This  would
not  have  been  the  case  if  the  Bretons  had  not  been  in  the  town ; for  they  would  have
surrendered  on  the  first  summons.  To  say  the  truth,  the  common  people  of  Castille  and
Galicia  are  good  for  nothing  in  war ; they  are  badly  armed,  and  of  poor  courage.  The
nobles,  who  call  themselves  gentlemen,  are  tolerably  well ; but  they  like  better  to  prance
about,  spurring  their  horses,  than  to  be  engaged  in  more  serious  matters.

The  English  arrived  about  sun-rise  before  Orense,  and,  having  entered  the  ditch,  which,
though  dry,  was  deep  enough,  advanced  to  the  palisades,  with  hatchets  and  iron  bars,  and
began  to  break  down  and  level  them.  When  this  was  done,  they  had  still  another  ditch  to
cross,  before  they  could  approach  the  wall,  which  was  as  wide  as  the  other,  and  many
parts  full  of  mud ; but  they  were  indifferent  to  this,  and  rushing  into  it,  came  to  the  walls.
Those  on  the  battlements  were  not  dismayed  at  what  they  saw,  but  defended  themselves
valiantly.  They  lanced  darts  at  the  enemy,  the  stroke  of  which  is  very  deadly ; and  it
required  strong  armour  to  resist  their  blows.  The  English,  having  prepared  ladders  the
preceding  day,  had  them  brought  and  fixed  to  different  parts  of  the  walls ; and  you  would
have  seen  knights  and  squires,  eager  for  renown,  ascend  them  with  targets  on  their  heads,
and  fight,  sword  in  hand,  with  the  Bretons,  who,  in  truth,  defended  themselves  gallantly ;
for  I hold  such  conduct  valorous,  in  allowing  themselves  to  be  so  often  attacked,  knowing
well  they  should  not  have  assistance  from  any  quarter.  The  king  of  Castille  and  the
French  knights  had  determined  to  permit  the  English  to  overrun  Galicia,  or  any  other  parts,
if  they  could,  without  offering  them  the  chance  of  a general  combat,  and  with  this  the
Bretons  had  been  made  acquainted.

Some  of  the  English  said, — “ Ah,  if  all  the  towns  in  Castille  give  us  as  much  trouble  as
this,  we  shall  never  have  done.”  Others  replied, — “ There  is  much  to  be  pillaged  within  it,
that  has  been  brought  thither  from  all  parts ; and  it  is  this  which  induces  them  to  make  so


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


obstinate  a resistance,  that  they  may  surrender  on  terms,  and  preserve  their  wealth  and
merchandise  from  being  plundered.”  Some  asked, — Who  are  the  captains?”  “ They  are
two  bastard  Bretons,  good  men  at  arms,  who  know  what  sieges  and  assaults  are,  for  they
have  been  at  many.  Their  names  are  the  bastard  de  Pennefort  and  the  bastard  d’Aulroy.”
“ Whoever  they  may  be,  they  are  valiant  fellows  thus  to  hold  out,  without  any  appeai’ance
of  succour  coming  to  them.”  Those  who  mounted  the  ladders  were  sometimes  repulsed  so
severely,  as  to  be  tumbled  to  the  ground,  which  caused  much  shouting  among  the  Castillians.
When  the  duke  of  Lancaster  was  risen  and  had  heard  mass,  he  said  he  would  go  and  view
the  attack.  He  mounted  a courser,  but  unarmed,  and  had  his  pennon,  that  was  emblazoned
with  tiie  arms  of  Castille,  England,  and  France,  borne  before  him,  which  fluttered  in  the
wind,  so  that  the  extremities  touched  the  ground.  On  the  duke’s  arrival,  the  besiegers
exerted  themselves  the  more,  in  order  to  be  noticed  and  praised.  The  enemy,  observing  the
pennon,  knew  the  duke  was  come,  and  they  also  gained  courage  to  continue  the  defence.
Thus  were  both  parties  employed  until  it  was  eight  o’clock ; and  there  did  not  seem  any
probability  that  Orense  would  speedily  be  won  by  such  attacks.  The  duke  asked  who  were
the  captains  of  the  garrison.  On  their  being  named,  he  said, — “ Tell  the  marshal  to  treat
with  them ; or  send  some  one  to  know  if  they  be  willing  to  enter  into  a negotiation  for
surrendering  the  town,  and  placing  it  under  our  obedience.  I do  not  believe  that  question
has  been  put  to  them.  Go,”  added  he  to  one  of  his  knights,  “ sir  William,  and  bring  the
marshal  to  speak  with  me.”

The  knight  left  the  duke,  rode  to  the  marshal,  and  said, — “ Sir  Thomas,  my  lord  wishes
to  speak  with  you.”  The  marshal  went  to  him ; and,  when  in  his  presence,  the  duke  said, —
“ Marshal,  do  you  know  whether  these  Bretons,  who  hold  the  place  against  us,  would  be
willing  to  put  themselves  under  our  obedience?  We  are  fatiguing  and  wounding  our  men,
and  wasting  our  ammunition,  when  we  know  not  how  soon  we  may  be  in  greater  want  of
it.  I therefore  beg  you  will  go  and  inform  them  you  are  willing  to  treat.”  “ My  lord,”
replied  sir  Thomas,  “I  will  cheerfully  do  so;  and  since  you  wish  to  show  them  mercy,  it  is
just  they  should  be  heard.”  The  marshal  then  returned  to  the  assault,  and,  calling  to  him
a herald,  said, — “ Go,  and  manage  to  speak  with  the  besieged ; our  men  will  make  way  for
thee ; and  tell  them  I am  willing  to  enter  into  a treaty.”  The  herald  said  he  would  do  so,
and  entered  the  ditch  clothed  in  a coat  of  arms  which  had  belonged  to  the  duke  of  Lancaster,
saying,  “ Open  your  ranks,  and  make  way  for  me  : I am  sent  by  the  marshal  to  parley  with
these  Bretons.”  As  he  said  this,  they  made  room  for  him  to  pass.  The  bastard  d’Aulroy,
seeing  him  push  through  the  crowd,  for  he  had  observed  from  the  ramparts  what  had  passed
between  him  and  the  marshal,  advanced  on  the  battlements,  and,  showing  himself,  said : — •
“ Herald,  what  is  it  you  want  ? I am  one  of  the  captains  in  this  town,  with  whom  I fancy
you  come  to  speak.”  “ It  is  so,”  replied  the  herald,  whose  name  was  Percy : “ my  lord
marshal  bids  you  come  to  the  barriers,  for  he  is  desirous  to  parley  and  treat  with  you.”
“ I will  do  so,”  said  the  bastard,  “ if  he  will  order  the  attack  to  cease  and  his  men  to  retire,
otherwise  not.”  “ I believe  you,”  answered  the  herald,  and  returned  to  relate  his  answer  to
the  marshal.  The  marshal  called  his  trumpet,  and  said, — “ Sound  the  retreat which  was
done,  and  the  assault  ceased  on  all  sides.  Upon  this,  the  captains  in  the  town  passed  the
gates,  and  came  to  the  barriers,  where  they  met  the  constable,  sir  John  Holland,  the  marshal,
and  many  others  of  the  English.  “ Flow,  my  fair  sirs,”  said  the  marshal,  “ can  you  think
of  thus  holding  out  and  suffering  yourselves  to  be  taken  by  storm,  by  which  you  may
probably  be  slain,  and  for  certain  will  lose  all.  We  know  well  that  the  townsmen  are  very
willing  to  surrender  to  our  lord  and  lady,  and  would  long  ago  have  done  so,  if  you  had  not
been  with  them.  You  may  repent  of  it;  for,  let  happen  what  will,  we  shall  never  depart
hence  until  the  place  be  ours  by  fair  means  or  foul.  Consult  together,  and  then  come  with
your  answer,  for  I have  full  powers  to  treat  with  you.”

“ Sir,”  replied  the  bastard  Aulroy,  “ we  have  already  consulted  and  formed  our  resolution.
If  you  will  consent  that  we,  and  what  belongs  to  us,  be  conducted  in  safety  to  Vilalpando,
or  wherever  else  we  may  please  to  go,  we  will  surrender  the  town ; but  the  inhabitants  of
both  sexes,  who  may  choose  to  remain  in  it,  shall  be  permitted  so  to  do,  without  any  risk  or
molestation,  provided  they  submit  themselves  to  the  duke  and  duchess  of  Lancaster’,  as  other


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


2.53


towns  in  Galicia  liave  done.  We  know  that  you  are  the  marshal  of  the  army,  part  of  whose
office  is  to  enter  into  treaties  with  an  enemy,  and  likewise  that  the  duke  will  ratify  whatever
engagements  you  may  enter  into.”  “ That  is  true,”  answered  sir  Thomas  : “ now  suppose  I
consent  to  all  you  have  asked,  I will  not  that  the  town  be  pillaged,  under  pretence  of  its
wealth  having  been  gained  from  the  adjacent  country,  for  that  would  cause  riots  between
your  men  and  ours.”  “ Oh,  no,”  said  the  bastard : “ we  will  only  carry  away  what  is  our
own : but,  if  any  of  our  men  shall  have  taken  or  bought  anything  without  paying,  we  will
not  enter  into  any  dispute  on  that  account.  With  regard  to  provisions,  I do  not  believe  our
men  have  paid  one  penny  since  they  have  been  here  in  garrison.”  “ As  for  that,”  replied
the  marshal,  “ it  is  nothing : it  is  an  advantage  our  men  will  take  as  well  as  yours  : but  I
speak  of  moveables.”  “ Sir,”  answered  the  bastard  d’Aulroy,  “ we  have  not  our  men  under
such  command  but  that  some  will  transgress.”  Sir  John  Holland  now  interfered,  and  said, —
“ Let  them  pass  : what  they  have  got  belongs  to  them  : we  shall  not  be  so  strict  as  to
search  their  trunks.”  “ Be  it  so,  then,”  said  the  marshal.

Everything  was  now  settled,  and  they  were  to  march  away  on  the  morrow.  The  English
returned  to  their  quarters  to  disarm,  and  refresh  themselves  with  what  they  had  brought.
The  Bretons  employed  the  whole  day  in  packing  up  the  great  plunder  they  had  made,  even
from  Castille,  for  the  king  had  abandoned  the  whole  country  to  them,  which  enriched
prodigiously  the  first  comers.  While  thus  employed,  they  seized  from  the  inhabitants  of
Orenso  whatever  they  could  conveniently  lay  their  hands  on,  such  as  furs,  cloth,  and  jewels ;
and  when  the  poor  people  said, — “ Gentlemen,  this  belongs  to  us ; you  did  not  bring  it
hither;”  they  answered, — “Hold  your  tongues,  ye  wicked  people:  we  have  a commission
from  the  king  of  Castille  to  pay  ourselves  wherever  we  go,  and,  as  you  refused  to  do  so,  we
are  forced  to  provide  for  ourselves.  W e have  served  you  faithfully  and  valiantly : you  are
therefore  bound  to  increase  our  pay,  and  it  is  thus  we  take  it.”  The  next  morning  the
marshal  mounted  his  horse,  and,  attended  by  about  sixty  lances,  rode  to  the  barriers  of
Orense,  where  he  waited  awhile  for  the  Bretons.  When  they  came,  he  asked, — “ Are  you
all  ready?” — “ Yes,”  they  replied:  “give  us  our  passport  and  escort.”  “ Whither  do  you
wish  to  go  ?”  “ To  Yilalpando.”  “ It  is  well,”  replied  the  marshal : “ here  is  your  escort :”
and,  calling  to  him  an  English  knight  whose  name  was  Stephen  Eastbury,  said, — “ Take  ten
of  our  lances,  to  escort  these  Bretons,  and  return  to-morrow.”  lie  obeyed  the  marshal’s
orders,  and  the  Bretons  marched  away  well  packed  and  heavily  laden.

When  they  were  all  gone,  the  marshal  and  his  men  entered  the  town,  where  he  was
received  with  the  greatest  respect ; for  they  took  him  for  the  duke  of  Lancaster,  which  was
the  reason  of  their  humility.  He  asked  some  of  the  townsmen, — “ These  Bretons,  who  are
gone  away  so  heavily  laden,  have  they  carried  off  any  of  your  properties?”  “ Of  ours,  my
lord ! yes,  by  God,  a great  deal.”  “ And  why  did  you  not  complain  to  me  ? I would  have
made  them  restore  it.”  “ My  lord,  we  were  afraid ; for  they  threatened  to  murder  us,  if  we
said  one  word:  they  are  a cursed  race,  for  there  is  not  one  but  is  a thief;  and  how  can
we  complain  when  they  rob  one  another?”  The  marshal  laughed,  and,  having  paused,
demanded  the  principal  persons  of  the  town.  When  they  arrived,  he  made  them  swear  to
preserve  the  town  of  Orense  in  obedience  to  the  duke  and  duchess  of  Lancaster,  in  like
manner  to  other  towns  in  Galicia : which  being  done,  he  renewed  the  officers  of  the  town,
who  took  similar  oaths.  All  being  finished,  he  and  his  company  drank  some  wine,  and
returned  to  the  duke  of  Lancaster,  who  was  reposing  under  the  shade  of  the  olive-trees ;
for  it  was  so  very  hot,  neither  man  nor  horse  could  withstand  the  heat  of  the  sun,  and  after
eight  o’clock  it  was  impossible  to  go  abroad  and  forage.  The  greatest  pleasure  the  duke
could  have  received  would  have  been  the  information,  that  the  king  of  Castille  was  on  his
march  to  offer  him  battle ; for  he  was  well  aware  he  could  never  otherwise  succeed  in  his
claim  on  that  kingdom.  He  was  continually  making  inquiries  how  the  king  of  Castille  was
employed,  and  he  w7as  answered, — “ My  lord,  wTe  learn  from  the  pilgrims  who  come  to  Saint
Jago,  that  he  is  not  making  any  preparations  to  take  the  field,  but  has  shut  himself  and  his
men  up  in  garrisons.  The  duke  of  Bourbon  is  not  yet  arrived,  nor  is  there  any  intelligence
received  of  his  coming.”  The  duke  was  advised  to  remain  but  five  days  in  Orense,  and  then
march  to  Zamora,  and  endeavour  to  force  a passage  over  the  Duero  by  the  bridge.  The


254


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


knight,  on  his  return  from  escorting  the  Bretons  to  Vilalpando,  was  asked  what  were  tho
numbers  in  garrison ; he  said, — “ He  had  heard  sir  Oliver  du  Guesclin  was  there,  with
one  thousand  spears,  French  and  Bretons.”  “ It  will  be  a good  thing,  my  lord,”  said  the
constable  and  sir  Thomas  Percy,  “ if  we  go  thither  and  skirmish  with  them.  Perhaps  they
may  come  out,  and  accept  our  challenge,  for  some  of  them  are  very  impatient  to  signalize
themselves.”  “ I agree  to  it,”  replied  the  duke  ; “ let  us  dislodge  and  march  hence,  for  wc
can  gain  nothing  by  staying  longer  here.”  Orders  for  decampment  on  the  morrow  were
issued,  and  for  the  army  to  march  towards  Vilalpando,  and  then  to  Zamora.

We  will  now  say  something  of  the  king  of  Portugal,  and  what  befel  him  on  his  entrance
into  Castille  to  form  a junction  with  the  duke  of  Lancaster.


CHAPTER  LXXII. TOE  KING  OF  PORTUGAL,  BEING  REPULSED  IN  HIS  ATTEMPTS  TO  STORM

THE  CASTLES  OF  SANTAREM,  BURNS  THE  TOWN. HE  MARCHES  TO  FERROL  IN

GALICIA.

The  king  of  Portugal,  on  his  departure  from  Oporto,  left  his  queen,  his  sister-in-law,  and
the  city,  under  the  guard  of  the  count  de  Novaire,  with  one  hundred  lances,  of  Portuguese
and  Gascons  who  had  come  to  serve  him.  When  the  king  took  the  field,  he  halted  the  first
day  at  the  distance  of  only  three  leagues  from  Oporto.  On  the  morrow,  he  dislodged,  and
marched  in  three  battalions ; but,  on  account  of  the  infantry,  which  consisted  of  twelve
thousand  men,  and  the  baggage,  he  could  but  advance  at  a foot’s  pace.  The  main  battalion
with  the  king  followed,  which  was  a thousand  good  spears,  and  in  it  were  don  Galois,
Fernando  Portelet,  John  Fernando  Portelet,  Guadaloupe  Fernando  Portelet,  and  Pounass
d’Acunha,  sir  Vasco  Martin  d’Acunha,  who  bore  the  king’s  banner,  John  Radighos,  Peter
John  Gomez  de  Salnez,  Joao  Rodriguez  de  Sa,  and  the  master  of  Avis,  Fernando  Rodriguez
de  Sequeira,  all  great  barons.  The  constable  of  Portugal  commanded  the  rear  battalion,
consisting  of  five  hundred  spears ; with  him  were  the  count  d’Angouse,  the  count  de  l’Escalle,
le  petit  Danede,  Mondest  Radighos,  Roderigo  de  Valconsiaux,  Ange  Salvese  de  Geneve,
John  Ansale  de  Popelan,  all  barons  and  knights.

In  this  manner  did  the  Portuguese  continue  their  march  towards  Santarem.  They
advanced  by  short  marches,  and  halted  every  third  day  : they  also  lay  by  the  greater  part
of  the  day.  They  arrived  at  Aljubarota,  where  they  halted  for  two  days,  and  took  as  many
in  going  from  thence  to  Ourem.  At  last  they  came  to  Santarem,  and  quartered  themselves
therein ; for  they  found  the  town  had  been  abandoned  since  the  battle  of  Aljubarota,  for
fear  of  the  Portuguese,  and  the  inhabitants  had  retired  with  their  effects  into  Castille.  The
castles,  however,  were  well  garrisoned  with  Bretons  and  Poitevins,  who  had  been  sent
thither  for  their  defence.  The  king  of  Portugal  was  advised  to  attack  these  castles,  which
were  situated  at  each  end  of  the  town;  for  he  could  not,  in  honour,  pass  by  without
attempting  some  deeds  of  arms : besides,  as  the  Castillians  had  conquered  this  place  from
the  Portuguese,  they  wished  to  try  if  they  could  recover  them.  They  had  brought  machines
of  war  from  Oporto,  for  they  knew  they  should  have  need  of  them  on  their  march.  The
king  and  his  army  were  quartered  in  and  about  Santarem,  which  is  situated  at  the  entrance
of  Castille,  on  the  Tagus.  By  means  of  this  river,  they  could  have  all  their  provision  and
stores  conveyed  to  them  from  Lisbon  or  Oporto,  of  which  they  took  the  advantage  ; for  they
were  upwards  of  thirty  thousand  men.

The  constable,  with  his  division  and  one  half  of  the  commonalty  of  Portugal,  posted
himself  opposite  the  eastern  castle,  called  la  Perrade.  The  marshal  with  his  battalion,  and
the  other  half  of  the  commonalty,  did  the  same  at  the  opposite  castle,  called  Callidon.
Morice  Fonchans,  an  able  man  at  arms,  and  a knight  from  Brittany,  commanded  in  la
Perrade ; and  sir  James  de  Mont-merle,  a knight  from  Poitou,  in  Callidon.  They  might
each  have  with  him  fifty  lances.  Fifteen  days  passed  without  anything  being  done  : their
machines  were,  indeed,  pointed  against  the  walls,  and  cast  heavy  stones  ten  or  twelve  times
a day,  but  did  little  damage,  except  to  the  roofs  of  the  towers,  which  they  ruined  ; but
the  garrisons  paid  no  attention  to  this,  for  their  lodgings  were  well  arched  : and  no  engine


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE.  &c.


255


nor  springall  could  hurt  them  with  any  stones  they  could  throw.  When  the  Portuguese
saw  they  had  no  hopes  of  success,  they  grew  tired,  and  resolved  to  decamp  and  enter  Galicia,
to  join  the  duke  of  Lancaster,  which  would  increase  their  strength,  and  the  king  and  duke
might  then  advise  together,  whither  to  march.  When  they  departed  from  Santarem,
they  so  completely  burnt  the  town,  that  there  did  not  remain  a shed  to  put  a horse  in.  The
garrisons,  seeing  them  depart,  were  so  much  rejoiced,  that  they  sounded  their  trumpets,  and,
with  other  signs  of  joy,  continued  playing  until  the  whole  were  out  of  hearing.  The  army
marched  that  day  for  Pontferrant,  in  Galicia,  in  their  route  to  Val-Sainte-Oatharine,  and
arrived  at  Ferrol,  which  is  a tolerably  strong  town,  and  in  the  interest  of  the  king  of  Castillo,
and  they  halted  before  it.


CHAPTER  LXXXII. — THE  KING  OF  PORTUGAL,  NOT  BEING  ABLE  TO  TAKE  FERROL  BY  STORM,
GAINS  IT  BY  AN  AMBUSCADE,  AND  PUTS  IT  UNDER  THE  OBEDIENCE  OF  TnE  DUKE  OF
LANCASTER.

The  king  of  Portugal  and  his  ai’my  found  a plentiful  country  at  Ferrol,  which  they
surrounded  ; and  the  constable  and  marshal  said,  they  would  storm  it,  as  it  was  to  be  taken.
They  were  two  days,  however,  without  making  any  attempt,  for  they  expected  that  it
would  surrender  without  an  assault,  but  they  were  mistaken  ; for  there  were  in  it  some
Bretons  and  Burgundians,  who  said  they  would  defend  it  to  the  last.  The  machines  were
brought  forth  on  the  third  day,  and  the  marshal’s  trumpets  sounded  for  the  attack,  when
all  made  themselves  ready,  and  advanced  to  the  walls.  The  men  at  arms  in  Ferrol,  hearing
the  trumpets,  knew  they  should  he  stormed,  and  made  preparations  accordingly.  They
armed  themselves,  and  all  men  capable  of  defence,  and  ordered  the  women  to  gather  and
bring  to  them  stones,  to  throw  down  on  the  enemy.  You  must  know,  that  the  women  in
Galicia  and  Castille  are  of  good  courage  to  defend  themselves,  and  equally  useful  as  the  men.
The  Portuguese  marched  in  handsome  array  to  the  ditches,  which,  though  deep,  were  dry,
and  merrily  entered  them.  They  began  to  ascend  the  opposite  bank  with  much  courage,
but  were  sorely  treated,  unless  well  shielded,  by  those  of  the  town,  who,  from  the  walls,  cast
down  on  them  stones  and  other  things,  that  wounded  and  killed  several,  and  forced  them  to
retreat  whether  they  would  or  not.  There  was  much  throwing  of  darts  on  both  sides  ; and
thus  lasted  the  attack  until  eight  o’clock,  when  the  day  became  exceedingly  hot,  without
wind  or  breeze,  insomuch,  that  those  in  the  ditches  thought  they  should  be  burnt : this  heat
was  so  excessive,  that  the  attack  was  put  an  end  to,  though  the  machines  cast  stones  into  the
town,  merely  for  the  chance  of  success.  The  Portuguese  retired  to  refresh  themselves,  and
attend  to  the  wounded.  The  marshal  resolved  not  to  renew  the  attack  but  by  his  machines,  for
otherwise  it  would  cost  too  many  lives ; and  to  skirmish  at  the  barriers,  to  amuse  the  young
knights,  and  enure  them  to  deeds  of  arms.  This  being  settled,  there  were,  almost  daily,
skirmishes  at  the  barriers ; and  these  within  the  town  were  accustomed  to  post  themselves
without  the  gates,  between  them  and  the  barriers,  the  better  to  engage  their  enemies.

Sir  Alvarez  Pereira,  the  marshal  of  Portugal,  who  was  subtle,  and  had  been  long  used  to
arms,  observing  this  conduct,  planned  upon  it  an  ambuscade.  Opening  himself  to  don  Juan
Fernando,  he  said, — “ I see  these  soldiers,  when  skirmishing,  sometimes  venture  beyond  the
gates : I have  formed  a plan,  which  if  you  will  assist  me  to  execute,  I think  we  may
discomfort  them.  I propose  that  we  form  an  ambuscade,  as  near  the  barriers  as  possible,  of
five  or  six  hundred  men,  well  mounted,  and  then  commence  a skirmish,  as  usual,  but  in  no
great  number ; and  retreat  by  degrees,  the  moment  they  seem  willing  to  pass  their  barriers,
which  I think  their  avarice  and  eagerness  will  induce  them  to  do.  We  must  then  turn  about
and  attack  them  lustily,  and  the  ambuscade  will  gallop  between  them  and  the  gates.  The
garrison  will  now  he  alarmed,  and  hasten  to  order  the  gates  to  be  opened,  and  whether  they
will  or  not,  we  shall  enter  the  place  with  them.  But  should  the  townsmen  refuse  to  open
the  gates,  all  those  who  are  without  must  be  our  prisoners.”  “ It  is  well  imagined,”  replied
don  Juan.  “Well,”  said  the  marshal,  “do  you  command  one  party,  and  I will  take  the
other.  You,  sir  Martin  de  Mello,  and  Ponasse  d’Acunha,  shall  have  the  ambuscade,  and  I


250


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


will  skirmish,  as  that  is  part  of  my  office.”  This  plan  was  adopted,  and  five  hundred  men,
well  armed  and  mounted,  were  chosen  to  form  the  ambuscade.

For  three  days  there  had  not  been  any  skirmishing,  to  the  surprise  of  the  garrison,  who
said  to  the  inhabitants : “ See,  wicked  people  as  ye  are,  ye  wanted  to  surrender  to  the  king
of  Portugal  without  striking;  a blow,  and  would  have  done  so,  if  we  had  not  been  here  to
defend  the  honour  of  your  town  ; this  we  have  so  successfully  done,  that  the  king  of  Portugal
is  on  the  eve  of  his  departure,  without  having  effected  anything.”

On  the  fourth  dnyT,  according  to  what  had  been  laid  down,  the  marshal  advanced  to  the
skirmish  with  but  few  followers  : the  great  ambuscade  remained  behind.  The  Bretons,
eager  to  make  rich  prisoners,  having  already  captured  six,  seeing  the  Portuguese  at  the
barriers,  had  the  gates  opened,  which  they  left  unfastened,  in  case  of  failure  (for  they  had  no
great  dependence  on  the  townsmen),  and  the  wicket  wide  open,  and  sallied  forth  to  skirmish
with  darts  and  lances,  as  is  usual  in  such  combats.  The  marshal,  when  he  saw  the  time  was
come,  made  his  men  wheel,  and  act  as  if  they  were  tired,  retreating  by  degrees.  Those
within  the  place,  observing  this,  and  thinking  they  should  make  prisoners  of  them  all,  opened
the  whole  of  the  barriers,  sallied  forth,  and,  falling  on  the  Portuguese,  captured  five-arid-
twenty.  In  the  struggle  and  pursuit,  the  Bretons  never  thought  of  closing  the  barriers;  and
the  marshal  now  made  his  signal  for  the  ambuscade  to  advance,  which  it  did  full  gallop,  and,
by  getting  between  the  Bretons  and  the  place,  made  themselves  masters  of  the  barriers.  The
French  and  Bretons  now  hastened  to  re-enter  the  gates,  but  it  was  of  no  avail,  for  the
Portuguese  entered  with  them  ; and  thus  was  the  town  won.  Very  few  were  slain,  and  the
soldiers  in  garrison  were  made  prisoners,  except  ten  or  twelve,  who  escaped  by  a postern
gate,  and  went  to  Vilalpando,  where  sir  Oliver  du  Guesclin  was  in  garrison,  with  one
thousand  French  lances  at  least,  and  these  runaways  related  to  him  how  Ferrol  had  been
lost.  In  this  manner  was  the  town  won  by  the  Portuguese,  and  put  under  the  obedience  of
the  duke  of  Lancaster,  for  whom  they  made  war.  The  king  of  Portugal  was  much  pleased
at  the  success  of  his  men,  and  instantly  sent  intelligence  of  it  to  the  duke,  adding,  he  had
greatly  increased  his  inheritance  by  the  capture  of  a town ; and  that  he  and  his  army  were
desirous  and  active  to  conquer  the  rest.


CHAPTER  LXXIV. THE  ARMY  OP  THE  DUKE  OP  LANCASTER  COMES  BEFORE  NOYA  IN

GALICIA. — THE  ENGLISH  ARE  RECEIVED,  AT  THE  BARRIERS,  BY  BARROIS  DES  BARRES
AND  HIS  COMPANIONS.

The  duke  of  Lancaster  was  much  rejoiced  at  the  news  from  the  king  of  Portugal : he  had
left  Orcnse,  and  was  on  his  march  towards  Noya,  where  le  Barrois  des  Barres,  sir  John  de
Chatelmorant,  sir  Tristan  de  la  Jaille,  sir  Reginald  de  Roye,  sir  William  de  Montigny,  and
many  other  knights  and  squires  were  in  garrison.  When  the  duke  came  within  sight  of  the
castle,  the  marshal  said, — “ There  is  Noya  : if  Corunna  be  one  of  the  keys  of  Galicia  towards
the  sea,  the  castle  of  Noya  is  another  towards  Castille  ; and  whoever  wishes  to  be  lord  of
Castillo  must  be  master  of  these  two  places.  Let  us  march  thither,  for  they  tell  me  that
Barrois  de  Barres,  one  of  the  ablest  captains  of  France,  is  within  it,  and  let  us  have  some
skirmishing  with  the  garrison  at  the  end  of  the  bridge.”  “We  are  willing  to  do  so,"  said
sir  Maubrun  de  Linieres  and  sir  John  d’Ambreticourt,  who  were  riding  by  his  side.  The
van  battalion  now  advanced,  consisting  of  five  hundred  men  at  arms,  for  the  duke  was
desirous  of  making  a good  appearance  to  those  within  the  castle ; and  he  knew  also  that  his
marshals  would  offer  to  skirmish,  should  they  find  any  to  accept  their  challenge.  The  watch
on  the  castle,  seeing  the  van  of  the  English  approach,  began  to  sound  his  horn  so  agreeably,
it  was  a pleasure  to  hear  him.

Le  Bari'ois  and  his  companions,  to  the  amount  of  one  hundred  men  at  arms,  hearing  that
the  English  were  at  hand,  armed  themselves,  and,  in  good  array,  advanced  to  the  barriers,
where  they  drew  up  under  twelve  pennons.  Sir  John  des  Barres,  being  the  most  renowned,
was  the  commander-in-chief,  and  next  to  him,  sir  John  de  Chatelmorant.  When  sir  Thomas
Moreaux,  the  marshal  of  the  army,  found  himself  near  the  place,  he  halted,  and,  having  dis-


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


257


mounted  as  well  as  his  companions,  they  gave  their  horses  to  the  pages  and  servants,  and
marched  in  a compact  body,  each  knight  and  squire  with  his  spear  in  hand,  towards  the
barriers  : every  six  paces  they  halted,  to  dress  themselves  without  opening  their  ranks.  To
say  the  truth,  it  was  a beautiful  sight.  When  they  were  come  as  far  as  they  wished,  they
halted  for  a short  time,  and  then  advanced  their  front  to  begin  the  action.  They  were  gal-
lantly received ; and,  I believe,  had  the  two  parties  been  in  the  plain,  many  more  bold
actions  would  have  taken  place  than  it  was  possible  to  find  an  opportunity  for  where  they
were ; for  the  barriers  being  closely  shut,  prevented  them  from  touching  each  other.  The
marshal  hit  sir  John  de  Cliatelmorant  with  his  lance,  as  did  sir  John  the  marshal ; for  eacli
was  eager  to  hurt  the  other,  but,  from  the  strength  of  their  armour,  they  could  not.  Sir
Thomas  Percy  attacked  Barrois  des  Barres ; Maubrun  de  Linieres,  sir  William  de  Montigny  ;
sir  John  d’Ambreticourt,  sir  Reginald  de  Roye  ; the  lord  Talbot,  sir  Tristan  de  la  Jaille  ; so
every  man  had  his  match  : and  when  they  were  fatigued  or  heated  they  retired,  and  other
fresh  knights  and  squires  renewed  the  skirmish.  This  was  continued  until  past  eight  o’clock :
indeed,  it  was  twelve  before  it  was  entirely  over.  The  archers  next  came  to  the  barriers ;
but  the  knights  withdrew,  for  fear  of  the  arrows,  and  ordered  their  cross-bows  and  Castillians
to  oppose  them,  which  they  did  until  noon,  when  the  lusty  varlets  continued  the  skirmish
until  sun-set,  and  the  knights  then  returned  fresli  and  vigorous  to  renew  it.

Tlius  was  the  day  employed  until  night,  when  the  English  retired  to  their  quarters,  and
the  knights  into  the  castle,  where  they  kept  a good  guard.  The  English  were  quartered
about  half  a league  from  Noya,  on  the  banks  of  the  river,  which  was  very  welcome  to  them
and  their  horses,  for  they  had  great  difficulty  in  procuring  water  on  their  march.  They
intended  to  remain  there  five  or  six  days,  and  then  march  to  Vilalpando,  and  look  at  the
constable  of  Castillo  and  the  French  there  in  garrison.  They  had  also  heard  from  the  king
of  Portugal,  who  was  encamped  in  the  plains  of  Ferrol,  and  intended  marching  for  the  town
of  Padron  * in  Galicia,  which  was  in  the  line  of  march  of  the  English  ; and  I believe  the
king  and  duke  were  to  meet  in  this  town,  to  confer  together  on  the  state  of  affairs,  and
determine  on  a plan  for  carrying  on  the  war.  They  had  already  been  one  month  in  the
enemy’s  country,  and  had  conquered  all  Galicia,  except  one  or  two  places,  without  having
any  intelligence  of  the  king  of  Castille  or  the  French,  which  greatly  surprised  them  ; for
they  had  heard  that  the  king  of  Castille  had  issued  his  summons  from  Burgos,  where  he
resided,  to  all  parts  of  Castille,  Seville,  Cordova,  Toledo,  Leon,  Valladolid,  Soria,  and  had
collected  sixty  thousand  men,  not  including  six  thousand  men  at  arms  from  France.  The
duke  of  Bourbon  was  likewise  daily  expected,  for  he  had  quitted  Paris.

It  was  for  this  reason  the  English  and  Portuguese  wanted  to  unite  their  armies,  to  be  in
greater  force,  and  better  enabled  to  meet  the  enemy ; for  they  believed  all  that  had  been
told  them  respecting  the  French  and  Castillians  as  true,  and  outwardly  showed  much  joy
thereat.  They  would  willingly  have  encountered  their  enemies,  for  they  were  convinced  they
could  never  bring  their  dispute  to  any  decision  without  a battle.

Sir  William  de  Lignac  and  sir  Walter  de  Passac  were  always  about  the  king’s  person,  and
accompanied  him  wherever  he  went ; for  they  had  two  or  three  times  a week  intelligence
from  France  of  what  was  going  on,  and  likewise  from  the  duke  of  Bourbon.  They  were
waiting  for  him,  as  he  had  begun  his  journey,  by  way  of  Avignon,  to  visit  the  pope  and
cardinals  ; and  would  not  therefore  offer  combat  during  his  absence,  nor  would  it  have  been
becoming  them  so  to  do.  Among  the  news  they  had  from  France,  the  most  surprising  was  the
account  of  the  duke  of  Brittany’s  arrest  and  confinement  of  the  constable  in  thecastle  of  Ermine,
until  he  ransomed  himself, by  paying  down  one  hundred  thousand  francs  and  the  surrender  of
three  castles  and  a town,  by  which  the  intended  invasion  of  England  was  prevented.  They
were  greatly  astonished,  and  could  not  imagine  what  the  duke  of  Brittany  meant  by  it : they
however  supposed  that  he  must  have  been  instigated  thereto  by  the  council  of  England.

* Padron  is  situated  on  the  river  Ulla,  four  leagues  to  the  southward  of  Saint  Jago  : it  was  formerly  a bishopric,
but  is  uotv  transferred  to  Saint  Jago.


vol.  ir.


H


253


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


CHAPTER  LXXV. THE  KING  OP  PRANCE  SENDS  SOME  OP  HIS  NOBLES  TO  DEMAND  PROM

TIIE  DUKE  OF  BRITTANY  THE  REASON  OF  THE  INSULT  OFFERED  TO  HIM  IN  THE
PERSON  OF  HIS  CONSTABLE,  SIR  OLIVER  DE  CLISSON.

TnE  court  of  France,  more  particularly  the  king’s  uncles,  and  the  principal  lords,  were
much  distressed  by  the  defiance  that  was  sent  by  the  duke  of  Gueldres  ; for  it  was  out-
rageous and  rude,  and  not  in  the  common  style  of  such  challenges,  as  I shall  explain  when  I
mention  the  particulars.  They  were  likewise  much  vexed  at  the  late  conduct  of  the  duke
of  Brittany,  which  had  broken  up  the  expedition  to  England  by  the  imprisonment  of  its
leader.  This  had  been  greatly  prejudicial  to  the  king,  nor  could  they  discover  any  cause  he
had  to  assign  for  such  conduct.  The  king  did  not  pay  such  attention  to  these  matters,  which,
considering  his  youth,  was  not  to  be  wondered  at,  as  if  he  had  been  of  more  advanced  years;
for  some  of  the  old  lords,  who  remembered  former  times,  said,  “ that  by  a similar  act  the
kingdom  had  been  much  agitated,  when  the  king  of  Navarre  assassinated  sir  Charles
d’Espaign,  who  at  the  time  was  constable  of  France,  for  which  king  John  could  never  after-
wards bear  the  king  of  Navarre,  and  had  deprived  him,  as  far  as  he  was  able,  of  all  his
possessions  in  Normandy."  “ Do  you  suppose,”  said  others,  “ that  if  king  Charles,  the  father
of  our  king,  were  now  alive,  who  loved  so  much  the  constable,  he  would  not  have  made  the
duke  pay  severely  for  this  insult  ? By  my  faith  would  he,  and  instantly  have  declared  war
against  him,  and,  cost  what  it  would,  have  driven  him  out  of  his  duchy.”  Thus  was  the
matter  discussed  through  France,  where  all  agreed  that  he  had  acted  very  ill.  The  king
and  his  uncles,  to  pacify  the  people,  who  were  much  dissatisfied,  and  to  inquire  into  the
grounds  of  this  business,  resolved  to  send  a prelate,  and  three  able  and  prudent  barons,  to
hear  the  duke’s  reasons,  and  to  summon  him  to  Paris,  or  wherever  else  the  king  might
please,  to  make  proper  excuses  for  his  conduct.  Sir  Milon  de  Dormans,  bishop  of  Beauvais,
was  nominated  as  principal : he  was  a most  able  man,  of  great  eloquence,  and  was  to  be
accompanied  by  sir  John  de  Vienne,  sir  John  de  Bueil,  and  the  lord  de  la  Riviere,  who  had
received  full  instructions  what  they  were  to  say  ; but  to  be  the  more  particularly  informed
of  what  had  passed,  the  bishop  of  Beauvais  went  to  Montlehery,  the  residence  of  the
constable,  to  learn  from  him  the  most  minute  details.  This  town  and  castle,  with  its  depen-
dencies, had  been  given  to  him  and  to  his  heirs  by  king  Charles.  The  bishop,  during  this
visit,  was  seized  with  an  illness  that  forced  him  to  keep  his  bed,  and  after  fifteen  days’
struggle  against  the  fever,  it  carried  him  off,  so  very  severe  was  the  attack.  The  bishop  of
Langres  was  nominated  in  the  place  of  the  bishop  of  Beauvais,  who  set  out,  with  the  before-
mentioned  barons,  for  Brittany.


CHAPTER  LXXVI. — FROISSART  MENTIONS  THE  PERSON  FROM  WHOM  HE  LEARNT  THE  ARREST
OF  THE  CONSTABLE  DE  CLISSON  ; WHO  LIKEWISE  INFORMS  HIM  THAT  SIR  BERTRAND
DU  GUESCLIN  OUGHT  TO  BE  CALLED  DU  GLAY-AQUIN.

I may,  perhaps,  be  asked,  how  I became  acquainted  with  the  events  in  this  history,  to
speak  so  circumstantially  about  them.  I reply  to  those  who  shall  do  so,  that  I have,  with
great  attention  and  diligence,  sought  in  divers  kingdoms  and  countries  for  the  facts  which
have  been,  or  may  hereafter  be.  mentioned  in  it : for  God  has  given  me  grace  and  opportu-
nities to  see,  and  make  acquaintance  with  the  greater  part  of  the  principal  lords  of  France
and  England.  It  should  be  known,  that  in  the  year  1390,  I had  laboured  at  this  history
thirty-seven  years,  and  at  that  time  I was  fifty-seven  years  old : a man  may,  therefore,
leam  much  in  such  a period,  when  he  is  in  his  vigour,  and  well  received  by  all  parties.
During  my  youth,  I was  five  years  attached  to  the  king  and  queen  of  England,  and  kindly
entertained  in  the  household  of  king  John  of  France  and  king  Charles  his  son.  I was,  in
consequence,  enabled  to  hear  much  during  those  times ; and,  for  certain,  the  greatest  pleasure
I have  ever  had,  was  to  make  every  possible  inquiry,  in  regard  to  what  was  passing  in  the
world,  and  then  to  write  down  all  that  I had  learnt.


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &e.


259


I will  now  say  from  whence  I heard  of  the  arrest  of  the  constable,  and  the  consequences
that  followed.  I was  riding  about  the  time  this  passed,  or  perhaps  a year  after,  from  Angers
to  Tours,  and  had  slept  at  Beaufort  en  Vallee*.  On  the  morrow  I overtook  a knight  from
Brittany,  called  sir  William  d’Ancenis,  who  was  going  to  visit  madamc  de  Maille  in  Touraine,
who  was  his  cousin,  as  she  had  lately  become  a widow.  I made  acquaintance  with  the
knight,  for  he  was  courteous  and  obliging  in  speech,  and  inquired  the  news  from  him  ; more
particularly  about  the  imprisonment  of  the  constable,  the  truth  of  which  I was  eager  to
know.  He  gave  me  the  information  I wanted ; for  he  said  he  had  been  at  the  parliament  at
Vannes,  with  his  cousin  the  lord  d’Ancenis,  a powerful  baron  in  Brittany.  In  the  same  manner
as  sir  Espaign  du  Lyon  told  me  all  that  passed  in  Foix,  Bearn,  and  Gascony,  and  as  don  Juan
Fernando  Portelet  the  events  in  Castille  and  Portugal,  did  the  gallant  knight  converse  with
me,  and  would  have  continued  it  longer,  had  1 rode  farther  in  his  company.  We  had
advanced  four  long  leagues  between  Montlihargne  and  Preuilly,  riding  at  a gentle  pace,
when  he  told  mo  many  things  on  the  road  respecting  Brittany,  which  I treasured  up  in  my
memory.  As  we  were  thus  riding,  we  entered  a meadow  near  to  Preuilly,  when  he  dis-
mounted, and  said, — “ Ah,  may  God  keep  the  soul  of  the  good  constable  of  France  ; for
he  had,  on  this  spot,  a most  honourable  combat,  and  greatly  profitable  to  the  country ; but
he  was  not  then  constable,  and  served  under  the  banner  of  sir  John  de  Bueil,  on  his  return
from  the  expedition  into  Spain.”  “Pray  have  the  goodness  to  relate  it  to  me.”  “ I will,”  said
he;  “but  let  us  remount  our  horses.”  We  did  so,  and,  continuing  our  journey,  he  thus  began:

“ In  the  time  I am  speaking  of,  this  country  was  quite  filled  with  English,  and  thieves
from  Gascony,  Brittany,  Germany : adventurers  from  all  nations  had  fixed  their  quarters
on  both  sides  of  the  Loire,  for  the  war  between  England  and  France  was  renewed.  A
party  of  them  had  fortified  themselves  in  the  castle  of  Beaufort  en  Vallee  ; which  you  have
seen,  and  supported  themselves  by  plundering  the  country  all  round  it.  But  to  come  to
the  immediate  object  of  my  story  : some  English  and  Gascons  had  possessed  themselves  of
Preuilly,  and  strengthened  it  so  much,  that  none  attempted  to  dislodge  them  : they  had  also
some  other  smaller  forts  near ; and  when  they  made  any  excursions,  they  could  assemble
between  eight  hundred  and  a thousand  combatants.

“ The  constable,  sir  Bertrand  du  Guesclin,  sir  John  de  Bueil,  the  lord  de  Mailly,  and
other  knights,  determined  to  deliver  the  country  from  these  people,  and  collected  about  five
hundred  spears.  They  learnt  that  the  English  intended  marching  towards  Saumer ; that
all  the  captains  of  the  different  forts  were  to  unite  their  forces;  and  that  the  place  of  meet-
ing was  Preuilly,  which  you  see  before  us.  Our  men,  having  crossed  the  river,  placed
themselves  in  ambuscade,  in  the  wood  below  us,  on  the  right  hand.  The  enemy  left  Preuilly
at  sun-rise,  to  the  amount  of  nine  hundred  fighting  men  : and  when  our  party  in  ambush
saw  them  advancing,  they  knew  a combat  to  be  inevitable.  They  held  a council  on  what
should  be  their  cry,  and  were  desirous  it  should  be  4 Sir  Bertrand !’ but  lie  would  not
consent,  and  declared  he  would  not  display  either  banner  or  pennon,  but  be  under  that  of  sir
John  de  Bueil.  Our  enemies  entered  the  mead,  where  we  just  now  dismounted,  and  they
had  scarcely  done  so  before  our  men  sallied  out  of  their  ambush  to  meet  them.  On  seeing
us,  being  of  good  courage,  they  drew  themselves  up  in  handsome  order.  We  did  the  same,
and  both  parties  advanced  to  the  combat,  which  instantly  commenced  with  such  thrusting
of  lances,  that  many  were  thrown  down  on  each  side.  It  lasted  a considerable  time  without
either  giving  way ; but,  to  say  the  truth,  we  were  all  picked  men,  and  with  the  enemy
were  numbers  badly  armed  and  plunderers.  They  gave  us,  however,  full  employment ;
but  sir  Morice  Trisequedy,  sir  Geoffry  Ricon,  sir  Geoffry  Kerimel,  and  Morfonace,  joining
sir  Bertrand  du  Guesclin,  full  gallop,  reinforced  us  with  sixty  good  spears,  whom  they  brought
with  them,  and,  attacking  the  English  on  horseback,  threw  them  into  a confusion  they  never
could  recover.  The  leaders  of  these  pillagers,  perceiving  the  event  was  likely  to  turn  out
unfavourable  to  them,  mounted  their  horses,  but  not  all ; for  seven  lay  dead  on  the  field,
with  three  hundred  of  their  men.  The  pursuit  lasted  as  far  as  St.  Maur,  where  sir  Robert
Cheney,  Robert  Hervey,  Richard  Giles,  and  James  Clerk,  got  into  a boat,  and  saved  tliom-


* Beaufort  en  Vall6e,-
sixteeu  from  Tours.


-or  Beaufort  la  Ville,  a town  of  Aujou,  on  tlic  river  Authion,  six  leagues  from  Angers,


260


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


selves  by  crossing  the  Loire.  They  made  for  four  castles  the  English  had  on  that  side
the  river,  wherein  they  did  not  long  remain,  but  hastened  for  Auvergne  and  Limousin,  as
they  fancied  the  constable  was  still  at  their  heels.

“ By  this  defeat,  my  good  master,  was  all  this  country  delivered  from  pillagers,  and
never  since  that  time  have  any  English  or  others  established  themselves  here.  I therefore
say,  that  constable  Bertrand  was  a gallant  man,  and  of  great  honour  and  advantage  to
France,  for  he  regained  large  tracts  of  territory  from  her  enemies.”  “ By  my  faith,  sir,  you
say  truly : he  was  indeed  a very  valiant  man,  and  so  is  sir  Oliver  du  Guesclin.”  On  my
naming  him  du  Guesclin,  the  knight  laughed;  and  I said,  “Sir,  what  do  you  laugh  at?”
“ Because  you  call  him  du  Guesclin,  which  is  not  his  proper  name,  nor  ever  was,  although
he  is  generally  so  called,  even  by  us  who  come  from  Brittany.  Sir  Bertrand  was  during
his  lifetime  desirous  to  alter  this,  but  could  not ; for  this  word  is  more  naturally  pronounced
than  the  one  he  wished  to  substitute  for  it.”  “ Pray,  sir,”  said  I,  “ have  the  kindness  to
tell  me  if  there  be  any  great  difference  between  them.”  “ No,  God  help  me  : the  only
difference  is  Glay-aquin  instead  of  Glesquin,  or  Guesclin.  I will  tell  you  whence  this
surname  is  derived,  according  to  what  I have  heard  the  old  people  in  Brittany  say,  and  it  is
certainly  true,  for  you  may  find  it  written  in  the  old  chronicles  of  Brittany.”  This  speech
gave  me  great  pleasure,  and  I replied, — “ Sir,  I shall  think  myself  much  obliged  by  your  so
doing  ; and  what  you  say  shall  not  be  forgotten,  for  sir  Bertrand  du  Guesclin  was  so  renowned
a knight,  that  his  reputation  ought  to  be  augmented  by  every  possible  means.”  “ That  is
true,”  said  the  knight,  and  thus  began :

“ In  the  reign  of  Charlemagne,  that  great  conqueror,  who  added  so  much  to  Christendom
and  France ; for  he  was  emperor  of  Rome  as  well  as  king  of  France  and  Germany ; and
whose  body  lies  now  at  Aix-la-Chapelle ; — this  king  Charles,  as  is  seen  in  the  ancient
chronicles  (for  you  know  that  all  the  knowledge  we  possess  in  this  world  we  owe  to  writing,
and  upon  no  other  foundation  can  we  depend  for  truth  but  on  what  is  contained  in  approved
books,)  was  several  times  in  Spain,  where  he  once  remained  for  nine  years  without  returning
to  France,  but  conquering  all  before  him.  At  this  time  there  was  a pagan  king,  called
Aquin,  wdio  reigned  over  Bugia  and  Barbary,  that  lie  opposite  to  Spain.  The  kingdom  of
Spain  was  very  considerable,  if  you  follow  its  coasts  from  St.  Jean  du  Pied  des  Ports,  for  it
then  contained  all  Arragon,  Navarre,  Biscay,  Oporto,  Coimbra,  Lisbon,  Seville,  Cordova,
Toledo,  and  Leon,  and  these  formerly  were  conquered  by  this  great  king.  During  his  long
residence  in  Spain,  Aquin,  king  of  Bugia  and  Barbary,  assembled  an  army  and  embarked
for  Brittany,  where  he  landed  at  the  port  of  Vannes.  He  brought  his  wife  and  children
with  him,  and,  having  established  himself  and  his  army  in  the  country,  proceeded  to  make
further  conquests.  King  Charles  was  duly  informed  of  what  was  passing  in  Brittany ; but
he  would  not  let  it  interfere  with  his  present  undertaking,  saying, — ‘ Let  him  establish
himself  in  Brittany  : it  will  not  be  difficult  for  us  to  free  the  country  from  him  and  his
people ; but  we  will  first  complete  the  conquest  of  this  country,  and  submit  it  to  the
Christian  faith.  This  king,  Aquin,  built  a handsome  tower  on  the  sea-shore  near  to  Vannes,
called  the  Glay,  wherein  he  took  pleasure  to  reside.  When  Charlemagne  had  accomplished
his  expedition  to  Spain  by  the  delivery  of  Galicia  and  other  provinces  from  the  Saracens,
whose  kings  he  had  slain,  and,  by  driving  out  the  infidels,  had  brought  the  whole  kingdom
under  the  Christian  faith  ; he  sailed  for  Brittany,  and  gave  battle  to  king  Aquin  and  his
adherents,  with  such  success  that  the  greater  part  of  the  infidels  were  killed,  and  king
Aquin  forced  to  fly,  in  a vessel  that  lay  ready  prepared  for  him  at  the  foot  of  the  tower  of
Glay.  He  was  so  hard  pressed  by  the  French,  he  could  only  embark  himself,  his  wife,  and
some  of  his  family,  and  in  the  hurry  forgot  a young  child,  of  about  a year  old,  that  was
asleep  in  the  tower.  The  king  having  escaped,  this  child  was  brought  to  Charlemagne,  who
was  much  pleased  with  him,  and  had  him  baptised.  Roland  and  Oliver  were  his  godfathers
at  the  font,  and  the  emperor  gave  him  handsome  presents  and  the  lands  his  father  had  won
in  Brittany.  This  child,  when  grown  up,  was  a valiant  knight,  and  called  Oliver  du
Glay-aquin,  because  be  had  been  found  in  the  tower  of  Glay,  and  was  the  son  of  king  Aquin.

“ Such  was  the  foundation  of  the  family  of  sir  Bertrand  du  Guesclin,  which,  as  you  see,
ought  to  be  called  du  Glay-aquin.  Sir  Bertrand  was  used  to  say,  that  when  he  should  have


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  Ac.


2,51

expelled  don  Pedro  from  Spain  and  crowned  don  Ilenry  de  Transtamare,  he  would  go  to
Bugia,  as  lie  should  have  only  the  sea  to  cross,  and  demand  his  inheritance:  and  would
undoubtedly  have  executed  it ; for  don  Henry  would  gladly  have  supplied  him  with  men
and  ships  ; but  the  prince  of  Wales,  by  bringing  back  and  replacing  don  Pedro  on  the  throne
of  Castille,  put  an  end  to  it.  Sir  Bertrand  was  made  prisoner  by  sir  John  Chandos,  at  the
famous  battle  of  Najarra,  and  ransomed  for  one  hundred  thousand  francs.  He  had  been
before  ransomed  by  the  same  knight,  and  for  the  like  sum,  at  the  battle  of  Auray.  The
renewal  of  the  war  between  England  and  France  put  an  effectual  stop  to  this  African
expedition,  and  gave  him  so  much  employment  that  ho  could  not  attend  to  anything  else.
He  was,  nevertheless,  the  direct  issue  from  king  Aquin,  who  reigned  over  Bugia  and
Barbary.  Thus  have  I traced  to  you  the  descent  of  sir  Bertrand  du  Guesclin.'’  “ That  is
true,”  replied  I,  “and  I am  very  thankful  to  you  for  it,  which  I will  not  forget.”  As  I said
this,  we  arrived  at  Preuilly  *.


CHAPTER  LXXVII. AMBASSADORS  FROM  THE  KING  OF  FRANCE  WAIT  ON  THE  DUKE  OF

BRITTANY  RESPECTING  THE  ARREST  OF  HIS  CONSTABLE. THE  DUKE,  HAVING  HEARD

THEM,  GIVES  THEM  HIS  ANSWER.

If  I could  have  been  as  long  with  sir  William  d’Ancenis  as  I was  with  sir  Espaign  du
Lyon,  when  wTe  travelled  together  from  Pamiers  to  Orthes  in  Bearn,  or  with  sir  Juan
Fernando  Portelet,  he  would  have  told  me  many  interesting  things  : but  it  could  not  be  ;
for,  soon  after  dinner,  we  came  to  two  roads ; one  leading  to  Tours,  whither  I was  bound,
and  the  other  to  Mailly,  which  he  was  to  follow.  Here  then  we  took  leave  of  each  other,
and  separated ; but  on  our  road  from  Preuilly,  before  our  separation,  he  told  me  many  things
about  the  bishop  of  Langres,  who  had  succeeded  the  bishop  of  Beauvais  in  the  embassy  to
the  duke  of  Brittany  with  sir  John  de  Beuil,  and  the  answer  they  received  from  the  duke.
Upon  the  authority  of  what  the  knight  said,  I have  written  as  follows :

The  ambassadors,  having  taken  leave  of  the  king  and  council,  continued  their  journey
until  they  came  to  Nantes,  where  they  inquired  the  residence  of  the  duke.  They  were  told,
that  he  chiefly  resided  at  or  near  Yannes  in  preference  to  any  other  place.  They  left
Nantes,  and  did  not  stop  until  they  arrived  at  Yannes,  as  it  is  only  twenty  leagues  distant,
and  dismounted  in  the  town,  for  the  duke  lived  in  the  castle  called  La  Motte.  When  they
had  equipped  themselves  in  a manner  becoming  their  rank,  they  waited  on  him,  who  received
them  outwardly  with  much  affection.  The  bishop  of  Langres,  being  a prelate,  was  the
spokesman,  and  harangued  in  a handsome  manner,  in  the  presence  of  his  two  companions,
sir  John  de  Yienne  and  sir  John  de  Beuil,  saying, — “ Lord  duke,  we  are  sent  hither  by  the
king  our  sovereign,  and  by  my  lords  his  uncles,  the  dukes  of  Berry  and  Burgundy,  to  say
they  are  wondrously  surprised  you  should  have  prevented  the  invasion  of  England  from
taking  place,  when  on  the  point  of  sailing,  and  have  ransomed  the  constable  of  France  for
such  an  immense  sum,  besides  seizing  three  of  his  castles  in  Brittany  and  the  town  of  Jugonf,
which,  should  they  turn  against  the  country,  may  seriously  injure  it.  We  are  therefore
charged  to  order  you,  on  the  part  of  our  sovereign  lord  the  king,  and  of  our  lords  his  uncles,
to  restore  to  sir  Oliver  de  Clisson,  constable  of  France,  those  parts  of  his  inheritance  you
now  withhold  from  him,  and  give  him  peaceable  possession  thereof,  according  to  justice,  in
the  same  condition  they  were  in  before  they  were  surrendered  up  to  you  through  constraint,
and  not  according  to  any  just  claim  you  had  upon  them,  and  also  the  sum  of  money  you
have  received,  wholly  and  fully,  wherever  he  shall  be  pleased  to  have  it  paid.  The  king

* The  high  reputation  of  Bertrand  du  Guesclin  gave  situation  of  the  old  castle  du  Guarplic,  that  was  built  on
rise  to  many  false  reports  of  his  origin  : the  above  is  one.  a creek,  or  gulf,  in  Concale  bay,  in  the  parish  of  Saint
To  detect  this,  it  is  only  necessary  to  state,  1st,  There  Coulomb,  diocese  of  D61.

never  was  a prince  in  Brittany  of  the  name  of  Aquin. — For  further  particulars,  see  1'ITistoire  de  la  Bretagne.

2dly,  Charlemagne  conquered  that  province  by  his  lieu-
tenants, and  was  never  there  in  person. — 3dly,  That  the  J Jugon  must  have  been  a place  of  considerable  cou-
original  name  of  the  house  of  du  Guesclin  was  not  Glay-  sequence,  for  I believe  there  is  an  old  proverb,
aquin,  but  Guarplic,  a compound  of  two  Breton  words,  “ Qui  a Bretagne  sans  Jugon

Gwar  and  Plic,  which  signifies  a creek,  and  describes  the  A tin  chappe  sans  chaperon.”


•202


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


and  his  council  likewise  summon  you  to  appear  at  Paris,  or  wherever  else  they  may  direct,
to  excuse  yourself  for  what  you  have  done.  The  king  is  so  good-tempered  and  forbearing,
that,  from  ties  of  blood,  he  will  readily  listen  to  your  excuses.  Should  they  not  be  quite
satisfactory,  our  lords,  the  dukes  of  Berry  and  Burgundy,  will  so  fashion  them  to  the  utmost
of  their  abilities,  and  by  entreaties  or  otherwise  manage  the  matter  so  that  you  shall  remain
friend  and  cousin  to  the  king,  as  it  is  reasonable  you  should  be.”

The  bishop,  turning  to  sir  John  de  Yienne,  said, — “ Do  you  agree  in  my  sentiments?”
“ Yes,  sir,”  he  replied.  Sir  John  de  Beuil  made  a similar  answer:  when  this  passed,  there
were  but  these  four  in  the  apartment.  The  duke,  having  heard  the  bishop,  was  very
thoughtful,  and  not  without  reason,  for  the  words  were  so  clear  they  required  no  expounding.
At  length  he  said, — “ Sir,  I have  well  heard  what  you  had  to  say : it  was  proper  I should
do  so,  as  you  come  from  my  sovereign  lord  the  king  of  France,  and  my  lords  his  uncles.  I
am  therefore  bounden  to  pay  you,  as  coming  from  them,  every  honour  and  respect,  and  am
willing  to  do  so.  What  you  have  said,  however,  demands  consideration ; and  I shall  take
the  advice  of  my  council,  that  I may  give  you  such  an  answer  as  may  please  you,  for  I
would  not  act  otherwise.”  “ You  say  well,”  replied  the  ambassadors,  “ and  we  are  satisfied.”
They  then  took  leave,  and  returned  to  their  hotel.  Towards  evening,  they  received  an
invitation  from  the  duke  to  dine  with  him  on  the  morrow,  which  they  accepted.  The  next
day  they  went  to  the  castle,  where  they  found  the  duke  and  his  knights,  who  received  them
magnificently.  Shortly  after  their  arrival,  basins  and  ewers  were  brought,  for  them  to  wash
before  they  sat  down  to  table.  The  bishop  of  Langres,  in  respect  to  his  prelacy,  was  seated
above  all  the  company : next  to  him  was  the  duke,  then  sir  John  de  Vienne  and  sir  John  de
Beuil.  The  dinner  was  very  splendid,  sumptuous,  and  well  served  : when  it  was  over,  they
retired  into  the  presence-chamber,  where  they  conversed  on  different  subjects,  and  amused
themselves  in  hearing  the  minstrels.

The  lords  from  France  thought  they  should  have  then  received  their  answer,  but  were
disappointed.  Wine  and  spices  were  brought,  which  having  partaken  of,  they  retired  to
their  hotels,  and  remained  the  whole  evening  comfortably  at  home.  On  the  ensuing
morning,  it  was  signified  to  them  that  the  duke  wished  to  see  them  at  the  castle,  whither
they  went ; and,  being  introduced  to  the  apartment  where  the  duke  was,  he  received  them
kindly,  and  thus  spoke : “ My  fair  sirs,  I know  you  are  anxious  for  an  answer  to  what  you
have  been  charged  to  tell  me  from  my  sovereign  and  other  lords,  that  you  may  report  it  to
them : I therefore  declare,  that  I have  done  nothing  to  sir  Oliver  de  Clisson  that  I repent  of,
except  that  he  has  escaped  too  cheaply  and  with  his  life : this  I spared  solely  on  account  of
his  office,  and  not  in  any  manner  out  of  personal  regard  ; for  he  has  behaved  so  very  ill  to
me,  in  several  instances,  that  I hate  him  mortally ; and,  begging  my  sovereign’s  and  their
graces’  pardon,  I have  not  prevented  the  expedition  to  England  taking  place  by  the  arrest  of
the  constable.  Of  this  I am  able  and  willing  to  exculpate  myself ; for  the  day  I had  him
arrested,  I was  thinking  no  harm  against  it#:  it  is  proper  to  take  advantage  of  an  enemy
wherever  it  may  be  found.  If  he  had  been  slain,  I believe  the  kingdom  of  France  w7ould
not  have  been  the  worse  governed  for  having  lost  the  supposed  benefit  of  his  counsel.  With
regard  to  the  castles  he  surrendered  to  me,  and  of  which  I am  in  possession,  I shall  keep
them  until  the  king  by  force  dispossesses  me  of  them.  As  to  the  money,  I reply,  that  from
the  hatred  of  sir  Oliver  de  Clisson,  I have  incurred  debts  in  this  and  other  countries,  and
have  from  this  sum  repaid  those  to  whom  I was  indebted.”  Such  was  the  answer  the  duke
of  Brittany  gave  to  the  ambassadors  from  the  king  of  France.  Many  debates  ensued,  to
induce  the  duke  to  send  a more  moderate  answer  ; but  his  replies  were  always  to  the  same
effect  as  what  he  had  before  spoken.  When  they  found  they  could  not  obtain  anything
more,  they  desired  to  take  their  leave,  which  being  granted,  they  prepared  for  their  departure,
and  journeyed  until  they  arrived  at  Paris ; thence  they  went  to  the  castle  of  Beauts,  near
Vincennes,  where  the  king  and  queen  resided.  The  dukes  of  Berry  and  Burgundy  soon
followed  them,  as  they  were  impatient  to  hear  the  duke  of  Brittany’s  answer,  which  as  you
have  heard  I will  not  repeat.  But  as  those  sent  into  Brittany  had  not  succeeded  in  any  one
point,  the  king  and  council  were  greatly  displeased  with  the  duke,  and  said  he  was  the
* The  original  runs,  “ nul  mal  je  n’y  pensoye.”


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  & c.


2G3


proudest  and  most  presumptuous  man  alive,  and  that  matters  should  not  remain  as  they
•vere  ; for  the  consequences  would  be  too  prejudicial  and  disgraceful  to  the  crown  of  France.
It  was  fully  the  intention  of  the  king  and  his  council  to  make  war  on  the  duke  of  Brittany.

The  duke  expected  nothing  less ; for  he  knew  he  had  angered  the  king  of  France,  as  well
as  those  of  his  council : but  his  hatred  against  the  constable  was  so  deep,  it  deprived  him  of
the  use  of  his  reason ; and  he  sorely  repented  that,  when  in  his  power,  he  had  not  put  him
to  death.  Things  remained  in  this  state  a considerable  time.  The  duke  resided  at  Vannes,
but  seldom  went  abroad  for  fear  of  ambuscades  : he  paid  great  court  to  the  principal  cities
and  towns  in  the  duchy,  and  made  secret  treaties  with  the  English  : he  also  garrisoned  his
strong  places  the  same  as  in  times  of  war.  His  opinion  continually  varied,  as  to  what  had
passed  : sometimes  he  said,  he  wished  he  had  not  arrested  the  constable  ; at  others,  to  excuse
himself,  he  declared  that  Clisson  had  so  grievously  insulted  him,  he  had  good  reason  for  what
he  had  done.  This  conduct  had  caused  him  to  be  feared  in  the  country  : for  the  lord  hath
small  authority  who  is  not  feared  by  his  subjects*;  for  whenever  he  pleases  he  may  he  at
peace  with  them.

We  will  now  leave  the  duke  of  Brittany,  and  return  to  the  affairs  of  England,  which,  at
this  moment,  were  in  a troubled  and  dangerous  state.


CHAPTER  LXXVIII. THE  DUKES  OF  YORK  AND  GLOUCESTER,  UNCLES  TO  THE  KING,  CON-
FEDERATE, WITH  OTHER  BARONS,  AGAINST  HIM  AND  HIS  COUNCIL. THE  PEOPLE  ARE

DISCONTENTED  WITH  THE  DUKE  OF  IRELAND. THE  LONDONERS,  THROUGH  THE  MEANS

OF  THE  DUKE  OF  GLOUCESTER  AND  HIS  FRIENDS,  OBTAIN  FROM  THE  KING,  THAT  A
DAY  SHOULD  BE  FIXED  FOR  THOSE  WHO  HAD  MANAGED  THE  FINANCES  TO  RENDER
AN  ACCOUNT  OF  THEM.

You  have  before  heard,  that  the  dukes  of  York  and  Gloucester  had  confederated  with  the
earl  of  Salisbury,  the  earl  of  Arundel,  the  earl  of  Northumberland,  the  earl  of  Nottingham,
and  the  archbishop  of  Canterbury,  against  the  king  and  his  council,  with  whom  they  were
very  much  dissatisfied.  They  said, — “ This  duke  of  Ireland  doth  with  the  king  and  the
realm  as  he  pleases  : the  king  has  only  base  knaves  about  his  person,  without  any  regard  to
noblemen  ; and  as  long  as  he  attends  to  no  other  advice  than  that  of  those  now  near  him,
things  cannot  go  on  well ; for  no  kingdom  can  prosper  when  governed  by  wicked  men.  It
is  well  known,  that  when  a poor  person  is  exalted  and  supported  by  his  lord,  he  corrupts  the
people,  and  destroys  the  country ; for  what  can  a base-born  man  feel  of  honour  ? his  sole
wish  is  to  enrich  himself:  just  like  the  otter,  who,  on  entering  a pond,  devours  all  the  fish
therein.  Whence  comes  it  that  this  duke  of  Ireland  hath  such  power  over  the  king,  (we
know  his  origin)  and  governeth  all  England  at  his  pleasure,  while  the  king’s  uncles  are
disregarded  ? Such  conduct  is  not  longer  to  be  suffered.  We  are  not  ignorant  who  the  earl
of  Oxford  was,  and  that  in  this  country  he  had  not  one  good  quality,  either  of  sense,  honour
or  gentility  allowed  him.”  “ Sir  John  Chandos,”  added  a knight,  “made  him  feel  this  very
sharply  once,  at  the  palace  of  the  prince  of  Wales,  at  St.  Andrews,  in  Bordeaux.”  “ How
so  ?”  demanded  another,  who  wished  to  know  the  particulars.  “ I will  tell  you,”  replied
the  knight,  “for  I was  present.  Wine  was  serving  round  to  the  prince  of  Wales  and  a
large  party  of  English  lords,  in  an  apartment  of  his  palace;  and,  when  the  prince  had  drunk,
the  cup  was  carried  to  sir  John  Chandos,  as  constable  of  Aquitaine,  who  took  it  and  drank,
without  paying  any  attention  to  the  earl  of  Oxford,  father  to  this  duke  of  Ireland,  or  desiring
him  to  drink  first.  After  sir  John  Chandos  had  drunk,  one  of  his  squires  presented  the
wine  to  the  earl  of  Oxford ; hut,  indignant  that  Chandos  had  drunk  before  him,  he  refused  it,
and  said,  by  way  of  mockery,  to  the  squire  who  was  holding  the  cup,  ‘ Go,  carry  it  to
thy  master,  Chandos  : let  him  drink.’  ‘ Why  should  I go  to  him  ? for  he  has  drunk.
Drink  yourself,  since  it  is  offered  you ; for,  by  St.  George,  if  you  do  not,  I will  throw  it  in
your  face.’  The  earl,  afraid  lest  the  squire  should  execute  what  he  had  said,  for  he  was
bold  enough  to  do  so,  took  the  cup  and  put  it  to  his  mouth  and  drank,  or  at  least  pretended
* Cur  e’est  petito  seigneurie  de  seigneur  qui  u’ent  craint  et  doubtd  de  ses  gens.


26-1


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  See.


to  drink.  Sir  John  Chandos  was  not  far  off,  and  heard  and  saw  the  whole,  and  his  squire,
whilst  the  prince  was  in  conversation  with  others,  came  and  told  him  what  had  passed.  Sir
John  Chandos  took  no  notice  of  it  until  the  prince  had  retired,  when,  stepping  up  to  the
earl  of  Oxford,  he  said, — ‘ What,  sir  Aubrey*,  are  you  displeased  that  I drank  first,  who
am  the  constable  of  this  country  ? I may  well  drink  and  take  precedence  before  you,  since
my  most  renowned  sovereign,  the  king  of  England,  and  my  lords,  the  princes,  assent  to  it.
True  it  is,  that  you  were  at  the  battle  of  Poitiers ; but  all  now  present  do  not  know  the
cause  of  it  so  well  as  I do  : I will  declare  it,  that  they  may  remember  it.  When  my  lord,
the  prince,  had  finished  his  journey  to  Languedoc,  Carcassonne  and  Narbonne,  and  was
returned  to  this  city  of  Bordeaux,  you  took  it  into  your  head  that  you  would  return  to
England;  but  what  did  the  king  say  to  you?  I know  it  well,  though  I was  not  present.
He  asked,  if  you  had  accomplished  your  service ; and,  afterward,  what  you  had  done  with
his  son.  You  replied,  “ Sir,  I left  him  in  good  health  at  Bordeaux.”  “What !”  said  the
king,  “ and  have  you  been  bold  enough  to  return  hither  without  him  ? Did  I not  strictly
enjoin  you,  and  the  others  who  accompanied  him,  never  to  return  without  him,  under  the
forfeiture  of  your  lands  ? and  yet  you  have  dared  to  disobey  my  commands.  I now  positively
order  you  to  quit  my  kingdom  within  four  days  and  return  to  the  prince ; for  if  you  be
found  on  the  fifth  day,  you  shall  lose  your  life  and  estates.”  You  were  afraid  to  hazard
disobedience,  as  was  natural,  and  left  England.  You  were  so  fortunate,  that  you  joined  the
prince  four  days  before  the  battle  of  Poitiers,  and  had,  that  day,  the  command  of  forty
lances,  while  I had  sixty.  Now,  consider  if  I,  who  am  constable  of  Aquitaine,  have  not
the  right  to  take  precedence,  and  drink  before  you  do.'  ‘ The  earl  of  Oxford  was  much
ashamed,  and  would  willingly  have  been  anywhere  but  there.  He  was  forced,  however,
to  bear  with  what  sir  John  Chandos  said,  who  spoke  aloud  that  all  might  hear  him.”
“ After  this,”  said  another  knight,  “ we  ought  not  to  be  surprised  that  the  duke  of  Ireland,
who  is  the  son  of  this  earl  of  Oxford,  is  not  more  considerate,  and  does  not  keep  in  his
memory  what  may  be  told  him  of  his  father,  instead  of  ruling  the  whole  kingdom  of
England,  and  setting  himself  above  the  king’s  uncles.”  “ And  why  should  he  not  do  so,”
replied  others,  “ since  the  king  wills  it  ?”

There  were  great  murmurings  throughout  England  against  the  duke  of  Ireland  ; but  what
injured  him  the  most  was  his  conduct  to  his  duchess,  the  lady  Philippa,  daughter  of  the
lord  de  Coucy  earl  of  Bedford,  who  was  a handsome  and  noble  lady,  and  of  the  highest
extraction.  He  fell  in  love  with  a German  lady,  one  of  the  attendants  of  the  present  queen ;
and,  by  his  solicitations  at  the  court  of  Rome,  pope  Urban  YI.  granted  him  a divorce  from
the  lady  Philippa,  without  any  title  of  justice,  but  through  presumption  and  indifference.
When  he  married  this  lady,  king  Richard  consented  thereto  ; for  he  was  so  blinded  by  the
duke  of  Ireland  that,  if  he  had  declared  that  black  was  white,  the  king  would  not  have  said
to  the  contrary.  The  mother  of  the  duke  was  mightily  enraged  with  him  for  this  conduct,
and  took  the  lord  de  Coucy’s  daughter  to  her  home  and  made  her  her  own  companion.  The
duke  certainly  acted  ill,  and  evil  befel  him  for  it,  as  this  was  one  of  the  principal  causes  of  the
hatred  all  England  bore  hinvj-.  It  is  but  just  that  what  is  conceived  in  evil  should  have
an  unfortunate  end  ; and  this  duke  confided  so  much  in  the  affection  of  the  king,  he
thought  no  one  would  dare  to  injure  him.

It  was  reported  through  England,  that  a new  tax  was  to  be  levied  on  every  fire,  and  that
each  was  to  pay  a noble,  the  rich  making  up  for  the  deficiencies  of  the  poor.  The  king’s
uncles  knew  this  would  be  difficult  to  bring  about ; and  they  had  caused  it  to  be  spread  in
the  principal  towns  how  greatly  the  inhabitants  would  be  oppressed  by  such  taxes,  and  that,  as

* This  earl  of  Oxford’s  name  was  Thomas.  Sir  Alberic  Edwardi  regis  filia  Isabella,  et  aliam  duceret,  quae  cum
tie  Vere  was  his  brother.  He  was  employed  in  different  regin  a Anna  venerat  de  Boemia  (ut  fertur)  cujusdam
negotiations  by  Richard  II.  Cellarii  filiam,  ignobilem  prorsus  atque  foedam  : ob  quam

Robert  was  the  son  and  heir  of  Thomas,  the  last  earl  of  causam  magna  surrepsit  occasio  scandalorum  (cujus  nomen
Oxford,  and  created  duke  of  Ireland.  eratin  vulgaria  idiomate  Lancecrona).  Favebat  sibi  in  his

See  Dugdale’s  Baronage.  omnibus  ipse  rex,  nolens  ipsum  in  aliquo  contristare,  vel

f Walsingham,  speaking  of  this  transaction,  says, — potius  (prout  dicitur)  non  valens  suis  votis  aliqualiter
“ Accidit  his  diebus,  ut  Robertus  Vere,  elatus  de  bonoribus  obviare,  qui  maleftciis  cujusdam  fratris  (qtti  cum  dicto
quosrex  impendebat  eidem  jugiter,  suam  repudiaret  uxorem  Roberto  fuit)  rex  impeditus  neqnaquam  quod  bonum  est
juvenculam,  nobilem,  atquo  pulchram,  genitam  deillustris  et  honestum  cernere,  vel  sectari  valebat.”


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


2G5

there  must  remain  great  sums  in  the  treasury,  the  people  ought  to  insist  on  having  an
account  of  their  expenditure  from  those  who  had  the  management,  such  as  the  archbishop  of
York,  the  duke  of  Ireland,  sir  Simon  Burley,  sir  Michael  de  la  Pole,  sir  Nicholas  Bramber,
sir  Robert  Tresilian,  sir  Peter  Gouloufre,  sir  John  Salisbury,  sir  John  Beauchamp,  and  the
master  of  the  wool-staple ; and,  if  these  would  render  an  honest  account,  there  would  he
found  money  enough  for  the  present  demands  of  the  kingdom.  It  is  a well-known  maxim,
that  no  one  pays  willingly,  or  takes  money  from  his  purse,  if  he  can  avoid  it.  These
rumours  were  soon  spread  throughout  England,  and  especially  in  London,  which  is  the  chief
key  of  the  realm,  so  that  the  people  rose  in  rebellion,  to  inquire  into  the  government  of  the
country,  for  that  there  had  not  for  some  time  been  anything  known  concerning  it.

The  Londoners  first  addressed  themselves  to  Thomas  of  Woodstock,  duke  of  Gloucester,
though  he  was  younger  than  the  duke  of  York  ; for  he  was  much  beloved  for  his  valour,
prudence,  and  steadiness  in  business.  When  they  were  in  his  presence,  they  said, — “ My
lord,  the  good  city  of  London  recommends  itself  to  your  care  ; and  its  citizens,  as  well  as  all
England,  entreat  you  would  take  upon  you  the  government  of  the  realm,  and  learn  from
those  who  have  possessed  themselves  of  the  kingdom  how  it  has  been  hitherto  governed  ; for
the  common  people  make  bitter  complaints,  that  taxes  upon  taxes  are  continually  imposed,
and  that  the  kingdom,  since  the  coronation  of  the  king,  has  been  more  grievously  oppressed
by  these  and  other  extraordinary  aids,  than  for  fifty  years  preceding  it.  No  one  knows  how
these  sums  have  been  expended,  nor  what  is  become  of  them.  You  will  be  pleased  to
inquire  into  this,  and  provide  a remedy,  or  things  will  turn  out  ill,  for  the  discontents  of  the
people  are  very  strong.”  The  duke  of  Gloucester  replied, — “My  good  sirs,  I have  attentively
listened  to  what  you  have  said ; but  I alone  can  do  nothing.  I know  you  have  well-founded
cause  of  complaint,  as  well  as  the  rest  of  England ; but  notwithstanding  I am  son  to  a king
of  England,  and  uncle  to  the  present  king,  if  I were  to  interfere  by  speaking  to  him,  he  would
not  attend  to  me ; for  my  nephew  has  counsellors  near  his  person  in  whom  he  confides  more
than  in  himself,  and  these  counsellors  lead  him  as  they  please.  If  you  wish  to  succeed  in
having  your  grievances  redressed,  you  should  enter  into  a confederacy  with  the  principal  towns,
and  with  some  of  the  nobles  and  prelates,  and  come  before  the  king,  where  my  brother  and
myself  will  cheerfully  meet  you,  and  say  to  the  king, — “Most  dear  lord,  you  have  been  crowned
when  very  young,  and  have  hitherto  been  very  badly  advised,  nor  have  you  attended  to  the
affairs  of  your  kingdom,  from  the  mean  and  weak  counsellors  you  have  chosen.  This  has
caused  the  mismanagement  of  affairs,  as  you  must  have  seen  ; and  if  God,  out  of  his  mercy,
had  not  stretched  forth  his  hand,  the  country  must  inevitably  have  been  ruined.  For  which,
most  redoubted  lord,  we  supplicate  you,  in  the  presence  of  your  uncles,  as  good  subjects
should  entreat  their  lord,  that  you  attend  to  these  matters,  that  the  noble  kingdom  and
crown  of  England,  which  has  descended  to  you  from  the  most  powerful  and  gallant  king  this
country  ever  possessed,  may  be  supported  in  prosperity  and  honour,  and  the  common  people,
who  now  complain,  be  maintained  in  their  just  rights  and  privileges.  This  you  swore  to
perform  on  the  day  of  your  coronation.  "We  also  entreat,  that  you  would  assemble  the
three  estates  of  the  realm,  that  they  may  examine  into  the  late  manner  of  your  government.
Should  it  have  been  managed  in  a manner  becoming  a person  of  your  rank,  those  who  have
governed  will  acquire  profit  and  honour,  and  shall  remain  as  long  as  they  choose,  and  while
it  may  be  your  good  pleasure,  in  their  offices.  But  if  those  who  may  be  appointed  to
examine  into  these  matters  find  anything  contrary  to  good  government,  they  will  provide  a
remedy  by  quietly  dismissing  from  your  person  those  who  have  so  acted,  and  replacing  them
by  others  better  qualified  ; but  with  your  consent  first  had,  then  that  of  your  uncles  and  of
the  prelates  and  barons  of  the  realm,  who  will  pay  attention  in  the  choice  to  your  honour  and
to  that  of  your  kingdom.”

“ When  you  shall  have  made  this  remonstrance  to  the  king,”  said  the  duke  of  Gloucester
to  the  Londoners,  “ he  will  give  you  an  answer.  If  he  should  say,  ‘ We  will  consider  of  it,’
cut  the  matter  short,  and  declare  you  will  not  have  any  delay ; and  press  it  the  more  to  alarm
him,  as  well  as  his  minions.  Say,  boldly,  that  the  country  will  not  longer  suffer  it ; and  it  is
wonderful  they  have  borne  it  so  long.  My  brother  and  myself  will  be  with  the  king,  and  also
the  archbishop  of  Canterbury,  the  earls  of  Arundel,  Salisbury  and  Northumberland,  but  say


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


20:5


nothing  should  we  not  be  present ; for  we  are  the  principal  personages  in  England,  and  will
second  you  in  your  remonstrance,  by  adding,  that  what  you  require  is  but  reasonable  and
just.  When  he  shall  hear  us  thus  speak,  he  will  not  contradict  us,  unless  he  be  very  ill
advised  indeed,  and  will  appoint  a day  accordingly.  This  is  the  advice  and  the  remedy  I
offer  you.”  The  Londoners  replied, — “ My  lord,  you  have  loyally  spoken ; hut  it  will  be
difficult  for  us  to  find  the  king  and  as  many  lords  as  you  have  named,  at  one  time  in  his
presence.”  “ Not  at  all,”  said  the  duke : u St.  George’s  day  will  he  within  ten  days,  and
the  king  will  then  be  at  Windsor ; you  may  be  sure  the  duke  of  Ireland  and  sir  Simon
Burley  will  be  there  also.  There  will  be  many  others.  My  brother,  myself,  and  the  earl
of  Salisbury,  will  be  there.  Do  you  come,  and  you  will  act  according  to  circumstances.”

The  Londoners  promised  to  be  at  Windsor  on  St.  George’s  day,  and  left  the  duke  of
Gloucester,  well  pleased  with  their  reception.  When  that  day  came,  the  king  of  England
held  a grand  festival,  as  his  predecessors  had  done  before  him,  and,  accompanied  by  his
queen  and  court,  went  to  Windsor.  On  the  morrow,  the  Londoners  came  thither  with  sixty
horse,  and  those  from  York  and  other  principal  towns  in  like  numbers,  and  lodged  themselves
in  the  town.  The  king  was  desirous  of  leaving  the  place  for  another  three  leagues  off,  when
he  heard  of  the  arrival  of  the  commons  of  England,  and  still  more  so,  when  told  they  wanted  to
speak  to  him  ; for  he  dreaded  greatly  their  remonstrances,  and  would  not  have  heard  them  :
but  his  uncles  and  the  earl  of  Salisbury  said, — “ My  lord,  you  cannot  depart,  for  they  are
deputed  hither  by  all  your  principal  towns.  It  is  proper  you  hear  what  they  have  to  say  :
you  will  then  give  them  your  answer,  or  take  time  to  consider  of  it.”  He  remained  there-
fore, but  sore  against  his  will.

The  commons  were  introduced  to  the  presence,  in  the  lower  hall,  without  the  new  building,
where  the  palace  stood  in  former  times.  The  king  was  attended  by  his  two  uncles,  the
archbishop  of  Canterbury,  the  bishop  of  Winchester,  lord  chancellor,  the  earl  of  Salisbury,
the  earl  of  Northumberland,  and  several  others  of  the  nobility.  The  commons  made  their
harangue  to  the  king,  by  their  spokesman,  a citizen  of  London,  called  Simon  de  Sudbury,
a man  of  sense  and  oratory.  He  formed  his  speech  from  what  the  duke  of  Gloucester  had
said  to  them  ; and,  as  you  have  heard  that,  I need  not  take  more  notice  of  it.  The  king,
having  heard  it,  replied, — “ Ye  commons  of  England,  your  requests  are  great  and  important,
and  cannot  be  immediately  attended  to ; for  we  shall  not  long  remain  here,  nor  are  all  our
council  with  us:  indeed  the  greater  part  are  absent.  I therefore  bid  each  of  you  return
quietly  to  your  homes,  and  there  peaceably  remain,  unless  sent  for,  until  Michaelmas,  when
the  parliament  shall  be  assembled  at  Westminster.  Come  thither  and  lay  your  requests
before  us,  which  we  will  submit  to  our  council.  What  we  approve  shall  be  granted,  and
what  we  think  improper  refused.  For  think  not  we  are  to  be  ruled  by  our  people.  That
has  never  been  ; and  we  can  perceive  nothing  but  what  is  right  and  just  in  our  government,
and  in  those  who  govern  under  us.”  Upwards  of  seven  instantly  replied  to  the  king,  and
said, — “ Most  redoubted  lord,  under  your  grace’s  favour,  your  justice  is  weak,  indeed,  in
the  realm,  and  you  know  not  what  behoveth  you  to  know  ; for  you  neither  make  inquiry,
nor  examine  into  what  is  passing ; and  those  who  are  your  advisers  will  never  tell  you,  for
the  great  wealth  they  are  amassing.  It  is  not  justice,  sir  king,  to  cut  off  heads,  wrists,  or  feet,
or  any  way  to  punish ; but  justice  consists  in  the  maintaining  the  subject  in  his  right,  and  in
taking  care  he  live  in  peace,  without  having  any  cause  of  complaint.  We  must  also  say  that
you  have  appointed  too  long  a day  by  referring  us  to  Michaelmas.  No  time  can  be  better
than  the  present : we,  therefore,  unanimously  declare,  that  we  will  have  an  account,  and
very  shortly  too,  from  those  who  have  governed  your  kingdom  since  your  coronation,  and
know  what  is  become  of  the  great  sums  that  have  been  raised  in  England  for  these  last  nine
years,  and  whither  they  have  passed.  If  those  who  have  been  your  treasurers  shall  give  a
just  account,  or  nearly  so,  we  shall  be  much  rejoiced,  and  leave  them  in  their  offices.  Those
who  shall  not  produce  honest  acquittances  for  their  expenditure  shall  be  treated  accordingly,
by  the  commissioners  that  are  to  be  nominated  by  you,  and  our  lords  your  uncles.”

The  king,  on  this,  looked  at  his  uncles  to  see  if  they  would  say  anything,  when  the  duke
of  Gloucester  said, — “ That  he  saw  nothing  but  what  was  just  and  reasonable  in  the  demands
they  had  made  : what  do  you  say,  fair  brother  of  York  ?”  “ As  God  may  help  me,  it  is  all


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


267


true,”  lie  replied,  as  did  the  other  barons  who  were  present ; hut  the  king  wished  them  to
give  their  opinions  separately.  “ Sir,”  added  the  duke  of  Gloucester,  “ it  is  but  fair  that  you
know  how  your  money  has  been  expended.”  The  king,  perceiving  they  were  all  united,  and
that  his  minions  dared  not  utter  one  word,  for  they  were  overawed  by  the  presence  of  the
nobles,  said, — “Well,  I consent  to  it:  let  them  be  sent  away;  for  summer  is  now
approaching,  and  the  time  for  my  amusement  in  hunting.”  Then,  addressing  the  Londoners,
he  added,  “ Would  you  have  the  matter  instantly  despatched  ?”  “ Yes,  we  entreat  it  of

you,  noble  king : we  shall  likewise  beg  of  these  lords  to  take  part,  more  particularly  our
lords  your  uncles.”  The  dukes  replied,  they  would  willingly  undertake  it,  as  well  on  the
part  of  their  lord  and  king,  as  for  the  country.  The  commons  then  said ; “ We  also  wish
that  the  reverend  fathers,  the  lord  archbishop  of  Canterbury,  and  the  bishops  of  Lincoln  and
Winchester,  be  parties.”  They  said,  they  would  cheerfully  do  so.  When  this  was  agreed
to,  they  nominated  the  lords  present,  such  as  the  earls  of  Salisbury  and  Northumberland,  sir
Reginald  Cobham,  sir  Guy  de  Bryan,  sir  Thomas  Felton,  sir  Mathew  Gournay,  and  said
there  should  be  from  two  to  four  of  the  principal  persons  from  each  city  or  large  town,  who
would  represent  the  commons  of  England.  All  this  was  assented  to,  and  the  time  for  their
meeting  fixed  for  the  week  after  St.  George’s  day,  to  be  liolden  at  Westminster  ; and  all  the
king’s  ministers  and  treasurers  were  ordered  to  attend,  and  give  an  account  of  their  adminis-
trations to  the  before-named  lords.  The  king  consented  to  the  whole,  not  through  force,  but
at  the  solicitations  and  prayers  of  his  uncles,  the  other  lords,  and  commons  of  England.  It,
indeed,  concerned  them  to  know  how  affairs  had  been  managed,  both  in  former  times  and  in
those  of  the  present  day.  All  having  been  amicably  settled,  the  assembly  broke  up,  and  the
lords,  on  leaving  Windsor,  returned  to  London,  whither  were  summoned  all  collecters  and
receivers,  from  the  different  counties,  with  their  receipts  and  acquittances,  under  pain  of
corporal  punishment  and  confiscation  of  goods.


CHAPTER  LXXIX. TIIE  COMMISSIONERS  OF  ACCOUNTS  CONDEMN  SIR  SIMON  BURLEY  TO  BE

IMPRISONED  IN  THE  TOWER  OF  LONDON. SIR  THOMAS  TRIVET  IS  KILLED  BY  A FALL

EROM  HIS  HORSE. SIR  WILLIAM  ELMHAM  IS  ACQUITTED  OF  HAVING  TAKEN  MONEY

FOR  TIIE  SURRENDER  OF  BOURBOURG  AND  GRAVELINES.

The  assembly  of  the  commissioners  of  accounts  was  held  at  Westminster,  consisting  of  the
king’s  uncles,  the  prelates,  barons,  and  deputies  from  the  principal  towns  of  England.  It
lasted  upwards  of  a month.  Some  of  those  who  appeared  before  it,  not  producing  fair  or
honourable  accounts,  were  punished  corporally,  and  by  confiscation  of  whatever  they

possessed.

Sir  Simon  Burley  was  charged  with  defalcations  to  the  amount  of  two  hundred  and  fifty
thousand  francs,  notwithstanding  he  had  been  tutor  to  the  king,  and  had  assisted  him  in  the
government  from  his  earliest  youth.  When  called  upon  to  account  for  what  had  become  of  it,
he  cast  the  blame  on  the  archbishop  of  York  and  sir  William  Neville,  saying  he  had  never
acted  but  with  them  and  by  their  advice,  and  in  conjunction  with  the  king’s  chamberlains,
sir  Robert  Tresilian,  sir  Robert  Beauchamp,  sir  John  Salisbury,  sir  Nicholas  Bramber,  and
others  ; but  those,  when  examined,  excused  themselves,  and  flung  the  whole  fault  on  him.
The  duke  of  Ireland  said  to  sir  Simon  privately — “ I understand  you  are  to  be  arrested  and
sent  to  prison  until  you  shall  pay  the  sum  you  are  charged  with.  Do  not  dispute  the
matter,  but  go  whither  they  may  order  : I will  make  your  peace  with  the  king,  though  they
had  all  sworn  to  the  contrary.  You  know  the  constable  of  France  owes  me  forty  thousand
francs  for  the  ransom  of  John  of  Blois,  and  this  sum  he  will  shortly  pay  : I will  offer  the
amount  to  the  commissioners,  which,  for  the  moment,  will  satisfy  them  : but  the  king  is
sovereign ; he  will  pardon  you  all,  for  the  balances  must  be  paid  to  him  and  to  none  other.”
“ If  I did  not  depend,  ’ replied  sir  Simon  Burley,  “ that  you  would  strongly  support  me  with
the  king,  and  assist  me  personally  in  this  matter,  I would  cross  the  sea  and  go  to  the  king  of
Bohemia.  I should  be  well  received  there,  and  remain  for  a time  until  all  this  bustle  were
blown  over.”  “ I will  never  forsake  you,”  said  the  duke  of  Ireland  : “ are  we  not  companions,


£63


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


and  equally  implicated  ? You  must  ask  time  for  repayment.  I know  well  that  you  can
pay  when  you  please,  in  ready  money,  one  hundred  thousand  francs.  Do  not  fear  death,  for
they  will  never  push  matters  so  far  as  that ; and  before  Michaelmas,  things  shall  have  a
different  turn  from  what  these  lords  think  : let  me  only  once  have  the  king  in  my  power,  and
I will  have  him,  for  all  that  he  now  does  he  is  forced  to.  We  must  satisfy  these  cursed
Londoners,  and  put  an  end  to  all  this  discontent  they  have  raised  against  us  and  our  friends.”

Sir  Simon  Burley  put  a little  too  much  confidence  in  these  words  of  the  duke  of  Ireland,
and  presented  himself  before  the  commissioners,  when  called  upon.  They  said, — “ Sir
Simon,  you  have  been  a knight  who  has  done  honour  to  our  country,  and  were  greatly
beloved  by  our  lord  the  late  prince  of  Wales.  Yon  and  the  duke  of  Ireland  have  been  the
principal  ministers  of  the  king.  We  have  carefully  examined  all  your  accounts  that  have
been  laid  before  us,  and  must  tell  you,  they  are  neither  fair  nor  honourable,  which  has
displeased  us  for  the  love  we  bear  you.  We  have  therefore  unanimously  resolved  that  you
be  sent  to  the  Tower  of  London,  there  to  be  confined  until  you  shall  have  repaid,  in  this
chamber,  according  to  our  orders,  the  sum  you  have  received  for  the  king  and  realm,  and  for
which,  from  the  examination  of  the  treasurer,  you  have  never  accounted  : the  sum  amounts
to  two  hundred  and  fifty  thousand  francs.  Now,  have  you  anything  to  say  in  your  defence  ?”
Sir  Simon  was  much  disconcerted,  and  said, — “ My  lords,  I shall  willingly  obey,  as  it  is
proper  I should,  your  commands,  and  go  whither  you  may  please  to  send  me.  But  I entreat
that  I may  have  a secretary  allowed  me  to  draw  out  an  account  of  the  great  expenses  I have
formerly  been  at  in  Germany  and  Bohemia,  when  negociatirig  the  marriage  of  our  king  and
lord.  If  I should  have  received  too  much,  grant  me,  through  the  king’s  grace  and  yours,
that  I may  have  a reasonable  time  for  repayment.”  “ To  this  we  agree,”  replied  the  lords  ;
and  sir  Simon  Burley  was  then  conducted  to  the  Tower.

The  accounts  of  sir  Thomas  Trivet  and  sir  William  Elmham  were  next  examined.  They
were  not  popular  with  any  of  the  barons  of  England,  nor  with  the  people,  on  account  of
their  conduct  in  Flanders ; for  it  was  said  no  Englishman  had  ever  made  so  shameful  an
expedition.  The  bishop  of  Norwich  and  the  governor  of  Calais,  who  at  that  time  was  sir
Hugh  Calverley,  had  cleared  themselves  from  any  blame : but  the  charge  laid  to  the  two
knights,  of  taking  money  for  the  surrender  of  Bourbourg  and  Gravelines,  prevented  them
doing  the  same:  and  some  in  England  wanted  to  have  their  conduct  (which  has  been  before
related)  construed  into  treason  ; and  the  knights  had  given  security  for  their  appearance,
when  called  upon,  to  the  king,  his  uncles,  and  the  council.  This  charge  was  now  renewed,
and  they  were  summoned  before  the  commissioners.  Sir  William  Elmham  appeared ; but
sir  Thomas  Trivet  did  not  come,  and  I will  tell  you  the  cause.  The  same  week  the
summons  from  the  commissioners  wras  brought  to  his  house  in  the  north,  he  had  mounted  a
young  horse,  to  try  him  in  the  fields.  This  horse  ran  away  with  him  over  hedge  and  through
bushes,  and  at  length  fell  into  a ditch  and  broke  the  knight’s  neck.  It  was  a pity,  and  his
loss  was  much  bewailed  by  the  good  people  of  England.  Notwithstanding  this,  his  heirs
were  forced  to  pay  a large  sum  of  florins  to  what  was  called  the  king’s  council ; but  the
whole  management  was  well  known  to  rest  with  the  uncles  of  the  king,  and  the  commis-
sioners  they  had  nominated.  For,  although  the  duke  of  Gloucester  was  the  youngest  of  the
king’s  uncles,  he  was  the  most  active  in  business  that  concerned  the  country  ; and  the  better
part  of  the  prelates,  nobles,  and  commons,  looked  up  to  him.

When  the  composition-money  of  the  late  sir  Thomas  Trivet,  who  was  killed  as  you  have
heard,  was  paid,  the  blame  cast  on  sir  William  Elmham  was  much  lightened.  His  former
deeds  in  the  Bordelois,  Guienne,  and  Picardy,  where  he  had  displayed  much  valour  in
support  of  England,  pleaded  for  him,  having  behaved  like  a gallant  knight,  so  that  nothing
could  be  laid  to  his  charge  but  having  taken  money  for  Bourbourg  and  Gravelines.  But
he  excused  himself  by  saying, — “ My  lords,  when  any  one  is  placed  as  we  were,  in  respect  to
these  two  towns,  it  appears  to  me  (from  what  I have  heard  sir  John  Chandos  and  sir  Walter
Manny,  who  had  abundance  of  good  sense  and  valour,  say),  that  when  two  or  three  means
offer,  the  one  most  profitable  to  ourselves,  and  that  which  can  hurt  our  enemies  the  most,
ought  ever  to  be  adopted.  Sir  Thomas  Trivet  and  myself,  finding  ourselves  surrounded,  so
that  succour  could  no  way  come  to  us,  and  that  we  should  not  be  able  long  to  withstand  their


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


209


assaults  (for  they  were  such  knights  and  squires  as  few  in  England  ever  saw,  and  in  such
numbers,  from  the  account  of  our  herald,  as  to  amount  to  sixteen  thousand  men  at  arms,  and
forty  thousand  others,  while  we  were  scarcely  three  hundred  lances,  and  as  many  archers;
our  town  was  also  so  extensive  we  could  not  attend  to  all  parts  of  it,  which  we  soon  felt  to
our  cost,  for,  while  we  were  defending  one  side,  it  was  set  on  fire  on  another) — we  became
very  much  confused,  which  the  enemy  perceived.  And,  in  truth,  the  king  of  France  and  his
council  acted  handsomely  by  granting  us  a truce,  for  if  they  had  on  the  morrow  renewed
their  attack,  in  the  situation  we  were  in,  they  must  have  had  us  at  their  mercy.  They
honourably  treated  with  us,  through  the  duke  of  Brittany,  who  took  much  trouble  on  the
occasion.  We  ought  to  have  paid  for  this,  but  they  gave  us  money ; and,  instead  of  being
worsted  by  our  enemies,  we  despoiled  them.  We  certainly  overreached  them,  when  they
paid  us,  and  suffered  us  to  depart  safe  and  well,  carrying  away  whatever  we  had  gained  by
this  expedition  in  Flanders.  Besides,”  added  sir  William,  to  purge  myself  from  all  blame,
should  there  be  in  England,  or  out  of  England,  any  knight  or  squire,  except  the  persons  of
my  lord  the  dukes  of  York  and  of  Gloucester,  who  shall  dare  to  say  that  I have  acted
disloyally  towards  my  natural  lord  the  king,  or  have  been  any  way  guilty  of  treason,  I am
ready  to  throw  down  my  glove,  and  with  my  body  try  the  event  by  deeds  of  arms,  such  as
the  judges  may  assign  me.”

This  speech,  and  the  known  valour  of  the  knight,  exculpated  him,  and  freed  him  from  all
fear  of  death,  which  he  was  in  danger  of  at  the  beginning.  He  returned  to  his  estate,  and
was  afterwards  a renowned  knight,  much  advanced,  and  of  the  king’s  council.  Sir  Simon
Burley  was  still  confined  in  the  Tower,  for  he  was  mortally  hated  by  the  king’s  uncles  and
the  commons  of  England.  The  king  did  everything  in  his  power  to  deliver  him  from  prison,
during  the  time  he  resided  at  Sheene  ; * but  the  commissioners,  being  determined  to  oppress
him,  dissembled,  and  said  they  could  not  as  yet  set  him  at  liberty,  for  his  accounts  were  not
closed.  The  king,  accompanied  by  the  duke  of  Ireland,  journeyed  towards  Wales,  by  way
of  Bristol  ; and  wheresoever  he  went  he  was  followed  by  the  queen,  and  all  the  ladies
and  damsels  of  her  court.


CHAPTER  LXXX. THE  KING  OE  ENGLAND  HAVING  LEFT  LONDON,  SIR  SIMON  BURLEY  IS

BEHEADED,  TO  THE  GREAT  DISPLEASURE  OF  THE  KING  AND  QUEEN. A CHANGE  OF

THE  MINISTRY.

Although  the  king  of  England  had  left  London,  his  uncles  there  remained  with  their
advisers.  You  have  often  heard,  that  when  any  disorder  is  in  the  head,  all  the  other
members  of  the  body  are  affected  by  it,  and  that  this  sickness  must  be  purged  away  by  some
means  or  other.  I say  this,  because  the  duke  of  Ireland  was  in  such  favour  with  the  king,
that  he  managed  him  as  he  pleased,  and  governed  him  at  will.  Sir  Simon  Burley  was  also
one  of  the  principal  advisers ; and  between  them  both  they  ruled,  for  a long  time,  king
and  kingdom.  They  were  suspected  of  having  amassed  very  large  sums  of  money,  and  it
was  rumoured  they  had  sent  great  part  of  it  for  safety  to  Germany.  It  had  also  come  to
the  knowledge  of  the  king,  his  uncles,  and  the  rulers  of  the  principal  towns  in  England,
that  great  cases  and  trunks  had  been  secretly  embarked  from  Dover  castle  in  the  night-time,
which  were  said  to  contain  this  money  sent  fraudulently  abroad  by  them  to  foreign  countries,
in  consequence  of  which  the  kingdom  was  greatly  impoverished  of  cash.  Many  grieved
much  at  this,  saying,  that  gold  and  silver  were  become  so  scarce  as  to  occasion  trade  to
languish.  Such  speeches  increased  the  hatred  to  sir  Simon  Burley,  and  the  commissioners
declared  they  thought  he  deserved  death.  In  short,  they,  on  finishing  his  accounts,  con-
demned him  to  suffer  this  punishment,  instigated  thereto  by  a desire  to  please  the  country,
and  by  the  archbishop  of  Canterbury,  who  related  to  the  lords  that  sir  Simon  wanted  to
remove  the  shrine  of  St.  Thomas  from  Canterbury  to  Dover-castle,  as  he  said,  for  greater
security,  at  the  time  the  French  invasion  was  expected ; but  it  was  commonly  believed  that
he  meant  to  seize  it,  and  carry  it  out  of  England.  Many,  now  he  was  in  prison,  came

* Richmond.


270


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


forward  against  him ; and  the  knight  was  so  overpowered,  that  nothing  he  could  say  in  his
defence  availed  him ; so  that  he  was  carried  forth  out  of  the  Tower,  and  beheaded,  as  a
traitor,  in  the  square  before  it.  God  have  mercy  on  his  misdeeds  ' Notwithstanding  I thus
relate  his  disgraceful  death,  which  I am  forced  to  by  my  determination  to  insert  nothing  but
truth  in  this  history,  I was  exceedingly  vexed  thereat,  and  personally  much  grieved ; for  in
my  youth  I had  found  him  a gentle  knight,  and,  according  to  my  understanding,  of  great
good  sense.  Such  was  the  unfortunate  end  of  sir  Simon  Burley.

Ilis  nephew  and  heir,  sir  Richard  Burley,  was  with  the  duke  of  Lancaster  in  Galicia,
when  this  misfortune  befel  his  uncle,  and  one  of  the  most  renowned  in  his  army,  after  the
constable  ; for  he  had  once  the  chief  command  of  the  whole  army,  and  instructed  sir  Thomas
Moreaux  in  his  office  of  marshal ; he  was  likewise  of  the  duke’s  council,  and  his  principal
adviser.  You  may  suppose  that,  when  he  heard  of  the  disgraceful  death  his  uncle  had
suffered,  he  was  mightily  enraged ; but,  alas ! this  gallant  knight  died  in  his  bed,  in  Castille,
of  sickness,  with  very  many  more,  as  I shall  fully  relate  when  arrived  at  that  part  of  my
history.

When  king  Richard,  who  was  amusing  himself  in  Wales,  heard  of  the  death  of  sir  Simon
Burley,  he  was  very  wroth  ; for  he  had  been  one  of  his  tutors  and  had  educated  him  : and
he  swore  it  should  not  remain  unrevenged,  for  he  had  been  cruelly  put  to  death,  and  without
the  smallest  plea  of  justice.  The  queen  also  bewailed  his  loss;  for  he  had  been  the  principal
promoter  of  her  marriage,  and  had  conducted  her  from  Germany  to  England.  The  king’s
council  began  now  to  be  seriously  alarmed,  such  as  the  duke  of  Ireland,  sir  Nicholas
Bramber,  sir  Robert  Tresilian,  sir  John  Beauchamp,  sir  John  Salisbury,  and  sir  Michael  de
la  Pole.  The  archbishop  of  York,  whose  name  was  William  Neville,  brother  to  the  lord
Neville  of  Northumberland,  was  dismissed  from  his  office  of  lord  treasurer,  which  he  had
held  a considerable  time,  and  forbidden,  by  the  duke  of  Gloucester,  if  he  valued  his  life,
ever  again  to  intermeddle  with  the  affairs  of  England ; but  he  might  retire  to  his  bishopric
of  York,  or  to  any  other  part  of  his  diocese,  for  that  of  late  he  had  been  by  far  too  busy.
He  was  told  that,  from  consideration  of  his  dignity  and  birth,  many  things  had  been  over-
looked that  were  highly  disgraceful  to  him ; and  that  the  greater  part  of  the  deputies  from
the  cities  and  towns  were  for  having  him  degraded  from  the  priesthood,  and  punished  in  like
manner  to  sir  Simon  Burley.  He  soon  left  London,  and  went  to  reside  on  his  archbishopric
in  the  north,  which  was  worth  to  him  about  forty  thousand  francs  a year.  His  whole
family  were  much  enraged,  and  thought  his  disgrace  had  been  caused  by  Henry  of  Northum-
berland, though  he  was  his  relation  and  neighbour.

The  archbishop  of  Canterbury,  who  was  valiant  and  learned,  and  much  in  the  favour  of
the  king’s  uncles,  succeeded  to  the  treasurership  : he  was  of  the  family  of  the  Montagues,
and  the  carl  of  Salisbury  was  his  uncle*.  The  commissioners  appointed  the  earl  of  Salisbury,
the  earl  of  Arundel,  the  earl  of  Northumberland,  the  earl  of  Devonshire,  the  earl  of  Not-
tingham, and  the  bishop  of  Norwich,  who  was  called  sir  Henry  de  Spencer,  the  king’s
council ; but  the  bishop  of  Winchester  retained  his  office  of  chancellor,  and  continued  near
the  person  of  the  king’s  uncles.  The  most  renowned  of  the  council,  after  the  duke  of
Gloucester,  was  sir  Thomas  Montague,  archbishop  of  Canterbury ; and  well  was  he
deserving  of  it,  for  the  great  pains  lie  took  to  reform  the  abuses  of  government,  and
withdraw  the  king  from  the  management  of  his  minions.  He  spoke  very  frequently  on
this  subject  to  the  duke  of  York,  who  replied, — “Archbishop,  matters  will,  by  degrees,
turn  out  differently  from  what  my  nephew  and  the  duke  of  Ireland  imagine.  But  we  must
wait  for  a favourable  opportunity,  and  not  be  too  pressing ; for  what  is  done  in  haste  is
never  well  done.  I agree  with  you,  that  if  we  had  not  in  time  taken  up  this  business,  the
king  would  have  been  so  governed,  that  the  kingdom  must  have  been  ruined.  The  king  of
France  and  his  council  were  well  acquainted  with  our  state ; and  for  this  did  they  make
such  immense  preparations,  to  take  the  advantage  to  invade  us.”

* This  must  be  a mistake.  In  1381  William  Courtney  was  archbishop  of  Canterbury,  and  in  1391  Thomas
Fitzallan,  son  of  the  earl  of  Arundel.


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  Ac.


271


CHAPTER  LXXXI. WHILE  THE  COUNCIL,  ON  THE  STATE  OF  THE  NATION,  IS  SITTING  AT

LONDON,  KING  RICHARD,  BY  THE  ADVICE  OF  THE  DUKE  OF  IRELAND,  DETERMINES  TO
WAGE  WAR  AGAINST  HIS  UNCLES  AND  THE  PRINCIPAL  TOWNS.

In  like  manner  as  the  king’s  uncles  and  the  new  council  of  state  were  devising  at  West-
minster on  the  means  of  reforming  abuses  in  the  government,  and  of  having  the  king  and
realm  under  their  power,  the  duke  of  Ireland  and  his  council  were  plotting  day  and  night
how  they  could  keep  their  places,  and  destroy  the  uncles  of  the  king,  by  means  which  I will
now  explain.

When  king  Richard,  accompanied  by  bis  queen*,  arrived  at  Bristol,  which  is  a handsome
and  strong  town,  he  fixed  his  residence  in  the  castle.  Those  in  Wales,  and  at  a distance,
thought  he  had  done  so  to  favour  the  duke  of  Ireland,  who  had  caused  it  to  be  reported  that
he  intended  going  from  thence  to  Ireland,  and  to  assist  him  with  money  to  increase  his
followers,  for  that  had  been  agreed  on  by  the  parliament.  It  had  been  ordered  that  the
duke,  on  setting  out  for  Ireland,  where  he  was  to  remain  three  years,  should  have  the
command  of  five  hundred  men  at  arms  and  fifteen  hundred  archers,  paid  by  England,  and
that  money  for  this  purpose  should  be  punctually  remitted  to  himt.  But  the  duke  had  no
inclination  to  go  thither;  for,  as  the  king  was  so  young,  he  managed  him  as  he  pleased,  and,
should  he  leave  him,  he  was  afraid  the  king’s  affection  would  be  cooled.  Add  to  this,  he
was  so  greatly  enamoured  with  one  of  the  queen’s  damsels,  called  the  Landgravine,  that  he
could  never  quit  her.  She  was  a tolerably  handsome  pleasant  lady,  whom  the  queen  had
brought  with  her  from  Bohemia.  The  duke  of  Ireland  loved  her  with  such  ardour,  that  he
was  desirous  of  making  her,  if  possible,  his  duchess  by  marriage.  He  took  great  pains  to
obtain  a divorce  from  his  present  duchess,  the  daughter  of  the  earl  of  Bedford,  from  Urban  VI.,
whom  the  English  and  Germans  acknowledged  as  pope.  All  the  good  people  of  England
were  much  astonished  and  shocked  at  this ; for  the  duchess  was  grand-daughter  of  the
gallant  king  Edward  and  the  excellent  queen  Philippa,  being  the  daughter  of  the  princess
Isabella.  Her  uncles,  the  dukes  of  York  and  Gloucester,  were  very  wroth  at  this  insult ;
but,  notwithstanding  their  hatred,  which  he  held  cheap,  the  duke  of  Ireland  was  so  smitten
and  blinded  by  his  love,  he  was  using  every  means  to  obtain  a divorce,  and  had  promised
the  lady  he  would  make  her  his  wife,  if  he  had  the  king  and  queen’s  consent,  and  a dispen-
sation from  Rome,  which  the  pope  would  not  dare  refuse  him  ; for  his  present  lady  was  a
Clementist,  and  the  lord  de  Coucy,  her  father,  had  made  war  in  Italy  for  Clement,  against
Urban,  which  inclined  the  latter  not  to  be  over- fond  of  him,  and  induced  him  to  listen  too
readily  to  the  proposals  for  a divorce.  Thus  was  he  urging  on  matters,  according  to  his
promise  to  the  landgravine  of  Bohemia,  and  would  not  have  any  connexion  with  his  wife  by
legal  marriage.  But  this  duke  of  Ireland  had  a mother  living,  the  countess  dowager  of
Oxford,  who,  so  far  from  approving  her  son’s  conduct,  greatly  blamed  him  for  his  follies,
saying  that  he  would  by  them  anger  Heaven,  who  would  one  day  punish  him  severely,  when
it  would  be  too  late  to  repent.  She  had  the  duchess  home  with  her,  and  gave  her  as  hand-
some an  establishment  as  she  could,  so  that  all  who  loved  the  young  lady  were  pleased  with
this  conduct.

In  such  a situation  was  the  kingdom  of  England  ; but,  to  bring  its  history  to  a conclusion,
I will  continue  the  subject  from  the  information  I then  received.  You  have  heard  that  the
duke  of  Ireland  kept  close  to  the  king  during  his  residence  at  Bristol  and  in  Wales,  solely
occupied  night  and  day  with  the  means  of  succeeding  in  his  plans.  He  was  assiduous  in  his
attentions  to  the  king  and  queen,  and  to  all  knights  and  squires  who  waited  on  them  at
Bristol  and  at  the  hunts  in  that  neighbourhood,  to  draw  them  over  to  his  faction  ; for  the  king
suffered  him  to  act  as  he  pleased.

* So  says  Jean  Petit,  “ et  la  rayne  aveques  lui.”  of^ England,  five  hundred  men  at  arms  and  fifteen  hundred

y There  16  a variation  in  the  copies  of  the  original,  as  archers.  And  it  was  ordered  that  he  should  abide  there
Jean  Petit  runs  thus: — “When  he  departed  from  the  three  years,  and  that  he  should  always  be  well  paid.”
king  and  his  uncles,  it  was  agreed  with  him  that  in  case  This  reading  appears  to  be  simpler  than  that  of  the  text,
he  should  go  on  this  voyage,  he  should  have,  at  the  charge  See  Jean  Petit’s  edition,  vol.  III.  p.  40.


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


°72

The  dulce,  during  this  period,  took  infinite  pains  in  visiting  all  the  gentlemen  near  to
Bristol,  and  went  frequently  into  Wales,  where  he  complained  to  all  who  would  listen  to
him,  gentlemen  or  others,  that  the  king’s  uncles,  from  their  ambition  to  obtain  the  government,
had  driven  from  the  council  the  most  noble  and  wisest  members,  such  as  the  archbishop  of
York,  the  bishop  of  Durham,  the  bishop  of  London,  sir  Michael  de  la  Pole,  sir  Nicholas
Bramber,  sir  John  Salisbury,  sir  Robert  Tresilian,  sir  John  Beauchamp,  and  himself;  that
they  had  put  to  death,  without  any  justice  whatever,  that  valiant  knight  sir  Simon  Burley  ;
and,  if  they  continued  to  govern  as  they  had  begun,  they  would  soon  destroy  all  England.
He  repeated  this  so  often,  and  with  such  success,  that  the  greater  part  of  the  knights  and
squires  of  Wales  and  of  the  adjoining  countries  believed  him.  They  came  to  Bristol,  and
demanded  from  the  king,  if  what  the  duke  had  told  them  had  his  approbation.  The  king
replied  it  had,  and  begged  of  them,  from  their  affection  to  him,  to  put  every  confidence  in  the
duke,  for  that  lie  would  avow  whatever  he  should  do  ; adding,  that  in  truth  his  uncles  were
too  ambitious,  and  that  he  had  his  fears  they  intended  to  deprive  him  of  his  crown.  Those
from  Wales,  who  had  always  loved  the  prince  of  Wales,  father  to  the  king,  having  heard  of
the  transactions  in  London,  were  firmly  persuaded  that  the  king  and  the  duke  of  Ireland  had
been  wronged,  and  demanded  from  the  king  how  he  wished  them  to  act.  The  king  answered,
“ He  would  gladly  see  the  Londoners,  who  had  been  the  chief  movers  in  this  business,
punished  and  brought  to  their  senses,  as  well  as  his  uncles.”  The  Welchmen  said  they  were
bounden  to  obey  his  commands,  for  lie  was  their  king  and  sovereign  lord,  to  whom,  and  to
none  else,  they  owed  faith  and  homage.  They  were  therefore  willing  to  go  whithersoever  he
would  order  them.  The  king  and  the  duke  of  Ireland  were  well  satisfied  with  this  answer ;
and  the  latter,  seeing  the  king  take  up  the  matter  as  personal  to  himself,  and  eager  to  attack
his  adversaries,  was  extravagant  in  his  joy,  and  said  to  the  council,  “ they  could  not  act
better  than  return  to  London  to  show  their  force,  and,  by  fair  or  other  means,  bring  the
citizens  back  to  their  obedience ; and  he  also  said,  and  always  represented  to  the  king,  that
whenever  there  were  so  many  rulers  in  a kingdom,  it  must  be  its  ruin.”  The  king  said,
“ that  his  opinion  was  the  same,  and  that,  if  hitherto  he  had  suffered  things  to  be  so  carried,
be  would  not  any  longer,  but  bring  forward  such  a remedy  tliat  other  countries  should  take
example  from  it.”

Now,  consider  in  your  own  mind  if  I had  not  good  cause  to  say  that  England  was,  at  this
period,  in  the  greatest  peril  of  being  ruined  past  recovery.  It  certainly  was,  from  the  causes
you  have  heard  ; for  the  king  was  exasperated  against  his  uncles  and  the  principal  nobility
of  the  kingdom,  and  they  were  so  likewise  against  him  and  many  nobles  of  his  party.  The
cities  and  towns  were  quarrelling  with  each  other,  and  the  prelates  in  mutual  hatred,  so  that
no  remedy  for  all  these  evils  could  be  looked  for  but  from  God  alone.  The  duke  of  Ireland,
when  he  perceived  he  had  gained  the  king,  and  the  greater  number  of  those  in  Bristol,
Wales,  and  the  adjoining  parts,  proceeded  to  say  to  the  king, — “ My  lord,  if  you  will  appoint
me  your  lieutenant,  I will  load  twelve  or  fifteen  thousand  men  to  London,  or  to  Oxford,
which  is  yours  and  my  city,  and  show  my  strength  to  these  Londoners  and  your  uncles,  who
have  treated  you  with  such  indignity,  and  have  put  some  of  your  council  to  death,  and,  by
fair  words  or  otherwise,  reduce  them  to  obedience.  The  king  replied,  he  was  satisfied ;
adding,  “ I now  nominate  you  lieutenant-general  of  my  kingdom,  to  assemble  men  wherever
you  can  raise  them,  and  to  lead  them  whithersoever  you  shall  think  it  will  be  most  for  the
advantage  of  our  realm,  that  all  may  see  the  whole  of  it  to  be  our  inheritance  and  right.  I
order  you  to  bear  our  banner,  guidon,  standard,  and  other  our  proper  habiliments  of  war,
which  we  ourselves  should  have  done,  had  we  taken  the  field.  I should  imagine,  that  all
conditions  of  men,  on  perceiving  my  banners,  would  flock  to  enrol  themselves  under  them,
and  would  be  fearful  of  incurring,  by  a contrary  conduct,  my  displeasure.”  This  speech
greatly  rejoiced  the  duke  of  Ireland.


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &e.


273


CHAPTER  LXXXII. — THE  KING  OP  ENGLAND  ISSUES  HIS  ORDERS  FOR  ALL  CAPABLE  OF

BEARING  ARMS  IN  THE  NEIGHBOURHOOD  OF  BRISTOL  TO  MARCH  TO  LONDON. SIR

ROBERT  TRESILIAN,  SENT  THITHER  AS  A SPY,  IS  DISCOVERED,  AND  BEHEADED  BY
COMMAND  OF  THE  KINGS  UNCLES.

The  king  of  England  issued  his  summons  to  many  great  barons,  knights,  and  squires  in
Wales,  in  the  country  round  Bristol,  and  on  the  Severn-side.  Some  excused  themselves  by
sending  satisfactory  reasons  ; but  others  came  and  placed  themselves  under  the  obedience  of
the  king,  notwithstanding  their  conviction  that  it  was  impossible  to  augur  anything  good
from  the  enterprise.


Richard  II.  at  Bristol.  Designed  from  Illuminations  in  the  Metrical  History  of  Richard  II Harleian  MS.  1319


While  this  army  was  collecting,  the  king  and  the  duke,  in  a secret  conference,  determined
to  send  one  of  their  confidential  friends  to  London,  to  observe  what  was  going  forward,  and,
if  the  king’s  uncles  still  remained  there,  to  discover  what  they  were  doing.  After  some
consideration,  they  could  not  think  on  a proper  person  to  send  on  this  errand  ; when  a knight,
who  was  cousin  to  the  duke,  and  of  the  king’s  as  well  as  of  his  council,  called  9ir  Robert
Tresilian,  stepped  forth,  and  said  to  the  duke, — “ I see  the  difficulty  you  have  to  find  a
trusty  person  to  send  to  London  : I will,  from  my  love  to  you,  risk  the  adventure."  The
king  and  the  duke,  well  pleased  with  the  offer,  thanked  him  for  it.  Tresilian  left  Bristol
disguised  like  a poor  tradesman,  mounted  on  a wretched  hackney  : be  continued  his  road  to
London,  and  lodged  at  an  inn  where  he  was  unknown  ; for  no  one  could  have  ever  imagined
that  one  of  the  king’s  counsellors  and  chamberlains  would  have  appeared  in  so  miserable  a
dress.

When  in  London,  he  picked  up  all  the  news  that  was  public,  for  he  could  not  do  more,
respecting  the  king’s  uncles  and  the  citizens.  Having  heard  there  was  to  be  a meeting
of  the  dukes  and  their  council  at  Westminster,  he  determined  to  go  thither  to  learn  secretly
VOL.  II.  T


27-i


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


all  lie  could  of  their  proceedings.  This  he  executed,  and  fixed  his  quarters  at  an  ale-house
right  opposite  the  palace-gate  : he  chose  a chamber  whose  window  looked  into  the  palace-
yard,  where  he  posted  himself  to  observe  all  who  should  come  to  this  parliament.  The
greater  part  he  knew,  but  was  not,  from  his  disguise,  known  to  them.  He,  however’,  remained
there,  at  different  times,  so  long,  that  a squire  of  the  duke  of  Gloucester  saw  and  knew  him,
for  he  had  been  many  times  in  his  company.  Sir  Robert  instantly  recollected  him,  and
withdrew  from  the  window  ; hut  the  squire,  having  his  suspicions,  said,  “ Surely  that  must
be  Tresilian  and  to  be  certain  of  it,  he  entered  the  ale-house,  and  said  to  the  landlady,
“ Dame,  tell  me,  on  your  troth,  who  is  he  drinking  above  : is  he  alone  or  in  company  ?”
“ On  my  troth,  sir,”  she  replied,  “ I cannot  tell  you  his  name  ; but  he  has  been  here  some
time.”  At  these  words,  the  squire  went  up  stairs  to  know  the  truth,  and  having  saluted  sir
Robert,  found  he  was  right,  though  he  dissembled  by  saying, — “ God  preserve  you,  master  !
I hope  you  will  not  take  my  coming  amiss,  for  I thought  you  had  been  one  of  my  farmers
from  Essex,  as  you  are  so  very  like  him.”  “ By  no  means,”  said  sir  Robert : “ I am  from
Kent,  and  hold  lands  of  sir  John  Holland,  and  wish  to  lay  my  complaints  before  the  council
against  the  tenants  of  the  archbishop  of  Canterbury,  who  encroach  much  on  my  farm.  “ If
you  will  come  into  the  hall,”  said  the  squire,  “ I will  have  way  made  for  you  to  lay  your
grievances  before  the  lords.”  “ Many  thanks,”  replied  sir  Robert : “ not  at  this  moment,
but  I shall  not  renounce  your  assistance."  At  these  words,  the  squire  ordered  a quart  of  ale,
which  having  paid  for,  he  said,  “ God  he  with  you !”  and  left  the  ale-house.  He  lost
no  time  in  hastening  to  the  council-chamber,  and  called  to  the  usher  to  open  the  door.  The
usher,  knowing  him,  asked  his  business  : he  said,  “ he  must  instantly  speak  with  the  duke  of
Gloucester,  on  matters  that  nearly  concerned  him  and  the  council.”  The  usher,  on  this,  bade
him  enter,  which  he  did,  and  made  up  to  the  duke  of  Gloucester,  saying,  “ My  lord,  I bring
you  great  news.”  “ Of  what  ?”  replied  the  duke.  “ My  lord,  I will  tell  it  aloud;  for  it
concerns  not  only  you  but  all  the  lords  present.  I have  seen  sir  Robert  Tresilian,  disguised
like  a peasant,  in  an  ale-house  close  by  the  palace  gate.”  “ Tresilian  !”  said  the  duke.  “ On
my  faith,”  my  lord,  “ it  is  true ; and  you  shall  have  him  to  dine  with  you,  if  you  please.”
“ I should  like  it  much,”  replied  the  duke ; “ for  he  will  tell  us  some  news  of  his  master,
the  duke  of  Ireland.  Go,  and  secure  him ; but  with  power  enough  not  to  be  in  danger  of
failing.”

The  sqnire,  on  these  orders,  left  the  council-chamber,  and,  having  chosen  four  bailiffs,  said
to  them, — “ Follow  me  at  a distance  ; and,  as  soon  as  you  shall  perceive  me  make  you  a sign
to  arrest  a man  I am  in  search  of,  lay  hands  on  him,  and  take  care  he  do  not,  on  any  account,
escape  from  you.”  The  squire  made  for  the  ale-house  where  he  had  left  sir  Robert,  and,
mounting  the  staircase  to  the  room  where  he  was,  said,  on  entering, — “ Tresilian,  you  are
not  come  to  this  country  for  any  good,  as  I imagine : my  lord  of  Gloucester  sends  for  you,
and  you  must  come  and  speak  with  him.”  The  knight  turned  a deaf  ear,  and  would  have
been  excused,  if  he  could,  by  saying,  “ I am  not  Tresilian,  but  a tenant  of  sir  John  Holland.”
“ That  is  not  true,”  replied  the  squire  ; “ your  body  is  Tresilian’s,  though  not  your  di’ess.”
And,  making  the  signal  to  the  bailiffs,  who  were  at  the  door,  they  entered  the  house  and
arrested  him,  and,  whether  he  would  or  not,  carried  him  to  the  palace.  You  may  believe
there  was  a great  crowd  to  see  him ; for  he  was  well  known  in  London,  and  in  many  parts  of
England.  The  duke  of  Gloucester  was  much  pleased,  and  would  see  him.  When  in  his
presence,  the  duke  said  ; “ Ti’esilian,  what  has  brought  you  hither  ? How  fares  my  sovereign?
Where  does  he  now  reside  ?”  Tresilian,  finding  he  was  discovered,  and  that  no  excuses
would  avail,  replied, — “ On  my  faith,  my  lord,  the  king  has  sent  me  hither  to  learn  the  news :
he  is  at  Bristol,  and  on  the  banks  of  the  Severn,  where  he  hunts  and  amuses  himself.”
“ How  !”  said  the  duke,  “ you  do  not  come  dressed  like  an  honest  man,  but  like  a spy.  If
you  had  been  desirous  to  learn  what  was  passing,  your  appearance  should  have  been  like
that  of  a knight  or  a discreet  person.”  “ My  lord,”  answered  Tresilian,  “ if  I have  done
wrong,  I hope  you  will  excuse  me;  for  I have  only  done  what  I was  ordered.”  “And  where  is
your  master,  the  duke  of  Ireland  ?” — “ My  lord,”  said  Tresilian,  “ he  is  with  the  king,  our
lord.”  The  duke  then  added, — “ We  have  been  informed  that  he  is  collecting  a large  body
of  men,  and  that  the  king  has  issued  his  summons  to  that  effect : whither  docs  he  mean  to


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


275

lead  them?”  “My  lord,  they  are  intended  for  Ireland.” — “For  Ireland!  said  the  duke.
“ Yes,  indeed,  as  God  may  help  me,”  answered  Tresilian.

The  duke  mused  awhile,  and  then  spoke  : “ Tresilian,  Tresilian,  your  actions  are  neither
fair  nor  honest ; and  you  have  committed  a great  piece  of  folly  in  coming  to  these  parts,
where  you  are  far  from  being  loved,  as  will  be  shortly  shown  to  you.  You,  and  others  of
your  faction,  have  done  what  has  greatly  displeased  my  brother  and  myself,  and  have  ill-
counselled  the  king,  whom  you  have  made  to  quarrel  with  his  chief  nobility.  In  addition,
you  have  excited  the  principal  towns  against  us.  The  day  of  retribution  is  therefore  come,
when  you  shall  receive  payment ; for  whoever  acts  justly  receives  his  reward  : look  to  your
affairs,  for  I will  neither  eat  nor  drink  until  you  be  no  more.”  This  speech  greatly  terrified
sir  Robert,  (for  no  one  likes  to  hear  of  bis  end,)  by  the  manner  in  which  it  was  uttered.
He  was  desirous  to  obtain  pardon,  by  various  excuses,  and  the  most  abject  humiliation,  but
in  vain ; for  the  duke  had  received  information  of  what  was  going  on  at  Bristol,  and  his
excuses  were  fruitless.  Why  should  I make  a long  story  ? Sir  Robert  was  delivered  to  the
hangman,  who  led  him  out  of  the  palace  to  the  place  of  execution,  where  he  wTas  beheaded,
and  then  hung  by  the  arms  to  a gibbet.  Thus  ended  sir  Robert  Tresilian.


CHAPTER  LXXXIII. WHEN  THE  NEAVS  OF  THE  DEATH  OF  SIR  ROBERT  TRESILIAN  IS

BROUGHT  TO  THE  ARCHBISHOP  OF  YORK  AND  SIR  NICHOLAS  BRAMBER,  THEY  CONFIRM

THE  KING  IN  HIS  INTENTION  OF  MAKING  WAR  ON  HIS  UNCLES. THE  DUKE  OF

IRELAND,  AS  LIEUTENANT-GENERAL,  LEADS  THE  ARMY  TO  OXFORD.

Intelligence  was  hastily  carried  to  king  Richard  at  Bristol,  that  sir  Robert  Tresilian
had  been  put  to  a shameful  death.  lie  took  it  sorely  to  heart,  and  swore  things  should  not
remain  in  the  state  they  were ; for  that  his  uncles  were  conducting  themselves  ill,  and
putting  to  death,  without  the  least  plea  of  justice,  his  knights  and  servants,  who  had  loyally
served  him  and  the  prince  his  father,  plainly  showing  their  intentions  were  to  deprive  him
of  his  crown,  and  that  such  conduct  touched  him  too  nearly  not  to  resent  it.  The  arch-
bishop of  York  had  been  the  chief  of  his  council  for  a considerable  time,  and,  being  then
with  the  king,  said, — “ My  lord,  you  ask  counsel,  and  I will  give  it  you.  Your  uncles
behave  shamefully,  and  want  to  make  the  world  believe  you  bave  only  traitors  near  your
person,  and  that  you  take  counsel  from  none  but  them.  Great  danger  now  hangs  over  the
country  ; for  if  the  commons  rise,  and  the  nobility  be  united,  much  mischief  will  ensue.  I
therefore  advise,  that  you  settle  all  these  things  by  force  : you  are  now  in  a very  populous
country : issue  your  summons  for  all  capable  of  bearing  arms,  gentlemen  and  others,  to  join
you  here  ; and,  when  they  be  assembled,  march  them  under  the  orders  of  the  duke  of  Ire-
land, Avho  Avill  gladly  take  the  command,  towards  London  ; and  let  there  be  no  other  banners
but  those  with  your  own  arms,  to  show  more  distinctly  the  business  is  your  own.  The
whole  country,  on  their  line  of  march,  will  join  them,  and  perhaps  the  Londoners  also,  who
have  no  personal  hatred  to  you,  who  have  never  done  them  any  injury.  All  the  mischief
that  could  have  been  done  you  has  already  been  effected  by  your  uncles.  Here  is  sir
Nicholas  Bramber,  who  has  been  frequently  mayor  of  London,  and  whom  you  created  a
knight  for  the  gallant  service  he  performed  in  former  times* ; consult  him,  for  he  ought  to
be  well  acquainted  with  the  Londoners,  being  a fellow-citizen,  and  must,  likewise,  have  some
steady  friends  among  them.  You  run  a risk  of  losing  your  kingdom  from  those  tumultuous
and  disloyal  proceedings.

The  king,  on  this,  turned  to  sir  Nicholas  Bramber,  and  desired  him  to  speak.  “ My
lord,”  said  sir  Nicholas,  “ since  you  command  me,  I will  speak  my  sentiments  before  these
lords,  according  to  the  best  of  my  judgment.  In  the  first  place,  I do  not  believe,  nor  ever
shall,  that  the  majority  of  the  Londoners  are  wanting  in  affection  to  our  lord  who  is  present.
They  greatly  loved  my  lord,  the  prince  his  father,  of  happy  memory;  and  they  gave  proofs
of  their  loyalty,  when  the  rabble  of  peasants  rose  in  rebellion : for,  to  say  the  truth,  had
they  been  inclined  to  have  joined  them,  there  would  have  been  an  end  of  the  king  and
* Alluding  to  his  conduct  at  the  time  Wat  Tyler  insulted  the  king  in  Smithficld.


276


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &e.


monarchy.  The  uncles  of  the  king  have  it  now  all  before  them,  and  laugh  at  the  citizens,
whom  they  make  believe  whatever  they  please  ; for  there  is  no  one  to  contradict  them,  or
to  show  what  falsehoods  they  daily  publish.  They  have  put  aside  all  the  king’s  officers,
myself  in  the  number,  and  replaced  them  with  others  of  their  way  of  thinking.  They  have
sent  the  king  to  a corner  of  his  kingdom  ; and  one  cannot  suppose  any  good  will  follow,  for
we  are  perfectly  ignorant  what  their  ultimate  intentions  may  be.  If  matters  continue  in
this  state  much  longer,  the  king  will  be  driven  out  of  his  kingdom  ; for  they  act  by  force,
and  the  king  by  kindness.  Have  they  not  already  put  to  death  that  gallant  knight  sir
Simon  Burley,  who  had  performed  such  meritorious  services  beyond  sea  ? and  have  they  not,
publicly,  imputed  to  him  the  greatest  falsehoods,  which  they  knew  to  be  untrue,  such  as,
that  he  intended  to  deliver  to  the  French  the  town  and  castle  of  Dover,  and  that,  for  that
purpose,  he  had  caused  them  to  assemble  at  Sluys  and  other  parts  of  Flanders  ? Have  they
not,  also,  in  despite  to  the  king,  disgracefully  slain  his  knight,  sir  Robert  Tresilian  ? and  they
will  treat  the  rest  in  the  same  manner  the  very  instant  they  can  lay  hands  on  them : I
therefore  advise,  that  the  king  use  rigorous  measures.  It  is  well  known  throughout  England
that  he  is  king ; that  he  was  educated  by  our  late  valiant  and  good  king  Edward,  at
Westminster,  who  made  all  his  subjects,  great  and  small,  swear  obedience  to  him  as  their
king,  after  his  decease,  which  oath  the  king’s  uncles  also  took.  It  appears  to  many,  if  they
dare  speak  out,  that  he  is  not  now  considered  as  king,  nor  does  he  keep  the  state  or  manner  of
a king;  for  he  is  not  suffered  to  act  as  he  pleases  : they  have  only  allowed  him  and  his  queen
a pension,  and  plainly  show  them,  that  they  have  not  sense  to  govern  the  realm,  and  that
their  whole  council  is  made  up  of  traitors  and  evil-designing  men.  I say,  therefore,  that  such
conduct  is  not  longer  to  be  borne;  and  I would  rather  die  than  remain  in  such  a state  of  danger,
and  see  the  king  thus  treated,  and  ruled  as  he  is  by  his  uncles.”  The  king  interrupted  him  by
saying, — “ What  is  now  doing  does  not  please  us ; and  I tell  you,  that  the  advice  you  have
given  seems  to  me  both  honourable  and  good  for  us  and  for  our  realm.”  The  conference
now  broke  up ; but  not  before  the  duke  of  Ireland  was  ordered,  as  king’s  lieutenant,  to
march,  with  all  the  force  he  could  collect,  towards  London,  to  try  the  courage  of  the  citizens,
and  see  if,  by  negociation  and  the  greatest  promises  on  the  part  of  the  king,  he  could  not
turn  them  to  his  faction.  It  was  not  long  before  the  duke,  with  fifteen  thousand  men,  left
Bristol  on  his  march  to  Oxford,  where  they  quartered  themselves,  and  in  the  country  round
about.  They  bore  banners  and  pennons  with  only  the  arms  of  England,  for  the  king  would
have  it  known  it  was  his  personal  quarrel.

News  was  carried  to  the  dukes  of  York  and  Gloucester,  that  the  duke  of  Ireland  was  on
his  march  to  London  with  fifteen  thousand  men  ; that  they  were  already  at  Oxford,  and  that
he  bore  the  king’s  own  banners.  It  wTas  time  for  them  to  consider  how  to  act : they
summoned  all  the  principal  leaders  in  London  for  wealth  or  power  to  a conference  at
Westminster,  wherein  they  told  them  how  the  duke  of  Ireland  was  marching  against
them  with  a large  force.  The  citizens,  like  persons  prepared  to  obey  the  will  of  the  king’s
uncles,  for  they  were  in  truth  all  so  inclined,  replied, — “Be  it  so,  in  God’s  name  : if  the
duke  of  Ireland  demand  battle  from  us,  he  shall  have  it.  We  will  not  shut  a gate  for  his
fifteen  thousand  men  : no,  nor  for  twenty  thousand,  if  he  had  them.”  The  dukes  were
much  contented  with  this  answer,  and  instantly  employed  numbers  of  persons  to  assemble
knights  and  squires  from  all  parts,  and  archers  from  the  principal  towns.  Those  whom  the
dukes  had  summoned  obeyed,  as  was  just,  for  they  had  sworn  so  to  do.  Men  came  from  the
counties  of  Norwich,  Kent,  Southampton,  from  Arundel,  Salisbury  and  the  country  round
London.  Many  knights  and  squires  came  thither  also,  without  knowing  whither  they  were
to  be  sent  or  conducted.


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


CHAPTER  LXXXIV. THE  DUKE  OF  IRELAND  SENDS  THREE  KNIGHTS  TO  LONDON  TO  LEARN

INTELLIGENCE. THE  DUKES  OF  YORK  AND  GLOUCESTER  TAKE  THE  FIELD  AGAINST

THE  DUKE  OF  IRELAND  AND  niS  ARMY.

I will  now  say  something  of  the  duke  of  Ireland,  who  had  fixed  his  quarters  at  Oxford.
He  had  indeed  fifteen  thousand  men,  hut  the  greater  part  had  joined  him  more  through
constraint  than  good-will.  The  duke,  to  sound  the  Londoners,  resolved  to  send  thither  sir
Nicholas  Bramber,  sir  Peter  Gouloufre,  and  sir  Michael  de  la  Pole  : they  were  to  enter  the
town  by  the  Thames,  and  to  hoist  the  king’s  flag,  and  observe  how  the  citizens,  on  seeing  it,
would  act.  These  three  knights,  in  compliance  with  the  duke’s  orders,  left  Oxford  with
only  thirty  horse,  and  rode  secretly  to  Windsor,  where  they  lay  that  night.  On  the  morrow,
they  crossed  the  Thames  at  the  bridge  of  Staines,  and  dined  in  the  king’s  palace  at  Shone*,
where  they  remained  until  late  in  the  evening,  when  they  departed  and  rode  for  another  of
the  king’s  palaces  at  Kensington,  nearer  London,  three  leagues  distant,  where  they  left  their
horses,  and,  having  entered  boats,  took  advantage  of  the  tide,  and  passed  through  London-
bridge  unobserved,  for  the  watch  had  not  any  suspicions  of  their  arrival.  They  entered  the
Tower  of  London,  and  found  the  governor  whom  the  king  had  appointed.  From  him  they
learnt  many  things  relative  to  the  king’s  uncles,  and  what  was  passing  in  London.  He  told
them,  they  had  run  great  risks  in  coming  to  him.  “ How  so  ?”  said  they.  “ We  are  knights
attached  to  the  king’s  person,  and  may  surely  lodge  ourselves  in  any  of  his  castles.”  “ You
will  not  find  things  so,”  answered  the  governor  ; “ for  though  this  town  and  all  within  it  are
willing  to  submit  themselves  to  the  obedience  of  the  king,  they  will  only  do  so  as  long  as  he
will  allow  himself  to  be  governed  by  his  uncles,  and  no  longer.  What  I tell  you  is  for  your
welfare  ; and  I am  bound  to  advise  you,  as  far  as  my  abilities  and  understanding  will  enable
me ; for  I suspect  that  when  day  shall  return  to-morrow,  if  it  please  God,  and  news  get
abroad  that  there  are  arrived  in  the  Tower  persons  on  the  part  of  the  king,  you  will  see  this
castle  besieged  by  the  citizens  on  all  sides,  who  will  not  depart  until  they  have  gained
admittance  and  have  seen  who  are  here  lodged.  Should  they  find  you,  they  will  carry  you
to  the  king’s  uncles,  and  you  may  guess  what  will  be  the  result.  I am  satisfied  they  are
so  much  enraged  against  the  duke  of  Ireland,  and  the  other  advisers  of  the  king,  that  if  once
they  lay  hold  of  you,  you  will  never  escape  with  life.  Consider  well  what  I have  said,  for
it  is  all  true.”

The  three  knights,  who  thought  they  should  do  wonders,  were  in  despair  at  what  they
heard  : they  held  a council,  and  determined  to  remain  where  they  were  until  the  morrow,
but  in  so  secret  a manner  that  none  should  know  of  their  arrival.  The  governor  loyally
promised  to  assist  them  to  the  utmost  of  his  power,  and,  in  their  presence,  took  possession  of
all  the  keys  that  gave  admittance.  When  day  came,  the  three  knights  held  another  council,
on  their  future  proceedings ; and,  having  well  considered  their  situation,  they  were  afraid
of  waiting  until  it  should  be  known  they  were  in  the  Tower,  for  they  were  convinced  they
would  be  shut  up  in  it ; so  that  wdien  it  was  dark,  and  the  tide  flowing,  they  embarked  in
a large  boat,  and  left  the  Tower,  without  having  dared  to  display  the  king’s  banners.  They
slept  that  night  at  Kensington,  and  on  the  morrow,  at  day-break,  mounted  their  horses  and
rode  by  Chertsey  to  Windsor,  where  they  dined  and  lay.  The  next  day  they  arrived  at
Oxford,  where  was  the  duke  of  Ireland  and  his  army : they  told  all  that  had  passed,  which
you  have  heard ; and  that,  although  they  were  received  into  the  Tower  of  London,  they
dared  not  abide  there.  The  duke  was  mightily  cast  down  on  hearing  this,  and  knew
not  what  to  say,  nor  how  to  act ; for  he  was  already  sensible  that  the  force  he  had  assembled
were  not  all  of  the  same  way  of  thinking,  nor  well  affected  to  his  cause : not  knowing
whether  to  stay  where  he  was  or  return  to  the  king,  he  called  a council  of  his  knights.
The  council  determined,  that  since  the  king  had  appointed  him  lieutenant-general,  to  punish
all  who  were  in  rebellion,  he  must  keep  the  field  ; for,  should  he  act  otherwise,  he  would  be
greatly  blamed,  incur  the  indignation  of  the  king,  and  prove  clearly  that  he  did  not  think
the  cause  just  or  good ; and  that  it  would  be  better  to  risk  the  event,  and  die  with  honour,

* Richmond.


273


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  Ac.


than  show  any  want  of  courage.  He  was  advised  to  inform  the  king  of  his  situation,  and  to
be  thankful  he  was  able  to  keep  his  ground  without  any  opposition,  for  none  had  hitherto
advanced  to  meet  him.  The  duke  sent  messengers  from  Oxford  to  the  king,  to  signify  his
situation,  and  to  entreat  he  would  send  him  more  men,  which  he  did.

When  the  dukes  of  York  and  Gloucester  heard  at  London,  that  the  duke  of  Ireland  was
at  Oxford  with  a powerful  army,  they  called  a council  to  consider  how  to  act.  All  the  chief
lords  of  their  party  were  present,  such  as  the  archbishop  of  Canterbury,  the  earls  of  Arundel,
Salisbury,  Northumberland,  and  many  other  great  barons,  with  the  whole  magistracy  of
London.  It  was  there  resolved,  (for  the  duke  of  Gloucester  would  have  it  so,)  instantly  to
prepare  and  take  the  field,  and  that  the  mayor  of  London  should  arm  by  constablewicks,  all
such  as  he  might  think  capable  of  assisting  them ; for  lie  declared  he  would  march  to  meet
the  duke  of  Ireland,  and  fight  with  him  wherever  he  should  find  him.  The  mayor  of  London
was  himself  a soldier,  and  he  only  selected  his  men  from  those  between  twenty  and  forty
years  of  age  ; and  the  lords  above  mentioned  had  at  least  one  thousand  men  at  arms  retainers
on  them.  This  army  marched  from  London,  and  lodged  at  Brentford  and  the  adjoining-
villages  ; on  the  next  day  at  Colebrook,  their  force  increasing  all  the  way.  They  followed
the  road  to  Reading,  to  gain  a passage  over  the  Thames ; for  the  bridges  of  Staines  and
Windsor  had,  by  command  of  the  duke  of  Ireland,  been  broken  down,  by  which  they  had  a
better  and  more  level  country  for  their  march.  The  duke  of  Ireland,  hearing  they  were  fast
approaching  Oxford,  was  much  alarmed,  and  demanded  counsel.  He  was  advised  to  draw
up  his  army  in  battle-array,  with  the  king’s  banners  displayed  in  front ; and  if  it  pleased
God,  the  day  would  be  his,  for  he  had  a good  cause.  This  plan  was  followed  : the  trumpets
sounded  to  arm,  and  march  out  of  Oxford,  which  was  done,  and  the  army  drawn  up  with
tiie  king’s  banners  displayed.  The  day  was  delightful,  and  the  weather  clear  and  pleasant.


CHAPTER  LXXXV. THE  KING’S  UNCLES  GAIN  A VICTORY  OVER  THE  DUKE  OF  IRELAND,  WHO

SAVES  HIMSELF  BY  FLIGHT  WITH  OTHERS  OF  HIS  ARMY.

News  was  brought  to  the  duke  of  Gloucester,  who  was  encamped  in  a handsome  mead
along  a river  that  falls  into  the  Thames,  three  leagues  from  Oxford,  that  the  duke  of  Ireland
had  taken  the  field,  and  had  drawn  up  his  fore®  in  order  of  battle.  The  duke  was  well
pleased  with  this  intelligence,  and  said  he  would  offer  him  combat,  but  they  must  cross  the
Thames.  The  trumpets  sounded  to  dislodge,  and  the  army  was  formed  as  if  for  immediate
battle.  They  were  within  two  leagues  of  the  enemy,  lying  in  ambush,  until  they  could  cross
the  river.  The  duke  of  Gloucester  sent  scouts  to  have  the  fords  examined,  who  brought
word  the  river  had  not,  for  thirty  years,  been  so  low  as  it  then  was.  The  scouts  after  this
easily  crossed,  and  advanced  to  observe  the  position  and  countenance  of  the  enemy

On  their  return,  they  said  to  the  duke, — •“  My  lord,  God  and  the  river  are  for  you  : it  is
so  low,  it  does  not  reach  the  bellies  of  our  horses.  We  have  seen  the  army  of  the  duke  of
Ireland,  which  is  well  and  handsomely  drawn  up.  We  know  not  if  the  king  be  there  in
person,  but  his  banners  are  ; and  we  could  not  perceive  any  other  banner  than  those  of  the
king,  emblazoned  with  the  arms  of  England  and  France.”  The  duke  implied, — “ God  assist
us  ! my  brother  and  self  have  a right  to  those  arms.  Let  us  advance,  in  the  name  of  God
and  St.  George  ; for  I will  have  a nearer  look  at  them.”  His  men  began  their  march,  and
in  higher  spirits,  on  knowing  the  river  was  so  easy  to  be  crossed.  The  horse  passed  first,  and
then  the  main  body.  When  the  duke  of  Ireland  was  told  that  the  king’s  uncles  had  passed
the  Thames  with  their  army,  and  that  shortly  there  must  be  a battle,  he  was  much  frightened ;
for  he  well  knew,  that  if  he  were  taken  by  the  duke  of  Gloucester,  he  would  not  accept  of
any  sum  for  his  ransom,  but  put  him  instantly  to  a disgraceful  death.  He  called,  therefore,
sir  Peter  Gouloufre  and  sir  Michael  dc  la  Pole,  and  said  to  them, — “ My  courage  certainly
faileth  me  this  day  ; for  I dare  not  abide  the  event  of  a battle  with  the  king’s  uncles,  who,
if  they  take  me,  will  put  me  to  a shameful  death.  How  the  devil  could  they  have  crossed
the  Thames  ? This  is  a bad  omen  for  us.”  “ What  do  you  intend  to  do  ?”  asked  the  two


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


279


knights.  “ I mean  to  save  myself : do  you  the  same,”  added  the  duke,  “ and  the  whole
army,  if  it  can.”  “ Well,”  replied  the  knights,  “let  us  keep  on  one  of  the  wings,  and  we
shall  have  two  cords  to  our  how.  We  shall  see  how  our  men  behave  : if  they  do  well,  we
will  remain,  for  the  honour  of  the  king  who  lias  sent  us  hither : if  they  be  defeated,  we  can
make  off,  and  have  the  advantage  of  going  whithersoever  we  like.”

This  plan  was  adopted ; and  the  duke  changed  his  horse  for  a very  active  one,  as  did  also
the  knights.  They  rode  round  the  army,  showing  a good  countenance,  and  telling  the  men
to  behave  well : that  they  should  have  the  day,  if  it  pleased  God  and  St.  George,  for  they
had  the  right ; and  the  quarrel  was  the  king’s,  which  was  to  their  advantage.  Thus
dissembling,  they  got  out  of  the  crowd,  and,  making  for  a corner  of  the  army,  formed  part
of  a wing.  They  had  scarcely  done  so,  when  the  dukes  of  York  and  Gloucester,  and  tho
other  lords,  were  seen  advancing,  with  banners  displayed,  and  trumpets  sounding.  Tho
king’s  army  no  sooner  perceived  their  array  than  they  were  panic-struck,  quitted  their
ranks,  and  turned  their  backs ; for  it  was  the  general  report  that  the  duke  of  Ireland  and
his  friends  had  fled.  All  was  now  in  disorder,  every  one  running  away  for  the  fastest,
without  making  the  smallest  defence.  The  duke  and  his  knights  were  soon  at  a distance,
for  they  were  not  desirous  of  returning  to  Oxford.

The  duke  of  Gloucester,  on  seeing  the  condition  of  the  king’s  army,  felt  compassion,  and
would  not  do  the  ill  he  might ; for  he  knew  the  greater  part  had  been  assembled  through
fear,  or  by  the  excitement  of  the  duke  of  Ireland.  He  therefore  said  to  his  men, — “ Sirs,
the  day  is  ours ; but  I forbid,  under  pain  of  death,  that  any  of  our  enemies  be  slain,  unless
he  make  a defence.  If  you  find  knights  or  squires,  take  them,  and  bring  them  to  me."
This  order  was  obeyed  : few  were  killed,  except  in  their  flight,  by  riding  over  or  against  each
other.  Sir  John,  called  the  Little  Beauchamp,  and  sir  John  Salisbury,  were  made  prisoners
in  the  pursuit,  and  brought  to  the  duke  of  Gloucester,  to  his  great  pleasure.  The  lords
marched  to  Oxford,  where  they  found  the  gates  open  ; and  those  who  could  do  so  lodged
themselves  there,  though  much  straitened.  When  the  duke  of  Gloucester  inquired  if  the
duke  of  Ireland  were  taken,  he  was  told  that  he  had  escaped.  The  duke  remained  two  days
at  Oxford,  when  he  gave  liberty  for  the  men  at  arms  to  return  to  their  homes,  after  having-
thanked  them  for  their  services.  He  told  the  mayor  of  London  and  the  leaders  of  the  bands,
that]  they  might  now  return  to  London,  which  they  cheerfully  did ; and  thus  this  expedition
ended.


CHAPTER  LXXXVI. THE  DUKE  OF  IRELAND,  WITH  SOME  OF  HIS  COMPANIONS,  ESCAPES  INTO

HOLLAND. THE  ARCHBISHOP  OF  CANTERBURY  IS  SENT  BY  THE  DUKES  OF  YORK  AND

GLOUCESTER  TO  TREAT  WITH  THE  KING. HE  CONDUCTS  HIM  WITH  HONOUR  TO  LONDON.

I will  now  say  what  became  of  the  duke  of  Ireland,  sir  Peter  Goulonfre,  and  sir  Michael
de  la  Pole,  on  the  day  on  which  they  had,  like  their  army,  saved  themselves  by  flight.  In
truth,  this  was  wisely  done ; for,  had  they  been  taken,  they  would  have  been  put  to  death
without  mercy.  I do  not  believe  they  fled  to  the  king  at  Bristol : if  they  did,  they  made
no  long  stay,  but  hastened  out  of  England  as  quickly  as  they  could.  I heard  that  they  rode
through  Carlisle  to  Edinburgh,  where  they  embarked  on  board  a vessel  bound  for  Holland
and  the  Texel,  and  landed  at  Dordrecht.  They  were  much  rejoiced  at  thus  being  in  a place
of  safety  ; and  it  was  told  me,  that  the  duke  of  Ireland  had,  for  a long  time  before,  made
large  deposits  of  money  at  Bruges,  by  means  of  the  Lombards,  to  be  prepared  for  every
event ; for,  though  he  knew  his  power  over  the  king  of  England,  he  was  much  afraid  of  the
nobles  and  the  people.  During  his  prosperity  he  had  made  very  ample  provision  of  money
in  Flanders  and  in  other  places,  where  he  thought  he  might  need  it.  I heard,  also,  that  the
first  payment  of  sixty  thousand  francs,  for  the  ransom  of  John  of  Brittany,  was  waiting
his  orders,  and  the  time  was  nearly  elapsed  for  the  receipt  of  the  other  sixty  thousand  francs.
He  had,  therefore,  provided  himself  with  money  for  a long  time.

When  duke  Albert  of  Bavaria,  who  was  regent  of  Hainault,  Holland,  and  Zealand,  for
his  brother,  count  William,  then  alive,  was  informed  that  the  duke  of  Ireland  had  fled  from


2 BO


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


England,  and  had  taken  up  his  residence  at  Dordrecht,  he  mused  awhile,  and  thought  it
improper  he  should  make  any  long  stay  there.  He  had  quitted  England  as  a fugitive,  and
was  in  the  ill-favour  of  his  cousins-german,  the  dukes  of  York  and  Gloucester,  to  whom  he
owed  love  and  affection : he  had,  beside,  behaved  shamefully  to  his  duchess,  who  was  the
daughter  of  his  cousin,  the  princess  Isabella  of  England.  In  consequence,  he  sent  to  tell  the
duke,  that  since  he  had  displeased  his  fair  cousins  of  England,  and  had  broken  his  marriage
to  connect  himself  with  another  woman,  he  must  instantly  leave  his  country  and  seek  other
quarters  ; for  he  would  never  suffer  the  duke  of  Ireland  to  inhabit  any  town  of  his.  When
he  received  this  order,  he  was  much  alarmed  lest  he  should  be  arrested  and  given  up  to  his
enemies,  and  humbled  himself  exceedingly  to  those  who  brought  the  order,  saying  he
would  cheerfully  obey  the  duke’s  commands.  He  instantly  directed  all  his  accounts  to  be
settled  and  paid,  and  embarked  on  board  a vessel,  with  attendants,  for  Utrecht,  which  is  a
town  solely  dependent  on  its  bishop,  where  he  arrived,  and  tarried  there  until  other
intelligence  was  brought  him.  We  will  now  leave  him,  and  return  to  the  affairs  of
England.

When  the  army  of  the  barons  had  been  disbanded  at  Oxford,  I know  not  if  the  dukes  of
York  and  Gloucester,  and  the  archbishop  of  Canterbury,  did  not  remain  there  some  days
longer;  during  which  time  the  two  knights,  sir  John  Salisbury  and  the  little  Beauchamp,
were  beheaded.  After  this  execution  they  returned  to  London,  where  they  stayed  some
time,  expecting  to  hear  from  the  king  ; but  all  they  learnt  was  that  he  continued  in  Bristol.
It  was  determined  in  council,  at  Westminster,  through  the  advice  of  the  archbishop  of
Canterbury,  to  send  a deputation  from  the  chief  barons  to  the  king,  to  remonstrate  with
him,  in  an  amicable  manner,  on  his  opposition  to  the  principal  persons  of  his  kingdom,  who
were  naturally  bound  to  guard  his  honour,  and  for  having  placed  his  confidence  in  a set  of
minions ; which  conduct  had  nearly  lost  him  his  crown.  While  this  was  going  forward  in
the  council,  sir  Nicholas  Bramber  had  been  taken  in  Wales,  and  brought  to  London.  The
king’s  uncles  were  rejoiced  at  this,  and  said  they  should  not  let  him  wait  long,  but  that  he
should  suffer  a similar  death  to  his  friends.  Sir  Nicholas,  unable  to  offer  anything  to  prevent
his  execution,  was  led  to  the  usual  place,  without  the  town,  and  there  beheaded.  He  was
lamented  by  some  of  the  citizens,  for  he  had.  in  former  times,  been  their  mayor,  and  had,
during  that  time,  well  and  honestly  governed  the  city.  He  had  also  been  of  essential  service
to  the  king  at  the  time  of  the  peasants’  rebellion,  by  slaying,  with  his  own  hand,  Lister ;
which  dismayed  the  insurgents  greatly,  and  put  them  to  flight ; and  for  this  the  king  had
created  him  a knight.  He  was  beheaded  like  the  others,  for  having  too  readily  put  his  faith
in  the  duke  of  Ireland.

The  king’s  uncles,  seeing  that  now  all  those  of  the  king’s  council  whom  they  hated  were
either  dead  or  had  quitted  the  country,  thought  it  time  to  put  the  government  on  a stable
footing ; for,  notwithstanding  they  had  put  to  death,  or  banished,  all  who  were  obnoxious  to
them,  they  never  intended  to  deprive  the  king  of  his  crown,  hut  only  to  reform  and  regulate
his  government  more  to  his  own  and  country’s  honour.  They  therefore  said  to  the  archbishop
of  Canterbury, — “ You  will  go  with  your  state  to  Bristol,  where  you  will  find  the  king,  and
remonstrate  with  him  on  the  affairs  of  his  realm,  and  the  condition  they  are  now  in  :
recommend  us  to  him,  and  say,  that  we  entreat  he  will  not  put  any  belief  in  what  he  may
hear  to  our  discredit : for  he  has  too  long  done  so,  against  his  own  honour  and  profit,  as  well
as  to  the  hurt  of  the  kingdom.  You  will  likewise  say,  that  we  and  the  good  city  of  London
beg  he  will  return  hither,  where  he  will  be  received  with  the  utmost  joy ; and  we  will
agree  to  his  having  the  nomination  of  his  council  in  any  way  most  agreeable  to  him.  We
charge  you,  however,  archbishop,  on  no  account  to  return  without  him,  for  those  who  are
now  attached  to  him  will  be  made  discontented.  Tell  him,  also,  not  to  be  angered  for  such
traitors  as  were  near  his  person,  who  may  have  been  slain  or  driven  out  of  the  kingdom,  for
by  them  his  crown  was  in  danger  of  being  lost.”

The  archbishop  promised  to  accomplish  the  matter  as  well  as  he  was  able,  and,  having
soon  made  his  preparations,  set  out  for  Bristol  in  grand  array,  such  as  became  so  reverend  a
prelate,  and  fixed  his  lodgings  in  the  town.  The  king  lived  very  privately,  for  all  those
who  used  to  be  with  him  were  either  dead  or  banished,  as  you  have  heard.  The  ai’chbishop


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


281


was  one  whole  day  and  two  nights  in  the  town  before  the  king  would  see  him,  so  sorely
vexed  was  he  with  his  uncles  for  having  driven  away  the  duke  of  Ireland,  whom  he  loved
above  all  mankind,  and  for  having  put  to  death  his  chamberlains  and  knights.  At  length,
he  was  so  well  advised  that  he  admitted  the  archbishop  to  his  presence.  On  his  entrance,
he  humbled  himself  much  before  the  king,  and  then  addressed  him  warmly  on  the  subjects
the  dukes  of  York  and  Gloucester  had  charged  him  with.  He  gave  him  to  understand,  that
if  he  did  not  return  to  London,  according  to  the  entreaties  of  his  uncles,  the  citizens  of  London,
and  the  greater  part  of  his  subjects,  he  would  make  them  very  discontented  ; and  he
remonstrated,  that  without  the  aid  of  his  uncles,  barons,  prelates,  knights,  and  commons,  from
the  chief  towns,  he  would  be  unable  to  act,  or  to  have  any  compliance  given  to  his  will.  This
he  had  been  charged  to  tell  him,  and  likewise  that  he  could  not  more  rejoice  his  enemies,
nor  more  effectually  hurt  his  country,  than  by  making  war  on  his  friends.  The  young  king
was  inclined  to  listen  to  the  arguments  of  the  archbishop ; but  the  insult  that  had  been
offered  him,  by  beheading  those  of  his  council  in  whom  he  had  no  fault  to  find,  was  too
fresh  in  his  memory  for  him  instantly  to  comply.  Many  plans  were  proposed  to  him  : at
last,  by  the  good  advice  of  the  queen,  and  of  the  most  prudent  of  his  counsellors,  who  had
remained  with  him,  such  as  sir  Richard  Stenor  and  others,  he  restrained  his  choler,  and  said
to  the  archbishop,  that  he  would  cheerfully  accompany  him  to  London.  My  lord  of
Canterbury  was  highly  pleased  on  hearing  this ; and  he  gained  much  honour  by  having
brought  matters  to  so  happy  a conclusion.  The  king  did  not  remain  at  Bristol  long  after
this,  but,  leaving  there  his  queen,  set  out  with  his  retinue  towards  London,  the  archbishop
accompanying  him.  On  his  arrival  at  Windsor,  he  stopped  three  whole  days.

When  news  was  brought  to  London  that  the  archbishop  of  Canterbury  had  so  far  succeeded
in  his  mission,  that  the  king  was  on  his  return  to  the  city,  the  whole  town  was  rejoiced;
and  they  determined  to  go  out  to  meet  and  conduct  him,  in  the  most  honourable  manner,  to
his  palace.  The  day  on  which  he  left  Windsor,  the  whole  road  from  London  to  Brentford
was  covered  with  people  on  foot  and  horseback.  The  dukes  of  York  and  Gloucester,  and
prince  John  of  York,  the  earls  of  Arundel,  Salisbury,  Northumberland,  and  many  barons
and  prelates,  went,  in  great  state,  to  conduct  the  king.  They  met  him  within  two  miles
from  Brentford,  and  received  him  most  affectionately,  as  good  subjects  should  their  lord.
The  king,  who  had  their  late  proceedings  still  rankling  in  his  heart,  scarcely  stopped  when
he  met  them,  nor  cast  his  eyes  towards  them.  The  person  he  talked  the  most  to  on  his  road
was  the  bishop  of  London.  On  their  arrival  in  Westminster,  the  king  dismounted  at  his
palace,  which  had  been  prepared  for  him.  He  there  partook  of  wines  and  spices,  as  did  his
uncles,  the  barons,  prelates,  and  knights,  who  were  entitled  to  the  honour.  Several  of  them
now  took  leave,  and  those  who  resided  in  London  went  home,  but  the  king’s  uncles,  the
archbishop  of  Canterbury,  and  the  whole  of  the  council,  remained  to  keep  him  company,  to
be  on  better  terms  together,  and  to  consult  on  the  affairs  of  the  nation,  for  they  had  formed
their  plans,  and  were  lodged,  some  in  the  palace,  and  others  in  the  abbey.


CHAPTER  LXXXVII. THE  KING,  BY  THE  ADVICE  OF  HIS  UNCLES  AND  COUNCIL,  SUMMONS

THE  NOBILITY  AND  COMMONERS  OF  THE  REALM  TO  A PARLIAMENT  AT  WESTMINSTER,
AND  TO  RENEW  THEIR  HOMAGE  TO  HIM

A special  parliament  being  ordered  to  meet  at  Westminster,  all  the  barons,  prelates,
knights,  and  chief  citizens  from  the  principal  towns,  were  summoned  to  attend,  and  all  who
held  fiefs  from  the  king.  The  reason  for  this  parliament  being  made  so  general,  was,  that
the  archbishop  of  Canterbury  had  remonstrated  in  the  council,  and  to  the  king’s  uncles,  that
when  they  had  crowned  king  Richard,  though  all  who  held  fiefs  under  him  had  made  their
homage,  and  held  their  lands  accordingly,  he  was  not  of  a proper  age  legally  to  receive  their
oaths.  A king  by  right  must  be  twenty-one  years  of  age  before  he  can  justly  govern  the
kingdom,  and,  until  that  time,  should  be  under  the  tutelage  of  his  uncles,  if  he  have  any,  or
under  those  of  his  subjects  the  nearest  related  to  him.  The  archbishop  added,  that  as  now
the  king  was  of  the  proper  age,  he  advised,  for  greater  security,  all  who  held  any  lands


282


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


under  him  should  renew  their  homage,  and  acknowledge  him  for  their  lord.  This  opinion  of
the  archbishop  was  acceded  to  by  the  king’s  uncles,  and  was  the  cause  of  so  general  a
summons  being  sent  abroad  for  all  persons  to  attend  this  parliament.  Every  one  having
obeyed,  London  and  Westminster  were  much  crowded.

On  the  day  appointed,  the  king  heard  mass  royally  clothed,  with  the  crown  on  his  head,
in  the  chapel  of  the  palace  *,  which  is  very  handsome  and  richly  decorated.  The  archbishop
of  Canterbury  said  mass,  and  performed  divine  service.  He  was  attentively  heard,  for  he
was  an  excellent  preacher.  When  the  service  was  over,  the  king’s  uncles  kissed  him,  in  sign
of  homage,  and  swore  faith  and  duty  to  him  for  ever.  Then  came  the  barons,  prelates,  and
all  who  held  anything  under  him,  and  with  joined  hands,  as  was  becoming  vassals,  swore
faith  and  loyalty,  and  kissed  him  on  the  mouth.  It  was  visible  that  the  king  kissed  some
heartily,  others  not ; for,  though  he  checked  himself  as  much  as  possible,  all  were  not  in  his
good  graces  ; but  he  dissembled,  for  he  wished  not  to  act  contrary  to  his  uncles.  If  he  had
possessed  the  power,  he  would  not  have  behaved  thus,  but  have  wreaked  a cruel  revenge  on
those  who  had,  as  he  thought,  so  undeservedly  put  to  death  sir  Simon  Burley  and  his  other
knights.

The  archbishop  of  York  was  summoned  by  the  council  to  attend  to  do  his  homage,  and
purge  himself  from  the  things  that  had  been  laid  to  his  charge ; for  he  had  always  been  a
partisan  of  the  duke  of  Ireland,  and  in  opposition  to  the  king’s  uncles.  When  he  received
this  summons,  knowing  he  was  not  beloved  by  the  dukes  of  York  or  Gloucester,  he  was
fearful  of  the  event,  and  therefore  sent  his  nephew,  the  son  of  lord  Neville,  to  make  his
excuses.  He  instantly  set  out  for  London,  and,  on  his  arrival  waited  on  the  king  first,  to
whom  he  made  excuses  for  his  uncle,  and  performed,  as  proxy,  the  homage  of  the  archbishop.
The  king  received  his  excuses,  for  he  loved  this  archbishop  more  than  that  of  Canterbury,
and  bore  him  out  before  the  council,  otherwise  he  would  have  been  heavily  fined : through
attention  to  the  king  the  council  admitted  his  excuses,  and  he  was  suffered  to  remain  in  his
diocese.  For  a long  time,  however,  he  was  afraid  to  reside  at  York,  but  lived  at  Newcastle
on  Tyne,  near  the  castles  of  his  brother  Neville  and  cousins.  Thus  were  affairs  in  England ;
but  the  king  had  not  for  some  time  the  command  of  his  council,  which  was  under  the  con-
troul  of  his  uncles,  and  the  barons  and  prelates  before  named.  W e will  now  return  to  what
was  going  forward  in  Castille  and  Portugal.

o o o


CHAPTER  LXXXVIII. THE  KING  OF  PORTUGAL  AND  DUKE  OF  LANCASTER  UNITE  THEIR

FORCES. WHEN  DISTRESSED  TO  CROSS  THE  RIVER  DUERO,  A GALICIAN  SQUIRE,  PRI-
SONER OF  WAR,  DIRECTS  THEM  TO  A FORD.

It  is  right,  since  the  matter  requires  it,  that  I now  say  something  of  the  expedition  of
the  duke  of  Lancaster,  and  how  he  persevered  in  it  this  season  in  Galicia.  I will  continue
it  from  where  I left  off,  as  I have  a great  desire  to  complete  its  history.

When  the  duke  and  his  army  had  conquered  the  town  and  castle  of  Orense,  they  halted
there  four  days  to  refresh  themselves,  as  there  were  plenty  of  provisions.  On  the  fifth  day,
they  departed,  taking  the  road  to  Noya.  They  quartered  themselves,  for  four  days,  in  a large
meadow  along  the  river-side  ; but  the  ground  was  already  burnt  up  by  the  great  heat  of  the
sun,  and  the  water  was  so  bad  that  the  horses  would  scarcely  drink  it : many  that  did  so
died.  Orders  were  given  to  dislodge  and  return  to  Orense  : for  the  marshals,  sir  Thomas
Moreaux  and  sir  Richard  Burley,  had  declared  the  castle  of  Noya  to  be  impregnable  but  by
a long  siege,  with  great  expense  of  money,  and  many  assaults.  The  duke  of  Lancaster,
likewise,  when  there,  received  intelligence  of  the  approach  of  the  king  of  Portugal  and  his
army,  consisting  of  three  thousand  spears  and  ten  thousand  serviceable  men : so  that,  when
the  two  armies  should  be  united,  something  essential  might  be  done  ; for  the  duke  had  with
him  fifteen  hundred  knights  and  squires,  and  six  thousand  archers.  This  intelligence  greatly

* This  chapel  was  afterwards  converted  into  the  house  the  admission  of  the  members  from  Ireland  on  the  union,
of  commons,  and  continued  to  he  used  as  such  till  its  many  of  the  paintings  and  other  ornaments  were  discovered,
destruction  by  fire  in  1834.  When  it  was  enlarged  for  and  have  been  engraven  and  published.


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


283


pleased  the  duke  ; he  decamped  from  before  Noya,  where  he  had  done  nothing,  and  returned
to  Orense.  lie  sent  for  his  duchess  and  ladies,  declaring  he  would  there  wait  the  arrival  of
the  kin 2'  of  Portugal.

The  king  of  Portugal  and  his  marshals,  having  taken  possession  of  Ferrol,  marched  for
Orense  to  meet  the  duke  of  Lancaster.  On  their  road,  they  came  to  Yille-de-Padron,  which
at  first  showed  symptoms  of  rebellion,  but,  when  the  army  appeared,  they  submitted.  The
king  and  his  army  remained  in  the  town  and  adjoining  country  fifteen  days,  and  greatly
wasted  its  provisions,  notwithstanding  a sufficiency  came  to  them  from  Portugal.  Galicia
was  ruined  by  these  two  armies ; and  the  weather  was  now  become  so  exceedingly  hot,  that
none  could  venture  abroad,  after  eight  o’clock  in  the  morning,  without  risk  of  death.  While
the  duke  and  duchess  of  Lancaster  remained  in  Orense,  their  men  and  horses  were  suffering
greatly  for  want  of  forage  and  water : there  were  neither  fresh  grass  nor  green  food,  for  the
ground  was  too  parched  for  any  seeds  to  spring.  The  whole  country  was  burnt  up ; and  the
English  were  forced  to  send  their  foragers  twelve,  sixteen,  nay  twenty  leagues,  for  food  for
themselves  and  horses.  Consider  what  their  difficulties  must  have  been.  The  knights  and
squires  of  England  found  the  wines  so  strong  and  ardent,  that  they  affected  their  heads,
stomachs,  and  bowels,  and  they  had  not  any  remedy ; for  there  was  a great  scarcity  of  good
water  to  temper  them  with,  or  to  cool  them.  Their  food  was  contrary  to  what  they  had
always  been  accustomed  to  ; for  in  their  own  country  they  live  at  their  ease,  whilst  now
they  were  burnt  with  external  and  internal  heat.  The  greatest  lords  were  in  the  utmost
poverty  and  distress  ; and  such  effects  as  were  natural,  followed,  which  I shall  relate  to  you.

The  English  knights  and  squires,  seeing  their  difficulties  increase,  from  the  scarcity  of
forage  and  the  extreme  heat  of  the  weather,  began  to  murmur  and  say,  “ Our  expedition
seems  drawing  to  a poor  end ; for  we  remain  too  long  in  one  place.”  “ That  is  true,”  replied
others  : “ and  we  have  another  thing  much  against  us ; we  have  brought  women,  who  only
wish  to  remain  quiet ; and  for  one  day  that  they  are  inclined  to  travel,  they  will  repose
fifteen.  It  is  this  which  has  checked  us,  and  will  be  our  destruction  ; for  if,  on  our  landing
at  Corunna,  we  bad  advanced  into  the  country,  we  should  have  succeeded  in  putting  it  under
our  obedience,  for  none  would  have  dared  to  oppose  us ; but  these  long  residences  have
encouraged  our  enemies,  who  have  strengthened  their  strong  places,  and  reinforced  their
towns  and  castles  with  men-at-arms  from  France;  and  have  also  posted  them  in  the  naiTow
passes,  and  along  the  rivers,  to  guard  and  defend  them.  They  will  defeat  us  without  a
battle ; for  they  know  it  would  be  more  to  their  advantage  to  decline  it.  This  kingdom  of
Castille  is  not  so  pleasant  a country  to  make  war  in  as  France,  where  there  are  plenty  of
large  villages,  a fair  country,  fine  rivers,  ponds,  rich  pastures,  and  agreeable  and  substantial
wines  for  men-at-arms  to  refresh  themselves  with,  and  a sun  and  climate  finely  temperate ;
but  here  every  thing  is  the  reverse.”  “ What  the  deuce,”  said  others,  “ what  business  had
the  duke  to  bring  his  wife  and  daughters  with  him,  since  he  came  hither  for  conquest  ? It
was  quite  unreasonable,  for  they  have  been  a great  hindrance  to  him.  It  is  well  known
throughout  all  Castille,  that  he  and  his  brother  are  the  lawful  heirs  of  the  crown,  in  right  of
their  wives,  who  were  daughters  of  don  Pedro ; but,  with  regard  to  the  conquest  or  the
surrender  of  any  towns,  ladies  can  do  but  little.”  This  was  the  language  held  in  different
parts  of  the  English  army,  by  many  knights  and  squires  when  among  themselves.  They
were  much  rejoiced  on  learning  that  the  king  of  Portugal  was  near  at  hand ; and  when  he
was  within  two  miles  of  the  town,  the  duke  of  Lancaster  and  his  knights  mounted  their
horses,  and  went  forth  to  meet  him.  There  was  much  apparent  joy,  and  the  king  and  the
duke,  as  well  as  the  English  and  Portuguese  knights,  testified  great  pleasure  at  meeting.
The  army  of  Portugal  was  behind,  under  the  command  of  six  great  barons  of  that  country,
namely,  Ponasse  d’Acunha,  Vasco  Martin  de  Merlo,  the  Posdich  Dosnedegousse,  Salvase  do
Merlo,  sir  Alleyne  Pereira,  marshal,  and  Joao  Rodriguez  de  Sa.  Several  barons  were  with
the  king,  whose  escort  was  but  three  hundred  spears.  On  their  arrival  at  Orense,  the  king
was  lodged  becoming  his  state,  and  much  at  his  ease,  and  the  place  was  full  of  horses.  The
king,  duke,  and  lords,  were  five  days  in  council,  and  determined  to  make  an  excursion,  with
the  united  armies,  towards  Medina  del  Campo  and  Vilalpando,  where  sir  Oliver  du  Guesclin,
constable  of  Castille,  and  the  largest  garrison  of  Frenchmen,  were  stationed.  They  were


284


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


puzzled  how  to  cross  the  Duero,  which  at  times  is  dangerous,  and  more  so  in  the  summer,
from  the  melting  of  the  snows  on  the  mountains,  than  in  the  winter,  when  it  is  frozen,  like
all  other  small  streams.  Notwithstanding  this  difficulty,  they  resolved  to  march  for  Campo,
in  the  hopes  of  finding  a ford ; and  orders  were  issued  to  the  armies  to  this  effect.  They
were  well  pleased  to  receive  them,  for  they  had  suffered  very  severely  at  Orense,  and  in
those  parts ; and  many  had  been  carried  off  by  sickness.

The  king  of  Portugal  and  the  duke  of  Lancaster  left  Orense  together ; but  their  armies
were  separated,  because  they  were  not  acquainted,  nor  understood  each  other  s language,
and  likewise  to  prevent  any  disputes  or  riots  that  might  fall  out  between  them ; for  the
Portuguese  are  passionate,  overbearing,  and  not  easily  pacified,  and  the  English  are  spiteful
and  proud.  The  constables  and  marshals  of  each  army,  when  they  sent  out  parties  to  forage,
ordered  them  to  take  separate  routes.  These  armies,  which  were  sufficient  to  combat  what
force  the  king  of  Castille  and  his  allies  could  bring  to  the  field,  continued  their  march  until
they  came  to  the  river  Duero.  This  was  not  easy  to  pass ; for  it  is  deep,  with  high  banks,
and  full  of  broken  rocks,  except  at  certain  bridges,  which  had  either  been  destroyed,  or  so
strongly  fortified  and  guarded,  it  was  not  possible  to  attempt  them  with  hopes  of  success.
While  they  were  considering  how  they  could  cross  it,  it  chanced  that  sir  John  Holland,  the
constable,  sir  Thomas  Moreaux  and  sir  Richard  Burley,  the  marshals,  or  their  foragers,
during  an  excursion,  fell  in  with  a squire  of  Galicia,  called  Domingo  V argas,  who  was  riding
through  the  country,  having  passed  the  river : he  knew  that  all  the  bridges  were  broken
down,  but  he  was  acquainted  with  a ford  that  could  easily  be  passed  on  horseback  or  on
foot ; and  when  he  saw  the  enemy,  he  had  turned  back,  and  was  riding  for  this  ford.  He
was  made  prisoner,  and  brought  to  these  lords,  who  examined  him  as  to  a ford ; and  the
constable  told  him,  that  if  he  would  show  them  a safe  one,  for  he  had  heard  there  were  such,
he  would  not  only  give  him  his  liberty,  but  make  him  a handsome  present  beside.  The
squire  was  not  well  advised,  and  too  eager  to  gain  his  liberty  and  the  constable’s  gift ; he
therefore  said,  that  he  would  show  them  a place  where  the  whole  army  might  cross  in  safety.
The  constable  and  marshals  were  so  joyful  on  hearing  this,  that  they  sent  to  acquaint  the
duke  with  the  good  news.  The  armies  followed  the  vanguard  of  the  constable,  which  had
arrived  at  the  ford.  The  squire  entered  the  river  as  their  guide  ; and  when  they  saw  there
was  not  any  danger,  all  passed  in  the  best  manner  they  could.

The  van,  having  crossed,  halted  on  the  bank  to  guide  the  main  army  over.  Sir  John
Holland  kept  his  promise  with  the  Galician  squire,  by  giving  him  his  liberty  and  a present ;
and  he  instantly  set  off  for  Medina  del  Campo,  where  the  king  of  Castile  then  was.  It  is  a
handsome  and  strong  city  in  that  country.  The  duke  of  Lancaster  and  the  king  of  Portugal
rode  in  company,  and  came  to  this  ford,  which  is  called  Place-ferrade,  where  the  gravel  is
sound  and  firm.  They  crossed  without  difficulty,  as  did  their  armies : the  rear  division
crossed  on  the  morrow,  and  they  all  encamped  themselves  on  its  banks.  News  was  soon
carried  to  Roales  Castroreris,  Medina  del  Campo,  Vilalpando,  Saliagan,  and  to  the  other
towns  and  castles  in  Castille,  that  the  English  had  passed  the  Duero,  having  discovered  a
ford.  They  were  much  surprised,  and  said  they  must  have  been  shown  it  through  treachery;
for,  if  it  had  not  been  made  known  by  some  of  the  natives,  they  would  never  have  found  it
out.  There  is  nothing  but  what  sooner  or  later  is  discovered,  by  servants  or  otherwise.
The  lords  attached  to  the  king  of  Castille  learnt  that  Domingo  Yargas  had  pointed  out  to
them  this  ford ; he  was  instantly  arrested,  and  having  acknowledged  what  he  had  done,
was  condemned  to  death.  He  was  carried  to  Vilalpando,  and  there  beheaded.


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  See.


285


CHAPTER  LXXXIX. SIR  WALTER  DE  PASSAC  AND  SIR  WILLIAM  DE  L1GNAC  ADVISE  THE

KING  OF  CASTILLE  NOT  TO  RISK  A BATTLE  BEFORE  THE  ARRIVAL  OF  THE  DUKE  OF

BOURBON. A PARTY  OF  THE  ENGLISH  SKIRMISH  WITH  TOE  GARRISON  OF  VILAL-

PANDO. THE  DUKE  OF  LANCASTER  IS  DISPIRITED  BY  HIS  OWN  ILL  HEALTH  AND

THE  GREAT  SICKNESS  OF  IIIS  ARMY.

Tiie  king  of  Castillo,  on  hearing  that  the  king  of  Portugal  and  the  duke  of  Lancaster
were  fast  approaching  with  so  great  a force,  was  much  alarmed,  and  sent  for  sir  Walter  de
Passac  and  sir  William  de  Lignac,  to  whom  he  said, — “ I am  exceedingly  surprised  that
the  duke  of  Bourbon  is  not  arrived.  Our  enemies  have  taken  the  field,  and,  if  no  one
oppose  them,  will  destroy  my  whole  country.  My  subjects  are  very  discontented  that  we
do  not  offer  them  combat.  Tell  me,  my  fair  sirs,  how  I had  best  act.”  These  two  lords,
who,  from  great  experience,  knew  more  of  arms  than  the  king,  and  for  this  had  they  been
sent  from  France  to  Castille,  replied,  — “ Sir  king,  depend  upon  it,  the  duke  of  Bourbon  will
come.  On  his  arrival,  we  will  consider  what  is  to  he  done ; hut,  until  then,  do  not  make
any  preparations  to  meet  your  enemies.  Let  them  make  what  excursions  they  please  : they
keep  the  field,  and  we  the  towns  and  castles,  which  are  well  provided  with  everything,  and
garrisoned  by  good  men  at  arms.  They  are  suffering  from  the  heat  of  the  sun  and  weather,
while  we  enjoy  the  shade  and  refreshing  breezes.  They  have  found  the  country  wasted,  and
the  further  they  advance  they  will  have  so  much  the  greater  scarcity  of  forage.  It  was  for
the  chance  of  their  entering  your  country,  that  all  the  small  forts  have  been  demolished,
wherein  the  farmers  intended  placing  their  wealth.  This  was,  sir  king,  wisely  done ; for
they  would  by  their  means  have  been  enabled  to  keep  possession  of  those  parts  where  they
now  are ; but  at  present  they  can  find  nothing  but  what  they  have  brought  with  them,
except  the  great  heat  of  a burning  sun,  which  you  may  be  assured  must  soon  destroy  them.
Though  all  your  towns  and  castles  are  well  provided  and  garrisoned,  we  can  believe  that  some
may  be  attacked  and  won,  for  that  is  the  delight  of  men  at  arms.  In  such  way  they  love  to
pass  their  time,  and  for  this  do  they  seek  adventures  through  the  world.  Do  not,  therefore,
be  any  way  cast  down  ; for  in  this  business,  we  engage,  you  shall  not  suffer  any  great  loss.”
This  speech  greatly  comforted  the  king  of  Castille,  and  he  was  well  pleased  with  them,  for
he  felt  that  what  they  had  said  was  truth.

We  will  return  to  the  duke  of  Lancaster  and  the  king  of  Portugal,  who,  though  they  kept
the  field,  would  have  willingly  gained  some  town  to  refresh  themselves  ; for  the  foragers  could
not  find  anything,  and  were  forced  to  unite  in  large  bodies  for  fear  of  ambuscades.  They
were  so  hard  pressed,  that  when,  in  their  excursions,  they  saw  at  a distance  a largo  village,
they  were  rejoiced,  and  cried  out,  “ Come  quick : let  us  hasten  to  that  village,  where  we
shall  find  enough  to  forage  and  to  enrich  ourselves.”  They  hastened  their  march  ; hut  when
they  arrived,  they  found  only  the  hare  walls : there  were  neither  inhabitants,  nor  even  a
dog,  nor  fowl,  so  completely  had  the  French  ruined  this  part  of  the  country.  They  thus  lost
their  time  and  expectations,  and  returned  to  their  lords  empty-handed.  Their  horses  were
in  sorry  condition  from  the  want  of  proper  food,  and  they  were  fortunate  whenever  they
could  meet  with  any  green  pastures.  Some  were  so  feeble  they  could  not  advance,  and  dropt
dead  on  the  road,  through  famine  and  heat.  Their  masters  were  not  in  a much  better
condition,  from  fevers  caused  by  the  oppressive  heat  in  the  day,  and  the  chill  of  the  nights,
without  having  anything  proper  to  refresh  or  recover  themselves.  Thus  was  it  in  the  duke’s
army ; for  the  English  have  a weaker  constitution  than  the  Portuguese,  who  bore  all  these
difficulties  without  hurt,  being  hardy  and  accustomed  to  the  climate  of  Castille.  In  this
melancholy  state  were  the  English  : many  died  of  their  disorders,  more  especially  such  as
were  not  well  attended,  and  had  not  wherewithal  to  provide  proper  remedies.

Sir  Richard  Burley,  sir  Thomas  Percy,  the  lord  Fitzwalter,  sir  Maubrun  de  Linieres,  sir
John  d’Ambreticourt,  Thierry  and  William  de  Soumain,  with  two  hundred  lances  of  such  as
were  desirous  to  seek  renown,  mounted  the  best  horses  in  the  army,  with  the  intent  to
surprise  the  French  garrison  in  Vilalpando.  They  had  heard  that  sir  Oliver  du  Guesclin,
constable  of  Castille,  had  with  him  there,  in  garrison,  some  of  the  ablest  knights  of  France.


28(5


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


They  left  the  army  one  morning,  after  drinking  a cup,  equipped  like  foragers,  and  came  to
a small  brook  that  runs  below  Vilalpando,  which  they  crossed  by  spurring  their  horses  over
it.  The  alarm  was  soon  spread  through  the  town,  that  the  English  were  at  the  barriers.
You  would  have  seen,  had  you  been  there  when  this  was  known,  knights  arming  themselves
hastily,  and  advancing  towards  the  lodgings  of  the  constable,  servants  saddling  horses  and
hurrying  with  them  to  their  masters.  Sir  Oliver  dir  Guesclin  would  have  restrained  his
companions  from  sallying  forth  to  meet  the  English,  had  he  been  able  ; but  their  courage  was
too  impetuous,  so  out  they  sallied,  gallantly  mounted  on  horses  that  had  been  inactive  and
well  fed.  Among  the  first  were,  sir  John  des  Barres,  the  viscount  de  Besliere,  sir  Robert  and
sir  John  de  Braquemont,  sir  Peter  de  Yillaines,  sir  Tristan  de  la  Jaille.

When  the  English  had  made  their  course  before  the  town,  they  ropassed  the  brook  in  the
same  manner  as  before,  and  retreated  to  a large  sand  bank,  when  they  drew  up  in  handsome
array,  about  three  bow-shots  distant  from  the  brook.  The  French  knights  advanced,  shouting
their  cries,  with  their  spears  in  their  rests  ; and,  when  near,  the  English  being  prepared,
stuck  spurs  into  their  horses  to  meet  them.  The  shock  was  very  great ; and  several  of  each
side  were  unhorsed  on  the  sand.  This  would  not  have  ended  so  speedily,  and  other  weapons
would  have  been  resorted  to  when  the  lances  failed  ; but  the  dust,  from  the  movements  of
the  horses,  was  so  great  and  disagreeable,  they  could  not  know  each  other;  their  horses  were
covered  with  dust  as  well  as  themselves ; and  it  was  in  such  clouds  that  they  could  not
breathe  without  swallowing  large  mouthfuls.  This  caused  the  attack  to  cease,  and  the
French  and  English  to  withdraw  from  the  combat : the  first  returned  to  Vilalpando.  There
was  not  any  one  slain,  nor  much  hurt,  on  either  side.  The  English  knights  went  not  more
than  one  league  beyond  Vilalpando  before  they  returned  to  their  army,  when  they  disarmed
themselves ; for  they  were  seized  with  fevers  and  other  disorders,  which  brought  them  to
death’s  door.

The  duke  of  Lancaster  was  greatly  dispirited,  and  knew  not  how  to  act ; for  he  saw  his
army  daily  wasting  away,  and  was  grieved  to  find  that  the  greater  and  better  part  were
confined  to  their  beds.  He  himself  was  so  unwell,  that  if  he  had  not  been  afraid  to  dishearten
his  men,  he  would  gladly  have  kept  his  chamber.  He  addressed  himself  to  the  king  of
Portugal,  and  desired  him  to  say  what,  in  the  present  circumstances,  should  be  done ; for  he
was  much  alarmed  at  this  mortality  in  his  army.  The  king  replied ; “ That,  from  appear-
ances, it  did  not  seem  probable  the  Castillians  would  offer  them  combat  at  this  season ; for
they  showed  more  inclination  that  they  should  waste  themselves  and  their  provision.”  “ How
then  would  you  advise  me  to  act  ?”  asked  the  duke.  “ I will  tell  you,”  answered  the  king :
“ as  the  weather  is  now  so  exceedingly  hot,  I would  advise  that  you  march  your  army  into
Galicia,  and  give  your  men  permission  to  recruit  themselves  wherever  they  please ; but  to
return  prepared  to  recommence  the  campaign  in  March  or  April.  Endeavour  to  procure
large  reinforcements  from  England,  under  the  command  of  one  of  your  brothers,  and  provision
in  plenty  for  the  winter  season.  A kingdom  is  not  soon  conquered,  nor  a climate  instantly
rendered  agreeable  to  the  constitutions  of  strangers.  Your  army  will  be  quartered  in  the
different  towns  now  under  your  obedience,  and  will  pass  their  time  as  well  as  they  can.”

“ This  may  be  right,”  said  the  duke ; “ but  the  consequences  will  be,  that  as  soon  as  our
enemies  shall  know  we  have  separated,  and  are  acquainted  that  you  are  retired  to  Portugal
with  your  army,  and  I with  mine  to  St.  Jago  or  Corunna,  they  will  take  the  field  ; for  I
have  heard  that  the  king  of  Castille  has  four  thousand  lances,  French  and  Bretons,  and  he
will  collect  as  many,  or  more,  in  his  own  country.  Add  to  this,  that  the  duke  of  Bourbon
is  on  his  march  with  two  thousand  men  at  arms,  and  will  be  eager  to  signalize  himself  on
bis  arrival.  Now,  consider,  should  all  this  force  enter  Galicia,  what  is  there  to  oppose  it  ?
Before  we  can  collect  our  men  and  form  a junction,  they  will  have  done  us  considerable
damage.”  “ Well,  then,”  replied  the  king  of  Portugal,  “ in  the  name  of  God,  let  us  keep
the  field  : my  men  are  fresh  and  unhurt,  and  equally  willing  with  myself  to  abide  the  event.”
The  conference  now  broke  up ; and  it  was  resolved  they  would  wait  the  arrival  of  the  duke
of  Bourbon,  to  see  if,  when  he  had  joined  the  Castillians,  they  would  offer  them  battle.  The
English  and  Portuguese  desired  nothing  more  eagerly  ; for  the  season  was  passing,  and  the
heat  increasing  : it  was  about  St.  John’s  day,  when  the  sun  is  at  its  height,  and  intolerably


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


287


liot,  especially  in  Castille,  Granada,  and  countries  far  to  the  south.  There  had  not  fallen
any  rain  or  dew  since  the  beginning  of  April,  so  that  the  'whole  country  was  burnt  up.  The
English  ate  plentifully  of  grapes  wherever  they  found  them  ; and,  to  quench  their  thirst,
drank  of  the  strong  wines  of  Castillo  and  Portugal : but  the  more  they  drank  the  more  they
were  heated;  for  this  new  beverage  inflamed  their  livers,  lungs,  and  bowels,  and  was  in  its
effect  totally  different  from  their  usual  liquors.  The  English,  when  at  home,  feed  on  fresh
meats  and  good  rich  ale,  which  is  a diet  to  keep  their  bodies  wholesome  ; but  now  they  were
forced  to  drink  hard  and  hot  wines,  of  which  they  were  not  sparing,  to  drown  their  cares.
The  early  part  of  the  night  is  warm,  from  the  great  heat  of  the  day,  but,  toward  sun-rise,  it
is  very  cold,  which  afflicted  them  sorely  ; for  they  slept  without  covering,  and  quite  naked,
from  the  heat  of  the  weather,  and  the  wine,  so  that  when  morning  came  they  were  chilled
by  the  change  of  air,  which  checked  all  perspiration,  and  flung  them  into  fevers  and  fluxes,
so  as  to  carry  them  off  instantly  to  their  graves.  Thus  died  very  many  of  the  barons  and
knights,  as  well  as  of  the  lower  ranks  ; for  these  disorders  spared  none.


CHAPTER  XC. TITE  DUKE  OF  LANCASTER  DISBANDS  HIS  ARMY. THREE  ENGLISH  KNIGHTS,

HAVING  OBTAINED  PASSPORTS,  WAIT  ON  THE  KING  OF  CASTILLE,  TO  NEGOTIATE  A
RETREAT  FOR  THE  MEN  AT  ARMS  THROUGH  niS  KINGDOM.

Good  or  evil  fortune  depends  upon  a trifle.  You  may  readily  believe  that  the  duke  of
Lancaster,  having  gained  a footing  in  Castille,  would  never  have  lost,  by  any  defeat  in
battle,  sucb  numbers  as  he  was  now  daily  doing  by  sickness.  He  himself  was  almost  dead
of  the  pestilence  I have  mentioned.  Sir  John  Holland,  constable  of  the  army,  saw,  with
great  concern,  the  miserable  situation  it  was  in  from  this  disorder,  from  which  scarcely  one
escaped  ; and  was  forced  daily  to  hear  the  complaints  of  high  and  low,  in  such  terms  as
these, — “ Ah,  my  lord  of  Lancaster,  why  have  you  brought  us  to  Castille  ? Accursed  bo
the  expedition.  He  does  not,  probably,  wish  that  any  Englishman  should  ever  again  quit
his  country  to  serve  him.  He  seems  resolved  to  kick  against  the  pricks.  lie  will  have  his
men  guard  the  country  he  has  conquered  ; but  when  they  shall  all  be  dead,  who  will  then
guard  it  ? Ho  shows  but  poor  knowledge  of  war ; for,  wdien  he  saw  that  no  one  came  to
oppose  him,  why  did  he  not  make  an  opportune  retreat  into  Portugal  or  elsewhere,  to  avoid
the  losses  he  must  now  suffer  ? for  we  shall  all  die  of  the  confounded  disorder,  and  without
having  struck  a blow’.”  Sir  John  Holland  was  much  hurt  on  hearing  such  language,  for  the
honour  of  the  duke,  whose  daughter  he  had  married ; and,  as  it  was  increasing,  he
determined  to  remonstrate  with  him  on  their  situation,  which  he  could,  from  his  connexion,
more  freely  do  than  any  other.  He  therefore  addressed  him, — “ My  lord,  you  must
immediately  alter  your  plans,  for  your  army  is  wholly  laid  up  with  sickness.  If  any  attack
should  bo  now  made  on  you,  you  could  not  draw  any  service  from  it ; for  the  men  are  all
worn  down  and  discontented,  and  their  horses  dead.  But  high  and  low  are  so  discouraged
by  this  disorder,  that  I repeat,  you  must  not  expect  any  service  from  them.”  “ What  can  I
do  ?"  replied  the  duke  : “ I wish  to  have  such  advice  as  is  reasonable.”  “ My  lord,”  said  sir
John  Holland,  “ I think  you  had  best  give  permission  for  your  men  to  retire  whithersoever
they  please  ; and  I would  advise  that  you  yourself  go  to  Portugal,  or  return  to  Galicia,  for
you  are  not  in  a state  to  undergo  hardships.”  “ That  is  well  considered,”  answered  the  duke  :
“ I consent  to  what  you  propose  ; and  you  may  give  our  men  notice,  that  I permit  them  to
go  into  Castille,  France,  or  wherever  else  they  may  choose,  so  they  enter  not  into  any  treaty
with  our  enemies ; for  I clearly  see  this  campaign  is  over.  Let  them  be  fully  paid  for  their
services  as  far  as  our  treasury  can  go,  and  also  for  the  expenses  of  their  journey,  and  then
make  our  chancellor  deliver  them  their  discharge.”

The  constable  replied,  that  he  W’ould  see  this  done.  He  ordered  the  intentions  of  the  duke
to  be  signified  throughout  the  army  by  sound  of  trumpet,  and  gave  notice  to  the  captains  to
come  to  him  with  their  accounts,  when  they  would  be  settled  and  paid,  to  their  satisfaction.
This  order  was  agreeable  to  all,  particularly  to  those  who  hoped  change  of  air  would
restore  them  to  health.  The  barons  and  knights  held  a council  how  they  were  to  return  to


288


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND.  FRANCE,  &c.


England  : by  sea  it  was  impossible,  for  they  had  no  vessels,  and  were  at  a distance  from  any
seaport.  They  were,  besides,  so  emaciated  and  weak,  from  the  fevers  and  fluxes,  that  they
would  have  been  unable  to  bear  a sea  voyage.  Having  considered  the  matter  well,  they
found  they  bad  no  other  choice  than  through  France  ; but  some  said — “ How  can  we  go
thither  ? we  have  enemies  in  all  the  countries  we  must  pass.  First,  there  is  Castille  : we
are  now  carrying  on  a destructive  war  against  it : then  Navarre  and  Arragon.  These  two
kingdoms  are  allied,  the  one  to  Castille,  and  the  other  to  France.  Arragon  has  already
showed  its  spite,  for  the  seneschal  of  Bordeaux  informs  us,  that  since  our  arrival  in  this
country,  he  has  thrown  the  archbishop  of  Bordeaux  into  prison  at  Barcelona,  who  had  gone
thither  to  demand  from  the  king  the  arrears  that  are  due  to  England.  Should  we  send  to
ask  passports  from  France,  the  journey  would  take  up  too  much  time ; and,  when  our
messenger  should  be  arrived,  wo  have  little  hopes  that  the  king,  who  is  young,  or  his
council,  would  grant  them ; for  the  constable  of  France,  sir  Oliver  de  Clisson,  hates  us
mortally,  and  this  is  increased  by  his  imagining  his  enemy,  the  duke  of  Brittany,  intends
turning  to  England.  Others,  who  were  farther  sighted,  and  of  more  sense,  said, — “ Let  all
doubts  be  laid  aside.  The  best  thing  we  can  do  is  to  try  the  king  of  Castille,  who  may
perhaps  not  only  allow  us  to  pass  peaceably  through  his  country,  but  also  obtain  for  us  the
same  permission  from  Arragon,  France,  and  Navarre.”

This  measure  was  adopted,  and  a herald,  called  Derby,  sent  for,  to  whom  were  given
letters  addressed  to  the  king  of  Castille.  The  herald  set  off,  and  followed  the  road  to
Medina  del  Campo,  where  the  king  then  resided.  When  in  his  presence,  he  cast  himself  on
his  knees  and  presented  his  letters,  which  were  written  in  French.  When  the  king  had  read
them,  and  understood  their  meaning,  he  smiled,  and,  turning  to  a knight  who  was  the
steward  of  his  household,  said, — “ Take  care  of  this  herald  : he  shall  have  his  answer
to-night,  that  he  may  return  early  to-morrow  morning.”  The  king  entered  his  closet,  and
sent  for  sir  Walter  de  Passac  and  sir  William  de  Lignac,  to  whom  he  showed  the  letters,  and
asked  what  answer  he  should  send.  The  substance  of  these  letters  was,  in  a few  words,  as
follows.  Sir  John  Holland,  constable  of  the  English  army,  desired  the  king  of  Castille  to
send  passports  for  three  knights  to  come  to  him  and  return,  that  they  might  have  a
conference  with  him.  The  two  knights  replied, — “ It  will,  my  lord,  be  right  that  you  grant
these  passports,  for  then  you  will  know  what  it  is  they  want.”  “ I agree  to  it,”  said  the
king,  and  instantly  ordered  a passport  to  be  drawn  out  for  the  coming  and  return  of  six
knights,  if  it  were  agreeable  to  the  constable,  with  their  attendants.  When  this  was  sealed
with  the  great  seal,  and  with  the  king’s  signet,  it  was  given  to  the  herald,  and  twenty  francs
with  it : having  received  the  whole,  he  returned  to  the  duke  of  Lancaster  and  the  constable
at  Orense.

The  herald  gave  the  constable  the  passport,  who  appointed  sir  Maubrun  de  Linieres,  sir
Thomas  Moreaux,  and  sir  John  d’Ambreticourt,  ambassadors  to  the  king  of  Castille.  They
set  off  as  soon  as  possible,  for  there  was  much  want  of  physicians  and  medicines,  as  well  as
of  fresh  meat  for  the  numerous  sick  who  were  scattered  in  different  parts.  These  ambas-
sadors passed  through  Vilalpando,  where  sir  Oliver  du  Guesclin  received  them  handsomely,
and  entertained  them  at  supper.  On  the  morrow,  one  of  the  knights  called  Tintemach,  a
Breton,  was  their  conductor,  to  secure  them  against  the  numerous  parties  of  Bretons  which
were  abroad.  They  arrived  safely  at  Medina  del  Campo,  where  they  found  the  king
impatient  to  know  what  had  brought  them  thither.  When  they  had  refreshed  and  dressed
themselves  at  an  hotel  that  had  been  prepared  for  them,  they  were  conducted  by  some
knights  of  the  household  to  the  presence  of  the  king,  who  apparently  received  them  with
pleasure.  They  presented  him  letters  from  the  constable,  but  from  none  else ; for  the
duke  of  Lancaster  excused  himself,  and  would  not  at  this  time,  nor  on  such  a subject,  write
to  him.

The  knights  and  squires  of  France  were  not  present  at  this  interview,  although  they  were
of  the  king’s  privy  council,  and  nothing  was  done  respecting  the  war  without  their  consent.
The  ambassadors  addressed  the  king,  saying, — “ Sir  king,  we  are  come  hither  on  the  part  of
the  constable  of  the  army  the  duke  of  Lancaster  has  brought  from  England.  But  unfor-
tunately very  great  sicknesses  and  mortality  have  befallen  it : the  constable  therefore  entreats.


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND  FRANCE.  &c.


280


that  you  would  have  the  goodness  to  open  your  country  and  towns  to  such  as  may  desire  to
try  change  of  air  for  the  recovery  of  their  health,  if  it  may  be  recovered,  and  to  enter  your
towns  to  recruit  their  strength  ; and  if  some  should  wish  to  return  to  England  by  land,  lie
begs  you  would  interest  yourself  witli  the  kings  of  France  and  Navarre,  that  they  may,  at
their  own  costs,  freely  pass  through  their  territories,  in  their  way  home.  This  is  the  solo
object  of  our  mission,  and  the  request  we  have  to  make  you.”  The  king  very  graciously
replied, — “ We  will  consider  what  will  be  proper  for  us  to  do,  and  give  you  our  answer.”
The  knights  replied,  they  were  satisfied.


CHAPTER  XCI. THE  ENGLISH  AMBASSADORS  OBTAIN  PASSPORTS  FROM  TIIE  KING  FOR  TnEIR

SICK  TO  PASS  IN  SAFETY  THROUGH  CASTILLE,  OR  TO  REMAIN  THERE,  TO  RECOVER  THEIR

HEALTH. MANY  KNIGHTS  AND  SQUIRES  DIE  IN  CASTILLE. TIIE  DUKE  OF  LANCASTER

DANGEROUSLY  ILL  AT  ST.  JAGO.

The  English  knights,  on  taking  leave  of  the  king,  went  to  their  lodgings,  where  they
remained  until  the  third  day,  when  they  returned  to  the  palace.  The  king  of  Castillo  was
much  rejoiced  at  their  request ; for  lie  saw  there  would  be  an  end  to  the  war  for  a long
time,  when  his  enemies  solicited  leave  to  march  peaceably  through  his  kingdom.  He  was
determined  what  answer  to  make,  though  his  council  had  advised  otherwise ; and,  wishing
to  pay  due  honour  to  the  French  knights,  he  sent  for  sir  Walter  de  Passac  and  sir  William
de  Lignac.  Having  explained  to  them  the  object  of  the  English  knights’  embassy,  and  the
request  of  the  constable,  he  demanded  from  them  how  he  should  act ; and  desired  sir  Walter
to  give  him  his  opinion.  Sir  Walter  was  unwilling  to  speak  before  the  members  of  the
council ; but,  as  the  king  would  have  it  so,  he  said, — “ Sir,  matters  are  come  to  the
conclusion  we  always  foretold,  that  your  enemies  would  be  worn  down  and  destroyed,
without  striking  a blow.  Since  their  sick  so  humbly  ask  assistance  and  comfort  in  your
country,  you  should  grant  their  request ; but  on  condition  that,  if  they  recover,  they  do  not
return  to  the  duke  of  Lancaster  or  to  the  king  of  Portugal,  but  continue  their  road  straight
homeward,  and  that  they  engage  not  to  bear  arms  against  you,  nor  the  realm  of  Castillo,  for
the  term  of  six  years.  We  also  hope  you  may  be  successful  in  obtaining  leave  for  them  to
pass  with  safety  through  Navarre  and  France.”  The  king  was  well  contented  with  this
advice,  for  it  was  what  he  was  inclined  to ; and  he  was  indifferent  what  terms  were
made,  so  that  he  got  rid  of  the  English.  He  replied  to  sir  Walter,  “ You  have  loyally
counselled  me,  and  I thank  you : it  shall  be  done  as  you  propose.”

The  English  knights  were  sent  for,  and  conducted  into  the  presence  chamber,  where  were
the  king  and  his  whole  council.  The  bishop  of  Burgos,  as  chancellor,  and  a great  orator,
thus  addressed  them  : “Ye  knights  of  England,  attached  to  the  duke  of  Lancaster,  who
have  been  sent  hither  by  his  constable,  listen  to  the  answer  the  king  gives  to  your  requests.
Out  of  his  great  pity  and  goodness  he  is  desirous  of  doing  to  his  enemies  all  the  kindness  in
his  power.  On  your  return  to  the  constable,  you  will  tell  him  from  the  king  of  Castille,
that  lie  may  publish,  by  sound  of  trumpet,  throughout  his  army,  that  this  country  is  open
and  ready  to  receive,  sick  or  well,  all  knights,  squires,  and  their  attendants,  who  may  be
desirous  of  coming  hither,  on  condition  that,  at  the  gates  of  whatever  city  or  town  they  may
wish  to  enter,  they  there  lay  aside  their  armour  and  arms,  when  they  will  be  conducted,  by
those  ordered  for  the  purpose,  to  hotels  prepared  for  them.  They  will  then  have  their
names  written  down  and  delivered  to  the  governor,  in  order  that  those  who  may  have
resided  in  any  towns  may  not,  on  any  pretext  whatever,  return  to  Galicia  or  Portugal,  but
quit  the  country  as  soon  as  may  be.  In  addition,  the  king  of  Castille  engages  to  obtain
a safe  passage  for  such  as  may  intend  to  go  to  Calais,  or  any  other  sea-port  they  may  choose,
in  Brittany,  Saintonge,  Normandy,  or  Picardy,  through  the  kingdoms  of  France  and
Navarre.  It  is  the  king’s  command,  that  those  knights  and  squires,  of  whatever  nation
they  be,  who  shall  undertake  this  journey,  do  not  bear  arms  against  the  kingdom  of
Castille,  under  any  pretence,  for  tho  space  of  six  years  : this  they  will  solemnly  swear  to

VOL.  II.  u


290


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


observe  at  the  time  the  passports  are  delivered  to  them.  You  will  carry  with  you  all  these
conditions,  fairly  written,  to  the  constable,  and  to  your  companions,  who  have  sent  you
hither.”

The  knights  thanked  the  king  and  his  council  for  the  answer  they  had  received,  but  added,
“ They  would  not  say  that  all  the  conditions  should  be  accepted  : if  they  were  not,  they
would  send  back  their  herald ; and,  should  he  not  return,  they  might  conclude  the  whole
were  accepted.”  “We  are  satisfied,”  replied  the  council.  The  king  withdrew  to  his
closet;  but  sir  Walter  de  Passac  and  sir  William  de  Lignac  remained  with  the  knights,
and  conducted  them  to  a handsome  apartment  where  a dinner  was  provided  for  them.
They  all  dined  together  : when  dinner  was  over,  they  partook  of  wines  and  spices  in  the
king’s  closet,  and  then  took  their  leave,  as  their  passes  were  ready  for  them.  On  their
return  to  their  hotel,  they  instantly  mounted  their  horses ; for  the  king’s  harbingers  had
supplied  them  with  all  things  at  his  expense,  and,  leaving  Medina,  they  rode  to  Villeclope,
where  they  lay  that  night.  On  the  morrow,  they  dined  at  Vilalpando,  and  lay  at  Noya.
The  next  day  they  came  to  Orense,  where  they  found  the  constable.  During  the  time  they
had  been  on  this  embassy,  the  lord  Fitzwalter,*  one  of  the  greatest  barons  in  the  duke’s  army,
had  died : he  was  a valiant  knight,  and  much  lamented  ; but  none  can  strive  against  death.
His  obsequies  were  very  honourably  performed,  and  the  king  of  Portugal  and  the  duke  of
Lancaster  attended  them.

The  three  knights  waited  on  the  duke,  to  show  him  their  papers,  and  relate  what  they
had  seen  and  heard.  Some  said  the  conditions  were  hard  ; but  others  denied  it,  and  said
they  were  courteous  enough,  considering  the  situation  and  danger  they  were  in.  It  was
known  in  the  army,  that  the  duke  would  discharge  all  who  desired  it,  and  that  they  might
enter  Castille  with  safety.  Those  who  were  ill  or  feeble,  and  wished  to  change  the  air,  took
leave  of  the  duke  and  constable,  and  left  the  army  as  soon  as  they  were  able,  but,  before
their  departure,  many  received  their  whole  pay  in  hard  money,  others  had  sufficient  security
for  it,  so  that  they  were  all  well  contented.  Some  went  to  Vilalpando,  others  to  Ruelles,
to  Noya,  to  Medina  del  Campo,  to  Caleforis,  or  to  St.  Phagon.  They  were  everywhere  well
received,  and  had  lodgings  found  them,  and  had  their  names  written  down  and  given  to  the
different  governors  in  the  manner  I have  mentioned.  The  greater  part  of  the  nobility  went
to  Vilalpando,  because  it  was  garrisoned  by  foreigners,  Bretons,  French,  Normans,  and
Poitevins,  under  the  command  of  sir  Oliver  du  Guesclin.  The  English  had  more  confidence
in  those  I have  named,  and  with  reason,  than  in  the  Castillians.

Thus  was  the  expedition  of  the  duke  of  Lancaster  put  an  end  to,  and  every  one  sought
the  best  he  could  for  himself.  You  may  suppose  this  was  a bitter  disappointment  to  the
duke,  for  he  saw  all  his  ambitious  expectations  annihilated : he  bore,  however,  his  misfor-
tune like  a gallant  prince  as  he  was,  for  he  perceived  he  could  not  any  way  amend  it.
The  king  of  Portugal,  finding  the  business  was  over,  dismissed  his  army,  retaining  only
three  hundred  spears,  and  left  Orense,  with  the  duke  of  Lancaster,  who  returned  with  his
duchess  to  Saint  Jago  de  Compostella.  The  king  remained  there  with  them  four  days : on
the  fifth  he  departed,  with  all  who  had  accompanied  him,  for  Oporto,  whore  his  queen
resided.

I must  now  relate  what  befel  many  of  those  knights  and  squires  who,  on  leaving  the
duke,  had  retired  into  Castille,  and  were  lodged  in  different  towns.  Those  wdio  had  been
afflicted  with  the  disorder,  notwithstanding  they  had  changed  the  air  and  medicines,  could
never  recover,  and  several  died  in  Vilalpando.  Many  barons  and  knights  of  England  died
in  their  beds,  to  the  great  loss  of  their  country,  while  the  king  of  Castille  was  obtaining  for
them  passports  to  travel  through  Navarre  and  France ; but  the  distance,  and  other  obstacles,
delayed  the  accomplishment.  Three  great  and  powerful  barons  died  at  Vilalpando  ; sir
Richard  Burley,  who  had  been  chief  marshal  of  the  army,  the  lord  Poiningsf,  and  sir  Henry
Percy,  cousin-gcrman  to  the  earl  of  Northumberland.  Sir  Maubrun  de  Linieres  died  at

* “Lord  Fitzwalter.”  See  Dugdale,  who  mentions  ensuing  (10th  Richard  II.)  on  a Wednesday  preceding
his  gallantry  in  the  attack  on  the  block-house  before  Brest,  the  feast  of  St.  Michael.  This  does  not  tally  with  the
but  omits  taking  notice  of  his  death  in  Spain.  Indeed,  season  of  tho  year  when  the  heats  are  so  great  in  Spain,
lie  only  says,  that,  — “he  departed  this  life  the  year  T “ Lord  Poinings.”  See  Dugdale.


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


201


Noya:  lie  was  a valiant  and  able  knight  from  Poitou.  Lord  Talbot*,  a great  baron  in
Wales,  died  at  Ruelles : and  of  this  pestilence  there  died,  in  different  places,  twelve  potent
barons,  full  eighty  knights,  and  two  hundred  squires,  all  gentlemen.  Consider  what  an
unfortunate  loss  this  was,  and  to  be  sustained  without  having  a battle  or  striking  a blow.
Of  archers  and  other  men,  upwards  of  five  hundred  died ; and  I was  told  by  an  English
knight  with  whom  I conversed,  on  his  return  through  France,  whose  name  was  sir  Thomas
Queensbury,  that  of  fifteen  hundred  men  at  arms  and  about  four  thousand  archers  whom
the  duke  of  Lancaster  had  brought  with  him  from  England,  not  one-half  ever  returned
home.

The  duke  of  Lancaster  fell  dangerously  sick,  and  became  very  low-spirited,  at  Saint  Jago.
He  was  so  ill,  that  it  was  frequently  reported  through  Castillo  and  France  that  lie  was  dead  :
indeed,  he  very  narrowly  escaped.  Thierry  de  Soumain,  who  was  of  great  valour,  and
squire  of  the  hody  to  the  duke,  was  attacked  by  this  disorder,  and  died  at  Betancos.  lie
was  born  in  Hainault,  and  his  death  was  much  bewailed.  His  brother  William  continually
attended  him  during  his  illness,  by  which  he  ran  great  risk  of  his  life.  You  must  know,
that  there  were  none  so  bold,  so  rich  or  so  fair,  but  were  afraid,  and  were  daily  expecting
death.  The  disorder  solely  attacked  the  duke’s  army,  for  the  French  were  no  way  affected.

This  caused  great  murmurings  among  them  and  the  Castillians  : they  said, — “ The  king
allows  these  English  to  recruit  themselves  in  his  towns,  which  may  cost  us  dear  by  their
bringing  the  disorder  among  us.”  But  others  replied, — •“  They  are  Christians  like  ourselves,
and  we  ought  to  have  compassion  on  each  other.”  True  it  is,  that  at  this  period  a French
knight  died  in  Castille,  who  was  greatly  lamented : for  he  was  courteous,  gallant,  and  bold
in  arms : his  name  was  sir  John  de  Roye,  and  he  was  brother-german  to  sir  Tristan,  sir
Reginald,  and  sir  Lancelot  de  Roye.  I will  relate  the  cause  of  his  death.  While  in  garrison
in  a town  of  Castille,  called  Segbonne,  lie  had  an  imposthume  in  his  body.  Being  young  and
lusty,  he  paid  no  attention  to  it,  and  one  day  mounting  his  courser,  in  galloping  him  over  the
plains,  this  imposthume  broke.  On  his  return,  he  was  laid  on  the  bed,  and  all  seemed
well,  but  on  the  fourth  day  he  died.  There  were  very  great  lamentations  made  after  him
by  all  his  friends : he  was  deserving  of  them  for  his  amiable  character  and  gallantry  in  arms.


CHAPTER  XCII. SIR  JOHN  HOLLAND  TAKES  LEAVE  OP  THE  DTJKE  OF  LANCASTER,  AND

RETURNS  WITH  IHS  LADY,  THROUGH  CASTILLE,  NAVARRE,  AND  BAYONNE,  TO  BOR-
DEAUX.  SIR  JOHN  d’aJIBRETICOURT  GOES  TO  PARIS,  TO  ACCOMPLISH  A DEED  OF

ARMS  WITH  THE  LORD  BOUCICAUT.

Notwithstanding  this  disorder  was  so  very  infectious  that  the  greater  part  of  the
English  fled  from  it,  sir  John  Holland  and  several  knights  and  squires  remained  with  the
duke.  The  knights,  seeing  there  was  an  end  to  the  war,  were  impatient  to  change  the  air,
and  said  to  the  constable, — “ Sir,  permit  us  to  set  out  on  our  return  to  Bayonne  or  Bordeaux,
to  escape  the  effect  of  this  pestilence,  for  our  lord  of  Lancaster  desires  it.  When  he  shall
wish  to  have  our  services,  he  can  easily  so  do  by  'writing  his  commands  ; and  we  shall  serve
him  more  effectually  when  we  have  recovered  our  health,  than  in  the  state  of  languor  we
now  fatally  experience.”  They  repeated  this  so  often,  that  sir  John  Holland  told  the  duke
of  their  discontents.  The  duke  answered, — “ Sir  John,  I am  willing  that  you  and  such
knights  as  choose,  set  out  on  your  return  home,  and  that  you  take  all  our  people  with  you.
Recommend  me  to  my  lord  the  king,  and  salute  from  me  my  brothers,  and  such  and  such
persons,  whom  he  named.”  “ I will  cheerfully  do  so,”  replied  the  constable ; “ but  my  lord,
are  you  aware,  that  though  the  council  of  Castille  has  handsomely  allowed  our  sick  to  enter
any  towns  they  may  please  for  the  recovery  of  their  health,  they  must  not,  when  well,
return  to  you  in  Galicia,  nor  in  Portugal  ? And  if  we  pass  through  France,  in  our  road  to
Calais,  the  French  knights  of  the  council  of  Castille  have  conditioned  that  we  do  not  arm
against  France  for  the  space  of  six  years,  unless  the  king  of  England  command  in  person.”

* This  must  be  a mistake,  for  lord  Talbot  did  not  die  until  tbe  20th  Richard  IT. — Dugdale.


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


2i)2

“ Sir  Jolm,”  said  the  duke,  “ you  must  know  that  the  French,  whenever  they  have  an
opportunity,  will  take  every  advantage  over  us.  But  I will  tell  you  how  you  shall  act.
You  will  pass  through  Castille  in  a courteous  manner,  and,  when  you  shall  he  on  the
frontiers  of  Navarre,  send  to  the  king  : he  is  our  cousin  : formerly  we  were  strongly  united,
and  the  connexion  is  not  broken ; for,  ever  since  we  bore  arms  for  him  in  his  war  against
our  adversary  of  Castille,  we  have  constantly  kept  up  a mutual  correspondence,  like  cousins
and  friends.  We  have  never  had  any  quarrel,  nor  have  we,  like  the  French,  made  war  upon
him.  For  these  reasons,  he  will  readily  grant  permission  for  you  and  your  men  to  pass
through  his  country.  On  your  arrival  at  St.  Jean  du  Pied  des  Ports,  take  the  road  through
Biscay  to  Bayonne  : that  is  our  inheritance : and  thence  you  may  go  to  Bordeaux  without
any  danger  from  the  French,  to  refresh  yourselves.  When  recovered,  you  may  there
embark,  traverse  the  deep,  and  land  in  Cornwall  or  Southampton,  as  the  wind  may  be
favourable.”  Sir  John  replied,  he  would  punctually  follow  the  plan  he  had  laid  down,  and
began  to  make  his  preparations  accordingly.  It  was  not  long  after  this  that  the  constable,  with
all  the  men  at  arms  and  others,  took  their  departure  ; and  the  duke  and  duchess  remained
at  Saint  Jago,  attended  by  their  household  only.  Sir  John  Holland  carried  his  lady  with
him,  and  arrived  at  the  city  of  Zamora,  which  is  large  and  handsome,  where  he  met  the
king  of  Castille,  sir  Walter  de  Passac  and  sir  William  de  Lignac.  They  politely  received
him  and  his  company,  as  lords  do  when  they  meet.  In  truth,  the  king  was  more  rejoiced  at
the  departure  of  the  English  than  at  their  arrival ; for  it  seemed  clear  to  him  that  the  wTar
was  completely  at  an  end,  and  that  the  duke  of  Lancaster  would  never  be  able  to  bring  again
so  large  a force  to  Castille  from  England,  for  he  was  well  informed  how  much  that  country
was  disunited  within  itself.

When  the  English,  who  had  retired  to  the  towns  in  Castille  for  the  recovery  of  their
healths,  heard  that  sir  John  Holland  was  on  his  march  with  the  remnant  of  the  army
homeward,  they  were  greatly  rejoiced,  and  made  instant  preparations  to  join  him.  Among
the  number  were,  the  lord  de  Chameaux  sir  Thomas  Percy,  the  lord  de  Leluytont,  and
the  lord  Bradestan,  with  many  more,  to  the  amount  of  a thousand  horse.  Those  that  were
sick  looked  on  themselves  as  half  recovered  the  moment  their  hopes  were  raised  of  returning
to  England,  so  much  had  they  of  late  suffered.

When  sir  John  Holland  took  leave  of  the  king  of  Castille,  he  showed  to  him  and  his  barons
much  affection,  and  gallantly  presented  them  with  handsome  mules ; he  likewise  ordered
all  the  expenses  of  their  journey  to  be  defrayed.  On  their  departure,  they  took  the  road  to
St.  Phagon,  where  they  rested  three  days  : they  were  well  received  in  all  places  they  passed ;
for  they  were  accompanied  by  some  knights  of  the  king’s  household,  who  paid  for  whatever
they  wanted  or  wished.  They  continued  their  route  until  they  were  out  of  Castille,  and
arrived  at  Najarra,  where  the  famous  battle  had  been  fought,  then  they  proceeded  to
Panders  J and  Logrogno,  where  they  halted  : for  they  were  uncertain  if  the  king  of  Navarre
would  allow  them  to  pass  through  his  kingdom.

They  deputed  to  him  two  knights,  whose  names  were  sir  Peter  Bisset  and  sir  William
Norwich,  who  found  the  king  at  Tudela.  They  had  an  interview  with  him,  and  managed
so  well,  they  obtained  permission  to  pass,  on  paying  for  whatever  they  should  want.  When
the  knights  returned,  they  left  Logrogno  for  Pampeluna,  and  passed  the  Pyrenees  at
Roncesvalles : they  then  quitted  the  road  for  Bearn,  and  took  that  through  Biscay,  for
Bayonne,  where  they  arrived.  Sir  John  Holland  and  h-is  countess  remained  there  a
considerable  time,  but  several  of  his  countrymen  continued  their  route  to  Bordeaux.  Thus
ended  this  expedition  of  the  duke  of  Lancaster.

It  happened,  during  the  most  active  part  of  the  campaign  in  Castille,  when  knights  and
squii’es  were  eager  after  adventures  and  deeds  of  arms,  that  the  lord  Boucicaut  had  taken
the  field,  and  had  sent  a herald  to  demand  from  sir  John  d’Ambreticourt  three  courses  with
spears  on  horseback.  Sir  John  had  agreed  to  meet  him,  with  the  addition  of  three  courses
with  daggers,  and  the  same  with  battle-axes,  all  on  horseback.  Sir  John,  having  so  readily
assented,  sought  for  him  everywhere  ; but  I know  not  for  what  reason  he  had  not  advanced

* “ Lord  de  Chameaux.”  Q.  Chymwell.  f “ Lord  de  Leluyton.”  Q.  Some  copies  read  Helmson.

J “ Pamiers.  ” Q.


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


203


to  that  part  of  the  country.  I do  not,  however,  say,  nor  mean  to  say,  that  the  lord  Boucicaut
was  not  equal  to  such  a challenge,  nor  even  to  one  of  more  hardy  adventure.  When  sir  John
d’Ambreticourt  was  at  Bayonne,  with  sir  John  Holland,  he  thought  much  on  this  challenge,
which,  having  accepted,  he  considered  himself  bound  to  accomplish ; and  that  he  could  not
honourably  leave  France  without  doing  so,  lest  the  French  might  say  he  had  returned  to
England  dishonourably.  He  consulted  his  companions,  but  especially  sir  John  Holland,
how  to  act.  He  was  advised  to  pass  through  France,  as  he  had  a good  passport,  which  the
duke  of  Bourbon  had  obtained  for  him,  and  go  to  Paris  in  search  of  the  lord  Boucicaut : he
might  hear  of  him  on  his  road,  or  at  Paris,  and  the  matter  would  he  settled  to  his  honour.
This  advice  being  agreeable  to  him,  he  departed,  and  took  the  road  through  the  country  of
the  Basques,  and  came  to  Orthes  in  Bearn,  where  he  found  the  count  de  Foix.  The  count
received  him  handsomely,  detained  him  some  short  time,  and,  on  his  going  away,  presented
him  with  two  hundred  florins  and  a very  fine  horse.  Sir  John  d’Ambreticourt  continued  his
road  through  Bearn,  Bigorre,  the  Toulousain,  and  Carcassonnois.  He  was  accompanied  by
William  de  Soumain  and  other  squires  from  Hainault,  who  were  returning  to  their  own
country.  On  their  arrival  at  Paris,  he  learnt  that  the  king  was  at  that  moment  in  Normandy,
and  the  lord  Boucicaut,  as  they  said,  in  Arragon.  Sir  John,  to  acquit  himself  honourably,
waited  on  the  principal  barons  of  France  that  were  then  at  Paris,  and  having  staid  there
eight  days  to  amuse  himself,  he  continued  his  journey  to  Calais,  and  those  from  Hainault
went  home.  Thus  were  the  different  captains  of  the  army  of  Castille  separated.


CHAPTER  XCIII. THE  DUKE  OF  BOURBON,  ON  LEAVING  AVIGNON,  CONTINUES  HIS  MARCH

TO  BURGOS,  WHERE  IIE  MEETS  THE  KING  OF  CASTILLE. THE  DUKE  OF  LANCASTER,

BEING  INFORMED  OF  THIS,  ADDRESSES  HIMSELF  TO  THE  KING  OF  PORTUGAL.— THE
DUKE  OF  BOURBON  AFTER  A SHORT  STAY  TAKES  LEAVE  OF  THE  KING  OF  CASTILLE,
AND  RETURNS  TO  FRANCE.

The  duke  of  Bourbon,  who  had  been  nominated  commander  in  chief  of  the  French  in
Castille,  was  duly  informed  of  everything  that  was  passing ; but,  had  he  imagined  the  king
of  Castille  had  been  so  much  pressed,  he  would  have  hastened  his  march  : for  he  had  taken
a long  time  on  his  journey,  and,  beside,  had  followed  a round-about  road.  He  went  first,  to
Avignon,  to  visit  the  person  who  styled  himself  pope  Clement,  where  he  staid  some  time,
then  to  Montpelier,  where  he  halted  five  days,  and  as  many  at  Bezieres  and  Carcassonne  :
from  thence  he  went  to  Narbonne  and  Perpignan,  and  entered  Arragon ; for  he  was
desirous  of  seeing  the  young  king  of  Arragon  and  his  cousin,  the  lady  Jolante  de  Bar.  The
duke  continued  his  journey  to  Barcelona,  where  he  met  the  king  and  queen  of  Arragon,  with
a numerous  body  of  earls  and  barons  of  the  country,  who  had  come  thither  to  receive  and
feast  him.  When  he  had  been  thus  entertained  for  the  space  of  six  days,  he  departed,  and
went  to  Valenoia.  It  was  there  he  first  heard  that  the  English  army  had  retreated,  and
that  sir  John  Holland  had  led  the  greater  part  into  Navarre  ; that  there  had  been  a great
mortality  among  the  English  ; and  that  his  cousin,  the  duke  of  Lancaster,  lay  dangerously
ill  at  Saint  Jago  : the  report  was,  that  he  was  actually  dead.  Notwithstanding  this
intelligence,  which  rendered  his  march  useless,  he  continued  advancing,  and  informed  the
king  of  Castille  of  his  arrival,  who  was  much  rejoiced  thereat,  and  appointed  the  city  of
Burgos  for  their  place  of  meeting.  The  king  ordered  all  things  to  he  properly  prepared  in
that  city  for  his  reception,  and  went  thither  ; for  many  of  the  French,  who  were  with  him,
were  anxious  to  see  the  duke  of  Bourbon.  The  duke,  having  passed  Y alencia  and  Saragossa,
entered  Castille  and  came  to  Burgos.  He  was  most  kindly  received  by  the  king,  barons
and  prelates  of  the  realm.  Sir  Oliver  du  Guesclin,  constable  of  Castillo,  sir  William  de
Lignac,  sir  Walter  de  Passac,  sir  John  des  Barres,  sir  John  and  sir  Reginald  de  Roye,  and
several  knights  of  France,  were  present,  who  had  left  their  garrisons  to  meet  the  duke  of
Bourbon.  They  had  no  longer  any  fears  of  the  English  or  Portuguese,  for  they  had  all
retreated,  and  the  English  had  already  given  up  those  towns  they  had  conquered  in  Galicia ;


294  CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.

for  they  knew  that,  as  their  army  had  left  the  country,  they  could  not  withstand  the
power  of  France.

The  news  was  carried  to  Galicia  that  the  duke  of  Bourbon  was  arrived  in  Castille,  with
a large  body  of  men  at  arms  from  France  ; and,  as  it  was  spoken  of,  this  force  was  multiplied
to  more  than  double  its  number.  The  country,  at  first,  was  alarmed  lest  the  duke  of
Bourbon  should  march  thither  to  reconquer  such  towns  as  had  surrendered ; and  though  the
duke  of  Lancaster  was  with  them,  and  comforted  them  as  much  as  he  could,  they  could  not
get  rid  of  their  fears.  When  the  duke  of  Lancaster  heard  his  cousin,  the  duke  of  Bourbon,
was  with  the  king  of  Castille  at  Burgos,  he  instantly  sent  to  the  king  of  Portugal,  to  entreat
he  would  not  disband  his  army  ; for  he  knew  not  what  the  French  might  intend,  now  the
country  was  in  so  defenceless  a state.  The  king  of  Portugal,  having  dismissed  his  army,  was
desirous  to  oblige  the  duke,  from  the  connexion  between  them,  and  left  Lisbon  for  Coimbra,
whence  he  issued  a summons,  for  all  men  at  arms  instantly  to  prepare  themselves  and  march
to  Oporto,  to  the  assistance  of  the  duke  of  Lancaster,  whose  illness  would  not  suffer  him  to
take  the  field  in  person,  although  he  was  daily  recovering  his  health.

The  duke  of  Bourbon  remained  with  the  king  of  Castille  at  Burgos,  where  he  received  the
greatest  honours  from  the  king,  the  barons  and  lords  of  the  realm.  Many  councils  were
held,  as  to  what  they  should  now  do  : whether  to  enter  Galicia  or  return  to  France.  The
king  and  his  ministers  saw  very  clearly  which  was  most  to  their  advantage,  and  said,  when
together, — “ Our  country  is  ruined  and  wasted  by  the  French ; and  although  they  have
defended  it  against  the  English,  we  have  paid  dear  enough.  It  will  be  but  just  we  thank
the  duke  of  Bourbon  for  the  trouble  he  has  had  in  coming  hither,  and  entreat  him,  through
affection  to  ns,  to  withdraw  his  men,  for  there  was  not  now  any  appearance  of  war  to  detain
them  ; that  as  for  Galicia,  they  could  invade  and  conquer  that  province  themselves,  whenever
they  pleased,  as  it  was  a trifling  matter.”  The  king’s  ministers  added  : “ If  we  keep  these
men,  they  will  expect  pay,  and,  if  that  be  not  given  to  them,  they  will  rob  and  plunder  the
country.  There  are,  already,  many  discontents  on  this  subject ; and  it  behoves  us  to  dismiss
them  in  a handsome  manner."  This  measure  was  adopted ; for  the  king  knew  well  that  his
kingdom  could  not  be  hurt,  without  his  suffering  from  it.  The  archbishop  of  Burgos
therefore,  in  the  presence  of  the  king  and  many  knights  from  France,  proposed  the  matter  to
the  duke  of  Bourbon.  The  duke,  as  well  as  his  knights,  instantly  agreed  to  it ; for  they
most  certainly  preferred  returning  to  France,  which  is  a different  country  in  all  respects  from
Castille,  and  gave  their  orders  accordingly.  The  duke  of  Bourbon,  though  he  came  the
last,  was  the  first  to  return,  and  declared  his  intentions  were,  to  pass  through  Navarre,  that
his  people  might  make  preparations  for  so  doing.  On  taking  his  leave  of  the  king,  very
rich  presents  were  made  him  : he  might  have  had  more,  had  he  chosen  it,  but  he  refused
several  that  were  pressed  on  him,  and  accepted  only  mules,  horses,  and  dogs  called  Allans*
in  Castille.

Proclamation  was  made  for  all  persons  to  leave  Castille  and  return  to  France,  according
to  the  orders  which  had  been  given  by  the  commander  in  chief ; but  sir  Oliver  du  Guesclin
and  the  marshal,  with  about  three  hundred  lances,  Bretons,  Poitevins  and  Saintongers,  were
to  remain  behind.  The  duke  of  Bourbon,  having  taken  leave  of  the  king,  queen,  and
barons,  was  escorted  as  far  as  Logrogno,  when  he  entered  Navarre.  Wherever  he  passed,
he  was  most  honourably  received,  for  the  duke  wTas  courteous,  gallant  and  much  renowned.
The  king  of  Navarre  entertained  him  very  kindly,  and  showed  not  any  appearance  of  the
hatred  he  bore  to  the  king  of  France  for  having  seized  his  inheritance  of  the  county
d’Evreux  in  Normandy.  He  knew  that  the  present  king,  who  was  so  nearly  related  to
the  duke  of  Bourbon,  was  no  wTay  to  blame,  for  at  the  time  he  was  an  infant.  He
mentioned  his  complaints  in  an  amicable  manner  to  the  duke,  and  entreated  him  to  mediate
between  him  and  his  cousin  of  France,  for  which  he  should  hold  himself  much  obliged.
The  duke  promised  to  use  his  endeavours  ; and  on  this  they  parted,  and  the.  duke  continued
his  journey  with  his  men  at  arms  peaceably  through  Navarre,  and,  having  crossed  the  moun-
tains at  Roncesvalles  and  traversed  the  country  of  Basques,  entered  Bearn  at  Sauveterre.

*“  Allan, — a kind  of  big,  strong,  thick-headed  and  “Allan  de  boucherie,  like  a mastiff, — Allan  gentil,
short-snouted  dog;  the  breed  whereof  came  first  out  of  somewhat  like  a greyhound, — Allan  sautre,  a cur  to  bait
Albania,  old  Epirus.”  wolves,”  &c. — Coigrave’s  Dictionary.


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


205


CHAPTER  XCIV. THE  COUNT  DE  FOIX  RECEIVES  THE  DUKE  OF  BOURBON  MOST  MAGNIFI-
CENTLY, AND  MAKES  HIM  nANDSOME  PRESENTS. THE  MEN  AT  ARMS  WHO  WERE

UNDER  SIR  WALTER  DE  PASSAC  AND  SIR  WILLIAM  DE  LIGNAC  SACK  THE  TOWN  OF

ST.  PIIAGON,  ON  TnEIR  DEPARTURE  FROM  CAST1LLE. THE  KING  IS  VERY  WROTH  FOR

THIS  AGAINST  THE  TWO  CAPTAINS  WHO  HAD  REMAINED  WITH  HIM.

Count  Gaston  de  Foix  was  well  pleased,  on  hearing  the  duke  of  Bourbon  was  at  Sauveterrc.
IIo  summoned  to  Orthes,  where  ho  resided,  a gallant  company  of  chivalry,  and  set  out  with
a grand  array  of  five  hundred  knights  and  squires  excellently  mounted.  They  had  advanced
two  leagues  before  they  met  the  duke,  who  was  likewise  attended  by  a large  company  of
knights  and  squires.  On  their  meeting,  they  embraced  and  showed  every  token  of  friendship,
such  as  well-educated  princes  know  how  to  do.  After  they  had  conversed  together  a short
space,  as  I was  informed  when  at  Orthes,  the  count  de  Foix  withdrew  with  his  company  into
the  plain,  but  the  duke  remained  where  they  had  met.  Then  three  knights,  sir  Espaign  de
Lyon,  sir  Peter  Cam  pestan  and  sir  Menault  de  Nouailles,  advanced  to  the  duke  and  said, — “My
lord,  we  come  to  offer  you  a present  from  the  count  de  Foix  on  your  return  from  Castille,  as
he  knows  you  have  been  at  a heavy  expense.  He  first  welcomes  you  to  his  country  of  Bearn,
and  presents  you  with  eight  thousand  florins,  this  mule,  two  coursers  and  two  palfreys.”
“ My  fair  sirs,”  replied  the  duke,  “ I am  very  much  obliged  to  the  count  de  Foix.  With
regard  to  the  florins,  we  cannot  receive  them  ; but  as  for  the  rest  we  accept  them  with  great
pleasure.”  The  florins  were  therefore  returned,  and  the  horses  and  mule  kept.  Shortly
afterward,  the  count  placed  himself  beside  the  duke,  and  conducted  him,  under  his  pennon,
to  Orthes,  when  he  was  lodged  in  the  castle,  and  his  attendants  in  the  town.

The  duke  of  Bourbon  remained  for  three  days  at  Orthes,  magnificently  entertained  with
dinners  and  suppers.  The  count  de  Foix  showed  him  good  part  of  his  state,  which  would
recommend  him  to  such  a person  as  the  duke  of  Bourbon.  On  the  fourth  day  he  took  his
leave  and  departed.  The  count  made  many  presents  to  the  knights  and  squires  attached  to
the  duke,  and  to  such  an  extent  that  I was  told  this  visit  of  the  duke  of  Bourbon  cost  him
ten  thousand  francs.  The  duke  took  his  road  to  France  by  Montpelier,  the  city  of  Puy,
and  county  of  Forets,  of  which  he  was  lord  in  right  of  his  duchess.  Though  the  duke  of
Bourbon  had  thus  left  Castille,  the  men  at  arms  under  sir  William  de  Lignac  and  sir
Walter  de  Passac  were  not  impatient  to  do  so.  They  were  upwards  of  three  thousand
spears  and  six  thousand  others,  avIio  in  small  parties  were  daily  quitting  the  country.
Many  of  them,  having  expended  their  pay,  and  being  weary  of  the  war,  set  out  on  their
return  ill  mounted  and  in  rags,  so  that  the  meeting  them  was  unfortunate,  for  they  dismounted
such  as  were  on  horseback,  and  made  war  on  all  passengers  and  on  whoever  had  remained
in  the  open  country,  whether  churchmen  or  not,  and  plundered  them,  under  the  pretext
that  the  king  of  Castille  had  not  given  them  their  pay,  and  that  they  had  been  ruined  by
the  war.  They  said  they  would  pay  themselves,  and  all  towns  not  well  inclosed  were  under
great  alarms.  Every  place  shut  its  gates  against  them,  for  whatever  they  could  find  was
seized  on  unless  well  fought  for.  Such  knights  and  squires  as  returned  through  Foix,  and
waited  on  the  count,  were  well  received  by  him,  and  received  magnificent  presents.  I was
told  that  this  expedition,  including  the  going  to  Castille  and  return,  cost  the  count  de
Foix,  by  his  liberalities,  upwards  of  forty  thousand  francs.

After  the  departure  of  the  duke  of  Bourbon,  an  accident  befel  the  town  of  St.  Phagon,
that  I am  about  to  relate,  which  caused  the  deaths  of  five  hundred  men.  You  must  know,
that  when  sir  William  de  Lignac  and  sir  Walter  de  Passac  first  came  into  Castille,  their
force,  which  was  very  considerable,  quartered  themselves  over  the  country  near  St.  Phagon,
which  is  rich,  and  abundant  in  all  sorts  of  provision.  Among  these  men  at  arms  were  many
Bretons,  Poitevins,'  Saintongers,  who,  riding  first  to  St.  Phagon,  entered  the  town  in  parties
of  six,  ten,  fifteen  and  twenty,  so  that  at  last  they  amounted  to  more  than  five  hundred,
including  servants.  As  they  entered,  they  lodged  themselves,  and  began  to  pillage  and  pack
up  every  valuable  they  could  find.  The  inhabitants,  noticing  their  conduct,  secretly  closed
their  gates,  that  no  more  should  enter ; and,  when  these  strangers  thought  to  repose  them-


29G


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  & e.


selves,  tlic  townsmen  cried  “ To  arms  !”  and  entering  the  chambers  where  they  lay,  slew
them  without  pity  or  mercy  : happy  were  they  who  could  escape,  for  they  murdered  upwards
of  five  hundred.  News  of  this  was  brought,  in  the  morning,  to  the  French  lords  quartered
near  the  town,  and  they  held  a council  to  consider  how  they  should  act.  They  thought  it
improper  at  the  moment  to  retaliate  on  them  for  this  conduct,  for  if  they  should  begin  by
burning  towns  and  villages,  the  whole  country  would  rise  against  them,  to  •the  great  joy  of
their  enemies  ; but  they  determined  that,  when  the  expedition  should  be  ended,  and  they  on
their  return,  they  would  then  talk  to  them,  and  make  them  pay  severely.

When  this  army  was  on  its  return  to  France,  which  included  all  except  those  who  remained
with  sir  Oliver  du  Guesclin,  they  said  among  themselves,  “ Our  arrival  at  St.  Phagon  cost
us  dear,  but  they  shall  fully  repay  us  on  our  return.”  They  were  all  of  this  mind,  and,
having  assembled  about  one  thousand,  they  entered  the  town,  as  there  was  neither  guard  nor
watch  ; for  the  townsmen  had  forgotten  what  had  passed,  and  hoped  the  French  had  done  so
likewise,  and  that  no  more  quarrels  would  happen  between  them.  It  was  not  so,  to  their
great  loss;  for,  when  they  thought  themselves  secure,  the  cry  of  “To  arms!”  resounded
from  more  than  one  hundred  places,  accompanied  with  voices  shouting,  “ Let  us  kill  and
destroy  all  the  scoundrels  of  this  town,  and  plunder  what  they  may  have,  in  revenge  for
their  murders  of  our  countrymen.”  The  Bretons  instantly  began  to  put  these  threats  into
execution,  and  to  enter  every  house  where  they  expected  pillage,  killing  the  inhabitants,
breaking  open  desks  and  trunks,  and  doing  every  mischief  in  their  power.  There  were,  this
day,  more  than  four  hundred  slaughtered,  the  town  robbed  and  half  burned,  which  was  a
great  pity.  Such  was  the  revenge  the  companions  took  on  St.  Phagon,  and  then  marched
away.

Intelligence  was  sent  to  the  king  of  Castille  that  the  men  at  arms,  who  had  been  under  sir
William  do  Lignac  and  sir  Walter  de  Passac,  had,  on  their  return,  pillaged  the  good  town  of
St.  Phagon,  murdered  upwards  of  four  hundred  of  its  inhabitants,  and  set  the  town  on  fire.
They  added,  that  if  the  English  had  taken  it  even  by  storm,  they  would  not  have  treated  it
so  cruelly.  At  the  time  this  was  told  the  king,  the  two  above-named  knights  were  with
him,  and  were  severely  reprimanded  by  him  and  his  council.  They  excused  themselves,
saying, — “ That  as  God  may  help  them,  they  were  ignorant  of  the  intentions  of  their  men  :
they  had,  indeed,  heard  they  were  much  displeased  with  the  inhabitants  of  St.  Phagon,  who,
on  their  coming  to  Castille,  had  murdered  many  of  their  companions,  for  which  revenge  had
lurked  in  their  hearts  ; but  that,  in  truth,  they  thought  it  had  been  forgotten.”  The  king  of
Castille  was  forced  to  pass  it  over,  as  it  might  have  cost  him  more  had  he  thought  of
punishing  it ; but  he  was  very  ill  pleased  with  these  two  commanders,  which  he  showed,
when  they  took  leave  of  him  to  return  to  France.  Had  he  been  contented  with  them,  it
may  be  supposed  they  would  have  had  more  magnificent  presents.  The  duke  of  Bourbon,
his  knights  and  squires,  having  quitted  the  king  to  his  satisfaction,  and  left  the  country  first,
had  carried  off  the  flower  of  the  presents.

The  French  marched  out  of  Castille  in  various  directions,  some  through  Biscay,  others
through  Arragon.  Many  knights  and  squires,  who  had  lived  on  their  pay,  disdaining  to
plunder,  returned  poor  and  sorrily  mounted ; while  others,  who  had  seized  on  whatever  they
could  meet  with,  were  well  furnished  with  gold  and  silver,  and  heavy  trunks.  Thus  it
happens,  in  these  adventures,  some  gain  and  others  lose.  The  king  of  Castillo  was  very
much  rejoiced  when  he  found  himself  and  kingdom  freed  from  such  men.


CHAPTER  XCV. THE  DUKE  OF  LANCASTER  LEAVES  SAINT  JAGO,  FOR  COIMBRA,  AND

THENCE  GOES  TO  BAYONNE.

W e will  return  to  the  duke  of  Lancaster,  whom  we  left  ill  in  bed  at  Saint  J ago,  where  he
resided  with  his  duchess  and  daughter  Catherine.  You  may  suppose,  the  duke  felt  many
mortifications,  from  the  complete  failure  of  his  hopes  of  the  crown  of  Castille,  and  the  great
loss  of  his  chivalry,  whom  he  daily  and  nightly  lamented,  and  whom  he  had  brought  with
such  difficulty  from  England.  He  had  now  no  expectation  of  making  a treaty  of  peace  that


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


297


should  allow  the  duchess  any  right  to  the  crown,  or  yield  up,  by  way  of  composition,  to
her  any  part  of  the  kingdom  ; for  he  had  heard  from  pilgrims,  to  Saint  Jago,  from  Brabant,
Hainault  and  other  countries,  who  had  passed  through  the  French  army  in  Castille,  that

the  Castillians  and  French  made  their  jokes  on  him,  saying  to  the  pilgrims, “ Ye  are

going  to  Saint  Jago,  are  ye  ? Ye  will  find  there  the  duke  of  Lancaster,  who,  for  fear  of
the  sun,  keeps  his  chamber.  Give  our  compliments  to  him,  and  ask  him,  on  his  faith,  if  we
French  know  how  to  make  war,  and  if  we  have  not  fought  him  fairly,  and  if  he  be  contented
with  us.  The  English  used  to  say,  that  we  knew  better  how  to  dance  and  sing  than  to
fight ; but  the  tables  are  now  turned  : it  is  they  who  repose  and  sing,  and  we  keep  the  field
and  guard  our  frontiers,  so  that  we  have  not  lost  anything.”

The  duke  of  Lancaster,  like  a wise  man,  bore  all  this  patiently,  for  he  could  not  do  other-
wise ; and,  when  he  was  able  to  ride,  he  departed  from  Saint  Jago  with  his  duchess  and
family.  The  king  of  Portugal  had  sent  his  constable,  the  count  de  Novaire,  and  sir  John
Fernando  Portclet,  witli  five  hundred  lances,  to  escort  him.  Among  these  knights  were  the
Ponnasse  d’Acunha,  Egeas  Colle,  Vasco  Martin  de  Merlo,  Galopes  Fernando,  sir  Alvarez
Perez,  John  Radighos  de  Sar,  Gaynes  de  Falnes,  all  barons.  With  this  escort,  the  duke
and  his  family  left  Compostella,  and  continued  their  march  to  Oporto,  where  the  king  and
queen  of  Portugal  were  waiting  for  them,  and  entertained  them  handsomely.  Soon  after  the
arrival  of  the  duke,  the  king  and  queen  left  Oporto,  and  went  to  Coimbra,  which  is  but  one
day’s  journey  distant.  The  duke  of  Lancaster  remained  there  for  two  months  and  attended
to  his  affairs,  and  to  the  making  of  preparations  for  his  departure.  By  the  king’s  orders,  the
high  admiral  of  Portugal,  don  Alphonso  Brecart,  had  equipped  some  galleys  for  his  reception ;
on  board  of  which,  when  the  weather  and  wind  were  favourable,  they  embarked,  and,
weighing  anchor,  took  to  the  deep,  and  in  one  day  and  a half  were  at  Bayonne,  which  is
upwards  of  seventy-two  leagues.  On  their  arrival,  they  were  disappointed  in  not  meeting-
sir  John  Holland  and  the  other  English ; but  they  had  left  it  for  Bordeaux,  where  they
had  embarked,  and  had  landed  in  England.


Bayonne,  as  it  appeared  in  the  seventeenth  century.  Prom  an  old  French  print.


long  residence  at  Bayonne,  and  enforced  the  payments  of
a t ears,  and  other  dues  from  the  duchy  of  Aquitaine,  and  such  parts  as  were  under  the
ju  tcnce  o mg  L chard  ; for  he  had  a commission  to  impose  and  receive  all  taxes  to  his

1 v US°,’l  T i'°  Sry  Cd  llimself  duke  and  governor  of  Aquitaine.  We  will  now  leave  the
ke  and  thc  English,  until  it  shall  be  proper  to  return  to  them,  and  speak  of  other  matters.


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


:o8


CHAPTER  XCVX. THE  COUNT  D’ARMAGNAC  TAKES  GREAT  PAINS  TO  PREVAIL  ON  THE  FREE

COMPANIES  TO  GIVE  UP  THEIR  FORTS  FOR  A SUM  OF  MONEY. THE  COUNT  DE  FOIX,

UNDERHAND,  PREVENTS  HIS  SUCCESS.

The  count  d’Armagnac,  at  this  period,  resided  in  Auvergne,  and  was  negotiating  with
such  free  companions  as  held  forts  in  Auvergne,  Quercy  and  Limousin.  The  count  took
great  pains,  from  his  attachment  to  France,  to  make  the  leaders  of  these  garrisons,  who  did
great  mischief  to  the  country,  surrender  them  up,  and  depart  to  other  places.  All  the
captains,  except  Geoffry  Tete-noire,  who  held  Yentadour,  seemed  willing  to  accept  his  terms,
and  receive,  in  one  sum,  two  hundred  and  fifty  thousand  francs.  On  payment  of  this  sum,
they  were  all  to  quit  the  country,  which  would  gladly  have  seen  them  depart ; for  the
inhabitants  could  not  till  the  earth,  nor  carry  on  trade,  for  fear  of  these  pillagers,  unless  they
had  entered  into  composition  with  them,  according  to  their  wealth  and  rank  ; and  these
compositions  amounted,  in  the  year,  to  as  much  as  was  now  demanded  for  the  evacuation  of
the  forts.  Although  these  garrisons  made  war  under  pretext  of  being  English,  there  were
very  few  of  that  nation ; but  the  greater  part  Gascons,  Germans  and  Foixiens,  and  from
different  countries,  who  had  united  together  to  do  mischief.

When  this  treaty  had  been  fully  concluded  with  all  the  captains,  except  Geoffry  Tete-noire,
the  count  d’Armagnac  entreated  the  count  dauphin  d’Auvergne,  who  was  a great  baron  and
able  negotiator,  to  join  him  in  this  treaty,  and  from  his  affection  to  him,  to  undertake  a
journey  to  Paris,  to  the  king  and  the  dukes  of  Berry  and  Burgundy,  who  at  that  time  governed
the  kingdom,  to  explain  what  he  had  done  in  regard  to  these  free  companions,  and  to  have
their  consent ; for  without  their  orders  the  sum  of  money  to  pay  them  could  not  he  raised  in
the  country.  The  count  dauphin  complied  with  this  request,  and  rode  to  Paris  ; hut  the
king  was  gone  to  Rouen,  whither  the  count  followed  him.  He  there  explained  to  the  king
and  his  council  the  state  of  the  country,  and  the  treaty  the  count  d’Armagnac  had  made  with
the  companions.  Pie  did  not  soon  accomplish  the  object  of  his  coming;  for  the  lords  of  the
council,  knowing  well  what  sort  of  people  these  free  companions  were,  had  no  faith  in  their
professions,  and  dreaded  they  would  not  abide  by  any  treaty.  They  said  to  him, — “ Count
dauphin,  we  know  that  you  and  the  count  d’Armagnac  are  anxious  to  promote  everything
for  the  honour  and  advantage  of  the  kingdom  ; for  both  of  you  have  rich  and  extensive
inheritances  within  it : hut  we  very  much  suspect  that  these  Gascons  and  Bearnois,  when
they  shall  have  received  the  sums  agreed  for,  and  the  country  shall  be  weakened,  will,  in  the
course  of  three  or  four  months,  return,  regain  possession  of  their  castles,  and  commit  greater
waste  than  they  have  hitherto  done.”  The  count  dauphin  replied  to  the  council, — “ My  lords,
it  is  our  intention,  that  when  this  sum  be  raised,  it  shall  be  deposited  at  Clermont  or  Riom,
and  there  remain  until  we  have  certificates  of  these  companies  having  quitted  the  country.”

“ That  is  well  said,”  answered  the  dukes  of  Berry  and  Burgundy : “ we  are  willing  the
money  he  raised  and  put  in  a place  of  safety ; for  at  all  events,  should  they  refuse  to  conform
to  the  treaty,  it  will  serve  to  collect  forces  to  make  war  upon  them,  and  drive  them  out  of
their  forts.  This  sum  shall  be  under  the  direction  of  you,  the  count  d’Armagnac,  and  the
bishops  o.f  Clermont  and  Puy  : you  will  take  care  that  it  be  honourably  disposed  of,  and  for
the  advantage  of  the  realm.”  Having  declared  he  would  do  so,  he  took  leave  of  the  king,
his  uncles,  and  council,  and  departing  from  Rouen,  continued  his  road  until  he  came  to
Clermont,  wdiere  he  found  the  count  d’Armagnac,  his  brother,  and  numbers  of  lords,  waiting
his  arrival.  He  related  to  them  that  the  king  and  his  council  had  their  doubts  of  the  captains
of  the  free  companies,  and  the  manner  this  money  was  raised,  and  deposited  in  a place  of
security  until  the  intentions  of  these  captains,  who  by  force  kept  possession  of  forts  and
castles  in  the  realm,  should  be  clearly  known.  They  replied, — “ that  such  were  their  wishes;
and,  since  it  is  agreeable  to  the  king,  we  will  finish  the  business ; but  we  must  first  conclude
a peace  or  truce  with  the  leaders,  that  the  country  may  be  assured  the  tax  we  are  about  to
raise  will  be  properly  applied  for  their  security.”  Commissaries  were  sent  by  the  count
d’Armagnac  to  parley  with  Perrot  le  Bearnois,  and  Amerigot  Marcel,  who  were  the  principal
chiefs  of  the  forts  on  this  side  the  Dordogne,  in  conjunction  with  the  bourg  de  Compane,
Bernard  des  Isles,  Olim  Barbe,  Abton  Seghin,  the  lord  de  l’Exemplaire,  and  many  more.


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


200


These  captains  could  never  agree  as  to  terms,  for  what  one  party  acceded  to  in  one  week,  the
next  it  was  refused : the  reason  was,  that  being  from  different  countries,  they  had  various
opinions.  Those  from  Armagnac,  who  were  a sort  of  retainers  to  the  count,  readily  assented
to  what  he  offered ; hut  the  greater  part,  and  most  determined  pillagers,  were  from  Bearn
and  Foix.

I do  not  mean  to  say  that  the  count  de  Foix  ever  wished  anything  hut  what  was  honour-
able and  advantageous  to  France ; but  when  he  first  heard  of  these  negotiations  with  the
captains  of  strong  places  in  Auvergne,  Quercy,  and  Rouergue,  he  was  desirous  to  know  upon
what  terms  they  were  made,  and  the  cause  why  the  count  d’ Armagnac  was  so  busy  in  the
matter,  and  would  be  informed,  when  these  places  should  be  evacuated  by  the  companions,
what  road  they  intended  to  take,  and  where  they  meant  to  fix  themselves.  lie  was
answered  : “ My  lord,  it  is  the  intention  of  the  count  d’ Armagnac  to  engage  these  men  at
arms,  when  they  shall  have  surrendered  tire  forts,  to  lead  them  into  Lombardy,  where  his
brother-in-law  (who,  you  know,  married  his  sister,  the  widow  of  your  son  Gaston)  has  great
difficulty  in  defending  his  inheritance,  for  there  seems  every  probability  of  a war  in  Lom-
bardy.” The  count  de  Foix  made  no  answer  to  this,  seeming  not  to  have  heard  it,  but  turned
about  to  others  present,  and  conversed  with  them.  He  was  not,  however,  the  less  thoughtful
about  what  had  been  said,  and  determined  secretly  to  prevent  any  of  these  treaties  being
concluded : at  least,  from  the  sequel  it  so  appears.

The  count  d’  Armagnac  could  never  succeed,  notwithstanding  his  repeated  attempts,  towards
inducing  any  of  the  captains  who  were  from  Bearn,  or  Foix,  to  yield  up  their  forts,  or  accept
of  any  engagement,  to  serve  the  count  or  his  brother  Bernard.  The  count  de  Foix,  who
was  prudence  itself,  considering  that  these  two  lords,  his  cousins,  and  those  of  Albreth,  were
very  powerful,  and  acquiring  friends  on  all  sides,  was  unwilling  to  add  to  their  strength  by
those  who  were  his  retainers : he  therefore  determined  what  line  he  would  follow,  as  was
told  me,  when  at  Orthes,  by  sir  Espaign  de  Lyon,  the  bourg  de  Compane,  captain  of  Carlat
in  Auvergne,  and  the  bourg  Anglois.  The  count  de  Foix  was  at  war  with  the  Armagnacs,
though  at  this  moment  there  was  a truce,  which  was  usually  renewed  five  or  six  times  every
year ; and,  should  the  Armagnacs  and  Albretlis  obtain  the  assistance  of  these  captains  of  free
companies,  who  were  so  hardy  and  cunning  in  war,  they  would  be  enabled  to  bring  a large
force  into  the  field,  and  do  the  count  de  Foix  great  mischief.  This  was  the  principal  cause
why  the  captains  who  were  dependent  on  him  would  never  accept  terms  from  the  count
d’  Armagnac.

They  indeed  gave  him  hopes  of  agreeing  'with  him  • but  although  many  appointments
were  made  for  a meeting,  they  kept  none,  but  ran  over  the  country,  and  pillaged  it  at  their
pleasure,  just  the  same  as  before  any  treaty  was  talked  of.  The  count  was  daily  expecting
to  conclude  one  j and  the  captain  he  was  most  anxious  to  gain  over  was  Perrot  le  Bearnois,
who  held  the  strong  castle  of  Chalucet,  and  was  the  principal  commander  in  Auvergne  and
Limousin,  for  his  compositions  extended  as  far  as  La  Rochelle.  The  others  were,  William  de
Sainte  Foix,  who  held  Bouteville ; Amerigot  Marcel,  who  resided  at  Loyse,  near  St.  Flour
in  Auvergne  ; the  bourg  de  Compane  and  the  bourg  Anglois,  who  held  Carlat.  He  said,  he
could  at  any  time  have  Amerigot  Marcel ; but  he  was  desirous  of  gaining  over  Perrot  le
Bearnois,  and  Geoffry  Tete-noire,  who  held  Yentadour,  and  was  the  chief  of  them  all.  They
only  laughed,  and  made  their  jokes  of  the  count,  disdaining  to  enter  into  any  treaty  with
him  or  any  one  else.  Geoffry  knew  his  castle  was  impregnable,  and  provided  with  stores
and  a sufficient  garrison  for  seven  or  eight  years ; and  it  was  not  in  the  power  of  any  lord  to
shut  him  up,  so  that  lie  could  not  be  prevented  from  making  sallies  whenever  he  chose.
Geoffry  began  all  his  passports  and  treaties  of  composition  with,  “ Geoffry  Tete-noire,  duke
of  Yentadour,  count  of  Limousin,  sovereign  lord  and  commander  of  all  the  captains  in
Auvergne,  Rouergue,  and  Limousin.”  I will  now  leave  these  matters,  and  speak  of  what  was
passing  in  my  own  country,  from  the  peace  which  was  granted  to  the  Ghent  men,  on  the
conclusion  of  their  war,  by  the  duke  and  duchess  of  Burgundy,  who  signed  and  sealed  it  in
the  noble  city  of  Tournay.  To  add  strength  to  my  history,  I must  speak  of  what  was
passing  in  Gueldres  and  Brabant ; for  the  king  of  France  and  duke  of  Burgundy  were  much
affected  by  the  events  that  happened  in  those  countries,  and  took  great  part  in  the  war  that
ensued.


800


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


CHAPTER  XCVII. A DIGRESSION  ON  THE  QUARREL  BETWEEN  TIME  HOUSES  OF  BRABANT  AND

GUELDRES. THE  LIFE  OF  COUNT  REGINALD  OF  GUELDRES  AND  HIS  SUCCESSORS,

UNTIL  THE  REIGN  OF  CHARLES  VI.  OF  FRANCE. THE  DUKE  OF  GUELDRES,  BEING

AN  ALLY  OF  ENGLAND,  SENDS  HIS  CHALLENGE  TO  FRANCE. THE  CAUSE  OF  TniS

CHALLENGE.

There  had  been,  for  some  time,  a hatred  between  the  bouses  of  Brabant  and  Gueldres  :
their  countries  border  on  each  other ; but  the  origin  of  this  hatred  of  the  Brabanters  was  on
account  of  the  town  of  Grave,  which  the  dukes  of  Gueldres  had  taken  possession  of,  and
kept  by  force.  This  the  Brabanters  complained  of,  as  it  is  situated  on  their  side  of  the  river
Meuse  ; and,  though  many  conferences  were  held  on  the  subject,  their  hatred  was  not  abated.
Those  of  Gueldres  complained,  that  the  duke  of  Brabant  bad,  in  revenge,  seized  on  three
castles  on  their  side  of  the  Meuse,  and  at  the  entrance  of  their  country,  called  Gambet,
Buct,  and  Mille*.  These  quarrels  between  the  two  dukes  were  frequently  embittered  ; but
it  was  the  opinion  of  many  able  knights  and  squires  in  arms,  that  if  the  lord  Edward  of
Gueldres  (who  was  unfortunately  slain  by  an  arrow  from  an  archer  of  the  dukes  of  Luxem-
bourg or  Brabant,  at  the  battle  of  Juliersj-,)  had  survived  and  gained  the  victory,  he  was  so
valiant,  he  would  have  reconquered  these  three  castles.

I will  now  relate,  according  to  my  promise,  how  these  castles  came  into  the  possession  of
Brabant,  that  I may  embellish  my  history ; and  I will  begin  with  speaking  of  the  dukes  of
Gueldres  J.  It  was  not  long  before  I began  to  indite  this  work,  that  there  lived  a count  of
Gueldres,  called  Reginald.  Gueldres  is  not  so  rich,  nor  so  extensive  a country  as  Brabant :
notwithstanding  this,  count  Reginald,  coming  to  his  property  when  a young  man,  had  every
inclination  for  expense,  and  cared  not  what  his  pleasures  cost  him.  He  attended  all  tilts  and
tournaments  in  the  greatest  magnificence,  and  expended,  yearly,  four  times  more  than  his
usual  revenue.  He  was  generous  and  liberal,  and  made  extravagant  presents,  so  that  he
borrowed  from  the  Lombards  on  all  sides,  and  was  soon  so  indebted  he  knew  not  whither  to
turn  himself.  II  is  relations  were  greatly  angered  by  such  conduct,  and  blamed  him  exceed-
ingly  ; but  in  particular  the  archbishop  of  Cologne,  who  was  his  uncle  by  his  mother’s  side.
One  day,  when  he  had  him  in  his  closet,  he  said, — “ Reginald,  my  fair  nephew,  you  have
managed  your  affairs  so  well,  that  you  will  soon  find  yourself  a poor  man ; for  your  lands
are  mortgaged  all  round.  In  this  world,  poor  lords  are  not  valued.  Do  you  imagine  that
those  to  whom  you  have  made  such  great  gifts  will  return  them  to  you  ? No,  as  God  may
help  me : they  will  fly  from  you  when  they  know  you  have  nothing  more  to  give,  and  will
laugh  at  and  mock  you  for  your  foolish  expenses,  and  you  will  not  find  one  friend  to  assist
you.  Do  not  depend  on  me ; for  though  I am  archbishop  of  Cologne,  I will  not  curtail  my
establishment  to  repair  your  fortune,  nor  give  you  the  patrimony  of  the  church:  no,  I vow
to  God,  my  conscience  forbids  it,  and  neither  the  pope  nor  cardinals  will  consent  to  it.  The
count  of  Hainault,  who  has  not  kept  the  state  you  have,  has  married  his  eldest  daughter,
Margaret,  to  Lewis  of  Bavaria,  emperor  of  Germany.  He  lias  three  more  whom  he  will
also  marry  very  nobly.  Had  you  lived  as  was  becoming  you,  and  had  you  not  mortgaged
your  lands,  towns,  or  castles,  you  were  a proper  person  for  such  an  alliance ; but,  situated  as
you  now  are,  you  will  never  obtain  one  of  them.  You  have  nothing  to  dower  a wife  with,
if  you  had  one : not  even  one  poor  lordship.”

The  earl  of  Gueldres  was  thunderstruck  at  this  reprimand  of  his  uncle,  for  he  felt  the
truth  of  it.  He  requested,  out  of  love  to  him,  he  would  give  him  advice.  “Advice!”
replied  the  archbishop  : “ It  is  now,  my  fair  nephew,  too  late  : you  wish  to  shut  the  stable-
door  when  the  steed  is  stolen.  I see  but  one  remedy  for  your  distress.”  “ And  wliat  is
that?”  said  the  count.  “ I will  tell  you,”  answered  the  archbishop.  “You  are  much
indebted  to  Bertaldo  of  Mechlin,  who  is  at  present  the  richest  merchant  in  the  world,  from
the  great  commerce  he  carries  on  with  all  parts  of  it  by  sea  and  land.  His  galleys  and
vessels  sail  as  far  as  Alexandria,  Cairo,  and  Damascus,  with  cargoes  of  the  value  of  one

* Q.  Gocli,  Beeck,  and  Megcn.  -f-  1372.

J They  were  first  created  dukes  of  Gueldres  by  the  emperor,  Lewis  of  Bavaria,  1339,  at  Frankfort


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


301


hundred  thousand  florins : he  also  has  a mortgage  on  the  greater  part  of  your  lands.  Bertaldo
has  one  daughter  now  of  an  age  to  marry,  and  no  other  children.  Several  great  barons  of
Germany  and  other  countries  have  demanded  her  in  marriage,  but,  I know  not  why,  unsuc-
cessfully : he  may  perhaps  fear  some  as  being  too  high,  and  others  he  may  hold  cheap :
I therefore  advise  you  to  treat  with  Bertaldo,  who  may  listen  to  you,  and  give  you  his
daughter,  that  you  may  clear  yourself  of  all  your  debts,  and  regain  possession  of  your  lands ;
for  I should  suppose,  from  your  birth  and  in  consideration  of  your  having  your  possessions,
between  the  Meuse  and  the  Rhine,  so  well  filled  with  populous  towns,  he  will  comply  with
your  request.”  “ By  my  faith,  uncle,”  replied  the  count,  “ you  advise  me  well,  and  I will
follow  what  yon  have  said.”

Count  Reginald,  shortly  after,  summoned  those  of  his  friends  in  whom  he  had  the  greatest
confidence  and  affection,  and  declared  to  them  his  intentions  of  marrying  the  daughter  of
Bertaldo  of  Mechlin.  He  requested  them  to  go  thither  and  demand  her,  and  he  would  make  her
countess  of  Gueldres,  on  such  conditions  as  the  archbishop  of  Cologne  should  be  agreeable  to.
Ilis  friends  complied  cheerfully,  and  made  instant  preparations  for  their  journey  to  Mechlin,
where  they  waited  on  Bertaldo,  and  told  him  the  object  of  their  coming.  Bertaldo  received
these  knights  and  clerks  from  the  count  de  Gueldres  very  graciously,  entertained  them  Well,
and  said  lie  would  consider  of  their  demand.  Being  so  very  rich,  for  he  was  worth  at  least  five
or  six  millions  of  florins,  he  was  anxious  for  the  advancement  of  his  daughter,  and,  thinking
lie  could  no  way  ally  her  more  nobly  than  to  the  count  de  Gueldres,  had  partly  in  his  own
mind  assented  to  it.  Before  he  declared  it,  he  had  many  doubts,  and  said  to  himself, —
“ If  I give  Mary  to  the  count,  he  will  wish  to  be  my  master,  and  I shall  no  longer  have  a
will  of  my  own.  Beside,  should  she  have  children  and  die,  which  may  happen,  he,  who  will
be  enriched  by  my  wealth  and  re-possessed  of  all  his  lands  in  the  country  of  Gueldres,  may
marry  again,  and  as  nobly  as  he  pleases,  and  have  children  by  his  second  wife,  who,  from
the  high  blood  of  their  mother,  may  hold  my  daughter’s  children  in  contempt,  and  perhaps
disinherit  them.  I must  have  all  these  doubts  cleared  up  before  I give  my  consent.  I will,
however,  mention  all  this  to  the  friends  of  the  count,  and  make  them  such  an  answer  as
this  : That  their  coming  has  pleased  me  much,  and  that  my  daughter  would  be  very  happy
to  be  so  nobly  married  as  to  the  count  de  Gueldres  : but  at  this  moment  it  was  well  known
the  affairs  of  the  count  were  in  the  utmost  disorder  ; that  all  his  lands  between  the  Meuse
and  Rhine  were  under  mortgage,  and  that,  to  clear  off  his  incumbrances,  he  has  demanded
my  daughter  in  marriage.  Before  I consent  to  this  union,  I wish  to  know  how  he  means
to  settle  his  estates,  and  that  my  daughter’s  children,  should  she  have  sons  or  daughters,  may
succeed  to  the  inheritance  of  Gueldres,  notwithstanding  any  other  marriage  take  place  in
case  of  her  death.  On  this  point  I am  determined,  and  I must  likewise  have  this  succession
assured  by  himself,  his  relations,  and  all  who  may  have  any  claims  thereto,  as  well  as  by  the
nobility  and  principal  towns  in  the  country.”  Thus  did  Bertaldo  form  the  answer  he  was  to
give  to  the  commissioners  from  the  count  de  Gueldres.

On  the  morrow,  at  a proper  hour,  Bertaldo  signified  to  the  count’s  friends  he  was  prepared
with  his  answer.  They  were  well  pleased  on  hearing  this,  and  repaired  to  the  hotel  of
Bertaldo,  where  every  thing  displayed  his  riches.  He  met  them  in  the  hall,  and,  after  some
agreeable  conversation,  conducted  them  to  an  apartment  fitted  up  in  a manner  becoming  a
king,  where  some  of  his  friends  were  assembled.  When  the  door  was  closed,  Bertaldo
desired  them  to  declare  the  cause  of  their  visit  to  him,  and  he  would  give  them  his  answer.
Upon  this,  the  dean  of  Cologne,  cousin  to  the  count  de  Gueldres,  and  a valiant  clerk,
explained  so  eloquently  the  object  of  their  embassy,  it  was  a pleasure  to  hear  him.  Of  his
speech  I need  not  make  any  further  mention,  for  the  subject  of  it  has  been  told,  and  it
related  solely  to  the  advantages  of  this  alliance,  and  its  conveniency  to  both  parties.

Bertaldo,  who,  the  preceding  day,  had  formed  his  plan,  answered  as  follows  : “ My  fail-
sirs,  I and  my  daughter  shall  hold  ourselves  much  honoured  by  so  noble  an  alliance  as  the
one  you  have  proposed ; and  when  such  matters  are  brought  forward,  the  less  delay  afterward
the  better.  I say  this,  because  an  alliance  by  marriage,  between  so  powerful  and  renowned
a lord  as  count  Reginald  de  Gueldres,  with  Mary,  my  daughter,  pleases  me  right  well.
You  require  that  his  estate,  which  is  now  much  entangled,  by  his  debts  to  Lombards  and


S02


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


others,  should  be  cleared  by  this  marriage,  and  every  incumbrance  clone  away.  Thanks  to
God,  I have  the  ability  as  well  as  inclination  so  to  do  ; but  I must  first  see  the  following
settlements  fairly  engrossed  and  sealed,  so  that,  hereafter,  no  contention  ensue  between  any
of  the  parties  : first,  my  daughter’s  children  shall  inherit  the  country  of  Gueldres,  compre-
hended within  its  present  limits ; and,  if  my  lord  Reginald  should  die  before  her,  without
having  any  heirs  from  her  body,  she  shall  peaceably  retain  the  possession  of  that  country
during  her  life,  and  then  it  may  revert  to  the  next  lawful  heir.  If  it  should  happen  that  my
daughter  have  an  heir  or  heirs  by  my  much  honoured  prince,  count  Reginald,  and  she  die  before
him,  the  count  de  Gueldres  shall  not,  on  account  of  any  secondary  marriage,  disinherit,  or
otherwise  deprive  the  heir  or  heirs  of  my  daughter  of  the  succession  of  Gueldres.  I consent,
however,  that  if  it  shall  be  his  good  pleasure  in  such  case  to  marry  again,  he  may  dower  the
lady  with  those  acquired  lands  on  the  other  side  of  the  Meuse,  bordering  on  the  bishopric  of
Liege  and  duchy  of  Brabant,  but  without  charging  any  part  of  the  country  of  Gueldres.
When  the  relations  and  friends  of  the  honourable  prince,  count  Reginald,  and  all  those  who
may,  from  their  family-connexions,  have  any  claims  on  the  duchy  of  Gueldres,  and  the  chief
towns,  shall  have  signed  and  sealed  settlements  drawn  up  in  the  manner  I have  mentioned,
I give  my  consent  to  the  marriage.  You  may  now,  therefore,  make  any  reply  you  have
been  charged  with.”

The  knights  from  Gueldres,  after  some  short  conversation  together,  said : “ Sir,  we  have
well  heard  your  terms ; but,  not  being  commissioned  to  say  anything  in  confirmation,  or
otherwise,  on  the  subject,  we  must  be  silent.  We  will  return  to  our  lord,  and  relate
punctually  to  him  and  his  council  what  you  offer,  and  very  shortly  you  shall  have  from  him
his  answer.”  “ God  grant  it  m-ay  he  favourable,”  replied  Bertaldo  ; “ for  I wish  it.”  On
this  they  all  left  the  apartment  and  went  away.  As  you  have  heard  everything  that  passed
on  this  subject,  I shall  not  dilate  on  it  more.  When  the  commissioners  were  returned  home,
matters  seemed  likely  to  be  soon  brought  to  a conclusion ; for  the  count  thought,  in  his
present  situation,  he  could  not  do  better  than  marry  the  daughter  of  Bertaldo,  who  was
powerfully  rich.  For  greater  security,  all  the  settlements  were  drawn  up,  and  engrossed  in
his  house : when  they  were  finished,  the  count  signed  and  sealed  them,  as  did  all  his  relations
whose  names  were  mentioned  therein,  and  the  nobility  and  magistrates  of  the  principal  towns.

Bertaldo  being  now  satisfied,  the  marriage  was  consummated,  the  debts  of  the  count  were
paid,  and  all  his  lands  freed  from  every  incumbrance.  Thus  was  the  count  de  Gueldres  made
rich  : he  took  a new  hotel,  and  formed  a different  establishment.  If,  formerly,  he  had  been
thought  to  keep  a magnificent  one,  this  was  much  superior ; for  he  had  now  wherewithal  to
support  it,  as  he  never  wanted  for  any  money  Bertaldo  could  give  him.  The  count  behaved
right  honourably  to  his  lady,  who  was  very  handsome,  good,  prudent,  and  devout.  At  the
end  of  four  years,  the  lady  died,  leaving  a daughter  of  the  name  of  Isabella.  The  count,
being  a young  man  when  he  became  a widower,  married  again  very  nobly ; for  king  Edward
of  England,  father  of  that  king  Edward  who  besieged  Tournay  and  conquered  Calais,  gave
him  his  daughter  Isabella*.  By  this  lady  he  had  three  children,  two  sons  and  a daughter,
sir  Reginald,  sir  Edward,  and  Joan,  who  was  afterwards  duchess  of  Julierst.

When  king  Edward  III.,  who  was  uncle  to  these  children  of  Gueldres,  came  first  into
Germany  to  visit  the  emperor,  and  had  been  appointed  by  him  vicar-general  of  the  empire  J,
as  is  contained  in  the  first  volume  of  this  history,  the  county  of  Gueldres  was  made  a duchy,
and  the  marquisate  of  Juliers  a county,  to  elevate  those  families  in  dignity.  But  to  come
nearer  to  our  times,  and  connect  this  with  our  history,  it  happened  that,  after  the  decease  of
this  count  Reginald  wo  have  been  speaking  of,  his  son,  also  called  Reginald,  nephew  to  the
king  of  England,  died  without  heirs  §.  Sir  Edward  of  Gueldres  succeeded  to  both  : he  was

* There  seems  some  mistake  here,  but  I cannot  make  Juliers,  married  Mary,  a daughter  of  the  count  de  Guel-
it  out,  nor  find  in  any  of  the  genealogical  accounts  of  the  dres,  hut  hy  his  first  wife,  Sophia  of  Mechlin.  Two
counts  of  Gueldres,  notice  of  this  marriage  with  the  children  only,  Reginald  and  Edward,  are  ascribed  to  the
daughter  of  the  merchant  Bertaldo  of  Mechlin.  second  marriage  in  L' Art  de  verifier  les  Dates. — Ed.

“ Reginald  IT.,  the  9th  count  of  Gueldres,  married,  in  J In  1338. — Ed.

1343,  Sophia,  countess  of  Mcclilin,  and  1355,  Eleauora  § Reginald  III.  died  in  1371,  leaving  no  children  by
of  England.” — Anderson's  Royal  Genealogies.  his  wife  Mary,  the  daughter  of  John  duke  of  Brabant.—

T William,  the  sixth  marquis,  and  afterwards  duke  of  Ed.


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


SCO


married  to  the  eldest  daughter  of  duke  Albert  of  Hainault  * ; but  she  was  so  young,  that  sir
Edward  neyer  carnally  knew  her,  and  he  died  also  without  heirs ; for,  like  a valiant  knight,
he  was  slain  in  battle,  in  a war  against  duke  Winceslaus  of  Brabant,  before  Juliers  f.

Sir  Edward’s  sister-german  was  married  to  count  William  of  Juliers,  and  her  brother  dying
without  issue,  she  claimed  Gueldres  as  her  inheritance,  and  brought  forward  her  pretensions.
Her  elder  sister,  by  the  first  marriage  £,  made  a similar  claim,  and  said,  since  no  male  heirs
remained  from  the  second  marriage,  the  duchy  became  her  right,  according  to  the  settlements
that  had  been  made  and  signed.  As  this  dispute  ran  high  between  the  two  sisters,  the  elder
was  advised  to  unite  herself,  by  marriage,  with  some  person  well  allied,  that  would  defend
her  rights.  She  followed  this  advice,  and  desired  the  archbishop  of  Cologne,  at  that  time
with  the  lord  John  do  Blois  §,  whose  brother,  count  Lewis,  was  still  alive,  to  open  the  matter
to  him,  and,  if  he  were  agreeable,  she  would  make  him  duke  of  Gueldres ; for,  by  the  death
of  her  two  brothers,  without  male  issue,  the  duchy  had  become  her  inheritance,  and  none
other  had  any  legal  claim  to  it.  The  lord  John  de  Blois,  who  had  been  brought  up  in
Holland  and  Zealand,  having  fair  inheritances  there,  and  speaking  the  language,  willingly
listened  to  the  proposal ; for  he  would  never  many  in  France,  thinking  he  should  acquire  a
large  tract  of  country  in  the  parts  he  liked  best.  The  knights  of  his  council,  in  Holland,
advised  him  to  accept  of  the  lady.  He  consented  to  this  ; but,  before  he  made  it  public,  ho
rode  to  Hainault,  to  consult  his  cousin,  duke  Albert,  and  hear  what  he  would  say  to  it.

Duke  Albert,  in  truth,  knew  not  what  advice  to  give  him,  or,  if  he  did,  he  kept  it  to
himself,  and  delayed  so  long,  before  he  could  make  up  his  mind,  that  lord  John  de  Blois  was
tired  of  waiting,  and,  mounting  his  horse,  rode  to  Gueldres,  married  the  lady  I have
mentioned,  and  took  possession  of  the  duchy.  He  was  not,  however,  acknowledged  duke  by
the  whole  country,  nor  were  her  claims  universally  allowed  ; the  majority  of  knights,  squires,
and  chief  towns,  inclined  more  to  the  lady  of  Juliers,  who,  having  a handsome  family  of
children,  had  gained  their  hearts.  The  lord  John,  therefore,  had  with  bis  wife  a war,  which
cost  him  much.  By  the  death  of  his  brother,  count  Lewis,  he  became  count  of  Blois,  lord  of
Avesnes  in  Hainault  ; and  the  rich  inheritances  of  Holland  and  Zealand  fell  likewise  to  hiin.
Notwithstanding  this,  his  council  advised  him  to  pursue  the  claim  of  his  lady  on  Gueldreland.
He  did  so,  to  the  utmost  of  his  power  ; but  Germans  are  a covetous  people,  and  they  only
continued  the  war  as  long  as  they  wTere  duly  paid.  The  dispute  cost  lord  John  very  large
sums,  and  was  never  of  any  service  to  him.  This  gallant  count,  lord  John  de  Blois,  died  in
the  castle  of  the  good  town  of  Schoonhoven,  in  the  month  of  June,  of  the  year  of  grace  1381,
and  was  carried  to  the  church  of  the  Cordeliers  at  Valenciennes,  and  buried  beside  his
grandfather,  sir  John  of  Hainault  ||.

The  lord  Guy  de  Blois  succeeded  his  brothers  in  all  their  possessions  in  France,  Picardy,
Hainault,  Holland,  and  Zealand,  as  well  as  in  the  country  of  Blois.  I know  not  how  many
years  the  lady  of  lord  John  survived  him,  but,  on  her  decease,  her  sister,  the  countess  of
Juliers,  remained  peaceable  possessor  of  the  duchy  of  Gueldres.  It  was,  however,  settled,  at
the  request  of  the  nobility  and  inhabitants  of  the  duchy,  that  lord  William  de  Juliers,  eldest
son  of  the  count  of  Juliers,  should  be  duke  of  Gueldres  ; for  it  had  reverted  to  him  in  direct
succession  from  his  uncles,  and,  on  this  account,  duke  Albert  and  his  duchess  had  given  him
their  daughter  in  marriage,  who  had  been  betrothed  to  duke  Edward,  as  before  mentioned.
Thus  was  this  lady  still  duchess  of  Gueldres,  and  this  last  marriage  was  more  suitable,
for  they  were  both  nearly  of  the  same  age.  The  duke  resided  constantly  in  his  own  country ;


* He  married  Catherine,  daughter  of  Albert,  regent  of
Holland,  on  the  16th  May,  1371. — Ed.

p He  died  on  the  24th  August,  1371,  from  the  effects
of  a wound  received  at  the  battle  of  Battweiler,  two  days
before.  He  was  only  thirty-six  years  old.: — Ed.

% Froissart’s  account  of  the  genealogy  of  this  family  is
not  correct.  The  dispute  was  between  Mary,  countess  of
Juliers,  the  half-sistpi  of  Edward  and  Reginald,  and
William,  her  grandson,  on  the  one  part,  and  Matilda,
Mary’s  elder  sisUir,  widow  of  John,  first  count  of  Clever,
on  the  other  part.  Whether  Mary  and  Matilda  were  both
the  daughters  of  Sophia  of  Mechlin,  or  whether  Reginald


the  second  married  thrice,  and  had  Matilda  by  a prior
wife  to  Sophia,  is  uncertain  ; but  no  mention  of  a third
marriage  is  to  he  met  with  in  any  records  of  the  time. —
Ed.

§ John  de  Chatillon,  count  of  Blois,  married  Matilda
in  1372. — Ed.

|]  Tlio  lords  Lewis,  John  and  Guy,  were  sons  of  the
count  Guy  de  Blois,  brother  to  Charles  de  Blois,  duke  of
Brittany,  by  a daughter  of  sir  John  of  Hainault,  who  con-
ducted queen  Isabella  of  France  to  England,  with  her  son
Edward  III.  Annotation  X. — Denys  Sauvage.


304


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


but  the  more  he  increased  in  age  the  greater  was  his  love  for  tilts,  tournaments,  and  such
amusements,  and  he  was  more  attached  to  the  English  than  to  the  French,  which  he  showed
as  long  as  he  lived.  He  had  always  rankling  in  his  breast  a similar  hatred  to  what  had
subsisted  between  his  ancestors  and  the  dukes  of  Brabant,  and  was  ever  seeking  for  occasion
of  quarrel  with  them  for  two  reasons  : one,  because  he  was  the  ally  of  king  Richard  II. ; the
other,  because  Winceslaus  of  Bohemia,  duke  of  Luxembourg,  had  purchased  from  the  count
de  Mours,  a great  baron  in  Germany,  those  three  castles  I have  before  mentioned,  but  will
now  mention  again,  to  make  the  matter  clearer,  Goch,  Beeck,  and  Megen,  they  are  situated
beyond  the  Meuse,  on  the  territory  of  Fauquemont.  The  dukes  of  Gueldres  had  in  former
times  been  lords  of  these  castles,  and  the  present  duke  was  much  vexed  that  he  could  not  add
them  to  his  inheritance,  but  as  long  as  duke  Winceslaus  lived  he  kept  all  this  to  himself.


CHAPTER  XCVIII.  FROISSART  RETURNS  TO  THE  QUARREL  BETWEEN  THE  HOUSES  OF

BRABANT  AND  GUELDRES,  WHICH  HE  HAD  LEFT  UNFINISHED  IN  THE  PRECEDING
CHAPTER,  AND  CONTINUES  THE  HISTORY  OF  THE  DUKES  OF  GUELDRES  TO  DUKE
WILLIAM,  WHO  SENDS  HIS  CHALLENGE  TO  CHARLES  VI.  KING  OF  FRANCE.

Duke  Reginald  of  Gueldres,  cousin-german  to  the  prince  of  Wales,  had  mortgaged  the
three  above-mentioned  castles  for  a sum  of  florins  to  a great  baron  of  Germany,  called  the
count  de  Mours.  He  kept  possession  of  them  for  a time  ; but,  when  no  intention  was  shown
of  paying  back  the  money  he  had  lent  on  their  security,  he  grew  melancholy,  and  sent  legal
summons  for  payment  to  duke  Reginald.  But  he  made  light  of  this,  as  he  had  not  any  money
to  acquit  himself  of  the  debt,  which  frequently  happens  to  many  great  lords  when  they  are
called  upon  for  payment.  When  the  count  de  Mours  perceived  this,  he  made  advances  to
the  duke  of  Brabant,  and  offered  him  these  castles  for  the  money  for  which  they  were
mortgaged.  The  duke  eagerly  accepted  the  proposal,  for  they  were  on  the  confines  of  the
territory  of  Fauquemont,  of  which  he  was  lord.  The  duke  was  desirous  to  increase  his
inheritance,  for  he  thought  surely  to  survive  his  present  duchess,  the  lady  Johanna  *.

He  took  possession  of  these  castles,  and  placed  in  them,  as  governor,  the  lord  de  Kale.
When,  upon  the  death  of  duke  Reginald,  the  lord  Edward  succeeded  to  the  duchy  of  Gueldres,
he  sent  ambassadors  to  the  duke  of  Brabant,  to  request  he  might  have  his  castles  for  the
money  he  had  paid  for  them.  The  duke,  not  having  purchased  them  for  this  end,  returned  a
positive  refusal.  The  duke  of  Gueldres  was  highly  indignant  at  this  answer,  and  in  con-
sequence was  hard  on  his  sister-in-law,  the  widow  of  the  lord  Reginald,  and  younger  sister
to  the  duchess  of  Brabant,  by  preventing  her  from  receiving  her  dower.  The  lady  went  to
Brabant,  and  laid  her  complaints  of  the  vexations  the  duke  of  Gueldres  was  occasioning  her,
before  the  duke  and  duchess.  On  account  of  the  long-subsisting  hatred  between  the
Brabanters  and  those  of  Gueldres,  for  the  seizure  of  Grave,  the  first  were  well  inclined  to  aid
the  lady  by  force  of  arms.  A large  body  of  men  at  arms  were  indeed  once  collected  in
Brabant,  and  advanced  to  Bois-le-Duc,  to  the  amount  of  twelve  hundred  spears.  The  duke
of  Gueldres  had  likewise  assembled  his  forces,  and  it  was  generally  thought  a battle  would
have  been  the  consequence ; but  duke  Albert,  the  count  de  Mours,  and  the  count  of  Juliers
this  time  interfered,  and  they  separated  without  coming  to  blows.

This  same  year  duke  Winceslaus  was  victorious  over  some  free  companies,  who  had
overrun  and  despoiled  his  lands  in  Luxembourg : he  banished  many,  and  put  to  death  their
leader,  called  the  Little  Mesclin,  in  the  tower  of' the  castle  of  Luxembourg.  In  this  year  also,
the  lord  Charles  of  Bohemia,  emperor  of  Germany,  appointed  the  duke  of  Brabant  chief  of
an  institution  called  in  Germany  Languefride,  which  signifies  an  association  for  the  repairs
and  security  of  the  public  roads,  so  that  persons  may  travel  from  one  part  to  another  without
danger.  The  emperor  gave  him  also  great  possessions  in  Alsace  on  both  sides  of  the  Rhine,

* Winceslaus  was  the  second  husband  of  Johanna,  second  son  of  the  duke  of  Burgundy,  her  heir,  1404.  Her
heiress  of  Brabant  and  Limbourg.  She  was  married  to  first  husband,  William,  count  of  Holland,  died,  1345,
him,  1355.  After  the  death  of  Winceslaus,  the  8th  without  issue.  Johanna  died  1406. — Anderson's  R.  G.
December,  1384,  and  his  son,  she  constituted  Anthony,


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


305


that  lie  might  guard  the  country  against  the  Linfars,  who  are  a most  wicked  people,  robbing
all  without  mercy.  He  gave  him  likewise  the  sovereignty  of  the  large  city  of  Strasburg,  and,
to  add  to  his  dignity,  created  him  a prince  of  the  Holy  Roman  Empire.  He  certainly  could
not  give  him  too  much,  for  this  duke  Winceslaus  was  generous,  amiable,  courteous  to  all,  and
gallant  in  arms.  Great  things  might  have  been  expected  from  him,  had  he  been  granted
longer  life,  but  he  died  in  the  flower  of  his  age  ; on  account  of  which  I,  the  author  of  this
history,  greatly  grieve,  and  wish  he  had  enjoyed  a course  of  eighty  years  or  more,  for  he
would  have  done  much  good  to  mankind.  The  schism  in  the  church  afflicted  him  greatly,
as  he  often  expressed  himself  to  me,  who  lived  with  him  on  the  most  intimate  and  friendly
footing.  And  notwithstanding  that  I have  seen  and  personally  known  upwards  of  two
hundred  powerful  princes  in  my  various  travels,  I have  never  found  any  more  courteous  and
amiable  than  this  duke  of  Brabant,  and  my  very  good  lord  the  count  Guy  de  Blois,  who
commanded  me  to  indite  this  Chronicle.  These  were  the  two  princes,  of  my  time,  of  the
greatest  liberality,  humility,  and  goodness,  who  lived  magnificently  on  their  revenues,  without
malice  or  any  way  oppressing  their  subjects  by  taxes,  and  issuing  any  hurtful  edicts  through
their  territories.  But  I will  now  return  to  the  principal  subject  of  this  chapter.


The  Emperor  constituting  the  Duke  of  Brabant  Llnguefride,  or  Keeper  of  the  Public  Roads.
Desigr.eJ  from  MSS.  Illuminations  of  the  Fifteenth  Century.


When  the  dukes  of  Juliersand  Gueldres,  who  were  brothers  by  marriage,  and  whose  hearts
were  too  much  attached  to  the  English  (for  they  had  long  been  the  allies  of  the  kings  of
England,  and  strongly  united  to  each  other),  heard  of  the  dignities  conferred  by  the  emperor
on  the  duke  of  Brabant,  they  were  much  exasperated ; not  from  any  wish  to  do  good  or
correct  the  wicked,  but  that  such  honours  should  be  conferred  on  their  enemy  : more
particularly  that  he  should  have  the  appointment  of  Languefride,  and  execute  the  office  with
severity,  for  it  affected  their  lands.  This  institution  had  been  first  formed  for  tbe  security  of
those  merchants  of  Hainault,  Brabant,  France,  Flanders,  and  Liege,  who  travelled  thence  to
Cologne,  Treves,  Lucca,  Constance,  and  other  cities  and  fairs  in  Germany.  Merchants  could
von.  n.  x


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &e.


80G

not  enter  those  countries  without  risk,  through  the  states  of  Juliers  or  Gueldres.  It  happened
there  were  some  robberies  committed  on  the  highways  by  these  Linfars,  who  had  escaped  into
the  territory  of  the  duke  of  Juliers  ; and  it  was  told  me,  that  the  duke  had  even  lent  them
horses  and  the  use  of  his  castles.  Heavy  complaints  were  made  of  this  to  duke  Winceslaus,
who  at  that  time  was  resident  in  Brussels,  and  that  the  Languefride  was  held  in  contempt ;
that  the  persons  who  had  violated  it  were  retired  into  the  duchy  of  Juliers,  where  they  lived
unmolested.

The  duke  of  Brabant,  at  that  time  young  and  chivalrous,  high  in  birth  and  rich  in  fortune,
was  greatly  piqued  at  this  conduct,  and  hurt  by  the  complaints  of  those  who  had  been
robbed  ; he  declared  he  would  speedily  provide  a remedy,  and,  being  nominated  chief  of  the
Languefride,  would  not  that  any  blame  should  fall  on  him  for  negligence  in  the  due  support
of  it.  To  be  assured  of  the  fact,  and  through  the  advice  of  his  friends,  he  sent  to  the  duke
of  Juliers  some  of  the  first  men  in  his  country,  such  as  the  lord  d’Urquon,  the  lord  Bour-
gueval,  sir  Scelar  archdeacon  of  Hainault,  Geoffry  de  la  Tour  grand-routier  of  Brabant,  and
several  more,  to  remonstrate  with  him  in  an  amicable  manner  on  the  impropriety  of  his
conduct,  and  that  proper  excuses  must  be  made  for  the  offence,  as  it  affected  too  strongly  the
duke  of  Brabant  as  chief  of  the  Languefride.

The  duke  of  Juliers  paid  but  little  attention  to  their  remonstrances,  for  he  seemed  rather
to  prefer  war  to  peace,  which  displeased  so  much  the  envoys  from  the  duke  of  Brabant,  that
they  took  leave  of  him,  and  returned  to  relate  all  that  had  passed.  The  duke  of  Brabant,
having  heard  them,  asked  their  advice  how  to  act.  “ Sir,”  they  replied,  “ you  know  it  full
well  yourself : speak  your  will.”  “ Well,  then,”  said  the  duke,  “ it  is  not  my  intention  to  let
this  matter  sleep,  nor  shall  it  be  said,  through  cowardice  or  weakness  of  heart  I have
suffered  any  robberies  to  be  committed  within  my  jurisdiction  with  impunity,  as  I will  make
my  cousin,  the  duke  of  Juliers,  and  his  adherents,  very  soon  feel,  and  that  the  business  is
personal  to  me.”  The  duke  was  not  idle,  but  instantly  set  clerks  to  work  in  writing  letters
to  all  from  whom  he  expected  any  assistance : some  he  entreated,  others  he  commanded,  and
gave  sufficient  notice  to  the  duke  of  Juliers  and  his  allies  of  his  intentions.  Eacli  of  these
lords  provided  themselves  as  ably  as  they  could:  but  the  duke  of  Juliers  would  have  made
an  indifferent  figure  without  his  brother-in-law  the  duke  of  Gueldres,  who  greatly  reinforced
him  with  men-at-arms  and  friends.  These  two  lords  collected  men  secretly  from  Germany ;
and  as  the  Germans  are  avaricious,  and  had  not  for  some  time  had  any  opportunity  of  gain,
they  accepted  their  pay,  and  came  in  greater  numbers  as  they  were  ignorant  they  were  to  be
employed  against  the  duke  of  Brabant.

The  duke  of  Brabant  left  Brussels  in  grand  array,  and  went  to  Louvain,  thence  to
Maestricht,  where  he  found  upwards  of  one  thousand  good  spears  waiting  for  him  : other
forces  were  coming  to  his  aid  from  France,  Flandei’s,  Hainault,  Namur,  Lorrain,  Bar,  and
different  parts,  so  that  his  army  amounted  to  full  two  thousand  five  hundred  lances.  Four
hundred  spears,  under  the  lord  of  Geant,  were  on  their  march  to  join  him  from  Burgundy ;
but  they  arrived  too  late,  from  not  knowing  when  an  engagement  would  take  place,  and
were  much  vexed  when  they  heard  that  it  was  over  without  their  being  present.  While
the  duke  of  Brabant  remained  at  Maestricht,  he  could  not  obtain  any  intelligence  of  his
enemies : he  therefore  determined  to  advance  and  enter  their  lands,  which  he  did  on  a
Wednesday,  and  there  encamped.  He  halted  that  day  and  the  next,  and  learnt  from  his
scouts  that  the  enemy  had  taken  the  field.  He  commanded  the  army  to  advance  into  the
territory  of  Juliers  and  burn  it.  This  Thursday  he  halted  at  an  early  hour.  The  van  Was
commanded  by  Guy  de  Ligny,  count  de  St.  Paul,  and  the  lord  Waleran  his  son,  who  though
very  young,  being  no  more  than  sixteen  years  old,  was  then  made  a knight.  The  Brabanters
encamped  very  close  together,  and,  as  it  appeared,  the  Germans  were  better  informed  of  their
state  than  the  Brabanters  were  concerning  them : for,  on  the  Friday  morning,  as  the  duke
had  heard  mass,  and  all  were  on  the  plain,  not  thinking  a battle  would  soon  take  place,  the
dukes  of  Juliers  and  Gueldres  made  their  appearance,  with  a large  and  well-mounted  body
of  men  at  arms.  The  duke  of  Brabant  was  told : “ Sir,  here  are  your  enemies  : put  on
your  helmets  quickly,  in  the  name  of  God  and  St.  George.”  He  was  well  pleased  on  hearing
this ; and  that  day  he  had  near  his  person  four  squires,  well  informed,  and  of  courage  to


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


307

save  such  a prince,  having  been  engaged  in  many  deeds  of  arms  and  pitched  battles  : their
names  were  John  de  Yalcon,  Baldwin  de  Beaufort,  Gerard  de  Blcs,  and  Orlando  de  Cologne.

The  men  of  Brussels  surrounded  the  duke  : some  were  mounted  with  their  servants
behind  them,  who  carried  flaggons  of  wine,  and  salmon,  trout,  and  eel-pies,  neatly  packed  in
handsome  towels  attached  to  their  saddles.  These  people,  with  their  horses,  filled  up  the
place  so  much,  that  no  proper  orders  could  be  given.  At  length,  Gerard  de  Bles  said  to  the
duke, — “ Sir,  order  all  these  horse  away  that  surround  us  : they  are  greatly  in  our  way,
and  prevent  us  from  knowing  what  is  become  of  the  van  and  rear  division,  under  your
marshal  sir  Robert  de  Namur."  “ I consent,”  replied  the  duke,  and  gave  his  orders.  Upon
this,  Gerard  and  his  companions,  sword  in  hand,  began  to  lay  about  them,  on  helmets  and
horses,  so  that  the  place  was  instantly  cleared ; for  no  one  would  willingly  have  his  horse
wounded  or  killed.  To  make  an  end  of  the  business,  the  dukes  of  Juliers  and  Gueldres
advanced  full  gallop  on  the  van,  under  the  command  of  the  count  de  St.  Paul  and  his  son,
which  they  broke  and  defeated,  and  many  were  slain  and  made  prisoners.  This  division
made  the  greatest  resistance,  and  the  count  de  St.  Paul  and  his  son  were  among  the  dead.
Fortune  was  unkind  to  the  duke  of  Brabant  and  his  allies;  for  this  battle  was  so  severe,
few  men  of  honour  escaped  death  or  captivity.

The  duke  of  Brabant,  sir  Robert  de  Namur,  sir  Lewis,  his  brother,  sir  William  de  Namur,
son  to  the  count  de  Namur,  were  made  prisoners,  and  such  numbers  of  others,  that  their
enemies  were  fully  occupied  when  they  surrendered  to  them.  There  were  many  slain  on  the
side  of  the  dnke  of  Juliers  : but  you  know  it  is  a general  observation,  a defeated  army  always
suffers  the  most.  The  Brabanters,  however,  had  one  satisfaction  in  their  great  loss,  in  the  death
of  duke  Edward  of  Gueldres ; for  it  was  the  opinion  of  all,  that  had  he  survived,  he  would
have  overrun  the  country,  and  conquered  the  whole,  as  well  as  Brussels,  without  meeting
any  opposition ; for  he  was  a most  outrageously  bold  knight,  and  detested  the  Brabanters,
on  account  of  the  three  castles  they  held  from  him.  The  duke  of  Juliers  gained  this
victory  on  a Friday  of  August,  the  eve  of  St.  Bartholomew’s  day,  in  the  year  of  our
Lord  137L

The  duchess  of  Brabant,  in  her  distress,  had  recourse  to  king  Charles  Y.  of  France,  who
was  nephew  to  the  duke.  The  king  advised  her  to  apply  in  person  to  the  emperor  of
Germany,  as  being  brother  to  the  duke  of  Brabant,  and  because  he  had  suffered  in  the
support  of  the  emperor’s  rights.  The  lady  did  so,  and  went  to  Coblentz,  where  she  found
the  emperor,  to  whom  she  made  her  complaints.  The  emperor  heard  her  with  attention,
and  was  bound  by  several  reasons  to  grant  her  relief  and  comfort ; first,  because  the  duke
was  his  brother,  and  because  he  had  appointed  him  his  vicar  of  the  empire,  and  chief  of  the
Languefride.  He  consoled  the  duchess,  and  told  her,  that  before  the  ensuing  summer  were
passed,  he  would  provide  an  ample  remedy  for  what  had  happened.  The  duchess  returned
to  Brabant  greatly  comforted.  The  emperor,  lord  Charles  of  Bohemia,  was  not  inactive ;
for  as  soon  as  the  winter  was  passed,  he  went  to  the  noble  city  of  Cologne,  where  he  made
such  vast  provision  of  stores,  as  if  he  were  about  to  march  to  the  conquest  of  a kingdom.
He  wrote  to  all  counts  and  dukes  who  held  lands  under  him,  to  meet  him  the  third  day  of
June*,  at  Aix-la-Chapelle.  each  accompanied  by  fifty  horse,  under  pain  of  forfeiture  of  his
lands  for  disobedience.  He  particularly  summoned  duke  Albert,  earl  of  Hainault,  to  Aix,
with  fifty  horse,  who  obeyed.

When  all  the  lords  who  had  been  summoned  were  arrived  at  Aix-la-Chapelle,  the  place
was  much  crowded,  and  the  emperor  then  declared  he  would  instantly  enter  the  duchy  of
Juliers  to  destroy  it,  on  account  of  the  great  outrage  that  had  been  offered  him,  by  the  duke
of  Juliers  taking  up  arms  against  his  vicar  and  brother ; for  such  had  been  the  sentence
adjudged  in  the  courts  of  the  empire.  The  archbishop  of  Treves,  the  archbishop  of  Cologne,
the  bishop  of  Mentz,  the  bishop  of  Liege,  duke  Albert  of  Bavaria,  the  duke  Otho  of
Bavaria t,  his  brother,  and  many  great  barons  of  Germany,  relations  of  the  duke  of  Juliers,
having  consulted  together,  thought  that  to  destroy  the  whole  of  the  territories  of  so  valiant
a knight,  was  a punishment  too  severe.  They  therefore  proposed  that  the  duke  of  Juliers

f Ot’110  V.,  surnamed  “ le  faineant,’’  margrave  of  Brandenburg.— Ed.

x 2


* 1372.— Ed.


303


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


should  be  summoned,  and  brought  to  acknowledge  his  error.  This  being  agreed  to,  all
parties  laboured  to  bring  about  a reconciliation.

Duke  Albert  and  his  brother  went  to  Juliers,  where  they  found  the  duke  so  much
dismayed  at  this  large  armament  of  the  emperor,  that  he  knew  not  how  to  act,  nor  what
counsel  to  follow,  for  he  had  heard  it  was  intended  against  him,  unless  his  friends  exerted
themselves  to  avert  it.  The  duke  of  Juliers  was  much  rejoiced  and  comforted  by  the  arrival
of  two  such  lords  as  duke  Albert  of  Bavaria  and  the  duke  Otho,  his  brother,  beside  being
his  relations  ; for  he  knew  they  would  not  allow  him  to  suffer  any  disgrace,  but  would  give
him  the  best  advice  for  his  conduct.  They  counselled  him  as  follows : to  send  some  of  his
principal  knights  for  his  cousin  the  duke  of  Brabant,  whom  he  had  detained  a prisoner  at
large  in  the  town  and  castle  of  Judeque#.  When  lie  was  brought  to  them,  these  lords  paid
him  every  respect  that  was  his  due.  They  then  all  left  Juliers  together,  and  rode  to  Aix,
where  they  dismounted  at  the  hotels  which  had  been  prepared  for  them.  Duke  Albert,  his
brother,  and  the  before-mentioned  prelates,  who  had  been  mediators  in  this  business,  went
to  the  emperor  and  his  council,  and  told  them,  that  the  duke  of  Juliers  was,  of  his  own  free
will,  come  to  wait  on  him,  and  was  willing  to  put  himself,  without  reservation,  in  his
power,  as  he  acknowledged  him  for  his  sovereign  and  liege  lord.  These  humble  words
greatly  softened  the  anger  of  the  emperor,  and  he  replied, — “ Let  the  duke  of  Juliers  come
hither.”

When  the  duke  of  Juliers  was  in  the  presence  of  the  emperor,  he  cast  himself  on  his
knees,  and  said, — “ Most  redoubted  and  sovereign  lord,  I understand  you  are  much  displeased
with  me  for  having  detained  so  long  in  prison  your  brother  of  Brabant.  I am  willing  to
refer  the  whole  matter  to  your  noble  self,  and  will  conform  to  whatever  may  be  your  judg-
ment and  that  of  your  council.”  The  emperor  made  no  answer  to  this  speech ; but  his  son,
the  king  of  Bohemia,  replied, — “ Duke  of  Juliers,  you  have  behaved  very  outrageously,  in
keeping  so  long  our  uncle  of  Brabant  prisoner ; and  had  it  not  been  for  your  well-beloved
cousins,  the  dukes  of  Bavaria  and  Austria,  who  have  so  warmly  interceded  for  you,  this
matter  would  have  turned  out  very  disagreeably  to  you,  and  you  would  have  well  deserved
that  it  should  do  so.  Continue  your  harangue,  and  manage  that  we  be  satisfied  with  you,
and  that  we  have  never  again  any  cause  to  complain  of  your  conduct ; for  another  time  it
will  cost  you  very  dear.”

The  duke  of  Juliers  was  still  on  his  knees  before  the  emperor,  seated  on  his  imperial
throne,  and  thus  spoke: — “ My  very  redoubted  and  sovereign  lord,  I acknowledge  that  I
have  been  guilty  of  contempt  to  your  imperial  dignity,  by  raising  an  army,  and  engaging
with  it  my  cousin,  your  brother,  the  vicar  of  the  holy  empire.  If  the  fortune  of  war  gave
me  the  day,  and  your  brother  was  taken  prisoner,  I now  restore  him  to  you  free  of  all
ransom  ; and,  if  you  please,  there  shall  never  again  be  ill-will  or  revenge  thought  on  between
us.”  The  prelates  and  princes,  standing  round,  said, — “ Most  renowned  lord,  accept  the
excuses  and  offers  which  your  cousin  the  duke  of  Juliers  makes  you,  and  let  them  satisfy
you.”  “We  are  willing  to  do  so,”  said  the  emperor;  and,  as  it  was  told  me,  in  further
confirmation  he  took  the  duke  of  Juliers  by  the  hand,  as  he  rose,  and  kissed  him  on  the
mouth.  The  king  of  Bohemia  and  duke  of  Brabant  did  the  same.

Thus  was  Winceslaus  of  Bohemia,  duke  of  Luxembourg  and  Brabant,  delivered  from  prison,
by  the  power  of  the  emperor,  without  ransom,  as  were  all  that  had  been  made  prisoners  by
the  duke  of  Juliers,  and  who  had  not  paid  their  ransoms,  by  the  treaties  that  were  drawn
up  in  consequence  of  this  reconciliation.  When  this  matter  had  been  concluded,  the
assembly  broke  up,  and  all  returned  to  their  homes.  The  emperor  went  to  Prague,  the
duke  of  Brabant  to  Brussels.  When  the  duke  of  Brabant  had  there  arrived,  he  imposed  a
very  heavy  tax  on  the  country,  to  make  restitution  to  the  knights  and  squires  for  some  part
of  the  losses  they  had  suffered.


* “Judeque.  ” Q.  if  not  Jiilich,  Juliers.


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


«09


CHAPTER  XCIX. A CONTINUATION  OF  THE  HISTORY  OF  TIIE  QUARREL  BETWEEN  BRABANT

AND  GUELDRES. ON  THE  DEATH  OF  DUKE  WINCESLAUS,  THE  YOUNG  WILLIAM  OF

JULIERS,  DUKE  OF  GUELDRES,  ENDEAVOURS  BY  EVERY  MEANS  TO  REGAIN  THE  THREE

CASTLES. 1IE  ALLIES  HIMSELF  TO  THE  KING  OF  ENGLAND,  BECAUSE  FRANCE  SUPPORTS

THE  RIGHTS  OF  THE  WIDOW-DUCHESS  OF  BRABANT.

I have  taken  much  pains  to  detail  all  the  particulars  of  this  matter  in  my  history,  to  bring
it  to  the  point  I aim  at,  which  is  to  explain  why  king  Charles  of  France  led  a powerful  army
into  Germany.  I might  indeed  have  passed  it  more  briefly  over,  if  I had  chosen;  but  the
dates  of  all  these  circumstances  ought  to  be  inserted  in  this  history.  In  truth,  I have  my
own  manner  of  relating  things,  which,  though  pleasing  to  me,  is  indifferent  enough.  When
I learnt  that  the  kings  of  France  and  England  were  about  to  interfere  in  this  business,  I
exerted  myself  to  examine  more  deeply  into  the  subject  than  I had  hitherto  done,  and  shall
continue  it  as  follows.

On  the  return  of  duke  Winceslaus  to  Brabant,  freed  from  all  dangers  of  prison,  as  you
have  heard,  he  was  desirous  of  visiting  his  states  and  castles,  as  well  in  the  duchy  of  Luxem-
bourg as  elsewhere.  He  took  therefore  his  road  towards  Alsace  and  the  city  of  Strasburg,
through  the  territory  of  Fauquemont.  He  visited  those  three  castles  which  had  caused  the
hatred  of  the  duke  of  Gueldres,  and  found  them  strong,  handsome,  and  well  situated.  If  he
liked  them  before,  he  was  now  still  more  pleased  with  them,  and  ordered  the  tenants  around
to  assist  in  strengthening  their  fortifications.  He  employed  masons,  carpenters  and  ditchers,
to  repair  and  ornament  them  ; and  before  his  departure,  he  appointed  a prudent  and  valiant
knight  called  sir  John  Grosset,  as  governor  in  chief,  with  orders  to  guard  and  defend  them
at  his  peril.  The  duke  continued  his  journey  through  his  states,  stopping  at  various  places,
according  to  his  pleasure,  and  then  returned  to  Brabant,  which  was  his  fixed  place  of
residence.

Sir  John  de  Blois  had  at  this  period  married  the  duchess-dowager  of  Gueldres,  to  whom
that  duchy  had  fallen  by  the  death  of  lord  Edward,  slain,  as  you  have  heard,  at  the  battle  of
Juliers  : but  the  duchess  of  Juliers  opposed  her  claim  on  Gueldres,  and  was  supported  by
the  majority  of  the  nobility  and  principal  towns ; for  she  was  more  popular  with  them  than
her  eldest  sister  because  she  had  a fine  son,  of  an  age  to  defend  them  in  war,  and  neither  her
sister  nor  her  husband,  sir  John  de  Blois,  had  ever  peaceable  possession  of  the  duchy.  The
war  to  support  the  claim  of  the  duchess,  in  which  he  was  forced  to  engage,  cost  him  upwards
of  one  hundred  thousand  francs ; and  after  all  William  de  Juliers,  son  to  the  duke  of  Juliers,
(who  had  early  shown  in  his  youth  that  chivalry  and  love  of  arms  had  descended  to  him  by
blood  on  both  sides)  remained  duke  of  Gueldres.  A union  was  concluded  between  him  and  the
eldest  daughter  of  duke  Albert,  who  was  married  to  the  lord  Edward  of  Gueldres,  but  the
marriage,  on  account  of  her  extreme  youth,  had  never  been  consummated.  By  this  union
with  lord  William,  she  remained  duchess  of  Gueldres.

Time  and  seasons  pass  and  change ; and  this  young  duke  increased  in  honour,  strength,
and  understanding,  with  a great  desire  for  deeds  of  arms,  and  a strong  inclination  to  add  to
his  states.  His  heart  was  more  English  than  French,  and  he  had  declared  in  his  younger
years  that  he  would  always  aid  the  kings  of  England  in  their  wars  ; for,  being  more  nearly
connected  by  blood  with  them  than  with  the  kings  of  France,  he  bore  them  greater  affection.
When  his  council  gave  him  to  understand  that  the  Brabanters  did  him  much  injury  by
the  detention  of  the  three  castles  which  the  duke  and  duchess  held  from  him,  he  replied,
“ Be  it  so  : wait  a while  : every  thing  has  its  turn.  It  is  not  yet  time  for  me  to  exert
myself,  for  our  cousin  of  Brabant  has  too  many  powerful  friends ; but  a time  may  come,
when  I will  rouse  myself  in  earnest.”  Things  remained  in  this  state,  until  God  was  pleased
to  call  to  him  duke  Winceslaus,  who  died  duke  of  Brabant  and  Luxembourg,  as  has  been
already  related  in  this  history.  The  duchess  and  the  states  suffered  a great  loss  by  the  death
of  this  gallant  duke.

The  young  duke  of  Gueldres,  who  was  now  of  an  age  to  maintain  his  pretensions  by
arms  against  his  enemies,  began  to  take  measures  for  the  regaining  these  three  castles,  which


310


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


had  created  such  hatred  between  Brabant  and  his  uncle,  the  lord  Edward  of  Gueldres.  He
sent  persons  properly  authorised  to  treat  with  the  duchess  of  Brabant  for  the  surrender  of
the  castles,  on  payment  of  the  sum  they  had  been  mortgaged  for  : but  the  lady  replied  that,
as  they  were  now  legally  in  her  possession,  she  would  keep  them  for  herself  and  her  heir,  as
her  lawful  inheritance  ; and  that  if  the  duke  were  in  earnest  in  his  professions  of  friendship
to  Brabant,  he  would  prove  it  by  yielding  up  the  town  of  Grave,  which  he  unjustly  detained.
The  Duke  of  Gueldres  on  hearing  this  answer,  which  was  not  very  agreeable  to  him,  was
much  piqued,  but  did  not  the  less  adhere  to  his  plans.  He  now  attempted  to  gain  over  to
his  interest  the  governor  of  those  castles,  sir  John  Grosset,  by  purchase  or  otherwise.  The
knight  was  prudent  and  steady  : he  told  those  who  had  been  sent  secretly  to  treat  with  him,
never  again  to  mention  the  subject,  for,  were  he  to  die  for  it,  he  would  never  act  dishonour-
ably, nor  be  guilty  of  treason  to  his  lawful  sovereign.  When  the  duke  found  he  had  not
any  hopes  of  succeeding  with  the  governor,  he  (as  I was  informed)  addressed  himself  to  sir
Reginald  d’Esconvenort,  and  excited  such  a hatred  between  him  and  sir  John  Grosset,  for  a
very  trifling  cause,  that  the  knight  was  shortly  after  murdered  in  the  plains,  either  by  sir
Reginald,  or  by  his  people,  or  through  an  ambuscade,  to  the  great  vexation  of  the  duchess  of
Brabant  and  that  country.  The  three  castles  were  put  under  an ot tier  governor  by  order  of
the  duchess  and  her  council.  Affairs  remained  some  years  in  this  state  ; hut  their  mutual
hatred  was  privately  kept  up,  as  well  for  these  castles  as  for  the  town  of  Grave.  Those
of  Gueldres  that  bordered  on  Brabant  did  as  much  mischief  as  they  could  to  their  neighbours,
more  particularly  the  inhabitants  of  Grave,  which  is  but  four  leagues  distant  from  Bois-le-
Duc,  and  a fine  open  country  to  ride  over  : they  therefore  harassed  greatly  the  Brabanters
near  that  part.

During  the  time  these  things  were  passing,  the  duke  of  Gueldres  crossed  the  sea  to  England,
to  visit  his  cousin  king  Richard,  and  his  other  relatives  the  dukes  of  Lancaster,  York,  and
Gloucester,  who  were  then  at  home,  and  the  great  barons  of  England.  They  made  him  good
cheer,  for  they  were  desirous  to  see  and  make  acquaintance  with  him,  having  before  heard
how  much  the  duke  was  attached  to  England.  In  this  journey  he  entered  into  an  alliance
with  the  king  of  England ; and,  although  he  had  not  hitherto  received  anything  from  the
king  to  induce  him  to  become  his  liegeman,  he  now  accepted  a pension  of  one  thousand
marcs  on  the  king  of  England’s  treasury,  which,  according  to  the  value  of  the  coin,  was  equal
to  four  thousand  francs  ready  money*.  He  was  advised  to  renew  his  claims  on  Brabant,
and  was  promised  to  he  effectually  assisted  by  England,  that  no  loss  should  accrue  to  him.
In  return  for  which,  he  swore  to  be  for  ever  loyal  in  his  services  to  England  : all  this  he
too  readily  entered  into.  When  this  treaty  had  been  concluded,  he  took  leave  of  the  king
and  his  barons,  and  returned  to  Gueldres,  when  he  told  the  duke  of  Juliers  what  he  had
done,  and  how  he  had  strengthened  himself  by  his  alliance  with  England.

The  duke  of  Juliers,  who,  from  age,  had  more  experience  than  his  son,  was  not  much
rejoiced  on  hearing  it,  and  said, — “ William,  what  you  have  done  maybe  the  cause  that
both  you  and  I shall  dearly  pay  for  your  visit  to  England.  Are  you  ignorant  of  the  power
of  the  duke  of  Burgundy,  and  that  he  has  not  his  equal  in  this  respect  ? He  is  the  next  heir
to  the  duchy  of  Brabant,  and  how  can  you  think  of  succeeding  in  any  opposition  to  him,  or
of  resisting  so  potent  a prince  ?”  “ How  !”  replied  the  duke  of  Gueldres,  “ the  more  rich

and  powerful  he  is,  the  better  to  make  war  on.  I had  rather  have  for  my  enemy  a rich  man,
who  has  large  possessions,  than  a little  baron  from  whom  nothing  can  be  gained : for  one
blow  I receive,  I wish  to  give  six ; besides,  the  emperor  of  Germany  is  so  much  connected
with  England,  that  I may  look  for  assistance  from  him  should  there  be  occasion.”  “ By  my
faith,  fair  son  William,  you  are  mad  ; and  more  of  your  schemes  will  fall  to  the  ground  than
will  be  accomplished.”

I will  explain  why  the  duke  of  Juliers  thus  checked  his  son,  and  doubted  of  the  success
of  his  enterprises.  The  late  king  of  France  exerted  himself  much  to  gain  friends  in  different
parts  : and,  though  he  could  not  prevail  on  many  to  join  him  in  his  wars,  yet,  by  gifts  and
other  compliments,  he  kept  them  quiet,  and  by  such  means  acquired  several  friends  in  the

* See  the  Foedera,  an.  10  Ricardi  II.  where  the  treaty  is  at  length.  The  pension  was  for  life,  of  one  thousand
pounds  sterling.


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c


311


empire  and  elsewhere.  When  the  emperor  had  forgiven  the  duke  of  Juliers’  conduct  to  the
duke  of  Brabant,  and  the  last,  by  obtaining  his  liberty,  was  reconciled  to  the  duke  of  Juliers,
he,  at  the  desire  of  the  king  of  France,  waited  on  him  at  Paris,  where  he  was  most  kindly
received.  The  king  gave  to  him  and  his  knights  very  rich  presents  of  jewels,  to  the
great  satisfaction  of  the  duke.  In  this  visit  the  duke  was  presented  with  Yierson*  and  its
lordships,  which  he  held  as  a fief  from  the  king,  to  whom  he  swore  lie  would  never  bear
arms  against  France.  Yierson  was  originally  dependent  on  the  counts  de  Blois,  is  situated
between  Blois  and  Berry,  and  may  be  worth  about  five  hundred  francs  a year.  During  the
reign  of  Charles  V.  he  truly  kept  his  oath,  and,  as  long  as  this  king  lived,  neither  bore  arms
himself,  nor  entered  into  any  treaty  with  the  enemies  of  Fiance.  When  Charles  YI.  began
his  reign,  he  was  so  much  embroiled  with  the  wars  with  Flanders  and  England,  that  he
could  not  attend  to  everything.  The  duke  of  Juliers,  not  being  summoned,  did  not  renew
his  homage  for  Yierson ; and  the  duke  of  Berry,  noticing  this,  seized  the  lands,  which  he
said  were  dependent  on  him,  and  thus  deprived  the  counts  of  Blois  of  their  rights.  This,
however,  caused  no  quarrel  between  the  families,  for  I saw  them  frequently  together,  and,
indeed,  from  their  connexion  it  was  right  they  should  be  good  friends ; for  Lewis,  son  of  the
duke  of  Berry,  was  married  to  the  lady  Mary,  daughter  of  the  count  de  Blois.  The  duke  of
Juliers  had  thoughts  of  claiming  the  lands  of  Yierson,  until  he  found  his  son  had  so  hastily,
and,  as  he  thought,  imprudently  allied  himself  with  England,  which  he  imagined  would  never
turn  out  to  his  advantage.  He  had  therefore  spoken  to  him  in  the  manner  I have  related,
when  the  duke  of  Gueldres  returned  from  England ; but  lie  paid  not  any  attention  to  it,
and,  as  he  was  young  and  rash,  replied  to  his  father,  that  he  would  not  do  otherwise  than
he  had  said  ; and  that  he  preferred  war  to  peace,  and  war  against  the  king  of  France  to  a
contest  with  a poorer  person.


CHAPTER  C. THE  DUCHESS  OF  BRABANT  SENDS  AMBASSADORS  TO  FRANCE  FOR  ASSISTANCE

AGAINST  THE  DUKE  OF  GUELDRES. THEY  ARRIVE  AT  THE  SAME  TIME  THE  DUKE’s

CHALLENGE  IS  BROUGHT,  AND  RECEIVE  FAVOURABLE  ANSWERS.

The  duchess  of  Brabant,  who  resided  at  Brussels,  was  well  informed  of  everything  that
was  passing,  and  that  the  duke  of  Gueldres  menaced  the  Brabanters  with  war.  She  was
fearful  that  he  would  put  his  threats  in  execution,  and  said, — “ Ah,  may  God  graciously
pardon  my  deceased  lord ; for,  had  he  been  alive,  the  duke  of  Gueldres  would  not  have
dared  to  use  the  expressions  I hear  he  has  done ; but,  because  I am  a woman,  and  old,  he
wants  to  attack  and  make  war  on  me.”  The  duchess  assembled  her  council  on  the  occasion ; for
she  knew  her  opponent  was  of  a hasty  temper,  and  that  action  would  soon  follow  his  words.
At  the  time  this  council  was  held,  the  duke  of  Gueldres  had  sent  his  defiance  to  the  king  of
France,  which  had  caused  great  slander  in  all  countries  where  it  had  been  told ; for  the  duke
was  but  a petty  prince  in  comparison  with  others ; and  the  tenor  of  this  challenge  was,  as
I heard,  written  in  such  imperious  and  coarse  language  as  astonished  all  who  saw  it.  This
challenge  was  spoken  of  variously,  according  as  the  different  persons  to  whom  it  was  told
were  attached.

The  council  of  the  duchess,  in  answer  to  her  when  she  demanded  their  advice,  said, — “ In
the  name  of  God,  lady,  what  you  ask  may  be  speedily  given.  W e advise,  that  you  send
ambassadors  to  the  king  of  France  and  to  the  duke  of  Burgundy.  You  have  a good
opportunity ; for  the  duke  of  Gueldres  has  sent  his  defiance  to  the  king  of  France  and  all
his  allies.  Should  he  carry  his  threats  into  execution,  and,  as  it  is  reported,  make  war  on
that  kingdom,  in  conjunction  with  the  English  and  Germans,  he  cannot  gain  a more  con-
venient entrance  into  it,  than  through  your  duchy.  It  is  right,  therefore,  the  king  and  the
duke  of  Burgundy  be  prepared,  and  that  all  your  castles  on  the  frontiers  be  well  supplied
with  men  at  arms ; for  there  is  no  enemy  so  contemptible,  but  that  he  should  be  feared.

* “ Vierson,” — a city  of  Berry,  on  the  Cher,  diocese  of  Bourges,  twenty-two  leagues  from  Orleans.


312


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


We  do  not  mean  to  say  that  against  him  alone,  nor  for  what  the  Gueldrians  may  be  able  to
do  against  ns,  we  should  seek  for  assistance  or  allies  : oh,  no  ; but  on  account  of  the
connexions  he  may  have  formed  with  foreign  countries,  especially  with  the  English,  in  whose
cause  he  is  now  arming,  and  the  Germans,  who  are  avaricious,  and  eager  to  make  war  on
France  for  the  wealth  they  hope  to  find  there.”  The  duchess  replied,  “ Your  advice  is  good,
and  I will  that  attention  be  paid  to  it.”  The  envoys  to  France  were  chosen  from  among  the
privy  counsellors  of  Brabant,  and  were  the  lord  de  Bourgueval  master  of  the  household,  sir
John  Opem,  a most  amiable  knight,  sir  Nicholas  de  la  Monnoye,  and  John  de  Grave,  a clerk.
When  their  credential  letters  were  drawn  out  and  sealed,  they  left  Brussels  and  took  the
road  to  Paris.  At  this  time,  however,  the  king  and  the  duke  of  Burgundy  were  at  Rouen,
whither  the  ambassadors  went.

On  their  arrival  at  Rouen,  they  waited  first  on  the  duke  of  Burgundy,  who  entertained
them  handsomely,  as  he  knew  them  well,  and  showed  him  their  credential  letters.  The  duke
having  perused  them,  at  the  proper  hour  led  them  to  the  king,  who  received  them  graciously,
from  his  regard  to  their  duchess.  The  king,  after  reading  their  papers,  said, — “ What  you
request,  demands  consideration : keep  near  our  fair  uncle  of  Burgundy,  and  your  business
shall  be  attended  to,  and  concluded  as  speedily  as  may  be.”  This  answer  was  satisfactory
to  them,  and,  having  taken  leave  of  the  king  and  the  duke  of  Burgundy,  they  returned  to  their
lodgings.  The  king  of  France,  his  uncles  and  the  lords  of  his  council,  had,  at  this  moment,  full
employment,  and  were  daily  in  council  respecting  different  matters  which  required  it.  The
challenge  of  the  duke  of  Gucldres  was  not  very  agreeable  ; and  they  knew  not  the  intentions
of  the  duke  of  Brittany,  from  his  strange  conduct  in  regard  to  the  constable  of  France.  They
had  likewise  heard  he  was  busy  in  providing  all  his  towns  and  castles  with  stores  and  men
at  arms ; and  that  his  correspondence  was  now  more  frequent  than  ever  with  the  king  of
England  and  his  two  uncles  : for  the  duke  of  Lancaster  was  still  in  Galicia.  The  council  of
France  had,  therefore,  enough  to  do,  to  weigh  well  these  matters;  and  were  so  much  occupied
on  them,  that  the  Brabanters  waited  some  time  for  their  answer.  At  length  the  duke  of
Burgundy  gave  it  them  as  follows  : “ You  will  return  to  our  fair  aunt,  and  salute  her  many
times  in  my  name.  Give  her  these  letters  from  the  king  and  from  me ; and  tell  her,  that
we  consider  her  affairs  as  our  own,  and  desire  her  not  to  be  alarmed  at  anything,  for  she
shall  have  speedy  aid ; and  tell  her  that  the  country  of  Brabant  shall  not,  in  any  way,  be  hurt
or  damaged.”  This  answer  was  very  agreeable  to  the  ambassadors,  who  instantly  returned  to
Paris,  and  thence  to  Brussels,  and  gave  the  duchess  a detailed  account  of  what  had  passed,
and  of  the  answer  they  had  received,  so  that  she  was  perfectly  contented.


CHAPTER  CI. — CONCERNING  TIIE  RUMOURS  OP  THE  SIGNS  OF  SANCTITY  WHICH  WERE
MANIFESTED  BY  THE  CARDINAL  DE  LUXEMBOURG  AFTER  HIS  DEATH. THE  EXTRA-

ORDINARY END  OF  THE  KING  OF  NAVARRE.

About  this  period,  there  were  many  rumours,  that  the  body  of  Saint  Peter  de  Luxembourg,
who  had  been  a cardinal,  showed  miraculous  powers  in  the  city  of  Avignon.  This  holy
cardinal  was  the  son  of  the  lord  Guy  de  Saint  Paul,  slain  at  the  battle  of  Juliers.  I must
say,  that  the  cardinal  led  a most  holy  and  devout  life,  doing  works  agreeable  to  God  ; for  he
was  courteous,  modest,  chaste,  and  a great  almsgiver.  He  kept  from  his  church  preferments
merely  sufficient  for  his  maintenance,  and  gave  all  the  rest  to  the  poor.  He  was  the  greater
part  of  the  day  and  night  in  prayer,  and  shunned  all  worldly  vanities.  His  life  was  so
devout  that  it  pleased  God  to  call  him  in  his  youth  ; and,  instantly  after  his  death,  his  body,
which  he  had  ordered  to  be  buried  in  the  common  sepulchre  with  the  poor,  performed
miracles,  for  his  whole  life  was  full  of  humility,  but  it  was  interred  in  the  chapel  of  St.
Michael.  When  the  pope  and  cardinals  perceived  that  miracles  increased  from  this  holy
body,  they  sent  an  account  of  them  to  the  king  of  France,  and  to  the  elder  brother  of  the  saint,
count  Waleran  de  St.  Paul,  inviting  him  to  come  to  Avignon.  The  count  could  not  refuse,
and,  when  he  went  thither,  presented  those  fine  silver  lamps  which  are  now  before  his  altar.


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


31.3


It  was  wonderful  the  great  faith  that  was  in  this  saint,  and  the  numbers  who  came  thither
when  I was  at  Avignon ; for  by  that  city  I returned  from  Foix,  to  witness  this.  His
miracles  and  votaries  daily  multiplied,  and  it  was  said  he  would  be  canonized ; but  I never
heard  more  about  it.

Since  I have  related  the  death  of  this  holy  cardinal,  I will  mention  that  of  a different  person,
for  I have  not  yet  spoken  of  the  death  of  a king  who  has  supplied  ample  materials  for  many
parts  of  this  history.  His  actions,  however,  were  the  reverse  from  those  of  the  preceding
personage,  for  by  them  the  realm  of  France  was  nearly  destroyed.  You  will  readily  guess  I
mean  the  king  of  Navarre.  It  is  a truth  well  known,  that  nothing  is  more  certain  than
death.  I repeat  it  because  the  king  of  Navarre,  when  he  died,  did  not  think  his  end  so  near.
Had  he  supposed  it,  he  probably  would  have  taken  more  care  of  himself.  He  resided  in  the
city  of  Pampeluna,  and  took  it  into  his  head  that  he  would  raise  two  hundred  thousand
florins  by  a tax  on  his  country.  His  council  dared  not  contradict  him,  for  he  was  a cruel
man  to  all  who  did  so.  The  principal  inhabitants  of  the  great  towns  were  summoned,  and,
fearful  of  disobeying,  they  came.  When  all  were  assembled  in  the  palace,  the  king  himself,
who  was  a subtle  and  eloquent  man,  explained  to  them  the  reasons  why  he  wanted  money ;
and  that  two  hundred  thousand  florins  must  be  raised  from  the  country,  in  such  wise  that
the  rich  should  pay  ton  francs  each,  the  middling  ranks  five,  and  the  poor,  one  franc.  This
demand  much  astonished  his  audience  ; for  the  preceding  year  there  had  been  a battle  in
Navarre,  which  had  caused  a tax  to  be  laid  for  one  hundred  thousand  florins  : lie  had,  beside,
in  the  same  year,  married  his  daughter  the  lady  Jane  to  the  duke  of  Brittany,  and  there
were  large  arrears  of  the  tax  of  her  dower  yet  unpaid.

The  king  having  demanded  their  answer,  they  requested  some  time  to  consult  together  :
he  allowed  them  fifteen  days,  when  they  were  all  to  meet  again  in  the  same  place,  that  is  to
say,  those  who  had  come  from  the  cities  and  towns ; on  which  they  departed.  When  news
of  this  heavy  tax  was  known,  the  whole  country  was  in  consternation.  At  the  end  of  the
fifteen  days,  they  assembled  again  at  Pampeluna,  and  the  deputies  from  the  principal  towns
amounted  to  about  sixty  persons.  The  king  would  hear  their  answer  in  person,  and  he
ordered  them  to  make  it  in  a large  orchard,  which  was  distant  from  the  palace,  and  inclosed
with  high  walls.  In  giving  their  answer,  they  explained  how  impossible  it  was  for  the
country  to  pay  this  new  tax,  from  the  poverty  of  the  kingdom,  and  from  the  arrears  of  former
taxes  being  still  unpaid.  They  were  unanimous  in  this  declaration,  and  begged  of  him,  for
God’s  sake,  to  have  pity  on  them,  for  the  country  could  not  in  truth  bear  any  additional
tax.

When  the  king  of  Navarre  found  he  had  not  any  hopes  of  success,  he  was  silent  and
discontented:  on  leaving  them  he  said,  “You  have  been  badly  advised:  consult  together
again  : ” and  then  went  away,  followed  by  his  council.  The  deputies  were  shut  up  in  this
orchard,  with  orders  for  no  one  to  be  suffered  to  go  out  of  it,  and  very  little  meat  or  drink
to  be  given  them.  They  remained  thus  in  great  fear  of  their  lives,  and  none  dared  open  their
lips.  It  may  be  supposed  he  succeeded  at  last  in  his  plan;  for  he  beheaded  three  of  the
most  determined  in  their  opposition,  to  frighten  the  others  to  his  will.  At  this  moment  an
extraordinary  event  happened  at  Pampeluna,  which  seemed  a judgment  from  God.  I will
relate  it,  as  several  persons  from  Pampeluna  told  it  me  at  Foix,  which  is  but  three  days’
journey  off.

It  was  reported,  that  the  king  of  Navarre  was  fond  of  women,  and  had  at  this  time  a very
handsome  lady  for  his  mistress,  with  whom  he  occasionally  amused  himself,  for  he  had  been
long  a widower.  Having  passed  a night  with  her,  he  returned  to  his  own  chamber,  shivering
with  cold,  and  said  to  one  of  his  valets,  “ Prepare  my  bed,  for  I want  to  lie  down  and  repose
myself  a little.”  When  ready,  he  undressed  himself  and  went  to  bed;  but  he  was  no  sooner  laid
down  than  he  began  to  shake,  and  could  not  get  warm.  He  was  of  a great  age,  about  sixty,
and  accustomed  to  have  his  bed  well  warmed  with  heated  air  to.  make  him  sweat ; and  this
practice  he  had  long  continued  without  any  visible  harm.  He  ordered  his  servants  to  warm
the  bed  as  usual ; but  this  time,  either  by  the  will  of  God  or  the  devil,  it  turned  out  very
unfortunate,  for  the  flames  somehow  set  fire  to  the  sheets,  and  it  could  not  be  extinguished
before  they  were  destroyed,  and  the  king,  who  was  wrapped  up  in  them,  horridly  burnt  as


814


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


far  as  his  navel.  He  did  not  instantly  die,  but  lingered  on,  in  great  pain  and  misery,  fifteen
days ; for  neither  surgeon  nor  physician  could  apply  any  remedies  to  prevent  his  death.
Such  was  the  end  of  the  king  of  Navarre,  which,  however,  freed  his  poor  subjects  from  the
tax  he  would  have  laid  on  them.  His  son  Charles  was  a young,  handsome,  and  gallant
knight : he  was  acknowledged  king  of  Navarre  by  all  Iris  subjects,  and,  soon  after  the
obsequies  of  his  father,  was  crowned  in  the  city  of  Pampeluna*.


OHAPTER  CII.— THE  DUKE  OF  BERRY  BESIEGES  VENTADOURf.

You  have  before  read  of  the  treaties  the  count  d’Armagnac  and  the  dauphin  of  Auvergne
attempted  to  make  with  the  captains  of  the  free  companies  who  held  castles  and  forts  in
Auvergne,  the  Gevaudan,  and  Limousin,  and  were  at  war  with  their  neighbours.  Many  of
them  wrere  inclined  to  accept  the  terms  offered,  for  they  thought  they  had  sufficiently  plun-
dered France,  and  wished  to  do  the  same  elsewhere.  The  count  d’Armagnac  promised  to
lead  them  into  Lombardy ; but  the  count  de  Foix,  whom  it  was  not  easy  to  deceive,  imagined
that  was  not  his  intention,  and  made  secret  inquiries  as  to  the  progress  of  the  business,  and
whither  the  men  at  arms  were  to  march  on  quitting  their  strongholds.  The  common  report
was,  that  they  still  continued  their  courses,  for  the  men  of  the  country  so  related  it  to  him.
Upon  hearing  this,  he  shook  his  head,  and  said, — “Such  men  at  arms  wall  not  be  trifled
with.  The  count  d’Armagnac  and  his  brother  Bernard  are  young,  and  I know  they  neither
love  me  nor  my  country  : these  men  at  arms,  therefore,  may  perchance  fall  on  me,  unless  I
shall  take  proper  order  to  guard  against  them.  The  proverb  says,  ‘ Long  provision  before-
hand maketh  sure  possession.’  ”

The  count  de  Foix  was  not,  in  truth,  wrong  in  his  conjectures,  as  appearances  at  one  time
showed,  which  I shall  relate,  if  I carry  my  history  to  that  length.  You  have  heard  how
that  Breton,  Geoffiry  Tetenoire,  had  long  held  the  castle  of  Yentadour,  on  the  borders  of
Auvergne  and  the  Bourbonnois,  and  had  refused  to  surrender  for  any  money  that  had  been
offered  him.  He  considered  this  castle  as  his  own  inheritance,  and  had  forced  all  the  sur-
rounding country  to  enter  into  composition  with  him  to  avoid  being  plundered.  By  this
means  every  one  could  labour  the  ground  at  theh-  pleasure,  and  he  was  enabled  to  keep  the
state  of  a great  baron.  He  was  a cruel  man,  and  very  ferocious  in  his  anger,  minding  no
more  killing  a man  than  a beast.  You  must  know,  that  when  the  tax  for  the  redemption
of  these  castles  was  first  raised,  those  in  Auvergne,  imagining  that  Yentadour  would  be
surrendered  to  the  duke  of  Berry,  and  the  country  delivered  from  the  oppressions  of  the
garrison,  very  cheerfully  paid  their  quota.  But  when  they  saw,  that  of  those  garrisons  who
continued  their  inroads,  that  of  Yentadour  was  the  most  daring,  they  were  very  disconsolate
and  considered  the  tax  that  had  been  raised  as  thrown  away.  They  declared,  that  until  the
garrison  of  Yentadour  was  prevented  from  overrunning  the  country,  they  would  never  pay
one  farthing  of  any  future  tax.  This  was  carried  to  the  duke  of  Berry,  who  was  lieutenant
of  Limousin,  Gevaudan,  and  Auvergne,  and  he  declared  to  his  council,  that  those  who  had
made  such  declaration  were  in  the  right,  and  that  the  promises  that  had  been  held  out  were


* “Charles  king  of  Navarre  died  in  1387,  aged  55
years.  His  death  was  worthy  of  his  life.  He  was  wrapped
up  in  cloths  that  had  been  dipped  in  spirits  of  wine  and
sulphur  to  re-animate  the  chill  in  his  Prnbs,  caused  by
his  debaucheries,  and  to  cure  his  leprosy.  By  some  acci-
dent, they  caught  fire,  as  they  were  sewing  them  about
him,  and  burnt  the  flesh  off  his  bones.  It  is  thus  that
almost  all  the  French  historians  relate  the  death  of  Charles;
hut  in  the.letter  of  the  bishop  of  Dax,  his  principal  minister,
to  queen  Blanche,  the  sister  of  this  prince,  and  widow  of
Philip  de  Valois,  there  is  not  one  word  said  of  this  horrid
accident,  hut  only  of  the  great  pains  he  suffered  in  his  last
illness,  and  the  resignation  with  which  he  bore  them.
Voltaire  pretends  that  Charles  was  not  worse  than  many
other  princes.  Ferreras  had  said  before  him,  that  the  French
eimamed  him  Charles  the  Bad,  on  account  of  the  troubles


he  had  fomented  in  the  kingdom  ; hut  that,  if  his  actions
were  examined,  he  would  be  found  not  sufficiently  wicked
to  deserve  such  a sirname.  It  is,  however,  precisely  his
actions  that  have  caused  it.  He  was,  says  father  Daniel,
treacherous,  revengeful,  cruel,  and  the  sole  cause  of  the
ruin  of  France.  Father  Daniel  speaks  exactly  like  Mari-
ana, who  has  painted  with  energy  his  cruelties,  his  infa-
mous debaucheries,  and  his  treasons.  Our  best  historians
have  done  the  same.  But  it  is  one  of  the  follies  of  our
age  to  attempt  the  re-establishment  of  the  most  worthless
characters,  and  to  cry  down  those  reputations  that  have
been  the  most  exalted.” —

Nouveau  Dictionnaire  Historique.

For  more  of  Charles  de  Navarre,  sec  les  Memoires  de
l’Academie.

f “ Veutadour,” — a castle  in  the  diocese  of  Limoges.


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


515


badly  kepi,  by  their  not  having  so  closely  besieged  the  place,  as  to  prevent  the  garrison
sallying  forth.  The  duke  then  ordered  that  four  hundred  spears  should  be  collected,  and
paid  by  the  country,  and  placed  under  the  command  of  sir  William  de  Lignac  and  sir  John
Bonne-lance,  a courteous  and  valiant  knight  from  the  Bourbonnois,  for  them  to  invest  Yen-
tadour  completely  on  all  sides  with  block-houses.

These  knights  and  men  at  arms  laid  their  siege  as  closely  as  they  could  to  the  castle,  and
erected  four  block-houses  : they  also  had  large  trenches  cut  by  the  peasants,  and  every
obstruction  thrown  across  the  roads  they  used  to  take,  so  that  the  garrison  was  completely
shut  in.  Geoffry,  however,  was  indifferent  to  this  : for  he  knew  he  had  provision  and  stores
to  last  for  seven  years,  and  that  his  castle  was  so  strongly  placed  upon  a rock  that  it  could
not  be  taken  by  storm ; and,  notwithstanding  these  block-houses,  and  this  supposed  complete
blockade,  he,  at  times,  with  some  of  his  companions,  made  sallies  through  a postern  that
opened  between  two  hidden  rocks,  and  overran  the  country  in  search  of  wealthy  prisoners.
They  never  brought  anything  beside  with  them  to  the  castle,  on  account  of  the  difficulty  of
the  passes.  This  opening  could  not  be  closed,  and,  to  the  surprise  of  the  country,  they  were
found  abroad  seven  leagues  distant : if  they  were  by  accident  pursued,  and  had  once  regained
their  mountains,  though  the  chase  lasted  for  three  leagues,  they  considered  themselves  as
secure  as  if  in  their  fort.  This  manner  of  harassing  the  country  was  long  continued  ; and
the  siege  of  the  castle,  in  the  manner  I have  related,  lasted  for  more  than  a year  : by  it  the
country  was  saved  the  large  sums  they  used  to  pay  as  composition-money.  We  will,  for  the
present,  leave  Ventadour,  and,  by  way  of  variety  speak  of  other  matters.


CHAPTER  cm. — THE  DUKE  OF  BURGUNDY  SENDS  FOUR  HUNDRED  SPEARS  TO  THE  DUCHESS
OF  BRABANT. THEY  SURPRISE  AND  BURN  THE  TOWN  OF  SEAULLE  IN  GUELDRES.

The  duke  of  Burgundy  was  not  forgetful  of  his  promise  to  his  aunt,  the  duchess  of  Brabant.
He  assembled  a body  of  four  hundred  good  men  at  arms,  from  Burgundy  and  other  parts,
and  appointed  two  knights  for  their  commanders  : the  one  was  sir  William  de  la  Tremouille,
a Burgundian;  the  other,  sir  Gervais  de  Merande,  a German:  and  said  to  them, — “You
will  conduct  these  men  at  arms  to  that  part  of  the  frontiers  of  Brabant  and  Gueldres  our  fair
aunt  and  her  council  have  fixed  on,  and  make  a severe  war  on  her  enemy,  for  such  are  our
commands.”  The  knights  replied,  they  were  ready  and  willing  to  obey  his  orders.  When
all  their  stores  and  men  were  assembled,  they  set  out  for  Brabant,  and,  having  entered  the
duchy  of  Luxembourg,  sent  to  inform  the  duchess  of  their  coming.  The  marshal  of  Brabant
went  to  meet  and  conduct  them,  and,  by  the  directions  of  the  council,  quartered  them  in  the
three  castles  the  duke  of  Gueldres  claimed,  of  which  they  now  formed  the  garrison,  and,  being
on  the  enemylg  land,  went  forth  daily  in  hopes  to  meet  them.  The  duke  of  Gueldres,
perceiving  that  hostilities  were  begun,  reinforced  all  his  towns  and  castles,  and  made  every
preparation  to  withstand  his  opponents.  Sir  William  de  la  Tremouille,  desirous  to  gain
renown,  and  to  do  some  act  that  should  make  it  known  he  was  in  the  country,  cast  his  eyes
on  a town  of  Gueldres,  about  four  leagues  from  the  castle  wherein  he  was,  in  hopes  to  gain
it : it  was  called  Seaulle.  Having  secretly  opened  his  mind  to  sir  Gervais  de  Merande,  and
explained  his  intentions,  he  agreed  to  accompany  him  ; for  he  was  equally  anxious  for  deeds
of  arms.  Having  collected  men  from  the  different  garrisons,  they  marched  off  at  midnight,
at  a brisk  trot,  under  the  care  of  able  guides,  who  brought  them  to  Seaulle  near  the  point  of
day.  They  then  halted,  and  formed  another  disposition,  which,  as  it  was  told  me,  was  as
follows  : sir  Gervais,  with  only  thirty  lances,  was  to  leave  the  main  body,  and,  if  possible,  to
gain  and  keep  the  gate,  until  sir  William  should  arrive  with  the  remainder ; for  if  the  whole
had  advanced,  an  alarm  might  have  been  given,  but  so  few  would  possibly  be  taken  for  a
party  whom  the  duke  of  Gueldres  had  sent  to  reinforce  the  place,  or  some  of  his  men  who
were  riding  from  one  town  to  another.

As  they  had  planned,  so  was  it  executed  : sir  Gervais  left  the  army  with  thirty  German
spears,  and  rode  towards  the  town.  He  passed  indeed  many  people  on  his  road  thither  ; for
it  was  market-day,  and,  as  he  passed,  saluted  them  in  German,  which  made  them  all  suppose


316


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


they  were  their  countrymen,  attached  to  the  duke  of  Gueldres,  and  going  to  the  garrison.
Sir  Gervais  rode  on  until  he  came  to  the  gate,  which  he  found  wide  open  and  slightly  guarded  :
indeed  it  was  so  early,  that  few  were  out  of  bed.  They  there  halted,  and  were  scarcely
masters  of  the  gate,  when  sir  William  de  la  Tremouille,  with  the  main  body,  came  up  full
gallop,  and  entered  the  town,  shouting  their  cry.  Thus  was  the  town  won  without  any
defence  being  made : the  garrison  never  imagined  the  French  would  have  been  so  enter-
prising, and  the  greater  part  were  still  in  bed.  It  was  on  the  Martinmas  eve  this  deed  was
done.  Three  days  before,  an  English  knight  had  entered  the  town  with  ten  spears  and
thirty  archers,  whom  the  king  of  England  had  sent  thither.  The  knight’s  name  was  sir
William  Fikaoul*  ; and,  at  the  moment  of  the  first  noise  and  bustle,  he  was  getting  out  of
his  bed.  Hearing  the  town  was  taken,  he  asked  by  whom  ; he  was  told  by  Bretons.  “ Ha!”
said  he,  “ Bretons  are  wicked  fellows  : they  will  pillage  and  burn  the  town,  and  then  leave
it : whose  cry  have  they?  ” “ In  the  name  of  God,”  replied  a knight,  “they  cry  Tremouille!”

Sir  William  Fikaoul,  upon  this,  armed  himself,  and  made  his  men  do  the  same,  and
barricade  his  house,  to  see  if  any  would  come  to  his  rescue,  but  in  vain;  for  every  one  was
so  frightened,  they  were  flying  in  all  directions,  some  for  the  church,  others  to  escape  by  an
opposite  gate  to  that  the  enemy  had  entered,  abandoning  all  they  possessed.  The  French  set
fire  to  the  town  to  alarm  others  at  a distance,  but  there  were  many  houses  of  stone  and
brick  which  could  not  be  affected  by  it : however,  the  greater  part  was  burnt  down  and
pillaged,  for  nothing  worth  taking  was  left ; and  they  carried  away  some  of  the  richest
inhabitants  prisoners.

The  English  knight  was  taken  doing  his  duty.  When  he  saw  all  was  lost,  he  ordered
his  house  to  be  cleared  of  the  barricades ; for  lie  was  fearful  of  fire,  as  his  hall  was  full  of
smoke,  and,  placing  himself  and  men  in  front,  fought  very  valiantly,  but  at  length  was  made
prisoner  by  sir  William  de  la  Tremouille : his  men  were  likewise  taken,  for  few  were  slain.
When  the  French  had  done  all  they  listed  at  Seaulle,  in  Gueldres,  and  their  servants  had
packed  up  the  plunder,  they  departed,  for  it  would  have  been  folly  to  have  remained  longer’,
and  marched  to  their  different  garrisons.  Such  was  the  success  of  this  first  blow  the  duke
of  Gueldres  received  : he  was  much  vexed  when  he  heard  of  his  loss,  and  hastened  thither
with  a large  body  of  men  at  arms,  hoping  to  find  the  French  still  there.  He  strengthened
and  repaired  the  town,  and  placed  therein  a garrison,  who  were  more  diligent  in  guarding  it
than  the  preceding  one  had  been.  Thus  it  happens  in  war ; sometimes  one  side  loses,  and
sometimes  another.

The  duchess  of  Brabant  was  highly  pleased  with  the  success  of  sir  William  de  la  Tremouille
and  sir  Gervais  de  Merande,  and  they  acquired  much  renown  for  it  throughout  the  country.
It  was  the  common  talk  in  Brabant,  that  in  the  course  of  the  ensuing  summer,  they  would
renew  the  attack,  and  keep  possession  of  it,  for  they  should  then  have  a sufficient  force.
The  duke  of  Burgundy  was  well  pleased  to  hear  such  satisfactory  accounts  of  the  good
conduct  of  those  he  had  sent  to  Brabant;  and,  to  encourage  them  to  persevere,  he
frequently  wrote  to  his  knight  sir  William  de  la  Tremouille.  They  guarded  so  well  the
castles  on  the  frontier,  that  no  loss  happened  ; and  the  enemy  was  more  careful  in  regard  to
their  towns  than  they  had  been  before  the  capture  of  Seaulle.  I will  now  relate  an  exploit
of  Perrot  le  Bearnois  in  Auvergne,  and  detail  the  whole  history  of  it  at  length.


CHAPTER  CIV. GERONNET  DE  MAUDURANT,  ONE  OF  THE  CAPTAINS  OF  PERROT  LE  BEARNOIS,

HAVING  BEEN  MADE  PRISONER  BY  JOHN  BONNE-LANCE,  AT  MONTFERRANT  IN  AUVERGNE,
FINDS  MEANS,  AFTER  HIS  RANSOM  WAS  PAID,  TO  PUT  LE  BEARNOIS  IN  POSSESSION  OF
MONTFERRANT.

This  same  year,  about  the  middle  of  May,  forty  bold  companions  set  out  from  Chalu9etf,
in  the  possession  of  Perrot  le  Bearnois,  in  Limousin,  to  seek  adventures  in  Auvergne,  under
the  command  of  a squire  from  Gascony  called  Geronnet  de  Maudurant,  an  able  man  at  arms.

* “ Fikaoul.”  Ferard  has  Viizraoul,  and  my  MS.  Fitz-Paul.  Lord  Berners  has  the  same  as  in  the  text.

I “ Chalujet,” — election  of  Limoges,  near  Pierre-bufficre.


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


317


On  account  of  the  dread  this  country  and  the  borders  of  the  Bourbonnois  had  of  these  people,
the  duke  of  Bourbon  had  appointed,  for  its  defence,  one  of  his  knights,  a valiant  man  at  arms
called  sir  John  Bonne-lance,  who  was  courteous,  amorous,  and  eager  to  display  his  courage.
When  he  heard  these  companions  were  abroad,  he  asked  how  many  they  might  be : and
when  they  said,  “ About  forty,”  he  replied,  “ As  for  forty  lances,  we  do  not  fear  that
number : I will  take  as  many  to  meet  them.”  lie  then  departed  from  the  place  where  he
had  heard  of  this  excursion,  but  his  greater  force  was  before  Yentadour,  and  collected  about
forty  or  fifty  of  his  men  at  arms  that  were  dispersed  on  the  borders  of  Limousin,  Auvergne,
and  the  Bourbonnois,  for  he  was  very  desirous  to  perform  some  deed  of  arms.  He  had  with
him  sir  Lewis  d’Ambiere,  sir  Lewis  d’Abton,  and  the  lord  do  St.  Obise.  They  took  the
field  without  following  any  particular  road,  for  they  were  well  acquainted  with  the  country,
and  came  to  a pass  through  which  they  imagined  the  enemy  must  cross,  and  nowhere  else,
on  account  of  the  mountains,  and  a river  which  is  wide  and  deep  from  the  melting  of
the  snow.  They  had  not  been  there  half  an  hour  when  the  enemy  appeared,  no  way
suspecting  this  meeting.  Bonne-lance  and  his  party,  with  their  spears  in  their  rests,
charged  them,  shouting  their  cry  as  they  were  descending  the  mountain  on  foot.  When  they
found  they  must  fight,  they  put  a good  countenance  on  it,  and  prepared  for  their  defence :
Geronnet,  who  was  a stout  squire,  set  them  the  example.  Many  were,  at  the  first  onset,
beat  down  on  both  sides  ; but,  to  say  the  truth,  the  French  were  by  far  better  men  at  arms
than  these  adventurers,  which  they  showed,  for  not  one  turned  his  back  but  the  servants,
who  by  flight  saved  themselves  while  their  masters  were  fighting.  Two-and-twenty  were
made  prisoners,  and  sixteen  left  dead  on  the  field  : their  leader  surrendered  himself  prisoner
to  Bonne-lance.

The  victorious  party  set  out  on  their  return,  carrying  their  prisoners  with  them.  On  the
road,  Bonne-lance  recollected  that,  about  a month  ago,  when  at  Montferrant  in  Auvergne,  he
had  been  well  received  by  the  ladies  and  damsels,  and  that,  as  they  were  amusing  themselves,
they  said  to  him,  “ Fair  brother  Bonne-lance,  you  are  often  in  the  field,  and  must  at  times
meet  your  enemies.”  A lady,  who  was  much  in  his  good  graces,  added, — “ I am  sure  you
have  frequent  engagements  with  them,  and  I say  so  because  I should  like  to  see  an  English-
man. I have  often  heard,  from  a squire  of  this  country  with  whom  you  are  well  acquainted,
of  the  name  of  Gourdines,  that  they  are  determined  men  at  arms,  and  as  expert  as  any  in
this  country.  Indeed,  they  prove  it  by  their  gallantly,  and  by  taking  from  us  towns  and
castles,  and  keeping  possession  of  them.”  “ By  God,  fair  lady,”  replied  Bonne-lance,  “ if  I
have  the  good  fortune  to  make  one  of  them  my  prisoner,  you  shall  see  him.”  “ Many
thanks,”  answered  the  lady.  When  Bonne-lance  remembered  this,  he  had  taken  the  road
to  Clermont  in  Auvergne,  as  the  engagement  bad  been  hard  by ; but  he  quitted  it,  and
followed  that  to  Montferrant,  which  lay  about  one  league  off  on  the  left  hand.  The
inhabitants  of  Montferrant  were  in  high  spirits  at  the  success  of  Bonne-lance  over  these
adventurers,  and  gave  him  a hearty  welcome.

When  he  and  his  people  had  dismounted  at  the  hotel,  they  disarmed  and  took  their  ease.
The  ladies  and  damsels  assembled  to  entertain  and  feast  Bonne-lance,  whom  they  came
twenty  times  to  see.  He  gallantly  received  them,  for  he  was  a prudent  knight,  and
addressing  himself  to  the  lady  who  was  so  anxious  to  see  an  Englishman,  said, — “ Lady,  I
am  come  to  acquit  myself  of  the  promise  I made  you  about  a month  ago,  that  if  I should,
by  good  fortune,  take  an  Englishman  prisoner,  I would  show  him  to  you.  Through  the
grace  of  God,  I have  this  day  fallen  in  with  a party  of  very  valiant  ones  ; but,  although  they
gave  us  enough  to  do,  the  field  is  ours.  They  were  not  indeed  real  Englishmen,  but  Gascons
who  wage  war  under  that  name,  and  come  from  Bearn  and  upper  Gascony.  You  may  view
them  at  your  leisure ; for,  out  of  my  love  to  you,  I shall  leave  them  in  this  town  until  they
have  paid  me  their  ransom.”  The  ladies  laughed,  turned  the  matter  into  merriment,  and
said  they  wrere  obliged  to  him.  When  they  departed,  he  accompanied  them,  and  remained
in  Montferrant  for  three  days,  amusing  himself  with  the  ladies  and  damsels.  Bonne-lance,
during  his  stay,  gave  good  entertainment  to  Maudurant  and  his  companions,  as  he  saw  they
were  poor,  but  bold  fellows  in  the  field ; it  would  have  been  better  for  the  town  had  he
killed  or  drowned  them  than  to  have  left  them  there.


318


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


"When  lie  was  going  away,  lie  said  to  Geronnet,  “ You  will  remain  here  as  hostage  for
your  companions,  who  are  to  seek  your  ransom  ; and,  when  you  shall  he  prepared  to  pay,  I
have  ordered  a person  to  receive  it  for  me ; and,  the  moment  you  have  acquitted  yourself  to
me,  you  may  depart,  for  I have  left  instructions  that  you  may  meet  with  no  impediment.
Remember,  Geronnet,  that  I have  treated  you  handsomely  ; and,  if  any  of  our  men  fall  into
your  hands,  do  you  treat  them  in  like  manner.”  “ On  my  faith,”  replied  Geronnet,  “ my
fair  lord  and  master,  that  I will  cheerfully  do,  for  we  are  bounden  to  it  by  your  generous
conduct.”  Bonne-lance  returned  to  the  siege  of  Ventadour,  and  twelve  of  his  prisoners
remained  in  Montferrant.  The  ten  others,  according  to  agreement,  returned  to  Chainlet,  to
seek  from  Perrot  le  Bearnois  two-and-twenty  hundred  francs  ; for  this  was  the  sum  their
ransoms  had  been  fixed  at.  The  twelve  in  Montferrant  were  lodged  in  a handsome  house,
and  lived  at  much  expense.  They  were  not  strictly  watched ; and,  during  the  fifteen  days
they  staid,  they  went  about  the  town  to  amuse  themselves,  and  made  such  observations  on
the  state  of  it  as  cost  it  afterwards  one  hundred  thousand  francs.

When  the  captain  of  Chalucet  heard  of  the  ill  success  of  Geronnet  de  Maudurant,  and  that
he  and  his  companions  had  been  defeated  by  sir  John  Bonne-lance,  he  was  very  indifferent
about  it,  and  replied  to  those  who  had  brought  him  tire  news, — “ You  are  come  hither  to
seek  for  money  to  pay  his  and  your  ransoms  : are  you  not  ?”  “ Yes,”  they  replied,  “ for

gain  is  not  always  to  be  looked  for.”  “ I know  nothing  of  gain  or  loss,”  answered  the
captain;  “ but  this  I know,  you  will  get  nothing  from  me.  I did  not  send  you  on  this
excui'sion : it  was  your  own  free  election  to  seek  an  adventure.  Send  to,  or  tell  your  com-
panions when  you  see  them,  that  adventure  must  deliver  them.  Do  you  suppose  that  I will
thus  spend  my  money  ? No,  my  friends,  that  I will  not,  by  my  faith  ! I can  always  have
men  enough,  who  will  make  more  prudent  excursions  than  ye  have  done.  I will  not,
therefore,  ransom  any  man  belonging  to  me,  unless  he  be  taken  when  in  my  company.”  This
was  ail  the  answer  they  could  get  respecting  Geronnet’s  ransom.  They  consulted  together,
and  thought  it  would  be  right  to  send  three  of  them  to  give  Geronnet  information  of  this,
that  he  might  consider  the  matter.  The  three  who  were  sent,  passing  without  the  walls  of
Clermont,  gave  their  horses  water  at  the  mill  brook,  which  runs  hard  by.  They  remained
some  time  in  the  brook  observing  the  walls  of  Clermont,  and  noticing  they  were  not  too  high
to  be  scaled.  “ By  the  head  of  Saint  Anthony,”  said  they  among  themselves,  “ this  town
may  be  easily  taken  : if  we  come  here  some  night,  we  may  have  it,  provided  the  guard  is  not
very  strong.”  They  then  added,  in  their  Gascon  dialect,  “ We  will  bargain  for  it  now,  and
another  time  buy  it : one  cannot  bargain  and  buy  in  the  same  day.”  They  then  passed  on,
and  arrived  at  Montferrant,  where  they  found  Geronnet  and  their  companions.  They  related
to  them,  word  for  word,  all  that  had  passed  between  them  and  Perrot  le  Bearnois,  which,  as
they  knew  not  where  else  to  seek  for  money  to  pay  their  ransoms,  vexed  them  exceedingly,
and  for  a day  and  night  they  were  outrageous  at  his  conduct.

Geronnet  having  calmly  considered  the  matter,  said  to  those  who  had  come  from  Chalucet,
“ Brother-soldiers,  return  to  our  captain,  and  tell  him  from  me,  that  ever  since  I have  been
under  his  command,  I have  loyally  and  faithfully  served  him,  and,  if  he  pleases,  will  continue
to  do  so ; and  let  him  know,  that  if  I shall  be  forced  to  turn  to  the  French  to  obtain  my
liberty,  he  will  not  gain  by  it.  I shall,  however,  delay  doing  this  as  long  as  I can  ; and  it
will  be  always  against  my  own  inclinations.  Tell  him  also,  that  if  he  will  pay  our  ransoms,

I will,  within  one  month  after  our  deliverance,  conduct  him  to  such  a place,  that  it  will  he
his  own  fault  if  he  does  not  gain  one  hundred  thousand  francs  from  it.”  The  three  com-
panions returned  to  Perrot,  and  punctually  gave  him  the  message  that  Geronnet  had  charged
them  with.  On  hearing  it,  he  mused  a while,  and  said,  “ It  may  be  so  : I will  speedily  give
him  his  liberty.”  He  ordered  a large  coffer  to  be  opened,  that  contained  upwards  of  forty
thousand  francs,  money  acquired  by  pillage  you  must  understand,  and  not  from  the  rents  of
his  estate  in  Bearn ; for  the  town  wherein  he  was  born,  and  always  resided  before  he  left
Bearn,  has  but  twelve  houses,  and  belongs  to  the  count  de  Foix.  The  name  of  it  is  Dadam,
three  leagues  from  Orthes.  Perrot  le  Bearnois  had  counted  out  before  him  two-and-twenty
hundred  francs,  and  one  hundred  for  their  expenses,  which  he  put  into  a purse,  and,  calling
to  him  the  three  companions  who  had  returned  from  Montferi’ant,  said, — “ I give  you  three-


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


319


and-twenty  hundred  francs : a friend  in  need  is  a friend  indeed : I shall  risk  them  for
Geronnet’s  freedom  : he  is  able  to  regain  for  me,  if  he  pleases,  as  much  again,  if  not  more.”

The  companions  took  the  money  and  set  out  again  for  Montferrant,  which  was  fourteen
long  leagues  distant ; but  they  had  very  good  passports,  which  permitted  them  to  pass  and
repass.  Geronnet,  on  learning  that  they  had  returned  with  the  money,  was  much  pleased :
he  sent  for  those  to  whom  sir  John  Bonne-lance  had  directed  him  to  pay  it,  and  said  to
them, — “ Count  it : you  will  find  the  purse  contains  two  thousand  two  hundred  francs,  which
is  all  we  are  to  give  you.”  After  this,  he  paid  liberally,  and  to  the  satisfaction  of  all,  the
expenses  they  had  been  at.  When  this  was  done,  Geronnet  borrowed  and  hired  horses  and
men  to  conduct  them  to  Clial injet,  sir  John  Bonne-lance  having  received  a certificate  of  the
ransom  being  paid.  I am  ignorant  whether  sir  John  Bonne-lance  sent  for  this  money  or  left
it  in  Montferrant,  trusting  to  the  strength  of  the  place  ; for  sir  Peter  de  Giac,  at  that  time
chancellor  of  France,  had  there  deposited  his  wealth,  of  which  he  lost  the  whole,  or  at  least
as  much  as  could  be  discovered,  according  to  what  you  will  hear  told.

When  Geronnet  de  Maudurant  returned  to  dialect,  his  companions  gladly  received  him,
and  made  him  good  cheer.  After  three  or  four  days,  Pcrrot  le  Bearnois  called  him,  and
said, — “ Geronnet,  you  are  obliged  to  the  fair  offers  you  sent  me,  for  your  freedom,  and  to
them  alone  ; for  you  know,  I was  not  any  way  bound  to  pay  your  ransom,  when  taken  in
excursions  made  without  my  orders : now,  keep  your  word,  and  prove  the  truth  of  your  offer  ;
otherwise  we  shall  be  on  bad  terms,  and  you  will  incur  my  serious  anger  : for  know  that  I
have  not  learnt  to  lose,  but  to  win.”  “ Captain,”  replied  Geronnet,  “ you  have  reason  to  say
so ; and  I now  offer  to  put  you  in  possession  of  Montferrant  within  fifteen  days,  if  you  be
willing  to  undertake  it.  In  this  town  there  is  great  wealth  and  wherewithal  to  plunder  ;
for,  besides  its  riches  in  silk  and  merchandise,  many  of  the  inhabitants  have  much  money.
Sir  Peter  de  Giac,  chancellor  of  France,  who  knows  well  where  to  seek  for  money,  has
deposited,  as  I have  been  informed,  a very  large  sum  in  this  town  of  Montferrant ; and  I
must  say,  it  is  the  weakest  and  worst  guarded  town  in  the  realm ; this  is  the  offer  I sent  to
you,  and  the  promise  I entered  into.  “ In  God’s  name,”  answered  Perrot,  “ it  is  well  said,
and  I accept  it : I will  secretly  make  preparations : you  know  all  the  outlets  of  the  town  : but
will  it  require  many  men  ?"  “ Three  or  four  hundred  spears,”  said  Geronnet,  “ will  do  the

business  ; for  they  do  not  seem  people  likely  to  make  any  great  resistance.”  “ Well,  by  God,”
replied  Perrot,  “ I will  undertake  it,  and  make  it  known  to  the  captains  of  the  forts  that  are
near  us,  and  when  we  be  all  assembled,  will  march  thither.”

In  consequence,  Perrot  le  Bearnois  got  himself  in  readiness,  and  sent  information  of  his
intentions  to  the  captains  of  the  forts  in  the  neighbourhood,  and  fixed  their  rendezvous  at  the
castle  of  Donzac*',  in  the  bishopric  of  Clermont,  that  was  not  far  distant  from  Montferrant :
Olim  Barbe,  a Gascon,  and  famous  pillager,  was  the  captain  of  it.  The  companions  from
seven  forts  attached  to  the  English  met,  on  the  appointed  day,  at  Donzac,  and  were  upwards
of  four  hundred  lances,  well  mounted,  whence  they  had  only  six  leagues  to  ride  to  Montferrant.
The  first  captain  who  arrived  was  Perrot  le  Bearnois,  to  show  he  was  the  chief  of  the
expedition,  and  to  consult  with  the  other  leaders  before  the  whole  came  thither,  and  lay  their
plans  according  to  the  information  which  had  been  given  by  Geronnet  de  Maudurant,  and  as
to  the  time  he  had  fixed  for  their  coming  to  the  town.

Geronnet,  with  eleven  companions,  dressed  themselves  in  coats  of  frise,  like  to  traders,  and
each  leading  a horse  well  laden,  according  to  the  custom  of  the  country,  set  out  from  Donzac
before  day,  conducting  their  horses  on  the  road,  as  carriers  . they  arrived  about  noon  in  the
town  of  Montferrant.  No  one  made  any  inquiries  who  they  were,  never  suspecting  them  to
be  otherwise  than  traders  or  carriers,  as  their  dresses  showed,  and  supposing  that  they  were
come  to  purchase  draperies  and  linens  at  the  fair ; for  they  had  travelled,  they  said,  from  beyond
Montpelier  for  this  purpose  ; and  already  much  merchandise  had  arrived  from  the  neighbour-
ing towns.  Geronnet  carried  his  company  to  the  Crown  Inn,  where,  having  put  their  horses
in  a stable,  they  chose  a handsome  apartment  for  themselves,  where  they  remained  in  quiet,
not  venturing  abroad,  in  the  town,  lest  their  plan  might  be  discovered,  but  thought  only  of
enjoying  themselves,  as  they  intended  others  should  pay  their  reckoning.  Towards  evening,
* “ Donzac,” — a village  in  Armagnac,  diocese  and  generality  of  Audi.


320


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


they  took  a great  deal  of  care  of  their  horses,  and  gave  the  host,  hostess,  and  servants  to
understand,  as  they  had  come  afar  otf,  it  was  necessary  they  should  be  well  attended  to.
They  called  so  loudly  for  candles,  they  could  not  satisfy  them  ; and  would  not  go  to  bed,  hut
kept  drinking  and  roaring  in  their  chamber.  The  host  and  hostess,  noticing  the  merry  life
they  led,  and  not  having  the  smallest  suspicion  of  them,  went  to  bed.

I will  now  return  to  Perrot  le  Bearnois  and  his  companions.  This  same  day,  towards
evening,  they  left  Donzac,  under  the  command  of  seven  captains.  Perrot  le  Bearnois  was
the  chief,  then  the  bourg  de  Copane,  whose  name  was  Arnaudon,  the  bourg  Anglois,  le  bourg
Carlat,  Apton  Seighin,  Olim  Barbe,  and  Bernadon  des  Isles  : there  was  also  with  them  a
grand  pillager  from  Bearn,  called  the  lord  de  Lance-plaine.  It  was  from  him  and  the  bourg
de  Copane  I learnt  all  this  business,  and  the  manner  of  its  being  undertaken,  after  Candlemas,
when  the  nights  are  long  and  cold.  The  weather  this  night  was  so  severe,  with  wind  and
rain,  that  the  captain  of  the  guard  would  not  leave  his  house,  but  sent  his  son,  a boy  about
sixteen  years  old,  to  examine  the  state  of  the  guard.  On  his  arrival,  between  the  outward


Perrot  le  Bearnois  and  a Company  of  Pillagers. — Designed  from  a MS.  Illumination  of  the  Fifteenth

Century.


and  inward  gate,  he  found  four  old  men,  almost  frozen  with  cold,  who  said  to  him,  “ Take
from  each  of  us  a halfpenny,  and  allow  us  to  go  and  warm  ourselves.”  The  youth  was  eager
for  the  money,  which  he  took,  and  suffered  the  guard  to  go  home.  Geronnet  or  some  of  his
people  were  constantly  on  the  watch  at  the  gate  of  the  Crown,  for  the  relief  of  the  guard.
Observing  the  youth  return,  and  the  guard  with  him,  they  said, — “ Things  go  well : it  will
be  a good  night  for  us  : there  are  none  in  the  town  but  those  who  are  now  in  bed,  and,  as  the
guard  is  dismissed,  we  have  nothing  to  fear.”

Perrot  and  his  companions  were  making  all  the  haste  they  could ; but  they  were  obliged
to  pass  under  the  walls  of  Clermont.  When  within  one  league  of  that  place,  they  met
Amerigot  Marcel,  governor  of  Alose,  near  St.  Flour,  with  about  one  hundred  spears.  When
they  were  known  to  each  other,  there  was  much  joy  ; and  they  mutually  asked  whither  they
were  going  in  such  bad  weather,  and  what  were  the  objects  of  their  being  abroad.  Amerigot
Marcel  said, — “ I come  from  my  castle  of  Alose,  and  am  going  to  Carlat.”  “ In  God’s
name,”  replied  the  two  captains  of  Carlat,  the  bourg  Anglois,  and  the  bourg  de  Copane,


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  & c.


321


“ here  we  are,  if  you  have  anything  to  say  to  us.  Do  you  want  anything  ? ” “ Yes,’’  said

he  : “ you  have  some  prisoners  who  belong  to  the  dauphin  d’ Auvergne,  and  you  know  lie  is
in  treaty  with  us  through  the  count  d’Armagnac.  I wish,  therefore,  to  have  those  prisoners
in  exchange  for  some  others  who  are  in  my  fort,  as  I have  been  earnestly  requested  to  get
them  by  the  lady  dauphin,  and  she  is  so  good  a lady,  one  cannot  refuse  her  anything.”  The
bourg  de  Copane  replied, — “ Amerigot,  you  are  indeed  bounden  to  oblige  this  lady,  for  you
had  from  her,  three  years  ago,  five  thousand  francs  of  her  money  for  the  ransom  of  the  castle
of  Mercier.  Where  is  now  the  lord  dauphin  ?”  “ They  tell  me,”  says  Amerigot,  “that  he

is  at  Paris,  negotiating  the  treaties  you  know  we  have  engaged  in  with  him  and  the  count
d’Armagnac.”  “ Come  with  us,”  said  Perrot  le  Bearnois,  “ and  leave  all  these  things  : you
will  gain  by  it,  for  you  shall  have  a share  of  our  booty.”  “ Whither  are  you  going  ?”  asked
Amerigot.  “ By  my  faith,  brother-soldier,  we  are  going  straight  to  Montferrant,  as  that
town  is  to  be  delivered  to  me  this  night.”  Amerigot  replied, — “ Perrot,  what  you  are  about
is  very  wrong ; for  you  know  we  have  entered  into  a treaty  with  the  count  d’Armagnac
and  this  country,  which,  on  that  account,  thinks  itself  in  a perfect  state  of  security.  You
will  act  indeed  very  ill,  if  you  execute  what  you  have  said,  and  by  it  break  off'  all  our
treaties.”  “ On  my  troth,  companion,  I will  never  keep  any  treaty,”  said  Perrot,  “ as  long
as  I am  master  of  the  field,  for  we  must  live.  Come  with  us,  for  you  have  nothing  to  do  at
Carlat,  as  the  captains  are  here,  and  those  they  have  left  behind  will  never  give  you
admittance  into  the  fort.”

“ With  you,”  replied  Amerigot,  “ I will  not  go,  but,  since  tilings  are  thus,  return  to  my
own  castle.”  The  parties  then  separated,  and  Perrot  continued  his  road  toward  Clermont
and  Montferrant.  When  they  were  below  Clermont,  they  suddenly  halted,  for  a new
thought  had  struck  some  of  them  from  what  the  Gascons  told  who  had  been  backwards  and
forwards  to  Chalucet  from  Montferrant.  They  said  to  the  captains  who  were  collected
together, — “ This  city  of  Clermont  is  large  and  rich,  and  as  easy  to  be  taken  as  Montferrant :
since  we  have  ladders  with  us,  let  us  scale  the  walls ; we  shall  gain  more  than  at  Mont-
ferrant.”— On  hearing  this,  they  had  almost  resolved  to  put  it  into  execution  ; but  their
captains,  having  considered  it,  said, — “ Clermont  is  a strong  town,  populous,  and  well
provided  with  arms  : if  once  we  alarm  them,  they  will  collect  together  and  defend  them-
selves. There  is  not  a doubt  of  our  having  the  worst  of  it ; and  if  we  be  repulsed,  and  our
horses  taken  or  lost,  We  shall  be  disabled  from  advancing  any  farther.  We  are  at  a distance
from  our  castles  : the  country  will  rise  against  us  : we  shall  be  pursued,  and  run  the  greatest
hazard  of  loss  of  life  or  liberty.  It  will  be  more  advisable  to  continue  our  road,  and  finish
what  had  been  first  fixed  on,  than  to  attempt  any  new  exploit  that  may  cost  us  too  dear.”
This  advice  was  followed,  and  not  one  word  more  said  on  the  subject.  They  passed  Clermont
as  quietly  and  quickly  as  they  could,  and,  on  the  point  of  eleven  o’clock,  came  before
Montferrant.  They  suddenly  halted,  when  they  perceived  the  town  about  two  bow-shots  off,
and  Perrot  said, — “ We  are  now  at  Montferrant : our  people  must  be  within  it.  Do  you
wait  here,  and  I will  go  by  these  ditches  to  see  if  I can  learn  anything  of  Geronnet,  who  has
brought  us  hither ; and  do  not  you  stir  until  I return.”  “ Go,”  replied  his  companions  :
“ we  will  wait  for  you.”

On  this,  Perrot  le  Bearnois,  with  three  others,  went  away  • but  it  was  so  very  dark,  they
could  not  see  the  length  of  an  acre,  and  it  rained,  snowed  and  blew,  most  unmercifully.
Geronnet  was  at  this  hour  on  the  walls,  impatiently  listening  to  hear  of  the  arrival  of  his
friends.  He  looked  down,  and  saw,  as  he  thought,  the  shadows  of  men  entering  the  ditches :
on  this  he  began  to  whistle.  He  was  heard  by  Perrot,  who  advanced  more  into  the  ditch,
for  there  was  no  water  in  it  on  that  side  ; and  Geronnet  asked,  “ Who  is  there  ?”  Perrot
knew  him  from  his  Gascon  pronunciation,  and  said,  “ I am  Perrot  le  Bearnois  : is  it  thou,
Geronnet  ?”  “ Yes,”  replied  he  : “ if  you  will  make  yourself  ready,  and  advance  your  men,
you  shall  enter  the  town  at  this  place : we  cannot  fail  of  success,  for  the  inhabitants  are  all
in  bed.”  “ At  this  place  ! ” said  Perrot,  “ God  forbid : I will  never  enter  that  way ; and,  if
I do  at  all,  it  shall  be  through  the  gate.”  “ Then  you  will  not  enter  at  all,”  replied  Geronnet,
in  a passion.  “ On  my  troth,  Perrot,  it  is  not  in  my  powTer  : come  hither  with  your  rope-
VOL.  IT.


v


322


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


ladders,  and  none  will  attempt  to  oppose  your  entrance.”  “ Listen  to  me,  Geronnet,”  said
PeiTot  • “ thou  hast  promised  to  give  me  entrance  into  this  town ; and,  according  to  thy
engagement,  I will  enter  it  in  no  other  way  than  by  the  gate.”  “ I cannot  help  it,”  said
Geronnet,  “ for  it  is  impossible  to  enter  by  the  gate,  as  it  is  closed  and  guarded,  although
the  men  may  be  asleep.”

While  they  were  thus  disputing,  some  of  Perrot’s  men  came  near  the  ditch  to  hear  if  any
body  were  stirring.  Near  to  where  they  were,  was  a small  insulated  house,  adjoining  the
walls,  in  which  lived  a poor  tailor,  who,  having  been  hard  at  work  until  that  hour,  was
going  to  bed.  As  the  wind  carried  the  sounds  of  their  voices,  and  as  persons  hear  better  in
the  night  than  in  the  day-time,  he  fancied  he  heard  some  loud  talking  on  the  bulwarks.  He
left  his  house,  and,  advancing  on  the  walls,  saw  Perrot’s  men  walking  about ; on  which  lie
cried  out,  “ Treason  ! ” when  one  of  Geronnet’s  companions  seizing  him  by  the  throat,  said, —
“ If  thou  utterest  another  word,  thou  art  a dead  man.”  On  this,  fearing  to  be  murdered,  he
was  silent,  and  Geronnet,  turning  towards  them,  said, — “ Do  not  kill  the  fellow,  for  he
comes  so  opportunely,  it  must  be  through  the  mercy  of  God  that  he  is  sent,  since  by  his
means  we  shall  completely  succeed  in  our  enterprise.”  Then  addressing  himself  to  Perrot,
he  added, — “ Do  you  return  to  your  men ; and,  when  you  shall  hear  the  inner  gate  open,
do  you  attack  the  outward  one  with  axes  to  gain  admittance.”  He  then  told  him  the  use  he
meant  to  make  of  the  tailor.  Perrot  went  to  his  men,  and  related  to  them  all  you  have  heard.
TV  hen  he  was  gone,  Geronnet  said  to  the  tailor,  “ If  thou  dost  not  promise  to  do  all  I shall
order  thee,  thou  art  instantly  a dead  man.”  “ And  what  do  you  want  me  to  do  ?”  “I  want
thee  to  go  with  me  to  the  gate  of  the  town,  and  awaken  the  porters,  and  tell  them  the
governor  has  sent  thee  thither  to  order  them  to  open  the  gates,  or  to  let  thee  open  them,  to
some  merchants  from  Montpelier,  who  are  without,  heavy  laden  with  merchandise  for  the
fair.”  “I  do  not  think  they  will  believe  me,”  said  the  man.  “ Yes,  they  will  if  thou  tell
them,  as  a token  of  being  sent  by  the  governor,  that  he  could  not  come  himself  to  relieve  the
guard,  but  sent  his  son  in  his  stead.  It  thou  dost  not  well  perform  all  I have  now  told  thee,
or  should  we  fail  in  our  exploit,  I will  slay  thee  with  this  dagger.”

The  poor  man,  seeing  himself  menaced  with  death,  for  the  Gascons  are  ready  enough  at
this  business,  promised  to  do  everything  according  to  the  orders  given  to  the  utmost  of  his
power.  They  went  to  the  gate,  and  after  knocking  at  it  for  some  time,  awakened  the
porters  : they  asked, — “ Who  are  ye  that  awaken  us  at  such  an  hour  ?”  “ I am  such  a one,”
naming  himself,  “ who  have  this  night  earned  home  some  work  to  the  governor’s  house  ; and
as  I was  coming  this  way,  news  was  brought  that  some  merchants  from  Montpelier  were
without  the  gate,  quite  jaded  and  wet  with  their  journey  and  loads.  Ide  has  therefore  sent
me  to  tell  you  to  open  the  gates,  or  to  give  me  the  keys  to  do  so  ; and,  as  a proof  I am  sent
by  him,  I was  to  say  lie  did  not  relieve  the  guard  this  evening,  but  sent  his  son.”  “That  is
true,”  replied  they  : “ thou  shalt  have  the  keys  : only  wait  a moment.”  One  of  them  arose,
and  taking  the  keys,  that  were  hanging  on  a peg,  opened  a small  window,  and  gave  them  to
him.  The  moment  after,  Geronnet  snatched  them  from  him,  and  went  to  the  bars  of  the
gate.  The  first  key  he  put  into  the  lock  luckily  opened  it : and  he  then  went  to  the  outward
gate,  thinking  to  do  the  same  there,  but  in  vain.

Perrot  and  his  companions  were  on  the  outside,  waiting  its  opening  ; but,  as  Geronnet’s
endeavours  were  fruitless,  he  said  to  them,  “ My  fair  sirs,  give  some  assistance ; for  I cannot
any  way  open  this  gate.”  Then  those  wdio  were  provided  with  axes  and  wedges,  began  to
use  them  like  carpenters.  As  soon  as  they  had  made  a hole,  Geronnet  gave  them  hatchets
and  saws  to  cut  the  bars.  Several  of  the  inhabitants,  on  hearing  the  noise,  quitted  their
beds,  wondering  what  it  could  be ; for  they  never  imagined  the  English  were  come  to
awaken  them  at  such  an  hour.  The  porters  at  the  gate,  who  had  so  badly  guarded  it,
hearing  the  clattering  of  armour  and  the  neighing  of  horses,  knew  they  had  been  deceived
and  surprised.  They  went  to  the  windows  over  the  gate,  and  bawded  out,  “ Treason  !
treason  !”  which  alarmed  the  whole  town  : many  rose  and  fled  to  save  themselves  and  fortune
in  the  castle,  but  few  were  allowed  to  enter  it : for,  when  the  governor  heard  the  English
had  surprised  the  town,  for  fear  of  consequences  he  would  not  lower  the  draw-bridge.  He
received,  indeed,  some  of  his  friends  at  the  first  moment,  by  means  of  a plank ; but  when  he


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


323


heard  the  cries  of  the  women  and  children,  he  withdrew  the  plank,  and  would  never  replace
it,  but  made  his  preparations  for  defence,  in  case  the  castle  should  be  attacked.

I have  said  how  the  first  gate  was  oponed  : the  second  was  cut  down  with  axes,  and  the
captains,  with  their  companions,  marched  into  the  town  without  any  opposition.  They  did
not,  at  first,  enter  adiouse,  for  they  knew  not  if  any  bodies  of  men  were  collecting  to  resist  them,
but  went  through  the  town  to  be  assured  of  it.  They  only  found  a few,  who  were  attempting  to
enter  the  castle,  that  made  any  resistance,  but  they  were  soon  cither  slain  or  made  prisoners.
Why  should  I make  a long  story  of  it?  The  town  of  Montferrant  was  thus  surprised,  on  a
Thursday  night,  the  thirteenth  day  of  February,  by  Perrot  le  Bearnois  and  his  accomplices.
When  they  saw  themselves  masters  of  the  place,  they  took  up  their  lodgings  at  different
hotels,  without  doing  violence  to  any  one ; for  Perrot  had  ordered,  under  pain  of  death,  that
neither  woman  nor  damsel  should  be  violated,  that  no  houses  should  be  burnt,  nor  any
prisoners  made  without  his  knowledge  ; and  that  no  one,  under  the  same  penalty,  should
hurt  church  or  churchman,  nor  take  away  anything  from  thence.  These  were  the  orders
Perrot  le  Bearnois  always  gave ; and  he  had  made  them  be  strictly  observed  ever  since  he
had  entered  France,  to  carry  on  a war  against  its  towns  and  castles.

Such  was  not  the  conduct  of  Geoft’ry  Tete-noire  : it  was  indifferent  to  him  whether
churches  were  plundered  or  not,  so  that  he  gained  by  it.  When  news  was  brought  to
Clermont,  which  is  but  a short  league  distant,  of  the  capture  of  Montferrant  by  the  English,
the  inhabitants  were  greatly  alarmed,  and  not  without  cause,  for  their  enemies  were  too  near.
They  knew  not  well  how  to  act ; but  they  made  preparations  for  the  defence  of  the  town.
This  intelligence  was  also  carried  to  Chateau-neuf,  on  the  Allier,  Thionne,  Yic,  Yssoire,
Riom,  Aigue-perse,  and  the  strong  castle  of  Montpensier : all,  or  the  greater  part,  of  these
places  belonged  to  the  duke  of  Berry.  Those  who  heard  it,  or  were  any  way  affected  by  it,
were  exceedingly  surprised:  and  the  neighbouring  parts  of  Auvergne,  Bourbonnois,  Forets,
and  even  as  far  as  Berry,  trembled.  When  the  news  came  to  Paris,  the  king  and  his  uncles
were.,  as  was  natural,  very  wroth.  The  count-dauphin  of  Auvergne  was  at  this  time  in
Paris,  on  the  affairs  of  his  country,  and  greatly  hurt  when  told  of  the  surprise  of  Montferrant ;
for,  as  he  was  with  the  count  d’Armagnac,  lieutenant  for  the  king  over  these  countries,  he
was  afraid  blame  would  be  imputed  to  him  for  being  absent  from  his  government.  But  his
excuse  was,  that  he  was  at  Paris  for  the  completion  of  the  treaties  that  had  been  entered  into
with  the  captains  of  the  free  companies,  and  that,  on  the  faith  of  them,  the  country  had
thought  itself  in  perfect  security.  The  dauphin,  however,  set  out  from  Paris,  for  Auvergne,
the  moment  he  heard  of  it,  leaving  his  state  behind,  and,  only  attended  by  one  page,  took
the  road  for  Moulins,  in  the  Bourbonnois,  changing  horses  daily.  In  this  haste,  he  came  to
St.  Pierre  le  Moustier*,  where  he  learnt  other  intelligence,  which  I will  relate  to  you.


CHAPTER  CV. PERROT  LE  BEARNOIS  AND  HIS  COMPANIONS  DETERMINE  NOT  TO  KEEP  POS-
SESSION OF  MONTFERRANT. THEY  MAKE  A SALLY'  ON  SOME  TROOPS  FROM  CLERMONT,

WHO  HAD  ADVANCED  TO  THE  BARRIERS  OF  THE  CAPTURED  TOWN,  AND  INSTANTLY
DEFEAT  THEM.

On  the  Friday  morning  these  captains,  being  complete  lords  of  Montferrant,  and  having-
had  all  the  inhabitants  tied  together,  so  that  they  could  not  any  way  oppose  them,  searched
their  houses,  and  packed  up  whatever  they  thought  would  be  profitable  to  them,  in  draperies,
cloths,  furs,  dresses,  and  other  articles.  When  at  breakfast  they  had  a long  consultation,
whether  to  keep  the  town  or  not : some  were  for  keeping  and  fortifying  it ; but  the  majority
were  of  a contrary  opinion,  and  said  it  would  be  madness  to  do  so,  for  they  would  be  at  too
great  a distance  from  their  own  castles,  and  be  inclosed  within  it.  Should  they  be  besieged,
they  were  not  in  force  to  hold  out,  and  too  far  from  any  assistance.  They  would  be  starved
into  a surrender ; for  there  were  numbers  of  gentlemen  in  the  towns  and  cities  about ; and
the  duke  of  Berry,  as  soon  as  he  should  hear  what  they  had  done,  would  order  thither  the
marshal  of  France,  the  lord  Lewis  de  Sancerre.  The  count  d’Armagnac  and  the  dauphin
* “St.  Pierre  le  Moustier,’’ — a town  in  the  Nivernois,  seven  leagues  from  Moulins.

y2


324


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


would  ad  vance  to  the  siege  with  a great  force,  without  waiting  to  be  sent  to ; for  they  had
under  them  the  following  great  barons:  the  lords  de  la  Tour,  d’Apton,  d’Aptiel,  de  Renel,
de  la  Palisse,  and  several  more ; but,  above  all,  sir  John  Bonnelance  would  come  hither,
with  a large  body  of  friends ; for  it  had  been  said  the  town  was  lost  by  his  imprudence  and
neglect.

Such  were  the  arguments  urged  against  keeping  the  town,  particularly  by  Perrot  le
Bearnois  and  Olim  Barbe.  Many  other  reasons  were  added ; for,  should  they  be  taken,
they  would  lose  all  they  had,  be  punished  for  what  they  had  done,  and  their  forts  woidd  be
taken  from  them.  They  therefore  resolved  to  march  away  that  evening,  and  carry  away
then’  booty  and  prisoners,  of  whom  they  had  more  than  two  hundred.  To  prevent  any
hindrance  to  this  plan,  they  posted  strong  guards  at  all  the  gates,  so  that  no  one  could  leave
the  town.

I will  now  relate  a skirmish  that  passed  between  them  and  some  from  Clermont.  When
news  first  came  to  Clermont  that  Montferrant  was  taken  by  the  English,  they  were  much
alarmed  at  having  such  neighbours,  and  held  many  consultations  on  the  subject.  There
was,  on  the  road  from  Clermont  to  Montferrant,  the  handsomest,  strongest,  and  best  built
church,  belonging  to  the  mendicant  friars,  in  France.  It  had  large  enclosures,  surrounded
by  high  walls,  within  which  were  very  productive  vineyards ; for,  one  year  with  another,
these  friars  made  from  one  hundred  to  six  score  hogsheads  of  wine.  In  these  consultations,
some  advised  the  destruction  of  this  monastery ; as  they  said  it  was  so  near  the  town,  that
it  was  not  unlikely  to  be  its  ruin,  if  in  the  hands  of  these  pillagers.  The  pulling  it  down
had  been  in  agitation  formerly,  and  they  were  now  eager  to  effect  it.  But  others  said,  it
would  be  a pity  to  destroy  such  handsome  buildings ; and  that  it  would  he  better  to  march
to  Montferrant,  and  skirmish  with  the  conquerors,  at  the  barriers,  and,  if  possible,  invest
the  place,  to  prevent  the  enemy  leaving  it ; for,  within  four  days,  the  knights  and  squires  of
the  Bourbonnois  and  Forets  would  be  collected  and  lay  siege  to  it.  While  these  conversations
were  going  forward  in  the  city  of  Clermont,  about  sixty  men  at  arms,  well  mounted,  were
ready  to  march  towards  Montferrant,  and  skirmish  at  the  barriers,  and  then  return  home
again.  No  one  checked  their  ardour ; for  there  were  among  them  some  of  the  noblest  in
the  town,  who  seemed  eager  to  perform  deeds  of  valour.  Being  all  equipped,  they  set  off
for  Montferrant,  taking  with  them  thirty  cross-bows.  Upwards  of  two  hundred  volunteers
left  Clermont  and  followed  them  on  foot.

It  was  told  to  the  companions  in  Montferrant,  that  a party  from  Clermont,  were  at  the
barriers.  This  news  pleased  them  much : upwards  of  one  hundred  of  the  most  expert
having  armed  themselves,  and  mounted  their  horses,  ordered  the  gates  to  be  thrown  open,
and  fell  upon  those  from  Clermont,  shouting,  “Saint  George!”  When  the  party  saw
themselves  thus  vigorously  attacked,  they  were  panic-struck  and  instantly  defeated,  without
making  the  smallest  defence,  but  flying  in  all  directions.  The  best  mounted,  on  leaving
Clermont,  took  the  lead,  and  said  on  the  road  they  would  be  the  first  to  attack  these
pillagers  ; but  shortly  they  were  the  first  to  return  to  their  town,  and  the  Gascons  at  their
heels.  Had  the  last  had  as  good  horses,  all  or  the  greater  part  would  have  remained  with
them : they,  however,  chased  them  until  they  met  the  volunteers  on  foot,  who,  when  they
perceived  the  defeat  of  their  townsmen,  kept  no  longer  any  order,  but  ran  away  for  the
fastest,  leaping  from  hedge  to  hedge,  and  from  ditch  to  ditch,  to  save  themselves.  The
cross-bows  from  Clermont  kept  in  better  array  when  the  others  fled,  and  drew  themselves
up  in  a vineyard  with  presented  bows,  making  a show  of  defence.  They  there  remained
until  the  English  had  returned  to  Montferrant,  for  they  never  thought  of  going  after  them.
The  Clermontois  lost  twenty  of  their  men,  six  killed  and  fourteen  made  prisoners.


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


.325


CHAPTER  CVI. PERROT  LE  BEARNOIS  AND  HIS  COMPANIONS,  HAYING  PLUNDERED  MONT-

FERRANT,  RETREAT  TO  THEIR  FORTS. HIS  ANSWER  TO  THE  DAUPHIN  OF  AUYERGNE,

WHO  COMPLAINS  OF  HIS  HAVING  SURPRISED  THIS  TOWN  DURING  THE  TIME  TREATIES
WERE  IN  AGITATION  FOR  HIS  LEAVING  THE  COUNTRY.

When  this  business  was  over,  they  were  busily  employed  until  near  night  in  packing  up
their  plunder.  On  the  point  of  six  o’clock,  having  completed  it,  they  were  on  foot,  except
about  sixty  on  horseback,  and  conducted  down  the  streets  more  than  four  hundred  horses
laden  with  cloths,  linen,  furs,  and  whatever  they  had  seized.  They  had  found  in  the  houses
of  the  rich,  caskets  full,  but  had  left  them  empty.  Having  bound  all  the  inhabitants,  two
and  two,  they  had  the  gates  opened  after  nightfall  and  departed,  not  having  staid  at  Mont-
ferrant  more  than  eighteen  hours.  They  sent  their  baggage  and  prisoners  before,  with  those
on  foot;  and  the  captains  followed  close  after  on  horseback.  It  was  dark  night;  and,  as
the  country  did  not  suspect  their  stay  would  have  been  so  short,  they  were  not  pursued.
About  midnight  they  came  to  Donzac,  which  they  had  left  two  days  before,  and  there
unpacked  and  examined  their  plunder.  I heard,  when  in  that  country,  that  they  gained  by
this  expedition  upwards  of  one  hundred  thousand  francs,  besides  prisoners ; for  sir  Peter  de
Giac,  chancellor  of  France,  alone  lost  more  than  thirty  thousand  francs  in  gold.

The  companions  had  wisely  resolved  to  leave  Montferrant  as  they  did : had  they  staid
two  days  longer,  they  could  not  have  attempted  it  without  great  danger  of  their  lives.  The
whole  surrounding  country  were  collecting,  and  advancing  in  great  bodies  to  lay  siege  to
them,  under  the  command  of  the  lords  de  la  Tour,  de  Montague,  d’Apthier,  d’Apthon,  sir
Guiscard  Dauphin,  the  marquis  of  Gaiulhat,  sir  Lewis  d’Ambiere,  the  lord  de  la  Palisse,  sir
Ploustrac  de  Chastelux,  and  the  seneschal  de  Montaigne.  None  remained  at  home,  and  the
count-dauphin  was  very  active  in  the  matter.  He  would  have  been  there  within  two  days,
had  he  not  heard  that  the  Gascons  had  retreated  to  their  forts  : at  the  same  time,  he  received
an  account  of  all  the  mischief  which  they  had  committed.  "When  he  was  assured  this
intelligence  was  true,  he  travelled  more  slowly  to  Saint  Pom^ain,  and  thence  to  Moulins  in
the  Bourbonnois,  where  he  met  his  daughter,  the  duchess  of  Bourbon,  who  had  been  very
much  alarmed,  but  was  rejoiced  on  hearing  the  enemy  had  retreated,  though  those  of
Montferrant  had  suffered  severely  by  their  visit,  as  her  country  was  now  freed  from  such
near  and  troublesome  neighbours.  “ On  my  faith,”  said  the  count-dauphin,  “ though  it  were
to  cost  me  a very  large  sum  of  money,  I wish  these  pillagers  had  remained  in  Montferrant,
for  it  should  have  ended  badly  with  them.  We  in  Auvergne  could  never  have  had  so  fair
an  opportunity  of  punishing  them,  and  gaining  their  forts.  They  prove  their  abilities  in
war  by  having  so  expeditiously  finished  the  matter.  They  have  now  re-entered  their  folds,
and  their  plunder  is  in  safety.”  Thus  did  the  count  -dauphin  of  Auvergne  and  his  daughter,
the  duchess  of  Bourbon,  converse  together.

Perrot  le  Bearnois,  Olim  Barbe,  le  bourg  de  Copane,  le  bourg  Anglois,  Apthon  Seighin,
and  the  other  captains  of  the  free  companies,  on  their  arrival  at  Donzac,  made  a division  of
their  pillage  and  prisoners ; some  they  ransomed,  others  were  carried  with  them  to  their
different  forts,  when  they  separated  at  Donzac  for  Carlat,  Chalmjet,  and  their  other  garrisons
The  country  of  Auvergne  was  now  better  guarded  than  ever.  The  count  d’Armagnac  and
the  count- dauphin  sent,  however,  to  tell  Perrot  le  Bearnois,  that  he  had  treacherously  and
wickedly  surprised  and  plundered  Montferrant,  during  the  time  when  treaties  were  nego-
tiating between  them,  and  that,  as  he  had  assented  to  such  treaties,  they  expected  he  would
make  reparation  for  the  mischief  that  had  been  done.  Perrot  replied  to  this  message  by
saying,  that  “ under  their  graces’  favour,  neither  he  nor  any  of  the  seven  captains,  who  had
plundered  Montferrant,  had  ever  entered  into  any  treaty  with  them : that  they  had  not
taken  the  town  treacherously  nor  by  scalado,  but  had  fairly  entered  by  the  gate,  which  had
been  opened  to  them  on  their  arrival : that  if  they  had  assented  to  a treaty,  legally  sworn
and  sealed,  they  would,  on  their  part,  religiously  and  loyally  have  adhered  to  it ; but  that


>20


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


was  not  the  fact,  nor  had  they  intentions  of  ever  entering  into  any  treaty  with  him.”
Things  remained  in  this  state,  nor  could  these  lords  gain  anything  more.  Sir  Peter  de  Giac
was  much  vexed  at  his  loss,  and  the  townsmen  of  Montferrant  recovered  themselves  as  well
as  they  conld  from  such  an  unfortunate  adventure.


CHAPTER  CVIX. THE  LORD  LEWIS  OF  BLOIS  MARRIES  THE  LADY  MARY  OF  BERRY,  AND

THE  LORD  JOHN  OF  BERRY  THE  PRINCESS  MARY  OF  FRANCE,  WHO  DIES  SHORTLY
AFTER. TnE  DEATH  OF  THE  LADY  JANE  OF  ARMAGNAC,  DUCHESS  OF  BERRY.

Count  Guy  de  Blois,  in  company  with  his  countess  and  a handsome  attendance  of  knights,
squires,  and  ladies,  set  out,  in  the  month  of  August  of  the  year  of  our  Lord  1386*,  in  grand
array,  from  his  castle  of  Blois,  for  Berry.  They  carried  with  them  their  young  son,  who,
the  preceding  year,  had  been  betrothed  to  the  lady  Mary,  daughter  of  the  duke  of  Berry ;
and  it  was  the  intention  of  all  parties,  that  on  their  arrival  at  Bourges  the  marriage  should
be  consummated.  When  the  contracts  had  been  signed,  the  marriage  ceremony  was  per-
formed in  the  cathedral  church  of  St.  Stephen,  at  Bourges,  by  a valiant  prelate,  the  cardinal
of  Avignon.  The  chancellor  of  Berry  and  the  bishop  of  Poitiers  had  betrothed  them  to
eacli  other  the  year  before.  There  were  many  grand  feasts  and  entertainments  at  this
wedding  of  lord  Lewis  of  Blois  with  the  lady  Mary  of  Berry,  and  the  tilts  and  tournaments
of  the  knights  and  squires  lasted  for  eight  days.  The  count  and  countess  of  Blois,  when  all
was  over,  took  leave  of  the  duke  of  Berry  and  returned  to  Blois,  accompanied  by  their
daughter-in-law.

This  same  year,  John  of  Berry,  son  of  the  duke  of  Berry,  and  styled  count  de  Montpen-
sier,  was  married  to  lady  Mary  of  France,  sister  to  king  Charles.  The  duchess  of  Berry,
with  her  son  and  the  lady  Mary  of  France,  paid  a visit  to  the  count  and  countess  of  Blois
during  the  Lent  of  the  ensuing  year.  They  and  their  attendants  were  grandly  received  in
the  castle  of  Blois,  as  the  count  understood  these  matters  well.  I was  present  at  the  time
of  this  visit.  When  the  duchess  and  her  children  had  staid  three  days,  they  departed  for
Poitiers ; but  they  went  by  water  down  the  Loire  as  far  as  Amboise,  and  from  thence
travelled  in  cars  and  on  horseback  to  Poitou.  The  duchess  and  her  children  resided  for  the
most  part  in  the  fair  castle  of  a handsome  town  called  Chinonf.

In  this  year  died  the  lady  Mary  of  France,  the  young  bride  of  the  count  de  Montpensier.
Soon  after  died  also,  the  lady  Jane  d’Armagnac,  duchess  of  Berry.  Thus  the  duke  and  his
son  were  left  widowers  : they,  however,  married  again,  but  not  immediately.  I shall  speak
of  these  second  marriages,  more  especially  of  that  of  the  duke,  at  a proper  time,  as  our
history  claims  that  mention  be  made  of  it.


CHAPTER  CVIII. WHILE  THE  COUNCIL  OF  FRANCE  IS  IN  DELIBERATION  WHETHER  OR  NOT

TO  MARCH  AN  ARMY  AGAINST  THE  DUKE  OF  GUELDRES,  THE  DUKE  OF  BERRY  SENDS
THE  COUNT  d’eSTAMPES  TO  THE  DUKE  OF  BRITTANY,  TO  ENDEAVOUR  TO  WIN  HIM
OVER  TO  THE  PARTY  OF  FRANCE,  AFTER  HAVING  ALIENATED  HIMSELF  FROM  IT  BY
THE  ARREST  OF  THE  CONSTABLE.

I have  before  mentioned  the  challenge  which  had  been  sent  by  the  duke  of  Gueldres  to  the
king  of  France.  It  was  much  talked  of  everywhere,  from  the  uncourteous  and  indeed  rude
language  it  was  said  to  contain.  I was  in  truth  shown  some  rough  drafts,  which  were  said
to  be  exact  copies  of  this  challenge  ; but  as  I never  saw  the  original,  nor  any  certified  copy,
I did  not  give  much  credit  to  what  so  nearly  concerned  a little  prince,  like  the  duke  of

'*  Denis  Sauvage,  in  a marginal  note,  says,  that  Frois-  t “ Chinon,”  an  ancient  town  of  France,  election  of
sart  having  omitted  to  notice  these  marriages  at  their  Tours.  It  is  remarkable  for  the  death  of  Henry  II.  of
proper  time,  prefers  mentioning  them  here  rather  than  England,  and  the  residence  of  Charles  VII,  of  France,
omit  them  entirely.  Rabelais  was  horn  very  near  to  it.


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


327


Gueldres  and  a king  of  France.  It  was  evident  that  this  conduct  had  greatly  angered  the
king  of  France,  who  seemed  determined  to  have  reparation,  and  expected  excuses  to  be  made
for  it  by  the  duke  of  Gueldres.  The  king’s  council  had  resolved  it  should  not  remain  quiet :
for  the  great  barons  had  declared,  that  if  the  king  did  not  show  his  resentment,  whatever
sums  it  might  cost  France,  they  would  be  alone  to  blame : for  the  king  had  proved,  when
in  Flanders,  his  willingness  to  pursue  his  enemies.  The  king  was  young,  indeed,  but  of  good
courage ; and  if  he  suffered  such  insults  with  patience,  foreign  countries  would  hold  the
nobility  of  France  very  cheap,  as  they  were  the  king’s  advisers,  and  had  sworn  to  guard  his
honour.  The  lord  de  Coucy  took  great  pains  in  the  council,  that  no  blame  might  fall  on  him  ;
and  showed  clearly  he  personally  felt  the  insult.  He  was  better  acquainted  with  the  character
of  the  Germans  than  many  others,  from  his  disputes  with  the  duke  of  Austria,  and  from
different  transactions  in  which  he  had  been  engaged  with  them.

The  king’s  ministers  saw  that  the  greater  part  of  the  nobles  of  t'he  realm  were  for  war
against  Gueldres,  and,  in  particular  the  duke  of  Burgundy,  on  account  of  the  warfare  the
duke  was  carrying  on  against  his  aunt,  the  duchess,  and  the  country  of  Brabant.  This  duchy
reverted  to  him  after  the  decease  of  his  aunt  and  her  sister*,  who  were  both  old  ladies.  The
duke  of  Burgundy  would  very  gladly  have  seen  the  duke  of  Gueldres,  who  was  chivalrous
enough,  checked  by  fair  or  foul  means.  It  was  necessary,  however,  the  kingdom  should  be
unanimous  in  this  disposition ; for  it  was  a great  distance  the  king  of  France  would  have  to
march  into  Germany  to  make  conquests  and  put  lords  under  his  obedience ; and  he  must
carry  with  him  the  whole  force  of  the  kingdom  ; for,  as  the  Germans  were  so  avaricious,  it
was  uncertain  if  they  would  not  all  unite  in  the  support  of  the  duke  of  Gueldres.  In
addition,  the  duke  of  Burgundy  and  the  other  nobles  were  aware  of  the  consequences  the
conduct  of  the  Duke  of  Brittany  might  lead  to  ; for  he  showed  his  preference  of  war  to  peace
with  France ; and  the  lords  of  the  council  knew  he  was  laying  provision  of  stores  and
artillery  in  all  his  strong  towns  and  castles  for  their  defence,  in  case  of  being  besieged.
Besides  this,  he  was  constantly  sending  over  letters  and  messengers  to  England,  to  the  king
and  his  council,  in  the  most  affectionate  terms,  offering  henceforth  the  strongest  friendship,  so
that  the  English  might  continue  the  war  with  the  most  flattering  hopes  of  success.

The  council  were  unwilling  to  decide  on  any  bold  measures,  until  this  cloud,  which  hung
over  Brittany,  was  removed  by  some  means  or  other,  so  that  the  kingdom  might  not  have
any  fear  from  that  quarter : for,  should  the  king  march  into  Germany,  the  country  would
be  left  defenceless,  and  they  knew  not  well  how  to  bring  about  an  accommodation.  Those
who  had  been  sent  into  Brittany,  the  Bishop  of  Langres,  sir  John  de  Vienne,  and  sir  John
de  Bueil,  were  returned,  and  had  told  the  king  and  his  uncles  of  their  ill  success.  TJpon  this
the  duke  of  Berry  resolved  to  send  thither  his  cousin,  the  count  d’Estampes,  who  was  a
valiant  man  and  able  negotiator.  He  therefore  addressed  him  in  such  words  as  these, — “ Fair
cousin,  I entreat  you  would  go  to  Brittany : it  is  absolutely  necessary  you  should  do  so,
to  negotiate  with  our  cousin,  the  duke  of  Brittany  ; and  should  you  find  him  hot  and  impe-
rious in  speech,  do  not  you  mind  it,  nor  put  yourself  in  any  passion.  Treat  him  gently,  and
with  the  greatest  attention,  and  endeavour  to  make  him  listen  to  reason  : tell  him  that
the  king,  myself,  and  brother  of  Burgundy,  wish  him  every  thing  good,  and  bear  him  the
strongest  affection ; and  that,  if  he  would  come  and  live  with  us,  he  would  find  us  always
ready  to  serve  him.  In  respect  to  the  castles  which  he  holds  from  the  constable,  say,
jokingly,  that,  to  be  sure,  he  had  seized  them  unjustly,  and  that,  if  he  would  be  pleased  to
render  them  back  it  would  redound  greatly  to  his  honour,  and  the  king  would  give  him  as
rich  and  as  strong  ones  in  any  part  of  the  kingdom  he  may  choose.  Exert  yourself,  dear
cousin,  to  bring  us  back  good  news  ; and  do  not  quit  him,  however  you  may  be  delayed


* la  the  ] 2th  annotation  of  Denis  Sauvage,  he  makes
the  following  observations ;

“ Sister.'”  “I  should  suppose  this  sister  to  he  Jane,
widow  of  the  late  William  count  of  Hainault,  according  to
the  29  th  and  1 17th  chapters  of  the  first  volume,  if  the  257th
of  the  same  volume,  and  the  209th  of  the  second,  did  not
incline  me  to  believe,  that  this  widow  was  the  Jane  of
Brabant  married  again  to  Winceslaus,  last  duke  of  Brabant,


who  acquired,  by  his  union  with  her,  that  duchy.  The
countess  of  Flanders,  who  was  sister  to  this  duchess,  died
five  years  before  her  husband,  count  Lewis  of  Flanders,
who  deceased  in  the  month  of  January,  1 384  ; so  that  I
suspeet  the  reading  should  be,  ‘ after  the  decease  of  his
aunt  who  was  now. very  old  for  I cannot  say  who  this
sister  was.”


,328


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


without  bringing  matters  to  some  sort  of  a conclusion,  taking  care  to  remember  all  the  duke’s
answers,  and  to  examine  well  the  state  of  the  duchy.”  The  count  d’Estampes  assured  the  duke
he  would  cheerfully  undertake  it ; and  he  made  no  long  delay,  from  the  time  of  his  conversa-
tion, in  his  preparations  for  the  journey.  When  ready,  he  set  out  for  Brittany,  taking  his
road  through  Chartres  and  Mans,  and  the  rich  country  of  Maine  to  Angers,  where  lie  met
the  queen  of  Naples,  widow  of  the  duke  of  Anjou,  who  had  styled  himself  king  of  Naples,
Sicily  and  Jerusalem,  duke  of  La  Puglia,  and  count  de  Provence.  Her  two  sons,  the  lords
Lewis  and  Charles,  were  with  her.

The  queen  received  her  cousin,  the  count  d’Estampes,  handsomely,  and  becoming  her
situation  ; and  they  had  many  conversations  together,  such  as  lords  and  ladies  are  accustomed
to  have.  John  of  Brittany  was  likewise  there,  who  was  not  in  the  good  graces  of  the  duke
of  Brittany,  whither  the  count  was  going : but  he  carried  it  off  as  well  as  he  could  ; for,  not
having  any  forces  to  support  his  pretensions,  he  was  obliged  so  to  do.  The  count  remained
at  Angers  a day  and  night,  and  then  took  his  leave,  and  departed  for  Chantoceaux  *,  where
lie  arrived  that  day,  and  then  continued  his  journey  to  Nantes,  where  he  refreshed  himself,
and  inquired  after  the  duke  of  Brittany.  He  was  told  that  he  was  at  Vannes,  or  in  that
part  of  the  country,  which  was  his  usual  place  of  residence.  He  took  the  road  for  Yannes,
where,  on  his  arrival,  he  waited  on  the  duke,  who  received  him  very  kindly,  for  they  were
nearly  connected  by  blood.  The  count  d’Estampes,  knowing  well  how  to  conduct  himself
with  great  princes  and  dames,  for  he  had  been  brought  up  and  educated  with  them,  acquitted
himself  with  much  prudence  when  in  the  presence  of  the  duke,  and,  dissembling  with  him,
did  not,  for  some  days,  discover  the  object  of  his  coming.  When  he  found  a proper  oppor-
tunity, he  began  upon  it  with  great  caution  and  humility,  to  gain  the  duke’s  affection,  in
manner  something  like  the  following : “ My  lord  and  very  dear  cousin,  you  must  not  be
surprised  if  I am  come  to  see  you  from  such  a great  distance,  for  I was  very  desirous  of  so
doing.”  He  then  continued  to  inform  him,  word  for  word,  what  the  duke  of  Berry  had
charged  him  to  say.  The  duke  of  Brittany  did  not  seem  to  pay  any  great  attention  to  what
he  said,  but,  when  he  had  done,  replied  to  the  count  d’Estampes, — “ We  have  in  truth  heard
before  what,  you  now7  tell  us,  and  will  consider  of  it,  for  we  have  not  as  yet  done  so.  You
will  remain  with  us  as  long  as  you  please,  for  your  coming  has  given  us  much  pleasure.”

The  count  could  not,  for  the  present,  obtain  any  other  answer  : but  he  continued  with
the  duke,  and  wTas  lodged  within  his  castle.  He  staid  about  fifteen  days  wdtli  the  duke  of
Brittany  in  Yannes  and  thereabouts,  who  treated  him  with  much  affection.  He  showed
him  his  fair  castle  of  Ermine,  which  he  had  had  newly  repaired  and  beautified,  as  he  there
enjoyed  himself  the  most.  The  count,  one  day  finding  him  in  good  humour,  again  remon-
strated with  him  on  his  late  conduct,  and  repeated  the  cause  of  his  coming ; but,  though  the
duke’s  answers  were  fair,  there  was  no  dependence  to  be  placed  on  his  restitution  of  the
hundred  thousand  francs  and  the  castles  to  the  constable.  He  did  at  length  restore  them  ;
but  it  was  of  his  ow7n  free-will,  without  any  request  being  made,  and  when  it  was  the  least
expected,  as  I wdll  relate  in  the  course  of  this  history,  according  to  the  information  I received.
The  count  d’Estampes,  finding  that  a longer  stay  in  Brittany  would  be  useless,  determined  to
take  his  leave  of  the  duke,  and  return  to  France,  to  the  duke  of  Berry,  who  had  sent  him
thither.  The  duke  of  Brittany  parted  with  him  very  affectionately,  and  presented  him  with
a handsome  white  palfrey,  saddled  and  equipped  as  if  for  a king,  and  a ring  with  a rich
stone,  which  had  cost  at  least  one  thousand  francs.

The  count,  on  leaving  Brittany,  went  to  Angers,  where  he  waited  on  the  queen  of  Naples
and  John  of  Bi'ittany,  who  were  anxious  to  hear  what  had  passed.  They  said,  “ Fair  cousin,
you  must  have  been  well  employed,  for  you  have  made  a long  stay  in  Brittany.”  tie  related
to  them  partly  what  he  had  done,  but  the  conclusion  was,  that  he  had  been  rmsuccessful.
When  he  had  remained  with  them  one  day,  he  departed  for  Tours,  and  continued  his  journey
into  Berry,  and  found  the  duke  of  Berry  at  Mehun-sur-Yevre  *,  where  he  had  lately  built  a
very  fine  castle,  and  was  daily  adding  to  it.  The  duke  of  Berry  entertained  the  count  well,
and  inquired  what  had  passed  in  Brittany.  The  count  told  him,  word  for  word,  the  conversation
between  him  and  the  duke,  and  that  it  had  been  impossible  to  turn  him  from  his  purposes,
® “ Chantoceaux,” — a small  town,  diocese  of  Naute9.


32Q


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.

whatever  they  might  be.  The  duke  of  Berry,  seeing  nothing  better  could  be  done,  made
light  of  it,  and,  shortly  after,  returned  to  the  king  and  the  duke  of  Burgundy,  to  relate  to
them  the  ill  success  of  the  journey  the  count  d’Estampes  had  undertaken,  at  his  request,  to
Brittany.  As  they  saw  they  could  not  do  more,  affairs  remained  in  this  state.


Duke  op  Brittany  presenting  Count  d’Estampes  with  “ a handsome  white  palfrey,  saddled  and  equipped  as  if  for
a king.”  Designed  from  MS.  illumination  of  the  15th  century.


CHAPTER  CIX. THE  CASTILLIANS  AND  FRENCH,  AFTER  THE  DEPARTURE  OF  THE  DUKE  OF

LANCASTER  FROM  GALICIA,  RE-CONQUER,  IN  A VERY  SHORT  TIME,  ALL  THE  TOWNS

AND  CASTLES  IIE  HAD  WON. TIIE  ENGLISH  ABUSE  CASTILLE,  WHEN  IN  THEIR  OWN

COUNTRY. TIIE  KING  OF  FRANCE  AND  HIS  COUNCIL  INVITE  THE  DUKE  OF  IRELAND,

WHO  HAD  FLED  FROM  ENGLAND,  TO  PARIS.

You  have  before  heard  how  the  English,  who  had  come  with  the  duke  of  Lancaster  to
Galicia,  had  departed,  and  how  the  duke  and  duchess  had  retired  to  Oporto,  where  they
had  resided  some  time  with  kino-  John  of  Portugal,  who  had  married  the  duke’s  daughter.
The  duke  of  Lancaster  was  very  disconsolate  that  his  affairs  had  taken  so  ruinous  a turn,
and  that  his  best  knights  and  squires  had  fallen  victims  to  disease.  The  whole  country  of
Galicia  was  now  returned  to  its  allegiance  to  the  king  of  Castille ; for  the  moment  the
Castillians,  and  the  French  knights  under  sir  Oliver  du  Guesclin,  heard  of  the  duke  of
Lancaster’s  departure  for  Portugal,  and  that  few  English  had  remained  behind,  they  sallied
forth  to  conquer  Galicia  back  again,  which  was  soon  done.  The  inhabitants  of  cities  and
towns  were  more  attached  to  the  king  of  Castille  than  to  the  duke  of  Lancaster,  provided,
however,  he  was  able  to  keep  the  field ; for  the  Castillians  and  Galicians  resemble  a good
deal  the  Lombards  and  Italians,  who  are  always  on  the  side  of  the  strongest,  and  shout  out,
“ The  conqueror  for  ever  1”

All  which  the  duke  of  Lancaster  had  been  able  to  win  before  the  beginning  of  July  was
regained,  and  the  places  garrisoned  again  by  French  and  others  under  the  obedience  of  the
king  of  Castille.  The  English,  who  thought  to  pass  the  winter  quietly  there,  were  driven
out  by  fair  or  foul  means,  for  such  as  made  resistance  were  put  to  death.  Others,  seeing
affairs  go  badly,  surrendered  on  having  passports  given  them  to  return  through  Castille  to
* “ Mcli u n-siir- Y e vre,” — a town  in  Berry,  on  the  Yevre,  four  leagues  from  Bourges.


330


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


Gascony  by  Bayonne  and  Bordeaux.  The  duke  of  Lancaster  was  duly  informed  of  all  this
when  at  Oporto,  and  not  being  able  any  way  to  provide  a remedy,  it  gave  him  great
unquietness  of  heart.  This  may  be  readily  believed,  for  the  higher  the  spirit  and  expectations
are,  the  greater  and  more  bitter  are  disappointments  when  things  turn  out  contrary.  He,
however,  kept  up  his  courage  tolerably  well,  and  said  at  times,  that  if  he  had  been  unsuccessful
this  year,  through  the  grace  of  God  he  should  do  better  another : for  the  fortunes  of  this
world  are  so  changeable,  they  cannot  remain  always  the  same.  The  king  of  Portugal
comforted  him  as  much  as  was  in  his  power,  saying, — “ Sir,  you  will  keep  your  state  in
this  country,  while  you  write  to  your  brothers  and  friends  in  England  the  melancholy  event
of  your  expedition,  though  they  be  now  fully  informed  of  all,  and  press  them  to  send  you,
early  in  March  next,  five  or  six  hundred  spears  and  two  thousand  archers.  I will  re-assemble
my  forces,  for  my  subjects  are  well  inclined  to  fight  the  Castillians,  and  we  will  make  an
effectual  war  against  them.  A kingdom  may  be  won  and  lost  in  one  campaign.”

The  duke,  on  hearing  the  king  thus  discourse,  was  much  pleased,  and  returned  him  his
thanks.  But,  notwithstanding  the  king  of  Portugal  had  held  such  language  to  induce  his
father-in-law  to  take  courage,  the  duke  was  not  ignorant  that  England  was  in  a very  troubled
state,  that  the  council  had  many  weighty  things  to  attend  to,  as  well  respecting  the  affairs  of
the  borders  of  Scotland,  which  gave  them  much  uneasiness,  as  concerning  the  duke  of
Brittany,  who  was  negotiating  important  treaties  with  them.  He  remembered  also  that  he
had  many  difficulties  to  obtain  the  force  he  had  brought  with  him  to  Galicia,  and  that,
knowing  his  countrymen  well,  he  had  never  had  any  intention  of  seeking  a reinforcement,
for  he  was  aware  the  country  at  present  was  as  heavily  pressed  as  it  was  able  to  bear;  that
those  who  had  gone  home  from  Castille  would  never  return  thither,  and  he  was  fearful  they
would  discourage  any  others  from  coming  to  his  aid.  Although  he  knew  all  this,  he  did  not
behave  well  to  the  king  and  barons  of  Portugal  in  hiding  it  from  them.  After  residing
some  time  at  Oporto,  he  told  the  king,  that  many  reasons  urged  him  to  return  to  Bayonne
and  the  Bordelois ; for  that  Portugal,  though  he  was  so  agreeably  received  there  by  all,  was
not  his  own  inheritance.  He  added,  that  as  there  were  so  many  strong  places  and  castles  in
the  archbishopric  of  Bordeaux,  on  the  borders  of  Foix,  Armagnac,  beyond  the  Garonne  and
Dordogne,  in  Quercy,  Perigord,  Limousin,  Auvergne,  and  other  parts,  which  were  still
attached  to  the  English,  and  whose  garrisons  were  carrying  on  a war  under  his  name  : it
therefore  was  his  duty  to  go  thither,  and  give  them  aid  and  advice,  should  there  be  occasion.
He  was  besides,  when  in  Portugal,  too  remote  to  hear  news  from  England ; for  the  English
dread  the  voyage  to  Portugal,  for  its  length  and  danger  of  meeting  Castillian,  Galician,  or
Seville  vessels,  which  cover  that  sea,  either  in  going  to,  or  returning  from  Flanders,  with
merchandise.

For  these  and  other  reasons,  the  duke  of  Lancaster  made  his  preparations  for  departure;
and  when  the  galleys,  which  the  king  of  Portugal  had  provided  for  him,  under  the  command
of  his  principal  admiral  Alphonso  Bretat,  were  ready,  and  the  weather  favourable,  he  and
his  duchess  took  leave  of  the  king,  their  daughter,  and  the  barons  of  Portugal,  and  embarked
and  put  to  sea.  They  coasted  the  shores,  and,  having  wind  and  weather  fair,  arrived  safely
at  Bayonne  in  a few  days.  The  inhabitants  of  Bayonne  and  the  adjacent  parts  were  much
rejoiced  at  their  arrival,  for  they  desired  greatly  their  coming,  and  waited  on  them  to  pay
their  respects.  News  of  the  duke  and  duchess  being  at  Bayonne  with  their  daughter  was
spread  far  and  near,  and  gave  much  pleasure  to  Bordeaux  and  the  Bordelois.

Sir  John  Harpedon,  seneschal  of  Bordeaux,  and  the  seneschal  des  Landes,  with  other
gentlemen  of  the  country,  such  as  the  lord  de  Mucident,  the  lords  de  Duras,  de  Rosem,  de
Landuras,  de  Chaumont,  de  l’Esparre,  de  Oopane,  and  several  more  of  the  principal  barons
and  knights,  paid  their  compliments  to  the  duke.  Fie  received  them  kindly  as  they  came,
for  they  arrived  separately.  All  offered  him  such  services  and  affection  as  are  due  to  a lord.
The  duke  resided  this  season  at  Bayonne.  He  frequently  wrote  to  the  king  of  England  and
to  his  brothers ; but,  for  whatever  he  could  urge,  he  had  not  any  reinforcement  of  men  at
arms  or  archers  ; and,  as  things  were  then  situated,  the  duke  of  Lancaster  and  his  concerns
were  totally  disregarded.  Those  who  had  returned  from  Castille  gave  such  accounts  as
discouraged  others  from  going  thither.  They  said,  “ The  voyage  was  so  long,  a war  with


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


331


France  would  be  far  more  advantageous.  France  has  a rich  country  and  temperate  climate,
with  fine  rivers  ; but  Casti’lle  lias  nothing  but  rocks  and  high  mountains,  a sharp  air,  muddy
rivers,  bad  meat,  and  wines  so  hot  and  harsh  there  is  no  drinking  them.  The  inhabitants
are  poor  and  filthy,  badly  clothed  and  lodged,  and  quite  different  in  their  manners  to  us,  so
that  it  would  be  folly  to  go  thither.  AVhen  you  enter  a large  city  or  town,  you  expect  to
find  everything,  but  you  will  meet  with  nothing  but  wines,  lard,  and  empty  coffers.  It  is
quite  the  contrary  in  France ; for  there  we  have  many  a time  found,  in  the  cities  and  towns,
when  the  fortune  of  war  delivered  them  into  our  hands,  such  wealth  and  riches  as  astonished
us.  It  is  such  a war  as  this  we  ought  to  attend  to,  and  boldly  hazard  our  lives,  for  it  is
very  profitable,  and  not  in  a war  with  Castille  or  Portugal,  where  there  is  nothing  but
poverty  and  loss  to  be  suffered.”

Such  were  the  conversations  of  the  English  who  had  returned  from  Castille,  so  that  the
ministers  who  ruled  the  country,  perceived  that  any  expedition  thither  would  be  very
unpopular.  The  country  was  not  as  yet  recovered  from  the  late  troubles,  which  the  exe-
cutions of  sir  Robert  Tresilian  and  others,  and  the  flight  of  the  duke  of  Ireland,  had
thrown  it  into.  The  king  had  also  new  counsellors,  with  whom  be  was  not,  at  that  time,
well  reconciled.  All  these  things  prevented  any  attention  being  paid  to  what  related  to  the
duke  of  Lancaster,  who  still  resided  at  Bayonne.  The  situation  of  England,  with  respect  to
its  internal  divisions,  the  desperate  state  of  the  affairs  of  the  duke  of  Lancaster,  and  all  that
related  to  the  duke  of  Ireland  and  his  partisans,  were  perfectly  known  to  the  king  of  France
and  his  council.  To  gain  more  information  on  these  subjects,  the  king,  by  the  advice  of  his
uncles,  resolved  to  invite  the  duke  of  Ireland  into  France,  and  to  send  to  him  at  Utrecht,
where  ho  resided,  proper  passports  for  his  coming  thither,  and  for  remaining  as  long  as  it
should  be  the  king’s  pleasure,  and  to  return  whenever  the  duke  should  please.  It  was
necessary  to  send  special  messengers,  and  that  his  passport  should  be  particularly  made  out
otherwise  the  duke  would  not  quit  Utrecht ; for  he  knew  he  was  in  the  ill  graces  of  the  lord
de  Coney,  (who  was  a great  baron,  and  of  high  birth  in  France)  and  not  without  cause,  for,
to  say  the  truth,  he  had  very  scandalously  treated  his  duchess,  the  daughter  of  the  lord  de
Coucy.  This  certainly  was  the  principal  reason  that  had  blasted  his  character  in  France
and  elsewhere ; for  lie  was  there  as  much  hated  and  despised  as  in  England.  When  this
matter  was  discussed  in  the  council  of  France,  the  lord  de  Coucy  strongly  opposed  it ; but
they  gave  so  many  reasons  for  the  advantages  that  might  be  reaped  from  the  duke’s  coming,
as  to  induce  him  to  yield ; indeed  as  the  king  willed  it,  he  could  not  say  more.

The  king,  being  young,  was  desirous  to  see  the  duke  of  Ireland,  because  he  had  been  told
he  was  a gallant  knight,  and  that  the  king  of  England’s  love  for  him  had  been  unbounded.
A knight  and  clerk,  who  was  one  of  the  king’s  notaries,  were  sent  to  seek  him.  The  duke
of  Ireland  was  very  much  astonished  when  he  first  heard  the  king  of  France  wished  to  see  him,
and  had  many  ideas  what  could  be  the  cause  of  it.  Having  considered  the  passport,  he  found
he  might  safely  go  to  the  king  in  France,  and  return  to  Utrecht  when  he  pleased.  He  there-
fore left  Utrecht,  in  company  with  those  who  had  been  sent  for  him,  and  continued  his
journey  until  he  arrived  at  Paris,  for  the  king  then  resided  at  the  castle  of  the  Louvre.  The
duke  was  well  received  by  the  king  and  his  uncles ; and  the  king  was  desirous  he  would  fix
his  residence  in  France,  and  had  an  hotel  appointed  for  him  to  live  and  keep  his  state.  He
had  wherewithal  to  do  so  handsomely,  for  he  had  brought  immense  sums  of  money  with  him
from  England,  and  the  constable  of  France  was  still  much  indebted  to  him  for  the  ransom  of
John  of  Brittany,  as  the  whole  had  not  been  paid.  The  duke  of  Ireland  made  frequent  visits
to  the  king,  who  entertained  him  well;  and  he  was  invited  to  all  the  feasts,  tilts  and  tourna-
ments.


332


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


CHAPTER  CX. THE  COUNCIL  OP  FRANCE  DISAGREE,  AS  TO  THE  KING’S  GOING  INTO  GERMANY,

ON  ACCOUNT  OF  THE  STATE  OF  THE  REALM. THE  DUKE  OF  BRITTANY  STRENGTHENS

HIS  GARRISONS,  AND  FORMS  ALLIANCES  WITH  ENGLAND  AND  THE  KING  OF  NAVARRE.
THE  ENGLISH  RAISE  A LARGE  ARMY.

You  have  before  heard  how  the  count  d’Estampes  was  sent  by  the  duke  of  Berry  into
Brittany,  in  the  hopes  of  conciliating  the  duke  of  Brittany,  and  had  returned  unsuccessful,  to
the  great  vexation  of  the  duke  of  Berry,  hut  more  particularly  to  that  of  the  king’s  council ;
for  they  knew  the  eagerness  of  the  king  to  march  to  Germany  to  revenge  himself  for  the  rude
and  outrageous  challenge  the  duke  of  Gucldres  had  sent  him.  The  wisest  of  the  council,
foreseeing  what  might  happen,  thought  it  would  be  too  dangerous  for  the  king,  at  this  moment,
to  leave  the  realm.  They  now  clearly  saw  the  duke  of  Brittany  would  not  listen  to  terms
of  accommodation,  and  felt  his  conduct,  in  arresting,  confining,  and  ransoming  the  constable,
for  one  hundred  thousand  francs,  three  castles  and  a town,  highly  offensive  to  the  honour  of
France.  They  heard  also,  that  the  duke  had  entered  into  a strong  alliance  with  the  king  of
England,  and  was  laying  up  stores  of  all  kinds  in  his  different  towns  and  castles.  He  was
seeking  friends  on  all  sides,  so  that  his  barons  and  knights  knew  not  how  to  act,  (or  at  least
the  greater  part)  whether  to  go  to  France,  or  remain  with  the  duke  and  abide  the  event ;
but  they  would  never  have  taken  arms  against  France,  for  the  knights  and  squires  of  Brittany
are  too  loyal  Frenchmen  to  be  induced  to  be  guilty  of  such  conduct.  The  council  were
fearful,  and  with  reason,  should  the  king  march  to  Germany  with  a large  force,  and  he
could  not  do  otherwise,  that  the  duke  of  Brittany  would  introduce  the  English  to  his  country,
by  Saint  Malo,  Saint  Matthieu,  Kemper,  Treguier,  Guerrande,  Vannes,  or  on  some  other
parts  of  the  coast,  for  they  could  not  gain  a better  entrance  into  France.  They  were,  there-
fore, much  puzzled,  how  they  could,  without  compromising  the  King’s  honour  and  that  of
the  realm,  bring  about  a reconciliation  with  the  duke.  But  some  of  the  council  said,  u that
it  would  be  very  blameable  in  the  king  to  put  off  his  expedition  for  this  duke  of  Brittany,
who  was  not  master  of  his  own  country  ; and  he  might  be  assured  that  the  knights  and
barons  of  Brittany  would  never  side  with  him  against  the  king  of  France.  Let  the  king,
in  God’s  name,  undertake  the  expedition,  and  the  constable,  with  his  Bretons,  may  stay  at
home  to  guard  the  country.”  This  opinion  was  ably  supported  in  the  council ; but  others
opposed  it,  saying,  “ It  cannot  be  done,  for  the  king  will  never  undertake  it  without  the
constable,  as  he  knows  more  of  war  than  any  other  knight.”  Some  argued,  saying,  “ Let
the  king  then  remain,  and  send  thither  one  of  his  uncles,  for  instance  my  lord  of  Burgundy,
with  two  thousand  lances  and  seven  thousand  lusty  varlets  ; for,  as  the  war  principally
affects  him,  he  is  bound  to  go  thither,  from  his  connection  with  Brabant,  which  is  the  seat
of  war ; and  he  will  be  joined,  when  in  that  country,  by  seven  hundred  spears,  and  from
twenty  to  thirty  thousand  of  the  common  people.” — “ What  you  say  is  to  no  purpose,”  others
replied,  “ for  the  king  is  determined  to  go,  as  commander  in  chief : he  says,  since  he  has
been  challenged,  he  will  not  refuse  it.  It  is  proper  he  should  therefore  go ; and,  as  he  is
young,  the  oftener  he  bears  arms,  the  more  will  he  like  them.” — “ All  this  is  well,”  said
some,  “but  who  will  be  bold  enough  to  advise  the  king  to  march  so  far  into  Germany,  and
among  such  proud  and  crafty  people  ? The  entrance  maybe  easy  enough,  but  not  so  the
return  ; for,  when  they  know  that  the  king  of  France  and  his  nobles  are  in  the  heart  of  their
country,  they  will  collect  together  at  some  of  the  passes  they  are  acquainted  with,  and  of
which  we  are  ignorant,  and  completely  destroy  us.  They  are  the  most  avaricious  of  mankind,
and  the  most  cruel  to  their  prisoners  ; for,  when  they  take  any  in  war,  they  throw  them  into
close  dungeons,  loaded  with  fetters,  and  such  like  prison  furniture  : they  are  cunning  enough
in  these  matters,  in  order  to  obtain  a larger  ransom  for  them.  They  are  in  the  highest
spirits  when  they  make  captive  a nobleman  or  man  of  rank,  and  carry  him  with  them  into
Bohemia,  Austria,  or  Saxony,  and  confine  him  in  some  uninhabited  castle,  where  you  must
seek  for  him.  Such  people  are  worse  than  Pagans  or  Saracens,  for  their  extreme  covetous-
ness robs  them  of  all  ideas  of  honour.  Now,  if  you  conduct  the  king  to  such  a country,  and
any  melancholy  event  happen,  and  who  can  foresee  what  unfortunate  accidents  may  not  occur  ?


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


333


it  will  be  said  that  we  have  advised  him,  like  traitors,  to  his  ruin,  and  not  for  the  welfare  of  him
or  the  kingdom.  But,  should  the  king  persist  in  this  expedition  (God  defend  the  realm  from
harm ! ) whom  will  he  take  with  him,  and  what  nobles  are  to  attend  him  ? for  he  must  be
properly  accompanied,  and  the  country,  being  left  empty  of  defenders,  is  in  risk  of  total  de-
struction. Who  will  now  advise  the  king  to  undertake  this  matter  in  person  ? ” — “ What
can  be  done  then  ? ” said  others  in  reply.  “ Why,”  answered  those  who  had  more  maturely
considered  the  matter,  and  weighed  all  the  difficulties  attending  it,  “ Let  the  king  think  no
more  of  it,  nor  send  any  considerable  force  thither.  The  duke  of  Gueldres  is  young  and  hot-
headed,  and  puffed  up  with  having  challenged  a king  of  France.  It  has  not  proceeded  from
any  solid  understanding,  but  from  the  self-sufficiency  of  a young  man,  who  wants  to  fly
before  he  has  wings.  Since  he  has  sent  his  defiance,  let  him  follow  it  up  : the  kingdom  of
France  is  large,  and  the  moment  he  shall  enter  it,  'whatever  part  it  may  be,  the  king  will  be
instantly  informed  of  it,  and  have  just  cause  for  calling  on  his  subjects  for  support,  and  for
marching  to  repel  the  invader,  should  he  have  remained  in  France,  or  for  pursuing  him  into
Germany.  The  king  will,  by  such  conduct,  acquire  honour  for  himself  and  his  kingdom,  at
a much  cheaper  rate  than  by  marching  into  Gueldres.  We  have  been  informed,  by  those
well  acquainted  with  the  country,  that  there  are  four  large  rivers  to  pass  before  you  arrive
at  the  duke’s  territories,  and  that  the  smallest  is  as  wide  as  the  Loire  at  Nemours  or  La
Charite,  and  the  country  was  covered  with  heath  and  offered  no  place  fit  for  encampment.
Now,  those  who  please  may  advise  the  king  to  undertake  his  expedition  through  such  acountry.”

Thus,  as  I have  said,  was  the  council  divided  respecting  this  expedition  to  Gueldres,  which
the  king  was  very  anxious  to  accomplish.  Indeed,  more  progress  would  have  been  made
towards  it,  if  they  had  not  been  afraid  of  the  mischief  that  might  come  from  Brittany ; and
this  delayed  it  much.  There  was  cause  for  their  fears ; for  the  duke,  who  had  received
information  of  the  challenge  of  the  duke  of  Gueldres,  and  of  the  king’s  eagerness  to  march
against  him,  was  only  waiting  until  the  king  had  quitted  the  kingdom,  to  introduce  the
English,  with  whom  he  had  formed  an  alliance,  into  his  duchy.  The  duke  had  by  his  subtle
arts  gained  over  the  principal  towns  to  his  interest,  such  as  Nantes,  Vannes,  Rennes,  Treguier,
Guerrande,  Lamballe,  St.  Malo,  and  St.  Matthieu  de  Fine-Poterne,  but  had  failed  in  his
attempts  to  gain  the  nobles.  He  hoped,  indeed,  they  would  accompany  the  constable  into
Germany  and  give  him  freer  scope  for  his  war.  He  filled  his  towns  and  castles  with  all  sorts
of  stores,  artillery  and  provisions,  plainly  showing  he  preferred  war  to  peace.  He  had  like-
wise formed  a strict  alliance  with  his  brother-in-law,  the  young  king  of  Navarre,  and  had
promised  him,  that  if  he  succeeded  in  his  attempt  to  bring  over  a body  of  Englishmen  at  arms
and  archers,  he  would  lead  them  instantly  to  Normandy,  and  recover  for  him  all  those  towns
and  places  the  late  king  of  France  had  won  from  his  father  by  himself,  or  the  lord  de  Coucy
and  others.  The  king  of  Navarre  indulged  in  these  hopes,  and  paid  every  respectful
compliment  to  the  duke  of  Lancaster  at  Bayonne,  with  whom  he  entered  into  an  alliance.

On  the  7th  day  of  April,  in  the  year  of  grace  1388,  it  was  determined  in  the  council  of
the  king  of  England,  by  the  dukes  of  York  and  Gloucester,  that  Richard  earl  of  Arundel
should  be  appointed  commander  in  chief  of  a naval  expedition.  He  was  to  have  under  him
one  thousand  men  at  arms  and  three  thousand  archers,  who  were  to  assemble  at  Southampton,
the  15th  of  May,  when  the  fleet  would  be  ready  prepared  to  receive  them,  and  it  was  fixed
that  those  who  were  to  accompany  him  were  immediately  to  begin  their  march  to  Southampton.
The  king  of  England  kept  a grand  feast  on  St.  George’s  day,  this  year,  at  Windsor,  which
was  attended  by  a number  of  the  lords,  who  were  to  accompany  the  earl  of  Arundel,  and
who  there  took  leave  of  the  king,  the  queen,  his  uncles  and  ladies.  The  whole  of  this
armament  were  at  Southampton  or  in  those  parts,  on  the  appointed  day,  and  embarked  on
board  the  fleet  the  twentieth  day  of  May,  when  the  weather  was  fine  and  clear.  With  the
earl  of  Arundel  were,  the  earls  of  Nottingham  and  Devonshire,  the  lord  Thomas  Percy,  the
lord  Clifford,  sir  John  de  Warwick,  sir  William  Leslie,  the  lord  Camois,  sir  Stephen  de
Liberie,  sir  William  Helmon,  sir  Thomas  Moreaux,  sir  John  d’Ambreticourt,  sir  Robert
Scot,  sir  Peter  de  Montberry,  sir  Lewis  Clanborough,  sir  Thomas  Cook,  sir  William  Paulet,
and  several  more  : in  the  whole,  there  were  one  thousand  good  men  at  arms  and  about  three
thousand  archers.  They  embarked  no  horses  with  them  ; for  they  hoped,  if  successful,  to


304


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


find  horses  in  plenty  in  Brittany.  The  day  they  weighed  anchor  the  sea  was  so  calm  and
serene,  that  it  was  beautiful  to  behold.  They  made  for  the  shores  of  Brittany  or  Normandy,
with  a determination  to  land  no  where  else,  unless  other  intelligence  should  be  sent  them.
They  had  in  their  fieet  some  light  vessels  (called  Balniers  Coursicrs)  which  drew  but  little
water,  and  these  were  sent  in  advance,  to  seek  adventures ; in  the  same  manner  as  knights
and  squires,  mounted  on  the  fleetest  horses,  arc  ordered  to  scour  in  front  of  an  army,  to  see
if  there  aro  any  ambuscades.  We  will,  however,  leave  this  army,  and  speak  of  the  affairs  of
Gucldres  and  Brabant,  and  of  the  siege  of  Grave.


CHAPTER  CXT. THE  BRABANTERS  LAY  SIEGE  TO  THE  TOWN  OP  GRAVE. THE  CONSTABLE

OP  PRANCE  GAINS  THE  TOWNS  OF  SAINT  MALO  AND  SAINT  MATTI1IEU  DE  FINE-
POTERNE,  AND  GARRISONS  THEM  WITH  IIIS  MEN.

T have  before  given  an  account  of  the  ancient  dukes  of  Gucldres,  and  how  the  eldest  son
of  the  first  duke  married  Bcrtaldo  of  Mechlin’s  daughter,  in  order  to  redeem  his  inheritance,
and  had  mortgaged  three  of  his  castles  to  the  count  dc  Hours,  who,  unable  to  regain  the
money  he  had  lent,  had  sold  them  to  Winceslaus,  duke  of  Brabant,  for  the  same  sum,  and  all
the  subsequent  events  to  the  time  of  duke  William  of  Gucldres,  son  of  the  duke  of  Juliers.
This  duke  of  Gucldres,  finding  lie  could  no  way  succeed  in  recovering  his  before-mentioned
three  castles  on  the  Meuse,  which  had  been  part  of  his  patrimonial  inheritance,  resolved  to
secure  himself  the  possession  of  Grave  from  the  Brabantcrs.  lie  had  married  his  bastard-
daughter  to  the  young  lord  of  Bruk,  who  claimed  the  town  of  Grave  as  lord  paramount.
There  was  an  amicable  treaty  made  between  them,  such  as  should  be  made  when  fathers  and
children  are  concerned  : and  the  young  lord  of  Bruk  yielded  to  the  duke  all  his  claims  on
Grave,  and  the  territories  thereto  belonging,  in  the  presence  of  the  knights  of  Gucldres  and
Juliers.  The  duke  of  Gucldres  gave  him,  in  return,  the  town  and  territory  of  Breda,
situated  on  the  river  Merck,  in  the  duchy  of  Gucldres,  bordering  on  Holland,  below  Brabant.
It  had  a handsome  castle : the  town  was  extensive  and  of  much  trade,  but  Grave  was  more
valuable.  The  duke  had  made  this  exchange  to  strengthen  himself  against  the  claim  of  the
Brabanters  ; but  the  duchess  and  her  subjects  said,  that  the  lord  of  Bruk  was  only  mortgagee
in  possession,  and  that  she  or  her  heirs  might  redeem  it  whenever  they  pleased.  The  duko
of  Gueldres  denied  this,  and  hence  arose  their  mutual  hatreds  and  wars.

The  Brabanters  this  year,  in  the  month  of  May,  came  with  a powerful  force  of  barons,
knights,  and  squires,  to  lay  siege  to  the  town  of  Grave.  They  brought  with  them  springalls,
and  various  other  machines  of  attack,  and  they  amounted  altogether  to  forty  thousand  men.
There  were  almost  daily  skirmishes  at  the  barriers.  The  town  of  Grave  is  situated  on  the
Brabant  side  of  the  Meuse,  over  which  there  is  a bridge  that  connects  it  with  Gueldres.
This  siege  was  a bold  enterprise  ; but  great  plenty  was  in  the  army  of  Brabant,  and  every-
thing was  to  be  had  there  for  money,  and  as  cheap  as  at  Brussels.  In  these  continual
skirmishes  at  the  barriers,  where  the  cross-bows  sometimes  ventured,  the  success  was  variable,
as  must  always  happen  when  the  parties  are  nearly  equal.

The  duke  of  Gueldres  was  regularly  informed  of  everything  that  passed  at  the  siege,  for
he  had  fixed  his  residence  only  four  leagues  off  at  Nimeguen.  He  wrote  frequently  to
England  for  assistance,  and  was  in  hopes  the  armament  at  sea,  under  the  earl  of  Arundel,
should  the  winds  prove  favourable,  would  come  to  raise  this  siege.  He  knew  the  town  of
Grave  was  strong,  and  that  it  was  amply  supplied  with  stores  and  provisions,  and  could  not
bo  won  by  storm.  As  it  could  only  be  gained  by  capitulation,  he  felt  assured  on  that  head,
as  he  depended  on  the  fidelity  of  the  inhabitants,  that  they  would  never  desert  him.  This
siege,  therefore,  lasted  a very  considerable  time.  The  earl  of  Arundel’s  fleet  was  still  at  sea,
and,  though  no  landing  had  been  attempted,  it  hovered  along  the  coasts  of  Brittany  and
Normandy,  so  that  the  Normans  from  St.  Michael’s  Mount  along  the  shore  to  Dieppe,  Saint
Valery,  and  even  Crotoy  in  Ponthieu,  were  much  alarmed,  and  uncertain  at  what  place  they
would  disembark.  All  these  sea-port  towns  were  well  provided  with  men  at  arms,  by  orders
from  the  king  of  France,  to  oppose  any  invasion.


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


335


Tlio  marshal  de  Blainville,  who  commanded  on  the  coast,  sent  the  lord  dc  Coney,  and  the
lord  de  Hambre,  two  great  Norman  barons,  to  the  town  of  Carentan,  which  is  situated  on  the
sea-shore,  and  formerly  belonged  to  Charles  king  of  Navarre.  The  constable  of  France  took
possession  of  tiro  towns  of  Saint  Malo  and  Saint  Matthieu  do  Fine-Poterne ; and,  as  soon  as
lie  learnt  the  English  were  at  sea,  he  placed  sufficient  garrisons  in  both,  in  the  name  of  the
king  of  France.  It  was  thought  in  France  that  war  would  bo  declared  against  the  duke  of
Brittany.  The  knights  and  squires  said,  that  this  appearance  of  the  English  fleet  was
another  instance  of  the  duke’s  perfidy  ; for,  by  their  continued  hovering  along  his  coasts,  it
was  clear  that  he  had  invited  them  thither.  They  never  quitted  their  stations,  unless  forced
by  stress  of  weather,  and,  when  favourable,  returned  to  them  again.


CHAPTER  CXII. THE  DUKE  OP  LANCASTER  nAS  INTENTIONS  OP  MARRYING  IIIS  DAUGHTER

T.0  THE  DUKE  DE  LA  TOURAINE,  BROTHER  TO  THE  KING  OF  FRANCE. THE  DUKE  OP

BERRY  PROPOSES  HIMSELF  FOR  HER  HUSBAND. THE  DUKE  OF  LANCASTER  IS  MUCH

SATISFIED  THEREAT.

I iiave  before  said  that  the  duke  of  Lancaster  had  quitted  Castillo  and  Portugal.  His
thoughts  on  the  unfortunate  event  of  his  expedition,  were  not  very  agreeable  ; for  he  saw  his
hopes  annihilated,  and  that  fortune,  as  very  often  happens  in  worldly  affairs,  had  suddenly
turned  against  him,  at  a time  when  it  was  the  least  expected  : for  he  had  left  England  well
accompanied  with  men  at  arms,  and  with  every  expectation  of  finishing  his  campaign  in  a
different  manner.  It  was  told  him  that  his  adversary  had  regained,  within  fifteen  days
after  he  had  left  the  country,  all  his  conquests,  which  had  occupied  him  six  weeks.  His
army  had  been  wasted  away  by  sickness,  and  he  despaired  of  any  assistance  from  home  ; for
the  English  were  tired  of  this  war,  as  it  was  at  such  a distance,  and  the  accounts  they  had
heard  of  the  countiy  disgusted  them  : besides,  the  duke  know  that  England  was  much
troubled  within  itself.  He  foresaw  little  hope  of  amendment  in  his  affairs  ; and  though  he
said  not  much  on  this  subject,  he  thought  a great  deal.  At  times,  ho  compared  himself  and
his  expedition  to  the  duke  of  Anjou  and  his  march  to  Naples ; for,  when  he  set  out  from
France,  he  was  so  magnificently  equipped,  nothing  was  ever  seen  like  to  it,  and  attended
by  multitudes  of  knights,  squires,  and  men  at  arms ; but  the  end  had  been,  that  all  were
either  killed  or  ruined.

It  was  not  surprising  that  the  duke,  considering  his  hopes  were  totally  destroyed,  should  be
sometimes  melancholy ; for  the  count  de  Foix,  who  was  one  of  the  wisest  princes,  in  conver-
sation with  his  knights,  had  declared  the  duke  of  Lancaster’s  expectations,  in  regard  to  the
crown  of  Castille,  were  completely  at  an  end.  The  duke  was,  however,  of  a high  spirit,
and  sought  consolation  in  the  prospect  of  the  elevation  of  his  children.  Fie  had  with  him  a
handsome  daughter,  by  the  lady  Constance,  daughter  of  don  Pedro,  in  whose  right  he  had
made  war  on  Castille : he,  therefore,  musing  on  this  subject,  said, — “ If  fortune  is  now
unfavourable  to  me,  it  may  be  otherwise  to  my  daughter,  who  is  young  and  handsome,  and
by  her  grandfather  and  mother  the  true  heiress  of  Castille.  Some  gallant  prince  of  France
may  seek  her  in  marriage,  either  for  the  above  right  or  her  high  birth  ; for  she  may  boast
that  she  springs  from  the  best  blood  in  Christendom.”  He  would  gladly  have  had  some
overtures  made  him  from  France  on  this  head  ; for  he  knew  the  king  had  a younger  brother,
in  the  duke  of  Touraine : “ and,”  added  the  duke,  “ we  might,  through  this  means,  recover
our  inheritance  of  Castille ; for  it  has  been  solely  through  the  aid  of  France  that  our
adversary  has  kept  his  crown  : should  that  power  turn  against  him,  which  would  be  the
case  if  a marriage  took  place  with  the  duke  of  Touraine,  he  must  speedily  surrender  his  throne
to  my  daughter.”  Such  were  the  expectations  the  duke  of  Lancaster  flattered  himself  with,
and  his  imaginations  were  in  a way  to  be  realised  ; not,  indeed,  by  the  king  of  France’s
brother,  but  by  one  who  was  well  qualified  to  change  the  face  of  affairs  in  Castille,  and  who
had  the  complete  government  of  France,  for  without  his  consent  nothing  was  done  : I mean
the  duke  of  Berry.

You  have  before  heard  how  he  and  his  son  were  made  widowers  nearly  at  the  same  time.


t>J>U


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  & c.


Wliat  I am  about  to  relate,  I know  from  my  own  knowledge  ; for  I,  the  author  of  this  book,
was  at  the  time  in  the  country  of  Blois,  on  the  borders  of  Poitou  and  Berry,  with  my  very
dear  and  honoured  lord,  the  count  Guy  de  Blois,  by  whose  desire  and  encouragement  this
history  was  undertaken.  The  duke  of  Berry  had,  among  his  other  thoughts  and  plans,  a
design  to  marry  again.  He  frequently  said  to  those  near  his  person,  that  a lord  was  nothing
without  a lady,  nor  a man  without  a wife.  Those  in  whom  he  had  the  greatest  confidence
replied,  “ Very  well,  my  lord,  marry  then  your  son  John  : your  house  will  be  more  pleasant,
and  better  managed.”  “ Ah,”  said  the  duke,  “ he  is  too  young.”  “ That  is  nothing,  my
lord  : do  not  you  see  the  count  de  Blois  has  married  his  son,  who  is  of  the  same  age,  with
your  daughter  Mary?” — “ That  is  true,”  answered  the  duke  : “ well,  name  then  a lady  for
him.” — “ We  name  the  daughter  of  the  duke  of  Lancaster.”  The  duke  mused  a while,  and
was  some  time  before  he  made  any  reply,  when,  addressing  himself  to  them,  he  said, — “ You
propose  marrying  my  son  John  with  my  cousin,  the  daughter  of  the  duke  of  Lancaster  :
by  St.  Denis,  you  have  made  me  imagine  that  she  will  be  an  excellent  match  for  myself,  and
I will  shortly  write  to  the  duke  on  the  subject.  He  resides,  as  I hear,  at  Bayonne  ; and  I
will  signify  to  him  that  some  of  my  council  shall  very  speedily  wait  on  him  to  treat  of  this
marriage  with  me,  I say  : not  for  my  son  John,  whom  I will  marry  elsewhere.”  Those  to
whom  he  had  spoken,  on  hearing  the  above,  burst  out  into  laughter.  “ What  do  you  laugh
at  ?”  said  the  duke.  “ We  laugh,  my  lord,  because  it  seems  that  you  prefer  to  have  a good
thing  yourself,  rather  than  give  it  your  son.” — “ By  my  faith,  I am  in  the  right ; for  my  fair
cousin  of  Lancaster  will  not  so  readily  give  his  daughter  to  my  son  as  he  will  to  me.”

Letters  were  instantlv  written  and  sent  to  the  duke  of  Lancaster.  The  messengers,  on
their  arrival  at  Bayonne,  presented  the  letters  to  the  duke,  who,  having  opened  them  and
perused  their  contents,  was  highly  delighted,  and  made  those  who  had  brought  them  good
cheer,  giving  them  to  understand,  that  their  intelligence  was  verv  agreeable  to  him.  The
duke  returned  such  answers  by  the  messengers  as  showed  the  proposal  was  very  satis-
factory. and  had  given  him  much  joy.  The  messengers,  on  their  return,  found  the  duke
of  Berry  in  Poitou,  but  preparing  to  return  to  Paris ; for  the  king  and  the  duke  of
Burgundy  had  expressly  sent  for  him,  to  consider  of  the  state  of  Brittany.  Having  read  the
answer  from  the  duke  of  Lancaster,  which  afforded  him  much  pleasure,  he  determined  to
persevere  in  the  business,  although  he  could  not  defer  his  journey  to  Paris.  He  resolved,
however,  to  proceed  in  it  by  the  shortest  mode,  and  sent  letters  to  one  of  his  knights,
called  sir  Helion  de  Lignac,  who  at  that  time  was  seneschal  of  La  Rochelle,  ordering  him
to  place  the  town  under  the  government  of  those  he  could  depend  upon,  and  then,  without
fail,  to  hasten  to  him  at  Paris.  Sir  Helion,  on  receiving  the  duke’s  orders,  sealed  with
his  seal,  and  noticing  the  haste  in  which  he  was  summoned  to  follow  him,  lost  no  time
in  putting  La  Rochelle  and  its  dependencies  under  the  command  of  two  valiant  knights  of
Beauce,  called  sir  Peter  de  Jouy  and  the  lord  Peter  Taillepie.  When  this  was  done,  he  took
the  shortest  road  he  could  to  join  the  duke,  who  he  knew,  from  the  tenor  of  his  letter,  would
be  impatient  to  see  him.

We  will  now  return  to  the  duke  of  Lancaster  at  Bayonne,  and  say  what  were  his  thoughts
on  the  proposal  from  the  duke  of  Berry.  He  was  not  willing  it  should  be  kept  secret : on
the  contrary,  he  published  it  everywhere,  that  his  enemies  might  be  alarmed,  and  the  matter
known  in  the  court  of  his  adversary  of  Castille.  The  duke,  in  consequence,  wrote  several
letters,  detailing  the  whole  business,  with  copies  of  the  duke  of  Berry’s  proposals,  and  his
answers  of  consent,  to  the  count  de  Foix ; because  he  knew  there  was  a continual  intercourse
of  knights  and  squires  from  all  countries  at  Orthes,  going  or  returning  to  Castille,  or  on
pilgrimage  to  or  from  Saint  Jago.  He  did  the  same  to  the  king  of  Navarre,  who  had  married
the  king  of  Castille’s  sister,  and  by  whom  he  had  a numerous  family,  that  the  intelligence  of
this  marriage  might  be  more  readily  believed  in  Castille  than  if  told  by  common  report.  He
wrote  also  on  the  same  subject  to  the  king  of  Portugal,  but  was  silent  respecting  it  iu  his
letters  to  the  king  and  his  brothers  in  England,  for  he  knew  the  English  would  not  be  pleased
at  it : indeed,  they  gave  proofs  of  their  dislike  to  this  marriage,  as  soon  as  they  heard  of  it,
as  I shall  relate  when  I am  come  to  that  part  of  my  history ; but  I must  now  return  to  the
duke  of  Brittany,  as  that  matter  presses.


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  Ac.


Ol>*


CHAPTER  CXIII. THE  LORD  DE  COUCY  AND  OTHER  BARONS  OF  FRANCE  ARE  SENT  TO  TIIE

DUKE  OF  BRITTANY. BEFORE  THEIR  ARRIVAL,  HE  HAD  RESTORED  TO  THE  OFFICERS

OF  THE  CONSTABLE  THE  PLACES  HE  HAD  TAKEN  FROM  HIM.

On  the  duke  of  Berry's  arrival  at  Paris,  many  councils  were  held  by  those  most  in  the
confidence  of  the  king  and  his  uncles,  such  as  the  bishops  of  Langres  and  Laon,  the  lord  de
Coucy  and  other  privy  counsellors,  as  well  on  the  affairs  of  Gueldres,  whither  the  king  was
still  very  desirous  of  going,  as  of  Brittany  ; for  the  duke  would  not  accept  of  the  advances
that  had  been  made  him  towards  a reconciliation  with  France.  They  knew  not  whom  they
could  send  to  make  another  attempt,  since  the  former  negotiators  had  failed.  The  council
were  much  troubled  on  this  account,  for  they  had  learnt  that  the  duke  of  Brittany  had  been
busily  employed  during  the  winter  in  victualling  again  and  reinforcing  all  his  towns  and
castles,  which  plainly  indicated  his  wish  to  have  been  for  war.  The  wisest  of  the  council
said,  — “ You  talk  of  going  to  Germany  : you  should  rather  go  to  Brittany,  and  destroy  that
insolent  duke,  who  holds  in  contempt  the  crown  of  France  and  refuses  to  obey  its  orders.
You  will  not  obtain  anything  from  him  by  treaty : and  his  presumption  is  so  great,  he  must
be  taught  his  duty  : he  neither  loves  nor  esteems  any  one  but  himself.  It  is  clear,  that  if
the  king  go  to  Germany,  and  leave  the  realm  unprotected  by  men  at  arms,  (and  unless  he  be
handsomely  attended,  he  need  not  think  of  it,)  this  duke  will  introduce  the  English  into  his
country,  and  give  them  an  entrance  to  France.  The  appearances  are  now  very  strong  that
he  will  do  so;  for  there  is  a large  English  fleet  on  his  coasts,  which  never  leaves  them  but
when  forced  to  it  by  stress  of  weather,  and  when  fair  it  returns  ; so  that  I see  no  alternative ;
you  must  have  open  war  or  peace.”  “ It  would  be  well,”  replied  others,  “ that  wre  again
send  to  him  the  bishop  of  Langres  and  the  count  de  St.  Pol,  for  this  last  is,  by  marriage,  his
brother-in-law*.”  “ Oh  no,  no,”  interrupted  sir  Yves  d’Orient : “ if  you  will  send  to  him
again,  you  cannot  send  one  more  agreeable  to  him,  nor  of  greater  weight,  than  the  lord  de
Coucy ; for  they  are  connected  by  marriage,  and  have  always  had  a great  affection  for  each
other  ; and  to  the  lord  de  Coucy  add  whomsoever  you  please.”  “ Since  you  have  made  this
proposal,  sir  Yves,”  said  the  duke  of  Burgundy,  “ name  those  whom  you  think  should
accompany  the  lord  de  Coucy.”  “ Willingly,”  replied  sir  Yves  : “ if  you  please,  then,  sir
John  de  Yienne  and  the  lord  de  la  Riviere  shall  go  with  him.  They  are  three  very  intelligent
lords ; and,  if  any  can  make  him  listen  to  reason,  they  will.”  “We  agree  to  this,”  said  the
dukes  of  Berry  and  Burgundy.

Although  the  three  lords  were  instructed  what  they  were  to  say,  and  how  to  act,  and  to
use  every  amicable  means  to  settle  the  business,  they  did  not  quit  Paris  immediately.  The
duke  of  Brittany  heard,  before  these  noblemen  left  France,  of  their  mission,  but  those  who
had  informed  him  knew  not  the  particulars  they  were  charged  with.  He  was  confident,
however,  it  related  to  matters  of  great  importance,  by  the  lord  de  Coucy’s  appointment.
He  frequently  meditated  on  the  subject,  and  opened  his  thoughts  to  some  of  the  most  con-
fidential of  his  council,  for  them  to  give  him  advice  how  to  act.  “ It  was  commonly  reported,”
he  said,  “ that  the  duke  of  Lancaster  was  about  marrying  his  daughter  in  France  to  the  duke
of  Berry,  and  that  matters  had  gone  so  far  that  sir  ITelion  de  Lignac  was  on  his  road  to
Bayonne  to  conclude  the  business  with  the  duke,  who  was  well  inclined  to  it.  Such  a report
surprised  him  exceedingly  ; for  the  duke  of  Lancaster,  who  was  his  brother-in-law,  had  never
written  to  him  on  the  subject,  and  all  he  knew  was  from  public  rumour.  This  silence  had
not  been  usual  to  him  formerly,  for  whenever  any  of  his  affairs  had  a connexion  with  France,
he  regularly  had  informed  him  of  them.”  His  council  replied, — “ Sir,  you  must  alter  your
plans,  whatever  they  may  be,  or  you  may  be  too  great  a loser,  and  bring  destruction  on  your
country.  This  you  should  dread ; for  what  occasion  have  you  to  go  to  war  since  you  are
now  at  peace,  and  they  are  begging  you  to  remain  so?  Your  lady  is  far  gone  with  child,
and  you  should  pay  attention  that  in  her  situation  she  be  not  alarmed.  The  kino;  of  Navarre
can  give  you  but  little  support,  for  he  has  enough  to  do  himself.  The  duke  of  Lancaster  is
a valiant  and  wise  prince ; but  he  marries,  as  they  say,  his  daughter  to  the  duke  of  Berry.

* The  duke  of  Brittany  and  the  count  de  St,  Pol  married  two  daughters  of  sir  John  Holland,  earl  of  Kent.

VOL.  IT.  Z


338


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


This  will  be  the  foundation  for  a long  peace  between  France  and  England,  and  various
treaties  will  be  formed  in  consequence.  You  will  see  shortly  the  king  of  Castille  driven  from
his  throne  ; for,  as  the  French  seated  him  on  it,  they  can  as  easily  dethrone  him  : indeed,
more  easily,  for  they  will  have  the  aid  of  the  duke  of  Lancaster  and  the  English.  We  have
in  truth  heard,  that  the  lord  de  Coucy,  the  admiral  of  France,  and  the  lord  de  la  Riviere,  are
coming  hither,  and  you  may  suppose  it  must  be  on  affairs  of  the  greatest  consequence  to  the
king  and  kingdom,  or  on  the  matter  of  the  constable  of  France,  whose  cause  the  king  has
warmly  espoused.  They  are  probably  ordered  to  know  positively  what  are  your  intentions,
and  if  you  persist  in  your  former  opinions.  Should  this  last  be  the  case,  we  suppose  (for  one
may  judge  tolerably  well  from  appearances)  that  the  immense  force,  now  rumoured  to  be
destined  against  Gueldres,  will  be  turned  against  you.  Now  consider  from  whom  you  may
expect  assistance,  should  war  be  declared  by  France,  as  it  most  certainly  will  be,  unless  you
consent  to  a reconciliation,  should  the  duke  of  Lancaster  marry  his  daughter  to  the  duke  of
Berry ; and  this  he  will  do,  for  where  can  he  ally  himself  better  in  regard  to  the  recovery
of  his  inheritance  ? The  majority  of  prelates,  barons,  knights,  and  principal  towns  of  the
duchy,  are  in  opposition  to  you.  We  therefore  say,  since  you  ask  our  advice,  that  it  is  at  this
moment  more  than  ever  requisite  for  you  to  consider  well  your  situation,  and  to  avoid  risking
the  loss  of  your  country,  which  has  cost  you  so  much  labour  and  blood  to  gain.  We  know
how  great  your  hatred  is  to  sir  Oliver  de  Clisson,  and  that  you  have  mutually  shown  your
dislikes  to  each  other ; but  you  must  soften  it  some  little,  at  least  in  appearance,  for  since  the
king  of  France,  his  uncles  and  barons  have  taken  up  his  quarrel,  they  will  support  him:  he
is  and  will  continue  their  constable.  Had  the  late  king  been  alive,  who  loved  him  so  much,
and  you  had  acted  the  same,  we  know  it  would  have  cost  the  king  half  his  kingdom,  but  he
would  have  made  you  suffer  for  the  injury  done  him.  The  present  king,  his  son,  is  young,
and  does  not  pay  that  attention  to  affairs  which  may  be  expected  from  him,  if  he  live,  ten
years  hence  : he  is  coming  on  the  stage,  and  you  are  going  off.  Should  you,  therefore,  engage
in  a new  war  with  France,  after  all  we  have  said,  it  will  be  contrary  to  our  opinions,  and  to
those  of  every  man  who  has  any  attachment  to  you.  You  must  dissemble  at  present  what
your  real  inclinations  may  be.  What  is  to  you  the  holding  these  castles  from  sir  Oliver  de
Clisson,  which  form  part  of  his  inheritance,  considering  the  manner  in  which  you  gained
them  ? and,  whether  you  have  peace  or  war,  they  will  cost  you  more  to  guard  for  three  years
than  ever  you  will  gain  from  them  in  twelve.  Give  them  back,  therefore,  handsomely  ; and
when  the  rumour  shall  be  spread  abroad,  for  there  is  no  fire  without  smoke,  that  you  have  so
done  of  your  own  free-will,  you  will  pacify  the  anger  of  many,  and  greatly  please  the  duke  of
Burgundy,  who  has  never  interfered  so  much  in  this  business  as  he  might,  had  he  so  pleased,
through  the  good  offices  of  your  cousin  the  duchess  of  Burgundy  : this  we  know  for  fact.  She
has  a numerous  family,  who  are  now  your  nearest  relations  : recollect,  therefore,  whence  your
origin,  and  who  are  your  connexions,  and  do  not  estrange  yourself  from  those  with  whom  you
ought  to  be  more  strongly  united  : it  will  be  madness  if  you  do,  and  you  will  be  undeserving-
pity  for  what  consequences  may  ensue.  Llave  no  connexion  with  England  : the  English  have
sufficient  employment  at  home.  They  will  make  you  great  protestations  of  friendship,  in
order  to  take  their  advantage  of  it,  and  nothing  more  : this  you  know,  for  you  were  in  your
youth  brought  up  among  them.”

The  duke  was  much  struck  on  hearing  such  very  forcible  reasoning,  and  remained  some
time  leaning  over  a window  that  opened  into  a court,  without  making  any  reply.  His
council  were  standing  behind  him  ; and,  after  some  musing,  he  turned  round  and  said, — “ I
perceive  clearly  that  you  have  well  and  honestly  advised  me.  I want  nothing  but  good
counsel,  and  yet  how  can  I pretend  to  cherish  love  where  I only  feel  hate  ? How  can  I ever
love  sir  Oliver  de  Clisson,  who  has  given  me  such  repeated  causes  for  hatred  ? and  the  thing
I most  repent  of  in  this  world  is,  the  not  having  put  him  to  death  when  I had  him  in  my
castle  of  Ermine.”  “ In  the  name  of  God,  sir,”  replied  those  near  him,  “ had  you  put  him
to  death,  you  could  never  have  possessed  yourself  of  his  estates,  for  there  is  an  appeal  from
this  duchy  to  the  parliament  of  Paris.  John  of  Brittany  and  the  son  of  the  viscount  de
Rohan  are  his  heirs  by  marriage  with  his  two  daughters,  and  would  of  right  have  succeeded
to  his  estates ; and  you  are  much  blamed  for  what  you  have  already  done  respecting  the


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


339


three  castles,  by  their  friends  in  France.  The  constable  has  made  his  complaints  to  tho
chamber  of  parliament  at  Paris,  where  sentence  will  he  given  against  you,  for  you  have  no
one  there  to  make  any  defence  for  what  he  may  accuse  you  of.  When  you  shall  have  lost
this  cause,  sir  Oliver  de  Clisson  and  his  heirs  will  be  entitled  to  follow  up  the  judgment  by
force  of  arms  ; and,  should  the  king  and  country  take  part  in  resisting  them,  you  must  have
a greater  power  than  we  know  you  have  at  this  moment  to  make  any  resistance.  It  will
therefore  he  more  to  your  advantage,  if,  while  this  matter  is  pending,  you  surrender  up  these
castles,  and  be  thanked  for  so  doing,  rather  than  wait  until  judgment  be  given  against  you,
with  heavy  damages.  You  will  also  regain  the  good  will  of  your  subjects,  which  is  certainly
worth  having,  and  live  in  peace  with  those  whose  affections  you  should  wish  to  preserve ; I
mean  the  king  of  France,  who  is  your  sovereign  and  natural  lord,  and  my  lord  of  Burgundy
and  his  children  your  cousins.  You  have  seen  an  example  in  your  own  time  in  the  late
earl  of  Flanders,  your  cousin-german,  who,  though  a valiant  and  wise  prince,  was,  through
extraordinary  events,  at  the  latter  end  of  his  days,  nearly  driven  out  of  his  inheritance ;
but,  by  humbling  himself  to  the  king  of  France  and  his  uncles,  they  assisted  him  in  the
recovery  of  his  country.”  “ Well,”  replied  the  duke,  “ I see,  since  I have  asked  your  advice,
it  will  be  proper  for  me  to  follow  what  you  have  said.”

I believe  everything  went  on  well  afterwards ; at  least,  such  were  the  appearances ; for
the  duke  of  Brittany,  who  had  hitherto  kept  possession  of  the  constable’s  castles,  now
remanded  his  men  from  them,  and  gave  up  their  possession  to  the  officers  of  sir  Oliver  de
Clisson.  This  was  the  first  act  of  moderation  on  his  part : hut  it  did  not  satisfy  the  king
nor  council  of  France,  who  insisted  on  the  restitution  of  the  money  that  had  been  paid  as
part  of  the  ransom,  and  that  the  duke  should  come  to  Paris,  and  personally  make  excuses
for  his  conduct  to  the  king,  in  the  presence  of  the  peers  of  France,  and  submit  to  such
punishment  as  the  king  and  his  peers  might,  after  great  deliberation,  adjudge  him.  The
three  envoys  to  Brittany  were  well  pleased  when  they  heard  of  the  restitution  of  the
constable’s  castles,  and  the  lord  de  Coucy  said, — “ Now,  gentlemen,  we  have  one  obstacle
the  less  to  surmount,  and  I suppose  the  duke  will  listen  to  what  we  may  have  to  say  to  him."

I was  told,  that  before  these  three  barons  left  Paris,  the  dukes  of  Berry  and  Burgundy
held  several  private  consultations  with  them,  and  recommended  them  to  use  every  gentle
method  to  bring  matters  to  a favourable  conclusion,  in  preference  to  harsh  ones ; and  to
prevail  on  the  duke  to  come  to  Paris,  or  at  least  half  way  to  the  town  of  Blois,  where  they
would  meet  him  and  hold  a conference  together.  The  three  barons,  who  were  prudent  and
had  received  their  full  instructions,  said,  they  would  use  their  utmost  endeavours  to  comply
with  their  wishes.  On  leaving  Paris,  they  continued  their  journey  until  they  came  to  the
city  of  Rennes  in  Brittany,  where,  on  asking  for  the  duke,  they  learnt  he  was  at  Yannes,
whither  they  went.  Their  coming  was  already  known  in  the  household  of  the  duke,  for
they  had  sent  forward  servants  to  prepare  their  lodgings.  The  duke  had  assembled  his
council  and  the  principal  barons  of  Brittany  near  his  person,  to  show  them  the  more
honour.  They  were  well  received  on  their  entering  Yannes,  by  the  knights  and  others  of
the  duke’s  household,  who  had  gone  forth  to  meet  them,  and  in  particular  by  the  lord  de
Laval,  who  resided  there.

They  dismounted  at  their  lodgings,  and,  having  dressed  and  refreshed  themselves  with
what  they  there  found,  re-mounted  their  horses,  and  rode  to  the  castle  de  la  Motte,  the
residence  of  the  duke,  who  met  and  received  them  with  much  joy,  telling  them  they  were
welcome,  for  that  he  was  very  happy  in  seeing  them.  He  took  the  lord  de  Coucy  by  tho
hand,  and  showed  him  much  kindness,  saying, — “ Fair  brother,  you  are  welcome  : I rejoice
to  see  you  in  Brittany  : before  you  leave  me,  I will  give  you  fine  sport  with  hunting  stags,
and  in  hawking.”  “ Dear  brother  and  lord,”  replied  the  lord  de  Coucy,  “ I thank  you ; and  I
and  my  companions  will  cheerfully  partake  of  them.”  The  duke  showed  them  every  attention,
and  conducted  them,  laughing  and  joking,  to  his  apartments,  where  they  amused  themselves
with  much  cheerfulness,  as  great  lords  are  accustomed  to  do  who  have  not  seen  each  other
for  some  time.  All  four  knew  how  to  keep  up  a brilliant  conversation  as  well,  if  not  better,
than  any  lords  I ever  saw,  not  excepting  the  duke  of  Brabant,  the  count  de  Foix,  nor
the  count  de  Savoy ; and,  in  particular  the  lord  de  Coucy  shone  above  all  others,  as  was

z 2


340


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


.acknowledged  by  all  lords  and  ladies,  in  whatever  country  he  had  visited,  whether  France,
England,  Germany,  Lombardy,  or  any  other  places.  He  had  seen  much  of  the  world,  and
had  travelled  to  various  parts,  to  which  he  was  naturally  inclined.

During  the  time  these  lords  were  in  conversation,  spices  were  brought  in  handsome  silver
comfit  boxes,  and  fine  wines  in  gold  and  silver  cans.  The  lords  partook  of  both,  and  shortly
after  took  leave  and  returned  to  their  lodgings.  Thus  passed  the  first  day,  without  one
word  being  said  of  the  cause  of  their  coming.

o o


CHAPTER  CXIV. WHILE  HELION  DE  LIGNAC,  AMBASSADOR  FROM  THE  DUKE  OF  BERRY  TO

THE  DUKE  OF  LANCASTER,  IS  NEGOTIATING  THE  MARRIAGE  WITH  HIS  DAUGHTER,
THE  KING  OF  CASTILLE  SENDS  AMBASSADORS  PRIVATELY  TO  BREAK  IT  OFF,  AND  TO

DEMAND  THE  LADY  IN  MARRIAGE  FOR  HIS  SON. HELION  DE  LIGNAC  IS  SENT  AWAY,

THE  DAY  OF  THEIR  ARRIVAL,  WITH  SOME  TRUCES  RESPECTING  THE  FRONTIERS  OF
AQUITAINE.

We  will  now  return  to  sir  Helion  de  Lignac,  who  had  been  sent  by  the  duke  of  Berry  to
the  duke  of  Lancaster.  The  knight  arrived  safely  at  Bayonne,  and,  having  dismounted  at
his  inn,  made  himself  ready  to  wait  on  the  duke,  who  had  already  been  informed  of  his
arrival,  and,  as  a mark  of  honour,  had  sent  two  of  his  knights  to  visit  him  at  his  hotel,  and
to  conduct  him  to  him.  Sir  Helion,  on  being  introduced  to  the  duke,  saluted  him  very
profoundly,  as  was  proper,  and  he  knew  well  how  to  acquit  himself.  The  duke  received  him
most  honourably,  raised  him  up  in  his  arms,  and  took  him  by  the  hand  to  lead  him  into  an
apartment,  for  they  had  met  in  the  hall.  Sir  Helion  then  gave  him  the  letters  he  had  been
charged  with  from  the  duke  of  Berry.  The  duke,  having  opened  and  read  them,  advanced
towards  sir  Helion,  who  declared  the  business  he  had  been  sent  on.  The  duke  very
courteously  replied,  and  said  to  sir  Helion,  he  was  welcome ; that  the  matter  he  was  come  to
treat  on  was  of  such  importance,  it  was  necessary  he  should  deliberate  with  his  council
thereon,  and  that  he  could  not  instantly  give  him  a decided  answer.

Sir  Helion  de  Lignac  remained  at  Bayonne  with  the  duke  of  Lancaster  and  his  knights
upwards  of  a month,  and  was  treated  most  kindly  by  words  and  otherwise,  and  made  to
understand  that  the  duke  was  not  unwilling  to  accept  of  the  duke  of  Berry’s  proposals ; but
this  was  not  the  fact,  for  all  these  fine  speeches  and  delays  were  fictions,  and  solely  used  to
give  more  publicity  to  what  was  going  forward,  more  especially  that  it  should  be  known  in  the
kingdom  of  Castille,  for  there  his  affections  were  placed.  The  duke  of  Lancaster  said  to  sir
Helion,  that  if  his  cousin  of  Berry  married  his  daughter,  he  must  unite  all  his  force  with  him
to  wage  war  on  his  adversary  of  Castille,  that  his  daughter’s  inheritance  might  be  recovered.
Sir  Helion,  in  reply,  said, — “ My  lord,  I am  not  charged  to  say  anything  respecting  this
matter  : you  will,  before  my  departure,  write  down  what  you  expect,  and  I will  carry  it  to
the  duke  of  Berry,  whose  affection  is,  I know,  so  strong  towards  you,  that  he  will  enter
into  all  reasonable  alliances  you  may  propose.”  “We  wish  for  nothing  more,”  said  the
duke.  Things  remained  in  this  state  during  the  time  of  sir  Helion’ s residence  at  Bayonne,
where  he  was  gaily  entertained  according  to  the  orders  the  duke  had  given.

In  the  meanwhile,  news  of  this  intended  marriage  was  everywhere  spread  abroad ; and,  in
particular,  it  was  carried  to  the  court  of  king  John  of  Castille  by  those  who  said, — “ Do  you
know  what  is  going  forwards  ? There  are  important  treaties  negociating  with  the  dukes  of
Berry  and  Lancaster,  for  a match  between  the  duke  of  Berry  and  the  lady  Catherine  ; and,
if  this  be  concluded,  as  there  seems  every  probability,  it  will  not  be  done  without  strong
alliances  being  made  between  them.  The  duke  of  Berry  has  at  this  moment  great  power  :
he  is  the  elder  uncle  of  the  king  of  France,  and  takes  the  lead  in  the  government  of  that
country.  He  will  succeed  in  whatever  he  may  propose,  as  to  peace  or  long  truces  with
England  : and,  on  the  other  hand,  the  duke  of  Lancaster  stands  in  the  same  relation  to  the
king  of  England,  is  wise,  and  of  great  power ; and,  as  it  should  seem,  the  English  are  tired
of  war.  If,  therefore,  by  means  of  this  connexion  with  France,  a firm  peace  should  be
established  with  England,  we  shall  have  the  war  to  support  alone  ; for  the  duke  of  Lancaster


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE.  &c.


341


will  not  give  lip  tamely  his  claims  on  Castillo,  but,  on  the  contrary,  insist  on  establishing
them,  as  his  daughter’s  lawful  inheritance  and  dower.  We  shall  thus  have  war  with  France
and  England.”  Those  most  in  the  confidence  of  the  king  of  Castille  said  to  him, — •“  Sire,
have  you  heard  the'rumours  that  are  abroad?  You  had  never  such  need  of  good  advice  as
at  this  moment.  The  dangers  from  the  duke  of  Lancaster  are  thicker  than  ever,  and  the
blast  comes  from  France.”  “ How  !”  replied  the  king  : “what  do  you  mean?”  “ In  the
name  of  God,  sir,  the  report  is  everywhere  current,  that  the  duke  of  Berry  is  to  marry  the
duke  of  Lancaster’s  daughter,  and  you  may  suppose  this  will  not  be  done  without  great
alliances  being  made  between  them  ; and  you  may  in  future  suffer  as  much  from  the  French
as  you  have  lately  gained  by  them.”  The  king,  on  hearing  this,  was  very  pensive,  for  he
knew  what  they  had  said  was  true.  He  demanded  advice  from  those  who  had  ever  been
attached  to  him,  how,  in  such  a circumstance,  he  ought  to  act,  and  they  gave  him  loyal  and
good  counsel,  as  I will  relate.

You  have  before  heard,  in  this  history,  how  king  Henry  of  Castille  had  made  his  peace
with  the  king  of  Arragon,  on  condition  that  his  son  John,  the  present  king  of  Castille,
married  his  daughter.  This  marriage  brought  peace  to  the  two  countries.  King  John  had
one  son  by  this  lady,  who  shortly  after  died  ; and  then,  by  the  advice  of  his  council,  he
married  again  with  the  lady  Beatrice,  daughter  to  the  king  of  Portugal.  The  son,  by  the
princess  of  Arragon,  was  a promising  youth,  though  very  young.  The  council  of  Castille,
in  reply  to  the  king’s  demand,  said, — “ Sire,  we  can  only  see  one  remedy  to  avert  the  evils
that  may  be  consequent  to  this  marriage  with  the  duke  of  Berry.”  “ What  is  it?”  asked
the  king.  “ It  is  the  infant  don  Henry  your  son,  who  is  alone  capable  of  preventing  this
match  ; for  we  are  persuaded,  that  if  the  duke  and  duchess  of  Lancaster  were  informed  you
were  willing  to  unite  him  with  the  lady  Catherine,  they  would  prefer  him  to  the  duke  of
Berry."  “ In  God’s  name,”  answered  the  king,  “ you  say  well,  and  I will  instantly  set
about  it ; for  our  subjects  will  be  quite  satisfied,  that  by  such  a marriage  they  will  have
peace  with  England  on  sea  and  land.  Now,  consider  of  the  most  proper  persons  to  send  to
treat  with  the  duke  of  Lancaster.”

“ Sire,  it  is  necessary  you  should,  in  this  matter,  employ  those  of  the  greatest  prudence
and  sagacity,  and  that  it  be  treated  with  the  utmost  secrecy,  lest  you  incur  the  hatred  of  the
king  of  France.  Great  jealousies  are  now  abroad,  and  persons  are  more  eager  to  report
scandal  than  good  actions,  for  evil  reports  are  sooner  made  public  than  others.  When  it
shall  be  told  to  the  court  of  France  that  you  are  in  treaty  with  the  duke  of  Lancaster,  they
will  wish  to  know  the  subject  and  the  particulars,  lest  it  may  prejudice  the  strong  alliance
the  late  king,  your  father,  of  worthy  memory,  entered  into  with  them,  and  on  which  account
the  French  have  assisted  you  in  your  wars.  You  must,  therefore,  send  to  the  duke  of
Lancaster  wise  and  discreet  persons,  that  the  matter  may  be  secretly  treated,  and  kept
private  until  all  things  be  completely  settled.”  “ What  you  have  said  is  right,”  replied  the
king  : “ now  name  those  whom  you  think  capable  of  accomplishing  the  matter.”  “ Sire,”
said  they,  “ we  will  send  your  confessor,  father  Fernando  de  Torre,  and  the  bishop  of
Geghene*,  who  was  confessor  to  the  late  king,  and  Peter  Gardelempos,  who  is  a great
orator.”  “ Be  it  so,  then,”  answered  the  king  : “ I consent ; let  them  be  sent  for,  and
instructed  what  they  are  to  say,  and  how  to  act ; for  formerly,  when  there  was  a treaty  of
peace  in  agitation,  they  were  not  listened  to  by  the  duke  of  Lancaster,  who  insisted,  as  a
preliminary,  that  I should  lay  down  my  crown,  and  this  I will  never  do.”

The  three  above-mentioned  persons  were  summoned  to  Burgos,  where  the  king  resided,
and  told  from  him  on  what  object  they  were  to  be  sent  to  Bayonne,  to  treat  with  the  duke
of  Lancaster.  They  professed  themselves  willing  to  undertake  it  to  the  best  of  their  abilities,
and  set  out  on  their  journey  with  few  attendants,  not  like  to  ambassadors  going  to  form
alliances,  for  they  were  not  certain  what  success  they  should  have.  On  entering  Navarre,
they  made  for  Pampeluna,  the  residence  of  the  king,  who  had  married  the  king  of  Castille’ s
sister.  She  entertained  them  kindly,  but  they  did  not  discover  to  her,  nor  to  the  king,  the
cause  of  their  journey.  They  passed  over  the  mountains  of  Pampeluna  and  Roncesvalles,
through  the  country  of  the  Basques,  and  arrived  at  the  good  town  of  Bayonne.  At  the  time
of  their  arrival,  sir  Helion  de  Lignac  was  still  there,  but  made  no  long  stay  afterwards  ;

* “ Goghene.”  Q.


342


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


for  father  Fernando,  the  king  of  Castille’s  confessor,  waited  privately  on  the  duke  of  Lancaster,
as  better  acquainted  with  him  than  the  others,  and  gave  him  to  understand  the  cause  of  their
coming,  and  by  whom  they  were  sent.

The  duke,  on  hearing  this,  opened  his  cars,  for  the  intelligence  was  highly  agreeable  to
him,  and  bade  father  Fernando  a hearty  welcome.  This  same  day  he  gave  sir  Helion  de
Lignac  leave  to  depart ; and  it  seems  to  me  that  the  duke  consented  to  a truce  for  those  who
were  carrying  on  the  war  under  his  name  in  the  seneschalships  of  Aquitaine,  Bigorre,
Toulouse,  and  other  places,  comprehending  all  within  the  river  Loire,  but  not  beyond  it,  to
last  until  the  first  day  of  May  1389.  This  truce  had  been  requested  by  the  duke  of  Berry,
that  his  people  might  pass  and  repass  from  him  to  the  duke  of  Lancaster  with  greater  security;
for  those  of  Mortagne  sur  mer,  Bouteville,  and  the  garrisons  in  Quercy,  Perigord,  and  on  the
Garonne,  were  very  cruel,  sparing  none,  and  acknowledging  no  lord.  It  was  to  keep  these
people  in  better  order  that  the  duke  of  Berry  had  solicited  a truce,  which  was  well  observed.
Sir  Helion  de  Lignac  left  the  duke  of  Lancaster  on  terms  of  the  strongest  affection,  and  he
seemed  sensible  things  were  in  the  train  he  wished  them,  for  the  duke  seemed  very  well
satisfied  with  what  the  duke  of  Berry  had  offered.  He  had  indeed  declared,  that  he  never
could  marry  his  daughter  in  France  without  the  consent  of  his  nephew  the  king  of  England
and  the  English  council ; but  matters  were  now  so  far  advanced,  he  seemed  to  think  there
would  not  be  any  great  difficulty  to  obtain  them.  On  these  assurances,  sir  Helion  returned
to  France,  delivered  letters  from  the  duke  of  Lancaster  to  the  duke  of  Berry,  and  related  to
him  all  that  had  passed  ; with  which  he  was  much  satisfied.

W e will  now  speak  of  the  ambassadors  from  Castille.  These  were  indeed  cordially  listened
to  by  the  duke  and  duchess,  for  their  hearts  were  wrapped  up  in  their  hopes  of  regaining
the  crown  for  themselves  or  their  child.  They  were  very  kindly  received  on  their  introduc-
tion at  the  castle  by  the  duke  and  duchess,  to  whom  they  delivered  their  credential  letters,
and  explained  the  object  of  their  mission.  They  first  proposed  a treaty  of  peace  with
Castille,  which  the  father-confessor  discoursed  much  on,  in  the  apartment  of  the  duke  where
only  the  duchess  was  present,  who  interpreted  to  the  duke  what  he  did  not  understand,  as
she  had  in  her  youth  been  educated  in  Castille  and  understood  the  language  perfectly  well.
The  duke  of  Lancaster,  at  this  first  interview,  did  not  discover  his  real  sentiments,  although
he  entertained  them  well,  but  said  it  would  be  difficult  to  exchange  such  hatred  for  peace,
and  to  establish  it  with  one  whom  they  wanted  to  disinherit,  and  that  it  was  not  his  inten-
tion to  relinquish  his  claim  to  the  crown  of  Castille.  The  friar  and  bishop  replied, — “ that
there  was  one  means  of  reconciling  his  right  and  the  right  of  their  lord  and  king ; and,  my
lord,  we  have  found  it.”  “ What  is  it  ? ” said  the  duke,  “ Sir,  you  have  by  your  lady  a
beautiful  daughter,  of  an  age  to  marry,  and  our  lord  of  Castille  has  a handsome  and  young
son  : if  a union  between  those  two  could  be  brought  about,  the  kingdom  of  Castille  would
have  peace  for  ever ; for  what  you  claim  will  fall  where  it  ought,  to  your  own  heir,  who  is
the  lineal  descendant  from  our  kings  of  Castille ; and  all  the  fatigues  you  have  undergone  in
this  war  must  have  been  for  the  ultimate  succession  of  this  young  lady.”

“ That  is  true,”  replied  the  duke ; “ but  I must  have  my  expenses  reimbursed,  for  I would
have  you  know  that  my  expedition  to  Castille  has  cost  England  and  me  upwards  of  five
hundred  thousand  francs.  I should  like,  therefore,  to  hear  what  you  say  of  repayment.”

“ My  lord,”  said  the  confessor,  “ if  what  we  have  proposed  shall  be  agreeable  to  you,  we
will  manage  all  other  things  to  your  perfect  satisfaction.”  “ Your  coming  hither,”  replied
the  duke,  “ has  given  us  pleasure ; and  I shall  certainly  marry  my  daughter,  before  I return
to  England,  to  Castille  or  France,  as  I have  had  proposals  from  thence ; but  matters  like
these  are  of  such  importance,  that  an  answer  cannot  be  given  at  the  first  overture. — With
regard  to  my  daughter,  whom  I consider  as  the  rightful  heiress  of  Castille,  I would  be  well
acquainted  with  him  who  should  marry  her.”  “ That  is  but  reasonable,  my  lord,”  said  the
confessor.  Thus,  as  I have  related,  were  the  proposals  of  marriage  made  from  France  and
Castille,  to  the  duke  of  Lancaster,  for  the  marriage  of  his  daughter.  They  were  both  well
received,  refusals  made  to  neither,  and  the  ambassadors  well  entertained.  The  marriage,
however,  with  Castille  was  more  agreeable  to  the  duke  and  duchess,  because  their  daughter
would  in  due  time  become  queen  of  Castille.

We  will  now  leave  the  duke  of  Lancaster,  and  return  to  the  affairs  of  Brittany.


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


343


CHAPTER  CXV.— THE  DUKES  OF  BERRY  AND  BURGUNDY  LEAVE  PARIS  FOR  BLOIS,  TO  HOLD

A CONFERENCE  WITH  THE  DUKE  OF  BRITTANY,  WHO  MEETS  THEM  THERE. THEY

PERSUADE  HIM,  AGAINST  HIS  INCLINATION,  TO  COME  TO  PARIS.

The  duke  of  Brittany,  as  I have  said,  received  the  French  knights  with  much  kindness,
more  particularly  the  lord  de  Coucy,  whom  he  had  been  desirous  to  see.  I was  informed  at
the  time,  the  lord  de  Coucy  was  the  most  instrumental  in  making  the  duke  change  his  mind:
not  but  that  sir  John  de  Yienne  and  the  lord  de  la  Riviere  exerted  themselves  to  the  same
purpose,  but  all  princes,  when  they  are  entreated,  will  naturally  incline  to  some  persons  more
than  others.  The  duke  of  Brittany  consented,  with  great  difficulty,  to  meet  the  dukes  of
Berry  and  Burgundy  at  Blois : after  many  fair  speeches,  he  said  he  would  go  thither,  but
not  one  step  farther.  The  lord  de  Coucy  replied,  that  they  asked  nothing  more,  unless  it
should  be  perfectly  agreeable  to  him.  These  three  lords  staid  with  the  duke  of  Brittany  I
know  not  how  many  days,  and  then  returned  to  the  dukes  of  Berry  and  Burgundy  to  tell
them  their  success.

Upon  this,  the  two  dukes  made  preparations  for  going  to  meet  the  duke  of  Brittany  at
Blois,  and  sent  before  all  purveyances  suitable  to  their  rank.  The  duke  of  Berry  arrived
first  at  the  castle,  where  he  was  kindly  received  by  the  countess  of  Blois,  his  son,  and  her
daughter,  as  was  becoming  him  and  them.  Count  Guy  de  Blois  was  not  at  this  time  in  the
country,  but  at  Cliatel  Regnaud,  and,  as  the  countess  and  her  children  were  at  home,  he
paid  no  attention  to  the  arrival  of  the  duke  of  Berry.  The  duke  of  Burgundy  came  in  a
grand  style,  accompanied  by  his  son-in-law,  lord  William  of  Hainault,  count  d’Ostrevant,
and  his  son  John  of  Burgundy,  called  count  de  Nevers.  The  duke  was  also  lodged  in  the
castle,  and  held  there  his  court.

The  duke  of  Brittany  came  last,  but  with  no  great  array,  attended  only  by  those  of  his
household,  in  number  about  three  hundred  horse ; for  it  was  his  intention  to  return  to  his
own  country  as  soon  as  these  conferences  should  be  over.  Such,  however,  were  not  the
intentions  of  the  other  dukes ; for  they  said,  "whether  he  would  or  not  they  would  force  him
to  come  to  Paris.  The  duke  of  Brittany  was  lodged  at  the  house  of  a canon  of  St.  Sauveur,
within  the  castle ; but  his  attendants,  with  those  of  the  other  lords,  were  quartered  in  the
town.  These  princes  kept  their  state  in  the  castle,  which  is  large,  and  one  of  the  handsomest
in  the  kingdom  of  France.

Conferences  were  held  between  the  three  dukes ; and  those  of  France  gave  handsome
entertainments  to  the  duke  of  Brittany,  showdng  him  much  affection,  and  repeatedly  thanking
him  for  coming  to  Blois.  The  duke  dissembled  as  well  as  he  could,  and  said,  that  indeed  it
was  from  his  love  to  them  he  had  undertaken  such  a journey,  for  that  he  was  very  unwell.
In  the  course  of  their  conversations  they  told  the  duke  of  Brittany,  that  since  he  had  come
so  far,  he  would  have  done  nothing  if  he  did  not  continue  his  journey  to  Paris,  for  the  king
was  very  anxious  to  see  him.  The  duke  made  every  excuse  for  not  complying  with  this
proposal,  saying  his  health  was  too  bad  to  go  so  far ; that  he  had  not  brought  any  attendants
with  him,  but  simply  those  of  his  household,  meaning  to  return  home  directly.  They  kindly
answered,  that,  begging  his  pardon,  it  would  not  be  decorous  for  him  to  visit  his  lord  para-
mount with  too  large  a company ; that  if  he  were  too  ill  to  ride,  they  were  provided  with
litters  and  cars  that  should  be  at  his  service ; and  that  he  was  bound  to  pay  his  homage  to
the  king,  which  he  had  never  yet  done.

The  duke  of  Brittany,  in  excuse,  said,  that  when  the  king  should  be  of  age,  and  take  the
reins  of  government,  he  would  come  to  Paris,  or  to  any  other  place  whither  he  might  order
him,  to  perform  his  homage,  for  he  was  bounden  so  to  do.  The  dukes  of  Berry  and  Bur-
gundy replied,  that  he  was  of  sufficient  age  and  understanding  to  receive  homage ; and  that
every  lord  of  France,  and  all  who  held  fiefs  under  the  crown,  excepting  himself,  had  done
their  homage,  for  the  king  was  now  in  his  twenty-first  year.  The  duke  of  Brittany,  finding
his  excuses  of  no  avail,  said, — “ Should  I go  to  Paris,  it  will  be  much  against  my  inclination,
and  very  prejudicial  to  my  interests ; for,  when  there,  I shall  meet  sir  Oliver  de  Clisson,
whom  I hate,  and  we  can  never  cordially  love  each  other  after  what  has  passed : he  will


344


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  & c.


make  me  bitter  and  injurious  reproaches,  and  consider  what  may  be  the  consequences.”  “ Oh
no,”  answered  the  two  dukes,  but  in  particular  the  duke  of  Burgundy,  “ fair  cousin,  have
no  fear  from  that  quarter;  for  we  solemnly  swear  to  you,  that  neither  the  constable  nor  John
of  Brittany,  unless  you  wish  it,  shall  see  or  speak  with  you : of  this  be  assured  : but  you
shall  see  the  king,  who  is  anxious  for  it.  and  the  barons  and  knights  cf  France,  who  will
make  you  good  cheer;  and  when  you  have  completed  the  object  of  your  journey,  you  shall
return  home  without  hindrance  or  hurt.”

Why  should  I make  a long  story  ? The  duke  of  Brittany  was  so  sweetly  entreated,  that
he  consented  to  go  to  Paris  ; but  he  insisted  that  he  should  never  see  the  constable  of  France
nor  John  of  Brittany,  and  that  they  should  never  be  in  the  same  company  with  him.  The
two  dukes  solemnly  pledged  themselves  to  all  his  requests ; and  on  their  faith  he  engaged  to
set  out  for  Paris.  They  remained  five  or  six  days  in  the  castle  of  Blois,  and  alternately
gave  grand  entertainments  to  each  other,  the  countess,  and  her  children.  Everything  having
been  so  settled,  the  two  dukes  took  leave  of  the  duke  of  Brittany  and  returned  to  Paris ;
but  the  lord  William  of  Hainault  did  not  accompany  his  father-in-law  the  duke  of  Bur-
gundy. He  attended  the  countess  of  Blois  and  her  family  to  chatel  Regnaud,  to  visit  count
Guy  de  Blois,  where  he  was  kindly  received  and  entertained  for  three  days,  when  he  took
leave  of  them  and  went  to  Paris,  by  way  of  Chateaudun*  and  Bonnevalf.


CHAPTER  CXVI. LEWIS  OF  ANJOU,  SON  TO  THE  LATE  DUKE  OF  ANJOU,  UNCLE  TO  KING'

CHARLES  VI.,  MAKES  HIS  PUBLIC  ENTRY  INTO  PARIS  AS  KING  OF  SICILY. THE  DUKE

OF  BRITTANY  COMES  THERE  SHORTLY  AFTER. THOMAS  IIAPURGAN,  AN  ENGLISHMAN,

AND  JOHN  DES  BARRES,  A FRENCHMAN,  PERFORM  A DEED  OF  ARMS  BEFORE  THE  KING
OF  FRANCE  AT  MONTEREAU  SUR  YONNE

The  duke  of  Brittany  went  to  Beaugency,  on  the  Loire,  where  he  made  his  preparations
for  going  to  Paris.  But  before  he  came  thither,  there  arrived  the  queen  of  Sicily  and
Jerusalem,  widow  of  the  late  duke  of  Anjou,  who  had  borne  the  title  of  king  of  those
countries,  as  well  as  of  Naples.  She  had  brought  with  her  her  young  son  Lewis,  who,
throughout  France  was  acknowledged  as  king  of  Naples,  and  was  likewise  accompanied  by
her  brother,  John  of  Brittany.  Before  she  entered  Paris,  she  signified  to  her  brothers,  the
dukes  of  Berry  and  Burgundy  §,  her  arrival,  with  her  son  Lewis,  their  nephew,  and  desired
to  know  whether  he  should  make  his  entry  as  king,  or  simply  as  duke  of  Anjou.  The  two
dukes,  having  considered  the  matter,  sent  for  answer,  that  they  desired  he  would  make  his
entry  as  king  of  Naples,  Sicily,  and  Jerusalem,  although  he  was  not  as  yet  in  possession  of
these  kingdoms  ; for  they  would  assist  him,  and  prevail  on  the  king  of  France  to  do  the
same,  so  effectually,  that  he  should  recover  those  territories,  and  peaceably  possess  them  as
his  right,  and  what  they  had  most  sacredly  promised  to  perform  to  their  late  brother  the
king  of  Naples.  The  lady,  upon  this,  made  preparations  accordingly ; and,  having  entered
Paris,  her  son  passed  in  grand  cavalcade,  through  the  street  of  St.  James,  to  his  hotel  in  the
Greve,  with  kingly  state,  accompanied  by  numbers  of  dukes,  counts,  and  prelates.  The
queen  and  her  son,  having  established  themselves  there,  waited  on  the  king,  who  resided  at
the  castle  of  the  Louvre,  expecting  the  duke  of  Brittany.

The  duke  of  Brittany,  on  his  approach  to  Paris,  stopped  one  night  at  Bourg  la  Reine,
previous  to  his  entry  which  he  made  on  the  morrow.  This  was  great  news  for  the  Parisians,
on  account  of  the  late  events  of  the  arrest  and  imprisonment  of  the  constable,  and  the  fruit-
less embassies  that  had  been  sent  to  summon  him||  : his  late  conduct,  and  his  coming  now  as
it  were  of  his  own  free  will,  were  variously  spoken  of.  It  was  on  a Sunday,  the  vigil  of  St.

* “ Chateau-dun,”  ail  ancient  town  in  Beauce,  diocese  leagues  from  Melun,  twenty  and  a half  from  Paris
of  Blois,  twelve  leagues  from  Chartres,  thirty-four  from  § Her  brothers-in-law,  own  brothers  to  her  deceased
Paris.  husband  Louis  of  Anjou. — Ed.

+ “ Bonneval,”  a town  in  Beauce,  four  leagues  from  ||  He  had  been  summoned  several  times,  and  the  king
Chateau-dun.  had  expected  his  appearance  ever  since  the  month  of  May.

1 ‘ Montereau-sur-Yonne,”  a town  in  Brie,  seven  - — Ed.


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


345


Palace  of  the  Louvre,  as  it  appeared  in  the  16th  century.  From  a print  in  Chastillon’s  Topograpliie  Franqoise.

The  duke  entered  the  gate  of  the  Louvre  well  prepared  what  to  say,  and  how  to  act.
He  wTas  preceded  by  the  lord  de  Coucy,  the  count  de  Savoye,  sir  John  de  Vienne,  sir  Guy
de  la  Tremouille,  sir  John  de  Beuil,  the  count  de  Meaux,  sir  Reginald  de  Roye  and  sir  John
des  Barres  : nearer  to  him,  on  each  side,  were  the  lord  William  de  Namur,  John  of  Burgundy,
and  the  count  d’Ostrevant : behind  him  were,  the  lord  de  Montfort  in  Brittany,  and  the
lord  de  Malestroit,  his  relation  and  minister.  There  was  a great  crowd  in  the  apartment,
which  was  not  only  small,  but  the  table  was  spread  in  it  for  the  king’s  dinner,  who  was
standing  before  it  with  his  three  uncles,  Berry,  Burgundy,  and  Bourbon.  The  moment  the
duke  of  Brittany  entered  the  room,  way  was  made  for  him,  and  an  opening  formed  to  the
king,  by  the  lords  falling  on  each  side.  When  in  the  presence,  he  dropped  on  one  knee,  but
speedily  arose,  and  advanced  about  ten  or  twelve  paces,  when  he  again  kneeled  : on  rising,
he  came  close  to  the  king,  kneeled  the  third  time,  and  saluted  him  bare-headed,  saying,
“ My  lord,  I am  come  to  see  you  : may  God  preserve  you  ! ” “ Many  thanks,”  replied  the
king.  “ I was  anxious  for  your  coming  : we  will  see  and  converse  with  you  at  our  leisure.
On  which  he  took  him  by  the  hand,  and  raised  him  up.  When  the  duke  had  risen,  he
bowed  to  all  the  princes  present,  one  after  the  other,  and  then  stood  opposite  to  the  king
without  saying  a word  ; but  the  king  never  took  his  eyes  off  him.

A signal  was  made  to  the  masters  of  the  household  to  bring  water,  when  the  king  washed,
and  the  duke  of  Brittany  held  the  bason  and  towel.  When  the  king  was  seated,  the  duke
took  leave  of  him  and  his  uncles.  The  lord  de  Coucy,  the  lord  de  Saint  Pol,  and  other  great
harons  conducted  him  to  the  court  where  his  horses  waited,  and,  having  mounted,  he  returned

* “ De  P Enter.”  It  is  now  the  gate  of  Saint  Michel.  For  more  particulars,  see  Sauval,  Antiquites  de  Paris,
tom.  i.  p.  36.


John  Baptist’s  feast,  in  the  year  1388,  at  ten  o’clock  in  the  morning.  The  duke  of  Brittany
entered  Paris  by  the  gate  de  1’Enfer*,  and  passing  the  whole  length  of  the  rue  de  la  Harpe,
crossed  the  pont  de  St.  Michel,  and  came  in  front  of  the  palace.  He  was  handsomely
accompanied  by  numbers  of  barons  and  knights  ; among  whom  was  the  lord  William  of
Hainault,  count  d’Ostrevant : his  brother-in-law  John  of  Burgundy,  and  the  lord  William  de
Namur  rode  before  him  When  he  arrived  at  the  castle  of  the  Louvre,  he  dismounted,  and.
as  he  passed  through  Paris,  was  much  stared  at  by  the  common  people.


340


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &e.

with  his  attendants  the  way  they  had  come,  through  the  street  de  la  Harpe,  and  dismounted
at  his  hotel.  None  of  those  who  had  attended  him  remained,  excepting  such  as  had  accom-
panied him  from  Brittany  to  Paris.  The  duke  of  Brittany  had  frequent  conferences  with
the  king  of  France  and  his  uncles  to  their  mutual  satisfaction  ; and  they  religiously  kept  the
promise  they  had  made  him,  for  he  never  saw,  during  his  stay  at  Paris,  John  of  Brittany  nor
the  constable  of  France.  When  affairs  were  in  so  good  a train  that  they  had  not  reason  to
be  suspicious  of  the  duke  of  Brittany,  (for  if  he  had  not  consented  to  everything  the  king  and
his  council  wished,  they  would  never  have  suffered  him  to  escape  from  their  hands,  as  they
now  had  him  in  Paris,)  they  thought  it  time  to  prepare  for  the  expedition  to  Gueldres  for
which  the  king  was  impatient,  to  punish  the  duke  of  Gueldres  for  the  insolent  and  rude
challenge  he  had  sent  him ; which,  the  more  it  was  considered,  was  the  less  to  be  borne

The  lord  de  Coucy  was  therefore  ordered  into  the  country,  near  Rheinis  and  Chalons  in
Champagne,  to  mark  out  the  line  of  march  for  the  king  and  his  army,  and  to  excite  the
knights  and  squires  of  Bar  and  Lorraine  to  join  him.  lie  was  in  no  way  to  introduce  'the
king’s  name,  but  to  engage  them  for  himself,  as  if  preparing  for  an  expedition  into  Austria.
Upon  this,  the  lord  de  Coucy  left  Paris,  and  went  to  Chalons,  where  he  resided  about  one
month,  and  retained  knights  and  squires  from  all  parts  in  Bar,  Lorraine,  Champagne,  and  in
the  Rethelois.  The  king  of  France,  after  several  conferences  with  the  duke  of  Brittany,  left
Paris,  though  the  duke’s  pleadings  in  his  courts  were  not  near  concluded  ; for  their  pro-
ceedings, when  they  choose,  are  very  tedious,  and  they  make  the  suitors  spend  much  money
without  any  great  advances  in  their  suits

The  king  went  to  Montereau  sur  Yonne,  on  the  borders  of  Brie  and  the  Gatinois,  where
he  held  his  court,  and  frequently  amused  himself  with  hunting  stags  and  other  animals  in  the
adjacent  forests.  During  the  residence  of  the  king  at  Montereau,  a deed  of  arms  was  there
performed  between  an  English  knight  attached  to  the  duke  of  Ireland,  called  sir  Thomas
Hapurgan,  and  sir  John  des  Barres.  This  duel  had  made  a great  noise  throughout  France,
and  in  other  countries ; and  it  was  to  be  fought  with  five  courses  of  the  lance  on  horseback,
five  thrusts  with  swords,  the  same  number  of  strokes  with  daggers  and  battle-axes ; and,
should  their  armour  fail,  they  were  to  be  supplied  anew,  until  it  were  perfect.

The  knights,  being  well  armed,  mounted  their  coursers  to  perform  their  duel,  in  the
presence  of  the  king,  his  barons  and  knights,  and  a great  concourse  of  people.  They  tilted
on  horseback  four  courses  very  stiffly,  and  kept  their  seats  well.  It  was  then  the  custom,  I
believe,  to  lace  on  the  helmets  with  a slight  thong,  that  they  might  not  make  too  great
resistance  to  the  blow  of  the  lance.  At  the  fifth  course,  John  des  Barres  struck  his  opponent
so  violent  a blow  on  the  shield,  that  he  knocked  him  over  the  crupper  of  his  horse  to  the
ground.  Sir  Thomas  was  stupified  by  the  fall,  and  it  was  with  much  difficulty  he  could  be
raised : however  he  recovered  well  enough  to  perform  his  other  courses  with  the  different
arms,  to  the  satisfaction  of  the  king  and  his  lords.


CHAPTER  CXVII. PERROT  LE  BEARNOIS  TAKES  THE  FIELD  BY  COMMAND  OF  THE  EARL  OF

ARUNDEL,  WHO  LANDS  HIS  FORCES  AT  MARANS*,  NEAR  LA  ROCHELLE.

I have  been  some  time  silent  respecting  the  expedition  that  was  at  sea  under  the  com-
mand of  the  earl  of  Arundel : it  is  now  necessary  I should  speak  of  it.  You  have  before
heard  the  cause  of  its  being  sent  from  England,  and  the  treaties  that  were  made  between  the
king  and  the  duke  of  Brittany.  This  fleet  had  remained  the  whole  season  on  the  coasts  of
Brittany  and  Normandy,  except  when  driven  off  by  storms,  but  it  always  returned  to  its
station.  There  were  in  this  fleet  some  light  vessels  called  Balleniers,  which  are  much  used
by  corsairs  ; for,  as  they  draw  little  water,  they  can  the  easier  approach  the  shores.  This
fleet  had  lain  at  anchor  upwards  of  a month  off  the  island  of  Brehat,  whence  it  had  got  pro-
vision. As  it  was  not  far  from  la  Roche-derrien,  they  heard  that  the  duke  of  Brittany  was
gone  to  Bloie,  to  meet  the  dukes  of  Berry  and  Burgundy,  who  had  held  such  fair  language  as


* “Marans,”  a town  in  Aunis,  four  leagues  from  la  Rochelle.


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.  ;347

persuaded  him  to  go  to  Paris,  where  he  had  been  so  well  received  by  the  king,  as  to  prevent
him  from  leaving  that  place  until  everything  had  been  satisfactorily  settled.

The  earl  of  Arundel  was  much  cast  down  when  he  heard  the  above,  and  called  a council  of
his  principal  officers,  to  consider  how  they  were  to  employ  their  force  during  the  remainder
of  the  season.  In  this  council  they  resolved  to  sail  for  la  Rochelle  and  make  war  on  that
country  ; for,  though  they  had  not  any  castles  in  those  parts,  yet  they  were  in  sufficient
numbers  to  withstand  the  force  Saintonge  or  Poitou  could  send  against  them.  They  intended
likewise  to  make  their  situation  known  to  their  friends  in  Limousin  and  Auvergne,  by  some
person  in  their  fleet  that  was  acquainted  with  the  country,  whom  they  would  land  on  the  coast
of  Brittany.  The  truces  which  sir  Ilelion  de  Lignac  had  obtained  from  the  duke  of  Lancaster
had  not  yet  taken  effect.  They  were  to  commence  on  the  first  of  August,  and  the  knight
was  at  this  time  going  or  returning,  I know  not  which,  to  or  from  the  duke  of  Lancaster  at
Bayonne.

It  fell  out  just  as  the  earl  of  Arundel  and  the  English  barons  wished  ; for  they  found  out  a
man  from  lower  Brittany,  who  served  under  sir  William  Ilelmon,  then  on  board,  who  came
from  near  Vannes,  and  understood  four  languages  perfectly  well,  that  of  lower  Brittany,
English,  Spanish,  and  French.  Before  they  landed  him  on  the  sand,  they  gave  him  the
following  orders:— “ Thou  wilt  go  by  all  the  bye-roads  in  this  country,  which  thou  sayest
thou  art  acquainted  with,  until  thou  shalt  come  to  Clialucet  *.  Thou  wilt  salute  Perrot  le
Bearnois,  from  us,  and  tell  him,  that  we  desire  he  will  take  the  field,  with  as  many  other
garrisons  of  our  party  as  he  can,  and  make  war  on  France  under  our  commission.  Thou  shalt
not  carry  any  letters  for  fear  thou  mightest  be  stopped  and  searched.  Say,  if  thou  findest
thyself  in  danger,  that  thou  belongest  to  a wine-merchant  of  la  Rochelle,  who  had  sent  thee
with  some  commissions,  and  thou  wilt  pass  everywhere.  Tell  Perrot  to  give  instant  alarm
to  Berry,  Auvergne,  and  Limousin,  by  taking  the  field ; for  we  will  disembark  near  la
Rochelle,  and  make  such  a war  that  he  shall  soon  hear  of  us.”

The  Breton  said,  he  would  faithfully  deliver  the  message,  unless  he  was  stopped  on  the
road.  On  being  landed,  as  he  knew  well  the  country  of  Brittany,  he  avoided  all  great
towns,  and,  passing  safely  through  Poitou  and  Limousin,  arrived  at  Clialucet,  of  which  Perrot
le  Bearnois  was  governor.  On  coming  to  the  barriers,  having  made  acquaintance  with  the
garrison,  they  allowed  him  to  enter,  after  examining  him  at  the  gates,  and  led  him  to  Perrot,
to  whom  he  punctually  delivered  the  message,  to  the  great  joy  of  the  governor,  who  had  been
long  impatient  to  hear  some  news  of  the  fleet,  and  now  he  had  it  quite  fresh.  lie  said  to  the
Breton, — “ Thou  art  welcome : my  companions  and  myself  are  very  eager  to  take  the  field,
which  we  will  now  speedily  do,  and  then  act  as  we  are  ordered.”  Perrot  le  Bearnois  instantly
sent  to  the  governors  of  Carlat,  the  bourg  de  Compane,  to  Olim  Barbe,  captain  of  Ouzach,  to
Amerigot  Marcel,  captain  of  Aloise,  near  Saint  Flour,  and  to  the  captains  of  the  other  forts
in  Auvergne  and  Limousin,  to  say  he  was  about  to  take  the  field,  as  the  season  wras  now
favourable,  and  desiring  they  would  join  him,  after  having  left  garrisons  in  their  forts  strong
enough  to  prevent  any  accident  during  their  absence.  These  companions  had  as  great  a
desire  to  take  the  field  as  Perrot  le  Bearnois ; for  they  could  only  enrich  themselves  by  the
losses  of  others,  and,  making  their  preparations  in  haste,  came  to  Clialucet,  where  the  general
assembly  had  been  fixed.  They  amounted  to  full  four  hundred  lances,  and  thought  themselves
in  sufficient  strength  for  any  gallant  enterprise,  and  that  there  was  not  a lord  in  the  country
able  to  withstand  them  ; for  sir  William  de  Lignac  and  Bonne-lance  would  not,  on  their
account,  break  up  the  siege  of  Ventadour.

Being  masters  of  the  country,  they  began  their  march  through  Auvergne,  towards  Berry,
because  they  knew  the  duke  was  with  the  king  at  Montereau-sui'-Yonne.  We  will,  for  a
while  leave  Perrot  le  Bearnois,  and  speak  of  the  earl  of  Arundel  and  his  fleet,  and  what  they
did  on  quitting  the  coast  of  Brittany.  When  they  weighed  anchor,  the  weather  was  so  fine
and  beautiful,  they  hoisted  every  sail,  and  advanced  as  it  pleased  God.  It  was  a magnificent
sight  to  view  this  fleet  of  six  score  vessels,  whose  streamers,  emblazoned  with  the  arms  of  the
different  lords,  were  glittering  in  the  sun,  and  fluttering  with  the  wind.  They  floated,  as  it
were,  on  a sea  that  seemed  proud  to  bear  them,  and  which  might  be  compared  to  a vigorous
* {*  Chalucet,”  a town  in  Limousin,  near  Picrro-bufficre.


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


340

courser,  who,  after  being  long  confined  in  the  stable,  gains  its  liberty  to  bound  over  the
plains  : for  thus  did  the  sea,  gently  ruffled  by  the  wind,  swell  on  with  a burden  it  was
lustily  bearing,  and,  figuratively  speaking,  it  may  be  supposed  to  say, — “ I delight  in
carrying  you,  and  will  do  so  without  danger,  until  you  be  arrived  in  a safe  harbour.”

The  fleet  coasted  Saintonge  and  Poitou,  and  cast  anchor  oft'  Marans,  near  la  Rochelle.
Some  of  the  most  adventurous,  to  the  amount  of  two  hundred,  observing  the  tide  was  flowing,
entered  their  barges,  and  sailed  up  the  river  to  the  town  of  Marans.  The  watch  on  the  castle
had  noticed  the  English  fleet  anchoring,  and  the  barges  ascending  the  river  with  the  tide,  and
had  sounded  his  horn  frequently,  to  alarm  the  townsmen,  that  they  might  save  all  they  could
of  their  property.  The  inhabitants,  of  both  sexes,  carried  their  most  valuable  things  to  the
castle  for  safety ; and  it  was  well  they  did  so,  or  they  would  have  been  lost.  While  the
English  were  landing,  they  discontinued  saving  their  property,  to  take  care  of  their  lives.
The  English,  on  entering  the  town,  began  to  pillage  it,  for  this  had  been  the  object  of  their
coming,  but  they  only  found  empty  coffers  : their  contents  had  been  carried  to  the  castle.
They  discovered,  however,  plenty  of  corn,  wine,  and  salted  provisions  : for  there  were  upwards
of  four  hundred  tuns  of  wine  in  the  town.  They  resolved  to  remain  to  guard  this  provision,
which  came  very  opportunely  to  them  ; for,  should  they  depart,  they  imagined  the  greater
part  would  be  carried  away  by  the  French,  up  the  river,  to  Fontenay  le  Comte.  They
remained  this  night  in  the  place,  having  arrived  there  only  about  vespers,  and  gave  them-
selves full  liberty,  sending,  however,  to  inform  their  companions  of  their  situation,  and  the
reason  why  they  did  not  return.

The  earl  of  Arundel  and  the  other  lords  were  satisfied,  and  said  they  had  acted  right.  On
the  morrow,  when  the  tide  began  to  flow,  the  smaller  vessels  weighed  anchor,  and  in  them
were  embarked  the  armour  and  other  necessaries  from  the  large  ships  that,  from  their  size,
could  not  enter  the  river.  There  were  left  in  them  one  hundred  men  at  arms  and  two
hundred  archers  to  guard  them,  as  they  lay  at  anchor  off  the  mouth  of  the  river.  When  this
had  been  done,  they  sailed  for  Marans,  and  landed  at  their  leisure,  for  none  came  to  oppose
them,  and  fixed  their  quarters  between  Marans  and  la  Rochelle,  which  is  but  four  short  leagues
distant.  The  alarm  was  soon  spread  over  the  country  that  the  English  had  landed  at  Marans,
to  the  amount  of  four  hundred  combatants,  including  archers.  The  towns  and  castles  in  the
low  countxy  were  much  frightened,  and  the  villagers  instantly  fled  to  the  neighbouring  forests
for  protection.


CHAPTER  CXVITI. THE  ROCHELLERS  SKIRMISH  WITH  THE  ENGLISH  NEAR  MARANS. THE

ENGLISH,  AFTER  PILLAGING  THE  COUNTRY  ROUND,  RETIRE  WITH  THEIR  BOOTY  TO
THEIR  FLEET. — PERROT  LE  BEARNOIS  DOES  THE  SAME  TO  HIS  FORT,  WITH  A GREAT
DEAL  OF  PLUNDER.

If  the  English  had  had  horses,  they  would  have  much  harassed  the  country  round  la
Rochelle ; for  it  was  void  of  men  at  arms,  at  least  such  as  could  have  opposed  them  success-
fully. True  it  is,  that  the  lords  de  Partenay,  de  Pons,  de  Linieres,  de  Tannaybouton,  sir
Geoffrey  d’Argenton,  the  lord  de  Montendre,  sir  Aimery  de  Rochechouart,  the  viscount  de
Thouars,  and  many  other  knights  and  squires  of  Poitou  and  Saintonge,  were  in  the  country,
but  each  was  in  his  own  castle  ; for  they  had  not  any  suspicions  of  the  English  coming  to
invade  them.  Had  they  been  so  fortunate  as  to  obtain  notice  of  their  intentions,  they  would
have  been  prepared  to  receive  them,  but  it  was  not  so  ; and  the  surprise  was  so  great,  that
all  were  frightened,  and  impatient  to  save  what  they  could.  The  farmers  began  to  hasten
their  harvest  of  corn,  for  it  was  the  beginning  of  August.  Add  to  this,  there  was  not  then
in  the  country  any  person  to  take  the  lead.  The  lieutenant  of  Poitou,  the  duke  of  Berry,
was  at  Montereau  : the  seneschal  of  Poitou  was  just  gone  to  Paris : the  seneschal  of  Saintonge
was  from  home  : the  seneschal  of  la  Rochelle,  sir  Helion  de  Lignac,  was  at  Bayonne,  on  the
business  of  the  duke  of  Berry,  by  which  tire  country  was  left  defenceless  ; for,  from  want  of
heads,  their  courage  failed,  and  without  that  nothing  effectual  can  be  done.  The  country
was  much  alarmed  for  two  causes  : they  had  the  English  army  and  fleet  on  one  side,  and


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


349


rumour  had  already  informed  them  that  Perrot  le  Bearnois  was  on  his  march,  with  more  than
fifteen  hundred  combatants,  and  had  already  entered  Berry.  They  knew  not  what  measures
to  adopt,  except  that  of  placing  then'  wealth  in  safety  ; for  it  was  said  these  two  armies  were
to  form  a junction  in  Saintonge  or  Poitou,  as  was  the  intention  of  many.

There  were,  indeed,  at  the  time  the  English  landed  at  Marans,  two  gallant  knights  from
Beauce  in  the  town  of  la  Rochelle,  sir  Peter  de  Jouy  and  the  lord  Taillepie,  whom  sir  Helion
de  Lignac  had  placed  there  for  its  defence,  when  he  set  out  to  meet  the  duke  of  Berry  at
Paris.  They  had  acquitted  themselves  ably  ; and  on  hearing  that  the  armament  under  the
earl  of  Arundel,  which  had  been  much  talked  of  all  the  summer,  had  disembarked  at  Marans,
they  told  the  mayor  and  the  principal  citizens,  for  it  is  a populous  place,  that  it  would  be
right  to  beat  up  the  English  quarters,  and  added, — “ We  hear  they  have  established  them-
selves at  Marans,  and  lay  the  surrounding  country  under  contribution  : we  two  are  determined
to  bid  them  welcome,  and  they  shall  pay  us,  or  we  will  repay  them,  for  what  they  have  done.
Great  blame  and  reproaches  will  fall  on  us,  to  whom  has  been  committed  the  government  of
this  town  and  country,  if  we  suffer  them  quietly  to  fix  their  quarters  there.  There  is  one
thing  much  in  our  favour  : they  have  not  any  horses,  and  are  for  the  most  part  sailors,  whilst
we  are  all  well  mounted.  We  will  send  our  cross-hows  before  us  to  awaken  them  with  a
shower  of  ari’ows  ; and,  when  they  have  made  their  attack,  they  will  return  homeward  : the
English  will  soon  be  on  foot,  and  we  will  then  charge  them,  and,  by  being  on  horseback,  may
do  them  great  mischief.”

Those  who  heard  this  speech  approved  of  it,  and  instantly  assembled  a body  of  twelve
hundred  cross-bows  and  varlets,  including  all  sorts.  At  the  first  dawn  of  day,  they  were  all
prepared,  and  set  out  from  la  Rochelle  at  a good  pace,  to  beat  up  the  quarters  of  the  English.
During  this,  the  horse  got  ready,  and  they  were  about  three  hundred,  for  many  knights  and
squires  had  hastened  to  la  Rochelle  on  the  first  intelligence  of  the  English  having  landed  at
Marans.  They  left  the  town  under  the  command  of  the  two  knights  before  named.  Had  the
English  fortunately  had  any  suspicion  of  this  attack  from  the  Rochellers,  and  had  formed  an
ambuscade  of  two  hundred  archers  and  one  hundred  men  at  arms,  not  one  would  ever  have
returned  to  la  Rochelle.

When  the  cross-bowmen  arrived  at  the  English  quarters,  it  was  very  early  morn  ; and  lucky
it  was  for  them  that  the  guard,  who  had  watched  all  night,  was  retired  at  sun- rise.  The
cross-bowmen  began  to  shoot  their  bolts  and  arrows,  which  passed  through  the  huts  made  of
boughs  and  leaves,  to  the  great  surprise  of  the  English  who  were  asleep  within-side  on
straw.  Many  were  wounded  before  they  discovered  they  were  attacked  by  the  French.
When  they  had  made  each  about  six  shots,  they  retreated,  according  to  their  orders,  and  the
men  at  arms  advanced  on  horseback  amidst  the  English  huts.  Knights  and  squires  speedily  left
their  lodgings,  and  drew  up  together ; and  the  French  captains,  seeing  they  were  preparing
themselves  in  earnest  to  take  the  field,  made  after  their  cross-bows  and  infantry,  who  were
hastening  homeward,  for  they  were  much  afraid  of  the  English  arrows.  Thus  hurrying,  and
in  dismay,  were  the  Rochellers  pursued,  though  the  horse  guarded  the  rear,  to  the  town  of
la  Rochelle.  The  earl  of  Arundel  with  upwards  of  four  hundred  men  at  arms  was  closely
following,  each  man  with  his  lance  in  his  hand  or  on  his  shoulder.  There  was  much
crowding  and  difficulty  to  pass  the  gates  ; and  sir  Peter  de  Jouy  and  the  lord  Taillepie  fought
like  valiant  heroes  in  defending  their  men,  keeping  still  on  their  rear,  until  they  were  come
to  the  barriers.  They  were  so  hard  pressed  by  the  English,  who  were  at  their  heels,  they
ran  a great  hazard  of  being  slain  or  made  prisoners ; for  the  attack  was  the  more  vigorous
against  them  as  it  was  visible  they  were  the  commanders.  Sir  Peter  de  Jouy  had  his  courser
killed  under  him,  and  was  with  great  difficulty  dragged  within  the  barriers.  Sir  Peter
Taillepie  was  pierced  through  the  thigh  with  a lance,  and  hit  by  an  arrow  on  the  helmet,
which  entered  his  head,  and  his  good  horse  fell  dead  under  him  at  the  gate.  There  was
much  slaughter  made  on  the  Rochellers  re-entering  the  town : upwards  of  forty  dead  and
wounded  lay  at  the  gates.  The  inhabitants  had  mounted  the  battlements,  and  fired  so
many  cannons  and  bombards  that  the  English  dared  not  approach  nearer.

Thus  ended  this  skirmish  between  the  English  and  Rochellers.  As  it  was  near  noon,  the
tarl  of  Arundel  had  sounded  the  retreat,  when  the  men  at  arms  and  archers  retired  in


350


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &e.

handsome  array  to  their  quarters,  where  they  disarmed  and  refreshed  themselves.  They  had
wherewithal,  having  been  amply  provided  with  wines  and  meat  from  the  surrounding  country.
The  English  lords  remained  at  Marans  for  fifteen  days,  waiting  for  deeds  of  arms  and
adventures ; but  the  Rochellers  never  ventured  again  to  come  near  them,  for  they  had  found
to  their  cost  how  valiantly  they  had  defended  themselves.  Their  two  commanders  were  also
wounded,  which  induced  the  others  to  wish  for  peace.  The  earl  of  Arundel,  indeed,  had
sent  four  times  parties  to  overrun  the  country  round  la  Rochelle,  and  as  far  as  Thouars,  who
did  much  mischief  and  terrified  the  inhabitants.  They  would  have  done  more  had  they  had
horses ; but  only  a few  were  mounted  on  what  they  could  find  in  the  country,  and  these
were  scarce,  for  no  sooner  was  the  invasion  known  than  all  the  inhabitants  of  the  flat  country
fled  with  their  stock  and  wealth  to  the  great  towns,  and  there  shut  themselves  up.

When  the  English  had  remained  near  la  Rochelle  for  fifteen  days,  without  seeing  any
attempt  made  to  oppose  them,  and  the  wind  became  fair,  they  embarked  a great  quantity  of
wine  and  fresh  meat  they  had  taken,  and,  having  weighed  anchor,  put  to  sea.  This  same
day,  they  met  twelve  ships  from  Bayonne,  on  their  voyage  to  England  with  Gascony  wines
and  other  merchandise.  They  sailed  together  for  some  time,  being  much  rejoiced  at  this
meeting,  for  they  were  well  acquainted,  and  the  Bayonnois  gave  the  earl  of  Arundel  t\Vo
pipes  of  wine  for  the  love  they  bore  him.  The  Bayonnois  then  separated  to  continue  their
voyage,  and  the  fleet  kept  cruising  about  in  search  of  adventures.

While  this  armament  was  lying  before  Marans,  Perrot  le  Bearnois  and  his  companions
had  taken  the  field,  and,  having  passed  Limousin,  had  entered  Berry.  He  had  with  him
four  hundred  spears  and  as  many  pillagers,  and  carried  off  in  one  day  all  the  merchandise
that  was  in  the  town  of  le  Blanc  * in  Berry,  and  gained  great  wealth  and  many  prisoners,
for  it  was  fair-day.  He  then  marched  to  Sellest,  which  he  plundered.  Thus  did  Perrot  le
Bearnois  maintain  himself.  He  advanced  far  into  the  interior  of  the  country,  doing  great
mischief  wherever  he  went,  for  none  ventured  to  oppose  him  ; and  all  parts  were  alarmed,
even  as  far  as  the  county  of  Blois  and  the  Touraine,  for  they  were  uncertain  whither  these
two  armies  would  march  next.  Some  imagined  they  would  unite ; but  it  was  not  so,  for
the  earl  of  Arundel  had  embarked  again,  as  I have  mentioned,  and  Perrot  with  his  com-
panions returned  to  their  strong-holds.  When  they  had  completely  plundered  the  country,
they  thought  it  would  be  more  safe  for  them  to  retire  to  their  castles  and  secure  their  gains.
They  took,  in  consequence,  the  roads  through  Limousin  and  Auvergne  to  their  forts ; and
nothing  more  was  done,  as  to  deeds  of  arms,  in  these  two  provinces  the  remainder  of  the
season,  for  the  truce  that  had  been  agreed  to  last  until  the  ensuing  month  of  May  now  took
place.  The  siege  ofVentadour  by  sir  William  de  Lignac,  sir  John  Bonne-lance,  and  sir
John  le  Bouteiller,  still  continued ; for  Geoffry  Tete-noire  was  so  presumptuous  as  to  pay  not
the  least  attention  to  the  truce,  nor  to  the  besiegers,  depending  on  the  strength  of  his  castle.

W e will  now,  for  variety,  return  to  the  affairs  of  Brabant  and  Gueldres.


CHAPTER  CXIX. THE  BRABANTERS  PRESS  GRAVE  HARD  BY  THEIR  SIEGE. THE  GUELDRIANS

BURN  A BRIDGE  THE  BRABANTERS  HAD  THROWN  OVER  THE  MEUSE,  TO  ENTER
GUELDRES.

I have  already  discoursed  of  and  explained  the  situation  of  the  dukes  of  Gueldres.  How
the  ancestor  of  the  duke  of  Gueldres  of  whom  I now  treat,  married  the  daughter  of
Bertaldo  of  Mechlin  to  rescue  and  repair  his  heritage  which  was  very  much  embarrassed  and
dilapidated ; and  how  the  duke  of  Gueldres,  son  of  the  duke  of  J uliers,  to  maintain  the  city  of
Grave  against  the  Brabanters,  for  which  he  had  good  cause  and  title,  determined,  since  he
could  not  recover  the  three  before-mentioned  castles  seated  on  the  river  Meuse,  Goch,  Buch,
and  Mille,  which  had  once  been  his  fiefs,  that  he  would  attach  the  city  of  Grave  to  his
heritage  in  perpetuity.  This  duke  had  a bastard  daughter  bestowed  upon  and  married  to  the
damoselj:  of  Kuck,  which  sire  de  Kuck  was  the  heir  of  the  city  of  Grave.  So  he  applied

* “Le  Blanc,” — in  the  generality  of  Bourges,  seventeen  leagues  from  Poitiers,  nine  from  Argenton.

t"  “ Selles,”  or  Celles,  three  leagues  from  St.  Aignan,  ten  from  Blois.

J A title  bestowed  indifferently  on  young  nobles  of  both  sexes. — Ed.


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


351


himself  to  him  so  amiably  that  both  father  and  son  had  nothing  else  left  for  it ; and  the
damosel  de  Kuck  gave  him  the  city  and  lordship  of  Grave,  and  assured  him  the  inheritance
in  the  presence  of  the  knights  and  barons  of  Juliers  and  Gueldres;  and  on  this  account  the
duke  of  Juliers  recompensed  him  with  the  land  and  lordship  of  Bois  le  Due,  situated  on  the
river  Ligne,  in  the  duchy  of  Guelderland.  A very  handsome  castle  belongs  to  this  city  of
Bois  le  Due,  which  is  a good  large  town  and  of  good  profit,  but  Grave  is  worth  more.  The
duke  of  Gueldres  made  this  bargain,  to  the  intent  that  he  might  have  a good  ground  of
quarrel  to  take  Grave  from  the  Brabanters  ; for  the  duchess  of  Brabant  and  her  council  said
that  anciently  the  lords  of  Kuck  had  held  it  in  mortgage,  but  that  she  or  her  heirs  might
redeem  it  whenever  they  pleased,  and  that  the  duke  of  Gueldres  had  no  right  to  keep  it
except  as  a pledge.  The  duke  of  Gueldres  maintained  an  opposite  opinion,  and  said  that  it
was  his  good  inheritance  and  he  would  hold  it  to  the  last.  This  was  the  cause  of  the  war
and  ill-will  that  arose  between  those  of  Brabant  and  Guelderland  : and,  in  the  month  of
May,  the  Brabanters  came  to  lay  siege  to  the  city  of  Grave ; knights,  squires,  and  the
commonalty  of  the  good  towns ; and  they  brought  and  carried  engines,  springalls,  trebus,
and  all  other  such  machines  for  the  assault.  And  there  were  full  forty  thousand  men  one
with  another,  who  were  encamped  before  Grave,  over  against  the  valley  of  the  river  Meuse.
And  their  host  was  well  furnished,  for  they  had  their  own  country  behind  and  on  all  sides
of  them,  from  whence  they  received  plentiful  supplies.  And  this  is  the  delight  of  the
Brabanters,  for,  wherever  they  may  be  or  go,  they  will  be  stuffed  to  the  neck  with  wine,
meat,  and  delicacies,  or  they  will  return  to  their  own  houses.

You  have  before  read  how  anxious  the  duchess  of  Brabant  was  to  make  war  on  the  duke
of  Gueldres,  and  to  besiege  Grave.  There  was  a great  force  of  knights  and  squires  from  the
principal  towns  before  it,  who  declared  their  intentions  were  not  to  depart  until  they  had
gained  possession  of  it ; and  the  duchess,  to  show  how  interested  she  was  in  the  matter,  had
come  to  reside  at  Bois  le  Due,  four  leagues  distant  from  it.  The  besieging  army  was
plentifully  supplied  with  all  things  that  came  thither  by  sea,  or  down  the  Meuse,  from  the
rich  country  of  Brabant,  so  that  the  siege  was  long  continued  ; and  the  Brabanters  had  many
large  machines  which  threw  into  the  town  stones  of  such  weight  as  to  do  much  damage
wherever  they  fell.  In  addition,  they  flung  into  the  town  all  the  dead  carrion  of  the  army
to  empoison  the  inhabitants  by  the  stink.  This  was  sorely  felt  by  them,  for  the  weather  was
hot,  and  the  air  too  calm  to  carry  off  these  villanous  smells.

At  times,  many  of  the  knights  and  squires  of  Brabant  came  to  skirmish  with  the  garrison
at  the  barriers ; for  the  duke  of  Gueldres  had  placed  within  the  town  some  gallant  com-
panions, who  were  not  shy  of  showing  their  courage  when  occasions  called  for  it,  and  the  enemy
advanced  so  near  as  the  barriers.  The  siege  lasted  a long  time  ; and  the  duke  of  Gueldres
had  fixed  his  quarters  at  Nimeguen  ; but  he  could  neither  raise  the  siege,  nor  offer  combat
to  the  Brabanters,  for  want  of  sufficient  force.  He  had  sent  to  England  an  account  of  his
situation,  and  expected  for  certain  he  should  have  a reinforcement  from  thence,  but  he  was
disappointed ; for  England  at  that  time  was  in  a very  unsettled  state,  and  new  ministers  had
been  forced  on  the  king  by  his  uncles  and  the  archbishop  of  Canterbury.  A parliament  was
indeed  holden,  about  St.  John  Baptist’s  day,  at  the  duke’s  request,  to  consider  whether  a
body  of  men  at  arms  and  archers  should  be  sent  to  assist  the  duke  of  Gueldres,  according  to
treaty.  Having  considered  the  matter  fully,  they  would  not  agree  to  it ; for  it  was  strongly
rumoured,  that  the  king  of  France  was  assembling  a large  army,  and  it  was  doubtful  whither
he  would  march  it,  and  the  English  imagined  it  was  intended  to  attack  Calais.  They  were
also  uneasy  respecting  the  Scots  on  the  borders,  and  were  fearful  of  sending  more  forces  out
of  the  kingdom,  as  a large  body  of  men  at  arms  and  archers  were  at  sea,  under  the  earl  of
Arundel,  lest  the  country  might  be  defenceless.  When  the  council  was  considering  the
affairs  of  Gueldres,  some  of  the  lords  said, — “ Let  the  duke  of  Gueldres  take  care  of  himself:
he  is  valorous  enough,  and  in  his  own  country,  and  will  withstand  all  the  Brabanters  can  do
against  him  : if  anything  worse  befal  him,  he  shall  have  assistance.  He  has  again  the
Germans,  his  neighbours,  on  his  side,  who  formerly  joined  him  against  France.”  Such  was
the  state  of  affairs  in  England  ; but  those  in  Grave  suffered  much  from  the  siege.  During
the  time  it  lasted,  the  Brabanters  resolved  to  throw  a wooden  bridge  over  the  Meuse,  that


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


they  might  have  an  entrance  into  Guelderland,  overrun  that  country,  and,  l>y  investing
the  town  of  Grave  on  all  sides,  prevent  any  provision  from  entering  it ; for  they  were
numerous  enough  to  surround  it,  could  they  gain  a passage  over  the  river.  As  they  finished
the  different  parts  of  this  bridge,  they  joined  and  placed  them  in  their  proper  situations,  and
had  made  such  advances,  that  it  was  within  the  length  of  a lance  of  the  opposite  shore.
You  may  suppose  that  the  duke  was  no  way  ignorant  of  what  they  were  about,  but  he  cave
not  any  interruption  to  their  building  the  bridge,  until  it  was  nearly  completed.  He  then
advanced  with  cannons  and  other  artillery,  and  attacked  it  so  roughly,  that  it  was  set  on  fire
and  destroyed.  Thus  did  the  Brabanters,  to  their  great  vexation,  lose  all  the  effect  of  their
labour.  They,  upon  this,  called  a council  to  determine  how  to  act.


CHAPTER  CXX.— THE  BRABANTERS  HAVING  PASSED  THROUGH  RAVENSTEIN  ENTER  GUEL-
DERLAND, AND  ARE  DEFEATED  BY  THE  DUKE  OF  GUELDRES. THE  SIEGE  OF  GRAVE

IS  RAISED  IN  CONSEQUENCE.

Three  short  leagues  from  Grave  lies  the  town  of  Ravenstein,  belonging  to  the  lord  de
Bourne,  who  is  a vassal  to  Brabant.  At  the  council  I mentioned,  the  lord  de  Bourne  was
solicited  by  the  ministers  of  the  duchess  of  Brabant,  and  by  the  knights  and  squires,  to  open
his  town  of  Ravenstein  for  them  to  gain  an  entrance  into  Guelderland,  and,  with  part  of  their
army,  overrun  it : he  complied  witli  their  request.  The  duke  of  Gueldres,  I know  not
whether  by  spies  or  otherwise,  gained  information  that  the  Brabanters  intended  entering  his
territories  by  the  bridge  of  Ravenstein,  through  the  compliance  of  the  lord  de  Bourne.  Pie
was  much  cast  down  when  he  first  learnt  this,  as  his  force  was  not  near  sufficient  to  meet
that  of  Brabant,  which  consisted  of  more  than  forty  thousand  men.  He  formed  various
plans  how  to  act,  and  at  last  determined  that,  if  the  Brabanters  entered  his  country,  he
would  retaliate  by  the  bridge  of  Grave,  for  he  was  resolved  not  to  be  shut  up  in  any  town.
He  consulted  the  lord  de  Ghesme,  a great  baron  in  Guelderland,  and  his  principal  adviser,
who  would  not  at  first  agree  to  his  taking  the  field,  on  account  of  the  smallness  of  his  numbers.
“ And  what  must  I do  then  ?”  said  the  duke.  “ Would  you  have  me  shut  myself  up  in  one
of  my  towns,  while  they  are  plundering  and  burning  my  country  ? This  would  be  too  great
a loss.  I vow  to  God  and  our  Lady,”  added  tbe  duke,  “ that  I will  take  the  field  to  meet
my  enemies,  and  follow  the  best  measures  I can  devise  that  the  event  may  be  favourable.”

This  plan  lie  executed  ; and,  on  the  morrow,  after  he  had  paid  his  devotions  in  the  church,
and  made  his  offering  at  the  altar  of  the  Virgin,  he  drank  some  wine,  and,  mounting  his
horse,  set  out  from  Nimeguen.  He  was  accompanied  by  only  three  hundred  spears,  or
indeed  less,  and  they  made  straight  for  the  place  where  they  supposed  they  should  find  their
enemies.  You  may  from  this  judge  of  the  duke’s  courage,  although  some  blamed  him.
When  they  were  without  the  town  of  Nimeguen,  like  a valiant  knight,  he  shouted  out, —
“ Forward,  forward  ! let  us,  in  the  name  of  God  and  St.  George,  hasten  to  meet  our  enemy  ;
for  I had  rather  perish  with  honour  in  the  field  than  die  dishonourably  shut  up  in  a town.”
With  him  were  the  lord  de  Ghesme,  who  commanded  the  expedition,  and  a valiant  and
prudent  knight,  called  the  heir  of  I Ianseberth,  the  lord  de  Huckelem,  sir  Ostez,  lord  of
Naspre,  and  several  other  knights  and  squires  of  good  courage.

The  same  day  on  which  the  duke  of  Gueldres  had  taken  the  field,  the  seneschal  of  Brabant
had  done  the  same  at  a very  early  hour  of  the  morning,  with  a large  body  of  knights  and
squires  from  Brabant,  who  were  eager  to  enter  Guelderland,  and  gain  there  both  honour  and
profit.  Upwards  of  ten  thousand  men  crossed  the  bridge  of  Ravenstein  ; and  the  seneschal,
the  lord  de  Ligniere,  the  lord  de  Bourgueval,  the  lord  de  Gence,  and  the  rest,  were  much
pleased  at  having  crossed  the  Meuse,  and  said  among  themselves,  they  would  that  day  ride
as  far  as  Nimeguen,  and  burn  its  mills,  suburbs,  and  the  villages  that  were  round  about ;

* “Ravenstein,” — a town  of  the  Netherlands  in  Dutch  Palatine;  but  the  Dutch  have  a right  to  put  a garrison
Brabant,  and  capital  of  a county  of  the  same  name,  with  there.  It  is  situated  on  the  Meuse,  on  the  confines  of
an  ancient  and  strong  castle.  It  belongs  to  the  elector  Guelderland,  ten  miles  south-west  of  Nimeguen.

Brookes’  Gazetteer.


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


353


but  they  had  shortly  other  news  brought  them  by  their  scouts,  whom  they  had  sent  forward
to  examine  the  country.  The  duke  of  Gueldres  wns  informed,  that  his  enemies,  to  the
amount  of  ten  thousand,  were  abroad,  and  had'passed  the  Meuse  at  the  bridge  at  Ravenstein.
The  duke  halted,  on  hearing  this,  to  consider  again  the  best  mode  of  proceeding,  for  some  of
his  companions  were  alarmed  at  the  smallness  of  their  numbers  in  comparison  with  the
enemy,  who  were  at  least  thirty  or  forty  for  one.  They  said, — IIow  is  it  possible  for
three  or  four  hundred  lances  to  oppose  ten  or  twelve  thousand  ? it  is  not  in  our  power  to
overthrow  them,  but  they  may  very  easily  slay  us."  Several  assembled  round  the  duke,
and  advised  him  to  retreat  to  Grave ; but  he  replied, — “ he  would  never  do  so,  nor  confine
himself  in  any  town,  but  march  to  meet  his  enemies,  for  his  courage  told  him  he  should
defeat  them  ; and  he  preferred  dying  with  honour  to  living  in  disgrace.  We  will  overthrow,"
said  he,  “ our  enemies,  and  gain  this  day  infinite  honour  and  wealth.”  He  then,  after  a short
pause,  added  in  a loud  voice, — “Forward,  forward!  those  who  love  me  will  follow  me.”
This  speech  of  the  duke  greatly  encouraged  his  men,  more  especially  those  who  had  heard
the  whole ; and  they  all  showed  a great  earnestness  to  combat  their  enemies,  who  were  fast
approaching.  They  tightened  their  armours,  lowered  the  visors  of  their  helmets,  and
re-girthed  their  saddles,  and  marched  slowly  in  handsome  array,  that  their  horses  might  be
fresh  for  the  charge.  Some  new  knights  were  made,  and  they  marched  in  this  order  towards
Ravenstein.

The  Brabanters,  with  great  numbers  of  common  people,  had  already  crossed  the  river,
when  news  was  brought  to  the  seneschal  and  his  knights  that  the  duke  of  Gueldres  had
taken  the  field,  and  was  so  near  that  they  must  speedily  see  him.  They  were  much  surprised
at  this  intelligence,  and  concluded  that  the  duke  must  at  least  have  had  with  him  six  times
more  men  than  he  had.  They  instantly  halted,  and  would  have  drawn  themselves  up  in
array,  but  had  not  time ; for  the  duke  of  Gueldres  appeared  with  his  company  full  gallop,
with  spears  in  their  rests,  and  shouting  their  cry,  “ Our  Lady  for  Gueldres  !”  A squire  of
Guelderland,  called  Hermaut  de  Morbec,  deserves  particular  attention,  from  the  great  desire
he  had  to  exalt  his  name.  He  left  the  ranks  of  the  battalion,  and,  spurring  his  horse,  was
the  first  to  assault  the  enemy,  and  at  this  gallant  tilt  unhorsed  the  man  he  struck.  I know
not  if  he  were  raised  from  the  ground,  for  the  crowd  was  so  great,  that  ■when  any  were
dismounted,  unless  instantly  relieved,  they  ran  great  risk  of  being  crushed  to  death.  More
than  six  score  Brabanters  were  unhorsed  at  this  first  charge.  Great  confusion  and  dismay,
with  but  a poor  defence,  reigned  among  them.  They  were  so  suddenly  attacked,  (which  is
the  way  enemies  should  be  by  those  who  wish  to  conquer  them,)  that  although  they  were  so
numerous,  and  had  many  great  lords,  they  wTere  dispersed  : they  could  never  form  any  array,
nor  could  the  lords  rally  their  men,  nor  these  last  join  their  lords.  Those  in  the  rear,  hearing
the  noise,  and  seeing  the  clouds  of  dust,  thought  their  men  must  have  been  discomfited,  and
that  the  enemy  were  coming  to  them,  so  that  they  beoame  panic-struck,  and,  turning  about,
fled  for  Ravenstein  or  the  Meuse.  Their  fright  was  so  great,  they  rushed  into  the  river,
whether  on  horseback  or  on  foot,  without  sounding  the  bottom  or  knowing  if  it  were  fordable,
for  they  imagined  the  enemy  was  at  their  heels.  By  this  self-defeat,  upwards  of  twelve
hundred  perished  in  the  river  Meuse ; for  they  leaped  one  on  the  other,  without  any  distinc-
tion, like  wild  beasts.  Many  great  lords  and  barons  of  Brabant  (whose  names  I shall  not
disclose,  to  save  them  and  their  heirs  from  the  disgrace  that  would  attach  to  them)  most
shamefully  fled  from  the  field,  and  sought  their  safety,  not  by  the  river  nor  by  Ravenstein,
but  by  other  roads  that  carried  them  to  a distance  from  their  enemies.

This  unfortunate  event  to  the  chivalry  of  Brabant  happened  between  Grave  and  Ravenstein.
Great  numbers  were  slain.  All  who  could  surrender  did  so  instantly ; and  the  Germans
took  them  at  ransom  very  readily,  for  the  great  profit  they  expected  to  make  from  them.
Those  who  had  fled  to  Grave  gave  the  alarm  to  the  besieging  army ; for  they  arrived  out  of
breath,  and  so  harassed  that  they  could  scarcely  say  to  them,  “ Retire  as  fast  as  you  can,
for  we  have  been  totally  defeated,  and  nothing  can  save  you.”  When  those  in  camp  saw
their  appearance  and  heard  their  report,  they  were  so  frightened  that  they  would  not  stay  to
pack  up  anything,  nor  even  take  down  their  tents  and  pavilions,  but  set  off  without  bidding
adieu,  and  left  everything  behind  them.  They  were  seized  with  such  a panic  as  neither  to

VOL.  II.  A A


854


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


take  victual  nor  carriage ; but  such  as  had  horses  leaped  on  them,  and  fled  for  safety  to
Bois-le-Duc,  Houdan,  Mont  St.  Gervais,  Gertruydenberg,  or  Dordrecht.  Their  only  care
was  to  save  themselves,  and  fly  from  their  enemies.  Had  the  garrison  of  Grave  known  of
this  defeat  of  the  Brabanters,  they  would  have  greatly  gained  by  it,  and  killed  or  brought
back  many  of  the  runaways.  They  were  not  made  acquainted  with  it  until  late,  when  they
sallied  forth,  and  took  possession  of  tents,  pavilions,  and  warlike  engines  the  Brabanters  in
their  fright  had  left  behind,  which  they  brought  at  their  leisure  into  Grave,  for  there  were
none  to  oppose  them.  Thus  was  the  siege  of  Grave  broken  up,  to  the  great  loss  of  the
Brabanters.  News  was  spread  far  and  near,  how  a handful  of  men  had  overthrown  forty
thousand  and  raised  the  siege  of  Grave.  The  lord  de  Bourgueval  and  the  lord  de  Linieres
were  made  prisoners,  with  others  to  the  amount  of  seventeen  banners.  These  and  the
pennons  you  will  find  hung  up  before  the  image  of  our  Lady  at  Nimeguen,  that  the  per-
petual remembrance  of  this  victory  may  be  kept  up.


CHAPTER  CXXI. THE  DUKE  OF  GUELDRES,  AFTER  THE  DEFEAT  OF  THE  BRABANTERS,

RETURNS  TO  NIMEGUEN. ON  THE  NEWS  OF  THIS  VICTORY,  THE  KING  AND  COUNCIL

OF  FRANCE  SEND  AMBASSADORS  TO  THE  EMPEROR  OF  GERMANY,  THE  MORE  SECURELY
TO  CARRY  ON  THEIR  WAR  AGAINST  GUELDRELAND.

Scarcely  can  I for  shame  perpetuate  the  disgraceful  defeat  of  the  Brabanters ; but,  as
I have  promised  at  the  commencement  of  this  history  to  insert  nothing  but  what  was  strictly
true,  I must  detail  the  unfortunate  consequences  of  this  battle.  The  young  duke  of  Gueldres
gained  this  renowned  victory  about  Magdalen-tide,  in  the  month  of  July  1388.  When  the
defeat  and  pursuit  were  over,  which  took  up  about  two  hours1  time,  and  the  field  cleared,
the  Gueldrians  collected  together,  and  greatly  rejoiced,  as  indeed  they  had  cause,  at  the
fortunate  success  of  the  day,  for  they  had  many  more  prisoners  than  they  were  in  number
themselves.  The  heralds  were  ordered  by  them  to  examine  the  dead,  and  report  who  had
been  slain.  Among  them  was  the  young  and  handsome  son  of  the  count  de  Namur  (who
was  styled  the  Yaissier  de  Celles,  lord  de  Balastre,)  which,  when  told  to  the  duke,  greatly
afflicted  him  ; and  he  bitterly  lamented  his  loss,  for  he  was  of  a most  amiable  character,
and  had  been  the  preceding  year  his  companion  at  arms  in  Prussia.

A council  was  held  in  the  field,  whether  or  not  to  retire  to  Grave  and  carry  their  prisoners
thither  ; but  the  duke  opposed  it,  saying — “ I made  a vow  to  our  Lady  of  Nimeguen  when
I left  that  town,  and  which  I again  renewed  before  we  began  the  combat : in  obedience  to
which,  I order,  that  we  gaily  return  to  Nimeguen,  and  offer  our  thanksgivings  to  the  Holy
Virgin,  who  has  assisted  us  in  our  victory.”  This  command  was  obeyed  ; for,  as  the  duke
had  given  it,  no  one  made  any  objection  ; and  they  set  out,  on  their  return  towards
Nimeguen,  full  gallop.  It  was  two  long  leagues  from  the  field  of  battle,  but  they  were
soon  there.

On  this  fortunate  news  being  told  in  that  town,  great  rejoicings  were  made  by  both  sexes  ;
and  the  clergy  went  out  in  procession  to  meet  the  duke,  and  received  him  with  acclama-
tions. The  duke  did  not  turn  to  the  right  nor  left,  but  rode  with  his  knights  straight  to
the  church  where  the  image  of  our  Lady  was,  and  in  which  he  had  great  faith.  When  he
had  entered  her  chapel,  he  disarmed  himself  of  every  thing  to  his  doublet,  and  offered  up  his
armour  on  the  altar,  in  honour  of  our  Lady,  returning  thanksgivings  for  the  victory  he  had
gained  over  his  enemies.  The  banners  and  pennons  of  the  enemy  were  all  hung  up  in  this
chapel,  but  I know  not  if  they  be  still  there*  : the  duke  retired  to  his  hotel,  and  his  knights
to  their  homes,  to  pay  attention  to  themselves  and  their  prisoners,  from  whom  they  expected
great  ransoms.  When  the  report  of  this  victory  over  the  Brabanters  was  made  public,  the
duke  of  Gueldres  was  more  feared  and  honoured  than  before.

The  duchess  of  Brabant,  who  had  resided  at  Bois-le-Duc,  was  much  vexed,  as  indeed  she
had  reason,  at  this  unfortunate  turn  in  her  affairs,  and  that  the  siege  of  Grave  was  raised.


In  the  last  paragraph  of  the  preceding  chapter,  it  is  intimated  that  they  were  still  remaining. — Ed.


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  Ac.


.55


She  ordered  a strong  garrison  into  Bois-le-Dne  to  guard  the  frontiers,  and  then  returned
through  Champagne  to  Brussels.  She  wrote  frequently  to  the  duke  of  Burgundy  the  state
of  things,  and  eagerly  pressed  him  to  assist  her  in  the  recovery  of  her  losses  ; for  all  her
hopes  were  in  him.  You  may  suppose,  the  news  of  this  victory  was  instantly  known  in
France,  particularly  at  the  court  of  the  king;  but  they  were  little  surprised  at  it,  rather
holding  it  cheap,  imagining,  when  the  king  marched  thither,  they  should  make  themselves
ample  amends.  Orders  were  sent  to  sir  William  dc  la  Tremouille  and  to  sir  Gervais  de
Merande,  who  had  been  placed  by  the  duke  of  Burgundy  in  the  three  castles  on  the  Meuse,
to  guard  well  that  frontier,  and  to  make  no  sallies  where  there  should  be  any  risk  of  loss  ;
for  that  they  would  shortly  hear  from  the  king,  who  was  preparing  to  visit  this  duke  of
Gueldres  and  his  country  in  person.  Sir  William  had  been  greatly  hurt  at  the  late  defeat
of  his  friends,  hut  the  intelligence  from  France  raised  his  spirits,  and  he  acted  conformably
to  the  orders  he  had  received.

Let  us  return  to  what  was  passing  in  France.  The  king’s  ardour  for  the  invasion  of
Gueldreland  wTas  no  way  abated  : he  was  anxious  to  undertake  it  at  all  events,  for  the
challenge  of  the  duke  had  mightily  enraged  him  ; and  he  declared  that,  cost  what  it  would,
he  would  have  ample  reparation,  or  his  territories,  with  those  of  his  father,  the  duke  of
Juliers,  should  be  despoiled  and  burnt.  Summonses  were  sent  to  all  the  dukes,  counts,
knights,  barons  and  men  at  arms,  of  France,  to  provide  themselves  with  sufficient  purvey-
ances for  a long  journey ; and  one  of  the  marshals  of  France,  sir  Louis  de  Sancerre,  was
ordered  to  remain  to  guard  the  kingdom,  from  beyond  the  river  Dordogne  to  the  sea  ; for  in
Languedoc,  and  in  the  country  between  the  Garonne  and  the  Loire,  the  truce  had  been
accepted  ; and  the  other  marshal,  the  lord  de  Blainville,  was  to  accompany  the  king.  The
different  lords  made  such  immense  provision  of  stores  of  all  kinds,  it  was  wonderful  to  think
of,  more  especially  in  wines.  All  those  in  Champagne  were  bespoken  for  the  king,  the
dukes  of  Berry,  Burgundy,  Touraine,  and  Bourbon  ; carriages  also,  of  every  description,  in
those  parts,  were  likewise  retained  for  them  : indeed,  the  preparations  for  this  expedition
were  prodigious.

The  duke  of  Brittany  was  still  at  Paris,  and  could  not  obtain  any  decision  respecting  his
affairs,  for  the  king  resided  chiefly  at  Montereau-sur-Yonne.  He  was,  however,  well  enter-
tained with  feasts  and  fair  words.  The  nobles  begged  of  him  to  have  patience,  for  he  would
very  shortly  have  his  business  finished ; but  that  the  king  was  so  impatient  to  begin  his
march  to  Germany,  he  attended  to  nothing  else.  The  duke  was  forced  to  make  the  best  he
could  of  it,  perceiving  he  could  not  amend  it,  and,  since  he  had  come  to  Paris,  was  resolved
not  to  depart  but  with  the  good  will  of  the  king,  although  his  stay  was  attended  with  vast
expenses.  When  it  was  known  for  certain  that  the  expedition  to  Gueldreland  was  to  take
place,  and  that  a tax  had  been  ordered  throughout  France  for  the  payment  of  the  knights
and  men-at-arms,  many  of  the  wisest  in  the  country,  whether  of  the  council  or  not,  said
that  it  was  ill  advised  to  encourage  a king  of  France  to  march  such  a distance  in  search  of
his  enemies,  and  that  the  kingdom  might  suffer  from  it,  (for  the  king  was  young,  and  very
popular  with  his  subjects,)  and  that  it  would  have  been  fully  sufficient  for  one  of  the  king’s
uncles,  or  both  of  them,  with  the  constable  of  France,  to  have  gone  with  six  or  seven
thousand  lances,  without  carrying  the  person  of  the  king  thither.

The  king’s  uncles  were  of  a similar  opinion  : they  most  prudently  remonstrated  with  him
on  the  impropriety  of  his  marching  with  his  army,  and  were  urging  many  strong  reasons
against  it,  when  he  flew  into  a rage,  and  shortly  interrupted  them,  by  saying, — “ If  you  go
thither  without  me,  it  will  be  contrary  to  my  will  and  pleasure  ; but  I can  assure  you,  you
shall  not  receive  one  penny,  for  otherwise  I cannot  restrain  you.”  When  the  dukes  of
Berry  and  Burgundy  heard  this  answer,  they  saw  he  was  determined  upon  going,  and
replied, — “ God  be  with  you  : you  shall  go  then ; and  we  will  no  more  think  of  undertaking
it  without  your  company.”  These  lords  and  the  council  then  deliberated  on  an  affair  of
some  consequence  to  this  intended  war.  There  had  been  a treaty  for  a long  time  in  force,
between  the  king  of  France  and  the  emperor  of  Germany,  which  stipulated,  that  neither  of
them  were- to  enter  the  territories  of  the  other  with  an  armed  force ; that  is  to  say,  that  the
king  of  France  and  the  emperor  could  not  make  war  on  each  other  without  incurring  a

A A 2 t


35  C,


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.

heavy  penalty,  and  the  sentence  of  the  pope,  who  had  solemnly  sworn,  at  his  coronation,  to
maintain  these  two  kingdoms  in  peace.  It  was  therefore  resolved,  in  case  the  king  persisted
in  his  intention  ot  invading  Gueldreland,  which  was  a dependence  on  the  empire,  to  make
the  emperor  fully  acquainted  with  the  dnke  of  Gueldres’  rash  conduct,  and  lay  before  him
the  insolent  challenge  he  had  sent  the  king  of  France,  who,  to  make  him  sensible  of  his
folly,  was  preparing  to  march  an  army  into  Germany,  not  any  way  Hostile  to  the  emperor
or  to  his  territories,  but  solely  against  this  duke  of  Gueldres,  and  to  attack  him  wherever  he
should  find  him.

Sir  Guy  de  Iloncourt,  a valiant  knight,  and  sir  Yves  d’Orient,  one  of  the  judges  in
parliament,  were  appointed  ambassadors  to  carry  this  message  to  the  emperor.  When  they
had  received  their  instructions  and  made  their  preparations,  they  took  leave  of  the  king  and
his  uncles,  and  rode  for  Chalons  in  Champagne,  with  an  attendance  suitable  to  their  rank,
and  the  purpose  they  were  going  on.  They  met  the  lord  de  Coucy  at  Chalons,  retaining
knights  and  men-at-arms  from  Bar,  Lorrain,  and  Champagne,  for  this  expedition,  of  which
he  was  to  command  the  van-guard.  He  entertained  the  ambassadors  one  day  splendidly  at
dinner,  and  on  the  morrow  they  continued  the  road  to  Sainte  Menehould,  and  thence
towards  Luxembourg,  to  gain  intelligence  where  the  emperor  was.


CHAPTER  CXXII. THE  KING  OF  FRANCE  AND  HIS  COUNCIL  PERMIT  THE  DUKE  OF  BRITTANY

TO  RETURN  HOME. THE  STATES  OF  BRABANT  SEND  EXCUSES  TO  THE  KING  OF  FRANCE,

FOR  NOT  ALLOWING  HIS  ARMY  TO  PASS  THROUGH  THEIR  COUNTRY.  — THE  SUCCESS
OF  THE  AMBASSADORS  WITH  THE  EMPEROR.

Although  ambassadors  had  been  sent  to  the  emperor,  the  French  did  no  way  relax  in
their  warlike  preparations.  It  was  signified  to  all  to  assemble  in  readiness  for  the  field  in
or  near  the  country  of  Champagne  by  the  middle  of  the  ensuing  August ; since  the  king  had
then  determined  to  begin  his  march,  whether  or  not  he  should  receive  answers,  through  sir
Guy  de  Honcourt  and  master  Yves  d' Orient,  from  the  emperor  of  Germany.  The  king  and
his  uncles  thinking  it  was  now  time  to  dismiss  the  duke  of  Brittany,  he  was  summoned  to
Montereau,  where  the  king  most  kindly  received  him,  as  did  the  dukes  of  Burgundy  and
Touraine.  The  duke  of  Berry  was  at  the  time  in  Berry  making  his  preparations  and  levies
of  men-at-arms,  having  fixed  on  Poitou  for  the  place  of  assembly,  before  they  began  their
march.  The  king  and  the  duke  of  Burgundy,  as  I have  said,  treated  the  duke  of  Brittany
in  the  most  friendly  manner.  He  had  before  surrendered  the  castles  and  town  of  Jugon  to
the  officers  of  the  constable,  but  made  great  difficulty  to  pay  back  the  hundred  thousand
francs,  which  had  been  expended  in  the  provisioning  his  castles,  and  in  retaining  men-at-
arms  the  whole  of  last  winter,  thinking  a war  would  be  declared  against  him  ; but  he  was
so  fairly  spoken  to,  that  he  promised  the  king  and  the  duke  of  Burgundy  to  repay  this  sum,
of  one  hundred  thousand  francs,  in  the  course  of  five  years,  by  yearly  payments  of  twenty
thousand  francs.  The  duke,  after  this,  took  leave  of  the  king,  who  made  him  very  handsome
presents  of  jewels,  and  went  back  to  Paris.  The  duke  of  Burgundy,  before  his  departure,
gave  to  him  and  his  knights  a magnificent  entertainment  in  his  hotel,  called  the  hotel
d’ Artois,  when  they  separated  on  the  most  friendly  terms.

The  duke  of  Brittany  made  no  longer  stay  after  this  at  Paris  ; but  having  arranged  his
affairs,  and  had  his  expenses  paid  by  his  officers,  he  set  out,  taking  the  road  to  Estampes,
travelled  through  Beauce  to  Beaugency  on  the  Loire,  with  a numerous  body  of  attendants
riding  before  him.  From  Beaugency  his  attendants  continued  their  road  through  the
country  of  Blois,  Touraine,  Maine,  and  Anjou  ; but  the  duke  had  his  vessels  waiting  for
him  at  Beaugency,  and  embarking  on  board  a handsome  yacht,  with  the  lords  de  Montfort
and  de  Malestroit,  sailed  down  the  Loire,  passing  under  the  bridge  at  Blois,  and  not  stopping
until  he  came  to  Nantes,  when  he  was  in  his  own  country.  I will  now  leave  the  duke  of
Brittany,  who  strictly  kept  the  engagements  he  had  entered  into  with  the  king  of  France
and  his  uncles,  and  has  never  since  done  any  thing  worthy  of  being  remembered  in  this
history,  nor  do  I know  if  he  ever  will.  If  he  should,  I will  relate  it,  according  to  the
manner  it  shall  be  told  me.


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


£57

The  king  of  France  was  busily  employed  in  making  his  preparations  to  invade  Gueldreland.
The  lord  de  Coney,  on  his  return  to  Montereau,  informed  the  king  and  his  uncles,  that  all
the  chivalry  of  Bar,  Lorrain,  Burgundy,  and  as  far  as  the  Rhine,  were  ready  and  willing  to
attend  them,  in  their  expedition  to  Germany.  The  king  was  much  pleased  on  hearing  this,
and  said,  that  “ if  it  pleased  God,  he  would  this  year  pay  a visit  to  his  cousins  of  Gueldres
and  Juliers.”  A council  was  held  on  the  most  convenient  line  of  march,  when  some  said,
that  the  shortest  way  would  be  through  Tierache*,  along  the  frontiers  of  Hainault  and  Liege,
and  passing  through  Brabant  into  Gueldres ; hut  others  proposed  crossing  the  Meuse  at  or
near  Utrecht,  and,  having  passed  that  river,  to  enter  Juliers,  and  march  thence  into  Gueldre-
land. Upon  this,  the  king  and  council  wrote  to  the  duchess  and  states  of  Brabant,  to  signify
that  the  king  and  his  army  intended  marching  through  their  country. — The  duchess  would
have  readily  consented  ; but  the  states  refused  the  passage,  saying  the  country  would  suffer
too  much  from  it.  The  principal  towns  and  nobles  were  all  of  this  opinion,  and  told  the
duchess,  that  if  she  allowed  the  French  to  enter  their  country,  they  would  never  bear  arms
for  her  against  Gueldres,  but  would  shut  themselves  up  in  their  castles,  and  defend  all  the
entrances  to  the  country,  for  they  should  have  more  damage  done  to  themselves  and  lands  by
such  passengers  than  if  their  enemy  were  in  the  country.  The  duchess,  finding  so  strong  an
opposition  to  allowing  a passage  to  the  French,  dissembled  her  real  thoughts,  and  calling  to
her  Sir  John  Opem,  master  John  Grave,  and  master  Nicholas  de  la  Monnoye,  charged  them
to  set  out  instantly  for  France,  and  make  excuses  for  the  states  of  Brabant,  to  the  king  and
the  duke  of  Burgundy,  for  their  refusal  to  allow  the  French  army  to  pass  through  Brabant,
fearful  lest  the  country  would  be  too  severely  oppressed  ; and  to  entreat  them,  for  the  love  of
God,  not  to  be  dissatisfied  with  her,  as  she  had  done  everything  in  her  power  to  obtain  their
consent.

These  envoys  left  Brussels,  and  arrived  at  Montereau- sur-Yonne,  where  they  found  tho
king  and  his  uncles,  whose  whole  conversation,  day  and  night,  was  on  the  expedition  to
Gueldreland. — They  first  waited  on  the  duke  of  Burgundy,  to  whom  they  gave  their  letters,
and  explained  so  well  the  reasons  of  the  states’  refusal  that  he  was  contented,  and,  at  the
prayer  of  his  aunt,  promised  to  mediate  between  them  and  the  king.  The  lord  de  Coucy  was
likewise  of  very  great  service  to  them,  so  that  the  first  plan  of  passing  through  Brabant  was
given  up,  and  the  excuses  from  the  duchess  and  her  states  were  accepted.  It  was  then
determined,  as  more  honourable  for  the  king  and  his  allies,  to  march  straight  through  his
kingdom.  A council  was  held  on  the  choice  of  those  who  were  to  form  the  vanguard  ; and
tw'o  thousand  five  hundred  pioneers  were  appointed  to  clear  away  all  trees  and  hedge-rows,
and  to  make  smooth  the  roads.  The  army  had  by  their  means  a most  excellent  road  through
France  to  the  forest  of  Ardennes ; but  there  it  failed  them,  for  rocks,  forests,  and  various
obstacles  opposed  their  passage.  The  lord  de  Coucy,  who  had  the  command  of  the  van-
guard, consisting  of  one  thousand  lances,  sent  forward  persons  to  examine  which  would  be
the  safest  road  for  the  king  and  the  baggage  to  march  (for  there  were  upwards  of  twelve
thousand  carriages,  without  counting  baggage  horses),  to  lay  open  the  forest,  and  make  roads
where  no  traveller  had  ever  before  passed.  Every  one  was  eager  to  be  thus  employed,  more
particularly  those  who  were  near  the  king’s  person  ; for  he  was  never  so  popular  at  anytime
as  he  was  now  in  Flanders,  nor  were  his  subjects  ever  so  united  to  assist  him  as  in  this  expe-
dition against  Gueldres.  While  this  was  passing,  the  king  sent  the  lord  de  Coucy  to
Avignon,  to  the  person  who  styled  himself  pope  Clement,  I know  not  on  what  business ;
and  the  viscount  de  Meaux,  Sir  John  de  Roye,  and  the  lord  de  la  Bonne,  commanded  in  his
absence.

We  will  now  say  something  of  the  ambassadors  who  had  been  sent  to  the  emperor  of  Ger-
many. They  continued  their  journey  until  they  arrived  at  Convalence+,  where  the  emperor
resided.  After  dismounting  at  their  hotel,  they  made  themselves  ready  to  wait  on  him,
who  had  before  heard  of  their  coming,  and  was  very  impatient  to  know  the  cause  of  it.
Having  assembled  his  council,  the  ambassadors  were  introduced  to  the  presence  of  the  empe-

* “ Tierache,”  a fertile  country  in  Picardy,  watered  by  the  Oise  and  Seine,  to  the  west  of  Champagne  and  the  south
of  Hainault.


f “ Convalesce.”  Qy.  Con6tauce,


858


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


ror,  whom  they  saluted  most  reverently,  and  gave  him  their  credential  letters  from  the  king
of  France.  After  he  had  attentively  perused  them,  he  eyed  sir  Guy  de  Honcourt,  and  said
“ Guy,  tell  us,  in  the  name  of  God,  what  you  are  charged  with."  The  knight  spoke  long
and  ably  in  explaining  to  the  emperor  and  his  council  the  reasons  why  the  king  of  France  was
about  to  enter  the  German  territory  with  a large  army,  not  with  the  smallest  intent  to  injure
that  or  any  other  part  of  the  territories  belonging  to  the  emperor,  hut  against  a personal
enemy.  He  then  named  him,  and  added, — “ The  duke  of  Gueldres  has  thought  proper  to
send  the  king  of  France  a most  insolent  challenge,  couched  in  outrageous  language,  not  usual
in  such  cases,  for  which  the  king  and  his  council  have  determined  to  punish  him.  The  king,
therefore,  entreats  you,  dear  sire,  from  your  connexions  with  him  by  blood,  that  you  will  not
abet  this  duke  in  his  presumptuous  conduct,  but  keep  those  treaties  of  alliance  which  have
formerly  been  made  between  you  and  France,  as  he  on  his  part  is  resolved  to  abide  by  them.”
The  emperor,  in  reply,  said, — “ Sir  Guy,  we  have  some  time  been  informed,  that  our  cousin,
the  king  of  France,  has  been  collecting  a large  body  of  men-at-arms,  at  a vast  expense,  when
it  was  unnecessary  for  him  to  give  himself  so  much  trouble  for  so  small  an  object ; for,  had
he  made  his  complaints  to  me,  I would  have  forced  the  duke  of  Gueldres  to  hear  reason
without  the  great  expense  he  has  been  at.”  “ Sire,”  answered  sir  Guy,  “ you  are  very  kind
in  thus  expressing  yourself ; but  our  lord,  the  king  of  France,  values  neither  expense  nor
trouble  wherever  his  honour  is  concerned  ; and  his  council  are  solely  anxious  that  you  should
not  be  dissatisfied  with  him,  for  he  is  determined  in  no  way  to  infringe  the  treaties  that  exist
between  France  and  Germany : on  the  contrary,  to  strengthen  them  as  much  as  possible,
and  for  this  have  sir  Yves  d’Orient  and  myself  been  sent  hither.”  “We  are  by  no  means,”
said  the  emperor,  “ dissatisfied  with  what  is  doing  in  France,  and  thank  my  cousin  for  the
information  he  sends  me  : let  him  come,  in  God's  name,  for  I do  not  intend  to  move.”

The  ambassadors  were  well  pleased  with  this  reply,  and  considered  the  matter  as  con-
cluded to  their  wish.  They  requested  answers  to  the  letters  they  had  brought,  which  were
cheerfully  promised.  They  dined  that  day  in  the  emperor’s  palace,  and  by  his  orders  were
well  feasted.  In  the  evening  they  retired  to  their  lodgings,  and  managed  things  so  well,
that  the  business  was  finished  to  their  satisfaction.  Having  received  their  letters  in  reply  to
those  they  had  brought,  they  took  leave  of  the  emperor,  and  returned  by  the  way  they  had
come  to  the  king  of  France  ; of  whom  we  will  now  speak.


CHAPTER  CXXI1I. THE  COUNT  DE  BLOIS  SENDS  TWO  HUNDRED  LANCES  TO  SERVE  THE

KING  IN  HIS  EXPEDITION  TO  GUELDRES. THE  AMBASSADORS  BRING  FAVOURABLE

ANSWERS  FROM  THE  EMPEROR  OF  GERMANY. THE  KING  OF  FRANCE  CONTINUES  HIS

MARCH  TOWARD  THE  FOREST  OF  ARDENNES. SIR  HELION  DE  LIGNAC  MAKES  HIS

REPORT  TO  THE  DUKE  OF  BERRY,  TOUCHING  HIS  MARRIAGE  WITH  THE  DAUGHTER
OF  THE  DUKE  OF  LANCASTER.

The  great  lords  and  barons  of  France  were  busily  employed  in  making  their  preparations
for  the  expedition  to  Gueldres  ; and  those  from  the  more  distant  parts  of  the  kingdom,  in
Auvergne,  Limousin,  Quercy,  Rouergue,  and  other  provinces,  had  already  begun  their  march
towards  Champagne.  The  greater  numbers  came  from  Picardy,  Burgundy,  Champagfie,
Bar,  and  Lorrain,  because  they  were  nearer  the  place  of  assembly.  The  villages  in  France
were  not  so  harshly  treated  as  usual : for  the  king  had  forbidden,  under  pain  of  death,  that
anything  should  be  taken  from  them  without  payment.  Notwithstanding  this  order  was
made  very  public,  the  men  at  arms  on  their  march  did  much  mischief ; for,  though  the
punishment  was  so  heavy,  they  could  not  abstain  from  what  they  had  been  accustomed  to.
They  were  indeed  very  badly  paid,  and  consequently  thought  they  had  a right  to  provide  for
themselves.  This  was  the  excuse  they  made  whenever  they  W'ere  reprimanded  by  their
captain  or  marshal.  The  count  de  Blois  was  summoned,  and  he  returned  for  answer,  he
would  send  two  hundred  chosen  lances  well  equipped  and  paid.  I know  not  how  he  was  dealt
withal,  but  he  sent  two  hundred  knights  and  squires  to  serve  the  king,  from  his  county  of
Blois,  under  the  command  of  the  lord  de  Vienne,  sir  William  de  Saint  Martin,  sir  William


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


969


de  Cliaumont,  and  the  lord  de  Montigny,  who  marched  at  their  leisure  towards  Champagne,
whither  they  had  been  ordered.

The  king  of  France  left  Montereau-sur-Yonne,  and  took  the  road  for  Chalons  in
Champagne,  without  the  duke  of  Berry  joining  him.  Fie  was  stil!  in  Berry,  waiting  the
return  of  sir  Ilelion  de  Lignac,  with  answers  from  the  duke  of  Lancaster,  respecting  his
marriage  with  his  daughter.  lie,  however,  received  none  ; for  the  duke  of  Lancaster
detained  him  at  Bayonne,  dissembling  his  opinion  between  him  and  the  ambassadors  from
Castille ; but  he  was  more  inclined,  as  well  as  the  duchess,  to  close  with  the  last ; yet,  before
them,  he  showed  the  utmost  attentions  to  sir  Ilelion,  to  make  them  the  more  eager  to  finish
the  business.  The  Castillian  ambassadors  laboured  hard  to  bring  the  marriage  to  a conclusion.
They  were  four  in  number,  don  Fernando  de  Leon,  doctor  in  divinity  and  confessor  to  the
king,  the  bishop  of  Segovia,  don  Pedro  Gadelope,  and  don  Diego  Loup,  who  were  continually
going  or  returning  from  one  party  to  the  other.  The  duke,  however,  gave  them  to  understand
that  he  would  prefer  a union  with  Castille  to  one  with  France,  provided  they  would  agree
to  his  terms.  He  demanded  payment  of  six  hundred  thousand  francs  within  three  years,
twelve  thousand  annually  for  his  and  the  duchess’s  lives,  and  two  thousand  more  for  the
duchess’s  household  yearly*.

When  it  was  known  that  the  king  had  left  Montereau  for  Chalons,  all  those  who  had
remained  at  home  hastened  their  march  to  join  him.  Thither  came  the  duke  of  Berry,
whose  quarters  were  at  Espinay,  and  the  duke  of  Bourbon,  the  count  de  la  Marche,
the  dauphin  d’Auvergne,  the  count  de  Sancerre,  the  count  de  St.  Pol,  the  count  de
Tonnerre.  Near  the  king’s  person  were  the  duke  of  Burgundy,  the  duke  of  Lorrain,  the
duke  of  Touraine,  the  constable  of  France,  sir  John  de  Yienne,  sir  Guy  de  la  Tremouille,  sir
Barrois  des  Barres,  and  sir  John  de  Bueil.  The  whole  country  round  Rheims  and  Chalons,


* According  to  Lopez  de  Ayala,  the  messengers  sent  by
the  king  of  Castille  to  the  duke  of  Lancaster  at  Bayonne
were  Ferrand  de  Illescas,  a monk  of  the  order  of  St.
Francis,  confessor  to  the  king,  Pero  Sanchez  del  Castillo
and  Alvar  Martinez  de  Villareal,  both  royal  auditors.
Before  their  departure  for  Bayonne,  the  king  of  Castille
assembled  the  general  cortes  at  Briviesca,  in  order  to  raise
the  sums  demanded  by  the  duke,  and  to  relieve  both  him-
self and  the  kingdom  from  a competitor  who  was  so  dan-
gerous an  enemy.  Ayala  details  all  the  conditions  of  the
treaty  ; the  following  are  the  principal  articles  :

Don  Henry,  eldest  son  of  don  John  of  Casiille,  aged
nine  years,  was,  within  two  months  from  the  signature  of
the  treaty,  to  marry  Catherine,  daughter  of  the  duke  of
Lancaster,  aged  fourteen  years.  If  the  infant  Henry  should
die  before  he  attained  the  age  of  fourteen  years,  or  without
consummating  the  marriage,  Catherine  was  to  marry  his
next  brother,  don  Ferrand.  Don  Henry  was,  immediately
upon  the  marriage,  to  receive  the  title  of  prince  of  the
Asturias,  and  Catherine  that  of  princess  of  the  Asturias.

The  king  of  Castille  was  to  assign  to  don  Henry  and
Catherine  the  city  of  Soria  and  the  towns  of  Amazan,
Atienza,  Soria,  and  Molina,  for  the  support  of  their  house-
hold, being  the  same  which  king  Henry  of  Castille  had
granted  to  Bertrand  duGuesclin,  and  which  he  had  after-
wards redeemed.

Within  two  months  next  after  the  treaty,  the  king
don  John  hound  himself  to  acknowledge  don  Henry  and
Catherine  as  his  successors.

The  king  don  John  was  to  pay  down  600,000  French
francs  to  the  duke  and  duchess  of  Lancaster,  as  the  price
of  their  renunciation  of  all  claim  upon  the  crown  of
Castille.

The  king  don  John  further  engaged  for  himself  and  his
heirs,  to  pay  the  further  annual  sum  of  40,000  francs  to
the  duke  and  duchess,  until  the  death  of  the  survivor.

Hostages  from  the  kingdoms  of  Castille  and  Leon  were
to  be  given  to  the  duke  of  Lancaster,  as  pledges  for  the
payment  of  the  600,000  francs.  These  hostages  were  don


Fadrique,  duke  of  Beuevcnto,  and  brother  to  kiug  John
of  Castille;  Pero  Ponce  de  Leon,  lord  of  Marchena  ; John
de  Velasco,  son  of  Pero  Fernandez  de  Velasco  ; Carlos  de
Arrelano,  John  de  Padillo,  Rodrigo  de  Rojas,  Lope  Ortiz
de  Estuniga,  John  Rodriguez  de  Cisneros,  Rodrigo  de
Casteneda,  and  several  other  citizens  of  various  large  towns ;
in  all  sixtv-six  persons.  (The  safe-conduct  granted  to
them  by  Richard  II.  on  the  26th  August,  1388,  is  given
in  Rymer.)

Free  pardon  was  to  be  granted  to  all  who  had  taken  part
with  the  duke  of  Lancaster.

The  duke  and  duchess  of  Lancaster,  on  their  parts,  re-
nounced all  pretension  to  the  kingdoms  of  Castille,  Leon,
Toledo,  Galicia,  Seville,  Cordova,  Murcia,  Jaen,  the
Algarves,  Algesiras,  the  lordships  of  Lara  and  Biscay,  and
that  of  Molina  ; and  they  acknowledged  don  John  as  king,
and  after  him  don  Henry  ; and,  in  case  of  his  death  with-
out children,  then  don  Ferrand  and  all  other  lawful  de-
scendants of  the  king  don  John,  who  should  ascend  the
throne  in  default  of  any  other  legitimate  heir.  They
further  engaged  never  to  procure  from  the  pope  a dispen-
sation from  their  oath,  either  openly  or  in  secret.

Constance,  duchess  of  Lancaster,  was  further  to  be  put
in  possession  of  the  towns  of  Guadalajara,  Medina  del
Carnpo,  and  Olmedo,  for  her  life,  she  engaging  that  they
should,  at  her  death,  be  delivered  back,  and  that  the
government  should  be  entrusted  to  none  but  Castillians.

Notwithstanding  his  new  alliances  with  England,  the
king,  don  John,  stipulated  for  the  preservation  of  his
ancient  alliance  with  France.

To  pay  the  sums  agreed  upon  with  the  duke  of  Lan-
caster and  ratified  by  the  cortes,  the  king  raised  a sort  of
loan  throughout  the  kingdom,  as  his  father  had  done  when
he  redeemed  the  lands  granted  to  Bertrand  du  Guescliu.
All  the  citizens,  with  the  exception  of  bishops,  priests,  and
nobles,  contributed  to  an  impost,  which  was  afterwards
repaid  to  them  by  successive  drawbacks  on  the  ordinary
taxes.  — Ed.


300


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


to  the  extent  of  twelve  leagues,  was  destroyed  by  these  men  at  arms,  who  were  dispersed
over  it,  from  Sainte  Meneliould  to  Monstier  in  Bar,  to  Chaumont  in  Bassigni*,  to  Vitry  en
Pertoist,  and  the  whole  of  the  bishoprics  of  Troyes  and  Langres.  The  lord  de  Coucy  was
not  yet  returned  from  his  journey  to  Avignon.

About  this  time  sir  Guy  de  Honeourt  and  sir  Yves  d’Orient  came  back  from  their  embassy
to  the  emperor,  and  met  the  king  at  Chalons.  The  king  and  his  nobles  were  rejoiced  at  their
arrival,  and  inquired  the  news.  They  told  them  all  that  had  passed  ; that  the  emperor  had
very  kindly  received  them,  and  handsomely  entertained  them  ; and  sir  Guy  added, — “ Sire,
and  you  my  lords,  when  the  emperor  and  his  council  had  read  your  letters  and  the  copy  of
the  duke  of  Gueldres’  challenge,  they  were  very  indignant  at  his  presumption,  and  are  desirous,
from  what  we  could  learn,  that  he  should  be  punished  for  his  insolence  : nor  will  the  emperor
make  any  opposition  to  your  intended  war,  which  he  seems  indeed  much  to  approve  of,  but
keep  strictly  to  all  the  articles  of  the  treaties  entered  into  between  him  and  France,  so  that
all  your  doubts  concerning  his  conduct  may  be  dissipated.”  The  king  of  France  and  his
council  were  well  satisfied  on  hearing  this,  although  many  said,  that  whether  the  emperor
would  or  not,  they  were  in  sufficient  numbers  to  go  whither  they  pleased  without  fearing
any  one.

The  king  gave  orders  for  the  march  of  the  army,  and  he  left  Chalons  for  Grand  Pre  t,
where  he  remained  for  three  days.  He  could  not  make  any  long  marches,  from  the  great
concourse  of  men  that  were  in  his  front,  in  his  rear,  and  on  all  sides ; and  he  was  forced  to
move  gently  on  account  of  his  great  train  of  baggage  and  purveyances,  which  occupied  a
length  of  fourteen  country  leagues,  and  was  daily  increasing.  The  count  de  Grand  Pre
received  the  king  in  his  town  with  every  respect,  and  ordered  all  things  so  much  to  the  king’s
pleasure,  that  he  expressed  his  satisfaction  to  the  count,  who  was  attached  to  the  van  division.
The  duke  of  Lorrain  and  sir  Henry  de  Bar  here  joined  the  king  with  a handsome  company
of  men  at  arms.  The  duke  of  Lorrain  was  ordered  to  the  division  of  his  son-in-law,  the
lord  de  Coucy,  but  sir  Henry  de  Bar  remained  near  the  king.

The  pioneers  had  been  continually  employed  in  clearing  the  forest  of  Ardennes,  by  felling
of  timber,  and  making  roads  where  none  had  ever  been  before.  They  had  much  difficulty  in
the  filling  up  of  valleys  and  forming  a tolerable  road  for  the  carriages  to  pass,  and  there  were
upwards  of  three  thousand  workmen  who  laboured  at  nothing  else,  from  Vierton  to
Neufchatel  in  the  Ardennes.  The  duchess  of  Brabant  was  exceedingly  pleased  when  she
heard  for  certain  that  the  kin"  of  France  was  on  his  march  through  the  Ardennes,  and
concluded  she  should  now  have  her  revenge  on  the  duke  of  Gueldres,  and  that  the  king  of
France  would  make  both  him  and  his  father,  the  duke  of  Juliers,  repent  of  their  conduct,
which  had  given  her  many  mortifications.  She  set  out  in  handsome  array  from  Brussels,
accompanied  by  the  lord  de  Samines,  in  the  Ardennes,  the  lord  de  Bocelars,  the  lord  de
Broquehort,  and  several  others,  for  Luxembourg,  to  receive  the  king,  and  have  some  conver-
sation with  him.  She  crossed  the  Meuse  by  the  bridge  at  Huy§,  and  went  to  Bastoigne,
where  she  halted  ; for  the  king  was  to  pass  there,  or  very  near  it,  which  he  did.  When  he
set  out  from  Grand  Pre,  he  crossed  the  Meuse  at  Morsay  ||,  with  his  whole  army  ; but  his
marches  were  very  short,  for  the  reasons  I have  before  given.

News  was  brought  to  the  dukes  of  Juliers  and  Gueldres,  for  such  intelligence  is  soon  spread
abroad,  that  the  king  of  France  was  on  his  march  to  visit  them,  with  an  army  of  one  hundred
thousand  men  ; and  that  he  had  never  collected  so  large  a body,  except  when  he  marched  to
Bourbourg,  imagining  the  English  to  be  in  greater  force  than  he  found  them.  The  duke  of
Juliers  began  to  be  greatly  alarmed ; but  his  son,  the  duke  of  Gueldres,  made  light  of  it,
saying, — “ Let  them  come  : the  greater  the  number,  the  sooner  will  they  be  worn  down,  their
baggage  destroyed,  and  their  purveyances  ruined.  Winter  is  coming  on,  and  my  country  is
a strong  one  : they  will  not  easily  enter  it,  and,  when  they  make  the  attempt,  shall  be  driven

* “ Bassigni,”  a small  country  on  the  confines  of  § “ Huy,”  a town  in  the  bishopric  of  Liege,  capital  of
Champagne  and  Lorrain  : Chaumont  is  the  capital.  the  Condrotz,  on  the  confluence  of  the  small  river  Huy

-f-  “ Vitry  en  Pertois,”  a small  town  in  Champagne,  and  the  Meuse,
near  Vitry  le  Francois.

J “ Grand  Pre,”  a town  in  Champagne,  election  of  ||  “ Morsay.”  Q.  Mouzon.

Sainte  Menehould.


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


361


back  with  other  sounds  than  trumpets.  They  must  always  keep  together,  which  will  he
impossible,  if  they  mean  to  invade  my  territory  ; and,  if  they  separate,  my  people  will  take
them  whether  they  will  or  no.- — However,  our  cousin  of  France  shows  good  courage  ; and  I
give  him  credit  for  doing  what  I would  attempt  if  in  his  place.”  Such  were  the  conversa-
tions the  duke  of  Gueldres  held  with  his  knights  on  this  subject  ; but  the  duke  of  Juliers
W'as,  on  the  contrary,  quite  disconsolate  ; for  he  saw,  if  the  French  were  determined  on  it,
his  country  must  be  ruined  and  burnt.  He  sent  for  his  brother,  the  archbishop  of  Cologne,
and  his  cousin,  sir  Arnold  de  Hornes,  bishop  of  Liege,  to  consult  with  them  on  the  occasion,
and  see  if  there  were  any  probable  remedy  to  prevent  his  lands  being  despoiled.  These  two
prelates  gave  him  the  best  advice  in  their  power,  and  recommended  him  to  humble  himself
before  the  king  of  France  and  his  uncles,  and  submit  to  their  will.  The  duke  having
answered,  that  he  would  most  cheerfully  do  so,  the  bishop  of  Utrecht,  who  was  likewise
present,  with  the  assent  of  the  archbishop,  advised  the  bishop  of  Liege  to  set  out  with  his
array  to  meet  the  king  of  France,  and  treat  with  him  on  this  subject.

The  king  of  France  continued  his  march,  but  only  two,  three,  or  four  leagues  a day,  and
sometimes  not  one,  from  the  great  baggage,  which  was  too  large  by  far,  that  accompanied
him.  Sir  William  de  Lignac,  and  his  brother  sir  Helion,  joined  the  king  between  Mouzon
and  Notre  Dame  d’Amot*,  where  the  duke  of  Berry,  with  his  body  of  five  hundred  spears,
was  quartered.  Sir  William  had  come  from  the  siege  of  Ventadour,  by  orders  of  the  duke
of  Berry,  as  had  sir  John  Bonne-lance  by  similar  ones  from  the  duke  of  Bourbon.  They  had
Lift  their  army  under  the  command  of  sir  John  Bouteiller  and  sir  Lewis  d’Ambiere,  as  they
were  desirous  of  attending  the  king  in  this  expedition.  Sir  Helion  had  come  from  Bayonne,
where  he  had  been  treating,  as  you  have  heard,  with  the  duke  of  Lancaster,  for  the  marriage
of  his  daughter  with  the  duke  of  Berry.  The  duke  of  Berry  made  him  good  cheer,  and
inquired  after  his  success.  Sir  Helion  related  everything  that  had  passed,  and  told  him  the
king  of  Castille  was  earnestly  negotiating  a peace  with  the  duke  of  Lancaster  by  the  union
of  his  son,  the  prince  of  Galicia,  with  his  daughter.  The  duke  was  very  pensive  on  hearing
this,  and,  after  a pause,  said,  — “ Sir  Helion,  you  will  return  to  France  ; and  I will  send  you
once  more,  accompanied  by  the  bishop  of  Poitiers,  for  the  duke  of  Lancaster’s  decisive
answer;  but  at  this  moment  we  have  enough  on  our  hands.”  This  same  week,  the  lord  de
Coney  returned  from  Avignon  to  the  king  in  the  Ardennes,  to  the  great  joy  of  the  whole
army.


CHAPTER  CXXIV. THE  PRINCIPAL  BARONS  OF  SCOTLAND  ASSEMBLE  IN  ARMS  TO  MAKE

WAR  ON  ENGLAND. THEY  LEARN  FROM  A SPY  WHOM  THEY  TAKE  PRISONER  THAT

THE  ENGLISH  ARE  ACQUAINTED  WITH  THEIR  INTENTIONS.

I have  before  related  in  this  history  the  troubles  king  Richard  of  England  had  suffered
from  his  quarrels  with  his  uncles,  urged  on  by  the  wicked  counsel  of  the  duke  of  Ireland,
which  had  caused  several  knights  to  lose  their  heads,  and  the  archbishop  of  York  nearly  to
be  deprived  of  his  benefice.  By  the  advice  of  the  archbishop  of  Canterbury  and  the  king’s
new  council,  the  lord  Neville,  who  had  commanded  the  defence  of  the  frontiers  of  Northum-
berland for  five  years  against  the  Scots,  was  dismissed  : for  this  service  he  had  been  paid  by
the  counties  of  Northumberland  and  Durham,  the  sum  of  sixteen  thousand  francs  annually.
Sir  Henry  Percy  being  appointed  in  his  stead  to  this  command,  with  a salary  of  eleven
thousand  francs  yearly,  was  a circumstance  which  created  much  animosity  and  hatred  between
the  Percies  and  Nevilles,  who  were  neighbours  and  had  been  friends.  The  barons  and  knights
of  Scotland,  knowing  of  this,  determined  on  an  inroad  to  England,  as  the  opportunity  was
favourable,  now  the  English  w’ere  quarrelling  among  themselves,  to  make  some  return  for  the
many  insults  they  had  suffered  from  them.

In  order  that  their  intentions  might  not  be  known,  they  appointed  a feast  to  be  holden  at
Aberdeen,  on  the  borders  of  the  Highlands.  The  greater  part  of  the  barons  attended  ; and
it  was  then  resolved,  that  in  the  middle  of  August  of  the  year  1388,  they  would  assemble

* “ Amot.”  Q.  Arlon.


362


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.

all  their  forces  at  a castle  called  Jedworth,  situated  amidst  deep  forests  and  on  the  borders
of  Cumberland.  Having  arranged  everything  concerning  this  business,  they  separated,  but
never  mentioned  one  word  of  their  intentions  to  the  king ; for  they  said  among  themselves,
he  knew  nothing  about  war.  On  the  appointed  day,  earl  James  Douglas  first  arrived  at
Jedworth  : then  came  John  earl  of  Moray,  the  earl  of  March  and  Dunbar,  William,  earl  of
Fife,  John  earl  of  Sutherland,  Stephen  earl  of  Menteith*,  William  carl  of  Mar,  sir  Archibald
Douglas,  sir  Robert  Erskine,  sir  Malcolm  Drummond,  sir  William  and  sir  James  Lindsay,
sir  Thomas  Berry,  sir  Alexander  Lindsay,  sir  John  Swinton  of  Swinton,  sir  John  de  Sandelans’
sir  Patrick  Dunbar,  sir  John  Sinclair,  sir  Walter  Sinclair,  sir  Patrick  Hepburn,  sir  John
Montgomery,  sir  John  his  son,  and  his  two  sons;  sir  John  Maxwell,  sir  Adam  Glendinning,
sir  William  de  Redurinf,  sir  William  Stuart,  sir  John  Halliburton,  sir  John  de  Ludie,  and
sir  Robert  Lauder,  sir  Stephen  Frazer,  sir  Alexander  and  sir  John  Ramsay,  sir  William  of
Noith  Berwick,  sir  Robert  Hart,  sir  W illiam  Wardlaw,  sir  John  Armstrong,  David
Fleming,  Robert  Campbell,  with  numbers  of  other  knights  and  squires  of  Scotland.


Jhdworth.  (Jedburgh.)  From  an  Original  Drawing.


There  had  not  been  seen,  for  sixty  years,  so  numerous  an  assembly  : they  amounted
to  twelve  hundred  spears,  and  forty  thousand  other  men  and  archers.  With  the  use  of  the
bow  the  Scots  are  little  acquainted ; but  they  sling  their  axes  over  their  shoulders,  and,
when  engaged  in  battle,  give  deadly  blows  with  them.  These  lords  were  well  pleased  on
meeting  each  other,  and  declared  they  would  never  return  to  their  homes  without  having
made  an  inroad  on  England,  and  to  such  an  effect  that  it  should  be  remembered  for  twenty
years  to  come.  The  more  completely  to  combine  their  plans,  they  fixed  another  meeting  to
be  held  at  a church  in  the  forest  of  Jedworth,  called  Zedonj,  before  they  began  their  march
to  England.

* “ Earl  of  Menteith.” — “ At  the  time  of  this  battle  (of  F “ Redurin.”  Q.

Otterhoume,)  the  earldom  of  Menteith  was  possessed  by  J “Zedon.  The  monastery  of  Zedon,  at  which  the
Robert  Stewart,  earl  of  Fife,  third  son  of  king  Robert  II.  Scottish  leaders  are  said  to  have  held  their  meeting  previ-
who,  according  to  Buchanan,  commanded  the  Scots  that  oils  to  entering  England,  is,  I should  suppose,  the  modern
entered  by  Carlisle.  But  our  minstrel  had  probably  an  Kirk-Yetholm,  exactly  upon  the  Borders,  and  near  tho
oye  to  the  family  of  Graham,  who  had  this  earldom  when  foot  of  Cheviot:  the  name  is  pronounced  Yetto’m,  which
the  ballad  was  written.” — Reliques  of  Ancienl  English  comes  very  near  Yedon.”. — W.  S.

Poetry.


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


3G3

Intelligence  was  carried  to  the  earl  of  Northumberland  (for  everything  is  known  to  tho.se
who  are  diligent  in  their  inquiries,)  to  his  children,  to  the  seneschal  of  York,  and  to  sir
Matthew  Redman,  governor  of  Berwick,  of  the  great  feast  that  was  to  be  kept  at  Aberdeen.
To  learn  what  was  done  at  it,  these  lords  sent  thither  heralds  and  minstrels.  The  Scots  barons
could  not  transact  their  business  so  secretly  but  it  was  known  to  these  minstrels,  that  there
was  to  be  a grand  assembly  of  men  at  arms  in  the  forest  of  Jedworth.  They  observed  also,
much  aoitation  through  the  country,  and,  on  their  return  to  Newcastle,  gave  a faithful  report
of  all  they  had  seen  or  heard  to  their  lords.  The  barons  and  knights  of  Northumberland  in
consequence  made  their  preparations,  but  very  secretly,  that  the  Scots  might  not  know  of  it,
and  put  off  their  intended  inroad,  and  had  retired,  to  their  castles  ready  to  sally  forth  on  the
first  notice  of  the  arrival  of  the  enemy.  They  said, — “ If  the  Scots  enter  the  country  through
Cumberland  by  Carlisle,  we  will  ride  into  Scotland,  and  do  them  more  damage  than  they
can  do  to  us ; for  theirs  is  an  open  country,  which  may  be  entered  anywhere,  but  ours  is  the
contrary,  with  strong  and  well  fortified  towns  and  castles.”

To  be  more  sure  of  their  intentions,  they  resolved  to  send  an  English  gentleman,  well
acquainted  with  the  country,  to  this  meeting  in  the  forest  of  Jedworth.  The  English  squire
journeyed  without  interruption  until  he  came  to  the  church  of  Yetholm,  where  the  Scots
barons  were  assembled,  and  entered  it,  as  a servant  following  his  master,  and  heard  the
greater  part  of  their  plans.  When  the  meeting  was  near  breaking  up,  he  left  the  church
on  his  return  and  went  to  a tree,  thinking  to  find  his  horse  which  he  had  tied  there  by  the
bridle,  but  he  was  gone ; for  a Scotsman  (they  are  all  thieves)  had  stolen  him.  He  was
fearful  of  making  a noise  about  it,  and  set  off  on  foot,  though  booted  and  spurred.  He  had
not  gone  two  bow-sliots  from  the  church  before  he  was  noticed  by  two  Scots  knights  who
were  in  conversation.  The  first  who  saw  him  said, — “ I have  witnessed  many  wonderful
things,  but  what  I now  see  is  equal  to  any : that  man  yonder  has,  I believe,  lost  his  horse,
and  yet  makes  no  inquiries  after  it.  On  my  troth,  I doubt  much  if  he  belongs  to  us  : let
us  go  after  him,  and  see  whether  I am  right  or  not.”  The  two  knights  soon  overtook  him.
On  their  approach  he  was  alarmed,  and  wished  himself  anywhere  else.  They  asked  him
whither  he  was  going,  whence  he  had  come,  and  what  he  had  done  with  his  horse.  As  he
contradicted  himself  in  his  answers,  they  laid  hands  on  him,  and  said  he  must  come  before
their  captains,  and  he  was  brought  back  to  the  church  of  Yetholm,  to  the  earl  of  Douglas  and
the  other  lords.  They  examined  him  closely,  for  they  knew  him  for  an  Englishman,  as  to
the  reasons  he  had  come  thither,  and  assured  him,  if  he  did  not  truly  answer  all  their
questions,  his  head  should  be  struck  off ; but,  if  he  told  the  truth,  no  harm  should  happen
to  him.  Very  unwillingly  he  obeyed,  for  the  love  of  life  prevailed ; and  the  Scots  barons
learnt  that  he  had  been  sent  by  the  earl  of  Northumberland  to  discover  the  number  of  their
forces,  and  whither  they  were  to  march.  This  intelligence  gave  them  the  greatest  pleasure,
and  they  would  not  on  any  account  but  have  taken  this  spy.

He  was  asked  where  the  barons  of  Northumberland  where  ? if  they  had  any  intentions  of
making  an  excursion?  and  what  road  to  Scotland  they  would  take;  along  the  sea-shore
from  Berwick  to  Dunbar,  or  by  the  mountains  through  the  country  of  Menteith  to  Stirling  ?
He  replied, — “ Since  you  will  force  me  to  tell  the  truth,  when  I left  Newcastle,  there  were
not  any  signs  of  an  excursion  being  made ; but  the  barons  are  all  ready  to  set  out  at  a
moment’s  warning,  as  soon  as  they  shall  hear  you  have  entered  England.  They  will  not
oppose  you,  for  they  are  not  in  sufficient  numbers  to  meet  so  large  a body  as  you  are  reported
to  them  to  consist  of.” — “ And  what  do  they  estimate  our  numbers  at  in  Northumberland  ?”
said  lord  Moray.  “ They  say,  my  lord,”  replied  the  squire,  “ that  you  have  full  forty
thousand  men,  and  twelve  hundred  spears  ; and  by  way  of  counteracting  your  career,  should
you  march  to  Cumberland,  they  will  take  the  road  through  Berwick  to  Dunbar,  Dalkeith,
and  Edinburgh : if  you  follow  the  other  road,  they  will  then  march  to  Carlisle,  and  enter
your  country  by  these  mountains.”  The  Scottish  lords,  on  hearing  this,  were  silent,  but
looked  at  each  other.  The  English  squire  was  delivered  to  the  governor  of  the  castle  of
Jedworth,  with  orders  to  have  particular  guard  over  him  ; when  they  conferred  together  in
the  church  of  Yetholm,  and  formed  other  plans.


864


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


CHAPTER  CXXV. THE  SCOTS  FORM  THEIR  ARMY  INTO  TWO  DIVISIONS ; ONE,  UNDER  THE

COMMAND  OF  SIR  ARCHIBALD  DOUGLAS,  MARCHES  TO  CARLISLE,  AND  THE  OTHER  TO

NEWCASTLE-ON-TYNE,  COMMANDED  BY  THE  EARL  OF  DOUGLAS, AT  THE  BARRIERS  OF

WHICH  PLACE,  HE  CONQUERS  THE  PENNON  OF  SIR  HENRY  PERCY.

The  barons  of  Scotland  were  in  high  spirits  at  this  intelligence,  and  considered  their
success  as  certain,  now  they  knew  the  disposition  of  the  enemy.  They  held  a council,  as  to
their  mode  of  proceeding,  and  the  wisest  and  most  accustomed  to  arms,  such  as  sir  Archibald
Douglas,  the  earl  of  Fife,  sir  Alexander  Ramsay,  sir  John  Sinclair,  and  sir  James  Lindsay,
were  the  speakers  : they  said, — “ That  to  avoid  any  chance  of  failing  in  their  attempt,  they
would  advise  the  army  to  be  divided,  and  two  expeditions  to  be  made,  so  that  the  enemy
might  be  puzzled  whither  to  march  their  forces.  The  largest  division,  with  the  baggage,
should  go  to  Carlisle,  in  Cumberland : and  the  other,  consisting  of  three  or  four  hundred
spears,  and  two  thousand  stout  infantry  and  archers,  all  well  mounted,  should  make  for
Newcastle-on-Tyne,  cross  the  river,  and  enter  Durham,  spoiling  and  burning  the  country.
They  will  have  committed  great  waste  in  England  before  our  enemies  can  have  any
information  of  their  being  there  : if  we  find  they  come  in  pursuit  of  us,  which  they  certainly
will,  we  will  then  unite  together,  and  fix  on  a proper  place  to  offer  them  battle,  as  we  all
seem  to  have  that  desire,  and  to  gain  honour;  for  it  is  time  to  repay  them  some  of  the
mischiefs  they  have  done  to  us.”  This  plan  was  adopted,  and  sir  Archibald  Douglas,  the
earl  of  Fife,  the  earl  of  Sutherland,  the  earl  of  Menteith,  the  earl  of  Mar,  the  earl  of
Stratherne,  sir  Stephen  Frazer,  sir  George  Dunbar,  with  sixteen  other  great  barons  of
Scotland,  were  ordered  to  the  command  of  the  largest  division  that  was  to  march  to  Carlisle.
The  earl  of  Douglas,  the  earl  of  March  and  Dunbar,  and  the  earl  of  Moray,  were  appointed
leaders  of  the  three  hundred  picked  lances  and  two  thousand  infantry,  who  were  to  advance
to  Newcastle-on-Tyne  and  invade  Northumberland.  When  these  two  divisions  separated,  the
lords  took  a very  affectionate  leave  of  each  other,  promising  that  if  the  English  took  the  field
against  them,  they  would  not  fight  until  they  were  all  united,  which  would  give  them  such
a superiority  of  force  as  must  ensure  victory.  They  then  left  the  forest  of  Jedworth,  one
party  marching  to  the  right  and  the  other  to  the  left.  The  barons  of  Northumberland  not
finding  their  squire  return,  nor  hearing  anything  of  the  Scots,  began  to  suspect  the  accident
which  had  happened.  They  therefore  ordered  every  one  to  be  prepared  to  march  at  a
moment’s  notice,  or  when  they  should  hear  of  the  Scots  having  entered  the  country,  for
they  considered  their  squire  as  lost.

Let  us  return  to  the  expedition  under  the  earl  of  Douglas  and  his  companions,  for  they
had  more  to  do  than  the  division  that  went  to  Carlisle,  and  were  eager  to  perform  some
deeds  of  arms.  When  the  earls  of  Douglas,  Moray,  and  March  were  separated  from  the  main
body,  they  determined  to  cross  the  Tyne  and  enter  the  bishopric  of  Durham,  and,  after  they
had  despoiled  and  burnt  that  country  as  far  as  the  city  of  Durham,  to  return  by  Newcastle,
and  quarter  themselves  there  in  spite  of  the  English.  This  they  executed,  and  riding  at  a
good  pace,  through  bye  roads,  without  attacking  town,  castle,  or  house,  arrived  on  the  lands
of  the  lord  Percy,  and  crossed  the  river  Tyne,  without  any  opposition,  at  the  place  they
had  fixed  on,  about  three  leagues  above  Newcastle,  near  to  Brancepeth*,  where  they  entered
the  rich  country  of  Durham,  and  instantly  began  their  war,  by  burning  towns  and  slaying
the  inhabitants.

Neither  the  earl  of  Northumberland  nor  the  barons  and  knights  of  the  country  had  heard
anything  of  their  invasion  : but  when  intelligence  came  to  Durham  and  Newcastle  that  the
Scots  were  abroad,  which  was  indeed  visible  enough  from  the  smoke  that  was  everywhere
seen,  the  earl  of  Northumberland  sent  his  two  sons  to  Newcastle ; but  he  himself  remained
at  Alnwick,  and  issued  his  orders  for  every  one  to  repair’  thither  also.  Before  his  sons  left
him,  he  said, — “ You  will  hasten  to  Newcastle,  where  the  whole  country  will  join  you:  I will
remain  here,  for  it  is  the  road  they  may  return  by : if  we  can  surround  them,  we  shall  do

* “ Brancepeth,” — four  miles  from  Durham.  A ruin  of  a fine  old  castle  remains,  which  I believe  has  been  lately
fitted  up  and  repaired  for  a residence.


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND.  FRANCE,  Ac


305


well ; but  I know  not  for  certain  where  they  now  are.”  Sir  Henry  and  sir  Ralph  Percy
obeyed  their  father’s  orders,  and  made  for  Newcastle  accompanied  by  the  gentlemen  and
others  fit  to  hear  arms.  In  the  mean  time,  the  Scots  continued  destroying  and  burning  all
before  them,  so  that  the  smoke  was  visible  at  Newcastle.  They  came  to  the  gates  of
Durham,  where  they  skirmished,  but  made  no  long  stay,  and  set  out  on  their  return,  as
they  had  planned  at  the  beginning  of  the  expedition,  driving  and  carrying  away  all  the  booty
they  thought  worth  their  pains.  The  country  is  very  rich  between  Durham  and  Newcastle,
which  is  but  twelve  English  miles  distant  : there  was  not  a town  in  all  this  district,  unless
well  inclosed,  that  was  not  burnt.  The  Scots  re-crossed  the  Tyne  at  the  same  place,  and
came  before  Newcastle,  where  they  halted.  All  the  knights  and  squires  of  the  country  were
collected  at  Newcastle,  and  thither  came  the  seneschal  of  York,  sir  Ralph  Langley,  sir
Matthew  Redman,  governor  of  Berwick,  sir  Robert  Ogle,  sir  Thomas  Grey,  sir  Thomas
Idalton,  sir  John  Felton,  sir  John  Lilburne,  sir  William  Walsingham,  sir  Thomas  Abington,
the  baron  of  Ilalton,  sir  John  Copeland,  and  so  many  others,  the  town  was  filled  with  mure
than  it  could  lodge.


Brancepeth  Castle.  From  an  Original  Drawing.


The  three  Scots  lords,  having  completed  the  object  of  their  expedition  into  Durham,  lay
before  Newcastle  three  days,  where  there  was  an  almost  continual  skirmish.  The  sons  of
the  earl  of  Northumberland,  from  their  great  courage,  wTere  always  the  first  at  the  barriers,
when  many  valiant  deeds  were  done  with  lances  hand  to  hand.  The  earl  of  Douglas
had  along  conflict  with  sir  Henry  Percy,  and  in  it,  by  gallantry  of  arms,  won  his  pennon,  to
the  great  vexation  of  sir  Henry  and  the  other  English.  The  earl  of  Douglas  said, — “ I will
carry  this  token  of  your  prowess  with  me  to  Scotland,  and  place  it  on  the  tower  of  my  castle
at  Dalkeith,  that  it  may  be  seen  from  far.” — “ By  God,  earl  of  Douglas,”  replied  sir  Henry,
“ you  shall  not  even  bear  it  out  of  Northumberland  : be  assured  you  shall  never  have  this
pennon  to  brag  of.”  “ You  must  come  then,”  answered  earl  Douglas,  “ this  night  and  seek
for  it.  I will  fix  your  pennon  before  my  tent,  and  shall  see  if  you  will  venture  to  take
it  away.”

As  it  was  now  late,  the  skirmish  ended,  and  each  party  retired  to  their  quarters,  to  disarm
and  comfort  themselves.  They  had  plenty  of  every  thing,  particularly  flesh  meat.  The
Scots  kept  up  a very  strict  watch,  concluding,  from  the  words  of  sir  Henry  Percy,  they
should  have  their  quarters  beaten  up  this  night : they  were  disappointed,  for  sir  Henry  was
advised  to  defer  it.


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


3f>6


CHAPTER  CXXVI. — THE  EARL  OP  DOUGLAS,  WHEN  ENCAMPED  BEFORE  OTTERBOURNE,  TS
ATTACKED  BY  SIR  HENRY  PERCY,  TO  RE-CONQUER  HIS  PENNON,  AND  A GENERAL  BATTLE
ENSUES.

On  the  morrow,  the  Scots  dislodged  from  before  Newcastle  ; and,  taking  the  road  to  their
own  country,  they  came  to  a town  and  castle  called  Ponclau*,  of  which  sir  Raymond  de
Laval,  a very  valiant  knight  of  Northumberland,  was  the  lord.  They  halted  there  about
four  o’clock  in  the  morning,  as  they  learnt  the  knight  to  be  within  it,  and  made  preparations
for  the  assault.  This  was  done  with  such  courage,  that  the  place  was  won,  and  the  knight
made  prisoner.  After  they  had  burnt  the  town  and  castle,  they  marched  away  for
Otterbournet,  which  was  eight  English  leagues  from  Newcastle,  and  there  encamped
themselves.

This  day  they  made  no  attack  ; but,  very  early  on  the  morrow,  their  trumpets  sounded,
and  they  made  ready  for  the  assault,  advancing  towards  the  castle,  which  was  tolerably  strong,
and  situated  among  marshes.  They  attacked  it  so  long  and  so  unsuccessfully,  that  they
were  fatigued,  and  therefore  sounded  a retreat.  When  they  had  retired  to  their  quarters,
the  chiefs  held  a council  how  to  act ; and  the  greater  part  were  for  decamping  on  the
morrow,  without  attempting  more  against  the  castle,  to  join  their  countrymen  in  the  neigh-
bourhood of  Carlisle.  But  the  earl  of  Douglas  overruled  this,  by  saying  : “ In  despite  of
sir  Henry  Percy,  who  the  day  before  yesterday  declared  he  would  take  from  me  his  pennon,
that  I conquered  by  fair  deeds  of  arms  before  the  gates  of  Newcastle,  I will  not  depart  hence
for  two  or  three  days  ; and  we  will  renew  our  attack  on  the  castle,  for  it  is  to  betaken  : we
shall  thus  gain  double  honour,  and  see  if  within  that  time  he  will  come  for  his  pennon  : if
he  do,  it  shall  be  well  defended.” — Every  one  agreed  to  what  earl  Douglas  had  said  ; for  it
was  not  only  honourable,  but  he  was  the  principal  commander ; and  from  affection  to  him,
they  quietly  returned  to  their  quarters.  They  made  huts  of  trees  and  branches,  and  strongly
fortified  themselves.  They  placed  their  baggage  and  servants  at  the  entrance  of  the  marsh
on  the  road  to  Newcastle,  and  the  cattle  they  drove  into  the  marsh  lands.

I will  return  to  sir  Henry  and  sir  Ralph  Percy,  who  were  greatly  mortified  that  the  earl  of
Douglas  should  have  conquered  their  pennon  in  the  skirmish  before  Newcastle.  They  felt
the  more  for  this  disgrace,  because  sir  Henry  had  not  kept  his  word ; for  he  had  told  the  earl,
that  he  should  never  carry  his  pennon  out  of  England,  and  this  he  had  explained  to  the  knights
who  were  with  him  in  Newcastle.  The  English  imagined  the  army  under  the  earl  of
Douglas  to  be  only  the  van  of  the  Scots,  and  that  the  main  body  was  behind  ; for  which
reason  those  knights  who  had  the  most  experience  in  arms,  and  wrere  the  best  acquainted
with  warlike  affairs,  strongly  opposed  the  proposal  of  Sir  Henry  Percy  to  pursue  them.
They  said,  “ Sir,  many  losses  happen  in  war : if  the  earl  of  Douglas  has  won  your  pennon,
he  has  bought  it  dear  enough  ; for  he  has  come  to  the  gates  to  seek  it,  and  has  been  well
fought  with.  Another  time,  you  will  gain  from  him  as  much  if  not  more.  We  say  so,
because  you  know,  as  well  as  we  do,  that  the  whole  power  of  Scotland  has  taken  the  field.
We  are  not  sufficiently  strong  to  offer  them  battle;  and  perhaps  this  skirmish  may  have
been  only  a trick  to  draw  us  out  of  the  town ; and  if  they  be,  as  reported,  forty  thousand
strong,  they  will  surround  us,  and  have  us  at  their  mercy.  It  is  much  better  to  lose  a
pennon  than  two  or  three  hundred  knights  and  squires,  and  leave  our  country  in  a defence-
less state.”

This  speech  checked  the  eagerness  of  the  two  brothers  Percy,  for  they  would  not  act  con-
trary to  the  opinion  of  the  council ; when  other  news  was  brought  them  by  some  knights
and  squires  who  had  followed  and  observed  the  Scots,  their  numbers,  disposition,  and  where
they  had  halted.  This  was  all  fully  related  by  knights  who  had  traversed  the  whole  extent
of  country  the  Scots  had  passed  through,  that  they  might  carry  to  their  lords  the  most  exact
information.  They  thus  spoke, — “ Sir  Henry  and  sir  Ralph  Percy,  we  come  to  tell  you

* “ Ponclau.”  Portland,  a village  on  tile  Blythe,  brated  battle,  and  the  old  ballads,  that  it  is  almost
about  five  tniles  from  Newcastle. — W.  S.  needless  to  sayit  issituated  in  the  parish  of  Elsdon,  North-

t “ Ottcrbonrne  ” — is  so  well  known  from  this  cele-  umberland.


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


80}

that  we  have  followed  the  Scottish  army,  and  observed  all  the  country  where  they  now  are.
They  first  halted  at  Pontland,  and  took  sir  Raymond  de  Laval  in  his  castle  : thence  they
went  to  Otterbourne,  and  took  up  their  quarters  for  the  night.  We  are  ignorant  of  what
they  did  on  the  morrow,  hut  they  seemed  to  have  taken  measures  for  a long  stay.  We
know  for  certain  that  their  army  does  not  consist  of  more  than  three  thousand  men,  including
all  sorts.”  Sir  Henry  Percy,  on  hearing  this,  was  greatly  rejoiced,  and  cried  out,  “ To
horse ! to  horse  ! for  by  the  faith  I owe  my  God,  and  to  my  lord  and  father,  I will  seek  to
recover  my  pennon,  and  to  heat  up  their  quarters  this  night.”  Such  knights  and  squires
in  Newcastle  as  learnt  this  were  willing  to  he  of  the  party,  and  made  themselves  ready.

The  bishop  of  Durham  was  expected  daily  at  that  town  ; for  he  had  heard  of  the  irruption
of  the  Scots,  and  that  they  were  before  it,  in  which  were  the  sons  of  the  earl  of  Northumber-
land preparing  to  offer  them  combat.  The  bishop  had  collected  a number  of  men,  and  was
hastening  to  their  assistance,  but  sir  Henry  Percy  would  not  wTait ; for  he  was  accompanied
by  six  hundred  spears,  of  knights  and  squires,  and  upwards  of  eight  thousand  infantry,  which,
he  said,  would  be  more  than  enough  to  fight  the  Scots,  who  were  but  three  hundred  lances  and
two  thousand  others.  When  they  were  all  assembled,  they  left  Newcastle  after  dinner,  and
took  the  field  in  good  array,  following  the  road  the  Scots  had  taken,  making  for  Otterbourne,
which  was  eight  short  leagues  distant;  but  they  could  not  advance  very  fast,  that  their
infantry  might  keep  up  with  them.

As  the  Scots  were  supping,  some  indeed  were  gone  to  sleep,  for  they  had  laboured  hard
during  the  day,  at  the  attack  of  the  castle,  and  intended  renewing  it  in  the  cool  of  the
morning,  the  English  arrived,  and  mistook,  at  their  entrance,  the  huts  of  the  servants  for
those  of  their  masters. — They  forced  their  way  into  the  camp,  which  was,  however,  tolerably
strong,  shouting  out,  “ Percy  ! Percy  ! ” In  such  cases,  you  may  suppose  an  alarm  is  soon
given,  and  it  was  fortunate  for  the  Scots  the  English  had  made  their  first  attack  on  their
servants’  quarters,  which  checked  them  some  little.  The  Scots,  expecting  the  English,  had
prepared  accordingly  ; for,  while  the  lords  were  arming  themselves,  they  ordered  a body
of  their  infantry  to  join  their  servants  and  keep  up  the  skirmish.  As  their  men  were  armed,
they  formed  themselves  under  the  pennons  of  the  three  principal  barons,  who  each  had
his  particular  appointment.  In  the  mean  time,  the  night  advanced,  but  it  was  sufficiently
light ; for  the  moon  shone,  and  it  was  the  month  of  August,  when  the  weather  is  temperate
and  serene.

When  the  Scots  were  quite  ready,  and  properly  arrayed,  they  left  their  camp  in  silence,
but  did  not  march  to  meet  the  English.  They  skirted  the  side  of  a mountain  which  was
hard  by ; for  during  the  preceding  day,  they  had  well  examined  the  country  around,  and  said
among  themselves,  “ Should  the  English  come  to  beat  up  our  quarters,  we  will  do  so  and  so,”
and  thus  settled  their  plans  beforehand,  which  was  the  saving  of  them  ; for  it  is  of  the
greatest  advantage  to  men  at  arms,  when  attacked  in  the  night,  to  have  previously  arranged
their  mode  of  defence,  and  well  to  have  weighed  the  chance  of  victory  or  defeat.  The  English
had  soon  overpowered  the  servants ; but,  as  they  advanced  into  the  camp,  they  found  fresh
bodies  ready  to  oppose  them,  and  to  continue  the  fight.  The  Scots,  in  the  mean  time,  marched
along  the  mountain  side,  and  fell  on  the  enemy’s  flank  quite  unexpectedly,  shouting  their
cries.  This  was  a great  surprise  to  the  English,  who,  however  formed  themselves  in  better
order,  and  reinforced  that  part  of  their  army.  The  cries  of  Percy  and  Douglas  resounded  on
each  side.

The  battle  now  raged : great  was  the  pushing  of  lances,  and  very  many  of  each  party
were  struck  down  at  the  first  onset.  The  English  being  more  numerous,  and  anxious  to
defeat  the  enemy,  kept  in  a compact  body,  and  forced  the  Scots  to  retire,  who  were  on  the
point  of  being  discomfited.  The  earl  of  Douglas  being  young,  and  impatient  to  gain  renown
in  arms,  ordered  his  banner  to  advance,  shouting,  “ Douglas  ! Douglas  ! ” Sir  Henry  and
Sir  Ralph  Percy,  indignant  for  the  affront  the  earl  of  Douglas  had  put  on  them,  by  conquering
their  pennon,  and  desirous  of  meeting  him,  hastened  to  the  place  from  which  the  sounds
came,  calling  out  “ Percy  ! Percy  ! ” The  two  banners  met,  and  many  gallant  deeds  of  arms
ensued.  The  English  were  in  superior  strength,  and  fought  so  lustily  that  they  drove  back
the  Scots.  Sir  Patrick  Idepburne,  and  his  son  of  the  same  name,  did  honour  to  their  knight-


368


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


hood  and  country,  by  their  gallantry,  under  the  banner  of  Douglas,  which  would  have  been
conquered  but  for  the  vigorous  defence  they  made ; and  this  circumstance  not  only  con-
tributed to  their  personal  credit,  but  the  memory  of  it  is  continued  with  honour  to  their
descendants.

I was  made  acquainted  with  all  the  particulars  of  this  battle  by  knights  and  squires  who
had  been  actors  in  it  on  each  side.  There  were  also,  with  the  English,  two  valiant  knights
from  the  county  of  Foix,  whom  I had  the  good  fortune  to  meet  at  Orthes  the  year  after  this
battle  had  been  fought.  Their  names  were  sir  John  de  Chateauneuf  and  John  de  Cautiron.
On  my  return  from  Foix,  I met  likewise  at  Avignon  a knight  and  two  squires  of  Scotland,
of  the  party  of  earl  Douglas.  They  knew  me  again,  from  the  recollections  I brought  to
their  minds  of  their  own  country ; for  in  my  youth,  I,  the  author  of  this  history,  travelled
all  through  Scotland,  and  was  full  fifteen  days  resident  with  William  earl  of  Douglas,  father
of  earl  James,  of  whom  we  are  now  speaking,  at  his  castle  of  Dalkeith,  five  miles  distant
from  Edinburgh. — Earl  James  was  then  very  young,  but  a promising  youth,  and  he  had  a
sister  called  Blanche*.  I had  my  information,  therefore,  from  both  parties,  who  agree  that
it  was  the  hardest  and  most  obstinate  battle  that  was  ever  fought.  This  I readily  believed,
for  the  English  and  Scots  are  excellent  men  at  arms,  and  whenever  they  meet  in  battle  they
do  not  spare  each  other ; nor  is  there  any  check  to  their  courage  so  long  as  their  weapons
endure. — When  they  have  well  beaten  each  other,  and  one  party  is  victorious,  tliev  are  so
proud  of  their  conquest,  that  they  ransom  their  prisoners  instantly,  and  in  such  courteous
manner  to  those  who  have  been  taken,  that  on  their  departure  they  return  them  their  thanks.
However,  when  in  battle,  there  is  no  boy’s  play  between  them,  nor  do  they  shrink  from  the
combat ; and  you  will  see,  in  the  further  detail  of  this  battle,  as  excellent  deeds  performed
as  were  ever  witnessed.


CHAPTER  CXXVIlf. THE  EARL  OP  DOUGLAS,  IN  RALLYING  HIS  MEN  WHO  WERE  RETREAT-
ING, IS  MORTALLY  WOUNDED. SIR  RALPH  PERCY,  BADLY  WOUNDED,  SURRENDERS

TO  SIR  JOHN  MAXWELL,  WHO  PUTS  HIM  IN  THE  HANDS  OP  THE  EARL  OP  MORAY.

The  knights  and  squires  of  either  party  were  anxious  to  continue  the  combat  with  vigour
as  long  as  their  spears  might  be  capable  of  holding.  Cowardice  was  there  unknown,  and
the  most  splendid  courage  was  everywhere  exhibited  by  the  gallant  youths  of  England  and
Scotland : they  were  so  closely  intermixed,  that  the  archers’  bows  were  useless,  and  they


* “ Blanche/  Earl  William  Douglas  was  first  mar-
ried to  Margaret,  daughter  of  the  earl  of  Mar.  By  her
he  had  two  children,  James,  who  succeeded  him  in  his
honours,  and  Isabel.

■f  Lord  Berners  is  always  best  when  battles  occur. —
His  spirit  arises,  and  his  words  sound  like  the  neigh  of  the
war-horse.  We  cannot  omit  his  version  of  the  combat  at
Otterhourne.

“ Knightes  and  squyers  were  of  good  courage  on  botli6
parties  to  fyghte  valyauntly,  cowardes  there’ had  no  place,
hut  hardynesse  rayned  with  goodly  feates  of  armes,  for
knyghtes  and  squyers  were  so  joined  togyder  at  hande
strokes,  that  archers  had  no  place  of  nether  party.  There
the  Scottes  shewed  great  hardynesse  and  fought  meryly,
with  great  desyre  of  honour;  the  Englysshmen  were  three
to  one.  Howbeit  I say  nat  but  Englysshmen  dyd  nobly
acquyte  themselfe,  for  ever  the  Englysshmen  had  rather
ben  slayne  or  taken  in  the  place  than  flye.  Thus  as  I
have  sayd  the  baners  of  Duglass  and  Percy  and  their  men
were  met  eache  against  other,  envyous  who  shulde  Wynne
the  honour  of  that  journey.  At  the  begynnynge  the
Englysshmen  were  so  stronge,  that  they  rcculed  backe
their  enerayes.  Than  the  erle  Duglass,  who  was  of  great
harte  and  liygh  of  enterprise,  seeynge  his  men  recule  backe,
than  to  recover  the  place  and  to  shewe  knyghtly  valure,
he  toke  his  axe  in  bothe  his  handes  and  entered  so  into


the  prease  that  he  made  hymselfe  waye  in  such  wyse  that
none  durste  aproche  nere  hym,  and  he  was  so  well  armed
that  he  bare  well  of  such  strokes  as  he  recyued.  Thus  ho
wente  ever  forwarde  lyk  a hardy  Hector,  wyllyngc  alone
to  conquere  the  felde,  and  to  discouifyte  his  enemyes.—
But  at  laste  ho  was  encountred  with  tine  speares  all  at
ones  ; the  one  strake  hym  on  the  shoulder,  tile  other  on
the  breste,  and  the  stroke  glented  downe  to  his  bely,
and  the  thyrde  strake  hym  in  the  thye,  and  sore  hurte
with  all  three  strokes  so  that  he  was  borne  perforce  to  the
erthe,  and  after  that  he  culde  nat  again  be  relcved.
Some  of  his  knyghtes  and  squyers  folowed  hym,  but  nat
all,  for  it  was  nyght,  and  no  lyght  but  by  the  shynynge  of
the  mone.  The  Englysshmen  knew  well  they  had  borne
one  down  to  the  erth,  but  they  wyst  nat  W'ho  it  was,  for
if  they  had  knowen  that  it  had  bene  the  erle  of  Duglass,
they  had  bene  thereof  so  joyful  and  so  prowde  that  the
vyctorye  had  bene  theirs.  Nor  also  the  Scottes  knew  nat
of  that  adventure  tyll  the  ende  of  the  batayle,  for  if  they
had  knowen  it  they  should  have  bene  so  sore  dyspayred
and  dyscoraged  that  they  wolde  have  fiedde  awaye.  Thus
as  the  erle  Duglass  was  felled  to  the  erth,  he  was  stricken
into  the  heed  with  an  axe,  and  anotherstroke  throughe  the
thye.  The  Englysshmen  passed  fbrthe  and  tooke  nc  hede
of  hym ; they  thoughte  none  otherwyse  but  that  they
hadde  slayne  a man  at  armes.” — Ed.


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &e.


SCO


fought  hand  to  hand  without  either  battalion  giving  way.  The  Scots  behaved  most  valiantly,
for  the  English  were  three  to  one.  I do  not  mean  to  say  the  English  did  not  acquit  them-
selves well ; for  they  would  sooner  be  slain  or  made  prisoners  in  battle,  than  reproached  with
flight.  As  I before  mentioned,  the  two  banners  of  Douglas  and  Percy  met,  and  the  men  at
arms,  under  each,  exerted  themselves  by  every  means,  to  gain  the  victory ; but  the  English,
at  this  attach,  were  so  much  the  stronger,  that  the  Scots  were  driven  back.  The  earl  of
Douglas,  who  was  of  a high  spirit,  seeing  his  men  repulsed,  seized  a battle-axe  with  both
his  hands,  like  a gallant  knight,  and,  to  rally  his  men,  dashed  into  the  midst  of  his  enemies,
and  gave  such  blows  on  all  around  him,  that  no  one  could  withstand  them,  but  all  made  way
for  him  on  every  side ; for  there  were  none  so  well  armed  with  helmets  or  plates  but  that
they  suffered  from  his  battle-axe.  Thus  he  advanced,  like  another  Hector,  thinking  to  recover
and  conquer  the  field,  from  his  own  prowess,  until  he  was  met  by  three  spears  that  were  pointed
at  him : one  struck  him  on  the  shoulder,  another  on  the  stomach,  near  the  belly,  and  the
third  entered  his  thigh.  He  could  never  disengage  himself  from  these  spears,  but  was  borne
to  the  ground  fighting  desperately.  From  that  moment  he  never  rose  again.  Some  of  his
knights  and  squires  had  followed  him,  but  not  all;  for,  though  the  moon  shone,  it  was
rather  dark.  The  three  English  lances  knew  they  had  struck  down  some  person  of  consider-
able rank,  but  never  thought  it  was  earl  Douglas : had  they  known  it,  they  would  have
been  so  rejoiced  that  their  courage  would  have  been  redoubled,  and  the  fortune  of  the  day  had
consequently  been  determined  to  their  side.  The  Scots  were  ignorant  also  of  their  loss  until
the  battle  was  over,  otherwise  they  would  certainly,  from  despair,  have  been  discomfited.

I will  relate  what  befel  the  earl  afterward.  As  soon  as  he  fell,  his  head  was  cleaved  with
a battle-axe,  the  spear  thrust  through  his  thigh,  and  the  main  body  of  the  English  marched
over  him  without  paying  any  attention,  not  supposing  him  to  be  their  principal  enemy.  In
another  part  of  the  field,  the  earl  of  March  and  Dunbar  combated  valiantly;  and  the
English  gave  the  Scots  full  employment  who  had  followed  the  earl  of  Douglas,  and  had
engaged  with  the  two  Percies.  The  earl  of  Moray  behaved  so  gallantly  in  pursuing  the
English,  that  they  knew  not  how  to  resist  him.  Of  all  the  battles  that  have  been  described
in  this  history,  great  and  small,  this  of  which  I am  now  speaking  was  the  best  fought  and
the  most  severe ; for  there  w7as  not  a man,  knight  or  squire,  who  did  not  acquit  himself
gallantly,  hand  to  hand  with  his  enemy.  It  resembled  something  that  of  Cocherel,  which
was  as  long  and  as  hardily  disputed.  The  sons  of  the  earl  of  Northumberland,  sir  Henry
and  sir  Ralph  Percy,  who  were  the  leaders  of  this  expedition,  behaved  themselves  like  good
knights  in  the  combat.  Almost  a similar  accident  befel  sir  Ralph  as  that  which  happened
to  the  earl  of  Douglas;  for,  having  advanced  too  far,  he  was  surrounded  by  the  enemy
and  severely  wounded,  and,  being  out  of  breath,  surrendered  himself  to  a Scots  knight,
called  sir  John  Maxwell,  who  was  under  the  command,  and  of  the  household,  of  the  earl  of
Moray.

When  made  prisoner,  the  knight  asked  him  who  he  was ; for  it  was  dark,  and  he  knew
him  not.  Sir  Ralph  was  so  weakened  by  loss  of  blood,  which  was  flowing  from  his
wound,  that  he  could  scarcely  avow  himself  to  be  sir  Ralph  Percy.  “Well,”  replied  the
knight,  “ sir  Ralph,  rescued  or  not,  you  are  my  prisoner  : my  name  is  Maxwell.”  “ I agree
to  it,”  said  sir  Ralph,  “ but  pay  some  attention  to  me ; for  I am  so  desperately  wounded,
that  my  drawers  and  greaves  are  full  of  blood.”  Upon  this,  the  Scots  knight  was  very
attentive  to  him ; when  suddenly  hearing  the  cry  of  Moray  hard  by,  and  perceiving  the
earl’s  banner  advancing  to  him,  sir  John  addressed  himself  to  the  earl  of  Moray,  and  said,—
“'My  lord,  I present  you  with  sir  Ralph  Percy,  as  a prisoner ; but  let  good  care  be  taken  of
him,  for  he  is  very  badly  wounded.”  The  earl  was  much  pleased  at  this,  and  replied, —
“Maxwell,  thou  hast  well  earned  thy  spurs  this  day.”  He  then  ordered  his  men  to  take
every  care  of  sir  Ralph,  who  bound  up  and  stanched  his  wounds.  The  battle  still  continued
to  rage,  and  no  one  could  say  at  that  moment  which  side  would  be  the  conqueror,  for  there
were  very  many  captures  and  rescues  that  never  came  to  my  knowledge.


n n


VOL.  II.


370


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


CHAPTER  CXXVIII. THE  EARL  OP  DOUGLAS,  THOUGH  MORTALLY  WOUNDED,  ORDERS  HIS

BANNER  TO  BE  RAISED,  AS  THE  BEARER  HAD  BEEN  SLAIN,  AND  FORBIDS  HIS  LAMENT-
ABLE STATE  TO  BE  MADE  KNOWN  TO  HIS  MEN,  URGING  THEM  ON  TO  THE  COMBAT,
BY  WHICH  THEY  DEFEAT  THEIR  ENEMIES  AND  MAKE  SIR  HENRY  PERCY  WITH  MANY
MORE  PRISONERS.

The  young  earl  of  Douglas  had  this  night  performed  wonders  in  arms.  When  he  was
struck  down,  there  was  a great  crowd  round  him ; and  lie  could  not  raise  himself,  for  the
blow  on  his  head  was  mortal.  His  men  had  followed  him  as  closely  as  they  were  able ;
and  there  came  to  him  his  cousins,  sir  James  Lindsay,  sir  John  and  sir  Walter  Sinclair,  with
other  knights  and  squires.  They  found  by  his  side  a gallant  knight  that  had  constantly
attended  him,  who  was  his  chaplain,  and  had  at  this  time  exchanged  his  profession  for  that
of  a valiant  man  at  arms.  The  whole  night  he  had  followed  the  earl  with  his  battle-axe  in
hand,  and  had  by  his  exertions  more  than  once  repulsed  the  English.  This  conduct  gained
the  thanks  of  his  countrymen,  and  turned  out  to  his  advantage,  for  in  the  same  year  he  was
promoted  to  the  archdeaconry  and  made  canon  of  Aberdeen.  His  name  was  sir  William  of
North  Berwick.  To  say  the  truth,  he  was  well  formed  in  all  his  limbs  to  shine  in  battle,
and  was  severely  wounded  at  this  combat.  When  these  knights  came  to  the  earl  of  Douglas,
they  found  him  in  a melancholy  state,  as  well  as  one  of  his  knights,  sir  Robert  Hart,  who
had  fought  by  his  side  the  whole  of  the  night,  and  now  lay  beside  him,  covered  with  fifteen
wounds  from  lances  and  other  weapons.


Death  of  Douglas.  Designed  from  Mb.  Illuminations  ot  the  15tli  century.


Sir  John  Sinclair  asked  the  earl,  “Cousin,  how  fares  it  with  you?”— “But  so  so,”
replied  he.  “ Thanks  to  God,  there  are  but  few  of  my  ancestors  who  have  died  in  chambers


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


371


or  in  their  beds.  I bid  yon,  therefore,  revenge  my  death,  for  I have  but  little  hope  of  living,
as  my  heart  becomes  every  minute  more  faint.  Do  you  Walter  and  sir  John  Sinclair  raise
up  my  banner,  for  certainly  it  is  on  the  ground,  from  the  death  of  David  Campbell,  that
valiant  squire,  who  bore  it,  and  who  refused  knighthood  from  my  hands  this  day,  though  he
was  equal  to  the  most  eminent  knights  for  courage  or  loyalty ; and  continue  to  shout
‘ Douglas !’  but  do  not  tell  friend  or  foe  whether  I am  in  your  company  or  not ; for,  should
the  enemy  know  the  truth,  they  will  be  greatly  rejoiced.”  The  two  brothers  Sinclair,  and
sir  John  Lindsay,  obeyed  his  orders.  The  banner  was  raised  and  “Douglas!”  shouted.
Their  men,  who  had  remained  behind,  hearing  the  shouts  of  “ Douglas!”  so  often  repeated,
ascended  a small  eminence,  and  pushed  their  lances  with  such  courage  that  the  English  were
repulsed,  and  many  killed  or  struck  to  the  ground.  The  Scots,  by  thus  valiantly  driving  the
enemy  beyond  the  spot  where  the  earl  of  Douglas  lay  dead,  for  he  had  expired  on  giving  his
last  orders,  arrived  at  his  banner,  which  was  borne  by  sir  John  Sinclair.  Numbers  were
continually  increasing,  from  the  repeated  shouts  of  “ Douglas!”  and  the  greater  part  of  the
Scots  knights  and  squires  were  now  there.  The  earls  of  Moray  and  March,  with  their
banners  and  men,  came  thither  also.  When  they  were  all  thus  collected,  perceiving  the
English  retreat,  they  renewed  the  battle  with  greater  vigour  than  before.

To  say  the  truth,  the  English  had  harder  work  than  the  Scots,  for  they  had  come  by
a forced  march  that  evening  from  Newcastle  on  Tyne,  which  was  eight  English  leagues
distant,  to  meet  the  Scots,  by  which  means  the  greater  part  were  exceedingly  fatigued  before
the  combat  began.  The  Scots,  on  the  contrary,  had  reposed  themselves,  which  was  to  them
of  the  utmost  advantage,  as  was  apparent  from  the  event  of  the  battle.  In  this  last  attack,
they  so  completely  repulsed  the  English,  that  the  latter  could  never  rally  again,  and  the
former  drove  them  far  beyond  where  the  earl  of  Douglas  lay  on  the  ground.  Sir  Henry
Percy,  during  this  attack,  had  the  misfortune  to  fall  into  the  hands  of  the  lord  Montgomery,
a very  valiant  knight  of  Scotland.  They  had  long  fought  hand  to  hand  with  much  valour,
and  without  hindrance  from  any  one  ; for  there  was  neither  knight  nor  squire  of  either  party
who  did  not  find  there  his  equal  to  fight  with,  and  all  were  fully  engaged.  In  the  end,  sir
Henry  was  made  prisoner  by  the  lord  Montgomery.

You  would  have  seen,  in  this  engagement,  such  knights  and  squires  as  sir  Malcolm
Drummond,  sir  Thomas  of  Erskine,  sir  William,  sir  James  and  sir  Alexander  Lindsay,  the
lord  Saltoun,  sir  John  Sandilands,  sir  Patrick  Dunbar,  sir  John  and  sir  Walter  Sinclair,  sir
Patrick  Hepburne  and  his  two  sons,  the  lord  Montgomery,  sir  John  Maxwell,  sir  Adam
Glendinning,  sir  William  Pod  one  *,  sir  William  Stuart,  sir  John  Ilaliburton,  sir  John
Lundie,  sir  Robert  Lauder,  sir  Alexander  Ramsay,  sir  Alexander  Frazer,  sir  John  Edmon-
stone,  sir  William  Wardlaw,  David  Fleming,  Robert  Campbell  and  his  two  sons,  John  and
Robert,  who  were  that  day  knighted,  and  a hundred  other  knights  and  squires,  whose  names
I cannot  remember ; but  there  was  not  one  who  did  not  most  gallantly  perform  his  part  in
this  engagement.

On  the  side  of  the  English,  there  were  sir  Ralph  de  Langley,  sir  Matthew  Redman,  sir
Robert  of  Ogle,  sir  Thomas  Graham,  sir  Thomas  Haltoun,  sir  John  Felton,  sir  Thomas
Abington,  sir  John  de  Lilbnrn,  sir  William  Walsingham,  the  baron  de  Haltoun,  sir  John  de
Copeland,  seneschal  of  York,  and  many  more,  who  on  foot  maintained  the  fight  vigorously,
both  before  and  after  the  capture  of  sir  Henry  Percy  jo  The  battle  was  severely  fought  on
each  side ; but,  such  is  the  fickleness  of  fortune,  that  though  the  English  were  a more
numerous  body  of  able  men  at  arms,  and  at  the  first  onset  had  repulsed  the  Scots,  they  in
the  end  lost  the  field ; and  all  the  above-named  knights,  except  sir  Matthew  Redman,
governor  of  Berwick,  were  made  prisoners.  But  he  seeing  they  were  defeated  without  hopes
of  recovery,  and  the  English  flying  in  all  directions,  while  his  brother-knights  were  surren-
dering themselves  to  the  Scots,  mounted  his  horse,  and  rode  off.

Just  as  the  defeat  took  place,  and  while  the  combat  was  continued  in  different  parts,  an
English  squire,  whose  name  was  Thomas  Felton,  and  attached  to  the  household  of  lord

* Rutherford  or  Ruthven. — Ed.  further  corrected  from  the  recent  French  edition  of  M.

f The  names  of  the  parties  on  both  sides  were  rectified  Buchou,  who  has  cleared  up  many  difficulties  by  reference
by  Mr.  Johnes,  assisted  by  sir  Walter  Scott,  and  have  been  to  the  MSS.  to  which  he  has  had  access Ed.

B B 2


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


Percy,  was  surrounded  by  a body  of  Scots.  He  was  a handsome  man,  and,  as  he  showed,
valiant  in  arms.  He  had  that  and  the  preceding  night  been  employed  in  collecting  the  best
arms,  and  would  neither  surrender  nor  deign  to  fly.  It  was  told  me,  that  he  had  made  a
vow  to  that  purpose,  and  had  declared  at  some  feast  in  Northumberland,  that  at  the  very
first  meeting  of  the  Scots  and  English,  he  would  acquit  himself  so  loyally  that,  for  having
stood  his  ground,  he  should  be  renowned  as  the  best  combatant  of  both  parties.  I also  heard,
for  I never  saw  him,  that  I know  of,  that  his  body  and  limbs  were  of  a strength  befitting
a vigorous  combatant ; and  he  performed  such  deeds  of  valour,  when  engaged  with  the  banner
of  the  earl  of  Moray,  as  astonished  the  Scots,  but  he  was  slain  while  thus  valiantly  fighting.
They  would  willingly  have  made  him  a prisoner  for  his  courage : and  several  knights
proposed  it  to  him,  but  in  vain,  for  he  thought  he  should  be  assisted  by  his  friends.  Thus
died  Thomas  Felton,  while  engaged  with  a cousin  of  the  king  of  Scotland,  called  Simon
Glendinning,  much  lamented  by  his  party.

According  to  what  I heard,  this  battle  was  very  bloody  from  its  commencement  to  the
defeat : but  when  the  Scots  saw  the  English  were  discomfited  and  surrendering  on  all  sides,
they  behaved  courteously  to  them,  saying,  “ Sit  down  and  disarm  yourselves,  for  I am  your
master,”  but  never  insulted  them  more  than  if  they  had  been  brothers.  The  pursuit  lasted
a long  time,  and  to  the  length  of  five  English  miles.  Had  the  Scots  been  in  sufficient
numbers,  none  would  have  escaped  death  or  captivity  ; and  if  sir  Archibald  Douglas,  the
earl  of  Fife,  the  earl  of  Sutherland,  with  the  division  that  had  marched  for  Carlisle,  had  been
there,  they  would  have  taken  the  bishop  of  Durham  and  the  town  of  Newcastle  on  Tyne,  as
I shall  explain  to  you*.


CHAPTER,  CXXIX. THE  BISHOP  OF  DURHAM  IS  ANXIOUS  TO  SUCCOUR  THE  ENGLISH  AND

RESCUE  SIR  HENRY  PERCY,  BUT  IS  SO  BADLY  SUPPORTED  BY  HIS  MEN,  THAT  HE  IS

FORCED  TO  RETREAT. HE  MAKES  SIR  JAMES  LINDSAY  PRISONER,  WHO  HAD  TAKEN

SIR  MATTHEW  REDMAN.

The  same  evening  that  sir  Henry  and  sir  Ralph  Percy  had  left  Newcastle,  the  bishop  of
Durham,  with  the  remainder  of  the  forces  of  that  district,  had  arrived  there  and  supped.
While  seated  at  table,  he  considered  that  lie  should  not  act  very  honourably  if  he  remained
in  the  town  while  his  countrymen  bad  taken  the  field.  In  consequence,  he  rose  from  table,
ordered  his  horses  to  be  saddled,  and  bis  trumpets  to  sound  for  those  who  had  horses  to  make
themselves  ready,  and  the  infantry  to  be  drawn  out  in  array  for  quitting  the  place.  When


* Through  the  kindness  of  my  friends  at  Edinburgh,
particularly  Dr.  Robert  Anderson  and  Walter  Scott,  Esq.
to  whom  the  public  are  indebted  for  many  instructive  and
amusing  performances,  I am  enabled  to  clear  np,  in  some
measure,  my  historian’s  blunders  in  the  names  of  the  heroes
at  this  celebrated  battle,  and  to  add  a few  more  particulars
concerning  it.

“ The  present  mansion  of  Otterbourne,  belonging  to  Mr.
Ellis  of  Newcastle,  is  founded  upon  the  ancient  castle  or
tower  which  Douglas  was  besieging  when  attacked  by
Percy.  The  field  of  battle  is  still  called  Battle-crofts.
There  is  a cross  erected  on  the  spot  where  Douglas  fell.”

See  the  two  ballads  on  this  battle,  published  by  Dr.
Percy  in  his  Reliques  of  Ancient  English  Poetry,  and  by
Walter  Scott,  Esq.  in  his  Border  Minstrelsy : from  the
Scots  ballad  I extract  as  follows.

“ Douglas  was  armed  with  an  iron  mace,  which  few  but
be  could  weld,  and  rushed  into  the  combat,  followed  only
by  bis  chaplain  and  his  two  squires.  Before  his  followers
could  come  up,  their  brave  leader  lay  stretched  on  the
ground,  with  three  mortal  wounds,  and  bis  two  squires
dead  by  bis  side  : the  priest  alone,  armed  with  a lance,
was  protecting  his  master  from  farther  injury.  ‘ I die
like  my  forefathers,’  said  the  expiring  hero,  ‘ in  a field  of
battle,  and  not  on  a bed  of  sickness.  Conceal  my  death,
defend  my  standard,  and  avenge  my  fall.  It  is  an  old


proverb,  that  a dead  man  shall  gain  a field,  and  I hope  it
will  be  accomplished  this  night.’

“ The  two  squires  of  the  body  to  Douglas  were  Robert
Hart  and  Simon  Glendinning : the  chaplain,  Richard
Lundie,  afterwards  archdeacon  of  Aberdeen.

“ The  banner  of  Douglas  was  borm  by  his  natural  son,
Archibald  Douglas,  ancestor  of  the  family  of  Cavers
hereditary  sheriffs  of  Tiviotdale,  amongst  whose  archieves
this  glorious  relic  is  still  preserved.  The  earl,  at  the
onset,  is  said  to  have  charged  his  son  to  defend  it  to  the
last  drop  of  his  blood.

“ Hotspur,  for  his  ransom  to  the  lord  Montgomery,
built  the  Castle  of  Penoon,  in  Ayrshire,  belonging  to  the
family  of  Montgomery,  now  earls  of  Eglintonn.”

In  this  ballad,  Douglas  is  said  to  have  been  murdered
by  one  of  his  own  men  ; and,  in  the  introductory  discourse,
there  seems  to  have  been  a traditionary  foundation  for  it,
and  the  very  person  is  named  that  was  supposed  to  have  done
the  deed  ; but  Mr.  Scott  rejects  this  as  totally  untrue,  and
arising  from  the  common  desire  of  assigning  some  remote
and  extraordinary  cause  for  the  death  of  a great  man.

Dr.  Percy  says  in  a note,  that  “ Otterbourne  is  near
the  old  Watling-street  road,  in  the  parish  of  Elsdon.  The
Scots  were  encamped  on  a grassy  plain  near  the  river  Read.
The  place  where  the  Scots  and  English  fought  is  still
called  Battle-riggs.”


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  See.


they  had  all  left  it,  they  amounted  to  seven  thousand  men ; that  is,  two  thousand  on  horse-
back and  five  thousand  on  foot.  Although  it  was  now  night,  they  took  the  road  toward
Otterbourne;  but  they  had  not  advanced  a league  from  Newcastle  before  intelligence  was
brought  that  the  English  were  engaged  with  the  Scots.  On  this,  the  bishop  halted  his  men  ;
and  several  more  joined  them,  out  of  breath  from  the  combat.  They  were  asked  how  the
affair  went : they  replied,  “ Badly,  and  unfortunately : we  are  defeated,  and  here  are  the
Scots  close  at  our  heels.”  This  second  intelligence,  being  worse  than  the  first,  gave  the  alarm
to  several,  who  broke  from  their  ranks ; and  when,  shortly  after,  crowds  came  to  them  flying
like  men  defeated,  they  were  panic-struck,  and  so  frightened  with  the  bad  news,  that  the
bishop  of  Durham  could  not  retain  five  hundred  of  his  men  together.

Now,  supposing  a large  body  had  come  upon  them  and  followed  them  in  their  flight  (with
the  addition  ofits  being  night,)  to  regain  the  town,  would  not  there  have  been  much  mischief?
for  those  acquainted  with  arms  imagine  the  alarm  would  have  been  so  great,  that  the  Scots
would  have  forced  their  way  into  the  place  with  them.  When  the  bishop  of  Durham,  who
was  eager  to  reinforce  the  English,  saw  his  own  men  thus  join  the  runaways  in  their  flight,
he  demanded  from  sir  William  de  Lussy*',  sir  Thomas  Clifford  and  other  knights  of  his
company,  what  they  were  now  to  do  ? These  knights  could  not,  or  would  not  advise  him  :
for  to  return  without  having  done  anything  would  be  dishonourable,  and  to  advance  seemed
attended  with  danger,  they  therefore  remained  silent ; but  the  longer  they  waited,  the  more
their  men  decreased  in  numbers.  The  bishop  at  length  said, — “ Gentlemen,  everything
considered,  there  is  no  honour  in  fool-hardiness,  nor  is  it  requisite  that  to  one  misfortune  we
add  another : we  hear  and  see  that  our  men  are  defeated  : this  we  cannot  remedy ; for,
should  we  attempt  to  reinforce  them,  we  scarcely  know  whither  we  should  go,  nor  what
numbers  the  enemy  consist  of.  We  will  return  this  night  to  Newcastle,  and  to-morrow
re-assemble  and  march  to  find  our  enemies.”  They  replied,  “ God  assist  us  in  it !” — Upon
this  they  marched  back  to  Newcastle.  Observe  the  consequences  of  this  alarm  ; for  had  they
remained  steady  in  a body,  as  they  had  left  Newcastle,  and  forced  the  runaways  to  return
with  them,  they  must  have  defeated  the  Scots,  which  was  the  opinion  of  many.  But  it  was
not  to  be  so,  and  the  Scots  remained  victorious.

I will  say  something  of  sir  Matthew  Redman,  who  had  mounted  his  horse  to  escape  from
the  battle,  as  he  alone  could  not  recover  the  day.  On  his  departure,  he  was  noticed  by  sir
James  Lindsay,  a valiant  Scots  knight,  who  was  near  him,  and,  through  courage  and  the  hope
of  gain,  was  desirous  of  pursuing  him.  Ilis  horse  was  ready,  and  leaping  on  him  with  his
battle-axe  hung  at  his  neck,  and  spear  in  hand,  galloped  after  him,  leaving  his  men  and  the
battle,  and  came  so  close  to  him,  that  he  might,  had  he  chosen,  have  hit  him  with  his  lance ;
but  he  said, — “ Ha,  sir  knight,  turn  about : it  is  disgraceful  thus  to  fly : I am  James
Lindsay ; and,  if  you  do  not  turn,  I will  drive  my  spear  into  your  back.”  Sir  Matthew
made  no  reply,  but  stuck  spurs  harder  into  his  horse  than  before.  In  this  state  did  the
chase  last  for  three  miles,  when  sir  Matthew’s  horse  stumbling  under  him,  he  leaped  off,
drew  his  sword  from  the  scabbard,  and  put  himself  in  a posture  of  defence.  The  Scots
knight  made  a thrust  at  him  with  his  lance,  thinking  to  strike  him  on  the  breast ; but  sir
Matthew,  by  writhing  his  body,  escaped  the  blow,  and  the  point  of  the  lance  was  buried  in
the  ground,  and  there  remained  fixed.  Sir  Matthew  now  stepped  forward,  and  with  his
sword  cut  the  spear  in  two.

Sir  James  Lindsay,  finding  he  had  lost  his  lance,  flung  the  shaft  on  the  ground,  and,
dismounting,  grasped  his  battle-axe,  which  was  slung  across  his  shoulder,  and  handled  it
with  one  hand  very  dexterously,  for  the  Scots  are  accustomed  thus  to  use  it,  attacking  the
knight  with  renewed  courage,  who  defended  himself  with  much  art.  They  pursued  each
other  for  a long  time,  one  with  the  battle-axe  and  the  other  with  the  sword,  for  there  was
no  one  to  prevent  them  ; but,  at  last,  sir  James  laid  about  him  such  heavy  blows,  that  sir
Matthew  was  quite  out  of  breath,  which  made  him  surrender;  and  he  said,  “Lindsay,  I
yield  myself  to  you.”  “ Indeed  !”  replied  the  Scots  knight,  “ rescued  or  not.”  “ I consent,”
said  sir  Matthew  : “ you  will  take  good  care  of  me.”  “ That  I will,”  answered  sir  James.
Sir  Matthew  on  this  put  his  sword  in  the  scabbard,  and  said,  “ Now,  what  do  you  require  of

*“De  Lussy.”  Q.  Lucy.


87-i


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


me,  for  I am  your  prisoner  by  fair  conquest?”  “ And  wliat  is  it  you  would  wish  me  to
do  ?”  replied  sir  James.  “ I should  like,”  answered  sir  Matthew,  “ to  return  to  Newcastle;
and,  within  fifteen  days,  I will  come  to  you  in  any  part  of  Scotland  you  shall  appoint.”
“ I agree,”  said  sir  James,  “ on  your  pledging  yourself,  that  within  three  weeks  you  be  in
Edinburgh ; and  wherever  you  may  go,  you  acknowledge  yourself  as  my  prisoner.”  Sir
Matthew  having  sworn  to  observe  these  conditions,  each  sought  his  horse,  that  was  pasturing
hard  by,  and,  having  mounted,  took  leave  and  departed,  sir  James  by  the  way  he  had  come,
to  join  his  countrymen,  and  sir  Matthew  to  Newcastle.

Sir  James,  from  the  darkness  of  the  night,  as  the  moon  did  not  shine  very  clear,  mistook
his  road,  and  had  not  advanced  half  a league  before  he  fell  in  with  the  bishop  of  Durham
and  more  than  five  hundred  English  : he  might  have  escaped  this  danger  had  he  chosen  it,
but  he  thought  they  were  his  friends  in  pursuit  of  the  enemy.  When  in  the  midst  of  them,
those  nearest  asked  who  he  was.  * He  replied,  “ I am  sir  James  Lindsay.”  Upon  this,  the
bishop,  who  was  within  hearing,  pushed  forward  and  said,  “ Lindsay,  you  are  taken :
surrender  yourself  to  me.”  “ And  who  are  you?”  said  Lindsay.  “ I am  the  bishop  of
Durham.  “And  where  do  you  come  from?”  added  Lindsay.  “ By  my  faith,  friend,  I
intended  being  at  the  battle,  but  unfortunately  was  too  late  ; and  in  despair  I am  returning
to  Newcastle,  whither  you  will  accompany  me.”  “ If  you  insist  on  it  I must  comply,”
answered  sir  James ; but  I have  made  a prisoner,  and  am  now  one  myself : such  is  the
chance  of  war.”  “ Whom  have  you  taken?”  asked  the  bishop.  “I  have  captured  and
ransomed,  after  a long  pursuit,  sir  Matthew  Redman.”  “ And  where  is  he  ?”  said  the  bishop.
“ On  my  faith,”  replied  sir  James,  “ he  is  returned  .to  Newcastle : he  entreated  I would
allow  him  three  weeks’  liberty,  which  I complied  with."  “ Well,  well,”  said  the  bishop,
“ let  us  get  on  to  Newcastle,  where  you  shall  converse  with  him.”  Thus  they  returned  to
Newcastle,  sir  James  Lindsay  as  prisoner  to  the  bishop  of  Durham.  Under  the  banner  of
the  earl  of  March,  a squire  of  Gascony,  John  de  Chateauneuf,  was  made  prisoner,  as  was
his  companion,  John  de  Cauteron,  under  the  banner  of  the  earl  of  Moray.


CHAPTER  CXXX. — THE  BISHOP  OP  DURHAM  MARCHES  ON  THE  MORROW  OF  THE  BATTLE  TO

THE  SCOTS  CAMP,  BUT  RETIRES  WITHOUT  DARING  TO  ATTACK  IT. THE  SCOTS  RETURN

TO  THEIR  OWN  COUNTRY.

Before  the  dawn  of  day,  the  field  was  clear  of  combatants.  The  Scots  had  retired  within
their  camp,  and  bad  sent  scouts  and  parties  of  light  horse  towards  Newcastle  and  on  the
adjacent  roads,  to  observe  whether  the  English  were  collecting  in  any  large  bodies,  that  they
might  not  a second  time  be  surprised.  This  was  wisely  done : for  when  the  bishop  of
Durham  was  returned  to  Newcastle,  and  had  disarmed  himself  at  his  lodgings,  he  was  very
melancholy  at  the  unfortunate  news  he  had  heard  that  his  cousins,  the  sons  of  the  earl  of
Northumberland,  and  all  the  knights  who  had  followed  them,  were  either  taken  or  slain.
He  sent  for  all  knights  and  squires  at  the  time  in  Newcastle,  and  demanded  if  they  would
suffer  things  to  remain  in  their  present  state,  for  that  they  would  be  disgraced  should  they
return  without  ever  seeing  their  enemies. — They  held  a council,  and  determined  to  arm
themselves  by  sun-rise,  and  to  march  horse  and  foot  after  the  Scots  to  Otterbourne  and
offer  them  battle.  This  resolution  was  published  throughout  the  town,  and  the  trumpets
sounded  at  the  appointed  hour.

The  whole  army  made  themselves  ready,  and  were  drawn  up  before  the  bridge.  About
sun-rise  they  left  Newcastle,  through  the  gate  leading  to  Berwick,  and  followed  the  road
to  Otterbourne.  They  amounted  in  the  whole,  including  horse  and  foot,  to  ten  thousand
men.  They  had  not  advanced  two  leagues  before  it  was  signified  to  the  Scots,  that  the
bishop  of  Durham  had  rallied  his  troops  and  was  on  his  march  to  give  them  battle.  This
was  likewise  confirmed  by  their  scouts,  who  brought  the  same  intelligence.

Sir  Matthew  Redman,  on  his  return  to  Newcastle,  told  the  event  of  the  battle,  and  of  his
being  made  prisoner  by  sir  James  Lindsay,  and  learnt,  to  his  surprise,  from  the  bishop,  or
from  some  of  his  people,  that  sir  James  had  in  his  turn  been  taken  by  the  bishop.  As  soon,


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


•°75

therefore,  as  the  bishop  had  quitted  Newcastle,  sir  Matthew  went  to  his  lodgings  in  search
of  his  master,  whom  he  found  very  melancholy,  looking  out  of  a window.  “ What  has
brought  you  here,  sir  James?”  was  the  first  salute  of  sir  Matthew.  Sir  James,  interrupting
his  melancholy  thoughts,  advanced  to  meet  him,  bade  him  good  day,  and  replied, — “ By  my
faith,  Redman,  ill  luck ; for  I had  no  sooner  parted  with  you,  and  was  returning  home,  than
I fell  in  witli  the  bishop  of  Durham,  to  whom  I am  prisoner,  in  like  manner  as  you  are  to
me.  I believe  there  will  be  no  need  of  your  coming  to  Edinburgh  to  obtain  your  ransom,
for  we  may  finish  the  business  here  if  my  master  consent  tc  it.”  “We  shall  soon  agree  as
to  that,"  replied  Redman:  “ but  you  must  come  and  dine  with  me;  for  the  bishop  and  his
men  have  marched  to  attack  your  countrymen.  I know  not  what  success  they  will  have,
nor  shall  we  be  informed  till  their  return.”  “ I accept  your  invitation,”  answered  Lindsay.
In  such  manner  did  these  two  enjoy  each  other’s  company  in  Newcastle.

The  barons  and  knights  of  Scotland,  on  being  informed  of  the  bishop  of  Durham’s  approach
with  ten  thousand  men,  held  a council,  whether  to  march  away  or  to  abide  the  event.  On
mature  consideration,  they  resolved  on  the  latter,  from  the  difficulty  of  finding  so  strong  a
position  to  defend  themselves  and  guard  their  prisoners,  of  whom  they  had  many.  These
they  could  not  carry  away  with  them,  on  account  of  the  wounded,  nor  were  they  willing  to
leave  them  behind.  They  formed  themselves  in  a strong  body,  and  had  fortified  their  camp
in  such  a manner  that  it  could  be  entered  by  only  one  pass.  They  then  made  their  prisoners
swear,  that  rescued  or  not  they  would  acknowledge  themselves  prisoners.  When  this  was
all  done,  they  ordered  their  minstrels  to  play  as  merrily  as  they  could.  The  Scots  have  a
custom,  when  assembled  in  arms,  for  those  who  are  on  foot  to  be  well  dressed,  each  having
a large  horn  slung  round  his  neck,  in  the  manner  of  hunters,  and  when  they  blow  all  together,
the  horns  being  of  different  sizes,  the  noise  is  so  great  it  may  be  heard  four  miles  off,  to  the
great  dismay  of  their  enemies  and  their  own  delight.  The  Scots  commanders  ordered  this
sort  of  music  now  to  be  played.

The  bishop  of  Durham  with  his  banner,  under  which  were  at  least  ten  thousand  men,  had
scarcely  approached  within  a league  of  the  Scots,  -when  they  began  to  play  such  a concert,
that  it  seemed  as  if  all  the  devils  in  hell  had  come  thither  to  join  in  the  noise,  so  that  those
of  the  English  who  had  never  before  heard  such,  were  much  frightened.  This  concert  lasted
a considerable  time,  and  then  ceased.  After  a pause,  when  they  thought  the  English  were
within  half  a league,  they  recommenced  it,  continuing  it  as  long  as  before,  when  it  again
ceased.  The  bishop,  however,  kept  advancing  with  his  men  in  battle-array  until  they  came
within  sight  of  the  enemy,  two  bow-shots  off  : the  Scots  then  began  to  play  louder  than
before,  and  for  a longer  time,  during  which  the  bishop  examined  with  surprise  how  well  they
had  chosen  their  encampment,  and  strengthened  it  to  their  advantage.  Some  knights  held  a
council  how  they  should  act,  and  it  seemed  that,  after  much  deliberation,  they  thought  it  not
advisable  to  risk  an  attack,  for  there  were  greater  chances  of  loss  than  gain,  but  determined
to  return  again  to  Newcastle.

The  Scots,  perceiving  the  English  were  retreating,  and  that  there  was  no  appearance  of
any  battle,  retired  within  their  camp  to  refresh  themselves  with  meat  and  liquor.  They
then  made  preparations  for  departure  : but  because  sir  Ralph  Percy  had  been  dangerously
wounded,  he  begged  of  his  master  to  allow  him  to  return  to  Newcastle,  or  wherever  else  in
Northumberland  he  might  have  his  wounds  better  attended  to,  and  remain  there  until  cured  ;
and  in  case  this  favour  was  granted  him,  as  soon  as  he  should  be  able  to  mount  a horse,  he
pledged  to  surrender  himself  at  Edinbui’gh,  or  in  any  other  part  of  Scotland.  The  earl  of
Moray,  under  whose  banner  he  had  been  taken,  readily  assented  to  this  request,  and  had  a
litter  prepared  for  him.  In  a similar  manner,  several  knights  and  squires  obtained  their
liberty,  fixing  on  a time  to  return  in  person  to  those  who  had  captured  them,  or  to  send  the
amount  of  their  ransoms*.

* The  ransoms  were  estimated  at  200,000  francs.  Sc_.s  Cal.  f.  104. — Froissart  apparently  errs  in  the  name
Robert  III.  granted  to  Henry  Preston,  for  the  redemption  of  his  captor ; yet  Mar  had  20/.  a year  for  a third  of  it,
of  Ralph  Percy,  the  lands  and  baronies  of  Frondin,  Aber-  the  whole  of  It  exceeding  600/. — Pinkerton’ s Hist,  of
deenshire,  the  town  of  Fyvie,  and  place  thereof,  the  town  Scotland , vol.  ii.  p.  41.  note.
of  Ivlcikle  Gaduies,  the  live-mark  land  of  Park-hill.


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND  FRANCE,  &c.


C7G


I was  told  by  those  who  were  of  the  victorious  party,  that  at  this  battle,  which  was  fought
in  the  year  of  grace  1388,  between  Newcastle  and  Otterburne,  on  the  19th  day  of  August,  there
were  taken  or  left  dead  on  the  field,  on  the  side  of  the  English,  one  thousand  and  forty  men  of
all  descriptions  ; in  the  pursuit  eight  hundred  and  forty,  and  more  than  one  thousand  wounded.
Of  the  Scots  there  were  only  about  one  hundred  slain,  and  two  hundred  made  prisoners.  As
the  English  were  flying,  they  at  times  rallied,  and  returned  to  combat  those  who  were  pur-
suing them,  whenever  they  thought  they  had  a favourable  opportunity,  and  it  was  thus  their
loss  was  so  considerable  in  the  pursuit.  You  may  judge,  from  the  number  of  killed  and  pri-
soners on  each  side,  if  this  battle  was  not  hardily  fought.

When  every  thing  had  been  arranged,  and  the  dead  bodies  of  the  earl  of  Douglas,  sir
Robert  Hart  and  sir  Simon  Glendinning  were  inclosed  within  coffins,  and  placed  on  cars,  they
began  their  march,  carrying  with  them  sir  Henry  Percy  and  upwards  of  forty  English
knights.  They  took  the  road  to  Melrose  on  the  Tweed,  and  on  their  departure  they  set  fire
to  their  huts.  They  lodged  this  night  in  England  without  any  opposition,  and  on  the
morrow  decamped  very  early  and  arrived  at  Melrose,  which  is  an  abbey  of  black  monks,  situated
on  the  borders  of  the  two  kingdoms.  They  there  halted,  and  gave  directions  to  the  friars
for  the  burial  of  the  earl  of  Douglas,  whose  obsequies  were  very  reverently  performed  on  the
second  day  after  their  arrival.  His  body  was  placed  in  a tomb  of  stone,  with  the  banner  of
Douglas  suspended  over  it.  Of  this  earl  of  Douglas,  God  save  his  soul ! there  was  no  issue,
nor  do  I know  who  succeeded  to  the  estate  of  Douglas ; for  when  I,  the  author  of  this  history,
was  in  Scotland,  at  his  castle  of  Dalkeith,  during  the  lifetime  of  Earl  William,  there  were
only  two  children,  a boy  and  a girl.  There  were  enow  of  the  name  of  Douglas  ; for  I knew
five  handsome  brothers,  squires,  of  this  name,  at  the  court  of  king  David  of  Scotland,  who
were  the  children  of  a knight  called  sir  James  Douglas*.  The  earl’s  arms,  of  three  oreilles
gules  on  a field  or,  descended  to  them;  but  I am  ignorant  to  whom  fell  the  landf.  You
must  know,  that  the  sir  Archibald  Douglas  whom  I have  often  mentioned  as  a gallant  knight,
and  one  much  feared  by  the  English,  was  a bastard.

When  they  had  finished  the  business  which  had  brought  them  to  Melrose,  they  departed,
each  to  his  own  country  ; and  those  who  had  prisoner’s  carried  them  with  them,  or  ransomed,
them  before  they  left  Melrose.  In  this  matter  the  English  found  the  Scots  very  courteous
and  accommodating,  which  pleased  them  much,  as  I learnt  at  the  castle  of  the  count  de  Foix
from  John  de  Chateauneuf,  who  had  been  made  prisoner  under  the  banner  of  the  earl  of
March  and  Dunbar : he  praised  the  earl  exceedingly  for  his  generosity  in  allowing  him  to
fix  his  ransom  at  his  pleasure.  Thus  did  these  men  at  arms  separate,  having  very  soon
and  handsomely  settled  the  amount  of  the  ransoms  for  their  prisoners,  who  by  degrees
returned  to  their  homes.  It  was  told  me,  and  I believe  it,  that  the  Scots  gained  two  hundred
thousand  francs  from  the  ransoms ; and  that  never  since  the  battle  of  Bannockburn,  when  the
Bruce,  sir  William  Douglas,  sir  Robert  de  Yersy  and  sir  Simon  Frazer  pursued  the  English
for  three  days,  have  they  had  so  complete  nor  so  gainful  a victory.

When  the  news  of  it  was  brought  to  sir  Archibald  Douglas,  the  earls  of  Fife  and  Suther-
land, before  Carlisle,  where  they  were  with  the  larger  division  of  the  army,  they  were
greatly  rejoiced,  but  at  the  same  time  vexed  that  they  had  not  been  present.  They  held
a council  and  determined  to  retreat  into  Scotland,  since  their  companions  had  already
marched  thither.  In  consequence,  they  broke  up  their  camp  and  re-entered  Scotland.

We  will  now  leave  the  English  and  Scots,  and  speak  of  the  young  king  of  France,  and  the
large  army  he  marched  into  Germany  to  revenge  himself  on  the  duke  of  Gueldres.


'*  Earl  James  Douglas  married  the  lady  Isabella  Stuart,
daughter  of  king  Robert  II.  and  dying  without  lawful  issue,
was  succeeded  by  his  brother,  Archibald  lord  Galloway,
called  Archibald  the  Grim.  This  last  was  the  issue  of
earl  William’s  second  marriage  with  Margaret,  daughter
of  Patrick  carl  of  March. — Crawford's  Peerage  of  Scot-
land.

•f  These  arms,  according  to  Crawford,  must  be  wrong;
for,  in  his  Peerage,  the  arms  are  described  as  “ Four  coats
quarterly;  1.  azure,  a lion  rampant,  crowned  with  an


imperial  crow  n,  or  ; 2.  or,  a lion  rampantgules,  surmounted
of  a ribbon  sable;  3.  or,  a fesse  cheque,  azure  and  argent,
surmounted  of  a bend  sable,  charged  with  five  buckles,  or  ;
4.  argent,  three  pyles  gules,  overall,  in  a shield  of  pretence
argent,  a heart,  gules,  ensigued  with  an  imperial  crown,
or,  on  a chief  azure,  three  mollets  of  the  first,  supported  on
the  dexter  with'a  savage,  wreathed  about  the  loins  with
laurel,  and  on  the  sinister  by  a stag  proper  : crest  a
salamander  vomiting  fire:  motto,  Jamais  arriere,  all
within  a compartment  of  stakes  impaled.”


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  Ac.


m 7


CHAPTER  CXXXI. THE  KING  OP  FRANCE  ENTERS  THE  DUCHY  OF  LUXEMBOURG,  ON  HIS

MARCH  TO  GUELDRES. THE  DUKE  OF  JULIERS,  FATHER  OF  THE  DUKE  OF  GUELDRES,

MAKES  EXCUSES  FOR  HIS  SON  TO  THE  KING  OF  FRANCE. HE  IS  GRACIOUSLY  RECEIVED,

AND  HAS  THE  TERRITORY  OF  VIERSON  RESTORED  TO  HIM,  FOR  WHICH  HE  PAYS
HOMAGE  TO  THE  KING.

When  the  king  of  France  and  his  army  had  crossed  the  Meuse  at  the  bridge  of  M or  say
they  took  the  road  to  the  Ardennes  and  bishopric  of  Luxembourg,  and  had  always  in
advance  a large  body  of  pioneers  to  clear  the  bushes  and  level  the  roads.  The  king’s  army
was  very  numerous,  and  well  appointed.  The  duke  of  Juliers  and  his  subjects  much  dreaded
their  approach,  for  they  know  they  should  be  first  attacked;  and  the  country  of  Juliers  is  so
level  that  the  men  at  arms  would  in  one  day  despoil  the  whole,  excepting  a few  castles  and
towns  which  would  perhaps  make  some  little  resistance,  but  they  could  not  hold  out  long.
The  king  of  France  entered  Luxembourg,  and  was  lodged  for  two  days  at  the  monastery
where  duke  Winceslaus  of  Brabant  had  been  buried.  At  his  departure,  he  took  the  road
to  Bastogne  j,  and  encamped  at  the  distance  of  a league  from  where  the  duchess  of  Brabant
was  lodged.  The  duchess  had  notified  to  the  duke  of  Burgundy  her  arrival  at  Bastogne,
who  waited  on  her,  and  conducted  her  to  the  king’s  tent.  The  king  received  her  very
kindly ; and,  after  they  had  conversed  some  time  together,  she  returned  to  Bastogne,
escorted  by  sir  John  de  Yienne  and  sir  Guy  de  la  Tremouille.  On  the  morrow  the  king
continued  his  march  until  he  arrived  on  the  borders  of  Germany,  ready  to  enter  Juliers.
But,  before  he  had  advanced  so  far,  Arnold  bishop  of  Liege  had  waited  on  him,  and  had
exerted  himself  much  to  exculpate  the  duke  of  Juliers,  and  to  soften  the  anger  the  king  of
France  bore  him,  as  father  to  the  duke  of  Gueldres;  and  had  said  to  the  king  and  his  uncles,
that  with  regard  to  the  imprudent  and  outrageous  challenge  the  duke  of  Gueldres  had  sent
to  France,  he  had  never  consulted  his  father  on  the  subject,  nor  informed  him  of  it  until  it
was  done,  and  therefore  his  territories  ought  not  to  suffer  for  it.

These  excuses,  however,  were  not  agreeable  to  the  king  nor  to  his  uncles ; and  it  was  their
intention,  that  unless  the  duke  of  Juliers  came  in  person,  and  made  a more  satisfactory
apology,  putting  himself  totally  in  the  king’s  mercy,  he  and  his  country  should  be  the  first
to  pay  for  it.  The  bishop  of  Liege,  the  barons  of  Hasbain  J,  and  the  magistrates  from  the
principal  towns,  who  had  accompanied  the  bishop,  now  offered  the  king  and  his  uncles  a free
entrance  for  their  army  into  their  country,  to  pass  and  repass,  and  refresh  themselves  with
provision  on  paying  for  it,  and  to  remain  there,  if  they  so  pleased.

The  king  and  his  uncles  thanked  them  for  their  offer,  which  they  did  not  refuse,  as  they
were  ignorant  how  affairs  would  turn  out.  The  bishop  returned  to  the  duke  of  Juliers  and
archbishop  of  Cologne,  and  told  them  all  that  had  passed,  that  they  might  consider  of  it.
The  duke  of  Juliers  was  very  much  alarmed  lest  his  country  should  be  ruined,  and  sent  for
all  those  knights  that  were  dependent  on  him,  to  have  their  advice,  for  the  French  were
daily  approaching. — The  lord  de  Coucy  commanded  the  vanguard,  of  one  thousand  spears ;
and  with  him  were  the  duke  of  Lorrain  and  the  viscount  de  Meaux,  with  about  two  hundred
lances  more.

When  the  French  were  near  the  borders  of  Germany,  they  marched  in  a more  compact
body,  and  took  great  precautions  in  their  encampments ; for  a body  of  three  hundred
Linfars§,  from  the  opposite  side  of  the  Rhine,  had  collected  together  on  their  line  of  march.
These  are  the  greatest  robbers  and  plunderers  in  the  world  ; and  they  hovered  alongside  the
French  army,  to  take  advantage  of  any  negligence  on  their  part.  The  French  were  suspi-
cious of  them,  and  dared  not  attempt  foraging  but  in  large  bodies.  I believe  the  lord
Boucicaut,  the  elder,  and  sir  Lewis  de  Grach,  were  made  prisoners  by  them,  and  carried  to
Nimeguen.  These  Germans  rode  through  by-ways,  and,  like  birds  of  prey,  night  and

* “ Morsay.”  Q.  Mouson,  or  Mezieres.  \ “ Hasbain,”  a small  territory  in  the  circle  of  West-

•f  “ Bastogne,”  or  Bastognack,  is  a small  town  in  the  plialia ; it  forms  the  principal  part  of  the  bishopric  of
duchy  of  Luxembourg:  it  was  formerly  more  considera-  Liege,

ble,  and  called  the  Paris  of  the  Ardennes.  § Leichtfertig — vagabonds,  freebooters Ed.


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


m


morning  fell  upon  tlie  French  wherever  they  found  a favourable  opportunity ; and  this  had
made  them  more  careful.

When  the  king  of  France  was  come  to  the  confines  of  Juliers,  and  the  vanguard  and
foragers  had  already  entered  it,  the  duke,  unwilling  that  his  country  should  be  destroyed,
listened  to  the  advice  of  the  archbishop  of  Cologne  and  bishop  of  Liege,  and  consented  they
should  negotiate  with  the  king  and  his  uncles,  and  entreat  that  his  country  should  remain
in  peace,  on  such  terms  as  I shall  mention.  These  two  prelates,  having  laid  the  foundation
for  a peace,  conducted  the  duke  of  Juliers  into  the  king’s  presence,  who  was  attended  by  his
uncles,  the  duke  of  Lorrain,  and  other  great  barons  of  France  of  the  blood  royal,  and  his
council.  On  the  duke’s  approaching  the  king,  he  cast  himself  on  his  knees,  and  made  very
handsome  excuses  for  the  challenge  his  son  had  sent  to  France.  He  told  the  king  that  his
son  was  a madman  ; that  he  had  never  consulted  him  respecting  this  challenge,  nor  indeed
in  anything  else,  but  always  acted  for  himself.  He  offered  his  services  to  the  king,  and
said, — “ My  lord,  with  your  permission,  I will  go  to  him,  and  sharply  remonstrate  with
him  on  his  follies,  and  order  him  to  come  and  make  his  apology  to  you  and  to  your  council.
If  he  refuse  to  follow  my  advice,  and  continue  to  act  from  his  own  headstrong  will,  I offer
to  give  you  possession  of  all  my  inclosed  towns  and  castles,  for  you  to  garrison  with  men  at
arms,  and  carry  on  the  war  against  him  until  he  shall  submit  himself  to  your  mercy.”  The
king,  on  this,  looked  at  his  brother,  his  uncles,  and  council,  as  it  seemed  to  him,  and  to
many  who  were  present,  a very  fair  offer.  He  made  the  duke  rise,  who  had  hitherto  con-
tinued on  his  knees,  and  said, — “ We  will  consider  what  you  have  offered,  and  the  promises
you  make  us.”  The  duke,  having  risen,  remained  with  the  two  prelates  who  had  brought
him  thither ; and  the  king  retired  with  his  uncles  and  privy  counsellors,  to  discuss  the  pro-
posal that  had  been  made  them.

This  council  lasted  some  time,  and  various  propositions  were  made,  each  pressing  his
different  plan.  The  duke  of  Burgundy  was  the  most  active,  as  indeed  the  matter  more
essentially  affected  him,  on  account  of  his  being  heir,  in  right  of  his  duchess,  to  the  succession
of  the  duchess  of  Brabant,  and  it  was  in  truth  owing  to  him  that  the  king  had  undertaken
this  expedition.  He  was  therefore  very  anxious  that  the  quarrel  should  be  amicably  termi-
nated, and  a solid  peace  established  between  all  parties,  that  there  might  not  be  any  necessity
for  renewing  the  war ; for  the  distance  was  great  for  the  king  and  lords,  besides  being  very
expensive,  and  heavy  on  the  kingdom.  After  several  had  given  their  opinions,  he  addressed
himself  to  the  king,  to  the  duke  of  Berry,  and  to  all  present,  saying, — “ My  lord,  and  you
brother  of  Berry,  and  gentlemen  of  the  council,  whatever  is  rashly  or  inconsiderately  begun
generally  ends  badly.  We  have  heard  our  cousin,  the  duke  of  Juliers,  excuse  himself  hand-
somely, and  we  have  heard  the  offer  he  lias  made,  that  his  son  shall  do  so  likewise  : he  is  of
that  gallantry  and  birth,  being  connected  with  me  by  blood,  that  we  ought  to  believe  what
he  has  said.  He  offers  to  the  king  his  person,  his  country,  his  towns,  and  castles,  in  case
his  son  shall  continue  obstinate,  and  refuse  to  make  any  apology  for  his  rash  challenge.  If
we  have  the  duke  of  Juliers  on  our  side,  the  duke  of  Gueldres,  whom  we  want  to  punish,
will  be  so  much  the  more  weakened,  that  he  will  the  more  dread  us,  and  the  sooner  bend  to
our  will.  I therefore  advise  that  the  excuses  of  the  duke  of  Juliers  and  his  offer  be  accepted,
for  he  has  greatly  humbled  himself ; and  the  archbishop  of  Cologne,  the  bishop  of  Liege,
with  other  potent  barons,  entreat  likewise  that  this  may  be  done.”

No  one  making  any  reply,  it  was  unanimously  agreed  to ; and  the  archbishop  and  bishop,
who  had  opened  the  negotiation,  were  called  in.  They  were  told  very  minutely  every  act
the  duke  of  Juliers  was  to  swear  to  perform,  if  he  were  desirous  that  his  country  should
remain  in  peace.  First,  that  he  should  go  himself,  or  send  to  his  son,  the  duke  of  Gueldres,
to  remonstrate  with  him  on  his  folly  and  impertinence,  in  sending  so  unusual  and  rude  a
challenge  to  so  powerful  a prince  as  the  king  of  France,  and  oblige  him  to  come  personally
and  submit  himself  to  the  mercy  of  the  king,  if  he  did  not  satisfactorily  excuse  himself.
Should  the  duke  of  Gueldres  refuse  compliance,  through  pride  and  weakness  of  understand-
ing, and  persist  in  his  opinion,  then  the  duke  of  Juliers  was  to  engage,  on  his  oath,  not  to
afford  him  the  least  support,  but,  on  the  contrary,  to  unite  himself  with  his  enemies,  and  to
assist  the  army  of  the  king,  which,  during  the  ensuing  winter,  would  be  quartered  through-


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


379


out  the  country  of  Juliers,  in  order  to  be  ready  to  carry  on  the  war  against  the  duke  of
Gueldres ; and  all  towns  and  castles,  belonging  to  the  duke  of  Juliers,  shall  receive,  on  the
most  friendly  footing,  the  men  at  arms  of  France.

These  two  prelates,  who  had  been  solely  called  to  the  council  to  remonstrate  touching
these  matters  with  the  duke  of  Juliers,  repeated  to  him  what  they  had  heard,  adding  such
weighty  reasons,  that  the  duke  assented  to  the  terms  : indeed,  he  saw  he  must  do  so,  if  he
wished  to  preserve;  his  country  from  ruin.  He  therefore  solemnly  swore  to  observe  faithfully
all  the  articles  of  the  treaty,  and  to  remain  a firm  friend  to  the  king  and  to  his  uncles,  for
which  his  duchy  was  saved  from  being  despoiled : but  forage,  of  which  there  was  enough,
was  completely  given  up  to  the  French.  Thus  did  the  duke  of  Juliers  become  liege  man  to
the  king  of  France,  and  paid  homage  for  the  territory  of  Yierson,  situated  between  Biois
and  Berry.  He  supped  that  night  with  the  king : it  was  on  a Thursday  ; and  there  were
seated  at  the  king’s  table,  first,  the  bishop  of  Liege,  the  archbishop  of  Cologne,  the
king,  the  duke  of  Burgundy,  the  duke  of  Touraine,  the  duke  of  Juliers,  and  the  duke  of
Bourbon.


CHAPTER  CXXXII. KING  CHARLES  VI.  QUARTERS  HIS  ARMY,  ON  A FRIENDLY  FOOTING,  IN

THE  DUCHY  OF  JULIERS. A SQUIRE  OF  AUVERGNE  IS  MURDERED  BY  A WOODCUTTER

WHOM  HE  IS  LEADING  AWAY  AS  HIS  PRISONER.

Such  was  the  conclusion  of  the  treaties  between  the  king  of  France  and  the  duke  of
Juliers,  by  which  the  last  enjoyed  peace,  although  the  king  quartered  himself  and  his  army
in  his  duchy,  which  he  found  a rich  country,  and  full  of  every  kind  of  provision.  The  duke
of  Juliers  went  to  his  son,  but  not  immediately,  and  in  the  interval  some  gallant  feats  of
arms  were  done ; for  the  Germans  were  so  eager  of  gain,  that  they  frequently,  during  the
night,  or  at  very  early  morn,  beat  up  the  quarters  of  the  French : sometimes  they  got  the
advantage,  at  other  times  they  were  made  prisoners ; but  for  one  German  that  was  taken,
they  made  four  Frenchmen  prisoners  in  return.  In  consequence,  the  constable  of  France,  the
lord  de  Coucy,  the  duke  of  Lorrain,  the  marshal  de  Blainville,  sir  John  de  Vienne,  and  the
lord  de  la  Tremouille,  assembled  their  men,  to  the  amount  of  about  four  thousand  men  at  arms,
and  marched  toward  a town  in  Gueldres  called  Remogne*,  and  drew  up  in  handsome  array
before  it.  At  this  time  the  duke  of  Gueldres  was  within  it,  and  thought  highly  of  their
appearance ; but  he  made  no  sally  against  them,  for  his  force  was  not  equal  to  attempt  it,
which  vexed  him  much.  The  French  men  at  arms  remained  four  hours  drawn  up  in  order
of  battle  before  the  place ; but  when  they  saw  that  none  came  out  to  oppose  them,  they
retreated  to  their  quarters.

It  happened  that  this  same  evening  several  knights  and  squires  assembled  at  the  lodgings
of  the  duke  of  Berry,  with  the  intent  of  making  an  excursion  on  the  morrow  into  the
enemy’s  country  in  search  of  adventures.  They  each,  to  the  amount  of  about  one  hundred
lances,  pledged  themselves  to  this ; but,  when  the  morning  came,  the  project  was  broken  off.
A squire  from  Auvergne,  called  Gourdinois,  a valiant  man  at  arms,  and  serving  under  the
banner  of  the  lord  d1  Alegre,  finding  this  excursion  laid  aside,  was  much  vexed  thereat , and,
speaking  of  it  to  some  of  his  companions  of  as  good  courage  as  himself,  they  collected  about
thirty  spears,  and  rode  out  that  morning,  but  met  with  no  adventure.  Gourdinois  was  so
desirous  of  feats  of  arms,  that  he  felt  sorely  the  disappointment  of  returning  without  having
struck  a blow,  and  said  to  his  companions, — “ Do  you  ride  on  gently,  while  I and  my  page
will  skirt  this  wood,  to  see  if  there  be  any  ambuscades,  or  any  persons  within  it,  and  wait
for  me  at  the  foot  of  yonder  hill.”  Having  assented  to  this,  Gourdinois  and  his  page  left
them,  and  rode  alongside  the  wood.  They  had  not  advanced  far,  when  he  heard  some  one
whistle : he  instantly  stuck  spurs  into  his  horse,  and  came  to  a hollow  road,  where  he  found
a Guelderlander  squaring  timber.  Gourdinois  seized  his  spear,  and  charged  the  man  full


* “ Remogne.”  Q


380


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  See.


gallop,  to  Ills  great  astonishment,  and  made  signs  to  him  to  follow  him ; for  he  said  to
himself, — “ At  least,  I shall  show  to  my  companions,  that  I have  done  something  by  making
this  man  my  prisoner,  and  he  may  be  of  some  use  to  us  in  our  quarters.”

II  e now  set  out  on  his  return,  riding  on  a small  hackney,  followed  by  the  woodman  on
foot,  with  a large  axe  on  his  shoulder  with  which  he  had  been  working.  The  page  of
Gourdinois  was  behind  mounted  on  his  courser,  bearing  his  helmet  and  dragging  his  lance,
half  asleep  from  having  left  his  bed  too  early.  The  German,  who  knew  not  whither  he  was
going,  nor  what  might  be  done  to  him,  thought  he  might  as  well  attempt  to  escape : he
therefore  advanced  close  to  Gourdinois,  and  with  his  uplifted  axe  smote  him  such  a blow  on
the  head  as  split  his  skull  to  the  teeth,  and  laid  him  dead  on  the  ground.  The  page,  from
his  distance  and  sleepiness,  neither  saw  nor  heard  anything  of  the  matter  ; and  the  peasant
ran  to  hide  himself  in  the  wood,  from  which  lie  was  not  far  off.  Those  who  heard  of  this
unfortunate  accident  were  much  distressed ; for  Gourdinois  was  well  beloved  by  all  who
knew  him,  particularly  by  his  countrymen  in  Auvergne,  for  he  was  the  man  at  arms  most
dreaded  by  the  English,  and  the  person  who  had  done  them  most  mischief.  He  would  never
have  been  suffered  to  remain  a prisoner,  though  twenty  thousand  francs  had  been  asked  for
his  ransom.

We  will  now  return  to  the  duke  of  Juliers.


CHAPTER  CXXXIII. THE  DUKE  OP  JULIERS  AND  ARCIIBISHOP  OP  COLOGNE  LEAVE  THE

KING  OF  FRANCE,  AND  GO  TO  THE  DUKE  OF  GUELDRES  AT  NIMEGUEN. BY  THEIR

REMONSTRANCES  AND  NEGOTIATIONS,  HE  OBTAINS  PEACE  WITH  THE  KING  OF  FRANCE
AND  DUCHESS  OF  BRABANT.

You  have  before  heard  how  the  duke  of  Juliers  made  his  peace  with  the  king  of  France,
through  the  mediation  of  the  two  prelates  already  mentioned  and  the  duke  of  Lorrain  his
cousin,  who  had  taken  great  pains  in  the  business,  and  had  gone  to  seek  him  in  the  town
of  Atdeke*',  whence  he  had  brought  him,  with  the  archbishop  of  Cologne,  to  a conference
with  the  king  of  France  and  his  uncles.  The  duke  had  then  promised  to  oblige  his  son,  the
duke  of  Gueldres,  to  submit  himself  to  the  king,  otherwise  he  was  to  unite  with  the  king  in
his  war  against  him.  These  terms  he  was  forced  to  comply  with,  or  his  duchy  would  have
been  destroyed.

The  duke  of  Juliers,  having  made  his  preparations,  set  out  with  the  archbishop  of  Cologne
for  Gueldres,  and,  having  crossed  the  river  Waal,  arrived  at  Nimeguen,  where  the  duke  of
Gueldres  then  resided.  lie  received  them  most  affectionately,  as  was  but  right,  for  what  tie
is  nearer  than  that  of  father  or  mother?  He  had  before  heard  that  the  duke  of  Juliers  had
made  his  peace  with  the  king  of  France,  which  was  not  very  pleasing  to  him,  but  he  had  no
occasion  to  show  his  dislike  to  it.  The  duke  of  Juliers  and  the  archbishop  remonstrated
with  him  for  some  time  on  the  situation  he  and  his  country  were  in.  At  first  he  paid  not
any  attention  ; for  lie  had  so  strongly  connected  himself  with  the  king  of  England  he  could
not  immediately  break  it  off,  nor  had  he  any  inclination  so  to  do,  for  his  heart  was  devoted  to
the  English.  He  argued  the  matter  with  them  obstinately,  declaring  he  would  abide  the
event ; and  if,  from  the  arrival  of  the  king  of  France  with  an  army,  he  should  suffer  any  loss,
he  was  young  and  might  at  other  times  revenge  himself  on  France  or  on  the  Brabanters  their
allies  ; adding,  that  in  war  the  chances  are  uncertain,  and  no  prince  can  undertake  one
without  expecting  loss  as  well  as  gain.

This  language  greatly  enraged  the  duke  of  Juliers,  who  said,  “ William,  how  will  you  carry
on  this  war  ? and  from  whom  do  you  expect  compensation  for  your  losses  ? ” — “ The  king  of
England  and  his  power,”  replied  he  ; “ and  I am  very  much  astonished  I have  had  no
intelligence  of  their  fleet ; for  if  they  had  kept  their  engagement,  by  which  they  were  to
come  hither,  I would  more  than  once  have  beaten  up  the  French  quarters.” — “ Do  you  wait


* “ Atdeke.”  Q.


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


381


for  them,  William  ? ” asked  the  duke  of  Juliers.  “ The  English  have  so  much  on  their  hands
at  this  moment,  they  cannot  give  you  any  assistance.  There  is  our  cousin,  the  duke  of
Lancaster,  at  Bayonne,  who  has  left  Castille  with  the  shattered  remains  of  his  army,  having
lost  the  greater  part  by  sickness,  and  by  that  the  season  for  making  war.  He  is  soliciting
reinforcements  of  men  at  arms  and  archers  from  England,  but  will  not  obtain  twenty  spears.
On  the  other  hand,  the  English  have  lately  experienced  a severe  overthrow  in  battle  with
the  Scots  near  Newcastle  on  Tyne,  in  Northumberland,  in  which  all  the  chivalry  of  the  north
have  been  made  prisoners  or  slain.  England,  besides,  is  not  unanimous  in  their  affection  to
the  king : you  will  therefore  act  wisely  not  to  depend  on  the  English  at  this  moment,  for  you
will  not  have  assistance  from  them,  nor  from  any  other  quarter.  I would  therefore  advise
that  you  suffer  us  to  manage  for  you  and  we  will  pacify  the  king  of  France,  and  make  up
this  quarrel  without  your  being  dishonoured  or  a loser  from  it.”  “My  lord,”  answered  the
duke  of  Gueldres,  “ how  can  I with  honour  accommodate  my  difference  with  the  king  of
France  ? were  I to  have  my  country  ruined  and  be  forced  to  go  and  live  elsewhere,  I would
not  do  it : I am  too  strongly  bound  to  the  king  of  England ; and  for  him  have  I defied  the
king  of  France.  Do  you  think,”  added  he,  “ that  for  his  menaces  I will  recall  my
word  or  break  my  engagement  ? You  only  wish  my  disgrace.  I entreat  you,  therefore,  to
leave  me  to  myself : I will  make  head  against  the  French,  for  their  threats  do  not  alarm  me.
The  rain,  wind,  and  cold  weather  will  make  war  for  me  ; and  before  the  month  of  January
be  arrived,  they  will  be  so  tired  and  worn  down,  that  the  boldest  among  them  will  wish  to
be  at  home.”

Neither  the  duke  of  Juliers  nor  the  archbishop  of  Cologne  could,  at  this  first  interview,
prevail  on  the  duke  of  Gueldres  to  change  his  resolution,  though  they  were  six  days  labouring
at  it,  and  daily  in  council.  At  length  the  duke  of  Juliers,  finding  his  arguments  of  no  avail,
was  so  angry,  as  to  say  to  him,  “ that  if  he  did  not  pay  more  attention  to  his  advice,  he
would  displease  him  greatly,  insomuch  that  he  should  never  inherit  one  foot  of  his  duchy  of
Juliers,  which  he  would  dispose  of  to  another,  who  should  be  powerful  enough  to  defend  it
against  him  ; ” adding,  “ that  none  but  a fool  refused  counsel.”  The  duke  of  Gueldres,  seeing
his  father  inflamed  with  passion,  replied  by  way  of  softening  matters, — “ Advise  me  then
how  with  honour  I may  act ; and  since  you  desire  it,  from  my  love  to  you,  I will  pay
attention  to  it ; for  I assuredly  owe  you  all  obedience,  and  shall  never  in  that  be  wanting.”
— “ Now,”  said  the  duke  of  Juliers,  “ You  speak  well  and  to  the  purpose,  and  we  will  con-
sider the  matter.”

It  was  then  determined,  after  many  and  long  consultations,  that  the  duke  of  Gueldres
should  wait  on  the  king  of  France,  and  pay  him  the  honour  and  respect  befitting  so  great  a
prince,  and  should  excuse  himself  for  having  sent  him  such  a challenge,  in  similar  words  to
these, — “ My  lord,  it  is  very  true  that  a letter,  sealed  with  my  signet,  was  sent  into  France
and  delivered  to  you,  in  which  was  contained  a challenge  drawn  up  in  very  outrageous
terms,  and  contrary  to  such  as  are  generally  used  in  the  like  cases,  when  princes  or  lords  defy
each  other ; but  this  I disavow,  as  never  having  been  uttered  from  my  mouth,  nor  written
by  my  commands,  as  I would  be  far  from  defaming  your  name  or  rank.  For  the  confirma-
tion of  what  I now  say,  and  to  remove  all  doubts,  I must  inform  you,  that  at  the  desire  of  my
much-redoubted  lord,  the  king  of  England,  and  his  council,  with  whom  I have  entered  into
very  close  alliance,  I sent  to  England  four  of  my  knights  to  whom  I intrusted  my  signet,  for
them  to  seal  whatever  might  be  required  of  them.  They  were  to  write  and  seal,  and  not  I : so
that  I never  knew  the  contents  of  the  letter  sent  to  France  until  it  had  been  sealed.  Be  pleased,
therefore,  to  accept  of  this  as  my  apology,  for  it  is  the  truth.  With  regard  to  my  oath  of  allegi-
ance to  my  redoubted  lord,  the  king  of  England,  I am  resolved  to  adhere  to  it,  and  to  obey,  as
far  as  in  melies,  whatever  he  may  command,  whether  to  challenge  you,  and  assemble  my  forces,
wherever  he  may  please,  to  oppose  you  or  any  other  prince,  except  my  natural  lord,  the
emperor  of  Germany  ; for  to  him  have  I personally  sworn  my  homage  in  the  fullest  manner.
But  out  of  respect  and  honour  to  you,  and  as  some  recompense  for  the  trouble  and  charges
you  have  had,  in  coming  to  this  distance  to  learn  the  truth  of  this  challenge,  I am  willing  to
swear,  and  that  oath  1 will  punctually  keep,  that,  henceforward,  I will  never  make  any  war
upon  you  nor  your  kingdom  without  having  first  given  you  one  year’s  notice  of  my  intention ;


382


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


and,  my  lord  I hope  you  will  think  this  sufficient.”  The  duke  of  Gueldres  replied,  that  all
this  he  would  willingly  say ; for  it  did  not  seem  to  him  to  convey  anything  blameable  or
dishonourable.

Upon  this  being  settled,  the  duke  of  Juliers  and  the  archbishop  departed  and  returned  to
Juliers,  and  thence  to  Endesker*.  At  a proper  season  they  waited  on  the  king  of  France,
and  related  to  him  and  his  uncles  every  particular  which  had  passed  between  them  and  the
duke  of  Gueldres ; and,  that  the  matter  might  be  immediately  considered,  they  added,  there
could  not  anything  more  be  obtained  from  his  son.  The  king  of  France  was  so  desirous  to  see
his  cousin  the  duke  of  Gueldres,  who  had  given  him  such  trouble,  that  he  assented  to  the  terms
of  the  treaty.  The  duke  of  Burgundy  was  also  anxious  that  the  territories  of  the  duchess  of
Brabant  should  remain  in  peace,  and  took  pains  that  this  treaty  should  be  agreed  to,  and
that  the  duke  of  Gueldres,  on  the  strength  of  it,  should  come  to  them.  There  was  also
another  reason  for  their  consenting  to  it : winter  was  approaching,  and  the  nights  were
already  cold  and  long.  The  French  lords  were  told  that  Gueldres  was  a miserable  country
to  winter  in,  and  they  daily  received  information  of  losses  of  knights,  squires,  and  horses,
that  had  been  captured  by  the  ambushes  of  these  Linfars.

From  all  these  reasons,  matters  were  so  far  concluded  that  the  duke  of  Gueldres  came  to
the  French  camp,  and  was  introduced  by  the  duke  of  Juliers  his  father,  the  duke  of  Lorraine
his  cousin,  and  the  archbishop  of  Cologne,  to  the  king’s  tent.  There  were  present,  at  this
interview,  the  king’s  uncles,  his  brother  the  duke  of  Touraine,  the  duke  of  Bar,  the  count  de
la  Marche,  the  count  de  St.  Pol,  the  count  dauphin  d’ Auvergne,  the  lord  de  Coucy  and  the
constable  of  France.  On  his  entrance  the  duke  of  Gueldres  cast  himself  on  his  knees  before
the  king  ; but  I heard  that  the  king  made  him  rise,  (in  this  matter,  however,  I know  nothing
but  what  I learnt  from  others),  and  that  he  boldly  excused  himself  for  the  challenge,  in  the
terms  you  have  before  heard.  The  king  accepted  his  apology  : and  he  then  declared,  on  his
oath,  that  if  he  were  ever  again  to  challenge  or  make  war  on  Fi’ance,  he  would  send  notice  of
it  one  year  beforehand.  Thus  did  Gueldres  and  Brabant  remain  in  a secure  state,  and  those
who  had  expected  the  most  were  the  greatest  losers.

Everything  being  now  settled,  the  duke  of  Gueldres  supped  with  the  king  of  France  at
his  table  : and  I must  say  he  was  much  looked  at,  for  the  great  plague  he  had  given  them.
These  treaties  were  fairly  written  and  sealed  ; and,  when  all  was  done,  the  lords  took  leave  of
each  other:  but,  before  the  duke  of  Gueldres  departed,  he  requested  that  the  prisoners  the  French
had  made  in  this  war  might  be  given  up,  which  was  agreed  to  in  the  manner  he  desired.  The
king  of  Fi’ance  demanded  that  all  prisoners  made  from  him  should  likewise  be  set  at  liberty  ;
but  the  duke  of  Gueldres  excused  himself,  saying, — “ My  lord,  that  cannot  be  done  : I am
a poor  man,  and  when  I heard  of  your  march  hither,  I strengthened  myself  as  much  as
possible  with  knights  from  the  other  side  of  the  Rhine  and  elsewhere,  agreeing  with  them
that  everything  they  might  take  should  be  their  own  property.  It  is  not  possible  for  me,
therefore,  to  despoil  them  of  what  I have  given,  nor  have  I the  power  so  to  do  • and,  should
I attempt  it,  they  would  make  war  upon  me.  Be  pleased,  therefore,  to  let  this  matter
remain  as  it  is,  for  I cannot  remedy  it.”  The  king,  perceiving  he  could  not  obtain  anything
more,  bore  it  as  well  as  he  could,  without  adding  a word  in  reply,  and  comforted  himself  on
the  greatness  of  his  power  that  could  enrich  so  many  poor  persons.  They  took  leave  of  each
other  mutually  satisfied,  and  orders  were  given  for  the  army  to  march  back  to  France.  It
was  said,  the  king  would  hold  the  feast  of  All-saints  in  the  city  of  Rheims.

I will  now  say  a word  of  the  English  fleet.


* “ Endesker.”  Q.


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


-is;!


CHAPTER  CXXXIV. THE  EARL  OF  ARUNDEL  AND  HIS  FLEET  ARE  DRIVEN  BY  STORMS  TO  LA

PALICE,  NEAR  LA  ROCHELLE. THE  LORD  LEWIS  DE  SANCERRE,  HAVING  HAD  INFOR-
MATION OF  THIS,  CHASES  THEM  AT  SEA,  BUT  IN  VAIN. THE  DUKE  OF  LANCASTER

MARRIES  HIS  DAUGHTER  TO  THE  HEIR  OF  CASTILLE.

Before  the  king  of  France  went  to  Gueldres,  and  during  the  time  he  was  there,  the
English  fleet  under  the  command  of  the  earl  of  Arundel  kept  hovering  along  his  coasts,  just  as
the  wind  drove  them,  in  search  of  adventures.  You  must  know,  that  generally  from  the
first  of  October  to  All-saints  day  the  weather  is  stormy ; but  this  year  it  was  unusually  so,
which  shattered  the  English  fleet,  and  there  was  no  seaman  on  board,  however  bold  he
might  be,  but  was  frightened  at  its  violence,  which  forced  the  ships  to  run  to  any  port  lest
worse  might  befal  them.  The  earl  of  Arundel,  with  twenty-seven  other  vessels,  made  for
the  harbour  of  la  Palice,  two  leagues  distant  from  la  Rochelle,  where  he  anchored  : indeed,
he  was  forced  so  to  do,  for  the  wind  was  contrary  and  he  could  not  leave  it.  When  news
was  brought  of  this  to  la  Rochelle  the  townsmen  were  much  alarmed,  thinking  the  English
intended  attacking  the  place  : they  closed  their  gates,  and  remained  guarding  them  for  a
day  and  a half.  Intelligence  came  from  la  Palice,  that  the  force  of  the  English  amounted
to  no  more  than  twenty-two  vessels,  driven  thither  by  stress  of  weather,  and  desirous  only
of  putting  to  sea  again ; that,  however,  the  earl  of  Arundel,  sir  Henry  Beaumont,  sir
William  Elmham,  and  upwards  of  thirty  English  knights,  were  there.  The  Rochellers,  on
this,  consulted  how  to  act ; and,  having  well  considered  the  matter,  they  said  they  should
not  do  their  duty  if  they  did  not  march  to  skirmish  with  the  enemy.

At  this  period,  the  lord  Lewis  de  Sancerre,  marshal  of  France,  was  arrayed  and  marshalled
before  the  castle  of  Bouteville,  with  a large  body  of  the  chivalry  of  Poitou,  Saintonge  and
other  parts,  and  had  there  inclosed  William  de  Sainte  Foix,  a Gascon  ; for  all  men  at  arms
had  not  accompanied  the  king  of  France,  and  the  lord  de  Sancerre  was  lieutenant  of  the
country,  from  Montpellier  to  la  Rochelle,  during  the  absence  of  the  lord  de  Coucy  with  the
army  in  Germany.  The  Rochellers  determined  to  send  information  of  the  arrival  of  the
English  to  the  lord  de  Sancerre,  who  on  hearing  it  was  much  rejoiced.  He  ordered  the
townsmen  to  arm  six  or  eight  galleys,  and  to  embark  on  board,  for  he  was  on  his  march  to
combat  the  English. — This  they  did ; and  sir  Lewis  broke  up  his  siege  and  marched  away,
thinking  it  would  be  more  to  his  honour  and  profit  to  engage  the  earl  of  Arundel  and  the
English  knights  lying  at  anchor,  than  to  continue  the  siege,  for  he  could  again  return  to  this
at  his  pleasure.

He  came  to  la  Rochelle,  followed  by  a large  body  of  knights  and  squires.  I know  not  by
what  means,  but  the  earl  of  Arundel  had  information  at  la  Palice,  that  the  marshal  of
France  with  a powerful  company  of  knights  and  squires  was  marching  to  attack  him.  The
news  was  not  very  agreeable  to  him  ; but  fortunately  the  weather  had  become  calm,  and  he
instantly  gave  orders  to  weigh  anchor  and  put  to  sea.  This  was  speedily  effected  : had  they
waited  longer  they  would  have  been  surrounded  within  the  haven,  and  every  one  of  his  vessels
must  necessarily  have  been  taken,  for  not  one  could  have  escaped.  The  galleys  from  la
Rochelle,  fully  armed  with  cannons  and  other  artillery,  appeared  in  sight,  steering  for  la
Palice,  as  the  English  were  under  sail.  They  chased  them  two  leagues,  saluting  them  with
their  cannon,  but  dared  not  follow  them  further,  for  fear  of  the  dangers  of  the  sea.  They
therefore  returned  to  la  Rochelle  ; but  the  marshal  of  France  was  much  angered  against
them,  for  having  been  so  tardy  to  inform  him  of  the  arrival  of  the  enemy.

The  earl  of  Arundel  sailed  for  the  mouth  of  the  Garonne,  to  repair  to  Bordeaux  ; and  the
siege  of  Bouteville  was  put  an  end  to,  for  William  de  Sainte  Foix,  during  the  time  the
marshal  had  gone,  as  he  thought,  to  fight  the  English,  had  provided  his  castle  with  all  things
necessary  for  a long  defence.

We  will  now  return  to  the  duke  of  Lancaster,  and  speak  of  his  negotiations  with  the  king
of  Castille  and  duke  of  Berry  respecting  the  marriage  of  his  daughter.  The  king  of  Castille
was  desirous  of  having  her  for  his  son,  as  the  means  of  peace  with  England.  The  duke  of
Berry  wished  her  for  himself,  being  very  impatient  to  marry  her.  The  duke  of  Lancaster


31U


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


was  wise  and  prudent : lie  saw  that  the  most  advantageous  alliance  for  himself  and  for  his
country  was  Castille,  in  preference  to  the  duke  of  Berry  ; for  by  it  he  should  recover  the
inheritance  of  Castille  for  his  daughter,  in  times  to  come.  If  he  gave  her  to  the  duke  of
Berry,  and  he  should  die  before  her,  she  would  be  poor  in  comparison  with  other  ladies  ; for
the  duke  had  children  by  his  first  marriage,  who  would  be  entitled  to  all  his  landed  property.
The  duchess  of  Lancaster  was  likewise  more  inclined  to  the  connexion  with  Castille,  so  that
when  sir  Helion  de  Lignac  had  left  the  duke,  on  his  return  to  the  duke  of  Berry  in  Germany,
the  commissioners  from  the  king  of  Castille  came  forward,  and  pushed  the  matter  so  warmly,
that  the  marriage  was  agreed  and  sworn  to,  between  the  lady  Catherine  and  the  son  of  the
king  of  Castille.  Proper  contracts  were  drawn  up  and  sealed,  with  covenants  to  prevent
any  danger  of  breaking  off  the  match  ; and  the  duchess  consented,  when  the  whole  should  be
concluded,  to  conduct  her  daughter  into  Castille.


CHAPTER  CXXXV. THE  KING  OF  FRANCE,  WHILE  ON  THE  FRONTIERS  OF  JULIERS,  HAS

PART  OF  HIS  CAMP  SURPRISED,  AND  SEVERAL  PRISONERS  MADE,  BY  SOME  GERMAN

PILLAGERS. THE  KING,  BEING  TWENTY-ONE  YEARS  OF  AGE,  TAKES  ON  HIMSELF  THE

GOVERNMENT  OF  HIS  KINGDOM. HE  SENDS  TO  THE  KING  OF  CASTILLE,  ON  HEARING

OF  THE  MARRIAGE  OF  HIS  SON  WITH  TOE  DAUGHTER  OF  THE  DUKE  OF  LANCASTER,
TO  REMONSTRATE  WITH  HIM  NOT  TO  ENTER  INTO  ANY  TREATIES  THAT  MAY  BE  PRE-
JUDICIAL TO  HIM  OR  TO  HIS  KINGDOM.

The  king  of  France  was  still  on  the  borders  of  Juliers,  (for  you  have  heard  on  what
grounds  peace  had  been  made  between  him  and  the  dukes  of  Juliers  and  Gueldres)  though
on  his  march  wdth  the  army  hack  to  France,  when,  one  clear  moon-light  night,  as  they  were
encamped  on  the  confines  of  Germany,  some  German  robbers,  who  would  never  accept  of
any  terms  of  peace,  made,  about  midnight,  an  attack  on  the  French.  These  men  were
under  the  lord  de  Blanquenemen  and  sir  Peter  de  Aremberg,  and  came  well  mounted,  to
observe  where  they  could  make  the  severest  attack  on  the  camp.  They  passed  the  quarters
of  the  viscount  de  Meaux,  hut  found  him  and  his  men  on  their  guard  ; and,  having  gone  back-
ward and  forward  without  saying  a word,  they  returned,  to  give  an  account  to  their  leaders,
at  their  ambuscade,  of  what  they  had  seen.  Shortly  after,  a large  body  of  these  Germans
made  an  irruption  on  the  French  camp,  overthrowing  I know  not  how  many,  and  making
fourteen  men  at  arms  prisoners.  The  lord  de  la  Yieville  and  the  lord  de  Montkarel  were
among  the  number,  in  consequence  of  great  neglect  in  not  having  placed  sufficient  guards.
When  it  was  known,  on  the  morrow,  that  these  two  lords  were  made  prisoners,  the  army
were  much  vexed  at  it,  and  ever  afterwards  were  more  attentive  to  their  guards.

When  the  king  left  Juliers,  none  of  the  garrisons  remained  behind : sir  William  de  la
Tremouille  and  sir  Gervais  de  Merande  joined  him,  and  the  Brabanters  retired  to  their  own
homes.  While  on  the  march,  and  immediately  on  the  king’s  return  to  France,  it  was
determined,  by  great  deliberation  of  the  council,  that  the  king,  who  had  since  the  death  of
his  father  been  under  the  management  of  his  uncles,  should  now  take  on  himself  the
government  of  the  kingdom,  which  his  uncles  must  resign  into  his  hands,  as  they  had  enough
to  do  elsewhere,  and  the  king  had  now  entered  his  twenty-first  year.  When  this  was  made
public,  it  gave  universal  satisfaction.

I believe  the  king,  with  his  uncles  and  brother,  kept  the  feast  of  All-saints  at  Rheim9 ;
and  that  there  they  first  heard  of  peace  being  made  between  the  king  of  Castille  and  duke
of  Lancaster,  and  of  the  marriage  of  the  lady  Catherine  with  the  infant.  The  king  of
France  laughed  and  joked  much  with  his  uncle,  the  duke  of  Berry,  saying, — “ Fair  uncle,
you  have  failed  in  your  intended  marriage,  for  another  has  seized  the  lady  you  meant  for
your  bride.  What  do  you  say  to  this?  How  does  your  courage  stand  ?”  The  duke  good-
humouredly  replied, — “ My  lord,  if  I have  been  disappointed  in  this,  I will  address  myself
elsewhere.”

Those  present  began  to  murmur  about  this  marriage,  and  to  say,  it  had  not  been  concluded
without  some  treaties  of  alliance  having  been  formed  which  might  be  very  prejudicial  here-


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


335


after  to  France ; “ for,"  added  some  who  seemed  to  be  fully  aware  of  the  consequences,
“ should  England,  Castille,  and  Portugal  unite,  and  make  war  upon  us,  they  would  be
enabled  to  do  us  very  serious  mischief  by  sea  and  land.  It  will  be  right  for  the  king  of
France  to  send  some  discreet  person  to  prevent  this  wicked  king,  who  has  thus  connected
himself  with  a dead  man,  (for  the  duke  of  Lancaster  has  neither  money  nor  men)  from
entering  into  any  treaties  without  the  consent  of  the  council  of  France ; otherwise  to  say,
the  king  would  reduce  him  to  the  state  of  the  lowest  varlet  with  the  same  ease  with  which
he  had  raised  him  to  his  present  state ; for  at  this  moment  he  has  no  ally  strong  enough  to
support  him.  A war  with  Castille  would  now  come  very  opportunely ; and,  after  dethroning
this  wicked  king,  the  son  of  a bastard,  the  king  might  bestow  the  crown  on  his  brother,
the  duke  of  Touraine,  who  is  not  over  rich  : he  would  govern  it  wisely,  and  defend  it
valiantly.  How  could  this  king  of  Castille  think  of  entering  into  any  treaty  whatever  with
the  duke  of  Lancaster  unknown  to  our  king,  who  has  so  generously  assisted  him  in  his
distress ; and  had  it  not  been  for  the  blood  of  France,  he  must  have  lost  his  realm.  Pie
bargains  well,  and  has  now  done  so ; but  let  it  be  as  we  say,  and  he  will  be  deserted  and
disgraced ; and,  in  God’s  name,  let  such  an  envoy  be  sent  thither  as  will  be  attended  to,  and
make  him  feel  how  very  ill  he  has  behaved.’’

These  murmurings  increased  so  much  that  the  king,  his  uncles,  and  council,  deliberated
whom  they  should  send  to  remonstrate  with  the  king  of  Castille,  that  he  enter  not,  at  his
peril,  into  treaties  with  the  duke  of  Lancaster  and  the  English  any  way  detrimental  to  the
crown  of  France.  If  he  had  done  so,  or  intended  it,  he  was  to  be  told,  that  the  power  of
France  would  debase  him  as  much,  if  not  more  than  it  had  exalted  him,  and  that  the  king
and  his  country  would  not  attend  to  any  other  thing  before  they  had  completed  his  destruc-
tion. It  was  long  debated  who  would  be  the  properest  person  to  send  thither ; for  it  was
agreed  it  should  be  some  one  of  courage  and  well  spoken,  as  it  would  be  fruitless  sending
simple  persons  on  such  a message.  Three  were  named  : the  lord  de  Coucy,  sir  John  de
Yienne,  admiral  of  France,  and  sir  Guy  de  la  Tremouille,  and  either  of  these  three  would
be  fully  qualified  to  go  to  Castille.  Having  considered  all  things,  they  chose  sir  John  de
Yienne*;  and  it  was  told  him,  on  the  part  of  the  king  and  his  council, — “ Admiral,  make
your  preparations  for  a journey  to  Castille;  you  will  have  no  other  than  credential  letters,
for  it  is  enough  that  you  are  master  of  the  subject  on  which  you  are  sent.  Tell  the  king  of
Castille  to  read  or  have  read  to  him  all  the  treaties  of  alliance,  and  promises  of  friendship,
which  have  been  formed  and  sworn  to  between  the  two  crowns ; and  remember  well  all  the
answers  you  may  receive  from  him  or  his  ministers  on  this  subject,  that  we  may  regulate
our  conduct  accordingly.”  All  this,  the  admiral  said,  he  woidd  studiously  attend  to.  The
admiral  was  not  long  in  making  preparations  for  his  journey,  and,  having  taken  leave  of  the
king  and  his  uncles,  left  Paris,  taking  the  road  towards  Burgundy ; for  he  was  desirous  of
visiting  the  pope  and  his  brother  at  Avignon,  which  he  did.

We  will  now  for  a while  leave  him,  and  say  something  of  Geoffry  Tete-noire  and  the  siege
of  Yentadour,  in  which  he  was  inclosed;  but  we  must  first  speak  of  the  duke  of  Berry,
whose  impatience  to  marry  again  was  shown  within  the  year,  when  he  took  to  himself  a
wife  of  whom  I shall  speak,  and  say  who  she  was,  and  where  he  was  married.


CHAPTER  CXXXVI. THE  DUKE  OF  BERRY,  BEING  DISAPPOINTED  IN  HIS  MARRIAGE  WITH

THE  DAUGHTER  OF  THE  DUKE  OF  LANCASTER,  SENDS  TO  THE  COUNT  DE  FOIX  TO
DEMAND  THE  DAUGHTER  OF  THE  COUNT  DE  BOULOGNE,  WHOM  HE  HAD  IN  WARDSHIP.

The  duke  of  Berry,  having  been  disappointed  in  marrying  the  daughter  of  the  duke  of
Lancaster,  was  told  that  the  count  dc  Boulogne  had  a beautiful  daughter  called  Jane,  by  the
lady  Eleanor  de  Comminges ; that  she  was  not  with  her  father  nor  mother,  but  in  the
country  of  Bearn  with  his  good  friend  and  cousin  the  count  de  Foix ; that  she  had  been
educated  by  the  count,  in  his  castle  of  Ortlies,  for  the  space  of  nine  years,  and  lie  had  the

* According  to  Lopez  d’ Ayala,  Moler  de  Mauny,  the  king’s  chamberlain,  tvas  joined  in  commission  with  sir  John
de  Yienne Ed.

VOL.  II.  C C


38G


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


wardship  of  all  her  property ; and  that  the  father  and  mother  had  not  any  way  interfered
since  she  had  been  under  the  care  of  the  count,  nor  had  the  young  lady  cost  them  anythino-;
that  she  had  been  often  demanded  in  marriage,  but  the  count  de  Foix  had  turned  a deaf  ear,
saying,  she  was  yet  too  young,  and  in  particular  by  sir  Bernard,  brother  to  the  count
d’Armagnac,  who  had  repeatedly  pressed  the  matter,  promising,  on  the  accomplishment  of
this  marriage,  to  put  an  end  to  his  war  on  Bearn  and  his  claims  on  that  country.  Notwith-
standing these  fair  promises,  the  count  would  not  listen  to  him,  but  said  that  his  cousin  was
too  young.  He  gave,  however,  other  reasons  to  his  confidential  friends,  and  said  to  sir
Espaign  du  Lyon, — “ These  Armagnacs  must  think  me  a great  fool,  when  they  ask  me  to
consent  to  my  destruction.  If  I give  them  my  cousin,  I shall  add  to  their  strength  and
weaken  myself.  They  already  withhold  from  her  by  force  her  inheritance,  in  right  of  her
mother,  of  Comminges  ; for  the  count  de  Boulogne  is  as  nobody  to  oppose  them.”

When  the  count  d'Armagnac  and  his  brother,  sir  Bernard,  found  they  could  not  succeed,
they  spoke  to  the  duke  of  Berry,  during  the  life  of  their  aunt,  his  first  duchess,  that  it  would
be  a good  match  for  his  son  John  of  Berry.  The  duke,  in  consequence,  had  sent  properly
qualified  persons  to  the  count  de  Foix  in  Bearn,  to  entreat  that  all  former  animosities  might
be  forgiven  and  forgotten,  and  that  he  would  consent  to  the  marriage  of  his  cousin  and  ward
with  his  son  John  ; for  that  tho  count  de  Boulogne,  her  father,  was  very  well  satisfied  that
it  should  take  place.

The  count  entertained  the  envoys  handsomely,  but  excused  himself  for  not  complying
with  their  demand,  as  the  lady  was  too  young  ; and  because  he  had  most  solemnly  promised
and  sworn  to  the  countess  her  mother,  when  she  delivered  her  into  his  hands,  that  he  would
never  betroth  her  to  any  person  whatever  without  her  knowledge.  He  would  therefore  keep
his  oath,  and  no  one  ought  to  attempt  to  make  him  break  it.  These  were  the  excuses  the
eon nt  made ; for  he  knew  well  that  his  cousin,  the  countess  of  Comminges,  who  resided  with
her  brother,  the  count  d’Urguel,  in  Arragon,  would  never  consent  to  her  daughter’s  marriage
with  any  one  connected  with  the  Armagnacs.

The  ambassadors  from  the  duke  of  Berry  returned,  therefore,  unsuccessfully ; and  in  their
absence  the  count  de  Foix  said,  (as  I learnt  from  sir  Espaign  du  Lyon) — “ The  duke  of  Berry
and  his  advisers  must  think  me  very  weak  and  ignorant,  when  they  propose  that  I should
reinforce  my  enemies.  John  of  Berry  is  cousin  to  my  adversaries,  the  Armagnacs : this
match  I will  never  consent  to,  and  had  much  rather  marry  her  in  England ; and  I have
already  had  proposals  from  Henry  of  Lancaster,  son  to  the  duke  of  Lancaster.  If  I were  not
afraid  of  too  much  angering  the  king  of  France,  no  one  else  should  have  my  cousin.  At
this  moment  I know  not  how  to  act ; but  I will  marry  her  to  my  own  satisfaction,  to
prevent  any  of  the  Armagnacs  having  her  against  my  will ; for,  as  the  whole  depends
on  my  determination,  I have  no  occasion  to  be  melancholy,  or  to  be  very  anxious  on  this
subject.”

When  the  duke  of  Berry  knew  for  certain  that  the  duke  of  Lancaster  intended  marrying
his  daughter  with  the  infant  of  Castille,  and  that  there  were  no  hopes  of  breaking  it  off,
he  was  so  pensive  and  melancholy  for  five  or  six  days,  that  those  of  his  nearest  relations
inquired  the  cause  of  it.  Having  opened  his  mind  to  them,  and  complained  of  his  disap-
pointment, his  council  replied, — “ Sir,  if  you  have  failed  with  the  lady  Catherine  of
Lancaster,  you  may  be  more  successful  in  another  quarter,  with  the  daughter  of  a great  lord,
and  who,  in  due  time,  will  be  a considerable  heiress,  though  at  this  moment  she  is  a
little  too  young  for  your  time  of  life;  and  I know  not  if  the  count  de  Foix  will  not  on  this
account  refuse  his  consent.”  “Is  she  the  daughter  of  the  count  de  Boulogne?”  asked  the
duke  “ Yes,  my  lord.”  “ In  God’s  name,”  replied  the  duke,  “ let  us  make  the  trial.”

It  was  not  long  after  this  before  he  wrote  to  the  count  de  Foix  to  signify  to  him,  in  the  most
friendly  manner,  that  he  would  send  to  him  four  knights  of  high  quality,  such  as  the  count  de
Sancerre,  the  lord  de  la  Riviere,  sir  Guy  de  la  Tremouille,  and  the  viscount  d’A.ssy,  to  treat
with  him  for  his  ward,  the  daughter  of  the  count  de  Boulogne,  in  marriage  ; and  these  lords
were  of  such  importance,  as  to  justify  him  in  putting  implicit  faith  in  them  : but  he  begged
of  him  to  send  him  a speedy  answer  to  his  letter,  that  these  knights  might  not  undertake  a
commission  that  would  be  unsuccessful.  The  count  de  Foix  received  handsomely  the


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


387


messengers  who  brought  this  letter,  and  wrote  hack  by  them  to  the  duke  of  Berry,  that  he  was
very  happy  in  the  proposals  he  had  made,  and  was  ready  to  receive  the  four  knights  either
in  Foix  or  in  Bearn ; but  that  the  consent  of  the  count  and  countess  de  Boulogne  must  first
he  had.

The  duke  of  Berry  was  well  pleased  on  receiving  such  an  answer,  and  negotiated  with  ono
and  another,  during  the  winter,  that  his  marriage  might  take  place  in  the  course  of  the
summer.  The  business,  notwithstanding,  was  not  so  soon  accomplished ; for  the  duke  of
Berry  knew  well  that  the  count  de  Foix  was  not  a person  to  act  hastily,  and  that  there
would  he  many  questions  and  replies  before  the  matter  could  be  expected  to  he  brought  to  a
conclusion.  He  therefore  prudently  carried  on  the  treaty,  by  sending  special  messengers  to
pope  Clement,  who  was  nearly  related  to  the  young  lady.  The  pope  was  rejoiced  at  hearing
his  cousin  would  be  so  highly  connected  as  with  the  duke  of  Berry,  uncle  to  the  king  of
France;  and  he  wrote,  in  consequence,  to  the  count  de  Foix,  to  notify  to  him  in  an
honourable  manner,  that  lie  would  not  on  any  account  this  proposal  should  be  rejected,  for
their  families  would  be  made  by  it.  The  count  de  Foix  received  letters  from  all  quarters;
for  he  could,,  on  such  occasions,  well  dissemble  his  real  sentiments,  and  yet  retain  the
affections  of  all,  the  pope  as  well  as  the  duke  of  Berry ; but  there  were  none  so  wise  among
them,  that  knew  what  were  the  count’s  real  thoughts.

We  will  now  leave  this  matter,  and  return  to  the  siege  of  Ventadour.


CHAPTER  CXXXVir. GEOFFRY  TETE-NOIRE  IS  WOUNDED  IN  THE  HEAD,  AT  A SKIRMISH,  AND

COMMITS  EXCESSES  WHICH  CAUSE  HIS  DEATH. HE  MAKES  A WILL,  AND  SUBSTITUTES

TWO  GOVERNORS  OF  VENTADOUR  IN  HIS  ROOM.

You  have  before  heard  how  sir  William  de  Lignac  and  sir  John  Bonne-lance,  with  many
knights  and  squires  from  Auvergne  and  Limousin,  had  besieged  the  castle  of  Ventadour,  and
Geoffry  Tete-noire  within  it.  It  was  so  strong,  that  it  could  not  be  taken  by  storm  ; and  he
had  laid  in  such  stores  of  all  things,  as  to  secure  a sufficiency  for  seven  or  eight  years,  without
anything  new  being  added.  The  besiegers,  who  had  surrounded  it  with  blockhouses,  came
at  times  to  skirmish  at  the  barriers  ; and  it  happened  that,  at  one  of  these,  Geoffry  Tete-noire
advanced  so  far  that  he  was  struck  on  the  head  by  a bolt  from  a cross-bow,  which  passed
through  the  helmet  and  cap  underneath,  and  wounded  him  so  severely  as  to  occasion  him  to
be  carried  to  his  bed.  His  companions  were  much  vexed  at  this,  and,  during  the  time  he
was  in  this  state,  all  skirmishing  ceased.  Had  he  taken  proper  care  of  himself,  he  would
have  soon  been  cured  of  this  wound ; but  he  indulged  himself  in  many  excesses,  particularly
in  fornication,  for  which  lie  paid  dearly  enough  by  his  death.  He  Was  warned  of  the
consequences  of  this  conduct,  and  told  that  he  was  in  so  dangerous  a condition,  (the  wound
having  become  an  imposthume)  that  it  was  necessary  he  should  settle  his  affairs.  He  did,
and  made  his  will  in  the  way  I shall  relate.

He  ordered  the  principal  persons  of  his  garrison,  and  those  who  had  been  the  most  used  to
arms,  into  his  presence ; and  when  they  were  come,  he  said  to  them,  sitting  up  in  his  bed, —
“ My  fair  sirs,  and  companions  in  arms,  I know  I am  in  great  danger  of  death  : we  have
been  a long  time  together,  and  I have  been  a loyal  captain  to  you  all,  to  the  utmost  of  my
power ; I should  wish,  therefore,  to  see,  before  I quit  this  world,  my  successor  appointed,
who  would  gallantly  behave  himself  towards  you  and  defend  this  castle,  which  I shall  leave
plentifully  stocked  with  all  necessary  things,  such  as  wines,  provision,  and  artillery.  I
therefore  beg  you  will  tell  me  if  you  have  taken  any  steps,  or  have  thought  of  electing  any
one  able  to  govern  and  lead  you  as  men  at  arms  ought  to  be  governed  and  led,  for  such  has
been  my  manner  of  carrying  on  the  war ; and  in  truth  I cared  not  against  whom.  I did
indeed  make  it  under  shadow  of  the  king  of  England’s  name,  in  preference  to  any  other ;
but  I have  always  looked  for  gain  and  conquest  wherever  they  may  be  had ; and  such  should
ever  be  the  conduct  of  adventurous  companions,  who  are  for  deeds  of  arms  and  to  advance
themselves.  This  country  is  very  fertile  : many  good  compositions  have  been  made  with  it,
though  the  French  now  check  them  by  their  war ; but  this  cannot  always  last,  for  their

c c 2


383


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


blockhouses  and  siege  must  have  an  end.  Now,  tell  me  truly,  have  any  of  you  thought  of
the  person  who  is  to  succeed  me  ?”

The  companions  remaining  silent,  he  again  addressed  them  with  the  utmost  good  humour,
saying, — “ I can  easily  believe  you  have  had  some  conversations  together  on  what  I have
mentioned ; and  I also,  during  the  time  I have  been  forced  to  keep  my  bed,  have  thought  on
this  matter  for  you.” — “ Sir,”  replied  they,  “ we  refer  the  matter  to  you  ; and  it  will  be
more  agreeable  if  it  came  from  you  than  from  us  : you  will  therefore  be  pleased  to  inform  us
of  your  will.”  “ Yes,”  said  Geoffry,  “ I will  tell  you,  and  name  those  I wish  to  succeed  me.
Here  is  Alleyn  Roux  and  his  brother  Peter,  my  cousins,  who  are  good  men  at  arms  and  of
my  blood : I entreat  you,  therefore,  to  accept  of  Alleyn  as  your  governor,  and  that  you  will
swear  to  him,  in  my  presence,  loyalty  and  obedience,  as  well  as  to  his  brother ; but  I mean
that  Alleyn  should  have  the  sovereign  command.” — “Sir,”  answered  they,  “We  will
cheerfully  do  so,  for  you  have  well  chosen.”  All  the  companions  then  took  oaths  of  obedience
to  Alleyn  Roux,  and  to  his  brother  Peter.  When  this  was  done,  Geotfry  Tete-noire  again
addressed  them : “ Well,  my  friends,  you  have  complied  with  my  request,  and  I thank  you
for  it.  Because  I wish  you  should  partake  of  what  you  have  helped  me  to  conquer,  I must
inform  you,  that  in  that  chest  which  you  see  yonder  (pointing  to  it  with  his  finger),  there  is
a sum  of  thirty  thousand  francs.  I would  acquit  my  conscience  and  myself  towards  those
who  have  faithfully  served  me : say,  therefore,  if  you  will  truly  fulfil  the  articles  of  my
will.”  Having  said  they  would,  he  continued : “ In  the  first  place,  I leave  to  the  chapel  of
St.  George,  within  our  walls,  the  sum  of  fifteen  hundred  francs  for  repairs  and  additional
buildings.  I give  to  my  mistress,  who  has  been  faithfully  attached  to  me,  two  thousand
five  hundred  francs — To  Alleyn  Roux,  your  governor,  two  thousand  francs — To  my  valets-
de-chambre,  five  hundred  francs — To  my  officers,  fifteen  hundred  francs.  The  surplus  I
thus  dispose  of : you  are  about  thirty  companions,  all  engaged  in  the  same  enterprise,  and
you  should  behave  like  brothers  to  each  other,  without  envy,  riot,  or  strife.  The  sum  I have
mentioned  you  will  find  in  the  chest : divide  it,  therefore,  among  you  fairly  and  honourably ;
but  should  the  devil  get  among  you,  and  you  cannot  agree,  here  is  a well-tempered  sharp
axe,  cut  open  the  chest,  and  let  those  who  can  seize  the  contents.”  To  this  speech,  they
unanimously  replied, — “ Lord  and  master,  we  will  not  disagree.  We  have  so  much  loved
and  feared  you,  we  will  never  break  the  chest,  nor  disobey  any  of  the  orders  you  have
given  us.”

Such  as  I have  related  was  the  last  will  of  Geoffry  Tete-noire,  who  only  lived  two  days  more,
and  was  buried  in  the  chapel  of  Saint  George  in  Yentadour.  All  his  legacies  were  paid,  and
the  overplus  divided  among  them  according  to  his  orders,  and  Alleyn  Roux  with  his  brother
Peter  were  obeyed  as  governors  of  the  castle.  The  blockade,  however,  was  *<ot  for  this
raised,  nor  were  the  skirmishes  less  frequent.  The  French  knights  and  squires  of  Auvergne
and  Limousin  were  rejoiced  at  the  death  of  Geoffry  Tete-noire,  and  were  not  so  much  afraid
of  those  he  had  left  behind,  for  he  had  been  a most  active  and  successful  captain  in  war  and
in  forming  garrisons.

We  will  now  return  to  the  duke  of  Gueldres  for  a short  time,  and  say  what  befel  him  at
this  season  ; having  already  mentioned  the  trouble  he  had  given  to  the  king  of  France  and
his  uncles,  by  forcing  them  to  march  to  the  borders  of  his  country,  and  then  to  return  without
doing  him  any  considerable  damage.


CHAPTER  CXXXVriI. THE  DUKE  OP  GUELDRES  IS  MADE  PRISONER  IN  PRUSSIA;  AND,  THOUGH

DELIVERED  BY  THE  KNIGHTS  OF  THE  TEUTONIC  ORDER,  HE  RETURNS  TO  KEEP  HIS
FAITn  TO  THE  PERSON  WHO  HAD  TAKEN  HIM.

When  the  duke  of  Gueldres  perceived  that  the  whole  army  of  France  had  retreated,  and
that  peace  was  established  with  the  duchess  of  Brabant  and  his  other  enemies  by  means  of
the  treaties,  the  particulars  of  which  you  have  heard  related  : one  of  the  articles  being
understood  to  have  been  the  surrender  of  the  town  of  Grave  within  the  year,  on  such
conditions  as  had  been  agreed  on  between  him,  the  duke  of  Burgundy  and  duchess  of


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


309


Brabant,  and  when  lie  found  ho  had  now  nothing  to  do  at  home,  under  these  circumstances,
I say,  he  resolved  to  make  an  excursion  into  Prussia.  He  made  preparations  accordingly,
and,  accompanied  by  many  knights  and  squires  of  his  own  and  other  countries,  began  his
journey  thither  about  the  octave  of  Saint  Martin,  taking  his  road  through  Germany.
Wherever  he  passed,  lie  was  handsomely  received,  and  arrived  on  the  territory  of  Prussia.
I know  not  how  it  happened,  hut  he  and  his  company  were  waylaid  in  the  plains,  and
attacked  by  a body  of  men  at  arms,  of  whom  he  had  not  the  least  suspicion,  and  for  that
reason  they  were  overpowered.  They  lost  their  arms,  horses,  gold  and  silver  plate,  and
were  carried  prisoners  to  a town  hard  by,  where  all  who  could  ransom  themselves  did  so  :
particularly  the  duke  of  Gueldres  pledged  himself  to  a squire  called  Arurant ; his  sirname
I am  ignorant  of;  and  then  the  duke  of  Gueldres  and  his  company  were  led  to  a strong
town  of  the  duke  de  Stolpcn,  not  that  the  duke  was  there  in  person.

When  the  grandmaster  and  knights  of  the  Teutonic  order  heard  that  the  duke  of  Gueldres
had  been  attacked  and  made  prisoner  on  his  road  to  Prussia,  they  were  exceedingly  enraged,
and  said  it  should  not  remain  unpunished,  otherwise  they  would  be  greatly  blamed.  They
instantly  issued  their  summons  for  the  attendance  of  their  vassals,  and  marched  with  a large
force  of  men  at  arms  from  Commisberg  * to  the  town  wherein  the  duke  of  Gueldres  was
detained  prisoner.  The  squire  who  had  made  the  duke  prisoner,  having  heard  of  this
expedition,  was  alarmed  for  the  consequences,  and  determined  to  leave  the  castle,  as  ill  might
hefal  him  should  he  he  taken  ; but  before  he  departed  he  waited  on  the  duke  of  Gueldres,
and  thus  spoke  : “ Duke  of  Gueldres,  you  are  my  prisoner,  and  I am  your  master.  You,
as  a gentleman,  have  pledged  your  faith  and  oath,  that  wherever  I should  please  to  go,
thither  you  would  follow  me.  I know  not  if  you  have  sent  for  the  grand-master  of  the
Teutonic  order,  hut  he  is  marching  hither  in  such  force  that  I do  not  think  it  prudent  to
wait  for  him.  Do  you  remain,  if  you  please,  but  I shall  carry  away  your  faith  with  me.”
To  this  the  duke  of  Gueldres  making  no  reply,  the  squire  departed,  and,  having  mounted  his
horse,  rode  off  to  a castle  of  greater  strength  ; hut,  on  his  going  away,  he  added,  “ Y ou  will
find  me  at  such  a place,”  and  named  to  him  the  castle,  which  was  very  strong,  and  far  from
all  roads.  He  was  no  sooner  gone  than  the  grand-master  arrived,  with  a considerable  force  :
no  one  issued  forth  to  oppose  him  : and,  had  he  found  the  squire  within,  he  would  infallibly
have  put  him  to  death.  He  therefore  returned  to  Koningsberg,  carrying  the  duke  of
Gueldres  with  him.

I will  relate  what  was  the  end  of  this  event ; for  in  whatever  country  it  was  told,  and
especially  in  Germany,  it  was  variously  spoken  of,  to  the  great  astonishment  of  all  lords  who
heard  it.  When  the  duke  of  Gueldres  arrived  at  Koningsberg,  having  obtained  his  liberty
in  the  manner  I have  said,  he  considered  that  he  had  pledged  his  faith  to  return  to  the  squire
who  had  made  him  prisoner : likewise  remembering  what  the  squire  had  said  on  his  departure,
he  was  much  cast  down,  and  thought  himself  bounden  in  honour  to  acquit  himself  loyally
towards  him.  He  therefore  told  the  grand-master  he  could  not  longer  remain  with  him,
nor  for  any  dispensation  or  absolution  would  give  up  his  intention  of  surrendering  himself  to
his  master  in  the  castle  where  he  had  been  appointed  to  do  so ; which  every  one  considered
as  an  act  of  great  honour.  When  this  came  to  the  ears  of  his  relations  and  subjects  in
Gueldres,  they  treated  for  bis  liberty,  which  they  obtained  through  the  means  of  the  duke  of
Stolpen,  who  took  much  pains  in  the  business ; but,  before  the  duke  would  consent  to  his
enlargement,  he  made  the  duke  of  Gueldres  swear,  that  neither  himself,  his  heirs,  nor  any
person  attached  to  him,  would  ever  seek  open  or  private  revenge  for  the  insult  he  had
received.  Thus  was  the  duke  of  Gueldres  set  at  liberty;  but  in  the  year  1388  did  this
misfortune  befall  him.  Let  us  return  to  sir  John  de  Vienne,  admiral  of  France,  and  relate
what  he  said  from  the  king  of  France  to  the  king  of  Castille.


* “ Commisberg.”  Q.  Koningsberg.


300


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


CHAPTER  CXXXIX. — SIR  JOHN  DE  VIENNE,  HAVING  RECEIVED  HIS  ANSWER  FROM  THE  KING
OF  CASTILLE,  RETURNS  TO  FRANCE. — THE  DUKE  OF  LANCASTER  PROCEEDS  IN  THE

MARRIAGE  OF  HIS  DAUGHTER  TO  THE  INFANT  OF  CASTILLE. THE  EARL  OF  ARUNDEL,

HAVING  MADE  SOME  CRUISES  ON  THE  COASTS  OF  NORMANDY,  RETURNS  WITH  HIS
FLEET  TO  ENGLAND.

The  admiral  of  France  continued  his  journey  until  he  arrived  in  Castille,  when  he  inquired
where  the  king  resided.  He  was  answered,  “ Most  commonly  at  Burgos,”  whither  he  then
rode.  Having  dismounted  at  his  inn,  he  made  himself  ready  to  go  to  the  palace ; but  as
soon  as  the  king’s  household  heard  of  his  arrival,  he  was  visited  by  them,  most  honourably,
according  to  the  custom  of  the  country,  from  their  attachment  to  the  king  of  France,  to
whom  they  held  themselves  much  indebted,  and  he  was  conducted  to  the  king’s  apartment.
Sir  John  was  kindly  greeted  by  the  king,  to  whom  he  gave  his  letters.  The  king  took  them,
and  called  his  council  aside,  wdien,  having  read  and  considered  them,  they  found  he  had  full
powers  given  him,  and  sir  John  was  called  and  bade  to  explain  the  cause  of  his  coming.  He,
who  was  ready  prepared,  thus  spoke,  in  handsome  language  : “ Sir  king,  and  you  gentlemen
of  his  council,  the  king  of  France  sends  me  hither,  on  account  of  the  marriage  which  he  has
heard  is  about  to  take  place  between  your  son  and  the  daughter  of  the  duke  of  Lancaster,
who  is,  as  you  know,  his  enemy.  The  king  of  France  and  his  ministers  are  greatly  at  a loss
to  conceive  how  you  could  think  of  entering  into  any  treaty  of  marriage  or  other  engagement,
without  their  being  made  acquainted  with  it ; for  they  say  truly,  that  no  union  can  be  formed
between  children  without  great  intimacy  and  affection  of  the  parents  being  the  consequences.
They  therefore  tell  you  by  my  mouth,  to  be  careful  not  to  enter  into  any  treaties  that  may
be  prejudicial  to  the  king  of  France  ; and  that  those,  so  solemnly  sworn  to  be  observed  by
the  late  king  Henry,  your  father,  the  prelates,  nobles  and  cities  of  the  realm,  be  no  way
infringed,  otherwise  you  will  incur  the  pain  of  excommunication  from  the  pope,  and  the
indignation  of  the  king  and  barons  of  France,  whom  you  will  find,  to  your  disgrace,  your
most  bitter  enemies.  This  is  what  I am  ordered  to  say  to  you  from  the  king  of  France  and
his  council.”

When  the  king  of  Castille  and  those  present  heard  such  a reproachful  message  from  the
king  of  France,  they  were  so  much  astonished,  that  they  looked  at  each  other,  but  not  one
attempted  to  make  any  reply.  A bishop,  however,  who  happened  to  be  there,  made  the
following  answer : “ Sir  John,  you  are  newly  arrived  in  this  country,  and  the  king  and
ourselves  are  glad  to  see  you,  and  bid  you  welcome.  Fair  sir,  the  king  has  perfectly  heard
and  understood  your  message,  and  you  shall  shortly,  within  a day  or  two,  have  such  an
answer  as  will  give  you  satisfaction.”  “ It  is  enough,”  replied  sir  John  de  Vienne,  who  then
took  leave  of  the  king  and  council  and  returned  to  his  lodgings.  It  was  reported  to  me  that
he  remained  seven  days  without  having  any  answer ; that  there  was  very  great  dissembling
on  this  occasion,  and  he  became  quite  melancholy,  for  he  never  saw  the  king,  but  remained
in  his  apartment,  scarcely  visited  by  any  one.  Sir  John  de  Vienne,  noticing  this  delay,  spoke
of  it  to  some  of  the  council,  whom  he  sometimes  saw,  declaring  he  would  return  without  the
answer.  They  suspected  he  would  keep  his  word  and  do  as  lie  said,  for  in  truth  such  was
his  intention.

He  was  therefore  invited  to  the  palace,  and  such  answers  made  him,  that,  on  his  return,
he  told  the  king  of  France,  and  those  who  had  sent  him,  not  to  be  under  any  uneasiness
respecting  the  king  of  Castille  or  his  council,  for  they  would  never  enter  into  any  treaties
with  England  that  should,  in  the  smallest  degree,  be  detrimental  to  those  which  had  been
formed  between  France  and  Castille.  If  the  king  of  Castille  married  his  son  to  the  daughter
of  the  duke  of  Lancaster,  according  to  the  unanimous  wish  of  his  country,  as  the  means  of
obtaining  peace,  and  extinguishing  all  claims  on  his  crown,  it  ought  not  to  have  given
umbrage  to  the  king  of  France  nor  to  that  nation  ; for  the  king  of  Castille  and  his  subjects
were  firmly  resolved  to  adhere  to  every  point  of  the  treaties  existing  between  them  and
France.

Such  was  the  purport  of  the  answer  sir  John  de  Vienne  had  brought  from  Castille.  The


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


391


king  of  Castille  and  the  duke  of  Lancaster  proceeded  in  the  marriage,  and  a treaty  of  peace
was  amicably  agreed  on  between  them,  by  the  before-mentioned  commissioners,  for  the  duke
still  resided  in  the  Bordelois.  He  had  come  with  his  duchess  and  daughter  from  Bayonne
to  Bordeaux,  where  he  was  joyfully  received,  as  they  were  desirous  of  his  living  among  them,
and  thence  had  gone  to  Libourne*.

When  it  was  known  for  certain,  in  the  castle  of  the  count  de  Foix,  that  the  king  of  Castille
had  made  peace  with  the  duke  of  Lancaster,  and  had  put  an  end  to  all  his  claims,  by  the
marriage  of  his  son  with  the  lady  Catherine  of  Lancaster,  to  whom  he  had  given  extensive
territories  in  Castille,  besides  a large  sum  to  the  duke,  amounting  to  two  hundred  thousand
nobles,  the  count  was  greatly  astonished,  (for  I was  then  present)  and  said  : “ This  king  of
Castille  is  a poor  creature,  to  make  peace  with  a dead  man ; for  I am  sure  the  duke  of
Lancaster  was  in  so  bad  a way  he  knew  not  where  to  turn  himself.  On  my  faith,”  continued
the  count,  “ the  duke  is  a man  of  ability,  and  has  prudently  managed  this  matter.”

It  was  about  Christmas  that  the  fleet  of  the  earl  of  Arundel,  which  had  been  hovering
the  whole  year  along  the  coasts  of  Brittany,  la  Rochelle,  Saintonge,  and  the  Bordelois,  came
to  the  shores  of  Normandy,  and  sailed  by  Carentan.  It  had  indeed  before  landed  at  Cher-
bourg, and  the  earl  seemed  inclined  to  make  war  on  that  part  of  the  country.  The  town  of
Carentan  and  its  dependencies  were  under  the  command  of  the  lord  de  Hambre  and  the  lord
de  Torci,  who  had  with  them  a considerable  number  of  knights  and  squires  of  Normandy.
The  earl  of  Arundel  learning  how  strongly  it  was  garrisoned,  passed  by,  thinking  he  might
lose  more  than  he  could  gain  were  he  to  attack  it,  and  fell  on  another  town,  called  Torignyt,
which  he  took  by  storm,  and  gained  great  wealth  by  plundering  it.  They  carried  away
many  prisoners,  and  marched  to  the  barriers  of  Bayeux,  but  only  made  a slight  skirmish.
The  English  passed  the  fords  of  St.  Clement,  and  did  great  damage  to  those  parts  ; for  they
staid  there  for  fifteen  days  without  any  one  coming  to  oppose  them.

The  marshal  de  Blainville  was  indeed  in  Normandy  ; but  he  had  no  information  of  what
was  passing,  or  he  would  have  provided  a remedy.  The  English  having  finished  their
expedition,  and  done  one  hundred  thousand  francs  of  mischief  to  Normandy,  made  a prudent
retreat,  and  recrossing  the  fords,  returned  to  Cherbourg,  where  they  embarked  their  pillage
safely  on  board  the  fleet : having  weighed  anchor,  they  took  to  the  deep,  and  landed  at
Southampton.  Such  wero  the  deeds  done  by  this  fleet,  under  the  command  of  the  earl  of
Arundel.


CHAPTER  CXL. — THE  LORD  LEWIS  DE  SANCERRE  VISITS  THE  COUNT  DE  FOIX  AT  ORTHES. —
A DEED  OF  ARMS  IS  PERFORMED,  BEFORE  THE  DUKE  OF  LANCASTER  AT  BORDEAUX,
BETWEEN  FIVE  FRENCH  AND  FIVE  ENGLISH  MEN.

The  lord  Lewis  de  Sancerre,  marshal  of  France,  at  this  time  resided  at  Toulouse  or
Carcassonne  in  Languedoc,  and  was  well  informed  of  the  treaties  that  were  in  agitation
between  the  duke  of  Berry  and  the  count  de  Foix,  for  the  marriage  of  the  daughter  of  the
count  de  Boulogne,  whom  the  duke  wished  to  have,  although  the  lady  was  very  young.
The  marshal  had  a desire  to  visit  the  count  de  Foix  at  Orthes,  and  I believe  (from  the
information  I had  from  his  people  who  found  me  there  at  Christmas)  the  king  of  France  had
ordered  him  thither,  and  I will  relate  on  what  errand.

The  king  of  France  was  at  this  period  very  young,  though  anxious  to  manage  his  govern-
ment well.  He  had  never  visited  Languedoc,  which  is  an  extensive  province  filled  with
towns  and  castles,  that  had  been  almost  ruined  by  the  oppressions  of  the  duke  of  Berry.
Heavy  complaints  of  this  had  been  made  to  the  king  when  he  took  the  government  into  his
own  hands ; and  he  said  he  would  travel  into  Languedoc,  and  visit  the  pope,  whom  he  had
never  yet  seen,  and  he  was  likewise  desirous  of  seeing  the  count  de  Foix,  of  whose  largesses
and  valour  he  had  heard  so  much.

The  marshal  de  Sancerre  left  Toulouse  with  full  five  hundred  horse,  rode  to  Tarbes  in

* “ Libourne,”  a town  on  the  confluence  of  the  Dordogne  and  Garonne,  five  leagues  north-east  from  Bordeaux.

f “ Torignv,”  a town  in  Normandy,  three  leagues  from  St.  Lo,  eight  from  Coutances.


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


302

Bigorre,  and  thence  to  Orthes  in  Bearn.  The  count  de  Foix,  having  had  intimation  of  his
coming,  ordered  the  stewards  of  his  household  to  have  the  town  of  Orthes  properly  prepared
for  his  reception,  as  his  visit  gave  him  great  pleasure.  These  orders  were  punctually
obeyed,  and  lodgings  were  marked  out  in  the  town  for  the  marshal’s  attendants,  but  he
himself  dismounted  at  the  castle.  The  count  de  Foix  went  out  of  the  town  to  meet  him,
attended  by  more  than  three  hundred  horse,  and  received  him  most  kindly.  The  lord  Lewis
de  Sancerre  remained  at  Orthes  about  six  days ; and  he  then  acquainted  the  count  of  the
king’s  intended  journey  into  Languedoc,  and  his  desire  to  see  him.  “ In  good  faith,”  replied
the  count  de  Foix,  “ he  will  be  welcome  there,  and  I will  with  pleasure  wait  on  him.”
“ Indeed,  my  lord,”  answered  the  marshal,  “ but  it  is  the  king’s  wish  to  know  on  his  arrival
iu  Languedoc,  plainly  and  openly,  whether  you  mean  to  attach  yourself  to  the  French  or  to
the  English ; for  in  these  wars  you  have  dissembled  your  real  sentiments,  and  have  never
borne  arms  either  from  summons  or  entreaties.”

“Ah,  lord  Lewis,”  said  the  count  de  Foix,  “I  give  you  many  thanks  for  having  spoken
to  me  on  this  subject.  If  I have  excused  myself  from  bearing  arms  for  either  side,  I have,
as  I think,  good  reasons  for  it : the  wars  between  England  and  France  no  way  concern  me,
for  I hold  my  country  of  Bearn  from  God,  my  sword,  and  by  inheritance.  I have  not,
therefore,  any  cause  to  enter  into  the  service,  or  incur  the  hatred,  of  either  of  these  kings.  I
know  well,  that  my  enemies,  the  Armagnacs,  have  done  all  in  their  power  to  put  me  in  the
ill  graces  of  both  monarchs  ; for  before  the  prince  of  Wales  marched  into  Spain,  at  the  instiga-
tion of  the  count  d’Armagnac,  he  would  have  made  war  on  me,  having  a strong;  inclination
for  it,  if  sir  John  Chandos  had  not  prevented  him.  Thanks,  however,  to  God,  I have  always
kept  myself  on  my  guard  in  as  courteous  a manner  as  possible,  and  shall  continue  to  do  so  as
long  as  I live  : after  my  death,  matters  must  take  the  turn  that  is  natural  for  them.”  Thus
did  the  count  de  Foix  and  the  marshal  de  Sancerre  converse  as  long  as  he  staid.  On  his
departure,  the  count  presented  him  with  a handsome  courser,  a fine  mule  and  good  hackney,
all  of  them  richly  caparisoned.  He  gave  also. to  sir  Robert  Challies,  to  sir  Richard  Dauphin,
and  to  the  knights  of  the  marshal,  two  hundred  francs  each,  and  to  five  of  his  squires  fifty
francs.

When  the  marshal  took  his  leave,  to  return  to  Toulouse,  I -wanted  to  accompany  him ; but
the  count  de  Foix  would  not  allow  me,  and  bade  me  stay  longer  with  him.  This  I was
forced  to  comply  with,  and  wait  his  will.  The  lord  Lewis,  on  leaving  Orthes,  took  the  road
to  Tarbes,  whither  he  was  escorted  by  the  lord  dauphin  of  Bigorre,  and  sir  Peter  Cabestan,
one  of  the  count  de  Foix’s  household.

About  this  time,  of  the  year  1389,  there  was  a deed  of  arms  performed  at  Bordeaux,
before  the  duke  of  Lancaster,  between  five  Englishmen  and  the  same  number  of  French,  of
whom  some  were  of  the  household  of  the  marshal  of  France.  The  combatants  were  sir
Petiton  de  Pellagie,  a Gascon  Englishman  ; against  sir  Morice  Mauvinet,  a Frenchman ; sir
Raymond  of  Arragon,  English,  against  the  bastard  de  Chauvigny,  French  ; sir  Lewis
Malapers,  governor  of  Aigues-Mortes,  English,  against  Jannequin  Corne  de  Cerf,  French  ;
Archibald  de  Villiers,  French,  against  the  son  of  the  lord  de  Chaumont,  Gascon-English.
Many  knights  and  squires  from  Bearn,  and  of  the  household  of  the  count  de  Foix,  being
desirous  of  seeing  these  combats,  went  thither  : I accompanied  them  ; for  it  is  but  twenty-
four  leagues  from  Orthes  to  Bordeaux,  and  we  were  spectators  of  these  duels,  which  were
fought  in  the  square  before  St.  Andrew’s,  in  the  presence  of  the  duke  and  duchess  of
Lancaster,  their  daughter,  and  the  ladies  and  damsels  of  the  country.  They  did  not  combat
altogether,  but  each  party  separately ; and  were  to  perform  three  courses  with  spears,  three
with  swords,  the  same  number  with  battle-axes,  and  three  with  daggers,  all  on  horseback.
The  tiltings  occupied  three  days,  and  were  gallantly  performed  without  any  of  the  ten  being
wounded.  Sir  Raymond  killed  the  horse  of  the  bastard  de  Chauvigny,  which  greatly  angered
the  duke  of  Lancaster  ; he  blamed  the  knight  much  for  having  pointed  his  spear  too  low,
and  presented  the  bastard  with  one  of  his  own  horses.

Such  was  the  end  of  this  deed  of  arms,  which  being  finished,  every  one  returned  to  his
own  home.


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


393


CHAPTER  CXLI. — THE  DUCHESS  OF  LANCASTER  CARRIES  nER  DAUGHTER  TO  CASTILLE,  TO

MARRY  HER  TO  THE  INFANT. HAVING  FOUND  THE  BONES  OF  HER  FATHER,  SHE

HAS  THEM  CONVEYED  TO  SEVILLE,  AND  BURIED  WITH  REGAL  OBSEQUIES.

Shortly  after  these  deeds  of  arms,  the  duchess  of  Lancaster  made  preparations  for  her
journey  into  Castille,  whither  she  was  to  carry  her  daughter,  to  solemnise  her  marriage  with
the  son  of  the  king  of  Castille.  It  was  her  intention,  when  in  Castille,  to  visit  the  field  of
battle  of  Monteil,  where  her  father,  don  Pedro,  had  lost  his  life,  and  make  strict  inquiries
where  his  body  had  at  that  time  been  buried,  which,  when  found,  was  to  be  taken  up,  and
conveyed  to  the  city  of  Seville,  and  magnificently  interred  there,  in  a manner  becoming  a
king.  When,  in  the  month  of  March  1389,  the  sun  began  to  have  some  force,  and  the  days
to  lengthen,  the  duchess,  having  her  array  ready,  set  out  from  Bordeaux,  and  wTent  to
Bayonne,  where  she  parted  from  the  duke,  who  returned  to  Bordeaux.  She  and  her  ladies
continued  their  journey  to  the  city  of  Dax,  where  they  were  joyfully  received,  as  that  town
belonged  to  England.  They  there  reposed  themselves  for  two  days,  and  then  pursued  their
road  through  the  country  of  the  Basques,  the  pass  of  Roncesvalles,  and  entered  Navarre.  At
Pampeluna,  they  found  the  king  and  queen  of  Navarre,  who  received  them  kindly  : for  the
queen  was  sister  to  the  king  of  Castillo*.

The  duchess  of  Lancaster  and  her  daughter  were  upwards  of  a month  traversing  Navarre,
for  they  resided  at  different  parts  with  the  king  and  queen ; and  wherever  they  went  all
their  expenses  were  defrayed.  On  their  entrance  into  Castille,  they  were  most  respectfully
treated  by  those  of  the  king’s  household  who  had  been  sent  to  meet  them  : there  were  also
deputies  from  different  parts  of  the  realm.  All  the  kingdoms  of  Spain,  Castille  and  Galicia,
Seville  and  Toledo,  and  Cordova,  were  rejoiced  at  the  arrival  of  these  ladies,  since  the
younger  was  about  to  marry  the  son  of  king  John  their  lord.  And  it  seemed  to  them  all
that  profound  peace  would  ensue,  for  they  should  be  freed  from  all  fear  of  the  English;  and  as
to  the  Portuguese,  they  should,  as  they  said,  make  head  against  them  very  easily.  Thus  the
ladies  proceeded  to  meet  king  John  of  Castille  at  Burgos,  who  gave  them  a splendid  and  affec-
tionate reception ; the  prelates  and  barons  of  the  country  were  there  also,  who  received  them
in  a similar  manner.  So  they  were  entertained  in  such  a manner  as  was  due  to  them  ; and
the  agreements  before  entered  into,  written  and  sealed,  between  John  king  of  Castille  and
John  duke  of  Lancaster  were  then  confirmed.  The  duke  of  Lancaster,  and  his  wife  were  to
receive  a yearly  revenue  of  fifty  thousand  francs,  for  which  four  cities  and  the  whole  country
of  Medina  del  Campo  were  pledged  ; and  further,  the  duchess  of  Lancaster  was  to  receive
for  the  support  of  her  household  sixteen  thousand  francs  ; and  her  daughter  and  the  son  of
the  king  were,  during  the  lifetime  of  the  king,  to  be  put  in  possession  of  the  whole  country
of  Galicia,  and  the  young  prince  was  to  have  the  title  of  prince  of  Galiciaf.

The  marriage  having  been  solemnised,  and  all  contracts  signed,  the  duchess  left  her  daughter
with  the  king  and  her  young  husband,  who  was  then  but  eight  years  old.  She  took  leave
of  the  king  to  go  to  Monteil,  as  she  had  proposed,  who  had  her  attended  by  the  greatest
personages  of  his  court.  On  her  arrival  at  Monteil,  such  researches  were  made,  that  she
discovered  where  her  father  had  been  buried,  and  had  his  bones  taken  up,  washed  and
embalmed,  and  carried  in  a coffin  to  Seville,  where  the  cavalcade  was  met  by  large  pro-
cessions from  that  town.  The  bones  were  conveyed  to  the  cathedral,  and  there  most
reverently  buried,  with  very  solemn  obsequies,  which  were  attended  by  king  John  of  Castille,
his  son,  the  young  prince  of  Galicia,  and  the  greater  part  of  the  prelates  and  barons  of  the
realm.  After  the  obsequies,  each  person  returned  home  : the  king  of  Castille,  accompanied
by  his  son  and  daughter-in-law,  went  to  V al  di  Soria ; but  the  duchess  of  Lancaster  went
to  Medina  del  Campo,  a handsome  and  large  town,  which  now  belonged  to  her  by  the  late
treaties  of  peace,  and  remained  there  some  time.

W e will  leave  speaking  of  her  and  of  Castille,  and  relate  the  marriage  of  the  duke  of  Berry,
and  other  events  which  ensued.

* Charles  II.  king  of  Navarre  married,  in  1361,  Leonora,  daughter  of  Henry  II.  and  sister  of  John,  king  of
Castille. — Ed.  f His  title  was  Prince  of  the  Asturias. — Ed.


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &g.


394


CHAPTER  CXLII. THE  DUKE  OP  BERRY  NEGOTIATES  SO  SUCCESSFULLY  WITH  THE  COUNT  DE

FOIX,  THAT  HE  SENDS  TO  HIM  HIS  COUSIN  OF  BOULOGNE,  WHOM  HE  INSTANTLY
MARRIES.

The  duke  of  Berry,  whose  first  duchess,  tire  lady  Joan  of  Armagnac,  had  departed  this
life,  was  very  impatient  to  marry  again ; for  no  sooner  was  he  assured  of  having  failed  in
his  proposals  to  the  duke  of  Lancaster,  than  he  set  clerks  to  work,  and,  with  proper
messengers,  sent  to  negotiate  with  the  count  de  Foix  for  the  daughter  of  the  count  de
Boulogne,  whom  he  had  had  in  wardship  for  nine  years.  Because  the  duke  of  Berry  had
no  prospect  of  success  but  through  the  count  de  Foix,  (who  was  of  such  a character  that  he
would  do  nothing  that  was  disagreeable  to  himself  for  either  father,  mother,  pope,  or  any
friend  the  young  lady  had,)  he  opened  himself  to  his  nephew  the  king  of  France,  and  to  his
brother  of  Burgundy,  entreating  them  earnestly  to  interfere  in  the  business.  The  king-
laughed  most  heartily  at  his  uncle  of  Berry,  who  was  now  of  a certain  age,  and  said, — “ My
good  uncle,  what  will  you  do  with  a young  girl  of  only  twelve  years  old,  and  yon  are  sixty  ?
On  my  faith,  it  is  great  folly  in  you  to  think  of  such  things.  Propose  my  fair  cousin  John,
your  son,  to  her,  who  is  of  a proper  ago,  and  a more  suitable  match.”  “ My  lord,”  replied,
the  duke,  “ this  has  been  proposed,  but  the  count  de  Foix  would  not  listen  to  it,  because  my
son  descends  by  the  mother  from  the  Armagnacs,  and  they  are  now  and  have  been  some
time  at  war.  If  the  girl  is  too  young,  I will  spare  her  awhile,  until  she  be  a perfect  woman.”
“ Indeed  !”  said  the  king,  “ but,  my  bonny  uncle,  she  will  not  spare  you.”  He  then  laugh-
ingly added, — “ However,  since  we  see  your  love  for  her  is  so  strong,  we  will  cheerfully
assist  you  in  the  matter.”

Not  long  after  this,  the  king  ordered  the  lord  de  la  Riviere,  his  first  knight,  steward  of
his  household  and  chamberlain,  to  undertake  a journey  to  Bearn,  and  with  him  the  viscount
d’Assy.  The  duke  of  Burgundy  named,  as  envoys  on  his  part,  the  bishop  of  Autun,  and
sir  William  de  la  Tremouille.  The  duke  of  Berry  entreated  a prudent  and  valiant  knight,
count  John  de  Sancerre,  to  go  thither  on  his  part.  These  five  knights,  who  were  appointed
to  demand  this  young  lady  in  marriage,  for  the  duke  of  Berry  from  the  count  de  Foix,  left
their  homes,  and  were  all  to  meet  at  Avignon.  They  staid  with  pope  Clement,  who  was
cousin-german  to  the  father  of  the  lady,  full  fifteen  days,  and  about  Candlemas  departed,
taking  the  road  through  Nismes  and  Montpellier  to  Toulouse.

They  travelled,  with  great  state  and  short  journeys,  unto  Beziers  and  Carcassonne,  where
they  found  the  marshal  de  Sancerre,  who  received  them  very  magnificently,  as  was  right.
He  conversed  with  them  concerning  the  count  de  Foix,  of  his  affairs  and  establishments,  for
it  was  not  more  than  two  months  since  he  had  returned  from  thence.  From  Carcassonne  they
went  to  Toulouse,  and  there  remained  while  they  sent  messengers  to  the  count  de  Foix,  at
Orthes.  They  opened  their  proposals  of  marriage,  but  distantly,  for  at  the  beginning  the
count  was  very  cold,  on  account  of  the  duke  of  Lancaster,  who  at  the  time  resided  at
Bordeaux  or  Libourne,  having  made  offers  of  his  son,  the  earl  of  Derby,  for  the  young  lady
of  Boulogne ; and  it  was  thought,  from  the  long  time  these  lords  remained  at  Toulouse,  the
marriage  would  not  take  effect.  They  regularly  sent  daily  and  weekly  accounts  of  their
progress,  and  what  answers  they  received  from  the  count  de  Foix,  to  the  duke  of  Berry,
who  resided  at  La  Nonnette*  in  Auvergne,  and  the  duke,  whose  only  anxiety  was  to  bring
the  matter  to  a conclusion,  repeatedly  wrote  back  to  press  them  not  to  desist  until  they  had
completed  the  business.

The  count  de  Foix,  who  was  wise  and  subtle,  seeing  the  ardour  of  the  duke,  treated  very
coldly,  and  managed  the  matter  so  well,  that,  with  the  consent,  and  indeed  at  the  entreaty
of  all  parties,  he  received  thirty  thousand  francs  for  the  time  the  young  lady  had  been  under
his  care  and  wardship.  He  might  have  had  a larger  sum,  had  he  demanded  it ; but  he
wished  to  show  moderation,  that  he  might  have  their  thanks,  and  also  that  the  duke  of
Berry  should  feel  himself  under  some  obligations  to  him.  When  everything  was  concluded,


* “ La  Nonnette,”  a town  in  Auvergne,  election  of  Issoire.


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  See,


305


the  count  do  Foix  sent  the  young  lady  of  Boulogne  to  Morlans,  escorted  by  five  hundred
lances,  under  the  command  of  sir  Espaign  du  Lyon,  sir  Reginald  William,  sir  Peter  de
Cabestan,  sir  Adam  de  Cacasse,  sir  Manaut  Nouilles,  and  sir  Peter  de  Kes.  She  was  there
delivered,  in  the  name  of  the  duke  of  Berry,  to  the  ambassadors  from  France,  who  were
escoi’ted  by  the  marshal  of  France  with  five  hundred  spears,  and  there  the  two  parties
separated.  Those  from  Foix  returned  home,  and  the  French  carried  with  them  the  lady.

The  duke  of  Berry  had  sent  to  her  his  array  of  cars  and  horses,  with  every  sort  of  dress
and  ornament  for  her  head,  as  if  she  had  been  queen  of  France.  I,  John  Froissart,  the
author  of  this  history,  took  my  departure  from  Orthes  at  the  same  time  with  her ; for  the
count  de  Foix  had  told  me,  I need  not  be  in  a hurry  to  leave  him,  for  he  would  take  care  I
should  return  in  good  company.  The  duchess  of  Berry,  for  such  I shall  henceforth  call  her,
continued  her  journey  until  she  came  to  Avignon,  when  she  dismounted  at  lodgings  provided
for  her  by  the  pope  at  Villeneuve,  without  Avignon.  On  the  morrow,  between  eight  and
nine  o’clock  in  the  morning,  all  the  cardinals  waited  on  her ; when,  having  mounted  a white
palfrey  the  pope  had  given  her,  she  crossed  the  bridge  over  the  Rhone  in  great  state,  and
waited  on  the  pope  at  his  palace  at  Avignon,  who  was  seated  in  consistory  on  his  papal
throne  to  receive  her.  He  kissed  her  on  the  mouth,  on  account  of  their  relationship  ; and
the  duchess,  with  her  company,  then  went  to  dinner  at  the  hotel  of  the  cardinal  of  Turin,
below  the  pope’s  palace,  and  there  met  a great  company  of  cardinals.  This  was  on  a
Tuesday:  the  following  day  the  pope  entertained  her  and  her  attendants  at  dinner  ; and  this
visit  of  the  duchess,  as  I have  heard  say,  cost  the  pope  ten  thousand  francs.

On  the  Friday  she  supped  at  the  palace,  and  took  leave  of  the  pope.  On  the  Saturday
she  departed,  and  dined  and  lay  at  Orange.  She  continued  her  journey  on  horseback,  or  in
a carriage,  through  Valence  and  Vienne,  to  Lyon,  where  she  reposed  herself  for  two  Avhole
days.  On  her  departure  she  went  to  La  Bresle,  then  passing  through  the  country  of  Forets,
came  to  La  Palisse,  in  Burgundy,  then  to  Quissy,  to  Hanche-sur-Allier,  and  to  Riom,  in
Auvergne,  where  she  likewise  remained  two  days  before  the  duke  of  Berry  arrived.  lie
came  thither  in  great  state,  the  night  of  Whitsunday,  and  on  that  day,  at  two  o’clock  in  the
morning,  he  was  married  to  her.  The  marriage  was  very  magnificent,  and  there  were
present  the  count  de  Boulogne,  the  count  d’Estampes,  and  the  count  dauphin  d’Auvergne.
The  feastings  and  tournaments  lasted  for  four  days,  and  I,  the  writer  of  this  book,  was  a
partaker  of  them  all.


CIIAPTER  CXLIII.— CERTAIN  PRUDENT  MEN  NEGOTIATE  A TRUCE,  FOR  THREE  YEARS,
BETWEEN  THE  FRENCH  AND  ENGLISH,  AND  ALL  THEIR  ALLIES.

You  have  heard  that  a truce  had  been  concluded  with  all  the  English  garrisons,  from  the
Loire  to  the  country  beyond  the  Garonne  and  Gironde,  to  last  until  Saint  John  the  Baptist’s
day,  1389.  During  this  time,  some  wise  and  great  lords  opened  a negotiation  for  a general
truce  between  France  and  England,  on  sea  and  land,  for  three  years.  It  was  the  intention
of  these  persons  that  all  the  allies  of  either  side  should  be  included  in  it,  such  as  the  kings
of  Castille  and  Scotland,  the  king  of  Portugal,  and  many  barons  of  Upper  Gascony.  They
had  much  trouble  before  they  could  accomplish  this ; for  the  Scots  would  no  way  listen  to
it,  though,  when  the  proposal  was  first  made  by  the  king  of  France  to  the  king  of  Scotland,
he  himself  had  readily  assented,  for  he  wished  not  for  war.  lie  summoned,  therefore,  the
prelates  and  barons  of  his  realm,  to  lay  the  matter  before  them,  as  he  could  not  agree  to
this  truce  for  the  kingdom  without  their  consent ; and,  if  he  had,  they  would  not  have
abided  by  it.  The  letters  which  had  been  received  from  the  king  of  France  were  read  in
their  presence,  containing  his  wish  that  they  would  agree  with  him  for  a truce  of  three  years.
This  intelligence  was  very  disagreeable  to  them,  and  they  said, — “ The  king  of  France  seems
to  propose  a truce,  when  it  is  the  moment  to  continue  the  war : we  have  completely  defeated
the  English  at  Otterbournc ; and  the  season  is  not  so  far  advanced,  but  that  we  may  do  it
again  and  again.”  Many  debates  ensued,  for  they  were  very  unwilling  to  accept  of  a truce.
It  was  at  length  resolved  to  send  a bishop  and  three  knights  to  the  king  of  France  and  his


non  CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.

council,  to  prevent  the  treaty  from  being  further  advanced,  and  to  offer  the  friendship  of  the
realm  of  Scotland.

The  bishop  of  St.  Andrews,  sir  Archibald  Douglas,  sir  William  Lindsay,  and  sir  John
Sinclair,  were  appointed  on  this  embassy.  They  departed  as  speedily  as  they  could,  and,
having  landed  at  Sluys,  rode  on  to  Paris.  They  laid  their  credential  letter^,  from  the
prelates  and  barons  of  Scotland,  before  the  king  of  France  and  his  council,  and  were  readily
listened  to,  from  the  great  desire  they  had  to  prosecute  the  war  against  the  English.  But,
notwithstanding  this,  the  treaty  was  now  so  far  advanced,  that  they  could  not  retract :
the  Scots,  therefore,  had  very  civil  answers  given  them  ; but  the  treaty  was,  of  necessity,
completed.

The  truce  was  concluded,  through  the  means  of  commissioners  of  high  rank  on  both  sides,
who  held  their  conferences  at  Leulinghem,  between  Boulogne  and  Calais.  In  it  were
included  all  the  allies  of  France  and  England,  who  agreed  to  preserve  the  peace  inviolate,
by  every  means,  public  or  private,  for  the  space  of  three  years.  The  commissioners  from
the  king  of  France  were  the  bishop  of  Bayeux,  count  Waleran  do  St.  Pol,  sir  William  de
Melun,  sir  Nicholas  Bracque,  and  sir  John  le  Mercicr,  who  resided  at  Boulogne.  On  the
part  of  the  king  of  England  were  the  bishop  of  Durham,  the  earl  of  Salisbury,  sir  William
Beauchamp,  governor  of  Calais,  John  Lanon,  Nicholas  de  Gaberth,  and  Richard  Roelle,
clerk  and  doctor  of  laws,  who  remained  at  Calais.  The  place  of  conference,  where  they
mutually  assembled,  was  Leulinghem,  between  Boulogne  and  Calais.

At  this  period,  there  was  much  bustle  in  France  and  elsewhere,  on  account  of  the  splendid
feasts  king  Charles  intended  holding  at  Paris,  on  the  entry  of  his  queen  Isabella,  wbo  had
never  as  yet  visited  that  city.  Knights,  squires,  ladies  and  damsels  made  the  richest  dresses
for  the  occasion ; of  all  which  I will  give  an  exact  account,  before  I say  more  of  the  truce
that  was  fairly  written  out,  and  sealed  by  all  the  parties.


END  OF  TIIE  THIRD  VOLUME  OF  THE  CHRONICLES  OF  SIR  JOHN  FROISSART.


FOURTH  VOLUME


OF


THE  CHRONICLES  OF  SIR  JOHN  FROISSART.


CHAPTER  I. FROISSART  RELATES  niS  TRAVELS  AFTER  nE  HAD  LEFT  ORTIIES.

You  who  take  delight  in  this  history  must  know,  that  on  my  leaving  the  castle  of  the  nohle
count  Gaston  de  Foix,  I returned  through  Auvergne  and  France,  in  company  with  the
gallant  lord  de  la  Riviere  and  sir  William  de  la  Tremouille,  who  had  conducted  the  lady
Jane  of  Boulogne  to  the  duke  of  Berry  in  the  town  of  Riom,  where  he  had  married  her,  as
has  been  related ; for,  having  been  present  at  all  these  feasts,  I may  well  speak  of  them.  I
went  thence  to  Paris,  where  I met  the  nohle  lord  de  Coucy,  one  of  my  patrons,  who  had
lately  married  a daughter  to  the  duke  of  Lorrain.

The  lord  de  Coucy  entertained  me  kindly,  and  asked  many  questions  about  Foix,  Bearn,
pope  Clement,  and  Avignon,  as  well  as  concerning  the  nuptials  of  the  duke  of  Berry,  and  of
a particular  friend  of  his,  and  likewise  one  of  my  patrons,  the  lord  Berald,  dauphin  of
Auvergne.  To  all  his  questions  I satisfied  him  as  to  what  I knew,  or  had  seen,  insomuch
that  he  was  well  pleased,  and  said, — “ You  shall  come  with  me  into  Cambresis,  for  I am
going  to  a castle  the  king  has  given  me,  called  Crevecoeur : it  is  two  leagues  from  Cambray,
and  nine  from  Valenciennes.”  “The  distances  are  very  right,  my  lord,”  replied  I,  and
accepted  his  other.  On  the  road,  he  told  me,  that  the  bishop  of  Bayeux,  the  count  de  St.
Pol,  sir  William  de  Melun,  and  sir  John  le  Mercier,  were  at  Boulogne,  by  orders  from  the
king  of  France ; and  that  there  were  at  Calais,  on  the  part  of  king  Richard  of  England,  the
bishop  of  Durham,  the  earl  of  Salisbury,  sir  William  Beauchamp,  governor  of  Calais,  sir
John  Clambon,  sir  Nicholas  Grandbourg,  knights  and  chamberlains  to  the  king  of  England,
and  sir  Richard  Rocharle*,  doctor  of  laws;  who  had  remained  at  Boulogne  and  Calais
upwards  of  a month,  waiting  for  commissioners  from  Scotland,  “ who  were  not  arrived  six
days  ago,  as  my  cousin  Saint  Pol  writes  me  word.  The  king  of  France  has  therefore
written  to  king  Robert  of  Scotland,  to  press  him  to  accept  of  the  truce,  for  the  English  will
not  consent  to  it  unless  the  Scots  be  included.”

Thus  continuing  our  journey,  we  came  to  Crevecoeur,  where  I remained  with  him  three
days  to  repose  and  refresh  myself,  when  I took  leave,  and  went  to  Valenciennes.  After
staying  there  a fortnight,  I went  to  Holland,  to  visit  my  gallant  patron  and  lord,  the  count
de  Blois,  whom  I found  at  Schoenhoven.  He  made  me  good  cheer,  and  inquired  after  news.
I told  him  enough  of  all  I had  seen  or  heard,  and  was  with  him  upwards  of  a month,  as
well  at  Gouda  as  Schoenhoven,  and  then  took  leave  to  return  to  France,  to  learn  the  parti-
culars of  the  conferences  that  were  holding  at  Leulinghem,  between  the  French  and  English,

* “ Clamhon, — Grandbourg,. — -Rocharle.  ” These  follows.  Those  from  France  are  also  different  from
names  are  different  in  almost  all  the  copies,  MS.  or  print-  Froissart.

ed.  They  are  called  Lanon,  L’asnon — Gaberth,  Gunboch  The  bishop  of  Durham, — sir  William  Beauchamp,

— Roolle  and  Rohale.  Lord  Berners  retains  them  as  in  governor  of  Calais, — sir  John  Devcreux,  steward  of  the
the  preceding  chapter,  but  totally  omits  them  in  this.  Tho  king’s  household, — sir  John  Clanvow,  sir  Nicholas  Dag-
treaty,  which  is  at  length  in  Rymer,  has  the  names  as  geworth,  knights  of  the  king’s  chamber.


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


398


and  likewise  to  be  present  at  the  magnificent  feasts  that  were  to  be  given  at  queen  Isabella’s
public  entry  into  Paris,  where  as  yet  she  had  never  been*.

To  learn  the  most  I could,  I travelled  through  Brabant,  and  managed  to  arrive  at  Paris
eight  days  before  the  commencement  of  the  feasts.  I had  so  much  forethought,  respecting
the  French  and  Scots  lords  who  had  been  at  the  conferences  at  Leulinghem,  that  I made
acquaintance  with  sir  William  de  Melun,  who  related  to  me  all  their  transactions,  and  that
the  count  de  St.  Pol  had  passed  over  to  England,  to  visit  his  brother-in-law,  king  Richard,
and  to  have  the  truce  confirmed,  which  was  to  last  for  three  years  ; but  he  said  he  would  be
here  at  all  events  to  partake  of  the  feasts.  I asked  sir  William, — “ what  lords  the  Scots
had  sent  to  the  conference ; for  that  in  my  younger  days  I had  been  in  Scotland,  as  far  as
the  Highlands,  and  as  at  that  time  I was  at  the  court  of  king  David,  I was  acquainted  with
the  greater  part  of  the  nobility  of  that  country.”  He  told  me,  “ that  the  bishop  of  Aberdeen,
sir  James  and  sir  David  Lindsay,  and  sir  Walter  Sinclair,  were  the  commissioners  for  Scot-
land f.”  All  this  I carefully  remembered,  that  I might  enregister  it  in  my  Chronicle,  with
all  I should  see  or  hear  at  this  grand  feast  of  queen  Isabella’s  entry,  the  arrangement  of
which  was  as  follows.


CHAPTER  II. QUEEN  ISABELLA  OF  FRANCE  MAKES  HER  PUBLIC  ENTRY  INTO

THE  CITY  OF  PARIS.


On  Sunday  the  20th  day  of  JuneJ,  in  the  year  of  our  Lord  1399,  there  were  such  crowds
of  people  in  Paris,  it  was  marvellous  to  see  them  ; and  on  this  Sunday,  the  noble  ladies  of
France  who  were  to  accompany  the  queen,  assembled  in  the  afternoon  at  Saint  Denis,  with
such  of  the  nobility  as  were  appointed  to  lead  the  litters  of  the  queen  and  her  attendants.
The  citizens  of  Paris,  to  the  amount  of  twelve  hundred,  were  mounted  on  horseback,  dressed
in  uniforms  of  green  and  crimson,  and  lined  each  side  of  the  road.  Queen  Joan  and  her
daughter  §,  the  duchess  of  Orleans,  entered  Paris  first,  about  an  hour  after  noon,  in  a
covered  litter,  and  passing  through  the  great  street  of  Saint  Denis,  went  to  the  palace,  where
the  king  was  waiting  for  them,  and  this  day  they  went  no  farther.  The  queen  of  France,
attended  by  the  duchess  of  Berry,  the  duchess  of  Burgundy,  the  duchess  of  Touraine,  the
duchess  of  Lorrain,  the  countess  of  Nevers,  the  lady  of  Coucy,  with  a crowd  of  other
ladies,  began  the  procession  in  open  litters,  most  richly  ornamented.  The  duchess  of
Touraine  was  not  in  a litter,  but  to  display  herself  the  more,  was  mounted  on  a palfrey,
magnificently  caparisoned.

The  litter  of  the  queen  was  led  by  the  dukes  of  Touraine  and  Bourbon  at  the  head ; the
dukes  of  Berry  and  Burgundy  were  at  the  centre,  and  the  lord  Peter  de  Navarre  and  the
count  d’Ostrevant  behind  the  litter,  which  was  open  and  beautifully  ornamented.  The
duchess  of  Touraine  followed,  on  her  palfrey,  led  by  the  count  de  la  Marche  and  the  count
de  Nevers,  the  whole  advancing  slowly,  at  a foot’s  pace.  After  her  came  the  duchess  of
Burgundy  and  her  daughter,  the  lady  Margaret  of  Hainault,  in  an  open  litter,  led  by  the
lord  Henry  de  Bar,  and  sir  William,  the  young  count  de  Namur.  Then  came  the  duchess


* Underneath  is  the  translation  of  a note,  vol.  iii.  p.  85.
of  M.  Levesque’s  history  of  the  five  first  kings  of  the
race  of  Valois.

“ One  would  be  tempted  to  believe,  from  the  recitals
of  our  historians,  that  the  queen,  who  had  now  been
married  four  years,  made  this  her  first  entry  into  Paris.
It  is  a mistake.  She  was  there  in  1386,  when  Charles
wrote  to  her,  the  28th  April,  from  Montdidier,  to  send  to
Amiens  the  amount  of  the  taxes,  and  to  hasten  all  the
men  at  arms  and  foreigners  that  were  intended  for  the
invasion  of  England  from  Paris.  He  orders  her  at  the
same  time  to  proclaim  war  against  the  Flemings  and  their
allies.  One  may  conjecture,  from  this  letter,  that  he  had
entrusted  her  with  the  regency.”

f The  Scots  commissioners  are  evidently  wrong.  The
finest  MS.  in  the  British  Museum  has  sir  Archibald  and


sir  William  Lindsay,  and  sir  John  Sinclair.  But  in
Rymer,  there  is  mention  only  made  of  the  archbishop  of
Glasgow  and  bishop  of  Dunkeld.

J “ June."  My  MSS.  and  that  in  the  B.  Museum
have  the  20th  of  August.

§ “ Queen  Joan  and  her  daughter."  I suspect
there  must  be  some  mistake,  although  this  paragraph  is  in
ail  the  editions  I know  of,  printed  and  MS. ; but  I cannot
discover  who  these  personages  were,  for  all  the  queens  of
that  name  were  dead,  the  last  of  them  the  preceding  year,
and  the  duke  of  Touraine,  the  king’s  brother,  succeeded
to  the  title  of  duke  of  Orleans  on  the  death  of  Philip,  in
1391  : he  had  been  lately  married  to  Valentina,  of  Milan,
who  is  mentioned  afterwards  as  forming  part  of  the  pro-
cession.


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


399


of  Berry,  and  the  daughter  of  the  lord  de  Coucy,  in  an  open  and  ornamented  litter,  led  by
sir  James  de  Bourbon,  and  sir  Philip  d’ Artois.  Then  the  duchess  of  Bar  and  her  daughter,
led  by  sir  Charles  d’Albret  and  the  lord  de  Coucy.  There  was  no  particular  mention  made
of  the  other  ladies  and  damsels  who  followed  in  covered  chariots,  or  on  palfreys,  led  by  their
knights.  Serjeants,  and  others  of  the  king’s  officers,  had  full  employment,  in  making  way
for  the  procession,  and  keeping  off  the  crowd ; for  there  were  such  numbers  assembled,  it
seemed  as  if  all  the  world  had  come  thither.


Triumphal  Entry  of  Queen  Isabella  into  Paris.  From  a MS.  Froissart  of  the  15th  century.


At  the  gate  of  St.  Denis,  that  opens  into  Paris,  was  the  representation  of  a starry
firmament,  and  within  it  were  children  dressed  as  angels,  whose  singing  and  chaunting  was
melodiously  sweet.  There  was  also  an  image  of  the  Virgin  holding  in  her  arms  a child,
who  at  times  amused  himself  with  a windmill,  made  of  a large  walnut.  The  upper  part  of
this  firmament  was  richly  adorned  with  the  arms  of  France  and  Bavaria,  with  a brilliant
sun  dispersing  its  rays  through  the  heavens;  and  this  sun  was  the  king’s  device  at  the
ensuing  tournaments*.  The  queen  of  France  and  the  ladies  took  delight  in  viewing  this  as
they  passed,  as  indeed  did  all  who  saw  it.  The  queen  then  advanced  slowly  to  the  fountain,
in  the  street  of  Saint  Denis,  which  was  covered  and  decorated  with  fine  blue  cloth,
besprinkled  over  with  golden  flowers-de-luce.  The  pillars  that  surrounded  the  fountain
were  ornamented  with  the  arms  of  the  chief  barons  of  France ; and,  instead  of  water,  it
ran  in  great  streams  of  Claire  t,  and  excellent  PiementJ.  Around  this  fountain  were  young
girls  handsomely  dressed,  having  on  their  heads  caps  of  solid  gold,  who  sang  so  sweetly,  it

* Louis  NIV.  took  the  same  device,  with  the  motto  of  “ Nec  pluribus  impar.”

F “ Claire,”  or  clairet, — light  red  wine. — Ed.

+ “ Piement  ’’—is  a liquor  made  of  honey,  wine,  and  different  spices. — Du  Cange.


4G0


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


was  a pleasure  to  hear  them ; and  they  held  in  their  hands  cups  of  gold,  offering  their
liquors  to  all  who  chose  to  drink.  The  queen  stopped  there  to  hear  and  look  at  them,  as
did  the  ladies  as  they  passed  by.

Below  the  monastery  of  the  Trinity  there  was  a scaffold  erected  in  the  street,  and  on  this
scaffold  a castle,  with  a representation  of  the  battle  with  king  Saladin,  performed  by  living-
actors  ; the  Christians  on  one  side  and  the  Saracens  on  the  other.  All  the  lords  of  renown,
who  had  been  present,  were  represented  with  their  blazoned  war-coats,  such  as  were  worn  in
those  times.  A little  above  was  the  person  of  the  king  of  France,  surrounded  by  his  twelve
peers,  in  their  proper  arms ; and  when  the  queen  came  opposite  the  scaffold,  king  Richard
was  seen  to  leave  his  companions,  and  advance  to  the  king  of  France,  to  request  permission
to  fight  the  Saracens,  which  having  obtained,  he  returned  to  his  army,  who  instantly
began  the  attack  on  Saladin  and  the  Sai’acens.  The  battle  lasted  for  a considerable  time,  and
was  seen  with  much  pleasure.

The  procession  then  passed  on,  and  came  to  the  second  gate  of  St.  Denis*,  where,  like  to
the  first,  there  had  been  made  a representation  of  a richly  starred  firmament,  with  the  Holy
Trinity  seated  in  great  majesty,  and  within  the  heaven  little  children  as  angels  singing  very
melodiously.  As  the  queen  passed  under  the  gate,  two  angels  descended  from  above,  holding
an  extraordinarily  rich  golden  crown,  ornamented  with  precious  stones,  which  they  gently
placed  on  the  head  of  the  queen,  sweetly  singing  the  following  verses :

“ Dame  enclose  entre  fleurs  de  Lys,

Reine  etes  vous  de  Paris,

De  France,  et  de  tout  le  pais.

Nous  en  r’allons  en  paradis.

When  they  came  opposite  the  chapel  of  St.  James,  they  found  a scaffold  erected  on  the
right  hand,  richly  decorated  with  tapestry,  surrounded  with  curtains,  in  the  manner  of  a
chamber  : within  which  were  men  who  played  finely  on  organs.  The  whole  street  of  Saint
Denis  was  covered  with  a canopy  of  rich  camlet  and  silk  cloths,  as  if  they  had  had  the  cloths  for
nothing,  or  were  at  Alexandria  or  Damascus.  I,  the  writer  of  this  account,  was  present,  and
astonished  whence  such  quantities  of  rich  stuffs  and  ornaments  could  have  come ; for  all  the
houses  on  each  side  the  great  street  of  Saint  Denis,  as  far  as  the  Chatelet,  or  indeed  to  the
great  bridgef,  were  hung  with  tapestries  representing  various  scenes  and  histories  to  the
delight  of  all  beholders.

The  queen  and  her  ladies,  conducted  by  great  lords  in  their  litters,  arrived  at  length  at
the  gate  of  the  Chatelet,  where  they  stopped  to  see  other  splendid  pageants  that  had  been
prepared  for  them.  At  the  gate  of  the  Chatelet  was  erected  a castle  of  wood,  with  towers,
strong  enough  to  last  forty  years.  At  each  of  the  battlements  was  a knight  completely  armed
from  head  to  foot ; and  in  the  castle  was  a superb  bed,  as  finely  decorated  with  curtains,  and
every  thing  else,  as  if  for  the  chamber  of  the  king,  and  this  bed  was  called  the  bed  of
justice,  in  which  lay  a person  to  represent  St.  Anne.  On  the  esplanade,  before  the  castle,
(which  comprehended  a tolerably  large  space)  was  a warren  and  much  brush-wood,  within
which  were  plenty  of  hares,  rabbits  and  young  birds,  that  fled  out  and  in  again  for  fear  of  the
populace.  From  this  wood,  on  the  side  near  the  queen,  there  issued  a large  white  hart,  that
made  for  the  bed  of  justice ; from  another  part  came  forth  a lion  and  eagle,  well  represented,
and  proudly  advanced  towards  the  stag.  Then  twelve  young  maidens,  richly  dressed,  with
chaplets  of  gold  on  their  heads,  came  out  of  the  wood,  holding  naked  swords  in
their  hands,  and  placed  themselves  between  the  hart,  the  lion,  and  eagle, — showing  that
with  their  swords  they  were  determined  to  defend  the  hart  and  the  bed  of  justice.

The  queen,  the  ladies  and  lords,  having  seen  this  pageant  with  pleasure,  passed  on  to  the
bridge  of  Notre-Dame,  which  was  decorated  so  handsomely,  it  could  not  be  amended  : it  was
covered  with  a starry  canopy,  of  green  and  crimson,  and  the  streets  were  all  hung  with
tapestry  as  far  as  the  church  of  Notre-Dame.  When  the  queen  and  her  ladies  had  passed


* Denys  Sauvage,  in  a marginal  note,  says,  “ that  ho
thinks  this  gate  was  called  la  Porte  aux  Peintres,”  and
was  pulled  down  in  the  reign  of  Francis  I.  It  was  called


Porte  aux  Peintres,  because  many  painters  resided  near  it.
— Sauval.

t Denys  Sauvage  says,  he  means  by  the  great  bridge
the  bridge  of  Notre-Dame.


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


401


the  bridge,  and  were  near  the  church,  it  was  late  in  the  evening ; for  the  procession,  ever  since
it  had  set  out  from  St.  Denis,  had  advanced  hut  a foot’s  pace.  The  great  bridge  of  Paris
was  hung  all  its  length  with  green  and  white  sarcenet ; hut  before  the  queen  and  her  com-
pany entered  Notre-Dame,  she  was  presented  with  other  pageants  that  delighted  her  and  her
ladies  very  much  : I will  describe  them.

A full  month  before  the  queen’s  entry  to  Paris,  a master  engineer  from  Geneva  had
fastened  a cord  to  the  highest  tower  of  Notre-Dame,  which,  passing  high  above  the  streets,
was  fixed  to  the  most  elevated  house  on  the  bridge  of  Saint  Michael.  As  the  queen  was
passing  down  the  street  of  Notre-Dame,  this  man  left  the  tower,  and,  seating  himself  on  the
cord,  descended,  singing,  with  two  lighted  torches  in  his  hand,  for  it  was  now  dark,  to  the
great  astonishment  of  all  who  saw  him  how  lie  could  do  it.  He  kept  the  lighted  torches  in
his  hands  that  he  might  be  seen  hv  all  Paris,  and  even  two  or  three  leagues  off.  lie  played
many  tricks  on  the  rope,  and  liis  agility  was  highly  praised.

The  Bishop  of  Paris  and  his  numerous  clergy,  clothed  in  their  robes,  were  without  the
church  of  Notre-Dame,  waiting  for  the  queen,  who  was  helped  out  of  her  litter  by  the  four
dukes,  of  Berry,  Burgundy,  Touraine  and  Bourbon. — When  the  other  ladies  had  left  their
litters  and  dismounted  from  their  palfreys  they  all  entered  the  church  in  grand  procession,
preceded  by  the  bishop  and  priests,  singing  aloud  to  the  praise  of  God  and  the  Virgin  Mary.
The  queen  was  conducted  through  the  nave  and  choir  to  the  great  altar,  where,  on  her  knees,
she  made  her  prayers  according  as  she  thought  good,  and  presented  as  her  offering,  four  cloths
of  gold,  and  the  handsome  crown  which  the  angels  had  put  on  her  head  at  the  gate  of  Paris,
as  has  been  related.  The  lord  John  de  la  Riviere  and  sir  John  le  Mercier  instantly  brought
one  more  rich  with  which  they  crowned  her.

This  being  done,  the  queen  and  her  ladies  returned  to  their  litters,  wherein  they  were
seated  as  before ; and,  as  ic  was  late,  there  were  upwards  of  five  hundred  lighted  tapers
attending  the  procession.  In  such  array  were  they  conducted  to  the  palace,  where  the  king,
queen  Joan,  and  the  duchess  of  Orleans,  were  waiting  for  them*.  The  ladies  here  quitted
their  litters,  and  were  conducted  to  different  apartments  ; and  the  lords,  after  the  dancing,
returned  to  their  hotelsf .

On  the  morrow,  which  was  Monday,  the  king  gave  a grand  dinner  to  a numerous  company
of  ladies ; and,  at  the  hour  of  high  mass,  the  queen  of  France  wras  led  by  the  before-mentioned
dukes  to  the  Holy  Chapel,  where  she  was  anointed  and  sanctified  as  queens  of  France  usually
are.  Sir  William  de  Viare,  archbishop  of  Rouen,  said  mass.  After  mass,  w hich  was  well  and
solemnly  sung,  the  king  and  queen  returned  to  their  apartments,  as  did  the  other  ladies  to  theirs
who  lodged  in  the  Palace.  Shortly  after  the  mass,  the  king,  queen,  and  all  the  ladies  entered
the  hall.  You  must  know,  that  the  great  table  of  marble  J,  which  is  in  this  hall,  and  is  never
removed,  was  covered  with  an  oaken  plank,  four  inches  thick,  and  the  royal  dinner  placed
thereon.  Near  the  table,  and  against  one  of  the  pillars,  was  the  king’s  buffet,  magnificently


* Denys  Sauvage,  in  a marginal  note,  says,  that  this
queen  Joan  was  the  widow  of  Charles  le  Bel,  and  her
daughter  Blanche  married  to  Philip  duke  of  Orleans,  brother
to  the  late  king  John.

Froissart  has  mentioned  them  before  ; hut  the  widow  of
Charles  le  Bel  died,  according  to  l’Art  de  Verifier  les  Dates,
at  Brie-comte-Robert,  1370,  and  queen  Isabella’s  entry
was  in  1389.

Froissart  having  omitted  a curious  circumstance  that
happened  at  this  entry  of  the  queen,  I shall  translate  it
from  Les  Grandes  Chroniques  de  St.  Denys.

“ The  king  having  heard  what  fine  pageants  were  pre-
paring, said  to  Savoisi,  who  was  one  of  his  valets-de-chambre,
‘ Savoisi,  I beg  that  thou  wouldst  mount  my  good  horse,
and  I will  get  up  behind  thee  ; and  we  will  disguise  our-
selves so  that  no  one  shall  know  us,  and  go  and  see  the
entry  of  my  wife.’  Savoisi  did  all  he  could  to  dissuade
the  king  from  this,  but  the  king  would  be  obeyed.  They
therefore  disguised  themselves,  and  the  king  rode  behind
Savoisi  to  different  parts  of  Paris.— They  came  to  the
Chatelet  as  the  queen  was  passing,  and  the  crowd  was  so
great,  that  Savoisi  got  into  the  midst.  Bailiffs,  armed
VOL  II.


with  staves,  had  been  stationed  there  to  prevent  any  harm
being  doneto  thepageant,  who  laid  about  them  mostlustily,
to  keep  off  the  crowd.  Savoisi  and  the  king, still  pushing
forward,  the  bailiffs,  who  knew  not  the  king,  gave  to  each
several  sharp  blows  on  their  shoulders.  In  the  evening,  the
king  told  the  ladies  what  had  happened  to  him  at  the
Chatelet,  and  there  was  much  laughing  and  joking  on  the
occasion  among  them.’’

X “ At  one  end  of  the  hall  of  the  Palace  was  placed  a
marble  table  that  filled  up  almost  the  whole  breadth  of  it,
and  was  of  such  a size  for  length,  breadth  and  thickness,
that  it  was  supposed  to  be  the  greatest  slab  of  marble
existing.

“ It  served,  for  two  or  three  hundred  years,  very  different
purposes  : at  one  time,  for  a theatre,  on  which  the  attor-
neys’ clerks  acted  their  mummeries,  and  at  another
for  the  royal  feasts,  where  only  emperors,  kings,  and
princes  of  the  blood  were  admitted,  with  their  ladies:
the  other  great  lords  dined  at  separate  tables.  It  wa,
consumed  by  fire  in  1618.” — Sauval.  Antiquites  di
Paris.


D I>


402


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


decked  out  with  gold  and  silver  plate,  and  much  envied  by  many  who  saw  it. — Before  the
king’s  table,  and  at  some  distance,  were  wooden  bars  with  three  entrances,  at  which  were
serjeants  at  arms,  ushers,  and  archers,  to  prevent  any  from  passing  them  but  those  who
served  the  table ; for  in  truth  the  crowd  was  so  very  great,  there  was  no  moving  but
witli  much  difficulty.  There  were  plenty  of  minstrels,  who  played  away  to  the  best  of  their
abilities.

The  kings,  prelates,  and  ladies,  having  washed  and  seated  themselves  at  table,  their  places
were  as  follows  : the  bishop  of  Noyon  was  seated  at  the  head  of  the  king’s  table,  then  the
bishop  of  Langres,  and  then  the  archbishop  of  Rouen,  by  the  side  of  the  king  of  France,  who
was  that  day  clothed  in  a crimson  surcoat,  lined  with  ermine,  and  the  royal  crown  on  his  head.
A little  above  the  king  was  the  queen,  crowned  also  very  richly.  Next  the  queen  was  placed
the  king  of  Armenia,  then  the  duchess  of  Berry,  the  duchess  of  Burgundy,  the  duchess  of  Tou-
raine,  madame  de  Nevers,  mademoiselle  Bonne  de  Bar,  madame  de  Coucy,  and  mademoiselle
Marie  de  Harcourt.  There  were  none  others  at  the  king’s  table,  except  at  the  very  lower
end,  the  lady  de  Sully,  wife  of  sir  Guy  de  la  Tremouille.  There  were  two  other  tables  in
the  hall,  at  which  were  seated  upwards  of  live  hundred  ladies  and  damsels ; but  the  crowd
was  so  great,  it  was  with  difficulty  they  could  be  served  with  their  dinner,  which  was  plentiful
and  sumptuous.  Of  this  it  is  not  worth  the  trouble  to  give  any  particulars ; but  I must
speak  of  some  devices  which  were  curiously  arranged,  and  would  have  given  the  king  much
amusement,  had  those  who  had  undertaken  it  been  able  to  act  their  parts.

In  the  middle  of  the  hall  was  erected  a castle  of  wood,  forty  feet  high,  twenty  feet  long,
and  as  many  wide,  with  towers  at  each  corner,  and  one  larger  in  the  middle.  This  castle  was
to  represent  the  city  of  Troy  the  great,  and  the  tower  in  the  middle  the  palace  of  Ilion,  from
which  were  displayed  the  banners  of  the  Trojans,  such  as  king  Priam,  Hector,  his  other  sons,
and  of  those  shut  up  in  the  place  with  them.  The  castle  being  on  wheels,  was  very  easily
moved  about.  There  was  a pavilion  likewise  on  wheels,  on  which  were  placed  the  banners
of  the  Grecian  kings,  that  was  moved,  as  it  were,  by  invisible  beings,  to  the  attack  of  Troy.
There  was  also,  by  way  of  reinforcement,  a large  ship,  well  built,  and  able  to  contain  one
hundred  men  at  arms,  that,  like  the  two  former,  was  ingeniously  moved  by  invisible  wheels.
Those  in  the  ship  and  pavilion  made  a sharp  attack  on  the  castle,  which  was  gallantly  de-
fended ; but  from  the  very  great  crowd,  this  amusement  could  not  last  long.  There  were  so
many  people  on  all  sides,  several  were  stifled  by  the  heat ; and  one  table  near  the  door  of
the  chamber  of  parliament,  at  which  a numerous  company  of  ladies  and  damsels  were  seated,
was  thrown  down,  and  the  company  forced  to  make  off  as  well  as  they  could.

The  queen  of  France  was  near  fainting,  from  the  excessive  heat,  and  one  of  the  doors  was
forced  to  be  thrown  open  to  admit  air.  The  lady  of  Coucy  was  in  the  same  situation.  The
king,  noticing  this,  ordered  an  end  to  be  put  to  the  feast,  when  the  tables  were  removed,  for
the  ladies  to  have  more  room.  Wine  and  spices  were  served  around,  and  every  one  retired
when  the  king  and  queen  went  to  their  apartments.  Those  ladies  who  did  not  lodge  in  the
Palace  returned  to  their  hotels,  to  recover  themselves  of  their  sufferings  from  the  heat  and
crowd.  The  lady  of  Coucy  remained  in  her  hotel  until  it  was  late  ; but  the  queen,  about
five  o’clock,  left  the  Palace,  attended  by  the  duchesses  before  named,  and,  mounting  an  open
litter,  proceeded  through  the  streets  of  Paris,  followed  by  the  ladies  in  litters,  or  on  horseback,
to  the  residence  of  the  king,  at  the  hotel  de  St.  Pol.  She  was  attended  by  upwards  of  one
thousand  horse.  The  king  took  boat  at  the  Palace,  and  was  rowed  to  his  hotel,  which,
though  it  was  sufficiently  large,  there  had  been  erected  in  the  court,  at  the  entrance  leading
to  the  Seine,  an  immense  hall,  covered  with  undressed  cloths  of  Normandy,  that  had  been
sent  from  divers  places  : the  sides  were  hung  with  tapestry,  that  represented  strange  histories,
and  gave  delight  to  all  who  saw  them.  In  this  hall  the  king  entertained  the  ladies  at  a
banquet : but  the  queen  remained  in  her  chamber,  where  she  supped,  and  did  not  again
appear  that  night.  The  king,  lords,  and  ladies,  danced  and  amused  themselves  until
day-break,  when  the  amusements  ceased,  and  every  one  retired  to  his  home,  each  of  them  to
sleep  and  repose  themselves,  as  it  was  full  time.

I will  now  speak  of  the  presents  the  Parisians  made  to  the  king,  queen,  and  duchess  of
Touraine,  who  was  but  lately  arrived  in  France  from  Lombardy:  she  was  called  Valentine,


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


403


and  was  daughter  to  the  duke  of  Milan.  She  had  this  year  been  married  to  the  duke  of
Touraine,  and  had  never  been  in  Paris  before  tins  public  entry  of  the  queen  : the  citizens,
therefore,  were  bound  to  bid  her  welcome.  About  twelve  o’clock,  forty  of  the  principal
citizens  of  Paris,  all  uniformly  dressed,  waited  on  the  king  at  his  hotel  of  Saint  Pol,  bringing
a present  they  had  displayed  through  the  streets  of  the  town.  Their  gift  was  in  a very  richly
worked  litter,  borne  by  two  strong  men,  dressed  as  savages.  This  litter  was  covered  with  a
transparent  crape  of  silk,  through  which  might  be  seen  the  magnificent  things  it  contained.

On  their  arrival,  they  advanced  to  the  king’s  chamber  (which  was  open  and  ready  prepared
to  receive  them,  as  their  coming  was  known,  and  welcome  is  always  made  to  those  who
bring  gifts)  ; and,  having  placed  the  litter  on  vessels,  in  the  midst  of  the  apartment,  they
cast  themselves  on  their  knees,  and  thus  spoke : “ Most  beloved  lord  and  king,  your
citizens  of  your  good  town  of  Paris  present  to  you  the  plate  that  is  contained  in  this  litter,  as
tokens  of  their  joy  that  you  have  taken  the  government  of  the  kingdom  into  your  own  hands.”
“ Many  thanks,  my  good  people,”  replied  the  king  : “ they  are  fair  and  rich.”  The  citizens
then  rose  up,  and  having  taken  leave  of  the  king,  withdrew.  When  they  were  gone,  the  king
said  to  sir  William  des  Bordes,  and  to  Montaigu*,  who  were  then  present,  “Let  us  go
nearer,  and  examine  what  their  gifts  are.”  They  approached,  and  looked  into  the  litter.  I
will  now  mention  what  presents  it  contained.  First,  there  were  four  pots  of  gold,  four
saucers  to  match,  four  golden  salts,  twelve  cups  of  the  same,  twelve  porringers,  and  six
dishes  of  gold  also  : the  whole  weighed  one  hundred  and  fifty  marcs.

Another  party  of  citizens,  very  handsomely  equipped  in  uniforms  of  cloth,  waited  on  the
queen,  and  presented  her  with  a litter  borne  by  two  men  dressed,  one  as  a bear,  the  other  as
a unicorn,  which  they  placed  in  her  chamber,  and  the  citizens  recommended  their  town  and
inhabitants  to  her  protection.  This  present  consisted  of  the  model  of  a ship  in  gold,  two
large  flaggons  of  gold,  two  comfit  boxes,  two  salts,  six  cups,  and  as  many  saucers,  all  of
gold  : twelve  lamps  of  silver,  two  silver  basins,  two  dozen  of  silver  porringers,  the  same
number  of  silver  cups  : the  whole  weight  of  gold  and  silver  being  three  hundred  marcs.

The  third  present  was  carried,  in  like  manner,  to  the  chamber  of  the  duchess  of  Touraine,
by  two  men  representing  Moors,  having  their  faces  blackened,  and  richly  dressed  with  white
turbans,  as  if  they  had  been  Saracens  or  Tartars.  This  litter  was  ornamented  and  covered,
like  the  others,  with  gauze,  and  accompanied  by  twelve  citizens  in  uniforms,  who  presented
the  duchess  with  a ship  in  gold,  a large  flaggon  of  gold,  two  comfit  boxes,  two  large  dishes,
and  two  salts,  all  of  gold  : six  jugs  of  silver,  and  two  dozen  cups  and  saucers  of  the  same  :
the  whole  weighing  two  hundred  marcs.  The  duchess  of  Touraine  was  exceedingly  pleased
with  this  present,  as  she  had  reason,  for  it  was  very  magnificent,  and  returned  handsomely
her  thanks  to  those  who  had  brought  it,  and  to  the  good  city  of  Paris  that  had  given  it
to  her.

Such  were  the  gifts  made  this  Tuesday  to  the  king  and  queen  of  France,  and  to  the  duchess
of  Touraine.  You  may  judge  from  them  the  liberality  and  riches  of  the  Parisians ; for  it
was  assured  me,  the  author  of  this  history,  that  all  these  presents,  which  I saw,  had  cost
upwards  of  sixty  thousand  golden  crowns.  When  these  ceremonies  were  concluded,  the
hour  for  dinner  arrived ; but  this  day  the  king  and  his  court  dined  in  private  at  their
different  hotels,  for  at  three  o’clock  the  tournament  was  to  take  place  in  the  square  of  Saint
Catherine,  where  scaffolds  had  been  erected  for  the  accommodation  of  the  queen  and  the  ladies.


* M.  Levesque  says,  that  Charles  owed  his  popularity
to  the  wise  choice  he  had  made  of  the  under-mentioned
ministers.  La  Riviere,  who  had  deserved  the  friendship
of  the  wisest  of  kings  : — Noviant,  charged  with  the  super-
intendence of  the  finances,  was  of  the  order  of  nobility,
though  without  fortune, — and  Montaigu,  born  in  obscurity,
raised  himself  by  his  talents  ; — but,  above  all,  the  duke  of
Bourbon,  who  had  preserved  his  integrity,  though  he  had
been  joined  in  the  regency  with  the  dukes  of  Berry  and
Burgundy.

“ This  John  de  Montaigu  , grand  master  of  the  house-
hold, and  superintendant  of  the  finances  to  Charles  VI.
was  accused  of  having  robbed  the  king,  and  was  condemned
to  be  beheaded.  This  was  done  without  the  king’s  know-


ledge, at  the  instigation  of  the  duke  of  Burgundy  and  the
king  of  Navarre.  He  was  beheaded  in  the  market-place
of  Paris,  the  17th  October,  1409,  and  his  remains  were
carried  to  the  gibbet  at  Montfaucon,  where  they  remained
hanging  for  nearly  three  years,  since  his  Body  was  not  taken
down  until  the  17th  September,  1412,  and  carried  to  the
convent  of  theCelestinsofMarcoussi, which  he  had  founded.

“ Although  he  was  executed  without  the  knowledge  of
the  king,  he  did  not  the  less  allow  the  confiscation  of  his
property,  to  he  given  to  Louis,  duke  de  Guienne,  dauphin.

“ I was,  however,  informed  by  M.  Perron,  who  has
carefully  applied  himself  to  learn  the  particulars  of  the
life  of  this  lord,  that  his  property  was  restored  to  his
heirs.” — Menagiana.


1)  D 2


404


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


I will  name  the  knights  of  this  grand  tournament,  who  were  styled  the  Knights  of  the
Golden  Sun,  which,  although  it  was  that  day  the  king  of  France’s  device,  was  borne  by
others,  who  tilted  in  hopes  of  gaining  the  prize.  These  knights  were  thirty,  including  the
king  : first,  the  duke  of  Berry,  the  duke  of  Burgundy,  the  duke  of  Bourbon,  the  count  de  la
Marche,  sir  James  de  Bourbon  Bis  brother,  sir  William  de  Namur,  sir  Oliver  de  Clisson
constable  of  France,  sir  John  de  Vienne,  sir  James  de  Vienne,  lord  d’Espaigny,  sir  Guy  de  la
Tremouille,  sir  William  de  la  Tremouille  his  brother,  sir  Philip  de  Bar,  the  lord  de  Rochfort
a Breton,  the  lord  de  Rais,  the  lord  de  Beaumanoir,  sir  John  de  Barbentjon  called  the
Ardenois,  the  halze  of  Flanders,  the  lord  de  Torcy  a Norman,  sir  John  des  Barres,  the  lord
de  Nantouillet,  the  lord  de  la  Rochefoucault,  the  lord  de  Garencieres,  sir  John  de  Harpedant,
the  baron  d’Ury,  sir  William  Marciel,  sir  Reginald  de  Roye,  sir  Geoffry  de  Carin,  sir  Charles
de  Changiet,  and  sir  William  de  Lignac.  All  these  knights  were  sumptuously  dressed,  and
each  had  on  his  shield  a splendid  sun.  At  three  o’clock,  they  entered  the  square  of  St.
Catherine,  where  the  queen  had  already  arrived  in  a magnificent  car,  and  the  duchesses  and
other  ladies  in  great  state,  and  taken  their  places  on  the  seats  prepared  for  them.  The  king
of  France  next  made  his  appearance  completely  equipped  for  tilting,  of  which  amusement  he
was  very  fond.

The  justs  now  began,  and  were  carried  on  with  vigour,  for  there  were  many  knights  from
foreign  parts.  Sir  William  de  Hainault,  count  d’Ostrevant,  tilted  right  well,  as  did  those
knights  who  had  accompanied  him,  such  as  the  lord  de  Gommines,  sir  John  d’Andregines,
the  lord  de  Cantan,  sir  Ansel  de  Transsegines,  and  sir  Clinquart  de  Herinno.  Every  one
performed  his  part,  in  honour  of  the  ladies  ; and  the  duke  of  Ireland  tilted  well : being  then
a resident  at  Paris,  the  king  had  invited  him  to  the  tournament.  A German  knight  from
beyond  the  Rhine,  called  sir  Gervais  de  Mirande,  gained  great  commendation.  The  number
of  knights  made  it  difficult  to  give  a full  stroke,  and  the  dust  was  so  troublesome  that  it
increased  their  difficulties.  The  lord  de  Coucy  shone  with  brilliancy.  The  tilts  were
continued  without  relaxation  until  night,  when  the  ladies  were  conducted  to  their  hotels.

The  queen  of  France  and  her  attendants  were  led  back  to  the  hotel  of  St.  Pol,  where  was
the  most  magnificent  banquet  for  the  ladies  ever  heard  of.  The  feast  and  dancing  lasted
until  sunrise,  and  the  prize  of  the  tournament  was  given,  with  the  assent  of  the  ladies  and
heralds,  to  the  king,  as  being  the  best  tilter  on  the  opponents’  side,  and  the  prize  for  the
holders  of  the  lists  was  given  to  the  halze  de  Flandres,  bastard-brother  to  the  duchess  of
Burgundy.  On  account  of  the  complaints  the  knights  made  of  the  dust  which  had  prevented
many  from  exerting  themselves  to  the  utmost  at  the  late  tournament,  the  king  ordered  the
lists  to  be  watereed.  Two  hundred  water-carriers  were  employed  on  the  Wednesday  to  water
the  square,  but,  notwithstanding  their  efforts,  there  was  still  a sufficiency  of  dust.

The  count  de  St.  Pol  arrived  this  Wednesday  straight  from  England,  having  made  haste
to  be  present  at  these  feasts,  and  had  left  sir  John  de  Chatel-Morant  to  follow  with  the  treaty
of  the  truce.  The  count  de  St.  Pol  was  kindly  received  by  the  king  and  his  lords  : his
countess,  who  had  been  near  the  person  of  the  queen  at  these  festivals,  was  rejoiced  at  his
arrival.  In  the  afternoon  of  the  Wednesday,  thirty  squires,  who  had  been  in  attendance  the
preceding  day,  advanced  to  the  lists  where  the  tournaments  had  been  held,  whither  the
ladies  also  came,  in  the  same  state,  and  seated  themselves  as  before.  The  tilting  was  ably
and  vigorously  kept  up  until  night,  when  the  company  returned  to  their  homes.  The
banquet  this  evening  at  the  hotel  de  St.  Pol  was  as  grand  as  the  preceding  one,  and  the  prize
was  adjudged  by  the  ladies  and  heralds  to  a squire  from  Hainault,  who  had  accompanied  the
count  d’Ostrevant,  called  John  de  F'laron,  as  the  most  deserving  of  the  opponents,  and  to  a
squire  belonging  to  the  duke  of  Burgundy,  called  John  de  Poulceres,  for  the  best  tenants  of
the  field.

The  tournament  was  continued  on  the  Thursday,  when  knights  and  squires  tilted
promiscuously,  and  many  gallant  justs  were  done,  for  every  one  took  pains  to  excel.  Night
put  an  end  to  it,  and  there  was  a grand  entertainment  again  for  the  ladies,  at  the  hotel  de  St.
Pol,  when  the  prize  for  the  opponents  was  given  to  sir  Charles  des  Armoyes,  and  for  the
tenants,  to  a squire  attached  to  the  queen,  called  Lons.

On  the  Friday,  the  king  feasted  the  ladies  and  damsels  at  dinner,  which  was  very  splendid


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &e.


405


and  plentiful.  Towards  the  end  of  it,  as  the  king  was  seated  at  table,  with  the  duchess  of
Berry,  the  duchess  of  Burgundy,  the  duchess  of  Touraine,  the  countess  de  Saint  Pol,  the
lady  of  Coucy,  and  many  more,  two  knights,  completely  armed,  entered  the  hall,  (which  was
very  spacious,  having  been,  as  I have  said,  erected  for  the  occasion)  on  barded  horses,  with
lances  in  their  hands.  One  was  sir  Reginald  de  Roye,  the  other  sir  Boucicaut  the  younger.
Having  tilted  bravely  for  some  time,  they  were  joined  by  sir  William  de  Namur,  sir  Charles
des  Armoyes,  the  lord  de  Garencieres,  the  lord  de  Nantouillet,  sir  John  de  Barbencon,  and
several  others,  who  gallantly  tilted  for  two  hours  before  the  king  and  ladies ; and,  when  they
had  sufficiently  amused  themselves,  they  returned  to  their  hotels.

The  ladies  and  damsels  took  their  leave,  this  Friday,  of  the  king  and  queen,  as  did  such
lords  as  pleased,  and  returned  to  their  homes.  The  king  and  queen  thanked  very  graciously
such  as  took  leave,  for  having  come  to  this  feast.


CIIAPTER  III. SIR  JOHN  DE  CHATEL-MORANT  BRINGS  FROM  ENGLAND  THE  TRUCES  FOR

THREE  YEARS,  SEALED  BY  KING  RICHARD  AND  HIS  ALLIES. — LEWIS  OF  ANJOU,  KING
OF  SICILY,  IS  BETROTHED  AND  MARRIED  TO  A DAUGHTER  OF  THE  KING  OF  ARRAGON.

After  this  grand  festival,  and  when  the  lords  and  ladies,  who  had  assisted  at  it,  were
returned  to  their  castles,  the  lord  de  Chatel-Morant,  whom  the  lord  de  Saint-Pol  had  left  in
England,  arrived  at  Paris  with  the  truces,  signed  by  the  king  of  England  and  his  allies.
He  delivered  to  the  king  and  his  ministers  the  charter  of  the  truce  that  was  to  last  for  three
years,  and  read  aloud  its  contents  in  the  presence  of  the  lord  de  Coucy,  who  was  lieutenant
for  the  king,  to  guard  and  defend  all  the  country,  from  the  Dordogne  to  the  sea,  including
Auvergne  and  Limousin.  All  who  should  infringe,  or  any  way  break  this  treaty,  or  cause
it  to  be  broken,  whatever  were  his  rank,  would  be  considered  as  a traitor,  and  incur  punish-
ment of  death.  The  lord  de  Coucy  had  also  a copy  delivered  to  him,  to  show  if  necessary,  to
those  garrisons  of  Ventadour,  Chalucjet,  Orbesi*,  Donzacht,  who  were  carrying  on  war  under
name  of  the  English,  that  they  might  not  have  any  cause  of  excuse,  and  incur  the  penalty,
should  they  continue  their  warfare.  The  lord  Lewis  de  Sancerre,  marshal  of  France,  had  it
in  like  manner  read  to  him,  and  a copy  given  to  him.  This  was  very  necessary  ; for  he  was
lieutenant  over  all  the  country  of  Languedoc,  from  the  river  Rhone  and  Avignon,  within  which
are  many  valuable  estates  and  lordships,  as  far  as  the  Dordogne.  His  government  contained
the  seneschalships  of  Beaucaire,  Carcassonne,  Toulouse,  Rouergue,  Agen,  Quercy,  Bigorre,
Perigord  and  Limoges,  where  were  many  forts  and  castles  that  minded  not  the  truce,  but
continued  to  carry  on  the  war,  such  as  Chatel-Cuillier,  and  the  strong  castle  of  Lourdes,  on
the  frontiers  of  Bearn,  which  kept  the  neighbourhood  under  continual  alarms.

About  this  time  there  was  a treaty  of  marriage  on  foot,  between  the  lord  Lewis  d' Anjou,
son  to  the  late  duke,  who  styled  himself  king  of  Naples,  Sicily,  Jerusalem,  and  count  of
Provence,  and  the  daughter  of  the  king  of  Arragon.  The  queen  of  Naples  went  to  visit  the
pope  at  Avignon,  carrying  with  her  the  young  lord  Lewis,  and  there  met  the  lord  de  Coucy,
who  was  much  rejoiced  at  her  arrival.  The  queen  was  handsomely  received  by  the  pope
and  cardinals  ; of  which  she  was  indeed  deserving,  for  she  was  an  active  bustling  lady,  and
one  who  did  not  sleep  over  her  interests.  She  entreated  the  lord  de  Coucy  to  escort  her  son
to  Arragon,  and  to  remain  with  him  until  he  were  married.  He  replied — “ Certainly,
madam,  there  is  not  a voyage  that,  for  seven  years  past,  I would  more  willingly  have
undertaken  than  to  Sicily  and  Naples,  more  particularly,  in  company  with  my  lord  your  son,
if  I have  the  consent  of  our  lord  and  king.”  “ Many  thanks,  lord  de  Coucy,”  said  the
queen  : “ you  show  us  your  good  inclinations  ; but,  for  the  present,  it  will  be  sufficient  if  you
will  accompany  our  son  to  Arragon.  The  queen  of  Arragon  will  be  very  happy  to  see
you,  for  your  daughter  is  married  to  her  brother,  sir  Llenry  de  Bar.”

The  lord  de  Coucy  cheerfully  agreed  to  undertake  this  journey ; and  the  king  of  Sicily,
having  made  his  preparations,  took  leave  of  pope  Clement,  and  of  his  mother,  with  many
tears.  Their  hearts  were  wrung,  not  indeed  without  cause,  at  this  separation,  for  he  was
* “ Orbesi,”— Orbessan,  a village  in  Armagnac.  f “ Donzach,” — a village  in  Armagnac,


400


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


going  to  a far  country,  and  it  was  uncertain  when  they  should  meet  again.  It  had  been
settled,  that  instantly  after  the  marriage  had  taken  place,  the  young  king  and  queen  were  to
embark  at  Barcelona,  and  sail  as  expeditiously  as  they  could  for  Naples  or  any  other  part  of
that  country.  The  young  king  of  Sicily  was  handsomely  attended,  and,  having  passed  through
Montpellier  and  Beziers,  came  to  Narbonne,  where  he  and  his  company  were  honourably
received  by  the  viscount.  Having  refreshed  their  horses  for  one  day,  they  continued  their
route  towards  Perpignan,  the  first  town  of  Arragon.  News  of  his  arrival  had  reached  the
court  of  Arragon,  and  the  queen  had  sent  proper  persons  to  receive  him  and  his  attendants,
and  show  them  all  respect,  so  that,  wherever  they  passed,  they  were  well  entertained,  and
all  their  expenses  paid.  The  viscount  de  Roquebertin  and  sir  Raymond  de  Baighes  were
their  conductors.  They  continued  their  journey  until  they  arrived  at  Barcelona,  where  the
king,  queen,  and  princess  were  expecting  them.  The  young  king  Lewis  was  very  kindly
received  ; and  the  queen  was  particularly  pleased  on  seeing  the  lord  de  Coucy,  and  thanked
her  future  son-in-law  for  having  brought  him  with  him,  adding,  that  everything  would  fare
the  better  for  it.

The  marriage  was  performed  and  consummated  between  these  two  persons  ; but  as  winter
was  approaching,  the  sea  voyage  was  deferred,  because  at  such  a time  the  sea  is  stormy  and
dangerous.  They  said  they  would  collect  all  the  purveyances  during  the  winter,  and  embark
in  the  beginning  of  the  ensuing  month  of  March.  The  lord  de  Coucy  was  perfectly  well
received  by  the  king  and  queen  of  Arragon  ; but,  having  had  letters  from  the  king  of  France,
ordering  him  to  return,  he  took  his  leave  of  them,  and  of  the  young  king  and  the  queen  of
Sicily,  as  well  as  of  the  lords  of  Arragon,  and  set  out  for  France.  If  he  had  had  time,  he
would  have  returned  by  Avignon  ; but  he  sent  his  excuses  to  the  pope  and  queen  of  Naples,
and  went  straight  to  Auvergne.  At  the  time  of  this  marriage  of  the  king  of  Sicily  with  the
princess  of  Arragon,  many  treaties  were  concluded  between  him  and  the  Arragonians,  who
were  to  assist  him  with  men  and  galleys  in  the  recovery  of  his  kingdom.  They  were  to
convey  him  to  Naples,  with  two  hundred  spears,  one  thousand  cross-bows,  and  the  same
number  of  infantry  armed  with  brigandines,  who  were  to  serve  him  at  their  own  charges,
during  the  war,  until  he  should  have  full  possession  of  Naples,  Sicily  and  its  dependencies,
la  Puglia,  Calabria  and  the  city  of  Gaieta,  the  residence  of  Margaret  de  Durazzo,  who  claimed
all  these  territories  as  her  own.

When  the  sweet  month  of  March  was  arrived,  and  the  winds  were  become  calm  and  the
waters  smooth,  and  the  trees  once  more  clothed  in  green,  and  all  purveyances  ready  and  em-
barked, as  well  as  the  men  at  arms  who  were  to  be  of  this  expedition,  the  young  couple  took
leave  of  the  king  and  queen  of  Arragon.  The  queen  with  tears  saw  them  depart,  and  re-
commended them  to  the  particular  care  of  the  count  de  Roddes,  a very  valiant  knight,  and
sir  Raymond  de  Baighes.  They  promised  special  obedience  to  the  queen’s  wishes,  although
the  count  d’Orghel  and  the  count  de  la  Lune  were  their  superiors  and  had  the  command  of
the  convoy.

There  were  on  board  these  galleys  fifteen  hundred  spears,  two  thousand  cross-bows,
and  two  thousand  lusty  varlets  armed  with  pikes  and  shields.  They  were  in  such  force
the  better  to  resist  their  enemies,  and  any  adventurers  they  might  encounter  at  sea ;
for  the  voyage  from  Barcelona  to  Naples  is  long,  and  Margaret  de  Durazzo,  their
adversary,  might  have  had  intelligence  of  their  motions,  and  stationed  a fleet  accordingly :
they  therefore  were  desirous  of  having  strength  enough  to  oppose  any  she  could  bring
against  them.

We  will  now  leave  the  affairs  of  Sicily,  and  return  to  those  of  France,  which  is  our  prin-
cipal object,  and  to  several  other  events.


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


107


CHAPTER  IV. THE  KING  OF  FRANCE  IS  DESIROUS  OF  VISITING  THE  DISTANT  PARTS  OF  HIS

KINGDOM. AT  THE  REQUEST  OF  THE  LORD  DE  COUCY,  HE  ORDERS  THE  DUKE  OF

IRELAND  OUT  OF  FRANCE.

When  the  king  of  France  saw  that  his  kingdom  was  now  at  peace,  in  consequence  of  the
truce  with  England,  he  had  a great  desire  to  visit  the  more  distant  parts  of  it,  and  particu-
larly Languedoc.  The  lord  de  la  Riviere  and  sir  John  le  Mercier,  at  that  time  his  most
intimate  advisers,  urged  him  to  visit  the  pope  and  cardinals  at  Avignon,  who  were  desirous
of  that  honour,  and  thence  to  go  to  Toulouse,  saying  that  a king  when  young,  should  visit
his  realm  to  acquaint  himself  with  its  inhabitants  and  inquire  how  they  have  been  governed,
as  it  would  redound  to  his  profit  and  glory,  and  cause  himself  to  be  more  beloved  by  his
subjects.

The  king  was  so  inclined,  and  willingly  attended  to  all  matters  of  government.  The  lord
de  la  Riviere,  who  was  but  lately  returned  from  those  parts,  told  him  that  his  subjects  in  the
seneschalships  of  Toulouse,  Carcassonne  and  Beaucaire,  were  impatient  to  see  him  ; for  that
the  duke  of  Berry,  during  his  government  of  that  country,  had  sorely  oppressed  them  with
taxes  and  other  impositions,  through  the  means  of  one  of  his  familiars,  called  Bethisac*,  who
had  pity  on  none,  and  that  they  were  quite  ruined.  On  this  account,  therefore  it  would  be
proper  for  him  to  go  thither,  and  he  could  then  summon  the  count  de  Foix,  whom  he  was  so
anxious  to  see,  to  meet  him  at  Toulouse.

The  king  having  assented  to  this  proposal,  ordered  immense  purveyances  to  be  provided
for  him  on  the  road  he  was  to  travel.  He  signified  to  his  uncle  and  aunt,  the  duke  and
duchess  of  Burgundy,  that,  as  he  passed  through  their  lands,  he  should  be  glad  to  see  their
children,  his  cousins  ; and  that  he  would  bring  with  him  his  brother  of  Touraine,  and  his  uncle
of  Bourbon.  This  news  of  the  king’s  intended  visit  to  Burgundy  was  highly  pleasing  to  the
duke  and  duchess.  They  had  proclaimed  a festival  and  tournament  to  be  holden  at  Dijon,
and  sent  invitations  to  the  knights  and  squires  of  Savoy  and  the  adjoining  countries,  who
made  their  preparations  accordingly.  During  the  time  all  these  different  arrangements
were  making  for  the  king’s  journey  to  Avignon  and  Languedoc,  other  events  happened  in
France.

You  have  heard  how  the  duke  of  Ireland,  formerly  earl  of  Oxford,  had  been  driven  out
and  banished  England,  for  his  demerits,  by  the  power  of  the  uncles  of  king  Richard,  but
especially  by  the  duke  of  Gloucester,  who  had  been  more  bitter  against  him  than  all  the
rest ; and  how  he  had  fled  to  Holland,  and  had  remained  a short  time  at  Dordrecht,  when
he  was  forced  thence  by  duke  Albert,  the  lord  of  Dordrecht  and  Holland,  who  refused  him
a residence  on  his  lands,  from  a wish  not  to  act  contrary  to  the  will  of  his  cousins  in  England,
notwithstanding  king  Richard  had  written  to  him  in  his  favour.  The  duke  of  Ireland,
being  forced  to  depart,  went  to  Utrecht,  where  he  resided  some  time,  and  might  have  staid
there  as  long  as  he  pleased ; for  Utrecht  is  a free  town  to  receive  whoever  lists,  if  they  pay
for  what  they  want,  and  this  duke  had  a sufficiency  of  money ; for  he  had  received  of  the
constable,  sixty  thousand  francs,  as  the  balance  of  the  ransom  of  John  of  Brittany.  You
have  also  heard  how  the  king  of  France  had  sent  him  passports  to  come  to  France,  having
invited  him  thither,  and  where  he  had  remained  for  more  than  a year,  the  king  showing  him
very  great  attention,  because  he  was  a foreigner.


* “John  Bethisac  wag  one  of  the  chief  advisers  of
the  duke  of  Berry,  and  was  accused  with,  Tietac  and  de
Bar,  two  other  domestics  of  this  prince,  of  having  raised
enormous  levies  from  the  Lauguedocians,  over  whom  the
duke  was  governor  and,  under  his  name  of  having  com-
mitted great  plunder  and  much  violence,  and  of  having
put  large  sums  into  their  own  pockets.  This  report  gave
rise  to  the  following  pasquinade,  that  is  even  current  in
our  times  :

Tietac,  de  Bar,  et  Bethisac,

Ont  mis  l’argent  du  roi  au  sac.”

“ Bethisac  suffered  the  punishment  of  his  crimes ; but


the  duke  of  Berry  having  claimed  him  as  his  domestic,  those
who  had  sworn  his  ruin  persuaded  him  to  own  he  had
erred  in  several  articles  of  faith,  which  would  cause  him
to  be  transferred  to  the  bishop,  and  the  duke  could  the
easier  save  him.  Crime  often  stupifics.  Bethisac  was
simple  enough  to  fall  into  their  trap.  The  bishop  of
Beziers  had  him  tried  and  given  over  to  the  secular  arm
as  an  heretic  and  sodomite.  This  wretch  was  burnt  alive,
which  was,  saysMezeray,  a feu  de  joie  for  the  people  whom
he  had  horribly  tormented.  History  does  not  say  whence
he  sprung,  but  probably  he  wa9  of  low  origin  who  wanted
to  rise  too  rapidly.”—  Dictionnaire  Historique.


408


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  Sec.


There  is  nothing  but  what  one  is  tired  of.  True  it  is,  that,  notwithstanding  this  duke  was
so  well  received  by  the  king,  the  lord  de  Coucy  mortally  hated  him,  and  not  without  reason  ;
for  although,  in  other  affairs,  he  showed  great  good  sense,  honour  and  liberality,  he  had  behaved
infamously  to  the  daughter  of  the  lord  de  Coucy,  whom  he  had  married,  and  without  any
reasons,  except  temptation  and  deceit,  he  had  divorced  and  taken  another  wife,  who  was  from
Bohemia,  and  one  of  the  ladies  attached  to  the  queen  of  England.  The  king  and  queen  had
improperly  and  sinfully  consented  to  this ; and  pope  Urban  had,  at  their  entreaties,  sent
from  Rome  a dispensation  for  the  marriage.  This  new  marriage  not  only  wounded  the
reputation  of  the  duke  of  Ireland,  but  was  the  principal  cause  of  his  ruin.

The  lord  de  Coucy  was  one  of  the  king  of  France’s  council,  and  very  deservedly  in  favour,
from  the  services  he  had  done,  and  was  willing  to  do,  his  country  : he  therefore,  with  the
assistance  of  his  friends,  sir  Oliver  de  Clisson,  the  lord  de  la  Riviere  and  sir  John  le  Mercier,
prevailed  on  the  king  to  dismiss  the  duke  of  Ireland.  Orders  were,  in  consequence,  sent  him
from  the  king,  to  choose  any  other  residence  but  France,  and  that  he  should  be  safely
conducted  out  of  that  kingdom.  The  duke  of  Ireland  perceived  they  were  tired  of  him,  and
that  he  ran  daily  risks,  from  the  lord  de  Coucy  and  from  his  relations.  lie  therefore  thought
it  would  be  best  for  him  to  leave  France  as  soon  as  possible,  and  retire  to  Brabant ; and
begged  of  the  king  to  write  to  the  duchess  of  Brabant,  that  he  might  live  peaceably  in  her
country.  The  king  cheerfully  complied  with  his  request,  and  wrote  to  his  aunt,  the  duchess,
who  at  his  desire  assented  to  it.

The  duke  of  Ireland  was  escorted  by  the  king  of  France’s  officers  as  far  as  Louvain,  where
he  fixed  his  residence  : he  went,  indeed,  at  times,  to  a castle  near  Louvain,  which  he  had
borrowed  from  a knight  of  Brabant.  The  archbishop  of  York,  who  was  of  the  house  of
Neville,  lived  with  the  duke,  as  he  had  been  banished  England  for  the  same  cause  as  himself.
The  archbishop’s  family  were  very  powerful  in  Northumberland,  from  their  property  and
connexions.  These  two  lords,  as  I have  heard,  remained  at  Louvain  as  long  as  they  lived,
for  they  could  never  obtain  favour  with  the  uncles  of  the  king  of  England,  and  there  died.
I never  heard  more  of  them.


CHAPTER  V. KING  CHARLES  OP  FRANCE  VISITS  HIS  UNCLE  THE  DUKE  OF  BURGUNDY,  AND

POPE  CLEMENT  AT  AVIGNON.

About  Michaelmas  1399,  the  king  of  France  set  out  from  the  castle  of  Beaute,  near  Paris,
where  he  left  the  queen,  and  took  the  road  to  Troyes  in  Champagne  in  his  way  to  Burgundy.
He  was  accompanied  by  his  uncle  the  duke  of  Bourbon,  the  duke  of  Touraine,  the  lord  de
Coucy  and  many  other  knights,  and  continued  his  journey  until  he  arrived  at  Dijon.

The  duke  of  Burgundy,  and  his  son  the  count  de  Nevers,  had  gone  as  far  as  Chatillon-sur-
Seine  to  meet  the  king.  On  his  arrival  at  Dijon,  he  was  received  with  every  respect  and
affection  by  the  duchess  of  Burgundy,  the  countess  of  Nevers,  and  all  who  had  come  thither
to  do  him  honour.  From  love  to  the  king,  many  ladies  and  damsels,  whose  company  lie
preferred,  were  come  to  Dijon,  such  as  the  lady  of  Sully,  the  ladies  of  Vergy  and  Pagny,
and  several  others,  handsome  and  gay,  and  richly  dressed.  The  dancings  and  carolliugs
instantly  began : the  ladies  exerted  their  talents  in  singing  and  dancing  to  amuse  the
king,  the  duke  of  Bourbon,  the  duke  of  Touraine  and  the  lord  de  Coucy.  On  the  Monday,
Tuesday  and  Wednesday,  were  tilts  gallantly  performed,  and  prizes  given  to  the  most
deserving.  The  king  remained  eight  whole  days  at  Dijon,  thus  amusing  himself : on  the  tenth,
I believe  he  took  leave  of  the  duke  and  duchess  of  Burgundy  and  their  family.  It  was  the
intention  of  the  duke  of  Burgundy  instantly  to  follow  the  king,  and  remain  with  him  ; and,
on  this  being  settled,  he  departed  from  Dijon,  having  bidden  adieu  to  the  ladies  and  damsels.

The  king  continued  his  journey  until  he  came  to  Villeneuve,  near  Avignon,  where  his
palace  had  been  prepared.  The  cardinals  of  Amiens*,  Aisgrenelf,  Saint  Marcel^,  Neufchastel§,

* John  de  la  Grange  was  minister  of  state  under  Charles  + Q.  if  not  Marcellin.

Y.  who  procured  him  the  purple.  He  w'as  covetous  and  § John  de  Neufchastel,  — created  cardinal  by  pope

ambitious.  "j"  Not  in  the  list  of  cardinals.  Clement.  For  further  particulars,  see  Morerl,  Sic.


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


400


and  upwards  of  thirteen  others,  went  out  to  meet  the  king,  as  they  were  rejoiced  at  his
arrival.  The  duke  of  Berry  was  already  at  Avignon,  and  lodged  in  the  palace  of  the  pope ;
but  he  came  to  Yilleneuve  to  meet  his  nephew,  and  fixed  his  quarters  at  the  hotel  cf  Arras,
called  Amontais,  on  the  road  to  Montpellier.  The  duke  of  Burgundy  arrived  the  day  after
the  king,  at  Yilleneuve,  down  the  Rhone,  for  at  Lyons  he  had  embarked  on  board  a large  barge.

These  three  dukes,  being  assembled,  determined  to  accompany  the  king  in  his  visit  to  the
pope  in  his  palace.  Having  had  everything  prepared  accordingly,  the  king  of  France,
attended  by  his  brother,  his  three  uncles,  and  twelve  cardinals,  crossed  the  Rhone  at  nine
o’clock,  and  went  to  the  palace,  where  pope  Clement  was  waiting  for  him  in  full  consistory,
seated  in  his  robes,  on  his  papal  chair.

When  the  king  came  into  his  presence,  he  bowed ; and,  when  near  to  him,  the  pope  rose
up,  and  the  king  kissed  his  hands  and  mouth.  The  pope  then  seated  himself,  and  made  the
king  sit  by  him  on  a handsome  seat  that  had  been  prepared  for  the  occasion.  The  four
dukes,  after  having  kissed  the  pope’s  hands  and  mouth,  seated  themselves  also  among  the
cardinals.  When  these  ceremonies  were  over,  it  was  dinner-time  : they  therefore  went  into
the  other  apartments  of  the  pope  and  the  hall,  where  the  tables  were  spread.  When  they
had  washed,  the  pope  took  his  place  at  a table  alone,  in  much  state.  The  king  was  placed
at  another  table  below  that  of  the  pope,  and  alone  also.  The  cardinals  and  dukes  seated
themselves  according  to  their  rank.  The  dinner  was  splendid,  plentiful  and  long.  When
over,  wine  and  spices  were  brought ; and  the  king  then  retired  to  an  apartment  that  had
been  prepared  for  him  in  the  palace,  as  did  the  dukes  to  theirs,  for  all  of  them  had  chambers,
properly  ornamented,  provided  for  them,  and  which  they  inhabited  as  long  as  they  staid  at
Avignon.

On  the  fifth  day  after  the  arrival  of  the  king  of  France  at  Avignon,  the  young  count  de
Savoye,  cousin  to  the  king,  and  nephew  to  the  duke  of  Bourbon,  came  thither.  The  king
was  pleased  at  his  coming,  for  he  had  seen  him  as  he  passed  through  Lyons,  and  had  invited
him  to  Avignon.  The  king  of  France,  the  duke  of  Touraine  and  the  count  de  Savoye,  being
young  and  giddy,  neither  could  nor  would  refrain  from  dancing,  carolling  and  amusing
themselves  with  the  ladies  and  damsels  of  Avignon,  though  they  were  in  the  pope’s  palace
and  among  the  cardinals ; and  the  count  of  Geneva,  brother  to  the  pope,  was  their  master
of  the  revels.  The  king  made  such  magnificent  presents  to  the  ladies,  that  they  all  praised
his  liberality.

The  pope  and  cardinals  were  much  rejoiced  at  this  visit  of  the  king  of  France,  as  indeed
they  had  good  reason  to  be  ; for  without  his  support  they  would  have  been  in  little  estima-
tion. There  were  no  kings  in  Christendom  who  paid  him  obedience  but  such  as  were  allied
to  France.  The  kings  of  Castille  and  Scotland  acknowledged  him  for  pope,  as  did  the  king  of
Arragon,  through  the  intercession  of  the  queen  Jolande  de  Bar,  who  was  cousin-german  to
the  king  of  France,  otherwise  he  would  have  remained  neuter  like  his  father.  You  may
therefore  suppose  the  pope  and  his  cardinals  were  happy  in  receiving  the  king  of  France  ; for
all  they  had  to  depend  on  was  obtained  through  his  favour.  The  king  of  France  remained,
I know  not  how  many  days,  with  the  pope  and  cardinals,  revelling  and  amusing  himself.
The  pope,  on  this  joyful  occasion,  gave  pardons  to  the  clergy  who  were  in  his  courts,  and
plenary  indulgences  to  all  for  one  month  to  come.  He  likewise  presented  the  king  with  the
nominations  to  all  his  cathedrals  and  other  churches,  and  in  each  church  the  reversion  of  two
prebends,  deferring  all  his  former  promises,  that  these  now  made  to  the  king  might  have  the
precedency,  which  was  fortunate  for  many  of  the  French  clergy,  who  were  thus  provided.
He  gave  also  reversions  to  the  dukes  of  Touraine,  Berry,  and  Burgundy,  and  the  lord  de
Coucy,  which  threw  back  all  those  he  had  formerly  promised  ; and  the  pope  was  so  courteous
and  liberal  on  this  occasion,  that  none  went  away  discontented.


410


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


CHAPTER  VI. THE  KING  OP  FRANCE  SENDS  THE  DUKES  OP  BERRY  AND  BURGUNDY  TO

THEIR  HOMES,  TO  THEIR  GREAT  DISSATISFACTION,  AND  CONTINUES  HIS  JOURNEY  FROM
AVIGNON  TO  LANGUEDOC.

The  king  of  France  resided  with  the  pope  about  eight  days,  during  which  time  his  holiness
had  fully  discussed  with  him  his  situation,  and  what  trouble  the  other  pope  at  Rome  gave
him,  in  depriving  him  of  his  right,  in  the  schism  he  caused  in  the  church.  The  king  was
willing  to  do  everything  in  his  power  to  relieve  him,  and  said  that  on  his  return  to  France,
he  would  endeavour  to  provide  a remedy,  and  exert  himself  to  unite  the  church.  Upon  this
he  took  leave  of  the  pope,  and  went  to  Villeneuve,  as  did  his  brother  and  his  uncles  of  Berry
and  Burgundy.  The  kino-  entertained  at  dinner  all  the  cardinals  and  the  count  of  Geneva,
after  which  he  took  leave  of  them,  returning  them  his  thanks  for  their  attentions,  saying,  he
should,  on  the  morrow,  begin  his  journey  to  Montpellier.

The  cardinals  having  left  the  king,  it  was  determined  in  council,  that  he  should  set  out
very  early,  in  company  with  his  brother  and  the  duke  of  Bourbon.  He  took  leave,  there-
fore, of  his  uncles  of  Berry  and  Burgundy,  bidding  them  return  to  their  own  estates,  as  he
had  not  then  any  further  occasion  for  them,  intending  to  go  as  far  as  Toulouse,  and  summon
thither  the  count  de  Foix  to  meet  him.  His  uncles  were  much  discontented  at  this  order  ;
but  the  king’s  council  was  at  that  time  so  formed,  that  the  dukes  of  Berry  and  Burgundy
had  no  voice  in  it,  nor  weight,  but  in  trifles.  The  government  of  Languedoc  had  been  taken
from  the  duke  of  Berry,  and  divided  into  seneschalships,  which  was  not  only  more  profitable
to  the  king,  but  more  agreeable  to  the  country ; for  the  duke  of  Berry,  during  his  govern-
ment, had  grievously  oppressed  the  inhabitants,  by  heavy  taxes,  as  I shall  more  fully  relate,
for  it  is  deserving-  to  be  detailed.

The  dukes  of  Berry  and  Burgundy  were  very  melancholy,  when  they  found  the  king
was  determined  they  should  not  accompany  him  in  his  journey  ; but  they  dissembled  their
thoughts  from  all  but  each  other,  and  thus  conversed  : “ The  king  is  going  to  Languedoc  tc
hold  inquisitions  on  those  who  have  governed  it,  and  to  treat  with  the  count  de  Foix,  (whc
is  the  proudest  person  existing,  and  never  loved  nor  esteemed,  though  neighbours,  the  kings
of  France,  England,  Castille,  Arragon  or  Navarre,)  and  only  takes  with  him  la  Riviere,  le
Mercier,  Montaigu  and  the  begue  de  Yillaines.  What  do  you  say  to  this,  brother  ?”  added
the  duke  of  Berry.  “ Our  nephew  is  young,  and  if  he  follow  young  counsel  he  will  be
deceived,  and  the  end  will  not  be  prosperous,  as  you  will  see.  For  the  present,  we  must
dissemble  this  affront ; but  the  time  will  come,  when  those  who  have  advised  it  shall  repent
of  it,  as  well  as  the  king.  Let  them  go  whither  they  please,  in  God’s  name  : we  will  return
to  our  own  home  ; and,  so  long  as  we  are  united,  they  cannot  do  us  any  injury,  for  we  are
the  greatest  personages  in  France.”  Such  was  the  language  of  these  two  dukes.

The  king  of  France  left  Villeneuve  early  in  the  morning,  for  Nimes,  where  he  arrived  to
dinner  ; but  his  uncles  and  the  lord  de  Coney  staid  with  the  pope,  at  Avignon,  four  days
longer,  when  they  all  separated,  and  each  went  different  ways.  The  day  the  king  dined  at
Nimes,  he  lay  at  Lunel,  and  the  next  day  dined  at  Montpellier,  which  was  but  three  short
leagues  distant.  He  was  joyfully  received  by  the  citizens,  ladies,  and  damsels,  who  were
desirous  to  see  him,  and  offered  him  magnificent  and  rich  presents  ; for  Montpellier  is  a
powerful  and  wealthy  town,  full  of  merchandise,  and  was  much  valued  by  the  king,  when  he
had  considered  its  importance.  The  citizens  told  him,  it  had  been  infinitely  richer  than  he
now  found  it,  before  the  dukes  of  Anjou  and  Berry  had  plundered  it,  as  they  had  severally
done  in  their  turn.  The  king  compassionated  them  much  for  the  losses  they  had  sustained,
and  promised  that  he  would  have  every  grievance  reformed,  and  the  government  placed  on
a different  footing.  The  citizens  likewise  addressed  the  king  during  his  stay  at  Montpellier,
saying, — “ Sire,  the  poverty  of  this  town  is  nothing  to  what  you  will  see  the  farther  you
advance ; for  this  place  has  many  resources  in  its  commerce,  which  the  inhabitants  carry  on
by  sea  and  land.  In  the  seneschalships  of  Toulouse  and  Carcassonne,  and  in  that  part  of  the
country,  where  these  dukes  have  laid  their  hands,  there  is  absolutely  nothing  ; for  they  have
carried  off  everything  portable ; and  you  will  find  the  inhabitants  so  poor  that  those  who


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


411


were  in  good  circumstances  have  not  wherewithal  to  cultivate  their  fields  or  vineyards.  It
is  melancholy  to  see  them,  their  wives  and  children ; for  they  had  every  year  five  or  six
taxes  on  their  hacks,  and  they  compounded  for  a third,  a half,  and  sometimes  all  their
property  was  taken  from  them  ; and  no  sooner  was  one  tax  paid  than  another  was  demanded.
These  two  lords,  your  uncles,  since  they  have  had  the  government  of  Languedoc,  have
collected,  as  the  accounts  will  prove,  upwards  of  thirty  thousand  francs,  from  the  country,
beginning  with  Villeneuve,  near  Avignon,  to  the  Toulousain,  as  far  as  the  river  Garonne,
and  turning  back  b.y  the  river  Dordogne.  Since  the  departure  of  the  duke  of  Anjou  to
Naples,  this  government  has  been  given  back  to  the  duke  of  Berry,  and  he  has  more  severely
oppressed  the  country,  which  he  found  rich  and  plentiful : the  duke  of  Anjou  made  only  the
rich  pay,  who  were  well  enabled  to  do  so ; but  the  duke  of  Berry  spares  neither  poor  nor
rich  : he  swallows  up  everything  by  means  of  one  Bethisac,  his  counsellor  and  treasurer,
who  is  a native  of  Beziers,  as  you  will  hear  from  the  complaints  the  poor  will  make  to  you,
in  crying  out  for  vengeance  against  him.”

The  king  replied, — “ May  God  forsake  my  soul,  if  I will  not  cheerfully  listen  to  their
complaints,  and,  before  I return,  provide  a remedy  for  them.  I will  punish  the  wicked,  and
have  an  inquisition  holden  on  the  officers  and  servants  of  my  uncles,  who  formerly  have  had
this  government ; and  those  who  have  behaved  ill  shall  be  treated  accordingly.”


CHAPTER  VII. DURING  THE  TIME  KING  CHARLES  OF  FRANCE  IS  AT  MONTPELLIER,  THREE

OF  HIS  CHAMBERLAINS  UNDERTAKE  TO  HOLD  A TOURNAMENT  NEAR  TO  CALAIS,
AGAINST  ALL  COMERS.

The  king  of  France  resided  at  Montpellier  upwards  of  twelve  days,  because  the  respect
and  amusements  he  enjoyed  there  from  the  citizens,  ladies  and  damsels,  pleased  him  greatly.
Indeed,  the  king  was  at  this  time  young  and  giddy : he  therefore  danced  and  carolled  with
these  frisky  ladies  of  Montpellier  all  night.  He  entertained  them  with  handsome  suppers
and  banquets,  and  presented  to  those  most  in  his  favour  rings  and  clasps  of  gold.  He  acquired
so  greatly  the  love  of  the  Montpellier  ladies  that  some  wished  he  had  made  a longer  stay,  for
it  was  one  continued  revel  and  pastime  the  whole  time  he  was  there.  You  know,  or  must
have  heard  it  noticed,  that  the  intercourse  of  young  gentlemen  with  the  fair  sex  encourages
sentiments  of  honour  and  a love  of  fame.  I mention  this,  because  there  were  with  the  king
of  France  three  gentlemen  of  great  enterprise  and  valour,  which  they  were  probably  induced
to  display  from  that  intercourse,  as  I shall  relate.

The  names  of  these  three  knights  were,  sir  Boucicaut  the  younger,  sir  Reginald  de  Roye,
and  the  lord  de  Saimpi.  These  knights  were  chamberlains  to  the  king,  and  were  much
esteemed  by  him  for  their  worth,  for  accoutring  him  so  ably  with  his  arms,  and  in  other
services,  such  as  good  knights  owe  to  their  lord.  While  they  were  at  Montpellier  amusing
themselves  with  the  ladies  and  damsels,  they  were  called  upon  to  answer  a challenge  in
the  course  of  the  ensuing  summer : the  principal  cause  of  this,  as  I was  informed,  was  as
follows.

During  the  reign  of  king  Charles.  Y.  of  happy  memory,  an  English  knight  of  high  birth
and  great  renown,  called  sir  Piers  Courteney,  came  from  England  to  Paris  to  challenge  sir
Guy  de  la  Tremouille,  in  a combat  before  the  king  and  lords  of  France,  and  whoever  else
might  wish  to  be  spectators  of  it.  Sir  Guy  de  la  Tremouille  accepted  the  challenge  ; and
the  king,  with  the  duke  of  Burgundy  and  many  of  the  great  barons,  were  present  at  this
combat.  I believe  they  only  ran  one  course  with  the  lance ; for  the  king  would  not  suffer
more  to  be  done,  to  the  great  discontent  of  the  English  knight,  who  seemed  desirous  of
pushing  the  combat  to  extremities.  He  was,  however,  appeased  by  fair  speeches,  saying,  he
ought  to  be  satisfied,  for  he  had  done  enough ; and  he  was  presented  with  very  rich  gifts  by
the  king  and  the  duke  of  Burgundy*.

* Sir  Piers  Courteney  is  mentioned  by  Dugdale,  vol.  i.  return  for  the  honours  they  had  paid  him  in  his  combat
p.  639,  to  have  obtained  licence,  in  the  7th  Rie.  II.  to  with  a knight  of  that  country.  This  knight  was  probably
send  various  presents  to  the  king  and  lords  of  France,  in  sir  Guy  de  la  Tremouille.  The  licence  is  in  the  Foedera.


412


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


Perceiving  he  could  do  nothing  more,  sir  Piers  Courteney  set  out  on  his  return  to  Calais ;
and  the  lord  de  Clary,  who  at  that  time  was  a gay  and  lively  knight,  was  ordered  to  escort
him.  They  rode  on  until  they  came  to  Lucen  % where  the  countess  de  St.  Pol,  sister  to  king
Richard  of  England,  resided.  The  countess  was  rejoiced  to  see  sir  Piers  Courteney ; for
before  her  marriage  with  the  count  de  St.  Pol,  she  had  been  united  to  his  cousin  the  lord
Courteney  f,  but  lie  had  died  young,  and  the  English  called  her  lady  Courteney  rather  than
countess  of  St.  Pol.  While  there,  the  countess,  in  the  course  of  conversation,  asked  sir  Piers
what  he  thought  of  the  kingdom  of  France:  he  replied, — “Certainly,  madam,  France  is
very  extensive,  rich  and  plentiful,  and  well  guarded.  In  our  country  we  do  not  form  a true
estimate  of  it.”  “ And  are  you  pleased  with  the  reception  the  lords  of  France  have  given
you?  have  they  not  entertained  you  handsomely?”  “To  be  sure,  madam,  I am  perfectly
contented  as  to  the  reception  I have  had  ; but,  in  regard  to  the  cause  of  my  having  crossed
the  sea,  they  have  but  shabbily  acquitted  themselves : and  I must  say,  that  if  the  lord  de
Clary,  who  is  a French  knight,  had  come  to  England,  and  challenged  any  one,  however  high
his  rank,  it  would  have  been  accepted,  and  the  terms  faithfully  fulfilled  to  his  utmost
pleasure ; but  this  has  been  refused  me.  True  it  is,  that  sir  Guy  de  la  Tremouille  and
myself  were  brought  into  the  lists ; but,  when  we  had  run  one  course  with  the  lance,  I was
stopped,  and  ordered  from  the  king  to  attempt  nothing  more,  for  that  we  had  done  enough.
I therefore  say,  madam,  and  shall  say  and  maintain  it  wherever  I go,  that  I have  not  met
any  one  able  to  oppose  me  in  arms ; and  that  it  has  not  been  my  fault,  but  rests  solely  with
the  knights  of  France.”

The  lord  de  Clary,  who  was  present,  marked  this  speech  in  his  memory,  and  with  great
difficulty  held  his  tongue,  on  account  of  having  the  English  knight  under  his  care.  The
countess  of  St.  Pol  replied, — “ My  lord,  you  will  leave  France  with  much  honour,  having
complied  with  the  request  of  the  king  of  France,  not  to  proceed  further  in  your  combat;  for
you  would  have  been  unable  to  do  more  contrary  to  his  will.  You  cannot  incur  any  blame
in  this  matter ; and  all  those  on  each  side  of  the  sea  that  shall  hear  it  told,  will  give  you
more  praise  than  blame : I therefore  beg  of  you  to  rest  satisfied.”  “ Lady,”  said  the
knight,  “ that  I will  do,  and  not  give  myself  any  further  care  or  trouble  about  it.”

Here  the  conversation  on  this  matter  ended ; and  other  subjects  were  discoursed  on,
during  the  day  and  night  they  remained.  On  the  morrow,  sir  Piers  Courteney  took  leave
of  the  countess  de  St.  Pol,  who  presented  him  with  a handsome  clasp  of  gold,  and  another
to  the  lord  de  Clary,  as  being  his  companion,  and  because  the  English  knight  was  under  his
care  and  escort.  They  left  Lucen  early  in  the  morning,  and  took  the  road  to  Boulogne,
where  they  lay  that  night,  and  the  next  day  rode  through  Marquise  to  Calais.  Between
Boulogne  and  Calais  there  are  but  seven  short  leagues,  and  a good  road ; and  at  the  distance
of  two  leagues  from  Calais  you  enter  on  the  territory  of  Melle,  Oye,  and  Guisnes,  which
then  belonged  to  the  king  of  England.  When  they  were  near  to  Calais,  sir  Piers  Courteney
said  : “ Lord  of  Clary,  we  are  now  on  the  territories  of  the  king  of  England  : you  have
handsomely  acquitted  yourself,  in  escorting  me ; and  I give  you  many  thanks  for  your
company.”

The  lord  de  Clary  had  not  forgotten  the  speech  of  sir  Piers  to  the  countess  St.  Pol,  in  the
presence  of  many  persons ; for  it  had  made  him  sulky  and  full  of  anger,  which  although  at
the  time  he  bad  not  noticed  as  he  thought  it  deserved,  he  was  unwilling  it  should  pass  off
unanswered ; for  he  considered  it  as  presumptuous,  and  dishonourable  to  the  chivalry  of
France.  Sir  Piers  had  publicly  declared,  that  he  had  purposely  left  England  to  seek  deeds
of  arms  in  France,  and  had  not  found  any  one  in  that  country  willing  to  oppose  him.  The
lord  de  Clary  had  therefore  determined,  in  his  own  mind,  that  such  expressions  should  not
remain  unnoticed.  He  therefore,  on  taking  leave,  said, — “ Sir  Piers,  you  are  now'  on  the
lands  of  the  king  of  England,  whither  I have  escorted  you,  by  orders  of  my  king  and  my
lord  of  Burgundy.  You  may  recollect  that,  the  day  before  yesterday,  when  we  were  in  the

* “ Lucen.”  Q.  Luzeuz,  a town  in  the  comte  de  St.  did  not  inherit  the  earldom.  His  widow  Maude,  daughter
Pol.  of  sir  Thomas  Holland,  married  Waleran  count  de  St.

f This  person  was  Hugh  Courteney,  son  of  the  earl  of  Pol.— Duodale.

Devonshire ; but  he  died  before  his  father,  and  of  course


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &e.


413


apartment  of  the  countess  de  St.  Pol,  who  entertained  us  handsomely,  you  spoke  with  too  great
latitude,  as  it  seemed  to  me,  and  too  much  to  the  blame  and  prejudice  of  the  French  chivalry;
for  you  said,  you  had  come  to  the  court  of  the  king  of  France,  and  had  found  none  willing
to  oppose  you  in  arms : and  you  seemed  to  have  it  understood,  that  there  was  not  a knight
in  France  who  dared  to  tilt  with  you  three  courses  with  a lance.  I wish  you  therefore  to
know,  that  I (who  am  one  of  the  smallest  knights  of  the  realm)  offer  myself,  to  maintain
that  France  is  not  so  devoid  of  knights,  but  that  you  may  find  many  willing  to  accept  your
challenge ; and  if  you  will  accept  of  me  to  this  intent,  either  this  day  or  to-morrow,  I will
meet  you  without  hatred  or  any  ill-will.  It  is  solely  with  a view  to  defend  our  honour,  and
that  you  may  not  return  to  Calais  or  England,  and  boast  you  have  defeated  the  chivalry  of
France  without  striking.a  blow  : now,  say  whether  you  will  accept  my  challenge  or  not.”  Sir
Piers  Courteney  wras  ready  with  his  answer,  and  said, — “ Lord  de  Clary,  you  speak  well :
I accept  your  challenge,  and  propose  that  you  be  at  this  place  to-morrow,  armed  as  you
please.  I will  be  so  likewise ; and  we  will  tilt  three  courses  with  the  lance,  by  which  you
will  recover  the  honour  of  France,  and  give  me  much  satisfaction.”  “ Agreed,”  replied  the
lord  de  Clary : “ I will  be  here  at  the  hour  you  shall  appoint.”  The  two  knights  then
pledged  their  faith  to  each  other  for  this  tournament,  and  separated : the  lord  de  Clary  went
to  Marquise,  which  was  not  far  distant,  where  he  provided  himself  with  armour,  a shield,
and  lance.  He  was  not  long  in  doing  this ; for  the  knights  on  the  frontier  of  Boulogne  and
Calais  take  care  to  have  ample  supplies.  He  did  it  all,  however,  as  secretly  as  he  could ; for
he  was  unwilling  that  too  many  should  know  and  speak  of  it.

In  like  manner,  sir  Piers  Courteney,  on  his  arrival  at  Calais,  was  not  unmindful  of  the
engagement  he  had  made.  lie  had  no  occasion  to  seek  either  for  armour  or  arms,  for  he  had
brought  with  him  from  England  his  own  proper  arms,  which  were  good  and  strong.

At  this  time  sir  John  Warnes*  was  governor  of  Calais,  to  whom  he  told  the  engagement
he  had  made  with  the  lord  de  Clary.  Sir  John  replied,  that  he  would  accompany  him,  with
some  other  knights  of  Calais.  On  the  ensuing  morning,  the  twxo  knights  met  at  the
appointed  place ; but  the  English  knight  wTas  better  accompanied  than  the  lord  de  Clary,
for  he  had  with  him  the  governor  of  Calais.  On  their  meeting  there  was  not  much  conver-
sation, for  each  knew  what  he  was  to  do.

Botli  of  them  were  strongly  and  completely  armed,  to  abide  the  event,  such  as  the  fortune
of  arms  should  decide,  and  they  were  well  mounted.  They  had  their  targets  fast  buckled
on,  and  their  lances  given  them,  which  were  of  sharp,  well-tempered  Bordeaux  steel.
Having  taken  their  distance,  they  spurred  their  horses  full  gallop,  against  each  other,  but
missed  their  strokes,  which  seemed  to  vex  them  greatly.  On  the  second  course,  they  met
full ; and  the  lord  de  Clary  gave  sir  Piei’s  so  severe  a blow  with  his  still’  and  well-tempered
lance,  that  it  pierced  the  target,  and,  entering  deeply  into  the  shoulder,  struck  him  off  his
horse.  The  lord  de  Clary,  having  so  ably  tilted,  passed  on,  and  finished  his  career  as  an
accomplished  knight  should,  and  remained  quiet ; but  seeing  the  English  knight  was
unhorsed,  surrounded  by  his  friends  as  he  lay  on  the  ground,  and  thinking  that  he  might
have  wounded  him,  for  his  lance  with  the  blow  was  shivered  in  pieces,  rode  towards  him.
The  English  advanced  to  meet  him,  saying  he  was  not  a courteous  tilter.  “Why  so?”
replied  the  lord  de  Clary,  “ Because  you  hav7e  thrust  your  lance  into  sir  Piers’  shoulder :
you  ought  and  could  have  tilted  more  liberally.”  “ It  was  not  my  part  to  be  over  courteous  ;
for  I was  ready  prepared  to  meet  with  such  an  accident,  or  perhaps  a worse,  if  it  had  so
happened : but  since  he  had  such  pleasure  in  justing,  ask  him,  or  I will  for  you,  if  he  be
satisfied,  or  wish  for  more.”  Sir  John  Bernes,  upon  this,  said, — “ No,  sir  knight : you  may
depart,  for  you  have  done  enough.”  The  lord  de  Clary  went  away  with  his  company,  and
the  English  carried  sir  Piers  Courteney  to  Calais,  that  his  wound  might  be  attended  to  and
cured.  The  lord  de  Clary  returned  to  France,  expecting  to  receive  great  praise  for  the
goodly  act  he  thought  he  had  done : but  I will  tell  you  how  it  turned  out.

When  it  was  made  known  to  the  king  01  France,  the  duke  of  Burgundy,  and  their
council,  that  the  lord  de  Clary,  in  accompanying  sir  Piers  Courteney,  had  fought  with,  and

* I cannot  discover  sir  John  Warnes,  and  must  suppose  it  a mistake ; for  sir  William  Beauchamp  was  governor  of
Calais  when  the  truce  was  signed.  Lord  Berners  calls  him  sir  John  Bernes.


414


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


so  dangerously  wounded  him,  that  he  was  in  danger  of  his  life,  they  were  highly  enraged
against  him,  and  in  particular  sir  Guy  de  la  Tremouille.  They  declared  his  conduct  deserved
at  least  confiscation  of  his  lands,  and  perpetual  banishment  from  the  kingdom  of  France.
Others,  who  were  his  enemies,  said  he  had  acted  like  an  infamous  traitor,  in  challenging  and
fighting  a knight  that  had  been  placed  under  his  guard  by  the  king  and  the  duke  of  Bur-
gundy ; that  he  was  guilty  of  an  unpardonable  crime,  and  ought  to  suffer  death.

The  lord  de  Clary  was  summoned  to  appear,  which  summons  he  obeyed,  and  when
brought  before  the  king,  the  duke  of  Burgundy,  and  the  council,  was  sharply  reprimanded,
for  having  dared  to  injure  a knight  who  had  come  from  foreign  countries  to  the  court  of
France  to  perform  a deed  of  arms  and  gain  renown,  and  had  left  that  court  with  perfect
satisfaction  to  all,  and  under  his  safeguard  ; notwithstanding  which,  he  had  on  his  return,
at  the  boundary  of  the  two  kingdoms,  challenged  him  to  mortal  combat,  without  having
demanded  permission  of  his  sovereign,  on  whose  territories  he  was : that  this  was  a crime
deserving  the  severest  punishment,  by  which  others  might  take  example.  The  lord  de
Clary,  on  hearing  this  bitter  reproof,  was  thunderstruck,  for  he  thought  what  he  had  done
deserved  a contrary  treatment.  Having  paused  awhile,  he  said, — “ My  lords,  it  is  indeed
true  that  you  intrusted  to  my  care  sir  Piers  Courteney,  with  orders  to  escort  him  as  far  as
Calais  or  to  the  borders  of  the  kingdom.  Of  this  I have  acquitted  myself  loyally  and  faith-
fully, which,  if  necessary  to  prove,  I can  readily  do  so  from  himself.  It  is  also  true,  that
on  our  road  we  visited  the  countess  do  St.  Pol  at  Luzieuz,  who  received  us  very  kindly.
While  there,  the  following  conversation  passed : The  lady  asked  sir  Piers,  if  he  were
contented  with  the  lords  of  France,  and  what  he  thought  of  the  country  ? The  knight
courteously  replied,  ‘ Madam,  the  state  of  France  is  rich,  extensive,  and  plentiful.  With
respect  to  its  lords,  I am  perfectly  satisfied  with  the  reception  and  entertainments  I have
had  from  them,  excepting  one  thing.  I have  put  myself  to  very  great  expense  in  my
preparations  and  journey  to  Paris,  to  perform  a deed  of  arms,  but,  when  arrived  there,
found  none  willing  to  accept  of  my  challenge.’  My  lords,  when  I heard  this  speech  before
such  a lady  as  the  countess  of  St.  Pol,  sister  to  the  king  of  England,  my  blood  boiled  within
me ; but,  with  much  difficulty  I kept  silence,  because  you  had  entrusted  him  to  my  care
and  protection ; and  I never  gave  him  the  least  cause  to  suspect  I was  any  way  hurt  by
what  he  had  said,  so  Iona'  as  we  continued  together  in  France.  But  true  it  is,  that  when  we
were  about  to  separate  on  the  borders  of  the  country  of  Guisnes,  I reminded  him  of  his
expressions  to  the  countess  de  St.  Pol,  which,  I said,  were  neither  civil  nor  honourable,  as  he
seemed  to  wish  it  to  be  understood,  that  the  chivalry  of  France  was  so  much  debased  that
he  could  not  meet  with  any  one  who  dared  to  fight  with  him : that  I,  as  a knight  of
France,  if  such  were  his  meaning,  offered  to  prove  the  contrary,  being  unwilling  that,  on  his
return  to  England,  he  should  have  the  power  of  renewing  his  boastings  : that  I was  ready
and  desirous  to  afford  him  the  pleasure  of  tilting  three  courses  with  a lance,  either  that  or
any  future  day.  Certainly,  my  lords,  I made  this  offer  for  the  honour  of  the  kingdom  of
France  and  its  chivalry,  who  are  here  present : and  it  seemed  to  me,  that  he  accepted  my
challenge  with  much  joy,  and  fixed  the  meeting  for  the  morrow,  on  the  spot  where  we  were
speaking.  He  then  went  to  Calais,  and  I returned  to  Marquise,  where  I provided  myself
with  the  necessary  arms,  as  he  was  to  do  at  Calais.  On  the  morrow,  according  to  our
appointment,  we  met.  He  came  well  attended  by  some  of  the  garrison  of  Calais,  and  some
of  the  knights  and  squires  of  the  borders  came  with  me,  such  as  the  lord  de  Montcarel  and
sir  John  de  Longvilliers-  When  we  met,  we  had  but  a short  conversation,  and  then  tilted
with  spears  of  war,  for  we  were  both  completely  armed,  to  the  best  of  our  abilities.  The
fortune  of  the  combat  fell  to  me,  for  at  the  second  course  I drove  my  lance  into  him,  and
threw  him  on  the  ground.  I then  wrent  to  see  what  situation  he  was  in,  and  if  he  wished
to  continue  the  combat.  The  governor  of  Calais  told  me  that  what  had  been  done  was
sufficient,  and  that  I might  depart.  This  I did.  You  have  ordered  me  hither,  and  here  I
am.  I thought  I had  acted  properly  in  support  of  the  honour  of  the  kingdom  and  its
chivalry,  and  have  related  to  you  the  exact  truth.  If  I am  to  be  punished  for  what  I have
done,  I shall  submit  myself  to  the  judgment  of  my  lord  the  constable,  and  the  marshals  of
France,  and  also  to  the  evidence  of  sir  Piers  Courteney  himself,  with  whose  consent  I have


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


415


fought  tills  duel,  and  to  the  discretion  of  all  knights  and  squires  of  honour  in  France  or
England,  who  may  wish  to  attend  to  it.”

The  lord  de  Clary,  having  thus  clearly  exculpated  himself,  greatly  softened  the  anger  of
those  who  had  sent  for  him  : hut  this  did  not  prevent  him  from  being  committed  to  prison,
where  he  remained  a considerable  time  in  much  danger.  His  lands  were  seized,  and  himself
on  the  point  of  banishment  from  France,  when  the  lord  de  Coucy  and  the  duke  of  Bourbon,
who  loved  him,  interfered,  and  with  great  difficulty  made  his  peace,  by  means  of  the  countess
de  St.  Pol,  who  testified  to  the  truth  of  what  he  had  said,  of  the  conversation  that  had
passed  at  her  house.  On  obtaining  his  liberty,  he  wTas  addressed, — “ Lord  de  Clary,  when
you  challenged  sir  Piers  Courteney  to  fight,  instead  of  acting,  as  yon  thought,  very  gallantly,
yon  behaved  infamously ; for  he  was  under  the  protection  of  the  king,  and  you  had  orders
to  conduct  him  in  safety  to  Calais.  You  committed  a great  outrage,  when  you  noticed,  in
the  manner  you  have  yourself  declared,  the  conversation  he  held  in  joke  at  the  countess  de
St.  Pol’s.  Before  you  had  proposed  this  combat,  you  ought  to  have  returned  hither  to  my
lords,  and  have  told  them,  that  sir  Piers  Courteney  had  held  such  and  such  insolent  language
against  the  honour  of  the  knights  of  France  in  your  presence.  They  would  then  have
ordered  you  how  to  act.  Because,  therefore,  you  have  not  done  this,  you  have  been  thus
punished.  Be  another  time  more  discreet ; and  return  thanks  for  your  deliverance  to  my
lord  of  Bourbon  and  the  lord  de  Coucy  : they  have  exerted  themselves  much  to  serve  you,
as  has  the  countess  de  St.  Pol ; for  that  good  lady  took  great  pains  that  you  should  be
acquitted.”  The  lord  de  Clary  replied, — “ Many  thanks,  my  lords  ; ” adding,  “ I certainly
thought  I was  deserving  more  praise  than  blame,  when  I acted  as  I did.”

During  the  stay  of  the  king  of  France  at  Montpellier,  he  gave  a grand  banquet  to  many
ladies  and  damsels  of  that  town  ; during  which,  all  I have  just  related  was  talked  over,  and
the  cause  was,  that  the  three  knights,  who  were  desirous  of  holding  the  lists  against  all
coiners,  wished  to  avoid  fallinof  under  like  blame  to  the  lord  de  Clary.

Sir  Boucicaut  the  younger,  sir  Reginald  de  Roye,  and  the  lord  de  Saimpi,  offered  to  hold
a field  of  arms  on  the  frontier  of  Calais,  in  the  course  of  the  ensuing  summer,  against  all
foreign  knights  and  squires,  for  the  space  of  thirty  days,  and  to  tilt  with  blunt  lances  or
others.  The  king  of  France,  as  well  as  those  present,  thinking  this  proposal  was  rather
presumptuous,  remonstrated  with  them,  and  desired  they  wrould  put  down  their  challenge
on  paper,  that  if  any  improper  language  were  made  use  of,  it  might  be  corrected ; for  the
king  and  his  ministers  wished  to  examine  it,  being  unwilling  that  any  improper  or  unusual
terms  should  be  used.  The  three  knights  agreed  that  this  would  be  right,  and,  in  reply  to
the  king,  said  they  would  instantly  obey  his  commands.  They  ordered  a clerk,  with  pens,
paper,  and  ink,  into  another  apartment,  and  dictated  to  him  as  follows :

“ From  the  great  desire  we  have  to  become  acquainted  with  the  nobles,  gentlemen,  knights,
and  squires  bordering  on  the  kingdom  of  France,  as  well  as  with  those  in  the  more  distant
countries.,  we  propose  being  at  St.  I ngelvere  * the  twentieth  day  of  May  next  ensuing,  and
to  remain  there  for  thirty  days  complete ; and  on  each  of  these  thirty  days,  excepting  the
Fridays,  we  will  deliver  from  their  vows  all  knights,  squires,  and  gentlemen,  from  whatever
countries  they  may  come,  with  five  courses  with  a sharp  or  blunt  lance,  according  to  their
pleasure,  or  with  both  lances  if  more  agreeable.  On  the  outside  of  our  tents  will  be  hung
our  shields,  blazoned  with  our  arms;  that  is  to  say,  with  our  targets  of  war  and  our
shields  of  peace.  Whoever  may  choose  to  tilt  with  us  has  only  to  come,  or  send  any  one,
the  preceding  day,  to  touch  with  a rod  either  of  these  shields,  according  to  his  courage.  If
he  touch  the  target,  he  shall  find  an  opponent  ready  on  the  morrow  to  engage  him  in  a
mortal  combat  with  three  courses  with  a lance  : if  the  shield,  he  shall  be  tilted  with  a
blunted  lance ; and  if  both  shields  are  touched,  he  shall  be  accommodated  with  both  sorts  of
combat.  Every  one  who  may  come,  or  send  to  touch  our  shields,  must  give  in  his  name  to
the  persons  who  shall  be  appointed  to  the  care  of  them.  And  all.  such  foreign  knights  and
squires  as  shall  be  desirous  of  tilting  with  us,  shall  bring  with  them  some  noble  friend,  and
we  will  do  the  same  on  our  parts,  who  will  order  what  may  be  proper  to  be  done  on  either
side.  We  particularly  entreat,  such  noble  knights  or  squires  as  may  accept  our  challenge,
* “ St.  Ingelvere,”— a village  in  Picardy,  near  Calais.


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


410

to  believe  that  we  do  not  make  it  through  presumption,  pride,  or  any  ill  will,  but  solely
with  a view  of  having  their  honourable  company,  and  making  acquaintance  with  them,
which  we  desire  from  the  bottom  of  our  hearts.  None  of  our  targets  shall  be  covered  with
steel  or  iron,  any  more  than  those  who  may  tilt  with  us ; nor  shall  there  be  any  fraud,  deceit,
or  trick  made  use  of,  but  what  shall  be  deemed  honourable  by  the  judges  of  the  tournament.
And  that  all  gentlemen,  knights,  and  squires,  to  whom  these  presents  shall  come,  may  depend
on  their  authenticity,  we  have  set  to  them  our  seals,  with  our  arms,  this  twentieth  day  of
November,  at  Montpellier,  in  the  year  of  grace  1389.”  Underneath  was  signed,  Reginald
de  Roye,  Boucicaut,  Saimpi.

The  king  of  France  was  well  pleased  with  this  courageous  challenge  of  his  three  knights,
and  declared  it  should  have  his  consent,  if,  on  examination  by  his  ministers,  there  was  no
fault  found  with  the  terms  it  was  couched  in.  It  was  objected  to  by  some,  that  it  was
wrong  to  fix  the  place  for  this  tournament  so  near  to  Calais,  as  the  English  might  think  it
was  arrogantly  and  particularly  aimed  at  them ; and  that  all  occasions  of  quarrel  should  be
avoided,  for  a truce  had  been  agreed  to  for  three  years  between  France  and  England.  The
king’s  ministers  were  one  whole  day  considering  the  matter,  without  coming  to  any  conclu-
sion. Some  of  the  most  prudent  said,  it  ought  not  to  be  allowed,  nor  the  whims  of  wild
young  knights  to  be  acceded  to,  for  more  evil  than  good  might  ensue  from  them.  The  king,
however,  who  was  young  himself,  greatly  inclined  towards  them,  and  said, — “Let  them
perform  their  enterprise : they  are  young  and  courageous,  and,  besides,  have  vowed  to  do  so
before  the  ladies  of  Montpellier.  We  are  desirous  they  should  undertake  it,  and  bring  it  to
the  happiest  end  they  can.”

When  the  king  had  thus  declared  his  mind  to  the  council,  no  one  made  further  opposition,
to  the  great  joy  of  the  knights.  The  challenge  having  been  agreed  to  in  the  manner  the
knights  had  drawn  it  out,  the  king  called  them  into  his  closet,  and  said, — “ Boucicaut,
Reginald,  and  Saimpi,  be  attentive  in  this  your  enterprise,  to  guard  well  your  own  honour  and
that  of  our  kingdom  : let  nothing  be  spared  in  the  state  you  keep ; for  I will  not  fail  to
assist  you  as  far  as  ten  thousand  francs.”  The  three  knights  cast  themselves  on  their  knees,
and  returned  the  king  their  warmest  thanks.


CHAPTER  VIII. DURING  THE  KING  OF  FRANCE’S  RESIDENCE  AT  BEZIERS,  ACCUSATIONS  ARE

MADE  AGAINST  BETHISAC,  TREASURER  TO  THE  DUKE  OF  BERRV. THINKING  TO  BE

SENT  TO  THE  POPE  AND  ESCAPE  PUNISHMENT,  HE  CONFESSES  HIMSELF  A HERETIC
AND  SODOMITE,  BUT  IS  TRANSFERRED  OVER,  BY  THE  OFFICIAL  AT  BEZIERS,  TO  THE
SECULAR  POWER,  AND  BURNT.

When  the  king  of  France  had,  for  fifteen  days  or  more,  taken  his  amusements  with  the
ladies  and  damsels  of  Montpellier,  and  his  ministers,  during  that  time,  had  attended  to  the
state  of  the  town,  for  that  had  been  the  cause  of  his  coming,  and  had  made  many  reforms  and
taken  off  several  heavy  taxes  of  which  the  inhabitants  had  complained,  he  graciously  took  his
leave  of  the  ladies,  and  one  morning  very  early  departed,  following  the  road  to  Alipiam*,
where  he  dined,  and  lay  that  night  at  St.  Thiberyf.  On  the  morrow,  after  his  morning-
draught,  he  set  off  and  came  to  Beziers,  where  he  was  received  most  joyfully ; for  the  good
people  of  that  town,  and  the  adjoining  ones  of  Pezenas,  Cabestan,  and  Narbonne|,  were
anxious  to  see  him,  in  order  to  make  their  complaints  against  an  officer  of  the  dnke  of  Berry,
called  Bethisac,  who  had  impoverished  the  country  all  around,  by  seizing  whatever  he  could
lay  his  hands  on.  This  Bethisac  had  attended  the  king’s  company  ever  since  he  had  left
Avignon  ; but  the  king’s  ministers,  who  sought  his  ruin,  never  told  him,  “ Bethisac,  look  to
yourself,  for  very  strict  inquiries  will  be  made  into  your  management : there  have  already
been  made  very  heavy  accusations  against  you  to  the  king.”  But,  on  the  contrary,  they

* “ Alipiam.”  It  is  Olipiam  in  the  MSS.  and  Alpiarn  f “ St.  Thibery,” — a town  in  the  diocese  of  Adge,
in  Verard.  Q.  if  not  intended  for  Ville  Airac,  which  is  near  Pezenas.

on  the  line  from  Montpellier  to  St.  Thibery.  t “ Pezenas,  Cabestan,  and Narbonne,”  towns  in  Lower

Languedoc.


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.  417

made  him  good  cheer,  joked  and  laughed  with  him,  and  promised  him  increased  honours,  in
which  he  was  disappointed,  as  I shall  shortly  relate.


Entry  of  Charles  King  of  France  to  Beziers.


Designed  from  Illuminations  of  the  period.


The  king  of  France  left  St.  Thibery  at  one  o’clock  in  the  afternoon,  and  between  three  and
four  entered  the  town  of  Beziers.  He  was  met  by  the  bishop  and  all  the  clergy  in  their
robes,  and  the  citizens,  ladies,  and  damsels  in  procession  : they  formed  a lane,  through  which
he  rode  a foot’s  pace ; and,  as  he  passed,  they  all  fell  on  their  knees.  In  this  manner  was  he
conducted  to  the  cathedral,  and  dismounted  at  the  portico,  where  had  been  erected  a rich
altar,  adorned  with  holy  relics  from  the  church.  The  king,  having  on  his  knees  very  devoutly
made  his  prayers  at  this  altar,  was  conducted  into  the  church  by  the  bishop  of  Beziers  and
the  duke  of  Bourbon,  followed  by  all  the  great,  lords.  He  remained  in  the  church  about  half
an  hour,  and  then  went  to  the  palace  that  was  adjoining,  where  he,  his  brother  the  duke  of
Touraine,  and  his  uncle  the  duke  of  Bourbon,  were  lodged.  The  other  lords  were  lodged  in
the  town,  which  was  of  a sufficient  size,  for  Beziers  is  a large  city.

The  king  was  for  three  days  revelling  with  the  ladies  and  damsels  of  Beziers,  before  any
notice  was  taken  of  Bethisao ; but  the  inquisitors  who  had  been  appointed  to  make  inquiries
concerning  him  were  not  idle,  but  did  their  office  secretly,  and  discovered  many  atrocious  acts
deserving  the  severest  punishment.  On  the  fourth  day,  Bethisac  was  summoned  before  the
council,  and  shut  up  in  a chamber  for  his  examination.  He  was  ordered  to  make  answer  to
the  following  accusations,  and  was  shown  at  the  same  time  a number  of  complaints  and
petitions  that  had  been  presented  to  the  king  at  Beziers,  accusing  him  of  weak  management
and  such  great  extortions  as  made  the  whole  country  cry  out  against  him.  All  these  were
read  in  his  presence.  To  some  he  gave  satisfactory  answers,  to  others  not,  saying  he  had  no
knowledge  of  them,  and  referrino-  them  to  the  seneschals  of  Beaucaire  and  Carcassone,  and  to
the  chancellor  of  Berry.  They  concluded  this  examination  by  telling  him,  it  was  necessary
to  commit  him  to  prison  until  he  should  clear  himself  from  these  heavy  charges.  This  lie
obeyed,  for  he  could  not  help  it ; and,  as  soon  as  he  was  gone,  the  inquisitors  went  to  his
house,  and  seized  all  his  papers  and  accounts  of  whatever  things  he  had  been  concerned
in,  carrying  them  away  to  search  into  them  more  at  leisure.  They  discovered  a variety  of

VOL.  II.  E E


418


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


transactions  and  accounts  of  large  sums  that  he  had  extorted  from  these  countries.  He  was
asked,  if  these  accounts  were  just,  and  what  had  become  of  the  large  sums  he  had  received  ;
he  answered,  “ that  the  accounts  were  just;  that  the  whole  amount  had  been  paid  to  his
lord  of  Berry,  and  had  passed  through  his  hands,  or  those  of  other  treasurers,  for  which  he
had  received  legal  acquittances,  that  were  in  such  a place  of  his  house.”  Persons  were  sent
thither,  who  laid  them  before  the  council : and  they  were  found,  on  comparing  them,  to  tally
tolerably  well  with  the  accounts  of  receipt.

The  inquisitors  and  the  council  were  satisfied,  and  Bethisac  was  no  longer  closely  confined.
The  council  conferred  together,  and  said, — “ Bethisac  is  clear  from  this  accusation  ; for  it  is
apparent,  that  all  the  sums  the  people  complain  of  having  been  exacted  from  them  have  been
paid  to  the  duke  of  Berry.  How  can  we  help  if  if  these  sums  have  been  extravagantly
spent  ? ” Bethisac’s  defence  was  nothing  but  the  truth  ; for  this  duke  of  Berry  was  the
most  covetous  man  alive,  and  if  he  could  only  get  money,  cared  not  by  what  means ; and
when  he  had  it,  he  miserably  expended  it,  like  many  of  the  present  and  past  times.

The  king’s  ministers  found  nothing  in  the  conduct  of  Bethisac  that  was  deserving  death.
All,  however,  were  not  of  this  opinion;  for  some  of  them  said, — “ Bethisac  has  made  such
cruel  levies,  and  so  impoverished  the  people,  to  gratify  the  passions  of  my  lord  of  Berry,  that
the  blood  of  these  poor  creatures  cries  out  loudly  against  him ; for  that  he  being  the  only
one  from  those  parts  of  the  duke’s  council,  and  knowing  the  poverty  of  the  country,  should
have  remonstrated  with  the  duke,  and  if  he  refused  to  listen  to  him,  he  should  have  come
and  informed  the  king  and  council  of  the  situation  of  the  country,  and  of  the  duke’s  intentions  :
proper  measures  would  then  have  been  taken,  and  himself  exculpated  for  the  large  sums  he
was  now  accused  of  having  amassed.”

In  consequence,  Bethisac  was  remanded  before  the  council,  and  again  more  closely
examined,  touching  the  expenditure  of  the  great  sums  that  had  been  raised  and  paid  to  the
duke  of  Berry  ; for  they  had  found  the  amount  to  be  three  millions  of  francs.  He  replied, —
“ My  lords,  I cannot  make  out  any  clearer  account  of  this  : the  duke  has  laid  out  large  sums
in  the  reparations  of  his  castles  and  houses,' in  the  purchase  of  lands  in  the  county  d’Estampes,
from  the  count  de  Boulogne,  and  in  jewels ; and  you  know  he  is  very  careless  in  such
purchases.  His  establishments,  which  were  very  great  before,  have  been  much  increased  ; and
he  has  made  such  presents  to  Thibaut  and  Morinot,  and  the  valets  about  his  person,  that  they
are  become  very  rich.”  “ And  you,  Bethisac,”  asked  the  council,  “have  you  been  well  paid
for  the  pains  and  services  you  have  done  him  ? one  hundred  thousand  francs  is  a pretty
tolerable  recompense.”  “ My  lords,”  said  Bethisac,  “ I am  very  well  satisfied  with  what
my  lord  of  Bci’ry  has  given  me ; for  he  wishes  all  his  people  to  be  rich.”  • “ Ha,  Bethisac,”
replied  the  council,  “ you  now  talk  like  a fool : riches,  ill  acquired,  are  neither  honourable  nor
profitable.  You  must  return  to  prison,  and  we  will  consider  what  you  have  now  told  us,
and  wait  there  the  king’s  pleasure,  to  whom  we  will  report  everything  you  have  said  in
your  defence.”  “ My  lords,”  replied  Bethisac,  “ God  assist  me !”

He  remained  in  prison  four  days  without  being  noticed  by  the  council.  When  it  was
known  in  the  country  that  Bethisac  had  been  arrested  and  thrown  into  prison,  and  that  an
inquisition  was  holding  on  his  conduct;  and  that  whoever  had  any  complaints  to  make  should
come  forward  ; numbers  hastened  to  Beziers,  and  presented  petitions  and  accusations  of
heavy  charges  against  Bethisac  at  the  king’s  palace.  Some  complained  that  he  had  robbed
them  of  their  lands  without  cause  ; others  of  the  violences  he  had  committed  on  their  wives
and  daughters.  In  short,  the  complaints  were  so  numerous,  that  the  king’s  council  were
tired  of  hearing  them  : they  plainly  showed  how  much  he  was  hated  by  the  people,  which
arose  from  the  great  exertions  he  had  made  to  fill  the  purse  of  the  duke  of  Berry.

The  council  were  embarrassed  to  know  how  to  act ; for  the  duke  of  Berry  had  sent  to
Beziers  two  knights,  the  lord  de  Nantouillet  and  sir  Peter  Mespin,  with  credential  letters  to
the  king.  These  knights  avowed,  in  the  name  of  the  duke,  all  the  acts  Bethisac  had
committed,  as  done  by  his  command,  and  claimed,  at  the  same  time,  the  person  of  Bethisac,
that  they  might  conduct  him  to  his  lord,  the  duke  of  Berry.  The  king,  from  the  many
infamous  stories  he  had  heard  of  Bethisac,  hated  him,  and  he  and  his  brother  were  inclined
to  have  him  put  to  death  : but  the  council  dared  not  condemn  him,  as  they  too  much  feared


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


419


the  duke  of  Berry.  They  said  to  the  king, — “ In  case  my  lord  of  Berry  takes  on  himself  all
the  acts  of  Bethisac,  whatever  they  may  deserve,  we  do  not  see  that,  with  any  plea  of
justice,  we  can  put  him  to  death.  For  at  the  time  when  he  raised  all  these  vast  sums,  by
harassing  the  people  with  taxes,  levies,  and  subsidies,  the  duke  of  Berry  acted  as  if  he  were
king,  with  the  same  royal  power  you  have  at  this  moment.  We  can,  however,  do  one
thing,  as  a punishment  for  his  crimes : we  may  take  possession  of  all  his  goods,  moveable
and  immoveable,  and  reduce  him  to  the  state  in  which  the  duke  of  Berry  found  him,  and
distribute  these  among;  such  as  have  suffered  the  most  from  his  wickedness.”

Why  should  I make  a longer  story  of  it  ? Bethisac  was  on  the  point  of  escaping  with  the
loss  indeed  of  his  fortune,  when  other  events  happened  that  I will  relate.  I know  not,  nor
have  ever  been  able  to  learn  but  from  his  own  confession,  whether  he  was  or  was  not  guilty
of  the  crimes  he  accused  himself  of.  He  declared  he  had  been  for  a long  time  a heretic,  and
had  done  many  horrid  and  wicked  deeds.  According  to  the  information  I had,  some  persons
visited  him  by  night  in  his  prison,  and,  to  frighten  him,  said,  Bethisac,  you  are  in  an
unfortunate  situation ; for  the  king  of  France,  his  brother,  and  the  duke  of  Bourbon,  are
determined  on  your  death  ; and  they  have  had  so  many  accusations  against  your  conduct,
when  you  formerly  governed  Languedoc,  that  they  judge  you  deserving  the  gallows,  and
you  will  not  escape  with  the  confiscation  of  your  wealth.  This  has  been  offered  to  the  king ;
but  he  hates  you  mortally,  and  refused  it,  saying,  that  both  your  property  and  your  body
too  was  forfeited  to  him,  and  you  should  not  long  remain  confined.  We  tell  you  this,  that
you  may  consider  and  make  the  best  use  of  your  time  ; for  to-morrow  you  will  be  brought
from  prison,  and,  from  the  appearances  we  have  observed,  we  suppose  you  will  be  condemned
to  death.  This  speech  greatly  terrified  Bethisac,  who  exclaimed,  “ Ah,  holy  Mary  ! are
there  no  means  to  avoid  this?”  “ Yes,”  replied  they  : “ say  to-morrow  that  you  wish  to
speak  to  the  council : they  will  either  come  or  send  for  you.  When  in  their  presence,  say,

‘ My  lords,  I fear  I have  greatly  offended  God,  and  for  this  offence  am  I now  suffering
under  these  slanderous  reports.'  They  will  ask  what  you  mean.  Reply,  that  you  have  for
a long  time  erred  from  the  faith,  and  that  you  are  a heretic.  Keep  steady  to  this  declaration.
The  bishop  of  Beziers,  when  he  hears  this,  will  claim  you  to  be  given  up  to  him.  This  will
be  instantly  complied  with,  for  such  cases  devolve  to  the  ecclesiastical  jurisdiction.  You
will  be  sent  to  Avignon,  where  no  one  will  venture  to  accuse  you  in  opposition  to  the  duke
of  Berry,  whom  the  pope  dare  not  anger.  By  this  means  you  will  escape,  without  loss  of
life  or  fortune;  but,  if  you  hesitate  in  taking  advantage  of  the  earliest  opportunity,
to-morrow  you  will  be  hanged  : for  the  king  hates  you  from  the  clamour  of  the  people,  with
whom  you  know  how  unpopular  you  are.”

Bethisac  unfortunately  believed  all  this  false  information  that  had  been  given  to  him,  for
those  who  are  in  peril  of  their  lives  are  much  confused  in  mind  : he  said, — “ You  are  my
good  friends  who  thus  kindly  advise  me,  and  may  God  reward  you  for  it ! The  time  may
perhaps  come  when  I shall  be  enabled  to  thank  you  otherwise  than  by  words.”  LTpon
this,  his  visitors  departed.  When  morning  came,  Bethisac  called  the  gaoler,  and  said, —
“ My  friend,  I beg  of  you  to  go,  or  send,  to  such  and  such  persons,”  whom  he  named,  in  the
number  of  his  inquisitors.  He  replied,  he  would  do  so ; and  they  were  informed,  that
Bethisac  wanted  to  speak  with  them  in  his  prison.  They  hastened  thither,  in  the  hope  that
they  were  already  acquainted  with  the  purport  of  his  sending  for  them.  When  arrived,  they
asked  what  he  wanted  : he  answered, — “ My  fail’  sirs,  I have  had  time  to  examine  the  state  of
mv  conscience  ; and  I fear  I have  greatlv  offended  God.  bv  having  for  a long  time  erred  in  my
faith  ; for  I do  not  believe  one  word  of  the  Trinity,  nor  that  the  son  of  God  has  ever  deigned
to  debase  himself  by  descending  from  Heaven,  and  putting  on  the  human  form  by  being  bom
of  woman.  I believe  likewise,  that  when  we  die,  our  soul  dies  with  us.”  “ By  holy  Mary,
Bethisac,”  replied  the  informers,  “ you  do  indeed  err  greatly  against  the  church  : consider
well  what  you  have  said,  for  your  speech  deserves  the  flames.”  “ I know  not,"  answered
Bethisac,  “ whether  my  speech  deserves  fire  or  water,  but  such  have  been  my  opinions  ever
since  I came  to  understanding,  and  such  will  they  continue  as  lono-  I live.”

The  inquisitors  were  so  rejoiced  at  what  he  had  said,  that  they  would  not  for  the  present
listen  to  more,  but,  on  their  departure,  strictly  charged  the  gaoler  not  to  admit  to  him  man

e e 2


420


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


or  woman,  lest  he  should  retract  his  opinions,  and  hastened  to  lay  before  the  council  what
they  had  heard.  They  went  to  the  king,  in  his  chamber,  and  reported  what  Bethisac  had
declared.  He  was  greatly  astonished,  and  said, — “ We  order  him  to  be  put  to  death  : he  is
a wicked  wretch,  a heretic  and  thief.  We  will,  that  he  be  burnt  and  hanged,  that  he  may
have  the  reward  he  deserves  ; nor  for  anything  my  uncle  of  Berry  shall  say,  will  I pardon
him.”

News  was  soon  spread  through  Beziers  and  other  places,  that  Bethisac  had  of  his  own
free  will,  without  the  least  constraint,  confessed  himself  a heretic  and  had  long  followed
the  doctrines  of  the  Bulgarians*,  and  that  the  king  had  condemned  him  to  he  burnt  and
hanged.  The  inhabitants  of  Beziers  were  pleased  at  this,  for  he  was  much  hated  by  them.
The  two  knights  from  the  duke  of  Berry  were  thunderstruck,  and  knew  not  how  to  act : at
length  sir  Peter  Mespin,  addressing  himself  to  the  lord  de  Nantouillet,  said, — “ I suspect
that  Bethisac  has  been  betrayed,  and  that  some  one,  who  has  been  to  see  him  in  prison,  has
frightened  him,  and  advised  him  to  accuse  himself ; and  that,  if  he  persist  in  owning  himself
guilty  of  these  horrible  and  infamous  crimes,  the  church  will  claim  him  to  be  tried  according
to  its  canons,  and  he  will  be  delivered  up  to  the  pope  at  Avignon.  Ah,  the  blockhead  will
be  deceived  ! for  I have  already  heard  the  king  has  declared  he  shall  be  burnt  and  hanged.
Come,  let  us  hasten  to  his  prison,  and  remonstrate  with  him  on  his  folly,  and  make  him
retract  all  he  has  said,  for  he  has  been  betrayed  by  false  friends.”

The  two  knights  immediately  went  from  then'  lodgings  to  the  prison,  and  demanded  from
the  gaoler  to  speak  with  Bethisac.  The  gaoler  excused  himself,  saying, — “ My  lords,  I am
particularly  ordered,  as  well  as  these  four  serjeants  at  arms,  who  have  been  sent  hither  by
the  king,  not  to  suffer  any  one  to  converse  with  the  prisoner,  under  pain  of  our  lives  ; and  this
command  of  the  king  we  dare  not  disobey.”  The  knights  perceived  all  further  attempt
would  be  vain,  for  it  was  over  with  Bethisac,  and  that  he  must  die  for  the  crimes  of  which
he  had  been  wickedly  induced  to  accuse  himself.  They  then  returned  to  their  inn,  paid  their
expenses,  mounted  their  horses,  and  set  out  on  their  return  to  the  duke  of  Berry.

The  end  of  Bethisac  was,  that  about  ten  o’clock  in  the  morning  of  the  next  day  he  was
carried  from  prison  to  the  palace  of  the  bishop,  where  were  assembled  his  judges  and  the
official  of  the  bishop’s  court.  The  bailiff  of  Beziers,  under  whose  care  he  had  been  committed
prisoner,  said  to  the  officers  of  the  bishop,  “ Here  is  Bethisac,  whom  we  deliver  to  you  as  a
Bulgarian,  a heretic,  and  one  erring  greatly  against  the  faith,  who,  had  he  not  been  a clerk,
should  have  been  punished  by  us  according  to  his  deserts.”  The  official  demanded  if  he  were
such  a person  as  he  had  been  represented,  and  that  he  would,  in  the  hearing  of  the  people,
avow  or  deny  it.  Bethisac,  who  expected  to  escape  by  confessing  himself  guilty,  replied,  that
the  charges  were  true.  He  was  thrice  asked  this  question,  and  thrice  acknowledged  it  aloud.
You  may  suppose  how  grossly  he  must  have  been  deceived : had  he  kept  firm  to  the  defence
he  had  made  to  the  accusations  brought  against  him,  he  would  have  been  acquitted ; for  the
duke  of  Berry  had  taken  upon  himself  all  the  charges  of  extortion,  in  raising  the  taxes  in
Languedoc.  Fortune,  one  may  conclude,  played  him  this  trick  ; and  when  he  was  seated,
as  he  thought,  on  the  top  of  her  wheel,  she  suddenly  turned  it  round  and  whirled  him  in  the
dirt,  as  she  has  done  to  thousands  since  the  world  began.

Bethisac  was,  by  the  official,  given  over  to  the  bailiff  of  Beziers,  who,  in  temporal  matters,
governs  for  the  king  : without  delay,  he  led  him  to  the  square  before  the  palace,  and  made
such  haste,  that  Bethisac  had  no  time  to  make  any  defence,  nor  retract  what  he  had  said  ;
for  when  Ire  saw  the  fire,  and  that  he  was  put  into  the  hands  of  the  executioner,  he  was
affrighted,  and  perceived  that  he  had  been  betrayed.  He  called  aloud  to  be  heard,  but  no
attention  whatever  was  paid  to  him  : he  was  told, — “ Bethisac,  the  order  is  given,  and  you
must  die  : your  evil  deeds  have  brought  you  to  a disgraceful  end.”  Much  haste  was  made,
for  the  fire  was  lighted  ; and  they  had  erected  a gallows  and  a post,  with  a large  collar  and
chain  : they  opened  the  collar  by  a hinge,  and  closed  it  again,  when  round  his  neck,  and

* Thie  name  was  given  to  the  Manicheans.  Their  church  of  Rome  called  heresiarchs.  The  Albigenses  had
doctrines  had  passed  from  Greece  into  Bulgaria,  from  in  the  preceding  century  been  distinguished  by  this
whence  they  had  spread  over  Europe  : hence  the  name  of  name. — Ed.

Boulgres  or  Bulgarians  was  given  to  those  whom  the


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


421


dragged  him  to  the  post,  fastening  him  thereto  with  the  chain.  He  cried  aloud,  saying,—
“ Duke  of  Berry,  they  wrongfully  and  treacherously  are  putting  me  to  death.”  The  moment
he  was  fastened  to  the  stake,  they  covered  him  with  dry  faggots,  to  which  they  set  lire ;
and  thus  was  Bcthisac  burnt,  and  his  hones  hanged  : the  square  being  in  front  of  the  palace,
the  king  of  France,  if  lie  pleased,  might  have  witnessed  it  from  the  windows  of  his  apartments.
Such  was  the  miserable  end  of  Bethisac  ; and  the  people  revenged  on  him  the  many  great
vexations  and  violences  he  had  committed  during  the  time  he  governed  Languedoc* * * §.


CHAPTER  IX. WHEN  THE  KING  OP  FRANCE  IS  AT  TOULOUSE,  HE  SUMMONS  THE  COUNT  DE

POIX,  WHO,  ON  IIIS  ARRIVAL,  PAYS  HIM  HOMAGE  FOR  HIS  COUNTY  OF  FOIX.

Tile  king  of  France  did  not  remain  long  in  Beziers  after  this  severe  act  of  justice,  but  set
out  with  his  array,  taking  the  road  towards  Carcassone.  Since  he  had  left  Avignon,  he  had
been  always  attended  by  his  marshal,  sir  Lewis  de  Sancerre.  The  king  did  not  follow  the
straight  road,  hut  visited  different  towns,  such  as  Cabestan*}*,  N ar bonne J,  Lymoux§,  Mont-
royal||,  and  Fougans,  thence  he  returned  to  Carcassone,  where  he  resided  four  days.  On  his
departure,  he  passed  through  Ville-franclie<|{,  Avignonet##  and  Mont-giscardf f,  in  his  way  to
Toulouse.  The  inhabitants  of  this  city,  being  anxious  to  see  him,  went  out  in  grand  proces-
sion, handsomely  dressed,  and  escorted  him  with  much  pomp  to  the  castle  of  Toulouse.  The
citizens  of  the  town,  which  is  rich  and  important,  made  the  king  such  presents,  on  his
arrival,  as  well  pleased  him.

When  the  king  had  refreshed  himself,  for  three  days,  in  Toulouse,  he  was  advised  to
summon  the  count  de  Foix,  who  had  left  Bearn,  and  fixed  his  residence  at  a town  in  Foix,
called  Mazeres,  fourteen  leagues  from  Toulouse  ; for  he  had  received  information  of  the
king’s  arrival  at  Toulouse,  and  of  his  intention  to  summon  him.  The  marshal  of  France
and  the  lord  de  la  Riviere,  were  ordered  to  wait  on  the  count,  who,  setting  out  on  a
Wednesday  after  dinner,  arrived  at  a tolerably  good  town  in  the  Toulousain,  called  Isle
Jourdainjj;,  and  on  the  morrow,  by  dinner-time,  came  to  Mazeres.  The  count  de  Foix,  on
learning  their  arrival,  received  them  kindly,  from  his  affection  to  the  king,  and  from  his
former  acquaintance  with  them.

The  marshal,  addressing  him,  said, — “ My  lord  of  Foix,  our  very  dear  lord,  the  king  of
France,  sends  us  to  invite  you  to  come  to  Toulouse  ; otherwise,  so  great  is  his  desire  to  see
you,  that  he  will  do  his  utmost  to  visit  you  in  your  own  country.”  The  count  replied, —
“ Sir  Lewis,  I wull  not  give  the  king  the  trouble  of  coming  to  me  ; for  it  is  more  becoming
that  I wait  on  him.  You  will  tell  him,  therefore,  if  you  please,  from  me,  that  I will  be  in
Toulouse  within  four  days.”  “ It  is  well  said,”  replied  the  knight : “ we  will  return,  and
carry  him  this  your  answer.”  “ That  you  may  boldly  do,”  said  the  count ; “ but  not
to-day  ; for  you  shall  now  stay  with  me,  as  I am  heartily  glad  to  see  you  both  ; and  in  the
morning  you  shall  set  out  on  your  return.”  The  two  knights  remained  with  the  count,  who
was  in  the  highest  good  humour,  that  day  and  night,  and  they  conversed  on  various
subjects.  The  count  was  a wise  and  prudent  man,  and  had  a talent  of  drawing  from  any
person  with  whom  he  conversed,  be  his  station  what  it  might,  his  most  private  thoughts.
At  bed-time,  they  took  leave  of  the  count,  intending  to  set  out  very  early  in  the  morning  for
Toulouse,  which  they  did,  and  I believe  performed  the  journey  in  one  day.  On  their  return,


* Don  Vaissette,  in  his  history  of  Languedoc,  gives  very
satisfactory  reasons,  to  show  that  ‘Froissart  was  mistaken
as  to  the  time  of  Bethisac’s  execution,  which  took  place
the  22d  December,  1389,  at  Toulouse,  some  months  after
the  king  had  left  Beziers.  For  further  particulars,  I refer
to  that  history.

f“Cabestan,” — a town  in  lower  Languedoc,  diocese
of  Nlmes.

+ “ Narbonne,” — a large  city  in  lower  Languedoc.

§ “ Lymoux,” — a city  in  upper  Languedoc,  five  leagues
from  Carcassone.


||  “Mont-royal.”  Q.

H “ Ville  franche,” — a town  in  upper  Languedoc,
diocese  of  Alby.

**  “ Avignonet,” — . town  in  upper  Languedoc,  diocese
of  St.  Papoul.

ft  “ Montgiscard,” — a town  in  upper  Languedoc,  three
leagues  from  Toulouse.

JJ  “ Isle  Jourdain,” — a town  in  Armagnac,  six  leagues
from  Toulouse.


422


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


they  found  the  king  playing  at  chess  with  the  duke  of  Bourbon,  who,  on  seeing  them,  called
out,  “ Well,  what  news?  Will  the  count  de  Foix  come  or  not?”  “ Yes,  sire,”  replied  la
Riviere : “ he  has  a very  earnest  desire  to  come  to  you,  and  will  be  here  within  four  days.”
“ Well,”  said  the  king,  “ we  shall  be  very  happy  to  see  him.”

The  two  knights  then  left  the  king  to  continue  his  gamo,  and  went  to  sup  and  refresh
themselves,  for  they  had  rode  a long  day’s  journey.  The  count  de  Foix,  who  resided  at
Mazeres,  was  not  forgetful  of  the  journey  he  was  to  make  ; and  his  preparations  were
soon  ready,  for  he  had  given  orders  on  that  head  when  he  had  first  heard  of  the  king’s
coming  to  Toulouse.  He  sent  forward  to  Toulouse  purveyances  in  abundance,  suitable
to  his  rank,  and  had  ordered  two  hundred  knights  and  squires  from  Bearn  to  attend  him.
On  the  day  the  count  had  fixed  for  his  arrival  at  Toulouse,  he  entered  the  city  with  upwards
of  six  hundred  horse,  and  well  accompanied  by  knights  and  squires  of  his  vassalage.
Among  them  were,  sir  Roger  d’Espaign  his  cousin,  the  lord  de  Corasse,  the  lord  de  Yalentin,
the  lord  de  Quer,  the  lord  de  Baruge,  sir  Espaign  du  Lyon,  the  lord  de  Roquepaire,  the  lord
de  Lane,  the  lord  de  Besach,  the  lord  de  Perle,  sir  Peter  de  Cabestain,  sir  Menaut  de  Noailles,
sir  Richard  de  la  Motlie,  sir  Arnold  de  Saint  Basile,  with  many  others.  He  was  also  attended
by  his  two  brothers,  sir  Peter  and  sir  Arnold  de  Bearn,  and  his  two  bastard  sons,  whom  he
affectionately  loved,  sir  Evan  and  sir  Graoien  de  Foix.  The  count  had  intentions  of  settling
on  these  two  sons  the  greater  part  of  Beam,  which,  being  free  land  and  dependent  on  no  one
but  God,  he  could  dispose  of  as  he  pleased.

The  count  de  Foix  dismounted  at  the  convent  of  the  Friar  Preachers,  where  he  and  his
household  were  lodged ; and  his  people  quartered  themselves  as  near  him  as  they  could.
The  citizens  of  Toulouse  showed  much  joy  at  the  arrival  of  the  count  de  Foix,  for  they  loved
him  from  his  being  so  kind  a neighbour,  and  never  suffering  any  of  his  people  to  make  war
or  commit  any  violence  on  their  country.  They  presented  him  with  the  finest  wines,  and  so
many  other  things,  that  he  was  well  contented  with  them.  He  made  his  entry  into  Toulouse
rather  late  in  the  evening,  and  remained  all  that  night  in  his  lodgings.  On  the  morrow,
about  ten  o’clock,  he  mounted  his  horse,  as  did  those  who  were  to  attend  him  to  the
king,  consisting  of  more  than  two  hundred  knights,  all  men  of  distinction  ; and  in  this
state  he  paraded  through  the  streets  of  Toulouse  to  the  castle,  where  the  king  resided.  He
dismounted  in  the  court  within  the  first  square  of  the  castle,  where  servants  took  and  held
their  horses.

The  count  and  his  company  ascended  the  steps  of  the  great  hall,  whither  the  king  had  gone
from  his  chamber  to  wait  his  arrival ; for  he  was  very  anxious  to  see  him  for  the  gallant
actions  he  had  performed,  and  on  account  of  his  fair  reputation.  The  count  de  Foix,  who
was  very  handsome  in  person  and  in  countenance,  entered  the  hall  bareheaded  (for  he  never
wore  a cap),  with  his  hair  scattered  about : when  he  perceived  the  king,  his  brother,  uncle,
and  the  lords  of  France,  in  the  act  of  doing  the  king  honour,  and  not  till  then,  he  bended  very
low  on  one  knee  : he  afterwards  rose  up,  advanced,  and  knelt  a second  time  close  to  the  king,
who  raised  him  up  with  his  hand,  and  embraced  him,  saying,  “Fair  cousin  of  Foix,  you  are
welcome,  for  your  visit  has  greatly  rejoiced  us.”  “ My  lord,”  replied  the  count,  “ I thank
you  much  for  what  you  are  pleased  to  say.”  They  had  a long  conversation  together,  until
dinner-time  arrived,  but  I neither  heard  the  words  nor  the  subject.  Water  being  brought,
they  washed,  and  seated  themselves  at  table.  The  archbishop  of  Toulouse  was  seated  at
the  head  of  the  king’s  table,  next  to  him  the  king,  then  his  uncle  the  duke  of  Bourbon,
then  the  count  de  Foix,  the  counts  de  la  Marche  and  de  V endome,  and  none  others.  At  the
second  were  seated,  the  lord  Charles  d’Albret,  the  count  de  Harcourt,  the  lord  Philip  de  Bar,
and  four  other  knights  attached  to  the  count  de  Foix.  At  another  table  were  placed,  the
marshal  de  Sancerre,  sir  Roger  d’Espaign,  and  eight  of  the  count’s  knights.  This  dinner  was
magnificent  and  splendid  in  all  respects.  When  they  had  dined,  the  tables  were  removed ;
and,  grace  being  said,  they  amused  themselves  in  various  ways.  The  king  and  the  lords
were  on  their  feet  nearly  two  hours,  in  the  presence  chamber,  listening  to  the  minstrels,  for
the  count  de  Foix  took  delight  in  them.

After  this,  wine  and  spices  were  brought,  and  the  comfit  box  was  presented  solely  to  the
king  by  the  count  de  Harcourt.  Sir  Gerard  de  la  Pierre  did  the  same  to  the  duke  of


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


423


Bourbon,  and  sir  Menaut  de  Noailles  to  the  count  de  Foix*.  When  this  was  done,  it  was
about  four  o’clock  in  the  afternoon  : the  count  de  Foix  took  leave  of  the  king,  the  duke  of
Bourbon,  and  the  other  lords,  and,  leaving  the  hall,  went  into  the  court,  where  he  found  his
horses  and  attendants  waiting  for  him.  The  count  and  his  company  having  mounted,  returned
to  bis  lodgings,  much  pleased  with  the  reception  and  entertainment  the  king  of  France  had
given  him,  and  praised  him  exceedingly  when  conversing  with  his  knights.  During  the  time
the  king  of  France  and  count  Gaston  de  Foix  were  at  Toulouse,  many  tokens  of  affection
passed  between  them,  which  was  encouraged  to  the  utmost  of  their  power  by  the  marshal
de  Sancerre  and  the  lord  de  la  Riviere,  because  they  saw  the  king,  as  well  as  the  duke  of
Bourbon,  had  conceived  a friendship  for  the  count  de  Foix.


Count  de  Harcourt  presenting  the  Comfit-Box  to  the  King.  Designed  from  Royal  MS.  14  E.  4


The  count  de  Foix  one  day  entertained  at  dinner  the  duke  of  Touraine,  the  duke  of  Bourbon,
the  count  de  la  Marche,  and  the  other  French  lords.  The  dinner  was  beyond  measure
grand  and  plentiful,  with  numerous  dishes  and  devices.  Upwards  of  two  hundred  knights
were  seated  at  table,  served  by  those  of  the  count  de  Foix  ; and,  just  as  the  tables  wrere  on
the  point  of  removal,  the  king  of  France,  who  had  dined  at  the  castle,  made  his  appearance,
attended  by  the  lord  Charles  d’Albret  and  the  lord  Philip  de  Bar,  his  cousin-germans.  He
could  not  resist  the  pleasure  of  seeing  this  company,  and  had  come  to  the  lodgings  of  the
count  attended  by  only  eleven  others.  The  count  de  Foix  and  the  whole  company  were
highly  pleased  at  this  condescension  of  the  king  in  coming  to  visit  him.  Various  were  the
diversions  on  this  occasion  ; and  the  Gascons  and  French  tried  their  skill  and  strength  in
wrestling,  throwing  the  bar  or  javelin  for  the  farthest  or  highest ; and  it  was  night  before  tire

* “ There  was  another  custom  at  the  tables  of  the  king  box.)  It  was  commonly  a squire  or  some  person  of  dis-
and great  barons,  which  was  not  usual  at  the  entertain-  tinction  who  had  the  honour  to  present  it  to  his  lord  alone,
ments  of  private  persons.  Besides  the  spices  which  com-  unless  he  wished  to  have  particular  respect  paid  to  any  of
posed  the  dessert,  and  were  intended  for  the  guests  in  his  guests,  to  whom  he  sent  it.”  Froissart  is  then  quoted
common,  there  were  other  more  rare  spices,  that  were  as  in  the  text,  by  M.  le  Grand  d’Aussy,  to  whom  I refer
served  in  a box  divided  into  compartments,  which  was  of  for  further  particulars  respecting  this  and  other  ancient
gold,  silver,  or  silver  gilt,  and  called  a 'drageoir’  (comfit  customs,  in  his  “ Vie  privee  des  Frangois.”


424


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


king  and  the  company  separated.  The  count  presented  that  day  to  the  duke  of  Touraine,
the  duke  of  Bourbon,  and  to  the  knights  and  squires  attached  to  the  king,  more  than  sixty
coursers,  palfreys,  and  ambling  mules,  all  saddled  and  caparisoned  becoming  their  different
ranks.  lie  gave  also  to  the  minstrels  of  the  king,  the  duke  of  Touraine,  and  the  duke  of
Bourbon,  two  hundred  golden  crowns,  and  to  the  heralds  the  like  sum.  All,  therefore,  were
loud  in  the  praise  of  his  generosity.

On  the  fourth  day  after  this  entertainment,  the  count  de  Foix,  well  attended  by  the  barons
and  knights  of  Bearn  and  Foix,  waited  on  the  king,  at  the  castle,  to  perform  what  had  been
required  of  him ; that  is  to  say,  his  homage  for  the  county  of  Foix  and  its  dependencies,
reserving  to  himself,  as  free  land,  Bearn.  There  had  been,  before  this,  many  treaties
negotiated  between  the  king  and  count  de  Foix,  through  the  king’s  ministers,  the  lord  de  la
Riviere,  sir  John  le  Mercier,  and  the  bishop  of  Noyon,  who  had  lately  arrived  from  Avignon ;
but  these  treaties  were  kept  very  secret.  It  was  said,  that  the  count  de  Foix  required  of  the
king  that  his  son  Evan  de  Foix  should,  after  his  decease,  inherit  that  country,  in  consideration
of  which  the  king  should  receive,  on  the  day  of  the  count’s  death,  one  hundred  thousand
francs  ; that  his  other  son,  sir  Gracien,  should  hold  the  lands  of  Aire  in  Bearn,  with  the  good
towns  of  Aire  and  Mont-marsen  ; and  that  all  the  lands  the  count  then  held  in  Bearn,  should
revert  to  his  heir,  the  viscount  de  Chateaubon.  This  distribution  had  caused  a difference
between  the  count,  his  barons,  and  knights  ; several  of  whom  said,  that  this  could  not  be
legally  done  without  the  public  consent  of  the  vassals  of  Bearn  and  Foix.  As  an  intermediate
step,  homage  was  made  of  the  county  of  Foix  to  the  king  of  France,  who,  by  the  advice  of
his  council,  said  to  the  count  and  barons  of  Foix, — “ I now  hold  in  my  hand  the  homage  for
my  county  of  Foix  ; and  if  the  succession  should  happen  to  be  vacated,  by  the  death  of  our
cousin,  the  count  de  Foix,  in  our  lifetime,  we  will  come  to  such  resolutions  concerning  it,
through  the  advice  of  our  council,  that  Evan  de  Foix,  and  all  the  vassals  of  that  country,  shall
be  perfectly  satisfied  therewith  *.”

This  speech  was  sufficient  for  the  count  and  his  barons  then  present.  When  the  regulations
had  been  properly  written  out  and  sealed,  the  count  de  Foix  took  leave  of  the  king,  his
brother,  uncle,  and  the  French  lords  ; but  that  day  he  dined  with  the  king,  and  in  the  evening
returned  to  his  lodgings.  On  the  morrow,  after  drinking  a cup,  he  departed  from  Toulouse,
leaving  his  purveyors  behind  to  pay  his  expenses,  and,  having  crossed  the  Garonne,  at  the
bridge  of  Toulouse,  returned  to  his  own  country,  by  way  of  Montmarsen,  and  arrived  at
Orthes,  where  he  dismissed  all  who  had  accompanied  him,  retaining  only  those  necessary  for
his  service.  It  was  told  me,  and  I believe  it,  that  this  visit  of  the  king  of  France  to  Languedoc
and  Toulouse,  cost  the  count  de  Foix  more  than  forty  thousand  francs  : great,  however,  as
this  sum  was,  the  count  was  so  courteous  and  liberal,  that  he  very  cheerfully  paid  it.


CHAPTER  X. THE  KING  OF  FRANCE  AND  HIS  BROTHER,  THE  DUKE  OF  TOURAINE,  WAGER

WHICH  SHALL  ARRIVE  THE  SOONEST  AT  PARIS,  FROM  MONTPELLIER,  EACH  ATTENDED
BY  ONLY  ONE  KNIGHT.

I believe  that  the  kino-  of  France,  during  his  residence  at  Toulouse,  attended  much  to  the
state  of  that  part  of  his  realm.  Fie  removed  seneschals  and  other  officers,  and  made  such
reforms  that  he  was  popular  with  all  ranks  of  people.  One  day,  in  the  presence  of  his  brother,
his  uncle,  the  duke  of  Bourbon,  and  numbers  of  lords  of  France  and  Gascony,  that  it  might
be  had  in  perpetual  remembrance,  he  gave  permission  to  his  cousin-german,  the  lord  Charles
d’Albret,  to  quarter  the  fleurs-de-lis  of  France,  alternately  with  his  own  ; for  the  arms  of
Albret  were  simply  gules  without  any  distinction,  but  at  present  they  are  quartered  with  those
of  France.  The  lord  d’Albret  considered  this  as  a most  distinguished  gift ; and  the  day  the

* These  precautions  were  vain.  Matthieu  de  Foix,  a government,  and  had  his  right  acknowledged  by  the  court
descendant  of  Roger  Bernard,  viscount  de  Castel-bon,  lord  of  France,  through  some  arrangements  he  made  with  it. —
of  Moncade  and  youngest  son  of  Gascon  I.  count  de  Foix,  Villaret,  tome  vi.
having  his  pretensions  supported  by  the  nobility,  seized  the


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


425


king  had  thus  enriched  the  arms  of  Albret,  the  lord  Charles  gave  a dinner  that  cost  him  one
thousand  francs ; and  presented  the  heralds  and  minstrels  who  had  attended  it  with  two
hundred  francs,  which  circumstance  caused  them  to  proclaim  his  liberality.

Shortly  afterward,  it  was  announced  that  the  king  would  leave  Toulouse,  on  his  return  to
Paris,  and  his  attendants  made  preparations  accordingly.  As  soon  as  it  was  known,  the
archbishop  and  seneschal  of  Toulouse,  with  the  citizens  and  ladies,  came  to  take  their  leave  of
the  king,  who  received  them  all  very  kindly.  lie  set  out  from  Toulouse  after  breakfast,  and
lay  the  first  night  at  Chateau-neuf  d’Aulroy,  and  then  continued  his  journey  to  Montpellier,
where  he  was  joyfully  received.  He  there  remained  for  three  days  to  amuse  himself ; for  the
town  and  the  ladies  afforded  him  much  pleasure.  He  was,  however,  very  impatient  to  return
to  Paris,  to  see  his  queen.  One  day,  while  at  Montpellier,  he  said,  jokingly,  to  the  duke  of
Touraine, — “ Fair  brother,  I wish  we  were  at  Paris,  and  our  attendants  where  they  now  are  :
for  I have  as  great  a desire  to  see  the  queen,  as  I suppose  you  must  have  to  see  my  sister-
in-law.”  “ My  lord,”  replied  the  duke,  “ we  shall  never  get  there  by  wishing  it : the  distance
is  too  great.”  “ That  is  true,”  answered  the  king  ; “ but  I think,  if  I pleased,  I could  very
soon  be  there.”  “ Then  it  must  be  by  dint  of  hard  riding,”  said  the  duke  of  Touraine,  “ and
not  otherwise,  and  I also  can  do  that ; but  it  would  be  through  means  of  my  horse.”
“ Come,”  said  the  king,  “ who  will  be  there  first  ? you  or  I : let  us  wager  on  this.”  “ With
all  my  heart,”  answered  the  duke,  who  would  at  all  times  exert  himself  to  get  money.  A
wager  was,  in  consequence,  made  between  them,  for  five  hundred  francs,  who  should  the  first
arrive  at  Paris,  setting  out,  on  the  morrow,  at  the  same  hour,  taking  with  them  only  one
servant,  or  one  knight,  as  they  pleased.  No  one  attempted  to  prevent  the  I'ace  from  taking
place,  and  they  set  out  as  they  had  settled  it : the  lord  de  Garencieres  accompanied  the  king,
and  the  lord  de  Yiefville  the  duke  of  Touraine.  Thus  these  four,  who  were  young  and  active,
rode  on  night  and  day,  frequently  changing  horses,  or  had  themselves  conveyed  in  carts,  when
they  wished  to  take  any  repose.

The  duke  of  Bourbon  returned  by  Puy  in  Auvergne  to  his  own  country,  and,  on  his  road,
visited  his  father-in-law,  the  dauphin  of  Auvergne,  the  dauphiness,  and  their  children,  who
were  eight  in  number,  brothers  and  sisters  to  the  duchess  of  Bourbon  by  a second  marriage.

The  king  of  France  and  his  brother  continued  their  journey  with  much  exertion,  to  gain
the  wager.  Consider  what  pains  these  two  young  princes  must  have  taken,  for  all  their
establishments  were  left  behind.  The  king  took  four  days  and  a half  to  perform  the  journey
to  Paris,  and  the  duke  of  Touraine  only  four  days  and  one  third*,  so  near  were  they  to  each
other ; but  the  duke  won  the  wager,  by  the  king  sleeping  eight  hours  at  Troyes  in  Champagne.
The  duke  embarked  on  the  Seine,  and  went  as  far  as  Melun  by  water : there  he  remounted
and  rode  on  to  Paris,  straight  to  the  hotel  de  Saint  Pol,  where  the  queen  and  the  duchess
resided,  and  inquired  after  the  king  (for  he  was  ignorant  whether  he  was  arrived  or  not,)
and  was  rejoiced  to  learn  that  he  was  not  come.  He  said  to  the  queen,  “ Madam,  you  will
very  shortly  hear  of  him.”  This  was  true  ; for  not  long  after  the  duke’s  arrival,  the  king
made  his  appearance,  and  the  duke  ran  to  him  and  said,  “ My  lord,  I have  won  the  wager  :
order  me  to  be  paid.”  “ That  is  but  just,”  replied  the  king,  “ and  it  shall  be  done.”  They
then  related  to  the  ladies  their  adventures  on  the  road,  and  how  they  had  come  in  four  days
and  a half  from  Montpellier,  which  was  distant  from  Paris  one  hundred  and  fifty  leagues.
The  ladies  turned  the  whole  into  a joke,  and  laughed  at  it ; but  they  were  sensible  how  greatly
they  must  have  been  fatigued,  and  nothing  but  their  youth  and  courage  could  have  borne
them  through  it.  You  must  know,  the  duke  of  Touraine  insisted  on  the  wager  being  paid  in
ready  money.

* The  distance  from  Montpellier  to  Paris  is  191  leagues. — Gazetteer.


426


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


CHAPTER  XI. — THE  DEATH  OP  POPE  URBAN  AT  ROME,  CALLED  THE  ANTI-POPE. POPE

CLEMENT  WRITES  TO  THE  KING  OF  FRANCE,  HIS  UNCLES,  AND  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF

PARIS,  ON  THE  OCCASION. THE  ELECTION  OF  POPE  BONIFACE  BY  THE  ROMAN

CARDINALS.

About  this  period,  pope  Urban  VI.  died  at  Rome,  to  the  sorroAv  of  the  Romans,  who
loved  him  much*.  He  was  buried,  with  great  solemnity,  in  the  church  of  Saint  Peter  ; and,
when  this  ceremony  was  ended,  the  cardinals  formed  a conclave  to  elect  another  pope,  and
hastened  the  matter  that  it  might  be  done  before  any  intelligence  of  the  death  of  Urban  could
be  carried  to  Avignon.  Pope  Clement  and  his  cardinals  did  not  hear  of  the  decease  of  Urban
until  the  tenth  day  after  it  had  happened.  They  immediately  assembled  at  the  palace,  where
many  proposals  were  discussed ; and  they  had  strong  hope  that  the  schism  of  the  church
would  he  concluded,  and  a union  formed  of  the  two  parties ; for  this  error  had  lasted  too
long.  They  imagined  that  the  cardinals  at  Rome  would  not  be  in  any  hurry  to  form  a conclave,
but  would  agree  to  acknowledge  tbe  pope  of  Avignon,  and  were  indulging  in  these  flattering
hopes,  when  other  accounts  forced  them  to  think  differently.  They  signified  to  the  king  of
France  the  death  of  Urban,  whom  they  called  the  anti-pope,  and  entreated  him  to  support
the  pretensions  of  Clement,  by  writing  in  his  favour  to  his  cousins  the  emperor  of  Germany,
the  king  of  Hungary,  the  count  de  Vertus,  and  to  the  duke  of  Austria,  who  had  acknowledged
the  late  pope  Urban,  and  to  request  they  would  agree  to  restore  peace  to  the  church  ; for  that
there  ought  not  to  be  any  variation  in  the  faith,  and,  as  there  is  but  one  God  in  Heaven,  there
cannot,  nor  ought  there  to  be,  more  than  one  vicegerent  on  earth.

When  this  information  arrived  at  Paris,  the  duke  of  Burgundy,  to  whom  the  pope  and
cardinals  had  likewise  written  to  the  same  purport,  was  with  his  nephew.  The  king  appeared
very  much  pleased  on  hearing  it,  and  said  to  the  duke, — “ Good  uncle,  vve  had  a great  desire
to  march  a large  army  to  Rome,  and  destroy  these  unbelievers ; but  this  is  checked  by  the
death  of  the  anti-pope,  for  pope  Clement  and  his  cardinals  have  assured  us  that  Urban  is
dead.  They  suppose  that  there  will  not  be  any  conclave  held  at  Rome  to  elect  another,  but
that  the  cardinals  Avill  submit  themselves  to  the  obedience  of  pope  Clement.  He  has  likewise
requested,  that  we  Avould  Avrite  to  our  cousins  the  emperor  of  Germany,  his  brother  the  king
of  Hungary,  to  tbe  count  de  Vertus,  and  to  the  duke  of  Austria,  to  secure  their  favour  in  his
support.  What  would  you  advise  us  to  do  ?”  “ My  lerd,”  replied  the  duke  of  Burgundy,

“ it  is  very  true  that  Urban  is  dead ; but  we  know  nothing  of  the  state  of  the  cardinals  at
Rome,  nor  of  the  Romans  ; nor  whether  these  cardinals  mean  to  persist  in  their  opinion.  It
will  be  difficult  for  them  to  change,  as  the  Romans  are  their  masters ; and  as  they  formerly
forced  them  to  elect  the  archbisho.p  of  Bari  pope,  whom  they  obeyed  as  long  as  he  lived,  they
may  again  force  them  to  elect  another  according  to  their  pleasure.  You  havre  therefore  no
occasion  to  be  in  any  haste  respecting  this  matter,  nor  to  write  to  those  who  Avill  not  do  much
for  you  in  the  business,  as  they  have  already  shown.  Remain  quiet,  therefore,  until  you
shall  hear  further  on  the  subject ; for  it  may  happen  that  the  cardinals  at  Rome  may  be  of  one
mind,  and,  though  differing  with  each  other,  may  dissemble  with  the  Romans,  and  acltnow-
ledge  no  other  pope  but  Clement ; and,  in  order  to  keep  the  Romans  in  good  humour,
promise  them  that  Clement  shall  fix  his  residence  at  Rome,  which  he  will  very  readily  consent
to,  if  the  matter  could  be  brought  to  depend  on  that.  Should  this  appear  probable,  it  will
then  be  time  for  you  to  write  to  those  Christian  kings  and  lords  Avho  hold  contrary  opinions
in  religion  to  you,  to  entreat  they  would  unite  to  put  an  end  to  the  schism,  and  to  promote  the
re-establishment  of  union  in  the  church.  This  is  Avhat  you  ought  to  do ; for  we  are  not  as
yet  assured  what  turn  the  business  may  take,  and  it  will  not  be  long  before  we  have  further
intelligence.”  When  the  duke  had  ended  this  speech  to  the  king  and  council,  no  one  made
any  reply ; for  they  thought  the  duke’s  reasoning  unanswerable.  The  king  seemed  convinced
by  it,  and  said ; “ Good  uncle,  Ave  believe  your  reasons,  for  you  see  farther  into  church

* He  died  18th  Oct.  1389.  But  so  far  from  being  boloved,  he  was  detested  for  his  violent  , and  tyrannical
conduct. — En.


427


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &e.

affairs  than  we  do  ; and  we  will  not  take  any  steps  in  the  matter  without  your  advice  and
approbation.”  The  business  was  here  ended,  and  other  matters  discussed.

The  intelligence  of  the  death  of  Urban  caused  great  disputes  among  the  students  at  the
university.  They  ceased  following  their  usual  studies,  and  were  employed  in  disputing  how
the  cardinals  would  act ; whether  they  would  elect  a pope  in  the  room  of  Urban,  or  acknow-
ledge the  pope  of  Avignon.  They  made  it  the  subject  of  argument,  and  it  was  carried  on
with  much  heat  and  animosity.  They  knew  that  Clement  had  written  to  the  king,  to  the
duke  of  Touraine,  to  the  duke  of  Burgundy,  and  to  the  ministers,  on  the  state  of  his  affairs  ;
and  he  hadalso  written,  in  general  terms,  to  the  university,  that  that  body  might  do  as  much  as
was  possible,  andwith  all  diligence,  for  his  assistance.  The  students  proposed  several  subjects
of  argument,  which  were  warmly  discussed  among  themselves.  Those  interested  for  Clement
said, — “ Tt  is  time  for  the  king  and  our  lords  in  France  to  write  to  the  chiefs  in  Christendom,
such  as  the  emperor  of  Germany,  the  king  of  Hungary,  the  lord  of  Milan,  the  duke  of  Austria,
and  all  who  hold  contrary  opinions  respecting  the  pope,  and  press  them  to  return  to  the  true
faith  ; for  it  would  do  them  infinite  honour.”  Three  times,  in  three  several  days,  the  principal
students  of  the  university  assembled,  and  went  in  a body  to  the  hotel  de  St.  Pol,  to  entreat
the  king  and  his  council  to  put  an  end  to  the  schism,  and  to  comply  with  the  solicitation  of
the  pope,  who  had  written  to  them  in  such  humble  terms.  They,  however,  were  not
admitted,  nor  had  any  answer  given  to  them,  which  made  them  very  discontented  : however,
the  following  news,  which  arrived  a few  days  after,  appeased  them.

The  Roman  cardinals  had  assembled  in  conclave,  and  elected  the  cardinal  of  Naples,  a prudent
and  courageous  clerk,  to  the  papacy,  who  took  the  name  of  Boniface*.  The  king  of  France


Coronation  of  Pope  Boniface.  From  a MS.  Froissart  of  the  Fifteenth  Century.


and  his  lords,  on  hearing  this,  were  very  melancholy,  and  thought  the  schism  in  the  church
likely  to  continue  for  a long  time.  “ Now  see,”  said  the  duke  of  Burgundy  to  the  kino-,
of  how  little  avail  your  letters  would  have  been,  which  they  were  urging  you  to  write  : Tt
has  happened  just  as  I foresaw."  “ My  good  uncle,”  replied  the  king,  “ you  have  indeed
judged  truly.  Pardons  were  offered  in  abundance  by  Boniface,  and  notified  to  all  the
c eigy  in  t le  different  kingdoms  under  his  obedience.  Those  who  wished  to  gain  them  set

* Pietro,  or  Perrin  de  Tomacelli,  cardinal  of  Naples,  pope  Boniface  IX.


428


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


out  on  their  journey  to  Rome  ; but  when  they  approached  near  Ancona  and  Romagna,  they
ran  great  risks ; for  sir  Bernard  de  la  Salle,  who  guarded  this  frontier,  and  made  war  on  the
Romans  in  the  name  of  Clement,  had  these  pilgrims  watched  on  all  the  roads,  and  did  them
much  evil,  several  of  whom  were  slain  or  lost.  W e will  for  the  present  leave  speaking  of
these  popes,  and  introduce  other  events.


CHAPTER  XXI. THE  SURRENDER  OP  THE  STRONG  CASTLE  OP  VENTADOUR  IN  LIMOUSIN,  THAT

HAD  BEEN  THE  CHIEF  RESIDENCE  OF  GEOPFRY  TETE-NOIRE.

You  have  before  heard  how  Geoffry  Tete-noire  was  master  of  the  castle  of  Ventadour,
which  he  had  held  against  all  the  force  sent  against  him  as  long  as  he  lived ; that  he  had
laid  the  country  under  contributions  upwards  of  thirty  leagues  round ; and  that,  when  he
died,  he  had  on  his  death-bed  named  his  two  nephews,  Alleyne  and  Peter  Roux,  to  succeed
him  in  the  command,  to  whom  all  the  leaders  of  that  garrison  had  in  his  presence  sworn
obedience  and  fidelity.  After  the  decease  of  Geoffry  Tete-noire,  these  two  brothers  governed
successfully  for  some  time,  keeping  the  whole  country  under  subjection.  This  castle
belonged  to  the  duke  of  Berry  by  purchase  from  the  count  de  Montpensier,  and  his  son,
John  of  Berry,  bore  its  title  ; but,  though  the  garrison  gave  him  much  vexation,  he  could
not  then  amend  it.  He  had  besieged  it  several  times  with  block-houses,  and  pressed  it  as
much  as  he  could,  but  in  vain : the  garrison  held  his  attempts  cheap,  and  sallied  out,  when-
ever they  pleased,  to  overrun  the  country.  The  two  brothers  would  not  pay  any  attention
to  the  truce  that  had  been  agreed  to  between  France  and  England,  saying  they  were  not
bound  to  abide  by  it,  but  would  make  war  when  and  where  they  pleased.  The  two  countries
of  Auvergne  and  Limousin  suffered  greatly  ; and  to  remedy  it,  a gallant  knight  of  Auvergne,
sir  William  le  Bouteiller,  with  sir  John  Bonne-lance,  sir  Lewis  d’Ambiere,  and  other  knights
and  squires  from  Limousin  and  Auvergne,  erected  block-houses  before  Ventadour,  and  had
there  remained  the  whole  of  the  season,  at  the  charge  of  the  country.

It  was  about  this  time,  as  I was  told,  that  the  governors  laid  a plot  to  entrap  sir  William
le  Bouteiller  and  sir  John  Bonne-lance,  who  had  done  them  much  mischief.  They  determined
to  have  it  told  these  two  knights  in  a secret  way,  that  they  were  desirous  of  surrendering
the  fort  for  a certain  sum  of  florins ; for  they  were  tired  of  remaining  there  longer,  and
wished  to  return  to  their  own  country  or  elsewhere.  They  imagined  the  knights  would
readily  comply,  for  the  duke  of  Berry  was  eager  to  gain  it  on  any  terms ; and  they  resolved
not  to  ask  a larger  sum  than  what  might  be  instantly  procured.  One  brother  asked  the
other,  “ What  sum  shall  we  fix  on?”  “ Ten  thousand  francs,  for  that  will  be  enough,  as
we  shall  have  beside  the  bodies  of  the  two  knights  by  an  ambush  we  will  place  in  one  of
the  towers.”

Consider  how  foolish  these  two  Bretons  must  have  been  to  imagine  they  could  deceive  two
such  knights  and  keep  their  money.  If  evil  befel  them,  they  are  unworthy  of  regret  or  pity.
Following  their  plan,  they  sent  one  of  their  varlets  out  of  the  castle,  saying, — “ Go  as  far
as  the  French  block-houses : allow  thyself  to  be  taken,  but  demand  to  be  carried  to  sir
William  le  Bouteiller  or  sir  John  Bonne-lance,  which  of  them  thou  pleasest,  give  them  these
letters,  and  require  an  answer,  as  their  contents  are  of  consequence  to  them  and  to  ns.”  The
servant,  who  thought  nothing  evil,  said  he  would  obey  their  commands,  and  advanced  to
the  nearest  block-house  of  the  French.  On  perceiving  him,  those  within  came  out  to  meet
him  and  demanded  his  business  : he  said,  he  wanted  to  speak  with  sir  William  le  Bouteiller
or  sir  John  Bonne-lance.  He  was  conducted  to  them,  for  the  two  knights  happened  to  be
then  together.  When  in  their  presence,  he  bowed,  and  took  them  aside  to  deliver  his  letters,
saying  that  sir  Alleyne  and  sir  Peter  Roux  had  sent  him  to  them.  They  were  much  surprised
on  hearing  this,  and  that  the  governors  of  Ventadour  should  write  to  them.  They  took  the
letters,  and  read  them  ; but  their  contents  were  merely  to  say,  that  Alleyne  and  Peter  Roux
would  willingly  have  a parley  with  them  on  something  to  their  advantage.  When  they  had
perused  the  letters,  they  were  more  astonished  than  before,  and  suspected  some  treachery.
They,  however,  consulted  together  on  what  could  be  wanted  with  them,  and  returned  a


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  & c.


429


verbal  message,  that  if  the  governors  wished  to  meet  them  without  the  castle,  they  would
promise  them,  and  those  who  should  accompany  them,  perfect  security  for  their  persons
until  they  had  re-entered  the  place.  Such  was  the  answer  the  varlet  brought  back  to
his  masters.  Sir  Peter  said  to  sir  Alleyne,  — “May  we  confide  in  such  promises?”  “Oh
yes,”  replied  his  brother ; “ for  consider,  their  word  is  given,  and  they  are  loyal  knights
incapable  of  breaking  it.  We  will  inform  them  of  our  intended  surrender,  which  they  will
eagerly  accept.”

On  the  morrow,  about  eight  o’clock,  they  ordered  the  wicket  adjoining  the  gate  to  be
opened,  and  the  bridge  to  he  lowered  down,  and  they  leant  on  the  chains  until  sir  William
le  Bouteiller  and  sir  John  Bonne-lance  arrived,  who  dismounted  before  the  bridge,  and
ordered  their  attendants  to  retire.  When  the  two  Breton  governors,  on  the  bridge,  saw
them,  they  asked,  “ May  we  come  and  converse  with  you  in  safety!”  “ Yes,”  replied  the
knights  ; “ but  is  there  no  treachery  on  your  side  ?”  “ Oh  no,”  answered  the  Bretons  : “ it
is  now  truce  between  us.”  “ Well  then,  come  with  all  security,  and  tell  us  what  you  have
to  say.  Peter  and  Alleyne  Roux  then  passed  the  bridge,  and  went  to  the  place  where  they
were  waiting  for  them.  The  two  knights  said, — “ What  is  the  subject  of  the  treaty  or
parley  you  wish  to  have  with  us?  Are  you  inclined  to  surrender  Ventadour?”  “ Yes,”
said  they,  “ hut  on  conditions.  We  only  ask  ten  thousand  francs  for  the  stores  ; for  we  are
tired  of  carrying  on  the  war  longer,  and  wish  to  retire  to  Brittany  or  to  whatever  other
country  we  may  cliuse.”  The  two  knights  were  rejoiced  at  this  proposal,  and  replied, —
“ You  offer  terms  we  shall  not  refuse ; hut  at  this  moment  we  have  not  such  a sum.  We
will,  however,  instantly  set  about  providing  it,”  “ Well,”  answered  the  governors,  “ when
you  have  got  it,  let  us  know,  and  we  will  keep  to  our  otter : but  let  the  matter  he  most
secret,  for  if  the  garrison  should  hear  of  it,  they  would  instantly  murder  us,  and  you  would
he  disappointed  in  your  expectations  of  gaining  the  place.”  Sir  William  le  Bouteiller
replied,  “ Never  fear  us  : we  will  manage  the  business  in  such  a manner  that  you  shall  not
incur  any  danger.”  On  this,  they  separated : the  brothers  re-entered  Yentadour,  and  the
knights  returned  to  their  quarters.

Sir  William  le  Bouteiller  and  sir  John  Bonne-lance  believing  this  transaction  was  honour-
able, no  way  suspecting  the  Bretons  meant  to  deceive  them  and  gain  possession  of  their
persons  as  well  as  money,  instantly  wrote  as  fair-languaged  letters  as  they  could  to  the  duke
of  Berry,  who  at  that  time  was  at  Riom  in  Auvergne.  They  desired  one  of  their  gentlemen,
who  had  been  well  educated,  called  Guyonnel  de  Saint- Yydel,  to  carry  the  letter,  and,
having  informed  him  of  the  fact,  desired  he  would  forget  nothing,  in  his  conversation  with
the  duke  of  Berry,  that  might  induce  him  to  agree  to  the  terms  of  surrender : for  they
thought  he  would  be  well  pleased,  as  he  had  been  for  a long  time  very  anxious  to  get
possession  of  Yentadour.  The  squire,  having  received  the  letter,  and  his  instructions,  what
to  say  and  how  to  act,  left  the  block-house,  and,  traversing  Limousin  and  Auvergne,  rode  on
until  he  came  to  Riom,  where  I believe  he  found  the  duke  of  Berry.

On  entering  his  presence,  he  knelt  and  gave  the  duke  the  letters,  recommending  to  him
the  two  knights,  as  he  knew  well  how  to  do.  The  duke  took  the  letter  and  read  it : when
he  had  a short  time  considered  its  contents,  he  was  so  well  pleased,  that  he  ordered  his
attendants  to  take  particular  care  of  the  squire,  which  was  done.  The  duke  called  to  him
such  of  his  council  and  treasurers  as  were  with  him,  and  said, — “ Here  is  great  news.  Our
knights,  who  are  blockading  Yentadour,  write  us  word  they  have  opened  a treaty  with
Alleyne  and  Peter  Roux,  who  are  willing  to  surrender  that  place  for  ten  thousand  francs.
That  is  no  large  sum  : it  has  cost  Limousin  and  Auvergne,  yearly,  sixty  thousand  francs,  as
composition  money,  to  he  unmolested  by  the  garrison.  We  wish  to  accept  their  offer,  and
as  speedily  as  may  be,  lest  they  should  repent  of  having  made  it.  Now,  treasurers,  find  me
instantly  ten  thousand  francs.  We  will  make  a loan  of  them,  as  is  but  just ; and  when  we
are  in  possession  of  this  castle,  will  levy  a tax  on  all  the  lands  which  have  paid  contribution,
that  will  doubly  repay  us.”  “ My  lord,”  replied  the  treasurers,  “ we  are  prepared  : only  give
us  five  or  six  days  to  collect  it.”  “You  shall  have  them,”  said  the  duke.  Thus  was  the
matter  settled.  The  treasurers  produced  the  sum  in  golden  crowns,  and  in  francs  of  France,
which  were  packed  up  in  four  small  boxes.


430


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


The  same  day  on  which  those  who  were  to  carry  the  money  to  the  two  knights  were  on
their  departure,  everything  being  ready  for  their  setting  out,  the  dauphin  of  Auvergne  and
the  lord  Reneil  arrived  at  Itiom,  on  business  with  the  duke  of  Berry,  such  as  was  common
between  great  lords.  They  were  made  welcome  by  the  duke,  who  was  so  pleased  at  the
thought  of  gaining  Ventadour  so  cheaply,  that  he  could  not  refrain  from  making  them
acquainted  with  it,  and  showing  them  the  letters  from  sir  William  le  Bouteiller  and  sir
John  Bonne-lance.  When  they  had  perused  them,  they  were  silent,  and  the  duke  noticing
it,  said, — “ What  are  you  considering  ? Have  you  any  suspicions  of  deceit  ? Tell  me,  before
the  money  be  sent  off.  “ My  lord,”  replied  the  dauphin,  “ you  know  for  how  long  a time
the  count  d’Armagnac  and  myself  have  been  employed  by  the  countries  of  Limousin,
Cahorsin,  Rouergue,  and  Auvergne,  to  gain  possession,  by  force  or  otherwise,  of  all  the
enemy’s  forts  in  these  seneschalships.  We  have  entered  into  several  treaties  with  many  of
them,  but  we  never  could  any  way  make  the  least  impression  on  the  garrison  of  Yentadour,
to  induce  them  to  surrender ; and  scarcely  would  they  deign  to  return  us  an  answer  when
we  sent  to  them.  If,  therefore,  they  have  agreed  to  the  treaty  you  have  shown  us,  it  cannot
be  from  want  of  provision ; for,  should  no  purveyances  enter  the  fort  for  eight  years,  I know
they  have  enough ; and  it  is  this  which  astonishes  us,  and  makes  us  suspect  treachery ; for
such  men  at  arms,  when  shut  up  in  fortresses,  have  a lively  imagination,  and,  when  it  turns
to  wickedness,  they  know  too  well  how  to  succeed  : therefore,  my  lord,  be  cautious  how  you
act.”  “ In  God’s  name,”  answered  the  duke  of  Berry,  “ you  do  not  tell  us  anything
extraordinary,  but  have  well  spoken,  when  you  thus  advise  us ; and  I will  take  more  pre-
cautions than  I at  first  intended.”

He  then  called  to  him  a knight,  whose  name  was  sir  Peter  Mespin,  and  said, — “ You  will
go  with  the  ransom-money  for  Yentadour  to  the  block-houses  before  that  place,  and  tell  sir
William  lc  Bouteiller  and  sir  John  Bonne-lance,  from  us,  to  be  very  cautious  how  they  act,
respecting  their  treaty,  and  not  to  put  too  much  confidence  in  these  Bretons  of  Yentadour ;
for  that  we  have  had  such  intelligence  concerning  them,  of  which  they  are  ignorant,  they
must  be  very  prudent  and  observing.

The  knight  undertook  the  journey,  and,  being  soon  ready,  departed  with  the  money  from
Riom,  and  rode  on  until  he  arrived  at  the  block-houses,  where  he  was  kindly  received  by
his  companions.  The  money  was  unpacked,  and  placed  in  security.  Sir  Peter  Mespin,
after  some  general  conversation,  told  his  message  as  follows : “ My  lord  of  Berry  orders  me
to  inform  you,  sir  William  and  sir  John,  that  you  must  act  with  the  greatest  precaution  in
this  treaty  with  the  governors  of  Ventadour,  that  you  may  not  lose  your  own  persons  and
the  money  he  sends  you  by  me,  for  that  he  has  had  accounts  given  him  of  the  characters  of
these  people  that  displease  him  much,  which  is  the  reason  he  is  anxious  for  you  to  act  with
prudence  to  be  a match  for  them,  as  he  suspects  this  offer  is  only  made  to  betray  you.  The
countries  of  Auvergne  and  Limousin  would  many  times  have  given  sixty  thousand  francs  for
the  evacuation  of  Ventadour,  which  the  governors  well  knew,  and  now  they  offer  it  to  you
for  ten  thousand  : it  is  this  which  makes  my  lord  suspect  treachery.”  The  two  knights
were  for  a moment  pensive,  and  then  said, — “ Two  heads  are  better  than  one.  You  have
well  spoken,  and  we  thank  you  for  the  advice  you  have  given.  You  will  remain  here  to
assist  us,  which  will  be  but  right,  for  within  two  days  we  shall  know  how  the  matter  will
turn  out.”  Sir  Peter  Mespin  replied,  lie  would  cheerfully  stay  with  them.

Shortly  after  this  the  two  knights  sent  one  of  their  servants  to  the  castle,  for  there  was
now  a truce  between  them,  to  let  the  governors  know  the  ten  thousand  francs  were  come,
and  that  they  were  ready  to  complete  the  bargain.  They  replied,  they  would  keep  to  their
agreement,  that  they  might  come  when  they  pleased,  or  inform  them  when  they  were  to
bring  the  money.  Alleyne  and  Peter  Roux,  who  had  no  good  inclinations,  as  was  proved
against  them,  had  already  made  their  preparations  for  the  capture  of  the  two  knights.
They  had  thus  planned  it.  At  the  entrance  of  the  castle  of  Yentadour,  and  withinside,  is
a large  tower,  that  commands  the  gate ; and,  without  having  first  gained  this  tower,  the
castle  cannot  be  won.  It  was  for  this  reason  it  was  always  kept  well  stored  with  artillery,
provision,  and  men,  that  in  case  the  castle  should  be  surprised,  the  garrison  might  retire
thither  in  safety.


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


431


The  two  Bretons,  whose  heads  were  full  of  malice,  posted  in  this  tower  thirty  determined
men,  armed  at  all  points  ; who,  when  the  French  should  think  themselves  in  secure  possession
of  the  castle,  towards  late  in  the  evening,  were  to  sally  forth  and  slay  all  without  mercy.
Everything  being  now  ready,  they  sent  to  sir  William  le  Bouteiller  and  sir  John  Bonne-lance
that  they  might  bring  the  money  in  all  security  to  the  castle,  the  gates  of  which  would  be
thrown  open  to  them.  The  French  knights  were  all  alive  at  this  message,  and  said  to  the
servant  who  had  brought  it, — “ Return  to  thy  masters,  and  tell  them  from  us,  that  we  will
be  with  them  to-morrow-morning.”  When  the  servant  was  gone,  the  two  knights  assembled
a larger  council  than  ever  they  had  before  done,  on  account  of  the  orders  sir  Peter  Mespin
had  brought  from  the  duke  of  Berry.

It  was  resolved  in  this  council  to  place  an  ambuscade  near  the  castle,  and  that  the  two
knights  should  go  thither  accompanied  by  thirty  men  armed  secretly  like  themselves.  On
their  entrance  into  Ventadour,  they  were  cautiously  to  examine  every  part  of  it : if  they
should  perceive  anything  that  could  induce  them  to  suspect  treachery,  they  were  to  sound  a
horn  and  seize  the  draw-bridge.  On  hearing  this  horn,  the  ambuscade  was  to  advance  full
gallop,  dismount  at  the  bridge,  and  gain  the  castle.  In  the  manner  in  which  they  had
planned  it  the  project  was  executed ; and  on  the  morrow  morning,  all  being  prepared,  they
rode  forward,  and  placed  a large  ambush  of  six  score  lances,  and  then,  with  thirty  com-
panions, secretly  armed,  went  to  Ventadour,  carrying  sir  Peter  Mespin  to  assist  them  with
his  advice.  They  did  not  forget  the  ransom-money,  which  was  neatly  packed  up  in  three
baskets,  on  the  backs  of  two  strong  horses.  They  found  Alleyne  and  Peter  Roux  at  the
barriers,  which  were  thrown  quite  back  on  their  approach  : having  passed  them  and  entered
the  gate,  the  brothers  would  have  closed  the  barriers  again ; but  the  French  knights  said, —
“ Let  them  remain  : is  it  a fair  bargain  or  not?  You  know  you  have  engaged  to  surrender
the  castle  for  ten  thousand  francs  in  hard  money  : they  are  ready,  and  on  the  two  sumpter
horses  you  see.  If  you  act  loyally  to  us,  we  will  do  the  same  to  you.”  They  knew  not
what  answer  to  make  to  this  speech  ; but  to  prevent  them  having  any  suspicions,  they  said, —
“ Y ou  say  well ; and  we  are  willing  to  act  as  fairly  as  yourselves.”

The  French  party  passed  on,  and  the  barriers  remained  open.  Had  they  been  closed,  the
ambuscade  would  never  have  been  able  to  arrive  in  time  to  counteract  the  trick  the  Bretons
intended  playing  them,  and  their  scheme  would  have  succeeded.  All  having  entered  the
gate,  Alleyne  and  Peter  Roux  went  to  shut  it;  but  the  French  said  to  Alleyne, — “Let  it
be  open  : we  wish  it,  for  we  are  ready  to  pay  you  down  the  money  as  agreed  upon  between
us.”  “ Be  it  so,”  replied  the  Bretons : “ let  us  see  the  cash.”  “ That  you  shall,”  said  the
French,  and  instantly  spread  on  the  ground  a sheet,  on  which  they  emptied  the  florins.
While  the  two  Bretons  were  examining  the  money,  which  made  a handsome  heap,  the
knights  were  doing  the  same  to  the  castle ; and,  in  consequence,  sir  Peter  Mespin  said
to  sir  William  le  Bouteiller, — “ Have  that  tower  opened  before  you  count  the  money,  for
there  may  perchance  be  in  it  an  ambush  to  surprise  us,  and  we  may  lose  our  lives  as  well  as
our  money.”

“ On  this,  sir  William  said  to  Alleyne  Roux,  “ Let  that  tower  be  opened,  for  we  will
have  that  done  before  we  proceed  any  farther.”  Alleyne  replied, — “ that  he  would  do  no
such  thing,  for  the  keys  were  lost.”  The  moment  he  had  uttered  this,  the  knights  were
more  suspicious  then  before,  and  said : “ Alleyne,  it  is  impossible  that  the  keys  of  the
principal  tower  should  be  lost.  Open  it  by  fair  means,  or  we  will  have  it  forced  ; for  you
have  promised  to  surrender  to  us  the  castle,  as  it  is,  without  fraud  or  treachery,  for  the  sum
of  ten  thousand  francs,  which  you  now  see  lying  before  you.”  Alleyne  answered, — “ I will
neither  open  it  myself,  nor  suffer  it  to  be  done,  until  I shall  have  received  and  placed  in
security  the  whole  money : when  that  is  done,  I will  seek  for  the  keys.”  The  knights
replied, — “ We  will  not  wait  so  long;  and  we  tell  you  plainly,  that  we  expect  no  favour
from  your  last  speeches,  which  clearly  indicate  that  you  mean  to  deceive  us.  We  therefore
arrest  you,  Peter  and  Alleyne  Roux,  in  the  names  of  the  king,  our  lord,  and  the  duke  of
Berry.  The  tower  shall  be  opened  by  force,  though  the  doors  of  it  be  broken : and  every
part  of  it,  as  well  as  of  the  castle,  shall  be  minutely  searched,  to  see  if  you  have  not  placed
an  ambush  to  surprise  us,  and  regain  the  castle.  Should  any  such  be  found,  you  are  lost,


432


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  Ac.

past  redemption,  as  in  justice  due  to  treason ; but  if,  on  the  contrary,  the  castle  be  in  the
situation  it  ought  loyally  to  be,  from  an  honourable  bargain,  we  will  punctually  keep  every
article  of  our  treaty,  and  you  shall  be  safely  conducted  whithersoever  you  may  please ; even
as  far  as  the  gates  of  Avignon,  should  you  desire  it.”

The  two  brothers  were  thunderstruck,  and  half  dead,  on  being  thus  arrested  ; and,  hearing
this  declaration  of  the  knights,  their  courage  failed  them,  and  they  repented  having  gone  so
far,  for  they  found  their  intentions  must  now  be  discovered.  The  French  knights  saw  plainly
they  were  guilty  of  what  they  had  suspected,  and  that  the  castle  was  not  meant  to  be
surrendered.  They  made  a sign  for  him  who  bore  the  horn  to  sound  for  their  ambuscade  to
advance  : which  having  done,  those  in  ambush  stuck  spurs  to  their  horses,  saying,  “ Let  us
hasten  to  Ventadour,  for  we  are  wanted : our  people  have  not  found  things  as  they  expected,
and  have  been  deceived  by  Alleyne  and  Peter  Roux.”  They  were  soon  at  the  castle,  for  it
was  not  far  distant,  and  the  barriers  and  gate  being  open,  though  well  guarded  by  the
French,  for  the  Bretons  were  no  longer  masters,  they  entered  the  place,  and  found  their
captains  in  the  court  talking  to  the  garrison.  The  governors  were  more  astonished  than
before,  on  seeing  themselves  thus  surrounded  by  their  enemies ; for  they  knew  they  had
acted  dishonourably.

Those  within  the  great  tower  were  ignorant  of  what  was  going  forward ; for  the  openings
in  the  walls  were  too  high  for  them  to  see  what  passed.  Some  said, — “We  hear  in  the
court  a great  noise : our  people  may  perhaps  be  tricked,  for  the  French  are  a cunning  race.
We  thought  to  deceive,  but  we  may  be  deceived,  and  Alleyne,  as  well  as  ourselves,  may
be  entrapped  and  taken  ; for  we  cannot  get  out  without  his  permission.”  They  would
willingly  have  been  anywhere  else  ; for  their  governors  had  brought  them  into  a melancholy
situation.  Sir  William  le  Bouteiller  and  sir  John  Bonne-lance,  finding  themselves  so
superior  in  force,  spoke  out  more  boldly  their  sentiments,  and  ordered  the  cash,  which  wTas
scattered  over  the  sheet,  to  be  collected  and  replaced  in  the  baskets,  before  the  face  of  the
two  brothers,  who  were  surrounded  by  the  French.  They  said ; “ Alleyne  and  Peter,  give
us  the  keys  of  the  tower  ; for  it  must  and  shall  be  examined,  to  see  if  any  one  be  within  it ;”
but  they  answered,  in  the  hope  of  prolonging  the  time, — “ Begin  your  search  elsewhere,  and
come  here  at  the  last.”  But  the  knights  replied ; “ Alleyne,  you  trifle  too  much  with  us,
for  we  will  examine  this  tower  first ; and,  if  you  make  any  further  resistance,  we  will  put
you  to  death  with  our  daggers.”  On  hearing  this,  they  feared  they  would  put  their  threat
into  execution  ; for  all  avoid  death  as  long  as  they  can,  though,  in  good  truth,  it  would  have
been  more  honourable  for  them  had  they  been  slain,  than  carried  away,  and  afterwards
punished  for  this  act,  by  a disgraceful  death,  as  you  will  speedily  hear  in  this  history.
During  the  dispute,  Peter  Roux  thought  of  an  expedient  to  excuse  their  conduct,  but  this
was  of  no  avail,  and  said, — “ My  lord  William,  and  you  sir  John,  it  is  indeed  true  that  there
are  in  this  tower  thirty  armed  men,  whither  my  brother  and  self  have  with  much  difficulty
forced  them  ; for  we  well  knew  they  would  not  assent  to  our  treaty  with  you.  It  is  for  this
reason  that  we  have  confined  them  in  that  tower  until  you  should  be  masters  of  the  castle ;
and  we  will,  with  yonr  permissions,  leave  them  there,  to  be  your  prisoners.  Give  us  the
money,  the  whole,  or  part  of  it,  as  you  are  bounden  to  do,  and  let  us  go  away.”

The  knights  were  tolerably  satisfied  on  hearing  this ; but  sir  William  le  Bouteiller,  having
considered  a little,  said, — “ Whatever  truth  may  be  in  what  you  have  told  us,  before  we
unpack  the  money  again,  we  must  have  all  the  keys  of  the  castle  delivered  to  us,  and  the
different  parts  pointed  out  to  which  they  lead.”  Alleyne,  seeing  he  could  no  longer  delay,
sent  for  them  to  the  room  wherein  they  were  deposited.  On  their  being  brought  to  the  court,
the  knights  said, — “ Now,  explain  to  us  what  gates  they  unlock,  and  whither  they  lead.”
Very  much  against  their  will,  they  pointed  out  the  keys  of  the  great  tower,  for  their
destruction  lay  in  it.  When  they  had  possession  of  them,  they  opened  its  gates,  and  found
the  thirty  companions  completely  armed,  who  had  been  therein  hid.

Alleyne  was  much  cast  down,  when  he  saw  the  French  knights  draw  themselves  up  in
array  before  the  gate,  and  heard  sir  William  le  Bouteiller  say, — “ You  are  hidden  within
this  tower,  .come  forth  instantly  and  without  fear,  under  pain  of  being  all  put  to  death.
We  shall  make  you  our  prisoners,  and  you  need  not  fear  any  punishment  if  you  tell  us  the


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FR  ANCE,  &e.


433


truth.”  When  they  saw  and  heard  the  French  offer  them  pardon,  taking  them  as  prisoners
only,  they  flung  down  their  staves  and  arms,  and  surrendered,  for  defence  would  not  have
been  of  any  avail.  These  men  were  then  separated,  and  examined  one  by  one  in  the
presence  of  Alleync  and  Peter  Roux,  and  acknowledged  the  intended  treason,  which  they
now  could  no  longer  deny.  The  French  knights  addressed  them, — “ It  is  very  displeasing
to  us,  that  you  should  have  been  guilty  of  so  disgraceful  a crime.  We  shall  not  punish  you
for  it : as  it  seems  to  us  so  heinous,  we  shall  leave  it  to  my  lord  of  Berry ; and,  if  he  will
shew  you  mercy,  we  shall  not  object.  We  rather  hope  he  may  be  so  inclined,  from  the
great  pleasure  the  possession  of  this  castle  will  give  him,  which  was  the  thing  in  the  world
he  was  most  anxious  to  gain.”  This  speech  gave  some  hopes  to  the  two  brothers,  who  found
themselves  fallen  into  a similar  trap  to  what  they  had  laid  for  otheps.  They  were  confined
in  rooms  well  guarded,  and  the  garrison  in  the  towers  and  in  other  parts  of  the  castle.  It
was  then  thoroughly  visited,  and  found  full  of  stores  and  provision ; all  of  which  they  left
untouched,  contenting  themselves  with  the  money  and  arms  they  discovered,  and  which,  as
fair  plunder,  was  divided  among  them  ; but  the  prisoners  were  given  to  the  knights.

Thus,  as  I have  related,  was  the  strong  castle  of  Ventadour  regained  by  the  French.  Sir
William  le  Bouteiller  appointed  a valiant  and  prudent  squire  of  Limousin,  called  Peter
Madich,  governor,  with  thirty  good  lances  for  its  defence.  He  ransomed  such  as  were
deserving  of  it ; but  having  discovered  among  the  prisoners  several  renegade  Frenchmen,
who  had  been  cruel  plunderers,  he  had  their  heads  cut  off,  or  hung  them  on  a new  gallows
that  had  been  erected  in  front  of  the  castle.  When  all  things  had  been  settled,  the  two
knights  resolved  to  ride  to  Riom,  to  wait  on  the  duke  of  Berry,  and  carry  Alleyne  and
Peter  Roux  with  them.  News  was  soon  spread  abroad  that  Ventadour  was  retaken,  to  the
great  joy  of  the  inhabitants  of  Auvergne  and  Limousin  ; for  the  enemies  of  the  realm  had
kept  possession  of  it  fifteen  years,  and,  during  that  time,  had  done  much  mischief  to  the
country,  and  had  greatly  impoverished  it.

Sir  William  le  Bouteiller  had  found  in  the  castle  of  Ventadour  a young  and  handsome
squire  from  Brittany,  called  le  Monadich*,  a cousin  to  Geoffry  Tete-noire,  who  had  lately
left  a convent  in  Brittany,  and  come  thither  to  learn  the  art  of  war,  for  he  would  not  be  a
monk.  The  French  knights  wanted  to  have  him  beheaded,  or  hanged  like  the  others;  but
sir  William  took  compassion  on  him,  and  saved  his  life,  for  which  he  swore  he  would  faith-
fully serve  him,  and  remain  for  the  time  to  come  a loyal  Frenchman.  They  made  no  long
stay  after  this,  but,  having  pulled  down  the  block-houses,  went  to  the  duke  of  Berry.  The
men  at  arms  separated,  each  going  to  his  own  home.  The  knights  arrived  at  Riom,  with
the  two  brothers  prisoners.  They  were  much  cast  down,  and  on  the  road  entreated  sir
William  and  sir  John  to  interest  themselves  in  their  behalf,  that  the  duke  might  not  be  too
severe  on  them.  The  duke  was  with  his  duchess  at  Riom,  and  most  kindly  received  the
two  knights  : he  considered  the  gain  of  the  castle  of  Ventadour  as  a very  gallant  exploit,  for
which  he  made  them  handsome  and  rich  gifts.

The  knights  asked  him,  what  was  his  pleasure  respecting  the  two  prisoners.  He  said,  he
would  consider  of  it ; which  having  done,  it  was  thought  by  his  council  most  advisable  to
send  them  to  the  king  at  Paris.  The  seneschal  of  Auvergne  was  sent  for,  and  to  him  were
delivered  the  Bretons.  He  carried  them  to  Paris,  where  they  were  confined  in  the  castle  of
Saint  Anthonyj-,  under  the  guard  of  the  viscount  d’Asci,  who  was  at  that  time  governor  of  it.
They  were  not  kept  long  in  prison,  but  delivered  over  to  the  provost  of  Paris,  who  carried
them  to  the  Chatelet,  where  they  were  tried  and  judged  guilty  of  death,  as  traitors  and
robbers.  They  were  then  given  up  to  the  hangman,  who  placed  them  bound  in  a cart,  and
carried  them  through  the  streets,  with  sound  of  trumpet,  to  a place  called  Les  Halles,  and
put  on  the  pillory,  which  was  turned  four  times  round,  that  the  populace  might  view  them.
Their  actions  were  then  read  aloud  ; after  which  they  were  beheaded  and  quartered,  and
their  quarters  fixed  to  the  four  principal  gates  of  the  town.  Thus  did  Alleyne  and  Peter
Roux  lose  their  castle  of  Ventadour,  and  forfeit  their  own  lives  by  a disgraceful  death.

* “ Tlie  little  monk.” — Ed.

f Probably  the  Bastille,  which  v.as  at  the  gate  of  St.  Anthony  before  the  revolution  in  1700.

F F


VOL.  II.


434


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


CHAPTER  XIII. THREE  FRENCH  KNIGHTS  HOLD  A TOURNAMENT  AT  SAINT  INGLEVERE,

NEAR  CALAIS,  AND  DEFEND  THE  LISTS,  FOR  THIRTY  DAYS,  AGAINST  ALL  COMERS,
FROM  ENGLAND,  AND  ELSEWHERE.

At  this  season,  the  truce  between  England  and  France  was  punctually  observed  on  sea
and  land  by  both  parties,  excepting  a few  pillagers  in  Auvergne,  who  continued  a war
against  the  peasants,  on  each  side  the  river  Dordogne.  Their  principal  leaders,  who  had
surrendered  on  capitulation,  were  not  openly  guilty  of  any  breach  of  the  truce,  but  secretly
encouraged  the  mischiefs  that  were  daily  committed  in  Auvergne.  Such  complaints  were
made  of  this  to  the  king. of  France,  that  he  determined,  with  the  advice  of  his  council,  to
remonstrate  with  the  king  of  England  on  the  conduct  of  these  pillagers,  who,  notwithstanding
the  truce,  still  carried  on  a war  in  Auvergne  and  the  adjoining  country,  which  could  not  be
suffered,  neither  ought  it  to  be.  I believe  the  king  of  England  excused  himself,  by  saying
that  those  who  had  committed  the  acts  complained  of  were  lawless  people,  over  whom  he  had
no  controul.

During  the  time  in  which  these  things  were  passing,  the  three  knights  before  mentioned,
who  had  undertaken  to  maintain  the  lists  against  all  comers,  at  Saint  Inglevere,  near  Calais,
namely,  sir  Boucicaut  the  younger,  the  lord  Reginald  de  Roye  and  the  lord  de  Saimpi,  were
making  preparations  to  fulfil  their  engagement.  This  tournament  had  been  proclaimed  in
many  countries,  but  especially  in  England,  where  it  had  caused  much  surprise,  and  excited
several  knights  and  squires,  who  were  fond  of  adventures  and  deeds  of  arms,  to  confer  on
the  subject.  Some  said  they  would  be  blameworthy,  if  they  did  not  cross  the  sea,  when  the
distance  was  so  short  to  Calais,  pay  a visit  to  these  knights  and  tilt  with  them.  I will  name
those  who  were  most  eager  in  these  conversations.  The  first  was  sir  John  Holland,  earl  of
Huntingdon,  sir  John  Courtenay*,  sir  John  Traictonf,  sir  John  GouloufifreJ,  sir  John  Roussel§,
sir  Thomas  Scorabonne  || , sir  William  Cliseton^f,  sir  William  Clinton,  sir  William  Taille-
bourg**,  sir  Godfrey  de  Seton,  sir  William  de  Haquenayff,  sir  John  Bolton,  sir  John
Arundel,  sir  John  d’Ambreticourt,  sir  John  Beaumont  and  many  more,  to  the  amount  of
upwards  of  one  hundred  knights  and  squires,  who  said, — “ Let  us  prepare  ourselves  to  attend
this  tournament  near  Calais;  for  these  French  knights  only  hold  it  that  they  may  have  our
company  : it  is  well  done,  and  shows  they  do  not  want  courage  : let  us  not  disappoint  them.”

This  challenge  was  made  so  public  in  England  that  many  who  had  no  intention  of  taking
part  themselves,  said,  they  would  go  thither  to  witness  the  performances  of  others.  Such
knights  and  squires  as  proposed  being  there,  when  the  appointed  term  was  approaching,
sent  beforehand  their  purveyances,  and  arms  for  tilting  and  for  war,  to  Calais.  Sir  John
Holland,  half  brother  to  the  king  of  England,  was  the  first  to  cross  the  sea : more  than  sixty
knights  and  squires  accompanied  him,  and  took  up  their  quarters  in  Calais.

At  the  beginning  of  the  charming  month  of  May,  the  three  before-mentioned  young
French  knights  were  fully  prepared  to  maintain  their  challenge  in  the  lists  at  Saint
Inglevere.  They  first  came  to  Boulogne,  where  I know  not  how  many  days  they  tarried,
and  then  went  to  the  monastery  of  Saint  Inglevere.  On  their  arrival,  they  learnt  that
numbers  of  English  knights  and  squires  were  come  to  Calais.  This  gave  them  much  pleasure;
and  to  hasten  the  business,  and  that  news  should  be  carried  to  the  English,  they  ordered
three  rich  vermilion-coloured  pavilions  to  be  pitched  near  the  appointed  place  for  the  lists,
and  before  each  were  suspended  two  targets,  for  peace  or  war,  emblazoned  with  the  arms  of
each  lord.  It  was  ordered,  that  such  as  were  desirous  of  performing  any  deed  of  arms
should  touch,  or  send  to  have  touched,  one  or  both  of  these  targets  according  to  their  pleasure,
and  they  would  be  tilted  with  agreeably  to  their  request.

On  the  21st  of  the  month  of  May,  as  it  had  been  proclaimed,  the  three  knights  were
properly  armed  and  their  horses  ready  saddled  according  to  the  laws  of  the  tournament.  On

* My  MSS.  have  sir  Peter  Courtenay.  ||  “ Sir  Thomas  Scorabonne.”  Q.  Sherborne.

t “ Sir  John  Traicton.”  Q.  Drayton.  The  MSS.  Peter.  “ Sir  William  Cliseton.”  Q.  Clifton.

1 “ Sir  John  Gouloutfre.”  Q.  Sir  John  Walworth.  **  “Sir  William  Taillebourg.”  Q.  Tallboys  or  Talbot.

§“  Sir  John  Roussel.”  Q.  Russel.  ft  “ Sir  William  de'Haquenay.”  Q.  Hackney.


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


435


the  same  day,  those  knights  who  were  in  Calais  sallied  forth,  either  as  spectators  or  filters,
and,  being  arrived  at  the  spot,  drew  np  on  one  side.  The  place  of  the  tournament  was
smooth,  and  green  with  grass.


Tournament  at  St.  I nglevere.  From  a MS.  Froissart  of  the  Fifteenth  Century.


Sir  John  Holland  was  the  first  who  sent  his  squire  to  touch  the  war-target  of  sir  Boucicaut,
who  instantly  issued  from  his  pavilion  completely  armed.  Having  mounted  his  horse,  and
grasped  his  spear,  which  was  stiff  and  well  steeled,  they  took  their  distances.  When  the
two  knights  had  for  a short  time  eyed  each  other,  they  spurred  their  horses  and  met  full
gallop  with  such  force  that  sir  Boucicaut  pierced  the  shield  of  the  earl  of  Huntingdon,
and  the  point  of  his  lance  slipped  along  his  arm,  but  without  wounding  him.  The  two
knights,  having  passed,  continued  their  gallop  to  the  end  of  the  list.  This  course  was  much
praised.  At  the  second  course,  they  hit  each  other  slightly,  but  no  harm  was  done ; and
then’  horses  refused  to  complete  the  third.  The  earl  of  Huntingdon,  who  wished  to  continue
the  tilt,  and  was  heated,  returned  to  his  place,  expecting  that  sir  Boucicaut  would  call  for
his  lance ; but  he  did  not,  and  showed  plainly  he  would  not  that  day  tilt  more  with  the  earl.
Sir  John  Holland,  seeing  this,  sent  his  squire  to  touch  the  war-target  of  the  lord  de  Saimpi.
This  knight,  who  was  waiting  for  the  combat,  sallied  out  from  his  pavilion,  and  took  his
lance  and  shield.  When  the  earl  saw  he  was  ready,  he  violently  spurred  his  horse,  as  did
the  lord  de  Saimpi.  They  couched  their  lances,  and  pointed  them  at  each  other.  At  the
onset,  their  horses  crossed ; notwithstanding  which,  they  met ; but  by  this  crossing,  which
was  blamed,  the  earl  wTas  unhehned.  He  returned  to  his  people,  who  soon  re-helmed  him  ;
and,  having  resumed  then1  lances,  they  met  full  gallop,  and  hit  each  other  with  such  force  in
the  middle  of  their  shields,  that  they  would  have  been  unhorsed  had  they  not  kept  tight
seats  by  the  pressure  of  their  legs  against  the  horses'  sides.  They  went  to  the  proper  places,
where  they  refreshed  themselves  and  took  breath.  Sir  John  Holland,  who  had  a great  desire
to  shine  at  this  tournament,  had  his  helmet  braced  and  grasped  his  spear  again ; when  the
lord  de  Saimpi,  seeing  him  advance  on  a gallop,  did  not  decline  meeting,  but,  spurring  his
horse  on  instantly,  they  gave  blows  on  their  helmets,  that  were  luckily  of  well-tempered
steel,  which  made  sparks  of  fire  fly  from  them.  At  this  course,  the  lord  de  Saimpi  lost  his
helmet ; but  the  two  knights  continued  their  career,  and  returned  to  their  places

F F 2


456


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


This  tilt  was  much  praised  ; and  the  English  and  French  said,  that  the  carl  of  Huntingdon,
sir  Boucicaut,  and  the  lord  de  Saimpi,  had  excellently  well  justed,  without  sparing  or  doing
themsel  ves  any  damage.  The  earl  wished  to  break  another  lance  in  honour  of  his  lady,  but
it  was  refused  him.  He  then  quitted  the  lists,  to  make  room  for  others,  for  he  had  run  his
six  lances  with  such  ability  and  courage  as  gained  him  praise  from  all  sides.

A young  and  gallant  knight  of  England  next  came  forth,  called  the  earl-marshal #,  who
sent,  according  to  the  regulations,  to  touch  the  war-target  of  sir  Reginald  de  Roye.  This
being  done,  sir  Reginald  came  from  his  pavilion  completely  armed,  and  mounted  his  horse
that  was  ready  for  him  : having  had  his  shield  and  helmet  buckled  on,  he  seized  his  lance
and  took  his  distance.  The  two  knights  spurred  their  horses,  but,  at  this  first  course,  failed
in  their  strokes,  from  their  horses  swerving  out  of  the  line,  to  their  great  vexation.  Sir
Reginald  was  hit  with  the  second  lance,  and  had  his  own  broken.  At  the  third  course,  they
met  with  such  force  that  the  fire  sparkled  from  their  helmets,  and  the  earl  was  unhelmed,
lie  continued  his  career  to  his  own  place,  but  justed  no  more  that  day,  as  he  had  done
sufficiently.

The  lord  Clifford  j-,  a valiant  knight,  and  cousin-german  to  the  late  sir  John  Chandos,  of
famed  renown,  then  advanced,  and  sent  to  have  the  war-shield  of  sir  Boucicaut  touched  with
a rod.  Sir  Boucicaut  instantly  appeared,  and,  having  his  armour  laced,  mounted  his
horse : placing  his  lance  in  its  rest,  they  met  full  gallop,  and  made,  by  their  blows,  the  fire
fly  from  their  helmets,  but  they  neither  broke  their  lances  nor  lost  their  stirrups  : having
passed,  they  returned  to  their  places,  making  ready  for  the  second  course.  This  was  done
without  anyway  sparing  themselves  : sir  Boucicaut  broke  his  lance  and  was  unhelmed,  but
did  not  for  this  fall  to  the  ground.  Lord  Clifford  returned  to  his  place,  to  prepare  himself
for  another  course,  hut  sir  Boucicaut  did  not  again  put  on  his  helmet.  Lord  Clifford,  noticing
this,  resolved  to  perform  a tilt  with  another  knight,  and  sent  his  squire  to  touch  the  shield
of  the  lord  de  Saimpi.  The  lord  de  Saimpi  being  ready,  sallied  forth  from  his  pavilion ;
they  ran  at  each  other  with  great  force,  met  full,  and  lord  Clifford  broke  his  lance  into  three
pieces  against  the  target  of  his  adversary.  In  return,  the  lord  de  Saimpi  struck  off  his
helmet,  and  both  continued  their  career  to  their  places.  The  lord  Clifford  tilted  no  more
that  day,  for  the  spectators  said  he  had  honourably  and  valorously  borne  himself.

Sir  Henry  Beaumont  | then  came  forward,  and  sent  to  have  the  target  of  sir  Boucicaut
touched,  who  was  instantly  ready  to  reply  to  the  call,  having  not  dismounted  from  the  tilts
with  lord  Clifford.  The  lord  Beaumont  did  not  manage  his  lance  well,  and  hit  Boucicaut
on  the  side ; but  sir  Boucicaut  struck  him  so  full  on  the  middle  of  his  shield  that  it  drove
him  to  the  ground,  and  continued  his  course.  Lord  Beaumont  was  raised  up  by  his
attendants  and  remounted.  The  lord  de  Saimpi  then  presented  himself,  and  they  tilted  two
courses  very  handsomely  without  liuid  to  either.

Sir  Peter  Courtenay,  who  was  anxious  to  engage  and  to  run  six  lances,  sent  a squire  to
touch  with  a rod  the  three  shields  of  war.  This  caused  a good  deal  of  surprise,  and  he  was
asked  what  were  his  intentions  by  so  doing.  He  replied,  that  he  wished  to  tilt  with  each
of  the  French  knights  two  lances,  if  no  misfortune  befel  him,  and  he  entreated  they  would
comply  with  his  request.  They  were  ready  to  consent  to  it,  and  sir  Reginald  de  Roye  first
offered  himself.  Having  made  themselves  ready,  they  spurred  their  horses,  and  took  good
aim  not  to  miss  their  stroke ; but,  from  the  restiveness  of  their  horses,  they  failed.  They
were  much  vexed,  and  returned  to  their  places.  On  the  second  course,  they  met  full  gallop ;
and  sir  Reginald  de  Roye,  having  unhelmed  his  adversary,  returned  gently  towards  his
pavilion,  his  two  courses  being  completed.  Sir  Peter  Courtenay  being  armed  once  more,
the  lord  de  Saimpi  advanced,  and  their  lances  were  broken  at  the  first  shock  : they  continued
their  course,  when  new  lances  were  given  them.  They  advanced  towards  each  other
furiously,  and  the  lord  de  Saimpi  hit  sir  Peter,  whose  horse  swerved  a little ; but  sir  Peter
struck  off  his  helmet,  and  rode  on  at  a gentle  pace  to  his  post.  Sir  Boucicaut  now  came  to
complete  the  twro  other  courses  ; and  at  their  onset  they  struck  each  other  on  the  shield  so

* I suppose  this  must  he  Thomas  Mowbray,  earl  of  f Froissart  calls  him  sir  Louis  de  Clifford,  hut  he  was
Nottingham  and  oarl-marshal : ho  was  afterwards  created  Thomas  lord  Clifford  of  Cumberland.  See  Dugdale.
duke  of  Norfolk.  See  Dugdale.  + Lord  Beaumont.  See  Dugdale.


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


437


rudely  that  the  two  horses  were  suddenly  checked  in  their  career  : no  other  damage  ensued.
At  the  second  course,  they  were  both  unhelmed.  When  these  six  tilts  were  done,  sir  Peter
requested,  as  a favour,  to  run  one  more  with  any  of  the  three  knights  who  pleased,  but  it
was  refused ; and  he  was  told,  that  he  had  done  enough  that  day.

An  English  knight,  called  sir  John  Gouloufre,  came  forth,  armed  from  head  to  foot,  and
sent  his  squire  to  touch  the  war-shield  of  sir  Reginald  de  Roye.  The  knight  obeyed  the
summons,  and  both  advanced  full  gallop.  They  hit  each  other’s  helmets,  but  were  neither
unhelmed  nor  had  their  lances  broken.  Their  horses  refused  to  run  the  second  course,  to
their  great  vexation.  At  the  third  tilt  they  struck  their  shields  and  broke  their  lances.
They  were  supplied  with  others,  and,  from  the  swerving  of  their  horses,  passed  their  fourth
career  without  striking  a blow.  The  fifth  lance  was  too  well  employed,  for  they  were  both
unhelmed,  and  then  each  rode  to  his  own  party.

Sir  John  Rousseau  *,  an  expert  and  valiant  knight  from  England,  but  well  known  for  his
prowess  in  various  countries,  ordered  his  squire  to  touch  the  shield  of  the  lord  de  Saimpi,
who  was  already  armed  and  mounted.  On  receiving  his  lance,  he  spurred  his  horse  against
the  English  knight,  and  the  shock  of  their  spears  against  the  targets  instantly  forced  them
to  stop.  Each  returned  to  his  post,  and  it  was  not  long  before  they  commenced  their  second
course  with  equal  vigour  : but  when  near,  the  horses  swerved,  which  prevented  their  stroke.
To  their  sorrow,  they  were  thus  obliged  to  return  again  to  the  end  of  the  lists.  They  were
more  successful  the  third  course ; for  they  struck  each  other  with  such  force,  that  the  vizors
of  their  helmets  were  broken  off : the  knights  continued  their  career,  and  the  Englishman
tilted  no  more  that  day.

Sir  Peter  Shirborne,  a young  knight,  but  of  good  courage,  sent  his  squire  to  touch  the
war-shield  of  sir  Boucicaut.  The  knight  was  ready  to  answer  him,  for  he  was  armed  and  on
horseback,  leaning  on  his  spear,  to  wait  for  an  adventure.  Perceiving  himself  called  upon,
he  raised  his  spear,  and  looked  to  see  what  his  adversary  was  about,  and  observing  that  he
was  handling  his  horse,  did  the  same.  When  they  began  their  course,  they  couched  their
spears,  thinking  to  make  sure  blows  ; but  they  were  disappointed,  to  their  great  vexation,  by
the  swerving  of  their  horses,  which  forced  them  to  return  to  their  posts.  They  determined  to
manage  them  better  at  their  second  tilt,  and  spurred  them  both  so  vigorously,  they  each  struck
the  other  on  the  vizor.  Sir  Boucicaut  broke  bis  lauce,  but  not  so  the  English  knight ; for  he
employed  it  with  such  force,  that  he  not  only  unhelmed,  but  made  the  blood  spout  from  his
nose  as  he  broke  off  the  helmet  of  sir  Boucicaut,  who  then  retired  to  his  pavilion  : he  tilted
no  more  that  day,  for  it  was  now  nearly  vespers.  Sir  Peter  Shirborne,  however,  would  not
desist  until  he  had  completed  his  number  of  lances  : he,  in  consequence,  sent  his  squire  to
touch  the  war- target  of  the  lord  de  Saimpi,  who  was  prepared  to  meet  him.  The  two
knights  spurred  on  violently  against  each  other,  and  hit  on  the  top  of  their  helmets ; but  the
lances  slipt  over,  and  they  passed  each  other  without  hurt.  The  spectators  said,  had  their
spears  been  pointed'lower,  and  the  shields  received  the  blows,  one  or  both  must  have  suffered
severely  from  the  shock.  The  next  course  they  struck  full  on  their  targets,  and  broke  their
lances  into  three  parts  ; but  the  blow  of  the  lord  de  Saimpi  was  so  strong  that  the  English
knight  lost  his  seat  and  fell  to  the  ground,  from  whence,  however,  he  instantly  arose,  and  was
led  by  his  attendants  from  the  lists.  The  lord  de  Saimpi  returned  to  his  post,  viewing  the
state  of  his  adversary,  and  showing  his  willingness  to  renew  the  tilt  with  him  he  had  over-
thrown or  with  any  other ; but  none  came  forward,  as  it  was  now  time  to  leave  off  for  this
day,  and  return  to  their  hotels.  The  English,  and  such  as  had  accompanied  them,  set  off  full
gallop  for  Calais,  where  they  remained  that  night  enjoying  themselves,  and  talking  over  the
feats  of  arms  that  had  been  performed.  The  French  retired  to  Saint  Ingleverc ; and,  if  the
English  talked  much  of  what  had  been  done,  youmayreadilysuppose  the  French  were  not  silent.

On  Tuesday,  after  mass  and  drinking  a cup,  all  those  who  intended  to  tilt,  and  those  who
wished  to  see  them,  left  Calais,  and  rode  in  an  orderly  manner  to  where  the  lists  had  been
held  the  preceding  day.  The  French  were  already  there,  as  was  right,  and  prepared  to
receive  them.  The  day  was  bright,  clear,  and  sufficiently  warm.  The  English  drew  up  on
one  side,  and  armed  those  who  were  to  tilt.

* He  is  called  before  Roussel.  In  the  MS.  in  the  British  Museum,  Roussel.


438


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


Sir  William  Clifton,  a very  valiant  and  expert  knight,  was  the  first  who  sent  his
squire  to  touch  the  shield  of  sir  Boucicaut : the  knight  instantly  came  forth,  armed  completely
for  the  tournament,  mounted  his  horse,  and  grasped  his  lance.  The  two  knights  met  full
gallop,  hitting  each  on  the  target,  but  passed  on  without  anything  more.  The  second  course
was  very  handsome  : they  met,  and  hit  each  on  the  helmet,  the  lances  crossing.  The
third  course  they  struck  again  their  shields,  and  with  such  violence  that  the  horses  were
stopped.  The  fourth  course  with  lances  was  gallantly  performed,  for  they  hit  each  other  so
strongly  on  the  vizors  of  their  helmets,  they  were  driven  off  by  the  blow  to  different  sides.
The  English  knight  tilted  no  more  that  day,  for  he  was  told  he  had  done  enough.

After  this,  sir  Nicholas  Clinton,  a young  English  knight,  sent  to  touch  the  target  of  the
lord  de  Saimpi,  who  immediately  appeared  ready  armed  and  mounted.  The  two  knights
spurred  their  horses,  bearing  their  spears  in  good  array : when  near,  they  struck  then-
opponent's  target  with  such  violence  that  the  steel  remained  fixed  ; and  it  is  wonderful  no
other  harm  ensued,  for  they  were  both  young,  of  good  courage,  and  did  not  spare  themselves.
They  neither  fell  nor  were  wounded,  but  their  lances  were  shivered  to  pieces.  They  then
passed  on,  each  to  his  post.  The  second  course  was  well  tilted : they  struck  each  on  the
helmets,  but,  as  it  was  on  the  top,  they  did  no  damage,  and  passed  on.  At  the  third  course
with  lances,  the  horses  swerved,  to  their  sorrow , and,  at  the  fourth,  the  lord  de  Saimpi
unhelmed  the  English  knight,  who  returned  to  his  countrymen  and  tilted  no  more,  for  they
assured  him  he  had  behaved  most  valiantly,  and  that  he  must  allow  others  to  have  their
share.

When  sir  Nicholas  Clinton  was  returned  from  the  lists,  a gallant  knight  of  England,  nearly
related  to  the  earl  of  Huntingdon,  called  William  Seimort*,  left  his  tent,  and  sent  to  touch
the  target  of  sir  Reginald  de  Roye,  who  appeared  to  meet  him.  Each  having  taken  his  post,
they  vigorously  spurred  their  horses,  and  gave  such  blows  on  their  shields,  that  it  was  sur-
prising they  were  not  unhorsed  ; but  both  kept  their  seats,  as  they  rode  well.  They  passed
on  to  their  places ; but  the  English  knight  let  fall  his  lance,  and  sir  Reginald  bore  his  in
handsome  array.

The  English  knight  having  had  his  lance  given  to  him,  he  placed  it  in  its  rest,  and  spurring
his  horse,  intended  to  have  done  wonders.  Indeed  the  blow  would  have  been  good  if  it  had
been  straight,  but,  by  the  swerving  of  his  horse,  it  was  very  weak  ; and  I doubt  if  it  were
not,  in  some  measure,  the  fault  of  the  knight.  Sir  Reginald  struck  him  such  a blow  on  the
shield,  as  made  him  bend  backward,  but  they  passed  on  without  further  hurt.  Being  pre-
pared for  the  third  course,  they  again  spurred  their  horses  and  couched  their  lances,  and
hit  each  other  so  rudely  on  the  helmets  that  the  fire  sparkled  from  them.  They  passed  on,
but  from  this  blow  their  lances  fell  to  the  ground  : persons  were  at  hand  to  pick  them  up  and
give  them  to  the  knights.  Having  replaced  the  lances  in  their  rests,  they  renewed  the  tilt,
and,  aiming  well,  struck  each  other  on  the  vizors  of  their  helmets  so  severely,  that  sir  William
Seimort  was  unhelmed  and  nearly  thrown  to  the  ground,  but,  though  he  staggered,  he  kept
his  seat.  The  English  knight  then  went  to  his  countrymen,  and  did  nothing  more  that  day.

A squire  called  Lancaster  now  stepped  forth,  and  sent  to  touch  the  shield  of  sir  Boucicaut.
He  was  ready  mounted  to  answer  the  call,  and,  having  grasped  his  spear,  they  met  most
courageously : they  struck  their  helmets,  so  as  to  make  the  fire  fly  from  them,  and  it  was
astonishing  they  kept  them  on  their  heads.  No  harm  being  done,  each  returned  to  his  post,
where  they  made  no  long  stay  before  they  began  their  second  course  with  great  vigour,  each
hitting  on  his  opponent’s  target : the  horses  swerved,  which  prevented  this  from  being  a
handsome  or  effectual  tilt,  hut  this  they  could  not  help.  At  the  third  lance  they  met,  and
the  blow  was  so  well  placed,  that  the  Englishman  was  unhelmed,  and  passed  on  to  his  post
bareheaded  all  hut  the  scull-cap,  and  would  not  that  day  tilt  more.

A young  knight  whose  name  was  sir  John  Tallboys,  next  made  his  appearance,  completely
armed,  and  sent  to  touch  the  war-target  of  the  lord  de  Saimpi.  That  knight  was  ready  for
the  tilt,  and,  having  grasped  his  spear,  stuck  spurs  into  his  horse  : their  first  onset  was  so
rough,  their  lances  were  shivered.  The  two  knights  passed  each  other  without  other  damage,
and  were  not  long  before  they  began  their  second  course,  having  received  new  lances,  of

* Q.  Seymour. — Ed.


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


439

which  there  was  a provision  ready,  all  of  the  same  length.  From  the  fault  of  their  horses,
though  they  aimed  well,  they  missed  hitting ; but  the  third  course  was  well  performed,  for
they  unhelmed  each  other,  and  then  each  retired  to  his  own  party,  and  the  English  knight
did  nothing  more  that  day.

Sir  Godfrey  de  Seca  next  presented  himself : he  was  a gallant  knight,  and  showed,  by  his
manner  of  riding  and  bearing  his  lance,  that  ho  wras  an  able  tilter,  and  desirous  of  renown.
He  sent  his  squire  to  touch  the  war-target  of  sir  Reginald  de  Roye.  That  knight  came
forward  instantly,  as  he  was  ready  mounted,  and,  placing  himself  properly  for  the  tilt,  they
both  set  off  full  gallop,  and  gave  such  blows  on  their  targets,  that  though  their  spears,  from
their  strength,  did  not  break,  they  remained  fastened  to  the  shields,  and  by  dint  of  hard
pushing,  the  .horses  were  checked  : each  knight  returned  to  his  post  without  losing  his  lance,
but  bearing  it  handsomely  before  him.  Having  placed  them  in  their  rests  they  again  spurred
their  horses,  which  were  strong  and  active,  but  by  their  swerving  they  missed  their  stroke
and  dropped  their  spears.  Those  near  picked  them  up  and  returned  them,  and  again  they
renewed  the  tilt ; for  they  were  heated,  and  seemed  unwilling  to  spare  each  other.  The
English  knight  hit  sir  Reginald  a very  severe  blow  on  the  top  of  his  helmet,  without  otherwise
damaging  him ; but  sir  Reginald  gave  him  so  strong  a thrust  on  the  target,  (for  at  that  time
he  was  counted  one  of  the  stoutest  tilters  in  France,  and  was  smitten  with  love  for  a young
lady  that  made  all  his  affairs  prosper)  it  pierced  through  it  as  well  as  his  left  arm  : the  spear
broke  as  it  entered,  the  butt  end  falling  to  the  ground,  the  other  sticking  in  the  shield,  and
the  steel  in  the  arm.  The  knight,  however,  did  not  for  this  fail  to  finish  his  course  gallantly  :
but  his  companions  came  to  him,  and  the  broken  spear  and  steel  were  extracted,  the  blood
stanched,  and  the  arm  tied  up.  Sir  Reginald  returned  to  his  friends,  and  there  remained,
leaning  on  another  lance  that  had  been  given  him.  Sir  Reginald  was  much  praised  by  the
French  and  English  for  this  tilt ; and  no  one  said  anything  improper  against  him,  on  account
of  the  Englishman  being  wounded,  for  such  are  the  events  of  arms  : to  one  they  are  fortunate,
to  another  the  reverse  ; and,  to  say  the  truth,  they  did  not  spare  each  other.

An  English  squire,  called  Blaquet  *,  then  sent  to  strike  the  war-shield  of  the  lord  de  Saimpi.
When  they  were  both  ready,  they  spurred  their  horses,  and  hit  on  the  helmets  hard  blows,
though  the  points  of  their  spears  slipped  off : on  finishing  their  career,  they  lost  their  lances.
When  they  were  restored  to  them,  they  began  their  second  course,  but,  by  the  fault  of  their
horses,  nothing  was  done.  At  the  third  onset,  Blaquet  gave  the  lord  de  Saimpi  a hard  blow
on  the  helmet,  but  was  struck  by  him  much  harder  on  the  vizor,  and  unhelmed,  with  a force
that  broke  the  buckle  which  fastened  it  behind,  and  it  fell  on  the  ground.  They  finished
their  course,  and  the  English  squire  went  among  his  countrymen,  not  intending  to  tilt  more
that  day.  The  lord  de  Saimpi  remained  gallantly  on  horseback,  leaning  on  his  spear,  to  wait
until  he  should  be  again  called  upon.

Sir  John  Bolton,  a gallant  knight  from  England,  shortly  after  this  tilt  was  over,  sent  his
squire  to  touch  the  shield  of  the  lord  de  Saimpi,  who,  being  prepared,  entered  the  lists,  his
target  on  his  neck  and  spear  in  hand.  Each  hit  his  adversary’s  shield,  and  it  was  surprising
they  were  not  pierced,  for  their  lances  were  strong,  and  their  heads  well  tempered  ; but  they
passed  without  further  loss  than  of  their  spears,  which  fell  to  the  ground.  When  they  were
picked  up  and  given  them,  they  again  spurred  their  horses,  and  struck  the  helmets,  but
without  effect,  and  continued  their  career.  At  the  third  course  their  horses  crossed.  The
lord  de  Saimpi,  at  the  fourth,  unhelmed  sir  John  Bolton,  by  a hard  blow,  and  then  the  two
knights  returned  to  their  friends.

Thomelin  Messidon  t,  a young  English  knight,  well  and  richly  armed,  with  a great  desire  to
gain  honour,  sent  to  touch  the  shield  of  sir  Boucicaut.  The  knight  instantly  came  forth,
and,  having  grasped  his  lance,  both  spurred  their  horses ; and  each  made  his  stroke  by
crossing  under  the  helmet : they  passed  on  without  hurt  or  blame,  but  were  not  long  before
they  spurred  on  again.  In  this  course,  they  hit  very  roughly  on  the  targets ; Thomelin
Messidon  shivered  his  lance  ; but  sir  Boucicaut’s  blow  was  so  severe,  it  drove  his  opponent
over  the  crupper  of  his  horse  to  the  ground.  Those  of  his  party  ran  to  raise  him  up,  and
carried  him  off,  for  he  tilted  no  more  that  day.

* “ Blaquet.”  Q.  Blake.  + “ Thomelin  Messidon.”  It  is  Messiden  in  the  MSS.


440


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


Another  squire  of  England,  called  Navarton*,  instantly  stepped  forth,  and  sent  to  touch
the  war-shield  of  sir  Boucicaut,  saying  he  would  revenge  his  companion,  whom  he  had  struck
to  the  ground  in  his  presence.  Boucicaut  was  ready  to  answer  him,  being  armed  and
mounted,  and  leaning  on  his  spear.  They  met  full  gallop,  and  hit  each  other  on  the  vizors
of  their  helmets,  but  passed  on  without  other  damage.  Having  had  their  helmets  re-adjusted,
and  their  lances  given  them,  they  again  met  with  great  violence,  and  from  the  shock  of  the
blows  on  the  targets,  the  horses  were  stopped,  and  the  lances  broken  into  three  pieces,  but
they  completed  their  course  without  any  hurt.  They  had  new  spears  given  them  ; and  at
the  third  course  sir  Boucicaut  was  hit  hard  on  the  target,  but  he  gave  Navarton  a blow  that
unhelmed  him  : he  then  withdrew  to  his  countrymen,  and  tilted  no  more  that  day ; for  they
said  he  had  done  sufficient,  and  had  gained  great  applause.

After  this,  another  squire  advanced,  called  Sequaqueton  *J*,  an  able  man  at  arms  and  expert
tilter.  He  sent  to  touch  the  shield  of  sir  Reginald  de  Roye,  who  replied,  that  he  was
prepared  and  mounted.  They  spurred  their  horses,  and  gave  violent  strokes  on  their  targets,
without  sparing  each  other.  Sequaqueton  bore  himself  handsomely  without  falling,  to  the
surprise  of  the  spectators,  for  sir  Reginald’s  blow  made  him  bend  backward  almost  on  the
crupper  of  his  horse ; but  he  raised  himself,  and  gallantly  finished  his  career  with  the  loss  only
of  his  lance.  Having  received  another,  they  ran  the  second  tilt  with  great  courage,  and
struck  such  blows  on  their  helmets  as  made  the  fire  fly  from  them.  It  was  a handsome
course,  and  no  damage  done.  They  repaired  to  their  posts,  and  spurred  again  for  the  third
time.  In  this  tilt,  Sequaqueton  was  severely  unhelmed,  and  on  the  point  of  falling,  both
himself  and  horse,  for  he  staggered  considerably.  The  squire,  when  on  his  feet,  returned  to
his  companions  and  tilted  no  more  : indeed,  there  was  an  end  to  the  whole  for  the  day,  as  it
was  now  late.  The  English  collected  together,  and  returned  to  Calais,  as  did  the  French  to
St.  Xnglevere.

You  must  know,  though  I have  not  before  made  mention  of  it,  that  king  Charles  of
France  was  present  at  these  justs.  Being  young,  and  desirous  of  witnessing  extraordinary
sights,  he  would  have  been  much  vexed  if  he  had  not  seen  these  tournaments.  He  was
therefore  present  at  the  early  part  and  latter  end  of  them,  attended  only  by  the  lord  de
Garencieres;  but  both  so  disguised  that  nobody  knew  of  it;  and  they  returned  every  evening
to  Marquise^.

The  ensuing  day,  Wednesday,  was  as  fine  as  the  foregoing  ; and  the  English,  who  had
crossed  the  sea  to  take  part  in  or  view  this  tournament,  mounted  their  horses,  at  the  same
hour  as  on  the  preceding  day,  and  rode  to  the  place  appointed  for  the  lists,  to  the  delight  of
the  French,  who  were  rejoiced  to  see  them.  It  was  not  long  after  their  arrival  when  an
English  squire,  a good  tilter,  called  John  Savage,  squire  of  honour  and  of  the  body  to  the  earl
of  Huntingdon,  sent  to  touch  the  shield  of  sir  Reginald  de  Roye.  The  knight  answered,
he  was  ready  and  willing  to  satisfy  him.  When  he  had  mounted  his  horse,  and  had  his
helmet  buckled  and  lance  given  to  him,  they  set  off  full  gallop,  and  gave  such  blows  on  the
targets,  that  had  the  spears  not  broken,  one  or  both  must  have  fallen  to  the  ground.  This
course  was  handsome  and  dangerous  ; but  the  knights  received  no  hurt,  though  the  points  of
the  lances  passed  through  the  targets,  and  slipped  off  their  side-armour.  The  spears  were
broken  about  a foot  from  the  shaft,  the  points  remaining  in  the  shields ; and  they  gallantly
bore  the  shafts  before  them,  as  they  finished  their  career.  The  spectators  thought  they  must
have  been  seriously  wounded;  and  the  French  and  English  hastened  each  to  their  companion,
whom,  to  their  joy,  they  found  unhurt.  They  were  told  they  had  done  enough  for  that
day;  but  John  Savage  was  not  satisfied,  and  said  he  had  not  crossed  the  sea  for  only  one
tilt  with  a lance.  This  was  reported  to  sir  Reginald,  who  replied, — “ He  is  in  the  right ;
and  it  is  but  just  that  he  should  be  gratified,  either  by  me  or  by  one  of  my  companions.’’
When  they  had  rested  themselves  a while,  and  received  new  lances,  they  began  their  second
course,  each  aiming  well  at  the  other  ; but  they  failed,  from  the  swerving  of  their  horses,  to
their  great  vexation,  and  returned  to  their  posts.  Their  lances,  which  had  been  accidentally
dropped,  were  given  to  them,  and  they  set  off  on  their  third  course.  This  time  they  hit  on

* TVarneston. — Buchon,  f.  “ Sequaqueton.”  Q.  Swinnerton.

t “ Marquise,” — a town  in  Picardy,  five  leagues  from  Calais,  three  and  a half  from  Boulogne.


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


441


the  vizors  of  their  helmets ; and,  by  the  force  and  crossing  of  their  lances,  both  were
unhelmed  as  they  passed.  The  tilt  was  much  applauded  for  its  correctness  and  vigour.
When  they  were  returned  to  their  posts,  the  English  told  John  Savage,  that  he  had  very
honourably  performed,  and  that  it  was  now  time  for  him  to  make  way  for  others  to  tilt  as
well  as  himself.  He  complied  with  this,  and,  laying  aside  his  lance  and  target,  dismounted,
and  rode  on  a hackney  to  witness  the  performances  of  others.

An  English  squire,  named  William  Basquenay,  cousin  to  the  earl  marshal,  came  forth
fully  armed  for  the  occasion,  and  sent  to  have  the  war-shield  of  sir  Boucicaut  stricken.  The
knight  instantly  made  his  appearance  at  the  end  of  the  lists,  and  each  galloped  towards  the
other  as  straight  as  they  could.  They  struck  their  helmets  gallantly ; and  the  blow  was  so
effectual  on  the  vizors  that  they  were  both  unhelmed,  and  continued  their  course  without
further  hurt.  Their  friends  who  were  near  re-adjusted  their  armours ; and,  giving  them
their  spears,  they  commenced  their  second  course  by  desperate  strokes  on  their  targets ; but,
the  lances  breaking,  no  harm  was  done,  and  they  continued  their  career.  They  were
supplied  with  new  lances,  that  were  stout  and  good ; but,  from  the  faidt  of  their  horses,
they  missed  their  strokes.  At  the  fourth  lanee,  they  hit ; and  William  Basquenay  was
unhelmed  a second  time,  and  then  returned  to  his  companions,  not  tilting  more  that  day.

A squire  from  England,  whose  name  was  John  Scot,  sent  to  have  the  war-shield  of  the
lord  de  Saimpi  touched.  He  immediately  appeared,  and  at  their  onset  they  gave  such
blows  on  their  targets  as  stopped  their  horses ; but,  their  lances  being  strong,  they  neither
broke  nor  fell  out  of  tbeir  hands.  The  second  course  was  well  performed  : the  lord  de
Saimpi  hit  his  adversary;  but  Scot  had  more  success  in  unhelming  him,  for  which  he  was
much  applauded  by  his  countrymen.  The  lord  de  Saimpi  was  soon  re-helmed  ; and,  grasping
his  spear,  they  spurred  against  each  other  with  great  violence.  They  placed  their  blows  on
their  targets,  but  with  a force  that  drove  John  Scot  out  of  his  saddle  to  the  ground,  and  thus  did
the  lord  de  Saimpi  revenge  himself.  The  squire  was  raised,  and  carried  off  by  his  companions.

Bernard  Stapleton,  an  English  squire,  sent  to  strike  the  lord  de  Saimpi’s  shield,  who  was
not  dismounted  from  his  last  tilt.  They  met,  and  hit  each  other  on  the  helmets  so  forcibly
as  to  make  the  sparks  fly  from  them ; but  they  passed  on  without  hurt  and  returned  to
their  posts.  Still  grasping  their  spears,  they  couched  them,  and  at  this  second  course  struck
very  severe  blows  on  their  targets,  but  kept  their  seats  well,  without  falling  or  staggering,
to  the  end  of  their  career.  The  third  lance  struck  the  helmets,  and  both  were  unhelmed.
The  English  squire  returned  from  the  lists,  as  his  friends  told  him  he  had  acquitted  himself
with  honour.

The  next  that  presented  himself  was  a young  gay  knight  from  England,  who  shone  in
tournaments,  in  dancing,  and  in  singing,  called  sir  John  Arundel.  He  sent  his  squire  to
touch  the  war-shield  of  sir  Reginald  de  Roye.  The  knight  replied,  that  he  wished  for
nothing  more  agreeable  than  to  tilt  with  him.  Having  received  their  spears,  they  galloped  off
at  the  same  moment,  and  gave  and  received  hard  blows  on  their  shields  ; but  they  kept  their
seats  handsomely,  and  continued  their  career.  Their  lances  having  fallen  from  their  hands,
were  restored  to  them  by  those  appointed  for  that  purpose ; and  they  began  their  second
course  with  blows  on  the  helmets  that  made  the  fire  fly,  but  they  passed  on  without  further
hurt.  At  the  third  onset,  the  horses  swerved  ; and  the  knights,  in  their  attempt  to  strike,
lost  their  lances,  and  with  difficulty  recovered  themselves.  At  the  fourth  they  struck  the
helmets,  but  without  harm  or  unhelming.  At  the  fifth  course,  they  hit  each  other  on  the
targets,  and  broke  tbeir  lances,  without  any  other  damage.  Sir  John  Arundel  completed
his  career,  and  returned  to  his  friends.

After  this,  Nicholas  Stone,  an  English  squire,  sent  to  touch  the  war-shield  of  sir  Boucicaut.
The  knight  seizing  his  lance,  they  spurred  against  each  other  and  hit  on  the  helmets ; but
the  spears  slipped  off,  and  they  passed  unhurt.  Holding  still  their  lances  in  the  rests,  they
set  off  again,  and  hit  so  hard  on  the  targets,  that  the  horses  staggered  with  the  shock,  and
the  knights  dropped  their  spears.  When  they  had  received  their  lances,  they  again  galloped
off  full  speed,  and  their  blows  on  the  helmets  were  effectual : at  least  the  English  squire
lost  his  helmet  and  retired,  for  his  friends  said  he  had  done  enough.

Another  squire  from  England,  called  John  Marshal,  advanced  to  the  lists,  completely


442


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


armed,  and  sent  to  touch  the  war-target  of  sir  Boucicaut,  who  replied,  he  was  ready,  and
waiting  to  be  called  upon.  At  their  first  course  they  hit  each  other  on  the  targets,  but  the
lances  fell  to  the  ground,  and  they  returned  to  their  stations  without  other  damage.  On
their  being  restored,  they  continued  their  tilt,  and  struck  hard  blows  on  the  helmets  without
anything  more,  and  pursued  their  career,  bearing  their  lances  handsomely  before  them.
When  they  had  rested  a little,  they  considered  how  they  could  best  annoy  each  other,  and,
having  aimed  well,  spurred  on  their  horses.  John  Marshal  gave  such  a thrust  on  Boucicaut’s
shield  that  bis  lance  was  broken  to  the  stump,  and  Boucicaut’s  blow  unhelmed  his  opponent,
and  drove  him  on  the  crupper  of  his  horse.  The  squire,  notwithstanding,  completed  his
course  without  falling,  and  then  went  to  his  companions,  who  said  he  ought  now  to  be
satisfied,  for  that  he  had  well  performed.

When  the  squire  had  withdrawn,  a young  and  frisky  English  knight  advanced,  who  was
eager  to  gain  renown.  His  name  was  sir  John  Cliseton*,  and  he  bore  for  arms  a field
argent,  fretted  azure,  with  a mullet  argent  in  chief.  He  sent  his  squire  to  touch  the  war-
shield  of  sir  Reginald  de  Roye,  who  was  much  pleased  at  the  summons.  Having  taken
their  stations  and  received  their  lances,  they  spurred  their  horses  and  bit  each  other  full  on
the  helmets,  but  passed  and  completed  their  career.  They  kept  their  lances  in  the  rests,  and
were  not  long  before  they  commenced  the  second  course,  in  which  they  gave  heavy  thrusts
on  their  shields,  but  without  any  loss,  except  of  their  spears,  which  fell  to  the  ground.
Having  received  their  lances,  they  hit  each  other,  on  the  third  course,  such  blows  on  the  tops
of  the  helmets  as  made  the  fire  fly.  At  the  fourth  course  their  horses  swerved,  to  their  great
disappointment.  The  fifth  was  well  performed,  for  each  broke  his  lance.  The  two  knights
grew  warm,  and  plainly  showed  they  were  desirous  of  trying  each  other’s  valour  to  the
utmost.  When  at  their  stations  they  had  fresh  lances  given  them,  that  were  stiff  enough  ;
and,  after  a short  delay,  they  again  spurred  their  horses,  and  laid  in  such  blows  on  the
helmets  that  both  were  unhelmed.  This  course  was  greatly  praised  by  all  present,  and  when
they  had  completed  their  career,  they  l’eturned  to  their  countrymen  ; for  the  English  knight
tilted  no  more  that  day.

When  this  was  finished,  a squire  from  England,  called  Roger  Lamb,  whose  arms  were  a
cross  gules,  on  a field  argent  and  sable  quartered,  came  forward,  handsomely  equipped,  and
gaily  sent  to  touch  the  war-target  of  the  lord  de  Saimpi  The  knight  instantly  obeyed  the
call,  and  by  his  alacrity  showed  he  preferred  tilting  to  remaining  idle.  On  the  first  onset,
they  checked  their  horses,  by  the  force  of  their  blows  on  their  shields  ; but  the  lances,
being  strong,  did  not  break,  and  they  continued  their  course.  On  the  second  tilt,  they  hit
the  helmets  hard  enough  ; but,  as  the  points  of  their  lances  grazed  off,  no  harm  was  done.
Roger  Lamb  was  unhelmed  at  the  third  course,  and  returned  to  his  countrymen  without
doing  more  that  day.

After  this  a gallant  knight  from  that  part  of  Hainault  called  Ostrevant,  a good  man  at
arms  and  able  tilter,  offered  himself.  He  had  been  educated  in  England  at  the  court  of  king
Edward,  and  bis  name  wras  sir  John  d’Ambreticourt,  and  brother  to  that  excellent  knight,
sir  Eustace  d’Ambreticourt.  He  bore  for  his  arms  ermine  two  bars  humetty  gules,  each
charged  with  three  escallop  shells  argent.  The  knight  was  well  equipped  for  the  tournament,
and  sent  one  of  his  squires  to  touch  the  war-target  of  sir  Reginald  de  Roye.  Having  taken
their  stations,  they  eyed  each  other  well,  and  spurring  their  horses,  gave  such  blows  on  the
shields  as  made  sparks  of  fire  fly  from  them,  and  the  horses  to  bend  under  them.  The  tilt
was  handsome,  for  no  harm  was  done,  and  they  continued  the  career.  They  were  not  long
before  they  ran  their  second  course,  and  again  hit  on  the  shields.  It  was  wonderful  that  this
was  not  attended  with  mischief,  for  they  were  botli  strong  and  courageous  tilters,  fearless  of
death  or  danger.  The  shock  of  this  attack  was  so  great  that  their  horses  were  forced  on
their  haunches,  and  the  two  knights  staggered.  Nevertheless  they  continued  their  career,
but  with  the  loss  of  their  lances.  Having  received  their  lances,  they  ran  their  third  course,
and  sir  John  d’Ambreticourt  unhelmed  sir  Reginald  de  Roye  so  as  to  injure  him  very  consi-
derably, and  to  terminate  his  career.  Sir  Reginald  went  to  his  party,  and  plainly  showed  he
would  not  tilt  more  that  day.  When  sir  John  d’Ambreticourt  perceived  this,  as  he  had  a

* ” Sir  John  Cliseton.”  Q.  Clifton.


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


443


great  delight  in  tilting,  he  sent  to  touch  the  war-shield  of  sir  Boucicaut,  who  instantly  ad-
vanced to  the  lists.  Having  had  his  target  buckled  on,  and  placed  his  spear  in  the  rest,  they
spurred  against  each  other,  and  gave  such  blows  on  the  shield  that  it  was  surprising  they
were  not  pierced  through  ; but  this  might  be  owing  to  the  swerving  of  the  horses.  When
returned  to  their  stations,  they  did  not  remain  long  before  they  commenced  their  second  course
with  vigour,  and  hit  each  other  hard  on  the  helmets  ; but  the  spears  slipped  off,  and  they
continued  their  career.  The  knights  having  lost  their  spears,  they  were  brought  to  them  by
their  squires,  and  they  renewed  the  tilt.  This  time  they  were  both  very  severely  unhelmed,
and  gallantly  finished  their  course.

The  English  now  collected  together,  as  evening  was  approaching,  and  returned  to  Calais,
where  they  passed  the  night  in  talking  over  the  different  feats  of  arms  that  had  been  that  day
performed.  The  French  amused  themselves  in  like  manner  at  Saint  Inglevere.  On  Thursday
morning,  the  fourth  day  of  the  tournament,  the  English  found  that  there  were  yet  many  knights
and  squires  who  had  not  entered  the  lists,  and  who  had  purposely  come  from  England  ; they
therefore  said,  that  all  who  had  any  intentions  to  tilt  should  do  so,  otherwise  they  would  not  be
handsomely  treated.  The  lords  of  England  had  agreed  to  return  to  Saint  Inglevere  on  the
Thursday,  for  those  who  pleased  to  perform  their  justs  : in  consequence,  they  left  Calais  after
mass,  and,  on  arriving  at  the  lists,  found  the  three  French  knights  ready  in  their  pavilions  to
answer  all  who  might  call  on  them,  attended  by  those  that  were  to  serve  them  and  such  as
came  to  witness  the  deeds  of  arms.

An  English  knight,  called  sir  Godfrey  d'Estas*,  was  the  first  who  entered  the  lists  : he
bore  for  arms  a lion  sable  on  a field  or,  with  three  bars  gules,  and  charged  with  a mullet  or,
on  the  dexter  paw  of  a lion,  and  was  completely  and  gaily  armed.  He  sent  a squire  to
touch  the  war-shield  of  sir  Boucicaut,  who  instantly  advanced  from  his  pavilion  prepared  to
obey  the  summons.  Having  received  their  spears  and  bucklers  and  eyed  each  other  for  a
short  time,  they  spurred  on  their  horses,  and  both  struck  violent  blows  on  the  helmets  ; but,  as
the  points  of  their  lances  slipped  off,  they  continued  their  course  to  their  stations.  Keeping  the
lances  in  the  rests,  they  recommenced  the  tilt,  and  met  with  such  force  on  their  bucklers,
that  had  not  their  spears  broken,  much  mischief  might  have  ensued.  When  they  had  rested
a while  and  had  new  lances,  they  ran  a third  course  with  great  violence,  and  hit  the  vizors
so  fairly  and  well,  that  both  were  unhelmed ; they  continued  their  career,  and  then  retired
to  their  own  people.  The  English  knight  did  nothing  more  this  day,  for  he  was  told  that
he  had  performed  well,  and  must  give  way  to  others.

Alain  Bourchf,  an  able  and  expert  English  squire,  sent  to  touch  the  war-target  of  the  lord
de  Saimpi,  who  came  from  his  pavilion  in  obedience  to  the  call.  They  gave  blows  on  their
helmets,  at  the  first  onset,  that  made  the  fire  sparkle,  but  no  other  harm  was  done.  At  the
second  tilt,  their  lances  met  on  their  bucklers  with  such  force  as  shivered  them  in  pieces,  but
they  continued  their  career  unhurt.  They  were  quickly  supplied  with  new  lances ; and,
spurring  on  the  third  time,  they  placed  their  thrusts  so  well  and  strong  that  they  were  both
unhelmed,  and  completed  their  course  : the  Englishman  retired  to  his  countrymen,  to  allow
others  to  show  their  skill  and  valour.

An  English  squire,  called  John  StorpJ,  sent  to  touch  the  target  of  sir  Boucicaut,  who
issued  forth  out  of  his  pavilion,  and  his  horse  being  ready,  mounted  him,  and  entered  the
lists.  They  failed  in  their  first  course,  from  the  fault  of  their  horses.  When  they  returned
to  their  stations,  they  were  not  long  before1  they  ran  the  second  ; and,  although  they  gave
each  other  severe  blows  on  the  helmet,  no  mischief  ensued.  At  the  third  course,  John
Scrope  was  forcibly  struck  to  the  ground  ; whence  he  was  raised  by  his  friends,  and  did  no
more  that  day.

A Bohemian  knight  now  advanced,  who  was  of  the  household1  of  the  queen  of  England,
called  sir  Herchauce.  He  was  esteemed  a strong  and  expert  tilter,  and  bore  for  his  arms
three  griffins’  feet  sable  on  a shield  argent  ongle  with  azure.  When  he  entered  the  lists,  he
was  asked  which  of  the  three  knights  he  wished  to  tilt  with  : he  replied,  “ With  Boucicaut."

* “ Sir  Godfrey  d’Estas.”  Q.  Eustace.

f “ Alain  Bourcli.”  Q.  Birch.  Lord  Berners  calls  him  Aleyne  Borrowe.

t “ John  Storp.”  Lord  Berners — Scrope,


444


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


On  this,  an  English  squire  was  sent,  according  to  the  regulations,  to  touch  sir  Boucicaut’s
war-target.  The  knight,  having  kept  himself  prepared  for  any  summons,  left  his  pavilion,
and,  having  fastened  his  buckler  and  grasped  his  lance,  entered  the  lists.  His  opponent  was
then  ready  to  meet  him  ; and  spurring  their  horses,  they  thought  to  give  full  strokes  ; but
it  was  not  so,  from  the  ill  conduct  of  the  Bohemian  knight,  for  which  he  was  greatly  blamed.
He  had,  out  of  tire  line  of  tilting,  hit  sir  Boucicaut  on  the  helmet,  and  continued  his  career  :
for  this  impropriety,  of  which  the  English  saw  him  guilty,  he  had  forfeited  his  arms  and
horse,  should  the  French  insist  upon  them.  The  French  and  English  held  a long  conversation
on  this  ill-placed  stroke  ; but  at  last  the  French  knights  pardoned  it,  the  better  to  please  the
English.  Herchauce  begged  as  a favour  that  he  might  be  permitted  to  run  only  one  course
more.  On  being  asked  “ With  which  of  the  three  knights?  ” he  sent  to  touch  the  target  of
sir  Reginald  de  Roye.  That  knight  was  waiting  in  his  pavilion,  not  having  tilted  that  day,
and  declared  his  willingness  to  accommodate  sir  Herchauce,  since  his  request  had  been  granted.
Sir  Reginald  mounted  his  horse,  and  having  had  his  buckler  fastened,  and  his  lance  given
him,  he  eyed  his  opponent,  that  he  might  well  point  his  stroke.  Both  spurred  their  horses
at  the  same  moment,  and  hit  on  the  shields ; but  sir  Reginald  (who  wTas  one  of  the  firmest
and  best  tilters  in  France)  thrust  with  such  force  as  made  the  Bohemian  fly  out  of  his  saddle,
and  fall  so  severely  on  the  ground  that  the  spectators  imagined  he  was  killed.  Sir  Reginald
continued  his  course  to  his  own  station.  Sir  Herchauce  was  raised  with  much  difficulty  by
his  attendants,  and  carried  to  the  English,  who  were  well  pleased  at  what  had  happened  to
him,  for  the  uncourteous  manner  in  which  he  had  run  his  first  course.  He  had  not  any  desire
to  tilt  more  that  day.

The  next  who  came  forward  was  Robin  Seorneborne*,  an  able  and  gay  squire  from
England.  He  sent  to  touch  the  war-target  of  the  lord  de  Saimpi,  who  was  ready  mounted
and  prepared  to  answer  him.  At  their  first  course  they  hit  their  helmets,  and  continued
their  career.  At  the  next,  they  struck  their  bucklers,  but  unsuccessfully,  as  before,  excepting
the  loss  of  their  lances.  Having  received  them  again,  they,  on  the  third  onset,  placed  their
thrusts  so  ably  and  forcibly  on  the  vizors,  that  both  were  unhelmed,  and  finished  their  course.
The  English  squire  returned  to  his  companions,  and  was  idle  during  the  rest  of  the  day.

Another  English  squire,  called  John  Merlan,  now  advanced.  He  bore  for  arms  a bend
sable  on  a field  argent,  charged  with  three  lion-heads  sable,  and  sent  to  touch  the  war-
target  of  sir  Reginald  de  Roye.  The  knight  answered,  he  was  at  his  service.  Having
entered  the  lists,  they  at  the  first  onset  gave  violent  blows  on  the  helmets,  but  without  any
effect,  and,  by  firmly  holding  their  lances,  returned  to  their  stations  without  loss  of  any
kind.  The  second  course,  their  spears  met  on  their  bucklers,  and  the  horses  were  checked  ;
having  thrown  down  their  lances,  they  continued  their  career,  each  to  his  station,  and  made
ready  to  tilt  well  the  third  lance.  When  their  spears  had  been  given  them,  they  set  off  full
gallop,  and  sir  Reginald  hit  John  Merlan  a blow  on  his  buckler,  which  forced  him  out  of  the
saddle  to  the  ground.  He  continued  his  course  to  his  station,  and  the  Englishman  was
raised  and  carried  to  his  countrymen.

John  Mouton,  another  squire  from  England,  next  offered  himself.  He  bore  for  arms  a
chevron  sable  on  a field  gules,  three  pierced  mullets  or,  with  an  indented  bordure  sable,  and
sent  to  strike  the  war-shield  of  sir  Boucicaut,  who  replied,  he  was  always  ready  to  tilt.
Their  first  strokes  met  on  their  bucklers,  but  without  damage.  It  was  not  their  fault,  for
the  blows  were  well  placed,  and  they  gallantly  passed,  bearing  their  lances  before  them,  to
their  stations.  They  were  not  long  before  they  commenced  their  second  tilt,  and  hit  very
severely  on  the  helmets,  but  without  loss,  excepting  their  lances,  and  returned  to  their  posts.
Those  who  were  appointed  to  gather  the  lances  that  fell,  instantly  presented  them  to  the
knights,  who  renewed  the  tilt;  but  at  this  third  course  sir  Boucicaut  unhelmed  John
Mouton,  who  retired  to  his  companions.

A very  handsome  knight  from  England  now  came  forth  : he  was  well  armed  at  all  points,
and  kept  an  excellent  position  on  his  horse,  and  was  called  sir  Jaquemin  Stropt.  He  sent  to
touch  the  war- target  of  the  lord  de  Saimpi,  who,  being  mounted  and  armed  before  lvis
pavilion,  advanced  to  the  lists.  At  their  first  course,  they  missed  their  stroke,  from  their

* “ Robin  Seorneborne.”  Q.  Sherburn,  or  Shilburn.  -f  “ Sir  Jaquemin  Strop.”  Q.  Sir  James  Sorope.


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  Sic.


4 -Lb


horses  running  out  of  the  line,  which  vexed  them  muen.  They  were  not  long  before  they
again  set  off,  full  gallop,  and,  when  they  met,  gave  such  blows  on  the  helmets  as  made
them  strike  fire  : they  passed  on  without  loss  hut  of  their  spears.  As  soon  as  they  were
returned  to  their  stations,  their  lances  were  brought  them,  and  after  a short  delay,  they
began  their  third  course.  They  both  hit  with  great  force  on  the  bucklers : but  sir  James
Scropc’s  lance  broke,  while  sir  Reginald  unhorsed  his  opponent  and  continued  his  career.
Sir  James  was  raised  from  the  ground  by  his  attendants,  and  did  no  more  that  day.

Another  English  knight,  called  sir  William  Masquelee,  was  ready  to  enter  the  lists,  and
to  engage  with  whoever  pleased  ; for  he  had  crossed  the  sea  with  the  earl  of  Huntingdon  in
this  view.  He  sent  to  touch  the  war-target  of  sir  Boucicaut,  who  had  his  buckler  fastened,
and  instantly  advanced  to  meet  his  adversary.  They  both  at  the  same  moment  spurred  their
horses,  which  were  fresh  and  eager  to  begin  the  course ; for  the  very  instant  they  felt  the
points,  they  bounded  forward.  The  two  knights  took  good  aim,  and  mutually  gave  such
strokes  on  their  helmets  that  fire  sparkled  from  them  ; and,  though  the  points  of  the  lances
slipped  off,  the  tilt  was  much  praised  by  all  present.  They  continued  their  career  to  their
different  stations,  but  did  not  make  any  long  stay  before  they  again  spurred  their  horses  and
couched  their  spears,  for  they  did  not  drop  them,  and  met  with  such  violence,  that  their
lances  must  have  pierced  the  bucklers,  if  the  horses  had  not  swerved.  They  finished  their
course,  throwing  down  their  lances,  and  completed  their  career  like  good  tilters,  in  excellent
array  to  their  posts.  Having  received  their  spears,  they  set  off  as  fast  as  their  horses  could
carry  them,  and,  on  their  meeting,  hit  the  vizors  of  the  helmets  severely.  The  tilt  was
loudly  applauded,  for  they  were  both  unhelmed,  and  bare-headed  all  but  the  scull-caps:  they
finished  their  career,  and  then  returned  to  their  friends,  for  they  had  excellently  performed.

An  English  squire  called  Nicholas  Lamb,  well  and  elegantly  armed,  advanced,  having  a
great  desire  to  try  his  skill  in  arms.  lie  sent  to  strike  the  war-target  of  the  lord  de  Saimpi,
who  was  already  mounted  and  armed,  in  front  of  his  pavilion,  with  his  buckler  on  his  breast,
blazoned  with  his  arms.  He  grasped  his  spear,  and  flew  to  the  lists  with  the  eagerness  of  a
hawk  to  seize  his  prey.  The  English  squire  did  the  same,  and,  setting  off  at  full  speed,  they
gave  such  blows  on  their  bucklers,  that  their  lances  were  shivered  : it  was  fortunate  they
broke,  or  the  knights  must  have  been  greatly  hurt,  or  unhorsed,  but  they  kept  their  seats
firmly.  When  returned  to  their  stations,  they  were  supplied  with  new  lances,  and  with
them,  at  the  second  course,  made  the  fire  fly  from  their  helmets  : no  other  damage  was  done,
for  the  spears  had  crossed,  and  they  continued  their  career  to  their  posts.  After  a short  rest,
they  commenced  their  third  tilt,  and  had  well  examined  where  they  could  best  place  their
thrusts.  This  was  gallantly  performed ; for  they  hit,  justly,  the  upper  parts  of  the  helmets,
and  the  points  of  the  lances  entered  : both  were  so  neatly  unhelmed,  that  the  lacings  burst,
and  the  helmets  flew  over  the  cruppers  of  their  horses  on  the  field.  The  knights  kept  their
seats  and  completed  their  course  in  handsome  array,  and  then  returned  to  their  countrymen.

The  tournament  was  now  at  an  end,  for  no  more  tilters  appeared  on  the  part  of  the
English.  The  earl  of  Huntingdon,  the  earl-marshal,  the  lord  Clifford,  the  lord  Beaumont*,
sir  John  Clifton,  sir  John  d’Ambreticourt,  sir  Peter  Sherburne,  and  all  those  knights  who
had  tilted  the  preceding  days,  then  waited  in  a body  on  the  French  knights,  and  thanked
them  warmly  for  the  amusements  they  had  given  them.  They  said, — “All  the  knights  who
have  accompanied  us  having  now  tilted,  we  take  our  leave  of  you,  and  return  to  Calais  on
our  way  to  England.  We  know  well  that  whoever  may  wish  to  try  their  skill  in  arms  will
find  you  here  for  thirty  days,  according  to  your  proclamation.  On  our  return  to  England,
we  shall  loudly  speak  of  your  gallantry,  and  tell  all  those  who  may  inquire  of  these  deeds  of
arms  to  come  and  witness  them  in  person.”  “Many  thanks,”  replied  the  three  knights  :
“ they  shall  be  made  welcome,  and  delivered  by  deeds  of  arms  as  you  have  been  ; and  w?o
desire  you  wfill  accept  our  best  acknowledgments  for  the  courtesy  you  have  shown  us.”

In  such  friendly  manner  did  the  English  and  French  knights  separate,  in  the  plain  of  St.
Ingle vere : the  first  took  the  road  to  Calais,  but  made  no  long  stay ; for  on  the  Saturday
morning  they  embarked  on  board  passage-boats,  and  landed  at  Dover  about  mid-day,  when
each  retired  to  his  inn.  They  staid  the  whole  of  Saturday,  and  Sunday  until  after  mass,  at
* “ Lord  Beaumont.”  Dugdale  Bays  his  name  was  John,  instead  of  Henry,  as  Froissart  calls  him.


44(5


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  Ac.


Dover;  where  having  refreshed  themselves  and  their  horses,  they  continued  their  journey  to
Rochester,  and  there  lay  that  night : on  the  morrow  they  arrived  at  London,  when  they
separated,  and  each  returned  to  his  home.  The  three  French  knights  before  named  kept
their  engagements  valiantly  at  St.  Inglevere.  When  the  English  knights  were  gone,  the
king  of  France  and  the  lord  de  Garencieres,  who  had  witnessed  the  tournament  in  disguise,
returned  to  their  inn  at  Marquise  ; and  on  the  morrow,  at  break  of  day,  they  set  out  for
Paris,  and  never  ceased  riding  until  they  came  to  Creil  * on  the  river  Oise,  where  at  that
time  the  queen  of  France  resided.  Scarcely  any  one  knew  that  the  king  was  present  at
these  tilts,  but  his  confidential  valets-de-chambre.

From  the  time  the  English  left  Calais,  I never  heard  that  any  others  came  from  England
to  St.  Inglevere  to  try  their  skill  in  arms.  The  three  knights,  however,  remained  there
until  the  thirty  days  were  fully  accomplished,  and  then  leisurely  returned  each  to  his  home.
When  they  waited  on  the  king  of  France,  the  duke  of  Touraine  and  other  lords  at  Paris,
they  were  most  handsomely  received.  Indeed,  they  were  entitled  to  such  reception,  for  they
had  gallantly  behaved  themselves,  and  well  supported  the  honour  of  the  king  and  of  the
realm  of  France.


CHAPTER  XIV. THE  DUKE  OP  BOURBON  IS  APPOINTED  CHIEF  OF  AN  EXPEDITION  TO

AFRICA,  THAT  IS  UNDERTAKEN  BY  SEVERAL  KNIGHTS  OF  FRANCE  AND  ENGLAND  AT
THE  SOLICITATION  OF  THE  GENOESE.

I have  delayed  for  a long  time  speaking  of  a grand  and  noble  enterprise  that  was  under-
taken by  some  knights  of  France,  England  and  other  countries,  against  the  kingdom  of
Barbary.  I wish  not  to  forget  nor  to  defer  it ; but,  as  I had  begun  on  the  tilts  at  St.
Inglevere,  I was  desirous  to  complete  that  account.  Since  that  is  done,  I will  return  to
other  subjects,  and  refresh  my  memory  accordingly ; for  such  events  as  I have  to  relate  are
greatly  amusing,  and,  if  I had  not  taken  pleasure  in  inditing  them,  I should  never  have
succeeded.  The  text  of  the  subject  I mean  to  proceed  on  says,  that  about  this  time  the
Genoese  were  reported  throughout  France  and  other  countries  to  be  desirous  of  raising  a
large  army  to  invade  Barbary ; and  that  all  knights,  squires  or  men  at  arms,  who  would
engage  in  this  expedition,  should  be  supplied  from  Genoa  with  such  purveyances  as  biscuit,
fresh  water,  vinegar,  and  vessels  and  galleys  to  transport  them  thither.

The  cause  of  their  forming  this  armament  was,  that  the  Africans  had  attacked  the  country
of  Genoa,  plundering  the  islands  belonging  to  them,  and  carrying  off  such  from  the  coasts  of
Genoa  as  were  not  on  their  guard,  by  which  they  were  kept  under  continual  alarms.  They
possessed  also  a town,  situated  on  the  sea-shore  of  Barbary,  which  is  beyond  measure  strong,
and  called  Africa'!,  surrounded  with  high  walls,  gates  and  deep  ditches.  Like  as  the  strong
town  of  Calais  is  the  key  of  France  and  Flanders,  and  whoever  is  master  of  it  may  at  all
times  enter  those  countries,  and  from  thence  may  be  sent  a powerful  force  by  sea,  to  do
mischief  to  their  neighbours  ; just  so  is  the  town  of  Africa  the  stronghold  of  the  inhabitants
of  Barbary,  Bugia  and  Tunis,  and  other  infidel  countries.  The  Genoese,  who  are  rich
merchants,  bore  great  hatred  to  this  town  ; for  its  corsairs  frequently  watched  them  at  sea,
and  when  strongest,  fell  on  and  plundered  their  ships,  carrying  their  spoils  to  this  town  of
Africa,  which  was,  and  is  now,  their  place  of  deposit,  and  may  be  called  their  warren.

The  Genoese,  to  put  an  end  to  such  conduct,  and  to  satisfy  the  complaints  of  their  subjects,
that  were  daily  made  to  them  from  the  island  of  AlbeJ,Isja§,  Guerse  || , Buscan*j.  Gorgennen**,
and  from  the  coast  as  far  as  the  gulf  of  Lyons  to  the  islands  of  Sardonnej-f,  Finesseejj;,  and
even  from  the  island  of  Majorca  §§,  determined  to  make  their  situation  known  to  the  court  of


* “ Creil,” — diocese  of  Senl'is,  ten  leagues  and  a half
from  Paris.

f “ Africa,”  a sea-port  town  of  Barbarv,  seventy  miles
distant  from  Tunis.  It  was  razed  to  the  ground  by
Andrew  Doria,  by  the  command  of  the  emperor  Charles  V.
and  has  never  been  rebuilt.

J “ Albe.  ” Q.  Elba.


§ “ Isja.”  Q.  Ischia.
j|  “ Guerse.”  Q.  Corsica.

“ Buscan.”  Q.

**  “ Gorgennen.”  Q.  Gorgona.
ft  “ Sardonne.”  Q.  Sardinia.

U “ Finessee.”  Q.

§§  “ Majorca,”  &c.  belonged  to  the  king  of  Arragon.


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


447


France,  and  to  offer  to  such  knights  as  would  undertake  an  expedition  against  these  infidels,
vessels  and  provision,  with  a passage  thither  and  back  free  of  all  costs,  provided  that  one  of
the  king’s  uncles,  or  his  brother  the  duke  of  Touraine  (who,  being  young,  ought  to  labour
to  gain  renown)  would  take  the  chief  command.  They  likewise  offered  the  aid  of  pilgrims,
from  foreign  parts  to  assist  them,  twelve  thousand  select  Genoese  cross-bows,  and  eight
thousand  infantry  armed  with  spears  and  shields,  all  at  their  expense.  They  imagined,  that
as  now  there  was  a truce  between  France,  England  and  their  allies,  their  knights  would,
from  having  nothing  to  do,  be  glad  to  join  in  this  warfare,  and  that  they  should  have  numbers
of  them  from  those  kingdoms.

When  this  intelligence  was  first  brought  to  the  French  knights  and  squires,  they  were
much  rejoiced,  in  hope  of  gaining  honour ; and  the  ambassadors  from  Genoa  were  told  they
should  not  return  without  their  business  being  attended  to,  and  succour  afforded  them,  for
their  anxiety  to  extend  the  Christian  faith  was  very  praiseworthy.  They  waited  at  Paris,
while  it  was  under  deliberation  of  the  council  who  should  be  appointed  commander-in-chief.
Tne  duke  of  Touraine  offered  his  services  to  the  king  and  council ; but  they,  as  well  as  the
dukes  of  Berry  and  Burgundy,  remonstrated,  that  this  command  was  not  fit  for  him.  They
considered,  that  as  the  Genoese  insisted  on  the  king’s  brother,  or  one  of  his  uncles,  taking  the
command,  the  duke  of  Bourbon  would  be  the  most  proper  person,  and  that  he  should  have
for  his  second  the  lord  de  Coucy.  The  Genoese  ambassadors,  having  received  a favourable
answer  from  the  king,  and  certain  assurances  of  being  assisted  with  knights  and  men  at  arms
from  France,  under  the  command  of  the  duke  of  Bourbon,  in  the  course  of  the  year,  were
greatly  contented.  They  took  leave  of  the  king,  and  returned  to  their  own  country,  to
relate  the  good  news,  and  make  preparations  accordingly.

Reports  of  an  invasion  of  Barbary  were  soon  spread  throughout  France  : to  some  knights
and  squires  it  was  agreeable,  to  others  the  contrary  ; all  who  were  desirous  of  going  thither
could  not,  as  it  would  have  been  at  their  own  charges,  for  no  lord  paid  for  any  but  those  of
his  own  household.  It  was  also  ordered,  that  no  one  from  France  should  make  part  of  this
expedition  but  such  as  had  the  king’s  leave  : for  the  council  wished  not  the  realm  to  be  void
of  defence,  and  the  Genoese  were  expressly  bound  not  to  suffer  any  servants  to  embark,  but
solely  such  as  were  gentlemen,  and  men  who  could  be  depended  upon.  It  was,  besides,  meant
as  a compliment  to  the  knights  and  squires  of  other  nations  who  might  wish  to  join  in  the
enterprise.  This  regulation  gave  pleasure  to  all  foreign  knights  who  heard  of  it.  The  duke  of
Bourbon,  having  accepted  the  command,  sent  his  servants  to  Genoa,  where  they  were  to
embark,  to  make  the  necessary  preparations  for  him  and  his  household.  The  gallant  count
d’Auvergne,  who  was  likewise  of  the  expedition,  did  the  same.  The  lord  de  Coucy,  sir  Guy
de  la  Tremouille,  sir  John  de  Vienne,  and  all  the  great  barons  and  knights  of  France  who
had  obtained  leave  to  make  part  of  this  army,  were  not  behindhand  in  sending  thither
purveyances  suitable  to  their  state.  The  lord  Philip  d’ Artois,  count  d’Eu,  sir  Philip  de  Bar,
the  lord  de  Harcourt,  sir  Henry  d’Antoing,  did  so  likewise.  From  Brittany  and  Normandy
many  great  lords  made  preparations  for  this  expedition  to  Barbary,  as  well  as  from  Hainault
among  the  last  were  the  lord  de  Ligne  and  the  lord  de  Havreth.  Several  knights  came  from
Flanders  ; and  the  duke  of  Lancaster  had  a bastard  son,  called  Henry  de  Beaufort,  whom,
through  devotion,  he  sent  thither.  He  had  him  well  accompanied  by  many  knights  and
squires  of  rank  in  England.

The  count  de  Foix  was  unwilling  his  bastard  son,  Evan  of  Foix,  should  remain  behind,
and  had  him  properly  attended  by  knights  and  squires,  as  he  wished  him  to  keep  his  state
grandly.  Every  one  had  taken  care  to  send  beforehand  all  he  should  want ; and  those  at
the  greatest  distance  from  Genoa,  left  their  countries  the  middle  of  May,  but  it  was  about  a
month  before  all  were  assembled.  The  Genoese  were  well  pleased  on  their  arrival,  and  made
handsome  and  rich  presents  to  the  chiefs,  the  better  to  secure  their  affections.  As  the
knights  arrived,  they  were  posted  adjoining  each  other,  and,  on  being  mustered  by  the
marshals,  amounted  to  fourteen  hundred  knights  and  squires.  They  were  embarked  on
board  of  ships  and  galleys,  that  had  been  properly  equipped  for  the  voyage,  on  Saint  John
Baptist’s  day,  in  the  year  of  grace  1390.


443


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


It  was  a beautiful  sight  to  view  this  fleet,  witli  the  emblazoned  banners  of  the  different
lords  glittering  in  the  sun  and  fluttering  in  the  wind ; and  to  hear  the  minstrels  and  other
musicians  sounding  their  pipes,  clarions  and  trumpets,  whose  sounds  were  re-echoed  back  by
the  sea.  When  all  were  embarked,  they  cast  anchor,  and  remained  tliat  night  at  the  mouth
of  the  harbour ; but  the  servants  and  horses  were  left  behind  on  shore.  A horse  worth  fifty
francs  was  on  their  embarkation  sold  for  ten,  as  many  of  the  knights  and  squires  were
uncertain  when,  or  if  ever,  they  should  return,  and  the  keep  of  five  horses  at  Genoa  was
upwards  of  a franc  a day  : they  therefore,  on  departing,  made  of  them  what  money  they
could,  but  it  was  little  enough.


English  and  French  Knights  under  the  Duke  of  £ourbon  on  their  voyage  to  Africa.  From  a MS.  Froissart

of  the  fifteenth  century.

There  were  about  three  hundred  galleys  to  transport  the  men  at  arms  and  archers,  and
upwards  of  one  hundred  vessels  for  the  purveyances  and  other  necessaries.  On  the  morrow,
at  day-break,  they  weighed  anchor,  and  rowed  coastwise  that  and  the  succeeding  night.
The  third  day,  they  made  Porto-fino,  where  they  lay  that  night : at  sun-rise,  they  rowed  to
Porto- Yenere,  and  again  cast  anchor.  The  ensuing  morning  they  weighed  and  took  to  the
deep,  putting  themselves  under  the  protection  of  God  and  St.  George.  When  they  had
passed  the  island  of  Elba,  they  encountered  a violent  tempest,  which  drove  them  back  by
Gorgona,  Sardinia  and  Corsica,  into  the  gulf  of  Lyons,  a position  always  dangerous  ; but
they  could  not  avoid  it,  for  the  tempest  was  so  violent,  that  the  ablest  mariner  could  not  do
anything  to  prevent  their  running  the  utmost  risk  of  destruction  : they  waited  therefore  the
will  of  God.  This  storm  lasted  a day  and  night,  and  dispersed  the  fleet.  When  the  weather
became  calm  and  the  sea  tranquil,  the  pilots  who  were  acquainted  with  those  seas  steered  as
directly  as  they  could  for  the  island  of  Com  meres*,  which  is  but  thirty  miles  from  the  town
of  Africa,  whither  they  bent  their  course.  The  masters  of  the  vessels  had  held  a council
before  they  entered  the  gulf  of  Lyons,  and  determined,  that  should  they  part  company,
they  would  rendezvous  at  the  island  of  Commeres,  and  wait  there  until  they  were  all

* “ Commeres.”  This  island  is  called  Conimbres  and  Hephestia,  a small  island  in  the  Mediterranean,  between
Cominicrcs,  in  the  printed  and  MS.  editions.  I suppose  Goao  and  Malta,  belonging  to  the  knights  of  Malta.—
it  mustnnean  Cominoor  Cumin,  Cuminum,  and  formerly  Bauduan.


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


449


assembled.  This  plan  was  adopted  ; and  it  was  upwards  of  nine  days  before  all  were
collected,  so  much  had  they  been  scattered.

The  island  of  Commeres,  though  not  large,  is  very  pleasant.  The  lords  there  refreshed
themselves,  and  praised  God  for  having  all  met  again  without  essential  loss  or  damage.
When  on  the  eve  of  departure,  the  French  lords,  who  took  the  lead,  held  a council  on  their
future  proceedings,  as  they  were  now  so  near  the  port  of  Africa.  We  will  for  a while
leave  this  expedition,  and  speak  of  events  that  happened  in  France,  more  particularly  in
Auvergne.


CnAPTER  XV. AYMERIGOT  MARCEL,  CAPTAIN  OF  THE  PILLAGING  COMPANIES,  HAVING

FORTIFIED  LA  ROCHE  DE  VENDAIS  ON  THE  BORDERS  OF  LIMOUSIN  AND  AUVERGNE,
IS  BESIEGED  BY  THE  VISCOUNT  DE  MEAUX,  BY  COMMAND  OF  THE  KING  OF  FRANCE.

During  the  time  of  the  assembly  of  this  body  of  men-at-arms  in  France,  for  the  expedi-
tion to  extend  the  Christian  faith,  and  gain  renown,  there  were  another  sort  of  men-at-arms
wholly  given  up  to  plunder,  in  Limousin,  Auvergne,  and  Itouergue,  who,  in  spite  of  the  truce,
were  continually  doing  mischief  to  these  countries,  which  thought  themselves  in  security.
The  king  of  France  had  caused  the  truce  to  be  publicly  notified  to  the  captains  of  the
freebooters,  particularly  to  Perrot  le  Bearnois,  governor  of  Chalmjet,  Aymerigot  Marcel,
Olim  Barbe,  captain  of  Donzac  in  Auvergne,  who  were  personally  named  in  the  act,  and
were  assured,  that  if  the  truce  were  in  the  smallest  degree  infringed,  those  guilty  of  it  should
be  corporally  punished,  without  hope  of  mercy.  This  was  done,  that  there  might  not  be
any  excuses  made  from  ignorance  of  the  treaty.  Some  of  the  captains,  fearful  of  a disgraceful
death,  or  of  incurring  the  king’s  indignation,  kept  the  peace  very  well.  Others  did  not,  for
which  they  paid  severely,  as  you  will  hear  in  the  continuation  of  this  history.

You  have  before  found  it  related  in  the  course  of  these  chronicles,  incited  and  arranged
by  me,  sir  John  Froissart,  treasurer  and  canon  of  Chimay,  how  peace  had  been  agreed  on
with  many  of  the  captains  of  castles  in  Auvergne,  Limousin,  Rouergue,  and  Cahorsin,  by  the
mediation  of  John  count  d’Armagnac,  and  Berald  dauphin  of  Auvergne,  to  whom  they  had
surrendered  their  castles  for  different  sums  of  money.  The  captains  were  also,  by  these
treaties,  bound  to  renounce,  during  the  truce,  the  continuance  of  the  'warfare  in  France,  and
to  accompany  the  count  d’Armagnac  to  Lombardy,  or  whither  else  he  might  lead  them.  lie
was  desirous  to  employ  them  in  a war  he  was  meditating  against  the  lord  Galeas  de  Visconti,
count  de  Vertus,  for  having  disinherited  his  cousins  german,  the  sons  of  his  late  uncle  the
lord  Barnabo,  as  has  been  before  mentioned.

The  count  d’Armagnac  and  the  dauphin  of  Auvergne  had  laboured  hard  to  gain  over  these
captains,  that  the  country  might  be  at  peace  ; and  for  this  end  a large  sum  had  been  raised
in  Auvergne,  Gevaudan,  Rouergue,  Cahorsin  and  Limousin,  to  the  amount  of  two  hundred
thousand  francs.  This  tax  pressed  so  hard  on  rich  and  poor,  that  many  were  forced  to  sell
their  inheritance  to  obtain  peace.  They  imagined,  that  having  paid  such  sums,  they  should
remain  unmolested  by  these  robbers  ; but  it  was  not  so  in  many  places,  more  especially  in
those  parts  where  Aymerigot  Marcel  had  his  garrison.  Notwithstanding  the  fact  that  he  had
surrendered,  by  capitulation,  his  castle  of  Aloise,  which  is  situated  in  the  heart  of  Auvergne,
to  the  count  d’Armagnac,  he  continued  to  do  much  mischief  to  the  inhabitants.  Aymerigot
was  so  rich  as  to  be  able  to  pay  down,  if  necessary,  for  his  ransom,  one  hundred  thousand
francs,  which  he  had  gained  by  plunder  during  ten  years  that  he  had  carried  on  this  trade.
The  count  d’Armagnac  was  anxious  to  have  Aymerigot  among  his  followers  to  Lombardy,
for  two  reasons : one  was,  to  have  his  advice,  as  in  everything  relative  to  war  he  was  subtle
and  enterprising,  and  very  able  respecting  the  escalade  of  forts,  and  the  mode  of  war  to  he
carried  on  : he  therefore  caused  him  to  be  told  how  desirous  he  was  of  his  company,  and  that
he  would  be  a great  gainer  if  he  would  join  him.  The  other  reason  of  his  wish  was,  that  if
Aymerigot  should  remain  behind,  although  he  had  sold  Aloise,  he  might  still  do  great  harm
to  that  country.

Aymerigot  dissembled  in  his  negotiations  with  the  count,  and  said  to  those  sent  to  him, — •

VOL.  II.  G G


460


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &o.


“ "When  I shall  witness  the  departure  of  the  count  d’Armagnac  to  Lombardy,  and  see  for
certain  that  he  is  in  earnest,  I do  not  think,  from  the  inclination  I feel  towards  him,  that  I
shall  remain  behind.”  This  was  the  only  answer  that  could  he  obtained  from  him.  The
count  d Armagnac  resided  in  Comminges  and  in  the  Toulousain,  making  his  preparations,
and  collecting  men  at  arms.  He  would  have  hastened  his  expedition,  if  that  to  Africa  had
not  interfered ; but  that  delayed  it  for  some  little  time,  for  many  knights  and  squires  who
were  gone  thither  had  promised  him  their  assistance,  as  soon  as  he  should  begin  his  march.
The  suddenness  of  the  invasion  of  Barbary  deranged  his  plans,  and  likewise  induced  the  more
speedy  capitulations  with  the  captains  of  the  free  companies.

Aymerigot  Marcel  was  much  vexed  that  he  had  sold  his  castle  of  Aloise,  near  St.  Flour*,
for  his  importance  was  lost,  and  he  was  less  feared.  During  the  time  he  held  it  against  the
whole  force  of  the  country,  he  was  dreaded  and  respected  by  his  companions  in  arms.  He
kept  it  always  in  good  repair  and  well  provisioned  ; for  his  compositions  with  the  country
round  amounted  to  twenty  thousand  florins  yearly.  He  was  quite  melancholy,  when  he
thought  of  his  reduced  state,  and  would  not  diminish  his  treasure,  which  he  had  gained  by  his
robberies,  now  the  means  of  increasing  it  were  closed.  He  said  to  himself,  that  he  heartily
repented  what  he  had  done,  because  in  his  opinion  the  pillaging  life  he  had  led,  taking  all
things  into  consideration,  was  not  to  be  despised.  At  times,  he  conversed  on  this  subject
with  his  former  companions,  and  said, — “ There  is  no  pleasure  nor  glory  in  this  world  like
what  men  at  arms,  such  as  ourselves,  enjoyed.  Flow  happy  were  we,  when  riding  out  in
search  of  adventures,  we  met  a rich  abbot,  a merchant,  or  a string  of  mules,  well  laden  with
draperies,  furs,  or  spices,  from  Montpellier,  Beziers,  or  other  places.  All  was  our  own,  or
at  least  ransomed  according  to  our  will.  Every  day  we  gained  money.  The  peasants  of
Auvergne  and  Limousin  loved  us,  and  provided  our  castle  with  corn,  meal,  baked  bread,
litter  for  our  horses,  oats,  hay,  good  wine,  fat  beeves,  sheep,  and  all  sorts  of  poultry  : we
lived  like  kings ; and  when  we  went  abroad,  the  country  trembled  : every  thing  was  ours,
both  in  going  and  returning.  How  did  I and  the  bourg  Copane  take  Carlat  ? and  how  did
I and  Perrot  le  Bearnois  win  Chalucjet  ? How  did  we,  you  and  I,  without  other  assistance,
scale  the  strong  castle  of  Marquel,  that  belongs  to  the  count-dauphin  ? I only  kept  it  five
days,  and  was  paid  down  on  a table  five  thousand  francs  for  it,  of  which  I gave  back  one
thousand,  from  love  to  the  count’s  children.  By  my  troth,  this  was  a profitable  and  pleasant
life,  and  I feel  myself  much  reduced  by  selling  Aloise,  which  was  strong  enough  to  resist
any  force  that  could  be  brought  against  it ; and  was  beside,  at  the  time  of  my  surrendering,
so  plentifully  stored  with  provision  and  other  necessaries,  that  it  would  not  have  needed
anything  for  seven  years  to  come.  I consider  myself,  therefore,  as  deceived  by  this  count
d’Armagnac : indeed,  Olirn  Barbe  and  Perrot  le  Bearnois  forewarned  me  that  I should
repent  when  too  late,  and  I now  find  their  words  very  true,  for  I most  certainly  do  repent
having  parted  with  this  castle.”

When  his  companions,  who  were  now  poor,  thus  heard  Aymerigot  complain,  and  perceived
he  was  in  earnest,  they  replied, — “ Aymerigot,  we  are  ready  to  obey  your  commands.  Let
us  renew  the  war,  and  consider  what  strong  place  we  may  seize  on  in  Auvergne  or  Limousin,
and  fortify  it.  We  shall  soon  recover  our  losses,  and  have  full  scope  for  pillaging,  as  the
count-dauphin  and  his  brother  Hugh  are  now  out  of  the  country,  with  many  other  knights
and  squires,  on  the  expedition  to  Barbary ; and  in  particular  the  lord  de  Coucy,  who  is
lieutenant  for  the  king  over  all  these  parts,  is  now  likewise  absent  on  this  same  expedition.
We  need  not  therefore  fear  him,  nor  the  duke  of  Berry,  who  is  at  Paris,  and  has  been  so  some
time  amusing  himself.”  “ I know  not  well  how  to  act,”  said  Aymerigot ; “ for  though  I am
well  inclined  to  follow  what  you  advise,  yet  as  I am  personally  named  in  the  treaties,  I am
particularly  pointed  at.”  “ Ah,”  answered  his  companions,  “ that  need  not  make  any
difference,  if  you  be  willing.  You  are  no  vassal  to  the  king  of  France,  and  therefore  owTe
him  neither  homage  nor  obedience.  You  are  the  king  of  England’s  man ; and  your
inheritance,  which  is  now  destroyed,  was  in  Limousin.  We  make  war  to  obtain  a livelihood,
for  we  must  live,  and  the  English  will  never  be  displeased  with  us  for  so  doing.  All  who
wish  for  gain  will  join  us  ; and  I think  we  may  show  a sufficient  cause  for  making  war,  by
* “ Saint  Flour,” — a town  in  Auvergne,  22  leagues  from  Clermont-ferrand,  25  from  Riom.


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


451


declaring  we  have  not  been  paid  the  compositions  that  are  due  to  us  from  Auvergne.  Let
us  send,  therefore,  to  the  peasants  of  different  villages  (taking  care,  however,  to  be  strong
enough  to  enforce  our  orders),  and  tell  them,  that  unless  they  compound  with  us,  we  will
make  war  on  them.”  “ Well,  be  it  so,”  replied  Aymerigot ; “ but  where  can  we  at  this  moment
fix  our  place  of  residence?”  Some  of  them  said, — “ We  know  of  a fort  that  is  dismantled,
belonging  to  the  lord  de  la  Tour,  which  no  one  guards.  Let  us  go  thither,  and  repair  and
strengthen  it ; and,  when  this  is  done,  we  will  garrison  it,  and  overrun  at  our  pleasure
Limousin  and  Auvergne.”  “ And  where  is  this  fort  situated?”  asked  Aymerigot.  “ One
league  from  la  Tour,”  answered  those  who  were  acquainted  with  it,  and  had  well  examined
its  situation:  “ it  is  called  la  Roche  de  Vendais.”  “ On  my  faith,  you  say  well : it  is  the
very  place  for  us,”  replied  Aymerigot ; “ and,  although  the  lands  are  now  separated  from  its
dependance,  it  is  a mesne  fief  on  Limoges.  We  will  go  and  look  at  it,  and,  if  worth  while,
take  possession  and  fortify  it.”

Having  determined  on  this,  they  all  went  to  la  Roche  de  Vendais,  examined  its  strength
minutely,  and  were  more  pleased  with  it  than  before  : they  instantly  took  possession,  and  by
degrees  fortified  the  place  before  they  made  any  excursions  or  did  harm  to  the  country.
When  they  had  made  it  sufficiently  strong  to  withstand  an  attack  or  siege,  and  the
companions  were  all  mounted,  they  began  to  overrun  the  more  immediate  neighbourhood,
to  make  prisoners  and  ransom  them.  They  laid  in  stores  of  flesh,  meal,  wax,  wine,  salt,
iron,  steel,  and  other  necessaries ; for  nothing  came  amiss  to  them  that  was  not  too  hot
or  too  heavy.

The  inhabitants  of  the  country  were  much  astonished  at  this,  for  they  thought  themselves
in  perfect  security  on  account  of  the  truce  between  the  two  kings  ; but  these  robbers  seized
whatever  they  pleased  in  their  houses,  or  in  the  fields,  calling  themselves  the  Adventurers.
The  lord  de  la  Tour  had  his  town  and  castle  well  guarded,  for  he  was  not  well  pleased  to
have  such  neighbours  a league  from  his  residence.  The  dauphiness  of  Auvergne,  a valiant
lady  and  of  great  prudence,  who  lived  with  her  children  in  the  strong  castle  of  the  good
town  of  Sardes,  situated  on  the  river  Evoque,  did  not  think  herself  in  safety  when  she  heard
that  Aymerigot  and  his  band  had  fortified  themselves  within  la  Roche  de  Arendais.  She
instantly  ordered  the  garrisons  of  her  castles  of  Marquel,  Ondable,  Chillac,  and  Blere,  to  be
reinforced  with  men  at  arms,  to  avoid  their  being  surprised ; for  she  much  dreaded
Aymerigot,  ever  since  he  had  received  from  her,  in  one  payment,  five  thousand  florins.

The  countries  of  Auvergne  and  Limousin  now  took  alarm  ; and  the  knights  and  squires,
with  the  townsmen  of  Clermont,  Montferrant,  and  Riom,  and  the  towns  on  the  Allier,
resolved  to  send  notice  of  their  situation  to  the  king  of  France.  In  this  they  were  joined  by
the  dauphiness;  but,  during  this  time,  those  in  la  Roche  de  Vendais  fortified  themselves
very  strongly,  and  while  about  it  they  erected  huts  covered  with  boughs  for  their  horses.
When  it  was  known  to  those  who  had  been  disbanded,  and  were  now  out  of  pay,  that
Aymerigot  Marcel  was  continuing  the  war,  they  were  much  rejoiced : many  came  to  offer
him  their  services,  and  he  had  very  soon  more  than  he  wished.  None  of  them  asked  for  pay,
but  solely  to  be  retained  by  him,  for  they  knew  well  that  those  under  him  would  gain  a
sufficiency  from  the  overplus  of  the  plunder  which  he  gave  up  to  his  men.  Sometimes  he
made  excursions  in  the  upper  parts  of  the  district,  and  sometimes  on  the  contrary  side,  for
no  one  ventured  as  yet  to  oppose  him,  so  that  his  fame  was  spread  far  and  near.  Nothing
was  talked  of  in  Auvergne  and  Limousin  but  the  robbers  of  la  Roche  de  Vendais,  and  greatly
was  the  country  frightened  by  them.

The  garrison  of  Chahujet,  under  the  command  of  Perrot  le  Bearnois,  adhered  steadily  to
the  truce ; and  when  he  learnt  that  Aymerigot  was  thus  harassing  the  countries  where  the
inhabitants  imagined  themselves  to  be  at  peace  with  every  one,  he  was  much  angered,  and
said  he  behaved  very  ill.  lie  also  sent  to  tell  him  not  to  expect  any  assistance,  nor  to  be
admitted  into  Chalucjet  nor  into  any  other  place  under  his  command.  Aymerigot  was
indifferent  as  to  this,  for  he  had  plenty  of  places  to  retire  to,  in  case  of  need,  beside  Chahnjet,
and  men  enough.  There  were  besides  numbers  that  had  nothing  to  do,  and  wished  for
mischief,  who  daily  offered  to  increase  his  forces.  Perrot  le  Bearnois  forbade  his  men,
under  pain  of  death,  to  make  any  sallies  injurious  to  the  country  people,  for  he  declared  he

g G 2


452


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  St c.


would  most  strictly  and  honourably  abide  by  the  letter  of  the  truce,  dim  Barbe,  however,
captain  of  Donzac,  dissembled  in  this  business,  saying  publicly  he  would  adhere  to  the  terms
of  the  truce  ; but  I was  told  that  his  men  sometimes  made  excursions  privately,  and,  when
they  had  collected  any  considerable  booty,  he  insisted  on  having  the  advantage  of  it.

The  deputies  from  Clermont,  Montferrant,  and  Riom,  arrived  at  Paris,  where  they  found
the  king,  the  duke  of  Berry,  the  duke  of  Touraine,  and  sir  Oliver  de  Clisson  constable  of
France.  They  immediately  waited  on  the  duke  of  Berry  and  his  council,  to  state  the  cause
of  their  coming,  and  to  inform  them  that  Aymerigot  Marcel  was  pillaging  Auvergne,  and
that  evil-minded  persons  were  daily  increasing.  They  entreated  them  for  God’s  sake  to
provide  a remedy,  for,  if  it  were  suffered  to  continue  much  longer,  the  whole  of  Auvergne
and  Limousin  would  be  completely  destroyed.  The  king  and  the  duke  of  Berry  were  much
astonished  on  hearing  this  intelligence,  for  they  thought  the  whole  country  was  at  peace,
in  conformity  to  the  truce.  The  deputies  were  asked  if  the  garrisons  of  Chalucet  and
Donzac  remained  quiet ; they  replied, — “ they  had  no  complaints  to  make  against  any  one
but  Aymerigot  Marcel  and  his  companions,  who  had  fortified  la  Roche  de  Vendais.”
“ Well,”  replied  the  king  and  the  duke  of  Berry,  “ now,  good  people,  return  home,  and
look  to  us ; for  we  will  speedily  provide  a remedy  that  shall  be  sufficient : make  what  haste
you  can  back,  and  tell  this  as  our  answer,  to  those  who  have  sent  you.”  The  deputies  were
well  pleased  with  this  speech,  and,  having  reposed  themselves  for  two  days  at  Paris,  they
set  out  on  their  return,  having  taken  leave  of  the  king  and  the  duke  of  Berry.

The  king  and  his  council  did  not  delay  attending  to  this  business,  for  the  duke  of  Berry
had  large  possessions  in  Auvergne,  and  urged  them  on.  They  considered  whom  they  should
send  thither,  for  the  lord  de  Coucy,  the  lieutenant  of  all  the  country,  from  la  Rochelle  to
Bourdeaux,  was  now  abroad  in  Barbary.  He  had,  indeed,  at  his  departure,  appointed  his
cousin,  sir  Robert  de  Buthune  viscount  de  Meaux,  his  deputy  during  his  absence.  The
council  did  not  forget  this,  and  thought  he  was  best  entitled  to  the  command.  Inquiries
were  made  where  he  was  to  be  found,  and  they  learnt  that  he  was  at  his  residence  at  Conde
sur  Marne.  Letters  were  written  to  him,  in  the  king’s  name,  for  him  to  come  to  Paris,  and
the  messenger  hastening  with  them,  found  him  and  his  lady  at  Conde.  Having  delivered
his  letters,  the  viscount  read  their  contents,  and  said  he  would  instantly  obey  the  king’s
orders,  as  was  but  right.  Having  made  his  preparations  as  speedily  as  he  could,  he  left
Conde  and  rode  on  to  Paris,  where  he  waited  on  the  king  and  council.  On  entering  the
council-chamber  he  was  told, — “ Viscount,  make  haste  and  assemble  all  your  retainers  of
men-at-arms,  for  you  must  immediately  set  off  for  Auvergne.  There  are  bands  of  pillagers,
of  whom  Aymerigot  Marcel,  as  we  are  informed,  is  the  chief,  who  rob  and  imprison  the
country  people.  Let  them  be  driven  thence ; and  if  you  can  any  way  efltrap  Aymerigot,
and  deliver  him  up  to  us,  we  shall  have  great  joy.  Orders  have  been  given  for  you  to  receive
the  pay  of  your  men-at-arms  at  Clermont  in  Auvergne ; and,  with  regard  to  your  expenses
thither,  speak  to  our  treasurer  of  the  army.  He  has  been  charged  to  pay  your  smaller
expenses,  and  to  hurry  you  away,  for  the  business  requires  it.”

The  viscount  replied  he  was  quite  ready,  and,  leaving  the  council,  returned  to  his  inn,
where  he  employed  persons  to  write  to  such  knights  and  squires  of  the  isle  of  France  and  in
Picardy,  who  were  his  acquaintance  and  dependants,  desiring  them  instantly  to  set  out  for
Chartres,  where  they  would  find  him  prepared  to  muster  them.  All  to  whom  he  had  sent
complied  with  his  request;  for  they  loved  him,  and  looked  to  him  as  to  an  able  captain.  They
were  all  at  Chartres  on  the  appointed  day,  and  amounted  to  two  hundred  lances,  good  men
and  to  be  depended  on.  After  they  had  been  mustered,  they  left  Chartres,  and  took  the
road  towards  Auvergne,  through  the  Bourbonnois.  The  news  of  this  assistance  coming
thither  was  soon  spread  abroad,  to  the  great  joy  of  the  inhabitants  of  Auvergne.  It  was
fortunate  so  much  haste  had  been  made  in  forwarding  this  force  ; for,  had  it  been  delayed  six
days  later,  Aymerigot  and  his  troops  had  planned  to  ravage  the  country,  between  Clermont
and  Montferrant,  and  down  the  river  Allier,  and  also  the  surrounding  country  of  Riom,  as
far  as  Gannat*.  Had  they  done  so,  they  would  have  plundered  it  of  one  hundred  thousand
francs  at  least ; for  the  parts  I have  mentioned  are  the  very  richest  in  Auvergne.  None
* “ Gannat” — a town  in  the  Bourbonnois,  five  leagues  from  Riom.


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


453


could  have  opposed  them,  for  the  whole  country  was  void  of  men  at  arms ; and  the  reports
were,  that  Aymerigot’s  troops  were  more  numerous  than  ever.

Aymerigot  and  his  men  were  prepared  for  this  excursion ; hut  they  learnt,  I know  not
how,  whether  from  pilgrims  or  spies,  that  a large  body  of  men  at  arms  was  marching  against
them,  under  the  command  of  the  viscount  de  Meaux,  to  besiege  and  to  drive  them  out  of
their  fortress  of  la 'Roche  deVendais.  This  intelligence  made  them  defer  their  intended
excursion,  and  shut  themselves  within  their  fort,  for  they  foresaw  they  would  be  besieged.
Aymerigot  now  began  to  repent  what  lie  had  done,  for  should  he  be  taken,  no  ransom  would
be  accepted  for  his  life.  He  thus  opened  himself  to  some  of  his  companions : “ I am
completely  disgraced,  by  having  followed  bad  advice,  and  avarice  will  be  my  ruin ; for  I
shall  be  destroyed  without  hope  of  ransom.”  They  replied, — “ Why  are  you  now  so
doubtful  of  yourself?  We  know  you  are  the  most  powerful  man  at  arms  in  these  countries,
and  you  have  a good  garrison,  well  provided  with  all  things.  We  are  men  of  determined
resolution,  as  eager  to  defend  our  lives,  as  you  can  be  to  defend  your  own.  You  cannot  be
ruined  without  our  suffering  with  you  : if,  unfortunately,  you  be  made  prisoner,  you  are  so
wealthy,  you  can  easily  tempt  them  with  your  ransom ; but  our  poverty  must  prevent  us
from  so  doing,  and  our  heads  pay  the  forfeit.  We  will  therefore  sell  them  as  dearly  as  vve
can,  and  guard  them  to  the  utmost  of  our  abilities.  Be  not,  therefore,  alarmed  at  anything
you  may  see  or  hear : we  need  not  care  for  the  siege,  if  we  manage  our  defence  with
prudence.”  Thus  did  the  companions  of  Aymerigot  Marcel  comfort  him.

The  viscount  de  Meaux,  with  his  men  at  arms,  continued  their  march  through  Moulins,
in  the  Bourbonnois ; but  the  duchess  of  Bourbon,  daughter  to  the  count  dauphin,  received
there  the  viscount  and  the  knights  very  grandly,  and  entertained  them  at  dinner.  That
evening  they  lay  at  Saint  Pourtjain.  Thence  they  marched  to  Gannat,  Aigue-perses*,  and
Riom,  where  they  halted.  They  then  marched  to  Clermont,  and  were  gladly  received  by
the  bishop  and  the  inhabitants.  The  men  at  arms  received  pay  at  Clermont,  for  a tax  had  been
levied  to  this  effect,  and  it  was  there  delivered  to  them.  They  continued  their  march  to
Notre-Dame  d’Orcinal'j',  four  leagues  from  la  Roche  de  Ycndais.  The  viscount  de  Meaux
there  fixed  his  quarters,  as  the  knights  and  squires  from  Auvergne  and  Limousin  had  named
this  place  for  the  point  of  assembly.  When  they  were  all  collected,  they  amounted  to  more
than  four  hundred  lances,  and  one  hundred  Genoese  cross-bows.  There  were  with  the  vis-
count, the  lord  de  Montagu  from  the  Vermandois,  and  his  brother,  the  lord  de  Dommart,
sir  Bernard  de  la  Riviere,  sir  William  le  Bouteiller,  the  lord  de  Domine,  the  lord  de  la  Roche,
the  Lord  de  la  Tour,  sir  Lewis  d’AbiereJ,  the  lord  de  Saint- Ampisse,  sir  Robert  Dauphin,
with  many  more.  The  captains  of  the  Genoese  were  two  valiant  squires,  called  Albert
d’Espinolle  and  Callinace.  Sir  Lewis  l’Esglivesle,  a gallant  squire,  was  at  this  time  the  vis-
count’s master  of  the  household.  The  Genoese,  as  well  as  the  whole  army,  were  completely
equipped  with  arms  and  other  necessaries,  or  they  would  not  have  passed  the  muster  made
by  the  viscount  de  Meaux.

The  garrison  under  the  command  of  Aymerigot  Marcel  and  his  uncle  Guyot  du  Sel,  in  la
Roche  de  Ycndais,  hearing  that  so  large  a force  was  now  advanced  to  Notre  Dame  de  Roque-
madour,  with  the  intention  of  besieging  them,  called  a general  council,  to  consider  how  they
could  the  most  effectually  resist  it.  They  first  resolved,  they  had  not  any  occasion  for  horses,
since  they  would  be  prevented  from  using  them  by  the  siege.  Tolerably  near  to  la  Roche
de  Vendais  was  another  fort,  called  Saint  Soupery,  under  the  government  of  Aymerigot,
where  his  wife  resided,  and  whither  he  had  sent  the  greater  part  of  his  wealth.  He  gave
orders  for  the  servants  and  horses  to  be  received  in  this  fort,  until  better  times.  La  Roche
do  Y endais  was  naturally  strong,  and  the  present  garrison  had  fortified  it  by  every  means  in
their  power.  The  lord  de  la  Tour  was  greatly  blamed  by  the  country  for  his  neglect  of  it,
as  they  said  it  was  from  this  circumstance  that  they  were  now  so  harassed ; and,  if  he  had
thought  the  expence  of  keeping  a guard  too  great,  why  had  he  not  given  it  up  to  the  inhabit-
ants of  the  country,  who  would  have  dismantled  it,  so  that  no  one  would  have  ever  thought

* “ Aigue-perses,” — a village  in  Limousin,  diocese  of  but  Notre-Dame  de  Roquemadour,  which  is  the  name  in
Limoges.  the  MSS., is  a celebrated  pilgrimage  in  Quercy,  near  Figeac.

t‘  ‘‘Notre-Dame  d’Orcinal,” — is  not  in  the  Gazetteer,  + In  the  MS.  it  is  sir  Louis  d’ Antibier e.


454


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


of  repairing  it  ? whereas  now  the  walls  had  been  left  entire,  and  the  mansion  tolerably  good  :
such  was  the  state  in  which  Aymerigot  had  found  it.

La  Roche  de  Vcndais  is  separated  from  the  high  mountains  that  surround  it,  and  is  seated
on  an  insulated  rock ; one  side  of  which  they  had  so  strongly  fortified  that  it  could  only  be
approached  in  front,  and  attacked  by  skirmishes.  The  force,  under  the  command  of  the
viscount  de  Meaux,  left  Notre-Dame  dc  Roquemadour,  and  advanced  to  la  Roche  de  Vendais,
which  they  laid  siege  to,  and  by  degrees  improved  their  quarters.  The  countess-dauphine,
on  hearing  that  la  Roche  de  Vendais  was  besieged,  with  a sufficient  force  under  the  viscount
de  Meaux,  was  greatly  rejoiced  ; and  as  she  imagined,  from  the  haste  in  which  he  had  left
Paris,  he  might  not  have  brought  tents  or  pavilions  with  him,  she  instantly  ordered  two
handsome  tents  belonging  to  her  lord  to  be  made  ready  and  sent  to  him  as  a loan,  for  his
better  accommodation  during  the  siege.  The  viscount  received  very  thankfully  these  tents,
which  came  so  opportunely,  and  returned  his  best  compliments  to  the  countess  for  her  atten-
tions. The  lord  de  la  Tour  was  at  home,  being  but  one  league  from  his  castle,  so  that  he  had
every  thing  he  could  wish  for.  The  other  knights  and  squires  accommodated  themselves  as
well  as  they  could.  They  had  provision  in  abundance  and  cheap,  for  it  was  sent  thither
from  all  quarters.  As  it  was  the  middle  of  August,  the  weather  was  warm  and  pleasant,
and  the  knights  were  comfortably  lodged  under  huts  made  of  green  boughs.

Intelligence  was  brought  to  the  army  that  made  them  suspicious  lest  the  neighbouring
garrisons  of  Chalmjet  and  Donzac  would  unite  together,  and  one  morning  or  evening
when  they  were  off  their  guard  come  and  attack  them,  to  force  them  to  raise  their  siege.
The  viscount  de  Meaux  and  his  knights  held  a council  on  this  intelligence,  and  resolved  to
send  a herald  to  Perrot  le  Bearnois,  governor  of  Chalet,  and  to  Oiim  Barbe  at  Donzac,  to
know  whether  they  were  at  war  or  peace  with  these  garrisons,  and  according  to  their  answer
to  prepare  themselves.  The  herald,  being  instructed  as  to  what  he  was  to  say  and  how  he
was  to  act,  departed,  and,  on  his  arrival  at  Chahujet,  accidentally  found  Perrot  le  Bearnois
at  the  barriers  amusing  himself  with  his  companions  in  throwing  the  bar.  He  dismounted,
and  asked  for  the  governor.  On  his  being  pointed  out,  he  advanced  towards  him,  and
punctually  delivered  the  message  he  had  been  charged  with.  Perrot  replied, — “Herald,  you
will  tell  your  masters  who  have  sent  you  hither,  that  we  mean  as  loyally  and  truly  to  keep
the  truce  which  has  been  concluded  between  France  and  England,  as  we  expect  it  will
be  kept  with  us.  Should  any  of  our  people  infringe  the  smallest  article  of  it,  and  we  be  made
acquainted  therewith,  we  will  lay  hands  on  them,  if  it  should  be  in  our  power,  and  inflict
such  punishment  as  they  deserve  and  as  we  have  promised  to  execute  on  them.  I wish  you
would  also  tell  your  masters,  that  what  Aymerigot  Marcel  has  done  was  without  any
advice  from  us,  to  whom  he  never  spoke  on  the  subject.  We  have  forbidden  him  or
his  people  to  seek  refuge  within  our  domain,  and  should  they  think  of  so  doing  it  will  ill
befal  them.”

The  herald  was  conducted  within  the  fort,  and  entertained  at  dinner ; after  which  he  took
his  leave,  and  Perrot,  out  of  love  to  the  lords  of  France,  presented  him  with  ten  francs.  The
herald  received  them  thankfully,  and  departed  for  Donzac,  where  he  saw  the  governor  Olim
Barbe  a Gascon.  lie  addressed  him  as  he  had  done  Perrot,  and  received  for  answer,  that
lie  would  not  on  any  account  infringe  the  truce,  for  by  so  doing  he  should  be  disgraced.
The  herald  dined  at  the  castle  of  Donzac,  and,  on  taking  leave,  had  ten  francs  given  to  him.
He  returned  to  la  Roche  de  Vendais,  where  he  was  surrounded  by  knights  and  squires
anxious  to  hear  the  answers  he  had  brought.  The  herald  minutely  related  every  thing  that
had  passed  ; and  the  viscount  de  Meaux  and  his  companions  were  more  easy  respecting
Perrot  le  Bearnois  and  Olim  Barbe  than  before : without  fear  from  that  quarter,  they  con-
tinued their  siege  with  greater  vigour.


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


455


CHAPTER  XVI. AYMERIGOT  MARCEL  ENDEAVOURS,  BUT  IN  VAIN,  TO  RAISE  THE  SIEGE  OP

LA  ROCHE  DE  VENDAIS  BY  LETTERS  AND  MESSAGES  TO  THE  KING  OF  ENGLAND,  THE
DUKE  OF  LANCASTER,  THE  VISCOUNT  DE  MEAUX,  AND  EVEN  TO  THE  DUKE  OF  BERRY.

During  the  siege  of  la  Roche  de  Vendais,  which  lasted  for  nine  weeks,  there  were
constant  skirmishes  between  the  two  parties,  in  which  many  were  wounded  by  the  cross-bows,
for  the  Genoese  are  expert  marksmen.  The  garrison  had  much  the  advantage  of  the
besiegers,  and  I will  tell  you  how.  They  could  sally  forth  whenever  they  pleased,
for  it  would  require  six  thousand  men  at  least  to  have  completely  surrounded  the  castle.
When  the  siege  first  took  place,  Aymerigot  felt  that  he  was  acting  wrong ; but  to  turn  the
matter  as  much  to  his  advantage  as  he  could,  and  if  possible  preserve  la  Roche  de  Vendais,
he  determined  to  send  one  of  his  men,  who  was  well  spoken,  to  England,  with  credential
letters  to  the  king  and  the  duke  of  Lancaster.  Aymerigot  opened  the  matter  to  his  uncle,
Guyot  du  Sel,  who,  though  about  sixty  years  of  age,  was  well  acquainted  with  arms  and
with  mankind.  Guyot  approved  of  the  manner  in  which  his  nephew  intended  acting,  and
said,  that  to  send  a person  well  spoken,  and  well  informed,  to  England,  would  not  be  lost
pains.  They  selected  a varlet  who  had  been  educated  by  them,  and  instructed  him  as
follows  : “ We  will  conduct  thee  in  safety  out  of  this  fort,  in  spite  of  our  enemies,  and  give
thee  money  sufficient  for  the  journey  thou  art  to  perform,  as  well  as  for  thy  other  wants.
Thou  wilt  carry  to  England  these  three  letters  ; one  to  the  king,  one  to  the  duke  of  Lancaster,
and  the  other  to  the  king’s  council ; which  thou  wilt  punctually  deliver.  Thou  wilt  recom-
mend me  handsomely  to  them  ; and,  as  these  are  credential  letters,  they  will  ask,  ‘ What  is
the  object  of  thy  coming  ? ’ thou  wilt  say  that  Aymerigot  Marcel,  their  little  soldier  and
subject,  who  is  firm  in  his  obedience  to  their  will,  is  besieged  in  a small  fort  belonging  to  the
king  of  England,  as  one  of  the  mesne  fiefs  of  Limousin ; that  those  who  are  before  it  exert
themselves  to  their  utmost  to  gain  the  place,  and  make  him  and  his  companions  prisoners ;
that  the  besiegers  are  sent  thither  by  the  king  of  France,  under  the  command  of  a cousin  to
the  lord  de  Coucy,  called  sir  Robert  viscount  de  Meaux  ; that  the  object  of  this  mission  is  to
request  the  king  of  England,  his  council,  and  the  duke  of  Lancaster,  as  lieutenant  for  the
king  in  the  Bordelois,  to  write  to  the  viscount  de  Meaux  to  depart  instantly  from  before  la
Roche  de  Vendais  with  all  his  men.  Be  sure  to  have  inserted  in  the  letters  for  the  viscount,
that  he  be  careful  not  to  infringe  the  truce  signed  at  Leulinghen,  or  to  dread  the  consequences,
because  I know  not  what  effect  these  letters  may  have  on  the  viscount,  nor  what  answer  he
will  make,  for  he  is  a strange  sort  of  a man.  Obtain,  likewise,  letters  from  the  king,  the
council,  and  the  duke  of  Lancaster,  to  the  duke  of  Berry  ; for,  if  he  please,  the  siege  will  be
instantly  raised.  Manage  to  bring  back  with  thee,  for  thy  greater  credit,  one  of  the  knights
of  honour  to  the  king  or  the  duke  of  Lancaster,  or  Derby  the  Herald.  Salute  him  from  me,
and  say,  if  lie  v ill  accompany  thee,  (for  he  is  an  able  negociator,  and  well  acquainted  witli
the  duke  of  Berry  and  the  lords  of  France,)  I will  give  him  one  hundred  francs.  Keep
well  in  thy  memory  all  I have  said,  and  tell  every  one  to  whom  thou  shalt  speak,  that  this
little  fort,  which  I have  garrisoned,  will  be  very  convenient  to  the  English  on  the  renewal  of
the  war  ; for  it  is  situated  on  the  borders  of  Auvergne  and  Limousin,  and  those  countries
may  be  made  to  contribute  upwards  of  two  hundred  thousand  francs  in  one  season.”

Aymerigot  Marcel  having,  in  the  presence  of  Ills  uncle,  well  tutored  his  messenger,  and  given
him  his  credential  letters,  and  one  hundred  francs  for  his  expenses,  he  was  escorted  from
the  fort  at  midnight,  on  foot,  to  another  fort  belonging  to  Aymerigot,  called  Saint  Soupery.
He  there  chose  the  best  horse,  as  they  were  all  at  his  disposal,  for  he  had  a long  journey  to
make,  and  passed  through  France  as  a native  of  the  province  of  Auvergne.  On  his  arrival
at  Calais,  he  made  acquaintance  with  sir  John  Beauchamp,  the  governor,  to  whom  he  told  a
part  of  his  business  that  he  might  be  the  sooner  forwarded  on  his  journey.  This  succeeded  ;
for  sir  John  ordered  him  an  immediate  passage  to  Dover,  whence,  on  having  his  horse  put
on  shore,  he  continued  his  road  to  London,  and  there  arrived  in  a day  and  a half.  He  was
fortunate  to  find  the  king,  his  two  uncles  of  Lancaster  and  York,  with  the  council,  at  the
palace  of  Westminster,  considering  the  affairs  of  Northumberland,  and  what  force  they  should


456


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


send  thither,  for  the  Scots  no  way  observed  the  truce.  The  messenger  from  Aymerigot  having
intrusted  the  subject  of  his  coming  to  the  master  of  the  inn  where  he  put  up,  he  conducted
him  to  Westminster,  and  procured  him  admission  to  the  duke  of  Lancaster,  who  had  arrived
before  the  other  counsellors,  and  was  in  the  presence-chamber.  He  presented  the  duke  with
the  letter  addressed  to  him,  who,  having  opened  and  read  it,  took  the  messenger  aside  to  learn
the  cause  of  his  arrival.  The  varlet  related  to  him  every  particular  wherewith  Aymerigot  had
charged  him.  The  duke,  having  heard  him,  asked  if  he  had  more  letters.  He  replied,  “ One
for  the  king,  and  another  for  the  council.”  “ It  is  well,”  answered  the  duke  : “ I will  obtain
for  you  an  audience,”  and  gave  orders  to  one  of  his  attendants  to  take  care  of  him.

The  duke  entered  the  council-chamber,  and  when  he  saw  a favourable  opportunity,  men-
tioned the  arrival  of  Aymerigot’s  messenger  : by  his  motion,  the  varlet  was  introduced,  and
presented  his  letters  to  the  king  and  to  the  council.  When  they  were  read,  he  was  desired  to
explain  the  object  of  his  mission.  Being  well  tutored,  and  not  afraid  of  speaking,  he  was  not
abashed,  otherwise  he  need  not  have  made  the  journey,  and  he  explained  so  eloquently  the
reasons  of  his  coming,  and  the  wishes  of  Aymerigot,  that  he  was  attentively  listened  to.
When  liehad  told  all  he  was  charged  with, he  was  informed  that  they  would  consider  the  matter,
and  that  he  should  have  an  answer  to  his  demands.  He  then  quitted  the  council-chamber,
and  waited  for  the  answer  to  the  letters.  He  was  told  that  the  king  would  write  to  the
viscount  do  Meaux,  and  to  the  duke  of  Berry,  in  the  manner  Aymerigot  had  desired.  The
duke  of  Lancaster  promised  to  do  the  same,  and  that  these  letters  should  be  delivered  by  an
English  squire  attached  to  the  duke  ; and  that  Derby  the  herald  should  cross  the  sea  and
accompany  them  when  they  gave  their  letters,  to  aid  their  success  ; for  he  was  well  known
to  many  lords  in  Auvergne,  particularly  to  the  duke  of  Berry.

Aymerigot’s  messenger  was  very  happy  to  hear  this,  and  followed  so  closely  the  duke  of
Lancaster  that  in  a few  days  the  letters  were  written,  and  the  gentleman,  whose  name  I
believe  was  Cherbury,  who  was  to  carry  them,  received  orders  of  departure.  The  herald
Derby  most  willingly  went  with  him,  for  Aymerigot’s  varlet  had  told  him  from  his  master,
that  if  he  would  cross  the  sea,  he  should  receive  one  hundred  francs  on  his  arrival  at  la  Roche
de  Vendais.  The  letters  being  sealed,  these  three  took  their  leave  of  the  duke  of  Lancastei’,
and  hastened  to  Dover : they  crossed  to  Calais  in  a passage-boat,  where  they  lay  that
night,  and  at  low  water  disembarked  their  horses,  and  on  the  morrow  rode  to  Boulogne.
They  passed  through  Picardy  to  Paris,  but,  making  no  stay  there,  continued  their  journey
to  Auvergne.

When  arrived  at  Limoges  and  the  environs  of  la  Roche  de  Yendais,  they  cautiously  ad-
vanced to  enter  the  castle  privately ; but,  on  consideration,  the  squire  and  herald  did  not
think  it  prudent  to  enter  la  Roche  de  Yendais,  but  sent  the  messenger  forward,  saying  they
could  now  find  the  way  themselves,  and  that  it  would  not  have  a good  appearance  should  they
be  seen  with  him,  for  it  would  look  as  if  he  had  been  sent  to  bring  them  from  England ; and
that  what  they  had  to  say  to  the  viscount  de  Meaux  would  come  with  more  weight  as  from
the  king  of  England  himself  than  if  any  others  had  interfered  in  it.  The  varlet  agreed  to
their  reasons,  and,  at  night-fall,  returned  to  their  fort,  by  a road  he  was  acquainted  with,
without  any  hindrance  from  the  besiegers.  He  there  found  Aymerigot  Marcel,  his  uncle
Guyot  du  Sel,  and  the  other  companions,  who  made  him  good  cheer,  and  were  astonished  that
he  could  have  returned  from  England  in  so  few  days.  He  related  every  thing  that  had
passed,  and  that  a squire  from  the  duke  of  Lancaster  and  Derby  the  herald  had  accompanied
him  with  letters  from  the  king  and  the  duke  to  the  viscount  de  Meaux  and  to  the  duke  of
Berry,  should  there  be  occasion.  “ And  why  did  they  not  come  with  you  hither  ? ” asked
Aymerigot.  “ Through  prudence,  as  they  told  me,”  replied  the  varlet,  “ for  they  will  under-
take the  commission  and  delivery  of  their  letters  themselves,  and  think  it  better  than  that
any  appearance  of  collusion  should  be  seen  between  you  and  them.”  “ They  act  wisely,”
said  Guyot  du  Scl,  “ and  show  by  this,  that  the  king  of  England  and  the  duke  of  Lancaster
send  them  of  their  own  accord,  and  that  they  are  interested  in  the  matter.”  “ Such  are  their
intentions,”  answered  the  messenger.

Aymerigot  was  delighted  on  hearing  this,  and  told  his  varlet  that  he  had  done  justice  to  his
commission,  and  he  in  a few  days  would  handsomely  reward  him  for  it.  The  English  squire  and


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


457


Derby  rode  on  for  la  Roche  de  Yendais,  to  the  place  where  the  besiegers  lay,  and  inquired  for
the  quarters  of  the  viscount  de  Meaux.  On  being  conducted  thither,  they  found  the  viscount
amusing  himself  with  seeing  the  bar  thrown.  On  their  approach,  they  bowed,  which  civility
he  returned,  and  asked,  “ whence  they  came."  They  replied,  “ from  England,  and  that  they
were  sent  by  the  king  and  the  duke  of  Lancaster.”  “ You  are  welcome,”  said  the  viscount ;
“ but  what  business  can  have  brought  you  to  this  wild  country  ? ” “ My  lord,”  answered

Derby,  “ this  is  a squire  attached  to  the  duke  of  Lancaster,  who  brings  yon  letters  from  the
king  of  England  and  from  his  lord,  which,  if  you  please,  you  will  read.  I have  accompanied
him,  because  I am  so  well  acquainted  with  this  country,  to  serve  him  as  a guide.”

The  squire  presented  his  letters,  which  the  viscount,  after  examining  the  seals,  knew  to  be
authentic,  and  to  come  from  England.  He  called  one  of  his  men  aside  who  could  read,  and
had  their  contents  repeated  over  two  or  three  times,  until  he  was  fully  master  of  them.  He
was  a while  pensive,  for  the  king  of  England  had  written,  to  complain  that  he  was  day  and
night  occupying  a part  of  his  territories  with  a large  army,  and  doing  acts  to  infringe  the
truce,  which  he  ought  not  to  do,  being  directly  contrary  to  the  articles  that  had  been  sworn
and  sealed  between  him  and  his  adversary  of  France ; and  that  as  soon  as  he  should  have
perused  these  letters,  he  must  raise  the  siege,  march  away  his  army,  and  leave  Aymerigot
Marcel  in  peaceable  possession  of  a castle  which  had  cost  him  such  large  sums  to  fortify.
Such  and  many  other  expressions  in  favour  of  Aymerigot,  did  these  letters  contain.  The
letter  from  the  duke  of  Lancaster  was  nearly  similar  to  those  from  the  king  and  council ; for
he  was  sovereign  lord  and  duke  of  Aquitaine.

The  viscount  de  Meaux,  having  consulted  some  of  his  friends,  said  to  the  squire  and  the
herald, — “ My  fair  sirs,  the  intelligence  yon  have  brought  demands  full  consideration  : I will
advise  upon  it,  and  you  shall  soon  have  my  answer.”  They  were  then  conducted  to  the
viscount’s  tent,  to  partake  of  his  wine.  During  this,  a council  was  summoned  of  the  lord  de
la  Tour,  sir  William  le  Bouteiller,  sir  Robert  Dauphin,  sir  Louis  d’Abiere,  the  lord  de  Mon-
tagu, and  sir  Berald  de  la  Riviere,  for  this  last  was  of  the  household  of  the  viscount.  When
they  were  assembled,  the  viscount  explained  to  them  the  cause,  and  laid  before  them  the
letters  he  had  received.  The  knights  were  much  surprised  how  intelligence  of  their  siege
could  have  been  carried  to  England  for  such  letters  to  be  sent  from  thence,  as  their  siege  had
not  lasted  one  month.  “ I will  tell  you  what  I imagine,”  said  the  viscount : “this  Ayme-
rigot is  a cunning  fellow ; and  the  moment  he  perceived  we  intended  besieging  him,  he  sent
a person  to  England  to  request  such  letters  might  be  written  as  are  now  before  you,  and  which
I shall  obey  or  not  as  I please.  I inform  you  that  I shall  instantly  answer  them : but,  in
regard  to  the  orders  of  the  king  of  England  and  the  duke  of  Lancaster,  I shall  not  pay  any
attention  to  them,  for  I am  no  way  bound  to  obey  them,  but  solely  the  king  of  France,  my
lord,  who  has  intrusted  me  with  this  command,  and  sent  me  hither.  Let  the  herald  and
squire  be  introduced,  and  I will  give  them  my  answer.”  They  were  sought  for,  and  con-
ducted to  the  assembly  of  the  viscount  and  his  knights  : when  in  their  presence,  they  bowed
their  heads,  and  the  viscount  thus  spoke  : “You  Derby,  and  you  Thomas  Cherbury,  for
such  I think  are  the  names  you  are  designed  by  in  the  letters  which  you  have  brought  from
the  king  of  England  and  the  duke  of  Lancaster.  They  have  been  informed,  it  seems,  (but  I
know  not  how,  whether  by  a messenger  from  Aymerigot  Marcel  or  some  friend  of  his,  who
has  been  in  his  name  to  England,)  that  I am  quartered  with  a large  army  on  the  lands  of  the
king  of  England,  and  order  me  instantly  to  raise  the  siege,  march  away  my  men,
and  leave  Aymerigot  in  poaceable  possession  of  the  small  fort  that  has  cost  him  so  large  a
sum  to  repair  and  strengthen.  They  tell  me  likewise  that  I am  risking  my  own  dishonour,
by  thus  infringing  a truce,  which  has  been  agreed  to  for  three  years,  between  the  kings  of
France  and  England,  and  their  allies.  I declare  to  you,  my  fair  sirs,  that  I will  not,  by  any
means,  violate  the  smallest  article  of  the  truce,  nor  shall  it  be  infringed  by  any  act  of  mine,
during  my  residence  here.  I am  the  king  of  France’s  subject,  my  liege  lord,  who  has  ordered
me  hither  as  his  marshal,  for  the  present,  from  the  complaints  that  have  been  made  him,  by
the  nobles  and  other  inhabitants  of  the  countries  of  Auvergne  and  Limousin,  of  the  great
damages  they  have  suffered  from  Aymerigot  Marcel,  who  has  seized  a fort  on  the  confines
of  these  two  provinces  that  had  been  abandoned,  and  was  never  again  intended  to  be  inha-


458


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &e.


bited,  which  lie  has  repaired  and  strengthened,  not  as  a mansion,  or  house  for  recreation,  but
as  a castle  and  rendezvous  for  robbers  and  marauders.  I am  therefore  ordered  hither  to
defend  and  guard  the  country  against  such  pillagers  as  may  be  collected  within  this  fort,
called  la  Roche  de  Vendais,  to  prevent  their  increase  in  numbers  and  in  wickedness,  and  to
arrest  all  of  them  I may  be  able  to  lay  hold  of,  that  they  may  suffer  the  punishment  due  to
their  crimes.  In  consequence,  my  fair  sirs,  I shall  strictly  obey  the  commands  I have
received,  and  loyally  acquit  myself  of  my  duty.  Of  course,  therefore,  I shall  not  move  from
hence  for  any  orders  I may  I’eceive,  until  I shall  have  possession  of  this  fort  and  the  garrison
that  now  holds  out  against  me  and  my  companions.

“ Should  Aymerigot  Marcel  set  up  a plea,  that  I have  any  way  broken  the  truce,  which  is
equivalent  to  a perfect  peace  for  the  time,  let  him  come  forth,  and  I will  have  him  fought
with  by  as  good  if  not  a better  man  than  himself,  and  prove  that  it  is  he  alone  who  has,  and
continues  to  violate  the  articles  of  the  truce.  Now,  my  fair  sirs,  having  maturely  weighed
everything,  I have  given  you  my  answer,  and  you  may  return  when  you  please  ; but  I beg
that,  on  your  return,  you  will  neither  add  to  nor  diminish  any  part  of  what  I have  said  to
you  ; for  reporters,  by  not  relating  the  exact  words  in  which  any  conversation  has  taken  place,
do  not  truly  inform  their  lords  of  the  matter.”  “ My  lord,”  replied  the  squire,  “ Derby
and  myself  are  come  hither  solely  to  hear  what  answer  you  shall  be  pleased  to  make
us,  and  carry  it  back,  and  since  you  have  done  so,  we  need  not  longer  remain.”

They  took  leave  of  the  viscount,  who  ordered  ten  francs  to  be  given  to  the  herald,  out  of
affection  to  the  king  of  England,  who  had  sent  him,  and  regard  for  the  duke  of  Lancaster,
to  whom  he  was  attached.  When  they  were  on  the  road  to  Clermont,  for  they  said  they  had
come  that  way  and  would  return  by  the  same,  and  when  they  had  advanced  about  half  a
league,  the  following  conversation  passed  between  them:  “We  have  had  ill  success:  we
must  wait  on  the  duke  of  Berry,  who  lives  in  Auvergne.”  “ He  is  lord  of  this  whole  country,"
said  Derby,  “ and  himself  duke  of  Berry  and  Auvergne.”  If  he  will  order  the  viscount  de
Meaux  to  decamp,  he  must  do  so,  for  he  dare  not  disobey  him.  As  we  have  letters  to  him
from  the  king  and  the  duke  of  Lancaster,  it  is  but  right  he  should  see  them,  and  that  we
should  know  his  intention  on  their  subject.”  Thus  did  they  converse  until  they  arrived  at
Clermont.  They  were  made  welcome,  for  the  herald  was  well  acquainted  in  these  parts,
having  been  there  before ; and  when  any  questions  were  asked,  who  and  what  they  were,
they  declared  themselves  messengers  from  the  king  of  England.  Having  inquired  where
the  duke  resided,  they  were  told  at  a handsome  castle  called  la  Nonnette.  The  herald  knew
it  well,  and,  leaving  Clermont,  they  rode  to  Issoire,  and  thence  to  La  Nonnette,  but  the
mountain  is  very  steep  on  which  is  situated  the  castle.  On  their  arrival  they  found  numbers
of  the  duke’s  servants  playing  in  the  square  before  the  castle-grate.  The  herald  was  known
to  many  of  them,  and  conducted  to  the  duke  of  Berry,  who,  in  consideration  of  his  regard
to  the  king  of  England  and  the  duke  of  Lancaster,  ordered  him  and  Lis  companion  to  be  well
taken  care  of.

The  squire,  being  the  bearer  of  the  letters  from  the  king,  presented  them  to  the  duke,
who,  having  read  them  twice  slowly  through,  paused  a little,  and  then  gave  such  courteous
answers  as  both  were  satisfied  with ; for  he  said,  “ from  his  affection  to  his  cousins,  he
would  do  all  in  his  power  to  comply  with  their  requests.”  The  herald  and  squire  concluded
from  this,  that  they  should  completely  succeed  in  their  mission,  and  were  in  high  spirits ;
but,  as  you  shall  hear,  they  were  disappointed.  The  duke  of  Berry  was  not  neglectful  of
the  business,  and  exerted  himself  to  have  the  siege  of  La  Roche  de  Vendais  raised,  from  his
regard  to  the  king  of  England  and  the  duke  of  Lancaster,  who  entreated  it ; and  engaged,
that  if  Aymerigot  Marcel  were  left  in  the  quiet  possession  of  his  fort,  he  should  not,  here-
after, molest  the  country,  and  that  he  should  make  any  reparation  to  the  king  of  France  for
having  offended  him.  The  duke  of  Berry,  anxious  to  oblige  the  English  who  were  in  his
castle,  wrote  letters  to  this  purport  to  the  viscount  de  Meaux ; and,  before  they  were  sealed,
had  them  read  to  his  guests,  who  were  exceedingly  pleased  with  their  contents.

The  letters  were  dispatched  by  an  able  squire  of  the  duke  to  the  viscount  de  Meaux,  who,
having  learnt  their  contents,  summoned  his  principal  knights,  and  had  them  again  read  in
their  presence,  during  the  time  the  squire  who  had  brought  them  was  made  welcome ; for,


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


469


out  of  love  to  the  duke  of  Berry,  they  gave  him  good  cheer.  “ Gentlemen,”  said  the
viscount  to  his  companions,  “ we  shall  never  have  peace  since  the  duke  of  Berry  supports
Aymerigot,  who  is  the  greatest  enemy  Auvergne  and  its  poor  inhabitants  have  ever  had,
and  for  these  last  twelve  years  has  so  sore  oppressed  them.  I thought  the  duke  hated  him  ;
but  it  seems  I was  mistaken,  for  he  commands  me  to  break  up  the  siege.  I will  not  at  this
moment  obey  his  orders,  but  excuse  myself  from  so  doing,  by  the  commission  I have
received  from  the  king  our  lord,  who  strictly  enjoined  me,  on  leaving  Paris,  not  to  quit  this
place  for  any  orders  I might  receive,  except  they  came  from  himself,  until  I had  conquered
the  fort  of  La  Roche  de  Vendais,  and  taken  Aymerigot  by  fair  or  foul  means.  The  duke
now  commands  me  to  raise  the  siege,  the  instant  I have  read  his  letters;  but,  by  my  faith,
I will  do  no  such  thing.”  “ Sir,”  replied  the  knights  and  squires  of  Auvergne,  “ you  say
loyally  and  well:  we  will  keep  steady  to  you.  We  suppose  that  my  lord  of  Berry  is
induced  to  write  thus  in  favour  of  his  enemies,  by  similar  letters  from  the  king  of  England
and  the  duke  of  Lancaster  to  those  you  have  received,  which  the  herald  and  English  squire
have  carried  to  him.”  “ I dare  say  you  have  guessed  right,”  said  the  viscount : “ I will,  if
I can,  find  out  the  truth  of  it.”

The  squire  was  called  in  to  receive  his  answer,  and  when  in  the  presence  of  the  assembled
knights,  the  viscount  thus  addressed  him,  calling  him  by  his  name,  for  he  knew  him  well, —
“ Peter,  I wish  you  to  understand  that  I owe,  and  am  desirous  of  paying,  all  obedience  to
my  lord  of  Berry,  for  he  is  so  noble,  and  so  nearly  related  to  the  king,  that  I should  be
sorry  to  do  otherwise,  but  myself  and  companions,  whom  you  see,  have  been  for  these  five
weeks  before  this  fort,  to  take  it  and  the  thieves  who  garrison  it,  by  positive  orders  from  the
king  and  his  council.  We  wonder,  therefore,  and  not  without  reason,  how  my  lord  of
Berry  can  entreat  us  in  favour  of  his  enemies,  and  desire  us  to  raise  the  siege  and  march
away.  We  all  agree  in  declaring  that,  if  it  were  done,  we  should  give  the  greatest
encouragement  to  all  thieves  who  in  future  may  overrun  the  kingdom,  and  induce  them  to
commit  the  greatest  outrages.  Peter,  you  will  tell  the  duke  of  Berry  from  us  all,  and  from
me  in  particular,  that  we  are  ready  and  willing  to  obey  his  commands,  but  that  I have  been
so  positively  ordered  to  continue  this  siege,  with  as  much  vigour  and  patience  as  possible,
until  I be  master  of  the  place  and  garrison,  that  I dare  not  act  contrary ; and  say,  that  I
shall  not  obey  any  other  commands  but  those  of  the  king,  whose  subject  I am,  and  who  has
sent  me  hither.  I beg  of  you,  Peter,  to  tell  me  one  thing,  if  it  is  not  an  improper  question
for  you  to  answer,  how  comes  it  that  my  lord  of  Berry  sues  in  favour  of  Aymerigot  Marcel,
who  has  done  such  mischief  to  Auvergne  and  Limousin,  now  that  he  is  in  a fair  way  of
being  caught  and  punished  for  his  wickedness  and  breach  of  faith  in  the  articles  of  the
truce  ? ”

The  squire  replied, — “Two  Englishmen,  a herald  and  another,  have  come  to  the  duke,
with  very  pressing  letters  from  the  king  of  England  and  the  duke  of  Lancaster  in  favour  of
Aymerigot.”  “ I readily  believe  you,”  said  the  viscount : “ it  is  Derby  the  herald,  and  a
squire  called  Cherbury,  who  likewise  brought  me  the  other  day  letters  similar,  I suppose,  to
those  you  mention.  Say  also  from  me,  in  addition  to  what  I have  before  spoken,  that  I beg
my  lord  of  Berry  to  consider  well  this  matter ; that  letters  thus  obtained  from  lords  on  the
other  side  of  the  water  deserve  no  attention  from  lords  on  this  side,  who  love  the  honour  or
advantage  of  the  kingdom  of  France.”  “ My  lord,”  answered  the  squire,  “ be  assured  that
I will  repeat  every  word  you  have  said  to  the  dvike  of  Berry,  for  Aymerigot  is  not  so  much
in  my  favour  but  I would  rather  see  his  punishment  than  his  deliverance.”  On  this,  the
squire  took  leave  of  the  viscount  and  knights  present,  mounted  his  horse,  and  rode  to  La
Nonnette,  where  he  related  to  the  duke  of  Berry,  that  the  viscount  de  Meaux  would  not,
for  any  other  commands  but  those  directly  from  the  king,  break  up  his  siege.  This  answer
was  not  very  agreeable  to  the  duke,  who  imagined  he  was  of  that  importance,  his  letters
ought  to  have  attention  paid  them  in  France,  or  at  least  in  Auvergne.  When  Derby  and
his  companion  learnt  the  purport  of  the  answer,  they  were  much  cast  down,  for  they  saw
they  had  laboured  in  vain.  They  asked  the  duke,  what  they  were  now  to  do.  “ Shall  we
leave  you  with  unsatisfactory  answers  to  our  king  and  the  duke  of  Lancaster  ? who  had  the
fullest  hope  you  would  have  had  the  siege  of  La  Roche  de  Yendais  raised,  for  it  is  within


460


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c,


your  territories.”  “ A little  patience,”  replied  the  duke  : 41  Ayrnerigot  is  in  a very  strong
place,  and,  unless  some  unfortunate  accident  happen,  cannot  for  a long  time  be  taken.  I
must  shortly  go  to  Paris ; and,  when  there,  I will  press  the  matter  warmly  with  the  king
and  his  council,  since  my  good  cousins  of  England  are  so  earnest  in  the  matter.  You  both
shall  accompany  me,  and  witness  the  exertions  I make.”  This  speech  contented  the  squire
and  the  herald.

Within  four  days  afterward,  the  duke  set  out  from  La  Nonnctte,  leaving  there  the  duchess
and  the  greater  part  of  his  household,  and  went  to  Riom  in  Auvergne.  He  waited  there
eight  days  for  the  count  de  Sancerre  awl  the  lord  de  Renel*,  whom  he  had  sent  to  Avignon
on  his  private  affairs.  On  their  arrival,  they  set  out  together  through  the  Bourbonnois,  and,
by  a short  day’s  journey,  came  to  Bourges,  where  they  tarried  two  days.  On  the  third,  the
duke  departed,  and  came  to  Mehun-sur-Yevrej*,  where  he  had  one  of  the  handsomest
castles  in  the  world  ; for  the  duke  had  expended  upwards  of  three  hundred  thousand  francs
in  building  and  ornamenting  it.  lie  remained  there  a fortnight,  to  the  great  uneasiness  of
the  two  Englishmen  who  were  suitors  for  Ayrnerigot : but,  as  they  could  not  help  it,  they
dissembled  their  thoughts.  Indeed,  the  duke  no  longer  intended  interfering  about  him,  and
I will  explain  why.  The  count  de  Sancerre,  the  lord  de  Renel,  and  sir  Peter  Mespin,  were
his  principal  advisers : they  heavily  charged  Ayrnerigot  with  several  crimes,  gently  blaming
the  duke,  and  saying  it  was  unbecoming  him  to  interfere  in  the  affairs  of  so  notorious  a
pillager,  whose  whole  life  had  been  infamous ; that  he  had  committed  such  disgraceful  acts
in  Auvergne  and  Limousin,  it  would  be  improper  to  speak  in  his  favour,  and  that  he  ought
to  be  left  for  the  king’s  justice  to  punish.  This,  and  speeches  similar  to  it,  had  so  cooled  the
duke  as  to  prevent  him  from  thinking  longer  on  the  subject ; but  the  two  Englishmen  did
not  neglect  their  duty  in  reminding  the  duke  of  it,  who,  dissembling  his  real  opinion,
courteously  answered, — “ Have  patience : we  shall  soon  be  at  Paris.”  Notwithstanding
this,  he  still  remained  at  Mehun-sur-  Yevre  more  than  three  weeks,  planning  new  improve-
ments with  his  master  of  the  works,  Andrew  Beau-neveu,  in  sculpture  and  painting;  for  in
such  arts  he  took  great  delight,  and  was  well  skilled  in  them.  There  was  not  a more  able
man  in  this  respect  than  master  Andrew  Beau-neveu,  in  any  country,  as  may  be  judged
from  the  many  fine  works  he  executed  in  France,  Hainault,  (his  native  country,)  and
England,  where  they  now  remain.


CHAPTER  XVII, AYMERIGOT  MARCEL  HAVING  LEFT  LA  ROCHE  HE  VENDAIS,  TO  SEEK  SUC-

COUR FROM  OTHER  PILLAGERS,  HIS  LIEUTENANT,  GUYOT  DU  SEL,  IS  SURPRISED  BY  AN
AMBUSCADE,  AND  THE  FORT  SURRENDERS  ON  CAPITULATION.

I will  now  relate  what  happened  to  Ayrnerigot  Marcel,  and  to  his  fort  of  La  Roche  de
Yendais.  He  had  a quick  imagination,  and  concluded,  from  the  continuance  of  the  siege,
that  the  letters  from  the  king  of  England  and  the  duke  of  Lancaster  had  failed  in  the  effect
he  looked  to  from  them.  He  therefore  thought  of  another  expedient,  which  was  to  leave
his  castle  and  ride  night  and  day  unto  the  garrisons  in  Perigord  and  other  places,  to  call
upon  Guyonnet  de  Sainte  Eoix,  Ernauton  de  Sainte  Colombe,  Ernauton  de  Rostem,  John
de  Morsen,  Peter  d’ Anohin,  Remonnet  de  Copane,  with  other  Gascon  and  Bearnois  men  at
arms  of  the  English  party,  and  entice  them  by  fair  speeches  to  enter  Auvergne  for  the  sake
of  plunder,  and  then  to  advance  to  La  Roche  de  Yendais,  some  morning  or  evening,  and
capture  the  knights  and  squires  before  it,  which  would  bring  them  more  than  one  hundred
thousand  francs  for  their  ransoms,  without  counting  smaller  articles  of  pillage.  He  explained
his  whole  plan  to  his  uncle,  Guyot  du  Sel,  and  asked  his  opinion.  He  replied,  that  he  very
much  approved  of  it,  for  that  he  saw  no  other  means  of  being  delivered  from  the  French.
44  Well,  uncle,”  said  Ayrnerigot, — “since  you  approve,  I will  undertake  it ; but  I must  beg
one  thing  of  you  before  I set  out.”  “ What  is  that?”  replied  Guyot.  “ It  is,  that  during

* “ The  lord  de  Renel.”  The  MSS.  have  Revel.

f “ Mehun-sur-Yevre.”  Charles  VII.  built  a large  castle,  or  probably  repaired  this  of  the  duke  of  Berry,  wherein
ho  died  1461,  having  starved  himself  for  fear  of  being  poisoned  by  his  son,  Louis  XI.


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE.  &c.


401


my  absence  von  never  sally  out  of  the  castle,  nor  open  the  barriers,  whatever  skirmishes  the
French  may  make,  for  you  may  lose  more  than  you  can  gain.”  “ I will  take  care  not  to  do
it,”  answered  Guyot : “ we  will  remain  shut  up  here,  until  your  return  or  until  we  hear
some  news  of  you.”  “ Indeed,  my  good  uncle,  I beg  it  of  you,  for  we  cannot  vex  them
more  than  by  keeping  within  our  walls : as  for  their  attacks  and  skirmishes,  wTe  do  not  value
them.”  Within  three  days  after,  Aymerigot  left  the  castle  attended  only  by  a page,  and
began  his  journey  without  fear  of  the  French.  His  intention  was  to  bring  back  with  him
some  bold  companions,  and  raise  the  siege.

Although  Aymerigot  had  quitted  La  Roche  de  Yendais,  it  was  unknown  to  the  besiegers  ;
for  the  garrison  could  go  in  and  out  without  danger  from  them.  There  were  daily  skirmishes
before  the  castle  and  at  the  barriers ; and,  about  five  or  six  days  after  the  departure  of
Aymerigot,  there  was  a grand  assault  made  by  the  French,  who  were  divided  into  three
parties,  all  of  which  were  engaged.  Guyot  du  Sel  was  a good  man  at  arms,  and  had  long
used  them  ; but  through  arrogance,  and  neglecting  to  observe  the  orders  of  his  nephew  not
to  open  the  barriers  nor  to  sally  forth  on  any  account,  he  suffered  as  you  will  hear.

Three  squires,  two  from  Auvergne  and  one  from  Brittany,  displayed  great  courage,  and
were  pre-eminent  at  this  attack  at  the  part  of  the  old  walls  very  near  the  castle.  The
squires  from  Auvergne  were  called  Richard  de  la  Violette  and  Lubinot  de  Rochefort ; the
Breton  was  le  Monadic,  who,  when  made  prisoner,  at  the  taking  of  Yentadour,  had  attached
himself  to  sir  William  le  Bouteiller.  This  assault  lasted  until  night,  and,  though  these
squires  gained  renown,  the  besiegers,  in  spite  of  their  labour  and  pain,  made  no  other  profit.
The  viscount  de  Meaux  determined,  that  at  the  next  skirmish  he  would  place  an  ambuscade
of  twelve  men  at  arms  in  an  old  grotto  withoutsidc  the  fort ; and  he  told  his  men, —
“ Advance  to  skirmish  at  the  barriers ; and  if  you  shall  perceive  the  garrison  inclined  to
make  a sally,  as  is  likely  enough  for  such  covetous  persons  to  do,  retire  gently  on  this  side
the  ambush,  when  you  will  wheel  round  to  renew  the  attack,  and  they,  being  thus  surrounded,
will  be  made  prisoners  or  slain.”

The  viscount’s  plan  was  executed.  Those  named  for  the  ambuscade  were  Lewis  de
la  Glisvelle,  Robert  de  Bethencourt,  Yandelle,  William  de  la  Saulsoye,  Peter  de  Saint  Vidal,
Gionnet  de  Villeracque,  Peter  de  Col,  Andrew  de  la  Roche,  John  Salmage,  with  three
others  to  make  up  the  dozen  of  good  men  at  arms,  who  posted  themselves  within  the  old
grotto.  Another  party  went  to  skirmish,  under  the  command  of  the  three  before-named
squires  : they  were  richly  armed  at  all  points,  the  more  to  tempt  the  avarice  of  the  garrison,
and  were  only  twelve  in  number.  When  arived  at  the  barriers,  they  purposely  began  the
attack  most  awkwardly,  so  that  Guyot  du  Sel  held  them  cheap,  and  said  to  his  companions, —
“ By  Saint  Marcel,  we  will  make  a sally  ; for  there  are  at  the  barriers  a set  of  youngsters
who,  from  their  manner,  do  not  seem  much  accustomed  to  the  use  of  arms.  We  will  teach
them  their  use ; and  they  cannot  avoid  being  our  prisoners.  At  these  words,  he  had  the
barriers  flung  open,  and  sallied  forth,  forgetful  of  his  promise  to  Aymerigot.  The  great
desire  he  had  to  perform  some  deed  of  arms,  and  to  gain  a prize,  induced  him  to  act  thus.
The  French  were  much  rejoiced  to  see  the  garrison  without  the  fort,  and  that  Guyot  du  Sel
was  among  the  first  : they  retreated  by  little  and  little  until  they  had  passed  the  ambush,
eagerly  pursued  by  Guyot’s  party.  When  those  in  ambush  saw  it  was  time,  they  quitted
the  grotto,  and  posted  themselves  on  the  road  to  the  fort,  shouting  out — “ Coucy  for  the
viscount ! ” and  thus  enclosed  their  front  and  rear.

Guyot  du  Sel,  observing  this,  knew  he  had  been  in  fault,  and  that  it  would  be  difficult  for
him  to  save  himself,  or  to  return  to  the  fort.  He  began  to  retire  towards  the  barriers,  but
was  strongly  opposed.  AY  by  should  I lengthen  my  story  ? They  were  all  made  prisoners,
as  it  were  in  a trap,  and  led  in  triumph  to  the  quarters  of  the  viscount  and  the  other  knights.
When  the  viscount  de  Meaux  saw  Guyot  du  Sel,  he  asked  him  “ where  was  Aymerigot
Marcel?”  for  he  thought  he  wTas  in  the  castle.  Guyot  replied,  “he  was  ignorant  where  he
was,  for  he  had  left  the  fort  twelve  days  ago.”  The  knights,  hearing  this,  concluded  he  was
gone  to  seek  for  aid.  Guyot  du  Sel  and  his  fellow-prisoners  were  then  ordered  away  ; and
the  viscount  asked  the  knights  of  Auvergne,  “ what  should  be  done  to  these  prisoners  ?”  for
he  wished  to  act  from  their  decision.  Sir  William  le  Bouteiller  answered, — “ Sir,  I certainly


4(12


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


believe  that  Aymerigot  Marcel  is  gone  to  persuade  the  garrisons  of  other  forts  to  come  to
his  assistance  : he  will  easily  find,  in  spite  of  the  truce,  adventurers,  who  will  join  him  in  his
wickedness,  and  they  may  fall  on  us  some  morning  or  evening  when  we  are  unprepared  to
resist  them,  and  do  us  much  damage  : Aymerigot  is  very  cunning,  and  of  great  wealth.
Let  us  therefore  tell  Guyot  du  Sel  to  surrender  la  Roche  de  Yendais,  and  if  he  refuse  his
consent,  that  his  own  head,  and  those  of  all  his  companions,  shall  instantly  be  sacrificed.”

“ This  is  good  advice,”  replied  the  viscount ; “ for,  in  truth,  to  obtain  this  fort  are  we
come  into  the  country.  If  we  have  not  now  Aymerigot  Marcel,  another  time  we  may  be
more  successful.”  Upon  this,  the  viscount,  the  lord  de  la  Tour,  sir  Robert  Dauphin,  sir
William  le  Bcuteiller  and  their  companions,  advanced  as  near  to  the  fort  as  they  could,
carrying  with  them  Guyot  du  Sel  and  the  other  prisoners.  The  viscount,  addressing  himself
to  Guyot  as  the  captain,  said, — “ Guyot,  you,  as  well  as  your  friends,  who  are  now  our
prisoners,  must  know  that,  unless  you  will  surrender  to  us  the  fort  of  la  Roche  de  Yendais,
we  shall  instantly  order  your  heads  to  be  cut  off ; but,  if  you  will  yield  it  up,  we  will  allow
you  freely  to  depart  whither  you  please.  Now,  consider  which  you  prefer,  death  or  liberty.”
Guyot  du  Sel  replied,  “ My  lord,  I will  do  all  I can  to  accommodate  you,”  and  with  this  he
advanced  to  the  barriers  to  speak  with  those  within  the  fort.  You  must  know,  that  the
remaining  garrison  looked  on  themselves  as  conquered ; for  they  knew  not  how  to  act,  nor
whom  to  choose  for  their  leader,  since  they  had  now  lost  their  two  captains,  the  most  able
among  them.  Guyot  du  Sel  had  not  sooner  explained  his  situation  than  they  agreed  to
surrender  on  the  terms,  that  they  should  carry  away  with  them  all  they  were  able,  and  be
allowed  one  month  to  retire  whither  they  pleased.  This  was  instantly  agreed  to,  and  written
and  signed.  The  French,  by  the  fortunate  issue  of  the  skirmish,  became  masters  of  la
Roche  de  Yendais  : so  true  is  it,  that  good  or  ill  fortune  in  arms  is  the  lot  of  perseverance.

The  whole  country  was  much  rejoiced  on  hearing  of  this  surrender.  The  articles  of  the
treaty  with  Guyot  du  Sel  were  punctually  observed,  and  when  the  garrison  had  packed  up  all
they  could  carry,  they  had  permission  to  depart,  and  passports  given  them,  to  continue  for
one  month.  The  viscount  de  Meaux  and  his  knights  abandoned  la  Roche  de  Yendais  to  the
country  people,  who  instantly  set  about  demolishing  it,  and  never  left  it  until  there  did  not
remain  one  stone  on  another.  The  men  at  arms  from  Auvergne,  who  had  joined  the  viscount,
now  took  leave  of  him,  and  returned  to  their  homes.  The  viscount  permitted  many  of  his
own  men  to  depart  for  Picardy  : he  himself  went  for  la  Rochelle,  but  stopped  at  Saint  Jean
d’Angely,  to  defend  that  part  of  Saintouge  against  pillagers,  who,  whenever  they  found  a
good  opportunity,  overran  it,  for  his  orders  were  to  oppose  them.


CHAPTER  XVIII. THE  MESSENGERS  FROM  ENGLAND,  HEARING  OF  THE  SURRENDER  OF  LA

ROCHE  DE  YENDAIS,  TAKE  LEAVE  OF  THE  DUKE  OF  BERRY. AYMERIGOT  RETIRES

TO  THE  HOUSE  OF  A RELATION,  CALLED  TOURNEMINE,  WHO  BETRAYS  HIM  TO  THE

KING  OF  FRANCE. HE  IS  CARRIED  TO  PARIS,  AND  THERE  BEHEADED  AND  HIS  BODY

QUARTERED.

You  have  heard  how  la  Roche  de  Yendais  was  won,  to  the  contentment  of  the  surrounding
country,  for,  had  it  been  otherwise,  it  would  have  suffered  much  from  the  garrison.  News
of  this  was  carried  to  the  duke  of  Berry  at  Cantelon,  a manor  of  his  situated  between
Chartres  and  Montlehery,  nine  leagues  from  Paris ; but  he  was  indifferent  about  the  matter,
for  he  was  become  quite  cool  in  regard  to  soliciting  the  king  in  favour  of  Aymerigot
Marcel.

When  Derby  the  herald  heard,  of  the  surrender  from  the  duke’s  knights,  he  said  to
Cherbury, — “ I have  lost  one  hundred  francs,  which  Aymerigot  had  promised  me.”  “ For
what?  and  how  have  you  lost  them?”  asked  the  squire.  “ In  God’s  name,”  said  Derby,
“la  Roche  de  Yendais  has  surrendered : the  French  have  conquered  it.  Let  us  take  leave
of  the  duke  of  Berry  and  return  to  England,  for  we  have  nothing  further  to  do  here.”
“ Since  it  is  so,”  answered  the  squire,  “ I agree  to  it.”  They  demanded  leave  of  the  duke
to  depart,  who  granted  it,  and  gave  them  letters  to  the  king  of  England  and  the  duke  of


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


403


Lancaster,  in  answer  to  those  they  had  brought.  On  their  departure,  he  presented  the
herald  with  forty  francs,  and  gave  to  the  squire  a handsome  hackney.  On  quitting  the  duke,
they  took  the  shortest  road  to  Calais,  and,  I believe,  went  straight  to  England.

News  of  the  loss  of  this  fort  was  carried  to  Aymerigot  Marcel,  as  he  was  raising  troops  to
break  up  the  siege.  When  he  first  heard  it,  he  would  have  all  the  particulars  told  him.
On  learning  that  it  had  been  occasioned  by  an  imprudent  sally  Guyot  du  Sel  had  made  on
the  French,  he  exclaimed, — “ Ah,  the  old  traitor ! by  Saint  Marcel,  if  I had  him  here,  I
would  slay  him.  He  has  disgraced  me  and  all  my  companions.  On  my  departure,  I had
most  positively  ordered  him  not  to  quit  the  fort,  whatever  attempts  the  French  might  make,
and  he  has  done  just  the  contrary.  This  loss  can  never  be  recovered  ; nor  do  I know  whither
to  make  my  retreat.  The  garrisons  of  Chal^et  and  Donzac  are  determined  to  abide  by  the
truce,  and  my  companions  are  scattered  abroad  like  discomfited  persons  ; but,  if  they  were
with  me,  I know  not  whither  I could  lead  them.  Considering  all  things,  I am  in  a distressing
situation  : I have  too  greatly  angered  the  king  of  France,  the  duke  of  Berry,  and  the  barons
and  commonalty  of  Auvergne,  to  expect  any  favour  ; for  I have  made  war  on  them  during
the  truce,  thinking  to  gain,  hut  I am  now  more  likely  to  lose  everything  : I know  not  how
to  act ; I wish  at  this  moment  that  my  wife,  myself  and  fortune,  were  in  England ; we  there
should  he  safe  ; but  how  the  devil  are  we  to  get  thither  ? for  I shall  be  robbed  of  my  wealth
twenty  times  before  I can  arrive  at  the  sea-shore.  All  the  roads  through  Poitou,  Normandy,
and  Picardy,  that  lead  to  the  sea,  are  well  guarded.  I have  forfeited  my  life ; that  is  clear  ;
and,  if  I am  taken  and  sent  to  Paris,  shall  be  punished  accordingly,  and  lose  my  all.  My
safest  plan  will  be  to  make  for  Bordeaux,  and  to  have  my  wealth  sent  thither  by  little  and
little,  and  then  to  remain  there  as  long  as  the  truce  holds  ; for  I am  in  hopes  that,  after
these  truces,  a curse  on  them  ! the  war  will  be  renewed  with  more  vigour  than  ever
between  France  and  England.  The  free  companions  will,  by  that  time,  have  spent  their
former  gains,  and  be  eager  to  replenish  their  purses.”  Thus  did  Aymerigot  Marcel  converse
with  himself : he  was  cast  down  and  sorrowful,  and  knew  not  from  whom  to  ask  advice,  nor
whether  to  return  to  Auvergne,  or  go  to  Bordeaux  and  send  for  his  wife,  and  have  his  fortune
brought  thither  by  little  at  a time.  If  he  had  followed  this  plan,  he  would  have  done  well ;
but  he  acted  otherwise,  and,  as  the  event  will  show,  suffered  for  it.  It  is  thus  Fortune  treats
her  favourites : when  she  has  raised  them  to  the  highest  point  of  her  wheel,  she  suddenly
plunges  them  in  the  dirt : witness  Aymerigot  Marcel.  The  foolish  fellow  was  worth,  as
was  believed  in  Auvergne,  more  than  one  hundred  thousand  francs  in  money,  which  he  lost
in  one  day,  together  with  his  life.  I therefore  say,  that  dame  Fortune  played  him  one  of  her
tricks,  which  she  had  played  to  several  before,  and  she  will  do  the  same  to  many  after  him.

Aymerigot,  in  his  tribulations,  bethought  himself  of  a cousin-german  he  had  in  Auvergne,
a squire  called  Tournemine,  to  whom  he  resolved  to  apply,  and  ask  his  advice.  This  he  did,
and,  only  attended  by  a page,  entered  the  castle  of  his  cousin.  Pie  thought  to  be  well
received  there,  on  account  of  his  relationship,  but  was  disappointed ; for  this  squire  was  not
in  the  good  graces  of  the  duke  of  Berry,  who  indeed  hated  him,  as  the  squire  knew  well.
He  was  afraid  of  the  consequences,  and  resolved,  on  seeing  his  cousin  Aymerigot  enter  his
castle,  to  arrest  him  and  inform  the  duke  of  Berry  what  he  had  done,  and  offer,  if  he  would
forgive  him  and  be  on  good  terms  for  the  future,  to  deliver  up  Aymerigot  Marcel,  for  him
to  do  with  him  as  he  should  please.  All  this  he  executed  ; for,  when  Aymerigot  entered  the
castle,  he  was  shown  into  a chamber,  when,  having  pulled  off  his  sword  and  cleaned  himself,
he  asked  the  servants,  “ Where  is  my  cousin  Tournemine  ?”  “ He  is  in  bis  chamber,”

replied  the  servants,  who  already  knew  their  master’s  design:  “ come  and  see  him.”  “With
all  my  heart,”  said  Aymerigot.  Having  put  on  a new  dress,  and  laid  aside  his  coat  of  mail,
which  he  usually  wore,  he  said  to  the  servants,  “ Come,  let  us  go  to  my  cousin  Tournemine,
for  it  is  a long  time  since  I have  seen  him.”  They  conducted  him  straight  to  his  chamber,
and,  on  entering  it,  Aymerigot  saluted  him,  suspecting  no  evil : but  Tournemine  said, —
“ How  is  this,  Aymerigot ? Who  has  sent  for  you  ? and  what  has  brought  you  hither?
Y ou  wish  to  dishonour  me.  I therefore  arrest  you  as  my  prisoner ; for  I should  not  other-
wise loyally  acquit  myself  to  the  crown  of  France,  nor  to  my  lord  of  Berry  : you  are  a wicked
traitor,  who  have  broken  the  truce,  and  shall  suffer  for  it : it  is  on  your  account  the  duke  of


464


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.

Berry  hates  me  mortally,  but,  through  your  means,  I will  make  my  peace  ; for,  dead  or
alive,  you  shall  be  given  up  to  him,  and  never,  on  any  other  account,  shall  you  leave  this
castle.”  This  speech  astonished  Aymerigot,  who  replied,— “ Why,  Tournemine,  I am  your
cousin.  Are  you  in  earnest  in  what  you  say  ? or  do  you  do  it  to  try  me  ? I came  hither,  in
full  confidence,  to  see  you  and  ask  your  advice,  and  I meet  with  this  cruel  and  harsh
reception.  I know  not  what  you  proposed  for  yourself,”  answered  Tournemine,  “ but  I
shall  certainly  execute  what  I have  intimated  to  you,”  and  then  laid  hands  on  him  : his
servants,  who  knew  what  they  were  to  do,  advanced  and  seized  him.  Thus  was  Aymerioot
taken  without  a possibility  of  making  any  defence;  for,  as  I have  said,  lie  had  disarmed
himself;  nor  could  any  entreaties  prevent  lournemine  from  ordering  him  heavy  fetters  on
his  legs,  and  causing  him  to  be  confined  in  a strong  tower  under  safeguards.


Execution  of  Aymerigot  Marcel  at  Paris.  From  MS.  Froissart  of  the  fifteenth  centurv.


When  this  was  done,  he  had  the  gates  of  the  castle  locked,  taking  himself  the  keys,
ordering  his  servants,  under  pain  of  death,  not  to  go  near  the  gates  unless  sent  by  him.
He  then  wrote  letters  to  the  duke  of  Berry,  to  say  he  had  made  Aymerigot  Marcel  his
prisoner;  and  if  he  would  forgive  him  and  make  a solid  peace,  he  would  give  him  up  to  his
pleasure.  When  the  letters  were  finished  and  sealed,  he  called  to  him  his  most  confidential
servant,  and  said, — “ Set  out  instantly  for  Paris,  and  deliver  these  letters  to  the  duke
of  Berry : recommend  me  to  him,  and  be  sure  not  to  return  without  answers.”  The
varlet  took  the  letters,  mounted  an  active  horse,  and  rode  to  Paris,  where  the  duke
of  Berry  was.  On  being  admitted,  he  presented  the  letters  from  his  master,  Tournemine.
The  duke,  having  opened  and  read  them,  said  smiling  to  his  knights, — “ Would  you  like  to
hear  news  ? Aymerigot  Marcel  is  caught : his  cousin-german  Tournemine,  as  he  writes  me
word,  holds  him  in  prison.”  The  knights  replied, — “ My  lord,  this  is  excellent  news  for
Auvergne  and  Limousin  ; for  they  have  had,  for  a long  time,  a bad  neighbour  in  Aymerigot.


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


405

lie  has  done  so  much  mischief  that,  if  you  please,  he  shall  make  his  end  on  a gibbet,  for  he
deserves  no  favour  nor  pardon.”  “ I know  not,”  said  the  duke,  “ what  the  king  or  his
council  may  wish  to  do  with  him  : I shall  talk  with  them  on  the  subject.”  Not  long  after
this  conversation,  the  duke  took  boat  and  crossed  the  Seine  to  the  Louvre,  where  the  king
and  his  council  were.  He  related  the  intelligence  he  had  received,  and  gave  them  the  letters
of  Tournemine  to  read,  which  afforded  satisfaction  to  all.  The  lords  said,  that  such  pillagers
always  came  to  a disgraceful  death,  and  that  sooner  or  later  it  awaited  them.  It  was
determined,  that  the  duke  of  Berry  should  undertake  the  management  of  this  business,  and
order  the  seneschal  of  Auvergne  to  fetch  Aymerigot,  and  bring  him  to  Paris,  where  he
should  be  confined  in  the  Bastille,  at  the  gate  of  St.  Anthony,  and  delivered  ovei  to  the
provost  of  the  Chatelet,  who  would  take  good  care  of  him.  It  was  also  resolved,  that  on
account  of  the  agreeable  service  Tournemine  had  now  done  to  the  crown  of  France,  all  his
former  misdeeds  should  he  forgiven,  and  a pardon  granted  by  letters  patent,  which  Tourne-
mine’s  servant  brought  back  with  him,  and  by  it  pleased  his  master  greatly,  for  in  them  he
confided.

It  was  not  long  before  the  seneschal  of  Auvergne,  by  an  order  from  the  duke  of  Berry,
came  to  the  castle  of  Tournemine,  and  had  Aymerigot  Marcel  delivered  up  to  him  : who  was
thunderstruck  at  thus  finding  himself  in  the  hands  of  his  enemies.  Why  should  I make  a
long  story  of  it?  The  seneschal  had  him  escorted  by  a body  of  men  at  arms  through  the
country,  and  crossed  the  Seine  and  Marne  at  Charenton.  Thence  he  conducted  him  to  the
castle  of  the  Bastille,  and  delivered  him  to  the  charge  of  the  viscount  d’Achy,  who  was  at
that  time  governor  of  it.  He  was  not  long  detained  there,  hut  given  up  to  the  provost  of
the  Chatelet,  who  carried  him  thither.  True  it  is,  that  he  offered  sixty  thousand  francs  for
his  pardon,  but  no  one  would  have  anything  to  do  with  him  : they  told  him  the  king  was
rich  enough,  and  wanted  not  his  money.  From  the  time  he  was  delivered  to  the  provost,
there  was  no  delay  in  his  trial,  when  he  was  condemned  to  a shameful  death,  as  a traitor  to
the  crown  of  France.

He  was  first  carried  in  a cart  to  the  pillory  in  the  market-place,  and  turned  round  within
it  several  times.  His  different  crimes  were  then  read  aloud,  for  which  he  was  to  receive
death.  Sir  William  le  Trim*  washy  his  side  a long  time,  and  talked  much  with  him,  on
the  affairs  of  Auvergne  as  it  was  supposed,  and  to  learn  the  truth  respecting  several  captains
of  forts,  whether  they  had  been  associates  in  his  wickedness.  This  was  certainly  known  to
the  lords,  but  I never  could  gain  information  respecting  it.  His  head  was  cut  off,  and  his
four  quarters  affixed  over  four  different  gates  of  Paris.  Such  was  the  end  of  Aymerigot
Marcel ; but  I know  not  what  became  of  his  wife,  or  of  his  wealth.


CHAPTER  XIX. TIIE  CHRISTIAN  LORDS  WEIC.n  ANCHOR,  AND  LEAVE  THE  ISLAND  OF  COMINO,

IN  ORDER  TO , LAY  SIEGE  TO  TIIE  TOWN  OF  AFRICA. THE  MANNER  IN  WHICH  THEY

CONDUCT  THEMSELVES.

I have  dwelt  very  long  on  the  subject  of  Aymerigot  Marcel,  in  detailing  his  actions,  that
I might  illustrate  his  life  and  death ; for  in  such  a history  as  this,  both  good  and  bad  must
be  spoken  of,  that  they  may  serve  as  an  excitement  or  warning  in  times  to  come.  Had
Aymerigot  turned  his  mind  to  virtue,  he  would  have  done  much  good,  for  he  was  an  able
man  at  arms  and  of  great  courage ; but,  having  acted  in  a different  manner,  he  came  to  a
disgraceful  death.

We  will  return  to  the  noble  enterprise  the  knights  of  France  and  other  countries  had
undertaken  against  Africa,  and  continue  our  narrative  from  the  place  where  we  left  off’.  It
was,  I believe,  at  the  island  of  Comino  that  the  knights  had  assembled,  after  the  great
storm  in  the  gulf  of  Lyons,  to  wait  for  those  who  had  separated  from  the  fleet,  as  that
island  was  but  thirty  miles  from  Africa,  whither  they  were  bound.  They  remained  there
nine  days,  and,  when  recovered  from  their  fatigues,  they  addressed  the  masters  of  the
galleys  as  follows : “ Gentlemen,  we  are  now  on  the  nearest  land  to  the  strong  town
* In  the  MSS.  it  is  sir  William  lo  Bouteiller,  which  I should  think  more  probable.

II  II


VOL.  II.


466


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.

of  Africa,  whither,  if  it  please  God,  we  will  go,  and  besiege  it.  We  must  therefore  consult
with  you  how  we  may  enter  the  harbour  and  disembark.  We  propose  to  send  in  advance
onr  smaller  vessels,  called  brigandines,  to  amuse  the  enemy,  while  we  remain  at  the  month
of  the  harbour  : on  the  following  day  we  will,  at  our  leisure,  land,  through  God's  grace,
and  encamp  ourselves  as  near  the  town  as  possible,  out  of  the  reach  of  their  bricolles  * :
the  Genoese  cross-bows  shall  be  drawn  up,  and  ready  for  defence  or  attack.  We  suppose
that,  on  our  debarkation,  a multitude  of  your  young  squires  will  demand  to  be  knighted,
for  increase  of  honour  and  advancement.  Instruct  them  gently  how  they  ought  to  act,  for
you  are  very  capable  of  doing  it ; and  know,  gentlemen,  that  we  are  well  inclined  to  acquit
ourselves  handsomely  towards  you  ; and,  to  show  our  eagerness  to  annoy  the  enemy,  we
shall  take  every  possible  pains  that  this  town  of  Africa  may  be  won.  It  has  done  you  too
great  damage  to  be  longer  endured,  and  is,  beside,  the  key  of  the  empire  of  Barbary  and  the
surrounding  kingdoms  of  Africa,  Morocco  and  Bugia.  Should  God,  of  his  goodness,  permit
us  to  conquer  it,  all  the  Sai’acens  will  tremble,  as  far  as  Nubia  and  Syria,  and  we  shall  be
everywhere  talked  of.  With  the  assistance  of  the  princes  of  Christendom,  who  are  the
nearest  to  us,  we  may  reinforce  it  with  men,  and  victual  it  again  ; so  that,  if  once  we  gain
possession,  it  will  become  a place  for  all  knights  and  squires  to  adventure  themselves  in
arms  against  the  enemies  of  God,  and  conquer  their  lands.”  “ My  lords,”  replied  the  masters
of  the  vessels,  “ we  shall  never  pretend  to  teach  you  how  to  act,  but  give  our  opinions  with
all  modesty  and  humility  ; for  you  are  too  noble,  wise  and  valiant,  for  us  to  pretend  to  lay
down  rules  for  your  conduct.”  The  lord  de  Coney  said, — “We  should,  however,  wish  to
have  your  opinions,  for  we  have  observed  nothing  but  what  is  praise- worthy  in  you  ; and,  as
it  is  you  who  have  brought  us  hither,  to  accomplish  deeds  of  arms,  we  shall  never  act  without
having  your  advice.”  Such  were  the  conversations  held  in  the  island  of  Comino,  in  the
presence  of  the  duke  of  Bourbon,  the  count  d’Eu,  and  some  of  the  great  barons  of  France,
with  the  captains  of  the  Genoese  vessels,  before  they  sailed  for  the  coast  of  Africa.

When  all  was  ready,  and  the  men  at  arms  had  re-embarked  on  board  their  galleys,  with  a
good  will  to  meet  their  enemies  the  Saracens,  the  admiral  gave  orders  for  the  trumpets  to
sound,  and  the  fleet  to  get  under  weigh.  The  sea  was  now  calm,  and  the  weather  fine  : it
was  a pleasure  to  see  the  rowers  force  their  vessels  through  its  smooth  surface,  which  seemed
to  delight  in  bearing  these  Christians  to  the  shores  of  the  infidels.  Their  fleet  was  numerous
and  well  ordered ; and  it  was  a fine  sight  to  view  their  various  banners  and  pennons,
emblazoned  with  their  arms,  fluttering  with  the  gentle  gales,  and  glittering  in  the  sun.
Late  in  the  evening,  the  Christians  saw  the  towers  of  Africa,  as  pointed  out  to  them  by  the
sailors,  which,  as  they  advanced,  opened  more  to  their  view.  Every  one  was  rejoiced  at
this  sight,  and  not  without  cause,  as  they  had  in  part  accomplished  the  object  of  their
voyage.  If  the  Christians,  on  thus  seeing  Africa,  conversed  much  concerning  the  war
they  were  about  to  commence,  the  Saracens,  who  had  as  plainly  observed  them  from  their
town,  and  were  on  the  watch,  did  the  same.  They  were  astonished  at  the  great  number
of  vessels,  of  all  descriptions,  and  concluded  they  had  a very  large  army  on  board,  to
besiege  the  town.  They  were  not  cast  down  with  this,  for  they  knew  the  place  was  strong,
well  fortified  with  towers,  and  plentifully  stored  with  artillery  and  provisions.

On  their  first  noticing  the  fleet,  they  sounded,  according  to  custom,  a number  of  bells  on
the  towers,  to  alarm  and  inform  the  country  that  an  enemy  was  on  the  coast.  There  were
encamped  near  the  town  a large  body  of  barbarians  and  infidels,  whom  the  kings  of  Tunis
and  Bugia  bad  sent  thither  to  defend  the  coast,  and  prevent  the  Christians  from  making  any
progress  into  the  interior  of  the  country.  The  noise  of  the  trumpets  and  drums  announced
to  them  the  arrival  of  the  Christians  ; and,  in  consequence,  they  formed  their  army  according
to  their  manner,  and  sent  some  of  the  ablest  captains  to  the  shore  to  observe  the  motions  of
the  enemy,  and  the  manner  of  their  debarkation.  They  also  posted  their  most  expert  men
at  arms  on  the  towers  and  battlements  of  the  town,  that  they  might  not  be  taken  by  surprise  ;
for  it  was  strong  enough  to  resist  everything  but  a long  siege,  if  they  were  on  their  guard.

As  I,  John  Froissart,  the  author  of  these  chronicles,  was  never  in  Africa,  I sought  all  the
information  I could  from  those  knights  and  squires  who  had  been  on  this  expedition,  and
* “ Bricolles,” — machines  to  throw  stones  : a sort  of  sling. — Du  Cange.


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


4G7


made  several  journeys  to  Calais  to  learn  tlie  truth  of  all  that  had  passed*.  QHaving  inquired
as  to  the  size  and  form  of  the  town  of  Africa,  some  who  had  been  there  figured  it  out  to  me,
and  said  it  was  in  the  form  of  a bow,  like  to  Calais,  extending  its  arms  towards  the  sea.
This  town  of  Africa,  at  the  time  the  lords  of  France  and  other  nations  were  before  it  with  an
anxious  desire  to  win  it,  was  wonderfully  strong,  surrounded  with  high  walls  at  proper
distances : the  entrance  of  the  harbour  was  defended  by  a tower  larger  than  the  rest,  on
which  was  placed  a bricolle  to  cast  large  stones  and  quarrels,  with  which  it  was  well
provided.

When  the  Christians  approached  the  harbour,  the  walls  of  the  town  seemed  to  be  hung
with  cloths  or  tapestry,  somewhat  similar  in  appearance  to  coverlids  of  beds.  They  cast
anchor  about  one  league  distant  from  the  port,  where  they  remained  until  the  morrow.  The
night  was  clear  and  serene,  for  it  was  the  month  of  July,  about  Magdalen-tide  ; and  they
made  themselves  comfortable,  rejoicing  that,  through  God’s  pleasure,  they  had  so  far
succeeded  as  to  have  the  town  of  Africa  now  before  them.

The  Saracens,  who  were  on  the  opposite  shore  observing  the  Christian  fleet,  held  tins  night
a council  on  their  future  mode  of  proceeding,  for  they  knew  the  town  would  be  besieged.
They  thus  conversed  among  themselves : “ Our  enemies  are  now  arrived  : they  will,  if  they
can,  land  and  lay  siege  to  Africa,  which  is  the  key  to  the  adjoining  kingdoms.  We  must,
therefore,  consider  well  our  plans  for  opposing  them  ; otherwise  we  shall  be  greatly  blamed,
and  especially  if  we  should  not  at  first  dispute  their  landing.”  It  was  proposed  by  a valiant
Saracen,  called  Mandifer,  to  resist  their  landing,  as  being  the  most  honourable,  and  to  oppose
them  instantly  with  their  whole  force,  or  they  would  probably  have  fault  found  with  them.
This  was  strongly  supported  by  many,  as  it  seemed  the  most  courageous  plan ; when  an
ancient  Saracen  began  to  speak,  who  had  great  influence  among  them,  as  he  showed.  This
lord  came  from  a town  in  Africa  called  Maldages,  and  his  name  was  Bellius.  He  gave  his
opinion  quite  contrary  to  that  of  Mandifer,  and  supported  it  with  the  following  reasons : —
“ Gentlemen,  we  are  sent  hither  to  guard  the  coast  and  defend  this  country ; but  we  have
had  no  orders  from  the  kings  of  Tunis  or  of  Bugia  to  attack  our  enemies  without  having
maturely  considered  the  consequences.  What  I have  to  propose,  I will  maintain  by  such
reasons  as  these : First,  you  must  suppose  that  this  army  of  Christians  has  been  long  in
preparation,  and  is  provided  with  all  things  necessary.  Their  captains,  you  may  also  believe,
are  perfect  men  at  arms,  as  able  in  council  as  in  the  field,  with  the  greatest  ardour  to  perform
deeds  of  arms.  If  we  meet  them  on  the  shore,  they  will  advance  their  Genoese  cross-bows,
for  you  may  be  assured  they  have  brought  numbers  of  them.  It  will  be  against  them  who
have  such  excellent  cross-bows  that  we  must  support  the  first  attack ; and  we  are  not
armed  nor  have  we  shields  to  guard  us  against  their  arrow’s  : our  men,  finding  themselves
wounded,  will  draw  back  and  refuse  the  combat,  so  that  these  Genoese  will  make  good  their
landing  in  spite  of  us.  Their  men  at  arms,  desirous  of  displaying  their  courage,  will  leap
from  their  boats,  and,  observing  our  disorder,  will  attack  us  with  lances,  and  gain  a victory  :
should  this  happen,  the  town  of  Africa  is  irrecoverably  lost  for  anything  we  can  do  to  prevent
it.  Those  within  will  be  so  much  discouraged  by  our  defeat,  that  before  our  men  can  be
rallied,  the  place  will  be  taken  by  storm  or  capitulation,  and  be  so  well  guarded  that  we  shall
have  the  greatest  difficulty  to  regain  it.  The  French,  and  those  with  them,  are  very  expert
and  subtle  in  arms.  I therefore  maintain,  that  it  will  be  more  to  our  advantage  that  the
enemy  should  be  ignorant  of  our  force  at  the  onset ; for  at  this  moment  we  have  not  a
sufficiency  to  offer  them  battle,  though  our  strength  is  daily  increasing.  I advise,  that  we
suffer  them  to  disembark  at  their  ease ; for,  as  they  have  no  horses  to  advance  into  the
country,  they  will  remain  where  they  land,  suspicious  of  our  intentions.]  The  town  of
Africa  is  not  afraid  of  them,  nor  of  their  attacks,  for  it  is  tolerably  strong,  and  well  provided
with  everything.  The  air  is  now  warm,  and  will  be  hotter.  They  will  be  exposed  to  the
heat  of  the  sun,  while  we  shall  be  in  the  shade.  Their  provisions  will  be  destroyed,  without
hopes  of  having  a supply,  if  they  make  any  long  stay,  and  we  shall  have  abundance  from
our  own  country  : we  will  frequently  beat  up  their  quarters ; and  should  they  be  unfortunate

* All  within  these  marks  [ ] is  additional  matter,  omitted  by  Sauvage  and  Verrard,  from  MS.  No.  4379,  Bib.  Harl.
in  the  Museum,  and  from  a MS.  in  the  Hafod  Library,  which  is  precisely  the  same.

II  H 2


4G8


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


in  these  skirmishes,  they  will  he  worn  down.  We  must  avoid  all  general  engagements,
otherwise  we  cannot  conquer  them ; but  we  shall  do  it  by  this  plan,  and  trusting  to  the
climate,  which  is  so  contrary  to  the  nature  of  their  constitutions.  QThey  will  not  have  any
reinforcements,  and  we  shall  have  many.  The  extreme  heat  of  the  sun,  and  the  fatigue  they
will  undergo  from  being  always  armed  in  fear  of  us,  will  very  soon  bring  on  disorders  which
will  carry  numbers  to  the  grave,  and  thus  shall  we  be  revenged  without  striking  a blow.]
Such  is  the  plan  I propose  ; and,  if  I knew  of  any  better,  I would  lay  it  before  you.”

All  those  in  the  council  who  had  been  used  to  arms  adopted  the  advice  the  old  Saracen
lord  had  given.  It  was  in  consequence  forbidden,  under  pain  of  death,  for  the  army  to  attack
or  skirmish  with  the  Christians  on  the  sea-shore,  but  they  were  ordered  to  remain  quietly  in
their  quarters,  and  suffer  them  to  land  and  encamp  themselves  without  any  opposition.  None
dared  infringe  these  orders.  They  sent  a body  of  their  archers  into  the  town  of  Africa,  to
assist  in  its  defence,  and  never  made  any  movement  until  the  morrow,  so  that  the  country
seemed  uninhabited.

The  Christians  having  lain  this  night,  as  I have  said,  at  anchor  at  the  mouth  of  the
harbour,  made  themselves  ready  the  next  day,  which  was  a clear  bright  morning,  for
approaching  the  town,  being  very  desirous  to  land.  Trumpets  and  clarions  began  to  sound
and  make  a loud  noise  on  board  the  different  galleys  and  ships.  When  it  was  about  nine
o’clock,  and  the  Christians  had  drunk  a cup,  and  partaken  of  soup  made  of  Grecian  or
Malmsey  wines,  with  which  they  had  abundantly  provided  themselves,  to  cheer  their  hearts
and  raise  their  spirits,  they  began  to  execute  the  plan  they  had  laid  down  while  at  the  island
of  Comino.  They  sent,  as  it  seems  to  me,  some  light  vessels  called  brigandines,  armed  with
bricolles  and  cannons,  first  towards  the  harbour.  When  they  were  properly  drawn  up  in
array,  they  entered  the  haven,  and  saluted  the  town  with  arrows  and  stones ; but  the  walls
were  hung  with  wet  carpeting  to  deaden  their  blows.  These  brigandines  entered  the  port
without  damage,  and  were  followed  by  the  galleys  and  other  vessels  in  such  handsome  order
as  to  make  a pleasant  show.  In  turning  into  the  harbour,  there  was  a large  castle  with
towers,  and  on  one  larger  than  the  rest  was  placed  a bricolle,  for  the  defence  of  the  place,  which
was  not  idle,  but  threw  quarrels  among  the  fleet.  On  each  of  the  towers  on  the  walls  was
a bricolle  which  shot  well ; and,  to  say  the  truth,  the  Saracens  had  laid  in  stores  for  a long
time,  from  the  expectation  of  a siege.

When  the  Christians  entered  the  port  of  Africa,  to  disembark,  the  weather  was  so
beautiful,  and  their  order  so  well  preserved,  that  it  was  delightful  to  see  it.  Their  trumpets
and  clarions  made  the  air  resound,  and  were  echoed  back  by  the  waves.  Many  knights
both  from  France  and  from  other  countries  now  displayed  their  banners,  and  several  knights
were  created.  The  first  of  whom  was  John  lord  deLigny,  in  Hainault : he  was  knighted  by
his  cousin,  sir  Henry  d’Antoing ; and  the  lord  de  Ligny  there  first  displayed  his  banner,
which  was  emblazoned  with  his  arms  on  a field  or,  having  a bend  gules.  He  was
accompanied  by  his  cousin-german,  the  lord  d’Havreth  in  Hainault.  All  the  knights  and
squires  disembarked  in  view  of  the  Saracens,  on  a Wednesday,  the  vigil  of  Magdalen- day  *,
in  the  year  of  grace  1390,  and  as  they  landed,  encamped  according  to  orders  from  the
marshals.  Thus  they  took  possession  of  the  land  of  their  enemies,  who,  noticing  their  camp,
could  not  avoid  highly  praising  the  good  order  of  it.  Those  in  the  larger  galleys,  that  could
not  lie  near  the  shore,  were  put  into  boats  and  conveyed  to  land,  under  the  banner  of  our  Lady.
The  Saracens,  both  within  and  without  the  town,  allowed  them  to  land  peaceably,  for  they
were  not  in  numbers  sufficient  to  oppose  them  : and  the  French  advanced  with  displayed
banners,  on  which  were  emblazoned  their  arms,  to  the  places  marked  out  for  their  lodgings
by  the  marshals.

The  duke  of  Bourbon,  as  commander  in  chief,  was  lodged  in  the  centre  of  his  army,  with
all  honour,  and  powerfully  guarded.  The  device  on  his  banner,  powdered  over  with  flowers-
de-luce,  was  a figure  of  the  Virgin  Mary  in  white,  seated  in  the  centre,  and  an  escutcheon  of
Bourbon  at  her  feet.  I will  name  those  lords  of  rank  who  were  quartered  on  the  right  of
the  duke,  looking  towards  the  town  : first,  sir  William  de  la  Tremouille  and  his  brother  with
a pennon  ; the  lord  de  Bordenay,  with  a banner ; sir  Helion  de  Lignac,  with  a pennon  ; the

* “ Magdalen-day,” — the  22d  July.


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


461)

lord  de  Tours,  the  same.  Then  were  placed  the  Hainaulters,  whose  standard  bore  the  device
of  the  lord  William  of  Hainault,  at  that  time  count  d’Ostrevant,  eldest  son  of  duke  Albert
of  Bavaria,  count  of  Holland,  Hainault,  and  Zealand,  which  device  was  a harrow  or,  on  a
field  gules.  There  were  the  lord  d’Havreth,  with  his  banner  ; the  lord  de  Li  guy,  with  his  ;
and  then  the  lord  Philip,  count  d’ Artois,  with  his  banner ; the  lord  de  Mathefelon,  with  his
banner ; the  lord  de  Calan,  with  a pennon : the  seneschal  d’Eu,  with  the  same ; the  lord
de  Linieres,  with  a banner ; the  lord  de  Thim,  with  the  same  ; the  lord  d’Ameval,  with  the
same ; sir  Walter  de  Chastillon,  with  a pennon  ; sir  John  de  Chateaumorant,  with  a banner;
the  brother  to  the  marshal  de  Sancerre,  with  a pennon  ; the  lord  de  Coucy,  with  his  banner,
and  better  supported  than  any,  except  the  duke  of  Bourbon  ; the  lord  de  Licques,  with  a
pennon  ; sir  Stephen  de  Sancerre,  with  the  same  ; and  then  the  pennon  of  the  king  of  France,
blazoned  with  his  device  : beside  it,  was  sir  John  le  Barrois,  with  his  pennon  ornamented
witli  his  arms  ; sir  William  Morles,  with  his  banner  ; the  lord  de  Longueval,  with  a pennon  ;
sir  John  de  Roye,  with  a banner ; the  lord  de  Bours,  with  a pennon  ; the  viscount  d’Ausnay,
a banner ; and  sir  John  de  Vienne,  admiral  of  France,  with  his  banner.

Those  on  the  left  hand  of  the  duke  of  Bourbon,  were  the  lord  d’Auseihont,  with  a banner;
sir  John  Beaufort,  bastard  to  the  duke  of  Lancaster,  a banner ; sir  John  le  Bouteiller,  an
Englishman,  a pennon  ; sir  John  de  Crania,  a banner;  the  souldich  de  l’Estrade,  a pennon  ;
sir  John  de  Harcourt,  a banner ; the  lord  Berald,  count  de  Clermont,  and  dauphin  of
Auvergne,  a banner,  and  with  good  array ; sir  Hugh  Dauphin,  his  brother,  a pennon ; the
lord  de  Berthencourt,  a pennon ; the  lord  de  Pierre  Buffiere,  a banner ; the  lord  de  Saint
Semere,  a banner;  the  lord  de  Louvart,  marshal  of  the  army,  a pennon;  the  begue  de
Beausse,  a pennon  ; the  lord  de  Louvy,  a banner ; sir  Gerard  de  Louvy,  his  brother,  a
pennon ; the  lord  de  Saint-Germain,  a banner  ; and  then  the  pennon  on  a standard,  with  the
device  of  the  duke  of  Bourbon ; the  lord  Philip  de  Bar,  a banner  ; sir  Lewis  de  Poitiers,  a
pennon ; sir  Robert  de  Calobre,  the  same ; the  viscount  de  Les,  a banner ; the  lord  de
Nogent,  the  same ; the  lord  de  Villeneuve,  a pennon ; sir  William  de  Moulin,  the  same ;
the  lord  de  Longwy,  a pennon ; sir  Angorget  d’Amboise,  the  same ; sir  Alain  de  la
Champaigne,  a pennon.

All  these  banners  and  pennons  that  I have  named  were  placed  in  front  of  the  camp,  facing
the  town  of  Africa ; but  there  were  many  knights  and  squires,  of  great  courage  and  ability,
who  were  quartered  in  the  fields,  whom  I cannot  name,  and,  if  I could,  it  would  take  up
too  much  place,  for  they  were,  in  the  whole,  fourteen  thousand,  all  gentlemen.  This  was  a
handsome  army,  able  to  perform  many  gallant  deeds,  and  support  a hard  warfare,  if  the
Saracens  had  ventured  an  attack,  which  they  did  not,  contenting  themselves  this  day  with
throwing  large  bolts,  not  meaning  to  act  contrary  to  their  plan.  When  the  Christians  were
encamped,  it  was  necessary  for  them  to  be  careful  of  the  provision  they  had  brought,  for
they  coidd  not  now  venture  to  forage  in  this  country,  nor  collect  wood  nor  boughs  for  huts,
as  they  would  have  run  many  risks,  by  foolishly  venturing  themselves  for  such  objects.

The  knights  were  lodged  under  tents  and  pavilions  of  cloth,  which  they  had  procured  at
Genoa.  The  Genoese  cross-bows  formed  two  wings,  inclosing  within  them  the  principal
lords,  and,  from  their  numbers,  they  occupied  a great  deal  of  ground,  turning  towards  the
sea-shore.  All  their  provision  was  on  board  the  vessels,  and  there  were  boats  continually
employed  in  bringing  different  articles  from  them,  as  they  were  wanted.  When  the
inhabitants  of  the  neighbouring  islands,  such  as  Sicily  and  others,  as  well  as  those  in  the
kingdom  of  Naples,  la  Puglia,  and  Calabria,  heard  the  Christians  were  laying  siege  to  Africa,
they  exerted  themselves  to  supply  them  with  every  sort  of  provision  : some  from  a desire  of
gain,  others  from  affection  to  the  Genoese.  From  Candia  were  brought  good  sweet  wine  and
grenaches *,  to  comfort  and  refresh  them,  without  which  they  could  not  long  have  supported
their  fatigues.  They  were  a very  large  body  of  men,  who  daily  consumed  much  in  eating
and  drinking.  However,  these  purveyances  did  not  come  regularly ; for  at  times  the  supply
was  most  abundant,  at  others,  they  were  in  great  distress  from  want.

• “ Grenaches,” — ■“  One  of  our  ancient  poets  of  the  wine,  was  then  esteemed  a foreign  wine.  It  is  probably
fourteenth  century  mentions,  under  the  year  1315,  Greek  that  which  Froissart  calls  Galvache,  Garnache,  or  Gal-
wine  and  wine  de  Grenache.  This  last,  which,  since  rigache.” — Vie  Privee  des  Francois,  vol.  iii.

Roussillon  has  formed  part  of  France, is  become  a national


470


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE.  &c.


CHAPTER  XX. — THE  CONDUCT  OF  THE  SARACENS  DURING  THE  SIEGE  OF  THE  TOWN  OF

AFRICA. THEY  SEND  TO  DEMAND  FROM  THE  FRENCH  THE  CAUSE  OF  THEIR  MAKING

WAR  AGAINST  THEM.

I will  say  something  of  the  Saracens,  for  it  is  but  just  they  should  be  equally  spoken  of
as  the  Christians,  that  the  truth  may  be  more  apparent.  You  must  know  that  these  infidels
had,  for  a long  time,  been  menaced  by  the  Genoese,  and  were  expecting  the  town  of  Africa
to  be  besieged,  in  which  they  were  not  disappointed.  They  had  made  preparations  for
resistance,  when  they  heard  of  the  arrival  of  the  Christian  fleet,  an  event  that  had  been  long-
looked  for  by  the  neighbouring  nations  ; for  they  are  not  prudent  nor  well  advised,  who  fear
not  their  enemies,  however  small  they  may  be.  The  Saracens,  however,  do  not  hold  the
Christians  cheap : on  the  contrary,  they  consider  them  as  men  of  courage  and  enterprise,
and  much  fear  them.  The  better  to  resist  their  enemies,  they  assembled  the  most  experienced
warriors  from  the  kingdoms  of  Bugia,  Morocco,  and  Tunis,  in  which  last  the  town  of  Africa
is  situated,  and  encamped  on  the  downs  near  the  sea  shore.  They  took  advantage  of  a large
and  thick  wood  in  their  rear,  to  avoid  any  danger  from  ambuscades  or  skirmishes  on  that
side.  The  Saracens  showed  much  ability  in  thus  posting  themselves.  They  amounted,
according  to  the  estimate  of  able  men  at  arms,  to  thirty  thousand  archers  and  ten  thousand
horse.  Others  thought  they  were  more ; but  their  exact  numbers  were  unknown,  for  the
Christians  supposed  many  were  lodged  in  the  wood.  They  were  very  numerous,  for  they
were  in  their  own  country,  and  could  come  and  go  from  their  army  at  their  pleasure  without
danger.  They  received  continual  supplies  of  fresh  provision,  whicli  was  brought  on  the
backs  of  camels.

The  second  day  after  the  Christians  had  landed,  the  Saracens,  about  dawn,  came  to  attack
the  camp,  sir  Henry  d’Antoing  having  the  command  of  the  guard  of  two  hundred  men  at  arms
and  one  thousand  Genoese  cross-bows.  The  skirmish  lasted  more  than  two  hours,  and
many  gallant  deeds  were  done  in  shooting  and  thrusting  the  lance,  for  there  was  not  any
engagement  with  the  sword  hand  to  hand.  The  Saracens  did  not  fool-liardily  risk  themselves,
but  fought  with  valour  and  more  prudence  than  the  Christians.  When  they  had  skirmished
some  time,  the  Saracens  retreated ; for  the  army  began  to  be  in  motion,  and  some  of  the
French  barons  had  come  to  witness  the  action,  and  observe  the  manner  of  their  enemies’
fighting,  that  they  might  be  prepared  to  meet  them  another  time.  The  Saracens  retired  to
them  camp,  as  did  the  Christians  to  theirs  ; but,  during  the  whole  time  of  this  siege  of  Africa,
the  Christians  were  never  left  quiet,  for  their  camp  was  every  night  or  morning  attacked  by
the  enemy.

Among  the  Saracens  was  a young  knight,  called  Agadinquor  Oliferne,  excellently  mounted
on  a beautiful  courser,  which  he  managed  as  he  willed,  and  which,  when  he  galloped,  seemed
to  fly  with  him.  From  his  gallantry,  he  showed  he  was  a good  man  at  arms;  and,  when
he  rode  abroad,  he  had  with  him  three  javelins,  well  feathered  and  pointed,  which  he
dexterously  flung,  according  to  the  custom  of  his  country.  He  was  completely  armed  in
black,  and  had  a kind  of  white  napkin  wrapped  round  his  head.  His  seat  on  horseback  was
graceful ; and,  from  the  vigour  and  gallantry  of  his  actions,  the  Christians  judged  he  was
excited  thereto  by  his  affection  to  a young  lady  of  the  country.  True  it  is,  he  most  sincerely
loved  the  daughter  of  the  king  of  Tunis,  who,  according  to  the  report  of  some  Genoese
merchants  who  had  seen  her,  was  very  handsome,  and  the  heiress  of  his  kingdom.  This
knight,  called  Agadinquor,  was  the  son  of  duke  Oliferne  ; but  I know  not  if  he  ever  married
this  lady.  I heard  that,  during  the  siege,  he  performed  many  handsome  feats  of  arms,  to  testify
his  love,  which  the  French  knights  saw  with  pleasure,  and  would  willingly  have  surrounded
him  ; but  he  rode  so  good  a horse,  and  had  him  so  well  in  hand,  that  all  their  efforts  were
vain.  The  Christian  lords  were  very  anxious  to  make  some  Saracens  prisoners,  to  learn
from  them  the  real  state  of  their  army;  but  they  were  so  cautious,  that  they  could  not  succeed,
and,  having  noticed  their  intent,  the  Saracen  chiefs  gave  orders  accordingly.  The  Saracens
were  much  afraid  of  the  Genoese  cross-bows  : they  shielded  themselves  as  well  as  they  could
against  their  bolts,  but  they  are  not  armed  so  strongly  as  the  Christians ; for  they  know  not


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


471


the  art  to  forge  armour  like  theirs,  nor  have  they  workmen  who  could  make  such.  Iron
and  steel  are  not  common  among  them  ; and  they  wear  light  targets  hanging  on  their  necks,
covered  with  boiled  leather  from  Cappadocia,  that  no  spear  can  penetrate,  if  the  leather  has
not  been  overboiled.  Their  manner  of  fighting,  according  to  what  I heard,  was  to  advance
on  the  Christians,  and  shoot  a volley  of  arrows  at  the  Genoese  the  moment  they  made  their
appearance,  and  then  to  fall  down  under  shelter  of  their  shields,  by  which  they  avoided  the
bolts  from  the  cross-bows,  that  went  over  them  : they  then  rose,  and  either  shot  more  arrows,
or  lanced  their  javelins  with  much  dexterity.

Thus  for  the  space  of  nine  weeks  that  the  siege  lasted,  were  continual  skirmishes  made  ;
and  on  both  sides  many  were  killed  and  wounded,  more  especially  such  as  ventured  too
rashly.  The  Christians  imitated  the  Saracens  by  avoiding  a close  combat ; and  the  lords
from  France  and  other  countries  took  delight  in  their  manner  of  fighting,  for,  to  say  tho
truth,  novelty  is  always  pleasing.  The  young  lords  of  these  infidels  were  greatly  struck
with  the  glittering  armour  and  emblazoned  banners  and  pennons  of  their  enemies,  and,  when
returned  to  their  camp,  they  conversed  much  about  them.  They  were,  however,  astonished
at  one  thing,  which  I will  now  relate.  The  Saracens  within  the  town  of  Africa  were
anxious  to  know  on  what  pretence  the  Christians  had  come  with  so  large  an  army  to  make
war  on  them ; and,  to  learn  the  reasons,  they  resolved,  as  I was  told,  in  council,  to  send  a
person  that  could  speak  Genoese,  and  gave  him  the  following  orders, — “ Go  and  take  the
road  to  the  camp  of  the  Christians,  [And  manage,  before  thou  returnest,  to  speak  with  some
lords  in  their  army,]  and  demand,  in  our  name,  why  they  have  brought  so  powerful  a force
against  us,  and  taken  possession  of  the  lands  of  the  king  of  Africa,  who  has  not  done  any
thing  to  offend  them.  True  it  is  that,  in  former  times,  we  were  at  war  with  the  Genoese,
but  that  should  no  way  concern  them  ; for  they  come  from  very  distant  countries,  and  the
Genoese  are  our  neighbours.  Our  custom  has  been,  excepting  in  times  of  truce,  to  seize
mutually  all  we  can  from  each  other.”

Having  received  these  instructions,  the  messenger  departed  and  rode  on  to  the  camp.  The
first  person  he  met  was  a Genoese,  to  whom  he  said  that  he  was  sent  by  the  Saracens  to
speak  with  some  baron  from  France.  The  Genoese,  to  whom  he  had  addressed  himself,  was
called  Antonio  Marchi,  a centurion  of  cross-bows,  who  took  him  under  his  care,  to  his  great
joy,  and  conducted  him  instantly  to  the  duke  of  Bourbon  and  the  lord  de  Coucy.  They
both  listened  very  attentively,  and  what  they  did  not  understand  the  centurion  interpreted
in  very  good  French.  When  he  had  finished  all  he  had  been  ordered  to  say,  he  asked  for  an
answer.  The  French  lords  told  him  he  should  have  one  as  soon  as  they  bad  considered  the
purport  of  his  message.  Twelve  of  the  greatest  barons  of  the  army  assembled  in  the  duke
of  Bourbon’s  tent,  and  the  messenger  and  interpreter  being  called  in,  the  last  was  ordered  to
tell  him  from  the  lords  present,  “ that  in  consequence  of  their  ancestors  having  crucified
and  put  to  death  the  son  of  God,  called  Jesus  Christ,  a true  prophet,  without  any  cause  or
just  reason,  they  were  come  to  retaliate  on  them  for  this  infamous  and  unjust  judgment.
Secondly,  they  were  unbaptised,  and  infidels  in  the  faith  to  the  holy  Virgin,  mother  of
Jesus  Christ,  and  had  no  creed  of  their  own.  For  these  and  other  causes,  they  held  the
Saracens  and  their  whole  sect  as  enemies,  and  were  come  to  revenge  the  injuries  they  had
done  to  their  God  and  faith,  and  would  to  this  effect  daily  exert  themselves  to  the  utmost  of
their  power.”  When  the  messenger  had  received  this  answer,  he  departed  from  the  army
unmolested,  and  returned  to  report  to  his  masters  what  you  have  just  read.  The  Saracens
laughed  heartily  at  hearing  it,  and  said,  they  made  assertions  without  proofs,  for  it  was  the
Jews  who  had  crucified  Jesus  Christ,  and  not  they.  Things  remained  on  the  former
footing . the  siege  was  continued,  and  each  army  on  its  guard.


472


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


CHAPTER  XXI. SOME  MIRACLES  ARE  SHOWN  TO  THE  SARACENS,  AS  THEY  ATTEMPT  TO

ATTACK  THE  CAMP  OF  THE  CHRISTIANS. SEVERAL  SKIRMISHES  DURING  THE  SIEGE.

THE  CLIMATE  BECOMES  UNWHOLESOME,  AND  OTHER  ACCIDENTS  BEPAL  THE  BESIEGERS.

Shortly  after  this  message,  the  Saracens  determined  in  council  to  remain  quiet  for  seven
or  eight  days,  and,  during  that  time,  neither  to  skirmish  nor  any  way  to  annoy  the
Christians,  but,  when  they  should  think  themselves  in  perfect  security,  to  fall  on  their  camp
like  a deluge.  This  was  adopted ; and  the  ninth  evening,  a little  before  midnight,  they
secretly  armed  their  men  with  their  accustomed  arms,  and  marched  silently  in  a compact
body  towards  the  Christian  camp.  They  had  proposed  making  a severe  attack  on  the
opposite  quarter  to  the  main-guard,  and  would  have  succeeded  in  their  mischievous  attempt,
if  God  had  not  watched  over  and  preserved  them  by  miracles  as  I will  now  relate.  As  the
Saracens  approached,  they  saw  before  them  a company  of  ladies  dressed  in  white ; one  of
whom,  their  leader,  was  incomparably  more  beautiful  than  the  rest,  and  bore  in  front  a
white  flag,  having  a vermilion  cross  in  the  centre.  The  Saracens  were  so  greatly  terrified
at  this  vision,  that  they  lost  all  their  strength  and  inclination  to  proceed,  and  stood  still,
these  ladies  keeping  steadily  before  them.  The  Genoese  cross-bows  had  brought  with  them
a dog,  as  I heard,  from  beyond  sea,  but  whence  no  one  could  tell,  nor  did  he  belong  to  any
particular  person.  This  dog  had  been  very  useful  to  them  ; for  the  Saracens  never  came  to
skirmish,  but  by  his  noise  he  awakened  the  army,  and  as  every  one  now  knew  that  whenever
the  dog  barked  the  Saracens  were  come,  or  on  their  road,  they  prepared  themselves
instantly : in  consequence  of  this,  the  Genoese  called  him  the  dog  of  our  Lady.  This
night,  the  dog  was  not  idle,  but  made  a louder  noise  than  usual,  and  ran  first  to  the  main-
guard,  which  was  under  the  command  of  the  lord  de  Torcy,  a Norman,  and  sir  Henry
d’Antoing.  As  during  the  night  all  sounds  are  more  easily  heard,  the  whole  army  was  in
motion,  and  properly  prepared  to  receive  the  Saracens,  who  they  knew  were  approaching.

This  was  the  fact ; but  the  Virgin  Mary  and  her  company,  having  the  Christians  under
their  care,  watched  over  them ; and  this  night  they  received  no  harm,  for  the  Saracens  were
afraid  to  advance,  and  returned  the  way  they  had  come.  The  Christians  were  more  attentive
to  their  future  guards.  The  Saracen  knights  and  squires,  within  the  town,  were  much  cast
down  at  the  sight  they  had  seen,  more  especially  those  who  were  advanced  near  this  company
of  ladies.  While,  on  the  other  hand,  the  Christians  were  greatly  exerting  themselves  to
win  the  place,  which  was  courageously  defended.  At  this  period,  the  weather  was  exceed-
ingly  hot ; for  it  was  the  month  of  August,  when  the  sun  is  in  its  greatest  force,  and  that
country  was  warmer  than  France,  from  being  nearer  the  sun,  and  from  the  heat  of  the
sands.  The  wines  the  besiegers  were  supplied  with  from  La  Puglia  and  Calabria  were  fiery,
and  hurtful  to  the  constitutions  of  the  French,  many  of  whom  suffered  severely  by  fevers,
from  the  heating  quality  of  their  liquors.  I know  not  how  the  Christians  were  enabled  to
bear  the  fatigues  in  such  a climate,  where  sweet  water  was  difficult  to  be  had.  They,
however,  had  much  resource  in  the  wells  they  dug ; for  there  were  upwards  of  two  hundred
sunk,  through  the  sands,  along  the  shore ; but,  at  times,  even  this  water  was  muddy  and
heated.  They  were  frequently  distressed  for  provision,  for  the  supply  was  irregular,  from
Sicily  and  the  other  islands : at  times  they  had  abundance,  at  other  times  they  were  in
want.  The  healthy  comforted  the  sick,  and  those  who  had  provision  shared  it  with  such  as
had  none ; for  in  this  campaign  they  were  all  as  brothers.  The  lord  de  Coucy,  in  particular,
was  beloved  by  every  gentleman : he  was  kind  to  all,  and  behaved  himself  by  far  more
graciously,  in  all  respects,  than  the  duke  of  Bourbon,  who  was  proud  and  haughty,  and  never
conversed  with  the  knights  and  squires  from  foreign  countries  in  the  same  agreeable  manner
the  lord  de  Coucy  did.

The  duke  was  accustomed  to  sit  cross-legged  the  greater  part  of  the  day  before  his
pavilion  ; and  those  who  had  anything  to  say  to  him  were  obliged  to  make  many  reverences,
and  address  him  through  the  means  of  a third  person.  ITe  was  indifferent  whether  the
poorer  knights  and  squires  were  well  or  ill  at  their  ease.:  this  the  lord  de  Coucy  always
inquired  into,  and  by  it  gained  great  popularity.  It  was  told  me,  by  some  foreign  knights


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


473


who  had  been  there,  that  had  the  lord  de  Coucy  been  commander-in-chief,  instead  of  the
duke  of  Bourbon,  the  success  would  have  been  very  different ; for  many  attacks  on  the  town
of  Africa  were  frustrated  by  tbe  pride  and  fault  of  the  duke  of  Bourbon : several  thought  it
would  have  been  taken,  if  it  had  not  been  for  him.


Siege  of  the  Town  of  Africa.  From  a MS.  Froissart  of  the  15th  century.


This  siege  lasted,  by  an  exact  account,  sixty-one  days ; during  which,  many  were  the
skirmishes  before  the  town  and  at  the  barriers : they  were  well  defended,  for  the  flower  of
the  infidel  chivalry  was  in  the  town.  The  Christians  said  among  themselves, — “ If  we  could
gain  this  place  by  storm  or  otherwise,  and  strongly  reinforce  and  victual  it  during  the  winter,
a large  body  of  our  countrymen  might  then  come  hither  in  the  spring  and  gain  a footing  in
the  kingdoms  of  Barbary  and  Tunis,  which  would  encourage  the  Christians  to  cross  the  sea
annually  and  extend  their  conquests.”  “ Would  to  God  it  were  so,”  others  replied ; “ for
the  knights  now  here  would  then  be  comfortably  lodged,  and  every  day,  if  they  pleased,
they  might  have  deeds  of  arms.”  The  besieged  were  alarmed  at  tbe  obstinacy  of  their
attacks,  and  redoubled  their  guards.  The  great  heat,  however,  did  more  for  them  than  all
the  rest,  added  to  the  constant  uncertainty  of  being  attacked ; for  the  policy  of  the  Saracens
was  to  keep  them  in  continual  alarms.  They  were  almost  burnt  up  when  in  armour  ; and
it  was  wonderful  that  auy  escaped  death ; for,  during  the  month  of  August  the  air  was
suffocating.  An  extraordinary  accident  happened,  which  if  it  had  lasted  any  time,  must
have  destroyed  them  all.  During  one  week,  from  the  heat  and  corruption  of  the  air,  there
were  such  wonderful  swarms  of  flies,  the  army  was  covered  with  them.  The  men  knew  not
how  to  rid  themselves  of  these  troublesome  guests,  which  multiplied  daily,  to  their  great
astonishment ; but,  through  the  grace  of  God  and  the  Virgin  Mary,  to  whom  they  were
devoted,  a remedy  was  found,  in  a thunder  and  hail  storm,  that  fell  with  great  violence,  and
destroyed  all  the  flies.  The  air,  by  this  storm,  was  much  cooled,  and  the  army  got  to  be  in
better  health  than  it  had  been  for  some  time.

Knights  who  are  on  such  expeditions  must  cheerfully  put  up  with  what  weather  may
happen,  for  they  cannot  have  it  according  to  their  wishes ; and,  when  any  one  falls  sick,  he
must  be  nursed  to  his  recovery  or  to  his  death.  Although  the  knights  from  France  had
undertaken  this  voyage  with  an  eagerness  and  resolution  that  bore  them  up  under  the  pains


474


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


they  suffered,  they  had  not  many  luxuries  to  gratify  them  ; for  nothing  was  sent  them  from
France,  nor  had  any  in  that  kingdom  more  intelligence  from  them  than  if  they  were  buried
under  ground.  Once,  indeed,  there  came  a galley  from  Barcelona,  laden  more  with  oranges
and  small  grains  than  with  anything  else.  The  oranges  were  of  the  greatest  service,  by  the
refreshment  they  afforded  ; but,  whatever  vessel  came  to  them,  none  returned,  for  fear  of
meeting  the  Saracens  at  sea,  and  because  they  wished  to  wait  'the  event  of  the  siege,  and  see
whether  the  Christians  would  conquer  the  town.

The  young  king  Lewis  of  Sicily  exerted  himself,  in  order  that  his  subjects  should  carry  a
constant  supply  of  provision  to  them,  for  he  was  their  nearest  neighbour.  It  was  fortunate
the  Saracens  were  not  strong  enough  at  sea  to  prevent  the  vessels  coming  from  the  ports  of
Sicily  and  Naples,  or  they  would  have  conquered  them  without  striking  a blow.  They
therefore  contented  themselves  with  keeping  the  Christians  under  perpetual  alarms  on  land.
The  Saracens  have. not  a large  navy  like  the  Genoese  and  Venetians;  and  what  they  get  at
sea  is  by  thievery  ; and  they  never  dare  wait  the  attack  of  the  Christians  unless  they  be  in
very  superior  numbers,  for  a well-armed  galley  with  Christians  will  defeat  four  of  such
enemies.  In  truth,  the  Turks  are  better  men  at  arms  by  sea  and  land  than  any  other  nation
of  unbelievers  of  our  faith  ; but  they  were  at  too  great  a distance  from  Africa,  and  the  town
could  not  receive  any  aid  from  them.  The  Turks  had  heard  that  the  town  of  Africa  was
besieged  by  the  Christians,  and  had  often,  but  in  vain,  wished  to  have  been  there.


CHAPTER  XXII. A CHALLENGE  IS  SENT  BY  THE  SARACENS  TO  OFFER  COMBAT  OF  TEN

AGAINST  TEN  CHRISTIANS. THE  SARACENS  FAIL  IN  THEIR  ENGAGEMENT. THE  TOWN

OF  AFRICA  IS  STORMED,  BUT  UNSUCCESSFULLY,  AND  WITH  THE  LOSS  OF  MANY  WORTHY
MEN.

The  besiegers  and  their  enemies  studied  day  and  night  how  they  could  most  effectually
annoy  each  other.  Agadinquor  Olifeme,  Madifer  de  Tunis,  Belins  Maldages,  and  Brahadin
de  Bugia,  and  some  other  Saracens,  consulted  together,  and  said : “ Here  are  our  enemies
the  Christians  encamped  before  us,  and  we  cannot  defeat  them.  They  are  so  few  in  number
when  compared  to  us,  that  they  must  be  well  advised  by  their  able  captains ; for,  in  all  our
skirmishes,  we  have  never  been  able  to  make  one  knight  prisoner.  If  we  could  capture  one
or  two  of  their  leaders,  we  should  acquire  fame,  and  learn  from  them  the  state  of  their  army
and  what  are  their  intentions.  Let  us  now  consider  how  we  may  accomplish  this.”
Agadinquor  implied,- — “ Though  I am  the  youngest,  I wish  to  speak  first.”  “We  agree  to
it,”  said  the  others.  “ By  my  faith,”  continued  he,  “ I am  very  desirous  of  engaging  them  ;
and  I think,  if  I were  matched  in  equal  combat  with  one  of  my  size,  I should  conquer  him.
If  you  will  therefore  select  ten  valiant  men,  I will  challenge  the  Christians  to  send  the  same
number  to  fight  with  us.  We  have  justice  on  our  side  in  this  war,  for  they  have  quarrelled
with  us  without  reason  ; and  this  right  and  the  courage  I feel,  induce  me  to  believe  that  we
shall  have  the  victory.”  Madifer  de  Tunis,  who  was  a very  valiant  man,  said, — “ Agadin-
quor, what  you  have  proposed  is  much  to  your  honour.  To-morrow,  if  you  please,  you  shall
ride  as  our  chief  towards  the  camp  of  the  Christians,  taking  an  interpreter  with  you,  and
make  a signal  that  you  have  something  to  say.  If  you  be  well  received  by  them,  propose
your  combat  of  ten  against  ten.  We  shall  then  hear  what  answer  they  give;  and,  though
I believe  the  offer  will  be  accepted,  we  must  take  good  counsel  how  we  proceed  against  these
Christians,  whom  we  consider  as  more  valiant  than  ourselves.”

This  being  determined  on,  they  retired  to  rest.  On  the  morrow,  as  usual,  they  advanced
to  skirmish ; but  Agadinquor  rode  on  at  some  distance  in  front  with  his  interpreter.  The
day  was  bright  and  clear,  and  a little  after  sunrise  the  Saracens  were  ready  for  battle.  Sir
Guy  and  sir  William  de  la  Tremouille  had  commanded  the  guard  of  the  night,  and  were  on
the  point  of  retiring  when  the  Saracens  appeared  in  sight  about  three  bow-shots  distant.
Agadinquor  and  his  interpreter  advanced  towards  one  of  the  wings,  and  made  signs  to  give
notice  that  he  wanted  to  parley  with  some  one  by  accident,  he  came  near  the  pennon  of  a
good  squire  at  arms  called  Affrenal,  who,  noticing  his  signs,  rode  forward  a pace,  and  told


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c


475


his  men  to  remain  as  they  were,  “ for  that  he  would  go  and  see  what  the  Saracen  wanted :
he  has  an  interpreter  with  him,  and  is  probably  come  to  make  some  proposition.”  His  men
remained  steady,  and  he  rode  towards  the  Saracen.

When  they  were  near  each  other,  the  interpreter  said, — “ Christian,  are  you  a gentleman,
of  name  in  arms,  and  ready  to  answer  what  shall  be  asked  of  you?”  “Yes,”  replied
Affrenal,  “ I am  : speak  what  you  please,  it  shall  be  answered.”  “ W ell,”  said  the  inter-
preter, “ here  is  a noble  man  of  our  country  who  demands  to  combat  with  you  bodily ; and,
if  you  would  like  to  increase  the  number  to  ten,  he  will  bring  as  many  of  his  friends  to  meet
you.  The  cause  for  the  challenge  is  this : They  maintain,  that  their  faith  is  more  perfect
than  yours ; for  it  has  continued  since  the  beginning  of  the  world,  when  it  was  written
down;  and  that  your  faith  has  been  introduced  by  a mortal,  whom  the  Jew’s  hung  and
crucified.”  “ IIo,”  interrupted  Affrenal,  “ be  silent  on  these  matters,  for  it  does  not  become
such  as  thee  to  dispute  concerning  them,  but  tell  the  Saracen,  who  has  ordered  thee  to  speak,
to  swear  on  his  faith  that  such  a combat  shall  take  place,  and  he  shall  be  gratified  within
four  hours.  Let  him  bring  ten  gentlemen,  and  of  name  in  arms,  on  his  side,  and  I will
bring  as  many  to  meet  him.”  The  interpreter  related  to  the  Saracen  the  words  that  had
passed,  who  seemed  much  rejoiced  thereat,  and  pledged  himself  for  the  combat.

This  being  done,  each  returned  to  his  friends ; but  the  news  had  already  been  carried  to
sir  Guy  and  to  sir  William  de  la  Tremouille,  who,  meeting  Affrenal,  demanded  how  he  had
settled  matters  with  the  Saracen.  Affrenal  related  what  you  have  heard,  and  that  he  had
accepted  the  challenge.  The  two  knights  were  well  pleased,  and  said, — “ Affrenal,  go  and
speak  to  others,  for  we  will  be  of  your  number  ten.”  He  replied, — “ God  assist  us!  I fancy
I shall  find  plenty  ready  to  fight  the  Saracens.”  Shortly  after,  Affrenal  met  the  lord  de
Thim,  to  whom  he  told  what  had  passed,  and  asked  if  he  would  make  one.  The  lord  de
Tliim  willingly  accepted  the  offer ; and  of  all  those  to  whom  Affrenal  related  it,  he  might,  if
be  pleased,  have  had  a hundred  instead  of  ten.  Sir  Boucicaut,  the  younger,  accepted  it  with
great  courage,  as  did  sir  Idelion  de  Lignac,  sir  John  Russel,  an  Englishman,  sir  John
Ilarpedone,  Alain  Boudet  and  Bouchet.  When  the  number  of  ten  was  completed,  they
retired  to  their  lodgings,  to  prepare  and  arm  themselves.  When  the  news  of  this  combat
was  spread  through  the  army,  and  the  names  of  the  ten  were  told,  the  knights  and  squires
said, — “ They  are  lucky  fellows,  thus  to  have  such  a gallant  feat  of  arms  fall  to  their  lot.”
“ Would  to  Heaven,”  added  many,  “ that  we  were  of  the  ten.”  All  the  knights  and  squires
seemed  to  rejoice  at  this  event,  except  the  lord  de  Coucy.  I believe  the  lord  de  Thim  was
a dependant  on,  or  of  the  company  of,  the  lord  de  Coucy  : for,  when  he  repaired  to  his  tent
to  arm,  he  found  him  there,  and  acknowledged  him  for  his  lord.  He  related  to  him  the
challenge  of  the  Saracen,  and  that  he  had  accepted  being  one  of  the  ten.  All  present  were
loud  in  praise  of  it,  except  the  lord  de  Coucy,  who  said, — “ Hold  your  tongues,  you
youngsters,  who  as  yet  know  nothing  of  the  world,  and  who  never  consider  consequences,
but  always  applaud  folly  in  preference  to  good.  I see  no  advantage  in  this  combat,  for
many  reasons : one  is,  that  ten  noble  and  distinguished  gentlemen  are  about  to  fight  with
ten  Saracens.  How  do  we  know  if  their  opponents  are  gentlemen  ? They  may,  if  they
choose,  bring  to  the  combat  ten  varlets,  or  knaves,  and,  if  they  are  defeated,  what  is  the
gain?  We  shall  not  the  sooner  win  the  town  of  Africa,  but  by  it  risk  very  valuable  lives.
Perhaps  they  may  form  an  ambuscade,  and,  while  our  friends  are  on  the  plain  waiting  for
their  opponents,  surround  them  .and  carry  them  off,  by  which  wTe  shall  be  greatly  weakened.
I therefore  say,  that  Affrenal  has  not  wisely  managed  this  matter ; and,  when  he  first  met
the  Saracen,  he  should  have  otherwise  answered,  and  said, — ‘ I am  not  the  commander-in-
chief of  our  army,  but  one  of  the  least  in  it ; and  you  Saracen,  who  address  yourself  to  me
and  blame  our  faith,  are  not  qualified  to  discuss  such  matters,  nor  have  you  well  addressed
yourself.  I will  conduct  you  to  my  lords,  and  assure  you,  on  my  life,  that  no  harm  befal
you  in  going  or  in  returning,  for  my  lords  will  cheerfully  listen  to  you.’  He  should  then
have  led  him  to  the  duke  of  Bourbon  and  the  council  of  war,  when  his  proposal  would  have
been  heard  and  discussed  at  leisure,  his  intentions  been  known,  and  answers  made  according  as
they  should  think  the  matter  deserved.  Such  a combat  should  never  be  undertaken  but  after
great  deliberation,  especially  with  enemies  like  to  those  we  are  engaged  with.  And  when


470


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


it  had  been  agreed  on,  that  the  names  and  qualities  of  each  combatant  should  be  declared,
we  would  then  have  selected  proper  persons  to  meet  them,  and  proper  securities  would  have
been  required  from  the  Saracens  for  the  uninterrupted  performance  of  the  combat,  and  a due
observance  of  the  articles.  If  matters  had  been  thus  managed,  lord  of  Thim,  I think  it
would  have  been  better.  It  would  be  well  if  it  could  be  put  on  this  footing ; and  I will
speak  to  the  duke  of  Bourbon  and  the  principal  barons  in  the  army,  and  hear  what  they
shall  say  on  the  subject.” — The  lord  de  Coucy  then  departed  for  the  tent  of  the  duke  of
Bourbon,  where  the  barons  were  assembled,  as  they  had  heard  of  this  challenge,  to  consider
what  might  be  the  probable  event  of  it.  Although  the  lord  de  Coucy  had  intended  his
speech  to  the  lord  de  Thim  as  advice  for  his  benefit,  he  did  not  the  less  arm  himself : when
fully  equipped,  he  went  with  his  companions,  who  were  completely  armed,  and  in  good  array,
with  sir  Guy  de  la  Tremouille  at  their  head,  to  meet  the  Saracens.

During  this,  there  was  conversation  on  the  subject  between  the  lords  in  the  tent  of  the
duke  of  Bourbon : many  thought  the  accepting  such  a challenge  improper,  and  supported
the  opinion  of  the  lord  de  Coucy,  who  said  it  ought  to  have  been  ordered  otherwise.  But
some,  and  in  particular  the  lord  Philip  d’ Artois,  count  d’Eu,  and  the  lord  Philip  de  Bar,
said, — “ Since  the  challenge  has  been  accepted  by  our  knights,  they  would  be  disgraced  were
the  combat  now  broken  off : and  in  the  name  of  God  and  our  Lady,  let  them  accomplish  it
the  best  manner  they  can.”  This  was  adopted  ; for  it  was  now  too  far  advanced  to  be  stopped.
It  was  therefore  ordered  to  draw  out  the  whole  army  properly  arrayed,  that  if  the  Saracens
had  formed  any  bad  designs,  they  might  be  prepared  to  meet  them.  Every  one,  therefore,
made  himself  ready : the  whole  were  drawn  up,  as  if  for  instant  combat ; the  Genoese
cross-bows  on  one  side,  and  the  knights  and  squires  on  the  other  ; each  lord  under  his  own
banner  or  pennon  emblazoned  with  his  arms.  It  was  a fine  sight  to  view  the  army  thus
displayed,  and  they  showed  great  eagerness  to  attack  the  Saracens.

The  ten  knights  and  squires  were  advanced  on  the  plain  waiting  for  their  opponents,  but
they  came  not,  nor  showed  any  appearance  of  so  doing ; for,  when  they  saw  the  Christian
army  so  handsomely  drawn  out  in  battle-array,  they  were  afraid  to  advance  though  they
were  thrice  their  numbers.  At  times  they  sent  horsemen,  well  mounted,  to  ride  near  their
army,  observe  its  disposition,  and  then  gallop  back,  which  was  solely  done  through  malice,
to  annoy  the  Christians.

This  was  the  hottest  day  they  felt,  and  it  was  so  extremely  oppressive  that  the  most  active
among  them  were  almost  stifled  in  their  armour : they  had  never  suffered  so  much  before,
and  yet  they  remained  expecting  the  ten  Saracens,  but  in  vain,  for  they  never  heard  a word
from  them.  The  army  was  ordered  to  attack  the  town  of  Africa,  since  they  were  prepared,
and  thus  pass  the  day ; and  the  ten  champions,  in  regard  to  their  honour,  were  to  remain  on
their  ground  to  the  evening.

The  knights  and  squires  advanced  with  great  alacrity  to  the  attack  of  the  town,  but  they
were  sorely  oppressed  with  the  heat ; and  had  the  Saracens  known  their  situation,  they  might
have  done  them  much  damage,  probably  they  might  even  have  raised  the  siege  and  obtained
a complete  victory,  for  the  Christians  were  exceedingly  weakened  and  worn  down.  True  it
is,  they  gained  by  storm  the  wall  of  the  first  enclosure  : but  no  one  inhabited  that  part,  and
the  enemy  retired  within  their  second  line  of  defence,  skirmishing  as  they  retreated,  and
without  any  great  loss.  The  Christians  paid  dear  for  an  inconsiderable  advantage  : the
heat  of  the  sun  and  its  reflection  on  the  sands,  added  to  the  fatigue  of  fighting,  which
lasted  until  evening,  caused  the  deaths  of  several  valiant  knights  and  squires  : the  more
the  pity.

I will  mention  the  names  of  those  who  this  day  fell  victims  to  the  heat  and  unhealthiness
of  the  climate.  First,  sir  William  de  Gacille,  sir  Guiscard  de  la  Garde,  sir  Lyon  Scalet,  sir
Guy  de  la  Salveste,  sir  William  d’Estapelle,  sir  William  de  Guiret,  sir  Raffroy  de  la  Chapelle,
the  lord  de  Pierre  Buffiere,  the  lord  de  Bonnet,  sir  Robert  de  Hanges,  sir  Stephen  de  San-
cerre,  sir  Aubert  de  la  Motte,  sir  Alain  de  la  Champaigne,  sir  Geoffry  Sressiers,  sir  Raoul
d’Econflan,  the  lord  de  Bourg  from  Artois,  sir  John  de  Crie,  bastard  de  la  Mouleraye,  sir
Tristan  his  brother,  sir  Arne  de  Consay,  sir  Arne  de  Donnay,  sir  John  de  Compaignfe,  sir
Fouke  d’Escauffours,  sir  John  de  Dignant,  sir  John  de  Cathenais.  I will  now  add  the  names


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


477


of  squires  who  fell  : Fouchans  de  Liege,  John  des  Isles,  Blondelet  d’Arenton,  John  de  la
Motte,  Blomberis,  Floridas  de  Rocque,  the  lord  de  Bellefreres,  William  Fondrigay,  Walter
de  Canfours,  John  Morillon,  Peter  de  Maulves,  Guillot  Villain,  John  de  la  Lande,  John
Purier,  John  le  Moine,  John  de  Launay  and  William  du  Parc.

Now  consider  how  great  was  this  loss  ; and,  had  the  advice  of  the  gallant  lord  de  Coucy
been  followed,  it  would  not  have  happened,  for  the  army  would  have  remained  quietly  in  its
camp,  as  it  had  hitherto  done.  The  whole  army  were  dismayed  at  it,  and  each  bewailed  the
loss  of  his  friend.  They  retired  late  to  their  camp,  and  kept  a stronger  guard  than  usual,
during  the  night,  for  fear  of  the  Saracens.  It  passed  however  without  further  accident,  and
more  prudent  arrangements  were  made.  The  Saracens  were  ignorant  of  what  their  enemies
had  suffered ; had  they  known  it,  they  would  have  had  a great  advantage  over  them,  but
they  were  in  dread  of  the  Christians,  and  never  ventured  to  attack  them  but  in  skirmishes,
retreating  after  one  or  two  charges.  The  person  among  them  who  had  shown  the
most  courage  was  Agadinquor  d’Oliferne.  He  was  enamoured  with  the  daughter  of
the  king  of  Tunis,  and  in  compliment  to  her,  was  eager  to  perform  brilliant  actions.

Thus  was  the  siege  of  Africa  continued  ; but  the  relations  and  friends  of  the  knights  and
squires  who  had  gone  thither,  from  France  and  other  countries,  received  no  intelligence,  nor
knew  more  of  them  than  if  they  were  dead.  They  wero  so  much  alarmed  at  not  having  any
news  of  them  that  many  processions  were  made  in  England,  France  and  Ilainault,  to  the
churches  to  pray  God  that  he  would  bring  them  back,  in  safety,  to  their  several  homes.  The
intention  of  the  Christians  was  to  remain  before  the  town  of  Africa,  until  they  should  have
conquered  it  by  storm,  treaty  or  famine.  The  king  of  Sicily,  as  well  as  the  inhabitants  of
the  adjacent  islands,  were  anxious  it  should  be  so,  for  the  Africans  had  done  them
frequent  damage ; but  the  Genoese  were  particularly  kind,  in  supplying  the  knights
and  squires  with  everything  they  wanted,  to  prevent  them  from  being  tired  with  the  length
of  the  campaign.

To  say  the  truth,  this  was  a very  great  enterprise,  and  the  knights  and  squires  showed  much
courage  and  perseverance  in  continuing  the  siege  in  so  unhealthy  a climate,  after  the  great
losses  they  had  suffered,  without  assistance  from  any  one  ; and  even  when  the  Genoese,  who
had  first  proposed  the  expedition,  were  dissembling  with  them,  and  as  it  was  said,  were  in
treaty  with  the  Saracens,  to  leave  the  Christian  army  unsupported  and  neglected  as  I shall
relate  in  due  time,  according  to  the  reports  that  were  made  to  me.

We  will  now  leave  the  affairs  of  Africa,  and  speak  of  the  handsome  feasts  that  were  at  this
time  given  at  London.


CHAPTER  XXIII. A GRAND  TOURNAMENT  IS  HOLDEN  AT  LONDON. THE  KING  OF  ENGLAND  GIVES

SPLENDID  ENTERTAINMENTS  DURING  THE  SIEGE  OF  THE  TOWN  OF  AFRICA  BY  THE

CHRISTIANS. THE  COUNT  d’oSTREVANT  RECEIVES  THE  ORDER  OF  THE  GARTER,  WHICH

DISPLEASES  THE  KING  OF  FRANCE.

News  of  the  splendid  feasts  and  entertainments  made  for  Queen  Isabella’s  public  entry
into  Paris  was  carried  to  many  countries,  and  very  justly,  for  they  were  most  honourably
conducted.  The  king  of  England  and  his  three  uncles  had  received  the  fullest  information
of  them  : for  some  of  his  knights  had  been  present,  who  had  reported  all  that  had  passed
with  the  utmost  fidelity.  In  imitation  of  this,  the  king  of  England  ordered  grand  tourna-
ments and  feasts  to  be  holden  in  the  city  of  London,  where  sixty  knights  should  be  accom-
panied by  sixty  noble  ladies,  richly  ornamented  and  dressed.  The  sixty  knights  were  to  tilt
for  two  days  ; that  is  to  say,  on  the  Sunday  after  Michaelmas-day,  and  the  Monday  following-
in  the  year  of  grace  1390.  The  sixty  knights  were  to  set  out  at  two  o’clock  in  the  afternoon
from  the  Tower  of  London,  with  their  ladies,  and  parade  through  the  streets,  down  Cheap-
side,  to  a large  square  called  Smithfield.  There  the  knights  were  to  wait  on  the  Sunday
the  arrival  of  any  foreign  knights  who  might  be  desirous  of  tilting  ; and  this  feast  of  the
Sunday  was  called  the  challengers.  The  same  ceremonies  were  to  take  place  on  the  Monday,
and  the  sixty  knights  to  be  prepared  for  tilting  courteously  with  blunted  lances  against  all


473


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


comers.  The  prize  for  the  best  knight  of  the  opponents  was  to  he  a rich  crown  of  gold,  that
for  the  tenants  of  the  lists  a very  rich  golden  clasp  : they  were  to  be  given  to  the  most  gallant
tilter,  according  to  the  judgment  of  the  ladies,  who  would  be  present  with  the  queen  of
England  and  the  great  barons,  as  spectators.

On  the  Tuesday,  the  tournaments  were  to  be  continued  by  squires,  against  others  of  the
same  rank  who  wished  to  oppose  them.  The  prize  for  the  opponents  was  a courser  saddled
and  bridled,  and  for  the  tenants  of  the  lists  a falcon.  The  manner  of  holding  this  feast  being
settled,  heralds  were  sent  to  proclaim  it  throughout  England,  Scotland,  Hainault,  Germany,
Flanders,  and  France.  It  was  ordered  by  the  council  to  what  parts  each  herald  was  to  go ;
and,  having  time  beforehand,  they  published  it  in  most  countries.

Many  knights  and  squires  from  foreign  lands  made  preparations  to  attend  it : some  to  see
the  manners  of  the  English,  others  to  take  part  in  the  tournaments.  On  the  feast  being  made
known  in  Hainault,  sir  William  de  Hainault  count  d’Ostrevant,  who  was  at  that  time  young
and  gallant,  and  fond  of  tilting,  determined,  in  his  own  mind,  to  be  present  and  to  honour
and  make  acquaintance  with  his  cousin,  king  Richard,  and  his  uncles  whom  he  had  never
seen.  He  therefore  engaged  many  knights  and  squires  to  accompany  him  ; in  particular  the
lord  de  Gomegines,  because  he  was  well  known  in  England,  having  lived  there  some  time.
Sir  William  resolved,  while  his  preparations  were  making,  to  visit  his  father,  the  count  of
Hainault,  Holland,  and  Zealand,  to  speak  with  him  on  the  subject,  and  to  take  leave  of  him
before  he  went  to  England.  He  therefore  set  out  from  Quesnoy,  in  Hainault,  and  continued
his  journey  to  the  Hague,  a good  town  in  Holland,  where  his  father  then  resided.  During
the  visit,  he  told  his  father  his  intentions  to  partake  of  the  great  feast  in  England,  to  see  his
cousins  and  other  English  lords  whom  he  was  desirous  of  knowing.  “ William,”  replied  the
count,  “ my  good  son,  you  have  nothing  to  do  in  England  : you  are  now  connected  by  marriage
with  the  blood  royal  of  France,  and  your  sister  is  the  wife  of  the  eldest  son  of  our  cousin  the
duke  of  Burgundy  : you  have  no  occasion,  therefore,  to  seek  other  connections.”  “ My  lord,”
answered  sir  William,  “ I do  not  wish  to  go  to  England  to  form  any  alliance,  but  merely  to
tilt  and  enjoy  this  feast,  which  has  been  publicly  proclaimed  everywhere,  and  visit  my
cousins,  whom  I have  never  seen.  Should  I not  go  thither,  after  the  particular  invitation  I
have  had,  for  a purpose  messenger  brought  it  me,  my  refusal  will  be  considered  as  the  effect
of  pride  and  presumption.  I feel  myself  bound  therefore  in  honour  to  go,  and  I beg,  father,
that  you  will  not  refuse  me  your  consent.”  “ William,”  replied  the  count,  “ you  are  your
own  master  ; act  as  you  please  ; but  I should  think,  for  the  sake  of  peace,  it  were  better  you
did  not  go.”

The  count  d’Ostrevant,  perceiving  this  subject  was  disagreeable  to  his  father,  turned  the
conversation  to  other  matters ; but  his  resolution  was  fixed,  and  his  purveyances  were
continued  to  be  made  and  forwarded  to  Calais.  His  herald,  Gomegines,  was  sent  to
England  to  inform  the  king  and  his  uncles,  that  he  would  come  honourably  attended  to  his
feast.  They  were  much  pleased  at  this  intelligence,  and  presented  the  herald  with  great  gifts,
which  were  very  acceptable,  for  he  became  blind  towards  the  end  of  his  days.  I know  not
if  he  had  angered  God,  that  he  was  afflicted  with  such  a punishment ; but  this  herald,  when
in  power,  had  behaved  with  so  much  insolence,  that  he  was  little  pitied  in  his  distress.
The  count  d’Ostrevant  took  leave  of  his  father,  and,  on  his  departure  from  the  Hague,
returned  to  his  lady  at  Quesnoy.  Many  noble  knights  were  busy  in  preparations  for  this
feast  that  had  been  so  pompously  proclaimed.

The  count  Waleran  de  Saint  Pol,  who  had  married  the  half-sister  to  king  Richard,  assem-
bled a handsome  body  of  knights  and  squires,  and  with  them  made  for  Calais,  where  passage-
vessels  were  waiting  to  convey  to  Dover  the  lords  and  knights  going  to  this  tournament.
From  Dover  they  continued  their  journey  to  London,  where  their  servants  had  previously
secured  their  lodgings.

The  count  d’Ostrevant  set  out  from  Hainault  with  a numerous  attendance  of  knights  and
squires,  and  travelled  through  Artois  to  Calais,  where  he  met  the  count  de  St.  Pol.  When
the  wind  was  favourable,  and  their  attendants  embarked,  they  crossed  the  channel ; but  it
was  told  me,  and  I believe  it,  that  the  count  de  St.  Pol  arrived  first  at  London,  where  he
found  the  king  and  his  brother-in-law,  sir  John  Holland,  who  with  many  other  nobles,  made


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


479


him  a hearty  welcome,  and  enquired  the  news  in  France.  The  count  d’Ostrevant  having
crossed  the  sea,  stopped  at  Canterbury,  and  on  the  Friday  morning,  without  breaking  his
fast,  paid  his  devotions  at  the  shrine  of  Thomas  a Becket,  making  at  the  same  time  a very
rich  offering  at  that  altar.  He  remained  that  whole  day  at  Canterbury,  and  on  the  following
went  to  Rochester.  On  account  of  his  numerous  train,  he  travelled  but  a short  day’s  journey,
to  spare  his  horses  that  carried  the  baggage.  After  mass  he  left  Rochester  and  dined  at
Hartford,  whence  he  continued  his  journey  to  London,  for  it  was  on  this  Sunday  the  tour-
naments were  to  begin.

This  Sunday,  according  to  proclamation,  being  the  next  to  Michaelmas  day,  was  the
beginning  of  the  tiltings,  and  called  the  feast  of  the  challengers.  About  three  o’clock,  there
paraded  out  from  the  Tower  of  London,  which  is  situated  in  the  square  of  St.  Catherine,  on
the  banks  of  the  Thames,  sixty  barded  coursers  ornamented  for  the  tournament,  on  each  was
mounted  a squire  of  honour  that  advanced  only  at  a foot’s  pace  ; then  came  sixty  ladies  of
rank,  mounted  on  palfreys  most  elegantly  and  richly  dressed,  following  each  other,  every  one
leading  a knight  with  a silver  chain  completely  armed  for  tilting  ; and  in  this  procession  they
moved  on  through  the  streets  of  London,  attended  by  numbers  of  minstrels  and  trumpets,  to
Smithfield.  The  queen  of  England  and  her  ladies  and  damsels  were  already  arrived  and
placed  in  chambers  handsomely  decorated.  The  king  was  with  the  queen.  When  the  ladies
who  led  the  knights  arrived  in  the  square,  their  servants  were  ready  to  assist  them  to  dis-
mount from  their  palfreys,  and  to  conduct  them  to  the  apartments  prepared  for  them.  The
knights  remained  until  their  squires  of  honour  had  dismounted  and  brought  them  their
coursers,  which  having  mounted,  they  had  their  helmets  laced  on,  and  prepared  themselves  in
all  points  for  the  tilt.

The  count  de  Saint  Pol  with  his  companions  now  advanced,  handsomely  armed  for  the
occasion,  and  the  tournament  began.  Every  foreign  knight  who  pleased  tilted,  or  had  time
for  so  doing,  before  the  evening  set  in.  The  tiltings  were  well  and  long  continued  until  night
forced  them  to  break  off.  The  lords  and  ladies  then  retired  where  they  had  made  appoint-
ments. The  queen  was  lodged  in  the  bishop  of  London’s  palace  near  St.  Paul’s  church,  where
the  banquet  was  held.

Towards  evening,  the  count  d’Ostrevant  arrived,  and  was  kindly  received  by  king  Richard
and  his  lords.  The  prize  for  the  opponents  was  adjudged  to  the  count  de  St.  Pol,  as  the  best
knight  at  this  tournament,  and  that  for  the  tenants  to  the  earl  of  Huntingdon.  The  dancings
were  at  the  queen’s  residence,  in  the  presence  of  the  king,  his  uncles  and  the  barons  of
England.  The  ladies  and  damsels  continued  their  amusements,  before  and  after  supper,
until  it  was  time  to  retire,  when  all  went  to  their  lodgings,  except  such  as  were  at-
tached to  the  king  or  queen,  who,  during  the  tournament,  lived  at  the  palace  of  the
bishop  of  London.

You  would  have  seen  on  the  ensuing  morning,  Monday,  squires  and  varlets  busily  employed,
in  different  parts  of  London,  furbishing  and  making  ready  armour  and  horses  for  their
masters  who  were  to  engage  in  the  justs.  In  the  afternoon,  king  Richard  entered  Smithfield
magnificently  accompanied  by  dukes,  lords,  and  knights,  for  he  was  chief  of  the  tenants  of
the  lists.  The  queen  took  her  station  as  on  the  preceding  day,  with  her  ladies,  in  the
apartments  that  had  been  prepared  for  her.  The  count  d’Ostrevant  came  next,  with  a large
company  of  knights  and  squires  fully  armed  for  tilting  ; then  the  count  de  Saint  Pol  and  the
knights  from  France.

The  tournament  now  began,  and  every  one  exerted  himself  to  the  utmost  to  excel : many
were  unhorsed,  and  more  lost  their  helmets.  The  justing  continued  with  great  courage  and
perseverance  until  night  put  an  end  to  it.  The  company  now  retired  to  their  lodgings  or  their
homes  j and,  when  the  hour  for  supper  was  near,  the  lords  and  ladies  attended  it,  which  was
splendid  and  well  served.  The  prize  for  the  opponents  at  the  tournament  was  adjudged,  by  the
ladies,  lords,  and  heralds,  to  the  count  d’Ostrevant,  who  far  eclipsed  all  who  had  tilted  that
day  ; that  for  the  tenants  was  given  to  a gallant  knight  of  England  called  sir  Hugh  Spenser.

On  the  morrow,  Tuesday,  the  tournament  was  renewed  by  the  squires,  who  tilted  in  the
presence  of  the  king,  queen,  and  all  the  nobles,  until  night,  when  all  retired  as  on  the  pre-
ceding day.  The  supper  was  as  magnificent  as  before  at  the  palace  of  the  bishop,  where  the


480


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


king  and  queen  lodged ; and  the  dancing  lasted  until  day-break,  when  the  company  broke  up
The  tournament  was  continued  on  the  Wednesday  by  all  knights  and  squires  indiscriminately,
who  were  inclined  to  just ; it  lasted  until  night,  and  the  supper  and  dances  were  as  the  pre-
ceding day.

On  Thursday,  the  king  entertained  at  supper  all  the  foreign  knights  and  squires,  and  the
queen  their  ladies  and  damsels.  The  duke  of  Lancaster  gave  a grand  dinner  to  them  on  the
Friday.  On  Saturday,  the  king  and  his  court  left  London  for  Windsor,  whither  the  count
d’Ostrevant,  the  count  de  St.  Pol,  and  the  foreign  knights  who  had  been  present  at  the  feasts,
were  invited.  All  accepted  the  invitation,  as  was  right,  and  went  to  Windsor,  which  has  a
handsome  castle,  well  built  and  richly  ornamented,  situated  on  the  Thames  twenty  miles
from  London.  The  entertainments  were  very  magnificent  in  the  dinners  and  suppers  king
Richard  made,  for  he  thought  he  could  not  pay  honour  enough  to  his  cousin  the  count  d’Ostre-
vant. He  was  solicited  by  the  king  and  his  uncles  to  be  one  of  the  companions  of  the  order  of
the  blue  Garter,  as  the  chapel  of  St.  George,  the  patron,  was  at  Windsor.  In  answer  to  their
request,  he  said  he  would  consider  of  it,  and  instantly  consulted  the  lord  de  Gomegines  and  the
bastard  Fierabras  de  Vertain,  who  were  far  from  discouraging  him  from  accepting  the  order.
He  returned  to  the  king,  and  was  admitted  a knight  companion  of  the  Garter,  to  the  great
surprise  of  the  French  knights  then  present.  They  murmured  together,  and  said, — “ This
count  d’Ostrevant  plainly  shows  that  his  heart  is  more  inclined  to  England  than  France,  when
he  thus  accepts  the  order  of  the  Garter,  which  is  the  device  of  the  kings  of  England.  He  is
purchasing  the  ill  will  of  the  court  of  France  and  of  my  lord  of  Burgundy,  whose  daughter  he
has  married,  and  a time  may  come  for  him  to  repent  of  it.  However,  to  say  the  truth,  he
must  know  what  concerns  him  best : but  he  was  well  beloved  by  the  king  of  France,  his
brother  the  duke  of  Touraine,  and  all  the  royal  family  ; so  that  when  he  came  to  them  at
Paris  or  elsewhere,  they  showed  him  more  kindness  than  to  any  other  of  their  cousins.”

Thus  was  the  count  d’Ostrevant  blamed  by  the  French,  without  the  smallest  cause ; for
what  he  had  done  was  no  way  to  injure  the  crown  of  France,  nor  his  cousins  and  friends  of
that  country.  Nothing  was  farther  from  his  mind  than  any  hostility  to  the  king  of  France  ;
but  he  had  accepted  the  Garter  to  oblige  his  cousins  in  England,  and  on  occasion  to  be  a
mediator  between  the  two  countries.  When  he  took  the  oaths  usual  on  the  admission  of
knights  to  the  order,  it  ought  to  be  known  publicly  that  nothing  was  said  or  done  prejudi-
cial to  France,  nor  any  treaties  entered  into  with  that  intent.  I mention  this,  since  it  is
impossible  to  prevent  the  envious  from  spreading  abroad  their  tales.  When  the  entertain-
ments at  Windsor  had  lasted  a sufficient  time,  and  the  king  had  made  handsome  presents  to
the  knights  and  squires  of  France,  particularly  to  the  young  count  d’Ostrevant,  the
company  took  leave  of  the  king,  the  queen,  and  the  court,  and  departed  for  their  different
homes.

Rumour,  which  magnifies  everything,  carried  to  the  king  of  France,  his  brother,  and  uncles,
every  particular  that  had  passed  at  this  feast  in  England.  Those  who  had  been  there  con-
firmed it,  nothing  was  forgotten,  but  rather  additions  made  with  the  intent  of  doing  mischief
in  preference  to  good.  They  related,  that  William  of  Hainault,  who  called  himself  count
d’Ostrevant,  had  taken  great  pains  to  honour  this  feast ; that  he  had  had  the  prize  given  him
at  the  tournament  in  preference  to  many  other  foreign  knights,  and  that  he  was  loud  in  the
praise  of  the  English,  and  was  become  the  liege-man  to  the  king  of  England  by  taking  the
oaths  and  accepting  the  order  of  the  blue  Garter,  in  the  chapel  of  Saint  George  at  Windsor,
which  order  had  been  established  by  king  Edward  and  his  son  the  prince  of  Wales  ; that  no
one  could  be  admitted  a knight  companion  of  that  order,  without  making  oath  never  to  bear
arms  against  the  crown  of  England,  and  this  oath  the  count  d’Ostrevant  had  taken  without
the  smallest  reservation.

The  king  of  France  and  his  uncles,  on  hearing  this,  were  much  troubled  and  vexed  with
the  count  d’Ostrevant.  The  king  said, — “ Only  think,  it  is  not  a year  ago  since  the  count
begged  of  me  that  his  brother  might  be  bishop  of  Cambray ; but  after  what  we  have  heard,
that  would  now  be  much  to  our  prejudice.  It  will  be  better  that  our  cousin  of  St.  Pol  have
Cambray  than  John  of  Hainault. — The  Hainaulters  were  never  our  sincere  friends,  nor  ever
will  be,  for  they  are  too  proud  and  presumptuous,  and  have  always  been  more  attached  to


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &e.


481


England  than  France,  hut  a time  may  come  when  they  shall  dearly  pay  for  it.  We  will,"
added  the  king,  “ that  the  count  d’Ostrevant  be  summoned  to  appear  before  us,  and  do
homage  for  the  county  of  Ostrevant,  or  we  will  dispossess  him  and  attach  it  to  our
crown.”  Such  of  the  council  as  were  present,  replied, — “ Sire,  you  say  well,  and  what
you  order  ought  to  be  done.”  The  duke  of  Burgundy,  whose  daughter  the  count
had  married,  was  highly  displeased  at  these  reports ; for  he  had  always  pushed  his  son-
in-law  as  much  as  he  could  into  the  good  graces  of  the  king  and  the  royal  family.  This
business  was  not  neglected ; for  the  king  of  France  wrote  very  sharp  letters  to  the  count
d’Ostrevant,  which  he  sent  to  him  at  Quesnoy,  commanding  him  to  come  to  Paris,  and,
in  the  presence  of  the  peers  of  France,  do  homage  for  the  county  of  Ostrevant,  or  he
would  make  war  upon  him,  and  dispossess  him  of  it.

The  count  d’Ostrevant,  on  perusing  these  letters,  found  that  the  king  and  his  council  were
much  angered,  and  instantly  assembled  his  most  confidential  counsellors  to  consider  of  the
answer.  He  called  to  his  aid  the  lord  de  Fontaines,  the  lord  de  Gomegines,  sir  William  de
Heremies,  the  lord  de  Trasscgnies,  the  bailiff  of  Hainault,  tbe  lord  de  Sancelles,  sir  Race  de
Montigny,  the  abbot  de  Crespin,  John  Semart,  and  James  Barrier  of  Valenciennes.  These
counsellors  having  some  time  debated,  and  turned  the  matter  over  various  ways,  thought  it
most  advisable  to  write  to  the  king  of  France,  and  answTer  generally  to  what  he  had  urged,
and  demand  an  opportunity  for  so  doing  more  particularly,  by  persons  that  were  properly
qualified  and  not  by  letters.  In  the  mean  time,  they  recommended  sending  a w'ell  informed
messenger,  to  duke  Albert  in  Holland,  to  acquaint  him  with  what  was  passing,  and  have  his
advice.  This  was  done:  they  wrote  such  humble  and  discreet  letters  to  the  king  of  France
and  his  council  as  greatly  pacified  them  ; and  sent  the  lord  de  Trasscgnies,  the  lord  de  San-
celles, John  Semart,  and  James  Barrier  to  Holland.  On  being  admitted  to  the  count  of
Holland  they  laid  before  him  the  situation  of  Hainault,  and  the  letters  that  had  been  received
from  the  king  of  France.

If  the  count  of  Holland  was  not  surprized  at  what  had  happened,  it  is  not  to  be  wondered
at ; for  he  replied, — “ I was  just  thinking  that  what  you  tell  me  would  come  to  pass  : my
son  William  had  no  business  to  go  to  England.  I have  given  up  to  him  the  government  of
Hainault : let  him  advise  with  the  wisest  and  most  prudent  in  that  country.  Make  interest
with  our  fair  cousin,  the  duke  of  Burgundy ; for  he  has  the  power  to  set  to  rights  all  this  business.
I cannot  give  you  better  advice,  nor  recommend  a more  fit  person  to  address  yourselves  to.”
On  this,  the  envoys  returned  to  Hainault,  and  related  ail  that  had  passed,  which  gave  satis-
faction. The  lord  de  Trasscgnies,  sir  William  de  Heremies,  sir  Race  de  Montigny,  John
Semart  and  James  Barrier,  were  ordered  to  wait  on  the  king  of  France  and  the  duke  of
Burgundy.  The  detail  of  all  that  passed  would  be  too  long  for  such  a history  as  this,  that
embraces  so  many  objects.  The  conclusion  was,  that  notwithstanding  the  support  of  the
duke  of  Burgundy,  the  count  d’Ostrevant  was  forced  to  go  to  Paris  to  perform  his  duty,  and
acknowledge  his  holding  the  county  of  Ostrevant  from  the  crown  of  France,  otherwise  he
would  have  had  war  instantly  carried  into  Hainault.  The  lord  de  Coucy  and  sir  Oliver  de
Clisson  took  much  pains  that  a war  should  ensue ; but  the  lord  de  la  Riviere  and  sir  John
le  Mercier  counteracted  them  to  the  utmost  of  their  power.  As  we  have  dwelt  too  long  on
these  matters,  we  will  return  to  the  barons  and  knights  of  France,  who  were  besieging  the
strong  town  of  Africa  against  the  Saracens.


CHAPTER  XXIV. THE  SIEGE  OF  AFRICA  IS  RAISED. THE  CAUSE  OF  IT. THE  KNIGHTS  AND

SQUIRES  RETURN  TO  THEIR  OWN  COUNTRIES.

You  have  before  heard,  what  pains  the  Christians  took  to  conquer  the  town  of  Africa  ;
for  they  thought,  if  they  succeeded,  they  should  gain  great  renown,  and  be  able  to  withstand,
during  the  winter,  all  the  forces  the  infidels  could  bring  against  them,  until  they  should  be
reinforced  from  Europe,  especially  by  the  king  of  France,  who  was  young  and  fond  of  arms,
and  there  were  still  two  years  to  run.  of  the  truce  with  England  : the  Christians  had  there-
fore laid  siege  to  Africa,  as  being  the  most  convenient  entrance  into  Barbary.  The  infidels,

VOL.  II.  I I


482


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


suspicious  of  such  being  their  intentions,  well  victualled  the  place,  and  reinforced  it  with  a
new  garrison,  the  better  to  guard  it.

The  siege  still  continued,  although,  after  the  before-mentioned  loss  on  the  part  of  the
Christians,  little  advantage  was  gained,  and  the  men  at  arms  were  greatly  discouraged ; for
they  could  not  obtain  any  opportunity  of  changing  the  tiresomeness  of  their  situation,  and  of
revenging  themselves  on  the  enemy.  Many,  in  consequence,  began  to  murmur  and  say, —
“We remain  here  in  vain;  for  if  we  do  nothing  more  effectual  than  skirmishing,  we  shall
never  gain  the  town:  if,  by  accident,  we  kill  one  infidel  by  our  arrows,  they  supply  his
place  with  ten  more,  as  they  arc  in  their  own  country,  and  have  provision  and  stores  in
abundance,  while  ours  are  brought  with  much  difficulty  and  uncertainty.  What  will
become  of  ns,  if  vve  stay  longer  ? The  cold  nights  of  winter  will  freeze  and  benumb  us  to
death.  We  shall  be  in  a most  disagreeable  state  for  many  reasons  : first,  at  that  time  of  the
year  the  sea  will  be  so  tempestuous  no  one  will  venture  on  it.  We  have  now  but  eight  days
provision,  and  should  the  stormy  weather  set  in,  and  prevent  any  vessels  arriving,  we  must
inevitably  perish.  Secondly,  suppose  we  have  provision  and  stores  in  plenty,  how  can  the
army  support,  for  so  long  a time,  the  fatigue  of  a regular  guard  ? The  danger  will  be  too
great ; for  the  enemy  is  on  his  own  ground,  and  well  acquainted  with  the  country,  and  may
attack  ns  in  the  night-season,  as  we  have  already  seen,  and  do  us  infinite  damage.  Thirdly,
should  we  be  infected  with  any  disorder,  from  want  of  better  air  and  fresh  provision,  it  may
be  contagious,  and  we  shall  drop  off  one  after  another,  for  we  have  not  any  remedies  to  guard
against  such  a misfortune.  Besides,  should  the  Genoese,  who  are  a treacherous  race,  wish
to  return  without  us,  they  might  embark  in  the  night-time,  and,  when  once  on  board  their
vessels,  we  could  not  prevent  them,  and  they  would  leave  us  here  to  pay  the  reckoning.  It
will  be  right  that  we  remonstrate  with  our  lords,  who  are  enjoying  their  ease,-  on  these  our
suspicions  ; for  the  Genoese  do  not  conceal  their  opinions  of  us.  Some  of  their  talkei-s  have
said  to  our  men, — ‘ You  Frenchmen  are  odd  men  at  arms : when  we  sailed  from  Genoa,  we
thought  you  would  have  conquered  this  town  of  Africa  within  a week  or  fortnight  after  your
landing  ; but  we  have  been  here  nearly  two  months,  and  nothing  has  been  done : by  the
assaults  and  skirmishes  you  make,  the  town  need  not  fear  you  these  two  years ; and  at  the
rate  you  go  on,  you  will  never  conquer  the  kingdoms  of  Tunis  or  Africa.’  ”

The  Genoese  had  so  frequently  held  this  language  to  the  varlets  and  others  of  the  army,
that  it  reached  the  ears  of  their  lords,  and  was  repeated  to  the  lord  de  Coucy,  who  was  wise
and  prudent,  and  to  whom  the  whole  army  looked  up.  He  considered  a while,  and  then
said  to  himself, — “ The  conversations  of  these  Genoese  are  but  too  well  founded  in  truth  : to
put  a stop  to  them,  a full  assembly  of  the  principal  knights  must  be  held,  to  consider  how
we  are  to  proceed,  for  winter  is  fast  approaching.”  At  this  council,  which  was  held  in  the
duke  of  Bourbon’s  tent,  various  plans  were  proposed  ; but  the  conclusion  was,  that  they
would,  for  this  season,  break  up  the  siege,  and  every  person  should  return  home  the  way  he
had  come.  The  chief  lords  secretly  made  preparations  accordingly,  and,  calling  to  them  the
masters  of  the  galleys  and  other  vessels,  acquainted  them  with  their  intentions.  The  captains
were  much  surprised,  and  said, — “ My  lords,  do  not  harbour  any  suspicions  of  us,  for  we  are
pledged  to  you  by  our  honour  and  oaths,  and  we  will  most  loyally  and  honestly  acquit
ourselves.  Had  we  pleased,  we  might  have  accepted  the  favourable  offers  that  were  made
us  by  the  Africans,  but  we  refused  to  enter  into  any  treaty  with  them,  from  our  attachments
and  engagements  to  you.’’

“We  have  no  doubts  of  you,  gentlemen,”  replied  the  lord  de  Coucy,  “ for  we  look  on  you
as  loyal  and  valiant  men  : but  we  have  considered  our  situation  ; winter  is  at  hand,  and  we
have  a scarcity  of  provision.  Should  it  be  God’s  good  pleasure  that  we  return  to  France,  we
will  inform  the  king,  who  is  young  and  fond  of  war,  of  the  state  of  this  country.  At  this
moment,  he  knows  not  where  to  employ  his  force,  for  he  and  the  king  of  England  are  at
peace.  lie  is  unhappy  when  idle,  and  we  shall  advise  him  to  undertake  an  expedition
hither,  as  well  to  have  the  pleasure  of  meeting  the  king  of  Sicily  as  to  conquer  this  country
from  the  Saracens.  Prepare  and  make  ready  your  galleys,  for  we  shall  leave  this  coast  in  a
very  few  days.”  The  Genoese  were  not  well  pleased  with  the  French  lords  for  thus  breaking


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


4.°n


up  the  siege  of  the  town  of  Africa  ; but,  as  they  could  not  amend  it,  they  were  forced  to
bear  with  it  as  well  as  they  could.

There  was  a rumour  current  in  the  Christian  camp,  that  the  Genoese  were  treating  with
the  Saracens  to  betray  and  deliver  up  to  them  the  remainder  of  the  army.  It  was  firmly
believed  by  many,  and  they  said : “ Our  principal  commanders,  the  duke  of  Bourbon,  the
dauphin  of  Auvergne,  the  lord  de  Coucy,  sir  Guy  de  la  Tremouille,  sir  Philip  do  Bar  and
sir  John  de  Vienne,  are  well  acquainted  with  this  plot  ; and  for  this  reason  they  have
determined  suddenly  to  break  up  the  siege.”  When  it  was  proclaimed  that  every  one  was
to  embark  on  board  the  galleys  or  other  vessels,  in  an  orderly  manner,  yon  would  have  seen
the  varlets  in  the  greatest  bustle  packing  np  the  purveyances  of  their  different  lords,  and
conveying  them  on  board  the  ships  which  lay  at  anchor  off  the  shore.  When  all  things  were
embarked,  the  knights  entered  the  galleys  that  had  brought  them  thither : many  had
bargained  with  the  captains  to  carry  them  to  Naples,  others  to  Sicily,  Cyprus  or  Rhodes,
thence  to  perform  a pilgrimage  to  Jerusalem.

After  having  remained  sixty-one  days  before  the  town  of  Africa,  they  broke  up  the  siege,
and  set  sail  from  that  country  in  sight  of  the  Saracens  from  the  walls.  This  gave  them  such
joy  that  they  sounded  horns  and  beat  drums,  and  made  so  great  a noise  by  their  shoutings,
as  to  be  heard  in  the  army  of  the  Saracens.  Several  young  knights  mounted  their  horses,
and  galloped  to  the  place  where  the  camp  had  been,  to  see  if  they  could  find  anything  left
behind.  Agadinquor  d’Olifcrne  and  Brahadin  de  Tunis  were  the  first  to  arrive ; but  the
Christians  had  so  completely  cleared  the  camp,  that  there  was  nothing  for  them  to  carry
away.  The  Saracens  left  their  station  to  examine  the  camp,  and  remained  more  than  two
hours  noticing  the  manner  and  form  of  it.  They  praised  much  their  subtlety  in  sinking
wells  for  fresh  water,  and,  having  for  some  time  viewed  the  galleys  under  sail,  they  returned
to  visit  their  friends  in  the  town  of  Africa.  Others  went  to  their  quarters,  and  rejoiced
greatly  that  the  Christians  had  not  dared  to  remain  longer.  They  held  their  power  very
cheap,  and  said,  they  should  no  longer  fear,  as  they  had  done,  the  French  or  Genoese.
They  spoke  truly,  as  I shall  explain.  When  this  siege  was  raised,  the  Saracens  grew  proud
on  the  occasion,  for  they  saw  the  Genoese  had  exerted  themselves  to  their  utmost  power  to
annoy  them  : this  expedition  could  not  have  been  undertaken  without  an  enormous  expense,
and  they  had  not  gained  anything.  But  they  did  not  know  the  great  losses  the  Christians
had  suffered  until  that  day,  and  I will  tell  you  by  what  accident  it  happened.  In  the  camp
of  the  Christians  was  found,  lying  on  the  ground,  a Genoese  varlet,  who  was  too  ill  with  a
fever  to  be  removed  when  the  sailors  sought  for  their  men  to  embark  on  board  the  barges.
The  Saracens  were  delighted  on  finding  this  man,  and  ordered  no  harm  to  be  done  him.
They  carried  him  to  the  principal  commanders  of  their  army,  and  told  them  where  they  had
found  him.  An  interpreter  was  sent  for  to  examine  him  ; but  at  first  he  would  not  make
any  answers,  considering  himself  as  a dead  man,  and  desiring  they  would  put  him  out  of  his
pain.  The  chiefs  of  the  army,  such  as  Agadinquor  d’Oliferne  and  Brahadin  de  Tunis,  thought
they  should  gain  nothing  by  his  death  ; and  to  induce  him  to  answer  truly,  without  any
equivocation,  what  questions  should  be  put  to  him,  they  promised  to  spare  his  life,  and  send
him  safe  and  well  to  his  own  country  on  board  of  the  first  galley  that  should  come  thither
from  Genoa  or  Marseilles,  with  a present  of  one  hundred  golden  besants.  The  varlet  hearing
this,  was  freed  from  his  fears  of  death  and  made  easy  ; for  he  knew  that  these  Saracens  never
break  their  words ; and,  as  every  one  dies  as  late  as  he  can,  he  said  to  the  interpreter,
“ Make  them  all  swear  on  their  faith  to  keep  what  they  have  promised,  and  I will  truly
answer  whatever  you  may  ask.”  The  interpreter  repeated  this  to  the  lords,  who  having
consented  to  his  demand,  the  varlet  said,  “ Now  ask  what  questions  you  please,  and  I will
answer  them.”  He  was  first  asked  who  he  was,  and  his  place  of  residence,  and  replied,
“ Portevances*  ; [that  his  name  was  Simon  Mollevin,  and  son  to  a captain  of  a galley  at
Portevances  3:”  then  as  to  the  commanders  of  the  Christian  army.  He  named  several ; for,
having  kept  company  and  drank  with  the  heralds,  he  had  often  heard  their  names  mentioned
and  remembered  some  of  them.  He  was  asked,  if  he  knew  the  reasons  why  they  had  so
suddenly  raised  the  siege  and  departed.  To  this  he  made  a very  prudent  reply,  by  saying,  ho
“ Portevances.”  In  the  MSS.  Portenaucs.  Q.  if  not  Portocross,  one  of  the  islands  of  Hieres,  off  Provence.

ii  2


4R4


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND  FRANCE,  &c.


was  ignorant  of  it,  as  he  was  not  present  at  the  council  of  war  when  it  was  determined  on,
and  could  only  tell  them  what  was  the  common  report  in  the  army.  It  was  said,  that  the
French  suspected  the  Genoese  of  a design  to  betray  them  ; but  the  Genoese  declared  this  was
false,  and  wrongfully  imputed  to  them  by  the  French.  They  had  left  the  coast  because  they
were  afraid  to  winter  in  this  country,  and  risk  the  loss  of  as  many  knights  as  they  had  once
done.  “ Ask  him,”  said  the  lords  to  the  interpreter,  “ to  explain  this.”  He  replied,  “ So
great  was  the  loss  on  the  day  the  combat  was  to  have  taken  place  between  ten  of  your
knights  with  ten  of  ours,  that  upwards  of  sixty  knights  and  squires,  men  of  renown,  died
that  day  ; and  it  was  solely  on  this  account,”  as  the  Genoese  said,  “ the  siege  was  raised.”
The  Saracen  chiefs  seemed  very  much  pleased  on  hearing  this,  and  made  no  further  inquiries,
but  punctually  kept  the  promise  they  had  made  him.

On  his  return  to  Portevances  and  Genoa,  he  related  all  that  had  passed  and  what  answers
he  had  made,  for  which  he  was  no  way  blamed.  The  Saracens  said  among  themselves, —
“ We  have  been  very  negligent  in  not  taking  better  measures  against  this  union  of  the
French  and  Genoese ; for,  though  they  have  been  this  time  unsuccessful  against  Africa,  we
must  henceforward  put  our  coast  in  a better  state  of  defence  (which-we  may  easily  do  ;)  and
we  must,  in  particular,  guard  the  straits  of  Morocco  so  strongly  that  neither  the  Genoese
nor  Venetians  shall  carry  their  merchandise  to  Flanders  through  this  strait,  without  paying
so  great  a toll  as  to  make  all  the  world  wonder  thereat,  and  even  then  it  shall  be  considered
as  a matter  of  favour.”

What  these  Africans  had  proposed  they  executed  : and  all  the  kingdoms  to  the  south,  west
and  east,  formed  an  alliance,  such  as  Africa,  Tunis,  Bugia,  Morocco,  Benmarin,  Tremecjen
and  Granada,  with  a resolution  of  well  guarding  their  coasts,  and  equipping  such  a fleet  of
galleys  as  should  make  them  masters  of  the  sea,  through  hatred  to  the  French  and  Genoese
for  their  late  siege  of  Africa.  They  interrupted  so  much  the  navigation  of  the  Venetians  and
Genoese,  that  merchandise  from  Alexandria,  Cairo,  Damascus,  Venice,  Naples  or  Genoa,
was  difficult  to  be  had  in  Flanders  for  money ; and,  in  particular,  every  sort  of  spicery  was
enormously  dear.


CHAPTER  XXV. — KING  CHARLES  OF  FRANCE  PROPOSES  TO  MARCH  TO  ITALY,  TO  FORM  AN

UNION  OF  THE  CHURCH  BY  FORCE,  AND  THENCE  TO  BARBARY. AMBASSADORS  FROM

ENGLAND  OFFER  PROPOSALS  FOR  A PEACE  BETWEEN  HIM  AND  KING  RICHARD. THE

DEATH  OF  JOHN  KING  OF  CASTILLE. HE  IS  SUCCEEDED  BY  IIIS  SON  HENRY,  WHO  IS

CROWNED  KING,  THOUGH  BUT  NINE  YEARS  OF  AGE.

When  the  Christian  fleet  sailed  from  Africa,  all  crossed  the  sea,  but  did  not  disembark  at
the  same  port.  Part  met  with  heavy  tempests,  that  put  them  in  great  danger  : the  greater
part,  however,  returned  to  Genoa.  Religious  processions  were  making  in  France  for  their
safety,  for  they  knew  not  what  was  become  of  them,  not  having  had  any  intelligence  since
their  departure.  The  ladies  of  Coucy,  of  Sully,  and  the  dauphiness  of  Auvergne,  were  in
great  anxiety  for  their  lords,  as  long  as  the  expedition  lasted,  and  were  much  rejoiced  on
hearing  they  were  returned.  The  duke  of  Bourbon  and  the  lord  de  Coucy  set  off  privately
for  Paris,  leaving  their  attendants  behind,  and  arrived  there  about  Martinmas-day.  The
king,  as  was  natural,  was  well  pleased  to  see  them,  and  asked  many  questions  respecting
Barbary,  and  the  success  of  the  expedition.  They  related  all  they  had  seen  or  heard,  which
was  eagerly  listened  to  by  the  king  and  his  brother,  the  duke  of  Touraine.  The  king  said,
“ If  we  can  manage  to  restore  union  to  the  church,  and  establish  a sound  peace  between  us
and  England,  we  should  very  much  like  to  lead  a great  army  to  Barbary,  to  exalt  the
Christian  faith,  confound  the  infidels,  and  acquit  the  souls  of  our  predecessors,  king  Philip  of
happy  memory,  and  king  John  our  grandfather  ; for  both  of  them  put  on  the  vermilion  cross,
to  pass  the  sea  for  the  holy  land  ; and  they  would  have  done  so,  if  violent  wars  had  not  nearly
overturned  their  kingdom.  Now,  if  we  can  restore  union  and  peace  to  the  church,  and
lengthen  our  truce  with  the  English  to  a proper  term,  we  are  resolved  to  undertake  this


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


486


expedition.”  Such  were  the  conversations  between  the  king  of  France  and  his  uncle,  the
duke  of  Bourbon,  and  the  lord  de  Coucy,  and  thus  did  things  remain.  By  degrees,  those
who  had  been  in  Africa  returned  home.  The  king  lived  at  Paris  the  whole  season,  residing
sometimes  at  the  Louvre,  at  others,  with  the  queen,  at  the  hotel  de  St.  Pol.

About  St.  Andrew’s  day,  when  the  knights  were  almost  all  returned  from  Barbary,
circumstances  which  served  for  a topic  of  conversation  with  every  one,  another  expedition
was  talked  of,  at  the  court  of  France,  but  I cannot  say  who  was  the  first  promoter  of  it.
The  king  of  France,  who  had  a great  love  of  arms,  was  thus  addressed  ; “ Sire,  your  devotion
and  inclination  naturally  lead  you  to  wish  to  carry  an  expedition  against  the  infidels  beyond
sea,  to  conquer  the  holy  land.”  “ That  is  very  true,”  answered  the  king  : “it  constitutes
the  occupation  of  my  thoughts  night  and  day.”  I believe  the  proposal  was  made  by  the  lord
de  la  Riviere  or  sir  John  le  Mercier  ; for  they  were  both  too  much  attached  to  pope  Clement,
and  so  greatly  in  the  king’s  favour,  that  whatever  they  said  was  done.  Others,  who  were
at  the  time  in  the  king’s  company,  said  ; “ Sire  you  cannot,  in  conscience,  undertake  such
an  expedition,  while  the  church  is  disunited  : begin  with  the  head,  and  your  enterprise  will
end  the  better."  “ How  would  you  have  me  begin  ?”  asked  the  king.  “ Sire,”  replied  they,
“ at  this  moment  you  have  nothing  on  your  hands.  You  are  at  peace  with  the  English ;
and  you  may,  during  the  truce,  undertake,  if  you  please,  an  expedition  : we  do  not  see  a
more  brilliant  one,  than  to  march  a large  army  to  Rome  and  destroy  this  anti-pope,  whom
the  Romans,  through  error,  have  elected  and  placed  on  the  throne  of  St.  Peter.  This  may
be  done,  if  you  exert  yourself : a more  meritorious  or  honourable  service  cannot  be  performed ;
and  the  instant  the  anti-pope  and  his  cardinals  shall  learn  you  are  advancing  against  them
with  a large  army,  they  will  surrender  themselves  to  your  mercy.

The  king  listened  attentively  to  this,  and  said  he  wTould  consider  of  it.  In  truth,  he  was
warmly  attached  to  pope  Clement ; for  the  preceding  year,  when  at  Avignon,  he  had
received  the  greatest  honours  and  attentions  from  him,  and  he  had  given  to  him,  his  brother
and  uncles,  more  than  they  had  asked.  This  he  thought  was  deserving  some  return,  and,
on  his  taking  leave,  he  had  promised  the  pope,  that  he  would  attend  to  his  affairs  in  such
wise  that  the  effect  of  his  interference  would  soon  be  known.  He  considered  himself  bound,
therefore,  to  do  something;  in  his  behalf.

At  this  time,  the  dukes  of  Berry  and  Burgundy  were  at  Paris  ; and  it  was  generally
reported,  that  soon  after  March  the  king  would  set  out  from  Paris,  for  Savoy  and  Lombardy,
and  that  the  duke  of  Savoy  was  to  send  his  cousin-german  with  him.  The  king  was  to  have
under  his  command  the  duke  of  Touraine  and  four  thousand  spears  ; the  duke  of  Burgundy
two  thousand  ; the  duke  of  Berry  the  same  number  ; the  constable  of  France  two  thousand
Bretons  and  Saintongers,  from  the  flat  countries ; the  duke  of  Bourbon  one  thousand  spears  ;
the  count  de  St.  Pol,  and  the  lord  de  Coucy,  one  thousand  spears ; and  all  these  men  at
arms  were  to  be  engaged  and  paid  for  three  months,  and  thus  from  time  to  time.  The  pope
and  cardinals  at  Avignon  were  as  much  rejoiced,  when  intelligence  of  this  was  carried  to
them,  as  if  the  expedition  were  already  commenced.  It  was  proposed  in  the  council  that  the
king  should  invite  the  duke  of  Brittany  to  form  part  of  it,  as  they  did  not  think  it  prudent
to  leave  him  behind.  The  king  in  consequence  wrote  him  a handsome  letter,  to  explain  the
plan  and  intention  of  the  expedition,  and  to  invite  him  to  make  part  of  it,  which  he  sent  by
an  honourable  man,  one  of  his  ushers  at  arms.

When  the  duke  of  Brittany  had  read  the  letter,  he  burst  out  into  laughter,  and  calling  to
him  the  lord  de  Montboucher,  said, — “ See  what  my  lord  of  France  writes  me.  He  has
undertaken  to  set  out  in  the  month  of  March  next  for  Rome,  and  destroy,  by  the  power  of
his  arms,  pope  Boniface  and  his  cardinals.  As  God  is  my  help,  he  will  never  succeed,  but
shortly  have  other  flax  to  spin,  which  will  force  him  to  give  up  such  foolish  business.  He
desires  me  to  accompany  him  with  two  thousand  lances.  As  I wish  to  pay  him  every
honour  that  is  his  due,  I shall  write  a very  civil  answer  back  to  please  him,  and  say  that,  if
he  persist  in  undertaking  the  expedition  mentioned  in  his  letter,  he  shall  not  go  without  me,
since  he  is  desirous  of  my  company ; but  I tell  you,  lord  de  Montboucher,  that  I shall  not
trouble  any  of  my  vassals  on  the  occasion,  for  I repeat,  it  will  end  in  words."  The  duke  of
Brittany  sent  very  handsome  letters  by  the  usher  at  arms,  to  the  king  at  Paris,  who  was  well


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


4 no

satisfied  with  the  answer.  No  one  attempted  to  discourage  the  king  respecting  this
expedition,  for  it  was  highly  agreeable  to  the  knights  and  squires,  as  it  made  them  of
importance,  and  employed  their  time.  All  ranks  of  persons  made  their  preparations,  even
the  clergy,  and  the  provinces  were  willing  to  tax  themselves  to  send  men  at  arms,  at  their
expense,  to  serve  the  king.

This  expedition  ended,  however,  as  the  duke  of  Brittany  had  foretold ; and  I will  relate
what  occasioned  its  being  broken  off.  About  Candlemas,  intelligence  was  brought  to  the
king  and  his  council,  which  they  had  not  thought  of,  nor  foreseen.  Part  of  the  king  of
England’s  cabinet-council  were  sent  in  handsome  state  to  wait  on  the  king  of  France  at
Paris.  At  the  head  of  this  legation  were,  sir  Thomas  Percy,  sir  Lewis  Clifford,  sir  Robert
Bricquet,  and  other  knights,  whose  names  I never  heard.  The  arrival  of  these  knights  at
Paris  was  a great  surprise  though  the  king  had  been  informed  of  their  coming ; for  the  king
of  England  had  written  to  him,  to  say  he  should  in  a few  days  send  some  of  his  council  to
Paris,  if  he  would  be  there.  The  king  of  France  was  very  anxious  to  learn  why  these
ambassadors  had  been  sent  in  such  haste,  and  what  they  had  to  propose.  The  English
knights  dismounted  at  the  sign  of  the  Chateau  de  Festu,  in  the  street  of  la  Croix  du  Tiroir,
where  they  had  fixed  their  lodgings.  The  king  of  France  was  at  the  Louvre,  and  the  duke
of  Touraine  with  him  : his  three  uncles,  and  the  constable  of  France,  were  likewise  at  their
different  hotels  in  Paris.  The  English  arrived  at  Paris  in  the  afternoon,  and  staid  the
remainder  of  that  day  and  the  night  at  their  inn  : on  the  morrow,  about  nine  o’clock,  they
mounted  their  horses,  which  were  handsomely  decorated,  and  went  in  state  to  the  Louvre,
where  the  king  was  waiting  for  them.  lie  was  attended  by  his  brother,  his  uncles,  the
count  de  St.  Pol,  the  lord  de  Coucy,  sir  Oliver  de  Clisson,  constable  of  France,  sir  John  de
Vienne,  sir  Guy  de  la  Tremouille,  and  other  great  barons.

The  ambassadors  dismounted  in  the  square  before  the  Louvre,  and,  on  entering  the  gate,
were  met  by  the  lord  de  la  Riviere,  sir  John  le  Mercier,  sir  Helion  de  Lignac,  sir  Peter  de
Villiers,  sir  William  de  la  Tremouille,  and  sir  William  Marcel,  who  received  them  as  knights
of  the  king  of  England’s  council,  and  conducted  them  most  respectfully  to  a handsome
apartment  where  the  king  of  France  was.  On  their  entrance  they  took  off  their  hoods,  and
bowed  very  low.  Sir  Thom  as  Percy  was  the  bearer  of  their  credential  letters,  which  he  presented
to  the  king,  who,  on  receiving  them,  made  the  knights  rise.  When  they  were  risen,  they
retired  some  paces  back.  The  king  of  France,  having  perused  the  letters,  called  to  him  his
brother  and  uncles,  and  showed  their  contents.  His  uncles  then  said,  “ My  lord,  call  to  you
the  knights  from  England,  and  demand  the  cause  of  their  coming  hither.”  The  king  did  so,
and  the  knights  were  asked  the  purport  of  their  credential  letters.  Sir  Thomas,  in  reply,
said, — “ Dear  sire,  it  is  the  wish  of  our  lord  the  king  of  England,  that  his  most  confidential
counsellors  such  as  his  uncles  of  Lancaster,  York,  or  Gloucester,  or  some  prelates  of  England
of  whom  that  country  has  the  best  opinion  for  sense  and  prudence,  should  meet  others  of
like  character,  of  your  council,  that  they  might  consider  on  the  means  of  forming  a solid
peace  between  you  and  him  and  your  allies.  This,  if  it  could  be  effected,  would  give  him
such  great  satisfaction,  that  he  would  not  complain  of  any  trouble  or  pain  his  counsellors
may  endure,  whom  he  shall  send  across  the  sea  to  Amiens,  or  any  other  appointed  place,  for
the  carrying  on  this  negotiation,  and  we  are  come  hither  from  our  lord  to  propose  this  matter,
and  to  learn  your  intentions  upon  it.”  The  king  replied, — “ Sir  Thomas,  you  and  your
companions  are  welcome,  and  your  visit  has  given  us  very  great  pleasure.  You  will  not
leave  Paris  immediately  : in  the  mean  time,  we  will  assemble  our  council,  and,  before  your
departure,  you  shall  have  such  answer  as  shall  be  satisfactory  to  you.”  The  English  were
well  pleased  with  this  reply,  and  the  king  entered  on  other  matters  of  conversation.  It  was
now  dinner-time;  and  the  English  knights  were  detained  to  dine  in  the  Louvre,  and  given  in
charge  to  the  lord  de  Coucy  and  the  lord  de  la  Riviere,  who  led  them  into  a very  richly
ornamented  apartment,  where  a table  was  spread  for  them.  They  dined  well,  and  at  their
leisure,  the  lord  de  Coucy  and  the  constable  keeping  them  company.  When  dinner  was
over,  they  wrent  into  the  king’s  apartment,  and  staid  until  wine  and  spices  were  brought  in
splendid  comfit  boxes  of  gold  and  silver.  After  the  knights  had  partaken  of  these,  they  took
leave  of  the  king  and  his  lords,  and  descended  into  the  court,  where  they  mounted  their
horses  and  returned  to  their  lodgings.


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


487


The  proposals  sir  Thomas  Percy  had  brought  from  England  were  exceedingly  agreeable  to
the  king  of  France,  to  his  uncle  the  duke  of  Burgundy,  and  to  others  of  his  council ; but  not
to  all,  especially  to  those  who  were  interested  concerning  the  pope  of  Avignon.  They  foresaw,
that  if  negotiations  were  once  begun  between  the  two  crowns,  it  would  require  a long  time  to
bring  them  to  a conclusion,  and  thus  retard  the  expedition  that  was  intended  against  Rome,  to
reduce  pope  Boniface  and  his  cardinals  to  the  obedience  of  pope  Clement.  The  object  of
peace,  however,  was  so  welcome  to  all  parts  of  Christendom,  and  would  be  of  such  advantage
to  every  country  that  no  one  dared  to  say  anything  against  it.  Besides,  the  duke  of
Burgundy  and  his  council  and  the  duke  of  Bourbon  were  unanimous  in  their  opinion  with
the  king.  The  king  of  France  showed  much  attention  to  sir  Thomas  Percy  and  his
companions ; but  there  was  one  knight  among  them  called  sir  Robert  Bricquet,  whom  ho
did  not  see  with  pleasure,  for  he  was  a Frenchman,  had  always  been  of  the  party  of  England
or  Navarre,  and  was  now  a knight  of  the  king  of  England’s  chamber.  The  king  prudently
dissembled  his  thoughts  ; but,  when  he  conversed  with  them,  he  always  addressed  himself  to
sir  Thomas  Percy,  sir  Lewis  Clifford,  or  to  sir  John  Clanvow.  The  king  said, — “ We  shall
be  happy  to  see  a solid  peace  established  between  our  adversary  of  England  and  us,  for  the
war  and  quarrel  has  lasted  too  long  a time  ; and  I wish  you  to  understand  that  it  shall  be  no
way  our  fault  if  the  negotiations  be  not  happily  concluded.”  “ Sire,”  replied  the  knights,
“ our  lord  the  king  of  England,  who  has  sent  us  hither,  has  the  same  peaceable  inclinations,
and  said,  on  our  departure,  that  it  should  not  be  to  his  blame  if  these  wars  and  dissentions
were  not  put  an  end  to,  for  they  had  lasted  too  long ; and  he  was  much  surprised  some
prudent  means  had  not  been  sooner  thought  of  for  this  purpose.”  “ Well,”  replied  the  king,
“ we  shall  see  what  good  affection  he  bears  us.”

The  English  remained  at  Paris  six  days,  and  dined  every  day  with  one  or  other  of  the
dukes.  In  the  mean  time,  the  matter  of  their  coming  had  been  debated  in  council,  and  it  was
settled  that  the  king  of  France,  his  uncles,  and  his  cabinet-council,  should  be  at  Amiens  the
middle  of  March,  and  wait  there  for  the  king  of  England,  his  uncles  and  council,  if  they
were  willing  to  meet  them.  The  English  knights  engaged,  that  on  their  side  there  should
not  be  any  delay,  and  that  some  of  the  king’s  uncles,  if  not  all,  would  be  at  Amiens  on  the
appointed  day.  Thus  was  this  business  concluded  ; and  the  day  before  the  ambassadors  were
to  take  leave  of  the  king  and  quit  Paris,  he  went  to  the  palace,  and  magnificently  entertained
at  dinner  these  English  lords  : his  brother  and  uncles  were  present:  he  made  sir  Thomas  Percy
sit  at  his  table,  calling  him  cousin,  from  his  relationship  with  the  earl  of  Northumberland.

During  the  dinner,  sir  Thomas  Percy  and  his  companions  were  presented  with  rich  and
handsome  jewels,  all  but  sir  Robert  Bricquet : he  was  passed  unnoticed.  The  knight,  who
presented  them  in  the  name  of  the  king,  (sir  Peter  Villiers,  high  steward  of  the  household)
said  to  him  : “ When  you  shall  have  done  service  acceptable  to  the  king,  he  is  rich  enough  to
reward  you  for  it,”  and  then  passed  by.  Sir  Robert  was  melancholy  on  hearing  this  speech,
and  then  first  learnt  he  was  disagreeable  to  the  king  of  France : he  was  therefore  forced  to
put  up  with  the  slight  as  well  as  he  could.  When  dinner  was  over,  and  they  had  washed
and  the  tables  were  removed,  grace  having  been  said,  minstrels  of  song  and  others  were
called  in,  who  performed,  as  usual,  before  the  king  and  his  company.  After  this,  sir  Thomas
Percy  advanced,  and,  casting  himself  on  his  knee,  said:  “Very  dear  sire,  I and  my  com-
panions are  much  surprised  at  one  thing.  You  have  most  splendidly  entertained  us,  and
presented  us  with  rich  gifts,  for  which  we  feel  very  thankful ; but  sir  Robert  Bricquet,  who
is  a knight  at  arms,  and  chamberlain  to  our  sovereign  lord  the  king  of  England,  has  been
passed  by,  and  we  would  willingly  know  the  reason  of  it.”  The  king  of  France  replied :
“ Sir  Thomas,  the  knight  you  have  named,  since  you  wish  to  know  the  cause  of  his  being
overlooked,  ought  not  to  have  taken  part  against  us ; for,  had  he  been  made  prisoner  in  war,
his  ransom  would  have  instantly  been  paid  by  his  death.”  On  saying  this,  lie  raised  up  sir
Thomas  Percy,  and  conversed  on  other  matters.  Shortly  after,  wine  and  spices  were  brought,
which  having  partaken  of  at  their  pleasure,  the  ambassadors  took  leave  of  the  king,  returned
to  their  lodgings,  and  paid  the  amount  of  their  expenses.  On  the  morrow,  they  departed
from  Paris,  and  continued  their  journey  to  England,  where  they  related  to  the  king  and  his
uncles  everything  that  had  passed,  greatly  extolling  the  king  of  France’s  magnificent  enter-
tainments, and  the  rich  gifts  he  had  made  them


403


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.

W e will,  for  a while  leave  speaking  of  England,  and  say  what  was  passing  in  Castille.
You  have  heard  of  the  alliance  between  the  king  of  Castille  and  the  duke  of  Lancaster,  who
had  claimed  that  crown  in  right  of  his  duchess,  the  lady  Constance,  eldest  daughter  of  the
late  don  Pedro,  by  whom  he  had  a beautiful  daughter,  that  was  married  to  don  Henry,
prince  of  Galicia,  heir  to  the  crown  of  Castille.  This  marriage  confirmed  the  peace  between
them.  About  two  years  after  the  celebration  of  these  nuptials,  king  John  of  Castille
departed  this  life,  and  was  buried  in  the  city  of  Burgos*.  On  this  event,  the  great  barons
and  prelates  of  the  realm  assembled,  and  declared  their  intentions  to  have  for  their  kino-  the
young  prince  of  Galicia.  This  was  done,  and  the  prince  was  crowned  in  the  ninth  year  of
his  age : his  queen  was  six  years  older.  Thus  was  the  daughter  of  the  duke  of  Lancaster,
by  the  lady  Constance,  queen  of  Castille,  and  of  all  the  possessions  of  don  Pedro,  don
Henry,  and  don  John,  excepting  those  parts  which  had  been  assigned  to  the  duke  and
duchess  of  Lancaster  for  their  joint  lives.  They  had,  beside,  a pension  of  one  hundred
thousand  florins,  for  which  four  of  the  most  opulent  cities  in  Castille  were  pledged.  The
duke  of  Lancaster  had  the  pleasure  of  seeing  his  two  daughters  queens  of  Castille  and
Portugal.

We  will  now  speak  of  the  expedition  made  by  John  count  d’Arsnagnac  into  Lombardy,
for  the  matter  requires  it.


CHAPTER  XXVI. OF  THE  EXPEDITION  OF  COUNT  JOHN  d’aRMAGNAC  INTO  LOMBARDY.

HIS  DEATH,  AT  THE  SIEGE  OF  ALEXANDRIA.

The  intention  of  the  count  d’Armagnac  to  lead  an  army  into  Lombardy  has  been  already
mentioned  in  this  history.  His  object  was  to  assist  his  sister-german  and  her  husband,  sir
Bernabo  Visconti,  eldest  son  to  that  sir  Bernabo  whom  the  duke  of  Milan  had  unnaturally
put  to  death.  This  duke  was  Galeas  Visconti,  count  de  Vertus,  whose  daughter  the  duke
of  Touraine  had  married.  The  lady  of  sir  Bernabo  was  daughter  to  sir  John  d’Armagnac,
and,  being  in  great  affliction,  had  recourse  to  her  brothers,  to  whom  she  related  the  misery
of  her  situation,  her  poverty  and  necessity,  and  humbly  prayed  their  pity,  and  that  they
would  defend  her  against  that  tyrant  the  count  de  Vertus,  who  had  disinherited  her  without
the  smallest  reason.  The  count  d’Armagnac  promised  his  sister  that  he  would  comply  with
her  request,  and  had  declared,  that  whatever  it  might  cost  him  to  recover  her  rights,  he
would  exert  himself  in  the  attempt  to  the  utmost  of  his  power.  What  he  had  engaged  to
do,  he  performed ; for  I have  before  mentioned,  that  in  conjunction  with  the  dauphin
d’ Auvergne,  he  had  entered  into  treaties  with  many  of  the  captains  of  forts  in  Auvergne,
Limousin,  Quercy,  or  other  parts,  who,  under  colour  of  fighting  for  the  king  of  England,
had  done  the  greatest  mischiefs  to  France.  These  garrisons  of  English,  Gascons,  and
Bretons,  received  different  sums,  and  a pardon  from  France,  on  surrendering  their  castles
and  quitting  the  kingdom.  They  readily,  therefore,  engaged  to  follow  the  count  d’Armagnac
into  Lombardy,  and  retired  until  the  proper  time  towards  the  rivers  Rhone  and  Saone.
The  dukes  of  Berry  and  Burgundy  permitted  them  to  take  what  purveyances  they  pleased
in  their  lordships,  for  they  were  very  desirous  to  be  rid  of  them.  The  lieutenant  of  the
king  of  France  for  Dauphiny  was  at  that  time  sir  Enguerrand  Durdin,  and  the  king  had
written  to  him  to  permit  all  men  at  arms  and  their  companions,  who  should  say  they
belonged  to  the  count  d’Armagnac,  to  pass  freely  through  Dauphiny,  and  to  have  whatever
they  might  be  in  need  of,  for  their  money.

The  count  de  Foix,  hearing  at  his  residence  at  Orthes  of  the  large  armament  the  count
d’Armagnac  was  raising,  began  to  be  alarmed,  for  he  was  of  a suspicious  temper.  He  had
indeed  learnt,  for  common  report  flies  everywhere,  that  it  was  intended  for  Lombardy
against  the  duke  of  Milan  : but  as  the  ancestors  of  this  count  d’Armagnac,  and  himself  and
his  brother  sir  Bernard,  had  been  at  war  with  him,  he  wras  doubtful  if  this  expedition  might
not  in  the  end  be  directed  against  him.  Not  to  be  unprepared,  therefore,  he  had  reinforced
and  re-victualled  all  his  castles,  that  if  they  should  make  an  attack,  he  might  be  enabled  to

* King  John  died  from  the  injuries  received  in  a fall  from  his  horse,  on  the  24th  August,  1390,  aged  thirty-two.
Hie  son  Henry,  who  succeeded  him,  was  then  eleven  years  old. — Ed.


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


489


meet  tliem.  But  neither  the  count  d’Armagnac  nor  his  brother  had  such  thoughts  : they
were  desirous  strictly  to  observe  the  truce  now  established  between  them.  Many  knights
and  squires  from  Gascony,  England,  and  Brittany,  who  had  engaged  their  services  to  the
count  d’Armagnac,  had  he  declared  war  against  the  count  de  Foix,  would  have  left  him  and
joined  his  adversary  : so  much  was  the  count  de  Foix  beloved  by  men-at-arms  for  his
liberality  and  courage.

When  the  duchess  of  Touraine  was  informed  that  the  count  d’Armagnac  was  preparing
to  lead  a large  body  of  men-at-arms  into  Lombardy,  to  make  war  on  her  father  the  duke  of
Milan,  and  that  the  dukes  of  Berry  and  Burgundy  consented  to  it,  from  their  desire  to  rid
the  kingdom  of  so  many  pillagers  which  had  of  late  so  grievously  harassed  it,  she  did  not
remain  idle,  but  instantly  -wrote  letters  to  the  count  de  Vertus  to  give  notice  of  it,  that  he
might  provide  himself  accordingly.  The  duke  of  Milan  was  already  informed  of  this
intention  of  the  count  d’Armagnac,  and  had  collected  men-at-arms  wherever  he  could  find
them,  and  reinforced  his  towns  and  castles  with  men,  stores,  and  provision,  concluding  he
should  have  a war  to  support  against  this  count  d’Armagnac.

About  the  middle  of  March,  the  greater  part  of  the  men-at-arms  were  assembled  in  the
country  near  Avignon : between  that  place  and  Lyons,  on  the  banks  of  the  Rhone,  were
fifteen  thousand  horse.  They  crossed  that  river  where  it  was  the  easiest  to  pass,  and,
entering  Dauphiny,  took  up  their  quarters  in  the  villages  or  fields.  Others  continued  their
route,  the  more  speedily  to  clear  the  passes  of  the  mountains,  which  are  dangerous  for  man
and  horse.  The  count  d’Armagnac,  his  brother,  with  other  knights,  visited  pope  Clement
and  his  cardinals  at  Avignon,  and  offered  to  serve  them  and  the  church  against  the  tyrant
of  Lombardy,  for  which  they  felt  themselves  obliged,  and  returned  many  thanks.  They
staid  at  Avignon  eight  days,  while  their  troops  passed  : they  then  took  leave  of  the  pope
and  cardinals,  and  made  ready  to  follow  them.  The  two  brothers,  sir  John  and  sir  Bernard
d’Armagnac,  here  separated,  and  thus  sir  John  addressed  him:  “Fair  brother,  you  will  now
return  to  Comminges  and  Armagnac,  to  guard  our  lands,  for  all  the  forts  are  not  yet  free
from  the  marauders.  There  is  Lourde,  which  sir  Arnaute  de  Bearn  holds  in  the  name  of
the  king  of  England ; and  Bouteville  is  garrisoned  by  Foixens  under  the  command  of  sir
John  de  Greilly,  son  to  the  late  captal  de  Buch.  Notwithstanding  there  is  a truce  between
the  count  de  Foix  and  us  for  the  present,  he  is  so  bold  and  enterprising  a knight,  that  we
are  never  sure  what  his  intentions  may  be ; and  for  these  reasons  I wish  you  to  return
instantly  home.  You  shall  hear  very  frequently  from  me  during  my  absence,  and  do  you
write  constantly.”  Sir  Bernard  readily  consented  to  what  his  brother  had  proposed,  for  he
thought  it  prudent  and  well  advised  : he  had  not,  beside,  any  great  inclination  to  cross  the
mountains.  Just  on  his  departure,  the  count  said, — “ Bernard,  you  will  go  hence  to  our
cousin  Raymond  de  Touraine,  who  has  married  my  cousin  the  daughter  of  the  prince  of
Orange,  and  is  now  engaged  in  war  with  the  comte  Yenaissain,  that  belongs  to  the  pope  :
entreat  of  him,  for  I have  been  so  requested  by  the  pope,  that  he  make  his  preparations  to
follow  me  in  this  expedition,  and  he  shall  be  my  companion  in  all  things : I will  wTait  for
him  at  Gap*,  situated  among  the  mountains.”  Sir  Bernard  promised  to  convey  this  message,
and  the  brothers  separated,  never  to  see  each  other  again.

The  count  d’Armagnac  took  the  road  leading  to  the  town  of  Gap,  and  sir  Bernard  that
to  the  castle  of  Boulogne,  where  sir  Raymond  de  Touraine  resided,  who  received  him  very
kindly.  Sir  Bernard  eloquently  delivered  the  message  from  his  brother,  to  induce  him  the
more  readily  to  comply  with  the  request  contained  in  it.  Sir  Raymond  replied, — “ Fair
cousin,  before  your  brother,  the  count  d’Armagnac,  shall  have  advanced  far  into  Lombard}',
or  laid  siege  to  any  town,  it  is  very  possible  that  I follow  him,  but  it  is  full  time  as  yet  for
me  and  my  people  to  begin  our  march.  If  my  cousin  therefore  sends  me  intelligence  about
the  middle  of  May  I will  set  out,  for  by  that  time  I hope  to  make  an  end  of  my  war  against
my  uncle,  the  pope  at  Avignon,  and  his  cardinals,  who  not  only  refuse  me  justice,  but  detain
from  me,  by  force,  everything  that  my  uncle,  pope  Gregory,  disposed  of  in  my  favour.
They  think  to  tire  me  out  and  excommunicate  me,  but  they  shall  be  mistaken.  They  engage
knights  and  squires  to  make  war  on  me,  by  granting  them  absolutions,  but  such  have  no

* “Gap,” — an  ancient  city  in  Dauphiny,  capital  of  the  Gapen^ois,  generality  of  Grenoble.


490


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


talents  for  war ; and  I shall  have  more  effective  men  at  arms  for  a thousand  florins,  than
they  can  obtain  by  their  absolutions  for  seven  years.”  “ My  good  cousin,”  answered  sir
Bernard,  “ keep  to  your  resolution  : what  you  say  is  true  ; and  I would  not,  by  any  means
advise  you  to  act  otherwise  than  you  do  : just  as  you  have  spoken  will  I write  to  my
brother  d' Armagnac.”

They  were  one  whole  day  together,  in  the  castle  of  Boulogne.  On  the  morrow,  sir
Bernard  d’Armagnac  departed,  and,  crossing  the  Rhone  at  the  Pont  du  Saint  Esprit,  rode
over  the  mountains,  through  Quercy,  until  he  reached  his  destination,  leaving  his  brother  to
manage  for  himself  his  war  with  the  count  dc  Vertus.  Before,  however,  lie  left  Pont  du
Saint  Esprit,  he  wrote  letters  to  the  count  d’Armagnac,  to  inform  him  of  the  answer  he  had
received  from  sir  Raymond  de  Touraine,  and  had  also  letters  from  his  brother,  on  his  road
towards  Gap.  Having  read  their  contents,  he  pursued  his  journey  without  farther  attending
to  them.

We  will  continue  our  history  of  the  count  John  d’Armagnac*  until  we  bring  it  to  a
conclusion,  without  speaking  of  other  events.  It  was  his  great  love  and  affection  for  his
sister  and  brother,  who  had  been  fraudulently  disinherited  by  the  count  de  Vertus,  who
styled  himself  lord  of  Milan,  that  had  induced  him  thus  gaily  to  march  into  the  plains  of
Piedmont  and  Lombardy.  There  were  likewise  two  very  just  reasons  for  this  armament;
one  was,  the  carrying  away  such  numbers  of  pillagers,  who  had  for  so  long  a time  oppressed
and  robbed  many  of  the  provinces  in  France,  for  by  this  means  the  country  was  cleared  of
them : the  other,  to  assist  his  sister  and  her  husband,  who  had  unjustly  been  deprived  of
their  inheritance,  so  that  lie  had,  on  every  account,  justice  on  his  side.  The  companions
were  unanimous  to  serve  him,  and  exclaimed, — “ Let  us  cheerfully  attack  these  Lombards :
we  have  a just  quarrel  and  a good  captain,  which  will  assist  our  cause,  and  we  are  going  to
the  richest  country  in  the  world;  for  Lombardy  receives  the  fat  from  other  parts;  and,  as
the  Lombards  are  rich  and  cowards,  we  shall  gain  great  profit.  We,  who  are  captains,  shall
return  so  enormously  rich,  that  we  need  never  more  think  of  war,  nor  carry  on  any  future
warfare.”

Such  were  the  conversations  on  their  march  ; and  when  they  came  to  a rich  country  they
halted  there  for  some  time,  to  refresh  themselves  and  their  horses.  At  the  time  I am  now
speaking  of,  that  gallant  English  knight,  sir  John  Ilactondet,  was  making  war  on  the
Florentines  for  pope  Boniface,  and  had  fixed  his  quarters  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Florence.
That  country  as  well  as  Perugia  were  in  rebellion  against  the  pope.  The  count  d’Armagnac
thought  if  he  could  gain  the  assistance  of  sir  John  Ilawkwood,  who  was  a most  enterprising
and  courageous  knight,  he  should  be  more  successful  in  his  war.  In  consequence,  during  his
residence  at  Grande  J,  at  the  entrance  into  Piedmont,  he  wrote  to  him  long  letters,  explanatory
of  his  situation,  and  the  reasons  which  urged  him  to  make  war  on  the  duke  of  Milan.  Having
properly  scaled  these  letters,  he  gave  them  to  a prudent  messenger,  who  performed  his  duty
well,  in  delivering  them  to  sir  John  Ilawkwood  : he  was  then  near  Florence,  and  had  under
his  command  full  two  thousand  combatants.  He  read  the  letters,  or  had  them  read  to  him.
On  hearing  their  contents,  he  was  well  pleased,  and  replied,  “ that  as  soon  as  he  should
have  put  an  end  to  the  war  lie  was  then  engaged  in,  he  would  not  attend  to  any  other  before
he  had  joined  the  count  d’Armagnac.”  The  squire  of  the  count,  who  had  brought  these
letters,  was  an  honourable  man,  and  replied, — “ Sir,  you  speak  well,  and  to  the  point : have
the  goodness  to  put  into  writing  what  you  say,  that  my  lord,  the  count  d’Armagnac,  may  bo
the  more  assured  of  your  intentions.”  “ Very  willingly,”  said  sir  John  Ilawkwood  ; “ and  it
is  but  right,  since  my  pleasure  and  will  are  to  meet  him.”  In  the  course  of  two  or  three
days,  the  letters  were  written  and  given  to  the  squire  who  had  come  from  the  count
d’Armagnac.  He  instantly  set  out  on  his  return,  and  found  the  count  near  to  Pignerol  §.
There  were  great  negotiations  going  forward  between  him  and  the  marquis  de  Saluces,  and
the  marquis  was  to  join  him  in  his  war  against  Milan.  The  news  the  squire  brought  from  sir


* John  III  of  Armagnac.  His  6ister  had  married
Charles  Visconti,  the  eon  of  Bernabo — Ed.

■f  “Sir  John  Hactonde.’’ — Sir  John  Hawkwood.


J “ Grande,” — in  the  MSS.  Granido.  Q.  Grenoble.
The  count  of  Armagnac  entered  Italy  in  July,  1391.

§ “ Pignerol,” — an  episcopal  town  of  Piedmont,  at  the
entrance  of  the  valley  of  Perouse.


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


491


John  Hawkwood  was  highly  agreeable  to  the  count  d’Armagnac.  He  said,  “ that  if  it  pleased
God,  he  would  this  season  make  so  severe  a war  on  the  count  de  Yertus,  that  he  should  be
glad  to  accept  of  reasonable  terms,  or  he  would  perish  in  the  attempt.”

From  what  you  have  heard,  you  may  suppose  the  count  d’Armagnac  had  a great  desire  to
aid  his  sister,  and  it  was  compassion  for  her  that  urged  him  to  it.  When  his  men  at  arms
had  passed  the  mountains,  and  had  gained  the  rich  plains  of  Piedmont,  near  toTurin,  they  were
not  long  before  they  made  excursions,  and  committed  great  destruction  on  the  surrounding
villages,  which  could  not  any  way  withstand  them.  The  count  d’Armagnac  laid  siege  to
Asti*,  intending  to  wait  there  for  sir  John  Hawkwood.  Purveyances  came  from  all
quarters ; and  the  companions  ransomed  small  forts  for  provision,  and,  until  their  wants
were  supplied,  they  took  every  thing  away.  The  country  of  Pignerol  and  the  territories  of
the  marquis  of  Montferrat  were  open  to  their  foraging  for  themselves  and  horses.  There
came  likewise  great  quantities  of  provision  to  them  from  Dauphiny  and  Savoy.  Many
leant  to  the  count  d’Armagnac  from  the  justice  of  his  quarrel  with  the  count  de  Yertus,  who
had  wickedly  put  to  death  his  uncle  Bernabo,  to  gain  his  inheritance ; and,  although  several
of  the  great  lords  of  that  country  were  silent  on  the  subject,  they  felt  much  compassion  for
those  who  had  been  thus  disinherited.

During  the  siege  of  Asti,  very  agreeable  news  was  brought  to  the  count  d’Armagnac  from
sir  John  Hawkwood.  He  informed  him,  that  the  Florentines  and  Venetians  had  submitted
to  the  mercy  of  the  pope  ; that  he  was  to  be  paid  sixty  thousand  florins,  for  himself  and  his
companions;  and  that,  the  moment  these  wTere  received,  he  would  march  with  five  hundred
men  at  arms  and  a thousand  infantry  t towards  the  frontiers  of  Genoa,  and,  whether  his
enemies  would  or  not,  he  intended  to  force  a passage  to  join  him.  The  count  d’Armagnac
and  his  army  were  much  pleased  at  the  thoughts  of  being  assisted  by  so  able  a commander  as
sir  John  Hawkwood  ; and  he  w’as  advised  to  break  up  the  siege  of  Asti,  and  transfer  it  to
a larger  town  called  Alexandria,  situated  at  the  entrance  of  Lombardy,  and,  after  they  should
have  conquered  it,  to  advance  to  Vercelli,  which  is  also  a large  and  handsome  city.  The
siege  was  in  consequence  transferred  from  Asti  to  Alexandria,  which  is  a fine  city,  and
seated  in  a rich  plain  on  the  frontiers  of  Piedmont  and  Lombardy,  in  the  direct  road  to
Genoa.  The  men  at  arms  had  crossed  the  Tesino  and  lodged  themselves  at  their  ease  in
this  plentiful  country.

Sir  Galeas,  lord  of  Milan  J,  count  de  Yertus,  resided  in  the  city  of  Pavia,  and  daily  heard
of  his  enemies  establishing  themselves  in  his  country:  but  his  greatest  surprise  was,  how
the  count  d’Armagnac  found  money  to  satisfy  the  large  body  of  men  at  arms  he  had  brought
with  him.  His  council,  with  whom  he  conversed  on  this  subject,  replied, — “ Sir,  these  are
free  companions,  and  part  of  those  pillagers  who  have  so  long  harassed  France  : they  do  not
require  pay,  but  to  seek  adventures,  and  run  the  chance  of  gain  from  plundering  the  country.
In  order  to  deliver  France  from  them,  after  the  surrender  of  their  strong  holds,  the  count
d’Armagnac  leads  them  hither.  The  duke  of  Berry  and  the  dauphin  of  Auvergne,  whose
lands  they  had  sorely  oppressed,  treated  with  them  by  means  of  the  count  d’Armagnac,  who
offered  the  king  of  France  and  the  above-mentioned  lords  to  engage  them  in  his  quarrel
with  you.  By  dint  of  money  he  purchased  their  forts;  and  the  king  of  France  granted
them  a free  pardon  for  all  their  past  deeds,  on  condition  they  joined  the  count  d’Armagnac’;
and  whatever  they  could  conquer  in  these  countries  was  to  be  their  own.  They  therefore
ask  no  pay ; and  there  are  among  them  men  at  arms  that  have  five  or  six  horses,  who,  if  in
their  own  country,  would  be  constrained  to  go  on  foot  like  absolute  paupers.  They  adventure
themselves  boldly,  and  it  is  hazardous  to  engage  with  them,  for  they  are  all  of  determined
courage.  The  best  advice  we  can  give  is,  that  you  guard  well  your  cities  and  principal
towns,  which  are  strongly  garrisoned  and  well  provided  with  all  things ; for  they  have  no
artillery,  nor  any  machines  for  carrying  on  a siege  worth  thinking  of.  They  will  advance
to  the  barriers  of  your  towns  to  skirmish  and  do  gallant  deeds  of  arms;  but  they  will  not
gain  anything  you  may  regret,  if  one  may  judge  by  what  has  passed,  for  they  have  now

* “Asti,” — an  ancient  town  of  Piedmont,  five  leagues  N.  E.  from  Albi,  eight  S.  W.  from  Casal.

t Milie  briyands.  A thousand  soldiers  armed  with  brigandines.

t He  was  created  duke  of  Milan  1395,  by  Winceslaus  king  of  the  Romans. — Diet.  Hist.


492


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


been  in  this  country  more  than  two  months,  and  have  only  conquered  a small  and  insignificant
fort.  Let  them  therefore  come  and  go,  without  offering  them  combat ; for  they  will  soon
be  tired  of  the  war,  and  will  be  defeated  without  a battle.  When  they  have  destroyed  all
the  low  countries,  they  will  be  in  want  of  provision,  and  famine  will  force  them  to  return,  if
no  worse  accidents  befal  them.  You  must  order  your  men  at  arms  to  keep  in  bodies  near
to  each,  other,  that,  in  case  of  need,  they  may  succour  and  give  advice  to  those  of  the
garrisons  who  may  want  it.  Reinforce  with  them  all  your  towns  and  castles ; for  the  rich
citizens  are  not  accustomed  to  war,  and  will  not  defend  themselves  like  knights  or  squires
who  have  been  brought  up  to  the  profession.  Send  some  of  your  chivalry  into  Alexandria:
you  will  gain  doubly  by  it,  for  your  city  will  be  more  ably  defended,  and  your  subjects  will
love  you  with  greater  affection  when  they  see  you  are  attentive  to  them  in  their  distress.
You  are  beside  bounden  to  do  this,  for  they  pay  you  taxes  and  other  levies  for  your
governing  and  taking  care  of  them.  Your  enemies  cannot  have  a sufficient  force  to  surround
Alexandria  on  all  sides,  and  prevent  the  men  at  arms  you  shall  send  thither  from  entering
the  town  ; and,  when  the  inhabitants  shall  see  them  arrive,  their  courage  will  be  raised,  their
attachment  to  you  increased,  .and  any  treaties  they  might  have  thought  of  entering  into  with
your  enemies  will  be  put  an  end  to.”

The  lord  of  Milan  followed  the  advice  that  had  been  given  him,  and,  without  delay,  sent
thither  a body  of  knights  and  men  at  arms  that  were  in  his  pay.  On  being  mustered,  they
amounted  to  five  hundred  lances  ; and  an  ancient  knight,  who  had  long  been  used  to  arms,
called  sir  James  de  la  Her  me  *,  was  appointed  their  commander.  They  rode  through  bye  ways
until  they  arrived  at  Alexandria  in  the  evening,  and  entered  it,  when  their  enemies  had
retired  fatigued  to  their  quarters,  from  skirmishing  at  the  barriers,  for  they  could  not
remain  idle.  The  citizens  were  rejoiced  at  the  arrival  of  sir  James  de  la  Berme  and  his
companions,  and  not  without  cause ; for  the  count  d’Armagnac,  not  having  seen  any  men
at  arms  during  the  three  days  he  lay  before  it,  concluded  none  were  in  the  town,  and  had
kept  up  a continual  assault  at  the  barriers ; but,  small  as  the  defence  was,  it  had  done  so
well,  that  the  Armagnacs  had  not  gained  any  advantage.  Sir  James  de  la  Berme,  on
entering  the  town,  retired  with  his  men  to  the  lodgings  which  had  been  assigned  them,  and,
having  taken  some  refreshment,  they  were  waited  on  by  the  principal  inhabitants,  to
congratulate  them  on  their  arrival.  He  inquired  into  the  state  of  the  town,  and  the  numbers
and  situation  of  the  enemy,  in  order  that  he  might  act  accordingly.  The  most  intelligent
replied,  “ that  from  the  moment  the  count  d’Armagnac  had  come,  there  had  never  been  any
cessation  of  skirmishes  and  attacks  on  the  barriers.”  “ Well,”  replied  the  knight,  “ to-morrow
if  it  please  God,  we  will  see  how  they  bear  themselves,  and  what  they  may  be  inclined  to
do.  They  are  ignorant  of  my  arrival,  and  I will  lay  an  ambush  for  them,  and  make  a
private  sally.”  “ Ah,  my  lord,”  said  those  who  had  before  spoken  to  him,  “ you  must  be
very  cautious  how  you  act,  for  they  are  sixteen  thousand  horse  at  least,  and,  should  they
discover  you  in  the  open  plain,  they  will  surround  and  overpower  you  by  their  numbers,
without  striking  a blow.”  The  knight  answered,  “ We  will  consider  more  of  it ; for,  since
we  are  come,  we  must  attempt  some  deeds  of  arms.”  The  conversation  now  ended,  and
every  one  returned  to  his  home ; but  the  knight  told  his  men,  secretly,  he  intended  making
a sally  and  placing  an  ambush,  that  all  might  be  prepared  against  the  morrow.

The  next  day,  sir  James  de  la  Berme  and  his  troops  being  armed,  made  a sally  through  a
private  gate,  on  the  opposite  side  of  the  town  to  the  place  where  the  besiegers  lay.  He  was
accompanied,  at  the  distance  of  half  a league,  by  about  three  hundred  of  the  townsmen,  to  a
narrow  valley  where  they  could  not  be  seen.  He  had  left  two  hundred  without  the  barriers,
with  orders,  if  they  were  attacked  to  defend  themselves  faintly,  retreating  towards  this
valley,  where  they  would  be  supported  by  the  ambuscade.  They  promised  punctual  obedience
to  these  orders.  The  day  was  exceedingly  hot ; but  the  count  d’Armagnac  was  young  and
enterprising : having  heard  mass  in  his  pavilion  and  drank  a cup,  he  demanded  his  arms,
and,  having  completely  equipped  himself,  displayed  only  his  pennon,  and  was  attended  by
no  more  than  one  hundred  men  , for  he  did  not  expect  to  meet  with  greater  opposition  than
usual,  and  advanced  at  a slow  pace  towards  the  barriers.  True  it  is,  that  some  few  men  at

* Known  also  as  Jaques  del  Venue.


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


493


arni9  followed  him  by  degrees;  but  others  said, — “ What  signifies  arming?  and  why  should
we  give  ourselves  so  much  trouble,  when  we  cannot  meet  with  any  one  at  the  barriers  worth
fighting  with?”  They  staid,  therefore,  within  their  camp,  eating  and  drinking.  The  count
d’Armagnac,  on  coming  to  the  barriers,  began  to  overthrow  and  beat  down  many  of  those
posted  there  to  receive  him,  as  good  men  at  arms  know  how  to  do ; but  the  townsmen  did
not  wait  long,  before  they  began  to  retreat  slowly  towards  the  ambuscade.

When  sir  James  de  la  Bcrme  saw  it  was  time,  he  sallied  forth  out  of  the  ambush,  and  tho
Armagnacs  were  surrounded  and  attacked  on  all  sides.  They  valiantly  defended  themselves,
and  were  reinforced  by  little  and  little  with  men  from  the  camp.  Many  gallant  deeds  were
done  this  day,  which  was  the  feast  of  St.  James  and  St.  Christopher.  It  was  so  very  hot,
that  those  who  bore  arms  thought  they  were  in  an  oven,  for  there  was  not  any  wind ; and
the  young  men  at  arms  were  overpowered  by  the  heat,  and  unable  to  exert  themselves.
Add  to  this,  that  the  force  of  the  lord  de  Milan  was  three  to  one  of  the  Armagnacs.  The
dust  oppressed  them  so  much,  they  could  not  see  each  other  ; but  the  Armagnacs,  in  this,
suffered  the  most.  This  was  an  unfortunate  day  for  the  count,  who  was  so  overcome  by  the
heat,  and  near  fainting,  that  he  withdrew  from  the  battle,  without  friend  or  foe  knowing
whither  he  was  gone.  He  had  retreated  to  a small  grove  of  alders,  through  which  ran  a
little  brook  ; and  he  no  sooner  felt  his  feet  in  the  water,  than  he  thought  he  was  in  paradise,
and  seated  himself  by  the  side  of  the  stream.  He,  with  some  difficulty,  took  off  his  helmet,
and  remained  covered  only  by  the  linen  scull-cap,  and  then  plunged  his  face  in  the  water,  at
the  same  time,  unfortunately,  drinking  large  draughts ; for  he  was  thirsty  from  the  heat,
and  could  not  quench  it.  He  drank  so  much,  that  his  blood  was  chilled,  and  a numbness  of
limbs  seized  him,  with  a strong  inclination  to  faint.  He  could  not  move,  and  lost  the  use  of
speech.  His  attendants  knew  not  what  was  become  of  him,  and  were  the  more  uneasy,
because  many  prisoners  had  been  made  : they  therefore  ceased  fighting.

A short  time  after  this,  a squire  belonging  to  the  duke  of  Milan  perceived  the  count
d’Armagnac,  and  wondered  much,  when  he  saw  him,  who  he  could  be;  for  it  was  visible  he
must  be  some  knight  or  man  of  high  rank  : he  called  out,  “ Who  are  you  ? Surrender ; for
you  are  my  prisoner.”  The  count  heard  him,  but  could  not  make  any  answer,  as  he  was
unable  to  articulate,  but  held  out  his  hand,  and  made  signs  that  he  surrendered.  The  squire
then  endeavoured  to  raise  him,  but,  finding  his  attempts  vain,  seated  himself  beside  him,
while  the  skirmish  was  still  continued,  and  many  gallant  actions  performed.

Sir  James  de  la  Berme,  being  a prudent  and  valorous  knight,  perceiving  the  day  was  his
own,  and  that  many  of  the  enemy  were  killed  and  wounded,  but  that  his  men  were  growing
weary,  and  the  Armagnacs  increasing  by  fresh  men  from  their  camp,  ordered  a retreat  to
Alexandria,  his  men  vigorously  defending  themselves  as  they  retired.  The  squire,  who  had
fortunately  found  the  count  d’Armagnac  in  the  state  I have  mentioned,  unwilling  to  leave
him  behind,  for  he  thought  him  a person  of  distinction,  called  to  some  of  his  companions  to
assist  in  carrying  him  to  the  town ; and  declared  that  whatever  he  should  receive  for  his
ransom,  he  would  handsomely  divide  with  them  for  the  trouble  they  would  have.  They
complied  with  his  request,  and,  with  some  difficulty,  carried  him  to  the  squire’s  lodgings  in
the  city,  where  the  count  was  disarmed,  undressed,  and  put  to  bed.  By  this  time,  sir  James  de
la  Berme  had,  with  his  men,  re-entered  the  place,  and  barricaded  the  bars  and  gates,  having
many  prisoners  with  them.  They  disarmed  and  refreshed  themselves  with  what  they  found
at  their  quarters,  as  did  likewise  the  Armagnacs,  who  had  been  at  this  skirmish,  on  their
return  to  the  army.

When  it  was  mentioned  in  the  camp  that  no  one  knew  what  was  become  of  the  count
d’Armagnac,  they  were  much  alarmed,  and  some  went  to  search  the  places  in  the  neighbour-
hood where  the  skirmish  had  been  fought,  but,  to  the  great  dismay  of  their  companions,  they
returned  without  having  discovered  any  traces  of  him.  The  squire,  into  whose  hands  he  had
fallen,  desirous  to  know  who  he  was,  addressed  himself  to  a Gascon  squire,  a man  of  honour
that  had  been  made  prisoner,  and  begged  of  him  to  accompany  him,  with  the  person  who
had  captured  him,  to  his  lodgings.  They  went  thither,  and  the  Lombardy  squire  led  the
Gascon  to  his  chamber,  where  the  count  d’Armagnac  lay  bitterly  bemoaning.  He  brought
a candle  near  his  face,  and  said  to  the  Gascon,  “ My  friend,  do  you  know  who  this  man  is  ?”


494


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


The  Gascon,  leaning  down  to  examine  his  features,  instantly  recognized  him,  and  replied,
— “ Yes,  I ought  to  know  him  well ; for  it  is  our  commander,  the  count  d’Armagnac.”  The
Lombardy  squire  was  rejoiced  to  hear  his  prisoner  was  of  such  distinction  ; but  the  count  was
so  very  ill  he  heard  nothing  they  asked  of  him.  Upon  which,  his  master  said ; “ Come,  come,
let  us  leave  him  quiet,  that  he  may  recover  himself,”  and  they  all  quitted  the  chamber.  He
died,  however,  that  same  night.  When,  on  the  morrow,  it  was  known  that  the  count
d’Armagnac  had  died  in  his  bed  at  Alexandria,  sir  James  de  la  Berme  would  not  that  it
should  be  made  secret,  but  sent  information  of  the  event  by  some  of  the  prisoners  to  the  camp,
to  see  how  they  would  act  on  the  occasion.

The  whole  army  were  in  dismay  on  hearing  their  loss  ; for  they  had  now  no  commander
in  chief  to  look  up  to,  as  they  were  mostly  all  free  companions.  They  therefore  said,  “ Let
us  hasten  back  to  our  own  countries,  for  we  have  lost  all  opportunities  of  gaining  anything
here.”  It  was  soon  known  in  Alexandria  that  the  Armagnacs  were  in  despair  for  the  death
of  the  count : they  therefore  made  a sally  from  the  town,  advancing  full  gallop  to  the  camp,
shouting  “ Pavia  for  the  lord  of  Milan  ! ” Not  one  of  the  Armagnacs  made  any  defence,  but
allowed  themselves  to  be  slain,  like  wicked  people  as  they  were  : the  conquest  was  great,  for
the  army  were  so  cast  down,  that  they  surrendered  without  striking  a blow,  and  throwing
down  their  arms,  made  for  Alexandria,  whither  the  Germans,  and  other  soldiers  in  the  pay
of  the  lord  of  Milan,  drove  them  like  a herd  of  cattle.  This  unexpected  death  of  the  count
d’Armagnac  happened  very  unluckily  for  himself  and  his  army.  Had  he  remained  quiet
but  five  days,  sir  John  Ilawkwood  would  have  arrived  with  five  hundred  horse  and  one
thousand  foot ; and  many  valiant  deeds  would  have  been  done  by  this  knight  and  his  men  ;
but  an  end  was  now  put  to  every  thing  by  this  loss.

You  may  suppose  the  count  de  Vertus  was  in  high  spirits  on  hearing  his  enemies,  whom
he  greatly  dreaded,  were  killed,  made  prisoners  or  put  to  flight,  and  that  the  count  d’Armag-
nac was  dead.  He  more  dearly  prized  his  knight,  sir  James  de  la  Berme,  through  whose
prudence  and  valour  this  good  fortune  had  befallen  him.  He  appointed  him  commander
in  chief  of  his  chivalry,  and  president  of  his  council.  The  lord  of  Milan  considered  how  he
should  act  towards  the  prisoners  ; and,  as  he  was  anxious  to  free  his  country  of  them,  he
behaved  in  the  most  courteous  manner,  giving  to  every  gentleman  ahorse,  and  to  the  infantry
one  florin  each,  besides  their  liberty,  free  of  ransom  ; but  he  made  them  all  take  an  oath
that  they  would  never  more  bear  arms  against  him.

Thus  did  this  army  return  defeated  from  Lombardy  and  Piedmont,  to  Savoy  and  Dau-
phiny  ; but  they  were  in  the  utmost  distress,  for  the  inclosed  towns  refused  them  admit-
tance, and  the  gates  of  all  castles  were  shut  against  them.  They  had  soon  spent  their  florins,
and  it  was  necessary  for  them  to  work  or  starve.  Some  showed  compassion,  and  gave  them
money ; but  others,  on  the  contrary,  laughed  at  and  abused  them,  saying  “ Go,  go  seek  your
count  d’Armagnac,  who  has  burst  himself  by  drinking  at  a fountain  near  Alexandria.”
They  were  still  worse  off  when  they  came  to  the  rivers  Rhone  and  Saone,  which  they
thought  to  cross  without  molestation  ; but  it  was  otherwise,  for  the  king  had  commanded
all  the  bridges  and  fords  to  be  guarded  against  them.  They  fell  now  into  the  greatest  poverty,
and  were  never  after  able  to  unite' together.

Thus  was  the  armament  of  count  John  d’Armagnac  destroyed,  and  his  sister  remained  in
the  same  distressful  state  as  before.  The  lord  of  Milan  ordered  the  body  of  the  count  d’Ar-
magnac to  be  embalmed,  put  into  a coffin,  and  escorted  by  a bishop  of  his  country  and  such
of  his  relations  as  had  remained  to  his  brother  sir  Bernard  d’Armagnac,  who  was  much  con-
cerned at  the  melancholy  event,  but  could  not  any  way  remedy  it.  The  count  d’Armagnao
was  buried  in  the  cathedral  church  of  Rodez,  where  he  lies.


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


405


CHAPTER  XXVII. THE  KING  OP  ENGLAND  IS  ANXIOUS  TO  MAKE  A PEACE  WITH  FRANCE.

THE  DUKE  OF  GLOUCESTER  THROWS  OBSTACLES  IN  THE  WAY. SIR  PETER  DE  CRAON,

FORMERLY  THE  FAVOURITE  OF  KING  CHARLES  AND  1IIS  BROTHER  THE  DUKE  OF
TOURAINE,  INCURS  THEIR  HATRED,  AND  TAKES  REFUGE  WITH  THE  DUKE  OF  BRIT-
TANY.

Sir  Thomas  Percy,  as  you  have  heard,  was  sent  by  the  king  of  England  to  propose  a
treaty  of  peace  to  the  court  of  France,  for  king  Richard  was  very  desirous  to  accomplish  it.
Two  of  his  uncles,  the  dukes  of  Lancaster  and  York,  were  of  his  opinion  ; but  his  other
uncle,  Thomas  of  Woodstock,  duke  of  Gloucester,  earl  of  Essex  and  Buckingham,  and  con-
stable of  England,  would  no  way  listen  to  it ; telling  his  friends  secretly,  that  he  would  never
agree  to  any  peace  with  France,  whatever  negotiations  might  be  taken  in  hand  on  the  sub-
ject, if  it  were  not  an  honourable  one  ; that  all  the  towns,  castles  and  lordships  which  were
yielded  to  England,  but  had  since  been  fraudulently  taken  back,  must  be  restored,  and  the
sum  of  1,400,000  francs,  which  had  remained  unpaid  by  the  French  when  they  began  the
war,  must  also  be  paid  down.  He  declared,  that  as  long  as  he  lived  he  should  never  change
these  sentiments ; in  which  he  was  joined  by  many  of  the  barons  of  England,  particu-
larly the  earl  of  Arundel,  who  privately  said  the  duke  of  Gloucester  was  in  the  right,
though  they  dissembled  their  opinions  in  public  from  seeing  how  much  the  king  of  England
was  bent  upon  peace.


Richard  II.  and  his  three  Uncles  the  Dukes  of  Lancaster,  York  and  Gloucester.  From  an  illumination  al
the  head  of  a most  beautiful  MS.  Epistle,  written  by  an  old  Monk  of  the  order  of  the  Celestins  at  Paris  on  the
subject  of  the  peace  between  France  and  England,  and  presented,  (as  shown  by  the  drawing)  by  him  to  Richard.
Royal  MSS.  20.  B.  VI.


The  poorer  knights  and  archers  were  of  course  for  war,  as  their  sole  livelihood  depended
upon  it.  When  these  things  are  considered,  and  the  claims  of  the  French,  it  will  be  very
clear  nothing  like  peace  could  be  concluded.  The  French  demanded  to  have  Calais  destroyed,
and  possession  given  them  of  the  lordships  of  Guines,  Flames,  Merle  and  Oye,  with  the
lands  of  Fretun  and  the  dependencies  of  Guines  as  far  as  the  river  that  runs  by  Gravelines.
True  it  is,  the  king  of  France  and  his  commissioners  were  willing  to  give  up  to  the  king  of
England  and  his  heirs  as  many  lands  in  Aquitaine  of  equal  or  more  value  as  to  revenue  than


496


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


those  they  demanded  ; but  the  duke  of  Gloucester  made  too  firm  an  opposition  to  this  article,
saying, — “ The  French  wish  to  pay  us  back  with  our  own  lands ; for  we  have  the  charter  of
king  John,  sealed  by  him  and  his  children,  which  gives  up  to  us  the  whole  of  Aquitaine  in
fee  simple.  Whatever  they  have  taken  from  it  since,  has  been  a fraud  and  a robbery  ;
and  their  whole  attempt,  night  and  day  is  to  deceive  us.  Should  Calais  and  the  lands
they  require  be  given  up  to  them,  they  will  be  lords  of  the  sea  and  attack  our  coasts.
Never,  therefore,  so  long  as  I live,  will  I consent  to  peace  with  France  on  these  terms.”

At  the  time  I am  now  speaking  of,  a knight  of  noble  extraction,  from  Anjou  and  Brittany,
wras  greatly  in  favour  with  the  king  of  France,  as  well  as  with  his  brother  the  duke  of
Touraine.  His  name  wTas  sir  Peter  de  Craon,  and  of  such  power  that  nothing  was  done  but
with  his  advice.  He  had  been  favourite  of  the  late  duke  of  Anjou,  king  of  Sicily,  and  was
immensely  rich,  which  had  given  rise  to  many  scandalous  reports  against  him ; for  it  was
currently  said  in  Fi’ance,  that  he  had  robbed  the  duke  of  Anjou.  This  caused  him  to  avoid
the  presence  of  the  young  king  of  Sicily  and  the  queen  his  mother  ; but  he  had  managed  to
acquire  the  affections  of  the  king  of  France  and  the  duke  of  Touraine.  The  constable  sir
Oliver  de  Clisson,  was  likewise  in  high  favour  with  the  king  and  his  brother  for  the  merito-
rious services  he  had  done  them  in  arms,  and  his  brilliant  actions  during  the  reign  of  the  late
king.  Sir  Oliver’s  daughter  was  married  as  you  have  heard,  to  John  of  Brittany,  brother
to  the  Queen-dowager  of  Sicily  ; and  this  marriage  had  sorely  displeased  the  duke  of  Brittany,
who  mortally  hated  the  constable,  considering  both  him  and  John  of  Brittany  as  his  secret
enemies.  lie  had  often  repented  not  having  put  the  constable  to  death  when  he  had  him  in
his  castle  of  Ermine.  Sir  Peter  de  Craon  was  a favourite  with  the  duke  of  Brittany,  being
also  his  cousin,  and,  during  the  reign  of  his  power  with  the  king  of  France  and  the  duke  of
Touraine,  would  willingly,  had  he  been  able,  have  caused  a quarrel  between  them  and  the
constable.  Thus  envies  and  jealousies,  which  have  always  underhand  ruled  in  France,  continue
to  act  until  they  bring  their  favourites  to  an  unfortunate  end.

The  constable  of  France  had  been  so  loyal  in  his  whole  conduct  towards  the  crown,  that  he
was  beloved  by  all  except  the  duke  of  Burgundy  ; and  the  hatred  he  bore  him  originated  in
the  duchess,  who  was  a lady  of  a high  spirit,  and  too  nearly  related  to  the  duke  of  Brittany
to  love  the  constable  ; besides,  she  continued  the  affection  of  her  father  to  all  whom  he  loved,
and  hated  those  he  had  hated  ; such  was  her  temper.  Sir  Peter  de  Craon,  who  at  this  time
resided  at  the  court  of  France  with  the  duke  of  Touraine,  kept  up  a frequent  correspondence
with  the  duke  of  Brittany,  they  writing,  in  the  most  friendly  manner,  to  each  other  concerning
the  state  of  their  affairs.

I am  unable  to  describe  the  exact  grounds  of  their  correspondence  ; but  I,  John  Froissart,
author  of  this  history,  during  the  time  of  my  residence  at  Paras,  (which  was  when  sir  Peter
de  Craon  made  the  daring  attack,  in  the  night-time,  on  the  constable,  who  narrowly  escaped
death,  as  I shall  relate,)  seeing  public  affairs  likely  to  be  much  troubled  and  turn  out  unfor-
tunate, made  many  and  frequent  inquiries  why  sir  Peter  de  Craon  had  so  very  suddenly  lost
the  affections  and  favour  of  the  king  and  the  duke  of  Touraine.  I had  so  often  demanded  the
cause  from  those  who  ought  to  be  acquainted  with  it,  that  at  last  X heard  the  truth  of  what
wTas  commonly  believed  to  have  occasioned  it.  He  was  under  the  displeasure  of  the  duke  of
Touraine,  for  having  revealed  secrets  intrusted  to  him  by  the  duke  to  the  duchess ; and,  if  he
did  so  he  behaved  shamefully.  The  duke  was  so  fond  of  sir  Peter  de  Craon  that  he  made  him
his  companion,  dressed  him  in  the  same  clothes  as  himself,  and  carried  him  wherever  he  wrent,
intrusting  him  with  all  his  most  secret  thoughts.  The  duke,  at  the  time  young  and  amo-
rous, much  amused  himself  with  the  company  of  ladies  and  damsels,  and,  as  I heard,  was
particularly  attached  to  a young  frisky  damsel  of  Paris.  His  intrigue  was  known  and  his
secrets  betrayed,  to  the  great  vexation  of  the  duke,  who  could  not  accuse  any  other  of  having
done  it  but  sir  Peter  de  Craon  ; for  to  him  alone  the  duke  had  discovered  it,  and  had  led  him
with  him  when  he  visited  secretly  this  noble  young  lady.  The  duke  was  much  smitten  with
her,  and  had  proffered  her,  if  she  would  consent  to  his  wishes,  one  thousand  golden  crowns ;
but  she  had  refused  them,  saying,  “ That  her  love  for  him  was  not  on  account  of  his  riches,
but  that  his  affection  had  won  hers ; and  that  she  scorned  to  sell  her  honour  for  gold,”
The  whole  of  this  business  was  told  the  duchess,  who  sent  for  the  young  lady  to  her  chamber.


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


407


On  her  entering,  she  called  her  by  her  name,  and,  with  much  anger,  said,  “ How  is  this  ?
do  you  seek  to  wrong  mo  with  my  lord  ? ” The  lady  was  thunderstruck,  and,  with  tears
replied,  “ Oh  no,  madam  : please  God,  I never  will  nor  even  think  of  it.”  “ It  is  not  so,”
said  the  duchess  ; “ for  I am  well  informed,  my  lord  and  you  love  each  other  mutually  ; and
the  matter  is  so  far  advanced,  that  at  such  a time  and  place  he  offered  you  a thousand
golden  crowns  to  possess  you.  You  refused  them,  for  which  you  behaved  well,  and  this
time  I forgive  you  ; but,  I caution  you,  if  you  value  your  life,  not  to  have  any  further
conversation  with  my  lord,  but  through  your  regard  to  me  send  him  a dismissal.”

The  young  lady,  finding  herself  very  justly  accused  and  in  some  danger,  replied  : “ Madam,
I will  free  myself  from  him  as  soon  as  possible,  and  henceforth  so  act  that  you  shall  never
again  hear  anything  disagreeable  of  me.”  On  this,  the  duchess  permitted  her  to  depart,  and  she
returned  home.  The  duke  much  in  love,  and  ignorant  of  what  had  passed,  went  to  the  place
where  the  ladyresided  ; but,  on  seeing  him,  she  fled,  and  acted  contrary  to  her  usual  manner,
showing  dislike  rather  than  love  ; for  she  was  afraid  to  do  otherwise,  from  the  promises  she  had
made  to  the  duchess.  The  duke  noticing  such  a difference  in  his  reception,  was  very  melan-
choly, and  would  know  the  cause  of  it.  The  young  lady,  with  tears,  said — “ My  lord,  you
have  revealed  to  the  duchess  the  offer  you  once  made  me,  or,  if  not  yourself,  some  one
has  done  it  for  you  : recollect  yourself,  for  you  are  discovered.  Madame  de  Touraine  told
me  of  it  herself  and  frightened  me  exceedingly ; but  she  has  this  time  forgiven  me,  on  con-
dition that  I promised,  on  my  oath,  never  again  to  give  her  cause  for  jealousy  by  any  further
conversation  with  you.”  The  duke  was  much  vexed  at  hearing  this  speech,  and  said : “ Fair
lady,  I swear  on  my  faith,  that  I would  rather  have  lost  one  hundred  thousand  francs,  than
have  betrayed  you  to  the  duchess.  Since  you  have  given  her  a promise  on  oath,  keep  it  ;
but,  cost  what  it  may,  I will  find  out  who  has  discovered  our  secrets.”  He  then  went  away,
and  though  he  dissembled  his  agitation,  he  did  not  think  the  less  concerning  the  cause.  In
the  evening  he  came  to  the  duchess’s  apartments  and  supped,  showing  her  more  affection  than
he  had  hitherto  done,  insomuch  that,  by  fair  speeches  and  attentions,  the  duchess  discovered
the  author  of  her  information  concerning  his  intrigue  to  be  sir  Peter  de  Craon.

The  duke  took  no  further  notice  of  the  matter,  and,  having  passed  the  night,  on  the  morrow,
at  nine  o’clock,  mounted  his  horse,  and  went  from  the  hotel  de  St.  Pol  to  the  Louvre.  The
king  was  going  to  hear  mass,  and  received  his  brother  affectionately  ; but  perceiving  from
his  manner  that  he  was  angered,  he  said,  “ Fair  brother,  what  ails  you  ? you  seem  much
agitated.”  “ My  lord,  if  I am  I have  good  cause  for  it.”  “ What  is  the  matter  ?”  said  the
king,  “ we  wish  to  know  it.”  The  duke,  unwilling  to  hide  his  grief,  told  him,  word  for  word,
everything  that  had  passed,  complaining  bitterly  of  sir  Peter  de  Craon,  and  added  : “ My
lord,  if  it  were  not  for  the  love  I bear  you,  and  for  my  own  honour,  I swear  on  the  faith  I
owe  you  I would  have  him  slain.”  “ Do  no  such  thing,”  said  the  king  ; “ we  will  order  him,
by  our  special  counsellors,  to  quit  instantly  our  palace,  for  that  we  have  no  further  need  of
his  services  ; and  do  you  the  same  on  your  part.”  “ That  I intended,”  replied  the  duke  of
Touraine,  who  was  satisfied  with  what  the  king  had  said.  This  same  day,  sir  Peter  de  Craon
was  told  by  the  lord  de  la  Riviere  and  sir  John  le  Mercier,  from  the  king,  that  he  must  no
longer  reside  in  the  palace,  and  instantly  seek  other  lodgings.  At  the  same  time,  sir  John
de  Bueil  and  lord  d’Ervaux,  seneschal  of  Touraine,  delivered  him  a similar  message  from  the
duke  of  Touraine.  Sir  Peter  seeing  himself  thus  dismissed,  was  much  ashamed  and  greatly
angered  : he  could  no  way  account  for  it,  as  the  messengers  had  not  declared  to  him  the
cause  of  his  disgrace.  Being  desirous  of  admittance  to  the  presence  of  the  duke,  to  learn
from  him  how  he  had  angered  him,  he  was  told,  that  neither  the  king  nor  the  duke  would
hear  anything  he  had  to  say.  When  he  found  his  disgrace  was  resolved  on,  he  packed  up
all  he  wanted,  and  set  out  much  dejected,  from  Paris,  for  a castle  of  his  in  Anjou,  called
Sable*.  • lie  remained  there  for  some  time,  but  in  very  low  spirits,  from  being  driven  from
the  palaces  of  France,  Touraine  and  Sicily.  He  therefore  determined,  since  their  gates  were
shut  against  him,  that  lie  would  retire  to  the  duke  of  Brittany  and  relate  to  him  what  had
happened.

This  he  executed,  and  met  the  duke  at  Vannes,  who  received  him  kindly.  lie  had
* Tie  castles  of  Craon  and  Sable  are  in  Anjou,  two  leagues  distant  from  la  Fleclic.

K K


VOL.  II.


408


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &e.


already  heard  what  had  befallen  him.  and  sir  Peter  again  told  him  every  particular  that  had
passed,  and  that  ho  was  banished  the  court  of  France.  The  duke  of  Brittany,  having  heard
his  story,  replied,  “ Good  cousin,  make  yourself  easy : it  is  the  lord  de  Clisson  who  lias
brewed  this  mischief  for  you.”  From  this  speech  a deadly  hatred  sprung,  and  greatly
increased,  as  you  will  hear  in  the  course  of  this  history.  Sir  Peter  de  Craon  lived  so  long
with  the  duke  of  Brittany  that  he  was  forgotten  in  France  ; for  the  constable  and  the  kino's
council  never  publicly  mentioned  his  name.  They  did  not  like  the  duke  of  Brittany  more
for  having  invited  and  retained  him  ; but  the  duke  was  indifferent  to  the  king  of  France’s
anger  or  love,  and  provided  all  his  towns  and  castles  plentifully  with  stores  and  provisions,
plainly  showing  he  cared  not  whether  it  was  war  or  peace  between  him  and  France.  Every
thing  he  did  was  known  to  the  king  and  his  council;  and  those  most  in  the  king’s  favour
thought  him  presumptuous,  and  menaced  him  for  his  conduct.  The  duke  held  their  menaces
cheap,  and  declared  he  would  wage  war  on  the  count  de  Penthievre  in  earnest,  and  on  all
his  abettors,  for  he  had  just  cause  of  quarrel.  He  said,  “ This  count  de  Penthievre,  our
cousin,  signs  himself  John  of  Brittany,  as  if  he  were  our  heir.  We  have  no  objection  to  his
signing  John  for  that  is  his  name,  or  count  de  Penthievre  ; but  we  are  resolved  he  shall  lay
down  the  ermines,  and  title  himself  J ohn  of  Blois,  or  of  Chatillon,  and  bear  none  other  arms
but  those ; if  he  refuse,  we  will  force  him  to  do  it,  and  take  from  him  his  lands,  which
he  holds  in  vassalage  from  us.  With  regard  to  the  duchy  of  Brittany,  he  need  not  think  of
that,  for  we  have  a son  and  a daughter  who  are  our  heirs.  Let  him  seek  some  other  inhe-
ritance, for  he  will  be  disappointed  in  ours.”  Such  were  the  conversations  of  the  duke  with
sir  Peter  de  Craon,  who,  far  from  contradicting  any  of  his  future  plans,  rather  urged  him  on,
from  hatred  to  the  constable  and  council  of  France.

We  will  now  leave  this  subject,  and  speak  of  a more  melancholy  one  relative  to  the
count  Guy  de  Blois,  whom  I have  before  mentioned  in  this  history  as  my  great  patron  and
master.


CHAPTER  XXVIII. THE  DEATH  OF  THE  YOUNG  COUNT  LOUIS  DE  CHASTILLON,  SON  TO  COUNT

GUY  DE  BLOIS. THE  SUDDEN  DEATH  OF  GASTON  COUNT  DE  FOIX.

I have  already  spoken  of  the  marriage  that  took  place  between  Louis  de  Chastillon,  son  of
the  count  de  Blois,  and  the  lady  Mary,  daughter  of  the  duke  of  Berry.  In  the  settlements
of  this  marriage,  the  duke  managed  well  for  his  daughter  ; for  she  had  a dower  of  six  thousand
livres,  French  money  (which  are  well  worth  the  same  sum  of  francs,  reckoning  them  as  florins)
assigned  her  on  the  county  of  Blois,  so  that  if  she  survived  her  husband,  the  county  of  Blois
would  be  obliged  to  pay  her  this  sum  annually  during  her  life.  Now  it  fell  out,  that  about
St.  John  Baptist’s  day,  in  the  year  of  our  Lord  1391,  the  boy  whom  I have  called  Louis
de  Blois,  son  to  the  count  de  Blois,  left  his  father  at  the  chateau  des  Moutils*,  situated  in  the
county  of  Blois,  and  set  out  for  Hainault  to  visit  his  mother  and  wife.  Not  long  after  his
arrival,  he  was  seized  with  a fever,  for  he  had  rode  very  hard  and  the  weather  was  hot :
he  was  also  of  a tender  age,  being  no  more  than  fourteen  years  old,  and,  in  spite  of  the  phy-
sicians, he  died,  for  they  could  not  check  the  fever.  His  parents,  you  may  suppose,  were
much  grieved  for  the  loss  of  their  heir,  as  was  the  young  lady  of  Berry  : she  loved  him
most  affectionately  and  considered  herself  as  nobly  married.  The  count  de  Blois  was  uneasy
at  the  consequences,  for  his  affairs  were  rather  in  confusion,  and  he  knew  the  duke  of  Berry
to  be  avaricious  beyond  measure,  who,  in  order  to  grasp  at  the  dower  of  his  daughter,  would
take  possession  of  the  county  of  Blois  : he  therefore  waited  the  event  in  silence.

Thus  were  the  two  daughters,  Bona  and  Mary,  widowed  in  the  same  year.  The
eldest  was  married  to  Amadeus  count  of  Savoy,  who  died  very  suddenly,  and  so  much  was
said  on  the  subject  that  sir  Otho  Grandeson  was  near  being  arrested  for  the  suspicions  that
were  laid  to  his  charge,  and  forced  to  quit  Savoy,  France,  and  Germany,  to  fix  his  residence
in  England.

In  this  year,  died  likewise  suddenly,  the  noble  and  gallant  count  de  Foix.  I will  say
* “ Lcs  Moutils,” — a village  in  the  Blesois,  diocese  of  Blois.


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


499


how  it  happened*.  True  it  is,  that  of  all  the  pleasures  of  this  world  he  took  most  delight  in
the  chase,  and  was  always  well  provided  with  hounds  of  all  sorts,  having  never  less  than
sixteen  hundred.  The  count  de  Foix  was  at  this  season  hunting  in  the  forest  of  Sauveterre,
on  the  road  to  Pampeluna  in  Navarre,  not  far  distant  from  Orthes  in  Bearn.  The  day  he
died,  he  had  all  the  forenoon  been  hunting  a hear,  and  it  was  late  in  the  evening  when  he
was  taken  and  cut  up.  His  attendants  asked  where  he  pleased  to  have  his  dinner  prepared  :
he  said,  “ At  the  inn  of  Rion,  where  we  will  dine,  and  in  the  cool  of  the  evening  ride  to
Orthes.”  His  orders  were  obeyed.  The  count  with  his  companions  rode  a foot’s  pace
towards  the  village  of  Rion,  and  dismounted  at  the  inn.  The  count  went  to  his  chamber,
which  he  found  ready  strewed  with  rushes  and  green  leaves ; the  walls  were  hung  with
boughs  newly  cut  for  perfume  and  coolness,  as  the  weather  was  marvellously  hot,  even  for
the  month  of  August.  He  had  no  sooner  entered  this  room,  than  he  said,  “ These  greens  are
very  agreeable  to  me,  for  the  day  has  been  desperately  hot.”  When  seated  he  conversed
with  sir  Espaign  du  Lyon  on  the  dogs  that  had  best  hunted  ; during  which  conversation  his
bastard-son  sir  Evan  and  sir  Peter  Cabestan  entered  the  apartment,  as  the  table  had  been
there  spread.  He  called  for  water  to  wash,  and  two  squires  advanced,  Raymonet  de  Lasne
and  Raymonet  de  Copane : Ernaudon  d’Espaign  took  the  silver  bason,  and  another  knight,
called  sir  Thibaut,  the  napkin.  The  count  rose  from  his  seat,  and  stretched  out  his  hands  to
wash  ; but  no  sooner  had  his  fingers,  which  were  handsome  and  long,  touched  the  cold
water,  than  he  changed  colour,  from  an  oppression  at  his  heart,  and,  his  legs  failing  him,
fell  back  on  his  seat,  exclaiming,  “ I am  a dead  man  : Lord  God,  have  mercy  on  me  ! ”
He  never  spoke  after  this,  though  he  did  not  immediately  die,  but  suffered  great
pain.  The  knights  present  and  his  son  were  much  terrified : they  carried  him  gently  in
their  arms  to  another  chamber,  and  laid  him  on  a bed  covering  him  well,  thinking  he  was
only  chilled.

The  two  squires  who  had  brought  water  to  wash  in  the  bason,  said,  to  free  themselves  from
any  charge  of  having  poisoned  him,  “Here  is  the  water  : we  have  already  drank  of  it,  and  will
now  again  in  your  presence,”  which  they  did,  to  the  satisfaction  of  all.  They  put  into  his
mouth  bread,  water,  and  spices,  with  other  comforting  things,  but  to  no  purpose,  for  in  less
than  half  an  hour  he  was  dead,  having  surrendered  his  soul  very  quietly.  God,  out  of  his
grace,  was  merciful  to  him.

You  may  imagine  all  present  were  exceedingly  afflicted  at  what  had  happened  : they
fastened  the  door  of  the  chamber,  that  his  household  might  not  instantly  be  made  acquainted
with  his  death.  The  knights  seeing  sir  Evan  lamenting  and  wringing  his  hands,  said  to  him,
— “ Evan,  the  business  is  over  : you  have  lost  your  father  and  lord.  We  know  that  he  loved
you  in  preference  to  all  others.  Take  care  of  yourself : mount  your  horse,  ride  and  gain
possession  of  the  castle  of  Orthes,  and  the  treasure  within  it,  before  any  one  know  of  our
lord’s  death.”  Sir  Evan  made  them  a low  reverence,  and  replied  : “ Gentlemen,  I return  you
many  thanks  for  the  friendship  you  now  show  me,  I trust  I shall  not.forget  it ; but  tell  me
what  are  my  lord’s  tokens,  or  I shall  not  gain  admittance  into  the  castle.”  “ Y ou  say  ti-ue,”
answered  the  knights : “ take  them.”  This  he  did.  The  tokens  were  a small  golden  ring  the
count  wore  on  his  finger,  and  a little  knife  with  which  lie  sometimes  cut  his  meat  at  table.
These  were  the  tokens  the  porter  of  the  castle  at  Orthes  was  acquainted  with,  and  had  he
not  seen  them  he  would  never  have  opened  the  gate.


* Gaston  de  Foix  was  born  in  1331,  and  died  in  1391.
His  character  is  nowhere  better  delineated  than  in  the
pages  of  Froissart  ; from  them  posterity  have  formed  their
judgment.  One  accomplishment,  however,  he  has  left  un-
recorded : Gaston  was  a poet,  or  at  least  a rhymer,  for  the
verses  he  has  left  behind  him  do  not  display  much  of.  the
poetic  fire  ; but  the  accomplishment  of  verse-making  was


considered  a necessary  part  of  a Provenfal  gentleman’s
education,  and  accordingly  we  find  that  Phoebus  possessed
it.  This  surname,  or  rather  sobriquet , is  not  well  ac-
counted for  ; some  say  it  was  given  from  his  love  for  the
chase,  others  from  his  fair  complexion,  and  others  from  his
choice  of  the  sun  ns  his  armorial  bearings.- — Ed.


K K 2


500


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


CHAPTER  XXIX. SIR  EVAN  DE  FOIX,  BASTARD-SON  TO  THE  LATE  COUNT,  INTENDING  TO

CARRY  AWAY  PRIVATELY  THE  TREASURE  OF  HIS  FATHER,  IS  DISCOVERED  BY  THE
TOWNSMEN  OF  ORTHES,  WHO,  HOWEVER,  PROMISE  EVERY  ASSISTANCE  TO  HIM  AND
TO  niS  BROTHER  THAT  IS  NOT  INCOMPATIBLE  WITH  THE  TRUE  HEIR  TO  THE  COUNT
DE  FOIX,  THE  VISCOUNT  DE  CHASTELBON.

Sir  Evan  de  Foix  left  the  inn  at  Rion  with  only  two  servants,  and  rode  in  haste  to  Orthes,
where  nothing  was  known  of  the  count's  death.  He  passed  through  the  streets  without
speaking  to  any  one,  or  his  errand  being  suspected,  until  he  came  to  the  castle,  and  called  to
the  porter.  The  porter  said,  “What  does  my  lord  Evan  want  ? Where  is  my  lord?’’
“ He  is  at  Rion,”  answered  the  knight,  “ and  has  sent  me  to  seek  for  some  things  that  are
in  his  chamber,  and  to  return  back  to  him.  To  convince  you  of  what  I say,  look  here  are
his  tokens,  his  ring  and  knife.”  The  porter,  having  eyed  them  through  a window,  knew
them  well  and  opened  the  wicket,  through  which  sir  Evan  entered,  and  his  servants  led  the
horses  to  the  stable.  When  sir  Evan  had  passed  the  gate,  he  told  the  porter  to  fasten  it ;
which  being  done,  he  seized  the  keys,  and  said  to  him,  “ Thou  art  a dead  man,  if  thou  do
not  obey  me.”  The  porter  was  frightened,  and  asked  the  cause.  “ My  lord  and  father  is
dead,”  said  the  knight,  “ and  I wish  to  gain  possession  of  his  treasure  before  any  one  know
of  it.”  The  porter  obeyed,  as  it  was  necessary  for  him  to  do  ; but  he  would  indeed  have
preferred  that  sir  Evan  should  have  the  treasure  to  all  other  persons.  Sir  Evan  knew  well
enough  where  it  was  deposited,  in  the  great  tower,  but  he  had  three  pair  of  strong  doors  to
open,  and  with  separate  keys,  before  he  could  gain  admittance.  These  keys  he  was  unable
for  some  time  to  find,  as  they  were  in  a small  long  box  of  fine  steel,  locked  with  a little  steel
key,  which  the  count  de  Foix  carried  with  him  when  he  rode  abroad ; and  it  was  found
hanging  to  a piece  of  silk  which  he  wore  over  his  shirt.  The  knights,  who  were  watching
the  body  of  the  count  at  Rion,  noticing  this  key,  could  not  imagine  the  use  of  it ; but  the
chaplain  of  the  count,  sir  Nicholas  de  l’Escalle,  being  present,  knew  it  well.  He  had  been
much  loved  by  the  count,  who  entrusted  him  with  all  his  secrets,  and,  when  he  had  visited
his  treasure,  had  never  taken  any  one  but  his  chaplain  with  him.  On  seeing  the  key,  he
said,  “ Sir  Evan  will  lose  his  pains,  for  without  this  key  he  can  never  enter  the  treasury  :
-this  opens  a small  steel  casket  in  wdiieh  the  other  keys  are.”  The  knights  were  vexed  at
hearing  this,  and  said,  “ Carry  it  to  him,  sir  Nicholas  : you  will  act  well  by  so  doing,  for  it
it  is  better  sir  Evan  should  gain  the  treasure  than  any  other  : he  is  a good  knight,  and  our
late  lord  loved  him  exceedingly.”  The  chaplain  answered,  “ Since  you  advise  me,  I will
cheerfully  do  it;”  and,  instantly  mounting  his  horse,  he  hastened  with  the  key  to  the  castle
of  Orthes,  where  sir  Evan  was  very  melancholy  at  not  finding  the  keys,  and  at  the
impossibility  of  forcing  the  locks  of  the  doors,  as  they  were  very  strong,  and  he  had  not  any
instruments  for  the  purpose.  While  he  was  in  this  distress,  and  sir  Nicholas  on  the  road  to
assist  him,  it  was  known  in  Orthes  (I  know  not  whether  by  inspiration,  or  from  women  and
servants  returning  from  Rion)  that  the  count  de  Foix,  their  lord,  was  no  more.

This  was  very  afflicting  news,  for  the  count  was  greatly  beloved  by  all  ranks.  The  whole
town  was  in  motion,  and  met  in  the  public  square,  where  they  conversed  together  on  the
subject.  Some  who  had  noticed  sir  Evan  ride  up  the  town,  said,  “We  saw  sir  Evan  de
Foix  gallop  towards  the  castle,  and  he  seemed  much  distressed.”  Others  replied,  “ Without
doubt,  what  we  have  heard  is  true  ; for  it  is  not  usual  for  him  to  ride  without  his  father.”
As  the  men  of  Orthes  were  thus  conversing  and  murmuring,  the  chaplain,  sir  Nicholas,  fell
into  their  hands.  They  surrounded  him  to  enquire  the  news,  and  said,  “ Sir  Nicholas,  how
fares  my  lord  ? they  tell  us  he  is  dead  : is  it  true  ? ” “ No,”  replied  the  chaplain  : “ he  is

not  dead,  but  most  dangerously  ill  ; and  I am  hastening  to  seek  for  some  things  that  may
do  him  good,  which  I shall  return  with  to  him.”  On  saying  this,  he  passed  on  to  the  castle.
Having  gained  admittance,  sir  Evan  was  rejoiced  at  his  arrival,  for  without  the  small  key  he
could  never  have  entered  the  tower.

I will  say  how  the  townsmen  behaved.  They  began  to  suspect  the  death  of  the  count  had
been  hid  from  them,  and  said  among  themselves,  “ It  is  now  night,  and  we  hear  nothing


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


501


certain  of  our  lord’s  health,  from  his  officers  or  secretaries.  Sir  Evan  and  his  chaplain,  who
was  his  confidential  secretary,  li  ave  entered  the  castle:  let  us  guard  that  place  this  night,
and  to-morrow  we  shall  have  certain  news.  We  will  send  privately  to  Rion  to  inquire  how
things  are ; for  we  know  that  the  greater  part  of  our  lord’s  treasure  is  in  the  castle,  and  if
he  he  robbed  or  defrauded  of  any  part  of  it,  we  shall  be  blamed.  We  must  therefore  be
on  our  guard  concerning  what  passes.”  “ That  is  true,”  replied  others,  who  thought  the
advice  good.  They  instantly  surrounded  the  castle,  and  placed  sufficient  guards  at  all  the
gates  of  the  town,  so  that  no  one  could  enter  or  go  out  without  permission ; and  this  strict
watch  they  continued  until  the  morrow.  The  truth  was  now  known  of  the  count’s  death,
and  caused  the  greatest  tribulation  among  the  inhabitants  of  all  descriptions,  for  he  was
much  beloved  by  his  subjects.  The  guards  were  now  doubled,  and  the  principal  townsmen
drew  up  before  the  castle.

When  sir  Evan  de  Foix  saw,  from  the  castle  of  Orthes,  the  manner  in  which  the  townsmen
had  drawn  themselves  np,  and  that  the  death  of  the  count  was  known  to  them,  he  said  to
the  chaplain, — “ Sir  Nicholas,  I have  failed  in  my  attempt : I can  never  go  hence  without
leave  of  the  inhabitants,  for  they  know  my  father  is  dead,  and  their  numbers  are  every
moment  augmenting.  I must  humble  myself  to  them,  for  force  will  be  of  no  avail.”  “ You
say  well,”  replied  the  chaplain  : “ you  will  gain  more  by  civil  words  than  harsh  ones  : go,
and  speak  to  them,  but  act  cautiously.”  Sir  Evan  went  to  a tower  near  the  gate,  which  had
a window  looking  over  the  bridge  to  the  square  where  the  townsmen  were  assembled.  It
was  in  this  tower  the  lady  J ane  of  Boulogne  was  brought  up  and  educated,  until  she  became
duchess  of  Berry,  as  has  been  already  noticed  in  this  history.

Sir  Evan  opened  the  window  of  the  tower,  and  called  to  him  some  of  the  principal  inha-
bitants, who  advanced  on  the  bridge  to  hear  what  he  had  to  say.  He  thus  addressed
them  aloud, — “ Good  people  of  Orthes,  I know  but  too  well  why  you  are  thus  assembled
and  sorrowful : you  have  good  cause  for  it.  I therefore  most  earnestly  entreat,  for  the
love  you  bore  my  late  lord  and  father,  that  you  will  not  be  displeased  nor  angered,  if  I have
hastened  to  take  possession  of  this  castle  and  what  is  contained  within  it,  for  I mean  nothing
but  what  is  just.  You  know  the  great  affection  my  lord  and  father  had  for  me,  and  that  he
would  willingly  have  made  me  his  heir.  It  has  happened,  by  the  will  of  God,  that  he  died
without  having  completed  any  regulations  to  that  effect,  which  has  thrown  me  upon  you,
with  whom  I was  brought  up  and  educated,  a poor  knight,  bastard  to  the  count  de  Foix.
I therefore  beg  you  would  counsel  me  how  to  act,  and  assist  me  in  this  time  of  distress.  I
pray  God  that  you  will  have  compassion  on  me,  as  it  will  be  an  act  of  charity ; and  I shall
open  the  castle  for  your  free  admittance,  as  I never  thought  of  closing  its  gates  against  you.”

The  chiefs  among  the  townsmen  answered, — “ Sir  Evan,  you  have  well  spoken,  and  to  the
purpose,  and  we  are  satisfied.  We  therefore  say,  that  you  shall  live  among  us  : and  it  is  our
intention  that  you  keep  this  castle,  and  all  that  is  within  it,  which  we  will  aid  you  to  defend.
Should  the  viscount  de  Chatelbon,your  cousin,  who  is  heir  to  the  territory  of  Be'arn,  and  the
nearest  relation  to  our  late  lord,  your  father,  claim  any  thing  belonging  to  this  castle,  we
will  strenuously  defend  you,  and  your  brother  sir  Gracien,  in  your  rights.  But  we  suppose,
that  when  the  king  of  France  was  last  at  Toulouse,  and  our  lord,  your  father,  waited  on  him,
some  regulations  were  made  respecting  these  matters  ; and  your  cousin,  sir  Roger  d’Espaign,
ought  to  know  all  the  circumstances  relative  to  them.  We  will  write,  to  inform  him  of  the
death  of  our  lord,  and  to  invite  him  hither,  to  give  us  his  advice,  as  well  on  the  state  of  Bearn
and  Foix,  which  may  fall  to  ruin,  as  respecting  the  moveables  and  funeral  of  our  lord.  What
we  have  now  said,  we  promise  you  most  faithfully  and  loyally  to  observe.”

Sir  Evan  was  well  satisfied  with  this  speech,  and  threw  open  the  gates  of  the  castle  for
all  to  enter  who  pleased.  Many  did  so,  examined  it  well,  and  placed  sufficient  guards  to
defend  it.


502


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


CHAPTER  XXX. TIIE  CORPSE  OF  THE  COUNT  DE  FOIX  IS  BROUGHT  FROM  RION  TO  ORTHES.

THE  KING  OF  FRANCE  SENDS  THE  BISHOP  OF  NOYON  AND  THE  LORD  DE  LA

RIVIERE  INTO  THE  COUNTY  OF  FOIX,  TO  MAKE  ARRANGEMENTS,  ACCORDING  TO  THE
DECREE  OF  TnE  COUNCIL.

This  same  day,  the  body  of  the  count  do  Foix  was  put  into  a coffin,  and  brought  to
Ortlies.  The  inhabitants,  men,  women  and  children,  who  went  to  meet  it,  wept  most
bitterly,  remembering  his  valour,  prudence  and  generosity,  and  the  happiness  they  had
enjoyed  during  the  whole  of  his  reign  ; for  there  was  neither  Englishman  nor  Frenchman
who  dared  to  anger  him.  They  said, — “ Our  neighbours  will  now  make  war  on  us  who
have  hitherto  lived  in  peace,  and  we  shall  inhabit  a land  of  misery  and  slavery.  No  one
will  now  attend  to  or  defend  our  rights.  Ah,  Gaston  ! fair  child,  why  didst  thou  anger  thy
father  ? If  thou  hadst  remained  to  us,  whose  youth  promised  so  much,  we  should  be
comforted ; but  we  lost  thee  when  too  young,  and  thy  father  has  lived  too  short  a time.  He  was
but  sixty-three  years  old*,  and  that  is  no  great  age  for  such  a handsome  and  healthy  prince,
and  one  who  had  every  comfort  about  him.  Ah,  desolated  and  comfortless  Bearn  ! now  thou
hast  lost  thy  prince,  what  will  become  of  thee  ? Never  slialt  thou  have  an  equal  to  the
gallant  and  noble  Gaston.”  With  such  lamentations  was  the  body  of  the  noble  count  carried
through  Ortlies,  attended  by  the  following  knights  : first,  the  viscount  de  Bruniquel  and  the
lord  de  Copane,  then  sir  Roger  d’Espaign  and  the  lord  de  Laisne,  sir  Raymond  de  la  Motte
and  the  lord  de  Besach,  sir  Menaut  de  Noailles  and  sir  Richard  de  Saint  George.  Sir  Evan
de  Foix  walked  in  the  rear,  attended  by  the  lord  de  Corasse,  the  lord  de  Barentin,  the  lord
de  Baruge,  the  lord  de  Quer,  and  upwards  of  sixty  knights  of  Bearn,  who  had  hastened
to  Rion  on  hearing  the  melancholy  news  of  their  lord’s  death.  The  body  of  the  count  was
borne,  with  his  face  uncovered,  to  the  church  of  the  Cordeliers  in  Ortlies,  where  it  was
opened,  embalmed,  and  put  into  a leaden  coffin,  and  left  in  that  state  until  the  day  of  its
interment.  It  was  handsomely  watched  ; for  there  were  continually  burning  around  it,
night  and  day,  twenty-four  large  wax  tapers,  which  were  held  by  as  many  varlets  ; twenty-
four  being  employed  on  this  service  during  the  day,  and  the  like  number  of  others  during
the  night.

The  death  of  the  count  de  Foix  was  now  public  in  various  places,  and  more  were  sorry
than  rejoiced  ; for  he  had  made,  in  his  lifetime,  innumerably  valuable  gifts,  and  was  beloved
by  all  who  were  acquainted  with  him.  Even  pope  Clement  showed  much  concern  on  hearing
it,  notwithstanding  the  difficulties  the  count  had,  for  a long  time,  thrown  in  the  way  of  the
marriage  of  his  cousin,  the  lady  Jane  of  Boulogne,  now  duchess  of  Berry.  The  bishop  of
Pamiers  was  at  this  time  resident  at  Avignon  ; for  he  was  afraid  of  living  in  his  diocese,
from  the  hatred  the  count  de  Foix  bore  him.  Although  they  were  relations,  and  the  count
had  made  him  a bishop,  he  incurred  the  count’s  disgrace,  from  his  attempts  to  extend  his
jurisdiction  to  the  prejudice  of  the  count.  The  pope  sent  for  him  to  the  palace,  and  said,
“ Bishop  of  Pamiers,  your  peace  is  made  : the  count  de  Foix  is  dead.”  The  bishop  was
well  pleased  to  hear  it,  and,  in  a few  days,  set  out  from  Avignon,  for  his  bishopric  in  the
county  of  Foix,

When  intelligence  of  the  count’s  death  was  carried  to  the  court  of  France,  the  king,  his
brother,  and  the  duke  of  Bourbon,  were  grieved  thereat,  for  his  many  good  qualities.  The
council  addressed  the  king  : “ Sire,  the  county  of  Foix  is  now  yours  by  lawful  succession  ;
for,  since  the  count  has  died,  without  leaving  any  heirs  by  marriage,  no  one  can  dispute
your  claim.  This  is  understood  by  the  landholders  of  Foix.  There  is  also  another  circum-
stance which  adds  to  your  claim,  you  have  lent  on  mortgage  of  that  county  fifty  thousand
francs,  send  and  take  possession  for  payment,  and  hold  it  as  your  legal  inheritance  : those
of  the  county  desire  nothing  more  eagerly  than  to  be  under  your  government.  It  is  a fair
possession,  and  comes  very  opportunely,  for  it  borders  on  Catalonia  and  Arragon  ; and  if,
in  time  to  come,  you  should  be  at  war  with  the  king  of  Arragon,  the  county  of  Foix  will  be
a good  frontier ; for  it  has  many  castles  and  forts  which  may  be  very  advantageously
* He  died  on  the  12th  of  August  1391,  and  was  born  in  1331. — Ed.


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


503


garrisoned  with  men  at  arms.”  The  king  listened  with  pleasure  to  this  speech,  and,
agreeing  with  his  council,  said,  “ See  whom  we  shall  send  thither.”  They  resolved  on  the
lord  de  la  Riviere,  because  he  had  formerly  been  there,  and  determined  that  he  should  bo
accompanied  by  the  bishop  of  Noyon.  These  two  lords  on  hearing  of  their  embassy,  made
Very  handsome  preparations,  but  did  not  immediately  set  out.  When  they  did,  they
tra veiled  slowly  and  at  their  leisure,  taking  the  road  through  Avignon.


CUAPTER  XXXI. THE  VISCOUNT  DE  CIIATELBON,  HEIR  TO  THE  COUNT  DE  POIX,

ATTENDS  HIS  FUNERAL  AT  ORTIIES. IIE  IS  ADVISED  TO  SEND  TO  THE  BEFORE

NAMED  COMMISSIONERS  FROM  FRANCE,  TO  DEMAND  POSSESSION  OF  THE  SUCCESSION
WHICH  HAD  FALLEN  TO  HIM  BY  THE  DEATH  OF  THE  COUNT  DE  FOLK  : IIE  AFTER-

WARDS SENDS,  TO  THE  SAME  PURPORT,  TO  THE  KING  OF  FRANCE.

The  death  of  the  count  de  Foix  was  signified  to  the  viscount  do  Chatelbon  in  Arragon.
He  instantly  set  out  for  Bf'arn,  and  arrived  at  Orthes ; but,  though  the  inhabitants  made
him  very  welcome,  they  did  not  acknowledge  him  for  their  lord.  They  said,  “ They  were
but  a part  of  the  country  ; and  that  it  would  be  necessary  for  all  the  barons,  prelates,  and
citizens  of  the  principal  towns  to  assemble  and  consider  of  the  business ; that  Bearn  was  an
independent  territory,  and  those  lords  who  resided  in  it  would  never  consent  that  it  should
pay  homage  to  any  one.”  It  was  now  determined  to  perform  the  obsequies  of  the
count  de  Foix,  and  then  to  summon  all  the  barons  of  Bearn  and  Foix  ; that  all  who  pleased
might  attend  and  deliberate  how  to  act,  on  the  present  occasion,  in  the  choice  of  a lord.
The  barons,  prelates  and  chief  citizens  of  Bearn  and  Foix  were  invited  to  the  funeral  of  the
count.  Those  from  Bearn  came ; but  the  Foixiens  refused,  saying  they  should  stay  at  home
to  guard  and  defend  their  country  until  the  matter  of  succession  were  determined,  for  they
had  heard  the  king  of  France  laid  claim  to  it.  The  bishop  of  Pamiers,  notwithstanding
this,  being  a relation  and  invited,  went  to  Orthes  in  handsome  state,  becoming  his  rank.

Great  were  the  numbers  who  attended  the  funeral  of  Gaston  count  de  Foix,  the  last  of
the  name,  in  the  church  of  the  cordelier  friars  of  Orthes,  on  a Monday,  the  1 2th  day  of
October,  in  the  year  of  our  Lord  1391.  In  addition  to  the  barons  and  knights,  there  were
three  bishops : first  the  bishop  of  Pamiers,  who  said  mass  and  performed  the  service ; then
the  bishops  of  Lescar  and  Oleron.  The  church  was  splendidly  illuminated,  and,  during
mass,  four  knights  displayed,  in  front  of  the  altar,  the  emblazoned  banners  of  Foix  and
Bearn.  The  first  was  supported  by  sir  Raymond  de  Chatelneuf,  the  second  by  sir  Espaign
du  Lyon,  the  third  by  sir  Peter  de  Quer,  and  the  fourth  by  sir  Menaut  de  Noailles.  Sir
Roger  d’Espaign  made  the  offering  of  his  sword,  supported  by  the  bourg  de  Copane*  and  sir
Peter  Andrew  de  Bearn,  governor  of  Lourde.  The  viscount  de  Bruniquel  offered  the  shield,
supported  by  sir  John  de  Chatelneuf  and  John  de  Chantiron.  The  helmet  was  offered  by
the  lord  Valentin  de  Bearn,  supported  by  sir  Arnold  de  Rostem,  and  Arnold  de  Sainte-
Colombe.  The  war-horse  was  offered  by  the  lord  de  Corasse,  supported  by  sir  Arnauton
d’Espaign  and  Raymonnet  de  Copane.

Every  part  of  the  obsequies  was  most  honourably  and  magnificently  performed  according
to  the  custom  of  the  country.  Sir  Evan  and  sir  Gracien  de  Foix,  the  two  bastard-sons  of
the  count,  were  present,  as  were  the  viscount  de  Chatelbon,  all  the  barons  from  Bearn,  and
some  from  Foix  ; but  the  last,  as  soon  as  the  service  was  ended,  mounted  their  horses,  and
went  to  dine  at  ITeriticl,  two  leagues  distant  from  Orthes.  Very  early  on  the  morrow,  the
bishop  of  Pamiers  took  his  departure,  refusing  to  assist  at  the  assembly  of  the  barons  of
Bearn,  which  was  fixed  for  that  day.  As  soon  as  the  obsequies  had  been  performed,  the
body  of  the  count  de  Foix  was  taken  from  the  leaden  coffin,  enwrapped  with  a new  and
handsome  waxed  cloth,  and  buried  in  front  of  the  grand  altar  in  the  choir  of  the  church  of
the  Cordeliers.  Of  him  there  is  an  end  : God  pardon  his  sins  !

I will  now  say  what  was  done  at  this  great  meeting  of  prelates,  barons,  knights,  and

* The  family  of  Copane  is  known  at  this  day  under  the  name  of  Caupenne.  The  castle  of  Caupennc  is  near
Bayonne. — Note  by  the  Marquis  de  Sy.


50  i


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.

principal  citizens  of  Bearn,  at  Orthes.  I imagine,  from  the  information  I received,  the
viscount  de  Chateaubon  was  addressed  nearly  as  follows  : “ My  lord,  we  know  well  that
from  your  relationship  to  our  late  much  honoured  lord,  whose  soul  God  pardon  ! you  are
entitled  to  succeed  to  all  his  inheritances,  as  well  in  Bearn  as  in  Foix  ; but  at  this  moment
we  dare  not  acknowledge  you  as  our  lord,  lest  we  be  guilty  of  great  imprudence,  and  hazard
this  country  of  Bearn  in  a dangerous  war  ; for  wc  have  heard  that  the  king  of  France,  who
is  our  good  neighbour,  and  very  powerful,  has  ordered  hither  some  of  his  council : we  know
not,  nor  shall  we  learn  until  they  arrive  and  tell  us,  on  what  cause  they  are  sent.  You  are
not  ignorant,  any  more  than  ourselves,  that  our  late  lord,  whom  God  forgive  ! was  last  year
with  the  king  of  France  at  Toulouse,  when  they  had  many  secret  conferences;  and  the
object  of  these  must  be  explained,  for,  should  he  have  signed  and  sealed  any  transfer  of  Foix
and  Bearn,  the  king  of  France  will  think  himself  justified  to  possess  them  by  force.  We
therefore  must  know  the  terms  of  such  treaties,  if  they  exist,  for  we  are  otherwise  situated
than  Foix.  Ours  is  a free  country*,  which  owes  neither  homage  nor  servitude  to  any
one  ; whereas  the  county  of  Foix  is  a tenure  from  the  king  of  France,  and  the  Foixiens  are
so  attached  to  France,  that  they  will  cheerfully  acknowledge  that  king  for  its  lord  : indeed
they  already  say,  that  since  the  count  de  Foix  has  deceased  without  heir-male  by  legal
marriage,  that  county  naturally  falls  to  the  king  of  France,  its  lord  paramount.  My  lord,
you  know  wc  shall  maintain  our  rights,  and  that  we  will  not  surrender  them  to  any  lord,
whether  the  king  of  France  or  you.  We  recommend,  therefore,  that  in  this  business  you
take  the  lead,  by  treaty  or  otherwise.”  The  viscount  replied, — “ And  how  would  you
advise  me  to  act  ? for  I have  declared  my  willingness  to  follow  every  thing  in  reason  that
you  shall  counsel  me.”  “ My  lord,”  said  they,  “ we  think  you  should  desire  your  cousin
sir  Roger  d’Espaign,  who  is  here  present,  to  accompany  you  at  your  expense  to  the  county
of  Foix,  to  negociate  with  the  barons,  prelates  and  principal  inhabitants.  If  you  succeed  in
prevailing  on  them  to  accept  you  for  lord,  or  to  keep  secret  their  intentions  until  you  shall
have  gained  over  the  king  of  France  by  means  of  a composition  in  money,  that  the  inhe-
ritance may  be  yours,  you  will  have  done  well.  Have  an  interview  with  the  commissioners
sent  by  the  king  of  France  to  Foix,  and  offer  one  or  even  two  hundred  thousand  francs,  you
will  find  it  cheaply  bought,  and  have  more  than  enough  to  pay  it  from  the  treasure  our  late
lord  (whose  soul  may  God  pardon!)  has  left  behind  him.  But  we  are  resolved  that  his  two
bastard-sons  shall  have  a handsome  share  of  his  landed  property,  and  of  the  ready
money.”

The  viscount  de  Chateau-bon  answered, — “ Gentlemen,  I consent  to  all  your  wishes.
Here  is  sir  Roger  d’Espaign,  and  in  your  presence  I entreat  that  he  will  accompany  me  on
this  journey.”  Sir  Roger  said,  he  would  cheerfully  do  so,  as  he  might  mediate  between
them  ; but  if  the  king  of  France,  his  sovereign  lord,  or  his  commissioners,  should  require
him  to  be  of  their  party,  or  wish  him  to  retire,  he  should  then  return.  The  viscount  was
satisfied  with  this  answer,  and  said, — “ I will  never  act,  cousin,  but  by  your  advice  ; and,
when  you  are  by  my  side,  I shall  be  more  encouraged  and  the  sooner  accomplish  my  ends.”
On  this,  the  meeting  was  on  the  point  of  being  dissolved,  when  the  viscount  requested  that
he  might  have,  by  way  of  loan,  five  or  six  thousand  francs  from  the  treasury,  to  cai-ry  on
his  affairs.  The  two  bastards  likewise  put  in  their  claims,  and  desired  they  might  have  a
share  of  the  money  of  their  father  which  the  men  of  Oi’thes  had  now  under  their  guard.
The  bai’ons,  prelates  and  citizens,  having  considered  these  demands,  agreed  that  the  viscount
should  have  five  thousand  francs,  on  the  terms  he  had  proposed,  and  the  two  bastards  of
Foix  two  thousand.  Orders  were  accordingly  given  for  their  delivery.  This  was  complied
with,  and  the  ti’easurei’s  summoned  to  pay  it.  Not  one  person  who  had  any  office  under  the
late  count  was  dismissed ; but  the  guard  of  the  castle  of  Oi’thes,  and  all  within  it,  was  given
to  the  inhabitants  of  the  town.

The  viscount  de  Chateau-bon,  on  his  arrival  at  Orthes,  set  at  liberty  all  prisoners  confined
in  the  castle.  They  were  vexy  numerous  ; for  the  count  de  Foix  was  very  cruel  to  any  per-
son who  incurred  his  indignation,  never  sparing  them,  however  high  their  rank,  but  ordei’-
ing  them  to  be  thrown  over  the  walls,  or  confined  on  bi’ead  and  water  during  his  pleasiu’e  ;

* The  Bearnese  hal  their  own  courts  and  customs,  which  they  long  preserved.  —I’d.


chronicles  of  England,  France,  &c.


505


and  such  as  ventured  to  speak  for  their  deliverance  ran  risks  of  similar  treatment.  It  is  a
well-known  fact,  that  he  confined,  in  a deep  dungeon,  his  cousin-german,  this  viscount  de
Chateau-bon,  during  eight  days  ; and  he  would  not  give  him  his  liberty  until  he  had  paid
down  forty  thousand  francs.  Since  that  time,  he  bore  him  such  a hatred,  that  he  dared  not
appear  before  him  ; and,  had  the  count  lived  two  years  longer,  the  viscount  de  Chateau-bon
would  never  have  inherited  his  possessions  in  Foix  and  Bearn.  Those  who  had  attended
this  meeting  at  Orthes  now  separated,  to  return  to  their  homes,  leaving  the  viscount  to  the
care  of  his  own  affairs.  He  was  not  idle,  but  collected  about  his  person  those  knights  and
squires  he  thought  attached  to  him,  and  left  Orthes  with  an  attendance  of  two  hundred  horse.
He  went  to  Morlaas,  a good  town  and  well  enclosed : it  is  the  last  in  Bearn,  on  the  side  of
Bigorre,  four  leagues  from  Pau,  and  six  from  Tarbes.

On  the  morrow,  as  lie  was  preparing  to  set  out  for  Saint  Gaudens,  another  good  town  at
the  entrance  of  Foix,  on  the  Garonne,  news  was  brought  him  that  the  bishop  of  Noyon  and
sir  Bureau  de  la  Riviere  were  arrived  in  great  state  at  Toulouse.  The  viscount  de  Chateau-
bon  asked  sir  Roger  d’Espaign  how  he  should  act.  Sir  Roger  replied, — “ Since  we  have
now  heard  of  them,  we  will  remain  and  observe  how  they  proceed.  In  a few  days,  they
will  make  us  acquainted  with  their  intentions.”  This  advice  of  sir  Roger  was  followed  : in-
deed it  would  have  been  useless  to  have  advanced  further  into  Foix,  for  all  the  chief  towns,
castles,  and  passes  over  the  river  Garonne,  were  shut  against  them,  such  as  Palaminich,
Castres,  Montesquieu,  Carthas,  Ortingas,  Sossa,  the  city  of  Pamiers,  the  castle  of  which  was
under  the  guard  of  the  townsmen,  Savredun,  Montant,  Mazeres,  Vespuis,  and  all  the  castles
on  the  frontier  of  Arragon.  The  inhabitants  of  Foix  declared  that  no  foreign  power,  of
men  at  arms,  should  enter  their  country,  until  the  right  of  succession  was  established  : they,
however,  showed  a great  inclination  that  France  should  have  their  country,  and  that  it
should  be  governed  by  a seneschal,  like  Toulouse,  Carcassonne  and  Beaucaire  ; but  it  hap-
pened otherwise,  as  I shall  shortly  relate.

When  the  commissioners  from  France  arrived  at  Toulouse,  they  sought  intelligence  from
the  archbishop,  the  seneschals  of  Foix  and  Toulouse,  who  told  them  enough  ; for  the  two
last  had,  from  the  great  love  they  bore  the  late  count  de  Foix,  with  many  of  the  principal
persons  in  Toulouse,  attended  his  funeral  at  Orthes.  They  had,  when  there,  inquired  into
the  state  and  disposition  of  the  country,  from  such  as  they  imagined  could  inform  them.
Upon  hearing  their  report,  the  bishop  of  Noyon  and  lord  de  la  Riviere  consulted  together,
and  determined  to  send  for  sir  Roger  d’Espaign,  for  he  was  liege-man  to  the  king  of  France,
his  officer,  and  seneschal  of  Carcassonne,  and  keep  him  with  them  should  there  be  occasion.
According  to  this  plan,  they  sent  off  an  honourable  squire,  with  letters  sealed  to  sir  Roger.
He  left  Toulouse,  thinking  to  meet  sir  Roger  at  Montreal  or  at  Saint  Gaudens,  with  the
viscount  de  Chateau-bon  ; for  he  had  heard  they  had  left  Morlaas  on  their  road  to  enter
Foix.  The  squire  followed  the  road  to  Saint  Gaudens,  and  soon  arrived  there,  as  the
distance  was  not  more  than  twelve  leagues.  He  presented  the  letters  to  sir  Roger,  telling
him  at  the  same  time  from  whom  they  came.  Sir  Roger,  having  read  them,  said, — “You
will  stay  here  to-day  : to-morrow  you  shall  return,  and  I hope  have  company  with  you.”
The  squire  assented  to  this.

The  viscount  and  sir  Roger  had  a long  conference  on  the  subject  of  these  letters,  and  it
was  concluded  that  Sir  Roger  should  wait  on  the  commissioners  at  Toulouse,  when  he  would
hear  what  was  the  object  of  their  coming,  and  what  their  intentions.  On  the  morrow,  the
knight,  in  company  with  the  squire  who  had  brought  the  letters,  set  out  for  Toulouse,  and
they  continued  their  journey  until  they  arrived  there  in  the  evening,  when  sir  Roger  retired
to  his  lodgings,  and  the  squire  to  his  masters.  On  learning  that  the  knight  was  arrived,  the
commissioners  said,  “ Since  sir  Roger  d’Espaign  is  come  in  person,  to-morrow  we  shall  have
some  intelligence.”  The  next  day,  after  mass,  sir  Roger  waited  on  the  bishop  of  Noyon  and
the  lord  de  la  Riviere,  who  kindly  received  him.  After  some  conversation  on  different  sub-
jects, they  told  him  the  cause  of  their  coming,  and  showed  the  king’s  procuration,  for  them
to  take  possession,  in  his  name,  of  the  county  of  Foix.  Sir  Roger  observed  their  papers  and
credential  letters  were  properly  drawn  up,  and,  after  a short  pause,  he  replied  : “ My  lord  of
Noyon,  and  you  my  lord  de  la  Riviere,  I am  not  such  an  intimate  counsellor  of  the  king  as


506


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


ye  are,  for,  if  I were,  I would  (under  your  favour)  advise  him  to  take  the  money,  and  indeed
somewhat  more  than  what  he  has,  on  mortgage  on  this  county,  advanced  to  the  late  count
and  to  he  repaid  on  his  death,  and  let  the  natural  heir  succeed  to  his  inheritances.  This
would  be,  in  my  mind,  greatly  to  his  honour  and  profit,  and  to  the  salvation  of  his  soul.  I
will  give  you  other  substantial  reasons  why  this  should  be  done,  if  you  will  listen  to  me.
First,  it  is  well  known  that  this  mortgage  was  fraudulently  made  by  the  late  count,  for  he
abounded  in  money  ; and  was  in  this  matter  actuated  solely  by  his  hatred  to  the  true  heir,
the  viscount  de  Chateau-bon,  whom  he  thought  he  could  never  sufficiently  injure.  The  king
may  therefore,  if  he  consent  to  it,  be  implicated  in  this  disgraceful  transaction.  Secondly,
by  following  my  advice,  the  king  will  be  a gainer ; for  the  county  of  Foix  will  cost  him  full
as  much  to  guard  and  defend  as  his  receivers  can  collect  from  it,  and  he  will,  beside,  lose  the
homage  and  service  of  a powerful  man.  Thirdly,  he  will  heavily  load  his  conscience  by  thus
disinheriting  another ; for  if  he  had  meant  to  act  justly  in  such  a bargain  and  sale,  he  ought
to  have  called  upon  all  the  relations  of  the  late  count,  who  had  the  remotest  claims  on  his
succession,  to  oppose  this  act,  if  they  should  have  thought  it  necessary,  which  was  not  done.
Consider,  therefore,  my  lords,  you  who  have  so  good  understandings,  and  are  come  hither  as
those  most  looked  up  to  in  the  king’s  council,  all  that  I have  said,  before  you  approve  your-
selves abettors  of  frauds,  which  must  affect  the  conscience  of  the  king,  for  on  you  will  the
whole  blame  be  thrown,  and,  before  it  be  too  late,  apply  a remedy.  You  have  now  time,
for  my  cousin,  the  viscount  de  Chateau-bon,  has  sent  mo  to  remonstrate  with  you  on  this
business  ; and  he,  as  well  as  myself,  beg  you  will  pay  attention  to  our  complaints ; for  it  is
not  just  to  seize  all  that  strength  and  power  may  enable  you  to  do.”  When  sir  Roger  had
done  speaking,  the  bishop  of  Noyon  and  the  lord  de  la  Riviere  looked  at  each  other;  and
the  bishop  thus  replied, — “ Sir  Roger,  we  are  convinced  the  proposition  you  have  made  us  is
caused  by  your  love  of  justice  ; but  our  commission  does  not  extend  to  annihilate  the  bar-
gains which  may  have  been  made  between  the  king  of  France  and  the  count  de  Foix.  How-
ever, from  consideration  and  love  to  you,  and  for  the  satisfaction  of  all  parties,  we  will  not
proceed  further  in  the  business,  if  you  will  undertake  a journey  to  Paris,  and  make  to  the
king  and  council  what  remonstrances  you  may  please  relative  to  it.  If  you  can  by  your
eloquence  prevail,  that  the  succession  of  Foix  devolve  to  the  viscount  de  Chateau-bon,  who
is  indeed,  as  you  say,  the  legal  heir,  we  shall  be  right  glad,  for  we  are  no  way  inclined  to
disinherit  him.”  “ My  lords,”  replied  sir  Roger,  “ you  make  me  very  happy  by  what  you
say : remain,  therefore,  and  amuse  yourselves  in  Toulouse  during  my  absence,  for  all  your
expenses  shall  be  defrayed  from  the  treasure  in  the  castle  of  Orthes.”

Thus  did  sir  Roger  d'Espaign  manage  the  matter,  during  his  stay  of  two  days  in  Toulouse
with  the  commissioners  from  France  : a better  negotiator  could  not  have  been  sent.  On
the  third  morning,  when  taking  leave  of  them,  he  said, — “ My  lords,  since  I have  begun  this
business,  I see  the  necessity  for  my  going  to  Paris,  to  bring  it  to  a conclusion,  but  I know
not  in  what  disposition  I shall  find  the  king  and  his  court.  Should  I stay  longer  than  I
propose,  I beg  you  will  not  be  uneasy,  for  it  will  be  the  fault  of  those  with  whom  I must
treat,  if  I do  not  very  speedily  return  : in  the  mean  time,  you  shall  constantly  receive
messengers  with  letters  from  me.”

“ Go,  in  God’s  name,”  said  the  two  lords  : “ we  know  it  will  not  be  your  fault  if  any  delay
happen.”  Thus  satisfied  with  each  other,  they  separated.  The  commissioners  remained  at
Toulouse,  and  sir  Roger  returned  to  the  viscount  de  Chateau-bon  at  St.  Gaudens,  to  tell  him
what  had  passed.  The  viscount  was  rejoiced  on  hearing  it,  and  said, — “ Sir  Roger,  my  fair
cousin,  I put  my  whole  confidence  in  you,  and  the  matter  interests  me  greatly ; for  it  is
nothing  less  than  whether  I am  or  am  not  to  have  the  property  of  my  family,  from  whom  I
am  sprung,  and  whose  arms  I bear.  I have  none  other  but  you  to  send  to  France,  nor  any
one  on  whom  I can  depend,  to  lay  before  the  king  and  council  the  hardship  of  my  case,  with
a force  of  eloquence  equal  to  the  occasion.  I therefore  entreat,  from  your  affection  to  me,
and  for  the  obligation  I shall  ever  be  under  to  you,  that  you  would  undertake  this  journey.”
Sir  Roger  said, — “ I knew  well  that  you  would  charge  me  with  this  business,  and,  from  my
love  to  you  and  our  relationship,  I will  readily  undertake  it.”  He  was  not  long  in  making
his  preparations  to  go  to  Paris,  and  took  the  road  through  Rodez,  as  being  the  shortest,  for


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


607


there  was  now  a truce  between  France  and  England.  Had  it  not  been  so,  this  way  would
not  have  been  the  most  expedient ; for  there  were  many  forts  on  the  borders  of  Quercy,
Rouergue  and  Limousin,  in  the  hands  of  the  English.

We  will  now  leave  sir  Roger  to  pursue  his  journey,  and  speak  of  the  king  of  France  and
the  duke  of  Brittany.


CHAPTER  XXXII. TIIE  KING  OF  FRANCE  AND  THE  DUKE  OF  BRITTANY  MEET  AT  TOURS,

TO  SETTLE  THEIR  DIFFERENCES. AMBASSADORS  FROM  ENGLAND  COME  THITHER  ALSO

TO  NEGOTIATE  A PEACE.

The  great  hatred  which  subsisted  between  the  duke  of  Brittany  and  sir  Oliver  de  Clisson,
constable  of  France,  has  been  repeatedly  mentioned  in  this  history.  Tr.e  duke,  in  addition
to  the  ill  will  he  bore  him,  was  envious  of  the  favour  he  was  in  with  the  king  of  France,
and  the  opinion  he  had  of  his  advice  : he  would  willingly  have  prevented  or  troubled  this,
if  he  had  the  power,  and  was  not  fearful  of  offending  the  king.  This  made  him  frequently
repent  that  lie  had  not  put  him  to  death  when  in  his  castle  of  Ermine,  for  no  one  would
have  revenged  it,  and  the  matter  would  soon  have  been  forgotten.  The  duke,  on  account  of
this  hatred  and  envy  of  the  constable,  was  very  backward  in  his  duties  to  the  crown  of
France,  and,  when  he  could,  absolutely  refused  paying  them.  He  knew  he  was  acting
improperly,  but  persisted  in  this  conduct,  for  he  was  too  much  inclined  to  England,  and  pro-
vided his  castles  and  towns  with  artillery  and  stores,  sending  secretly  to  England  for  men  at
arms  and  archers,  whom  lie  placed  in  his  forts,  giving  it  out  that  he  was  expecting  war  to
be  made  on  him,  but  his  subjects  could  not  guess  from  what  quarter.

News  of  all  that  he  was  doing  was  carried  to  the  court  of  France,  and  several  spoke
loudly  against  him.  The  duke,  indeed,  knew  that  many  of  the  French  lords  disliked  him  ;
but  ho  was  indifferent  as  to  this,  and  continued  to  act  as  before,  entrusting  only  the  duchess
of  Burgundy  with  the  real  state  of  his  affairs  and  his  intentions.  He  was  right  so  to  do,
for  he  was  by  her  strongly  supported.  She  had  a great  affection  for  the  duke  of  Brittany,
not  only  because  he  was  her  relation,  but  her  father,  the  late  earl  of  Flanders,  had  been  much
attached  to  him,  and  comforted  him  in  all  his  distresses.  This  duchess  of  Burgundy  was  a
determined  lady,  and  the  duke,  her  husband,  would  not  willingly  have  angered  her,  as  was
indeed  natural ; for  he  had  gained  by  his  marriage  with  her  immense  possessions,  and  was
the  father  of  many  fine  children,  which  bound  him,  as  well  as  the  whole  royal  family,  the
more  to  her.

These  hatreds  and  jealousies  were  daily  increasing ; and  although  the  duke  of  Brittany
went  to  Paris,  and  paid  his  homage  to  the  king,  I will  not  pretend  to  say  that  it  was  done
from  the  heart,  for  on  his  return  to  Brittany,  very  little  change  was  observed  in  his  conduct.
He  had  also  sworn  obedience  to  the  pope  of  Avignon,  but  acted  contrary  to  his  solemn  pledge,
for  he  disclaimed  him  by  words,  and  would  not  allow  his  bulls  to  have  effect  in  his  duchy.
He  was  neuter  between  the  two  popes  in  many  tilings,  and  disposed  of  vacant  benefices
according  to  his  pleasure;  so  that  no  foreign  clerk,  unless  he  was  perfectly  agreeable  to  the
duke,  could  obtain  any  benefice  in  Brittany.  And  with  regard  to  any  writs,  or  law  pro-
cesses, which  were  sent  thither  from  the  parliament  of  Paris,  he  held  them  very  cheap,  and
seemed  to  expect  that  his  own  officers  should  take  the  precedence  in  all  such  proceedings.

The  duke  deprived  even  the  prelates  of  Brittany  of  many  of  their  rights,  who,  though  they
made  loud  complaints  of  this  to  the  parliament  of  Paris,  could  not  obtain  redress  ; for  when
the  duke  was  summoned  to  defend  himself  against  these  charges  in  the  courts  of  justice,  he
never  came  nor  sent  any  persons  sufficiently  authorised  to  answer  for  him.  When,  by  order
of  the  parliament,  the  king’s  officers  were  sent  into  Brittany  to  serve  the  duke  with  writs  of
summons,  they  never  could  speak  with  nor  obtain  a sight  of  him,  from  different  excuses  he
made;  but,  when  they  had  left  his  country  and  where  returned  to  Paris,  he  said, — “Yes,
to  be  sure  I will  go  to  Paris  to  hear  law  ! never  will  I do  such  a thing.  Three  years  ago,  I
was  there  for  that  purpose  and  to  obtain  justice  ; but  the  last  I never  could  get.  Our
judges  of  the  parliament  turn  it  as  they  please  ; and  they  must  think  me  very  young  and


508


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


ignorant  when  they  want  thus  to  manage  me.  I wish  to  let  them  know,  that  if  all  my
subjects  were  unanimous  in  the  same  opinions  with  me,  I would  find  the  kingdom  of  France
so  much  employment  that  the  most  obstinate  should  listen  to  reason.  All  who  had  loyally
and  faithfully  served  should  be  rewarded  accordingly,  and  such  as  had  acted  on  opposite
principles  should  be  punished ; and  those  who  demanded  justice  should  have  it.”  Such
speeches,  which  were  often  repeated,  were  carried  to  the  French  court ; and  the  king’s  most
confidential  ministers  said,  “ This  duke  of  Brittany  is  so  presumptuous  and  obstinate  in  his
opinions  that,  if  he  be  suffered  to  go  on  with  such  discourses,  the  kingdom  will  be  weakened,
by  other  lords  following  his  example,  and  the  rights  of  the  crown  by  degrees  may  be  lost.”
It  was  therefore  resolved,  to  obviate  all  difficulties,  that  the  duke  of  Brittany  should  be
civilly  invited  to  come  to  Tours,  where  the  king  of  France,  from  the  affection  he  bore  him,
would  endeavour  to  give  him  the  meeting,  attended  only  by  the  dukes  of  Berry  and  Bur-
gundy, and  the  bishops  of  Chartres  and  Autun,  members  of  his  council,  who  were  expressly
named,  as  more  in  favour  with  the  duke  of  Brittany  than  any  other  lords  in  France,  except
the  lord  de  Coucy  and  the  lord  d’Estampes.

This  plan  being  followed,  the  count  d’Estampes  and  sir  Yves  d’Orient  were  sent  into
Brittany,  where  they  had  much  difficulty  to  persuade  the  duke  to  meet  the  king  of  France
and  his  uncles  at  Tours.  They  discussed  the  matter  so  ably,  he  at  length  said,  “ that  he
would  go  to  Tours ; but  they  need  not  press  him  to  prolong  his  journey,  for  further  he  would
not  go,  neither  would  he  see  his  enemy,  sir  Oliver  de  Clisson,  as  he  hated  him  mortally.”
These  terms  were  complied  with  before  he  would  consent  to  set  out  for  Tours.  The  two
envoys  returned  to  France  to  tell  the  king  and  his  uncles  their  success  with  the  duke  of
Brittany.  They  appeared  satisfied  therewith,  since  they  could  not  do  better.  The  king  and
his  lords  began  to  make  preparations  for  this  journey  to  Tours  on  a large  scale ; for  they
imagined  they  should  remain  there  two  or  three  months,  as  the  treaties  and  negotiations
which  were  to  be  proposed  would  require  much  time  before  they  could  be  concluded.

The  king  of  France,  the  duke  of  Touraine,  the  duke  of  Berry,  the  duke  of  Burgundy,  his
son  John  of  Burgundy,  the  duke  of  Bourbon,  the  lord  de  Coucy,  the  count  de  la  Marche,
the  count  de  Saint  Pol,  and  the  whole  of  their  councils,  came  to  Tours,  wdiere  lodgings  had
been  provided  for  them.  The  constable  of  France  and  his  son-in-law,  John  of  Brittany,
came  thither  from  a different  quarter,  as  indeed  they  were  nearly  concerned  in  the  matters
then  going  forward.  The  duke  of  Brittany,  after  keeping  them  waiting  a fortnight,  at  last
arrived.  Some  said,  that  notwithstanding  he  had  made  them  come  there,  he  would  not  meet
them  ; for  he  had  sent  twice  or  thrice  to  say  he  was  too  ill  to  ride  ; but  having  considered
the  business,  he  at  length  came.  His  purveyances  were  grand,  and  he  and  his  people  were
lodged  at  their  ease.

QThe  negotiations  instantly  began  on  both  sides  ; but  as  the  days  were  now  short,  it  being
the  winter  season,  there  could  not  be  any  long  discussions  before  dinner,  which  were  renewed
afterward  until  the  evening.  During  the  time  these  treaties  were  going  forward  at  Tours,
between  the  king  of  France  and  the  duke  of  Brittany,  which  lasted  good  part  of  the  winter,
sir  Roger  d’Espaign  and  sir  Espaign  du  Lyon  arrived  there  from  Toulouse  on  a Wednesday.
The  city  was  so  full  of  lords  and  other  company,  that  it  was  with  much  difficulty  they
could  find  lodgings.  Having  at  last  obtained  them,  they  waited  on  the  king  and  his
ministers,  and  explained,  as  eloquently  as  they  were  able,  the  cause  of  their  coming,  and  the
case  of  the  viscount  de  Chateau -bon,  in  regard  to  his  claims  on  the  county  of  Foix,  and  the
honour  of  Bearn.]  The  king  and  his  council  were  so  fully  occupied  with  the  affairs  of
Brittany,  which  touched  them  more  nearly,  that  they  could  not  attend  to  other  business.

Sir  Roger  d’Espaign  was  however  well  heard,  though  he  had  not  a speedy  answer : he  re-
mained there  upwards  of  two  months,  and  was  daily  told  his  proposal  should  be  considered,
but  the  answer  was  not  given.  There  was  another  cause  of  delay,  during  the  king’s  residence
at  Tours,  that  increased  the  labours  of  his  council ; for  sir  John  Clanvow,  counsellor  and
chamberlain  to  the  king  of  England,  and  Richard  Rowhall,  clerk,  doctor  of  laws,  and  of  the
council  of  England,  arrived  there  from  king  Richard,  on  the  subject  of  a peace  which  had
been  first  proposed  by  sir  Thomas  Percy  and  the  lord  de  Clifford,  some  time  before  at  Paris,
as  you  have  heard.  On  their  arrival,  all  other  business  was  laid  aside,  and  they  alone  were


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


509


attended  to.  It  was  told  me,  they  had  brought  credential  letters  to  the  king,  and  the  dukes
of  Berry  and  Burgundy,  who  heard  what  they  had  to  say.  Their  mission  was  to  know  if
the  king  of  France  and  his  council  were  willing  to  hold  conferences  at  Amiens,  as  had  been
proposed,  to  endeavour  to  establish  a lasting  peace  between  the  two  kingdoms  and  their
allies.  The  king  of  France,  who,  from  every  appearance,  seemed  desirous  of  peace,  answered
in  the  affirmative,  and  said,  “ that  as  soon  as  the  business  between  him  and  the  duke  of
Brittany  was  finished,  and  he  was  returned  from  Tours,  he  would  not  attend  to  any  thing
until  he  arrived  at  Amiens,  accoi’ding  to  the  former  propositions  ; and  that  lie  would  wait
there  the  arrival  of  the  commissioners  from  England,  who  should  be  made  welcome  with  the
best  cheer  of  the  country.”

The  English  were  well  pleased  with  this  answer,  and  staid  five  days  at  Tours,  passing
their  time  with  the  king,  the  chief  lords  and  the  chancellor  of  France.  Having  accomplished
the  object  of  their  coming,  they  took  leave  of  the  king  and  court.  The  king  made  them
handsome  presents,  for  which  they  returned  thanks,  and  had  all  their  expenses,  while  at
Tours,  paid.  During  their  stay,  they  neither  saw  nor  spoke  with  the  duke  of  Brittany,  for
they  were  anxious  to  avoid  giving  the  French  any  cause  of  suspicion  of  underhand  dealing.
They  returned  through  Paris  and  Picardy  to  Calais,  and,  having  a favourable  passage,
arrived  at  Dover,  and  thence  journeyed  to  London,  where  they  found  the  king  and  council
assembled  at  Westminster,  and  related  to  them  the  answer  they  had  received,  and  what
observations  they  had  made.  The  king  and  council  were  satisfied  with  what  they  heard,
and  gave  orders  respecting  the  conferences  to  be  holden  at  Amiens.

We  will  now  return  to  the  ambassadors  from  Bearn  and  Foix.


CHAPTER  XXXIII. SIR  ROGER  D’ESPAIGN  AND  SIR  ESPAIGN  DU  LYON,  AMBASSADORS  FROM

THE  VISCOUNT  DE  CIIATEAUBON,  PRACTISE  SO  SUCCESSFULLY  WITH  THE  COURT  OF
FRANCE,  THAT  HE  IS  DECLARED  nEIR  AND  SUCCESSOR  TO  THE  COUNT  DE  FOIX  BY
LETTERS  PATENT  FROM  THE  KING  OF  FRANCE.

Sir  Roger  d’Espaign  and  sir  Espaign  du  Lyon  acquitted  themselves  handsomely  and
successfully,  in  regard  to  the  affairs  of  the  viscount  de  Chateaubon.  They  had  many
difficulties  to  overcome  with  the  king  and  the  court,  more  especially  with  the  members  of
the  privy  council,  who  had  advised  the  king  to  annex  the  county  of  Foix  to  the  crown  of
France,  since  the  inhabitants  were  desirous  of  it.  The  king  was  likewise  of  this  opinion,
but  the  duke  of  Burgundy  more  wisely  opposed  it,  and  recommended  it  to  the  king  to  do
nothing  more  than  receive  back  the  money  he  had  advanced,  saying,  he  had  lands  enough  to
guard  without  adding  these,  and  disinheriting  the  lawful  heir.  I believe  the  duke  of
Burgundy’s  advice  would  not  have  been  attended  to,  if  the  duke  of  Berry  had  not  taken  up
the  matter.  You  have  heard  that  formerly  he  had  sent  to  the  count  de  Foix  the  count  de
Sancerre,  the  viscount  d’Assy,  sir  William  de  la  Tremouille,  and  the  lord  de  la  Riviere,  to
treat  for  his  marriage  with  the  lady  Jane  of  Boulogne,  whom  the  count  de  Foix  had  in
ward.  The  count  listened  to  the  proposals,  but  told  the  envoys  that  the  duke  of  Berry
should  never  have  her  for  his  wife  if  he  did  not  give  him  thirty  thousand  francs  for  the
expenses  of  her  education,  and  this  demand  the  duke  paid,  for  he  was  determined  to  have
the  lady.  This  he  had  not  forgotten,  and,  sending  for  sir  Roger  d’Espaign  and  sir  Espaign
du  Lyon  to  his  chamber  at  Tours,  shut  the  door  and  conversed  with  them  in  private,
saying,  “ You  may,  if  you  please,  succeed  in  the  object  of  your  journey  hither ; but  you
must  first  promise  me,  that  I shall  be  fully  repaid  the  sum  my  treasurer  gave  the  count  de
Foix  when  I was  married  to  my  present  duchess.  I have  always  determined,  that  if  I
survived  the  count,  this  money  should  be  paid  me  back.”

The  two  knights,  hearing  the  duke  thus  talk,  looked  at  each  other,  but  said  not  a word.
The  duke  added, — “ My  fair  sirs,  it  was  for  this  I wished  to  speak  with  you  by  ourselves :
consult  together  on  what  I have  told  you ; for,  be  assured,  whether  you  consent  or  not,  I
will  obtain  repayment,  and  your  treaty  shall  not  succeed.  I can  depend  on  my  good  brother
of  Burgundy  acting  as  I please ; he  is  lieutenant  over  all  the  countries  of  Oil,  as  I am  over


CIO


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


those  of  Oc,  and  none  will  dare  to  controvert  my  orders,  or  oppose  my  will.  This  viscount
de  Chateaubon  will  find  money  enough  for  my  demand,  since  the  late  count  has  left  more
behind  him  than  the  king  has  in  his  treasury.”  Sir  Roger  d’Espaign  now  answered,
“ My  lord,  suppose  we  were  to  accede  to  your  proposal,  we  have  not  any  money  with  us.”
“ Oh,”  replied  the  duke,  “ sir  Roger,  that  shall  be  no  hindrance.  You  shall  take  the  debt
on  yourself,  and  give  me  your  bond  for  it : I have  that  opinion  of  your  honour  I will  credit
you  for  this,  or  a much  larger  sum  if  it  were  necessary.”  “ My  lord,”  said  sir  Roger,  “ I
thank  you  : we  will  consult  together,  and  you  shall  to-morrow  have  our  answer.”  “ I am
satisfied,”  answered  the  duke  ; when  the  conversation  ended,  and  the  doors  were  opened.

The  two  knights  returned  to  their  lodgings,  and  had  many  conversations,  whether  or  not
they  should  agree  to  the  duke’s  demand,  and  accept  of  his  mediation.  Every  thing  considered,
they  thought  the  best  they  could  do  would  be  to  consent : for  the  matter  had  been  drawn
out  to  a great  length  without  any  appearance  of  being  decided;  but  on  condition  that  all
the  landed  property  was  yielded  to  the  viscount  de  Chateaubon.  On  the  morrow,  they
returned  to  the  duke  of  Berry,  and  engaged  themselves  for  the  payment  of  thirty  thousand
francs,  on  condition  he  would  influence  the  king  and  council  to  allow  the  viscount  de
Chateaubon  to  inherit  Foix,  on  his  paying  back  the  sum  it  had  been  mortgaged  for.  The
duke  replied, — “ Leave  that  to  me : I will  have  it  done,  otherwise  I shall  not  expect  you  to
fulfil  your  engagements.”  From  that  day  forward,  the  duke  of  Berry  was  so  anxious  to
receive  his  thirty  thousand  francs,  and  so  able  an  advocate  for  the  viscount  de  Chateaubon,
that  every  thing  wTas  arranged  according  to  his  wishes.  The  king  and  council  desisted  from
their  first  demands  ; and  the  two  foreign  knights  had  given  them  letters  of  confirmation  of
the  county  of  Foix  to  the  viscount  de  Chateaubon,  addressed  to  the  bishop  of  Noyon  and
the  lord  de  la  Riviere,  who  had  remained  at  Toulouse.

The  substance  of  these  letters,  as  I learnt  from  credible  persons  who  had  been  on  this
embassy,  was  as  follows: — “ We  Charles,  by  the  grace  of  God  king  of  France,  order  and
command  our  reverend  father  in  God  the  bishop  of  Noyon,  and  our  knight  and  chamberlain
the  lord  de  la  Riviere,  to  allow  the  viscount  de  Chateaubon,  heir  of  Foix  and  Bearn,  to  have
peaceable  possession  and  enjoyment  of  the  same,  and  of  all  dependencies  thereto  belonging,
on  condition  that  he  first  pay  into  your  hands  the  sum  of  sixty  thousand  francs,  which  you
will  receive  in  one  payment  in  the  city  of  Toulouse ; and  we  will,  after  payment  made,  that
the  receipt,  sealed  by  our  seneschal  of  Toulouse,  to  the  viscount  de  Chateaubon,  shall  be  a
full  and  legal  acquittance  to  him,  and  to  whomever  else  it  may  concern.  In  addition,  we
expect  payment  of  twenty  thousand  francs,  for  the  expenses  you  have  been  at  in  your
journeys  to  and  from  the  county  of  Foix  on  this  occasion : you  will  for  this  money  give
acquittances  from  our  above-named  office  in  Toulouse  : saving  and  reserving  that  sir  Evan
and  sir  Gracien  de  Foix,  bastard-sons  of  the  late  Gaston  count  de  Foix,  of  happy  memory,
have  a reasonable  share  of  the  moveable  property  and  inheritances  of  their  deceased  father,
according  to  the  discretion  and  advice  of  sir  Roger  d’Espaign,  the  viscount  de  Bruniquel,  sir
Raymond  de  Chateauneuf,  and  the  lord  de  Corasse,  to  whom  we  will  write,  that  they  acquit
themselves  in  the  matter  honourably  to  the  discharge  of  our  conscience ; for,  some  time
since,  we  made  such  promise  to  their  father.  And  should  any  demur  arise,  either  on  the
part  of  the  four  knights  to  whom  we  have  entrusted  this  business,  or  from  obstinacy  and
rebellion  on  the  part  of  the  viscount  de  Chateaubon,  we  annul  and  declare  all  treaties  we
may  have  entered  into  void,  and  of  no  effect.  In  testimony  whereof,  we  have  given  these
letters  under  our  seal,  in  the  city  of  Tours,  this  15th  day  of  December,  in  the  12th  year  of
our  reign.”

When  these  letters  were  finished  to  the  satisfaction  of  the  king,  council,  and  ambassadors,
the  knights  made  preparations  for  their  departure ; and,  having  taken  leave  of  the  king  and
lords,  and  paid  their  expenses,  they  set  out  from  Tours  on  their  return  home.

You  before  heard  that  the  lord  Louis  de  Sancerre,  marshal  of  France,  was  resident  in  the
neighbourhood  of  Carcassonne,  and  had  been  so  a long  time,  as  lieutenant  for  the  king  over
all  those  countries  as  far  as  the  Dordogne.  The  bishop  of  Noyon  and  the  lord  de  la  Riviere
sent  for  him  to  Toulouse,  and  thus  addressed  him  : — “ Marshal,  the  viscount  de  Chateaubon,
who  declares  himself  heir,  by  the  death  of  Gaston  count  de  Foix,  to  the  county  of  Foix  and


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


511


its  dependencies,  save  and  except  what  may  concern  Bearn,  is  in  treaty  with  us.  We  have
sent  intelligence  of  it  to  the  king  and  his  council ; but  we  know  not,  nor  indeed  can  we  as  yet,
how  the  king  and  his  ministers  may  please  to  act  in  the  matter.  Be  you,  therefore,
provided  with  a sufficient  body  of  men  at  arms,  and  garrison  well  the  frontiers  of  Foix.  Sir
Roger  d’Espaign  and  sir  Espaign  du  Lyon  are  now  in  France ; and  if  we  hear  from  them,
or  by  messengers  from  the  king,  that  there  is  no  probability  of  any  compromise  taking  place,
but  that  the  king  means  to  annex  Foix  to  his  cx-own,  you  will  instantly  enter  that  county,
and  take  possession  of  it,  according  to  the  powei-s  the  king  has  intrusted  to  us  in  this  affair.”
The  lord  Louis  said,  that  in  regard  to  this  he  was  well  prepared,  and  was  increasing  his
strength  daily,  waiting  for  the  answer  from  the  king.

We  will  now  return  to  the  duke  of  Brittany.


CHAPTER  XXXIV. DURING  THE  RESIDENCE  OF  THE  KING  OF  FRANCE  AND  DUKE  OF

BRITTANY  AT  TOURS,  TnEIR  DIFFERENCES  ARE  PARTLY  ACCOMMODATED  BY  MEANS
OF  THE  MARRIAGES  OF  THE  DUKES  SON  WITH  A PRINCESS  OF  FRANCE,  AND  A SON
OF  JOHN  OF  BRITTANY,  SON  TO  THE  LATE  LORD  CHARLES  DE  BLOIS,  WITH  A DAUGHTER
OF  THE  DUKE  OF  BRITTANY.

I have  mentioned  that  treaties  were  negociating  at  Tours  between  the  king  of  France  and
the  duke  of  Brittany.  The  duke  gave  the  king  and  his  council  a great  deal  of  trouble,  for
he  would  not  abate  any  of  his  pretensions.  When  any  propositions  were  made  to  him,  he
refused  them ; and  in  like  manner  was  it  returned,  when  he  offered  any  on  his  part ; so
that  there  did  not  seem  a probability  of  their  disputes  being  terminated.  The  duke  declared
himself  willing  to  serve  the  king  according  to  the  homage  he  had  paid,  and  to  the  duty  he
owed.  “ Why  then,”  asked  the  king’s  council,  “ since  you  acknowledge  yourself  vassal  to
the  king,  do  you  not  obey  him  in  all  things  ?”  “ Wherein  am  I a rebel  ?”  demanded  the
duke.  They  mentioned  many  instances,  and,  first,  his  conduct  towards  the  pope  of  Avignon,
whom  the  king,  his  lord,  obeyed  as  the  true  pope,  and  with  regard  to  whom  he  was
dissembling  his  opinion,  and  refused  to  obey  his  commands,  filling  up  all  the  vacant  benefices
in  his  duchy,  without  paying  attention  to  those  who  had  provided  themselves  with  bulls
from  the  pope.  This,  they  said,  was  rebellious  against  the  king  in  thought  and  deed.  The
duke  replied, — “ That  no  one  had  a right  to  arraign  or  judge  his  conscience  but  God  alone,
who  was  its  supreme  lord.  With  regard  to  the  two  rival  popes,  he  had  never  made  any
declaration  ; that  when  Urban  was  elected,  he  was  with  his  cousin,  the  earl  of  Flanders,  in
the  town  of  Ghent;  that  the  cardinal,  Robert  de  Geneve,  sent  to  the  earl  letters  patent,
sealed  with  his  seal,  which  signified  and  certified  to  my  cousin,  that,  by  the  grace  of  God
and  the  divine  inspiration,  the  conclave  had  elected  Urban  pope.  How  can  an  election  be
set  aside  that  seems  to  me  made  in  the  most  regular  manner  ? I wish  not  to  say  a word
against  the  king  or  his  crown,  for  I am  his  cousin  and  vassal,  and  will  faithfully  serve  him,
whenever  I am  required,  to  the  utmost  limits  of  my  duty ; but  I shall  speak  my  mind  as  to
those  who  do  not  advise  him  honourably.”  “ Tell  us  who  they  are,  and  we  will  provide  a
remedy.”

“ Oh,”  replied  the  duke,  “ you  know  them  better  than  I do,  for  you  live  more  with
them ; but,  as  to  what  you  have  said  touching  the  vacant  benefices,  I am  not  so  severe
against  suitors  for  them  as  you  say,  for  I permit  the  clergy  of  my  duchy  to  provide
themselves  with  bulls  from  pope  Clement ; but  I object  to  strangers  having  the  same
liberty,  and  will  tell  you  why  I refuse  it.  They  want  to  carry  all  the  profit  of  the  benefices  out
of  the  country,  without  serving  them.  This  is  so  contrary  to  reason,  conscience,  and  justice,
that  I will  never  consent  to  it.  You  say  my  conduct  was  rebellious  and  haughty,  respecting
the  king’s  sergeants  that  came  with  writs  into  my  country  of  Brittany.  I neither  am
rebellious  nor  wish  to  be  so.  You  ought  to  know-,  or,  if  you  do  not,  you  should  learn,  that
the  fief  of  Brittany  is  so  noble,  no  law  proceedings  can  take  effect  unless  the  duke,  its
natural  lord,  shall  hold  an  open  court  of  justice,  to  hear  causes,  and  the  reasons  why  any
appeals  may  be  made  thence,  and  to  see  that  the  officers,  who  bring  writs  of  appeal  or


512


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


summons,  do  their  duty  regularly  : should  there  he  sergeants  or  other  officers  in  my  duchy
negligent,  or  against  whom  strangers  have  cause  of  complaint,  I would  punish  them  severely,
for  a warning  to  others.  In  addition  to  what  I have  said,  that  the  king’s  council  do  many
reprehensible  things,  they  plainly  discover  their  inclinations  to  encourage  the  hatred  of  the
king  against  me  : the  proof  is  clear,  by  their  suffering  my  cousin,  John  of  Blois,  to  act  in
two  instances  very  injuriously  against  me  : the  first  is,  the  signing  himself  John  of  Brittany,
as  if,  by  bearing  this  name,  he  could  form  a claim  on  the  inheritance  of  that  duchy  ; but  he
cannot  have  any  right,  because  I have  children,  a son  and  daughter,  who  will  succeed  to  my
possessions.  Secondly,  he  bears  the  ermines,  which  are  the  arms  of  Brittany,  and  he  had
formerly  renounced  the  name,  arms,  and  all  things  thereto  appertaining.  True  it  is,  that  sir
Oliver  de  Clisson  supports  him  in  this  conduct,  to  vex  me  ; and,  as  long  as  this  shall
continue,  I will  not  listen  to  any  treaty  of  peace  or  friendship  with  the  king.  I shall  not
make  war  against  him,  for  he  is  my  natural  lord,  but  if,  through  envious  or  malevolent
informations,  he  make  war  on  me,  I will  defend  myself,  and  shall  be  found  ready  on  my
own  territories.  All  that  I have  now  said,  I wish  the  king  to  be  made  acquainted  with.”

Such  was  the  bitterness  with  which  these  negotiations  were  carried  on  between  the  king  of
France  and  the  duke  of  Brittany.  The  duke  was  master  of  his  council,  but  the  king  was
led  by  sir  Oliver  de  Clisson,  the  begue  de  Yillaines,  sir  John  le  Mercier,  and  sir  William
de  Montagu.  The  duke  of  Burgundy,  who  saw  more  clearly  into  this  matter,  was  uneasy
that  the  duke’s  reasons  were  made  public,  though  he  supported  them  privately  as  much  as
he  could,  in  which  he  was  assisted  by  the  duke  of  Berry,  who  hated  the  confidential  advisers
of  the  king.  By  their  means,  his  treasurer,  Bethisac,  had  suffered  an  ignominious  death  at
Beziers,  which  he  was  forced  to  put  up  with,  for  it  was  not  yet  time  to  revenge  himself.

In  this  state  did  they  remain  at  Tours  for  upwards  of  three  months,  without  any  progress
being  made  in  the  treaties.  They  were  on  the  point  of  being  broken  off,  for  the  king  was
impatient  at  the  delays,  and  wanted  to  return  to  Paris,  whence  he  would  issue  a special
summons  for  the  ensuing  summer,  and  make  war  on  the  duke  of  Brittany  and  his  allies,
leaving  all  others  in  peace.  But  the  dukes  of  Berry  and  Burgundy,  the  lord  de  Coucy,  the
count  de  Saint  Pol,  sir  Guy  de  la  Tremouille,  the  chancellor  of  France,  and  many  other
great  barons  and  prelates,  desirous  that  an  end  should  be  put  to  these  differences,  held  a
conference,  and  said, — “ We,  who  are  so  nearly  connected  with  the  king  and  the  greatest
barons  of  bis  realm,  having  agreed  to  meet  the  English  commissioners  this  Lent  at  Amiens,
to  consider  of  a treaty  of  peace,  must  hasten  to  put  an  end  to  this  ill  humour  of  the  king
and  the  duke  of  Brittany  ; for  should  we  separate  without  doing  so,  the  English  would  have
the  advantage  in  the  business  at  Amiens : they  will  expect  the  support  of  the  duke  of
Brittany  and  his  country,  for  they  are  near  neighbours,  and  we  shall  have  a war  with  Brittany
and  England,  like  what  we  had  before,  and  it  will  be  too  heavy  for  us.”

These  lords  and  their  councils  so  often  turned  the  matter  over,  that  they  at  length  discovered
a means  of  reconciliation  between  the  king  and  the  duke  of  Brittany.  I will  mention  it,
for  without  this  I do  not  believe  it  would  ever  have  taken  place.  It  was  proposed  that  a
marriage  between  the  son  of  the  duke  of  Brittany  and  a daughter  of  the  king  of  France
should  take  place  ; and,  as  John  of  Brittany  had  a son,  a similar  connection  should  be  formed
with  the  daughter  of  the  duke  of  Brittany.  These  articles  were  agreed  upon  : but,  notwith-
standing this  alliance,  John  of  Brittany  was  obliged  to  lay  aside  the  arms  of  Brittany,  and
take  those  of  Chatillon  ; and,  if  he  were  desirous  of  bearing  any  thing  relative  to  Brittany,
as  a descendant  of  that  house  by  his  mother’s  side,  he  might  bear  on  the  arms  of  Chatillon  a
bordure  ermine,  three  sables  or,  and  an  escutcheon  ermine  in  chief  gules,  and  none  others.
Thus  was  the  business  brought  to  a conclusion,  and  the  duke  restored  to  the  friendship  of
the  king  of  France  and  his  uncles.  He  dined  with  the  king,  in  company  with  John  of  Brittany,
count  de  Penthievre ; and  much  affection  was  mutually  displayed  by  all  parties,  on  account
of  the  marriages  which  had  been  agreed  to  be  solemnised.

The  duke  of  Brittany  would  never  see  sir  Oliver  de  Clisson,  for  the  hatred  he  bore  him  ;
but  the  constable  was  indifferent  to  this,  as  the  hatred  was  mutual.  All  things  being  now
settled,  and  the  lords  having  sworn  to  see  these  marriages  consummated  when  the  children
should  be  of  a proper  age,  and  the  different  treaties  having  been  engrossed,  they  thought  it


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


513


time  to  quit  Tours,  for  their  stay  had  been  too  long,  and  return  to  Paris,  as  the  time  wa3
approaching  for  the  conferences  at  Amiens.  The  king  of  France,  his  brother,  uncles,  and
council,  had  promised  to  be  there  to  receive  the  king  of  England  and  his  council.  The
duke  of  Brittany  took  leave  of  the  king,  his  brother,  and  uncles,  and  of  those  most  in  his
favour,  and  set  out  from  Tours  for  his  own  country;  as  did  the  dukes  of  Berry  and  Burgundy,
with  other  lords  ; but  the  king,  the  duke  of  Touraine,  the  duke  of  Bourbon,  and  the  lord  de
Coucy,  staid  at  Tours,  and  I will  tell  the  reason.


CHAPTER  XXXV. THE  COUNT  DE  BLOIS  AND  MARY  OP  NAMUR,  HIS  COUNTESS,  SELL  TO  THE

DUKE  OP  TOURAINE  THE  COUNTY  OP  BLOIS  WITH  OTHER  LANDS. THE  VISCOUNT  DE

* CHATEAUBON  TAKES  POSSESSION  OF  THE  INHERITANCES  OF  THE  LATE  COUNT  DE
FOIX.

I have  before  recorded  in  this  history,  that  Louis  de  Blois,  son  to  the  count  de  Blois,
had  died  when  young,  at  Beaumont  in  Hainault,  leaving  the  lady  Mary,  daughter  of  the
duke  of  Berry,  a widow,  who  lost  by  the  event  many  of  the  good  things  of  this  world  :
for  her  husband  was  a rich  heir,  and  would  have  been  a powerful  lord.  I mention  this,  be-
cause I wish  it  to  be  known  in  times  to  come  how  such  large  properties  have  been  disposed
of  or  alienated.  The  count  and  countess  of  Blois  were  not  formed  to  have  any  more  children  ;
for  by  indulging  themselves  too  much  in  the  pleasures  of  the  table,  and  eating  too  many
sweet  dishes,  they  were  become  enormously  hit.  The  count  could  no  longer  mount  his
horse,  but  was  always  carried  in  a car  whenever  he  travelled  from  one  place  to  another,  or
took  the  diversions  of  hunting  or  hawking.  As  this  was  well  known  to  the  lords  of  France,
a thought  struck  the  duke  of  Touraine,  during  his  residence  at  Tours,  which  he  carried  into
effect.

The  duke  had  a very  large  sum  of  ready  money,  perhaps  a million  of  florins,  lying  idle,
which  he  had  received  from  the  count  de  V ertus,  on  his  marriage  with  the  lady  Valentina  of
Milan.  This  money  he  wanted  to  dispose  of  to  advantage.  He  knew  the  great  properties
of  the  count  de  Blois  would  be  dispersed  after  his  death.  The  county  of  Blois  would  fall  to
John  of  Brittany,  who  was  his  cousin-german ; the  lands  in  Hainault  to  the  duke  of  Juliers
and  duke  of  Lancaster,  excepting  Chimay,  which  would  go  to  Conflans  in  Champagne.
The  county  of  Soissons  had  belonged  formerly  to  the  counts  of  Blois,  but  was  alienated  to
the  lord  de  Coucy,  for  the  ransom  of  Guy  de  Blois  from  England.  The  lands  of  Argies
and  Nouvion  went  to  other  heirs  : Holland  and  Zealand  fell  to  the  count  of  Hainault.
Thus  would  this  noble  inheritance  be  dispersed  piece-meal,  for  it  was  well  known  it  must
happen  on  the  death  of  the  present  possessor.  The  duke  of  Touraine  cast  his  eyes  on  this
property,  as  he  had  money  enough  to  purchase  it,  were  it  sold  at  a fair  price,  and  determined
to  desire  the  king,  his  brother,  to  treat  with  the  count  de  Blois  for  the  county  of  Blois,
which  was  a valuable  property,  and  very  convenient  to  him  by  bordering  on  his  duchy  of
Touraine.  To  this  county  are  also  attached  many  considerable  fiefs.  The  duke  of  Touraine,
having  this  scheme  in  his  head,  did  not  rest  before  he  mentioned  it,  first  to  the  king,  then
to  the  duke  of  Bourbon,  and  to  the  lord  de  Coucy,  who  wTas  an  able  negotiator  and  much  in
favour  with  the  count  de  Blois,  for  he  had  married  the  daughter  of  his  cousin-german  the
duke  of  Lorraine.  The  duke  of  Touraine  and  the  above  mentioned  persons  were  careful  not  to
drop  the  least  hint  of  this  business  to  the  duke  of  Berry,  because  the  lady  Mary,  his  daughter,
had  her  jointure  of  six  thousand  francs  a year  settled  on  this  county,  and  the  duke  of  Berry
imagined  that,  for  this  sum  and  the  charges  that  would  accrue,  he  should  obtain  the  county  of
Blois,  for  a person  more  covetous  of  other  people’s  property  could  not  be  found.  The  duke  of
Burgundy  was  also  kept  ignorant  of  this  plan,  because  the  lady  Margaret,  his  eldest  daughter,
was  married  to  William  of  Hainault,  son  to  the  count  of  Hainault;  and  he  thought  that  by  some
incident,  by  purchase  or  otherwise,  the  lands  of  Holland,  Zealand  and  Hainault  might  revert
to  his  son-in-law,  the  count  d’Ostrevant,  or  to  his  son  John  of  Burgundy,  who  had  married
Margaret  eldest  daughter  of  the  count  of  Hainault.  The  king  and  the  three  other  lords  pro-
posed therefore,  on  their  departure  from  Tours,  to  visit  their  cousin  the  count  Guy  de  Blois,

VOL.  IX.  L L


514


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


who  resided  at  a handsome  castle,  eight  leagues  from  Tours,  called  Chateau-morant,  and  to
open  a treaty  for  the  sale  of  the  county  of  Blois,  with  the  count  and  the  countess,  who  was
very  avaricious.

It  chanced,  by  some  accident  I am  unacquainted  with,  that  the  bailiff  of  Blois,  named
sir  Reginald  de  Sens,  a knight  of  law  and  arms,  and  of  great  prudence,  heard  of  this  intended
visit  and  its  purposes.  He  was  much  concerned  from  the  love  he  bore  his  lord,  lest  he  might
dishonour  himself  and  disinherit  his  heirs  by  a sale,  for  which  he  had  no  need,  and  severely
wound  his  conscience.  He  determined  therefore,  if  possible,  to  prevent  it,  and,  setting  out
from  Blois,  rode  all  night  to  Chateau-morant,  where,  being  introduced  to  the  count,  he  said,
“ My  lord,  the  king  of  France,  the  dukes  of  Touraine  and  Bourbon,  with  the  lord  de  Coucy,
are  coming  hither.”  “ That  is  true,”  replied  the  count : “ why  do  you  mention  it  ? ”
“ I am  come  to  tell  it  because  you  will  be  pressed  to  sell  your  heritage.  Consider  well  the
subject  as  you  have  time  beforehand.”  The  count  de  Blois  was  much  surprised  at  hearing
this,  and  said, — “ I cannot  prevent  any  one  from  speaking  to  me,  or  offering  proposals  ; but,
before  I consent  to  the  selling  my  inheritance,  fraudulently  disinheriting  my  heirs  and  dishon-
ouring myself,  I must  have  neither  plate  nor  porringer  of  silver  to  pawn.”  “My  lord,’'  replied
the  knight,  “ remember  this  when  the  time  comes,  for  you  will  see  that  all  I have  told  you
is  true."  “ Don’t  doubt  it,  bailiff,”  said  the  count : “ I am  not  so  young  nor  so  foolish  to
listen  to  such  proposals.”  On  this,  the  bailiff  returned  to  Blois,  where  he  resided,  for  he  did
not  wish  the  company  he  had  mentioned  should  find  him  there.  Two  days  after,  the  king
and  his  company  arrived  at  Chateau-morant,  to  the  great  joy  of  the  count  and  countess  of
Blois,  at  his  visiting  them,  and  they  entertained  him  splendidly.  The  king,  to  win  the  affec-
tions of  the  count,  and  gain  him  over  to  his  plan,  said — “ Fair  cousin,  I see  you  are  the  lord
in  our  kingdom  the  most  endowed  with  honour  and  liberality,  and  that  in  former  times  you
must  have  had  large  expenses  : to  assist  and  recompense  you,  we  will  grant  you  a tax  on
the  county  of  Blois  that  shall  be  worth  twenty  thousand  francs.”

The  count  returned  his  thanks  and  accepted  the  gift,  which,  however,  was  of  no  value  to
him,  for  he  never  received  one  penny  from  it.  After  this,  the  matter  of  sale  of  the  county
of  Blois  was  entered  on,  first  by  the  king,  and  seconded  by  the  duke  of  Bourbon : but,
finding  the  count  very  cool  and  indifferent  about  it  they  addressed  themselves  to  his  lady,
and  remonstrated  with  her,  in  specious  terms,  respecting  the  hazard  she  incurred  of  being
reduced  to  a poor  estate  should  she  survive  the  count,  as  she  had  every  appearance  of  doing ;
and  it  would  be  more  for  her  advantage  to  have  riches  and  jewels  in  plenty,  which  she  might
easily  secure,  if  she  would  persuade  her  lord  to  listen  to  the  proposals  they  had  made  for  the
purchase  of  the  county  of  Blois.  The  countess,  from  her  avaricious  disposition  and  her
eagerness  to  receive  the  florins,  assented  and  procured  everything  they  wanted,  with  the
assistance  of  another  person,  that  is  to  say,  a valet-de-chambre  of  the  count,  called  Sohier,
who  was  the  son  of  a cloth-worker  in  the  town  of  Mechlin.  This  Sohier  so  completely
governed  the  count,  that  everything  was  done  as  he  ordered,  and  the  count  had  given  him
upwards  of  five  hundred  francs  of  yearly  revenue  for  ever.  See  the  mischief  of  such  cases,
and  how  miserably  some  lords  are  governed ; for  Sohier  had  neither  prudence  nor  sense
worth  mentioning,  to  deserve  such  rewards,  except  the  foolish  pleasure  of  his  lord,  who  had
taken  a friendship  to  him.

In  like  manner,  the  duke  of  Berry  had  a worthless  fellow,  called  James  Thibaut,  that
governed  him,  to  whom  he  had,  at  different  times,  given  two  hundred  thousand  francs,  which
he  might  as  well  have  thrown  into  the  river.  If,  therefore,  Sohier  would  have  wished  to
have  excused  himself  for  this  sale  taking  place,  he  could  not,  for,  if  he  had  pleased,  it  would
never  have  been  done  ; but  to  gratify  the  king,  the  dukes  of  Touraine  and  Bourbon,  and  the
lord  de  Coucy,  as  well  as  the  countess  de  Blois,  who,  through  avarice,  had  already  consented
to  everything,  he  urged  on  the  count  in  private,  and  made  him  totally  forget  everything  he
had  promised  his  bailiff,  and  the  reversion  of  the  county  of  Blois  was  sold  for  two  hundred
thousand  francs,  and  the  duke  de  Touraine  was  to  take  on  himself  the  payment  of  the  countess
de  Dunois’  jointure  of  six  thousand  francs.  There  was  also  another  sale  made,  of  the  rever-
sion of  the  lands  in  Plainault,  for  which  the  duke  of  Touraine  was  likewise  to  pay  two
hundred  thousand  francs.  Count  Guy  de  Blois,  indeed,  reserved  in  this  last  sale  the  consent


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


516


of  the  count  de  Hainault,  the  lord  paramount  of  those  lands,  but  who  would  never  insist  on
his  homage  for  them.  The  king  of  France  and  the  duke  of  Touraine,  however,  took
on  them  to  answer  for  the  consequences,  and  before  they  left  the  count  they  bound
him  so  completely  in  writings  sealed,  that  he  could  not  anyway  retract,  for  he  had  none  to
advise  him  but  Sohier,  who  was  illiterate,  having  never  had  any  education,  and  he  was
already  on  their  side.

In  such  a manner  were  these  bargains  concluded,  which  I have  detailed  as  fully  as  I was
able,  that  in  future  times  the  whole  truth  of  the  transaction  may  be  made  public,  by  means
of  these  chronicles.  In  good  truth,  my  lord  and  patron,  count  Guy  de  Blois,  like  an  ignorant
and  ill-advised  person,  pushed  on  by  his  countess  and  his  valet-de-chambre,  made  these  miser-
able sales.  When  every  thing  was  concluded  relative  to  this  business,  to  the  satisfaction  of
^the  king,  the  duke  of  Touraine  and  their  counsellors,  they  took  leave  of  the  count  and  returned
to  Paris.  The  news  of  these  purchases  made  a great  noise  in  many  countries  and  astonished
all  who  heard  it.

We  will  speak  of  sir  Roger  d’Espaign  and  sir  Espaign  du  Lyon,  and  say  how  they  pros-
pered since  they  departed  from  Tours,  on  the  road  to  Toulouse,  where  the  bishop  of  Noyon
and  the  lord  de  la  Riviere  were  waiting  for  them.  Their  arrival  at  Toulouse  gave  great
pleasure,  for  they  had  been  long  expected  : they  instantly  waited  on  the  commissioners  from
France,  to  show  their  papers,  which  they  had  received  from  the  king,  and  which  fully
explained  the  successful  issue  of  their  journey.  The  bishop  of  Noyon  and  the  lord  de  la
Riviere  entertained  them  well,  and  showed  they  were  much  rejoiced  at  the  succession,  with
all  its  dependencies,  of  the  count  de  Foix,  devolved  on  the  viscount  de  Chateaubon,  according
to  the  tenure  and  form  whereby  the  count  Gaston  had  held  them,  and  in  the  manner  de-
tailed in  the  written  documents.  After  considering  the  business,  they  thought  it  advisable
that  sir  Roger  d’Espaign  and  sir  Espaign  du  Lyon,  who  had  taken  so  much  pains  and  incurred
so  much  labour  in  it,  should  wait  on  the  viscount  de  Chateaubon  and  the  councils  of
Foix  and  Bearn,  to  inform  them  what  had  been  agreed  on,  that  all  things  might  be  regularly
managed,  to  bring  the  whole  to  a happy  conclusion.

The  knights  consented  to  this  proposal,  and  having  refreshed  themselves  two  days  in
Toulouse,  set  out  for  Saint  Gaudens.  The  viscount  was  not  there,  but  at  a beautiful  castle,
at  the  entrance  of  Bearn  called  Pau,  where  they  found  him.  He  was  happy  to  see  them,
having  long  wished  it,  but  much  more  so  when  he  learnt  that  the  king  of  France  desisted
from  taking  possession  of  the  county  of  Foix:  he  knew  well  where  to  find  the  money
required  for  the  repayment  of  the  mortgage,  and  that  enough  would  remain  after  this
was  done.

I believe  my  readers,  as  well  as  myself,  will  think  I have  said  enough  respecting  the
affairs  of  Foix  and  Bearn : I will  therefore  leave  them,  and  enter  on  other  matters  ; for  it
would  take  up  too  much  time  to  pursue  in  detail  every  thing  that  passed  there  on  the  return
of  the  two  knights  from  France.  To  conclude,  the  viscount  de  Chateaubon  was  acknow-
ledged count  de  Foix  and  Bearn,  on  the  same  terms  on  which  count  Gaston  de  Foix,  of
happy  memory,  had  held  them*,  and  he  received  the  homage  of  all  who  wTere  his  vassals.
He  satisfied  his  two  cousins,  sir  Evan  and  sir  Gracient,  the  bastards  of  Foix,  by  the
handsome  allotment  he  gave  them  of  the  inheritances  and  moveables  of  their  father,  and
repaid  to  the  commissioners  from  France,  the  mortgage  that  was  on  Foix.  Before  all  these
things  were  accomplished,  summer  was  far  advanced,  and  the  bishop  of  Noyon  remained  at
Toulouse  with  the  lord  de  la  Riviere  ; for  they  would  not  depart  until  every  thing  was
completely  settled,  to  the  honour  and  profit  of  the  crown,  according  to  the  instructions  they
had  received  from  the  king  of  France.

* The  viscount  de  Chateaubon  was  acknowledged  as  F Cracien  married  Isabella  de  la  Cerda,  a daughter  of
sovereign  of  Bearn,  by  the  estates  assembled  at  Ortheis,  the  king  of  Castile  and  heiress  of  the  duchy  of  Medina
5th  July  1393.  He  was  married  to  the  only  daughter  Celi. — Ed.
of  Don  John  king  of  Arragon. — Ed.


h L 2


.516


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


CHAPTER  XXXVI. A GRAND  ASSEMBLY  AT  AMIENS,  OF  THE  ICING  AND  LORDS  OF  FRANCE

AND  ENGLAND,  TO  TREAT  OF  A PEACE  BETWEEN  THE  TWO  KINGDOMS.

We  will  now  speak  of  the  grand  assembly  of  the  lords  of  France  and  England,  which
was  held  in  the  city  of  Amiens,  to  treat  of  a final  peace  between  the  two  countries,  at
Mid-lent,  in  the  year  of  grace  1391.  Great  preparations  were  made  before  the  arrival  of
the  lords  ; and  in  particular  those  made  for  the  king,  his  three  uncles,  and  many  of  the  great
barons  and  prelates,  wTere  very  sumptuous.  Other  lords  were  desirous  to  make
a figure  ; for  it  was  currently  reported  and  believed  that  king  Richard  of  England
intended  being  there  in  person,  to  form  an  acquaintance  with  those  he  had  never  yet  seen,
but  he  did  not  come.  That  he  had  intentions  of  being  there  was  certain,  for  lie  came
as  far  as  Dover  with  his  three  uncles  of  Lancaster,  York,  and  Gloucester,  meaning
to  cross  the  sea  with  them.  Many  councils  were  held  at  Dover,  to  debate  whether
the  king  should  proceed  further  or  not ; and  the  council,  having  considered  all  things,
decided  he  should  remain  in  the  castle  of  Dover,  and  the  duke  of  Gloucester  with  him.  The
dukes  of  Lancaster  and  York,  the  earl  of  Huntingdon,  the  earl  of  Derby,  sir  Thomas  Percy,
the  bishop  of  Durham,  the  bishop  of  London,  and  others  of  the  king’s  council,  prepared  to
cross  the  channel.  They  did  not  all  pass  over  instantly,  but  sent  their  purveyances  forward,
and  then  crossed  themselves  to  Calais,  where  they  were  lodged.  When  the  day  approached
for  the  meeting  at  Amiens,  these  lords  set  out  from  Calais  together : they  were  more  than
two  hundred  horse,  and  it  was  a fine  sight,  for  they  rode  in  handsome  array.  The  king  of
France  had  given  orders  that,  during  the  time  the  conferences  should  last,  all  the  expenses  of
the  English,  in  coming  to  and  returning  from  Amiens  to  Calais,  should  be  defrayed  by  his
treasury  ; that  is  to  say,  their  nourishment  as  well  as  that  of  their  horses.

In  company  with  the  dukes  of  Lancaster  and  York  was  their  niece,  daughter  of  their
sister  and  the  lord  de  Coucy  : she  was  styled  duchess  of  Ireland,  having  been  married  to
that  duke,  as  you  have  heard.  This  young  lady  came  to  visit  her  father  at  Amiens ; for
hitherto  she  had  seen  but  little  of  him,  which  made  her  naturally  more  anxious  now  to  wait
on  him.  She  travelled  in  good  state,  but  like  a widow  who  had  enjoyed  but  little  pleasure
in  her  marriage.  It  had  been  ordered  by  the  king  and  council  of  France,  that  the  English
lords  who  were  coming  to  Amiens  to  arrange  a solid  peace,  should  be  received  with  the
greatest  honours  ; and  that  the  four  dukes  then  at  Amiens,  namely,  the  dukes  of  Touraine,
Berry,  Burgundy  and  Bourbon,  should  ride  without  the  town  to  meet  and  bid  them  welcome.
As  soon,  therefore,  as  the  English  were  near  Amiens,  these  dukes,  attended  by  all  the  great
barons  of  France,  rode  forth  in  grand  array.  The  duke  of  Touraine  took  the  lead,  in  great
state,  and,  when  he  met  his  cousins  of  England,  they  mutually  saluted  each  other,  with  every
respect,  as  such  lords  know  how  to  do.  When  the  duke  of  Touraine  had  conversed  a short
time  with  them,  he  took  his  leave,  returned  to  the  town  with  his  numerous  attendants,  and
dismounted  at  the  palace  of  the  bishop,  where  the  king  resided,  remaining  with  him  in  his
chamber.

The  other  three  dukes,  after  the  departure  of  the  duke  of  Touraine,  rode  each  with  his
array  to  meet  the  English  lords ; and,  on  their  meeting,  many  old  acquaintances  were
renewed  with  a satisfaction  such  as  was  a pleasure  to  behold.  When  these  dukes  had
conversed  a little,  the  gallant  count-dauphin  of  Auvergne  (who,  during  the  time  he  was  a
hostage  in  England,  had  lived  much  with  the  duke  of  Lancaster,  and  bore  him  great
affection)  advanced  his  horse,  and  saluted  him  : the  duke  of  Lancaster  no  sooner  recollected
him  than  he  pressed  him  to  his  arms,  and  showed  him  every  sign  of  friendship : their
conversation  was  interrupted  by  the  dukes  of  Berry  and  Burgundy,  who  joined  the  duke  of
Lancaster.  The  duke  of  Bourbon,  the  lord  de  Coucy  and  the  count  de  St.  Pol,  rode  with
the  duke  of  York,  the  earl  of  Huntingdon  and  sir  Thomas  Percy,  conversing  all  the  way
as  they  approached  Amiens.  At  the  entrance  of  the  city,  the  honours  paid  the  English
were  increased  ; for  the  duke  of  Lancaster  rode  between  the  dukes  of  Berry  and  Burgundy,
and  when  their  horses  moved  it  was  but  a foot’s  pace.  Their  horses  heads  were  in  a line,
which  they  took  care  to  keep  ; and  thus  these  three  passed  the  gates,  riding  very  slowly  and


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  & c.


517


paying  each  other  mutual  honours,  to  the  palace  of  the  bishop,  where  the  king  and  the  duke
of  Touraine  were.  Having  dismounted,  they  ascended  the  steps ; and  the  dukes  of  Berry
and  Burgundy,  taking  the  English  dukes  by  their  hands,  led  them  towards  the  king  of
France,  the  other  lords  following.


Assembly  of  the  French  King  and  the  Lords  of  France  and  England,  to  treat  or  a Peace  between  the
two  Kingdoms.  From  a MS.  Froissart  of  the  Fifteenth  Century.


When  in  the  presence  of  the  king,  the  three  dukes  who  supported  the  uncles  of  the  king
of  England,  and  the  other  French  lords,  cast  themselves  on  their  knees  ; but  the  two  English
dukes  remained  as  they  were,  inclining  gently  their  heads  in  honour  of  the  king.  The  king
instantly  advanced  to  them,  took  their  hands,  and  bade  his  uncles  and  the  other  lords  rise,
and  then  entered  into  a friendly  conversation  with  them,  as  did  the  barons  of  France  with
those  of  England.  After  this  first  interview,  the  lords  of  England  took  their  leave  of  the
king,  his  brother  and  uncles,  and  were  attended  as  far  as  the  steps  of  the  palace,  when  they
mounted  their  horses,  and  were  escorted  to  their  hotels  by  the  constable  of  France,  the
lord  de  Coucy,  the  count  de  St.  Pol,  sir  John  de  Vienne,  and  the  other  lords  of  France,  who
there  took  leave,  and  went  back  to  the  king  or  to  their  lodgings.  The  duchess  of  Ireland
was  lodged,  with  her  attendants,  at  her  father  the  lord  de  Coucy’s  hotel.

It  had  been  forbidden  by  the  king  and  council,  (and  public  proclamation  had  been  made
before  the  arrival  of  the  English,  that  no  one  might  plead  ignorance,)  that  any  outrages
whatever  be  committed  during  the  holding  of  these  conferences  under  pain  of  death,  or  any
quarrelling  with  the  English,  or  riot,  during  their  stay  in  the  city  of  Amiens.  All  knights
and  squires  were  strictly  commanded  by  the  king,  under  pain  of  incurring  his  indignation,
not  to  talk  of,  or  propose,  any  deeds  of  arms  to  any  knight  or  squire  from  England,  but  to
treat  them  with  the  utmost  civility  and  attention  wherever  they  should  meet,  in  the
fields,  the  palace,  or  in  church  : that  no  pages  nor  varlets  of  any  lords  of  France  cause  riot
or  quarrels  in  the  inns,  under  pain  of  losing  their  heads ; and  that  whatever  the  English
knights  or  squires  might  ask  for  should  be  immediately  given  them  : that  no  innkeeper
should  demand  payment  for  meat  or  drink,  or  other  common  necessaries.  It  was  also
forbidden  any  knight  or  squire  of  France  to  be  out  at  night  without  a torch ; but  the
English  might  do  so,  if  they  pleased ; and  if  any  Englishman  were  found  on  the  roads,  or  in
any  other  place,  having  lost  his  way,  he  should  be  courteously  conducted  to  where  he
lodged.


518  CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.

Four  guards  of  one  thousand  men  each,  were  stationed  at  the  four  squares  of  Amiens;
and,  should  there  be  a fire  during  the  night  in  any  part  of  the  town,  these  guards  were  not
to  move  on  any  account  from  their  posts ; but,  when  the  fire-bell  rang,  those  appointed  to
that  duty  were  to  hasten  to  extinguish  it.  It  was  likewise  ordered,  that  no  knight  or  squire
should  advance  from  his  place  to  speak  with  the  king,  unless  called  or  spoken  to  by  his
majesty ; and  that,  during  the  time  the  English  barons  were  in  the  king’s  presence,  no
knight  or  squire  converse  together  nor  address  the  English.  It  was  commanded,  under
heavy  penalties,  that  no  innkeeper,  or  others,  steal  or  put  aside,  through  avarice,  any  of  the
bows  or  arrows  of  the  English ; but  if  out  of  courtesy,  the  English  thought  proper  to  give
any  to  them,  they  might  accept  such  presents.

You  must  know,  that  all  these  orders  and  regulations  were  formed  with  great  deliberation
of  council,  to  do  the  more  honour  to  the  English  who  were  come  to  negociate  a peace,  and
proclaimed  several  times,  that  they  might  be  strictly  attended  to ; for,  if  they  were  infringed,
those  guilty  of  it  were  to  have  been  punished  without  mercy.

Every  day  conferences  were  held  with  the  English  lords,  with  scarcely  any  intermission,
during  the  fortnight  they  staid  at  Amiens,  without  coming  to  any  conclusion,  for  the  difference
was  too  great  in  their  demands.  The  French  would  have  Calais  razed  to  the  ground,  so  that
it  should  never  again  be  habitable.  The  English  would  not  listen  to  this,  nor  dared  they
consent  to  such  an  article  in  the  treaty;  for  the  commons  of  England  love  Calais  more
than  any  other  town  in  the  world,  saying,  that  as  long  as  they  are  masters  of  Calais,  they
carry  the  keys  of  France  at  their  girdle.  However  great  the  differences  between  the  lords
of  England  and  France  in  these  matters,  and  the  lengtli  of  time  they  were  occupied  on  them,
they  separated  with  great  good  humour  on  both  sides  from  the  conferences,  saying,  “We
will  again  meet  to-morrow  on  this  business  ; and  we  hope,  through  our  diligence,  to  bring
the  matter  at  last  to  a happy  conclusion.”  The  king  of  France  entertained  the  lords  of
England  three  times  most  magnificently  at  dinner  in  the  episcopal  palace.  The  duke  of
Touraine,  the  duke  of  Berry,  the  duke  of  Burgundy,  the  duke  of  Bourbon,  the  lord  de
Coucy,  the  count  de  Saint  Pol,  gave  each  a dinner  to  the  English  commissioners.
Whatever  the  English  wanted  was  delivered  them,  free  of  cost,  by  clerks  who  were
appointed  to  take  an  account  of  all  things  they  had,  which  they  referred  to  the  king’s
exchequer  for  payment.

You  must  know,  that  although  the  dukes  of  Lancaster  and  York  were  at  Amiens,  they
had  received  such  instructions  from  the  king  of  England  and  his  council,  that  they  could  not
add  to  nor  alter  any  of  the  terms  of  the  treaty  they  had  been  charged  with.  Many  persons
will  not  readily  believe  what  I am  about  to  say,  though  it  is  strictly  true,  which  is,  that
the  English  are  fonder  of  war  than  of  peace.  During  the  reign  of  king  Edward  of  happy
memory,  and  in  the  lifetime  of  his  son  the  prince  of  Wales,  they  made  such  grand  conquests
in  Fiance,  and  by  their  victories  and  ransoms  of  towns,  castles  and  men,  gained  such  wealth
that  the  poorest  knights  became  rich ; and  those  who  were  not  gentlemen  by  birth,  by
gallantly  hazarding  themselves  in  these  wars,  were  ennobled  for  their  valour  and  wealth.
Those  who  came  after  them  were  desirous  of  following  the  same  road,  although  sir  Bertrand
du  Guesclin  and  many  other  knights  of  France,  as  has  been  related  in  this  history,  by  their
valour  and  prudence  had  greatly  changed  the  face  of  the  English  possessions  in  France  since
the  times  of  king  Edward  and  his  son.  Even  the  duke  of  Gloucester,  son  of  king  Edward,
inclined  to  the  opinion  of  the  commons,  as  did  many  other  knights  and  squires  who  were
desirous  of  war  to  enable  them  to  support  their  state.  This  caused  great  difficulties  in
forming  any  treaty  of  final  peace,  notwithstanding  the  king  of  England  was  earnest  about
it.  By  him  and  the  duke  of  Lancaster  were  these  conferences  holden  in  the  city  of  Amiens ;
but  they  were  fearful  of  angering  the  commons  of  England  : they  indeed  would  have
consented  to  a peace,  if  the  French  would  have  restored  all  that  had  been  given  them  by
the  treaty  of  Bretigny  and  paid  the  arrears  of  fourteen  hundred  thousand  francs,  which  were
unsettled  when  they  recommenced  the  war.


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


511)


CHAPTER  XXXVII. THE  FRENCH  AND  ENGLISH  LORDS,  NOT  BEING  ABLE  TO  AGREE  ON  THE

TERMS  OF  PEACE,  PROLONG  THE  TRUCE  ONE  YEAR. TnE  ENGLISH,  ON  THEIR  RETURN,

ARE  ACCOMPANIED  BY  THE  LORD  DE  CHATEAU-MORANT,  TO  BRING  BACK  THE  KING
of  England’s  final  answer.

The  conferences  were  held  at  Amiens,  respecting  a peace,  witli  great  perseverance  and
attention  on  the  part  of  the  lords  commissioners  of  each  nation.  It  was  wondered  why  the
matter  failed ; for  the  duke  of  Burgundy  and  the  duke  of  Lancaster  were  much  in  earnest
to  bring  it  to  a happy  conclusion,  reserving  always  what  was  contained  in  their  private  in-
structions, which  they  dared  not  go  beyond.  The  French,  perceiving  the  English  were
obstinate  in  their  terms,  in  order  to  soften  them  offered,  if  they  would  consent  to  raze  Calais,
the  peaceable  possession  of  what  they  then  held  in  Aquitaine,  with  nine  bishoprics,
independent  of  all  other  jurisdictions,  and  payment  of  the  fourteen  hundred  thousand  francs
within  three  years.  The  duke  of  Lancaster  and  his  council  replied, — “We  have  remained
here  a long  time  without  concluding  any  thing,  nor  shall  we  be  able  to  finish  the  business
without  returning  to  England,  and  reporting  to  the  king  our  lord,  and  the  three  states  of  the
realm,  what  you  have  now  proposed.  Be  assured  that  my  brother  York  and  myself  will
use  every  diligence,  as  well  as  our  council  who  have  attended  us  hither,  in  ending  the  matter
according  to  our  and  your  wishes,  with  the  exception  of  what  you  demand  concerning
Calais ; hut  that  we  dare  not  mention,  without  incurring  the  hatred  of  the  people.  It  will
be  therefore  better  to  remain  silent,  than  to  say  what  would  bring  blame  and  hatred  against
us.”  The  king  of  France  was  tolerably  satisfied  with  this  answer,  as  were  his  uncles  : they
said,  that  if,  when  returned  to  England,  they  would  exert  themselves  to  obtain  peace,  a trifle
on  their  part  should  not  prevent  it;  for  the  war  had  lasted  too  long,  and  caused  numberless
misfortunes  to  both  countries.

During  the  assembly  at  Amiens,  the  commissioners  bethought  themselves,  that  as  the
truce  between  France  and  England  would  expire  on  St.  John  Baptist’s  day,  they  might
prolong  it,  for  themselves  and  their  allies,  without  any  blame,  for  one  year  longer,  by  sea
and  land.  With  regard  to  the  determination  that  might  be  given  by  the  parliament  to  their
proposals,  they  desired  to  send  two  knights  with  them  to  England,  to  bring  back  the  final
answer.  To  this  the  dukes  of  Lancaster  and  York  readily  assented.

I was  told,  and  believe  truly,  from  the  appearances  I observed,  that  the  king  of  France
was  very  desirous  of  peace  at  almost  any  rate ; for  there  were  reports  current  throughout
France,  that  Amurat  * had  invaded,  with  a powerful  army  of  Turks,  the  kingdom  of
Hungary.  This  intelligence  had  been  brought  by  the  elder  lord  Boucicaut,  marshal  of
France,  and  sir  John  de  Carouge,  who  were  lately  returned  from  Greece  and  parts  of
Turkey.

The  king  of  France,  when  younger,  had  an  anxious  wish  to  undertake  an  expedition
against  Amurat,  and  recover  Armenia,  which  the  Turks  had  seized  from  king  Leon,  who
was  then  present  at  the  conferences  at  Amiens.  He  had  stated  his  grievances  to  the  dukes
of  Lancaster  and  York,  who  knew  him  well,  for  he  had  been  in  England,  to  offer  his
mediation  for  peace  between  the  two  countries,  when  the  king  of  France  was  encamped  near
Sluys.  The  king  of  France,  weighing  this  invasion  of  the  Turks  in  his  mind,  and  his  former
promises  of  support  to  the  king  of  Armenia,  thus  spoke  to  the  duke  of  Lancaster  when  he
took  his  leave, — “ Fair  cousin,  if  peace  shall  be  established  between  us  and  the  king  of
England,  we  may  undertake  an  expedition  to  Turkey,  to  assist  the  king  of  Armenia  and  the
emperor  of  Constantinople  t,  whom  Amurat  presses  very  hard,  and  recover  Armenia  from
the  hands  of  the  Turks.  They  tell  us  that  Amurat  is  a man  of  great  valour  and  enterprise,
but  of  a sect  contrary  to  our  faith,  which  he  daily  oppresses  : we  ought,  therefore,  to  unite
in  its  defence  ; and  I entreat,  fair  cousin,  that  you  will  consider  of  it,  and  do  every  thing  you
can  to  promote  this  expedition  when  returned  to  England.”  The  duke  of  Lancaster  promised
1,0  comply  with  his  request,  and  to  exert  himself  so  strongly  in  the  matter,  that  the  effects
would  soon  be  apparent.  Upon  this  they  took  leave  of  each  other.

* Amurat  died  the  same  year,  and  was  succeeded  by  Bajazet. — Ed.  f Emanuel  Paleologua. — Ed.


520


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


The  conferences  at  Amiens  lasted  fifteen  days,  and  the  lords  from  England  were  the  first
to  separate.  They  carried  with  them  the  outlines  of  a treaty,  to  lay  before  the  king  of
England  and  his  council.  The  duchess  of  Ireland  bade  adieu  to  her  father,  the  lord  de
Coucy,  and  accompanied  her  uncles  on  their  return.  All  the  English,  on  their  road  to  and
from  Calais,  and  while  at  Amiens,  needed  not  to  have  expended  a farthing  unless  they  chose
it,  for  the  king  had  ordered  their  whole  expenses  to  be  defrayed  by  his  officers.  The  duke
of  Burgundy  went  to  Arras,  where  he  met  his  duchess,  who,  during  the  time  of  the  con-
ferences, had  visited  Flanders.  The  dukes  of  Touraine,  Berry,  and  Bourbon  remained  with
the  king,  whose  intention  it  was  to  go  to  Beauvais  and  Gisors,  to  amuse  himself,  and  return
that  way  to  Paris.

In  company  with  the  dukes  of  Lancaster  and  York  were  the  two  French  knights  who
were  sent  to  England  by  orders  from  the  king  of  France ; their  names  were  sir  John  de
Chateaumorant  and  sir  Taupin  de  Cantemerle ; and  they  were  to  bring  back  the  final  answer
of  the  king  and  council  of  England  respecting  a general  peace.  The  English  dukes  were
escorted  to  Calais  by  sir  Reginald  de  Roye,  the  lord  de  Montaurel  and  the  lord  de  la  Yieville,
who  then  took  their  leave  and  returned.  The  English  crossed  the  channel  at  their  leisure
to  Dover,  where  they  found  the  king  and  the  duke  of  Gloucester  waiting  for  them.  A grand
council  was  holden  by  the  king  and  his  lords  on  all  that  had  passed  at  Amiens ; the  king
was  well  pleased  with  what  his  uncles  had  done  there  ; but  the  duke  of  Gloucester,  who  was
always  against  any  treaty  with  France,  declared,  that  not  any  propositions  for  peace  could
be  determined  on  till  they  were  laid  before  the  parliament,  which  ought  instantly  to  be  sum-
moned ; and  whatever  measure  the  three  estates  of  the  realm  should  resolve  on,  that  ought
to  be  adopted,  and  none  other.

This  proposal  of  the  duke  of  Gloucester  was  agreed  to  : indeed  they  dared  not  oppose  him,
for  he  was  too  popular  with  the  commons  of  England.  The  French  knights  were  told  that
they  must  continue  their  journey  to  London,  otherwise  they  could  not  obtain  any  answer.
They  were  willing  to  consent  to  this,  as  was  right,  and  set  out  with  the  king  and  his  lords,
the  greater  part  of  whom  went  straight  to  London  ; but  the  king  turned  off  at  Dartford,
and  took  the  road  to  Eltliam,  where  he  had  a handsome  palace.  He  there  staid  some  little
time  with  the  queen,  and  they  came  together  to  Shene  *,  and  thence  to  Windsor,  where  the
French  knights  received  an  answer  : but  before  I say  what  that  answer  was,  I must  speak
of  the  king  of  France.


CHAPTER  XXXVIII. THE  FIRST  ILLNESS  OF  KING  CHARLES. COUNT  BERNARD  d’aRMAGNAC

DOES  HOMAGE  TO  THE  KING. THE  LORD  DE  CHATEAUMORANT  RETURNS  FROM  ENGLAND

WITH  AN  ANSWER  RESPECTING  PEACE.

After  the  conferences  at  Amiens,  the  king  of  France,  unfortunately,  and  through  his  im-
prudence, was  seized  with  a burning  fever,  for  which  he  was  advised  to  change  the  air.  He
was  put  into  a litter  and  carried  to  Beauvais,  where  he  remained  in  the  bishop’s  palace  until
cured.  His  brother,  the  duke  of  Touraine,  and  his  uncles  of  Berry  and  Bourbon,  attended
him  constantly,  and  there  kept  their  Easter.  When  the  king  was  perfectly  recovered,  and
able  to  ride,  he  went  to  Gisors,  at  the  entrance  of  Normandy,  for  the  pleasure  of  hunting,
as  there  are  many  large  forests  in  the  neighbourhood.  During  his  residence  at  Gisors,  sir
Bernard  d’Armagnac,  brother  to  the  count  who  died  in  Italy,  came  thither  in  handsome
state,  accompanied  by  the  dauphin  of  Auvergne,  whom  he  met  at  Paris.  As  he  held  the
counties  of  Armagnac  and  Rodez  from  the  crown  of  France,  he  paid  the  king  homage  for
them,  in  the  usual  manner  of  vassals  to  their  lord  paramount  for  the  fiefs  they  hold.  He
became  now  the  king  of  France’s  man,  and,  having  had  the  articles  of  homage  properly
drawn  out  and  engrossed,  he  and  the  dauphin  took  leave  of  the  king,  and  returned  to
Auvergne  and  Languedoc.  About  Ascension-day,  the  king  came  to  Paris  in  perfect  health,
and  fixed  his  residence  at  the  hotel  de  Saint  Pol,  which  had  been  prepared  for  him,  the  queen
and  the  duchess  of  Touraine  having  arrived  there  before  him.

* Richmond,


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


521

The  lord  de  Chateaumorant  and  sir  Taupin  de  Cantemerle  were  all  this  time  waiting  in
England  for  an  answer.  They  had  attended  the  feast  of  Saint  George  at  Windsor,  where
was  a brilliant  company  of  barons,  and  the  king’s  uncles.  The  lords  who  had  been  at
Amiens  consulted  together,  on  the  promises  they  had  made  the  king  of  France,  as  well  as
in  respect  to  an  answer  for  the  two  knights,  who  were  very  pressing  to  have  one,  and  leave
to  return  home.  After  considering  the  matter,  they  thus  addressed  them  : “ You  Cha-
teaumorant, and  you  Cantemerle,  must  know,  that  at  this  moment  we  cannot  obtain  any
answer  for  you  to  carry  to  the  king  of  France.  It  will  be  a long  time  before  the  parliament
will  take  up  the  matter,  for  it  does  not  meet  before  Michaelmas.  But  to  acquit  ourselves,
"and  to  excuse  you,  we  will  write  letters  fully  explanatory  of  the  delay ; and  if  you,  or  any
others,  will  return  hither  during  the  sitting  of  parliament,  you  shall  receive  such  answer  as
the  three  estates  of  the  kingdom  shall  think  proper  to  give.”  The  French  knights  hearing
this,  and  seeing  no  probability  of  having  any  other  answer,  replied, — “ In  the  name  of  God,
we  are  satisfied  with  what  you  now  say  : write  and  seal  your  letters,  and  we  will  set  out  on
our  return.”  This  being  done,  they  took  leave  of  the  king,  and  went  to  London  to  make
preparations  for  their  departure.  The  king  ordered  all  their  expenses  to  be  paid,  and  had
them  conducted  to  Dover,  where  the  bailiff  had  provided  a vessel  for  them  and  their  horses  ;
but  they  were  detained  at  Dover  five  days  waiting  for  a wind.  On  the  sixth  it  was  favour-
able, and  they  landed  at  Boulogne.  They  took  their  road  through  Amiens,  and  by  short
days’  journeys  arrived  at  Paris,  when  they  found  the  king  and  his  lords,  for  it  was  Whit-
suntide. They  delivered  their  letters,  which  were  immediately  read,  but  I believe  no  great
reliance  was  put  on  them ; and  in  a short  time,  they  had  other  affairs  of  greater  consequence
at  home  to  attend  to.


CHAPTER  XXXIX. — SIR  PETER  DE  CRAON,  THROUGH  MALEVOLENCE,  WAYLAYS  SIR  OLIVER

DE  CLISSON,  BEATS  AND  SEVERELY  WOUNDS  HIM. THE  KING  AND  COUNCIL  ARE  GREATLY

ANGERED  THEREAT.

You  have  before  heard  how  sir  Peter  de  Craon,  a knight  of  high  birth  and  great  wealth,
was  disgraced  by  the  king  of  France  and  his  brother,  as  well  as  the  reasons  for  it ; and  that,
having  retired  to  the  court  of  Brittany,  the  duke  had  assured  him  sir  Oliver  de  Clisson  was
at  the  bottom  of  this  business.  Some  supposed  the  duke  had  been  instigated  to  say  this
from  his  hatred  to  the  constable,  whom  he  wished  to  dishonour  and  destroy.  While  sir
Peter  de  Craon  was  with  the  duke  of  Brittany,  they  had  frequent  conversations  on  what
means  they  could  employ  to  put  sir  Oliver  to  death  ; for  they  said,  that  if  he  were  but
destroyed,  no  one  would  seek  to  revenge  his  loss  ; and  the  duke  expressed  his  regret  he  had
not  put  him  to  death  when  in  his  castle  of  Ermine,  adding,  he  would  willingly  give  one
hundred  thousand  francs  if  he  could  once  more  have  him  in  his  possession.  Sir  Peter  de
Craon,  observing  the  mortal  hatred  of  the  duke  to  Clisson,  thought  of  an  extraordinary
expedient  when  meditating  alone  on  this  subject,  for  it  is  from  appearances  we  must  judge.
He  resolved,  whatever  might  be  tbe  consequences,  that  he  would  himself  assassinate  the
constable,  or  have  it  done  under  his  own  eyes,  and  not  attend  to  any  thing  until  the  deed
were  performed,  when  he  would  afterwards  treat  for  his  pardon.  He  was  no  way  afraid  of
what  John  of  Blois  or  the  viscount  de  Rohan,  who  had  married  the  constable’s  two  daughters,
could  do  against  him  : he  held  them  very  cheap,  for,  with  the  assistance  of  the  duke  and  his
family-connections,  he  could  withstand  them  both.  The  house  of  Blois  was  much  weakened,
and  the  count  Guy  de  Blois  had  just  sold  the  reversion  of  that  county  to  tin  duke  of  Tou-
raine,  which  by  succession  ought  to  have  descended  to  John  of  Brittany,  who  had  in  this
sale  been  very  unkindly  treated  by  the  count  de  Blois.  Now,  if  the  constable  were  slain,
by  degrees  he  would  soon  get  the  better  of  the  favourites  of  the  king  and  the  duke  of  Tou-
raine,  such  as  the  lord  de  la  Riviere,  sir  John  le  Mercier,  Montagu,  le  begue  de  Villaines,
sir  John  de  Bueil,  and  others  in  the  king’s  confidence  who  were  friends  of  the  constable,  and
whom  the  dukes  of  Berry  and  Burgundy  detested,  notwithstanding  the  outward  marks  of
friendship  they  showed  them.


522


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


Sir  Peter  de  Craon  persevered  in  his  abominable  designs,  urged  on  by  that  enemy  who
never  sleeps,  and  who  delights  in  the  heart  of  the  wicked  man  that  is  inclined  towards  him.
He  regularly  formed  his  whole  plan,  in  the  manner  I shall  mention  ; but,  had  he  foreseen  the
great  evils  and  mischiefs  that  ensued  from  them,  it  is  to  be  hoped  reason  and  temperance
would  have  ruled  in  his  heart  to  prevent  them  from  being  put  into  execution.  It  is  truly
said,  that  a too  great  desire  to  accomplish  an  object  clouds  the  understanding,  and  that
vicious  inclinations  overrule  virtue.  Thus  it  happened  to  sir  Peter  de  Craon,  whose  eagerness
to  destroy  the  constable  made  him  listen  to  the  counsels  of  folly  and  madness.  He  had
secured  a safe  retreat  with  the  duke  of  Brittany,  after  the  deed  should  be  done  and  the
constable  dead,  without  fear  of  any  search  being  there  made  for  him,  for  the  duke  had  pro-
mised him  an  asylum ; and,  should  the  king  of  France  follow  him  with  a powerful  army  to
Brittany,  in  one  night  he  could  embark  and  sail  for  Bayonne,  Bordeaux,  or  England,  where
he  could  not  come  after  him.  The  English  mortally  hated  Clisson,  for  his  great  severity  to
them  from  the  time  he  had  turned  to  the  French  : before  that  period  he  was  strongly  con-
nected with  them,  and  had  done  the  crown  essential  services,  as  you  have  had  it  related  in
this  history.

Sir  Peter  de  Craon  long  brooded  over  this  intended  deed,  without  mentioning  it  to  any
one  : I know  not  if  he  even  told  it  to  the  duke  of  Brittany.  Some  think  he  must  have  dis-
closed it  to  him ; but  others  thought  the  contrary : the  first  opinion,  however,  was  strength-
ened, if  not  confirmed,  by  sir  Peter  and  his  accomplices  returning  by  the  shortest  road,  and
as  expeditiously  as  possible,  to  Brittany,  instantly  after  the  assassination,  as  to  a place  of
refuge.  In  addition  to  this,  he  sold  all  the  castles  and  estates  he  held  in  Anjou  to  the  duke
of  Brittany,  and  had  renounced  his  allegiance  to  the  king  of  France,  under  pretence  of
taking  a journey  to  the  Holy  Land.  I shall  not  say  more  of  these  surmises,  but  relate  the
fact ; for  I,  the  author  of  this  history,  was  at  Paris  when  this  misfortune  happened  to  sir
Oliver  de  Clisson,  and  ought  therefore  to  be  well  informed  from  the  enquiries  I made  con-
cerning; it.

You  must  know,  that  at  this  period  sir  Peter  de  Craon  had  a very  handsome  house  near
the  churchyard  of  Saint  John  at  Paris*,  like  other  great  lords,  to  receive  him,  when  he  came
to  that  city.  This  hotel  was,  in  his  absence,  under  the  care  of  a house-steward ; and,  during
the  last  Lent  season,  he  had  sent  varlets  thither  for  his  service,  with  orders  to  lay  in  a large
store  of  wines,  and  all  sorts  of  provision.  He  had  likewise  written  to  the  steward  to  pur-
chase for  him  armour,  such  as  coats  of  mail,  gauntlets,  steel  helmets,  and  other  things
sufficient  for  forty  men,  and  to  let  him  know  when  they  were  provided,  that  he  might  send
for  them,  but  to  observe  the  greatest  secrecy  in  the  business.  The  steward,  thinking  no
harm,  obeyed  the  orders,  and  provided  the  armour ; during  which  time,  sir  Peter  resided  at
a handsome  castle  of  his  in  Anjou,  called  Sable,  from  whence  he  sent  at  different  times  four
or  more  determined  fellows,  in  the  most  secret  manner  possible,  to  his  hotel  in  Paris.  He
said  to  them  nothing  more  when  they  left  him,  but — “ When  you  arrive  at  my  house  in
Paris,  make  yourselves  comfortable,  and  ask  the  house-steward  for  whatever  you  may  want,
who  will  instantly  give  it  to  you ; but  do  not,  on  any  account,  pass  the  gates  or  show  your-
selves. I will  one  day  satisfy  you  well  for  your  obedience,  and  pay  you  handsome  wages.”
Upon  this,  they  departed,  and  journeyed  to  Paris,  which  they  entered  at  their  pleasure  : for
in  those  days  the  gates  were  never  shut  night  nor  day.  At  length,  they  amounted  to  forty
courageous  bravos,  for  such  were  what  sir  Peter  wanted.  There  were  several  among  them
who,  had  they  known  the  business  they  were  engaged  in,  would  not  have  come ; but  sir
Peter  took  good  care  not  to  betray  his  secret.  About  the  feasts  of  Whitsuntide,  sir  Peter
de  Craon  came  to  his  hotel  in  Paris,  not  in  state,  but  as  privately  as  his  men  had  done.  On
his  arrival,  he  asked  for  the  porter,  and  said : “ I command  thee,  under  pain  of  having  thy

* “ The  street  of  the  Mauvais-garfons,  in  the  rue  de3  hid  himself  and  accomplices  within  it,  to  assassinate  sir
Bouchcries,  took  its  name  from  a sign.  With'rcgard  to  Oliver,  de  Clisson.  The  street  then  changed  its  name,
the  other  rue  des  Mauvais-gar.qons,  which  leads  from  the  and  was  called  la  rue  des  Mauvais-garjons.  The  hotel
rue  de  la  Verrerie  to  that  of  la  Tixeranderie,  it  was  was,  by  orders  from  the  king,  razed  to  the  ground,  and
formerly  called  rue  de  Chartron ; but  when  the  lords  de  the  spot  given  to  the  church-wardens  of  St.  John,  to
Craon  built  a house  there,  which  is  now  a churchyard,  it  enlarge  their  church-yard.” — Sauval,  Aniiquites  de
was  called  rue  de  Craon,  to  the  time  when  Peter  de  Craon  Paris.


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


523

eyes  thrust  out,  not  to  admit  either  man  or  woman  into  the  hotel,  nor  permit  any  one  to  go
out,  without  my  special  orders.”  The  porter,  as  well  as  the  house-steward,  promised
obedience.  He  shut  up  in  their  chambers  the  wife  of  the  latter,  her  children  and  the
chambermaid.  He  was  in  the  right  to  do  this.  Had  these  women  or  children  gone  into
the  street,  his  arrival  would  have  been  known  ; for  young  children  and  women  naturally
tell  all  they  see,  and  what  is  intended  to  he  concealed.  Thus,  as  I have  related,  were  the
whole  of  his  people  confined  within  the  walls  of  the  hotel,  until  the  feast  of  the  holy
sacrament.  You  may  suppose,  that  sir  Peter  had  his  spies  fully  employed,  to  bring  him
intelligence ; hut  it  was  not  until  the  eve  of  this  feast  he  found  a fit  opportunity  to  execute
his  scheme,  which  had  vexed  him  much.

It  happened  that,  on  the  feast  of  the  holy  sacrament,  the  king  of  France  kept  an  open
court  at  the  hotel  de  St.  Pol,  where  he  entertained  all  barons  and  lords  who  were  in  Paris.
He  was  in  high  enjoyment,  as  were  the  queen  and  the  duchess  of  Touraine  : to  add  to  their
amusements,  after  the  dinner,  lists  were  prepared  within  the  courts  of  the  hotel,  and  young
knights  and  squires,  ready  armed  and  mounted  for  tilting,  came  thither,  and  justed  very
gallantly.  The  tiltings  were  well  performed,  to  the  delight  of  the  king,  queen,  ladies,  and
damsels,  and  lasted  until  the  evening.  The  prize  for  the  best  tilter  was  adjudged  by  the
queen,  the  duchess  of  Touraine,  and  the  ladies  and  heralds  appointed  to  the  office,  to  sir
William  de  Flandres,  count  de  Namur.  The  king  entertained  at  supper,  in  the  hotel  de
Saint  Pol,  every  knight  who  wished  to  partake  of  it ; and,  afterward,  the  dancings  con-
tinued until  one  o’clock  in  the  morning.  When  these  were  over,  every  one  retired  to  his
home,  without  guard  and  without  suspicion.  Sir  Oliver  de  Clisson  remained  the  last ; and,
when  he  had  taken  leave  of  the  king,  he  returned  to  the  apartment  of  the  duke  of  Touraine,
and  asked,  “ My  lord,  shall  you  stay  here  to-night,  or  do  you  go  to  Poulain’s  ?”  This  Pou-
lain  was  treasurer  to  the  duke  of  Touraine,  and  lived  at  the  Croix  du  Tiroir,  near  the  Silver
Lion.  The  duke  replied, — “ Constable,  I am  not  determined  whether  I shall  stay  or  not ;
but  do  you  go,  for  it  is  high  time  to  retire.”  “ My  lord,  God  give  you  a good  night !”  said
sir  Oliver,  and  went  away.  He  found  his  servants  and  horses  waiting  for  him  in  the  square
before  the  hotel ; but  they  had  not  more  than  eight  or  ten  torches,  which  the  varlets  lighted.
When  the  constable  was  mounted,  and  the  torches  were  borne  before  him,  he  rode  down  the
broad  street  of  St.  Catherine.

Sir  Peter  de  Craon’s  spies  had  this  day  exerted  themselves,  and  he  knew  every  particular
relative  to  the  constable, — of  his  staying  behind  the  rest  of  the  company,  the  exact  number
of  his  horses  and  attendants.  He  had,  in  consequence,  quitted  his  hotel  with  his  men  all
mounted  and  secretly  armed ; but  there  were  not  six  of  them  who  knew  what  his  real
intentions  were.  He  had  advanced  to  the  causeway,  near  the  place  of  St.  Catherine,  where
he  and  his  people  lay  hid,  waiting  for  the  constable  to  pass.  As  soon  as  the  constable  had
left  the  street  of  St.  Pol,  and  turned  into  the  square  of  the  great  street,  advancing  a foot’s
pace,  with  a torch  on  each  side  to  light  him,  he  began  a conversation  with  one  of  his  squires,
saying, — “ I am  to  have  at  dinner,  to-morrow,  my  lord  of  Touraine,  the  lord  de  Coucy,  sir
John  de  Vienne,  sir  Charles  d’ Angers,  the  baron  d’lvry,  and  several  more : be  sure  take
care  they  have  all  things  comfortable,  and  let  nothing  he  spared.”  As  he  said  this,  sir  Peter
de  Craon  and  his  company  advanced,  and,  without  saying  a word,  fell  on  the  constable’s
attendants  and  extinguished  the  torches.  The  constable,  hearing  the  clatter  of  the  horses
behind  him,  thought  it  was  the  duke  of  Touraine  who  was  playing  him  a trick,  and  cried
out, — “ My  lord,  by  my  faith,  this  is  very  ill  done ; but  I excuse  it,  for  you  are  so  young
you  make  a joke  of  every  thing.”  At  these  words,  sir  Peter  de  Craon,  drawing  his  sword
from  the  scabbard,  said, — “ Death,  death  ! Clisson,  you  must  die.”  “ Who  art  thou,”  said
Clisson,  “ that  utterest  such  words  ?”  “ I am  Peter  de  Craon,  thy  enemy,  whom  thou  hast

so  often  angered,  and  thou  shalt  now  pay  for  it.”  Then,  calling  to  his  people,  lie  said, —
“ Advance,  advance ! I have  found  him  I was  in  search  of,  and  whom  I have  long  wanted
to  seize.”  He  then  struck  him  several  blows,  and  his  men,  drawing  their  swords,  fell  on  him.
Sir  Oliver  was  quite  unarmed,  having  only  a short  cutlass,  not  two  feet  long,  which,  how-
ever, he  drew,  and  defended  himself  with  it  as  well  as  he  could.  His  servants,  being  quite
defenceless,  were  soon,  dispersed.  Some  of  sir  Peter’s  men  asked,  if  they  were  to  murder


624


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


all  ? “Yes,1’  replied  he,  “ all  who  put  themselves  in  a posture  of  defence.”  They  could  not

resist  the  attack,  for  they  were  but  eight,  and  without  armour.  Sir  Peter’s  men  fully  in-
tended to  murder  the  constable,  and  their  master  wished  nothing  more  than  to  see  it  done ;
but,  as  I heard  from  some  of  those  who  had  been  in  this  attack,  the  moment  they  learnt
that  the  person  they  were  assassinating  was  the  constable  of  France,  their  arms  became,  as
it  were,  nerveless  through  surprise,  and  their  blows  were  given  weakly  and  through  fear,  for
in  perpetrating  wickedness  none  are  bold.

The  constable  parried  the  blows  tolerably  well  with  his  short  cutlass ; but  his  defence
would  have  been  of  no  avail,  if  God’s  providence  had  not  protected  him.  lie  kept  steady
on  horseback  some  time,  until  he  was  villanously  struck  on  the  back  part  of  his  head,  which
knocked  him  off  his  horse.  In  his  fall,  he  hit  against  the  hatch  of  a baker’s  door,  who  was
already  up  to  attend  to  his  business  and  bake  his  bread.  Having  heard  the  noise  of  horses
on  the  causeway  and  high  words,  the  baker  had,  fortunately  for  the  constable,  half  opened
the  hatch ; and  sir  Oliver,  falling  against  it,  burst  it  quite  open  and  rolled  into  the  shop.
Those  on  horseback  could  not  follow  him,  as  the  entrance  was  neither  wide  nor  high  enough,
and  besides,  they  did  their  work  like  cowards.  It  must  be  owned  for  truth,  that  God
showed  great  favour  to  the  constable : if  he  had  not  exactly  fallen  against  the  hatch,  or  if  it
had  been  closed,  he  would  infallibly  have  lost  his  life,  and  have  been  trampled  to  death  by
the  horses,  for  they  were  afraid  to  dismount.  Several  of  them  imagined,  even  sir  Peter  de
Craon  and  the  person  who  had  hit  him,  that  the  blow  on  his  head  which  unhorsed  him
must  cause  his  death  : sir  Peter,  therefore,  said, — “ Come,  let  us  away  : we  have  done
enough  : if  he  be  not  dead,  he  can  never  recover  from  the  last  blow,  which  was  given  by  a
lusty  arm.”  On  saying  this,  they  collected  together  and  left  the  place  at  a good  trot,  and
were  soon  at  the  gate  of  Saint  Anthony,  which  they  passed,  and  gained  the  fields  ; for  since
the  battle  of  Rosebecque,  ten  years  ago,  the  gates  were  never  shut.  The  Parisians  had  then
their  mallets  taken  from  them  by  the  constable,  and  many  of  the  citizens  punished  and  fined
for  their  imprudent  conduct,  as  I have  fully  narrated.


CHAPTER  XL. THE  KING  OP  FRANCE  SENDS  HIS  OWN  PHYSICIANS  AND  SURGEONS  TO  VISIT

THE  CONSTABLE  DURING  THE  NIGHT. — HE  ORDERS  THE  PROVOST  OF  PARIS  TO  PURSUE

SIR  PETER  DE  CRAON,  WHO  HAD  FLED  FOR  REFUGE  TO  THE  DUKE  OF  BRITTANY.

SOME  OF  HIS  MEN,  HAVING  REMAINED  AT  PARIS,  ARE  EXECUTED.

Thus  was  sir  Oliver  de  Clisson  left  for  dead  at  the  baker’s,  who  was  much  frightened
when  he  learnt  it  was  the  constable.  Sir  Oliver’s  attendants,  who  had  been  little  hurt,  for
sir  Peter  de  Craon’s  men  were  only  bent  on  killing  their  master,  collected  together  as  well
as  they  could,  and  dismounting  before  the  baker’s  door,  entered  the  shop,  where  they  found
their  lord  severely  wounded  on  the  head,  and  his  face  covered  with  blood.  They  were,  as
may  be  supposed,  greatly  affected,  and  with  tears  and  groans  bewailed  his  loss,  for  at  the
first  moment  they  thought  he  was  a dead  man.

News  of  this  was  carried  to  the  king  at  the  hotel  de  Saint  Pol,  just  as  he  was  going  into
bed.  In  much  alarm,  they  said,  “ Ah,  sire  ! we  dare  not  conceal  from  you  a shocking  event
that  has  just  happened  in  Paris.”  “ What  event?”  asked  the  king.  “ Your  constable,  sir
Oliver  de  Clisson,  is  murdered.”  “ Murdered  ! ” repeated  the  king.  “ How  ? and  who  has
done  it  ? ” “ Sire,  that  we  do  not  know  ; but  this  misfortune  has  befallen  him  hard  by,  in

the  great  street  of  St.  Catherine.”  “ Come,  quickly  light  torches,  for  I will  go  and  see
him,”  replied  the  king.  The  torches  being  ready,  the  varlets  bore  them  before ; and  the
king  threw  only  a cloak  over  him,  while  the  shoes  were  putting  on  his  feet.  The  men  at
arms  and  ushers  of  the  guard  of  the  palace  escorted  him.  Those  who  were  gone  to  bed,  on
hearing  what  had  passed,  instantly  dressed  themselves  to  follow  the  king,  who  had  left  the
hotel  de  Saint  Pol  in  such  haste  that  sir  Walter  Martel  and  sir  John  de  Lignac  were  the
only  chamberlains  that  attended  him,  for  he  would  not  wait  for  others,  and  thus  he  walked
at  a good  pace  with  torches  before  and  behind  him.  In  this  manner  he  arrived  at  the


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


625


baker’s  shop,  which  he  entered  ; but  the  chamberlains,  with  many  torches,  staid  without.
The  king  found  his  constable  nearly  in  the  state  he  had  heard  him  to  be  in,  except  that  he
was  not  dead ; for  his  servants  had  stripped  him  to  see  if  he  had  received  many  wounds,  and
where  they  had  been  given.  The  first  words  tliG  king  said,  were,  “ Constable,  how  fares  it
with  you  ?”  “ Dear  sire,”  replied  he,  “ but  so  so,  and  very  weak.”  “ And  who  has  put
you  in  thi3  state  ? ” “ Sire,  Peter  dc  Craon  and  his  accomplices  have  traitorously,  and
without  the  smallest  suspicion,  attacked  me.”  “ Constable,”  said  the  king,  “ nothing  shall
ever  be  more  severely  punished  than  this  crime,  nor  can  any  sufferings  make  amends  for  it :
run  quickly,”  added  the  king,  “ for  doctors  and  surgeons.”  These  were  before  sent  for;  and
they  arrived  from  all  quarters,  particularly  those  attached  to  the  king’s  person.  On  their
arrival,  the  king  was  well  pleased,  and  said, — “ Attend  well  to  my  constable,  and  tell  me
what  state  he  is  in  ; for  I am  sorely  grieved  at  his  misfortune.”  The  doctors,  having  declared
they  would,  examined  him  all  over,  the  king  being  present,  who  was  greatly  angered  at  this
event : he  asked,  “ If  there  were  any  danger  of  death  ? ” The  doctors  unanimously  replied,
— “ Sire,  certainly  not ; and,  within  fifteen  days,  we  will  restore  him  to  you  well  enough  to
ride  on  horseback.”  This  answer  pleased  the  king,  who  said,  “ God  be  praised,  this  is
excellent  news.”  Then  addressing  himself  to  the  constable,  added  : “ Take  care  of  yourself,
and  do  not  think  of  this  or  other  business ; no  crime  shall  be  more  rigorously  punished  than
that  of  these  traitors : they  shall  pay  for  it  as  if  it  were  done  to  myself.”  The  constable
faintly  answered,  “ May  God  repay  you  all,  and  for  your  kindness  in  this  visit.”

On  this,  the  king  took  leave  and  returned  to  his  palace,  and  sent  for  the  provost  of  Paris,
who  made  no  long  delay  before  he  arrived,  for  it  was  now  quite  day.  When  the  provost
entered,  the  king  said, — “ Take  with  you  a body  of  armed  men,  and  pursue  that  traitor,
Peter  de  Craon,  who  has  treacherously  assassinated,  and  nearly  murdered,  our  constable.
You  cannot  do  us  a more  agreeable  service  than  to  take  him  and  bring  him  before  us.”  The
provost  replied,  “ Sire,  I will  do  every  thing  in  my  power  ; but  what  road  do  you  suppose
he  may  have  taken  ? ” “ Inquire,  and  make  good  diligence,”  said  the  king.  At  that  time,

the  four  principal  gates  of  Paris  were  always  open  night  and  day  : this  regulation  had  been
observed  from  the  time  the  king  returned  from  Flanders,  after  defeating  the  Flemings  at  the
battle  of  Rosebecque,  and  when  the  Parisians,  showing  symptoms  of  rebellion,  had  their
mallets  taken  from  them.  In  order  the  more  easily  to  chastise  the  Parisians,  sir  Oliver  de
Clisson  had  advised  the  chains  to  be  taken  from  across  the  streets,  and  the  gates  off  their
hinges,  which  had  been  done  ; and  the  gates  had  been,  for  the  last  ten  years,  lying  against  the
walls,  so  that  any  one  might  enter,  or  go  out  of  Paris,  at  all  hours.  Now,  observe  how  the
seasons  repay,  sir  Oliver  reaped  what  he  had  sown  himself : had  the  gates  and  chains
remained,  sir  Peter  de  Craon  would  not  have  dared  to  commit  this  outrage,  for  he  could
never  have  got  out  of  Paris,  but  knowing  he  could  set  off  at  any  hour,  he  was  encouraged
thus  to  disgrace  himself.  When  he  left  the  constable,  he  concluded  he  was  dead,  or  at  least
that  he  would  never  recover  ; but  it  was  not  so,  as  you  have  heard,  to  his  great  mortification.
He  quitted  Paris  by  St.  Anthony’s  gate,  about  one  o’clock  in  the  morning,  and,  as  some
say,  crossed  the  Seine  at  the  bridge  of  Charenton,  and  continued  his  road  to  Chartres ; but,
according  to  others,  after  going  out  of  Paris,  he  returned  by  the  gate  of  St.  Honore,  under
Montmartre,  and  crossed  the  Seine  at  Pomjon.  Whichever  way  he  passed  the  river,  he
arrived  at  Chartres  at  eight  o’clock  in  the  morning,  with  some  of  the  best  mounted  of  hi3
accomplices.  All  did  not  follow  but  took  different  routes,  and  in  small  companies,  to  avoid
being  taken  in  the  pursuit.  On  his  way  to  Paris  he  had  ordered  twenty  horses  to  be  in
waiting  for  him,  at  the  house  of  a canon,  who  was  his  friend  and  had  served  him ; but  it
would  have  been  better  for  him  never  to  have  known  him,  although  the  canon  was  ignorant
of  the  crime  he  had  committed.  Sir  Peter  de  Craon,  on  his  arrival  at  Chartres,  drank
some  wine  and  changed  horses,  and  then  instantly  departed,  taking  the  road  for  Maine.
He  continued  his  journey,  until  he  came  to  a strong  castle  he  still  possessed,  called  Sable,
where  he  stopped  and  refreshed  himself,  and  said  he  would  not  go  further,  but  wait  there
until  he  heard  some  intelligence  of  the  constable.

On  the  Friday,  the  day  following  this  assassination,  it  was  all  the  news  of  Paris,  and  every
one  greatly  blamed  sir  Peter  de  Craon.  The  lord  de  Coucy  was  no  sooner  informed  of  it,  than


526


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


ho  mounted  his  hoi’se,  attended  by  only  seven  persons,  and  rode  to  the  constable’s  hotel
behind  the  Temple,  whither  he  had  been  carried ; for  they  mutually  loved  each  other,  styling
themselves  brothers  and  companions  in  arms.  This  interview  with  the  lord  de  Coucy  was  of
service  to  the  constable  ; and  he  was  visited  by  all  the  other  lords  of  the  court.  The  duke
of  Touraine  accompanied  the  king  in  his  next  visit : the  two  brothers  were  very  wroth,  and
said  sir  Peter  de  Craon  had  committed  this  crime  in  spite  of  them ; and  that  it  was  a plot
formed  by  traitors  to  throw  the  kingdom  into  confusion.  The  duke  of  Berry,  who  was  at
the  time  in  Paris,  dissembled  his  sentiments,  and  seemed  to  make  light  of  what  had  passed.
I,  the  author  of  this  history,  was  then  informed,  that  if  he  had  pleased,  this  accident  would
not  have  happened,  for  it  was  in  his  power  to  have  prevented  it,  and  I will  tell  you  how.

The  day  of  the  feast  of  the  holy  sacrament,  a clerk  who  was  one  of  the  familiars  of  sir
Peter  de  Craon,  came  to  the  duke  of  Berry,  and  said  : “ My  lord,  I would  willingly  open
my  mind  to  you,  respecting  some  improper  conduct  that  is  going  forward,  which  is  illegal,
and  may  end  unfortunately,  for  you  are  more  able  than  any  other  to  put  a stop  to  it.”
“ What  is  it  ? ” asked  the  duke.  “ My  lord,  I must  first  insist  that  you  promise  my  name
shall  never  be  brought  into  question ; for,  to  prevent  great  mischief  being  done,  and  the
peril  that  may  ensue  in  the  matter,  I am  come  to  discover  the  whole  to  you.”  “ Speak  out
then,  boldly,”  replied  the  duke  : “ I will  bear  you  through  it.”  “ My  lord,”  said  the  clerk,
“ I very  much  suspect  that  sir  Peter  de  Craon  intends  murdering  the  constable ; for  he  has
collected  within  his  hotel,  in  the  church -yard  of  St.  John,  a number  of  companions,  whom
he  has  secretly  kept  there,  ever  since  Whitsuntide.  Should  he  accomplish  his  purpose,  the
king  will  be  exceedingly  vexed,  and  confusion  ensue  to  the  kingdom.  It  is  for  this  I
disclose  it  to  you.  my  lord  ; for,  although  I am  secretary  to  my  lord  of  Craon,  and  have  sworn
fidelity  to  him,  I cannot  suffer  such  an  outrage  to  be  committed.  If  you  do  not  take
measures  to  prevent  this,  none  other  will,  at  this  moment,  and  I beg  you  will  remember  what
I have  now  told  you,  at  a proper  opportunity ; for,  since  I find  sir  Peter  de  Craon  is
determined  to  persevere  in  this  business,  I must  fly,  and  never  again  return  to  his  service.”
The  duke  of  Berry  perfectly  well  comprehended  all  the  clerk  had  told.  He  said  to  him,
“ Remain  with  me  to-day,  and  to-morrow  morning  I will  inform  my  lord  of  this  plot.  It  is
now  too  late,  and  I wish  not  to  trouble  the  king  on  such  a day  as  this,  but,  to-morrow,  I
will  not  fail  doing  it ; and  we  will  provide  a remedy,  since  sir  Peter  de  Craon  is  in  the
town,  which  I was  ignorant  of.”  Thus,  by  the  delay  and  negligence  of  the  duke  of  Berry,
did  the  mischief  happen,  as  I have  related.

The  provost  of  Paris,  witli  upwards  of  sixty  horse,  issued  out  at  the  gate  of  St.  Honore,  on
the  traces  of  sir  Peter  de  Craon.  When  he  came  to  Poncjon,  to  cross  the  Seine,  he  asked  the
bridge-keeper,  if  any  one  had  passed  that  morning?  he  answered,  “ Yes,  my  lord,  a company
of  about  twelve  horsemen ; but  I did  not  see  any  knight  or  person  whom  I knew.”  “ And  what
road  did  they  take  ? ” demanded  the  provost.  “ That  leading  to  Vannes,”  said  the  bridge-
master.  “Ah,”  replied  the  provost,  “ it  may  very  probably  be  they,  who  are  making  for  Cher-
bourg.” He  then  quitted  the  road  to  Chartres,  following  that  to  Cherbourg,  and  thus  lost  all
traces  of  them.  When  they  had  rode  on  the  road  to  Yannes  till  it  was  dinner-time,  they  met  a
knight  of  that  country  hare-liunting  ; and,  making  inquiry  from  him,  he  said  that  he  had  seen
in  the  morning  about  fifteen  horsemen  riding  oner  the  fields,  and  he  thought  they  were  going  to
Chartres.  Upon  this,  the  provost  again  changed  his  road,  and,  arriving  in  the  evening  at
Chartres  learnt  that  sir  Peter  de  Craon  had  been  at  the  canon’s  house  about  eight  o’clock,
where  he  had  disarmed  himself  and  changed  horses.  He  now  saw  that  all  further  pursuit  would
be  vain,  as  sir  Peter  had  got  so  much  before  him,  and  returned  to  Paris  on  the  Saturday.

The  king  of  France  and  the  duke  of  Touraine  were  very  anxious  to  lay  hands  on  sir  Peter
de  Craon  ; and,  as  it  was  uncertain  what  road  he  had  taken,  they  ordered  sir  John  le  Barrois,
with  sixty  horse,  after  him  by  the  gate  of  Saint  Anthony.  Sir  John  crossed  the  Seine  and
Marne  at  the  bridge  of  Charenton,  and  scoured  the  whole  country  as  far  as  Estampes.  On
Saturday  he  arrived  to  dinner  at  Chartres,  where  he  heard  the  truth  of  his  escape,  and  con-
cluded it  would  be  fruitless  to  follow  him,  as  he  must  be  at  too  great  a distance.  He  re-
turned to  Paris  on  the  Sunday,  and  related  to  the  king  the  country  he  had  been  over,  with
the  same  ill  success  as  the  provost  had  before  complained  of.


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


627


On  the  Saturday  morning,  the  officers  of  justice,  who  had  been  searching  all  the  villages
round  Paris,  discovered  in  a hamlet  seven  leagues  from  Paris,  two  men  at  arms,  squires  to
sir  Peter  de  Craon,  and  his  page,  who  had  stopped  in  this  village  from  inability  or  unwilling-
ness to  proceed  further.  They  were  arrested  by  the  officers,  brought  back  to  Paris,  and
executed  on  the  Monday  following.  They  were,  however,  first  led  to  the  place  where  the
crime  had  been  committed,  and  each  had  his  hand  cut  off  at  the  wrist : they  were  then  beheaded
in  the  market-place,  and  their  bodies  hung  on  a gibbet.  On  the  Wednesday  following,  sir
Peter’s  house-steward  was  executed ; but  many  said  this  was  unjustly  done,  while  others
replied,  that  he  suffered  for  not  having  revealed  the  arrival  of  sir  Peter  de  Craon  at  Paris.
The  canon  of  Chartres,  at  whose  house  sir  Peter  had  stopped  to  refresh  himself  and  change
horses,  was  arrested  and  confined  in  the  bishop’s  prison.  Everything  he  possessed  was  con-
fiscated, and  himself  condemned  to  perpetual  imprisonment  on  bread  and  water  : no  excuses
he  could  plead  for  his  innocence  in  this  matter  were  of  the  smallest  avail,  though  he  bore  in
Chartres  the  character  of  an  honest  prudent  man*.

Sir  Peter  de  Craon  was  exceedingly  vexed,  when  he  heard  for  certain,  at  his  castle  of
Sable,  whither  he  had  retired,  that  the  constable  was  not  dead,  and  had  not  received  any
wounds  that,  in  six  weeks’  time,  could  prevent  him  mounting  his  horse.  He  considered  that
he  would  not  be  safe  in  this  castle  when  it  should  be  known  where  he  was,  and  that  he
would  be  too  closely  surrounded  to  quit  it  when  he  pleased.  He,  in  consequence,  gave  the
charge  of  it  to  some  of  his  people,  and  left  it  secretly,  taking  the  road  towards  Brittany,
where  he  arrived  without  stopping  and  found  the  duke  at  Susmett.  The  duke,  who  had
already  heard  the  issue  of  the  assassination,  and  that  the  constable  was  not  dead,  said,  on
receiving  sir  Peter  de  Craon,  “ You  are  a poor  creature,  who  cannot  slay  a man  when  you
have  him  in  your  power.”  “ My  lord,”  replied  sir  Peter,  “ it  was  a damnable  business.  I
believe  all  the  devils  in  hell,  to  whom  he  belongs,  defended  him,  and  preserved  him  from
mine  and  my  men’s  blows.  There  were  upwards  of  sixty  thrusts  and  cuts  made  at  him
with  swords  and  cutlasses  ; and  when  he  was  knocked  off  his  horse,  in  good  truth,  I thought
he  was  dead ; but  his  good  fortune  made  him  fall  against  the  hatch  of  a baker’s  shop  that
was  half  open,  by  which  means  he  rolled  into  the  shop.  Had  he  fallen  in  the  street,  we
would  have  killed  him  and  trampled  him  under  our  horses’  feet.”  “ Well,”  said  the  duke,
“ it  cannot  be  otherwise  at  present.  I am  sure  it  will  not  be  long  before  I hear  from  the
king  of  France,  and  shall  incur  as  much  hatred  as  yourself.  Keep  quiet  near  me  ; for  I
am  convinced  things  will  not  remain  as  they  now  are,  but  that  the  king  and  constable
will  wage  a serious  war  against  me.  However,  since  I promised  you  protection,  I will
keep  my  word.”


CHAPTER  XLI. — THE  KING  OF  FRANCE  SUMMONS  THE  DUKE  OF  BRITTANY  TO  DELIVER  UP

SIR  PETER  DE  CRAON. HIS  ANSWER  NOT  BEING  SATISFACTORY,  THE  KING  DECLARES

WAR  AGAINST  HIM. THE  KING’S  UNCLES  MURMUR  AT  THE  GREAT  RICHES  OF  THE

CONSTABLE,  WHICH  WERE  DISCLOSED  BY  HIS  WILL.

Intelligence  was  brought  to  the  king  of  France,  some  days  after  the  assassination  of
the  constable,  that  the  duke  of  Brittany  had  received  sir  Peter  de  Craon.  His  most  con-
fidential counsellors  advised  him  to  send  instantly  to  the  duke  of  Brittany,  and  summon  him,
on  his  faith  and  homage,  should  that  false  traitor  to  the  crown  of  France,  sir  Peter  de  Craon,
be  in  any  parts  of  Brittany,  to  arrest  him  and  send  him  without  delay  to  France.  When
these  letters  were  written  and  sealed,  they  were  given  to  one  of  the  king’s  messengers,  who
set  out  for  Brittany,  and  found  the  duke  at  his  castle  of  Ermine,  near  Vannes.  The  duke,

* A process  was  instituted  against  Peter  de  Craon,  who  himself  by  infamously  outraging  the  modesty  of  Jeanne
was  condemned  for  contumacy.  All  his  goods  were  con-  de  Chastillon  the  wife  of  Peter  de  Craon,  and  her  daughter,
fiscated,  his  houses  taken  possession  of,  his  furniture  seized  a celebrated  beauty  of  the  time,  and  afterwards  turning
by  the  king  and  his  lands  given  to  the  duke  of  Orleans  and  them  out  of  doors  in  their  chemises. — Buchon.
other  courtiers.  The  monk  of  St.  Denis  relates  that  Jean  ■ f “ Au  Susmet.”  Q.  Succinio,  which  was  a residence
de  Vienne,  the  admiral  of  France,  who  was  charged  with  of  the  duke  of  Brittany,
taking  possession  of  the  estate  of  Fertti-Bernard,  disgraced


628


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


having  received  and  read  the  letters,  told  the  messenger,  he  would  write  an  answer  to  the
king.  The  substance  of  it  was,  that  he  excused  himself  from  knowing  anything  of  sir  Peter
de  Craon,  or  where  he  was  ; nor  did  lie  wish  to  know  anything,  for  it  was  no  concern  of  his ;
and  that,  as  to  sir  Peter’s  hatred  and  quarrel  with  sir  Oliver  de  Clisson,  it  no  way  touched
or  regarded  him,  and  he  entreated  the  king  to  hold  him  excused.  When  this  answer  had
been  properly  drawn  up  and  sealed,  it  was  given  to  the  messenger,  who  returned  with  it
to  Paris.  The  king  and  his  council  were  impatient  to  receive  the  duke’s  answer ; and,  when
the  letters  were  delivered  to  the  king,  he  attentively  read  them,  and  turning  to  his
brother  the  duke  of  Touraine,  and  the  council,  said,  “ This  is  not  satisfactory.”  Others  replied,
that  the  duke  of  Brittany  was  at  the  bottom  of  the  whole  mischief.  The  king  and  the  duke
of  Touraine  declared  that  such  an  outrage  was  too  great  to  be  lightly  passed  over,  and  was  a
direct  attack  on  the  royal  majesty  of  France.

The  duke  of  Berry  was  at  this  time  in  Paris,  and,  in  his  frequent  visits  to  the  palace,  the
king  talked  much  to  him  concerning  the  crime  of  sir  Peter  de  Craon.  The  duke  replied :
“ My  lord,  he  has  certainly  committed  a great  outrage ; and  if  it  were  known  where  he  was,

I would  advise  that  he  be  arrested  and  punished  for  it.”  “ Good  uncle,”  said  the  king,  “ he
is  now  with  the  duke  in  Brittany,  and  nowhere  else  : we  are  determined  to  march  thither,
and  you  shall  accompany  us.”  The  duke  of  Berry  assented,  though  he  was  dissembling
his  real  sentiments,  and  added,  “ My  lord,  we  must  have  our  good  brother  of  Burgundy  also
with  us.”  “ We  will  have  him,”  replied  the  king,  “ for  we  will  not  go  without  him  ; and  our
army  shall  be  of  strength  sufficient  to  conquer  all  our  enemies.  We  now  clearly  see,  that
this  duke  of  Brittany  neither  loves  nor  esteems  us.  Good  uncle,  he  is  very  proud  and  pre-
sumptuous ; and  we  will  not  attend  to  any  other  affair  until  we  have  brought  him  to  reason.”
Thus  did  the  king  and  the  duke  of  Berry  converse  together  : the  duke  assented  to  everything
his  nephew  proposed,  though  determined,  in  his  own  mind,  to  act  in  opposition  to  it.  The
king  of  France  was  too  earnest  in  his  desire  to  revenge  the  insult  offered  his  constable,  and
was  daily  pressing  forward  the  preparations  for  his  expedition  to  Brittany.  Fie  was  to
march  first  into  Anjou,  to  destroy  all  the  castles  and  possessions  held  there  by  sir  Peter  de
Craon,  notwithstanding  the  duke  of  Brittany  claimed  them  for  his  own  by  purchase.  The  king
and  his  council  answered,  that  he  had  never  had  possession  given  him  of  them  ; and  that  from
having  supported  and  protected  sir  Peter  de  Craon,  he  had  incurred  personally  the  indignation
of  the  crown  of  France,  although  a marriage  had  this  season  been  formed  between  the  son  of
the  duke  and  a princess  of  France.

While  these  preparations  were  going  forward,  and  the  rumour  of  the  king’s  expe-
dition against  Brittany  was  every  where  talked  of  in  France,  the  bishop  of  Noyon
and  the  lord  de  la  Riviere  returned  to  Paris,  having  fulfilled  their  mission  to  Bearn
and  Foix.  They  related  to  the  king  and  council  what  they  had  done,  but  the  affairs
of  Brittany  occupied  so  entirely  the  time  of  the  council,  that  they  could  not  attend  to
anything  else ; and  the  king  was  impatient  ffir  the  constable  to  be  sufficiently  recovered  to
mount  his  horse.

Before  the  king  left  Paris,  he  commanded  the  very  handsome  hotel  sir  Peter  de  Craon
had,  near  the  church-yard  of  Saint  John,  to  be  razed  to  the  ground,  and  the  spot  given  for  an
addition  to  the  church-yard.  The  king  ordered  large  provision  of  stores  to  be  made  on  the
roads  to  Anjou,  Maine,  Touraine,  Brittany,  and  along  the  banks  of  the  Loire,  ready  for  his
intended  expedition  ; for  no  one  dared  to  make  any  opposition  to  it.  It  was  well  known  in
Paris,  and  likewise  in  different  parts  of  the  country,  that  sir  Oliver  de  Clisson,  constable  of
France,  had  made  his  will,  in  order  that,  in  case  of  death  from  his  wounds,  his  heirs  might
know  where  to  seek  for  his  wealth.  He  had  but  two  children,  both  females,  one  married  to
John  of  Brittany,  count  de  Penthievre,  whom  he  had  ransomed  from  England  for  six  score
thousand  francs  paid  to  the  duke  of  Ireland,  as  has  been  related.  His  other  daughter  was,
or  would  be  viscountess  de  Rohan,  in  right  of  her  husband.  The  whole  of  his  money
and  movable  property,  without  including  any  part  of  his  heritage,  amounted  to  seventeen
hundred  thousand  francs,  to  the  great  astonishment  of  all  who  heard  it,  as  to  the  means  by
which  he  had  been  able  to  amass  so  large  a sum.  The  dukes  of  Berry  and  Burgundy,  in
particular,  were  much  surprised,  as  well  as  their  councils,  for  the  constable  was  not  any  way


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


529


in  favour  with  them  : so  that,  when  among  themselves  they  thus  spoke  very  freely  on  the
subject : “ How  the  devil  can  this  constable  have  collected  such  an  immense  sum  of  florins,
and  such  splendid  furniture  ? The  king  of  Franco  has  nothing  like  it.  We  must  suppose  that  it
lias  not  been  lawfully  acquired.”  This  passed  off;  but  those  who  hated  him  did  not  think
the  less  of  it.

The  king  was  still  a.t  Paris,  though  his  preparations  were  ready ; and  all  who  had  been
summoned  to  accompany  the  expedition  to  Brittany  were  assembling  accordingly.  The
duke  of  Burgundy  was,  however,  much  vexed  at  this  war,  saying  it  was  made  without  reason,
and  would  end  badly;  for  neither  France  nor  Brittany,  nor  their  knights  and  squires,  were
anyway  concerned  in  the  quarrel  between  sir  Oliver  de  Clisson  and  sir  Peter  de  Craon;  nor  had
they  any  business  to  make  war  on  their  account,  but  should  let  them  fight  it  out  themselves,
without  thus  destroying  and  harassing  the  poor  of  both  countries.  The  duke  of  Berry  was
of  the  same  opinion ; but  they  could  not  be  heard,  for  the  king  had  other  counsellors  to
whom  he  listened  in  preference.  They  knew  not,  therefore,  how  to  prevent  the  war  from
taking  place,  and  when  they  saw  the  king  was  obstinately  bent  upon  it,  they  obeyed,  but  as
slowly  as  they  could.  I heard,  and  believe  it  true,  that,  through  the  intervention  of  the
duke  of  Burgundy,  the  count  d’Ostrevant  was  summoned  by  the  king  of  France  to  attend  him
with  three  hundred  lances  : the  count,  who  loved  arms,  made  his  preparations,  and  summoned
his  vassals,  but,  when  he  had  completed  everything  at  a great  expense,  he  received  counter-
orders, not  to  stir.


CHAPTER  XL1T. TIIE  DUKE  OF  TOURAINE  IS  CREATED  DUKE  OF  ORLEANS. THE  CON-

STABLE OF  FRANCE  BEING  RECOVERED,  THE  KING  OF  FRANCE  ADVANCES  TO  MANS,
WITH  THE  INTENTION  OF  CONTINUING  HIS  MARCH,  TO  MAKE  WAR  ON  THE  DUKE  OF
BRITTANY.

W hen  all  things  were  ready  for  the  king’s  departure  from  Paris,  an  exchange  of  lands
was  made  between  the  king  and  the  duke  of  Touraine,  but  this  exchange  was  greatly  in
favour  of  the  duke ; for  he  surrendered  to  his  brother  the  duchy  of  Touraine  and  its
dependencies,  receiving  in  return  the  duchy  of  Orleans,  which  was  of  four  times  the
value,  on  the  same  terms  and  conditions  that  Philip  duke  of  Orleans  had  formerly  held
it.  We  shall  henceforward  call  him  duke  of  Orleans*.  The  king  was  so  pleased  when
sir  Oliver  de  Clisson  had  recovered  from  his  wounds  sufficiently  to  ride,  that  he  said
he  would  now  set  out  from  Paris  to  Brittany,  to  show  he  made  the  quarrel  his  own.
In  consequence,  he  and  the  duke  of  Orleans  took  leave  of  the  queen,  the  duchess,  and
the  other  ladies  and  damsels  who  were  at  the  hotel  de  Saint  Pol,  and  went  that  night
to  the  house  of  his  minister,  Montagu,  where  they  supped  and  lay.  The  duke  of  Bour-
bon, the  count  de  Namur,  and  the  lord  de  Coucy,  went  with  them.  I know  not  if
they  all  lay  there,  but  the  king  did  so  and  dined  there  on  the  morrow.  In  the  afternoon
he  departed  in  handsome  array,  and  supped  and  lay  at  St.  Germain-en-Laye,  where  lie  re-
mained several  days.  At  this  period,  according  to  the  report  of  his  physicians,  the  king’s
health  was  not  good  ; but,  he  was  so  impatient  to  carry  on  the  war,  he  declared  his  health
was  better  than  theirs.  This  he  said  to  push  forward  the  business  ; for  his  two  uncles  of
Berry  and  Burgundy  were  still  behind,  and  showed  clearly  the  expedition  was  contrary
to  their  opinion,  and  that  willingly  they  would  avoid  going  with  him.  They  had,  how-
ever, issued  summonses  to  their  vassals,  for  they  were  bound  in  honour  to  accompany  the1
king.

When  the  king  had  sojourned  at  St.  Germain  for  fifteen  days,  and  the  different  lords  were
arrived,  or  on  the  road,  he  was  advised  to  depart.  He  did  so,  crossed  the  Seine,  and  marching
for  Chartres,  arrived  at  Auneau,  a good  town  and  handsome  castle,  that  belonged  to  the  lord
de  la  Riviere  in  right  of  his  wife.  In  company  with  him  were  the  dukes  of  Orleans  and
Bourbon.  The  lord  de  la  Riviere  received  the  king  and  these  lords  very  magnificently,  as
lie  was  well  able  to  do,  and  they  remained  his  guests  for  three  days.  On  the  fourth  day  they
# He  was  created  Duke  of  Orleans  on  the  4th  of  June  1393 Ed.


VOL.  II.


M M


530


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


departed,  and  went  to  Chartres,  of  whicliplace  the  brother  of  Montagu  was  bishop.  The  king,
the  duke  of  Orleans,  and  the  duke  of  Bourbon,  were  lodged  in  the  episcopal  palace.  On  the
second  day,  the  duke  of  Berry,  and  the  count  de  la  Marche,  came  there ; but  the  duke  of
Burgundy  was  still  behind.  He  had  begun  his  journey,  and  on  the  fourth  day  arrived,  to
the  great  joy  of  the  king.  Men  at  arms  were  pouring  in  from  all  quarters  ; and  the  king
said  he  would  never  return  to  Paris  until  he  had  made  this  duke  of  Brittany  listen  to  reason,
who  had  so  often  given  him  plague  and  vexation.  There  were  too  many  about  the  king,
wTho  urged  him  on  ; so  that  the  dukes  of  Berry  and  Burgundy,  who  wished  for  more  mode-
rate counsels,  were  not  attended  to.  This  created  a disgust  in  them  and  their  advisers  ; and
they  said  among  themselves,  that  public  affairs  could  not  long  remain  in  their  present
hazardous  and  unsettled  circumstances,  and  that  the  king  was  cutting  out  for  himself  and
kingdom  work  enough,  when  he  rejected  the  advice  of  his  uncles  and  listened  to  others  of
little  weight.  After  staying  about  seven  days  in  Chartres,  he  departed  for  Mans.  He  was
followed  by  men  at  arms  from  Artois,  Beauvais,  Yermandois  and  Picardy,  and  other  distant
countries.  They  said  when  together, — “ How  comes  this  duke  of  Brittany  to  give  us  so
much  trouble.  He  is  full  of  pride,  and  has  never  been  truly  affectionate  to  the  crown  of
France.  If  it  had  not  been  for  his  cousin,  the  late  earl  of  Flanders,  who  supported  him,  and
the  duchess  of  Burgundy,  who  does  so  at  this  moment,  he  w'ould  long  ago  have  been  de-
stroyed. He  never  could  bear  the  lord  de  Clisson  from  the  moment  he  quitted  the  English
party,  and  is  greatly  to  blame  now  in  assisting  sir  Peter  de  Craon  against  the  king  and  the
constable.”  Others  replied, — “ Let  the  king  alone;  for  he  has  taken  this  business  so  much  to
heart,  he  will  make  the  duke  repent  of  it  before  he  returns.”  “ That  he  will,”  said  others,
“ if  there  be  no  treachery  in  his  way.  Do  you  suppose  that  all  who  now  accompany  him
are  enemies  to  the  duke  of  Brittany  ? Certainly  not ; for  whatever  they  may  dare  say,  they
show  their  intentions  too  openly  by  their  actions.  They  are  plotting  night  and  day  how
they  may  prevent  this  expedition,  and  they  harass  the  king  so  much,  it  will  be  well  if  he
keep  his  health.”

Such  were  the  conversations  of  the  men  at  arms  on  their  march,  following  the  king  to
Maine.  The  king,  on  his  arrival  at  Mans,  was  lodged  in  the  castle,  and  his  lords  in  the
town  as  well  as  the  state  of  its  accommodations  would  allow.  The  army  spread  themselves
abroad  in  the  plains,  which  were  rich  and  good  lodging  for  men  at  arms.  The  king  and  his
court  remained  in  the  city  of  Mans  upwards  of  three  weeks,  for  the  king  was  in  a very
feverish  state  and  unfit  to  ride.  The  physicians  told  the  duke  of  Orleans  and  his  uncles,
that  the  king  was  oppressed  with  too  much  business,  and  was  not  in  a situation  to  go
through  it ; that  rest  and  quiet  were  absolutely  necessary,  for  that  ever  since  he  had  left
Amiens  after  the  conferences,  his  health  had  not  been  so  good  as  it  was  formerly.  The
king's  uncles  remonstrated  on  all  this  with  the  council,  for  the  king  would  not  pay  any
attention  to  what  the  physicians  said ; and  he  was  so  impatient  to  carry  the  war  into
Brittany,  he  told  his  uncles,  that  he  was  always  better  when  on  horseback,  than  when  doing
nothing ; and  added,  “ Whoever  advises  me  to  the  contrary  will  highly  displease  me,  and
show  he  has  not  any  love  for  me.”  This  was  all  the  answer  he  would  give.  Every  day
there  was  a council  holden,  which  lasted  until  noon,  or  beyond  it ; and  the  king  would
always  be  present,  to  check  any  delays  being  made  to  the  expedition  into  Brittany.


CHAPTER  XLIII. THE  KING  OF  FRANCE,  DURING  HIS  STAY  AT  MANS,  AGAIN  SENDS  SOME

NOBLE  PERSONAGES  TO  THE  DUKE  OF  BRITTANY,  WITH  ORDERS  TO  DISMISS  SIR  PETER
DE  CRAON.- — THE  KING  IS  INFORMED  THAT  SIR  PETER  IS  AT4RESTED  AT  BARCELONA
BY  COMMAND  OF  THE  QUEEN  OF  ARRAGON.

The  king  was  advised,  during  his  stay  at  Mans,  to  which  he  assented,  out  of  affection  for
his  uncles,  to  send  four  knights  to  Brittany.  They  were  to  remonstrate  strongly  with  the
duke,  on  the  part  of  the  king  and  council,  how  greatly  he  had  misbehaved  by  affording  an
asylum  to  an  enemy  of  the  king  and  realm ; and  that,  if  he  were  desirous  to  acknowledge
his  fault,  and  make  amends  for  it,  he  must  send  sir  Peter  de  Craon  to  Mans,  when  they


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


531


would  endeavour  to  make  his  peace  with  the  king,  and  prevent  this  expedition  from  doing
harm  to  him  or  to  his  country.  According  to  what  I heard,  sir  Reginald  de  Roye,  the  lord
de  Garencieres,  the  lord  de  Chateau-morant,  and  sir  Taupin  de  Cantemelle,  governor  of
Gisors,  were  ordered  on  this  mission.  They  left  the  city  of  Mans  with  forty  lances,  and,
having  passed  through  Angers,  journeyed  on  to  Nantes,  when,  having  entered  the  town,  they
found  there  the  duke.  He  gave  them  a good  welcome,  and  entertained  them  with  a
splendid  dinner  ; hut,  before  this,  they  had  fulfilled  their  commission,  and  had  ably  explained
to  him  the  object  of  their  coming,  and  what  the  king  and  council  had  ordered  them  to  say.
The  duke  answered  prudently  and  nobly,  “ that  he  would  be  most  happy  to  arrest  and  give
up  to  the  king  sir  Peter  de  Craon,  but,  as  God  might  help  him,  he  neither  knew  where  he  was,
nor  what  he  was  about : be  therefore  entreated  these  lords  to  make  his  peace,  for  he  had
assured  them  of  the  truth;”  adding,  “ he  had  heard,  upwards  of  a year  ago,  sir  Peter  de  Craon
declare,  that  sir  Oliver  de  Clisson  hated  him  so  mortally,  he  would  attack  him  the  first
favourable  opportunity,  with  all  the  force  he  could  muster,  let  the  event  be  what  it  would.
When  he  told  me  this,  I asked  if  he  had  notified  this  to  sir  Oliver : he  said  he  had,  and  had
sent  him  his  defiance ; adding,  that  he  would  put  him  to  death,  by  day  or  night,  the  very
first  time  he  met  him.  I know  nothing  further  of  the  matter,  and  am  surprised  that  my  lord
should  think  of  making  war  on  me  for  this  cause.  Begging  his  pardon,  I do  not  feel  that  I am
any  way  so  blameable,  either  towards  him  or  the  kingdom  of  France,  thatvvar  should  be  declared
against  me;  for  never  will  I infringe,  if  it  please  God,  the  alliances  that  have  been  entered
into  between  us,  as  well  in  regard  to  the  marriage  of  our  children,  as  respecting  other
matters.”  This  was  the  answer  the  French  knights  received  from  the  duke  of  Brittany ;
and,  when  they  had  dined  with  him,  and  remained  one  day  more  at  Nantes,  they  took  leave,
and  set  out  on  their  return  the  way  they  had  come.

The  king  and  council  were  impatient  for  their  ai’rival,  to  hear  the  duke’s  answer.  What
you  have  just  heard,  the  knights  repeated  to  the  king,  and  to  those  interested,  from  the  duke
of  Brittany.  The  dukes  of  Berry  and  Burgundy  were  well  satisfied  with  it,  and  would
have  persuaded  others  to  be  so  likewise,  saying  the  answer  was  proper  and  reasonable.  But
the  king  declared  that,  from  the  information  he  had  received,  he  was  of  a contrary  opinion,
and  since  he  was  come  so  far,  he  would  never  return  to  Paris  until  he  had  humbled  the  duke
of  Brittany.  The  dukes  of  Berry  and  Burgundy  would  willingly  have  altered  this  declaration,
had  they  known  how,  but  they  were  not  attended  to;  and  the  king  had  taken  such  a hatred
to  sir  Peter  de  Craon,  whom  he  said  the  duke  of  Brittany  secreted  in  his  country,  that  no
excuses  were  of  avail.

There  wras  a report  at  Mans,  and  in  many  other  places  of  France,  that  the  lady  Jolande  de
Bar,  queen  of  Arragon,  and  cousin-german  to  the  king  of  France,  had  thrown  into  the
prisons  of  Barcelona,  a knight  who  was  unknown  to  her  or  to  her  people ; and,  from  his
refusal  to  tell  his  name,  he  was  thought  to  be  sir  Peter  de  Craon.  The  queen  of  Arragon,
wishing  to  please  the  king,  wrote  to  him  in  the  most  friendly  terms,  to  say, — “ that  on  the
fifth  day  of  July  a knight,  with  a handsome  array,  had  come  to  Barcelona,  with  intent  to
cross  the  sea ; that  he  had  hired,  at  a very  dear  rate,  a vessel  to  cany  him,  as  he  said,  to
Naples.  Having  had  all  our  ports  well  guarded,  so  that  no  stranger  could  leave  them  without
permission,  and  this  knight  refusing  to  say  who  he  was,  we  have  detained  him  in  prison.
We  suppose,  from  the  great  anxiety  he  shows  for  his  liberty,  that  he  is  the  knight  you  are
seeking  for,  and  on  whose  account  you  have  written  to  us.  Have  the  goodness,  therefore,
to  send  hither,  as  speedily  as  may  be,  some  persons  who  are  acquainted  with  sir  Peter  de
Craon ; for  he  whom  we  hold  in  prison  shall  not  be  set  at  liberty  until  we  have  heard  from
you.  We  shall  learn  with  pleasure  that  the  intelligence  we  have  sent  has  been  agreeable  to
you  and  to  your  council.  May  the  Holy  Spirit  have  you  in  his  keeping ! Written  at
Perpignan  the  ninth  day  of  July,”  and  signed  “ Jolande  de  Bar,  queen  of  Arragon  and
Majorca,  lady  of  Sardinia.”  The  superscription  was,  “ To  our  very  redoubted  lord  the  king
of  France.”

This  intelligence  softened  the  hearts  of  many,  and  the  expedition  was  on  the  point  of
being  broken  off ; but  the  friends  of  the  constable  thought  this  was  an  invented  story,  to
prevent  the  king  advancing  further  ; and  that  sir  Peter  de  Craon  was  in  danger  of  no  other

m m 2


532


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


prison  than  what  the  duke  of  Brittany  pleased,  for  he  was  safely  in  refuge  within  his  duchy.
The  king  paid  no  attention  to  this  letter,  saying  it  was  all  deceit ; but  the  duke  of  Burgundy
replied, — “ At  least,  my  lord,  to  satisfy  my  niece  of  Arragon,  who  has  written  to  you,  and
to  deliver  this  knight,  if  he  be  guiltless,  condescend  to  send  some  one  thither,  that  our  cousin
may  not  be  displeased  with  you  and  with  us.  “ We  are  very  willing  to  do  so,  good  uncle,”
said  the  king,  “for  I wish  not  to  vex  you.  Let  some  persons  be  sent  to  Barcelona  ; but  I am
firmly  persuaded  that  the  traitor,  Peter  de  Craon,  is  not  there,  nor  in  any  prison  but  the
duke  of  Brittany’s  palace ; and  I swear,  by  the  faith  I owe  St.  Denis,  that  one  day  he  shall
severely  pay  for  it.”  Nothing  could  alter  the  king’s  opinion  that  sir  Peter  de  Craon  was  in
Brittany.  The  duke  of  Brittany  received  regular  information  of  what  was  passing,  and,  as
the  king  was  so  much  enraged  against  him,  was  not  well  satisfied  of  his  security ; for  he
saw  that  the  dukes  of  Berry  and  Burgundy  had  no  weight  in  the  council,  and  that  the  party
of  his  adversary,  Clisson,  led  tTie  king  just  as  they  pleased.  He  had  his  castles  and  towns
most  strictly  guarded  ; but,  unfortunately  for  him,  there  were  no  towns  or  castles  he  dared
trust  his  person  to,  excepting  Vannes,  Campel,  Dol,  Quimperle,  Ermine,  Quimper-Corentin,  and
Suseniot.  He  had  written  to  the  knights  and  barons  of  Brittany,  from  whom  he  looked  for
support  and  advice,  but  they  all  dissembled  with  him,  seeing  the  king,  their  lord  paramount,
so  wroth  against  him,  and  from  his  so  openly  taking  the  part  of  sir  Peter  de  Craon  against
the  king  and  the  constable,  which  was  very  indecent.  He  almost  repented  what  he  had
done  ; but,  his  spirit  was  so  lofty,  he  disdained  to  own  it,  and  he  said  to  himself, — “ If  the
king,  as  he  seems  now  inclined,  enter  Brittany  with  his  army,  I will  not,  at  the  beginning,
make  any  opposition,  that  I may  see  who  are  my  friends  and  enemies,  nor  will  I hurry
myself  to  retaliate  ; but,  when  he  shall  think  himself  in  full  security,  I will  fall  upon  him,
since  there  is  no  other  way  of  obtaining  peace.”

Thus  did  the  duke  counsel  with  himself,  and  at  times  with  his  ministers ; for  he  concluded
that  a war  with  France  was  now  inevitable.  It  was  not  so,  however,  for  matters  turned  out
otherwise  than  he  expected,  to  his  great  advantage.  The  old  proverb  says,  “ He  is  not  poor
who  is  lucky.”  The  duke  of  Brittany  was  wondrous  fortunate  at  this  season,  from  an
astonishing  and  pitiable  accident  that  befel  the  king  of  France.  Nothing  less  could  have
withdrawn  from  him  the  dangers  he  was  surrounded  by,  and  permitted  him  the  enjoyment
of  peace.


CHAPTER  XLIV. THE  KING,  HAVING  LEFT  MANS  TO  CARRY  ON  HIS  WAR  AGAINST  BRITTANY,

IS  ORDERED  TO  RETURN,  BY  AN  UNKNOWN  PERSON. THIS  SAME  DAY,  HIS  MIND  IS

DERANGED,  AND  HE  IS  BROUGHT  BACK  TO  MANS.

When  the  king  of  France  had  resided  about  three  weeks  in  the  city  of  Mans,  during
which  time  councils  were  daily  held,  and  when  the  knights  were  returned  with  the  duke  of
Brittany’s  answer,  as  you  have  heard  ; the  king  said,  that  since  he  knew  what  to  depend  on,
he  would  not  longer  stay  at  Mans,  for  it  was  displeasing  and  hurtful  to  him,  but  advance
towards  the  frontiers  of  Brittany,  nearer  this  duke,  who  was  supporting  the  traitor,  sir  Peter
de  Craon.  The  intention  of  the  king  was  to  deprive  the  duke  of  Brittany  of  his  duchy,
and  nominate  a governor  of  it,  until  his  children  should  be  of  age  to  have  it  restored  to
them,  but  the  present  duke  was  to  be  driven  thence  ; and  this  determination  was  so  firmly
rooted  in  his  mind,  nothing  could  make  him  change  it.  He  set  out  from  Mans  between  nine
and  ten  o’clock  in  the  morning ; and  the  lords  and  others  who  had  been  quartered  there
prepared  to  follow  him,  after  they  had  heard  mass  and  drank  a cup.  He  had,  the  evening
before,  sent  for  the  marshals  of  his  army  to  his  chamber,  and  ordered  them  to  have  the  men
at  arms  ready  by  early  morn  to  march  to  Angers  ; “ for,”  he  added,  “ we  have  determined
never  to  return  from  Brittany,  until  we  shall  have  destroyed  the  traitors  who  give  us  so
much  trouble.”  The  marshals  gave  their  orders  for  the  army  to  march  on  the  morrow,  and
assured  the  captains  that  it  was  now  determined  upon  to  pursue  the  road  to  Brittany.  The
day  the  king  left  Mans  was  excessively  hot,  as  was  to  be  expected,  for  it  was  the  middle  of
August,  when  the  sun  is  in  its  greatest  force.


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


530


You  must  know,  in  order  perhaps  to  account  truly  for  what  followed,  that  the  king,
during  his  stay  at  Mans,  laboured  hard  and  assiduously  in  the  council,  where  he  had  but
little  assistance,  and  was  beside  not  perfectly  recovered  in  health.  He  had  been  the  whole
summer  feeble  in  body  and  mind,  scarcely  eating  or  drinking  any  thing,  and  almost  daily
attacked  with  fever,  to  which  he  was  naturally  inclined,  and  this  was  increased  by  any
contradiction  or  fatigue.  He  suffered  much  from  the  insult  offered  his  constable,  so  that  his
physicians  and  uncles  noticed  that  at  times  his  intellects  were  deranged  ; but  they  could  not
do  any  thing,  for  he  would  not  listen  to  what  they  proposed,  nor  would  he  consent,  on  any
account,  to  defer  the  expedition  to  Brittany.

I was  told  that  a strange  accident  happened  to  him  as  he  was  riding  through  the  forest  of
Mans,  for  which  he  ought  to  have  assembled  his  council,  instead  of  pursuing  his  march
farther.  A man,  bareheaded,  with  naked  feet,  clothed  in  a jerkin  of  white  russet  *,  that
showed  he  was  more  mad  than  otherwise,  rushed  out  from  among  the  trees,  and  boldly  seized
the  reins  of  the  king’s  horse.  Having  thus  stopped  him,  he  said,  “ King,  ride  no  further,
but  return,  for  thou  art  betrayed.”  This  speech  made  such  an  impression  on  the  king’s  mind,
which  was  weak,  that  his  understanding  was  shaken.  As  the  man  finished  his  speech,  the
men  at  arms  advanced  and  beat  him  soundly  on  his  hands,  which  made  him  drop  the  reins.
They  suffered  him  to  run  off,  without  paying  attention  to  what  he  had  said,  thinking  he  was
Some  madman,  for  which  they  were  by  many  afterwards  greatly  blamed  and  disgraced : they
ought  at  least  to  have  arrested  him,  to  have  examined  if  he  were  really  mad,  and  to  learn
why  he  had  uttered  such  words,  and  whence  he  had  come.  Nothing,  however,  was  done,
and  he  made  off  by  their  rear,  and  was  never  after  seen  by  any  who  had  the  least  knowledge
of  him.  Those  who  were  near  the  king’s  person  heard  very  plainly  the  words  he  had
spoken.

The  king  and  his  army  passed  on ; and  it  might  be  about  twelve  o’clock  when  they  were
clear  of  the  forest.  They  now  entered  an  extensive  sandy  plain  ; and  the  sun  was  so  re-
splendent, and  in  such  force,  that  scarcely  any  could  endure  the  heat:  the  horses,  consequently,
suffered  much.  There  were  none  so  used  to  arms  as  not  to  complain  of  the  oppressive  heat ;
and  the  lords  took  different  routes,  apart  from  each  other.  The  king  rode  by  himself,  to
have  less  dust ; and  the  dukes  of  Berry  and  Burgundy,  conversing  together,  kept  on  his  left
hand,  at  about  two  acres’  distance  from  him.  The  other  lords,  such  as  the  count  de  la
Marche,  sir  James  de  Bourbon,  sir  Charles  d’Albret,  sir  Philip  d’ Artois,  sir  Henry  and  sir
Philip  de  Bar,  sir  Peter  de  Navarre,  rode  in  different  paths.  The  duke  of  Bourbon,  the
lord  de  Coucy,  sir  Charles  d’ Angers,  the  baron  d’lvry,  were  following  at  a gentle  pace,
talking  together,  and  some  distance  from  the  king,  not  suspecting  the  misfortune  which  was
on  the  point  of  befalling  him.  It  was  manifestly  the  work  of  God,  whose  punishments  are
severe,  to  make  his  creatures  tremble.  Have  we  not  seen  many  similar  examples,  both  in
the  Old  and  the  New  Testament,  especially  in  the  instance  of  Nebuchadnezzar,  king  of  the
Assyrians  ? He  reigned  over  them  with  such  power,  that  nothing  was  spoken  of  but  his
magnificence  and  glory  ; when  suddenly,  in  the  midst  of  his  pomp,  the  Lord  of  kings,  God,
the  Master  of  heaven  and  earth,  and  Creator  of  all  things,  struck  him  in  such  wise  that  he
lost  his  senses  and  his  kingdom.  He  continued  for  seven  years  in  this  deplorable  state,  living
on  acorns  and  wild  fruits,  having  the  taste  of  a wild  boar  or  hog.  After  this  period  of  peni-
tence, God  restored  to  him  his  senses  and  memory  ; upon  which  he  declared  to  Daniel,  the
servant  of  the  Lord,  that  there  was  none  other  god  but  the  God  of  Israel.  To  speak  truly,
God  the  Father,  the  Son,  and  the  Holy  Ghost,  three  in  name,  but  one  in  substance,  was,  is
and  ever  will  be,  of  as  sufficient  power  to  declare  his  works  as  from  the  beginning,  and  one
ought  not,  therefore,  to  be  surprised  at  whatever  wonderful  things  happen.

The  reason  why  I thus  speak  is,  that  a great  influence  from  Heaven  this  day  fell  on  the
king  of  France,  and,  as  some  say,  from  his  own  fault.  The  physicians  of  his  body,  who
ought  to  have  known  well  his  constitution,  declared,  that  considering  the  weak  state  of  his
health,  he  should  not  have  thus  exposed  himself  to  the  heat  of  the  day,  but  have  rode  in  the
cool  of  the  mornings  or  evenings.  Those,  who  had  advised  otherwise  were  disgraced  ; but
he  had  been  long  led  by  his  ministers  to  act  just  as  they  pleased.  The  king  rode  over  this

* Burcl  blanc.


534


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


sandy  plain,  that  reflected  the  heat,  which  was  much  greater  than  had  been  ever  before
known  or  felt  in  that  season  : he  was  besides  dressed  in  a jacket  of  black  velvet  that  added
to  the  warmth,  and  had  only  a single  hood  of  crimson,  ornamented  with  a chaplet  of  large
beautiful  pearls  the  queen  had  presented  to  him  on  his  leaving  her.  He  was  followed  by  one
of  his  pages,  who  had  a Montauban  cap  of  polished  steel  on  his  head  that  glittered  in  the  sun,
and  behind  him  another  page  rode  on  horseback,  carrying  a vermilion-coloured  lance,  en-
veloped with  silk  for  the  king,  the  head  of  which  lance  was  broad,  sharp  and  bright.  The
lord  de  la  Riviere  had  brought  a dozen  such  when  he  last  came  from  Toulouse,  and  this  was
one ; for  he  had  presented  the  whole  to  the  king,  who  had  given  three  to  the  duke  of  Orleans,
and  the  same  number  to  the  duke  of  Burgundy.

As  they  were  thus  riding,  the  pages,  who  were  but  children,  grew  negligent  of  themselves
and  their  horses  ; and  the  one  who  bore  the  lance  fell  asleep,  and,  forgetful  of  what  he  had
in  his  hand,  let  it  fall  on  the  casque  of  the  page  before  him,  which  made  both  the  lance  and
casque  ring  loudly.  The  king,  being  so  near,  (the  pages  rode  almost  on  the  heels  of  his
horse,)  was  startled  and  shuddered  ; for  he  had  in  his  mind  the  words  the  wise  man  or  fool
had  spoken  when  he  seized  his  horse’s  reins  in  the  forest  of  Mans,  and  fancied  a host  of  enemies
were  come  to  slay  him.  In  this  distraction  of  mind,  he  drew  his  sword,  and  advanced  on
the  pages,  for  his  senses  were  quite  gone,  and  imagined  himself  surrounded  by  enemies,
giving  blows  of  his  sword,  indifferent  on  whom  they  fell,  and  bawled  out,  “Advance!
advance  on  these  traitors.”  The  pages,  seeing  the  king  thus  wroth,  took  care  of  themselves,
for  they  imagined  they  had  angered  him  by  their  negligence,  and  spurred  their  horses  different
ways.  The  duke  of  Orleans  was  not  far  distant  from  the  king,  who  made  up  to  him  with
his  drawn  sword,  for  at  that  moment  his  frenzy  had  deprived  him  of  the  means  of  knowing
either  his  brother  or  uncles.  The  duke  of  Orleans,  seeing  him  approach  with  his  naked
sword,  grew  alarmed,  and,  spurring  his  horse,  made  off  and  the  king  after  him.  The  duke
of  Burgundy,  hearing  the  cries  of  the  pages,  cast  his  eyes  to  that  quarter,  and  seeing  the
king  pursuing  his  brother  with  his  drawn  sword,  was  thunderstruck,  and  not  without  reason :
he  cried  out  for  help,  saying, — “ My  lord  has  lost  his  senses : for  God’s  sake  lay  hands  on
him  and  then  added,  “ Fly,  fair  nephew  of  Orleans  : fly,  or  my  lord  will  murder  you.”
The  duke  of  Orleans  was  much  frightened,  and  galloped  as  fast  as  his  horse  could  go,  followed
by  knights  and  squires.  There  were  now  great  shoutings,  insomuch  that  those  at  a distance
thought  they  were  hunting  a wolf  or  hare,  until  they  learnt  it  was  the  king,  who  was  not
himself.

The  duke  of  Orleans,  however,  escaped  by  making  several  turns,  and  was  aided  by  knights,
squires,  and  men  at  arms,  who  surrounded  the  king,  and  allowed  him  to  waste  his  strength
on  them  ; for,  of  course,  the  more  he  exerted  himself,  the  weaker  he  grew.  When  he  made
a blow  at  any  one  knight  or  squire,  they  fell  before  the  stroke,  and  I never  heard  that  in  this
fit  of  madness  any  one  was  killed.*  Several  were  struck  down  by  his  blows,  because  no
one  made  any  defence.  At  last,  when  he  was  quite  jaded  and  running  down  with  sweat,
and  his  horse  in  a lather  from  fatigue,  a Norman  knight,  who  was  one  of  his  chamberlains,
and  much  beloved  by  biro,  called  sir  William  Martel,  came  behind,  and  caught  him  in  his
arms,  though  he  had  his  sword  still  in  his  hand.  When  he  was  thus  held,  all  the  other
lords  came  up,  and  took  the  sword  from  him  : he  was  dismounted,  and  gently  laid  on  the
ground,  that  his  jacket  might  be  stripped  from  him,  to  give  him  more  air  and  cool  him.
His  three  uncles  and  brother  approached  ; but  he  had  lost  all  knowledge  of  them,  showing
no  symptoms  of  acquaintance  or  affection,  but  rolled  his  eyes  round  in  his  head  without  speaking
to  any  one.  The  princes  of  the  blood  were  in  amazement,  and  knew  not  what  to  say  nor
how  to  act.  The  dukes  of  Berry  and  Burgundy  at  length  said,  “ We  must  return  to  Mans,
for  the  expedition  is  at  an  end  for  this  season.”  They  did  not  then  say  all  they  thought ;
but  they  made  their  intentions  very  apparent  to  those  who  were  not  in  their  good  graces,
on  their  return  to  Paris,  as  I shall  relate  in  the  course  of  this  history.  It  must  be  owned,
that  when  all  things  are  considered,  it  was  a great  pity  for  a king  of  France,  who  is  the
most  noble  and  powerful  prince  in  the  world,  to  be  thus  suddenly  deprived  of  his  senses.

* “LesGrandes  Chroniques  de  France”  say,  that  he  killed  four  men,  and  the  anonymous  MSS.  of  St.  Denys  add
a fifth,  a knight  of  Guyenne,  called  the  Bastard  of  Polignac. — Ed.


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.  535

There  could  not  be  any  remedy  applied,  nor  any  amendment  expected,  since  God  willed  it
should  he  so.

Having  undressed  and  cooled  him  as  gently  as  they  could,  they  laid  him  on  a litter,  and
carried  him  slowly  to  Mans.  The  marshals  instantly  sent  orders  for  the  van  to  return,  and
the  whole  army  was  informed  there  was  an  end  to  the  expedition.  To  some,  the  reasons
were  told  why  it  was  thus  put  an  end  to,  to  others  not.  The  evening  the  king  was  brought
back  to  Mans,  his  physicians  were  much  occupied  with  him,  and  the  princes  of  his  blood  in
the  utmost  trouble.  The  event  was  spoken  of  very  differently  : some  said  that  the  king,  to
ruin  the  kingdom  of  France,  had  been  poisoned,  or  bewitched,  the  morning  before  he  left
Mans.  These  words  were  so  often  repeated,  that  they  came  to  the  ears  of  the  duke  of
Orleans  and  others  of  the  blood-royal.  In  conversation  together,  they  said, — “ Do  you  hear,
(for  you  must,  unless  you  shut  your  ears)  what  murmurings  there  are  against  the  king's
ministers  ? It  is  reported,  and  commonly  believed,  that  he  has  been  poisoned  or  bewitched  :
now,  how  can  we  know  whether  this  has  been  done  or  not?”  Some  made  answer,  “From
his  physicians,  for  they  must  know  his  habit  and  constitution.”  The  physicians  were  sent
for,  and  most  strictly  examined  by  the  duke  of  Burgundy.  To  this  examination  they  replied,
“ that  the  king  had,  for  a long  time,  been  suffering  under  this  disorder ; and,  knowing  that
this  weakness  of  intellect  oppressed  him  grievously,  it  would  make  its  appearance.”  The
duke  of  Burgundy  told  the  physicians,  “ that  in  the  whole  of  the  matter  they  had  honestly
acquitted  themselves,  but  that  the  king,  from  his  great  anxiety  to  undertake  this  war,  would
not  listen  to  any  advice  on  the  subject  of  his  health.  Cursed  be  this  expedition,  and  unhappy
is  it  that  ever  it  was  proposed,  for  it  has  been  his  destruction ; and  it  would  have  been  better
that  Clisson  and  his  whole  race  had  been  murdered,  than  that  the  king  had  been  afflicted
with  such  a disorder.  News  of  it  will  be  carried  everywhere,  and,  as  he  is  now  but  a young
man,  we  who  are  his  uncles,  and  of  his  blood,  wfflo  should  have  advised  him,  shall  be  much
blamed,  though  we  have  been  no  way  in  fault.  Now  tell  us,”  said  the  duke,  addressing
himself  to  the  physicians,  “were  you  present  yesterday  morning  at  his  dinner  before  he
mounted  his  horse  ?”  “ Yes,  in  God’s  name  were  we,”  said  they.  “And  what  did  he  eat

and  drink  ?"  “ So  very  little,  that  it  is  scarcely  ■worth  mentioning  ; for  he  sat  musing  the

whole  time."  “And  wfflo  was  the  person  that  last  served  him  with  liquor  ?”  asked  the  duke.
“ That  we  know  not,”  said  the  physicians  ; “ for  as  soon  as  the  table  was  removed,  we  went
away  to  make  ourselves  ready  for  riding,  but  you  will  learn  it  from  his  butlers  or  chamber-
lains.” Robert  Tulles,  a squire  from  Normandy,  and  head  butler,  was  called.  On  his
coming,  he  was  questioned  who  had  served  the  king  with  wine.  He  replied,  “ My  lords,
sir  Robert  de  Lignac.”  The  knight  was  then  sent  for,  and  asked  wfflere  he  had  taken  the
wine  to  serve  the  king  the  morning  before  he  mounted  his  horse.  “ My  lords,”  said  he,
“here  is  Robert  Tulles  who  gave  it  me,  and  tasted  it,  as  well  as  myself,  in  the  king’s
presence.”  “ That  is  true,”  added  Robert  Tulles  ; “ and  in  this  respect  there  shall  not  be
the  smallest  ground  for  suspicions  ; for  there  is  now  some  of  the  very  same  in  bottles  to  what
the  king  drank,  which  we  will  open  and  drink  before  you.”

The  duke  of  Berry  then  said, — .“We  are  debating  here  about  nothing  : the  king  is  only
poisoned  or  bewitched  by  bad  advisers,  but  it  is  not  time  at  present  to  talk  of  these  matters.
Let  us  bear  the  misfortune  as  well  as  we  can  for  the  moment.”


CHAPTER  XLV. KING  CHARLES  VI.  OP  FRANCE,  CONTINUING  DERANGED  IN  MIND,  IS  RE-
MOVED FROM  MANS  TO  CREIL,  ON  THE  OISE. THE  REGENCY  OF  THE  KINGDOM  IS

GIVEN  TO  THE  DUKES  OF  BERRY  AND  BURGUNDY  BY  THE  THREE  ESTATES.

On  the  conclusion  of  the  duke  of  Berry’s  speech,  the  lords  retired  to  their  lodgings  for  the
night ; and  the  king’s  uncles  ordered  four  knights  of  honour  to  sit  up  with  the  king,  to
attend  him  quietly,  and  administer  to  his  wants.  They  were  sir  Reginald  de  Roye,  sir
Reginald  de  Trie,  the  lord  de  Garencieres,  and  sir  William  Martel.  The  lord  de  la  Riviere,
sir  John  le  Mercier,  Montagu,  the  begue  de  Villaines,  sir  William  desBordes,  and  sir  Helion
de  Lignac,  were  ordered  not  to  interfere  in  any  manner  of  business  until  the  king  should


530


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


be  perfectly  recovered.  On  receiving  this  order,  they  departed,  and  others  took  charge  of
the  government.  On  the  morrow  morning,  the  king’s  uncles  visited  him : they  found  him
very  weak,  and  asked  how  he  had  slept?  His  chamberlains  replied, — “Very  little:  he
cannot  rest.”  “ This  is  sad  news,”  said  the  duke  of  Burgundy.  All  three  then  approached
him  ; and  by  this  time  the  duke  of  Orleans  arrived,  and  asked  him  how  he  was  ? He  made
no  answer,  but  stared  at  them  without  recollecting  who  they  were.  These  lords  were  much
shocked,  and,  conversing  together,  said,  “ We  need  not  stay  longer,  for  he  is  extremely  ill,
and  we  do  him  more  harm  than  good  by  our  presence.  We  have  ordered  his  chamberlains
and  physicians  to  take  every  care  of  him,  which  of  course  they  will  do.  Let  us  consider
how  the  kingdom  is  to  be  governed,  for  a government  must  speedily  be  provided,  or  all
tilings  will  go  ill.”  “ Good  brother,”  said  the  duke  of  Burgundy  to  the  duke  of  Berry,  “ it
will  be  necessary  for  us  to  go  to  Paris,  and  order  the  king  to  be  brought  hence  gently ; for
we  can  have  him  better  attended  when  nearer  to  us  than  here.  We  will  assemble  the  whole
council  at  Paris,  and  discuss  how  the  kingdom  shall  be  governed,  and  whether  our  fair
nephew  of  Orleans  be  regent  or  we.”  “ It  is  well  spoken,”  replied  the  duke  of  Berry  :
“let  us  consider  of  the  best  place  for  the  king  to  be  removed  to  for  the  recovery  of  his
health.”  After  some  consultation,  it  was  determined  he  should  be  carried,  with  every  pre-
caution, to  the  castle  of  Creil,  which  has  a good  air,  and  is  in  a rich  country  on  the  river
Oise.

When  this  was  settled,  the  men  at  arms  were  disbanded,  and  orders  given  by  the  marshals
for  them  to  retire  peaceably  to  their  homes,  without  committing  any  ravages  on  the  country ;
and  that,  if  such  excesses  were  indulged  in,  the  leaders  would  be  called  upon  to  make
reparation.  The  king’s  uncles  and  the  chancellor  of  France  sent  off  varlets  to  the  different
cities  and  principal  towns  in  Picardy,  to  order  the  inhabitants  to  be  very  attentive  in  the
guard  of  them,  for  the  reason  that  the  king  was  indisposed.  These  orders  were  obeyed.
The  French  nation  was  dismayed  and  concerned  when  it  was  publicly  known  that  the  king
laboured  under  a frenzy.  They  spoke  much  against  those  who  had  advised  him  to  this
expedition  to  Brittany,  and  said  he  had  been  betrayed  by  those  who  had  urged  him  on
against  the  duke  and  sir  Peter  de  Craon.  People’s  tongues  could  not  be  stopped,  for  it  was
so  serious  a misfortune,  it  was  necessary  vent  should  be  somehow  given  to  the  vexation  it
caused.

The  king  was  carried  to  Creil,  and  put  under  the  care  of  the  before-named  knights  and
his  physicians.  The  men  at  arms  were  disbanded,  and  marched  home.  It  was  strictly
forbidden  the  queen’s  household  and  all  others,  under  pain  of  being  severely  punished,  to
mention  this  misfortune  to  the  queen,  who  was  far  gone  with  child.  It  was  concealed  from
her  for  some  time,  during  which  the  king  was  under  the  care  of  the  knights  at  Creil,  and
his  physicians,  who  were  giving  him  various  medicines,  which,  however,  did  him  little  good.
At  this  time,  there  was  a most  learned  physician  in  France,  who  had  not  his  equal  anywhere,
a friend  of  the  lord  de  Coney,  and  born  on  his  lands.  His  name  was  master  William  de
Ilarseley : he  had  fixed  his  residence  in  the  city  of  Laon,  which  he  preferred  to  any  other.
On  first  hearing  of  the  king’s  illness  and  the  cause  of  it,  knowing,  as  he  thought,  the  king’s
constitution,  he  said, — “ This  disorder  of  the  king  proceeds  from  the  alarm  in  the  forest,
and  by  inheriting  too  much  of  his  mother’s  weak  nerves.”  These  words  were  carried  to  the
lord  de  Coney,  at  that  time  in  Paris  with  the  duke  of  Orleans  and  the  king’s  uncles.  The
whole  of  the  council,  and  the  principal  barons  and  prelates  of  the  realm,  were  there  assem-
bled, to  consult  on  the  government  of  the  kingdom  during  the  king’s  illness,  and  until  he
should  be  perfectly  restored  ; and  whether  the  duke  of  Orleans,  or  his  uncles,  or  all  three,
should  have  the  regency.  They  were  upwards  of  fifteen  days  before  they  could  agree  : at
last,  it  was  thought  advisable,  from  the  youth  of  the  duke  of  Orleans,  which  made  him
unfit  to  bear  so  great  a weight,  that  the  two  uncles  of  the  king  should  govern  the  kingdom ;
but  that  the  duke  of  Burgundy  should  be  the  principal ; and  that  the  duchess  of  Burgundy
should  remain  with  the  queen,  and  be  respected  as  second  to  her  in  rank.


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


537


CHAPTER  XLVI. THE  LORD  DE  COUCY  INTRODUCES  THE  GREAT  PHYSICIAN,  MASTER  WILLIAM

DE  HARSELEY,  TO  CURE  THE  KING  OP  FRANCE. VARIOUS  CAUSES  ASSIGNED  FOR  THIS

DISORDER.

The  lord  de  Coucy  was  not  unmindful  of  what  he  had  heard  of  master  William  de
Harscley.  He  spoke  of  him  to  the  king’s  uncles,  and  mentioned  his  learning  and  success,
and  that  it  would  be  proper  he  should  try  his  skill  to  recover  the  king.  The  dukes  of  Berry
and  Burgundy  listened  to  it,  and  sent  for  him.  On  his  arrival  at  Paris,  he  first  waited  on
the  lord  de  Coucy,  with  whom  he  was  very  intimate,  and  he  introduced  him  to  the  king’s
uncles,  saying, — “ Here  is  master  William  de  Harselcy,  of  whom  I spoke  to  you.”  The  two
dukes  received  him  kindly,  and  made  him  welcome.  They  then  ordered  him  to  visit  the
king  at  Creil,  and  remain  with  him  until  he  should  have  restored  him  to  health.  Master
William,  in  consequence  of  these  orders  from  the  dukes,  set  out  from  Paris  in  good  array,
as  was  becoming  him,  and  arrived  at  Creil,  where  he  established  himself  near  the  king’s
person,  and  took  the  lead  over  the  other  physicians,  undertaking  to  make  a cure ; for  he  saw
it  was  to  be  done,  since  the  disorder  was  caused  by  weakness  of  nerves,  from  the  sudden
alarm  of  the  appearance  of  the  madman,  and  then  by  the  noise  from  the  blow  on  the  page’s
helmet ; and  he  was  very  anxious  to  restore  the  king  to  health.

News  of  the  king  of  France’s  illness  was  carried  far  and  near,  and,  however  others  may
have  been  grieved  at  it,  you  may  suppose  that  the  duke  of  Brittany  and  sir  Peter  de  Craon
were  not  much  affected : they  soon  dried  their  tears,  for  he  was  pursuing  them  with  bitter
hatred.  Pope  Boniface  and  his  cardinals  at  Rome  were  rejoiced  on  hearing  it.  They
assembled  in  full  consistory,  and  said  the  worst  of  their  enemies,  meaning  the  king  of  France,
was  severely  chastised,  when  God  had  thus  deprived  him  of  his  senses;  and  that  this
punishment  had  been  inflicted  by  Heaven,  for  having  so  strenuously  supported  the  anti- pope
of  Avignon ; that  this  chastisement  should  make  him  attend  more  to  his  own  kingdom,  and
that  their  cause  would  now  bo  better.

The  pope  and  cardinals  at  Avignon,  considering  the  great  support  the  king  had  given  them,
had  cause  for  alarm ; but  they  showed  none  for  the  honour  of  the  king  and  realm.  They
said  among  themselves,  that  the  king  was  young  and  wilful,  and  had,  by  his  own  fault,
brought  on  him  this  disorder ; that  those  about  his  person  had  allowed  him  to  act  too  much  as
he  pleased ; and  that  he  had  exerted  himself  in  different  excesses,  and  by  riding  post  night  and
day,  and  had  laboured  unreasonably,  in  mind  and  body,  on  matters  that  should  have  been
done  by  his  ministers  and  not  by  himself ; and  that,  if  he  had  been  properly  and  soberly
educated  by  the  advice  of  his  uncles,  this  unfortunate  illness  would  never  have  happened.
They  added,  that,  “ when  he  was  on  his  journey  to  Languedoc,  he  had  promised,  on  the  word
of  a king,  and  swore  likewise  on  his  faith,  that  he  would  raise  a sufficient  force  to  destroy
the  anti-pope  and  his  cardinals  at  Rome,  and  put  an  end  to  the  schism  and  troubles  of  the
church ; but  he  had  done  nothing,  and  thus  forfeited  his  oath  and  promise,  by  which  he  has
angered  God,  who,  to  correct  him,  punishes  him  with  this  rod  of  frenzy.  It  therefore
behoves  us,  when  he  shall  have  recovered  his  health,  which  may  soon  happen,  to  send  pro-
perly instructed  legates  to  remonstrate  with  him  on  this  breach  of  promise,  in  order  that,
through  our  neglect,  he  may  not  be  forgetful  of  it.” — Such  was  the  language  at  Avignon
between  the  pope  and  cardinals,  who  agreed  that  this  disorder  had  been  incurred  by  his  own
negligence  and  fault ; but  they  greatly  blamed  those  of  his  council  and  household  for  not
having  better  attended  to  him.  Many  others,  in  France,  did  the  same.

In  a church  at  Haspres,  in  Hainault,  dependent  on  the  abbey  of  Saint  Vast  at  Arras,  lies
the  canonized  body  of  Saint  Aquaire,  in  a rich  shrine  of  silver.  This  saint  is  celebrated  for
the  cures  he  has  performed  on  those  afflicted  with  madness,  and  on  that  account  is  much
visited  from  all  parts.  To  pay  due  respect  to  the  saint,  there  was  made  a figure  of  wax
resembling  the  king,  which  was  sent  thither  with  a large  wax  taper,  and  offered,  with  much
devotion,  to  the  shrine  of  the  saint,  that  he  might  pray  to  God  to  alleviate  this  cruel  afflic-


63G


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


tion  of  tlie  king.  A similar  offering  was  made  to  Saint  Hermier  in  Rouais,  who  has  the
reputation  of  curing  madness,  and  wherever  there  were  saints  that  were  supposed  to  have
efficacy,  by  their  prayers  to  God,  in  such  disorders,  thither  were  sent  offerings  from  the
king,  with  much  ceremony  and  devotion.


Shrine  of  St.  Aquaire.  Presentation  of  the  Waxen  Figure  of  tlie  King. — .
Designed  from  Contemporary  MSS.


When  this  event  was  known  in  England,  the  king  and  lords  were  greatly  concerned  thereat.
The  duke  of  Lancaster  especially  testified  his  sorrow,  and  said  to  the  knights  near  his
person, — “ On  my  faith,  it  is  a great  pity,  for  he  showed  himself  a man  of  courage,  with
strong  inclinations  to  do  good.  When  I took  leave  of  him  at  Amiens,  he  said, — ‘ Fair  cousin
of  Lancaster,  I earnestly  entreat  you  will  exert  yourself  to  the  utmost  of  your  power  that
there  may  be  a solid  peace  between  the  king  of  England  your  nephew  and  myself,  and
between  our  kingdoms  : we  may  then  march  a powerful  army  against  this  Amurat,  who  has
conquered  the  kingdom  of  Armenia  from  its  lawful  monarch,  and  who  intends  to  destroy  all
Christendom,  that  we  may  exalt  our  faith,  as  we  are  bounden  so  to  do.’  Now,”  added  the
duke,  “ there  is  an  end  to  this,  for  he  will  never  again  have  that  confidence  he  before  enjoyed
put  in  him.”  “That  is  true  enough,”  said  those  who  heard  him,  “and  the  kingdom  of
France  seems  likely  to  fall  into  much  trouble.’’


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &e.


M9


CHAPTER  XLVII. THE  DUKES  OF  BERRY  AND  BURGUNDY  RUIN  THOSE  WHO  HAD  BEEN  THE

CONFIDENTIAL  SERVANTS  OF  THE  KING. THE  DUKE  OF  BURGUNDY  TREATS  RUDELY

THE  CONSTABLE  DE  CLISSON.

Such  were  the  conversations  of  lords  in  different  countries  on  hearing  of  the  king  of
France’s  illness,  who  remained  confined  in  the  castle  of  Creil,  under  the  care  of  the  four
knights,  and  master  William  de  Harseley,  who  had  the  sole  management  of  him:  none  were
allowed  to  speak  with  the  king,  nor  even  entered  the  castle,  but  such  as  had  his  permission,
or  were  acting  under  his  orders.  At  times,  the  dukes  of  Orleans  and  Bourbon  came  to  visit
the  king,  and  see  how  he  was  going  on,  but  the  dukes  of  Berry  and  Burgundy  never  left
Paris.  They  had  not  as  yet  made  any  changes  in  the  government,  but  they  shortly  intended
doing  so  in  regard  to  many  who  were  not  in  their  good  graces,  from  their  behaviour  when  in
power,  which  was,  as  they  thought,  contradictory  and  presumptuous.

The  duke  of  Berry  said,  that  Clisson,  la  Riviere,  le  Mercier,  and  le  begue  de  Villaine9,
had,  during  their  attendance  on  the  king  in  Languedoc,  caused  his  treasurer  and  faithful
servant  Bethisac  to  be  disgracefully  punished  with  death,  through  envy  and  wickedness  ;
and  that,  in  spite  of  anything  he  could  say  or  do,  he  could  never  get  him  out  of  their  hands.
“ Let  them  now  beware  of  me,  for  the  time  shall  come  when  I will  repay  them  with  the  same
coin,  and  struck  from  the  same  mint.”  The  duke  of  Burgundy  and  those  attached  to  him
loved  no  better  the  above-named  persons,  who  had  governed  the  king ; for,  whenever  they
wanted  anything  at  court,  they  were  repulsed  sharply  enough,  and  very  little  done  for  them,
of  which  they  murmured  and  talked  loudly  behind  their  backs.

The  duchess  of  Burgundy,  who  was  a very  unforgiving  and  haughty  lady,  resided  at  Paris
with  the  queen,  and  had  the  supreme  government  of  her  and  her  household,  so  that  no  one
was  permitted  to  speak  with  the  queen  but  through  her  permission.  This  lady  hated  with
her  whole  heart  sir  Oliver  de  Clisson,  on  account  of  the  duke  of  Brittany,  who  was  nearly
related  to  her.  She  frequently  remonstrated  with  the  duke  of  Burgundy,  saying,  that  those
who  had  supported  sir  Oliver  de  Clisson  against  so  potent  a prince  as  his  cousin  the  duke  of
Brittany,  were  very  blame-worthy.  The  duke  of  Burgundy  was  cool  and  prudent,  and  saw
far  into  the  state  of  affairs  and  their  consequences : he  wished  not  to  encourage  any  troubles
in  France,  but  to  keep  every  one  in  good  humour  as  long  as  it  should  be  possible,  and  on  this
account  had  never  opposed  any  measures  of  his  late  brother,  Charles  Y.  nor  of  his  nephew,
the  present  king.  He  therefore  replied  thus  gently  to  his  w-ife  : “ Lady,  it  is  good  at  all
times  to  dissemble.  The  duke  of  Brittany,  it  is  true,  is  a great  prince,  and  an  overmatch
for  the  lord  de  Clisson.  If  I join  the  duke,  and  make  myself  openly  one  of  his  partisans,  the
kingdom  would  be  dissatisfied,  and  not  without  reason  ; for  the  lord  de  Clisson  would  declare
and  prove,  that  the  whole  hatred  our  cousin  the  duke  bears  him  is  for  having  supported  the
interests  of  France,  in  which  wre  have  so  large  a share,  and  it  is  so  believed  throughout  the
realm.  Hitherto  I have  had  no  cause  whatever  to  incline  me  to  the  duke  against  the  lord
de  Clisson.  It  therefore  behoves  me  to  dissemble  my  real  sentiments,  if  I wish  to  preserve
the  favour  of  the  king  and  country  to  whom  I am  bounden  by  every  tie,  which  is  not  my  case
with  regard  to  the  duke  of  Brittany.  It  has  happened  that  my  lord  the  king  is  indisposed,
and  in  an  alarming  state,  as  you  know : this  is  very  much  against  the  lord  de  Clisson,  and
will  be  hurtful  to  all  who  advised  him  to  undertake  this  expedition,  and  on  which  he  was  so
obstinately  bent,  in  spite  of  everything  my  brother  and  myself  could  urge  against  it.  The
rod  is  already  prepared  with  which  they  shall  be  punished,  as  you  shall  shortly  witness  or
hear  of ; but  have  the  goodness,  at  this  moment,  to  have  a little  patience.  Lady,  lady,  there
is  no  season  but  what  makes  some  return,  nor  any  fortune  stable,  nor  afflicted  heart  but  is  at
times  rejoiced,  nor  angered  minds  but  have  their  revenge.  Clisson,  la  Riviere,  Montagu,  le
Mercier,  de  Villaines,  and  others  wdio  have  acted  improperly,  will  shortly  be  made  to  suffer
for  it.”  With  such  conversations  did  the  duke  and  duchess  of  Burgundy  amuse  themselves  ;
and  not  many  days  after  this  last,  the  dukes  of  Berry  and  Burgundy  had  a private  conference
They  said,  “ it  was  now  time  to  punish  those  who  had  dishonoured  their  nephew,  the  king,


540


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


and  who  had  led  him  to  act  according  to  their  pleasure.  We  will  begin,  first,  with  the  con-
stable, for  he  is  of  the  highest  rank  and  greatest  wealth : when  he  made  his  will  a short
time  ago,  on  being  wounded,  he  proved  he  had  seventeen  hundred  thousand  francs  in  money
and  movables.  How  the  devil  could  he  have  amassed  such  a sum  ? for  the  marriage  of  his
daughter,  with  our  cousin,  John  of  Brittany,  whom  he  ransomed  from  England,  must  have
cost  him,  in  the  whole,  two  hundred  thousand  francs!  But  how  shall  we  manage  to  begin
on  him,  with  any  reasonable  pretext  ? for  he  is  strongly  supported  by  our  nephew,  the  duke
of  Orleans,  and  by  many  of  the  great  barons  of  France.  However,  if  we  can  but  once  lay
hands  on  him,  we  will  attack  him  by  law,  and  the  parliament  at  present  is  of  our  party.”
“ That  is  true,”  replied  the  duke  of  Burgundy ; “ and  the  first  time  he  comes  to  me,  which
he  must  do  to-morrow  on  business,  I will  convince  him  by  the  reception  I give  him,  that  he
is  not  in  my  favour,  and  do  you,  brother  of  Berry,  do  the  same  when  he  comes  to  you.”
“ That  I will,”  answered  the  duke  of  Berry ; and  with  these  words  the  conference  ended.

The  lord  de  Clisson,  who  thought  not  but  that  he  was  moderately  well  in  favour  with  the
dukes  of  Berry  and  Burgundy,  waited  on  the  last,  for  business  of  his  office.  He  had  been
much  teased  by  many  knights  and  squires,  who  were  of  the  late  expedition,  and  wanted
money,  for  they  had  never  received  anything  : the  chancellor  of  France  and  the  treasurer
had  sent  them  to  the  constable  to  be  paid.  He  came  therefore  one  afternoon  to  the  hotel
d’ Artois,  to  remonstrate  with  the  duke  of  Burgundy  on  this  business,  and  nothing  else,  for
he  had  already  been  dismissed  from  any  share  in  the  government.  When  he  arrived  at  the
hotel  d’ Artois  he  entered  the  court  with  his  attendants,  who  were  not  numerous,  and  dis-
mounted. The  constable  ascended  the  stairs  attended  by  only  one  squire,  the  others  waiting
for  him  in  the  court.  He  found  two  of  the  duke’s  knights  in  the  hall,  and  demanded  from
them  if  the  duke  was  disengaged,  and  if  he  could  speak  with  him.  “ Sir,  we  know  not,”
replied  they  ; “ but  will  soon  inform  you  if  you  will  wait  here.”  They  entered  the  duke’s
apartment,  and  found  him  unoccupied,  chatting  with  a herald,  returned  from  a grand  feast
in  Germany.  The  knights  interrupted  the  conversation,  by  saying,  “ My  lord,  sir  Oliver  de
•Clisson  is  in  the  hall,  and  wishes  to  speak  with  you,  if  it  be  your  pleasure.”  “ In  God’s
name,”  replied  the  duke,  “ let  him  come  forward : we  have  at  present  leisure  to  speak  with
him,  and  hear  what  he  has  to  say.”  One  of  the  knights  left  the  apartment,  and  called  the
constable,  saying, — “ Sir,  come  on  : my  lord  sends  for  you.”  The  constable  no  sooner  entered
the  room,  than  the  duke  changed  colour,  and  repented  having  sent  for  him,  although  he  was
anxious  to  tell  him  his  mind.

The  constable  took  off  his  hood,  and,  bowing  to  the  duke,  said, — “ I am  come,  my  lord,  to
know  how  to  act  respecting  the  payment  of  the  knights  and  squires  who  were  of  the  late
expedition,  for  my  office  is  perpetually  besieged  by  them  ; and,  as  you  and  my  lord  of  Berry
at  present  govern  the  kingdom,  have  the  goodness  to  inform  me.”  The  duke  of  Burgundy
angrily  replied, — “ Clisson,  Clisson,  you  need  not  trouble  yourself  about  the  state  of  France ;
for,  without  your  office,  it  will  be  perfectly  well  governed.  In  an  evil  hour  have  you  inter-
fered in  it.  How  the  devil  can  you  have  amassed  such  a sum  as  seventeen  hundred  thousand
francs,  which  you  declared  yourself  to  be  possessed  of  by  your  will  ? Neither  my  lord  the
king,  my  brother  of  Berry,  nor  myself,  with  all  our  power,  have  ever  been  able  to  collect
such  a sum.  Quit  my  presence,  and  leave  my  house,  and  let  me  never  see  you  again ; for,
if  it  were  not  from  regard  to  my  own  honour,  I would  have  your  other  eye  put  out.”  At
these  words,  the  duke  of  Burgundy  went  away,  leaving  the  lord  de  Clisson  astonished.  He
quitted  the  apartment,  with  his  head  sunk  down,  and  quite  melancholy,  without  being
attended  by  any  one.  Having  crossed  the  hall,  he  descended  into  the  court,  mounted  his
horse,  and  departed  with  his  people,  taking  a private  way  to  his  own  hotel,  without  saying
a word.


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


641


CHAPTER.  XLVIII. SIR  OLIVER  DE  CLISSON,  AFTER  TnE  nARSH  ANSWER  OF  THE  DUKE  OF

BURGUNDY,  RETIRES  TO  MONTLHERY. BEING  PURSUED  THITHER,  HE  nAS  TIME  TO

MAKE  HIS  RETREAT  TO  CHASTEAU-JOSSELIN.

When  the  lord  de  Clisson  had  entered  his  hotel,  he  formed  various  plans  in  his  own  mind
as  to  his  future  conduct : he  foresaw  that  very  shortly  public  affairs  would  be  badly  managed,
and  had  no  one  to  open  his  mind  to  on  the  subject,  for  the  duke  of  Orleans  was  at  Creil :
indeed,  had  he  been  at  Paris,  he  had  no  power  to  save  or  defend  him.  Suspecting,  after
what  had  passed,  that  the  duke  of  Burgundy  would  arrest  him,  and  force  his  hotel,  he
determined  not  to  wait  the  event,  but  ordered  his  most  confidential  servants  to  pack  up  all
he  should  want,  and,  in  the  evening,  set  off  from  Paris,  attended  by  only  two  persons.  He
passed  the  gate  of  St.  Anthony,  and  rode  to  Charenton,  where,  crossing  the  Seine  by  the
bridge,  he  continued  his  journey  to  his  castle  of  Montlhery,  seven  * leagues  from  Paris,  where
he  remained  until  he  heard  other  news.  ^

The  same  day  the  duke  of  Burgundy  had  rebuffed  the  constable,  be  met  the  duke  of
Berry  at  the  Louvre,  on  the  affairs  of  the  nation.  lie  told  his  brother  of  Berry  how  he  had
spoken  to  sir  Oliver  de  Clisson,  who  answered, — “ You  have  well  done.  We  must,  by
some  means  or  other,  lay  hold  of  him ; for  in  truth,  Clisson,  le  Mercier,  la  Riviere,  and
Montagu  have  plundered  the  kingdom ; but  the  time  is  now  come  when  they  must  make
ample  restitution,  and  their  heads  ought  to  pay  the  forfeit  also.  I know  not  the  particular
reasons,  but  it  is  a fact,  that  the  day  the  constable  left  Paris,  Montagu  did  the  same,  and
also  by  the  gate  of  St.  Anthony.  He  took  the  road  for  Troyes  in  Champagne,  but  said  he
would  not  stop  anywhere  until  he  was  arrived  at  Avignon,  whither  he  had  already  sent  the
greater  part  of  his  wealth.  He  had  left  a sufficiency  with  his  wife  to  maintain  her  state
handsomely  ; for  he  foresaw,  since  the  king  was  deprived  of  his  senses,  public  affairs  would
go  ill  under  the  government  of  the  dukes  of  Berry  and  Burgundy,  who  never  spoke  to  him.

Sir  John  le  Mercier  would  have  been  glad  to  have  done  the  same,  had  he  been  able ; but
he  had  been  put  under  an  arrest,  and  nothing  could  come  in  or  go  out  of  his  house  without
the  knowledge  of  his  guards.  What  he  had  before  laid  by  in  a place  of  security  was  of  the
greatest  service  to  him  at  a proper  opportunity,  for  all  that  was  known  to  be  bis  was  claimed
and  seized  by  the  two  regents.  He  was  afterwards  committed  a prisoner  to  the  castle  of  the
Louvre,  as  was  in  like  manner  le  begue  de  Yillaines,  count  de  Ribadeo  in  Spain.  They  sent
to  the  hotel  of  Montagu,  but  found  no  one,  nor  could  they  learn  whither  he  was  gone,  and
with  this  they  were  forced  to  be  satisfied.  Inquiries  were  made  if  sir  Oliver  de  Clisson  were
in  Paris,  and  orders  were  sent  to  his  hotel  for  him  to  surrender  himself  a prisoner  in  the
Louvre : but  no  person  was  at  his  hotel  except  the  house-steward,  who  could  not  give  any
intelligence  concerning  him.  Two  days  passed  before  it  was  known  that  he  was  in  his  castle
of  Montlhery.  The  two  dukes,  impatient  to  lay  hold  on  him,  ordered  instantly  Barrois  des
Barres,  sir  John  de  Chateaumorant,  the  lord  de  Coucy,  and  sir  William  de  la  Tremouille  to
collect  three  hundred  lances ; and  said  to  them, — “ March  with  this  force  without  delay  to
Montlhery,  invest  the  town  and  castle,  and  do  not  leave  it  until  you  shall  bring  us  Clisson
dead  or  alive.”

The  knights  obeyed,  as  was  their  duty,  for  the  government  of  the  kingdom  was  now  in
the  hands  of  these  two  dukes,  and  they  left  Paris  with  their  three  hundred  lances,  not  all  at
once,  but  in  five  separate  bodies,  that  their  departure  might  be  the  less  noticed.  God,
however,  assisted  the  constable ; and  he  had  such  good  friends  among  this  armament,  that
he  was  punctually  informed  of  its  departure,  and  the  hour  it  would  arrive,  so  that  he  had
full  leisure  to  take  proper  measures  not  to  suffer  from  it.  He  and  his  people  left  Montlhery,
and  by  travelling  through  by-roads,  over  heaths,  and  avoiding  all  inclosed  towns  or  cities,
arrived  safely  in  Brittany,  and  entered  his  castle  called  chateau-Josselin,  which  was  well
provided  with  all  things,  where  he  remained  to  wait  other  intelligence.

Barrois  des  Barres  and  the  other  knights  put  their  orders  into  execution,  took  possession  of


Montlhery  is  only  six  leagues  from  Paris. — Ed.


542


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


the  town  of  Montlhery,  and  surrounded  the  castle.  They  remained  thus  one  night,  imagining
the  constable  was  within,  hut  he  was  not,  as  you  have  heard.  On  the  morrow,  while  they
were  preparing  for  the  assault,  the  servants  in  the  castle  came  out  to  know  what  they  were
about.  The  knights  said  they  wanted  sir  Oliver  de  Clisson,  and  that  was  the  object  of  their
coming.  The  servants  in  guard  of  the  castle  replied,  that  the  lord  de  Clisson  had  left  it  four
days  ago  ; and  offered  to  open  every  part  of  it  for  them  to  search.  The  knights  and  squires
entered  the  castle  armed  from  head  to  foot,  as  if  for  instant  combat,  for  fear  of  being  sur-
prised by  treachery  or  an  ambuscade.  They,  however,  found  that  the  servants  had  told
them  the  truth  ; for  they  minutely  searched  every  part  of  it,  without  discovering  any  traces
of  the  lord  de  Clisson.  After  tins,  they  marched  away  on  their  return  to  Paris,  when  they
related  to  those  who  had  sent  them  all  they  had  done.


CHAPTER  XLIX. THE  LORD  DE  LA  RIVIERE,  THE  PRINCIPAL  MINISTER  OF  THE  KING

OF  FRANCE  BEFORE  IIIS  ILLNESS,  IS  MADE  PRISONER  BY  ORDERS  OF  THE  DLKES  OF

BERRY  AND  BURGUNDY. THE  DUCHESS  OF  BERRY  INTERCEDES  FOR  HIM  WITH  HER

LORD.

The  dukes  of  Berry  and  Burgundy,  finding  that  the  constable  had  escaped,  were  much
vexed  ; while,  on  the  contrary,  the  dukes  of  Orleans  and  Bourbon  rejoiced  at  it.  “ Now,”
said  the  duke  of  Burgundy,  “ he  shows  by  his  flight  that  he  suspects  us ; but,  though  he  has
fled,  he  is  not  yet  acquitted.  We. will  force  him  hastily  to  return,  or  he  shall  lose  every
thing  we  can  lay  our  hands  on.  Even  this  shall  not  free  him  from  some  heavy  charges
which  only  wait  for  trial,  to  prove  him  guilty  and  deserving  punishment.  If  the  great,  the
powerful,  and  the  wicked  be  not  chastised,  justice  will  not  be  equally  dealt,  and  the  lower
ranks  and  the  poor  will  with  truth  be  discontented.  Justice  ought  to  be  dealt  out  without
discrimination  to  all,  that  every  one  may  take  example.”  Such  was  the  discourse  of  the
duke  of  Burgundy  ; but  the  lord  de  Clisson  was  safe  in  his  castle  of  Josselin,  in  Brittany,
well  provided  with  every  thing  to  defend  it,  and  to  hold  out  a long  siege.

The  day  that  Barrois  des  Barres  returned  to  Paris,  to  tell  his  lords  that  sir  Oliver  de
Clisson  was  not  at  Montlhery,  the  two  dukes  said, — “ Barrois,  set  out  to-morrow  very  early,
and  ride  to  Auneau.  We  have  heard  the  lord  de  la  Riviere  is  there.  Demand  to  see  him
from  us  and  from  the  council,  and  manage  so  that  you  give  a good  account  of  him  when  we
shall  require  it  from  you.”  Sir  Barrois,  having  promised  obedience,  rode  the  next  morning
with  his  men  at  arms  to  Auneau,  near  to  Chartres.  It  has  a handsome  castle,  which  the
lord  de  la  Riviere  received  in  marriage  with  his  wife  the  lady  of  Auneau,  and  he  had  greatly
improved  both  the  castle  and  lands.  He  was  much  beloved  by  his  vassals,  whom  he  treated
with  affectionate  care.  The  commissioners  sent  by  the  dukes,  on  their  arrival  at  Auneau,
executed  their  orders  on  the  lord  de  la  Riviere,  whom  they  found  with  his  lady  and  children.
He  was  expecting  such  a message,  for  he  had  already  learnt  that  sir  John  le  Mercier  and  the
count  de  Ribadeo  were  in  prison,  and  that  the  constable  had  fled  from  Montlhery  to  a more
distant  and  secure  castle.  Those  who  had  brought  him  this  intelligence  said, — “ Sir,  save
yourself ; for  the  envious,  who  at  this  present  time  govern,  are  against  you,  and  fortune  has
turned  with  them.”  To  this  he  had  replied, — “ Here  and  every  where  else  I am  in  the
power  of  God  : if  I fly  or  hide,  I should  accuse  myself  as  guilty  of  crimes  of  which  I feel
myself  incapable  and  innocent.  God  has  given  me  all  I possessed,  and  he  may  take  it  from
me  whenever  he  pleases : to  his  will  I submit.  I have  faithfully  and  loyally  served  the  late
king,  of  happy  memory,  as  well  as  the  present  king.  My  services  have  been  well  known  to
both,  and  they  have  royally  rewarded  them.  I feel  bold  enough,  from  what  by  their
commands  I have  done  for  the  good  of  the  kingdom,  to  stand  the  judgment  of  the  parliament
of  Paris  ; and,  if  they  shall  find  in  my  whole  conduct  any  thing  worthy  of  blame,  let  me  be
punished.”

Such  was  the  declaration  of  the  lord  de  la  Riviere  to  his  wife  and  his  friends,  before  the
commissioners  from  the  regents  came  to  Auneau.  On  their  arrival,  his  servants  said, —
“ My  lord,  here  are  such  and  such  persons,  with  a large  force,  who  want  to  enter  the  castle  :


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


543


what  do  you  say?  shall  we  open  the  gates?"  “Why  not?”  he  replied:  “ they  are  very
welcome.”  On  saying  this,  he  went  to  meet  them,  and  received  every  one  most  graciously,
and  in  conversing  together  they  all  entered  the  hall  of  the  castle  of  Auneau.  After  a short
pause,  sir  Barrois  des  Barres,  a gallant  and  courteous  knight,  with  much  vexation,  arrested
the  lord  de  la  Riviere,  according  to  the  orders  he  had  received,  which  he  was  bound  to  execute.
The  lord  de  la  Riviere  held  him  excused,  and  immediately  obeyed  his  summons  ; for  he
neither  could  nor  would  otherwise  act  by  disputing  it ; and  he  remained  a prisoner  in  his  own
castle  of  Auneau.  You  may  imagine  his  lady  was  in  great  anguish  when  she  saw  fortune  thus
adverse  to  her  lord,  and  she  still  more  dreaded  the  conclusion.

The  lord  de  la  Riviere  was  not  long  a prisoner  in  his  own  castle,  before  he  was  sent  for  by
those  who  ruled  the  temporality  and  spirituality  of  France  (for  the  person  who  signed  himself
pope  Clement  held  all  his  power  in  that  country  through  the  good-will  of  these  dukes)  to
Paris,  where  he  was  confined  in  the  prisons  of  the  Louvre.  Many  in  France  were  afflicted
at  this,  but  they  dared  only  speak  of  it  in  private.  They  were  indifferent  as  to  sir  John  le
Mercier,  but  the  lord  de  la  Riviere  had  been  courteous,  debonair,  and  patient  in  bearing  poor
people,  and  such  as  were  not  of  rank  to  attend  his  public  audiences.  It  was  reported  in
Paris  that  they  were  to  be  beheaded  ; and  it  was  whispered  slanderously,  to  ruin  their
popularity,  that  they  had  been  traitors  to  the  crown,  and  plundered  the  treasury  of  great
wealth,  with  which  they  had  kept  up  their  state,  and  built  houses  and  fine  castles,  while
poor  knights  and  squires,  who  had  exposed  their  lives  in  arms  for  the  service  of  the  realm,
and  sold  their  inheritances  for  subsistence,  could  not  obtain  any  payments,  for  a long  time
past,  from  sir  Oliver  de  Clisson,  the  lord  de  la  Riviere,  sir  John  le  Mercier,  or  from  Montagu,
who  had  fled.  Their  numerous  enemies,  who  were  in  great  strength,  declared  they  deserved
to  die,  which  put  them  in  great  risk.  They  urged,  as  a crime  against  them,  that  they  had
advised  the  king  to  go  to  Mans,  and  thence  to  Brittany,  and  had,  by  poisoned  liquors  which
they  gave  him  to  drink,  brought  on  this  frenzy ; and  it  was  currently  reported,  that  the
king’s  physicians,  who  had  the  care  of  his  health,  were  not,  in  any  way,  permitted  to  have
their  will,  nor  was  their  advice  followed.

So  much  was  said  against  these  two,  that  the  lord  de  la  Riviere  and  sir  John  le  Mercier  were
removed  from  the  Louvre  and  delivered  over  to  the  provost  of  the  Chatelet,  and  confined  in
the  castle  of  St.  Anthony,  under  the  guard  of  the  viscount  d’Achy,  at  that  time  the  governor.
On  this  removal,  though  the  common  report  ran  that  they  were  to  be  put  to  death,  in  truth
they  were  never  condemned ; nor  could  those  by  whom  they  had  been  examined,  ever  in
their  consciences  find  them  guilty  of  death.  They  were,  however,  daily  attacked  by  some,
who  said,  “ Take  heed  to  your  souls,  for  your  bodies  are  already  disposed  of : you  are  both
condemned  to  have  your  heads  cut  off.”  In  this  distressing  state  they  were  kept  for  some
time ; but  the  begue  de  Villaines,  a great  knight  and  valiant  man  at  arms,  from  the  country
of  Beauce,  inculpated  in  the  same  accusations,  had  many  friends,  who  pleaded  effectually  in
his  favour,  and  he  was  freed  from  prison  with  a full  acquittal.  On  his  leaving  the  prison,
he  was  told  by  his  relations,  sir  Barrois  des  Barres  and  others,  to  prepare  to  set  out  for
Castille,  where  in  future  he  must  reside,  on  the  handsome  inheritance  he  gained  by  bis
marriage  with  the  countess  de  Ribadeo.  He  followed  the  advice  that  had  been  given  him,
and  speedily  packed  up  all  he  wanted,  and  set  out  for  Castille,  leaving  his  two  friends  in
prison,  and  in  daily  peril  of  losing  their  lives.  All  the  property,  moveable  and  immoveable,
of  sir  John  le  Mercier,  that  was  in  France,  and  could  be  laid  hold  of,  was  confiscated  and
given  to  others.  His  fine  house  at  Pont  a Louvion  *,  in  the  diocese  of  Laon,  that  had  cost
him  such  immense  sums,  was  seized  and  given  to  the  lord  de  Coucy,  with  all  its  estates,
manors,  axxd  dependencies.  I am  ignorant  if  this  was  done  at  his  request,  but  he  possessed
it,  and  his  heirs  afterwards.

The  regents  treated  the  lord  de  la  Riviere  very  cruelly.  They  confiscated  all  his  estates,
as  well  what  had  descended  to  him  as  those  he  had  purchased,  and  all  his  moveables  wherever
they  could  be  found.  The  lady,  his  wife,  had,  however,  reserved  to  her  use  all  the  domain
of  Auneau,  and  whatever  else  she  had  inherited  from  her  family,  by  father  or  mother.  She

* “ Pont  k Louvion.” — It  is  in  the  MSS.  Pont-Aubumen,  and  Pont  a Lonnion.  Q.  if  not  Pont  i!t  Nouvion.
There  are  three  villages  of  that  name  in  the  election  of  Laon.


544


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


had  a young  and  genteel  daughter,  of  ten  years  old,  who  had  been  betrothed  to  James  de
Ghastillon,  son  and  heir  to  sir  Hugh  de  Chastillon,  who  had  formerly  been  master  of  the
cross-hows  of  France ; he  was  already  in  possession  of  large  estates,  and  in  the  expectation
of  more.  He  had  made  several  excursions  with  his  intended  father-in-law,  the  lord  de
la  Ri  viere ; hut,  notwithstanding  this,  the  regents  would  break  off  the  intended  marriage  in
spite  of  the  young  man.  This  connexion  was  put  an  end  to,  and  he  married  elsewhere,
according  to  the  pleasure  of  the  dukes  of  Berry  and  Burgundy,  and  the  lord  de  la  Tremouille,
who  took  the  management  of  the  business.

The  lord  de  la  Riviere  had  likewise  a son,  a squire,  who  was  his  heir,  married  to  the  only
daughter  of  the  lord  de  Dampmartin,  who  was  not  likely  to  have  more  children,  and  this
daughter  was  his  heiress.  The  regents  wanted  likewise  to  break  off  this  marriage,  and
unite  her  more  nobly ; but  the  count  de  Dampmartin,  like  an  honourable  man,  stepped
forward,  and  said, — “ That  as  long  as  the  son  of  the  lord  de  la  Riviere  lived,  his  daughter
should  have  no  other  husband  ; and,  if  violence  were  used  to  shorten  his  days,  his  daughter
should  remain  a widow,  and  he  would  so  strongly  settle  his  property,  that  those  who  might
wish  to  gain  it  by  fraud  or  otherwise  would  find  themselves  disappointed.”  When  they  saw
the  firmness  of  the  count  de  Dampmartin,  and  that  he  would  not  give  up  his  son-in-law,
they  left  him  quiet,  and  the  marriage  remained  good ; but  the  fii’st  I mentioned  was  set
aside  by  an  absolution  from  pope  Clement,  who  was  forced  to  give  it  whether  he  would  or
not ; for  he  had  no  power  over  the  realm  of  France  hut  what  the  two  dukes  were  pleased
to  allow  him,  so  greatly  was  the  church  lowered  and  hurt  by  the  disgraceful  schism,  and  by
the  conduct  of  those  who  ought  to  have  ruled  it  better.

Many  in  France,  and  in  other  countries,  acquitted  the  lord  de  la  Riviere  from  all  blame,
but  their  excusing  him  was  of  no  avail ; for  although  his  innocence  was  as  clear  as  the  day,
no  one  dared  to  speak  in  his  behalf,  but  that  courageous  young  lady  the  duchess  of  Berry.
Too  often  had  that  good  lady  cast  herself  at  her  lord’s  feet,  saying,  with  uplifted  hands, —
“ Ah,  my  lord,  you  allow  yourself  to  he  swayed  wrongly  and  sinfully,  by  the  envious  and
disappointed,  who  poison  your  mind  with  tales  against  this  valiant  knight,  and  virtuous  man,
the  lord  de  la  Riviere.  They  accuse  him  unjustly,  and  no  one  dares  to  say  a word  in  his
defence.  I wish  you  therefore  to  know,  that,  if  he  be  put  to  death,  I shall  never  again
taste  happiness,  but  remain  all  my  days  in  sorrow  and  affliction.  He  is,  whoever  may  say
the  contrary,  a most  loyal  and  prudent  knight.  Ah,  my  lord,  you  little  l’emember  the  hand-
some services  he  has  done  yon,  nor  the  pains  and  difficulty  he  had  to  encounter  when  he
accomplished  our  marriage.  I do  not  say  this  as  pretending  to  have  been  worth  the  trouble,
for  I am  hut  a poor  lady  in  comparison  to  you  ; hut  you,  who  were  so  anxious  to  have  me,
had  to  deal  with  a hard  and  cunning  lord,  the  late  count  de  Foix,  in  whose  wardship  I then
was  ; and,  if  it  had  not  been  for  the  persuasive  manners  of  the  lord  de  la  Riviere,  I should
have  never  been  your  duchess,  hut  settled  in  England  ; for  the  duke  of  Lancaster  solicited
me  for  the  earl  of  Derby,  and  the  count  de  Foix  inclined  more  to  him  than  to  you.  Most
dear  sir,  you  ought  not  to  be  forgetful  of  these  things,  for  you  know  what  I say  is  true.  I
therefore  most  humbly  entreat  that  you  would  have  compassion  on  the  gallant  knight  who
so  courteously  conducted  your  business,  in  regard  to  me,  that  he  suffer  neither  in  life  nor
limb.”

The  duke  of  Berry,  thus  attacked  by  his  young  and  handsome  wife,  whom  he  doted  upon,
and  feeling  that  all  she  had  said  was  true,  was  much  softened  in  his  hatred  to  the  lord  de  la
Riviere  ; and  to  appease  his  lady,  who  he  saw  was  in  earnest,  replied, — “ Lady,  as  God  may
save  my  soul,  I would  rather  have  paid  twenty  thousand  francs,  than  that  la  Riviere  should
have  misconducted  himself  towards  the  crown  of  France.  Before  this  indisposition  of  the
king,  I loved  him  well,  and  considered  him  as  a prudent  and  valiant  knight.  Since,  how-
ever, you  thus  anxiously  interest  yourself  for  him,  I will  abate  my  anger  ; and  from  your
entreaties  and  solicitations  he  shall  fare  the  better.  I will  exert  my  power  to  the  utmost,
and  do  more  for  your  prayers  than  if  all  France  united  had  petitioned  me  in  his  behalf.”

My  lord,”  answered  the  lady,  “please  God,  I shall  see  the  effects  of  it.  You  will  do  a
good  and  charitable  act ; for  I believe  there  is  not  one,  beside  myself,  that  has  spoken  in  his
favour.1-’  “You  say  truly,”  replied  the  duke;  “but  when  you  so  warmly  take  up  the


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


545


matter,  it  is  fully  sufficient.1-’  Thus  was  the  duchess  contented  with  the  answers  of  the  duke  ;
and  when  he  and  the  duke  of  Burgundy,  with  their  councils,  met  on  the  business,  there  was
much  altercation.  There  is  not  a doubt  but,  if  this  virtuous  lady  had  not  interfered,  he
would  have  been  put  to  death.  From  affection  to  her,  it  was  otherwise ; and  sir  John  lo
Mercier  was  fortunate  in  being  the  companion  of  the  lord  de  la  Riviere,  and  implicated  in
the  same  charges,  for  they  could  not  in  conscience  have  executed  one  without  the  other.

Notwithstanding  this  delay,  they  did  not  feel  perfectly  secure  in  prison,  for  they  knew
they  had  many  enemies,  who  were  now  in  power,  and  angry  (though  they  were  forced  to
abide  by  it)  that  they  had  not  sooner  been  punished.  Sir  John  le  Mercier,  during  his
confinement  in  the  Bastille,  was  in  such  continual  grief  and  tears  that  he  nearly  lost  his  sight.
It  was  melancholy  indeed  to  hear  the  bitterness  of  his  lamentations.


CHAPTER  L. AFTER  MANY  ADJOURNMENTS  AND  DELAYS,  THE  CONSTABLE  DE  CLISSON

IS,  BY  JUDGMENT  OF  THE  COURT  OF  PARLIAMENT  OF  PARIS,  BANISHED  TnE  REALM
OF  FRANCE,  CONDEMNED  TO  PAY  A FINE  OF  ONE  HUNDRED  THOUSAND  FRANCS,  AND
DECLARED  INCAPABLE  OF  HOLDING  THE  OFFICE  OF  CONSTABLE  OF  FRANCE.

During  the  confinement  of  the  two  knights  in  prison,  where  they  remained  upwards  of  a
year,  uncertain  what  the  conclusion  would  be,  the  lord  de  Clisson  was  attacked  every  way,
to  degrade  his  honour  and  deprive  him  of  his  office.  They  were  more  desirous  to  lay  hold
of  him  than  any  others  of  the  late  ministry,  but  he  took  good  care  to  prevent  it.  He  was
wise  in  so  doing  ; for  if  he  had  been  arrested,  every  thing  was  prepared  for  his  execution  the
moment  he  should  be  condemned,  without  the  smallest  bope  of  mercy,  to  please  his  adver-
sary, the  duke  of  Brittany,  who  had  never  done  any  good  to  France.

When  the  regents  found  he  had  escaped,  they  resolved  to  proceed  in  a different  manner.
It  was  ordered,  that  he  should  be  summoned  by  the  court  of  parliament  of  Paris  to  appear
before  it,  and  answer  such  charges  as  should  be  made  against  him,  under  pain  of  being
dishonoured  and  banished  from  France.  Commissioners  were  sent  after  him  into  Brittany,
by  the  chamber  of  parliament,  to  summon  and  arrest  him.  They  acquitted  themselves  well,
so  far  as  going  into  Brittany  and  demanding  at  all  the  towns  and  castles  belonging  to  sir
Oliver  de  Clisson  where  he  was  to  be  found,  saying, — “ We  are  sent  by  the  king  and  council
to  speak  with  my  lord  the  constable  : tell  us  how  we  can  see  him,  that  we  may  perform  our
message.”  The  inhabitants  of  the  towns  or  castles  dependent  on  the  lord  de  Clisson  answered,
as  they  had  been  tutored  to  do, — “ Gentlemen,  you  are  very  welcome : if  we  wanted  to
speak  with  our  lord  the  constable,  we  would  go  to  such  a place,  where  we  should  find  him
without  fail.”  Thus  were  the  commissioners  sent  from  town  to  town,  asking  after  sir  Oliver
de  Clisson,  but  without  ever  finding  him,  or  having  any  other  answers.  At  length  being
tired  of  the  pursuit,  they  returned  to  Paris,  and  related  their  ill  success,  and  the  tricks  the
constable’s  vassals  had  played  them.  Those  who  had  accused  him,  and  wished  his  condem-
nation, would  not  that  he  had  acted  otherwise,  for  now,  they  said,  they  would  have  instant
judgment,  and  he  should  be  treated  according  to  his  deserts.

They  publicly  summoned,  by  order  of  parliament,  sir  Oliver  de  Clisson  in  all  legal  form,
allowing  the  usual  interval  between  each  summons,  to  prevent  those  attached  to  him  from
saying  that  hatred  or  malice  had  outstripped  justice.  After  every  adjournment  was  com-
pleted, without  any  intelligence  received  from  him,  and  after  he  had  been  summoned  first  at
the  door  of  the  chamber  of  parliament,  then  publicly  at  the  gates  and  on  the  steps  of  the
palace,  with  every  usual  solemnity,  without  any  answer  being  returned,  a most  cruel  sentence
was  passed  by  the  court.  He  was  banished  the  kingdom  of  France  for  a false  and  wicked
traitor  to  the  crown,  condemned  to  pay  a fine  of  one  hundred  thousand  marcs  of  silver,  for
the  extortions  which  he  had  fraudulently  and  wickedly  committed  in  former  times,  as  well
in  the  office  of  constable  as  in  the  exchequer  and  elsewhere,  and  to  be  deprived  for  ever  of
the  office  of  constable  of  France.  The  duke  of  Orleans  was  invited  by  the  court  to  be
present  when  this  sentence  was  passed,  but  he  would  not,  and  excused  himself.  The  dukes
of  Berry  and  Burgundy  were  there,  with  a great  many  of  the  barons  of  France.

YOL.  II.  N N


546


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


Now  observe  the  works  of  Fortune,  bow  firm  and  steady  they  are,  when  such  a valiant
and  good  knight  who  had  laboured  so  successfully  for  the  honour  of  France  was  thus
maliciously  degraded  in  honour  and  hurt  in  his  fortune.  He  was  lucky  in  not  obeying  any
of  the  summonses,  for,  had  he  come,  they  would  have  disgracefully  put  him  to  death  ; nor
could  the  duke  of  Orleans  have  saved  him,  for,  if  lie  had  interceded  for  him,  no  attention
would  have  been  paid  to  it.  You  may  suppose  that  the  duke  of  Brittany  and  sir  Peter  de
Craon,  who  were  strongly  connected  with  each  othci’,  were  much  rejoiced  at  this ; but  they
were  vexed  the  constable  had  not  borne  company  with  the  lord  de  la  Riviere  and  sir  John  le
Mercier.  This  sentence  made  a great  noise  in  France  and  elsewhere.  Some  pitied  him,
and  said  in  secret  that  he  had  been  unjustly  treated  : others  opposed  it,  saying  it  was  fortunate
he  had  not  been  laid  hold  of  and  hanged,  for  he  was  deserving  of  it.  “ Our  regents,”  they
added,  “ who  are  well  acquainted  with  his  manner  of  life,  have  not  been  to  blame  in  suffer-
ing him  to  be  thus  treated.  How  the  devil  could  he  have  laid  by  such  a sum  as  a million
and  a half  of  florins  ? It  could  not  have  been  by  conquests  in  war,  but  from  pillage  and
robbery,  and  from  the  pay  of  poor  knights  and  squires,  as  is  well  known  at  the  chancery
and  treasury,  where  it  is  all  written  down.  In  the  expeditions  to  Flanders,  he  raised  and
received  large  sums  of  money,  as  well  as  in  that  which  the  king  made  into  Germany.  All
the  taxes  for  the  war,  and  the  payment  of  the  men  at  arms,  passed  through  his  hands.  He
paid  himself  and  others  as  he  pleased,  keeping  the  better  part,  without  any  one  daring  to  say
a word  against  it.”  In  such  terms  was  sir  Oliver  de  Clisson  accused  behind  his  hack  ; and
the  proverb  says  truly,  that  “ those  whom  necessity  forces  to  sell  have  never  a fair  offer.”

The  duke  of  Brittany  caused  it  to  be  rumoured  throughout  his  country,  that  whenever
the  dukes  of  Berry  and  Burgundy  should  please,  he  could  easily  reduce  the  lord  de  Clisson
to  rhe  lowest  state ; hut  at  the  moment  he  left  him  undisturbed,  to  see  what  turn  affairs
would  take,  for  he  expected,  from  the  measures  then  pursuing,  the  lord  de  Clisson  must  be
deprived  of  the  constableship.  The  duke  of  Brittany  and  sir  Peter  de  Craon  were  thus
suddenly  relieved  from  all  anxiety  by  the  favour  of  dame  Fortune,  who,  ever  in  motion,
exalts  those  who  least  expect  it,  and  tumbles  others  into  the  dirt  from  the  top  of  her  wheel.

Sir  Oliver  de  Clisson,  the  lord  de  la  Riviere,  and  sir  John  le  Mercier,  were  principally
accused  of  being  the  authors  of  the  king’s  illness  ; and  it  was  commonly  reported  by  those
who  hated  them,  and  wished  their  death,  that  they  had  poisoned  the  king.  Now  consider
how  little  there  was  in  this  charge,  or  how  little  probability  of  their  attempting  such  an  act,
who  were  sure  of  being  persecuted  if  any  accident  happened  to  the  king,  and  of  course  would
have  been  the  most  eager  to  have  preserved  him  in  health.  But  nothing  was  believed  which
they  urged  in  their  defence,  as  you  already  know.  The  lord  de  la  Riviere  and  sir  John  le
Mercier  were  for  a long  time  imprisoned  in  the  Bastille,  and  in  great  danger  of  being  publicly
beheaded.  It  would  undoubtedly  have  been  done,  if  the  king  had  not  very  opportunely
recovered  his  health,  and  had  it  not  been  for  the  strong  and  repeated  intercessions  the  duchess
of  Berry  made  for  the  lord  de  la  Riviere.  The  lord  de  Clisson  resided  in  Brittany ; and  a
severe  warfare  was  kept  up  between  him  and  the  duke,  which  cost  many  lives,  as  will  be
related  hereafter.


CHAPTER  LI.> — KING  CHARLES  RECOVERS  HIS  SENSES  THROUGH  THE  MERCY  OF  GOD,  AND
THE  DILIGENT  ATTENTION  OF  HIS  PHYSICIAN,  MASTER  WILLIAM  DE  HARSELEY.

The  disorder,  which  befel  the  king  on  his  journey  to  Brittany,  greatly  affected  all  his
subjects,  and  they  naturally  felt  for  their  king,  who,  before  this  illness,  was  very  popular
with  all  ranks.  Being  the  chief,  every  part  of  the  government  suffered  ; for,  in  like  manner,
when  the  head  of  a man  is  sick,  his  other  members  are  not  painless.  No  one  ventured  to
talk  openly  of  his  indisposition,  which  was  concealed  as  much  as  it  could  be.  Indeed,  it  was
perfectly  unknown  to  the  queen  until  she  was  recovered  from  her  lying-in ; and  I believe
this  time  she  was  brought  to  bed  of  a daughter.  Master  William  de  Harseley,  who  had
the  king  under  his  care,  resided  quietly  with  him  at  Creil,  and  was  very  attentive  to  him,
which  gained  him  honour  and  profit,  for  by  little  and  little  he  recovered  for  him  his  health.


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


517


He  first  got  rid  of  the  fever  and  great  heat  he  complained  of,  and  then  restored  to  him  his
appetite,  sleep,  and  his  recollection  of  things  about  him.  Until  lie  was  strong  enough  to
bear  removal  for  change  of  air,  he  allowed  him  to  ride,  hunt,  and  amuse  himself  with
hawking.


King  Charles  and  a Hawking  Party.  From  an  original  design.


On  the  news  of  the  king’s  recovery  being  spread  abroad,  the  whole  kingdom  of  France
was  rejoiced,  and  most  heartily  and  sincerely  were  thanksgivings  offered  up  to  God  for
having  restored  the  king  to  his  senses  and  memory.  During  his  residence  at  Creil,  he
demanded  to  see  the  queen  and  his  son : she  came  thither,  and  brought  the  dauphin.  The
king  received  them  very  kindly;  and  thus  by  degrees,  through  the  mercy  of  God,  was  he
restored  to  health.  Master  William  de  Harseley,  seeing  him  in  so  fair  a way,  was  in  high
spirits,  and  not  without  reason,  for  he  had  performed  an  astonishing  cure.  He  now  gave
him  up  to  the  care  of  his  brother,  the  duke  of  Orleans,  and  his  uncles,  the  dukes  of  Berry,
Burgundy,  and  Bourbon,  saying  to  them, — “ Thanks  to  God,  the  king  is  now  well : I
deliver  him  up  to  you  ; but  henceforward,  you  must  carefully  avoid  angering  or  vexing  him,
for  as  yet  his  nerves  have  not  quite  recovered  their  strength,  though  they  will  daily  get
better.  Amusements  and  relaxations  from  the  fatigues  of  business  will  be  of  service  to  him,
and,  above  all,  he  must  not  weary  himself  too  much  with  his  ministers  or  council ; for  his
head  will  continue  some  time  weak  and  delicate,  as  he  has  been  much  pulled  down  and
shattered  by  this  indisposition.”

Having  consulted  together,  they  resolved  to  retain  master  William  de  Harseley  at  such
an  ample  salary  as  should  satisfy  him ; for  it  is  the  object  of  all  medical  men  to  gain  large
salaries,  and  as  much  profit  as  possible,  from  the  lords  and  ladies  who  call  for  their  aid.  It
was  therefore  proposed  to  him  to  remain  with  the  king ; but  he  excused  himself,  saying,
“ that  he  was  old  and  weakly ; that  the  manner  of  living  at  court  would  not  agree  with  his
years,  and  that  he  must  immediately  return  to  his  nursling  at  home.”  When  they  saw  he
was  determined  in  his  refusal,  they  pressed  him  no  further.  They  gave  him  permission  to
depart,  and,  on  his  taking  leave,  presented  him  with  one  thousand  crowns  of  gold,  and  an

N N 2


540


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


order  for  four  horses  on  the  post-masters  whenever  lie  should  please  to  come  to  court.  I
believe  he  never  returned  ; for  he  continued  in  the  city  of  Laon,  where  lie  died  very  rich,
possessed  of  thirty  thousand  francs.  He  was  the  most  niggardly  man  of  his  time  : his  whole
pleasure  was  amassing  money,  and  never  spending  a farthing  at  home,  hut  eating  and
drinking  abroad  wherever  he  could.  With  such  rods  arc  physicians  corrected.


CHAPTER  LII. THE  TRUCE  IS  PROLONGED  BETWEEN  PRANCE  AND  ENGLAND. — THE

VISCOUNT  DE  CHASTELBON  DOES  HOMAGE  FOR  THE  COUNTY  OF  FOIX  TO  THE  KING
OF  FRANCE.

To  continue  this  noble  and  pleasant  history,  undertaken  at  the  request  and  pleasure  of  that
liberal  and  potent  prince,  my  very  dear  lord  and  patron,  Guy  de  Chastillon,  count  de  Blois,
lord  of  Avesnes,  Chimay,  Beaumont,  Schoenlioven  and  Turgow  ; I,  John  Froissart,  priest
and  chaplain  to  my  very  dear  lord  before  named,  and  at  the  time  treasurer  and  canon  of
Chimay  and  Lille  in  Flanders,  set  myself  to  work  at  my  forge,  to  produce  new  and  notable
matter  relative  to  the  wars  between  France  and  England  and  their  allies,  as  clearly  appears
from  the  various  treaties  which  are  of  this  date,  and  which  excellent  materials,  through  the
grace  of  God,  I shall  work  upon  as  long  as  I live ; for  the  more  I labour  at  it  the  more  it
delights  me  : just  as  a gallant  knight  or  squire  at  arms,  who  loves  his  profession,  the  longer  he
continues  it  so  much  the  more  delectable  it  appears.

You  have  had  it  before  related  in  these  chronicles,  that  a truce  had  been  agreed  on  for
three  years  at  Lculinghen,  between  France  and  England ; that  ambassadors  from  France,
namely  the  count  de  Saint  Pol  and  the  lord  de  Chateaumorant,  had  brought  the  papers  signed
and  sealed  from  England  ; and  that,  since  then,  the  lord  de  Chateau-morant  and  sir  Taupin
de  Cantemerle  had  accompanied  the  dukes  of  Lancaster  and  York  from  the  conferences  at
Amiens  to  London,  to  learn  the  intentions  of  the  king  and  parliament  of  England,  in  regard
to  the  advances  which  had  been  made  at  Amiens  towards  a solid  peace  between  the  two
nations,  subject,  however,  to  the  consent  of  England,  which  had  been  reserved  in  the  treaty
by  the  dukes  of  Lancaster  and  York.  The  French  knights  had  returned  to  France;  for
they  were  told  nothing  could  be  done  in  the  matter  until  the  meeting  of  the  parliament,
which  was  appointed  to  be  holden  at  Westminster  at  Michaelmas  : that  then  the  affair
would  be  discussed,  and  they  should  have  an  answer.  When  it  was  known  in  England  how
grievously  the  king  of  France  was  afflicted,  the  business  was  much  retarded.  Nevertheless,
the  king  and  the  duke  of  Lancaster  were  desirous  of  peace  between  England  and  France,  and,
had  it  depended  on  them,  it  would  have  been  concluded  ; but  it  was  not  so,  for  the  commons
of  England  preferred  war  to  peace,  saying,  “ that  war  with  France  was  more  beneficial  to
them  than  otherwise.”  This  was  also  the  opinion  of  Thomas  duke  of  Gloucester,  constable
of  England,  who  was  very  popular  throughout  the  country.  Lie  inclined  for  war,  as  did  all
the  young  men  who  were  anxious  to  eignalise  themselves  in  arms ; but  his  brother,  the  duke
of  Lancaster,  as  the  oldest  and  most  powerful,  took  the  lead,  and  said,  “ the  war  had
lasted  long  enough  between  France  and  England,  and  that  a good  peace,  if  properly  attended
to,  would  be  very  welcome  to  all  parties,  who  had  su ffered  greatly  from  the  long  state  of
warfare.”  The  duke  added,  “ that  holy  Christendom  was  in  danger  from  Bajazet,  who
was  in  great  force  on  the  frontiers  of  LIungary,  sorely  oppressing  that  country  ; and
that  was  the  proper  theatre  for  all  young  bachelors  who  wished  to  try  their  skill  in
arms.”

Let  us  weigh  well  these  words  of  the  duke  of  Lancaster,  which  were  offered  with  the
best  intentions ; for  he  had  many  times  invaded  France  and  overrun  that  country  with  small
gain.  Lie  had  undergone  great  bodily  fatigue ; and  though  he  burnt  and  destroyed  the  flat
country,  it  was  almost  as  soon  recovered  again  from  the  damages  it  had  suffered.  He  said
that  this  war  led  to  no  good  end,  but,  if  continued,  must  be  pushed  forward  with  vigour,
and  the  slightest  reverse  might  be  attended  with  the  worst  consequences.  He  likewise  per-
ceived the  king  was  more  desirous  of  peace  than  war.  I,  the  author  of  this  history,  know
not  how  to  determine  who  was  in  the  right,  or  who  in  the  wrong  ; but  it  was  said  the  reason


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


549


of  the  duke  of  Lancaster’s  conduct  was,  that  he  had  married  his  two  daughters  in  Castille
and  Portugal,  and  therefore  he  was  desirous  of  peace.  His  son-in-law,  the  king  of  Castille,
was  young,  and  to  prevent  any  troubles  from  his  grandees,  and  in  order  that  he  might  reign
quietly,  it  was  necessary  there  should  be  such  a peacewith  France  as  the  English  could  not
infringe.  Should  they  do  so,  the  French  would  instantly  fall  on  Castille  ; for  they  had  free
entrances  thither,  through  the  kingdom  of  Arragon,  of  which  the  lady  Jolande  de  Bar,  a
French  woman,  was  queen,  and  who  governed  that  kingdom  as  well  as  Catalonia,  or  through
the  countries  of  Bearn  and  the  Basques  ; for  the  viscount  de  Chateaubon,  the  heir  to  the  late
count  de  Foix,  had  sworn  and  sealed  to  grant  this  permission,  when  required  by  the  king  of
France.  The  French  had  therefore  several  entrances  to  Castille,  without  danger  of  opposi-
tion from  the  king  of  Navarre,  who  would  not  willingly  anger  his  cousin-german  the  king  of
France.  His  brother  sir  Peter  de  Navarre,  was  beside  at  the  court  of  France,  and  would
instantly  soften  any  disputes  that  should  arise  between  the  king  of  France  and  his  brother
of  Navarre ; for  he  was  a good  Frenchman  and  never  acted  but  for  the  mutual  interest  of
the  two  kings.  The  duke  of  Lancaster  was  fully  aware  of  all  the  consequences  of  war,
and  frequently  remonstrated  on  the  subject  with  his  son,  Henry  carl  of  Derby,  who  though
young,  had  an  understanding  and  prudence  that  seemed  likely  to  produce  perfection.  This
earl  of  Derby  bad  four  fine  sons,  Henry,  John,  Humphrey  and  Thomas,  and  two  daughters,
by  Mary  de  Bohun,  daughter  to  the  earl  of  Hereford  and  Northampton,  constable  of  England,
and  possessed  in  her  right  very  large  estates.

The  conclusion  of  the  matter  respecting  peace,  which  was  long  discussed  in  the  parliament
held  at  Westminster,  of  prelates,  noblemen,  and  citizens  from  the  cities  and  principal  towns,
was,  that  a truce  should  take  place  between  England,  France,  and  their  respective  allies,
by  sea  and  land,  to  last  from  Michaelmas  to  Saint  John  Baptist’s  day,  and  one  year  longer.
Those  who  had  been  sent  by  the  king  of  France  carried  back  the  articles  of  the  truce  pro-
perly signed  and  sealed,  and  the  agreement  was  well  observed  by  all  parties.

The  health  of  the  king  of  France  had  been  so  exceedingly  weakened  by  his  late  illness,
that  his  council  knew  not  to  whom  to  apply  for  advice  ; for  the  physician  who  had  before
attended,  master  William  de  Llarseley,  was  dead.  He  had,  however,  given  the  king,  before
he  left  him,  several  good  recipes  which  he  had  used,  and  had  returned  to  Paris  in  the  winter
with  very  good  health,  to  the  great  joy  of  his  family  and  the  whole  commonalty  of  France,
with  whom  he  was  very  popular.  The  queen  accompanied  him  from  Creil  to  Paris,  where
they  resided  at  the  hotel  de  Saint  Pol.  At  times  he  went  to  the  Louvre,  but  for  the  most
part  staid  at  the  hotel  de  Saint  Pol ; and,  during  the  long  winter  nights,  there  were  carol-
ings,  dancings  and  other  amusements,  in  the  presence  of  the  king,  queen,  duchess  of  Berry,
duchess  of  Orleans  and  other  ladies,  who  thus  passed  the  winter  nights.

At  this  season,  the  viscount  de  Chateaubon  came  to  Paris,  to  do  homage  to  the  king  for
the  county  of  Foix,  which  he  inherited  as  legal  heir  to  Gaston  de  Foix,  and  which  was  a fief
dependent  on  France.  Bearn  is  an  independent  state,  and  the  lords  of  it  owe  service  to
none  other  lord  but  God,  notwithstanding  the  claims  the  late  prince  of  Wales,  of  happy
memory,  urged  against  Gaston  de  Foix,  the  late  lord  of  Bearn.  The  prince  pretended  it
was  dependent  on  Aquitaine,  but  the  count  de  Foix  denied  the  fact.  To  say  the  truth,  all
these  claims  of  the  prince  were  instigated  through  the  count  John  d’Armagnac,  as  has  been
already  told,  so  that  I shall  now  pass  the  matter  over.  When  the  viscount  de  Chateaubon
whom  henceforward  I shall  call  the  count  de  Foix,  came  to  Paris,  he  brought  a cousin  with
with  him,  a bastard  son  of  the  late  count,  called  Evan  de  Foix,  a handsome  and  accomplished
knight,  whom  his  late  father  would  have  willingly  made  his  heir,  with  his  brother  Gracien,
that  was  now  with  the  king  of  Navarre,  but  the  barons  of  Bearn  would  not  consent  to  it.
The  matter,  therefore,  remained  unsettled,  for  the  count,  as  you  have  seen,  died  suddenly.
On  sir  Evan  being  introduced  to  the  king,  he  took  a great  liking  to  him,  for  he  was  wonder-
fully handsome  and  well  made  ; he  was  besides  of  the  same  age  with  the  king ; and  the
affairs  of  the  viscount  de  Chateaubon  were  benefited  by  this  friendship,  as  they  were  the
more  speedily  concluded.  The  viscount  returned  home;  but  sir  Evan  remained  at  court,  and  was
named  by  the  king  one  of  the  knights  of  his  bed-chamber,  with  twelve  coursers  at  the  charge
of  the  crown.


550


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


CHAPTER  LIII. THE  KING  OP  PRANCE  IN  GREAT  DANGER  OF  HIS  LIFE  AT  A MASKED

DANCE  OP  MEN  DRESSED  LIKE  SAVAGES. POPE  BONIFACE  AND  THE  CARDINALS  AT

ROME  SEND  A LEARNED  PRIAR  TO  THE  KING.

Not  long  after  this,  a marriage  took  place  between  a young  squire  of  Vermandois  and  a
damsel  of  the  queen,  both  of  the  royal  household.  The  court  were  much  pleased  at  it,  and
the  king  resolved  to  keep  their  wedding  feast  at  his  expense.  It  was  held  at  the  hotel  of
Saint  Pol,  and  great  crowds  of  lords  attended  ; among  whom  were  the  dukes  of  Orleans,
Berry,  Burgundy,  and  their  duchesses.  The  wedding-day*  was  passed  in  dancing  and  joy.
The  king  entertained  at  supper  the  queen  in  great  state  ; and  every  one  exerted  himself
to  add  to  the  gaiety,  seeing  how  much  delighted  the  king  appeared.

There  was  in  the  king’s  household,  a Norman  squire,  called  Hugonin  de  Gensay,  a near
relation  of  the  bridegroom,  who  thought  of  the  following  piece  of  pleasantry  to  amuse  the
king  and  ladies.  This  marriage  was  on  a Tuesday  before  Candlemas-day,  and  he  had  in  the
evening  provided  six  coats  of  linen  covered  with  fine  flax,  the  colour  of  hair.  He  dressed
the  king  in  one  of  them,  the  count  de  Joigny,  a young  and  gallant  knight,  in  another,  which
became  him  well ; sir  Charles  de  Poitiers,  son  of  the  count  de  Valentinois,  had  the
third;  sir  Evan  de  Foix  the  fourth  ; the  son  of  the  lord  de  Nantouillet,  a young  knight,
had  the  fifth,  and  Hugonin  dressed  himself  in  the  sixtht.  When  they  were  all  thus  dressed,
by  having  the  coats  sewed  round  them,  they  appeared  like  savages,  for  they  were  covered
with  hair  from  head  to  foot.  This  masquerade  pleased  the  king  greatly,  and  he  expressed
his  pleasure  to  his  squire.  It  was  so  secretly  contrived  that  no  one  knew  anything  of
the  matter  hut  the  servants  who  had  attended  on  them.  Sir  Evan  de  Foix,  who  seemed  to
have  more  foresight  of  what  was  to  happen,  said  to  the  king, — “ Sire,  command  strictly
that  no  one  come  near  ns  with  torches ; for,  if  a spark  fall  on  the  coats  wTe  are  dressed  in,
the  flax  will  instantly  take  fire,  and  we  must  inevitably  be  burnt : take  care,  therefore,  of
what  I say.”  “ Evan,”  replied  the  king,  “ you  speak  well  and  wisely,  and  your  advice  shall
be  attended  to.”  lie  then  forbade  his  servants  to  follow,  and,  sending  for  one  of  the
serjeants  at  arms  that  waited  at  the  doors  of  the  apartments,  said  to  him, — “ Go  to
the  room  where  the  ladies  are,  and  command,  in  the  king’s  name,  that  all  the  torches  he
placed  on  one  side  of  it,  and  that  no  person  come  near  six  savage  men  who  are  about  to  enter.”

The  serjeant  did  as  he  had  been  ordered  by  the  king,  and  the  torch-bearers  withdrew  on
one  side  and  no  one  approached  the  dancers,  so  long  as  the  savages  staid  in  the  room.  The
apartment  was  now  clear  of  all  but  ladies,  damsels,  and  knights  and  squires,  who  were
dancing  with  them.  Soon  after,  the  duke  of  Orleans  entered,  attended  by  four  knights,  and
six  torches,  ignorant  of  the  orders  that  had  been  given,  and  of  the  entrance  of  the  savages.
He  first  looked  at  the  dancing,  and  then  took  part  himself,  just  as  the  king  of  France  made
his  appearance,  with  five  others  dressed  like  savages,  and  covered  with  flax,  to  represent  hair
from  head  to  foot.  Not  one  person  in  the  company  knew  them  ; and  they  were  all  fastened
together,  while  the  king  led  them  dancing.  On  their  entrance,  every  one  was  so  occupied
in  examining  them,  that  the  orders  about  the  torches  were  forgotten.  The  king,  who  was
the  leader,  fortunately  for  him,  quitted  them  to  show  himself  to  the  ladies,  as  was  natural  to
his  youth,  and  passing  by  the  queen,  placed  himself  near  the  duchess  of  Berry,  who  though
his  aunt,  was  the  youngest  of  the  company.  The  duchess  amused  herself  in  talking  with
him,  and  endeavouring  to  find  out  who  lie  was ; but  the  king,  rising  up  from  his  seat,
would  not  discover  himself.  The  duchess  said,  “ You  shall  not  escape  thus,  for  I will  know
your  name.”

At  this  moment,  a most  unfortunate  accident  befel  the  others,  through  the  youthful  gaiety
of  the  duke  of  Orleans,  who,  if  he  had  foreseen  the  mischief  he  was  about  to  cause,  it  is  to
be  presumed  would  not,  for  any  consideration,  have  so  acted.  He  was  very  inquisitive  in
examining  them,  to  find  out  who  they  were  ; and,  as  the  five  were  dancing,  he  took  one  of

* The  29th  of  January  1392  old  style,  1393  new  were, — theking, — HuguesdeCuissai, — le  comte  deJoigni,
style. — Ed.  - — Aymard  de  Poitiers,  son  of  the  count  de  Valentinois,

t In  the  history  of  France  hy  Villaret,  these  masquers  — le  batard  de  Foix, — Jean  de  Nantouillet.


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


551


the  torches  from  his  servants,  and,  holding  it  too  near  their  dresses,  set  them  on  fire.  Flax,
you  know,  is  instantly  in  a blaze,  and  the  pitch,  with  which  the  cloth  had  been  covered
to  fasten  the  flax,  added  to  the  impossibility  of  extinguishing  it.  They  were  likewise  chained
together,  and  their  cries  were  dreadful ; for,  the  fire  was  so  strong,  scarcely  any  dared
approach.  Some  knights  indeed  did  their  utmost  to  disengage  them,  but  the  pitch  burnt
their  hands  very  severely  ; and  they  suffered  a long  time  afterwards  from  it.


The  Masque  at  Paris,  in  which  the  King  and  others  were  in  great  danger.  From  a MS.  of  the  15th  century


One  of  the  five,  Nantouillet,  recollected  that  the  buttery  was  near,  broke  the  chain,  and
flying  thither,  flung  himself  into  a large  tub  of  water  which  was  there  for  washing  dishes
and  plates.  This  saved  him,  or  he  would  have  been  burnt  to  death  like  the  others : but  he
was  withal  some  time  very  ill.  When  the  queen  heard  the  cause  of  the  cries,  she  was  alarmed
lest  the  king  should  be  hurt,  for  he  had  told  her  he  would  be  one  of  the  six,  and  in  her  fright
fainted  and  fell  down  : her  ladies  and  knights  hastened  to  her  assistance  ; and  the  confusion
was  so  great,  no  one  knew  what  to  do.  The  duchess  of  Berry  saved  the  king  by  throwing
the  train  of  her  robe  over  him,  and  detaining,  him,  for  he  wanted  to  quit  her.  “ Where  are
you  going,”  said  she  : “ do  you  not  see  your  companions  are  in  a blaze  ? who  are  you  ? for
it  is  not  now  a time  to  keep  it  a secret.”  He  then  named  himself,  saying,  “ I am  the  king.”
“ Ah,  my  lord,”  replied  the  duchess,  “ put  on  quickly  another  dress,  and  show  yourself  to
the  queen,  for  she  is  very  much  distressed  about  you.”

The  king  on  this  left  the  room,  and,  having  thrown  aside  his  mummery,  dressed  himself
as  fast  as  he  could,  and  returned  to  the  queen,  who  had  been  much  comforted  by  the  duchess
of  Berry.  When  the  king  had  quitted  her,  she  went  to  the  queen  and  said,  “ Madam,  do
not  be  alarmed  for  the  king:  you  will  shortly  see  him,  for  I have  been  talking  with  him.”
As  she  said  this,  the  king  appeared,  and  the  queen  trembled  for  joy : she  was  carried  by
her  knights  to  her  chamber,  where  the  king  attended  and  comforted  her.  The  bastard  of
Foix,  when  on  fire,  cried  aloud,  “ Save  the  king,  save  the  king!”  who  indeed  was  saved  in
the  manner  I have  related.  It  was  the  providence  of  God  that  inspired  him  to  leave  his
companions  and  converse  with  the  ladies,  for,  had  he  remained  with  them,  he  must  inevitably
have  been  burnt  to  death.

This  terrible  accident  happened  about  twelve  o’clock  at  night,  in  the  ball-room,  at  the
hotel  de  Saint  Pol,  and  it  was  a most  melancholy  spectacle.  Of  the  four  that  were  on  fire,


5o2


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &o.


two  died  on  tLe  spot:  the  other  two,  the  bastard  of  Foix  and  the  count  de  Joigny,  were
carried  to  their  hotels,  and  died  two  days  afterward  in  great  agonies.  Thus  unfortunately
did  the  wedding-feast  end,  although  the  married  couple  could  no  way  be  blamed.  The
duke  of  Orleans  was  alone  in  fault,  who  certainly  intended  not  any  harm  when  he  held  the
torcli  so  near  them.  Ills  giddiness  caused  it ; and,  when  he  witnessed  how  unlucky  he  had
been,  he  said  aloud, — “ Listen  to  me  all  that  can  hear  me.  Let  no  one  be  blamed  for  this
unfortunate  accident  but  myself : what  has  been  done  was  through  my  fault : but  woe  i3
me  that  it  has  happened ! and,  had  I foreseen  the  consequences,  nothing  on  earth  should
have  induced  me  to  do  it.”  The  duke  then  followed  the  king,  and  made  his  excuses,  which
were  accepted.  This  melancholy  event  happened  on  the  Tuesday  before  Candlemas-eve,  in
the  year  of  grace  1392  : it  made  a great  noise  in  France  and  in  other  countries.

The  dukes  of  Berry  and  Burgundy  were  not  present  when  the  maskers  were  set  on  fire,
but  were  at  their  own  hotels,  having  taken  leave  of  the  king,  queen,  and  ladies.  When,  on
the  morrow,  it  became  public  in  Paris,  the  people  wondered  greatly,  and  said  that  God
had  a second  time  shown  his  kind  providence  to  the  king,  and  that  he  ought  now  to  put
aside  these  childish  things,  and  occupy  himself  more  seriously ; for  that  he  had  too  long
played  the  boy,  which  was  unbecoming  a king  of  France.  The  commonalty  murmured
among  themselves,  and  said, — “ What  a narrow  escape  the  king  has  had ! if  he  had  been
burnt  like  the  others,  which  might  easily  have  happened,  what  would  have  become  of  his
uncles  ? They  may  be  assured  not  one  of  them  would  have  escaped  death,  nor  any  knight
found  in  Paris.”  The  dukes  of  Berry  and  Burgundy,  hearing  of  this  language,  were
astonished  and  alarmed,  and  not  without  cause.  They  mounted  their  horses,  and  rode  to
the  hotel  de  Saint  Pol  to  the  king,  and  congratulated  him  on  his  escape.  They  found  him
still  frightened,  for  he  had  not  yet  recovered  the  sense  of  the  peril  he  had  been  in  the
preceding  night.  lie  told  them  his  fair  aunt  of  Berry  had  saved  him  from  being  burnt,
but  that  he  was  exceedingly  grieved  for  the  melancholy  end  of  the  count  de  Joigny,  sir  Evan
de  Foix,  and  sir  Charles  de  Poitiers.  His  uncles  consoled  him,  saying, — “ My  lord,  what  is
done  cannot  be  recovered  : you  must  forget  their  deaths,  and  render  thanks  to  God  for  the
miraculous  escape  you  yourself  have  had  ; for  this  event  might  have  been  nearly  the  death
of  the  kingdom  as  well  as  your  own.  You  may  easily  imagine  what  would  have  been  the
consequences,  when  the  commons  of  Paris  hold  such  language  as  has  been  reported  to  us ;
and  God  knows,  that  if  you  had  perished,  they  would  have  murdered  us  all.  Make  yourself
ready  to  go  in  royal  state,  suitable  to  your  rank,  and  ride  in  pilgrimage  to  the  church  of
Notre-Dame  and  show  yourself  to  your  people  ; we  will  accompany  you,  for  the  citizens  of
Paris  are  very  desirous  to  see  you.”  The  king  replied,  he  would  do  as  they  had  advised,
and  then  entered  into  conversation  with  his  brother  the  duke  of  Orleans,  whom  he  much
loved.  His  uncles  received  the  duke  kindly,  blaming  him  a little  for  the  youthful  trick  he
had  played.  It  seemed  he  was  not  displeased  at  their  lecture,  and  declared  he  never  intended
or  suspected  he  was  doing  wrong.

On  the  point  of  nine  o’clock,  the  king  and  Lis  attendants  mounted  their  horses,  and  rode
through  Paris  from  the  hotel  de  Saint  Pol,  to  the  church  of  Notre  Dame,  to  appease  the
people,  who  were  in  great  commotion,  where  he  heard  mass,  and  made  his  offerings.  He
then  returned  to  the  hotel  de  Saint  Pol  with  his  lords,  who  dined  there.  This  accident  was
by  degrees  forgotten,  and  obsequies,  prayers,  and  alms  were  made  for  the  dead.  Ah,  count
Gaston  de  Foix  ! hadst  thou  been  alive  and  heard  of  the  cruel  death  of  this  thy  favourite
son,  thou  wouldst  have  been  sadly  grieved,  for  thou  didst  love  him  much,  and  I know  not
how  thou  wouldst  have  been  consoled.  All  the  lords  and  ladies  in  France,  when  they  heard
of  this  accident,  were  shocked  and  grieved.

But  you  must  know,  that  pope  Boniface  and  his  cardinals  at  Rome  were  well  pleased
when  they  learnt  the  news,  because  the  king  was  contrary  to  their  interests.  They  said
among  themselves,  in  a consistory,  that  it  was  a second  punishment  sent  by  God,  to  make
him  take  warning,  for  having  supported  the  anti-pope  of  Avignon,  Robert  de  Geneve,  who
was  false,  proud,  and  presumptuous,  and  had  never  done  one  good  act  in  his  whole  life,
but  had  deceived  the  world.  The  pope  and  cardinals  resolved  to  send  in  a secret  manner
and  without  pomp,  a learned  friar  to  the  king  of  France,  well  instructed  how  to  speak  and


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


553


preach,  to  attempt  to  bring  him  and  the  French  nation  back  to  the  way  of  salvation.  They
maintained,  that  he  was  now  gone  astray,  and  that  being  the  greatest  king  in  Christendom,
the  church  ought  to  be  enlightened  and  supported  by  him  more  than  by  any  other.  They
selected  a devout  and  sensible  man,  whom  they  ordered  to  go  into  France;  but,  before  his
departure,  they  fully  instructed  him  what  to  say  and  how  to  act.  This  was  not  so  quickly
done,  nor  did  the  envoy  soon  arrive,  for  the  distance  was  great,  and  he  had  many  different
states  to  pass  through.  It  was  beside  necessary  that  the  friar,  who  was  a Franciscan  monk,
should  know  if  the  king  of  France  were  willing  to  see  him  before  he  set  out.


CHAPTER  LIV. THE  DUCHESS  OP  BERRY  SUPPORTS  THE  LORD  DE  LA  RIVIERE  IN

OPPOSITION  TO  THE  DUCHESS  OF  BURGUNDY.

We  will  return  to  the  affairs  of  France,  and  say  how  they  were  going  on.  Notwith-
standing the  king’s  recovery,  the  dukes  of  Berry  and  Burgundy  did  not  desist  from  their
attempts  to  ruin  that  valiant  and  prudent  knight,  the  lord  de  la  Riviere.  He  and  sir  John
le  Mercier  were  still  confined  in  the  Bastille  of  Saint  Anthony,  under  the  care  of
the  viscount  d’Achy ; and  it  was  current  througli  Paris,  that  they  would  be  put  to
death,  insomuch  that  it  was  daily  expected  they  would  be  delivered  over  to  the
provost  of  the  Chatelet,  and  when  once  this  was  done,  nothing  could  prevent  them  from
being  publicly  beheaded  as  traitors  to  the  crown  of  France.  From  the  information  I then
had,  I am  convinced  their  execution  would  have  taken  place,  had  not  the  grace  of  God  been
shown  them,  and  the  duchess  of  Berry  exerted  herself  so  much.  This  good  lady  was
incessant  in  her  entreaties  for  la  Riviere, — who  had  carried  her  to  France  and  concluded  her
marriage, — but  not  without  great  difficulty,  with  the  duke  of  Berry.  Sir  John  le  Mercier
was  therefore  fortunate  in  his  situation  to  share  the  benefits  of  her  exertions.  She  frequently,
with  tears,  addressed  her  lord,  saying,  “ that  he  was  instigated  by  the  malicious  and  envious
insinuations  of  the  enemies  of  la  Riviere  to  keep  him  so  long  in  prison,  and  confiscate  his
inheritance.  Ah,  my  lord,  you  make  him  a very  ungrateful  return  for  all  the  pains  he  took
in  bringing  about  our  marriage,  when  you  thus  consent  to  his  destruction.  At  least,  if  you
take  his  property,  spare  his  life ; for,  if  he  be  executed  for  the  charges  that  are  so  unjustly
made  against  him,  I shall  never  again  enjoy  happiness.  My  lord,  I do  not  say  this  from
any  feigned  motive,  but  I really  feel  that  it  will  weigh  most  heavily  on  my  mind.  I there-
fore pray  God  you  will  take  proper  measures  for  his  deliverance.”  The  duke  perceiving
she  was  in  earnest,  and  that  her  arguments  were  good,  abated  greatly  his  hatred  to  the  lord
de  la  Riviere,  who  would  sooner  have  obtained  his  liberty ; but  they  were  desirous  of
putting  to  death  sir  John  le  Mercier,  and  they  could  not  punish  one  without  the  other.
This  sir  John  le  Mercier  had  wept  so  long  in  prison,  that  he  had  almost  lost  his  eye-sight.

Had  the  duchess  of  Burgundy  been  listened  to,  they  would  have  suffered  a disgraceful
and  public  death,  without  hopes  of  mercy ; for  she  hated  them  because  they  had,  with  sir
Oliver  de  Clisson,  advised  the  king  of  France  to  make  the  expedition  into  Brittany,  to
destroy  her  cousin  the  duke.  She  said,  that  Clisson,  le  Mercier,  and  la  Riviere  were  the
cause  of  the  king’s  illness,  which  would  never  have  happened,  had  they  not  persuaded  him
to  undertake  the  war  against  Brittany.  You  must  know,  that  although  the  king  was  now
in  a tolerably  good  state  of  mental  and  bodily  health,  the  dukes  of  Berry  and  Burgundy  did
not  resign  the  government  of  the  kingdom  ; and,  as  they  had  all  the  weight,  they  determined
to  have  the  profit  also.  To  this  end,  they  placed  only  their  creatures  about  the  king’s
person,  who  was  but  a king  in  name,  for  the  two  dukes  took  on  themselves  to  manage
whatever  concerned  the  realm.  The  duchess  of  Orleans  was  not  pleased  that  the  duchess
of  Burgundy  should  have  rank  second  to  the  queen.  She  loved  honours,  and  said  to  those
in  her  confidence, — “ The  duchess  of  Burgundy  has  no  right  to  take  precedence  of  me  : I
am  nearer  the  crown  of  France  than  she  is,  for  my  lord  is  brother  to  the  king.  It  may  so
happen  that  he  shall  be  king ; and,  as  I then  must  be  queen,  I know  no  reason  why  she  is
thus  eager  of  honours  that  are  not  belonging  to  her,  and  to  place  me  behind  her.”

We  will  for  a while  leave  these  ladies,  and  speak  of  some  changes  in  France,  and  of  sir
Oliver  de  Clisson,  and  of  the  manner  in  which  he  was  treated.


554


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


CHAPTER  LV. THE  LORD  DE  COUCY  REFUSES  TO  ACCEPT  THE  SWORD  OF  CONSTABLE  IN

THE  ROOM  OF  CLISSON. THE  DUKES  OF  BERRY  AND  BURGUNDY  INVEST  THE  LORD

PHILIP  d’aRTOIS,  COUNT  D’EU,  WITH  IT,  IN  CONSIDERATION  OF  HIS  MARRIAGE  WITH
THE  LADY  MARY  OF  BERRY,  WIDOW  OF  THE  LORD  LOUIS  DE  BLOIS.

You  have  before  heard  that  the  constable  was  summoned  publicly  by  the  parliament  of
Paris,  after  an  adjournment  of  fifteen  days  between  each  summons,  and  how  commissioners
were  sent  in  pursuit  of  him  to  Brittany,  but  in  vain,  for  he  concealed  himself  from  them.
Had  they  been  able  to  have  spoken  to  him,  they  would  have  served  him  personally  with  the
orders  of  the  court,  and  laid  hands  on  him,  according  to  the  instructions  they  had  received.
When,  on  their  return,  they  had  given  an  account  of  their  mission  to  the  parliament,  it  was
determined  by  the  court  and  lords  of  parliament,  that  sir  Oliver  de  Clisson,  constable  of
France,  had  forfeited  the  protection  of  the  court,  and  should  be  banished  France,  and  deprived
of  all  offices  and  possessions  he  held  within  that  kingdom ; for  that  he  had  contumaciously
refused  obedience  to  the  summons  of  the  great  chamber,  though  sealed  with  their  seal,  and
also  had  refused  to  send  back  his  sword  of  office.  The  dukes  of  Berry  and  Burgundy,  with
their  councils,  who  all  hated  the  constable,  and  wished  his  ruin,  said  they  would  provide  a
remedy,  for  the  office  of  constable  was  so  noble,  and  of  such  weight,  it  could  not  long  remain
vacant,  for  fear  of  accidents  that  might  happen.

The  lord  de  Coucy  was  thought  the  most  proper  person  to  fill  it ; but  he  excused  himself,
and  refused  positively  to  accept  of  it,  though  he  should  be  forced  to  leave  France.  When
they  saw  he  was  determined,  they  looked  elsewhere.  At  this  time  a treaty  of  marriage  was
in  agitation  between  the  lord  Philip  d’ Artois  and  the  young  countess  de  Dunois,  the  widow
of  the  lord  Louis  de  Blois,  and  the  king  of  France  was  well  inclined  that  this  marriage  with
his  cousin  should  take  place,  hut  the  duke  of  Berry  refused  his  consent ; for  the  county  of
Eu  is  but  of  small  value,  in  comparison  of  what  she  was  entitled  to  from  her  first  union,
and  he  looked  to  marry  her  more  nobly.  To  say  the  truth,  the  countess  was  for  beauty  and
goodness,  and  everything  belonging  to  a noble  lady,  worthy  of  the  highest  rank.  The  duke
of  Berry,  however,  was  unwilling  to  anger  the  king  of  France,  who  knew  well  that  he  was
solicited  by  many  persons  for  the  hand  of  his  daughter  : among  whom  were  the  young  duke
of  Lorraine,  the  count  d’Armagnac,  and  the  eldest  son  of  the  count  de  Foix  and  de  Bearn.
The  king  was  averse  to  all  these  proposals,  and  said  to  the  duke  of  Berry, — “ Fair  uncle  of
Berry,  we  are  not  willing  that  our  cousin  your  daughter  should  be  settled  at  a distance  from
the  fleurs-de-lis.  We  will  provide  a marriage  for  her,  that  shall  he  suitable  in  all  respects.
We  see  her  with  pleasure  near  us ; and  it  becometh  her  not  to  leave  her  mother-in-law,  as
they  are  nearly  of  the  same  age."  These  words  and  others  cooled  the  duke’s  intentions  of
marrying  his  daughter  otherwise  than  as  it  pleased  the  king,  who  leant  to  his  cousin  the  lord
Philip  d’ Artois.  He  was  a young  and  gallant  knight,  and  had  acquired  great  renown  in
arms,  in  the  different  expeditions  he  had  made,  as  well  near  home  as  beyond  sea,  and  was
also  much  in  the  favour  of  the  knights  and  squires  of  France.

The  dukes  of  Berry  and  Burgundy  agreed,  that  if  the  king  would  give  to  their  cousin  of
Artois  the  office  of  constable  of  France,  which  was  now  vacant,  from  the  sentence  against
sir  Oliver  de  Clisson,  the  marriage  with  the  lady  Mary  should  take  place  ; for,  in  case  he
were  constable,  he  would  be  wealthy  enough  to  keep  a becoming  state.  They  resolved  to
speak  to  the  king  on  this  subject,  which  they  did,  as  follows  : — “ My  lord,  your  council
recommends  that  our  cousin,  the  lord  Philip  d’ Artois,  count  d’Eu,  be  invested  with  the  office
of  constable  of  France;  for  Clisson,  by  the  sentence  of  your  judges  in  parliament,  has
forfeited  it,  and  the  office  cannot  longer  be  vacant  without  great  prejudice  to  the  realm.  You
are  bounden,  as  well  as  ourselves,  to  assist  our  cousin  of  Artois,  for  he  is  very  nearly  related
to  us  by  blood ; and,  since  such  an  office  is  vacant,  we  cannot  better  fill  it  than  by  sir  Philip
d’ Artois,  for  he  will  ably  and  loyally  execute  it,  and  is  much  beloved  by  every  knight  and
squire,  being  without  envy  or  avarice.”  This  speech  was  very  agreeable  to  the  king,  who
gaily  replied,  that  he  would  think  of  it,  and,  if  the  office  was  to  be  disposed  of,  he  would
rather  the  count  d’Eu  had  it  than  any  other.  Things  remained  some  time  in  this  state ; but


555


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.

the  king  was  continually  solicited  by  his  uncles,  who  were  desirous  of  advancing  sir  Philip
d’  Artois,  and  degrading  sir  Oliver  de  Clisson  ; for  the  duke  of  Berry  hated  him  for  the  death
of  Bethisac,  and  the  duke  of  Burgundy  for  his  opposition  to  the  duke  of  Brittany ; but  the
duchess  of  Burgundy  was  yet  more  inveterate  against  him  than  her  lord.  The  king  at  length
gave  his  assent,  on  condition  the  duke  of  Bei'ry  gave  him  his  daughter.


Marriage  of  Philip  d’Artois  and  Lady  Mary  de  Berry.  Designed  from  Monuments  of  the  family  at

the  Chateau  d’Eu.

But,  before  matters  had  proceeded  thus  far,  in  order  to  avoid  disgusting  the  king,  and  to
satisfy  the  duke  of  Orleans,  who  strongly  supported  the  lord  de  Clisson,  sir  William  des
Bordes,  sir  William  Martel,  both  knights  of  the  king’s  chamber,  and  sir  Philip  de  Savoisis,
knight  to  the  duke  of  Berry,  were  again  sent  to  Brittany,  to  speak  with  sir  Oliver  de  Clisson
in  the  king’s  name.  These  knights,  having  made  their  preparations,  took  their  road  through
Angers,  where  they  met  the  queen  of  Jerusalem  and  John  of  Brittany,  who  handsomely
entertained  them,  in  honour  of  the  king.  They  remained  at  Angers  two  days,  and  inquired
where  they  could  find  the  lord  de  Clisson,  for  they  had  a very  courteous  message  to  deliver
to  him  from  the  king  alone,  who  had  ordered  them  to  speak  with  him.  They  replied,  that
they  had  not  any  positive  intelligence  where  he  was  ; but  they  supposed  he  must  be  in  one
of  his  castles  in  Brittany : that  he  did  not  constantly  remain  in  any  one,  but  moved  from
one  to  another.  At  their  departure,  the  knights  took  leave  of  the  queen,  her  son  Charles,
prince  of  Tarentum,  and  John  of  Brittany,  count  de  Penthievre,  and  continued  their  journey
to  Rennes.  The  duke  of  Brittany  had  shut  himself  up  with  his  duchess  in  Vannes,  without
making  any  excursions  abroad  for  fear  of  ambuscades,  and  meeting  his  adversary  Clisson,  as
they  were  carrying  on  a murderous  war  against  each  other.  When  their  parties  met,  mercy
was  shown  by  neither,  and  the  field  was  gained  by  the  death  of  their  opponents : if,  there-
fore, he  felt  alarmed,  he  had  cause  for  it;  for,  although  the  duke  was  sovereign  of  the
country,  there  was  not  a knight  or  squire  that  would  bear  arms  against  the  lord  de  Clisson.
They  dissembled  with  the  duke,  saying,  the  quarrel  did  not  any  way  concern  them,  and
staid  at  home  without  interfering.  This  the  duke  was  forced  to  put  up  with.

When  the  knights  arrived  at  Rennes,  they  asked  where  they  could  for  certain  find  sir
Oliver  de  Clisson,  but  no  one  coidd  positively  answer  them.  They  resolved  to  ride  to
chateau- Josselin,  and  were  well  received  by  the  vassals  of  sir  Oliver,  out  of  respect  to  the


556


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


king  of  France.  They  inquired  after  their  lord,  and  where  they  could  see  him,  for  they
were  sent  by  the  king  and  the  duke  of  Orleans  to  speak  with  him.  They  either  would  not,
or  could  not,  give  them  any  satisfactory  account ; but  said,  in  excuse  for  themselves  and  sir
Oliver, — “ Certainly,  my  lords,  not  one  of  us  knows  where  to  find  him  : to-day  he  is  at  one
place,  to-morrow  at  another.  You  may  safely  ride  all  over  Brittany,  since  you  come  from
the  king;  and  all  the  castles  and  houses  of  our  lord  will  be  thrown  open  to  you.”

Perceiving  they  could  not  obtain  any  further  information,  they  left  chateau-Josselin,  and
rode  to  all  the  castles,  both  great  and  small,  of  the  lord  de  Clisson,  but  without  learning
anything  more.  They  then  waited  on  the  duke  and  duchess  at  Yannes,  who  gave  them  a
hearty  welcome  ; but  they  only  staid  half  a day  with  them,  without  discovering  the  object
of  their  secret  mission,  nor  was  the  dnke  very  inquisitive  about  their  coining.  They  did  not
see  sir  Peter  de  Craon.  On  taking  leave  of  the  duke  and  duchess,  they  set  out  on  their
return  to  Paris  to  the  king  and  lords,  who  were  expecting  them.  They  gave  an  account  to
the  king  and  the  duke  of  Orleans,  of  having  visited  all  the  towns  and  castles  of  the  lord  de
Clisson  without  seeing  or  gaining  any  certain  intelligence  of  him.  The  dukes  of  Berry  and
Burgundy  were  pleased  at  hearing  this,  and  would  not  have  wished  it  otherwise.

Shortly  afterward,  the  marriage  was  consummated  between  the  lord  Philip  d’ Artois  and
the  lady  Mary  of  Berry.  He  was  appointed  constable  of  France,  to  enjoy  all  the  privileges
and  emoluments  of  that  office,  although  sir  Oliver  de  Clisson  had  not  resigned  it,  nor  sent
back  his  sword  of  office.  He  persisted  that  he  was  still  constable,  for  that  he  had  never
done  anything  against  the  king  or  crown  of  France  that  could  have  deprived  him  of  it.
Things,  therefore,  remained  in  this  state.


CHAPTER  LVI. THE  CONSTABLE  DE  CLISSON,  DURING  HIS  ABSENCE  FROM  FRANCE,  WAGES

WAR  ON  THE  DUKE  OF  BRITTANY.

Sir  Oliver  de  Clisson  was  soon  informed  that  the  count  d’Eu  was  nominated  constable  of
France,  and  was  to  do  the  duty  and  receive  the  profits  from  the  date  of  his  appointment,
with  the  consent  of  the  king  of  France,  and  that  he  had  married  the  daughter  of  the  duke  of
Berry,  widow  of  lord  Louis  of  Blois.  To  all  this  he  was  perfectly  indifferent,  for  he  felt
that  his  loyalty  and  honour  were  as  firm  as  ever,  and  that  he  had  never  done  anything  to
forfeit  either  against  the  king  or  crown  of  France,  but  that  all  these  proceedings  originated
in  the  hatred  and  malice  of  the  dukes  of  Berry  and  Burgundy,  which  were  so  great  that
they  could  not  conceal  them.  This  determined  the  lord  de  Clisson  to  continue  his  war  with
prudence  and  vigour  against  the  duke  of  Brittany.  It  was  severe  and  bloody,  for  neither
party,  when  they  met,  made  a sham  of  fighting,  but  killed  each  other  without  mercy.  The
lord  de  Clisson  rode  frequently  from  one  of  his  castles  to  another,  and  laid  more  ambuscades
than  the  duke,  finding  himself  superior  in  numbers  to  oppose  him.  None  of  the  Breton
chivalry  would  interfere  by  bearing  arms  on  either  side ; but,  when  the  duke  sent  for  them,
they  came  to  know  what  he  wanted.  He  demanded  from  them  aid  and  advice  to  correct  his
vassal,  sir  Oliver  de  Clisson,  who  had  greatly  misbehaved  himself  towards  him.  The  barons
of  Brittany,  such  as  the  viscount  de  Rohan,  the  lord  de  Dinant,  sir  Ilermen  de  Lyon,  and
many  more,  excused  themselves,  saying,  they  were  uninterested  in  this  quarrel,  and  would
not  therefore  bear  arms  against  the  lord  de  Clisson ; but  that  they  would  heartily  labour  to
mediate  between  the  duke  and  him,  if  they  knew  how,  or  saw  any  probability  of  establishing
peace  between  them.

The  duke  seeing  lie  could  no  way  prevail  on  them  to  join  him,  and  that  in  this  warfare  lie
was  losing  more  men  than  the  lord  de  Clisson,  consented  to  send  the  above-named  barons  to
treat  with  him,  and  bring  him,  under  safe  passports,  to  Yannes,  that  they  might  confer
together.  They  were  to  add,  that  he  would  find  him  courteous  and  well-inclined  to  listen
to  any  reasonable  terms  ; and,  if  lie  bad  treated  him  with  contempt,  he  would  make  such
reparations  as  those  he  addressed  should  think  proper.  The  knights  willingly  undertook  the
mission,  for  the  sake  of  doing  good,  and  set  out  in  search  of  sir  Oliver  de  Clisson,  whom  I
believe  they  found  at  chateau-Josselin.  They  told  him  the  message  they  were  charged  with


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &e.


557


from  the  duke,  and  urged  him  strongly  to  accept  of  peace;  for  war  between  them  was  very
unbecoming,  displeasing  to  the  nobles,  and  highly  oppressive  to  the  lower  orders  in  Brittany.
“ Sir  Oliver,”  said  they,  “ we  are  thus  pressing,  in  the  hope  that  you  will  be  pleased  to  wait
on  our  lord ; and,  for  your  safety  and  secure  return,  we  pledge  ourselves  to  remain  in  your
castle  of  Josselin,  without  ever  stirring  beyond  the  gates.  We  imagine,  that  when  our  lord
and  you  shall  confer  together,  you  will  very  speedily  settle  your  differences,  for  we  left  him
with  the  best  intentions  towards  you.”

To  this  speech,  sir  Oliver  replied, — “ My  good  sirs,  what  advantage  can  my  death  be  to
you  ? Do  you  think  I know  not  the  duke  of  Brittany  ? Most  certainly  I do ; and  he  is
too  haughty  and  revengeful,  whatever  he  may  have  assured  you  relative  to  my  security  and
safe  return,  not  to  resolve  the  moment  I shall  be  in  bis  presence  to  have  me  put  to  death,  in
spite  of  his  promises  to  you ; and,  if  I be  killed,  your  fate  will  be  the  same,  for  my  people
will  of  course  retaliate  on  you.  It  is,  therefore,  much  better  we  run  not  such  risks.  I will
guard  myself  well  against  him ; and  let  him,  if  he  please,  do  the  same.”  “ Fair  cousin,”
replied  sir  Charles  de  Dinant,  “ you  may  say  what  you  please ; we  have  not  seen  him  show
any  wish  to  have  you  killed,  if  he  could  converse  with  you  in  the  manner  we  have  proposed,
but,  on  the  contrary,  the  strongest  desire  to  accommodate  all  matters  of  dispute.  We  there-
fore, for  him  and  for  ourselves,  beg  you  will  consent  to  it.”  Sir  Oliver  answered, — “ I
believe  firmly,  that  you  wish  me  every  good ; but,  on  the  security  he  offers  through  you,  I
will  not  advance  one  step.  However,  since  you  are  all  so  earnest  in  the  business,  for  which
it  behoves  me  to  thank  you,  I will  mention  on  what  terms  I will  come  to  him ; and  you
shall,  if  they  be  agreeable  to  you,  carry  them  back  as  my  final  answer.  On  your  return,
you  will  tell  the  duke,  that  I will  not  accept  other  pledge  for  my  safety  than  his  only  son,
who  is  betrothed  to  a princess  of  France.  Let  him  send  him  hither  to  remain  under  the
guard  of  my  men,  in  chateau- Josselin,  until  I be  returned,  and  I will  then  set  out  to  wait
on  him.  This  mode  is  more  agreeable  to  me  than  any  other,  and  also  more  reasonable ; for
were  you  to  remain  here  as  hostages,  as  you  offer,  who  would  there  be  to  negotiate  the
treaty  ? or  who  would  be  the  mediators  between  us  ? and  how,  without  your  interference,
shall  we  ever  come  to  an  agreement  ?”  When  the  three  barons  saw  he  was  determined,  they
took  leave  of  the  lord  de  Clisson,  and  returned  to  V annes,  to  relate  to  the  duke  what  sir
Oliver  had  said.  In  regard  to  sending  his  son  to  chateau- Josselin,  the  duke  absolutely
refused,  and  the  war  continued  on  the  same  footing  as  before,  so  that  no  merchants  or  others
dared  to  travel  through  the  country.  All  commerce  was  at  a stand  in  Brittany,  which  was
severely  felt  in  the  cities  and  large  towns : even  the  labourers  in  husbandry  were  also  in  a
state  of  idleness.

The  duchess  of  Burgundy  assisted  her  cousin  as  much  as  she  could  with  men  at  arms  from
Burgundy  and  elsewhere,  for  the  duke  could  not  prevail  on  his  subjects  to  take  part  in  the
war,  and  the  knights  and  squires,  excepting  those  of  his  household,  dissembled  their  opinions.
On  the  other  hand,  the  duke  of  Orleans,  who  was  attached  to  the  constable,  supported  him
underhand,  and  sent  him  men  at  arms  and  good  coursers  to  re-mount  his  men.  Sir  Oliver
made  more  frequent  excursions  than  the  duke,  and  it  happened  that  he  met  with  two  of  the
duke’s  squires  who  were  going  on  his  business : one  of  them  was  called  Bernard,  and  the
other  Yvonnet : they  could  neither  fly  nor  avoid  falling  into  sir  Oliver’s  hands,  who  was
rejoiced  at  it,  for  he  was  well  acquainted  with  them.  One  had  in  former  times  done  him  a
service,  the  other  the  contrary,  which  he  then  recollected.  They  were  much  frightened  at  being
thus  caught,  and  sir  Oliver  addressed  them, — “ Dost  thou  remember,  Yvonnet,  how  cruelly
thou  behavedst  to  me  in  the  castle  of  Ermine,  near  Yannes,  when  thou  didst  shut  me  up  in
a dungeon  ? Thou,  Bernard,  then  hadst  pity  on  me,  and  pulling  off  thy  coat,  because  I was
only  in  my  doublet  and  lying  on  the  pavement,  gavest  it  to  me,  to  cover  me  from  the  cold.
I will  now  return  that  friendship,  by  sparing  thy  life ; but  as  for  this  wicked  traitor,  Yvonnet,
who  might  have  avoided,  if  he  pleased,  the  cruelty  of  his  conduct,  he  shall  suffer.”  At  these
words,  he  drew  his  dagger,  and  slew  him  on  the  spot.  He  then  continued  his  course,  without
touching  the  servants.

Another  time,  sir  Oliver  de  Clisson,  with  about  three  hundred  lances,  was  riding  before
the  castle  of  Auray,  in  which  were  the  duke  and  duchess.  He  met  about  forty  of  the  duke’s


558


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


varlets,  who  had  tied  their  horses  to  trees,  for  it  was  near  midsummer,  and,  having  cut  some
hay,  were  trussing  it  up  to  carry,  like  foragers,  to  their  lodgings.  Sir  Oliver  galloped  among
them,  without  other  harm  than  the  fright  he  put  them  to,  and  said, — “ How  dare  you  take
the  field,  and  carry  away  the  harvest  of  the  farmers  ? You  have  not  sown  this,  and  are  cutting
it  before  it  is  ripe  : you  have  begun  your  harvest  too  soon.  Come,  take  up  your  scythes,  and
mount  your  horses : for  this  time  I will  do  you  no  harm ; but  go  and  tell  the  duke  of
Brittany,  who  I know  is  in  Auray,  to  come  hither,  or  send  his  men  to  receive  me ; and  that
Clisson  informs  him  he  will  remain  here  until  sun-set.”  The  varlets  were  happy  in  their
escape,  for  they  thought  they  should  all  be  killed ; therefore  they  picked  up  their  scythes,
mounted  their  horses,  and  returned  to  the  duke  in  Auray.  I doubt  not  they  punctually
delivered  the  message,  but  the  duke  neither  sallied  out  himself,  nor  sent  any  of  his  men  to
meet  sir  Oliver  de  Clisson.  Such  skirmishes  passed  often  between  them,  but  the  principal
inhabitants  never  interfered.

We  will  now  leave  the  affairs  of  Brittany,  and  return  to  those  of  France  and  England.


CHAPTER  LVTI. A TREATY  OF  PEACE  IS  CONCLUDED  BETWEEN  THE  KINGS  OF  FRANCE

AND  ENGLAND,  THROUGH  THE  MEDIATION  OF  THEIR  UNCLES.

You  have  before  heard  of  the  conferences  that  were  held  at  Amiens  on  a peace  between
France  and  England,  and  on  what  terms  the  duke  of  Lancaster  had  gone  back.  The  English
were  unwilling  to  consent  to  a peace,  notwithstanding  the  king,  the  dukes  of  Lancaster  and
York,  and  all  the  commissioners  who  had  been  at  Amiens,  strongly  urged  it ; for  the  majority
of  the  commons  were  desirous  of  war ; and  two  thirds  of  the  young  knights  and  squires
knew  not  how  to  employ  themselves:  they  had  learnt  idleness,  and  looked  to  war  as  the
means  of  support.  However,  they  were  forced  to  submit  to  the  opinions  of  the  king,  his
uncles,  and  the  more  intelligent  part  of  the  nation.  The  duke  of  Lancaster,  considering  the
matter,  as  well  in  regard  to  the  welfare  of  his  two  daughters,  the  queens  of  Castille  and
Portugal,  as  in  respect  to  his  nephew,  the  king  of  England,  who  was  greatly  inclined  to
peace,  took  much  pains  to  bring  it  about,  because  he  thought  it  would  likewise  be  for  the
honour  and  advantage  of  England.

On  the  part  of  France,  the  duke  of  Burgundy  greatly  exerted  himself,  for  he  found  the
whole  weight  of  the  government  rested  on  him  ; since  his  nephews,  the  king  and  the  duke  of
Orleans,  were  weak  in  body  and  mind.  He  was  of  great  power  by  his  marriage  with  the
heiress  of  Flanders,  and  daily  expecting  to  inherit  Brabant  also.  If,  therefore,  in  times  to
come,  these  countries  should  quarrel  with  France,  and  unite  themselves,  as  they  had  formerly
done,  with  England,  they  would  be  an  overmatch  for  her.  The  duke  of  Burgundy  was  a
long-sighted  politician,  as  I was  told  by  those  who  ought  to  know ; and  he  and  the  duke  of
Lancaster  effected  that  the  conferences  should  be  renewed  at  Leulinghen,  where  they  had
before  beep  held,  and  that  the  commissioners  should  have  full  powers  to  conclude  a peace.
The  conferences  were  to  be  holden  in  the  ensuing  month  of  May,  at  Leulinghen,  in  the  year
of  grace  1393.  It  had  been  thus  agreed  to  by  both  parties,  and  commissioners  were  appointed
by  each  king.

On  the  part  of  the  king  of  England,  were  his  two  uncles  the  dukes  of  Lancaster  and
Gloucester : this  last  was  very  popular  with  the  commons  of  England,  and  all  others  who
preferred  war  to  peace.  From  among  the  prelates  were  selected  the  archbishop  of  Y ork , the
bishop  of  London,  and  other  clerks  learned  in  the  laws,  to  expound  the  Latin  letters.

These  lords  * repaired  to  Calais  soon  after  St.  George’s  day,  which  is  always  celebrated  at
Windsor  with  great  feastings  by  the  knights  of  the  blue  garter.  The  dukes  of  Berry  and
Burgundy  made  preparations  for  coming  to  Boulogne,  that  they  might  be  near  at  hand  to
the  place  of  conference.  The  king  of  France  showed  great  impatience  for  peace,  as  the  wars
had  lasted  too  long ; and  he  said  to  his  uncles,  that  he  would  fix  his  residence  near  to

* In  the  Fcedera  the  commissioners  arc, — the  duke  of  Lancaster, — the  duke  of  Gloucester, — Walter  bishop  of
Durham, — Thomas  earl  Marshal,  governor  of  Calais, — sir  Thomas  Percy, — sir  Lewis  Clifford, — Richard  Rouhall,
doctor  of  laws.


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


551)


Leulinghen,  to  piove  liow  eager  lie  was  in  the  matter,  and  to  be  ready  at  hand  if  necessary.
It  was  proposed  that  he  should  be  at  Saint  Omer,  on  the  frontiers  of  Calais,  or  at  Therouenne,
Montreuil,  or  Abbeville ; but  the  last  place  was  determined  on  for  his  residence,  as  it  was
large  and  convenient,  and  the  court  could  easily  be  lodged  on  the  banks  of  the  beautiful
river  Somme.

When  this  was  fixed,  great  preparations  were  made  for  the  reception  of  the  king  in
Abbeville ; and  the  abbey  of  Saint  Peter,  as  being  a large  and  handsome  edifice  of  the
Benedictine  monks,  was  chosen  for  his  lodgings.  Thither  came  the  king  of  France,  accompanied
by  his  brother,  the  duke  of  Orleans,  and  sir  Reginald  de  Corbie*  chancellor  of  France.  Tne
dukes  of  Berry  and  Burgundy,  with  the  other  commissioners,  were  at  Boulogne,  and  the
duke  of  Lancaster  and  his  company  at  Calais.  It  was  a handsome  show  to  see  the  state  and
array  of  the  French  and  English  commissioners,  when  they  opened  the  conferences  at
Leulinghen,  between  Boulogne  and  Calais.  There  wrere  tents  and  pavilions  erected  for
them  to  take  refreshments,  or  sleep  in  on  occasion ; and  two  or  three  days  in  the  week  the
commissioners  met,  and  were  frequently  nine  hours  discussing  the  preliminaries  for  a peace,
in  a large  and  handsome  pavilion  that  had  been  pitched  for  their  assembling  in.

It  was  told  me  (for  I,  John  Froissart,  the  writer  of  this  history,  was  at  Abbeville,  that  I
might  learn  the  truth  of  what  was  passing,)  by  those  who  were  well  informed,  that  after
the  procurations  from  the  two  kings  had  been  verified  as  to  the  commissioners’  powers  of
concluding  a peace,  the  French  proposed  that  Calais  should  be  so  demolished,  as  that  it  could
never  again  be  made  habitable.  The  dukes  of  Lancaster  and  Gloucester  instantly  answered
that  they  needed  not  have  made  this  proposition,  for  that  Calais  would  be  the  very  last  town
the  crown  of  England  would  part  with  ; and  that  if  they  intended  this  as  a basis  for  treating,
there  was  an  end  to  the  business,  for  they  would  not  hear  further  on  the  subject.  The  dukes
of  Berry  and  Burgundy,  perceiving  their  cousins  of  England  so  determined,  dropped  the
matter,  for  they  found  it  would  be  in  vain  to  press  it,  and  discoursed  on  other  topics.  The
English,  for  a long  time,  demanded  restitution  of  every  thing  that  had  been  yielded  to  the
late  king  Edward,  and,  in  addition  to  these  territories,  the  balance  of  the  ransom  that  had
been  due  when  the  war  was  renewed  between  France  and  England.  This  was  resisted
strenuously  by  the  French  dukes,  who  argued  themselves,  and  by  their  learned  clerks,  on  the
unreasonableness  of  the  demand.  The  two  dukes  and  the  chancellor  of  France  replied  with
temper, — “ that  with  regard  to  the  first  demand,  that  the  whole  of  the  territory  that  had
been  yielded  to  king  Edward  should  be  restored,  it  was  impossible ; for  the  inhabitants
of  the  towns,  castles,  and  lands,  which  had  been  assigned  to  England  by  the  treaty  of
Bretigny,  and  afterwards  confirmed  at  Calais,  in  the  year  1360,  were  too  adverse  to  such
restoration  ; and  the  king  of  France,  to  whom  they  had  voluntarily  surrendered  themselves,
had,  in  consequence,  accepted  their  homage,  granted  them  protection,  and  such  other  privileges,
on  his  royal  word,  as  could  not  be  broken ; and  that,  if  they  wished  for  peace,  they  must  oiler
other  preliminaries.”

It  was  then  resolved,  between  the  four  dukes,  on  whom  it  solely  depended  whether  there
should  be  peace  or  war,  that  each  party  should  reduce  to  writing  their  different  grounds  of
treating,  and  mutually  deliver  them  to  each  other,  to  consider  of  them  at  their  leisure,  with
their  clerks,  learned  in  the  laws,  who  had  accompanied  them,  and  determine  on  what  parts
they  could  agree  to,  and  what  would  not  be  accepted.  This  was  assented  to  by  all ; for
the  dukes  were  before  much  fatigued  in  hearing  the  various  papers  read  and  discussed ; more
especially  the  English  commissioners ; for,  as  it  was  carried  on  in  French,  they  were  not  so
well  used  to  the  finesse  and  double  meanings  of  that  language  as  the  natives,  who  turned
and  twisted  it  to  their  own  advantage  at  pleasure.  The  English  opposed  this,  for  they
wished  every  thing  to  be  made  clear  and  intelligible  to  every  one.  The  French  accused  the
English  of  having,  at  various  times,  infringed  the  articles  of  the  peace,  and  offered  to  prove
it  by  written  documents,  and  the  word  of  their  king,  as  well  as  by  the  judgment  of  the  pope.
This  made  the  English  more  diligent  to  have  every  thing  made  out  plain ; and,  whenever

* I imagine  this  must  be  a mistake,  though  the  MSS.  succeeded  him,  and  died  1413. — IIfnault.  [Fierre  de
are  the  same  ; for  Pierre  de  Giac  was  chancellor  after  sir  Giac  died  the  17th  Aug.,  1387,  and  Arnaud  de  Corbie
Miles  des  Dormans,  and  died  1407.  Arnaud  de  Corbie  succceeded  him  in  that  year,  aud  not  in  1407. — Ed.]


5 GO


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


they  found  anything  obscure  in  the  proposals  that  had  been  given  them  from  the  French  com-
missioners, which  they  examined  carefully  and  at  leisure,  they  made  their  clerks  demand  from
the  dukes  of  Berry  and  Burgundy  how  they  understood  such  expressions ; for  the  English
dukes  would  not  pass  over  an  article  that  had  the  least  tendency  to  a double  meaning ; and
whatever  they  did  not  clearly  understand  they  had  erased  in  their  presence,  declaring  they
would  not  allow  of  any  thing  that  could  bear  a misconstruction,  for  that  the  French,  who
had  been  from  their  youth  trained  to  such  things,  were  more  subtle  than  the  English.

So  many  difficulties  greatly  lengthened  the  conferences ; and  the  English  held  themselves
obliged  to  demand  restitution  of  all  the  lands  dependent  on  Aquitaine,  and  their  profits  since
the  commencement  of  the  war,  as  they  had  been  charged  to  do  by  the  parliament  of  England.
This  the  French  would  not  agree  to:  they  were  willing,  indeed,  to  yield  the  countries  of
Tarbes,  Bigorre,  Agen,  and  the  Agenois,  with  Perigord,  but ' declared  they  would  never
restore  Cahors,  Rouergue,  Quercy,  and  Limousin,  nor  give  up  any  part  of  Ponthieu  or  Guines
more  than  the  English  possessed  at  the  present  moment.  On  these  grounds  things  remained  :
they  stood  out  for  upwards  of  fifteen  days,  and  only  came  to  the  conclusion  that  it  should  be  laid
before  the  two  kings  : to  forward  the  business,  the  dukes  of  Berry  and  Burgundy  offered  to
set  out  for  Abbeville,  to  inform  the  king  of  France  of  all  that  had  passed  ; and,  if  he  would
acquiesce  in  the  English  proposals,  they  would  not  oppose  them.  They  entreated,  on  the
other  hand,  their  cousins  to  write  to  king  Richard,  and  amicably  let  him  know  what  they
had  done ; for  he  had,  for  two  years  past,  shown  the  most  anxious  desire  for  peace  between
England,  France,  and  all  their  allies.  The  two  dukes  promised  compliance  ; but  you  must
know,  as  I was  well  informed,  the  duke  of  Gloucester  was  more  difficult  to  persuade  than
his  brother,  and  he  had  been  purposely  chosen  his  colleague,  by  those  who  preferred  war  to
peace,  because  they  knew  he  would  not  assent  to  any  thing  that  was  in  the  least  dishonourable
to  his  country.  The  four  dukes  then  separated  in  a most  friendly  manner,  having  been  nine
days  in  conference.  The  English  commissioners  returned  to  Calais,  and  the  French  to
Boulogne,  whence  they  set  out  for  Abbeville.  They  found  there  the  king  of  France,  who
was  amusing  himself,  he  having  taken  a liking  to  the  place.  There  is  scarcely  any  city  in
France  more  pleasantly  situated ; and  within  it  is  a handsome  inclosed  garden,  partly
surrounded  by  the  river  Somme,  in  which  the  king  spent  much  of  his  time,  and  often
supped  there,  telling  his  brother  and  council  that  the  air  of  Abbeville  had  done  his  health
great  good.

At  this  time,  Leon  king  of  Armenia  was  with  the  king  of  France  : he  was  just  come  from
Greece  and  the  frontiers  of  his  own  kingdom,  into  which  he  dared  not  venture ; for  the  Turks
had  conquered,  and  kept  possession  of  it  as  well  as  other  places,  in  defiance  of  the  world,
excepting  the  strong  town  of  Conich*,  situated  on  the  sea-shore,  which  the  Genoese  had
strongly  garrisoned  and  guarded  against  the  Turks ; for,  if  they  had  possession  of  this  place,
they  would  grievously  harass  by  sea  the  Cyprotes,  and  other  Christians  of  Rhodes  and
Candia.  The  king  of  Armenia  would  gladly  have  seen  a peace  concluded  between  France
and  England,  that  such  knights  and  squires  as  wished  for  deeds  of  arms  might  travel  to
Greece,  and  assist  him  in  the  recovery  of  his  kingdom.

The  king  received  kindly  his  two  uncles  at  Abbeville,  and  made  them  good  cheer.  He
asked  how  the  treaty  was  going  on,  and  how  they  were  themselves.  They  having  related
to  him  the  true  state  of  affairs,  and  how  all  had  passed,  he  was  well  contented,  and  testified
his  joy  and  wishes  for  peace.  In  like  manner,  the  two  English  dukes,  on  their  arrival  at
Calais,  had  written  to  the  king  of  England  the  demands  and  answers  made  to  them,  which,
being  sealed,  were  forwarded  to  him.  In  reply  to  which,  the  king  had  desired  they  would
proceed  in  the  treaty,  for  the  war  had  lasted  long  enough,  to  the  ruin  of  the  country,  and  the
slaughter  of  chivalry,  and  the  great  weakening  of  Christendom.  “ This  might,”  he  added,
“ have  serious  consequences ; for  Bajazet  with  his  Turks  were  advancing  towards  the  king-
dom of  Hungary,  and  were  now  in  Wallachia,  as  letters  to  France  and  England  had  brought
information.”

The  time  was  now  come  for  the  return  of  the  four  dukes  and  commissioners  to  the  renewal
of  the  conferences  at  Leulinghen.  With  the  French  lords  came  the  king  of  Armenia,  to

* “ Conich.'’  The  MSS.  have  Gourch.


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  iec.


501


remonstrate  with  the  English  on  his  distressing  situation  : he  was  well  known  to  the  duke
of  Gloucester,  when  he  had  visited  England  during  the  threatened  invasion  from  France,  who
had  shown  him  many  civilities,  and  carried  him  to  a heautiful  castle  he  had  in  Essex  called
Fleshy.  The  dukes  of  Lancaster  and  Gloucester  received  him  well,  particularly  the  last,  on
account  of  former  acquaintance.  They  patiently  listened  to  all  his  grievances,  and  replied
so  graciously  that  he  was  well  contented  with  them.  At  these  conferences  many  different
proposals  were  made,  and  the  cardinal  de  Luna  *,  in  hopes  of  being  heard  by  the  commissioner,
liad  made  a long  stay  at  Abbeville,  whither  he  had  been  sent  as  legate  by  pope  Clement  for
the  affairs  of  the  church.  He  was  lodged  at  the  convent  of  the  Cordeliers,  on  the  river
Somme.  The  French  wanted  to  insert  in  their  preliminaries  some  articles  relative  to  the
church  and  to  the  support  of  this  Robert  de  Geneve,  who  styled  himself  pope  : hut  when  the
English  dukes  observed  this,  they  stepped  forward  witli  courage,  saying  to  their  cousins  of
France, — “Take  away  this  legate:  we  want  not  to  hear  his  speeches:  it  has  not  been
without  fully  weighing  their  merits  that  we  have  determined  which  of  the  popes  to  obey.
We  desire,  therefore,  not  to  hear  anything  on  this  subject ; and,  should  he  again  come
forward  under  your  protection,  w’e  will  break  up  the  conference  and  return  home.”  From
this  time,  nothing  more  was  said  of  the  cardinal,  who  remained  quiet  in  Abbeville.  The
lords  now  pushed  forward  the  treaty  with  such  success  that  it  was  brought  to  a happy
conclusion,  and  to  the  satisfaction  of  all  parties.

The  four  dukes  saw  their  respective  kings  were  anxious  for  peace,  more  especially  the
king  of  France,  who,  when  the  duke  of  Lancaster  had  taken  leave  of  him  at  Amiens  during
the  former  conferences,  had  said, — “ Fair  cousin,  I beg  you  to  exert  yourself  that  there  may
be  a solid  peace  between  my  brother  of  England  and  me,  that  we  may  assist  our  cousin  the
king  of  Hungary  against  Bajazet,  who  is  so  powerful  in  Turkey.”  The  duke  of  Lancaster
had  promised  the  king  to  do  his  utmost ; and  indeed  it  was  through  his  remonstrances  with
his  nephew,  king  Richard,  his  brothers,  and  the  parliament,  that  the  conferences  were
renewed  at  Leulinghen,  to  establish  a peace,  if  possible,  to  the  honour  of  England.  The
duke  of  Gloucester  was  much  colder  in  the  matter,  and  carefully  noticed  all  the  contentious
speeches  of  the  French,  saying,  the  French  always  wished  to  fight  with  both  hands.  He
made  so  strong  an  opposition,  that  the  adverse  party  perceiving  it,  sent  a squire  of  honour,
and  of  the  bed-chamber  and  council  of  the  king  of  France,  to  the  duke  : his  name  was
Robert  l’Hermite ; and  this  is  what  he  said,  for  the  duke  related  to  me  the  words  at  his
castle  of  Pleshjr.  “My  lord,  for  the  love  of  God  do  not  longer  oppose  a peace.  You  see
how  diligent  our  lords  of  France  are  in  promoting  it,  and  it  will  be  charity  in  you  to  join
them,  for  the  war  has  lasted  too  long ; and,  when  kings  wish  for  peace,  their  relations  and
subjects  ought  to  obey.”  “ Robert,  Robert,”  replied  the  duke  of  Gloucester,  “ I wish  not  to
prevent  a peace ; but  you  Frenchmen  use  such  specious  words,  beyond  our  understanding,
that,  when  you  will,  you  may  urge  them  as  signifying  war  or  peace  as  you  shall  choose.  In
this  manner  has  the  business  hitherto  been  conducted,  dissembling  always  until  you  have
gained  your  end.  If  my  lord  the  king  had  believed  me,  and  the  majority  of  those  who  are
hound  to  serve  him,  there  never  would  have  been  peace  with  France,  until  you  had  restored
to  us  all  you  have  taken  through  treacherous  causes,  as  is  known  to  God,  and  to  all  who  will
search  into  the  business.  But,  since  my  lord  inclines  to  peace,  you  are  in  the  right  to  press
it  forward  : it  is  just  that  we  should  also  approve  of  it,  and  since  peace  is  so  much  wished
for  are  we  here  assembled : let  it,  however,  be  well  kept  on  your  side,  as  it  shall  be  on  ours.”
On  saying  this,  the  duke  of  Gloucester  went  awTay.  Robert  l’Hermite,  at  the  same  time,
took  his  leave,  and  returned  to  his  countrymen.  I will  not  protract  the  subject  longer,  but
come  to  the  conclusion,  as  the  matter  requires  it.

The  four  dukes,  having  full  powers  from  their  respective  monarchs,  to  conclude  a truce  or
peace,  continued  their  conferences  with  such  success,  that  the  report  in  Abbeville  was  current
of  a peace  having  been  made  between  France,  England,  and  their  allies.  But  I,  the  author
of  this  history,  who  at  the  time  resided  in  Abbeville,  to  learn  news,  could  never  understand
that  a peace  had  been  concluded  : only  the  truce  had  been  prolonged  for  four  years,  on  sea

* The  cardinal  de  Luna,  an  Arragonian,  was  anti-pope  after  the  death  of  Clement,  under  the  name  of  Benedict
XIII.  See  more  of  his  turbulent  life  in  Muratori,  &c.

VOL.  II.  O O


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


5(>2

and  land,  between  all  the  parties.  It  was  imagined  that,  before  the  expiration  of  this  term,
all  the  territories  and  lordships  in  Languedoc,  that  were  to  revert  to  the  kings  of  England
and  their  heirs  for  ever,  would  be  surrendered  to  king  Richard,  or  to  his  commissioners.  In
return  for  the  giving  up  so  many  towns,  castles,  and  lordships,  which  had  been  agreed  to  by
the  commissioners  for  peace,  the  dukes  of  Lancaster  and  Gloucester  engaged  that  their  captains,
of  whatever  nation  they  might  be,  who  held  possession  of  different  forts  in  France,  that  were
to  revert  to  the  king  of  France,  should  evacuate  them,  and  cease  from  carrying  on  any  war
under  the  name  and  pretext  of  the  king  of  England  or  the  English.  All  the  articles  of  the
truce  were  fairly  written  out,  signed  and  sealed  by  the  different  lords,  and  copies  of  them
sent  to  the  two  kings,  before  they  parted,  at  Leulinghen.

The  king  of  England  was  very  impatient  to  hear  of  peace  being  concluded,  and  his  uncles,
knowing  this,  determined  to  send  him  an  express  with  the  news : they  called  to  them  a
herald,  named  Marche,  who  was  king  at  arms  in  England,  and  wrote  to  the  king  by  him  the
whole  detail  of  what  had  been  agreed  on,  and  signed  by  both  parties.  The  herald  was
rejoiced  to  receive  these  letters  from  the  dukes,  and,  leaving  the  English  tents,  rode  to  Calais,
where  he  hired  a fishing-boat,  and,  by  the  grace  of  God,  a favourable  win  d,  and  the  exertions
of  the  fishermen,  was  speedily  landed  at  Dover.  He  then  continued  his  journey  until  he
came  to  London,  where  he  found  the  king.  On  his  arrival,  he  was  introduced  into  the  king’s
chamber,  because  he  was  come  from  Calais,  where  the  king’s  uncles  were  negotiating  a peace.
He  presented  his  letters ; and  the  king,  having  perused  them,  was  so  well  pleased  with  their
contents,  and  the  good  news  he  had  brought,  that  he  gave  him  very  rich  gifts,  and  a hand-
some annuity,  as  the  herald  told  me  afterwards  when  riding  with  him  through  part  of
England.


CHAPTER  LVIII. THE  TREATY  OF  PEACE  IS  NEARLY  BROKEN  OFF  BY  POPE  BONIFACE,  AND

BY  THE  KING  OF  FRANCE  RELAPSING  INTO  HIS  FORMER  ILLNESS.

Let  us  return  to  the  commissioners  from  France  and  England  at  Leulinghen.  When  they
pleased  they  lived  in  tents,  which  were  prepared  for  them  in  great  numbers  and  magnificence.
The  English  were  very  attentive  to  the  verification  of  the  different  papers,  that  nothing
obscure  or  doubtful  might  remain.  They  examined  every  paper,  and  had  every  expression
made  clear  before  they  signed  them.  From  an  event  that  happened,  the  negotiations  which
had  taken  up  so  much  time  were  near  being  broken  off.  I will  say  what  it  was ; for  in
matters  of  history  everything  should  be  detailed,  that  the  truth  may  be  more  apparent.
You  have  heard  that  the  king  of  France  had  made  a long  stay  at  Abbeville  : he  took  pleasure
in  the  place,  but  his  stay  was  prolonged  on  account  of  the  treaty  that  was  going  forward  at
Leulinghen.

Just  at  the  conclusion  of  the  treaty,  the  dukes  of  Lancaster  and  Gloucester  declared  it  was
the  intention  of  king  Richard  and  the  parliament,  that  pope  Boniface,  who  was  acknowledged
for  the  true  pope  by  the  Romans,  Germans,  Hungarians,  Lombards,  Venetians,  English,  and
by  all  Christendom  except  France,  should  be  received  as  such,  and  the  person  who  styled
himself  pope  Clement  be  degraded  and  condemned.  This  proposal,  the  two  dukes  said,  they
had  been  specifically  ordered  to  make  by  the  three  estates  of  England.  When  the  dukes  of
Berry  and  Burgundy  heard  this,  to  please  their  cousins  of  England,  and  to  prevent  the  treaty
from  being  interrupted,  they  desired,  in  a friendly  way,  to  have  a little  time  to  consider  what
they  had  proposed.  It  being  granted,  they  consulted  together ; and  the  duke  of  Burgundy
eloquently  and  prudently  answered  as  follows,  to  soften  the  matter  to  the  English  dukes  : —
“ It  does  not  seem  to  us  any  way  proper  that  we  should  intermix  with  our  negotiations  the
dispute  between  the  two  popes.  My  brother  of  Berry  and  myself  are  somewhat  surprised
how  you  could  have  proposed  it,  for  at  the  beginning  of  the  conferences  you  objected  to  the
presence  of  the  cardinal  de  Luna,  who  is  now  at  Abbeville  as  legate  from  the  pope,  and
refused  to  hear  anything  he  had  to  say.  We  had  before  determined  that  when  the  cardinals
elected  Urban  for  pope,  and  on  his  death  Boniface,  the  elections  were  null,  for  no  one  either
from  your  country  or  ours  was  summoned  to  them  ; and  the  election  of  him  who  calls  himself


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


563


Clement  and  resides  at  Avignon  is,  from  the  same  cause,  in  the  like  predicament.  AVe  do
not  deny  that  it  would  be  great  charity  in  those  who  could  attend  to  it,  to  appease  and  put
an  end  to  this  schism  in  the  church.  But,  in  regard  to  ourselves,  we  must  refer  the  matter
to  the  university  of  Paris ; and,  when  all  our  business  here  shall  be  concluded  by  a solid
peace,  we  will,  in  conjunction  with  the  council  of  our  cousin  the  king  of  Germany,  willingly
attend  to  this  matter,  as  you  may  do  on  your  side.”

This  reply  of  the  duke  of  Burgundy  was  agreeable  to  the  English  dukes,  for  it  seemed
reasonable,  and  they  answered,  “ You  have  well  spoken  : let  the  matter  now  rest,  and  be  as
you  say.”  The  negotiations  were  going  on  as  well  as  before  ; but  there  fell  out,  just  at  the
conclusion,  a great  hindrance  by  the  king  of  France  relapsing  into  the  same  frenzy  by  which
he  was  afflicted  in  the  preceding  year.  He  had  remained  at  Abbeville  until  near  Midsummer,
at  the  abbey  of  Saint  Peter,  passing  his  time  in  a variety  of  amusements.  The  first  that
noticed  his  relapse  was  a Norman  knight,  called  sir  AVilliam  Martel,  who  was  employed  the
most  about  the  king’s  person.  The  dukes  of  Berry  and  Burgundy  were  at  the  time  at
Leulinghen  or  Boulogne,  bringing  the  conference  to  a close,  or  at  least  finishing  all  that
could  be  done  this  year.  The  moment  the  duke  of  Orleans  perceived  the  state  of  the  king’s
health,  he  sent  information  to  his  uncles  by  a favourite  squire  of  his  own,  called  Boniface,  an
agreeable  man.  The  two  dukes,  on  hearing  this  unfortunate  intelligence,  set  out  as  speedily
as  they  could  ; for  they  had  already  taken  leave  of  their  cousins  of  England,  who  were
returned  to  Calais  to  wait  for  information  from  the  king  of  Navarre  and  the  duke  of
Brittany.

It  had  been  proposed  at  the  conferences,  that  as  the  castle  of  Cherbourg  in  Normandy  had
been  mortgaged  to  the  king  of  England  for  sixty  thousand  nobles,  who  in  consequence  had
possession,  it  should  be  restored  to  the  king  of  Navarre,  on  the  king  of  France  repaying  the
sixty  thousand  nobles  ; and  in  like  manner  was  the  castle  of  Brest  to  be  surrendered  to  the
duke  of  Brittany.  The  dukes  of  Berry  and  Burgundy  did  not  wait  for  the  conclusion  of
these  two  articles,  but  hastened  to  Abbeville,  where,  to  their  sorrow,  they  found  the  king  in
a very  poor  state  of  health.  The  king’s  disorder  was  kept  secret  as  long  as  possible,  but  in
such  cases  it  is  very  soon  publicly  known.  The  court  at  Abbeville  was  shortly  dispersed,
and  every  one  retired  to  his  home.  Councils  wrere  holden  as  to  the  proper  place  the  king
should  he  conveyed  to,  and  in  respect  to  his  management.  The  castle  of  Creil  was  again
fixed  on  for  his  residence,  whither  he  was  carried  in  a litter.  The  weather  was  now  so  hot,
that  they  rested  the  day  and  only  travelled  the  night  season  : the  king  was  attended  to  Creil
by  his  brother  and  the  duke  of  Berry.  The  duke  of  Burgundy  went  to  Artois,  and  thence
visited  Flanders,  having  met  his  duchess  at  the  castle  of  Hedin.

The  lord  de  la  Riviere  and  sir  John  le  Mercier  seemed  entirely  forgotten  : no  one  spoke  of
them,  nor  interfered  in  their  delivery  from  prison.  This  relapse  of  the  king  had,  however,
greatly  exculpated  them  for  the  accusations  of  having  been  the  cause  of  his  first  illness  in  the
eyes  of  the  public.  The  wisest  in  France  had  now  learnt,  that  from  the  weakness  of  his
nerves,  he  was  naturally  inclined  to  this  disorder,  which  had  been  brought  forward  with
greater  force  from  the  excesses  he  had  indulged  in.  It  was  much  regretted  by  those  who
wished  his  recovery  that  master  AVilliam  de  Harseley  was  no  more,  for  his  relatives  knew
not  where  to  seek  a prudent  physician  that  was  acquainted  with  his  disorder.  It  was,
however,  a matter  of  necessity  to  make  the  best  use  of  such  as  they  had.


CHAPTER  LIX. THE  DEATH  OP  POPE  CLEMENT  AT  AVIGNON. THE  ELECTION  OP  POPE

BENEDICT. A LEARNED  CLERK,  IN  THE  ARCHBISHOPRIC  OP  RHEIMS,  SUPPORTS  THE

RIGHT  OP  THE  SEE  OP  AVIGNON,  BY  HIS  SPEECHES  AND  PREACHINGS.

In  the  month  of  September,  of  this  year,  Robert  de  Geneve,  whom  we  have  called  pope
in  our  history,  died  at  his  palace  in  Avignon  #.  It  happened  to  him  just  as  he  had  wished,
that  he  might  die  pope.  He  died  indeed  with  the  honour  and  state  I have  mentioned,  but
whether  he  enjoyed  these  wrongfully  or  not,  I shall  not  pretend  to  determine,  for  such
* He  died  on  the  16th  September,  1394. — Ed.

oo  2


564


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


matters  do  not  belong  to  me.  The  cardinals  at  Avignon  were  much  surprised  at  this
event,  and  resolved  to  form  a conclave  in  haste,  and  elect  one  from  among  themselves  as  his
successor.

The  health  of  the  king  of  France  was  again  beginning  to  I’eturn,  to  the  great  joy  of  all
who  loved  him,  and  his  good  queen,  who  had  been  in  great  affliction.  She  was  a valiant
lady,  whom  God  corrected  and  loved : she  had  made  many  processions,  and  given  great
alms,  in  hopes  of  his  recovery,  in  several  parts  of  France,  but  especially  in  Paris.

The  college  of  cardinals  at  Avignon,  as  I was  then  informed,  elected  pope  the  cardinal
legate  de  Luna.  To  say  the  truth,  he  was  a devout  man,  and  of  a contemplative  life ; but
they  had  chosen  him  subject  to  the  approbation  of  the  king  of  France  and  his  council,
otherwise  they  would  not  have  been  able  to  maintain  their  election.  Consider  how  much
the  church  must  have  been  degraded  by  this  schism,  when  those  who  were,  or  ought  to
have  been  free,  thus  subjected  themselves  to  the  will  of  others,  whom  they  should  have
commanded.  All  the  solemnities  required  at  the  coronation  of  a pope  were  paid  to  the
cardinal  de  Luna,  who  took  the  name  of  Benedict  *.  He  offered  a general  pardon  to  all
clergy  who  should  come  to  Avignon ; and,  by  the  advice  of  his  cardinals,  wrote  letters  to
the  king  of  France,  to  announce  his  elevation  to  the  papacy.  I heard  that  the  king  paid
little  attention  to  his  letter ; for  he  was  not  yet  determined  whether  to  acknowledge  him
for  pope  or  no  ; and,  to  have  the  best  advice  on  the  occasion,  he  summoned  before  him  the
most  learned  and  prudent  clerks  of  the  university  of  Paris.

Master  John  Gigencourt  and  master  Peter  Playons  t,  who  were  esteemed  the  most
learned  and  acute  in  the  university,  told  the  king,  as  did  others,  that  the  schism  in  the
church  corrupted  the  Christian  faith  ; that  the  church  ought  not  longer  to  be  kept  in  this
state,  for  that  all  Christendom  suffered  from  it,  but  more  particularly  churchmen ; and  that
it  was  unbecoming  the  university  to  send  to  pope  Benedict  at  Avignon,  lists  of  those  priests
who  had  need  of  briefs.  The  king,  on  hearing  their  opinions,  thought  them  reasonable,  and
consented  that  there  should  be  a cessation  of  such  lists  as  were  usually  sent  to  the  pope,
until  the  disputes  between  the  two  popes  were  settled : things  therefore  remained  in  this
state.  The  duke  of  Berry,  however,  strenuously  supported  the  new  pope ; and  all  the
clergy  dependent  on  him  acknowledged  him  for  the  true  one ; and  many  of  his  people  were
provided  with  pardons  from  this  Benedict.  The  duke  and  duchess  of  Burgundy,  the  duke  of
Orleans,  with  many  other  great  lords  of  France,  dissembled  their  real  opinions  on  the
subject  to  the  king.  Some  through  favour  acknowledged  Benedict,  who  was  prodigal  of  his
pardons,  in  order  that  the  court  of  Avignon  might  thrive  the  more.

The  duke  of  Brittany  readily  enough  followed  the  opinion  of  the  king  of  France ; for  he
had  been  in  former  times  so  scandalised  by  the  information  the  earl  of  Flanders,  his  cousin,
had  given  him  of  the  rebellion  in  the  church,  that  he  would  never  allow  of  Clement  being
the  true  pope,  although  his  clergy  paid  him  obedience  and  acknowledged  him.  When  any
of  the  churches  in  France  became  vacant,  the  king  disposed  of  them  to  clergymen,  without
ever  speaking  of  it  to  pope  Benedict,  who,  as  well  as  his  cardinals,  was  greatly  surprised  at
such  conduct,  and  began  to  fear  the  king  would  deprive  them  of  the  benefices  they  held  in
his  realm.  They  resolved,  therefore,  to  send  a well-instructed  legate  to  France,  to  remon-
strate with  the  king  and  council  on  the  state  of  the  church,  and  to  learn  their  intentions,
and  likewise  to  assure  them  that  the  pope  they  had  elected  was  only  conditionally  chosen,
in  case  of  his  proving  agreeable  to  the  king,  but  that  otherwise  they  would  dethrone  him,
and  exalt  another  more  to  his  pleasure.

About  this  period,  the  friar,  whom  I before  mentioned  to  have  been  sent  by  pope
Boniface  J to  the  king  of  France,  but  without  the  pomp  or  state  of  a legate,  arrived  at
Paris,  with  the  consent  of  the  king,  who  listened  to  his  arguments  and  sermons  with
pleasure.  The  legate  from  Avignon,  a subtle  and  eloquent  clerk,  was  heard  also  by  the

* Peter  of  Lana,  born  of  an  illustrious  family  of  Spain,  He,  however,  afterwards  showed  very  little  respect  to  this
wa9  elected  Pope  on  the  ‘28th  September,  1394,  and  took  oath. — Ed.

the  name  of  Benedict  XIII.  Before  his  election,  he  sub-  -|-  In  the  Museum  MS.  it  is  Gignicourt  and  Pierre  de
scribed  an  act  by  which  all  the  cardinals  promised  on  oath  Lyons  : in  mine,  the  first  as  D.  Sauvage,  and  the  other
to  use  every  effort  for  the,  reunion  of  the  church,  and  Pierre  de  Palions.

oven  to  resign  the  pontificate  if  neessary  for  that  purpose.  J Boniface  IX.  elected  Pope  the  2nd  Nov.  1389. — Ed.


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


bC'5


king  and  his  court : those  attached  to  the  pope  at  Avignon  took  good  care  to  push  him  forward,
and  contrived  that  lie  should  have  audiences  often.  It  was  the  opinion  of  the  council,  hut
it  was  not  without  great  difficulty  the  university  of  Paris  suhscrihed  to  this  opinion,  that  it
would  he  a wise  and  prudent  measure,  if  means  could  be  found  to  make  the  rival  popes
resign  their  dignities,  as  well  as  all  the  cardinals,  and  then  select  the  most  learned  and
prudent  among  the  clergy,  from  the  empire  of  Germany,  France,  and  other  countries,  who
should  form  a general  council,  and  then,  without  favour  or  affection  to  any  party,  restore  the
church  to  its  former  unity,  discipline,  and  stability.  They  declared  they  saw  no  other  way
of  destroying  the  schism ; for  the  hearts  of  different  lords  were  so  swollen  with  pride,  each
would  support  his  own  party.

This  idea,  which  was  proposed  in  the  presence  of  the  king,  and  the  dukes  of  Orleans  and
Burgundy,  in  council,  was  approved  of ; and  the  king,  having  agreed  to  it,  said  he  would
cheerfully  write  on  the  subject  to  the  kings  of  Germany,  Bohemia,  Hungary,  and  England ;
that  he  thought  he  could  depend  on  the  kings  of  Castille,  Navarre,  Arragon,  Sicily,  Naples,
and  Scotland,  obeying  whatever  pope  he  should  acknowledge.  In  consequence  of  this
proposition  being  adopted,  the  king  of  France  sent  off  special  messengers  with  letters  to  the
kings  above  mentioned,  hut  answers  were  not  returned  to  them  so  soon  as  expected.
During  this  interval,  that  learned  clerk,  master  John  de  Gigencourt,  died  at  the  Sorbonne.
The  king  of  France,  his  court,  and  the  university  were  very  sorry  for  the  loss,  as  his  equal
was  not  at  Paris,  and  he  would  have  been  of  singular  service  in  reforming  the  church,  and
bringing  about  a union.

o o

At  this  time,  there  was  at  Avignon  a clerk  well  skilled  in  science,  doctor  of  laws,  and
auditor  of  the  palace : he  was  a native  of  the  archbishopric  of  Rheims,  and  called  sir  John
de  Varennes.  He  was  much  advanced  in  the  church  for  the  services  he  had  rendered  pope
Clement  and  others,  and  was  on  the  point  of  being  a bishop  or  cardinal.  He  had  also  been
chaplain  to  a cardinal,  called,  at  Avignon,  Saint  Peter  of  Luxembourg.  This  John  de
Varennes,  beneficed  and  advanced  as  he  was,  resigned  all,  retaining  only,  for  his  subsistence,
the  canonry  of  our  Lady  at  Rheims,  which  is  worth,  by  residence,  one  hundred  francs ;
otherwise  not  more  than  thirty.  He  quitted  Avignon,  returned  to  his  native  country,  and
fixed  his  abode  at  the  village  of  Saint  Lye,  near  Rheims,  where  he  led  a devout  life,
preaching  the  faith  and  works  of  our  Lord,  and  praising  the  pope  of  Avignon.  He  declared
he  was  the  true  pope,  condemning,  by  his  speeches,  that  of  Rome,  He  was  much  attended
to,  and  followed  by  the  people,  who  came  to  see  him  from  all  countries,  for  the  sober  and
holy  life  he  led,  fasting  daily,  and  for  the  fine  sermons  he  preached.  Some,  however,  said,
that  the  cardinals  at  Avignon  had  sent  him  thither  to  support  their  cause,  and  to  exhibit
the  holiness  of  his  life,  which  was  devout  enough  to  have  entitled  him  to  be  raised  to  the
papacy.  Master  John  de  Varennes  would  not  allow  himself  to  be  called  the  holy  man  of
Saint  Lye,  but  simply  the  Auditor.  lie  lived  with  his  mother,  and  every  day  said  mass
very  devoutly.  All  that  was  given  him,  for  he  asked  for  nothing,  he  distributed  in  alms  to
the  glory  of  God.

We  will  now  leave  him,  and  speak  of  other  matters.


CHAPTER  LX. THE  KING  OF  ENGLAND  IS  ADVISED  TO  MAKE  A JOURNEY  TO  IRELAND,

AND  TO  SETTLE  ON  THE  DUKE  OF  LANCASTER,  AND  HIS  HEIRS  FOR  EVER,  THE
DUCHY  OF  AQUITAINE  WITH  ALL  ITS  DEPENDENCIES.

The  truces  that  had  been  agreed  to  between  the  kings  of  France  and  England,  and
their  allies,  were  well  observed  on  sea  and  land.  There  were,  however,  some  pillagers  still
in  Languedoc,  who  came  from  foreign  countries,  such  as  Gascony,  Bearn,  and  Germany.
Sir  John  de  Grailly,  bastard-son  to  the  late  captal  de  Buch,  a young  and  expert  knight,
was  governor  of  the  strong  castle  of  Bouteville.  You  may  suppose  that  the  captains  of
such  forts  as  Lourde  in  Bigorre,  on  the  borders  of  Arragon,  Bouteville  on  the  frontiers  of
Saintonge,  near  la  Rochelle,  and  Mortaign,  were  sorely  vexed  they  could  no  longer  overrun
the  country  and  make  their  accustomed  pillage  from  the  neighbouring  towns.  They  had


566  CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.

been  particularly  forbidden  to  infringe  the  articles  of  the  truce,  under  pain  of  being  severely
punished.

At  this  period,  an  expedition  against  Ireland  was  proposed  in  the  English  council ; for,
in  the  truces  king  Richard  had  agreed  to  with  France  and  her  allies,  young  as  he  was,  he
had  reserved  Ireland  from  being  included,  as  his  predecessors  had  always  claimed  it  as  their
right ; and  his  grandfather,  king  Edward  of  happy  memory,  had  signed  himself  king  and
lord  of  Ireland,  and  had  continued  his  wars  against  the  natives  notwithstanding  his  pressure
from  other  quarters.  The  young  knights  and  squires  of  England,  eager  to  signalise  them-
selves in  arms,  were  rejoiced  to  learn  that  king  Richard  intended  leading  a large  power  of
men  at  arms  and  archers  into  Ireland,  and  that  he  had  declared  he  would  not  return  thence
until  he  should  have  finally  settled  everything  to  his  satisfaction.  It  was,  at  the  same
council,  ordered,  that  the  duke  of  Lancaster,  who  in  his  time  had  laboured  hard,  on  sea  and
land,  for  the  augmentation  of  the  honour  of  England,  should  make  a journey  to  Aquitaine,
with  five  hundred  men  at  arms  and  one  thousand  archers.  He  was  to  embark  at  Plymouth
or  Southampton,  as  he  pleased,  and  sail  for  Guienne  or  Aquitaine.  It  was  the  intention  of
king  Richard  and  his  council,  that  the  duke  of  Lancaster  should  hold  in  perpetuity,  for
himself  and  heirs,  the  whole  territory  of  Aquitaine,  with  all  its  seneschalships  and  domains,
in  such  manner  as  king  Edward  of  England,  his  father,  and  the  former  dukes  of  Aquitaine,
had  held  them,  and  which  king  Richard  held  at  this  moment,  with  the  reserve  of  homage  to
the  kings  of  England.  The  duke  of  Lancaster  was  to  enjoy  all  other  rights,  lordships,  and
rents,  which  stipulation  was  confirmed  by  the  king,  wholly  and  fully,  under  his  seal.

The  duke  of  Lancaster  was  very  thankful  for  this  magnificent  gift,  as  he  had  reason  to
be ; for  in  truth  the  duchy  of  Aquitaine  has  wherewithal  to  enable  its  lord  to  keep  a grand
state.  The  deed  which  was  to  establish  this  gift,  having  been  properly  engrossed,  was
carefully  examined,  and  passed  with  great  deliberation  of  council,  in  the  presence  of  the
king,  his  uncles  the  dukes  of  York  and  Gloucester,  the  earls  of  Salisbury,  Arundel,  and
Derby  (son  to  the  duke  of  Lancaster),  the  earl  marshal,  the  earl  of  Rostellant  *,  the  earls  of
Northumberland  and  Nottingham,  sir  Thomas  Percy,  the  lords  Despencer  and  Beaumont,
sir  William  Arundel,  the  archbishops  of  Canterbury  and  York,  the  bishop  of  London,  and
of  all  those  who  were  entitled  to  be  present,  whether  prelates  or  barons.  The  duke  of
Lancaster  thanked,  in  the  first  place,  the  king  his  nephew,  then  his  brothers,  and  the
barons  and  prelates  of  the  council.  After  which  he  began  to  make  most  sumptuous
preparations  for  crossing  the  sea,  and  taking  possession  of  the  duchy  the  king  had  invested
him  with.  Purveyors  were  likewise  busy  in  preparing,  on  a large  scale,  for  the  king’s
expedition  to  Ireland ; and  those  lords  who  were  to  accompany  him  were  ordered  to  make
preparations  of  whatever  things  they  might  think  necessary.


CHAPTER  LXI. THE  DEATH  OF  THE  LADY  ANNE  OF  BOHEMIA,  QUEEN  OF  ENGLAND. THE  DUKE

OF  LANCASTER  LANDS  IN  AQUITAINE,  AND  THE  KING  OF  ENGLAND  IN  IRELAND.

The  king  of  England  and  the  duke  of  Lancaster  were  daily  occupied  in  their  preparations
for  leaving  England,  and  had  sent  their  men  and  purveyances  to  the  different  ports  they
were  to  embark  from  ; the  one  to  Ireland,  and  the  other  to  Aquitaine ; but  their  expedition
was  delayed  for  about  two  months  by  an  event  I will  now  relate.  At  this  period,  the
lady  Anne,  queen  of  England,  fell  sick,  to  the  great  distress  of  the  king  and  her  household.
Her  disorder  increased  so  rapidly  that  she  departed  this  life  on  the  feast  of  Whitsuntide,
in  the  year  of  grace,  1394.  The  king  and  all  who  loved  her  were  greatly  afflicted  at  her
death.  She  was  buried  in  the  cathedral  church  of  London  f ; but  her  obsequies  were
performed  at  leisure,  for  the  king  would  have  them  magnificently  done.  Abundance
of  wax  was  sent  for  from  Flanders  to  make  flambeaux  and  torches,  and  the  illumination

* Rostellant.  Q.  Rutland.  she  died,  he  did  also,  for  anger,  throw  down  the  build-

f “ On  the  7th  of  June,  queen  Anne  died  at  Shene  in  ings,  unto  the  which  former  kings,  being  weary  of  the
Surrey,  and  was  buried  at  Westminster.  The  king  took  city,  were  wont  for  pleasure  to  resort.”
her  death  so  heavily  that,  besides  cursing  the  place  where  Stowe's  Chronicle*


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


507


was  so  great  on  the  day  of  the  ceremony,  that  nothing  was  ever  seen  like  to  it  before,  not
at  the  burial  of  the  good  queen  Philippa  nor  of  any  other.  The  king  would  have  it  so,
because  she  was  daughter  to  the  king  of  Bohemia,  emperor  of  Rome  and  of  Germany.  He
was  inconsolable  for  her  loss,  as  they  mutually  loved  each  other,  having  been  married  young.
This  queen  left  no  issue,  for  she  had  never  borne  children.

Thus  in  the  same  year  were  the  king,  the  duke  of  Lancaster,  and  the  earl  of  Derby  made
widowers.  There  was  no  talk  of  the  king’s  marrying  again,  for  he  would  not  hear  of  it.
Although  the  expeditions  to  Ireland  and  Aquitaine  were  delayed  by  the  queen’s  death,  those
lords  who  were  named  to  go  to  Ireland  did  not  fail  continuing  their  preparations ; and,  as
their  purveyances  were  ready,  they  sent  them  across  the  sea  to  Ireland  from  Brisco*  and
Lolighett  in  Wales;  and  the  conductors  were  ordered  to  carry  them  to  a city  on  the  coast
of  Ireland,  called  DimelinJ,  which  had  always  been  steadily  attached  to  England,  and  was
an  archbishopric  : the  archbishop  of  which  place  was  with  the  king.


Richard  II.  on  his  Voyage  to  Ireland.  Metrical  History  of  Richard  II.  Harleian  MSS.


Soon  after  Saint  John  Baptist’s  day,  king  Richard  left  London,  and  took  the  road  for
Wales,  amusing  himself  by  hunting  on  the  way,  to  forget  the  loss  of  his  queen.  Those
ordered  to  attend  him  began  their  journey,  such  as  his  two  uncles  of  York  and  Gloucester,
with  grand  array,  as  did  the  other  lords  : the  earl  of  Kent,  half-brother  to  the  king,  sir
Thomas  Holland,  his  son,  the  earl  of  Rutland,  son  to  the  duke  of  York,  the  earl  marshal,
the  earls  of  Salisbury  and  Arundel,  sir  William  Arundel,  the  earl  of  Northumberland,  sir
Thomas  Percy  his  brother,  high  steward  of  England,  the  earls  of  Devonshire  and  Nottingham,
with  numbers  of  knights  and  squires.  A considerable  body  remained  at  home  to  guard  the
borders  of  Scotland ; for  the  Scots  are  a wicked  race,  and  pay  not  any  regard  to  truces  or
respites,  but  as  it  suits  their  own  convenience.

At  the  time  the  king  of  England  undertook  this  expedition,  he  had  not  the  company  of
his  other  half-brother,  sir  John  Holland  earl  of  Huntingdon,  for  he  was  on  a pilgrimage  to
Jerusalem  and  Saint  Catherine  of  Mount  Sinai,  and  was  to  return  through  Hungary.
Having  heard  at  Paris,  as  he  passed  through  France,  where  he  had  been  handsomely  treated

* “ Brisco.”  Q.  Bristol.  t “ Lolighet.”  Q.  Holyhead.


% “ Dimelin.”  Q.  Dublin.


5G8


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


by  the  king  and  his  court,  in  respect  to  the  king  of  England,  that  the  king  of  Hungary  and
Amurat  * wero  to  have  a battle,  he  declared  he  would  not  fail  being  present.

The  duke  of  Lancaster  and  his  array  arrived  at  Plymouth,  where  transports  waited  to
carry  them  across  the  sea.  When  his  men  and  purveyances  were  all  on  board,  they  weighed
anchor,  and  steered  with  a favourable  wind  for  Bordeaux.

We  will  return  to  the  king  of  England,  who  had  with  him  full  four  thousand  men
at  arms  and  thirty  thousand  archers.  They  were  shipped  at  three  different  places,  Bristol,
Holyhead,  and  Herfordt,  and  passed  over  daily;  but  it  was  a month  before  the  whole
armament  and  their  horses  landed  in  Ireland.  On  the  other  hand,  there  was  in  Ire-
land a valiant  English  knight,  called  the  earl  of  Ormond,  who,  like  his  predecessors,  held
lands  in  that  country,  but  they  were  disputed,  and  he  had  made  similar  preparations  to  his
ancestors.

The  earl  marshal  had  the  command  of  the  van,  consisting  of  fifteen  hundred  lances  and
two  thousand  archers,  who  prudently  and  valiantly  conducted  themselves.  King  Richard
and  his  uncles  embarked  at  Haverford  in  Wales,  many  at  Holyhead,  and  others  at  Bristol,
and  the  whole  landed  without  any  loss.  As  they  disembarked,  by  orders  from  the  constable
and  marshals,  they  quartered  themselves  on  the  country,  occupying  a large  uninhabited  tract,
of  about  thirty  English  miles,  beside  the  city  of  Dublin.  The  army  lodged  themselves
prudently,  for  fear  of  the  Irish  : had  they  done  otherwise,  they  would  have  suffered  for  it.
The  king,  his  uncles,  and  prelates,  were  quartered  in  Dublin  and  near  it ; and  I was  told  that,
during  the  whole  campaign,  they  were  well  supplied  with  all  sorts  of  provision ; for  the
English  are  expert  in  war,  and  know  well  how  to  forage  and  take  proper  care  of  them-
selves and  horses.  I will  relate  the  history  of  this  campaign  of  king  Richard,  and  what
befel  him,  according  to  the  information  I received.


CHAPTER  LXII. — SIR  JOHN  FROISSART  ARRIVES  IN  ENGLAND,  AND  IS  PRESENTED  TO  KING
RICHARD  BY  TnE  DUKE  OF  YORK,  UNCLE  TO  THE  KING.

In  truth,  I,  sir  John  Froissart,  treasurer  and  canon  of  Chimay,  in  the  county  of  Hainault,
and  diocese  of  Liege,  had,  during  my  stay  at  Abbeville,  a great  desire  to  go  and  see  the
kingdom  of  England  : more  especially  since  a truce  had  been  concluded,  for  four  years,  on
sea  and  land,  between  France,  England,  and  their  allies.  Several  reasons  urged  me  to  make
this  journey,  but  principally  because  in  my  youth  I had  been  educated  at  the  court  of  king
Edward,  of  happy  memory,  and  that  good  lady,  Philippa,  his  queen,  with  their  children,
and  others  of  the  barons  of  those  times,  and  was  treated  by  them  with  all  honour,  courtesy,
and  liberality.  I was  anxious,  therefore,  to  visit  that  country,  for  it  ran  in  my  imagination
that  if  I once  again  saw  it,  I should  live  the  longer;  for  twenty-seven  years  past  I had
intentions  of  going  thither,  and  if  I should  not  meet  with  the  lords  whom  I had  left  there,
I should  at  least  see  their  heirs,  who  would  likewise  be  of  great  service  to  me  m the  verifica-
tion of  the  many  histories  I have  related  of  them.

I mentioned  my  purpose  to  my  very  dear  patrons,  the  lord  duke  Albert  of  Bavaria,  count
of  Hainault,  Holland,  and  Zealand,  and  lord  of  Frizeland;  to  the  lord  William  his  son,
styled  count  d’Ostrevant ; to  my  dear  and  much  honoured  lady  Joan,  duchess  of  Brabant  and
Luxembourg ; and  to  my  very  much  respected  lord  Enguerrand,  lord  of  Coucy ; as  well  as
to  that  gallant  knight,  the  lord  de  Gomegines.  We  had  both,  during  our  youth,  arrived
together  at  the  English  court,  where  I saw  also  the  lord  de  Coucy,  and  all  the  nobles  of
France,  who  were  hostages  for  the  redemption  of  king  John  of  France,  which  has  been  before
related  in  this  history.  The  three  lords  above  mentioned,  as  well  as  the  lord  de  Gomegines,
and  madame  de  Brabant,  on  my  telling  them  my  intentions,  encouraged  me  to  persevere,
and  they  all  gave  me  letters  of  introduction  to  the  king  and  his  uncles,  with  the  reserve  of
the  lord  de  Coucy,  who,  from  being  now  so  much  attached  to  France,  could  only  write  to
his  daughter,  the  duchess  of  Ireland.

* The  person  thus  called  was  the  sultan  Bajazet  I.  who  began  his  reign  1391.

t From  what  follows,  1 suppose  this  must  mean  Haverford-west,  in  Pembrokeshire,  as  it  is  pronounced  Harford.


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


5(10


I had  taken  care  to  form  a collection  of  all  the  poetry  on  love  and  morality  that  I had
composed  during  the  last  twenty-four  years,  which  I had  caused  to  be  fairly  written  and
illuminated.  I was  also  incited  to  oo  to  England  and  see  king  Richard,  son  to  the  noble
and  valiant  prince  of  Wales  and  Aquitaine,  whom  I had  not  seen  since  the  time  of  his
christening  in  the  cathedral  church  of  Bordeaux.  I was  then  present,  and  had  intentions  of
accompanying  the  prince  of  Wales  in  his  expedition  to  Spain;  but,  when  we  came  to  the
city  of  Dax,  the  prince  sent  me  back  to  the  queen  his  mother  in  England.  I was  desirous,
therefore,  to  pay  my  respects  to  the  king  of  England  and  his  uncles,  and  had  provided
myself  with  my  book  of  poesy  finely  ornamented,  bound  in  velvet,  and  decorated  with
silver-gilt  clasps  and  studs,  as  a present  for  the  king.  Having  this  intention,  I spared  no
pains ; and  the  cost  and  labour  seem  trifling  to  people,  whenever  they  undertake  anything
willingly.

Having  provided  myself  with  horses,  I crossed  from  Calais  to  Dover  on  the  12th  day  of
July;  but  found  no  one  there  whom  I had  been  acquainted  with  in  my  former  journeys :
the  inns  were  all  kept  by  new  people,  and  the  children  of  my  former  acquaintance  were
become  men  and  women.  I staid  half  a day  and  night  to  refresh  myself  and  horses ; and  on
Wednesday,  by  nine  o’clock,  arrived  at  Canterbury  to  visit  the  shrine  of  Saint  Thomas  and
the  tomb  of  the  late  prince  of  Wales,  who  had  been  buried  there  with  great  pomp.  I heard
high  mass,  made  my  offering  at  the  shrine,  and  returned  to  my  inn  to  dinner,  when  I heard
the  king  was  to  come  the  following  day  in  pilgrimage  to  St.  Thomas  of  Becket.  lie  was
lately  returned  from  Ireland,  where  he  had  remained  for  nine  months,  or  thereabouts,  and
was  anxious  to  pay  his  devotions  in  this  church,  on  account  of  the  holy  body  of  the  saint,
and  because  his  father  was  there  buried.  I thought,  therefore,  it  would  be  well  to  wait  his
arrival,  which  I did;  and,  on  the  morrow,  the  king  came  in  great  state,  accompanied  by
lords  and  ladies,  with  whom  I mixed;  but  they  were  all  new  faces  to  me,  for  I did  not
remember  one  of  them.

Times  and  persons  had  greatly  changed  since  I was  last  in  England,  eight-and-twenty
years  past.  The  king  had  not  either  of  his  uncles  with  him  : the  duke  of  Lancaster  was  in
Aquitaine,  and  the  dukes  of  York  and  Gloucester  in  other  parts.  I was  at  first  quite
astonished,  and  should  have  been  comforted  could  I have  seen  an  ancient  knight  who  had
been  of  the  bed-chamber  to  king  Edward,  and  was  in  the  same  capacity  to  the  present  king,
as  well  as  of  his  privy  council,  and  could  I have  made  myself  known  to  him.  The  name  of
this  knight  was  sir  Richard  Sturry.  I asked  if  he  were  alive : they  said  he  was,  but  not
then  present,  as  he  was  at  his  residence  in  London.  I then  determined  to  address  myself  to
sir  Thomas  Percy,  high  steward  of  England.  I found  him  gracious  and  of  agreeable  manners,
and  he  offered  to  present  me  and  my  letters  to  the  king.  I was  rejoiced  at  this  promise ;
for  it  is  necessary  to  have  friends  to  introduce  one  to  so  great  a prince  as  the  king  of  England.
He  went  to  the  king’s  apartments  to  see  if  it  were  a proper  time,  but  found  the  king  had
retired  to  repose  : he  therefore  bade  me  return  to  my  inn.  When  I thought  the  king  might
be  risen,  I wTent  again  to  the  palace  of  the  archbishop,  where  he  lodged ; but  sir  Thomas
Percy  and  his  people  were  preparing  to  set  out  for  Ospringe,  whence  he  had  come  that
morning.  I asked  sir  Thomas’s  advice  how  to  act:  “ For  the  present,”  he  said,  “ do  not
make  further  attempts  to  announce  your  arrival,  but  follow  the  king ; and  I will  take  care,
when  he  comes  to  his  palace  in  this  country,  which  he  will  do  in  twTo  days,  that  you  shall  be
well  lodged  as  long  as  the  court  tarries  there.”

The  king  was  going  to  a beautiful  palace  in  the  county  of  Kent,  called  Leeds  castle,  and
I followed  sir  Thomas  Percy’s  advice  by  taking  the  road  to  Ospringe.  I lodged  at  an  inn
where  I found  a gallant  knight  of  the  king’s  chamber,  but  he  had  that  morning  staid  behind
on  account  of  a slight  pain  in  his  head  that  had  seized  him  the  preceding  night.  This  knight,
whose  name  was  sir  William  de  Lisle,  seeing  I was  a foreigner  and  a Frenchman  (for  all
who  speak  the  language  of  Oil*  are  by  the  English  considered  as  Frenchmen,  whatever
country  they  may  come  from),  made  acquaintance  with  me,  and  I with  him,  for  the  English

* La  Languc  d’Oil,  was  the  language  spoken  in  the  north  of  France,  in  contra-distinction  to  the  Langue  d'Oc,  the
dialect  of  the  south,  whence  the  name  of  the  province  Languedoc.  Oil  and  Oc,  are  now  both  superseded  by  the
modern  “ Oui.” — Ed.


570


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


are  courteous  to  strangers.  He  asked  my  situation  and  business  in  England,  which  I related
to  him  at  length,  as  well  as  what  sir  Thomas  Percy  had  advised  me  to  do.  He  replied,  that
I could  not  have  had  better  advice,  for  that  the  king  would  on  Friday  be  at  Leeds  castle,  and
would  find  there  his  uncle  the  duke  of  York.  I was  well  pleased  to  hear  this,  for  I had
letters  to  the  duke,  and,  when  young,  was  known  to  him  while  in  the  household  of  the  late
king  and  queen.

I courted  the  acquaintance  of  sir  William  de  Lisle,  as  a means  of  gaining  greater  intimacy
with  the  king’s  household.  On  the  Friday,  we  rode  out  together,  and  on  the  road  I asked
if  he  had  accompanied  the  king  on  his  expedition  to  Ireland.  He  said  be  had.  I then
asked  if  there  were  any  foundation  in  truth  for  what  was  said  of  St.  Patrick’s  hole  *.  He
replied  there  was ; and  that  he  and  another  knight,  during  the  king’s  stay  at  Dublin,  had
been  there.  They  entered  it  at  sunset,  remained  there  the  whole  night,  and  came  out  at
sun-rise  the  next  morning.  I requested  he  would  tell  me  whether  he  saw  all  the  marvellous
things  which  are  said  to  be  seen  there.  He  made  me  the  following  answer : — “ When  I and
my  companion  had  passed  the  entrance  of  the  cave,  called  the  Purgatory  of  Saint  Patrick,
we  descended  three  or  four  steps  (for  you  go  down  into  it  like  a cellar),  but  found  our  heads
so  much  affected  by  the  heat,  we  seated  ourselves  on  the  steps,  which  are  of  stone,  and  such
a drowsiness  came  on,  that  we  slept  there  the  whole  night.”  I asked,  if,  when  asleep,  they
knew  where  they  were,  and  what  visions  they  had.  He  said,  they  had  many  very  strange
dreams,  and  they  seemed,  as  they  imagined,  to  see  more  than  they  would  have  done  if  they
had  been  in  their  beds.  This  they  both  were  assured  of.  “When  morning  came,  and  we
were  awake,  the  door  of  the  cave  was  opened,  for  so  we  had  ordered  it,  and  we  came  out,
but  instantly  lost  all  recollection  of  everything  we  had  seen,  and  looked  on  the  whole  as  a
phantom.”  I did  not  push  the  conversation  further,  although  I should  have  much  liked  to
have  heard  what  he  would  say  of  Ireland ; but  other  knights  overtook  us,  and  conversed
with  him ; and  thus  we  rode  to  Leeds  castle,  where  the  king  and  his  court  arrived  shortly
after.  The  duke  of  York  was  already  there  ; and  I made  myself  known  to  him,  by  present-
ing him  letters  from  his  cousins,  the  count  of  Hainault  and  the  count  d’Ostrevant.  The
duke  recollected  me,  and  made  me  a hearty  welcome,  saying, — “ Sir  John,  keep  with  us  and
our  people ; for  we  will  show  you  every  courtesy  and  attention : we  are  bounden  so  to  do,
from  remembrance  of  past  times,  and  affection  to  the  memory  of  our  lady-mother,  to  whom


* “ Nothing  has  rendered  this  county  (Donegal)  so
famous  as  the  cave  discovered  by  the  patron  saint  of  Ire-
land, or  his  namesake,  abbot  of  Nevers,  about  four  hun-
dred years  after,  in  which  the  holy  monk  obtained  a con-
stant exhibition  of  the  torments  of  the  wicked,  for  the
edification  of  the  Irish.  But  that  it  could  not  be  Saint
Patrick  who  first  invented  it,  is  plain  from  his  silence  about
it. in  his  book  ‘ de  tribus  habitaculis,’  heaven,  earth,  and
hell.  Henry  or  Hugh,  monk  of  Saltrey,  in  Huntingdon-
shire, was  the  first  who  wrote  about  it,  and  what  one
Owen  or  Tyndal,  a soldier,  had  seen  there.  It  was  about
sixteen  feet  and  a half  long,  by  two  feet  one  inch  wide,
built  of  freestone,  covered  with  broad  flags,  and  green
turf  laid  over  them,  and  was  so  low  and  narrow,  that  a
tall  man  could  hardly  sit,  much  less  stand  in  it.  In  the
side  was  a window  just  wide  enough  to  admit  a faint  ray
of  light  : in  the  floor  a cavity  capable  of  containing  a man
at  his  length  ; and,  under  a large  stone  at  the  end  of  the
pavement,  a deep  pit,  which  had  opened  at  the  prayers  of
the  saint.  The  bottom  of  the  cave  was  originally  much
below  the  surface  of  the  ground.  It  stood  on  the  east  side
of  the  church,  in  the  church-yard,  encompassed  with  a
wall,  and  surrounded  by  circles  or  cells,  called  the  beds,
scarcely  three  feet  high,  denominated  from  several  saints.
The  penitents  who  visited  this  island,  after  fasting  on
bread  and  water  for  nine  days,  and  making  processions
round  these  holy  stations  thrice  a-day  barefoot,  for  the
first  seven  days,  and  six  times  on  the  eighth,  washing  their
weary  limbs  each  night  in  the  adjoining  lake,  on  the  ninth
enter  the  cave.  Here  they  observe  a twenty-four  hours’


fast,  tasting  only  a little  water,  and,  upon  quitting  it,  bathe
in  the  lake,  and  so  conclude  the  solemnity.  The  original
preparatory  fast,  as  we  learn  from  Matthew  Paris,  was
fifteen  days,  and  as  long  after  quitting  the  cave,  out  of
which  a?l  who  entered  did  not  return.

“ Leave  being  first  obtained  of  the  bishop  of  the  diocese,
the  prior  represented  to  the  penitents  all  the  horror  and
difficulty  of  the  undertaking,  suggesting  to  them  at  the
same  time  an  easier  penance.  If  they  persevered  in  their
resolution,  they  were  conducted  to  the  door  with  a pro-
cession from  the  convent,  and,  after  twenty-four  hours,
confinement,  let  out  next  morning  with  the  like  ceremony.
In  this  recess,  enlightened  only  by  a kind  of  twilight,
which  discovered  a field  and  hall,  Owen  was  first  visited
by  fifteen  persons  clothed  in  white,  like  religious, -newly
shorn,  who  encouraged  him  against  the  horrid  scenes  that
were  next  to  present  themselves  to  his  view.  They  were
succeeded  by  troops  of  demons,  who  began  with  laying  him
on  a burning  pile,  which  he  soon  extinguished,  by  pro-
nouncing the  name  of  Christ.  They  then  dragged  him
through  the  several  scenes  of  torment,  where  the  wicked
suffered  all  the  variety'  of  tortures  of  ancient  Tartarus ;
and,  standing  proof  against  all  these  horrors,  he  was  fa-
voured with  a full  view  and  description  of  paradise,  by
two  venerable  prelates,  who  refused  to  let  him  stay  there.
He  met  with  the  same  demons  and  monks  as  he  went  out
of  the  cave,  after  which  he  visited  the  holy  sepulchre,
and,  at  his  return,  taking  upon  him  the  habit  assisted  in
founding  Besmagovcisth  Abbey.” — Gough’s  Addition  to
Camden,  p.  641,  vol.  3.


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


571


you  were  attached.  We  have  not  forgotten  these  times.”  I warmly  thanked  him,  as  was
just,  for  his  kind  speech,  and  was  well  noticed  by  him,  sir  Thomas  Percy,  and  sir  William
de  Lisle,  who  carried  me  to  the  king’s  chamber,  where  I was  introduced  to  him  by  his  uncle,
the  duke  of  York.

The  king  received  me  graciously  and  kindly ; he  took  all  the  letters  I presented  to  him,
and,  having  read  them  attentively,  said  I was  welcome,  and  that  since  I had  belonged  to  the
household  of  the  late  king  and  queen,  his  grandfather  and  grandmother,  I must  consider
myself  still  as  of  the  royal  household  of  England.  This  day  I did  not  offer  him  the  book  I
had  brought ; for  sir  Thomas  Percy  told  me  it  was  not  a fit  opportunity,  as  he  was  much
occupied  with  serious  business.  The  council  was  deeply  engaged  on  two  subjects  ; first,  in
respect  to  the  negotiation  with  France,  to  treat  of  a marriage  between  the  king  and  the
lady  Isabella,  eldest  daughter  to  the  king  of  France,  who  at  that  time  was  about  eight  years
old.  The  ambassadors  appointed  to  make  this  proposal  to  France,  were  the  earl  of  Rutland,
cousin-german  to  the  king,  the  earl  marshal,  the  archbishop  of  Dublin,  the  bishop  of  Lye,
the  lord  Clifford,  lord  Beaumont,  lord  Hugh  Spencer,  and  several  others*.

Secondly,  the  lord  de  la  Barde,  the  lord  de  la  Taride,  the  lord  de  Pinterne,  the  lord  de
Chateauneauf,  the  lords  de  Levesque  and  de  Copane,  the  chief  magistrates  of  Bordeaux,
Bayonne,  and  Dax,  were  come  to  England,  and  greatly  persecuted  the  king,  since  his  return
from  Ireland,  for  an  answer  to  their  petitions  and  remonstrances  on  the  gift  the  king  had
made  his  uncle,  the  duke  of  Lancaster,  of  all  Aquitaine,  with  its  lordships,  baronies,  and
dependencies,  which  had  appertained  to  the  king  and  crown  of  England.  The  above-
mentioned  lords,  and  principal  cities  and  towns  in  Aquitaine,  maintained  that  such  a gift
could  not  be  made,  and  that  it  was  null ; for  that  the  whole  of  Aquitaine  was  a fief  depending
solely  on  the  crown  of  England,  and  that  they  would  never  consent  thus  to  be  disjoined  from
it.  They  had  made  several  reasonable  propositions  for  an  accommodation,  which  I will
relate  in  proper  time  and  place.  In  order  that  these  matters  might  be  more  fully  considered,
and  indeed  they  required  it,  the  king  had  summoned  the  principal  barons  and  prelates  of  the
realm  to  meet  him  on  Magdalen-day,  at  his  palace  of  Eltharn,  seven  miles  from  London,  and
the  same  distance  from  Dartford.  On  the  fourth  day  after  the  king’s  arrival,  when  I learnt
that  he,  his  council,  and  the  duke  of  York,  were  about  to  quit  Leeds  castle  and  go  to
Rochester,  in  their  way  to  Eltharn,  I set  out  in  their  company.


CHAPTER  LXVI. THE  INFORMATION  FROISSART  GAINS  IN  ENGLAND,  TOUCHING  THE  OPPO-

SITION OF  THE  INHABITANTS  OF  AQUITAINE  TO  THE  GIFT  THE  KING  OF  ENGLAND  nAD

MADE  OF  IT  TO  HIS  UNCLE  THE  DUKE  OF  LANCASTER. THE  COMMISSIONERS  SENT  TO

REMONSTRATE  ON  THE  MATTER  WITH  THE  KING,  CANNOT  OBTAIN  A DECISIVE  ANSWER
RELATIVE  THERETO.

On  the  road  to  Rochester,  I asked  sir  William  de  Lisle  and  sir  John  de  Grailly,
governor  of  Bouteville,  the  cause  of.tlie  king’s  journey  to  London,  and  why  the  parliament
was  to  be  assembled  at  Eltharn.  They  both  answered  me  satisfactorily  ; but  sir  John  Grailly
particularly  informed  me  why  the  lords  of  Gascony,  and  the  deputies  from  the  chief  towns
were  come  to  England.  He  was  so  well  acquainted  with  them,  being  as  it  wrere  from
the  same  country  and  fellow  subjects  to  England,  that  they  hid  nothing  from  him.  He
said,  “ that  when  the  duke  of  Lancaster  came  last  to  Aquitaine,  he  was  provided  with
deeds  sealed  with  the  great  seal  of  England,  which  had  been  regularly  agreed  to  in  parlia-
ment and  signed  by  the  dukes  of  York  and  Gloucester,  to  whom  Aquitaine  might  possibly
revert,  by  succession,  to  king  Richard  of  England,  who  had  no  children,  and  these
two  dukes  were  brothers-german,  by  father  and  mother,  to  the  duke  of  Lancaster.  The

* See  the  Foedera  for  full  particulars.  The  ambassadors  the  earl  of  Rutland  and  the  youngest  daughter  of  the  king
were  the  archbishop  of  Dublin,  the  bishop  of  Saint  David’s,  of  France.

the  earl  of  Rutland,  the  earl  marshal  and  sir  William  The  instructions  to  these  ambassadors  are  dated  “ Leeds
Scrope.  They  were  to  propose  also  a marriage  between  Castle,  8th  day  of  July  1395.”


572


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


duke  of  Lancaster  sent  part  of  liis  council  to  Bordeaux,  to  inform  the  mayor  and  magis-
trates of  his  coming  and  the  cause  of  it.  They  were  greatly  surprised  on  hearing  it ; hut,
notwithstanding,  they  well  feasted  the  commissioners  he  had  sent,  in  honour  to  the  kino-,  to
whom  they  owed  service  and  obedience.  They  desired  time  to  consider  of  their  answer,
which  being  granted,  they  replied,  that  the  duke  of  Lancaster,  as  son  to  king  Edward  of
happy  memory,  who  had  been  their  lord,  was  welcome,  but  not  in  any  other  capacity,  as  they
had  not  as  yet  sufficiently  weighed  the  matter  to  determine  on  receiving  him  as  their  lord  ;
for  their  sovereign,  king  Richard,  to  whom  they  had  sworn  fealty,  had  not  acquitted  them
of  their  obedience.  The  duke’s  commissioners  replied,  that  as  to  this,  the  duke  would  take
upon  himself  to  satisfy  them  they  should  never  have  any  trouble  from  his  nephew  the  king
of  England.  When  those  of  Bordeaux  saw  themselves  thus  hardly  pressed,  they  made
another  excuse  by  saying, — “ Gentlemen,  the  grant  we  perceive  includes  not  only  us  but  the
cities  of  Bayonne  and  Dax,  and  the  prelates  and  barons  of  Gascony  who  are  under  the
obedience  of  the  king  of  England.  Go  to  them,  and  as  they  shall  regulate  we  will  do  the
same.”  The  commissioners,  not  being  able  to  get  any  other  answer,  left  Bordeaux,  and  re-
turned to  the  duke  of  Lancaster  at  Libourne.  When  the  duke  heard  the  above  answer,  he
became  very  thoughtful,  and  foresaw  that  the  business  he  was  come  upon  would  not
be  so  soon  settled  as  he  had  at  first  imagined,  or  had  been  made  to  understand.  He  sent,
however,  his  commissioners  to  Bayonne,  who  were  received  by  the  Bayonnois  in  just
the  same  manner  as  they  had  been  received  at  Bordeaux,  nor  could  they  obtain  a different
answer.

At  length,  the  prelates,  barons,  and  deputies  from  all  the  towns  of  Gascony  under  the
obedience  of  England,  assembled,  and,  having  debated  the  justice  of  the  king  of  England’s
grant  to  the  duke  of  Lancaster,  came  to  the  following  conclusion.  They  were  very  willing
to  receive  in  their  castles,  cities,  and  towns,  the  duke  of  Lancaster,  as  son  to  the  noble  king
Edward  of  happy  memory,  and  as  uncle  to  king  Richard  of  England ; but  on  condition
he  would  solemnly  swear,  that  himself  and  people  would  peaceably  demean  themselves
during  their  stay,  and  that  they  would  not  take  anything  by  force,  but  pay  ready  money  for
whatever  they  might  want ; nor  should  he,  the  duke  of  Lancaster,  extend  the  powers  of  the
crown  to  oppress  any  one,  nor  do  so  by  other  means.  The  duke  replied,  that  he  was  not
come  to  hurt  or  oppress  the  people,  but,  on  the  contrary,  to  guard  and  defend  them  as  his
own  inheritance,  and  intreated  that  the  will  of  the  king  of  England  should  be  complied  with.
But  the  country,  with  one  voice  declared  they  would  not  be  disjoined  from  the  crown  of
England,  and  that  it  was  not  in  the  power  of  the  king  of  England  thus  to  turn  them  over  to
another.  This  matter  was  disputed  for  a long  time  between  the  duke  of  Lancaster,  and  the
Gascons ; and  when  he  saw  he  could  not  prevail  on  them  to  receive  him  as  their  lord,  he  re-
quested they  would  send  sufficiently-authorised  persons  to  the  king  of  England,  as  he  would
do  on  his  part,  and  whatever  the  parliament  of  England  should  determine,  whether  in  his
favour  or  not,  he  would  abide  by.  The  Gascons  thinking  this  a very  reasonable  proposal
from  the  duke,  agreed  to  it ; and  he  then  came  with  his  attendants  to  reside  among
them,  at  his  former  lodgings  in  the  abbey  of  Saint  Andrew.  The  prelates  and  barons
of  Gascony  as  well  as  the  cities  of  Bayonne  and  Dax,  selected  proper  commissioners  to  send
to  England.

When  the  king  of  France,  his  uncles,  and  ministers,  heard  for  certain  that  the  duke  of
Lancaster  had  been  peaceably  received  in  Bordeaux,  and  that  he  had  there  fixed  his  residence,
they  knew  not  what  to  think  of  it,  nor  whether  he  would  adhere  to  the  truces  that  had  been
made  between  France  and  England.  This  gave  them  so  much  uneasiness  that  they  resolved
to  send  ambassadors  to  the  duke  of  Lancaster  to  learn  his  intentions.  The  lord  de  Boucicaut,
marshal  of  France,  sir  John  de  Chateaumorant  and  sir  John  Barrois  des  Barres,  were  chosen
for  this  purpose,  and  they  were  to  have  under  their  command  one  thousand  well  appointed
men  at  arms.  They  left  Paris,  and  continued  their  march  to  A gen,  where  they  quartered
themselves  as  well  as  in  the  surrounding  country  : they  then  sent  heralds  and  messengers
to  the  duke  of  Lancaster,  in  the  city  of  Bordeaux,  to  notify  their  wishes  to  speak  with  him.
The  duke  made  the  messengers  good  cheer,  heard  what  they  had  to  say,  and  wrote  back  to
their  lords,  that  since  they  were  desirous  to  speak  with  him,  he  was  as  anxious  to  meet  them  ;


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


673


and,  in  order  to  give  them  less  trouble,  would  go  to  Bergerac,  where  they  would  confer  to-
gether. The  messengers,  on  their  return  to  Agen,  gave  their  lords  the  letter  from  the  duke  of
Lancaster,  which  satisfied  them  as  to  their  safety,  and  they  made  preparations  accordingly.
As  soon  as  they  heard  of  the  duke’s  arrival  at  Bergerac,  they  left  the  city  of  Agen,  and
marched  thither,  where  they  found  the  gates  open  to  receive  them.  The  lords  entered  the
town,  and  went  to  the  hotels  which  had  been  prepared  for  them  ; but  their  men  lodged  them-
selves in  the  suburbs  and  adjacent  villages.  The  three  lords  waited  on  the  duke  of  Lancaster,
who  kindly  received  them,  as  he  knew  well  how  to  do  ; and  in  reply  to  what  they  urged,  he
said,  “ that  he  wished  to  be  always  a good  neighbour,  and  on  friendly  terms  with  the  king
and  realm  of  France,  and  to  adhere  to  every  article  of  the  truces  that  had  been  lately  made
between  France,  England,  and  their  allies.  He  had  been  very  active  in  forming  these  truces,
and  of  course  would  be  unwilling  any  way  to  infringe  them ; and  of  this  they  might  be
perfectly  assured.”

The  answer  of  the  duke  was  highly  gratifying  to  the  French  lords,  who  remained  with
him  on  the  most  friendly  terms.  He  entertained  them  grandly  at  dinner  and  supper  in  the
castle  of  Bergerac,  after  which  they  separated  in  a very  amicable  manner.  The  duke  returned
to  Bordeaux,  and  the  French  lords  towards  Paris ; but  in  their  way  they  met  the  duke  of
Berry  in  Poitiers,  to  whom  they  related  all  they  had  done,  and  the  duke  of  Lancaster’s
answer.  The  duke  of  Berry  thought  it  satisfactory  and  reasonable,  as  did  the  king  of  France
and  the  duke  of  Burgundy,  when  the  three  lords  reported  it  to  them,  on  their  arrival  at
Paris.  Things  remained  on  this  assurance  quiet.  “ What  after  happened  I have  told  you,”
added  sir  John  de  Grailly  ; “ for  the  duke  of  Lancaster  sent  hither  some  of  the  principal  of
his  council,  such  as  sir  William  de  la  Perriere,  sir  Peter  Cliqueton,  and  two  doctors  of  laws,
master  John  Huclie  and  master  John  Richards  de  Lincestre,  to  plead  his  cause  before  the
king,  his  uncles  and  council*.  It  is  for  this  reason  the  king  is  now  going  to  Eltham  ; for  as
Thursday  next  is  Magdalen-day,  the  parliament  will  meet  there.  What  decision  they  will
come  to,  I cannot  say ; but  this  I know,  that  the  duke  of  Gloucester  will  be  present,  and  be
violent  in  his  support  of  the  duke  of  Lancaster’s  claims  ; for  I have  heard  from  some  of  the
English  who  ought  to  know,  that  he  wTould  cheerfully  see  his  brother  firmly  established  in
Guyenne,  and  never  to  return  to  England,  for  he  finds  him  his  superior,  and  for  this  reason
is  desirous  he  should  gain  the  duchy  of  Aquitaine.  The  duke  of  Gloucester  has  a good  head,
but  is  proud,  and  wonderfully  overbearing  in  his  manners.  Let  him  say  or  act  as  he  pleases,
he  is  always  popular  with  the  commonalty,  for  they  are  mutually  attached  to  each  other.
He  was  the  cause  of  the  execution  of  that  valiant  knight,  sir  Simon  Burley.  He  it  was,
likewise,  who  caused  the  banishment  of  the  duke  of  Ireland,  the  archbishop  of  York  and
other  knights  of  the  king’s  council,  who  were  either  put  to  death  on  very  slight  grounds,  or
forced  into  foreign  countries,  during  the  time  the  duke  of  Lancaster,  who  is  more  feared  than
loved  in  this  country,  was  in  Castille.

“ Let  us  for  the  present,”  said  sir  John  de  Grailly,  “ quit  this  matter,  and  speak  of  the
second  object  that  occupies  the  council.  It  seems  to  me,  from  what  I have  seen  and  heard,
that  the  king  of  England  wishes  to  marry  again,  and  has  had  researches  made  everywhere,
but  in  vain,  for  a suitable  lady.  If  the  duke  of  Burgundy  or  count  of  Hainault  had  daughters
of  a proper  age,  he  would  not  be  averse  to  either ; but  they  have  none  that  are  not  already
betrothed.  He  has  been  told  that  the  king  of  Navarre  has  sisters  and  daughters,  but  he
will  not  hear  of  them.  The  duke  of  Gloucester  has  likewise  a grown  up  girl  and  marriageable,
and  he  would  be  well  pleased  if  his  nephew  would  choose  her  ; but  the  king  says,  she  is  too
nearly  related,  being  his  cousin-german.  King  Richard’s  thoughts  are  so  bent  on  the  eldest
daughter  of  the  king  of  France,  he  will  not  hear  of  any  other  : it  causes  great  wonder  in  this
country  that  he  should  be  so  eager  to  marry  the  daughter  of  his  adversary,  and  he  is  not  the
better  beloved  for  it.  This  he  seems  indifferent  to,  and  plainly  shows  that  henceforward  he
will  prefer  war  with  any  country  rather  than  with  France.  It  is  known  from  experience
how  anxious  he  was  that  a stable  peace  should  be  established  between  the  two  countries  ;
for  he  said  the  wars  had  lasted  too  long  between  him  and  his  predecessors  with  France,  and

* Hollingshed  calls  them  sir  William  Perreer, — sir  Peter  Clifton, — master  John  Huich, — and  master  John
Richards,  a canon  of  Leicester.


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


574

that  too  many  valiant  men  had  been  slain  on  both  sides,  to  the  great  weakening  of  the
defenders  of  the  Christian  faith.  To  put  this  idea  out  of  the  king’s  mind,  for  it  is  no  way
agreeable  to  the  people  of  England  that  he  should  connect  himself  by  marriage  with  France,
they  have  told  him  the  lady  was  by  far  too  young,  and  that  for  live  or  six  years  to  come  she
would  not  be  of  a proper  age  for  a wife.  He  replied  by  saying,  that  every  day  she  would
increase  in  age.  In  addition  to  this,  he  gave  pleasantly  his  reasons  for  his  preferring  her  :
that  since  she  was  so  young,  he  should  educate  her,  and  bring  her  up  to  his  own  mind,  and
to  the  manners  of  the  English  ; and  that  for  himself,  he  was  young  enough  to  wait  until  she
should  be  of  proper  age  for  his  wife.  Nothing  can  make  him  change  this  resolution,  and
before  you  leave  this  country,  you  may  perhaps  witness  many  str’ange  things.  It  is  for  this
and  the  other  business  I mentioned  that  he  is  journeying  towards  London.”

With  such  conversation  did  sir  John  de  Grailly  entertain  me  while  travelling  between
Rochester  and  Dartford.  He  was  the  bastard-son  of  that  gallant  knight  the  captal  de
Buch.  I eagerly  listened  to  all  he  said,  and  treasured  his  words  in  my  memory ; for  I
rode  chiefly  in  his  company,  and  with  sir  William  de  Lisle,  the  whole  way  from  Leeds
castle  to  Eltham

The  king  arrived  at  Eltham  on  a Tuesday.  On  the  Wednesday,  the  lords  came  from
all  parts.  There  were  the  duke  of  Gloucester,  the  earls  of  Derby,  Arundel,  Northumberland,
Kent,  Rutland,  the  earl  marshal,  the  archbishops  of  Canterbury  and  of  York,  the  bishops  of
London  and  of  Winchester  : in  short,  all  who  had  been  summoned  arrived  at  Eltham  on  the
Thursday,  by  eight  o’clock  in  the  morning.  The  parliament  was  holden  in  the  king's
apartment,  in  the  presence  of  the  king,  his  uncles,  and  council.  The  knights  from  Gascony
and  the  deputies  from  the  cities  and  towns,  as  well  as  those  sent  by  the  duke  of  Lancaster,
were  present.

I cannot  say  what  passed  at  this  parliament,  for  I was  not  admitted,  nor  were  any  but
the  members  of  it.  It  sat  for  upwards  of  four  hours.  When  it  was  over,  I renewed  my
acquaintance  after  dinner  with  an  ancient  knight  whom  in  my  youth  I well  knew,  when  he
was  of  the  chamber  of  king  Edward.  He  was  now  one  of  the  principal  advisers  of  king
Richard,  and  deserving  of  it : his  name  was  sir  Richard  Sturry.  He  immediately  recol-
lected me,  though  it  was  twenty-four  years  since  we  had  seen  each  other ; the  last  time
was  at  Colleberge  *,  at  Brussels,  in  the  hotel  of  duke  Winceslaus  and  the  duchess  Jane  of
Brabant,  Sir  Richard  Sturry  seemed  very  glad  to  see  me,  and  made  me  a hearty  welcome.
He  asked  many  questions,  which  I answered  as  fully  and  as  well  as  I could.  While  we
were  walking  near  the  king’s  apartment  at  Eltham,  I inquired  if  he  could  inform  me  what
had  been  the  determination  of  the  parliament : having  mused  awhile,  he  said  he  would  tell
me,  for  it  was  not  worth  while  to  conceal  what  must  shortly  be  made  public.

“ You  know,”  continued  the  knight,  “ or  have  heard,  that  the  duke  of  Lancaster  left
England  for  Aquitaine,  on  receiving  the  magnificent  gift  the  king  our  lord  made  him.  The
king  loves  all  who  pretend  friendship  for  him,  but  particularly  the  duke  of  Lancaster ; and
out  of  gratitude,  which  he  strongly  feels,  for  the  great  services  the  duke  has  done  the  crown,
as  well  on  this  as  on  the  other  side  of  the  sea,  the  king  has  given  him  and  to  his  heirs  for
ever  the  whole  of  the  duchy  of  Aquitaine,  with  all  its  dependencies,  excepting  the  homage,
which  is  the  sole  thing  he  has  reserved  for  the  crown  of  England  in  times  to  come.  This
gift  has  gone  through  every  legal  form,  with  the  approbation  and  consent  of  his  other  uncles
and  the  English  parliament.  The  king  has  specially  commanded  all  his  subjects  within  the
boundaries  of  Aquitaine  to  obey  punctually  his  well-beloved  uncle  the  duke  of  Lancaster
as  their  sovereign  lord,  and  to  pay  him  homage  and  service,  in  the  usual  manner  as  they
have  done  to  their  lords  in  former  times.  Should  any  prove  rebellious  to  these  orders,  the
king  gives  the  duke  of  Lancaster  full  powers  to  punish  such  within  three  days  after  their
disobedience,  without  any  expectation  of  support  from  him.  It  has  happened,  however,
that  notwithstanding  these  strict  orders  of  the  king,  the  barons,  knights,  gentlemen,  cities
and  towns  of  Gascony,  under  the  obedience  of  England,  have  united  together  in  opposition

* “Colleberge.”  I do  not  understand  this  passage,  for  stop  at  the  end  of  Colleberg  in  the  printed  and  MS.
the  town  of  Colberg  is  in  the  duchy  of  Pomerania.  It  copies  : the  MSS.  say  fourteen  years  instead  of  twenty-
never  could  have  been  there  they  met.  There  is  a full  four.


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


575


to  the  duke  of  Lancaster,  and  refuse  to  obey  him,  declaring  and  maintaining  that  the  gift
the  king  made  }jis  uncle  of  Lancaster  is  null  and  void.  The  duke,  who  is  desirous  of  acting
in  this  business  by  fair  means,  has  listened  to  their  reasonings  on  the  subject,  and  advised,
to  prevent  further  mischief,  that  they  should  send  hither  properly-instructed  persons  to  lay
their  complaints  before  the  king,  and  declare  their  reasons  for  having  opposed  his  orders.

“ They  have  certainly  this  day  very  ably  explained  the  cause  of  refusing  their  obedience
to  the  duke  of  Lancester,  and  have  given  the  king  and  his  council  enough  to  think  upon.
They  will  probably  succeed  in  their  mission,  and  I will  tell  you  my  reasons  for  so  thinking;
but  you  will  keep  them  secret,  until  the  matter  shall  become  more  public.”  I replied,  that
he  might  depend  on  my  doing  it.  He  then  continued  : “ I believe  it  was  the  official  of
Bordeaux,  who,  for  his  learning  was  their  spokesman ; — he  began  by  showing  their  pro-
curations from  the  different  towns,  that  greater  faith  might  be  given  to  what  he  should  say.
He  then  declared,  that  ‘ the  cities  of  Bordeaux,  Bayonne,  Dax,  and  all  the  lordships  dependent
on  them,  or  within  their  limits  and  jurisdictions,  are  of  such  noble  condition,  that  no  king
of  England,  by  any  act  of  his,  can  disjoin  them  from  the  domain  of  the  crown  of  England,
nor  alienate  or  dispose  of  them  to  any  child,  uncle,  or  brother  he  may  have,  nor  by  any
way  of  marriage-settlement  nor  otherwise.  The  above-named  towns  have  received,  from
different  kings  of  England,  certain  privileges,  which  their  successors  have  sworn  to  maintain
without  any  infringement ; and  the  moment  a king  of  England  comes  into  possession  of
the  crown  of  England  and  its  dependencies,  he  swears,  on  the  missal  in  his  hand,  to  preserve
inviolate  all  their  privileges,  which  you,  dear  sire,  have  also  done,  as  these  papers  will
prove.’  He  then  produced  charters,  fairly  engrossed  and  sealed  with  the  great  seal  of
England,  which  king  Richard,  who  was  then  present,  had  given  them,  and  read  the  whole,
clause  by  clause.  The  contents  of  the  charters  were  well  understood,  for  they  were  in
Latin  and  French ; and  at  the  end  he  named  several  great  barons  and  prelates,  to  the
number  of  eleven,  who  had  been  nominated  as  sureties.

“ When  the  papers  were  read,  each  lord  looked  at  his  neighbour  and  to  the  king,  but
not  one  said  a word  in  reply.  The  official,  having  finished  reading  his  deeds,  thus  spoke,
addressing  himself  ‘to  the  king  : ‘ Most  beloved  and  renowned  sovereign,  and  you,  my  dear
lords,  all  what  you  have  just  heard,  am  I charged  by  the  deputies  of  the  principal  towns
and  inhabitants  of  Gascony  to  lay  before  you,  and  to  maintain  their  dependence  solely  on
the  crown  of  England,  as  the  charters  that  have  been  shown  plainly  declare.  Should  the
country  be  inclined  to  receive  the  duke  of  Lancaster  for  its  lord,  and  be  freed  from  the
service  and  homage  it  owes  you,  the  loss  would  be  very  great  to  England ; for  if,  at  this
moment,  the  duke  is  attached  to  the  king,  and  attentive  to  preserve  the  privileges  of  the
crown  of  England,  that  love  and  affection  will,  in  course  of  time,  be  much  weakened  by  his
successive  heirs,  and  by  intermarriages  that  may  take  place : it  is  necessary  that  marriages
should  be  concluded  between  great  princes,  for  the  more  effectually  preserving  the  love  of
their  subjects.  Now  it  may  happen,  in  times  to  come,  that  the  heirs  of  the  duke  of
Lancaster  shall  unite  themselves  by  marriage  with  the  daughters  of  the  kings  of  France,  the
dukes  of  Berry,  Brittany,  the  counts  of  Foix  or  of  Armagnac,  the  kings  of  Navarre,  the
dukes  of  Anjou  or  of  Maine,  and  form  alliances  with  their  connexions  on  the  other  side  of
the  sea,  claiming  the  whole  sovereignty  of  Guyenne,  and  ruining  the  country,  by  putting
it  in  opposition  to  England.  The  king  of  England  would  probably,  in  such  a case,  have
great  difficulty  in  recovering  the  rights  due  to  the  crown.  Condescend,  therefore,  most
noble  king,  and  you,  my  dear  lords,  to  consider  well  all  the  reasons  I have  laid  before  you ;
for  the  whole  country  is  unanimous  and  determined  to  I’emain  under  the  obedience  of  our
much  redoubted  lord  and  king,  and  in  dependence  on  the  crown  of  England.’  The  official
here  ended  his  speech ; and  the  prelates  and  lords,  looking  to  each  other,  approached  the
king,  conducted  by  his  two  uncles  and  the  earls  of  Derby  and  Arundel.

“ It  was  then  suggested  to  those  who  had  come  from  Aquitaine,  to  leave  the  chamber
until  called  for,  which  they  did,  with  the  two  knights  who  had  been  sent  by  the  duke  of
Lancaster.  This  being  done,  the  king  demanded  from  the  prelates  and  barons  what  answer
should  be  made.  The  prelates  referred  the  answer  to  the  two  uncles  of  the  king,  because
the  matter  more  nearly  affected  them.  At  first,  they  excused  themselves,  saying,  it  was  a


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


576

public  concern,  and  should  be  deliberated  on  in  common,  and  not  treated  as  any  matter  of
favour.  The  business  thus  remained  for  some  time ; but  the  duke  of  Gloucester  beino-
desired  to  give  his  opinion,  he  said,  it  would  be  a strong  measure  to  take  from  the  king
a gift  that  he  had  made  with  the  unanimous  consent  of  his  council,  and  that  had  been
invested  with  every  legal  form,  because  his  subjects  were  rebellious ; that  the  king  was  not
lord  of  his  inheritance  if  he  could  not  dispose  of  it  as  he  pleased.  Some  commented  on  this
speech,  while  others  had  the  courage  to  say  the  answer  was  not  reasonable,  though  they
dared  not  contradict  it ; for  the  duke  of  Gloucester  was  much  feared.  The  earl  of  Derby,  son
of  the  duke  of  Lancaster,  added,  ‘ Good  uncle,  you  have  well  spoken,  and  justly  explained
the  matter,  and  I support  what  you  have  said.’  The  council  on  this  began  to  separate,
and  to  murmur  one  to  another ; but  they  did  not  call  in  the  envoys  from  Guyenne,  nor
those  from  the  duke  of  Lancaster.”

Here  the  old  knight  ended  the  conversation ; but  I learnt  from  him  afterwards,  that
when  the  king  heard  this,  he  dissembled  his  opinion,  with  the  intention  of  again  summoning
his  council  after  dinner,  to  know. if  any  measures,  more  to  the  advantage  of  the  crown,  should
be  adopted,  or  if  anything  further  should  be  done  in  respect  to  Aquitaine.

The  king  made  the  archbishop  of  Canterbury  speak  on  the  business  of  his  marriage,  as  he
had  ordered  him  in  the  morning,  and  who  should  be  sent  to  Fi’ance,  for  he  was  very  earnest
that  this  matter  should  be  accomplished.  It  had  before  been  in  debate,  and  was  nearly
agreed  to,  and  those  were  named  who  were  to  cross  the  sea,  although  their  instructions  had
not  been  given  to  them.  In  this  council  it  was  ordered,  that  the  archbishop  of  Dublin,  the
earl  of  Rutland,  the  earl-marshal,  the  lord  Beaumont,  sir  Hugh  Spencer,  sir  Lewis  Clifford,
to  the  number  of  twenty  knights  and  forty  squires  of  honour,  should  wait  on  the  king  of
Fiance  and  propose  a treaty  of  marriage  between  the  king  of  England  and  the  lady  Isabella,
his  daughter,  who  might  then  be  about  eight  years  old.  She  had  been  betrothed  before  to
the  duke  of  Brittany’s  son,  as  you  have  seen  when  the  meeting  took  place,  and  peace  was
made  between  the  king  of  France  and  the  duke  of  Brittany,  at  Tours.  To  break  this
would  be  difficult,  for  the  king  of  France  and  his  uncles  had  put  their  seals  to  the  treaty.
Notwithstanding  this  obstacle,  the  English  ambassadors,  having  received  their  instructions,
left  London,  and  crossing  the  sea  at  Dover,  arrived  in  two  or  three  days  at  Calais.  They
staid  there  five  days  to  refresh  themselves  and  their  horses,  and  then  departed,  taking  the
road  to  Amiens,  having  sent*  before  the  Irish  herald  March,  who  had  brought  them  pass-
ports from  the  king  of  France  on  his  return  to  Calais.  The  lord  de  Moncliourel  * was  also
sent  as  a guide,  and  to  have  all  cities  and  towns  opened  to  them,  as  well  as  to  provide  for
what  they  might  want.  We  will  leave  them  for  a little,  and  return  to  the  matters  we  were
before  speaking  of.

As  I have  mentioned,  the  deputies  from  Gascony  and  from  the  chief  towns  in  Aquitaine
were  earnest  in  their  solicitations  to  the  king  and  council  that  they  might  remain  attached
to  the  crown  of  England,  according  to  their  ancient  rights  and  privileges,  which  it  had  been
repeatedly  sworn  should  be  observed,  in  spite  of  every  cause,  obstacle,  or  condition  to  the
contrary.  Three  parts  of  the  council,  and  the  unanimous  voice  of  the  people  of  England,
were  on  their  side;  but  Thomas  of  Woodstock,  duke  of  Gloucester,  youngest  son  to  the  late
king  Edward,  opposed  them,  and  plainly  showed  he  wished  his  brother  of  Lancaster  to  be
detained  in  Aquitaine,  for  he  felt  he  was  too  powerful  when  in  England,  and  too  nearly
allied  to  the  king.  As  for  his  brother  of  York,  he  held  him  cheap,  for  he  interfered  little  in
public  affairs,  and  was  without  malice  or  guile,  wishing  only  to  live  in  quiet : he  had  beside
just  married  a young  and  beautiful  wife,  daughter  to  the  earl  of  Kent,  with  whom  he  spent
most  of  his  time  which  was  not  occupied  with  other  amusements.  The  duke  of  Gloucester
was  cunning  and  malicious,  and  continually  soliciting  favours  from  his  nephew  king  Richard,
pleading  poverty,  though  he  abounded  in  wealth ; for  he  was  constable  of  England,  duke  of
Gloucester,  earl  of  Buckingham,  Essex,  and  Northampton.  He  had,  beside,  pensions  on  the
king’s  exchequer,  to  the  amount  of  four  thousand  nobles  a-year;  and  he  would  not  exert
himself  in  any  way  to  serve  his  king  or  country,  if  he  were  not  well  paid  for  it.  He
was  violently  adverse  to  those  of  Aquitaine  in  this  business,  and  did  everything  in  his

* Moncliourel.  In  the  MSS.  Mont-caurel.


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


677


power  that  the  duke  of  Lancaster  might  not  return  to  England,  for  then  he  would  have
everything  his  own  way.

To  show  that  he  governed  the  king  and  was  the  greatest  in  the  council,  as  soon  as  he  had
delivered  his  opinion  and  saw  that  many  were  murmuring  at  it,  and  that  the  prelates  and
lords  were  discussing  it  in  small  parties,  he  quitted  the  king’s  chamber,  followed  by  the  earl
of  Derby,  and  entered  the  hall  at  Eltharn,  where  he  ordered  a table  to  be  spread,  and  they
both  sat  down  to  dinner  while  the  others  were  debating  the  business.  When  the  duke  of
York  heard  they  were  at  dinner’,  he  joined  them.  After  their  dinner,  which  took  no  long
time,  the  duke  of  Gloucester,  dissembling  his  thoughts,  took  leave  of  the  king  as  he  was
seated  at  table,  mounted  his  horse,  and  returned  to  London.  The  earl  of  Derby  remained
that  and  the  ensuing  day  with  the  king  and  tho  lords,  but  those  from  Aquitaine  could  not
procure  any  answer  to  their  petitions.


CHAPTER  LXIV. FROISSART  PRESENTS  HIS  BOOK  OF  LOVE  POEMS  TO  KING  RICHARD  OF

ENGLAND. HE  RELATES  WIIAT  HE  HAD  HEARD  OF  THE  LAST  EXPEDITION  OF  THE

ENGLISH  TO  IRELAND.

I have  taken  much  pleasure  in  detailing  everything  relative  to  the  dispute  with  Gascony
and  Aquitaine,  that  the  truth  of  my  history  may  be  apparent ; and  because  I,  the  author  of
it,  could  not  be  present  in  these  councils,  that  ancient  and  valiant  knight  sir  Richard  Sturry
told  me  everything,  word  for  word,  as  I have  transcribed.  On  the  Sunday,  the  whole  council
were  gone  to  London,  excepting  the  duke  of  York,  who  remained  with  the  king,  and  sir
Richard  Sturry  : these  two,  in  conjunction  with  sir  Thomas  Percy,  mentioned  me  again  to
the  king,  who  desired  to  see  the  book  I had  brought  for  him.  I presented  it  to  him  in  his
chamber,  for  I had  it  with  me,  and  laid  it  on  his  bed.  He  opened  and  looked  into  it  with
much  pleasure.  He  ought  to  have  been  pleased,  for  it  was  handsomely  written  and  illumi-
nated, and  bound  in  crimson  velvet,  with  ten  silver-gilt  studs,  and  roses  of  the  same  in  the
middle,  with  two  large  clasps  of  silver-gilt,  richly  worked  with  roses  in  the  centre.  The
king  asked  me  what  the  book  treated  of:  I replied, — “ Of  love  !”  He  was  pleased  with  the
answer,  and  dipped  into  several  places,  reading  parts  aloud,  for  he  read  and  spoke  French
perfectly  well,  and  then  gave  it  to  one  of  his  knights,  called  sir  Richard  Credon,  to  carry  to
his  oratory,  and  made  me  many  acknowledgments  for  it.

It  happened  this  same  Sunday,  after  the  king  had  received  my  book  so  handsomely,  an
English  squire,  being  in  the  king’s  chamber,  called  Henry  Castide  *,  a man  of  prudence  and
character,  and  who  spoke  French  well,  made  acquaintance  with  me,  because  he  saw  the  king
and  lords  give  me  so  hearty  a reception,  and  had  likewise  noticed  the  book  I had  presented
to  the  king : he  also  imagined,  from  his  first  conversation,  that  I was  an  historian ; indeed,
he  had  been  told  so  by  sir  Richard  Sturry.  He  thus  addressed  me  : — “ Sir  John,  have  you
as  yet  found  any  one  to  give  you  an  account  of  the  late  expedition  to  Ireland,  and  how  four
kings  of  that  country  submitted  themselves  to  the  obedience  of  the  king?”  I replied,  that
I had  not.  “ I will  tell  it  you,  then,”  said  the  squire,  who  might  be  about  fifty  years  old,
“ in  order  that,  when  you  are  returned  home,  you  may  at  your  leisure  insert  it  in  your
history,  to  be  had  in  perpetual  remembrance.”  I was  delighted  to  hear  this,  and  offered  him
my  warmest  thanks.

Henry  Castide  thus  began : — “ It  is  not  in  the  memory  of  man  that  any  king  of  England
ever  led  so  large  an  armament  of  men  at  arms  and  archers  to  make  war  on  the  Irish,  as  the
present  king.  He  remained  upwards  of  nine  months  in  Ireland,  at  great  expense,  which,
however,  was  cheerfully  defrayed  by  his  kingdom ; for  the  principal  cities  and  towns  of
England  thought  it  was  well  laid  out,  when  they  saw  their  king  return  home  with  honour.
Only  gentlemen  and  archers  had  been  employed  on  this  expedition  ; and  there  were  with  the
king  four  thousand  knights  and  squires  and  thirty  thousand  archers,  all  regularly  paid  every

“Castide.”  The  MSS.  Cristeed.  Stowe,  Henry  Cristall. — Sauvage  afterwards  calls  him  Cristclle.

VOL.  II.  F P


578


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


week,  and  so  well  they  were  satisfied.  To  tell  you  the  truth,  Ireland  is  one  of  the  worst
countries  to  make  war  in,  or  to  conquer ; for  there  are  such  impenetrable  and  extensive
forests,  lakes,  and  bogs,  there  is  no  knowing  how  to  pass  them,  and  carry  on  war  advan-
tageously : it  is  so  thinly  inhabited,  that,  whenever  the  Irish  please,  they  desert  the  towns,
and  take  refuge  in  these  forests,  and  live  in  huts  made  of  boughs,  like  wild  beasts ; and
whenever  they  perceive  any  parties  advancing  with  hostile  dispositions,  and  about  to  enter
their  country,  they  fly  to  such  narrow  passes,  it  is  impossible  to  follow  them.  When  they
find  a favourable  opportunity  to  attack  their  enemies  to  advantage,  which  frequently  happens,
from  their  knowledge  of  the  country,  they  fail  not  to  seize  it ; and  no  man  at  arms,  be  he
ever  so  well  mounted,  can  overtake  them,  so  light  are  they  of  foot.  Sometimes  they  leap
from  the  ground  behind  a horseman,  and  embrace  the  rider  (for  they  are  very  strong  in  their
arms)  so  tightly,  that  he  can  no  way  get  rid  of  them.  The  Irish  have  pointed  knives,  with
broad  blades,  sharp  on  both  sides  like  a dart-head,  with  which  they  kill  their  enemies ; but
they  never  consider  them  as  dead  until  they  have  cut  their  throats  like  sheep,  opened  their
bellies  and  taken  out  their  hearts,  which  they  carry  off  with  them,  and  some  say,  who  are
well  acquainted  with  their  manners,  that  they  devour  them  as  delicious  morsels.  They  never
accept  of  ransom  for  their  prisoners ; and  when  they  find  they  have  not  the  advantage  in
any  skirmishes,  they  instantly  separate,  and  hide  themselves  in  hedges,  bushes,  or  holes  under
ground,  so  that  they  seem  to  disappear,  no  one  knows  whither.


Irish  Chieftains  making  a Charge.  Metrical  History,  Harleian  MSS.


“ Sir  William  Windsor,  who  has  longer  made  war  in  Ireland  than  any  other  English
knight,  has  never  been  able,  during  his  residence  among  them,  to  learn  correctly  their
manners,  nor  the  condition  of  the  Irish  people.  They  are  a very  hardy  race,  of  great
subtlety,  and  of  various  tempers,  paying  no  attention  to  cleanliness,  nor  to  any  gentleman,
although  their  country  is  governed  by  kings,  of  whom  there  are  several,  but  seem  desirous
to  remain  in  the  savage  state  they  have  been  brought  up  in.  True  it  is,  that  four  of  the
most  potent  kings  in  Ireland  have  submitted  to  the  king  of  England,  but  more  through  love
and  good-humour,  than  by  battle  or  force.  The  earl  of  Ormond,  whose  lands  join  their
kingdoms,  took  great  pains  to  induce  them  to  go  to  Dublin,  where  the  king  our  lord  resided,
and  to  submit  themselves  to  him  and  to  the  crown  of  England.  This  was  considered  by


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


r,  70

every  one  as  a great  acquisition,  and  the  object  of  the  armament  accomplished  : for,  during
the  whole  of  king  Edward’s  reign,  of  happy  memory,  he  had  never  such  success  as  king
Richard.  The  honour  is  great,  but  the  advantage  little,  for  with  such  savages  nothing  can
be  done.  I will  tell  you  an  instance  of  their  savageness,  that  it  may  serve  as  an  example  to
other  nations.  You  may  depend  on  its  truth ; for  I was  an  eye-witness  of  what  I shall
relate,  as  they  were  about  a month  under  my  care  and  governance  at  Dublin,  to  teach  them
the  usages  of  England,  by  orders  of  the  king  and  council,  because  I knew  their  language  as
well  as  I did  French  and  English,  for  in  my  youth  I was  educated  among  them  ; and  earl
Thomas,  father  of  the  present  earl  of  Ormond,  kept  me  with  him,  out  of  affection,  for  my
good  horsemanship.

“ It  happened  that  the  earl  above-mentioned  was  sent  with  three  hundred  lances  and  one
thousand  archers  to  make  war  on  the  Irish  ; for  the  English  had  kept  up  a constant  warfare
against  them,  in  hopes  of  bringing  them  under  their  subjection.  The  earl  of  Ormond,  whose
lands  bordered  on  his  opponents,  had  that  day  mounted  me  on  one  of  his  best  horses,  and  I
rode  by  his  side.  The  Irish  having  formed  an  ambuscade  to  surprise  the  English,  advanced
from  it ; but  were  so  sharply  attacked  by  the  archers,  whose  arrows  they  could  not  withstand,
for  they  are  not  armed  against  them,  that  they  soon  retreated.  The  earl  pursued  them,  and
I,  who  was  well  mounted,  kept  close  by  him : it  chanced  that  in  this  pursuit  my  horse  took
fright,  and  ran  away  with  me,  in  spite  of  all  my  efforts,  into  the  midst  of  the  enemy.  My
friends  could  never  overtake  me ; and,  in  passing  through  the  Irish,  one  of  them,  by  a great
feat  of  agility,  leaped  on  the  back  of  my  horse,  and  held  me  tight  with  both  his  arms,  but
did  me  no  harm  with  lance  or  knife.  He  pressed  my  horse  forward  for  more  than  two
hours,  and  conducted  him  to  a large  bush,  in  a very  retired  spot,  where  he  found  his  com-
panions who  had  run  thither  to  escape  the  English.  He  seemed  much  rejoiced  to  have  made
me  his  prisoner,  and  carried  me  to  his  house,  which  was  strong,  and  in  a town  surrounded
with  wood,  palisades,  and  stagnant  water:  the  name  of  this  town  was  Herpelin*.  The
gentleman  who  had  taken  me  was  called  Brin  Costeret  f,  a very  handsome  man.  I have
frequently  made  inquiries  after  him,  and  hear  that  he  is  still  alive,  but  very  old.  This  Bryan
Costeret  kept  me  with  him  seven  years,  and  gave  me  his  daughter  in  marriage,  by  whom  I
have  two  gilds.  I will  tell  you  how  I obtained  my  liberty.  It  happened  in  the  seventh
year  of  my  captivity,  that  one  of  their  kings,  Arthur  Macquemaire,  king  of  Leinster,  raised
an  army  against  Lionel  duke  of  Clarence,  son  to  king  Edward  of  England,  and  both  armies
met  very  near  the  city  of  Leinster.  In  the  battle  that  followed,  many  were  slain  and  taken
on  both  sides  ; but,  the  English  gaining  the  day,  the  Irish  were  forced  to  fly,  and  the  king
of  Leinster  escaped.  The  father  of  my  wife  was  made  prisoner,  under  the  banner  of  the
duke  of  Clarence ; and  as  Bryan  Costeret  was  mounted  on  my  horse,  which  was  remembered
to  have  belonged  to  the  earl  of  Ormond,  it  was  then  first  known  that  I was  alive,  that  he
had  honourably  entertained  me  at  his  house  in  Herpelin,  and  given  me  his  daughter  in  mar-
riage. The  duke  of  Clarence,  sir  William  Windsor,  and  all  of  our  party,  were  well  pleased
to  hear  this  news,  and  he  was  offered  his  liberty,  on  condition  that  he  gave  me  mine,  and
sent  me  to  the  English  army,  with  my  wife  and  children.  He  at  first  refused  the  terms,
from  his  love  to  me,  his  daughter,  and  our  children;  but,  when  he  found  no  other  terms
would  be  accepted,  he  agreed  to  them,  provided  my  eldest  daughter  remained  with  him.  I
returned  to  England  with  my  wife  and  youngest  daughter,  and  fixed  my  residence  at  Bristol.
My  two  children  are  married : the  one  established  in  Ireland  has  three  boys  and  two  girls,
and  her  sister  four  sons  and  two  daughters.

“ Because  the  Irish  language  is  as  familiar  to  me  as  English,  for  I have  always  spoken  it
in  my  family,  and  introduce  it  among  my  grandchildren  as  much  as  I can,  I have  been  chosen
by  our  lord  and  king  to  teach  and  accustom  the  four  Irish  kings,  who  have  sworn  obedience
for  ever  to  England,  to  the  manners  of  the  English.  I must  say,  that  these  kings  who  were
under  my  management  were  of  coarse  manners  and  understandings  ; and,  in  spite  of  all  that
I could  do  to  soften  their  language  and  nature,  very  little  progress  has  been  made,  for  they
would  frequently  return  to  their  former  coarse  behaviour.

“ I will  more  particularly  relate  the  charge  that  was  given  me  over  them,  and  how  I

* “ Herpelin.”  In  MSS.  Herpelepin.  f “ Brin  Costeret.”  Q.  Bryan  Costeret,

x-  i>  2


580


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


managed  it.  The  king  of  England  intended  these  four  kings  should  adopt  the  manners,
appearance,  and  dress  of  the  English,  for  he  wanted  to  create  them  knights.  He  gave  them
first  a very  handsome  house  in  the  city  of  Dublin  for  themselves  and  attendants,  where  I
was  ordered  to  reside  with  them,  and  never  to  leave  the  house  without  an  absolute  necessity.
I lived  with  them  for  three  or  four  days  without  any  way  interfering,  that  we  might  become
accustomed  to  each  other,  and  I allowed  them  to  act  just  as  they  pleased.  I observed,  that
as  they  sat  at  table,  they  made  grimaces,  that  did  not  seem  to  me  graceful  nor  becoming,  and
I resolved  in  my  own  mind  to  make  them  drop  that  custom.  When  these  kings  were  seated
at  table,  and  the  first  dish  was  served,  they  would  make  their  minstrels  and  principal  servants
sit  beside  them,  and  eat  from  their  plates  and  drink  from  their  cups.  They  told  me,  this
was  a praiseworthy  custom  of  their  country,  where  everything  was  in  common  but  the  bed.
I permitted  this  to  be  done  for  three  days ; but  on  the  fourth  I ordered  the  tables  to  be  laid
out  and  covered  properly,  placing  the  four  kings  at  an  upper  table,  the  minstrels  at  another
below,  and  the  servants  lower  still.  They  looked  at  each  other,  and  refused  to  eat,  saying
I had  deprived  them  of  their  old  custom  in  which  they  had  been  brought  up.  I replied
with  a smile,  to  appease  them,  that  their  custom  was  not  decent  nor  suitable  to  their  rank,
nor  would  it  be  honourable  for  them  to  continue  it ; for  that  now  they  should  conform  to  the
manners  of  the  English ; and  to  instruct  them  in  these  particulars  was  the  motive  of  my
residence  with  them,  having  been  so  ordered  by  the  king  of  England  and  his  council.  When
they  heard  this  they  made  no  further  opposition  to  whatever  I proposed,  from  having  placed
themselves  under  the  obedience  of  England,  and  continued  good-humouredly  to  persevere  in
it  as  long  as  I staid  with  them.

“ They  had  another  custom  I knew  to  be  common  in  the  country,  which  was  the  not
wearing  breeches.  I had,  in  consequence,  plenty  of  breeches  made  of  linen  and  cloth,  which
I gave  to  the  kings  and  their  attendants,  and  accustomed  them  to  wear  them.  I took  away
many  rude  articles,  as  well  in  their  dress  as  other  things,  and  had  great  difficulty  at  the  first
to  induce  them  to  wear  robes  of  silken  cloth,  trimmed  with  squirrel-skin  or  minever,  for  the
kings  only  wrapped  themselves  up  in  an  Irish  cloak.  In  riding,  they  neither  used  saddles
nor  stirrups,  and  I had  some  trouble  to  make  them  conform  in  this  respect  to  the  English
manners.

“ I once  made  inquiry  concerning  their  faith ; but  they  seemed  so  much  displeased,  I was
forced  to  silence  : they  said  they  believed  in  God  and  the  Trinity,  without  any  difference
from  our  creed.  I asked  which  pope  they  were  inclined  to : they  replied,  without  hesitation,
‘ To  that  at  Rome.’  I enquired  if  they  would  like  to  receive  the  order  of  knighthood  ? for
the  king  would  willingly  create  them  such,  after  the  usual  modes  of  France,  England,  and
other  countries.  They  said  they  were  knights  already,  which  ought  to  satisfy  them.  I asked
when  they  were  made  ; they  answered,  at  seven  years  old ; that  in  Ireland  a king  makes
his  son  a knight,  and  should  the  child  have  lost  his  father,  then  the  nearest  relation  ; and
the  young  knight  begins  to  learn  to  tilt  with  a light  lance  against  a shield  fixed  to  a post  in
a field,  and  the  more  lances  he  breaks  the  more  honour  he  acquires.  ‘ By  this  method,’
added  they,  ‘ are  our  young  knights  trained,  more  especially  kings’  sons.’  Although  I asked
this,  I was  before  well  acquainted  with  the  manner  of  educating  their  children  to  arms.  I
made  no  further  reply  than  by  saying,  this  kind  of  childish  knighthood  would  not  satisfy
the  king  of  England,  and  that  he  would  create  them  in  another  mode.  They  asked,  ‘ In
what  manner?’  ‘In  church,  with  most  solemn  ceremonies;’  and  I believe  they  paid
attention  to  what  I said.

“ About  two  days  after,  the  king  was  desirous  to  create  these  kings  knights ; and  the  earl
of  Ormond,  who  understood  and  spoke  Irish  well,  as  his  lands  joined  the  territories  of  the
kings,  was  sent  to  wait  on  them,  that  they  might  have  more  confidence  in  the  message  from
the  king  and  council.  On  his  arrival,  they  showed  him  every  respect,  which  he  returned,
as  he  knew  well  how  to  do,  and  they  seemed  happy  at  his  coming.  He  began  a most
friendly  conversation  with  them,  and  inquired  if  they  were  satisfied  with  my  conduct  and
behaviour.  They  replied,  ‘ Perfectly  well : he  has  prudently  and  wisely  taught  us  the
manners  and  usages  of  his  country,  for  which  we  ought  to  be  obliged,  and  do  thank  him.’
This  answer  was  agreeable  to  the  earl  of  Ormond,  for  it  showed  sense  ; and  then,  by  degrees,


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  & c.


581


he  began  to  talk  of  the  order  of  knighthood  they  were  to  receive,  explaining  to  them  every

article  and  ceremony  of  it,  and  how  great  a value  should  be  set  on  it,  and  how  those  who

were  created  knights  behaved.  The  whole  of  the  earl’s  conversation  was  very  pleasing  to

the  four  kings,  whom,  however,  as  I have  not  yet  named,  I will  now  do : first,  Aneel  the

great,  king  of  Mecte  * ; secondly,  Brun  de  Thomond,  king  of  Thomond  and  of  Aire-f*;  the

third,  Arthur  Macquemaire,  king  of  Leinster;  and  the  fourth,  Contruo,  king  of  Chenour

and  Evpej.  They  were  made  knights  by  the  band  of  the  king  of  England,  on  the  feast  of

our  Lady  in  March,  which  that  year  fell  on  a Thursday,  in  the  cathedral  of  Dublin,  that

was  founded  by  Saint  John  the  Baptist.  The  four  kings  watched  all  the  Wednesday-night

in  the  cathedral ; and  on  the  morrow,  after  mass,  they  were  created  knights,  with  much

solemnity.  There  were  knighted  at  the  same  time  sir  Thomas  Orphem§,  sir  Joathas  Pado,

and  his  cousin  sir  John  Pado.  The  four  kings  were  very  richly  dressed,  suitable  to  their

rank,  and  that  day  dined  at  the  table  of  king  Richard,  where  they  were  much  stared  at  by

the  lords  and  those  present : not  indeed  without  reason  ; for  they  were  strange  figures,  and

differently  countenanced  to  the  English  or  other  nations.  We  are  naturally  inclined  to  gaze

at  anything  strange,  and  it  was  certainly,  sir  John,  at  that  time,  a great  novelty  to  see  four

Irish  kino-s.”

©

“ Sir  Henry,  I readily  believe  you,  and  would  have  given  a good  deal  if  I could  have  been
there.  Last  year  I had  made  arrangements  for  coming  to  England,  and  should  have  done
so,  had  I not  heard  of  the  death  of  queen  Anne,  which  made  me  postpone  my  journey.  But
I wish  to  ask  you  one  thing,  which  has  much  surprised  me : I should,  like  to  know  how
these  four  Irish  kings  have  so  readily  submitted  to  king  Richard,  when  his  valiant  grand-
father, who  was  so  much  redoubted  everywhere,  could  never  reduce  them  to  obedience,  and
was  always  at  war  with  them.  You  have  said  it  was  brought  about  by  a treaty  and  the
grace  of  God  : the  grace  of  God  is  good,  and  of  infinite  value  to  those  who  can  obtain  it ;
but  we  see  few  lords  now-a-days  augment  their  territories  otherwise  than  by  force.  When
I shall  be  returned  to  my  native  country  of  IPainault,  and  speak  of  these  matters,  I shall  be
strictly  examined  concerning  them ; for  our  lord  duke  Albert  of  Bavaria,  earl  of  Holland,
Hainault,  and  Zealand,  and  his  son  William  of  Hainault,  style  themselves  lords  of  Friesland,
an  extensive  country,  over  which  they  claim  the  government,  as  their  predecessors  have  done
before  them ; but  the  Frieslanders  refuse  to  acknowledge  their  right,  and  will  not  by  any
means  submit  themselves  to  their  obedience.”

To  this  Henry  Castide  answered : “ In  truth,  sir  John,  I cannot  more  fully  explain  how
it  was  brought  about ; but  it  is  generally  believed  by  most  of  our  party,  that  the  Irish  were
exceedingly  frightened  at  the  great  force  the  king  landed  in  Ireland,  where  it  remained  for
nine  months.  Their  coasts  were  so  surrounded,  that  neither  provision  nor  merchandise
could  be  landed  ; but  the  inland  natives  were  indifferent  to  this,  as  they  are  unacquainted
with  commerce,  nor  do  they  wish  to  know  anything  of  it,  but  simply  to  live  like  wild  beasts.
Those  who  reside  on  the  coast  opposite  to  England  are  better  informed,  and  accustomed  to
traffic.  King  Edward,  of  happy  memory,  had  in  his  reign  so  many  wars  to  provide  for,  in
France,  Brittany,  Gascony,  and  Scotland,  that  his  forces  were  dispersed  in  different  quarters,
and  he  was  unable  to  send  any  great  armament  to  Ireland.  When  the  Irish  found  so  large
a force  was  now  come  against  them,  they  considered  it  most  advisable  to  submit  themselves
to  the  king  of  England.  Formerly,  when  Saint  Edward,  who  had  been  canonised,  and  was
worshipped  wfith  much  solemnity  by  the  English,  was  their  king,  he  thrice  defeated  the
Danes  on  sea  and  land.  This  Saint  Edward,  king  of  England,  lord  of  Ireland  and  of
Aquitaine  ||,  the  Irish  loved  and  feared  more  than  any  other  king  of  England  before  or  since.
It  was  for  this  reason,  that  when  our  king  went  thither  last  year,  he  laid  aside  the  leopards
and  flowers  de  luce,  and  bore  the  arms  of  Saint  Edward  emblazoned  on  all  his  banners  : these
were  a cross  patence  or,  on  a field  gules,  with  four  doves  argent  on  the  shield  or  banner,  as


* “ ADeel  the  great,  king  of  Mecte.”  Q.  O'Neale  the
great,  king  of  Meath.

f “ Thomond  and  Aire.”  Q.  Ulster.

I “ Contruo,  king  of  Chenour  and  Erpe.”  Q.  O'Con-
nor, king  of  Connaught


§ “ Sir  Thomas  Orphem.”  MSS.  Ourghem  and
Gourghem.

||  This  must  be  a mistake;  for  Aquitaine  teas  brought
to  the  crown  of  England  by  the  marriage  of  Eleanora,
the  divorced  queen  of  Louis  le  Jeune,  king  of  Fiance,  with
Henry  II.


582


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


you  please.  This  we  heard  was  very  pleasing  to  the  Irish,  and  inclined  them  more  to
submission,  for  in  truth  the  ancestors  of  these  four  kings  had  done  homage  and  service  to
Saint  Edward : they  also  considered  king  Richard  as  a prudent  and  conscientious  man,  and
have  therefore  paid  their  homage  in  the  like  manner  as  was  done  to  Saint  Edward.

“ Thus  I have  related  to  you  how  our  king  accomplished  the  object  of  his  expedition  to
Ireland.  Keep  it  in  your  memory,  that  when  returned  home  you  may  insert  it  in  your
chronicle  with  other  histories  that  are  connected  with  it.”  “ Henry,”  said  I,  “ you  have
well  spoken,  and  it  shall.be  done.”  Upon  this  we  separated;  and  meeting  soon  after  the
herald  March,  I said  — “ March,  tell  me  what  are  the  arms  of  Henry  Castide  ; for  I have
found  him  very  agreeable,  and  he  has  kindly  related  to  me  the  history  of  the  king’s  expedition
to  Ireland,  and  of  the  four  Irish  kings,  who,  as  he  says,  were  under  his  governance  upwards
of  fifteen  days.”  March  replied,  “ He  bears  for  arms  a chevron  gules  on  a field  argent,  with
three  besants  gules,  two  above  the  chevron  and  one  below.”

All  these  things  I retained  in  my  memory,  and  put  on  paper,  for  I wished  not  to
forget  them.


CHAPTER  LXV. THE  DUKE  OF  LANCASTER  IS  ORDERED  BACK  FROM  AQUITAINE. — KING

RICHARD  RECEIVES  A FRIENDLY  ANSWER  TO  THE  PROPOSALS  HIS  AMBASSADORS  HAD
MADE  TO  THE  KING  OF  FRANCE  FOR  A MARRIAGE  BETWEEN  HIM  AND  THE  LADY
ISABELLA,  PRINCESS  OF  FRANCE.

I remained  in  the  household  of  the  king  of  England  as  long  as  I pleased  : but  I was  not
always  in  the  same  place,  for  the  king  frequently  changed  his  abode.  He  went  to  Eltham,
Leeds-castle,  Kingston,  Shene,  Chertsey,  and  Windsor ; none  very  far  from  London.  I was
told  for  truth,  that  the  king  and  his  council  had  written  to  the  duke  of  Lancaster  to  return
to  England,  for  those  from  Aquitaine  had  boldly  declared  they  would  not  submit  to  any
other  lord  but  the  king  of  England.  This  had  been  determined  on  by  so  large  a majority
of  the  council  that  the  duke  of  Gloucester,  anxious  as  he  was  to  keep  his  brother  out  of
England,  could  not  prevail  that  the  gift  the  king  had  made  him  should  be  persevered  in.
The  whole  council  were  fearful  of  the  consequences : they  were  perfectly  aware  of  what  the
deputies  from  Gascony  had  meant  by  their  speeches ; for  they  declared,  that  should  the
duchy  of  Aquitaine  be  alienated  from  the  crown  of  England,  it  would  in  times  to  come  be
very  prejudicial  to  its  interests.  They  were  unwilling,  therefore,  to  risk  such  a loss,  as  the
the  towns  of  Bordeaux  and  Bayonne  had  always  strongly  supported  the  cause  of  England.
This  was  not  forgotten  to  be  urged  in  the  council  during  the  absence  of  the  duke  of  Gloucester;
but  when  he  was  present  none  dared  to  declare  their  real  sentiments.  The  affair,  therefore,
was  not  further  pressed.

I will  now  say  something  of  the  earl  of  Rutland,  the  earl  marshal,  and  the  other  English
ambassadors,  that  had  been  sent  to  France  to  treat  of  a marriage  between  king  Richard  and
the  young  daughter  of  the  king  of  France,  who  was  not  then  more  than  eight  years  old,  and
tell  how  they  prospered.  These  ambassadors  continued  their  journey  from  Calais,  through
Amiens,  Clermont  in  Beauvoisis,  to  Paris  : wherever  they  passed,  they  were  most  honourably
received,  according  to  orders  that  had  been  given  by  the  king  of  France  and  his  council.
They  were  lodged  at  Paris  near  rfie  Croix  du  Tiroir,  and  their  attendants  and  horses,  to  the
amount  of  five  hundred,  in  the  adjacent  streets.  The  king  of  France  resided  at  the  Louvre,
the  queen  and  her  children  at  the  hotel  de  Saint  Pol,  the  duke  of  Berry  at  the  hotel  de  Nesle,
the  duke  of  Burgundy  at  the  hotel  d’ Artois : the  duke  of  Bourbon,  the  duke  of  Orleans,  the
count  de  Saint  Pol,  and  the  lord  de  Coucy,  were  at  their  own  hotels ; for  the  king  had
summoned  the  whole  of  his  council,  that  he  might  be  the  better  advised  what  answer  to
make  to  the  English  lords.  He  had  ordered  that  two  hundred  crowns  of  France  should  be
paid  during  their  stay  in  Paris,  for  the  expenses  of  them  and  their  horses.

The  principal  lords,  such  as  the  earl  of  Rutland  and  the  earl  marshal,  were  frequently
with  the  king,  and  staid  dinner : the  king,  his  brother  and  uncles,  showed  them  every
attention,  from  respect  to  the  king  of  England.  The  ambassadors  demanded  an  answer  to


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


583


their  proposals,  but  were  some  time  put  off  with  excuses  ; for  it  was  matter  of  great  surprise
to  every  one  that  the  English  should  be  so  forward  to  offer  such  an  alliance  after  the  hitter
war  that  had  been  carried  on  between  the  two  nations,  for  such  a length  of  time.  Some  in  the
council  said, — “ How  will  it  be  possible  for  the  king,  our  lord,  to  give  his  daughter  in
marriage  to  his  adversary  the  king  of  England?  We  think,  that  before  such  a measure  can
take  place,  there  ought  to  be  a solid  peace  established  between  France,  England,  and  their
allies."  This  and  many  other  points  were  agitated  in  the  privy  council  of  France.

There  was  at  this  period  a very  wise  chancellor  of  France,  called  sir  Arnaud  de  Corbie  :
he  saw  far  into  events  likely  to  happen,  and  knew  well  the  different  interests  that  swayed
the  kingdom.  lie  said  to  the  king  and  his  uncles, — “ My  lords,  we  ought  to  go  straight
forward  in  this  business ; for  king  Richard  of  England  shows  plainly  that  he  wishes  nothing
but  affection  to  France,  since  he  is  desirous  to  ally  himself  with  us  by  marriage.  We  have
had  two  conferences  for  peace  at  Amiens  and  at  Leulinghen,  but  neither  were  brought  to
any  better  conclusion  than  a prolongation  of  the  truce.  We  know  for  certain,  that  the  duke
of  Gloucester  is  in  opposition  to  the  king  of  England  and  his  two  brothers  of  Lancaster  and
of  York,  in  everything  relative  to  a peace  with  France.  Neither  the  king  of  England  nor
any  others  who  wish  for  peace  can  make  him  change  his  sentiments,  hut  in  the  end  he  will
not  be  able  to  withstand  the  king.  Let  us  therefore  make  the  most  of  this  overture,
and  give  the  ambassadors  such  an  answer  that  they  may  return  satisfied.”  The  king  of
France  and  his  uncles  agreed  with  the  chancellor,  more  especially  the  duke  of  Burgundy,
who  was  so  tired  of  war  that  he  was  anxious  for  peace  on  almost  any  terms.  He  was
principally  induced  to  this  from  his  territories  of  Flanders,  which  he  held  in  right  of  his
duchess,  being  opposite  to  the  shores  of  England ; and  the  hearts  of  the  Flemings  were  more
inclined  to  the  English  than  the  French,  from  the  commerce  that  was  carried  on  between  the
two  countries.  It  was  determined  in  the  privy  council,  that  the  hearty  welcome  which  had
been  made  to  the  English  should  be  continued : the  king  particularly  willed  it  so  : and  it
was  advised  (whether  through  dissimulation  or  not)  that  the  ambassadors  from  England
should  receive  kind  answers,  and  have  hopes  given  them  before  their  departure  that  the  king
of  England’s  proposal  would  be  complied  with.

The  queen  of  France  resided  at  the  hotel  of  St.  Pol  on  the  banks  of  the  Seine ; and,  the
better  to  please  the  English  lords,  their  request  was  granted,  to  visit  the  queen  and  children,
and  especially  the  princess  whom  they  were  soliciting  for  their  queen,  as  they  were  impatient
to  see  her.  This  had  been  at  first  refused,  for  the  council  excused  themselves,  by  saying
that  she  was  but  a child ; and  that,  at  her  age  of  eight  years,  nothing  could  be  judged  of
what  she  might  turn  out.  She  had,  however,  been  well  educated,  as  she  showed  the  English
lords  when  they  waited  upon  her ; for  when  the  lord  marshal  had  dropped  on  his  knees,
saying,  “ Madam,  if  it  please  God,  you  shall  be  our  lady  and  queen,”  she  replied  instantly,
and  without  any  one  advising  her,  “ Sir,  if  it  please  God,  and  my  lord  and  father,  that  I be
queen  of  England,  I shall  be  well  pleased  thereat ; for  I have  been  told  I shall  then  be  a
great  lady.”  She  made  the  earl  marshal  rise,  and,  taking  him  by  the  hand,  led  him  to  the
queen,  who  was  much  pleased  at  her  answer,  as  were  all  who  heard  it.  The  appearance
and  manners  of  this  young  princess  were  very  agreeable  to  the  English  ambassadors ; and
they  thought  among  themselves  that  she  would  be  a lady  of  high  honour  and  great  worth.
When  they  had  staid  at  Paris  more  than  twenty  days,  having  all  their  expenses  defrayed  by
the  king  of  France,  they  received  favourable  answers  to  their  demands  from  the  king  and
council,  with  great  hopes  that  the  object  of  their  mission  would  be  accomplished,  but  not
immediately ; for  the  princess  was  very  young,  and  had  likewise  been  betrothed  to  the  son
of  the  duke  of  Brittany.  This  obstacle  they  were  told  must  be  first  got  over,  before  any
thing  further  could  he  done  in  the  matter : it  must  therefore  remain  in  this  state  the  ensuing
winter  : during  Lent  the  king  of  France  would  send  information  of  what  had  been  done  to
the  king  of  England ; and,  when  the  days  should  be  lengthened,  the  weather  fine,  and  the
sea  calm,  they  might  return,  or  any  others  whom  the  king  of  England  should  prefer  to  send,
and  they  would  be  well  received  by  the  king  and  council  of  France.

This  answer  was  satisfactory  to  the  English  ambassadors.  They  took  leave  of  the  queen,
her  daughter  the  lady  Isabella,  the  brother  and  uncles  of  the  king,  and  of  all  of  whom  it  was


584


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


necessary  to  take  leave,  and  left  Paris,  following  the  same  road  they  had  come  from  Calais.
The  earl  of  Rutland  and  earl  marshal,  who  were  the  principals  in  this  embassy,  hastened,
before  any  of  their  attendants,  to  carry  the  news  of  what  they  had  done  to  the  kino-  of
England.  They  landed  at  Sandwich,  and  in  less  than  a day  and  a half  arrived  at  Windsor,
where  the  king  then  was.  He  was  much  rejoiced  at  their  arrival,  and  with  the  answers
they  had  brought  back.  He  did  not  neglect  this  business ; for  his  mind  was  so  much
occupied  with  it,  that  his  whole  thoughts  were  employed  on  the  means  of  obtaining  the
daughter  of  France  for  his  queen.  If  the  king  of  England  was  thus  busily  employed,  the
king  and  council  of  France  were  not  less  so,  in  turning  their  thoughts  how  they  could  make
the  most  of  this  marriage  to  the  honour  and  advantage  of  their  country.

Many  spoke  of  it,  saying, — “ If  our  advice  were  asked  on  the  matter,  and  listened  to,  we
would  say,  that  the  king  of  England  should  never  have  a princess  of  France  until  a firm
peace  were  made  between  the  two  kingdoms  arid  their  allies.  What  good  can  be  looked  to
from  this  connexion  to  either  country  ? for  the  moment  the  truces  expire,  and  they  have  but
three  years  to  run,  the  war  will  recommence  with  as  much  inveteracy  as  before.  These  things
ought  to  be  well  considered.”  The  dukes  of  Berry  and  Orleans,  with  many  of  the  great
barons  of  France,  were  of  this  opinion,  which  was  well  known  to  the  king,  the  duke  of
Burgundy,  and  to  the  chancellor,  who  were  eager  for  any  peace  that  should  not  be  dis-
honourable to  the  crown  of  France.


CHAPTER  LXVI. A SQUIRE  OP  NORMANDY,  CALLED  ROBERT  THE  HERMIT,  HAVING

DECLARED  HE  HAD  SEEN  A VISION,  WHILE  AT  SEA,  ORDERING  HIM  TO  INTERFERE
IN  MAKING  A PEACE  BETWEEN  FRANCE  AND  ENGLAND,  IS  SENT  TO  KING  RICHARD  AND
HIS  UNCLES  TO  THIS  EFFECT.

At  this  period  a valiant  and  prudent  squire  returned  home  to  France  : he  had  travelled
much  beyond  sea,  and  his  voyages  and  travels  had  gained  him  great  renown,  both  at  home
and  abroad,  wherever  they  were  known.  This  squire  was  from  the  country  of  Caux  in
Normandy,  and  his  name  was  Robert  Menuot*,  but  he  as  called  Robert  the  Hermit.  He
was  of  a religious  and  holy  life,  of  fair  speech,  and  might  be  about  fifty  years  old.  He  had
attended  the  conferences  at  Leulinghen  between  the  lords  of  France  and  England,  where  his
discourses  had  been  well  listened  to.  When  Robert  left  Syria  to  return  home,  he  embarked
at  Barutli,  but  had  when  at  sea  a furious  tempest,  so  that,  for  two  days  and  a night,  he  and
his  companions  were  in  such  danger  they  thought  they  must  be  lost.  Persons  in  such  peril
are  generally  very  repentant  and  contrite,  and  have  a greater  fear  of  God.  It  happened,
toward  the  end  of  the  storm,  when  the  weather  and  sea  became  somewhat  calmer,  that  a
figure  as  bright  as  crystal  appeared  to  Robert,  and  said : “ Robert,  thou  shalt  escape  from
this  peril,  as  well  as  thy  companions  for  thy  sake,  for  God  has  favourably  heard  thy  prayers.
He  orders  thee  by  me  to  return  to  France  as  speedily  as  thou  canst,  and  instantly  on
thy  arrival  to  wait  on  the  king,  and  relate  what  has  befallen  thee.  Thou  wilt  tell  him  to
listen  to  peace  with  his  adversary  the  king  of  England,  for  their  wars  have  lasted  too  long.
Do  thou  interfere  boldly  when  conferences  shall  be  holden  to  treat  of  peace  between  king
Charles  and  king  Richard,  for  thou  shalt  be  heard  ; and  all  those  who  shall  any  way  oppose
or  prevent  peace  from  taking  effect,  shall  dearly  pay  for  their  wickedness  in  their  lifetime.”
Upon  this,  the  voice  ceased  and  the  figure  vanished,  leaving  Robert  very  pensive  on  what  he
had  heard.  He,  however,  believed  that  what  he  had  seen  came  from  Heaven  : and  from  that
moment  they  had  wind  and  weather  to  their  wishes,  which  brought  them  to  Genoa.

Robert,  on  landing,  took  leave  of  his  fellow-passengers,  and  made  the  best  of  his  way  to
Avignon,  where  the  first  thing  he  did  was  to  pay  his  devotions  in  the  church  of  St.  Peter.
Finding  there  the  grand  penitentiary,  he  confessed  himself  duly  and  devoutly  to  him,  relating
the  vision  you  have  just  read,  and  asked  his  advice  how  he  should  act  on  the  occasion.
The  penitentiary  strictly  enjoined  him  not  to  mention  the  vision  to  any  one  before  he  had
told  it  to  the  king  of  France,  according  to  the  orders  given  him,  and  that  whatever  the  king

* “ Robert  Menuot.”  MSS.  Mennot.


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


585


should  command  he  must  do.  Robert  followed  this  advice,  and  dressing  himself  in  plain
grey  cloth,  with  very  simple  attendance,  left  Avignon,  and  continued  his  journey  to  Paris,
where  he  heard  that  the  king  was  at  Abbeville,  to  be  near  the  conference  at  Amiens  between
the  French  and  English.  He  immediately  went  to  the  abbey  of  St.  Peter,  where  the
king  was  lodged  at  Abbeville,  and  was  introduced  to  the  presence  by  a Norman  knight,
his  nearest  relation,  called  sir  William  Martel,  who  was  of  the  king’s  chamber.  Robert
minutely  related  every  thing  that  had  happened  to  him,  which  the  king  listened  to
with  great  attention  ; but  as  the  duke  of  Burgundy  and  sir  Arnaud  de  Corbie,  chancellor  of
France,  the  two  most  active  commissioners  for  France,  were  absent  at  the  conference,  he
said  to  Robert, — “ Our  council  are  at  Leulinghen  : you  will  remain  here  until  they  shall
return,  when  I will  talk  with  my  uncle  of  Burgundy  and  the  chancellor,  and  act  according
as  they  shall  best  advise  me.”  “ God  assist  them  ! ” answered  Robert.

This  same  week  the  commissioners  returned  to  Abbeville  from  the  conference,  bringing
with  them  a project  for  peace.  The  English  had  inserted  articles  of  such  importance  as  a
preliminary,  that  they  had  refused  to  admit  them  without  knowing  first  the  king’s  will  on
the  subject,  and  on  their  arrival  they  laid  them  before  his  majesty.  The  king  took
his  uncle  of  Burgundy  and  the  chancellor  aside,  to  inform  them  of  what  Robert  the
hermit  had  told  him,  and  to  know  if  it  ought  to  be  believed  and  acted  upon.  They
having  looked  at  each  other  some  time  in  silence,  said  they  would  examine  this  Robert  them-
selves, and  then  would  give  him  their  opinion.  Robert  was  sent  for,  and  being  not  far  from
where  these  secret  councils  were  held,  soon  arrived.  On  his  admission,  he  paid  the  king  and  the
duke  of  Burgundy  much  respect;  and  the  king  said,  “ Repeat  once  more,  very  minutely,  all  that
you  told  me.”  “Willingly,  sire,”  replied  Robert.  lie  then  detailed  all  you  have  before  heard  of
his  adventures  and  vision,  to  which  they  attentively  listened ; and,  when  he  had  done,  they
desired  him  to  leave  the  chamber,  these  three  only  remaining  together.  The  kingaskedthe  duke
of  Burgundy  what  he  thought  of  it : “ My  lord,”  said  he,  “ the  chancellor  and  myself
will  consider,  of  it,  and  give  you  our  answer  to-morrow.”  “Very  well,”  answered  the  king.

The  duke  and  the  chancellor  consulted  a long  time  by  themselves  on  this  matter,  and  on
their  mode  of  acting  ; for  they  saw  the  king  believed  the  whole,  and  was  desirous  that  Robert
should  be  added  to  them  as  a commissioner,  for  he  was  so  eloquent  he  converted  the  hearts
of  all  wdio  heard  him.  They  at  last  resolved,  that  if  Robert  should  publicly  declare  the
orders  he  had  received  in  his  vision,  it  would  be  advisable  for  him  to  come  to  Leulinghen
and  explain  it  to  the  lords  of  England,  and  all  who  wished  to  hear  it ; that  it  was  lawful
so  to  act ; and  this  was  the  answer  they  made  to  the  king  on  the  ensuing  day.  When  the
duke  of  Burgundy  and  the  chancellor  returned  to  the  conference,  they  carried  Robert  the
hermit  with  them,  who  was  ready  enough  to  speak  what  you  have  heard.  On  the  lords  of
France  and  England  being  assembled,  Robert  came  in  the  midst  of  them,  and  eloquently  told
the  vision  he  had  had  at  sea,  and  maintained,  by  a long  harangue,  that  what  it  said  was  by
divine  inspiration,  and  that  God  had  sent  it  to  him,  because  he  willed  it  should  be  so.  Some  of
the  English  lords,  such  as  the  duke  of  Lancaster,  the  earl  of  Salisbury,  sir  Thomas  Percy,
sir  William  Clanvow,  the  bishops  of  Saint  David’s  and  London,  were  inclined  to  credit  what
Robert  related  ; but  the  duke  of  Gloucester  and  the  earl  of  Arundel  paid  not  any  regard  to
it,  and,  when  at  their  lodgings,  in  the  absence  of  the  French  lords,  said  it  was  only  a cheat,
and  a story  made  up  to  laugh  at  and  deceive  them.  They  unanimously  resolved  to  write  to
king  Richard  every  particular  of  what  Robert  the  hermit  had  said  and  seen.  This  was  done,
and  the  letters  given  to  a knight  of  the  king’s  chamber,  called  sir  Richard  Credon,  who  found
the  king  at  a handsome  place  in  Kent,  called  Leeds  castle.  He  presented  the  king  letters
from  his  commissioners  at  Leulinghen,  which  gave  him  a full  detail  of  every  tiling  relative
to  Robert  the  hermit.  The  king  took  much  delight  in  perusing  these  letters  at  his  leisure,
and,  when  he  came  to  the  part  that  related  to  Robert  the  hermit,  he  said  he  should  be
glad  to  see  and  hear  this  Robert ; for  he  was  inclined  to  believe  that  what  he  said  had
happened  to  him  might  be  true.  He  wrote  back  to  the  duke  of  Lancaster  and  the

earl  of  Salisbury,  to  press  them  to  exert  themselves,  that  a firm  peace  should  be  estab-
lished between  him,  the  king  of  France  and  his  allies;  for,  as  Robert  the  hermit  had  said,
the  wars  had  lasted  too  long,  and  it  was  full  time  to  hit  upon  some  means  to  procure  peace.


58G


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


I have  before  related  the  whole  of  this  matter  ; and  that  as  nothing  was  concluded,  in  regard
to  a peace,  a truce  had  been  agreed  on  by  the  commissioners  on  each  side,  before  they  sepa-
rated, between  the  two  kingdoms  and  their  allies,  to  last  for  four  years,  while,  in  the  mean
time,  they  would  study  to  promote  a lasting  peace.  Such  were  the  intentions  of  the  English
commissioners,  with  the  exception  of  the  duke  of  Gloucester  ; for  he  was  resolved,  on  his  return
to  England,  to  oppose  any  peace  with  France ; but  he  dissembled  then  his  real  sentiments,  to
please  the  king  and  his  brother  of  Lancaster.  Thus  did  I become  acquainted  with  what  passed
relative  to  Robert  the  hermit.

Shortly  after  the  return  of  the  earl  of  Rutland,  the  earl  marshal,  the  archbishop  of  Dublin,
sir  Hugh  Despencer,  sir  Lewis  Clifford,  and  those  who  had  been  attached  to  the  embassy  to
France  bringing  with  them  friendly  answers  relative  to  the  marriage,  the  parliament  assembled
at  Westminster.  These  parliaments  last  usually  four  days,  when  all  business  relative  to  the
country  is  settled.

At  the  meeting  of  this  parliament  the  duke  of  Lancaster  returned  from  Bordeaux,  whither
he  had  been  sent  as  duke  of  Aquitaine,  for  the  inhabitants  had  refused  to  receive  him  in  that
quality.  But  I have  mentioned  these  things  before,  and  shall  therefore  say  no  more  on  the
subject.  The  duke  of  Lancaster,  on  his  return  to  England,  was  well  received  by  the  king
and  lords,  as  was  right,  and  they  discoursed  on  various  business  together.  As  soon  as  it  was
known  in  France  that  the  duke  of  Lancaster  was  in  England,  the  king  and  his  council  re-
solved to  send  thither  Robert  the  hermit,  with  credential  letters  to  the  kino-  of  England,  who
was  desirous  of  seeing  him  ; and  that,  when  he  should  come  back  to  France,  the  count  de
Saint  Pol  would  go  thither.  Robert  the  hermit  would  be  well  received  by  the  king  and
lords  of  England,  who  would  cheerfully  attend  to  all  he  should  relate  of  the  affairs  of  Syria,
Tartary,  of  Bajazet  and  Turkey,  where  he  had  resided  a long  time ; for  of  such  matters  the
English  lords  are  very  curious.  Robert  was  ordered  to  make  his  preparations  for  going  to
England,  which  much  pleased  him,  saying  he  would  willingly  go  thither,  as  it  was  a country
he  had  never  seen.

Credential  letters  were  given  him  from  the  king  of  France  to  king  Richard  and  to
his  uncles.  Robert  left  Paris  with  his  array  of  only  seven  horses,  (but  all  his  expenses,  as
was  just,  were  to  be  paid  by  the  king  of  France,)  and  travelled  to  Boulogne,  where  he
embarked  and  crossed  to  Dover.  He  then  went  to  Eltham,  a palace  of  the  king  of  England,
seven  miles  from  London,  and  met  there  the  king,  the  duke  of  Lancaster,  the  earls  of  Salis-
bury and  Huntingdon,  and  sir  Thomas  Percy,  who  showed  him  much  attention,  in  honour
to  the  king  of  France,  as  did  their  sovereign,  from  his  desire  to  see  him.  He  gave  his  letters
to  the  king  and  the  other  lords,  who  perused  them  with  pleasure ; hut  the  duke  of
Gloucester  was,  I believe,  at  this  time  at  a castle  of  his  called  Pleshy,  in  Essex.  When
Robert  had  remained  at  Eltham  with  the  king  and  his  court  five  days,  he  took  his  leave,  and
departed  to  visit  the  duke  of  Gloucester.  With  this  intention  he  rode  to  London,  and,  on  the
next  day,  continued  his  journey,  and  lay  at  a town,  fifteen  miles  from  London,  called  Bre-
honde*,  and  on  the  morrow  arrived  at  Pleshy,  where  he  was  handsomely  received  by  the
duke  and  duchess  and  their  children.  Robert  delivered  his  letters  from  the  king  of  France
to  the  duke,  who,  on  finding  that  they  were  credential  letters,  took  Robert  aside  and  de-
manded the  cause  of  his  coming.  Robert  replied,  that  he  would  tell  him  at  his  leisure,  for
that  he  was  not  come  to  make  a short  visit.  “Well,’'  said  the  duke,  “ you  are  very  welcome.”
Robert  the  hermit  was  well  acqi’ainted  with  the  double  character  of  the  duke,  and  that  he
was  violent  against  a peace  with  France,  and  in  strong  opposition  to  the  king  and  his  brother
of  Lancaster,  who  were  well  inclined  to  put  an  end  to  the  war.  He  knew  not  well  how  to
begin  on  this  business,  nor  what  means  to  urge  to  make  him  change  his  opinion ; for  he
had  witnessed  his  violence  at  Leulinglien,  and  knew  that  a war  with  France  was  uppermost
in  his  thoughts.  This,  however,  did  not  prevent  Robert  from  talking  to  the  duke  of
Gloucester,  respecting  a peace  ; but  he  found  the  duke  cold  and  reserved  in  his  answers.
He  said,  “ that  he  had  two  elder  brothers,  of  Lancaster  and  York,  and  that  it  was  to  them
such  affairs  ought  to  be  addressed,  in  preference  to  him ; besides,  supposing  he  was  willing
to  agree  to  a peace,  perhaps  the  rest  of  the  nation  would  not  consent.”

* ,c  Brehonde.”  Q.  Brentwood.  Buvntwood.


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c


587


“ My  very  dear  lord,”  replied  Robert,  “for  the  love  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Ciirist  do  not
oppose  a peace : you  can  do  a great  deal  towards  forming  one  ; and  you  know  how  much
your  king  and  nephew  is  inclined  to  it,  who,  besides,  is  anxious  to  strengthen  the  love
between  the  two  kingdoms,  by  a marriage  with  the  daughter  of  the  king  of  France.”  To
this  the  duke  answered, — “ Robert,  although  you  are  at  this  moment  in  high  favour,  and
well  listened  to  by  the  kings  and  lords  of  both  countries,  the  matter  of  peace  is  of  so  much
consideration,  that  persons  of  greater  weight  than  you  must  interfere  in  it.  I repeat  to  you,
what  I have  frequently  said  at  different  places  and  times,  that  I shall  never  be  against  a
peace  that  is  honourable  to  my  country.  All  that  in  a former  peace  was  agreed  upon  with
the  king  my  father,  and  my  brother  the  prince  of  Wales,  and  confirmed  by  the  oath  of  king
John,  for  himself  and  successors,  under  penalty  of  excommunication  by  the  pope,  has  not
bean  kept,  and  their  oaths  are  of  no  value.  The  French  have  fraudulently  broken  the  articles
of  this  peace,  and  have  even  taken  possession,  by  treachery  and  force,  of  those  lands,  castles
and  towns,  that  were  given  up  at  the  peace  to  our  late  king  and  father,  and  to  his  successors.
Besides,  of  the  three  millions  of  francs,  which  were  to  be  paid  as  the  ransom  of  king  John,
six  hundred  thousand  are  yet  unpaid.  These  matters,  Robert,  being  so  fresh  in  our  memory,
trouble  us  greatly,  and  make  us  cautious ; and  we  wonder  (I  speak  not  only  of  myself  but  of
others  who  have  a right  to  interfere  in  the  government)  how  our  king  should  be  so  thought-
less that  he  does  not  compare  past  times  with  the  present ; and  how  lie  can  think  of  uniting
himself  with  his  enemies,  and  thereby  disinheriting  the  crown  of  England  of  all  future
advantage.”

“ Dear  lord,”  replied  Robert,  “ our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  suffered  on  the  cross  for  us  sinners ;
but  he  forgave,  at  his  death,  those  who  had  crucified  him.  It  is  necessary,  therefore,  that
we  in  like  manner  forgive  our  enemies,  if  we  expect  to  be  admitted  to  the  glories  of  paradise.
All  hatred,  malice  and  ill  will  were  put  an  end  to,  and  mutually  pardoned,  the  day  the  peace
was  signed  by  your  ancestor  at  Calais.  War  was  afterwards  renewed  with  bitterness
between  the  two  countries,  through  faults  and  deceptions  on  each  side ; for,  when  the  prince
of  Wales  returned  from  Castille  to  Aquitaine,  a set  of  people  called  Companions,  the  greater
part  of  whom  were  English,  or  Gascons  dependent  on  the  king  of  England  or  the  prince,
collected  together  and  entered  France,  without  the  smallest  title  of  reason,  and  carried  thither
a more  disastrous  war  than  the  preceding  one.  They  called  the  kingdom  of  France  their
manor,  and  were  so  determined  on  mischief  there  was  no  resisting  them  : for  this  reason,
when  the  realm  was  so  oppressed,  and  the  evils  daily  multiplying,  king  Charles,  son  to  king
John,  was  advised  by  his  vassals  to  provide  a remedy,  and  oppose  such  conduct  by  open  war  or
otherwise.  Many  great  barons  of'Gasconyat  this  time  allied  themselves  with  the  king  of  France,
whom  the  prince  of  Wales,  who  ought  to  have  been  their  lord,  wTanted  to  oppress  and  bring  more
under  his  power,  as  they  said  and  wanted  to  prove  by  various  facts,  but  which  they  would  not
longer  sutler.  They  made  war  on  the  prince,  in  conformity  to  their  appeal  to  the  king  of  France,
who,  by  the  advice  of  his  council,  joined  them  in  order  to  get  rid  of  these  free  companies  that
ravaged  France.  Many  lords,  towns  and  castles  turned  to  the  king  of  France,  from  the
oppressions  they  laboured  under  from  the  prince  or  those  employed  by  him.  Thus  was  the
war  renewed  with  more  inveteracy  than  before,  to  the  destruction  of  the  people  and  country,
as  well  as  the  weakening  the  faith  of  God.  This  last  is  so  sensibly  felt  in  Christendom  that
the  enemies  of  our  faith,  much  emboldened,  have  already  conquered  great  part  of  Greece,  and
the  empire  of  Constantinople,  through  fault  of  not  resisting  a Turk  called  Basant,  surnamed
Amorabaquin*.  He  has  conquered  the  whole  kingdom  of  Armenia,  with  the  exception  of  the
single  town  of  Courch,  situated  on  the  sea-shore,  like  Southampton  or  Bristol  in  this  country.
The  Genoese  and  Venetians  hold  this  against  the  Turks  ; but  they  cannot  long  withstand  the
power  of  Bajazet,  emperor  of  Constantinople,  who  is  of  your  blood,  for  he  is  the  son  of  Hugh
de  Lusignan,  by  the  Lady  Mary  de  Bourbon,  cousin-german  to  the  queen  your  mother.  But
should  there  be  peace  (as  there  will,  if  it  please  God)  between  France  and  England,  all
knights  and  squires  desirous  of  glory,  and  of  exalting  their  names,  will  hasten  thither,  and
assist  the  king  of  Armenia  to  drive  out  the  Turks  from  his  kingdom.  The  war  lias  continued

* Tliis  Amorabaquin,  so  much  disfigured,  was  the  sultan  Bajazet,  who  ascended  the  throne  1391.  He  was  sur-
named,  like  his  father,  l’Amurath  Bacquin,  according  to  the  MSS.  in  the  British  Museum.


508


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  & c.


too  long  between  France  and  England,  and  all  those  who  may  any  way  oppose  or  delay  the
blessings  of  peace  will  severely  be  punished  in  this  life  for  so  doing.”

“ IIow  do  you  know  that  ? ” said  the  duke  of  Gloucester.  “ Dear  lord,”  answered  Robert,
“ all  I say  comes  from  divine  inspiration,  and  was  given  me  in  a vision  as  I was  returning
by  sea  from  Baruth  in  Syria  towards  the  island  of  Rhodes.”  He  then  related  fully  all  he
had  seen  and  heard  in  this  vision,  the  more  effectually  to  move  the  heart  of  the  duke  of
Gloucester  to  listen  to  terms  of  peace.  But  the  heart  of  the  duke  was  hardened  against  peace,
and  he  always  returned  to  his  former  opinions,  holding  in  contempt,  by  his  words,  the  French
in  all  things,  notwithstanding  what  Robert  had  said  to  him  : however,  as  he  was  a foreigner,
and  seemed  eager  to  do  good,  and  knowing  besides  that  the  king  of  England  wanted  to  con-
clude a peace,  he  dissembled  his  real  sentiments  as  much  as  he  could,  and  turned  the  conver-
sation to  other  subjects.

Robert  the  hermit  staid  two  days  and  as  many  nights  at  Pleshy  with  the  duke  and  duchess
of  Gloucester  and  their  children,  who,  in  outward  appearance,  made  him  very  welcome.  On
the  third  day  he  took  leave  of  them,  and  departed  for  London  ; and  went  thence  to  Windsor,
where  the  king  then  resided.  He  was  handsomely  entertained  at  Windsor,  as  well  in  honour
to  the  king  of  France,  who  had  sent  him,  as  on  account  of  his  eloquence  and  good
manners.  It  may  be  supposed  that  the  king  of  England  inquired  of  him  secretly  how  he
had  succeeded  with  his  uncle  of  Gloucester,  and  Robert  told  him  truly  all  that  had  passed..
The  king  knew  well  that  the  duke  of  Gloucester  would  never  willingly  agree  to  a peace  with
France,  from  his  preference  to  war  : he  therefore  paid  much  greater  court,  and  showed  more
affection  to  his  other  uncles  of  Lancaster  and  York,  and  to  other  prelates  and  barons  of
England,  who  he  thought  would  serve  him.

Robert  the  hermit  having  been  a month  or  more  in  England,  began  to  make  preparations
for  his  departure.  When  he  took  leave  of  the  king  and  lords,  the  king  made  him  very  rich
presents,  out  of  love  to  the  king  of  France,  as  did  the  dukes  of  Lancaster  and  York,  the  earls
of  Huntingdon  and  Salisbury,  and  sir  Thomas  Percy.  The  king  had  him  escorted  as  far  as
Dover,  where  he  embarked,  and  landed  at  Calais  : he  then  journeyed  on  to  Paris,  wdiere  he
found  the  king  and  queen  of  France,  and  his  uncles,  to  whom  he  faithfully  related  the  detail
of  his  journey,  and  the  good  cheer  the  king  of  England  had  made  him.  Messengers  were
almost  daily  passing  from  one  king  to  the  other,  with  the  most  friendly  letters  from  each.
The  king  of  England  was  very  impatient  to  succeed  in  his  marriage  with  the  daughter  of  the
king  of  France,  who,  on  his  side,  had  an  affection  for  it,  as  he  did  not  see  how  he  could  more
nobly  marry  her.


CHAPTER  LXVIl. THE  LORD  DE  LA  RIVIERE  AND  SIR  JOHN  LE  MERCIER  ARE  DELIVERED

OUT  OF  PRISON.

The  lord  de  la  Riviere  and  sir  John  le  Mercier,  after  having  been  carried  from  prison  to
prison,  and  to  different  castles,  were  at  last  given  up  to  the  provost  of  the  Chatelet,  and  in  daily
expectation  of  being  put  to  death,  through  the  hatred  of  the  dukes  of  Berry  and  Burgundy
and  their  advisers.  They  had  been  in  this  melancholy  state  for  more  than  two  years,  without
the  king  being  able  to  assist  them.  He,  however,  would  not  consent  to  their  execution ; and
the  dukes  of  Berry  and  Burgundy  perceived  that  the  duke  of  Orleans  strongly  befriended
them.  The  duchess  of  Berry  was  incessant  in  her  entreaties  with  her  lord  in  their  favour,
more  particularly  for  the  lord  de  la  Riviere ; but  they  could  not  condemn  one  without  the
other,  for  they  were  both  implicated  in  the  same  accusation.  The  solicitations  of  many
worthy  persons,  added  to  the  justice  of  their  cause,  were  of  much  weight ; and  several
of  the  great  barons  of  France  thought  they  had  now  sufficiently  suffered,  and  should  be
set  at  liberty  ; for  that  sir  John  le  Mercier  had  wept  so  continually,  when  in  prison,  his
sight  was  weakened  so  that  he  could  scarcely  see,  and  it  was  currently  reported  he  was
quite  blind.

At  length  there  was  an  end  put  to  their  sufferings  ; for  the  king,  although  he  had  consented
to  their  imprisonment,  for  reasons  which  had  been  given  him,  granted  them  his  pardon,


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


580


deferring  further  inquiry  into  what  had  been  laid  to  their  charge  until  a future  opportunity,
and  when  he  should  be  more  fully  informed.  All  his  lands  and  castles  were  restored  to  the
lord  de  la  Riviere,  and  in  the  first  instance,  the  beautiful  castle  of  Auneau,  near  Chartres,  on
the  borders  of  Beauce  ; but  he  was  ordered  thither,  and  never  to  recross  the  river  Seine,
unless  recalled  by  the  king’s  own  mouth.  Sir  John  le  Mercier  returned  to  his  fine
house  of  Noviant,  of  which  he  bore  the  title  as  lord,  in  the  Laonnois ; and  he  had  similar
orders  not  to  repass  the  rivers  Seine,  Marne  and  Oise,  unless  specially  commanded  by  the
king.  They  also  bound  themselves  to  go  to  whatever  prison  they  might  hereafter  be
ordered  by  the  king  or  by  his  commissioners.  The  two  lords  thankfully  accepted  this
grace,  and  were  rejoiced  to  be  delivered  from  the  Chatelet.  On  gaining  their  liberty,  they
thought  they  should  be  allowed  to  see  the  king,  and  thank  him  for  his  mercy,  but  it
was  not  so : they  were  forced  to  quit  Paris  instantly,  and  set  out  for  their  different
estates.  They,  however,  obtained  their  liberty,  to  the  great  joy  of  all  who  were  attached
to  them.


CHAPTER  LXVIII. THE  DUKE  OF  BRITTANY  AND  SIR  OLIVER  DE  CLISSON  ARE  RECONCILED.

THE  DOWAGER  QUEEN  OF  SICILY  INSTITUTES  A LAW-SUIT  IN  THE  COURTS  OF  PARIS

AGAINST  SIR  PETER  DE  CRAON.

You  have  often  heard  of  the  feuds  between  tbe  duke  of  Brittany  and  sir  Oliver  de
Clisson ; and  that,  whenever  the  two  parties  met,  a deadly  engagement  ensued,  without
either  side  showing  mercy.  In  this  warfare,  however,  sir  Oliver  had  the  advantage,
for  two-thirds  of  the  country  were  in  his  favour.  The  barons  of  Brittany  dissembled
between  both ; and  the  citizens  of  the  chief  towns  told  the  duke,  that  this  war  no  way
concerned  them,  and  that  they  would  not  interfere  in  it,  for  that  commerce  was  more
essential  to  them  than  a war  with  the  lord  de  Clisson.  Sir  Oliver  held  them  excused  in
regard  to  him,  as  they  would  be  mediators  in  a peace,  which  the  viscount  de  Rohan,  the
lord  de  Leon,  and  the  lord  de  Dignan,  were  pressing  on  the  duke  of  Brittany,  who  had
declared  to  these  three  lords,  that  if  he  could  obtain  a meeting  with  the  lord  de  Clisson,  he
would  comply  with  such  terms  as  they  should  think  honourable  to  propose.

These  three  barons  went  to  the  castle  where  sir  Oliver  resided,  and  told  him  how  far
they  had  succeeded  with  the  duke,  who  would  at  any  time  grant  him  and  his  company
passports  for  coming  and  going ; and  that  they  imagined,  if  once  they  could  meet,  all  their
quarrels  would  be  put  an  end  to.  The  lord  de  Clisson  replied, — “ You  are  all  my  friends
and  relations,  and  I put  my  whole  confidence  in  you  : I verily  believe  what  you  say  from
the  duke  that  he  would  willingly  have  me  in  his  presence ; but,  as  God  and  my  lord
St.  Yves  may  help  me,  I will  never  on  such  words  or  promise  quit  my  castle.  Tell  him,
since  he  has  deputed  you  here,  to  send  me  his  eldest  son,  who  shall  remain  as  my  pledge ;
and,  when  he  shall  be  arrived,  I will  wait  on  him  when  and  where  he  pleases.  As  my  end
shall  be,  so  will  be  that  of  his  son ; if  I return,  he  shall  return ; but,  if  I be  detained,  so
shall  he.  Such  are  my  conditions."  The  three  barons,  seeing  they  could  gain  no  other
answer,  were  satisfied  with  it,  and,  taking  their  leave  in  a friendly  manner,  departed  for
Yannes,  where  the  duke  was  waiting  for  them,  and  related  to  him  the  proposal  from  sir
Oliver  de  Clisson.  The  duke  could  not  obtain  other  terms ; and  the  lord  de  Clisson  had
greatly  the  advantage  in  this  war : the  duke  conquered  nothing  from  him,  while  sir  Oliver
won  several  places  from  the  duke,  besides  having  twice  captured  all  his  gold  and  silver  plate,
with  many  precious  jewels,  all  of  which  he  turned  to  his  own  profit.

The  end,  however,  of  this  quarrel  was  as  follows : the  duke  of  Brittany,  as  great  a prince
as  he  was,  saw  plainly  he  could  no  way  bend  the  lord  de  Clisson  to  his  will,  for  he  had  too
many  friends  in  Brittany.  With  the  exception  of  the  great  barons  in  the  duchy,  all  the
knights,  squires,  and  inhabitants  of  the  principal  towns,  inclined  to  the  lord  de  Clisson.
The  barons  dissembled  their  sentiments,  and  told  the  duke,  they  would  not  interfere  in  the
matter  unless  it  should  be  to  mediate  a peace,  if  any  means  could  be  found  out  for  so  doing.
The  duke  of  Orleans,  in  particular,  supported  sir  Oliver  underhand  in  various  ways,  and  he
was  well  pleased  whenever  he  received  news  of  the  good  success  of  his  enterprises.  The


690


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


duke  of  Brittany,  who  was  of  a subtle  imagination,  and  had  laboured  hard  with  many
difficulties  in  his  time,  weighed  all  these  circumstances ; and  also  that  he  was  not  beloved
by  his  subjects,  who  would  show  it.  if  they  dared,  without  infringing  their  homage,  as  well
as  the  children  of  sir  Charles  de  Blois  slain  at  the  battle  of  Auray ; namely,  John  of
Brittany,  count  de  Penthievre  and  Limoges,  married  to  the  daughter  of  the  lord  de  Clisson  ;
sir  Henry  of  Brittany  * his  brother,  and  their  sister  the  queen  of  Naples  and  Jerusalem.
He  felt  likewise  that  he  was  growing  old,  that  his  children  were  young,  and  except  the
duke  and  duchess  of  Burgundy,  he  had  not  a friend  in  France  who  would  take  care  of
them,  in  case  of  his  decease ; for,  by  the  mother’s  side,  they  came  from  the  branch  of
Navarre,  which  was  not  a family  well  beloved  in  France  from  the  remembrance  of  the
many  wicked  acts,  in  former  times,  of  king  Charles  of  Navarre,  the  duchess  of  Brittany’s
father.  He  wTas  therefore  afraid,  should  he  die  during  the  subsisting  hatred  of  sir  Oliver
de  Clisson  and  the  count  de  Penthievre,  his  children  would  have  too  many  enemies  He
perceived  also  that  the  English,  who  had  certainly  raised  him  to  the  honours  he  now
possessed,  w'ere  becoming  indifferent  to  his  welfare,  and  would  probably  increase  in
coolness,  if  the  information  he  had  received  of  the  approaching  connexion  between  the  kings
of  France  and  England  were  true.  He  had  learnt  that  the  treaty  of  marriage  wTas  far
advanced  between  the  king  of  England  and  the  daughter  of  the  king  of  France,  who  had
been  promised  to  his  eldest  son.

All  these  things  alarmed  the  duke,  but  especially  what  has  been  last  mentioned  troubled
him  more  than  all  the  rest.  Having  fully  considered  them,  he  resolved  to  throw  aside  all
dissembling,  and  openly  and  honestly  make  peace  with  sir  Oliver  de  Clisson  and  John  of
Brittany ; leaving  them  to  say  what  amends,  if  any,  he  should  make  for  the  damages  done
them  during  the  war,  and  for  what  had  happened  in  former  times,  reserving  to  himself  the
duchy  of  Brittany,  which  was  to  descend  after  him  to  his  children,  according  to  the  treaty
that  had  been  signed,  with  the  approbation  of  all  parties,  by  the  children  of  sir  Charles  de
Blois.  This  treaty  lie  was  not  desirous  to  have  broken : on  the  contrary,  he  would  that
every  article  should  be  observed,  and  that  it  should  again  be  sworn  to  and  loyally  main-
tained in  its  whole  extent.  Should  John  of  Blois,  count  de  Penthievre,  not  be  satisfied  with  his
inheritance  in  Brittany,  he  would  fairly  leave  it  to  the  viscount  de  Rohan,  the  lords  de  Dignan,
de  Laval,  de  Leon,  de  Beaumont,  and  sir  John  de  Harpedane,  to  settle  the  matter  between
them.  The  duke  of  Brittany,  having  maturely  arranged  this  in  his  own  mind,  without
asking  advice  from  any  one  of  his  council,  called  a secretary,  to  whom,  on  entering  his
chamber,  he  gave  a large  sheet  of  paper,  and  said,  “Write  down  as  I shall  dictate.”  The
secretary  being  ready,  the  duke  repeated  to  him  every  word  he  was  to  write.  The  letter
was  indited  in  the  most  friendly  terms  to  sir  Oliver  de  Clisson,  desiring  him  to  devise  some
means  for  them  to  have  an  interview,  when  everything  should  be  settled  in  the  most
agreeable  manner.

When  the  letter  was  folded  up,  in  the  presence  only  of  the  duke  and  his  secretary,  he
sealed  it  with  his  signet,  and,  calling  his  most  trusty  varlet  into  the  chamber,  Said, —
“ Hasten  to  castle  Josselin,  and  say  boldly  that  I have  sent  thee  to  speak  with  my  cousin
sir  Oliver  de  Clisson.  Thou  wilt  be  introduced  to  him  : salute  him  from  me  : if  he  return
the  salute,  give  him  this  letter,  and  bring  me  back  his  answer ; but  on  thy  life  tell  no  man,
woman,  or  child  whither  thou  art  going,  nor  wTho  has  sent  thee.”  The  varlet,  having  pro-
mised obedience,  set  out,  and  on  his  arrival  at  chateau-Josselin,  the  guard  was  greatly
surprised  when  they  heard  that  the  duke  of  Brittany  had  sent  him  to  speak  with  their  lord.
Nevertheless,  they  informed  sir  Oliver  of  his  coming,  who  ordered  him  into  his  presence  :
on  his  entrance,  he  delivered  his  message  and  the  letter.  The  lord  de  Clisson  examined  the
private  signet  of  the  duke,  which  he  knew  well,  opened  the  letter,  and  read  it  two  or  three
times  over,  and  was  much  astonished,  during  the  perusal,  at  the  affectionate  and  friendly
terms  it  was  written  in.  After  musing  some  time,  he  told  the  varlet  he  would  consider  his
answer,  and  ordered  him  to  be  conducted  to  an  apartment  by  himself.

* Denys  Sauvage  says  in  a marginal  note,  that  he  never  John,  married  to  Margaret  de  Clisson, — N.  N.  married
heard  of  this  personage  before,  and  supposes  that  at  that  to  Charles  of  Spain,  constable  of  France,  murdered  by  the
period  the  count  de  Penthievre  had  not  any  brother.  king  of  Navarre, — Mary,  wife  of  Lewis  duke  of  Anjou,

In  Anderson’s  Royal  Genealogies,  the  lord  Charles  de  son  of  John,  king  of  France.

Blois  had  issue  Guido  count  de  Penthievre,  died  S.  P., —


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


C97


The  attendants  of  the  lord  de  Clisson  were  confounded  at  what  they  saw  and  heard ; for
never  before  had  any  one  come  from  the  duke  of  Brittany  who  had  not  been  instantly  put
to  death,  or  confined  in  the  deepest  dungeon.  When  sir  Oliver  had  retired  to  his  chamber,
his  thoughts  were  occupied  with  the  contents  of  the  letter,  and  his  hatred  to  the  duke  was
extinguished,  from  the  submissive  and  affectionate  manner  in  which  he  had  written  to  him  :
he  said  to  himself  that  he  would  prove  him,  and  see  if  he  were  really  in  earnest ; for  he
could  not  venture  to  go  to  him  merely  on  the  faith  of  this  letter,  and,  if  any  accident  hap-
pened to  him,  he  would  be  pitied  by  none.  He  determined,  therefore,  that  if  the  duke
would  send  his  son  as  an  hostage,  he  would  come  to  him  when  and  where  he  pleased,  but
not  otherwise.  lie  wrote  a very  friendly  answer,  and  the  conclusion  was,  that  if  he  wished
to  see  him,  he  must  send  his  son  as  his  pledge,  who  would  be  taken  the  greatest  care  of  until
his  return.  This  letter  was  sealed  and  given  to  the  varlet,  who  hastened  back  to  the  duke
at  Yannes,  where  he  was  impatiently  expecting  him.  On  receiving  the  letter  from  sir
Oliver,  he  instantly  read  it : having  paused  a moment,  he  said,  “ I will  do  it ; for,  since  I
mean  to  treat  amicably  with  him,  every  cause  of  distrust  must  be  removed.”  lie  wrote
to  the  viscount  de  Rohan,  who  resided  at  his  castle  of  Caire,  in  the  neighbourhood  of
Vannes,  to  come  to  him.  The  viscount,  on  the  receipt  of  the  duke’s  letter,  waited  on
him,  and  lie  then  explained  his  intentions,  by  saying,  “ Viscount,  you  and  the  lord  de
Monboucher  shall  carry  my  son  to  chateau-Josselin,  and  bring  back  with  you  the  lord  de
Clisson,  for  I am  determined  to  make  up  our  quarrel.”  The  viscount  replied,  that  with  joy
he  would  obey  him.

It  was  not  many  days  after,  that  the  viscount  de  Rohan,  the  lord  de  Monboucher,  and
sir  Yves  de  Tegre,  carried  the  boy,  who  might  be  about  seven  years  old,  to  chateau-Josselin,
where  they  were  handsomely  and  honourably  received  by  sir  Oliver  de  Clisson.  When  he
saw  the  boy,  and  this  proof  of  confidence  from  the  duke,  he  was  much  affected.  The  three
knights  also  said,  “ You  see,  sir,  how  well  inclined  the  duke  is  to  you : he  now  bears  you
nothing  but  the  sincerest  affection.”  “ I am  at  present  convinced  of  it,”  replied  sir  Oliver  ;
“ and,  since  he  makes  such  advances,  I will  not  be  behindhand,  but  put  myself  under  his
obedience.  I know  not  if  to  you,  who  are  so  nearly  related  to  him,  and  in  whom  he  has
such  trust  as  to  confide  his  son  and  heir,  to  bring  and  leave  here  as  an  hostage  until  my
return,  he  has  told  the  contents  of  the  letter  he  sent  me  under  his  private  signet.”  “ Sir,”
answered  the  knights,  “ he  has  assured  us  of  the  earnest  and  sincere  desire  he  has  to  make
peace  with  you ; and  you  may  believe  us,  for  we  are  your  relations.”  “ I firmly  do  believe
you,”  said  sir  Oliver,  as  he  went  out  to  fetch  the  duke’s  letter.  Having  read  it  to  them,
they  replied,  “ He  certainly  has  spoken  to  us  in  the  very  same  terms  in  which  he  has
written  to  you,  and  in  consequence  has  sent  us  hither.”  “ So  much  the  better,”  answered
sir  Oliver.

It  was  not  long  after  the  arrival  of  the  three  knights,  with  the  heir  of  Brittany,  before
the  lord  de  Clisson  had  made  his  preparations.  They  all  set  out  together  from  chateau-
Josselin,  carrying  the  boy  with  them ; for  sir  Oliver  said  he  would  give  him  back  to  his
father,  as  henceforward  he  should  never  distrust  the  duke,  after  the  trial  he  had  made  of
him.  Such  generosity  was  shown  on  both  sides,  that  it  was  no  wonder  a firm  peace  was
the  consequence.

They  continued  their  journey  to  Vannes,  where,  according  to  the  duke’s  orders,  sir
Oliver  dismounted  at  a convent  of  the  Dominicans,  which  is  situated  without  the  town,
where  the  duke  had  fixed  the  meeting  to  take  place.  When  he  heard  that  the  lord  de
Clisson  had  brought  back  his  son,  he  was  highly  delighted  with  his  generosity  and  courtesy.
The  duke  set  out  from  his  castle  of  la  Motte,  for  the  convent,  where  he  and  sir  Oliver  shut
themselves  up  in  a chamber : having  conversed  some  time,  they  went  privately  into  the
garden,  and  thence  to  the  banks  of  a river,  and  entered  a small  boat  that  conveyed  them  to
a large  vessel  that  lay  at  anchor  at  the  mouth  of  the  river,  which  they  boarded,  and,  when
at  a distance  from  their  people,  continued  for  a long  time  in  conference.  I cannot  pretend
to  say  what  passed  between  them,  but  I will  relate  the  consequences.  Their  friends  thought
they  were  all  the  time  in  the  convent,  when  they  were  on  ship-board,  arranging  all  things
on  the  footing  they  wished  them  to  remain.  They  were  upwards  of  two  hours  together,  if


592


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


not  longer,  according  to  what  I heard,  and  made  a firm  peace,  which  they  mutually
swore  to  observe  most  religiously.  When  they  were  about  to  return,  they  called  their
boatman,  who  rowed  them  back  to  the  place  he  had  brought  them  from,  and  they  entered
the  church  by  a private  door,  through  the  garden  and  cloisters  of  the  convent,  whence  they
soon  departed  for  the  castle  of  la  Motte,  the  duke  holding  sir  Oliver  by  the  hand.  All  who
thus  saw  them  were  pleased : indeed,  the  whole  of  Brittany  was  very  happy  when  the  news
of  this  reconciliation  was  made  public ; but  greatly  were  they  surprised  on  hearing  how  it
had  been  brought  about.

John  of  Blois,  count  de  Penthievre,  was  no  loser  by  this  peace : on  the  contrary,  his
revenue  was  augmented  twenty  thousand  golden  crowns  of  France,  well  and  legally  assigned
to  him  and  his  heirs.  To  confirm  and  strengthen  this  peace,  a marriage  was  concluded
between  the  son  of  John  of  Blois  and  a daughter  of  the  duke  of  Brittany ; so  that  those
who  looked  for  a continuance  of  war  were  disappointed.  When  intelligence  of  these  trans-
actions reached  France  and  England,  it  caused  very  great  surprise  *.

You  have  before  had  it  related  how  sir  Peter  de  Craon  incurred  the  indignation  of  the
king  of  France  and  the  duke  of  Touraine,  for  his  attempt  to  murder  the  constable  of
France,  sir  Oliver  de  Clisson,  as  he  was  returning  to  his  hotel  in  the  night-time  from  the
king’s  palace ; and  that,  from  the  duke  of  Brittany  having  supported  and  given  him  an
asylum,  the  king  of  France  had  declared  war  against  him,  which  he  would  have  carried
into  effect  had  he  not  been  suddenly  taken  ill  between  Mans  and  Angers,  when  on  his
march  to  Brittany : but  this  melancholy  event  caused  the  expedition  to  be  put  an  end  to,
the  army  to  be  disbanded,  and  every  man  to  return  to  his  own  home.  You  have  also  heard
how  the  dukes  of  Berry  and  Burgundy  took  up  this  business,  and  showed  great  hatred  to
those  who  had  advised  the  king  to  this  expedition  against  Brittany,  such  as  the  lord  de
Clisson,  the  lord  de  la  Riviere,  sir  John  le  Mercier,  Montagu,  and  others,  whom  they  made
sutler  severely  for  it ; for  these  two  dukes  had  the  sovereign  government  of  the  kingdom
during  the  illness  of  the  king.  You  have  likewise  heard  of  the  inveterate  war  that  was  carried
on  between  the  duke  of  Brittany  and  sir  Oliver  de  Clisson,  and  of  their  reconciliation ; as
well  as  of  the  deliverance  of  the  lord  de  la  Riviere,  sir  John  le  Mercier,  and  Montagu,  from
their  confinements.  Montagu  had  not  so  many  difficulties  to  encounter  as  the  other  two ;
for,  the  instant  the  king  recovered  his  health,  he  would  have  Montagu  near  his  person,  and
assisted  to  make  his  excuses  for  several  charges  that  had  been  laid  against  him.  You  must
know,  however,  that  this  disorder  of  the  king,  and  many  of  the  like  kind  that  followed,
(for  he  had  several  relapses,  to  the  great  sorrow  and  alarm  of  France,)  greatly  weakened
his  power ; and  his  will  was  so  little  attended  to,  that  the  three  above-named  persons,  or
two  of  them  at  least,  very  narrowly  escaped  death.

Sir  Peter  do  Craon  hearing  of  the  miserable  state  of  the  king  and  kingdom  of  France,
far  from  being  sorry,  was  much  rejoiced,  and  made  the  strongest  entreaties  that  he  might
be  restored  to  the  king’s  favour,  and  allowed  to  return  to  the  court  of  France.  Ilis
negotiators  were  the  duke  of  Burgundy  and  sir  Guy  de  la  Tremouille,  who  would  too
easily  have  succeeded  had  not  the  duke  of  Orleans  strenuously  opposed  it.  lie  prevented
any  treaty  being  made  in  favour  of  sir  Peter  de  Craon  as  long  as  the  war  continued  between
the  duke  of  Brittany  and  the  lord  de  Clisson ; but,  when  they  were  reconciled,  his  hatred
against  sir  Peter  was  much  softened.  At  this  period,  the  queen  of  Naples  and  Jerusalem,
widow  of  the  late  duke  of  Anjou,  was  prosecuting  sir  Peter  de  Craon  in  the  courts  of  justice


* AVhen  the  duke  of  Brittany  and  the  lord  de  Clisson
were  reconciled,  they  named  commissioners  to  put  their
agreement  into  a legal  form  ; and,  according  to  the  histo-
rian of  Brittany  often  quoted,  these  lawyers  met  at  Aucfer,
near  Redon,  the  19th  October,  1395.  The  principal
articles  of  the  treaty  were,  that  the  duke  should  assign
over  to  the  count  de  Penthievre  the  lordships  of  Chateau-
neuf  du  Fose,  Vhelgouet,  Gourien,  Duault,  Chhteaulin
in  Cornuaille,  Lannnion  and  Cbauteaulin  sur  Trieuc,
for  the  yearly  payment  of  eight  thousand  livres ; that
the  duke  might  take  back  these  lands  when  he  pleased,
on  giving  others  of  like  value  in  Brittany  or  France  ;


that  the  count  should  pay  obedience  to  the  duke,  not-
withstanding the  demolition  of  the  castle  of  Tonguedoc,
the  restoration  of  which  he  could  never  insist  on  ; that
the  lord  de  Clisson  would  acknowledge  the  duke  for  his
lord,  but  to  have  liberty,  during  four  years,  to  appear
personally  or  by  proxy  ; that  all  lands  that  had  been
seized  by  each  side  during  the  war  should  be  restored  to
their  respective  owners.  This  treaty  was  sealed  and
sworn  to  by  the  lord  de  Clisson,  at  Rieux,  the  20th
October.  The  count  de  Penthievre  swore  to  it  five  days
after  at  Guingamp,  in  the  presence  of  the  viscount  de  Foil
and  Henri  de  Juck,  chamberlains  to  the  duke.


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


593


at  Paris,  for  the  restitution  of  one  hundred  thousand  francs,  a sum  she  claimed  as  duo  to
her  late  lord ; and  for  that  reason,  and  to  attend  the  more  to  her  affairs,  she  resided  privately  in
Paris.  Sir  Peter  found  himself  very  disagreeably  situated  : he  was  fearful  of  the  decision
of  the  parliament,  for  the  lady  was  of  great  personal  weight,  and  had  proved  from  whom,
during  the  life  of  the  duke  of  Anjou,  he  had  received  this  sum,  and  for  which,  as  she
maintained,  he  had  never  accounted.  He  was  ill  at  ease  on  this  account,  and  besides  knew
he  had  incurred  the  disgrace  of  the  king  and  the  duke  of  Orleans.  The  duke  and  duchess
of  Burgundy  comforted  him  as  well  as  they  could ; and  he  was  allowed  to  come  to  Paris
privately,  where  he  remained,  during  the  greater  part  of  his  residence,  at  the  hotel  d’  Artois,
under  the  protection  of  the  duchess  of  Burgundy.


CHAPTER  LXIX. TOE  KING  OF  HUNGARY  WRITES  TO  THE  KING  OF  FRANCE  niS  SITUATION

IN  RESPECT  TO  THE  SULTAN  BAJAZET. JOHN  OF  BURGUNDY,  ELDEST  SON  TO  THE

DUKE  OF  BURGUNDY,  MARCHES,  AS  COMMANDER  IN  CHIEF,  AN  ARMY  TO  THE  SUCCOUR
OF  THE  HUNGARIANS.

About  this  time,  Sigismond  king  of  Hungary  wrote  very  affectionate  letters  to  the  king
of  France,  which  he  sent  by  a bishop  and  two  of  his  knights.  The  contents  of  these  letters
related  to  the  threats  of  Bajazet,  and  his  boastings  to  the  king  of  Hungary,  of  carrying  the
war  into  the  midst  of  his  realm,  and  thence  to  Rome,  where  his  horse  should  eat  his  oats  on
the  altar  of  Saint  Peter.  He  said  he  would  establish  that  place  for  the  seat  of  his  imperial
government,  and  be  attended  by  the  emperor  of  Constantinople  and  all  the  principal  barons
of  Greece : each  of  whom  should  follow  their  own  laws,  for  that  he  would  only  reserve  to
himself  his  authority  as  their  lord  paramount.  The  king  of  Hungary  entreated  the  king  of
France  to  listen  to  his  distress ; and  make  it  public  throughout  France  and  other  countries,
that  all  knights  and  squires  might  be  moved  to  provide  themselves  with  every  necessary  for
a journey  to  Hungary,  to  oppose  the  sultan  Bajazet,  and  prevent  holy  Christendom  from
being  oppressed  or  violated  by  him,  and  that  his  vain  boastings  might  be  annihilated.  Many
affectionate  expressions  were  contained  in  these  letters,  such  as  kings  and  cousins  are  accus-
tomed to  write  to  each  other  in  cases  of  necessity.  Those  who  brought  them  were  men  of
rank  and  understanding,  and  acquitted  themselves  so  well,  that  king  Charles  was  much
inclined  to  their  request ; and  the  propositions  from  king  Richard  for  the  marriage  of  his
daughter  prospered  the  more,  and  were  sooner  agreed  to,  than  if  this  intelligence  from
Hungary  had  not  arrived  in  France  ; for,  as  king  of  France  and  eldest  son  of  the  church,  he
was  very  desirous  of  providing  a remedy  for  the  evils  that  threatened  it.  The  subject  of  these
letters  was  soon  made  public,  both  at  home  and  abroad,  to  move  the  hearts  of  gentlemen,
knights,  and  squires,  who  were  desirous  to  travel  in  search  of  glory.

At  the  time  this  news  came  to  Paris,  there  were  with  the  king  the  duke  and  duchess  of
Burgundy,  their  eldest  son,  John  of  Burgundy  count  de  Nevers,  who  was  not  then  a knight,
sir  Guy,  and  sir  William  de  la  Tremouille,  sir  John  de  Yienne,  admiral  of  France,  with
other  great  barons.  It  was  proposed,  therefore,  at  the  hotel  of  the  duke  of  Burgundy,  who
was  eager  to  send  assistance  to  Hungary,  that  his  son,  the  count  de  Nevers,  should  undertake
an  expedition  thither,  as  commander  in  chief  of  the  French  and  other  chivalry.  John  of
Burgundy  was  a courteous  and  amiable  youth  of  twenty-two  years  old,  greatly  beloved  By
the  knights  and  squires  of  Burgundy,  and  indeed  by  all  who  were  acquainted  with  him.
He  had  married  a prudent  and  devout  lady,  the  daughter  of  duke  Albert  of  Bavaria,  count
of  Hainault,  Holland,  and  Zealand,  who  had  brought  him  two  children,  whom,  in  due
season,  he  looked  to  ally  nobly.  It  was  hinted  to  him,  to  know  what  he  would  say,  that
perhaps  the  king  of  France  might  select  him,  to  lead  a body  of  men  at  arms  to  the  assistance
of  the  king  of  Hungary.  He  replied,  “ that  if  it  were  agreeable  to  his  lord  the  king,  and
his  lord  and  father,  he  would  cheerfully  accept  of  this  command,  which  came  very  opportunely,
as  he  had  a great  desire  to  gain  renown.”  “ Sir,”  answered  those  to  whom  he  had  addressed
himself,  “ speak  first  to  your  father,  and  learn  whether  he  be  willing  that  you  go,  and  if  he
will  talk  to  the  king  on  the  subject ; for  without  their  consent  nothing  could  be  done."

VOL.  II.  Q Q


504


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.

It  was  not-  long  after  this,  that  John  of  Burgundy  spoke  to  the  duke  his  father,  requesting
humbly  his  consent  to  go  on  the  expedition  to  Hungary,  as  he  had  a strong  wish  for  it.
When  he  made  this  request,  there  were  with  the  duke  sir  Guy  and  sir  William  de  la
Tremouille,  sir  James  de  Vergy,  and  other  knights,  who,  taking  part  in  the  conversation,
said, — “My  lord,  what  John  of  Burgundy  asks  is  very  reasonable,  for  it  is  time  he  should
receive  the  order  o'f  knighthood  ; and  lie  cannot  more  honourably  receive  it,  than  when
inarching  against  the  enemies  of  God  and  of  our  faith.  In  case  the  king  intend  to  send
assistance  to  Hungary,  whom  can  he  so  properly  appoint  as  a leader  as  his  cousin-german,
your  son  ? and  you  will  see  that  many  knights  will  join  his  company  to  advance  their  name.”
The  duke  replied, — “ You  speak  to  the  purpose,  and  we  have  no  inclination  to  check  the
ardour  of  our  son  ; but  we  must  first  talk  to  the  king,  and  hear  what  he  shall  say.”  The
subject  then  dropped  ; but  it  was  not  long  before  the  duke  mentioned  it  to  the  king,  who
instantly  complied,  saying,  he  would  do  well  to  go  thither ; and,  if  he  was  in  earnest,  he
not  only  gave  his  consent,  but  would  appoint  him  commander-in-chief  of  the  expedition.

It  was  published  in  Paris  and  elsewhere,  that  John  of  Burgundy  was  to  lead  a large  body
of  men  at  arms  into  Hungary,  to  oppose  the  force  of  Bajazet*;  that,  when  this  was  done,
lie  was  to  advance  to  Constantinople,  cross  the  Hellespont,  enter  Syria,  gain  the  Holy  Land,
and  deliver  Jerusalem  and  the  holy  sepulchre  from  the  hands  of  the  infidels,  and  the  bondage
of  the  sultan.  Knights  and  squires  began  now  to  collect  together,  with  other  gentlemen
who  were  desirous  of  renown.  The  duke  of  Burgundy,  on  the  appointment  of  his  son  to
the  chief  command,  paid  greater  attention  than  before  to  the  Hungarian  ambassadors,  who,
perceiving  the  good-will  of  the  king  of  France  and  the  nation,  were  well  pleased,  and  took
leave  of  the  king,  the  dukes  of  Orleans,  Berry,  Burgundy,  the  lord  Philip  d’ Artois,  count
d’Eu  and  constable  of  France,  the  count  de  la  Marche,  and  the  other  barons,  on  their
departure  for  their  own  country,  where  the  king  of  Hungary  was  greatly  delighted  with  the
news  they  brought.  In  consequence  of  this,  he  gave  orders  for  large  stores  of  provision  to
be  provided  against  the  arrival  of  the  French ; and  sent  messengers  to  his  brother,  the  king
of  Germany,  and  his  cousin,  the  duke  of  Austria,  for  all  the  passes  in  then’  territories  to  be
thrown  open,  as  it  would  be  necessary  for  them  to  march  that  way : he  likewise  ordered
plenty  of  provision  to  be  ready  prepared,  on  the  road  they  were  to  come.  He  sent  also
information  of  the  expected  assistance  from  France  to  the  great  master  of  the  Teutonic
order,  and  to  the  knights  of  Rhodes,  that  they  might  be  ready  to  meet  John  of  Burgundy,
who,  in  the  course  of  this  summer,  would  lead  a thousand  knights  and  squires,  all  men
of  valoui’,  into  Hungary,  on  their  way  to  Turkey,  to  oppose  the  menaces  of  the  sultan  Bajazet.

While  the  news  of  this  expedition  was  the  matter  of  conversation  everywhere,  the  lord
de  Coucy  returned  from  the  frontiers  of  Genoa,  where  he  had  been  upwards  of  a year
negotiating  with  the  Genoese.  Some  of  the  leading  men  in  that  city  had  informed  the  duke
of  Orleans  that  persons  composing  the  government  of  Genoa  were  desirous  of  having  for
their  duke  one  of  the  blood-royal  of  France,  and,  as  he  had  married  the  daughter  of  the
duke  of  Milan,  it  would  be  very  suitable  for  him.  In  consequence  of  this,  the  lord  de  Coucy
had  passed  through  Savoy  and  Piedmont,  with  the  consent  of  the  count  de  Savoye  and  the
Savoyards,  accompanied  by  three  hundred  lances  and  five  hundred  cross-bows.  Having
obtained  leave  from  the  duke  of  Milan,  he  continued  his  journey  from  Asti  in  Piedmont  to
a town  called  Alexandria,  and  thence  to  the  frontiers  of  Genoa,  to  enter  into  negotiations
with  the  Genoese,  and  learn  more  plainly  their  intentions.  By  force  he  could  do  nothing,
unless  he  were  very  superior  to  the  Genoese,  which  was  not  the  case.  When  the  lord  de
Coucy  had  entered  the  territories  of  Genoa,  which  are  not  easy  to  conquer,  if  the  inhabitants
have  any  disposition  to  defend  them,  some  of  those  lords  who  had  sent  the  information  to
the  duke  of  Orleans,  and  had  been  the  cause  of  his  coming,  waited  on  him,  and  with  many
friendly  expressions  welcomed  him  to  their  country  and  offered  him  their  castles.  But  the
lord  de  Coucy  was  as  prudent  as  valiant,  and  being  well  acquainted  with  the  character  of
the  Lombards  and  Genoese,  was  unwilling  to  trust  too  much  to  their  offers  and  promises.
However,  he  received  them  kindly,  and  treated  them  fairly  by  words ; for  although  there
were  many  conferences  between  them,  they  wei’e  held  in  the  open  fields,  and  not  in  any
house  or  castle  ; but  the  more  he  negotiated  the  less  he  gained.  The  Genoese  showed  him
* The  Turks  were  already  in  possession  of  some  parts  of  Greece.


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


69o


every  token  of  affection,  and  invited  him  repeatedly  to  come  to  Genoa,  or  to  Porto  Yenere,
but  the  lord  do  Coucy  would  never  put  himself  in  their  power.  The  issue  of  his  negotiation
was  unsuccessful ; and  when  it  was  found  he  could  not  do  any  thing,  having  regularly  written
to  the  duke  of  Orleans  respecting  the  state  of  affairs,  he  was  remanded  to  Paris,  at  the  time
when  the  expedition  to  Hungary  was  in  agitation.

The  duke  and  duchess  of  Burgundy  were  happy  at  his  return,  and,  sending  for  him  to  the
hotel  d’ Artois,  addressed  him  in  the  most  amicable  manner  as  follows  : “ Lord  de  Coucy,  we
have  the  highest  opinion  of  your  understanding,  valour,  and  prudence ; and  as  we  have  made
John  our  son  and  heir  undertake  the  command  of  an  expedition,  which  we  hope  will  turn
out  to  the  honour  of  God  and  Christendom,  knowing  that  you  of  all  the  knights  of  France
are  the  best  informed  of  warlike  affairs,  we  beg  and  entreat  most  earnestly  that  you  would
be  the  counsellor  and  companion  of  our  son  in  this  expedition  ; for  which  we  shall  be  so
greatly  obliged,  that  we  will  return  it  by  serving  you  or  yours  to  the  utmost  of  our  power.”
The  lord  de  Coucy  replied,— “ My  lord,  and  you  Madam,  what  you  request  is  to  me  an  order.
I will  surely  be  of  this  expedition,  if  it  please  God,  for  two  reasons : first,  from  devotion,
and  to  defend  the  faith  of  Jesus  Christ  ; secondly,  from  the  honour  you  do  me,  by  giving
me  the  charge  of  advising  my  lord  John  your  son.  I shall  therefore  obey,  and  acquit  myself
in  all  respects  to  the  best  of  my  abilities.  But,  my  dear  lord,  and  you  my  very  dear  lady,
you  may  readily  excuse  me  from  this  weight,  and  lay  it  on  the  lord  Philip  d’ Artois,  constable
of  France,  and  on  the  count  de  la  Marche  ; for  they  are  nearly  related  to  him,  and  intend  to
form  a part  of  the  expedition.”  The  duke  answered, — “ Lord  de  Coucy,  you  have  seen  much
more  than  either  of  them,  and  know  more  of  war  than  our  cousins  of  Eu  and  de  la  Marche ;
and  we  entreat  you  to  comply  with  our  request.”  “ My  lord,”  said  the  lord  de  Coucy,  “ your
words  are  commands ; and  I will  do  as  you  require,  since  it  is  your  pleasure,  with  the  aid
of  sir  Guy  de  la  Tremouille,  his  brother  sir  William,  and  sir  John  de  Vienne  admiral  of
France.”  The  duke  and  duchess  were  well  pleased  with  this  answer.

The  lords  of  France  made  vast  preparations  for  their  expedition  to  Hungary,  and  solicited
the  company  and  service  of  different  barons,  knights,  and  squires.  Such  as  were  not  asked,
and  had  a wish  to  go  thither,  made  application  to  the  count  d’Eu,  constable  of  France,  the
count  de  la  Marche  or  the  lord  de  Coucy,  that  they  would  take  them  in  their  company.
Some  were  accepted  : but  those  who  were  not,  considering  the  great  distance  Hungary  and
Turkey  were  from  France,  greatly  cooled  in  their  ardour ; for,  as  they  were  not  retained,
they  were  not  sufficiently  wealthy  to  perform  the  journey  with  credit  to  themselves.  Nothing
was  spared  in  the  preparations  for  the  young  John  of  Burgundy  with  regard  to  horses,
armour,  emblazonments,  dresses,  silver  and  gold  plate,  and  the  duke’s  officers  were  fully
employed  in  the  business.  Large  sums  of  florins  were  given  to  the  servants  of  John  of
Burgundy,  who  paid  them  to  the  different  workmen  as  they  finished  and  brought  home  their
works.  The  barons,  knights,  and  squires,  to  do  him  honour,  exerted  themselves  to  make
their  equipments  as  handsome  as  possible.

The  lord  Philip  d’ Artois,  count  d’Eu,  made  magnificent  preparations;  for  he  was  determined
to  march  thither  as  constable  of  France ; and  the  king,  who  much  loved  him,  assisted  him
with  money,  and  he  acted  in  the  same  manner  with  respect  to  the  lord  Boucicaut,  marshal  of
France.  The  duke  of  Burgundy,  considering  that  this  expedition  would  cost  him  very  large
sums,  and  that  the  state  of  his  wife,  himself,  and  his  son  Anthony,  ought  not  to  be  any  way
diminished,  bethought  himself  of  a tax  he  had  in  reserve,  in  order  to  find  a supply  of  money
for  these  expenses.  He  had  received  from  cities  and  towns  in  Burgundy,  as  the  usual  tax  on
his  eldest  son  receiving  the  order  of  knighthood,  six  score  thousand  golden  crowns  : but  his
additional  tax  was  laid  on  all  knights  who  held  fiefs  from  him,  to  attend  his  son  into  Hungary,
or  compound  in  money.  Some  were  taxed  at  one  thousand  livres,  others  at  two  thousand  ;
some  at  five  hundred ; each  according  to  his  wealth,  or  the  value  of  the  lands.  Ladies  and
ancient  knights,  who  were  unfit  or  disabled  to  undertake  such  an  expedition,  paid  compositions
at  the  duke’s  pleasure.  The  young  knights  and  squires  were  exempted  paying,  for  they  were
told, — “ My  lord  does  not  want  your  money  : you  must  accompany  the  lord  John  at  your
own  costs  and  charges.”  Of  this  last  tax,  the  duke  of  Burgundy  received  from  the  gentlemen
of  his  duchy  sixty  thousand  crowns,  for  none  were  exempted.


qq  2


59(1


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


CHAPTER  LXX. THE  COUNT  D’OSTREVANT,  BROTHER-IN-LAW  TO  JOHN  OF  BURGUNDY,  BEING

DESIROUS  TO  MARCH  TO  HUNGARY,  IS  ADVISED  BY  niS  FATHER  TO  ATTEMPT,  IN
PREFERENCE,  THE  RE-CONQUEST  OF  FRIESLAND,  WHICH  BELONGED  TO  THEM.

News  of  this  expedition  to  Hungary  was  spread  far  and  near.  On  its  being  announced  in
Hainault,  knights  and  squires,  eager  for  renown,  assembled  together,  and  said, — “ It  would
not  be  amiss  if  our  lord  of  Hainault,  who  is  young  and  promising,  were  to  accompany  his
brother-in-law,  the  count  de  Nevers,  in  this  expedition  ; and,  should  it  take  place,  we  must
not  fail  to  attend  him.”  The  count  d’Ostrevant  resided  in  Quesnoy  at  the  time  such
conversations  were  held,  and  was  informed  what  his  knights  and  squires  said.  This
made  him  the  more  willing  to  accompany  his  brother-in-law,  having  before  had  such  intentions.
Whenever  the  subject  was  mentioned  in  his  presence,  he  dissembled  his  real  thoughts,  by
saying  little  about  it,  meaning  to  consult  his  lord  and  father,  duke  Albert  of  Bavaria,  count
of  Hainault,  how  he  would  advise  him  to  act.

It  was  not  many  days  before  lie  set  out  to  visit  the  duke  and  duchess  of  Bavaria  at  the
Hague,  where  they  lived.  He  addressed  his  father, — “ My  lord,  it  is  currently  reported
that  my  brother-in-law  of  Nevers  has  undertaken  an  expedition  to  Hungary,  and  thence  to
Turkey,  against  the  sultan  Bajazet.  There  must  be  grand  deeds  of  arms  performed  ; and  at
this  moment  I am  perfectly  idle,  knowing  not  whither  to  bear  arms  : I wish  to  learn  your
intentions,  if  it  would  be  agreeable  to  you  that  I should  accompany  my  brother-in-law  on
this  honourable  expedition,  with  one  hundred  of  our  chivalry.  My  lord  and  lady  of  Burgundy
will  thank  me  for  so  doing ; and  there  are  many  knights  and  squires  in  Hainault  who  will
eagerly  go  with  me.”  Duke  Albert  replied,  like  one  who  had  well  weighed  the  subject, —
“ William,  since  thou  hast  so  great  a desire  to  travel,  and  to  seek  for  deeds  of  arms  in
Hungary  and  Turkey,  against  a people  and  country  who  have  never  done  us  any  wrong,  it
must  be  caused  by  vain-glory  alone,  for  thou  hast  not  a shadow  of  reason  to  induce  thee  to  go
thither.  Let  John  of  Burgundy  and  our  cousins  of  France  perform  their  enterprise,  and  do
thou  undertake  one  that  more  nearly  touches  us.  March  to  Friesland,  and  conquer  back
that  country,  which  was  our  inheritance  ; for  the  Frieslanders  have,  by  rebellion,  withdrawn
themselves  from  our  obedience ; and,  if  thou  undertake  this,  1 will  assist  thee.”  This
speech  from  his  father  was  very  agreeable  to  the  count  d’Ostrevant,  and  raised  his  spirit : he
answered,  “ My  lord,  you  say  well,  and,  if  it  be  your  opinion  I should  undertake  such  an
expedition,  I will  do  so  heartily.”  By  little  and  little,  the  matter  was  so  long  talked  over
between  the  father  and  son,  that  the  invasion  of  Friesland  was  agreed  upon  ; and  a circum-
stance I shall  relate  greatly  helped  him  in  this  matter.

The  count  d’Ostrevant  had  at  that  time,  for  his  principal  adviser,  a squire  of  Hainault,
called  Fier-a-bras,  or  the  bastard  of  Vertain.  He  was  equal  in  prudence  as  in  arms,  so  that
when  the  count  told  him  what  his  father  had  said,  he  replied, — “ Sir,  my  lord  your  father
gives  you  excellent  advice.  It  will  be  more  for  your  honour  to  undertake  this  expedition
than  to  join  that  to  Hungary  ; and,  when  you  begin  your  preparations  for  it,  you  will  find
plenty  of  knights  and  squires  in  Hainault  and  elsewhere,  ready  to  accompany  and  assist  you.
But  if  you  really  are  in  earnest  to  undertake  it,  I would  recommend  that  you  first  go  to
England,  to  make  known  your  intentions  to  the  knights  and  squires  of  that  country ; and
to  entreat  the  king  of  England,  your  cousin,  that  he  would  permit  you  to  retain  knights,
squires,  and  archers,  and  allow  them  to  accept  of  your  pay,  and  to  accompany  you  from
England.  The  English  are  men  of  valour : if  you  succeed  in  obtaining  their  assistance,
you  will  go  far  to  be  successful ; and  if  you  can  prevail  on  your  cousin,  the  earl  of  Derby,  to
take  part  and  come  with  you,  there  will  be  still  greater  chances  of  success,  and  your
enterprise  will  gain  more  renown.”  The  count  d’Ostrevant  inclined  to  the  council  of
Fier-a-bras  de  Vertain,  for  he  thought  it  good;  and,  when  he  spoke  of  it  to  the  lord  de
Gomegines,  he  likewise  agreed  to  it,  as  did  all  who  were  friends  to  the  count.  News  of
this  was  whispered  throughout  Hainault,  and  a proclamation  soon  after  issued,  to  prohibit
all  knights  and  squires  from  quitting  the  country,  to  form  part  of  any  expedition  to


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


597


Hungary  or  elsewhere,  for  that  the  count  d’Ostrevant  needed  their  services,  and  would,  this
summer,  lead  them  against  Friesland.

We  will,  for  a while,  leave  this  matter,  and  speak  of  others  that  were  in  greater  for-
wardness.


CHAPTER  LXXI. JOnN  OF  BURGUNDY,  COUNT  OF  NEVERS,  LEADS  AN  ARMY  INTO  HUNGARY

AGAINST  THE  TURKS. THE  NEGOTIATIONS  FOR  THE  MARRIAGE  OF  KING  RICHARD  OF

ENGLAND  WITH  THE  ELDEST  PRINCESS  OF  FRANCE  ARE  CONTINUED.

The  knights  and  squires  in  different  countries  were  all  alive  at  the  wars  that  seemed  likely
to  take  place  in  opposite  quarters : some  made  themselves  ready  for  the  expedition  to
Hungary ; others  for  that  to  Friesland : and  whenever  they  met  they  conversed  on  these
subjects.  The  count  de  Nevers  was  prepared  ; and  all  those  knights  had  been  enrolled  who
were  to  be  under  his  charges,  and  to  accompany  him.  The  purveyances  were  very  considerable
and  well  arranged ; and,  as  the  honour  of  the  expedition  was  given  to  him,  he  made  handsome
presents  to  his  knights  and  squires,  and  gave  them  many  stores ; for,  as  the  journey  was
long  and  expensive,  it  was  but  proper  the  men  at  arms  should  be  aided  to  support  them.  In
like  manner  did  other  lords  act ; such  as  the  constable  of  France,  the  count  de  la  Marche,
the  lords  Philip  and  Henry  de  Bar,  the  lord  de  Coucy,  sir  Guy  de  la  Tremouille,  sir  John
de  Vienne  admiral  of  France,  Boucicaut  marshal  of  France,  sir  Reginald  de  Roye,  the  lords
de  St.  Pol,  de  Montmorel,  de  Saint  Py,  the  haze  de  Flandres,  sir  Louis  de  Breze,  his  brother,
and  the  borgne  de  Monquel,  with  many  more ; for  they  amounted  to  one  thousand  knights
and  as  many  squires,  all  men  of  tried  courage  and  enterprise.

They  left  their  homes  about  the  middle  of  March,  and  advanced  in  good  array  by  com-
panies. They  found  all  the  roads  open  to  them,  for  the  king  of  Germany  had  commanded
that  his  country  and  Bohemia  should  afford  them  every  friendly  assistance  to  supply  their
wants,  and  that  the  prices  of  provision  should  on  no  account  be  raised.  Thus  did  these  lords
of  France  march  to  the  assistance  of  the  king  of  Hungary,  whose  army  was  to  have  a pitched
battle  against  that  of  Bajazet,  on  the  20th  day  of  the  ensuing  month  of  May*.  They
passed  Lorrain,  the  counties  of  Bar  and  Montbelliard,  the  duchy  of  Burgundy,  and  entering
Aussaist,  traversed  that  wdiole  country,  and,  having  crossed  the  Rhine  in  many  places,
marched  through  the  county  of  Ferrette,  and  entered  Austria.  This  is  an  extensive  and
wild  country,  with  difficult  passes  ; but  they  advanced  with  so  good  an  inclination,  that  they
did  not  suffer  from  the  labour  and  fatigue.  The  chief  conversation  of  the  French  lords  was
concerning  the  power  of  the  Turks,  which  they  seemed  to  make  very  light  of.

The  duke  of  Austria  gave  the  French  lords  a handsome  reception  ; but  he  was  particularly
attentive  to  John  of  Burgundy,  for  the  lord  Otlio,  eldest  son  to  the  duke,  had  espoused
Mary  of  Burgundy,  his  sister  j;.  All  these  French  lords  were  to  assemble  at  a city  called
Buda,  in  Hungary.  Let  us  return  to  the  affairs  of  France.

You  have  before  heard  that  the  king  of  England  had  sent  as  ambassadors  to  the  king  of
France,  to  conclude  a marriage  between  him  and  his  eldest  daughter  Isabella,  the  archbishop
of  Dublin,  the  bishop  of  St.  David’s,  the  earl  marshal,  the  earl  of  Rutland,  son  to  the  duke
of  York,  sir  Henry  Clifford,  the  lord  Beaumont,  the  lord  Despencer,  sir  John  de  Robesart,
and  several  more.  They  had  succeeded  well  in  the  business,  and  the  French  king  made  them
welcome,  as  did  his  uncles  and  council.  The  ambassadors  returned  to  England  in  high
spirits,  and  gave  the  king  great  hopes  that  his  wishes  would  be  gratified.  King  Richard  was
not  idle  in  the  business,  but  during  the  following  winter,  frequently  reminded  the  king
and  council  of  France  of  it,  who  were  far  from  being  adverse,  for  they  considered  it  as
one  of  the  surest  means  to  put  an  end  to  the  wars  which  had  lasted  so  long  between
France  and  England.  The  treaty  was  carried  on  with  eagerness  and  friendship  on  both

* In  the  year  1396. — Ed.  Austria,  married  Catherine,  not  Mary,  daughter  of  Philippe

+ Alsace. — Ed.  le  Hardi,  and  sister  of  Jean-sans-peur,  the  leader  of  this

$ There  is  a mistake  here.  Leopold  IV.,  duke  of  expedition. — Ed.


598


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


sides  ; and  the  king  of  England  promised,  from  the  power  he  had  over  his  subjects,  that,
there  should  be  peace  between  the  two  countries.  To  conclude  the  business,  the  earl  of
Rutland  and  the  earl  marshal,  with  the  other  ambassadors,  were  again  sent  to  Paris.  They
were  lodged  at  the  Croix  du  Tiroir,  and,  with  their  attendants,  occupied  the  whole  of  that
street,  and  part  of  another : they  were  full  six  hundred  horse  *,  and  remained  in  Paris  upwards
of  three  weeks,  supplied  with  everything  from  the  king  of  France.


CHAPTER  LXXII. THE  QUEEN  OF  NAPLES,  WIDOW  TO  TIIE  LATE  DUKE  OP  ANJOU,  OBTAINS

JUDGMENT  IN  PARLIAMENT  AGAINST  SIR  PETER  DE  CRAON.

During  the  time  these  ambassadors  were  at  Paris  negotiating  the  marriage  of  the  king  of
England,  the  dowager  queen  of  Naples  was  also  there,  busily  employed  in  her  own  concerns,
for  she  was  a lady  of  great  activity.  Her  business  at  that  time  was  before  the  parliament,
where  she  was  pleading  two  causes  : one  for  the  inheritance  of  the  county  of  Roussy  against
the  count  de  Brianne ; for  the  late  duke  of  Anjou,  her  lord,  had  bought  and  paid  for  it  to  a
lady  who  was  countess  de  Roussy,  some  time  wife  to  sir  Louis  de  Namur,  from  whom  she
was  divorced.  The  other  was  against  sir  Peter  de  Craon,  from  whom  she  claimed  the  sum
of  one  hundred  thousand  francs,  and  which  she  proved  he  had  received  for  and  in  the  name
of  her  late  lord  the  king  of  Naples,  Sicily,  and  Jerusalem,  on  condition  to  pay  the  same  to
him  in  la  Puglia;  but,  when  lie  was  informed  of  the  king  of  Naples’  death,  he  no  longer
continued  his  journey  but  returned  to  France,  making  use  of  the  above-mentioned  sum  to  his
own  profit,  without  rendering  any  account  of  it  to  the  queen  of  Naples,  nor  to  her  two
children  Lewis  and  Charles,  but  dissipating  it  in  folly  and  extravagance.  This  was  the
cause,  as  the  queen  of  Naples  said,  of  the  loss  of  that  kingdom,  which  was  regained  by
Margaret  Durazzo  and  the  heirs  of  sir  Charles  Durazzo ; for  the  soldiers  of  her  late  lord,
who  were  aiding  her  to  continue  the  war  in  Calabria  and  la  Puglia,  deserted  her  for  want  of
pay  : many  had  turned  to  the  count  de  St.  Severino  and  to  Margaret  Durazzo,  and  others
had  retired  from  the  war.

All  these  matters  were  pleaded  in  the  courts  of  the  parliament  at  Paris,  for  upwards  of
three  years  : although  sir  Peter  de  Craon  was  absent,  his  advocates  defended  him  well.
They  said,  that  in  regard  to  the  sum  of  one  hundred  thousand  francs  which  he  was  charged
with  having  received  in  the  name  of  the  king  of  Naples,  that  king  was  indebted  to  him  as
much,  if  not  more,  for  the  great  and  noble  services  he  had  rendered  him. — Notwithstanding
the  length  of  time  this  cause  lasted,  it  was  impossible  to  put  off  for  ever  its  conclusion ; and
the  lady  was  very  urgent  that  judgment  should  be  given  by  the  parliament.  The  judges,
having  considered  the  matter  well,  declared  they  would  give  no  judgment  until  both  parties
were  personally  before  them.  This  was  then  difficult  to  accomplish,  from  the  disgrace  sir
Peter  de  Craon  was  in  with  the  king  and  the  duke  of  Orleans,  for  his  attempt  to  assassinate
the  constable.  The  lady,  finding  nothing  would  be  done  until  sir  Peter  was  before  the  court,
perfectly  free  from  every  other  charge  except  what  she  accused  him  of,  and  with  full  liberty
to  go  anywhere  in  France,  exerted  herself  greatly  to  obtain  this  for  him,  that  an  end  might
be  put  to  her  suit.  Her  solicitations  with  the  king,  the  duke  of  Orleans,  the  count  de
Penthievre,  sir  John  Harpedane  and  others,  who  had  any  complaints  against  him,  were
successful,  and  he  was  acquitted  of  all  other  charges.  I know  not  whether  it  happened
through  dissimulation  or  otherwise,  but  he  was  shown  great  attention  and  kindness  by  the
nobles  and  ladies  of  France  until  the  time  when  judgment  was  to  be  given.  He  kept  up  as
great  state  at  Pal  is  as  ever  he  had  done,  and  was  appointed  to  receive  the  English  ambassadors,
and  to  introduce  them  to  the  king,  his  brother,  and  uncles,  for  he  was  a knight  perfectly  well1
versed  in  all  such  ceremonies.

The  day  was  fixed  for  the  parliament  to  decide  on  the  queen  of  Naples’  complaints  : the
sentence  had  before  been  determined  upon,  and  waited  solely  for  the  appearance  of  all  parties

* The  Monk  of  St.  Denis  says  that  their  numbers  were  with  their  attendants  on  foot  (as  was  customary),  would
more  than  twelve  hundred.  Six  huudred  horsemen,  amount  to  that  number. — Ea.


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


599


concerned.  A great  number  of  the  nobility  attended,  that  it  might  have  more  authenticity ;
among  whom  were  the  queen  of  Sicily  and  Jerusalem,  duchess  of  Anjou  and  countess  of
Provence,  her  son  Charles,  prince  of  Tarentum,  and  John  of  Blois,  more  commonly  called
John  of  Brittany,  count  de  Penthievre  and  Limoges,  the  dukes  of  Orleans,  Berry,  Burgundy,
and  Bourbon,  the  count  do  Brianne  and  the  bishop  of  Laon,  whom  the  queen  had  brought
before  the  court  on  the  subject  of  her  claim  on  the  county  of  Roussy.  Sir  Peter  de  Craon
was  likewise  there,  attended  by  many  of  his  relations  and  friends.

The  matter  of  the  county  of  Roussy  was  first  disposed  of ; and  the  judgment  of  the  court
was  solemnly  pronounced,  that  the  county  should  belong  to  the  count  de  Brianne  and  to  his
heirs,  who  was  to  have  immediate  possession  given  him  ; but  the  queen  of  Naples  was  to  be
repaid  in  money  the  full  amount  of  what  her  late  lord,  the  duke  of  Anjou,  had  given  to  the
countess  of  Roussy,  lately  deceased.  The  heirs  of  the  countess  of  Roussy,  to  whom  the
lands  belonged,  thanked  the  court  for  the  judgment  they  had  given.  The  president,  who
was  to  declare  the  sentence  in  the  second  cause,  now  rose,  and  said,  “ the  parliament  had
determined  that  sir  Peter  de  Craon  was  indebted  to  the  queen  of  Naples  in  the  sum  of  one
hundred  thousand  francs,  which  he  must  pay  to  her,  or  be  committed  to  prison  until  it  was
done  completely  to  her  satisfaction.”  The  queen  thanked  the  court  for  their  judgment,  and,
instantly,  on  her  request,  sir  Peter  de  Craon  was  arrested,  in  the  king’s  name,  and  carried  to
the  prison  of  the  Louvre,  where  he  was  confined  and  well  guarded.  Upon  this,  the  parliament
broke  up,  and  every  one  returned  to  his  home.  Thus  were  these  two  sentences  given,  through
the  activity  of  the  duchess  of  Anjou.


CHAPTER  LXXIII. — THE  MARRIAGE  IS  CONCLUDED  BETWEEN  KING  RICHARD  OF  ENGLAND

AND  THE  LADY  ISABELLA,  ELDEST  DAUGHTER  TO  CHARLES  VI.  KING  OF  FRANCE.

THE  DUKE  OF  LANCASTER  MARRIES  AGAIN. SIR  PETER  DE  CRAON  IS,  AFTER  SOME

TIME,  DELIVERED  FROM  PRISON,  AT  THE  ENTREATY  OF  THE  YOUNG  QUEEN  OF  ENGLAND.

TnE  earl  marshal,  the  earl  of  Rutland,  and  the  English  ambassadors  remained  for  twenty-
two  days  in  Paris,  where  they  were  excellently  well  entertained  by  the  king  and  his  court :
their  negotiations  were  successful,  and  the  marriage  between  the  king  of  England  and  the
princess  Isabella  was  agreed  on.  She  was  betrothed  and  espoused  by  the  earl  marshal,  as
proxy  for  the  king  of  England,  and  the  lady,  ever  after,  was  styled  queen  of  England.  I
was  at  the  time  told  it  was  pleasant  to  see  that,  young  as  she  was,  she  knew  well  how  to  act
the  queen.  When  this  business  was  completed,  and  the  different  treaties  signed  and  sealed,
the  ambassadors  took  their  leave  of  the  king  and  his  court,  and  departed  from  Paris  to  Calais,
on  their  return  to  England,  where  they  were  joyfully  received  by  the  king,  the  duke  of
Lancaster,  and  the  lords  attached  to  the  king’s  person  and  pleasures.

However  much  others  might  be  pleased,  it  was  not  so  with  the  duke  of  Gloucester ; for  he
saw  plainly  that  by  this  marriage  peace  would  be  established  between  the  two  kingdoms,
which  sorely  displeased  him,  unless  it  should  be  such  a peace  as  would  redound  to  the  honour
of  England,  and  every  thing  were  placed  on  the  same  footing  as  when  the  war  broke  out  in
Gascony.  He  frequently  conversed  on  this  subject  with  his  brother  the  duke  of  York,  and,
whenever  the  occasion  was  favourable,  endeavoured  to  draw  him  over  to  his  way  of  thinking,
for  lie  was  but  of  weak  understanding.  Lie  dared  not  speak  so  freely  to  his  elder  brother  of
Lancaster,  who  was  of  the  king’s  party,  and  well  satisfied  with  this  marriage,  on  account  of
his  two  daughters  the  queens  of  Castille  and  Portugal.  At  this  period,  the  duke  of  Lancaster
married  his  third  wife,  the  daughter  of  a Hainault  knight,  called  sir  Paon  de  Ruet : he  had
formerly  been  one  of  the  knights  to  the  good  and  noble  queen  Philippa  of  England,  who
much  loved  the  Llainaulters,  as  she  was  herself  of  that  country.

This  lady  whom  the  duke  of  Lancaster  married  was  called  Catherine*,  and  in  her  youth
had  been  of  the  household  of  the  duchess  Blanche  of  Lancaster.  Before  the  lady  Blanche’s
death,  and  even  when  the  duke  was  married  to  his  second  wife  Constance,  the  daughter  of

* Catherine  Svvynford. — Ed.


GOO


CIIRONrCLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


don  Pedro,  he  cohabited  with  the  lady  Catherine  de  Ruet,  who  was  then  married  to  an
English  knight  now  dead*.

The  duke  of  Lancaster  had  three  children  + by  her,  previous  to  his  marriage,  two  sons  and
a daughter  : the  eldest  son  was  named  J ohn  lord  Beaufort  of  Lancaster  ; the  other  Thomas,
whom  the  duke  kept  at  the  schools  in  Oxford,  and  made  a great  churchman  and  civilian.
He  was  afterward  bishop  of  Lincoln,  which  is  the  richest  bishopric  in  the  kingdom  : from
affection  to  these  children,  the  duke  married  their  mother,  to  the  great  astonishment  of  France
and  England,  for  Catherine  Swynford  was  of  base  extraction  in  comparison  to  his  two  former
duchesses  Blanche  and  Constance.  When  this  marriage  was  announced  to  the  ladies  of  high
rank  in  England,  such  as  the  duchess  of  Gloucester,  the  countess  of  Derby,  the  countess  of
Arundel,  and  others  connected  with  the  royal  family,  they  were  greatly  shocked,  and  thought
the  duke  much  to  blame.  They  said,  “ he  had  sadly  disgraced  himself  by  thus  marrying  his
concubine  and  added,  that,  “ since  it  was  so,  she  would  be  the  second  lady  in  the  kingdom,
and  the  queen  would  be  dishonourably  accompanied  by  her  ; but  that,  for  their  parts,  they
would  leave  her  to  do  the  honours  alone,  for  they  would  never  enter  any  place  where  she
was.  They  themselves  would  be  disgraced  if  they  suffered  such  a base-born  duchess,  who
had  been  the  duke’s  concubine  a long  time  before  and  during  his  marriages,  to  take  precedence,
and  their  hearts  would  burst  with  grief  were  it  to  happen.”  Those  who  were  the  most
outrageous  on  the  subject  were  the  duke  and  duchess  of  Gloucester.  They  considered  the  duke
of  Lancaster  as  a doating  fool  for  thus  marrying  his  concubine,  and  declared  they  would
never  honour  his  lady  by  calling  her  sister.  The  duke  of  Y ork  made  light  of  the  matter,  for
he  lived  chiefly  with  the  king  and  his  brother  of  Lancaster.  The  duke  of  Gloucester  was  of
a different  way  of  thinking  : although  the  youngest  of  the  three  brothers,  he  yielded  to  no
man’s  opinion,  was  naturally  very  proud  and  overbearing,  and  in  opposition  to  the  king’s
ministers,  unless  he  could  turn  them  as  he  willed.  Catherine  Ruet,  however,  remained
duchess  of  Lancaster,  and  the  second  lady  in  England,  as  long  as  she  lived.  She  was  a lady
accustomed  to  honours,  for  she  had  been  brought  up  at  court  during  her  youth,  and  the  duke
fondly  loved  the  children  he  had  by  her,  as  he  showed  dui’ing  his  life  and  at  his  death.

1 must  mention,  that  when  the  sentence  of  the  court  of  parliament  at  Paris  had  been
pronounced  against  sir  Peter  de  Craon  in  favour  of  the  queen  of  Naples,  he  was  confounded.
Finding  that  he  must  refund  the  one  hundred  thousand  francs  or  remain  his  whole  life  in
prison,  he  listened  to  the  counsel  that  was  given  him  from  the  duke  and  duchess  of  Burgundy.
They  advised  him  to  solicit  the  young  queen  of  England  to  intercede  with  the  queen  of  Naples
to  obtain  his  liberty  for  fifteen  days  only,  that  he  might  seek  out  his  friends  in  Paris  to  pay
this  money,  or  to  become  his  sureties  until  he  had  procured  it  in  Brittany  or  elsewhere,
engaging  to  return  with  the  sum  he  wras  condemned  to  pay.  The  queen  of  Naples  complied
with  the  request  of  the  queen  of  England,  but  on  condition  that  sir  Peter  de  Craon  should
every  night  sleep  in  his  prison  at  the  Louvre.  Sir  Peter  sought  for  aid  among  bis  relatives
in  vain  ; for  the  sum  was  too  great  for  them  to  advance,  and  they  refused  being  his  sureties.
At  the  end  of  the  fifteen  days,  he  was  forced  to  return  to  his  prison,  where  he  was  strictly
guarded  day  and  night,  and  at  his  own  proper  costs.

We  will  now  speak  of  what  actions  and  enterprises  the  count  de  Nevers  and  the  lords  of
France  performed  this  summer  in  Hungary  ; and  then  say  something  of  the  expedition  the
earl  of  Idainault  and  earl  of  Ostrevant  made  into  Friesland.

* Sir  Hugh  Swynford.  Henry  Beaufort,  hishop  of  Winchester  and  cardinal  of

■f*  Froissart  mistakes  in  the  number,  and  Thomas  for  Beaufort, — Thomas  Beaufort,  duke  of  Exeter  and  earl  of
Henry.  According  to  Sandford,  ho  had  four  children  by  Dorset, — Joan  Beaufort,  countess  of  Westmoreland.
Catherine  Swynford  : — John  Beaufort,  earl  of  Somerset, — For  further  particulars,  see  Sandford  and  Dugdale.


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


601


CHAPTER  LXXIV. JOHN  OF  BURGUNDY,  COUNT  OF  NEVERS,  PASSES  THE  DANUBE  WITH  HIS

ARMY. AFTER  THE  CAPTURE  OF  SEVERAL  PLACES,  THE  TOWN  OF  NICOPOLI  IS

BESIEGED  *.

On  the  arrival  of  the  count  de  Nevers  with  his  army,  which  was  composed  of  numbers  of
valiant  men  from  France  and  other  countries,  at  Buda  in  Hungary,  the  king  gave  them
a most  hearty  reception,  as  indeed  he  ought,  for  to  serve  him  they  were  come.  It  was  the
intention  of  the  king  of  Hungary,  before  he  took  the  field,  to  obtain  some  certain  intel-
ligence of  the  movements  of  Bajazet,  who  had  given  him  notice  since  last  February  to
increase  his  forces,  as  he  would  in  the  course  of  the  month  of  May  lead  an  immense  army  to
cross  the  Danube  and  offer  combat  to  the  Hungarians.  Many  wondered  how  this  could  be
done ; but  others  replied, — “ Nothing  was  impossible  to  man ; that  as  Bajazet  was  of  great
valour  and  enterprise,  and  had  said  he  would  do  so,  he  would  surely  accomplish  it ; but,  if
lie  failed  in  his  threat,  and  did  not  cross  the  Danube,  we  ought  to  cross  it,  and  enter  his
kingdom  of  Turkey.  The  king  of  Hungary  could  lead  thither  one  hundred  thousand  men,
including  foreigners,  which  was  sufficient  to  conquer  all  Turkey,  and  even  to  advance  to  the
kingdom  of  Persia.  If  we  gain  a victory  over  Bajazet,  we  shall  so  far  succeed,  that  we
may  conquer  Syria  and  the  Holy  Land,  and  deliver  Jerusalem  out  of  the  hands  of  the
Sultan  and  the  enemies  of  our  God.  In  the  ensuing  summer,  the  kings  of  France  and
England  will  jointly  raise  a large  force  of  men  at  arms  and  archers  ; and,  when  they  shall
be  united  to  us,  nothing  will  be  able  to  withstand  so  powerful  an  army.”

Such  were  the  conversations  of  the  French  in  Hungary.  When  the  month  of  May
arrived,  being  disappointed  in  their  expectations  of  hearing  of  the  march  of  Bajazet,  the
king  of  Hungary  sent  scouts  across  the  Danube  to  seek  intelligence,  and,  at  the  same  time,
issued  his  summons  for  his  power  to  assemble.  The  knights  of  Rhodes  came  thither  in
numbers  during  the  month  of  May,  looking  for  the  arrival  of  the  Saracens,  but  no  news
was  heard  of  them.  The  king  of  Hungary,  on  this,  sent  some  Hungarians  who  were  used  to
arms,  and  well  acquainted  with  the  country,  beyond  the  Danube,  but  they  were  as  unsuc-
cessful as  his  former  scouts,  in  not  meeting  Bajazet : they  heard  that  he  was  still  in  Asia,
at  Damascus,  Antioch,  or  Alexandria.  The  king,  on  receiving  this  information,  called
a council  of  his  lords,  and  those  who  were  come  from  France,  who  were  eager  to  signalise
themselves,  to  consider  how  they  should  act  in  this  emergency.  The  king  told  them  that  he
had  sent  some  expert  men  at  arms  to  seek  Bajazet,  who  had  advanced  far  into  Turkey ;
and  that  there  was  no  appearance  Bajazet  would  this  summer  put  the  menace  into  execution,
of  crossing  the  Danube  to  offer  him  battle.  The  king  wished  to  have  advice  on  this  matter,
more  especially  from  the  French  lords.  The  lord  de  Coucy  having  consulted  with  the
other  barons,  answered  for  them,  that  if  Bajazet  should  have  told  lies,  and  deceived  them
by  not  keeping  his  word,  they  ought  not  for  that  to  remain  idle,  but  attempt  some  deeds  of
arms,  since  they  were  come  thither  to  that  effect ; that  all  the  French,  Germans,  and  other
foreigners,  were  willing  to  meet  the  Turks ; and  if  under  the  command  of  Bajazet  so  much
the  better,  as  it  would  redound  more  to  their  honour.  What  the  lord  de  Coucy  said  was
approved  of  by  the  French,  Germans,  Bohemians,  and  others,  as  the  most  advantageous
manner  of  employing  the  season.

Orders  were,  in  consequence,  issued  by  the  king  and  marshals,  that  every  one  be  prepared
by  a certain  day,  which  was  appointed  on  the  octave  of  Saint  John  the  Baptist,  to  march
for  Turkey.  These  orders  were  punctually  obeyed ; and  you  woidd  have  seen  servants
busily  employed  in  preparing  all  things  for  their  masters’  wants.  The  lords  of  France  were
desirous  of  making  a handsome  figure,  and  examined  well  their  armour  and  equipages,
sparing  no  money  to  have  them  as  complete  as  possible.  Their  appearance  was  grandly
magnificent,  when  they  took  the  field  from  Buda,  the  principal  city  of  Hungary.  The
constable  of  Hungary  had  the  command  of  the  van  division,  because  he  knew  the  country

* “ Nicopoli,” — on  the  Danube,  in  Bulgaria,  sixty  and  Bajazet.  Sigiemond  lost  the  battle  and  twenty
leagues  N.W.  from  Adrianople.  It  is  famous  for  tho  thousand  men  ; hut  it  cost  Bajazet  sixty  thousand,  who
battle,  in  1393,  between  Sigismond,  king  of  Hungary,  were  left  dead  on  the  field.


602


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


well,  and  led  with  him  a large  body  of  Hungarians  and  Germans.  Next  to  him  marched
the  French  lords,  the  constable  of  France,  the  count  de  la  Marche,  the  lord  de  Coucy,  the
lords  Henry  and  Philip  de  Bar,  and  many  more.

With  the  king  of  Hungary  rode  the  greatest  barons  of  his  realm,  as  was  proper,  and  by
his  side  John  of  Burgundy,  who  often  conversed  with  him.  They  were  full  sixty  thousand
horse  : the  infantry  were  few  in  number,  indeed  none  but  the  followers  of  the  army.  The
array  of  the  Christians  was  noble  and  handsome ; and  among  the  Hungarians  were  many
cross-bow  men  on  horseback.  This  army  advanced  until  it  came  to  the  banks  of  the
Danube,  which  it  crossed  in  barges,  boats,  and  pontoons,  prepared  some  time  since  for  this
purpose.  It  was  more  than  eight  days  before  all  had  passed  over ; and  as  they  landed  on.
the  opposite  shore,  they  lodged  themselves  to  wait  for  their  companions.  The  Danube
divides  the  kingdoms  of  Hungary  and  Turkey.  When  the  whole  army  had  crossed,  they
were  delighted  to  find  themselves  on  Turkish  ground,  for  they  were  impatient  to  try  the
courage  of  the  Turks.  After  a council,  they  resolved  to  besiege  a town  in  Turkey  called
Comecte  *,  and  made  preparations  to  invest  it  on  all  sides.  This  could  easily  be  done ; for


King  of  Hungary  holding  a Council  with  the  French  Knights.  From  MSS.  of  the  15th  Century.


it  is  situated  in  an  open  plain,  with  a river  deep  enough  to  bear  vessels,  called  the  Mecte  'f,
which  rises  in  Turkey,  and  falls  into  the  Danube  near  the  sea.  This  river  Danube  is  very
wide,  and  has  more  than  four  hundred  leagues  of  course  from  its  spring  to  the  sea ; it  would
be  the  most  profitable  of  rivers  to  Hungary  and  the  adjoining  countries,  if  the  vessels  it
carries  could  have  a free  passage  to  the  sea,  but  that  is  impossible ; for,  right  at  its  mouth,
there  is  a mountain  which  divides  it  into  two  parts,  and  chokes  the  passage : the  noise  of
the  water  is  so  tremendous,  no  vessel  dares  approach  it,  and  it  may  be  heard  seven  leagues
off.  On  both  sides  of  the  river  Mecte  are  fertile  meads,  to  the  great  advantage  of  the
inhabitants,  and  vineyards,  which  in  favourable  seasons  produce  good  wines.  The  Turks
vintage  them,  and,  when  made,  they  are  put  into  goat-skins,  and  sold  to  the  Christians,  for,
according  to  their  religion,  they  are  forbidden  to  taste  wine  under  pain  of  death  ; at  least
when  discovered  so  doing,  they  are  punished : they  make  pleasant  beverages  of  many  other
excellent  fruits  and  spices,  and  are  accustomed  to  drink  much  of  goat’s  milk,  during  the  hot
weather,  to  refresh  and  cool  them.

The  king  of  Hungary  encamped  his  army  before  this  town  without  opposition,  for  no  one

* “ Comccte.”  Q.  Nissa.  t “ Mecte.”  Q.  Morava.


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


603


made  any  attempt  to  prevent  the  siege ; nor  was  there  any  person  or  army  in  the  place,
from  Bajazet,  to  guard  or  defend  it.  On  their  arrival,  they  found  the  fruits  ripe,  which
was  a great  comfort  to  them.  Many  attacks  were  made  on  the  town,  but  they  were
valiantly  opposed  by  the  inhabitants,  in  the  expectation  of  daily  receiving  reinforcements
from  Bajazet,  their  lord,  to  raise  the  siege.  None,  however,  came,  and  the  city  was  taken
by  storm,  with  great  slaughter  of  men,  women,  and  children ; for  the  Christians  on  entering
it  spared  none.  When  Comecte  had  thus  been  destroyed,  the  king  of  Hungary  decamped
with  his  army,  and  advanced  farther  into  Turkey  towards  the  large  city  of  Nicopoli ; but,
before  he  arrived  there,  he  came  to  a town  called  Laquaire,  where  he  encamped  fifteen  days,
for  it  was  so  long  before  he  could  conquer  it.  This  was  also  taken  by  storm,  and  destroyed.
They  then  marched  to  another  town  and  castle  called  Brehappe,  governed  by  a Turkish
knight,  the  lord  of  the  place,  who  had  with  him  a strong  garrison.

The  king  of  Hungary  encamped  his  Hungarians  about  a league  distant  from  it  on  account
of  water,  for  there  was  none  nearer  Brehappe ; but  the  counts  de  Nevers,  d’Eu,  de  la
Marche,  and  the  lords  de  Coucy,  Boucicaut,  de  Saimpi,  de  Roye,  Henry  and  Philip  de  Bar,
with  more  than  a thousand  French  knights  and  squires,  made  their  approaches  close  to  the
town.  The  count  de  Nevers  had  been  created  a knight  by  the  king  of  Hungary,  on  his
entering  Turkey ; and,  the  day  he  displayed  his  banner,  upwards  of  three  hundred  were
knighted.  Those  who  had  advanced  to  the  town  won  it,  within  four  days,  by  assault ; but
the  castle  was  too  strong,  and  resisted  all  their  attacks.  The  lord  of  Brehappe,  whose  name
was,  I believe,  Corbadas,  a very  valiant  man,  saved  many  of  his  people  within  the  castle.
He  had  three  brothers,  called  Maladius,  Balachius,  and  Ruffin.  After  the  capture  of  the  town,
the  Christians  were  seven  days  before  the  castle,  and  attacked  it  many  times,  but  they  lost
more  than  they  gained.  These  four  brothers  showed  they  were  men  of  valour  by  the  defence
they  made.  The  French  lords  having  well  considered  the  strength  of  the  castle,  and  that  they
lost  more  than  they  won,  saw  plainly  their  attempts  would  be  vain,  and  decamped,  for  they
had  heard  the  king  of  Hungary  was  desirous  to  lay  siege  to  Nicopoli.  Thus  was  the  siege  of
Brehappe  Castle  broken  up,  and  the  garrison  left  in  peace,  but  the  town  was  burnt.  The
count  de  Nevers  and  the  lords  of  France  joined  the  king  of  Hungary,  who  instantly  prepared
to  march  to  Nicopoli.

Corbadas  de  Brehappe  was  well  pleased  to  observe  the  Christians  marching  away,  and
said, — “ We  shall  now  be  undisturbed  for  some  time : if  my  town  be  burnt,  it  will  be
rebuilt  and  recover  itself : but  I am  surprised  that  we  have  no  news  from  our  sultan  Bajazet;
for  he  told  me,  the  last  time  I spoke  with  him  in  the  city  of  Nicopoli,  that  he  would  return
to  this  country  the  beginning  of  May.  His  intentions  were  to  cross  the  Hellespont,  and
march  to  Hungary  to  offer  battle  to  the  Christians,  as  he  had  sent  to  inform  the  king  of
Hungary.  But  this  he  has  not  done ; and  the  Hungarians,  greatly  strengthened  and
emboldened  by  succours  from  France,  have  crossed  the  Danube  and  entered  Turkey,  where
they  will  destroy  all  the  possessions  of  Bajazet,  for  we  have  no  force  to  oppose  them.  They
will  now  for  certain  besiege  Nicopoli,  which,  although  sufficiently  strong  to  hold  out  for
some  time,  must  be  well  defended.  We  are  four  brothers,  knights,  and  relations  to  Bajazet:
we  ought,  therefore,  to  attend  to  his  concerns ; and,  in  consequence,  I propose  the  following
plan : I and  my  brother  Maladius  will  go  to  Nicopoli  to  assist  in  its  defence ; Balachius
shall  remain  here  to  guard  Brehappe,  and  Ruffin  shall  cross  the  sea  and  hasten  to  find
Bajazet,  and  inform  him  of  everything  that  has  happened,  and  the  great  army  that  has
invaded  Turkey,  that  he  may  take  instant  measures  to  prevent  the  dishonourable  loss  of  his
possessions,  and  march  such  a force  against  the  Christians  as  may  conquer  them  ; otherwise  he
will  not  only  lose  Armenia  that  he  has  won,  but  his  own  territories  also  ; for,  according  to
appearances,  the  king  of  Hungary  and  the  Christians  are  determined  to  attempt  his
complete  destruction.”  The  three  Turks  approved  of  what  their  brother  had  said,  and
promised  obedience.  They  made  preparations  accordingly ; and,  in  the  mean  time,  the  siege
was  laid  before  Nicopoli  by  the  Christian  army,  amounting  to  nearly  one  hundred  thousand
men.  Corbadas  de  Brehappe  and  his  brother  Maladius  gained  admittance  into  the  town,  to
the  joy  of  the  inhabitants.  Balachius  remained  in  the  castle  of  Brehappe,  and  Ruffin  took
the  first  opportunity  of  setting  out,  passing  the  Christian  army  in  the  night,  for  he  was


604  CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.

well  acquainted  with  the  country,  and  crossed  the  Hellespont  to  learn  intelligence  where
Bajazet  was.

In  truth,  Bajazet  was  at  Cairo  with  the  sultan  of  Babylon,  to  solicit  his  aid,  and  there
the  Turk  found  him.  When  Bajazet  saw  him,  he  was  much  surprised,  and  imagined
something  extraordinary  had  happened.  He  called  to  him,  and  asked  how  things  were
going  on  in  Turkey.  “ My  lord,”  replied  he,  “ they  are  very  anxious  to  see  you  there,  for
the  king  of  Hungary,  with  an  immense  force,  lias  crossed  the  Danube,  and  invaded  the
country.  They  have  committed  great  destruction,  and  burnt  five  or  six  of  your  inclosed
towns : when  I left  Brehappe,  they  were  marching  to  Nicopoli.  My  brothers  Corbadas
and  Maladius  have  thrown  themselves,  with  some  men  at  arms,  into  the  town  to  assist  in
the  defence.  You  must  know,  that  in  this  army  of  the  king  of  Hungary,  there  is  a body  of
Frenchmen,  the  most  gallant  and  best  appointed  that  can  be  seen.  It  behoves  you,  there-
fore, to  summon  your  friends  and  vassals,  and  hasten  to  Turkey  with  an  army  powerful
enough  to  drive  these  Christians  across  the  Danube ; but  if  your  force  is  not  very  consider-
able, you  will  not  be  able  to  accomplish  it.”

“ How  many  are  they?”  asked  Bajazet.  “Upwards  of  one  hundred  thousand,”  said  the
Turk,  “ and  all  on  horseback,  armed  in  the  best  possible  manner.”  Bajazet  made  no  reply
to  this,  but  entered  the  chamber  of  the  sultan  of  Babylon,  leaving  the  Turk,  who  had
brought  this  intelligence,  among  his  people.  He  related  what  you  have  just  heard  to  the
sultan  of  Babylon,  who  answered, — “ You  must  provide  yourself  accordingly,  and  shall
have  men  enough  to  oppose  them,  for  we  must,  by  all  means,  defend  our  religion  and
possessions.”  “That  is  true,”  replied  Bajazet,  “and  my  wishes  are  now  accomplished*
for  I was  desirous  that  the  king  of  Hungary  would  cross  the  Danube  with  his  army  and
enter  Turkey.  At  present,  I shall  let  him  have  full  scope,  but  in  the  end  he  shall  repay  me
fully  for  what  he  has  done.  It  is  four  months  since  I heard  of  this  expedition,  from  my
good  friend  the  duke  of  Milan,  who  at  the  same  time  sent  me  twelve  hawks  and  gerfalcons,
the  finest  I ever  saw.  With  these  presents,  lie  wrote  me  the  names  and  surnames  of  the
barons  of  France  who  were  coming  to  carry  the  war  into  Turkey;  adding,  that  if  I could
capture  those  named  in  his  letter,  their  ransoms  would  be  worth  to  me  more  than  a million
of  florins.  Besides  the  barons  he  mentioned,  there  ought  to  be  with  them  from  France,  or
the  neighbouring  countries,  five  hundred  gallant  squires.  The  duke  of  Milan  advised  me,
if  we  had  a battle  (which  will  infallibly  be  the  case,  for  I shall  march  to  meet  them),  to
draw  up  my  men  with  prudence,  and  to  take  every  advantage  in  the  combat ; for  they  were
all  men  of  such  ability  and  resolution,  that  the  meanest  would  not  fly,  to  avoid  death.
They  have  undertaken  this  expedition,  as  the  duke  writes  me,  solely  through  valour,  to  do
some  deeds  of  arms  that  may  gain  them  renown.  For  this  I feel  myself  thankful  to  them  ;
and  their  desire  for  arms  shall  be  gratified  within  three  months  from  this  time,  when,
perhaps,  they  may  have  more  than  sufficient.”


CHAPTER  LXXV. A DIGRESSION  FROM  THE  PRINCIPAL  HISTORY,  TO  EXPLAIN  WHY  JOHN

GALEAS  OF  MILAN  WAS  MOVED  TO  GIVE  THE  TURK  INFORMATION  OF  THE  EXPEDITION
INTENDED  AGAINST  HIM.

What  Bajazet  had  told  the  sultan  of  Babylon  respecting  the  information  he  had  received
from  the  lord  of  Milan  must  surprise  every  one.  It  was  supposed  he  had  been  baptised  and
was  regenerated  in  our  faith,  and  yet  he  had  sought  the  friendship  and  alliance  of  an  infidel
king,  an  enemy  to  our  religion,  and  had  every  year  sent  him  presents  of  hounds  and  hawks,
or  the  finest  linen  cloth  that  could  be  procured  at  Rheims,  Cambray,  or  in  Holland,  which
is  very  agreeable  to  the  Saracens,  who  have  none  but  what  comes  from  our  country.
Bajazet,  in  return,  made  him  rich  gifts  of  cloth  of.  gold  and  precious  stones,  of  which  they
have  abundance ; and  we  cannot  obtain  them  without  great  risk,  unless  by  means  of  the
Venetians  or  Genoese,  who  traffic  with  those  parts.  With  regard  to  the  count  de  Vertus,
duke  of  Milan,  and  the  lord  Galeas,  his  father,  who  reigned  over  the  Milanese  as  tyrants,
it  is  marvellous  to  think  of  their  fortunes,  and  how  they  first  gained  possession  of  that
country.


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


605


There  were  three  brothers  of  the  house  of  Visconti,  sir  Matthew,  sir  Galeas,  and  sir
Bernabo.  These  three  brothers  had  an  uncle  * who  was  archbishop  of  Milan  during  the
time  the  lord  Charles  de  Luxembourg,  king  of  Bohemia  and  Germany,  was  elected  emperor
in  the  room  of  Lewis  of  Bavaria,  who  had  obtained  that  dignity  by  force.  He  was  never
acknowledged  emperor  by  the  church,  but,  on  the  contrary,  was  excommunicated  by  pope
Innocent  Vi.,  who  then  reigned.  The  cause  of  his  excommunication  was,  that  after  being
crowned  at  Rome,  by  a pope  and  twelve  cardinals  of  his  creation,  he  gave  liberty  to  his
German  soldiers  to  plunder  Rome,  to  make  them  amends  for  the  pay  that  was  due.  This
was  the  recompense  the  Romans  received  for  the  reception  they  gave  him ; and  for  this
cause  he  died  under  sentence  of  excommunication.  The  pope  and  cardinals  whom  he  had
made  came  of  their  free  will  to  Avignon,  and  submitted  themselves  to  pope  Innocent,  who
absolved  them  of  their  error.

To  return  to  the  lords  of  Milan : I will  say  how  they  first  obtained  possession  of  the
Milanese.  This  archbishop,  their  uncle,  received  in  Milan  the  new  emperor  on  his  return
from  Aix-la-Chapelle  (where  he  had  performed  the  usual  ceremonies  for  forty  days)  with  so
much  magnificence  and  splendour  that,  in  return  for  this  good  cheer  and  for  a loan  of  one
hundred  thousand  ducats,  the  emperor  created  him  viscount  of  Milan,  and  gave  to  him  the
territory  of  the  Milanese,  and  to  his  nephews  after  him,  to  hold  during  pleasure,  and  until
the  hundred  thousand  ducats  were  repaid  in  one  sum.  When  the  archbishop  died,  his
nephew,  sir  Matthew,  was  acknowledged  by  the  emperor  as  viscount  of  Milan.  His  two
brothers,  sir  Galeas  and  sir  Bernabo,  who  then  were  far  from  rich,  took  counsel  together,
and  determined  to  seize  the  government  and  rule  over  Lombardy : to  accomplish  this,  they
resolved  on  their  brother’s  death,  by  poison  or  otherwise  -f",  and  then  to  unite  themselves  so
strongly  by  marriage  that  no  one  would  dare  to  anger  them.  After  the  death  of  sir
Matthew,  they  reigned  with  great  power,  and  were  on  the  best  terms  during  their  lives.
They  divided  the  country  of  Lombardy  between  them  : sir  Galeas  had  ten  towns,  being  the
eldest  brother,  and  sir  Bernabo  nine ; and  Milan  was  governed  alternately  by  them  for  one
year.  To  maintain  their  government,  and  supply  their  expenses,  they  laid  heavy  taxes
and  gabelles  on  the  people,  and,  by  various  means,  extorted  great  wealth  from  their
subjects.  They  had  their  towns  garrisoned  with  foreign  mercenaries,  Germans,  French,
Bretons.,  English,  and  from  every  nation  except  Lombardy,  for  in  the  Lombards  they  had  no
confidence.  These  soldiers  were  regularly  paid  every  month,  and  were  much  dreaded  by  the
people,  for  none  dared  to  oppose  them.  When  any  of  the  neighbouring  lords  ventured  to
resist  their  encroachments,  they  took  a severe  revenge,  and  destroyed  several,  that  others
might  take  warning.

The  inhabitants  of  their  towns  were  under  such  awe,  that  they  possessed  nothing  but
through  the  good  pleasure  of  sir  Galeas  and  sir  Bernabo,  and  those  who  were  rich  they  taxed
three  or  four  times  a year.  They  said  the  Lombards  were  too  proud  of  their  riches,  and
good  for  nothing  unless  kept  under  subjection.  They  were  indeed  so  by  them,  for  none  dared
murmur  or  say  a word  against  any  of  their  commands.  The  two  brothers  married  nobly,
but  they  bought  their  wives  from  the  wealth  of  their  people.  Sir  Galeas  espoused  Blanche,
sister  to  the  good  count  of  Savoy  : before  he  had  his  consent,  he  gave  him  one  hundred
thousand  ducats.  Sir  Bernabo  married  in  Germany  a sister  to  the  duke  of  Brunswick,  and
did  not  pay  a less  sum  than  his  brother  had  done  J.  They  had  many  children,  whom  they
married  to  powerful  families,  to  add  to  their  strength.  Sir  Galeas  had  a son  called  John
Galeas,  and  when  he  heard  that  king  John  of  France  had  obtained  his  liberty  from  England,
and  that  he  was  in  great  difficulty  to  procure  the  first  payment  of  his  ransom,  of  three
millions  of  francs,  he  negotiated  with  the  king  and  his  council  to  have  one  of  the  daughters
of  France  for  wife  to  his  son  John  Galeas.  His  proposals  were  listened  to,  because  they  knew
he  was  rich,  and  the  king  was  distressed  for  money.  Fie  bought,  therefore,  the  daughter  of

* Giovanni  Visconti.. — Ed.

f Although  they  might  have  intended  the  crime,  they  had  no  necessity  for  its  perpetration.  Matthew  died  from
the  effects  of  his  intemperance. — Ed.

J Galeas  Visconti  married  Blanche  of  Savoy,  10th  September,  1350.

Bernabo  Visconti  married  Beatrix  Scaligera,  through  pride  called  Regina.  27th  September,  1350.

Anderson's  Royal  Genealogies.


GOG


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


king  John  for  six  hundred  thousand  francs,  which  being  paid  to  the  king  of  England,  his  son
married  her.  She  brought  him  as  her  dower  the  county  of  Vertus  in  Champagne.  They  had
a son  and  daughter,  and  the  last  was  married,  by  dint  of  money,  to  the  second  son  of  the  late
king  Charles  V.  called  Lewis,  who  is  at  this  moment  duke  of  Orleans,  count  of  Blois  and  of
Valois.  This  marriage  cost  the  count  de  Vertus,  father  of  the  lady,  one  million  of  francs,
with  part  of  which  was  bought  the  county  of  Blois,  as  you  have  heard  related  in  this  history.
The  two  brothers  lived  in  great  friendship  with  each  other,  which  increased  their  power ; and
neither  pope  nor  cardinal,  who  made  war  against  them,  could  gain  any  advantage,  nor  any
prince,  except  the  marquis  of  Montferrat,  who  succeeded  through  the  aid  of  sir  John
Hawkwood  and  the  English  companies,  whom  he  sought  in  Provence,  and  led  into  Lombardy.

After  the  death  of  Galeas,  his  son  John  Galeas,  count  de  Vertus,  reigned  with  great  power,
and  at  the  beginning  was  much  beloved  in  Lombardy  for  his  prudent  and  wise  conduct.  He
abolished  the  most  oppressive  taxes  his  father  had  imposed,  and  was  so  popular  that  all  spoke
well  of  him ; but  when  he  had  so  far  succeeded,  he  showed  his  natural  disposition,  which  he
had  long  restrained.  He  laid  an  ambuscade  for  his  uncle,  sir  Bernabo,  who  thought  himself
on  the  best  terms  with  him  ; and,  when  he  was  taken,  he  was  told  that  one  lord  was  sufficient
for  Lombardy.  Lie  could  not  obtain  any  favour,  for  the  power  was  against  him,  and,  being
carried  to  a castle,  was  put  to  death,  but  how  I know  not.  Sir  Bernabo  had  many  fine
children  ; and  the  queen  of  France  is  the  daughter  of  one  that  was  married  to  the  duke  of
Austria  and  Bavaria.  Sir  Galeas  seized  all  the  children  of  his  uncle  he  could  lay  hands  on,
as  well  as  his  possessions,  which  he  annexed  to  his  own,  and  reigned  in  great  splendour  and
wealth.  He  shortly  after  renewed  the  taxes  he  had  taken  off,  and  extorted  money  from  his
subjects  by  every  means  of  imposition,  which  made  him  more  feared  than  loved.  Lie  followed
the  errors  of  his  father,  declaring  and  maintaining,  that  he  would  never  believe  in,  nor  adore
God  : in  consequence,  he  deprived  the  monasteries  of  great  part  of  their  revenues,  which  he
appropriated  to  himself,  saying,  the  monks  lived  too  delicately  on  rich  food  and  choice  wines ;
that  such  superfluities  prevented  them  rising  at  midnight  to  perform  their  church  duties,  and
that  Saint  Benedict  had  not  thus  framed  his  laws  for  their  conduct,  but  he  would  bring  them
back  to  eggs  and  thin  wine,  that  their  voices  might  be  louder  and  clearer  to  chaunt  in  the
church.

Thus  did  sir  Galeas,  father,  and  son,  and  sir  Bernabo,  act  like  popes  in  their  dominions  as
long  as  they  lived  : they  did  much  injustice  to  churchmen,  without  fearing  anything  the
popes  might  say  or  do  against  them ; and  when  the  schism  happened,  and  the  two  popes  of
Rome  and  Avignon  were  excommunicating  each  other,  these  lords  of  Milan  laughed  at  both,
as  indeed  did  many  other  great  lords.  The  daughter  of  this  sir  John  Galeas,  duchess  of
Orleans,  inherited  more  of  the  dispositions  of  her  father  than  of  her  mother,  who  was  a
princess  of  France  ; for  she  was  envious,  and  covetous  of  the  pomp  of  this  world,  and  would
gladly  have  seen  her  lord  king  of  France,  no  matter  how.  A scandalous  report  was  very
current,  that  the  disorder  of  the  king,  which  had  so  much  distressed  the  kingdom,  and
baffled  all  the  skill  of  the  physicians,  was  owing  to  her.  I will  say  what  gave  rise  to  these
suspicions,  and  made  them  the  more  readily  believed.

Valentina,  duchess  of  Orleans,  had  a handsome  son  of  the  age  of  the  dauphin  of  France,
and  while  these  two  children  were  playing  together  in  the  chamber  of  the  duchess,  a poisoned
apple  was  thrown  on  the  floor,  near  the  dauphin,  in  hopes  he  would  take  it,  but,  through
God’s  providence,  he  did  not.  The  son  of  the  duchess,  thinking  no  harm,  ran  and  ate  it,  but
he  had  no  sooner  put  it  into  his  mouth  than  death  followed,  in  spite  of  every  care  to  prevent
it.  Those  who  had  the  government  of  the  dauphin  carried  him  away,  and  never  allowed
him  afterward  to  enter  the  apartments  of  the  duchess.  This  story  caused  great  murmurings
in  Paris  and  elsewhere,  and  the  people  were  so  enraged  against  her,  as  to  occasion  the  duke
to  hear  of  it : they  publicly  said  in  Paris,  that  if  she  was  not  prevented  from  being  near  the
king,  they  would  come  and  take  her  away  by  force  and  put  her  to  death,  for  that  she  intended
to  poison  the  king  and  all  his  family,  having  already  made  him  suffer  by  her  enchantments.
What  gave  additional  weight  to  this,  was  the  king’s  refusal,  during  his  illness,  to  see  the
queen,  whom  he  would  not  recollect,  nor  any  other  person  than  the  duchess  of  Orleans.  The
duke  of  Orleans,  to  put  an  end  to  these  scandalous  reports,  took  her  away  from  the  hotel  de


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


007


Saint  Pol  himself,  and  sent  her  to  one  of  his  castles  called  Asnieres,  on  the  road  to  Beauvais,
where  she  remained  some  time  without  ever  passing  the  gates  of  the  castle.  She  was  removed
thence  to  Neufchatel  on  the  Loire,  and  the  duke  hated  her  much  for  the  accident  which  had
happened  to  his  son : his  other  fine  children,  however,  softened  his  resentment  to  her.

Intelligence  of  this  was  carried  to  Milan,  and  sir  Galeas  heard  with  fear  the  great  danger
his  daughter  was  in.  He  was  very  wroth  with  the  king  of  France  and  his  ministers,  and
sent  sir  James  de  la  Berme,  with  other  noble  persons,  ambassadors  to  France,  to  excuse  his
daughter,  and  to  say,  that  if  any  knight  should  accuse  her  of  treason,  he  would  provide  a
person  to  challenge  him  to  mortal  combat.  At  the  time  these  ambassadors  came  to  Paris,
the  king  was  in  tolerable  health  ; but  very  little  attention  was  paid  them,  or  to  the  excuses
they  made  for  the  duchess  of  Orleans,  and  they  received  a short  answer.  When  they  saw
this,  they  returned  to  Milan  to  relate  to  the  duke  what  they  had  seen  and  heard.  The  duke
was  more  angered  than  before,  and  sent  his  defiance  to  the  king  and  kingdom  of  France;
but,  when  it  was  brought,  the  most  gallant  part  of  the  French  chivalry  had  already  set  out
for  Hungary,  and  were  now  entered  into  Turkey.  From  spite  to  the  king  of  France,  the
duke  of  Milan  had  formed  an  alliance  with  Bajazet ; and  by  his  means  was  the  sultan  regularly
informed  of  all  that  was  passing  in  Christendom,  and  the  secret  history  of  France.

We  will  now  leave  this  matter,  and  say  how  the  sultan  Bajazet  and  the  Christian  barons
and  knights  in  Turkey  prospered.


CHAPTER  LXXVI. WniLE  BAJAZET  IS  RAISING  A GREAT  ARMY  TO  OPPOSE  TOE  HUNGARIANS

AND  FRENCH,  THE  LORD  DE  COUCY,  DURING  THE  SIEGE  OF  NICOPOLI,  DEFEATS  A LARGE
BODY  OF  TURKS  WITH  AN  INFERIOR  FORCE.

Bajazet  made  no  long  stay  at  Cairo  with  the  sultan  of  Babylon,  who  promised  to  send  a
great  army  to  his  aid  under  the  command  of  his  best  men  at  arms,  that  he  might  successfully
oppose  the  barons  and  knights  of  France.  They  despatched  messengers  on  all  sides  to  all
who  they  imagined  could  assist,  begging  they  would  exert  themselves  in  this  affair,  which
was  become  of  the  greatest  consequence ; for,  should  the  French  conquer  Turkey,  all  the
surrounding  kingdoms  would  tremble,  their  religion  be  destroyed,  and  themselves  reduced  to
slavery  under  the  Christians,  and  it  were  far  better  to  die  before  such  events  should  happen.

Many  Saracen  kings  obeyed  the  summons  which  Bajazet  and  the  sultan  of  Babylon  had
sent  as  far  as  Persia,  Media,  and  Tartary,  and  to  the  north  to  the  kingdom  of  Lecto  *,  beyond
the  frontiers  of  Prussia.  The  Saracen  monarchs,  having  heard  the  army  of  the  Christians
was  composed  of  the  flower  of  their  chivalry,  selected  from  their  own  sect  those  of  the  greatest
ability,  and  who  had  been  longest  trained  to  arms ; so  that  their  armament  was  not  soon
ready  to  march,  nor  their  purveyances  prepared.  It  was  the  intention  of  Bnjazet  to  raise  a
force  sufficient  to  withstand  the  Christians  : he  therefore  began  his  march  towards  Turkey,
followed  by  large  companies  from  various  parts.  Tartary,  Persia,  and  Media,  sent  him  many
valiant  Saracens,  who  were  impatient  for  the  combat,  and  to  try  their  force  against  the
Christians.

We  will  now  leave  Bajazet,  and  return  to  the  Christians,  who  were  besieging  the  strong
city  of  Nicopoli.  The  garrison  was  very  numerous,  and  defended  the  place  valiantly  against
the  attacks  of  their  enemies,  but  expressed  themselves  much  surprised  that  they  heard  nothing
of  Bajazet.  The  emperor  of  Constantinople  had  indeed  written  to  say,  that  he  was  still  in
the  country  about  Alexandria.  The  besieging  army  lay  before  Nicopoli,  having  provision  in
abundance  which  came  to  them  from  Hungary  and  the  surrounding  countries.  During  the
siege,  the  lord  de  Coucy  and  some  other  French  knights  took  a fancy  to  make  an  expedition
farther  into  Turkey,  for  they  were  tired  of  remaining  so  long  inactive,  while  the  king  of
Hungary  should  continue  his  approaches  to  the  town.  The  lord  de  Coucy,  as  commander  in
chief,  left  the  camp  with  about  five  hundred  lances  and  as  many  cross-bows,  on  horseback,
accompanied  by  the  lords  de  Roye,  do  Saint  Py,  the  governor  of  Beauvoir,  the  lord  de
Montcaurcl,  the  borgne  de  Montquel,  and  several  more.  They  selected  as  guides  some  of  the

* “ Lecto.”  MS.  Locco,  Qy.  Lithuania.


008


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


best  mounted  Hungarian  scouts,  well  acquainted  with  the  country,  to  lead  them  where  they
thought  was  probable  to  meet  the  enemy.  This  same  week,  the  Turks  likewise  took  the
field  to  the  amount  of  twenty  thousand  men ; for,  having  heard  the  Christians  were  destroying
and  burning  their  country,  they  determined  to  put  an  end  to  it.  They  collected  in  the  force
I have  said,  and  advanced  to  a pass  through  which  it  was  necessary  the  Christians  should
march  to  enter  the  open  country,  for  there  was  no  other  entrance.  Having  remained  there
for  two  days  without  hearing  anything  of  the  enemy,  they  were  on  the  point  of  returning  the
third  day,  when  the  Hungarian  scouts  came  galloping*  to  the  place  where  the  Turks  lay  in
ambush.  When  they  thus  saw  them,  they  kept  quiet  to  observe  the  Christians,  without
making  any  sally  or  throwing  a lance.  The  Christians  advanced  near  to  the  Turks,  and,
although  they  could  not  see  the  whole,  found  they  were  very  numerous.  After  a short  stay,
they  returned  to  inform  the  lord  de  Coucy  and  the  other  lords  what  they  had  seen.  The
Christians  were  rejoiced  on  hearing  it,  and  the  lord  de  Coucy  said, — “ We  must  advance,  and
see  what  kind  of  people  they  are  ; for,  since  we  are  come  thus  far,  we  must  not  return  without
offering  them  combat,  otherwise  we  may  be  blamed.”  “You  are  in  the  right,”  answered
such  lords  as  heard  him.

They  then  tightened  their  armour,  regirthed  their  horses,  and  advanced  at  a gentle  pace  to
where  the  Turks  lay.  There  was  a small  wood  between  the  two  parties  : when  the  French
knights  came  to  it,  they  halted,  and  the  lord  de  Coucy  said  to  sir  Reginald  de  Roye  and  the
lord  de  Saint  Py, — “ I would  advise,  in  order  to  draw  the  Turks  out  of  their  ambush,  that
you  two  advance  with  one  hundred  of  our  men,  while  we  post  the  remainder  in  this  wood.
The  Turks,  seeing  so  small  a party,  will  quit  their  ambush : do  you  suffer  yourselves  to  be
pursued,  and,  when  past  this  wood,  wheel  round  on  them  : we  will  instantly  sally  forth,  and
thus  inclose  and  conquer  them  at  our  pleasure.”  This  plan  was  adopted,  and  the  two  knights
set  oft’  with  about  one  hundred  of  the  best  mounted  : the  main  body,  to  the  amount  of  eight
hundred  men  of  tried  courage,  entered  the  wood,  where  they  hid  themselves.  The  others


Battle  of  Nicopoli.  Designed  from  Contemporary  MSS. ; an  oriental  MS.  Hist,  of  Tamerlane  furnishing  the

Costume  of  the  Turks.

galloped  towards  the  Turks,  who  were  much  pleased,  thinking  what  they  saw  was  the  whole
force  of  the  enemy  : they  quitted  their  ambuscade  and  advanced  on  the  plain.  The  Christian

* It  is  in  D.  Sauvage  “ came  to  Brechaut hut  the  MS.  in  the  Museum  has  it  as  in  the  text,  and  my  MS.
c‘  brochant”  (spurring)  instead  of  “ courant.”


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  Ac.


009


lords,  observing  this,  turned  about,  and  suffered  themselves  to  be  pursued,  but,  as  they  were
so  well  mounted,  the  Turks  could  not  come  up  with  them.  Both  parties  passed  the  wood
without  the  ambush  being  noticed,  when  the  lord  de  Coucy  sallied  forth  with  his  men,
shouting,  “ Our  Lady  for  the  lord  de  Coucy !”  and,  falling  on  the  rear  of  the  Turks,  struck
down  many.

The  Turks  halted,  on  finding  themselves  thus  surrounded,  and  made  the  best  defence  they
could ; but  it  little  availed,  for,  not  suspecting  any  forces  behind,  they  were  thunderstruck
when  they  were  attacked  on  all  sides.  The  French  displayed  great  valour,  and  overthrow
all  that  opposed  them  : they  slew  heaps  on  the  field,  and  killed  all  they  overtook  in  their
flight  like  wild  beasts.  They  showed  mercy  to  none,  and  happy  were  they  who  could  save
themselves.  After  this  defeat,  the  French  returned  in  the  evening  to  the  camp  before
Nicopoli.

News  was  spread  throughout  the  army  that  the  lord  de  Coucy  had,  by  his  valour,  over-
thrown more  than  fifteen  thousand  Turks.  Very  many  were  loud  in  his  praise  for  this
action,  but  not  so  the  count  d’Eu  ; for  he  said,  “ the  expedition  had  been  undertaken  through
vanity,  and  that  he  saw  nothing  praise-worthy  in  it,  as  it  had  put  the  detachment  under  his
command  in  great  risk,  by  attacking  so  very  superior  a force.  It  was,  beside,  his  duty  (since
he  was  so  eager  to  perform  some  deeds  of  arms,  and  had  met  the  Turks  in  the  field)  to  have
sent  information  of  his  intention  to  the  commander  in  chief,  the  count  de  Nevers,  who  was
anxious  to  gain  renown.”  Thus,  through  envy  as  it  may  be  supposed,  did  the  count  d’Eu
speak  of  the  lord  de  Coucy.  During  the  whole  expedition,  he  never  had  any  friendship  for
him,  notwithstanding  he  saw  that  he  was  beloved  and  respected  by  all  the  French  and  foreign
knights,  which,  he  imagined,  should  have  been  his  due  ; for  he  was  very  nearly  connected  by
blood  with  the  king  of  France,  and  boro  for  arms  the  flower  de  luces  with  a bar,  and  was
besides  constable  of  France.  Such  was  the  beginning  of  the  hatred  of  the  count  d’Eu  to  the
gallant  lord  de  Coucy,  which  at  last  broke  out,  and  caused  the  destruction  of  the  Christian
army,  as  you  will  soon  have  related.

We  will  now  leave  this  subject,  and  return  to  what  was  passing  between  the  kings  of
France  and  England.


CHAPTER  LXXVII. THE  DUKE  OF  GUELDRES  PREVENTS  THE  EARL  OF  DERBY  JOINING  THE

COUNTS  OF  HAINAULT  AND  OF  OSTREVANT  IN  THEIR  EXPEDITION  AGAINST  FRIESLAND.

NEGOTIATIONS  FOR  PEACE  BETWEEN  FRANCE  AND  ENGLAND  ARE  CONTINUED  UNTIL

KING  RICHARD  CROSSES  OVER  TO  CALAIS,  TO  CONCLUDE  THEM  WITH  THE  DUKE  OF
BURGUNDY.

You  have  before  heard  in  this  history  that  the  marriage  of  the  king  of  England  with  a
princess  of  France  was  nearly  approaching ; that  the  two  kings  showed  great  affection  to
each  other,  as  did  the  relatives  on  either  side,  excepting  the  duke  of  Gloucester.  But  he
had  no  joy  in  it ; for  he  knew  that,  by  this  connection,  peace  would  be  established  between
the  two  kingdoms,  which  he  would  unwillingly  see,  for  he  only  wished  for  war,  and  excited
all  whom  he  thought  so  inclined,  to  throw  every  obstacle  in  the  way.  At  that  time,  there
was  a knight  in  his  service  called  sir  John  Baquigay*,  a reserved  man,  who  knew  all  the
secrets  of  the  duke,  and  who,  by  encouraging  his  warlike  dispositions,  followed  the  natural
bent  of  his  own  inclinations.

At  this  period,  the  duke  of  Gueldres  came  to  England  to  visit  the  king  and  his  uncles,
and  to  offer  his  loyal  services,  for  he  was  so  bounden  by  faith  and  homage.  The  duke  woidd
gladly  have  seen  the  king  making  preparations  for  war,  for  he  disliked  peace.  The  duke  of
Gueldres  had  many  conversations  with  the  duke  of  Lancaster  respecting  the  intended
expedition  of  the  counts  of  Hainault  and  of  Ostrevant  against  Friesland  ; for  at  this  moment
Fier-a-bras  de  Vertain  was  in  England,  having  been  sent  thither  by  the  count  d’Ostrevant
to  seek  men  at  arms  and  archers.  The  earl  of  Derby  had  been  requested  to  accompany  his

* (<  Baquigay.” — Museum  MS.  Hacquingay. — Ilafod  MS.  Laquingay.

R R


VOL.  II.


mo


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


cousins  of  Hainault  and  Ostrevant,  to  which  he  was  well  inclined,  and  had  told  Fier-a-bras
that  he  should  be  well  pleased  to  go  to  Friesland,  if  it  met  the  approbation  of  the  Icing  and
his  father.  When,  therefore,  the  duke  of  Gueldres  came  to  England,  the  duke  of  Lancaster
spoke  to  him  on  this  subject,  and  desired  him  to  say  what  he  thought  of  it.  He  replied,
“ that  the  expedition  would  be  attended  with  much  danger;  that  Friesland  was  not  a
country  easily  conquered,  and  that  many  counts  of  Holland  and  Hainault,  who  in  former
times  claimed  it  as  their  inheritance,  had  marched  thither  with  great  force,  to  bring  it  under
their  subjection,  but  had  never  returned.  The  Frieslanders  are  a people  void  of  honour  and
understanding,  and  show  mercy  to  none  who  fall  in  their  way.  They  pay  no  respect  to  any
lord,  however  great  his  rank ; and  their  country  is  very  strong,  surrounded  by  the  sea,  and
full  of  bogs,  islands,  and  marshes,  so  that  no  persons  can  find  their  way  through  it  but  the
natives.  I have  been  much  pressed  to  join  this  expedition,  but  I will  never  enter  such  a
country ; and  I would  not  advise  that  my  cousin  of  Derby  go  thither,  for  it  is  not  suitable
to  him.  I am  satisfied  my  brother-in-law  d’Ostrevant  will  undertake  the  expedition,  for  he
is  very  eager  to  do  so,  and  will  lead  many  Hainaulters  with  him,  but  there  is  a chance  if  any
of  them  ever  come  home  again.”

This  speech  of  the  duke  of  Gueldres  had  such  an  effect  on  the  duke  of  Lancaster,  that  he
resolved  in  his  own  mind  the  earl  of  Derby  should  not  go  to  Friesland.  He  signified  to  him
secretly  his  intentions,  for  his  son  did  not  live  with  him,  and  that,  notwithstanding  the
engagements  he  had  entered  into,  he  must  break  them  off,  for  neither  the  king  nor  himself
would  consent  that  he  should  go  on  this  expedition.  Thus  did  the  duke  of  Gueldres  prevent
the  count  of  Hainault  and  his  son  from  having  the  company  of  the  earl  of  Derby,  in  which
respect  he  was  not  well  advised,  nor  was  he  thanked  by  either ; but  he  was  by  nature  all
his  life  proud  and  envious.

Fier-a-bras  de  Vertain,  notwithstanding  this  disappointment,  was  not  the  less  diligent  in
collecting  forces,  and  had  engaged  many  knights  and  squires,  with  more  than  two  hundred
archers.  But  the  earl  of  Derby  excused  himself,  for  the  reasons  above-mentioned.  His
excuses  were  accepted,  for  they  plainly  saw,  that  had  not  the  king  forbidden  his  going,  at
the  request  of  the  duke  of  Lancaster,  he  would  have  been  of  the  party.  The  king  of  England,
to  do  honour  to  his  cousin  of  Hainault,  ordered  vessels  to  be  prepared  in  the  Thames  to  carry,
at  his  cost,  such  knights  as  went  on  this  expedition  to  Encuse*,  a sea-port  belonging  to  the
earl  of  Hainault,  at  the  extremity  of  Holland,  and  twelve  leagues  by  water  from  Friesland.

About  this  time,  the  king  of  France  sent  Waleran  count  de  Saint  Pol  to  England  to  press
forward  the  treaty  for  peace,  and  to  urge  secretly  the  king  of  England  to  its  conclusion.
Robert  the  hermit,  who  had  been  before  in  England  on  this  subject,  and  willingly  listened
to  by  the  king,  accompanied  the  count  de  Saint  Pol.  On  the  count’s  arrival  in  England,  he
found  the  king  at  his  palace  of  Eltham,  with  his  brothers  the  eaids  of  Kent  and  Pluntingdon,
and  his  uncle  the  duke  of  Lancaster.  The  king  received  him  with  pleasure  and  kindness,
and,  having  patiently  heard  all  he  had  to  say,  took  him  aside,  and  replied, — “ Fair  brother
of  Saint  Pol,  with  regard  to  this  treaty  of  peace  with  my  father-in-law  the  king  of  France,
I am  heartily  inclined  to  it ; but  I cannot  accomplish  it  alone,  nor  do  everything  myself.
True  it  is,  that  my  two  brothers,  and  two  uncles  of  Lancaster  and  York,  are  equally  desirous
for  it  as  myself ; but  my  other  uncle  of  Gloucester  is  violently  against  it,  and  he  leads  the
Londoners  as  he  wills,  and  may  attempt  to  stir  up  a rebellion  in  the  country,  and  raise  the
people  against  me.  Now,  consider  the  danger  I should  run  if  there  were  a second  rebellion,
headed  by  the  duke  of  Gloucester  and  other  great  barons  and  knights  who  are,  as  I know,  of
his  way  of  thinking.  I am  puzzled  how  to  act,  for  my  uncle  of  Gloucester  is  of  so  reserved
a nature,  no  one  knows  his  real  thoughts.”  “ My  lord,”  answered  the  count  de  St.  Pol,  “ you
must  gain  him  over  by  fair  and  kind  speeches.  Make  him  handsome  presents,  and,  should
he  demand  anything,  however  unreasonable,  grant  it  him  instantly.  This  is  the  only  means
to  gain  him  ; and,  if  you  continue  such  conduct  until  your  marriage  be  completed,  your  queen
brought  hither,  and  all  affairs  concluded,  you  may  then  follow  a different  method ; for  you
will  be  powerful  enough  to  crush  all  your  enemies  or  rebellious  subjects,  as  the  king  of

* “ Encuse.”  Q.  Enchuysen.  D.  Sauvage,  in  a marginal  note,  calls  it  Neuse.  My  MS.  lias  Emaise, — “ la
ville  d’Emaise.”


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


nil

France  will  at  all  times  be  ready  to  assist  you,  and  this  you  may  securely  depend  upon.”
“ In  God’s  name,  brother-in-law,”  said  the  king,  “ you  speak  to  the  purpose,  and  it  shall  be
as  you  advise."

The  count  de  Saint  Pol  was  lodged  in  London  during  his  stay  in  England ; but  he  had
frequent  conferences  with  the  king  at  Eltham,  and  with  the  duke  of  Lancaster  on  the
subject  of  the  marriage.  It  had  been  ordered  at  Paris,  as  the  count  told  the  king,  that
the  king;  of  France  and  his  uncles  would  come  to  Saint  Omer,  and  bring  the  young
princess  with  them  who  was  to  be  queen  of  England.  It  was  therefore  their  wish  that  the
king  of  England  should  come  to  Calais,  and  that,  between  the  towns  of  Saint  Omcr  and
Calais,  an  interview  should  take  place  between  the  two  kings,  who  from  personal  knowledge
would  have  their  affections  much  strengthened  ; and  then  there  might  be  some  secret  treaties
made  respecting  a peace  between  them  and  their  uncles, without  employing  too  many  persons
in  the  business,  before  the  king  carried  his  queen  to  England.  If  a peace  could  not  be  concluded,
the  truce  was  then  to  be  prolonged  for  the  term  of  thirty  or  forty  years,  between  France,
England,  and  their  allies.  This  proposal  seemed  so  fair  and  honourable  to  the  king  of
England  and  his  council,  that  orders  were  instantly  issued  for  purveyances  of  every  kind  to
be  made  ready  for  the  king’s  voyage  and  residence  at  Calais.  Many  lords  did  the  same.
The  duke  and  duchess  of  Gloucester,  with  their  children,  were  invited  by  the  king  to  be  of
the  party,  as  were  the  dukes  and  duchesses  of  York  and  Lancaster  : this  last  lady,  being
with  her  lord  at  Eltham,  had  already  been  asked.  The  king  and  the  count  de  Saint  Pol
travelled  together  through  Canterbury  to  Dover,  followed  by  all  the  lords  who  had  been
invited  to  accompany  him.  In  truth,  the  count  de  Saint  Pol,  from  his  impatience  to  carry
the  news  to  the  king  of  France,  crossed  the  sea  on  his  arrival  at  Dover  to  Boulogne,  and
hastened  thence  to  Paris,  and  related  to  the  king  and  his  uncles  every  thing  which  had  passed
with  the  king  of  England.  This  gave  general  satisfaction,  and  the  king  and  court  set  out
from  Paris,  and  by  short  days’  journeys  came  to  Amiens.

In  the  mean  time,  the  king  of  England,  his  uncles,  and  a large  train  of  lords  and  ladies,
had  crossed  the  sea  to  Calais,  where  they  were  lodged.  The  duke  of  Burgundy  came  to  St.
Omer  to  press  forward  the  treaties,  which  were  carried  on  through  the  mediation  of  the  count
de  St.  Pol  and  Robert  the  hermit.  The  duke  of  Burgundy  was  conducted  by  the  count  de  St.
Pol  to  Calais  on  the  Eve  of  Our  Lady  the  middle  of  August,  to  wait  on  the  king  of  England
and  his  uncles.  He  was  welcomed  with  joy  by  the  king  and  his  lords  ; and  they  conferred
together  for  some  time  on  the  articles  for  a peace,  to  which  the  king  inclined  : indeed,  to  say
the  truth,  he  was  indifferent  what  might  be  agreed  on,  provided  lie  had  his  wife.  When
the  duke  of  Burgundy  had  staid  at  Calais  two  days  negotiating  a peace,  the  king  told  him
that  he  would  lay  all  the  articles  on  his  return  to  England  before  the  parliament;  for  that
neither  himself  nor  his  lords  could  agree  to  anything  conclusive  without  the  assent  of  the
people  of  England,  and  it  must  be  deferred  until  their  will  were  known.  He  added,  that  he
himself  would  go  over,  and  return,  and  so  make  one  journey  for  the  conclusion  of  all  things.
“ That  will  be  well  done,”  replied  the  duke  of  Burgundy  and  the  count  de  Saint  Pol;  who
returned  to  St.  Omer,  and  thence  to  Amiens,  where  they  expected  to  meet  the  king  and
queen  of  France  with  their  daughter,  the  future  queen  of  England.  The  dukes  of  Berry  and
Brittany  were  also  there ; for  the  king  of  France  had  sent  for  the  last-mentioned  duke,
who  came  thither  in  grand  array.

The  king  of  England  and  his  lords  returned  to  London  ; but  their  ladies  remained  until
they  should  come  back,  which  was  speedily  done.  During  this  period,  the  expedition  from
Hainault  against  the  Frieslanders  took  place,  commanded  by  the  earl  of  Ilainault  and  his  son
the  count  d’Ostrevant.  We  will  relate  the  arrangement  of  it,  for  it  is  now  time.


it  it  2


012


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


CHAPTER  LXXVIII. THE  COUNTS  OF  HAINAULT  AND  OF  OSTREVANT  RAISE  A LARGE  ARMY

OF  MEN  AT  ARMS,  KNIGHTS  AND  SQUIRES,  TO  INVADE  FRIESLAND. THE  KING  OF

FRANCE  SENDS  THEM  ASSISTANCE,  UNDER  THE  COMMAND  OF  COUNT  WALERAN  DE  ST.
POL  AND  THE  LORD  CHARLES  d’aLBRET.

You  have  before  heard  the  great  desire  duke  Albert  of  Bavaria  and  his  son  William  count
d’Ostrevant  had  to  invade  Friesland,  and  to  employ  their  arms  in  the  conquest  of  it.  The
knights  and  squires  of  Hainault,  Holland  and  Zealand,  were  willing  to  second  them,  because
they  thought  it  was  their  lawful  inheritance.  To  gain  assistance,  the  count  d’Ostrevant  had
sent  one  of  his  squires,  a renowned  man  at  arms,  called  Fier-a-bras  de  Vertain,  to  England,
where  he  had  been  successful : king  Richard,  out  of  affection  to  his  cousin,  had  sent  him
some  men  at  arms,  and  two  hundred  archers,  under  the  command  of  three  English  lords  ;
one  was  named  Cornewall,  another  Colleville,  but  the  name  of  the  third,  who  was  a squire,
I have  forgotten.  It  was  told  me,  and  likewise  that  he  was  a gallant  man  at  arms,  and  had
long  been  used  to  war  : a short  time  before,  he  had  in  a riot  had  his  chin  cut  off,  which
was  replaced  by  one  of  silver  that  was  fastened  by  a silken  cord  tied  round  his  head.  This
force  arrived  at  Enchuysen  in  proper  time.  To  be  more  particular  in  this  matter,  I must
say  that  I was  informed  duke  Albert  held  many  consultations  with  his  son,  the  count  d’Os-
trevant, and  they  called  into  their  councils  a noble  and  valiant  squire,  named  William  de
Croembourg*,  who  earnestly  exhorted  them  to  the  war,  for  he  mortally  hated  the  Frieslanders.
lie  had  done  them  some  mischief,  and  did  them  much  more,  as  you  shall  hear.

Duke  Albert  of  Bavaria  set  out  from  the  Plague  in  company  with  his  son,  the  count
d’Ostrevant,  for  Hainault,  and  convened  the  states  of  that  country  at  Mons,  who  readily
obeyed  the  summons  of  their  lord.  He  laid  before  them  his  wish  to  invade  Friesland,  and
remonstrated  on  his  right  to  do  so,  and  the  lawful  claim  he  had  on  it.  In  proof  of  this,  he  had
read  to  them  certain  letters  patent,  apostolical  and  imperial,  authentically  sealed  with  lead
and  gold,  which  evidently  showed  his  right  over  that  country.  The  duke  addressed  the
meeting, — “ My  lords,  and  valiant  men  our  subjects,  you  know  that  every  one  ought  to
guard  and  defend  his  inheritance,  and  that  man,  in  the  defence  of  himself  or  country,  has  a
right  to  make  war.  You  know  also,  that  the  Frieslanders  ought  to  acknowledge  themselves
our  subjects,  but  they  are  rebellious  against  us,  and  against  our  rights,  like  men  without
law  or  religion.  Notwithstanding  the  justice  of  our  claim,  we  cannot,  my  very  dear  lords,
without  your  personal  and  pecuniary  aid,  attempt  to  make  these  people  listen  to  reason.
We  therefore  entreat  your  assistance  in  this  necessity,  both  personal  and  pecuniary,  that  we
may  subjugate  these  disobedient  Frieslanders  to  our  will.”

To  this  remonstrance  the  three  estates  unanimously  assented  ; and,  as  they  were  always
inclined  to  comply  with  the  desires  of  their  lord,  they  presented  duke  Albert,  from  the
country  of  Hainault,  the  sum  of  thirty  thousand  francs  in  ready  money,  without  including
the  town  of  Valenciennes.  This  town  performed  equally  well  its  duty,  for  duke  Albert,
attended  by  his  son,  went  thither,  and  made  a similar  request,  to  what  he  had  done  so
successfully  at  Mons.  These  two  valiant  princes  were  very  joyful  to  see  their  subjects  so
forward  to  assist  their  war,  as  it  assured  them  they  were  well-beloved  by  them.  Since  they
had  now  a sufficiency  of  money,  they  resolved  to  inform  the  king  of  France  of  their  intended
expedition,  and  to  request  aid  from  him.  Two  prudent  and  valiant  knights,  the  lord  de
Ligne  and  the  lord  de  Jumont,  were  sent  thither,  and  acquitted  themselves  well,  for  they
were  much  in  favour  with  the  French,  especially  the  lord  de  Ligne,  whom  the  king,  from  his
partiality  to  him,  had  made  one  of  his  chamberlains.  He  proposed  to  the  king  of  France  the
request  of  his  lord,  duke  Albert  of  Bavaria,  so  eloquently,  that  he  and  his  council  promised
the  assistance  he  required.  The  duke  of  Burgundy  was  urgent  for  its  being  granted,  because
his  daughter  having  married  the  duke’s  son,  he  thought,  if  the  expedition  were  successful,
it  would  be  for  the  advantage  of  the  count  d’Ostrevant.

Many  of  the  great  barons  disapproved  of  it,  and  spoke  against  it,  saying, — “ How  can
these  Hainaulters  come  hither  to  solicit  aid  from  our  king,  when  they  have  already  been  to
* “ Oroembourg.” — In  my  MS.  Croembourc.  Museum  MS.  Curembourch.


613


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.

ask  the  same  from  the  English  ? Have  we  not  lately  seen  that  the  count  d’Ostrevant  has
accepted  of  the  order  of  the  Garter,  which  is  the  English  device  ? Has  he  shown,  by  so
doing,  any  very  great  affection  for  France  ?”  But  others,  who  were  better  informed,  replied,
— “ My  fair  sirs,  you  are  wrong  to  talk  thus ; if  the  count  d’Ostrevant  has  accepted  tire
Garter,  it  was  not  to  ally  himself  with  England  ; for  he  is  too  strongly  connected  with  the
French.  Is  it  not  true  that  he  has  married  the  lady  Catherine,  daughter  to  the  duke  of
Burgundy  ? and  is  not  this  a better  and  more  valuable  alliance  than  the  blue  Garter  ? Never,
therefore,  say  that  he  will  not  prefer  doing  services  to  the  French  rather  than  to  the  English.
The  king  will  honour  himself  and  exalt  the  French  name,  if  he  give  him  the  aid  he  has  been
wisely  advised  to  afford.”  Thus  did  the  French  converse  on  these  matters,  which  made  a
great  noise  in  France,  for  nothing  was  talked  of  but  the  deeds  of  arms  that  were  to  be  per-
formed in  Hungary  or  Turkey  against  Bajazet,  and  in  Friesland  against  the  Frieslanders.
The  king  of  France  did  not  delay  raising  an  army  of  five  hundred  lances,  composed  of
Picards  and  French,  and  gave  the  command  of  them  to  the  count  Waleran  de  St.  Pol  and
the  lord  Charles  d’Albret,  two  knights  that  were  well  qualified  for  the  business.  They  were
to  lead  this  body  of  men  to  the  town  of  Enchuysen  in  lower  Friesland,  as  that  was  the
place  of  assembly  for  the  whole  army,  and  they  were  to  embark  there  for  upper  Friesland,
which  they  did.

When  the  two  valiant  knights,  the  lord  de  Ligne  and  the  lord  de  Jumont,  saw  the  good
inclination  of  the  king,  and  were  assured  that  every  order  had  been  given,  and  the  pay
issued  for  the  men  at  arms  who  were  to  be  sent  to  assist  the  count  of  fiainault,  they  took
leave  of  the  king  of  France,  and,  thanking  him  for  bis  friendship  to  their  lords,  returned
to  Hainault,  to  relate  to  the  duke  of  Bavaria  and  the  count  d’Ostrevant  how  successful  they
had  been.  They  were  received  with  the  honours  they  had  deserved,  and  detailed  the
courteous  answers  they  received  from  the  king  of  France  and  the  duke  of  Burgundy,  who
had  feasted  them  grandly,  and  the  rich  presents  that  were  given  them,  for  which  they  thanked
the  duke  and  his  son,  as  it  was  from  affection  to  them  they  had  been  shown  such  courtesy.
The  whole  would  be  too  long  to  relate : we  will  therefore  pass  it  over,  and  come  to  the
principal  matter.

Duke  Albert,  on  hearing  that  the  king  of  France  was  to  send  to  his  assistance  five  hundred
lances,  assembled  all  his  barons  and  vassals  of  Hainault.  The  assembly  consisted  of  the
lord  de  Vertain,  seneschal  of  Hainault,  a very  valiant  man  and  renowned  in  arms;  the
lords  de  Ligne  and  de  Gomegines,  whom  he  appointed  marshals  of  his  army ; the  lords  de
Havreth,  Michelet  de  Ligne,  de  Lalain,  de  Hordaing,  de  Chin,  de  Cautain,  du  Quesnoy,  de
Fleron,  his  brother  John,  the  lords  de  Bousset,  de  Jumont  (who  were  knights  always  eager
to  meet  their  enemies,  but  at  this  time  they  had  bleared  eyes,  red  as  crimson),  Robert  le  Roux  ;
the  lords  de  Monthiaux,  de  Fontaines,  de  Seulles,  the  lords  James  de  Sars,  William  de
Hermes,  and  Pinchart  his  brother ; the  lords  de  Lens,  de  Verlammont,  Anseaux  de  Tras-
seigines,  Octes  de  Seaussines and  his  brother  Gerard;  the  lord  de  Ictre,  his  brother  John  : sir
Anseaux  de  Sars,  Bridaux  de  Montigny,  Daniaux  de  la  Poulle,  Guy  de  la  Poulle ; the  lord
de  Masting ; sir  Floridas  de  Yilliers,  who  was  a most  valiant  knight,  and  had  gained  great
renown  for  his  gallant  deeds  of  arms  against  the  Turks  and  Saracens  in  the  Holy  Land  ; sir
Eustace  de  Vertain,  sir  Fier-a-bras  de  Vertain,  who  was  but  just  returned  from  England,  and
rejoiced  his  lord  with  the  success  of  his  mission  there ; the  lord  de  Osteven,  sir  Rasse  de
Montigny,  Thuq  de  Merse;  the  lord  de  Rorsin,  sir  John  d’Andregines,  Persant  his  brother,
and  great  numbers  of  other  gentlemen  and  squires,  whom,  having  assembled  in  his  hall  at
Mons,  he  addressed,  saying,  “ That  he  hoped  they  would  all  arm,  and  provide  themselves
with  followers  and  every  necessary,  each  according  to  his  power,  to  assist  him  in  his  intended
expedition  against  Friesland ; and  that,  out  of  affection  to  him,  and  regard  to  their  own
honour  and  renown,  they  would  accompany  him  to  his  town  of  Enchuysen,  in  lower  Fries-
land, and  to  Meemelie*,  and  thence  embark  witli  him  for  upper  Friesland,  where  he  proposed
being,  if  it  pleased  God,  by  the  middle  of  August  ensuing,  and  that  he  would  wait  for  them
in  one  or  other  of  the  two  before-mentioned  towns  ; that  it  was  his  intention  to  go  thither

* “ Meemelie.” — British  Museum  BIS.  Metenelich.  Hafod  MS.  Bletmelic.  Q.  if  uot  Medendric,  which  is  not  far
from  Enchuysen.


William  of  Hainault  on  his  Expedition  against  Friesland.  From  MSS.  of  the  15th  Century.

You  may  suppose,  that  when  all  these  preparations  were  making  for  the  departure  of  so
many  knights  and  squires,  the  ladies  and  damsels  were  not  in  high  spirits.  We  must  allow
they  were  very  much  cast  down,  for  they  saw  their  fathers,  brothers,  uncles,  husbands  and
lovers,  going  on  a dangerous  expedition,  not  having  forgotten  how,  in  former  times,  the
Hainaulters  with  count  William  had  remained  on  the  field  of  battle  in  Friesland.  They
were  therefore  fearful  that  what  had  happened  to  their  predecessors  might  befal  them,  and
loudly  praised  the  duchess  of  Brabant  for  having  forbidden  any  gentleman  or  others  of  her
country  to  take  part  in  this  expedition.  The  ladies  frequently  pressed  their  lovers  and  friends
to  decline  going,  and  many  meetings  were  holden,  but  to  little  purpose.  They  were  particu-
larly angry  with  Fier-a-bras,  bastard  deVertain,  for  they  said  he  was  the  principal  promoter  of
this  expedition.  Duke  Albert  and  his  son,  on  leaving  Mons  after  the  promise  of  the  Hain-
aulters to  assist  them,  returned  to  Zealand,  and  made  similar  requests  to  the  Zealanders,  who
in  like  manner  complied  ; and  the  lord  de  la  Yere,  sir  Floris  de  Boessel,  Floris  d’Abel,  the
lord  de  Zenemberge,  sir  Clais  de  Boysel  and  Philip  de  Cortein,  were  very  instrumental  in
forwarding  the  business.  They,  as  well  as  many  other  gentlemen,  instantly  armed,  and  put
themselves  in  handsome  array,  plainly  showing  they  were  desirous  to  gain  renown.


614  CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


beforehand  to  make  the  necessary  preparations,  and  to  receive  his  men  at  arms,  and  such
Hollanders  and  Zealanders  as  would  be  induced  to  enter  his  service,  and  aid  him  to  the
accomplishment  of  his  purposes.  All  the  knights,  squires  and  lords  in  Hainault  instantly
complied  with  his  request,  and  promised  him  their  services  like  loyal  vassals.  Duke  Albert
and  the  count  d’Ostrevant  found  them  punctual  in  the  performance  of  their  promises,  and
they  made  themselves  speedily  ready,  so  that  about  the  beginning  of  August  of  the  year
1396,  they  assembled  and  marched  off  in  companies,  handsomely  arrayed,  towards  Antwerp,
where  they  were  to  embark  for  Enchuysen,  the  general  rendezvous.


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


015


CHAPTER  LXXIX. THE  EARL  OF  HAINAULT  LANDS  WITH  HIS  ARMY  3N  FRIESLAND.— HE

DEFEATS  THE  FRIESLANDERS  IN  BATTLE,  BUT  IS  NEVERTHELESS  FORCED  TO  RETIRE  TO
HOLLAND,  TO  PASS  THE  WINTER,  WITHOUT  HAVING  GAINED  ANY  THING  IN  FRIESLAND.

The  duke  of  Bavaria  and  his  son,  having  been  so  successful  in  Ilainault  and  Zealand,
made  the  same  requests  to  the  Hollanders,  especially  to  the  barons  and  chief  towns.  To  say
the  truth,  the  Hollanders  were  much  pleased  to  hear  war  was  about  to  be  made  ou  the  Fries-
landers : they  hated  them,  particularly  the  knights  and  squires,  for  there  was  a continual
warfare  carried  on,  and  they  mutually  plundered  each  other  on  the  frontiers  of  the  two
countries.  When  the  great  lords  in  Holland,  such  as  the  lord  d’Atrel,  and  other  gallant
knights  and  squires,  heard  the  supplications  of  their  princes,  duke  Albert  and  his  son  count
William,  they  immediately  offered  their  services,  and  promised  them  every  assistance.  They
were  speedily  armed,  and  the  principal  towns  supplied  them  with  a large  body  of  cross-bows,
pikemen  and  men  at  arms.  It  was  not  long  before  they  were  all  assembled  at  Enehuysen,
where  vessels  had  been  provided  to  carry  them  to  Friesland.  They  were  so  numerous,  they
were  said  to  be  thirty  thousand  sailors,  and  that  the  town  of  Haarlem  alone  had
supplied  twelve  hundred.  These  vessels  were  amply  freighted  with  warlike  stores  and  other
necessaries.  You  may  imagine  the  grief  of  the  ladies  and  damsels  in  Holland  and  Zealand
was  not  less  than  those  of  Ilainault,  when  they  found  their  lovers  and  relations  were
engaged  in  this  war.  Their  anger  fell  chiefly  on  the  lord  de  Cruembourg,  because  they
thought  he  had  been  the  great  adviser  of  duke  Albert  in  the  matter,  and  on  the  lord  de
Merebbede.  This  last  was  eager  for  revenge  on  the  Frieslanders  for  the  injuries  they  had
done  him  : in  the  before  mentioned  battle,  when  count  William  was  unfortunately  slain,  he
had  lost  three-and-thirty  of  his  relations,  bearing  his  arms  on  their  coats,  with  sir  Daniel  de
Merebbede  their  leader,  none  of  whom  would  the  Frieslanders  ransom.  These  two  lords,
therefore,  were  afraid  to  appear  before  the  princesses  and  ladies  of  duke  Albert’s  court.

In  a short  time,  the  whole  army  was  assembled  : the  English  came  first,  next  the  Hainaulters
in  very  handsome  array,  under  the  command  of  the  lord  seneschal  de  Jumont,  and  the  lord  de
Gomegines,  who  was  marshal ; then  the  Hollanders  and  Zealanders ; but  the  French  did  not
come  so  soon  as  expected,  which  delayed  the  embarkation  eleven  days.  During  this  interval,
there  arose  a quarrel  between  the  English  and  Hollanders  ; and,  had  it  not  been  for  the  count
d’Ostrevant,  the  English  would  have  been  slain.  The  quarrel  was  made  up  ; and  the  French
arrived,  to  the  joy  of  all,  for  they  consisted  of  a well-appointed  body  of  men  at  arms.  Every  one
was  now  ordered  instantly  to  embark,  which  being  done,  they  hoisted  sail,  recommended  them-
selves to  God,  and  put  to  sea.  The  water  was  smooth,  and  seemed  to  take  pleasure  in  bearing
them.  There  were  such  numbers  of  vessels  that,  had  they  been  arranged  in  a line  from  Encliuy-
sen  to  Kuynder  (which  is  in  upper  Friesland,  and  where  they  intended  to  land), though  twelve
leagues  distant,  the  whole  sea  would  have  been  covered  ; but  they  sailed  in  one  body.

We  will  for  a while  leave  them,  and  speak  of  the  Frieslanders,  who,  as  I was  informed,
had  been  long  acquainted  with  duke  Albert’s  intention  of  marching  against  them  with  a
powerful  army.  They  held  many  councils  on  the  subject,  and  determined  to  combat  their
enemies  at  the  very  moment  of  then'  landing  ; for  they  said  they  should  prefer  death  with
liberty,  to  being  slaves ; and  would  never  quit  the  battle  while  alive.  They  also  resolved
not  to  accept  of  ransoms  for  any  person,  however  high  his  rank,  but  to  put  their  prisoners  to
death,  or  keep  them  in  banishment  from  their  own  countries.  Among  these  was  a Frieslander
of  high  birth  and  renown  : he  was  of  great  strength  and  stature,  for  he  was  taller  by  a head
than  all  his  countrymen.  His  name  was  Yves  Jouvere  ; but  the  Hollanders,  Zealanders  and
Hainaulters  called  him  “ The  great  Frieslander.”  This  valiant  man  had  gained  much
reputation  in  Prussia,  Hungary,  Turkey,  Rhodes  and  Cyprus,  where  he  had  performed
such  deeds  of  valour  that  he  was  much  spoken  of.  When  he  heard  his  countrymen  thus
readily  resolve  on  battle,  he  addressed  them, — “ 0 ye  noble  men,  and  free  Frieslanders,
know  that  there  is  no  fortune  stable.  If  in  former  times  you  have,  by  your  prowess,
conquered  the  Hainaulters,  Hollanders  and  Zealanders,  those  who  are  now  about  to  invade
us  are  men  expert  in  war,  and  be  assured  they  will  act  otherwise  than  their  predecessors  :


G16  CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.

you  will  see  they  will  not  fly,  Lilt  fight  with  the  utmost  prudence.  I would  therefore  advise
that  we  suffer  them  to  land  and  make  what  progress  they  can  into  the  country : let  us  guard
our  towns  and  fortresses,  and  give  up  to  them  the  plains,  where  they  will  waste  themselves.
Our  country  will  not  long  support  them.  It  is  beside  cut  up  with  ditches  and  dykes,  so  that
they  cannot  advance  far  into  the  interior,  and  they  will  be  forced  to  return  after  having
burnt  ten  or  twelve  villages.  This  they  will  the  more  speedily  do,  for  they  cannot  ride,  nor
indeed  without  difficulty  march  on  foot,  through  the  country,  which  will  wear  them  out.  The
damage  they  can  do  will  be  trifling,  and  we  can  soon  repair  it ; but,  if  we  offer  them  battle,
I very  much  fear  we  shall  be  overpowered,  for  I have  been  credibly  informed  they  are  one
hundred  thousand  men  under  arms.”  He  said  truly,  for  they  were  at  least  as  many,  if
not  more.

Three  valiant  Friesland  knights,  sir  Feu  de  Dorekerque,  sir  Gerard  Gavin  and  sir  Tiny  de
Walturg,  seconded  this  proposal ; but  the  people  would  not  listen  to  it,  and  they  were
supported  by  several  of  those  noble  men  called  Elins,  who  are  gentlemen  and  judges  of  causes.
They  opposed  wdiat  the  great  Frieslander  had  offered  with  such  success,  as  to  occasion  it  to
be  determined  that,  as  soon  as  they  should  hear  of  the  enemy  landing,  they  were  to  march
and  offer  them  combat.  This  being  resolved  on,  the  assembly  broke  up,  that  every  one
might  make  his  preparations.  To  say  the  truth,  they  were  in  general  very  poorly  armed  :
many  had  no  other  defensive  covering  than  their  waistcoats  made  of  coarse  thick  cloth,
scarcely  better  than  horse-cloths.  Some  were  armed  in  leather,  others  with  rusty  jackets  of
mail,  which  seemed  unfit  for  service  ; but  there  were  some  perfectly  well  armed.  When  the
Frieslanders  were  ready  to  march,  they  took  from  their  churches  the  crosses  and  banners,
and  divided  themselves  into  three  battalions,  each  consisting  of  about  ten  thousand  men :
they  halted,  on  arriving  at  a pass  defended  by  a ditch,  very  near  to  where  the  Hainault
army  was  to  land,  and  plainly  saw  the  Hainaulters,  Hollanders  and  Zealanders,  for  they
were  close  to  the  shore,  and  preparing  to  disembark.  It  was  on  Saint  Bartholomew’s  day,
which  this  year  fell  on  a Sunday,  that  duke  Albert  and  his  army  landed  in  Friesland.

The  Frieslanders,  noticing  the  movements  of  their  enemies,  sallied  forth,  to  the  amount
of  about  six  thousand,  and  mounted  the  dykes  to  see  if  they  could  any  way  prevent  their
landing.  Among  the  Frieslanders,  there  was  a sort  of  mad  woman  dressed  in  blue  cloth,
who,  quitting  her  countrymen,  rushed  forward  towards  the  Hainaulters  and  Hollanders,
making  ready  for  battle.  When  she  had  approached  the  army  within  bow-shot,  she  turned
her  back,  and,  raising  up  her  petticoats  and  shift,  showed  her  bare  rump  to  all  who  wished  to
see  it,  bawling  out  some  words  in  her  own  language,  which  meant,  “ Take  this  for  your
welcome.”  Those  on  ship-board,  seeing  the  wickedness  of  this  woman,  let  fly  such  a shower
of  arrows  and  bolts  that  her  legs  and  thighs  were  larded  with  them  ; for  it  seemed  a shower
of  snow,  so  many  were  the  arrows  shot  at  her.  Several  leaped  into  the  water,  and,  pursuing
tin's  wretched  woman  with  drawn  swords,  soon  overtook  her,  and  cut  her  into  a thousand
pieces.  In  the  mean  time,  the  debarkation  was  taking  effect ; and  the  Hainaulters  marched
to  the  enemy,  who  received  them  courageously,  with  long  pikes,  and  staves  shod  wTith  iron,
and  repulsed  them  vigorously.  The  landing  was  strongly  contested,  and  numbers  were
killed  and  wounded  ; but  from  the  advantages  of  their  bows  and  cross-bows,  and  by  their
superior  mode  of  fighting,  the  Hainaulters  gained  the  dyke,  and  remained  victors  on  the
field  at  this  first  attack.  When  they  were  all  disembarked,  they  ranged  themselves  along
the  dyke,  each  under  his  banner,  and,  when  thus  drawn  up,  their  line  extended  more  than
half  a league.  The  Frieslanders,  on  their  loss  of  the  dyke,  retreated  to  another  pass,  where
they  had  cast  up  the  earth  in  their  front,  and  the  ditch  was  very  deep  : they  amounted  to
about  thirty  thousand,  and  as  they  were  at  no  great  distance,  were  plainly  seen  by  the
Hainaulters  and  their  allies,  from  their  position  on  the  dyke.  Each  party  remained  on
the  ground  : in  the  mean  time,  the  whole  army  was  landed,  with  their  baggage,  and  some
tents  were  pitched,  under  which  they  reposed  themselves  during  the  Sunday  and  Monday,
observing  the  Frieslanders,  with  whom  on  these  two  days  there  were  many  skirmishes  and
deeds  of  arms.

Both  armies  were  ready  prepared  for  battle  on  the  Tuesday  morning : and  many  newT
knights  were  made  of  the  Hainaulters,  Hollanders  and  Zealanders,  when  it  was  resolved  to


617


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.

attack  the  enemy.  They  drew  up  in  handsome  array,  placing  their  archers  in  front,
intermixed  with  the  ranks,  and,  with  trumpets  sounding,  marched  to  pass  the  ditch.  The
Frieslanders  guarded  themselves  from  the  arrows  by  means  of  the  mound  of  earth  thrown
from  the  ditch,  which  was  as  High  as  their  heads ; but  the  Hollanders  leaped  into  the  ditch,
and  made  bridges  of  their  pikes  and  lances.  The  enemy  defended  themselves  valiantly,  and
gave  such  rude  blows  on  those  who  attempted  to  mount  the  bank,  that  they  drove  them  on
their  backs  into  the  ditch.  In  short  so  many  valorous  deeds  were  done,  it  is  impossible  to
recount  them  all ; but  tbe  Hainaulters  and  their  allies  were  too  strongly  armed,  and  the
Frieslanders  could  not  otherwise  hurt  them  than  by  knocking  them  down.  The  new  knights
acquitted  themselves  honourably,  but  the  enemy  displayed  great  courage  : they  are  a lusty
race,  though  very  badly  armed,  and  some  of  them  without  shoes  or  stockings  ; notwith-
standing which,  they  made  an  obstinate  defence.  During  this  skirmish,  the  lord  de  Ligne,
the  seneschal  of  Hainault  and  the  lord  de  Jumont,  with  other  Hainault  knights,  following
the  course  of  the  ditch  found  a passage  for  their  horses,  and  fell  upon  the  rear  of  the  Fries-
landers, to  their  utter  dismay.  They  quitted  the  defence  of  the  ditch  to  repel  this  last
attack  ; but  the  Hainaulters  charged  them  so  vigorously,  that  the  enemy  were  broken  and
dispersed,  and  the  Hollanders  and  Zealanders  crossed  the  ditch  and  joined  in  the  fray.  The
battle  was  now  very  murderous  ; and  the  Frieslanders  gave  destructive  blows  with  the  axes
they  had  armed  themselves  with,  which  served  them  to  fell  timber  ; but  the  great  Frieslander,
Yves  Jouvere,  lost  his  life.  Not  long  after  this,  the  Frieslanders  yielded  the  field,  and  took
to  flight  as  fast  as  they  could.  The  carnage  in  the  pursuit  was  horrible,  for  none  were
spared  : the  Hollanders,  in  particular,  killed  all  they  could  overtake  : even  such  as  had  been
made  prisoners  by  the  English,  French  and  Hainaulters,  they  killed  while  in  their  hands.

The  lord  William  de  Cruembourg,  and  his  two  sons,  John  and  Henry,  who  had  that
morning  been  knighted,  acquitted  themselves  gallantly,  and  were  the  most  active  in  slaying
the  Frieslanders,  showing  clearly  they  loved  them  not.  To  conclude,  the  Frieslanders  were
completely  defeated  and  the  greater  part  killed  : some  few  were  made  prisoners,  and  about
fifty  carried  to  tbe  Hague,  where  they  remained  a long  time.  The  lord  of  Kuynder,  who
was  the  lord  of  the  town  where  duke  Albert  had  landed,  had  surrendered  himself  to
the  duke  on  the  Monday,  and  himself  and  two  sons  were  in  the  battle  against  the  Fries-
landers. They  lived  afterwards  under  the  protection  of  duke  Albert  and  his  son  count
William .

After  this  defeat,  the  Hainaulters,  Hollanders,  Zealanders,  French  and  English,  quartered
themselves  about  Kuynder,  and  took  several  towns  and  castles ; but  their  captures  were
inconsiderable,  for  the  Frieslanders  did  them  much  harm  by  ambuscades  and  skirmishes.  If
they  made  any  prisoners,  they  had  no  ransom  to  offer ; and  it  was  seldom  they  would
surrender,  but  fought  until  they  were  slain,  saying  they  preferred  death  and  liberty  to  being
under  the  subjection  of  any  lord  whatever.  Their  friends  or  relations  never  brought  any
ransoms  for  those  who  were  taken,  but  left  them  to  die  in  prison.  The  Frieslanders  offered
their  prisoners  in  exchange,  man  for  man ; but,  when  their  enemies  had  none  to  give  in
return,  they  put  them  to  death.  When  the  Hainault  army  had  been  in  the  country  about
five  weeks,  and  had  destroyed  and  burnt  many  towns  and  villages,  of  little  value  indeed,
the  weather  began  to  be  very  cold  and  to  rain  almost  daily  : there  were  also  great  tempests
at  sea.  Duke  Albert  and  his  son,  in  consequence,  proposed  the  return  of  the  army  to
lower  Friesland,  whence  they  had  come,  and  to  march  into  Holland,  the  more  comfortably
to  pass  the  winter,  which  had  set  in  very  hard.  This  was  done ; and,  on  their  arrival  at
Enchuysen,  the  lords  dismissed  their  men,  particularly  the  strangers,  with  whom  they  were
well  contented,  and  paid  them  their  full  pay,  thanking  them  at  the  same  time  for  the  services
they  had  rendered.  Thus  was  this  great  army  disbanded,  without  having  made  any  conquest  ;
but,  two  years  after,  these  noble  princes,  duke  Albert  and  his  son  count  William,  returned
thither  a second  time,  and  made  great  conquests  by  their  excellent  prowess,  which,  if  it
please  God,  shall  be  fully  recounted.  But  for  the  moment  we  will  not  say  more,  and  relate
the  magnificent  marriage  of  the  king  of  England  with  the  princess  Isabella  of  France.


018


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


CHAPTER  LXXX. THE  CEREMONY  OP  THE  MARRIAGE  OF  THE  KING  OP  ENGLAND  WITH  A

PRINCESS  OP  FRANCE. THE  KING  OP  FRANCE  DELIVERS  HER  TO  THE  KING  OF

ENGLAND,  IN  HIS  TENT  BETWEEN  ARDRES  AND  CALAIS.

You  have  before  heard  of  the  journey  of  the  king  of  England  to  Calais,  where  he  resided
with  his  uncles,  prelates,  and  barons  of  his  council,  during  which  time  he  had  held  a con-
ference with  the  duke  of  Burgundy  respecting  the  articles  of  peace.  The  king  had  returned
to  London  to  wait  the  meeting  of  his  parliament  at  Michaelmas ; but  in  the  mean  time
great  purveyances  were  made  for  him  and  for  his  barons,  and  sent  to  Calais  and  Guines.
The  larger  part  were  forwarded  down  the  river  Thames,  but  a good  deal  was  collected'  in
Flanders,  at  Damme,  Bruges,  and  Sluys,  which  were  sent  by  sea  to  Calais.  In  like  manner,
great  preparations  were  made  for  the  king  of  France,  the  duke  of  Orleans,  their  uncles,  and
the  barons  and  prelates  of  France,  at  Saint  Omer,  Aire,  Therouenne,  Ardres,  la  Montoire,
Leulinghen,  and  in  all  the  monasteries  and  houses  round  about.  No  expense  was  spared
on  either  side ; and  the  lords  of  each  country  were  emulous  to  outshine  one  another.  In
the  abbey  of  Saint  Bertin  *,  great  were  the  preparations  to  receive  the  royal  visiters.

The  session  of  parliament,  which  usually  lasts  forty  days,  and  is  held  in  the  king’s  palace
at  Westminster,  was  now  abridged,  for  the  king  attended  it  only  five  days:  when  the
business  of  the  nation,  and  what  particularly  interested  the  king,  and  had  caused  his  return
from  Calais,  was  settled,  he  and  his  two  uncles  of  Lancaster  and  Gloucester,  and  the
members  of  his  council,  set  out  from  London,  and  crossed  the  sea  to  Calais.  The  duke  of
York  and  the  earl  of  Derby  did  not  attend  the  king,  but  remained  behind  to  guard  England
in  his  absence.  Information  was  instantly  sent  to  the  French  lords  in  Picardy  of  the  king
of  England’s  return  to  Calais ; and  the  duke  and  duchess  of  Burgundy  came  to  Saint  Omer,
and  fixed  their  residence  in  the  abbey  of  Saint  Bertin.  The  king  of  France  sent  the  count
de  Saint  Pol  to  king  Richard,  as  soon  as  he  heard  of  his  arrival  at  Calais,  to  compliment
him  in  his  name,  and  to  lay  before  him  the  orders  which  had  been  given  for  the  ceremony
of  his  marriage.  The  king  of  England  eagerly  listened  to  this,  for  lie  took  much  pleasure
in  the  business.  The  count  de  Saint  Pol,  on  his  return  to  Saint  Omer,  was  accompanied
by  the  duke  of  Lancaster,  his  son  Beaufort  of  Lancaster,  the  duke  of  Gloucester,  with  his
son  Humphrey,  the  earl  of  Rutland,  the  earl  marshal,  the  carl  of  Huntingdon,  chamberlain
of  England,  and  many  other  barons  and  knights,  who  were  handsomely  received  by  the
duke  and  duchess  of  Burgundy.  The  duke  of  Brittany  came  thither  also,  having  left  the
king  of  France  and  the  young  queen  of  England  at  Aire.

You  must  know  that  every  honour  and  respect  that  could  be  imagined  were  paid  to  the
English  lords.  The  duchess  of  Burgundy  entertained  them  splendidly  at  dinner ; at  which
was  present  the  duchess  of  Lancaster,  with  her  son  and  two  daughters.  There  was  an
immense  variety  of  different  dishes  and  decorations  on  the  tables,  and  very  rich  presents
made  of  gold  and  silver  plate : nothing,  in  short,  was  spared,  so  that  the  English  were
astonished  where  such  riches  could  come  from,  and  especially  the  duke  of  Gloucester,  who
told  his  friends  that  the  kingdom  of  France  abounded  in  wealth  and  power.  To  soften  the
temper  of  the  duke  of  Gloucester,  whom  the  French  lords  knew  to  be  proud,  and  their
bitter  enemy,  they  paid  him  the  most  flattering  attentions.  Notwithstanding  this,  and  the
handsome  presents  they  offered,  which  he  accepted,  the  same  rancour  remained  in  his  breast,
and,  in  spite  of  everything  the  French  could  say  or  do,  whenever  the  subject  of  peace  was
mentioned,  his  answers  were  as  harsh  and  severe  as  ever.  The  French  are  very  subtle;  but,
with  regard  to  him,  they  could  never  gain  his  affections ; and  his  conversation  was  so
reserved,  it  was  not  possible  to  discover  his  real  sentiments.  When  the  duke  of  Burgundy
saw  this,  he  said  to  his  council, — “ We  shall  never  succeed  until  we  gain  over  this  duke  of
Gloucester : as  long  as  he  lives,  there  will  not  be  any  solid  peace  with  England,  for  he  will
ever  find  some  cause  of  quarrel,  and  renew  the  hatred  of  the  people  of  both  countries : his
whole  thoughts  are  on  this  subject ; and  were  it  not  for  the  amiable  qualities  of  the  king  of
Ergland,  which  we  hope  may  produce  in  time  more  favourable  effects,  in  good  truth  he
* ,l  Saint  Bertin,” — an  abbey  in  the  city  of  Saint  Omer.


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


619


should  never  have  our  cousin  as  his  wife.”  After  the  duchess  of  Burgundy,  the  countess  of
Nevers,  the  countess  of  Saint  Pol,  and  the  lords  and  ladies  of  France,  had,  as  you  have
heard,  magnificently  entertained  the  English  lords  and  ladies  (at  which  time  it  was  deter-
mined when  and  where  the  two  kings  should  meet,  and  the  king  of  England  receive  his
wife),  the  company  took  leave  of  each  other,  and  the  two  dukes,  with  their  duchesses  and
children,  returned  with  the  other  barons  and  knights  to  Calais,  and  related  to  king  Richard
how  grandly  they  had  been  received,  and  the  rich  presents  that  had  been  made  them.  Their
praises  pleased  the  king ; for  he  was  delighted  whenever  he  heard  the  king  of  France  or  the
French  well  spoken  of,  so  much  was  he  already  enamoured  with  them,  on  account  of  the
king’s  daughter  whom  he  was  to  marry.

Shortly  after  this,  the  king  of  France,  accompanied  by  the  duke  of  Brittany,  came  to
Saint  Omer,  and  was  lodged  in  the  abbey  of  Saint  Bertin  : all  who  had  before  occupied  it  were
forced  to  dislodge.  The  dukes  of  Berry,  Burgundy,  and  Bourbon,  having  been  ordered  to
confer  with  the  king  of  England  at  Calais,  set  out  from  Saint  Omer,  and,  on  their  arrival  at
Calais,  were  received  with  every  honour  and  kindness  by  the  king  and  his  lords.  They
were  entertained  with  splendour;  and  the  three  dukes  concluded  certain  treaties  with  the
king  of  England  and  his  uncles.  Many  in  France  and  England  thought  a peace  had  been
concluded,  for  at  that  time  the  duke  of  Gloucester  was  well  inclined  to  it,  in  consideration
of  the  kind  promises  of  the  king,  who  had  engaged,  if  a peace  were  made,  to  create  his  son
Humphrey  earl  of  Rochester,  and  make  the  annual  revenue  of  it  equal  to  two  thousand
pounds  sterling,  and  to  present  the  duke  of  Gloucester  with  fifty  thousand  nobles  on  his
return  to  England.  Thus,  through  his  avaricious  disposition,  was  the  duke  of  Gloucester
softened  in  his  opinions  respecting  a peace  with  France.  It  was  so  visible,  that  the  French
dukes  observed  it,  for  they  had  never  before  found  him  so  tractable  or  moderate  in  his
conversation.  When  the  French  lords  had  concluded  the  business  they  had  come  upon,
they  took  leave  of  the  king,  and  returned  to  the  king  of  France  and  the  duke  of  Orleans  at
Saint  Omer,  who  were  impatient  to  hear  the  success  of  their  journey.  The  king  of  France
departed  from  St.  Omer,  and  resided  in  the  foi't  of  Ardres : the  duke  of  Burgundy  went  to
la  Montoire,  the  duke  of  Brittany  to  the  towrn  of  Esque,  and  the  duke  of  Berry  to  Tourne-
hem.  The  plain  was  covered  with  tents  and  pavilions  full  of  French  and  English.  The
king  of  England  and  the  duke  of  Lancaster  were  lodged  in  Guines,  and  the  duke  of  Gloucester
at  Hamme.

On  the  vigil  of  the  feast  of  Saint  Simon  and  Saint  Jude*,  which  fell  on  a Friday,  in  the
year  of  grace  1396,  the  two  kings  left  their  lodgings  on  the  point  of  ten  o’clock,  and,  accom-
panied by  their  attendants,  went  to  the  tents  that  had  respectively  been  prepared  for  them.
Thence  they  advanced  on  foot  to  a certain  spot  which  had  been  fixed  on  for  their  meeting,
and  which  was  surrounded  by  four  hundred  French  and  as  many  English  knights,  brilliantly
armed,  with  swords  in  hand.  These  eight  hundred  knights  were  so  drawn  up,  that  the  two
kings  passed  between  their  ranks,  conducted  in  the  following  order : the  dukes  of  Lancaster
and  Gloucester  supported  the  king  of  France,  as  did  the  dukes  of  Berry  and  Burgundy  the
king  of  England,  and  thus  they  advanced  slowly  through  the  ranks  of  the  knights : when
the  two  kings  were  on  the  point  of  meeting,  the  eight  hundred  knights  fell  on  their  knees
and  wept  for  joy.  The  two  kings  met  bareheaded,  and  having  saluted,  took  each  other  by
the  hand,  when  the  king  of  France  led  the  king  of  England  to  his  tent,  which  was  handsome
and  richly  adorned  : the  four  dukes  took  each  other  by  the  hand,  and  followed  them.  The
English  and  French  knights  remained  at  their  post,  looking  at  their  opponents  with  good
humour,  and  never  stirred  until  the  whole  ceremony  was  over.  The  spot  where  the  two
kings  had  met  was  marked,  and  a chapel  in  honour  of  the  Virgin  Mary  was  proposed  to  be
erected  on  it,  but  I know  not  if  it  were  ever  put  into  execution.  On  the  entrance  of  the  twx>
kings  holding  each  other  by  the  hand  into  the  tent,  the  dukes  of  Orleans  and  of  Bourbon
came  forward  and  cast  themselves  on  their  knees : the  kings  stopped  and  made  them  rise.
The  six  dukes  then  assembled  in  front  and  conversed  together:  the  kings  passed  on,  and
had  some  conversation,  while  the  wine  and  spices  were  preparing.  The  duke  of  Berry
served  the  king  of  France  with  the  comfit-box,  and  the  duke  of  Burgundy  with  the  cup  of
* The  feast  of  Saint  Simon  and  Saint  Jude  is  on  the  28th  October.


0-20


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


wine.  In  like  manner  was  the  king  of  England  served  by  the  dukes  of  Lancaster  and
Gloucester.  After  the  kings  had  been  served,  the  knights  of  France  and  England  took
the  wine  and  spices,  and  served  the  prelates,  dukes,  princes,  and  counts ; and,  after  them,
squires  and  other  officers  of  the  household  did  the  same  to  all  within  the  tent,  until
every  one  had  partaken  of  the  spices  and  wine ; during  which  time,  the  two  kings  freely
conversed.

After  a short  space,  the  two  monarchs  took  leave  of  each  other,  as  did  the  different  lords.
The  king  of  England  and  his  uncles  retired  to  their  tents,  while  the  horses  were  made
ready:  they  then  mounted,  and  took  the  road  towards  Calais;  the  king  to  Guines,  the
dukes  of  Lancaster  and  Gloucester  to  Hamme,  and  the  others  to  their  lodgings  at  Calais.
In  like  manner  did  the  king  of  France  return  to  Ardres,  accompanied  by  the  duke  of  Orleans;
the  duke  of  Berry  to  Tournehem,  and  the  duke  of  Burgundy  to  la  Montoire ; for  nothing
more  was  done  that  day,  although  the  tents  and  pavilions  of  the  king  of  France  and  other
lords  were  left  standing.

At  eleven  o’clock  of  the  Saturday  morning,  the  feast  of  Saint  Simon  and  Saint  Jude,  the
king  of  England,  attended  by  his  uncles  and  all  the  noblemen  who  had  accompanied  him
from  England,  waited  on  the  king  of  France  in  his  tent.  They  were  received  by  the  king,
his  brother,  and  uncles,  with  great  pomp  and  the  most  affectionate  words.  The  dinner-
tables  were  there  laid  out : that  for  the  kings  was  long  and  handsome,  and  the  side-boai’d
covered  with  the  most  magnificent  plate.  The  two  kings  wei’e  seated  by  themselves ;
the  king  of  France  at  the  top  of  the  table,  and  the  king  of  England  below  him,  but
at  a good  distance  from  each  other.  They  were  served  by  the  dukes  of  Beri’y,  Burgundy,
and  Bourbon : the  last  entertained  the  two  monarchs  with  many  gay  remarks,  to  make
them  laugh,  and  those  about  the  table,  for  he  had  much  drollery,  and,  addi'essing
the  king  of  England,  said, — “ My  lord  king  of  England,  you  ought  to  make  good  cheer,
for  you  have  had  all  your  wishes  gratified.  You  have  a wife,  or  shall  have  one,  for  she
will  be  speedily  delivered  to  you.”'*“  Bourbonnois,”  replied  the  king  of  France,  “we
wish  our  daughter  were  as  old  as  our  cousin  of  Saint  Pol,  though  we  were  to  double  her


Isabella  and  tuf.  King  of  England  taking  leave  of  the  King  of  France,  at  the  Camp  between  Ardres  and
Calais.  From  MSS.  of  the  15th  Century.

dower,  for  then  she  would  love  our  son  of  England  much  more.”  The  king  of  England
heard  well  these  words,  and  replied,  bowing  to  the  king  of  France  (for  he  did  not  address
himself  to  the  duke  of  Bourbon,  since  the  king  had  compared  his  daughter  with  the  countess


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


021


of  Saint  Pol’s),  “ Good  father-in-law,  the  age  of  our  wife  pleases  us  right  well : we  pay  not
so  much  attention  concerning  her  age,  as  we  value  your  love,  and  that  of  our  subjects,  for
we  shall  now  be  so  strongly  united  that  no  king  in  Christendom  can  any  way  hurt  us.”
When  dinner  was  over,  which  lasted  not  long,  the  cloth  was  removed,  the  tables  carried
away,  and  wine  and  spices  brought.  After  this,  the  young  queen  of  England  entered  the
tent,  attended  by  a great  number  of  ladies  and  damsels.  The  king  led  her  by  the  hand,  and
gave  her  to  the  king  of  England,  who  instantly  after  took  his  leave.  The  queen  was  placed
in  a very  rich  litter  which  had  been  prepared  for  her  ; but,  of  all  the  French  ladies  who
were  there,  only  the  lady  of  Coucy  went  with  her,  for  there  were  many  of  the  principal
ladies  of  England,  such  as  the  duchesses  of  Lancaster,  York,  Gloucester,  Ireland,  the  lady
of  Namur,  the  lady  Poinings,  and  others  of  the  nobility,  who  received  queen  Isabella  with
great  joy.  When  the  ladies  were  ready,  the  king  of  England  and  his  lords  departed,  and,
riding  at  a good  pace,  arrived  at  Calais.  The  king  of  France  and  his  court  returned  to
Saint  Omer,  where  he  had  left  the  queen  and  duchess  of  Burgundy,  and  staid  there  the
Sunday  and  Monday  following.  On  the  Tuesday,  which  was  All-saints- day,  the  king  of
England  was  married  by  the  archbishop  of  Canterbury,  in  the  church  of  Saint  Nicholas  at
Calais,  to  the  lady  Isabella  of  France.  Great  were  the  feastings  on  the  occasion,  and  the
heralds  and  minstrels  were  so  liberally  paid  they  were  satisfied.

On  the  ensuing  Thursday,  the  dukes  of  Orleans  and  Bourbon  came  to  Calais,  to  visit  the
king  and  queen  of  England : they  staid  that  day,  and  on  the  following  went  back  to  dinner
at  Saint  Omer,  where  the  king  and  queen  of  France  waited  for  them.  This  same  morning,
the  king  and  queen  of  England,  having  heard  an  early  mass  and  drank  some  wine,  embarked
on  board  the  vessels  which  had  been  prepared  for  them,  with  a favourable  wind.  They
weighed  anchor,  set  their  sails,  and  in  less  than  three  hours  landed  at  Dover.  The  king
dined  at  the  castle,  and  lay  the  next  night  at  Rochester : passing  through  Dartford,  he
arrived  at  his  palace  of  Eltham,  where  the  lords  and  ladies  took  leave  of  the  king  and  queen,
and  went  to  their  homes.

Fifteen  days  after,  the  queen  made  her  entry  into  London,  grandly  attended  by  lords,
ladies,  and  damsels.  She  lay  one  night  in  the  Tower,  seated  on  the  banks  of  the  Thames,
and  the  next  day  was  conducted  in  great  pomp,  through  the  streets,  to  Westminster,  where
the  king  was  waiting  in  his  palace  to  receive  her.  This  day,  the  Londoners  made  very  rich
presents  to  the  queen,  which  were  graciously  accepted.  During  the  time  the  court  was  at
Westminster,  a tournament  was  ordered  to  be  held  at  Candlemas  in  Smithfield,  between
forty  knights  and  as  many  squires ; and  notices  of  it  were  given  to  the  heralds,  that  they
might  publish  it  beyond  sea,  and  as  far  as  Scotland.

When  the  king  of  France  was  returned  to  Paris  after  the  marriage  of  his  daughter,  and
his  lords  were  gone  to  their  residences,  there  were  great  rumours  of  war.  It  wras  said  to
have  been  settled  that,  at  the  beginning  of  March,  the  king  was  to  lead  a large  army  into
Lombardy  to  destroy  the  duke  of  Milan;  and  that  the  king  was  so  bent  on  this  expedition,
he  would  not  listen  to  anything  that  was  said  against  it.  The  king  of  England  was  to  send
his  father-in-law  six  thousand  archers ; and  the  duke  of  Brittany,  who  had  been  constantly
with  the  king,  offered  his  services  on  the  expedition,  with  two  thousand  Breton  spears.
Purveyances  were  already  making  for  the  king  and  lords  in  Dauphiny  and  in  Savoy.
When  the  duke  of  Brittany  took  leave  of  the  king  of  France  and  his  lords,  to  return  to  his
duchy,  I believe  the  duke  of  Burgundy  made  such  earnest  intercession  with  the  king,  and
those  immediately  concerned,  that  the  duke  of  Brittany  carried  with  him  his  cousin  sir
Peter  de  Craon,  who  was  confined  a prisoner  at  his  own  charges,  in  the  tower  of  the  Louvre,
for  the  debt  he  had  been  sentenced  to  pay  of  one  hundred  thousand  francs  to  the  queen
of  Jerusalem.  I imagine  he  engaged  to  pay  the  queen  the  above  sum  by  instalments;
but  I will,  for  the  present,  leave  speaking  of  these  matters,  and  return  to  what  was  passing
in  Turkey.


G22


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


CHAPTER  LXXXI. THE  CHRISTIANS  ARE  FORCED  TO  RAISE  THE  SIEGE  OF  NICOPOLI,  BY

THE  ARRIVAL  OF  BAJAZET  IN  TURKEY. THEY  ARE  DEFEATED  AND  THE  HUNGARIANS

PUT  TO  FLIGHT,  THROUGH  THE  PRESUMPTUOUS  FOLLY  OF  THE  FRENCH.

You  have  before  read  in  our  history  how  the  king  of  Hungary,  and  the  lords  from  France
who  had  gone  to  Hungary  in  search  of  deeds  of  arms,  had  valiantly  crossed  the  Danube,  and
entered  Turkey ; where  during  the  summer,  from  the  month  of  July,  they  had  conquered  a
large  tract  of  country,  having  mercifully  spared  the  inhabitants  and  many  towns  and  castles,
for  none  could  withstand  their  power.  They  had  besieged  the  city  of  Nicopoli,  and  so  hardly
pressed  it  by  their  attacks,  that  it  was  on  the  point  of  surrendering  without  hearing  any
intelligence  of  Bajazet.  The  king  of  Hungary  had  even  addressed  the  French  lords,  such  as
the  count  de  Nevers,  the  count  d’Eu,  the  count  de  la  Marche,  the  count  de  Soissons,  the  lord
de  Coucy,  and  the  barons  and  knights  of  Burgundy,  saying, — “ My  fair  sirs,  thanks  to  God,
we  have  made  a successful  campaign  ; for  we  have  performed  many  brilliant  deeds  of  arms,
and  have  conquered  Turkey.  I look  on  the  town  of  Nicopoli  as  our  own,  for  it  is  so
undermined  it  can  hold  out  no  longer  than  we  please.  I therefore  would  propose,  that  after
we  shall  have  gained  and  shown  mercy  to  this  town,  we  attempt  nothing  more  this  season,
but  rccross  the  Danube,  and  return  to  Hungary,  where  I have  many  handsome  towns  and
castles  prepared  to  receive  you,  since  you  have  so  gallantly  assisted  me  against  the  Turks,
my  bitter  enemies.  During  the  winter,  we  will  provide  stores  for  the  ensuing  summer,  each
according  to  his  pleasure,  and  send  information  of  our  situation,  and  what  we  have  done,  to
the  king  of  France,  who,  before  that  time,  will  send  us  large  reinforcements ; and  I hope,
when  he  shall  know  the  success  we  have  had,  he  may  be  inclined  to  come  hither  in  person,
for  he  is  young  and  fond  of  arms.  But  whether  he  come  or  not,  if  it  please  God,  we  will
next  summer  cross  the  Hellespont,  regain  Armenia,  thence  march  to  Syria,  with  the  towns
of  Jaffa  and  Baruth,  and  conquer  Jerusalem  and  the  Holy  Land.  Should  the  sultan  oppose
us,  we  will  offer  him  battle,  and  never  return  without  having  combated  him.”  Such  was  the
speech  of  the  king  of  Hungary  to  the  French  lords  : they  considered  Nicopoli  as  won,  but  it
fell  out  otherwise.

During  the  whole  summer,  Bajazet  had  been  busily  employed  in  raising  an  army  of
Saracens  and  infidels : he  had  even  sent  to  Persia  for  succour,  and  the  great  lords  of  his
religion  had  joined  him  against  Christendom.  They  had  crossed  the  Hellespont  to  the  amount
of  two  hundred  thousand  ; but  the  Christians  were  not  only  ignorant  of  their  numbers,  but
of  their  approach  ; and,  they  advanced  so  secretly,  they  were  close  to  Nicopoli  before  the
besiegers  knew  of  their  having  begun  their  march.  Bajazet  was  as  well  acquainted  with  the
stratagems  of  war  as  most,  and  of  great  valour  and  enterprise.  He  considered  maturely  the
power  of  the  Christians,  and  said  they  were  a valiant  race.  Bajazet  marched  to  raise  the
siege  of  Nicopoli  in  the  following  order.  His  army  was  drawn  up  in  the  form  of  a harrow,
and  occupied  about  a league  of  ground  : in  front  of  this  main  body,  and  a league  in  advance,
were  eight  thousand  Turks,  to  mask  the  body  of  the  army,  which  was  divided  into  two  wings.
Bajazet  was  in  the  midst  of  his  main  body,  who  thus  quietly  advanced,  with  their  van-guard
of  eight  thousand  in  front : they  were  thus  ordered,  to  make  an  appearance  as  if  they  were
the  whole  army ; but  whenever  they  met  the  Christians,  they  were  to  fall  back  gently  towards
the  main  body,  which  was  then  to  extend  itself  as  much  as  possible,  and  endeavour  to  enclose
the  Christians,  whom  they  should  then  conquer  at  pleasure.  Such  was  the  order  of  battle
of  Bajazet.

It  happened,  that  on  the  Monday  preceding  Michaelmas-day,  in  the  year  1396,  about  ten
o’clock,  as  the  king  of  Hungary  and  the  lords,  who  were  lying  before  Nicopoli,  were  seated
at  dinner,  news  was  brought  them  that  their  enemies,  the  Turks,  were  near  at  hand  ; but,  as
I heard,  the  scouts  did  not  inform  them  of  the  whole  truth  : they  had  not  noticed  the  main
body  of  the  Turks,  for  the  moment  they  saw  the  van-guard  they  dared  not  advance  farther,
as  they  were  not  men  at  arms  fearless  of  such  an  enterprise.  The  Hungarians  and  French
had  each  scouts  of  their  own,  and  both  parties  arrived  nearly  at  the  same  time  with  this
intelligence.  The  greater  part  of  the  army  were  at  dinner  when  the  news  was  carried  to  the
count  de  Nevers  and  the  other  French  lords,  the  messenger  bawling  out,  “ Come ! quickly


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


623


arm  yourselves,  that  you  be  not  surprised,  for  the  Turks  are  on  full  march  to  meet  you.”
This  information  was  agreeable  to  many  who  were  desirous  of  arms : they  instantly  arose,
pushed  the  tables  aside,  and  demanded  their  horses  and  armour.  They  were  somewhat
heated  with  wine,  and  hastened  to  the  field  as  well  as  they  could.  Banners  and  pennons
were  displayed,  under  which  every  one  ranged  himself  in  his  proper,  post.  The  banner  of
the  Virgin  Mary  was  unfurled,  and  the  guard  of  it  given  to  that  valiant  knight  sir  John  de
Vienne,  admiral  of  France.  The  French  were  so  eager  to  arm  themselves  that  they  were  the
first  in  the  field,  drawn  up  in  handsome  array,  and  seemingly  fearless  of  the  Turks  ; for  they
were  ignorant  of  their  immense  numbers,  and  that  Bajazet  commanded  in  person.  As  the
French  lords  were  hastening  from  their  tents  to  the  field,  the  marshal  of  the  king  of  Hungary,
named  sir  Henry  d’Ostenlemhalle*,  mounted  on  a handsome  courser,  came  to  them  with  few
attendants.  He  was  a valiant  and  experienced  knight,  and  had  borne  before  him  a pennon
of  his  arms,  which  were  a cross  anchored  sable  on  a field  argent,  which  in  heraldry  is  called
cross  moline.  He  stopped,  when  opposite  the  banner  of  Our  Lady,  where  the  principal  lords
were  assembled,  and  said  aloud, — “ I am  sent  hither  by  my  lord,  the  king  of  Hungary,
who  entreats  you  by  me,  that  you  will  not  begin  the  battle  before  you  shall  again  hear
from  him;  for  he  much  suspects  and  fears  that  the  scouts  have  not  brought  exact  intelli-
gence of  the  numbers  of  the  Turks.  Within  two  hours  you  shall  have  more  certain
intelligence,  for  we  have  sent  other  scouts,  who  will  advance  farther  than  the  former  ones,
and  bring  us  better  information.  Be  assured  the  Turks  will  never  attack  you,  unless  you
force  them  to  it,  or  until  they  have  collected  all  their  forces  together.  You  will  act  as  you
shall  think  best,  but  such  are  my  lord  the  king’s  orders.  I must  now  return,  for  I cannot
longer  stay.”

On  saying  this,  the  Hungarian  marshal  left  them ; and  the  lords  assembled  together  to
consider  what  was  to  be  done.  The  lord  de  Coucy  was  asked  his  opinion,  and  replied,  that
the  king  of  Hungary  had  a right  to  order  them,  and  that  what  lie  had  requested  was
perfectly  just.  It  was  mentioned  to  me  that  the  count  d’Eu,  constable  of  France,  was  vexed
that  his  opinion  had  not  been  first  asked  before  the  lord  de  Coucy ’s,  and,  through  spite  and
malice,  instantly  opposed  what  he  had  said,  adding  : “ Yes,  yes,  the  king  of  Hungary  wishes
to  gain  all  the  honour  of  the  day  : he  has  given  us  the  van-guard,  and  now  wants  to  take  it
away,  that  he  may  have  the  first  blow  : let  those  who  will  believe  what  he  sends  to  us,  for
my  part  I never  will then  addressing  the  knight  who  bore  bis  banner,  he  said, — “ In  the
name  of  God  and  Saint  George,  you  shall  see  me  this  day  prove  myself  a good  knight.”
The  lord  de  Coucy  thought  this  a very  vain  speech  of  the  constable,  and,  turning  to  sir  John
de  Vienne,  who  had  the  banner  of  Our  Lady  under  his  guard,  and  by  whom  all  the  others
were  to  rally,  asked  what  ought  to  be  done.  “ Lord  de  Coucy,”  he  replied,  “ when  truth
and  reason  are  not  heard,  folly  and  presumption  must  reign ; and,  since  the  count  d’Eu  is
determined  to  fight  the  enemy,  we  must  follow  him  ; but  we  should  have  greater  advantage,
if  we  waited  the  king  of  Hungary’s  orders,  and  were  all  united.”  While  they  thus  conversed,
the  infidels  were  fast  approaching : the  two  wings  of  their  army,  which  consisted  of  sixty
thousand  men  each,  were  already  closing  round  them.  The  Christians,  observing  this,
would  have  retreated,  but  that  was  impossible,  as  they  were  completely  surrounded.  Many
knights  and  squires,  who  had  been  used  to  arms,  now  knew  the  day  must  be  lost ; notwith-
standing which  they  advanced,  following  the  banner  of  Our  Lady,  that  was  borne  by  that
gallant  knight  sir  John  de  Vienne.

The  lords  of  France  were  so  richly  dressed  out,  in  their  emblazoned  surcoats,  as  to  look
like  little  kings  ; but,  as  I was  told,  when  they  met  the  Turks,  they  were  not  more  than  seven
hundred,  which  sufficiently  showed  the  folly  of  the  measure ; for,  had  they  waited  for  the
Hungarian  army,  consisting  of  sixty  thousand  men,  they  might,  perhaps,  have  gained  a
victory,  but,  to  their  pride  and  presumption,  was  the  whole  loss  owing ; and  it  was  so  great,
that  never  since  the  defeat  at  Roncesvalles,  where  the  twelve  peers  of  France  were  slain,
did  the  French  suffer  so  considerably.  However,  before  they  were  overcome,  they  made
great  slaughter  of  the  Turks ; though  several  knights  and  squires  saw  they  were  marching
to  destruction,  through  their  own  folly.  The  French  defeated  the  van  battalion,  and  put  it
to  flight,  pursuing  it  into  a valley  where  Bajazet  was  posted  with  the  main  army.  The

* MSS.  Steulemclialle.


C24


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


French  would  have  returned,  as  they  were  mounted  on  barbed  horses,  but  could  not,  for  they
were  now  inclosed  on  all  sides.  The  battle,  therefore,  raged  with  fury,  and  lasted  a con-
siderable time.  News  was  carried  to  the  king  of  Hungary,  that  the  French,  English,  and
Germans  were  engaged  with  the  Turks,  not  having  obeyed  his  orders  sent  them  by  the
marshal.  He  was  very  wroth  on  hearing  it,  as  indeed  he  had  reason  to  be,  and  foresaw  they
would  all  be  cut  off.  He  said  to  the  grand  master  of  Rhodes,  who  was  beside  him,  “ We
shall  lose  the  day,  from  the  vanity  of  the  French  : if  they  had  believed  me,  and  waited  for
our  joining,  we  should  have  had  sufficient  strength  to  cope  with  the  enemy.”  As  he  thus
spoke,  looking  behind  him,  he  perceived  that  his  men  were  flying  panic-struck,  and  the  Turks
pursuing  them.  He  then  saw  the  day  was  irrecoverably  lost,  and  those  near  his  person  cried  out,
“ Sire,  save  yourself ! for  should  you  be  killed  or  taken,  Hungary  will  be  completely  ruined.
We  must  be  defeated,  through  French  pride ; and  their  valour  will  prove  in  vain,  for  every
one  of  them  will  be  taken  or  slain ; not  one  can  possibly  escape.  Fly,  therefore,  from  the
danger,  before  it  be  too  late.”  The  king  of  Hungary  was  in  the  utmost  rage  to  be  thus
defeated  through  the  arrogance  of  the  French,  and  obliged  to  fly,  if  he  would  avoid  captivity  or
death.  It  was  a most  unfortunate  day  for  the  Hungarians  and  French  ; whoever  x’uns  away
from  battle  is  pursued,  and,  as  the  Hungarians  fled  in  the  greatest  confusion,  the  Turks
followed,  killing  them  or  making  prisoners  at  pleasure.  God,  however,  assisted  the  king  of
ir  ungary  and  the  grand  master  of  Rhodes ; for,  on  their  arrival  on  the  banks  of  the  Danube,
they  found  a small  vessel  belonging  to  the  grand  master,  into  which  they  entered,  with  only
five  more,  and  crossed  to  the  opposite  shore.  Had  they  delayed,  they  must  have  been  killed
or  taken  ; for  the  Turks  came  to  the  river  as  they  were  passing  it,  and  made  a great  slaughter
of  those  who  had  followed  the  king  thinking  to  escape.

We  will  return  to  tire  French  and  Germans,  who  were  fighting  most  valiantly.  The  lord
de  Montcaurel,  a gallant  knight  from  Artois,  seeing  the  defeat  inevitable,  and  wishing  to
save  his  son,  who  was  very  young,  said  to  his  squire, — “ Carry  off  my  son  : thou  mayest
escape  by  that  wing  which  is  open  : save  my  son,  and  I will  abide  the  event  with  my  com-
panions.” The  youth,  on  hearing  his  father  thus  speak,  declared  he  would  not  go  nor  leave
him  in  such  danger  ; but  the  father  forced  him  away,  and  the  squire  brought  him  safely  to
the  Danube : the  youth,  who  was  very  melancholy  at  the  situation  of  his  father,  was  unfor-
tunately drowned  by  falling  between  two  barges,  without  a possibility  of  being  saved.  Sir
William  de  la  Tremouille  and  his  son  displayed  great  feats  of  valour  before  they  were  slain.
Sir  John  de  Vienne,  who  bore  the  banner  of  Our  Lady,  in  spite  of  his  deeds  of  arms  was
killed  grasping  the  banner  in  his  hands,  and  thus  was  he  found  after  the  battle.  The  whole
of  the  French  force  that  had  been  engaged  at  this  battle  of  Nicopoli  were  defeated  and  slain,
by  the  means  I have  related.

The  lord  John  of  Burgundy,  count  of  Nevers,  was  wondrous  richly  arrayed,  as  were  the
lord  Guy  de  la  Riviere,  and  many  barons  and  knights  from  Burgundy  in  compliment  to
him.  Two  squires  from  Picardy,  William  d’Eu  and  the  borgne  de  Montquel,  who  had
displayed  their  courage  in  many  former  battles,  did  the  same  at  Nicopoli.  These  two  squires
by  their  vigorous  courage,  twice  forced  through  the  Turkish  army,  and  returned  to  the
fight,  but  were  at  length  slain.  To  say  the  truth,  the  whole  of  the  French  chivalry  and
those  from  other  countries  acquitted  themselves  most  gallantly  ; and  had  they  been  assisted
by  the  Hungarians  with  equal  courage,  the  day  would  have  turned  out  differently.  But
the  whole  of  the  mischief  was  caused  by  the  French,  and  their  presumption  was  their  ruin.
There  was  a knight  from  Picardy,  called  sir  James  de  Helly,  who  had  resided  some  time  in
Turkey,  and  had  served  in  arms  under  Amurat,  father  of  the  sultan  Bajazet,  of  whom  we
are  now  speaking,  and  who  knew  a little  of  the  Turkish  language.  When  he  saw  the  day
was  lost,  he  thought  of  saving  his  life  ; and  as  he  knew  the  Saracens  to  be  a covetous  race,
he  surrendered  himself  to  them,  on  their  granting  him  his  life.  Thus  did  he  escape ; and
also  another  squire  from  the  Tournaisis,  called  James  du  Fay,  who  had  formerly  served
Tamerlane  king  of  Tartary,  but  when  he  learnt  That  the  French  were  marching  to  Turkey,
be  quitted  Tamerlane,  and  joined  his  countrymen.  He  was  at  this  battle,  and  saved  by
Tamerlane’s  men,  who  had  been  ordered  thither  in  compliance  with  the  request  made  to
him  for  assistance  by  Bajazet.  Tamerlane  had  sent  him  a considerable  body  of  men,  as
Saracen  and  Pagan  kings  always  do  to  the  aid  of  each  other.


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


025


CHAPTER  LXXXIT. TIIE  TURKS,  AFTER  TIIE  BATTLE  OF  NICOPOLI,  PUT  TO  DEATH  ALL  THEIR

PRISONERS,  EXCEPT  TIIE  COUNT  DE  NEVERS  AND  SOME  OTHER  GREAT  LORDS.

At  this  battle  of  Nicopoli,  which  was  so  fatal  to  the  French,  very  many  were  saved,  from
the  extreme  richness  of  their  armour  : they  were  dressed  like  kings  ; and  the  Saracens  and
Turks,  who  are  avaricious,  thought,  by  saving  their  lives,  they  should  gain  large  ransoms  ;
for  they  believed  them  much  greater  lords,  from  their  appearance,  than  they  really  were.  The
count  de  Nevers  was  made  prisoner,  as  were  the  counts  d’Eu  and  de  la  Marche,  the  lord  de
Coucy,  the  lord  Henry  de  Bar,  sir  Guy  de  la  Tremouille,  Boucicaut  and  others.  The  lord
Philip  de  Bar,  sir  John  de  Vienne,  sir  William  de  la  Tremouille  and  his  son,  were  killed.
This  battle  lasted  for  three  hours;  and  the  king  of  Hungary  lost  his  whole  baggage,  his
gold  and  silver  plate,  jewels,  and  everything  else.  lie  had  escaped  by  fortunately  finding  a
vessel  from  Rhodes  on  the  Danube,  that  had  brought  provisions,  in  which  he  crossed  the
river  with  six  others  : had  he  not  done  so,  he  must  have  been  slain  or  taken.  There  were
more  killed  in  the  pursuit  than  in  the  battle,  and  numbers  were  drowned.  Happy  was  he
who  could  escape  from  such  danger  by  any  means.

When  the  business  was  over,  and  the  Turks,  Persians,  and  others  sent  thither  by  different
infidel  kings,  had  retired  to  their  lodgings,  (that  is  to  say,  to  the  tents  and  pavilions  they
had  conquered  from  the  Christians,  in  which  they  found  wines,  meats,  and  every  other
necessary)  they  enjoyed  themselves,  and  made  merry,  like  men  who  have  gained  a victory
over  their  enemies.  Bajazet  dismounted,  at  the  sound  of  many  minstrels,  according  to  their
custom,  at  the  principal  tent  that  had  belonged  to  the  king  of  Hungary,  which  was  very
large,  and  richly  adorned.  Bajazet  took  pleasure  in  viewing  it,  and  glorified  himself
internally  for  the  victory  he  had  obtained  over  the  Christians,  and  thanked  his  God  for  it,
according  to  the  manner  of  their  religion.  When  he  was  disarmed,  to  cool  and  refresh
himself,  he  sat  on  a silken  carpet  in  the  middle  of  the  tent,  and  sent  for  his  principal
friends,  to  chat  and  joke  with  them.  He  began  the  conversation,  by  saying  he  would  now
march  a great  force  into  Hungary,  to  conquer  that  country  and  the  rest  of  Christendom,
which  he  wTould  put  under  his  obedience,  but  that  each  kingdom  might  follow  its  own  religion
and  laws,  owning  him  for  their  lord  : that  he  would  reign  like  Alexander  of  Macedon,  who
for  twelve  years  governed  the  whole  world,  as  he  was  descended  from  his  blood.  All
assented  to  what  Bajazet  said,  and  agreed  to  his  proposal.  He  gave  out  three  orders : the
first  that  every  one  who  had  made  prisoners  should  produce  them  before  him  the  next  day;
the  second,  that  the  dead  should  be  carefully  examined,  and  the  nobles  and  great  lords  be  set
apart,  and  left  untouched  until  he  had  seen  them  ; the  third,  that  exact  inquiries  should  be
made  among  the  slain  and  prisoners  after  the  king  of  Hungary,  that  he  might  know  whether
he  was  dead  or  alive.  These  orders  were  fulfilled,  for  none  dared  disobey  them.

When  Bajazet  had  refreshed  himself,  and  changed  his  dress,  he  resolved  to  visit  the  dead
on  the  field  of  battle ; for  he  had  been  told  the  victory  had  cost  him  dear,  and  that  he
had  lost  great  numbers  of  men.  He  was  much  surprised  to  hear  this,  and  would  not
believe  it.  He  mounted  his  horse,  attended  by  bis  vizier,  nobles  and  bashaws : some  said
his  principal  officers  were  his  brothers,  whom  he  would  not  acknowledge  as  such,  declaring  he
had  no  brothers.  On  his  coming  to  the  field  of  battle,  he  found  what  had  been  told  him
was  true  ; for  where  one  Christian  lay  dead  there  were  thirty  of  their  enemies.  The  sight
vexed  him  much,  and  he  said  aloud, — “ This  has  been  a cruel  battle  for  our  people  : the
Christians  have  defended  themselves  desperately  ; but  I will  have  this  slaughter  well  revenged
on  those  who  are  prisoners.”  He  now  left  the  field  and  returned  to  his  tent,  comforting
himself  for  the  loss  he  had  suffered  by  the  victory  and  defeat  of  the  Christians ; but,  not-
withstanding this,  he  passed  the  night  in  great  fury.  On  the  morrow,  before  he  was  risen  or
had  shown  himself,  great  numbers  came  before  his  tent,  to  learn  his  will  respecting  the
prisoners  ; for  it  had  been  rumoured  that  he  intended  having  them  all  put  to  death  without
mercy.  Bajazet,  however,  in  spite  of  his  rage  against  the  Christians,  had  given  orders  that
all  the  principal  lords  who  had  been  made  prisoners  should  be  separated  from  the  others,
for  he  had  been  told  they  would  pay  him  large  ransoms,  and  on  that  account  he  was  inclined

VOL.  11.  s p


62G  CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.

to  spare  them.  He  had  also  learnt  that  many  of  the  Tartars,  Arabs,  Bedouins  and  Syrians,
had  made  prisoners,  from  whom  they  expected  to  gain  large  fortunes,  as  indeed  they  did,  by
concealing  their  prisoners  from  Bajazet.  Sir  James  de  Ilelly,  whom  I mentioned  before,
was,  luckily  for  him,  brought  this  Tuesday  morning  before  the  tent  of  the  sultan,  with  many
other  prisoners,  for  he  who  had  taken  him  was  afraid  of  keeping  him  hid.  As  they  were
waiting  the  coming  of  Bajazet,  some  of  the  knights  of  his  household,  standing  round  the
tent,  recollected  sir  James,  and  delivered  him  from  the  hands  of  those  who  had  taken  him.
He  remained  with  the  attendants  of  the  sultan,  who  had  been  formerly  acquainted  with  him  ;
and  fortunate  it  was  for  him,  as  you  will  hear  related,  for  to  the  greater  part  of  the
Christians  it  was  a disastrous  day.

Before  Bajazet  appeared,  inquiries  had  been  made  who  were  the  greatest  lords  among  the
prisoners,  and  his  interpreters  had  been  very  strict  in  their  examinations,  putting  such  aside
not  to  he  killed.  The  first  was  John  of  Burgundy  commander-in-chief,  then  the  count  d’Eu,
the  count  de  la  Marche,  the  lord  de  Coucy,  lord  Henry  de  Bar,  sir  Guy  de  la  Tremouille,  and
two  more,  amounting  in  all  to  eight.  Bajazet  would  see  and  talk  with  them.  He  eyed
them  long  in  silence,  and  these  lords  were  conjured  on  their  faith  to  avow  if  they  were  the
persons  who  had  been  so  named.  He  also  resolved  to  send  for  sir  James  de  Ilelly,  that  he
might  assure  him  of  the  truth.  On  his  coming,  he  was  remembered  by  the  sultan  whom  he
had  served,  and  was  now  perfectly  secure  from  danger.  He  was  asked  if  he  knew  those
French  lords  who  were  prisoners  at  the  bottom  of  the  tent.  “ I cannot  say,”  he  replied  ;
“ but,  if  I saw  their  faces,  I should  know  them  all.”  He  was  then  ordered  to  go  near  and
examine  them,  and  report  truly  their  names  to  the  sultan,  for  that  his  determination  would
be  according  to  what  he  should  say.  He  went  near  the  prisoners,  and,  bowing  to  them,
knew  them  all.  He  told  them  his  fortunate  escape,  and  that  he  had  been  sent  by  the  sultan
to  see  if  they  were  the  persons  answering  to  the  names  they  had  given  themselves.  “ Ah,
sir  James,”  said  they,  “ you  are  well  acquainted  with  us  all  : you  see  how  fortune  has
turned  against  us,  and  what  great  danger  we  are  in  when  we  depend  on  the  mercy  of  this
sultan.  If  it  may  any  how  save  our  lives,  tell  him  we  are  of  even  greater  rank  than  we
have  said,  and  able  to  pay  him  large  sums  for  our  ransoms.”  “ My  lords,”  replied  sir  James,
“ this  I will  most  cheerfully  do,  for  it  is  my  duty.”  The  knight  then  returned  to  Bajazet,
and  said,  “ Those  lords  who  are  prisoners,  and  with  whom  I have  been  talking,  are  of  the
noblest  blood  in  France,  nearly  related  to  the  king,  and  willing  to  pay  for  their  liberty  a great
sum  of  money.”  This  answer  was  very  agreeable  to  the  sultan,  who  would  not  listen  to
more,  but  said,  “ Let  those  alone  he  spared,  and  all  the  other  prisoners  put  to  death,  to  free
the  country  from  them,  and  that  others  may  take  example  from  their  fate.”

The  sultan  now  made  his  appearance  to  his  people  before  the  tent,  who,  bowing  down,
made  him  their  obeisance.  The  army  was  drawn  up  in  two  wings  on  each  side  ; the  sultan
with  his  nobles,  the  count  de  Nevers  and  those  who  were  to  be  spared,  were  in  the  centre ;
for  he  would  they  should  witness  the  execution  of  their  companions,  which  the  Saracens
were  eager  to  perform.  Many  excellent  knights  and  squires  of  France  and  other  nations,  who
had  been  taken  in  battle  or  in  the  pursuit,  were  now  brought  forth  in  their  shirts,  one  after
another,  before  Bajazet,  who  eyeing  them  a little,  they  were  led  on  ; and,  as  he  made  a signal,
were  instantly  cut  to  pieces  by  those  waiting  for  them  with  drawn  swords.  Such  was  the
cruel  justice  of  Bajazet  this  day,  when  upwards  of  three  hundred  gentlemen  of  different
nations  were  thus  pitilessly  murdered.  It  was  a cruel  case  for  them  to  suffer  for  the  love  of
our  Saviour  Jesus  Christ,  and  may  he  receive  their  souls  !

Among  the  murdered  of  that  day  was  the  gallant  knight  sir  Henry  d’Antoing  : may  God
show  gracious  mercy  to  his  soul ! The  lord  Boucicaut,  marshal  of  France,  was  led  naked  like
the  others,  before  Bajazet,  and  would  have  suffered  the  same  cruel  death,  had  not  the  count
de  Nevers  left  his  companions,  who  were  motionless  at  the  sad  sight,  and  flung  himself  on  his
knees  to  the  sultan,  entreating  him  to  spare  the  lord  Boucicaut,  who  was  much  beloved  by
the  king  of  France,  and  well  able  to  pay  a considerable  ransom ; and  the  count  made
signs,  as  paying  from  one  hand  to  the  other,  that  he  would  give  a large  sum  of  money,  to
soften  the  anger  of  the  sultan.  Bajazet  consented  to  the  request  of  the  count  de  Nevers,  and
the  lord  Boucicaut  was  put  aside  with  those  who  were  not  to  be  killed.  Others  were  brought


C 27


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  Ac.

forward,  until  the  number  I have  mentioned  was  completed  : such  was  the  cruel  revenge  the
infidels  had  on  the  Christians.  It  seems,  according  to  what  I heard,  that  Bajazet  took
delight  that  the  victory  he  had  gained  over  the  Christians,  and  the  capture  of  the  count
de  Nevers,  should  be  known  in  France,  and  carried  thither  by  a French  knight.  Three
knights,  of  whom  sir  James  de  Helly  was  one,  were  brought  before  Bajazet  and  the
count  de  Nevers,  who  was  asked  which  of  the  three  he  wished  should  qo  to  the  king  of
France  and  to  his  father  the  duke  of  Burgundy.  Sir  James  de  Helly  had  the  good  fortune
to  be  made  choice  of,  because  the  count  do  Nevers  was  before  acquainted  with  him  : he
therefore  said  to  the  sultan, — “ Sir,  I wish  that  this  person  may  go  to  France  from  you  and
from  me.”  This  was  accepted  by  Bajazet,  and  sir  James  de  Helly  remained  with  him  and
the  other  French  lords  ; but  the  two  unsuccessful  knights  were  delivered  over  to  the  soldiery,
who  massacred  them  without  pity.

After  all  these  things  were  done,  every  thing  was  quiet.  Bajazet,  having  learnt  that  the
king  of  Hungary  was  escaped,  resolved  to  march  more  into  the  interior  of  Turkey  towards
the  city  of  Bursa,  whither  he  would  carry  his  prisoners,  for  he  had  done  enough  this
campaign.  lie  therefore  disbanded  his  army,  more  especially  that  part  of  it  which  had
come  from  distant  countries.  Thus  was  it  done,  and  the  army  broke  up,  which  had  been
composed  of  men  from  Tartary,  Persia,  Media,  Syria,  Alexandria  and  Egypt,  and  from  other
distant  countries  of  infidels.  Bajazet  gave  particular  orders  to  sir  James  de  Helly,  that  when
he  went  to  France,  he  should  take  his  road  through  Lombardy,  and  salute  from  him  the
duke  of  Milan ; and  it  was  the  sultan’s  intention  that  sir  James  should  publish,  wherever
he  passed,  the  great  victory  he  had  gained  over  the  Christians.  The  count  de  Nevers  wrote
by  him,  as  well  for  himself  as  for  his  fellow-prisoners,  to  the  king  of  France,  and  to  the
duke  and  duchess  of  Burgundy.  On  receiving  these  letters  and  other  verbal  messages,  the
knight  departed  from  the  sultan  and  the  lords  of  France ; but  before  be  set  out,  Bajazet
made  him  promise,  on  oath,  that  as  soon  as  he  should  have  performed  the  journey,  and
delivered  all  he  had  been  charged  with  to  the  king  of  France  and  the  other  lords,  he  would
return,  which  the  knight  swore  he  would  do,  and  kept  his  oath.  We  will  now  leave
Bajazet,  and  the  French  lords  who  remained  prisoners  during  his  pleasure,  and  speak  of
other  things.


CHAPTER  LXXXIII. — THE  FRENCH  AND  OTHERS  WHO  HAD  BEEN  IN  TURKEY  SUFFER  GREAT
HARDSHIPS  ON  THEIR  RETURN  HOME,  AFTER  HAVING  ESCAPED  FROM  THE  BATTLE  OF
NICOPOLI.  — SIR  JAMES  DE  HELLY  BRINGS  CERTAIN  INTELLIGENCE  OF  THIS  DEFEAT  TO
THE  KING  OF  FRANCE.

After  this  memorable  victory  which  the  Turks  and  their  allies  gained  over  the  Christians,
as  has  been  related  in  this  history,  such  knights  as  could  escape  saved  themselves.  On  the
Monday  morning,  the  day  of  the  battle,  more  than  three  hundred  knights  and  squires,  being
out  foraging,  were  not  present  at  it.  When  they  heard  from  the  runaways  that  a defeat  was
inevitable,  they  gave  over  all  thoughts  of  returning  to  their  camp,  but  took  different  roads
to  make  their  escape  from  Turkey  as  speedily  as  they  could.  French,  Germans,  and  others,
made  for  a country  adjoining  to  Hungary,  called  Wallachia,  which  is  well  inhabited,  and
had  been  conquered  from  the  Turks,  and  turned  by  force  to  the  Christian  faith.  The  guards
of  the  passes  and  castles  in  Wallachia,  allowed  the  Christians  who  came  from  Turkey  free
entrance,  and  gave  them  lodging  ; but,  on  the  morrow,  when  they  were  about  to  depart,  they
took  from  the  knights  their  armour  and  all  they  had,  and  gave  them  in  return  a miserable
jacket,  and  some  little  money,  just  enough  to  bear  the  day’s  expenses.  This  favour  was  only
shown  to  gentlemen  ; for  those  who  were  not  of  that  rank  were  stripped  naked,  and  scourged
villanously  with  rods.  The  French  and  their  companions  suffered  most  exceedingly  in  poverty
and  distress,  during  their  passage  through  Wallachia  and  Hungary  ; and  with  difficulty  could
they  meet  with  any,  who,  for  the  love  of  God,  would  give  a morsel  of  bread,  or  lodge  them
for  the  night.  They  endured  this  misery  until  they  came  to  Vienna  in  Austria,  where  they
were  kindly  received  by  the  good  people,  who  clothed  such  as  were  naked,  and  shared  with

s s 2


r>2B


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


them  their  food.  They  were  treated  with  the  same  kindness  in  Bohemia  : had  they  found
the  Germans  as  hardhearted  as  the  Hungarians,  they  would  never  have  been  able  to  have
returned  home,  but  must  have  perished  with  cold  and  hunger  on  the  road.  Thus,  wherever
they  came,  whether  alone  or  in  companies,  they  brought  most  melancholy  news,  which  excited
pity  for  them  in  every  breast  that  heard  their  sad  tale.

Those  of  the  French  nation,  who  had  fled  from  Turkey,  arrived  at  last  at  Paris,  and  told
the  melancholy  event  of  the  battle  at  Nicopoli ; but  they  were  not  believed  nor  listened  to  :
the  Parisians  said  it  was  a pity  that  such  rascally  liars  were  not  hanged  or  drowned,  for  daily
spreading  abroad  so  many  falsehoods.  This  news  was,  however,  confirmed  by  others  who
arrived  after  them,  and  told  the  same  tale,  some  one  way,  and  others  differently,  but  all
agreeing  as  to  the  complete  overthrow  of  the  Hungarians  and  their  allies.  The  king  of
France  was  very  much  vexed  on  hearing  such  melancholy  nows  talked  of,  for  there  were  too
many  of  his  relations  implicated  in  tire  loss,  besides  other  excellent  knights  and  squires  of
France.  He  therefore  forbade  anything  to  be  said  on  the  subject,  until  he  should  receive
more  positive  information,  to  confirm  the  truth  or  falsehood  of  these  reports  ; and  those  who
had  divulged  such  news,  saying  they  were  come  from  Turkey  and  Hungary,  were  arrested,
and  confined  in  the  Chatelet  of  Paris.  They  consisted  of  great  numbers,  and  were  told,  that
if  what  they  had  said  should  be  found  false,  orders  had  been  given  for  all  of  them  to  be
drowned  ; for  the  king  was  very  wroth  they  should  have  published  such  disastrous  news.

It  happened  that,  on  Christmas-day  about  noon,  sir  James  de  Helly  arrived  in  Paris,  and
the  moment  lie  bad  dismounted  at  his  inn,  he  inquired  where  the  king  was.  They  told  him
at  the  hotel  de  Saint  Pol,  on  the  banks  of  the  Seine,  whither  he  went.  There  was  with  the
king  this  day,  as  is  usual  on  such  solemn  festivals,  the  duke  of  Orleans,  the  dukes  of  Berry,
Burgundy,  and  Bourbon,  the  count  de  Saint  Pol,  and  many  of  the  nobility.  Sir  James  de
Helly  entered  the  hotel  in  the  same  dress  he  had  rode  in,  booted  and  spurred,  so  that  he  was
aot  known ; for  ho  had,  for  a long  time,  been  seeking  adventures  in  foreign  parts,  in
preference  to  living  with  his  relations  and  friends.  By  fair  speeches  he  got  at  last  to  the
king’s  apartment,  and  made  himself  known,  saying  he  was  come  immediately  from  Bajazet
and  Turkey,  and  that  he  had  been  present  at  the  battle  of  Nicopoli,  where  the  Christians  had
lost  the  day  ; and  that  he  had  brought  certain  intelligence  from  the  count  de  Nevers,  and
from  the  other  French  lords  with  whom  he  had  marched  through  Hungary.  The  knights
of  the  king’s  chamber  were  pleased  to  hear  this ; for  they  knew  the  king,  the  duke  of
Burgundy,  and  many  lords,  were  very  anxious  to  learn  true  intelligenco  from  those  countries.
They  therefore  made  way  for  him  to  approach  the  king : when  near,  he  fell  on  his  knees,  as
was  right,  and  told  all  he  had  been  charged  with,  as  well  by  Bajazet,  as  by  the  count  de
Nevers  and  the  French  lords  his  fellow-prisoners.  The  king  and  lords  listened  attentively  to
all  he  said,  for  they  believed  he  was  speaking  the  truth.  Many  questions  were  asked,  in
order  to  hear  a more  detailed  account,  to  all  of  which  he  answered  very  pertinently,  and  to
the  satisfaction  of  the  king,  who  was  greatly  affected  at  the  loss  the  king  of  Plungary  and
his  chivalry  had  suffered.  He  was  somewhat  comforted  that  the  king  of  Hungary  had
escaped  death  and  prison ; for  he  supposed  that  he  would  renew  the  war  against  Turkey  with
vigour,  and  have  ample  revenge  on  Bajazet.

The  king  of  France  and  his  lords  were  rejoiced  that  the  count  de  Nevers  and  his  few
companions  were  free  from  danger  of  being  murdered ; and,  as  they  were  now  prisoners,  the
lords  debated  on  the  means  of  paying  their  ransom.  Sir  James  de  Plelly  said  that  he  hoped
Bajazet  would,  within  a year  or  two,  sell  them  their  liberty,  for  he  was  very  avaricious.
This  he  personally  knew,  having  resided  a long  time  in  Turkey,  and  for  three  years  served
Amurat,  father  to  the  present  sultan.  The  king  made  the  knight  rise,  and  treated  him
kindly,  as  did  the  lords  present.  They  said,  he  had  been  very  fortunate  to  have  had  a friend
in  so  great  a monarch  as  this  infidel  Bajazet,  after  such  a severe  battle,  and  to  be  sent  by  him
with  his  message  to  the  king  of  France.  He  and  his  family  ought  to  pride  themselves  on
such  good  fortune.  The  king  ordered  all  who  had  been  confined  in  the  Chatelet,  for  having
first  spread  abroad  this  intelligence,  to  be  set  at  liberty.  They  were  happy  to  hear  this,  for
many  of  them  had  repented  they  had  talked  so  much.


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  & c.


r,29


CHAPTER  LXXXIV. SIR  JAMES  DE  HELLY,  HAVING  RECEIVED  HIS  DESPATCHES  FROM  THE

KING  OF  FRANCE,  ARRIVES  IN  HUNGARY,  IN  HIS  WAY  TO  TURKEY. THE  KING  -SENDS

SIR  JOHN  DE  CHASTELMORANT,  WITH  PRESENTS  TO  BAJAZET,  AND  IIIS  RECOMMEND-
ATIONS IN  FAVOUR  OF  THE  FRENCH  PRISONERS. THE  MANNER  IN  WHICH  THEY  ARE

TREATED.

Wiien  the  intelligence  sir  James  de  Helly  had  brought  was  made  public,  all  who  had
lost  husband,  brother,  father,  or  child,  were  in  the  utmost  consternation,  as  may  easily  he
supposed.  The  high  nobility  of  France,  such  as  the  duchess  of  Burgundy  and  the  lady
Margaret  of  Hainault,  were  greatly  afflicted  on  account  of  their  son  and  husband  the  count
de  Nevers,  for  he  was  much  beloved  by  them.  The  countess  of  Eu  lamented  her  lord  the
constable,  as  did  the  countess  de  la  Marche  : the  ladies  of  C-oucy,  of  Bar,  and  Sully,  in  like
manner  bewailed  the  melancholy  situation  of  their  lords.  They  were  fortunate  in  having
only  their  lords’  captivity  to  lament,  and  were  somewhat  comforted  thereat ; but  the
relations  and  friends  of  those  who  had  been  massacred  were  inconsolable,  and  the  grief  of
France  lasted  a long  time.  The  duke  of  Burgundy  treated  most  kindly  sir  James  de  Helly
for  having  brought  him  intelligence  of  his  son : he  made  him  many  rich  gifts,  and  retained
him  for  one  of  his  knights,  with  a pension  of  two  hundred  livres  a-year  during  his  life.  The
king  of  France  also,  and  the  lords  of  the  court,  gave  him  handsome  presents.  He  informed
them  he  was  bound  to  return  to  Bajazet,  after  he  should  have  delivered  his  letters,  as  the
sultan’s  prisoner ; for  he  was  sent  solely  with  a view  to  publish  Bajazet’s  victory,  and  to
say  what  lords  had  perished  or  been  made  prisoners  at  the  battle  of  Nicopoli.  This  seemed
reasonable,  and  the  king,  the  duke  of  Burgundy,  and  such  lords  as  were  at  Paris,  prepared
to  write  to  their  friends  and  relations  who  were  prisoners.  It  was  determined  in  council,
that  the  king  should  send  some  knight  of  renown,  prudence,  and  valour  to  Bajazet,  who,
having  delivered  his  message,  was  to  return  with  more  detailed  accounts  of  the  state  of
the  prisoners,  in  case  sir  James  de  Helly  were  not  permitted  so  to  do  by  the  sultan,  whose
prisoner  he  was.  Sir  John  de  Chateaumorant  was  selected  for  this  embassy,  as  being  every
way  qualified  for  it.

Sir  James  de  Helly  was  asked  what  jewels  or  presents  would  be  most  acceptable  to  the
sultan,  that  the  count  de  Nevers  and  the  other  prisoners  might  fare  the  better.  The  knight
said,  that  Bajazet  took  great  pleasure  in  viewing  fine  tapestry  from  Arras  or  Picardy,  which
represented  ancient  histories  : he  was  also  fond  of  gerfalcons  : but  he  thought  that  fine  linen
from  R'heims,  and  scarlet  cloths,  would  be  most  acceptable  to  the  sultan  and  his  lords.
There  was  plenty  of  cloths  of  gold  and  silks  in  Turkey,  with  which  they  were  amply
provided,  and  consequently  would  like  things  they  could  not  get  at  home.  The  king  and
the  duke  of  Burgundy,  therefore,  resolved  what  to  send,  for  they  were  anxious  to  please
Bajazet  on  account  of  the  count  of  Nevers.  Sir  James  de  Helly  remained  at  Paris,  with
the  king  and  lords,  about  twelve  days,  and  was  well  listened  to  by  all : for  he  entertained
them  with  his  adventures  in  Hungary  and  Turkey,  and  with  descriptions  of  the  manners  of
Bajazet.  On  his  departure,  he  was  told, — “ Sir  James,  you  may  now  set  out  on  your
return  to  the  sultan,  at  your  leisure.  We  suppose  you  will  go  through  Lombardy,  to  the
duke  of  Milan ; for  he  and  Bajazet  are  great  friends,  although  they  have  never  seen  each
other : but,  whatever  road  you  take,  we  entreat  and  order  you  to  wait  in  Hungary  for  sir
John  de  Chateaumorant,  who  will  be  sent  by  the  king  with  presents  to  the  sultan,  as  it  is
our  intent  that  he  pursue  his  journey  from  Hungary  in  your  company  to  Turkey,  or  until
you  shall  meet  the  sultan,  that  he  may  behave  the  more  kindly  to  the  count  de  Nevers  and
his  fellow-prisoners,  who  are  now  in  his  power.”  Sir  James  promised  obedience,  and,
having  received  his  despatches,  took  leave  of  the  king,  the  duke  of  Burgundy,  and  the  other
lords,  and  left  Paris,  following  the  same  road  by  which  he  had  come.  He  continued  his
journey,  firmly  resolved  never  to  return  to  France  until  he  had  obtained  his  liberty.  After
his  departure,  the  duke  of  Burgundy  was  constantly  employed  in  preparing  the  presents  for
the  sultan  ; and,  by  the  time  they  were  provided,  sir  John  de  Chateaumorant  was  ready  to
set  out,  for  he  had  begun  his  preparations  for  the  journey  on  his  being  first  nominated  to


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


6o0


go  thither.  They  made  gi’eat  haste  to  have  the  presents  from  the  king  to  Bajazet  in  time
for  sir  John  de  Chateaumorant  to  overtake  sir  James  de  Helly.  These  presents  consisted  of
pieces  of  the  best-worked  tapestry  from  Arras,  representing  the  history  of  Alexander  the
Great  and  his  conquests,  which  was  a delightful  sight  for  all  men  of  honour,  the  finest  linens
from  Rheims,  and  scarlet  and  crimson  cloths,  which  were  packed  on  six  sumpter-horses.
All  these  things  were  easily  to  he  had  for  money ; but  there  was  great  difficulty  in  procuring
white  gerfalcons.  At  last,  however,  they  were  got,  either  in  Paris  or  from  Germany;  and
sir  John  de  Chateaumorant,  having  received  his  final  instructions,  left  Paris,  and  began  his
journey  fifteen  days  after  sir  James  de  Helly.

In  the  interval  during  which  these  knights  were  on  their  journey,  the  king  of  Hungary
returned  to  his  kingdom.  On  his  arrival  being  known,  his  subjects  were  greatly  rejoiced,
and  flocked  to  him,  for  he  was  much  beloved.  They  comforted  him  by  saying,  that  if  in
this  campaign  he  had  been  unfortunate,  in  another  he  would  be  more  successful.  The  king
bore  his  misfortunes  as  well  as  he  could.  Immediately  after  the  battle,  Bajazet  disbanded
his  army  and  marched  to  the  city  of  Bursa,  carrying  with  him  his  prisoners.  They  were
put  under  strict  confinement,  and  very  little  comfort  allowed  them.  They  suffered  much
from  the  change  of  diet,  as  they  had  always  been  accustomed  to  have  their  own  cooks,  and
their  tables  served  with  every  delicacy ; but  of  all  this  they  were  deprived,  and  forced  to
live  on  coarse  meat,  and  that  badly  or  not  thoroughly  dressed.  They  had  plenty  of  spices,
and  millet  bread,  which  is  disagreeable  to  a French  palate.  They  had  great  difficulty  in
procuring  wine  : although  they  were  great  princes,  there  was  not  any  attention  paid  them,
for  the  Turks  were  indifferent  whether  they  were  sick  or  in  health ; and,  if  the  advice  of
several  had  been  adopted,  they  would  all  have  been  put  to  death.

These  lords  of  France  comforted  each  other,  and  thankfully  received  whatever  was  given
them,  for  they  could  no  way  better  themselves.  At  the  beginning  of  their  captivity,  several
of  them  were  very  unwell : the  count  de  Nevers  bore  his  misfortune  the  best,  and  kept  up
his  spirits  to  comfort  the  others.  lie  was  assisted  in  this  by  the  lord  Boucicaut,  the  count
de  la  Marche,  and  lord  Henry  de  Bar,  who  said,  that  the  honours  and  glories  of  arms  could
not  be  gained  without  meeting  with  unfortunate  reverses ; and  that  no  man,  however
valiant  or  lucky,  or  accustomed  to  war,  had  everything  according  to  his  wish ; and  that  they
ought  to  thank  God,  for  having  had  their  lives  saved  from  the  furious  rage  of  Bajazet  and
his  followers,  for  it  had  been  determined  by  the  army  to  put  every  one  to  death.  Boucicaut
said,  “ I ought  to  be  more  thankful  than  any  one  to  God  for  my  life  being  spared,  for  I
was  brought  out  to  be  massacred  as  my  companions  had  been,  and  should  have  lost  my
head,  had  not  my  lord  of  Nevers  cast  himself  on  his  knees  to  Bajazet,  who,  at  his  request,
granted  me  his  pardon.  I hold  this  a most  fortunate  escape ; and  since  it  was  the  good
pleasure  of  our  lord  that  I should  live,  I have  no  doubt  but  that  God,  who  has  delivered  us
from  this  peril,  will  continue  his  mercy  to  us,  for  we  are  his  soldiers ; and  that  we  shall
soon  obtain  our  liberty,  for  we  are  now  suffering  in  his  cause.  Beside,  sir  James  de  Helly
is  on  his  road  to  France,  who  will  relate  to  the  king  and  barons  our  distress ; and  I expect,
within  the  year,  we  shall  receive  comfort  and  our  liberty.  Things  will  not  remain  long
as  they  are.  There  is  much  good  sense  in  the  king  and  the  duke  of  Burgundy,  who
will  never  forget  us ; and,  by  some  means  or  other,  we  shall  receive  sufficient  sums  for  our
ransoms.”

Thus  the  gallant  knight,  the  lord  Boucicaut,  comforted  himself,  and  bore  his  captivity
with  patience,  as  did  likewise  the  young  count  de  Nevers ; but  the  lord  de  Coucy  was  sorely
afflicted,  which  is  not  to  be  wondered  at.  Before  this  event,  he  had  been  a lord  of  such  high
spirit  as  nothing  could  cast  down : this  captivity  in  Turkey,  however,  preyed  on  his  mind
more  than  it  did  on  the  spirits  of  the  others,  and  he  became  quite  melancholy.  He
complained  of  great  oppression  at  his  heart,  and  said  he  should  never  return  to  France ;
that  he  had  escaped  many  perils  and  dangerous  adventures,  but  this  would  be  his  last.
The  lord  Henry  de  Bar  consoled  him,  and  blamed  him  for  being  so  disconsolate  without
cause ; and  told  him  it  was  folly  to  be  thus  cast  down,  when  he  ought  to  find  more
satisfaction  in  his  own  mind  than  any  other.  Notwithstanding  the  advice  he  was  giving,
he  himself  severely  felt  his  own  situation,  and  bitterly  regretted  his  wife.  The  count


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


631


d’Eu,  constable  of  France,  suffered  from  similar  regrets.  Sir  Guy  de  la  Tremouille  and
the  count  de  la  Marche  kept  up  their  spirits  very  tolerably.  Bajazet  was  desirous  they
should  have  some  amusements  in  their  captivity,  and  at  times  visited  and  conversed  with
them  most  graciously : he  was  likewise  anxious  they  should  witness  his  state  and  power.

We  will  now  leave  them,  and  return  to  sir  James  de  Helly  and  sir  John  de  Chateau-
morant,  who  were  both  journeying  towards  Hungary.


CHAPTER  LXXXV. SIR  JAMES  DE  HELLY,  ON  HIS  RETURN  TO  TURKEY,  OBTAINS  HIS

LIBERTY,  AND  CARRIES  A PASSPORT  FROM  THE  SULTAN  TO  SIR  JOHN  DE  CHASTEL-

MORANT  IN  HUNGARY. SIR  JOHN  DE  CHASTELMORANT  IS  FORCED  TO  SEND  A MESSENGER

TO  TI1E  KING  OF  FRANCE,  TO  INFORM  IIIM  THAT  THE  KING  OF  HUNGARY  WILL  NOT
ALLOW  THE  PRESENTS  TO  BE  CARRIED  TO  THE  SULTAN.

Sir  James  de  Ilelly  waited  about  ten  or  twelve  days  at  Buda,  in  Hungary,  for  sir  John
de  Chateaumorant,  who  was  continuing  his  road  as  expeditiously  as  he  could.  Sir  James
was  rejoiced  on  his  arrival;  for  he  was  impatient  to  return  to  Turkey  to  acquit  himself  of
his  promise,  and  to  see  and  bring  comfort  to  the  count  de  Nevers  and  the  other  French  lords
who  were  prisoners.  The  king  of  Hungary  made  sir  John  de  Chateaumorant  a kind
welcome,  in  compliment  to  the  king  of  France  and  his  royal  cousins.  He  learnt  from  his
people  that  the  knight  was  carrying  magnificent  presents,  and  rich  jewels,  to  the  sultan :
this  vexed  him  greatly,  but  he  prudently  dissembled  any  knowledge  of  it  until  sir  James  de
Helly  should  have  set  out  for  Turkey.  He  declared,  however,  to  his  confidential  friends,
that  that  recreant  dog,  Bajazet,  should  never  receive  any  presents  from  France  or  elsewhere,
if  he  had  the  power  to  prevent  it.  When  sir  James  had  refreshed  himself  some  time  at
Buda,  he  took  leave  of  the  king  and  of  Chateaumorant,  to  continue  his  journey  to  Turkey,
that  he  might  obtain  from  the  sultan  a passport  for  sir  John  to  pursue  his  road  to  him.
When  sir  James  mentioned  it,  the  king  of  Hungary  replied  he  would  do  well.  On  this  the
knight,  having  procured  guides,  was  conducted  by  them  through  Hungary  and  Wallachia
to  Bursa,  but  did  not  find  there  Bajazet,  who  was  gone  to  another  town  in  Turkey  called
Poly.  Wherever  he  went  he  carried  the  prisoners  with  him,  excepting  the  lord  de  Coney,
who  was  left  at  Bursa,  unable  to  ride  from  sickness.  There  tarried  with  him  his  cousin,
a valiant  baron  from  Greece,  and  a descendant  of  the  dukes  of  Austria,  called  the  lord
de  Mathelin.

Sir  James  de  Helly  continued  his  journey  to  Poly,  where  he  met  Bajazet,  who  was  glad
to  see  him  return  from  France,  and  keep  his  word.  Sir  James  humbled  himself  much
before  him,  and  said,  “ Most  dear  and  redoubted  lord,  here  is  your  prisoner,  who  has
delivered,  to  the  best  of  his  abilities,  the  message  you  have  charged  him  with.”  Bajazet
replied,  “Thou  art  welcome,  for  thou  hast  loyally  acquitted  thyself;  and,  in  consideration
of  it,  I now  give  thee  thy  liberty.”  Sir  James  thanked  him  respectfully  for  this  favour,
and  told  him  that  the  king  of  France,  and  the  duke  of  Burgundy,  father  to  the  count  de
Nevers  his  prisoner,  had  sent  him  an  honourable  knight  with  credential  letters  as  ambassador,
and  likewise  with  such  grand  presents  as  he  was  sure  would  give  him  delight.  The  sultan
asked  if  he  had  seen  them.  He  replied,  “ I have  not ; but  the  knight  charged  with  the
commission  has  brought  them  as  far  as  Hungary,  and  is  now  at  Buda  waiting  my  return,
with  passports  for  him  to  continue  his  journey  : I came  to  announce  this  news  to  you,  and
to  solicit  passports,  if  it  be  agreeable  to  you  to  receive  him.”  “We  are  very  willing  he
should  have  passports,  and  you  may  have  them  made  out  in  any  form  you  choose.”  The
knight  thanked  him  for  his  gracious  answer,  when  the  sultan  left  him  to  attend  to  other
affairs.  About  an  hour  afterwards,  sir  James  requested  the  sultan’s  permission  to  visit  and
converse  with  the  French  prisoners,  as  he  had  much  to  say  to  them  from  their  friends  and
relations.  Bajazet  was  some  time  silent  before  he  gave  him  an  answer,  when  he  said,
“ Thou  shalt  see  one  of  them,  but  not  more.”  He  then  made  a sign  to  his  attendants  for
the  count  de  Nevers  to  be  brought  to  converse  with  sir  James  for  a short  space,  and  then
to  be  carried  back  to  his  prison.  The  order  was  instantly  obeyed  ; and  the  count  de  Nevers


632


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


saw  sir  James  de  Iielly  with  great  joy.  He  made  many  inquiries  after  the  king  of  France,
the  duke  and  duchess  of  Burgundy,  and  what  was  passing  in  that  country.  The  knight
related  to  him  everything  he  had  seen  or  heard,  and  delivered  him  all  the  messages  he  had
been  charged  with ; hut  they  were  greatly  interrupted  by  the  officers  of  the  sultan,  who
pressed  them  to  finish  their  conversation,  as  they  had  other  business  to  attend  to.

Sir  James  asked  the  count  if  all  the  other  French  lords  were  in  good  health.  Fie  replied,
— “ All,  except  the  lord  de  Coucy,  who  has  remained  sick  at  Bursa ; and  this  favour,  I
understand,  has  been  granted  through  the  credit  of  the  lord  de  Mathelin,  who  has  pledged
himself  for  him,  and  is  much  esteemed  by  the  sultan.”  Sir  James  then  told  him  that  the
king  and  the  duke  of  Burgundy  had  sent  sir  John  Chateaumorant  as  ambassador  to  Bajazet,
with  most  magnificent  presents  to  soften  the  sultan’s  anger  ; but  that  sir  John  had  stopped
at  Buda  in  Hungary  until  lie  should  return  with  a passport  for  him  and  his  attendants ;
that  the  sultan  had  promised  the  passport,  with  which  he  intended  returning  to  Buda  in  a
very  few  days.  The  count  de  Nevers  was  exceedingly  rejoiced  on  hearing  this ; but  he
dared  not  give  way  to  his  feelings,  for  the  Turks  were  observing  them.  The  last  words  the
count  said  to  him  were, — “ Sir  James,  I understand  that  Bajazet  has  given  you  your  liberty,
and  that  you  may  return  to  France  when  you  please.  On  your  arrival  there,  tell  my  lord
and  father  from  me,  that  if  he  have  any  intention  to  ransom  me  and  my  companions,  he
must  not  delay  to  negotiate  through  the  means  of  Venetian  or  Genoese  merchants,  and  close
with  the  first  offer  the  sultan,  or  his  ministers  for  him,  may  make ; for  we  are  lost  for  ever,
if  it  be  longer  neglected.  But  I understand  that  the  sultan  is  very  loyal  and  courteous  in
his  character,  when  applied  to  properly.”

Thus  ended  their  interview,  and  the  count  de  Nevers  was  conducted  back  to  prison.  Sir
James  de  Iielly  hastened  the  passport  which  had  been  promised  him.  When  it  had  been
drawn  out  in  the  usual  form,  and  sealed  by  Bajazet,  it  was  delivered  to  the  knight,  who
took  leave  of  the  sultan  and  his  court,  and  set  off  on  his  return  to  Buda.  He  instantly
waited  on  sir  John  de  Chateaumorant,  who  was  impatiently  expecting  him,  and  said, —
“ I bring  you  a passport  for  yourself  and  your  attendants,  to  go  and  return  in  safety  from
Turkey,  which  the  sultan  readily  granted  me.”  “ That  is  well  done,”  replied  sir  John  :
“ let  us  go  to  the  king  of  Hungary,  and  tell  him  the  news.  To-morrow  morning  I will  begin
my  journey,  for  I have  staid  here  long  enough.”  They  went  to  the  king’s  chamber,  and
related  to  him  all  you  have  just  heard.  The  king  replied, — “ Chateaumorant  and  Helly,  I
am  glad  to  see  you  both,  as  well  on  your  own  account  as  for  the  affection  I bear  to  the  king
and  my  cousins  of  F rance,  and  I shall  at  all  times  be  happy  to  serve  you.  You  may  travel
through  any  part  of  my  kingdom,  unmolested,  or  even  into  Turkey,  if  it  he  your  pleasure ;
but  with  regard  to  your  carrying  any  rich  presents  or  jewels  to  the  sultan,  which  you,
Chateaumorant,  are  charged  with  from  France,  I will  never  consent  that  they  pass  through
my  kingdom,  to  he  offered  to  the  infidel  Bajazet,  for  he  shall  never  be  enriched  by  them.  I
should  be  extremely  blamed  and  laughed  at,  if  in  future  times  he  be  enabled  to  boast,  that
to  gain  his  love,  and  from  fear,  because  he  has  gained  a victory  over  me,  and  detains  some
great  barons  of  France  prisoners,  the  king  of  France  and  his  princes  have  sent  him  rich
presents.  In  respect  to  the  gerfalcons,  I am  indifferent  whether  he  have  them  or  not ; for
birds  fly  anywhere,  and  are  as  soon  lost  as  given ; but  with  respect  to  fine  tapestry,  which
would  remain  as  a proof  of  his  boastings  being  true,  I will  not  consent  that  he  enjoy  the
pleasure  of  possessing  it.  Therefore,  Chateaumorant,”  continued  the  king  of  Hungary,  “ if
you  wish  to  make  a journey  into  Turkey,  to  see  Bajazet,  and  present  him  with  the  falcons,
you  may  do  so,  but  you  shall  not  carry  him  anything  else.”

Sir  John  de  Chateaumorant  replied, — “ Certainly,  sire,  it  is  not  the  intention  of  the  king
of  France,  nor  to  his  honour  more  than  to  that  of  the  other  lords  who  have  sent  me,  that  I
fail  in  any  particular  in  the  accomplishment  of  the  objects  they  have  charged  me  with.” —
“ Very  well,”  said  the  king : “ you  will  not  at  present  have  any  other  answer  from  me  than
what  you  have  heard.”  The  two  knights  left  the  apartment,  and  consulted  together  how  to
act,  for  this  refusal  of  the  king  of  Hungary  had  disconcerted  them.  They  thought  their  only
expedient  was  to  send  oft'  a messenger  express  with  the  account  of  the  king  of  Hungary’s
conduct  to  the  king  of  France  and  the  duke  of  Burgundy,  for  them  to  provide  a remedy,  and


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &<\


G33


to  explain  tlie  causes  of  their  delay.  They  wrote,  in  consequence,  letters  to  the  king  and  the
duke  of  Burgundy,  and  engaged  a trusty  messenger  to  carry  them,  whom  they  supplied  with
a sufficiency  of  money  for  him  frequently  to  change  his  horses  on  the  road,  that  he  might
hasten  his  journey,  while  they  waited  his  return  at  Buda.

The  messenger  journeyed  with  great  diligence  to  Paris,  and  delivered  his  letters  to  the  king
of  France  and  the  duke  of  Burgundy.  Having  read  them,  they  were  much  surprised  and
vexed  that  the  king  of  Hungary  should  prevent  their  ambassador  from  continuing  his  journey
with  the  presents  to  the  sultan  of  Turkey,  as  they  had  ordered  him  to  do.  The  duke  of
Berry,  however,  excused  the  king  of  Hungary,  saying  he  was  no  way  to  blame,  for  it  was
too  debasing  to  a king  of  France  to  send  presents  and  jewels  to  such  a recreant  pagan  king.
The  duke  of  Burgundy  was  more  nearly  affected  in  the  matter,  and  defended  the  measure  as
reasonable,  since  fortune  had  been  so  favourable,  to  give  the  sultan  a victory,  in  which  the
whole  force  of  the  king  of  Hungary  was  slain  or  put  to  flight,  and  the  greater  part  of  the
nobles  made  prisoners  that  had  been  in  the  battle.  It  therefore  behoved  their  relations  and
friends  to  adopt  every  mode  for  their  deliverance,  if  they  were  desirous  of  seeing  them  again.
This  speech  of  the  duke  of  Burgundy  was  supported  by  the  king  and  council.  The  king
asked  the  duke  of  Berry, — “ Good  uncle,  if  this  sultan  Bajazet,  or  any  other  pagan  king,
were  to  send  you  a rich  and  sparkling  ruby,  would  you  accept  of  it?”  “ My  lord,”
replied  the  duke,  “ I should  consider  of  it.”  The  king  reminded  him  that  it  was  not  ten
years  since  the  sultan  had  sent  him  a ruby  that  had  cost  twenty  thousand  francs.

The  king  of  Hungary  was  condemned  by  all  for  having  prevented  the  presents  from  being
carried  to  the  sultan,  which  might  have  the  effect  of  adding  to  the  distressful  state  of  the
French  lords  that  were  prisoners.  The  king  was  therefore  advised  to  write  courteous  letters
to  the  king  of  Hungary,  to  request  that  he  would  no  longer  prevent  his  ambassador  from
proceeding  on  his  journey  with  the  presents  to  the  court  of  Turkey.  When  they  had  been
fairly  written  out  and  sealed,  they  were  given  to  the  messenger  from  Hungary,  who,  leaving
Paris,  set  out  on  his  return  to  Buda.


CHAPTER  LXXXVI. TnE  DUCHESS  OP  ORLEANS  IS  SUSPECTED  OF  CAUSING  THE

king’s  ILLNESS.

Every  year  the  king  of  France  had  relapses  of  his  frenzy,  without  any  physician  or
surgeon  being  able  to  prevent  it.  Some  indeed  had  boasted  that  they  would  restore  liim  to
sound  health,  but  it  was  soon  found  they  laboured  in  vain.  The  king’s  disorder  never  ceased
until  it  had  run  its  course,  in  spite  of  prayers  and  medicines.  Some  of  the  physicians  and
sorcerers  who  attended  the  king,  on  finding  their  labour  lost,  declared  the  king  must  have
been  poisoned  or  enchanted  by  some  pernicious  herbs.  This  agitated  greatly  the  minds  of
the  nobility  and  people,  for  these  sorcerers  affirmed,  the  better  to  gain  belief,  that  the  king
was  under  the  power  of  sorcery,  and  that  they  knew  it  from  the  devil  who  had  revealed  it  to
them.  Several  of  these  conjurors  had  been  burnt  at  Paris  and  Avignon,  for  having  gone  so
far  as  to  say  that  the  duchess  of  Orleans,  daughter  to  the  duke  of  Milan,  was  the  cause  of
this  mischief,  that  she  might  succeed  to  the  crown  of  France.  This  was  so  much  believed
that  common  report  said  she  had  frequently  practised  such  arts,  and  that,  so  long  as  she
was  near  the  person  of  the  king,  he  neither  would  nor  could  regain  his  health.  It  was
therefore  necessary,  to  put  an  end  to  this  slander,  that  the  duchess  of  Orleans  should  quit
Paris.  She  went  first  to  reside  at  Asnieres,  a very  handsome  castle  near  Pontoise,  that
belonged  to  the  duke  her  lord,  and  then  to  Neufchateau,  on  the  Loire,  which  also  belonged
to  him.  The  duke  of  Orleans  was  very  melancholy  on  hearing  such  injurious  reports  against
his  duchess,  which  he  dissembled  as  well  as  he  could,  and  never  on  this  account  quitted  the
king  or  court,  for  he  took  pleasure  in  attending  public  business  and  the  different  councils  on
the  affairs  of  the  realm.

Galeas  duke  of  Milan  was  duly  informed  of  the  infamous  crimes  his  daughter,  the  duchess
of  Orleans,  was  accused  of.  He  deeply  felt  the  injury,  and  had  twice  or  thrice  sent  ambassadors
to  France,  to  exculpate  his  daughter  to  the  king  of  France  and  his  council,  offering,  at  the


034


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


same  time,  a knight  or  knights  that  should  engage  in  mortal  combat  any  person  who  should
dare  to  accuse  his  daughter  of  such  iniquitous  and  treasonable  practices.  The  duke  of
Milan  threatened  to  make  war  on  France ; for  he  had  learnt  that  the  king,  when  he  gave
his  daughter  in  marriage  to  the  king  of  England,  between  Ardres  and  Calais,  had  declared
that  on  his  return  to  Paris,  he  would  not  attend  to  anything  until  he  should  march  a large
army  into  the  Milanese ; and  that  his  son-in-law,  king  Richard,  had,  to  his  great  satisfaction,
offered  him  one  thousand  English  spears  and  six  thousand  archers.  Galeas  had  likewise
heard  that  purveyances  were  making  throughout  Dauphiny  and  Savoy  for  the  king  of  France,
for  it  was  by  Piedmont  he  intended  entering  Lombardy.  This  expedition,  however,  was
laid  aside,  and  no  more  thought  of,  when  the  news  arrived  of  the  unfortunate  issue  of  the
battle  of  Nicopoli,  and  the  death  and  captivity  of  the  French  nobles.  The  king  and  the  duke
of  Burgundy  were  so  afflicted  at  this  event,  that  they  could  not  attend  to  anything  else ;
they  besides  knew  that  the  duke  of  Milan  was  on  the  most  friendly  terms  with  Bajazet,
which  was  an  additional  reason  at  this  moment  not  to  push  any  hostile  attempts  against  him,
and  he  was  left  unmolested.


CHAPTER  LXXXVII. THE  DTTKE  AND  DUCHESS  OF  BURGUNDY  DILIGENTLY  EXERT  THEM-

SELVES TO  FIND  MEANS  TO  RANSOM  THE  COUNT  DE  NEVERS,  THEIR  SON,  AND  HIS

FELLOW-PRISONERS  IN  TURKEY. THE  KING  OF  HUNGARY,  THROUGH  THE  PERSUASION

OF  THE  GRAND  MASTER  OF  RHODES,  PERMITS  THE  AMBASSADOR  FROM  THE  KING  OF
FRANCE  TO  PASS  THROUGH  HIS  KINGDOM  WITH  THE  PRESENTS  FOR  THE  SULTAN
BAJAZET.

The  duke  and  duchess  of  Burgundy  considered  every  possible  means  of  recovering  their
son.  As  they  knew  they  must  pay  a very  large  sum  for  his  ransom,  they  reduced  their
expenses  as  much  as  possible,  to  gather  all  the  money  they  could  ; without  this,  they  knew
they  could  not  succeed  ; and  made  many  friends  among  the  Venetian  and  Genoese  merchants,
for  through  their  means  the  ransoms  were  to  be  negotiated.  The  duke  of  Burgundy  resided
with  the  king,  who  conversed  with  him  frequently  on  affairs  of  state,  and  paid  attention  to
what  he  said ; for  the  duke  had  the  principal  share  in  the  government,  which  made  his  own
affairs  prosper  the  more.

At  this  time  there  lived  in  Paris  a Lombard,  who  was  a great  and  rich  merchant,  and
transacted  business  for  the  other  Lombards : he  was  known  and  spoken  of  all  over  the
world,  wherever  commerce  was  carried  on  : his  name  was  Dinde  Desponde,  and  by  him  all
exchanges  were  made.  If  before  the  event  of  the  battle  of  Nicopoli  lie  was  beloved  by  the
king  of  France  and  the  lords  of  his  court,  he  was  now  much  more  so,  and  had  frequent
consultations  with  the  duke  of  Burgundy  on  the  surest  means  to  recover  his  son  and  the
other  lords  who  were  prisoners  in  Turkey.  Dinde  Desponde  said  to  the  duke, — “ My  lord,
by  degrees  all  thinos  are  brought  about.  The  merchants  of  Genoa,  and  of  the  islands  under
fcheir  obedience,  are  well  known  everywhere,  and  traffic  with  Cairo,  Alexandria,  Damascus,
Damietta,  and  Turkey,  and  in  different  countries  of  infidels ; for  trade,  my  lord,  as  you  know,
finds  its  way  everywhere,  and  rules  the  world.  Write,  therefore,  to  the  Genoese,  and
prevail  on  the  king  to  do  so  likewise,  in  a friendly  manner,  promising  them  great  rewards  if
they  will  undertake  the  business ; for  there  is  nothing  but  may  be  accomplished  with  money.
The  king  of  Cyprus,  who  is  near  to  Turkey,  and  now  at  peace  with  the  sultan,  may  also
assist  in  the  matter.  You  must  suppose  that,  as  for  myself,  I will  exert  my  powers  to  the
utmost,  for  I am  bound  to  obey  you  in  everything.”

The  duke  and  duchess  of  Burgundy  neglected  no  means  to  free  their  son  from  his  captivity,
for  they  were  sorely  afflicted  by  it.  He  was  the  heir  to  their  vast  possessions ; and  this
misfortune  had  happened  to  him  on  his  first  onset  in  arms.  The  ladies  of  France  lamented
the  loss  of  their  husbands  and  friends,  especially  the  lady  of  Coucy,  who  refused  all  comfort,
and  bewailed  him  day  and  night.  The  duke  of  Lorrain  and  sir  Ferri  de  Lorrain,  her
brothers,  visited  her  at  Saint  Gobin  *,  where  she  resided,  and  consoled  her  as  well  as  they
* “ Saint  Gobin,” — near  La  Fere  in  Picardy,  now  famous  for  its  fine  manufacture  of  looting-glasses.


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


C35

could.  Tliey  advised  her  to  send  into  Turkey  to  gain  some  intelligence  of  him,  for  they  had
heard  he  had  greater  liberty  allowed  him  than  the  other  prisoners.  The  lady  thanked  her
brothers  for  this  advice,  and  instantly  sent  for  sir  Robert  Desne*,  a good  and  valiant  knight
of  the  Cambresis.  She  entreated  him  so  sweetly,  urging  him,  out  of  affection  to  her,  to
undertake  a journey  into  Turkey,  that  the  knight  consented,  and  engaged  to  go  thither  and
bring  back  full  intelligence  of  the  lord  de  Coucy.

Sir  Robert  soon  made  his  preparations,  and,  accompanied  by  four  others,  set  out  for
Hungary.  In  like  manner  did  other  ladies  in  France  send  to  inquire  after  their  husbands.
The  king  of  Hungary  was  very  obstinate  in  his  refusal  to  allow  sir  John  de  Chateaumorant
to  continue  his  journey  to  Turkey  with  the  presents  from  the  king  of  France  to  the  sultan.
Though  this  greatly  displeased  sir  John  and  sir  James  de  Ilelly,  they  could  not  prevail  on
him  to  alter  his  resolution.  It  happened  that  the  grand-master  of  Rhodes  came  at  this  time
to  Ruda.  He  was  most  kindly  received  by  the  king,  as  indeed  he  ought  to  have  been,  for  on
the  day  of  the  battle  he  had  saved  the  king  from  death  or  captivity.  He  made  acquaintance
with  the  two  knights  from  France,  who  related  to  him  the  conduct  of  the  king  of  Hungary,
and  the  circumstance  of  his  detaining  them  at  Buda.  He  was  much  surprised,  and  said,  to
soften  their  anger,  he  would  speak  to  the  king  on  the  subject,  and,  as  they  should  soon
experience,  with  good  effect.  He  managed  the  matter  so  prudently  with  the  king,  that  they
were  permitted  to  continue  their  journey  to  Turkey,  with  all  their  presents,  which  were
restored  to  them.  The  ambassador  arrived  in  safety  at  the  place  where  Bajazet  resided,
owing  to  the  passports  sir  James  de  Ilelly  had  brought  to  him.  The  sultan  received  the
knights,  and  their  presents  from  the  king  of  France,  with  much  respect,  and  seemed  very
proud  of  what  the  king  had  sent  him.  The  knights  were  only  permitted  to  have  one  interview
with  the  count  de  Nevers,  but  with  none  of  the  others  : this,  however,  was  of  a sufficiently
long  continuance.  On  their  taking  leave,  the  count  said, — “ Recommend  me  to  my  lord  and
father,  the  duke  of  Burgundy,  to  my  lady-mother,  to  my  lord  the  king,  and  to  my  lord  of
Berry,  and  salute  in  my  name  all  my  friends.  Should  there  he  any  negotiation  going  forward
with  Bajazet,  urge  the  speedy  conclusion,  for  we  suffer  from  every  delay.  We  were
originally  eight  prisoners,  but  are  now  increased,  by  sixteen  more,  to  twenty-four  + : let  the
ransom  include  all  of  us,  for  it  will  be  as  readily  agreed  to  for  the  whole  as  for  one.  Bajazet
has  settled  this  in  his  own  mind,  and  you  may  depend  on  his  steadiness ; and  those  who
have  sent  you  hither  may  rely  on  his  word,  for  it  is  inviolable.”  Sir  James  de  Helly  and
sir  John  de  Chateaumorant  replied,  they  would  say  and  do  everything  he  had  directed.
They  then  took  leave  of  the  count  de  Nevers,  and  the  sultan,  and  set  out  for  Hungary  and
France.  On  their  return,  tliey  met  the  messenger  whom  they  had  sent  to  Paris,  as  has  been
mentioned,  bringing  letters  to  the  king  of  Hungary.  They  made  him  come  back  with  them,
as  he  had  now  no  occasion  to  proceed  further,  for  they  had  been  in  Turkey ; and  they  all
returned  together,  to  the  king  of  France  at  Paris.


CHAPTER  LXXXVIII. THE  DUKE  OF  GLOUCESTER  PLOTS  THE  DESTRUCTION  OF  HIS  NEPHEW,

THE  KING  OF  ENGLAND. THE  KING,  HAVING  INFORMATION  OF  HIS  PRACTICES,  HAS

HIM  ARRESTED  BY  THE  EARL  MARSHAL.

I have  been  some  time  without  saying  anything  of  the  duke  of  Gloucester,  the  youngest
son  of  the  late  king  Edward  of  England,  for  I have  not  had  any  cause  for  so  doing.  But  I will
now  speak  of  him,  because  his  heart  would  no  way  incline  to  the  French,  and  he  was  more
pleased  than  hurt  at  the  melancholy  loss  they  had  sustained  in  Turkey.  He  had  with  him
a knight  called  sir  John  Lackingay,  who  was  his  most  confidential  adviser,  and,  as  it  was
afterwards  discovered,  held  with  him  such  conversations  as  the  following : “ These  vain-
boasting  French  have  been  nearly  annihilated  in  Turkey.  Such  knights  and  squires  as  join
company  with  them  know  not  what  they  are  about,  and  are  ill-advised  when  they  do  so,  for
they  are  so  full  of  vanity  and  presumption,  that  they  never  can  bring  to  a successful  issue
anything  they  undertake.  This  has  often  been  apparent  during  the  wars  of  my  lord  and
* “ Sir  Robert  Desne.”  Sir  Robert  de  Seu,  MSS.  B.  M.  and  Hafod.  f The  MSS.  say  nine  original  prisoners.


G3G


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


father,  and  our  brother  the  prince  ff  Wales,  for  they  never  could  obtain  a victory  over  our
men.  I know  not  why  we  have  any  truces  with  them  : if  it  were  war  with  them,  as  we
have  good  cause  for  quarrel,  we  would  wage  it  now  more  successfully  than  ever,  for  the
flower  of  the  French  chivalry  is  slain  or  in  captivity.  Our  countrymen  wish  for  war,  for
without  it  they  cannot  exist,  and  idleness  to  men  at  arms  is  death.  I swear,  therefore,  by
God,  that  if  I be  alive,  and  in  health,  twro  years  hence,  the  war  shall  be  renewed,  for  I will
not  keep  any  truce  or  peace.  The  French  have  shown  how  little  they  have  regarded  them
in  former  times,  and  have,  by  whatever  treacherous  and  underhand  means  they  could  devise,
deprived  us  of  the  duchy  of  Aquitaine,  which  was  given  up  to  my  late  lord  and  father,  in
conformity  to  a sound  treaty  of  peace.  This  I have  more  than  once  charged  them  with,  in  the
conference  on  the  other  side  of  the  sea ; but  they  made  such  flourishing  and  complimentary
speeches,  they  always  lighted  on  their  feet,  and  I was  not  attended  to  cither  by  the  king  or
by  my  brothers.  If  the  king  of  England  had  a good  head,  and  were  as  desirous  as  I am  of
war,  and  would  take  some  pains  to  recover  the  inheritance  they  have  shamefully  stolen  from
him,  he  would  find  one  hundred  thousand  archers  and  six  thousand  men  at  arms  willing  to
cross  the  sea,  and  ready  to  serve  him  with  their  lives  and  fortunes.  But  things  are  not  so.  At
this  moment  we  have  an  unwarlike  king,  who  is  indifferent  as  to  arms,  otherwise  he  would
show  himself  in  France  : for  there  never  was  so  favourable  an  opportunity  to  carry  the  war
thither  as  at  this  present  moment,  since  they  would  be  assured  of  a battle,  and  the  people  of
this  country,  who  are  always  eager  to  fight  with  those  richer  than  themselves,  for  the  sake
of  the  spoil,  would  venture  boldly,  in  the  hope  of  having  the  like  success  with  their  ancestors
under  the  king  my  father,  of  happy  memory,  and  my  brother  the  prince  of  Wales.

“ I am  the  last  of  the  royal  family  of  England;  but,  were  I believed,  I would  be  the  first
to  renew  the  wars,  to  retaliate  for  the  wrongs  that  have  been  done  us,  and  which  they  are
daily  doing  by  the  connivance  and  weakness  of  our  rulers,  more  particularly  of  our  head  the
king  of  England,  who  has  allied  himself  by  marriage  with  the  daughter  of  his  enemy  the
king  of  France.  That  is  a sure  proof  he  will  have  no  war:  certainly  not:  he  is  too  heavy
behind,  and  only  wishes  for  the  pleasures  of  the  table  and  the  amusements  of  ladies.  That
is  not  the  life  for  men  at  arms,  who  are  desirous  of  renown  and  profit.  I have  not  forgotten
my  last  expedition  through  France.  I might  have  had  with  me  about  two  thousand  lances
and  eight  thousand  archers.  When  wTe  crossed  the  sea,  we  entered  France  by  way  of  Calais,
and  continued  our  march  through  the  country,  without  meeting  any  one  to  oppose  us  or
offer  us  battle.  Such  formerly  was  the  success  of  sir  Robert  Ivnolles,  sir  Hugh  Calverley,
sir  Thomas  Grandson,  sir  Philip  Gifford;  but  they  had  not  as  many  men  as  I had  under  their
command,  and  yet  they  marched  to  the  gates  of  Paris,  and  demanded  battle  from  the  king
of  France.  No  one,  however,  ventured  out  to  answer  their  challenge,  and  they  continued
their  route  without  interruption  into  Brittany.  You  might  then  have  marched  from  Calais
to  Bordeaux,  without  any  one  daring  to  oppose  you  ; but  I am  persuaded  whoever  should
now  attempt  it  would  be  combated ; for  he  who  at  present  signs  himself  king  of  France  is
young,  active,  and  has  a strong  desire  to  achieve  some  gallant  enterprise.  He  would  therefore
fight  with  us,  whatever  might  be  the  consequences,  and  that  is  everything  we  could  desire ;
for  it  has  been  by  battle  and  victories  over  the  French,  who  are  so  rich,  that  we  are  become
wealthy  : if  peace  continue,  we  shall  languish  and  become  more  enervated  than  ever,  since
my  nephew  came  to  the  throne  of  England.  Things  cannot  long  remain  in  this  state,  before
the  people  will  perceive  and  redress  them.  The  king  raises  heavy  taxes  on  the  merchants,
who  are  greatly  discontented : he  squanders  the  money  no  one  knows  how,  and  thus  is  the
kingdom  of  England  impoverished.  True  it  is,  that  he  gives  largely  to  those  about  him,  and
in  whom  he  confides,  but  the  people  pay  for  this,  and  it  will  shortly  cause  a rebellion ; for
they  already  begin  to  murmur,  and  to  say  publicly  that  such  measures  must  not  longer  be
suffered.  The  king  gives  out  that  as  soon  as  the  truces  between  France  and  England  shall
be  signed,  he  will  make  a voyage  to  Ireland,  and  employ  there  his  men  at  arms  and  archers.
He  has  already  been  there,  and  gained  but  little,  for  Ireland  is  not  worth  conquering : the
Irish  are  a poor  and  wicked  people,  with  an  impoverished  country ; and  he  who  should
conquer  it  one  year,  would  lose  it  the  next.  Lackingay,  Lackingay  ! all  you  have  just  heard
me  say  consider  as  truth  ”


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


G07


Such  were  the  conversations,  as  it  was  afterwards  known,  between  the  duke  of  Gloucester
and  his  knight.  He  had  conceived  a great  hatred  to  his  nephew,  the  king  of  England,  and
could  no  way  speak  well  of  him  ; and  although  he  was,  with  his  brother  of  Lancaster,  the
greatest  personage  in  England,  and  one  by  whose  advice  the  government  ought  to  have  been
carried  on,  he  paid  not  any  attention  to  it.  When  the  king  sent  for  him,  if  it  was  his  pleasure
he  would  come,  but  more  frequently  be  staid  at  borne ; and,  when  he  obeyed,  he  was  always
the  last  to  come  and  the  first  to  depart.  On  giving  his  opinion,  it  must  be  implicitly  followed,
for  he  would  not  suffer  it  to  be  contradicted.  He  then  took  leave,  mounted  his  horse,  and
set  off  for  a handsome  castle  he  had  in  Essex,  thirty  miles  from  London,  called  Fleshy,  where
he  resided  more  constantly  than  anywhere  else.  This  lord  Thomas  was  a great  lord,  and
could  afford  to  expend  annually,  from  his  income,  sixty  thousand  crowns.  He  was  duke  of
Gloucester,  earl  of  Essex  and  Buckingham,  and  constable  of  England  ; and,  from  his  rough
manner,  was  more  dreaded  by  the  king  than  any  other  of  his  uncles,  for,  in  his  speech,  he
never  spared  him.  The  king  was  always  submissive  to  him,  and  whatever  he  asked  was
instantly  granted.  The  duke  of  Gloucester  bad  ordered  many  severe  and  hasty  executions
in  England,  and,  without  any  title  of  reason  or  justice,  had  caused  that  prudent  and  gallant
knight  sir  Simon  Burley  to  be  beheaded,  with  many  others  of  the  king’s  council.  This  duke
likewise  caused  the  banishment  of  the  archbishop  of  York  and  the  duke  of  Ireland  from
England,  notwithstanding  the  confidence  the  king  reposed  in  them,  accusing  them  of  giving
evil  counsel  to  the  king,  keeping  him  under  their  governance,  and  wasting  the  revenues  of
the  kingdom  on  themselves.  The  duke  of  Gloucester’s  two  brothers  of  Lancaster  and  York
resided  generally  with  the  king : he  was  jealous  of  them,  and  said  to  several  (such  as
Robert  * bishop  of  London  and  others)  who  went  to  visit  him  at  his  castle  of  Plcshy,  that
his  brothers  were  too  expensive  to  the  king,  and  that  it  would  be  more  decent  for  them  to
live  at  their  own  houses.  The  duke  gained,  by  every  possible  means,  the  love  of  the  Londoners;
for  he  thought,  if  he  acquired  popularity  with  them,  the  rest  of  England  would  follow  their
example.  The  duke  had  a nephew,  son  to  his  brother  Lionel,  duke  of  Clarence,  who  had
married  the  daughter  of  Galeas,  lord  of  Milan,  and  died  at  Asti  in  Piedmont.  The  duke
of  Gloucester  would  gladly  have  seen  his  nephew,  called  John  earl  of  Marclif , on  the  throne
of  England,  and  king  Richard  deposed  from  it,  saying  he  was  neither  worthy  nor  capable  to
hold  the  government  of  England ; and  this  opinion  he  made  no  secret  of  to  those  who  were
in  his  confidence.  He  invited  this  earl  of  March  to  come  and  see  him ; and  when  at  Plcshy,
he  unbosomed  himself  to  him  of  all  the  secrets  of  his  heart,  telling  him  that  he  had  been  selected
for  king  of  England ; that  king  Richard  and  his  queen  were  to  be  confined,  but  with  ample
provision  for  their  maintenance,  as  long  as  they  lived  ; and  he  earnestly  besought  his  nephew
to  believe  all  he  said,  for  he  should  make  it  a point  to  put  his  plans  into  execution,  and
that  he  was  already  joined  by  the  earl  of  Arundel,  sir  John  Arundel,  the  earl  of  Warwick,
and  many  prelates  and  barons  of  England.

The  earl  of  March  was  thunderstruck  on  hearing  this  proposal  from  his  uncle ; but,  young
as  ho  was,  he  dissembled  bis  real  sentiments,  and  prudently  replied,  to  please  his  uncle  and
to  get  away,  that  he  never  thought  of  such  things,  and  they  were  of  such  a magnitude  as  to
require  his  deliberate  consideration.  The  duke  then,  observing  the  manner  of  his  nephew,
desired  he  would  keep  what  he  had  said  very  secret.  This  he  promised  faithfully  to  do,
and,  taking  his  leave,  hastened  from  him,  and  instantly  went  to  his  estates  in  Ireland : he
w’ould  never  listen  nor  send  any  answer  to  all  the  proposals  his  uncle  made  to  him,  excusing
himself  honourably  from  taking  part  in  them,  as  he  foresaw  they  must  end  badly.  The
duke  of  Gloucester  employed  all  possible  means  to  stir  up  troubles  in  England,  and  excite
the  Londoners  against  the  king.  The  year  that  a truce  had  been  signed  between  England
and  France,  to  last  for  thirty  years,  king  Richard  and  his  queen  came  to  London,  on  their

* Robert  Braybook,  who  succeeded  Courtnay,  on  bis  22d  Richard  II. , whose  death  Richard  went  over  to  avenge,
uanslation  to  Canterbury,  1381,  and  died  1404,  having  when  Henry  IV.  plotted  to  dethrone  him.  Ib.  p.  226.
been  chancellor  of  England  scarcely  six  months. — Gough's  This  Roger  was  declared  heir  to  the  crown  by  parliament,
Pleshy,  note,  p.  59.  9th  Rich.  II.  Leland’s  Collectanea,  vol.  i.  p.  693. —

p “ He  was  third  son  of  Edward  Mortimer  earl  of  Froissart  took  the  opportunity  of  the  marriage  of  Lionel
March,  by  Philippa,  daughter  of  Lionel  duke  of  Clarence,  and  Yiolanta  to  visit  Italy,  and  dwells  on  the  solemnities

and  was  hanged  3d  Henry  VI.  Sandford,  p.  224 and  festivals  of  the  wedding.” — Gough' s Pleshy,  p.  60.

Froissart  means  Roger,  his  elder  brother,  slain  in  Ireland,


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.

return  from  France  : the  duke  of  Gloucester  whispered  the  citizens  to  petition  the  king  to
abolish  all  taxes  and  subsidies  which  had  been  imposed  for  the  last  twenty  years,  as  it  was
reasonable  they  should  now  cease,  since  a truce  had  been  signed  for  so  long  a term,  and  they
had  been  levied  solely  as  war-  taxes,  to  pay  tlie  men  at  arms  and  archers  in  support  of  the
war.  He  told  the  merchants,  “ it  was  hard  to  pay  thirteen  florins  out  of  every  hundred  as  a
tax  on  merchandise,  which  were  spent  in  idle  dances  and  feasts  : you  pay  for  them,  and  are
sorely  oppressed.  Add  to  your  petition  a remonstrance  for  the  l'ealm  to  be  governed
according  to  ancient  custom  and  usages,  and  that  whenever  there  shall  be  any  necessity  to
raise  money  for  the  defence  of  the  kingdom,  you  will  tax  yourselves  with  such  sums  as  shall
be  satisfactory  to  the  king  and  his  council.”  This  advice  of  the  duke  of  Gloucester  was
followed  by  the  Londoners,  and  many  of  the  principal  towns.  They  collected  together,  and
went  in  a body  to  the  king  at  Eltliam,  where  they  demanded  redress  of  what  they  complained
of,  and  that  all  taxes  which  had  been  raised  for  the  support  of  the  war  should  be  instantly
abolished.  Only  two  of  the  king’s  uncles  were  present  when  the  citizens  presented  their
petition  and  remonstrance,  namely,  the  dukes  of  Lancaster  and  York.  The  king  desired
they  would  answer  the  Londoners  and  the  other  citizens  who  had  accompanied  them,  but
particularly  the  duke  of  Lancaster;  who  said  to  them, — “My  fair  sirs,  you  will  now,  each  of
you,  return  to  your  homes,  and,  within  a month  from  this  day,  come  to  the  palace  of  West-
minster, when  the  king,  his  nobles  and  prelates  of  the  council,  shall  be  assembled,  and  your
petition  and  remonstrance  be  taken  into  consideration.  What  shall  then  be  thought  right  to
maintain  or  abolish  will  be  determined  upon,  and  you  may  depend  on  having  such  redress  as
ought  to  satisfy  you.”

This  answer  contented  some,  but  not  all ; for  there  were  among  them  rebels  attached  to  the
duke  of  Gloucester,  who  wanted  a more  speedy  decision  of  their  demands ; but  the  dukes  of
Lancaster  and  York  appeased  them  by  gentle  words,  and  they  all  departed.  The  matter,
nowever,  did  not  rest  here ; but  at  the  month’s  end  they  again  went  to  the  king  at  West-
minster, who  was  surrounded  by  his  nobles  and  prelates.  The  duke  of  Gloucester  was  now
present,  and  leant  much  to  the  petitioners ; but,  in  the  answer  which  was  made  to  them,  he
dissembled  his  real  thoughts,  in  order  that  the  king,  his  brothers,  and  the  members  of  the
council,  might  not  notice  them.  The  duke  of  Lancaster  replied  for  the  king,  and,  addressing
himself  to  the  Londoners,  as  they  composed  the  majority,  said, — “ Ye  citizens  of  London,  it
pleases  my  lord  the  king  that  I give  an  answer  to  your  petition  : in  obedience  to  his  command,
I shall  declare  to  you  what  the  king  and  his  council  have  determined  upon.  Ye  know,  that
to  provide  against  dangers  to  the  kingdom,  ye,  as  well  as  the  other  cities  and  towns  within
the  realm,  agreed,  about  six  years  ago,  that  a tax  of  thirteen  per  cent,  should  be  laid  on  all
merchandise  that  was  sold,  and  for  which  the  king  granted  to  you  many  privileges  such  as
he  will  not  take  from  you,  but  on  the  contrary  may  augment,  if  ye  prove  not  undeserving
of  the  favour.  But  since  ye  seem  now  to  turn  rebellious,  and  draw  back  from  what  ye  had
willingly  before  agreed  to,  he  recals  his  former  favours  : and  here  are  his  nobles  and  prelates,
who  have  sworn  to  support  him  in  all  his  lawful  measures  to  the  utmost  of  their  power,  and
are  now  willing  to  continue  their  aid  in  maintaining  all  legal  grants.  Consider,  therefore,
calmly,  this  matter,  and  that  the  state  of  the  king  demands  great  expense ; if  his  revenue  is
augmented  one  way,  it  is  diminished  another ; besides,  his  receipts  are  not  so  considerable  as
they  were  in  former  times.  The  war  has  involved  greater  costs  than  were  provided  for.
The  expenses  of  the  ambassadors  for  the  peace,  on  this  and  on  the  other  side  of  the  sea,  have
called  for  large  sums ; and  those  for  the  king’s  marriage  have  been  very  great.  Although
there  is  now  a truce  between  England  and  France,  the  annual  charges  for  the  garrisons  of
the  different  towns  and  castles  under  the  obedience  of  the  king  in  Gascony,  the  Bourdelois,
Bayonnois,  and  Bigorre,  are  very  heavy.  The  fleet  which  must  be  maintained  to  guard  our
coasts  and  harbours  costs  a great  deal.  The  frontiers  of  Scotland,  and  of  our  possessions  in
Ireland,  must  not  be  left  defenceless,  and  they  demand  large  sums.  All  these  articles,  and
several  others  relating  to  the  state  of  the  king  and  country  of  England,  annually  absorb
great  sums,  which  the  nobles  and  prelates  understand  and  know  much  better  than  you  can,
who  attend  only  to  your  trades  and  the  disposal  of  your  wares.  Give  thanks  to  God  that
ye  have  peace,  and  consider  that  no  one  pays  that  is  not  liable  so  to  do,  and  carries  on  a


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


63f)


trade,  and  that  foreigners  pay  this  tax  as  well  as  yourselves.  Ye  are  much  better  off  than
those  of  France,  Lombardy,  or  other  countries,  where  it  is  to  be  hoped  your  merchandise  is
carried ; for  they  are  taxed  and  taxed  over  again  three  or  four  times  a-year,  while  ye  only
have  a moderate  duty  imposed  on  your  wares.”  The  duke  of  Lancaster  addressed  them  so
mildly  and  calmly,  that  although  they  came  thither  with  the  worst  intentions,  from  the
machinations  of  others,  they  were  satisfied;  and  the  assembly  bi’oke  up  without  making  any
new  demand,  for  the  deputies  from  the  majority  of  the  principal  towns  were  contented  with
the  answer.  There  were  some  who  would  have  rejoiced  to  have  seen  the  meeting  end
differently,  though  they  did  not  show  it  openly.  The  duke  of  Gloucester  returned  to  his
castle  of  Pleshy,  perceiving  that  this  time  he  was  disappointed  in  his  expectations,  and  was
constantly  devising  means  of  exciting  disturbances  in  England  and  causing  a rupture  with
France.  In  this  attempt,  he  was  joined  by  the  uncle  of  his  duchess,  the  earl  of  Arundel,
who  was  desirous  of  war  above  all  things  ; and  they  had  successfully  practised  with  the  earl
of  Warwick,  so  that  he  obeyed  tbeir  wills.

The  king  of  England  had  two  brothers  by  his  mother’s  side ; the  eldest,  Thomas  earl  of
Kent ; the  youngest,  a valiant  knight,  sir  John  Holland  earl  of  Huntingdon,  and  chamberlain
of  England.  The  last  was  married  to  a daughter  of  the  duke  of  Lancaster ; and  it  was  he
who  had  killed  the  earl  of  Stafford’s  son,  as  has  been  mentioned  in  this  history.  The  issue
of  the  earl  of  Stafford  was  a young  squire,  who  was  under  the  protection  and  wardship  of
the  duke  of  Gloucester.  The  earl  of  Huntingdon  resided  chiefly  at  the  court  of  his  brother
the  king  of  England,  and  was  better  acquainted  than  any  other  with  the  intrigues  of  the  duke
of  Gloucester,  from  the  private  inquiries  he  made  into  his  conduct.  He  wTas  much  afraid  of
the  duke,  for  he  knew  him  to  be  proud,  cruel,  and  passionate  : he  nourished  his  enemy  under
his  eye,  for  the  crime  he  had  committed  on  the  earl  of  Stafford’s  son  had  never  been  forgiven.
King  Richard  was  naturally  fond  of  his  brother,  and  supported  him  against  all : he  saw  with
pain  that  his  uncle  of  Gloucester  was  his  enemy,  and  took  much  trouble  to  form  a party
against  him  to  force  him  to  leave  the  kingdom.  He  and  the  earl  of  Huntingdon  conversed
frequently  on  this  subject ; during  which  time,  the  count  de  Saint  Pol  arrived  in  England,
whither  he  had  been  sent  by  the  king  of  France  to  see  his  daughter,  the  young  queen  of
England,  how  they  were  going  on,  and  to  cultivate  affection  between  the  two  countries ; for,
since  the  truce  had  been  signed,  it  was  the  intention  of  the  two  kings  and  their  councils,  that
France  and  England  should  be  on  the  most  friendly  terms  with  each  other,  in  spite  of  what
their  ill-wishers  might  attempt  to  the  contrary.

The  king  and  the  earl  of  Huntingdon  made  the  count  de  Saint  Pol  a hearty  welcome  on
his  arrival,  as  well  from  love  to  the  king  of  France  as  because  he  had  married  their  sister.
At  this  moment,  neither  the  dukes  of  Lancaster  nor  of  York  were  with  the  king  ; for  they
began  to  dissemble  with  him,  and  to  suspect,  from  the  great  murmurings  in  many  parts  of
England  on  the  king’s  conduct,  that  affairs  would  not  end  well : they  therefore  wished  not
to  be  called  upon  by  the  king  or  people,  but  left  the  whole  to  the  duke  of  Gloucester  and  his
accomplices.  The  king  of  England  discoursed  very  freely  with  the  count  de  Saint  Pol,  as
well  on  the  state  of  the  country  as  concerning  his  uncle  the  duke  of  Gloucester,  whom  he
described  as  very  rough  in  his  manners  and  rebellious  in  his  conduct,  and  he  related  to  him
various  instances  of  his  slights.  The  count  de  Saint  Pol,  on  hearing  them,  was  much  surprised,
and  replied,  “ that  such  behaviour  ought  not  longer  to  be  borne  ; for,  my  lord,”  added  he,
“ if  you  suffer  him  to  go  on,  he  will  be  your  ruin.  It  is  currently  reported  in  France,  that
his  only  object  is  to  break  the  truce  and  renew  the  war  between  France  and  England  : by
little  and  little  he  will  win  the  hearts  of  the  more  indigent  men  at  arms  of  the  country,  who
wish  for  war  rather  than  peace ; and  if  such  persons  unite  together  and  hostilities  commence,
the  more  prudent  part  of  the  nation  will  not  be  listened  to ; for  where  wickedness  and
obstinacy  govern,  wisdom  and  common  sense  are  not  heard.  Take  your  precautions  before-
hand ; for  it  is  better  you  make  your  enemies  afraid  of  you,  than  that  you  should  fear  them.”
These  words  of  the  count  made  a deep  impression  on  the  king’s  mind ; and,  as  he  was
continually  thinking  on  them,  he  renewed  the  subject  with  the  earl  of  Huntingdon,  on  the
count  de  Saint  Pol’s  return  to  France.  The  earl  replied,  “ My  lord,  our  brother-in-law  Saint
Pol  has  told  you  the  real  truth,  and  I would  advise  you  to  take  measures  accordingly.”


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  See.


640


I was  informed,  that  about  a month  after  the  departure  of  the  count  de  Saint  Pol  from
England,  the  king  became  exceedingly  unpopular : it  was  rumoured  that  the  count  had
come  to  treat  with  the  king  for  the  restoration  of  Calais  to  the  French.  Nothing  could
have  agitated  the  English  more  than  such  reports ; and  the  people  were  so  uneasy,  that  the
Londoners  went  even  to  Pleshy,  to  consult  the  duke  of  Gloucester  on  the  occasion.  The
duke,  instead  of  calming,  excited  them  more  by  saying,  “ He  could  do  nothing  in  the
business ; for  he  was  sure  the  French  would  give  all  the  daughters  of  their  king,  if  they
could  recover  Calais.”  This  answer  made  the  Londoners  very  melancholy ; and  they  said
they  would  see  the  king,  and  remonstrate  with  him  on  the  agitation  the  whole  country  was
in.  “ Do  so,”  replied  the  duke  of  Gloucester : “ remonstrate  with  him  firmly,  and  make
him  fear  you.  Mark  well  the  answer  he  shall  give,  so  that  you  may  repeat  it  to  me  the
next  time  I see  you ; and,  when  I know  his  answer,  I will  then  give  you  my  advice  how
to  act.  It  may  be  that  some  iniquitous  treaties  are  on  foot,  for  the  earl  marshal,  who  is
governor  of  Calais,  has  been  twice  at  Paris,  where  he  remained  some  time,  and  he  was  the
most  active  in  concluding  the  marriage  of  the  king  with  the  lady  Isabella.  The  French  are
a subtle  race,  and  see  far  into  consequences : they  pursue  their  object  by  degrees,  and  are
extravagant  in  their  promises  and  presents  to  gain  their  ends.”

The  Londoners  pursued  the  plan  they  had  settled  at  Pleshy,  and  went  to  Eltham  to  speak
with  the  king.  At  that  time  were  with  him  his  two  brothers,  the  earls  of  Kent  and
Huntingdon,  the  earl  of  Salisbury,  the  archbishop  of  Canterbury,  the  archbishop  of  Dublin,
his  confessor,  sir  Thomas  Percy,  sir  William  Lisle,  sir  Richard  Credon,  sir  John  Golofre,
and  several  more,  all  knights  of  the  king’s  chamber.  The  citizens  remonstrated  temperately
with  the  king:  told  him  the  cause  of  their  coming,  not  in  a haughty  or  harsh  manner,  but
with  courteous  speech,  and  repeated  to  him  the  reports  which  were  so  current  throughout
England.  The  king  was  greatly  astonished  at  hearing  them,  and  was  much  affected,  though
he  dissembled  his  feelings.  Fie  appeased  the  citizens,  by  declaring  there  was  not  one  word
of  truth  in  all  the  rumours  that  were  so  industriously  circulated : that  the  count  de  Saint
Pol  had  come  hither  to  amuse  himself,  and  that  the  king  of  France  had  also  sent  him,  out  of
his  affection  to  the  king  and  queen  of  England,  to  see  them ; but  he  swore,  as  God  might
help  him,  and  on  the  faith  he  owed  the  crown  of  England,  that  no  treaty  of  any  sort  had
ever  been  mentioned,  and  he  was  astonished  whence  such  scandalous  reports  could  have
arisen.  When  the  king  had  done  speaking,  the  earl  of  Salisbury  addressed  the  citizens :
“ My  good  people  of  London,  withdraw  to  your  homes,  and  be  assured  that  the  king  and  his
council  wish  for  nothing  more  than  the  honour  and  profit  of  England.  Those  who  have
busily  said  the  contrary  have  been  ill  advised,  and  plainly  show  they  would  with  pleasure
see  the  country  in  trouble,  and  the  people  in  rebellion  against  their  king.  This  you  ought
particularly  to  dread,  for  you  have  before  witnessed  how  near  you  were  to  destruction,
when  a few  wicked  persons  rebelled,  but  were  severely  punished  for  it : depend  upon  it,
that  when  the  people  are  wicked,  neither  justice  nor  truth  will  be  attended  to.”  These
speeches  appeased  the  citizens,  who  were  tolerably  contented  with  what  they  had  heard.
Having  taken  leave  of  the  king,  they  departed,  on  their  return  to  London.

The  king  remained  at  Eltham,  very  melancholy  at  the  words  he  had  heard.  He  retained
near  his  person  his  two  brothers,  and  such  of  his  friends  as  he  had  the  greatest  confidence
in  ; for  he  began  to  doubt  the  affection  of  his  uncles,  from  observing  they  now  chiefly  resided
at  their  country-seats.  He  was,  in  consequence,  very  suspicious  of  them,  especially  of  the
duke  of  Gloucester,  whom  he  feared  more  than  the  dukes  of  Lancaster  and  York,  and  kept
up  a constant  guard,  night  and  day,  of  one  thousand  archers.  The  king  of  England  had
received  positive  information  that  the  duke  of  Gloucester  and  the  earl  of  Arundel  had  plotted
to  seize  his  person,  and  that  of  the  queen,  and  carry  them  to  a strong  castle,  where  they
should  be  confined  under  proper  guards,  but  allowed  sufficiently  for  their  table  and  other
necessary  expenses.  That  four  regents  should  be  appointed  over  the  kingdom,  of  whom  the
dukes  of  Lancaster  and  York  wTere  to  be  the  chief,  and  have  under  them  the  government  of
all  the  northern  parts,  from  the  Thames  to  the  Tyne,  and  as  far  as  the  Tweed,  that  runs  by
Berwick,  comprehending  all  Northumberland,  and  the  borders  of  Scotland.  The  duke  of
Gloucester  was  to  have  for  his  government  London,  Essex,  and  that  part  of  the  country  to


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  & c.


G41


the  mouth  of  the  Humber,  and  likewise  all  the  coast  from  the  Thames  to  the  water
of  Southampton,  and  westward  comprehending  Cornwall.  The  earl  of  Arundel  was  to
have  Sussex,  Kent,  Surrey,  Berkshire,  and  all  the  country  from  the  Thames  to  Bristol,  and
the  river  Severn,  that  divides  England  from  Wales,  where  there  are  very  extensive  lord-
ships,  with  power  of  punishing  by  death  all  offenders.  But  their  chief  design  was  to  find
out  some  means  of  rekindling  the  war  witli  France;  and,  if  the  king  of  France  wished  to
have  his  daughter  again,  it  might  be  done,  for  she  was  still  very  young,  not  more  than  eight
years  and  a half  old,  and,  perchance,  when  she  was  marriageable,  she  might  repent  of  this
connexion,  for  she  was  innocently,  and  without  her  being  able  to  judge  for  herself,  married,
and,  beside,  it  was  unjust  to  break  off  her  match  with  the  heir  of  Brittany ; but  should  she
wish  to  abide  by  her  marriage,  she  would  in  justice  remain  queen  of  England,  and  enjoy  her
dower,  but  she  should  never  be  the  companion  of  the  king  of  England.  Should  the  king  die
before  she  was  of  a proper  age,  she  was  to  be  sent  back  to  France.

These  were  the  plans  that  had  been  concerted  by  many  of  the  English,  particularly  the
Londoners,  for  they  hated  the  king,  and  several  now  repented  they  had  checked  the  mobs
which  attacked  London  from  the  different  counties  of  England ; for  they  had  determined,
according  to  their  confessions  when  put  to  death,  to  murder  the  king,  the  earl  of  Salisbury,
the  carl  of  Oxford,  and  the  whole  of  the  king’s  council.  Ilad  this  been  done,  the  kingdom
would  soon  have  found  another  head ; and  the  citizens,  with  the  consent  of  the  country,  and
the  aid  of  the  duke  of  Gloucester  (who  took  great  pains  to  excite  trouble  and  confusion),
would  have  selected  a fit  person  to  wear  the  crown,  and  placed  the  government  and  kingdom
in  a different  state  to  what  it  then  was.  Such  were  the  secret  murmurings  of  the  citizens,
and  others  of  their  party,  in  their  private  meetings,  the  whole  of  which  was  told  to  the
king  by  his  spy ; and  greater  blame  was  laid  on  the  duke  of  Gloucester  for  all  this  business
than  on  any  other  person.

It  is  not  to  be  wondered,  if  the  king  was  considerably  alarmed  at  the  discovery  of  so
much  hatred  and  malice  lurking  against  him.  He  paid  greater  court  than  ever  to  the  duke
of  Gloucester  and  the  citizens  when  they  came  to  see  him,  but  all  in  vain.  At  times,  the
king  mentioned  the  matter  privately  to  the  dukes  of  Lancaster  and  York,  who  resided  more
with  him  than  his  uncle  of  Gloucester,  and  consulted  with  them  how  he  could  avoid  the
machinations  of  the  duke  and  his  accomplices,  all  of  which  he  was  thoroughly  acquainted
with.  He  addressed  his  uncles,  saying, — “ My  good  uncles,  for  the  love  of  God,  advise  me
howT  to  act.  I am  daily  informed  that  your  brother,  the  duke  of  Gloucester,  and  the  earl  of
Arundel,  with  others,  are  determined  to  seize  and  confine  me  in  one  of  their  castles,  and
that  the  Londoners  will  join  them.  Their  plan  is  to  allow  me  a sufficiency  for  my  state,
but  to  separate  my  queen  from  me,  who  is  but  a child,  and  daughter  to  the  king  of  France,
and  send  her  to  some  other  place  of  confinement.  Now,  my  dear  uncles,  such  cruel  acts  as
these  must  not  be  suffered,  if  they  can  be  prevented.  You  have  paid  me  homage,  and
sworn  obedience  to  me  as  your  sovereign,  in  the  presence  of  your  lord  and  father,  king
Edward,  and  my  grandfather  of  happy  memory,  at  the  same  time  with  the  other  barons
and  prelates  of  the  realm.  It  is  now  twenty  years  since  this  was  done;  and  I entreat  you,
therefore,  from  the  love  you  bear  me,  and  on  the  oaths  you  have  taken,  that  you  assist  me
on  this  occasion ; for  everything  assures  me  the  duke  of  Gloucester  only  desires  that  war  be
renewed  with  France,  in  spite  of  the  truces  which  you,  with  us  and  all  England,  have
sworn  to  observe.  In  consideration  of  this  was  my  marriage  concluded  with  the  daughter
of  the  king  of  France,  and  we  wish  to  observe  every  article  of  the  treaty  most  punctually.
You  know  also,  that  whoever  attempts  to  infringe  this  truce  will  commit  a crime,  and  be
liable  to  corporal  punishment,  as  well  as  confiscation  of  goods : you  likewise  know,  that  I
have  borne  with  your  brother,  my  uncle  of  Gloucester,  as  much  as  I have  been  able,  and
made  light  of  his  menaces,  but  in  the  end  they  may  cost  me  dear.  You  are  bound,  there-
fore, by  every  tie,  to  give  your  best  advice,  since  I require  it  from  you.”  When  the  dukes
of  Lancaster  and  of  York  heard  their  nephew  thus  address  them,  and  saw  that  he  was  in
great  anguish  of  heart ; knowing,  at  the  same  time,  that  the  greater  part  of  what  he  had
said  was  strictly  true ; they  replied, — “ My  lord,  have  a little  patience,  and  wait  a short
time  before  you  make  any  rash  resolutions.  We  know  that  our  brother  of  Gloucester  has

VOL.  II.  T T


642


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


the  most  passionate  and  wrong-headed  temper  of  any  man  in  England ; but  he  cannot  do
more  than  man,  and,  if  he  work  one  way,  we  will  counteract  him  another : you  need  not
fear  our  brother  so  long  as  you  shall  follow  our  advice.  He  talks  frequently  of  things  he
cannot  execute ; and  neither  he  nor  his  abettors  can  break  the  truce  which  has  been  signed,
nor  confine  you  in  any  castle : we  will  never  suffer  it,  nor  that  you  be  separated  from  the
queen ; for,  if  he  imagine  such  things,  he  deceives  himself.  W e therefore  humbly  beg  you
will  be  appeased,  for,  please  God,  everything  shall  end  well.  Many  things  may  be  said  that
cannot  be  executed,  and  all  which  a man  thinketh  doth  not  come  to  pass.”

By  such  means,  the  dukes  calmed  the  king’s  mind ; but  as  they  foresaw  that  public
affairs  would,  from  their  bad  management,  cause  troubles  in  the  realm,  and  that  the  hatred
between  their  nephew  and  brother  was  daily  increasing,  to  avoid  being  called  upon  by  either
party,  they  left  the  king’s  household  with  their  families,  taking  leave  of  the  king  for  a
considerable  time,  and  retired  to  their  different  castles.  The  duke  of  Lancaster  carried  with
him  his  duchess,  who  had  been  some  time  the  companion  of  the  young  queen  of  England.
They  took  this  opportunity  of  hunting  stags  and  deer,  as  is  the  custom  in  England,  and  the
king  remained  with  his  attendants  in  and  about  London.  They  afterwards,  however,  greatly
repented  having  left  the  king ; for  such  things  shortly  happened  as  troubled  the  whole
kingdom,  which  would  not  have  been  done  had  they  remained  with  the  king,  for  they  would
have  more  prudently  advised  than  such  counsellors  as  he  listened  to.

There  was  not  one  of  the  king’s  servants  that  did  not  fear  the  duke  of  Gloucester,  and
wash  his  death,  no  matter  by  what  means.  That  gallant  and  loyal  knight,  sir  Thomas
Percy,  had  been  for  a long  time  steward  of  the  household,  and  all  the  accounts  passed
officially  through  his  hands.  He  noticed  with  grief  the  hatred  that  subsisted  between  the
king  and  the  duke  of  Gloucester,  and  other  great  barons  of  England.  Although  he  was
beloved  by  all,  he  foresaw,  like  a man  of  understanding,  that  public  affairs  would  end  badly,
and,  in  consequence,  resigned  his  office  into  the  king’s  hands  in  the  most  honourable  manner
he  could,  and  requested  permission  to  retire,  which  the  king  very  unwillingly  consented  to.
He  gave  such  plausible  reasons  for  his  request,  that  another  was  established  in  his  place,
and  sir  Thomas  Percy  went  to  his  own  estate,  where  he  resided.  The  king  had  about  his
person  many  young  counsellor’s,  who  too  much  dreaded  the  duke  of  Gloucester : they
frequently  said  to  him, — “ Very  dear  sire,  it  is  a dangerous  office  to  serve  you,  for  we  have
seen  our  predecessors,  in  whom  you  had  great  confidence,  meet  but  a poor  reward.  That
valiant  knight,  sir  Simon  Burley,  so  much  beloved  by  your  lord  and  father,  whom  God
pardon ! and  who  took  such  pains  for  the  accomplishment  of  your  first  marriage,  the  duke
of  Gloucester,  your  uncle,  put  shamefully  to  death,  by  having  him  publicly  beheaded  like  a
traitor.  He  likewise,  as  you  know,  had  many  others  arbitrarily  executed  without  your
being  any  way  able  to  grant  them  your  pardon,  or  save  them  from  their  ignominious  deaths.
Dear  sire,  we  expect  nothing  better ; for  whenever  your  uncle  cometli  hither  to  see  you,
which  is  not  often,  we  dare  not  raise  our  eyes  from  the  ground  nor  look  at  any  body.  He
eyes  us  from  head  to  foot,  and  seems  to  think  we  take  too  much  upon  us  from  being  about
your  person  ; and  be  assured,  dear  sire,  that  as  long  as  he  lives,  there  will  never  be  quiet  in
England,  nor  will  any  one  attempt  to  do  anything  good.  Besides,  he  publicly  threatens
to  confine  you  and  the  queen,  and  keep  you  under  subjection  during  his  good  pleasure.
You  will  be  an  undone  king,  and  destroyed  as  well  as  us,  if  you  do  not  speedily  take  some
strong  measures.  As  for  the  queen,  she  need  not  care : she  is  young,  and  daughter  to  the
king  of  France,  whom  they  dare  not  anger,  as  too  many  evils  would  result  from  it  to
England.  Your  uncle  of  Gloucester,  to  make  you  more  unpopular  with  your  subjects,
spreads  abroad  in  London  (we  have  heard  it),  that  you  are  unworthy  to  bear  a crown,  and
to  possess  so  noble  an  inheritance  as  England  and  its  dependencies ; that,  when  you  married
again,  you  chose  the  daughter  of  your  adversary  the  king  of  France,  for  which  you  were
very  blame- worthy ; and  that  you  have  debased  the  chivalry  of  England,  and  the  courage  of
its  knights  squires,  and  nobles,  who  had  so  valiantly  carried  on  the  war  against  France,
and  would  have  continued  it,  enfeebled  as  they  are,  if  you  had  not  prevented  them ; that
you  have  placed  the  kingdom  in  a most  perilous  situation,  with  great  risk  of  its  destruction,
and  that  it  is  a pity  you  are  suffered,  and  have  been  suffered,  to  reign  so  long.  The  French


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


G43


say  (as  the  common  report  runs),  that  you  intend  to  lay  aside  the  arms  of  France  from
your  arms,  which  causeth  great  hatred  against  you ; and  it  is  the  more  readily  believed
from  the  great  pains  you  took  to  have  the  truce  signed,  which  was  done  more  through  force
than  love,  for  the  nobles  of  this  country  who  had  served  in  these  wars  would  not  assent  to
it : that  you  have  not  carefully  examined  the  treaties  signed  by  king  John  of  France  and  his
children,  which  those  of  his  blood,  now  living,  have  treacherously  infringed ; and  that  the
French,  by  underhand  means,  caused  a renewal  of  war,  and  seized  by  usurpation  the  rights
of  your  predecessors,  and  possessed  themselves  of  very  many  towns,  cities,  and  castles  in
Aquitaine,  to  the  great  loss  of  the  crown  of  England,  and  all  through  your  negligence  and
want  of  courage : that  you  have  been  afraid  of  your  enemies,  and  not  followed  up  the
advantages  you  had  in  the  justice  of  this  quarrel,  which  you  still  have  as  well  as  your
ancestors,  who  immediately  have  preceded  you,  such  as  your  lord  and  father  the  prince  of
Wales,  and  the  good  king  Edward,  who  both  took  such  pains  to  augment  the  glory  of  the
crown.  Dear  sire,  the  Londoners  say,  as  indeed  do  numbers  of  others  (which  it  behoves  us
not  to  conceal  longer  from  you),  that  a day  shall  come  when  you  will  be  reminded  of  these
things  to  your  cost.”

King  Richard  treasured  up  all  these  speeches  in  his  mind,  and  pondered  over  them
continually.  Shortly  after  the  departure  of  his  two  uncles  of  Lancaster  and  York,  he  sum-
moned up  more  courage  than  usual,  and  said  to  himself,  that  it  would  be  better  he  should
destroy  than  be  destroyed,  and,  that,  within  a short  time,  he  would  hold  his  uncle  of
Gloucester  so  securely,  he  should  be  incapable  of  injuring  him.  As  he  could  not  accomplish
this  alone,  he  opened  himself  to  those  most  in  his  confidence.  It  w7as  to  the  earl  marshal,
who  was  his  cousin,  and  also  earl  of  Nottingham,  that  he  discovered  his  intention,  and  most
minutely  gave  him  his  orders  how  he  was  to  act.  The  earl-marshal,  from  the  favours  he
had  received,  loved  the  king  in  preference  to  the  duke  of  Gloucester,  and  kept  the  secret  he
had  been  entrusted  with  from  all  but  such  as  he  was  forced  to  employ,  as  he  could  not  do
the  whole  himself.  What  I am  about  to  say  will  explain  the  matter.


The  king,  under  pretence  of  deer-hunting,  went  to  a palace  he  had  at  Havering-at-the-
Bowcr,  in  Essex  : it  is  about  twenty  miles  from  London,  and  as  many  from  Fleshy,  where


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


CAi


the  duke  of  Gloucester  generally  resided.  The  king  set  out  one  afternoon  from  Havering,
without  many  attendants,  for  he  had  left  them  behind  with  the  queen  at  Eltham,  ami
arrived  at  Fleshy  about  five  o’clock  : the  weather  was  very  hot ; and  he  came  so  suddenly
to  the  castle,  that  no  one  knew  of  it,  until  the  porter  cried  out,  “ Here  is  the  king ! ” The
duke  of  Gloucester  had  already  supped,  for  he  was  very  temperate  in  his  diet,  and  never
sat  long  at  dinner  or  supper.  He  immediately  went  out  to  meet  the  king  in  the  court  of
the  castle,  and  paid  him  all  the  respect  due  to  his  sovereign,  as  did  the  duchess  and
her  children.

The  king  entered  the  hall  and  the  apartment,  where  the  table  was  again  laid  out  for  the
king,  who  ate  some  little ; but  he  had  before  told  the  duke,  “ Good  uncle,  have  your  horses
saddled,  not  all,  but  five  or  six,  for  you  must  accompany  me  to  London,  as  I am  to  have
a meeting  to-morrow  with  the  citizens ; and  we  shall  surely  meet  my  uncles  of  Lancaster
and  York,  but  I shall  advise  with  you  what  answer  to  make  to  the  Londoners’  demands.
Tell  your  house-steward  to  follow  us  with  your  servants  to  London,  where  they  will  find
you.”  The  duke,  suspecting  nothing  evil  intended  against  him,  too  easily  consented ; and
the  king,  having  soon  supped,  rose  from  table.  Everything  being  ready,  the  king  took
leave  of  the  duchess  and  her  children,  mounted  his  horse,  and  the  duke  did  the  same,
attended  only  by  three  squires  and  four  varlets.  They  took  their  way  to  Bondelay,  to
avoid  the  high  road  to  London  and  Brentwood,  with  the  other  towns  through  which  it
passes.  They  rode  hard,  for  the  king  pretended  impatience  to  get  to  London,  and  conversed
all  the  way  with  the  duke  of  Gloucester.  On  their  arrival  at  Stratford,  near  the  Thames,
where  an  ambuscade  had  been  laid,  the  king  galloped  forwards,  leaving  his  uncle  behind,  on
which  the  earl-marshal  advanced  to  the  rear  of  the  duke,  with  a large  body  of  men,  and
said,  “ I arrest  you  in  the  king’s  name.”  The  duke  was  panic-struck,  for  he  saw  he  had  been
betrayed,  and  cried  aloud  after  the  king.  I know  not  if  the  king  heard  him,  but  he  did  not
turn  back,  galloping  on  faster  than  before,  and  followed  by  his  attendants.

We  will  now  leave  this  matter  for  a short  time.


CHAPTER  LXXXIX. THE  LORD  DE  COUCY  AND  THE  COUNT  d’eU,  CONSTABLE  OP  PRANCE,

DIE  IN  TURKEY,  BEFORE  THE  TREATY  FOR  THEIR  DELIVERANCE  IS  ARRANGED. A

RANSOM  IS  AGREED  ON  FOR  THE  OTHER  PRISONERS  WHO  WERE  TAKEN  AT  THE  BATTLE
OF  NICOPOLI.

You  have  before  heard  how  sir  John  de  Chateaumorant  and  sir  James  de  Helly  were
sent  by  the  king  of  France  and  the  duke  of  Burgundy  as  ambassadors  to  Bajazet,  in  Turkey,
and  of  the  success  of  their  mission.  On  their  return  to  France  they  were  well  received  by
the  king,  the  duke  and  duchess  of  Burgundy,  from  the  certain  intelligence  they  had  brought
from  the  count  de  Nevers  and  his  fellow-prisoners.  These  knights  told  the  king  they
thought  the  sultan  would  readily  listen  to  terms  for  their  ransom,  for  they  had  been  so  given
to  understand  by  some  of  bis  principal  advisers,  lest  the  prisoners  might  die  while  in  cap-
tivity, which  was  likely  enough  to  happen,  from  the  difference  of  air  and  diet,  and  they
would  not  in  that  case  gain  anything  by  them.  These  words  encouraged  the  duke  and
duchess  of  Burgundy  to  exert  themselves  in  procuring  the  ransom  of  their  son  and  heir,  and
they  were  occupied  day  and  night  in  devising  means  to  open  negotiations  with  the  sultan.
The  duchess  said  this  battle  of  Nicopoli  had  been  very  unfortunate  to  her,  for  she  had  lost
by  it  three  of  her  brothers,  who  were  gallant  knights  in  arms : the  first,  the  haze  de
Flandres,  the  second,  sir  Louis  de  Breze,  and  the  third,  sir  John  d’Ypres : there  was  another
brother,  the  youngest  of  them,  who  had  remained  at  home.  To  say  the  truth,  the  duchess
had  grief  enough,  and  it  was  not  surprising  if  she  was  melancholy,  but  the  duke  and  his
advisers  calmed  her,  by  their  earnestness  in  procuring  her  son’s  liberty : this  was  not,
however,  soon  done,  for  the  distance  and  difficulty  of  treating  with  such  people  forced  them
to  go  about  the  business  leisurely.

About  the  time  I am  now  speaking  of,  that  gallant  knight  and  excellent  man  the  lord
EngUerrand  de  Coucy,  count  de  Soissons,  and  a potent  lord  in  France,  died  at  Bursa  in


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND.  FRANCE,  &c.


G4.5


Turkey.  Sir  Robert  d’Esne,  who  had  been  sent  to  him  by  the  lady  de  Coucy,  bad  not
advanced  further  than  Vienna,  on  his  journey  thither,  when  he  was  informed  of  his  death.
He  returned  with  this  news  to  F ranee,  and  told  it  to  the  family  of  the  lord  de  Coucy,
though  not  to  the  widow,  before  whom  he  did  not  appear  until  the  governor  of  the  castle
of  Saint  Gobin  was  sent  to  seek  the  body,  have  it  embalmed,  and  brought  to  France.  It
was  conveyed  to  the  abbey  of  Nogent  near  to  Coucy,  and  received  by  the  duchess  of  Bar,
the  bishop  of  Laon,  and  many  abbots : there  the  gentle  knight  was  buried,  and  thus  ended
the  year  of  grace  1397.

The  king  of  France  and  the  duke  of  Burgundy  were  very  active  in  their  endeavours  to
abridge  the  captivity  of  their  friends  in  Turkey,  and  there  passed  not  a day  without  their
having  some  conversation  on  the  subject.  Sir  Dinde  de  Desponde  was  of  all  their  con-
sultations, and  said  the  Venetian  or  Genoese  merchants  could  alone  assist  them ; for  by
means  of  merchandise,  which  governs  everything,  and  their  connexions  with  other  merchants,
they  could  pass  everywhere,  and  learn  the  temper  of  the  infidel  sultans.  They  had  great
weight,  particularly  in  Cairo,  Alexandria,  Damascus,  and  Antioch,  where  they  had  factories,
and  the  Saracens  and  Christians  mutually  interchanged  their  merchandises.  The  king  and
the  duke,  therefore,  made  as  many  friends  among  these  merchants  as  they  could,  and  gave
up  all  intentions  of  making  war  on  the  duke  of  Milan  from  the  friendship  they  learnt  Bajazet
bore  him.  On  the  other  hand,  king  James  of  Cyprus  knew  well,  that  if  he  coidd  any  how
soften  the  anger  of  the  sultan,  and  prevail  on  him  to  accept  of  reasonable  terms  for  the
ransom  of  the  French  lords,  he  should  greatly  oblige  the  king  of  France,  the  duke  of
Burgundy,  and  the  whole  of  the  nation.  To  accomplish  this,  the  king  of  Cyprus  had  a ship
made  of  gold,  curiously  wrought,  that  might  be  worth  ten  thousand  ducats,  which  he  sent
by  bis  knights  as  a present  to  the  sultan  Bajazet.  It  was  beautifully  worked,  and  was
graciously  accepted  by  the  sultan,  who  replied,  he  would  return  him  double  its  value  in
courtesy  and  affection.  This  answer  brought  back  by  the  Cypriote  knights,  was  instantly
made  known  to  the  king  of  France  and  the  duke  of  Burgundy  by  some  merchants,  who
wrote  to  sir  Dinde  that  he  might  inform  them  of  it.  King  James  was  wise  in  making  this
present : he  dreaded  the  king  of  France,  and  all  kings,  for  having  murdered  in  the  night-
time his  valiant  brother,  king  Peter,  who  had  fought  so  courageously  against  the  Saracens,
and  had  won  from  them  the  towns  of  Satalia  and  Alexandria ; and  they  were  more  afraid  of
him  than  of  all  the  other  kings  or  emperors  in  Christendom.

King  J ames  had  sorely  repented  having  committed  this  crime,  or  being  present  when  it
was  done ; and,  not  daring  to  continue  in  Cyprus,  for  the  Christians  would  have  put  him
to  a disgraceful  death,  could  they  have  caught  him,  he  embarked  on  board  a galley  belonging
to  some  Genoese  merchants  which  was  in  the  port  of  Nicosia,  where  the  murder  had  been
done,  and  fled  to  Genoa.  The  Genoese  kindly  entertained  him,  and  some  say  that  this
villanous  murder  had  been  instigated  by  them ; for,  shortly  after,  they  entered  the  harbour
of  Famagousta  with  a large  fleet  of  galleys  and  men  at  arms,  which  they  took  possession  of,
and  have  held  by  force  ever  since.  True  it  is,  that  the  late  king  of  Cyprus  had  a very
promising  youth  for  his  son,  whom  he  brought  with  him,  in  company  with  a knight  who
had  travelled  through  Lombardy  to  Rome,  the  last  time  he  had  crossed  the  sea : this  youth
the  Cypriotes  crowned  their  king  on  the  assassination  of  his  father,  but  he  lived  not  long  to
enjoy  it.  On  his  death,  the  Genoese  brought  back  James,  whom  they  had  crowned  king,
and  he  has  reigned  ever  since  in  Cyprus,  through  the  support  the  Genoese  give  him  against
all  nations.  They  would  never  give  up  possession  of  the  town  or  port  of  Famagousta,  and
are  the  masters  of  it  at  this  present  moment  of  my  writing  these  chronicles.  Indeed,  had
the  Genoese  not  held  it,  the  Turks  and  infidels  woidd  have  conquered  the  whole  of  the
island,  as  well  as  Rhodes  and  the  other  adjacent  islands;  but  the  Venetians  and  Genoese
are  their  great  opponents.  When  the  last  saw  that  the  kingdom  of  Armenia  was  conquered
by  the  Turks,  they  seized  the  town  of  Courch,  that  is  situated  on  the  sea-sliore,  which  they
have  kept  under  their  governance.  The  Turks,  were  they  not  fearful  of  Courch  and  Pera,
near  Constantinople,  would  do  the  greatest  mischief  to  all  who  navigate  those  seas,  as  well  as
to  Rhodes  and  the  neighbouring  islands.  It  is  by  these  means  the  frontiers  of  Christendom
are  defended ; but  let  us  return  to  king  James  of  Cyprus.  When  he  found,  from  the  base


G4G


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c


crime  he  had  been  guilty  of,  he  was  fallen  under  the  displeasure  and  hatred  of  every  crowned
head,  he  exerted  himself  to  the  utmost  to  recover  their  favour,  and  thought  himself  highly-
honoured  by  the  letter  the  king  of  France  had  written  to  him.  He  was  afraid  of  him,  and
not  without  reason,  for  the  duke  of  Bourbon,  uncle  to  the  king  of  France,  was,  by  right  of
succession  through  the  Lusignans,  the  true  heir  to  the  throne  of  Cyprus.  This  king  James,
although  brother  to  the  late  king,  was  not  so  by  lawful  marriage,  but  a bastard,  as  was  well
known  to  the  Genoese.  When  they  gave  him  the  crown  they  mutually  entered  into  special
treaties  with  each  other ; and  the  Genoese  bound  themselves  to  defend  his  and  his  descendants’
rights  to  the  government  against  all  claimants  : in  consideration  of  which,  they  had  many
lordships  and  tracts  of  land  yielded  up  to  them  in  the  island  of  Cyprus.  Every  thing  they
did  in  the  defence  of  king  James  was  to  strengthen  themselves  against  the  Venetians,  and  to
open  greater  markets  for  their  trade  with  the  Saracens,  for,  as  factors,  they  have  many
connexions  with  them  and  others  of  their  faith.  King  James,  through  the  Genoese,  took
great  pains  to  please  the  king  of  France  and  his  subjects,  and  it  was  in  consequence  of  this
he  had  made  Bajazet  so  very  rich  a present,  which  was  highly  pleasing  to  the  sultan  and  his
ministers,  who  valued  it  much.  It  was  supposed  by  many,  that  sir  Dinde  Desponde  had
urged  on  the  Genoese  in  this  matter,  as  they  were  very  warm  in  their  endeavours  to  bring
about  a treaty  for  the  deliverance  of  the  count  de  Nevers  and  the  other  prisoners.

The  duke  and  duchess  of  Burgundy  heard,  with  infinite  pleasure,  that  the  sultan  began  to
tire  of  his  prisoners,  and  would  readily  enter  into  a treaty  for  their  liberty.  They  selected
a valiant  knight  from  the  country  of  Flanders,  called  sir  Guissebreth  de  Linrenghen,  who
was  regent  of  Flanders  under  the  duke  and  duchess  of  Burgundy,  to  go  to  Turkey  and  treat
with  Bajazet  for  the  ransom  of  the  French  lords.  At  the  same  time  they  sent  for  sir  James
de  Ilelly,  and  entreated  that  he  would  accompany  their  ambassador,  because  he  was  well
acquainted  with  the  countries  he  was  to  travel  through,  and  with  the  court  of  the  sultan,
promising  that  his  trouble  and  attention  should  be  handsomely  remunerated.  Sir  James,
having  promised  to  fulfil  their  commands,  set  out  in  company  with  the  Flemish  knight : on
their  arrival  in  Hungary,  they  waited  on  the  king,  to  deliver  the  letters  which  were  intrusted
to  them.  The  king  received  the  letters  and  knights  with  joy,  in  compliment  to  the  king
of  France : he  was  before  acquainted  with  sir  James  de  Helly.  They  informed  the  king,
the  object  of  their  mission  to  Bajazet  was  to  treat  for  the  release  of  his  prisoners,  if  he  were
inclined  to  listen  to  them.  The  king  of  Hungary  replied,  that  it  would  be  well  done  if  they
could  obtain  their  liberty  for  money : and  the  attempt  was  worth  trying,  for  nothing  could
be  lost  by  that.  He  offered  them  every  assistance  in  his  power,  of  money  or  men,  for  which
the  knights  thanked  him.

They  had  many  difficulties  to  encounter,  before  they  could  enter  into  a personal  treaty
with  Bajazet ; for  it  was  first  necessary  that  sir  James  de  Helly  should  wait  on  the  sultan  to
obtain  a passport  for  sir  Guissebreth  de  Linrenghen  to  travel  through  Turkey,  which  having-
been  properly  made  out  he  returned  with  it  to  Hungary.  They  journeyed  to  Turkey
together ; and  Bajazet  received  the  regent  of  Flanders  with  kindness,  and  listened  to  his
proposals,  which  formed  the  basis  for  a treaty.  At  this  time  there  lived  a Genoese  merchant
called  Bartholomeo  Pelegrini,  in  the  island  of  Scio,  who  was  universally  esteemed  for  his
probity  and  knowledge  in  trade,  even  by  Bajazet  himself : to  him  sir  Dinde  de  Desponde
had  written  to  interest  himself  in  the  business,  that  it  might  have  a more  speedy  termination,
for  they  were  well  known  to  each  other,  and  promised  him  a handsome  recompense,  if
successful  in  obtaining  the  French  lords’  liberty,  from  the  duke  and  duchess  of  Burgundy,
and  other  lords  and  ladies  who  had  friends  or  husbands  in  the  power  of  Bajazet.  He
entreated  him  to  take  upon  himself  the  debt  for  their  ransom,  however  large  the  sum,  and  to
conduct  the  French  lords  to  Venice,  or  to  some  part  under  the  government  of  the  Venetians ;
and  that  the  moment  he  should  be  assured  from  him  of  then-  arrival  thither,  he  would,  with-
out delay,  hasten  to  Venice  in  person,  with  the  amount  of  the  sum  to  repay  him  what  he
had  expended.  The  Genoese  merchant  complied  with  the  request  of  sir  Dinde,  as  well  from
personal  regard  to  him,  as  for  the  profit  and  honour  he  should  acquire  by  it,  and  for  the
esteem  he  should  gain  from  the  king  of  France ; for,  from  such  a king,  it  was  worth  having.
From  the  information  I had,  I am  inclined  to  believe  that  the  king  of  Cyprus  sent  some  of


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


647


his  ablest  counsellors  to  push  forward  the  negociations  with  the  sultan,  in  compliance  with
the  solicitations  of  the  king  of  France  and  the  duke  of  Burgundy.  The  lords  de  Mathelin
and  d’ Amine,  two  great  barons  of  Greece,  and  much  in  favour  with  Bajazet,  interfered  also
in  the  matter,  according  to  the  requests  that  had  been  made  them  from  France,  otherwise
they  would  not  have  troubled  themselves  about  it.

Turkey  was  an  extensive  country,  and  not  convenient  to  travel  through,  to  those  unaccus-
tomed to  it : Bajazet,  therefore,  as  soon  as  he  had  consented  to  a treaty,  resolved  that  all
the  French  prisoners  should  be  conveyed  to  Bursa,  where  the  whole  business  should  be
concluded.  Those  lords  were  brought  thither,  to  the  amount  of  twenty-five  ; but  their
conductors,  the  Turks,  treated  them  scandalously  on  the  road,  by  beating  them  forward,  for
they  had  purposely  badly  mounted  them,  and  their  horses  would  only  go  at  a foot’s  pace  :
for  this  they  were  beaten  by  the  Turks,  who  heard,  very  unwillingly,  that  they  were  to  have
their  liberty.  On  their  arrival  at  Bursa,  where  the  negociators  from  the  king  of  France,  the
duke  of  Burgundy,  the  king  of  Cyprus,  the  Venetians  and  Genoese  were  waiting  to
receive  them,  they  had  more  liberty  than  when  in  the  prisons  of  the  sultan  : but,  notwith-
standing it  was  known  they  were  to  be  ransomed,  they  were  so  closely  guarded  that  they
could  not  obtain  a fourth  part  of  their  wishes.  Among  the  different  persons  who  were  at
Bursa  on  account  of  the  treaty,  Bajazet  inclined  more  to  sir  Guissebreth  de  Linrenghen,  for
sir  James  de  Helly  had  told  him  he  was  regent  of  Flanders  and  the  most  confidential  coun-
sellor of  the  duke  of  Burgundy.  The  sultan  resided  in  a handsome  castle  near  Bursa,  and
where  the  negotiators  went  to  discuss  matters  with  him  : the  ransom  for  the  twenty-five
prisoners  was  fixed  at  two  hundred  thousand  ducats.  The  lords  de  Mathelin  and  d’ Amine,
with  the  Genoese  merchant  of  Scio,  pledged  themselves  to  the  sultan  for  the  due  payment  of
it.  The  count  de  Nevers  gave  his  oath  to  the  merchant,  for  himself  and  the  rest,  that  on
his  arrival  at  Venice,  he  would  never  depart  thence  until  the  whole  of  this  sum  were  paid  to
his  satisfaction.  Before  the  treaties  were  concluded,  the  count  d’Eu  was  so  much  weakened
by  sickness,  change  of  air,  and  diet  he  had  not  been  accustomed  to,  that  he  departed  this
life  at  Haute-loge,  where  he  had  been  confined  with  the  other  lords,  who  were  much  afflicted
thereat,  though  they  could  not  any  way  prevent  it.  The  lord  Philip  d’ Artois,  count  d’Eu
and  constable  of  France,  was,  when  dead,  opened  and  embalmed,  and  in  this  state  put
into  a coffin  and  carried  to  France,  where  he  lies  buried  in  the  church  of  Saint  Laurence
at  Eu.

When  the  sultan  Bajazet  was  completely  satisfied  as  to  the  security  of  those  who  had
pledged  themselves  for  the  payment  of  the  two  hundred  thousand  ducats  as  the  ransom  for  the
French  lords,  the  two  ambassadors  from  the  duke  of  Burgundy  were  impatient  to  return  to
France,  and  carry  the  joyful  news  of  their  success  to  the  king  and  other  lords  so  greatly
interested  in  it.  They  took  leave  of  Bajazet  and  those  of  his  court  they  were  the  most
intimate  with ; and,  as  the  regent  of  Flanders  was  in  his  favour,  the  gallant  sultan  ordered,
that  twenty  thousand  ducats  should  be  deducted  from  the  two  hundred  thousand  he  was  to
receive,  and  given  to  the  two  knights,  in  consideration  of  the  great  pains  they  had  taken  to
accomplish  these  treaties.  The  two  knights  gratefully  thanked  the  sultan,  as  they  had
reason,  for  his  magnificent  gift,  and,  after  taking  leave  of  the  Turkish  court  and  the  French
lords,  returned  to  Bursa.  They  there  left  the  count  de  Nevers  and  his  companions,  waiting
the  lords  de  Mathelin  * and  d’ Amine,  who  were  to  come  for  them  in  their  galley,  and
embarked  on  board  a small  passage -galley  for  Mathelin.  On  quitting  the  harbour,  the
sea  was  calm  and  the  weather  temperate  ; but  they  had  not  advanced  far  before  it  changed,
and  at  length  became  so  tempestuous  that  sir  Guissebreth,  sorely  tormented  by  sea-sickness,
died  before  they  could  reach  Mathelin.  Sir  James  de  Helly  was  much  grieved  for  his  loss,
and,  engaging  a Venetian  galley,  sailed  to  Rhodes.  Fie  published  everywhere  the  deliverance
and  speedy  arrival  of  the  count  de  Nevers  and  his  companions,  to  the  great  joy  of  the
knights  of  Rhodes.  On  his  arrival  in  France,  he  made  the  king,  the  duke  and  duchess  of
Burgundy,  and  the  nation,  happy  by  the  good  news  he  had  brought.  Sir  James  spoke

* D.  Sauvage  supposes,  in  a marginal  note,  this  must  be  the  lord  of  the  island  of  Mitelino,  but  confesses  his  igno.
ranee  of  the  other.


648  CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.

loudly  in  the  praise  of  his  companion,  sir  Guissebreth,  and  of  the  great  pains  he  took  to
conclude  the  treaty.

The  sultan  Bajazet,  having  had  eveiy  thing  respecting  the  ransom  of  liis  French  prisoners
settled  to  his  satisfaction,  resolved  on  allowing  them  more  liberty,  for  indeed  they  were  now
no  longer  prisoners,  and  invited  them  to  his  presence  before  the  departure  of  the  ambassadors,
to  show  them  the  magnificence  of  his  establishments.  They  were  said  to  be  very  grand
indeed  ; and  immense  numbers  were  daily  attendant  on  his  person.  He  sent  some  of  his
principal  lords  to  invite  the  count  de  Nevers  and  his  companions  to  the  castle,  where  he
received  and  entertained  them  handsomely : he  ordered  all  things  they  might  want  to  be
delivered  out  to  them  by  his  officers,  as  was  the  usual  custom  of  his  court.  The  sultan
conversed  daily  with  the  count  de  Nevers,  by  means  of  an  interpreter,  and  paid  him  much
respect,  for  he  knew  that  he  was,  or  would  be,  a very  great  lord  in  France,  by  the  great
exertions  that  were  made,  and  the  large  sum  paid  for  his  ransom,  which  was  enough  to
satisfy  his  avarice,  having  securities  for  the  amount  of  one  million  of  florins.  The  other
French  lords  were  equally  astonished  with  the  count  de  Nevers  at  the  power  and  state  of
Bajazet.  He  was  attended  by  such  numbers,  that  they  were  always  encamped,  for  no
town  could  lodge  them  ; and  the  expense  must  have  been  very  great  to  supply  so  many  with
food.  It  was  surprising  where  such  quantities  came  from,  notwithstanding  the  natives  of
warm  climates  are  very  temperate  in  their  diet,  eating  hut  little  meat,  living  on  spices  and
sugar,  of  which  they  have  abundance,  as  well  as  goats’  milk,  the  common  beverage  of  the
Turks  and  Saracens,  and  they  have  plenty  of  bread  made  of  millet.

The  sultan  had  at  this  time  seven  thousand  falconers,  and  as  many  huntsmen  : you  may
suppose  from  this  the  grandeur  of  his  establishments.  One  day,  in  the  presence  of  the
count  de  Nevers,  he  flew  a falcon  at  some  eagles  ; the  flight  did  not  please  him  ; and  he  was
so  wroth,  that,  for  this  fault,  he  was  on  the  point  of  beheading  two  thousand  of  his  falconers,
scolding  them  exceedingly  for  want  of  diligence  in  their  care  of  his  hawks,  when  the  one
he  was  fond  of  had  behaved  so  ill.  Another  time,  when  the  count  de  Nevers  and  the  French
barons  were  with  the  sultan,  a poor  woman  came  to  him  in  tears,  to  demand  justice  against
one  of  his  servants,  and  said, — “ Sultan,  I address  myself  to  thee,  as  my  sovereign,  and
complain  of  one  of  thy  servants,  who  is  I understand,  attached  to  thy  person.  He  this
morning  entered  my  house,  and  seized  by  force  the  goat  milk  I had  provided  for  myself  and
children,  and  drank  it  against  my  will.  I told  him  that  I should  complain  to  thee  of  this
outrage,  but  I had  no  sooner  uttered  the  words,  than  he  gave  me  two  great  cuffs,  and  would
not  leave  me,  though  I ordered  him  in  thy  name.  Sultan,  do  me  justice,  as  thou  hast
sworn  to  thy  people  thou  wouldest,  that  I may  be  satisfied,  this  injury  he  punished,  and
that  every  one  may  know  thou  wilt  see  the  meanest  of  thy  subjects  righted.”

The  sultan  was  very  rigidly  determined  that  all  crimes  committed  within  his  dominions
should  be  severely  punished  : he  therefore  listened  to  her  attentively,  and  said  he  would  do
her  justice.  He  then  ordered  the  varlet  to  be  brought,  and  confronted  with  the  woman,  who
repeated  her  complaint.  The  varlet,  who  dreaded  Bajazet,  began  to  make  excuses,  saying
it  was  all  false.  The  woman  told  a plain  tale,  and  persisted  in  its  truth.  The  sultan  stopped
her,  and  said, — “ Woman,  consider  well  thy  accusation ; for,  if  I find  thou  hast  told  me  a
lie,  thou  shalt  suffer  death.”  “ Sir,”  replied  the  woman,  “ I consent  to  it ; for  were  it  not
true,  I could  have  no  reason  to  come  before  thee,  and  I only  ask  for  justice.”  “ I will  do  it,”
answered  the  sultan,  “ for  I have  so  sworn,  and  indiscriminately  to  every  man  or  woman
within  my  dominions.”  He  then  ordered  the  varlet  to  he  seized,  and  to  have  his  belly  opened,
for  otherwise  he  would  not  have  known  if  he  had  drank  the  milk  or  not.  It  was  there
found,  for  it  had  not  had  time  to  he  digested ; and  the  sultan,  on  seeing  it,  said  to  the
woman,  “ Thou  hadst  just  cause  of  complaint  : now  go  thy  way,  for  the  injury  done  thee
has  been  punished.”  She  was  likewise  paid  for  her  loss.  This  judgment  of  Bajazet  was
witnessed  by  the  French  lords,  who  were  at  the  time  in  his  company.


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


<U9


CHAPTER  XC. THE  FRENCH  LORDS  WHO  HAD  BEEN  PRISONERS  IN  TURKEY  RETURN

BY  SEA  TO  VENICE.

When  the  count  de  Nevers  and  the  lords  of  France  who  were  made  prisoners  at  the
battle  of  Nicopoli  (excepting  the  count  d’Eu  and  the  lord  de  Coucy,  who  had  died)  had  been
some  time  entertained  by  the  sultan,  and  had  seen  great  part  of  his  state,  he  consented  they
should  depart,  which  was  told  them  by  those  who  had  been  ordered  to  attend  to  their  per-
sonal wants.  The  count  and  his  companions  waited  on  the  sultan  in  consequence,  to  thank
him  for  his  kindness  and  courtesy.  On  taking  his  leave,  the  sultan  addressed  him,  by  means
of  an  interpreter,  as  follows  : “ John,  I am  well  informed  that  in  thy  country  thou  art  a great
lord,  and  son  to  a powerful  prince.  Thou  art  young,  and  hast  many  years  to  look  forward  ;
and,  as  thou  mayest  be  blamed  for  the  ill  success  of  thy  first  attempt  in  arms,  thou  mayest
perchance,  to  shake  off  this  imputation  and  regain  thine  honour,  collect  a powerful  army  to
lead  against  me,  and  offer  battle.  If  I feared  thee,  I would  make  thee  swear,  and  likewise
thy  companions,  on  thy  faith  and  honour,  that  neither  thou  nor  they  would  ever  bear  arms
against  me.  But  no  : I will  not  demand  such  an  oath  : on  the  contrary,  I shall  be  glad
that  when  thou  art  returned  to  thy  country,  it  please  thee  to  assemble  an  army,  and  lead
it  hither.  Thou  wilt  always  find  me  prepared,  and  ready  to  meet  thee  in  the  field  of  battle.
What  I now  say,  do  thou  repeat  to  any  person,  to  whom  it  may  please  thee  to  repeat  it ; for  I
am  ever  ready  for,  and  desirous  of,  deeds  of  arms ; as  well  as  to  extend  my  conquests.”

These  high  words  the  count  de  Nevers  and  his  companions  understood  well,  and  never
forgot  them  so  long  as  they  lived.  After  this,  when  all  things  for  their  departure  were  ready,
they  were  conducted  by  Ali  bashaw  and  Soli  bashaw,  with  a large  escort,  to  the  lords  de
Mathelin  and  d’Amine,  and  the  others  who  had  interested  themselves  for  their  liberty.
Before  they  embarked  on  board  the  galleys  destined  to  carry  them,  they  paid  every  expense
they  had  incurred  at  Bursa,  or  at  other  places,  with  so  much  punctuality  that  they  were
greatly  praised.  As  they  weighed  anchor,  their  conductors  returned  to  the  sultan ; and  the
galleys,  having  a favourable  wind,  soon  arrived  at  the  harbour,  where  the  count  and  his
friends  were  received  with  joy.  The  lady  of  the  lord  de  Mathelin  was  of  a certain  age,  but
perfectly  well  bred,  and  as  fully  accomplished  as  any  lady  in  Greece,  for  in  her  youth  she  had
been  brought  up  at  the  court  of  Constantinople  with  the  lady  Mary  of  Bourbon.  She  had
from  her  learnt  many  things,  for  the  lords  and  ladies  of  France  are  better  educated  than  those
in  any  other  country.  This  lady  thought  herself  highly  honoured  when  she  saw  the  count
de  Nevers,  sir  Henry  de  Bar,  Guy  de  la  Tremouille,  and  the  other  lords  under  her  roof,  and
welcomed  them  with  every  sign  of  pleasure.  She  first  clothed  them  with  fine  new  linen  and
cloth  of  Damascus  made  into  gowns  and  vestments,  according  to  the  taste  in  Greece.  After
she  had  dressed  the  masters,  she  did  the  same  to  their  servants  in  the  handsomest  manner,
each  according  to  his  rank.  The  lords  were  very  thankful  for  her  kindness,  and  publicly
declared  their  gratitude  for  her  generous  conduct,  as  well  as  that  of  the  lords  de  Mathelin
and  d’Amine,  who  honoured  them  by  every  mark  of  respect,  and  administered  to  their
necessities.

News  was  soon  carried  to  the  island  of  Rhodes,  that  the  sultan  had  accepted  a ransom  for
the  French  lords,  and  that  they  were  now  at  Mathelin.  The  intelligence  gave  much  pleasure
to  the  grand-master  and  to  all  his  knights,  who  proposed  to  equip  and  arm  two  galleys,  and
send  them  to  Mathelin  to  convey  the  count  and  his  fellow-prisoners  to  Rhodes.  This  was
executed ; and,  when  ready,  sir  James  de  Brasemont*,  a Burgundian,  who  was  marshal  of
Rhodes,  embarked  on  board,  and  had  a favourable  voyage  to  Mathelin,  where  he  was  made
heartily  welcome  by  the  lord  de  Mathelin,  his  lady,  and  their  guests.  He  remained  there
four  days : on  the  fifth,  the  galleys  having  on  board  the  purveyances  of  the  French  lords,
the  count  and  his  companions  took  leave  of  the  lord  and  lady  de  Mathelin,  returning  them
their  best  thanks  for  all  the  kindness  and  friendship  they  had  received,  especially  the  count
de  Nevers,  who,  as  the  principal  personage,  said  he  was  bound  at  all  times  hereafter  to  render
* “ Sir  James  do  Brasemont.”  Tho  MSS.  have  de  BaufFrcmont,  which  I should  prefer.


G50


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND  FRANCE,  &c.


them  every  service  in  liis  power.  After  many  compliments  on  both  sides,  the  French  lords
entered  the  galleys,  and,  as  long  as  they  were  in  sight,  the  lord  de  Mathelin  remained  on  the
shore,  and  after  that  went  home.  The  galleys,  having  a favourable  wind,  arrived  at  Rhodes,
and  anchored  in  the  haven,  where  vessels  from  Cyprus,  Barutli,  and  other  ports  in  the  Levant,
usually  do.  On  their  landing,  they  were  received  by  many  of  the  knights  of  Rhodes,  who
wear  a white  cross,  in  memory  of  the  cross  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  who  suffered  to  deliver
others  from  the  pains  of  hell.  They  are  valiant  knights,  and  give  daily  assaults  by  sea  or
land  on  the  infidels,  to  support  and  defend  the  Christian  faith.

The  count  do  Nevers  and  the  lords  of  France  were  received  by  the  grand  prior  of  Rhodes
and  the  grand  prior  of  Aquitaine,  in  their  robes  of  ceremony,  who  offered  to  lend  them  any
sum  of  money,  as  far  as  their  abilities  extended,  to  enable  them  to  discharge  their  daily
expenses,  which  the  count  and  his  friends  thought  a most  courteous  offer,  and  thanked  them
accordingly.  In  truth,  they  were  in  want  of  money,  and  the  grand  prior  of  Aquitaine,  a
right  valiant  knight,  as  his  actions  showed  in  the  Holy  Land,  lent  the  count  de  Nevers  thirty
thousand  francs,  which  were  counted  out  by  sir  Regnier  Pot,  house-steward  to  the  count,
and  the  lord  do  Rochefort  in  Burgundy.  I believe  this  sum  was  as  much  for  his  companions
as  for  the  count  himself,  and  was  divided  among  them,  although  the  count  de  Nevers  took  on
himself  the  whole  debt.  The  French  lords  remained  some  time  in  the  island  of  Rhodes,  to
recover  and  properly  array  themselves,  for  the  climate  was  by  far  more  temperate  than  in
the  countries  where  they  had  lately  resided  : during  the  time  they  tarried  at  Rhodes,  waiting
for  the  galleys  from  Venice,  sir  Guy  de  laTrcmouille  was  seized  with  so  dangerous  an  illness,
that  he  there  departed  this  life.  He  ordered  his  body  to  be  buried  on  the  spot  where  he
died,  and  was,  consequently,  interred  in  the  church  of  Saint  John,  in  the  island  of
Rhodes.  Ilis  funeral  was  honourably  attended  by  the  French  lords,  who  much  regretted
his  loss,  more  especially  the  count  de  Nevers,  who  knew  that  his  father,  the  duke  of
Burgundy,  would  be  greatly  affected  by  it,  as  he  had  always  found  him  a wise  and  honest
counsellor.

The  galleys  from  Venice  at  length  arrived,  properly  armed  and  equipped,  to  the  great  joy
of  the  French  lords.  They  were  not  long  in  making  their  preparations  to  depart,  and  took
leave  of  the  knights  of  Rhodes,  who  recommended  their  order  to  them,  and  to  all  devout
souls  who  would  be  willing  to  assist  it.  The  count  de  Nevers,  the  lords  Henry  de  Bar,  de
Boucicaut,  sir  William  de  la  Tremouille,  the  lord  de  Rochefort,  sir  Regnier  Pot,  and  the
rest,  embarked  on  board  the  Venetian  galleys,  the  captains  of  which  resolved  to  touch  at  the
different  islands,  that  their  passengers  might  sail  more  at  their  ease,  and  refresh  themselves
on  shore,  and  show  the  count  de  Nevers  the  various  islands  which  lay  between  Rhodes  and
Venice.  They  steered  first  for  Modon*,  which  is  five  hundred  miles  from  Rhodes,  and
tarried  there  some  days,  to  amuse  themselves,  for  the  port  and  country  belong  to  the
Venetians.  From  Modon  they  had  a fine  passage  to  Colefo'f*,  as  the  sea  was  calm,  where
they  refreshed  themselves;  and  from  Colefo  they  made  for  the  island  of  Garre  J,  where  they
did  the  same : thence  they  sailed  for  the  island  of  Chifolignie§  ; and,  having  anchored,  they
landed,  and  were  met  by  a large  party  of  ladies  and  damsels,  who  have  the  government  of
the  island.  They  received  the  French  lords  with  joy,  and  led  them  to  the  interior  part  of
the  island,  which  is  very  beautiful,  to  amuse  and  enjoy  themselves.  Some  say,  who  pretend
to  be  acquainted  with  the  state  of  this  island,  and  insist  upon  it,  that  fairies  and  nymphs
inhabit  it,  and  that  frequently  merchants  from  Venice  or  Genoa,  who  have  been  forced  by
stress  of  weather  to  make  some  stay  there,  have  seen  the  appearances  of  them,  and  have  had
the  truth  of  these  reports  confirmed.

The  count  de  Nevers  and  his  friends  were  very  happy  with  the  dames  of  Ceplialonia,  for
they  entertained  them  gaily,  telling  them  their  arrival  had  been  matter  of  joy  to  them,  from
their  being  knights  of  honour  and  renown,  for  in  general  they  had  no  other  visitors  but
merchants.  I may  be  asked,  if  this  island  be  solely  inhabited  by  women.  I answer  no ;
but  women  have  the  sovereignty  of  it : they,  however,  employ  themselves  in  needle  and  other

* “ Modon,”  a town  and  port  in  the  Morea.

t “ Colefo.”  I should  have  imagined  this  to  be  Corfu,  if  Cephalonia  were  not  seemingly  intended  afterwards.

+ “ Garre.”  Q.  Zante.  § “ Chifolignie.”  Q.  Cephalonia.


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


651


works;  and  make  such  fine  cloths  of  silk,  that  none  others  can  be  compared  to  them.  The
men  of  the  island,  being  ignorant,  are  employed  to  carry  abroad  these  works,  wherever  they
shall  think  to  have  the  greatest  profit,  but  the  women  remain  at  home.  The  men  honour
the  fair  sex  for  their  works,  and  because  they  have  always  a sufficiency  of  wealth.  The  state
of  the  island  is  such,  that  no  one  dare  approach  it,  to  commit  any  injury,  for  whoever  should
attempt  it  would  perish,  as  has  been  frequently  seen.  For  this  cause,  these  ladies  live  in
peace,  without  fear  of  any  one : they  are  amiable,  good-tempered,  and  without  pride,  and
certainly,  when  they  please,  converse  with  fairies,  and  keep  them  company.

After  the  count  de  Nevers  and  his  companions  had  amused  themselves  at  this  island  for
five  days,  they  took  leave  of  the  ladies : the  count  made  them  such  handsome  presents,  for
their  courteous  treatment  of  them,  that  they  were  contented,  and  thanked  him  gratefully  on
his  departure.  When  the  lords  were  embarked,  they  put  to  sea,  and  favourable  winds
carried  them  to  a territory  called  Ragusa,  when  they  refreshed  themselves  again,  and  thence
made  for  Clarence*,  which  is  one  hundred  miles  distant  from  Venice.  While  the  galleys
were  at  anchor,  and  the  lords  in  the  town  of  Clarence,  which  belongs  to  the  Venetians,  they
were  known  by  a squire  of  honour  and  renown,  from  Hainault,  called  Bridoul  de  la  Porte.
He  was  a native  of  Mons,  and  had  made,  at  his  own  expense,  a pilgrimage,  through  devotion,
to  the  Holy  Sepulchre  at  Jerusalem,  and  had  visited  Cairo  and  St.  Catherine’s  Mount.  The
French  lords  had  come  to  Clarence  two  days  before  him,  and  gave  him  a welcome  reception,
on  hearing  he  was  so  good  a man,  and  a native  of  Hainault,  the  country  of  the  countess  of
Nevers,  who  was  daughter  to  the  earl  of  Hainault,  and  because  they  were  all  in  countries
distant  from  their  own.  They  asked  him  what  parts  he  was  last  come  from,  and  also
concerning  the  affairs  of  king  James  of  Cyprus,  and  respecting  Turkey.  He  made  no
difficulty,  but  instantly  gave  prudent  and  intelligent  answers.  The  barons  of  France,  having
reposed  themselves,  re-embarked,  and  made  sail  for  Pareuse  t.  All  large  vessels  and  galleys
which  cannot,  from  want  of  water,  land  their  cargoes  at  Venice,  put  into  this  port,  for  here
the  sea  becomes  shallow.  The  French  knights  made  no  long  stay  before  they  embarked  in
smaller  vessels  and  arrived  at  Venice,  where  they  were  received  with  great  joy.  On  their
landing,  they  all  returned  thanks  to  God  for  their  happy  deliverance  from  the  hands  of  the
infidels,  of  which  at  one  time  they  had  despaired.  The  count  de  Nevers  and  his  companions
went  to  the  hotels  which  had  been  prepared  for  them  ; for,  as  their  coming  was  known  and
expected  for  some  time,  their  friends  had  sent  servants  and  equipages  to  wait  their  arrival.
The  count  found  part  of  his  attendants,  whom  the  duke  and  duchess  of  Burgundy  had  sent
thither,  ready  to  receive  him.  Sir  Dinde  de  Desponde  had  also  been  at  Venice  some  time
waiting  for  them  with  the  amount  of  their  ransom,  for  without  his  assistance,  nothing  could
be  done.

The  French  lords,  on  their  arrival  at  Venice,  instantly  employed  clerks  and  messongers  to
write  and  carry  letters  to  France  and  elsewhere,  to  inform  their  friends  of  their  happy
deliverance.  This  was  very  soon  publicly  known,  to  the  joy  of  all  who  heard  it.  The  duke
and  duchess  of  Burgundy  lost  no  time  in  preparing  everything  suitable  to  the  rank  of  their
son  the  count  de  Nevers,  such  as  gold  and  silver  plate,  linen,  tapestry,  clothes  of  all
sorts,  which  were  packed  up  on  sumpter-horses,  and  sent  to  Venice  under  the  care  of  the  lord
de  Hangiers  j and  sir  James  de  Helly.  In  like  manner  did  all  the  friends  and  relatives  of
the  other  lords  send  them  every  necessary  suitable  to  their  ranks.  You  may  suppose  all  this
was  done  at  a great  expense,  for  nothing  was  spared : their  residence  at  Venice  cost  much,  as
it  is  one  of  the  dearest  towns  in  the  world  for  strangers.  It  was  proper  these  lords  should
keep  up  a state  becoming  their  rank,  which  fell  naturally  most  heavy  on  the  count  de  Nevers,
their  commander  in  chief.

The  duke  and  duchess  of  Burgundy  were  very  active  in  procuring  his  ransom,  that  their
son  and  heir  might  leave  Venice  with  honour,  and  return  to  France  and  Flanders,  where  his
presence  was  much  wished  for.  The  duke  said,  that  were  it  not  for  the  aid  of  his  good

* “ Clarence,”  or  Chiarenza,  is  in  the  Morea,  opposite  £ “ The  lord  de  Hangiers.”  D.  Sauvage  supposes  it
to  Cephalonia.  ought  to  have  been  de  Hangest,  for  a family  of  that  name

f “ Pareuse.”  Q.  Parenzo,  a town  on  the  coast  of  existed  in  his  time  in  Picardy.

Istria,  nearly  opposite  to  Venice.


652


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


subjects  in  Burgundy,  Artois,  and  Flanders,  the  money  would  never  have  been  raised,  for
their  own  and  their  son's  other  expenses  were  very  great.

The  different  negociations  and  embassies  had  called  for  large  sums,  and,  though  the  ransom
was  but  two  hundred  thousand  florins  to  Bajazet,  yet  the  other  costs  and  expenses  amounted
to  as  much  more,  as  was  declared  by  those  through  whose  hands  the  money  passed ; and
without  this  sum  their  liberty  would  never  have  been  obtained.  It  was  matter  of  much
consideration  how  this  money  was  to  be  raised ; for  neither  the  duke  nor  duchess  were
inclined  to  abate  anything  of  their  state,  which  was  very  magnificent.  It  was  resolved  by
his  council  to  lay  a tax  on  all  the  towns  under  his  obedience,  more  especially  those  of
Flanders ; for  they  abounded  in  wealth,  from  their  commerce,  and  therefore  the  greater  load
was  laid  on  them,  that  the  count  de  Nevers  might  be  at  liberty  to  quit  Venice.  When  the
matter  was  mentioned  to  the  townsmen  of  Ghent,  they  readily  declared  their  willingness  to
present  their  young  lord  fifty  thousand  florins  to  aid  him  in  his  ransom.  Bruges,  Mechlin,
Antwerp,  Ypres,  Courtray,  and  the  other  towns  in  Flanders,  expressed  their  readiness  to
assist  in  the  ransom  of  the  count  de  Nevers.  The  duke  and  duchesS  of  Burgundy  were  well
pleased  at  these  answers,  and  returned  their  warm  acknowledgments  to  the  magistrates  of
the  different  towns  in  Flanders,  and  to  those  of  Artois  and  Burgundy,  who  had  testified
equally  good  inclinations.

The  king  of  France  was  also  very  desirous  of  aiding  the  French  lords  in  their  ransom,  although
he  had  already  been  at  a heavy  expense  in  sending  his  ambassadors  to  Hungary  and  Turkey.
These  charges,  however,  he  did  not  regret,  since  his  cousins  were  now  safe  at  V enice,  and
with  them  his  own  knight  the  lord  de  Boucicaut.  The  count  de  Nevers  and  his  companions
were  still  at  V enice,  for  it  was  not  his  intention  to  depart  thence  until  the  discharge  of  the
ransom  should  be  completed.  The  merchants  of  Scio  and  the  two  Grecian  lords  had  pledged
themselves  to  the  sultan  for  the  payment,  and  such  an  immense  sum  was  not  readily  raised.
Sir  Dinde  de  Dcspondo  took  great  pains  to  accomplish  the  business  from  bis  regard  to  the
king  of  France  and  the  duke  of  Burgundy,  who  had  sent  him  to  Venice  for  the  purpose,  and
he  was  more  subtle  and  conversant  in  such  business  than  any  other  person  whatever.

While  others  were  diligently  despatching  the  business  of  their  ransom,  the  lords  spent
their  time  most  joyously  at  Venice;  but,  about  this  period,  an  infectious  disorder  afflicted
that  town  and  neighbourhood,  which  began  in  the  month  of  August,  and  never  ceased  until
Saint  Andrew’s  day.  Great  numbers  fell  victims  to  it,  and  among  the  rest  (the  more  the
pity  !)  the  lord  Henry  de  Bar,  eldest  son  to  the  duke  of  Bar,  and,  in  right  of  his  wife,  heir  to
all  the  estates  of  the  late  lord  de  Coucy,  excepting  the  dower  of  his  widow.  Thus  were  the
two  ladies  de  Coucy  made  widows  in  one  year,  which  was  a great  misfortune.  The  body  of
the -lord  Henry  was  embalmed  and  brought  to  France,  and  I believe  buried  at  Paris,  for  his
obsequies  were  there  performed  with  much  solemnity.  On  account  of  this  epidemical
distemper,  and  to  avoid  its  danger’,  the  count  de  Nevers  left  Venice,  and  fixed  his  residence
at  Treviso,  where  he  and  the  other  French  lords  remained,  with  their  households,  for  upwards
of  four  months  without  stirring  from  it.  During  their  stay  at  Treviso,  the  king  of  Hungary
was  informed  by  the  knights  of  Rhodes,  of  their  having  made  peace  with  Bajazet,  and
obtained  their  liberty  by  payment  of  two  hundred  thousand  francs.  He,  in  consequence,
sent  letters  by  a bishop  and  some  of  his  knights  to  the  count  de  Nevers,  to  mark  his  affection
to  him,  with  others  to  those  who  had  the  government  of  Venice.  The  bishop  and  knights
were  ordered  by  the  king  to  address  the  count  as  follows,  and  of  which  they  handsomely
acquitted  themselves.

“ My  lord,  we  are  sent  hither  by  our  much-redoubted  lord,  and  your  cousin,  the  king  of
Hungary,  who  salutes  you  by  us.  Here  are  letters  written  by  him  to  congratulate  you  on
your  deliverance  from  the  sultan  Bajazet,  his  enemy.  He  is  sincerely  rejoiced  at  your  and
your  companions’  escape,  for,  without  the  means  you  have  pursued,  it  would  never  have  been
effected.  Dear  sir,  our  lord  is  well  assured  that  your  treaties  with  the  sultan  must  have  cost
you  immense  sums  of  money,  and,  with  the  losses  you  all  suffered  at  the  disastrous  battle  of
Nicopoli,  will  have  made  it  difficult  to  you  to  procure  a sufficiency  for  your  ransom.  Our
sovereign,  therefore,  dear  sir,  orders  us  to  make  you  his  excuses  for  not  offering  you,  on
this  occasion,  his  assistance : if  it  were  in  his  power,  he  would  most  cheerfully  do  it,  for  he


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


653


conceives  and  declares  lie  is  bound  to  aid  you,  from  his  connection  with  you  by  blood  and
other  causes ; were  it  not  that  he  and  his  subjects  have  had  such  losses  by  the  late  defeat,
that  you,  who  are  a person  of  great  understanding,  will  readily  believe,  and  know  the
impossibility  of  his  giving  any  aid  at  this  present  moment.  The  revenues  of  Hungary  are
ruined  for  this  and  the  ensuing  year,  but  whenever  they  are  recovered,  and  the  usual  payments
made,  that  he  may  be  enabled  to  show  his  offers  are  not  mere  empty  words,  he  will  assuredly
come  handsomely  forward  to  your  service.  That  you  may  believe  our  most  redoubted
sovereign  and  your  cousin  is  in  earnest,  we  must  acquaint  you  that  he  has  ordered  us  to
offer  for  sale  to  the  rulers  of  Venice,  the  rents  he  receives  from  this  town,  which  amount  to
seven  thousand  ducats  yearly ; and  that  whatever  these  may  produce  you  are  to  dispose  of
as  if  it  were  your  own ; and  for  which  we  will  sign  receipts  to  the  V enetians,  having  full
authority  so  to  do.”

The  speech  of  the  ambassadors  from  the  king  of  Hungary  was  very  agreeable  to  the
French  lords.  They  answered  by  the  lord  de  Rochefort,  who,  in  the  name  of  all,  said  “ that
they  were  very  sensible  of  this  mark  of  kindness  from  the  king  of  Hungary,  who,  to  oblige
his  cousin  the  count  de  Nevers,  offered  to  sell  his  inheritance  to  aid  them ; that  this  was
not  an  offer  to  be  refused,  nor  the  friendship  and  courtesy  forgotten ; that  the  count  desired
to  have  a little  time  to  consider  of  his  answer  to  the  king.”  This  wTas  agreed  to ; and,
within  a few  days,  the  ambassadors  were  told  by  the  count  de  Nevers,  that  it  would  be
very  unbecoming  him  to  pledge  or  sell  the  inheritance  of  another ; but  that,  if  it  were
agreeable  to  them  who  had  such  powers,  to  prevail  on  the  Venetians  to  advance,  on  the
security  of  these  rents,  a sufficient  sum  for  the  count  de  Nevers’  daily  expenses,  and  to  enable
him  to  acquit  himself  of  the  thirty  thousand  florins  the  grand  prior  of  Aquitaine  had  lent
him  with  so  much  generosity  in  the  island  of  Rhodes,  he  should  consider  it  as  a great  favour,
and  most  kindly  thank  the  king  of  Hungary  and  his  council  for  so  doing.”

The  ambassadors  cheerfully  promised  to  make  the  proposal  to  the  Venetians.  When  the
Venetians  heard  it,  they  coldly  replied  they  would  deliberately  consider  of  the  matter,  and
demanded  fifteen  days  to  weigh  their  determination.  When  these  were  expired,  they
answered  (as  I was  told  by  one  who  heard  it),  “ That  if  the  king  of  Hungary  were  disposed
to  sell  his  whole  kingdom,  the  V enetians  would  willingly  make  the  purchase,  and  pay  the
money  down ; but  as  for  such  a trifle  as  seven  thousand  ducats  of  yearly  revenue  which  ho
possessed  in  the  city  of  Venice,  it  was  of  so  little  value  that  they  could  not  set  a price  on  it
either  to  buy  or  sell,  and  they  would  not  trouble  themselves  about  so  small  an  object.”

Such  was  the  answer  made  by  the  V enetians  to  the  ambassadors  of  the  king  of  Hungary.
Some  said,  this  reply  was  mere  dissimulation,  and  that,  though  the  Hungarians  had  made
the  offer  to  the  count,  they,  in  an  underhand  way,  caused  this  answer  to  be  given.  Things,
therefore,  remained  in  the  state  they  wTere  in  before,  and  the  ambassadors  took  leave  of  the
count  de  Nevers  and  those  of  his  countrymen  then  with  him,  who  were,  sir  Reguier  Pot,
the  lord  de  Rochefort,  and  sir  William  de  la  Tremouille.  They  left  Venice,  and  returned  to
Hungary;  but  the  French  lords  continued  at  Treviso  on  account  of  the  great  mortality  that
reigned  in  Venice.


CHAPTER  XCI. THE  LORD  LOUIS  DE  SANCERRE  IS  MADE  CONSTABLE  OP  FRANCE  IN  THE

ROOM  OF  THE  COUNT  D’EU,  WHO  HAD  DIED  IN  TURKEY. BOUCICAUT,  DURING  HIS

ABSENCE  WITH  THE  COUNT  DE  NEVERS,  IS  APPOINTED  MARSHAL  OF  FRANCE  IN  THE

PLACE  OF  THE  LORD  LOUIS  DE  SANCERRE. THE  FRENCH  LORDS  WHO  HAD  BEEN

PRISONERS  IN  TURKEY  RETURN  TO  FRANCE.

You  have  heard  that  the  count  d’Eu,  constable  of  France,  died  in  his  bed  at  Bursa  in
Turkey,  to  the  great  regret  of  all  his  friends,  more  especially  the  king  of  France,  who  much
loved  him.  The  constableship  became  vacant  by  his  death,  and  that  office  is  of  such  weight
that  it  must  not  long  remain  so.  Councils  were  therefore  held  to  appoint  his  successor,  and
the  wiser  among  them  nominated  the  lord  Louis  de  Sancerre,  in  which  they  were  confirmed
by  the  majority  in  the  kingdom.  He  had  been  a very  long  time  marshal  of  France,  and


054


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  See.


was  so  at  the  time  of  his  election,  residing  in  Languedoc.  Being  sent  for  by  the  king
to  Paris,  he  was  invested  with  the  office  of  constable,  and  by  this  vacated  the  charge  of
marshal ; on  which  the  king  said,  that  he  had  already  thought  of  a successor,  for  that  no
one  should  have  it  but  his  knight  the  lord  Boucicaut.  All  the  lords  agreed  to  the  propriety
of  this  choice,  for  indeed  he  was  deserving  of  it,  and  when  appointed  was  at  Venice.  He
returned  home  shortly  after  this,  for  the  ransoms  were  paid,  and  the  whole  of  those  who  had
been  prisoners  in  Turkey  came  back  to  France,  to  the  great  joy  of  their  friends  and  country-
men. The  lord  Boucicaut  was  made  marshal  of  France  • and  the  count  de  Nevers  waited
on  the  duke  and  duchess  of  Burgundy,  and  was  well  feasted  by  them  and  others,  for  he  was
returned  from  a long  and  dangerous  expedition,  wherein  he  and  his  companions  had  suffered
many  perils,  but,  through  the  grace  of  God,  they  had  escaped,  and  were  returned  home.
The  count  was  seen  with  much  pleasure  by  all  in  Flanders,  Artois,  and  Burgundy,  and
other  dependencies  of  his  father,  as  he  was  their  heir-apparent.  After  he  had  remained
some  time  with  the  duke  and  duchess,  and  had  visited  the  countries  under  their  obedience,
he  determined  to  wait  on  the  king  of  France  and  the  duke  of  Orleans,  both  of  whom  received
him  honourably  and  kindly.  He  was  made  welcome  by  all  the  lords  and  ladies  of  the  court.
The  king  and  the  duke  of  Orleans  were  very  glad  to  see  him  again,  and  eagerly  listened
to  his  relation  of  what  he  had  suffered.  They  inquired  news  of  Turkey,  of  the  battle  of
Nicopoli,  of  the  adventures  he  had  met  with,  how  he  was  made  prisoner,  and  of  the  state  of
Bajazet.

The  count  satisfied  them  by  his  answers,  for  he  was  well  spoken,  and  made  no  complaints,
at  least  by  speech,  of  the  sultan,  but  said  he  had  found  him  courteous  and  affable,  even  to
those  attached  to  his  person ; that  he  was  very  well  treated ; and  he  did  not  forget  to  tell
the  lords  to  whom  he  was  speaking,  that  Bajazet,  on  his  taking  leave,  to  quit  Turkey,  had
said,  that  he  was  born  to  bear  arms,  and  make  conquests  in  this  world  every  year  to  a
greater  extent,  and  that  he  wished  not  to  prevent  his  prisoners  from  again  taking  up  arms
against  him,  for  he  would  with  pleasure  meet  them  in  battle  two,  three,  or  four  times  if
necessary ; and  that  it  was  his  intention  to  march  to  Rome,  and  feed  his  horse  on  the  altar
of  Saint  Peter.  The  count  added,  that  the  sultan  thought  our  faith  erroneous,  and  corrupted
by  those  who  ought  to  have  kept  its  purity;  and  the  Turks  laughed  and  made  their  jokes
at  it.  Many  Saracens  declare  that  Christianity,  from  the  above  cause,  will  be  destroyed,
and  that  the  time  is  now  come  for  its  ruin ; and  that  Bajazet  was  born  to  accomplish  this,
and  be  king  over  all  the  world.  “ Such  was  the  language  the  interpreter  translated  to  me;
and,  from  what  I saw  and  heard,  I believe  they  are  perfectly  well  acquainted  in  Turkey,
Tartary,  Persia,  and  throughout  the  whole  of  the  infidels’  country,  with  our  schisms  in  the
church,  and  how  the  Christians  are  at  difference,  one  with  another,  respecting  the  two  popes
of  France  and  Italy;  and  the  Saracens  are  wonderfully  surprised  how  the  kings  of  the
different  countries  suffer  it.”

This  speech  of  the  count  de  Nevers  gave  the  king  and  lords  of  France  enough  to  think  on.
Some  said  the  Saracens  were  in  the  right  to  make  their  jokes  and  laugh,  for  priests  were
allowed  to  meddle  too  much  in  affairs  that  did  not  concern  them ; that  it  was  time  to  lower
their  pomp,  or  force  them  to  do  it  of  themselves.  The  young  clergy,  who  were  studying  the
Scriptures  at  the  university  of  Paris,  could  not  obtain  any  benefices  from  this  schism  in  the
church,  and  were  not  displeased  that  the  people  murmured  against  the  popes.  They
rejoiced  at  what  the  count  de  Nevers  had  related,  and  that  the  Turks  and  Saracens  made
derision  of  our  faith.  “ In  good  truth,”  they  added,  “ they  are  in  the  right  to  laugh  at  it,
and,  if  the  king  of  France  and  the  emperor  of  Germany  do  not  speedily  attend  to  this  schism,
we  foresee  that  church-affairs  will  daily  become  worse.  All  things  considered,  those  who
have  been  neuter  between  the  two  popes  have  acted  wisely,  and  thus  it  behoves  every  one
who  wishes  for  union  in  the  church.”

It  was  secretly  told  the  king,  by  those  who  loved  him  and  were  desirous  he  should  regain
his  health,  that  it  was  the  common  opinion  throughout  France  he  would  never  be  perfectly
recovered  until  the  church  were  properly  regulated.  They  added,  that  his  father,  king
Charles  of  happy  memory,  had,  on  his  death-bed,  charged  his  council  with  this  matter ; that
he  suspected  lie  had  been  deceived  by  these  popes,  and  had  made  his  determination  too  soon,


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


055


for  which  he  felt  his  conscience  was  loaded.  lie  excused  himself,  saying, — “ When  our
lord  and  father  died,  we  were  very  young.  We  have  followed  the  counsel  of  those  who
have  hitherto  governed,  and  if  we  have  acted  wrong  or  foolishly,  it  has  been  their  fault,  and
not  ours ; but,  since  we  have  had  fuller  information,  we  will  soon  .attend  to  the  business,
and  in  such  a manner  that  the  effect  shall  be  apparent.”  The  king  of  France  paid  more
attention  to  this  matter  than  he  had  ever  done  before,  and  promised  himself  and  his  council
that  he  would  provide  a remedy.  He  spoke  of  it  to  his  brother,  the  duke  of  Orleans,  who
inclined  instantly  to  his  opinion,  as  did  the  duke  of  Burgundy,  for,  notwithstanding  he  had
acknowledged  the  pope,  who  styled  himself  Clement,  he  had  no  great  faith  in  him : the
prelates  of  France,  particularly  Guy  do  Roye,  archbishop  of  Rheims,  the  archbishops  of
Sens,  of  Rouen,  and  the  bishop  of  Autun,  had  induced  him  to  acknowledge  Clement.

It  was  determined  in  a private  council,  that,  if  a union  of  the  church  were  sought  for,  it
was  necessary  to  have  the  assent  of  Germany.  Learned  men  were  therefore  sent  as  ambas-
sadors to  the  king  of  Bohemia  and  Germany,  who  styled  himself  king  of  the  Romans.
Master  Philip  des  Playes  was  one  of  these  ambassadors,  who  had  instructions  to  prevail  on
the  king  of  Germany  to  meet  the  king  of  France  in  the  city  of  Rheims ; and  that  no  prelates,
cardinals,  archbishops,  or  bishops,  might  any  way  interrupt  this  meeting,  or  interfere  with
the  object,  it  was  published  that  the  cause  for  the  two  monarchs,  with  their  councils,  coming
to  Rheims,  was  to  treat  of  a marriage  between  a son  of  the  marquis  of  Brandenburgh,
brother  to  the  emperor,  and  a daughter  of  the  duke  of  Orleans,  and  under  cover  of  this  they
could  treat  of  other  matters.

During  the  time  these  negotiations  wTere  going  forward,  the  lord  Guy  de  Chatillon,  count
de  Blois,  departed  this  life  in  his  hotel  at  Avesnes,  in  Hainault.  He  was  carried  to  Valen-
ciennes and  buried  in  the  church  of  the  Franciscans,  in  a chapel  called  the  Chapel  of  Artois.
True  it  is,  that  he  had  made  a large  inclosure  for  the  Franciscans,  and  intended  erecting  his
tomb  within  it;  but  he  died  so  much  in  debt,  that  his  countess,  the  lady  Mary  of  Namur,
was  obliged  to  renounce  all  claim  to  his  moveables.  She  dared  not  act  under  his  will,  but
retired  to  her  dowry  of  the  lands  of  Chimay  and  Beaumont,  and  the  estates  went  to  their
right  heirs.  The  duke  of  Orleans  had  the  county  of  Blois,  for  which,  during  the  late  count’s
life,  he  had  paid  him  two  hundred  thousand  crowns  of  France.  The  lands  in  Hainault,
Holland,  and,  Zealand,  went  to  duke  Albert  of  Bavaria:  those  of  Avesnes,  Landrecies,
and  Louvion  in  Tierache,  fell  to  John  of  Blois,  more  commonly  called  John  of  Brittany,  to
whom,  if  count  Guy  had  not  sold  it,  the  county  of  Blois  would  have  devolved  as  to  its  right
heir.  Observe  what  mischief  a lord  may  do  his  heir  by  listening  to  bad  advice  *.  £ I make

mention  of  it  because  the  count  Guy  de  Blois  was  very  anxious,  during  his  life,  that  I,  sir
John  Froissart,  should  indite  this  history;  and  he  was  at  great  expenses  to  forward  it,  for
so  considerable  an  undertaking  cannot  be  accomplished  without  heavy  charges.  May  God
receive  his  soul ! He  was  my  lord  and  patron,  of  high  honour  and  great  renown,  and  had
no  need  to  make  the  pitiful  bargains  he  did  in  the  sale  of  his  estates ; but  he  too  readily
believed  those  who  advised  him  to  dishonourable  and  profitless  acts.  The  lord  de  Coucy,
who  died  at  Bursa,  was  very  culpable  in  this  business.]]  We  will  now  return  to  the  affairs
of  England.


CHAPTER  XCII. THE  DEATHS  OF  THE  DUKE  OF  GLOUCESTER  AND  THE  EARL  OF  ARUNDEL.

THE  MANNER  IN  WHICH  THE  DUKES  OF  LANCASTER  AND  YORK,  AND  THE  LONDONERS,
TAKE  THE  MATTER.

You  have  before  seen,  in  the  course  of  this  history,  that  king  Richard  of  England  would
not  longer  conceal  the  great  hatred  he  bore  his  uncle  of  Gloucester,  but  had  determined  to
have  him  cut  off,  according  to  the  advice  given  him,  setting  it  forth  to  be  more  advisable  to
destroy  than  be  destroyed.  You  have  likewise  heard  how  the  king  had  rode  to  the  castle
of  Pleshy,  thirty  miles  from  London,  and  with  fair  words  had  cajoled  the  duke  out  of  his
castle,  and  was  accompanied  by  him  to  a lane  that  led  to  the  Thames,  where  they  arrived
* All  between  the  crotchets  is  from  the  MSS.  in  the  B.  Museum  and  at  Hafod,  but  not  in  the  printed  copies.


656


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  Ac.


between  ten  and  eleven  o’clock  at  night ; and  how  the  earl-marshal,  who  there  lay  in
ambush,  had  arrested  him  in  the  king’s  name,  and  forced  him  towards  the  Thames,  in  spite
of  his  cries  to  the  king  to  deliver  him.  He  was  conscious,  that  from  the  moment  of  his
being  thus  arrested,  his  end  was  resolved  on,  and  it  was  confirmed  to  him  by  the  king
turning  a deaf  ear  to  his  complaints,  and  riding  on  full  gallop  to  London,  where  he  lodged
that  night  in  the  Tower.  The  duke  of  Gloucester  had  other  lodgings ; for,  whether  lie
would  or  not,  he  was  forced  into  a boat  that  carried  him  to  a vessel  at  anchor  on  the  Thames,
into  which  lie  was  obliged  to  enter.  The  earl-marshal  embarked  also  witli  his  men,  and,
having  a favourable  wind  and  tide,  they  fell  down  the  river,  and  arrived,  late  on  the  morrow
evening,  at  Calais,  without  any  one  knowing  of  it  except  the  king’s  officers.  QThe  earl-
marshal,  as  governor,  could  enter  Calais  at  all  hours,  without  any  one  thinking  it  extraor-
dinary : he  carried  the  duke  to  the  castle,  wherein  he  confined  him.]

You  may  suppose,  that  when  news  was  carried  to  Plesliy  of  the  duke  of  Gloucester’s
arrest,  the  duchess  and  her  children  were  greatly  dismayed,  and,  since  such  a bold  measure
had  been  taken,  were  much  afraid  of  the  consequences.  Suspecting  the  duke’s  life  was  in
great  danger,  they  consulted  sir  John  Laquingay  what  would  be  best  for  them  now  to  do.
The  knight  advised  them  to  send  instantly  to  the  dukes  of  Lancaster  and  York,  the  duke’s
brothers ; for  by  their  mediation,  perhaps,  the  king’s  clioler  would  be  appeased.  He  saw
no  other  means,  as  the  king  would  not  choose  to  make  them  his  enemies.  The  duchess
of  Gloucester  followed  this  advice  of  the  knight,  and  instantly  despatched  messengers  to
both,  for  they  resided  at  a distance  from  each  other.  They  were  much  enraged  at  hearing
their  brother  was  arrested,  and  returned  answers  to  the  duchess,  not  to  be  too  much
distressed  at  what  had  happened,  for  the  king  would  not  dare  to  treat  him  otherwise  than
by  fair  and  legal  measures,  for  it  would  not  be  suffered.  This  answer  comforted  the  duchess
and  her  children.

The  king  of  England  left  the  Tower  of  London  at  a very  early  hour,  and  rode  to  Eltham,
where  he  remained.  The  same  day,  towards  evening,  the  earls  of  Arundel  and  Warwick
were  brought  to  the  Tower  by  the  king’s  officers,  and  there  confined,  to  the  great  surprise
of  the  citizens.  Their  imprisonment  caused  many  to  murmur,  but  they  were  afraid  to  act,
or  do  anything  against  the  king’s  pleasure,  lest  they  might  suffer  for  it.  It  was  the  common
conversation  of  the  knights,  squires,  and  citizens  of  London,  and  in  ocher  towns, — “ It  is
useless  for  us  to  say  more  on  this  matter,  for  the  dukes  of  Lancaster  and  of  York,  brothers
to  the  duke  of  Gloucester,  can  provide  a remedy  for  all  this  whenever  they  please : they
assuredly  would  have  prevented  it  from  happening,  if  they  had  suspected  the  king  had  so
much  courage,  or  that  he  would  have  arrested  their  brother ; but  they  will  repent  of  their
indolence : and,  if  they  are  not  instantly  active,  it  will  end  badly.”

When  the  duke  of  Gloucester  saw  himself  confined  in  the  castle  of  Calais,  abandoned  by
his  brothers,  and  deprived  of  his  attendants,  he  began  to  be  much  alarmed.  He  addressed
himself  to  the  earl- marshal:  “ For  what  reason  am  I thus  carried  from  England  and  confined
here  ? It  seems  that  you  mean  to  imprison  me.  Let  me  go  and  view  the  castle,  its  garrison,
and  the  people  of  the  town.”  “ My  lord,”  replied  the  earl,  “ I dare  not  comply  with  your
demands,  for  you  are  consigned  to  my  guard,  under  pain  of  death.  The  king  our  lord  is  at
this  moment  somewhat  wroth  with  you ; and  it  is  his  orders  that  you  abide  here  a while,  in
banishment  with  us,  which  you  must  have  patience  to  do,  until  we  have  other  news,  and
God  grant  that  it  may  be  soon  ! for,  as  the  Lord  may  help  me,  I am  truly  concerned  for
your  disgrace,  and  would  cheerfully  aid  you  if  I could,  but  you  know  the  oath  I have  taken
to  the  king,  which  I am  bound  in  honour  to  obey.”  The  duke  of  Gloucester  could  not
obtain  any  other  answer.  He  judged,  from  appearances  of  things  around  him,  that  he  was
in  danger  of  his  life,  and  asked  a priest  who  had  said  mass,  if  he  would  confess  him.  This
he  did,  with  great  calmness  and  resignation,  and  with  a devout  and  contrite  heart  cried
before  the  altar  of  God,  the  Creator  of  all  things,  for  his  mercy.  He  was  repentant  of  all
his  sins,  and  lamented  them  greatly.  He  was  in  the  right  thus  to  exonerate  his  conscience,
for  his  end  was  nearer  than  he  imagined.  I was  informed,  that  on  the  point  of  his  sitting
down  to  dinner,  when  the  tables  were  laid,  and  he  was  about  to  wash  his  hands,  four  men
rushed  out  from  an  adjoining  chamber,  and,  throwing  a towel  round  his  neck,  strangled


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


6.37


him,  by  two  drawing  one  end  and  two  the  other  *.  When  he  was  quite  dead,  they  carried
him  to  his  chamber,  undressed  him,  and  placed  the  body  between  two  sheets,  with  his  head
on  a pillow,  and  covered  him  with  furred  mantles.  They  then  re-entered  the  hall,  properly
instructed  what  to  say  and  how  to  act,  and  declared  the  duke  of  Gloucester  had  been  seized
with  a fit  of  apoplexy  as  he  was  washing  his  hands  before  dinner,  and  that  they  had  great
difficulty  to  carry  him  to  bed.  This  was  spoken  of  in  the  castle  and  town,  where  some
believed  it,  but  others  not.  Within  two  days  after,  it  was  published  abroad  that  the  duke  of
Gloucester  had  died  in  his  bed  at  the  castle  of  Calais ; and,  in  consequence,  the  earl  marshal
put  on  mourning,  for  he  was  nearly  related  to  him,  as  did  all  the  knights  and  squires  in  Calais.

News  of  this  event  was  sooner  known  in  France  and  Flanders  than  in  England.  The
French  rejoiced  much  at  it ; for  it  was  commonly  reported  that  there  would  never  be  any
solid  peace  between  France  and  England  as  long  as  the  duke  of  Gloucester  lived ; and  it  was
well  remembered,  that  in  the  negotiations  for  peace  he  was  more  obstinate  in  his  opinions
than  either  of  his  brothers ; and,  for  this  reason,  his  death  was  no  loss  to  France.  In  like
manner,  many  knights  and  squires  of  the  king  of  England’s  household,  who  were  afraid  of
him,  for  his  severe  and  rough  manners,  were  pleased  at  his  death.  They  recounted  how  he
had  driven  the  duke  of  Ireland  to  banishment,  and  had  ignominiously  beheaded  that  prudent
and  gallant  knight  sir  Simon  Burley,  who  had  been  so  much  beloved  by  the  prince  of  Wales,
and  had  done  essential  services  to  his  country.  The  deaths  of  sir  Robert  Trevilian,  sir
Nicholas  Bramber,  sir  John  Standwich,  and  others,  were  not  forgotten,  so  that  the  duke  of
Gloucester  was  but  little  lamented  in  England,  except  by  those  who  were  of  his  party  and
manner  of  thinking.

The  duke’s  body  was  honourably  embalmed  at  Calais,  and  put  into  a leaden  coffin,  with
an  outward  one  of  wood,  and  transported  in  this  state  by  sea  to  England.  The  vessel  that
carried  the  body  landed  at  Iladleigh  Castle  on  the  Thames,  and  thence  it  was  conveyed  on
a car,  unattended,  to  his  castle  of  Pleshy,  and  placed  in  the  church  which  the  duke  had
founded  in  honour  of  the  Holy  Trinity,  with  twelve  canons  to  perform  devoutly  the  divine
service.  In  this  church  was  the  duke  buried.  The  duchess  of  Gloucester,  her  son  Humphrey,
and  her  two  daughters,  were  sorely  grieved  when  the  body  of  the  duke  arrived.  The
duchess  had  double  cause  of  affliction,  for  the  earl  of  Arundel,  her  uncle,  had  been  publicly
beheaded  in  Cheapside  by  orders  of  the  king.  No  baron  nor  knight  dared  to  interpose,  nor
advise  the  king  to  do  otherwise,  for  he  was  himself  present  at  the  execution,  which  was
performed  by  the  earl’s  son-in-law,  the  earl-marshal,  who  bandaged  his  eyes.

The  earl  of  Warwick  ran  great  risk  of  suffering  the  same  death,  but  the  earl  of  Salisbury,
who  was  in  favour  with  the  king,  interceded  for  him,  as  did  many  other  barons  and  prelates.
The  king  listened  to  their  solicitations,  on  condition  he  were  sent  to  a place  he  could  not
leave,  for  he  would  never  absolutely  pardon  him,  as  he  was  deserving  death,  for  having
joined  the  duke  of  Gloucester  and  the  earl  of  Arundel  in  their  attempts  to  annul  the  truce
which  had  been  signed  and  sealed  by  the  kings  of  France  and  England,  for  themselves  and
allies.  This  alone  was  a crime  to  be  punished  by  an  ignominious  death  : for  the  conditions
of  the  treaties  were,  that  whoever  should  break  or  infringe  them  was  to  be  so  punished.

The  earl  of  Salisbury  was  very  earnest  in  his  supplications  for  the  earl  of  Warwick.
They  had  been  brothers  in  arms  ever  since  their  youth  ; and  he  excused  him  on  account  of
his  great  age,  and  of  his  being  deceived  by  the  fair  speeches  of  the  duke  of  Gloucester  and
the  earl  of  Arundel : that  what  had  been  done  was  not  from  his  instigation,  but  solely  by
that  of  others ; and  the  house  of  Beauchamp,  of  which  the  earl  of  Warwick  was  the  head,
never  imagined  treason  against  the  crown  of  England.  The  earl  of  Warwick  was,  therefore,
through  pity,  respited  from  death,  but  banished  to  the  Isle  of  Wight,  which  is  a dependency
on  England.  He  was  told, — “ Earl  of  Warwick,  this  sentence  is  very  favourable,  for  you
have  deserved  to  die  as  much  as  the  earl  of  Arundel,  but  the  handsome  services  you  have
done  in  times  past,  to  king  Edward  of  happy  memory,  and  the  prince  of  Wales  his  son,  as
well  on  this  as  on  the  other  side  of  the  sea,  have  secured  your  life ; but  it  is  ordered  that
you  banish  yourself  to  the  Isle  of  Wight,  taking  with  you  a sufficiency  of  wealth  to  support

* He  was  smothered  with  pillows,  not  strangled.  Hall,  one  of  the  accomplices,  made  a particular  confession  of  all
the  circumstances.  See  Pari  Plac.  viii.  p.  452 Ed.

VOL.  IT.


U U


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


f)  58

your  state  as  long  as  you  shall  live,  and  that  you  never  quit  the  island.”  The  earl  of
Warwick  was  not  displeased  with  this  sentence,  since  his  life  was  spared,  and,  having
thanked  the  king  and  council  for  their  lenity,  made  no  delay  in  his  preparations  to  surrender
himself  in  the  Isle  of  Wight  on  the  appointed  day,  which  he  did  with  part  of  his  household.
The  Isle  of  Wight  is  situated  opposite  the  coast  of  Normandy,  and  has  space  enough  for  the
residence  of  a great  lord,  hut  he  must  provide  himself  with  all  that  he  may  want  from  the
circumjacent  countries,  or  he  will  be  badly  supplied  with  provision  and  other  things.

Thus  were  affairs  carried  on  in  England,  and  daily  going  from  bad  to  worse,  as  you  will
find  it  related.  When  the  dukes  of  Lancaster  and  York  heard  of  their  brother’s  death  at
Calais,  they  instantly  suspected  the  king  their  nephew  was  guilty  of  it.  At  the  time,  they
were  not  together,  but  each  at  his  country-seat,  according  to  the  custom  in  England.  They
wrote  to  each  other  to  consult  how  they  should  act  on  the  occasion,  and  hastened  to  London
because  they  knew  the  citizens  were  very  angry  at  the  event.  On  their  arrival,  they  had
several  meetings,  and  declared  that  the  putting  the  duke  of  Gloucester  to  death  for  some
foolish  words  ought  not  to  be  passed  over  in  silence,  nor  borne ; for,  although  he  had  warmly
opposed  the  treaty  with  France,  he  had  not  acted  upon  it ; that  there  was  an  essential
difference  between  talking  and  acting,  and  that  words  alone  did  not  deserve  the  severe
punishment  he  had  suffered,  and  that  this  matter  must  be  inquired  into  and  amended.  The
two  brothers  were  in  a situation  to  have  thrown  England  into  confusion,  for  there  were
enow  who  would  have  supported  them,  more  especially  all  the  kindred  of  the  late  earl  of
Arundel,  which  is  a powerful  family  in  England,  and  the  family  of  the  earl  of  Stafford.

The  king  at  this  time  resided  at  Eltham,  whither  he  had  summoned  all  his  vassals  and
dependants.  He  had  collected  round  London,  in  the  counties  of  Kent  and  Essex,  upwards
of  ten  thousand  archers,  and  had  with  him  his  brother  sir  John  Holland,  the  earl  marshal,
the  earl  of  Salisbury,  with  many  other  great  barons  and  knights.  The  king  sent  orders  to
the  citizens  of  London  not  to  admit  the  duke  of  Lancaster  within  their  walls ; but  they
replied,  they  knew  of  no  reason  why  they  should  refuse  him  admittance,  and  the  duke
resided  there  with  his  son  the  earl  of  Derby,  as  did  the  duke  of  York  with  his  son  the  earl
of  Rutland.  The  king  loved  the  earl  of  Rutland  and  the  earl  marshal  beyond  measure  : the
first  dissembled  his  opinions  concerning  the  death  of  the  duke  of  Gloucester,  and  would
willingly  have  seen  peace  restored  on  both  sides.  He  said,  that  his  late  uncle  had  on  several
occasions  treated  the  king  very  unbecomingly.  The  Londoners  considered,  also,  that  great
mischiefs  might  befal  England  from  these  dissensions  between  the  king,  his  uncles,  and  their
supporters ; that,  since  the  duke  of  Gloucester  was  now  dead,  it  could  not  he  helped ; and
that  he,  in  some  measure,  had  been  the  cause  of  it,  by  his  too  great  freedom  of  speech,
and  from  his  attempts  to  excite  the  people  of  England  to  break  the  truces  that  had  been
signed  between  France  and  England.  The  citizens,  therefore,  prudently  dissembled  their
thoughts ; and,  as  what  was  done  could  not  now  be  undone,  they  feared,  should  matters
be  pushed  to  extremities,  they  might  suffer  very  considerably  in  their  commerce  from  the
king  of  France.

The  resentments  of  the  citizens  began  to  cool,  and  they  offered  to  mediate  between  the
king  and  the  duke  of  Lancaster,  who  was  mightily  angered  by  the  murder  of  his  brother.
He  bethought  himself,  however,  that  as  his  nephew  was  married  to  the  daughter  of  the
king  of  France,  should  he  wage  war  against  king  Richard,  his  two  daughters  married  in
Castille  and  Portugal  might  suffer  for  it,  from  the  French  carrying  a war  into  those
countries.  The  duke  was  beside  forced  to  change  his  mind,  whether  he  would  or  not,  from
the  solicitations  of  the  citizens  of  London  and  some  of  the  English  prelates,  who  had  been
the  mediators  between  the  king  and  his  uncles.  The  king  obtained  peace,  on  promising
from  that  day  forward  to  be  solely  guided  by  the  advice  of  the  duke  of  Lancaster,  engaging
never  to  do  anything  without  first  consulting  him.  The  promise,  however,  he  paid  not  any
regard  to,  but  followed  the  counsels  of  the  rash  and  evil-minded,  for  which  hereafter  he
Severely  suffered,  as  shall  be  related  in  this  history.  Tlius  did  the  king  of  England  gain
peace  from  his  uncles  for  the  murder  of  the  duke  of  Gloucester,  and  now  governed  more
fiercely  than  before.  He  went  with  his  state  to  Pleshy  in  Essex,  which  had  belonged  to  his
uncle  of  Gloucester,  and  should  have  descended  to  his  son  Humphrey  as  heir  to  his  father ;
but  the  king  took  possession  of  it,  for  it  is  the  rule  in  England  for  the  king  to  have  the


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


659


wardship  of  all  children  who  have  lost  their  fathers,  and  are  under  twenty-one  years  of  age.
at  which  period  their  estates  are  restored  to  them.  King  Richard  took  his  cousin  Humphrey
of  Gloucester  in  ward,  appropriating  all  his  possessions  to  his  own  profit.  He  made  him
live  with  him,  and  the  duchess  and  her  two  daughters  with  the  queen.

The  late  duke  of  Gloucester  was  by  inheritance  constable  of  England ; but  the  king
deprived  his  heir  of  it,  and  gave  it  to-his  cousin  the  earl  of  Rutland.  The  king  now  assumed
a greater  state  than  ever  king  of  England  had  done  before,  nor  had  there  been  any  one  who
had  expended  such  large  sums  by  one  hundred  thousand  nobles.  He  also  took  the  ward-
ship of  the  heir  of  Arundel,  son  to  the  late  earl  whom  he  had  beheaded  in  London,  as  has
been  related,  and  forced  him  to  live  with  him.  And  because  one  of  the  knights  of  the  late
duke  of  Gloucester,  named  Cerbec  *,  had  spoken  too  freely  of  the  king  and  council,  he  was
arrested  and  instantly  beheaded.  Sir  John  Lacquingay  was  likewise  in  some  peril ; but,
when  he  saw  the  turn  affairs  had  taken,  he  quitted  the  service  of  the  duchess  of  Gloucester,
and  fixed  his  abode  elsewhere.  At  this  period  there  was  no  one,  however  great,  in  England,
that  dared  speak  his  sentiments  of  what  the  king  did  or  intended  doing.  He  had  formed
a council  of  his  own  from  the  knights  of  his  chamber,  who  encouraged  him  to  act  as  they
advised.  The  king  had  in  his  pay  full  two  thousand  archers,  who  were  on  guard  day  and
night,  for  he  did  not  think  himself  perfectly  safe  from  his  uncles  or  the  Arundel  family  f.


CHAPTER  XCIII.  — A GREAT  ASSEMBLY  HOLDEN  AT  RLIEIMS,  BY  THE  EMPEROR  OF  GERMANY
AND  KING  OF  FRANCE,  ON  THE  SCHISM  IN  THE  CHURCH,  AND  ON  THE  MEANS  OF
UNITING  THE  TWO  PARTIES.

At  this  period,  there  was  a numerous  assembly  of  great  lords  in  the  city  of  Rheims,  as
well  from  the  empire  of  Germany  as  from  France,  whose  object  was  to  restore  union  to  the
church.  At  the  solicitation  of  the  king  of  France,  the  emperor  $ had  come  thither  in  person,
attended  by  his  ministers ; but  because  they  wished  it  not  to  be  publicly  known  that  this
meeting  was  to  consider  of  the  rivalship  of  the  two  popes  of  Rome  and  of  Avignon,  they  had
it  rumoured,  that  the  lords  of  the  empire  came  to  Rheims  to  treat  of  a marriage  between  a
son  of  the  marquis  of  Brandenburgh,  brother  to  the  emperor,  and  a daughter  of  the
duke  of  Orleans.  The  king  of  France  was  lodged  in  the  archbishop’s  palace,  as  were  the
dukes  of  Orleans,  Berry,  Burgundy,  and  count  de  Saint  Pol,  with  other  barons  and  prelates
of  France.  When  the  emperor  was  about  to  make  his  entry  into  Rheims,  all  these  lords
and  prelates,  with  Charles,  king  of  Navarre,  went  to  meet  him : after  receiving  him  most
honourably,  they  conducted  him  first  to  the  church  of  Our  Lady,  and  then  to  the  abbey  of
Saint  Remy,  where  he  was  lodged  with  all  his  lords.  His  attendants,  and  the  others  who
had  accompanied  him,  were  placed  as  near  to  him  as  was  possible ; and  the  king  of  France
had  ordered,  that  all  the  expenses  of  the  emperor  and  Germans,  during  their  residence  in
Rheims,  should  be  paid  by  his  officers  in  the  most  ample  manner.  In  consequence,  there
were  daily  delivered  to  the  Germans  ten  tons  of  herrings,  for  it  was  Lent,  and  eight
hundred  carp,  without  counting  different  sorts  of  fish  and  other  things,  which  cost  the  king
immense  sums.

When  the  emperor  paid  his  first  visit  to  the  king  of  France,  the  great  lords  before-
mentioned  went  to  seek  him  at  the  abbey  of  Saint  Remy,  and  conducted  him  in  great  state
to  the  palace.  On  the  two  monarchs  meeting,  they  paid  many  compliments  to  each  other,
as  they  knew  well  how  to  do,  especially  the  king  of  France,  for  the  Germans  are  a rude
unmannered  race,  except  in  what  regards  their  personal  advantage,  and  in  this  they  are
active  and  expert  enough.  The  lords  of  both  countries  who  were  present  made  acquaintance
together,  with  many  outward  signs  of  satisfaction : and  the  king  of  France  entertained  the
whole  at  dinner,  of  which  I will  mention  some  particulars.  At  the  top  of  the  king’s  table

* Cerbec.  It  is  Cerber  and  Cerbel.

•f  For  more  ample  particulars  respecting  the  murder  of  tho  duke  of  Gloucester,  I must  refer  the  reader  to
Mr.  Gough’s  History  of  Pleshy.

+ Wenceslaus  of  Luxembourg.

UU  2


660


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


was  seated  the  patriarch  of  Jerusalem : next  to  him  the  emperor,  then  the  kino-  of  France,
and  the  king  of  Navarre  : no  more  were  at  this  table.  At  the  others  were  seated  the  lords
from  Germany ; and  they  were  waited  on  by  the  lords  of  France,  for  none  of  them  sat  down.
The  dukes  of  Berry,  Bourbon,  and  the  count  de  St.  Pol,  with  other  great  barons,  placed  the
dishes,  and  served  the  king’s  table.  The  duke  of  Orleans  supplied  the  company  with  such
quantities  of  plates  of  gold  and  silver  as  though  they  had  been  made  of  wood.  The  dinner
was  splendid,  and  abundantly  well  served,  and  deserving  of  remembrance.  I was  told  that
the  king  made  a present  to  the  emperor  of  all  the  gold  and  silver  plate  that  was  used,  as
well  as  what  was  on  the  side-board,  with  all  tlxe  tapestry  and  ornaments  of  the  apartment
whither  the  emperor  retired  after  dinner  to  partake  of  wine  and  spices.  This  gift  was
estimated  at  two  hundred  thousand  florins ; and  the  other  Germans  were  presented  witli
magnificent  gifts  of  gold  and  silver  plate.  The  Germans,  and  other  strangers  who  had  come
thither  to  view  the  feast,  greatly  wondered  at  the  wealth  and  power  of  France.

During  the  residence  of  these  monarchs  at  Rheims,  their  ministers  frequently  met  to
consider  of  the  marriage  of  the  marquis  of  Brandenburgh,  and  the  reformation  of  the  church.
The  marriage  was  agreed  on,  and  published  in  Rheims,  but  their  consultations  and  reso-
lutions, concerning  the  church,  were  kept  secret : what  I shall  say  on  the  subject  came  to
my  knowledge  afterward.  It  was  determined  that  Peter  d’Ailly,  bishop  of  Camhray,  should
be  sent  as  ambassador  from  the  emperor  and  the  king  of  France  to  the  person  who  styled
himself  pope  Boniface  at  Rome,  and  negotiate  with  him  in  their  names  with  the  view  of
inducing  him  to  submit  to  a new  election  : should  the  choice  again  fall  on  him,  he  would  be
acknowledged  by  them  as  pope,  but,  if  not,  then  he  was  to  resign.  The  bishop  was  to
declare  the  same  to  the  pope  of  Avignon ; adding  that,  if  either  of  the  popes  refused  to
comply  with  this  disposition  of  the  two  monarchs,  they  would  he  degraded,  and  every  honour
and  profit  of  the  church  taken  from  them : that  in  this  the  kings  of  England,  Scotland,
Castillo,  Portugal,  and  Navarre,  had  joined.  The  emperor  said  he  would  answer  for  his
brother  the  king  of  Hungary,  and  all  Bohemia  and  Germany,  as  far  as  Prussia,  being  of  the
same  sentiment.  The  monarchs  likewise  declared,  that,  on  the  bishop’s  return  from  his
embassy,  they  would  exert  themselves,  with  their  friends  and  allies,  that  what  they  had
now  agreed  on  should  be  executed  without  any  variation.  Thus  ended  this  meeting : the
two  monarchs  separated  most  amicably,  and  each  returned  to  his  usual  place  of  residence.
The  duke  of  Burgundy  refused  to  attend  at  Rheims ; for  he  said  it  would  not  answer  any
purpose,  and  that  whatever  might  be  given  to  the  Germans,  they  would  never  keep  the
engagements  they  should  enter  into.  However,  notwithstanding  this  speech  of  the  duke,
nothing  was  left  undone,  and  matters  were  concluded  as  you  have  heard.

Peter  d’Ailly,  bishop  of  Cambray,  was  not  long  in  making  preparations  for  his  journey,
and  set  out  on  his  embassy  to  Rome  and  Avignon,  to  declare  the  engagements  the  emperor
and  king  of  France  had  entered  into.  The  king  of  France  sent  ambassadors  to  his  son-in-
law,  the  king  of  England,  to  acquaint  him  with  what  had  been  done,  that  he  might  unite  in
the  same  opinion.  King  Richard  received  the  ambassadors  with  joy  : and  when  he  learnt
the  object  of  their  mission,  which  was,  to  entreat  he  wTould  remain  neuter,  if  he  could  not
prevail  on  his  subjects  to  unite  with  France  and  Germany,  in  case  the  two  popes  refused
compliance,  replied  he  would  so  manage  that  his  kingdom  should  act  in  the  matter  as  he
pleased.  This  lie  instantly  promised,  to  the  great  joy  of  the  ambassadors.  After  they  had
staid  with  the  king  and  queen  of  England  as  long  as  they  had  chosen,  they  took  leave  and
returned  to  Paris  by  Boulogne,  and  related  all  that  had  passed  to  the  king  and  council.
This  was  very  agreeable  to  the  king,  and  affairs  remained  in  this  state  some  time.

The  king  of  Navarre  came  to  Paris  to  visit  the  king  of  France,  and  thought  he  might
perhaps  recover  his  inheritance  of  Evreux  in  Normandy,  which  the  king  of  France  had
seized  from  his  father,  as  has  been  related  in  this  history ; but,  in  spite  of  every  attempt,  he
was  unsuccessful.  The  king  of  Navarre,  seeing  he  laboured  in  vain,  took  the  matter  in
great  displeasure,  and  abruptly  left  the  court  of  France,  discontented  with  the  king  and  his
ministers,  and  returned  to  Navarre,  We  will  now  leave  the  affairs  of  Germany,  France,
and  Navarre,  to  speak  of  what  befel  England,  whence  sprung  such  melancholy  events  as
have  not  been  recorded  in  this  history,  and  which  my  readers  will  allow  when  they  come  to
the  detail  of  them.


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &e.


001


CHAPTER  XCIV. — THE  EARL  MARSHAL  CHALLENGES  THE  EARL  OF  DERBY,  SON  TO  THE  DUKE
OF  LANCASTER,  IN  THE  PRESENCE  OF  THE  KING  AND  HIS  COUNCIL.

King  Richard  of  England  was  of  a temper  that,  when  he  took  a liking  to  any  one,  he
instantly  raised  him  to  high  honours,  and  had  such  confidence  in  him  that  no  one  dared  to
say  anything  to  his  prejudice.  At  the  same  time,  there  had  not  been  a king  of  England  in
the  memory  of  man  who  so  easily  believed  all  that  was  told  him.  His  favourites,  however,
paid  no  attention  to  the  miserable  fate  of  many  of  their  predecessors ; how  the  duke  of
Ireland  had  been  banished,  sir  Simon  Burley,  sir  Robert  Tresilian,  sir  Nicholas  Bramber,
and  others  had  lost  their  lives,  for  counsels  they  had  given  the  king,  and  for  which  the  duke
of  Gloucester  had  taken  great  pains  in  their  destruction.  The  duke  was  now  dead,  and  the
favourites  of  the  moment,  who  continually  counselled  the  king  as  they  pleased,  were  not
sorry,  for  they  imagined  no  one  would  now  pretend  to  oppose  them.  Some  about  the  king’s
person  could  not  disguise  their  pride  and  presumption,  especially  the  earl  marshal,  who  was
in  the  highest  degree  of  favour.  To  flatter  and  please  the  king,  and  to  show  how  true  and
loyal  a servant  he  was,  whenever  he  heard  any  reports  he  told  them  to  the  king,  expecting
from  such  means  to  rise  still  higher  in  favour ; but  many,  thinking  to  advance,  are  repulsed.
Thus  it  happened  to  the  earl  marshal.

You  must  know  that  the  earl  of  Derby  and  the  late  duke  of  Gloucester  had  married  two
sisters,  daughters  to  the  earl  of  Hereford  and  Northampton,  constable  of  England  : the
children,  therefore,  of  the  earl  of  Derby  and  duke  of  Gloucester  were  cousins-german  by
their  mother’s  side,  and  one  degree  removed  by  their  father’s.  To  say  the  truth,  the  death
of  the  duke  of  Gloucester  had  displeased  many  of  the  great  barons  of  England,  who  frequently
murmured  at  it  when  together ; but  the  king  had  now  so  greatly  extended  his  power,  none
dared  to  speak  of  it  openly,  nor  act  upon  the  current  rumours  of  the  mode  of  his  death.
The  king  had  caused  it  to  be  proclaimed,  that  whoever  should  say  anything  respecting  the
duke  of  Gloucester  or  the  earl  of  Arundel,  should  be  reckoned  a false  and  wicked  traitor
and  incur  his  indignation.  This  threat  had  caused  many  to  be  silent,  afraid  of  what  might
befal  them,  who  were,  nevertheless,  much  dissatisfied.

At  this  time,  a conversation  passed  between  the  earl  of  Derby  and  the  earl-marshal,  in
which  the  state  of  the  king  and  the  counsellors  whom  he  trusted  became  the  subject  of
discussion.  The  earl  marshal  caught  at  the  following  words  the  other  had  made  use  of,  with
a good  intent,  thinking  they  would  never  have  been  mentioned  again,  for  they  were  neither
arrogant  nor  traitorous  : “ Holy  Mary  ! fair  cousin,  what  does  the  king  next  intend  to  do  ?
Will  he  drive  all  the  nobles  out  of  England  ? There  will  soon  be  none  left ; and  he  plainly
shows  he  is  not  desirous  to  add  to  the  honour  of  his  realm.”  The  earl  marshal  made  no
reply,  but  treasured  this  speech  in  his  mind,  as  he  considered  it  very  impertinent,  in  regard
to  the  king,  and  thought  within  himself  that  the  earl  of  Derby  was  well  inclined  to  excite
troubles  in  England,  for  he  was  marvellously  beloved  by  the  Londoners.  He  therefore
determined  (for  the  devil  entered  his  brain,  and  what  has  been  ordained  to  happen  must
come  to  pass),  to  report  this  speech  in  the  presence  of  the  king  and  his  nobility.

Soon  after  this  conversation,  the  earl  marshal,  to  flatter  and  gain  favour  with  the  king,
said, — [“  My  lord,  all  your  enemies  and  ill-wishers  are  not  dead,  nor  out  of  the  kingdom.”
The  king  changed  colour,  and  replied,  “How,  cousin,  do  you  know  this?”  “ I know  it
well,”  answer  the  earl  marshal : “ for  the  moment,  I will  not  say  more  ; but,  that  you  may
provide  a remedy  in  time,  have  it  proclaimed  that  you  will  hold  a solemn  feast  on  this
ensuing  Palm  Sunday,  and  invite  all  the  princes  of  your  blood,  particularly  the  earl  of  Derby,
when  you  shall  hear  something  that  will  surprise  you,  and  what  you  are  not  suspicious  of,
notwithstanding  it  so  nearly  concerns  you.”  The  king  was  very  pensive  on  hearing  this,
and  begged  the  earl  marshal  to  give  him  further  information ; that  he  might  safely  tell  him
all,  for  he  would  keep  it  secret.  I know  not  if  he  did  so  ; but  the  king,  if  he  did,  kept  it  to
himself,  and  allowed  the  earl  to  act  in  the  matter  as  he  pleased ; the  consequences  of  which
were  as  follows.

The  king  had  it  proclaimed  that  he  would  hold  a solemn  feast  at  his  palace  at  Eltham  on


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &e.


(562

Palm  Sunday,  and  sent  particular  invitations  to  the  dukes  of  Lancaster  and  York  and  their
children,  who,  not  suspecting  any  mischief,  came  thither.  When  the  day  of  the  feast  was
arrived,  and  all  the  lords  had  retired  after  dinner  with  the  king  to  his  council-chamber,  the
earl  marshal,  having  settled  in  his  own  mind  how  to  act  and  what  to  say,  cast  himself  on
his  knees  before  the  king,  and  thus  addressed  him  “ Very  dear  and  renowned  lord,  I am
of  your  kindred,  your  liege  man  and  marshal  of  England ; and  I have  beside  sworn  on  my
loyalty,  my  hand  within  yours,  that  I would  never  conceal  from  you  anything  I might  hear
or  see  to  your  prejudice,  on  pain  of  being  accounted  a disloyal  traitor.  This  I am  resolved
never  to  he,  hut  to  acquit  myself  before  you  and  all  the  world.”  The  king,  fixing  his  eyes
on  him,  asked,  “ Earl  marshal,  what  is  your  meaning  in  saying  thus?  We  will  know  it.”
“ Very  dear  lord,”  replied  the  earl,  “ as  I have  declared,  I will  not  keep  any  secret  from
you  : order  the  earl  of  Derby  to  come  to  your  presence,  and  I will  speak  out.”  The  earl  of
Derby  was  called  for,  and  the  king  made  the  earl  marshal  rise,  for  he  addressed  him  on  his
knees.  On  the  earl  of  Derby’s  arrival,  who  thought  no  harm,  the  earl  marshal  spoke  as
follows : “ Earl  of  Derby,  I charge  you  with  having  thought  and  spoken  disrespectfully
against  your  natural  lord  the  king  of  England,  when  you  said  he  was  unworthy  to  hold  his
crown : that  without  law  or  justice,  or  consulting  his  council,  he  disturbed  the  realm  ;
and  that,  without  any  shadow  of  reason,  he  banished  those  valiant  men  from  his  kingdom
who  ought  to  be  its  defenders,  for  all  of  which  I present  my  glove,  and  shall  prove,  my  body
against  yours,  that  you  are  a false  and  wicked  traitor.”


The  Eahl  Marshal  challenging  the  Earl  of  Dfrby.  From  MSS.  of  tlie  Fifteenth  Century.


The  earl  of  Derby  was  confounded  at  this  address,  and  retired  a few  paces,  without
demanding  from  the  duke  his  father,  or  any  of  his  friends,  how  he  should  act.  Having
mused  a while,  he  advanced,  with  his  hood  in  his  hand,  towards  the  king,  and  said,  “ Earl
marshal,  I say  that  thou  art  a false  and  wicked  traitor,  which  I will  bodily  prove  on  thee,
and  here  is  my  glove.”  The  earl  marshal,  seeing  his  challenge  was  accepted,  showed  a good
desire  for  the  combat,  by  taking  up  the  glove  and  saying, — “ I refer  your  answer  to  the  good
pleasure  of  the  king  and  the  lords  now  present.  I will  prove  that  what  you  have  said  is  false,
and  that  my  words  are  true^’  Each  of  these  lords  then  withdrew  with  his  iriends,  and  the
time  for  serving  wine  and  spices  was  passed  by ; for  the  king  showed  he  was  sore  displeased,
and  retired  to  his  chamber  and  shut  himself  within  it.  His  two  uncles  remained  without
with  their  children,  as  did  the  earl  of  Salisbury  and  Huntingdon,  the  kings  brother.


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


6G3


Soon  afterward,  the  king  called  to  him  his  uncles,  and  demanded  from  them  how  he  was  to
act  on  this  occasion.  “ Sire,  order  your  constable  hither,  and  we  will  tell  you."  The
earl  of  Rutland,  constable  of  England,  being  sent  for,  came,  and  he  was  told, — “ Constable,
go  to  the  earl  of  Derby  and  the  carl  marshal,  and  oblige  them  to  promise  not  to  quit  the
kingdom  without  the  king’s  permission.”  The  constable  obeyed  the  order,  and  returned  to
the  king’s  apartment.  You  may  believe  the  whole  court  was  greatly  troubled  by  this  event,
and  many  barons  and  knights  were  much  displeased,  who  blamed  the  earl  marshal  for  his
conduct ; but  what  he  had  said  he  could  not  now  retract,  and  he  showed  by  his  manners
that  he  made  light  of  it,  so  arrogant  and  swollen  with  pride  was  his  heart.  The  lords  now
separated,  each  for  his  own  home.  The  duke  of  Lancaster,  in  spite  of  appearances,  was
much  vexed  at  what  had  passed,  and  his  opinion  was,  that  the  king  should  not  have  listened
to  such  a charge,  but  instantly  have  annihilated  it ; and  in  this  lie  was  joined  by  the  more
sensible  barons  of  the  country.

The  earl  of  Derby  resided  in  London,  for  he  had  his  house  there,  and  kept  up  his  state.
The  duke  of  Lancaster,  the  duke  of  York,  the  earl  of  Northumberland,  and  many  other
great  lords,  for  he  was  much  beloved,  were  his  securities  to  appear  and  answer  the  challenge.
The  earl  marshal  was  sent  to  the  Tower  of  London,  where  he  lived  with  his  household.  These
two  lords  made  ample  provision  of  all  things  necessary  for  the  combat ; and  the  earl  of
Derby  sent  off  messengers  to  Lombardy  to  have  armour  from  sir  Galeas,  duke  of  Milan.
The  duke  complied  with  joy,  and  gave  the  knight,  called  sir  Francis,  who  had  brought  the
message,  the  choice  of  all  his  armour  for  the  earl  of  Derby.  When  he  had  selected  what  he
wished  for  in  plated  and  mail  armour,  the  lord  of  Milan,  out  of  his  abundant  love  to  the  earl,
ordered  four  of  the  best  armourers  in  Milan  to  accompany  the  knight  to  England,  that  the
earl  of  Derby  might  be  more  completely  armed.  The  earl  marshal,  on  the  other  hand,  sent
into  Germany,  whence  he  thought  he  should  be  ably  assisted  by  his  friends.  Each  provided
himself  most  magnificently,  to  outshine  the  other ; but  the  greater  splendour  was  shown  by
the  earl  of  Derby,  for  I must  say  that,  when  the  earl  marshal  undertook  this  business,  he
expected  to  have  been  better  supported  than  he  was  by  the  king.  It  was  hinted  to  the  king,
by  those  near  his  person, — “ Sire,  you  have  no  occasion  to  interfere  further  in  this  matter  :
dissemble  your  thoughts,  and  leave  them  to  themselves : they  are  fully  capable  of
managing  it.  The  earl  of  Derby  is  wondrous  popular  in  the  kingdom,  but  more  especially  in
London ; and,  should  the  citizens  perceive  that  you  take  part  with  the  earl  marshal  against
the  earl  of  Derby,  you  will  irrecoverably  lose  their  affection.”

The  king  attended  to  this  advice,  for  he  knew  it  was  true  : in  consequence,  he  dissembled
his  opinion,  and  suffered  each  to  provide  for  himself.  The  news  of  this  combat  between  the
earl  of  Derby  and  the  earl  marshal  made  a great  noise  in  foreign  parts  : for  it  was  to  be  for
life  or  death,  and  before  the  king  and  great  barons  of  England.  It  was  spoken  of  differently  :
some  said,  particularly  in  France, — “ Let  them  fight  it  out : these  English  knights  are  too
arrogant,  and  in  a short  time  will  cut  each  other’s  throats.  They  are  the  most  perverse
nation  under  the  sun,  and  their  island  is  inhabited  by  the  proudest  people.”  But  others,
more  wise,  said, — “ The  king  of  England  does  not  show  great  sense,  nor  that  he  is  well
advised,  when  for  foolish  words,  undeserving  serious  notice,  he  permits  two  such  valiant  and
noble  lords,  and  of  his  kindred,  thus  to  engage  in  mortal  combat.  He  ought,  according  to
the  opinions  of  many  wise  men,  to  have  said,  when  he  first  heard  this  charge, — “ You  earl
of  Derby,  and  you  earl  marshal,  are  my  near  relations : I command,  therefore,  that  you
harbour  no  hatred  nor  malevolence  against  each  other,  but  live  like  friends  and  cousins  as
you  are.  Should  your  stay  in  this  country  become  tiresome,  travel  into  foreign  parts,  to
Hungary  or  elsewhere,  and  seek  for  deeds  of  arms  and  adventures.”  If  the  king  of  England
had  done  so,  or  come  forward  to  prevent  this  combat,  he  would  have  acted  wisely,  according
to  the  opinions  of  men  of  sense  and  prudence.

The  duke  of  Lancaster  was  much  vexed  and  melancholy  at  seeing  the  king  of  England,
his  nephew,  thus  badly  conduct  himself,  but  knew  not  to  whom  to  open  his  thoughts.  He,
like  a wise  man,  considered  the  consequences  that  might  ensue,  and  at  times  said  to  those  he
most  confided  in, — “ Our  nephew  will  ruin  everything  before  he  have  done  : he  too  readily
listens  to  evil  counsellors,  who  will  destroy  him  and  his  kingdom.  Should  he  live  long,  he


6G4


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


will  lose  by  little  and  little  all  it  has  cost  his  predecessors  and  ns  so  much  pains  to  gain.  He
encourages  discord  between  his  nobles  and  great  lords,  by  whom  he  ought  to  be  honoured  and
served,  and  the  country  guarded.  He  has  put  my  brother  to  death,  for  it  is  now  notorious
he  ordered  it,  and  likewise  the  carl  of  Arundel,  because  they  told  him  the  truth  ; but  this  he
refuses  to  hoar,  and  will  not  listen  to  any  one  who  does  not  flatter  his  own  imaginations.  He
cannot  sooner  ruin  liis  country  than  by  exciting  hatreds  among  his  nobility  and  principal
towns.  The  French  are  too  subtle  a race,  for  one  misfortune  that  befals  us  they  would  wish
ten,  as  they  can  never  obtain  their  ends,  or  recover  their  domains,  but  through  ourselves ;
and  every  day  there  are  examples  of  the  misery  of  kingdoms  when  divided.  Such  has  been
the  unfortunate  lot  of  France,  Castille,  Naples,  and  the  Roman  state ; and  the  present  schism
is  the  ruin  of  the  contending  popes,  as  well  as  the  church.  Flanders  is  another  example
which  we  have  seen  of  self-destruction.  Friesland  is  at  this  moment  in  a similar  state,
oppressed  by  the  war  of  the  count  of  Hainault,  and  ruining  themselves  by  domestic  quarrels.
We  shall  be  in  the  same  situation  unless  God  prevent  it,  from  the  appearance  of  the  present
state  of  affairs.  The  king  has  consented  that  my  son  and  heir,  for  I have  none  other  by  my
first  two  marriages,  should  be  challenged  to  mortal  combat  for  a mere  trifle ; and  I,  his
father,  dare  not  say  a word  against  it,  in  regard  to  my  own  and  my  son’s  honour ; for  my
son  has  the  feelings  of  a knight,  and  is  of  sufficient  strength  to  encounter  the  earl  marshal.
Howbeit,  let  the  best  be  made  of  it,  they  will  never  again  love  each  other  as  they  did  before.”
Such  were  the  conversations  of  the  duke  of  Lancaster.

The  two  earls,  in  the  mean  time,  were  making  every  preparation  for  their  combat.  The
duke  of  Lancaster  never  went  near  the  king,  and  as  seldom  saw  his  son,  acting  throughout
with  great  good  sense.  He  knew  the  earl  of  Derby  was  very  popular  with  all  ranks  in
England,  but  more  particularly  with  the  Londoners,  who  waited  on  him,  and  addressed  him, —
“ Earl  of  Derby,  make  your  mind  easy  : whatever  may  be  the  event  of  this  combat  it  will
turn  out  to  your  honour,  in  spite  of  the  king  and  all  his  minions.  We  know  well  how  things
are  managed,  and  what  will  be  the  result  of  them  : this  accusation  has  been  invented  by
envy,  to  cause  your  banishment  out  of  the  kingdom,  where  they  are  aware  you  are  so  greatly
beloved  by  all  ranks  and  sexes ; and  should  you  be  forced  to  quit  us  in  sorrow,  you  shall
return  in  joy,  for  you  are  more  worthy  to  rule  than  Richard  of  Bordeaux.  Whoever  may
choose  to  search  the  matter  to  the  bottom,  to  discover  the  real  origin  of  you  both,  will  soon
see  that  you  have  a greater  right  to  the  crown  of  England  than  he  who  wears  it,  although
we  have  paid  him  homage,  and  acknowledged  him  for  king  these  twenty  years ; but  that
was  obtained  by  the  entreaties  of  your  grandfather,  king  Edward  of  happy  memory,  who  was
suspicious  of  what  we  hint,  and  feared  the  consequences.  There  was  once  a serious  dispute
on  this  subject  between  king  Edward  and  your  grandfather  by  your  mother’s  side,  duke
Llenry  of  Lancaster,  but  the  great  lords  interfered  and  made  up  matters  between  them.  King
Edward  was  valiant  and  successful  in  all  his  enterprises,  and  had  gained  the  love  of  his
subjects  high  and  low'.  Your  grandfather  of  Lancaster  only  required  from  the  king  what  was
just,  and  served  him  and  his  kingdom  so  loyally,  that  his  conduct  deserved  the  commendation
of  all.  Every  one  who  knew  him  called  him  their  old  father.  These  things  are  worthy
of  king  Richard’s  consideration,  and  may  make  him  repent,  if  anything  can,  at  his  leisure,
that  he  has  not  more  prudently  governed.”  Such  conversations  did  many  of  the  nobles  and
citizens  of  London  hold  with  the  earl  of  Derby,  who  was  pleased  with  their  affection,  and
received  them  kindly.  He  did  not,  however,  neglect  any  preparations  for  his  combat,  but
sent  to  every  one  of  his  friends  throughout  England,  to  entreat  their  company  at  the  appointed
day  and  place.

King  Richard,  notwithstanding  he  had  suffered  this  challenge  and  appeal  to  arms  to  be
made  in  his  presence,  was  uncertain  how  to  act,  and  whether  to  allow  the  combat  to  take
place  or  not.  And  although  he  was  the  king  of  England  the  most  feared  of  any  who  had
worn  the  crown,  he  was  guarded  day  and  night  by  two  thousand  archers,  who  were  regularly
paid  weekly,  and  had  confidence  only  in  his  brother  the  earl  of  Huntingdon,  and  the  earls
of  Salisbury  and  Rutland,  his  cousin,  who  were  highly  in  his  favour.  Lie  paid  no  regard  to
others,  except  a few  of  the  knights  of  his  chamber,  who  were  his  advisers.  When  the  day
for  the  combat  was  approaching,  and  the  two  lords  had  made  their  preparations,  waiting


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


605


only  for  the  king’s  commands,  king  Richard’s  secrtit  advisers  asked,  “ Sire,  what  is  your
intention  respecting  this  combat  between  your  two  cousins,  the  earl  of  Derby  and  the  earl
marshal  ? Will  you  permit  them  to  proceed  ?”  “Yes,”  replied  the  king  : “why  not  ? I intend
to  he  present  myself  and  to  see  their  prowess.  We  may  perhaps  learn,  from  the  issue  of  this
combat,  what  we  are  now  ignorant  of,  although  it  may  be  very  important  for  us  to  know,
that  we  may  provide  accordingly  : for  there  is  no  one  so  great  in  England,  but,  if  he  anger
me,  he  shall  dearly  pay  for  it.  Should  I allow  myself  to  be  any  way  governed  by  my
subjects,  they  would  soon  overpower  me  ; I know  for  certain  that  some  of  my  kinsmen  have
held  secret  meetings  respecting  my  government ; but  the  most  dangerous  among  them  was
the  duke  of  Gloucester,  for  in  all  England  there  was  none  more  wrong-headed.  He  is  now
at  peace,  and  henceforward  we  shall  manage  the  rest  well  enough.  But  tell  me,  I pray  you,
why  you  ask  the  question  ? ” “ Sire,”  replied  they,  “ we  are  bound  to  advise  you  to  the

best  of  our  knowledge  and  abilities.  We  sometimes  hear  and  observe  what  you  cannot,  for
you  are  in  your  apartments,  and  we  abroad  in  the  fields,  or  in  London,  where  many  con-
versations are  held  that  nearly  touch  you,  as  well  as  us.  There  is  yet  time  to  provide  a
remedy,  and  we  earnestly  advise  you  not  to  delay  it.”  “ What  do  you  mean?”  said  the
king : “ speak  out,  and  do  not  spare  me ; for  I wish  to  act  rightly,  and  to  maintain  justice
in  my  kingdom.”  “ Sire,  the  common  report  throughout  England,  but  especially  in  London,
is,  that  you  are  the  cause  of  this  combat,  and  that  you  have  induced  the  earl  marshal  to
challenge  the  earl  of  Derby.  The  Londoners  in  general,  and  many  of  the  prelates  and  nobles,
say,  that  you  are  in  the  direct  road  to  destroy  all  your  kindred  and  kingdom,  but  that  they
will  not  suffer  it  to  be  done.  Now,  were  the  citizens  to  rise  and  be  joined  by  the  nobility,
who  could  oppose  them  ? You  have  no  power  but  from  your  vassals ; and  they  are  now  more
suspicious  of  you  than  ever,  from  your  marriage  with  a princess  of  France ; and  you  are  less
beloved  by  your  subjects  on  this  account.  Know,  that  if  you  allow  these  two  earls  to  meet
in  arms,  you  will  not  be  lord  of  the  field,  but  the  Londoners,  united  with  the  earl  of  Derby’s
great  connexions  by  blood,  who  are  all  much  attached  to  him.  The  earl  marshal  is  become
very  unpopular,  particularly  with  the  citizens  of  London,  who  would  willingly  put  him  to
death.  Three  parts  of  the  people  of  England  say,  that  when  you  heard  the  charge  of  the
earl  marshal,  you  should  have  acted  otherwise  than  you  did,  and  checked  the  quarrel  by
telling  them,  ‘ You  are  both  my  cousins  and  liege  men,  and  I command  that  peace  be  hence-
forward between  you  ; and  that  you  should  have  taken  the  earl  of  Derby  by  the  hand,  and
led  him  to  your  chamber  with  every  token  of  affection.  Because  you  did  not  this,  the
common  report  is,  that  you  warmly  take  the  part  of  the  earl  marshal  against  the  earl  of
Derby.  Weigh  well  what  we  have  said,  for  we  have  told  you  the  truth,  and  you  never  had
more  occasion  for  good  advice  than  at  this  moment.”

The  king,  on  hearing  these  words,  changed  colour  (for  they  had  boldly  spoken  out,  and
certainly  what  they  had  said  could  not  be  contradicted),  turned  aside  and  leant  on  a window,
where  he  mused  a considerable  time.  He  then  turned  to  those  who  had  addressed  him,
namely,  the  archbishop  of  York,  the  earls  of  Huntingdon  and  Salisbury,  and  three  other
knights  of  his  chamber,  and  said, — “ I have  attentively  heard  everything  you  have  advised,
and  should  be  blame- worthy  if  I followed  not  your  counsel : consider,  therefore,  how  you
would  have  me  act."  “ Sire,”  replied  their  spokesman,  “ what  we  have  been  talking  of  is
matter  of  great  danger.  You  must  dissemble  your  resentments,  and  put  an  end  to  this
business,  if  you  wish  for  peace  and  to  preserve  your  honour.  You  ought  to  pay  more  respect
to  the  general  opinion  of  your  realm  than  to  the  idle  talk  of  two  knights.  It  is  believed
throughout  England  that  the  lord  marshal  behaved  himself  very  ill,  and,  by  stirring  up  many
things  that  were  better  forgotten,  is  desirous  to  pick  a quarrel  with  the  earl  of  Derby,  raise
the  people,  and  throw  all  things  into  confusion.  He  must  therefore  suffer  for  so  doing,  and
the  earl  of  Derby  be  acquitted.  W e have  considered  the  matter  in  every  point  of  view,  and
advise  that,  before  they  arm  or  make  further  preparations,  you  send  them  your  commands  to
appear  before  you,  and  to  abide  by  whatever  you  determine  between  them.  You  will
therefore  give  judgment,  that,  within  fifteen  days,  the  earl  marshal  quit  England,  without
any  hope  of  ever  returning,  and  the  earl  of  Derby  be  banished  thence  for  the  space  of  ten
years.  When  the  time  for  their  departure  arrives,  you  will,  to  please  the  people,  abridge


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  Nc.


6GG

four  years  of  the  earl  of  Derby’s  sentence,  so  that  his  banishment  will  be  only  for  six
years,  but  that  he  must  not  expect  further  favour.  Such  is  the  advice  we  give  you  : be
very  careful  to  prevent  their  meeting  in  arms,  or  the  greatest  mischiefs  may  arise  from
it.”  The  king  was  thoughtful  a moment,  and  replied,  “ You  have  faithfully  advised  me,  and
it  shall  be  done.”


CHAPTER  XCV. — KING  RICHARD  OP  ENGLAND  BANISHES  THE  EARL  OP  DERBY  FROM
ENGLAND  FOR  TEN  YEARS,  AND  THE  EARL  MARSHAL  FOR  HIS  LIFE.

Not  long  after  this,  the  king  of  England  summoned  a large  council  of  the  great  nobles  and
prelates  at  Eltham.  On  their  arrival,  he  placed  his  two  uncles  of  Lancaster  and  York
beside  him,  with  the  earls  of  Northumberland,  Salisbury  and  Huntingdon.  The  earl  of
Derby  and  the  earl  marshal  were  sent  for,  and  put  into  separate  chambers,  for  it  had  been
ordered  they  were  not  to  meet.  The  king  showed  he  wished  to  mediate  between  them,
notwithstanding  their  words  had  been  very  displeasing  to  him,  and  ought  not  to  be  lightly
pardoned.  He  required  therefore  that  they  should  submit  themselves  to  his  decision ; and
to  this  end  sent  the  constable  of  England,  with  four  great  barons,  to  oblige  them  to  promise
punctually  to  obey  it.  The  constable  and  the  lords  waited  on  the  two  earls,  and  explained
the  king’s  intentions  They  both  bound  themselves,  in  their  presence,  to  abide  by  whatever
sentence  the  king  should  give.  They  having  reported  this,  the  king  said, — “ Well  then,  I
order  that  the  earl  marshal,  for  having  caused  trouble  in  this  kingdom,  by  uttering  words
which  he  could  not  prove  otherwise  than  by  common  report,  be  banished  the  realm  : he  may
seek  any  other  land  he  pleases  to  dwell  in,  but  he  must  give  over  all  hope  of  returning
hither,  as  I banish  him  for  life.  I also  order,  that  the  earl  of  Derby,  our  cousin,  for  having
angered  us,  and  because  he  has  been,  in  some  measure,  the  cause  of  the  earl  marshal’s  crime
and  punishment,  prepare  to  leave  the  kingdom  within  fifteen  days,  and  be  banished  hence
for  the  term  of  ten  years,  without  daring  to  return  unless  recalled  by  us ; but  we  shall  reserve
to  ourself  the  power  of  abridging  this  term  in  part  or  altogether.”  The  sentence  was  satisfac-
tory to  the  lords  present,  who  said  : “ The  earl  of  Derby  may  readily  go  two  or  three  years
and  amuse  himself  in  foreign  parts,  for  he  is  young  enough  ; and,  although  he  has  already
travelled  to  Prussia,  the  Holy  Sepulchre,  Cairo  and  Saint  Catherine’s,*'  he  will  find  other
places  to  visit.  He  has  two  sisters,  queens  of  Castille  and  of  Portugal,  and  may  cheerfully
pass  his  time  with  them.  The  lords,  knights  and  squires  of  those  countries,  will  make  him
welcome,  for  at  this  moment  all  warfare  is  at  an  end.  On  his  arrival  in  Castille,  as  he  is
very  active,  he  may  put  them  in  motion,  and  lead  them  against  the  infidels  of  Granada,
which  will  employ  his  time  better  than  remaining  idle  in  England.  Or  he  may  go  to
Hainault,  where  his  cousin,  and  brother  in  arms,  the  count  d’Ostrevant,  wrill  be  happy  to  see
him,  and  gladly  entertain  him,  that  he  may  assist  him  in  his  war  against  the  Frieslanders.
If  he  go  to  Hainault,  he  can  have  frequent  intelligence  from  his  own  country  and  children.
He  therefore  cannot  fail  of  doing  well,  whithersoever  he  goes  ; and  the  king  may  speedily
recall  him,  through  means  of  the  good  friends  he  will  leave  behind,  for  he  is  the  finest  feather
in  his  cap  ; and  he  must  not  therefore  suffer  him  to  be  too  long  absent,  if  he  wish  to  gain  the
love  of  his  subjects.  The  earl  marshal  has  had  hard  treatment,  for  he  is  banished  without
hope  of  ever  being  recalled  ; but,  to  say  the  truth,  he  has  deserved  it,  for  all  this  mischief  has
been  caused  by  him  and  his  foolish  talking  : he  must  therefore  pay  for  it.”  Thus  conversed
many  English  knights  with  each  other,  the  day  the  king  passed  sentence  on  the  earl  of  Derby
and  the  earl  marshal.


* The  monastery  on  Mount  Sinai. — Ed.


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


er.7


CHAPTER  XCVI. — THE  EARL  OP  DERBY,  IN  CONSEQUENCE  OF  HIS  BANISHMENT,  LEAVES

ENGLAND  FOR  FRANCE.  THE  EARL  MARSHAL,  IN  OBEDIENCE  TO  HIS  SENTENCE,

GOES  TO  FLANDERS,  AND  THENCE  INTO  LOMBARDY.

When  the  two  earls  heard  the  sentence  the  king  had  passed  on  them,  they  were  much
cast  down,  and  not  without  cause.  The  earl  marshal  bitterly  repented  what  he  had  said
and  done,  but  he  could  not  foresee  its  consequences  : he  had  firmly  relied  on  being  otherwise
supported  by  the  king  than  he  was,  or  he  would  not  have  thought  of  it.  It  was,  however,
necessary  to  make  his  preparations  for  banishment.  He  settled  the  payments  of  his  income
through  the  Lombards  of  Bruges,  and,  quitting  England,  arrived  at  Calais,  where  he  had
been  governor.  He  staid  there  a short  time,  to  receive  part  of  his  equipage  which  had  been
left  behind.  On  his  departure  he  took  leave  of  the  townsmen  of  Calais,  and  having  fixed  his
route,  would  not  go  to  France  nor  Hainault,  for  he  had  not  any  business  at  these  places,  but
went  to  Bruges,  where  he  staid  fifteen  days.  On  leaving  this  town,  he  visited  Ghent,
Mechlin,  Louvain,  St.  Tron,  Utrecht,  Aix  and  Cologne,  where  we  will  leave  him,  and  speak
of  the  earl  of  Derby,  who  in  like  manner  made  his  preparations  for  obeying  his  sentence  of
banishment.

When  the  day  of  his  exile  drew  near,  he  went  to  Eltham  where  the  king  resided.  He
found  there  his  father,  the  duke  of  York  his  uncle,  and  with  them  the  earl  of  Northumber-
land, sir  Henry  Percy  his  son,  and  a great  many  barons  and  knights  of  England,  vexed
that  his  ill  fortune  should  force  him  out  of  England.  The  greater  part  of  them  accompanied
him  to  the  presence  of  the  king,  to  learn  his  ultimate  pleasure  as  to  this  banishment.  The
king  pretended  that  he  was  very  happy  to  see  these  lords  : he  entertained  them  well,  and
there  was  a full  court  on  the  occasion.  The  earl  of  Salisbury,  and  the  earl  of  Huntingdon,
who  had  married  the  duke  of  Lancaster’s  daughter,  were  present,  and  kept  near  to  the  earl
of  Derby,  whether  through  dissimulation  or  not  I am  ignorant.  When  the  time  for  the  earl
of  Derby’s  taking  leave  arrived,  the  king  addressed  his  cousin  with  great  apparent  humility,
and  said,  “ that  as  God  might  help  him,  the  words  which  had  passed  between  him  and  the
lord  marshal  had  much  vexed  him ; and  that  he  had  judged  the  matter  between  them  to  the
best  of  his  understanding,  and  to  satisfy  the  people,  who  had  murmured  greatly  at  this
quarrel.  Wherefore,  cousin,”  he  added,  “ to  relieve  you  somewhat  of  your  pain,  I now
remit  four  years  of  the  term  of  your  banishment,  and  reduce  it  to  six  years  instead  of  ten.
Make  your  preparations,  and  provide  accordingly.”  “ My  lord,”  replied  the  earl,  “ I humbly
thank  you  ; and,  when  it  shall  be  your  good  pleasure,  you  will  extend  your  mercy.”  The
lords  present  were  satisfied  with  the  answer,  and  for  this  time  were  well  pleased  with  the
king’s  behaviour,  for  he  received  them  kindly.  Some  of  them  returned  with  the  earl  of
Derby  to  London.  The  earl’s  baggage  had  been  sent  forward  to  Dover,  and  he  was  advised
by  his  father,  on  his  arrival  at  Calais,  to  go  straight  to  Paris,  and  wait  on  the  king  of  France
and  his  cousins  the  princes  of  France,  for  by  their  means  he  would  be  the  sooner  enabled  to
shorten  his  exile  than  by  any  other.  Had  not  the  duke  of  Lancaster  earnestly  pressed  this
matter,  like  a father  anxious  to  console  his  son,  he  would  have  taken  the  direct  road  to  the
count  d’Ostrevant  in  Hainault.

The  day  the  earl  of  Derby  mounted  his  horse  to  leave  London,  upwards  of  forty  thousand
men  were  in  the  streets,  bitterly  lamenting  his  departure  : “ Ah,  gentle  earl ! will  you  then  quit
us  ? This  country  will  never  be  happy  until  your  return,  and  the  days  until  then  will  be  insuf-
ferably long.  Through  envy,  treachery  and  fear,  are  you  driven  out  of  a kingdom  where  you  are
more  worthy  to  reside  than  those  which  cause  it.  You  are  of  such  high  birth  and  gallantry,
that  none  others  can  be  compared  to  you.  Why  then  will  you  leave  us,  gentle  earl  ? You  have
never  done  wrong  by  thought  or  deed,  and  are  incapable  of  so  doing.”  Thus  did  men  and  women
so  piteously  complain,  that  it  was  grievous  to  hear  them.  The  earl  of  Derby  was  not  accom-
panied by  trumpets,  nor  the  music  of  the  town,  but  with  tears  and  lamentations.  Some  of
the  knights  who  attended  him  whispered  each  other — See  the  conduct  of  the  people,  how
readily  they  complain  for  trifles  ! Whoever  is  inclined  to  stir  up  the  Londoners  against  the
king  may  soon  effect  it,  and  force  the  king  to  seek  another  country,  and  the  earl  of  Derby


008  CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  & c.

to  remain : but  this  is  not  the  moment,  for,  since  my  lord  of  Lancaster  suffers  it,  we  must  be
patient.”

The  mayor  of  London  and  several  of  the  principal  citizens,  accompanied  the  earl  of  Derby
as  far  as  Dartford : some  even  rode  to  Dover  with  him,  and  remained  in  his  company  until
he  embarked  on  board  the  vessel  that  was  to  convey  him  to  Calais,  when  they  returned  to
their  homes.  The  earl  of  Derby,  before  his  arrival  at  Calais,  had  sent  a knight  and  herald
to  the  king  of  France,  and  to  the  dukes  of  Orleans,  Berry,  Burgundy  and  Bourbon,  to  know
if  it  were  agreeable  to  them  that  he  should  fix  his  residence  in  Paris,  paying  punctually  for
all  that  he  or  his  people  might  want,  and  if  the  court  would  receive  him.

The  king  of  France,  his  brother  and  uncles,  readily  complied  with  his  request,  and
apparently  seemed  very  glad  that  he  would  come  there  ; for,  as  they  assured  the  knight,  they
very  sincerely  felt  for  the  present  disgrace  of  the  earl.  The  knight  and  herald,  on  their
return,  met  the  earl  at  Calais ; and  the  king  of  France  had  sent  with  them  sir  Charles  de
Hangiers,  to  have  all  the  cities  and  towns  opened  to  the  English  as  they  travelled  to  Paris.
The  earl  of  Derby  set  out  in  gallant  array,  becoming  his  rank,  and  took  the  road  to  Amiens,
where,  and  in  every  other  town,  he  was  handsomely  received.


CHAPTER  XCVII. THE  COUNT  D’oSTREVANT  SENDS  AMBASSADORS  TO  THE  EARL  OP  DERBY.

THE  EARL  ARRIVES  AT  PARIS.

The  moment  William  earl  of  Ostrevant,  who  resided  at  Quesnoy,  heard  that  his  cousin
the  earl  of  Derby  had  crossed  the  sea,  and  was  at  Calais,  he  ordered  sir  Ancel  de  Trassaguies
and  sir  Fierabras  do  Yertain  to  ride  thither  and  wait  on  the  earl,  and  invite  him  to  Ilainault,
whither,  if  he  pleased  to  come  and  amuse  himself,  he  would  give  him  a hearty  welcome,  for  it
would  be  very  agreeable  to  himself  and  his  countess.  The  two  knights  obeyed  the  earl’s
orders,  and  rode  to  Cambray  and  Bapaumes  ; for  they  had  heard  the  earl  of  Derby  had  left
Calais,  and  taken  the  road  towards  Paris  through  Amiens.  They  determined,  in  consequence,
to  push  forward,  and  overtook  the  earl  of  Derby  on  his  road,  to  whom  they  punctually
delivered  their  message.  The  earl  thanked  them,  as  well  as  his  cousin  of  Ilainault  who  had
sent  them,  but  excused  himself  for  the  present  from  accepting  their  invitation,  as  he  was
engaged  to  visit  the  king  of  France  and  his  cousins,  but  that  he  did  not  renounce  the  affec-
tion and  courtesy  the  count  d’Ostrevant  offered  him.  The  two  knights,  having  executed
their  commission,  took  leave,  and  returned  to  Ilainault,  to  report  all  they  had  seen  and
heard,  and  the  earl  continued  his  journey  to  Paris.  When  news  was  brought  to  the  king,
and  the  dukes  of  Orleans,  Berry  and  Burgundy,  that  the  earl  of  Derby  was  approaching  Paris,
the  principal  French  lords  instantly  made  handsome  preparations  to  go  out  and  meet  him.
The  apartments  of  the  hotel  de  Saint  Pol  were  richly  furnished  ; and  the  great  barons  then  in
the  town  set  out  for  Saint  Denis.  The  king  remained  at  the  hotel  de  Saint  Pol : but  the
dukes  of  Orleans  and  Berry  left  Paris,  and  first  met  the  earl  of  Derby  : then  came  the  dukes
of  Burgundy  and  Bourbon,  and  the  lord  Charles  d’Albret,  with  many  great  prelates  and
barons.  Their  meeting  was  joyous  on  both  sides,  and  they  entered  Paris  in  brilliant  array.

An  unfortunate  accident  happened  on  this  occasion,  which  I will  relate.  A prudent  and
valiant  squire,  called  Boniface,  a native  of  Lombardy,  was  mounted  on  a strong  courser  that
had  not  been  well  broken.  When  passing  through  the  streets,  he  rose  upon  his  hind-legs,
and  the  squire,  checking  by  the  bridle,  pulled  him  so  hard  that  he  fell  backward,  and  threw
Boniface  with  such  force  on  the  pavement,  that  his  skull  was  fractured.  Thus  died  Boniface,
to  the  great  regret  of  many  lords,  particularly  the  duke  of  Orleans,  by  whom  he  was  much
esteemed.  He  had  been  a favourite  with  the  late  lord  de  Coucy,  who  had  brought  him  from
Lombardy  to  France.

The  procession  at  length  arrived  at  the  hotel  de  Saint  Pol,  where  the  king  was  waiting  :
he  received  very  kindly  his  cousin  the  earl  of  Derby,  who,  having  been  well  educated,
behaved  so  agreeably  to  the  king,  that  he  was  much  liked,  and,  in  token  of  his  favour,  the
king  gave  him  his  order  to  wear.  The  earl  accepted  it  with  pleasure,  and  returned  his  thanks.
I cannot  pretend  to  say  all  that  passed  between  them,  but  the  meeting  seemed  to  their


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &o.


GOO


mutual  satisfaction.  When  wine  and  spices  had  been  served,  the  earl  took  leave  of  the  king,
and  waited  on  the  queen,  who  resided  in  other  apartments  of  the  same  palace.  He  staid
there  some  time,  for  the  queen  entertained  him  handsomely.  On  taking  leave,  he  went  to
the  court  and  mounted  his  horse,  and  was  escorted  to  his  hotel  by  the  lords  of  France,  where
he  supped  that  night  with  his  own  people.  Such  was  his  reception  at  Paris : there  were
many  grand  entertainments  made  to  amuse  him,  and  that  he  might  think  the  less  on  his
banishment  from  his  own  country,  which  was  very  displeasing  to  the  French  lords.  [[In
spite  of  all  their  kind  endeavours,  he  at  times  was  very  melancholy,  and  not  without  reason,
on  being  thus  separated  from  his  family.  He  was  impatient  to  return,  and  much  vexed  that
for  such  a frivolous  cause  he  should  be  banished  from  England,  and  from  his  four  promising
sons,  and  two  daughters.  The  earl  frequently  dined  with  the  king,  the  duke  of  Orleans,  and
other  great  barons,  who  did  everything  they  could  to  make  his  time  pass  agreeably.]

We  will  now  leave  the  earl  of  Derby,  to  speak  of  the  affairs  of  the  church,  and  of  the  two
popes,  Benedict  of  Avignon,  and  Boniface  of  Rome.


CHAPTER  XCVIII. THE  EMPEROR  AND  THE  KING  OF  FRANCE  FURSUE  THE  FLANS  THEY  HAD

SETTLED  AT  RHEIMS,  FOR  A UNION  OF  TIIE  CHURCn. THE  BISHOP  OF  CAMBRAY  IS

SENT  BY  THEM  TO  THE  POPE  AT  ROME. THE  ANSWER  THAT  IS  MADE  HIM.'

You  have  before  heard  of  the  meeting  which  had  taken  place  at  Rheims  between  the
emperor  and  the  king  of  France,  when  many  secret  councils  were  held,  on  establishing  the
union  of  the  church,  for  the  present  schism  was  disgraceful.  In  consequence  of  the  plans
then  formed,  Peter  d’Ailly,  bishop  of  Cambray,  was  sent  ambassador  to  pope  Boniface  at
Rome.  The  bishop  set  out,  and  met  the  pope  at  Fondi,  to  whom  he  delivered  his  credential
letters  from  the  king  and  the  emperor.  The  pope,  having  examined  them,  was  satisfied  of
their  validity,  and  received  the  bishop  kindly,  for  he  guessed  the  object  of  his  mission.  The
ambassador  explained  the  cause  of  his  coming,  which  the  pope  attentively  listened  to,  and
thus  replied  : “ That  the  answer  his  propositions  required  did  not  only  personally  attach  to
him,  but  to  all  his  brother-cardinals,  who  might  aspire  to  the  papacy.  He  would  summon
a consistory,  and,  when  they  had  fully  considered  the  matter,  would  give  him  an  answer  that
should  be  satisfactory.”  This  was,  for  the  present,  sufficient  for  the  bishop  of  Cambray,  who
dined  that  day  at  the  palace  of  the  pope  with  some  of  his  cardinals,  and  then,  leaving  Fondi,
went  to  Rome.

Shortly  after,  pope  Boniface  held  a convocation  of  cardinals  at  Rome ; for  he  had  quitted
Fondi,  and  resided  at  the  Vatican.  No  one  was  present  at  this  consistory  but  the  pope  and
cardinals,  before  whom  he  laid  the  propositions  of  the  bishop  of  Cambray,  and  demanded
advice  what  answer  he  should  make  to  them.  Much  discussion  ensued ; for  the  cardinals
were  averse  to  undo  what  they  had  done,  thinking  it  would  turn  out  to  their  disgrace.
They  said  to  the  pope, — “ Holy  father,  considering  our  situation,  we  think  you  should
conceal  your  real  sentiments  on  this  matter : but  to  encourage  the  hopes  of  the  king  of  France
and  those  of  his  creed,  you  will  in  your  answer  declare  your  willingness  to  comply  with
whatever  the  emperor  of  Germany,  the  king  of  Hungary,  and  the  king  of  England,  shall
advise  you ; that  the  person  who  resides  at  Avignon,  and  styles  himself  pope  Benedict,
whom  the  king  of  France  and  his  nation  have  acknowledged,  must  first  resign  all  claims  to
the  papacy  ; and  that  then  you  will  cheerfully  attend  a general  council,  wherever  the  above-
named  kings  shall  appoint,  and  bring  your  brother  cardinals  with  you.”  This  advice  was
very  agreeable  to  Boniface,  who  replied,  in  conformity  to  it,  but  in  more  general  terms,  to
the  bishop  of  Cambray,  who  acquitted  himself  honourably  in  the  business  he  had  been  sent
upon.

"When  the  Romans  heard  that  the  emperor  and  the  king  of  France  had  written  to  the
pope  to  resign  his  dignity,  great  were  the  murmurings  throughout  the  city ; for  the  Romans
were  fearful  they  should  lose  the  holy  see,  which  was  of  infinite  consequence  to  them  and
profit,  from  the  general  pardons  that  were  personally  sought  for,  and  which  obliged  such
multitudes  to  visit  Rome.  The  jubilee  was  soon  to  take  place,  for  which  they  had  made


670


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


great  preparations ; and  they  were  uneasy  lest  they  might  have  incurred  these  expenses  for
nothing.  The  principal  inhabitants  of  Rome  waited  on  the  pope,  and  showed  him  greater
love  than  ever,  saying : Holy  father,  you  are  the  true  pope : remain  in  the  inheritance

and  patrimony  of  the  church,  which  belonged  to  St.  Peter,  and  let  no  one  advise  you  to
do  otherwise.  Whoever  may  be  against  you,  we  will  always  continue  your  steady  friends,
and  expend  our  lives  and  fortunes  in  the  defence  of  your  right.”  Pope  Boniface  replied, —
“ My  children,  be  comforted,  for  I will  never  resign  the  popedom ; and,  whatever  the
emperor  or  the  king  of  France  may  do,  I will  not  submit  myself  to  their  wills.”  The
Romans  were  satisfied  with  this  answer,  and  returned  to  their  homes.

The  bishop  of  Cambray  took  no  notice  of  this,  but  proceeded  in  the  business  he  had  been
charged  with.  I fancy  pope  Boniface  kept  steady  in  his  answer,  that  when  it  should  be
publicly  known  pope  Benedict  had  resigned  the  papacy,  he  would  act  in  such  manner  as
should  be  agreeable  to  those  who  had  sent  him.  The  bishop,  not  being  able  to  obtain  more,
departed  for  Germany,  and  found  the  emperor  at  Constance,  to  whom  he  delivered  the
answer  you  have  heard.  The  emperor  said, — “ Bishop,  you  will  carry  this  to  the  king  of
France,  our  brother  and  cousin ; and,  accordingly  as  he  shall  act,  so  will  I and  the  empire;
but,  from  what  I see,  he  must  begin  first,  and  when  he  has  deposed  his  pope,  we  will  depose
ours.”  The  bishop  took  leave  of  the  emperor,  and  set  out  for  Paris,  where  the  king  and  his
lords  were  expecting  him.  He  delivered  the  answer  from  the  pope,  and  the  message  from
the  emperor,  which  was  kept  secret  until  the  king  should  assemble  a great  council  of  his
nobles,  to  have  their  advice  on  the  matter.


CHAPTER  XCIX. THE  KING  OF  FRANCE,  IN  CONFORMITY  TO  THE  ADVICE  OF  HIS  NOBLES

AND  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  PARIS,  SENDS  THE  BISHOP  OF  CAMBRAY  TO  POPE  BENEDICT
AT  AVIGNON,  ON  THE  SUBJECT  OF  A UNION  OF  THE  CHURCH,  AND  ALSO  HIS  MARSHAL
BOUCICAUT  THITHER,  TO  CONSTRAIN  THE  POPE  TO  OBEDIENCE  BY  FORCE  OF  ARMS
SHOULD  THERE  BE  OCCASION.

The  king  of  France,  in  consequence  of  the  answer  of  pope  Boniface,  and  the  message  of
the  emperor,  that  the  pope  at  Avignon  must  be  the  first  deposed,  assembled  the  nobles  and
prelates  of  his  kingdom  at  Paris.  Prior  to  this,  some  of  the  prelates  of  France,  such  as  the
archbishop  of  Rheims,  sir  Guy  de  Roye,  the  archbishops  of  Rouen  and  of  Sens,  the  bishops
of  Paris,  Beauvais,  and  Autun,  had  strongly  supported  the  pope  of  Avignon,  particularly
Clement,  who  had  promoted  them  to  their  benefices.  These  six  prelates,  therefore,  by
particular  orders,  were  not  summoned  to  this  council,  but  others  in  their  room,  and  the
heads  of  the  university  of  Paris.  After  the  bishop  of  Cambray  had  fully  explained  to  the
assembly  the  object  of  his  embassy  to  Rome,  what  he  had  done  there,  the  pope’s  answer,  and
the  message  from  the  emperor,  for  he  had  returned  through  Germany,  they  began  to  discuss
the  matter,  and  it  was  resolved  the  university  should  have  the  preponderating  voice.  It
was  determined  in  this  council,  to  the  satisfaction  of  the  king,  the  duke  of  Orleans,  their
uncles,  and  all  the  members  of  it,  that  the  king  of  France  should  send  his  marshal,  the
lord  Boucicaut,  to  Avignon,  to  prevail  on  pope  Benedict,  by  negotiation  or  force,  to  resign
the  papacy,  and  submit  himself  to  the  determination  of  the  king  and  his  council ; that  the
church  in  France  should  remain  neuter  as  to  the  true  pope,  until  union  were  restored  to
it,  according  to  the  decrees  of  a general  council  of  prelates  and  churchmen  which  was  to  be
instantly  called.

This  resolution  seemed  good  to  every  one,  and  was  adopted  by  the  king  of  France,  and  all
who  had  formed  the  council.  The  marshal  of  France  and  the  bishop  of  Cambray  were  ordered
to  Avignon ; and  these  two  lords  left  Paris  soon  afterwards,  travelling  in  company  as  far  as
Lyons,  where  they  separated.  The  marshal  was  to  remain  at  Lyons  until  he  heard  from  the
bishop,  who  continued  his  journey  to  Avignon,  to  learn  what  answer  the  person  who  styled
himself  pope  at  Avignon  would  make  to  the  proposals  from  the  king  of  France.  On  his  arrival
at  Avignon,  he  fixed  his  lodgings  in  the  great  wood-market.  Some  of  the  cardinals  suspected
the  cause  of  his  coming,  since  he  was  sent  by  the  king  of  France,  but  they  dissembled  their


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


671


thoughts  until  they  heard  what  he  had  to  say,  and  observed  how  Benedict  should  answer
and  conduct  himself.  As  soon  as  the  bishop  of  Cambray  had  taken  some  refreshments  and
changed  his  dress,  he  waited  on  the  pope  in  his  palace.  He  made  him,  when  in  his  presence,
the  proper  obeisances,  but  not  so  reverently  as  if  he  and  all  the  world  acknowledged  him  for
the  true  pope,  although  he  had  given  him  the  bishopric  of  Cambray,  through  the  recom-
mendation of  the  lords  in  France.  The  bishop,  being  well  versed  in  Latin  and  French,  made
an  elegant  harangue,  to  explain  the  object  of  his  mission  from  the  emperor  and  the  king  of
France.  When  the  pope  heard  that  it  was  the  intention  of  these  two  monarchs  that  he  as
well  as  pope  Boniface  should  resign  their  dignities,  he  frequently  changed  colour,  and,  raising
his  voice,  said, — “ I have  laboured  hard  for  the  good  of  the  church,  and  have  been  duly  elected
pope,  yet  now  my  resignation  is  sought : this  I will  never  consent  to  as  long  as  I live  ; and
I wish  the  king  of  France  to  know  that  I shall  not  pay  any  attention  to  his  regulations,  but
will  keep  my  name  and  dignity  until  death.”

“ Sire,”  answered  the  bishop  of  Cambray,  “ I always  thought  you,  under  reverence,  more
prudent  than  I find  you  really  are.  Fix  a day  for  the  meeting  of  your  cardinals,  to  consult
with  them  on  your  answer ; for,  unless  they  agree  with  you,  your  opposition  will  be  in  vain
against  them  and  against  the  powers  of  Germany  and  France.”  Upon  this,  two  cardinals  of
his  creation,  who  foresaw  that  matters  would  end  badly,  stepped  forward  and  said,  “ Holy
father,  the  bishop  of  Cambray  advises  you  well : follow  what  he  says,  we  entreat  you.”
The  pope  replied,  he  would  do  so  willingly : the  audience  was  put  an  end  to,  and  the  bishop
returned  to  his  lodgings,  without  waiting  on  any  of  the  cardinals.

On  the  next  morning,  the  consistory  bell  was  rung,  and  a conclave  holden  of  all  the
cardinals  then  at  Avignon,  at  the  pope’s  palace.  The  bishop  of  Cambray  discoursed  in
Latin  on  the  reasons  why  he  was  come  thither,  and  on  the  object  of  those  who  had  sent  him.
When  he  had  finished  speaking,  he  was  told  they  would  maturely  consider  the  business,  and
give  him  an  answer,  but  that  at  present  he  must  withdraw.  He  went  elsewhere  to  amuse
himself,  while  Benedict  and  his  cardinals  debated  his  proposals.  They  were  for  a considerable
time  in  council,  and  many  thought  it  very  hard  to  undo  what  had  been  regularly  effected  ;
but  the  cardinal  of  Amiens  said, — “ My  fair  sirs,  whether  we  will  or  not,  we  must  obey  the
orders  of  the  emperor  of  Germany  and  the  king  of  France,  since  they  are  now  united ; for,
without  their  good  pleasure,  we  cannot  exist.  We  might  indeed  withstand  the  emperor,  if
the  king  of  France  would  support  us,  but,  as  that  is  no  longer  the  case,  we  must  submit,  or
he  will  exclude  us  from  all  our  benefices,  and  how  then  are  w~e  to  live?  In  truth,  holy
father,  we  have  elected  you  pope,  on  condition  that  you  would  exert  yourself  in  the  reform
of  abuses  in  the  church,  and  promote  a union,  all  of  which' you  have  strenuously  promised  to
do  until  this  day.  Answer  for  yourself,  therefore,  in  a temperate  manner,  that  we  may
praise  you,  for  you  must  be  better  acquainted  with  your  own  mind  and  courage  than  we
are.”  Many  of  the  cardinals  spoke  at  once,  and  said  : “ Holy  father,  the  cardinal  of  Amiens
speaks  well,  and  we  beg  of  you  to  let  us  know  your  intentions."  Upon  this,  Benedict
replied, — “ I have  always  had  an  earnest  desire  for  a union  of  the  church,  and  have  taken
great  pains  to  promote  it ; but  since,  through  the  grace  of  God,  you  have  raised  me  to  the
papacy,  I will  never  resign  it,  nor  submit  myself  to  any  king,  duke,  or  count,  nor  agree  to
any  treaty  that  shall  include  my  resignation  of  the  popedom.”  The  cardinals  now  all  rose,
and  there  was  much  murmuring:  some  said  he  had  well  spoken,  and  others  the  contrary.  Thus
was  the  conclave  broken  up  in  discord,  and  many  of  the  cardinals  departed  to  their  hotels
without  taking  leave  of  the  pope.  Those  who  were  in  his  good  graces  remained  with  him.

When  the  bishop  of  Cambray  observed  the  manner  in  which  the  cardinals  left  the  palace,
he  knew  there  had  been  great  disagreement,  and  entering  the  hall  of  the  conclave,  advanced
up  to  Benedict,  who  was  still  on  his  throne,  and,  without  much  respect,  said,  “ Sire,  give
me  an  answer ; I cannot  wait  longer ; for  your  council  is  dismissed.  You  must  let  me
have  your  final  determination  on  the  proposals  I made  you,  as  I am  now  about  to  depart
hence.”  Pope  Benedict,  still  heated  by  anger  at  the  speech  of  the  cardinal  of  Amiens,
replied, — “ Bishop,  I have  consulted  my  brother  cardinals,  who  have  elected  me  to  this
dignity,  and  they  agree  that  every  due  solemnity  has  been  used,  such  as  is  usual  in  such
cases.  Since,  therefore,  I am  pope,  and  acknowledged  as  such  by  all  my  subjects,  I will


072


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


preserve  it  as  long  as  I live,  and  will  not,  though  it  cost  me  my  life,  renounce  it ; for  I have
never  done  anything  to  forfeit  the  divine  protection.  You  will  tell  our  son  of  France  that
hitherto  we  have  considered  him  as  a good  Catholic ; but  that,  from  the  bad  advice  he  has
lately  received,  he  is  about  to  embrace  errors  which  he  will  repent  of.  I entreat  that  you
would  beg  of  him,  from  me,  not  to  follow  any  counsels,  the  result  of  which  may  trouble  his
conscience.”

On  saying  this,  Benedict  rose  from  his  throne,  and  retired  to  his  chamber,  attended  by
some  of  his  cardinals.  The  bishop  of  Cambray  went  to  his  inn,  dined  soberly,  and  then,
mounting  his  horse,  crossed  the  Rhone,  passed  through  Villeneuve,  and  lay  at  Bagnols,*
which  belongs  to  France.  He  there  heard  that  the  Lord  Boucicaut,  marshal  of  France,  was
at  St.  Andrieu,  within  nine  leagues  of  Avignon,  and  thither  the  bishop  went  on  the  following
day,  and  related  to  him  all  that  had  passed,  with  an  answer  he  had  received  from  Benedict,
who  styled  himself  pope.


CHAPTER  C. — IN  CONSEQUENCE  OF  THE  ANSWER  OF  POPE  BENEDICT,  THE  MARSHAL  BOUCI-
CAUT OBLIGES  HIM  BY  FORCE  OF  ARMS  TO  SUBMIT  HIMSELF  TO  THE  WILL  OF  THE
KING  OF  FRANCE  RESPECTING  A UNION  OF  THE  CHURCH.

When  the  marshal  of  France  had  heard  from  the  bishop  of  Cambray  the  pope’s  answer,
and  that  he  refused  to  submit  himself  to  the  king  of  France,  he  said  to  him, — “ Bishop,  you
may  now  return  to  France,  for  you  have  nothing  more  to  do  here ; and  I will  execute  wliat
I have  been  charged  with  by  the  king,  my  lords  his  uncles,  and  the  council.”  The  bishop
replied,  “ God’s  will  be  done.”  He  remained  that  day  in  the  village,  and  on  the  morrow
departed,  taking  his  road  towards  Puy  in  Auvergne.  The  marshal  instantly  set  clerks  and
messengers  to  work  in  summoning  the  knights,  squires,  and  men-at-arms  in  the  Viverais,
Auvergne,  and  from  the  countries  as  far  as  Montpellier ; for  he  was  commissioned  so  to  do
by  the  king  of  France.  He  ordered  the  seneschal  of  Beaucaire  to  shut  up  all  the  passes  to
Avignon,  as  well  on  the  Rhone  as  by  land,  that  nothing  might  enter  that  place,  nor  be  sent
thither  from  the  Pont  du  Saint  Esprit ; for  he  was  particularly  anxious  that  it  should  not
be  supplied  with  provisions  or  stores.  The  summons  of  the  marshal  was  readily  obeyed,  by
some  through  attachment,  but  by  many  in  the  expectation  of  plundering  Avignon.  Sir
Raymond  de  Touraine  came  with  pleasure  to  the  marshal,  who  was  ready  to  march,  in
company  with  the  lords  de  la  Both,  de  Tournon,  de  Monclau,  and  d’TJzes  and  others,  so
numerous,  that  the  marshal  sent  a herald  with  his  defiance  to  the  pope  in  his  palace,  and  to
his  cardinals  in  Avignon.

This  was  a severe  blow  to  the  cardinals  and  to  the  inhabitants ; for  they  knew  well  they
could  not  long  effectually  withstand  the  power  of  the  king  of  France.  They  called  a council
of  the  cardinals  and  principal  persons  in  the  town,  and,  in  consequence,  waited  on  Benedict,
and  temperately  remonstrated  with  him,  that  they  were  unable  and  unwilling  to  support  a
war  against  the  king  of  France,  for  it  was  necessary  they  should  carry  on  their  commerce
by  land  and  water,  to  live.  Benedict,  like  a madman,  replied, — ■“  Your  city  is  strong,  and
well  provided  with  stores  and  provisions.  I will  send  to  Genoa  and  elsewhere  for  men-at-
arms,  and  write  to  my  son  the  king  of  Arragon,  who  is  the  standard-bearer  of  the  church,
to  come  to  my  assistance,  which  he  will  do,  for  he  is  bound  to  it  by  two  reasons ; I am  his
kinsman,  and  he  owes  obedience  to  the  pope.  Do  you  depart  hence  and  guard  your  town,
and  I will  defend  my  palace,  for  you  are  alarmed  at  trifles.”  This  was  all  the  answer  they
could  obtain  from  the  pope,  and  the  cardinals  and  townsmen  retired  to  their  houses.  The
pope,  whom  I call  Benedict,  had,  for  a long  time  before  laid  up  in  his  palace  great  quantities
of  wines,  corn,  salted  meat,  oil,  and  of  every  necessary  store  for  a fortress.  He  himself  was
a bold  and  determined  character,  not  easily  dismayed.

The  marshal  Boucicaut  marched  from  the  town  of  St.  Esprit,  and,  with  the  consent  of
the  Prince  of  Orange,  passed  through  Orange  with  his  army,  and  entered  the  Comtat
Venaissin,  belonging:  to  the  Church,  which  was  soon  overrun.  The  men-at-arms  crossed  the

J O O 1

* Bagnols, — a town  iu  lower  Languedoc,  three  leagues  from  the  Pont  du  Saint  Esprit,  and  fifty-two  from  Lyons.


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


673


bridge  at  Sorgues,*  and  were  masters  of  each  side  of  that  river.  The  marshal  left  some
men  in  the  town  to  guard  it  and  defend  the  passage,  and  oppose  the  garrison  of  Noues,  that
held  out  for  the  pope.  lie  then  fixed  his  head-quarters  at  Saint  Yerain,  near  Avignon,  and
his  army  was  daily  increasing.  The  city  of  Avignon  was  now  so  completely  surrounded,
that  nothing  could  enter  by  land  or  water  without  leave.  The  seneschal  of  Beaucaire’s
quarters  were  at  Villeneuve,  close  to  Avignon,  though  belonging  to  France,  and  he,  with
five  hundred  combatants,  guarded  that  side  of  the  town.  The  marshal  of  France,  with  two
thousand  men-at-arms,  was  on  the  opposite  side  : he  sent  notice  to  the  townsmen,  that  if
they  did  not  open  their  gates,  and  submit  themselves  to  his  will,  he  would  burn  and  destroy
all  the  houses  and  vineyards  as  far  as  the  river  Durance.  This  greatly  dismayed  the
inhabitants  of  both  sexes,  who  had  their  inheritances  in  that  part  of  the  country,  and  they
called  a council,  to  which  they  admitted  the  cardinals  of  Amiens,  Poitiers,  Neufchateau,  and
Viviers,  to  have  their  advice.  The  townsmen,  who  were  the  most  interested  in  the  marshal’s
menace,  informed  the  meeting  of  their  fears  lest  he  should  execute  it,  saying  it  was  made
by  orders  from  the  king  of  France,  whom  they  were  not  prepared  to  resist,  nor  could  they
do  so  with  effect,  for  he  was  too  near  a neighbour  ; and  that,  considering  all  things,  it  would
be  much  better  to  submit  themselves  to  the  king  of  France  than  remain  obstinate  in  the
support  of  Benedict,  who  was  unable  to  afford  them  any  assistance.  They  asked  the
cardinals  if  they  would  join  them.  The  cardinals  said  they  would.  Provisions  began  to  be
scarce  in  Avignon  ; besides,  their  benefices  were  in  France,  which  they  would  not  lose  ; and
they  agreed  with  the  townsmen  in  their  treaty  with  the  marshal.  The  terms  of  the  treaty  were,
that  he  and  his  army  should  be  admitted  into  Avignon,  to  besiege  the  palace,  but  that  no
violence  should  be  done  to  the  cardinals,  their  dependants,  nor  the  townsmen.  This  the
marshal,  the  French  lords,  and  captains  of  the  men-at-arms,  swore  faithfully  to  observe.
When  this  was  done  the  army  entered  the  town,  and  lodged  themselves  at  their  ease,  for  it
was  large  enough,  and  took  off  all  obstructions  on  the  Rhone  and  at  the  gates,  to  allow  free
liberty  for  the  entrance  of  provisions.

Pope  Benedict  was  much  cast  down  when  he  heard  that  his  cardinals  and  the  townsmen
had  concluded  a treaty  with  the  marshal  of  France,  without  consulting  him.  He  said  he
would  never  surrender,  so  long  as  he  had  breath,  and  shut  himself  up  in  his  palace,  which
is  very  strong  and  handsome,  and  easy  to  be  defended,  provided  it  be  well  stored  with
provisions.  The  pope  sent  off  letters  by  messengers,  before  the  marshal  entered  Avignon,
to  the  king  of  Arragon,  humbly  entreating  him  to  come  and  succour  him  in  his  distress,  and
to  send  him  men-at-arms  sufficient  to  oppose  the  marshal  of  France.  He  added,  that  if  he
could  be  extricated  from  the  situation  in  which  he  was,  and  conveyed  to  Arragon,  he  would
establish  the  holy  see  at  Perpignan  or  at  Barcelona.  The  king  of  Arragon  carefully  perused
these  letters,  but  paid  little  attention  to  their  contents.  He  said  to  those  near  his  person, —
“ What ! does  this  priest  suppose  that  I am  to  involve  myself  in  a war  with  the  king  of
France,  to  support  his  quarrel  ? I should  indeed  be  very  blame-worthy,  were  I to
interfere.”  “ Sire,”  replied  his  knights,  “ what  you  say  is  true  : you  have  no  business  to
meddle  with  such  matters ; for  you  must  know  that  the  king  of  France  has  been  ably
advised,  and  has  just  cause  to  act  as  he  does.  Leave  the  clergy  to  themselves ; and,  if  they
wish  for  support  they  must  subject  themselves  to  those  lords  from  whose  countries  they
receive  the  amount  of  their  benefices.  They  have  too  long  held  them  undisturbed,  and  they
ought  to  feel  and  be  sensible  whence  their  wealth  arises.  The  king  of  France  has  besides
written  to  entreat  that  you  would  agree  with  him  in  a neutrality  between  the  two  popes.
Accept  his  invitation,  for  the  queen,  who  is  his  cousin-german,  has  done  so ; and  the  greater
part  of  the  kingdom  and  clergy  are  willing  to  do  the  same  ; for  we  hold,  especially  the
Catalonians,  that  this  opinion  is  the  surest ; otherwise,  should  the  Christian  princes  not
unite  in  the  same,  there  will  never  be  any  union  in  the  church,  from  the  divisions  of  these
two  popes.”  Thus  did  the  king  of  Arragon  and  his  lords  converse  on  the  subject,  while
poor  Benedict,  shut  up  in  his  palace,  was  looking  in  vain  for  assistance  being  sent  him  from
Arragon.  The  marshal  of  France  was  in  Avignon,  and  the  palace  so  strictly  invested,
nothing  could  enter  it,  which  forced  those  within  to  live  on  the  provisions  they  had.  Of
* The  l'iver  Sorgues  takes  its  rise  from  the  spring  at  Vaucluse.


VOL.  II.


X X


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


r>74

food  there  was  a sufficiency  for  two  or  three  years  ; but,  as  there  was  a scarcity  of  fuel  to
dress  their  victuals,  they  began  to  be  alarmed  at  the  consequences.

The  king  of  France  held  a weekly  correspondence  with  the  lord  Boucicaut,  on  the  state  of
Benedict ; and  the  king  oi'dered  him  not  to  depart  until  he  had  completed  the  business  with
the  pope.  He  therefore  increased  the  guard  round  the  palace,  to  prevent  him  issuing  forth.
The  conclusion  was,  that  Benedict,  finding  himself  thus  constrained,  that  there  was  no  fuel,
and  that  their  provisions  were  daily  decreasing,  without  any  assistance  coming  to  his  aid,
begged  for  mercy,  through  the  mediation  of  some  of  his  cardinals.  The  terms  of  the  treaty
were,  that  he  was  not  to  leave  the  palace  of  Avignon  until  union  should  be  restored  to  the
church  ; that  he  should  be  put  under  the  guard  of  proper  persons  ; and  that  the  cardinals  and
richest  citizens  of  Avignon  should  be  responsible  for  his  appearance,  dead  or  alive.  This
satisfied  the  marshal.  Those  cardinals  who  had  benefices  in  France  exerted  themselves
much  to  conclude  this  treaty,  declaring  unanimously  they  would  comply  with  the  orders  of
the  king  of  France.  Thus  ended  this  business,  and  the  men-at-arms  marched  away  from
Avignon,  every  one  to  his  own  home.


CHAPTER  CI. THE  MARSHAL  BOUCICAUT  RETURNS  TO  HUNGARY  AGAINST  THE  TURKS.

THE  EARL  OF  DERBY  SENDS  TO  REQUEST  PERMISSION  OF  THE  DUKE  OF  LANCASTER

TO  ACCOMPANY  BOUCICAUT  IN  THIS  EXPEDITION. THE  KING  OF  ENGLAND  IS  SOLICITED

BY  THE  KING  OF  FRANCE  TO  ENGAGE  HIS  SUBJECTS  TO  A NEUTRALITY  BETWEEN  THE
TWO  POPES,  UNTIL  A NEW  ELECTION  SHALL  TAKE  PLACE ; BUT  THEY  REFUSE  COM-
PLIANCE WITH  THEIR  MONARCH’S  REQUEST.

After  this  exploit,  the  marshal  Boucicaut  returned  to  Paris,  and  shortly  after  made
preparations  to  go  to  Hungary  • for  the  king  had  written  to  the  king  of  France,  to  his  uncles,
and  to  the  knights  and  squires  of  France,  that  Bajazet  was  assembling  a large  army  of  Turks,
Arabians,  Persians,  Tartars,  Syrians,  and  others  of  his  religion.  The  king  of  Hungary  was
in  consequence  desirous  of  collecting  a numerous  force  to  oppose  him,  and  offer  him  battle
with  more  advantage  than  the  last.

The  earl  of  Derby,  who  resided  at  Paris  at  the  hotel  de  Clisson,  near  the  Temple,  was
very  desirous  to  go  on  the  expedition  to  Hungary,  to  avoid  putting  the  king  of  France  to
further  expense ; for  he  received  from  the  French  treasury,  every  week,  five  hundred  golden
crowns  for  his  expenses,  which  his  people  were  most  punctually  paid.  On  the  first  mention
of  this  expedition,  the  earl  of  Derby  eagerly  listened  to  it ; for  he  felt  himself  under  great
obligations  to  the  king  of  France,  and  was  unwilling  to  be  a charge  on  him  longer.  He
likewise  thought  that  he  should  gain  honour  by  going  to  Hungary,  and  that  it  would  make
the  time  of  his  banishment  the  sooner  pass  away.  He  consulted  his  confidential  servants,
who  advised  him  to  undertake  it,  but  first  to  solicit  the  consent  of  his  father  the  duke  of
Lancaster.  The  earl,  in  consequence,  sent  to  England  the  knight  nearest  his  person,  to  learn
the  pleasure  of  his  father,  and  how  he  would  advise  him  to  act.  When  the  knight,  whose
name  was  Dinorth*,  arrived  at  London,  he  heard  the  duke  of  Lancaster  was  at  his  castle  of
Hertford,  about  twenty  miles  from  London,  whither  he  went,  and  related  to  him  the  earl  of
Derby’s  wish  to  join  the  expedition  to  Hungary.  When  the  duke  had  heard  all  he  had  to
say,  he  was  well  contented  with  the  state  of  his  son,  and  bade  him  welcome,  adding,  that
what  he  had  said,  and  the  letters  he  had  brought,  demanded  consideration.  You  will  rest
yourself  here  while  we  deliberate  on  the  subject ; and,  in  the  mean  time,  you  must  see  my
son’s  children,  to  give  them  news  of  their  father,  and  carry  intelligence  of  them  to  him,  for
that  he  will  expect  from  you.”  “ My  lord,”  replied  the  knight,  “ what  you  say  is  true.”
Thus  did  he,  by  desire  of  the  duke,  stay  some  little  time  in  England.

The  king  of  France  sent  ambassadors  to  Germany  to  inform  the  emperor  that  he  had  laid
hands  on  Benedict,  who  for  a time  had  styled  himself  pope.  These  ambassadors  were  the
patriarch  of  Jerusalem,  sir  Charles  de  Hangiers,  and  others  of  his  knights  : they  set  out  for
Germany,  and  met  the  emperor  at  Strasbourg,  to  whom  they  satisfactorily  delivered  their
* “ Dinorth.”  The  MSS.  have  Du  Roch.  Q.  if  not  Dymocke.


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


6”o


message.  The  emperor  and  his  council  said  they  would  deliberate  on  the  matter,  but  would
gladly  first  know  the  determination  of  the  king  of  England,  for  which  the  king  of  France
had  taken  on  himself  to  answer.  Upon  this,  the  embassy  returned  to  France,  and  reported
what  you  have  just  read.  The  king  of  France,  to  hasten  the  business,  sent  a grand  embassy
to  England  to  remonstrate  witli  the  king  on  the  present  distracted  state  of  the  church.  The
king  of  England  would  willingly  have  joined  the  king  of  France,  but  he  had  not  his  prelates
nor  his  churchmen  and  subjects  as  much  under  his  command  as  his  father-in-law  kept  them  in
France.  All  this  he  told  in  confidence  to  the  French  ambassadors,  at  the  same  time  promising
them  to  do  his  utmost  to  comply  with  the  king  of  France’s  request.

The  French  ambassadors  returned  to  Paris ; and  king  Richard,  in  consequence  of  his
wishes  to  please  his  father-in-law,  summoned  a meeting  of  the  prelates  and  clergy  of  his
realm,  at  his  palace  of  Westminster,  which  is  out  of  the  city  of  London.  When  they  met,
he  eloquently  harangued  them  on  the  miserable  schism  in  the  church,  and  the  plan  the  king
of  France  had  adopted,  of  remaining  neuter  between  the  two  rival  popes,  according  to  the
advice  of  the  university  of  Paris,  and  other  learned  clerks.  The  kings  of  Scotland,  Castille,
Arragon,  and  Navarre  had  followed  this  example,  and  all  Germany,  Bohemia,  and  Italy
intended  doing  the  same.  He  therefore  entreated  that  his  kingdom  would  adopt  the  like
measures.  When  the  prelates,  who  were  ignorant  why  they  had  been  assembled,  heard  this
speech,  they  were  greatly  astonished,  and  were  silent.  Several  murmured  and  said,—
“ Our  king  is  quite  a Frenchman : his  only  wish  is  to  disgrace  and  ruin  us,  but  he  shall  not
succeed.  What ! does  he  want  to  make  us  change  our  creed  ? He  may  go  so  far  that  evil
will  befall  him.  We  will  do  nothing  in  this  matter,  since  the  king  of  France  proposes  it.
Let  him  keep  to  his  neutrality,  if  he  please,  and  we  will  keep  our  creed.  We  will  never
suffer  any  attempt  to  deprive  us  of  it,  unless  better  reasons  can  be  shown  than  those  we  have
just  heard.”

The  king,  seeing  them  thus  murmur  together,  made  the  bishop  of  London,  who  had  laid
the  proposals  of  neutrality  before  them,  ask  what  determination  were  best  to  be  taken.
They  replied,  one  by  one,  that  the  matter  was  so  weighty,  great  deliberation  was  requisite
before  any  answer  could  be  made.  Upon  this,  the  meeting  broke  up,  and  the  clergy  who
had  been  assembled  retired  to  their  inns  in  the  city  of  London.  The  citizens,  learning  from
them  the  cause  of  the  meeting,  and  the  proposition  that  the  king  had  made  them,  were  greatly
angered  against  him,  for  in  England  the  belief  in  the  pope  of  Rome  was  general.  They
said, — “ This  Richard  of  Bordeaux  will  ruin  everything,  if  he  be  suffered  to  go  on.  His
head  is  so  thoroughly  French,  he  cannot  disguise  it ; but  a day  may  come  when  he  shall  pay
for  all  without  having  time  to  repent,  and  so  shall  those  who  have  been  his  advisers.”

Things  continued  in  this  state  ; and  all  his  solicitations  and  remonstrances  with  his  clergy
to  remain  neuter  obtained  not  any  attention.  The  king  of  France  and  his  council  were
dissatisfied  that  king  Richard  had  not  instantly  determined  his  country  to  be  neuter,  but  in
truth  he  could  not  prevail  with  his  clergy  to  do  so ; and  shortly  after  there  fell  out  such
horrible  events  that  the  like  are  not  to  be  found  in  this  whole  history,  nor  in  that  of  any
other  Christian  king,  except  that  noble  prince  Lusignan,  king  of  Cyprus  and  Jerusalem,
whom  his  brother  and  the  Cypriots  villanously  murdered.


CHAPTER  CII. TOE  ANSWER  THE  DUKE  OF  LANCASTER  GIVES  THE  KNIGHT  WnO  HAD  BEEN

SENT  TO  HIM  BY  THE  EARL  OF  DERBY,  TO  REQUEST  HIS  PERMISSION  TO  JOIN  THE
EXPEDITION  AGAINST  THE  TURKS. THE  DEATH  OF  THE  DUKE  OF  LANCASTER.

When  the  chevalier  Dinorth,  who  had  been  sent  by  the  earl  of  Derby  to  the  duke  of
Lancaster,  had  received  answers  to  the  letters  he  had  brought,  and  had  visited  all  the  castles
of  the  earl  his  lord,  and  waited  on  his  four  sons  and  two  daughters,  who  had  remained  in
England,  he  took  leave  and  returned  to  France.  The  answer  from  the  duke  of  Lancaster  was,
that  he  would  not  advise  his  son  to  go  into  Hungary,  but,  when  tired  of  France,  to  visit
Castille  and  Portugal,  and  amuse  himself  at  the  courts  of  his  brothers-in-law  and  sisters.
The  earl  of  Derby  read  these  letters  twice  over,  and  mused  some  time  on  their  contents.  II  is

x x 2


67C


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.

knight  told  him  in  confidence  that  the  duke  of  Lancaster’s  physicians  and  surgeons  had
assured  him  the  duke  laboured  under  so  dangerous  a disease  it  must  soon  cause  his  death.

This  information  made  the  earl  give  over  all  thoughts  of  travelling  further.  lie  remained
in  Paris,  at  the  hotel  do  Clisson,  which  had  been  prepared  for  him  and  his  attendants.  He
frequently  visited  the  king,  the  duke  of  Orleans  and  their  uncles,  who  entertained  him
handsomely.  The  carl  was  so  sensible  of  their  attentions,  that  he  said  to  the  king  of  France —
“ My  lord,  you  pay  me  so  much  honour  and  courtesy,  and  give  me  proofs  of  such  affection,
that  I know  not  how  I shall  be  ever  able  to  make  you  an)7  return ; hut,  if  it  please  God  that
I go  back  to  England,  I will  not  forget  them  in  my  attachment  to  our  queen,  your  daughter,
whom  God  preserve  !”  “ Many  thanks,  fair  cousin,”  replied  the  king.  It  happened,  that

about  Christmas-tide,  duke  John  of  Lancaster  fell  dangerously  ill  of  a disorder  which  ended
his  life,  to  the  great  grief  of  all  his  friends.  He  had  been  some  time  very  low  spirited,  on
account  of  the  banishment  of  his  son,  whom  his  nephew  king  Richard  had  forced  out  of
England  for  a trifling  cause,  and  also  for  the  manner  in  which  the  kingdom  was  governed,
which,  if  persevered  in,  he  foresaw  must  be  its  ruin.  The  king  of  England,  as  it  seemed,  was
little  affected  by  his  uncle’s  death,  and  ho  was  soon  forgotten.

Many  of  the  nobles,  but  not  all,  were  uneasy  the  kingdom  was  so  weakened  by  the  deaths
of  the  dukes  of  Lancaster,  Gloucester,  and  the  earl  of  Arundel,  and  that  the  earl  of  Derby
was  banished,  who  ought  to  be  now  duke  of  Lancaster  by  legal  succession.  Some  said, —
“ We  shall  see  what  the  king  will  do.  It  is  time  that  he  recal  his  cousin  the  earl  of  Derby,
and  remit  his  further  punishment,  though  there  was  scarcely  any  justice  in  it.  It  is  proper
that  he  return  to  take  possession  of  his  lands,  and  do  homage  as  duke  of  Lancaster.”  Such
speeches  were  common  throughout  England,  but  especially  in  London,  where  the  earl  of  Derby
was  a hundred  times  more  beloved  than  king  Richard.  Notwithstanding  these  murmurs,
and  that  he  was  spoken  to  on  the  subject,  as  well  as  his  ministers,  nothing  was  done  : on  the
contrary,  the  king  showed  he  was  more  irritated  against  the  carl.  In  this  he  was  very
badly  advised ; for  if,  on  the  death  of  his  uncle,  he  had  sent  for  the  earl  of  Derby,  and  said
to  him, — “Fair  cousin,  you  are  welcome.  You  are  now  duke  of  Lancaster,  and,  after  us,
the  greatest  personage  in  the  realm  : we  will,  therefore,  that  you  remain  with  us  ; and  we
will  be  governed  by  your  counsels,  and  do  nothing  without  your  approbation  — he  would
then  have  continued  king  of  England,  and  avoided  the  unfortunate  end  that  was  awaiting
him  : the  catastrophe  was  now  so  near  at  hand  that  he  could  no  way  avoid  it,  as  you  shall
speedily  hear.


CHAPTER  CIII. THE  KING  OF  ENGLAND  MAKES  THE  KING  OF  FRANCE  ACQUAINTED  WITH

THE  DEATH  OF  THE  DUKE  OF  LANCASTER,  BUT  DOES  NOT  NOTICE  IT  TO  THE  EARL  OF
DERBY,  THOUGH  SON  TO  THE  LATE  DUKE.

The  news  of  the  death  of  the  duke  of  Lancaster  was  soon  public  in  France.  King
Richard  wrote  an  account  of  it  to  the  king  with  a sort  of  joy,  but  did  not  notice  it  to  his
cousin  the  earl  of  Derby.  The  earl,  however,  knew  it  as  soon,  if  not  sooner  than  the  king
of  France,  from  his  people  in  England.  He  clothed  himself  and  his  attendants  in  deep
mourning,  as  was  right,  and  had  his  obsequies  grandly  performed ; at  which  were  present,
the  king  of  France,  the  duke  of  Orleans,  their  three  uncles,  and  numbers  of  the  prelates  and
great  barons  of  France,  for  the  earl  was  much  liked  by  all.  The  French  barons  visited  him
often,  and  some  were  displeased  at  and  took  part  in  his  misfortunes : he  was  an  amiable
knight,  courteous  and  pleasant  to  every  one,  and  it  was  currently  said,  the  king  of  England
was  very  ill  advised  not  to  recal  him.  To  say  the  truth,  if  the  king  had  wisely  considered
consequences,  he  would  have  done  it : affairs  would  not  have  turned  out  so  miserably  as
they  did.  The  earl  of  Derby  was  now,  by  the  death  of  his  father,  duke  of  Lancaster,  and
the  most  potent  baron  in  England,  second  to  none  but  the  king,  and  by  his  advice  the  king
should  have  governed.

The  king  and  his  ministers  should  not  have  forgotten  that  the  people  of  England,  more
particularly  the  Londoners,  iiad  frequently  risen  against  the  government ; that  the  king  was


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c


G77


not  popular  with  any  rank  of  men ; and  that,  during  the  life  of  the  duke  of  Gloucester,  he
had  suffered  many  vexations,  and  even  personal  danger.  When  the  citizens  of  London  and
the  deputies  from  the  great  towns  waited  on  the  king  at  Eltham,  to  petition  for  the  abolition
of  the  war  taxes,  their  plan  was  (by  the  secret  advice  of  the  duke  of  Gloucester  and  other
lords),  to  seize  the  king  and  queen,  and  choose  another  in  his  room.  King  Richard  and  his
queen  were  to  be  confined  and  allowed  a sufficiency  for  their  maintenance  during  their  lives.
The  duke  of  Gloucester  had  requested  his  nephew,  son  to  the  daughter  of  the  duke  of
Clarence,  called  John  earl  of  March,  to  take  charge  of  the  government  of  England ; but  he
had  excused  himself  from  so  doing,  and  the  meeting  wras  dismissed  in  tolerably  good  humour
by  the  prudence  and  temper  of  the  duke  of  Lancaster,  and  Richard  reigned  with  greater
prosperity  than  before.  The  king  was  not  unacquainted  with  these  designs  against  him ;
and  by  tbe  wicked  counsel  of  those  about  his  person,  who  gave  him  to  understand  the  duke
of  Gloucester  was  at  the  bottom  of  this  plot,  under  pretence  of  great  affection  he  had  him
arrested  in  the  night,  and  carried  over  to  Calais,  where  he  was  strangled.  This  caused  a
great  noise  in  all  parts  of  England,  and  proposals  were  made  for  dethroning  the  king;  but
the  duke  of  Lancaster,  with  his  usual  prudence  and  wisdom,  although  the  duke  of  Gloucester
was  his  brother,  and  he  was  sorely  afflicted  by  his  death,  considering  he  could  not  restore
him  to  life  and  the  consequences  that  might  ensue,  again  appeased  these  discontents ; and  his
nephew,  king  Richard,  was  more  feared  than  ever.

The  king  ought  to  have  remembered  all  these  circumstances,  and  likewise  that  the  earl  of
Derby  was  the  most  popular  man  in  England  with  every  description  of  men,  and  should
therefore  instantly,  on  the  death  of  his  father,  have  recalled  him.  But  the  king  had  no
such  inclination : on  the  contrary,  he  immediately  sent  his  officers  to  take  possession  of  his
lands  and  seize  their  rents,  declaring,  that,  during  his  banishment,  neither  the  earl  nor  his
family  should  receive  any  of  his  revenues  in  England.  He  also,  to  the  great  vexation  of
such  as  were  attached  to  the  carl  or  his  children,  disposed  of  several  estates  in  the  duchy  of
Lancaster  to  some  of  his  knights,  and  to  whoever  asked  for  them.  The  English  barons
greatly  blamed  him  for  this,  and  said, — “ It  is  clear  the  king  of  England  bears  no  good-will
to  his  cousin,  the  earl  of  Derby,  when  he  refuses  to  recal  him,  and  suffer  him  to  take
possession  of  his  inheritance.  He  would,  with  his  children,  be  a grand  support  to  the
crown,  and  a staff  to  lean  on,  but  he  acts  quite  contrary,  by  thus  keeping  him  out  of  the
kingdom,  in  a disagreeable  state,  and  which  he  would  make  worse  if  he  could.  He  has  taken
possession  of  his  lands,  and  sent  hither  his  officers,  as  if  they  were  legally  his  own,  who
treat  the  tenants  worse  than  any  in  England  : should  they  complain,  during  the  absence  of  their
lord,  they  are  not  attended  to.  It  is  no  sign  of  affection  or  justice  towards  the  earl  of
Derby  and  his  children,  when  he  thus  seizes  the  inheritance  of  Lancaster,  that  descends  to
them  as  the  true  heirs  of  the  lady  Blanche,  daughter  of  Henry  duke  of  Lancaster,  and
likewise  that  from  their  mother,  the  daughter  of  the  earl  of  Hereford  and  Northampton,  and
constable  of  England,  which  he  is  daily  distributing  piece-meal  to  any  person  according  to
his  pleasure.  This  conduct  is  contrary  to  reason  and  justice,  and  so  greatly  disliked  by  the
good  people  of  England,  that  things  cannot  longer  remain  in  their  present  state.”

Such  conversations  were  general  among  the  nobles,  prelates,  and  commonalty  of  England.
In  like  manner,  the  lords  in  France,  who  heard  of  this  matter,  and  were  acquainted  with
the  earl  of  Derby,  wondered  at  it,  and  said, — “ According  to  our  opinion,  this  king  of
England  has  formed  too  great  a hatred  against  the  earl  of  Derby,  who  is  his  cousin-german.
He  is  a graceful  and  courteous  knight  to  all  who  address  him.  Either  the  king  of  England
knows  some  things  of  him  that  we  do  not,  or  he  is  miserably  advised : it  is  surprising  the
king  of  France,  his  brother  the  duke  of  Orleans,  and  their  uncles  of  Berry,  Burgundy,
and  Bourbon,  do  not  interfere  in  the  business,  for  he  is  daily  with  some  of  them.  They
would  have  greater  weight  than  any  others,  and  the  king  of  England  would  do  more  to
please  them  from  love  to  his  queen,  who  is  daughter  to  the  king  of  France ; but,  as  they
have  not  taken  any  steps  in  the  matter,  it  behoves  us  to  hold  our  peace.”  In  truth,  the
king  of  France  and  his  family  were  perfectly  well  disposed  toward  the  earl  of  Derby,  whom
they  greatly  respected,  and  wished  always  for  his  company.  It  was  considered  that  he  was
a widower,  likely  to  marry  again,  and  that  the  duke  of  Berry  had  a daughter,  who  though


<5  78


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


so  young,  was  a widow  of  two  husbands : she  had  been  first  married  to  Louis  de  Blois,  who
had  died  in  his  youth,  and  then  to  the  lord  Philip  d’ Artois,  count  d’Eu,  who  died  in  Turkey,
as  you  have  read  in  this  history.  Mary  of  Berry  was  not  more  than  twenty-three  years
old,  and  a marriage  between  her  and  the  earl  of  Derby  was  talked  of  and  nearly  concluded.

The  duke  of  Berry  knew  well  that  the  earl  of  Derby  was  the  greatest  heir-apparent  in
England,  as  did  the  king  of  France,  who  was  anxious  this  match  should  take  place,  on
account  of  his  daughter  being  queen  of  England.  It  was  natural  to  imagine  that  two  such
ladies,  so  nearly  related,  would  be  agreeable  company  to  each  other,  and  that  the  kingdoms
of  France  and  England  would  enjoy  longer  peace,  and  be  more  intimately  connected.  All
this  would  probably  have  been  true,  if  it  could  have  been  accomplished  but  king  Richard
and  his  council  broke  off  all  these  measures.  Whatever  misfortunes  fate  has  decreed  cannot
be  prevented ; they  must  have  their  course ; and  those  that  befel  king  Richard  are  wonderful
indeed  to  think  on.  He  might  indeed  have  avoided  them,  but  what  must  be  will  be.

I,  John  Froissart,  author  of  these  chronicles,  will  literally  say  what,  in  my  younger  days,
I heard  at  a mansion  called  Berkhampstead,  distant  from  London  thirty  miles,  and  which,
at  the  time  I am  speaking  of,  in  the  year  of  our  Lord  1361,  belonged  to  the  prince  of  Wales,
father  to  king  Richard.  As  the  prince  and  princess  were  about  to  leave  England  for
Aquitaine,  to  hold  their  state,  the  king  of  England,  queen  Philippa,  my  mistress,  the  dukes
of  Clarence,  Lancaster,  the  lord  Edmund,  who  was  afterward  earl  of  Cambridge  and  duke
of  York,  with  their  children,  came  to  this  mansion  to  visit  the  prince  and  take  leave  of  him.
I was  at  that  time  twenty-four  years  old,  and  one  of  the  clerks  of  the  chamber  to  my  lady
the  queen.  During  this  visit,  as  I was  seated  on  a bench,  I heard  the  following  conversation
from  a knight  to  some  of  the  ladies  of  the  queen.  He  said, — “ There  was  in  that  country
a book  called  Brut,  which  many  say  contains  the  prophecies  of  Merlin.  According  to  its
contents,  neither  the  prince  of  Wales  nor  duke  of  Clarence,  though  sons  to  king  Edward,
will  wear  the  crown  of  England,  but  it  will  fall  to  the  house  of  Lancaster.”  When  the
knight  said  this,  the  earl  of  Derby  was  not  born : his  birth  was  seven  years  after.  This
prophecy,  however,  was  verified,  for  I have  since  seen  Henry,  earl  of  Derby,  king  of  England.


CHAPTER  CIV. THE  TREATY  OF  MARRIAGE  BETWEEN  THE  EARL  OF  DERBY  AND  THE

DAUGHTER  OF  THE  DUKE  OF  BERRY  IS  BROKEN  OFF  BY  THE  KING  OF  ENGLAND,
THROUGH  THE  MEANS  OF  THE  EARL  OF  SALISBURY.

The  moment  king  Richard  learnt  that  a treaty  of  marriage  was  going  forward,  with  the
approbation  of  all  parties,  between  the  earl  of  Derby  and  the  lady  Mary  of  Berry,  he  became
very  thoughtful  and  much  displeased  thereat.  He  said  to  the  Earl  of  Salisbury,  in  whom
he  had  great  confidence, — “ My  lord,  you  must  make  yourself  ready  to  go  to  Paris ; I will
give  you  credential  letters  to  the  king  our  father,  and  to  our  well-beloved  brother  and
uncles.  Tell  them  to  beware  of  forming  any  alliance  or  marriage  with  such  a traitor  as  the
earl  of  Derby,  who  would  have  betrayed  his  sovereign : you  are  perfectly  acquainted  with
the  fact : and,  with  your  good  understanding,  act  in  such  wise  that  I shall  be  satisfied,  and
this  marriage  be  put  aside.”  The  earl  of  Salisbury  replied, — “ Sire,  I shall  punctually  obey
all  your  commands  ; but,  if  this  marriage  could  be  broken  off  by  any  other  means  than  mine,
I shall  be  very  thankful  to  you.”  “ Earl  of  Salisbury,”  answered  the  king,  “ make  no
excuses ; for  I will  and  entreat  that  you  go  thither,  and  whatever  may  be  the  consequences
1 will  support  you  through  them.”  “Well,  sire,”  said  the  earl,  “since  you  specially
command  me,  and  the  matter  seems  to  interest  you  so  much,  I will  undertake  it,  but  I go
very  unwillingly.”  “ Hasten  your  preparation  as  much  as  you  can,”  replied  the  king,  “ that
the  treaty  of  marriage  be  not  too  far  advanced.”

The  earl  of  Salisbury  was  soon  ready,  and,  having  had  his  credential  letters  sealed,  he
departed  from  the  king,  who  at  the  time  resided  with  his  queen  at  Leeds-castle.  He  carried
with  him  private  lettei'S  from  the  queen  to  the  king  and  queen  of  France,  and  to  her
brother  the  duke  of  Orleans,  and,  hastening  his  journey,  arrived  at  Dover,  where,  the  wind
being  favourable,  he  embarked,  and  landed  at  Calais.  He  was  received  by  the  king’s  half-


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &r.


079


brother,  the  earl  of  Huntingdon,  governor  of  Calais,  to  whom  lie  told  part  of  his  business.
He  made  no  long  stay  at  Calais,  but  continued  his  road  through  Amiens  to  Paris,  and
wherever  he  passed  he  was  well  entertained.  On  his  arrival  at  Paris,  he  lodged  at  the
White  Horse,  in  the  square  of  the  Greve  *.  After  he  had  dressed  himself,  he  waited  on  the
king  and  queen,  and  delivered  his  credential  letters : when  the  king  of  France  had  perused
them,  he  took  the  earl  of  Salisbury  aside  and  demanded  his  business.  The  earl  related  to
him  very  minutely  everything  he  had  been  charged  with  by  the  king  of  England,  and  called
the  earl  of  Derby  a traitor  to  his  natural  lord.  The  king,  on  hearing  this  expression,  was
angered  (for  he  had  taken  so  strong  a liking  to  the  earl  of  Derby,  that  he  would  not  hear
anything  said  in  his  dispraise),  and  gave  back  the  letters  to  the  earl,  saying, — “ Earl  of
Salisbury,  we  readily  believe  what  you  tell  us ; but  our  son  of  England  bears  too  great  a
hatred  to  our  cousin  of  Derby,  and  we  wonder  he  has  continued  it  so  long,  for  we  think  that
his  court  would  be  better  adorned  if  he  were  near  his  person,  and  those  who  have  the  most
weight  in  his  council  ought  to  advise  him  to  recal  his  cousin.”  “ Very  dear  sire,”  replied
the  earl  of  Salisbury,  “ I only  act  as  I have  been  ordered.”  “ That  is  true,”  said  the  king  :
“ we  are  not  angry  with  you,  for  perchance  our  son  may  know  of  these  matters  more  than
we  can : execute  the  commission  you  have  been  charged  with.”  The  earl  then  waited  on
the  duke  of  Berry,  and  delivered  his  message  from  king  Richard.  The  duke  made  no
answer,  but  went  to  the  king  at  the  hotel  de  Saint  Pol,  and  asked  if  he  had  received  any
news  from  England.  The  king  told  him  all  that  had  passed  between  him  and  the  earl  of
Salisbury,  and  a privy  council  of  the  king’s  uncles  and  principal  lords,  was  summoned  on  the
occasion.  They  said, — “ The  king  of  England  must  fear  very  much  the  earl  of  Derby,
from  circumstances  that  we  are  ignorant  of,  and  that  have  not  been  made  public.  We
ought  to  be  more  attached  to  him  than  to  the  earl  of  Derby,  from  his  connexion  witli  us  by
marriage ; and,  as  we  have  been  informed,  he  will  be  greatly  displeased  if  we  proceed  in  the
marriage  of  the  earl  of  Derby  with  the  countess  d’Eu,  we  must  break  it  off.  We  have  only
to  conceal  what  we  have  heard  from  England  until  the  earl  of  Salisbury  be  returned.”

The  king  and  his  council  adopted  this  resolution.  When  the  earl  of  Salisbury  had
completed  the  business  he  had  been  sent  on  to  Paris,  he  took  leave  of  the  king  and  his  lords,
and  departed.  The  king,  however,  showed  he  was  more  displeased  than  otherwise  at  the
intelligence  he  had  brought,  and  returned  to  the  earl  his  credential  letters,  refusing  to
accept  of  them,  from  his  partiality  to  the  earl  of  Derby.  This  last  knew  of  the  earl  of
Salisbury  being  at  Paris,  but  they  never  saw  each  other ; and  the  carl  of  Salisbury  returned
to  Calais  without  speaking  to  the  earl  of  Derby,  and  thence  to  England  to  report  the  success
of  his  mission.

The  earl  of  Derby  was  much  displeased  that  the  earl  of  Salisbury  should  leave  Paris
without  seeing  him,  and  augured  from  it  nothing  favourable.  His  council  were  of  the  same
opinion,  and  said  to  him, — “ My  lord,  you  will  soon  perceive  such  things  as  you  little  dream
of,  although  they  are  as  yet  hid  from  you.  The  French  are  a close  and  subtle  people:  perhaps
the  king  of  England  and  his  minions  are  vexed  that  the  king  of  France  and  his  court  show
you  such  honour  and  affection ; perhaps  also  it  may  be  rumoured  in  England  that  you
propose  marrying  the  lady  Mary  of  Berry,  and  king  Richard,  to  whom  this  intelligence  will
not  be  agreeable,  has  sent  over  to  have  it  broken  off : should  that  be  the  case,  you  will
speedily  hear  of  it.”  Thus,  as  the  knights  and  council  of  the  earl  of  Derby  had  supposed
matters  were,  did  they  turn  out.  About  a month  after  the  departure  of  the  earl  of  Salisbury,
the  commissioners  from  the  earl  of  Derby  renewed  the  matter  of  the  marriage  with  the  lady
Mary  of  Berry  : but  those  on  the  part  of  the  duke  replied, — “ Tell  my  lord  of  Derby,  that
when  he  is  in  the  presence  of  the  king  and  his  brother  the  duke  of  Orleans,  he  may  propose
this  business  himself ; for  we  cannot  say  more  on  the  subject,  since  it  is  not  agreeable  to  our
employers  that  we  longer  interfere  in  it.”

These  words  were  repeated  to  the  earl  of  Derby,  who  suspected  nothing  more  was  meant
by  it  than  to  hasten  the  marriage ; for  the  king  of  France  and  his  lords  had  shown  outwardly
as  much  eagerness  for  the  match  as  ever.  lie  remembered  what  had  been  told  him,  and  at
a proper  opportunity,  when  the  king  and  his  lords  were  together,  renewed  his  proposal  of
* The  MSS.  say,  “at  the  chiiteau  tic  Festus,  in  the  rue  du  Tiroir. 11


030


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


marriage.  The  duke  of  Burgundy,  having  been  charged  with  the  answer,  replied,  “ Cousin
of  Derby,  we  cannot  think  of  marrying  our  cousin  to  a traitor.”  The  earl  instantly  changed
colour  on  hearing  this  expression,  and  said, — “ Sir,  I am  in  the  presence  of  my  lord  the  king,
and  must  interrupt  your  speech,  to  answer  the  expression  you  have  used.  I never  was  nor
ever  thought  of  being  a traitor ; and  if  any  one  dare  to  charge  me  with  treason,  I am  ready
to  answer  him  now,  or  at  whatever  time  it  may  please  the  king  to  appoint.”  “ No,  cousin,”
said  the  king,  “ I do  not  believe  you  will  find  any  man  in  France  that  will  challenge  your
honour.  The  expression  my  uncle  has  used  comes  from  England.”  The  earl  of  Derby  cast
himself  on  his  knees,  and  replied,  “ My  lord,  I willingly  believe  you  : may  God  preserve  all
my  friends,  and  confound  mine  enemies!”  The  king  made  the  earl  rise,  and  said — “ Earl,
be  appeased  : all  this  matter  will  end  well ; and  when  you  shall  be  on  good  terms  with  every
one,  wc  ca?i  then  talk  of  marriage.  But  it  will  be  first  necessary  that  you  have  possession
of  your  duchy  of  Lancaster;  for  it  is  the  custom  of  France,  and  of  many  countries  on  this
side  the  sea,  that  when  a lord  marries  with  the  consent  of  his  lord  paramount,  should  he
have  one,  he  settles  a dower  on  his  wife.”  Upon  this,  wine  and  spices  were  brought : the
conversation  ended ; and,  when  the  king  retired  to  his  closet,  every  one  went  away.

The  earl  of  Derby,  on  his  return  to  the  hotel  de  Clisson,  was  bitterly  enraged,  and  not
without  reason,  to  be  accused  of  treason,  when  he  thought  himself  one  of  the  most  loyal
knights  in  the  universe,  and  in  the  presence  too  of  the  king  of  France,  who  had  shown  him
so  much  affection  and  courtesy,  and  that  this  accusation  should  have  been  brought  from
England  by  the  earl  of  Salisbury.  His  knights  pacified  him  as  well  as  they  could,  by  saying,
“ My  lord,  whoever  wishes  to  live  in  this  world  must  sometimes  suffer  trouble.  Comfort
yourself  for  the  present,  and  bear  all  things  with  patience : perhaps  you  will  hereafter  have
it  made  up  in  joy  and  glory.  Of  all  the  lords  on  this  side  of  the  sea,  the  king  of  France
loves  you  the  most,  and,  from  what  we  hear  and  see,  he  will  instantly  prevent  any  insult
being  offered  you.  You  should  he  thankful  to  him  and  his  uncles  for  having  kept  this
matter  secret  during  the  stay  of  the  earl  of  Salisbury,  and  until  he  was  landed  in  England.”
“ Indeed !”  replied  the  earl : “ I should  have  thought  it  more  loyal  to  have  made  the  charge
while  lie  was  here,  than  to  have  waited  so  long.  I could  then  have  been  enabled  sufficiently
to  exculpate  myself  in  the  presence  of  the  king  and  his  lords,  so  that  my  innocency  would
have  been  apparent,  but  I must  now  submit  to  the  disgrace  until  I shall  wipe  it  off.”  “ My
lord,”  answered  his  knights,  “ all  faults  cannot  be  corrected  at  once : have  patience,  we  hope
things  will  turn  out  better  in  England  than  you  think.  The  affection  the  whole  country
bear  you  will  very  soon,  if  it  please  God,  deliver  you  from  all  dangers.”  Thus  did  his  knights
attempt  to  comfort  the  earl  of  Derby,  who  was  more  cast  down  than  man  ever  was ; and
what  they  had  uttered  by  chance,  for  consolation,  turned  out  true,  as  I shall  now  relate.

It  was  known  in  England  that  the  earl  of  Salisbury  had  been  sent  to  France  with  credential
letters,  and  that,  on  the  strength  of  them,  he  had  accused  the  earl  of  Derby  to  the  king  of
France  and  his  uncles,  as  a perjured,  false,  and  wicked  traitor,  which  words  had  greatly
angered  many  of  the  prelates  and  barons  of  the  kingdom.  They  said,  when  among  themselves:
“ The  earl  of  Salisbury  has  done  very  wrong  to  carry  such  a message  to  France,  and  make
so  heavy  a charge  against  the  most  honourable  man  in  the  world.  The  day  will  come  when
he  shall  repent  of  this,  and  say,  “ It  weighs  heavily  on  me  that  I ever  carried  a message  to
France  against  the  earl  of  Derby.”  The  Londoners  were  exceedingly  enraged  against  the
king  and  his  ministers  for  their  conduct,  and  said, — “ Ah,  gallant  and  courteous  earl  of
Derby,  how  great  are  the  jealousies  and  hatreds  against  thee  when,  to  overwhelm  thee  with
disgrace  and  vexation,  they  charge  thee  with  treason  ! It  was  not  enough  for  the  king  and
his  minions  to  force  thee  out  of  the  kingdom,  but  they  must  add  this  charge  also  ; but,  by
God,  all  things  have  an  end,  and  their  turn  may  come.”  “ Alas !”  cried  the  people,  “ what
have  his  children  done  ? when  the  king  seizes  their  inheritance,  which  ought  to  be  theirs  by
direct  succession  from  grandfather  and  father.  There  must  be  some  change  in  public  measures,
for  wo  neither  can  nor  will  suffer  them  to  go  on  longer.”


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


681


CHAPTER  CV. KING  RICHARD  OF  ENGLAND  PROCLAIMS  A TOURNAMENT,  WHICH  IS

ATTENDED  BY  VERY  FEW  PERSONS. ON  SETTING  OUT  FOR  IRELAND,  HE  BANISHES

THE  EARL  OF  NORTHUMBERLAND  AND  HIS  SON  THE  KINGDOM.

Soon  after  the  return  of  the  earl  of  Salisbury  from  France  to  England,  king  Richard  had
proclaimed  throughout  his  realm  and  in  Scotland,  that  a grand  tournament  would  be  held  at
Windsor,  by  forty  knights  and  forty  squires,  clothed  in  green,  with  the  device  of  a white
falcon,  against  all  comers,  and  that  the  queen  of  England,  well  attended  by  ladies  and  damsels,
would  be  at  this  feast.  The  queen  was  indeed  present  at  the  tournament  in  magnificent
array,  but  very  few  of  the  barons  attended  : the  greater  part  of  the  knights  and  squires  of
England  were  disgusted  with  the  king,  for  the  banishment  of  the  carl  of  Derby,  the  injuries
he  was  doin"  the  earl’s  children,  the  murder  of  the  duke  of  Gloucester,  that  had  been
committed  in  the  castle  of  Calais,  the  death  of  the  earl  of  Arundel,  whom  he  had  beheaded  in
London,  and  the  perpetual  exile  of  the  earl  of  AVarwick.  None  of  the  kindred  of  these  lords
came  to  the  feast,  which  was  of  course  very  poorly  attended.

The  king,  after  this  tournamant,  made  preparations  to  go  to  Ireland.  He  left  his  queen,
Isabella,  .and  her  household  at  Windsor  castle,  and  took  the  road  to  Bristol,  where  he  laid  in
ample  purveyances  and  stores.  He  had  with  him  full  two  thousand  lances,  knights  and
squires,  and  ten  thousand  archers.  When  the  Londoners  heard  he  was  set  out,  they  began
to  murmur  together  and  say, — “ Well!  Richard  of  Bordeaux  has  taken  the  road  to  Bristol
for  Ireland.  It  will  be  his  destruction  : never  will  he  return  thence  to  joy,  more  than  his
ancestor,  king  Edward,  who  governed  his  realm  so  foolishly,  through  the  counsels  of  the
Despencers,  and  paid  for  it.  This  Richard  of  Bordeaux  has  confided  so  long  in  weak  and
wicked  counsellors,  that  it  cannot  longer  be  borne.”

You  must  know,  that  although  many  barons,  knights,  and  squires  accompanied  the  king
in  his  expedition  to  Ireland,  they  were  much  discontented  with  him,  and  did  not  follow  him
with  a goodwill.  When  they  were  together,  they  conversed,  saying,  “ Our  king  governs
very  badly,  and  too  readily  believes  weak  counsel.”  This  was  so  often  and  so  loudly  spoken
of  throughout  the  realm,  particularly  by  the  earl  of  Northumberland  and  his  son  Harry
Percy,  that  the  king’s  ministers  heard  of  it,  and  said  to  the  king : “ Sire,  the  earl  of
Northumberland  and  his  son  say  things  that  must  not  be  suffered,  for  they  want  to  excite
your  subjects  to  rise  against  you.  Every  rebel  must  be  punished,  one  after  another,  that
the  greatest  barons  may  fear  you,  and  take  example.”  “ That  is  true,”  replied  the  king :
“ how  shall  I act  on  this  occasion  ?”  “ We  will  tell  you,  sire  : they  are  to  join  this  expedition,
but  not  yet  arrived.  When  they  come,  order  them  to  your  presence  by  the  earl  of  Salisbury
or  any  other  you  please,  and  then  remonstrate  with  them  on  the  injurious  speeches  they  have
uttered  against  you  and  your  ministers.  You  will  hear  what  answer  they  make,  and,  as
that  may  be,  consider  how  you  shall  punish  them,  by  imprisonment  or  otherwise.”  The
king  replied, — “ You  say  well,  and  what  you  advise  shall  be  done.”

The  earl  of  Northumberland  and  his  son  had  good  friends  on  this  expedition,  by  whom
great  part  of  the  secret  councils  of  the  king  were  revealed  : they  were  strongly  advised  not
to  join  the  armament,  nor  appear  in  the  king’s  presence,  for  that  he  was  so  wrath  with  them,
they  would  at  least  be  severely  reprimanded,  if  not  imprisoned.  On  hearing  this,  they
retarded  their  journey  towards  Bristol ; for,  according  to  the  intelligence  sent  them,  had
they  come,  they  would  have  run  a risk  of  their  lives.  The  king’s  ministers,  perceiving  the
earl  of  Northumberland  did  not  arrive,  said  to  him, — “ See,  sire,  if  we  did  not  tell  you  the
truth  : neither  the  earl  of  Northumberland  nor  his  son  condescend  to  serve  you,  although
ordered  ; and,  if  you  send  them  a special  summons,  you  will  have  a confirmation  that  what
we  have  told  you  is  true.”  The  king  said,  it  should  be  done.  Letters  were  signed,  sealed,
and  sent  off  by  a special  messenger,  containing  orders  for  the  earl  of  Northumberland  and
sir  Henry  Percy  instantly  to  join  the  king’s  forces,  and  perform  their  duties  as  they  were
bounden  to  do.  The  messenger  continued  his  journey  to  a very  handsome  castle*  of  the
earl  of  Northumberland  on  the  borders  of  Scotland,  and  delivered  his  letters.  The  carl  read
them  attentively,  and  then  gave  them  to  his  son.

* Alnwick.


G82


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


They  determined  to  entertain  the  messenger  well,  and  to  write  to  the  king  to  excuse
themselves,  as  they  were  no  way  prepared,  nor  could  they  leave  their  own  country,  as  the
king  had  a sufficiency  of  men  for  the  business  he  was  going  upon.  The  messenger  returned
with  his  answers,  and  gave  them  the  king ; but  they  were  not  agreeable  to  him  nor  to  his
ministers,  and  for  this  and  other  charges,  which  were  publicly  made  against  the  earl  of
Northumberland  and  his  son,  they  were  banished  England,  never  to  return  until  recalled
by  the  king.  This  sentence  was  published  in  London  and  in  all  the  towns  of  England,  to'
the  great  astonishment  of  the  citizens,  who  could  not  conceive  why  they  had  thus  been  so
severely  punished ; for  they  had  always  considered  the  earl  of  Northumberland  and  sir
Henry  Percy  as  two  of  the  most  loyal  subjects  in  the  realm.  Some  said,  when  conversing-
on  this  matter,  that  “ the  ministers  of  the  king  hated  them,  and  would  in  the  end  cause
their  master’s  destruction.  It  may  be  that  the  earl  and  his  son  have  talked  too  freely  about
the  king’s  ministers,  and  his  foolish  government ; and,  as  truth  is  not  always  agreeable,
these  gallant  knights  suffer  for  it ; but  those  who  have  now  judged  them  may  hereafter  have
their  turn.”

Such  were  the  conversations  of  the  discontented  Londoners,  as  well  as  of  the  majority  of
the  English  people.  The  earl  and  his  son  were  connected  by  blood  with  the  noblest  and
richest  families,  who  were  exasperated  by  their  banishment ; and  among  them  his  brother,
sir  Thomas  Percy,  who  had  done  many  very  great  services  to  the  crown  of  England.  When
the  earl  heard  of  his  banishment,  he  summoned  all  his  friends  and  relations  ; but  many  were
with  the  king  and  could  not  attend.  On  their  assembling,  he  consulted  them  how  he  should
act  in  the  disgrace  the  king  had  so  undeservedly  heaped  on  him  ; and  it  was  determined  to
send  to  Scotland,  to  request  the  king  would  afford  the  earl  and  his  son  an  asylum  in  that
country  until  affairs  should  mend,  or  the  king’s  anger  be  pacified.  This  resolution  was
adopted,  and  a messenger  sent  to  the  king  of  Scotland  to  make  the  above  request.  King
Robert,  the  earl  Archibald  of  Douglas,  and  the  barons  of  Scotland,  cheerfully  complied  with
it,  and  returned  for  answer,  that  the  kingdom  was  ready  to  receive  them  ; and,  if  they  wanted
five  or  six  hundred  lances,  they  would  be  instantly  at  their  service,  on  hearing  from  them.
This  answer  was  highly  pleasing  to  the  earl  of  Northumberland  and  his  kindred  ; and  things
remained  in  this  state,  the  earl  in  his  own  country  among  his  friends ; for  king  Richard  and
his  advisers  had  in  a short  time  so  much  to  do,  that  they  had  no  leisure  to  attend  to  the  earl
of  Northumberland,  nor  to  say  to  him,  “ Quit  the  kingdom,  or  we  will  force  you.”  They
were  obliged  to  give  up  all  thoughts  but  for  their  own  safety,  as  you  will  hear  in  the  course
of  this  history.


CHAPTER  CVI. THE  ENGLISH,  AND  PARTICULARLY  THE  LONDONERS,  RISE  IN  FAVOUR  OF

THE  EARL  OF  DERBY  AGAINST  KING  RICHARD.

During  the  time  kino-  Richard  was  holding  his  court  at  Bristol  and  in  that  neighbourhood,
there  was  a general  insurrection  of  the  people  of  England.  The  courts  of  justice  were  closed  ;
at  which  many  of  the  prelates,  barons  and  prudent  part  of  the  people,  who  only  wanted  for
peace  and  to  pay  what  was  lawful,  were  much  dejected.  A stop  was  put  to  all  traffic,  for
merchants  dared  not  travel  for  fear  of  being  robbed,  and  having  no  courts  to  apply  to  for
redress.  All  these  things  were  very  prejudicial,  and  contrary  to  the  usual  customs  of  the
country  ; for  in  general  all  people,  labourers  and  tradesmen,  lived  peaceably,  and  followed
their  occupations  without  hindrance,  but  it  was  now  quite  the  contrary.  When  merchants
went  with  their  goods  from  one  town  to  another,  and  had  any  money  in  their  purses,  it  was
taken  from  them.  The  farmers’  houses  were  pillaged  of  grain,  and  their  beeves,  pigs  and
sheep  carried  away,  without  the  owners  daring  to  say  a word.  These  enormities  increased
so  much,  there  was  nothing  but  complaints  heard.  The  common  people  said,  “ Times  are
sadly  changed  for  the  worse  since  the  days  of  king  Edward  of  happy  memory.  Justice  was
then  rigorous  in  punishing  the  wicked.  Then  there  was  no  man  in  England  daring  enough
to  take  a fowl  or  sheep  without  paying  for  them,  but  now  they  carry  off  all  things,  and  we
must  not  speak.  This  cannot  go  on  without  the  country  being  ruined,  and  yet  no  one


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


683


attempts  to  check  it.  We  have  a good-for-nothing  king,  who  only  attends  to  his  idle
pleasures;  and,  as  it  should  seem,  he  cares  not  how  public  affairs  are  managed,  so  that  his
inclinations  are  gratified.  We  must  look  for  a remedy,  or  our  enemies  and  ill-wishers  will
be  rejoiced  and  laugh  at  us.  King  Richard  has  made  his  brother,  the  earl  of  Huntingdon,
governor  of  Calais,  and  perchance  there  may  be  some  underhand  treaties  going  forward  to
surrender  it  to  the  French,  although  it  be  so  necessary  and  convenient  to  England : should
this  happen  no  nation  will  be  ever  more  discomfited  than  the  English,  and  with  good  reason,
for  they  will  lose  the  keys  of  the  entrance  to  France.”  These  murmurings  and  discontents
multiplied ; and  the  prelates  and  rich  barons  came  to  live  in  London,  that  they  might  avoid
the  troubles  and  dangers  which  were  increasing  throughout  the  kingdom.  The  families  of
those  whom  the  king  had  put  to  death  or  banished  were  rejoiced,  and  looked  out  for  greater
mischiefs  as  the  consequence.

The  citizens  of  London,  who  being  rich  from  their  trade,  are  enabled  to  live  in  state,  and
by  whom  the  other  parts  of  England  are  generally  governed,  foresaw  that  most  dangerous
consequences  would  ensue,  unless  they  stepped  forward,  as  they  had  wisely  done  formerly
against  king  Edward  and  the  Despencers,  who  had  forced  queen  Isabella  and  the  prince  of
Wales  out  of  the  kingdom,  and  wanted  to  destroy  them.  The  king  had  no  cause  for  so  doing,
hut  they  were  absent  from  England  three  years.  When  the  Londoners  perceived  king
Edward  so  besotted  with  the  Despencers,  they  provided  a remedy,  by  sending  secretly  to
queen  Isabella  information,  that  if  she  could  collect  a body  of  three  hundred  armed  men,
and  land  with  them  in  England,  she  would  find  the  citizens  of  London,  and  the  majority  of
the  nobles  and  commonalty,  ready  to  join  her,  and  place  her  on  the  throne.  The  queen
found  a friend  in  sir  John  of  Hainault,  lord  of  Beaumont  and  Chimay,  and  brother  to  count
William  of  Hainault,  who  undertook,  through  affection  and  pity,  to  carry  her  and  her  son
back  to  England.  He  exerted  himself  so  much  in  her  service,  with  knights  and  squires,  that
he  collected  a body  of  four  hundred,  and  landed  them  in  England,  to  the  great  comfort  of
the  Londoners.  The  citizens  joined  them,  for,  without  their  assistance,  they  would  never
have  accomplished  their  enterprise.  King  Edward  was  made  prisoner  at  Bristol,  and  carried
to  Berkeley-castle,  where  he  died.  His  advisers  were  all  put  to  death  with  much  cruelty;
and  that  same  day  king  Edward  III.  was  crowned  king  of  England,  in  the  palace  of
Westminster.

The  Londoners  remembered  all  these  circumstances  very  well ; for  the  children  of  those
days,  now  become  men,  had  often  had  them  told  by  their  fathers,  and  others  read  them  in
the  chronicles  of  those  times.  They  therefore  said  to  one  another  privately, — “ Our  ances-
tors, in  former  days,  provided  a remedy  for  the  mischiefs  that  afflicted  the  country,  which
were  not  so  alarming  as  at  this  moment : if  this  wicked  king  Richard  be  suffered  to  rule
according  to  his  pleasure,  we  must  all  be  ruined,  and  the  country  destroyed.  Ever  since  he
began  his  reign,  the  kingdom  has  not  prospered  to  the  degree  in  which  it  did  before  : he
shows  no  signs  of  being  the  son  of  the  prince  of  Wales;  for,  if  he  were  his  son,  he  would
follow  his  manners,  and  take  pleasure  in  imitating  his  prowess,  instead  of  idly  dallying  with
ladies,  and  spending  his  time  among  them,  or  putting  his  confidence  in  those  who  have
neither  weight  nor  sense  but  in  amassing  treasures  and  destroying  England.  Have  not  the
traitors  near  his  person  infamously  murdered  that  valiant  duke  of  Gloucester,  because  lie  saw
clearly  public  affairs  were  badly  governed,  going  on  from  bad  to  worse,  and  spoke  boldly  the
truth  concerning  them  ? Have  they  not  also  put  to  death  that  gallant  knight  the  earl  of
Arundel,  and  banished  England,  without  reason,  the  gentle  sir  Henry  of  Lancaster,  earl  of
Derby,  by  whom,  and  his  four  promising  sons,  the  kingdom  ought  to  be  supported  ? This
cruel  conduct  is  much  aggravated  ; for,  while  they  make  the  earl  suffer  many  disgusts  beyond
sea,  they  have  disinherited  his  children  of  the  estates  tliat  devolved  to  them  from  their  grand-
mother, the  lady  Blanche  of  Lancaster,  by  dividing  and  distributing  them  daily  to  those  who
are  unworthy  to  possess  them.  Because  those  two  gallant  knights,  the  earl  of  Northumber-
land and  sir  Henry  Percy,  have  spoken  their  minds  on  this  subject,  king  Richard  has  also
banished  them : it  is  clear  there  will  not  soon  be  any  men  of  courage  and  honesty  in  the
country,  and  hatreds  and  discontents  are  now  increasing  everywhere,  so  that  if  a remedy  be
not  sought  for,  all  things  will  fall  to  ruin.  The  remedy  is  in  the  earl  of  Derby,  who  is  now


684


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


losing  his  time  in  France : him  we  must  send  for,  and,  on  his  arrival,  appoint  him  regent  of
the  kingdom,  that  he  may  reform  all  abuses,  and  punish  those  who  have  used  him  so  ill.
Richard  of  Bordeaux  must  he  arrested  and  confined  in  the  Tower  of  London,  when  all  his
actions  will  be  examined  and  put  into  writing,  which  are  sufficiently  numerous,  and  will
prove  clearly  he  is  unworthy  to  govern  a kingdom  or  wear  a crown  : his  acts  are  so  infamous,
that  they  will  condemn  him.”


CHAPTER  evil. TnE  ARCHBISHOP  OF  CANTERBURY  IS  SENT  TO  FRANCE  BY  THE  LONDONERS,

AND  OTHERS  OF  THEIR  PARTY  IN  ENGLAND,  TO  BRING  BACK  THE  EARL  OF  DERBY.

Such  was  the  language  of  the  Londoners,  and  of  many  others  throughout  England  ; but,
although  much  was  done  to  excite  the  people  to  insurrections,  they  would  never  have
attempted  what  they  did,  if  the  Londoners  had  not  set  them  the  example.  The  citizens  of
London,  who,  from  their  power  and  wealth,  lead  the  rest  of  England,  held  several  secret
councils,  to  which  were  admitted  some  prelates  and  knights,  when  they  resolved  to  send  in
search  of  the  earl  of  Derby,  who  was  residing  at  Paris  or  thereabout,  and  bring  him  back  to
England.  On  his  return,  they  were  to  remonstrate  with  him  on  the  weak  government  of
wicked  king  Richard,  and  propose,  if  he  would  undertake  it,  to  give  him  the  crown,  and
elect  him  and  his  heirs  kings  for  ever,  on  condition  that  he  promised  to  govern  according  to
the  ancient  usages  of  the  country.  They  next  thought  on  the  most  proper  person  to  send  on
this  commission : he  must  be  prudent  and  brave  ; for  it  would  be  a grand  enterprise  to  seduce
the  earl  from  France,  when  the  king  and  his  uncles  were  showing  him  every  token  of  love
and  courtesy ; and  he  would  not  put  any  belief  in  the  simple  propositions  of  a low-born
person,  nor  in  any  letters  that  were  sent  him,  but  rather  the  contrary.  In  consequence,
they  entreated  the  archbishop  of  Canterbury  *,  a man  of  prudence  and  wisdom,  to  undertake
it,  who,  for  the  good  of  his  country,  complied  with  the  request.  He  made  his  preparations
for  the  journey  so  privately,  that  none  knew  of  his  departure  but  those  in  the  secret.  lie,
with  six  more,  embarked  on  board  a vessel  on  the  Thames,  and  landed  at  Sluys,  thence  he
went  to  Ardembourg,  Ghent,  Oudenarde,  Ath,  Conde  and  Valenciennes,  and  stopped  at  the
hotel  of  the  Swan,  in  the  market-place.  Having  staid  there  three  days  to  recover  himself,
he  pursued  his  journey,  not  as  archbishop  of  Canterbury,  but  like  a simple  monk  on  a pil-
grimage, discovering  to  no  one  Lis  rank,  nor  the  business  lie  was  about.  He  departed  from
Valenciennes  the  fourth  day,  having  hired  a guide  to  conduct  him  to  Paris,  giving  out  that
he  was  on  a pilgrimage  to  Saint  Maur  des  Fosses f.  He  arrived  at  length  where  the  earl  of
Derby  resided,  which  was,  I believe,  at  the  hotel  de  Vinchester near  to  Paris.

When  the  earl  of  Derby  first  saw  the  archbishop,  his  heart  rejoiced  and  he  recovered  his
spirits.  Those  about  him  were  well  pleased,  for  they  concluded  he  had  brought  some
important  intelligence  from  England.  The  archbishop,  however,  did  not  discover  the  cause
of  his  coming,  and,  to  prevent  any  suspicions  of  it,  said  he  was  on  a pilgrimage  to  Saint
Maur  des  Fosses,  which  the  earl’s  attendants  believed  and  were  satisfied.  When  the
archbishop  thought  it  was  time  to  make  the  object  of  his  journey  known,  he  took  the  earl
into  a private  chamber,  and  there  informed  him  of  the  miserable  state  England  was  in;  that
violence  and  desolation  ruled  in  many  parts,  and  that,  by  the  king’s  fault,  there  was  neither
law  nor  justice : that  the  Londoners,  with  some  prelates  and  valiant  men,  had  determined
to  remedy  these  evils,  and  that  for  this  he  had  been  sent  by  them  to  say,  that  if  the  earl
would  return  to  England  (for  he  was  wasting  his  time  in  France)  they  would  make  him
king:  Richard  of  Bordeaux  had  done,  or  consented  to  so  many  atrocious  acts,  that  the

* Thomas  Fitz-alan,  son  to  the  earl  of  Arundel.  There  seems  a mistake  as  to  the  name  of  the  bishop  of

•f  Saint  Maur  des  Fosses, — a town  in  the  Isle  of  France,  Winchester.  Peter  de  Rupibus  was  bishop  1204,  and
diocese  of  Paris.  died  1 238.

J Froissart  has  said  before,  the  earl  of  Derby  resided  This  hotel  de  Yinchester  is  pronounced,  by  corruption,
at  the  hotel  de  Clisson,  near  the  Temple.  This  hotel  de  BicOtre,  and  is  now  used  as  a prison,  an  hospital,  and  an
Vinchester  was  so  called  from  having  been  built  by  John  asylum  for  lunatics;  the  buildings  having  been  much  cx-
bisbop  of  Winchester  1204.  It  belonged,  at  the  period  tended  in  modern  times,
we  are  now  speaking  of,  to  the  duke  of  Berry. — Sauval ,

Autiqniles  de  Paris.


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  & c.


C85


people  were  indignant,  and  resolved  to  rise  against  him.  “ Now  is  the  time,  or  never,”  added
the  archbishop,  “ for  you  to  seek  your  deliverance,  and  the  advantage  of  yourself  and  children  ;
for,  if  you  do  not,  no  one  else  will  for  them,  since  this  Richard  of  Bordeaux  is  giving  away
all  their  estates  to  his  minions,  or  to  whoever  asks  for  them.  The  citizens  of  London,  and
many  other  gallant  men,  are  greatly  enraged  at  such  conduct,  and  would  amend  it  if  they
could,  though  hitherto  they  have  heen  silent.  lie  has  filled  up  the  measure  of  his  crimes
by  the  murder  of  the  duke  of  Gloucester,  the  beheading  of  the  earl  of  Arundel  without  cause,
the  exile  of  the  earl  of  Warwick,  and  your  banishment ; clearly  showing  his  intentions  to
deprive  England  of  its  nobles  and  the  support  she  might  have  from  them,  for  he  has  lately
banished  the  earl  of  Northumberland  and  his  son  because  they  talked  too  freely  of  him  and
his  ministers.  The  citizens  of  London  and  the  greater  part  of  the  prelates  and  barons  of
England  entreat  you  will  not  sleep  over  this  business,  but  that  you  will  take  leave  of  the
king  of  France  and  the  French,  and  return  home,  where  you  will  be  joyfully  received,  and
every  promise  I have  made  he  punctually  fulfilled,  for  the  country  desire  none  other  than
you  for  their  king,  so  much  are  you  beloved  and  respected.”

When  the  earl  of  Derby  had  heard  this  speech  of  the  archbishop,  he  did  not  immediately
reply,  but,  leaning  on  a window  that  looked  into  the  gardens,  mused  awhile,  and  having
various  thoughts  in  his  mind,  turned  to  the  bishop,  and  said  : “ My  lord,  your  speech  requires
much  consideration.  I would  be  unwilling  to  begin  an  enterprise  and  be  forced  to  leave  it
unfinished,  for  I well  know,  that  unless  by  the  means  you  propose,  it  will  be  a long  time
before  I return  to  England.  I am  loth  to  resort  to  this,  for  the  king  of  France  and  his
nobles  have  paid  me  every  honour  and  attention,  and  will  continue  so  to  do,  as  long  as  I
shall  please  to  live  among  them.  Should  I accept  of  the  offers  and  kind  promises  which
you  and  my  good  friends  the  citizens  of  London  make,  I must  subject  myself  to  their  will,
arrest  king  Richard,  and  put  him  to  death.  For  this  I shall  be  universally  blamed,  and  I
would  not  willingly  do  so,  if  any  other  means  could  be  adopted.”  “ My  lord,”  replied  the
archbishop,  “ I am  sent  hither  with  every  good  disposition  towards  you.  Call  in  your
council,  and  lay  before  them  the  propositions  I have  made : I will  also  explain  why  I am
deputed  hither,  and  I do  not  think  they  will  advise  you  to  act  otherwise  than  to  accept
them.”  “ I consent,”  said  the  earl,  “ for  such  matters  demand  great  consideration.”

The  earl  of  Derby  sent  for  those  knights  and  squires  in  whom  he  had  the  most  confidence,
and  in  their  presence  desired  the  archbishop  to  repeat  what  he  had  just  told  him ; which
being  done,  he  asked  their  advice  how  he  should  act.  They  unanimously  answered, —
“ My  lord,  God  has  taken  compassion  on  you : be  careful  how  you  refuse  such  offers,  for
you  will  never  have  more  advantageous  ones  made  you.  Whoever  will  examine  your  blood
will  find  that  it  descends  in  a straight  line  from  Saint  Edward,  king  of  England.  Thank
your  good  friends  the  Londoners  for  wishing  to  deliver  you  from  exile,  and  for  having  pity
on  your  children  and  the  kingdom  of  England,  which  now  is  sorely  troubled.  Have  you
forgotten  the  many  wrongs  this  Richard  of  Bordeaux  has  done  you,  and  who  does  not
dissemble  his  wishes  to  add  to  them  daily.  When  your  marriage  with  the  lady  Mary  of
Berry  was  on  the  point  of  being  concluded,  did  he  not  send  over  the  earl  of  Salisbury  to
break  off  the  match,  and  to  accuse  you  before  the  king  and  his  whole  court  of  being  a false
and  wicked  traitor  ? Such  things  are  unpardonable,  and  you  should  rather  seek  for
means  of  revenge.  If  you  will  not  help  yourself,  no  one  will  do  it  for  you : consider
well,  therefore,  all  we  have  said."


CHAPTER  CVIII. THE  EARL  OF  DERBY  TAKES  LEAVE  OF  THE  KING  AND  LORDS  OF  FRANCE,

TO  VISIT  HIS  COUSIN  THE  DUKE  OF  BRITTANY.

The  earl  of  Derby’s  courage  was  raised  on  hearing  his  council  thus  boldly  declare  their
opinion,  and  he  said, — “ I will  do  whatever  you  advise,  for  I have  called  you  together  to
have  your  counsel.”  They  unanimously  answered,  “You  say  well;  and  we  will  advise
you.  according  to  circumstances,  to  the  best  of  our  power.”  After  this,  they  carried  on  their
business  so  very  secretly,  that  none  of  the  household  but  those  immediately  concerned  knew


680


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND  FRANCE.  &c.


anything  of  what  was  going  forward.  They  consulted  how  they  could  cross  the  sea  before
any  news  of  their  intention,  should  reach  England,  and  whether  to  travel  through  Hainault
and  Holland,  and  embark  at  Dordrecht,  or  to  go  to  Brittany  under  pretence  of  visiting  the
duke,  sail  from  one  of  his  ports,  and  land  at  Plymouth  or  any  other  place  whither  God
might  please  to  send  them.  Everything  considered,  they  thought  the  road  through  Brittany
the  easiest  accomplished  : and  they  advised  the  earl,  saying, — “ My  lord,  you  will  take  leave
of  the  king  of  France,  his  brother,  and  uncles,  and  thank  them  warmly  for  the  affection  and
courtesy  they  have  shown  you.  After  this,  you  will  request  the  king  to  grant  you  an  escort
to  Brittany,  to  visit  the  duke  and  stay  some  time  with  him.”

The  earl  of  Derby  consented,  and  came  to  Paris,  where  all  things  were  prepared  for  his
departure : he  waited  on  the  king  as  usual  whenever  he  pleased,  for  the  doors  of  the  palace
were  open  to  him  at  all  hours.  At  this  last  visit,  he  talked  to  the  king  very  ably,  as  he
knew  well  how  to  do,  as  to  his  future  plans,  and  said  he  would  go  and  amuse  himself  in
Brittany  and  visit  the  duke,  whom  he  called  his  uncle,  for  he  had  married  a sister  to  his
father,  daughter  to  king  Edward.  The  king,  not  thinking  he  was  plotting  mischief,  easily
assented : and  the  earl,  having  requested  an  escort  to  Brittany,  the  king  promised  to  give
instant  orders  for  one  to  be  at  his  command.  To  shorten  the  matter,  the  earl  managed  his
affairs  with  much  discretion,  and  took  leave  of  all  the  lords  who  were  then  at  court : on  his
departure,  he  made  very  handsome  presents  to  the  king’s  officers,  for  he  was  bounden  so  to
do ; and  to  the  heralds  and  minstrels  resident  in  Paris,  and  who  attended  the  farewell  supper
lie  gave  at  the  hotel  de  Clisson  to  such  of  the  French  knights  as  chose  to  partake  of  it.


Earl  of  Dfrby  taking  leave  of  the  King  and  Lords  of  France  at  Paris.  From  MSS.  of  the  loth  Century.


These  things  done,  on  the  next  morning  he  and  his  attendants  mounted  their  horses  and
left  Paris  by  the  gate  of  St.  Janies,  following  the  road  to  Estampes.  A knight  from  Beauce,
called  sir  Guy  le  Bavcux,  escorted  them.  They  continued  their  journey  to  Blois,  where
they  remained  eight  days ; for  the  earl  had  sent  forward  one  of  his  knights  and  a herald,  to
signify  to  the  duke  lvis  intention  of  visiting  him,  and  the  circumstance  of  his  being  on  the
road.  The  duke  of  Brittany  was  very  happy  to  learn  that  his  nephew,  the  earl  of  Derby,
was  coming  to  see  him  ; for  he  was  attached  to  him,  and  had  always  loved  the  duke  of
Lancaster  and  his  other  brothers.  “ Why,”  said  the  duke  to  the  knight,  whose  name  Avas
sir  William  de  la  Perriere,  “ has  our  nephew  stopped  on  the  road,  since  he  intends  to  visit
us,  and  has  not  come  directly  hither?”  The  knight  excused  him  as  well  as  he  could;  but


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &e.


087


the  duke  said, — “ It  is  foolish ; for  there  is  no  knight  whom  for  these  last  seven  years  I
should  more  gladly  see  in  Brittany  than  my  fair  nephew  the  earl  of  Derby.  Let  him  come
to  us  with  a hearty  welcome,  and  he  shall  find  my  country  and  towns  open  and  ready  to
receive  him.”  The  knight  was  well  contented  with  this  answer,  and  set  out  on  Ids  return  as
speedily  as  possible.  On  his  arrival  at  Blois,  he  told  the  earl  and  his  council  the  words  of
the  duke  of  Brittany.  On  the  morrow  they  mounted  their  horses,  and  left  Blois,  with  the
good  wishes  of  the  inhabitants,  who  had  been  paid  most  liberally  for  everything  they  had
wanted,  and  all  were  contented.

In  company  with  the  earl  of  Derby  was  sir  Peter  de  Craon,  who  had  been  so  much
harassed  by  the  parliament  of  Paris  in  his  suit  with  the  queen  of  Naples,  that  he  was  in
a manner  banished  France,  and  all  his  castles  and  estates  sequestered  for  payment  of  the
one  hundred  thousand  francs  he  was  indebted  to  the  queen,  and  various  other  heavy  sums
incidental  to  the  costs  and  expenses  of  this  suit.  The  earl  of  Derby  journeyed  on  until  he
came  to  Nantes,  where  he  met  the  duke  of  Brittany,  who  received  him  and  his  company
with  much  joy.  Sir  Guy  le  Baveux  returned  to  France,  and  the  earl  staid  with  the  duke,
who  entertained  him  in  the  best  manner.  The  archbishop  of  Canterbury  accompanied  the
earl,  but  did  not  open  himself  to  any  one  on  the  cause  of  his  coming,  so  that  it  was  a perfect
secret  excepting  to  the  earl  and  his  council.  The  duke,  to  show  his  love,  spared  no  expense
in  entertaining  his  nephew  and  his  attendants,  although  he  knew  king  Richard  was  very
wrath  against  him,  for  which  he  pitied  him.

The  earl,  noticing  the  great  affection  of  the  duke,  by  the  advice  of  his  council  discovered
some  parts  of  his  plan,  by  way  of  sounding  him  on  the  subject.  He  asked  his  advice  how
to  act  in  respect  to  his  inheritances  of  the  duchy  of  Lancaster  and  others  which  his  father
had  held,  and  by  right  of  succession  had  at  his  death  devolved  on  him ; but  that  the  king,
far  from  allowing  him  to  have  possession  of  them,  had  banished  him  from  England,  and  was
daily  giving  away  the  estates  of  his  family  to  any  who  asked  for  them ; that  numbers  of
nobles  and  prelates  were  exceedingly  discontented  with  the  king  for  this  conduct,  and  that
many  parts  of  England  were  in  a state  of  warfare  against  each  other ; that  the  good  people
of  London  had  compassion  on  him,  and  had  given  him  to  understand  they  would  cheerfully
receive  him,  if  he  would  return,  and  bring  about  a reconciliation  between  him  and  the  king,
and  recover  for  him  his  inheritances.  When  the  duke  of  Brittany  heard  this,  he  replied, —
“ Fair  nephew,  the  straightest  road  is  always  the  best  and  surest.  You  are  in  a distressing
situation,  and  ask  advice : I thererefore  recommend  you  to  trust  to  the  Londoners : they  are
powerful,  and  will  force  king  Richard,  who,  I understand,  has  behaved  to  you  very  unjustly,
to  do  as  they  shall  please,  in  conjunction  with  the  prelates  and  nobles  who  are  attached  to
you  in  England.  I will  assist  you  with  vessels,  men  at  arms,  and  cross-bows,  to  convey  you
over  the  sea,  and  to  defend  you  against  any  dangers  you  may  meet  with.”  The  earl  of  Derby
was  very  thankful  to  the  duke  of  Brittany  for  this  advice  and  offer.


CHAPTER  CIX. THE  EARL  OF  DERBY  SAILS  FROM  BRITTANY  TO  ENGLAND. — HIS  RECEPTION

BY  THE  CITIZENS  OF  LONDON.

Thus  were  all  things  settled  most  amicably  between  the  duke  of  Brittany  and  the  earl  of
Derby,  who  staid  some  time  with  the  duke,  and  gave  out  that  he  would  remain  longer ; but,
in  the  mean  time,  his  purveyances  were  preparing  at  a distant  sea-port,  which  I believe  was
Yannes,  whither  the  duke  and  earl  came  when  all  things  were  ready.  When  the  wind  was
favourable  for  England,  the  earl  and  his  attendants  embarked  on  board  the  vessel  prepared
for  him.  He  wTas  to  be  escorted  by  three  ships  full  of  men  at  arms  and  cross-bows,  as  far
as  the  coasts  of  England.  The  fleet,  having  weighed  anchor,  put  to  sea,  and  the  farther
they  advanced  towards  England,  the  more  favourable  was  the  wind,  so  that,  within  two
days  and  as  many  nights,  they  arrived  at  Plymouth,  where  they  landed  few  at  a time,  and
entered  the  town  *.  The  bailiff  of  Plymouth,  to  whom  the  king  had  intrusted  the  guard  of

* This  is  a mistake  : lie  probably  coasted  England,  and  landed  at  Ravenspurn  in  Yorkshire,  between  Hull  and
Bridlington.


688


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


the  town,  was  astonished  to  see  so  many  men  at  arms  and  cross-bows ; but  the  archbishop  of
Canterbury  satisfied  him,  by  saying  they  were  men  at  arni3  whom  the  duke  of  Brittany  had
sent  for  the  good  of  the  realm,  and  to  serve  the  king  and  country.  The  bailiff’s  suspicions
were  lulled ; and  the  earl  so  disguised  himself  that  he  was  not  discovered  by  any  of  the
townsmen,  and  retired  to  a private  chamber,  where  he  remained  shut  up.  The  archbishop,
on  their  arrival  at  Plymouth,  instantly  wrote  letters,  signed  and  sealed  by  him,  which  he
despatched  by  one  of  his  servants  to  London,  to  inform  the  citizens  of  the  earl’s  landing

The  messenger  made  such  haste,  by  changing  horses  in  the  different  towns  he  passed
through,  that  he  arrived  at  London  by  break  of  day  on  the  following  morning.  He  entered
the  city  by  London  bridge  gate,  which  was  not  shut,  and  went  to  the  house  of  the  mayor,
who  was  in  bed ; but,  on  hearing  a messenger  was  come  from  the  archbishop,  he  leaped  out
of  it,  and  ordered  the  man  into  his  chamber,  who  gave  him  the  letters  from  the  archbishop.
The  mayor  opened  and  read  their  contents  with  pleasure,  and  instantly  dressing  himself,
sent  oft’  his  servants  with  the  intelligence  of  the  earl  of  Derby’s  landing,  to  the  houses  of  those
who  had  been  the  most  active  in  sending  for  him.  All  were  rejoiced  at  the  news  ; and  about
two  hundred  of  the  principal  citizens  assembled,  who  held  no  long  council,  for  the  case  did
not  require  it,  but  cried  out, — “ Come,  let  us  hasten  to  make  ourselves  ready,  and  go  and
meet  our  lord  of  Lancaster,  since  we  have  invited  him  hither.  The  archbishop  of  Canterbury
has  done  well  to  bring  him ; and  let  the  earl’s  arrival  be  made  known  to  such  gallant  lords
and  knights  as  are  desirous  to  see  him,  and  have  him  for  their  sovereign.”  Many  persons
were  then  selected  to  publish  this  intelligence,  and  carry  it  to  the  barons,  knights,  and
squires  of  their  party.  Upwards  of  five  hundred  Londoners  mounted  their  horses,  and  were
so  impatient  to  see  the  earl  of  Derby,  that  they  would  scarcely  wait  one  for  another.

The  earl  made  no  long  stay  at  Plymouth,  but  on  the  morrow,  when  the  horses  were
disembarked,  mounted  them  and  took  the  road  to  London.  Sir  Peter  de  Craon  and  the
Bretons  still  accompanied  the  earl  of  Derby.  The  mayor  of  London  and  the  chief  citizens
were  the  first  who  met  the  earl  and  the  archbishop  on  the  road.  The  meeting  was  very
affectionate  on  both  sides ; and  as  they  rode  onward,  they  met  more  of  the  Londoners.
They  lay  the  first  night  at  Guildford,  twenty-eight  miles  from  London.  On  the  morrow,
all  the  city  of  London  knew  that  the  earl  of  Derby  was  coming  thither,  and  men,  women,
children,  and  clergy,  dressed  in  their  best  clothes,  •went  to  meet  him,  so  eager  were  they  to
see  him.  The  moment  he  came  in  sight,  they  shouted  out,  “ Welcome,  long  wished-for  earl
of  Derby  and  duke  of  Lancaster:  may  all  joy  and  prosperity  attend  you  ! ” They  said, —
“ that  ever  since  he  had  left  England  nothing  good  had  befallen  it : by  him  all  things  would
be  restored,  and  put  on  a proper  footing ; for  we  have  lived  in  a wretched  state  by  the
miserable  councils  of  Richard  of  Bordeaux,  but  he  is  most  blameable  himself ; for  a king,  to
succeed  in  the  good  government  of  his  kingdom,  should  have  sense  and  discretion  enough  to
distinguish  between  good  and  evil,  otherwise  he  is  unfit  to  wear  a crown ; but  this  Richard
has,  in  many  respects,  acted  wrong  from  design,  as  shall  be  proved  against  him.”  Such  were
the  greetings  the  earl  of  Derby  had  on  his  approach  to  London.  The  mayor  of  London  rode
by  the  side  of  the  earl,  to  the  delight  of  the  people,  who  were  pleased  to  see  how  kindly  they
were  received.  The  mayor  said,  “ See,  my  lord,  how  much  the  people  are  rejoiced  at  your
arrival.”  “ It  is  very  true,”  replied  the  earl.  As  lie-  advanced,  he  bowed  his  head  to  the
right  and  left,  and  noticed  all  comers  with  kindness.

In  this  state  they  arrived  in  London,  when  the  earl  was  escorted  to  his  house ; and  every
one  retired  to  his  own  until  he  had  dined.  Then  the  mayor,  the  chief  magistrates  of  London,
and  many  barons,  knights,  bishops,  abbots,  at  the  time  in  town,  came  to  see  the  earl  and
congratulate  him.  The  duchess  of  Gloucester  and  her  two  daughters,  who  were  his  cousins-
german,  waited  likewise  on  him  ; but  their  brother  Humphrey  was  with  the  king  on  his
expedition  to  Ireland,  more  through  constraint  than  love.  With  these  ladies  came  the
countess  of  Arundel  and  some  of  her  children,  as  did  the  lady  Warwick  and  many  other
ladies  resident  in  London.  The  whole  town  was  so  rejoiced  at  the  earl’s  return,  that  every
shop  was  shut,  and  no  more  work  done  than  if  it  had  been  Easter-day.


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


680


CHAPTER  CX. THE  EARL  OF  DERBY,  NOW  DBKE  OF  LANCASTER,  UNDERTAKES  THE

GOVERNMENT  OF  ENGLAND,  AND,  BY  THE  AID  OF  THE  LONDONERS,  DETERMINES  TO
SEIZE  TILE  TIIRONE.— HE  MARCHES  IN  ARMS  AGAINST  KING  RICHARD  AT  BRISTOL.

To  bring  this  matter  to  a conclusion,  it  was  determined  to  march  against  the  king,  whom
the  citizens  of  London  and  other  towns  called  by  no  other  title  than  Richard  of  Bordeaux  :
and  the  lower  classes  had  such  a hatred  to  him,  as  not  to  be  able  to  speak  of  him  but  in  his
dispraise.  The  Londoners  already  treated  the  earl  of  Derby  as  their  king,  and  had  formed
resolutions  accordingly.  The  earl  of  Derby  engaged  to  undertake  the  government  of  England
on  condition  the  crown  was  settled  on  him  and  his  heirs  for  ever,  which  the  Londoners  swore
to  observe,  under  their  hands  and  seals,  and  promised  that  the  rest  of  England  should  do  the
same  in  so  solemn  a manner  that  there  never  should  be  a question  concerning  it : they  also
promised  him  assistance  in  men  and  money.  These  obligations  having  been  entered  into  on
each  side,  which  did  not  take  much  time,  for  they  were  in  haste  to  free  themselves,  twelve
hundred*,  well  armed  and  mounted,  were  ordered  to  accompany  the  earl  of  Derby  towards
Bristol,  to  make  Richard  of  Bordeaux  a prisoner,  and  conduct  him  to  London.  When  there,
he  should  be  legally  tried  before  the  nobles,  prelates,  and  commons  of  England,  and  judged
according  to  the  proof  of  the  charges  laid  against  him.  It  was  also  ordered,  to  avoid  slanderous
reports,  that  the  men  at  arms  and  cross-bows,  who  had  been  lent  by  the  duke  of  Brittany  to
the  earl,  as  his  escort,  should  be  sent  back,  for  they  had  men  sufficient  for  the  purpose  they
were  about.  The  earl,  in  consequence,  called  the  Bretons  before  him,  thanked  them  warmly
for  the  services  they  had  rendered  him,  and  on  their  departure,  gave  them  so  much  money
that  they  were  contented.  They  returned  to  their  vessels  at  Plymouth,  and  thence  sailed
to  Brittany.

The  earl  of  Derby  was  prepared  to  march  to  Bristol  as  commander-in-chief  of  these
Londoners,  for  he  was  more  interested  in  the  matter  than  any  one  else,  and  set  out  in  grand
array.  He  pressed  his  march  as  much  as  he  could,  and  was  joined  by  all  the  countries  he  passed
through.  News  was  carried  to  the  army  of  king  Richard  t,  of  the  march  of  the  earl  of
Derby  and  the  Londoners ; but  it  was  known  to  many  knights,  squires,  and  archers,  before
the  king ; and  several  heard  it  who  were  afraid  to  tell  him.  When  it  became  more  public,
there  were  many  murmurings  in  the  army ; and  those  about  the  person  of  the  king  were
exceedingly  alarmed,  for  they  now  saw  matters  were  ripe  with  every  mischief  and  danger  to  the
king  and  to  themselves.  They  knew  they  had  many  enemies  in  the  kingdom  ; and  that  such
as  had  hitherto  kept  up  fair  appearances,  now  the  earl  of  Derby  was  come  back,  would  turn
against  them.  Thus  did  it  happen ; for  numbers  of  knights  and  squires  who  had  served  the
king  in  this  campaign,  dissembled,  and  quitted  him  without  taking  leave,  or  saying  they  were
going  away.  Some  retired  to  their  houses,  and  others  went  straight  to  the  earl  of  Derby
and  joined  his  army.  As  soon  as  Humphrey  of  Gloucester,  and  Richard  of  Arundel,  son  to
the  late  earl,  knew  for  certain  of  the  earl  of  Derby’s  approach,  they  left  the  king,  and  never
stopped  until  they  had  joined  him.  The  earl  and  his  army  had  passed  Oxford,  and  were  then  at
a town  called  Cirencester : he  had  great  joy  in  receiving  his  cousins,  and  asked  the  stateofking
Richard,  where  he  was,  and  how  they  had  managed  to  quit  him.  They  replied,  that  they
had  not  spoken  to  him  of  their  departure : but  the  moment  they  had  heard  of  his  march,
they  had  mounted  their  horses,  and  hastened  to  offer  him  their  services,  and  to  revenge  the
loss  of  their  fathers,  whom  Richard  of  Bordeaux  had  put  to  death.  The  earl  bade  them
welcome,  and  said, — “ We  will  mutually  assist  each  other.  Richard  of  Bordeaux  must  be
carried  to  London,  for  so  have  I promised  the  Londoners,  and  will  keep  my  word,  and  they
are  willing  to  aid  me  with  all  their  power.  W e have  men  enough  to  fight  with  him  ; and,
if  he  wish  it,  we  will  give  him  battle.”

* “ Twelve  hundred,” — the  MSS.  say  twelve  thousand,  which  i9  more  probable,
t Richard  was  in  Ireland  when  the  news  arrived. — Ed.


VOL.  II


Y Y


600


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


CHAPTER  CXI. KING  RICHARD  IS  INFORMED  THAT  THE  EARL  OF  DERBY  IS  MARCHING

AGAINST  HIM  WITH  A POWERFUL  ARMY. HE  RETIRES  TO  FLINT-CASTLE*.

When  matters  could  not  longer  be  concealed,  it  was  told  to  king  Richard, — “ Sire,  take
care  of  yourself : you  must  have  good  and  speedy  counsel,  for  the  Londoners  have  risen  with
a mighty  power,  and  intend  to  march  against  you.  They  have  elected  the  earl  of  Derby,
your  cousin,  their  commander,  and  by  his  advice  they  act : you  may  be  assured  that  some
strong  treaties,  have  been  entered  into  between  them,  since  he  has  crossed  the  sea  by  their
invitation.”  The  king  was  thunderstruck  at  hearing  this,  and  knew  not  what  answer  to
make  ; for  his  courage  forsook  him,  and  he  foresaw  affairs  would  end  badly  unless  proper
steps  were  immediately  taken.  Having  mused  a while,  he  replied  to  the  knights  who  had
given  him  this  information, — “ Instantly  make  ready  our  men  at  arms  and  archers,  and  issue
a special  summons  throughout  the  kingdom  for  the  assembling  of  all  my  vassals,  as  I will
not  fly  before  my  subjects.”  “ By  God,”  answered  the  knights,  “ everything  goes  badly,  for
your  men  are  leaving  you  and  running  off.  You  have  already  lost  half  your  army,  and
the  remainder  are  panicstruck  and  wavering.”  “ What  can  I do  then  ?”  asked  the  king.
“ We  will  tell  you,  sire : quit  the  field,  for  you  cannot  hold  it  longer,  and  make  for  one  of
your  castles,  where  you  can  remain  until  your  brother,  Sir  John  Holland,  who  is  enter-
prising and  courageous,  and  must  now  have  heard  of  the  rebellion,  come  to  you  : he  will,  by
force  or  negotiations,  bring  your  affairs  into  a different  state  from  that  in  which  they  are  at
present.  When  it  is  known  that  he  has  taken  the  field,  many  who  have  fled  from  you  will
join  him.”  The  king  agreed  to  this  advice.  The  earl  of  Salisbury  was  not  then  with  him,
but  in  another  part  of  the  country  ; and,  when  he  heard  that  the  eaid  of  Derby  was  marching
a large  army  against  the  king,  he  judged  things  would  turn  out  badly  for  his  master,  and  for
all  who  had  been  Lis  advisers.  He  therefore  remained  quiet,  waiting  for  further  intelligence.

The  duke  of  York  had  not  accompanied  the  king  on  this  expedition  : but  his  son,  the  earl
of  Rutland,  had  been  induced  to  join  him,  for  two  reasons  ; one,  in  return  for  the  great
affection  king  Richard  had  shown  him  ; the  other,  because  he  was  constable  of  England.  It
was  therefore  necessary  he  should  attend  his  king.  Other  news  was  brought  the  king,  as
he  supped  : they  said, — “ Sire,  you  must  determine  how  you  will  act ; for  your  army  is  as
nothing  compared  to  the  force  marching  against  you,  and  a combat  will  be  of  no  avail,  and
appease  the  malcontents  as  you  have  formerly  done,  by  kind  words  and  fair  promises,  and
punish  them  afterwards  at  your  leisure.  There  is  a castle  twelve  miles  from  hence,  called
Flint,  that  is  tolerably  strong  : we  therefore  advise  that  you  fly  thither  and  remain  shut  up
as  long  as  you  please,  or  until  you  hear  other  news  from  sir  John  Holland  and  your  friends.
We  will  send  to  Ireland  for  succour;  and  when  the  king  of  France,  your  father-in-law,
shall  hear  of  your  distress,  he  will  assist  you.”

King  Richard  listened  to  this  advice,  and  thought  it  good : he  selected  such  as  he  wished
to  accompany  him,  and  ordered  the  earl  of  Rutland  to  remain  at  Bristol  with  the  remnant
of  the  army,  ready  prepared  to  advance  when  they  should  hear  other  news,  or  when  they
should  be  sufficiently  strong  to  combat  their  enemies.  These  commands  were  obeyed  ; and
tJre  king,  attended  by  his  household  only,  departed  on  the  ensuing  morning  for  Flint-castle,
which  they  entered  without  showing  any  appearance  of  making  war  on  any  one,  but  solely
to  defend  themselves  and  the  place,  should  they  be  attacked f.


CHAPTER  CXII. — KING  RICHARD  SURRENDERS  HIMSELF  TO  THE  EARL  OF  DERBY,  TO  BE

CONDUCTED  TO  LONDON.

The  earl  of  Derby  and  the  Londoners  had  spies  who  brought  them  daily  accounts  of  the
state  of  the  king,  which  were  confirmed  by  knights  and  squires,  who  had  left  his  army  to
join  the  earl.  The  intelligence  of  the  king  having  fled  to  Flint-castle  was  soon  known  to  him  ;

* It  was  Conway  castle  to  which  Richard  retired,
f This  account  of  Froissart  is  very  incorrect,  and  I refer  to  the  different  English  chronicles.


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


01)1


and  that  he  had  there  shut  himself  up  with  a few  men  at  arms,  of  his  household,  showing  no
symptoms  of  making  war,  but  to  get  out  of  his  difficulties,  if  possible,  by  a treaty.  The  earl
was  advised  to  march  thither,  and  get  possession  of  his  person  by  force  or  otherwise.  This
was  followed ; and,  when  the  army  was  within  two  miles  of  Flint,  they  came  to  a village,
where  they  halted,  and  the  earl  refreshed  himself  with  meat  and  drink.  He  there  resolved
in  his  own  mind,  without  consulting  others,  to  march  with  only  two  hundred  horse,  leaving
the  rest  behind,  and,  when  near  the  castle  wherein  the  king  was,  to  endeavour,  by  fair
speeches,  to  enter  the  castle,  and  cajole  the  king  to  come  forth  and  trust  to  him,  who  would
insure  him  against  all  perils  on  his  road  to  London,  engaging  that  he  should  not  suffer  any
bodily  harm,  and  promising  to  mediate  between  him  and  the  Londoners,  who  were  greatly
enraged  against  him.  This  plan  was  approved  of  by  those  to  whom  he  mentioned  it ; but
he  was  told, — “ My  lord,  beware  of  any  dissimulation  in  the  business  : Richard  of  Bordeaux
must  be  taken,  dead  or  alive,  with  all  the  traitors  who  have  been  his  advisers,  and  conducted
to  the  Tower  of  London.  Neither  the  Londoners  nor  we  will  hear  anything  to  the  contrary.”
The  earl  of  Derby  replied, — “ Do  not  fear  : what  I have  proposed  shall  be  executed.  If  I
can  by  fair  words  get  him  out  of  the  castle,  I will  do  it ; but  if  he  refuse  to  listen  to  me,  I
shall  instantly  make  you  acquainted  with  it.  You  will  advance  the  main  army  immediately,
and  we  will  besiege  the  castle,  and  by  assault  have  him  dead  or  alive,  for  the  place  is  to  be
taken.”

The  Londoners  were  now  satisfied,  and  the  earl  left  the  army  with  two  hundred  horse.
They  soon  came  before  the  castle,  where  the  king  was  shut  up  in  one  of  the  chambers  much
cast  down.  The  earl  and  his  men  rode  to  the  gate,  which  was  closed,  for  the  case  required
it,  and  knocked  loudly.  Those  within  asked,  “ Who  is  there?”  The  earl  replied,  “I  am
Henry  of  Lancaster,  and  am  come  to  demand  from  the  king  my  inheritance  of  the  duchy  of
Lancaster.  Tell  him  so  from  me.”  “ My  lord,”  answered  those  who  heard  him,  “ we  will
cheerfully  do  it,”  and  instantly  ascended  to  the  hall  where  the  king  was  with  those  of  his
knights  that  had  for  a long  time  been  his  chief  counsellors,  and  related  the  message,  for  he
was  eager  to  hear  who  had  so  rudely  knocked  at  the  gate — “ Sire,  it  is  your  cousin  the  earl
of  Derby,  who  is  come  to  demand  his  inheritance  from  you.”  The  king  looked  at  his  knights,
and  asked  how  he  should  act.  “ Sire,”  replied  they,  “ this  request  is  no  way  improper  : you
may  allow  him  to  come  into  your  presence,  with  only  eleven  others,  and  hear  what  he  has  to
say.  He  is  your  cousin,  and  a great  lord  of  the  country,  and  can  besides,  if  he  please,  make
up  all  differences ; for  he  is  exceedingly  beloved  in  England,  more  especially  by  the  Lon-
doners, who  sent  for  him  beyond  sea,  and  are  now  in  rebellion  against  you.  You  must
dissemble  until  matters  be  appeased,  and  the  earl  of  Huntingdon,  your  brother,  arrived.  It
is  unfortunate  for  him  and  you  that  he  is  at  this  moment  at  Calais  ; for  there  are  many  in
England  who  now  rebel  against  you,  that,  were  he  by  your  side,  would  remain  quiet,  and
not  dare  take  any  part.  He  is  married  to  the  sister  of  the  earl  of  Derby,  and  by  his  good
sense  and  exertions,  we  hope  and  suppose  he  will  make  peace  between  you  and  your  people.”

The  king  consented  to  this  proposal,  and  said,  “ Go  to  him  : have  the  gates  opened  that
he  and  eleven  more  may  enter.”  Two  knights  then  left  the  king,  and,  crossing  the  court
of  the  castle,  came  to  the  gate,  and  had  the  wicket  opened.  Having  passed  it,  they  bowed
to  the  earl  of  Derby  and  to  his  knights,  addressing  them  in  courteous  language  ; for  they
felt  they  had  no  force  to  resist  them,  and  that  they  were  hated  by  the  Londoners.  They
wished  therefore  to  accommodate  matters  by  fair  speeches  and  outward  appearances.  They
said  to  the  earl,  “ My  lord,  what  is  your  pleasure  ? The  king  is  at  mass,  and  has  sent  us
hither  to  speak  with  you.”  “I  will  tell  you,”  answered  the  earl.  “You  know  that  ^
ought  to  have  possession  of  the  duchy  of  Lancaster  : I am  come  partly  on  that  account,  and
on  some  other  business  I wish  to  speak  of  to  the  king.”  “ My  lord,”  replied  they,  “ you  are
welcome : the  king  will  see  and  hear  you  with  pleasure,  and  has  told  us  that  you  and  eleven
more  may  enter  the  castle.”  The  earl  said  it  pleased  him  ; and  he  and  eleven  others  passed
the  wicket,  which  was  instantly  shut  on  the  others  who  remained  without.

Consider  the  great  risk  and  danger  the  earl  of  Derby  ran,  for  they  could  as  easily  have
slain  him,  when  in  the  castle  (which  they  should  have  done,  right  or  wrong),  and  his  com-
panions, as  birds  in  a cage.  He  never  thought  of  the  peril  he  was  in,  but  went  straight

v y 2


692


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  Ac.


forward  and  was  conducted  to  the  king.  The  king,  on  seeing,  him,  changed  colour,  as  one
who  knew  he  had  greatly  misconducted  himself.  The  earl  spoke  aloud,  without  paying  any
reverence  or  honour  to  the  king,  and  asked  him,  “ Have  you  broken  your  fast  ? ” The  kirn*
answered,  “ No  : it  is  yet  early  morn  : why  do  you  ask  ?”  “ It  is  time  you  should  break-

fast,” replied  the  earl,  “ for  you  have  a long  way  to  ride.”  “ What  road  ?”  said  the  king.
“ You  must  come  to  London,”  answered  the  earl:  “and  I advise  that  you  eat  and  drink
heartily,  to  perform  the  journey  more  gaily.”  The  king  was  now  very  melancholy,  and
frightened  at  these  words : he  said,  “ I am  not  as  yet  hungry,  nor  have  I any  desire  to  eat "
The  knights,  desirous  to  flatter  the  earl  of  Derby  (perceiving  things  were  taking  a serious
turn),  said,  “ Sire,  have  confidence  in  my  lord  of  Lancaster,  your  cousin,  for  he  can  but  wish
your  good.”  “ Well,”  said  the  king,  “ I am  willing  so  to  do  : have  the  tables  covered.”

They  hastened  to  obey  these  orders  ; and  the  king  washed  his  hands,  seated  himself  at
table,  and  was  served.  They  asked  the  earl  if  he  would  not  be  seated,  and  eat.  He  said,
“ no ; for  that  he  had  breakfasted.”  During  the  time  the  king  was  eating  ( which  was  not
long,  for  his  heart  was  too  much  oppressed  to  eat)  the  whole  country  was  covered  with  men
at  arms  and  archers,  who  could  be  plainly  seen  from  the  windows  of  the  castle.  The  king,
on  rising  from  table,  perceived  them,  and  asked  his  cousin  the  earl  who  they  were.  He
replied,  “For  the  most  part  Londoners.”  “And  what  do  they  want?”  said  the  king.
“ They  want  to  take  you,”  answered  the  earl,  “ and  carry  you  to  the  Tower  of  London,  and
there  is  not  any  means  of  pacifying  them,  unless  you  consent  to  go.”  “ No  ! ” replied  the
king,  who  was  much  frightened  at  hearing  this,  for  he  knew  the  Londoners  hated  him,  and
continued,  “ cannot  you,  cousin,  prevent  this  ? I would  not  willingly  yield  myself  into  their
hands  ; for  I am  aware  they  hate  me,  and  have  done  so  for  a long  time,  although  I am  their
sovereign.”  The  earl  of  Derby  answered, — “ I see  no  other  way  to  prevent  it,  but  to  sur-
render yourself  to  me,  and,  when  they  know  you  are  my  prisoner,  they  will  not  do  you  any
harm.  You  must  make  preparations  to  be  conducted  and  imprisoned  in  the  Tower  of
London  with  your  attendants.”  The  king,  not  knowing  how  to  act  in  his  distress,  and
fearing  the  Londoners  would  put  him  to  death,  yielded  himself  prisoner  to  the  earl  of  Derby,
promising  to  do  whatever  he  should  advise.  His  knights,  squires  and  officers,  surrendered
in  like  manner,  to  avoid  greater  danger.  The  earl,  in  the  presence  of  those  who  had  accom-
panied him,  received  the  king  and  his  attendants  as  Lis  prisoners,  and  ordered  the  horses  to
be  instantly  saddled,  brought  to  the  court,  and  the  gates  of  the  castle  to  be  thrown  open,  on
which  many  men  at  arms  and  archers  entered  it.

The  earl  of  Derby  now  issued  a proclamation,  that  no  one  should  dare  to  touch  anything
in  the  castle,  or  lay  hands  on  any  servant  or  officer  of  the  king,  under  pain  of  being  instantly
hanged,  for  that  every  person  and  tiling  were  under  his  special  protection  and  guard.  This
was  obeyed,  for  there  was  not  one  bold  enough  to  act  contrary.  The  earl  conducted  his
cousin,  king  Richard,  down  stairs  to  the  court  of  the  castle,  continuing  in  close  conversation
with  him,  where  he  had  his  usual  state,  without  the  smallest  change  having  been  made  in  it.
While  they  were  saddling  the  horses,  and  making  ready,  they  talked  on  different  subjects,
and  were  much  looked  at  by  the  Londoners.

I heard  of  a singular  circumstance  that  happened,  which  I must  mention.  King  Richard
had  a greyhound  called  Math  *,  beautiful  beyond  measure,  who  would  not  notice  nor  follow
any  one  but  the  king.  Whenever  the  king  rode  abroad,  the  greyhound  was  loosed  by  the
person  who  had  him  in  charge,  and  ran  instantly  to  caress  him,  by  placing  his  two  fore  feet  on
his  shoulders.  It  fell  out,  that  as  the  king  and  the  duke  of  Lancaster  were  conversing  in  the
court  of  the  castle,  their  horses  being  ready  for  them  to  mount,  the  greyhound  was  untied,
but,  instead  of  running  as  usual  to  the  king,  he  left  him,  and  leaped  to  the  duke  of
Lancaster’s  shoulders,  paying  him  every  court,  and  caressing  him  as  he  was  formerly  used
to  caress  the  king.  The  duke,  not  acquainted  with  this  greyhound,  asked  the  king  the
meaning  of  this  fondness,  saying,  “ What  does  this  mean?”  “ Cousin,”  replied  the  king,
“ it  means  a great  deal  for  you,  and  very  little  for  me.”  “ How  ?”  said  the  duke:  “pray

* Tho  Museum  MSS.  coll  this  greyhound  Blemach,  de  Blois,  were  on  the  point  of  engaging,  the  lord  Charles’s
mine  Mach.  The  greyhound  seems  to  have  been  a greyhound  left  him  and  caressed  John  of  Montford,  who
favourite  prognosticator  in  these  times ; for,  when  the  gained  the  battle,
armies  of  the  two  rivals,  John  of  Montford  and  Charles


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


693


explain  it.”  “ I understand  by  it,”  answered  the  king,  “ that  tliis  greyhound  fondles  and
pays  his  court  to  you  this  day  as  king  of  England,  which  you  will  surely  be,  and  I shall  be
deposed,  for  the  natural  instinct  of  the  dog  shows  it  to  him.  Keep  him  therefore  by  your
side,  for  he  will  now  leave  me,  and  follow  you.”  The  duke  of  Lancaster  treasured  up  what
the  king  had  said,  and  paid  attention  to  the  greyhound,  who  would  never  more  follow
Richard  of  Bordeaux,  but  kept  by  the  side  of  the  duke  of  Lancaster,  as  was  witnessed  by
thirty  thousand  men.


CHAPTER  CXIII. THE  LADV  OF  COUCY  IS  TAKEN  AWAY  FROM  THE  YOUNG  QUEEN  OF

ENGLAND,  AND  A NEW  HOUSEHOLD  APPOINTED  FOR  HER. — KING  RICHARD  IS  CONFINED
IN  THE  TOWER  OF  LONDON.


Having  mounted  their  horses,  they  departed  from  Flint-castle*,  and  Henry  duke  of
Lancaster,  whom  we  shall  no  longer  call  earl  of  Derby,  rode  by  the  king’s  side,  and  at  times
conversed  witli  him.  They  were  surrounded  by  a large  body  of  men  at  arms  and  archers.
Those  of  the  king’s  party  advanced  by  themselves,  and  the  first  town  they  lay  at  was
Oxford  t ; for  the  duke  of  Lancaster  avoided  all  the  large  towns  and  castles,  by  keeping  in
the  open  country,  for  fear  of  insurrections  of  the  people.  The  duke  disbanded  a great  part
of  his  army,  saying,  “ he  had  enough  for  the  completion  of  his  business,  as  the  king  could
not  now  fly  nor  escape  from  him.  We  will  carry  him  and  his  advisers  to  London,  and
securely  place  them  in  the  Tower.  They  are  my  prisoners,  and  I can  take  them  any  where :
return,  therefore,  to  your  homes  until  you  shall  again  hear  from  me.”  All  assented  to  this
proposal  of  the  duke,  who  took  the  direct  road  to  Windsor ; and  the  Londoners,  except  those
lie  had  kept  with  him,  went  to  their  homes.  The  duke  of  Lancaster,  on  leaving  Windsor,
did  not  follow  the  road  to  Colnbrook,  but  that  to  Shene,  and  dined  with  the  king  at  Chertsey.
King  Richard  had  earnestly  requested  his  cousin  not  to  carry  him  through  London,  which
was  the  reason  they  had  gone  this  road.

As  soon  as  the  Londoners  were  masters  of  the  king,  they  sent  some  of  the  principal  citizens
to  queen  Isabella,  who  resided  with  the  lady  of  Coucy  at  Leeds  castle.  She  was  next  in
rank  to  the  queen ; and  they  addressed  her, — “ Lady,  make  preparations  of  departure,  for
you  must  not  longer  remain  here.  Take  care,  on  quitting  the  queen,  that  you  show  not  any
tokens  of  anger  at  being  dismissed  ; but  say,  that  your  husband  and  daughter  have  sent  for
you.  This  we  advise  you  to  do,  if  you  regard  your  life ; for,  should  you  act  any  way
contrary,  it  will  be  forfeited.  You  have  no  need  to  ask  questions,  nor  make  inquiries:  you
shall  be  conducted  to  Dover,  and  embark  on  board  a passage-boat  to  convey  you  to  Boulogne.”
The  lady  of  Coucy,  afraid  of  these  manaces,  and  knowing  those  who  made  them  to  be  cruel
and  full  of  hatred,  replied,  “ that  in  God’s  name,  she  would  do  as  they  wished.”  Preparations
were  soon  made  : palfreys  and  hackneys  were  provided  for  herself  and  attendants ; and  all
the  French  of  both  sexes  set  off,  escorted  as  far  as  Dover,  when  they  were  liberally  paid,
according  to  their  degrees.  The  first  tide,  they  embarked  on  board  a vessel,  with  a favourable
wind  to  Boulogne.  The  household  of  the  queen  was  thus  broken  up,  and  neither  French
nor  English  were  left  with  her  who  were  attached  to  king  Richard.  A new  one  was  formed
of  ladies,  damsels,  officers,  and  varlets,  who  were  strictly  enjoined  never  to  mention  the  name
of  king  Richard  in  their  conversations  with  her.


* Conway  castle.

f “ After  the  king  had  been  carried  to  the  duke  of  Lan-
caster at  Chester,  on  the  third  day  the  duke  departed  with
Iiis  prisoner  thence  to  Nantwich  ; the  next  day  to  New-
castle, and  there  the  earl  of  Warwick’s  son  met  them ;
and  so  journeying  forth,  the  next  day  they  came  to  Staf-
ford, and  after  they  departed  to  Lichfield,  where  the  king
thought  to  have  escaped,  slipping  down  into  a garden,  out
of  a window  of  a great  tower  ; but  he  was  espied,  and
brought  into  the  tower  again.  From  Lichfield,  the  duke
went  to  Coventry  ; but,  before  they  could  come  thither,
the  Welshmen  did  them  much  mischief,  and  slew  many
of  them  ; and  the  Englishmen,  when  they  by  great  chance


could  take  any  of  them,  they  tied  to  their  horses’  tails,
and  drew  them  after  them  through  ways  full  of  stoues,
and  caused  them  to  die  miserably.

“ The  duke  passed  from  Coventry  to  Daventry,  the
next  day  to  Northampton,  from  thence  to  Dunstable,  and
then  to  Saint  Alban9.  Within  five  or  six  miles  before  his
coming  to  London,  the  mayor  and  the  companies  in  their
liveries,  with  great  noise  of  trumpets,  met  the  duke,  doing
more  reverence  to  him  than  to  the  king,  rejoicing  that  God
had  sent  them  such  a prince,  that  had  conquered  the  realm
within  one  month’s  space,”  &c. — Stowe’s  Chronicle,  by
Howes,  pp.  322,  323.


694


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  See.


The  duke  of  Lancaster  and  his  company,  on  their  departure  from  Chertsey,  rode  to  Sliene,
and,  during  the  night,  conducted  the  king  and  such  of  his  knights  and  others  as  they  wished
to  coniine,  to  the  Tower  of  London.  On  the  morrow,  the  Londoners  heard  the  king  was  in  the
Tower,  and  were  much  rejoiced  ; but  there  were  many  murmurings  that  he  had  been  brought
thither  privately,  and  the  people  were  very  angry  with  the  duke  of  Lancaster  because  he
had  not  carried  him  publicly  through  the  streets  in  open  day,  not  to  do  him  honour,  but  that
they  might  show  their  scorn,  so  much  was  he  hated  by  them.  Consider  how  serious  a thing
it  is  when  the  people  rise  up  in  arms  against  their  sovereign,  more  especially  such  a people
as  the  English.  In  such  a case,  there  is  no  remedy  ; for  they  are  the  worst  people  in  the
world,  the  most  obstinate  and  presumptuous ; and  of  all  England  the  Londoners  are  the
leaders,  for,  to  say  the  truth,  they  are  very  powerful  in  men  and  in  wealth.  In  the  city  and
neighbourhood,  there  are  twenty-four  thousand  men,  completely  armed  from  head  to  foot,  and
full  thirty  thousand  archers.  This  is  a great  force,  and  they  are  bold  and  courageous ; and
the  more  blood  is  spilt,  the  greater  their  courage.


CHAPTER  CXIV. THE  EARL  OP  RUTLAND,  CONSTABLE  OF  ENGLAND,  HEARING  THE  KING

HAS  SURRENDERED,  DISMISSES  HIS  MEN  AT  ARMS. FOUR  KNIGHTS  OF  TnE  KING’S

CHAMBER,  HAVING  BEEN  PUT  TO  DEATH  BY  THE  LONDONERS,  HE  IS  ADVISED  BY
THOSE  WHO  WERE  IMPRISONED  WITH  HIM  TO  RESIGN  HIS  CROWN  TO  THE  DUKE  OF
LANCASTER.

We  will  speak  of  the  earl  of  Rutland,  son  to  the  dulce  of  York,  at  this  time  constable  of
England,  who  had  remained  at  Bristol  with  his  brother-in-law  the  lord  de  Spencer,  and  their
men.  When  they  learnt  that  the  castle  the  king  had  retired  to  was  invested,  and  that  the
king,  on  his  surrendering,  was  carried  to  London,  they  instantly  foresaw  the  event,  and  that
it  must  end  badly  for  king  Richard.  They  determined  not  to  stay  longer  where  they  were,
but  dismissing  their  men  at  arms,  except  such  as  were  attached  to  their  persons,  left  Bristol,
and  rode  to  a very  handsome  seat*  the  lord  de  Spencer  had  in  Wales,  where  they  remained
until  they  heard  other  intelligence.  The  duke  of  York  resided  at  his  own  castle  with  his
people,  and  interfered  not  in  what  was  passing  in  the  country,  nor  had  done  so  for  a long
time,  but  taking  all  things  as  they  happened,  although  he  was  very  much  vexed  that  there
should  be  such  great  differences  between  his  nephew,  the  king,  and  his  relations.

We  will  return  to  king  Richard.  When  the  duke  of  Lancaster  had  imprisoned  him  and
those  of  his  council  in  the  Tower,  and  placed  sure  guards  over  them,  the  first  thing  he  did
was  to  recall  the  earl  of  Warwick  from  his  banishment,  and  to  give  him  his  liberty.  He  next
sent. to  summon  the  earl  of  Percy  and  his  son  sir  Harry  Percy  to  attend  him,  which  they  did.
He  then  inquired  how  he  could  lay  hands  on  those  four  companions  who  had  strangled  his
uncle  in  the  castle  of  Calais,  and  at  length  succeeded  in  arresting  the  whole  four,  and  would
not  have  taken  twenty  thousand  nobles  for  their  deliverance.  He  had  them  confined  in
separate  prisons  in  London.  The  duke  then  consulted  with  his  council  and  the  citizens  what
should  be  done  with  Richard  of  Bordeaux,  who  was  confined  in  the  great  Tower  of  London,
wherein  king  John  of  France  was  once  imprisoned,  during  the  campaign  of  king  Edward  in
France.  It  was  resolved  that  the  king  should  be  deprived  of  all  his  state  and  outward
marks  of  royalty,  if  they  wished  to  act  prudently,  for  the  news  of  his  arrest  would  make  a
great  noise , throughout  Christendom,  as  they  had  acknowledged  him  twenty-two  years  as
their  king,  and  now  held  him  a prisoner.

They  examined  the  whole  acts  of  his  reign,  and  drew  up  twenty-eight  articles  against  him,
with  which  they  came  to  the  Tower,  accompanied  by  the  duke  of  Lancaster,  and  some  knights
and  squires  of  his  council.  They  entered  the  king’s  apartment  without  speaking  to  him,
or  paying  any  kind  of  respect,  and  read  to  him  these  charges.  He  did  not  deny  them,  for  he
knew  they  were  true,  but  said  that  everything  he  had  done  was  by  the  advice  of  his  council.
He  was  told  to  name  those  who  had  been  bis  principal  advisers,  which  he  did,  hoping  to
escape  by  throwing  the  blame  on  them,  as  be  had  formerly  done,  and  they  to  receive  the

* D.  Sauvage  calls  this  seat  Heulle.  My  MS.  says  only  a very  handsome  manor,  which  I suppose  must  have  been
Caerphilly  in  Glamorganshire.


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


605


punishment;  but  this  was  not  the  intention  of  those  Londoners  who  had  confined  him.  At
this  time  they  said  nothing  further,  but  went  away : the  duke  of  Lancaster  to  his  own
house,  leaving  the  mayor  and  men  of  law  to  act  as  they  pleased.

The  mayor  went  to  the  town-house  of  London,  called  the  Guildhall,  where  justice  is
administered  to  the  citizens,  followed  by  crowds  of  people,  expecting  something  effective  to
be  done,  as  indeed  there  was.  I will  detail  what  passed.  First,  all  the  articles  which  had
been  drawn  up  against  the  king  and  read  to  him,  were  again  read  aloud,  with  comments  by
the  person  who  read  them,  adding,  that  the  king  had  not  denied  their  truth,  but  confessed
he  had  done  them  through  the  advice  of  four  knights  of  his  chamber,  by  whose  counsels  he
had  put  to  death  the  duke  of  Gloucester,  the  earl  of  Arundel,  and  sir  Thomas  Corbet,  and
that  they  had  for  a long  time  excited  him  to  these  acts.  Such  deeds  were  unpardonable,
and  must  be  punished ; for  by  them  and  their  fellows  had  the  courts  of  justice  been  shut  at
Westminster,  and  all  the  other  royal  courts  tl  .rough out  England,  which  had  caused  great
mischiefs,  and  encouraged  bands  of  robbers  to  pillage  merchants  travelling  from  town  to
town,  and  to  plunder  the  houses  of  farmers.  By  these  means  the  kingdom  of  England
had  been  almost  irrecoverably  ruined ; and  it  was  to  be  supposed,  from  this  wanton  neglect
of  England,  that  Calais  or  Guisnes,  or  both,  would  have  been  given  up  to  their  enemies  the
French.  Such  speeches  as  the  above  made  an  impression  on  the  minds  of  the  people,  so  that
many  of  the  discontented  said, — “ These  things  are  deserving  punishment,  that  others  may
take  example ; and  Richard  of  Bordeaux  has  so  much  disgraced  himself,  that  he  is  unworthy
of  wearing  a crown,  and  ought  to  be  deprived  of  all  honours,  and  confined  to  pass  his  future
life  on  bread  and  water,  and  subsist  on  that  as  he  could.”  Some  of  the  lower  classes  cried
out, — “ Sir  mayor,  you  and  your  companions,  who  are  the  distributors  of  justice,  look  that
it  be  done : we  insist  upon  it,  and  spare  no  man.  You  see,  by  what  you  have  told  us,  that
the  case  requires  it,  and  immediately,  for  they  have  convicted  themselves.”

The  mayor  and  the  lawyers  retired  to  the  judgment-seat,  and  the  four  knights  were
condemned  to  death.  They  were  sentenced  to  be  brought  before  the  apartment  of  the  Tower
of  London  in  which  king  Richard  was  confined,  that  he  might  see  them  from  the  windows,
and  thence  drawn  on  sledges  by  horses  through  the  streets  to  Cheapside,  each  person
separately,  and  there  beheaded,  their  heads  affixed  to  spikes  on  London-bridge,  and  their
bodies  hung  on  a gibbet,  and  there  left.  When  this  sentence  was  pronounced,  they  hastened
to  execute  it.  Everything  being  prepared,  the  mayor  of  London,  and  the  lords  who  had
assisted  him  in  this  judgment,  set  out  from  Guildhall  with  a large  body  of  people,  and  came
to  the  Tower  of  London,  where  they  seized  the  four  knights  of  the  king,  sir  Bernard  Brocas,
the  lord  Marclais,  master  John  Derby,  receiver  of  Lincoln,  and  the  lord  Stelle,  steward  of
the  king’s  household.  They  were  brought  into  the  court,  and  each  tied  to  two  horses,  in  the
sight  of  all  in  the  Tower,  who  were  eye-witnesses  of  it  as  well  as  the  king,  who  were  much
displeased,  and  in  despair ; for  the  remainder  of  the  king’s  knights  that  were  with  him
looked  for  similar  treatment,  so  cruel  and  revengeful  did  they  know  the  Londoners  to  be.
Without  saying  a word,  these  four  were  dragged  from  the  Tower,  through  the  streets  to
Cheapside,  and,  on  a fishmonger’s  stall,  had  their  heads  struck  off,  which  were  placed  over
the  gate  on  London-bridge,  and  their  bodies  hung  on  a gibbet.  After  this  execution  every
man  retired  to  his  home.

King  Richard  was  much  afflicted  at  finding  himself  in  such  danger  from  the  citizens,  and
that  his  power  was  completely  gone.  He  saw  that  all  England  was  against  him  ; and,  if  he  had
some  few  friends  left,  they  could  not  assist  him,  for  his  enemies  were  too  numerous.  Those
about  him  said ; “ Sire,  we  have  not,  as  it  seems,  any  great  hope  of  saving  our  lives.  When
your  cousin  of  Lancaster  prevailed  on  you  to  yield  yourself  up  to  him,  he  promised  that  you
and  twelve  of  your  knights  should  be  his  own  prisoners,  and  no  harm  done  to  them : of
these,  four  have  just  been  put  to  a disgraceful  death : we  must  expect  the  same,  and  will
give  you  our  reasons  for  it.  The  Londoners,  who  have  urged  him  to  do  this  deed,  have  made
him  enter  into  such  engagements  with  them  that  he  cannot  act  in  any  other  manner.  God
will  be  very  merciful  to  us  if  we  are  suffered  to  die  here  a natural  death,  for  to  die  a
disgraceful  one  makes  us  shudder.”  King  Richard,  on  hearing  them  thus  talk,  wept  bitterly,
wrung  his  hands,  and  cursed  the  hour  he  had  been  born,  when  his  end  was  so  miserable.


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


690

Those  around  him  pitied  his  distress,  and  comforted  him  as  well  as  they  were  able.  One
of  his  knights  said — “ Sire,  you  must  not  be  too  much  cast  down.  We  see,  as  well  as  you,
that  this  world  is  nothing,  and  that  the  fickleness  of  fortune  is  wonderful,  sparing  neither
princes  nor  poor  persons.  The  king  of  France,  whose  daughter  you  have  married,  cannot  at
this  moment  assist  you,  for  he  is  too  far  off.  If  you  can,  by  dissembling,  escape  from  this
peril,  and  save  your  life  and  ours,  you  will  act  well ; and,  within  a year  or  two,  your  fortune
may  change.”

“What  would  you  have  me  do?”  replied  the  king,  “for  there  is  nothing  I will  not
attempt  to  save  us.”  “ Sire,  we  tell  you  for  a truth,  that  from  every  appearance,  the  Lon-
doners want  to  crown  your  cousin  of  Lancaster  their  king ; and  with  this  intent  they  sent
for  him  from  France,  and  have  aided  him  in  all  his  exploits.  Now  it  is  impossible,  that  so
long  as  you  shall  be  alive,  this  coronation  can  take  place  without  your  consent.  Suppose,
therefore,  you  were  to  offer  your  cousin  terms,  that  we  might  escape  the  imminent  danger
we  are  in,  and  that  you  send  to  speak  with  him  on  business.  On  his  coming,  treat  him
affectionately,  and  say  that  you  wish  to  resign  the  crown  into  his  hands,  and  that  he  be
king  : by  this  means,  you  will  soften  him  and  appease  the  citizens.  You  will  earnestly  beg,
that  he  allow  you  to  finish  your  days  here,  or  elsewhere ; and  for  us  to  remain  with  you,  or
be  separated,  or  banished  abroad  for  our  lives,  at  his  pleasure ; for  he  who  loseth  his  life
loseth  everything.”  King  Richard  heard  these  words  with  comfort  to  his  heart,  and  said  he
would  act  accordingly,  for  he  saw  his  danger  was  very  great.  He  gave  his  keepers  to  under-
stand he  would  willingly  speak  with  the  duke  of  Lancaster.


CHAPTER  CXV. KING  RICHARD  OF  ENGLAND  RESIGNS  IIIS  CROWN  AND  KINGDOM  INTO  THE

HANDS  OF  THE  DUKE  OF  LANCASTER.

Intelligence  was  carried  to  the  duke  of  Lancaster  that  Richard  of  Bordeaux  had  a
great  desire  to  speak  with  him.  The  duke  left  his  house  in  the  evening,  entered  his  barge
with  his  knights,  and  was  rowed  down  the  Thames  to  the  Tower,  which  he  entered  by  a
postern  gate,  and  went  to  the  apartment  of  the  king.  The  king  received  him  with  great
kindness,  and  humbled  himself  exceedingly  like  to  one  who  perceives  he  is  in  a dangerous
state.  Flo  addressed  him — “ Cousin,  I have  been  considering  my  situation,  which  is
miserable  enough,  and  I have  no  longer  any  thoughts  of  wearing  my  crown  or  governing
my  people.  As  God  may  have  my  soul,  I wish  I were  at  this  moment  dead  of  a natural
death,  and  the  king  of  France  had  his  daughter  again  ; for  we  have  never  enjoyed  any  great
happiness  together,  nor  since  I have  brought  her  hither  have  I had  the  love  my  people  bore
me  formerly.  Cousin  of  Lancaster,  when  I look  back,  I am  convinced  I have  behaved  very
ill  to  you,  and  to  other  nobles  of  my  blood,  for  which  I cannot  expect  peace  nor  pardon.
All  things,  therefore,  considered,  I am  willing  freely  to  resign  to  you  the  crown  of  England ;
and  I beg  you  will  accept  the  resignation  as  a gift.”

The  duke  replied,  “ that  it  would  be  necessary  the  three  estates  of  the  realm  should  hear
this.  I have  issued  summonses  for  the  assembling  the  nobles,  prelates,  and  deputies  from
the  principal  towns ; and  within  three  days  a sufficiency  will  be  collected  for  you  to  make
your  resignation  in  due  form.  By  this  act,  you  will  greatly  appease  the  hatred  of  the
nation  against  you.  To  obviate  the  mischiefs  that  had  arisen  from  the  courts  of  justice
being  shut,  and  which  had  created  an  almost  universal  anarchy,  was  I sent  for  from  beyond
sea.  The  people  wanted  to  crown  me,  for  the  common  report  in  the  country  is,  that  I have
a better  right  to  the  crown  than  you  have.  This  was  told  to  our  grandfather,  king  Edward
of  happy  memory,  when  he  educated  you,  and  had  you  acknowledged  heir  to  the  throne ;
but  his  love  was  so  strong  for  his  son,  the  prince  of  Wales,  nothing  could  make  him  alter
his  purpose,  but  that  you  must  be  king.  If  you  had  followed  the  example  of  the  prince,  or
attended  to  the  advice  of  his  counsellors,  like  a good  son,  who  should  be  anxious  to  tread
in  the  steps  of  a father,  you  might  still  have  been  king ; but  you  have  always  acted  so
contrary,  as  to  occasion  the  rumour  to  be  generally  believed  throughout  England  and
elsewhere,  that  you  are  not  the  son  of  the  prince  of  Wales,  but  of  a priest  or  canon.


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


697


“ I liave  heard  several  knights,  who  were  of  the  household  of  my  uncle  the  prince,  declare,
that  he  was  jealous  of  the  princess’s  conduct.  She  was  cousin-german  to  king  Edward,  who
began  to  dislike  her  for  not  having  children  hy  his  son,  since  he  had,  by  her  former  marriage
with  sir  Thomas  Holland,  stood  godfather  to  two  sons.  She  knew  well  how  to  keep  the
prince  in  her  chains,  having,  through  subtlety,  enticed  him  to  marry;  but,  fearful  of  being
divorced  hy  his  father,  for  want  of  heirs,  and  that  the  prince  would  marry  again,  it  was  said
she  got  connected  with  some  one,  by  whom  she  had  you  and  another  son,  who  died  in  his
infancy,  and  no  judgment  can  be  formed  of  his  character:  but  you,  from  your  manners  and
mode  of  acting,  so  contrary  to  the  gallantry  and  prowess  of  the  prince,  are  thought  to  be
the  son  of  a priest  or  canon ; for,  at  the  time  of  your  birth,  there  were  many  young  and
handsome  ones  in  the  household  of  the  prince  at  Bordeaux.  Such  is  the  report  of  this
country,  which  your  conduct  has  confirmed  : for  you  have  ever  shown  great  affection  to  the
French,  and  an  inclination  to  live  on  good  terms  with  them,  to  the  loss  and  dishonour  of
England.  Because  my  uncle  of  Gloucester  and  the  earl  of  Arundel  wished  you  would
loyally  defend  the  honour  of  the  kingdom,  by  following  the  steps  of  your  ancestors,  you
have  treacherously  put  them  to  death.

“ With  regard  to  me,  I have  taken  you  under  my  protection,  and  will  guard  and  preserve
your  life,  through  compassion,  as  long  as  I shall  he  able.  I will  likewise  entreat  the
Londoners  in  your  behalf,  and  the  heirs  of  those  you  have  put  to  death.”  “ Many  thanks,"


Richard  II.  resigning  the  Crown  into  the  Hands  of  the  Duke  of  Lancaster.  From  MSS.  of  the  I5th  Century.

answered  the  king : “ I have  greater  confidence  in  you  than  in  any  ether  person  in  England.

“ You  are  in  the  right,”  replied  the  duke  ; “ for,  had  I not  stepped  forward  between  you
and  the  people,  they  would  have  seized  you,  and  disgracefully  killed  you,  in  return  for  all
your  wicked  acts,  which  are  the  cause  of  the  dangerous  state  you  are  now  in.  king
Richard  heard  all  this  patiently,  for  he  saw  that  neither  arguments  nor  force  could  avail,
and  that  resignation  and  humility  were  his  only  arms.  He  therefore  humbled  himself
exceedingly  to  the  duke,  earnestly  begging  that  his  life  might  be  spared.  . The  duke,  of
Lancaster  remained  with  the  king  upwards  of  two  hours,  and  continued  in  his  conversation
to  reproach  him  for  all  the  faults  he  was  accused  of.  He  then  took  leave,  re-entered  is


GAS


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


barge,  and  returned  to  his  house,  and,  on  the  morrow,  renewed  his  orders  for  the  assembly
of  the  three  estates  of  the  realm.

The  duke  of  York,  and  his  son,  the  earl  of  Rutland,  came  to  London,  as  did  the  earl  of
Northumberland  and  his  brother,  sir  Thomas  Percy,  to  whom  the  duke  of  Lancaster  gave  a
hearty  welcome,  with  numbers  of  prelates,  bishops,  and  abbots.  The  duke  of  Lancaster,
accompanied  by  a large  body  of  dukes,  prelates,  earls,  barons,  knights,  and  principal  citizens,
rode  to  the  Tower  of  London,  and  dismounted  in  the  court.  King  Richard  was  released
from  his  prison,  and  entered  the  hall  which  had  been  prepared  for  the  occasion,  royally
dressed,  the  sceptre  in  his  hand,  and  the  crown  on  his  head,  but  without  supporters  on  either
side.  He  addressed  the  company  as  follows : “ I have  reigned  king  of  England,  duke  of
Aquitaine,  and  lord  of  Ireland,  about  twenty-two  years,  which  royalty,  lordship,  sceptre,
and  crown,  I now  freely  and  willingly  resign  to  my  cousin,  Henry  of  Lancaster,  and  entreat
of  him,  in  the  presence  of  you  all,  to  accept  this  sceptre.”  He  then  tendered  the  sceptre  to
the  duke  of  Lancaster,  who  took  it  and  gave  it  to  the  archbishop  of  Canterbury.  King
Richard  next  raised  the  crown  with  his  two  hands  from  his  head,  and,  placing  it  before  him,
said,  “ Henry,  fair  cousin,  and  duke  of  Lancaster,  I present  and  give  to  you  this  crown,
with  which  I was  crowned  king  of  England,  and  all  the  rights  dependent  on  it.”

The  duke  of  Lancaster  received  it,  and  delivered  it  over  to  the  archbishop  of  Canterbury,
who  was  at  hand  to  take  it.  These  two  things  being  done,  and  the  resignation  accepted,
the  duke  of  Lancaster  called  in  a public  notary,  that  an  authentic  act  should  be  drawn  up  of
this  proceeding,  and  witnessed  by  the  lords  and  prelates  then  present.  Soon  after,  the  king
was  conducted  to  where  he  had  come  from,  and  the  duke  and  other  lords  mounted  their
horses  to  return  home.  The  two  jewels  were  safely  packed  up,  and  given  to  proper  guards,
to  place  them  in  the  treasury  of  Westminster-abbey,  until  they  should  be  called  for  when
the  parliament  were  assembled.


CHAPTER  CXVI. A PARLIAMENT  MEETS  AT  WESTMINSTER,  WHEN  THE  DUKE  OF  LANCASTER

IS  PUBLICLY  ACKNOWLEDGED  KING  OF  ENGLAND. THE  GREAT  MAGNIFICENCE  OF  HIS

CORONATION.

On  a Wednesday,  the  last  day  of  September  1399,  Henry  duke  of  Lancaster  held  a par-
liament at  Westminster  ; at  which  were  assembled  the  greater  part  of  the  clergy  and  nobility
of  England,  and  a sufficient  number  of  deputies  from  the  different  towns,  according  to  their
extent  and  wealth.  In  this  parliament,  the  duke  of  Lancaster  challenged  the  crown  of
England,  and  claimed  it  as  his  own,  for  three  reasons : first,  by  conquest ; secondly,  from
being  the  right  heir  to  it ; and,  thirdly,  from  the  pure  and  free  resignation  of  it  to  him,  by
king  Richard,  in  the  presence  of  the  prelates,  dukes  and  earls  in  the  hall  of  the  Tower  of
London.  These  three  claims  being  made,  he  required  the  parliament  to  declare  their  opinion
and  will.  Upon  this,  they  unanimously  replied,  that  it  was  their  will  he  should  be  king,
for  they  would  have  no  other.  He  again  asked,  if  they  were  positive  in  this  declaration  ;
and,  when  they  said  they  were,  he  seated  himself  on  the  royal  throne.  This  throne  was
elevated  some  feet  from  the  floor,  with  a rich  canopy  of  cloth  of  gold,  so  that  he  could  be
seen  by  all  present.  On  the  king’s  taking  his  seat,  the  people  clapped  their  hands  for  joy,
and  held  them  up,  promising  him  fealty  and  homage.  The  parliament  was  then  dissolved,
and  the  day  of  coronation  appointed  for  the  feast  of  Saint  Edward,  which  fell  on  a Monday,
the  13th  of  October.

On  the  Saturday  before  the  coronation,  the  new  king  went  from  Westminster  to  the  Tower
of  London,  attended  by  great  numbers,  and  those  squires  who  were  to  be  knighted  watched
their  arms  that  night : they  amounted  to  forty-six : each  squire  had  his  chamber  and  bath,
in  which  he  bathed.  The  ensuing  day,  the  duke  of  Lancaster,  after  mass,  created  them
knights,  and  presented  them  with  long  green  coats,  with  straight  sleeves  lined  with  minever,
after  the  manner  of  prelates.  These  knights  had  on  their  left  shoulders'  a double  cord  of
white  silk,  with  white  tufts  hanging  down.  The  duke  of  Lancaster  left  the  Tower  this
Sunday  after  dinner,  on  his  return  to  Westminster  : he  was  bare-headed,  and  had  round  his


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


699


neck  the  order  of  the  king  of  France.  The  prince  of  Wales,  six  dukes,  six  earls,  eighteen
barons,  accompanied  him  ; and  there  were,  of  knights  and  other  nobility,  from  eight  to  nine
hundred  horse  in  the  procession.  The  duke  was  dressed  in  a jacket,  after  the  German
fashion,  of  cloth  of  gold,  mounted  on  a white  courser,  with  a blue  garter  on  his  left  leg.  He
passed  through  the  streets  of  London,  which  were  all  handsomely  decorated  with  tapestries
and  other  rich  hangings : there  were  nine  fountains  in  Cheapside,  and  other  streets  he  passed
through,  which  perpetually  ran  with  white  and  red  wines.  He  was  escorted  by  prodigious
numbers  of  gentlemen,  with  their  servants  in  liveries  and  badges  ; and  the  different  com-
panies of  London  were  led  by  their  wardens  clothed  in  their  proper  livery,  and  with  ensigns
of  their  trade.  The  whole  cavalcade  amounted  to  six  thousand  horse,  which  escorted  the
duke  from  the  Tower  to  Westminster.  That  same  night  the  duke  bathed,  and  on  the
morrow  confessed  himself,  as  he  had  good  need  to  do,  and  according  to  his  custom  heard
three  masses.  The  prelates  and  clergy  who  had  been  assembled  then  came  in  a large  body
in  procession  from  Westminster-abbey,  to  conduct  the  king  thither,  and  returned  in  the
same  manner,  the  king  and  his  lords  following  them.  The  duke®,  earls,  and  barons,  wore
long  scarlet  robes,  with  mantles  trimmed  with  ermine,  and  large  hoods  of  the  same.  The
dukes  and  earls  had  three  bars  of  ermine  on  the  left  arm,  a quarter  of  a yard  long,  or  there-
about : the  barons  had  but  two.  All  the  knights  and  squires  had  uniform  cloaks  of  scarlet
lined  with  minever.  In  the  procession  to  the  church,  the  duke  had  borne  over  his  head  a
rich  canopy  of  blue  silk,  supported  on  silver  staves,  with  four  golden  bells  that  rang  at  the
corners,  by  four  burgesses  of  Dover,  who  claimed  it  as  their  right.  On  each  side  of  him
were  the  sword  of  mercy  and  the  sword  of  justice : the  first  was  borne  by  the  prince  of
Wales,  and  the  other  by  the  earl  of  Northumberland,  constable  of  England,  for  the  earl  of
Rutland  had  been  dismissed.  The  earl  of  Westmoreland,  marshal  of  England,  carried  the
sceptre.


Coronation  of  Henry  IV.  From  MSS.  of  15th  century.

The  procession  entered  the  church  about  nine  o’clock ; in  the  middle  of  which  was  erected
a scaffold  covered  with  crimson  cloth,  and  in  the  centre  a royal  throne  of  cloth  of  gold.
When  the  duke  entered  the  church,  he  seated  himself  on  the  throne,  and  was  thus  in  regal
state,  except  having  the  crown  on  his  head.  The  archbishop  of  Canterbury  proclaimed  from
the  four  corners  of  the  scaffold,  how  God  had  given  them  a man  for  their  lord  and  sovereign,
and  then  asked  the  people  if  they  were  consenting  to  his  being  consecrated  and  crowned  king.


7 DO


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


They  unanimously  shouted  out,  “ Ay  ! ” and  held  up  their  hands,  promising  fealty  and
homage.  After  this,  the  duke  descended  from  his  throne,  and  advanced  to  the  altar  to  be
consecrated.  This  ceremony  was  performed  by  two  archbishops  and  ten  bishops  : he  was
stripped  of  all  his  royal  state  before  tbe  altar,  naked  to  his  shirt,  and  was  then  anointed  and
consecrated  at  six  places  ; that  is  to  say,  on  the  head,  the  breast,  the  two  shoulders,  before
and  behind,  on  the  back  and  hands:  they  then  placed  a bonnet  on  his  head;  and,  while
this  was  doing,  the  clergy  chanted  the  litany,  or  the  service  that  is  performed  to  hallow
a font.

The  king  was  now  dressed  in  a churchman’s  clothes  like  a deacon  ; and  they  put  on  him
shoes  of  crimson  velvet,  after  the  manner  of  a prelate.  Then  they  added  spurs  with  a point,
but  no  rowel,  and  tbe  sword  of  justice  was  drawn,  blessed  and  delivered  to  the  king,  who
put  it  into  the  scabbard,  when  the  archbishop  of  Canterbury  girded  it  about  him.  The
crown  of  Saint  Edward,  which  is  arched  over  like  a cross,  was  next  brought  and  blessed,
and  placed  by  the  archbishop  on  the  king’s  head.  When  mass  was  over,  the  king  left  the
church,  and  returned  to  the  palace  in  the  same  state  as  before.  There  was  in  the  court-yard
a fountain  that  constantly  ran  with  white  and  red  wine  from  various  mouths.  The  king
went  first  to  his  closet,  and  then  returned  to  the  hall  to  dinner.

At  the  first  table  sat  the  king,  at  the  second  the  five  great  peers  of  England,  at  the  third
the  principal  citizens  of  London,  at  the  fourth  the  new-created  knights,  at  the  fifth  all
knights  and  squires  of  honour.  The  king  was  served  by  the  prince  of  Wales,  who  carried
the  sword  of  mercy,  and  on  the  opposite  side  by  tbe  constable,  who  bore  the  sword  of
justice.  At  the  bottom  of  tbe  table  was  tbe  earl  of  Westmoreland  with  the  sceptre.
There  were  only  at  the  king’s  table  the  two  archbishops  and  seventeen  bishops.  When
dinner  was  half  over,  a knight  of  the  name  of  Dymock  entered  the  hall  completely  armed,  and
mounted  on  a handsome  steed,  richly  barbed  with  crimson  housings.  The  knight  was  armed
for  wager  of  battle,  and  was  preceded  by  another  knight  bearing  his  lance  : he  himself  had
his  drawn  sword  in  one  hand,  and  his  naked  dagger  by  bis  side.  The  knight  presented  the
king  with  a written  paper',  the  contents  of  which  were,  that  if  any  knight  or  gentleman
should  dare  to  maintain  that  king  Henry  was  not  a lawful  sovereign,  he  was  ready  to  oiler
him  combat  in  the  presence  of  the  king,  when  and  where  he  should  be  pleased  to  appoint.
The  king  ordered  this  challenge  to  be  proclaimed  by  heralds  in  six  different  parts  of  the  town
and  the  hall,  to  which  no  answer  was  made.  After  king  Henry  had  dined,  and  partaken  of
wine  and  spices  in  the  hall,  he  retired  to  his  private  apartments,  and  all  the  company  went
to  their  homes.  Thus  passed  the  coronation  day  of  king  Henry,  who  remained  that  and
the  ensuing  day  at  the  palace  of  Westminster.  The  earl  of  Salisbury  could  not  attend  these
feasts,  for  he  was  in  close  confinement  under  secure  guards ; and  the  king’s  ministers,  with
many  of  the  nobles  and  citizens  of  London,  were  anxious  that  he  should  be  publicly  beheaded
in  Cheapsi.de.  They  said  that  he  was  deserving  of  every  punishment,  for  having  carried
such  a message  from  Richard  of  Bordeaux  to  the  French  king  and  his  court,  and  piddicly
proclaiming  king  Henry  a false  and  wicked  traitor,  and  that  these  were  unpardonable  crimes.
Tbe  king  was  naturally  good-tempered,  and,  far  from  inclining  to  put  him  to  death,  took
compassion  on  him,  and  listened  to  the  excuses  he  made  for  what  he  had  done,  by  throwing
the  blame  on  the  four  knights  who  had  been  beheaded,  as  he  had  only  obeyed  their  orders.
The  council  and  Londoners  would  not  hear  his  excuses,  and  would  have  him  executed,  for
they  said  he  had  deserved  it.  The  earl  of  Salisbury  therefore  continued  in  prison,  in  great
danger  of  his  life.

Sir  John  Holland,  earl  of  Huntingdon,  who  was  governor  of  Calais,  had  been  duly  informed
of  all  that  had  passed  ; how  his  brother,  king  Richard,  had  been  arrested  and  carried  to  the
Tower  of  London,  where  he  had  been  condemned  to  pass  his  life,  after  resigning  his  crown
to  Henry  of  Lancaster,  who  was  acknowledged  king  of  England.  The  earl  of  Huntingdon,
notwithstanding  the  vexation  the  state  of  bis  brother,  king  Richard,  gave  him,  weighed  well
the  times  and  circumstances,  and  found  that  he  alone  could  not  pretend  to  withstand  the
whole  power  of  England.  His  countess,  sister-german  to  king  Henry,  told  him,  on  his
return  from  Calais  to  England, — “ My  lord,  you  must  prudently  lay  aside  your  anger,  and
not  hastily  do  anything  you  may  repent  of,  for  my  lord  the  king,  my  brother,  can  show  you


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


701


much  kindness.  You  see  the  whole  kingdom  is  in  his  favour,  and  should  you  commit
yourself  by  any  rash  act,  you  are  ruined.  I advise  and  entreat  you  to  dissemble  your  vexa-
tion, for  king  Henry  is  as  much  your  brother  as  king  Richard.  Attach  yourself  to  him,
and  you  will  find  him  a good  and  faithful  friend  ; for  there  has  not  been  any  king  of  England
so  rich  as  he  is,  and  he  may  be  of  the  greatest  service  to  you  and  to  your  children.”  The  earl
of  Huntingdon  listened  to  what  the  countess  said,  and  followed  her  advice.  He  waited  on
his  brother-in-law,  king  Henry,  paid  him  many  respects,  and  did  his  homage,  promising  fealty
and  service  : the  king  received  him  with  much  pleasure.  The  earl,  afterwards,  with  the
support  of  other  friends,  pressed  the  king  so  strongly  in  favour  of  the  earl  of  Salisbury,  that
his  excuses  were  heard  and  accepted  : his  mission  to  France  was  pardoned,  and  he  regained
the  favour  of  the  king  and  people.


CHAPTER  CXVII. INTELLIGENCE  OF  THE  IMPRISONMENT  OF  KING  RICHARD  IS  CARRIED  TO

FRANCE  BY  TI1E  LADY  OF  COUCY. KING  CHARLES  IS  MUCn  DISPLEASED  THEREAT.

THE  DUKE  OF  BOURBON  ATTEMPTS  IN  VAIN  TO  REDUCE  BORDEAUX,  AND  OTHER

TOWNS  IN  AQUITAINE,  TO  THE  CROWN  OF  FRANCE.

The  lady  of  Coucy,  on  landing  at  Boulogne,  hastened  her  affairs,  that  she  might  begin
her  journey  to  Paris;  for  there  were  already  great  murmurings  in  many  parts  of  France  at
the  events  which  were  happening  in  England.  Some  imperfect  intelligence  had  been  carried
of  them  thither  by  merchants  of  Bruges,  but  when  the  lady  of  Coucy,  who  had  been  attached
to  queen  Isabella,  returned,  the  whole  truth  was  known.  This  lady,  on  her  coming  to
Paris,  went,  as  was  natural,  to  the  hotel  of  her  lord,  who  had  arrived  the  preceding  night.
News  of  it  was  instantly  carried  to  the  king  of  France,  who  sent  directly  for  the  lord  de
Coucy  to  come  and  bring  him  intelligence  of  king  Richard  and  his  queen  Isabella.  On  his
entering  the  king’s  chamber,  lie  asked  him  the  state  of  England.  The  knight,  not  daring  to
conceal  anything,  told  him  the  full  particulars  he  had  learnt  from  his  wife.  The  king  was
much  affected  at  the  melancholy  account  ho  heard,  for  he  knew  the  English  to  be  determined,
and  hard  to  appease ; and,  although  he  had  been  for  a considerable  time  in  a good  state  of
health,  the  rage  he  got  into,  on  learning  the  events  passing  in  England,  brought  back  his
frenzy,  to  the  grief  of  his  brother,  uncles,  and  the  barons  of  France,  but  they  could  not
prevent  it.

The  duke  of  Burgundy  said, — “ The  marriage  of  king  Richard  with  Isabella  was  ill
advised : I spoke  of  it  when  in  agitation,  but  was  not  attended  to.  The  Londoners  never
sincerely  liked  king  Richard,  and  all  this  misery  has  been  hatched  by  the  duke  of  Gloucester.
We  must  learn  how  the  English  mean  to  proceed,  and  take  our  measures  accordingly.
Since  they  have  imprisoned  their  king,  they  will  put  him  to  death  (for  they  never  loved
him,  because  he  preferred  peace  to  war),  and  crown  the  duke  of  Lancaster.  He  will  be
forced  to  enter  into  such  engagements  from  his  obligations  to  them,  that  wdiether  ho  will  or
not,  he  must  act  as  they  shall  please.”  The  duke  of  Burgundy  added,  “ that  it  would  be
proper  to  know  the  inclinations  of  the  inhabitants  of  Bordeaux ; for  king  Richard,  having
been  born  there,  was  greatly  beloved  by  them,  as  well  as  by  those  of  Dax,  Bayonne,  and
that  whole  country.  It  would  not  be  amiss  (he  said)  that  the  constable,  lord  Louis  de
Sancerre,  should  have  notice  of  what  wTas  proposed,  and  that  he  should  advance  toward  the
frontiers  of  Aquitaine,  taking  with  him  sir  Reginald  d’Espagne,  Barrois  des  Barres,  and
other  barons  and  prelates,  who  knew  how  to  negotiate  ; that  his  brother  of  Berry  should  go
into  Poitou,  and  hover  over  the  borders  of  Saintes,  Blaze  and  Mirabel,  in  order  that,  if  those
of  Bordeaux  should  be  inclined  to  enter  into  any  treaty,  they  might  be  received ; for  we
must  gain  them  now,  or  never.”  These  propositions  of  the  duke  of  Burgundy  were  heard
attentively,  and  his  advice  followed.  He  understood  the  matter  well,  and  what  ensued
proved  it.  The  inhabitants  of  Bordeaux,  Dax  and  Bayonne,  were  lost  in  astonishment  when
they  heard  that  their  lord,  king  Richard,  had  been  arrested  and  was  confined  in  the  Tower
of  London,  his  principal  counsellors  executed,  and  duke  Henry  of  Lancaster  crowned  king,
and  would  not  at  first  believe  that  such  melancholy  events  had  happened  in  England  : but,


702


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


as  the  reports  were  confirmed  daily  by  fresh  intelligence,  they  were  constrained  to  think
them  true.  The  gates  of  the  three  cities  were  closed,  and  no  person  whatever  suffered  to  go
out,  from  the  sorrow  they  were  in,  more  particularly  those  of  Bordeaux,  for  king  Richard
had  been  educated  among  them.  They  were  sincerely  attached  to  him,  and  he  always
received  them  kindly  when  they  waited  on  him,  inclining  naturally  to  comply  with  every
request  they  made  him.  On  first  hearing  of  his  misfortune,  they  said, — “ Ah,  Richard,
gentle  king  ! by  God,  you  are  the  most  honourable  man  in  your  realm.  This  mischief  has
been  brewed  for  you  by  the  Londoners,  who  never  loved  you,  and  their  dislike  was  still
increased  by  your  alliance  with  France.  This  misfortune  is  too  great  for  us  to  bear.  Ah,
king  Richard  ! they  have  acknowledged  you  their  sovereign  two-and-twenty  years,  and  now
they  imprison  you,  and  will  put  you  to  death  ; for,  since  they  have  crowned  the  duke  of
Lancaster  king,  that  consequence  must  follow.”  Such  were  the  lamentations  of  the  towns-
men of  Bordeaux,  and  that  whole  country  ; and  they  continued  so  long  that  the  seneschal
of  Bordeaux,  a valiant  and  able  English  knight,  determined  to  send  home  intelligence  of
these  complaints  in  Bordeaux,  Dax  and  Bayonne,  and  that  they  were  on  the  point  of  sur-
rendering themselves  to  the  king  of  France.  Having  written  and  sealed  his  letters,  he  gave
them  to  a trusty  varlet,  whom  he  embarked  on  board  a vessel ; and,  having  a favourable
wind,  he  was  landed  in  Cornwall,  and  thence  pursued  his  journey  to  London,  where  king
Henry  at  that  time  was  holding  his  parliament.  These  letters  were  addressed  generally  to
the  king  and  citizens  of  London,  and  being  opened  and  read,  the  king  and  his  parliament
consulted  on  them.  The  Londoners  said,  like  men  no  way  dismayed, — “ Those  of  Bor-
deaux and  Bayonne  will  never  turn  to  the  French : they  cannot  bear  them  nor  suffer  their
tricks.  They  are  free  under  us ; but,  if  the  French  govern  them,  they  will  be  taxed  and
taxed  over  again  two  or  three  times  a-year.  This  they  have  not  been  accustomed  to,  and
will  find  it  hard  to  endure.  These  three  cities  are  beside  surrounded  by  the  lands  of  great
barons,  who  are  and  always  have  been  loyal  to  England,  such  as  the  lords  de  Pommiers,  de
Mucident,  de  Duras,  de  Landuras,  de  Copane,  de  Rosem,  de  Langurant,  and  many  other
barons  and  knights,  wdio  will  instantly  make  war  upon  them  : they  cannot  issue  out  of  their
gates  without  being  made  prisoners.  Notwithstanding,  therefore,  what  the  seneschal  of
Bordeaux  writes  to  us,  we  do  not  fear  they  will  ever  turn  to  the  French : let  us  however
send  them  some  man  of  valour  and  prudence,  whom  they  esteem,  and  who  has  governed  them
before  : and  we  recommend  sir  Thomas  Percy.”  What  they  had  advised  wras  done,  and  sir
Thomas  Percy  was  entreated  by  the  king  and  citizens  to  undertake  the  voyage  and  the
government  of  that  country.  Sir  Thomas  could  not  refuse,  and  made  his  preparations.

It  was  now  about  Christmas,  when  the  winds  are  high,  and  the  sea  rough : he  made,
therefore,  his  purveyances  in  Cornwall,  at  the  port  nearest  to  Bordeaux,  and  his  equipment
was  two  hundred  men  at  arms  and  four  hundred  archers.  Sir  Thomas  was  accompanied  by
his  nephew,  Hugh  de  Hastings,  Thomas  Colleville,  William  Lisle,  John  de  Grailly,  bastard-
son  to  the  captal  de  Buch,  William  Drayton,  John  d’Ambreticourt,  and  several  others.  He
had  likewise  with  him  Robert  bishop  of  London  *,  and  master  Richard  Rowhall.  It  was,
however,  the  middle  of  March  before  they  were  able  to  embark.

Before  these  lords  arrived  at  Bordeaux,  the  duke  of  Bourbon  came  to  the  city  of  Agen,
to  treat  with  those  of  Aquitaine,  and  made  such  progress  that  the  magistrates  of  Bordeaux,
Dax  and  Bayonne,  were  deputed  to  Agen.  The  duke  received  them  most  kindly,  and  was
not  sparing  of  fine  words  and  fair  promises  : he  gave  them  to  understand,  that  if  they  would
turn  to  the  French,  and  submit  themselves  to  the  obedience  of  the  king  of  France,  they
should  have  granted  whatever  they  might  ask,  and  that  the  engagements  they  entered  into
should  be  sealed  and  recorded  to  last  for  ever  ; that  whenever  they  might  call  on  France,
they  should  be  supported  to  the  utmost  of  its  power.  He  made  them  many  other  flattering
promises ; but  they  replied,  they  must  return  to  their  constituents,  and  lay  before  them  his
offers,  and  consider  how  to  act.  They  then  left  Agen  and  the  duke  of  Bourbon,  on  their
return  home,  where,  on  their  arrival,  they  related  all  the  duke  had  said ; but  his  offers
came  to  nothing,  for  the  inhabitants  of  these  towns  having  considered  their  present  situation,
and  that  France  was  vexed  by  all  sort  of  taxes,  and  every  oppressive  means  to  extort  money,
* Robert  Braybrook,  dean  of  Sarum  and  lord  chancellor.


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


70,3


concluded  they  should  suffer  similar  vexations  if  they  submitted  themselves  to  the  French  :
“ It  will  be,  therefore,  better  for  us,”  they  said,  “ to  remain  steady  to  the  English,  who  hold
us  frank  and  free.  If  the  Londoners  have  deposed  king  Richard,  and  crowned  king  Henry,
what  is  that  to  us  ? We  have  s.till  a king ; and  we  understand  the  bishop  of  London  and  sir
Thomas  Percy  are  on  their  way  hither,  who  will  fully  inform  us  of  the  truth.  We  have
more  commerce  with  the  English  than  the  French,  in  wool,  wines  and  cloth,  and  they  are
naturally  more  inclined  to  us.  Let  us,  therefore,  be  cautious  how  we  enter  into  any  treaties
of  which  we  may  hereafter  repent.”

Thus  were  the  negotiations  of  Bordeaux,  Dax  and  Bayonne,  with  the  French,  broken  off.
Sir  Thomas  Percy  and  the  bishop  of  London  arrived  safe  in  the  harbour  of  Bordeaux  with
their  charge  of  men  at  arms  and  archers,  to  the  great  joy  of  some,  and  grief  of  others,  who
were  of  the  party  of  the  king  of  France.  These  English  lords  lodged  all  together  at  the
abbey  of  Saint  Andrew,  and,  when  they  thought  it  was  time,  they  remonstrated  with  the
commonalty  of  Bordeaux  on  the  state  of  England,  and  the  cause  of  their  coming,  with  such
success  as  they  were  contented  with : Dax  and  Bayonne  were  also  satisfied.  These  cities
and  their  dependencies  remained  steady  to  the  English  interest,  and  hard  would  it  have  been
to  have  turned  them  to  the  French.


CHAPTER  CXVIII. THE  COUNCIL  OF  FRANCE,  BY  PERMISSION  OF  KING  HENRY,  SEND  OVER

PERSONS  TO  VISIT  ISABELLA,  QUEEN  TO  RICHARD  II.

The  council  of  France,  perceiving  the  king  so  greatly  affected  at  what  had  befallen  his
son-in-law,  king  Richard,  determined  to  send  to  England  some  lord  of  high  rank  to  see  and
inquire  into  the  situation  of  queen  Isabella.  The  lord  Charles  d’Albreth  and  Charles  de
Hangiers  were  nominated  on  this  embassy,  and  made  their  preparations  accordingly.  On
leaving  Paris,  they  rode  to  Boulogne,  where  they  remained  and  sent  a herald  to  inform  king
Henry  of  their  intention  of  coming  to  England ; for,  although  there  was  a truce  between  the
two  kingdoms,  they  would  not  venture  thither  without  his  assurance  of  safety.  King
Henry,  who  had  not  forgotten  the  kindness  of  the  king  of  France  when  in  exile,  mentioned
the  matter  to  his  council ; and  the  herald  was  told,  that  it  was  very  agreeable  to  the  king
and  council  that  his  lords  and  their  company  should  come  to  England,  and  by  the  direct
road  to  London,  not  quitting  it  without  license.  The  French  herald  returned  to  tell  his
lords  at  Boulogne  what  he  had  obtained.  They  were  pleased  with  the  answer,  since  they
could  not  obtain  more.  They  immediately  embarked  themselves  and  horses  in  two  vessels,
and,  putting  to  sea,  arrived  at  Dover.  On  disembarking  and  entering  the  town,  they  were
met  by  one  of  the  king’s  knights,  who  had  been  ordered  thither  to  receive  them.  Having
known  him,  when  he  accompanied  the  king  in  his  banishment  to  Paris,  they  were  all  soon
well  acquainted.  The  lord  Charles  d’Albreth  and  the  lord  de  Hangiers  were  handsomely
lodged  in  Dover,  where  they  staid  until  their  horses  were  landed.  They  continued  their
journey  through  Canterbury  to  Eltham,  and  wherever  they  stopped  all  their  expenses  were
paid  by  the  king.  The  king  and  his  council  were  at  Eltham,  and  they  were  splendidly
entertained  in  compliment  to  the  king  of  France,  to  whom  king  Henry  felt  himself  under
obligations.

The  lord  d’Albreth  explained  to  the  king  the  cause  of  his  coming,  who  replied,  “ You
will  go  to  London,  and  within  four  days  I will  consult  my  council,  and  you  shall  have  an
answer  to  your  demands.”  This  satisfied  them.  They  dined  with  the  king,  and,  when
it  was  over,  remounted  their  horses  and  rode  to  London,  attended  by  the  knight,  who  lodged
them  conveniently  in  London,  and  never  quitted  them.  The  king  of  England  came,  as  he
had  said,  to  his  palace  of  Westminster,  and  the  French  lords  were  told  of  it,  and  to  hold
themselves  in  readiness  to  attend  him,  for  they  would  be  summoned.  The  king,  having  his
council  with  him,  and  being  prepared  what  answer  to  make,  the  French  lords  were  intro-
duced. They  said,  they  had  been  sent  by  the  king  and  queen  of  France  to  see  the  young
queen  of  England  their  daughter.  The  king  answered, — “ Gentlemen,  we  no  way  wish
to  prevent  you  seeing  her ; but  you  must  promise,  on  your  oaths,  that  neither  yourselves,


704


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


nor  any  of  your  company,  speak  to  her  on  what  has  lately  passed  in  England,  nor  about
Richard  of  Bordeaux.  Should  you  do  otherwise,  you  will  greatly  offend  us  and  the  country,
and  put  yourselves  in  peril  of  your  lives.”

The  two  knights  replied,  they  would  not  infringe  this  regulation : all  they  wanted  was  to
see  and  converse  with  her,  and  then  they  would  set  out  on  their  return.  Not  long  after  this,
the  earl  of  Northumberland  carried  them  to  Havering-at-tl  i e-Bower,  where  the  young  cpieen
resided.  She  was  attended  by  the  duchess  of  Ireland,  daughter  to  the  lord  de  Coucy,  the
duchess  of  Gloucester,  her  two  daughters,  and  other  ladies  and  damsels,  as  companions.
The  earl  introduced  the  two  knights  to  the  queen,  who  conversed  some  time  with  them,
asking  questions  after  her  parents,  the  king  and  queen  of  France.  They  kept  the  promise
they  had  made,  by  never  mentioning  the  name  of  king  Richard ; and,  when  they  had  been
with  her  a sufficient  time,  took  leave  and  returned  to  London.  They  made  no  long  stay
there,  but,  having  packed  up  their  tilings,  and  had  their  expenses  paid  by  the  king’s  officers,
they  rode  to  Eltham,  and  dined  with  the  king,  who  presented  them  with  some  rich  jewels.
On  taking  leave,  the  king  parted  with  them  amicably,  and  said, — “ Tell  those  who  have
Sent  you,  that  the  queen  shall  never  suffer  the  smallest  harm  or  any  disturbance,  but  keep  up
a state  and  dignity  becoming  her  birth  and  rank,  and  enjoy  all  her  rights;  for,  young  as  she
is,  she  ought  not  as  yet  to  be  made  acquainted  with  the  changes  in  this  world.”  The  knights
were  very  happy  to  hear  the  king  speak  thus,  and  then  departed.  They  lay  that  night  at
Dartford,  on  the  morrow  at  Ospringe,  the  next  at  Canterbury,  and  then  at  Dover,  the  king’s
officers  paying  every  expense  of  their  journey.  Having  embarked  with  a favourable  wind,
they  were  landed  at  Boulogne,  and  thence  proceeded  to  the  king  and  queen  at  Paris,  to
whom  they  related  what  you  have  read.

We  will  now  leave  them,  and  speak  of  the  affairs  of  England.


CHAPTER  CXIX. THE  EARLS  OF  HUNTINGDON  AND  SALISBURY,  AND  SOME  OTHERS,  HAVING

FAILED  TO  MURDER  TREACHEROUSLY  KING  HENRY  OF  LANCASTER,  RISE  IN  ARMS
AGAINST  HIM. — THEY  ARE  DEFEATED  AND  BEHEADED,  AND  THEIR  HEADS  SENT  TO
THE  KING.

It  was  much  disputed  among  the  nobles,  and  in  the  principal  towns,  whether  Richard  of
Bordeaux  was  put  to  death,  and  nothing  more  was  said  about  him,  which  was  but  what  he
deserved.  King  Henry  declared,  that  in  regard  to  the  charges  made  against  him  he  much
pitied  him,  and  would  never  consent  to  his  death ; that  the  prison  wherein  he  was  confined
was  sufficient  punishment ; and  that  he  had  engaged  his  word  no  other  harm  should  be  done
him,  which  promise  he  was  resolved  to  keep.  The  enemies  of  king  Richard  replied, —
“ Sire,  we  see  plainly  that  compassion  alone  moves  you  thus  to  say  and  act,  but,  in  so  doing,
you  are  running  great  risks ; for,  so  long  as  he  shall  be  alive,  notwithstanding  the  outward
good-humour  and  sincerity  with  which  he  resigned  to  you  his  crown,  and  that  in  general
you  have  been  acknowledged  as  king,  and  received  the  homage  of  all,  there  must  remain  many
attached  to  him,  who  still  preserve  their  affection,  and  will  instantly  rise  against  you
whenever  they  perceive  any  hopes  of  delivering  him  from  prison.  The  king  of  France  also,
whose  daughter  he  married,  is  so  exasperated  at  the  late  events,  that  he  would  willingly
retaliate  the  first  opportunity ; and  his  power  is  great  of  itself,  and  must  be  increased  by  his
connexions  in  England.”  King  Henry  answered, — “ Until  I shall  observe  anything  contrary
to  the  present  state  of  affairs,  or  that  the  king  of  France  or  other  persons  act  against  me,
I will  not  change  my  resolution,  but  firmly  keep  the  promise  I have  made.”  This  was  the
answer  of  king  Henry,  for  which  he  narrowly  escaped  suffering,  as  you  shall  presently  hear.

The  earl  of  Huntingdon,  brother  to  king  Richard,  though  married  to  the  sister  of  king
Henry,  could  not  forget  his  treatment  of  the  late  king,  any  more  than  the  earl  of  Salisbury.
They  had  a secret  meeting  near  to  Oxford,  on  the  means  to  deliver  Richard  of  Bordeaux
from  the  Tower  of  London,  destroy  king  Henry,  and  throw  the  country  into  confusion.
They  resolved  to  proclaim  a tournament  to  be  holden  at  Oxford,  of  twenty  knights  and
squires,  and  invite  the  king  to  witness  it  privately.  During  the  time  the  king  was  sitting


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


705


at  dinner  they  were  to  slay  him  (for  they  were  to  be  provided  with  a sufficiency  of  men  at
arms  for  their  purpose),  and  to  dress  out  in  the  royal  robes  a priest  called  Magdalen,  who
had  been  of  king  Richard’s  chapel,  and  was  like  him  in  countenance,  and  make  the  people
to  understand  that  he  was  delivered  from  prison,  and  had  resumed  his  state.  They  were,
instantly  after  the  business  was  completed,  to  send  information  of  it  to  the  king  of  France,
that  he  might  send  them  large  succours,  under  the  command  of  the  count  de  Saint  Pol  or
any  others.

They  executed  this  plan,  and  proclaimed  a grand  tournament  to  be  bolden  by  twenty
knights  and  as  many  squires  at  Oxford,  who  were  to  be  accompanied  by  many  ladies  and
damsels.  They  had  gained  to  their  party  the  young  earl  of  Kent,  nephew  to  the  earl  of
Huntingdon,  and  the  lord  de  Spencer,  one  of  the  most  powerful  barons  in  England.  They
expected  the  aid  of  the  earl  of  Rutland,  because  king  Henry  bad  deprived  him  of  the
constableship,  but  he  failed  them,  and  some  say  that  by  him  their  plot  was  discovered.  When
all  things  had  been  settled  for  this  feast,  the  earl  of  Huntingdon  came  to  Windsor,  where
the  king  held  his  state,  and  with  much  flattering,  like  one  who,  by  soft  words,  thought  to
deceive,  invited,  with  many  marks  of  affection,  the  king  to  be  present  at  it.  Not  supposing
any  treason  was  intended,  he  readily  complied:  and  the  earl  of  Huntingdon,  much  rejoiced,
thanked  and  left  the  king.  On  going  av7ay,  he  said  to  the  canon  de  Robersac*,  “ Get  tbyself
ready  for  our  feast,  and  I promise  thee  if  thou  come,  and  we  meet  in  the  lists,  there  shall  be
a sharp  conflict  between  us.”  Sir  John  de  Robersac  replied,  “ By  my  faith,  my  lord,  if
the  king  come  to  your  feast,  it  is  necessary  that  I accompany  him.”  Upon  this  the  earl
shook  him  by  tbe  hand,  and  said,  “ Many  thanks,”  and  passed  on.  Several  knights  and
squires,  hearing  of  this  tournament,  made  preparations  to  attend  it,  and  all  the  armourers  in
London  were  fully  employed.  The  king’s  ministers  were  attentive  to  every  circumstance
that  was  agitated,  and  they  told  him,  “ Sire,  you  have  no  business  to  go  to  this  tournament,
and  must  not  think  of  it,  for  we  have  heard  whispers  of  plots  that  are  very  displeasing  to  us,
and  in  a few  days  we  shall  learn  the  whole.”  The  king  believed  what  they  had  said,  and
did  not  go  to  the  tournament,  nor  any  of  his  knights,  and  indeed  very  few  of  those  who
were  marked  for  death.

When  the  earls  of  Salisbury,  Huntingdon,  Kent,  and  the  lord  de  Spencer,  found  they  had
failed  in  their  scheme  of  seizing  the  king,  they  held  a council,  and  said, — “ We  must  go  to
Windsor  and  raise  the  country.  We  will  dress  Magdalen  in  royal  robes,  and  make  him
ride  with  us,  proclaiming  that  king  Richard  has  escaped  from  prison.  All  wTho  see  him  will
believe  it  true,  and  the  report  will  gain  such  credit  that  we  shall  destroy  our  enemies."  This
they  executed,  by  collecting  their  whole  party,  amounting  in  all  to  about  five  hundred  men,
and,  placing  Magdalen  in  the  centre,  dressed  in  royal  state,  they  rode  towards  Windsor,
where  king  Henry  kept  his  court.  God  was  very  kind  to  the  king,  for  he  had  early
intelligence  that  the  earls  of  Huntingdon,  Salisbury,  the  young  earl  of  Kent,  and  the  lord
de  Spencer,  were  advancing  toward  Windsor,  to  seize  and  murder  him  ; that  they  were  in
sufficient  force  to  take  the  castle,  and  had  with  them  Magdalen,  one  of  the  priests  of  the
chapel  royal  to  Richard  of  Bordeaux,  dressed  up  as  the  late  king ; and  that  they  gave  it  out
everywhere  that  king  Richard  had  escaped  from  prison.  Many  of  the  country  people
believed  it,  saying,  “ We  have  seen  him,”  mistaking  him  for  the  king.

Those  who  brought  the  intelligence  said  to  king  Henry,  “ Sire,  depart  hence  instantly,
and  ride  to  London,  for  they  will  be  here  in  a short  time.”  He  followed  this  counsel,  and,
mounting  his  horse,  set  off  with  his  attendants  from  Windsor,  taking  the  road  to  London.
He  had  not  been  long  departed,  before  those  who  intended  to  put  him  to  death  came  to
Windsor,  and  entered  the  castle  gate,  for  there  were  none  to  oppose  them.  They  searched
the  apartments  of  the  castle,  and  the  houses  of  the  canons,  in  hopes  of  finding  the  king,  bu
were  disappointed.  On  their  failure,  they  were  much  enraged,  and  rode  away  to  Colnbrook,
where  they  lay,  and  forced  many  to  join  them  by  fair  or  foul  means,  saying  that  king  Richard
was  in  their  company,  which  some  believed,  but  others  not.  King  Henry,  doubtful  of  the
consequences  of  this  conspiracy,  hastened  to  London,  and,  by  a roundabout  road,  entered  the
Tower.  Some  sharp  words  passed  between  him  and  Richard  of  Bordeaux  : he  told  him, —
* In  the  MSS.  he  is  called  Bobessart  and  Robertsart.


vol.  ir


z z


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


7043

“ I saved  your  life,  and  had  great  difficulty  in  doing  it ; and,  in  return,  you  want  to  have
me  murdered  by  your  brother,  and  my  brother-in-law,  and  by  the  earls  of  Salisbury  and
Kent,  your  nephew,  with  the  lord  de  Spencer,  but,  if  you  have  bad  any  band  in  this  plot,  it
shall  end  badly  for  you.”  Richard  denied  any  knowledge  of  it,  saying, — “ As  God  may
help  me,  and  have  compassion  on  my  soul,  I never  before  beard  one  word  of  this  plot.  I
never  looked  for  any  change  in  my  situation,  for  I am  perfectly  contented  with  my  present
state.”  Nothing  more  passed.  The  king  sent  for  the  mayor  of  London  and  his  particular
friends,  to  whom  he  related  everything  he  knew  or  had  heard  of  this  conspiracy.  They  were
greatly  surprised  on  hearing  it,  and  said, — “ Sire,  you  must  summon  your  forces,  and  march
instantly  against  them,  before  they  increase  more  in  numbers.  We  have  made  you  king,  and
king  you  shall  be,  in  spite  of  all  that  envy  and  discontent  may  do  against  you.”  The  king
lost  no  time  in  employing  clerks  and  messengers  to  write  and  carry  letters  to  the  knights  of
his  realm.  He  wrote  himself  to  his  constable,  the  earl  of  Northumberland,  to  his  marshal,
the  earl  of  Westmoreland,  and  to  other  great  barons  in  Essex  and  Lincoln,  from  whom  he
expected  assistance.  All  who  received  them  made  haste  to  join  the  king.

The  earls  of  Huntingdon  and  Salisbury,  and  their  party,  determined  to  march  to  London,
for  they  imagined  there  must  he  some  of  the  citizens  attached  to  king  Richard,  who  would
give  them  support.  In  consequence,  they  left  Colnbrook,  and  advanced  to  Brentford,  seven
miles  from  London,  where  they  lay.  Not  one  of  the  Londoners  joined  them,  but  shut
themselves  up  in  their  town.  When  they  saw  this,  they  marched  away  towards  Saint  Albans,
a large  town,  and  there  staid  one  day.  On  the  morrow,  they  went  to  Berkhampstead.  They
continued  marching  through  different  parts,  publishing  everywhere  that  Magdalen  was  king
Richard,  and  came  to  a stx’ong  town  called  Soncestre  *,  which  had  a bailiff  attached  to  king
Henry  for  the  guard  of  the  town  and  defence  of  the  adjacent  parts.  The  three  earls  and  lord
de  Spencer  took  up  their  lodgings  in  Cirencester,  and  were  that  night  left  quiet,  for  the
bailiff,  being  a valiant  and  prudent  man,  did  not  think  he  was  strong  enough  to  combat
them,  and  dissembled  his  thoughts  as  well  as  he  could.

The  next  morning  the  earl  of  Salisbury  and  lord  de  Spencer  left  the  earl  of  Huntingdon
and  his  nephew,  saying  they  would  advance  farther  into  the  country  to  gain  friends,  and
would  visit  the  lord  of  Berkeley.  They  rode  down  Severn  side,  but  were  badly  advised  thus
to  separate,  for  both  parties  were  weakened  by  it.  The  earl  of  Huntingdon  remained  in
Cirencester,  and  attempted  to  tamper  with  the  bailiff  and  townsmen.  He  told  them  that
the  Londoners  had  delivered  king  Richard  out  of  prison,  and  within  two  days  he  would  be
there.  The  bailiff,  having  collected  a large  force,  said  that  not  one  word  was  true  ; for  that
he  had  just  heard  the  contrary  from  king  Henry  and  the  citizens  of  London  to  assure  him  of
the  truth,  and  that  he  should  act  conformably  to  the  orders  he  had  received.  The  earl  of
Huntingdon,  hearing  this,  changed  colour  from  disappointment.  Finding  he  could  not  gain
his  end,  he  returned  to  his  lodgings,  armed  himself,  and  made  his  men  do  the  same,  determining
to  conquer  these  ale-drinkers  by  force,  and  set  fire  to  their  town  as  an  example,  and  to  terrify
the  country.  The  bailiff  was  not  idle  in  collecting  all  the  men  he  could : they  amounted,
archers  and  all,  to  two  thousand  men,  which  he  drew  up  in  the  market-place,  when  the  force
of  the  earls  of  Huntingdon  and  Kent  were  not  three  hundred.  Notwithstanding  this
inequality,  they  made  ready  to  begin  the  battle,  and  the  archers  attacked  each  other,  so  that
several  were  wounded.  The  bailiff  and  his  men,  who  were  very  numerous,  charged  the
rebels  vigorously,  without  sparing  any  one,  for  he  had  the  king’s  special  orders  to  take  the
leaders,  dead  or  alive.  The  earl’s  party  were  forced  to  retire  within  their  lodgings ; and  the
house  wherein  the  two  earls  were,  the  bailiff’s  men  surrounded  and  conquered.

Many  were  killed,  and  more  wounded.  The  earl  of  Huntingdon  defended  himself  gallantly,
like  a valiant  man  at  arms  as  he  was ; but  the  numbers  against  him  were  too  great  to
withstand ; and  he  was  slain  fighting,  as  was  the  young  earl  of  Kent,  who  was  much
lamented  by  several  knights  in  England  and  other  countries.  He  was  young  and  handsome,
and  had  very  unwillingly  taken  part  in  this  conspiracy ; but  his  uncle  and  the  earl  of
Salisbury  had  forced  him  into  it.  The  men  of  Cirencester,  who  were  wroth  against  them,
cut  off  their  heads,  and  sent  them  in  two  panniers,  as  fish  is  carried,  by  a varlet  on  horseback,
* “ Soncestre,” — Cirencester,  pronounced  Ci5eter.


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


707


to  rejoice  the  king  and  the  Londoners.  A similar  fate  befel  the  earl  of  Salisbury  and  lord
de  Spencer : they  were  made  prisoners  by  the  knights  and  squires  the  king  had  sent  against
them,  who  had  them  beheaded,  and  sent  their  heads  to  London.  Great  numbers  of  their
partisans,  and  knights  and  squires  who  had  accompanied  them,  were  executed,  after  which
the  country  remained  in  peace.

The  king  of  France,  his  brother,  nncles,  and  council,  learning  that  during  Easter  of  the
year  1400,  the  English  had  sent  men  at  arms  and  archers  to  Calais,  Guisnes,  and  the  neigh-
bouring castles,  and  were  providing  these  places  with  many  stores,  issued  a summons  for  all
knights  and  squires  to  prepare  themselves  to  march  whithersoever  they  might  be  ordered,
and  specially  provided  for  the  frontier  of  Boulogne  and  the  sea-shore.


CHAPTER  CXX. ON  THE  DEATn  OP  JOHN  OF  MONTFORT,  DUKE  OF  BRITTANY,  THE  BRETONS

UNDERTAKE  THE  WARDSHIP  OF  THE  YOUNG  DUKE,  AND  TO  BE  FRIENDLY  TO  FRANCE.
— THE  FRENCH  KING,  DISTRUSTING  TIIE  SENTIMENTS  OF  THE  NEW  REIGN  IN  ENGLAND,
MAKES  PROVISION  AGAINST  ANY  SUDDEN  CHANGE.

At  this  period,  John  duke  of  Brittany  departed  this  life,  leaving  issue  two  sons  and  a
daughter.  The  eldest  son  had  been  betrothed  to  the  second  daughter  of  the  king  of  France  :
he  could  not  have  the  eldest,  as  she  was  married  to  the  king  of  England,  as  has  been  related.
She  had  indeed  been  promisedhim,  and  treaties  entered  into  on  the  subject  atTours  inTouraine;
but  the  king  was  advised  to  break  it  off,  to  marry  her  more  nobly  and  richly  in  England.
Many  of  the  French  lords,  however,  said,  that  it  would  never  turn  out  well  thus  to  break
through  solemn  engagements.  On  the  death  of  the  duke  of  Brittany,  it  was  determined
in  the  council,  that  the  duke  of  Orleans  should  advance  to  the  borders  of  Brittany  with  a
body  of  men  at  arms,  to  confer  with  the  nobles  and  chiefs  of  the  principal  towns  of  the  duchy,
to  learn  their  intentions  respecting  the  young  duke,  and  to  demand  he  should  be  delivered
up  to  him  to  carry  to  the  court  of  France.

The  duke  of  Orleans,  in  consequence  of  this  resolution,  summoned  a considerable  number
of  men  at  arms,  and  marched  them  to  Pontorson,  where  he  halted,  and  signified  his  arrival
to  the  barons  of  Brittany.  The  prelates,  nobles,  and  chief  magistrates  of  the  great  towns,
assembled  at  Pontorson,  when  the  duke  of  Orleans  made  them  the  above  request.  They
were  prepared  with  an  answer,  and  replied  they  would  be  guardians  to  their  young  duke
[hind  educate  him  in  their  own  country  until  he  should  be  of  a proper  age ; that  then  they
would  bring  him  to  France,  that  he  might  do  his  homage  to  the  king,  as  was  his  duty  ; that,
for  the  due  performance  of  this,  they  were  willing  to  enter  into  bonds,  subjecting  themselves
to  the  loss  of  their  lands'should  they  break  the  engagement.]  The  duke  of  Orleans,  finding
that  he  could  not  gain  more,  took  an  obligation  from  the  principal  barons,  who  had  their
duke  in  ward,  to  deliver  him  up  to  the  king  of  France  when  he  should  be  of  a proper  age.
These  obligations  being  written  and  sealed,  the  duke  of  Orleans  had  them  in  charge,  and,
taking  leave  of  the  barons,  departed  from  Pontorson,  on  his  return  to  Paris,  and  related  to
the  king,  his  brother,  all  that  had  passed.

It  was  known  in  England,  that  the  French,  by  their  king’s  command,  had  strongly
reinforced,  and  re-victualled  all  the  towns,  castles,  and  forts  in  Picardy,  and  on  the  borders
of  the  Boulonois,  and  had  closed  the  river  Somme,  so  that  no  merchandise  nor  corn  could
come  to  England,  nor  pass  Abbeville.  The  merchants  of  the  two  countries,  who  were  used
freely  to  visit  each,  were  now  afraid  of  doing  so ; and  those  on  the  borders  of  Calais  and
Gnisnes  were  ruined,  although  there  were  not  any  hostilities  commenced,  for  orders  to  that
effect  had  not  been  given.  The  king  of  England  was  advised  by  his  council  to  be  on  his
guard ; for  the  French,  they  said,  were  making  great  preparations  of  ships  at  Harfleur,  and
plainly  showed  they  were  inclined  for  war.  The  count  de  Saint  Pol  and  the  lord  Charles
d’Albreth  were  appointed  commanders ; and  it  wTas  to  be  supposed,  that  if  the  earls  of
Huntingdon  and  Salisbury  were  alive,  they  would  have  crossed  the  sea,  for  they  had  many
connexions  in  England.  They  added,  “ Sire,  so  long  as  Richard  of  Bordeaux  lives,  the
country  will  never  have  peace."  “ I believe  what  you  say  may  be  true,”  replied  the  king ;

z z 2


708


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


“ but,  with  regard  to  me,  I will  never  put  him  to  death.  I have  given  him  my  word,  that
no  bodily  harm  shall  befal  him ; and  I will  keep  my  promise,  until  it  shall  appear  that  he
enters  into  any  plots  against  me.”  “ Sire,”  answered  the  knights,  “ his  death  would  be  more
to  your  advantage  than  his  life : for,  so  long  as  the  French  know  he  is  alive,  they  will  exert
themselves  to  make  war  against  you,  in  the  hope  of  replacing  him  on  the  throne,  on  account
of  his  having  married  the  daughter  of  their  king.”  The  king  of  England  made  no  reply,  but,
leaving  them  in  conversation,  went  to  his  falconers,  and,  placing  a falcon  on  his  wrist,  forgot
all  in  feeding  him.


CHAPTER  CXXI. THE  DEATH  OF  KING  RICHARD.  — THE  TRUCES  ARE  RENEWED  AND  KEPT

BETWEEN  FRANCE  AND  ENGLAND. THE  EARL  MARSHAL,  WHO  HAD  BEEN  BANISHED

ENGLAND,  DIES  AT  VENICE.

It  was  not  long  after  this  that  a true  report  was  current  in  London  of  the  death  of  Richard
of  Bordeaux.  I could  not  learn  the  particulars  of  it,  nor  how  it  happened,  the  day  I wrote
these  chronicles*.  Richard  of  Bordeaux,  when  dead,  was  placed  on  a litter  covered  with
black,  and  a canopy  of  the  same.  Four  black  horses  were  harnessed  to  it,  and  two  varlets
in  mourning  conducted  the  litter,  followed  by  four  knights  dressed  also  in  mourning.  Thus


Funeral  Procession  of  Richard  II.  From  MSS.  of  15th  century


they  left  the  Tower  of  London,  where  he  had  died,  and  paraded  the  streets  at  a foot’s  pace
until  they  came  to  Cheapside,  which  is  the  greatest  thoroughfare  in  the  city,  and  there  they
halted  for  upwards  of  two  hours.  More  than  twenty  thousand  persons,  of  both  sexes,  came
to  see  the  king,  who  lay  in  the  litter,  his  head  on  a black  cushion,  and  his  face  uncovered.

Some  pitied  him,  when  they  saw  him  in  this  state,  but  others  did  not,  saying  he  had  for
a long  time  deserved  death.  Now  consider,  ye  kings,  lords,  dukes,  prelates,  and  earls,  how
very  changeable  the  fortunes  of  this  world  are.  This  king  Richard  reigned  twenty-two
years  in  great  prosperity,  and  with  much  splendour ; for  there  never  was  a king  of  England
who  expended  such  sums,  by  more  than  one  hundred  thousand  florins,  as  king  Richard  did
in  keeping  up  his  state,  and  his  household  establishments.  I,  John  Froissart,  canon  and
treasurer  of  Chimay,  know  it  well,  for  I witnessed  and  examined  it,  during  my  residence

B It  is  not  to  this  day  certain  whether  he  died  by  voluntary  or  compulsory  starvation,  or  was  murdered  by  Piers
Exton. — Ed.


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  &c.


700


with  him,  for  a quarter  of  a year.  He  made  me  good  cheer,  booanse  in  my  youth  I had  been
secretary  to  king  Edward  his  grandfather,  and  the  lady  Philippa  of  Hainault,  queen  of
England.  When  I took  my  leave  of  him  at  Windsor,  he  presented  me,  by  one  of  his  knights
called  sir  John  Golofre,  a silver  gilt  goblet,  weighing  full  two  marcs,  filled  with  one  hundred
nobles,  which  were  then  of  service  to  me,  and  will  be  so  as  long  as  I live.  I am  bound  to
pray  to  God  for  him,  and  sorry  am  I to  write  of  his  death  ; but,  as  I have  dictated  and
augmented  this  history  to  the  utmost  of  my  power,  it  became  necessary  to  mention  it,  that
what  became  of  him  might  be  known.

I saw  two  strange  things  in  my  time,  though  widely  different.  I was  sitting  at  dinner  in
the  city  of  Bordeaux  when  king  Richard  was  born:  it  was  on  a Wednesday,  on  the  point
of  ten  o’clock.  At  that  hour  sir  Richard  de  Pontchardon,  then  marshal  of  Aquitaine,  came
to  me  and  said, — “ Froissart,  write,  that  it  may  be  remembered,  my  lady  the  princess  is
brought  to  bed  of  a fine  son  : he  is  born  on  Twelfth-day,  the  son  of  a king’s  son,  and  shall  be
king  himself.”  The  gallant  knight  foretold  the  truth,  for  he  was  king  of  England  twenty-
two  years ; but  he  did  not  foresee  what  was  to  be  the  conclusion  of  his  life.  When  king
Richard  was  born,  his  father  was  in  Galicia,  which  don  Pedro  had  given  him  to  conquer  : a
curious  thing  happened,  on  my  first  going  to  England,  which  I have  much  thought  on  since.
I was  in  the  service  of  queen  Philippa,  and,  when  she  accompanied  king  Edward  and  the
royal  family,  to  take  leave  of  the  prince  and  princess  of  Wales,  at  Berkhampstead,  on  their
departure  for  Aquitaine,  I heard  an  ancient  knight,  in  conversation  with  some  ladies,  say,
— “ We  have  a book  called  Brut*,  that  declares  neither  the  prince  of  Wales,  dukes  of  Clarence,
York,  nor  Gloucester,  will  be  kings  of  England,  but  the  descendants  of  the  duke  of  Lancaster."
Now  I,  the  author  of  this  history,  say  that,  considering  all  things,  these  two  knights,  sir
Richard  de  Pontchardon,  and  sir  Bartholomew  Burghersh,  in  what  they  said,  were  both  in
the  right,  for  all  the  world  saw  Richard  reign  for  twenty-two  years  in  England,  and  saw
the  crown  then  fall  to  the  house  of  Lancaster.  King  Henry  would  never  have  been  king,  on
the  conditions  you  have  heard,  if  his  cousin,  Richard,  had  treated  him  in  the  friendly  manner
he  ought  to  have  done.  The  Londoners  took  his  part  for  the  wrongs  the  king  had  done  him
and  his  children,  whom  they  much  compassionated.

When  the  funeral  car  of  king  Richard  had  remained  in  Cheapside  two  hours,  it  was
conducted  forward,  in  the  same  order  as  before,  out  of  the  town.  The  four  knights  then
mounted  their  horses,  which  were  waiting  for  them,  and  continued  their  journey  with  the
body  until  they  came  to  a village,  where  there  is  a royal  mansion,  called  Langley,  thirty
miles  from  London.  There  king  Richard  was  interred  : God  pardon  his  sins,  and  have  mercy
on  his  soul  !

News  was  spread  abroad  that  king  Richard  was  dead.  This  had  been  expected  some
time ; for  it  was  well  known  he  would  never  come  out  of  the  Tower  alive.  His  death  was
concealed  from  his  queen,  as  orders  had  been  given  for  that  purpose,  which  were  prudently
obeyed  for  a considerable  time.  All  these  transactions  were  perfectly  well  known  in  France  ;
and  such  knights  and  squires  as  wished  for  war,  looked  every  moment  for  orders  to  attack
the  frontiers.  The  councils,  however,  of  both  kingdoms,  thought  it  would  be  for  the
advantage  of  the  two  countries  that  the  truces  should  be  renewed,  and  for  this  end  different
negotiatiors  went  to  the  neighbourhood  of  Calais.  The  king  of  France  was  not  in  good
health,  nor  ever  had  been  since  he  heard  of  the  misfortunes  of  his  son-in-law,  Richard  ; and
his  disorder  was  greatly  increased  when  he  was  told  of  his  death.

The  duke  of  Burgundy  took  the  chief  government  of  the  realm : he  came  to  Saint  Omer
and  Bourbourg,  where  were  the  duke  of  Bourbon,  the  lord  Charles  d’Albreth,  sir  Charles  de
Hangiers,  sir  John  de  Chateaumorant,  and  such  prelates  as  the  patriarch  of  Jerusalem,  the
bishops  of  Paris  and  Beauvais.  On  the  part  of  England  were  the  earls  of  Northumberland,
Rutland  and  Devonshire,  Sir  Henry  Percy,  son  to  the  earl  of  Northumberland,  sir  Evan
Fitzwarren,  and  the  bishops  of  Winchester  and  Ely.  The  French  proposed  having  the  queen
of  England  delivered  to  them,  but  the  English  would  not  listen  to  it,  saying  they  would
gladly  have  her  reside  in  England  on  her  dower,  and  that  if  she  had  lost  her  husband,  they
would  provide  her  another,  who  should  be  young  and  handsome,  and  whom  she  would  love.

* The  romance  of  Brut  by  Robcat  Wall. — Eo.


CHRONICLES  OF  ENGLAND.  FRANCE.  &c.


710

Richard  of  Bordeaux  was  too  old  for  her,  and  the  person  they  should  offer  was  suitable  in
every  respect,  being  no  ether  than  the  prince  of  Wales,  eldest  son  to  king  Henry.  The
French  would  not  agree  to  this,  for  they  dared  not  come  to  any  final  conclusion  in  this
matter  without  the  consent  of  the  king  her  father.  He  was  now  in  a very  bad  state,  and
much  weakened  in  his  constitution,  for  there  had  not  been  found  any  physician  who  could
conquer  his  disorder.  The  treaty  was  therefore  laid  aside,  and  the  subject  of  the  truce
canvassed.  It  was  so  well  conducted,  that  it  was  resolved  to  continue  it  to  the  original  term
of  thirty  years,  four  of  which  were  already  gone,  and  it  was  now  to  last  for  twenty-six  years.
This  was  put  into  writing,  and  signed  and  sealed  by  those  who  had  full  powers  so  to  do
from  the  two  kings.  When  this  was  done,  they  separated,  and  each  party  returned  home.

I have  not  mentioned  what  became  of  the  earl  marshal,  by  whom  all  these  late  misfor-
tunes originated,  but  I will  now  tell  you.  He  was  residing  in  Venice  when  he  first  heard
that  Henry  of  Lancaster  was  king  of  England,  and  king  Richard  dead,  and  took  this  news
so  grievously  to  heart  that  .he  fell  sick,  was  put  to  bed,  became  frantic,  and  died.  Such  were  the
misfortunes  that  befell  the  greatest  lords  in  England.


CHAPTER  CXXII. — FRAXCE  PRESERVES  A NEUTRALITY  BETWEEN  THE  POPES  OF  ROME  AND
AVIGNON. THE  ELECTION  OF  THE  EMPEROR  ROBERT.

In  the  year  of  grace  1399,  pope  Benedict,  whom  the  French  had  formerly  supported,  was
deposed,  as  well  likewise  the  emperor  of  Germany  * for  his  wicked  deeds.  The  electors  of  the
empire,  and  all  the  great  barons  of  Germany  rose  against  him,  and  sent  him  to  Bohemia,  of
which  country  he  was  king.  They  elected  emperor  in  his  stead  a valiant  and  prudent  man,
called  Robert,  duke  of  Heidelberg,  who  came  to  Cologne,  and  was  there  crowned  with  the
crown  of  Germany  ; for  those  of  Aix  would  not  admit  him  within  their  town,  nor  the  duke
of  Gueldres  submit  himself  to  his  obedience,  which  angered  him  much.  The  new  emperor
promised  to  restore  union  to  the  church.  In  the  mean  time,  the  king  of  France  negotiated
with  the  Liege  men,  who  were  determined  for  the  Roman  pope,  and  managed  so  well,  through
sir  Baldwin  de  Mont-jardin  (who  governed  in  part  the  bishopric  of  Liege,  and  was  a knight
of  the  king’s  chamber),  that  the  whole  country  complied  with  the  desire  of  the  French  king,
and  became  neuter.

The  Liege  men  sent  orders  to  those  of  their  clergy  who  were  at  Rome,  that  if  they  did
not  return  home  by  a fixed  day,  they  should  be  deprived  of  their  benefices.  On  hearing
this,  they  all  came  back  to  Liege ; and  pope  Boniface,  who  lost  much  by  this  order,  sent  a
legate  to  Germany  to  preach  to  the  Liege  men,  and  endeavour  to  make  them  return  to  their
former  creed.  The  legate  dared  not  advance  farther  than  Cologne,  but  sent  his  instructions
and  letters  to  Liege.  They  read  them  and  told  the  messenger, — “ Do  not  return  hither
again  on  the  business  thou  art  now  come  upon,  unless  thou  shalt  wish  to  be  drowned  ; for  as
many  messengers  as  shall  be  sent  us,  so  many  will  we  throw  into  the  Meuse.”

* Wenceslaus. — Ed.


END  OF  THE  CHRONICLES  OF  SIR  JOHN  FROISSART.


I N I)  E X


BBEVTLLE,  the  town  of,
taken  by  the  French  forces
under  sir  Hugh  de  Chatillon,  vol.

i,  401

Aberdeen,  the  bishop  of,  taken  pri-
soner by  the  English  at  the  bat-
tle of  Nevil’s  Cross,  i,  177

Acbery  sur  Aine,  the  town  of,  in
Picardy,  taken  by  the  English
under  sir  Eustace  d'Ambreti-
court,  i,  274

Achievement  at  arms,  between  the
lord  de  la  Rochfoucault  and  sir
William  de  Montferrant,  at  Bor-
deaux, ii,  210

Acquigni,  the  castle  of,  taken  oy  the
lord  de  la  Riviere,  i,  325

Acquitaine,  the  country  of,  con-
quered from  the  English  by  the
earl  of  Lisle,  i,  76  ; given  to  the
duke  of  Lancaster  by  Richard  II.
and  his  council,  ii,  5(i6

Acquitaine,  the  towns  of,  send  am-
bassadors to  England  to  remon-
strate against  the  gift  made  of  the
duchy  to  the  duke  of  Lancaster,

ii,  571  ; succeed  in  the  object  of
their  remonstrance,  582

Additions  to  the  printed  copies  of
Froissart’s  Chronicles,  from  MSS.
in  the  Hafod  library,  i,  196  et
seq.  ; 495  note  ; 622  et  seq.  ; 663
note  ; 664  note  ; 667  ; ii,  467  ;
508  ; 661

Africa,  the  town  of,  besieged  by  the
duke  of  Bourbon,  ii,  468  ; the
siege  abandoned,  483

Agace.Gobin,  conducts  the  English
army  under  king  Edward  III.  to
a ford  on  the  Somme  at  Blanche-
taque,  previous  to  the  battle  of
Crecy,  i,  161

Agen,  the  town  of,  taken  by  the
French  army  under  the  duke  of
Anjou,  i,  445

Aiguillon,  the  castle  of,  in  Gascony,
surrenders  to  the  earl  of  Derby,
i,  136  ; besieged  by  the  duke  of
Normandy,  149  ; the  siege  aban-
doned by  order  of  the  king  of
F ranee  ,170;  taken  by  the  F rench ,
under  the  duke  of  Anjou,  445

Aire,  the  town  of,  in  Artois,  be-
sieged by  the  Flemings  in  the
interest  of  the  king  of  England,
i,  184


Albret,  sir  Perducas  d’,  takes  of-
fence at  the  conduct  of  the  prince
of  Wales,  i,  356  ; marries  the
lady  Isabella  of  Bourbon,  383  ;
complains  to  the  king  of  France
of  a tax  the  prince  of  Wales  was
about  to  impose  upon  the  lands
of  himself  and  other  lords  of
Gascony,  ib.  ; returns  to  the  in-
terest oftheprince  of  Wales,  413;
receives  the  investiture  of  thelands
of  Chaumont,  716;  his  death,  ib.
Albret,  the  lord  Charles  d’,  obtains
permission  from  Charles  YI.  to
quarter  the  fleurs  delis  of  France
alternately  with  his  own  arms,
ii,  424

Alenfon,  the  earl  of,  slain  at  the
battle  of  Crecy,  i,  167
Alenjon,  earl  Peter  d’,  returns  to
France  from  England,  where  he
had  been  as  one  of  the  hostages
for  king  John,  i,  397
Alexandria,  the  town  of,  in  Lom-
bardy, besieged  by  the  count  d’ Ar-
magnac,  ii,  492  ; siege  raised,  494
Aljubarota,  the  battle  of,  between
the  armies  of  Spain  and  Portugal,
ii,  121,  162

Aloise,  the  castle  of,  in  Auvergne,
taken  by  Amerigot  Marcel,  i,  569
St.  Amand,  the  town  of  taken  by
the  earl  of  Hainault,  i,  82
Ambreticourt,  sir  Eustace  d’,  hos-
pitably receives  queen  Isabella  of
England,  after  she  had  fled  from
Paris,  i,  9 ; taken  prisoner  at  the
battle  of  Poitiers,  218;  rescued  by
his  own  men,  220  ; defeated  and
taken  prisoner  at  the  battle  of
Nogent-sur-Seine,  261  ; obtains
his  freedom  and  takes  several
towns  in  Champagne,  264  ; takes
the  town  of  Achery-sur-Aine,  in
Picardy,  274  ; commits  great  de-
vastations in  Picardy,  280  ; made
prisoner  and  ransomed  in  Li-
mousin, 458  ; dies  at  Carentan,
in  Normandy,  ib.

Ambreticourt,  sir  John  d’,  appoint-
ed ambassador  to  the  king  of
Castille,  ii,  288  ; on  his  return
from  Galicia,  goes  to  Paris,  to  ac-
complish a deed  of  arms,  29-2
Amurat,  the  Turkish  commander,
defeated  by  the  Hungarians,  ii,


143  ; invades  Hungary  a second
time,  519

Anchin,  Peter  d’,  takes  the  town  of
Ortingas,  ii,  76  ; sells  it  for  8000
francs,  77

Andreghen,  sir  Arnold  d’,  captured
at  the  battle  of  Poitiers,  i,  219  ;
advises  Henry,  king  of  Castille,
not  to  hazard  a battle  with  the
prince  of  Wales,  367  ; captured
at  the  battle  of  Navaretta,  373

Andreghien,  the  castle  of,  belonging
to  the  earl  of  Flanders,  burnt  and
pillaged  by  the  Whitehoods,  un-
der John  Lyon,  i,  584

St.  Andrews,  the  bishop  of,  taken
prisoner  at  the  battle  of  Nevil’s
Cross,  i,  177

Anghein,  the  lord  d’,  takes  the  town
of  Grammont,  in  Flanders,  for
the  earl,  i,  671  ; slain  before
Ghent,  672

Angle,  sir  Guiscard  d\  appointed
marshal  of  Guienne,  i,  302  ; tra-
vels through  France  to  Acqui-
taine in  disguise,  400  ; created  a
knight  of  the  garter,  469;  cap-
tured by  the  Spaniards  before  La
Rochelle,  473  ; ransomed,  502  ;
appointed  tutor  to  Richard  the
Second,  511  ; dies  in  London,
603,  667

AngoulOme,  the  town  of,  taken  by
the  earl  of  Derby,  i,  141  ; by  the
duke  of  Normandy,  148 ; sur-
renders a second  time  to  the
French,  481

Anjou,  the  duke  of,  left  as  a hostage
for  the  payment  of  the  ransom  of
kingJohn  of  France,  i,  291;  breaks
his  parole,  305  ; summons  his
vassals  to  make  war  on  the  prince
of  Wales  in  Acquitaine,  402  ;
heads  an  army  against  Guienne,
445  ; breaks  up  his  expedition,
450;  leads  an  army  into  Upper
Gascony,  500  ; takes  the  town  of
Lourde,  ib.  ; makes  a truce  with
the  duke  of  Lancaster,  50 1 ; takes
several  places  in  Upper  Gascony,
502  ; undertakes  an  expedition
against  the  English  in  the  Bor-
delois,  518;  takes  the  town  of
Bergerac,  523 ; takes  several  other
places  in  Gascony,  524  et  seq.  ;
returns  to  Toulouse.  528 ; col-


12


iects  another  army  against  the
English  in  Gascony,  543  ; makes
war  on  Brittany,  567  ; receives
the  territories  of  the  queen  of
Naples  as  a gift  from  pope  Cle-
ment, 574;  seizes  the  jewels  of
his  brother  king  Charles  the  Fifth,
617;  seizes  the  government  of
France  as  regent  during  the  mi-
nority of  Charles  the  Sixth,  ib.  ;
makes  preparations  to  march  for
Naples,  677  ; sets  out  for  Italy,
683 ; enters  Naples,  68u  ; dies
at  a castle  near  Naples,  ii,  24 ;
takes  Malvoisin,  83  ; * besieges
Lourde,  but  being  unable  to  take
the  castle,  he  burns  the  town  and
retreats,  88

Anjou,  madame  d’,  queen  of  Na-
ples, advised,  on  the  death  of  her
husband,  the  duke  of  Anjou,  to
solicit  the  pope  for  possession  of
Provence,  ii,  24 ; urges  her  claims
to  this  country,  31  ; makes  her
public  entry  into  Paris  in  com-
pany with  her  son  Lewis  of  Anjou,
king  of  Sicily,  &c.,  344  ; insti-
tutes a lawsuit  in  the  courts  of
Paris  against  sir  Peter  Craon,
593  ; obtains  judgment  against
him,  598

Anjou,  Lewis  of,  son  of  the  duke  of
Anjou,  makes  his  public  entry
into  Paris  as  king  of  Sicily,  &c.,
ii,  344  ; sets  out  from  Avignon
to  Arragon,  405  ; marries  the
daughter  of  the  king  of  Arragon,
406  ; embarks  with  his  young
bride  for  Sicily,  ib.

Anne,  of  Bohemia,  sets  out  for
England,  i,  681  ; married  to
Richard  the  Second,  ib. ; her
death,  ii,  566

Annequin,  sir  Baldwin  d’,  captured
by  sir  Bartholomew  Burghersh,
i,  274

Apologue,  delivered  to  the  cardinals
respecting  the  papacy,  by  friar
John  de  la  Rochetaillade,  ii,  145
Appearances,  wonderful,  in  the
heavens,  seen  by  the  army  of
Philip  von  Artaveld  on  the  eve

* It  may  not  be  improper  to  observe
here,  once  for  all,  upon  a circumstance
which  will  doubtless  excite  the  surprise
of  the  reader,  that  in  this  instance,  as
well  as  several  others  in  different  parts
of  the  Index,  events  are  inserted  subse-
quently to  the  account  of  the  death  of
the  agent.  This  has  arisen  unavoidably
from  the  manner  in  which  Froissart
composed  his  history,  and  from  new  and
additional  information  communicated  to
him  many  years  after  he  had  completed
the  former  part  of  his  work,  and  had
mentioned  the  death  of  the  person  to
whom  such  information  related.  But  it
was  considered  that  it  would  have  been
a vain  and  fruitless  attempt  to  rectify
this  imperfection ; it  has,  therefore,  been
deemed  advisable  to  leave  things  as  they
were  found,  and  to  insert  the  events  se-
lected for  the  Index  in  the  order  and
rotation  in  which  they  appear  noticed
by  the  author  himself.


IN  DEX.

of  the  battle  of  Rosebecque,  i,
740

Ardembourg,  the  town  of,  taken  by
the  men  of  Ghent,  i,  755  ; nar-
rowly escapes  being  taken  a
second  time  by  them,  ii,  37

Ardres,  the  town  of,  in  Picardy,
attacked  ineffectually  by  the
French  forces,  i,  410  ; surrenders
to  the  duke  of  Burgundy,  513

Ardvick,  the  castle  of,  in  Picardy,
taken  by  the  duke  of  Burgundy,

i,  513

Armagnac,  the  lord  of,  complains
to  the  king  of  France  of  a tax
the  prince  of  Wales  was  about  to
impose  upon  the  lands  of  himself
and  other  lords  of  Gascony,  i,
383

Armagnac,  the  count  d’,  obtains
the  remission  of  sixty  thousand
francs  of  his  ransom  of  the  count
de  Foix,  at  the  intercession  of
the  princess  of  Wales,  ii,  73 ;
endeavours  to  prevail  on  the  free
companies  to  sell  their  forts,  298 ;
is  thwarted  by  the  count  de  Foix,
299  ; leads  an  army  into  Lom-
bardy against  the  duke  of  Milan,
488  ; applies  to  sir  John  Hawk-
wood  for  his  assistance,  490  ;
besieges  Alexandria,  491  ; his
death,  493

Armagnac,  sir  Bernard  d’,  does
homage  to  the  king  of  France,

ii,  520

Arnaut,  sir  Peter,  appointed  go-
vernor of  Lourde,  in  Gascony,
ii,  74  ; murdered  by  the  count  de
Foix,  89

Arragon,  the  king  of,  promises  to
assist  king  Henry  of  Castille
against  don  Pedro,  and  the  prince
of  Wales,  i,  350 ; his  death,  ii,
206

Arras,  a conference  held  therewith
the  view  of  bringing  about  a
peace  between  the  kings  of  France
and  England,  i,  87

Artaveld,  Jacob  von,  a citizen  of
Ghent,  governs  all  Flanders,  i,
41  ; sends  ambassadors  to  Ed-
ward the  Third,  to  invite  him
over,  45  ; joins  the  earl  of
Hainault  with  a large  army  be-
fore Thin-l’Ev6que,  70;  attempts
to  disinherit  the  earl  of  Flanders,
and  to  give  the  country  to  the
king  of  England,  142  ; Mur-
dered at  Ghent,  144

Artaveld,  Philip  von,  son  of  the
above,  appointed  governor  of
Ghent,  i,  647  ; leads  the  men  of
Ghent  to  attack  the  earl  of  Flan-
ders at  Bruges,  700  ; defeats  the
earl,  and  takes  Bruges,  703 ;
returns  to  Ghent  in  great  state,
708;  besieges  Oudenarde,  710;
writes  to  the  king  of  France  to
solicit  his  interference  to  make
peace  between  the  country  of
Flanders  and  the  earl,  715;  his
letters  treated  with  contempt,


715  ; imprisons  a messenger  from
the  king  of  France,  719 ; his
answer  to  the  letters  he  had
brought  him,  ib.  ; takes  mea-
sures to  guard  the  passes  of  the
country  against  the  army  of  the
king  of  France,  723  ; after  the
defeat  of  Peter  du  Bois,  collects
a force  to  oppose  the  king  of
France  in  person,  734  ; defeated
and  slain  at  the  battle  of  Rose-
becque, 744

Artois,  lord  James  d’,  captured  at
the  battle  of  Poitiers,  i,  220

Artois,  lord  John  d’,  captured  at
the  battle  of  Poitiers,  i,  220

Artois,  lord  Philip  d’,  marries  the
lady  Mary  of  Berry,  and  is  ap-
pointed constable  of  France,  ii,
555

Artois,  the  lord  Robert  d’,  be-
friends Isabella,  queen  of  Ed-
ward the  Second,  after  she  had
been  commanded  to  quit  France,
i,  8 ; is  himself  banished  by  king
Philip,  34  ; takes  refuge  in  Eng-
land, and  is  created  earl  of  Rich-
mond, 36  ; sent  into  Brittany  to
aid  the  countess  of  Montford
against  the  lord  Charles  of  Blois,
117  : engages  the  lord  Lewis  of
Spain  at  sea,  118;  lands  in  Brit-
tany, 1 1'9  ; takes  the  town  of
Vannes,  120  ; is  besieged  in  it,
ib. ; killed,  ib.

Arundel,  the  earl  of,  besieged  with
king  Edw'ard  the  Second  in  Bris-
tol by  the  queen’s  forces,  i,  1 1 ;
condemned  to  death  and  be-
headed, 12

Arundel,  Richard  earl  of,  defeats
the  Flemish  fleet  under  sir  John
le  Bucq,  ii,  215  ; appointed  to
the  command  of  a naval  expedi-
tion, 333  ; lands  near  la  Rochelle,
347  ; defeats  the  Rochellers  in  a
skirmish,  348  ; lands  in  Nor-
mandy, and  overruns  the  coun-
try, 349;  returns  to  Southampton,
391  ; joins  the  duke  of  Glocester
in  his  attempts  to  excite  dis-
turbances in  England,  637 ; com-
mitted to  the  Tower,  656  ; be-
headed, 657

Arundel,  sir  John,  heads  an  arma-
ment against  France,  and  lands  at
Cherbourg,  i,  544  ; sent  with  a
force  to  the  assistance  of  the
duke  of  Brittany,  593  ; perishes
at  sea,  ib.

Asai,  Guy  d’,  steward  of  Toulouse,
endeavours  to  prevent  the  free
companies  from  entering  France,
on  their  return  from  Spain,  i,
352  ; is  defeated  by  them  before
Montauban,  and  made  prisoner,
354

Assembly,  of  the  lords  of  England
and  France,  held  at  Amiens,  to
treat  of  a peace  between  the  two
countries,  ii,  516 ; breaks  up
without  having  accomplished  the
object  of  its  meeting,  519


INDEX.


1l3


Assembly,  held  at  Rheims  by  the  I
king  of  France  and  the  emperor  |
of  Germany,  to  consult  on  mea-
sures to  put  an  end  to  the  schism
in  the  church,  ii,  659
Assueton,  sir  John,  a Scots  knight,
performs  a gallant  deed  of  arms
at  Noyon,  i,  448

Athenis,  the  town  of,  taken  from
the  English  by  the  duke  of  Nor-
mandy, i,  147

Athens,  the  duke  of,  slain  at  the
battle  of  Poitiers,  i,  221
Atremen,  Francis,  a citizen  of  Ghent,
surprises  the  town  of  Oudenarde,
ii,  7 ; defeats  a party  of  the
French  at  Ardembourg,  30 ;
makes  an  unsuccessful  attempt
to  take  Ardembourg,  ii,  37  ;
murdered  at  Ghent,  177
Attigny,  the  town  of,  in  Cham-
pagne, taken  by  sir  Eustace
d’Ambreticourt,  i,  26’4
Aubenton,  the  town  of,  taken  by
the  earl  of  Hainault,  i,  62
Auberoche,  the  town  of,  in  Peri-
gord,  taken  by  the  earl  of  Derby,
i,  132;  retaken  by  the  duke  of
Anjou,  525

Aubriot,  Hugh,  liberated  by  the
insurgents  at  Paris,  i,  676
Audley,  sir  James,  handsomely
rewarded  by  the  prince  of  Wales
for  his  conduct  at  the  battle  of
Poitiers,  i,  224  ; his  generosity
to  his  squires,  226 ; his  death,  42  I
Audley,  sir  Peter,  makes  an  inef-
fectual attempt  to  take  the  town
of  Chalons,  i,  257
Avesbury,  Robert  of,  his  history  of
the  progress  of  Edward  the  Third
in  Normandy,  quoted,  i,  157
note

Aulnay,  the  town  of,  in  Poitou,
taken  by  the  earl  of  Derby,  i,  171
Auray,  the  castle  of,  in  Brittany,
taken  bythe  lord  Charles  of  Blois,
i,  110;  taken  by  the  lord  John
de  Montford,  336  ; surrenders
to  the  French  forces,  516
Auray,  the  battle  of,  between  the
lord  John  de  Montford  and  the
lord  Charles  of  Blois,  i,  332
Austarde,  Wantaire,  commands  a
troop  of  the  free  companies  at
Roullebois,  i,  31 1

Auterme,  Roger  d’,  bailiff  of  Ghent,
murdered  by  the  Whitehoods,  i,
581

Auterme,  Oliver  d’,  revenges  him-
self on  the  men  of  Ghent  for  the
murder  of  his  brother,  i,  596  ;
banished  from  Flanders,  599
Auxerre,  the  earl  of,  slain' at  the
battle  of  Crecy,  i,  167
Auxerre,  the  earl  of,  captured  at
the  battle  of  Auray,  i,  334  ;
imprisoned  on  account  of  his
alliance  with  don  Henry  of  Cas-
tille,  378

Aymery,  sir  John,  captured  by  the
French,  ii,  103;  slain  at  San-
cerre,  105


B.

Bacon,  a robber  in  Languedoc,
takes  the  castle  of  Cobourne,  in
Limousin,  and  does  other  mis-
chief, i,  190

Bailleul,  sir  William  de,  defeated
in  a skirmish  at  Pont  a Tressin,

i,  80

Bajazet,  the  sultan,  raises  a large
force  to  oppose  the  king  of  Hun-
gary and  John  of  Burgundy,  who
had  invaded  Turkey,  ii,  607  ;
marches  for  Nicopoli,  622  ; de-
feats the  combined  Christian
armies  with  great  slaughter,  624  ;
put  his  prisoners,  with  very  few
exceptions,  to  death,  626  ; dis-
bands his  army,  630  ; a singular
instance  of  his  justice,  648

Ball,  John,  a refractory  priest,
excites  the  people  of  Kent  to
rebellion,  i,  652  ; enters  London
at  their  head,  658 ; taken  and
beheaded,  664

Balon,  the  castle  of,  in  Auvergne,
taken  by  Amerigot  Marcel,  i,  569

Barfleur,  the  town  of,  in  Normandy,
taken  by  Edward  the  Third,  i,
152

Barres,  sir  Barrois  de  (with  other
French  knights),  goes  to  the
assistance  of  the  king  of  Castille,

ii,  167  ; enters  Corunna  to  de-
fend it  against  the  duke  of  Lan-
caster, 170;  acquires  great  wealth
by  destroying  the  country  before
the  English  army,  174

St.  Basile,  the  castle  of,  in  Gas-
cony, taken  by  the  earl  of  Derby,
i,  135;  retaken  by  the  duke  of
Anjou,  525

Bassere,  La,  the  castle  of,  taken  by
the  French  under  sir  Walter  de
Passac,  ii,  130

Batefol,  sir  Seguin  de,  chosen  com-
mander of  a band  of  freebooters
in  Gascony,  i,  294  ; takes  the
city  of  Brioude  in  Auvergne,  300

Battle,  the  noted,  between  thirty
Bretons  and  thirty  English,  i,
191  note

Bayeux,  the  city  of,  taken  by  the
French  under  the  lord'  de  Coucy,

i,  542

Bayonne,  the  town  of,  besieged  by
the  king  of  Castille,  i,  544  ;
taken  bv  the  duke  of  Lancaster,

ii,  192

Bearn,  Peter  de,  his  strange  dreams,
ii,  99

Bearnois,  Perrot  le,  captain  of  some
free  companies,  takes  the  town
of  Moutferrant,  in  Auvergne,  by
stratagem,  ii,  323  ; abandons  it,
and  retires  to  his  forts,  324  ;
takes  the  field  by  order  of  the
earl  of  Arundel,  346;  overruns
the  country  of  Berry,  347

Beaufort,  the  cardinal  de,  elected
pope,  under  the  name  of  Gregory
the  Eleventh,  i,  458


Beaulieu,  William  de,  captured  by
the  English  garrison  of  Cher-
bourg, i,  568

Beaumanoir,  the  lord  of,  endea-
vours to  make  peace  between
the  lord  John  de  Montford  and
the  lord  Charles  of  Blois,  i,  331

Beaumont,  sir  Henry,  takes  Ed-
ward the  Second  prisoner,  while
endeavouring  to  escape  from
Bristol,  i,  12

Beaumont-en-Laillois,  the  town  of,
taken  by  the  earl  of  Derby,  i,

131

Beauvais,  the  country  of,  invaded
by  the  English,  under  Edward
the  Third,  i,  159

Becherel,  the  town  of,  in  Brittany,
besieged  by  the  French  under
the  lord  de  Clisson,  i,  490  ; sur-
renders on  terms,  501,  503

Bel,  John  le,  his  chronicles  adopted
by  Froissart,  as  the  foundation  of
his  own,  i,  1,  3

Belleperche,  the  town  of,  taken  by
the  free  companies  in  the  interest
of  the  prince  of  Wales,  i,  418;
retaken  by  the  duke  of  Bourbon,
442

Benedict,  pope,  elected  at  Avignon,
ii,  564 ; forced  to  resign  his
dignity  by  the  king  of  France
and  the  emperor  of  Germany,
674 ; deposed,  710

Benon,  the  towm  of,  taken  by  the
English  under  the  earl  of  Derby,
i,  171;  retaken  by  sir  Bertrand
du  Guesclin,  484

Bergerac,  the  town  of,  taken  by
the  earl  of  Derby,  i,  130;  re-
taken by  the  duke  of  Anjou,  523

Berkeley,  Thomas,  lord  of,  cap-
tured at  the  battle  of  Poitiers,
i,  222

Berly,  the  town  of,  taken  by  the
forces  of  the  king  of  Navarre,  i,
250

Berry,  John  duke  of,  returns  to
France  from  England,  where  he
had  been  a hostage  for  king  John ,

i,  396 ; collects  his  vassals  to
make  war  on  the  prince  of  Wales
in  Acquitaine,  402  ; invades  Li-
mousin, 445  ; takes  the  town  of
Limoges,  450  ; takes  the  town  of
St.  Severe,  in  Saintonge,  479;
appointed  governor  of  Langue-
doc, 622  ; betrothes  his  daughter
to  the  son  of  the  count  de  Blois,

ii,  28  ; besieges  the  castle  of
Ventadour,  314  ; endeavours  to
win  over  the  duke  of  Brittany  to
the  French  interest,  327 ; pro-
poses to  marry  the  daughter  of
the  duke  of  Lancaster,  336 ;
having  failed,  he  sends  to  the
count  de  Foix,  to  demand  his
ward,  the  daughter  of  the  count
de  Boulogne,  in  marriage,  385  ;
is  married  to  her,  395  ; accom-
panies the  king  of  France  in  his
visit  to  the  pope  at  Avignon,  409  ;
claims  the  liberation  of  his  agent


714


INDEX.


Bethisac,  who  was  under  prosecu-
tion for  mal-administration,  418
Berry,  John  of,  son  of  the  duke  of
Berry,  marries  the  lady  Mary  of
France,  sister  of  Charles  the
Sixth,  ii,  326

Berry,  the  duchess  of,  petitions  her
husband  in  behalf  of  the  lord  de
la  Riviere,  ii,  544 ; supports  the
lord  de  la  Riviere,  in  opposition
to  the  duchess  of  Burgundy,  553
Bersat,  the  town  of,  taken  by  the
English,  i,  554

Berwick,  the  castle  of,  taken  by
Edward  the  Third,  i,  34  ; taken
by  the  Scots,  530 ; retaken  by
the  earl  of  Northumberland,  532
Besenghen,  the  fort  of,  in  Gascony,
taken  by  the  English  under  sir
Thomas  Trivet,  i,  556
Bete,  sir  Symon,  a citizen  of  Ghent,
put  to  death  for  having  endea-
voured to  make  peace  between
that  town  and  the  earl  of  Flan-
ders, i,  675

Bethisac,  John,  the  confidential
agent  of  the  duke  of  Berry  in
Toulouse,  tried  at  Beziers  for
mal-administration,  ii,  417  ; hav-
ing confessed  himself  guilty  of
heresy,  &c.  he  is  burnt  to  death,
420

Bethune,  sir  Robert  de,  takes  the
fort  of  La  Roche  Vandais,  ii,  461
Blanchetaque,  the  battle  of,  be-
tween the  kin.g  of  England  and
sir  Godemar  du  Fay,  i,  161
Blancquefort,  Henry  de,  brother  of
the  emperor  of  Germany,  forcibly
marries  Margaret  of  Hungary,
who  had  been  betrothed  to  Louis
de  Valois,  ii,  46

Blayes,  the  town  of  besieged  by  the
earl  of  Derby,  i,  141
Blois,  the  earl  of,  slain  at  the  bat-
tle of  Cressy,  i,  167
Blois,  lord  Charles  of,  claims  the
duchy  of  Brittany,  i,  92 ; declared
the  lawful  duke  of  Brittany  by
the  parliament  of  Paris,  93  ; en-
ters Brittany  with  a large  force,
assisted  by  the  king  of  France,
94 ; conquers  several  towns  in  the
duchy,  ib.  ; takes  his  adversary,
the  earl  of  Montfort,  prisoner,
95  ; takes  the  town  of  Rennes,
105  ; Besieges  the  countess  of
Montfort  inHennebon,ib. ; takes
the  castle  of  Auray,  110;  takes
the  town  of  Vannes  by  storm,  ib. ;
takes  the  town  of  Carhaix,  112  ;
obtains  possession  of  the  town  of
Jugon  by  treachery,  115  ; enters
into  a truce  with  the  countess  of
Montfort,  ib. ; besieges  La  Roche
d’Errien,  182  ; taken  prisoner  by
the  forces  of  the  countess,  183  ;
sent  to  England,  1 90  ; returns  to
France,  236  ; raises  an  army  to
oppose  lord  John  de  Montfort,
327  ; killed  at  the  battle  of  Auray,
333  ; canonised  by  Urban  the
Fifth,  335


Blois,  Guy,  count  de,  returns  from
England,  where  he  had  been  hos-
tage for  king  John,  i,  397  ; joins
the  king  of  France  against  Eng-
land, 443  ; sells  the  reversion  of
the  county  of  Blois  to  the  duke
of  Touraine,  ii,  513  ; dies  at
Avennes,  in  Hainault,  655

Blois,  John  of,  marries  the  widow
of  William,  count  of  Juliers,  ii,
303  ; his  death,  ib.

Blois,  lord  Lewis  of,  marries  the
lady  Mary  of  Berry,  ii,  326  ;
dies  in  Hainault,  498

Blois,  the  county  of,  the  reversion
of  it  sold  to  the  duke  of  Touraine,
ii,  513

Blondeau,  sir  John,  surrenders  the
castle  of  La  Roche-sur-Yon  to
the  duke  of  Cambridge,  i,  420  ;
put  to  death  in  consequence,  ib.

Bodenay,  sir  Theobald  de,  captured
at  the  battle  of  Poitiers,  i,  221

Bohemia,  Charles  of  Luxembourg
king  of,  slain  at  the  battle  of
Crecy,  i,  166

Bois,  Peter  du,  a citizen  of  Ghent,
chosen  one  of  the  commanders
of  the  Whitehoods  in  that  city,
i,  586  ; narrowly  escapes  being
put  to  death,  645  ; besieges  Cour-
tray,  ib. ; obtains  the  appointment
of  Philip  von  Artaveld  to  be  go-
vernor of  Ghent,  648  ; defends
the  pass  of  Commines  against
the  army  of  the  king  of  France,
728  ; defeated,  with  great  slaugh-
ter, 733  ; prevents  the  town  of
Bruges  from  surrendering  to  the
king  of  France,  738  ; retreats  to
Ghent  after  the  defeat  of  Philip
van  Artaveld,  747  ; encourages
the  men  of  Ghent  to  withstand
the  army  of  the  king  of  France,
749  ; after  a peace  being  con-
cluded between  the  duke  of  Bur-
gundy, as  heir  of  Flanders,  and
the  men  of  Ghent,  he  retires  to
England,  ii,  66

Boniface  IX.  elected  pope  by  the
cardinals  of  Rome,  ii,  427  ; sends
a learned  friar  to  the  king  of
France  to  endeavour  to  gain  him
over  to  his  interest,  522

Bonneval,  the  castle  of,  taken  by
the  earl  of  Derby,  i,  131

Bordeaux,  the  town  of,  besieged
by  the  French  under  the  earl  of
Lisle,  i,  76

Bordeaux,  the  archbishop  of,  im-
prisoned at  Barcelona,  ii,  206  ;
liberated,  208

Bordes,  sir  William  de,  captured  by
the  garrison  of  Cherbourg,  i,  568

Boteler,  sir  John,  of  Warrington,
captured  at  Roche  Perion,  i,  111;
narrowly  escapes  being  put  to
death,  113

Boucicault,  the  lord  of,  taken  pri-
soner at  Romorantinby  the  prince
of  Wales,  i,  212  ; appointed  to
the  command  of  an  expedition
against  the  king  of  Navarre,  310;


takes  the  town  of  Mantes  by  stra-
tagem, 312  ; takes  the  town  of
Meulan,  ib.

Boucicaut,  sir,  the  younger,  with
two  other  French  knights,  holds
a tournament  near  Calais  against
all  comers,  ii.  434

Boucicaut,  the  lord,  taken  prisoner
by  the  Turks  at  the  battle  of  Ni-
copoli,  ii,  625  ; obtains  his  ran-
som, 649;  arrives  at  Venice,  651 ;
appointed  marshal  of  France,
654  ; obliges  pope  Benedict  to
submit  to  the  emperor  of  Ger-
many and  the  king  of  France,
673;  sent  to  Hungary  against  the
Turks,  674

Boule,  John,  a citizen  of  Ghent,
appointed  one  of  the  captains  of
the  Whitehoods  in  that  city,  i,
586  ; put  to  death  by  the  men  of
Ghent,  639

Bourbon,  lord  John  de,  earl  of

■ March,  appointed  to  the  com-
mand of  an  army,  to  go  into  Spain
against  Don  Pedro,  i,  341

Bourbon,  sir  James  de,  captured
by  the  English  at  the  battle  of
Poitiers,  i,  223  ; sent  by  the  king
of  France  to  oppose  the  free
companies,  294  ; completely  de-
feated by  them  at  the  battle  of
Brignais,  297  ; his  death,  ib.

Bourbon,  duke  Peter  de,  slain  at  the
battle  of  Poitiers,  i,  221

Bourbon,  duke  Louis  de,  takes  the
castle  of  Belleperche,  i,  442 ;
heads  an  army  into  Poitou  and
Limousin,  ii,  32  ; takes  Mont-
lieu  in  Saintonge,  33  ; besieges
Taillebourg,  ib. ; takes  Verteuil
and  returns  to  Paris,  47  ; ap-
pointed to  the  command  of  an
army  to  assist  the  king  of  Cas-
tille  against  the  duke  of  Lan-
caster, 214;  arrives  at  Burgos,
293  ; returns  to  France,  294  ;
magnificently  entertained  by  the
count  de  Foix,  295  ; appointed
commander  in  chief  of  an  ex-
pedition against  Barbary,  446;
embarks  at  Genoa,  447  ; lands
with  his  army  before  the  town
of  Africa,  which  he  besieges,
468 ; his  army  suffers  from  the
heat  and  insalubrity  of  the  cli-
mate, 473  ; abandons  the  siege
and  returns  to  France,  481  ;
makes  an  ineffectual  attempt  to
gain  over  the  towns  of  Acquitaine
during  the  imprisonment  of  king
Richard  the  Second,  in  the
Tower,  702

Bourchier,  sir  John,  appointed  go-
vernor of  Ghent,  ii,  24  ; retires
to  England,  66

Bourdeilles,  the  town  of,  taken  by
the  English  under  the  duke  of
Cambridge,  i,  417

Bournezel,  sir  Peter,  lord  de,  sent
on  an  embassy  from  the  king  of
France  to  the  king  of  Scotland,
i,  564  ; arrested  at  Sluys  by  order


INDEX.


715


of  the  earl  of  Flanders,  564  ; re-
turns to  Paris,  ib.

Boutville,  the  town  of,  taken  by
the  French,  i,  562
Brabant,  the  duke  of,  joins  the  Eng-
lish forces  before  Cambray,  i,  5 1 ;
purchases  three  castles  belonging
to  the  duke  of  Gueldres,  ii,  604  ;
appointed  chief  of  the  Langue-
fride,  ib.  ; invades  the  country  of
Juliers,  306  ; defeated  and  taken
prisoner  by  the  dukes  of  Juliers
and  Gueldres,  307  ; obtains  his
liberty,  308  ; his  death,  309
Brabant,  the  duchess  of,  forms  a
marriage  between  the  children  of
Burgundy  and  those  of  Hainault,
ii,  26  ; causes  the  daughter  of
duke  Stephen  of  Bavaria  to  be
brought  to  Fi  ance  to  be  married
to  Charles  the  Sixth,  39  ; applies
to  the  emperor  to  interest  him-
self to  obtain  the  liberation  of
her  husband  from  the  duke  of
Juliers,  307  ; sends  ambassadors
to  solicit  the  assistance  of  France
against  the  duke  of  Gueldres,
311;  besieges  Grave,  334  ; makes
peace  with  the  duke  of  Gueldres,
382

Brabanters,  the,  besiege  Grave,  ii,
334  ; defeated  with  great  slaugh-
ter at  the  bridge  of  Ravestein,

353  ; abandon  the  siege  of  Grave,

354  ; refuse  to  permit  the  king  of
France  and  his  army  to  march
through  their  country,  357

Bramber,  sir  Nicholas,  beheaded  by
order  of  the  duke  of  Gloucester,
&c.,  ii,  281

Brantome,  the  town  of,  taken  by
sir  Bertrand  du  Guesclin,  i,  455
Brest,  the  castle  of,  taken  by  the
earl  of  Montfort  as  duke  of  Brit-
tany, i,  89  ; besieged  by  the
French  under  sir  Bertrand  du
Guesclin,  493  ; succoured  by  the
earl  of  Salisbury,  494  ; besieged
by  sir  Oliver  de  Clisson,  542  ;
besieged  a second  time  by  him,
ii,  129

Breteuil,  the  castle  of,  taken  by  the
king  of  France,  i,  209
Breuse,  the  viscount  de,  captured
by  the  prince  of  Wales  at  the
battle  of  Poitiers,  i,  213
Brian,  sir  Guy,  defeats  a Flemish
fleet  off  the  isle  of  Bas,  on  the
coast  of  Brittany,  i,  465
Brignais,  the  battle  of,  between
lord  James  of  Bourbon  and  the
freebooters,  i,  296
Brignais,  the  castle  of,  taken  by  the
freebooting  companies,  i,  295
Brimeu,  the  lord  de,  taken  prisoner
by  the  English  near  Arras,  i,
608

Brioude,  the  town  of,  taken  by  sir
Seguin  Batefol,  i,  300  ; surrenders
to  the  French,  ii,  108
Bristol,  besieged  by  Isabella,  queen
of  Edward  the  Second,  to  obtain
possession  of  her  husband  and


the  two  sir  Hugh  Spencers,  i,  1 1 ;
surrenders  to  her  forces,  12

Brittany,  John  duke  of,  his  death,
i,  87

Brittany,  duke  of. — Vide  Montfort,
John  de

Brittany,  John  of,  son  of  the  lord
Charles  of  Blois,  obtains  his  ran-
som, after  having  been  long  im-
prisoned in  England,  ii,  212  ;
marries  the  daughter  of  sir  Oliver
de  Clisson,  ib.

Brittany,  the  lords  of,  undertake
the  wardship  of  their  young  duke,
on  the  death  of  his  father  John
de  Montfort,  707

Brittany,  the  duchy  of,  adjudged  to
the  lord  Charles  of  Blois  by  the
parliament  of  Paris,  i,  93

Bruce,  Robert,  king  of  Scotland,
defeats  the  English  under  Edward
the  Second,  at  the  battle  of  Ban-
nockburn, i,  5 ; sends  a defiance
to  Edward  the  Third,  15;  invades
England,  18  ; his  dying  request
to  lord  James  Douglas.  27  ; his
death,  ib.

Bruce,  David,  king  of  Scotland,
dies  at  Edinburgh,  i,  491

Bruges,  the  town  of,  enters  into  an
alliance  with  the  men  of  Ghent,
i,  585  ; taken  by  the  men  of
Ghent,  703;  its  gates  and  walls
demolished,  707 ; submits  to  the
mercy  of  the  king  of  France,  after
the  defeat  of  the  men  of  Ghent
under  Philip  von  Artaveld,  747

Brunes,  lord  Bartholomew  de,  cap-
tured at  the  battle  of  Poitiers,  i,
223

Brux,  the  town  of,  taken  by  the
English  under  sir  James  Audley,
i,  412

Buch,  the  capta  of,  defeats  the
infamous  Jacquerie  of  Beauvoisis,
with  great  slaughter,  i,  242 ; takes
the  town  of  Clermont,  in  Beau-
voisis, 252  ; joins  the  king  of
Navarre,  312  ; captured  at  the
battle  of  Cocherel,  in  Normandy,
321  ; makes  peace  between  the
kings  of  France  and  Navarre,
and  obtains  his  liberty,  338;  pre-
vents the  town  of  Linde  from
being  given  up  to  the  French,
446 ; taken  by  the  French  at
Soubise,  481  ; imprisoned  in  the
Temple  at  Paris,  484  ; his  death,
513

Buckingham,  the  earl  of,  appointed
to  the  command  of  an  army  to  go
to  the  assistance  of  the  duke  of
Brittany,  i,  603 ; arrives  at  Calais,
and  marches  into  France,  604  ;
burns  and  despoils  the  country
of  Champagne,  608  ; overruns
the  countries  of  Gatinois  and
Beauce,  613  ; crosses  the  Sarthe
with  great  difficulty,  617  ; arrives
at  Vannes,  in  Brittany,  greatly
dissatisfied  with  the  conduct  of
the  duke  of  Brittany,  620  ; be-
sieges Nantes,  624  ; remonstrates


with  the  duke  of  Brittany  for  not
having  joined  him,  625  ; raises
the  siege  of  Nantes,  627 ; arrives
at  Vannes,  628  ; returns  to  Eng-
land in  disgust,  634  ; suspected
of  favouring  the  rebellion  of  Wat
Tyler  and  Jack  Straw,  656  ;
created  duke  of  Glocester,  ii , 203.
[For  the  remaining  particulars  of
this  prince,  see  Glocester,
Duke  of.]

Bucq,  sir  John  de,  admiral  of  Flan-
ders, defeated  and  captured  by
the  English  fleet  under  the  earl
of  Arundel,  ii,  216  ; dies  in  Lon-
don, 217

Budes,  Silvester,  makes  war  on  the
Romans  on  the  behalf  of  pope
Clement,  i,  570;  beheaded  at
Mascon,  574

Buffiere,  the  lord  Pierre  de,  cap-
tured at  the  battle  of  Poitiers,  i,
222

Burghersh,  sir  Bartholomew,  takes
the  castle  of  Cormicy,  in  Cham-
pagne, i,  278

Burgundy,  Philip  duke  of,  enters
into  a composition  with  Edward
the  Third  to  spare  his  duchy,  in
his  march  through  France,  i,
279  ; his  death,  300

Burgundy,  Philip  (son  of  king  John
of  France)  duke  of,  his  creation,
i,  322  ; sent  against  the  free
companies  into  Caux,  &c.  323  ;
takes  the  castle  of  Marcheville,
and  several  other  places  in
Beauce,  325,  et  seq.  ; invades
great  part  of  the  country  of
Montbelliard,  326  ; takes  the
town  of  La  Charite,  ib.  ; marries
the  daughter  of  the  earl  of  Flan-
ders, 409  ; appointed  to  the
command  of  an  armament  against
England,  419  ; ordered  to  march
against  the  duke  of  Lancaster  at
Calais,  421  ; takes  the  towns  of
Ardres  and  Ardvick,  513 ; makes
peace  between  the  earl  of  Flan-
ders and  the  men  of  Ghent,  591 ;
appointed  governor  of  Picardy,
622  ; instigates  the  king  of
France  to  make  war  on  Flanders,
712  ; sends  succours  to  the  earl
of  Flanders  to  oppose  the  bishop
of  Norwich,  765 ; obtains  the
town  of  Sluys  in  exchange  for  the
country  of  Bethune,  ii,  43;  makes
peace  with  the  men  of  Ghent,  59 ;
sends  forces  to  the  assistance  of
the  duchess  of  Brabant,  against
the  duke  of  Gueldres,  315  ; goes
to  Blois  to  meet  the  duke  of
Brittany,  343  ; accompanies  the
king  of  France  in  his  visit  to  the
pope,  at  Avignon,  408  ; ordered
to  return,  to  his  great  dissatisfac-
tion, 410;  appointed  regent  of
France  during  the  derangement
of  Charles  the  Sixth,  536  ; treats
sir  Oliver  de  Clisson,  the  constable
of  France,  harshly,  540  ; arrests
several  of  the  king’s  council,  542


716


INDEX.


Burgundy,  John  of,  son  of  the  duke
of  Burgundy,  appointed  com-
mander-in-chief of  an  expedition
against  the  Turks,  ii,  593 ; crosses
the  Danube  with  a large  force,  in
company  with  the  king  of  Hun-
gary, 601  ; takes  by  storm  the
town  of  Comecte,  603  ; besieges
Nicopoli,  607  ; defeated  by  the
Turkish  army  under  the  sultan
Bajazet,  624  ; taken  prisoner,
626  ; obtains  his  ransom,  649  ;
returns  to  France,  654

Burley,  sir  Simon,  taken  by  the
French,  i,  405  ; sent  to  negotiate
a marriage  between  Richard  the
Second  and  the  daughter  of
Charles  of  Bohemia,  emperor  of
Germany,  593  ; advises  the  re-
moval of  the  shrine  of  St.  Tho-
mas from  Canterbury  to  Dover
castle,  by  which  he  gives  great
offence,  ii,  197  ; committed  to
the  Tower  by  order  of  the  com-
missioners of  accounts,  appointed
to  examine  into  his  conduct  dur-
ing his  administration,  267  ;
beheaded,  270

Burley,  sir  Richard,  son  of  the
above,  dies  in  Castille,  ii,  270,
290


C.

Cadillac,  the  town  of,  taken  by
storm,  i,  526

Cadsant,  the  island  of,  taken  by  the
English,  i,  44
Caen,  the  battle  of,  i,  155
Caen,  the  town  of,  taken  by  Edward
the  Third,  i,  156

Cahors,  the  town  of,  turns  to  the
French  interest,  i,  406
Cahours,  Raoul  de,  defeats  the
English  under  sirThomasDagge-
worth  in  Brittany,  i,  201
Calais,  the  battle  of,  between  the
English  and  French  forces,  i,  192
Calais,  the  town  of,  besieged  by
Edward  the  Third,  i,  169 ; surren-
ders to  him,  186

Calverly,  sir  Hugh,  joins  the  prince
of  Wales  in  Acquitaine  with  a
large  body  of  the  free  companies,
i,  404  ; endeavours  to  dissuade
the  bishop  of  Norwich  from
entering  Flanders  with  the  forces
under  his  command,  758
Cambray,  the  city  of,  besieged  by
Edward  the  Third,  i,  50
Cambridge,  the  earl  of,  sent  to  the
assistance  of  the  prince  of  Wales
in  Aquitaine,  i,  403  ; makes  war  in
Perigord  &c.  404;  takes  the  town
of  Bourdeilles,  41 7 ; leads  a body
of  troops  to  the  relief  of  Belle-
perche,  440  ; returns  to  England,
459  ; appointed  to  the  command
of  an  army  to  go  to  the  assist-
ance of  the  king  of  Portugal
against  the  king  of  Castille,  651;
arrives  at  Lisbon,  669 ; returns


with  his  army,  dissatisfied  with  I
the  conduct  of  the  king  of  Portu-
gal, 693,  ii,  69  ; created  duke  of
York,  203.  [For  the  remaining
particulars  of  this  prince  see
York,  the  duke  of]

Camerolles,  the  castle  of,  taken  by
the  duke  of  Burgundy,  i,  325
Campreny,  the  lord  of,  captured  by
the  captal  of  Buch,  i,  282
Candorier,  John,  mayor  of  La
Rochelle,  obtains  possession  of
the  castle  from  the  English,  by
stratagem,  i,  482

Canterbury,  the  archbishop  of,  sent
to  Bristol  by  the  duke  of  Glou-
cester and  the  Londoners,  on  an
embassy  to  Richard  the  Second,
ii,  280 ; conducts  him  to  London,
281  ; sent  to  France  with  an
application  from  the  Londoners
to  the  earl  of  Derby  to  return  to
England,  684  ; conducts  the  earl
to  London,  688

Caponnal,  Caponnel  de,  liberated
by  exchange,  i,  438
Captal,  the  title  explained,  i,  213
note

Carcilhart,  the  fort  of,  taken  by  the
English  under  sir  Thomas  Trivet,
i,  556

Carentan,  the  town  of,  taken  by
Edward  the  Third,  i,  153  ; re-
taken by  the  French  under  the
lord  de  Coucy,  543
Carhaix,  the  town  of,  taken  by  the
lord  Charles  of  Blois,  i,  113
Carogne,  sir  John  de,  kills  James
le  Gris  in  a mortal  combat,  ii,
205

Carquefou,  the  town  of,  taken  by  the
lord  Charles  of  Blois,  i,  95
Cassel,  the  battle  of,  i,  30
Casseres,  the  town  of,  taken  by  the
count  de  Foix,  ii,  78
Cassuriel,  the  castle  of,  in  Auvergne,
taken  by  Amerigot  Marcel,  i,  568
Castillon,  the  town  of,  taken  by
the  duke  of  Anjou,  i,  524
Cervole,  Arnauldde,  the  archpriest,
collects  a body  of  armed  men  and
pillages  Provence,  i,  238  ; cap-
tured at  the  battle  of  Brignais,
297

Chalons,  the  town  of,  unsuccess-
fully attacked  by  sir  Peter
Audley,  i,  257

Chalons,  the  bishop  of,  slain  at
the  battle  of  Poitiers,  i,  221
Chandos,  sir  John,  receives  the
lands  of  St.  Sauveur-le-Vicomte
as  a gift  from  the  king  of  Eng-
land, i,  290  ; appointed  regent
over  all  the  possessions  of  the
king  of  England  in  France,  293  ;
appointed  constable  of  Guienne,
302 ; sent  to  the  assistance  of
the  lord  John  de  Montfort  in
Brittany,  327  ; prevents  a peace
being  concluded  between  John
de  Montfort  and  the  lord  Charles
of  Blois,  331  ; defeats  the  army
of  lord  Charles  at  the  battle  of


Auray,  332  ; advises  the  prince
of  Wales  not  to  persevere  in  his
design  of  enforcing  the  fouage  or
hearth-tax,  and  failing  to  succeed
retires  to  his  country  seat,  384  ;
recalled  by  the  prince,  and  sent
to  make  war  on  the  French  and
Gascon  lords,  399  ; takes  the
town  of  Terrieres,  and  several
others  in  the  Toulousain,  405,
et  seq ; appointed  seneschal  of
Poitou,  421  ; invades  and  pil-
lages the  territories  of  Anjou
and  Rochechouart,  422 ; killed
'in  a skirmish  at  the  bridge  of
Lussac,  437

Chargny,  the  lord  de,  slain  at  the
battle  of  Poitiers,  i,  223

Chargny,  sir  Geoffry  de,  endea-
vours to  gain  possession  of  Calais
by  bribing  the  governor,  sir
Amery  de  Pavie,  i,  192;  defeated
by  the  king  of  England,  195  ;
embarks  for  Scotland  to  offer
his  assistance  against  England,
ii,  18  ; returns,  and  is  in  great
danger  from  the  Zealanders,  22

Chargny-en-Dormois,  the  castle  of,
taken  by  sir  John  Chandos,  i,
274

Charite,  La,  the  town  of,  in  the
Nivernois,  taken  by  the  lord
Lewis  of  Navarre,  i,  324  ; taken
by  the  duke  of  Burgundy,  326  ;
taken  a second  time  by  the
French,  ii,  103

Charles,  emperor  of  Germany,  his
death,  i,  592

Charles  of  Bohemia,  emperor  of
Germany,  collects  a large  army
to  make  war  on  the  duke  of
Gueldres  in  the  cause  of  the
duchess  of  Brabant,  ii,  307  ; re-
ceives his  submission,  308

Charles  the  Fourth,  king  of  France,
takes  measures  to  assist  his  sister
Isabella,  queen  of  Edward  the
Second,  against  her  husband  and
the  Spencers,  i,  6 ; is  prevailed
upon  by  sir  Hugh  Spencer  to
break  up  the  expedition  which
he  had  encouraged  his  sister  to
raise  in  France,  7 ; commands
her  to  quit  the  kingdom,  8 ; his
death,  29

Charles  the  Fifth,  king  of  France,
crownedat Rheims,i,  322 ; makes
peace  with  the  lord  John  de
Montfort,  and  acknowledges  him
lawful  duke  of  Brittany,  338  ;
makes  peace  with  the  king  of
Navarre,  ib. ; raises  an  army  to
make  war  on  Don  Pedro,  king
of  Castille,  340  ; is  advised  to
declare  himself  lord  paramount
of  Guienne,  and  to  renew  the
war  with  England,  390,  393;
summonses  the  prince  of  Wales
to  appear  before  the  parliament
of  Paris  to  answer  the  complaints
of  some  Gascon  lords,  394 ;
makes  preparations  to  renew  the
war  against  the  English,  396 ;


INDEX.


717


gains  over  several  captains  of
the  free  companies,  399  ; sends
his  challenge  to  the  king  of
England,  400  ; prepares  an
armament  for  the  invasion  of
England,  419;  breaks  up  the
expedition  in  consequence  of  the
arrival  of  the  duke  of  Lancaster
at  Calais,  ib.  ; assembles  a large
force,  to  make  war  on  Acquitaine,
443  ; makes  peace  with  the  king
of  Navarre,  444  ; enters  into  an
alliance  with  don  Henry,  king  of
Castille,  408  ; makes  peace  with
the  king  of  Navarre,  491  ; sends
an  army  to  invade  the  duchy  of
Brittany,  492  ; enters  into  a
truce  with  the  English,  506  ;
fits  out  a fleet  for  the  invasion  of
England,  which  does  consider-
able mischief,  512  ; declares  war
against  the  king  of  Navarre, 514;
instigates  the  king  of  Scotland
to  make  war  on  England,  529  ;
seizes  the  possessions  of  the  king
of  Navarre  in  Normandy,  540 ;
sends  an  ambassador  to  the  king
of  Scotland,  563;  his  ambassador
detained  by  the  earl  of  Flanders,
564  ; orders  the  earl  of  Flanders
to  send  the  duke  of  Brittany  out
of  his  dominions,  565  ; puts
himself  under  obedience  to  Cle-
ment as  the  lawful  pope,  570  ;
afflicted  with  a singular  disorder,
615;  his  last  words  and  advice
on  his  death-bed,  616  ; dies  at
Paris,  617

Charles  the  Sixth,  of  France,  crown-
ed at  Rheims,  621 ; sends  an  army
to  the  assistance  of  the  king  of
Castille,  680 ; determines  to  make
war  on  Flanders  in  behalf  of  the
earl,  712;  on  account  of  a dream,
he  chooses  a flying  hart  for  his
device,  714  ; endeavours  to  treat
with  the  Flemings,  718  ; collects
a large  force  to  reduce  them  to
obedience,  722 ; defeats  the  Flem-
ish army  at  the  bridge  of  Corn-
mines,  735  ; receives  the  sub-
mission of  Ypres  and  several
other  places,  737,  et  seq. ; defeats
the  Flemings,  under  Philip  von
Artaveld,  with  great  slaughter,
743  ; enters  Courtray,  747  ; re-
ceives the  submission  of  Bruges,
748  ; returns  to  France,  750 ;
makes  his  entrance  into  Paris,
752  ; assembles  a large  army  to
oppose  the  bishop  of  Norwich  in
Flanders,  767  ; takes  Cassel,  ii,
3 ; and  Bourbourg,  11  ; returns
to  France,  12  ; enters  into  a
truce  with  England,  13 ; prepares
to  renew  the  war,  25 ; marries
the  lady  Isabella,  of  Bavaria,  42q
makes  great  preparations  to  in-
vade England,  174;  promises  to
assist  the  king  of  Castille,  180  ;
joins  his  armament  at  Sluys,  198 ;
puts  off  his  design,  and  disbands
his  army,  203  ; makes  prepara-


tions to  assist  the  king  of  Castille,
214  ; prepares  another  armament
against  England,  under  sir  Oliver
de  Clisson,  236 ; his  designs  frus-
trated by  the  arrest  of  sir  Oliver
by  the  duke  of  Brittany,  242  ;
receives  an  insulting  defiance
from  the  duke  of  Gueldres,  249;
commands  the  duke  of  Brittany
to  restore  to  sir  Oliver  de  Clisson
the  places  which  he  had  unjustly
taken  from  him  for  his  ransom,
261  ; receives  a haughty  answer
from  him,  262  ; promises  to  as-
sist the  duchess  of  Brabant
against  the  duke  of  Juliers,  312  ;
invites  the  duke  of  Ireland  (who
had  been  banished  England  by
the  duke  of  Gloucester  and  his
party)  to  reside  in  France,  331  ;
prepares  an  army  to  invade  Guel-
derland,  355;  sends  ambassadors
to  explain  his  intentions  to  the
emperor  of  Germany,  356  ; re-
ceives favourable  answers,  360  ;
enters  the  duchy  of  Juliers,  379 ;
receives  the  submission  of  the
duke  of  Gueldres,  382  ; returns
to  France,  ib.  ; takes  upon  him-
self the  government  of  France
on  coming  of  age,  384  ; sends
ambassadors  to  the  king  of  Cas-
tille, to  remonstrate  with  him  on
the  marriage  of  his  son,  the  in-
fanta of  Spain,  with  the  daughter
of  the  duke  of  Lancaster,  385  ;
enters  into  a truce  with  the  king
of  England,  395  ; orders  the  duke
of  Ireland  to  quit  France,  407  ;
visits  the  pope  at  Avignon,  408 ;
visits  Montpelier,  &c.  410,  et
seq.  ; receives  the  homage  of  the
count  de  Foix  at  Toulouse,  424  ;
travels  with  great  speed  from
Montpelier  to  Paris,  for  a wager
against  the  duke  of  Touraine,  ib. ;
reproves  the  count  d’Ostrevant
for  accepting  the  order  of  the
Garter  from  the  king  of  England,
480  ; proposes  to  march  to  Italy
to  restore  the  union  of  the  church,
484  ; receives  ambassadors  from
the  king  of  England  with  propo-
sitions for  a peace,  486  ; on  the
death  of  the  count  de  Foix,  sends
ambassadors  to  Ortlies,  to  make
some  arrangements  respecting  the
country,  502  ; meets  the  duke  of
Brittany  at  Tours,  to  make  an
amicable  settlement  of  the  differ-
ences between  them,  507 ; ac-
knowledges the  viscount  de  Cha-
teaubon  heir  and  successor  to  the
count  de  Foix,  510;  agrees  to
marry  his  daughter  to  the  son  of
the  duke  of  Brittany,  512  ; re-
ceives the  commissioners  from  the
king  of  England  at  Amiens,  516  ;
not  being  able  to  conclude  a peace,
he  enters  into  a truce  for  a year,
519  ; commands  the  duke  of  Brit-
tany to  deliver  up  sir  Peter  de
Craon.  who  had  fled  to  Brittany,


after  attempting  to  assassinate
sir  Oliver  de  Clisson,  527  ; after
receiving  the  duke’s  refusal,  he
leads  an  army  against  him  to-
wards Brittany,  529  ; arrives  at
Mans,  530  ; is  accosted  by  a
madman  in  the  forest  of  Mans,
who  orders  him  to  return,  533  ;
becomes  deranged,  534 ; his  expe-
dition is  in  consequence  broken
up,  ib.  ; removed  to  Creil  for  the
benefit  of  his  health,  536  ; reco-
vers his  senses,  546  ; returns  to
Paris,  549  ; in  great  danger  of
losing  his  life  at  a masqued  dance,
550  ; appoints  commissioners  to
negotiate  a peace  with  the  king
of  England  at  Leulinghen,  558  ;
prolongs  the  truce  with  him,  561 ;
relapses  into  his  former  malady,
563  ; sends  Robert  the  hermit  to
England,  to  assist  in  bringing
about  a peace  between  the  two
countries,  584  ; liberates  the  lord
de  la  Riviere  and  sir  John  le
Mercier,  who  had  been  impri-
soned by  his  uncles,  during  his
derangement,  588;  appoints  John,
son  of  the  duke  of  Burgundy,
commander  in  chief  of  an  expe-
dition against  the  Turks  in  Hun-
gary, 593  ; betroths  his  daughter,
the  lady  Isabella,  to  Richard  the
Second  of  England,  599  ; sets  out
for  St.  Omer,  to  meet  the  king  of
England,  611;  has  an  interview
with  him  at  Ardres,  619;  delivers
up  his  daughter  to  him,  620  ;
proposes  to  lead  an  army  into
Lombardy  against  the  duke  of
Milan,  621  ; meets  the  emperor
of  Germany  at  Rheims,  to  confer
upon  measures  to  restore  the  re-
union of  the  church,  659  ; sends
ambassadors  to  pope  Boniface,  to
acquaint  him  with  the  resolutions
of  the  assembly,  669 ; sends  the
same  to  pope  Benedict  at  Avig-
non, 670  ; informed  of  the  im-
prisonment of  Richard  the  Second
in  the  Tower  of  London,  701;  re-
lapses again  into  hisderangement,
ib.  ; his  council  send  persons
over  to  England  to  visit  his
daughter,  queen  Isabella,  during
the  confinement  of  the  king,  703

Charles,  lord  of  Navarre,  causes  the
constable  of  France  to  be  mur-
dered, i,  203  ; obtains  the  king’s
pardon,  205

Charles,  son  of  the  king  of  Na-
varre, marries  the  daughter  of
Henry  of  Castille,  i,  560

Charles,  of  Spain,  earl  of  Angou-
I6me,  appointed  constable  of
France,  i,  202  ; murdered  by
order  of  Charles  of  Navarre,  204

Charter  of  peace,  between  the  king
of  England  and  the  duke  of  Nor-
mandy, i,  284

Chateau-ceaux,  the  castle  of,  taken
by  the  lord  Charles  of  Blois,  i,  94

Chatel-bon,  the  viscount  de,  claims


718


INDEX


the  succession  of  Foix,  ii,  504  ;
his  claim  acknowledged  by  the
king  of  France,  510  ; takes  pos-
session of  the  county  as  his  in-
heritance, 515;  does  homage  to
the  king  of  France,  549
Chatelheraut,  the  town  of,  taken  by
the  French,  i,  440
Chatelmorant,  sir  John  de,  carries
over  from  England  truces  for
three  years,  signed  by  king  Rich-
ard and  his  allies,  ii,  405  ; sent
to  Turkey,  to  treat  for  the  ran-
som of  the  duke  of  Burgundy
and  the  other  officers  taken  at
the  battle  of  Nicopoli,  629
Chatillon,  sir  Hugh  de,  conquers
Ponthieu  from  the  English,  i,
401 ; captured  at  Abbeville,  433  ;
escapes  from  England,  503
Chaumont,  the  hermit,  taken  pri-
soner at  Romorantin  by  the
prince  of  Wales,  i,  211
Chauvigny,  the  lord  of,  taken  pri-
soner by  the  prince  of  Wales,  i,
213  ; quits  the  party  of  the  prince
of  Wales  for  that  of  the  king  of
France,  411

Chauvigny,  the  town  of,  in  Poitou,
taken  by  sir  Bertrand  du  Gue-
sclin,  i,  476

Cherbourg,  the  town  of,  burnt  and
pillaged  by  Edward  the  Third,  i,
153  ; besieged  by  sir  Bertrand  du
Guesclin,  515

Chimay,  the  town  of,  pillaged  by
the  French,  i,  59

Civray,  the  town  of,  in  Poitou,
taken  by  sir  Bertrand  du  Gue-
sclin, i,  489

Civray,  the  battle  of,  i,  488
Clement  the  Sixth,  pope,  dies  at
Avignon,  i,  203

Clement  the  Seventh,  pope,  elected
during  the  lifetime  of  Urban  the
Sixth,  which  causes  a schism  in
the  church,  i,  569  ; is  acknow-
ledged by  the  king  of  France
&c.,  570  ; goes  to  Avignon,  571  ;
presents  the  duke  of  Anjou  with
the  territories  of  the  queen  of
Naples,  which  she  had  given  up
to  his  disposal,  573  ; dies  at
Avignon,  ii,  563

Clermont,  the  town  of,  in  Beau-
voisis,  taken  by  the  captal  of
Buch,  i,  252

Clermont,  the  cardinal  of,  elected
pope,  under  the  name  of  Inno-
cent the  Sixth,  i,  203
Clermont,  lord  John,  slain  at  the
battle  of  Poitiers,  i,  219
Clisson,  the  lord  of,  captured  at
Vannes,  i,  122 ; exchanged  for
lord  Stafford,  124;  beheaded  at
Paris,  125

Clisson,  sir  Oliver  de,  besieges  the
town  of  Becherel,  i,  490 ; be-
sieges la  Roche-sur-Yon,  493 ;
takes  the  town  of  Dinant,  59-3  ;
appointed  constable  of  France,
622;  besieges  Brest,  ii,  129;  his
fleet  dispersed  by  a storm  on  his


voyage  to  Sluys,  to  join  the  arma-
ment of  the  king  of  France,  201 ;
obtains  the  liberation  of  John  of
Brittany  from  England  and  mar-
ries him  to  his  daughter,  213;
makes  preparations  to  invade
England,  236,  239;  arrested  lyy
the  duke  of  Brittany  at  the
castle  of  Ermine,  242;  obtains
his  liberty,  245 ; complains  to
the  king  of  France  of  the  conduct
of  the  duke  of  Brittany,  and
offers  to  resign  his  office  of  con-
stable, 248;  retires  to  Montle-
hery,  249 ; takes  the  towns  of  St.
Malo  and  St.  Matthieu  de  Fine-
Poterne,  335 ; his  castles  restored
to  him  by  the  duke  of  Brittany,
339 ; waylaid  and  severely  wound-
ed by  sir  Peter  de  Craon,  521  ;
on  account  of  his  wealth,  he  in-
curs the  suspicions  and  hatred  of
the  dukes  of  Berry  and  Burgundy,
528 ; treated  with  great  harsh-
ness by  the  duke  of  Burgundy,
540  ; retires  from  Paris,  541  ;
summoned  to  appear  before  the
parliament  of  Paris,  545 ; not
answering  the  summons,  he  is
banished  the  kingdom,  ib.  ; wages
a violent  warfare  against  the  duke
of  Brittany,  556  ; makes  peace
with  him,  589

Clisson,  sir  Walter  de,  slain  at
Brest,  i,  89

Cobourne,  the  castle  of,  in  Limou-
sin, taken  by  a robber  of  the
name  of  Bacon,  i,  1 90

Cocherel,  the  battle  of,  in  Norman-
dy, i,  317

Combat,  the  noted,  between  thirty
Bretons  and  thirty  English,  i,
191  note

Combat  between  sir  Bertrand  du
Guesclin  and  sir  Nicholas  Dag-
worth,  at  Rennes,  i,  236

Combat  between  sir  Aymon  de
Pommiers  and  sir  Foulque  d’Ar-
chiac,  before  the  king  of  France
at  VillenCuve,  i,  303

Combat,  remarkable  one  at  Larre,
between  the  garrison  of  Lourde
and  Tarbe,  ii,  85

Combat,  a mortal,  at  Paris,  between
sir  John  de  Carogne  and  James
le  Gris,  ii,  204

Comecte,  the  town  of,  in  Turkey,
taken  by  storm  by  the  combined
Christian  armies  under  the  king
of  Hungary  and  John  of  Bur-
gundy, ii,  603

Comfit  Box  (drageoir)  a spice-box
used  in  the  dessert  of  the  great,
some  account  of  it,  ii,  423  note

Commissioners  sent  to  France,  to
execute  the  condition  of  the  peace
between  France  and  England,  i,
292

Commissioners  appointed  to  ex-
amine into  the  conduct  of  the
managers  of  the  finances  under
Richard  the  Second,  ii,  267  ;
commit  sir  Simon  Burley  to  the


Tower,  268 ; condemn  him  to
death,  269  ; appoint  a new  coun-
cil for  the  king,  270
Concarneau,  the  town  of,  taken
by  sir  Bertrand  du  Guesclin,  i,
492

Conferences  held  at  Avignon  be-
tween the  French  and  English  to
negotiate  a peace,  i,  205
Conferences  held  at  Leulinghen  for
the  same  purpose,  ii,  560
Connie,  the  castle  of,  taken  by  the
duke  of  Burgundy,  i,  324
Conquet,  the  castle  of,  taken  by  the
forces  of  the  lord  Charles  of  Blois,
i,  109;  retaken  by  sir  Walter
Manney,  ib.

Constance,  the  lady,  daughter  of
don  Pedro,  king  of  Castille,  mar-
ried to  the  duke  of  Lancaster,  i,
467

Convalle,  the  castle  of,  taken  by
the  French  under  sir  Walter  de
Passac,  ii,  134

Copeland,  John,  captures  the  king
of  Scotland  at  the  battle  of  Nevil’s
Cross,  i,  176  ; delivers  him  up
to  the  queen  of  England  by  order
of  king  Edward,  who  was  at
Calais,  178

Corasse,  the  lord  of,  said  to  have
been  served  by  a familiar  spirit
called  Orthon,  ii,  127
Cormicy,  the  castle  of,  taken  by
sir  Bartholomew  Burghersh,  i,
277

Coucy,  the  lord  de,  declines  taking
any  part  in  the  wars  between  the
kings  of  France  and  England,  i,
438 ; leads  a large  army  into
Austria,  507 ; returns  without
having  effected  anything,  ib.  ;
takes  the  town  of  Bayeux,  &c.,
542  ; takes  the  town  of  Evreux,
547  ; appointed  governor  of  Pi-
cardy, 602  ; appeases  the  Parisian
insurgents,  676  ; endeavours  to
gain  over  the  duke  of  Brittany  to
the  French  interest,  ii,  337  ; ac-
companies the  lord  Lewis  of  An-
jou, king  of  Sicily,  to  Arragon,
405  ; refuses  to  accept  the  office
of  constable  of  Prance  after  the
disgrace  of  sir  Oliver  de  Clisson,
554  ; defeats  a large  Turkish
force  near  Nicopoli,  607 ; cap-
tured at  the  battle  of  Nicopoli,
625  ; dies  at  Bursay  in  Turkey,
644

Coucy,  the  lord  Raoul  de,  captured
at  Mauconseil,  i,  249
Coulogne,  sir  Robert  de,  slain  in  a
skirmish  at  Tournehem,  i,  429
Council  of  State,  a new  one  ap-
pointed for  Richard  the  Second
by  the  commissioners  of  accounts,
ri,  270

Courtray,  the  town  of,  turns  to  the
interest  of  the  earl  of  Flanders,
i,  640  ; besieged  by  the  men  of
Ghent  under  Peter  du  Bois,  644;
burnt  by  order  of  the  king  of
France,  750


INDEX.


710


Coutantin,  the  battle  of,  between
the  French  and  English,  i,  232
Craon,  the  lord  of,  taken  prisoner
by  the  prince  of  Wales  at  Romo-
rantin,  i,  212

Craon,  sir  Peter  de,  incurs  the  dis-
pleasure of  the  king  of  France,  ii,
497  ; retires  to  Brittany,  ib. ;
waylays  and  endeavours  to  as-
sassinate sir  Oliver  de  Clisson,
521  ; takes  refuge  in  Brittany,
527 ; endeavours  to  make  his
peace  with  the  king  of  France,
592 ; prosecuted  in  the  courts  of
Paris  by  the  duchess  of  Anjou,
593;  judgment  being  given  against
him,  he  is  committed  to  prison,
5 99  ; obtains  his  liberty,  600  ;
accompanies  Henry,  earl  of  Der-
by, into  England,  687
Crecy,  the  battle  of,  i,  164
Creil,  the  town  of,  taken  by  the
king  of  Navarre,  i,  248
Croisade,  preached  against  the  Sar-
acens, i,  38  ; against  the  free-
booting  companies  by  pope  In-
nocent the  Seventh,  298
Croquart,  a page,  turns  robber,  i,
191  ; killed  by  the  fall  of  his
horse,  192

Crotoy,  the  town  of,  taken  by  Ed-
ward the  Third,  i,  162  ; retaken
by  sir  Hugh  de  Chatillon,  401


D.

Daggeworth,  sir  Thomas,  sent
into  Brittany  to  the  assistance  of
the  countess  de  Montford,  i,  127;
taken  prisoner  before  La  Roche
d’Errien,  182 ; killed  in  Brit-
tany, 201

Daire,  John,  a citizen  of  Calais,  his
patriotic  conduct  during  the  siege
of  that  city  by  Edward  the  Third,

i,  187

Dalkeith,  the  castle  of,  taken  by
Edward  the  Third,  i,  37
Damazan,  the  castle  of,  taken  by
the  duke  of  Normandy,  i,  148
Dammartin,  the  earl  of,  slain  at
the  battle  of  Poitiers,  i,  223
Dampmartin,  the  lord  de,  resists
the  dukes  of  Berry  and  Burgundy
in  their  attempts  to  break  olf  the
marriage  of  his  daughter  with
the  son  of  the  lord  de  la  Riviere,

ii,  544

Damme,  the  town  of,  taken  by  the
men  of  Ghent,  i,  706;  ii,  41;
taken  by  the  king  of  France,  44
David  the  Second,  king  of  Scot-
land, retires  to  France,  i,  46  ;
enters  into  an  alliance  with  king
Philip,  47  ; returns  to  Scotland,
97  ; assembles  an  army  to  invade
England,  ib.  ; takes  the  town  of
Durham,  99 ; besieges  Wark
castle,  100  ; returns  to  Scotland,
102;  invades  England  a second
time,  173;  defeated  and  taken
prisoner  at  Nevil’s  Cross,  175;


sent  to  the  tower  of  London,  179;
liberated  by  a treaty  of  peace,
235  ; comes  to  England  to  meet
the  king  of  Cyprus,  306  ; enters
into  a truce  with  the  king  of
England,  447  ; his  death,  491

Death,  remarkable,  of  a soldier,
who  had  sacrilegiously  robbed  the
church  of  Ronay,  in  Champagne,

i,  262

Deed  of  arms,  between  sir  Thomas
Harpurgan  and  sir  John  des
Barres,  ii,  346

Deed  of  arms,  between  five  English
and  five  French  knights,  before
the  duke  of  Lancaster  at  Bor-
deaux, ii,  392

Deputations  from  the  different
towns  of  England  wait  on  Richard
the  Second  at  Windsor  to  lay
their  grievances  before  him,  and
to  demand  redress,  ii,  266

Derby,  the  earl  of,  appointed  to  the
command  of  a large  army  to  go
into  Gascony,  i,  127  ; takes  Ber-
gerac and  several  other  places  in
Gascony,  128,  et  seq  ; created
duke  of  Lancaster,  197

Derby,  Henry  earl  of,  marries  the
lady  Mary,  daughter  of  the  earl
of  Hereford,  i,  624  ; appointed
the  lieutenant  of  his  father,  the
duke  of  Lancaster,  during  his
absence  in  Spain,  ii,  166  ; chal-
lenged by  the  earl  marshal  of
England  in  the  presence  of  the
king,  661 ; banished  the  kingdom,
666 ; goes  to  Paris,  667 ; the
people  of  England  rise  in  his  fa-
vour, 682;  receives  a request
from  the  people  of  London  to
return  to  England,  684  ; arrives
in  London,  687  ; undertakes  the
government  of  England,  and  de-
termines to  seize  the  throne,  688;
marches  towards  Bristol  against
Richard  the  Second,  689  ; takes
him  prisoner,  and  conducts  him
to  London,  ib.  ; crowned  king
of  England  under  the  title  of
Henry  the  Fourth,  698  ; in  dan-
ger of  being  murdered  by  the
earls  of  Huntingdon  and  Salis-
bury, 704

Derval,  the  castle  of,  besieged  by
sir  Bertrand  du  Guesclin,  i,  493  ;
relieved  by  sir  Robert  Knolies,495

Desponde,  Dinde,  a rich  merchant,
employed  to  negotiate  the  ran-
som of  John  of  Burgundy  and
his  companions  from  the  sultan
Bajazet,  ii,  634

Destournay,  the  lord,  takes  the
town  of  Oudenarde  by  stratagem,

ii,  23

Devereux,  sir  John,  takes  the  castle
of  Uzes,  in  Auvergne,  i,  465

Dighos,  the  town  of,  in  Galicia,  sur-
renders to  the  duke  of  Lancaster’s
army,  230

Dinant,  the  town  of,  in  Brittany,
taken  by  the  forces  of  the  lord
Charles  of  Blois,  i,  109  ; taken  by


the  English  under  Edward  the
Third,  96  ; surrenders  to  the  lord
John  de  Montfort,  336  ; taken  by
sir  Bertrand  du  Guesclin,  492  ;
taken  by  sir  Oliver  de  Clisson,
593

Dissensions  at  York  between  the
archers  of  England  and  the  Haiu-
aulters,  i,  1 6

Dormans,  sir  William  de,  preaches
the  justice  of  the  cause  of  the
French  king,  i,  407
Doublet,  Oliver,  beheaded  at  Rouen,
i,  208

Douglas,  sir  Archibald,  defeated  and
captured  by  sir  Thomas  Mus-
grave,  near  Melrose,  i,  534
Douglas,  lord  James,  departs  for
the  Holy  Land  to  fulfil  the  re-
quest of  Robert  Bruce  the  First,
i,  28  ; killed  in  Spain,  fighting
against  the  Saracens,  ib.

Douglas,  lord  William,  takes  the
castle  of  Edinburgh  by  strata-
gem,!, 77  ; taken  prisoner  at  the
battle  of  Nevil’s  Cross,  177  note
Douglas,  the  earl  of,  invades  Eng-
land with  a large  orce,  ii,  364  ;
takes  the  pennon  of  sir  Henry
Percy  before  Newcastle,  365 ; slain
at  the  battle  of  Otterbourne,  369
Dream,  remarkable,  of  Charles  the
Sixth  of  France,  i,  713
Drue,  the  castle  of,  taken  by  the
duke  of  Normandy,  i,  325
Duel,  at  Paris,  between  James  le
Gris  and  John  de  Carogne,  ii,
203

Dumbarton,  the  castle  of,  taken  by
Edward  the  Third,  i,  36
Dundee,  the  town  of,  burnt  by  Rich-
ard the  Second,  ii,  53
Dunfermline,  the  town  of,  destroyed
by  Richard  the  Second,  ii,  53
Dunkirk,  the  town  of,  taken  by  the
bishop  of  Norwich,  i,  763
Duras,  the  town  of,  taken  by  storm
by  the  duke  of  Anjou,  i,  527
Duras,  the  lord  de,  captured  by  the
French  under  the  duke  of  Anjou,
i,  522  ; turns  to  the  French  in-
terest, but  quits  it  afterwards,
523

Durazzo,  the  lord  Charles  de,  de-
fends the  kingdom  of  Naples
against  the  pretensions  of  the
duke  of  Anjou,  i,  684  ; put  to
death  in  Hungary,  ii,  38
Durham,  the  city  of,  taken  and  de-
stroyed by  the  Scots,  i,  99. —
[This  account  supposed  to  be
fabulous,  102  note. J


E.

Edinburgh,  the  town  of,  taken
by  Edward  the  Third,  i,  36  ; re-
taken by  sir  William  Douglas,
77  ; destroyed  by  Richard  the
Second,  ii,  53

Edward  the  First,  king  of  England,
his  character  and  successes,  i,  4 ;


720


INDEX.


his  singular  request  on  his  death-
bed, 38

Edward  the  Second,  his  character,
i,  4 ; an  account  of  his  family
relations,  5 ; influenced  in  his
government  by  sir  Hugh  Spencer,
ib.  ; shuts  himself  up  in  Bristol
against  the  queen  and  her  party,
1 1 ; taken  prisoner  by  them,  12  ;
confined  in  Berkeley  castle,  13  ;
publicly  deposed,  and  sentenced
by  the  people  of  England  to  be
imprisoned  during  his  life,  14

Edward  the  Third,  crowned  king  of
England,  i,  14;  receives  a defiance
from  Robert  Bruce,  kipgof  Scot-
land, 15  ; leads  a large  army  to
oppose  the  invasion  of  the  Scots,
19;  returns,  25;  marries  the  lady
Philippa  of  Hainault,  26  ; enters
into  a truce  with  the  Scots,  ib.  ;
does  homage  to  the  king  of
France  for  the  duchy  of  Gui-
enne,  32  ; raises  an  army  to  in-
vade Scotland,  36  ; takes  Edin-
burgh and  several  other  places,
ib.  el  seq.  ; returns  to  England,
37  ; takes  measures  to  make  war
on  the  king  of  France,  39  ; soli-
cits the  friendship  of  the  Flem-
ings, 42  ; passes  over  to  Flanders,
and  makes  great  alliances  in  the
empire,  45  ; appointed  vicar-ge-
neral of  the  empire  of  Germany,
47 ; sends  his  defiance  to  the  king
of  France,  48;  besieges Cambray,
50  ; marches  into  France,  52 ;
returns  to  Hainault,  57  ; assumes
the  arms  of  France,  58  ; returns
to  England,  ib.  ; sails  with  a
large  armament  for  Flanders,  72  ;
defeats  the  French  at  sea,  and
arrives  at  Ghent,  73  ; besieges
Tournay,  74  ; returns  t.o  England
in  consequence  of  a truce  being
entered  into,  86 ; receives  the
homqge  of  lord  John  de  Mont-
fort  for  the  duchy  of  Brittany,
92  ; assembles  an  army  to  oppose
an  invasion  of  the  Scots,  97  ; is
enamoured  with  the  countess  of
Salisbury,  100  ; sends  a force  to
the  assistance  of  the  lord  de  Mont-
fort,  105  ; makes  great  feasts  out
of  affection  for  the  countess  of
Salisbury,  115  ; sends  reinforce-
ments into  Brittany,  117  ; heads
a large  army  into  Brittany,  12)  ;
besieges  the  town  of  Vannes,  ib.  ;
besieges  and  takes  several  other
places,  ib.  el  seq.  ; enters  into  a
truce  with  the  French,  and  re-
turns to  England,  124  ; institutes
the  order  of  the  garter,  125;
founds  the  chapel  of  St.  George
at  Windsor,  ib.  ; sends  his  defi-
ance to  the  king  of  France,  12-6;
appoints  the  earl  of  Derby  to  the
command  of  an  expedition  into
Gascony,  127 ; heads  a large  army
into  Normandy,  152  ; takes  the
town  of  Barfleur,  and  several
others,  153,  et  seq.  ; marches  to-


wards Paris,  destroying  the  coun-
try on  his  way,  158;  distressed
to  find  a passage  over  the  Somme,
160  ; is  conducted  to  one  by  a
peasant  named  Gobin  Agace,  161;
engages  the  French  under  king
Philip,  at  Crecy,  and  totally  de-
feats them,  1 66,  et  seq  ; besieges
the  town  of  Calais,  169  ; solicits
the  friendship  of  the  Flemings,
179;  obtains  possession  of  Calais,

186  ; orders  six  respectable  citi-
zens, who,  for  the  security  of  the
other  inhabitants,  had  generously
volunteered  to  submit  themselves
to  his  pleasure,  to  be  put  to  death,

187  ; is  dissuaded  from  his  pur-
pose by  the  queen,  188  ; orders
all  the  old  inhabitants  of  the  town
to  be  expelled,  189  ; makes  his
public  entry  into  Calais,  ib.  ;
enters  into  a truce  with  the  king
of  France,  ib.  ; the  expense  of
his  establishment  at  Calais,  190
note  ; fights  incognito  nearCalais,
under  the  banner  of  sir  Walter
Manny,  192  ; takes  sir  Eustace
de  Ribeaumont  prisoner,  194  ;
presents  him  with  a chaplet  of
pearls  in  honour  of  his  prowess,
195  ; defeats  the  Spaniards  at
sea,  198  ; leads  a large  army  into
France  during  the  imprisonment
of  king  John  in  England,  267  ;
besieges  Rheims,  273  ; takes  the
town  of  Tonnerre,  278  ; enters
into  a composition  with  the  duke
of  Burgundy  to  spare  his  duchy,
279  ; proceeds  towards  Paris,
destroying  the  country  in  his
march,  ib. ; enters  into  a treaty
of  peace  with  the  king  of  France,
284  ; entertains  him  at  Calais,
291 ; returns  to  England,  ib.  ;
declines  embarking  in  the  croi-
sades,  306  ; receives  a defiance
from  the  king  of  France,  400  ;
sends  reinforcements  into  Pon-
tliieu,  &c.,  401  ; sends  to  Bra-
bant and  Hainault  for  assistance,
407  ; enters  into  alliance  with
the  king  of  Navarre,  409  ; sends
the  duke  of  Lancaster  with  a
large  body  of  men  to  Calais,  419;
applies  to  sir  Robert  de  Namur
for  his  assistance,  ib. ; enters  into
a truce  with  the  Scots,  447 ;
makes  peace  with  the  Flemings,
466  ; prepares  an  army  to  invade
France,  470  ; sails  from  South-
ampton, but  is  obliged  to  return
by  contrary  winds,  485  ; enters
into  a truce  with  the  French,
506  ; dies  at  Shene,  510

Edward,  the  Black  Prince  of  Wales,
his  valour  at  the  battle  of  Crecy,
i,  167  ; heads  an  army  into  Gas-
cony, 206  ; invades  the  county  of
Berry,  209  ; takes  the  town  of
Romorantin,  211  ; defeats  and
captures  the  king  of  France  at
the  battle  of  Poitiers,  223  ; em-
barks for  England  with  his  pri-


soner king  John,  233  ; arrives  in
London,  234  ; accompanies  the
king  of  England  in  an  expedition
against  France,  269  ; sets  out  for
Acquitaine,  302 ; makes  prepara-
tions to  assist  Don  Pedro,  king
of  Castille,  349  ; promises  the
king  of  Majorca  to  assist  him
against  the  king  of  Arragon,  355;
offends  the  lord  d’Albret,  356  ;
sets  out  on  his  expedition  iuto
Spain,  359  ; takes  the  town  of
Salvatierra,  363 ; defeats  the  army
of  Don  Henry  de  Trastamare,
king  of  Castille,  at  the  battle  of
Navarreta,  369  ; takes  the  town
of  Najarra,  374  ; sets  out  on  his
return  to  Acquitaine,  displeased
with  the  conduct  of  Don  Pedro,
379  ; arrives  with  his  army  at
Bordeaux,  380  ; endeavours  to
impose  the  fouage,  or  a hearth-
tax,  in  Acquitaine,  383  ; excites
the  discontent  and  opposition  of
many  of  the  lords  of  Gascony,  ib. ;
summoned  to  appear  before  the
parliament  of  Paris  to  answer
their  complaints,  394  ; his  reso-
lute answer  to  the  summons,  395 ;
prepares  to  make  war  on  France,
398  ; recalls  sir  John  Chandos
from  his  retirement,  and  appoints
him  to  the  command  of  a force
against  the  French  and  'Gascon
lords,  399  ; receives  succours
from  England  under  the  earls  of
Cambridge  and  Pembroke,  464  ;
prepares  to  oppose  the  dukes  of
Anjou  and  Berry,  446  ; takes  the
town  of  Limoges  by  storm,  453 ;
on  the  death  of  his  eldest  son
Edward  gives  up  the  duchy  of
Acquitaine  to  the  care  of  his  bro-
ther the  duke  of  Lancaster,  and
returns  to  England,  459  ; his
death,  508  ; visits  the  count
d’Armagnac  at  Tarbes,  ii,  73  ; is
visited  by  the  count  de  Foix,  74  ;
appoints  sir  Peter  Arnaut  gover-
nor of  Lourde,  ib.

Elmham,  sir  William,  committed
to  the  Tower  by  the  commission-
ers of  accounts,  on  a charge  of
having  sold  Bourbourg  and
Gravelines  to  the  French,  ii,
12

English,  the,  their  manners  in  the
time  of  Froissart,  ii,  136

Ententja,  the  town  of,  in  Galicia,
surrenders  to  the  duke  of  Lancas-
ter, ii,  222

Escaudoure,  the  castle  of,  in  Hai-
nault, taken  and  destroyed,  i,  68

Espaign,  the  bourg  d’,  his  remark-
able strength,  ii,  87

Estampes,  the  count  d,  sent  to
endeavour  to  win  over  the  duke
of  Brittany  to  the  French  inte-
rest, ii,  326

Eu,  the  earl  of,  taken  prisoner  by
the  English  under  Edward  the
Third,  i,  155  ; beheaded  at  Paris,
202


INDEX.


721


Eu,  the  count  de.  See  Artois,
Philip  d’

Evan,  of  Wales,  receives  a naval
command  under  the  king  of
France,  i,  474  ; defeats  the  En-
glish in  the  island  of  Guernsey,
ib. ; sent  to  Spain  to  solicit  assist-
ance from  king  Henry,  ib.  ; in-
sults the  earl  of  Pembroke  at  St.
Andero,  475  ; blockades  the  town
of  La  Rochelle,  480  ; takes  the
castle  of  Soubise,  481  ; besieges
Mortmain-sur-mer,  528;  assassi-
nated by  John  Lambe,  546
Evreux,  the  county  of,  subdued  for
the  king  of  France  by  sir  Bertrand
du  Guesclin,  i,  514
Europe,  desolated  by  the  plague,  i,
200

Eustace  de  St.  Pierre,  a citizen  of
Calais,  his  patriotic  conduct  du-
ring the  siege  of  that  town,  i,  137


F.

Famine,  a great  one,  in  France,  i,
251

Faucille,  John  de,acitizen  of  Ghent,
retires  from  the  town  after  the
murder  of  the  bailiff  by  the  White-
hoods,  i,  582  ; dies  at  Lisle,  647
Fay,  sir  Godemar  du,  defends  the
ford  of  Blanchetaque  against  Ed-
ward the  Third  and  his  army,  i,
161 ; defeated  by  the  English,  ib. ;
narrowly  escapes  being  put  to
death,  170

Felton,  sir  William,  killed  in  Spain,
i,  366

Felton,  sir  Thomas,  captured  by  the
French  under  the  duke  of  Anjou,
i,  522

Fenestrages,  the  lord  Broquart  de,
takes  the  town  of  Hans,  i,  260  ;
defeated  and  captured  by  sir  Eus-
tace d’Ambreticourt,  261
Ferdinand,  king  of  Portugal,  de-
clares war  against  John,  king  of
Castille,  i,  649  ; applies  to  Eng-
land for  assistance,  650 ; takes
the  field  against  the  Spaniards,
691  ; makes  peace  with  the  king
of  Castille,  692 ; marries  his
daughter  the  infanta  to  him,  694  ;
his  death,  ib. ; marries  the  wife
of  one  of  his  knights,  ii,  152
Ferrol,  the  town  of,  taken  by  the
king  of  Portugal,  ii,  256
Flanders,  the  origin  of  the  civil  wars
in,  i,  575

Flanders,  the  nobility  of,  make  war
on  the  men  of  Ghent,  i,  60
Flanders,  the  earl  of,  slain  at  the
battle  of  Crecy,  i,  167
Flanders,  Lewis  earl  of,  betrothed
through  the  constraint  of  the
Flemings,  to  Isabella,  daughter
of  the  king  of  England,  i,  179;
escapes  into  France,  181  ; mar-
ries the  daughter  of  the  duke  of
Brabant,  196  ; detains  an  ambas-
sador from  the  king  of  France  to
VOL.  II.


the  king  of  Scotland,  564;  sup-
ports the  cause  of  pope  Urban  in
his  dominions,  against  the  Cle-
mentists,  570  ; endeavours  to  put
down  the  Whitehoods,  which  had
been  revived  at  Ghent,  580  ; col-
lects a force  to  make  war  on  them ,
584 ; makes  peace  with  them,  591 ;
comes  to  Ghent  at  the  entreaty
of  the  inhabitants,  595  : endea-
vours to  prevail  on  them  to  lay
aside  the  Whitehoods,  ib.  ; causes
JohnPruniaux  to  be  beheaded , 599 ;
goes  to  Bruges  at  the  request  of
the  inhabitants,  637  ; renews  the
war  with  the  men  of  Ghent,  ib.  ;
besieges  the  town,  640  ; defeats
the  men  of  Ghent  under  Rassa  de
Harzelle,  and  burns  a body  of
them  in  the  church  of  Nevele,
643  ; besieges  again  the  town  of
Ghent,  670  ; defeated  by  the  men
of  Ghent  at  Bruges,  703 ; escapes
with  great  difficulty  to  Lisle,  706 ;
applies  to  the  king  of  France  for
assistance,  722  ; becomes  an  ob-
jectofhatred  to  the  English,  756 ;
applies  to  the  duke  of  Burgundy
for  assistance  to  oppose  the  bishop
of  Norwich,  757 ; dies  at  St.
Omer,  ii,  14  ; the  ceremony  of
his  funeral,  15

Flemings,  the,  under  Colin  Donne-
quin,  defeated  at  Cassel  by  Phi-
lip of  Valois,  i,  30

Flemings,  under  Jacob  van  Arta-
veld,  promise  to  assist  Edward
the  Third  against  the  king  of
France,  i,  58  ; remain  firm  to
their  alliance,  notwithstanding
the  solicitations  of  the  king  of
France,  63

Flemings,  the,  under  Robert  d’Ar-
tois,  flee  in  confusion  from  before
St.  Omer,  i,  85

Flemings,  the,  refuse  to  disinherit
the  earl  of  Flanders,  i,  142  ; con-
strain him  to  be  betrothed  to  the
daughter  of  the  king  of  England,
180;  besiege  the  town  of  Aire,
1 84  ; defeated  by  the  English  off
the  island  of  Bas,  466 ; make
peace  withtheking  of  England,  ib.

Foix,  Gaston  Phoebus,  count  of,  his
passion  for  dogs,  i,  xxi ; defeats
the  infamous  Jacquerie  of  Beau-
voisis,  with  great  slaughter,  at
Meaux,  242  ; visits  the  prince  of
Wales  at  Tarbes,  ii,  74;  remits,
at  the  entreaty  of  the  princess  of
Wales,  sixty  thousand  francs  of
the  ransom  of  the  count  d'Ar-
magnac,  ib.  ; takes  the  town  of
Casseres  from  the  Armagnacs,
78  ; his  riches  and  liberality,  84  ;
murders  sir  Peter  Arnaut,  89

Foix,  the  count  de,  obtains  Mal-
voisin  from  the  king  of  France  as
a gift,  ii,  90  ; origin  of  the  wars
between  him  and  the  Armagnacs,
92  ; his  character  and  manner  of
life,  94  ; kills  his  son  and  heir
Gaston,  95  ; his  manner  of  keep-


ing the  feast  of  St.  Nicholas,  100  :
rapidly  and  in  a secret  manner
informed  of  the  battle  of  Aljuba-
rota,  126;  grants  permission  to
the  French  army  to  pass  through
his  territories,  on  their  way  to
Castille,  225  ; magnificently  en-
tertains the  duke  of  Bourbon
on  his  return  towards  France,
293 ; prevents  the  count  d’Ar-
magnac  from  succeeding  in  his
attempt  to  purchase  the  forts  oc-
cupied by  the  free  companies,
299  ; marries  his  ward,  the  daugh-
ter of  the  count  of  Boulogne,  to
the  duke  of  Berry,  394 ; does
homage  to  the  king  of  France  at
Toulouse  for  the  county  of  Foix,
424  ; his  death,  499  ; and  fune-
ral, 503

Foix,  Evan  of,  burnt  to  death  at  a
masked  dance  in  Paris,  ii,  551
Fongasse,  Laurence,  an  ambassador
from  Portugal  to  England,  relates
to  the  duke  of  Lancaster  the
events  which  had  happened  in
Portugal  after  the  departure  of
the  earl  of  Cambridge,  ii,  152
Fontenay  le  Comte,  the  castle  of,
taken  by  sir  Bertrand  du  Gues-
clin, i,  484

St.  Forget,  the  castle  of,  taken  by
sir  Walter  de  Pascal,  ii,  130
Forsath,  in  Gascony,  taken  by  the
earl  of  Derby,  i,  130
Fouage,  the  nature  of  the  tax  so
called,  i,  381,  note
Friesland,  invaded  by  the  count  of
Hainau't,  ii,  615

Froissart,  sir  John,  his  preface  to
his  chronicles,  i,  1 ; his  reasons
for  visiting  the  count  de  Foix,  ii,
68  ; sets  out  for  Bearn,  in  com-
pany with  sir  Espaign  du  Lyon,
who  informs  him  of  many  parti-
culars relative  to  the  wars  in  Gui-
enne,  75  ; arrives  at  Orthes,  94  ;
becomes  acquainted  with  the
Bastot  de  Mauleon,  101  ; his  de-
scription of  the  manners  of  the
English  and  Gascons  in  his  time,
136;  travels  to  Middleburgh,  in
Zealand,  148;  receives  informa-
tion relative  to  the  affairs  of  Por-
tugal, ib, ; is  informed  of  the  par-
ticulars of  the  arrest  of  sir  Oliver
de  Clisson  by  the  duke  of  Brit-
tany, 259  ; returns  to  France  from
Bearn,  in  company  with  the  lord
de  la  Riviere  and  sir  William  de
la  Tremouille,  397  ; goes  to  Hol-
land, ib. ; returns  to  Paris  to
witness  queen  Isabella’s  public
entrance  into  that  city,  398  ;
visits  England  in  the  reign  of
Richard  the  Second,  ii,  568  ; pre-
sents his  book  of  love  poems  to
the  king,  577

G.

G abiclle,  the,  a tax  upon  salt,  im-
posed through  France,  i,  206
3 A


INDEX.


Galande,  the  castle  of,  in  Brittany,
taken  by  sir  Bertrand  du  Gues-
clin,  i,  492

Garliz,  Gomez,  beheaded  by  order
of  don  Pedro,  i,  376
Gars,  the  abbe  de,  beheaded  at
Amiens,  i,  251

Gascons,  the,  oppose  the  attempt  of
the  prince  of  Wales  to  impose  a
hearth  tax  on  the  country,  i,  383
Gascons,  the,  their  manners  in  the
time  of  Froissart,  ii,  136
Geneva,  the  cardinal  de,  elected
pope  during  the  life-time  of  Ur-
ban the  Sixth,  i,  570
Genoa,  its  state  and  condition  in
the  time  of  Froissart,  ii,  138
Genoese,  the,  raise  a large  army  to
invade  Barbary,  ii,  446  ; besiege
the  town  of  Africa,  468  ; break
up  their  expedition,  483
Gente,  sir  Guisebert,  a citizen  of
Ghent,  killed  for  having  endea-
voured to  make  peace  between
the  town  and  the  earl  of  Flanders,
i,  675

Genville,  the  earl  of,  captured  at
the  battle  of  Poitiers,  i,  221
St.  George,  the  chapel  of,  at  Wind-
sor, founded  by  Edward  the
Third,  i,  125

Germany,  the  emperor  of,  attends  a
great  assembly  at  Rheims,  with
the  king  of  France,  to  consult
upon  means  to  restore  the  union
of  the  church,  ii,  659  ; deposed,
710

Ghent,  the  town  of,  besieged  by
the  earl  of  Flanders,  i,  640,  670
Ghent,  the  men  of,  put  to  death
Jacob  van  Artaveld,  i,  142  ; re-
vive the  custom  of  the  White-
hoods,  and  elect  John  Lyon  their
captain,  578  ; apply  to  the  earl
of  Flanders  to  preserve  their
franchises,  579  ; murder  the  bai-
liff of  Ghent,  581  ; endeavour  to
make  their  peace  with  the  earl,
583 ; enter  into  alliance  with  other
towns  of  Flanders,  586;  choose
new  leaders,  after  the  death  of
John  Lyon,  ib. ; enter  into  al-
liance with  the  town  of  Ypres,
587  ; besiege  Oudenarde,  ib.  ;
march  to  attack  the  earl  of  Flan-
ders, in  Dendremonde,  588  ;
make  peace  with  the  earl,  591  ;
take  the  town  of  Oudenarde,
597  ; surrender  it  to  the  earl’s
forces,  599  ; destroy  the  houses
of  the  nobility,  600  ; put  to  death
John  Boule,  one  of  their  com-
manders, 639  ; take  several  towns
in  Flanders,  64 1 ; defeated  with
great  slaughter  at  Nevele,  where
several  hundreds  of  them  are
burnt  in  a church,  643  ; besiege
Courtray,  645  ; greatly  distressed
for  provisions,  but  relieved  by
the  men  of  Liege,  694 ; defeat
the  earl  of  Flanders  at  Bruges,
703  ; take  the  town  of  Bruges
and  several  others,  ib.  et  seq. ;


besiege  Oudenarde,  709  ; endea-
vour to  form  an  alliance  with
England,  716  ; defeated  at  the
pass  of  Commines,  under  Peter
du  Bois,  733 ; defeated,  under
Philip  van  Artaveld,  at  the  battle
of  Rosebecque,  743  ; endeavour
to  make  peace  with  the  earl,  751 ;
take  the  town  of  Ardembourg,
755  ; assist  the  English  at  the
siege  of  Ypres,  765;  defeat  a
party  of  the  French  at  Ardem-
bourg, ii,  30  ; take  Damme,  41  ;
make  peace  with  the  duke  of
Burgundy,  the  heir  of  Flanders,
62

Gloucester,  the  duke  of,  [for  the
preceding  particulars  of  this
prince  see  Buckingham,  the
earl  of,]  his  creation,  ii,  203  ;
confederates  with  the  duke  of
York  and  others  against  Richard
the  Second  and  his  council,  263  ;
defeats  the  king’s  forces,  under
the  duke  of  Ireland,  near  Oxford,
278  ; thwarts  the  king  in  his  in-
tentions of  making  peace  with
the  king  of  France,  495  ; plots
the  destruction  of  the  king,  635  ;
instigates  the  Londoners  to  peti-
tion for  a repeal  of  the  war  taxes,
638  ; arrested  by  order  of  the
king,  644  ; put  to  death  at  Ca-
lais, 656

Gomegines,  the  lord  of,  defeated
and  taken  prisoner  on  his  way  to
join  the  king  of  England  before
Rheims,  i,  275

Goodman,  James,  chosen  leader  of
the  infamous  Jacquerie  of  Beau-
voisis,  i,  240

Goy  la  Foret,  the  castle  of,  taken
by  sir  Walter  Manny,  i,  112  ;
surrenders  to  sir  Bertrand  du
Guesclin,  492

Gramat,  the  town  of,  taken  by  sir
John  Chandos,  i,  415

Grammont,  the  town  of,  in  Flan-
ders, taken  by  the  lord  d’An-
ghein,  i,  671

Grave,  the  town  of,  besieged  by  the
Brabanters,  ii,  334

Gravelines,  the  town  of,  taken  by
the  bishop  of  Norwich,  i,  759

Gravelle,  the  lord  of,  beheaded  at
Rouen,  i,  208

Gregory  the  Eleventh,  pope,  elected
at  Avignon,  i,  458  ; endeavours
to  make  peace  between  the  kings
of  France  and  England,  499  ;
removes  to  Rome,  537  ; his
death,  ib.

Griffith,  a Welshman,  commands  a
troop  of  the  free  companies,  and
pillages  several  places  in  France,

i,  238

Gris,  James  le,  killed  in  a duel  at
Paris  by  sir  John  de  Carogne,

ii,  203

Gueldres,  the  duke  of,  promises  to
assist  the  king  of  England  against
France,  i,  407 ; enters  into  an
alliance  with  England,  ii,  249,


310  ; sends  an  insulting  defiance
to  the  king  of  France,  249  ; en-
deavours to  obtain  possession  of
three  castles  belonging  to  his
duchy,  which  had  been  sold  to
the  duke  of  Brabant,  310 ; obtains
possession  of  Grave,  334 ; defeats
the  Brabanters  at  the  bridge  of
Ravestein,  353 ; makes  peace  with
the  king  of  France  and  the  duchess
of  Brabant,  382  ; taken  prisoner
in  Prussia,  389  ; delivered  by  the
Teutonic  knights,  ib. ; returns  to
Prussia  to  keep  his  faith  with  his
capturer,  and  obtains  his  liber-
^ ty,  ib.

Guerrande,  the  town  of,  taken  by
the  forces  of  the  lord  Charles  of
Blois,  i,  109

Guesclin,  sir  Bertrand  du,  chosen
commander  of  the  French  forces
in  Normandy,  i,  318  ; defeats  the
forces  of  the  king  of  Navarre  at
the  battle  of  Cocherel,  321  ; ob-
tains possession  of  the  castle  of
Roulleboise,  323  ; goes  to  the
assistance  of  the  lord  Charles  of
Blois,  327  ; taken  prisoner  at  the
battle  of  Auray,  333  ; ransomed,
341  ; leads  an  army  into  Spain,
ib.  ; appointed  constable  of  Cas-
tille,  343  ; goes  to  the  assistance
of  Henry  of  Castille  against  don
Pedro  and  the  prince  of  Wales,
359  ; captured  at  the  battle  of
Navaretta,  373;  obtains  his  ran-
som, 381  ; joins  king  Henry  be-
fore Toledo,  386 ; again  appointed
constable  of  Spain,  390  ; joins
the  duke  of  Anjou  in  an  expedi-
tion against  the  prince  of  Wales,
444 ; invades  the  viscounty  of
Limoges,  453  ; takes  the  town  of
Yrier,  ib.  ; appointed  constable
of  France,  455 ; defeats  the  forces
of  sir  Robert  Knolles  at  Pont-
valin,  456  ; takes  the  castle  of
Monmorillon  and  several  other
places  in  Poitou,  476,  et  seq.  ;
heads  an  army  against  Brittany,
492  ; takes  the  town  of  Rennes
and  several  others,  ib.,  et  seq. ;
sent  with  a large  army  against  the
king  of  Navarre,  514  ; makes  war
on  Brittany,  567  ; dies  at  Au-
vergne, 601  ; the  etymology  of
his  name,  ii,  260  ; see  also  261,
note

Guesclin,  sir  Oliver  du.  made  pri-
soner by  the  garrison  of  Cher-
bourg, i,  553

Guincamp,  the  town  of,  taken  by
sir  Bertrand  du  Guesclin,  i,  492

Guistelles,  the  lord  de,  appeases  an
insurrection  at  Bruges  against
the  French  troops,  ii,  202


H.

Hainault,  the  country  of,  invaded
by  the  French,  i,  58,  65;  in
danger  of  being  pillaged  by  the


INDEX.


723


Bretons  belonging  to  the  army  of
Charles  the  Sixth,  of  France,  748
Hainault,  sir  John  of,  offers  his
assistance  to  Isabella,  queen  of
Edward  the  Second,  i,  9 ; escorts
her  to  England,  11  ; assists  her
at  the  siege  of  Bristol,  ib. ; assists
the  king  of  England  in  an  expe-
dition against  the  Scots,  16  ; his
territories  invaded  by  the  king  of
France,  58  ; appointed  governor
of  Ilainault  during  the  absence  of
the  earl  in  England,  62  ; quits
the  allegiance  of  England  for
that  of  France,  145
Hainault,  William  earl  of,  father  of
Philippa,  queen  of  England,  his
death,  i,  43

Hainault,  William  earl  of,  son  of
the  above,  sends  his  defiance  to
the  king  of  France,  i,  61  ; takes
the  town  of  Aubenton,  &c.,  ib.  ;
visits  England,  62 ; Germany,
69;  returns  to  Hainault,  70;
assembles  a large  army  to  raise
the  siege  of  Thin-l’Ev6que,  ib.  ;
burns  the  town  of  Seclin,  &e.  76  ;
takes  the  town  of  St.  Amand,
83;  Utrecht,  145;  slain  in  Fries-
land, ib.

Hainault,  the  count  of,  raises  an
army  to  invade  Friesland,  ii,  612  ;
overruns  the  country,  and  dis-
bands his  forces,  617
Harcourt,  the  earl  of,  beheaded  at
Rouen,  i,  208

Harcourt,  the  young  earl  of,  makes
peace  with  the  duke  of  Nor-
mandy, i,  259

Harcourt,  sir  Godfrey  de,  banished
from  France,  i,  142  ; accom-
panies the  king  of  England  in  an
expedition  into  Normandy,  151 ;
created  one  of  the  marshals  of  his
army,  152 ; defeats  a body  of  men
from  Amiens  on  their  march  to
join  the  king  of  France,  159  ;
carries  on  the  war  in  Normandy
for  the  king  of  Eugland,  232  ;
defeated  and  slain  at  the  battle
of  Coutantin,  233
Harcourt,  sir  John,  returns  to
France  from  England,  where  he
had  been  as  hostage  for  king
John,  i,  397

Harlestone,  sir  William,  appointed
governor  of  Cherbourg,  i,  516  ;
defeats  a body  of  French  troops
under  sir  William  de  Bourdes,
whom  he  captures,  517
Harsley,  William  de,  a physician
of  France,  cures  king  Charles  the
Sixth  of  France  of  his  first  de-
rangement, ii,  547 ; dies  at  Laon,
548

Harzelle,  Rasse  de,  chosen  one  of
the  commanders  of  the  White-
hoods  of  Ghent,  i,  586 ; takes
several  towns  in  Flanders,  642  ;
killed  in  an  engagement  with  the
earl  of  Flanders,  643
Harzelles,  the  lord  de,  Killed  at
Ghent,  ii,  24


Haspres,  the  town  of,  burnt  by  the
French,  i,  60

Hawkwood,  sir  John,  an  English
commander,  enters  into  the  ser-
vice of  Urban  the  Sixth  in  Italy,

i,  574

Helly,  sir  James  de,  taken  prisoner
by  the  Turks  at  the  battle  of
Nicopoli,  ii,  62.4 ; sent  to  France
with  information  of  the  defeat  of
the  army  of  John  of  Burgundy,
627  ; obtains  his  liberty,  631  ;
returns  to  France,  635
Hennebon,  the  town  of,  in  Brittany,
taken  by  the  earl  of  Montford,
as  duke  of  Brittany,  i,  91  ; be-
sieged by  the  lord  Charles  of
Blois,  105,  113;  taken  by  sir
Bertrand  du  Guesclin,  492
Henry  the  Fourth,  of  England,
crowned  during  the  life-time  of
Richard  the  Second,  ii,  699
Henry  de  Trastamare,  enters  Cas-
tille  with  a large  army  to  dethrone
his  brother  don  Pedro,  i,  342  ;
acknowledged  and  crowned  king
of  Castille  by  the  Spaniards,  343 ;
takes  measures  to  oppose  don
Pedro  and  the  prince  of  Wales,
349 ; defeated  at  the  battle  of
Navarretta,  374;  escapes  to  Ar-
ragon,  377  ; makes  war  on  the
prince  of  Wales  in  Aquitaine,
378  ; makes  war  on  don  Pedro,
assisted  by  the  king  of  Arragon,
384 ; defeats  don  Pedro  near
Montiel,  387 ; puts  him  to  death,
389  ; obtains  the  submission  of
Castille,  390  ; enters  into  alliance
with  the  king  of  France,  467  ;
makes  war  on  the  king  of  Navarre,
514;  concludes  a peace  with  him,
560  ; his  death,  ib.

Henry,  the  infant  of  Spain,  marries
the  daughter  of  the  duke  of  Lan-
caster, ii,  393  ; crowned  king  of
Castille,  488

Heurielle,  the  castle  of,  taken  by
the  king  of  Navarre,  i,  248
Holland,  sir  John,  kills  lord  Ralph
Stafford,  ii,  50

Hostages,  sent  to  England  for  king
John  of  France,  i,  291
Huet,  sir  Walter,  killed  in  a skir-
mish in  Brittany,  i,  498
Hungary,  the  king  of,  applies  to
the  court  of  France,  for  assist-
ance against  the  sultan  Bajazet,

ii,  593  ; crosses  the  Danube  with
a large  army,  accompanied  by
John  of  Burgundy  and  his  forces,
601  ; takes  the  town  of  Comecte
by  storm,  603;  besieges  Nicopoli,
607  ; his  army  defeated  by  Ba-
jazet, 624

Huntingdon,  the  earl  of,  proclaims
a tournament  at  Oxford  with  the
view  of  murdering  king  Henry,
ii,  704  ; slain  at  Cirencester,  706


I.

St.  Iago  be  Compostella,  the
town  of,  in  Galicia,  taken  by  the
duke  of  Lancaster,  ii,  171
Innocent  the  Sixth,  pope,  elected
at  Avignon,  i,  203  ; endeavours
to  make  peace  between  the  kings
of  France  and  England,  and  the
kings  of  France  and  Navarre,
212 ; orders  a croisade  to  be
preached  against  the  free  com-
panies, 298  ; his  death,  801
Insurrection  in  Paris  against  Charles
the  Sixth,  i,  676
Insurrection  at  Rouen,  i,  677
Insurrection,  a general,  in  England,
in  favour  of  the  earl  of  Derby
against  Richard  the  Second,  ii,
682

Interview  between  the  king  of  Por-
tugal and  the  duke  of  Lancaster,
ii,  186

Interview  between  tbe  kings  of
France  and  England  at  Ardres,
ii,  620

Ireland,  the  earl  of  Oxford  created
duke  of,  ii,  203 ; incurs  the  hatred
of  the  people  of  England,  264  ;
obtains  a divorce  from  his  wife,
the  lady  Philippa,  ib.,  271 ; endea-
vours to  counteract  the  measures
of  the  commissioners  of  accounts
and  the  new  council  of  state,
272  ; marches  from  Bristol  to-
wards London  as  lieutenant  for
the  king,  276 ; defeated  near
Oxford  by  the  Londoners,  under
the  duke  of  Gloucester,  278  ; flies
the  kingdom,  279 ; invited  to
France,  331  ; ordered  thence,  408
Irish,  their  manners  and  mode  of
warfare,  ii,  578

Isabella,  queen  of  Edward  the  Se-
cond, declared  ineligible  to  the
crown  of  France,  i.  5 ; incurs
the  hatred  of  sir  Hugh  Spencer,
6 ; lays  her  grievances  before  her
brother,  Charles  the  Fourth  of
France,  and  solicits  his  advice
and  assistance,  ib.  ; commanded
to  quit  France,  8 ; lands  in  Eng-
land with  a considerable  force,
and  is  joined  by  the  English
barons,  10;  takes  her  husband
prisoner  at  Bristol,  1 1 ; confines
liim  in  Berkeley  castle,  12;  enters
London  amidst  great  rejoicings,
13  ; obtains  the  coronation  of  her
son  Edward  the  Third,  14  ; sus-
pected of  being  pregnant  by  sir
Roger  Mortimer,  31  ; committed
to  prison  by  order  of  the  council,
ib.  ; dies  in  London,  302
Isabella,  daughter  of  Edward  the
Third  of  England,  betrothed  to
Lewis  earl  of  Flanders,  i,  179
Isabella,  the  lady,  of  Bavaria,
married  to  Charles,  the  Sixth  of
France,  ii,  42  ; makes  her  public
entry  into  Paris,  398
Isabella,  daughter  of  Charles  the
3 A 2


INDEX.


721

Sixth,  betrothed  to  Richard  the
Second  of  England,  ii,  599  ; de-
livered to  him  by  king  Charles
at  Ardres,  620  ; married  to  him
at  Calais,  621


J.

Jacquerie,  the  rise  of  an  infamous
body  of  men  in  Beauvoisis  under
this  appellation,  i,  240  ; their
atrocities,  ib.  ; a large  number  of
them  destroyed  by  the  king  of
Navarre,  241 ; thousands  of  them
slain  at  Meaux  by  the  earl  of  Foix
and  the  captal  of  Buch,  242

James,  king  of  Cyprus,  interests
himself  to  obtain  the  liberation  of
John  of  Burgundy  and  his  com-
panions, who  were  prisoners  in
Turkey,  ii,  645

St.  Jean  d’Angely,  the  town  of,
taken  by  the  earl  of  Derby,  i,
171  ; surrenders  to  the  French,
202,  431

Jews,  the,  persecuted  through
Europe,  i,  200

John,  son  of  Philip  of  Valois,
crowned  king  of  France,  i,  202  ;
makes  his  public  entry  into  Paris,
ib.  ; prevents  a combat  between
the  duke  of  Lancaster  and  the
duke  of  Brunswick,  203  ; takes
possession  of  the  lands  of  the
king  of  Navarre  in  Normandy,
205  ; coins  florins  of  gold,  which
were  called  lamb  florins,  ib.  ;
marches  an  army  against  the  king
of  England,  207 ; gives  the  duchy
of  Normandy  to  his  eldest  son,
the  dauphin  of  Vienne,  ib.  ; ar-
rests the  king  of  Navarre,  208  ;
marches  an  army  against  the  duke
of  Lancaster,  209  ; collects  an
army  to  oppose  the  prince  of
Wales,  210  ; defeated  and  taken
prisoner  at  the  battle  of  Poitiers,
'223  ; surrenders  to  the  prince  of
Wales,  224  ; embarked  for  Eng-
land, 234;  rides  through  London,
ib. ; confined  in  Windsor  castle,
ib. ; enters  into  a treaty  with  the
king  of  England  and  the  prince  of
Wales,  263  ; the  French  council
refuse  to  ratify  it,  ib.  ; sent  to
the  Tower  of  London,  269  ; ob-
tains his  liberty,  and  returns  to
France,  290  ; magnificently  en-
tertained at  Paris,  292  ; quarrels
with  the  king  of  Navarre,  300  ;
yisits  the  pope  at  Avignon,  301  ;
puts  on  the  cross,  303  ; returns
to  England,  307  ; his  death,  310 ;
buried  at  St.  Denis,  314,  and
note

John,  don,  son  of  Henry  de  Tras-
tamare,  crowned  king  of  Castille,
i,  560  ; makes  war  on  Portugal,
649  ; takes  the  field  against  the
king  of  Portugal  and  the  earl  of
Cambridge,  691  ; makes  peace
with  the  king  of  Portugal,  692 ;


marries  his  daughter,  694  ; sends
his  defiance  to  the  new  king  of
Portugal,  and  raises  an  army  to
make  war  on  him,  ii,  71,  155;
besieges  Lisbon,  72,  156;  applies
to  the  king  of  France  for  assist-
ance, 73  ; abandons  the  siege  of
Lisbon,  113  ; takes  the  field
against  the  king  of  Portugal,  116;
defeated,  with  great  slaughter,  at
the  battle  of  Aljubarota,  121,
163  ; enters  into  a truce  with  the
king  of  Portugal,  126  ; applies  to
France  for  assistance  against  the
king  of  Portugal  and  the  duke  of
Lancaster,  180  ; grants  permis-
sion to  the  duke  of  Lancaster  to
send  his  men  into  Castille  to  re-
cruit their  health,  289  ; regains
possession  of  Galicia  after  the
departure  of  the  duke  of  Lancas-
ter, 329  ; sends  ambassadors  to
the  duke  of  Lancaster,  to  demand
his  daughter  for  the  infant  of
Spain,  341  ; makes  peace  with
the  duke,  391  ; marries  his  son
to  the  lady  Catherine  of  Lancas-
ter, 393  ; his  death,  488

John,  don,  grand  master  of  Avis,
declared  king  of  Portugal,  i,  694  ;
ii,  71,  153;  crowned,  71,  158;
sends  ambassadors  to  England  to
solicit  the  alliance  of  Richard  the
Second,  72,  109  ; raises  an  army
to  make  war  on  the  king  of  Cas-
tille, 116;  defeats  him  at  the
battle  of  Aljubarota,  121,  163;
enters  into  a truce  with  him  ,126;
sends  ambassadors  to  solicit  the
assistance  of  the  duke  of  Lancas-
ter, 149  ; receives  favourable
answers,  165  ; writes  friendly
letters  to  the  duke  of  Lancaster
on  his  arrival  in  Galicia,  180  ;
has  an  interview  with  him,  186  ;
marries  the  lady  Philippa,  daugh-
ter of  the  duke  of  Lancaster,  221 ;
takes  the  field  against  the  king
of  Castille,  251  ; burns  the  town
of  Santarem,  254;  takes  Ferrol,
255  ; forms  a junction  with  the
duke  of  Lancaster  at  Orense,282 ;
dismisses  his  army,  290

John  of  Gaunt,  earl  of  Richmond,
created  duke  of  Lancaster,  i,  302

John,  friar,  de  la  Rochtaillade,  de-
livers an  apologue  before  the
cardinals  concerning  the  papacy,
ii,  145

Joigny,  the  earl  of,  captured  by  the
prince  of  Wales,  i,  213  ; taken
prisoner  at  the  battle  of  Auray,
334

Joigny,  the  lord  Raoul  de,  taken
prisoner  by  the  prince  of  Wales,
i,  213

Joinville,  the  fort  of,  taken  by  the
free-booting  companies,  i,  293

Jouel,  sir  John,  joins  the  king  of
Navarre,  i,  313  ; slain  at  the
battle  of  Cocherel  in  Normandy,
321

Jouy,  the  count  de,  burnt  to  death


at  a masked  dance  at  Paris,  ii,
551

Jugon,  the  town  of,  taken  by  the
lord  Charles  of  Blois  through
treachery,  i,  115;  retaken  by  the
lord  John  de  Montfort,  336 ;
surrenders  to  sir  Bertrand  du
Guesclin,  492

St.  Julien,  Louis  de,  takes  the
town  of  Chatelheraut,  i,  439
Juliers,  William  count  de,  made
duke  of  Gueldres,  ii,  303
Juliers,  the  duke  of,  promises  as-
sistance to  the  king  of  England
against  France,  i,  408 ; defeats
the  duke  of  Brabant  with  great
slaughter,  ii,  307  ; makes  his
peace  with  the  emperor,  308  ;
makes  his  submission  to  the  king
of  France,  378 ; makes  peace
between  the  duke  of  Gueldres
and  the  king  of  France,  382


K.

Kent,  the  earl  of,  beheaded  through
the  jealousy  of  sir  Robert  Morti-
mer, i,  30

Knights  Bachelors,  the  signification
of  their  title,  i,  83  ; note

Knights  Bannerets,  an  account  of
their  title  and  rank,  i,  26  ; note

Knights  of  the  Garter,  the  order
instituted  at  Windsor  by  Edward
the  Third,  i,  125  ; the  names  of
the  first  knights,  ib. ; note

Knights  of  the  Hare,  the  origin  of
their  title,  i,  57

Knights  of  the  Star,  the  first  of
that  order,  i,  202

Knolles,  sir  Robert,  commands  a
troop  of  the  free  companies  in
Normandy,  i,  288  ; makes  an
incursion  into  Berry  and  Au-
vergne, 265 ; goes  to  the*assist-
ance  of  the  prince  of  Wales,  412;
appointed  captain  of  the  prince
of  Wales’s  companies,  413  ; sum-
moned to  England  by  king  Ed-
ward, 442 ; leads  an  army  into
Picardy,  447  ; enters  into  a com-
position to  save  the  country  from
being  pillaged,  448  ; defeated  at
Pont  Valin  by  sir  Bertrand  du
Guesclin,  457  ; he  retreats  into
Brittany,  ib. ; incurs  the  displea-
sure of  the  king  of  England,  465 ;
some  account  of  his  life,  ib.  note ;
reinstated  in  his  favour,  ib. ; ap-
pointed governor  of  Brittany,
492  ; captures  the  lord  de  Mau-
voisin,  61  7


L.

Lac,  Le,  the  town  of,  takenby  the
earl  of  Derby,  iy  130
Lamb  florins,  first  coined,  i,  205
Lambe,  John,  assassinates  Evan  of
Wales  at  Mortmain-sur-mer,  i,
546


INDEX.


725


Lancaster,  Thomas,  earl  of,  be-
headed through  the  enmity  of  sir
Hugh  Spencer,  i,  6

Lancaster,  Henry,  earl  of,  brother
of  the  former,  joins  the  party  of
queen  Isabella  against  Edward
the  Second  and  the  Spencers,  i,  1 1

Lancaster,  the  duke  of,  son  of  earl
Henry,  lands  in  Coutantin  to
assist  Philip  of  Navarre  against
the  king  of  France,  i,  209  ; takes
the  town  of  Vemeuil,  ib. ; be-
sieges Rennes,  235  ; leads  a large
army  into  Picardy,  266  ; per-
suades the  king  of  England  to
make  peace  with  the  duke  of
Normandy,  283  ; dies  of  the
plague,  300

Lancaster,  John  of  Gaunt,  duke  of,
his  creation,  i,  302 ; embarks
with  a large  army  for  Aquitaine,
355  ; leads  a large  army  into
France,  419 ; returns  to  England,
433  ; embarks  with  a large  force
for  Aquitaine,  444  ; appointed
governor  of  Aquitaine,  459;  takes
Mont  Paon,  462  ; Marries  the
lady  Constance,  daughter  of  don
Pedro  of  Castille,  467  ; returns  to
England,  468  ; leads  an  army
through  France  to  Bordeaux,
496,  et  seq.  ; enters  into  a truce
with  the  French,  and  returns  to
England,  506  ; made  regent  of
England,  during  the  minority  of
Richard  the  Second,  511  ; heads
an  army  into  Brittany,  514  ; be-
sieges St.  Malo,  ib.,  544;  aban-
dons the  siege,  552  ; informed  of
the  death  of  don  Henry,  king  of
Castille,  562  ; sent  to  treat  with
the  Scots,  651  ; makes  a truce
with  them,  665  ; refused  admis-
sion into  Berwick  castle,  ib.  ;
returns  to  Scotland  with  the  earl
of  Douglas,  666 ; sent  for  by
king  Richard,  667 ; offended  with
the  earl  of  Northumberland,  668 ;
appeased  by  the  king,  669  ; ob-
tains an  army  to  make  war  on
Castile,  ii,  165  ; embarks  for  Por-
tugal, 166  ; forces  the  French  to
raise  the  blockade  of  Brest,  168  ;
arrives  at  Corunna,  170;  takes
the  town  of  St.  Iago  de  Compos-
tella  and  several  others  in  Galicia,
in  , et  seq. ; makes  war  on  Arra-
gon,  207  ; marries  his  daughter,
the  lady  Philippa,  to  the  king  of
Portugal,  221 ; takes  the  towns
of  Entenc;a,  &c.,  225,  et  seq.  ;
suffers  greatly  from  the  heat  of
the  climate,  282  ; forms  a junc-
tion with  the  king  of  Portugal,
283  ; passes  the  Duero,  284 ;
dispirited  by  the  sickness  of  him-
self and  army,  286  ; disbands  his
men,  287 ; obtains  permission
from  the  king  of  Castille  for  them
to  recruit  their  health  in  his
towns,  289  ; quits  Galicia  and
returns  to  Bayonne,  296,  329 ;
applies  to  England  for  fresh  as-


sistance, 330;  betroths  his  daugh-
ter Catherine  to  the  infant  of
Spain,  384  ; makes  peace  with
the  king  of  Castille,  39 1 ; mar-
ries his  daughter  to  the  infant,
393  ; receives  the  duchy  of  Aqui-
taine as  a gift  from  king  Richard
and  his  council,  566 ; embarks
for  Aquitaine,  568 ; ordered
to  return  in  consequence  of  the
remonstrances  of  the  towns  of
Aquitaine  against  the  king’s  gift,
582  ; marries  his  concubine,  599  ;
offended  with  king  Richard  for
the  murder  of  the  duke  of  Glou-
cester, 658  ; makes  peace  with
him,  ib. ; his  death,  676
Lancaster,  the  duchess  of,  takes
her  daughter  to  Castille,  and  mar-
ries her  to  the  infant,  ii,  393 ;
finds  the  bones  of  her  father,  don
Pedro,  and  has  them  buried  at
Seville,  ib.

Langon,  the  town  of,  taken  by  the
earl  of  Derby,  i,  130;  surrenders
to  the  duke  of  Anjou,  502
Langurant,  the  lord  de,  captured  by
the  duke  of  Anjou,  i,  521 ; turns
to  the  French  interest,  523 ;
slain  near  Cardillac,  561
Launoy,  John  de,  one  of  the  com-
manders of  the  men  of  Ghent,
slain  at  the  church  of  Nevele,  i,
644

Lauton,  sir  John,  slain  before  La
Rochelle,  i,  473

Le  Clerc,  Arnold,  one  of  the  com-
manders of  the  men  of  Ghent,
defeats  a party  of  the  Flemish
nobility  at  Oudeuarde,  i,  646  ;
Defeated  and  slain  at  Berchem,
ib.

Leon,  king  of  Armenia,  arrives
in  France,  after  losing  his  do-
minions, ii,  137  ; relieved  by  the
king  of  France,  143;  his  death,
144,  note  ; endeavours  to  nego-
tiate a peace  between  the  kings
of  France  and  England,  199
Leon,  sir  Herve  de,  captured  be-
fore Vannes,  i,  122  ; liberated  by
king  Edward,  126;  dies  at  Paris,
ib.

Letter,  from  Edward  the  Black
Prince  to  the  bishop  of  Wor-
cester, after  the  battle  of  Poitiers,
i,  229,  note

Letter,  sent  by  the  king  of  England
to  Aquitaine,  i,  439
Lewis,  the  lord,  of  Spain,  raises  the
siege  of  Hennebon,  i,  108  ; takes
the  town  of  Dinant,  &c.,  109  ;
defeated  at  Quimperle  by  sir  Wal-
ter Manny,  110 ; engages  lord
Robert  d’ Artois  at  sea,  118
Libourne,  the  town  of,  taken  by  the
earl  of  Derby,  i,  132
Liege,  the  bishop  of,  endeavours  to
make  peace  between  the  earl  of
Flanders  and  the  bishop  of  Nor-
wich, i,  706

Lieux,  the  town  of,  taken  by  the
earl  of  Derby,  i,  132


Lignac,  sir  Helion  de,  sent  to  treat
with  the  duke  of  Lancaster  for
the  marriage  of  his  daughter  to
the  duke  of  Berry,  ii.  336
Lignac,  sir  William  de,  seneschal
of  Saintonge,  takes  the  castle  of
Aigle,  ii,  33  ; accompanies  the
duke  of  Bourbon  to  the  assistance
of  the  king  of  Castille,  214  ; ar-
rives at  Burgos,  233
Limoges,  the  town  of,  surrenders  to
the  duke  of  Berry,  i,  450  ; taken
by  storm  by  the  prince  of  Wales,
453

Linde,  the  town  of,  besieged  by  the
duke  of  Anjou,  i,  446  ; delivered
by  the  captal  of  Buch,  ib.
Linieres,  sir  Maubrun  de,  dies  at
Noya,  ii,  291

Lionel,  earl  of  Ulster,  created  duke
of  Clarence,  i,  302  ; marries  the
daughter  of  the  lord  Galeas  of
Milan,  382  ; his  death,  390
Lisbon,  the  city  of,  besieged  by  the
king  of  Castille,  ii,  72,  156
Lisle,  the  earl  of,  makes  war  in  Gas-
cony for  the  king  of  France,  i,  76;
besieges  Auberoehe,  132  ; taken
prisoner  by  the  earl  of  Derby,  134
St.  Lo,  the  town  of,  taken  by  the
English  under  king  Edward,  i,
154

London,  the  bishop  of,  appointed
to  accompany  the  duke  of  Lan-
caster in  an  expedition  against
Spain,  i,  757

Londoners,  the,  dissatisfied  with
king  Richard  and  his  council,
apply  to  the  duke  of  Gloucester
to  take  upon  him  the  government
of  the  realm,  ii,  265  ; wait  upon
the  king  at  Windsor  to  lay  their
grievances  before  him,  and  to
demand  redress,  266  ; prevail
upon  the  king  to  fix  a day  to  ex-
amine into  the  conduct  of  those
who  had  had  the  management  of
the  finances,  267  ; defeat  the
duke  of  Ireland  and  the  king’s
forces,  near  Oxford,  278  ; wait
upon  the  king,  at  the  instigation
of  the  duke  of  Gloucester,  to  de-
mand the  repeal  of  the  taxes
which  had  been  imposed  to  carry
on  the  war  with  France,  638 ;
take  part  with  the  earl  of  Derby
in  his  quarrel  with  the  earl  mar-
shal, 664 ; rise  in  favour  of  the
earl  of  Derby  against  Richard  the
Second,  683 ; send  the  archbishop
of  Canterbury  to  France  to  bring
back  the  earl  of  Derby,  684
Longueval,  sir  William  de,  takes
the  castle  of  Mont  Paon,  i,  460  ;
surrenders  it  to  the  duke  of  Lan-
caster, 462

Lorraine,  the  duke  of,  slain  at  the
battle  of  Crecy,  i,  167
Lorris,  sir  Launcelot  de,  mortally
wounded  at  Cherbourg,  i,  567
Louis,  de  Valois,  (parries,  by  pro-
curation, Margaret  of  Hungary,
ii,  39


72G


INDEX.


Lourde,  the  garrison  of,  take  several
places  in  France,  ii,  75,  et  seq.

Louvaine,  sir  Nicholas,  governor  of
Abbeville,  taken  prisoner  by  sir
Hugh  de  Chatiilon,  i,  401

Louvier,  the  town  of,  taken  by  the
English,  underEdwardthe  Third,

i,  158

Luna,  the  cardinal  de,  elected  pope
at  Avignon,  under  the  title  of
Benedict  the  Eleventh,  ii,  564

Lusignan,  the  town  of,  in  Poitou,
taken  by  the  earl  of  Derby,  i,  1 71 ;
surrenders  to  sir  Bertrand  du
Guesclin,  489

Lusignan,  Peter  de,  king  of  Cyprus,
arrives  at  Avignon,  i,  303  ; visits
Germany  to  exhort  the  emperor  to
join  the  croisade  against  the  Sara-
cens, 304  ; visits  the  king  of  Na-
varre, 305  ; endeavours  to  pre-
vail on  the  king  of  England  to
put  on  the  cross,  306 ; goes  to
Aquitaine  to  solicit  the  prince
of  Wales  to  do  the  same,  307  ;
returns  to  Paris,  313  ; put  to
death,  ii,  138

Lussac,  the  town  and  castle  of,
taken  by  sir  Bertrand  du  Gues-
clin, i,  476

Luxembourg,  sir  Peter  de,  his  body
said  to  show  miraculous  powers,

ii,  312

Luzumont,  the  castle  of,  in  Brittany,
taken  by  sir  Bertrand  du  Gues-
clin, i,  492

Lyon,  John,  a citizen  of  Ghent,
revives  the  custom  of  the  White-
hoods,  i,  578  ; instigates  the  men
of  Ghent  to  demand  of  the  earl
of  Flanders  the  preservation  of
their  franchises,  579  ; burns  and
pillages  the  castle  of  Andreghein,
belonging  to  the  earl,  583  ; dies
at  Ardembourg,  586

Lyon,  sir  Espaing  du,  accompa-
nies Froissart  to  Bearn,  and  re-
lates to  him  many  particulars
relative  to  the  wars  in  Guienne,
&c.  ; ii,  75

M.

St.  MAHE,the  town  of,  in  Brittany,
surrenders  to  sir  Bertrand  du
Guesclin,  i,  492

Maillart,  John,  a citizen  of  Paris,
prevents  the  city  being  betrayed
by  theprovostof merchants, i,  246

Majorca,  James,  king  of,  applies  to
the  princeof  Wales  for  his  assist-
ance against  the  king  of  Arragon,
i,  355  ; accompanies  the  prince
and  Don  Pedro  into  Spain,  361  ;
taken  prisoner  at  Valladolid,  by
king  Henry  of  Castilie,  384  ;
ransomed  by  his  wife,  the  queen
of  Naples,  466 : makes  war  on
the  king  of  Arragon,  ib.  ; dies
at  Val  di  Soria,  467

St.  Maixant,  the  town  of,  in
Poitou,  taken  by  the  duke  of
Berry,  i,  483


Maleval,  sir  Louis  de,  tunas  to  the
French  interest,  i,  438

St.  Malo,  the  town  of,  surrenders
to  sir  Bertrand  du  Guesclin,  i,
492 ; besieged  by  the  duke  of
Lancaster,  544

Malvoisin,  the  castle  of,  taken  by
the  duke  of  Anjou,  ii,  83

Mandarant,  the  castle  of,  taken  by
the  earl  of  Derby,  i,  130

Manners  of  the  English  and  Gas-
cons in  the  time  of  Froissart,  ii,
136

Manny,  sir  Courageous,  left  for
dead  at  the  battle  of  Nogent-
sur-Seine,  i,  261

Manny,  sir  Giles,  killed  before
Cambray,  i,  59

Manny,  sir  Walter,  makes  an  in-
cursion into  France,  i,  49  ; sent
with  an  English  force  into  Brit-
tany, to  the  assistance  of  the
countess  of  Montfort,  105  ;
arrives  at  Hennebon,  108  ; re-
takes the  castle  of  Conquet,  1 09 ;
defeats  the  lord  Lewis  of  Spain,
at  Quimperle,  1 10  ; takes  the
castle  of  Goy  la  Foret,  111  ;
accompanies  the  earl  of  Derby
into  Gascony,  128  ; finds  the
sepulchre  of  his  father  at  La
Reole,  138  ; defeats  the  French
under  sir  Geoffrey  de  Chargny,
before  Calais,  192  ; dies  in  Lon-
don, 468

Mantes,  the  town  of,  taken  by  the
French  under  the  lord  de  Bou-
cicaut,  i,  312

Marans,  the  town  of,  in  the  Rochel-
lois,  taken  by  sir  Bertrand  du
Guesclin,  i,  48

Marcel,  Amerigot,  takes  the  castle
of  Cassuriel,  and  other  places,  in
Auvergne,  568,  et  seq.  ; takes
by  surprise  the  castle  of  Marquel,
ii,  8 ; fortifies  himself  in  La
Roche  Vandais,  451  ; besieged
by  the  viscount  de  Meaux,  454  ;
sends  to  England  to  solicit  the
duke  of  Lancaster  for  assistance,
455  ; during  his  absence  at
Perigord,  his  fort  surrenders,  462 ;
betrayed  by  a relative,  to  whom
he  had  applied  for  an  asylum,
463  ; beheaded  at  Paris,  465

Marcel,  Etienne,  provost  of  the
merchants  of  Paris,  kills  three
knights  in  the  apartment  of  the
regent,  i,  239 ; builds  a wall
round  Paris,  241  ; killed  by  John
Maillart,  while  attempting  to
betray  the  city  to  the  English
and  Navarrois,  246

March,  the  earl  of,  taken  pri-
soner by  the  English  at  the
battle  of  Nevil’s  Cross,  i,  177;
appointed  constable  of  the  En-
glish army  under  Edward  the
Third,  269

Marchiennes,  the  monastery  of,
taken  by  the  Hainaulters,  i,  83

Marcheville,  the  castle  of,  taken  by
the  duke  of  Burgundy,  i,  325


Mardt,  John  de,  unjustly  executed
at  Paris,  i,  754

Margaret,  countess  of  Hainault,
takes  possession  of  the  country,
as  her  inheritance,  after  the  death
of  earl  William,  i,  145
Margaret  of  Hungary,  married  by
procuration  to  Louis  de  Valois,
ii,  38  ; forcibly  married  by  Henry
de  Blancquefort,  brother  to  the
emperor  of  Germany,  46
Marneil,  sir  Raymond  de,  turns  to
the  French  interest,  i,  438  ; taken
prisoner  by  the  English,  458  ;
makes  his  escape,  459
Marquel,  the  castle  of,  in  Auvergne,
taken  by  Amerigot  Marcel,  ii,  8
Marriage,  concluded  between  the
children  of  Burgundy  and  those
of  Hainault,  ii,  28
Marshal,  the  earl,  of  England,
challenges  the  earl  of  Derby  in
the  presence  of  king  Richard,  ii,
661 ; banished  the  kingdom,  666;
dies  at  Venice,  710
St.  Maubert,  the  fort  of,  taken  by
the  English  under  the  lord
Neville,  i,  550

Maubue,  lord,  beheaded  at  Rouen,
i,  208

Mauconseil,  the  castle  of,  taken  by
the  king  of  Navarre,  i,  248  ; be-
sieged by  the  duke  of  Normandy,
249  ; razed  to  the  ground,  262
Maudurant,  Geronnet  de,  captured
by  sir  John  de  Bonnelance,  ii,
317  ; taken  to  Montferrant,  ib. ;
ransomed,  319;  gains  posses-
sion of  the  town  of  Montferrant
for  Peter  le  Bearnois,  321
Mauleon,  le  Bastot  de,  relates  his
adventures  to  Froissart,  at
Orthes,  ii,  101

Mauny,  sir  Oliver  de,  makes  the
king  of  Navarre  prisoner,  i,  363
St.  Maur,  the  abbey  of,  on  the
Loire,  taken  by  the  English
under  the  earl  of  Pembroke,  i,
431

Mauvoisin,  lord  de,  captured  by
sir  Robert  Knolles,  i,  617
Maxwell,  sir  John,  captures  sir
Ralph  Percy  at  the  battle  of
Otterbourn,  ii,  369
Meaux,  the  battle  of,  i,  242
St.  Mecaire,  the  town  of,  surren-
ders to  the  duke  of  Anjou,  i,  525
Melrose,  the  abbey  of,  destroyed
by  Richard  the  Second,  ii,  52
Melval,  lord  Louis  de,  taken  pri-
soner at  the  battle  of  Poitiers,  i,
222

Melun,  the  town  of,  on  the  Seine,
besieged  by  the  duke  of  Nor-
mandy, i,  258

Menstreworth,  sir  John,  with  his
followers,  quits  the  army  of  sir
Robert  Knolles,  i,  456 ; ex-
ecuted in  London,  465
Mercier,  sir  John  le,  one  of  the
ministers  of  Charles  the  Sixth  of
France,  committed  to  prison
during  the  regency  of  the  duke


INDEX.


727


of  Burgundy,  ii,  541  ; his  pro-
perty confiscated,  543  ; released
from  prison,  588

Mesclin,  the  little,  captain  of  some
free  companies,  put  to  death  at
Luxembourg,  ii,  304
Meulan,  the  town  of,  taken  by  the
French  under  the  lord  de  Bouci-
caut,  i,  312

Milhaud,  the  castle  of,  in  Rouergue,
takenbysirBertrand  duGuesclin,

i,  464

Mirabeau,  the  town  of,  taken  by
the  earl  of  Derby,  i,  171
Miraculous  appearances,  said  to
have  been  seen  by  the  Saracens
during  the  siege  of  Africa, ii, 472
Miramont,  the  castle  of,  taken  by
the  duke  of  Normandy,  i,  146
Moissac,  the  town  of,  in  Quercy,
taken  by  the  English  under
sir  John  Chandos,  i,  414  ;
surrenders  to  the  duke  of  Anjou,
445

Moncontour,  the  castle  of,  in
Poitou,  taken  by  the  English
under  lord  Thomas  Percy,  i,  463  ;
taken  by  sir  Bertrand  du  Gues-
clin,  477

Monmorillon,  the  castle  of,  in
Poitou,  taken  by  sir  Bertrand  du
Guesclin,  i,  477

Monsac,  the  town  of,  taken  by  the
duke  of  Anjou,  i,  5(12
Monstier,  lord  Peter  de,  appointed
chief  of  the  croisade  against  the
free  companies  in  France,  i,  299
Montacute,  sir  William,  created
earl  of  Salisbury,  i,  38
Montagu,  lord  William  de,  slain  at
the  battle  of  Poitiers,  i,  222
Montauban,  battle  of,  between  sir
Guy  d’Asai  and  the  free  com-
panies, i,  354

Montbeliard,  the  earl  of,  invades
the  duchy  of  Burgundy,  i,  325
Montebourg,  the  town  of,  burnt
and  pillaged  by  the  English  under
king  Edward  the  Third,  i,  153
Montendre,  the  lord  of,  captured
at  the  battle  of  Poitiers,  i,  223
Montferrant,  the  town  of,  taken  by
stratagem  by  Perrot  le  Bearnois,

ii,  322

Montferrat,  the  marquis  de,  leads
the  free  companies  into  Lom-
bardy, i,  299 ; conquers  several
places  from  the  lord  of  Milan,  ib.
Montfort,  the  earl  of,  takes  mea-
sures to  secure  to  himself  the
duchy  of  Brittany,  after  the  death
of  his  brother,  i,  87  ; takes  the
town  of  Brest  and  several  others,
90,  et  seq. ; does  homage  to  the
king  of  England  for  the  duchy
of  Brittany,  92 ; summoned  be-
fore the  parliament  of  Paris,  at
the  suit  of  the  lord  Charles  of
Blois,  ib. ; captured  by  the  French-
at  Nantes,  96  ; dies  in  the
Louvre  at  Paris,  ib.  [See  this
account  corrected,  ib.  no/e]
Montfort,  the  lord  John  de,  defeats


the  forces  of  the  lord  Charles  of
Blois,  at  the  battle  of  Auray,  i,  332;
his  behaviour  on  seeing  the  body
of  his  adversary,  who  had  been
slain  in  the  battle,  334  ; takes
Auray  and  other  places,  336,  et
seq.  ; makes  peace  with  the  king
of  France,  and  is  acknowledged
duke  of  Brittany,  338  ; marries
the  daughter  of  the  princess  of
Wales,  ib.  ; applies  to  England
for  assistance  against  the  king  of
France,  487 ; retakes  several
places  in  Brittany,  505  ; besieges
Quimperl6,  506 ; disbands  his
army,  and  retires  to  England,
507  ; returns  to  Brittany,  591  ;
solicits  king  Richard  for  succours,
602  ; excuses  himself  to  the  earl
of  Buckingham,  who  had  come
to  his  assistance,  for  not  meeting
him  on  his  march,  619  ; makes
peace  with  the  king  of  France,
633  ; arrests  sir  Oliver  de  Clisson
in  the  castle  of  Ermine,  and
causes  the  expedition  against
England  to  be  given  up,  ii,  242  ;
liberates  sir  Oliver,  247  ; re-
quired by  the  king  of  France  to
explain  his  conduct  towards  the
constable,  and  to  deliver  up  to
him  the  castle  he  had  taken  from
him  as  his  ransom,  261  ; his
answer,  262  ; disregards  the  over-
tures made  by  the  duke  of  Berry
to  gain  him  over  to  the  French
interest,  328  ; enters  iuto  an  al-
liance with  England,  333  ; with
Navarre,  ib.  ; restores  the  castles
of  sir  Oliver  de  Clisson,  339  ;
goes  to  Paris  at  the  entreaty  of
the  dukes  of  Berry  and  Burgun-
dy, 343  ; makes  his  peace  with
the  king  of  France,  344  ; returns
to  Brittany,  356  ; meets  the  king
of  France  at  Tours  to  make  an
amicable  settlement  of  the  differ-
ences existingbetween  them,  507 ;
agrees  to  marry  his  son  to  the
daughter  of  the  king  of  France,
and  his  daughter  to  John  of  Brit-
tany, 511  ; grants  an  asylum  to
sir  Peter  de  Craon  after  his  at-
tempt to  murder  sir  Oliver  de
Clisson,  527 ; involves  himself
in  a war  with  the  king  of  France,
ib. ; wages  a destructive  war
against  sir  Oliver  de  Clisson,  556 ;
makes peacewithhim, 589;  grants
assistance  to  the  earl  of  Derby  to
embark  for  England,  687 ; his
death,  707

Montfort,  the  countess  de,  carries
on  the  war  against  the  lord  Charles
of  Blois,  after  the  capture  of  her
husband,  i,  96  ; solicits  assist-
ance from  England,  105 ; be-
sieged by  the  lord  Charles  of
Blois,  in  Hennebon,  ib. ; displays
great  courage  in  the  defence  of
the  town,  106;  enters  into  a
truce  with  the  lord  Charles  of
Blois,  and  goe6  to  England,  1 15  ;


returns  to  Brittany  with  rein-
forcements, under  sir  Robert
d’ Artois,  118  ; her  forces  take
the  lord  Charles  of  Blois  prisoner
at  La  Roche  d’Errien,  183
Montgis,  the  castle  of,  taken  by  the
earl  of  Derby,  i,  130
Montiel,  the  battle  of,  i,  387
Montlieu,  the  castle  of,  taken  by
the  duke  of  Bourbon,  ii,  33
Montmorency,  sir  Charles  de,  taken
prisoner  at  Pont-a-Tressin,  i,  84
Mont-paon,  the  castle  of,  surren-
ders to  the  French  under  sir  Wil-
liam de  Longueval,  i,  460  ; reta-
ken by  the  duke  of  Lancaster,  462
Montpellier,  the  towns  and  lord-
ships  of,  belonging  to  the  king  of
Navarre,  seized  by  the  French,
i,  541

Montpezat,  the  village  of,  taken  by
the  duke  of  Anjou,  i,  445
Montpin,  the  fort  of,  taken  by  sir
Thomas  Trivet,  i,  556
Montpouillant,  the  town  of,  taken
by  the  earl  of  Derby,  i,  1 40
Montreuil  Bonin,  the  town  of,  taken
by  the  earl  of  Derby,  i,  172
Monsegur,  the  village  of,  surrenders
to  the  earl  of  Derby,  i,  136  ; taken
by  the  duke  of  Anjou,  525
Moray,  Randolph,  earl  of,  his  death,

i,  27

Moray,  the  earl  of,  taken  prisoner
by  the  English  before  Newcastle
upon  Tyne,  i,  99  : exchanged  for
the  earl  of  Salisbury,  1 04
Morbeque,  Denys  de,  captures  king
John  at  the  battle  of  Poitiers,  i,
223

Moron,  Castel,  taken  by  the  earl  of
Derby,  i,  140

Mortain,  the  town  of,  in  Normandy,
taken  by  sir  Bertrand  du  Gues-
clin, i,  514

Mortain-sur-Mer,  the  town  of,  in
Poitou,  taken  by  the  earl  of
Derby,  i,  1 71  ; besieged  by  Evan
of  Wales,  528  ; the  siege  raised
by  the  English,  550
Mortemer,  the  castle  of,  surrenders
to  sir  Bertrand  du  Guesclin,  i,  489
Mortimer,  sir  Roger,  ignominiously
put  to  death,  i,  31
Mouton,  a French  coin  so  called,
the  origin  of  its  appellation,  i,  23 1 ,
note

Mucident,  the  lord  of,  killed  before
Cliargny  in  Dormois,  i,  274
Mucident,  the  lord  of,  taken  pri-
soner by  the  duke  of  Anjou,  i,
522  ; turns  to  the  French  interest,
523;  returns totheEnglish party,
560

Muros,  the  town  of,  in  Galicia,  sur-
renders to  the  duke  of  Lancaster,

ii,  220

Murray,  the  earl  of,  captured  by
the  English  at  the  battle  of  Nevil’s
Cross,  i,  176

Musgrave,  sir  Thomas,  defeated  and
captured  by  the  Scots  at  Melrose,
i,  534


INDEX.


728


N.

Najarra,  the  town  of,  taken  by
the  prince  of  Wales,  i,  374
Namur,  sir  Philip  de,  slain  at  Den-
dremonde,  i,  641

Namur,  sir  Robert  de,  does  homage
to  the  king  of  England,  before
Calais,  i,  181  ; promises  to  assist
him  against  France,  419  ; joins
the  English  forces,  under  the
duke  of  Lancaster,  before  Tourne-
hem,  422  ; defeats  a party  of  the
French  in  a skirmish,  429
Namur,  sir  William  de,  gives  the
town  of  Sluys  to  the  duke  of  Bur-
gundy, in  exchange  for  the  coun-
try of  Bethune,  ii,  43
Nantes,  the  town  of,  taken  by  the
lord  Charles  of  Blois,  i,  95 ;
besieged  by  Edward  the  Third,
121  ; surrenders  to  sir  Bertrand
du  Guesclin,  494  ; besieged  by  the
earl  of  Buckingham,  624
Naples,  Joan,  queen  of,  surrenders
her  dominions  to  pope  Clement,
i,  573

Narbonne,  the  viscount  de,  cap-
tured bythefreecompaniesbefore
Montauban,  i,  354
Naval  engagement,  before  Sluys,
between  the  navies  of  France  and
England,  i,  72  ; between  the
Spaniards  and  the  English  under
king  Edward  the  Third,  198  ; off
the  island  of  Bas  in  Brittany,  be-
tween the  English  and  Flemings,
465 ; before  La  Rochelle,  between
the  earl  of  Pembroke  and  the
Spaniards,  470

Navarretta,  the  battle  of,  between
the  prince  of  Wales  and  don
Henry  of  Castille,  369
Navarre,  Charles,  kingof,  lands  with
a large  army  at  Cherbourg,  i,  206;
arrested  by  the  king  of  France,
208  ; escapes  from  the  castle  of
Alleres,  239  ; makes  peace  with
the  duke  of  Normandy,  ib.  ; ha-
rangues the  Parisians,  240  ; de-
stroys many  of  the  infamous
Jacquerie,  of  Beauvoisis,  241  ;
declares  war  against  France,  247 ;
takes  several  towns  and  fortresses
in  France,  248  ; makes  peace
with  the  duke  of  Normandy,  259 ;
declares  war  against  him,  275  ;
makes  war  on  France,  304  ; makes
peace  with  the  king  of  France,
338  ; enters  into  alliance  with
don  Pedro  of  Castille,  348  ; con-
ducts theprince  of  Wales  and  don
Pedro  to  Pampeluna,  360  ; enters
into  an  alliance  with  the  king  of
England,  409  ; makes  peace  with
the  kingof  France, 444,  491  ; ap-
plies to  king  Richard  of  England
for  assistance  against  the  king  of
France,  541  ; enters  into  an  alli-
ance with  him  iu  England,  ib. ;
solicits  aid  from  the  English  at
Bordeaux,  to  raise  the  siege  of


Pampeluna,  554 ; concludes  a
peace  with  the  king  of  Spain,
560  ; his  extraordinary  death,  ii,
313

Navarre,  the  young  king  of,  goes
to  Paris,  to  endeavour  to  gain
back  his  inheritance  of  Evreux,
ii,  660

Navarre,  the  lord  Lewis  of,  takes
the  town  of  La  Charitd,  i,  324  ;
marries  the  queen  of  Naples,  339
Navarre,  Philip  of,  defends  the  pos-
sessions of  his  brother  in  Nor-
mandy against  the  king  of  France,

i,  209  ; raises  an  army  to  raise
the  siege  of  St.  Valery,  255  ; re-
fuses to  accept  the  peace  which
had  been  concluded  between  his
brother  and  the  duke  of  Nor-
mandy, 259

Necromancer,  a,  offers  to  deliver
up  the  castel  del  Ovo  to  the  duke
of  Anjou  by  enchantment,  i,  685;
beheaded  by  order  of  the  earl  of
Savoy,  686

Negociations,  carried  on  at  Bilinges
respecting  a peace  between  the
English  and  the  French,  i,  12
Nesle,  Guy  de,  defeated  and  taken
prisoner  by  the  English  in  Saint-
onge,  i,  202;  slain,  203
Nesle,  lord  William  de,  slain  at  the
battle  of  Poitiers,  i,  221
Nevele,  the  church  of,  burnt  by  the
earl  of  Flanders,  with  several
hundreds  of  the  men  of  Ghent  in
it,  i,  643

Nevil’s  Cross,  the  battle  of,  i,  176
Neville,  the  lord,  raises  the  siege
of  Mortain,  i,  549  ; takes  St.
Maubert,  550  ; dismissed  from
his  command  inNorthumberland,

ii,  361

Newtoun,  sir  John,  sent  on  an
embassy  to  Richard  the  Second
from  the  rebels  of  Kent,  i,  656
Nicopoli,  the  town  of,  in  Turkey,
besieged  by  the  king  of  Hungary
and  John  of  Burgundy,  ii,  601  ;
the  siege  raised  by  the  sultan
Bajazet,  622

Niort,  the  town  of,  stormed  by  the
English,  i,  480 ; surrenders  to
sir  Bertrand  du  Guesclin,  489
Nogent-sur-Seine,  the  town  of,
sold  to  the  bishop  of  Troyes,  i,
262  ; the  battle  of,  260
Normandy,  the  duchy  of,  invaded
by  Edward  the  Third,  i,  152
Normandy,  the  duke  of,  invades
Il  'inault,  i,  65  ; besieges  Thin-
l’Eveque,6'9 ; enters  Brittany  with
the  lord  Charles  of  Blois,  94  ;
leads  a large  army  to  oppose  the
king  of  England  in  Brittany,
123 ; enters  into  a truce  with  him,
124;  leads  an  army  into  Gas-
cony to  oppose  the  earl  of  Derby,
146  : takes  the  town  of  Mirau-
mont  and  others,  ib.  et  seq.  ;
marries  Jane,  countess  of  Bou-
logne, 196;  appointed  regent  of
Fiance  during  the  imprisonment


of  king  John  in  England,  233  ;
besieges  Paris,  243  ; makes  peace
with  the  king  of  Navarre,  ib.  ;
enters  Paris,  246  ; lays  siege  to
Melun,  258  ; collects  a force  to
drive  the  English  out  of  Cham-
pagne, 260  ; refuses  to  ratify  the
peace  concluded  between  king
John  and  the  English,  263  ; de-
clines to  accept  the  challenge  of
the  king  of  England,  281  ; en-
deavours to  make  peace  with
him,  283  ; appointed  regent  on
the  departure  of  king  John  for
England,  308  ; crowned  king  of
France  at  Rheims,  under  the  title
of  Charles  the  Fifth,  322

Northumberland,  the  earl  of,  takes
Berwick  castle,  i,  530 ; enters
Scotland  with  a large  army,  533  ;
appointed  lieutenant  of  North-
umberland, &c.  651 ; enters  Scot-
land with  a large  force,  ii,  18  ;
banished  by  Richard  the  Second,
682 ; recalled  by  the  earl  of
Derby,  694

Norwich,  the  bishop  of,  appointed
commander-in-chief  of  a croisade
against  the  Clementists,  i,  756 ;
enters  Flanders  contrary  to  the
advice  of  sir  Hugh  Calverley,
758  ; takes  the  town  of  Grave-
lines and  other  places,  759,  et
seq. ; besieges  Ypres,  765  ; aban-
dons the  siege,  and  returns  to
England,  ii,  2 ; badly  received  on
his  return,  12

Noyon,  the  bishop  of,  taken  pri-
soner at  Mauconseil,  i,  249


O.

Oliferne,  Agadinquor,  an  African
chief,  his  conduct  at  the  siege  of
Africa,  ii,  470

Orchies,  the  town  of,  burnt  by  the
earl  of  Hainault,  i,  76
Orenze,  the  town  of,  in  Galicia,
surrenders  to  the  forces  of  the
duke  of  Lancaster,  ii,  252
Oriflamme,  the  sacred  banner  so
called,  displayed  by  the  king  of
France  at  the  battle  of  Rose-
becque  in  Flanders,  i,  744
Orleans,  the  duchess  of,  suspected
of  causing  the  illness  of  the  king
of  France,  ii,  633

Orthon,  a familiar  spirit,  serves  the
lord  of  Corasse,  ii,  127
Ortingas,  the  town  of,  taken  by
Peter  d’Anchin,  ii,  76
Ostrate,  Waustre,  takes  the  castle
of  Roulebois-sur-Seine,  i,  275
Ostrevant,  the  country  of,  burnt  by
the  garrison  of  Douay,  i,  68
Ostrevant,  the  count  of,  created  a
knight  of  the  garter,  ii,  480 ;
gives  offence  to  the  king  of
France,  ib. ; does  homage  to  the
king  of  France  for  the  county  of
Ostrevant,  481 ; raises  an  army
to  invade  Friesland,  612;  invades


INDEX.


729-


Friesland,  615  ; disbands  his
army,  617;  invites  the  earl  of
Derby  to  Hainault  after  he  had
been  banished  from  England,  668
Otho,  sir,  of  Brunswick,  demands
his  pay  from  pope  Clement  at
Avignon,  ii,  144

Otterbourne,  the  battle  of,  ii,  366  ;

[see  also  372,  note ]

Oudenarde,  the  town  of,  besieged
by  the  men  of  Ghent,  i,  587,  709  ;
taken  by  Francis  Atremen,  ii,  7 ;
retaken  by  the  lord  Destournay,  23
Oxford,  the  earl  of,  taken  prisoner
in  Gascony,  i,  131  ; endeavours
to  dissuade  the  king  of  England
from  assisting  his  uncles  in  their
pretensions  to  the  crown  of  Cas-
tille,  ii,  70  ; created  duke  of  Ire-
land, 202


P.

Pampeluna,  the  town  of,  besieged
by  the  king  of  Castille,  i,  544
Paris,  the  city  of,  besieged  by  the
duke  of  Normandy,  i,  243
Parisians,  the,  rebel  against  Charles
the  Sixth,  i,  676;  appeased  by
the  lord  de  Coucy,  ib.  ; fined  by
the  king,  753

Partenay,  the  lord  de,  captured  at
the  battle  of  Poitiers,  i,  223
Passac,  sir  Walter  de,  takes  St.
Forget,  and  several  other  places
in  the  Toulousain,  ii,  131  ; ac-
companies the  duke  of  Bouibou
in  an  expedition  into  Castille,
214  ; arrives  at  Burgos,  233
St.  Patrick’s  Hole,  in  Ireland,  its
singular  properties,  ii,  570,  and
note

Pavie,  sir  Aymery  de,  governor  of
Calais,  enters  into  a treaty  with
sir  Geoffry  de  Chargny  to  deliver
the  town  up  to  him,  i,  192  ; pre-
vented by  the  king  of  England,
ib. ; taken  prisoner  by  sir  Geoffry
de  Chargny,  and  beheaded,  200
Peace,  concluded  between  France
and  England,  i,  264 ; at  Leu-
linghen,  ii,  561

Pedro  the  Fourth,  don,  king  of
Castille,  summoned  to  appear
before  pope  Urban  the  Fifth  at
Avignon,  i,  340  ; excommuni-
cated, ib. ; endeavours  to  raise  a
force  to  oppose  his  brother  don
Henry,  and  the  duke  of  Bur-
gundy, 342 ; flies  to  Corunna,  ib.  ;
goes  to  Aquitaine  to  solicit  the
assistance  of  the  prince  of  Wales,
345  ; enters  Spain,  accompanied
by  the  prince  and  a large  force,
359 ; defeats  the  army  of  don
Henry,  369  ; obtains  the  sub-
mission of  Castille,  375  ; incurs
the  displeasure  of  the  prince  of
Wales,  379;  defeated  by  don
Henry  at  Montiel,  387  ; taken
prisoner,  388  ; killed  by  his  bro-
ther, 389


Pembroke,  the  earl  of,  sent  to  the
assistance  of  the  prince  of  Wales
in  Aquitaine,  i,  403  ; makes  war
in  Perigord,  &c.,  404  ; invades
the  territories  of  Anjou,  422  ;
returns  to  England,  459  ; ap-
pointed governor  of  Aquitaine,
4G9  ; defeated  and  taken  pri-
soner by  the  Spaniards  before
La  Rochelle,  473  ; insulted  by
Evan  of  Wales  at  St.  Andero,
475  ; obtains  his  ransom,  501  ;
dies  at  Arras,  ib.

Pennon,  the  nature  of  the  military
ensign  so  called,  explained,  i,
214,  note

Percy,  sir  Henry,  dies  in  Castille,

i,  290

Percy,  sir  Henry,  appointed  com-
mander in  chief  of  the  forces  in
Northumberland,  ii,  361
Percy,  sir  Ralph,  captured  at  the
battle  of  Otterbourne,  ii,  369
Percy,  sir  Thomas,  appointed  se-
neschal of  Poitou,  i,  438  ; takes
the  castle  of  Montcontour,  463  ;
captured  by  the  French  at  Sou
bise,  481  ; resigns  his  office  of
steward  of  the  household  to  king
Richard  the  Second,  ii,  642  ; ap-
pointed governor  of  Aquitaine,
702

Perigord,  the  cardinal  de,  endea-
vours to  make  peace  between  the
king  of  France  and  the  prince  of
Wales  previous  to  the  battle  of
Poitiers,  i,  215  ; makes  peace  be-
tween the  duke  of  Normandy  and
the  king  of  Navarre,  259
Perigord,  the  earl  of,  defeats  the
high  steward  of  Rouergue,  i,  398 ;
besieges  Realville,  406
Perth,  the  town  of,  destroyed  by
Richard  the  Second,  i,  53
Peterson,  John,  admiral  of  the  Flem-
ish fleet,  defeated  and  captured
by  the  English  off  the  island  of
Bas,  i,  465

St.  Phagon,  the  town  of,  in  Spain,
pillaged  by  some  Breton  soldiers,

ii,  296

Philip,  lord,  of  Burgundy,  killed
before  Aiguillon,  i,  169
Philip  of  Valois,  chosen  king  of
France,  to  the  exclusion  of  Isa-
bella, queen  of  England,  i,  5,  29  ;
makes  war  on  the  Flemings,  ib. ;
banishes  Robert  d’Artois  from
France,  34  ; puts  on  the  cross,
38  ; enters  into  an  alliance  with
the  king  of  Scotland,  46 ; re-
ceives a defiance  from  the  king
of  England,  48  ; leads  an  army
to  oppose  his  forces,  54  ; de-
stroys the  territories  of  sir  John
of  Hainault,  58  ; invades  Flan-
ders, 63  ; sends  forces  into  Scot-
land to  assist  the  Scots  against
the  English,  78 ; assembles  a
large  army  to  raise  the  siege  of
Tournay,  ib.  ; enters  into  a truce
with  the  king  of  England,  86  ;

| assists  the  lord  Charles  of  Blois


to  recover  the  duchy  of  Brittany
from  the  earl  of  Montfort,  93  ;
assembles  an  army  to  oppose  the
earl  of  Derby  in  Gascony,  146;
collects  another  army  to  oppose
king  Edward  in  Normandy,  154 ;
defeated  at  the  battle  of  Crecy,
167 ; collects  a large  army  to
raise  the  siege  of  Calais,  184  ;
enters  into  a truce  with  the  king
of  England,  189 ; marries  the
lady  Blanche,  daughter  of  Philip,
king  of  Navarre,  195  ; dies  at
Nogent-le-Roi,  202
Philip,  son  of  king  John  of  France,
created  duke  of  Burgundy,  i,  322
Philippa,  daughter  of  the  earl  Wil-
liam of  Hainault,  married  to  Ed-
ward the  Third, i, 26;  in  the  absence
of  the  king  raises  an  army  to  op-
pose the  Scots,  173;  defeats  them
at  the  battle  of  Nevil’s  Cross,  175 ;
receives  the  king  of  Scotland  as
her  prisoner  at  York,  178  ; her
three  last  requests  to  king  Ed-
ward, 428  ; her  death,  ib.
Philippa,  daughter  of  the  duke  of
Lancaster,  married  to  the  king  of
Portugal,  ii,  221

Picardy,  the  country  of,  invaded  by
king  Edward  the  Third,  i,  159
Pierrepont,  the  town  of,  taken  by
sir  Eustace  d’Ambreticourt,i,280
Piquigny,  sir  John  de,  delivers  the
king  of  Navarre  from  the  castle
of  Alleres,  i,  239 ; forces  the  duke
of  Normandy  to  raise  the  siege  of
Mauconseil,  249  ; endeavours  to
take  the  town  of  Amiens,  250 ;
dies  at  La  Herrielle,  262
Plague,  the,  desolates  all  Europe,
i,  20  , and  note

Plaisac,  Heliot  de,  governor  of
Boutville,  taken  by  the  French,

i,  562

Poinings,  lord,  dies  in  Castille,  ii,
290

Poitiers,  the  city  of,  taken  by  the
earl  of  Derby,  i,  172  ; surrenders
to  sir  Bertrand  du  Guesclin,  479
Poitiers,  the  battle  of,  between  the
king  of  France  and  the  prince  of
Wales,  i,  217

Poitiers,  sir  Charles  de,  burnt  to
death  at  a masked  dance  at  Paris,

ii,  551

Poix,  the  town  of,  destroyed  by  the
English  under  Edward  the  Third,
i,  159

St.  Pol,  the  count  de,  captured  by
the  English  at  Lique,  and  sent
to  England,  i,  503  ; marries  the
lady  Maude,  daughterof  the  prin-
cess of  Wales,  566 ; leads  an  army
into  Friesland,  ii,  615
St.  Pol,  the  earl  of,  slain  at  the
battle  of  Crecy,  i,  167
St.  Pol,  the  town  of,  besieged  by  the
duke  of  Lancaster,  i,  432
Pommiers,  the  lord  de,  beheaded
at  Bordeaux  for  treason,  i,  519
Pompadour,  the  lord  of,  captured
at  the  battle  of  Poitiers,  i,  223


730


INDEX.


Pondaire,  the  town  of,  taken  by  the
earl  of  Derby,  i,  130
Pons,  the  lord  de,  slain  at  the  battle
of  Poitiers,  i,  223 ; turns  to  the
French  interest,  i,  462
Pont  au  Demer,  the  town  of,  in
Normandy,  taken  by  sir  Bertrand
du  Guesclin,  i,  514
Pont  du  St.  Esprit,  the  town  of,
taken  by  the  free  companies,  i,  298
Pontevedra,  the  town  of,  in  Galicia,
surrenders  to  the  army  of  the
duke  of  Lancaster,  ii,  190
Ponthieu,  the  country  of,  conquered
by  the  forces  under  sir  Hugh  de
Chatillon,  i,  401

Ponthieu,  the  earl  of,  captured  at
the  battle  of  Poitiers,  i,  223
Populace,  of  England,  rebel  against
king  Richard  and  the  nobility,  i,
655  ; enter  London  and  do  much
mischief,  657  ; dispersed  by  the
king,  660

Porcien,  the  earl  of,  ransomed,  i,
402

Porkers  of  la  Respaille,  a set  of  pil-
lagers so  called,  commit  several
depredations  in  Flanders,  ii,  30
Port  St.  Marie,  taken  by  the  duke
of  Anjou,  i,  445

Portboeuf,  Peter,  governor  of  Di-
nant,  taken  prisoner,  i,  122
Portelet,  don  Juan  Ferdinando  de,
informs  Froissart  of  many  parti-
culars relative  to  the  affairs  of
Portugal,  ii,  148

Poulat,  the  castle  of,  in  Gascony,
taken  by  the  English  under  sir
Thomas  Trivet,  i,  557
Poursuivant  d’  Amour,  the  meaning
of  the  title  explained,  i,  402,  note
Pressigny,  sir  Reginald  de,  put  to
death,  i,  205

Preux,  the  castle  of,  taken  by  the
duke  of  Burgundy,  i,  325
Prie,  the  lord  of,  captured  at  the
battle  of  Auray,  i,  333
Pruniaux,  John,  a citizen  of  Ghent,
appointed  one  of  the  commanders
of  the  Whitehoods  in  that  city,
i,  586  ; destroys  the  walls  of
Oudenarde,  597  ; banished  from
Flanders,  599  ; delivered  up  to
the  earl,  and  beheaded,  ib.
Pulpiron,  the  castle  of,  taken  by
the  French  under  sir  Walter  de
Passac,  ii,  132

Punach,  the  town  of,  taken  by  the
earl  of  Derby,  i,  1 30


Q.

Quarrel,  between  the  houses  of
Brabant  and  Gueldres,  the  cause
of,  explained,  ii,  300
Queens,  three,  besieged  in  the  town
of  Melun-sur-Seine,  i,  258
Quimpercorentin,  the  town  of,  in
Brittany,  taken  by  sir  Bertrand
du  Guesclin,  i,  492
Quimperl^,  the  town  of,  in  Brit-
tany, taken  by  sir  Bertrand  du


Guesclin,  i,  492  ; besieged  by  the
duke  of  Brittany,  506


R.

Raimbaut,  Lewis,  a captain  of  the
free  companies,  beheaded,  ii,  108
Ramsay,  Alexander,  takes  the  castle
of  Berwick,  i,  529  ; captured  in
the  castle  by  the  earl  of  Nor-
thumberland, 532
Ravenal,  lord  Raoul  de,  captured  at
Mauconseil,  i,  249
Realville,  the  town  of,  taken  by
storm  by  the  earl  of  Perigord,  i,
410

Reginald,  count  of  Gueldres,  his
extravagance,  ii,  300  ; marries
the  daughter  of  Bertaldo  of
Mechlin,  302;  afterwards  mar-
ries Isabella,  daughter  of  Ed-
ward the  Second  of  England,  ib.
Rennes,  the  town  of,  taken  by  the
earl  of  Montfort,  or  duke  of
Brittany,  i,  90 ; surrenders  to
the  lord  Charles  of  Blois,  105  ;
besieged  by  the  duke  of  Lan-
caster, 235  ; taken  by  sir  Ber-
trand du  Guesclin,  492
Reole,  La,  the  town  of,  taken  by
the  earl  of  Derby,  i,  138  ; sur-
renders to  the  duke  of  Anjou,
502

Reyneval,  lord  Raoul  de,  defeated
by  the  English  and  Navarrois,
under  sir  Godfrey  de  Harcourt,

i,  232

Rheims,  the  town  of,  besieged  by
Edward  the  Third,  i,  273
Ribadavia,  the  town  of,  taken  by
storm  by  the  duke  of  Lancaster,

ii,  220

Ribadeo,  count,  of  Spain,  one  of
the  ministers  of  Charles  the
Fourth  of  France,  arrested  by  the
duke  of  Burgundy  while  regent,
ii,  541

Ribeaumont,  sir  Eustace  de,  cap-
tured near  Calais,  i,  194;  receives
a chaplet  of  pearls  from  the  king
of  England,  in  reward  for  his
prowess,  195  ; slain  at  the  battle
of  Poitiers,  221

Ribemmont,  sir  Galahaut  de,  mor-
tally wounded  in  a skirmish  with
the  English,  i,  272
Richard,  son  of  the  prince  of  Wales,
declared  presumptive  heir  to
the  throne  of  England,  i,  509  ;
crowned  king  of  England,  511
Richard  the  Second,  placed  under
the  tuition  of  sir  Guiscard  d’ An-
gle, i,  511  ; enters  into  an  al-
liance with  the  king  of  Navarre,
541;  sends  an  army  to  the  assist-
ance of  the  duke  of  Brittany,
592  ; quells  the  rebellion  of  the
populace  under  Wat  Tyler,  &c.,
660  ; Makes  a tour  through  se-
veral parts  of  England  to  punish
the  insurgents,  606  ; marries  the
lady  Anne  of  Bohemia,  681  ; en-


ters into  a truce  wim  France,  ii,
13  ; heads  an  army  to  oppose  the
Scots  and  the  admiral  of  France,
50  ; destroys  the  abbey  of  Mel-
rose, and  several  places  in  Scot-
land, 52,  et  seq. ; quarrels  with
his  uncles  of  York  and  Glouces-
ter, 237 ; excites  the  discontent  of
the  people  of  England,  ib. ; re-
tires to  Wales,  239  ; constrained
by  the  people  to  appoint  commis-
sioners to  examine  into  accounts
of  his  confidential  ministers,  267 ;
retires  to  Bristol,  271 ; takes
measures  to  counteract  the  pro-
ceedings of  the  new  council,
which  had  been  appointed  for
him  by  the  commissioners  of  ac-
counts, 273  ; sends  the  duke  of
Ireland,  as  his  lieutenant,  with  a
large  army  towards  London,  276 ;
his  troops  defeated  near  Oxford.
278;  returns  to  London  under
the  conduct  of  the  archbishop  of
Canterbury,  281  ; assembles  a
parliament  to  receive  the  homage
of  his  subjects,  ib.;  enters  into
a truce  with  the  king  of  France,
395  ; holds  a grand  tournament
at  London,  477  ; endeavours  to
make  peace  with  France,  486 ;
concludes  a peace  with  king
Charles,  558;  presents  the  duke
of  Lancaster  with  the  duchy  of
Aquitaine,  566 ; leads  an  army
into  Ireland,  567 ; obtains  the
submission  of  four  Irish  kings,
579  ; seeks  to  marry  the  lady
Isabella,  daughter  of  the  king  of
France,  582  ; recals  the  duke  of
Lancaster  from  Aquitaine,  ib.  ;
has  an  interview  with  the  king  of
France  at  Ardres,  61 9 ; receives
the  lady  Isabella  from  king
Charles  in  his  tent  at  Ardres,  620 ;
marries  her  at  Calais,  621 ; be-
comes unpopular  in  England,
638  ; orders  the  duke  of  Glouces-
ter to  be  arrested,  644  ; invests
the  earl  of  Rutland  with  the  eon-
stableship  of  England,  659  ; pro-
claims a feast  to  be  held  at
Eltham,  661  ; banishes  the  earl
marshal  for  life,  and  the  earl  of
Derby  for  six  years,  666  ; seizes
the  revenues  of  the  duchy  of
Lancaster  on  the  death  of  the
duke,  677  ; breaks  off  a marriage
which  was  in  contemplation  be-
tween the  earl  of  Derby  and  the
daughter  of  the  duke  of  Berry,
678 ; holds  a tournament  at
Windsor,  which  is  but  thinly  at-
tended, 681  ; banishes  the  earl
of  Northumberland  and  his  son,
682  ; the  people  of  England  rise
in  rebellion  against  him,  and  in
favour  of  the  earl  of  Derby,  683;
retires  to  Flint  [Conway]  castle,
690  ; surrenders  to  the  earl  of
Derby,  691  ; imprisoned  in  the
Tower  of  London,  694  ; resigns
the  crown  in  favour  of  the  earl  of


Derby,  696  ; his  death,  708  ; his
funeral,  ib.

Rigault,  Giles,  de  Rouffy,  present-
ed with  the  red  hat  in  the  pre-
sence of  king  John  at  Paris,  i,
202

Riviere,  the  lord  de  la,  takes  the
castle  of  Aquigni,  i,  325  ; im-
prisoned by  the  dukes  of  Bur-
gundy and  Berry  during  the  re-
gency, ii,  543  ; his  estates  con-
fiscated, ib. ; delivered  from  pri-
son, 588

Robert,  duke  of  Heidelberg,  elected
emperor  of  Germany,  7 1 0
Robert,  king  of  Sicily,  endeavours
to  make  peace  between  the  kings
of  France  and  England,  i,  74
Robert,  the  Hermit,  ordered  by  a
vision  to  interfere  in  bringing
about  a peace  between  France  and
England,  ii,  584 ; attends  the
conferences  at  Leulinghen,  585  ;
sent  to  England,  586
Robesart,  the  canon  de,  defeats  the
Navarrois  near  Creil,  i,  253;  turns
to  the  English  interest,  403
Roche,  La,  sur  Yon,  the  castle  of,
taken  by  the  duke  of  Cambridge,
i,  420  ; surrenders  to  the  French
under  sir  Oliver  de  Clisson,  493
Roche,  La,  d’Errien,  the  town  of,
taken  by  sir  Thomas  Daggeworth,
i,  182;  besieged  by  the  lord
Charles  of  Blois,  ib.  ; surrenders
to  sir  Bertrand  du  Guesclin,  492
Rochechouart,  the  viscount  de,  cap-
tured at  the  battle  of  Poitiers,  i,
223  ; imprisoned  by  the  prince  of
Wales,  411  ; liberated,  421  ; his
lands  invaded  by  sir  John  Chan-
dos,  423

Rochelle,  the  town  of,  blockaded
by  the  Spaniards  and  French
under  Evan  of  Wales,  i,  481  ;
turns  to  the  French  interest,  482
Rochemilon,  the  castle  of,  taken
by  the  earl  of  Derby,  i,  135
Roche-posay,  la,  the  town  of,  taken
by  the  French  under  sir  John  de
Bueil,  i,  411

Rochetaillade,  John  de,  a fanatical
cordelier  friar,  prophesies,  i,  280;
delivers  an  apologue  to  the  car-
dinals respecting  the  papacy,  ii,
145

Romorantin,  the  town  of,  taken  by
the  prince  of  Wales,  i,  211
Roquemadour,  the  town  of,  taken
by  sir  John  Chandos,  i,  415
Rosebecque,  the  battle  of,  between
the  king  of  France  and  the  men
of  Ghent,  i,  743

Rosem,  the  lord  de,  captured  by
the  duke  of  Anjou,  i,  522
Roucy,  the  town  of,  in  Picardy,
taken  by  Robin  Scott,  i,  253  ;
retaken  by  the  archbishop  of
Rheims,  262

Rouelles,  the  town  of,  in  Galicia,
surrenders  to  the  duke  of  Lan-
caster, ii,  181

Rouen,  the  inhabitants  of,  rebel


INDEX.

against  Charles  the  Sixth,  i,
677

Roulleboise-sur-Seine,  the  castle  of,
taken  by  Wanstre  Ostrate,  i,  275;
delivered  up  to  sir  Bertrand  du
Guesclin,  353

Routes,  a band  of  armed  men  so
called,  make  war  on  Arragon,  ii,
207  ; defeated  by  Raymond  de
Bachez,  209

lloye,  the  lord  of,  defeats  and  cap-
tures the  lord  of  Gomegines,  i,
276

Roye,  sir  Reginald  de,  with  two
other  knights,  holds  a tourna-
ment near  Calais  against  all
comers,  ii,  434

Rue,  James  de  la,  executed  at
Paris  for  treason,  i,  514


S

Saimpi,  the  lord  de,  with  two  other
knights,  holds  a tournament  near
Calais  against  all  comers,  ii,  434
Saintes,  the  town  of,  surrenders  to
the  French  forces,  i,  482
Saintonge,  the  lord  de,  captured  at
the  battle  of  Poitiers,  i,  223
Saintre,  lord  John  de,  captured  at
the  battle  of  Poitiers,  i,  223
Salisbury,  the  earl  of,  taken  pri-
soner by  the  garrison  of  Lille,  i,
64 ; exchanged  for  the  earl  of
Moray,  104 ; heads  an  expedi-
tion into  Brittany,  491 ; sent  on
an  embassy  to  France,  677 ;
unites  with  the  earl  of  Hunting-
don in  his  plan  to  murder  king
Henry,  704  ; beheaded,  707
Salisbury,  the  countess  of,  defends
Wark  Castle  against  the  Scots,
i,  101  ; resists  with  great  spirit
the  dishonourable  overtures  of
king  Edward,  ib

Salisbury,  sir  John,  beheaded  at
Oxford,  ii,  289

Salle,  sir  Robert,  governor  of  Nor-
wich, killed  by  the  insurgents  in
the  reign  of  Richard  the  Second,
i,  661

Salvatierra,  the  town  of,  surrenders
to  the  army  of  don  Pedro  and  the
prince  of  Wales,  i,  363
St.  Salvin,  the  abbey  of,  besieged  by
the  French,  i,  431
Sancerre,  the  lord  Lewis  de,  appoint-
ed marshal  of  France,  i,  418  ;
defeats  the  earl  of  Pembroke  at
Puirenon,  427  ; visits  the  count
deFoixat  Orthes,  ii,  391  ; made
constable,  653

Santarem,  the  town  of,  rebels
against  the  king  of  Castille,  112  ;
returns  to  obedience,  113  ; burnt
by  the  king  of  Portugal,  ii,
254

Sauveterre,  the  town  of,  taken  by
the  duke  of  Anjou,  i,  525
St.  Sauveur  le  Vicomte,  the  castle
of,  taken  by  the  French,  i,  507
Saxony,  the  duke  of,  sent  by  the


731

emperor  of  Germany  into  Eng-
land to  see  the  country  previous
to  the  marriage  of  the  lady  Anne,
of  Bohemia,  to  Richard  the
Second,  i,  606

Scarcity,  a great  one  in  France,  i,
202

Schism,  occasioned  in  the  church
by  the  election  of  two  popes,  i.
569

Scots,  the,  invade  England  under
Robert  Bruce,  i,  18  ; their  cha-
racter and  manners,  ib. ; retake
many  of  their  fortresses,  and
penetrate  as  far  as  Durham  into
England,  77  ; retake  Edinburgh,
ib. ; take  Stirling  Castle,  97  ;
enter  into  a truce  with  the  king
of  England,  ib. ; invade  England
under  king  David,  98  ; take  the
town  of  Durham,  99  ; besiege
Wark  Castle,  1 00  ; defeated  by
the  English  at  the  battle  of
Nevil’s  Cross,  174  ; refuse  to
abide  by  the  truce  which  had
been  agreed  upon  at  Belinge,  ii,
19  ; enter  England  contrary  to
the  orders  of  king  Robert,  20  ;
invade  England  with  the  assist-
ance of  sir  John  de  Vienne,  48  ;
treat  the  admiral  with  much
harshness,  55 ; invade  England
under  the  young  earl  of  Douglas,
364  ; defeat  the  English  at  the
battle  of  Otterbourne,  370
Scott,  Robin,  takes  the  town  of
Roucy,  in  Picardy,  i,  253
Seaule,  the  town  of,  taken  by  the
French  under  sir  William  de  la
Tremouille,  ii,  316
Seclin,  the  town  of,  burnt  by  the
earl  of  Hainault,  i,  76
Segar,  John,  governor  of  Nogent,
murdered  at  Troyes,  i,  263
Senerach,  the  lord  de,  captured  at
the  battle  of  Poitiers,  i,  222
Sequainville,  sir  Peter  de,  be-
headed at  Rouen,  i,  323
St.  Severe,  in  Saintonge,  taken  by
the  duke  of  Berry,  i,  479
Sluys,  the  town  of,  taken  by  the
men  of  Ghent,  i,  706  ; exchanged
for  the  country  of  Bethune,  ii,  43
Soubise,  the  castle  of,  taken  by  the
French  under  Evan  of  Wales,  i.
481

Southampton,  the  town  of,  pillaged
by  the  French,  i,  50
Sow,  the  use  of  the  military  machine
so  called,  i,  521

Spaniards,  the,  defeated  at  sea  by
Edward  the  Third,  i,  1 98
Spencer,  sir  Hugh,  the  elder,  be-
sieged with  Edward  the  Second
in  Bristol,  i,  1 1 ; taken  and  be-
headed, 1 2

Spencer,  sir  Hugh,  the  younger,
directs  the  government  of  Edward
the  Second,  i,  6 ; causes  the  earl
of  Lancaster  to  be  beheaded,  ib.;
frustrates  the  endeavours  of  queen
Isabella  to  obtain  assistance  in
France,  8 ; besieged  with  the


732


INDEX.


king  in  Bristol  by  the  queen’s
forces,  1 1 ; ignominiously  be-
headed at  Hereford,  13
Spencer,  the  lord  de,  his  death,  i,
513

Stafford,  lord,  captured  before
Vannes,  i,  122;  exchanged  for
the  lord  of  Clisson,  124  ; created
an  earl,  197

Stafford,  lord  Ralph,  killed  by  sir
John  Holland,  ii,  50
Standwich,  John,  puts  Wat  Tyler
to  death  in  Smithfield,  i,  062
Star,  the  order  of  the,  revived  by
king  John  of  France,  i,  202
Stirling  Castle,  taken  by  the  Scots,

i,  97

Straw,  Jack,  heads  the  populace  of
England  in  the  rebellion  against
king  Richard  and  the  nobility,  i,
654  ; taken  and  beheaded,  664
Stuart,  Robert,  succeeds  to  the
crown  of  Scotland  on  the  death
of  David  the  Second,  i,  491  ;
enters  into  an  alliance  with  the
king  of  France,  529  ; makes  pre-
parations to  invade  England,  ib. ;
sends  to  excuse  himself  to  the
king  of  England  for  some  inroads
which  the  Scots,  contrary  to  his
orders,  had  made  into  England,

ii,  20  ; assembles  a large  army  to
invade  England,  with  the  assist-
ance of  the  admiral  of  France,
47

Sudbury,  Simon  de,  archbishop  of
Canterbury  and  chancellor  of
England,  murdered  in  the  Tower
of  London  by  Wat  Tyler,  i,  659
Suffolk,  the  earl  of,  captured  by
the  governor  of  Lille,  i,  64
Surgeres,  the  town  of,  taken  by  the
earl  of  Derby,  i,  171  ; surrenders
to  sir  Bertrand  du  Guesclin,  484


T.

Taillebourg,  the  town  of,  taken
by  the  English  under  the  earl  of
Derby,  i,  171 ; surrenders  to  the
French,  481  ; besieged  by  the
duke  of  Bourbon,  ii,  33

Tailles,  the  nature  of  the  tax  so
called,  explained,  i,  381  ; note

Talbot,  lord,  dies  at  Ruelles  in
Spain,  ii,  291

Tankerville,  the  earl  of,  taken  pri-
soner by  the  English  under  Ed-
ward the  Third,  i,  157  ; captured
at  the  battle  of  Poitiers,  223

Tarbe,  sir  Aimery  de,  killed  in  a
naval  engagement  before  la
Rochelle,  i,  473

Tassegnon,  the  castle  of,  in  Gas-
cony, taken  by  sir  Thomas  Tri-
vet, i,  556

Tax  on  income,  established  in
France,  i,  207

Tello,  don,  brother  of  Henry,  king
of  Castille,  defeats  a body  of
English  troops  under  sir  William
Felton,  i,  366


Terrieres,  the  town  of,  taken  by  sir
John  Chandos,  i,  406
Tertre,  Peter  du,  executed  at  Paris
for  treason,  i,  514
Tete-noir,  Geoffry,  obtains  posses-
sion of  the  castle  of  Ventadour,
in  Auvergne,  i,  568 ; mortally
wounded,  ii,  387  ; makes  his  will,
388  ; his  death,  ib.

Thilliers,  the  castle  of,  taken  by
king  John  of  France,  i,  209
Thin  l’Eveque,  the  town  of,  be-
sieged by  the  duke  of  Normandy,

i,  69

Thouars,  the  town  of,  taken  by  sir
Bertrand  du  Guesclin,  i,  484
Thurie,  the  town  and  castle  of,
taken  by  le  Bastot  de  Mauleon,

ii,  105

Tibald,  doctor  Simon,  bishop  of
London,  preaches  the  justice  of
the  war  against  France,  i,  407,
and  note

Tilt,  at  Enten^a,  between  sir  John
Holland  and  sir  Reginald  de
Rove,  ii,  228

Tonnerre,  the  town  of,  taken  by
Edward  the  Third,  i,  278
Tonniens,  the  town  of,  taken  by  the
duke  of  Normandy,  i,  148  ; sur-
renders to  the  duke  of  Anjou,
445

Tour,  the  lord  de  la,  slam  at  the
battle  of  Poitiers,  i,  221
Touraine,  the  duke  of,  brother  of
Charles  the  Sixth  of  France,  buys
the  reversion  of  the  county  of
Blois,  ii,  513;  created  duke  of
Orleans,  529

Tournament,  held  at  Mons,  i,  86  ;
given  by  king  Edward  the  Third
at  London,  out  of  affection  for
the  countess  of  Salisbury,  115  ;
held  at  Vannes  before  the  duke
of  Brittany  and  the  earl  of  Buck-
ingham, 630  ; at  Cambray,  in
honour  of  the  marriage  of  the
children  of  Burgundy  with  those
of  Hainault,  ii,  28  ; at  Paris,  in
honour  of  queen  Isabella’s  public
entrance,  404  ; at  Inglevere,  near
Calais,  by  three  French  knights
against  all  comers,  434  ; held  at
London,  by  order  of  Richard  the
Second,  477  ; at  Windsor,  which
is  badly  attended,  681  ; held. at
Oxford  by  the  earl  of  Hunting-
don, &c.,  705

Tournay,  the  town  of,  besieged  by
Edward  the  Third,  i,  74
Treaty  of  alliance,  entered  into  at
Viivorde,  between  the  countries
of  Flanders,  Brabant,  and  Hain-
ault, i,  74

Treaty  of  peace,  copy  of  the,  be-
tween the  duke  of  Burgundy  and
the  men  of  Ghent,  ii,  52
Trelawny,  sir  Matthew,  severely
wounded  at  Rocheperion,  i,  111  ;
taken  prisoner,  112;  rescued
from  death,  113

Tremouille,  sir  William  de  la,  ap-
pointed to  command  a body  of


men  to  assist  the  duchess  of
Brabant  against  the  duke  of
Gueldres,  ii,  315

Tressilian,  sir  Robert,  beheaded  by
order  of  the  duke  of  Gloucester
and  his  party,  ii,  275

Trivet,  sir  Thomas,  sent  to  the
assistance  of  the  king  of  Navarre,
i,  555  ; takes  several  forts  in
Gascony,  556,  et  seq.  ; marches
into  Castille,  557;  returns  to
England,  562 ; defeats  the  French
near  Arras,  607  ; committed  to
the  Tower  of  London,  ii,  12  ;
killed  by  a fall  from  his  horse,
268

Truce,  between  the  English  and  the
Scots,  i,  26;  between  the  French
and  English,  86  ; between  the
English  and  the  Scots,  97,  104  ;
between  the  lord  Charles  of
Blois  and  the  countess  of  Mont-
fort,  115;  for  three  years,  be-
tween the  French  and  English,
124  ; between  France  and  Eng-
land, 189;  prolonged  by  order  of
pope  Innocent,  205  ; between
France  and  England,  234  ; be-
tween the  English  and  the  Scots,
447  ; between  the  French  and
English,  594  ; between  the  Eng-
lish and  Scots,  665  ; between  the
French  and  English  with  all  their
allies,  ii,  13  ; between  the  kings
of  Castille  and  Portugal,  120;
between  the  French  and  English,
395,  548,  558

Tyler,  Wat,  heads  the  populace  of
England  in  their  rebellion  against
king  Richard  the  Second  and  the
nobility,  i,  654 ; killed  in  Smith-
field,  662


U.

Urban  the  Fifth,  pope,  elected
at  Avignon,  i,  301  ; preaches  a
croisade  against  the  Saracens,
303 ; excommunicates  don  Pedro,
king  of  Castille,  340  ; his  death,
458

Urban  the  Sixth,  elected  at  Rome,
i,  538 ; sends  a bull  to  England
for  the  destruction  of  the  Cle-
mentists,  756  ; besieged  in  Peru-
gia, ii,  144  ; escapes  to  Rome,
145  ; dies  at  Rome,  426
Utrecht,  the  town  of,  taken  by  the
earl  of  Hainault,  i,  145
Uzes,  the  castle  of,  in  Auvergne,
taken  by  sir  John  Devereux,  i,
464  ; surrenders  to  sir  Bertrand
du  Guesclin,  ib.


V.

St.  Valery,  the  castle  of,  taken
by  the  king  of  Navarre,  i,  248  ;
taken  by  the  earl  de  St.  Pol,  254 ;
taken  by  sir  Hugh  de  Chatillon,
401


INDEX.


733


Valois,  the  lady  Joan  de,  concludes
a trace  between  the  kings  of
France  and  England,  i,  86
Vannes,  the  town  of,  surrenders  to
the  earl  of  Montfort  as  duke  of
Brittany,  i,  91  ; taken  by  storm
by  the  lord  Charles  of  Blois,  110;
retaken  by  lord  Robert  d’ Artois,
119;  taken  by  sir  Oliver  de  Clis-
son,  120  ; besieged  by  the  Eng-
lish, 121  ; taken  by  sir  Bertrand
du  Guesclin,  492

Varennes,  John  de,  resigns  all  his
preferments  in  the  church,  ii,
565

Vauclingen,  the  town  of,  taken  by
the  duke  of  Burgundy,  i,  513
Vaudemont,  earl  of,  captured  at  the
battle  of  Poitiers,  i,  221
Vauflart  de  la  Croix,  sir,  defeated
in  a skirmish  at  Pont  <\  Tressin,
i,  80 ; put  to  death  at  Lille,  ib.
Vaulx,  sir  Henry  de,  taken  prisoner
at  Commercy,  i,  278
Ventadour,  the  castle  of,  in  Au-
vergne, betrayed  to  Geoffrey
Tete-noire,  i,  568 ; besieged  by  the
duke  of  Berry,  ii,  314  ; taken  by
his  forces,  428

Verchin,  sir  Gerard  de,  mortally
wounded  in  a tournament  at
Mons,  i,  86

Verneuil,  the  town  of,  taken  by  the
duke  of  Lancaster,  i,  209
Verteuil,  the  town  of,  taken  by  the
duke  of  Bourbon,  ii,  47
Vienne,  sir  John  de,  governor  of
Calais,  sent  prisoner  to  England,
i,  189

Vienne,  sir  John  de,  admiral  of
France,  heads  an  expedition  to
Scotland  to  invade  England,  ii,
29 ; badly  treated  by  the  Scots,
36  ; invades  England,  accompa-
nied by  a Scottish  army,  48  ; re-
turns to  France,  56  ; sent  on  an


embassy  into  Castille,  385 ; killed
at  the  battle  of  Nicopoli,  624
Vienne,  the  dauphin  of,  invested
with  the  duchy  of  Normandy,

i,  207

Vietat,  don  Alphonso,  high  admiral
of  Portugal,  sent  to  England  to
convey  the  duke  of  Lancaster  and
his  army  to  Portugal,  ii,  165
Vigo,  the  town  of,  in  Galicia,  sur-
renders to  the  army  of  the  duke
of  Lancaster,  ii,  192
Villaines,  le  begue  de,  one  of  the
ministers  of  Charles  the  Sixth,
arrested  by  the  duke  of  Burgundy
during  his  regency,  ii,  541  ; libe-
rated, 543

Villeclope,  the  town  of,  in  Galicia,
taken  by  the  duke  of  Lancaster,

ii,  183

Villefranche,  the  town  of,  taken  by
the  earl  of  Derby,  i,  140  ; taken
by  storm  by  the  duke  of  Nor-
mandy, 146  ; taken  by  sir  John
Chandos,  416

Visconti,  sir  Bernabo  de,  put  to
death  by  his  nephew,  ii.  31
Visconti,  sir  Galeas  de,  puts  sir
Bernabo,  his  uncle,  to  death,  ii,
31  ; enters  into  an  alliance  with
the  sultan  Bajazet,  604


W

Wake,  sir  Thomas,  defeated  by  the
Gascon  lords,  i,  398
Walworth,  sir  William,  lord  mayor
of  London,  assists  to  secure  Wat
Tyler  in  Smithfield,  i,  662
Wark  castle,  belonging  to  the  earl
of  Salisbury,  besieged  by  the
Scots,  i,  101

Wars,  the,  between  France  and  Eng-
land, how  caused,  i,  5
Warwick,  the  earl  of,  joins  the  duke


THE  END.


LONDON  !

BRADBURY  AND  EVANS,  PRINTERS,  WHITEBRIAI


of  Gloucester  in  his  attempts  to
excite  disturbances  in  England,
ii,  637  ; sent  to  the  Tower,  656  ;
banished  to  the  Isle  of  Wight,
657 ; recalled  by  the  earl  of  Derby,

Wersey,  lord  Robert  de,  taken  pri-
soner at  the  battle  of  Nevil’s
Cross,  i,  176

Whitehoods,  the  custom  of  wearing
them  revived  at  Ghent,  i,  578

Whitehoods,  the,  see  “ Ghent,
men  of”

Winceslaus  the  Sixth,  emperor  of
Germany,  his  election,  i,  592  ;
sends  his  sister,  Anne  of  Bohe-
mia, to  England,  to  be  married
to  Richard  the  Second,  681  ; dies
at  Luxembourg,  ii,  13

Wisant,  James  and  Peter,  their  pa-
triotic conduct  during  the  siege
of  Calais,  i,  187

Wykeham,  sir  William,  appointed
bishop  of  Worcester  and  chancel-
lor of  England,  i,  397


Y.

York,  the  archbishop  of,  dismissed
from  his  office  of  treasurer  by  the
commissioners  of  accounts,  ii,
270

York,  the  duke  of,  his  creation,  ii,
201  ; confederates  with  the  duke
of  Gloucester  and  others  against
king  Richard  and  his  council,  263
Ypres,  the  town  of,  enters  into  an
alliance  with  the  men  of  Ghent,
i,  587  ; turns  to  the  earl  of  Flan-
ders, 639 ; surrenders  to  the  king
of  France,  737  ; besieged  by  the
Bishop  of  Norwich,  i,  756
Yrier,  the  town  of,  in  Limoges,
taken  by  sir  Bertrand  du  Gues-
clin, i,  453


GETTY  CENTER  LIBRARY


3 3125  00777  5980


w Jjy\


