This is a reproduction of a library book that was digitized 
by Google as part of an ongoing effort to preserve the 
information in books and make it universally accessible. 


Google books Es 


https://books.google.com [m] 


THE LOEB CLASSICAL LIBRARY 
-- Up 
EDITED BY 
E. CAPPS, prn.n, u.p. T. E. PAGE, LITT.D. 
W. H. D. ROUSE, urrr.». 


FRONTINUS 


citet reti £e c 


3HOI99VvMW V.LHOd 


E "LN 


FRONTINUS, 


Barna HA 
THE STRATAGEMS 
AND 


THE AQUEDUCTS OF ROME 


WITH AN ENGLISH TRANSLATION BY 
CHARLES E. BENNETT 


LATE GOLDWIN SMITH PROFESSOR OF LATIN IN 
CORNELL UNIVERSITY 


THE TRANSLATION OF THE AQUEDUCTS BEING A 
REVISION OF THAT OF 


CLEMENS HERSCHEL 


EDITED AND PREPARED FOR THE PRESS BY 


MARY B. McELW AIN 


PROFESSOR OF LATIN IN SMITH COLLEGE 


LONDON : WILLIAM HEINEMANN 


NEW YORK : G. P. PUTNAM'S SONS 
MCMXXV 


Printed in Great Britain 


aero 
[d 
fett 


v 


rrerre 
feet Cee 


—— 


OG 2-5-43 RAG 


Qvod. | 
satin, 
à -H-43 
41106 


PREFACE 


BeroreE his death in May 1921, Professor Bennett 
had finished the draft of his translation of the 
Strategemata and of his revision of Clemens Herschel's 
translation of the De 4quis. He had also, through 
various footnotes, indicated clearly his attitude toward : 
the texts he had adopted as the basis for his trans- 
lation. For the editorial revision of the versions, 
the introductory material, the index, many of the 
footnotes and the general matters of typography, 
the responsibility should rest with the undersigned. 
The references to the sources of the Sírategemata 
have been selected for the most part from those 
cited in Gundermann's conspectus locorum. 

The translation of the Strategemata is based upon 
Gundermann's text, Leipzig, 1888, with very few 
changes, which are indicated in the footnotes. The 
brackets indicating glosses or conjectures have been 
omitted for the sake of appearance. Professor 
Bennett's translation is the first English rendering 
of the Strategemata with any accuracy of interpreta- 
tion, the only other English version, published in 
London in 1811 by Lieutenant Robert B. Scott, 
leaving much to be desired both in the matter of 
interpretation and the manner of expression. A 
French version, prepared under the direction of 
M. Nisard, is a careful piece of work, well annotated, 
and indicating knowledge of the sources as well as 
of the standard editions of the Stralegemata. 


v 


PREFACE 


The text of the De 4quis is that of Bücheler, 
Leipzig, 1858, with certain changes in spelling and 
punctuation and with the omission of his diacritical 
marks. Some variants in readings have been ad- 
mitted, and where the text is unreadable, conjectures 
have been accepted and the translation bracketed. 
The translation is a revision of that of Herschel, 
1899, since the credit for the first English version 
of this treatise must go not to a Latinist but to an 
hydraulic engineer. In the preface to his book, 
Mr. Herschel thus explains his undertaking of this 
translation: * Having had the study of Frontinus 
for my pastime and hobby for many years, it has 
seemed to me fitting that others should be enabled 
likewise to partake of the instruction and pleasure 
this has given me. . . . We laymen have been wait- 
ing for a long time for Latin scholars to do this thing 
for us, and they have not responded." Mr. Herschel 
was very familiar with the translations of the French 
architect, Rondelet, and the German builder, Dede- 
rich, and he resolved to add an English rendering 
to these translations by men whose interests were 
primarily scientific. 

But though not a Latin scholar, Mr. Herschel 
achieved what few Latin scholars can hope to do. 
In his quest for first-hand information about his 
subject, he went to Rome, studied the aqueducts 
in person, conferred with Lanciani and others, and 
finally went to the monastery at Monte Cassino and 
succeeded in having this, the sole original manu- 
script of the De Aquis, photographed for publication 
in his book. This is an excellent facsimile, and a 
most valuable gift to the student of this work. 

During the preparation of his translation, Mr. 


vi 


PREFACE 


Herschel found in Professor Bennett an interested 
and helpful adviser. In the conclusion of his preface 
he says: “ Professor Charles E. Bennett gave me 
active aid, countenance and encouragement at every 
stage of the work, and ended off by reading the 
proofs and correcting the copy of the translation to 
an extent that makes the translation fairly his own." 
When, therefore, Professor Bennett was considering 
the preparation of this volume, Mr. Herschel gener- 
ously turned over to him for revision his translation, 
which for twenty-five years has continued to be the 
only English version of the De Aqus. And within 
the past year this pioneer translator has given further 
proof of his continued interest in Frontinus and his 
spirit of co-operation with the students of the classics 
by patiently solving for the writer some of the 
technical difficulties encountered in proof reading. 
For this help grateful acknowledgment is here 
made. 
Mary B. McEwan. 


Smith College, Northampton, Mass. 


vii 


CONTENTS 


PREFACE. . . . . . . . . |. . 
LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS . . . . . . . . . . 


THE LIFE AND WORKS OF SEXTUS JULIUS FRONTINUS 


THE MANUSCRIPTS :— 


OF THE STRATEGEMATA . . . . " 
OF THE DE AQUIS om ce uer nua Ras. ge er eom. ty 
BIBLIOGRAPHY . . . . . . . . . . we Us 
SIGLA e. è . . . LJ . . e e . . . e . . 
THE STRATAGEMS 6^ dee cho oe a E S O&O ST WI ns us 
BOOK I e . * . . . . . * . LI , . e 
BOOK Ill 4. a 4 owe» ae GS eS 
BOOK III. 9.1 oo Om Ñ 
BOOK IV. .& o wow RS o9 we 
THE AQUEDUCTS OF ROME . . . . . . . . 


BOOK I... . 
BOOK IL 4 l. ow & 7*3» a ‘o 


INDEX , Sp eo 3€ ox do* oet €x 


jx 


LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS 


TO FACE PAGE 


PORTA MAGGIORE . . . . . . . . Frontispiece 

MAP OF AQUEDUCTS . . . . . . . . . . . . 29841 
RUINS OF AQUA CLAUDIA . . . . . . . . . . 885 
THE SEVEN AQUEDUCTS AT THE PORTA MAGGIORE . . 361 
AD SPEM VETEREM. . . . . . . . . . . . . 2908 
RUINS OF AQUA CLAUDIA NEAR THE APPIAN WAY . . 407 
MAP OF ROME AND VICINITY . . . . . . . . Atend 


TABLES SHOWING THE WATER SUPPLY OF THE CITY OF 


ROME . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . At end 


THE LIFE AND WORKS OF 
SEXTUS JULIUS FRONTINUS! 


Or the details of the life of Frontinus we are but 
scantily informed. His personality, as will be shown, 
stands out in his works in no ambiguous fashion, but 
the events of his career, so far as we can glean 
them, are few, disjointed and indefinite. Even the 
year of his birth is not known, but since Tacitus? 
speaks of him as praetor urbanus in the year 70 a.D., 
we may infer that he was born not far from the year 
35. 

Of his family and of his birthplace we know as 
little. His family name, Julius, and the fact that he 
held the office of water commissioner, which, as he 
tells us,? was from olden times administered by the 
most eminent men of the State, would point to 
. patrician descent. His writings on surveying,* so 
far as we have knowledge of them, betray the 
teachings of the Alexandrian school of mathematics, 
especially of Hero of Alexandria, and it is not 
unlikely that he was educated in that city. 

He was three times elected consul, first in 73 or 


1 The biographical sketch here given is taken largely from 
Professor Bennett's article, ** A Roman Waring” (Atlantic 
Monthly, March 1902), to which the reader is referred for a 
fuller and very sympathetic account of Frontinus as water 
commissioner, and from Herschel’s Life and Works of 
Frontinus. 

3 Hist. iv. 399. 3 De Aquis, l, p. 331. * Cf. p. xviii. 


xiii 


LIFE AND WORKS OF FRONTINUS 


74,1 again in 98,2 and a third time in 100.3 After his 
first incumbency of this office, he was dispatched to 
Britain as provincial governor. In this post, as 
Tacitus? tells us, Frontinus fully sustained the tra- 
ditions established by an able predecessor, Cerialis, 
and proved himself equal to the difficult emergencies 
with which he was called upon to cope. He sub- 
dued the Silures, a powerful and warlike tribe of 
Wales, and with the instinct for public improvements 
which dominated his whole career, at once began in 
the conquered district the construction of a highway, 
named from him the Via Julia, the course of which 
can still be made out, and some of whose ancient 
pavement, it is thought, may still be seen. 

From this provincial post he returned to Rome in 
78, after which the next twenty years of his life are 
a blank. But to this period, from his forty-third to 
his sixty-second year, we attribute a large part of 
his writings. His treatise on the Art of War? may 
have been written immediately after his return from 
Britain in 78. His Strategemata is assigned by Gun- 
dermann to the years 84-96.8 Within this period 


! C. Nipperdey, Opuscula (Berlin, 1877), p. 520 ff., places 
the date of his first consulship in 73. 

2 C.I.L. iii. 2, p. 862 ; Mart. x. xlviii. 20. 

3 C.I.L. viii. 7066 ; vi. 9229. 

‘ His exact tenure of office there is incertain. of. E. 
Hübner, Die römischen Legaten von Britannien. Rhein. Mus. 
xii. (1857), p. 52; Nipperdey, Opuscula, loc. cit. 

5 Agricola, xvii: sustinuitque molem Iulius Frontinus, vir 
magnus, quantum licebat, validamque et pugnacem Silurum 
gentem armis subegit, super virtutem hostium locorum quoque 
difficultates eluctatus. 

* Cf. Wm. Camden, Britannia, iii. p. 113 ; D. Williams, 
History of Monmouthshire, p. 36 ff. 

* Cf. p. xviii. 8 Cf. p. xx. 


xiv 


LIFE AND WORKS OF FRONTINUS 


also his services as Augur doubtless began, an office 
in which the younger Pliny succeeded him at his 
death in 103 or 104.1 

In 97 he was appointed to the post of water com- 
missioner, the office whose management gives him 
probably his best title to eminence, and during the 
tenure of this he wrote the De Aquis. The office of 
water commissioner he held presumably until his 
death. | 

The De Aquis is primarily a valuable repository of 
information concerning the aqueducts of Rome. But 
it is much more than that. It gives us a picture of 
the faithful public servant, charged with immense 
responsibility, called suddenly to an office that had 
long been a sinecure and wretchedly mismanaged, 
confronted with abuses and corrüption of long stand- 
ing, and yet administering his charge with an eye 
only to the public service and an economical use of 
the public funds. It is this aspect of the De Aquis 
which lends it, despite its generally technical nature 
and its absolute lack of stylistic charm, a certain 
literary character. It depicts a man; it depicts 
motives and ideals, the springs of conduct. 

The administration of which Frontinus was a part 
was essentially one of municipal reform. Nerva 
and Trajan alike aimed to correct the abuses and 
favouritism of the preceding régime. They not only 
chose able and devoted assistants in their new 
policy; they themselves set good examples for 
imitation. 

In Frontinus they found a loyal and zealous 
champion of their reforms. Realizing the import- 
ance of his office, he proceeded to the study of its 

1 Cf, Pliny, Epist. IV. viii. 3 ; x. xiii. 
XV 


LIFE AND WORKS OF FRONTINUS 


details with the spirit of the true investigator, dis- 
playing at all times a scrupulous honesty and fidelity. 

ere one asked to point out, in all Roman history, 
another such example of civic virtue and conscientious 
performance of simple duty, it would be difficult to 
know where to find it. Men of genius, courage, 
patriotism are not lacking, but examples are few of 
men who laboured with such whole-souled devotion 
in the performance of homely duty, the reward for 
which could certainly not be large, and might possi- 
bly not exceed the approval of one’s own conscience. 

In Martial ! we have a picture of Frontinus spend- 
ing his leisure days in a delightful environment. 
Pliny? writes of appealing to him as one well 
qualified to help to settle a legal dispute. In the 
preface to an essay on farming? which Frontinus 
wrote, it is stated that he was interrupted in his 
writing by being obliged to serve as a soldier, and it 
is thought that this may have been on the occasion 
of Trajan's expedition against the Dacians in 99; 
this, however, is pure conjecture. 

Near Oppenheim in Germany has been found an 
inscription * dedicated by Julia Frontina, presumably 


1 x. lviii. 1-6: 
Anxuris aequore placidos, Frontine, recessus, 
et propius Baias, litoreamque domum, 
et quod inhumanae cancro fervente cicadae 
non novere nemus, flumineosque lacus 
dun colui, doctas tecum celebrare vacabat 
Pieridas ; nunc nos maxima Roma terit. 
2 Epist. v. i. 5: adhibui in consilium duos quos tunc civitas 
nostra spectatissimos habuit, Corellium et Frontinum. 
3 Cf. p. xviii. 
4 Cf. A. Dederich, Zeitschr. für die Allerthums- Wissenschaft, 
vi. (1839), p. 841. 


xvi 


1 fi t, 


LIFE AND WORKS OF FRONTINUS 


the daughter of Frontinus ; its date is supposed to 
be about 84. Another inscription near the ancient 
Vetera Castra! is dedicated to Jupiter, Juno and 
Minerva in recognition of the recovery from illness 
of Sextus Julius Frontinus; and there is also a lead 
pipe, said to have been found near the modern Via 
Tiburtina, inscribed SEXTIULIFRONTINI. 

Pliny ? has preserved for us a saying of Frontinus, 
* Remembrance will endure if the life shall have 
merited it," and the truth of the words is most aptly 
exemplified in the case of their author. Rich and 
valuable as is his treatise, the De Aquis, in facts 
relating to the administration of ancient aqueducts, 
it is the personality of the writer that one loves to 
contemplate, his sturdy honesty, his conscientious 
devotion to the duties of his office, his patient 
attention to details, his loyal attachment to the 
sovereign whom he delighted to serve, his willing 
labours in behalf of the people whose convenience, 
comfort and safety he aimed to promote. We sym- 
pathize with him in his proud boast? that by his 
reforms he has not only made the city cleaner, but 
the air purer, and has removed the causes of pesti- 
lence that had formerly given the city such a bad 
repute; and we can easily pardon the Roman Philis- 
tinism with which, after enumerating the lengths 
and courses of the several aqueducts, he inquires in 
a burst of enthusiasm,* ** Who will venture to com- 


! A Roman camp on the Rhine, now Birten or Xanthen. 

2 Epist. IX. xix. 1, 6: addis etiam melius rectiusque Fron- 
tinum, quod vetuerit omnino monumentum sibi fieri. | Vetuit 
exstrut monumentum ; sed quibus verbis? — '* Impensa monu- 
menti supervacua est ; memoria nostri durabit, si vita meruimus. 

8 Of. De Aquis, 88, p. 417. 

* Cf. De Aquis, 16, p. 357. 

xvii 


LIFE AND WORKS OF FRONTINUS 


pare with these mighty works the pyramids or the 
useless though famous works of the Greeks?" A 
thorough Roman of the old school, he has surely by 
his life, as revealed in the De Aquis, abundantly 
merited the remembrance which posterity has 
accorded and will long continue to accord him. 

The works of Frontinus are all of a technical 
nature, written, as he tells us,! partly for his own 
instruction, and partly for the advantage of others. 
The first of these was probably a treatise on the Art 
of Surveying, of which fragments are extant. It 
consisted originally of two books, and the excerpts, 
collected by Lachmann,? treat the following subjects : 
de agrorum qualitate, de controversiis, de limitibus, de 
controversiis agrorum. The work is known to us 
principally through the codex Arcerianus at Wolfen- 
büttel, dating probably from the sixth or not later 
than the seventh century, which appears to have 
been a book used by the Roman State employees 
and contains treatises on Roman law and land 
surveying, including some pages of Frontinus. 
Various citations in other authors from this work 
of Frontinus point to the latter as a pioneer in this 
practical work of the Roman surveyor, and to his 
writings as the standard authority for many years. 

The composition by Frontinus of a military work 
of a theoretical nature is attested first by his own 
words in the preface to his Strategemata,? and also by 

1 De Aquis, Pref. 2, p. 333. 

2 Die Schriften der róm. Feldmesser, Berlin, 1848, 1852. Cf. 
also M. Cantor, Die róm. Agrimensoren und thre Stellung in 
der Gesch. der Feldmesskunst, Leipzig, 1875. 

* Cum ad instruendam rei militaris scientiam unus ex 


numero studiosorum eius accesserim cique destinato, quanium 
cura nostra valuit, satisfecisse visus sim, etc. 


xviii 


LIFE AND WORKS OF FRONTINUS 


statements of Aelian,! a late contemporary, and of 
Vegetius,? who wrote on the Art of War some three 
centuries later. This treatise is wholly lost, except 
in so far as Vegetius may have incorporated it in his 
own work. 

The Strategemata, presumably following the lost 
work on the Art of War, which it was designed to 
supplement, narrates varied instances of successful 
stratagems, which illustrate the rules of military 
science, and which may serve to foster in other 
generals the power of conceiving and executing like 
deeds. As it has come down to us, this work 
consists of four books, three of them written by 
Frontinus, the fourth by an author of unknown 
identity.A These four books were still further 
increased by additional examples, interpolated here 
and there throughout the work. 

Such is Gundermann's conclusion, resulting 
from his own investigations? added to those of 


“1 De Instruendis Aciebus, Pref. : wapa &povríyo trav émuafipwv 
bTarikGv Tuépas Tivas Oiérpuja, bótay ümeveykauévo vepl Thy èv 
Tots moàéuois éumeipíay . . . eüpoy obk éAárrova onoudhy Éxovra 
eis THY wapd Tots “EAAnot reÜeopnuévnv ud0gouw. | 

2 De Re Militari, i. 8: compulit evolutis auctoribus ea me in 
hoc opusculo fidelissime diccre, quae Cato ille Censorius de 
disciplina militari scripsit, quae Cornelius Celsus, quae 
Frontinus perstringenda duxerunt; and ii. 3: nam unius 
aetatis sunt, quae fortiter fiunt; quae vero pro utilitate rei 
publicae scribuntur, aeterna sunt. Idem fecerunt alii complures, 
sed praecipue Frontinus, divo Traiano ab eius modi comprobatus 
industria. 3 Cf. Strat. Pref. p. 3. 

4 E. Fritze, P. Esternaux and F. Kortz dissent from this 
view and claim the fourth book also for Frontinus. Cf. also 
note 6 on p. xxii. 

5 G. Gundermann, Quaestiones de [uli Frontin? Stratege- 
maton Libris, Fleckeisen Jahrb. Supplementbd. 16 (1888), 
p. 315. 

xix 


b 2 


LIFE AND WORKS OF FRONTINUS 


Wachsmuth ! and Wolfflin.? From internal evidence 
Gundermann places the composition of the first 
three books between 84 and 96, basing this inference 
upon references to Domitian, who is repeatedly 
called Germanicus,? a title not given to him until 
after his expedition against the Germans in 83, and 
who is nowhere called divus, as is Vespasian in the 
Strategemata,4 and Nerva in the De Aquis,’ so that 
the composition of the work evidently fell within the 
lifetime of Domitian, The dating of the fourth 
book isa matter of conjecture. Wachsmuth assigned 
it to the fourth or fifth century, believing it the 
work of a ludi magister, who compiled it when seek- 
ing examples suitable for declamationes or controversiae. 
Wölfflin saw no reason to dissent from this conclusion. 
Gundermann, while admitting that there is no argu- 
ment to prove that it was not written then,—except 
that if this view is correct, the pseudo-Frontinus 
must have imitated the purer speech of Frontinus 
summo studio,—thinks that its composition belongs 
rather to the beginning of the second century, and 
that its author was a student of rhetoric who lived 
not long after Frontinus, a dull man who did not 
weigh the value of his sources in his compilation. 
Gundermann cites iv. iii. 14 to support his theory, 
but Wachsmuth would transpose this example to 
the second book as being applicable to Frontinus 
himself. Schanz enters into the controversy and 


1 C. Wachsmuth, Ueber die Undchtheit des vierten Buchs 
der Frontinschen Strategemata, Rhein. Mus. xv. (1860), p. 574. 

3 E. Wölfflin, Frontíns Kriegslisten, Hermes, ix. (1875), p. 
12. 3 Cf. 1 i. 8 ; rr. iii. 23 ; rr. xi. 7. 

* Cf. 11. i. 17. 5 Cf. 109. 

6 d Schanz, Zu Frontins Kriegslisten, Philol. xlviii. (1889), 
p. 674. i 


XX 


LIFE AND WORKS OF FRONTINUS 


says that the language of the fourth book con- 
clusively refutes Wachsmuth's view; he submits 
instead the theory that the author of this book was 
a contemporary of Frontinus, the officer to whom the 
Lingones! submitted in 70 a.b., who drew his 
examples from Frontinus and other sources, and that 
a third person joined the two works, wrote a preface 
for the fourth book, and added to the preface of the 
first book. This hypothesis, he thinks, removes 
the troublesome problem of duplicates,? which could 
easily creep in with a third reader somewhat 
superficially handling new material. 

The points of dissimilarity between the first three 
books and the fourth are treated in detail by 
Wachsmuth, and even more exhaustively by Wolfllin. 
The two works differ first of all in the plan followed 
by their respective authors. Frontinus in his pre- 
face? outlines the arrangement which he proposes 
to follow in presenting examples: in the first book 
he will give illustrations of stratagems employed 
before the battle begins; in the second, those that 
refer to the battle itself and that tend to effect the 
complete subjugation of the enemy ; the third will 
contain stratagems connected with sieges and the 
raising of sieges. To this arrangement the titles of 
the chapters in the first three books conform, whereas 
the headings of the chapters in the fourth book give 
no suggestion of historical stratagems, but belong 
rather, as Wachsmuth says, to a militarisches Moral- 
büchlein. Stewechius, for this reason, conjectured 
that this fourth book might be Frontinus's theoretical 
work, but its preface controverts this idea. 


1 Cf. Iv. iii. 14. 2 Cf. p. xxv. 
3 Cf. p. 5 


. p. 9. 
xxi 


LIFE AND WORKS OF FRONTINUS 


In his further proof of the spurious character of 
the fourth book, Wachsmuth points out that of the 
duplicate illustrations found throughout the entire 
work,! all but one occur in Book IV. ; he notes also 
that the examples in this book are drawn much 
more largely from Valerius Maximus than are those 
of the earlier books, and that several of its titles 
correspond to titles employed by Valerius Maximus,” 
and he further proceeds to cite thirty-two passages,’ 
which he claims are taken almost verbatim from that 
author. He contrasts the use of such words as 
traditur, fertur, dicitur^ which he claims are found 
in no genuine example in the first three books, 
with the constat5 of the true Frontinus, who 
would regard illustrations of unsafe tradition as 
of little benefit to the generals whom he wished 
to instruct.$ 

Wachsmuth finds traces of the pseudo-Frontinus 
in the fourth paragraph of the preface to Book I., 
which are designed to pave the way for the fourth 
book, where the ozparyyixa outnumber the orparyyy- 


1 Cf. p. xxv. 

3 i.e. chapters i., iii., iv., v. vi. Cf. Val. Max. rr. vii; 
IV. lii. ; VI. v. ; III. viii. ; IV. i. 

3 ie. Iv: i.l, 2, 13, 17, 18, 23, 26, 31, 32, 38, 39, 40, 42, 
44, 46; iii. 1, 3, 12; iv. 1, 2; v. 4, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 20, 23; 
vi. 3; vii. 29, 36, 39. 

* Cf.1v:l.15;i.35; ii. 1 ; iii. 1, 10, 11 ; v. 13, 14 ; vii. 4. 

5 Cf. 11. i. 13 ; ir. iii. 21. 

$ H. M. Connor, in an appendix to her thesis, A Study of 
the Syntax of the Strategemata of Frontinus (Ithaca, 1921), 
makes a comparative study of the syntactical uses of the 
first three books and the fourth, and concludes: ** A thought- 
ful examination of the four books has revealed to me no 
compelling argument in respect to syntactical structure, 
diction or content, which establishes the existence of a 
pseudo-Frontinus. ” 


xxii 


LIFE AND WORKS OF FRONTINUS 


para, and where the writer has a distinct preference 
for dicta.! 

On these and other grounds Wachsmuth brands 
as spurious a number of examples in their entirety 
and parts of various others. In his decisions against 
the following twenty, Wolffin and Gundermann 
concur: I. iii. 7; r. vii 4; 1. vii. 7 ; 1. xi. 15 ; m. iii, 
11; mn. iv. 14; mn. iv. 19; rm. viii, 5; m. viii. 9; 
n. xi. 6; nr. iv. 2; ur. iv. 4; nr, vii. 55 imr. xii, 3; 
Ir, xiii. 3-5; ur xv. 2; rv. iii. 10; iv. vii. 11. 

Woltllin agrees with Wachsmuth in his general 
conclusions and continues this line of investigation. 
He begins by comparing the preface to the De Aquis 
with what he considers the genuine preface to the 
Strategemata, and notes similarities of style and 
structure, He then goes on to compare the first 
three books of the Strategemata with the fourth in 
points of Latinity, arrangement or subject matter. 
He contrasts the two authors' methods of employing 
proper names,? notes the frequent recurrence in 
Frontinus of certain phrases? not found in the 
pseudo-Frontinus, observes that Frontinus customarily 
places the author of his stratagems at the beginning 
of the storv, and follows certain subordinate principles 
of subdivision * within the general divisions of his 

1 Cf. 1v. v. 12, 13; vi. 3; vii. 4. Also Iv. i. 17; Iv. vii. 
1, 2, 3, 16. 

2 e.g. Frontinus sometimes speaks of the elder Scipio 
merely as Scipio, sometimes as Africanus; he mentions the 
younger Scipio only once, as Scipio. In Book IV. the 
younger Scipio is once called Africanus, once Aemilianus; 
the elder is spoken of merely as Scipio. 

3 i.e. ob hoc, ob id, ideoque, as against ob eam causam in 
Book IV. 

* i.e. that of nationality, followed by Val. Max. ; or of 
locality, e.g. 1. iv. 1-7, operations on land; 8-10, on rivers; 
11-14, on sea. - 

xxiii 


LIFE AND WORKS OF FRONTINUS 


work, neither of which usages characterizes the 
pseudo-Frontinus, and adds examples of other varia- 
tions in Latinity and subject matter. Of Wachsmuth's 
thirty-two examples,! Wolfllin recognizes twenty as 
surely and directly taken from Valerius Maximus, 
and he adds to the list 1. xi. 11-13, not mentioned 
by Wachsmuth. He considers the relation of the 
real and the pseudo-Frontinus to other authors from 
whom they drew their material, and finds a difference 
in their attitude toward Sallust, Caesar and Vegetius ; 
and in general he discerns in the true Frontinus a 
truthfulness toward the facts given in his sources, 
whereas the pseudo-Frontinus, while exhibiting at 
times a slavish dependence on form, has no conscience 
about changing the facts, He believes that it was 
not by accident but by design that the fourth book 
was united to the other three, that the author of 
this book wished to be considered Frontinus and 
took certain definite measures to achieve that end, 
attempting to imitate the style of Frontinus in the 
use of certain phrases,? keeping all his stories within 
the period which would be known to Frontinus, and 
in the preface to Book IV. virtually claiming the 
authorship of the first three books. Wölfflin rejects 
also, as belonging to the pseudo-Frontinus, the third 
paragraph of the preface to Book I., as well as the 
fourth (rejected by Wachsmuth and Gundermann), 
since he finds in it a rhetorical exaggeration,’ not 
characteristic of the true Frontinus, and a lack of 
consistency between the apology for incompleteness 
1 Cf, p. xxii. 
2 e g. quodam deinde tempore, tum cum maxime. 


3 ie. quis enim ad perccnsenda omnia monumenta, quae 
utraque lingua tradita sunt, sufficiat? 


xxiv 


LIFE AND WORKS OF FRONTINUS 


here expressed} and Frontinus’s avowed intention 
of citing only as occasion shall demand.? But his 
strongest reason for suspecting the genuineness of 
these two paragraphs lies in the fact that their 
insertion here interferes with an arrangement ex- 
hibited elsewhere by Frontinus of annexing the 
summary of succeeding chapters directly to some 
such statement as quibus deinceps generibus suas species 
attribui.’ 

Gundermann reviews the arguments of Wachsmuth 
and WoltHin, accepts many of their conclusions and 
adds to the evidence. He disagrees with Wölfflin 
as to the ungenuineness of the third paragraph of 
the preface, and defends the authenticity of several 
examples. Of the duplicates, the critics agree that 
IV. v. 8, 9, 10, 11, and rv. vii. 6 are interpolations 
from Book I., and that 11. iv. 15, 16 are interpolations 
from Book IV. Woólfflin and Gundermann regard 
I. i. 11 as transposed from chapter v. ; Wachsmuth 
thinks it originated in chapter i. 

Besides these duplicates, there are several cases 
in which the same story has apparently been drawn 
from different sources and is, therefore, told differ- 
ently in two places; i.e. 1. iv. 9 and 1. iv. 9a; 1. v. 10 
and mr. ix. 9; r. v, 24 and rr. xii. 4; 1. viii. 11 and 
IV. i. 29; mr. xvi. l and rv. vii. 36; mı. ix. 6 and 
III. Xi. 9 ; 1v. ii. 5 and rv. ii, 7. 

In addition to the stories suspected as a whole, 
various other portions of the text are regarded as 
interpolated, i.e. parts of 1. ii. 6; 1. xi, 13 ; u. iii. 7; 


1 ne me pro incurioso reprehendat, qui praeteritum aliquod a 
nobis reppererit exemplum. 

2 quemadmodum res poscet. 

* Cf. Books II. and III., and the De Aquis. 


XXV 


LIFE AND WORKS OF FRONTINUS 


n. v. 31; n. v. 34; m. ix. 2; 1v. v. 14, which are 
condemned on grounds of Latinity or other lack of 
agreement with the genuine or even the pseudo-Fron- 
tinus. In all sections of the book are found errors 
in names and in facts, and many changes in order 
have been suggested. Wachsmuth would put 11. ix. 
3, 5 in m. viii., and tv. iii. 14 after 11. xi. 7. Gunder- 
mann thinks ir. viii. 5 should follow u. viii. 3, and 
n, viii. 9 follow ir. viii. 10. For the transposition 
of a whole leaf of the manuscript, see p. xxxi. The 
errors in general Gundermann thinks should be 
attributed in small part to copyists, in larger part 
to the carelessness or the error of the author, but in 
largest part to the sources from which the material 
is drawn, many of which no longer exist. 

In his preface to the De Aquis! Frontinus himself 
tells us how it came to be written. Having been 
invested with the duties of water commissioner, he 
deemed it of the greatest importance to familiarize 
himself with the business he had undertaken, con- 
sidering nothing so disgraceful as for a decent man 
to conduct an office delegated to him according to 
the instructions of assistants. He therefore gathered 
together scattered facts bearing on his subject, 
primarily to serve for his own guidance and instruc- 
tion, though not unmindful of the fact that his 
efforts might be found useful by his successor. 

Animated by this spirit and purpose, he wrote 
his little manual, faithfully carrying out the pro- 
gramme which he had laid down for himself at the 
outset of the work. He tells us the names of the 
aqueducts existing in his day, when and by whom 
each was constructed, at what points each had its 


1 Cf. p. 331. 
xxvi 


LIFE AND WORKS OF FRONTINUS 


source, how far they were carried underground and 
how far on arches, the height and size of each, the 
number of taps and the distributions made from 
them, the amount of water supplied to public 
reservoirs, public amusements, State purposes and 
private persons, and finally what laws regulated the 
construction and maintenance of aqueducts, and 
what penalties enforced these laws, whether estab- 
lished by resolutions of the Senate or by edicts of 
the Emperors. And what he records is based not 
on hearsay, but on personal examination of all 
details, supplemented by the study of plans and 
charts which he had made. 

The work is a simple and truthful narration of 
facts, containing a mass of technical detail essential 
to a complete understanding of the system described. 
As an honest and thorough-going exposition of that 
system, the De Aquis will always remain the starting- 
point for any investigation pertaining to the water 
supply of ancient Rome. 


xxvii 


THE MANUSCRIPTS 
I. Or THE STRATEGEMATA 


Tue codices of the Strategemata! are of two 
classes. Of the better class, three manuscripts 
survive; of the second, inferior class, there are 
many representatives. 

The three manuscripts of the first class are the 
codex Harleianus 2666 (H), which contains the entire 
work, but is very carelessly written; the codex 
Gothanus I. 101 (G), and the codex Cusanus C. 14 (C), 
each of which contains excerpts only. These three 
have been taken from a copy which, though not 
free from errors and lacunae, was still most carefully 
written, and must be thought to have preserved with 
the greatest fidelity even mutilated words. 

The second class is derived from a codex which 
the copyist had corrected in many places according 
to his pleasure, and the manuscripts of this class 
never bring any help to readings where the first 
class is in error. The best representative of the 
second class is coder Parisinus 1240 (P), which far 
surpasses all the rest in authority. Both classes 
come from the same archetype in which a leaf had 
been transposed.? A copyist of P about the thir- 


1 For a full account of all the manuscripts, cf. G. Gunder- 
mann, De Iuli Frontini Strategematon libro quo fertur quarto, 
Commentationes Philologae Jenenses (Leipzig, 1881), p. 83. 

2 Cf. p. xxxi. 

xxviii 


THE MANUSCRIPTS 


teenth century, noticing this transposition, attempted 
a re-arrangement which appears in some of the later 
codices and editions. 

The archetype had many lacunae, glosses and 
duplicates. . It seems to have contained, besides the 
Strategemala, a breviarium of Eutropius, since these 
two works are found combined in most of the oldest 
codices of both classes. After the thirteenth cen- 
tury, copyists put Vegetius and Frontinus in one 
codex. 

The coder Harleianus, a parchment of the ninth 
or tenth century, is now in the British Museum. It 
contains many errors and omissions. Some of these 
were corrected by the copyist himself, others by 
another hand of the same period. The latter (desig- 
nated by 4) became the model for the second class 
of manuscripts, the readings coinciding in many 
instances with those of P. As the corrector fre- 
quently used the eraser, for readings lacking in G 
and C we have only the testimony of the second 
class. The readings of hk are sometimes happy 
amendments, sometimes atrocious corruptions. The 
writer omitted, copied incorrectly, amended and 
changed the spelling, assimilating most prepositions. 

The codex Gothanus, a parchment of the ninth 
century, contains a breviarium of Eutropius, a 
breviarium of Festus and excerpts from Frontinus.! 
It was written by two hands. The copyist of 
Frontinus frequently separated the words wrongly, 
and misunderstood signs of abbreviation. 


1 7.e. all of Book IV., followed by 11. ix. 7—1r. xii. 2 (from 
quarum metu illi through secundum consuetudinem) ; pref. to 
Book I. ; ri. 1-2; pref. to Book II. ; rr. i. 1-3; pref. to 
Book IIT. ; rir. i. 1-3 ; rm. iii. 1-7 ; 11. vii. 1-6. 


xxix 


THE MANUSCRIPTS 


The codex Cusanus is a parchment of the twelfth 
century.! It is written in two columns and contains 
many other things besides excerpts ? from Frontinus. 
Few of the latter are intact, most of them being 
contracted or otherwise changed; but this codex 
contains some excellent notes. 

The codex Parisinus is a parchment dating from 
the end of the tenth or the beginning of the 
eleventh century. It contains the Strategemata and 
a breviarium of Eutropius. The order of examples 
found in the early codices is retained,’ and the 
passage 11. ix. 7T—11. xii. 2 (quarum metu 1lli—secundum 
consuetudinem) stands at the end of Book IV., but 
after the words persecuti aciem in fossas deciderunt et 
in eo modo victi sunt (the concluding words of 11. xii. 2 
in our present arrangement, the conclusion of ir. ix. 7 
as it then stood), the copyist wrote duo capitula sunt 
requirenda. 

d is the designation given by Gundermann to all 
the codices of the second class excluding P. "These 
date mostly from the fourteenth or fifteenth century. 
The oldest and best among them are Harleianus 2729, 
Oxontensis- Lincolniensis 100, Parisinus 5802, Gudianus 
16. Here and there these codices show an amend- 
ment which is an improvement, but almost every- 


! Cf. Joseph Klein, Ueber eine Handschrift des Nicolaus von 
Cues., Berlin, 1866, p. 6. 

2 i.e. pref. to Book I. (si qui erunt—hostis sit, cf. p. 6), 
followed by 1: i. 12, 13, 4; ii. 7; v. 1; vi. 4; vii. 2, 3; 
viii. 8; x. 4; xi. 5, 8, 19; xii. 1, 5, 12; a: i. 1, 2, 13, 17; 
ii. 2; v. 41; vi. 3; viii. 6, 7, 11; ix. 6, 7; xiii. 2, 3, 8; 
II: vii. 6 ; ix. 6 ; Iv: i. 3, 5, 17, 29, 35, 36, 38, 42, 45; iii. 
1, 2, 3, 9, 10, 12; iv. 1, 2; v. 12, 13 ; vii. 1, 4, 10, 14, 15, 37; 
II. xi. 2. 

3 Cf. p. xxxi. 


XXX 


THE MANUSCRIPTS 


where are signs of corruptions which have been 
afterwards corrected. 

In the manuscript from which the archetype of 
our present manuscripts was derived, a leaf (or 
leaves) at some time became transposed which con- 
tained the following: iv. vii. 42 (beginning with 
continere vellet), iv. vii. 43 (now 11. ix. 8), 44 (11. ix. 9), 
45 (rr. ix. 10), rr. x. 1, 2, ir. xi, 1-7, 11. xii. 1, 2 (through 
secundum consuetudinem). This leaf had stood origin- 
. ally after the leaf ending with the words quarum 
metu illi con- in 1u. ix. 7, and before that beginning 
with the words adventaret recepit. aciem in 11. xii. 2, 
and when transposed stood between the leaf which 
ends with the words cum in agmine milites, in tv. vii. 
42, and the leaf beginning with the words -nere 
vellent pronuntiavit in the same chapter. 

To F. Haase! and E. Hedicke? belongs the credit 
of the present arrangement of the examples. Haase, 
having chanced on a manuscript of Frontinus in a 
book-shop, bought it fairly cheaply, being attracted 
by a note after 1. ix. 7, which in all the better 
manuscripts ended in this way: quarum metu illi cum 
adventarenl, recepit aciem; persecuti aciem in fossas 
deciderunt et eo modo victi sunt. In this copy there 
followed in red ink the words: nota hic defectum 
magnum. Haase was led by this to investigate more 
fully and he decided, as a result of his researches, 
that the passages found in the codices at the end 
of Book IV. should not be placed after n. ix. 7, but 
within it, since the conclusion of im. ix. 7 was quite 
unsuitable to its beginning. Hedicke later followed 
up Haase's work, and by the discovery of like in- 


1 Cf. Rhein. Mus. iii. (1845), p. 312. 
* Cf. Hermes, vi. (1872), p. 156. 


xxxi 


THE MANUSCRIPTS 


consistencies in the two parts of i. xii. 2, and tv. 
vii, 42, as they stood, and by the use of slight 
emendations, restored the order and consistency of 
the arrangement as it stands to-day. 


II. Or tHe De Aquis 


As early as 1425 Poggio Bracciolini had learned 
that at Monte Cassino there was a copy of the De 
Aquis of Frontinus, but it was not until he visited 
the monastery in 1429 that the manuscript, C, was 
actually found. It was carried off to Rome, copied 
and returned to Monte Cassino, where it still re- 
mains. It is an original manuscript in the sense 
that at the time of its discovery no other manuscript 
of the work was known, nor has any since come to 
light, excepting those derived from copies made 
by Poggio at that time. 

Eight of these copies are described by Bücheler 
in his preface, only two of them being of any 
significance. According to the judgment of Poleni, 
in which Bücheler concurs, these two were written 
a little after the middle of the fifteenth century. 
The coder Urbinus, or Vaticanus 1345, agrees closely 
with the original at Monte Cassino; the codex 
Vaticanus 4498, which contains many errors and 
seems to have come from an inferior copy, was used 
by Pomponius Laetus and Sulpicius in bringing out 
their first edition in 1484-1492. Jocundus may 
have had access to the original copy, since he 
agrees with it in certain readings not found in 
earlier editions. Poleni used a copy of C made by 
Gattola! and both Vatican manuscripts. Biicheler 


1 qui satis ut illa aetate religiose Poleno librum descripsit. B. 
xxxii 


THE MANUSCRIPTS 


consulted both Vaticans and a copy of C which 
Kellermann! had made for Schultze. 

The original manuscript, C 361, is of parchment 
and contains, besides the De Aquis, the De Re 
Militari of Vegetius and a part of Varro's De Lingua 
Latina. It had seen hard usage before it came to 
the monastery, some leaves being torn and some 
chapters much mutilated. Poleni places its date at 
the end of the thirteenth or the beginning of the 
fourteenth century, while the catalogue of the 
library of Monte Cassino assigns it to the end of 
the eleventh or the beginning of the twelfth. 
Bücheler thinks it belongs to the thirteenth rather 
than the eleventh. It is written in minuscules 
which were growing dim even when copied by 
Gattola; to-day some parts of the manuscript are 
so obscure as to be difficult to read. Various 
portions were copied in red ink ;? the punctuation 
is erratic ; sentences sometimes begin with capitals, 
again with small letters; no intervals are left 
between words except where the intention is to 
show that something is missing from the text; but 
in places where lacunae are found, the spaces left 
do not always seem proportioned to the words to 
be supplied. 

There are traces of emendation by some hand ot 
a later century ; dots, originally omitted, have been 
placed over the letter :; marks of abbreviation have 

1 quo qui epigraphica studia attigerunt, auctorem sciunt 
nullum esse certiorem. B. 

2 e.g. the words at the beginning of the preface: Incipit 
prologus tuliifrontini in libro deaqueductu urbis; at the end 
of chapter iii.: Explicit prologus; after chapter lxiii. : liber 
primus explicit. liber secundus incipit ; the names of the aque- 
ducts at the beginning of chapters Ixv-Ixxiii. 


xxxlii 


THE MANUSCRIPTS 


been mischievously doubled and tripled in places,! 
words have been changed? and lacunae filled in. 

In the mathematical part of the work, the numbers 
are often quite obviously incorrect, although it is 
hard to tell whether the inaccuracies are to be 
attributed to the author, whose interests were not 
primarily in the field of mathematics, and who may 
have used approximate figures at times, or to the 
copyist, who did not understand the signs or who 
may have erred in the substitution of the names of 
the figures for their symbols. 

The title of the work given in C is de aqueductu 
urbis Romae ; that of the early editions, de acquae- 
ductibus ; for these infelicities Bücheler has substi- 
tuted the title suggested by Heinrich, de aquis urbis 
Romae. 

The division into two books is indicated in C and 
in the codex Urbinus. The numbers of the chapters 
were added by Poleni. For a new collation of C, 
cf. Petschenig, Wien. Stud. vi. (1884), p. 249. For 
a facsimile of the manuscript, cf. Clemens Herschel, 
The Two Books on the Water Supply of the City of 


Rome. 


1 Cf. 112. 2 e.g. quarto to quinto in 11. 


xXXlV ` 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 


Tue editio princeps of the Strategemata was printed 
at Rome in 1487 by Eucharius Silber in the same 
book with Aelian, Vegetius and Modestus ; this was 
reprinted in 1494 and 1497. In 1495 an edition 
appeared at Bologna containing the same works, and 
in the sixteenth century no fewer than ten editions 
were printed at Antwerp, Basel, Cologne, Leyden 
and Paris, in which Frontinus was either combined 
with Aelian, Vegetius and Modestus or was one of 
the authors represented in larger collections of 
examples of military achievements. In the seven- 
teenth century six or seven editions appeared, 
including that of Tennulius (Leyden and Amsterdam, 
1675), with notes and emendations, and that of 
Scriverius (Leyden, 1607), who was the first to unite 
the works of Frontinus in one volume. In his 
collection of treatises on military matters, which 
included the Strutegemata, he incorporated also the 
De Aquis, De Re Agraria, De Limitibus and De 
Coloniis. He included also in this edition notes and 
comments of Stewechius and Modius. The edition 
of Keuchen (Amsterdam, 1661) also contains all 
these works; the Bipontine edition of 1788 and that 
of Dederich (Leipzig, 1855) contain the Strategemata 
and the De Aquis. 

Oudendorp's edition (Leyden, 1731 and 1779) 
included notes and emendations of Modius, Stewe- 
chius, Tennulius, Casaubon, Salmasius, Gronovius 


XXXV 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 


and Scriverius. He consulted eleven codices in the 
preparation of his book, as wellas the earlier editions, 
added copious notes of his own, incorporated in the 
volume Poleni's life of Frontinus,! and provided the 
book with an index. The edition of Schwebel 
(Leipzig, 1772) contained Poleni's life of Frontinus 
and selected notes from previous works with some 
additions of his own. 

The authoritative critical edition is that of 
Gundermann, (Leipzig, 1888). This contains, in 
addition to a full critical apparatus, a conspectus 
locorum, a fairly exhaustive list of references to the 
sources of the Strategemata. 

Among the books and monographs dealing with 
various matters connected with the Strategemata, the 
following may be mentioned: 


G. Gundermann, Quaestiones de Juli Frontini Strate- 
gematon Libris, Fleckeis. Jahrb. Supplementbd. 
16 (1888), p. 315. 

M. Petschenig, Sprachliches zu Frontins Strategemata, 
Philol. Supplementbd. 6 (1892), p. 399. 

A. Eussner, Zu Frontins Strategemata, Blatter für das 
bayr. Gymn. vii. (1871), p. 84. 

J. Zechmeister, De [uli Frontini Strategematon Libris, 
Wien. Stud. v. (1883), p. 224. 

G. Hartel, Analecta, Wien. Stud. vi. (1884), p. 98. 

P. Esternaux, Die Komposition von Frontins Stratege- 
mala, Progr. Berlin, 1899. 

F. Kortz, Quaest. Grammaticae de Juli Frontimi 
Operibus Institutae, Diss. Münster, 1893. 

H. Düntzer, Domitian in Frontins Strategemata, Bonner 
Jahrbücher, H 96/97 (1896), p. 172. 


1 (f, p. xxxviii. 
xxxvi 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 


G. Grasso, Una questione di topogr. stor. ed un errore di 
Frontino tra le imprese di Filippo II di Macedonia, 
Rendiconti d. R. Istituto lombardo Ser. 2, vol. 
31 (1898), p. 976. 

A. Dederich, Bruchstücke aus dem Leben des Sextus 
Julius Frontinus, Zeitschr. für die Alterthumsw. 
1839, pp. 834, 1077. 

E. Fritze, De Tuli Frontini Strategematon Libro iv., 
Diss. Halle, 1888. 

C. Wachsmuth, Rhein. Mus. xv. (1860), p. 574. 

E. Wolfflin, Hermes, i ix. (1875), p. 72. 

F. Haase, Rhein. Mus iii. (1845), p. 312. 

E. Hedicke, Hermes, vi. (1872), p. 156. 

G. Gundermann, Comment, philol. Jen. 1 (1881), p. 83. 

H. M. Connor, A Study of the Syntax of the Stratege- 
mata of Frontinus, Diss. Ithaca, 1921. 

M. Schanz, Philol. xlviii. (1889), p. 674. 


The editio princeps of the De Aquis is that of 
Pomponius Laetus and Sulpicius, brought out at 
Rome 1484—1492 in connection with Vitruvius, with 
whom this work of Frontinus was combined in most 
of the earlier editions. Then followed editions 
printed in Venice and Florence, 1495-1497, several ! 
editions in the sixteenth century, including that of 
Jocundus published at Florence in 1513, and again 
in 1522 and 1523, and three in the seventeenth 
century, one of which was the edition of Scriverius.? 

In 1722 Poleni? brought out his elegant edition, 
which far surpassed all the preceding works. He 
used three manuscripts in its preparation, C and 


1 One at Basel in 1530, and at Strassburg in 1543 and 
550 


2 Cf. p. xxxv, 3 vir de Frontino optime meritus. B. 
xxxvii 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 


both Vaticans, and consulted former editions, using 
Jocundus as his base, but deferring to the codices 
in case of disagreement, except where the greater 
probability of Jocundus's reading won him to that. 
He claims that as an editor he forbore to make con- 
jectures, unless driven to this by the most urgent 
necessity, which led to his being criticized for leaving 
many places unamended. He included much in the 
way of explanatory and illustrative material, being 
especially fitted to do this as a mathematician and a 
man of letters, appended a collection of imperial 
edicts concerning aqueducts, incorporated conjectures 
and notes of Opsopoeus, Scriverius, Scaliger and 
Keuchen, pruned out corruptions of copyists and 
editors, added a life of Frontinus, a prolegomenon 
and an index of matters treated there and in the 
notes. In the mathematical part of the work, in 
order to correct manifest errors, he recklessly changed 
numbers, disregarding the codex when he failed to 
understand the symbols, and using the system adopted 
by Metius! in his calculations, whereas Frontinus 
must, with all antiquity, have used the system of 
Archimedes.? 

Other editions of the eighteenth century are the 
Bipontine (1788) and the Adler, printed at Altona 
in 1792. Dederich’s edition (Wesel, 1841) included 
notes of Heinrich and Schultze. It is characterized 
by careless mistakes, bad judgment in the choice of 
readings, and a lack of intelligence in interpretation. 


1 Adrien Metius (1571-1635) was celebrated for adopting 
the fraction 355/113 to represent the relation of the circum- 
ference of a circle to its diameter, this relationship having 
been previously indicated by mathematicians from the time 
of Archimedes by 22/7. 

2 Cf. tables at end of book. 


xxxviii 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 


The authoritative critical edition is that of Bücheler 
(Leipzig, 1858). In preparing it he consulted C 
and both Vatican manuscripts, and aimed to retain 
the reading of the codex whenever possible. He 
has taken great pains to atone for the copyist's 
carelessness by indicating for each lacuna the exact 
number of letters to be supplied. He has also 
bracketed many conjectures which have crept into 
the text as glosses, and where he has admitted his 
own or others' conjectures, he has clearly marked 
them as such. His text differs in places from the 
reading of C as shown by the facsimile in Herschel's 
edition, where he has failed to note the divergence. 
This may be due to inaccuracies in his copy of C. 

In 1899 Clemens Herschel visited the monastery 
at Monte Cassino and succeeded in securing a fac- 
simile of C which stands in the front of his work, 
The Two Books on the Water Supply of the City of 
Rome. This work includes not only the translation 
of the De Aquis, but also several chapters treating - 
of the measuring and distribution of water, water 
rights in Rome, the building of aqueducts, etc. 

Among the important works relating to the study 
of the Roman aqueduct system, the first to mention 
is, of course, the epoch-making treatise of Rodolfo 
Lanciani, Topografia di Roma antica, i commentarii di 
Frontino intorno le aque e le aque dotti, silloge epigrafica 
aquaria, Memorie delle classe di scienze morali, stor. 
e filol. della accad. dei Lincei bol. 4 (1881), p. 315. 
Other books and monographs are : 

A. Rocchi, Il diverticolo Frontin. all acqua Tepula, 
Studi e docum. di storia e diritto 17 (1896), 
p. 125. 

K. Merckel, Die Ingenieurtechnik im Altertum, Berlin, 
1899. 


xxxix 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 


L. Cantarelli, La Serie dei curatores aquarum, Bolletino 
della commissione arch. com. di Roma 29 (1901), 
p. 180. 

M. H. Morgan, Remarks on the Water Supply of 
Ancient Rome, Transactions and Proceedings of 
the Am. Phil. Ass. xxxiii. (1902), p. 30. 

Th. Ashby, Die antiken Wasserleitungen der Stadt Rom, 
Neue Jahrb. für das klass. Altertum 23 (1909), 
p. 246. 

G. Gundermann, Berl. philol. Wochenschr. xxiii. (1903), 

. 1450. 

R. lancisni Ruins and Excavations of Ancient Rome. 

J. H. Middleton, The Remains of Ancient Rome. 

S. B. Platner, Ancient Rome. 

C. E. Bennett,“ A Roman Waring,” Atlantic Monthly, 
1902, p. 382. 

Clemens Herschel, Lecture delivered before the 
Engineering Students of Cornell University, 
1894. 


SIGLA 


H = Codex Harleianus 2666. 
P — Codex Parisinus 7240. | 
d — Codices (singly or collectively) of an 
inferior class. 
C — Monte Cassino Codex. 
cod. Vat, = Codex Vaticanus 4498. 
cod. Urb. = Codex Urbinus. 
D — Bücheler. 


xl 


THE STRATAGEMS OF 
SEXTUS JULIUS FRONTINUS 


BOOK I. 


VOL, I. B 


IULI FRONTINI 
STRATEGEMATON 


LIBER PRIMUS 


Cum ad instruendam rei militaris scientiam unus 
ex numero studiosorum eius accesserim eique desti- 
nato, quantum cura nostra valuit, satisfecisse visus 
sim, deberi adhuc institutae arbitror operae, ut sol- 
lertia ducum facta, quae a Graecis una orparņnyņnpátwv 
appellatione comprehensa sunt, expeditis amplectar 
commentariis. lta enim consilii quoque et provi- 
dentiae exemplis succincti duces erunt, unde illis 
excogitandi generandique similia facultas nutriatur ; 
praeterea continget, ne de eventu trepidet inven- 
tionis suae, qui probatis eam experimentis comparabit. 

Illud neque ignoro neque infitior, et rerum gesta- 
rum scriptores indagine operis sui hanc quoque 
partem esse complexos et ab auctoribus exemplorum 
quidquid insigne aliquo modo fuit traditum. Sed, ut 
opinor, occupatis velocitate consuli debet. Longum 
est enim, singula et sparsa per immensum corpus 


! The praenomen appears at the beginning of Book II in 
one MS., P. 

2 Frontinus alludes to his work on the Art of War. Thi 
is now lost. 


2 


| THE STRATAGEMS OF 
SEXTUS' JULIUS FRONTINUS 


BOOK I 


Since I alone of those interested in military science 
have undertaken to reduce its rules to system,? and 
since I seem to have fulfilled that purpose, so far 
as pains on my part could accomplish it, I still feel 
under obligation, in order to complete the task I 
have begun, to summarize in convenient sketches 
the adroit operations of generals, which the 
Greeks embrace under the one name strategemata. 
For in this way commanders will be furnished with 
specimens of wisdom and foresight, which will serve 
to foster their own power of conceiving and executing 
like deeds. There will result the added advantage 
that a general will not fear the issue of his own 
stratagem, if he compares it with experiments 
already successfully made. 

I neither ignore nor deny the fact that historians 
have included in the compass of their works this 
feature also, nor that authors have already recorded 
in some fashion all famous examples. But I ought, 1 
think, out. of consideration for busy men, to have 
regard to brevity. For it is a tedious business to 
hunt out separate examples scattered over the vast 


3 
B 2 


SEXTUS JULIUS FRONTINUS 


historiarum persequi; et hi, qui notabilia excerpse- 
runt, ipso velut acervo rerum confuderunt legentem. 
Nostra sedulitas impendet operam, ut, quemadmodum 
res poscet, ipsum quod exigitur quasi ad interro- 
gatum exhibeat ; circumspectis enim generibus, prae- 
paravi opportuna exemplorum veluti consilia, Quo 
magis autem discreta ad rerum varietatem apte con- 
locarentur, in tres libros ea diduximus: in primo 
erunt exempla, quae competant proelio nondum com- 
misso; in secundo, quae ad proelium et confectam 
pacationem pertineant; tertius inferendae solvendae- 
que obsidioni habebit orparnyjpara; quibus deinceps 
generibus suas species adtribui. 

Huic labori non iniuste veniam paciscar, ne me 
pro incurioso reprehendat, qui praeteritum aliquod a 
nobis reppererit exemplum. Quis enim ad percen- 
senda omnia monumenta, quae utraque lingua tradita 
sunt, sufficiat? At multa et transire mihi ipse per- 
misi; quod me non sine causa fecisse scient, qui 
aliorum libros eadem promittentium legerint; verum 
facile erit sub quaque specie suggerere. Nam cum 
hoc opus, sicut cetera, usus potius aliorum quam 
meae commendationis causa adgressus sim, adiuvari 
me ab his qui aliquid illi adstruent, non argui 


credam. 


4 


. STRATAGEMS, I 


body of history ; and those who have made selections 
of notable deeds have overwhelmed the reader by 
the very mass of material. My effort will be devoted 
to the task of setting forth, as if in response to 
questions, and as occasion shall demand, the illus- 
tration applicable to the case in point. For having 
examined the categories, I have in advance mapped 
out my campaign, so to speak, for the presentation 
of illustrative examples. Moreover, in order that 
these may be sifted and properly classified according 
to the variety of subject-matter, I have divided them 
into three books. In the first are illustrations of 
stratagems for use before the battle begins; in the 
second, those that relate to the battle itself and tend 
to effect the complete subjugation of the enemy ; the 
third contains stratagems connected with sieges and 
the raising of sieges. Under these successive classes 
I have grouped the illustrations appropriate to each. 

It is not without justice that I shall claim in- 
dulgence for this work, and I beg that no one will 
charge me with negligence, if he finds that I have 
passed over some illustration. For who could prove 
equal to the task of examining all the records which 
have come down to us in both languages! And so I 
have purposely allowed myself to skip many things. 
That I have not done this without reason, those will 
realize who read the books of others treating of the 
same subjects; but it will be easy for the reader 
to supply those examples under each category. For 
since this work, like my preceding ones, has been 
undertaken for the benefit of others, rather than for 
the sake of my own renown, I shall feel that I am 
being aided, rather than criticized, by those who 
will make additions to it. 


5 


SEXTUS JULIUS FRONTINUS 


Si qui erunt, quibus volumina haec cordi sint, 
meminerint erparyjywóv et orparņnyņnpárwv perquam 
similem naturam discernere. Namque omnia, quae 
a duce provide, utiliter, magnifice, constanter fiunt, 
orparnyixa habebuntur; si in specie eorum sunt, 
erporjyjuara. Horum propria vis in arte sollertiaque 
posita proficit tam ubi cavendus quam opprimendus 
hostis sit. Qua in re cum verborum quoque inlustris 
exstiterit effectus, ut factorum ita dictorum exempla 
posuimus.! 

Species eorum, quae instruant ducem in his, quae 
ante proelium gerenda sunt: 


I. De occultandis consiliis. 
HI. De explorandis consiliis hostium. 

III. De constituendo statu belli. 

ILII. De transducendo exercitu per loca hosti 
infesta. 

V. De evadendo ex locis difficillimis. 

VI. De insidiis in itinere factis. 

VII. Quemadmodum ea, quibus deficiemur, vide- 
antur non deesse aut usus eorum ex- 
pleatur. 

VIII. De distringendis hostibus. 

VIIII. De seditione militum compescenda. 
X. Quemadmodum intempestiva postulatio 
pugnae inhibeatur, 

XI. Quemadmodum incitandus sit ad proelium 
exercitus. 

XII. De dissolvendo metu, quem milites ex ad- 
versis conceperint ominibus. 


1 This paragraph is regarded by modern critics as inter- 
polated. See Introduction, p. xxiv, 


: 


STRATAGEMS, I 


If there prove to be any persons who take an 
interest in these books, let them remember to dis- 
criminate between *'strategy " and “ stratagems,” 
which are by nature extremely similar. For every- 
thing achieved by a commander, be it characterized 
by foresight, advantage, enterprise, or resolution, 
will belong under the head of “strategy,” while 
those things which fall under some special type of 
these will be * stratagems." The essential character- 
istic of the latter, resting, as it does, on skill and 
cleverness, is effective quite as much when the 
enemy is to be evaded as when he is to be crushed. 
Since in this field certain striking results have 
been produced by speeches, I have set down 
examples of these also, as well as of deeds. 

Types of stratagems for the guidance of a com- 
mander in matters to be attended to before battle : 


I. On concealing one's plans. 
II. On finding out the enemy's plans. 
III. On determining the character of the war. 
IV. On leading an army through places infested 
by the enemy. 
V. On escaping from difficult situations. 
VI. On laying and meeting ambushes while on the 
march. 
VII. How to conceal the absence of the things we 
: lack, or to supply substitutes for them. 
VIII. On distracting the attention of the enemy. 
IX. On quelling a mutiny of soldiers. 
X. How to check an unseasonable demand for 
battle. 
:XI. How to arouse an army's enthusiasm for battle. 
XII. On dispelling the fears inspired in soldiers by 
adverse omens, 


7 


SEXTUS JULIUS FRONTINUS 


I. De OccutTanpis Consiliis 


1. M. Poncius Caro devictas a se Hispaniae civi- 
tates existimabat in tempore rebellaturas fiducia 
murorum. Scripsit itaque singulis, ut diruerent muni- 
menta, minatus bellum, nisi confestim obtemperas- 
sent, epistulasque universis civitatibus eodem die 
reddi iussit. Unaquaeque urbium sibi soli credidit 
imperatum ; contumaces conspiratio potuit facere, si 
omnibus idem denuntiari notum fuisset. 

2. Himilco dux Poenorum, ut in Siciliam inopina- 
tus appelleret classem, non pronuntiavit, quo profi- 
cisceretur, sed tabellas, in quibus scriptum erat, quam 
partem peti vellet, universis gubernatoribus dedit 
signatas praecepitque, ne quis legeret nisi vi tempes- 
tatis a cursu praetoriae navis abductus. 

3. C. Laelius, ad Syphacem profectus legatus, 
quosdam ex tribunis et centurionibus per speciem 
servitutis ac ministerii exploratores secum duxit. Ex 
quibus L. Statorium, qui saepius in isdem castris 
fuerat et quem quidam ex hostibus videbantur agnos- 
cere, occultandae condicionis eius causa baculo ut 
servum castigavit. 

4. Tarquinius Superbus pater, principes Gabinorum 
interficiendos arbitratus, quia hoc nemini volebat 
commissum, nihil nuntio respondit, qui ad eum a 
filio erat missus; tantum virga eminentia papaverum 
capita, cum forte in horto ambularet, decussit. Nun- 
tius sine responso reversus renuntiavit adulescenti 


1195 p.c. Cf. Appian Hisp. 41. 

3 396 B.c. Cf. Polyaenus v. x. 2. 

3 203 B.c. Cf. Livy xxx. 4. 

4 The surname Superbus, here given to Tarquinius Priscus, 
the father, is usually applied only to his son, the last Roman . 
king. 


8 


STRATAGEMS, I. 1. 1-4 


I. ON CoNcEaALING ONke's PLANS 


Marcus Poncius Cato believed that, when 
opportunity offered, the Spanish cities which he had 
subdued would revolt, relying upon the protection 
of their walls. He therefore wrote to each of the 
cities, ordering them to destroy their fortifications, 
and threatening war unless they obeyed forthwith. 
He ordered these letters to be delivered to all cities 
on the same day. Each city supposed that it alone 
had received the commands; had they known that 
the same orders had been sent to all, they could have 
joined forces and refused obedience.! 

Himilco, the Carthaginian general, desiring to 
land in Sicily by surprise, made no public announce- 
ment as to the destination of his voyage, but gave 
all the captains sealed letters, in which were in- 
structions what port to make, with further directions 
that no one should read these, unless separated 
from the flag-ship by a violent storm.? 

When Gaius Laelius went as envoy to Syphax, 
he took with him as spies certain tribunes and 
centurions whom he represented to be slaves and 
attendants. One of these, Lucius Statorius, who 
- had been rather frequently in the same camp, and 
whom certain of the enemy seemed to recognize, 
Laelius caned as a slave, in order to conceal the 
man's rank.? 

Tarquin the Proud,* having decided that the 
leading citizens of Gabii should be put to death, and 
not wishing to confide this purpose to anyone, gave 
no response to the messenger sent to him by his 
son, but merely cut off the tallest poppy heads 
with his cane, as he happened to walk about in the 
garden. The messenger, returning without an 


9 


SEXTUS JULIUS FRONTINUS 


Tarquinio, quid agentem patrem vidisset. llle intel- 
lexit, idem esse eminentibus faciendum. 

5. C. Caesar, quod suspectam habebat Aegyptio- 
rum fidem, per speciem securitatis inspectioni urbis 
atque operum ac simul licentioribus conviviis deditus, 
videri voluit captum se gratia locorum ad mores 
Alexandrinos vitamque deficere; atque inter eam 
dissimulationem praeparatis subsidiis occupavit Ae- 
gyptum. | 

6. Ventidius Parthico bello adversus Pacorum re- 
gem, non ignarus Pharnaeum quendam, natione 
Cyrrhestem, ex his qui socii videbantur, omnia quae 
apud ipsos agerentur nuntiare Parthis, perfidiam 
barbari ad utilitates suas convertit, Nam quae 
maxime fieri cupiebat, ea vereri se ne acciderent, 
quae timebat, ea ut evenirent optare simulabat. 
Sollicitus itaque, ne Parthi ante transirent Euphraten, 
quam sibi supervenirent legiones quas in Cappadocia 
trans Taurum habebat, studiose cum proditore egit, 
uti sollemni perfidia Parthis suaderet, per Zeugma 
traicerent exercitum, qua et brevissimum iter est et 
demisso alveo Euphrates decurrit; namque si illa 
venirent, adseverabat se opportunitate collium usu- 
rum ad eludendos sagittarios, omnia autem vereri, si 


1 Qf. Livy i. 54; Val Max. vir iv. 2. Herod. v. 92 
tells the same story of Periander and Thrasybulus. 

3 Alexandria. 

3 48 B.C. Cf. Appian C. ii. 89. 


Io 


STRATAGEMS, I. 1. 4-6 


answer, reported to the young Tarquin what he had 
seen his father doing. The son thereupon under- 
stood that the same thing was to be done to the 
prominent citizens of Gabii.! 

Gaius Caesar, distrusting the loyalty of the 
Egyptians, and wishing to give the appearance of 
indifference, indulged in riotous banqueting, while 
devoting himself to an inspection of the city? and 
its defences, pretending to be captivated by the 
charm of the place and to be succumbing to the 
customs and life of the Egyptians. Having made 
ready his reserves while he thus dissembled, he 
seized Egypt.? 

When Ventidius was waging war against the 
Parthian king Pacorus, knowing that a certain Phar- 
naeus from the province of Cyrrhestica, one of those 
pretending to be allies, was revealing to the Par- 
thians all the preparations of his own army, he 
turned the treachery of the barbarian to his own 
advantage ; for he pretended to be afraid that those 
things would happen which he was particularly 
desirous should happen, and pretended to desire 
those things to happen which he really dreaded. 
And so, fearful that the Parthians would cross the 
Euphrates before he could be reinforced by the 
legions which were stationed beyond the Taurus 
Mountains in Cappadocia, he earnestly endeavoured 
to make this traitor, according to his usual perfidy, 
advise the Parthians to lead their army across 
through Zeugma, where the route is shortest, and 
where the Euphrates flows in a deep channel; for 
he declared that, if the Parthians came by that 
road, he could avail himself of the protection of 
the hills for eluding their archers; but that he 


II 


SEXTUS JULIUS FRONTINUS 


se infra per patentis campos proiecissent. Inducti 
hac adfirmatione barbari inferiore itinere per cir- 
cuitum adduxerunt exercitum dumque fusiores ripas 
et ob hoc operosiore ponte! iungunt instrumentaque 
moliuntur, quadraginta amplius dies impenderunt. 
Quo spatio Ventidius ad contrahendas usus est 
copias eisque triduo, antequam Parthus adveniret, 
receptis acie commissa vicit Pacorum et interfecit. 

7. Mithridates, circumvallante Pompeio, fugam in 
proximum diem moliens, huius consilii obscurandi 
causa latius et usque ad applicitas hosti valles pabu- 
latus, conloquia quoque cum pluribus avertendae 
suspicionis causa in posterum constituit, ignes etiam 
frequentiores per tota castra fieri iussit; secunda 
deinde vigilia praeter ipsa hostium castra agmen 
eduxit. 

8. Imperator Caesar Domitianus Augustus Ger- 
manicus, cum Germanos, qui in armis erant, vellet 
opprimere nec ignoraret maiore bellum molitione 
inituros, si adventum tanti ducis praesensissent, pro- 
fectioni suae census obtexuit Galliarum ; sub quibus 
inopinato bello adfusus contusa immanium ferocia 
nationum provinciis consuluit. 


! operosiore ponte Salmasius; operosiores pontes MSS. 
and edd. 


1 Since Ventidius really wished the Parthians to take the 
longer route, that his reinforcements might have time to 
arrive, he led Pharnaeus to believe that he hoped they would 
cross by the shorter route. For. he knew that Pharnaeus 
would counsel the Parthians to take the course of action not 
desired by himself. 

? The text is very uncertain at this point, though the 
general meaning is clear. 


3 38 B.o. . Cf. Dio xlix. 19. 
I2 


STRATAGEMS, I. 1. 6-8 


feared disaster if they should advance by the lower 
road through the open plains.! Influenced by this 
information, the barbarians led their army by a 
circuitous route over the lower road, and spent above 
forty days in preparing materials and in constructing 
a bridge? across the river at a point where the banks 
were quite widely separated and where the building 
of the bridge, therefore, involved more work. Ven- 
tidius utilized this interval for reuniting his forces, 
and having assembled these, three days before the 
Parthians arrived, he opened battle, conquered 
Pacorus, and killed him.’ 

Mithridates, when he was blockaded by Pompey 
and planned to retreat the next day, wishing to 
conceal his purpose, made foraging expeditions over 
a wide territory, and even to the valleys adjacent 
to the enemy. For the purpose of further averting 
suspicion, he also arranged conferences for a sub- 
sequent date with several of his foes; and ordered 
numerous fires to be lighted throughout the camp. 
Then, in the second watch, he led out his forces 
directly past the camp of the enemy.* 

When the Emperor' Caesar Domitianus Augustus 
Germanicus wished to crush the Germans, who were | 
in arms, realizing that they would make greater 
preparations for war if they foresaw the arrival of 
so eminent a commander as himself, he concealed the 
reason for his departure from Rome under the pre- 
text of taking a census of the Gallie provinces. 
Under cover of this he plunged into sudden warfare, 
crushed the ferocity of these savage tribes, and thus 
acted for the good of the provinces.5 


* 66 B.c. Cf. Appian Mithr. 99. 5 83 A.D. 
13 


SEXTUS JULIUS FRONTINUS 


9. Claudius Nero, cum e re publica esset Hasdru- 
balem copiasque eius, antequam Hannibali fratri 
iungerentur, excidi idcirceque festinaret se Livio 
Salinatori collegae suo, cui bellum mandatum fuerat, 
parum fidens viribus quae sub ipso erant, adiungere 
neque tamen discessum suum ab Hannibale, cui 
oppositus erat, sentiri vellet, decem milia fortissi- 
morüm militum elegit praecepitque legatis, quos 
relinquebat, ut eaedem stationes vigiliaeque ageren- 
tur, totidem ignes arderent, eadem facies castrorum 
servaretur, ne quid Hannibal suspicatus auderet 
adversus paucitatem relictorum. Cum deinde in 
Umbria occultatis itineribus collegae se iunxisset, 
vetuit castra ampliari, ne quod signum adventus sui 
Poeno daret, detractaturo pugnam, si consulum 
iunctas vires intellexisset. Igitur inscium duplicatis 
adgressus copiis superavit et velocius omni nuntio 
rediit ad Hannibalem. Ita ex duobus callidissimis 
ducibus Poenorum eodem. consilio alterum celavit, 
alterum oppressit. : 

. 10. Themistocles exhortans suos ad suscitandos 
festinanter muros, quos iussu Lacedaemoniorum 
deiecerant, legatis Lacedaemone missis, qui inter- 
pellarent, respondit, venturum se ad diluendam hane 
existimationem; et pervenit Lacedaemonem. Ibi 


1 207 B.C. Cf. Val. Max. vil. iv. 4; Livy xxvii. 43 ff. 
14 


STRATAGEMS, I. 1. 9-10 


When it was essential that Hasdrubal and his 
troops should be destroyed before they joined 
Hannibal, the brother of Hasdrubal, Claudius Nero, 
lacking confidence in the troops under his own com- 
mand, was therefore eager to unite his forces with 
thosé of his colleague, Livius Salinator, to whom the 
direction of the campaign had been committed. 
Desiring, however, that his departure should be 
unobserved by Hannibal, whose camp was opposite 
his, he chose ten thousand of his bravest soldiers, 
and gave orders to the lieutenants whom he left 
that the usual number of patrols and sentries should 
be posted, the same number of fires lighted, and the 
usual appearance of the camp be maintained, in order 
that Hannibal might not become suspicious and 
venture to attack the few troops left behind. Then, 
when he joined his colleague in Umbria after secret 
marches, he forbade the enlargement of the camp, 
lest he give some sign of his arrival to the 
Carthaginian commander, who would be likely to 
refuse battle if he knew the forces of the consuls 
had been united. Accordingly, attacking the enemy 
unawares with his reinforced troops, he won the 
day and returned to Hannibal in advance of any 
news of his exploit. Thus by the same plan he stole 
a march on one of the two shrewdest Carthaginian 
generals and crushed the other.! 

Themistocles, urging upon his fellow-citizens the 
speedy construction of the walls which, at the com- 
mand of the Lacedaemonians, they had demolished, 
informed the envoys sent from Sparta to remonstrate 
about this matter, that he himself would come, to 
put an end to this suspicion. Accordingly he came 
to Sparta. There, by feigning illness, he secured 


15 


SEXTUS JULIUS FRONTINUS 


simulato morbo aliquantum temporis extraxit; et 
postquam intellexit suspectam esse tergiversationem 
suam, contendit falsum allatum ad eos rumorem et 
rogavit, mitterent aliquos ex principibus, quibus 
crederent de munitione Athenarum. Suis deinde 
clam scripsit, ut eos qui venissent retinerent, donec 
refectis operibus confiteretur Lacedaemoniis, munitas 
esse Athenas neque aliter principes eorum redire 
posse, quam ipse remissus foret. Quod facile praesti- 
terunt Lacedaemonii, ne unius interitum multorum 
morte pensarent. 

11. L. Furius, exercitu perducto in locum iniquum, 
cum constituisset occultare sollicitudinem suam, ne 
reliqui trepidarent, paulatim se inflectens, tamquam 
circuitu maiore hostem adgressurus, converso agmine 
ignarum rei quae agebatur exercitum incolumem 
reduxit. 

12. Metellus Pius in Hispania interrogatus, quid 
postera die facturus esset, “ tunicam meam, si eloqui 
posset," inquit, ** comburerem." 

13. M. Licinius Crassus percunctanti, quo tempore 
castra moturus esset, respondit: ** vereris, ne tubam 
non exaudias ? " 


II. De ExpPLonRaNbDiIs Consitus Hostium 


1. Scieio ArricaNus, capta occasione mittendae ad 
Syphacem legationis, cum Laelio servorum habitu 


1 Identical with 1. v. 13, and regarded as an interpolation in 
this place. 


1 478 B.c. Cf. Thuc. i. 90 ff. 

2 79-72 p.c. Cf. Val. Max. vit. iv. 5. 

3 Plut. Demetr. 28 tells the same story of Antigonus and 
Demetrius. 


16 


STRATAGEMS, I. 1. 10-1. T 


a considerable delay. But after he realized that his 
subterfuge was suspected, he declared that the 
rumour which had come to the Spartans was false, 
and asked them to send some of their leading men, 
whose word they would take about the building 
operations of the Athenians, Then he wrote 
secretly to the Athenians, telling them to detain 
those who had come to them, until, upon the 
restoration of the walls, he could admit to the 
Spartans that Athens was fortified, and could inform 
them that their leaders could not return until he 
himself had been sent back. These terms the 
Spartans readily fulfilled, that they might not atone 
for the death of one by that of many.! 

Lucius Furius, having led his army into an un- 
favourable position, determined to conceal his 
anxiety, lest the others take alarm. By gradually 
changing his course, as though planning to attack 
the enemy after a wider circuit, he finally reversed 
his line of march, and led his army safely back, 
without its knowing what was going on. 

When Metellus Pius was in Spain and was asked 
what he was going to do the next day, he replied: 
* [f my tunic could tell, I would burn it.” ? 

When Marcus Licinius Crassus was asked at what 
time he was going to break camp, he replied: “ Are 
you afraid you'll not hear the trumpet? "? 


II.—On Finpine Our tue Enemy’s PLANS 


Scipio AFRICANUS, seizing the opportunity of send- 
ing an embassy to Syphax, commanded specially 
chosen tribunes and centurions to go with Laelius, 


17 
VOL. I. c 


SEXTUS JULIUS FRONTINUS 


tribunos et centuriones electissimos ire iussit, quibus 
curae esset perspicere regias vires. Hi, quo liberius 
castrorum positionem scrutarentur, equum de in- 
dustria dimissum tamquam fugientem  persectati 
maximam partem munimentorum circumierunt. Quae 
cum nuntiassent, incendio confectum bellum est. 

2. Q. Fabius Maximus bello Etrusco, cum adhuc 
incognitae forent Romanis ducibus sagaciores explo- 
randi viae, fratrem Fabium Caesonem, peritum 
linguae Etruscae, iussit Tusco habitu penetrare 
Ciminiam silvam, intemptatam ante militi nostro. 
Quod is adeo prudenter atque industrie fecit, ut 
transgressus silvam Umbros Camertes, cum animad- 
vertisset non alienos nomini Romano, ad societatem 
compulerit. 

3. Carthaginienses, cum animadvertissent Alexan- 
dri ita magnas opes, ut Africae quoque immineret, 
unum ex civibus, virum aorem nomine Hamilcarem 
Rhodinum, iusserunt simulato exsilio ire ad regem 
omnique studio in amicitiam eius pervenire. Qua is 
potitus consilia eius nota civibus suis faciebat. 

. 4. Idem Carthaginienses miserunt, qui per speciem 
legatorum longo tempore Romae morarentur excipe- 
rentque consilia nostrorum. 

5. M. Cato in Hispania, quia ad hostium consilia 


1 i.e. the information furnished by the spies enabled 
Scipio to set fire to the camp of Syphax. 

3 203 B.c. Cf. Livy xxx. 4 ff. 

3 810 B.c. Cf. Livy ix. 36. 

4 331 B.c. Cf. Justin. xxr. vi. 1. 


18 


~ STRATAGEMS, I. 1. 1-5 


disguised as slaves and entrusted with the task of 
spying out the strength of the king. These men, 
in order to examine more freely the situation of the 
camp, purposely let loose a horse and chased it 
around the greatest part of the fortifications, pre- 
tending it was running away. After they had 
reported the results of their observations, the 
destruction of the camp by fire! brought the war 
to a close.? 

During the war with Etruria, when shrewd 
methods of reconnoitering were still unknown to 
Roman leaders, Quintus Fabius Maximus com- 
manded his brother, Fabius Caeso, who spoke the 
Etruscan language fluently, to put on Etruscan dress 
and to penetrate into the Ciminian Forest, where 
our soldiers had never before ventured. He showed 
such discretion and energy in executing these 
commands, that after traversing the forest and 
observing that the Umbrians of Camerium were not 
hostile to the Romans, he brought them into an 
alliance.’ 

When the Carthaginians saw that the power of 
Alexander was so great that it menaced even Africa, 
they ordered one of their citizens, a resolute man 
named Hamilcar Rhodinus, to go to the king, pre- 
tending to be an exile, and to make every effort to 
gain his friendship. When Rhodinus had succeeded 
in this, he disclosed to his fellow-citizens the king's 
plans.4 TM 

The same Carthaginians sent men to tarry a long 
time at Rome, in the róle of ambassadors, and thus 
to secure information of our plans. 

When Marcus Cato was in Spain, being unable 
otherwise to arrive at a knowledge of the enemy's 

19 
c 2 


SEXTUS JULIUS FRONTINUS 


alia via pervenire non potuerat, iussit trecentos 
milites simul impetum facere in stationem hostium 
raptumque unum ex his in castra perferre incolumem. 
Tortus ille omnia suorum arcana confessus est. 

6. C. Marius consul bello Cimbrico et Teutonico 
ad excutiendam Gallorum et Ligurum fidem litteras 
eis misit, quarum pars prior praecipiebat, ne inte- 
riores, quae praesignatae erant, ante certum tempus 
aperirentur. Easdem postea ante praestitutum diem 
repetiit et, quia resignatas reppererat, intellexit 
hostilia agitari. 

Est et aliud explorandi genus, quo ipsi duces nullo 
extrinsecus adiutorio per se provident, sicut : ! 

7. Aemilius Paulus consul, bello Etrusco apud op- 
pidum Vetuloniam demissurus exercitum in planitiem, 
contemplatus procul avium multitudinem citatiore 
volatu ex silva consurrexisse, intellexit aliquid illic 
insidiarum latere, quod et turbatae aves et plures 
simul evolaverant. Praemissis igitur exploratoribus 
comperit, decem milia Boiorum excipiendo ibi Roma- 
norum agmini imminere, eaque alio quam exspecta- 
batur latere missis legionibus circumfudit. 


1 The last two lines of No. 6 are probably an inter- 
polation. 


2195 Bc. Plut. Cat. Maj. 13 attributes this stratagem 
to Cato at Thermopylae four years later. 
? The letter was presumably in codex form, with the 
second and third leaves fastened together by a special seal. 
104 B.C. 


20 


STRATAGEMS, I. i. 5-7 


plans, he ordered three hundred soldiers to make a 
simultaneous attack on an enemy post, to seize one 
of their men, and to bring him unharmed to camp. 
The prisoner, under torture, revealed all the secrets 
of his side.! 

During the war with the Cimbrians and Teutons, 
the consul Gaius Marius, wishing to test the loyalty 
of the Gauls and Ligurians, sent them a letter, 
commanding them in the first part of the letter not 
to open the inner part, which was specially sealed, 
before a certain date. Afterwards, before the 
appointed time had arrived, he demanded the 
same letter back, and finding all seals broken, he 
knew that acts of hostility were afoot.? 

There is also another method of securing intelli- 
gence, by which the generals themselves, without 
calling in any outside help, by their own unaided 
efforts take precautions, as, for instance: 

In the Etruscan war, the consul Aemilius Paulus 
was on the point of sending his army down into the 
plain near the town of Vetulonia, when he saw afar 
off a flock of birds rise in somewhat startled flight 
from a forest, and realized that some treachery was 
lurking there, both because the birds had risen in 
alarm and at the same time in great numbers. He 
therefore sent some scouts ahead and discovered 
that ten thousand Boii were lying in wait at that 
point to meet the Roman army. These he over- 
whelmed by sending his legions against them at 
a different point from that at which they were 
expected, 


* Q. Aemilius Papus, consul in 282 and 278 B.C., waged 
war on the Etruscans. Pliny N.H. iii. 138 shows a like con- 
fusion of these names. 


2I 


SEXTUS JULIUS FRONTINUS 


8. Similiter Tisamenus Orestis filius, cum audisset 
iugum ab hostibus natura munitum teneri, praemisit 
sciscitaturos, quid rei foret; ac referentibus eis non 
esse verum, quod opinaretur, ingressus iter, ubi vidit 
ex suspecto iugo magnam vim avium simul evolasse 
neque omnino residere, arbitratus est latere illic 
agmen hostium. Itaque circumducto exercitu elusit 
insidiatores. 

9. Hasdrubal frater Hannibalis iunctum Livii et 
Neronis exercitum, quamquam hoc illi non duplicatis 
castris dissimularent, intellexit, quod ab itinere stri- 
gosiores notabat equos et coloratiora hominum, ut ex 
via, corpora. 


III. De Constituenpo STaTU BELLI 


]. ALEXANDER Mackpo, cum haberet vehementem 
exercitum, semper eum statum belli elegit, ut acie 
confligeret. 

2. C. Caesar bello civili cum veteranum exercitum 
haberet, hostium autem tironem esse sciret, acie 
semper decertare studuit. . 

3. Fabius Maximus adversus Hannibalem, succes- 
sibus proeliorum insolentem, recedere ab ancipiti 
discrimine et tueri tantummodo Italiam constituit, 
Cunctatorisque nomen et per hoc summi ducis 
meruit. 

4. Byzantii adversus Philippum omne proeliandi 


1 Cf. Polyaen. 11. xxxvii. 
2 207 B.c. Cf. r.i. 9 and Livy xxvii. 47.. 
3 217 B.c. Cf. Livy xxi. xii. 6-12... 


22 


STRATAGEMS, I. 1. 8-111. 4 


In like manner, Tisamenus, the son of Orestes, 
hearing that a ridge, a natural stronghold, was held 
by the enemy, sent men ahead to ascertain the facts ; 
and upon their reporting that his impression was 
without foundation, he began his march. But when 
he saw a large number of birds all at once fly from the 
suspected ridge and not settle down at all, he came 
to the conclusion that the enemy’s troops were hiding 
there; and so, leading his army by a detour, he 
escaped those lying in wait for him.! 

Hasdrubal, brother of Hannibal, knew that the 
armies of Livius and Nero had united (although by 
avoiding two separate camps they strove to conceal 
this fact), because he observed horses rather lean 
from travel and men somewhat sunburned, as 
naturally results from marching.? 


III. On DETERMINING THE CHARACTER OF 
THE WAR 


Wuenever Alexander of Macedon had a strong 
army, he chose the sort of warfare in which he could 
fight in open battle. 

Gaius Caesar, in the Civil War, having an army 
of veterans and knowing that the enemy had only 
raw recruits, always strove to fight in open battle. 

Fabius Maximus, when engaged in war with 
Hannibal, who was inflated by his success in battle, 
decided to avoid any dangerous hazards and to de- 
vote himself solely. to the protection of Italy. By 
this policy he earned the name of Cunctator (** The 
Delayer") and the reputation of a consummate 
general? 

The Byzantines in their war with Philip, avoid- 


23 


SEXTUS JULIUS FRONTINUS 


discrimen evitantes, omissa etiam finium tutela, intra 
munitiones oppidi se receperunt adsecutique sunt, ut 
Philippus obsidionalis morae impatiens recederet. 

5. Hasdrubal Gisgonis filius secundo Punico bello 
in Hispania victum exercitum, cum P. Scipio instaret, 
per urbes divisit. lta factum est, ut Scipio, ne 
oppugnatione plurium oppidorum distringeretur, in 
hiberna suos reduceret. 

6. Themistocles adventante Xerxe, quia neque 
proelio pedestri neque tutelae finium neque obsidioni 
credebat sufficere Athenienses, auctor fuit eis liberos 
et coniuges in Troezena et in alias urbes amandandi 
relictoque oppido statum belli ad navale proelium 
transferendi. 

7. Idem fecit in eadem civitate Pericles adversum 
Lacedaemonios.! 

8. Scipio, manente in Italia Hannibale, transmisso 
in Africam exercitu necessitatem Carthaginiensibus 
imposuit revocandi Hannibalem. Sic a domesticis 
finibus in hostiles transtulit bellum. 

9. Athenienses, cum Deceliam castellum ipsorum 
Lacedaemonii communissent et frequentius vexa- 
rentur, classem, quae Peloponnesum infestaret, mise- 
runt consecutique sunt, ut exercitus Lacedaemonio- 
rum, qui Deceliae erat, revocaretur. 

10. Imperator Caesar Domitianus Augustus, cum 
Germani more suo e saltibus et obscuris latebris 
subinde impugnarent nostros tutumque regressum 


1 No. 7 is thought to be an interpolation. 


1 339 p.c. Cf. Justin. ix. 1. 

2 207 B.c. Cf. Livy xxviii. 2-3. 
3 480 B.c. Cf. Herod. viii. 41. 
* 431 B.c, Of, Thuc, i. 143, 


24 


STRATAGEMS, I. ii. 4-10 


ing all risks of battle, and abandoning even the 
defence of their territory, retired within the walls of 
their city and succeeded in causing Philip to with- 
draw, since he could not endure the delay of a siege.! 

Hasdrubal, the son of Gisco, in the Second Punic 
War, distributed his vanquished army among the 
cities of Spain when Publius Scipio pressed hard upon 
him. As a result, Scipio, in order not to scatter his 
forces by laying siege to several towns, withdrew his 
army into winter quarters.? 

Themistocles, when Xerxes was approaching, 
thinking the strength of the Athenians unequal to a 
land battle, to the defence of their territory, or to 
the support of a siege, advised them to remove their 
wives and children to Troezen and other towns, to 
abandon the city, and to transfer the scene of the 
war to the water.? 

Pericles did the same thing in the same state, in 
the war with the Spartans.4 

While Hannibal was lingering in Italy, Scipio 
sent an army into Africa, and so forced the Carthagin- 
ians to recall Hannibal. In this way he transferred 
the war from his own country to that of the enemy.» 

When the Spartans had fortified Decelea, a 
stronghold of the Athenians, and were making 
frequent raids from there, the Athenians sent a fleet 
to harass the Peloponnesus, and thus secured the 
recall of the army of Spartans stationed at Decelea.9 

When the Germans, in accordance with their usual 
custom, kept emerging from woodland-pastures and 
unsuspected hiding-places to attack our men, and 
then finding a safe refuge in the depths of the 


5 204 p.c. Cf. Appian Hann. 55 ; Livy xxviii. iL ff. 
* 413 B.C. Cf. Thuc. vii. 18. 


25 


SEXTUS JULIUS FRONTINUS 


in profunda silvarum haberent, limitibus per centum 
viginti milia passuum actis non mutavit tantum 
statum belli, sed et subiecit dicioni suae hostes, 
quorum refugia nudaverat. 


IV. De TRANspucENDo ExkncirTU per Loca Hosri 
INFESTA 


1, Aemitius PauLus consul cum in Lucanis iuxta 
litus angusto itinere exercitum duceret et Tarentini 
ei classe insidiati agmen eius scorpionibus adgressi 
essent, captivos lateri euntium praetexuit, quorum 
respectu hostes inhibuere tela. 

2. Agesilaus Lacedaemonius, cum praeda onustus 
ex Phrygia rediret insequerenturque hostes et ad 
locorum opportunitatem lacesserent agmen eius, 
ordinem captivorum ab utroque latere exercitus sui 
explicuit; quibus dum parcitur ab hoste, spatium 
transeundi habuerunt Lacedaemonii. 

3. Idem, tenentibus angustias Thebanis, per quas 
transeundum habebat, flexit iter, quasi Thebas con- 
tenderet. Exterritis Thebanis digressisque ad tutanda 
moenia repetitum iter, quo destinaverat, emensus est 
nullo obsistente. 

4. Nicostratus dux Aetolorum adversus Epirotas, 
cum ei aditus in fines eorum angusti forent, per 


1 83 A.D. 

? A military engine for throwing darts, stones, and other 
missiles. 

3 989 p.c. Cf. Zonar. viii. 2. Since no Aemilius Paulus 
waged war with the Tarentines, this is probably the Papus 
referred to in the note to I, ii. 7. 

* 396 B.c. Cf. Polyaen. 11, i. 30. 


26 


STRATAGEMS, I. 11. 10-1v. 4 


forest, the Emperor Caesar Domitianus Augustus, by 
advancing the frontier of the empire along a stretch 
of one hundred and twenty miles, not only changed 
the nature of the war, but brought his enemies 
beneath his sway, by uncovering their hiding-places.! 


IV. On LEADING an ARMY THROUGH PLACES 
INFESTED BY THE ENEMY 


Wuen the consul Aemilius Paulus was leading 
his army along a narrow road near the coast in 
Lucania, and the fleet of the Tarentines, lying in 
wait for him, had attacked his troops by means of 
scorpions,? he placed prisoners as a screen to his line 
of march. Not wishing to harm these, the enemy 
ceased their attacks.? 

Agesilaus, the Spartan, when returning from 
Phrygia laden with booty, was hard pressed by the 
enemy, who took advantage of their position to 
harass his line of march. He therefore placed a file 
of captives on each flank of his army. Since these 
were spared by the enemy, the Spartans found time 
to pass.‘ - | 

The same Agesilaus, when the Thebans held a 
pass through which he had to march, turned his 
course, as if he were hastening to Thebes. Then, 
when the Thebans withdrew in alarm to protect 
their walls, Agesilaus resumed his march and arrived 
at his goal without opposition.5 

When Nicostratus, king of the Aetolians, was 
at war with the Epirotes, and could enter their 
territory only by narrow defiles, he appeared at one 


5 394 or 377 B.C.. Cf. Xen. Hell. v. iv. 49 ff.; Polyaen. 
I. i. 24. 


27 


SEXTUS JULIUS FRONTINUS 


alterum locum inrupturum se ostendens, omni illa 
ad prohibendum occurrente Epirotarum multitudine, 
reliquit suos paucos, qui speciem remanentis exercitus 
praeberent ; ipse cum cetera manu quo non exspecta- 
batur aditu intravit. 

5. Autophradates Perses, cum in Pisidiam exerci- 
tum duceret et angustias quasdam Pisidae occuparent, 
simulata vexatione traiciendi instituit reducere. 
Quod cum Pisidae credidissent, ille nocte validissi- 
mam manum ad eundem locum occupandum prae- 
misit ac postero die totum traiecit exercitum. 

6. Philippus Macedonum rex Graeciam petens, 
cum Thermopylas occupatas audiret et ad eum legati 
Aetolorum venissent acturi de pace, retentis eis ipse 
magnis itineribus ad angustias pertendit securisque 
custodibus et legatorum reditus exspectantibus inopi- 
natus Thermopylas traiecit. 

7. Iphicrates dux Atheniensium adversus Anaxi- 
bium Lacedaemonium in Hellesponto circa Abydon, 
cum transducendum exercitum haberet per loca, 
quae stationibus hostium tenebantur, alterum autem 
latus eius transitus abscisi montes premerent, 
alterum mare allueret, aliquamdiu moratus, cum 
incidisset frigidior solito dies et ob hoc nemini 
suspectus, delegit firmissimos quosque, quibus oleo 
ac mero calefactis praecepit, ipsam oram maris 


1 359-330 B.c, Cf. Polyaen. vir. xxvii. 1. 
2 210 B.C. 
28 


STRATAGEMS, I. iv. 4-7 


point, as if intending to break through at that place. 
Then, when the whole body of Epirotes rushed 
thither to prevent this, he left a few of his men to 
produce the impression that his army was still there, 
while he himself, with the rest of his troops, entered 
at another place, where he was not expected. 

Autophradates, the Persian, upon leading his army 
into Pisidia, and finding certain passes occupied 
by the Pisidians, pretended to be thwarted in his 
plan for crossing, and began to retreat. When the 
Pisidians were convinced of this, under cover of 
night he sent a very strong force ahead to seize the 
same place, and on the following day sent his whole 
army across.! 

When Philip of Macedon was aiming at the con 
quest of Greece, he heard that the Pass of Ther- 
mopylae was occupied by Greek troops. Accordingly, 
when envoys of the Aetolians came to sue for peace, 
he detained them, while he himself hastened by 
forced marches to the Pass, and since the guards had 
relaxed their vigilance while awaiting the return of 
the envoys, by his unexpected coming he succeeded 
in marching through the Pass.? 

When the Athenian general Iphicrates was en- 
gaged in a campaign against the Spartan Anaxibius 
on the Hellespont near Abydus, he had to lead his 
army on one occasion through places occupied by 
enemy patrols, hemmed in on the one side by pre- 
cipitous mountains, and on the other washed by the 
sea. For some time he delayed, and then on an 
unusually cold day, when no one suspected such a 
move, he selected his most rugged men, rubbed 
them down with oil and warmed them up with wine, 
and then ordered them to skirt the very edge of the 


29 


SEXTUS JULIUS FRONTINUS 


legerent, abruptiora tranarent, atque ita custodes 
angustiarum inopinatos oppressit a tergo. 

8. Cn. Pompeius, cum flumen transire propter 
oppositum hostium exercitum non posset, adsidue 
producere et reducere in castra instituit; deinde, 
in eam demum persuasionem hoste perducto, ne 
ullam viam ad progressum Romanorum teneret, 
repente impetu facto transitum rapuit. 

9. Alexander Macedo, prohibente rege Indorum 
Poro traici exercitum per flumen Hydaspen, adversus 
aquam adsidue procurrere iussit suos; et ubi eo 
more exercitationis adsecutus est, ut! a Poro ad- 
versa ripa caveretur, per superiorem partem subitum 
transmisit exercitum. 

9a, Idem, quia Indi fluminis traiectu prohibebatur 
ab hoste, diversis locis in flumen equites instituit 
immittere et transitum minari; cumque exspec- 
tatione barbaros intentos teneret, insulam paulo 
remotiorem primum exiguo, deinde maiore praesidio 
occupavit atque inde in ulteriorem ripam transmisit. 
Ad quam manum opprimendam cum universi se 
hostes effudissent, ipse libero vado transgressus 
omnes copias coniunxit. | 

10. Xenophon, ulteriorem ripam Armeniis tenen- 
tibus, duos iussit quaeri aditus; et cum a vado 


1 The textis uncertain. The reading gives the obvious sense 
of the passage. 


1 389-388 B.c. Cf. Polyaen. rir. ix. 33. 

2 Cf. the Spartan trick at Aegospotami, Xen. Hell. 11. i. 
21 ff. 

3 326 s.c. Cf. Polyaen. Iv. iii. 9; Plut. Alex. 60; Curt. 
xiii. 13. Frontinus, misled by different names given to the 


30 


^— STRATAGEMS, I. iv. 7-10 


sea, swimming across the places that were too pre- 
cipitous to pass. Thus by an unexpected attack from 
the rear he overwhelmed the guards of the defile.! 

When Gnaeus Pompey on one occasion was pre- 
vented from crossing a river because the enemy's 
troops were stationed on the opposite bank, he 
adopted the device of repeatedly leading his troops 
out of camp and back again. Then, when the enemy 
were at last tricked into relaxing their watch on the 
roads in front of the Roman advance, he made a 
sudden dash and effected a crossing.? 

When Porus, a king of the Indians, was keeping 
Alexander of Macedon from leading his troops across 
the river Hydaspes, the latter commanded his men 
to make a practice of running toward the water. 
When by that sort of manceuvre he had led Porus 
to guard the opposite bank, he suddenly led his army 
across at a higher point of the stream.’ 

The same Alexander, prevented by the enemy 
from crossing the river Indus, began to send horse- 
men into the water at different points and to threaten 
to effect a crossing. Then, when he had the bar- 
barians keyed up with expectation, he seized an 
island a little further off, at first with a small force, 
then with a larger one, and from there sent troops 
to the further bank. When the entire force of the 
enemy rushed away to overwhelm this band, he 
himself crossed safely by fords left unguarded and 
reunited all his troops.? 

Xenophon once ordered his men to attempt a 
crossing in two places, in the face of Armenians who 
had possession of the opposite bank. Being repulsed 


river, probably took the same story from two different 
sources, Cf. Introd. p. xxv. 


3I 


SEXTUS JULIUS FRONTINUS 


inferiore repulsus esset, transiit ad superius, inde 
quoque prohibitus hostium occursu repetit vadum 
inferius, iussa quidem militum parte subsistere, 
quae, cum Armenii ad inferioris vadi tutelam 
redissent, per superius transgrederetur. Armenii, 
credentes decursuros omnes, decepti sunt a rema- 
nentibus ; hi cum resistente nullo vadum superassent, 
transeuntium suorum fuere propugnatores. 

11. Appius Claudius consul primo bello Punico, 
cum a Regio Messanam traicere militem nequiret, 
custodientibus fretum Poenis, sparsit rumorem, quasi 
bellum iniussu populi inceptum gerere non posset, 
classemque in Italiam versus se agere simulavit. 
Digressis deinde Poenis, qui profectioni eius habue. 
rant fidem, circumactas naves appulit Siciliae. 

12. Lacedaemoniorum duces, cum Svracusas navi- 
gare destinassent et Poenorum dispositam per litus 
classem timerent, decem Punicas naves, quas cap- 
tivas habebant, veluti victrices primas iusserunt agi, 
aut a latere iunctis aut puppe religatis suis. Qua 
specie deceptis Poenis transierunt. 

13. Philippus, cum angustias maris, quae Creva 
appellantur, transnavigare propter Atheniensium 
classem, quae opportunitatem loci custodiebat, non 
posset, scripsit Antipatro Thraciam rebellare, praesi- 
diis quae ibi reliquerat interceptis; sequeretur 


1 401] p.c. Cf. Xen. Anab. 1v. iii. 20; Polyaen. r. xlix. 4. 

2 264 p.c. Cf. Polyb. 1. xi. 9. Zonar. virt. viii, 6 gives a 
somewhat different account of this crossing. 

8 397 B.c. Cf. Polyaen. II. xi. t i.e., the Hellespont. 


32 


STRATAGEMS, I. iv. 10-13 


at the lower point, he passed to the upper; and 
when driven back from there also by the enemy's 
attack, he returned to the lower crossing, but only 
after ordering a part of his soldiers to remain behind 
and to cross by the upper passage, so soon as the 
Armenians should return to protect the lower. The 
Armenians, supposing that all were proceeding to 
the lower point, overlooked those remaining above, 
who, crossing the upper ford without molestation, 
defended their comrades as they also passed over.! 

When Appius Claudius, consul in the first Punic 
War, was unable to transport his soldiers from 
the neighbourhood of Regium to Messina, because 
the Carthaginians were guarding the Straits, he 
caused the rumour to be spread that he could not 
continue a war which had been undertaken without 
the endorsement of the people, and turning about 
he pretended to set sail for Italy. Then, when the 
Carthaginians dispersed, believing he had gone, 
Appius turned back and landed in Sicily.? 

When certain Spartan generals had planned to 
sail to Syracuse, but were afraid of the Carthaginian 
fleet anchored along the shore, they commanded 
that ten Carthaginian ships which they had captured 
should go ahead as though victors, with their own 
vessels either lashed to their side or towed behind. 
Having deceived the Carthaginians by these appear- 
ances, the Spartans succeeded in passing by.? 

When Philip was unable to sail through the straits 
called Stena,* because the Athenian fleet kept guard 
at a strategic point, he wrote to Antipater that 
Thrace was in revolt, and that the garrisons which 
he had left there had been cut off, directing Anti- 
pater to leave all other matters and follow him. 


33 
VOL. I. D 


SEXTUS JULIUS FRONTINUS 


omnibus omissis. Quae ut epistulae interciperentur 
ab hoste, curavit. Athenienses, arcana Macedonum 
excepisse visi, classem abduxerunt ; Philippus nullo 
prohibente angustias freti liberavit. 

13a. Idem, quia Cherronessum, quae iuris Athenien- 
sium erat, occupare prohibebatur, tenentibus tran- 
situm non Byzantiorum tantum, sed Rhodiorum 
quoque et Chiorum navibus, conciliavit animos 
eorum reddendo naves, quas ceperat, quasi seques- 
tres futuras ! ordinandae pacis inter se ac Byzantios, 
qui causa belli erant. Tractaque per magnum tempus 
postulatione, cum de industria subinde aliquid in 
condicionibus retexeret, classem per id tempus 
praeparavit eaque in angustias freti imparato hoste 
subitus evasit. 

14. Chabrias Atheniensis, cum adire portum Sa- 
miorum obstante navali hostium praesidio non posset, 
paucas e suis navibus praeter portum missas iussit 
transire, arbitratus, qui in statione erant, persecutu- 
ros; hisque per hoc consilium avocatis, nullo obstante 
portum cum reliqua adeptus est classe. 


V. De Evapenpo Ex Locis DirriciLLIMIS 
1. Q. SEeRTOoRIUSs in Hispania, cum a tergo instante 
hoste flumen traicere averet,? vallum in ripa eius in 


1 futuras d ; futuros Gund. 
2 haberet HP; haveret, Hartel, Gund. 


1 340-339 B.c. Polyaen. Iv. ii. 8 attributes this stratagem 
to Philip on the occasion of his march against Amphissa. 

2 339 B.C. 

3 388 p.c. Cf. Polyaen. m1. xi. 10, 12. 


31 


» 
STRATAGEMS, I. iv. 13-v. 1 


This letter Philip arranged to have fall into the 
hands of the enemy. The Athenians, imagining 
they had secured secret intelligence of the Mace- 
donians, withdrew their fleet, while Philip now 
passed through the straits with no one to hinder 
him.! 

The Chersonese happened at one time to be con- 
trolled by the Athenians, and Philip was prevented 
from capturing it, owing to the fact that the strait 
was commanded by vessels not only of the Byzantines 
but also of the Rhodians and Chians; but Philip won 
the confidence of these peoples by returning their 
captured ships, as pledges of the peace to be arranged 
between himself and the Byzantines, who were the 
cause of the war. While the negotiations dragged 
on for some time and Philip purposely kept changing 
the details of the terms, in the interval he got ready 
a fleet, and eluding the enemy while they were oft 
their guard, he suddenly sailed into the straits.? 

When Chabrias, the Athenian, was unable to 
secure access to the harbour of the Samians on 
account of the enemy blockade, he sent a few of his 
own ships with orders to cross the mouth of the 
harbour, thinking that the enemy on guard would 
give chase. When the enemy were drawn away by 
this ruse, and no one now hindered, he secured 
possession of the harbour with the remainder of his 
fleet.? 


V. ON Escapina From DIFFICULT SITUATIONS 


Wen Quintus Sertorius, in the Spanish cam- 
paign, desired to cross a river while the enemy were 
harassing him from the rear, he had his men con- 


35 
D 2 


SEXTUS JULIUS FRONTINUS 


modum cavae lunae duxit et oneratum materiis 
incendit; atque ita exclusis hostibus flumen libere 
transgressus est. 

2. Similiter Pelopidas Thebanus bello Thessalico 
transitum quaesivit. Namque castris ampliorem 
locum supra ripam complexus, vallum cervolis et 
alio materiae genere constructum incendit, dumque 
ignibus submoventur hostes, ipse fluvium superavit. 

9. Q. Lutatius Catulus, cum a Cimbris pulsus 
unam spem salutis haberet, si flumen liberasset, 
cuius ripam hostes tenebant, in proximo monte 
copias ostendit, tamquam ibi castra positurus. Ac 
praecepit suis, ne sarcinas solverent aut onera 
deponerent neu quis ab ordinibus signisque dis- 
cederet; et quo magis persuasionem hostium con- 
firmaret, pauca tabernacula in conspectu erigi iussit 
ignesque fieri et quosdam vallum struere, quosdam 
in lignationem, ut conspicerentur, exire. Quod 
Cimbri vere agi existimantes et ipsi castris delege- 
runt locum dispersique in proximos agros ad 
comparanda ea, quae mansuris necessaria sunt, occa- 
sionem dederunt Catulo non solum flumen traiciendi, 
sed etiam castra eorum infestandi. 

4. Croesus, cum Halyn vado transire non posset 
neque navium aut pontis faciendi copiam haberet, 
fossa superiore parte post castra deducta alveum 
flumini a tergo exercitus sui reddidit. 


— 


1 80-72 B.C 2 369-364 p.c. Cf. Polyaen. rr. iv. 2. 
3 102 B.C. 4546 B.c. Cf. Herod. i. 75. 


36 


STRATAGEMS, I. v. 1-4 


struct a crescent-shaped rampart on the bank, pile 
it high with timber, and set fire to it. When the * 
enemy were thus cut off, he crossed the stream 
without hindrance.! 

In like manner Pelopidas, the Theban, in the 
Thessalian war, sought to cross a certain stream. 
Choosing a site above the bank larger than was 
necessary for his camp, he constructed a rampart of 
chevauz-de-frise and other materials, and set fire to 
it. Then, while the enemy were kept off by the 
fire, he crossed the stream.? 

When Quintus Lutatius Catulus had been re- 
pulsed by the Cimbrians, and his only hope of safety 
lay in passing a stream the banks of which were 
held by the enemy, he displayed his troops on the 
nearest mountain, as though intending to camp there. 
Then he commanded his men not to loose their 
packs, or put down their loads, and not to quit the 
ranks or standards. In order the more effectively to 
strengthen the impression made upon the enemy, he 
ordered a few tents to be erected in open view, and 
fires to be built, while some built a rampart and 
others went forth in plain sight to collect wood. 
The Cimbrians, deeming these performances genuine, 
themselves also chose a place for a camp, scattering 
through the nearest fields to gather the supplies 
necessary for their stay. In this way they afforded 
Catulus opportunity not merely to cross the streami, 
but also to attack their camp.? 

When Croesus could not ford the Halys, and 
had neither boats nor the means of building a bridge, 
he began up stream and constructed a ditch behind 
his camp, thus bringing the channel of the river in 
the rear of his army.* 


37 


SEXTUS JULIUS FRONTINUS 


5. Cn. Pompeius Brundisii, cum excedere Italia et 
"transferre bellum proposuisset, instante a tergo 
Caesare conscensurus classem quasdam obstruxit 
vias, alias parietibus intersaepsit, alias intercidit 
fossis easque sudibus erectis praeacutis! operuit 
cratibus, humo adgesta; quosdam aditus, qui ad 
portum ferebant, trabibus transmissis et in densum 
ordinem structis, ingenti mole tutatus est. Quibus 
perpetratis ad speciem retinendae urbis raros pro 
moenibus sagittarios reliquit, ceteras copias sine 
tumultu ad naves deduxit. Navigantem eum mox 
sagittarii quoque per itinera nota degressi parvis 
navigiis consecuti sunt. 

6. C. Duellius consul in portu Syracusano, quem 
temere intraverat, obiecta ad ingressum catena 
clausus universos in puppem rettulit milites atque 
ita resupina navigia magna remigantium vi conci- 
tavit; levatae prorae super catenam processerunt. 
Qua parte superata transgressi rursus milites proras 
presserunt, in quas versum pondus decursum super 
catenam dedit navibus. 

7. Lysander Lacedaemonius, cum in portu Athe- 
niensium cum tota classe obsideretur, obrutis? hos- 
tium navibus ab ea parte, qua faucibus angustissimis 


1 praeclusas, the MSS. and Gund.; but Gund. suggests 
praeacutis, comparing Caesar, B.C. i. 27. 

3 With this reading of the MSS., Oud. suggests this explana- 
tion: per mersas ab hostibus de industria naves, ab ea sci- 
licet parte qua deberet cum sua classe exire, unde obstructus 
ei erat exitus. 


1 49 p.c. Cf. Caes. B.C. i. 27-28. 
2 260 B.C. Zonar. vii. 16 makes Hippo, rather than 
Syracuse, the scene of this stratagem. 3 Piraeus. 


39 


STRATAGEMS, I. v. 5-7 


When Gnaeus Pompey at Brundisium had 
planned to leave Italy and to transfer the war to 
another field, since Caesar was heavy on his heels, 
just as he was on the point of embarking, he placed 
obstacles in some roads; others he blocked by con- 
structing walls across them; others he intersected 
with trenches, setting sharp stakes in the latter, and 
laying hurdles covered with earth across the open- 
ings. Some of the roads leading to the harbour he 
guarded by throwing beams across and piling them 
one upon another in a huge heap. After consum- 
mating these arrangements, wishing to produce the 
appearance of intending to retain possession of the 
city, he left a few archers as a guard on the walls ; 
the remainder of his troops he led out in good order 
to the ships. Then, when he was under way, the 
archers also withdrew by familiar roads, and over- 
took him in small boats.! 

When the consul Gaius Duellius was caught 
by a chain stretched across the entrance to the 
harbour of Syracuse, which he had rashly entered, 
he assembled all his soldiers in the sterns of the 
boats, and when the boats were thus tilted up, he 
propelled them forward with the full force of his 
oarsmen. Thus lifted up over the chain, the prows 
moved forward. When this part of the boats had 
been carried over, the soldiers, returning to the 
prows, depressed these, and the weight thus trans- 
ferred to them permitted the boats to pass over the 
chain.? 

When Lysander, the Spartan, was blockaded in 
the harbour? of the Athenians with his entire fleet, 
since the ships of the enemy were sunk at the point 
where the sea flows in through a very narrow 


39 


SEXTUS JULIUS FRONTINUS 


influit mare, milites suos clam in litus egredi iussit 
et subiectis rotis naves ad proximum portum Muny- 
chiam traiecit. 

8. Hirtuleius legatus Q. Sertorii, cum in Hispania 
inter duos montes abruptos longum et angustum 
iter ingressus paucas duceret cohortes comperissetque 
ingentem manum hostium adventare, fossam trans- 
versam inter montes pressit vallumque materia 
exstructum incendit atque ita intercluso hoste 
evasit. 

9. C. Caesar bello civili, cum adversus Afranium 
copias educeret et recipiendi se sine periculo facul- 
tatem non haberet, sicut constiterat, prima et secunda 
acie in armis permanente, tertia autem acie furtim 
a tergo ad opus applicata, quindecim pedum fossam 
fecit, intra quam sub occasum solis armati se milites 
eius receperunt, 

10, Pericles Atheniensis, a Peloponnesiis in eum 
locum compulsus, qui undique abruptis cinctus duos 
tantum exitus habebat, ab altera parte fossam ingen- 
tis latitudinis duxit velut hostis excludendi causa, 
ab altera limitem agere coepit, tamquam per eum 
erupturus. Hi qui obsidebant, cum per fossam, 
quam ipse fecerat, exercitum Periclis non crederent 
evasurum, universi a limite obstiterunt. Pericles, 
pontibus quos praeparaverat fossae iniectis, suos quis 
non resistebatur emisit. 

11. Lysimachus, ex his unus in quos opes Alexan- 
dri transierunt, cum editum collem castris destinasset, 


1 404 B.C. 2 79-75 B.C. 

3 49 p.c. Cf. Caes. B.C. i. 42. 

4 430 B.c. Cf. mr. ix. 9. Variations of the same story. 
Polyaen. v. x. 3 attributes this stratagem to Himilco. 


40 


STRATAGEMS, I. v. 7-11 


entrance, he commanded his men to disembark 
secretly. Then, placing his ships on wheels, he 
transported them to the neighbouring harbour of 
Munychia.! 

When Hirtuleius, lieutenant of Quintus Sertorius, 
was leading a few cohorts up a long narrow road in 
Spain between two precipitous mountains, and had 
learned that a large detachment of the enemy was 
approaching, he had a ditch dug across between the 
mountains, fenced it with a wooden rampart, set fire 
to this, and made his escape, while the enemy were 
thus cut off from attacking him.? 

When Gaius Caesar led out his forces against 
Afranius in the Civil War, and had no means of 
retreating without danger, he had the first and 
second lines of battle remain in arms, just as they 
were drawn up, while the third secretly applied 
itself to work in the rear, and dug a ditch fifteen 
feet deep, witlin the line of which the soldiers 
under arms withdrew at sunset.? 

Pericles the Athenian, being driven by the 
Peloponnesians into a place surrounded on all sides 
by precipitous cliffs and provided with only two 
outlets, dug a ditch of great breadth on one side, as 
if to shut out the enemy ; on the other side he 
began to build a road, as if intending to make a 
sally by this. The besiegers, not supposing that 
Pericles army would make its escape by the ditch 
which he had constructed, massed to oppose him on 
the side where the road was. But Pericles, spanning 
the ditch by bridges which he had made ready, 
extricated his men without interference.* 

Lysimachus, one of the heirs to Alexander's 
power, having determined on one occasion to pitch 


41 


SEXTUS JULIUS FRONTINUS 


imprudentia autem suorum in inferiorem deductus 
vereretur ex superiore hostium incursum, triplices 
fossas intra vallum obiecit; deinde simplicibus fossis 
circa omnia tentoria ductis tota castra confodit et 
intersaepto hostium aditu, simul humo quoque et 
frondibus quas fossis superiecerat patefacto,! in su- 
periora evasit. 

12. C. Fonteius Crassus in Hispania cum tribus 
milibus hominum praedatum profectus locoque iniquo 
circumventus ab Hasdrubale, ad primos tantum 
ordines relato consilio, incipiente nocte, quo tempore 
minime exspectabatur, per stationes hostium perrupit.? 

13. L. Furius exercitu perducto in locum iniquum, 
cum constituisset occultare sollicitudinem suam, ne 
reliqui trepidarent, paulatim inflexit iter, tamquam 
circuitu maiore hostem adgressurus ; converso agmine 
ignarum rei quae agebatur exercitum incolumem 
reduxit.? 

14. P. Decius tribunus bello Samnitico Cornelio 
Cosso consuli iniquis locis deprehenso ab hostibus 
suasit, ut ad occupandum collem, qui erat in propin- 
quo, modicam manum mitteret, seque ducem his qui 
mittebantur obtulit. Avocatus in diversum hostis 
dimisit consulem, Decium autem cinxit obseditque. 
Illas quoque angustias noctu eruptione facta cum 
frustratus esset Decius, incolumis cum militibus 
consuli accessit.4 


1 Text and interpretation of this clause are hopelessly 
uncertain. 

2 Identical with 1v. v. 8. 

* Identical with 1. i. 11. 

* Practically identical with 1v. v. 9. 


1 323-281 B.C. 2 343 B.c. Cf. Livy vii. 34 ff. 
42 


STRATAGEMS, I. v. 11-14 


his camp on a high hill, was conducted by the 
inadvertence of his men to a lower one. Fearing 
that the enemy would attack from above, he dug a 
triple line of trenches and encircled these with a 
rampart. Then, running a single trench around all 
the tents, he thus fortified the entire camp. Having 
thus shut off the advance of the enemy, he filled in 
the ditches with earth and leaves, and made his way 
across them to higher ground.! 

Gaius Fonteius Crassus, when in Spain, having set 
out with three thousand men on a foraging expe- 
dition, was caught in an awkward position by 
Hasdrubal. At nightfall, when such a movement 
was least expected, communicating his plan only to 
the centurions of the first rank, he burst through 
the enemy’s patrols. 

Lucius Furius, having led his army into an un- 
favourable position, determined to conceal his 
anxiety, lest the others take alarm. By gradually 
changing his course, as though planning to attack 
the enemy after a wider circuit, he finally reversed 
his line of march, and led his army safely back, 
without their knowing what was going on. 

When the consul Cornelius Cossus had been 
caught in a disadvantageous position by the enemy 
in the Samnite War, Publius Decius, tribune of the 
soldiers, urged him to send a small force to occupy 
a hill near by, and volunteered as leader of those 
who should be sent. The enemy, thus diverted to 
a different quarter, allowed the consul to escape, but 
surrounded Decius and besieged him. But Decius, 
extricating himself from this predicament by making 
a sortie at night, escaped with his men unharmed, 
and rejoined the consul.? 


43 


SEXTUS JULIUS FRONTINUS 


15. Idem fecit sub Atilio Calatino consule is, cuius 
varie traditur nomen: alii Laberium, nonnulli Q. 
Caedicium, plurimi Calpurnium Flammam vocitatum 
scripserunt. Is cum demissum in eam vallem videret 
exercitum, cuius latera omniaque superiora hostis 
insederat, depoposcit et accepit trecentos milites, 
quos adhortatus, ut virtute sua exercitum servarent, 
in mediam vallem decucurrit ; et ad opprimendos 
eos undique descendit hostis longoque et aspero 
proelio retentus occasionem consuli ad extrahendum 
exercitum dedit.! 

16. Q. Minucius consul in Liguria, demisso in 
angustias exercitu, cum iam omnibus obversaretur 
Caudinae cladis exemplum, Numidas auxiliarés, tam 
propter ipsorum quam propter equorum deformi- 
tatem despiciendos, iussit adequitare faucibus quae 
tenebantur. Primo intenti hostes, ne lacesserentur, 
stationem obiecerunt. De industria Numidae ad 
augendum sui contemptum labi equis et per ludi- 
brium spectaculo esse adfectaverunt. Ad novitatem 
rei laxatis ordinibus barbari in spectaculum usque 
resoluti sunt, Quod ubi animadverterunt Numidae, 
paulatim succedentes additis calcaribus per inter- 
missas hostium stationes eruperunt ; quorum deinde 
cum proximos incenderent agros, necesse Liguribus 
fuit avocari ad defendenda sua inclusosque Romanos 
emittere. 

1 Practically identical with Iv. v. 10. 
1958 B.c. Cf. Livy xxi. Ix. 11; Zonar. viii. 12. Gell. iii. 


7 gives a different account of this incident. 
3 193 B.c. Cf. Livy xxxv. ll. 


44 


' STRATAGEMS, I. v. 15-16 


Under the consul Atilius Calatinus the same thing 
was done by a man whose name is variously reported. 
Some say he was called Laberius, and some Quintus 
Caedicius, but most give it as Calpurnius Flamma. 
This man, seeing that the army had entered a valley, 
the sides and all commanding parts of which the 
enemy had occupied, asked and received from the 
consul three hundred soldiers. After exhorting these 
to save the army by their valour, he hastened to the 
centre of the valley. To crush him and his followers, 
the enemy descended from all quarters, but, being held 
in check in a long and fierce battle, they thus afforded 
the consul an opportunity to extricate his army.! 

When the army of the consul Quintus Minucius 
had marched down into a defile of Liguria, and the 
memory of the disaster of the Caudine Forks occurred 
to the minds of all, Minucius ordered the Numidian 
auxiliaries, who seemed of small account because of 
their own wild appearance and the ungainliness of 
their steeds, to ride up to the mouth of the defile 
which the enemy held. The enemy were at first on 
the alert against attack, and threw out patrols. 
But when the Numidians, in order to inspire still 
more contempt for themselves, purposely affected to 
fall from their horses and to engage in ridiculous 
antics, the barbarians, breaking ranks at the novel 
sight, gave themselves up completely to the enjoy- 
ment of the show. When the Numidians noticed 
this, they gradually drew nearer, and putting spurs 
to their horses, dashed through the lightly held line 
of the enemy. Then they set fire to the fields near 
by, so that it became necessary for the Ligurians to 
withdraw to defend their own territory, thereby 
releasing the Romans shut up at the pass.? 


45 


SEXTUS JULIUS FRONTINUS 


17. L. Sulla, bello sociali apud Aeserniam inter 
angustias deprehensus ab exercitu hostium, cui Duil- 
lius praeerat, conloquio petito de condicionibus pacis 
agitabat sine effectu. Hostem tamen propter in- 
dutias neglegentia resolutum animadvertens, nocte 
profectus relicto bucinatore, qui vigilias ad fidem 
remanentium divideret et quarta vigilia commissa 
consequeretur, incolumes suos cum omnibus impedi- 
mentis tormentisque in tuta perduxit. 

18. Idem adversus Archelaum praefectum Mithri- 
datis in Cappadocia, iniquitate locorum et multitudine 
hostium pressus, fecit pacis mentionem interposi- 
toque tempore etiam indutiarum et per haec avocata 
intentione adversarium evasit. 

19. Hasdrubal frater Hannibalis, cum saltum non 
posset evadere, faucibus eius obsessis, egit cum 
Claudio Nerone recepitque dimissum Hispania ex- 
cessurum. Cavillatus deinde condicionibus dies 
aliquot extraxit, quibus omnibus non omisit per 
angustos tramites et ob id neglectos dimittere per 
partes exercitum ; ipse deinde cum reliquis expeditis 
facile effugit. 

20. Spartacus fossam, qua erat a M. Crasso circum- 
datus, caesis captivorum pecorumque corporibus 
noctu replevit et supergressus est. 


1 90 B.C. 2 92 B.C. 
3 211 p.c. Cf. Livy xxvi. 17; Zonar. ix. 7. 
471 B.C. 


46 


STRATAGEMS, I. v. 17-20 


In the Social War, Lucius Sulla, surprised in a 
defile near Aesernia by the army of the enemy under 
the command of Duillius, asked for a conference, but 
was unsuccessful in negotiating terms of peace. 
Noting, however, that the enemy were careless and 
off their guard as a result of the truce, he marched 
forth at night, leaving only a trumpeter, with in- 
structions to create the impression of the army's 
presence by sounding the watches, and to rejoin 
him when the fourth watch began. In this way he 
conducted his troops unharmed to a place of safety, 
with all their baggage and engines of war.! 

The same Sulla, when fighting in Cappadocia 
against Archelaus, general of Mithridates, em- 
barrassed by the difficulties of the terrain and the 
large numbers of the enemy, proposed peace. Then, 
taking advantage of the opportunity afforded by the 
truce, which served to divert the watchfulness of 
his adversary, he slipped out of his hands.? 

Hasdrubal, brother of Hannibal, when unable 
to make his way out of a defile the entrance 
of which. was held by the enemy, entered into 
negotiations with Claudius Nero and promised to 
withdraw from Spain if allowed to depart. Then, 
by quibbling over the terms, he dragged out negotia- 
tions for several days, during all of which time he 
was busy sending out his troops in detachments by 
way of paths so narrow that they were overlooked 
by the Romans. Finally he himself easily made his 
escape with the remainder, who were light-armed.? 

When Marcus Crassus had constructed a ditch 
around the forces of Spartacus, the latter at night 
filled it with the bodies of prisoners and cattle that 
he had slain, and thus marched across it.* 


47 


SEXTUS JULIUS FRONTINUS 


2]. Idem, in Vesuvio obsessus ea parte, qua mons 
' asperrimus erat ideoque incustoditus, ex vimine sil- 
vestri catenas conseruit ; quibus demissus non solum 
evasit, verum etiam ex alio latere Clodium ita terruit, 
ut aliquot cohortes gladiatoribus quattuor et septua- 
ginta cesserint. 

22. Idem, cum a P. Varinio proconsule praeclusus 
esset, palis per modica intervalla fixis ante portam 
erecta cadavera, adornata veste atque armis, alli- 
gavit, ut procul intuentibus stationis species esset, 
ignibus per tota castra factis. Imagine vana deluso 
hoste copias silentio noctis eduxit. 

23. Brasidas dux Lacedaemoniorum, circa Amphi- 
polim ab Atheniensium multitudine numero impar 
deprehensus, claudendum se praestitit, ut per longum 
coronae ambitum extenuaret hostilem frequentiam, 
quaque rarissimi obstabant, erupit. 

24. Iphicrates in Thracia, cum depresso loco 
castra posuisset, explorasset autem ab hoste proxi- 
mum teneri collem, ex quo unus ad opprimendos 
ipsos descensus erat, nocte paucis intra castra relictis 
imperavit, multos ignes facerent, eductoque exercitu 


173 B.c. Cf. Plut. Crassus 9; Flor. iii. 20. 
2 73 B.C. 
3 424 or 422 B.c. Cf. Thuc. iv. 102, 106 ff. ; v. 6-11. 


48 


STRATAGEMS, I. v. 21-24 


The same Spartacus, when besieged on the slopes 
of Vesuvius at the point where the mountain was 
steepest and on that account unguarded, plaited 
ropes of osiers from the woods. Letting himself 
down by these, he not only made his escape, but 
by appearing in another quarter struck such terror 
into Clodius that several cohorts gave way before a 
force of only seventy-four gladiators.! 

The same Spartacus, when enveloped by the 
troops of the proconsul Publius Varinius, placed 
stakes at short intervals before the gate of the 
camp; then setting up corpses, dressed in clothes 
and furnished with weapons, he tied these to the 
stakes, to give the appearance of sentries when 
viewed from a distance. He also lighted fires 
throughout the whole camp. Deceiving the enemy 
by this empty show, Spartacus by night silently 
led out his troops.? 

When Brasidas, a general of the Spartans, was 
surprised near Amphipolis by a host of Athenians 
who outnumbered him, he allowed himself to be 
enveloped, in order to diminish the density of the 
enemy's ranks by lengthening the line of besiegers. 
Then he broke through at the point where the line 
was most lightly held.? 

Iphicrates, when campaigning in Thrace, having 
on one occasion pitched his camp on low ground, 
discovered through scouts that thé neighbouring 
hill was held by the enemy, and that from it 
came down a single road which might be utilized 
to overwhelm him and his men. Accordingly he | 
left a few men in camp at night, and commanded 
them to light a number of fires. Then leading forth 
his troops and ranging them along the sides of the 


49 
VOL. I, E 


SEXTUS JULIUS FRONTINUS 


et disposito circa latera praedictae viae passus est 
transire barbaros; locorumque iniquitate, in qua ipse 
fuerat, in illos conversa, parte exercitus tergo eorum 
cecidit, parte castra cepit. 

25. Darius, ut falleret Scythas, discessu suo! 
canes atque asinos in castris reliquit. Quos cum 
latrantes rudentesque M hostis audiret, remanere 
Darium credidit. 

26. Eundem errorem obiecturi nostris Ligures per 
diversa loca buculos laqueis ad arbores alligaverunt, 
qui diducti frequentiore mugitu speciem rema- 
nentium praebebant hostium. 

27. Hanno, ab hostibus clausus, locum eruptioni 
maxime aptum adgestis levibus materiis incendit ; 
tum hoste ad ceteros exitus custodiendos avocato 
milites per ipsam flammam eduxit, admonitos ora 
scutis, crura veste contegere. 

28. Hannibal, ut iniquitatem locorum et inopiam 
instante Fabio Maximo effugeret, noctu boves, 
quibus ad cornua fasciculos alligaverat sarmentorum, 
subiecto igne dimisit ; cumque ipso motu adolescente 
flamma  turbaretur pecus, magna  discursatione 
montes, in quos actum erat, conlustravit, Romani, 
qui ad speculandum concurrerant, primo prodigium 
opinati sunt; dein cum certa Fabio renuntiassent, 


! ut falleret Scythas, discessu suo Bennett; ut falleret 
Scythas discessu, canes Gund. The MSS. lack suo. 


1 389 p.c. This same story is told in 11. xii. 4. Cf. also 
Polyaen. rir. ix. 41, 46, 50. 
2 513 B.c. Cf. Herod. iv. 135; Polyaen. vīr. xi. 4. 


50 


STRATAGEMS, I. v. 24-28 


road just mentioned, he suffered the barbarians to 
pass by. When in this way the disadvantage of 
terrain from which he himself suffered had been 
turned against them, with part of his army he over- 
whelmed their rear, while with another part he 
captured their camp.! 

Darius, in order to deceive the Scythians, left 
dogs and asses in camp at his departure. When 
the enemy heard these barking and braying, they 
imagined that Darius was still there.? 

To produce a like misconception in the minds 
of our men, the Ligurians, in various places, tied 
bullocks to trees with halters. The animals, being 
thus separated, bellowed incessantly and produced 
the impression that the Ligurians were still there. 

Hanno, when enveloped by the enemy, selected 
the point in the line best suited for a sortie, and, 
piling up light stuff, set fire to it. Then, when the 
enemy withdrew to guard the other exits, he marched 
his men straight through the fire, directing them 
to protect their faces with their shields, and their 
legs with their clothing. 

Hannibal on one occasion was embarrassed by 
difficulties of terrain, by lack of supplies, and by 
the circumstance that Fabius Maximus was heavy 
on his heels. Accordingly he tied bundles of lighted 
fagots to the horns of oxen, and turned the animals 
loose at night. When the flames spread, fanned by 
the motion, the panic-stricken oxen ran wildly hither 
and thither over the mountains to which they had 
been driven, illuminating the whole scene. The 
Romans, who had gathered to witness the sight, 
at first thought a prodigy had occurred. Then, when 
scouts reported the facts, Fabius, fearing an ambush, 

5I 
E 2 


SEXTUS JULIUS FRONTINUS 


ille insidiarum metu suos castris continuit. Barbari 
obsistente nullo profecti sunt. 


VI. De Iwsipiis iN ITINERE FACTIS 


1. Futvius Nositior, cum ex Samnio in Lucanos 
exercitum duceret et cognovisset a perfugis hostes 
novissimum agmen eius adgressuros, fortissimam 
legionem primo ire, ultima sequi iussit impedimenta. 
Ita factum pro occasione amplexi hostes diripere 
sarcinas coeperunt. Fulvius legionem, de qua supra 
dictum est, quinque cohortes in dextram viae partem 
direxit, quinque ad sinistram, atque ita praedationi 
intentos hostes explicato per utraque latera milite 
clausit ceciditque. 

2. Idem, hostibus tergum eius in itinere premen- 
tibus, flumine interveniente non ita magno, ut 
transitum prohiberet, moraretur tamen rapiditate, 
alteram legionem in occulto citra flumen conlocavit, 
ut hostes paucitate contempta audacius sequerentur. 
Quod ubi factum est, legio, quae ob hoc disposita 
erat, ex insidiis hostem adgressa vastavit. 

3. Iphicrates in Thracia, cum propter condicionem 
locorum longum agmen deduceret et nuntiatum esset 
ei hostes summum id adgressuros, cohortes in utra- 


1 217 B.c. Cf. Livy xxii. 16-17; Appian Hann. 14-15. 
2 Thus giving him time to set this ambush. 


52 


STRATAGEMS, I. v. 28-v1. 3 


kept his men in camp. Meanwhile the barbarians 
marched away, as no one prevented them.! 


VI.—On Lavine AND MEETING AMBUSHES WHILE ON 
THE Marcu 


Waen Fulvius Nobilior was leading his army from 
Samnium against the Lucanians, and had learned 
from deserters that the enemy intended to attack 
his rearguard, he ordered his bravest legion to go 
in advance, and the baggage train to follow in the 
rear. The enemy, regarding this circumstance as a 
favourable opportunity, began to plunder the bag- 
gage. Fulvius then marshalled five cohorts of the 
legion I have mentioned above on the right side 
of the road, and five on the left. Then, when the 
enemy were intent on plundering, Fulvius, deploying 
his troops on both flanks, enveloped the foe and cut 
them to pieces. 

The same Nobilior on one occasion was hard 
pressed from the rear by the enemy, as he was on 
the march. Across his route ran a stream, not so 
large as to prevent passage, but large enough to 
cause delay by the swiftness of the current.? On 
the nearer side of this, Nobilior placed one legion 
in hiding, in order that the enemy, despising his 
small numbers, might follow more boldly. When 
this expectation was realized, the legion which had 
been posted for the purpose attacked the enemy 
from ambush and destroyed them. 

When Iphicrates was leading his army in Thrace 
in a long file on account of the nature of the terrain, 
and the report was brought to him that the enemy 
planned to attack his rearguard, he ordered some 


53 


SEXTUS JULIUS FRONTINUS 


que latera secedere et consistere iussit, ceteros 
suffugere et iter maturare; transeunte autem toto 
agmine lectissimos quosque retinuit et ita passim 
circa praedam occupatos hostes, iam etiam fatigatos, 
ipse requietis et ordinatis suis adgressus fudit 
exuitque praeda. 

4. Boii in silva Litana, quam transiturus erat 
noster exercitus, succiderunt arbores ita, ut parte 
exigua sustentatae starent,.donec impellerentur ; 
delituerunt deinde ad extremas ipsi ingressoque 
silvam hoste per proximas ulteriores impulerunt. 
Eo modo propagata pariter supra Romanos ruina 
magnam manum eliserunt. 


VII. QUEMADMODUM EA, QUIBUS Dericiemur, VIDE- 
ANTUR NON Deesse auT Usus EoruM EXPLEATUR 


1. L. Carcitius METELLUS, quia usu navium, quibus 
elephantos transportaret, deficiebatur, iunxit dolia 
constravitque tabulatis ac super ea positos per 
Siculum fretum transmisit. 

2. Hannibal, cum in praealti fluminis transitum 
elephantos non posset compellere nec navium aut 
materiarum, quibus rates construerentur, copiam 
haberet, iussit ferocissimum elephantum sub aure 
vulnerari et eum qui vulnerasset tranato statim 
flumine procurrere. Elephantus exasperatus ad per- 


! i.e. to give the appearance of flight. 

3 389 p.c. Cf. Polyaen. 111. ix. 49, 54. 

3 216 B.c. Twenty-five thousand, according to Livy 
xxiii. 24. * 250 B.c. Cf. Zonar. viii. 14. 


54 


STRATAGEMS, I. vi. 3-vit. 2 


cohorts to withdraw to both flanks and halt, while 
the rest were to quicken their pace and flee.! But 
from the complete line as it passed by, he kept back 
all the choicest soldiers. Thus, when the enemy 
were busy with promiscuous pillaging, and in fact 
were already exhausted, while his own men were 
refreshed and drawn up in order, he attacked and 
routed the foe and stripped them of their booty.? 

When our army was about to pass through the 
Litana Forest, the Boii cut into the trees at the 
base, leaving them only a slender support by 
which to stand, until they should be pushed over. 
Then the Boii hid at the further edge of the 
woods and by toppling over the nearest trees caused 
the fall of those more distant, as soon as our fhen 
entered the forest. In that way they spread general 
up among the Romans, and destroyed a large 
orce. 


VII. How TO CONCEAL THE ABSENCE OF THE THINGS 
WE LACK, OR TO SUPPLY SUBSTITUTES FOR THEM 


Lucius Carcitius MrELLus, lacking ships with 
which to transport his elephants, fastened together 
large earthen jars, covered them with planking, and 
then, loading the elephants on these, ferried them 
across the Sicilian Straits. 

When Hannibal on one occasion could not force 
his elephants to ford an especially deep stream, 
having neither boats nor material of which to con- 
struct them, he ordered one of his men to wound 
the most savage elephant under the ear, and then 
straightway to swim across the stream and take to 
his heels. The infuriated elephant, eager to pursue 


55 


SEXTUS JULIUS FRONTINUS 


sequendum doloris sui auctorem tranavit amnem et 
reliquis idem audendi fecit exemplum. 

3. Carthaginiensium duces instructuri classem, 
quia sparto deficiebantur, crinibus tonsarum muli- 
erum ad funes efficiendos usi sunt. 

4. Idem Massilienses et Rhodii fecerunt.! 

5. M. Antonius a Mutina profugus cortices pro 
scutis militibus suis dedit. 

6. Spartaco copiisque eius scuta ex vimine fuerunt, 
quae coriis tegebantur. 

7. Non alienus, ut arbitror, hic locus est referendi 
factum Alexandri Macedonis illud nobile, qui per 
deserta Africae itinera gravissima siti cum exercitu 
adfectus oblatam sibi a milite in galea aquam 
spectantibus universis effudit, lior exemplo 
temperantiae, quam si communicare potuisset.? 


VIII. De DisrRiNGENDIs Hostisus 


1. CorioLaNus, cum ignominiam damnationis suae 
bello ulcisceretur, populationem patriciorum agrorum 
inhibuit, deustis vastatisque plebeiorum, ut discordiam 
moveret, qua consensus Romanorum distringeret. 


1 No. 4 is regarded as an interpolation. 
| ? No. 7 is thought to be an interpolation. 


1218 Bc. Cf. Livy xxi. xxviii. 5-12. 

2 The Spanish broom, used for making rope. 

3 146 B.c. Cf. Flor. rr. xv. 10. * 43 B.C, 
5 73 p.c. Cf. Flor. 111. xx. 6. 


STRATAGEMS, I. vir. 2—vin. 1 


the author of his suffering, swam the stream, and 
thus set an example for the rest to make the same 
venture.! 

When the Carthaginian admirals were about to 
equip their fleet, but lacked broom,? they cut off the 
hair of their women and employed it for making 
cordage.? 

The Massilians and Rhodians did the same. 

Marcus Antonius, when a refugee from Mutina, 
gave his soldiers bark to use as shields.* 

Spartacus and his troops had shields made of 
osiers and covered with hides.® 

This place, I think, is not inappropriate for re- 
counting that famous deed of Alexander of Macedon. 
Marching along the desert roads of Africa, and 
suffering in common with his' men from most dis- 
tressing thirst, when some water was brought him 
in a helmet by a soldier, he poured it out upon 
the ground in the sight of all, in this way serving 
his soldiers better by his example of restraint than 
if he had been able to share the water with the rest.® 


VIII. On DISTRACTING THE ATTENTION OF THE 
ENEMY 


Wuen Coriolanus was seeking to avenge by war 
the shame of his own condemnation, he prevented the 
ravaging of the lands of the patricians, while burning 
and harrying those of the plebeians, in order to 
arouse discord whereby to destroy the harmony of 
the Romans.’ 


* 332-331 B.c. Cf. Polyaen. Iv. iii. 25. Curt. vii. v. 9-12 
and Plut. Alex. 42 have a slightly different version. 
7 489 Bo. Cf, Livy 11. xxxix. 0-8; Plut. Coriol. 27. 


(97 


SEXTUS JULIUS FRONTINUS 


2. Hannibal Fabium, cui neque virtute neque 
artibus bellandi par erat, ut infamia distringeret, 
agris eius abstinuit, ceteros populatus. Contra ille, 
ne suspecta civibus fides esset, magnitudine animi 
effecit, publicatis possessionibus suis. 

3. Fabius Maximus quinto consul, cum Gallorum 
et Umbrorum, Etruscorum, Samnitium adversus po- 
pulum Romanum exercitus coissent, contra quos et 
ipse trans Appenninum in Sentinate castra commu- 
niebat, scripsit Fulvio et Postumio, qui in praesidio 
urbi erant, copias ad Clusium moverent. Quibus ob- 
secutis ! ad sua defendenda Etrusci Umbrique dever- 
terunt ; relictos Samnites Gallosque Fabius et collega 
Decius adgressi vicerunt. 

4. M'. Curius adversus Sabinos, qui ingenti exer- 
citu conscripto relictis finibus suis nostros occupa- 
verant, occultis itineribus manum misit, quae deso- 
latos agros eorum vicosque per diversa incenderunt. 
Sabini ad arcendam domesticam vastitatem reces- 
serunt; Curio contigit et vacuos infestare hostium 
fines et exercitum sine proelio avertere sparsumque 
caedere. 

5. T. Didius, paucitate suorum diffidens, cum in 
adventum earum legionum, quas exspectabat, tra- 
heret bellum et occurrere eis hostem comperisset, 


1 obsecutis Oudendorp ; adsecutis Gund. with MSS. 


1217 r.c. Cf. Livy xxm. xxii. 1-8; Plut. Fab. 7. 
Polyaen. I. xxxvi. 2 attributes a like act to Pericles, 
1 295 B.C. Cf. Livy x. 27. 3 290 B.C, 


58 


STRATAGEMS, I. vii. 2-5 


When Hannibal had proved no match for Fabius 
either in character or in generalship, in order to 
smirch him with dishonour, he spared his lands, when 
he ravaged all others. To meet this assault, Fabius 
transferred the title to his property to the State, 
thus, by his loftiness of character, preventing his 
honour from falling under the suspicion of his 
fellow-citizens.! 

In the fifth consulship of Fabius Maximus, the 
Gauls, Umbrians, Etruscans, and Samnites had formed 
an alliance against the Roman people. Against these 
tribes Fabius first constructed a fortified camp 
beyond the Apennines in the region of Sentinum. 
Then he wrote to Fulvius and Postumius, who 
were guarding the City, directing them to move on 
Clusium with their forces. When these commanders 
complied, the Etruscans and Umbrians withdrew to 
defend their own possessions, while Fabius and his 
colleague Decius attacked and defeated the remaining 
forces of Samnites and Gauls.? 

When the Sabines levied a large army, left 
their own territory, and invaded ours, Manius Curius 
by secret routes sent against them a force which 
ravaged their lands and villages and set fire to 
them in divers places. In order to avert this 
destruction of their country, the Sabines thereupon 
withdrew. But Curius succeeded in devastating their 
country while it was unguarded, in repelling their 
army without an engagement, and then in slaughter- 
ing it piecemeal.? 

Titus Didius at one time lacked confidence be- 
cause of the small number of his troops, but con- 
tinued the war in hope of the arrival of certain 
legions which he was awaiting. On hearing that the 


59 


SEXTUS JULIUS FRONTINUS 


contione advocata aptari iussit milites ad pugnam ac 
de industria neglegentius custodiri captivos. Ex 
quibus pauci, qui profugerant, nuntiaverunt suis 
pugnam imminere; et illi, ne sub exspectatione 
proelii diducerent viris, omiserunt occurrere eis, 
quibus insidiabantur; legiones tutissime nullo 
excipiente ad Didium pervenerunt. 

6. Bello Punico quaedam civitates, quae a Romanis 
deficere ad Poenos destinaverant, cum obsides de- 
dissent, quos recipere antequam desciscerent stude- ` 
bant, simulaverunt seditionem inter finitimos ortam, 
quam Romanorum legati dirimere deberent, missos- 
que eos velut contraria pignora retinuerunt nec ante 
reddiderunt, quam ipsi reciperarent suos. 

7. Legati Romanorum, cum missi essent ad 
Antiochum regem, qui secum Hannibalem victis 
iam Carthaginiensibus habebat consiliumque eius 
adversus Romanos instruebat, crebris cum Hannibale 
conloquiis effecerunt, ut is regi fieret suspectus, cui 
gratissimus alioquin et utilis erat propter callidi- 
tatem et peritiam bellandi. 

8. Q. Metellus adversus Iugurtham bellum gerens 
missos ad se legatos eius corrupit, ut sibi proderent 
regem; cum et alii venissent, idem fecit; eodem 
consilio usus est et adversus tertios. Sed de capti- 


1 98-93 B.c. In Spain. 
3 192 B.c, Cf. Livy xxxv. 14; Nep. Hann. 2. 


69 


STRATAGEMS, I. vir, 5-8 


enemy planned to attack these legions, he called 
an assembly of the soldiers and ordered them to 
get ready for battle, and purposely to exercise a 
careless supervision over their prisoners. As a 
result, a few of the latter escaped and reported 
to their people that battle was imminent. The 
enemy, to avoid dividing their strength when ex- 
pecting battle, abandoned their plan of attacking 
those for whom they were lying in wait, so that . 
the legions arrived without hindrance and in perfect 
safety at the camp of Didius.! 

In the Punic War certain cities had resolved to 
revolt from the Romans to the Carthaginians, but 
wishing, before they revolted, to recover the hostages 
they had given, they pretended that an uprising had 
broken out among their neighbours which Roman 
commissioners ought to come and suppress. When 
the Romans sent these envoys, the cities detained 
them as counter-pledges, and refused to restore 
them until they themselves recovered their own 
hostages. 

After the defeat of the Carthaginians, King 
Antiochus sheltered Hannibal and utilized his 
counsel against the Romans. When Roman envoys 
were sent to Antiochus, they held frequent con- 
ferences with Hannibal, and thus caused him to 
become an object of suspicion to the king, to whom 
he was otherwise most agreeable and useful, in 
consequence of his cleverness and experience in war.” 

When Quintus Metellus was waging war against 
Jugurtha, he bribed the envoys sent him to betray 
the king into his hands. When other envoys came, 
he did the same; and with a third embassy he 
adopted the same policy. But his efforts to take 


61 


SEXTUS JULIUS FRONTINUS 


vitate Iugurthae res parum processit; vivum enim 
tradi sibi volebat. Plurimum tamen consecutus est, 
nam cum interceptae fuissent epistulae eius ad regios 
amicos scriptae, in omnis eos rex animadvertit 
spoliatusque consiliis amicos postea parare non 
potuit. 

9. C. Caesar, per exceptum quendam aquatorem 
cum comperisset Afranium Petreiumque castra noctu 
moturos, ut citra vexationem suorum hostilia im- 
pediret consilia, initio statim noctis vasa conclamare 
milites et praeter adversariorum castra agi mulos 
cum fremitu et sono iussit. Continuere se, quos 
retentos volebat, arbitrati castra Caesarem movere. 

10. Scipio Africanus ad excipienda auxilia cum 
commeatibus Hannibali venientia Minucium Ther- 
mum dimisit, ipse subventurus. 

11. Dionysius Syracusanorum tyrannus, cum Afri 
ingenti multitudine traiecturi essent in Siciliam ad 
eum oppugnandum, castella pluribus locis communiit 
custodibusque praecepit, ut ea advenienti hosti dede- 
rent dimissique Syracusas occulte redirent. Afris 
necesse fuit capta castella praesidio obtinere; quos 
Dionysius, redactos ad quam voluerat paucitatem, 


1108 p.c. Cf.Sall. Jug. T ae 70, 72. 
? 40 p.c. Cf. Caes. B.C. i. 
3 202 p.c, Cf. Appian on. 36. 


62 


STRATAGEMS, I. vut. 8-11 


Jugurtha prisoner met with small success, for Me- 
tellus wished the king to be delivered into his 
hands alive. And yet he accomplished a great deal, 
for when his letters addressed to the friends of the 
king were intercepted, the king punished all these 
men, and, being thus deprived of advisers, was 
unable to secure any friends for the future.! 

Gaius Caesar on one occasion caught a soldier 
who had gone to procure water, and learned from 
him that Afranius and Petreius planned to break 
camp that night. In order to hamper the plans of 
the enemy, and yet not cause alarm to his own 
troops, Caesar early in the evening gave orders to 
sound the signal for breaking camp, and commanded 
mules to be driven past the camp of the enemy with 
noise and shouting. Thinking that Caesar was 
breaking camp, his adversaries stayed where they 
were, precisely as Caesar desired.? 

When, on one occasion, reinforcements and 
provisions were on the way to Hannibal, Scipio, 
wishing to intercept these, sent ahead Minucius 
Thermus, and arranged to come himself to lend his 
support. 

When the Africans were planning to cross over to 
Sicily in vast numbers in order to attack Dionysius, 
tyrant of Syracuse, the latter constructed strong- 
holds in many places and commanded their defenders 
to surrender them at the coming of the enemy, and 
then, when they retired, to return secretly to 
Syracuse. The Africans were forced to occupy the 
captured strongholds with garrisons, whereupon 
Dionysius, having reduced the army of his opponents 
to the scanty number which he desired, and being 
now approximately on an equality, attacked and 


63 


SEXTUS JULIUS FRONTINUS 


paene iam par numero adgressus vicit, cum suos 
contraxisset et adversarios sparsisset. 

12. Agesilaus Lacedaemonius, cum inferret bellum 
Tissaphernae, Cariam se petere simulavit, quasi aptius 
locis montuosis adversus hostem equitatu praeva- 
lentem pugnaturus. Per hanc consilii ostentationem 
avocato in Cariam Tissapherne, ipse Lydiam, ubi 
caput hostium regni erat, inrupit oppressisque, qui 
illie agebant, pecunia regia potitus est. 


VIIII. De Sepitione Mitirum CoMPESCENDA 


1. Autus MaNrivs consul, cum comperisset con- 
iurasse milites in hibernis Campaniae, ut iugulatis 
hospitibus ipsi res invaderent eorum, rumorem 
sparsit, eodem loco hibernaturos; atque ita dilato 
coniuratorum consilio Campaniam periculo liberavit 
et ex occasione nocentes puniit. 

2. L. Sulla, cum legiones civium Romanorum 
perniciosa seditione furerent, consilio restituit sani- 
tatem  efferatis. Propere enim adnuntiari iussit, 
hostem adesse, et ad arma vocantium clamorem tolli, 
signa canere.  Discussa seditio est universis adversus 
hostem consentientibus. 

3. Cn. Pompeius, trucidato ab exercitu Mediolani 
senatu, ne tumultum moveret, si solos evocasset 


1396 B.c. Cf. Polyaen. v. ii. 9. 

2 395 B.C. Cf. Xen. Hell. 111. iv. 20; Plut. Ages. 9-10; 
Nep. Ages. 3. 

3 Livy vii. 38-39 attributes this stratagem to C. Marcius 
Rutilius, consul in 342 B.c. 


64 


STRATAGEMS, I. vii. r1-ix. 3 


defeated them, since he had concentrated his own 
forces, and had separated those of his adversaries.! 
When Agesilaus, the Spartan, was waging war 
against Tissaphernes, he pretended to make for 
Caria, as though likely to fight more advantageously 
in mountainous districts against an enemy strong in 
cavalry. When he had advertised this purpose, and 
had thus drawn Tissaphernes off to Caria, he himself 
invaded Lydia, where the capital of the enemy's 
kingdom was situated, and having crushed those in 
e command at that place, he obtained possession of 
the king's treasure.” | 


1X. On QueLLING a MuriNv or SorpiEns 


Wuen the consul, Aulus Manlius, had learned 
that the soldiers had formed a plot in their winter- 
quarters in Campania to murder their hosts and 
seize their property, he disseminated the report 
that they would winter next season in the same 
place. Having thus postponed the plans of the 
conspirators, he rescued Campania from peril, and, 
so soon as occasion offered, inflicted punishment on 
the guilty.? 

When on one occasion legions of Roman soldiers 
had broken out in a dangerous mutiny, Lucius Sulla 
shrewdly restored sanity to the frenzied troops; for 
he ordered a sudden announcement to»be made that 
the enemy were at hand, bidding a shout to be 
raised by those summoning the men to arms, and 
the trumpets to be sounded. Thus the mutiny was 
broken up by the union of all forces against the foe. 

When the senate of Milan had been massacred 
by Pompey's troops, Pompey, fearing that he might 

65 

VOL. I. F 


SEXTUS JULIUS FRONTINUS 


nocentes, mixtos eis qui extra delictum erant venire 
iussit. lta et noxii minore cum metu, quia non 
segregati ideoque non ex causa culpae videbantur 
arcessiri, paruerunt et illi, quibus integra erat 
conscientia, custodiendis quoque nocentibus ad- 
tenderunt, ne illorum fuga inquinarentur. 

4. C. Caesar, cum quaedam legiones eius seditio- 
nem movissent, adeo ut in perniciem quoque ducis 
viderentur consurrecturae, dissimulato metu processit 
ad milites postulantibusque missionem ultro minaci ° 
vultu dedit. Exauctoratos paenitentia coegit satis- 
facere imperatori obsequentioresque in reliqua opera 
se dare. 


X. QUEMADMODUM IwTEMPEsTIvA POSTULATIO 
PUGNAE INHIBEATUR 


1. Q. SERTORIUS, quod experimento didicerat impa- 
rem se universo Romanorum exercitui, ut barbaros 
quoque inconsulte pugnam exposcentes doceret, ad- 
ductis in conspectum duobus equis, praevalido alteri, 
alteri admodum exili, duos admovit iuvenes similiter 
adfectos, robustum et gracilem. Ac robustiori impe- 
ravit equo exili universam caudam abrumpere, gracili 
autem valentiorem per singulos pilos vellere. Cum- 
que gracilis fecisset quod imperatum erat, validissi- 


1 47 B.C. Cf. Suet. Caes. 70; Appian B.C. ii. 92. 
66 


- STRATAGEMS, I. ix. 3-x. 1 


cause a mutiny if he should call out the guilty 
alone, ordered certain ones who were innocent to 
come interspersed among the others. In this way 
the guilty came with less fear, because they had not 
been singled out, and so did not seem to be sent for 
in consequence of any wrong-doing; while those 
whose conscience was clear kept watch on the 
guilty, lest by the escape of these the innocent 
should be disgraced. | 

When certain legions of Gaius Caesar mutinied, 
and in such a way as to seem to threaten even the 
life of their commander, he concealed his fear, and, 
advancing straight to the soldiers, with grim visage, 
readily granted discharge to those asking it. But 
these men were no sooner discharged than penitence 
forced them to apologize to their commander and 
to pledge themselves to greater loyalty in future 
enterprises.! 


X. How Tro Cueck AN UNSEASONABLE DEMAND 
FOR BATTLE 


AFTER Quintus Sertorius had learned by experi- 
ence that he was by no means a match for the 
whole Roman army, in order to prove this to the 
barbarians also, who were rashly demanding battle, 
he brought into their presence two horses, one very 
strong, the other very feeble. Then he brought up: 
‘two youths of corresponding physique, one robust, 
the other slight. The stronger youth was com- 
manded to pull out the entire tail of the feeble 
_horse, while the slight youth was commanded to 

pull out the hairs of the strong horse one by one. 
: Then, when the slight youth had succeeded in his 
67 

F 2 


SEXTUS JULIUS FRONTINUS 


mus cum infirmi equi cauda sine effectu luctaretur, 
* naturam," inquit Sertorius, * Romanarum cohortium 
per hoc vobis exemplum ostendi, milites; insupera- 
biles sunt universas adgredienti; easdem lacerabit 
et carpet, qui per partes adtemptaverit." 1 

2. Idem, cum videret suos pugnae signum incon- 
sulte flagitantes crederetque rupturos imperium, nisi 
congrederentur, permisit turmae equitum ad laces- 
sendos hostes ire laborantique submisit alias et sic 
recepit omnes tutiusque et sine noxa ostendit, quis 
exitus flagitatam pugnam mansisset. Obsequentis- 
simis inde eis usus est. 

3. Agesilaus Lacedaemonius, cum adversus The- 
banos castra super ripam posuisset multoque maiorem 
hostium manum esse intellegeret et ideo suos arcere 
a cupiditate decernendi vellet, dixit responso deum se 
ex collibus pugnare iussum et ita exiguo praesidio 
ad ripam posito accessit in colles. Quod Thebani pro 
metu interpretati transierunt flumen et, cum facile 
depulissent praesidium, ceteros insecuti avidius 
iniquitate locorum a paucioribus victi sunt. - 

4. Scorylo dux Dacorum, cum sciret dissociatum 
armis civilibus populum Romanum neque tamen sibi 
temptandum arbitraretur, quia externo bello posset 


1 Practically identical with Iv. vii. 6. 


1 80-72 B.c. Cf. Val. Max. vii. iii. 6 ; Plut. Sert. 16 ; Hor. 
Epist, 11. i. 45 ff. ; Plin. Epist. 111. ix. 11. 

2 80-72 B.c. Cf. Plut. Sert. 16. 

3 369 B.c. Cf. Polyaen. rr. i. 27. 


68 


STRATAGEMS, I. x. 1-4 


task, while the strong one was still vainly struggling 
with the tail of the weak horse, Sertorius observed: 
* By this illustration I have exhibited to you, my 
men, the nature of the Roman cohorts. They are 
invincible to him who attacks them in a body; yet 
he who assails them by groups will tear and rend 
them." 1 

When the same Sertorius saw his men rashly 
demanding the signal for battle and thought them 
in danger of disobeying orders unless they should 
engage the enemy, he permitted a squadron of 
cavalry to advance to harass the foe. "When these 
troops became involved in difficulties, he sent others 
to their relief, and thus rescued all, showing more 
safely, and without injury, what would have been 
the outcome of the battle they had demanded. 
After that he found his men most amenable.? 

When Agesilaus, the Spartan, was fighting against 
the Thebans and had encamped on the bank of 
a stream, being aware that the forces of the enemy 
far outnumbered his own, and wishing therefore to 
keep his men from the desire of fighting, he 
announced that he had been bidden by a response 
of the gods to fight on high ground. Accordingly, 
posting a small guard on the bank, he withdrew to 
the hills. The Thebans, interpreting this as a mark 
of fear, crossed the stream, easily dislodged the 
defending troops, and, following the rest too eagerly, 
were defeated by a smaller force, owing to the 
difficulties of the terrain.? 

Scorylo, a chieftain of the Dacians, though he 
knew that the Romans were torn with the dissen- 
sions of the civil wars, yet did not think he ought 
to venture on any enterprise against them, inasmuch 


69 


SEXTUS JULIUS FRONTINUS 


concordia inter cives coalescere, duos canes in 
conspectu popularium commisit iisque acerrime 
inter ipsos pugnantibus lupum ostendit, quem 
protinus canes omissa inter se ira adgressi sunt. 
Quo exemplo prohibuit barbaros ab impetu Romanis 
profuturo. 


XI. QuEMADMOoDUM INciTANDUS SiT AD PnRoELIUM 
EXeRcITUS 


1. M. FaBius et Cn. Manlius consules adversus 
Etruscos propter seditfones detractante proelium 
exercitu ultro simulaverunt cunctationem, donec 
milites probris hostium coacti pugnam deposcerent 
iurarentque se ex ea victores redituros. | 

2. Fulvius Nobilior, cum adversus Samnitium nu- 
merosum exercitum et successibus tumidum parvis 
copiis necesse haberet decertare, simulavit unam 
legionem hostium corruptam a se ad proditionem 
imperavitque ad eius rei fidem tribunis et primis 
ordinibus et centurionibus, quantum quisque nu- 
meratae pecuniae aut auri argentique haberet 
conferret, ut repraesentari merces  proditoribus 
posset; se autem his qui contulissent pollicitus 
est consummata victoria ampla insuper praemia 
daturum. Quae persuasio Romanis alacritatem 
adtulit et fiduciam, unde etiam praeclara victoria 
commisso statim bello parata est. 


! 480 B.c. Cf. Livy rr. xliii. 11-xlv ; Dionys. ix. 7-10. 
* These were a special class of centurions. 


70 


STRATAGEMS, I. x. 4-xi. 2 


as a foreign war might be the means of uniting the 
citizens in harmony. Accordingly he pitted two 
dogs in combat before the populace, and when they 
became engaged in a desperate encounter, exhibited 
a wolf to them. The dogs straightway abandoned 
their fury against each other and attacked the wolf. 
By this illustration, Scorylo kept the barbarians from 
a movement which could only have benefited the 
Romans. 


XI. How To arouse AN ArmMy’s ENTHUSIASM 
FoR BATTLE 


Wuen the consuls Marcus Fabius and Gnaeus 
Manlius were warring against the Etruscans, and 
the soldiers mutinied against fighting, the consuls 
on their side feigned a policy of delay, until the 
soldiers, wrought upon by the taunts of the enemy, 
demanded battle and swore to return from it 
victorious.! 

Fulvius Nobilior, deeming it necessary to fight 
with a small force against a large army of the Sam- 
nites who were flushed with success, pretended that 
one legion of the enemy had been bribed by him to 
turn traitor; and to strengthen belief in this story, 
he commanded the tribunes, the “ first ranks," 2 
and the centurions to contribute all the ready money 
they had, or any gold and silver, in order that 
the price might be paid the traitors at once. He 
promised that, when victory was achieved, he 
would give generous presents besides to those who 
contributed for this purpose. This assurance brought 
such ardour and confidence to the Romans that they 
straightway opened battle and won a glorious victory. 


71 


SEXTUS JULIUS FRONTINUS 


9. C. Caesar adversus Germanos et Ariovistum 
pugnaturus confusis suorum animis pro contione 
dixit, nullius se eo die opera nisi decimae legionis 
usurum. Quo consecutus est, ut decimani tamquam 
praecipuae fortitudinis testimonio concitarentur et 
ceteri pudore, ne penes alios gloria virtutis esset. 

4. Q. Fabius, quia egregie sciebat et Romanos 
eius esse libertatis, quae contumelia exasperaretur, 
et a Poenis nihil iustum aut moderatum exspectabat, 
misit legatos Carthaginem de condicionibus pacis. 
Quas cum illi iniquitatis et insolentiae plenas 
rettulissent, exercitus Romanorum ad pugnandum 
concitatus est. 

5. Agesilaus Lacedaemoniorum dux, cum prope 
ab Orchomeno socia civitate castra haberet com- 
perissetque plerosque ex militibus  pretiosissima 
rerum deponere intra munimenta, praecepit oppi- 
danis, ne quid ad exercitum suum pegtinens reci- 
peretur, quo ardentius dimicaret miles, qui sciret 
sibi pro omnibus suis pugnandum. 

6. Epaminondas dux Thebanorum adversus Lace- 
daemonios dimicaturus, ut non solum viribus milites 
sui, verum etiam adfectibus adiuvarentur, pronun- 
tiavit in contione destinatum Lacedaemoniis, si 
victoria potirentur, omnes virilis sexus interficere, 
uxoribus autem eorum et liberis in servitutem 


1 Practically identical with 1v. v. 11. 


158 p.c. Cf. Caes. D.G. 1. xxxix. 7, xr. l, 14 ff. 
3 217-203 B.C. ? Cf, Polyaen. rr. i. 18. 


12 


STRATAGEMS, I. xı. 3-6 


Gaius Caesar, when about to fight the Germans 
and their king, Ariovistus, at a time when his own 
men had been thrown into panic, called his soldiers 
together and declared to the assembly that on that 
day he proposed to employ the services of the tenth 
legion alone. In this way he caused the soldiers 
of this legion to be stirred by his tribute to their 
unique heroism, while the rest were overwhelmed 
with mortification to think that reputation for 
courage should rest with others.! 

Quintus Fabius Maximus, since he knew full well 
that the Romans possessed a spirit of independence 
which was roused by insult, and since he expected 
nothing just or reasonable from the Carthaginians, 
sent envoys to Carthage to inquire about terms of 
peace. When the envoys, brought back proposals 
full of injustice and arrogance, the army of the 
Romans was stirred to combat.? 

When Agesilaus, general of the Spartans, had his 
camp near the allied city of Orchomenos and learned 
that very many of his soldiers were depositing their 
valuables within the fortifications, he commanded 
the townspeople to receive nothing belonging to his 
troops, in order that his soldiers might fight with 
more spirit, when they realised that they must fight 
for all their possessions.? 

Epaminondas, general of the Thebans, on one 
occasion, when about to engage in battle with the 
Spartans, acted as follows. In order that his soldiers 
might not only exercise their strength, but also be 
stirred by their feelings, he announced in an 
assembly of his men that the Spartans had resolved, 
in case of victory, to massacre all males, to lead the 
wives and children of those executed into bondage, 


73 


SEXTUS JULIUS FRONTINUS 


abductis Thebas  diruere. Qua  denuntiatione 
concitati primo impetu Thebani Lacedaemonios 
expugnaverunt. 

7. Leotychidas dux Lacedaemoniorum classe 
pugnaturus eodem die, quo vicerant socii, quamvis 
ignarus actae rei vulgavit nuntiatam sibi victoriam 
partium, quo constantiores ad pugnam milites 
haberet. 

8. Aulus Postumius proelio, quo cum Latinis 
conflixit, oblata specie duorum in equis iuvenum 
animos suorum erexit, Pollucem et Castorem adesse 
dicens, ac sic proelium restituit. 

9. Archidamus Lacedaemonius adversus Arcadas 
bellum gerens arma in castris statuit et circa ea 
duci equos noctu clam imperavit. Quorum vestigia 
mane, tamquam Castor et Pollux perequitassent, 
ostendens adfuturos eosdem ipsis proeliantibus 
persuasit. 

10. Pericles dux Atheniensium initurus proelium, 
cum animadvertisset lucum, ex quo utraque acies 
conspici poterat, densissimae opacitatis, vastum alio- 
quin et Diti patri sacrum, ingentis illic staturae 
hominem, altissimis coturnis et veste purpurea ac 
coma venerabilem, in curru candidorum equorum 
sublimem constituit, qui dato signo pugnae prove- 
heretur et voce Periclem nomine appellans cohorta- 


1 371 B.C. 

2 479 B.c. Cf. Diodor. xi. 34-35; Polyaen. i. 33. Herod. 
ix. 100—101 has a different version. 

3 496 B.c. Cf. Val. Max. 1. viii. 1 ; Cic, De Nat. Deor. 11. 
ii. 6; Dionys. vi. 13. * 467 B.c. Cf. Polyaen. 1. xli. 1. 


74 


STRATAGEMS, I. xr. 6-10 


and to raze Thebes to the ground. By this 
announcement the Thebans were so roused that 
they overwhelmed the Spartans at the first onset.1 

When Leotychides, the Spartan admiral, was on 
the point of fighting a naval battle on the very day 
when the allies had been victorious, although he was 
ignorant of the fact, he nevertheless announced that 
he had received news of the victory of their side, in 
order that in this way he might find his men more 
resolute for the encounter.? 

. When two youths, mounted on horseback, ap- 
peared in the battle which Aulus Postumius fought 
with the Latins, Postumius roused the drooping 
spirits of his men by declaring that the strangers 
were Castor and Pollux. In this way he inspired 
them to fresh combat.’ 

Archidamus, the Spartan, when waging war 
against the Arcadians, set up weapons in camp, and 
ordered horses to be led around them secretly at 
night. In the morning, pointing to their tracks and 
claiming that Castor and Pollux had ridden through 
the camp, he convinced his men that the same gods 
would also lend them aid in the battle itself.4 

On one occasion when Pericles, general of the. 
Athenians, was about to engage in battle, noticing a 
grove from which both armies were visible, very 
dense and dark, but unoccupied and consecrated to 
Father Pluto, he took a man of enormous stature, 
made imposing by high buskins, purple robes, and 
flowing hair, and placed him in the grove, mounted 
high on a chariot drawn by gleaming white horses. 
This man was instructed to drive forth, when the 
signal for battle should be given, to call Pericles by 
name, and to encourage him by declaring that the 


75 


SEXTUS JULIUS FRONTINUS 


retur eum diceretque deos Atheniensibus adesse. Quo 
paene ante coniectum teli hostes terga verterunt. 
11. L. Sulla, quo paratiorem militem ad pugnan- 
dum haberet, praedici sibi a diis futura simulavit. 
Postremo etiam in conspectu exercitus, priusquam in 
aciem descenderet, signum modicae amplitudinis, 
quod Delphis sustulerat, orabat petebatque, pro- 
missam victoriam maturaret. 
12. C. Marius sagam quandam ex Syria habuit, a 
qua se dimicationum eventus praediscere simulabat. 
13. Q. Sertorius, cum barbaro et rationis indocili 
milite uteretur, cervam candidam insignis formae 
per Lusitaniam ducebat et ab ea se quae agenda aut 
vitanda essent, praenoscere adseverabat, ut barbari 
ad omnia tamquam divinitus imperata oboedirent. 
Hoc genere strategematon non tantum ea parte 
utendum est, qua imperitos existimabimus esse, apud 
quos his utemur, sed multo magis ea, qua talia erunt, 
quae excogitabuntur, ut a diis monstrata credantur.! 
14. Alexander Macedo sacrificaturus inscripsit me- 
dicamento haruspicis manum, quam ille extis erat 
esuppositurus, Litterae significabant victoriam Alex- 
andro dari. Quas cum iecur calidum rapuisset et 
a rege militi esset ostensum, auxit animum tamquam 
deo spondente victoriam. | 


1 The second paragraph of 13 is regarded as an interpolation. 


1 Cf. Val. Max. 1. ii. 3; Plut, Sulla 29. 

2 (Cf, Val. Max. I. ii. 32; Plut. Mar. 17. 

3 Cf. Val. Max. 1. ij. 4; Plut. Sertor. 11; Gell. xv. 22. 

* Cf. Polyaen. Iv. iii. 14 and Iv. xx. Plut. <Apophth. 
Lacon. Ages. Magni 77 attributes this stratagem to Agesilaus, 


46 


STRATAGEMS, I. xı. 10-14 


gods were lending their aid to the Athenians. Asa 
result, the enemy turned and fled almost before a 
dart was hurled. 

Lucius Sulla, in order to make his soldiers readier 
for combat, pretended that the future was foretold 
him by the gods. His last act, before engaging in 
battle, was to pray, in the sight of his army, to a 
small image which he had taken from Delphi, 
entreating it to speed the promised victory.! 

Gaius Marius had a certain wisewoman from 
Syria, from whom he pretended to learn in advance 
the outcome of battles.? 

Quintus Sertorius, employing barbarian troops 
who were not amenable to reason, used to take with 
him through Lusitania a beautiful white deer, and 
claimed that from it he knew in advance what ought 
to be done, and what avoided. In this way he 
aimed to induce the barbarians to obey all his 
commands as though divinely inspired.? 

This sort of stratagem is to be used not merely 
in cases when we deem those to whom we apply it 
simple-minded, but much more when the ruse 
invented is such as might be thought to have been 
suggested by the gods. 

Alexander of Macedon on one occasion, when 
about to make sacrifice, used .a preparation to 
inscribe certain letters on the hand which the priest 
was about to place beneath the vitals. These letters 
indicated that victory was vouchsafed to Alexander. 
When the steaming liver had received the impress 
of these characters and had been displayed by the 
king to the soldiers, the circumstances raised their 
spirits, since they thought that the god gave them 
assurance of victory.* 


77 


SEXTUS JULIUS FRONTINUS . 


15. Idem fecit Sudines haruspex proelium Eumene 
cum Gallis commissuro.! | 

16. Epaminondas Thebanus adversus Laccdaetios 
nios, fiduciam suorum religione adiuvandam ratus, 
arma quae ornamentis adfixa in templis erant nocte 
subtraxit persuasitque militibus deos iter suum sequi, 
ut proeliantibus ipsis adessent. | 

17. Agesilaus Lacedaemonius, cum quosdam Per- 
sarum cepisset, quorum habitus multum terroris 
praefert, quotiens veste tegitur, nudatos militibus 
suis .ostendit, ut alba corpora et umbratica con-. 
temnerentur. 

18. Gelo Syracusarum tyrannus bello adversum 
Poenos suscepto, cum multos cepisset, infirmissimum 
quemque praecipue ex auxiliaribus, qui nigerrimi 
erant, nudatum in conspectum suorum produxit, ut 
persuaderet contemnendos. 

19. Cyrus rex Persarum, ut concitaret animos po- 
pularium, tota die in excidenda silva quadam eos 
fatigavit; deinde postridie praestitit eis liberalissi- 
mas epulas et interrogavit, utro magis gauderent. 
Cumque ei praesentia probassent, * atqui per haec," 
inquit, * ad illa perveniendum est ; nam liberi beati- 
que esse, nisi Medos viceritis, non potestis." Atque 
ita eos ad cupiditatem proelii concitavit. 


— 


1 No. 15 i8 thought to be an interpolation. 


1 Cf. Polyaen. 1v. xx. 

2 371 B.c. Cf. Polyaen. 1. iii. 8 and 19. 

3 395 B.c. Cf. Polyaen. rr. i. 6; Xen. Hell. 111. iv. 19; 
Plut. Ages. 9. i 

* 480 B.C. 

5 558 B.c. Cf. Herod. i. 126 ; Polyaen. vir. vi. 7; Justin. 
I. vi. 4—6. | 


78 


STRATAGEMS, I. xı. 15-19 


The soothsayer Sudines did the same thing when 
Eumenes was about to engage in battle with the 
Gauls.1 

Epaminondas, the Theban, in his contest against 
the Spartans, thinking that the confidence of his, 
troops needed strengthening by an appeal to re- 
ligious sentiment, removed by night the weapons 
. which were attached to the decorations of the 
temples, and convinced his soldiers that the gods 
were attending his march, in order to lend their 
aid in the battle itself.? 

Agesilaus, the Spartan, on one occasion captured 
certain Persians. The appearance of these people, 
when dressed in uniform, inspired great terror. But 
Agesilaus stripped his prisoners and exhibited them 
to his soldiers, in order that their delicate white 
bodies might excite contempt.? 

Gelo, tyrant of Syracuse, having undertaken war 
against the Carthaginians, after taking many prisoners, 
stripped all the feeblest, especially from among the - 
auxiliaries, who were very swarthy, and exhibited 
them nude before the eyes of his troops, in order to 
convince his men that their foes were contemptible. 

Cyrus, king of the Persians, wishing to rouse the 
ambition of his men, employed them an entire day 
in the fatiguing labour of cutting down,a certain 
forest. Then on the following day he gave them a 
most generous feast, and asked them which they 
liked better. When they had expressed their 
preference for the feast, he said: “And yet it is 
only through the former that we can arrive at the 
latter; for unless you conquer the Medes, you 
cannot be free and happy.” In this way he roused 
them to the desire for combat.5 


79 


SEXTUS JULIUS FRONTINUS 


20. L. Sulla, quia adversus Archelaum praefectum 
Mithridatis apud Piraeea pigrioribus ad proelium 
militibus utebatur, opere eos fatigando compulit ad 
poscendum ultro pugnae signum. 

21. Fabius Maximus veritus, ne qua fiducia navium, 
ad quas refugium erat, minus constanter pugnaret 
exercitus, incendi eas, priusquam iniret proelium, 
iussit. 


XII. De Dissotvenpo Meru, Quem Mites Ex AD- 
vERSIS CONCEPERINT OMINIBUS 


1. Scipio, ex Italia in Africam transportato exer- 
citu, cum egrediens nave prolapsus esset et ob hoc 
attonitos milites cerneret, id quod trepidationem 
adferebat, constantia et magnitudine animi in hor- 
" tationem convertit et “ plaudite," inquit, “ milites, 
Africam oppressi." 

2. C. Caesar, cum forte conscendens navem lapsus 
esset, “ teneo te, terra mater," inquit, Qua inter- 
pretatione effecit, ut repetiturus illas a quibus 
proficiscebatur terras videretur. 

3. T. Sempronius Gracchus consul, acie adversus 
Picentes directa, cum subitus terrae motus utrasque 
partes confudisset, exhortatione confirmavit suos 
et impulit, consternatum superstitione invaderent 
hostem, adortusque devicit. 


1 86 B.C. 2315 B.c. Cf. Livy ix. 23. 

3 204 B.C. * Cf. Suet. Caes. 59. 
_ 5 P. Sempronius Sophus, consul, defeated the Picentines 
^ 208 B.c. Cf. Flor.i.19.  - 

Oo 


SS ras ie Oe 


STRATAGEMS, I. xı. 20-xit. 3 


Lucius Sulla, in the campaign against Archelaus, 
general of Mithridates, found his troops somewhat 
disinclined for battle at the Piraeus. But by 
imposing tiresome tasks upon his men he brought 
them to the point where they demanded the signal 
for battle of their own accord.! 

Fabius Maximus, fearing that his troops would 
fight less resolutely in consequence of their reliance 
on their ships, to which it was possible to retreat, 
ordered the ships to be set on fire before the battle 
began.? | 


XII. On DisPELLING THE Fears INSPIRED IN 
SOLDIERS BY ADVERSE OMENS 


Scipio, having transported his army from Italy to 
Africa, stumbled as' he was disembarking. When 
he saw the soldiers struck aghast at this, by his 
steadiness and loftiness of spirit he converted their 
cause of concern into one of encouragement, by 
saying: “Congratulate me, my men! I have hit 
Africa hard.” 3 

Gaius Caesar, having slipped as he was about to 
embark on ship, exclaimed: “I hold thee fast, 
Mother Earth." By this interpretation of the inci- 
dent he made it seem that he was destined to come 
back to the lands from which he was setting out.4 

When the consul Tiberius Sempronius Gracchus 
was engaged in battle with the Picentines, a sudden 
earthquake threw both sides into panic. Thereupon 
Gracchus put new strength and courage into his men 
by urging them to attack the enemy while the latter 
were overwhelmed with superstitious awe. Thus he 
fell upon them and defeated them.5 

81 

VOL, I, G 


SEXTUS JULIUS FRONTINUS 


4. Sertorius, cum equitum scuta extrinsecus equo- 
rumque pectora cruenta subito prodigio apparuissent, 
- victoriam portendi interpretatus est, quoniam illae 
partes solerent hostili cruore respergi. 

5. Epaminondas Thebanus contristatis militibus, 
quod ex hasta eius ornamentum infulae more 
dependens ventus ablatum in sepulchrum Lace- 
daemonii cuiusdam  depulerat, “ nolite,’ inquit, 
* milites, trepidare; Lacedaemoniis significatur in- 
teritus; sepulchra enim funeribus ornantur." 

6. Idem, cum fax de caelo nocte delapsa eos qui 
animadverterunt terruisset, *lumen," inquit, “hoc 
numina ostendunt." 

7T. Idem, instante adversus Lacedaemonios pugna, 
cum sedile in quo resederat succubuisset et id vulgo 
pro tristi exciperetur significatione confusi milites 
interpretarentur, “immo,” inquit, * vetamur sedere." 

8. C. Sulpicius Gallus defectum lunae imminen- 
tem, ne pro ostento exciperent milites, praedixit 
futurum, additis rationibus causisque defectionis. 

9. Agathocles Syracusanus adversus Poenos, simili 
eiusdem sideris deminutione quia sub diem pugnae 
ut prodigio milites sui consternati erant, ratione qua 
id accideret exposita docuit, quidquid illud foret, ad 
rerum naturam, non ad ipsorum propositum pertinere. 


1 371 B.c. Cf. Diodor. xv. lii. 5 ff. 

2 i.e., ‘we must be up and doing." 

3 168 B.c. Cf. Livy xliv. 37 ; Cic. De Senect. xiv. 49 ; Val. 
Max. vill. xi. 1. 

* 310 p.c. Cf. Justin. xxi. vi. 1-5; Diodor. xx. v. 5. 


82 


STRATAGEMS, 1. xit. 4-9 


Sertorius, when by a sudden prodigy the outsides 
of the shields of his cavalrymen and the breasts of 
their horses showed marks of blood, interpreted this 
as a mark of victory, since those were the parts 
which were wont to be spattered with the blood of 
the enemy. 

Epaminondas, the Theban, when his soldiers were 
depressed because the decoration hanging from his 
spear like a fillet had been torn away by the wind 
and carried to the tomb of a certain Spartan, said : 
* Do not be concerned, comrades! Destruction is 
foretold for the Spartans. Tombs are not decorated 
except for funerals.” 1 

The same Epaminondas, when a meteor fell from 
the sky by night and struck terror to the hearts of 
those who noticed it, exclaimed: “ It is a light sent 
us from the powers above." 

When the same Epaminondas was about to open 
battle against the Spartans, the chair on which he 
had sat down gave way beneath him, whereat all the 
soldiers, greatly troubled, interpreted this as an un- 
lucky omen. But Epaminondas exclaimed: “ Not at 
all; we are simply forbidden to sit.” 2 

Gaius Sulpicius Gallus not only announced an 
approaching eclipse of the moon, in order to prevent 
the soldiers from taking it as a prodigy, but also 
gave the reasons and causes of the eclipse.’ 

When Agathocles, the Syracusan, was fighting 
against the Carthaginians, and his soldiers on the 
eve of battle were thrown into panic by a similar 
eclipse of the moon, which they interpreted as a 
prodigy, he explained the reason why this happened, 
and showed them that, whatever it was, it had to do 
with nature, and not with their own purposes.* 

83 
a 2 


SEXTUS JULIUS FRONTINUS 


10. Pericles, cum in castra eius fulmen decidisset 
terruissetque milites, advocata contione lapidibus in 
conspectu omnium conlisis ignem excussit seda- 
vitque conturbationem, cum docuisset similiter 
nubium adtritu excuti fulmen. 

1l. Timotheus Atheniensis adversus Corcyraeos 
navali proelio decertaturus gubernatori suo, qui 
proficiscenti iam classi signum receptui coeperat 
dare, quia ex remigibus quendam sternutantem 
audierat, *'miraris," inquit, “ex tot milibus unum 
perfrixisse ? ” 

12. Chabrias Atheniensis classe dimicaturus, ex- 
cusso ante navem ipsius fulmine, exterritis per tale 
prodigium militibus *nunc," inquit, “ potissimum 
ineunda pugna est, cum deorum maximus Iuppiter 
adesse numen suum classi nostrae ostendit." 


1 375 B.c. Cf. Polyaen. 11. x. 2. 
2 391-357 B.C. 


84 


STRATAGEMS, I. xi. 10-12 


Pericles, when a thunderbolt struck his camp and 
terrified his soldiers, calling an assembly, struck fire 
by knocking two stones together in the sight of all 
his men. He thus allayed their panic by explaining 
that the thunderbolt was similarly produced by the 
contact of the clouds. 

When Timotheus, the Athenian, was about to 
contend against the Corcyreans in a naval battle, his 
pilot, hearing one of the rowers sneeze, started to 
give the signal for retreat, just as the fleet was 
setting out; whereupon Timotheus exclaimed : “ Do 
you think it strange if one out of so many thousands 
has had a chill? " ! 

As Chabrias, the Athenian, was about to fight a 
naval battle, a thunderbolt fell directly across the 
path of his ship. When the soldiers were filled with 
dismay at such a portent, he said: * Now is the very 
time to begin battle, when Jupiter, mightiest of the 
gods, reveals that his power is present with our 
fleet." ? 


85 


—— Ee 


FREI 


BOOK II 


LIBER SECUNDUS 


Dispositis primo libro exemplis instructuris, ut 
mea fert opinio, ducem in his, quae ante com- 
missum proelium agenda sunt, deinceps reddemus 
pertinentia ad ea, quae in ipso proelio agi solent, et 
deinde ea, quae post proelium. 

Eorum, quae ad proelium pertinent, species sunt : 


I. De tempore ad pugnam eligendo. 
Il; De loco ad pugnam eligendo. 
III. De acie ordinanda. 
HII. De acie hostium turbanda. 
V. De insidiis. 
VI. De emittendo hoste, ne clausus proelium 
ex desperatione redintegret. 
VII. De dissimulandis adversis. 
VIII. De restituenda per constantiam acie. 


Eorum deinde, quae post proelium agenda sunt, 
has esse species existimaverim : 


VIIII. Si res prospere cesserit, de consummandis 
reliquiis belli. 
X. Si res durius cesserit, de adversis emend- 
andis. 
XI. De dubiorum animis in fide retinendis. 
XII. Quae facienda sint pro castris, si satis fidu- 
ciae in praesentibus copiis non habe- 
amus. 
XIII. De effugiendo, 


88 


BOOK II 


Havine in Book I given classes of examples which, 
as I believe, will suffice to instruct a general in those 
matters which are to be attended to before beginning 
battle, 1 will next in order present examples which 
bear on those things that are usually done in the 
battle itself, and then those that come subsequent 
to the engagement. 

Of those which concern the battle itself, there are 
the following classes : 


I. On choosing the time for battle. 
II. On choosing the place for battle. 
III. On the disposition of troops for battle. | 
IV. On creating panic in the enemy's ranks. 
V. On ambushes. 
VI. On letting the enemy escape, lest, brought to 
bay, he renew the battle in desperation. 
VII. On concealing reverses. 
VIII. On restoring morale by firmness. 


Of the matters which deserve attention after battle, 
I consider that there are the following classes: 


IX. On bringing the war to a close after a successful 
engagement. 
X. On repairing one’s losses after a reverse. 
XI. On ensuring the loyalty of those whom one 
mistrusts. 

XII. What to do for the defence of the camp, in 
case a commander lacks confidence in his 
present forces. 

XIII, On retreating. 


89 


SEXTUS JULIUS FRONTINUS 


I. De Tempore AD PuaNAM ELiGENDO 


1. P. Scipio in Hispania, cum comperisset Hasdru- 
balem Poenorum ducem ieiuno exercitu mane proces- 
sisse in aciem, continuit in horam septimam suos, 
quibus praeceperat, ut quiescerent et cibum caperent ; 
cumque hostes inedia, siti, mora sub armis fatigati 
repetere castra coepissent, subito copias eduxit et 
commisso proelio vicit. 

2. Metellus Pius in Hispania adversus Hirtuleium, 
cum ille oriente protinus die instructam aciem vallo 
eius admovisset, fervidissimo tunc tempore anni intra 
castra continuit suos in horam diei sextam. Atque ita 
fatigatos aestu facile integris et recentibus suorum 
viribus vicit. 

3. Idem, iunctis cum Pompeio castris adversus Ser- 
torium in Hispania, cum saepe instruxisset aciem, 
hoste qui imparem se duobus credebat pugnam de- 
trectante, quodam deinde tempore Sertorianos milites 


animadvertisset magno impetu instinctos, deposcentes . 


pugnam umerosque exserentes et lanceas vibrantes, 
existimavit ardori cedendum in tempore recepitque 
exercitum et Pompeio idem faciendi auctor fuit. 

4. Postumius consul in Sicilia, cum castra eius a 
Punicis trium milium passuum spatio distarent et 
dictatores Carthaginiensium cotidie ante ipsa muni- 


1 206 B.o. Cf. Polyaen. vir. xvi. 1. 2 76 B.C. 
go 


STRATAGEMS, II. 1. 1-4 


I. On CHoosiNa THE TIME ron BATTLE 


Wuen Publius Scipio was in Spain and had learned 
that Hasdrubal, leader of the Carthaginians, had 
marched out and drawn up his troops in battle array 
early in the morning before they had had breakfast, 
he kept back his own men till one o'clock, having 
ordered them to rest and eat. When the enemy, 
exhausted with hunger, thirst, and waiting under 
arms, had begun to return to camp, Scipio suddenly 
led forth his troops, opened battle, and won the day.! 

When Metellus Pius was waging war against 
Hirtuleius in Spain, and the latter had drawn up 
his troops immediately after daybreak and marched 
them against Metelluss entrenchments, Metellus 
held his own forces in camp till noon, as the weather 
.at that time of year was extremely hot. Then, when 
the enemy were overcome by the heat, he easily 
defeated them, since his own men were fresh and 
their strength unimpaired.? 

When the same Metellus had joined forces with 
Pompey against Sertorius in Spain, and had re- 
peatedly offered battle, the enemy declined combat, 
deeming himself unequal to two. Later on, however, 
Metellus, noticing that the soldiers of the enemy, 
fired with great enthusiasm, were calling for battle, 
baring their arms, and brandishing their spears, 
thought it best to retreat betimes before their 
ardour. Accordingly he withdrew and caused Pompey 
to do the same. 

When Postumius was in Sicily in his consulate, 
his camp was three miles distant from the Cartha- 
ginians. Every day the Punic chieftains drew up 
their line of battle directly in front of the fortifica- 


9I 


SEXTUS JULIUS FRONTINUS 


menta Romanorum dirigerent aciem, exigua manu 
levibus adsidue proeliis pro vallo resistebat. Quam 
consuetudinem contemnente iam Poeno, reliquis 
omnibus per quietem intra vallum praeparatis, ex 
more pristino cum paucis sustentavit incursum ad- 
versariorum ac solito diutius detinuit. Quibus 
fatigatis post sextam horam et iam se recipientibus, 
cum inedia quoque laborarent, per recentes suos 
hostem, quem praedicta profligaverant incommoda, 
fugavit. 

5. Iphicrates Atheniensis, quia exploraverat eodem 
adsidue tempore hostes cibum capere, maturius vesci 
suos iussit et eduxit in aciem egressumque hostem 
ita detinuit, ut ei neque confligendi neque abeundi 
daret facultatem.  Inclinato deinde iam die reduxit 
suos et nihilominus in armis retinuit. Fatigati hostes 
non statione magis quam inedia statim ad curam cor- 
poris et cibum capiendum festinaverunt. Iphicrates 
rursus eduxit et incompositi hostis adgressus est 
castra. 

6. Idem, cum adversus Lacedaemonios pluribus 
diebus castra comminus haberet et utraque pars 
certis temporibus adsidue pabulatum lignatumque 
procederet, quodam die militum habitu servos lixasque 
dimisit ad munera, milites retinuit; et cum hostes 
dispersi essent ad similia munera, expugnavit castra 
eorum inermesque cum fasciculis passim ad tumultum 
recurrentes facile aut occidit aut cepit. 


! 262 B.C. 3 Cf. Polyaen. 111. ix. 53. 
3 393-392 B.c. Cf. Polyaen. 111. ix. 52. 


92 


STRATAGEMS, II. 1. 4-6 


tions of the Romans, while Postumius offered resist- 
ance by way of constant skirmishes, conducted by a 
small band before his entrenchments. As soon as 
the Carthaginian commander came to regard this as 
a matter of course, Postumius quietly made ready 
all the rest of his troops within the ramparts, meet- 
ing the assault of the foe with a few, according to 
` his former practice, but keeping them engaged longer 
than usual, When, after noon was past, they were re- 
treating, weary and suffering from hunger, Postumius, 
with fresh troops, put them to rout, exhausted as 
they were by the aforementioned embarrassments.! 

Iphicrates, the Athenian, having discovered that 
the enemy regularly ate at the same hour, commanded 
his own troops to eat at an earlier hour, and then 
led them out to battle. When the enemy came 
forth, he so detained them as to afford them no 
opportunity either of fighting or of withdrawing. 
Then, as the day drew to a close, he led his troops 
back, but nevertheless held them under arms. The 
enemy, exhausted both by standing in the line and 
by hunger, straightway hurried off to rest and eat, 
whereupon Iphicrates again led forth his troops, and 
finding the enemy disorganized, attacked their camp.? 

When the same Iphicrates had his camp for several 
days near the Lacedaemonians, and each side was in 
the habit of going forth at a regular hour for forage 
and wood, he one day sent out slaves and camp- 
followers in the dress of soldiers for this service, 
holding back his fighting men; and as soon as the 
enemy had dispersed on similar errands, he captured 
their camp. Then as they came running back from 
all quarters to the mélée, unarmed and carrying their 
bundles, he easily slew or captured them. 


93 


SEXTUS JULIUS FRONTINUS 


T. Verginius consul in Volscis, cum procurrere 
hostes effuse ex longinquo vidisset, quiescere suos 
ac defixa tenere pila iussit. Tum anhelantes integris 
viribus exercitus sui adgressus avertit. 

8. Fabius Maximus non ignarus, Gallos et Samni- 
tes primo impetu praevalere, suorum autem infatiga- 
biles spiritus inter moras decertandi etiam incalescere, 
imperavit militibus, contenti primo congressu susti- 
nere hostem mora fatigarent. Quod ubi successit, 
admoto etiam subsidio suis in prima acie, universis 
viribus oppressum fudit hostem. x 

9. Philippus ad Chaeroneam memor, sibi esse 
militem longo usu duratum, Atheniensibus acrem 
quidem, sed inexercitatum et in impetu tantum 
violentum, ex industria proelium traxit, moxque 
languentibus iam Atheniensibus concitatius intulit 
signa et ipsos cecidit. 

10. Lacedaemonii certiores ab exploratoribus facti, 
Messenios in eam exarsisse rabiem, ut in proelium 
cum coniugibus ac liberis descenderent, pugnam 
distulerunt. 

11. C. Caesar bello civili, cum exercitum Afrani 
et Petrei circumvallatum siti angeret isque ob hoc 
exasperatus interfectis omnibus impedimentis ad 
pugnam descendisset, continuit suos, arbitratus 

1494 p.c. Cf. Livy 11. xxx. 10 ff. 

2 995 B.C. Cf. Livy x. 28 ff. 


3 338 B.c. Cf. Polyaen. Iv. ii. 7: Justin. 1x. iii. 9. 
4 The motive was to be less encumbered on the march. 


94 


STRATAGEMS, II. 1. 7-11 


When the consul Verginius, in the war with the 
Volscians, saw the enemy run forward at full 
stretch from a distance, he commanded his own 
men to keep steady and hold their javelins at rest. 
Then, when the enemy were out of breath, while 
his own army was still strong and fresh, he attacked 
and routed them.} 

Since Fabius Maximus was well aware that the 
Gauls and Samnites were strong in the initial attack, 
while the tireless spirits of his own men actually 
waxed hotter as the struggle continued, he com- 
manded his soldiers to rest content with holding 
the foe at the first encounter and to wear them 
out by delay. When this succeeded, bringing up 
reinforcements to his men in the van, and attacking 
with his full strength, he crushed and routed the 
enemy.? 

At Chaeronea, Philip purposely prolonged the 
'engagement, mindful that his own soldiers were 
seasoned by long experience, while the Athenians 
were ardent but untrained, and impetuous only in 
the charge. Then, as the Athenians began to grow 
weary, Philip attacked more furiously and cut them 
down.? 

When the Spartans learned from scouts that the 
Messenians had broken out into such fury that they 
had come down to battle attended by their wives and 
children, they postponed the engagement. 

In the Civil War, when Gaius Caesar held the 
army of Afranius and Petreius besieged and suffering 
from thirst, and when their troops, infuriated because 
of this, had slain all their beasts of burden * and come 
out for battle, Caesar held back his own soldiers, 
deeming the occasion ill-suited for an engagement, 


95 


SEXTUS JULIUS FRONTINUS 


alienum dimicationi tempus, quod adversarios ira 
et desperatio incenderet. 

12. Cn. Pompeius, fugientem Mithridatem cupiens 
ad proelium compellere, elegit tempus dimicationi 
nocturnum, ut abeunti se opponeret. Atque ita prae- 
paratus subitam hostibus necessitatem decernendi 
iniecit. Praeterea sic constituit aciem, ut Ponti- 
corum quidem oculos adversa luna praestringeret, 
suis autem inlustrem et conspicuum praeberet 
hostem. 

13. Iugurtham constat, memorem virtutis Roma- 
norum, semper inclinato die committere proelia 
solitum, ut, si fugarentur sui, opportunam noctem 
haberent ad delitiscendum. 

14. Lucullus adversus Mithridatem et Tigranem i in 
Armenia Maiore apud Tigranocertam, cum ipse non 
amplius quindecim milia armatorum haberet, hostis 
autem innumerabilem multitudinem eoque ipso inha- 
bilem, usus hoe eius incommodo nondum ordinatam 
hostium aciem invasit atque ita protinus dissipavit, 
ut ipsi quoque reges abiectis insignibus fugerent. 

15. Ti. Nero adversus Pannonios, cum barbari 
feroces in aciem oriente statim die processissent, 
continuit suos passusque est hostem nebula et 
imbribus, qui forte illo die crebri erant, verberari. 
Ac deinde, ubi fessum stando et pluvia non solum 
sed et lassitudine deficere animadvertit, signo dato 
adortus superavit. 


149 B.c. Cf. Caes. B.C. i. 81 ff. 

2 66 B.c Cf. Flor. 11. v. 22-24; Plut. Pomp. 32 ff. 

3 111-106 B.o. Cf. Sall. Jug. xcviii. 2. 

* 69 5.c. Cf. Plut. Lucul. 26-28; Appian Mithr. 84-85. 
5 12-10 B.c. or 6-9 a.D. The future Emperor Tiberius. 


96 


STRATAGEMS, II. 1. 11-15 


since his opponents were so inflamed with wrath and 
desperation.} 

Gnaeus Pompey, desiring to check the flight of 
Mithridates and force him to battle, chose night as 
the time for the encounter, arranging to block his 
march as he withdrew. Having made his prepara- 
tions accordingly, he suddenly forced his enemy to 
fight. In addition to this, he so drew up his force 
that the moonlight falling in the faces of the Pontic 
soldiers blinded their eyes, while it gave his own 
troops a distinct and clear view of the enemy.? 

It is well known that Jugurtha, aware of the 
courage of the Romans, was always wont to engage 
in battle as the day was drawing to a close, so that, 
in case his men were routed, they might have the 
advantage of night for getting away.? 

At Tigranocerta in Greater Armenia, Lucullus, in 
the campaign against Mithridates and Tigranes, did 
not have above 15,000 armed men, while the enemy 
had an innumerable host, which for this very reason 
was unwieldy. Taking advantage, accordingly, of 
this handicap of the foe, Lucullus attacked their line 
before it was in order, and straightway routed it so 
completely that even the kings themselves discarded 
their trappings and fled.4 

In the campaign against the Pannonians, when 
the barbarians in warlike mood had formed for battle 
at the very break of day, Tiberius Nero held back his 
own troops, and allowed the enemy to be hampered 
by the fog and be drenched with the showers, which 
happened to be frequent that day. Then, when he 
noticed that they were weary with standing, and 
faint not only from exposure but also from exhaustion, 
he gave the signal, attacked and defeated them.’ 


97 
VOL. I. H 


SEXTUS JULIUS FRONTINUS 


16. C. Caesar in Gallia, quia compererat Ariovisto 
Germanorum regi institutum et quasi legem esse 
non pugnandi decrescente luna, tum potissimum 
acie commissa impeditos religione hostes vicit. 

17. Divus Augustus Vespasianus ludaeos Saturni 
die, quo eis nefas est quicquam seriae rei agere, 
adortus superavit. 

18. Lysander Lacedaemonius vesie Athenienses 
apud Aegospotamos instituit certo tempore infestare 
naves Atheniensium, dein revocare classem. Ea re 
in consuetudinem perducta, cum Athenienses post 
digressum eius ad contrahendas copias dispergerentur, 
extendit ex consuetudine classem et recepit. Tum 
hostium maxima parte ex more dilapsa, reliquos 
adortus occidit et universas naves cepit. 


II. De Loco av PuaNAM ELIGENDO 


1. M’. Curius, quia phalangi regis Pyrrhi ex- 
plicitae resisti non posse animadvertebat, dedit 
operam, ut in angustiis confligeret, ubi conferta sibi 
ipsa esset impedimento. 

2. Cn. Pompeius in Cappadocia elegit castris 
locum editum. Unde adiuvante proclivi impetum 
militum facile ipso decursu Mithridatem superavit. 

3. C. Caesar adversus Pharnacem Mithridatis 


1 58 n.c. Cf. Caes. B.G. i. 50; Plut. Caes. 19. 

2 70 A.D. 

3 405 B.c. Cf. Xen. Hell. n. i. 21 ff; Plut. Lysand. 10-11. 
t 281-275 B.C. 5 66 B.C. 


98 


STRATAGEMS, II. 1. 16-1. 3 


Gaius Caesar, when in Gaul, learned that it was a 
principle and almost a law with Ariovistus, king of 
the Germans, not to fight when the moon was 
waning. Caesar therefore chose that time above all 
others for engaging in battle, when the enemy were 
embarrassed by their superstition, and so conquered 
them. 

The deified Vespasian Augustus attacked the Jews 
on their sabbath, a day on which it is sinful for them 
to do any business, and so defeated them.? 

When Lysander, the Spartan, was fighting against 
the Athenians at Aegospotami, he began by attack- 
ing the vessels of the Athenians at a regular hour 
and then calling off his fleet. After this had become 
an established procedure, as the Athenians on one 
occasion, after his withdrawal, were dispersing to 
collect their troops, he deployed his fleet as usual 
and withdrew it. Then, when most of the enemy 
had scattered according to their wont, he attacked 
and slew the rest, and captured all their vessels.? 


II. ON Cuoosiua TuE PracE ron BATTLE 


MaNrus Cunivs, observing that the phalanx of King 
Pyrrhus could not be resisted when in extended 
order, took pains to fight in confined quarters, where 
the phalanx, being massed together, would embarrass 
itself.^ 

In Cappadocia Gnaeus Pompey chose a lofty site 
for his camp. As a result the elevation so assisted 
the onset of his troops that he easily overcame 
Mithridates by the sheer weight of his assault.5 

When Gaius Caesar was about to contend with 
Pharnaces, son of Mithridates, he drew up his line 


99 
H 2 


SEXTUS JULIUS FRONTINUS 


filium dimicaturus in colle instruxit aciem ; quae res 
expeditam ei victoriam fecit, nam' pila ex edito in 
subeuntis barbaros emissa protinus eos averterunt. 

4. Lucullus adversus Mithridatem et Tigranem 
in Armenia Maiore apud Tigranocertam dimicaturus, 
collis proximi planum verticem raptim cum parte 
copiarum adeptus, in subiectos hostes decucurrit et 
equitatum eorum a latere invasit; aversumque et 
eorundem protinus pedites proturbantem insecutus 
clarissimam victoriam rettulit. 

5. Ventidius adversus Parthos non ante militem 
eduxit, quam illi quingentis non amplius passibus 
abessent, atque ita procursione subita adeo se ad- 
movit, ut sagittas, quibus ex longinquo usus est, 
comminus applicitus eluderet. Quo consilio, quia 
quandam etiam fiduciae speciem ostentaverat, cele- 
riter barbaros debellavit. 

6. Hannibal apud Numistronem contra Marcellum 
pugnaturus cavas et praeruptas vias obiecit a latere, 
ipsaque loci natura pro munimentis usus clarissimum 
ducem vicit. 

,7. Idem apud Cannas, cum comperisset Volturnum 
amnem ultra reliquorum naturam fluminum ingentis 
auras mane proflare, quae arenarum et pulveris ver- 
tices agerent, sic direxit aciem, ut tota vis a tergo 
suis, Romanis in ora et oculos incederet, Quibus 


1 47 p.c. Cf. Bell. Alexandr. 73-76. 

2 60 p.c. Cf. Plut. Lucul. 28; Appian AMithr. 85. 

3 38 p.c. Cf. Flor. Iv. ix. 6. 

t 210 B.c. According to Livy xxvi. ii. 4 and Plut. Marc. 
24, the result of the battle was indecisive. 


IOO 


STRATAGEMS, II. 11. 3-7 


of battle on a hill. This move made victory easy for 
him, since the darts, hurled from higher ground 
against the barbarians charging from below, straight- 
way put them to flight! 

When Lucullus was planning to fight Mithridates 
and Tigranes at Tigranocerta in Greater Armenia, 
he himself swiftly gained the level top of the nearest 
hill with a part of his troops, and then rushed down 
upon the enemy posted below, at the same time 
attacking their cavalry on the flank. When the 
cavalry broke and straightway threw the infantry 
into confusion, Lucullus followed after them and 
gained a most notable victory.? 

Ventidius, when fighting against the Parthians, 
would not lead out his soldiers until the Parthians 
were within five hundred paces. Thus by a rapid 
advance he came so near them that, meeting them 
at close quarters, he escaped their arrows, which 
they shoot from a distance. By this scheme, since 
he exhibited a certain show of confidence, he quickly 
subdued the barbarians.? 

At Numistro, when Hannibal was expecting a 
battle with Marcellus, he secured a position where 
his flank was protected by hollows and precipitous 
roads. By thus making the ground serve as a 
defence, he won a victory over a most renowned 
commander .* 

Again at Cannae, when Hannibal icarnea that the 
Volturnus River, at variance with the nature of other 
streams, sent out high winds in the morning, which 
carried swirling sand and dust, he so marshalled 
his line of battle that the entire fury of the elements 
fell on the rear of his own troops, but struck the 
Romans in the face and eyes. Since this difficulty 


IOI 
& 


SEXTUS JULIUS FRONTINUS 


incommodis mire hosti adversantibus illam memora- 
bilem adeptus est victoriam. 

8. Marius adversus Cimbros ac Teutonos consti- 
tuta die pugnaturus firmatum cibo militem ante 
castra conlocavit, ut per aliquantum spatii, quo 
adversarii dirimebantur, exercitus hostium potius! 
labore itineris profligaretur.  Fatigationi deinde 
eorum incommodum aliud obiecit, ita ordinata 
suorum acie, ut adverso sole et vento et pulvere 
barbarorum occuparetur exercitus. 

9. Cleomenes Lacedaemonius adversus Hippiam 
Atheniensem, qui equitatu praevalebat, planitiem, 
in qua dimicaturus erat, arboribus prostratis impediit 
et inviam fecit equiti. 

10. Hiberi in Africa ingenti hostium multitudine 
excepti timentesque, ne circumirentur, applicuerunt 
se flumini, quod altis in ea regione ripis praefluebat. 
Ita a tergo amne defensi et subinde, cum virtute 
praestarent, incursando in proximos omnem hostium 
exercitum straverunt. 

11. Xanthippus Lacedaemonius sola loci commu- 
tatione fortunam Punici belli convertit. Nam cum 
a desperantibus iam Carthaginiensibus mercede sol- 
licitatus animadvertisset Afros quidem, qui equitatu 
et elephantis praestabant, colles sectari, a Romanis 

autem, quorum robur in pedite erat, campestria 
teneri, Poenos in plana deduxit; ubi per elephantos 


1 Probably corrupt. 


1216 p.c. Cf. Val Max. vii iv. ext. 2; Plut. Fab. 16; 
Livy xxii. 48, 46. In none of these accounts is a river 
mentioned as the source of the wind. Livy speaks of the 
ventus Volturnus. 

2101 B.c. Cf. Plut. Mar. 26; Polyaen. virt. x. 3. 

3 510 B.C. 


102 
e 


STRATAGEMS, II. 1. 7-11 


was a serious obstacle to the enemy, he won that 
memorable victory.! 

After Marius had settled on a day for fighting the 
Cimbrians and Teutons, he fortified his soldiers with 
food and stationed them in front of his camp, in 
order that the army of the enemy might be ex- 
hausted by marching over the interval between the 
opposing armies. Then, when the enemy were thus 
used up, he confronted them with another embarrass- 
ment by so arranging his own line of battle that the 
barbarians were caught with the sun and wind and 
dust in their faces.? 

When Cleomenes, the Spartan, in his battle against 
Hippias, the Athenian, found that the latter's main 
strength lay in his cavalry, he thereupon felled trees 
and cluttered the battlefield with them, thus making 
it impassable for cavalry.? 

The Iberians in Africa, upon encountering a great 
multitude of foes and fearing that they would be 
surrounded, drew near a river which at that point 
flowed along between deep banks. Thus, de- 
fended by the river in the rear and enabled by their 
superior prowess to make frequent onsets upon those 
nearest them, they routed the entire host of their 
adversaries. . 

Xanthippus, the Spartan, by merely changing the 
locality of operations, completely altered the fortunes 
of the Punic War; for when, summoned as a mer- 
cenary by the despairing Carthaginians, he had 
noticed that the *Africans, who were superior in 
cavalry and elephants, kept to the hills, while the 
Romans, whose strength was in their infantry, held 
to the plains, he brought the Carthaginians down to 
level ground, where he broke the ranks of the 


103 


SEXTUS JULIUS FRONTINUS 


dissipatis ordinibus Romanorum sparsos milites per 
Numidas persecutus eorum exercitum fudit, in illam 
diem terra marique victorem. 

12. Epaminondas dux Thebanorum adversus Lace- 
daemonios directurus aciem, pro fronte eius decurrere 
equitibus iussis, cum ingentem pulverem hostium 
oculis obiecisset exspectationemque equestris cer- 
taminis praetendisset, circumducto pedite ab ea 
parte, ex qua decursus in aversam hostium aciem 
ferebat, inopinantium terga adortus cecidit. 

13. Lacedaemonii CCC contra innumerabilem 
multitudinem Persarum Thermopylas occupaverunt, 
quarum angustiae non amplius quam parem nu- 
merum comminus pugnaturum poterant admittere. 
Eaque ratione, quantum ad congressus facultatem, 
aequati numero barbarorum, virtute autem praes- 
tantes, magnam eorum partem ceciderunt nec supe- 
rati forent, nisi per proditorem Ephialten Trachinium 
cireumductus hostis a tergo eos oppressisset. 

14. Themistocles dux Atheniensium, cum videret 
utilissimum Graeciae adversus multitudinem Xerxis 
navium in angustiis Salaminis decernere idque 
persuadere civibus non posset, sollertia effecit, ut 
a barbaris ad utilitates suas Graeci compellerentur. 
Simulata namque proditione misit ad Xerxen, qui 
indicaret populares suos de fuga cogitare difficilio- 


1 255 p.c. Cf. Polyb. i. 33 ff. ; Zonar. viii. 13. 
2 362 p.c. Cf. Polyaen. rr. iii. 14. 
3 480 B.c. Cf. Herod. vii. 201 ff. ; Polyaen. vu. xv. 5. 


104 


STRATAGEMS, II. 11. r1-14 


Romans with the elephants. Then pursuing their 
scattered troops with Numidians, he routed their 
army, which till that day had been victorious on 
land and sea. 

Epaminondas, leader of the Thebans, when about 
to marshal his troops in battle array against the 
Spartans, ordered his cavalry to engage in manceuvres 
along the front. Then, when he had filled the eyes 
of the enemy with clouds of dust and had caused 
them to expect an encounter with cavalry, he led 
his infantry around to one side, where it was possible 
to attack the enemy’s rear from higher ground, and 
thus, by a surprise attack, cut them to pieces.? 

Against a countless horde of Persians, three hundred 
. Spartans seized and held the pass of Thermopylae 
which was capable of admitting only a like number 
of hand-to-hand opponents. In consequence, the 
Spartans became numerically equal to the barbarians, 
so far as opportunity for fighting was concerned, and 
being superior to them in valour, slew large numbers 
.of them. Nor would they have been overcome, had 
not the enemy been led around to the rear by the 
traitor Ephialtes, the Trachinian, and thus been 
enabled to overwhelm them.? 

Themistocles, leader of the Athenians, saw that 
it was most advantageous for Greece to fight in the 
Straits of Salamis against the vast numbers of 
Xerxes's vessels, but he was unable to persuade his 
fellow Athenians of this. He therefore employed a 
stratagem to make the barbarians force the Greeks 
to do what was advantageous for the latter; for 
under pretence of turning traitor, he sent a messenger 
to Xerxes to inform him that the Greeks were 
planning flight, and that the situation would be 


105 


SEXTUS JULIUS FRONTINUS 


remque ei rem futuram, si singulas civitates obsi- 
dione adgrederetur. Qua ratione effecit, ut exercitus 
barbarorum primum inquietaretur, dum tota nocte in 
statione custodiae est; deinde, ut sui mane integris 
viribus cum barbaris vigilia marcentibus confligerent, 
loco ut voluerat arto, in quo Xerxes multitudine qua 
praestabat uti non posset. 


III. De Acik& OnnpiNANDA 


1. Cn. Scipio in Hispania adversus Hannonem 
ad oppidum Indibile, cum animadvertisset Punicam 
aciem ita directam, ut in dextro cornu Hispani 
constituerentur, robustus quidem miles, sed qui 
alienum negotium ageret, in sinistro autem Afri, 
minus viribus firmi, sed animi constantiores, reducto 
sinistro latere suorum, dextro cornu, quod validis- 
simis militibus exstruxerat, obliqua acie cum hoste 
conflixit. Deinde fusis fugatisque Afris Hispanos, 
qui in recessu spectantium more steterant, facile in . 
deditionem compulit. 

2. Philippus Macedonum rex adversus Hyllios! 
gerens bellum, ut animadvertit frontem hostium 
stipatam electis de toto exercitu viris, latera autem 
infirmiora, fortissimis suorum in dextro cornu con- 
locatis, sinistrum latus hostium invasit turbataque 
tota acie victoriam profligavit. 


1 yllyrios P. 


1 480 B.c. Cf. Herod. viii. 75; Plut. Them. 12; Nep. 
Them. 4. 

3 218 B.c. Cn. Cornelius Scipio Calvus. Cf. Polyb. iii. 76. 

3 Tilyrians. * 359 B.œ Cf. Diodor. xvi. 4. 


106 


STRATAGEMS, II, i. 14-11. 2 


more difficult for the King if he should besiege each 
city separately. By this policy, in the first place he 
caused the host of the barbarians to be kept on the 
alert doing guard-duty all night; in the second 
place, he made it possible for his own followers, 
the next morning, with strength unimpaired, to 
encounter the barbarians all exhausted with watch- 
ing, and (precisely as he had wished) in a confined 
place, where Xerxes could not utilize his superiority 
in numbers.! 


III. ON tue Disposirion or TRoors ror BATTLE 


GNAEUS Scipio, when campaigning in Spain against 
Hanno, near the town of Indibile, noted that the 
Carthaginian line of battle was drawn up with the 
Spaniards posted on the right wing—sturdy soldiers, 
to be sure, but fighting for others—while on the left 
were the less powerful, but more resolute, Africans. 
He accordingly drew back his own left wing, and 
keeping his battle-line at an angle with the enemy, 
engaged the enemy with his right wing, which he 
had formed of his sturdiest soldiers. Then routing 
the Africans and putting them to flight, he easily 
forced the surrender of the Spaniards, who had 
stood apart after the manner of spectators.? 

When Philip, king of the Macedonians, was waging 
war against the Hyllians,? he noticed that the front 
of the enemy consisted entirely of men picked from 
the whole army, while their flanks were weaker. 
Accordingly he placed the stoutest of his own men 
on the right wing, attacked the enemy’s left, and 
by throwing their whole line into confusion won a 
complete victory. 


@ 107 


SEXTUS JULIUS FRONTINUS 


3. Pammenes Thebanus, conspecta Persarum acie, 
quae robustissimas copias in dextro cornu conlocatas 
habebat, simili ratione et ipse suos ordinavit omnem- 
que equitatum et fortissimum quemque peditum in 
dextro cornu, infirmissimos autem contra fortissimos 
hostium posuit praecepitque, ut ad primum impetum 
eorum fuga sibi consulerent et in silvestria con- 
fragosaque loca se reciperent. Ita frustrato robore 
exercitus, ipse optima parte virium suarum dextro 
cornu totam circumiit aciem hostium et avertit. 

4. P. Cornelius Scipio, cui postea Africano cogno- 
men fuit, adversus Hasdrubalem Poenorum ducem 
in Hispania gerens bellum ita per continuos dies 
ordinatum produxit exercitum, ut media acies for- 
tissimis fundaretur. Sed cum hostes quoque eadem 
ratione adsidue ordinati procederent, Scipio eo die, 
quo statuerat decernere, commutavit instructionis 
ordinem et firmissimos! in cornibus conlocavit ac 
levem armaturam in media acie, sed retractam. Ita 
cornibus, quibus ipse praevalebat, infirmissimas 
hostium partes lunata acie adgressus facile fudit. 

5. Metellus in Hispania, eo proelio quo Hirtuleium 
devicit, cum comperisset cohortes eius, quae validis- 
simae vocabantur, in media acie locatas, ipse mediam 
suorum aciem reduxit, ne ea parte ante cum hoste 
confligeret, quam cornibus complicatis medios undique 
circumvenisset. 


1 id est legionarios of the MSS. is omitted after firmissimos 
as probably a gloss. 


1 353 B.c. Cf. Polyaen. v. xvi. 2. 
2 206 B.c. Cf. Livy xxviii. 14-15; Polyb. xi. 22 ff. 
3 76 B.c. Q. Caecilius Metellus Pius. 

1038 


* 


STRATAGEMS, II. m. 3-5 - 


Pammenes, the Theban, having observed the battle- 
line of the Persians, where the most powerful troops 
were posted on the right wing, drew up his own men 
also on the same plan, putting all his cavalry and the 
bravest of his infantry on the right wing, but station- 
ing opposite the bravest of the enemy his own 
: weakest troops, whom he directed to flee at the first 
onset of the foe and to retreat to rough, wooded 
places. When in this way he had made the enemy's 
strength of no effect, he himself with the best part 
of his own forces enveloped the whole array of the 
enemy with his right wing and put them to rout.! 

Publius Cornelius Scipio, who subsequently re- 
ceived the name Africanus, on one occasion, when 
waging war in Spain against Hasdrubal, leader of the 
Carthaginians, led out his troops day after day in 
such formation that the centre of his battle-line was 
composed of his best fighting men. But when the 
enemy also regularly came out marshalled on the 
same plan, Scipio, on the day when he had determined 
to fight, altered the scheme of his arrangement and 
stationed his strongest troops on the wings, having his 
light-armed troops in the centre, but slightly behiud 
the line, Thus, by attacking the enemy's weakest 
point in crescent formation from the flank, where he 
himself was strongest, he easily routed them.? 

Metellus, in the battle in which he vanquished 
Hirtuleius in Spain, had discovered that the battalions 
of Hirtuleius which were deemed strongest were 
posted in the centre. Accordingly he drew back 
the centre of his own troops, to avoid encountering 
the enemy at that part of the line, until by 
an enveloping movement of his wings he could 
surround their centre from all sides.? 


109 


SEXTUS JULIUS FRONTINUS 


6. Artaxerxes adversus Graecos, qui Persida intra- 
verant, cum multitudine superaret, latius quam 
hostes acie instructa in fronte peditem, equitem 
levemque armaturam in cornibus conlocavit. Atque 
ita ex industria lentius procedente media acie copias 
hostium cinxit ceciditque. 

7. Contra Hannibal ad Cannas reductis cornibus 
productaque media acie nostros primo impetu pro- 
trusit. Idem conserto proelio, paulatim invicem 
sinuantibus procedentibusque ad praeceptum cor- 
nibus, avide insequentem hostem in mediam aciem 
suam recepit et ex utraque parte compressum cecidit. 
Veterano et diu edocto usus exercitu, hoc enim 
genus ordinationis exsequi nisi peritus et ad omne 
momentum respondens miles vix potest.! 

. 8. Livius Salinator et Claudius Nero, cum Has- 
drubal bello Punico secundo decernendi necessitatem 
evitans in colle confragoso post vineas aciem direxis- 
set, ipsi diductis in latera viribus vacua fronte ex 
utraque parte circumvenerunt eum atque ita adgressi 
superarunt. | 

9. Hannibal, cum frequentibus proeliis a Claudio 
Marcello superaretur, novissime sic castra metabatur, 
ut aut montibus aut paludibus aut simili locorum 
aliqua opportunitate adiutus aciem eo modo conloca- 
ret, ut vincentibus quidem Romanis paene indemnem 
recipere posset intra munimenta exercitum, ceden- 
tibus autem instandi liberum haberet arbitrium. 

10. Xanthippus Lacedaemonius in Africa adversus 


1 The last sentence of 7 is regarded as an interpolation. 


1 401 B.c. Battle of Cunaxa. Cf. Xen. Anab. 1. viii. 10. 
2 216 &.c. Cf. Livy xxii. 47; Polyb. iii. 115. 
3 207 B.c. Battle of the Metaurus. Cf. Livy xxvii. 48. 


110 


STRATAGEMS, II. ur. 6-10 


Artaxerxes, having superior numbers in his cam- 
paign against the Greeks, who had invaded Persia, 
` drew up his line of battle with a wider front than 
the enemy, placing infantry, cavalry, and light-armed 
troops on the wings. Then by purposely causing the 
centre to advance more slowly he enveloped the 
enemy troops and cut them to pieces.! 

On the other hand, at Cannae Hannibal, having 
drawn back his flanks and advanced his centre, drove 
back our troops at the first assault. Then, when the 
fighting began, and the flanks gradually worked 
towards each other moving forward according to 
instructions, Hannibal enveloped within his own 
lines the impetuously attacking enemy, forced them 
towards the centre from both sides, and cut them to 
pieces, using veteran troops of long training; for 
hardly anything but a trained army, responsive to 
every direction, can carry out this sort of tactics.? 

In the Second Punic War, when Hasdrubal was 
seeking to avoid the necessity of an engagement, 
and had drawn up his line on a rough hillside behind 
protective works, Livius Salinator and Claudius Nero 
diverted their own forces to the flanks, leaving their 
centre vacant. Having in this way enveloped Has- 
drubal, they attacked and defeated him. 

After Hannibal had been defeated in frequent 
battles by Claudius Marcellus, he finally laid out his 
camp on this plan: Protected by mountains, marshes, 
or similar advantages of terrain, he so posted his 
troops as to be able to withdraw his army, practically 
without loss, within his fortifications, in case the 
Romans won, but so as to have free option of pursuit, 
in case they gave way. 

Xanthippus, the Spartan, in the campaign "con- 


III 


SEXTUS JULIUS FRONTINUS 


M. Atilium Regulum levem armaturam in prima 
acie conlocavit, in subsidio autem robur exercitus 
praecepitque auxiliaribus, ut emissis telis cederent 
hosti et, cum se intra suorum ordines recepissent, 
confestim in latera discurrerent et a cornibus rursus 
erumperent; exceptumque iam hostem a robustio- 
ribus et ipsi circumierunt. 

11. Sertorius idem in Hispania adversus Pompeium 
fecit! 

12. Cleandridas Lacedaemonius adversus Lucanos 
densam instruxit aciem, ut longe minoris exercitus 
speciem praeberet. Securis deinde hostibus in ipso 
certamine diduxit ordines et a lateribus circumventos 
eos fudit. 

13. Gastron Lacedaemonius, cum auxilio Aegyp- 
tiis adversus Persas venisset et sciret, firmiorem esse 
Graecum militem magisque a Persis timeri, commu- 
tatis armis Graecos in prima posuit acie et, cum 
illi aequo Marte pugnarent, submisit Aegyptiorum 
manum. Persae cum Graecis, quos Aegyptios opina- 
bantur, restitissent, superveniente multitudine, quam 
ut Graecorum expaverant, cesserunt. 

14. Cn. Pompeius in Albania, quia hostes et numero 
et equitatu praevalebant, iuxta collem in angustiis 


1 No. 11 is probably interpolated 


1 These were the ‘‘ light-armed troops,” already mentioned. 
3 255 B.C. 3 (f, TI. v. 3l. 

- es 443 B.c. Cf. Polyaen. II. x. 4 

5 Cf. Polyaen. ii. 16. 


II2 


STRATAGEMS, II. m. 10-14 


ducted in Africa against Marcus Atilius Regulus, 
placed his light-armed troops in the front line, 
holding the flower of his army in reserve. Then he 
directed the auxiliary troops,! after hurling their 
javelins, to give way before the enemy, withdraw 
within the ranks of their fellow-soldiers, hurry to 
the flanks, and from there again rush forward to the 
attack. Thus when the enemy had been met by 
the stronger troops, they were enveloped also by 
these light-armed forces.? 

Sertorius employed the same tactics in Spain in 
the campaign against Pompey.? 

Cleandridas, the Spartan, when fighting against 
the Lucanians, drew up his troops in close array, so 
as to present the appearance of a much smaller army. 
Then, when the enemy had thus been put off their 
guard, at the moment the engagement began he 
opened up his ranks, enveloped the enemy on the 
flank, and put them to rout.* 

Gastron, the Spartan, having come to assist the 
Egyptians against the Persians, and realizing that 
the Greek soldiers were more powerful and more 
dreaded by the Persians, interchanged the arms of 
the two contingents, placing the Greeks in the front 
line. When these merely held their own in the 
encounter, he sent in the Egyptians as reinforce- 
ments. Although the Persians had proved equal to 
the Greeks (deeming them Egyptians), they gave 
way, so soon as they were set upon by a multitude, 
of whom (as supposedly consisting of Greeks) they 
had stood in terror.’ 

When Gnaeus Pompey was fighting in Albania, 
and the enemy were superior in numbers and in 
cavalry, he directed his infantry to cover their 


113 
VOL. I. I 


SEXTUS JULIUS FRONTINUS 


protegere galeas, ne fulgore earum conspicui fierent, 
iussit pedites, equites deinde in aequum procedere 
ac velut praetendere peditibus, praecepitque eis, ut 
ad primum impetum hostium refugerent et, simul 
ad pedites ventum esset, in latera discederent. Quod 
ubi explicitum est, patefacto loco subita peditum 
consurrexit acies invectosque temere hostes inopinato 
interfusa proelio cecidit. 

15. M. Antonius adversus Parthos, qui infinita 
multitudine sagittarum exercitum eius obruebant, 
subsidere suos et testudinem facere iussit, supra 
quam transmissis sagittis sine militum noxa exhaustus 
est hostis. 

16. Hannibal adversus Scipionem in Africa, cum 
haberet exercitum ex Poenis et auxiliaribus, quorum 
pars non solum ex diversis partibus, sed etiam ex 
Italicis constabat, post elephantos LXXX, qui in 
prima fronte positi hostium turbarent aciem, auxiliares 
Gallos et Ligures et Baliares Maurosque posuit, ut 
neque fugere possent Poenis a tergo stantibus et 
hostem oppositi, si non infestarent, at certe fati- 
garent. Tum suis et Macedonibus, qui iam fessos 
Romanos integri exciperent, in secunda acie con- 
locatis, novissimos Italicos constituit, quorum et time- 
bat fidem et segnitiam verebatur, quoniam plerosque 
eorum ab Italia invitos extraxerat. 


——————————————M—MÁÁ——a 


1 65 B.C. Cf. Dio xxxvii. 4. 

2 In the /estudo, the soldiers secured protection by holding 
their over-lapped shields above their heads, a formation 
whose appearance suggested the scales of a tortoise. 

3 36 Bc. Cf. Dio xlix. 29-30; Plut. Anton. 45. 


II4 


STRATAGEMS, II. mi. 14-16 


helmets, in order to avoid being visible in consequence 
of the reflection, and to take their place in a defile 
by a hill Then he commanded his cavalry to 
advance on the plain and to act as a screen to the 
infantry, but to withdraw at the first onset of the 
enemy, and, as soon as they reached the infantry, to 
disperse to the flanks. When this manceuvre had 
been executed, suddenly the force of infantry rose 
up, revealing its position, and pouring with unex- 
pected attack upon the enemy who were heedlessly 
bent on pursuit, thus cut them to pieces.! 

When Mark Antony was engaged in battle with 
the Parthians and these were showering his army 
with innumerable arrows, he ordered his men to stop 
and form a :estudo.? The arrows passed over this 
without harm to the soldiers, and the enemy's supply 
was soon exhausted.? 

When Hannibal was contending against Scipio in 
Africa, having an army of Carthaginians and auxili- 
aries, part of whom were not only of different 
nationalities, but actually consisted of Italians, he 
placed eighty elephants in the forefront, to throw 
the enemy into confusion. Behind these he stationed 
auxiliary Gauls, Ligurians, Balearians, and Moors, 
that these might be unable to run away, since the 
Carthaginians were standing behind them, and in - 
order that, being placed in front, they might at least 
harass the enemy, if not do him damage. In the 
second line he placed his own countrymen and the 
Macedonians, to be fresh to meet the exhausted 
Romans ; and in the rear the Italians, whose loyalty 
he distrusted and whose indifference he feared, 
inasmuch as he had dragged most of them from Italy 
' against their will. 


I15 
12 


SEXTUS JULIUS FRONTINUS 


Scipio adversus hanc formam robur legionis triplici 
acie in fronte ordinatum per hastatos et principes et 
triarios opposuit ; nec continuas construxit cohortes, 
sed manipulis inter se distantibus spatium dedit, per 
quod elephanti ab hostibus acti facile transmitti sine 
perturbatione ordinum possent. Ea ipsa intervalla 
expeditis velitibus implevit, ne interluceret acies, 
dato his praecepto, ut ad impetum elephantorum 
vel retro vel in latera concederent. Equitatum 
deinde in cornua divisit et dextro Romanis equitibus 
Laelium, sinistro Numidis Masinissam praeposuit. 
Quae tam prudens ordinatio non dubie causa victoriae 
fuit. 

17. Archelaus adversus L. Sullam in fronte ad 
perturbandum hostem falcatas quadrigas locavit, in 
secunda acie phalangem Macedonicam, in tertia 
Romanorum more armatos auxiliares, mixtis fugitivis 
Italicae gentis, quorum pervicaciae plurimum fide- 
bat; levem armaturam in ultimo statuit; in utroque 
deinde latere equitatum, cuius amplum numerum 
habebat, circumeundi hostis causa posuit. 

Contra haec Sulla fossas amplae latitudinis utroque 
latere duxit et capitibus earum castella communiit. 
Qua ratione, ne circumiretur ab hoste et peditum nu- 
mero et maxime equitatu superante, consecutus est. 
Triplicem deinde peditum aciem ordinavit relictis 
intervallis, per quae levem armaturam et equitem, 


1 These names designate three successive lines of battle. 
The hastati were the first line; the two other lines were 
drawn up behind these. 

? 902 p.c. Battle of Zama. Cf. Livy xxx. 33, 35; Polyb. 
xv. ix. 6-10, xv. xi. 1-3; Appian Pun. 40-41. Livy and 
Polybius put Laelius on the left wing and Masinissa on the 
rights Appian puts Laelius on the right and Octavius on 
the left. 


116 


STRATAGEMS, II. m1. 16-17 


Against this formation Scipio drew up the flower 
of his legions in three successive front lines, arranged 
according to Aastatt, principes, and triarit) not making 
the cohorts touch, but leaving a space between the 
detached companies through which the elephants 
driven by the enemy might easily be allowed to pass 
without throwing the ranks into confusion. These 
intervals he filled with light-armed skirmishers, that 
the line might show no gaps, giving them instructions 
to withdraw to the rear or the flanks at the first 
onset of the elephants. The cavalry he distributed 
on the flanks, placing Laelius in charge of the Roman 
horsemen on the right, and Masinissa in charge of the 
Numidians on the left. This shrewd scheme of 
arrangement was undoubtedly the cause of his 
victory.” 

In the battle against Lucius Sulla, Archelaus 
placed his scythe-bearing chariots in front, for the 
purpose of throwing the enemy into confusion; in 
the second line he posted the Macedonian phalanx, 
and in the third line auxiliaries armed after the 
Roman way, with a sprinkling of Italian runaway 
slaves, in whose doggedness he had the greatest 
confidence. In the last line he stationed the light- 
armed troops, while on the two flanks, for the 
purpose of enveloping the enemy, he placed the 
cavalry, of whom he had a great number. 

To meet these dispositions, Sulla constructed 
trenches of great breadth on each flank, and at their 
ends built strong redoubts. By this device he 
avoided the danger of being enveloped by the enemy, 
who outnumbered him in infantry and especially in 
cavalry, Next he arranged a triple line of infantry, 
leaving intervals through which to send, according 


117 


SEXTUS JULIUS FRONTINUS 


quem in novissimo conlocaverat, cum res exegisset, 
emitteret. Tum postsignanis qui in secunda acie 
erant imperavit, ut densos numerososque palos firme 
in terram defigerent, intraque eos appropinquantibus 
quadrigis antesignanorum aciem recepit. Tumdemum 
sublato universorum clamore velites et levem arma- 
turam ingerere tela iussit. Quibus factis quadrigae 
hostium aut implicitae palis aut exterritae clamore 
telisque in suos conversae sunt turbaveruntque 
Macedonum structuram. Qua cedente, cum Sulla in- 
staret et Archelaus equitem opposuisset, Romani 
equites subito emissi averterunt eos consummave- 
runtque victoriam. 

18. C. Caesar Gallorum falcatas quadrigas eadem 
ratione palis defixis excepit inhibuitque. 

19. Alexander ad Arbela, cum hostium multitu- 
dinem vereretur, virtuti autem suorum fideret, aciem 
in omnem partem spectantem ordinavit, ut circum- 
venti undique pugnare possent. 

20. Paulus adversus Persen Macedonum regem, 
cum is phalangem suorum duplicem mediam in 
partem direxisset eamque levi armatura cinxisset et 
equitem utroque cornu conlocasset, triplicem aciem 
cuneis instruxit, inter quos velites subinde emisit. 
Quo genere cum profligari nihil videret, cedere 
instituit, ut hac simulatione perduceret hostes in 


! 'Troops posted behind the standards. 

3 Troops posted in front of the standards and serving for 
their defence. 

3 86 B.C. 

4 331 &.c. Cf. Curt. 1v. xiii. 30-32; Diodor. xvi. lvii. 5. 


118 


STRATAGEMS, II. m1. 17-20 


to need, the light-armed troops and the cavalry, which 
he placed in the rear. He then commanded the post- 
signani,! who were in the second line, to drive firmly 
into the ground large numbers of stakes set close 
together, and as the chariots drew near, he withdrew 
the line of antesignani? within these stakes. Then at 
length he ordered the skirmishers and light-armed 
troops to raise a general battle-cry and discharge their 
spears. By these tactics either the chariots of the 
enemy were caught among the stakes, or their drivers 
became panic-stricken at the din and were driven by 
the javelins back upon their own men, throwing the 
formation of the Macedonians into confusion. As 
these gave way, Sulla pressed forward, and Archelaus 
met him with cavalry, whereupon the Roman horse- 
men suddenly darted forth, drove back the enemy, 
and achieved victory.? 

In the same way Gaius Caesar met the scythe- 
bearing chariots of the Gauls with stakes driven in 
the ground, and kept them in check. 

At Arbela, Alexander, fearing the numbers of the 
enemy, yet confident in the valour of his own troops, 
drew up a line of battle facing in all directions, in 
order that his men, if surrounded, might be able to 
fight from all sides.* 

When Perseus, king of the Macedonians, had 
drawn up a double phalanx of his own troops and 
had placed them in the centre of his forces, with 
light-armed troops on each side and cavalry on both 
flanks, Paulus in the battle against him drew up a 
triple array in wedge formation, sending out 
skirmishers every now and then between the wedges. 
Seeing nothing accomplished by these tactics, he 
determined to retreat, in order by this feint to lure 


II9 


SEXTUS JULIUS FRONTINUS 


confragosa loca, quae ex industria captaverat. Cum 
sic quoque, suspecta calliditate recedentium, ordi- 
nata sequeretur phalanx, equites a sinistro cornu 
praeter oram phalangis iussit transcurrere citatis 
equis, tectos, ut objectis armis ipso impetu praefrin- 
gerent hostium spicula. Quogeneretelorumexarmati 
Macedones solverunt aciem et terga verterunt. 

21. Pyrrhus pro Tarentinis apud Asculum, secun- 
dum Homericum versum, quo pessimi in medium 
recipiuntur, dextro cornu Samnites Epirotasque, 
sinistro Bruttios atque Lucanos cum Sallentinis, in 
media acie Tarentinos conlocavit, equitatum et 
elephantos in subsidiis esse iussit. 

Contra consules, aptissime divisis in cornua equi- 
tibus, legiones in prima acie et in subsidiis con- 
locaverunt et his immiscuerunt auxilia. XL milia 
utrimque fuisse constat. Pyrrhi dimidia pars exer- 
citus amissa, apud Romanos V milia desiderata sunt. 

22. Cn. Pompeius adversus C. Caesarem Palae- 
pharsali triplicem instruxit aciem, quarum singulae 
denos ordines in latitudinem habuerunt. Legiones 
secundum virtutem cuiusque firmissimas in cornibus 
et in medio conlocavit, spatia his interposita tironi- 
bus supplevit. Dextro latere DC equites propter 
flumen Enipea, qui et alveo suo et alluvie regionem 
impedierat, reliquum equitatum in sinistro cornu 


1168 B.c. Battle of Pydna. Cf. Livy xliv. 41; Plut. 


Aem. 20. 

2 Iliad iv. 299 seems to have become proverbial; cf. 
Ammian. Marc. XXIV. vi. 9. 

3 979 B.c. Cf. Plut. Pyrrh. 21. 

* A town in Thessaly near Pharsalus, 


129 


STRATAGEMS, II. in. 20-22 


the enemy after him on to rough ground, which he 
had selected with this in view. When even then 
the enemy, suspecting his ruse in retiring, followed 
in good order, he commanded the cavalry on the 
left wing to ride at full speed past the front of the 
phalanx, covering themselves with their shields, in 
order that the points of the enemy's spears might 
be broken by the shock of their encounter with the 
shields. When the Macedonians were deprived of 
their spears, they broke and fled.! 

Pyrrhus, when fighting in defence of the Taren- 
tines near Asculum, following the Homeric verse,? 
according to which the poorest troops are placed in 
the centre, stationed Samnites and Epirotes on the 
right flank, Bruttians, Lucanians, and Sallentines on 
the left, with the Tarentines in the centre, ordering 
the cavalry and elephants to be held as reserves. 

The consuls, on the other hand, very judiciously 
distributed their cavalry on the wings, posting 
legionary soldiers in the first line and in reserve, . 
with auxiliary troops scattered among them. We 
are informed that there were forty thousand men 
on each side. Half of Pyrrhus’s army was lost; on 
the Roman side only five thousand. 

In the battle against Caesar at Old Pharsalus,4 
Gnaeus Pompey drew up three lines of battle, each 
one ten men deep, stationing on the wings and in the 
centre the legions upon whose prowess he could most 
safely rely, and filling the spaces between these 
with raw recruits. On the right flank he placed 
six hundred horsemen, along the Enipeus River, 
which with its channel and deposits had made the 
locality impassable; the rest of the cavalry he 
stationed on the left, together with the auxiliary 


121 


SEXTUS JULIUS FRONTINUS 


cum auxiliis omnibus locavit, ut inde Iulianum 
exercitum circumiret. 

Adversus hanc ordinationem C. Caesar et ipse 
triplici acie dispositis in fronte legionibus sinistrum 
latus, ne circumiri posset, admovit paludibus. In 
dextro cornu equitem posuit, cui velocissimos miscuit 
peditum, ad morem equestris pugnae exercitatos. 
Sex deinde cohortes in subsidio retinuit ad res subi- 
tas et dextro latere conversas in obliquum, unde 
equitatum hostium exspectabat, conlocavit. Nec ulla 
res eo die plus ad victoriam Caesari contulit; effu- 
sum namque Pompei equitatum inopinato excursu 
averterunt caedendumque tradiderunt. 

23. Imperator Caesar Augustus Germanicus, cum 
subinde Chatti equestre proelium in silvas refugi- 
endo deducerent, iussit suos equites, simulatque ad 
impedita ventum esset, equis desilire pedestrique 
pugna confligere; quo genere consecutus est, ne 
quis iam locus victoriam eius moraretur. 

24. C. Duellius, cum videret graves suas naves 
mobilitate Punicae classis eludi inritamque virtutem 
militum fieri, excogitavit manus ferreas. Quae ubi 
hostilem apprenderant navem, superiecto ponte trans- 
grediebatur Romanus et in ipsorum ratibus comminus 
eos trucidabat. 


1 4e, in fighting in conjunction with cavalry—doubtless 
after the method detailed in Caesar's Gallic War, i. 48. 

2 48 B.C. Cf. Caes. D.C. iii. 89, 93, 94; Plut. Caes. 44, 
Pomp. 69. * Domitian. 

483 A.D. Cf. Suet. Domit. 6. 


122 


STRATAGEMS, II. ri. 22-24 


troops, that from this quarter he might envelop the 
troops of Caesar. 

Against these dispositions, Gaius Caesar also drew 
up a triple line, placing his legions in front and 
resting his left flank on marshes in order to avoid 
envelopment. On the right he placed his cavalry, 
among whom he distributed the fleetest of his foot- 
soldiers, men trained in cavalry fighting.! Then he 
held in reserve six cohorts for emergencies, placing 
them obliquely on the right, from which quarter he 
was expecting an attack of the enemy's cavalry. 
No circumstance contributed more than this to 
Caesar's victory on that day; for as soon as Pompey's 
cavalry poured forth, these cohorts routed it by an 
unexpected onset, and delivered. it up to the rest of 
the troops for slaughter.? 

The Emperor Caesar Augustus Germanicus,? when 
the Chatti, by fleeing into the forests, again and 
again interfered with the course of a cavalry engage- 
ment, commanded his men, as soon as they should 
reach the enemy's baggage-train, to dismount and 
fight on foot. By this means he made sure that 
his success should not be blocked by any difficulties 
of terrain. 

When Gaius Duellius saw that his own heavy 
ships were eluded by the mobile fleet of the Cartha- 
ginians and that the valour of his soldiers was thus 
brought to naught, he devised a kind of grappling- 
hook. When this caught hold of an enemy ship, 
the Romans, laying gangways over the bulwarks, 
went on board and slew the enemy in hand-to-hand 
combat on their own vessels.5 


5 260 B.c. Cf. Flor. rr. ii. 8-9 ; Polyb. i. 22. 
123 


SEXTUS JULIUS FRONTINUS 


III. De Acre Hostium TunBANDA 


l. Papirius Cursor filius consul, cum aequo Marte 
adversus obstinatos Samnites concurreret, ignoran- 
tibus suis praecepit Spurio Nautio, ut pauci alares 
et agasones mulis insidentes ramosque per terram 
trahentes a colle transverso magno tumultu de- 
currerent. Quibus prospectis proclamavit victorem 
adesse collegam, occuparent ipsi praesentis proelii 
gloriam. Quo facto et Romani fiducia concitati pro- 
ruere et hostes pulvere perculsi terga verterunt. 

2. Fabius Rullus Maximus quarto consulatu in 
Samnio, omni modo frustra conatus aciem hostium 
perrumpere, novissime hastatos subduxit ordinibus 
et cum Scipione legato suo circummisit iussitque 
collem capere, ex quo decurri poterat in hostium 
terga. Quod ubi factum est, Romanis crevit animus 
et Samnites perterriti fugam molientes caesi sunt. 

3. Minucius Rufus imperator, cum a Scordiscis 
Dacisque premeretur, quibus eimpar erat numero, 
praemisit fratrem et paucos una equites cum aenea- 
toribus praecepitque, ut, cum vidisset contractum 
proelium, subitus ex diverso se ostenderet iube- 
retque concinere aeneatores ; resonantibus montium 


1 Of the dictator. 2 Spurius Carvilius, 
3 293 p.c. Cf. Livy x. 40-41. 
* First line troops. 


5 297 p.c. Cf. Livy x. 14. 
124 


STRATAGEMS, II. iv. 1-3 


IV. On Creatina Panic IN THE ENEMY's RANKS 


WutN Papirius Cursor, the son,! in his consulship 
failed to win any advantage in his battle against the 
stubbornly resisting Samnites, he gave no intimation 
of his purpose to his men, but commanded Spurius 
Nautius to arrange to have a few auxiliary horsemen 
and grooms, mounted on mules and trailing branches 
over the ground, race down in great commotion from 
a hill running at an angle with the field. As soon as 
these came in sight, he proclaimed that his colleague ? 
was at hand, crowned with victory, and urged his 
men to secure for themselves the glory of the present 
battle before he should arrive. At this the Romans 
rushed forward, kindling with confidence, while the 
enemy, disheartened at the sight of the dust, turned 
and fled.? 

Fabius Rullus Maximus, when in Samnium in his 
fourth consulship, having vainly essayed in every 
way to break through the line of the enemy, finally 
withdrew the hastatt4 from the ranks and sent them 
round with his lieutenant Scipio, under instructions 
to seize a hill from which they could rush down upon 
the rear of the enemy. When this had been done, 
the courage of the Romans rose, and the Samnites, 
fleeing in terror, were cut to pieces.5 

The general Minucius Rufus, hard pressed by the 
Scordiscans and Dacians, for whom he was no match 
in numbers, sent his brother and a small squadron 
of cavalry on ahead, along with a detachment of 
trumpeters, directing him, as soon as he should see 
the battle begin, to show himself suddenly from the 
opposite quarter and to order the trumpeters to blow 
their horns. Then, when the hill-tops re-echoed with 


I25 


SEXTUS JULIUS FRONTINUS 


iugis species ingentis multitudinis offusa est hostibus, 
qua perterriti dedere terga. 

4. Acilius Glabrio consul adversus Antiochi regis 
aciem, quam is in Achaia pro angustiis Thermopy- 
larum direxerat, iniquitatibus loci non inritus tantum, 
sed cum iactura quoque repulsus esset, nisi circum- 
missus ab eo Porcius Cato, qui tum, iam consularis, 
tribunus militum a populo factus in exercitu erat, 
deiectis iugis Callidromi montis Aetolis, qui prae- 
sidio ea tenebant, super imminentem castris regiis 
collem a tergo subitus apparuisset. Quo facto per- 
turbatis Antiochi copiis utrimque inrupere Romani 
et fusis fugatisque castra ceperunt. 

5. C. Sulpicius Peticus consul contra Gallos dimi- 
caturus iussit muliones clam in montes proximos 
cum mulis abire et indidem conserto iam proelio 
velut equis insidentes ostentare se pugnantibus ; 
quare Galli existimantes adventare auxilia Romanis 
cessere iam paene victores. 

6. Marius circa Aquas Sextias, cum in animo 
haberet postera die depugnare adversus Teutonos, 
Marcellum eum parva manu equitum peditumque 
nocte post terga hostium misit et ad implendam. 
multitudinis speciem agasones lixasque armatos simul 
ire iussit iumentorumque magnam partem instra- 


1 109 s.c. 

2191 po. Cf. Livy xxxvi. 14-19; Plut. Cat. Maj. 12ff. ; 
Appian Syr. 17 tf. 

3 358 p.c. Peticus was dictator in this year, having been 
consul in 364 and 361. Cf. Livy vii. 14-15. Appian Gall. 1 
gives a different stratagem. 


126 


STRATAGEMS, II. iv. 3-6 


the sound, the impression of a huge multitude was 
borne in upon the enemy, who fled in terror.! 

The consul Acilius Glabrio, when confronted by 
the army of King Antiochus, which the latter had 
drawn up in front of the Pass of Thermopylae in 
Greece, was not only hampered by the difficulties 
of terrain, but would have been repulsed with loss 
besides, had not Porcius Cato prevented this. Cato, 
although an ex-consul, was in the army as a tribune 
of the soldiers, elected to this office by the people. 
[Having been sent by Glabrio to make a détour], he 
dislodged the Aetolians, who were guarding the 
crest of Mt. Callidromus, and then suddenly appeared 
from the rear on the summit of a hill commanding 
the camp of the king. The forces of Antiochus 
were thus thrown into panic, whereupon the Romans 
attacked them from front and rear, repulsed and 
scattered the enemy, and captured their camp.? 

The consul Gaius Sulpicius Peticus, when about to 
fight against the Gauls, ordered certain muleteers 
secretly to withdraw with their mules to the hills 
near by, and then, after the engagement began, to 
exhibit themselves repeatedly to the combatants, as 
though mounted on horses. The Gauls, therefore, 
imagining that reinforcements were coming, fell 
back before the Romans, though already almost 
victorious.? 

At Aquae Sextiae, Marius, purposing to fight a 
decisive battle with the Teutons on the morrow, 
sent Marcellus by night with a small detachment 
of horse and foot to the rear of the enemy, and, to 
complete the illusion of a large force, ordered armed 
grooms and camp-followers to go along with them, 
and also a large part of the pack-animals, wearing 


127 


SEXTUS JULIUS FRONTINUS 


torum centunculis, ut per hoc facies equitatus obi- 
ceretur, praecepitque, ut, cum animadvertissent 
committi proelium, ipsi in terga hostium descende- 
rent. Qui apparatus tantum terroris intulit, ut 
asperrimi hostes in fugam versi sint. 

7. Licinius Crassus fugitivorum bello apud Cama- 
latrum educturus militem adversus Castum et Canni- 
cum duces Gallorum XII cohortes cum C. Pomptinio 
et Q. Marcio Rufo legatis post montem circummisit ; 
quae cum commisso, iam proelio a tergo clamore 
sublato decucurrissent, ita fuderunt hostes, ut ubique 
fuga, nusquam pugna capesseretur. 

8. M. Marcellus, cum vereretur, ne paucitatem 
militum eius clamor detegeret, simul lixas calo- 
nesque et omnis generis sequellas conclamare iussit 
atque hostem magni exercitus specie exterruit. 

9. Valerius Laevinus adversus Pyrrhum, occiso 
quodam gregali tenens gladium cruentum, utrique 
exercitui persuasit Pyrrhum interemptum ; quam- 
obrem hostes destitutos se ducis morte credentes, 
consternati a mendacio in castra se pavidi receperunt. 

10. Iugurtha in Numidia adversus C. Marium, 
cum Latinae quoque linguae usum ei conversatio 
pristina castrorum dedisset, in primam aciem procu- 
currit et occisum a se C. Marium clare praedicavit 
atque ita multos nostrorum avertit. 


1102 Bc. Cf. Plut. Mar. 20; Polyaen. viii. x. 2. 

2 7] B.C. 3 216 &.c. Cf. Livy xxi. xvi. 13-14. 
4 980 p.c. Cf. Plut. Pyrrh. 17. 

5 107 Bo. Cf. Sall. Jug. ci. 6-8. 


128 


STRATAGEMS, II. iv. 6-10 


saddle-cloths, in order by this means to present the 
appearance of cavalry. He commanded these men 
to fall upon the enemy from the rear, as soon as 
` they should notice that the engagement had begun. 
This scheme struck such terror into the enemy that 
despite their great ferocity they turned and fled.! 

Licinius Crassus in the Slave War, when about to 
lead forth his troops at Camalatrum against Castus 
and Cannicus, the leaders of the Gauls, sent twelve 
cohorts around behind the mountain with Gaius 
Pomptinius and Quintus Marcius Rufus, his lieu- 
tenants. When the engagement began, these troops, 
raising a shout, poured down from the mountain in 
the rear, and so routed the enemy that they fled in 
all directions with no attempt at battle.? 

Marcus Marcellus on one occasion, fearing that a 
feeble battle-cry would reveal the small number of 
his forces, commanded that sutlers, servants, and 
camp-followers of every sort should join in the cry. 
He thus threw the enemy into panic by giving the 
appearance of having a large army.? 

Valerius Laevinus, in the battle against Pyrrhus, 
killed a common soldier, and, holding up his dripping 
sword, made both armies believe that Pyrrhus had 
been slain. The enemy, therefore, panic-stricken 
at the falsehood, and thinking that they had been 
rendered helpless by the death of their commander, 
betook themselves in terror back to camp.* 

In his struggle against Gaius Marius in Numidia, 
Jugurtha, having acquired facility in the use of the 
Latin language as a result of his early association 
with Roman camps, ran forward to the front line and 
shouted that he had slain Gaius Marius, thus causing 
many of our men to flee.5 


129 
VOL. I. K 


SEXTUS JULIUS FRONTINUS 


11. Myronides Atheniensis dubio proelio adversus 
Thebanos rem gerens repente in dextrum suorum 
cornu prosiluit et exclamavit sinistro iam se vicisse ; 
qua re et suis alacritate et hostibus iniecto metu vicit. 

12. Croesus praevalido hostium equitatui came- 
lorum gregem opposuit, quorum novitate et odore 
consternati equi non solum insidentes praecipitave- 
runt, sed peditum quoque suorum ordines protriverunt 
vincendosque hosti praebuerunt. 

13. Pyrrhus Epirotarum rex pro Tarentinis adver- 
sus Romanos eodem modo elephantis ad perturbandam 
aciem usus est. 

14. Poeni quoque adversus Romanos frequenter 
idem fecerunt.! 

15. Volscorum castra cum prope a virgultis silva- 
que posita essent, Camillus ea omnia, quae conceptum 
ignem usque in vallum perferre poterant, incendit et 
sic adversarios exuit castris.? 

16. P. Crassus bello sociali eodem modo prope cum 
copiis omnibus interceptus est.? 

l7. Hispani contra Hamilcarem boves vehiculis 
adiunctos in prima fronte constituerunt vehiculaque 
tedae et sebi et sulphuris plena, signo pugnae dato, 
incenderunt; actis deinde in hostem bubus conster- 
natam aciem perruperunt. 


t No. 14 is regarded as an interpolation. 

2 Identical with 1v. vii. 40 and regarded as an interpolation 
in this place. 

3 Identical with 1v. vii. 41 and regarded as an interpolation 
in this place. ° 


1 457 B.c. Cf. Polyaen. t. xxxv. 1. 

2 546 B.c. Cf. Herod. i. 80; Polyaen. vir. vi. 6; they 
attribute this stratagem to Cyrus. 

3 280 &.c. Cf. Flor. 1. xviii. 8; Plut. Pyrrh. 17. 


I 3o 


STRATAGEMS II. iv. 11-17 


Myronides, the Athenian, in an indecisive battle 
which he was waging against the Thebans, suddenly 
darted forward to the right flank of his own troops 
and shouted that he had already won victory on the 
left. Thus, by inspiring courage in his own men 
and fear in the enemy, he gained the day.! 

Against overwhelming forces of the enemy's cavalry 
Croesus once opposed a troop of camels. At the 
strange appearance and smell of these beasts, the 
horses were thrown into panic, and not merely threw 
their riders, but also trampled the ranks of their own 
infantry under foot, thus delivering them into the 
hands of the enemy to defeat. 

Pyrrhus, king of the Epirotes, fighting on behalf 
of the Tarentines against the Romans, employed 
elephants in the same way, in order to throw the 
Roman army into confusion.? 

The Carthaginians also often did the same thing 
in their battles against the Romans.‘ 

The Volscians having on one occasion pitched 
their camp near some brush and woods, Camillus set 
fire to everything which could carry the conflagra- 
tion up to their entrenchments, and thus deprived 
his adversaries of their camp. 

In the same way, Publius Crassus in the Social War 
narrowly escaped being cut off with all his forces. 

The Spaniards, when fighting against Hamilcar, 
hitched steers to carts and placed them in the font line. 
These carts they filled with pitch, tallow, and sulphur, 
and when the signal for battle was given, set them 
afire. Then, driving the steers against the enemy, 
they threw the line into panic and broke through.® 


* Of. r1. v. 4. 5 929 p.c. Cf. Appian Hisp. 5. 
131 
K 2 


SEXTUS JULIUS FRONTINUS 


18. Falisci et Tarquinienses, compluribus suorum 
in habitum sacerdotum subornatis, faces et angues 
furiali habitu praeferentibus, aciem Romanorum 
turbaverunt. 

19. Idem Veientes et Fidenates facibus adreptis 
fecerunt.! 

20. Atheas rex Scytharum, cum adversus amplio- 
rem Triballorum exercitum confligeret, iussit a feminis 
puerisque et omni imbelli turba greges asinorum ac 
boum ad postremam hostium aciem admoveri et 
erectas hastas praeferri; famam deinde diffudit, tam- 
quam auxilia sibi ab ulterioribus Scythis adventarent. 
Qua adseveratione avertit hostem. 


V. Dk Insip1s 


]. Romutus, per latebras copiarum parte disposita, 
cum ad Fidenas accessisset, simulata fuga temere 
hostes insecutos eo perduxit, ubi occultos milites 
habebat, qui undique adorti effusos et incautos 
ceciderunt. 

2. Q. Fabius Maximus consul, auxilio Sutrinis mis- 
sus adversus Etruscos, omnes hostium copias in se 
convertit; deinde simulato timore in superiora loca 
velut fugiens recessit effuseque subeuntes adgressus 
non acie tantum superavit, sed etiam castris exuit. 


1 No. 19 is probably an interpolation. 


1 356 B.c. Cf. Livy vit. xvii. 3. 

2 426 p.c. Cf. Livy iv. 33; Flor. 1. xii. 7. 

3 Cf. Polyaen. vri. xliv. 1. 

* Cf. Livy i. 14; Polyaen. viir. iii. 2. 

5 310 B.c. Q. Fabius Maximus Rullianus. Cf. Livy ix. 35. 


I32 


STRATAGEMS, II. iv. 18-v. 2 


The Faliscans and Tarquinians disguised a number 
of their men as priests, and had them hold torches 
and snakes in front of them, like Furies. Thus they 
threw the army of the Romans into panic.! 

On one occasion the men of Veii and Fidenae 
snatched up torches and did the same thing.? 

When Atheas, king of the Scythians, was contend- 
ing against the more numerous tribe of the Triballi, 
he commanded that herds of asses and cattle should 
be brought up in the rear of the enemy's forces by 
women, children, and all the non-combatant popula- 
tion, and that spears, held aloft, should be carried in 
front of these. Then he spread abroad the rumour 
that reinforcements were coming to him from the 
more distant Scythian tribes. By this declaration 
he forced the enemy to withdraw.? 


V. ON AMBUSHES 


RowuLus, when he had drawn near to Fidenae, 
distributed a portion of his troops in ambush, and 
pretended to flee. When the enemy recklessly 
followed, he led them on to the point where he was 
holding his men in hiding, whereupon the latter, 
attacking from all sides, and taking the enemy off 
their guard, cut them to pieces in their onward rush.* 

The consul Quintus Fabius Maximus, having been 
sent to aid the Sutrians against the Etruscans, 
caused the full brunt of the enemy's attack to fall 
upon himself. ‘Then, feigning fear, he retired to 
higher ground, as though in retreat, and when the 
enemy rushed upon him pell-mell he attacked, and 
not merely defeated them in battle but captured 
their camp. 


133 


SEXTUS JULIUS FRONTINUS 


3. Sempronius Gracchus adversus Celtiberos metu 
simulato continuit exercitum ; emissa deinde arma- 
tura levi, quae hostem lacesseret ac statim pedem 
referret, evocavit hostes. Deinde inordinatos adgressus 
usque eo cecidit, ut etiam castra caperet. 

4. L. Metellus consul in Sicilia bellum adversus 
Hasdrubalem gerens, ob ingentem eius exercitum et 
CXXX elephantos intentior, simulata diffidentia intra 
Panormum copias tenuit fossamque ingentis magni- 
tudinis ante se duxit. Conspecto deinde exercitu 
Hasdrubalis, qui in prima acie elephantos habebat, 
praecepit hastatis, tela in beluas iacerent protinusque 
se intra munimenta reciperent. Ea ludificatione 
rectores elephantorum concitati in ipsam fossam 
elephantos egerunt. Quo ut primum inlati sunt, 
partim multitudine telorum confecti, partim retro 
in suos acti totam aciem turbaverunt. Tunc Me- 
tellus, hanc opperiens occasionem, cum toto exercitu 
erupit et adgressus a latere Poenos cecidit ipsisque 
elephantis potitus est. 

5. Thamyris Scytharum regina Cyrum Persarum 
ducem aequo Marte certantem simulato metu elicuit 
ad notas militi suo angustias atque ibi, repente 
converso agmine, natura loci adiuta devicit, 

6. Aegyptii conflicturi acie in eis campis, quibus 


1179 B.c. Cf. Livy xl. 48. 2 The modern Palermo. 
3 251 p.c. Cf. Polyb. i. 40. 


4529 B.C. Cf. Justin, i. 8; Herod. i. 204 ff. 
134 


STRATAGEMS, II. v. 3-6 


Sempronius Gracchus, when waging war against 
the Celtiberians, feigned fear and kept his army in 
camp. Then, by sending out light-armed troops to 
harass the enemy and retreat forthwith, he caused: 
the enemy to come out; whereupon he attacked 
them before they could form, and crushed them so 
completely that he also captured their camp.! 

When the consul Lucius Metellus was waging war 
in Sicily against Hasdrubal—and with all the more 
alertness because of Hasdrubal's immense army and 
his one hundred and thirty elephants—he withdrew . 
his troops, under pretence of fear, inside Panormus? 
and constructed in front a trench of huge pro- 
portions. Then, observing Hasdrubal's army, with 
the elephants in the front rank, he ordered the 
hastati to hurl their javelins at the beasts and 
straightway to retire within their defences. The 
drivers of the elephants, enraged at such derisive 
treatment, drove the elephants straight towards the 
trench. As soon as the beasts were brought up to 
this, part were dispatched by a shower of darts, part 
were driven back to their own side, and threw the 
entire host into confusion. Then Metellus, who was 
biding his time, burst forth with his whole force, 
attacked the Carthaginians on the flank, and cut 
them to pieces. Besides this, he captured the 
elephants themselves.? 

When Thamyris, queen of the Scythians, and 
Cyrus, king of the Persians, became engaged in an 
indecisive combat, the queen, feigning fear, lured 
Cyrus into a defile well-known to her own troops, 
and there, suddenly facing about, and aided by the 
nature of the locality, won a complete victory.* 

The Egyptians, when about to engage in battle on 


135 


SEXTUS JULIUS FRONTINUS 


iunctae paludes erant, alga eas contexerunt com- 
missoque proelio fugam simulantes in insidias hostes 
evocaverunt, qui rapidius per ignota invecti loca limo 
inhaeserunt circumventique sunt. 

7. Viriathus, ex latrone dux Celtiberorum, cedere 

se Romanis equitibus simulans usque ad locum vora- 
ginosum et praealtum eos perduxit et, cum ipse per 
solidos ac notos sibi transitus evaderet, Romanos 
ignaros locorum immersosque limo cecidit. 
. 8. Fulvius imperator Cimbrico bello conlatis cum 
hoste castris equites suos iussit succedere ad munitio- 
nes eorum lacessitisque barbaris simulata fuga regredi. 
Hoc cum per aliquot dies fecisset, avide insequenti- 
bus Cimbris, animadvertit castra eorum solita nudari. 
Itaque per partem exercitus custodita consuetudine 
ipse cum expeditis post castra hostium consedit 
occultus effusisque eis ex more repente adortus et 
desertum proruit vallum et castra cepit. 

9. Cn. Fulvius, cum in finibus nostris exercitus 
Faliscorum longe nostro maior castra posuisset, per 
suos milites quaedam procul a castris aedificia suc- 
cendit, ut Falisci suos id fecisse credentes spe praedae 
diffunderentur. 

10. Alexander Epirotes adversus Illyrios conlocata 
in insidiis manu quosdam ex suis habitu Illyriorum 


1147-139 r.c. Inii. xiii. 4, Viriathus is dux Lusitanorwum. 

2 Livy xl. 30-32 says that Q. Fulvius Flaccus used this 
statagem with the Celtiberians in 181 s.c. There is no 
account of Fulvius's warring with the Cimbrians. 


136 


STRATAGEMS, II. v. 6-10 


a plain near a marsh, covered the marsh with sea- 
weed, and then, when the battle began, feigning 
flight, drew the enemy into a trap; for the latter, 
while advancing too swiftly over the unfamiliar 
ground, were caught in the mire and surrounded. 

Viriathus, who from being a bandit became leader 
of the Celtiberians, on one occasion, while pretend- 
ing to give way before the Roman cavalry, led them 
on to a place full of deep holes. There, while he 
himself made his way out by familiar paths that 
afforded good footing, the Romans, ignorant of the 
locality, sank in the mire and were slain.! 

Fulvius, commander in the Cimbrian war, having 
pitched his camp near the enemy, ordered his 
cavalry to approach the fortifications of the bar- 
barians and to withdraw in pretended flight, after 
making an attack. When he had done this for 
several days, with the Cimbrians in hot pursuit, he 
noticed that their camp was regularly left exposed. 
Accordingly, maintaining his usual practice with part 
of his force, he himself, with light-armed troops, 
secretly took a position behind the camp of the 
enemy, and as they poured forth according to their 
custom, he suddenly attacked and demolished the 
unguarded rampart and captured their camp.? 

Gnaeus Fulvius, when a force of Faliscans far 
superior to ours had encamped on our territory, had 
his soldiers set fire to certain buildings at a distance 
from the camp, in order that the Faliscans, thinking 
their own men had done this, might scatter in hope 
of plunder. 

Alexander, the Epirote, when waging war against 
the Illyrians, first placed a force in ambush, and then 
dressed up some of his own men in Illyrian garb, 


137 


SEXTUS JULIUS FRONTINUS 


instruxit et iussit vastare suam, id est Epiroticam 
regionem, Quod cum Illyrii viderent fieri, ipsi 
passim praedari coeperunt eo securius, quod prae- 
cedentes veluti pro exploratoribus habebant ; a quibus 
ex industria in loca iniqua deducti caesi fugatique 
sunt. , 

11. Leptines quoque Syracusanus adversus Cartha- 
ginienses vastari suos agros et incendi villas castella- 
que quaedam imperavit. Carthaginienses, a suis id 
fieri rati, et ipsi tamquam in adiutorium exierunt 
exceptique ab insidiatoribus fusi sunt. 

12. Maharbal, missus a Carthaginiensibus adversus 
Afros rebellantes, cum sciret gentem avidam esse 
vini, magnum eius modum mandragora permiscuit, 
cuius inter venenum ac soporem media vis est. Tum 
proelio levi commisso ex industria cessit. Nocte 
deinde intempesta relictis intra castra quibusdam 
sarcinis et omni vino infecto fugam simulavit; 
cumque barbari occupatis castris in gaudium effusi 
avide medicatum merum hausissent et in modum 
defunctorum strati iacerent, reversus aut cepit eos 
aut trucidavit. 

13. Hannibal, cum sciret sua et Romanorum 
castra in eis locis esse, quae lignis deficiebantur, ex 
industria in regione deserta plurimos armentorum 
greges intra vallum reliquit, qua velut praeda 
Romani potiti in summis lignationis angustiis insalu- 


1 397-396 s.c. Cf. Polyaen. v. viii. 1. 

2 A Carthaginian officer under Hannibal. 

3 Polyaen. v. x. l attributes this stratagem to Himilco, 
396 B.c. 


138 


STRATAGEMS, II. v. 10-13:. 


ordering them to lay waste his own, that is to say, 
Epirote territory. When the Illyrians saw that this 
was being done, they themselves began to pillage 
right and left—the more confidently since they 
thought that those who led the way were scouts. 
But when they had been designedly brought by the 
latter into a disadvantageous position, they were 
routed and killed. 

Leptines, the Syracusan, also, when waging war 
against the Carthaginians, ordered his own lands to 
be laid waste and certain farm-houses and forts to - 
be set on fire. The Carthaginians, thinking this 
was done by their own men, went out themselves 
also to help; whereupon they were set upon by men 
lying in wait, and were put to rout.! 

Maharbal,? sent by the Carthaginians against the 
rebellious Africans, knowing that the tribe was 
passionately fond of wine, mixed a large quantity ot 
wine with mandragora, which in potency is something 
between a poison and a soporific. Then after an 
insignificant skirmish he deliberately withdrew. At 
dead of night, leaving in the camp some of his 
baggage and all the drugged wine, he feigned flight. 
When the barbarians captured the camp and in a 
frenzy of delight greedily drank the drugged wine, 
Maharbal returned, and either took them prisoners 
or slaughtered them while they lay stretched out 
as if dead.? 

Hannibal, on one occasion, aware that both his 
own camp and that of the Romans were in places 
deficient in wood, deliberately abandoned the 
district, leaving many herds of cattle within his 
camp. The Romans, securing possession of these as 
booty, gorged themselves with flesh, which, owing to 


139 


SEXTUS JULIUS FRONTINUS 


bribus se cibis oneraverunt. Hannibal, reducto nocte 
exercitu, securos eos et semicruda graves carne 
maiorem in modum vexavit. 

14. Ti. Gracchus in Hispania, certior factus hostem 
inopem commercio laborare, instructissima castra 
omnibus esculentis deseruit; quae adeptum hostem 
et repertis intemperanter repletum gravemque re- 
ducto exercitu subito oppressit. 

15. Chii, qui adversus Erythraeos bellum gere- 
bant, speculatorem eorum in loco edito deprehen- 
sum occiderunt et vestem eius suo militi dederunt, 
qui ex eodem iugo Erythraeos signo dato in insidias 
evocavit. 

16. Arabes, cum esset nota consuetudo eorum, 
qua de adventu hostium interdiu fumo, nocte igne 
significare instituerant, ut sine intermissione ea fie- 
rent, praeceperunt, adventantibus autem adversariis 
intermitterentur ; qui cum cessantibus luminibus ex- 
istimarent ignorari adventum suum, avidius ingressi 
oppressique sunt. 

17. Alexander Macedo, cum hostis in saltu editiore 
castra communisset, subducta parte copiarum prae- 
cepit his quos relinquebat, ut ex more ignes exci- 
tarent speciemque praeberent totius exercitus; ipse 
per avias regiones circumducta manu hostem superiore 
adgressus loco depulit. 


1 179-178 B.C. 
2 327 p.c. Polyaen. Iv. iii. 29 and Curt. vIr. xi. 1 tell of 
the employment of a different stratagem. 


140 


STRATAGEMS, II. v. 13-17 


the scarcity of firewood, was raw and indigestible. 
Hannibal, returning by night with his army, finding 
them off their guard and gorged with raw meat, 
inflicted great loss upon them. 

Tiberius Gracchus, when in Spain, upon learning 
that the enemy were suffering from lack of pro- 
visions, provided his camp with an elaborate supply 
of eatables of all kinds and then abandoned it. 
When the enemy had got possession of the camp 
and had gorged themselves to repletion with the 
food they found, Gracchus brought back his army 
and suddenly crushed them.! 

The Chians, when waging war against the Ery- 
threans, caught an Erythrean spy on a lofty 
eminence and put him to death. They then gave 
his clothes to one of their own soldiers, who, by 
giving a signal from the same eminence, lured the 
Erythreans into an ambush. 

The Arabians, since their custom of giving notice 
of the arrival of an enemy by means of smoke by 
day, and by fire at night, was well known, issued 
orders on one occasion that these practices should 
continue without interruption until the enemy 
actually approached, when they should be discon- 
tinued. The enemy, imagining from the absence or 
the fires that their approach was unknown, advanced 
too eagerly and were overwhelmed. 

Alexander of Macedon, when the enemy had 
fortified their camp on a lofty wooded eminence, 
withdrew a portion of his forces, and commanded 
those whom he left to kindle fires as usual, and thus 
to give the impression of the complete army. He 
himself, leading his forces around through un- 
travelled regions, attacked the enemy and dislodged 
them from their commanding position.? 


I4I 


SEXTUS JULIUS FRONTINUS 


18. Memnon Rhodius, cum equitatu praevaleret 
et hostem in collibus se continentem in campos 
vellet deducere, quosdam ex militibus suis sub specie 
perfugarum misit in hostium castra, qui adfirmarent 
exercitum Memnonis tam perniciosa seditione furere, 
ut subinde aliqua pars eius dilaberetur. Huic adfir- 
mationi ut fidem faceret, passim in conspectu hostium 
iussit parva castella muniri, velut in ea se recepturi 
essent qui dissidebant. Hac persuasione sollicitati, 
qui in montibus se continuerant, in plana descende- 
runt et, dum castella temptant, ab equitatu circum- 
venti sunt. 

19. Harrybas rex Molossorum, bello petitus a Bar- 
dyli Illyrio, maiorem aliquanto exercitum habente, 
amolitus! imbelles suorum in vicinam regionem 
Aetoliae famam sparsit, tamquam urbes ac res suas 
Aetolis concederet. Ipse cum his, qui arma ferre 
poterant, insidias in montibus et locis confragosis 
distribuit. Illyrii timentes, ne quae Molossorum 
erant ab Aetolis occuparentur, velut ad praedam 
festinantes neglectis ordinibus accelerare coeperunt ; 
quos dissipatos, nihil tale exspectantes, Harrybas ex 
insidiis fudit fugavitque. 

20. T. Labienus C. Caesaris legatus adversus Gallos 
ante adventum Germanorum, quos auxilio his venturos 
sciebat, confligere cupiens diffidentiam simulavit posi- 


1 molitus HP. corr. d. 


1 Polyaen. v. xliv. 2 has a slightly different version, 
142 


STRATAGEMS, II. v. 18-20 


Memnon, the Rhodian, being superior in cavalry, 
and wishing to draw down to the plains an enemy 
who clung to the hills, sent certain of his soldiers 
under the guise of deserters to the camp of the 
enemy, to say that the army of Memnon was inspired 
with such a serious spirit of mutiny that some portion 
of it was constantly deserting. To lend credit to 
this assertion, Memnon ordered small redoubts to 
be. fortified here and there in view of the enemy, 
as though the disaffected were about to retire to 
these. Inveigled by these representations, those 
who had been keeping themselves on the hills came 
down to level ground, and, as they attacked the 
redoubts, were surrounded by the cavalry.! 

When Harrybas, king of the Molossians, was 
attacked in war by Bardylis, the Illyrian, who com- 
manded a considerably larger army, he dispatched 
the non-combatant portion of his subjects to the 
neighbouring district of Aetolia, and spread the 
report that he was yielding up his towns and 
possessions to the Aetolians. He himself, with 
those who could bear arms, placed ambuscades here 
and there on the mountains and in other inaccessible 
places. The Illyrians, fearful lest the possessions 
of the Molossians should be seized by the Aetolians, 
began to race along in disorder, in their eagerness 
for plunder.. As soon as they became scattered, 
Harrybas, emerging from his concealment and taking 
them unawares, routed them and put them to 
flight. 

Titus Labienus, lieutenant of Gaius Caesar, eager 
to engage in battle with the Gauls before the arrival 
of the Germans, who, he knew, were coming to their 
aid, pretended discouragement, and, pitching his 


143 


SEXTUS JULIUS FRONTINUS 


tisque in diversa ripa castris profectionem edixit in 
posterum diem. Galli credentes eum fugere flumen, 
quod medium erat, instituerunt transmittere. Labi- 
enus circumacto exercitu inter ipsas superandi amnis 
difficultates eos cecidit. 

2]. Hannibal, cum explorasset neglegenter castra 
Fulvi Romani ducis munita, ipsum praeterea multa 
temere audere, prima luce, cum densiores nebulae 
praestarent obscuritatem, paucos equites munitionum 
nostrarum vigilibus ostendit; quo Fulvius repente 
movit exercitum. Hannibal per diversam partem 
castra eius occupavit et ita! in tergum Romanorum 
effusus octo milia fortissimorum militum cum ipso 
duce trucidavit. 

22. Idem Hannibal, cum inter Fabium dictatorem 
et Minucium magistrum equitum divisus esset exer- 
citus et Fabius occasionibus immineret, Minucius 
pugnandi cupiditate flagraret, castra in campo, qui 
medius inter hostes erat, posuit et, cum partem pedi- 
tum in confragosis rupibus celasset,ipse ad evocandum 
hostem misit, qui proximum tumulum occuparent. 
Ad quos opprimendos cum eduxisset copias Minucius, 
insidiatores ab Hannibale dispositi subito consur- 
rexerunt et delessent Minuci exercitum, nisi Fabius 
periclitantibus subvenisset. 

23. Idem Hannibal, cum ad Trebiam in conspectu 
haberet Semproni Longi consulis castra, medio amne 


1 illa, Gund.; ita, most edd. 


1 53 p.c. Cf. Caes. B.G. vi. 7-8; Dio xl. 31. 

2 210 p.c. At Herdonia. Cf. Livy xxvii. 1; Appian 
Hann. 48. 

3217 B.C. Cf. Livy xxii. 28; Polyb. iii. 104-105. 


144 


STRATAGEMS, Il. v. 20-23 


camp across the stream, announced his departure 
for the following day. The Gauls, imagining that 
he was in flight, began to cross the intervening 
river. Labienus, facing about with his troops, cut 
the Gauls to pieces in the very midst of their 
difficulties of crossing.! 

Hannibal, on one occasion, learned that the camp 
of Fulvius, the Roman commander, was carelessly 
fortified and that Fulvius himself was taking many 
rash chances besides. Accordingly, at daybreak, 
when dense mists afforded cover, he permitted a 
few of his horsemen to show themselves to the 
sentries of our fortifications; whereupon Fulvius 
suddenly advanced. Meanwhile, Hannibal, at a 
different point, entered Fulvius's camp, and over- 
whelming the Roman rear, slew eight thousand of 
the bravest soldiers along with their commander 
himself.? 

Once, when the Roman army had been divided 
between the dictator Fabius and Minucius, master 
of the horse, and Fabius was watching for a favour- 
able opportunity, while Minucius was burning with 
eagerness for battle, the same Hannibal pitched his 
camp on the plain between the hostile armies, and 
having concealed a portion of his troops among rough 
rocks, sent others to seize a neighbouring hillock, as 
a challenge to the foe. When Minucius had led out 
his forces to crush these, the men placed here and 
there in ambush by Hannibal suddenly sprang up, 
and would have annihilated Minucius's army, had 
not Fabius come to help them in their distress.? 

When the same Hannibal was encamped in the 
depths of winter at the Trebia, with the camp of 
the consul, Sempronius Longus, in plain view and 


145 
VOL. I. I. 


SEXTUS JULIUS FRONTINUS 


interfluente, saevissima hieme Magonem et electos 
in insidiis posuit, Deinde Numidas equites ad 
eliciendam Semproni credulitatem adequitare vallo 
eius iussit, quibus praeceperat, ut ad primum nos- 
trorum incursum per nota refugerent vada. Hos 
consul et adortus temere et secutus ieiunum exer- 
citum in maximo frigore transitu fluminis rigefecit. 
Mox torpore et inedia adfectis Hannibal suum mi- 
litem opposuit, quem ad id ignibus oleoque et cibo 
foverat; nec defuit partibus Mago, quin terga 
hostium in hoc ordinatus caederet. 

24. Idem ad Trasumennum, cum arta quaedam 
via inter lacum et radices montis in campos patentes 
duceret, simulata fuga per angustias ad patentia 
evasit ibique castra posuit ac nocte dispositis mili- 
tibus et per collem, qui imminebat, et in lateribus 
angustiarum prima luce, nebula quoque adiutus, 
aciem direxit. Flaminius velut fugientem insequens, 
cum angustias esset ingressus, non ante providit 
insidias, quam simul a fronte, lateribus, tergo cir- 
cumfusus ad internecionem cum exercitu caederetur. 

25. Idem Hannibal adversus lunium dictatorem 
nocte intempesta DC equitibus imperavit, ut in plures 
turmas segregati per vices sine intermissione circa 
castra hostium se ostentarent. lta tota nocte Romanis 


1218 B.c. Cf. Livy xxi. 54ff; Polyb. iii. 71. 

? Generally considered to be the narrow passage between 
the lake and Monte Gualandro, near Borghetto. Livy’s 
description suits this locality ; that of Polybius does not. ` 

3 217 p.c. Cf. Livy xxii. 4; Polyb. iii. 83 ff. 

* M. Junius Pera. 


146 


STRATAGEMS, II. v. 23-25 


only the river flowing between, he placed Mago 
and picked men in ambush. Then he commanded 
Numidian cavalry to advance up to Sempronius's 
fortifications, in order to lure forth the simple-minded 
Roman. At the same time, he ordered these troops 
to retire by familiar fords at our first onset. By 
heedlessly attacking and pursuing the Numidians, the 
consul gave his troops a chill, as a result of fording 
the stream in the bitter cold and without breakfast. 
Then, when our men were suffering from numbness 
and hunger, Hannibal led against them his own 
troops, whom he had got in condition for that 
purpose by warm fires, food, and rubbing down 
with oil. Mago also did his part, and cut to pieces 
the rear of his enemy at the point where he had 
been posted for the purpose.! 

At Trasimenus, where a narrow way,? running 
between the lake and the base of the hills, led out 
to the open plain, the same Hannibal, feigning flight, 
made his way through the narrow road to the open 
districts and pitched his camp there. Then, posting 
soldiers by night at various points over the rising 
ground of the hill and at the ends of the defile, at 
daybreak, under cover of a fog, he marshalled his 
line of battle. Flaminius, pursuing the enemy, who 
seemed to be retreating, entered the defile and did 
not see the ambush until he was surrounded in front, 
flank, and rear, and was annihilated with his army.® 

The same Hannibal, when contending against the 
dictator Junius, ordered six hundred cavalrymen to 
break up into a number of squadrons, and at dead 
of night to appear in successive detachments with- 
out intermission around the camp of the enemy. 
Thus all night long the Romans were harassed and 


147 
L 2 


SEXTUS JULIUS FRONTINUS 


in vallo statione ac pluvia, quae forte continua fuerat, 
inquietatis confectisque, cum receptui signum mane 
Iunius dedisset, Hannibal suos requietos eduxit et 
castra eius invasit. 

26. Epaminondas Thebanus in eundem modum, 
cum Lacedaemonii ad Isthmon vallo ducto Pelo- 
ponneson tuerentur, paucorum opera levis armaturae 
tota nocte inquietavit hostem. Ac deinde prima 
luce revocatis suis, cum Lacedaemonii se recepissent, 
subito universum exercitum, quem quietum habuerat, 
admovit et per ipsa munimenta destituta propugnato- 
ribus inrupit. 

2T. Hannibal directa acie ad Cannas DC equites 
Numidas transfugere iussit, qui ad fidem faciendam 
gladios et scuta nostris tradiderunt et in ultimum 
agmen recepti, ubi primum concurri coepit, strictis 
minoribus quos occultaverant gladiis, scutis iacentium 
adsumptis, Romanorum aciem ceciderunt. 

28. Iapydes P. Licinio proconsuli paganos quoque 
sub specie deditionis obtulerunt, qui recepti et in 
postrema acie conlocati terga Romanorum ceciderunt. 

29. Scipio Africanus, cum adversa haberet bina 
hostium castra, Syphacis et Carthaginiensium, statuit 
Syphacis, ubi multa incendii alimenta erant, adgredi 
nocte ignemque inicere, ut ea re Numidas quidem 


! 216 B.c. At Capua. Cf. Polyaen. vi. xxxviii. 6; Zonar. 
ix. 3. 
2 369 B.c. Cf. Polyaen. rr. iii. 9. 

3 216 p.c. Cf. Livy xxii. 48; Val. Max. vir. iv. eat. 2; 
Appian Hany. 20ff. Livy and Appian give the number as 
five hundred. 


148 


STRATAGEMS, II. v. 25-29 


worn out by sentry duty on the rampart and by the 
rain, which happened to fall continuously, so that 
in the morning, when Junius gave the signal for 
recall, Hannibal led out his own troops, who had 
been well rested, and took Junius's camp by assault.! 

[n the same way, when the Spartans had drawn 
entrenchments across the Isthmus and were defend- 
ing the Peloponnesus, Epaminondas, the Theban, 
with the help of a few light-armed troops, harassed 
the enemy all night long. Then at daybreak, after 
he had recalled his own men and the Spartans had 
also retired, he suddenly moved forward the entire 
force which he had kept at rest, and burst directly 
through the ramparts, which had been left without 
defenders.” 

At the battle of Cannae, Hannibal, having drawn 
up his line of battle, ordered six hundred Numidian 
cavalry to go over to the enemy. To prove their 
sincerity, these surrendered their swords and shields 
to our men, and were dispatched to the rear. Then, 
as soon as the engagement began, drawing out small 
swords, which they had secreted, and picking up 
the shields of the fallen, they slaughtered the troops 
of the Romans.’ 

Under pretence of surrender, the lapydes handed 
over some of their tribesmen to Publius Licinius, 
the Roman proconsul. These were received and 
placed in the last line, whereupon they cut to 
pieces the Romans who were bringing up the rear. 

Scipio Africanus, when facing the two hostile camps 
of Syphax and the Carthaginians, decided to make 
a night attack on that of Syphax, where there was 
a large supply of inflammable material, and to set 
fire to it, in order thus to cut down the Numidians 


149 


SEXTUS JULIUS FRONTINUS 


ex suis castris trepidantes caederet, Poenos autem, 
quos certum erat ad succurrendum sociis procursuros, 
insidiis dispositis exciperet. Utrumque ex sententia 
cessit, nam tamquam ad fortuitum incendium sine 
armis procurrentis adortus cecidit. 

30. Mithridates, a Lucullo virtute frequenter 
superatus, insidiis eum appetiit, Adathante quodam 
eminente viribus subornato, ut transfugeret et fide 
parta hosti facinus perpetraret; quod is strenue 
quidem, sed sine eventu conatus est.  Receptus 
enim a Lucullo in gregem equitum non sine tacita 
custodia habitus est, quia nec credi subito transfugae 
nec inhiberi reliquos oportebat. Cum deinde fre- 
quentibus excursionibus promptam et enixam operam 
exhiberet, fide adquisita tempus elegit, quo missa 
principia quietem omnibus castrensibus dabant prae- 
toriumque secretius praestabant. Casus adiuvit Lu- 
cullum. Nam qui ad vigilantem usque admitteretur, 
fatigatum nocturnis cogitationibus illo tempore 
quiescentem invenit. Cum deinde, tamquam nun- 
tiaturus subitum aliquid ac necessarium, intrare 
vellet et pertinaciter a servis valetudini domini 
consulentibus excluderetur, veritus, ne suspectus 


1 203 B.c. Cf. Livy xxx. 5-6; Polyb. xiv. 4. 
I 50 


STRATAGEMS, II. v. 29-30 


as they scurried in terror from their camp, and also, 
by laying ambuscades, to catch the Carthaginians, 
who, he knew, would rush forward to assist their 
allies. Both plans succeeded. For when the enemy 
rushed forward unarmed, thinking the conflagration 
accidental, Scipio fell upon them and cut them to 
pieces.! 

Mithridates, after repeated defeats in battle at 
the hands of Lucullus, made an attempt against his 
life by treachery, hiring a certain Adathas, a man 
of extraordinary strength, to desert and to perpetrate 
the deed, so soon as he should gain the confidence 
of the enemy. This plan the deserter did his best 
to execute, but his efforts failed. For, though 
admitted by Lucullus to the cavalry troop, he was 
quietly kept under surveillance, since it was neither 
well to put trust at once in a deserter, nor to 
prevent other deserters from coming. After this 
fellow had exhibited a ready and earnest devotion 
on repeated raids, and had won confidence, he chose 
a time when the dismissal of the staff-officers 
brought with it repose throughout the camp, and 
caused the generals headquarters to be less 
frequented. Chance favoured Lucullus; for where- 
as the deserter expected to find Lucullus awake, in 
which case he would have been at once admitted to 
his presence, he actually found him at that time fast 
asleep, exhausted with revolving plans in his mind 
the night before. Then when Adathas pleaded to 
be admitted, on the ground that he had an un- 
expected and imperative message to deliver, he was 
kept out by the determined efforts of the slaves, 
who were concerned for their master’s health. 
Fearing consequently that he was an object of 


151 


SEXTUS JULIUS FRONTINUS 


esset, equis quos ante portam paratos habebat ad 
Mithridaten refugit inritus. 

3l. Sertorius in Hispania, cum and Lauronem 
oppidum vicina castra Pompei castris haberet et duae 
tantummodo regiones essent, ex quibus pabulum peti 
posset, una in propinquo, altera longius sita, eam 
quae in propinquo erat subinde a levi armatura in- 
festari, ulteriorem autem vetuit ab ullo armato adiri, 
donec persuasit adversariis, tutiorem esse quae erat 
remotior. Quam cum petissent Pompeiani, Octavium 
Graecinum! cum decem cohortibus in morem Ro- 
manorum armatis et decem Hispanorum levis arma- 
turae et Tarquitium Priscum cum duobus milibus 
equitum ire iubet ad insidias tendendas pabulatori- 
bus. Illi strenue imperata faciunt. Explorata enim 
locorum natura, in vicina silva nocte praedictas 
copias abscondunt ita, ut in prima parte leves 
Hispanos, aptissimos ad furta bellorum, ponerent, 
paulo interius scutatos, in remotissimo equites, ne 
fremitu eorum cogitata proderentur ; quiescere omnes 
silentio servato in horam tertiam diei iubent. Cum 
deinde Pompeiani securi oneratique pabulo de reditu 
cogitarent et hi quoque, qui in statione fuerant, 
quiete invitati ad pabulum conligendum dilaberentur, 
emissi primum Hispani velocitate gentili in palantes 
effunduntur et convulnerant confunduntque nihil 


1 graecinium HP. Graecinum Oud. 
172 p.c. Cf. Appian Mithr. 79; Plut. Lucull. 16. The 


name of the deserter varies in the different accounts. 
2 About 9 A.M. 


152 


STRATAGEMS, II. v. 30-31 


suspicion, he mounted the horse which he held in 
readiness outside the gate, and fled to Mithridates 
without accomplishing his purpose.! 

When Sertorius was encamped next to Pompey 
near the town of Lauron in Spain, there were only 
two tracts from which forage could be gathered, one 
near by, the other farther off. Sertorius gave 
orders that the one near by should be continually 
raided by light-armed troops, but that the remoter 
one should not be visited by any troops. Thus, he 
finally convinced his adversaries that the more distant 
tract was safer. When, on one occasion, Pompey's 
troops had gone to this region, Sertorius ordered 
Octavius Graecinus, with ten cohorts armed after 
the Roman fashion, and ten cohorts of light-armed 
Spaniards along with Tarquitius Priscus and two 
thousand cavalry, set forth to lay an ambush against 
the foragers. These men executed their instructions 
with energy; for after examining the ground, they 
hid the above-mentioned forces by night in a neigh- 
bouring wood, posting the light-armed Spaniards in 
front, as best suited to stealthy warfare, the shield- 
bearing soldiers a little further back, and the cavalry 
in the rear, in order that the plan might not be 
betrayed by the neighing of the horses. Then they 
ordered all to repose in silence till the third hour 
of the following day.? When Pompey's men, enter- 
taining no suspicion and loaded down with forage, 
thought of returning, and those who had been on 
guard, lured on by the situation, were slipping away 
to forage, suddenly the Spaniards, darting out with 
the swiftness characteristic of their race, poured 
forth upon the stragglers, inflicted many wounds 
upon them, and put them to rout, to their great 


153 


SEXTUS JULIUS FRONTINUS 


tale exspectantes. Prius deinde quam resisti his 
inciperet, scutati erumpunt e saltu et redeuntes 
in ordinem consternant avertuntque; fugientibus 
equites immissi toto eos spatio, quo redibatur in 
castra, persecuti caedunt. Curatum quoque, ne quis 
effugeret, nam reliqui CCL equites praemissi facile 
per compendia itinerum effusis habenis, antequam 
ad castra Pompei perveniretur, conversi occurre- 
runt eis, qui primi fugerant. Ad cuius rei sensum 
Pompeio emittente legionem cum D. Laelio in 
praesidium suorum, subducti in dextrum latus velut 
cesserunt equites, deinde circumita legione hanc 
quoque a tergo infestaverunt, cum iam et a fronte 
qui pabulatores persecuti erant incursarent ; sic legio 
quoque inter duas acies hostium cum legato suo 
elisa est. Ad cuius praesidium Pompeio totum 
educente exercitum, Sertorius quoque e collibus 
suos instructos ostendit effecitque, ne Pompeio ex- 
pediret ; ita praeter duplex damnum, eadem sollertia 
inlatum, spectatorem quoque eum cladis suorum con- 
tinuit. Hoc primum proelium inter Sertorium et Pom- 
peium fuit; X milia hominum de Pompei exercitu 
amissa et omnia impedimenta Livius auctor est.! 

32. Pompeius in Hispania, dispositis ante qui ex 
occulto adgrederentur, simulato metu deduxit instan- 
tem hostem in loca insessa ; deinde, ubi res poposcit, 


1 The last sentence is considered by some an interpolation. 


176 B.c. Cf. Plut. Sert. 18; Appian B.C. i. 109. The 
allusion to Livy cannot be identified. 


154 


STRATAGEMS, II. v. 31-32 


amazement. Then, before resistance to this first 
assault could be organised, the shield-bearing troops, 
bursting forth from the forest, overthrew and routed 
the Romans who were returning to the ranks, while 
the cavalry, dispatched after those in flight, fol- 
lowed them all the way back to camp, cutting 
them to pieces. Provision was also made that no 
one should escape. For two hundred and fifty 
reserve horsemen, sent ahead for the purpose, found 
` it a simple matter to race forward by short cuts, 
and then to turn back and meet those who had 
first fled, before they reached Pompey's camp. On 
learning of this, Pompey sent out a legion under 
Decimus Laelius to reinforce his men, whereupon 
the cavalry of the enemy, withdrawing to the right 
flank, pretended to give way, and then, passing 
round the legion, assaulted: it from the rear, while 
those who had followed up the foragers attacked 
it from the front also. Thus the legion with its 
commander was crushed between the two lines of 
the enemy. When Pompey led out his entire army 
to help the legion, Sertorius exhibited his forces 
drawn up on the hillside, and thus baulked Pompey's 
purpose. Thus, in addition to inflicting a twofold 
disaster, as a result of the same strategy, Sertorius 
forced Pompey to be the helpless witness of the 
destruction of his own troops. This was the first 
battle between Sertorius and Pompey. According 
to Livy, ten thousand men were lost in Pompey's 
army, along with the entire transport.! 

Pompey, when warring in Spain, having first 
posted troops here and there to attack from ambush, 
by feigning fear, drew the enemy on in pursuit, till 
they reached the place of the ambuscade. Then 


155 


SEXTUS JULIUS FRONTINUS 


conversus et in fronte et utrisque lateribus ad 
internecionem cecidit, capto etiam duce eorum 
Perperna. 

33. Idem adversus Mithridaten in Armenia, nu- 
mero et genere equitum praevalentem, tria milia levis 
armaturae et D equites nocte in valle sub virgultis, 
quae inter bina castra erant, disposuit. Prima deinde 
luce in stationem hostium emisit equites ita formatos, 
ut, cum universus cum exercitu hostium equitatus 
proelium inisset, servatis ordinibus paulatim cederent, 
donec spatium darent consurgendi a tergo ob hoc 
dispositis. Quod postquam ex sententia contigit, con- 
versis qui terga dedisse videbantur, medium hostem 
trepidantem cecidit, ipsos etiam equos pedite com- 
minus accedente confodit. Eoque proelio fiduciam 
regi, quam in equestribus copiis habebat, detraxit. 

94. Crassus bello fugitivorum apud Cantennam 
bina castra comminus cum hostium castris vallavit. 
Nocte deinde commotis copiis, manente praetorio in 
maioribus castris, ut fallerentur hostes, ipse omnes 
copias eduxit et in radicibus praedicti montis consti- 
tuit; divisoque equitatu praecepit L. Quintio, partem 
Spartaco obiceret pugnaque eum frustraretur, parte 
alia Gallos Germanosque ex factione Casti et Cannici 
eliceret ad pugnam et fuga simulata deduceret, ubi 


172 p.c. Cf. Livy Per. 96; Oros. v. xxiii. 13; Appian 
B.C. i. 115. 
2 66 B.c. Cf. Appian Mithr. 98 ; Dio xxxvi. xlvii. 3-4. 


156 


STRATAGEMS, II. v. 32-34 


when the opportune moment arrived, wheeling about, 
he slaughtered the foe in front and on both flanks, 
and likewise captured their general, Perperna.! 

The same Pompey, in Armenia, when Mithridates, 
was superior to him in the number and quality of his 
cavalry, stationed three thousand light-armed men 
and five hundred cavalry by night in a valley under 
cover of bushes lying between the two camps. Then 
at daybreak he sent forth his cavalry against the 
position of the enemy, planning that, as soon as the 
full force of the enemy, cavalry and infantry, became 
engaged in battle, the Romans should gradually fall 
back, still keeping ranks, until they should afford 
room to those who had been stationed for the purpose 
of attacking from the rear to arise and do so. When 
this design turned out successfully, those who had 
seemed to flee turned about, enabling Pompey to 
cut to pieces the enemy thus caught in panic 
between his two lines. Our infantry also, engaging 
in hand-to-hand encounter, stabbed the horses of the 
enemy. That battle destroyed the faith which the 
king had reposed in his cavalry.? 

In the Slave War, Crassus fortified two camps close 
beside the camp of the enemy, near Mt. Cantenna. 
Then, one night, he moved his forces, leading them 
all out and posting them at the base of the mountain 
above mentioned, leaving his headquarters tent in 
the larger camp in order to deceive the enemy. 
Dividing the cavalry into two detachments, he 
directed Lucius Quintius to oppose Spartacus with 
one division and fool him with a mock encounter ; 
with the other to lure to combat the Germans and 
Gauls, of the faction of Castus and Cannicus, and, 
by feigning flight, to draw them on to the spot 


157 


SEXTUS JULIUS FRONTINUS 


ipse aciem instruxerat. Quos cum barbari insecuti 
essent, equite recedente in cornua, subito acies Ro- 
mana adaperta cum clamore procurrit. XXXV milia 
armatorum eo proelio interfecta cum ipsis ducibus 
Livius tradit, receptas quinque Romanas aquilas, 
signa sex et XX, multa spolia, inter quae quinque 
fasces cum securibus.! 

95. C. Cassius in Syria adversus Parthos ducemque 
Osacen equitem ostendit a fronte, cum a tergo pe- 
ditem in confragoso loco occultasset. Dein cedente 
equitatu et per nota se recipiente, in praeparatas 
insidias perduxit exercitum Parthorum et cecidit. 

36. Ventidius Parthos et Labienum, alacres succes- 
sibus victoriarum, dum suos ipse per simulationem 
metus continet, evocavit et in loca iniqua deductos 
adgressus per abreptionem adeo debellavit, ut desti- 
tuto Labieno provincia excederent Parthi. 

97. Idem adversus Pharnastanis Parthos, cum ipse 
exiguum numerum militum haberet, illis autem 
fiduciam ex multitudine videret increscere, ad latus 
castrorum. XVIII cohortes in obscura valle posuit, 
equitatu post terga peditum conlocato. Tum paucos 
admodum milites in hostem misit; qui ubi simulata 
fuga hostem effuse sequentem ultra locum insidiarum 


1 The last sentence is considered by some an interpolation. 


171 Bc. Cf. Livy Per. 97; Plut. Crass, 11; Oros. v. 
xxiv. 6. 2 51 B.c. Cf. Dio xl. 29. 
$ 39 p.c. Cf. Dio xlviii, 39—40 ; Justin. xLir. iv. 7-8. 


158 


STRATAGEMS, II. v. 34-37 


where Crassus himself had drawn up his troops in 
battle array. When the barbarians followed, the 
cavalry fell back to the flanks, and suddenly the 
Roman force disclosed itself and rushed forward 
with a shout. In that battle Livy tells us that 
thirty-five thousand armed men, with their com- 
manders, were slain ; five Roman eagles and twenty- 
six standards were recaptured, along with much 
other booty, including five sets of rods and axes.! 

Gaius Cassius, when fighting in Syria against the 
Parthians and their leader Osaces, exhibited only 
cavalry in front, but had posted infantry in hiding on 
rough ground in the rear. Then, when his cavalry 
fell back and retreated over familiar roads, he drew 
the army of the Parthians into the ambush prepared 
for them and cut them to pieces.? 

Ventidius, keeping his own men in camp on 
pretence of fear, caused the Parthians and Labienus, 
who were elated with victorious successes, to come 
out for battle. Having lured them into an un- 
favourable situation, he attacked them by surprise and 
so overwhelmed them that the Parthians refused to 
follow Labienus and evacuated the province.? 

The same Ventidius, having himself only a small 
force available for use against the Parthians under 
Pharnastanes, but observing that the confidence of 
the enemy was growing in consequence of their 
numbers, posted eighteen cohorts at the side of the 
camp in a hidden valley, with cavalry stationed 
behind the infantry. Then he sent a very small 
detachment against the enemy. When these by 
feigning flight had drawn the enemy in hot pursuit 
beyond the place of ambush, the force at the side 
rose up, whereupon Ventidius drove the Parthians 


e 


SEXTUS JULIUS FRONTINUS 


perduxere, coorta a latere acie praecipitatos in fugam, 
in his Pharnastanem, interfecit. 

38. C. Caesar, suis et Afranii castris contrarias 
tenentibus planitias, cum utriusque partis plurimum 
interesset colles proximos occupare idque propter 
saxorum asperitatem esset difficile, tamquam Ilerdam 
repetiturum retro agmen ordinavit, faciente inopia 
fidem destinationi. Intra brevissimum deinde spa- 
tium exiguo circuitu flexit repente ad montis occu- 
pandos. Quo visu perturbati Afraniani velut captis 
castris et ipsi effuso cursu eosdem montes petiere. 
Quod futurum cum praedivinasset Caesar, partim 
peditatu quem praemiserat, partim a tergo summissis 
equitibus inordinatos est adortus. 

39. Antonius apud Forum Gallorum, cum Pansam 
consulem adventare comperisset, insidiis per silvestria 
Aemiliae viae dispositis agmen eius excepit fuditque 
et ipsum eo vulnere adfecit, quo intra paucos dies 
exanimaretur. 

40. Iuba rex in África bello civili Curionis animum 
simulato regressu impulit in vanam alacritatem ; cuius 
spei vanitate deceptus Curio, dum tamquam fugi- 
entem Sabboram regium praefectum persequitur, 
devenit in patentes campos, ubi Numidarum circum- 
ventus equitatu, perdito exercitu, cecidit. 

41. Melanthus dux Atheniensium, cum provocatus 
a rege hostium Xantho Boeotio descendisset ad pug- 


139 5.0. Cf. Dio xviii. xli. 1-4; Plut. Ant. 33. 

2 40 B.C. Cf. Caes. B.C. i. 65-72. 

3 43 p.c. Mutina. Cf. Appian B.C. iii. 66ff.; Cic. ad 
Fam. x. 30. 

449 Bc. Cf. Caes. B.C. ii. 40-12; Dio xli. 41-42; 
Appian Z.C. ii. 45. 


160 


^ 


STRATAGEMS, Il. v. 37-41 


in precipitate flight and slaughtered them, Pharnas- 
tanes among them.! 

On one occasion when the camps of Gaius Caesar 
and Afranius were pitched in opposite plains, it was 
the special ambition of each side to secure possession 
of the neighbouring hills—a task of extreme difficulty 
on account of the jagged rocks. In these cir- 
cumstances, Caesar marshalled his army as though to 
march back again to llerda, a move supported by 
his deficiency of supplies. Then, within a short time, 
making a small detour, he suddenly started to seize 
the hills. The followers of Afranius, alarmed at 
sight of this, just as though their camp had been 
captured, started out themselves at top speed to gain 
the same hills. Caesar, having forecast this turn of 
affairs, fell upon Afranius's men, before they could 
form—partly with infantry, which he had sent 
ahead, partly with cavalry sent up in the rear.? 

Antonius, near Forum Gallorum, having heard that 
the consul Pansa was approaching, met his army by 
means of ambuscades, set here and there in the 
woodland stretches along the Aemilian Way, thus 
routing his troops and inflicting on Pansa himself a 
wound from which he died in a few days.? 

Juba, king in Africa at the time of the Civil War, 
by feigning a retirement, once roused unwarranted 
elation in the heart of Curio. Under the influence 
of this mistaken hope, Curio, pursuing Sabboras, the 
king's general, who, he thought, was in flight, came 
to open plains, where, surrounded by the cavalry of 
the Numidians, he lost his army and perished himself.* 

Melanthus, the Athenian general, on one occasion 
came out for combat, in response to the challenge of 
the king of the enemy, Xanthus, the Boeotian. As 


161 
VOL, I. M 


SEXTUS JULIUS FRONTINUS 


nam, ut primum comminus stetit, “ inique, inquit, 
* Xanthe, et contra pactum facis; adversus solum 
enim cum altero processisti.” Cumque admiratus 
ille, quisnam se comitaretur, respexisset, aversum 
uno ictu confecit. | 

42. Iphicrates Atheniensis ad Cherronessum, cum 
sciret Lacedaemoniorum ducem Anaxibium exercitum 
pedestri itinere ducere, firmissimam manum militum 
eduxit e gavibus et in insidiis conlocavit, naves autem 
omni tamquam onustas milite palam transnavigare 
iussit; ita securos et nihil exspectantes Lacedae- 
monios a tergo ingressus itinere oppressit fuditque. 

43. Liburni, cum vadosa loca obsedissent, capiti- 
bus tantum eminentibus fidem fecerunt hosti alti 
maris ac triremem, quae eos persequebatur, impli- 
catam vado ceperunt. 

44. Alcibiades dux Atheniensium in Hellesponto 
adversus Mindarum Lacedaemoniorum ducem, cum 
amplum exercitum et plures naves haberet, nocte 
expositis in terram quibusdam militum suorum, parte 
quoque navium post quaedam promunturia occultata, 
ipse cum paucis profectus ita, ut contemptu sui 
hostem invitaret, eundem insequentem fugit, donec 
in praeparatas insidias perduceret. Aversum deinde 
et egredientem in terram per eos, quos ad hoc ipsum 
exposuerat, cecidit. 


1 Cf. Polyaen. i. 19. 

2 389-388 B.c. Cf. Xen. Hell. 1v. viii. 32 ff. 

* 410 Bc. Cf. Xen. Hell. 1. i. 11 ff.; Polyaen. I. xl. 9; 
Diodor. xiii. 50. 


162 


STRATAGEMS, II. v. 41-44 


soon as they stood face to face, Melanthus exclaimed : 
* Your conduct is unfair, Xanthus, and contrary to 
agreement. I am alone, but you have come out 
with a companion against me." When Xanthus 
wondered who was following him and looked behind, 
Melanthus dispatched him with a single stroke, as 
his head was turned away. 

Iphicrates, the Athenian, on one occasion in the 
Chersonesus, aware that Anaxibius, commander of 
the Spartans, was proceeding with his troops by 
land, disembarked a large force of men from his 
vessels and placed them in ambush, but directed his 
ships to sail in full view of the enemy, as though 
loaded with all his forces. When the Spartans were 
thus thrown off their guard and apprehended no 
danger, Iphicrates, attacking them by land from the 
rear as they marched along,crushed and routed them.? 

The Liburnians on one occasion, when they had 
taken a position among some shallows, by allowing 
only their heads to appear above the surface of the 
water, caused the enemy to believe that the water 
was deep. In this way a galley which followed them 
became stranded on the shoal, and was captured. 

Alcibiades, commander of the Athenians at the 
Hellespont against Mindarus, leader of the Spartans, 
having a large army and numerous vessels, landed 
some of his soldiers by night, and hid part of his ships 
behind certain headlands. He himself, advancing 
with a few troops, so as to lure the enemy on in 
scorn of his small force, fled when pursued, until he 
finally drew the foe into the trap which had been 
laid. Then attacking the enemy in the rear, as he 
disembarked, he cut him to pieces with the aid of 
the troops which he had landed for this very purpose.? 

163 
M 2 


SEXTUS JULIUS FRONTINUS 


45. Idem, navali proelio decertaturus, constituit 
malos quosdam in promunturio praecepitque his quos 
ibi relinquebat, ut, cum commissum proelium sensis- 
sent, panderent vela. Quo facto consecutus est, ut 
hostes aliam classem in auxilium ei supervenire 
arbitrati verterentur. 

46. Memnon Rhodius navali proelio, cum haberet 
ducentarum navium classem et hostium naves elicere 
ad proelium vellet, ita ordinavit suos, ut paucarum 
navium malos erigeret easque primas agi iuberet; 
hostes procul conspicati numerum arborum et ex eo 
navium quoque coniectantes obtulerunt se certamini 
et a pluribus occupati superatique sunt. 

47. Timotheus dux Atheniensium adversus Lace- 
daemonios navali acie decertaturus, cum instructa 
classis eorum ad pugnam processisset, ex velocissimis 
navibus viginti praemisit, quae omni arte varioque 
flexu eluderent hostem; ut primum deinde sensit 
minus agiliter moveri adversam partem, progressus 
praelassatos facile superavit. 


VI. De Emittenpo Hoste, NE CrLAusus PRoELIUM 
EX DESPERATIONE REDINTEGRET 


1. Garros eo proelio, quod Camilli ductu gestum 
est, desiderantes navigia, quibus Tiberim transirent, 
senatus censuit transvehendos et commeatibus quoque 
prosequendos. 


Eiusdem generis hominibus postea per Pompti- 


1 375 B.c. Cf. Polyaen. 111. x. 6, 12, 16. 
164 


STRATAGEMS, II. v. 4s-vt. 1 


The same Alcibiades, on one occasion, when about 
to engage in a naval combat, erected a number of 
masts on a headland, and commanded the men whom 
he left there to spread sails on these as soon as they 
noticed that the engagement had begun. By this 
means he caused the enemy to retreat, since they 
imagined another fleet was coming to his assistance. 

Memnon, the Rhodian, in a naval encounter, pos- 
sessing a fleet of two hundred ships, and wishing to 
lure the vessels of the enemy out to battle, made 
arrangements for raising the masts of only a few of 
his ships, ordering these to proceed first. When the 
enemy from a distance saw the number of masts, and 
from that inferred the number of vessels, they offered 
battle, but were fallen upon by a larger number of 
ships and defeated. 

Timotheus, leader of the Athenians, when about 
to engage in a naval encounter with the Spartans, 
as soon as the Spartan fleet came out arrayed in line 
of battle, sent ahead twenty of his swiftest vesSels, 
to baulk the enemy in every way by various tactics. 
Then as soon as he observed that the enemy were 
growing less active in their manœuvres, he moved 
forward and easily defeated them, since they were 
already worn out.! 


VI. On LETTING THE Enemy Escape, Lest, BROUGHT 
TO Bav, He Renew tHe BATTLE IN DESPERATION 


Wuen the Gauls, after the battle fought under 
Camillus's generalship, desired boats to cross the 
Tiber, the Senate voted to set them across and to 
supply them with provisions as well. 

On a subsequent occasion also a free passage was 


165 


SEXTUS JULIUS FRONTINUS 


num agrum fugientibus via data est, quae Gallica 
appellatur. 

2. T. Marcius eques Romanus, cui duobus Scipio- 
nibus occisis exercitus imperium detulit, cum cir- 
cumventi ab eo Poeni, ne inulti morerentur, acrius 
pugnarent, laxatis manipulis et concesso fugae spatio 
dissipatos sine periculo suorum trucidavit. 

9. C. Caesar Germanos inclusos, ex desperatione 
fortius pugnantis, emitti iussit fugientesque adgressus 
est. 

4. Hannibal, cum ad Trasumennum inclusi Romani 
acerrime pugnarent, diductis ordinibus fecit eis abe- 
undi potestatem euntesque sine suorum sanguine 
stravit. 

5. Antigonus rex Macedonum Aetolis, qui in ob- 
sidionem ab eo compulsi fame urguebantur statue- 
rantque eruptione facta commori, viam fugae dedit ; 
atque ita infracto impetu eorum insecutus aversos 
cecidit. 

6. Agesilaus Lacedaemonius adversus Thebanos, 
cum acie confligeret intellexissetque hostes locorum 
condicione clausos ob desperationem fortius dimicare, 
laxatis suorum ordinibus apertaque Thebanis ad eva- 
dendum via, rursus in abeuntis contraxit aciem et 
sine iactura suorum cecidit aversos. 


1 349 p.c. L. Furius Camillus, son of the great Camillus. 

2 212 p.c. Livy xxv. 37 gives his praenomen as Lucius. 

3 217 B.C. * 223-221 B.c. Antigonus Doson. 

5 394 B.c. Cf. Polyaen. 11. i. 19 ; Plut. Agesil. 18. Xen. 
Hell. iv. 3 notes the failure of Agesilaus to employ this 
stratagem. 


166 


STRATAGEMS, II. vi. 1-6 


afforded to the people of the same race when retreat- 
ing through the Pomptine district. This road goes 
by the name of the “ Gallic Way." 1 

Titus Marcius, a Roman knight, on whom the 
army conferred the supreme command after the two 
Scipios were slain, succeeded in enveloping the 
Carthaginians. "When the latter, in order not to die 
unavenged, fought with increased fury, Marcius 
opened up the maniples, afforded room for escape, 
and as the enemy became separated, slaughtered 
them without danger to his own men.? 

When certain Germans whom Gaius Caesar had 
penned in fought the more fiercely from desperation, 
he ordered them to be allowed to escape, and then 
attacked them as they fled. 

At Trasimenus, when the Romans had been 
enveloped and were fighting with the greatest fury, 
Hannibal opened up his ranks and gave them an 
opportunity of escape, whereupon, as they fled, he 
overwhelmed them without loss of his own troops.? 

When the Aetolians, blockaded by Antigonus, 
king of the Macedonians, were suffering from famine 
and had resolved to make a sally in face of certain 
death, Antigonus afforded them an avenue of flight. 
Thus having cooled their ardour, he attacked them 
from the rear and cut them to pieces.* 

Agesilaus, the Spartan, when engaged in battle 
with the Thebans, noticed that the enemy, hemmed 
in by the character of the terrain, were fighting 
with greater fury on account of their desperation. 
Accordingly he opened up his ranks and afforded 
the Thebans a way of escape. But when they tried 
to retreat, he again enveloped them, and cut them 
down from behind without loss of his own troops.5 


167 


SEXTUS JULIUS FRONTINUS 


7. Cn. Manlius consul, cum ex acie reversus capta 
ab Etruscis Romanorum castra invenisset, omnibus 
portis statione circumdatis inclusos hostes in eam 
rabiem efferavit, ut ipse in proelio caderet. Quod 
ut animadverterunt legati eius, ab una porta remota 
statione exitum Etruscis dederunt et effusos persecuti, 
occurrente altero consule Fabio, ceciderunt. 

8. Themistocles victo Xerxe volentes suos pontem 
rumpere prohibuit, cum docuisset aptius esse eum 
expelli Europa, quam cogi ex desperatione pugnare. 
Idem misit ad eum, qui indicaret, in quo periculo 
esset, nisi fugam maturaret. 

9. Pyrrhus Epirotarum rex, cum quandam civita- 
tem cepisset clausisque portis ex ultima necessitate. 
fortiter dimicantes eos, qui inclusi erant, animadver- 
tisset, locum illis ad fugam dedit. 

10. Idem inter praecepta imperatoria memoriae 
tradidit, non esse pertinaciter instandum hosti 
fugienti, ne non solum ea re fortius ex necessitate 
resisteret, sed ut postea quoque facilius acie cederet, 
cum sciret non usque ad perniciem fugientibus 
instaturos victores. 


1 480 p.c. Cf. Livy ii. 47. 

2 i.e. the bridge which Xerxes had constructed across the 
Hellespont at the time of his invasion of Greece. 

3 480 B.c. Cf. Justin. 11. xiii. 5ff.; Polyaen. I. xxx. 4. 
Plut. Them. 16 and Herod. viii 108 attribute the advice 
against destroying the bridge to Aristides and Eurybiades 
respectively. 


168 


STRATAGEMS, II. vi. 7-10 


Gnaeus Manlius, the consul, on returning from 
battle found the camp of the Romans in possession 
of the Etruscans. He therefore posted guards at 
all the gates and roused the enemy, thus shut up 
within, to such a pitch of fury that he himself was 
slain in the fighting. When his lieutenants realized 
the situation, they withdrew the guards from one 
gate and afforded the Etruscans an opportunity of 
escape. But when the latter poured forth, the 
Romans pursued them and cut them to pieces, with 
the help of the other consul, Fabius, who happened 
to come up.! 

When Xerxes had been defeated and the Athe- 
nians wished to destroy his bridge,? Themistocles 
prevented this, showing that it was better for them 
that Xerxes should be expelled from Europe rather 
than be forced to fight in desperation. He also sent 
to the king a messenger to tell him in what danger 
he would be, in case he failed to make a hasty 
retreat.? 

When Pyrrhus, king of the Epirotes, had captured 
a certain city and had noticed that the inhabitants, 
shut up inside, had closed the gates and were fight- 
ing valiantly from dire necessity, he gave them an 
opportunity to escape. 

The same Pyrrhus, among many other precepts 
on the art of war, recommended never to press 
relentlessly on the heels of an enemy in flight—not 
merely in order to prevent the enemy from resisting 
too furiously in consequence of necessity, but also to 
make him more inclined to withdraw another time, 
knowing that the victor would not strive to Hestroy 
him when in flight. 


169 


SEXTUS JULIUS FRONTINUS 


VII. De DissiMULANDIS ADVERSIS 


1, TurLvs HosriLivs rex Romanorum commisso ad- 
versus Veientes proelio, cum Albani deserto exercitu 
Romanorum proximos peterent tumulos eaque res 
turbasset nostrorum animos, clare pronuntiavit iussu 
suo Albanos id fecisse, ut hostem circumveniret. 
Quae res et terrorem Veientibus et Romanis fiduciam 
attulit remque inclinatam consilio restituit. 

2. L. Sulla, cum praefectus eius, comitante non 
exigua equitum manu, commisso iam proelio ad 
hostis transfugisset, pronuntiavit iussu suo id factum ; 
eaque ratione militum animos non tantum a con- 
fusione retraxit, sed quadam etiam spe utilitatis, 
quae id consilium secutura esset, confirmavit. 

3. Idem, cum auxiliares eius missi ab ipso circum- 
venti ab hostibus et interfecti essent verereturque, 
ne propter hoc damnum universus trepidaret ex- 
ercitus, pronuntiavit auxiliares, qui ad defectionem 
conspirassent, consilio a se in loca iniqua deductos. 
Ita manifestissimam cladem ultionis simulatione 
velavit et militum animos hac persuasione confirmavit. 

4. Scipio, cum Syphacis legati nuntiarent ei regis 
sui nomine, ne fiducia societatis eius ex Sicilia in 
Africam transiret, veritus, ne confunderentur animi 
suorum abscisa spe peregrinae societatis, dimisit pro- 


1 Cf. Livy i. 27; Val. Max. vir. iv. 1; Dionys. iii. 24. 
Nep. Ages. 6 and Datam. 6 attributes like stratagems to 
Agesilaus and Datames. 


170 


STRATAGEMS, II. vir. 1-4 


VII. ON CoNcEaLIiNG REVERSES 


Tuttus Hostilius, king of the Romans, on one 
occasion had engaged in battle with the Veientines, 
when the Albans, deserting the army of the Romans, 
made for the neighbouring hills. Since this action 
disconcerted our troops, Tullus shouted in a loud 
voice that the Albans had done that by his instruc- 
tions, with the object of enveloping the foe. This 
declaration struck terror into the hearts of the 
Veientines and lent confidence to the Romans. By 
this device he turned the tide of battle:1 

When a lieutenant of Lucius Sulla had gone over 
to the enemy at the beginning of an engagement, 
accompanied by a considerable force of cavalry, Sulla 
announced that this had been done by his own 
instructions. He thereby not merely saved his 
men from panic, but encouraged them by a certain 
expectation of advantage to result from this plan. 

The same Sulla, when certain auxiliary troops dis- 
patched by him had been surrounded and cut to 
pieces by the enemy, fearing that his entire army 
would be in a panic on account of this disaster, 
announced that he had purposely placed the auxili- 
aries in a place of danger, since they had plotted to 
desert. In this way he veiled a very palpable 
reverse under the guise of discipline, and encouraged 
his soldiers by convincing them that he had done 
this. 

When the envoys of King Syphax told Scipio in 
the name of their king not to cross over to Africa 
from Sicily in expectation of an alliance, Scipio, 
fearing that the spirits of his men would receive a 
shock, if the hope of a foreign alliance were cut off, 


171 


SEXTUS JULIUS FRONTINUS 


pere! legatos et famam diffudit, tamquam ultro a 
Syphace accerseretur. 

5. Q. Sertorius, cum acie decertaret, barbarum, qui 
ei nuntiaverat Hirtuleium perisse, pugione traiecit, | 
ne et in aliorum id notitiam perferret et ob hoc 
animi suorum infirmarentur. 

6. Alcibiades Atheniensis, cum ab Abydenis proe- 
lio urgueretur subitoque magno cursu tristem adven- 
tare animadvertisset tabellarium, prohibuit palam 
dicere, quid adferret. Dehinc secreto sciscitatus, a 
Pharnabazo regio praefecto classem suam oppug- 
nari celatis et hostibus et militibus proelium finiit 
ac protinus ad eripiendam classem ducto exercitu 
opem tulit suis. 

7T. Hannibalem venientem in Italiam tria milia 
Carpetanorum reliquerunt; quos ille, exemplo ne 
et ceteri moverentur, edixit a se esse dimissos et 
insuper in fidem eius rei paucos levissimae operae 
domos remisit. 

8. L. Lucullus, cum animadvertisset Macedonas 
equites, quos in auxilio habebat, subito consensu ad 
hostem transfugere, signa canere iussit et turmas, 
quae eos sequerentur, immisit. Hostis committi 
proelium ratus transfugientes telis excepit. Mace- 
dones, qui viderent neque recipi se ab adversariis 
et premi ab his, quos deserebant, necessario ad 
iustum proelium conversi hostem invaserunt. 


1 prorelegatos HP ; propere legatos Mod. Cf. Livy xxix. 24. 


1 204 p.c. Cf. Livy xxix. 23-24; Polyaen. vill. xvi. 7. 
2 75 B.C. 3 409 B.O. 
4 218 B.o. Cf. Livy xxi. 23. 5 74—66 B.C. 

172 


STRATAGEMS, II. vii. 4-8 


summarily dismissed the envoys, and spread abroad 
the report that he was expressly sent for by Syphax.! 

Once when Quintus Sertorius was engaged in 
battle, he plunged a dagger into the barbarian who 
had reported to him that Hirtuleius had fallen, for 
fear the messenger might bring this news to the 
knowledge of others and in this way the spirit of 
his own troops should be broken.? 

When Alcibiades, the Athenian, was hard pressed 
in battle by the Abydenes and suddenly noticed a 
courier approaching at great speed and with dejected 
countenance, he prevented the courier from telling 
openly what tidings he brought. Having privately 
learned that his fleet was beset by Pharnabazus, the 
commander of the king, he concealed the fact both 
from the enemy and from his own soldiers, and 
finished the battle. Then straightway marching to 
rescue his fleet, he bore aid to his friends.? 

When Hannibal entered Italy, three thousand 
Carpetani deserted him.  Fearing that the rest of 
his troops might be affected by their example, he 
proclaimed that they had been discharged by him, 
and as further proof of that, he sent home a few 
others whose services were of very little importance.* 

When Lucius Lucullus noticed that the Macedonian 
cavalry, whom he had as auxiliaries, were suddenly 
deserting to the enemy in a body, he ordered the 
trumpets to sound and sent out squadrons to pursue 
the deserters. The enemy, thinking that an engage- 
ment was beginning, received the deserters with 
javelins, whereupon the Macedonians, seeing that 
they were not welcomed by the enemy and were 
attacked by those whom they were deserting, were 
forced to resort to a genuine battle and assaulted 
the enemy.5 


173 


SEXTUS JULIUS FRONTINUS 


9. Datames dux Persarum adversum Autophra- 
daten in Cappadocia, cum partem equitum suorum 
transfugere comperisset, ceteros omnes venire secum 
iussit adsecutusque transfugas conlaudavit, quod eum 
alacriter praecessissent, hortatusque est eos etiam, ut 
fortiter hostem adorirentur. Pudor transfugis attulit 
paenitentiam et consilium suum, quia non putabant 
deprehensum, mutaverunt. 

10. T. Quintius Capitolinus consul cedentibus Ro- 
manis ementitus est in altero cornu hostes fugatos 
et ita confirmatis suis victoriam rettulit. 

11. Cn. Manlius adversus Etruscos, vulnerato col. 
lega M. Fabio, qui sinistrum cornu ducebat, et ob 
id ea parte cedente, quod etiam occisum crederent 
consulem, cum turmis equitum occurrit, clamitans 
et collegam vivere et se dextro cornu vicisse; qua 
constantia redintegratis animis suorum vicit. 

12. Marius adversus Cimbros et Teutonos, cum 
metatores eius per imprudentiam ita castris locum 
cepissent, ut sub potestate barbarorum esset aqua, 
Hagitantibus eam suis, digito hostem ostendens 
* illinc,” inquit, * petenda est"; quo instinctu 
adsecutus est, ut protinus barbari tollerentur. 

13. T. Labienus post Pharsalicam pugnam, cum 


1 362 s.c. Nep. Datam. 6, Diodor. xv. 91 and Polyaen. 
VII. xxi. 7 give a slightly different version of this episode. 

2 468 B.C. Cf. Livy IL lxiv. 5-7; Dionys. ix. 57. 

3 480 B.C. According to Livy ii. 46-47 and Dionys. ix. 11, 
Q. Fabius and Manlius were wounded, and Marcus Fabius 
was the author of this stratagem. 

* 102 5.c. Cf. Flor. n iii. 7-10; Plut. Mar. 18. 


174 


STRATAGEMS, Il. vir. 9-13 


Datames, commander of the Persians against Auto- 
phradates in Cappadocia, learning that part of his 
cavalry were deserting, ordered the rest of his troops 
to follow with him. Upon coming up with the 
deserters, he commended them for outstripping him 
in their eagerness, and also urged them to attack 
the enemy courageously. Seized with shame and 
penitence, the deserters changed their purpose, 
imagining that it had not been detected.! 

The consul Titus Quinctius Capitolinus, when the 
Romans yielded ground in battle, falsely claimed 
Du ai enemy had been routed on the other flank. 
By thus lending courage to his men, he won a 
victory.? 

When Gnaeus Manlius was fighting against the 
Etruscans, his colleague Marcus Fabius, commander 
of the left flank, was wounded, and that section of 
the army therefore gave way, imagining that the 
consul had been slain. Thereupon Manlius con- 
fronted the broken line with squadrons of horse, 
shouting that his colleague was alive and that he 
himself had been victorious on the right flank. By 
this dauntless spirit, he restored the courage of his 
men and won the victory.? 

When Marius was fighting against the Cimbrians 
and Teutons, his engineers on one occasion had 
heedlessly chosen such a site for the camp that the 
barbarians controlled the water supply. In response 
to the soldiers demand for water, Marius pointed 
with his finger toward the enemy and said : “ There 
is where you must get it." Thus inspired, the 
Romans straightway drove the barbarians from the 
place.* 

. Titus Labienus, after the Battle of Pharsalia, 


175 


SEXTUS JULIUS FRONTINUS 


victis partibus Dyrrhachium refugisset, miscuit vera 
falsis et, non celato exitu pugnae, aequatam partium 
fortunam gravi vulnere Caesaris finxit; et hac adsi- 
mulatione reliquis Pompeianarum partium fiduciam 
fecit. 

14. M. Cato, cum Ambraciam eo tempore, quo 
sociae naves ab Aetolis oppugnabantur, imprudens 
uno lembo appulisset, quamquam nihil secum prae- 
sidii haberet, coepit signum voce gestuque dare, quo 
videretur subsequentis suorum navis vocare, eaque 
adseveratione hostem terruit, tamquam plane appro- 
pinquarent, qui quasi ex proximo citabantur. Aetoli, 
ne adventu Romanae classis opprimerentur, reli- 
querunt oppugnationem. 


VIII. De RestTITUENDA PER CONSTANTIAM ACIE 


1. Servius TurLivs adulescens proelio, quo rex Tar- 
quinius adversus Sabinos conflixit, signiferis segnius 
dimicantibus raptum signum in hostem misit; cuius 
recuperandi gratia Romani ita ardenter pugnaverunt, 
ut et signum et victoriam rettulerint. 

2. Furius Agrippa consul cedente cornu signum 
militare ereptum signifero in hostes Hernicos et 
Aequos misit. Quo facto eius proelium restitutum 


1 48 B.C. 2 191 B.C. 

3 This type of stratagem was very frequently resorted to. 
Cf. Florus i. 11; Val. Max. irr. ii. 20; Caes. B.G. iv. 25; 
Livy Iv. xxix. 3 and passim. 


176 


STRATAGEMS, Il. vu. 13-vin. 2 


when his side had been defeated and he himself 
had fled to Dyrrhachium, combined falsehood with 
truth, and while not concealing the outcome of the 
battle, pretended that the fortunes of the two sides 
had been equalized in consequence of a severe 
wound received by Caesar. By this pretence, he 
created confidence in the other followers of Pompey's 
party.! mE 

Marcus Cato, having inadvertently landed with a 
single galley in Ambracia at a time when the allied 
fleet was blockaded by the Aetolians, although he 
had no troops with him, began nevertheless to make 
signals by voice and gesture, in order to give the 
impression that he was summoning the approaching 
ships of his own forces. By this earnestness he 
alarmed the enemy, just as though the troops, whom 
he pretended to be summoning from near at hand, 
were visibly approaching. The Aetolians, accord- 
ingly, fearing that they would be crushed by the 
arrival of the Roman fleet, abandoned the blockade.? 


VIII. On Restorina MORALE Bv FinMNESS 


In the battle in which King Tarquinius encountered 
the Sabines, Servius Tullius, then a young man, 
noticing that the standard-bearers fought half- 
heartedly, seized a standard and hurled it into the 
ranks of the enemy. To recover it, the Romans 
fought so furiously that they not only regained the 
standard, but also won the day.? 

The consul Furius Agrippa, when on one occasion 
his flank gave way, snatched a military standard 
from a standard-bearer and hurled it into the hostile 
ranks of the Hernici and Aequi. By this act the 


177 
VOL. 1. N 


SEXTUS JULIUS FRONTINUS 


est; summa enim alacritate Romani ad recipiendum 
signum incubuerunt. 

3. T. Quintius Capitolinus consul signum in hostes 
Faliscos eiecit militesque id repetere iussit. 

4. M. Furius Camillus tribunus militum consulari 
potestate, cunctante exercitu, arreptum manu signi- 
ferum in hostes Volscos et Latinos traxit; ceteros 
puduit non sequi. 

5. Salvius Pelignus bello Persico idem fecit.! 

6. M. Furius averso exercitu, cum occurrisset, 
adfirmavit non recepturum se in castra quemquam 
nisi victorem, reductisque in aciem victoria potitus 
est. 

T. Scipio apud Numantiam, cum aversum suum 
videret exercitum, pronuntiavit pro hoste sibi futurum, 
quisquis in castra redisset. 

8. Servilius Priscus dictator, cum signa legionum 
ferri in hostis Faliscos iussisset, signiferum cunctan- 
tem occidi imperavit; quo exemplo perterriti hostem 
invaserunt. 

9. Cossus Cornelius magister equitum adversus 
Fidenates idem fecit.? 


1 No. 5 is probably an interpolation. 
2 No. 9 is probably an interpolation. 


1446 5.c. Cf. Livy rrr. lxx. 2-11. 

? There is no other record of Titus Quinctius Capitolinus's 
warring with the Faliscans. Livy iv. 29 attributes this 
stratagem to Titus Quinctius Cincinnatus in the war with 
the Volscians, 431 B.C. 

3 386 B.c. Cf. Livy vi. 7-8. 

4 Plut. Aem. 20 attributes to Salvius a stratagem similar 
to the first three of this chapter. 168 B.C. 


178 


STRATAGEMS, II. vri. 2-9 


day was saved, for the Romans with the greatest 
eagerness pressed forward to recapture the standard.! 

The consul Titus Quinctius Capitolinus hurled a 
standard into the midst of the hostile ranks of the 
Faliscans and commanded his troops to regain it.? 

Marcus Furius Camillus, military tribune with 
consular power, on one occasion when his troops 
held back, seized a standard-bearer by the hand 
and dragged him into the hostile ranks of the 
Volscians and Latins, whereupon the rest were 
shamed into following.? 

Salvius, the Pelignian, did the same in the 
Persian War.* 

Marcus Furius, meeting his army in retreat, 
declared he would receive in camp no one who was 
not victorious. Thereupon he led them back to 
battle and won the day.® 

Scipio, at Numantia, seeing his forces in retreat, 
proclaimed that he would treat as an enemy whoever 
should return to camp.® 

The dictator Servilius Priscus, having given the 
command to carry the standards of the legions 
against the hostile Faliscans, ordered the standard- 
bearer to be executed for hesitating to obey. The 
rest, cowed by this example, advanced against the 
foe.? ! 

Cornelius Cossus, master of the horse, did the 
same in an engagement with the people of Fidenae.® 


5 381 5.c. Camillus. Cf. Livy vi. 24. 

€ 133 s.c. 

7 418 B.o. According to Livy iv. 46-47, the battle was 
with the Aequi, not the Faliscans. 

9 426 B.o. Cf. Livy Iv. xxxiii. 7; Flor. 1. xi. 2-3. This 
stratagem is similar to number 10, rather than number 8. 


179 
N 2 


SEXTUS JULIUS FRONTINUS 


10. Tarquinius adversus Sabinos cunctantes equi- 
tes detractis frenis concitatisque equis perrumpere 
aciem iussit. 

11. M. Atilius consul bello Samnitico ex acie refu- 
gientibus in castra militibus aciem suorum opposuit, 
adfirmans secum et bonis civibus dimicaturos eos, 
nisi cum hostibus maluissent; ea ratione universos 
in aciem reduxit. 

12. L. Sulla, cedentibus iam legionibus exercitui 
Mithridatico ductu Archelai, stricto gladio in primam 
. aciem procucurrit appellansque milites dixit, si quis 
quaesisset, ubi imperatorem reliquissent, responde- 
rent pugnantem in Boeotia; cuius rei pudore universi 
eum secuti sunt. 

13. Divus Iulius ad Mundam referentibus suis 
pedem equum suum abduci a conspectu iussit et in 
primam aciem pedes prosiluit ; milites, dum destituere 
imperatorem erubescunt, redintegraverunt proelium. 

14. Philippus veritus, ne impetum Scytharum sui 
non sustinerent, fidelissimos equitum a tergo posuit 
praecepitque, ne quem commilitonum ex acie fugere 
paterentur, perseverantius abeuntes trucidarent. Qua 
denuntiatione cum effecisset, ut etiam timidissimi 
malent ab hostibus quam ab suis interfici, victoriam 
adquisivit. 


1 294 B.c. Cf. Livy x. 36. A slightly different version of 
this story is told in 1v. i. 29. 

2 85 B.C. Cf. Plut. Sulla 21; Polyaen. vii. ix. 2; Appian 
M ithr. 49. 

3 45 B.C. Cf. Plut. Caes. 56; Polyaen. vir xxiii. 16; 
Vell. ii. 55. 


180 


STRATAGEMS, II. viri. 10-14 


Tarquinius, when his cavalry showed hesitation 
in the battle against the Sabines, ordered them to 
fling away their bridles, put spurs to their. horses, 
and break through the enemy’s line. 

In the Samnite War, the consul Marcus Atilius, 
seeing his troops quitting the battle and taking 
refuge in camp, met them with his own command 
and declared that they would have to fight against 
him and all loyal citizens, unless they preferred to 
fight against the enemy. In this way he marched 
them back in a body to the battle.! 

When Sulla's legions broke before the hosts of 
Mithridates led by Archelaus, Sulla advanced with 
drawn sword into the first line and, addressing his 
troops, told them, in case anybody asked where they 
had left their general, to answer: * Fighting in 
Boeotia." Shamed by these words, they followed 
him to a man.? 

The deified Jul'us, when his troops gave way at 
Munda, ordered his horse to be removed from sight, 
and strode forward as a foot-soldier to the front 
line. His men, ashamed to desert their commander, 
thereupon renewed the fight.? 

Philip, on one occasion, fearing that his troops 
would not withstand the onset of the Scythians, 
stationed the trustiest of his cavalry in the rear, and 
commanded them to permit no one of their com- 
rades to quit the battle, but to kill them if they 
persisted in retreating. This proclamation induced 
even the most timid to prefer to be killed by the 
enemy rather than by their own comrades, and 
enabled Philip to win the day.* 


4 Justin. r. vi. 10-13 attributes a similar stratagem to 
Astyages. 
181 


SEXTUS JULIUS FRONTINUS 


De His Quar Post Proetium FIUNT 


VIIII. Si Res PROSPERE Cesserit, DE CONSUMMANDIS 
REriquus BELL: 


1. C. Manius, victis proelio Teutonis, reliquias 
eorum, quia nox intervenerat, circumsedens, sublatis 
subinde clamoribus per paucos suorum territavit 
insomnemque hostem detinuit, ex eo adsecutus, ut 
postero die inrequietum facilius debellaret. 

2. Claudius Nero, victis Poenis, quos Hasdrubale 
duce in Italiam ex Hispania traicientes exceperat, 
caput Hasdrubalis in castra Hannibalis eiecit; quo 
factum est, ut et Hannibal luctu et exercitus despera- 
tione adventantis praesidii adfligerentur. 

3. L. Sulla his, qui Praeneste obsidebantur, 
occisorum in proelio ducum capita hastis praefixa 
ostendit atque ita obstinatorum pervicaciam fregit. 

4. Arminius dux Germanorum capita eorum, quos 
occiderat, similiter praefixa ad vallum hostium ad- 
moveri iussit. . 

5. Domitius Corbulo, cum Tigranocertam obsideret 
et Armenii pertinaciter viderentur toleraturi obsidio- 
nem, in Vadandum unum! ex megistanis, quos 
ceperat, animadvertit caputque eius ballista excussum 
intra munimenta hostium misit. Id forte decidit in 


1 I have supplied this word in accrodance with Gundermann's 
suggestion. 


1 102 B.C. 

2 207 B.c. Cf. Livy xxvii. 51; Zonar. ix. 9. 
3 82 p.c. Cf. Appian B.C. i. 93—94. 

* 9 A.D. 


182 


STRATAGEMS, II. ix. 1-5 


ON MEASURES TAKEN AFTER BATTLE 


IX. ON BniNGiNG THE Wan TO a CLOSE 
AFTER A SUCCESSFUL ENGAGEMENT . 


ArrER Gaius Marius had defeated the Teutons 
in battle, and night had put an end to the conflict, 
he encamped round about the remnants of his 
opponents. By causing a small group of his own 
men to raise loud cries from time to time, he kept 
the enemy in a state of alarm and prevented them 
from securing rest. He thus succeeded more easily 
in crushing them on the following day, since they 
had had no sleep.! 

Claudius Nero, having met the Carthaginians on 
their way from Spain to Italy under the command 
of Hasdrubal, defeated them and threw Hasdrubal's 
head into Hannibal's camp. As a result, Hannibal 
was overwhelmed with grief and the army gave up 
hope of receiving reinforcements.? 

When Lucius Sulla was besieging Praeneste, he 
fastened on spears the heads of Praenestine generals 
who had been slain in battle, and exhibited them 
to the besieged inhabitants, thus breaking their 
stubborn resistance.? 

Arminius, leader of the Germans, likewise fastened 
on spears the heads of those he had slain, and 
ordered them to be brought up to the fortifications 
of the enemy.* 

When Domitius Corbulo was besieging Tigrano- 
certa and the Armenians seemed likely to make an 
obstinate defence, Corbulo executed Vadandus, one 
of the nobles he had captured, shot his head out 
of a ballista, and sent it flying within the fortifica- 
tions of the enemy. It happened to fall in the 

183 


SEXTUS JULIUS FRONTINUS 


medium concilium, quod cum maxime habebant bar- 
bari; ad cuius conspectum velut ostento consternati 
ad deditionem festinaverunt. 

6. Hermocrates Syracusanus superatis acie Car- 
thaginiensibus veritus, ne captivi, quorum ingentem 
manum in potestatem redegerat, parum diligenter 
custodirentur, quia eventus dimicationis in epulas 
et securitatem compellere victores poterat, finxit 
proxima nocte equitatum hostilem venturum. Qua 
exspectatione adsecutus est, ut solito attentius vigiliae 
agerentur. 

7. Idem, rebus prospere gestis et ob id resolutis 
suis in nimiam securitatem somnoque et mero pressis, 
in castra hostium transfugam misit, qui prohiberet 
eos a fuga: dispositas enim ubique a Syracusanis 
insidias. Quarum metu illi continuerunt se intra 
castra. Hermocrates detentos eos postero die habilio- 
ribus iam suis tradidit bellumque confecit. 

8. Miltiades, cum ingentem Persarum multitudinem 
apud Marathona fudisset, Athenienses circa gratula- 
tionem morantis compulit, ut festinarent ad opem urbi 
ferendam, quam classis Persarum yetebat; cumque 
praecucurrisset implessetque moenia armatis, Persae, 
rati ingentem numerum esse Atheniensium et alio 
milite apud Marathona pugnatum, alium pro muris 


1 60 A.D. 
2 413 p.c. Cf. Polyaen. 1. xliii. 2; Thuc. vii. 73; Plut. 
Nic. 26. 


184 


STRATAGEMS, II. ix. 5-8 


midst of a council which the barbarians were holding 
at that very moment, and the sight of it (as though 
it were some portent) so filled them with consterna- 
tion that they made haste to surrender.! 

When Hermocrates, the Syracusan, had defeated 
the Cathaginians in battle, and was afraid that the 
prisoners, of whom he had taken an enormous 
number, would be carelessly guarded, since the ' 
successful issue of the struggle might prompt the 
victors to revelry and neglect, he pretended that 
the cavalry of the enemy were planning an attack 
on the following night. By instilling this fear, he 
succeeded in having the guard over the prisoners 
maintained even more carefully than usual. 

When the same Hermoc®tes had achieved certain 
successes, and for that reason his men, through a 
spirit of over-confidence, had abandoned all restraint 
and were sunk in a drunken stupor, he sent a 
deserter into the camp of the enemy to prevent 
their flight by declaring to them that ambuscades 
of Syracusans had been posted everywhere. From 
fear of these, the enemy remained in camp. Having 
thus detained them, Hermocrates, on the following 
day, when his own men were more fit, gave the 
enemy over to their mercy and ended the war.” 

When Miltiades had defeated a huge host of 
Persians at Marathon, and the Athenians were losing 
time in rejoicing over the victory, he forced them 
to hurry to bear aid to the city, at which the Persian 
fleet was aiming. Having thus got ahead of the 
enemy, he filled the walls with warriors, so that the 
Persians, thinking that the number of the Athenians 
was enormous and that they themselves had met 
one army at Marathon while another was now 


185 


SEXTUS JULIUS FRONTINUS 


suis opponi, circumactis extemplo navibus Asiam 
repetierunt. 

9. Pisistratus Atheniensis, cum excepisset Mega- 
rensium classem, qua illi ad Eleusin noctu applicue- 
rant, ut operatas Cereris sacro feminas Atheniensium 
raperent, magnaque edita caede eorum ultus esset 
suos, eadem quae ceperat navigia Atheniensi milite 
"complevit, quibusdam matronis habitu captivarum 
in conspectu locatis. Qua facie decepti Megarenses 
tamquam suis et cum successu renavigantibus effuse 
obvii inermesque rursus oppressi sunt. 

10. Cimon dux Atheniensium, victa classe Persa- 
rum apud insulam Cypron, milites suos captivis armis 
induit et eisdem barbarorum navibus ad hostem navi- 
gavit in Pamphyliam afud flumen Eurymedonta. 
Persae, qui et navigia et habitum superstantium 
adgnoscerent, nihil caverunt, Subito itaque oppressi 
eodem die et navali et pedestri proelio victi sunt. 


X. Sı Res Durius CrsskRIT, DE ADVERSIS 
EMENDANDIS 


1. T. Dipivus in Hispania, cum acerrimo proelio 
conflixisset, quod nox diremerat, magno numero 
utrimque caeso complura suorum corpora intra noctem 
sepelienda curavit. Hispani postero die ad simile 
officium progressi, quia plures ex ipsorum numero 
quam ex Romanis caesos reppererant, victos se esse 


1 490 p.c. Cf. Herod. vi. 115 ff. 

2 604 Bc. Cf. Justin. ii. 8; Polyaen. 1. xx. 2; Plut. 
Solon 8. 

.* 466 B.c. Cf. Thuc. i. 100; Polyaen. 1. xxxiv. 1 ; Diodor. 
xi. 61. l 


186 


STRATAGEMS, II. ix. 8-x. 1 


confronting them on the walls, straightway turned 
their vessels about and laid their course for Asia.! 

When the fleet of the Megarians approached 
Eleusis at night with the object of kidnapping the 
Athenian matrons who had made sacrifice to Ceres, 
Pisistratus, the Athenian, engaged it in battle and, 
by ruthlessly slaughtering the enemy, avenged his 
own countrymen. Then he filed these same 
captured ships with Athenian soldiers, placing in 
full view certain matrons dressed as captives. The 
Megarians, deceived by these appearances, thinking 
their own people were sailing back, and that, too, 
crowned with victory, rushed out to meet them, in 
disorder and without weapons, whereupon they were 
a second time overwhelmed.? 

Cimon, the Athenian general, having defeated the 
fleet of the Persians near the island of Cyprus, fitted 
out his men with the weapons of the prisoners and 
in the barbarians own ships set sail to meet the 
enemy in Pamphylia, near the Eurymedon River. 
The Persians, recognizing the vessels and the garb 
of those standing on deck, were quite off their guard. 
Thus on the same day they were suddenly crushed 
in two battles, one on sea and one on land.’ 


X. On Reparrina One’s Losses AFTER A REVERSE 


Wuen Titus Didius was warring in Spain and had 
fought an extremely bitter engagement, to which 
darkness put an end, leaving a large number of 
slain on both sides, he provided for the burial by 
night of many bodies of his own men. On the 
following day, the Spaniards, coming out to perform 
a like duty, found more of their men slain than of 


187 


SEXTUS JULIUS FRONTINUS 


secundum eam dinumerationem argumentati, ad 
condiciones imperatoris descenderunt. ; 
2. T. Marcius eques Romanus, qui reliquiis exer- 
citus praefuit, cum in propinquo bina castra Poeno- 
rum paucis milibus passuum distarent, cohortatus 
milites proxima castra intempesta nocte adortus est ; 
et cum hostem victoriae fiducia incompositum adgres- 
sus ne nuntios quidem cladis reliquisset, brevissimo 
tempore militi ad requiem dato, eadem nocte raptim 
famam rei gestae praegressus altera eorundem castra 
invasit. Ita bis simili usus eventu, deletis utrubique 
Poenis, amissas populo Romano Hispanias restituit. 


XI. De Dusiorum Animis IN Fipe REgrINENDIS 


. 1. P. Vaerius Epidauri timens oppidanorum per- 
fidiam, quia parum praesidii habebat, gymnicos ludos 
procul ab urbe apparavit. Quo cum omnis fere multi- 
tudo spectandi causa exisset, clausit portas nec 
ante admisit Epidaurios, quam obsides a principibus 
acciperet. 

2. Cn. Pompeius, cum suspectos haberet Chaucenses 
et vereretur, ne praesidium non reciperent, petiit 
ab eis, ut aegros interim apud sc refici paterentur; 
fortissimis deinde habitu languentium missis civitatem 
occupavit continuitque. 


1 98-93 B.C. | j 
3 212 p.c. Livy xxv. 37 gives his praenomen as Lucius, 


188 


STRATAGEMS, II. x. 1-Xi. 2 


the Romans, and argüing according to this calculation 
that they had been beaten, came to terms with the 
Roman commander.  - | | 

Titus Marcius, a Roman knight, who had charge 
of the remnants of the army [of the Scipios] in Spain, 
seeing near at hand two camps of the Carthaginians 
a few miles distant from each other, urged on his 
men and attacked the nearer camp at dead of night. 
Since the enemy, being flushed with victory, were 
without organization, Marcius by his attack did not 
leave even so much as a single man to report the 
disaster. Granting his troops merely the briefest 
time for rest, and outstripping the news of his 
exploit, he attacked the second camp the same 
night. Thus, by a double success, he destroyed the 
Carthaginians in both places and restored to` the 
Roman people the lost provinces of Spain.? 


XI. ON ENsuniNG THE Lovarrv or Tuose WHoM 
One MISTRUSTS 


Wuen Publius Valerius had an insufficient garrison 
at Epidaurus and therefore feared perfidy on the 
part of the townspeople, he prepared to celebrate 
athletic contests at some distance from the city. 
When nearly all the population had gone there to 
see the show, he closed the gates and refused to 
admit the Epidaurians until he had taken hostages 
from their chief men. | | 

Gnaeus Pompey, suspecting the Chaucensians and 
fearing that they would not admit a garrison, asked 
that they would meanwhile permit his invalid soldiers 
to recover among them. Then, sending his strongest 
men in the guise of invalids, he seized the city and 
held it. 

189 


SEXTUS JULIUS FRONTINUS 


3. Alexander devicta perdomitaque Thracia petens 
Asiam, veritus, ne post ipsius discessum sumerent 
arma, reges eorum praefectosque et omnis, quibus 
videbatur inesse cura detractae libertatis, secum 
velut honoris causa traxit, ignobiles autem relictis 
plebeiosque praefecit, consecutus, uti principes bene- 
ficiis eius obstricti nihil novare vellent, plebs vero ne 
posset quidem, spoliata principibus. 

4. Antipater, conspecto Peloponesiorum exercitu, 
qui audita morte Alexandri ad infestandum imperium 
eius confluxerant, dissimulans scire se, qua mente 
venissent, gratias his egit, quod ad auxilium feren- 
dum Alexandro adversus Lacedaemonios convenis- 
sent, adiecitque id se regi scripturum; ceterum 
ipsos, quia sibi opera eorum in praesentia non 
esset necessaria, abirent domos, hortatus est, et 
hac adseveratione periculum, quod ex novitate rerum 
imminebat, discussit. 

5. Scipio Africanusin Hispania, cum inter captivas 
eximiae formae virgo et nobilis! ad eum perducta 
esset omniumque oculos in se converteret, summa 
custodia habitam sponso nomine Alicio reddidit in- 
superque aurum, quod parentes eius redempturi 
captivam donum Scipioni adtulerant, eidem sponso 
pro nuptiali munere dedit. Qua multiplici magni- 
ficentia universa gens victa imperio populi Romani 
accessit. 


1 The text is confused and uncertain here. Oud. conjectures 
eximiae formae virgo nubilis. 


1 334 p.c. Cf. Justin. xr. v. 1-3. 

3 i.e. he intentionally acted on the assumption that they 
had not heard of the death of Alexander, though he knew 
this assumption to be false. 

3 331-330 B.C. 


190 


STRATAGEMS, II. xı. 5-5 


When Alexander had conquered and subdued 
Thrace and was setting out for Asia, fearing that 
after his departure the Thracians would take up 
arms, he took with him, as though by way of con- 
ferring honour, their kings and officials—all in fact 
who seemed to take to heart the loss of freedom. 
In charge of those left behind he placed common 
and ordinary persons, thus preventing the officials 
from wishing to make any change, as being bound 
to him by favours, and the common people from 
even being able to do so, since they had been 
deprived of their leaders.! 

When Antipater beheld the army of the Pelopon- 
nesians, who had assembled to assail his authority 
on hearing of the death of Alexander, he pretended 
not to understand with what purpose they had come, 
and thanked them for having gathered to aid Alex- 
ander against the Spartans, adding that he would 
write to the king about this? But inasmuch as he 
did not need their assistance at present, he urged 
them to go home, and by this statement dispelled 
the danger which threatened him from the new 
order of affairs.? 

When Scipio Africanus was warring in Spain, there 
was brought before him among the captive women 
a noble maiden of surpassing beauty who attracted 
the gaze of everyone. Scipio guarded her with the 
greatest pains and restored her to her betrothed, 
Alicius by name, presenting to him likewise, as a 
marriage gift, the gold which her parents had 
brought to Scipio as a ransom. Overcome by this 
manifold generosity, the whole tribe leagued itself 
with the government of Rome.* 

4 210 p.c. Cf. Livy xxvi. 50; Val. Max. 1v. iii. 1; Gell. 
vii. 8; Polyb. x. 19. 

IQI 


SEXTUS JULIUS FRONTINUS 


6. Alexandrum quoque Macedonem traditum est 
eximiae pulchritudinis virgini captivae, cum finitimae 
gentis principi fuisset desponsa, summa abstinentia 
ita pepercisse, ut illam ne adspexerit quidem. Qua 
mox ad sponsum remissa, universae gentis per hoc 
beneficium animos conciliavit sibi.! 

7T. Imperator Caesar Augustus Germanicus eo bello, 
quo victis hostibus cognomen Germanici meruit, cum 
in finibus Cubiorum castella poneret, pro fructibus 
locorum, quae vallo comprehendebat, pretium solvi 
iussit; atque ita iustitiae fama omnium fidem ad- 
strinxit. 


XII. Quake FactENDA SiNT PRO CasrRoRUM De- 
FENSIONE, sI SATIS Fipuciak. 1N PRAESENTIBUS 
Coris NoN HABEAMUS 


1. T. QuiNTIUs consul, cum Volsci castra eius 
adgressuri forent, cohortem tantummodo in statione 
detinuit, reliquum exercitum ad quiescendum dimisit. 
Aeneatoribus praecepit, ut vallum insidentes equis 
circumirent concinerentque. Qua facie et simulatione 
cum et propulsasset et detinuisset per totam noctem > 
hostes, ad lucis exortum fessos vigilia repente facta 
eruptione facile superavit. 

2. Q. Sertorius in Hispania hostium equitatui 
maxime impar, qui usque ad ipsas munitiones nimia 
fiducia succedebat, nocte scrobes aperuit et ante eos 


1 No. 6 is apparently interpolated. 
1 Cf, Gell. vii. 8; Ammian. Marc. xxiv. iv. 27. 
? Domitian. 5 83 A.D. 
1468 p.c. Cf. Livy ii. 64—65. 
192 


STRATAGEMS, II. xı. 6-xu. 2 


The story goes that Alexander of Macedon like 
wise, having taken captive a maiden of exceeding 
beauty betrothed to the chief of a neighbouring 
tribe, treated her with such extreme consideration 
that he refrained even from gazing at her. When 
the maiden was later returned to her lover, Alex- 
ander, as a result of this kindness, secured the 
attachment of the entire tribe. 

When the Emperor Caesar Augustus Germanicus,? 
in the war in which he earned his title by conquering 
the Germans, was building forts in the territory of 
the Cubii, he ordered compensation to be made for 
the crops which he had included within his fortifica- 
tions. Thus the renown of his justice won the 
allegiance of all, 


XII. WHAT TO po FOR THE DEFENCE OF THE CAMP, 
IN CASE A COMMANDER LACKS CONFIDENCE IN His 
Present Forces 


Tue consul, Titus Quinctius, as the Volscians were 
about to attack his camp, kept only one cohort on 
duty, and dismissed the remainder of the army to 
take their rest, directing the trumpeters to mount 
their horses and make the round of the camp sound- 
ing their trumpets. By exhibiting this semblance 
of strength, he kept the enemy off and held them 
throughout the night. Then at daybreak, attacking 
them by a sudden sortie when they were exhausted 
with watching, he easily defeated them.‘ 

Quintus Sertorius, when in Spain, was completely 
outmatched by the cavalry of the enemy, who in 
their excessive confidence advanced up to his very 
fortifications. Accordingly during the night he con- 


193 
VOL, I. o 


SEXTUS JULIUS FRONTINUS 


aciem direxit, Cum deinde turmales secundum con- 
suetudinem adventarent, recepit aciem; persecuti 
aciem in fossas deciderunt et eo modo victi sunt. 

3. Chares dux Atheniensium, cum exspectaret 
auxilia et veréretur, ne interea contemptu praesentis 
paucitatis hostes castra eius oppugnarent, complures 
ex eis quos habebat per aversam partem nocte emis- 
Sos iussit, qua praecipue conspicui forent hostibus, 
redire in castra et accedentium novarum virium 
speciem praebere; atque ita simulatis auxiliis tutus 
est, donec instrueretur exspectatis. 

4. Iphicrates Atheniensis, cum campestribus locis 
castra haberet explorassetque Thracas ex collibus, 
per quos unus erat descensus, nocte ad diripienda 
castra venturos, clam eduxit exercitum et in utraque 
viae latera, per quam transituri Thraces erant, 
distributum conlocavit; hostemque decurrentem in 
castra, in quibus multi ignes per paucorum curam 
instituti speciem manentis ibi multitudinis serva- 
bant, a lateribus adortus oppressit. 


XIII. De ErrucikeNDo 


l. GaLL: pugnaturi cum Attalo aurum omne et 
argentum certis custodibus tradiderunt, a quibus, si 


1 80-72 B.C. 2 366-338 B.C. 
3 389 ».c. This same story is told in 1. v. 24. Cf. also 
Polyaen. 111, ix. 41, 46, 50. 


194 


STRATAGEMS, II. xn. 2—xn1. 1 


structed trenches and drew up his line of battle in 
front of them. Then when the cavalry approached, 
as was their wont, he drew back his line. The enemy 
following close on his heels, fell into the trenches 
and thus were defeated.! l 

Chares, the Athenian commander, on one occasion 
was expecting reinforcements, but feared that mean- 
while the enemy, despising his small force, would 
attack his camp. He therefore ordered that a 
number of the soldiers under his command should 
pass out at night by the rear of the camp, and 
should return by a route where they would be 
clearly observed by the enemy, thus creating the im- 
pression that fresh forces were arriving. In this way, 
he defended himself by pretended reinforcements, 
until he was equipped with those he was expecting.? 

Iphicrates, the Athenian, being encamped on one 
occasion on level ground, happened to learn that 
the Thracians were intending to come down from 
the hills, over which there was but a single line 
of descent, with the purpose of plundering his camp 
by night. He therefore secretly led forth his troops 
and posted them on both sides of the road over 
which the Thracians were to pass. Then when the 
enemy descended upon the camp, in which a large 
number of watch-fires, built by the hands of a few 
men, produced the impression that a mighty host 
was still there, Iphicrates was enabled to attack them 
on the flank and crush them.? 


XIII. On RETREATING 
WueEn the Gauls were about to fight with Attalus, 
they handed over all their gold and silver to trusty 
guards, with instructions to scatter it, in case their 


195 
o 2 


SEXTUS JULIUS FRONTINUS 


acie fusi essent, spargeretur, quo facilius conligenda 
praeda hostem impeditum effugerent. 

2. Tryphon Syriae rex victus per totum iter fugiens 
pecuniam sparsit et sectanda ea Antiochi equites 
moratos ! effugit. 

3. Q. Sertorius, pulsus acie a Q. Metello Pio, ne 
fugam quidem sibi tutam arbitratus, abire dispersos 
milites iussit, admonitos in quem locum vellet con- 
venire. 

4. Viriathus dux Lusitanorum copias nostras lo- 
corumque iniquitatem evasit eadem qua Sertorius 
ratione, sparso exercitu, dein reconlecto. 

5. Horatius Cocles, urguente Porsennae exercitu, 
iussit suos per pontem redire in urbem eumque, 
ne eos insequeretur hostis, intercidere. Quod dum 
efficitur, in capite eius propugnator ipse insequentes 
detinuit. Audito deinde fragore pontis abrupti, de- 
iecit se in alveum eumque in armis et vulneribus 
oneratus tranavit. 

6. Afranius in Hispania ad Ilerdam, cum Caesarem 
fugeret, instante eo castra posuit; cum idem Caesar 
fecisset et pabulatum suos dimisisset, ille signum 
repente itineri dedit. 

T. Antonius, cum ex Parthis instantibus reciperet 


1 moratus H, Gund. ; moratos d, Wachs. 


1 Cic. Pro Lege Manil. ix. 22 and Flor. rir. v. 18 attribute 
a similar stratagem to Mithridates. 

2 134 B.C. 3 75 B.C. Cf. Plut. Pomp. 19. 

* 147-139 B.c. Cf. Appian Hisp. 62. Cf. note to ii. v. 7. 

5 507 B.c. Cf. Livy ii. 10; Dionys. v. 23-25; Plut. 
Publ. 16. $493.0. Cf. Caes. B.C, i. 80. 


196 


STRATAGEMS, II. xm. 1-7 


forces should be routed in battle, in order that 
thereby the enemy might be occupied in picking 
up the spoils and they themselves might more easily 
escape. 

Tryphon, king of Syria, when defeated, scattered 
money along the whole line of his retreat. While 
the cavalry of Antiochus delayed to pick this up, he 
effected his escape.? 

Quintus Sertorius, when defeated in bate by 
Quintus Metellus Pius, being convinced that not 
even an organized retreat was safe, commanded his 
soldiers to disband and retire, informing them at 
what point he desired them to reassemble.? 

Viriathus, leader of the Lusitanians, extricated 
himself from an awkward position, and from the 
menace of our troops, by the same method as 
Sertorius, disbanding his forces and then re- 
assembling.‘ 

Horatius Cocles, when Porsenna’s army was press- 
ing hard upon him, commanded his supporters to 
return over the bridge to the City, and then to 
destroy the bridge in order that the foe might not 
follow them. While this was being done, he him- 
self, as defender of the bridgehead, held up the 
oncoming enemy. Then, when the crash told him 
that the bridge had been destroyed, he threw him- 
self into the stream, and swam across it in his 
armour, exhausted though he was by wounds.5 

Afranius, when fleeing from Caesar near llerda in 
Spain, pitched camp, while Caesar was pressing close 
upon him. When Caesar did the same and sent his 
men off to gather forage, Afranius suddenly gave the 
signal to continue the retreat.® 

When Anthony was retreating, hard pressed by 


197 


SEXTUS JULIUS FRONTINUS 


exercitum et, quotiens prima luce moveret, totiens 
urguentibus barbarorum sagittis infestaretur abeun- 
tium agmen, in quintam horam continuit suos fidem- 
que stativorum fecit. Qua persuasione digressis inde 
Parthis, iustum iter reliquo die sine interpellatione 
confecit. 

8. Philippus in Epiro victus, ne fugientem eum 
Romani premerent, indutias ad sepeliendos qui 
caesi erant impetravit et ob id remissioribus custo- 
dibus evasit. 

9. P. Claudius, navali proelio superatus a Poenis, 
cum per hostium praesidia necesse haberet erumpere, 
reliquas viginti naves tamquam victrices iussit ornari ; 
atque ita Poenis existimantibus superiores fuisse acie 
nostros terribilis excessit. 

10. Poeni classe superati, quia instantem avertere 
Romanum studebant, simulaverunt in vada naves 
suas incidisse haerentisque imitati effecerunt, ut 
victor eorum timens casum spatium ad evadendum 
daret. | 

11. Commius Atrebas, cum victus a Divo Iulio ex 
Gallia in Britanniam fugeret et forte ad Oceanum 


1 36 B.C. 

2 198 B.C. 

3 249 p.c. Battle of Drepanum. Eutrop. ii. 26, Polyb. 
I. li. 11-12, and Oros. Iv, x. 3, give the number of ships as 
thirty. 


198 


STRATAGEMS, II. xm, 7-11 


the Parthians, as often as he broke camp at day- 
break, his retiring troops were assailed by volleys 
of arrows from the barbarians. Accordingly one 
day he kept his men back till nearly noon, thus 
producing the impression that he had made a per- 
manent camp. As soon as the Parthians had become 
persuaded of this and had withdrawn, he accom- 
plished his regular march for the remainder of the 
day without interference.! 

When Philip had suffered defeat in Epirus, in 
` order that the Romans might not overwhelm him 
in flight, he secured the grant of a truce to bury 
the dead. In consequence of this, the guards 
relaxed their vigilance, so that Philip slipped 
away.? 

Publius Claudius, defeated by the Carthaginians 
in a naval engagement and thinking it necessary 
to break through the forces of the enemy, ordered 
his twenty remaining vessels to be dressed out as 
though victorious. The Carthaginians, therefore, 
thought our men had proved themselves superior 
in the encounter, so that Claudius became an 
object of fear to the enemy and thus made his 
escape.? 

The Carthaginians, on one occasion, when defeated 
in a naval battle, desiring to shake off the Romans 
who were close upon them, pretended that their 
vessels had caught on shoals and imitated the move- 
ments of stranded galleys. In this way they caused 
the victors, in fear of meeting a like disaster, to 
afford them an opportunity of escape. 

Commius, the Atrebatian, when defeated by the 
deified Julius, fled from Gaulto Britain, and happened 
to reach the Channel at a time when the wind was 


199 


SEXTUS JULIUS FRONTINUS 


vento quidem secundo, sed aestu recedente venisset, 
quamvis naves in siccis litoribus haererent, pandi 
nihilominus vela iussit. Quae.cum persequens eum 
Caesar ex longinquo tumentia et flatu plena vidisset, 


* ratus prospero sibi eripi cursu recessit. 


200 


STRATAGEMS, II. xur. 11 


fair, but the tide was out. Although the vessels 
were stranded on the flats, he nevertheless ordered 
the sails to be spread. Caesar, who was following 
from a distance, seeing the sails swelling with the 
full breeze, and imagining Commius to be escaping 
from his hands and to be proceeding on a prosperous 
voyage, abandoned the pursuit. 


201 


Digitized by Google 


BOOK III 


LIBER TERTIUS 


. Sı priores libri responderunt titulis suis et lecto- 
rem hucusque cum attentione perduxerunt, edam 
nunc circa oppugnationes urbium defensionesque 
atparnynuara. Nec morabor ulla praelocutione, 
prius traditurus quae oppugnandis urbibus usui 
sunt, tum quae obsessos instruere possint. De- 
positis autem operibus et machinamentis, quorum 
expleta iam pridem inventione nullam video ultra 
artium materiam, has circa expugnationem species 
orparnyņpárwv fecimus: 


I. De repentino impetu. 
II. De fallendis his qui obsidebuntur. 
III. De eliciendis ad proditionem. 
IIII. Per quae hostes ad inopiam redigantur. 
V. Quemadmodum persuadeatur obsidionem 
permansuram. 
VI. De districtione praesidiorum hostilium. 
VII. De fluminum derivatione et vitiatione 
aquarum. 
VIII. De iniciendo obsessis pavore. 
VIII. De inruptione ex diversa parte quam 
exspectabimur. 
X. De insidiis, per quas eliciantur obsessi. 
XI. De simulatione regressus. 


1 A curious illustration of the rashness of prophecy. 


204 


BOOK III 


Ir the preceding books have corresponded to their 
titles, and | have held the attention of the reader up 
to this point, I will now treat of ruses that deal with 
the siege and defence of towns. Waiving any preface, 
I will first submit those which are useful in the siege 
of cities, then those which offer suggestions to the 
besieged. Laying aside also all considerations of 
works and engines of war, the invention of which 
has long since reached its limit,! and for the improve- 
ment of which I see no further hope in the applied 
arts, I shall recognize the following typesof stratagems 
connected with siege operations: * 


I. On surprise attacks. 
II. On deceiving the besieged. 
III. On inducing treachery. 
IV. By what means the enemy may be reduced 
to want. 
V. How to persuade the enemy that the siege 
will be maintained. 
VI. On distracting the attention of a hostile 
garrison. 
VII. On diverting streams and contaminating 
| waters. . 
VIII. On terrorizing the besieged. 
IX. On attacks from an unexpected quarter. 
X. On setting traps to draw out the besieged. 
X]. On pretended retirements. 
205 


SEXTUS JULIUS FRONTINUS 


Ex contrario circa tutelam obsessorum : 


XII. De excitanda cura suorum. 
XIII. De emittendo et recipiendo nuntio, 
XIIL. De introducendis auxiliis et commeatibus 
suggerendis. 2 
XV. Quemadmodum efficiatur ut abundare vide- 
antur quae deerunt. 
XVI. Qua ratione proditoribus et transfugis 
occurratur. 
XVII. De eruptionibus. 
XVIII. De constantia obsessorum. 


I. De REPENTINO [IMPETU 


1. T. QuiNTIUs consul, victis acie Aequis et Volscis, 
cum Antium oppidum expugnare statuisset, ad contio- 
nem vocato exercitu exposuit, quam id necessarium 
et facile esset, si non differretur; eoque impetu, 
quem exhortatio concitaverat, adgressus est urbem. 

2. M. Cato in Hispania animadvertit potiri se 
quodam oppido posse, si inopinatos invaderet. 
Quadridui itaque iter biduo per confragosa et 
deserta emensus, nihil tale metuentes oppressit 
hostes. Victoribus deinde suis causam tam facilis 
eventus requirentibus dixit, tum illos victoriam 
adeptos, cum quadridui iter biduo corripuerint. 


1 468 B.C. 2 195 B.C. 


206 


STRATAGEMS, III. 1. 1-2 


On the other hand, stratagems connected with the 
protection of the besieged : 


XII. On stimulating the vigilance of one's own 
troops. 
XIII. On sending and receiving messages. 
XIV. On introducing reinforcements and supplying 
provisions. . 
XV. How to produce the impression of abundance 
of what is lacking. 
XVI. How to meet the menace of treason and 
desertion, 
XVII. On sorties. 
XVIII. Concerning steadfastness on the part of the 
besieged. 


I. ON SURPRISE ATTACKS 


Tue consul Titus Quinctius, having conquered the 
Aequians and Volscians in an engagement, decided 
to storm the walled town of Antium. Accordingly 
he called an assembly of the soldiers and explained 
how necessary this project was and how easy, if 
only it were not postponed. Then, having roused 
enthusiasm by his address, he assaulted the town.! 

Marcus Cato, when in Spain, saw that he could 
gain possession of a certain town, if only he could 
assault the enemy by surprise. Accordingly, having 
in two days accomplished a four days' march through 
rough and barren districts, he crushed his foes, who 
were fearing no such event. Then, when his men 
asked the reason of so easy a success, he told them 
that they had won the victory as soon as they had 
accomplished the four days’ march in two, 


207 


SEXTUS JULIUS FRONTINUS 


IJ. De FarrLENpis His Qui OBSIDEBUNTUR 


1. Domitius CaLvinus, cum obsideret Lueriam, 
oppidum Ligurum, non tantum situ et operibus, 
verum etiam propugnatorum praestantia tutum, 
circumire muros frequenter omnibus copiis instituit 
easdemque reducere in castra. Qua consuetudine 
inductis ita oppidanis, ut crederent exercitationis 
id gratia facere Romanum, et ob hoc nihil ab eo 
conatu caventibus, morem illum obambulandi in 
subitum direxit impetum, occupatisque moenibus 
expressit, ut se ipsos dederent oppidani. 

2. C. Duellius consul subinde exercendo milites 
remigesque consecutus est, ut securis Carthaginiensi- 
bus usque in id tempus innoxiae consuetudinis subito 
admota classe murum occuparet, 

3. Hannibal in Italia multas urbes cepit, cum 
Romanorum habitu quosdam suorum, ex longo belli 
usu latine quoque loquentis, praemitteret. 

4. Arcades Messeniorum castellum obsidentes, 
factis quibusdam armis ad similitudinem hostilium, 
eo tempore quo successura alia praesidia his ex- 
ploraverunt, instructi eorum qui exspectabantur 
ornatu admissique per hunc errorem ut socii, 
possessionem loci cum strage hostium adepti sunt. 

5. Cimon dux Atheniensium in Caria insidiatus 
cuidam civitati religiosum incolis templum Dianae 


1 260 B.C. 
2 216-203 B.c. 


208 


STRATAGEMS, III. u. 1-5 


II. On Decervine THE BEsrEGED 


Wuen Domitius Calvinus was besieging Lueria, a 
town of the Ligurians, protected not only by its 
location and siege-works, but also by the superiority 
of its defenders, he instituted the practice of march- 
ing frequently around the walls with all his forces, 
and then marching back to camp. When the towns- 
people had been induced by this routine to believe 
that the Roman commander did this for the purpose 
of drill, and consequently took no precautions against 
his efforts, he transformed this practice of parading 
into a sudden attack, and gaining possession of the 
walls, forced the inhabitants to surrender. 

The consul Gaius Duellius, by frequently exercising 
his soldiers and sailors, succeeded in preventing the 
Carthaginians from taking notice of a practice which 
was innocent enough, until suddenly he brought up 
his fleet and seized their fortifications.! 

Hannibal captured many cities in Italy by sending 
ahead certain of his own men, dressed in the garb of 
Romans and speaking Latin, which they had acquired 
as a result of long experience in the war.? 

The Arcadians, when besieging a stronghold of the 
Messenians, fabricated certain weapons to resemble 
those of the enemy. Then, at the time when they 
learned that another force was to relieve the first, 
they dressed themselves in the uniform of those who 
were expected, and being admitted as comrades in 
consequence of this confusion, they secured posses- 
sion of the place and wrought havoc among the foe. 

Cimon, the Athenian general, having designs on a 
certain city in Caria, under cover of night set fire to 
a temple of Diana, held in high reverence by the in- 


209 
VOL, I. P 


SEXTUS JULIUS FRONTINUS 


lucumque, qui extra muros erat, noctu improvisus 
incendit; effusisque oppidanis ad opem adversus 
ignes ferendam vacuam defensoribus cepit urbem. 

6. Alcibiades dux Atheniensium, cum civitatem 
Agrigentinorum egregie munitam obsideret, petito 
ab eis concilio diu tamquam de rebus ad commune 
pertinentibus disseruit in theatro, ubi ex more 
Graecorum locus consultationi praebebatur ; dumque 
consilii specie tenet multitudinem, Athenienses, quos 
ad id praeparaverat, incustoditam urbem ceperunt. 

7. Epaminondas Thebanus in Arcadia die festo 
effuse extra moenia vagantibus hostium feminis ple- 
rosque ex militibus suis muliebri ornatu immiscuit, 
Qua simulatione illi intra portas sub noctem recepti 
ceperunt oppidum et suis aperuerunt. 

8. Aristippus Lacedaemonius festo die Tegeata- 
rum, quo omnis multitudo ad celebrandum Minervae 
sacrum urbe egressa erat, iumenta saccis frumenta- 
riis palea refertis onusta Tegeam misit, agentibus ea 
militibus, qui negotiatorum specie inobservati portas 
aperuerunt suis. 

9. Antiochus in Cappadocia ex castello Suenda, 
quod obsidebat, iumenta frumentatum egressa inter- 
cepit occisisque calonibus, eorundem vestitu milites 
suos tamquam frumentum reportantes summisit. Quo 


1 About 470 s.c. 

2 415 B.C. Thuc. vi. 51, Polyaen. 1. xl. 4 and Diodor. xir. 
iv. 4, make Catana, and not Agrigentum, the scene of this 
stratagem. 

3 379 B.c. Polyaen. rr. iii. 1 has a different version of this 
story, but in 11. iv. 3 attributes a somewhat similar stratagem 
to Pelopidas. 


210 


STRATAGEMS, III, n. 5-9 


habitants, and also to a grove outside the walls. 
Then, when the townspeople poured out to fight the 
conflagration, Cimon captured the city, since it was 
left without defenders.! 

Alcibiades, the Athenian commander, while be- 
sieging the strongly fortified city of the Agrigentines, 
requested a conference of the citizens, and, as though 
discussing matters of common concern, addressed 
them at length in the theatre, where according to 
the custom of the Greeks it was usual to afford a 
place for consultation. Then, while he held the 
crowd on the pretence of deliberation, the Athenians, 
whom he had previously prepared for this move, 
captured the city, thus left unguarded.? 

When Epaminondas, the Theban, was campaigning 
in Arcadia, and on a certain holiday the women of 
the enemy strolled in large numbers outside the 
walls, he sent among them a number of his own 
troops dressed in women's attire. In consequence 
of this disguise, the men were admitted towards 
nightfall to the town, whereupon they seized it and 
threw it open to their companions.? 

Aristippus, the Spartan, on a holiday of the 
Tegeans, when the whole population had gone out 
of the city to celebrate the rites of Minerva, sent to 
Tegea a number of mules laden with grain-bags 
filled with chaff. The mules were driven by soldiers 
disguised as traders, who, escaping notice, threw 
open the gates of the town to their comrades. 

When Antiochus was besieging the fortified town of 
Suenda in Cappadocia, he intercepted some beasts of 
burden which had gone out to procure grain. Then, 
killing their attendants, he dressed his own soldiers 
in their clothes and sent them in as though bringing 


21I 
P 2 


SEXTUS JULIUS FRONTINUS 


errore illi custodibus deceptis castellum intraverunt 
admiseruntque milites Antiochi. 

10. Thebani, cum portum Sicyoniorum nulla vi 
redigere in potestatem suam possent,navem ingentem 
armatis compleverunt, exposita super merce, ut 
negotiatorum specie fallerent. Ab ea deinde parte 
murorum, quae longissime remota erat a mari, paucos 
disposuerunt, cum quibus e nave quidam egressi 
inermes simulata rixa concurrerent. Sicyoniis ad 
dirimendum id iurgium advocatis, Thebanae naves 
et portum vacantem et urbem occupaverunt. 

11. Timarchus Aetolus, occiso Charmade Ptolomaei 
regis praefecto, clamide interempti et galeari ad 
Macedonicum ornatus est habitum; per hunc erro- 
rem pro Charmade in Saniorum portum receptus 
occupavit. 


III. De ELICIENDIS ap PRODITIONEM 


1. Papirius Cursor consul apud Tarentum Miloni, 
qui cum praesidio Epirotarum urbem obtinebat, salu- 
tem ipsi et popularibus, si per illum oppido potiretur, 
pollicitus est. Quibus praemiis ille corruptus persua- 
sit Tarentinis, ut se legatum ad consulem mitterent, 
a quo plena promissa ex pacto referens in securita- 


1 Polyaen. v. xvi. 3 makes Pammenes the author of this 
stratagem, 369 B.C. 
3 Ptolemy Ceraunus, king of Macedonia, 280 s.c. 


212 


STRATAGEMS, III. ir. 9-1n. 1 


back the grain. The sentinels fell into the trap 
and, mistaking the soldiers for teamsters, let the 
troops of Antiochus enter the fortifications. 

When the Thebans were unable by the utmost 
exertions to gain possession of the harbour of the 
Sicyonians, they filled a large vessel with armed men, 
exhibiting a cargo in full view on deck, in order, 
under the guise of traders, to deceive their enemies. 
Then at a point of the fortifications remote from the 
sea they stationed a few men, with whom certain 
unarmed members of the crew upon disembarking 
were to engage in a fracas, on the pretence of a 
quarrel. When the Sicyonians were summoned to 
stop the altercation, the Theban crews seized both 
the unguarded harbour and the town.! 

Timarchus, the Aetolian, having killed Charmades, 
general of King Ptolemy,? arrayed himself in Mace- 
donian fashion in the cloak and casque of the slain 
commander. Through this disguise he was admitted 
as Charmades into the harbour of the Sanii and 
secured possession of it. 


III. On Inpucinc TREACHERY 


Wuen the consul Papirius Cursor was before 
Tarentum, and Milo was holding the town with a 
force of Epirotes, Papirius promised safety to Milo 
and the townspeople if he should secure possession 
of the town through Milo's agency.  Bribed by these 
inducements, Milo persuaded the Tarentines to send 
him as ambassador to the consul, from whom, in 
conformity with their understanding, he brought 
back liberal promises by means of which he caused 


213 


SEXTUS JULIUS FRONTINUS 


tem oppidanos resolvit atque ita incustoditam urbem 
Cursori tradidit. 

2. M. Marcellus, cum Syracusanum quendam So- 
sistratum ad proditionem sollicitasset, ex eo cognovit 
remissiores custodias fore die festo, quo Epicydes 
praebiturus esset vini epularumque copiam. [nsidiatus 
igitur hilaritati et quae eam sequebatur socordiae 
munimenta conscendit vigilibusque caesis aperuit 
exercitui Romano urbem nobilibus victoriis claram. 

3. Tarquinius Superbus, cum Gabios in deditionem 
accipere non posset, filium suum Sextum Tarquinium 
caesum virgis ad hostem misit. Is incusata patris 
saevitia persuasit Gabinis, odio suo adversus regem 
uterentur, et dux ad bellum electus tradidit patri 
Gabios. 

4. Cyrus Persarum rex comitem suum Zopyrum, 
explorata eius fide, truncata de industria facie, ad 
hostes dimisit. Ile adsentante iniuriarum fide 
creditus inimicissimus Cyro, cum hanc persuasionem 
adiuvaret procurrendo propius, quotiens acie decer- 
taretur, et in eum tela dirigendo, commissam sibi 
Babyloniorum urbem tradidit Cyro. 

5. Philippus, oppido Saniorum exclusus, Apollonidi 
praefecto eorum ad proditionem corrupto persuasit, 
ut plaustrum lapide quadrato oneratum in ipso aditu 


1272 B.C. Cf. Zonar. viii. 6. 

3 212 B.c. Livy xxv. 23 ff., Plut. Marc. 18, and Polyaen. 
viii. 11 name Damippus a Spartan, rather than Sosistratus, 
as the source of the information. 

3 Cf. Livy i. 53; Val. Max. vil. iv. 2; Polyaen. viii. 6. 

* 518 B.c. Herod. iii. 153, Justin. 1. x. 15, and Polyaen. 
vii. 13, represent Zopyrus as mutilating himself, and make 
Darius rather than Cyrus the monarch at the time. 


214 


STRATAGEMS, III. u. 1-5 


the citizens to relapse into a feeling of security, and 
was thus enabled to hand the city over to Cursor, 
since it was left unguarded.! 

Marcus Marcellus, having tempted a certain 
Sosistratus of Syracuse to turn traitor, learned 
from him that the guards would be less strict on 
a holiday when a certain citizen named Epicydes 
was to make a generous distribution of wine and 
food. So, taking advantage of the gaiety and the 
consequent laxness of discipline, he scaled the walls, 
slew the sentinels, and threw open to the Roman 
army a city already made famous as the scene of 
noted victories.? 

When Tarquinius Superbus was unable to induce 
Gabii to surrender, he scourged his son Sextus with 
rods and sent him among the enemy, where he 
arraigned the cruelty of his father and persuaded 
the Gabians to utilize his hatred against the king. 
Accordingly he was chosen leader in the war, and 
delivered Gabii over to his father.? 

Cyrus, king of the Persians, having proved the 
loyalty of his attendant Zopyrus, deliberately muti- 
lated his face and sent him among the enemy. In 
consequence of their belief in his wrongs, he was 
regarded as implacably hostile to Cyrus, and pro- 
moted this belief by running up and discharging his 
weapons against Cyrus, whenever an engagement 
took place, till finally the city of the Babylonians 
was entrusted to him and by him delivered into 
the hands of Cyrus.* 

Philip, when prevented from gaining possession 
of the town of the Sanians, bribed one of their 
generals, Apollonides, to turn traitor, inducing him 
to plant a cart laden with dressed stone at the 


215 


SEXTUS JULIUS FRONTINUS 


portae poneret. Confestim deinde signo dato inse- 
cutus oppidanos circa impedita portae claustra tre- 
pidantis oppressit. 

6. Hannibal apud Tarentum, quae a praesidio 
Romano duce Livio tenebatur, Cononeum quendam 
Tarentinum, quem ad proditionem sollicitaverat, eius- 
modi fallacia instruxit, ut ille per causam venandi 
noctu procederet, quasi id per hostem interdiu non 
liceret. Egresso ipsi apros subministrabant, quos 
ille tamquam ex captura Livio offerret; idque cum 
saepius factum esset et ideo minus observaretur, 
quadam nocte Hannibal venatorum habitu Poenos 
comitibus eius immiscuit. Qui cum onusti venatione 
quam ferebant recepti essent a custodibus, protinus 
eos adorti occiderunt. Tum fracta porta admissus 
cum exercitu Hannibal omnes Romanos interfecit, 
exceptis his qui in arcem profugerant. 

7. Lysimachus rex Macedonum, cum Ephesios 
oppugnaret et illi in auxilio haberent Mandronem 
archipiratam; qui plerumque oneratas praeda naves 
Ephesum appellebat, corrupto ei ad proditionem 
iunxit fortissimos Macedonum, quos ille restrictis 
manibus pro captivis Ephesum introduceret, Postea 
raptis ex arce armis urbem Lysimacho tradiderunt. 


1 359-336 B.C. i 

3 212 B.c. Cf. Appian Hann. 32; Livy xxv. 8-9; Polyb. 
viii. 26. The name of the traitor is variously given. 

3 287 BC. Cf. Polyaen. v. 19. | 


210 


STRATAGEMS, III. rir. 5-7 


very entrance to the gate. Then straightway giving 
the signal, he followed after the townspeople, who 
were huddled in panic around the blocked entrance 
of the gate, and succeeded in overwhelming them.! 

When Hannibal was before Tarentum, and this 
town was held by a Roman garrison under the 
command of Livius, he induced a certain Cononeus 
of Tarentum to turn traitor, and concerted with him 
a stratagem whereby he was to go out at night for 
the purpose of hunting, on the ground that the 
enemy rendered this impossible by day. When he 
went forth, Hannibal supplied him with boars to 
present to Livius as trophies of the chase. When 
this had repeatedly been done, and for that reason 
was less noticed, Hannibal one night dressed a 
number of Carthaginians in the garb of hunters 
and introduced them among Cononeus's attendants. 
When these men, loaded with the game they were 
carrying, were admitted by the guards, they straight- 
way attacked and slew the latter. Then breaking 
down the gate, they admitted Hannibal with his 
troops, who slew all the Romans, save those who 
had fled for refuge to the citadel.? 

When Lysimachus, king of the Macedonians, was 
besieging the Ephesians, these were assisted by the 
pirate chief Mandro, who was in the habit of 
bringing into Ephesus galleys laden with booty. 
Accordingly Lysimachus bribed Mandro to turn 
traitor, and attached to him a number of dauntless 
Macedonians to be taken into the city as captives, 
with hands pinioned behind their backs. These 
men subsequently snatched weapons from the 
citadel and delivered the town into the hands of 
Lysimachus.? 


217 


SEXTUS JULIUS FRONTINUS 


IIII. Per quae Hostes ap INoPiAM REDIGANTUR 


1. Fasrus Maximus vastatis Campanorum agris, ne 
quid eis ad fiduciam obsidionis superesset, recessit 
sementis tempore, ut frumentum quod reliquum 
habebant in sationes conferrent; reversus deinde 
renata protrivit et ad famem redactis potitus est. 

2. Antigonus adversus Athenienses idem fecit.! 

3. Dionysius, multis urbibus captis, cum Reginos 
adgredi vellet, qui copiis abundabant, simulabat 
pacem petiitque ab eis, ut commeatus exercitui 
ipsius sumministrarent. Quod cum impetrasset ex- 
hausto oppidanorum frumento adgressus urbem 
alimentis destitutam superavit. 

4. Idem et adversus Himeraeos fecisse dicitur.? 

5.» Alexander oppugnaturus Leucadiam commeati- 
bus abundantem prius castella, quae in confinio 
erant, cepit omnesque ex his Leucadiam passus 
est confugere, ut alimenta inter multos celerius 
absumerentur. 

6. Phalaris Agrigentinus, cum quaedam loca mu- 
nitione tuta in Sicilia oppugnaret, simulato foedere 
frumenta, quae residua habere se dicebat, apud eos 
deposuit; deinde data opera, ut camerae tectorum, 


1 No. 2 is probably interpolated. 
2 No. 4 is probably interpolated. 


1 Apparently a confusion of two occasions. Cf. Livy 
XXIII. xlviii. 1-2 and xxv. xiii. 215 or 211 B.C. 

2 263 B.c. Cf. Polyaen. tv. vi. 20. 

3 391 B.c. The version of Diodor. xiv. 108 is slightly 
different. 

* 387 B.c. Cf. Polyaen. v. ii. 10. 

5 Son of Pyrrhus, 266-263 B.C. 


218 


STRATAGEMS, III. iv. 1-6 


IV. By waar Means THE ENEMY MAY BE REDUCED 
TO WANT 


Fasius Maximus, having laid waste the lands of 
the Campanians, in order that. they might have 
nothing left to warrant the confidence that a siege 
could be sustained, withdrew at the time of the 
sowing, that the inhabitants might plant what seed 
they had remaining. Then, returning, he destroyed 
the new crop and thus made himself master of the 
Campanians, whom he had reduced to famine.! 

Antigonus employed the same device against the 
Athenians.” 

Dionysius, having captured many cities and wish- 
ing to attack the Rhegians, who were Well provided 
with supplies, pretended to desire peace, and begged 
of them to furnish provisions for his army. When 
he had secured his request and had consumed the 
grain of the inhabitants, he attacked their town, 
now stripped of food, and conquered it.? 

He is said to have employed the same device also 
against the people of Himera.* 

When Alexander 5 was about to besiege Leucadia, 
a town well-supplied with provisions, he first cap- 
tured the fortresses on the border and allowed all 
the people from these to flee for refuge to Leucadia, 
in order that the food-supplies might be consumed 
with greater rapidity when shared by many. 

Phalaris of Agrigentum, when besieging certain 
places in Sicily protected by fortifications, pretended 
to make a treaty and deposited with the Sicilians 
all the wheat which he said he had remaining, 
taking pains, however, that the chambers of the 
buildings in which the grain was stored should have 


219 


SEXTUS JULIUS FRONTINUS 


in quibus id conferebatur, rescissae pluviam re- 
ciperent, eos fiducia conditi commeatus proprio tritico 
abusos initio aestatis adgressus inopia compulit ad 
deditionem. 


V. QUEMADMODUM PERSUADEATUR OBSIDIONEM 
PERMANSURAM 


1. Crearcnus Lacedaemonius, exploratum habens 
Thracas omnia victui necessaria in montes com- 
portasse unaque spe sustentari, quod crederent eum 
commeatus inopia recessurum, per id tempus, quo 
legatos eorum venturos opinabatur, aliquem ex 
captivis in conspectu iussit occidi et membratim 
tamquam alimenti causa in contubernia distribui. 
Thraces nihil non facturum perseverantiae causa eum 
credentes, qui tam detestabiles epulas sustinuisset 
experiri, in deditionem venerunt. 

2. Ti. Gracchus, Lusitanis dicentibus in X annos 
cibaria se habere et ideo obsidionem non expavescere, 
* undecimo," inquit, “anno vos capiam." Qua voce 
perterriti Lusitani, quamvis instructi commeatibus, 
statim se dediderunt. 

3. A. Torquato Graecam urbem oppugnanti cum 
diceretur, iuventutem ibi studiose iaculis et sagittis 
exerceri, * pluris eam," inquit, * propediem vendam." 


1 570-554 B.c. Cf. Polyaen. v. i. 3. According to 
Polyaenus, the Sicilians were to return to Phalaris not the 
grain he had left with them but the crops from their later 
harvests. 

3 402—401 B.c. Cf. Polyaen. rr. ii. 8. 

3 179-178 B.C. 


220 


STRATAGEMS, III. iv. 6-v. 5 


leaky roofs Then when the Sicilians, relying on 
the wheat which Phalaris had deposited with 
them, had used up their own supplies, Phalaris 
attacked them at the beginning of summer and as 
a result of their lack of provisions forced them to 
surrender.! 


V. How ro PERSUADE THE ENEMY THAT THE SIEGE 
WILL BE MAINTAINED 


+- Wuen Clearchus, the Spartan, had learned that the 
Thracians had conveyed to the mountains all things 
necessary for their subsistence and were buoyed up 
by the sole hope that he would withdraw in con- 
sequence of lack of supplies, at the time when he 
surmised their envoys would come, he ordered one 
-of the prisoners to be put to death in full view and 
his body to be distributed in pieces among the tents, 
as though for the mess. The Thracians, believing 
that Clearchus would stick at nothing in order to 
hold out, since he brought himself to try such loath- 
some food, delivered themselves up.? 

When the Lusitanians told Tiberius Gracchus that 
they had supplies for ten years and for that reason 
stood in no fear of a siege, he answered: “ Then 
Ill capture you in the eleventh year." Terror- 
stricken by this language, the Lusitanians, though 
well supplied with provisions, at once surren- 
dered.? 

When Aulus Torquatus was besieging a Greek 
city and was told that the young men of the city 
were engaged in earnest practice with the javelin 
and bow, he replied: * Then the price at which I 
shall presently sell them shall be higher." 


22I 


SEXTUS JULIUS FRONTINUS 


VI. De DisrRIcTIoNE PRAEsIDIoRUM HosTIUM 


1. Scipio, Hannibale in Africam reverso, cum 
plura oppida, quae ratio illi in potestatem redigenda 
dictabat, firmis praesidiis diversae partis obtinerentur, 
subinde aliquam manum submittebat ad infestanda 
ea. Novissime etiam tamquam direpturus civitates 
aderat, deinde simulato metu refugiebat. Hannibal, 
ratus veram esse eius trepidationem, deductis undique 
praesidiis, tamquam de summa rerum decertaturus 
insequi coepit. Ita consecutus Scipio, quod petierat, 
nudatas propugnatoribus urbis per Masinissam et 
Numidas cepit. 

2. P. Cornelius Scipio, intellecta difficultate expug- 
nandi Delminum, quia concursu omnium defende- 
batur, adgredi alia oppida coepit et revocatis! ad sua 
defendenda singulis vacuatam auxiliis Delminum 
cepit. 

3. Pyrrhus Epirotarum rex adversus Illyrios, cum 
civitatem quae caput gentis erat redigere in potesta- 
tem suam vellet, eius desperatione ceteras urbes 
petere coepit consecutusque est, ut hostes fiducia 
velut satis munitae urbis eius ad tutelam aliarum 
dilaberentur ; quo facto revocatis ipse rursus omnibus 
suis vacuam eam defensoribus cepit. 

4. Cornelius Rufinus consul, cum aliquanto tem- 


1 revocatis Bennett; evocatis MSS., edd. 


1 202 B.C. 3 155 B.C. 
3 296—280 B.C. 


222 


STRATAGEMS, III. vi. 1-4 


VI. On DISTRACTING THE ATTENTION or A HOosTILE 
GARRISON 


Wuen Hannibal had returned to Africa, many 
towns were still held by strong forces of the Car- 
thaginians. Scipio's policy demanded that these 
towns should be reduced. Accordingly he often 
sent troops to assault them. Finally he would 
appear before the towns as though bent on sacking 
them, and would then retire, feigning fear. Hanni- 
bal, thinking his alarm real, withdrew the garrison 
from all points, and began to follow, as though 
determined to fight a decisive battle. Scipio, having 
thus accomplished what he intended, with the 
assistance of Masinissa and the Numidians, captured 
the towns, which had thus been stripped of their 
defenders.! 

Publius Cornelius Scipio, appreciating the difficulty 
of capturing Delminus, because it was defended 
by the concerted efforts of the population of the 
district, began to assault other towns, Then, when 
the inhabitants of the various towns had been called 
back to defend their homes, Scipio took Delminus, 
which had been left without support.? 

Pyrrhus, king of Epirus, in his war against the 
Illyrians, aimed to reduce their capital, but despair- 
ing of this, began to attack the other towns, and 
succeeded in making the enemy disperse to protect 
their other cities, since they had confidence in the 
apparently adequate fortification of the capital. 
When he had accomplished this, he recalled his 
own forces and captured the town, now left without 
defenders.? 

The consul Cornelius Rufinus for some time be- 


223 


SEXTUS JULIUS FRONTINUS 


pore Crotona oppidum frustra obsedisset, quod 
inexpugnabile faciebat adsumpta in praesidium 
Lucanorum manus, simulavit se coepto desistere. 
Captivum deinde magno praemio sollicitatum misit 
Crotona, qui, tamquam ex custodia effugisset, per- 
suasit discessisse Romanos. Id verum Crotonienses 
arbitrati dimisere auxilia destitutique propugnatoribus 
inopinati et invalidi capti sunt. 

5. Mago dux Carthaginiensium, victo Cn, Pisone 
et in quadam turre circumsesso, suspicatus ventura 
ei subsidia perfugam misit, qui persuaderet appropin- 
quantibus captum iam Pisonem ; qua ratione deterritis 
eis reliqua victoriae consummavit. 

6. Alcibiades in Sicilia, cum Syracusanos capere 
vellet, ex Catiniensibus, apud quos tum exercitum 
continebat, quendam exploratae sollertiae submisit 
ad Syracusanos. Is in publicum concilium introductus 
persuasit infestissimos esse Catinienses Atheniensibus 
et, si adiuvarentur a Syracusanis, futurum, ut oppri- 
merent eos et Alcibiadem. Qua re adducti Syracusani 
universis viribus Catinam petituri processerunt, re- 
licta ipsorum urbe, quam a tergo adortus Alcibiades 
desolatam, ut speraverat, adflixit. 

7. Cleonymus Atheniensis Troezenios, qui praesi- 


1277 p.c. Cf. Zonar. viii. 6. 3 216—208 B.C. 

3 415 B.C. This account agrees with that of Polyaen. 
I. xl. 5. Thuc. vi. 64ff., and Diodor. xri. vi. 2 ff., attribute 
the stratagem to Nicias and Lamachus, and give a different 
version of its result. 


224 


STRATAGEMS, III. vi. 4-7 


sieged the city of Crotona, without success, since 
it had been made impregnable by the arrival of a 
band of Lucanian reinforcements. He therefore 
pretended to desist from his undertaking, and by 
offers of great rewards induced a certain prisoner 
to go to Crotona. This emissary, by feigning to 
have escaped from custody, persuaded the inhabi- 
tants to believe his report that the Romans had 
withdrawn. The people of Crotona, thinking this 
to be true, dismissed their allies. Then, weakened 
by being stripped of their defenders, they were 
surprised and captured.! 

Mago, general of the Carthaginians, having de- 
feated Gnaeus Piso and having blockaded the tower 
wherein he had taken refuge, suspecting that rein- 
forcements would come to his relief, sent a deserter 
to persuade the approaching troops that Piso was 
already captured. Having thus scared them off, 
Mago made his victory complete.? 

Alcibiades, wishing to capture the city of Syracuse 
in Sicily, chose from among the people of Catana, 
where he was encamped, a certain man of tested 
shrewdness and sent him to the Syracusans. This 
man, when brought before the public assembly of 
the Syracusans, persuaded them that the people of 
Catana were very hostile to the Athenians, and 
that, if assisted by the Syracusans, they would crush 
the Athenians and Alcibiades along with them. 
Induced by these representations, the Syracusans 
left their own city and set out in full force to join 
the people of Catana, whereupon Alcibiades attacked 
Syracuse from the rear, and finding it unprotected, 
as he had hoped, brought it under subjection.? 

When the people of Troezen were held in subjec- 


.225 
VOL. I. © Q 


SEXTUS JULIUS FRONTINUS 


dio Crateri tum tenebantur, adgressus tela quaedam, 
in quibus scriptum erat venisse se ad liberandam 
eorum rem publicam, intra muros iecit et eodem tem- 
pore captivos quosdam conciliatos sibi remisit, qui 
Craterum detractarent. Per hoc consilium seditione 
intestina apud obsessos concitata admoto exercitu 
potitus est civitate. 


VII. De FruMiNvuM DerivaTIoNE ET VITIATIONE 
AQUARUM 


1. P. SEnviLIuUs Isauram oppidum, flumine ex quo 

hostes aquabantur averso, ad deditionem siti com- 
ulit. 

i 2. C. Caesar in Gallia Cadurcorum civitatem amne 
cinctam et fontibus abundantem ad inopiam aquae 

redegit, cum fontes cuniculis avertisset et fluminis 

usum per sagittarios arcuisset, 

3. L. Metellus in Hispania citeriore in castra ho- 
stium humili loco posita fluvium ex superiore parte 
immisit et subita inundatione turbatos per dispositos 
in hoc ipsum insidiatores cecidit. 

4. Alexander apud Babylona, quae media flumine 
Euphrate dividebatur, fossam pariter et aggerem 
instituit, ut in usum eius existimarent hostes egeri 
terram ; atque ita subito flumine averso per alveum 


1 277-276 s.c. Polyaen. 11. xxix 1 calls Cleonymus a 
king of Sparta. 

2 78-76 B.C. 

3 51 B.c. Cf. Hirt. B.G. viii. 40 ff. 

4 143-142 ».c. Quintus Caecilius Metellus Macedonicus, 
although the better manuscript readings give L. as the 
praenomen. 


226 


STRATAGEMS, III. vi. 7-vir. 4 


tion by troops under the command of Craterus, the 
Athenian Cleonymus made an assault on the town 
and hurled within its walls missiles inscribed with 
messages stating that Cleonymus had come to 
liberate their state. At the same time certain 
prisoners whom he had won over to his side were 
sent back to disparage Craterus. By this plan he 
stirred up internal strife among the besieged and, 
bringing up his troops, gained possession of the 
city.! 


VII. On DivknTING STREAMS AND CONTAMINATING 
WATERS 


PunLivs SEnviLIivs diverted the stream from which 
the inhabitants of Isaura drew their water, and thus 
forced them to surrender in consequence of thirst.? 

Gaius Caesar, in one of his Gallic campaigns, 
deprived the city of the Cadurci of water, although 
it was surrounded by a river and abounded in springs ; 
for he diverted the springs by subterranean channels, 
while his archers shut off all access to the river. 

Lucius Metellus, when fighting in Hither Spain, 
diverted the course of a river and directed it from 
a higher level against the camp of the enemy, which 
was located on low ground. Then, when the enemy 
were in panic from the sudden flood, he had them 
slain by men whom he had stationed in ambush for 
this very purpose.* 

At Babylon, which is divided into two parts by 
the river Euphrates, Alexander constructed both a 
ditch and an embankment, the enemy supposing that 
the earth was being taken out merely to form the 
embankment. Alexander, accordingly, suddenly 


227 
Q2 


SEXTUS JULIUS FRONTINUS 


veterem, qui siccatus ingressum praebebat, urbem 
intravit. 

5. Semiramis adversus eosdem Babylonios eodem 
Euphrate averso idem fecisse dicitur.! 

6. Clisthenes Sicyonius ductum aquarum in oppi- 
dum Crisaeorum ferentem rupit; mox adfectis siti 
restituit aquam elleboro corruptam, qua usos profluvio 
ventris deficientes cepit. 


VIII. De InicreEnpo OsnsEssis PavonE 


1. PuiniPPUS, cum  Prinassum castellum nulla vi 
capere posset, terram ante ipsos muros egessit simu- 
lavitque agi cuniculum ; castellani, quia subrutos se 
existimarant, dediderunt. 

2. Pelopidas Thebanus Magnetum duo oppida si- 
mul oppugnaturus non ita longo spatio distantia, quo 
tempore ad alterum eorum exercitum admovebat, 
praecepit, ut ex composito ab aliis castris quattuor 
equites coronati notabili alacritate velut victoriam 
nuntiantes venirent. Ad cuius simulationem curavit, 
ut silva quae in medio erat incenderetur, praebitura 
speciem urbis ardentis; praeterea quosdam capti- 


1 No. 5 is probably an interpolation. 


1 Herod. i. 191, Xen. Cyrop. vii. 5, and Polyaen. vit. vi. 5, 
attribute this stratagem to Cyrus rather than Alexander. 

2 505—585 B.c. Polyaen. vi. 13 attributes this stratagem 
to Eurylochus ; Pausan. x. xxxvii. 7, to Solon. 

3 201 B.c. Cf. Polyb. xvi. 11; Polyaen. Iv. xviii. 1. 


228 


STRATAGEMS, III. vir. 4-viir. 2 


diverting the stream, entered the town along the 
former river bed, which had dried up and thus 
afforded an entrance to the town.! 

Semiramis is said. to have done the same thing in 
the war against the Babylonians, by diverting the 
same Euphrates. 

Clisthenes of Sicyon cut the water-pipes leading 
into the town of the Crisaeans. Then when the 
townspeople were suffering from thirst, he turned 
on the water again, now poisoned with hellebore. 
When the inhabitants used this, they were so 
weakened by diarrhoea that Clisthenes overcame 
them.? 


VIII. On TERRORIZING THE BresiEGED 


Wuen Philip was unable by the utmost exertions 
to capture the fortress of Prinassus, he made excava- 
tions of earth directly in front of the walls and pre- 
tended to be constructing atunnel. The men within 
the fortress, imagining that they were being under- 
mined, surrendered.? 

Pelopidas, the Theban, on one occasion planned 
to make a simultaneous attack on two towns of the 
Magnetes, not very far distant from each other. As 
he advanced against one of these towns, he gave 
orders that, in accordance with preconcerted arrange- 
ments, four horsemen should come from the other 
camp with garlands on their heads and with the 
marked eagerness of those who announce a victory. 
To complete the illusion, he arranged to have a 
forest between the two cities set on fire, to give the 
appearance of a burning town. Besides this, he 
ordered certain prisoners to be led along, dressed in 


229 


SEXTUS JULIUS FRONTINUS 


vorum habitu eodem iussit perduci. Qua adsevera- 
tione perterriti qui obsidebantur, dum in parte iam 
se superatos existimant, defecerunt. 

9. Cyrus Persarum rex, incluso Sardibus Croeso, 
qua praeruptus mons nullum aditum praestabat, ad 
moenia malos exaequantis altitudinem iugi subrexit, 
quibus simulacra hominum armata Persici habitus 
imposuerat, noctuque eos monti admovit. Tum prima 
luce ex altera parte muros adgressus est. Ubi orto 
sole simulacra illa armatorum referentia habitum 
refulserunt, oppidani captam urbem a tergo creden- 
tes et ob hoc in fugam dilapsi victoriam hostibus 
concesserunt. 


VIIII. De INRuPTIoNE Ex Diversa PARTE QUAM 
ExsPECTABIMUR 


1. Scipio apud Carthaginem sub decessum 1 aestus 
maritimi, secutus deum ut dicebat ducem, ad muros 
urbis accessit et cedente stagno, qua non exspecta- 
batur, inrupit. 

2. Fabius Maximus Cunctatoris filius apud Arpos 
praesidio Hannibalis occupatos, considerato situ urbis, 
sescentos milites obscura nocte misit, qui per muni- 
tam eoque minus frequentem oppidi partem scalis 
evecti in murum portas revellerent. Hi adiuti deci- 
dentium aquarum sono, qui operis strepitum obscura- 


1 discessum MSS., edd. ; Gund. suggests the above reading. 


1 369—364 B.c. Cf. Polyaen. rr. iv. 1. 

* 546 p.c. Cf. Polyaen. vit. vi. 10; Ctes. ed. Müller, pp. 
46-60. Herod. i. 84 makes no mention of this stratagem. 

* 210 p.c. Cf. Livy xxvi. 45-46; Polyb. x. 10 ff. ; Appian 
Hisp. 21 ff. 


230 


STRATAGEMS, III. vur. 2—1x. 2 


the costume of the townspeople. When the besieged 
had been terrified by these demonstrations, deeming 
themselves already defeated in one quarter, they 
ceased to offer resistance.! 

Cyrus, king of the Persians, at one time forced 
Croesus to take refuge in Sardis. On one side a 
steep hill prevented access to the town. Here near 
the walls Cyrus erected masts equal to the height of 
the ridge of the hill, and on them placed dummies 
of armed men dressed in Persian uniforms. At night 
he brought these to the hill. Then at dawn he 
attacked the walls from the other side. As soon as 
the sun rose and the dummies, flashing in the sun- 
light, revealed the garb of warriors, the townspeople, 
imagining that their city had been captured from 
the rear, scattered in flight and left the field to the 
enemy.? 


IX. On Attacks From AN UNEXPECTED QUARTER 


Scipio, when fighting before Carthage, approached 
the walls of the city, just before the turn of the 
tide, guided, as he said, by some god. Then, when 
the tide went out in the shallow lagoon, he burst in 
at that point, the enemy not expecting him there.® 

Fabius Maximus, son of Fabius Cunctator, finding 
Arpi occupied by Hannibal’s forces, first inspected 
the site of the town, and then sent six hundred 
soldiers on a dark night to mount the walls with 
scaling-ladders at a part of the town which was 
fortified and therefore less guarded, and to tear 
down the gates. These men were aided in the 
execution of their orders by the noise of the falling 
rain, which deadened the sound of their operations. 


231 


SEXTUS JULIUS FRONTINUS 


bat, iussa peragunt; ipse dato signo ab alia parte 
adgressus cepit Arpos. 

3. C. Marius bello Iugurthino apud flumen Mulu- 
cham, cum oppugnaret castellum in monte saxeo 
situm, quod una et angusta semita adibatur, cetera 
parte velut consulto praecipiti, nuntiato sibi per 
Ligurem quendam ex auxiliis gregalem militem, qui 
forte aquatum progressus, dum per saxa montis 
cocleas legit, ad summa pervenerat, erepi posse in 
castellum, paucos centuriones cum velocissimis mili- 
tibus, quibus perfectissimos aeneatores immiscuerat, 
misit capite pedibusque nudis, ut prospectus nisusque 
per saxa facilior foret, scutis gladiisque tergo aptatis. 
Hi Ligure ducente loris et clavis quibus in ascensu 
nitebantur adiuti, cum ad posteriora et ob id vacua 
defensoribus castelli pervenissent, concinere et tumul- 
tuari, ut praeceptum erat, coeperunt, Ad quod con- 
stitutum Marius constantius adhortatus suos acrius 
instare castellanis coepit, quos ab imbelli multitudine 
suorum revocatos, tamquam a tergo capti essent, 
insecutus castellum cepit. 

4. L. Cornelius Rufinus consul complura Sardiniae 
cepit oppida, dum firmissimas partes copiarum noctu 


1213 B.c. Cf. Livy xxiv. 46-47. 
2 107 p.c. Cf. Sall. Jug. 92-94; Flor. 11. i. 14. 


232 


STRATAGEMS, III. 1x. 2-4 


In another quarter, Fabius himself made an attack 
at a given signal and captured Arpi.! 

In the Jugurthine War Gaius Marius was at one 
time besieging a fortress situated near the Mulucha 
River. It stood on a rocky eminence, accessible on 
one side by a single narrow path, while the other 
side, as though by special design, was precipitous. It 
happened that a certain Ligurian, a common soldier 
from among the auxiliaries, had gone out to procure 
water, and, while gathering snails among the rocks 
of the mountain, had reached the summit. This 
man reported to Marius that it was possible to 
clamber up to the stronghold. Marius accordingly 
sent a few centurions in company with his fleetest 
soldiers, including also the most skilful trumpeters. 
These men went bare-headed and bare-footed, that 
they might see better and make their way more 
easily over the rocks ; their shields and swords were 
fastened to their backs. Guided by the Ligurian, 
and aided by straps and staffs, with which they sup- 
ported themselves, they made their way up to the 
rear of the fortress, which, owing to its position, was 
without defenders, and then began to sound their 
trumpets and make a great uproar, as they had 
previously been directed. At this signal, Marius, 
steadfastly urging on his men, began to advance 
with renewed fury against the defenders of the 
fortress. The latter were recalled from the defence 
by the populace, who had lost heart under the 
impression that the town had been captured from 
the rear, so that Marius was enabled to press on 
and capture the fort.? 

The consul Lucius Cornelius Rufinus captured 
numerous towns in Sardinia by landing powerful 


233 


SEXTUS JULIUS FRONTINUS 


exponit, quibus praecipiebat, delitiscerent opperiren- 
turque tempus, quo ipse naves appelleret. Occur- 
rentibus deinde adventanti hostibus et ab ipso per 
simulationem fugae longius ad persequendum avoca- 
tis, illi in relictas ab his urbes impetum fecerunt. 

5. Pericles dux Atheniensium, cum oppugnaret 
quandam civitatem magno consensu defendentium 
tutam, nocte ab ea parte murorum, quae mari adia- 
cebat, classicum cani clamoremque tolli iussit. Hostes 


penetratum illic in oppidum rati reliquerunt portas, 
per quas Pericles destitutas praesidio inrupit. 


6. Alcibiades dux Atheniensium Cyzicum oppug- 
nandae eius causa nocte improvisus accessit et ex 
diversa parte moenium cornicines canere iussit. Suffi- 
cere propugnatores murorum poterant. Ad id latus, 
a quo solo se temptari putabant, cum confluerent, 
qua non obsistebatur, muros transcendit. 

7. Thrasybulus dux Milesiorum, ut portum Sicyo- 
niorum occuparet, a terra subinde oppidanos temp- 
tavit et illo, quo lacessebantur, conversis hostibus 
classe inexspectata portum cepit. 

8. Philippus in obsidione cuiusdam maritimae urbis 
binas naves procul a conspectu contabulavit super- 
struxitque eis turres; aliis deinde turribus adortus 


1 Probably a confusion of names: Lucius Cornelius Scipio 
invaded Sardinia in 259 B.c. (cf. 11. x. 2). Publius Cornelius 
Rufinus was consul in 277, but waged war only in Italy. 

2 According to Thuc. viii. 107 and Diodor. xir. xl. 6, 
Cyzicus was not fortified by walls. This stratagem belongs 
rather to the taking of Byzantium, 409 B.c. Cf. 11. xi. 3; 
Diodor. xiii. 66—67 ; Plut. Alcib. 31. 3 About 600 B.C. 


234 


STRATAGEMS, III. ix. 4-8 


detachments of troops at night, with instructions to 
remain in hiding and to wait till he himself drew near 
land with his ships. Then as the enemy came to 
meet him at his approach, he led them a long chase 
by pretending to flee, while his other troops attacked 
the cities thus abandoned by their inhabitants.! 

Pericles, the Athenian general, was once besieging 
a city which was protected by very determined 
defenders. At night he ordered the trumpet to be 
sounded and a loud outcry to be raised at a quarter 
of the walls adjacent to thesea. The enemy, think- 
ing that the town had been entered at that point, 
abandoned the gates, whereupon, as soon as these 
were left without defence, Pericles burst into the 
town. 

Alcibiades, the Athenian general, planning to 
assault Cyzicus, approached the town unexpectedly 
at night, and commanded his trumpeters to sound 
their instruments at a different part of the fortifica- 
tions. The defenders of the walls were ample, but 
since they all flocked to the side where alone they 
imagined themselves to be attacked, Alcibiades 
succeeded in scaling the walls at the point where 
there was no resistance.? 

Thrasybulus, general of the Milesians, in his 
efforts to seize the harbour of the Sicyonians, made 
repeated attacks upon the inhabitants from the 
land side. Then, when the enemy directed their 
attention to the point where they were attacked, 
he suddenly seized the harbour with his fleet.? 

Philip, while besieging a certain coast town, 
secretly lashed ships together in pairs, with a 
common deck over all, and erected towers on them. 
Then launching an attack with other towers by land, 


235 


SEXTUS JULIUS FRONTINUS 


a terra, dum urbis propugnatores distringit, turritas 
naves a mari applicuit et, qua non resistebatur, 
subiit muros. 

9. Pericles Peloponnesiorum castellum oppugna- 
turus, in quod duo omnino erant accessus, alterum 
fossa interclusit, alterum munire instituit. Castel- 
lani securiores ab altera parte facti eam solam, quam 
muniri videbant, custodire coeperunt. Pericles prae- 
paratis pontibus iniectisque super fossam, qua non 
cavebatur, subiit castellum. 

10. Antiochus adversus Ephesios Rhodiis, quos in 
auxilio habebat, praecepit, ut nocte portum cum 
magno strepitu invaderent; ad quam partem omni 
multitudine cum tumultu decurrente, nudatis defen- 
sore reliquis munitionibus, ipse a diverso adgressus 
civitatem cepit. 


X. De Disponennis INsipiis, IN Quas ELiCIANTUR 
OssEssI 


1. Cato in conspectu Lacetanorum, quos obsidebat, 
reliquis suorum summotis, Suessetanos quosdam ex 
auxiliaribus maxime imbelles adgredi moenia iussit ; 
hos cum facta eruptione Lacetani facile avertissent et 
fugientes avide insecuti essent, illis quos occultaverat 
coortis oppidum cepit. 

2. L. Scipio in Sardinia, cuiusdam civitatis pro- 
pugnatores ut eliceret, cum parte militum, relicta 


1 430 B.C. Cf. 1. v. 10 and note. 
2 195 p.c. Cf. Livy xxxiv. 20. 


STRATAGEMS, III. ix. 8-x. 2 


he distracted the attention of the defenders of the 
city, till he brought up by sea the ships provided 
with towers, and advanced against the walls at the 
point were no resistance was offered. 

Pericles, when about to lay siege to a fortress of 
the Peloponnesians to which there were only two 
avenues of approach, cut off one of these by a trench 
and began to fortify the other. The defenders of the 
fortress, thrown off their guard at one point, began 
to watch only the other where they saw the building 
going on. But Pericles, having prepared bridges, 
laid them across the trench and entered the fortress 
at the point where no guard was kept.! 

Antiochus, when fighting against the Ephesians, 
directed the Rhodians, whom he had as allies, to make 
an attack on the harbour at night with a great uproar. 
When the entire population rushed headlong to 
this quarter, leaving the rest of the fortress with- 
out defenders, Antiochus attacked at a different 
quarter and captured the town. 


X. On SEerTING Traps To Draw out THE BESIEGED 


Waen Cato was besieging the Lacetani, he sent 
away in full view of the enemy all his other troops, 
while ordering certain Suessetani, who were the least 
martial of all his allies, to attack the walls of the 
town. When the Lacetani, making a sortie, easily 
repulsed these forces and pursued them eagerly as 
they fled, the soldiers whom Cato had placed in hiding 
rose up and by their help he captured the town.” 

When campaigning in Sardinia, Lucius Scipio, in 
order to draw out the defenders of a certain city, 
abandoned the siege which he had begun, and pre- 


237 


SEXTUS JULIUS FRONTINUS 


oppugnatione quam instruxerat, speciem fugientis 
praestitit; insecutisque temere oppidanis per eos, 
quos in proximo occultaverat, oppidum invasit. 

3. Hannibal, cum obsideret civitatem Himeram, 
castra sua capi de industria passus est, iussis recedere 
Poenis, tamquam praevaleret hostis; quo eventu. 
Himeraeis ita deceptis, ut gaudio impulsi relicta 
urbe procurrerent ad Punicum vallum, Hannibal 
vacuam urbem per eos, quos in insidiis ad hanc 
ipsam occasionem posuerat, cepit. 

4. Idem, ut Saguntinos eliceret, rara acie ad mu- 
ros accedens ad primam eruptionem oppidanorum 
simulata fuga cessit interpositoque exercitu ab oppido 
interclusos a suis hostes in medio trucidavit. 

5. Himilco Carthaginiensis apud Agrigentum iuxta 
oppidum partem copiarum in insidiis posuit prae- 
cepitque his, ut, cum processissent oppidani, ligna 
umida incenderent. Deinde cum reliqua parte exer- 
citus luce ad eliciendos hostes progressus simulata 
fuga persequentis oppidanos longius cedendo pro- 
traxit. Insidiatores prope moenia imperatum ignem 
acervis subiecerunt ; unde obortum contemplati fu- 
mum Agrigentini incensam civitatem suam existi- 
maverunt, defendendaeque eius gratia dum trepide 


1950 B.C. Cf. 111. ix. 4 and note. 

* 409 p.c. The Hannibal here mentioned is the son of 
Gisgo. Diodor. xiii. 59-62 represents the Carthaginians as 
withdrawing in flight rather than executing a stratagem. 

3 219 p.c. Sonof Hamilcar Barca. The identity of names 
led to the confusion between these two generals. 


238 


STRATAGEMS, III. x. 2-5 


tended to flee with a detachment of his troops. 
Then, when the inhabitants followed him pell-mell, 
he attacked the town with the help of those whom 
he had placed in hiding near at hand.! 

When Hannibal was besieging the city of Himera, 
he purposely allowed his camp to be captured, order- 
ing the Carthaginians to retire, on the ground that 
the enemy were superior. The inhabitants were so 
deceived by this turn of affairs that in their joy they 
came out of the city and advanced against the Car- 
thaginian breast-works, whereupon Hannibal, finding 
the town vacant, captured it by means of the troops 
whom he had placed in ambush for this very contin- 
gency.? 

In order to draw out the Saguntines, Hannibal on 
a certain occasion advanced against their walls with 
a thin line of troops. Then, at the first sally of the 
inhabitants, feigning flight, he withdrew, and inter- 
posing troops between the pursuing foe and the city, 
he slaughtered the enemy thus cut off from their 
fellows between the two forces.? 

Himilco, the Carthaginian, when campaigning near 
Agrigentum, placed part of his forces in ambush near 
the town, and directed them to set fire to some damp 
wood as soon as the soldiers from the town should 
come forth. Then, advancing at daybreak with the 
rest of his army for the purpose of luring forth the 
enemy, he feigned flight and drew the inhabitants 
after him for a considerable distance by his retire- 
ment. The men in ambush near the walls applied 
the torch to the wood-piles as directed. The Agri- 
gentines, beholding the smoke ascend, thought their 
city on fire and ran back in alarm to protect it. 


239 


SEXTUS JULIUS FRONTINUS 


recurrunt, obviis eis qui insidiati iuxta muros erant 
et a tergo instantibus quos persecuti fuerant, in 
medio trucidati sunt. 

6. Viriathus disposito per occulta milite paucos 
misit, qui abigerent pecora Segobrigensium ; ad quae 
illi vindicanda cum frequentes procurrissent simulan- 
tesque fugam praedatores persequerentur, deducti in 
insidias caesique sunt. 

T. Scordisci equites, cum Heracleae duarum co- 
hortium! praesidio praepositus esset Lucullus, pecora 
abigere simulantes provocaverunt eruptionem ; fugam 
deinde mentiti sequentem Lucullum in insidias de- 
duxerunt et octingentos cum eo milites occiderunt. 

8. Chares dux Atheniensium civitatem adgressurus 
litori appositam, post quaedam promunturia occulte 
habita classe, e navibus velocissimam praeter hostilia 
praesidia ire iussit; qua visa cum omnia navigia, 
quae pro custodia portus agebant, ad persequendam 
evolassent, Chares indefensum portum cum reliqua 
classe invectus etiam civitatem occupavit. 

9. Barca dux Poenorum in Sicilia Lilybaeum nos- 
tris terra marique obsidentibus partem classis suae 
procul armatam iussit ostendi; ad eius conspectum 
cum evolassent nostri, ipse reliquis quas in occulto 
tenuerat navibus Lilybaei portum occupavit. 


1 cohortium, Fretnsheim ; partium MSS. and edd. 


! 406 B.c. Cf. Polyaen. v. x. 4. In the Old Testament 
(Josh. viii.), a similar stratagem is employed by Joshua. 
2 147-139 B.c. 3 366-336 B.C. 


240 


STRATAGEMS, III. x. 5-9 


Being encountered by those lying in wait for them 
near the walls, and beset in the rear by those whom 
they had just been pursuing, they were caught 
between two forces and so cut to pieces.! 

Viriathus, on one occasion, having placed men in 
ambush, sent a few others to drive off the flocks of 
the Segobrigenses. When the latter rushed out in 
great numbers to defend their flocks and followed 
up the marauders, who pretended to flee, they were 
drawn into an ambush and cut to pieces.? 

When Lucullus was put in charge of a garrison of 
two cohorts at Heraclea, the cavalry of the Scordisci, 
by pretending to drive offthe flocks of the inhabitants, 
provoked a sortie. Then, when Lucullus followed, 
they drew him into an ambush, feigning flight, and 
killed him together with eight hundred of his 
followers. 

The Athenian general, Chares, when about to 
attack a city on the coast, hid his fleet behind certain 
promontories and then ordered his swiftest ship to 
sail past the forces of the enemy. At sight of this 
ship, all the forces guarding the harbour darted out 
in pursuit, whereat Chares sailed in with the rest of 
his fleet and took possession of the undefended 
harbour and likewise of the city itself.? 

On one occasion when Roman troops were block- 
ading Lilybaeum by land and sea, Barca, general of 
the Carthaginians in Sicily, ordered a part of his fleet 
to appear in the offing ready for action. When our 
men darted out at sight of this, Barca seized the 
harbour of Lilybaeum with the ships which he had 
held in hiding.* 

4 249 p.c. Cf. Polyb. i. 44, where Hannibal, rather than 
Barca, is the general. 

241 

VOL. I. R 


SEXTUS JULIUS FRONTINUS 


XI. De Simu.atTione REGRESSUS . 


1. PuonMioN dux Atheniensium, cum depopulatus 
esset agros Chalcidensium, legatis eorum de ea re 
querentibus benigne respondit et nocte, qua dimissu- 
rus illos erat, finxit litteras sibi supervenisse civium 
suorum, propter quas redeundum haberet; ac pau- 
lum regressus dimisit legatos. His omnia tuta et 
abisse Phormionem renuntiantibus, Chalcidenses spe 
et oblatae humanitatis et abducti exercitus remissa 
urbis custodia, cum confestim Phormion revertisset, 
prohibere inexspectatam vim non potuerunt. 

2. Agesilaus dux Lacedaemoniorum, cum Phocen- 
ses obsideret et intellexisset eos, qui tunc praesidio 
illis erant, iam gravari belli incommoda, paulum 
regressus tamquam ad alios actus liberam recedendi 
occasionem his dedit; non multo post milite reducto 
destitutos Phocenses superavit. 

3. Alcibiades adversus Byzantios, qui se moenibus 
continebant, insidias disposuit et simulato regressu 
incautos eos oppressit. 

4. Viriathus, cum tridui iter discedens confecisset, 
idem illud uno die remensus securos Segobrigenses et 
sacrificio cum maxime occupatos oppressit. 

5. Epaminondas Mantineae, cum Lacedaemonios 
in subsidium hosti venisse animadverteret, ratus posse 


1 432 r.c. Cf. Polyaen. ri. iv. 1. 

2 396—394 B.c. Cf. Polyaen. rr. i. 16. 

3 409 B.c. Cf. Diodor. xiii. 66-67; Plut. Alcib. 31. 
* 147-139 B.c. 


242 ] 


STRATAGEMS, III. xı. 1x5 


XI. On PRETENDED RETIREMENTS 


WueEn the Athenian general Phormio had ravaged 
the lands of the Chalcidians, and their envoys com- 
plained of this action, he answered them graciously, 
and at evening, when he was about to dismiss them, 
pretended that a letter had come from his fellow- 
citizens requiring hisreturn. Accordingly he retired 
a short distance and dismissed the envoys. When 
these reported that all was safe and that Phormio had 
withdrawn, the Chalcidians in view of the promised 
consideration and of the withdrawal of the troops, 
relaxed the guard of their town. Then Phormio 
suddenly returned and the Chalcidians were unable 
to withstand his unexpected attack.! 

When the Spartan commander, Agesilaus, was 
blockading the Phocaeans and had learned that those 
who were then lending them support were weary 
with the burdens of war, he retired a short distance 
as though for other objects, thus leaving the allies 
free opportunity to withdraw. Not long after, 
bringing back his troops, he defeated the Phocaeans 
thus left without assistance.? 

When fighting against the Byzantines, who kept 
within their walls, Alcibiades laid an ambush and, 
feigning a retirement, took them off their guard and 
crushed them.? 

Viriathus, after retreating for three days, suddenly 
turned round and traversed the same distance in one 
day. He thus crushed the Segobrigenses, taking 
them off their guard at a moment when they were 
earnestly engaged in sacrifice.4 

In the operations around Mantinea, Epaminondas, 
having noticed that the Spartans had come to help 


243 
R 2 


SEXTUS JULIUS FRONTINUS 


Lacedaemonem occupari, si clam illo profectus esset, 
nocte crebros ignes fieri iussit, ut specie remanendi 
occultaret profectionem. Sed a transfuga proditus, 
adsecuto exercitu Lacedaemoniorum, itinere quidem 
quo Spartam petebat destitit, idem tamen consilium 
convertit ad Mantinienses ; aeque enim ignibus factis 
Lacedaemonios, quasi maneret, frustratus per quad- 
raginta milia passuum revertit Mantineam eamque 
auxilio destitutam occupavit. 


Ex CoNTRARIO circa TUTELAM OBSESSORUM 


XII. De Exciranpsa Cura Suorum 


1. Atcipiapes dux Atheniensium, civitate sua a 
Lacedaemoniis obsessa, veritus neglegentiam vigilum 
denuntiavit his qui in stationibus erant, observarent 
lumen, quod nocte ostenturus esset ex arce, et ad 
conspectum eius ipsi quoque lumina attollerent; in 
quo munere qui cessasset, poenam passurum. Dum 
sollicite exspectatur signum ducis, pervigilatum ab 
omnibus et suspectae noctis periculum evitatum est. 

2. Iphicrates dux Atheniensium, cum praesidio 
Corinthum teneret et sub adventum hostium ipse 
vigilias circumiret, vigilem, quem dormientem in- 
venerat, transfixit cuspide; quod factum quibusdam 


1 362 B.c. Cf. Polyb. ix. 8; Diodor. xv. 82-84; Plut. 
A ges. 34. 
? Cf. Polyaen. 1. xl. 3. 


244 


STRATAGEMS, III. xı. 5-xi. 2 


his enemies, conceived the idea that Sparta might 
be captured, if he should set out against it secretly. 
Accordingly he ordered numerous watch-fires to be 
built at night, that, by appearing to remain, he 
might conceal his departure. But betrayed by a 
deserter and pursued by the Lacedaemonian troops, 
he abandoned his march to Sparta, and employed the 
same scheme against the Mantineans ; for by building 
watch-fires as before, he deceived the Spartans into 
thinking that he would remain. Meanwhile, return- 
ing to Mantinea by a march of forty miles, he found 
it without defences and captured it! 


ON THE oTHER HAND, SrRATAGEMS CONNECTED 
WITH THE PROTECTION OF THE BESIEGED 


XII. On STIMULATING THE VIGILANCE OF ONE’s 
Own Troops 


ALcIBIADES, the Athenian commander, when his 
own city was blockaded by the Spartans, fearing 
negligence on the part of the guards, ordered the men 
on picket-duty to watch for the light which he 
should exhibit from the citadel at night, and to 
raise their own lights at sight of it, threatening 
that whoever failed in this duty should suffer a 
penalty. While anxiously awaiting the signal of 
their general, all maintained constant watch, and so 
escaped the dangers of the perilous night.? 

When Iphicrates, the Athenian general, was hold- 
ing Corinth with a garrison and on one occasion 
personally made the rounds of the sentries as the 
enemy were approaching, he found one of the guards 
asleep at his post and stabbed him with his spear. 


245 


SEXTUS JULIUS FRONTINUS 


tamquam saevum increpantibus * qualem inveni," 
inquit, *talem reliqui." 
3. Epaminondas Thebanus idem fecisse dicitur.! 


XIII. De Emirrenpo et RECIPIENDo NuNTIO 


1. RoMaNi, obsessi in Capitolio, ad Camillum au- 
xilio? implorandum miserunt Pontium Cominium, 
qui, ut stationes Gallorum falleret, per saxa Tarpeia 
demissus tranato Tiberi Veios pervenit et perpetrata 
legatione similiter ad suos rediit. 

2. Campani, diligenter Romanis a quibus obsessi 
erant custodias agentibus, quendam pro transfuga 
subornatum miserunt, qui occultatam balteo epistulam 
inventa effugiendi occasione ad Poenos pertulit. 

3. Venationi quoque et pecoribus quidam insuerunt 
litteras membranis mandatas.? 

4. Aliqui et iumento in aversam partem inful- 
serunt, dum stationes transeunt.? 

5. Nonnulli interiora vaginarum inscripserunt.? 

6. L. Lucullus, Cyzicenos obsessos a Mithridate 
ut certiores adventus sui faceret, cum praesidiis 
hostium teneretur introitus urbis, qui unus et angustus 
ponte modico insulam continenti iungit, militem e 
suis nandi et nauticae artis peritum iussit insidentem 
duobus inflatis utribfis litteras insutas habentibus, 


1 No. 3 is apparently interpolated. 

2 The text is uncertain, auxilio Gund; ab exilio HP; ad 
auxilium d ; ad Camilli auxilium ab exsilio Ded. 

3 Nos. 3, 4, and 5 are thought to be interpolations. 


1 393-391 p.c. Cf. Nep. Jphic. ii. 1-2. 
2 390 p.c. Cf. Livy v. 46; Diodor. xiv. 116; Plut. Camil. 
25. 


246 


STRATAGEMS, III. xii. 2—xin. 6 


When certain ones rebuked this procedure as cruel, 
he answered: “ I left him as I found him.” 1 

Epaminondas the Theban is said, on one occasion, 
to have done the same thing. 


XIII. On Senpine AND ReckiviNa MESSAGES 


Wuen the Romans were besieged in the Capitol, 
they sent Pontius Cominius to implore Camillus to 
come to their aid. Pontius, to elude the pickets 
of the Gauls, let himself down over the Tarpeian 
Rock, swam the Tiber, and reached Veii. Having 
accomplished his errand, he returned by the same 
route to his friends.? 

When the Romans were maintaining careful guard 
against the inhabitants of Capua, whom they were 
besieging, the latter sent a certain fellow in the 
guise of a deserter, and he, finding an opportunity 
to escape, conveyed to the Carthaginians a letter 
which he had secreted in his belt.? 

Some have written messages on skins and then 
sewed these to the carcasses of game or sheep. 

Some have stuffed the message under the tail of 
a mule while passing the picket-posts. 

Some have written on the linings of scabbards. 

When the Cyzicenes were besieged by Mithridates, 
Lucius Lucullus wished to inform them of his ap- 
proach. There was a single narrow entrance to the 
city, connecting the island with the mainland by a 
small bridge. Since this was held by forces of the 
enemy, he sewed some letters up inside two inflated 
skins and then ordered one of his soldiers, an adept 


3 211 B.C. -— xxvi. 7 represents Hannibal as sending 
the letter to the Capuans, 
241 


SEXTUS JULIUS FRONTINUS 


quos ab inferiore parte duabus regulis inter se dis- 
tantibus commiserat, ire septem milia passuum 
traiectum. Quod ita perite gregalis fecit, ut cruribus 
velut gubernaculis dimissis cursum dirigeret et procul 
visentis, qui in statione erant, marinae specie beluae 
deciperet. 

7. Hirtius consul ad Decimum Brutum, qui Muti- 
nae ab Antonio obsidebatur, litteras subinde misit 
plumbo scriptas, quibus ad brachium religatis milites 
Scultennam amnem tranabant. 

8. Idem columbis, quas inclusas ante tenebris et 
fame adfecerat, epistulas saeta ad collum religabat 
easque a propinquo, in quantum poterat, moenibus 
loco emittebat. Illae lucis cibique avidae altissima 
aedificiorum petentes excipiebantur a Bruto, qui eo 
modo de omnibus rebus certior fiebat, utique post- 
quam disposito quibusdam locis cibo columbas illuc 
devolare instituerat. 


XIIII. De IntTRopDuUcENDIs AuxiLiis ET CoMMEATIBUS 
SUGGERENDIS 


1. Berro civili, cum Ategua urbs in Hispania 
Pompeianarum partium obsideretur, Maurus inter 
noctem tamquam Caesarianus tribuni cornicularius 
vigiles quosdam excitavit; ex quibus cum tesseram 
accepisset, alios excitans constantia fallaciae suae 
per medias Caesaris copias praesidium Pompei 
transduxit. 


1748.0. Cf. Flor. rr. v. 15-16; Oros. vr. ii. 14. 

2 43 B.c. Cf. Dio xlvi. 36. 

3 43 5. Cf. Plin. N.H. x. 37. 

* 45 ».c. Cf. Dio xliii. 33-34. According to Dio, this 
man, Munatius Flaccus, whose real mission is to aid the 
Ateguans in withstanding the blockade of Caesar's troops, 
represents to the sentries that he has been sent by Caesar 


248 


STRATAGEMS, III. xii. 6—xiv. r 


in swimming and boating, to mount the skins, which 
he had fastened together at the bottom by two 
strips some distance apart, and to make the trip of 
seven miles across. So skilfully did the soldier do 
this that, by spreading his legs, he steered his 
course as though by rudder, and deceived those 
watching from a distance by appearing to be some 
marine creature.! 

The consul Hirtius often sent letters inscribed on 
lead plates to Decimus Brutus, who was besieged by 
Antonius at Mutina. The letters were fastened 
to the arms of soldiers, who then swam across the 
Scultenna River.? 

Hirtius also shut up pigeons in the dark, starved 
them, fastened letters to their necks by a hair, and 
then released them as near to the city walls as he 
could. The birds, eager for light and food, sought 
the highest buildings and were received by Brutus, 
who in that way was informed of everything, 
especialy after he set food in certain spots and 
taught the pigeons to alight there.? 


XIV. On IuTRoDUCING REINFORCEMENTS AND 
SUPPLYING Provisions 


In the Civil War, when the Spanish city ot 
Ategua, belonging to Pompey’s party, was under 
blockade, one night a Moor, pretending to be a 
tribune’s adjutant belonging to the Caesarian party, 
roused certain sentries and got from them the pass- 
word. He then roused others, and by continuing 
his deception, succeeded in conducting reinforce- 
ments for Pompey through the midst of Caesar’s 
troops.4 
to betray the city. Thus having once learned the password, 


he secures an easy entrance into the city, 
249 


SEXTUS JULIUS FRONTINUS 


2. Hannibale obsidente Casilinum, Romani far in 
doliis secunda aqua Volturni fluminis demittebant, ut 
ab obsessis exciperetur. Quibus cum obiecta per me- 
dium amnem catena Hannibal obstitisset, nuces spar- 
sere. Quae cum aqua ferente ad oppidum defluerent, 
eo commeatu sociorum necessitatem sustentaverunt. 

3. Hirtius Mutinensibus obsessis ab Antonio salem, 
quo maxime indigebant, cupis conditum per amnem 
Scultennam intromisit. 

4. Idem pecora secunda aqua demisit, quae excepta 
sustentaverunt necessariorum inopiam, 


XV. QuemMapMopuM EFrFiciaTuR UT ABUNDARE 
VIDEANTUR QUAE DEERUNT 


1, Romani, cum a Gallis Capitolium obsideretur, 
in extrema iam fame panem in hostem iactaverunt 
consecutique, ut abundare commeatibus viderentur, 
obsidionem, donec Camillus subveniret, toleraverunt. 

2. Athenienses adversus Lacedaemonios idem fe- 
cisse dicuntur.! 

3. Hi, qui ab Hannibale Casilini obsidebantur, ad 
extremam famem pervenisse crediti, cum etiam her- 
bas alimentis eorum Hannibal, arato loco qui erat 
inter castra ipsius et moenia, praeriperet, semina in 
praeparatum locum iecerunt, consecuti, ut habere 
viderentur, quo victum sustentarent usque ad satorum 
proventum. 


1 No. 2 is thought to be interpolated. 


1 216 p.c. Cf. Livy xxiii. 19. ? 43 B.C. 
3 390 B.c. Cf. Livy v. 48; Val. Max. vu. iv. 3; Ovid 
Fast. vi. 350 ff, 4 216 B.c. Cf. Livy xxiii. 19. 


250 


STRATAGEMS, III. xiv. 2-xv. 3 


When Hannibal was besieging Casilinum, the 
Romans sent big jars of wheat down the current 
of the Volturnus, to be picked up by the besieged. 
After Hannibal stopped these by throwing a chain 
across the river, the Romans scattered nuts on the 
water. These floated down stream to the city and 
thus sustained the necessities of the allies.! 

When the inhabitants of Mutina were blockaded 
by Antonius, and were greatly in need of salt, 
Hirtius packed some in jars and sent it in to them 
by way of the Scultenna River.* 

Hirtius also sent down the river carcasses of 
sheep, which were received and thus furnished the 
necessities of life. 


XV. How To PRODUCE THE IMPRESSION OF 
ABUNDANCE OF WHAT IS LACKING 


WHEN the Capitol was besieged by the Gauls, the 
Romans, in the extremity of famine, threw bread 
among the enemy. They thus produced the im- 
pression that they were well supplied with food, 
and so withstood the siege till Camillus came.’ 

The Athenians are said to have employed the 
same ruse against the Spartans. 

The inhabitants of Casilinum, when blockaded 
by Hannibal, were thought to have reached the 
starvation point, since Hannibal had cut off from 
their food supply even their use of the growing 
herbs by ploughing the ground between his camp 
and the city walls. The ground being thus made 
ready, the beseiged flung seed into it, thus giving 
the impression that they had enough wherewith to 
sustain life even till harvest time.* 


251 


SEXTUS JULIUS FRONTINUS 


4. Reliqui ex Variana clade, cum obsiderentur, 
quia defici frumento videbantur, horrea tota nocte 
cireumduxerunt captivos, deinde praecisis manibus 
dimiserunt; hi circumsedentibus suis persuaserunt, 
ne spem maturae expugnationis reponerent in fame 
Romanorum, quibus ingens alimentorum copia super- 
esset. 

5. Thraces in arduo monte obsessi, in quem hosti- 
bus accessus non erat, conlato viritim exiguo tritico 
paucas oves paverunt et egerunt in hostium praesi- 
dia; quibus exceptis et occisis, cum frumenti vestigia 
in visceribus earum apparuissent, opinatus hostis 
magnam vim tritici superesse eis, qui inde etiam 
pecora pascerent, recessit ab obsidione. 

6. Thrasybulus dux Milesiorum, cum longa obsi- 
dione milites sui angerentur ab Alyatte, qui sperabat 
eos ad deditionem fame posse compelli, sub adventum 
legatorum Alyattis frumentum omne in forum com- 
pelli iussit et conviviis sub id tempus institutis per 
totam urbem epulas praestitit; atque ita persuasit 
hosti superesse ipsis copias, quibus diuturnam susti- 
nerent obsidionem. 


XVI. Qua Ratione PnopiToniBUS ET TRANSFUGIS 
OccuRRATUR 


1. CLaupius ManckELLvus, cognito consilio L. Bantii 
Nolani, qui corrumpere ad defectionem populares 


1 4, e. the defeat of Varus by Arminius in the Teutoburg 
Forest in 9 A.D. 
2 About 611 &.c. Cf, Herod, i. 21-22; Polyaen. vi. 47. 


252. 


STRATAGEMS, III. xv. 4-xvi. 1 


When the survivors of the Varian disaster! were 
under siege and seemed to be running short of food, 
they spent an entire night in leading prisoners 
round their store-houses; then, having cut off their 
hands, they turned them loose. These men per- 
suaded the besieging force to cherish no hope of an 
early reduction of the Romans by starvation, since 
they had an abundance of food supplies. 

When the Thracians were besieged on a steep 
mountain inaccessible to the enemy, they got to- 
gether by individual contributions a small amount 
of wheat. This they fed to a few sheep which they 
then drove among the forces of the enemy. When 
the sheep had been caught and slaughtered, and 
traces of wheat had been found in their intestines, 
the enemy raised the siege, imagining that the 
Thracians had a surplus of wheat, inasmuch as they 
fed it even to their sheep. 

The Milesians were at one time suffering a long 
siege at the hands of Alyattes, who hoped they 
could be starved into surrender. But the Milesian 
commander, Thrasybulus, in anticipation of the 
arrival of envoys from Alyattes, ordered all the grain 
to be brought together into the market-place, 
arranged for banquets to be held on that occasion, 
and provided sumptuous feasts throughout the city. 
Thus he convinced the enemy that the Milesians 
had abundance of provisions with which to sustain 
a long siege.? 


XVI. How ro Meer tHe MeENAcE oF TREASON 


AND DEsERTION 


A cERTAIN Lucius Bantius of Nola on one occasion 
cherished the plan of rousing his fellow-citizens to 


253 


SEXTUS JULIUS FRONTINUS 


studebat et Hannibali gratificabatur, quod illius 
beneficio curatus inter Cannenses saucius et ex 
captivitate remissus ad suos erat, quia interficere 
eum, ne supplicio eius reliquos concitaret Nolanos, 
non audebat, arcessitum ad se allocutus est, dicens 
fortissimum militem eum esse, quod antea ignorasset, 
‘_hortatusque est, ut secum moraretur, et super ver- 
borum honorem equo quoque donavit. Qua benigni- 
tate non illius tantum fidem, sed etiam popularium, 
quae ex illo pendebat, sibi obligavit. | 

2. Hamilcar dux Poenorum, cum frequenter auxi- 
liares Galli ad Romanos transirent et iam ex consue- 
tudine ut socii exciperentur, fidissimos subornavit 
ad simulandam transitionem, qui Romanos excipi- 
endorum causa eorum progressos ceciderunt, Quae 
sollertia Hamilcari non tantum ad praesentem pro- 
fuit successum, sed in posterum praestitit, ut 
Romanis veri quoque transfugae forent suspecti. 

3. Hanno Carthaginiensium imperator in Sicilia, 
cum comperisset Gallorum mercennariorum circiter 
quattuor milia conspirasse ad transfugiendum ad 
Romanos, quod aliquot mensum mercedes non 
receperant, animadvertere autem in eos non au- 
deret metu seditionis, promisit prolationis iniuriam 
liberalitate pensaturum. Quo nomine gratias agenti- 
bus Gallis per tempus idoneum praedaturos polli- 
citus fidelissimum dispensatorem ad Otacilium 


1216 ».c. Cf. Livy xxiii. 15-16; Plut. Marcel. 10-11. 
Variations of this stratagem and its author are found in 
Iv. vii. 36, Plut. Fab. 20 and Val, Max. vir. iii. 7. 

2 260—241 B.C. 


254 


STRATAGEMS, III. xvi. 1-3 


revolt, as a favour to Hannibal, by whose kindness 
he had been tended when wounded among those 
engaged at Cannae, and by whom he had been sent 
back from captivity to his own people. Claudius 
Marcellus, learning of his purpose and not daring to 
put him to death, for fear that by his punishment 
he would stir up the. rest of the people of Nola, 
summoned Bantius and talked with him, pronouncing 
him a very valiant soldier (a fact which Marcellus 
admitted he had not previously known), and urging 
him to remain with him. Besides these compli- 
ments, he presented him also with a horse. By 
such kindness he secured the loyalty, not only of 
Bantius, but also of his townspeople, since their 
allegiance hinged on his.! 

When the Gallic auxiliaries of Hamilcar, the 
Carthaginian general, were in the habit of crossing 
over to the Romans and were regularly received by 
them as allies, Hamilcar engaged his most loyal men 
to pretend desertion, while actually they slew the 
Komans who came out to welcome them. This 
device was not merely of present aid to Hamilcar, 
but caused real deserters to be regarded in future as 
objects of suspicion in the eyes of the Romans.? 

Hanno, commander of the Carthaginians in Sicily, 
learnéd on one occasion that about four thousand 
Gallic mercenaries had conspired to desert to the 
Romans, because for several months they had received 
no pay. Not daring to punish them, for fear of 
mutiny, he promised to make good the deferred 
payment by increasing their wages. When the 
Gauls rendered thanks for this, Hanno, promising 
that they should be permitted to go out foraging 
at a suitable time, sent to the consul Otacilius an 


255 


SEXTUS JULIUS FRONTINUS 


consulem misit, qui, tamquam rationibus interversis 
transfugisset, nuntiavit nocte proxima Gallorum 
quattuor milia, quae praedatum forent missa, posse 
excipi. Otacilius nec statim credidit transfugae 
nec tamen rem spernendam ratus disposuit in 
insidiis lectissimam manum suorum. Ab ea Galli 
excepti dupliciter Hannonis 'consilio satisfecerunt ; 
et Romanos ceciderunt et ipsi omnes interfecti 
sunt. 

4. Hannibal simili consilio se a transfugis ultus 
est. Nam cum aliquos ex militibus suis sciret 
transisse proxima nocte nec ignoraret exploratores 
hostium in castris suis esse, palam pronuntiavit non 
debere transfugas vocari sollertissimos milites, qui 
ipsius iussu exierint ad excipienda hostium consilia. 
Auditis quae pronuntiavit, rettulerunt exploratores 
ad suos. Tum comprehensi a Romanis transfugae 
et amputatis manibus remissi sunt. 

5. Diodotus, cum praesidio Amphipolim tueretur 
et duo milia Thracum suspecta haberet, quae vide- 
bantur urbem direptura, mentitus est paucas hostium 
naves proximo litori applicuisse easque diripi posse ; 
qua spe stimulatos Thracas emisit ac deinde clausis 
portis non recepit. 


XVII. De EnurrioNiBUS 


1. Romant, quiin praesidio Panormitanorum erant, 


veniente ad obsidionem Hasdrubale raros ex industria 


1261 B.c. Cf. Diodor. xxii. viii. 3. Zonar. viii. 10 
attributes this stratagem to Hamilcar. 

2 168 B.c. In Livy xliv. 44, the author of the stratagem 
is called Diodorus. 


256 


dite. uu Fe cedem cts 


STRATAGEMS, III. xvi. 3-xvir. 1 


extremely trustworthy steward, who pretended to 
have deserted on account of embezzlement, and who 
reported that on the coming night four thousand 
Gauls, sent out on a foraging expedition, could be 
captured. Otacilius, not immediately crediting the 
deserter, nor yet thinking the matter ought to be 
treated with disdain, placed the pick of his men in 
ambush. These met the Gauls, who fulfilled Hanno's 
purpose in a twofold manner, since they not only 
slew a number of the Romans, but were themselves 
slaughtered to the last man.! 

By a similar plan Hannibal took vengeance on 
certain deserters; for, being aware that some of his 
soldiers had deserted on the previous night, and 
knowing that spies of the enemy were in his camp, 
he publicly proclaimed that the name of “ deserter ” 
ought not to be applied to his cleverest soldiers, 
who at his order had gone out to learn the designs 
of the enemy. The spies, as soon as they heard 
this pronouncement, reported it to their own side. 
Thereupon the deserters were arrested by the Romans 
and sent back with their hands cut off. 

When Diodotus was holding Amphipolis with a 
garrison, and entertained suspicions of two thousand 
Thracians, who seemed likely to pillage the city, he 
invented the story that a few hostile ships had put 
in at the shore near by and could be plundered. 
When he had incited the Thracians at that prospect, 
he letthem out. Then, closing the gates, he refused 
to admit them again.? 


XVII. On Sortizs 
Wuen Hasdrubal came to besiege Panormus, the 
Romans, who were in possession of the town, 


257 
VOL. I. s 


SEXTUS JULIUS FRONTINUS 


‘in muris posuerunt defensores; quorum paucitate 
contempta cum incautus muris succederet Hasdrubal, 
eruptione facta ceciderunt eum. 

2. Aemilius Paulus, universis Liguribus improviso 
adortis castra eius, simulato timore militem diu 
continuit; deinde fatigato iam hoste quattuor 
portis eruptione facta stravit cepitque Ligures. 

3. Livius praefectus Romanorum arcem Tarenti- 
norum tenens misit ad Hasdrubalem legatos, abire 
uti sibi incolumi liceret; ea simulatione ad securi- 
tatem perductum hostem eruptione facta cecidit. 

4. Cn. Pompeius circumsessus ad Dyrrachium non 
tantum obsidione liberavit suos, verum etiam post 
eruptionem, quam opportuno et loco et tempore 
fecerat, Caesarem ad castellum, quod duplici mu- 
nitione instructum erat, avide inrumpentem exterior 
ipse circumfusus corona obligavit, ut ille inter eos 
quos obsidebat et eos qui extra circumvenerant 
medius non leve periculum et detrimentum senserit. 

5. Flavius Fimbria in Asia apud Rhyndacum ad- 
versum filium Mithridatis, brachiis ab latere ductis, 
deinde fossa in fronte percussa, quietum in vallo 
militem tenuit, donec hostilis equitatus intraret 
angustias munimentorum ; tunc eruptione facta sex 
milia eorum cecidit. 


t 251 ».c. Cf. Polyb. i. 40. 
2 181 5.0. Cf. Livy xl. 25, 27-28. 


3 212-209 B.C. 
* 48 p.c. Cf. Caes. B.C. iii. 65-70. 
5 85 B.C. 


STRATAGEMS, III. xvi. 1-5 


purposely placed a scanty number of defenders on 
the walls. In contempt of their small numbers, 
Hasdrubal incautiously approached the walls, where- 
upon they made a sortie and slew him.! 

When the Ligurians with their entire force made 
a surprise attack on the camp of Aemilius Paulus, 
the latter feigned fear and for a long time kept 
his troops in camp. Then, when the enemy were 
exhausted, making a sortie by the four gates, he 
defeated the Ligurians and made them prisoners.? 

Livius, commander of the Romans, when holding 
the citadel of the Tarentines, sent envoys to Has- 
‘drubal, requesting the privilege of withdrawing 
undisturbed. When by this feint he had thrown 
the enemy off their guard, he made a sortie and cut 
them to pieces.? 

Gnaeus Pompey, when besieged near Dyrrhachium, 
not only released his own men from blockade, but 
also made a sally at an opportune time and place; 
for just as Caesar was making a fierce assault on a 
fortified position surrounded by a double line of 
works, Pompey, by this sortie, so enveloped him 
with a cordon of troops that Caesar incurred no 
slight peril and loss, caught, as he was, between 
those whom he was besieging and those who had 
surrounded him from the outside.* 

Flavius Fimbria, when fighting in Asia near the 
river Rhyndacus against the son of Mithridates, 
constructed two lines of works on his flanks and a 
ditch in front, and kept his soldiers quietly within 
their entrenchments, until the cavalry of the enemy 
passed within the confined portions of his fortifica- 
tions. Then, making a sortie, he slew six thousand 
of them.5 


259 
s 2 


SEXTUS JULIUS FRONTINUS 


6. C. Caesar in Gallia, deletis ab Ambiorige Ti- 
turii Sabini et Cottae legatorum copiis, cum a Q. 
Cicerone, qui et ipse oppugnabatur, certior factus 
cum duabus legionibus adventaret, conversis hostibus 
metum simulavit militesque in castris, quae artiora 
solito industria fecerat, tenuit. Galli praesumpta 
iam victoria velut ad praedam castrorum tendentes 
fossas implere et vallum detrahere coeperunt; qua 
re proelio non aptatos Caesar emisso repente undique 
milite trucidavit. | 

7. Titurius Sabinus adversus Gallorum amplum 
exercitum continendo militem intra munimenta 
praestitit eis suspicionem metuentis. Cuius au- 
gendae causa perfugam misit, qui adfirmaret exer- 
citum Romanum in desperatione esse ac de fuga 
cogitare. Barbari oblata victoriae spe concitati 
lignis sarmentisque se oneraverunt, quibus fossas 
complerent, ingentique cursu castra nostra in colle 
posita petiverunt. Unde in eos Titurius universas 
immisit copias multisque Gallorum caesis plurimos 
in deditionem accepit. 

8. Asculani, oppugnaturo oppidum Pompeio cum 
paucos senes et aegros in muris ostendissent, ob id 
securos Romanos eruptione facta fugaverunt. 

9. Numantini obsessi ne pro vallo quidem in- 

! 54 B.C. Cf. Caes. B.G. v. 37-52; Dio xl. 10; Polyaen. 
VIII. xxiii. 7. 


2 56 B.C. Cf. Caes. B.G. iii. 17-19. 
3 90 B.C. 


260 


STRATAGEMS, III. xvir. 6-9 


When the forces of Titurius Sabinus and Cotta, 
Caesar's lieutenants in Gaul, had been wiped out 
by Ambiorix, Caesar was urged by Quintus Cicero, 
who was himself also under siege, to come with 
two legions to his relief. The enemy then turned 
upon Caesar, who feigned fear and kept his troops 
within his camp, which he had purposely constructed 
on a smaller scale than usual. The Gauls, already 
counting on victory, and pressing forward as though 
to plunder the camp, began to fill up the ditches 
and to tear down the ramparts. Caesar, therefore, 
as the Gauls were not equipped for battle, suddenly 
sent forth his own troops from all quarters and cut 
the enemy to pieces." 

When Titurius Sabinus was fighting against a large 
force of Gauls, he kept his troops within their 
fortifications, and thus produced upon the Gauls the 
impression that he was afraid. To further this 
impression, he sent a deserter to state that the 
Roman army was in despair and was planning to 
flee. Spurred on by the hope of victory thus offered, 
the Gauls loaded themselves with wood and brush 
with which to fill the trenches, and at top speed 
started for our camp, which was pitched on the top 
of an elevation. From there Titurius launched all 
his forces against them, killing many of the Gauls 
and receiving large numbers in surrender.? 

As Pompey was about to assault the town ot 
Asculum, the inhabitants exhibited on the ramparts 
a few aged and feeble men. Having thus thrown 
the Romans off their guard, they made a sortie and 
put them to flight.? 

When the Numantines were blockaded, they did 
not even draw up a line of battle in front of the 


261 


SEXTUS JULIUS FRONTINUS 


struxerunt aciem adeoque se continuerunt, ut Popilio 
Laenati fiducia fieret scalis oppidum adgrediendi; 
quo deinde suspicante insidias, quia ne tunc quidem 
obsistebatur, ac suos revocante, eruptione facta 
aversos et descendentis adorti sunt. 


XVIII. De CONSTANTIA OBSESSORUM 


1. Romani, adsidente moenibus Hannibale, osten- 
tandae fiduciae gratia supplementum exercitibus, quos 
in Hispania habebant, diversa porta miserunt. 

2. Idem agrum, in quo castra Hannibal habebat, 
defuncto forte domino venalem ad id pretium licendo 
perduxerunt, quo is ager ante bellum venierat. 

3. Idem, cum ab Hannibale obsiderentur et ipsi 
obsiderent Capuam, decreverunt, ne nisi capta ea 
revocaretur inde exercitus. 


1 138 B.C. 
2 9]1 p.c. Cf. Livy xxvi. 11; Val. Max. 111. vii. 10. 
3 211 B.c. Cf. Livy xxvi. i. 7-8. 


262 


STRATAGEMS, III. xvi. 9-xviir. 3 


entrenchments, but kept so closely within the town 
that Popilius Laenas was emboldened to attack it 
with scaling-ladders. But, suspecting a ruse, since 
not even then was resistance offered, he recalled 
his men; whereupon the Numantines made a sortie 
and attacked the Romans in the rear as they were 
climbing down.! 


XVIII. CoNcERNING STEADFASTNESS ON THE 
PART or THE BESIEGED 


Tue Romans, when Hannibal was encamped near 
their walls, in order to exhibit their confidence, sent 
troops out by a different gate to reinforce the armies 
which they had in Spain.? 

The land on which Hannibal had his camp having 
come into the market owing to the death of the 
owner, the Romans bid the price up to the figure at 
which the property had sold before the war.? 

When the Romans were besieged by Hannibal 
and were themselves besieging Capua, they passed 
a decree not to recall their army from the latter 
place until it was captured.’ 


263 


BOOK IV 


LIBER QUARTUS! 


Murra lectione conquisitis strategematibus et non 
exiguo scrupulo digestis, ut promissum trium libro- 
rum implerem, si modo implevi, hoc exhibebo ea, 
quae parum apte discriptioni priorum ad speciem 
alligatae subici videbantur et erant exempla potius 
strategicon quam strategemata; quae idcirco sepa- 
ravi, quia quamvis clara diversae tamen erant sub- 
stantiae, ne, si qui forte in aliqua ex his incidissent, 
similitudine inducti praetermissa opinarentur. Et 
sane velut res residua expedienda fuit, in qua et 
ipse ordinem per species servare conabor : 


I. De disciplina. 
II. De effectu disciplinae. 
III. De continentia. 
IIII. De iustitia. 
V. De constantia. 
VI. De affectu et moderatione. 
VII. De variis consiliis. 


1 On the authenticity of Book IV, see Introduction, pp. xix. f. 
266 


BOOK IV 


Havine, by extensive reading, collected examples 
of stratagems, and having arranged these at no small 
pains, in order to fulfil the promise of my three 
books (if only I have fulfilled it), in the present book 


I shall set forth those instances which seemed to fall ' 


less naturally under the former classification (which 
was limited to special types), and which are illustra- 
tions rather of military science in general than of 
stratagems. Inasmuch as these incidents, though 
famous, belong to a different subject,! I have given 
them separate treatment, for fear that if any persons 
should happen in reading to run across some of 
them, they might be led by the resemblance to 
imagine that these examples had been overlooked by 
me. As supplementary material, of course, these 
topics called for treatment. In presenting them, I 
shall endeavour to observe the following categories : 


I. On discipline. 
II. On the effect of discipline. 
III. On restraint and disinterestedness 
IV. On justice. 
V. On determination (“the will to victory ’’). 
VI. On good will and moderation. 
VII. On sundry maxims and devices. 


1 That is, different from the class of stratagems proper. 


267 


SEXTUS JULIUS FRONTINUS 


I. De DisciPLINA 


1. P. Scipio ad Numantiam corruptum superiorum 
ducum socordia exercitum correxit dimisso ingenti 
lixarum numero, redactis ad munus cotidiana exerci. 
tatione militibus. Quibus cum frequens iniungeret 
iter, portare complurium dierum cibaria imperabat, 
ita ut frigora et imbres pati, vada fluminum pedibus 
traicere adsuesceret miles, exprobrante subinde im- 
peratore timiditatem et ignaviam, frangente deli- 
. eatioris usus ac parum necessaria expeditioni vasa. 
Quod maxime notabiliter accidit C. Memmio tribuno, 
cui dixisse traditur Scipio: * mihi paulisper, tibi et 
rei publicae semper nequam eris." 

2. Q. Metellus bello Iugurthino similiter lapsam 
militum disciplinam pari severitate restituit, cum 
insuper prohibuisset alia carne quam assa elixave 
milites uti. 

3. Pyrrhus dilectatori suo fertur dixisse: “tu 
grandes elige, ego eos fortes reddam." 

4. L. Paulo et C. Varrone consulibus milites primo 
iure iurando adacti sunt; antea enim sacramento 
tantummodo a tribunis rogabantur, ceterum ipsi inter 
se coniurabant se fugae atque formidinis causa non 


1 134 p.c. Cf. Val. Max mr. vii. 1 ; Livy Per. 57; Polyaen. 
VIII. xvi. 2. 

3 109 B.o. Cf. Val. Max. 11. vii. 2; Sall. Jug. 45. Polyaen. 
vill, xvi. 2 and Plut. Apophth. Scip. Min. 16 attribute this to 
Scipio. 

3 The point of the prohibition is not obvious to the modern 
sense. 


268 


STRATAGEMS, IV. 1. 1-4 


I. On DisciPLINE 


Wuen the Roman army before Numantia had 
become demoralized by the slackness of previous 
commanders, Publius Scipio reformed it by dismissing 
an enormous number of camp-followers and by bring- 
ing the soldiers to a sense of responsibility through 
regular daily routine. On the occasion of the 
frequent marches which he enjoined upon them, 
he commanded them to carry several days' rations, 
under such conditions that they became accustomed 
to enduring cold and rain, and to the fording of 
streams. Often the general reproached them with 
timidity and indolence; often he broke utensils 
which served only the purpose of self-indulgence 
and were quite unnecessary for campaigning. A 
notable instance of this severity occurred in the case 
of the tribune Gaius Memmius, to whom Scipio is 
said to have exclaimed: * To me you will be worth- 
less merely for a certain period ; to yourself and the 
state for ever!” 1 

Quintus Metellus, in the Jugurthine War,? when 
discipline had similarly lapsed, restored it by a like 
severity, while in addition he had forbidden the 
soldiers to use meat, except when baked or boiled.? 

Pyrrhus is said to have remarked to his recruiting 
officer: ** You pick out the big men! I'll make them 
brave." 

In the consulship. of Lucius Paulus and Gaius 
Varro, soldiers were for the first time compelled to 
take the tus iurandum. Up to that time the sacra- 
mentum was the oath of allegiance administered to 
them by the tribunes, but they used to pledge each 
other not to quit the force by flight, or in conse- 


269 


SEXTUS JULIUS FRONTINUS 


abituros neque ex ordine recessuros nisi teli petendi 
feriendive hostis aut civis servandi causa. 

5. Scipio Africanus, cum ornatum scutum elegan- 
tius cuiusdam vidisset, dixit non mirari se, quod 
tanta cura ornasset, in quo plus praesidii quam in 
gladio haberet. 

6. Philippus, cum primum exercitum constitueret, 
vehiculorum usum omnibus interdixit, equitibus non 
amplius quam singulos calones habere permisit, pedi- 
tibus autem denis singulos, qui molas et funes fer- 
rent; in aestiva exeuntibus triginta dierum farinam 
eollo portari imperavit. 

T. C. Marius recidendorum impedimentorum gra- 
tia, quibus maxime exercitus agmen oneratur, vasa 
et cibaria militis in fasciculos aptata furcis imposuit, 
sub quibus et habile onus et facilis requies esset; 
unde et proverbium tractum est “ muli Mariani.” 

8. Theagenes Atheniensis, cum exercitum Me- 
garam duceret, petentibus ordines respondit ibi se 
daturum. Deinde clam equites praemisit eosque 
hostium specie impetum in suos retorquere iussit, 
Quo facto cum quos secum habebat tamquam ad 
hostium occursum praepararentur, permisit ita ordi- 


1 216 p.c. Cf. Livy xxii. 38. Up to the time of the Battle 
of Cannae, there were two military oaths, the sacramentum, 
which was compulsory and was administered by the consul 
when the soldier first enlisted, and the ius turandum, a 
voluntary oath taken before a tribune when the soldiers 
were assigned to separate divisions. In 216 the two were 
united, and thereafter the ius iurandum, administered by 
the military tribune, wascompulsory. The facts here stated 
are slightly at variance with the general understanding. 

3 134 p.c. Cf. Livy Per. 57; Plut. Apophth. Scip. Min. 18 ; 
Polyaen. vir. xvi. 3, 4. 


270 


STRATAGEMS, IV. 1. 4-8 


quence of fear, and not to leave the ranks except to 
seek a weapon, strike a foe, or save a comrade.! 

Scipio Africanus, noticing the shield of a certain 
soldier rather elaborately decorated, said he didn't 
wonder the man had adorned it with such care, 
seeing that he put more trust in it than in his sword.? 

When Philip was organizing his first army, he 
forbade anyone to use a carriage. The cavalrymen 
he permitted to have but one attendant apiece. In 
the infantry he allowed for every ten men only one 
servant, who was detailed to carry the mills and 
ropes. When the troops marched out to summer 
quarters, he commanded each man to carry on his 
shoulders flour for thirty days. 

For the purpose of limiting the number of pack 
animals, by which the march of the army was 
especially hampered, Gaius Marius had his soldiers 
fasten their utensils and food up in bundles and 
hang these on forked poles, to make the burden 
easy and to facilitate rest; whence the expression 
** Marius's mules." 4 

When Theagenes, the Athenian, was leading his 
troops towards Megara and his men inquired as to 
their place in the ranks, he told them he would 
assign them their places when they arrived at their 
destination, Then he secretly sent the cavalry 
ahead and commanded them, in the guise of enemies, 
to turn back and attack their comrades. When this 
plan was carried out and the men whom he had with 
him made preparations for an encounter with the 
foe, he permitted the battle-line to be drawn up in 


3 The mills were for grinding corn. The allusion to the 
ropes is not clear. 
* Cf. Fest. Paul. 24, 2;, 148, 6. 


271 


SEXTUS JULIUS FRONTINUS 


nari aciem, ut quo quis voluisset loco consisteret ; 
cum inertissimus quisque retro se dedisset, strenui 
autem in frontem prosiluissent, ut quemque invenerat 
stantem, ita ad ordines militiae provexit. 

9. Lysander Lacedaemonius egressum via quen- 
dam castigabat. Cui dicenti ad nullius rei rapinam 
se ab agmine recessisse respondit: “ne speciem 
quidem rapturi praebeas volo." 

10. Antigonus, cum filium suum audisset dever- 
tisse in mulieris! domum, cui tres filiae insignes 
specie essent, “audio,” inquit, “ fili, anguste habitare 
te pluribus dominis domum possidentibus : hospitium 
laxius accipe." Iussoque commigrare edixit, ne quis 
minor quinquaginta annos natus hospitio matris 
familias uteretur. 

11. Q. Metellus consul, quamvis nulla lege im- 
pediretur, quin filium contubernalem perpetuum 
haberet, maluit tamen eum in ordine merere. 

12. P. Rutilius consul, cum secundum leges in 
contubernio suo habere posset filium, in legione 
militem fecit. 

13. M. Scaurus filium, quod in saltu Tridentino 
loco hostibus cesserat, in conspectum suum venire 
vetuit. Adulescens verecundia ignominiae pressus 
mortem sibi conscivit. 

14. Castra antiquitus Romani ceteraeque gentes 
passim per corpora cohortium velut mapalia consti- 
tuere soliti erant, cum solos urbium muros nosset 


1 mulieris, Götz; eius MSS. ; anus Gund. 


1 Polyaen. v. xxviii. 1 attributes this to Theognis ; in III. 
ix. 10, he attributes it to Iphicrates. 

3 323—321 B.c. Cf. Plut. Demetr. 23, Apophth. Antig. 5. 

3 143 (?) 109 (?) &.c. Sall Jug. xiv. 4 says that Metellus 
Numidicus kept his son with him as tent-mate. 
272 


STRATAGEMS, IV. 1. 8-14 


such a way that each man took his place where he 
wished, the most cowardly retiring to the rear, the 
bravest rushing to the front. He thereupon assigned 
to each man, for the campaign, the same position in 
which he had found him.! 

Lysander, the Spartan, once flogged a soldier who 
had left the ranks while on the march. When the 
man said that he had not left the line for the purpose 
of pillage, Lysander retorted: * I won't have you 
look as if you were going to pillage." 

Antigonus, hearing that his son had taken lodgings 
at the house of a woman who had three handsome 
daughters, said: “I hear, son, that your lodgings 
are cramped, owing to the number of mistresses in 
charge of your house. Get roomier quarters." 
Having commanded his son to move, he issued an 
edict that no one under fifty years of age should 
take lodgings with the mother of a family. 2 

The consul Quintus Metellus, although not pre- 
vented by law from having his son with him as a 
regular tent-mate, yet preferred to have him serve 
in the ranks.? 

The consul Publius Rutilius, though he might by 
law have kept his son in his own tent, made him a 
soldier in the legion.4 

Marcus Scaurus forbade his son to come into his 
presence, since he had retreated before the enemy 
in the Tridentine Pass. Overwhelmed by the shame 
of this disgrace, the young man committed suicide.® 

In ancient times the Romans and other peoples 
used to make their camps like groups of Punic huts, 
distributing the troops here and there by cohorts, 
since the men of old were not acquainted with walls 


4 105 B.c. — 510250. Cf. Val, Max. v. viii. 4, 


273 
VOL. I. T 


SEXTUS JULIUS FRONTINUS 


antiquitas. Pyrrhus Epirotarum rex primus totum 
exercitum sub eodem vallo continere instituit, Ro- 
mani deinde, victo eo in campis Arusinis circa urbem 
Malventum, castris eius potiti et ordinatione notata 
paulatim ad hanc usque metationem, quae nunc 
effecta est, pervenerunt. 

15. P. Nasica in hibernis, quamvis classis usus 
non esset necessarius, ne tamen desidia miles cor- 
rumperetur aut per otii licentiam sociis iniuriam 
inferret, navis aedificare instituit. 

16. M. Cato memoriae tradidit in furto compre- 
hensis inter commilitones dextras esse praecisas 
aut, si lenius animadvertere voluissent, in principiis 
sanguinem missum. 

17. Clearchus dux Lacedaemoniorum exercitui 
dicebat imperatorem potius quam hostem metui 
debere, significans eos, qui in proelio dubiam mor- 
tem timuissent, certum, si deseruissent, manere 
supplicium. l 

18. Appii Claudii sententia senatus eos, qui a 
Pyrrho rege Epirotarum capti et postea remissi erant, 
equites ad peditem redegit, pedites ad levem arma- 
turam, omnibus extra vallum iussis tendere, donec 
bina hostium spolia singuli referrent. 

19. Otacilius Crassus consul eos, qui ab Hannibale 


1 The modern Benevento. Pyrrhus was defeated here in 
275 B.C. 

2 Cf. Livy xxxv. 14. Plut. Pyrrh. 16 represents Pyrrbus, 
on the other hand, marvelling at the arrangement of the 
Roman camp, 3 194—193 B.c. 

* Gell. x. viii. 1 gives an interesting conjecture as to the 
origin of this second punishment. 

5 431—401 B.c. Cf. Val. Max. rr. vii. extr. 2; Xen. Anab. 
II. vi. 10. 

€ 279 B.c. Cf. Val. Max. 11. vii. 15; Eutrop. ii. 13. 


274 


STRATAGEMS, IV. 1. 14-19 


except in the case of cities. Pyrrhus, king of the 
Epirotes, was the first to inaugurate the custom of 
concentrating an entire army within the precincts 
of the same entrenchments. Later the Romans, 
after defeating Pyrrhus on the Arusian Plains near 
the city of Maleventum,! captured his camp, and, 
noting its plan, gradually came to the arrangement 
which is in vogue to-day.? 

At one time, when Publius Nasica was in winter- 
quarters, although he had no need of ships, yet he 
determined to construct them, in order that his 
troops might not become demoralized by idleness, 
or inflict harm on their allies in consequence of the 
licence resulting from leisure.? 

Marcus Cato has handed down the story that, 
when soldiers were caught in theft, their right hands 
used to be cut off in the presence of their comrades ; 
or if the authorities wished to impose a lighter 
sentence, the offender was bled at headquarters.* 

The Spartan general Clearchus used to tell his 
troops that their commander ought to be feared 
more than the enemy, meaning that the death they 
feared in battle was doubtful, but that execution for 
desertion was certain.5 

On motion of Appius Claudius the Senate degraded 
to the status of foot-soldiers those knights who had 
been captured and afterwards sent back by Pyrrhus, 
king of the Epirotes, while the foot-soldiers were de- 
graded to the status of light-armed troops, all being 
commanded to tent outside the fortifications of the 
camp until each man should bring in the spoils of 
two foemen.® 

The consul Otacilius Crassus ordered those who 
had been sent under the yoke by Hannibal and had 


275 
T 2 


SEXTUS JULIUS FRONTINUS 


sub iugum missi redierant, tendere extra vallum 
iussit, ut immuniti adsuescerent periculis et adversus 
hostem audentiores fierent. 

20. P. Cornelio Nasica Decimo Iunio consulibus, 
qui exercitum deseruerant, damnati virgis caesi 
publice venierunt. 

21. Domitius Corbulo in Armenia duas alas et tres 
cohortes, quae ad castellum Initia hostibus cesserant, 
extra vallum iussit tendere, donec adsiduo labore et 
prosperis excursionibus redimerent ignominiam. 

22. Aurelius Cotta consul, cum ad opus equites 
necessitate cogente iussisset accedere eorumque pars - 
detractasset imperium, questus apud censores effecit, 
ut notarentur; a patribus deinde obtinuit, ne eis 
praeterita aera procederent; tribuni quoque plebis 
de eadem re ad populum pertulerunt. omniumque 
consensu stabilita disciplina est. 

23. Q. Metellus Macedonicus in Hispania quinque 
cohortes, quae hostibus cesserant, testamentum fa- 
cere iussas ad locum reciperandum remisit, minatus 
non nisi post victoriam receptum iri. 

24. P. Valerio consuli senatus praecepit, exerci- 
tum ad Sirim victum ducere Saepinum ibique castra 
munire et hiemem sub tentoriis exigere. 

24a. Senatus, cum turpiter fugati eius milites 


1 Manius Otacilius Crassus was consul in 263 and 246 B.c. 
Titus Otacilius Crassus was consul in 261 B.C. 

2 138 B.c. Cf. Livy Per. 55. 

3 58—59 A.D. Cf. Tac. Ann. xiii. 36. 

4 252 p.c. Val Max. Ir. ix. 7 cites a somewhat similar 
case of discipline. 

5 143 p.c. Cf. Val. Max. rr. vii. 10; Vell. ii. 5. 

$ 980 B.c. Publius Valerius Laevinus. 


276 


, STRATAGEMS, IV. 1. 19-24a 


then returned, to camp outside the entrenchments, 
in order that they might become used to dangers 
while without defences, and so grow more daring 
against the enemy.! 

In the consulship of Publius Cornelius Nasica and 
Decimus Junius those who had deserted from the 
army were condemned to be scourged publicly with 
rods and then to be sold into slavery.? 

Domitius Corbulo, when in Armenia, ordered two 
squadrons and three cohorts, which had given way 
before the enemy near the fortress of Initia, to camp 
outside the entrenchments, until by steady work and 
successful raids they should atone for their disgrace.? 

When the consul Aurelius Cotta under pressing 
necessity ordered the knights to participate in a 
certain work and a part of them renounced his 
authority, he made complaint before the censors and 
had the mutineers degraded. Then from the 
senators he secured an enactment that arrears of 
their wages should not be paid. The tribunes of the 
plebs also carried through a bill with the people on 
the same matter, so that discipline was maintained 
by the joint action of all.4 

When Quintus Metellus Macedonicus was cam- 
paigning in Spain, and five cohorts on one occasion 
had given way before the enemy, he commanded the 
soldiers to make their wills, and then sent them back 
to recover the lost ground, threatening that they 
should not be received in camp except after victory.? 

The Senate ordered the consul Publius Valerius to 
lead the army, which had been defeated near the river 
Siris, to Saepinum, to construct a camp there, and 
to spend the winter under canvas.9 

When his soldiers had been disgracefully routed, 


271 


SEXTUS JULIUS FRONTINUS 


essent, decrevit, ne auxilia eis summitterentur, nisi 
captis eius ... 

25. Legionibus, quae Punico bello militiam detrac- 
taverant, in Siciliam velut relegatis per septem annos 
hordeum ex senatus consulto datum est. 

26. L. Piso C. Titium praefectum cohortis, quod 
loco fugitivis cesserat, cinctu togae praeciso, soluta 
tunica, nudis pedibus in principiis cotidie stare, 
dum vigiles venirent, iussit, conviviis et balneo 
abstinere. 

27. Sulla cohortem et centuriones, quorum statio- 
nem hostis perruperat, galeatos et discinctos perstare 
in principiis iussit. 

28. Domitius Corbulo in Armenia Aemilio Rufo 
praefecto equitum, quia hostibus cesserat et parum 
instructam armis alam habebat, vestimenta per licto- 
rem scidit eidemque ut erat foedato habitu perstare 
in principiis, donec emitteretur,! imperavit. 

29. Atilius Regulus, cum ex Samnio in Luceriam 
transgrederetur exercitusque eius obviis hostibus 
aversus esset, opposita cohorte iussit fugientes pro 
desertoribus caedi. 

30. Cotta consul in Sicilia in Valerium, nobilem 
tribunum militum ex gente Valeria, virgis animad- 
vertit. 

31. Idem P. Aurelium sanguine sibi iunctum, quem 


1 emitteretur Bennett; mitterentur MSS. and edd. 


1 In the Second Punic War, after Cannae. 

2 Cf. Livy xxiv. 18. The substitution of barley for wheat 
rations was a common form of punishment; Cf. Suet. Aug. 
24; Plut. Marc. 25. 

3 133 B.c. Cf. Val. Max. it. vii. 9. 4 58-59 A.D. 

5 294 B.o. Cf. It. viii. 11 and note. * 252 B.C. 


278 


STRATAGEMS, IV. 1. 24a-31 


the Senate ordered that no reinforcements should be 
sent them, unless . . . | 

The legions which had refused to serve in the 
Punic War! were sent into a kind of banishment in 
Sicily, and by vote of the Senate were put on barley 
rations for seven years.? 

Because Gaius Titius, commander of a cohort, had 
given way before some runaway slaves, Lucius Piso 
ordered him to stand daily in the headquarters of 
the camp, barefooted, with the belt of his toga cut 
and his tunic ungirt, and wait till the night- 
watchmen came. He also commanded that the 
culprit should forgo banquets and baths.? 

Sulla ordered a cohort and its centurions, through 
whose defences the enemy had broken, to stand 
continuously at headquarters, wearing helmets and 
without uniforms. 

When Domitius Corbulo was campaigning in 
Armenia, a certain Aemilius Rufus, a praefect of 
cavalry, gave way before the enemy. On discovering 
that Rufus had kept his squadron inadequately 
equipped with weapons, Corbulo directed the lictors 
to strip the clothes from his back, and ordered 
the culprit to stand at headquarters in this unseemly 
plight until he should be released.* 

When Atilius Regulus was crossing from Samnium 
to Luceria and his troops turned away from the 
enemy whom they had encountered, Regulus blocked 
their retreat with a cohort, as they fled, and ordered 
them to be cut to pieces as deserters.® 

The consul Cotta, when in Sicily, flogged a certain 
Valerius, a noble military tribune belonging to the 
Valerian gens.® 

The same Cotta, when about to cross aver to 


279 


SEXTUS JULIUS FRONTINUS 


obsidioni Lipararum, ipse ad auspicia repetenda Mes- 
sanam transiturus, praefecerat, cum agger incensus 
et capta castra essent, virgis caesum in numerum 
gregalium peditum referri et muneribus fungi iussit. 

32. Fulvius Flaccus censor Fulvium fratrem suum, 
quia legionem, in qua tribunus militum erat, iniussu 
consulis dimiserat, senatu movit. 

33. M. Cato ab hostili litore, in quo per aliquot 
dies manserat, cum ter dato profectionis signo clas- 
sem solvisset et relictus e militibus quidam a terra 
voce et gestu expostularet, uti tolleretur, circumacta 
ad litus universa classe, comprehensum supplicio 
adfici iussit et, quem occisuri per ignominiam hostes 
fuerant, exemplo potius impendit. 

94. Appius Claudius ex his, qui loco cesserant, 
decimum quemque militem sorte ductum fusti per- 
cussit. 

35. Fabius Rullus consul ex duabus legionibus, quae 
loco cesserant, sorte ductos in conspectu militum 
securi percussit. 

96. Aquilius ternos ex centuriis, quarum statio ab 
hoste perrupta erat, securi percussit. 

97. M. Antonius, cum agger ab hostibus incensus 
esset, ex his, qui in opere fuerant, duarum cohortium 


1 Of. Val. Max. I. vii. 4. 

2 174 p.c. Cf. Val. Max. r1. vii. 5; Livy xl. 41, xli. 27; 
Vell. 1. x. 6. 

3 471 B.o. Of. Livy ii. 59; Dionys. ix. 50; Zonar. vii. 17, 


. 280 


STRATAGEMS, IV. 1. 31-37 


Messana to take the auspices afresh, placed in 
charge of the blockade of the Liparian Islands a 
certain Publius Aurelius, who was connected with 
him by ties of blood. But when Aurelius's line of 
works was burned and his camp captured, Cotta had 
him scourged with rods and ordered him to be 
reduced to the ranks and to perform the tasks of 
a common soldier.! | 

The censor Fulvius Flaccus removed from the 
Senate his own brother Fulvius, because the latter 
without the command of the consul had disbanded 
the legion in which he was tribune of the soldiers.? 

On one occasion when Mareus Cato, who had 
lingered for several days on a hostile shore, had at 
length set sail, after three times giving the signal 
for departure, and a certain soldier, who had been 
left behind, with cries and gestures from the land, 
begged to be picked up, Cato turned his whole fleet 
back to the shore, arrested the man, and commanded 
him to be put to death, thus preferring to make an 
example of the fellow than to have him ignominiously 
put to death by the enemy.’ 

In the case of those who quitted their places in 
the line, Appius Claudius picked out every tenth 
man by lot and had him clubbed to death. 

In the case of two legions which had given way 
before the foe, the consul Fabius Rullus chose men 
by lot and beheaded them in sight of their comrades. 

Aquilius beheaded three men from each of the 
centuries whose position had been broken through 
by the enemy. 

Marcus Antonius, when fire had been set to his 
line of works by the enemy, decimated the soldiers 
of two cohorts of those who were on the works, and 


281 


SEXTUS JULIUS FRONTINUS 


militem decimavit et in singulos ex his centuriones 
animadvertit, legatum cum ignominia dimisit, reliquis 
ex legione hordeum dari iussit. 

38. In legionem, quae Regium oppidum iniussu 
ducis diripuerat, animadversum est ita, ut quattuor 
milia tradita custodiae necarentur; praeterea senatus 
consulto cautum est, ne quem ex eis sepelire vel 
lugere fas esset. 

39. L. Papirius Cursor dictator Fabium Rullum 
magistrum equitum, quod adversum edictum eius 
quamvis prospere pugnaverat, ad virgas poposcit, 
caesum securi percussurus ; nec contentioni aut pre- 
cibus militum concessit animadversionem eumque 
profugientem Romam persecutus est, ne ibi quidem 
remisso prius supplicii metu, quam ad genua eius et 
Fabius cum patre provolveretur et pariter senatus 
ac populus rogarent. 

40. Manlius, cui Imperioso postea cognomen fuit, 
filium, quod is contra edictum patris cum hoste pug- 
naverat, quamvis victorem in conspectu exercitus 
virgis caesum securi percussit. 

41. Manlius filius, exercitu pro se adversus patrem 
seditionem parante, negavit tanti esse quemquam, ut 
propter illum disciplina corrumperetur, et obtinuit, 
ut ipsum puniri paterentur. 


1 36 B.c. Cf. Plut. Ant. 39. 

3 When Pyrrhus was in southern Italy, the people of 
Rhegium applied to Rome for assistance, and the Romans 
sent them a garrison of four thousand soldiers, levied amon 
the Latin colonies in Campania. In 279 these troops seize 
the town, killed or expelled the male inhabitants, and took 
possession of the women and children. Cf. Livy xxviii. 28 ; 
Val. Max. rr. vii. 15; Polyb. 1. vii. 6-13 ; Oros. Iv. iii. 3-5. 

3 325 B.c. Cf. Livy viii. 2911. ; Val. Max. Ir. vii. 8, 111 
ii. 9; Eutr, ii. 8. 

* 340 5.c. Cf. Livy viii. 7; Val. Max. 11. vii. 6 ; Sall. Cat. 


282 


. STRATAGEMS, IV. 1. 37-41 


punished the centurions of each cohort. Besides 
this, he dismissed the commanding officer in disgrace, 
and ordered the rest of the legion to be put on 
barley rations.! 

The legion which had plundered the city ot 
Rhegium without the orders of its commander was 
punished as follows: four thousand men were put 
under guard and executed. Moreover the Senate 
by decree made it a crime to bury any one of these 
or indulge in mourning for them.” 

The dictator Lucius Papirius Cursor demanded 
that Fabius Rullus, his master of the horse, be 
scourged, and was on the point of beheading him, 
because he had engaged in battle against orders— 
successfully withal. Even in the face of the efforts 
and pleas of the soldiers, Papirius refused to renounce 
his purpose of punishment, actually following Rullus, 
when he fled for refuge to Rome, and not even there 
abandoning his threats of execution until Fabius and 
his father fell at the knees of Papirius, and the Senate 
and people alike joined in their petition.’ 

Manlius, to whom the name “ The Masterful " was 
afterwards given, had his own son scourged and be- 
headed in the sight of the army, because, even though 
he came out victorious, he had engaged in battle with 
the enemy contrary to the orders of his father.4 

The younger Manlius, when the army was pre- 
paring to mutiny in his behalf against his father, said 
that no one was of such importance that discipline 
should be destroyed on his account, and so induced 
his comrades to suffer bim to be punished.* 


52 ; Cic. de Fin. 1. vii. 23, de Off. 111. xxxi. 112. The father, 
Titus Manlius Torquatus, was the son of Lucius Manlius, 
dictator in 363, who had also received the cognomen Imperi- 
osus an account of his severity. 


283 


SEXTUS JULIUS FRONTINUS 


49. Q. Fabius Maximus transfugarum dextras 
praecidit. 

43. C. Curio consul bello Dardanico circa Dyrra- 
chium, cum ex quinque legionibus una seditione 
facta militiam detractasset secuturamque se teme- 
ritatem ducis in expeditionem asperam et insidiosam 
negasset, quattuor legiones eduxit armatas et con- 
sistere ordinibus detectis armis velut in acie iussit. 
Post hoc seditiosam legionem inermem procedere 
discinctamque in conspectu armati exercitus stra- 
menta coegit secare, postero autem die similiter 
fossam discinctos milites facere, nullisque precibus 
legionis impetrari ab eo potuit, ne signa eius 
summitteret nomenque aboleret, milites autem in 
supplementum ceterarum legionum distribueret. 

44. Q. Fulvio Appio Claudio consulibus milites ex 
pugna Cannensi in Siciliam a senatu relegati postu- 
laverunt a consule M. Marcello, ut in proelium 
ducerentur. Ille senatum consuluit; senatus nega- 
vit sibi placere committi his rempublicam, qui eam 
deseruissent; Marcello tamen permisit facere, quod 
videretur, dum ne quis eorum munere vacaret neve 
donaretur neve quod praemium ferret aut in Italiam 
reportaretur, dum Poeni in ea fuissent. 

45. M. Salinator consularis damnatus est a populo, 
quod praedam non aequaliter diviserat militibus. 


1142-140 B.c. Quintus Fabius Maximus Servilianus. Cf. 
Val Max 11. vii. 11 ; Oros. v. iv. 19. 

3 One of the leading tribes of Illyria, subdued by the 
Romans. According to Livy Per. 92, 95 and Eutrop. vi. 2, 
Curio was proconsul when he carried on this campaign in 


2912 p.c. Cf. Livy xxv. 5-7; Val. Max. 11. vii. 15; Plut. 
Marc. 13. Marcellus was proconsul, not consul Cf. Livy 
xxvi. 1, 


284 


STRATAGEMS, IV. 1. 42-45 


Quintus Fabius Maximus cut off the right hands 
of deserters.! 

When the consul Gaius Curio was campaigning 
near Dyrrhachium in the war against the Dardani? 
and one of the five legions, having mutinied, had 
refused service and declared it would not follow his 
rash leadership on a difficult and dangerous enter- 
prise, he led out four legions in arms and ordered 
them to take their stand in the ranks with weapons 
drawn, as if in battle. Then he commanded the 
mutinous legion to advance without arms, and forced 
its members to strip for work and cut straw under 
the eyes of armed guards. The following day, in 
like manner, he compelled them to strip and dig 
ditches, and by no entreaties of the legion could he 
be induced to renounce his purpose of withdrawing 
its standards, abolishing its name, and distributing 
its members to fill out other legions. 

In the consulship of Quintus Fulvius and Appius 
Claudius, the soldiers, who after the battle of Cannae 
had been banished to Sicily by the Senate, peti- 
tioned the consul Marcellus to be led to battle. 
Marcellus consulted the Senate, who declared it 
was not their pleasure that the public welfare should 
be trusted to those who had proved disloyal. Yet 
they empowered Marcellus to do what seemed best 
to him, provided none of the soldiers should be 
relieved of duty, honoured -with a gift or reward, 
or conveyed back to Italy, so long as there were 
any Carthaginians in the country.? 

Marcus Salinator, when ex-consul, was condemned 
by the people because he had not divided He booty 
equally among his soldiers.* 


4 218 B.c. Cf. Livy xxvii. 34, xxix. 37. 
285 


SEXTUS JULIUS FRONTINUS 


46. Cum ab Liguribus in proelio Q. Petilius consul 
interfectus esset, decrevit senatus, uti ea legio, in 
cuius acie consul erat occisus, tota infrequens re- 
ferretur, stipendium ei annuum non daretur, aera 
reciderentur. 


II. De Errecru DISCIPLINAE 


1. BRuT: et Cassi exercitus, memoriae proditum 
est, bello civili cum una per Macedoniam iter face- 
rent priorque Brutus ad fluvium, in quo pontem 
iungi oportebat, pervenisset, Cassi tamen exerci- 
tum et in efficiendo ponte et in maturando transitu 
praecessisse ; qui vigor disciplinae effecit, ne solum 
in operibus, verum et in summa belli praestarent 
Cassiani Brutianos. 

2. C. Marius, cum facultatem eligendi exercitus 
haberet ex duobus, qui sub Rutilio et qui sub Metello 
ac postea sub se ipso meruerant, Rutilianum quam- 
quam minorem, quia certioris disciplinae arbitrabatur, 
praeoptavit. 

3. Domitius Corbulo duabus legionibus et paucis- 
simis auxiliis disciplina correcta Parthos sustinuit. 

4. Alexander Macedo XL milibus hominum iam 
inde a Philippo patre disciplinae adsuefactis orbem 
terrarum adgressus innumerabiles hostium copias 
vicit. l 


1 The term in/regquens was technically applied to soldiers 
who were absent from or irregular in attendance on their 
duties. 

2176 B.c. Cf. Livy xli. 18; Val. Max. 11. vii. 15. 

3 42 B.C. * 104 B.C. 

5 55-59 A.D. Cf. Tac. Ann. xiii. 8, 35. 


286 


STRATAGEMS, IV. 1. 46-11. 4 


When the consul Quintus Petilius had been killed 
in battle by the Ligurians, the Senate decreed that 
that legion in whose ranks the consul had been 
slain should, as a whole, be reported “ deficient " ;! 
that its year's pay should be withheld, and its wages 
reduced.? 


II. ON tHe Errect or DISCIPLINE 


Wuen, during the Civil War, the armies of Brutus 
and Cassius were marching together through Mace- 
donia, the story goes that the army of Bratus arrived 
first at a stream which had to be bridged, but that 
the troops of Cassius were the first in constructing 
the bridge and in effecting a passage. This rigorous 
discipline made Cassius’s men superior to those of 
Brutus not only in constructing military works, but 
also in the general conduct of the war.? 

When Gaius Marius had the option of choosing 
a force from two armies, one of which had served 
under Rutilius, the other under Metellus and later 
under himself, he preferred the troops of Rutilius, 
though fewer in number, because he deemed them 
of trustier discipline.* 

By improving discipline, Domitius Corbulo with- 
stood the Parthians with a force of only two legions 
and a very few auxiliaries.5 

Alexander of Macedon conquered the world, in 
the face of innumerable forces of enemies, by means 
of forty thousand men long accustomed to discipline 
under his father Philip.® 


6 334 B.C. Cf. Livy xxxv. 14; Justin. xi. 6; Plut. Alex. 
15. The numbers vary in the different authors. 


287 


SEXTUS JULIUS FRONTINUS 


5. Cyrus bello adversus Persas quattuordecim 
milibus armatorum immensas difficultates superavit. 

6. Epaminondas dux Thebanorum quattuor mili- 
bus hominum, ex quibus CCCC tantum equites erant, 
Lacedaemoniorum exercitum viginti quattuor milium 
peditum, equitum mille sescentorum vicit. 

7. A quattuordecim milibus Graecorum, qui nume- 
rus in auxiliis Cyri adversus Artaxerxen fuit, centum 
milia barbarorum proelio superata sunt. 

8. Eadem Graecorum proelio quattuordecim milia 
amissis ducibus, reditus sui cura uni ex corpore suo 
Xenophonti Atheniensi demandata, per iniqua et 
ignota loca incolumia reversa sunt. 

9. Xerxes a trecentis Lacedaemoniorum ad Ther- 
mopylas vexatus, cum vix eos confecisset, hoc se 
deceptum aiebat, quod multos quidem homines 
haberet, viros autem disciplinae tenaces nullos. 


III. De CoNTINENTIA 


1. M. CaroNEM vino eodem quo remiges contentum 
fuisse traditur. 

2. Fabricius, cum Cineaslegatus Epirotarum grande 
pondus auri dono ei daret, non accepto eo dixit malle 
se habentibus id imperare, quam habere. 

3. Atilius Regulus, cum summis rebus praefuisset, 


1401 B.c. Cf. 1v. ii. 7; Xen. Anab. 1. ii. 9; Plut. Artaz. 
6 ; Diodor. xiv. xix. 6. 

2 371 &.c. Battle of Leuctra. Diodor. xv. 52ff. and Plut. 
Pelop. 20 give different numbers. 

3 Battle of Cunaxa. Cf. 1v. ii. 5. 

* Cf. Xen. Anab. iii. 1 ff. 

5 480 p.c. In Herod. vii. 210, the historian himself, not 
the king, makes this observation. 

* Cf. Val. Max. Iv. iii. 11 ; Plin. N.H. 8, 14. 


288 


STRATAGEMS, IV. rr. 5-1. 3 


Cyrus in his war against the Persians overcame 
incalculable difficulties with a force of only fourteen 
thousand armed men. 

With four thousand men, of whom only four 
hundred were cavalry, Epaminondas, the Theban 
leader, conquered the Spartan army of twenty-four 
thousand infantry and sixteen hundred cavalry.? 

A hundred thousand barbarians were defeated in 
battle by fourteen thousand Greeks, the number 
assisting Cyrus against Artaxerxes. 

The same fourteen thousand Greeks, having lost 
their generals in battle, returned unharmed through 
difficult and unknown places, having committed the 
management of their retreat to one of their number, 
Xenophon, the Athenian.* 

When Xerxes was defied by the three hundred 
Spartans at Thermopylae and had with difficulty 
destroyed them, he declared that he had been de- 
ceived, because, while he had numbers enough, yet 
of rea] men who adhered to discipline he had 
none.5 


III. On Restraint AND. DIsINTERESTEDNESS 


Tue story goes that Marcus Cato was content with 
the same wine as the men of his crews.9 

When Cineas, ambassador of the Epirotes, offered 
Fabricius a large amount of gold, the latter rejected 
it, declaring that he preferred to rule those who had 
gold rather than to have it himself.” 

Atilius Regulus, though he had been in charge 


7 980 ».c. Gell. i. 14 tells this story of Fabricius; 
usually it is related of Curius. Cf. Val. Max. lv. iii. 5; Cic. 
de Sen. xvi. 55; Plut. Apophth. M’. Curit. 

289 

VOL. I. U 


SEXTUS JULIUS FRONTINUS 


adeo pauper fuit, ut se coniugem liberosque toleraret 
agello, qui colebatur per unum vilicum ; cuius audita 
morte scripsit senatui de successore, destitutis rebus 
obitu servi necessariam esse praesentiam suam. 

4. Cn. Scipio post res prospere in Hispania gestas 
in summa paüpertate decessit, ne ea quidem relicta 
pecunia, quae sufficeret in dotem filiarum, quas ob 
inopiam publice dotavit senatus. 

5. Idem praestiterunt Athenienses filiis Aristidis 
post amplisimarum rerum administrationem in 
maxima paupertate defuncti. 

6. Epaminondas dux Thebanorum tantae abstinen- 
tiae fuit, ut in suppellectili eius praeter stoream et 
unicum veru nihil inveniretur. 

7. Hannibal surgere de nocte solitus ante noctem 
non requiescebat ; crepusculo demum ad cenam voca- 
bat neque amplius quam duobus lectis discumbebatur 
apud eum. 

8. Idem, cum sub Hasdrubale imperatore milita- 
ret, plerumque super nudam humum sagulo tectus 
somnos capiebat. 

9. Aemilianum Scipionem traditur in itinere cum 
amicis ambulantem accepto pane vesci solitum. 

10. Idem et de Alexandro Macedone dicitur.! 


1 No. 10 is probably interpolated, 


1 255 B.c. Cf. Val Max. Iv. iv. 6; Livy Per. 18; Senec. 
ad Helv. 12 ; Apul. Apol. 18. 

3 Other writers, excepting Seneca, speak of but one 
daughter, and represent the dowry as given when Scipio was 
warring in Spain, in 218-211 p.c. Cf. Val. Max. 1v. iv. 10; 
Sen. Qu. Nat. 1. xvii. 9; Apul. 4pol. 18; Ammian. Marc. 
XIV. vi. 11. 

* 468 B.c. Cf. Nep. Aristid. 3; Plut. Aristid. 95. 

* 362 B.c. Cf. Plut. Fab. Max. 27; Nep. Epam. 3. 


390 


STRATAGEMS, IV, u. 3-10. 


of the greatest enterprises, was so poor that he 
supported himself, his wife, and children on a small 
farm which was tilled by a single steward. Hearing 
of the death of this steward, Regulus wrote to the 
Senate requesting them to appoint someone to 
succeed him in the command, since his property 
was left in jeopardy by the death of nis slave, and 
his own presence at home was necessary.! 

Gnaeus Scipio, after successful exploits in Spain, 
died in the extremest poverty, not even leaving 
money enough for a dowry for his daughters. The 
Senate, therefore, in consequence of their poverty, 
furnished them dowries at public expense.? 

The Athenians did the same thing for the 
daughters of Aristides, who died in the greatest 
poverty after directing most important enterprises.? 

Epaminondas, the Theban general, was a man 
of such simple habits that among his belongings 
nothing was found beyond a mat and a single spit.* 

Hannibal was accustomed to rise while it was still 
dark, but never took any rest before night. At 
dusk, and not before, he called his friends to dinner; 
and not more than two couches? were ever filled 
with dinner guests at his headquarters. $ 

. The same general, when serving under Hasdrubal 
as commander, usually slept on the bare ground, 
wrapped only in a common military cloak.9 

The story goes that Scipio Aemilianus used to 
eat bread offered him as he walked along on the 
march in the company of his friends. 

The same story is related of Alexander of Macedon. 


5 Frontinus has in mind a Roman lectus, or dining-couch, 
which accommodated three persons. 
6 Cf. Livy xxi. 4; Sil. Ital. xii, 559-560. 
^^ 291 
v 2 


SEXTUS JULIUS FRONTINUS 


11. Masinissam, nonagensimum aetatis annum 
agentem, meridie ante tabernaculum stantem vel 
ambulantem capere solitum cibos legimus. 

12. M'. Curius, cum victis ab eo Sabinis ex sena- 
tus consulto ampliaretur ei modus agri, quem consum- 
mati milites accipiebant, gregalium portione contentus 
fuit, malum civem dicens, cui non esset idem quod 
ceteris satis. 

13. Universi quoque exercitus notabilis saepe fuit 
continentia, sicut eius qui sub M. Scauro meruit. 
Namque memoriae tradidit Scaurus pomiferam ar- 
borem, quam in pede castrorum fuerat complexa 
metatio, postero die abeunte exercitu intactis fructibus 
relictam. 

14. Auspiciis Imperatoris Caesaris Domitiani Au- 
gusti Germanici! bello, quod Iulius Civilis in Gallia 
moverat, Lingonum opulentissima civitas, quae ad 
Civilem desciverat, cum adveniente exercitu Caesaris 
populationem timeret, quod contra exspectationem 
inviolata nihil ex rebus suis amiserat, ad obsequium 
redacta septuaginta milia armatorum tradidit mihi. 

15. L. Mummius, qui Corintho capta non Italiam 
solum sed etiam provincias tabulis statuisque exor- 
navit, adeo nihil ex tantis manubiis in suum con- 
vertit, ut filiam eius inopem senatus ex publico 
dotaverit. 


1 Germanici eo d ; the best MSS., followed by Gund., have 
Germanico. 


1 148 B.œ. Cf. Polyb. xxxvii. 11-12; Cic. de Sen. x. 31. 

3 Cf, Val. Max. Iv. ii. 5; Plin. N.H. xviii. 4; Plut. 
Apophth. M’. Curii. Nep. Thras. 4 attributes a somewhat 
similar reply to Pittacus. 

3 For the Memoirs of Scaurus, consul 115 B.C., cf. Val. 
Max. Iv. iv. 11 ; Tac. Agric. 1. 

* 70 A.D. Cf. Introduction, p. xx. 


292 


STRATAGEMS, IV. m. 11-15 


We read that Masinissa, when in his ninetieth 
year, used to eat at noon, standing or walking about 
in front of his tent! 

When, in honour of his defeat of the Sabines, 
the Senate offered Manius Curius a larger amount 
of ground than the discharged troops were receiving, 
he was content with the allotment of ordinary 
soldiers, declaring that that man was a bad citizen 
who was not satisfied with what the rest received.? 

The restraint of an entire army was also often note- 
worthy, as for example of the troops which served 
under Marcus Scaurus. For Scaurus has left it on 
record that a tree laden with fruit, at the far end of 
the fortified enclosure of the camp, was found, the 
day after the withdrawal of the army, with the fruit 
undisturbed.? 

In the war waged under the auspices of the 
Emperor Caesar Domitianus Augustus Germanicus 
and begun by Julius Civilis in Gaul, the very wealthy 
city of the Lingones, which had revolted to Civilis, 
feared that it would be plundered by the approach- 
ing army of Caesar. But when, contrary to ex- 
pectation, the inhabitants remained unharmed and 
lost none of their property, they returned to their 
loyalty, and handed over to me seventy thousand 
armed men.4 

After the capture of Corinth, Lucius Muinmius 
adorned not merely Italy, but also the provinces, 
with statues and paintings. Yet he refrained so 
scrupulously from appropriating anything from such 
vast spoils to his own use that his daughter was in 
actual need and the Senate furnished her dowry at 
the public expense.5 


5 146 B.c. Cf. Cic. de Off. 11. xxii. 76 ; in Verr. 1. xxi. 55; 
Plin. N.H, xxxiv. vii. 17. 


293 


SEXTUS JULIUS FRONTINUS 


HII. De IvusriT!A 


1. CaMiLLo Faliscos obsidenti ludi magister liberos 
Faliscorum tamquam ambulandi causa extra murum 
eductos tradidit, dicens retentis eis obsidibus neces- 
sario civitatem imperata facturam. Camillus non 
solum sprevit perfidiam, sed et restrictis post terga 
manibus magistrum virgis agendum ad parentes tra- 
didit pueris, adeptus beneficio victoriam, quam fraude 
non concupierat, nam Falisci ob hanc iustitiam sponte 
ei se dediderunt. 

2. Ad Fabricium ducem Romanorum medicus 
Pyrrhi Epirotarum regis pervenit pollicitusque est 
daturum se Pyrrho venenum, si merces sibi, in qua 
operae pretium foret, constitueretur. Quo facinore 
Fabricius egere victoriam suam non arbitratus, regi 
medicum detexit atque ea fide meruit, ut ad petendam 
amicitiam Romanorum compelleret Pyrrhum. 


V. De CONSTANTIA 


1. Cn. Pompeius minantibus direpturos pecuniam 
militibus, quae in triumphum! ferretur, Servilio et 
Glaucia cohortantibus, ut divideret eam, ne seditio 
fieret, adfirmavit non triumphaturum se potius et 
moriturum, quam licentiae militum succumberet, 
castigatisque oratione gravi laureatos fasces obiecit, 


1 triumphum Bennett ; triumpho MSS. and edd. 


1 394 B.c. Cf. Val. Max. vr. v. 1; Livy v. 27 ; Plut. 
Camil. 10 ; Polyaen. viii. 7. 

2 979 B.C. Uf. Livy Per. 13; Cic. de Off. 11. xxii. 86; 
Plut. Pyrrh. 21. Val. Max. vi. v. l and Gell. iii. 8 represent 
Fabricius as disclosing the plot, but not the name of the 
traitor. S 


294 


STRATAGEMS, IV. iv. 1-v. 1 


IV. On Justice 


Wuen Camillus was besieging the Faliscans, a 
school teacher took the sons of the Faliscans outside 
the walls, as though for a walk, and then delivered 
them up, saying that, if they should be retained as 
hostages, the city would be forced to execute the 
orders of Camillus, But Camillus not only spurned 
the teacher's perfidy, but tying his hands behind his 
back, turned him over to the boys to be driven back 
to their parents with switches. He thus gained by 
kindness a victory which he had scorned to secure 
by fraud ; for the Faliscans, in consequence of this 
act of justice, voluntarily surrendered to him.! 

The physician of Pyrrhus, king of the Epirotes, 
came to Fabricius, general of the Romans, and 
promised to give Pyrrhus poison if an adequate . 
reward should be guaranteed him for the service. 
Fabricius, not considering that victory called for any 
such crime, exposed the physician to the king, and 
by this honourable act succeeded in inducing Pyrrhus 
to seek the friendship of the Romans.? 


V. On Determination (“Tue WiLL To Victory ’’) 


Wuen the soldiers of Gnaeus Pompey threatened 
to plunder the money which was being carried for 
the triumph, Servilius and Glaucia urged him to 
distribute it among the troops, in order to avoid the 
outbreak of a mutiny. Thereupon Pompey declared 
he would forgo a triumph, and would die rather 
than yield to the insubordination of his soldiers; 
and after upbraiding them in vehement language, 
he threw in their faces the fasces wreathed with 


295 


SEXTUS JULIUS FRONTINUS 


ut ab illorum inciperent direptione; eaque invidia 
redegit eos ad modestiam. 

2. C. Caesar,seditione in tumultu civilium armorum 
facta, maxime animis tumentibus, legionem totam 
exauctoravit, ducibus seditionis securi percussis; mox 
eosdem, quos exauctoraverat, ignominiam deprecantis 
restituit et optimos milites habuit. 

3. Postumius consularis cohortatus suos, cum inter- 
rogatus esset a militibus, quid imperaret, dixit, ut se 
imitarentur, et arrepto signo hostis primus invasit ; 
quem secuti victoriam adepti sunt. 

4. Claudius Marcellus, cum in manus Gallorum 
imprudens incidisset, cireumspiciendae regionis qua 
evaderet causa equum in orbem flexit; deinde cum 
omnia esse infesta vidisset, precatus deos in medios 
hostis inrupit; quibus inopinata audacia perculsis, 
ducem quoque eorum trucidavit atque, ubi spes 
salutis vix superfuerat, inde opima rettulit spolia. 

5. L. Paulus, amisso ad Cannas exercitu, offerente 
equum Lentulo quo fugeret, superesse cladi quam- 
quam non per ipsum contractae noluit, sed in eo 
saxo, cui se vulneratus acclinaverat, persedit, donec 
ab hostibus oppressus confoderetur. 

6. Varro collega eius vel maiore constantia post 


1795.c. Cf. Plut. Pomp. 14, Apophth. Pomp. 6; Zonar. 
x. 2. There is no mention of Glaucia in this connection 
elsewhere. 

2 49 p.c. Cf. Suet. Caes. 69; Appian B.C. ii. 47; Dio xli. 
26 ff. 3 Viridomarus, the Insubrian Gaul. 

4 Spoils taken by a victorious commander from the leader 
of the enemy. 

5 929 p.c. Cf. Val. Max. ul. ii. 5; Livy Per. 20; Plut. 
Marc. 6 ff. ; Flor. ii. 4. 

* 216 B.c. Cf. Livy xxii. 49, 


296 


STRATAGEMS, IV. v. 1-6 


laurel, that they might start their plundering by 
seizing these. "Through the odium thus aroused he 
reduced his men to obedience.! 

When a sedition broke out in the tumult of the 
Civil War, and feeling ran especially high, Gaius 
Caesar dismissed from service an entire legion, and 
beheaded the leaders of the mutiny. Later, when 
the very men he had dismissed entreated him to 
remove their disgrace, he restored them and had in 
them the very best soldiers.? 

Postumius, when ex-consul, having appealed to 
the courage of his troops, and having been asked by 
them what commands he gave, told them to imitate 
him. Thereupon he seized a standard and led the 
attack on the enemy. His soldiers followed and 
won the victory. 

Claudius Marcellus, having unexpectedly come 
upon some Gallic troops, turned his horse about 
in a circle, looking around for a way of escape. 
Seeing danger on every hand, with a prayer to the 
gods, he broke into the midst of the enemy. By his 
amazing audacity he threw them into consternation, 
slew their leader,?? and actually carried away the 
spolia opima% in a situation where there had scarcely 
remained a hope of saving his life.5 

Lucius Paulus, after the loss of his army at Cannae, 
being offered à horse by Lentulus with which to 
effect his escape, refused to survive the disaster, 
although it had not been occasioned by him, and 
. remained seated on the rock against which he had 
leaned when wounded, until he was overpowered 
and stabbed by the enemy.® 

Paulus's colleague, Varro, showed even greater 
resolution in continuing alive after the same disaster, 


297 


SEXTUS JULIUS FRONTINUS 


eandem cladem vixit gratiaeque ei a senatu et populo 
actae sunt, quod non desperasset rem publicam. Non 
autem vitae cupiditate, sed rei publicae amore se 
superfuisse reliquo aetatis suae tempore approbavit ; 
et barbam capillumque summisit et postea numquam 
recubans cibum cepit. Honoribus quoque, cum ei 
deferrentur a populo, renuntiavit, dicens felicioribus 
magistratibus rei publicae opus esse. 

7. Sempronius Tuditanus et Cn. Octavius tribuni 
militum omnibus fusis ad Cannas, cum in minoribus 
castris circumsederentur, suaserunt commilitonibus 
stringerent gladios et per hostium praesidia erumpe- 
rent secum, id sibi animi esse, etiamsi nemini ad 
erumpendum audacia fuisset, adfirmantes; de cunc- 
tantibus XII omnino equitibus, L peditibus qui 
comitari sustinerent repertis, incolumes Canusium 
pervenerunt. 

8. C. Fonteius Crassus in Hispania cum tribus 
milibus hominum praedatum profectus locoque ini- 
quo circumventus ab Hasdrubale, ad primos tantum 
ordines relato consilio, incipiente nocte, quo tempore 
minime exspectabatur, per stationes hostium erupit.! 

9. P. Decius tribunus militum bello Samnitico 
Cornelio consuli iniquis locis deprehenso ab hostibus 


1 Identical with 1. v. 12. 


1 Cf. Livy xxi. lxi, 14-15; Val. Max. 111. iv. 4, Iv. v. 2. 

2 When the Romans reached Cannae, they pitched two 
camps, the larger on the N.W. bank of the Aufidus, the 
smaller on the S. E. bank, about a mile and a quarter apart. 
according to Polybius rrr. ex. 10. Before the battle, Hannibal 
transferred his camp from the east side of the river to the 
west. 

3 216 B.c. Cf. Livy xxii. 50; Appian Hann. 16. Livy 
gives the number of those escaping from the smaller camp 


298 


STRATAGEMS, IV. v. 6-9 


and the Senate and the people thanked him “because,” 
they said, ** he did not despair of the commonwealth." 
But throughout the rest of his life he gave proof 
that he had remained alive not from desire of life, 
but because of his love of country. He suffered his 
beard and hair to remain untrimmed, and never 
afterwards reclined when he took food at table. 
Even when honours were decreed him by the people 
he declined them, saying that the State needed 
more fortunate magistrates than himself.! 

After the complete rout of the Romans at Cannae, 
when Sempronius Tuditanus and Gnaeus Octavius, 
tribunes of the soldiers, were besieged in the smaller 
camp,? they urged their comrades to draw their 
swords and accompany them in a dash through the 
forces of the enemy, declaring that they themselves 
were resolved on this course, even if no one else 
possessed the courage to break through. Although 
among the wavering crowd only twelve knights and 
fifty foot-soldiers were found who had the courage 
to accompany them, yet they reached Canusium 
unscathed.? 

When Gaius Fonteius Crassus was in Spain, he 
set out with three thousand men on a foraging 
expedition and was enveloped in an awkward position 
by Hasdrubal In the early part of the night, at 
a time when such a thing was least expected, having 
communicated his purpose only to the centurions of 
the first rank, he broke through the pickets of the 
enemy. 

When the consul Cornelius had been caught in an 
awkward position by the enemy in the Samnite War, 


as six hundred. Appian says ten thousand from the larger 
camp escaped. One leader only is mentioned by both. 


299 


SEXTUS JULIUS FRONTINUS 


suasit, ut ad occupandum collem qui in propinquo 
erat modicam manum mitteret, seque ducem his qui 
mittebantur obtulit. Avocatus in diversum hostis 
emisit consulem, Decium autem cinxit obseditque. 
Illas quoque angustias nocte eruptione facta cum 
eluctatus esset Decius, incolumis cum militibus 
consuli accessit.! 

10. Idem fecit sub Atilio Calatino consule, cuius 
varie traduntur nomina: alii Laberium, nonnulli 
Q. Caedicium, plurimi Calpurnium Flammam vocita- 
tum scripserunt. Hic cum demissum in eam vallem 
videret exercitum, cuius latera omniaque superiora 
hostis insederat, depoposcit et accepit a consule tre- 
centos milites, quos hortatus, ut virtute sua exercitum 
servarent, in mediam vallem decucurrit ; ad opprimen- 
dos eos undique descendit hostis longoque et aspero 
proelio retentus occasionem consuli ad extrahendum 
exercitum dedit? 

11. C. Caesar adversus Germanos et regem Ario- 
vistum pugnaturus, confusis suorum animis pro 
contione dixit nullius se eo die opera nisi decimae 
legionis usurum. Quo adsecutus est, ut et decimani 
tamquam praecipuae fortitudinis testimonio con- 
citarentur et ceteri pudore, ne penes alios gloria 
virtutis esset.? 

12. Lacedaemonius quidam nobilis, Philippo de- 

1 Practically identical with 1. v. 14. 


2 Identical with 1. v. 15. 
9 Identical with 1. xi. 3. 


1 Cf. 1. v. 14 and note. 3 Cf. 1. v. 15 and note. 
3 Cf. 1. xi. 3 and note. 


300 


STRATAGEMS, IV. v. 9-12 


Publius Decius, tribune of the soldiers, urged him 
to send a small force to occupy a neighbouring hill, 
and volunteered to act as leader of those who should 
- be sent. The enemy, thus diverted to a different 
quarter, allowed the consul to escape, but surrounded 
Decius and besieged him. Decius, however, extri- 
cated himself from this predicament also by making 
a sortie at night, and escaped unharmed along with 
his men and rejoined the consul.! 

Under the consul Atilius Calatinus the same 
exploit was performed by a man whose name is 
variously reported. Some say he was called Laberius, 
some Quintus Caedicius, but most call him Calpurnius 
Flamma. This man, seeing that the army had entered 
a valley, the sides and all the commanding parts of 
which had been occupied by the enemy, asked and 
received from the consul three hundred soldiers. 
After exhorting these to save the army by their 
courage, he hastened to the centre of the valley. To 
crush him and his followers, the enemy descended 
from all directions, but being held in check in a 
long and fierce battle, they thus afforded the consul 
an opportunity of extricating his army.? 

Gaius Caesar, when about to fight the Germans 
and their king Ariovistus, at a time when his own 
men had been thrown into panic, called his soldiers 
together and declared to the assembly that on that 
day he proposed to employ the services of the tenth 
legion alone. In this way he caused the soldiers 
of this legion to be stirred by his tribute to their 
unique heroism, while the rest were overwhelmed 
with mortification to think that a reputation for 
courage should be confined to others.? 

A certain Spartan noble, when Philip declared he 


301 


SEXTUS JULIUS FRONTINUS 


nuntiante multa se prohibiturum, nisi civitas sibi 
traderetur, * num," inquit, “et pro patria mori nos 
prohibebit ? "' 

13. Leonidas Lacedaemonius, cum dicerentur Per- 
sae sagittarum multitudine nubes esse facturi, fertur 
dixisse: * melius in umbra pugnabimus." 

14. C. Aelius praetor urbanus, cum ei ius dicenti 
picus in capite insedisset et haruspices respondissent 
dimissa ave hostium victoriam fore, necata populum 
Romanum superiorem, at C. Aelium cum familia 
periturum, non dubitavit necare picum. Atque nostro 
exercitu vincente ipse cum quattuordecim Aeliis ex- 
eadem familia in proelio est occisus. Hunc quidam 
non C. Caelium, sed Laelium fuisse et Laelios, non 
Caelios perisse credunt. 

15. P. Decius, primo pater, postea filius, in magis- 
tratu se pro re publica devoverunt admissisque in 
hostem equis adepti victoriam patriae contulerunt. 

16. P. Crassus, cum bellum adversus Aristonicum 
in Asia gerens inter Elaeam et Myrinam in hostium 
copias incidisset vivusque abduceretur, exsecratus in 
consule Romano capitivitatem virga, qua ad equum 
erat usus, oculum Thracis, a quo tenebatur, eruit 


1 Cf. Cic. Tusc. v. xiv. 42; Val. Max. vi. iv. ext. 4; 
Plut. Apophth. Lacon. Ignot. 50. 

2 Cf. Cic. Tusc. 1. xlii. 101; Val. Max. rir. vii. ext. : 

3 Cf. Plin. N.H. x. xviii. '20. Val Max. v. vi. 4 says 
that the Aelian family lost seventeen members at the battle 
of Cannae. The last sentence of this paragraph is undoubtedly 
an interpolation. 

* 340 & 295 B.c. Cf. Val. Max. v. vi. Da 6; Cic. de Fin. 
II. xix. 61, and frequently ; Livy viii. 9, x. 

302 


STRATAGEMS, IV. v. 12-16 


would cut them off from many things, unless the 
state surrendered to him, asked: * He won't cut us 
off from dying in defence of our country, will he?" ! 

Leonidas, the Spartan, in reply to the statement 
that the Persians would create clouds by the multi- 
tude of their arrows, is reported to have said: * We 
shall fight all the better in the shade.” 2 

When Gaiüs Aelius, a city praetor, was holding 
court on one occasion, a woodpecker lighted upon 
his head. The soothsayers were consulted and made 
answer that, if the bird should be allowed to go, 
the victory would fall to the enemy, but that, if it 
were killed, the Roman people would prevail, though 
Gaius and all his house would perish. Aelius, 
however, did not hesitate to kill the woodpecker. 
Our army won the day, but Aelius himself, with 
fourteen others of the same family, was slain in 
battle. Certain authorities do not believe that the 
man referred to was Gaius Caelius, but a certain 
Laelius, and that they were Laelii, not Caelii, who 
perished.? 

Two Romans bearing the name Publius Decius, 
first the father, later the son, sacrificed their lives 
to save the State during their tenure of office. By 
spurring their horses against the foe they won 
victory for their country.* 

When waging war against Aristonicus in Asia 
somewhere between Elaea and Myrina, Publius 
Crassus fell into the hands of the enemy and was 
being led away alive. Scorning the thought of 
captivity for a ltoman consul, he used the stick, 
with which he had urged on his horse, to gouge 
out the eye of the Thracian by whom he was held 
captive. The Thracian, infuriated with the pain, 


393 


SEXTUS JULIUS FRONTINUS 


atque ab eo per dolorem concitato transverberatus 
dedecus servitutis, ut voluerat, effugit. 

17. M. Cato Censorii filius in acie decidente equo 
prolapsus, cum se recollegisset animadvertissetque 
gladium excidisse vaginae, veritus ignominiam rediit 
in hostem exceptisque aliquot vulneribus, reciperato 
demum gladio, reversus est ad suos. 

18. Petilini a Poenis obsessi parentes et liberos 
propter inopiam eiecerunt, ipsi coriis madefactis et 
igne siccatis foliisque arborum et omni genere ani- 
malium vitam trahentes undecim menses obsidionem 
toleraverunt. 

19. Hispani Consabrae obsessi eadem omnia passi 
sunt nec oppidum Hirtuleio tradiderunt. 

20. Casilini obsidente Hannibale tantam inopiam 
perpessi sunt, ut CC denariis murem venisse pro- 
ditum memoriae sit eiusque venditorem fame perisse, 
emptorem autem vixisse. Fidem tamen servare 
Romanis perseveraverunt. 

21. Cyzicum cum oppugnaret Mithridates, captivos 
eius urbis produxit ostenditque obsessis, arbitratus 
futurum, ut miseratione suorum compelleret ad de- 
ditionem oppidanos; at illi cohortati ad patiendam 
fortiter mortem captivos servare Romanis fidem 
perseveraverunt. 

22. Segovienses, cum a Viriatho his liberi et con- 


1 130 8.c. Crassus was proconsul at the time of his death. 
Cf. Val. Max. m1. ii. 12; Flor. 11. xx. 4-5 ; Oros. v. x. 1-4. 

2 168 B.c. Battle of Pydna. Cf. Val. Max. rmm. ii. 16; 
Justin. xxxiii. 2. Plut. 4emil. 21 gives a slightly different 
story. 

3 216 B.c. Cf. Livy xxiii. 20, 30; Val. Max. vi. vi. ext. 2; 


Appian Hann. 29. * 79-75 B.C. 5 About £6 15s. 
* 216 ».c. Cf. Val. Max. vit. vi. 2, 3; Plin. N.H. vir. 
lvii. 82; Livy xxiii. 19. 7.4 p.c. Cf. Appian Mith. 73. 


304 


STRATAGEMS, IV. v. 16-22 


stabbed him to death. Thus, as he desired, Crassus 
escaped the disgraee of servitude.! 

Marcus, son of Cato the Censor, in a certain battle 
fell off his horse, which had stumbled. Cato picked 
himself up, but noticing that his sword had slipped 
out of its scabbard and fearing disgrace, went back 
among the enemy, and though he received a number 
of wounds, finally recovered his sword and made his 
way baek to his comrades.? 

The inhabitants of Petelia, when they were 
blockaded by the Carthaginians, sent away the 
children and the aged, on account of the shortage 
of food. They themselves, supporting life on hides, 
moistened and then dried by the fire, on leaves of 
trees, and on all sorts of animals, sustained the siege 
for eleven months.? 

The Spaniards, when blockaded at Consabra, 
endured all these same hardships; nor did they 
surrender the town to Hirtuleius.* 

The story goes that the inhabitants of Casilinum, 
when blockaded by Hannibal, suffered such shortage 
of food that a mouse was sold for two hundred 
denarii? and that the man who sold it died of 
starvation, while the purchaser lived. Yet the 
inhabitants persisted in maintaining their loyalty 
to the Romans.9 

When Mithridates was besieging Cyzicus, he 
paraded the captives from that city and exhibited 
them to the besieged, thinking thus to force the 
people of the town to surrender, through compassion 
for their fellows. But the townspeople urged the 
prisoners to méet death with heroism, and persisted 
in maintaining their loyalty to the Romans.’ 

The inhabitants of Segovia, when Viriathus pro- 

395 

VOL, 1, x 


SEXTUS JULIUS FRONTINUS 


iuges redderentur, praeoptaverunt spectare supplicia 
pignorum suorum, quam a Romanis deficere. 

23. Numantini, ne se dederent, fame mori prae- 
fixis foribus domuum suarum maluerunt. 


VI. De ArrkECTU ET MODERATIONE 


1. Q. Fasıus hortante filio, ut locum idoneum 
paucorum iactura caperet, “visne,” inquit, “tu ex 
illis paucis esse? ” 

2. Xenophon, cum equo veheretur et pedites iugum 
quoddam occupare iussisset, unum ex eis obmurmu- 
rantem audiens facile tam laboriosa sedentem impe- 
rare, desiluit et gregalem equo imposuit, cursu ipse 
ad destinatum iugum contendens. Cuius facti ru- 
borem cum perpeti miles non posset, inridentibus 
commilitonibus sponte descendit. Xenophontem vix 
universi perpulerunt, ut conscenderet equum et 
laborem suum in necessaria duci munera reservaret. 

3. Alexander, cum hieme duceret exercitum, resi- 
dens ad ignem recognoscere praetereuntis copias 
coepit; cumque conspexisset quendam prope exani- 
matum frigore, considere loco suo iussit dixitque ei : 


1 147-139 B.c. 

2 133 &.c. Cf. Livy Per. 59; Val. Max. 111. ii. ext. 7, vir. 
vi. ext. 2; Sen. de Ira i. 11 

3 Quintus Fabius Maximus Cunctator, Cf. Sil. Ital. vii. 
539 ff. Plut. Apophth. Caec. Metell. relates a similar reply of 
Metellus. 

* 401 p.c. Cf. Xen. Anab. 111. iv. 44-49. 


306 


STRATAGEMS, IV, v. 22-v1. 3 


posed to send them back their wives and children, 
preferred to witness the execution of their loved 
ones rather than to fail the Romans.! 

The inhabitants of Numantia preferred to lock 
the doors of their houses and die of hunger rather 
than surrender.? 


VI. ON Goop Witt AND MODERATION 


Quintus FaBius,? upon being urged by his son to 
seize an advantageous position at the expense of 
losing a few men, asked : * Do you want to be one 
of those few ? " 

When Xenophon on one occasion happened to be 
on horseback and had just ordered the infantry to 
take possession of a certain eminence, he heard one 
of the soldiers muttering that it was an easy matter 
for amounted man to order such difficult enterprises. 
At this Xenophon leaped down and set the man 
from the ranks on his horse, while he himself hurried 
on foot with all speed to the eminence he had 
indicated. The soldier, unable to endure the shame 
of this performance, voluntarily dismounted amid 
the jeers of his comrades. It was with difficulty, 
however, that the united efforts of the troops induced 
Xenophon to mount his horse and to restrict his 
energies to the duties which devolved upon a 
commander.4 

When Alexander was marching at the head of 
his troops one winter's day, he sat down by a fire 
and began to review the troops as they passed by. 
Noticing a certain soldier who was almost dead with 
the cold, he bade him sit in his place, adding: “ If 

397 
x 2 


SEXTUS JULIUS FRONTINUS 


* si in Persis natus esses, in regia sella resedisse tibi 
capital foret, in Macedonia nato conceditur." 

4. Divus Augustus Vespasianus, cum quendam 
adulescentem honeste natum, militiae inhabilem, 
angustiarum rei familiaris causa deductum ad longi- 
orem ordinem rescisset, censu constituto honesta 
missione exauctoravit. 


VII. De Variis Consis 


1. C. Caesar dicebat idem sibi esse consilium ad- 
versus hostem, quod plerisque medicis contra vitia 
corporum, fame potius quam ferro superandi. 

2. Domitius Corbulo dolabra hostem vincendum 
esse dicebat. 

3. L. Paulus imperatorem senem moribus dice- 
bat esse oportere, significans moderatiora sequenda 
consilia. 

4. Scipio Africanus fertur dixisse, cum eum parum 
quidam pugnacem dicerent : * imperatorem me mater, 
non bellatorem peperit." 

5. C. Marius Teutono provocanti eum et postu- 
lanti, ut prodiret, respondit, si cupidus mortis esset, 
laqueo posse eum vitam finire; cum deinde instaret, 
gladiatorem contemptae staturae et prope exactae 
aetatis obiecit ei dixitque, si eum superasset, cum 
victore congressurum. 


1 Cf. Val. Max. v. i. ext. 1; Curt. vir. iv. 15-17. 

3 Cf. Veget. iii. 26; Appian Hisp. 87. 

* Cf. Livy xliv. 36; Gell. xim. iii. 6; Plut. Apophth. 
Aemil. 5. 


308 


STRATAGEMS, IV. vi. 3-vii. 5 


you had been born among the Persians, it would 
be a capital crime for you to sit on the king's 
seat; but since you were born in Macedonia, that 
privilege is yours." 1 

When the Deified Vespasianus Augustus learned 
that a certain youth, of good birth, but ill adapted to 
military service, had received a high appointment 
because of his straitened circumstances, Vespasian 
settled a sum of money on him, and gave him an 
honourable discharge. 


VII. On Sunpry Maxims AND Devices. 


Gaius Caesar used to say that he followed the 
same policy towards the enemy as did many doctors 
when dealing with physical ailments, namely, that 
of conquering the foe by hunger rather than by 
steel.? 

Domitius Corbulo used to say that the pick was 
the weapon with which to beat the enemy. 

Lucius Paulus used to say that a general ought to 
be an old man in character, meaning thereby that 
moderate counsels should be followed.? 

When people said of Scipio Africanus that he 
lacked aggressiveness, he is reported to have 
answered: “My mother bore me a general, not 
a warrior.” 

When a Teuton challenged Gaius Marius and 
called upon him to come forth, Marius answered 
that, if the man was desirous of death, he could end 
his life with a halter. Then, when the fellow per- 
sisted, Marius confronted him with a gladiator of 
despicable size, whose life was almost spent, and 
told the Teuton that, if he would first defeat this 
gladiator, he himself would then fight with him. 


309 


SEXTUS JULIUS FRONTINUS 

6. Q. Sertorius, quod experimento didicerat im- 
parem se universo Romanorum exercitui, ut barbaros 
quoque inconsulte pugnam deposcentis doceret, ad- 
ductis in conspectum duobus equis, eorum praevalido 
alteri, alteri admodum exili duos admovit iuvenes 
similiter electos, robustum et gracilem. Ac robus- 
tiori imperavit equi exilis universam caudam abrum- 
pere, gracili autem valentioris per singulos pilos 
vellere ; cumque gracili successisset quod imperatum 
erat, validissimus cum infirmi equi cauda sine effectu 
luctaretur, *naturam," inquit Sertorius, “ Romana- 
rum virium per hoc vobis exemplum ostendi, milites : 
insuperabiles sunt universas adgredienti; easdem 
lacerabit et carpet, qui per partes adtemptaverit."! 

7. Valerius Laevinus consul, cum intra castra sua 
exploratorem hostium deprehendisset magnamque 
copiarum suarum fiduciam haberet, cireumduci eum 
iussit: terrendi quidem hostis causa exercitus suos 
visendos speculatoribus eorum, quotiens voluissent, 
patere. 

8. Caedicius primipilaris, qui in Germania post 
Varianam cladem obsessis nostris pro duce fuit, 
veritus, ne barbari ligna quae congesta erant vallo 
admoverent et castra eius incenderent, simulata 
lignorum inopia, missis undique qui ea furarentur 
effecit, ut Germani universos truncos amolirentur. 


1 Practically identical with i. X. 1. 


1 Cf. x. x. 1 and note. 

2 280 B.c. Cf. Eutrop. ii. 11 ; Zonar. viii. 3. Livy xxx. 29, 
Appian Pun. 39 and Polyaen. virt. xvi. 8 attributes a similar 
stratagem to Scipio. 

? The defeat of Varus by Arminius in the Teutoburg 
Forest in 9 A.D. 

* Cf. Vell. ii. 120. 


310 


STRATAGEMS, IV. vir. 6-8 


. After Quintus Sertorius had learned by experience 
that he was by no means a match for the whole 
Roman army, and wished to prove this to the 
barbarians also, who were rashly demanding battle, 
he brought into their presence two horses, one very 
strong, the other very feeble. Then he brought up 
two youths of corresponding physique, one robust, 
the other slight. The stronger youth was com- 
manded to pull out the entire tail of the feeble 
horse, while the slender youth was ordered to pull 
-out the hairs of the strong horse, one by one. Then, 
when the slight youth had succeeded in his task, 
while the strong one was still struggling vainly with 
the tail of the feeble horse, Sertorius observed : 
* By this illustration I have exhibited to you, my 
men, the nature of the Roman cohorts. They are 
invincible to him who attacks them in a body; but 
he who assails them by groups, will tear and rend 
them.” 1 
The eonsul Valerius Laevinus, having caught a 
-spy within his camp, and having entire confidence 
.in his own forces, ordered the man to be led around, 
observing that, for the sake of terrifying the enemy, 
his army was open to inspection by the spies of the 
, enemy, as often as they wished.? 
= Caedicius, a centurion of the first rank, who acted 
‘as leader in Germany, when, after the Varian 
disaster,? our men were beleagured, was afraid that 
the barbarians would bring up to the fortifications 
the wood which they had gathered, and would set 
fire to his camp. He therefore pretended to be in 
need of fuel, and sent out men in every direction to 
steal it. In this way he caused the Germans to 
remove the whole supply of felled trees.* | 


.31I 


SEXTUS JULIUS FRONTINUS 


9. Cn. Scipio bello navali amphoras pice et taeda 
plenas in hostium classem iaculatus est, quarum 
iactus et pondere foret noxius et diffundendo, quae 
continuerant, alimentum praestaret incendio. 

10. Hannibal regi Antiocho monstravit, ut in 
hostium classem vascula iacularetur viperis plena, 
quarum metu perterriti milites a dimicatione et 
nauticis ministeriis impedirentur. 

11. Idem fecit iam cedente classe sua Prusias.! 

12. M. Porcius Cato, in classem hostium cum tran- 
siluisset, deturbatis ex ea Poenis eorumque armis 
et insignibus inter suos distributis multas naves 
hostium, quos sociali habitu fefellerat, mersit. 

13. Athenienses, cum subinde a Lacedaemoniis 
infestarentur, diebus festis, quos sacros Minervae 
extra urbem celebrabant, omnem quidem colentium 
imitationem expresserunt, armis tamen sub? veste 
celatis. Peracto ritu suo non statim Athenas reversi, 
sed protinus inde raptim acto Lacedaemonem versus 
agmine eo tempore, quo minime timebantur, agrum 
hostium, quibus subinde praedae fuerant, ultro 
depopulati sunt. 

14. Cassius onerarias naves, non magni ad alia 
usus, accensas opportuno vento in classem hostium 
misit et incendio eam consumpsit. 

15. M. Livius fuso Hasdrubale hortantibus eum 


1 No. 11 is probably interpolated. 
2 sub, inferior MSS. ; et, better MSS. and edd. 


1 Justin. xxxii. 4 and CD Hann. 10 represent Hannibal 
as suggesting this device to Prusias. 
2 48 B.c. Cf. Caes. B.C. iii. 101. 


312 


STRATAGEMS, IV. vit. 9-15 


Gnaeus Scipio, in a naval combat, hurled jars 
filled with pitch and rosin among the vessels of the 
enemy, in order that damage might result both 
from the weight of the missiles and from the 
scattering of their contents, which would serve as 
fuel for a conflagration. 

Hannibal suggested to King Antiochus that he 
hurl jars filled with vipers among the ships of the 
enemy, in order that the crews, through fear of 
these, might be kept from fighting and from per- 
forming their nautical duties.! 

Prusias did the same, when his fleet was by now 
giving way. 

Marcus Porcius Cato, having boarded the ships of 
the enemy, drove from them the Carthaginians. 
Then, having distributed their weapons and insignia 
among his own men, he sank many ships of the 
enemy, deceiving them by their own equipment. 

Inasmuch as the Athenians had been subject to 
repeated attacks by the Spartans, on one occasion, 
in the course of a festival which they were cele- 
brating outside the city in honour of Minerva, they 
studiously affected the róle of worshippers, yet with 
weapons concealed beneath their clothing. When 
the ceremonial was over, they did not immediately 
return to Athens, but at once marched swiftly upon 
Sparta at a time when they were least feared, and 
themselves devastated the lands of an enemy whose 
victims they had often been. 

Cassius set fire to some transports which were of 
no great use for anything else, and sent them with 
a fair wind against the fleet of the enemy, thereby 
destroying it by fire.* 

When Marcus Livius had routed Hasdrubal, and 


313 


SEXTUS JULIUS FRONTINUS 


quibusdam, ut hostem ad internecionem perseque- 
retur, respondit: *'aliqui et supersint, qui de victoria 
nostra hostibus nuntient." | 

16. Scipio Africanus dicere solitus. est hosti non 
solum dandam esse viam ad fugiendum, sed etiam 
muniendam. 

17. Paches Atheniensis adfirmavit incolumes fu- 
turos hostes, si deponerent ferrum ; eisque obsecutis 
condicionibus universos, qui in sagulis ferreas fibulas 
habuissent, interfici iussit, 

18. Hasdrubal subigendorum Numidarum causa 

ingressus fines eorum resistere parantibus adfirmavit 
ad capiendos se venisse elephantos, quibus ferax est 
Numidia; ut hoc permitterent, poscentibus pretium 
cum promisisset, ea persuasione avocatos adortus sub 
leges redegit. 
. 19. Alcetas Lacedaemonius, ut Thebanorum com- 
meatum facilius ex inopinato adgrederetur, in occulto 
paratis navibus, tamquam unam omnino haberet tri- 
remem, vicibus in ea remigem exercebat; quodam 
deinde tempore omnis naves in Thebanos transnavi- 
gantis immisit et commeatibus eorum potitus est. 

20. Ptolomaeus adversus Perdiccam exercitu prae- 
valentem, ipse invalidus, omne pecudum genus, reli- 
gatis ad tergum quae traherent sarmentis, agendum 
per paucos curavit equites; ipse praegressus cum 
copiis quas habebat effecit, ut pulvis, quem pecora 


1207 &.c. Cf. Livy xxvii. 49. 

2 Cf. Veget. iii. 21. T 

3 Thuc. iii. 34 and Polyaen. iii. 2 cite another instance of 
the cunning treachery of Paches in 427 B.C. > | 

* 377 B.C. Cf. Polyaen. ii. 7. Caes. B.C. iii. 24 relates a 
similar stratagem employed by Antony. 


3 I4 


STRATAGEMS, IV. vir. 15-20 


certain persons urged him to pursue the enemy to 
annihilation, he answered: * Let some survive to 
carry to the enemy the tidings of our victory ! "! 

Scipio Africanus used to say that a road not only 
ought to be afforded the enemy for flight, but that it 
ought even to be paved.? 

Paches, the Athenian, on one occasion declared 
that the enemy would be spared, if they put aside 
the steel. When they had all complied with these 
terms, he ordered the entire number to be executed, 
since they had steel brooches on their cloaks.? 

When Hasdrubal had invaded the territory of the 
Numidians for the purpose of subduing them, and 
they were preparing to resist, he declared that he 
had come to capture elephants, an animal in which 
Numidia abounds. For this privilege they demanded 
money, and Hasdrubal promised to pay it. Having 
by these representations thrown them off the scent, 
he attacked them and brought them under his 
power. 

Alcetas, the Spartan, in order the more easily to 
make a surprise attack on a supply convoy of the 
Thebans, got ready his ships in a secret place, and 
exercised his rowers by turns on a single galley, 
as though that was all he had. Then at a certain 
time, as the Theban vessels were sailing past, he 
sent all his ships against them and captured their 
supplies.4 

When Ptolemy with a weak force was contending 
against Perdiccas’s powerful army, he arranged for 
a few horsemen to drive along animals of all sorts, 
with brush fastened to their backs for them to trail 
behind them. He himself went ahead with the 
forces which he had. As a consequence, the dust 


315 


SEXTUS JULIUS FRONTINUS 


excitaverant, speciem magni sequentis exercitus 
moveret, cuius exspectatione territum vicit hostem. 

21. Myronides Atheniensis adversus Thebanos 
equitatu praevalentes pugnaturus in campis suos edo- 
cuit manentibus esse spem aliquam salutis, cedentibus 
autem perniciem certissimam ; qua ratione confirmatis 
militibus victoriam consecutus est. 

22. C. Pinarius in Sicilia praesidio Hennae prae- 
positus, claves portarum quas penes se habebat re- 
poscentibus magistratibus Hennensium, quod sus- 
pectos eos tamquam transitionem ad Poenum pararent 
habebat, petiit unius noctis ad deliberationem spatium 
indicataque militibus fraude Graecorum, cum prae- 
cepisset ut parati postera die signum exspectarent, 
prima luce adsistentibus militibus redditurum se 
claves dixit, si idem omnes Hennenses censuissent ; 
ob eam causam universa multitudine convocata in 
theatrum et idem flagitante, manifesta deficiendi 
voluntate, signo militibus dato universos Hennenses 
cecidit. 

23. Iphicrates dux Atheniensium classem suam 
hostili habitu instruxit et ad eos quos suspectos habe- 
bat invectus,cum effuso studio exciperetur, deprehensa 
eorum perfidia oppidum diripuit. 

24. Ti. Gracchus, cum edixisset futurum, ut ex 


1 321 B.c. Cf. Polyaen. iv. 19. Front. 1. iv. 1 relates a 
somewhat similar device of Papirius Cursor. 

3 457 p.c. Cf. Polyaen. I. xxxv. 2. 

3 214 B.c. Cf. Livy xxiv. 37-39; Polyaen. viii. 21. 

* 390-389 B.c. Cf. Polyaen. 111. ix. 58. 


316 


STRATAGEMS, IV. vit. 20-24 


raised by the animals produced the appearance of 
a mighty army following, and the enemy, terrified 
by this impression, were defeated.! 

Myronides, the Athenian, when about to fight on 
an open plain against the Thebans, who were very 
strong in cavalry, warned his troops that, if they 
stood their ground, there was some hope of safety, 
but that, if they gave way, destruction was absolutely 
certain. In this way he encouraged his men and 
won the victory.? 

When Gaius Pinarius was in charge of the garrison 
of Henna in Sicily, the magistrates of the city 
demanded the keys of the gates, which he had in 
his keeping. Suspecting that they were preparing 
to go over to the Carthaginians, he asked for the 
space of a single night to consider the matter; and, 
revealing to his soldiers the treachery of the Greeks, 
he instructed them to get ready and wait for his 
signal on the morrow. At daybreak, in the presence 
of his troops, he announced to the people of Henna 
that he would surrender the keys, if all the in- 
habitants of the town should be agreed in their view. 
When the entire populace assembled in the theatre 
to settle this matter, and, with the obvious purpose 
of revolting, made the same demand, Pinarius gave 
the signal to his soldiers and murdered all the people 
of Henna.? 

Iphicrates, the Athenian general, once rigged up 
his own fleet after the style of the enemy, and sailed 
away to a certain city whose people he viewed with 
suspicion. Being welcomed with unrestrained en- 
thusiasm, he thus discovered their treachery and 
sacked their town.‘ 

When Tiberius Gracchus had proclaimed that he 


317 


SEXTUS JULIUS FRONTINUS 


volonum numero fortibus libertatem daret, ignavos 
crucibus adfigeret, et quattuor milia ex his, quia seg- 
nius pugnaverant, metu poenae in quendam munitum 
collem coissent, misit qui eis dicerent totum sibi 
exercitum volonum vicisse videri, quod hostes fudis- 
sent; et sic eos et sua fide et ipsorum metu exsolutos 
recepit. 

25. Hannibal post proelium, quo ingentem cladem 
ad Trasumennum Romani acceperunt, cum sex milia 
hostium interposita pactione in potestatem suam red- 
egisset, socios Latini nominis benigne in civitates 
suas dimisit, dictitans se Italiae liberandae causa 
bellum gerere; eorumque opera aliquot populos in 
deditionem accepit. 

26. Mago, cum Locri obsiderentur a Crispino 
classis nostrae praefecto, diffudit ad Romana castra 
rumorem Hannibalem caeso Marcello ad liberandos 
obsidione Locros venire; clam deinde equites emissos 
iussit a montibus, qui in conspectu erant, se osten- 
dere; quo facto effecit, ut Crispinus Hannibalem 
adesse ratus conscenderet naves ac fugeret. 

27. Scipio Aemilianus ad Numantiam omnibus 
non cohortibus tantum, sed centuriis sagittarios et 
funditores interposuit. 


12]45p.c. Cf. Livy xxiv. 14-16. 

3 i.e. the Latin League. The cities of Latium were from 
very early times united in an alliance with Rome. At first 
this bond was of a political nature, on a basis of perfect 
equality ; later Rome became the leading power and assumed 
the supremacy. 

3 217 B.c. Cf. Livy xxii. 6, 7, 13; Polyb. iii. 77, 84-85. 

* 208 B.c. Cf. Livy xxvii. 28. 


318 


STRATAGEMS, IV. vit. 24-27 


would confer freedom on such of the volunteer 
slaves as showed courage, but would crucify the 
cowards, some four thousand men who had fought 
rather listlessly, gathered on a fortified hill in fear of 
punishment. Thereupon Gracchus sent men to tell 
them that in his opinion the whole force of volunteer 
slaves had shared in the victory, since they had 
routed the enemy. By this expression of confidence 
he freed them from their apprehensions and took 
them back again.! 

After the battle of Lake Trasimenus, where the 
Romans suffered great disaster, Hannibal, having 
brought six thousand of the enemy under his power 
by virtue of a covenant he had made, generously 
allowed the allies of the “ Latin Name” ? to return 
to their cities, declaring that he was waging war for 
the purpose of freeing Italy. As a result, by means 
of their assistance he received in surrender a number 
of tribes.3 

When Locri was blockaded by Crispinus, admiral 
of our fleet, Mago spread the rumour in the Roman 
camp that Hannibal had slain Marcellus and was 
coming to relieve Locri from blockade. Then, 
secretly sending out cavalry, he commanded them 
to show themselves on the mountains, which were 
in view. By doing this, he caused Crispinus, in the 
belief that Hannibal was at hand, to board his 
vessels and make off.4 

Scipio Aemilianus, in the operations before Numan- 
tia, distributed archers and slingers not only among 
all his cohorts, but even among all the centuries.5 


5 133 B.c. Veget. i. 15 narrates instances of the important 
part played in Roman battles by archers and javelin throwers, 
and emphasizes the necessity of training in archery. 


319 


SEXTUS JULIUS FRONTINUS 


28. Pelopidas Thebanus, cum a Thessalis in fugam 
versus flumen, in quo tumultuarium fecerat pontem, 
liberasset, ne sequentibus hostibus idem transitus 
maneret, novissimo agmini praecepit, incenderent 
pontem. 

29. Romani, cum Campanis equitibus nullo modo 
pares essent, Q. Naevius centurio in exercitu Fulvi 
Flacci proconsulis excogitavit, ut delectos ex toto 
exercitu, qui velocissimi videbantur et mediocris 
erant staturae, parmulis non amplis et galeiculis 
gladiisque ac septenis singulos hastis quaternorum 
circiter pedum armaret eosque adiunctos equitibus 
iuberet usque ad moenia provehi, deinde ibi positos, 
nostris equitibus se reeipientibus, inter hostium 
equitatum proeliari; quo facto vehementer et ipsi 
Campani adflicti sunt et maxime equi eorum, quibus 
turbatis prona nostris victoria fuit. 

30. P. Scipio in Lydia, cum die ac nocte imbre 
continuo vexatum exercitum Antiochi videret nec 
homines tantum aut equos deficere, verum arcus 
quoque madentibus nervis inhabiles factos, exhortatus 
est fratrem, ut postero quamvis religioso die commit- 
teret proelium ; quam sententiam secuta victoria est. 

31. Catonem vastantem Hispaniam legati Ilerge- 
tum, qui sociorum populus erat, adierunt oraverunt- 
que auxilia. llle, ne aut negato adiutorio socios 


1 369—364 B.C. l 
2 211 p.c. Cf. Livy xxvi. 4; Val. Max. rr. iii. 3. 
3 190 &.c. Cf. Livy xxxvii. 37, 39 ff. ; Flor. 11. viii. 17. 


320 


STRATAGEMS, IV, vii. 28-31 


When Pelopidas, the Theban, had been put to 
flight by the Thessalians and had crossed the river 
over which he had constructed an emergency bridge, 
he ordered his rearguard to burn the bridge, in order 
that it might not serve also as a means of passage to 
the enemy who were following him.! 

When the Romans in certain operations were no 
match for the Campanian cavalry, Quintus Naevius, 
a centurion in the army of Fulvius Flaccus, the pro- 
consul, conceived the plan of picking from the whole 
army the men who seemed swiftest of foot and of 
medium stature, arming them with small shields, 
helmets, and swords, and giving to each man seven 
spears, about four feet in length. These men he 
attached to the cavalry, and commanded them to 
advance to the very walls, and then, taking their 
position at that point, to fight amid the cavalry 
of the enemy, when our cavalry retreated. By this 
means the Campanians suffered severely, and especi- 
all their horses. When these were thrown into 
confusion, victory became easy for our troops.? 

When Publius Scipio was in Lydia, and observed 
that the army of Antiochus was demoralized by the 
rain, which fell day and night without cessation, 
and when he further noted that not only were men 
and horses exhausted, but that even the bows were 
rendered useless from the effect of the dampness on 
their strings, he urged his brother to engage in 
battle on the following day, although it was conse- 
crated to religious observance. The adoption of this 
plan was followed by victory.® 

When Cato was ravaging Spain, the envoys of the 
Ilergetes, a tribe allied with the Romans, came to 
him and begged for assistance. Cato, unwilling either 


321 
VOL. I, Y 


SEXTUS JULIUS FRONTINUS 


alienaret aut diducto exercitu vires minueret, tertiam 
partem militum cibaria parare et naves ascendere 
iussit, dato praecepto, ut causati ventos retro redi- 
rent; praecedens interim adventantis auxilii rumor 
ut Ilergetum excitavit animos, ita hostium consilia 
discussit. | 

32. C. Caesar, cum in partibus Pompeianis magna 
equitum Romanorum esset manus eaque armorum 
scientia milites conficeret, ora oculosque eorum gladiis 
peti iussit et sic aversa facie cedere coegit. 

33. Voccaei, cum a Sempronio Graccho conlatis 
signis urgerentur, universas copias cinxere plaustris, 
quae impleverant fortissimis viris muliebri veste tectis. 
Sempronium, tamquam adversus feminas audentius 
ad obsidendos hostis consurgentem, hi qui in plaustris 
erant adgressi fugaverunt. 

34. Eumenes Cardianus, unus! ex successoribus 
Alexandri, in castello quodam clausus, quoniam ex- 
ercere equos non poterat, certis cotidie horis ita 
suspendebat, ut posterioribus pedibus innixi, priori- 
bus allevatis, dum naturalem adsistendi appetunt 
consuetudinem, ad sudorem usque crura iactarent. 

35. M. Cato pollicentibus barbaris duces itinerum 
et insuper praesidium, si magna summa eis promit- 


1 Suggested by Gundermann. 


1 195 p.c. Cf. Livy xxxiv. 11-13. 

2 48 B.c. Cf. Plut. Caes. 44-45, Pomp. 69; Polyaen. virt. 
xxiii. 25. 3 179-178 B.c. 

4 320 B.C. Cf. Nep. Éwmen. 5; Plut. Lumen. 11; Diodor. 
xviii. 42. 
322 


STRATAGEMS, IV. vu. 31-35 


to alienate his allies by refusing aid, or to diminish 
his own strength by dividing his forces, ordered a 
third part of his soldiers to prepare rations and 
embark on their ships, directing them to return and 
to allege head winds as the reason for this action. 
Meanwhile the report of approaching aid went on 
before them, raising the hopes of the Ilergetes, and 
shattering the plans of the enemy.! 

Since in the army of Pompey there was a large 
force of Roman cavalry, which by its skill in arms 
wrought havoc among the soldiers of Gaius Caesar, 
the latter ordered his troops to aim with their 
‘swords at the faces and eyes of the enemy. He 
thus forced the enemy to avert their faces and 
retire.? 

When the Voccaei were hard pressed by Sempronius 
Gracchus in a pitched battle, they surrounded their 
entire force with a ring of carts, which they had 
filled with their bravest warriors dressed in women’s 
clothes. Sempronius rose up with greater daring to 
assault the enemy, because he imagined himself 
proceeding against women, whereupon those in the 
carts attacked him and put him to flight.® 

When Eumenes of Cardia, one of the successors of 
Alexander, was besieged in a certain stronghold, and 
was unable to exercise his horses, he had them 
suspended during certain hours each day in such 
a position that, resting on their hind legs and with 
their fore feet in the air, they moved their legs till 
the sweat ran, in their efforts to regain their natural 
posture. 

When certain barbarians promised Marcus Cato 
guides for the march and also reinforcements, pro- 
vided that a large sum of money should be assured 

323 
v 2 


SEXTUS JULIUS FRONTINUS 


teretur, non dubitavit polliceri, quia aut victoribus 
ex spoliis hostilibus poterat dare aut interfectis 
exsolvebatur promisso. 

36. Q. Maximus transfugere ad hostes volentem 
Statilium, nobilem clarae operae equitem, vocari ad 
se iussit eique excusavit, quod invidia commilitonum 
virtutes illius ad id tempus ignorasset; tum donato 
ei equo pecuniam insuper largitus obtinuit, ut, quem 
ex conscientia trepidum arcessierat, laetum dimit- 
teret et ex dubio in reliquum non minus fidelem 
quam fortem haberet equitem. 

37. Philippus, cum audisset Pythian quendam 
bonum pugnatorem alienatum sibi, quod tres filias 
inops vix aleret nec a rege adiuvaretur, monentibus 
quibusdam, uti eum caveret, *quid? si," inquit, 
“ partem aegram corporis haberem, absciderem potius 
quam curarem ? " deinde familiariter secreto elicitum 
Pythian, accepta difficultate necessitatium domesti- 
carum, pecunia instruxit ac meliorem fidelioremque 
habuit, quam habuerat antequam offenderet. 

38. T. Quintius Crispinus post infaustam adversus 
Poenos dimicationem, qua collegam Marcellum ami- 
serat, cum comperisset potitum anulo interfecti 
Hannibalem, litteras circa municipia totius Italiae 
dimisit, ne crederent epistulis, si quae Marcelli anulo 


1 195 B.c. Cf. Plut. Cat. Maj. 10. 
2 Cf. 111. xvi. l and note; Plut. Fab. 20. 
3 The father of Alexander. 


324 


STRATAGEMS, IV. vit. 35-38 


them, he did not hesitate to make the promise, 
since, if they won, he could reward them from the 
spoils of the enemy, while, if they were slain, he 
would be released from his pledge.! 

When a certain Statilius, a knight of distinguished 
record, evinced an inclination to desert to the enemy, 
Quintus Maximus ordered him to be summoned to 
his presence, and apologized for not having known 
until then the real merits of Statilius, owing to the 
jealousy of his fellow-soldiers. Then, giving Statilius 
a horse and bestowing a large gift of money besides, 
he succeeded in sending away rejoicing a man who, 
when summoned, was conscience-stricken ; he suc- 
ceeded also in securing for the future a loyal and brave 
knight in place of one whose fealty was in doubt.? 

Philip,? having heard that a certain Pythias, an 
excellent warrior, had become estranged from him 
because he was too poor to support his three 
daughters, and was not assisted by the king, and 
having been warned by certain persons to be on his 
guard againstthe man, replied: * What! If part of my 
body were diseased, should I cut it off, rather than give 
it treatment?" Then, quietly drawing Pythias aside 
for a confidential talk, and learning the seriousness 
of his domestic embarrassments, he supplied him 
with funds, and found in him a better and more 
devoted adherent than before the estrangement. 

After an unsuccessful battle with the Cartha- 
ginians, in which he had lost his colleague Marcellus, 
Titius Quinctius Crispinus, learning that Hannibal 
had obtained possession of the ring of the slain hero, 
sent letters among all the municipal towns of Italy, 
warning the inhabitants to give credit to no letters 
which should be brought sealed with the ring of 


325 


SEXTUS JULIUS FRONTINUS 


signatae perferrentur.  Monitione consecutus est, 
ut Salapia et aliae urbes frustra Hannibalis dolis 
temptarentur. 

39. Post Cannensem cladem perculsis ita Roma- 
norum animis, ut pars magna reliquiarum nobilissimis 
auctoribus deserendae Italiae iniret consilium, P. 
Scipio adulescens admodum impetu facto in eo ipso 
in quo talia agitabantur coetu pronuntiavit manu se 
sua interfecturum, nisi qui iurasset non esse sibi 
mentem destituendae rei publicae ; cumque ipse se 
primus religione tali obligasset, stricto gladio mortem 
uni ex proximis minatus, nisi acciperet sacra- 
mentum, illum metu, ceteros etiam exemplo coegit 
ad iurandum. 

40. Volscorum castra cum prope a virgultis silvaque 
posita essent, Camillus ea omnia, quae conceptum 
ignem usque in vallum perferre poterant, incendit 
et sic adversarios exuit castris.! 

41. P. Crassus bello sociali eodem modo prope 
cum copiis omnibus interceptus est.? 

42. Q. Metellus in Hispania castra moturus, cum 
in agmine milites continere vellet, pronuntiavit 
comperisse se insidias ab hostibus dispositas; idcirco 
ne discederent a signis neve agmen laxarent. Quod 
cum ex disciplina fecisset, exceptus forte veris in- 
sidiis, quia praedixerat, interritos milites habuit, 


1 Identical with 11. iv. 15. 
2 Identical with 11. iv. 106. 


1208 B.c. Cf. Livy xxvii. 28. 

2216 B.c. Cf. Livy xxii. 53; Val. Max. v. vi. 7; Sil. 
Ital. x. 426 ff 

3 389 p.c. Cf. Livy vi. ii. 9-11; Plut. Cam. 34. 

* 90 B.C. 5 143-142 B.c. 


326 


STRATAGEMS, IV. vu. 38-42 


Marcellus. As a result of this advice, Salapia and 
other cities were assailed in vain by Hannibal's 
insidious efforts.1 

After the disaster at Cannae, when the Romans 
were so terror-stricken that a large part of the 
survivors thought of abandoning Italy, and that too 
with the endorsement of nobles of the highest 
standing, Publius Scipio, then extremely young, in 
the very assembly where such a course was being 
discussed, proclaimed with great vehemence that he 
would slay with his own hand whoever refused to 
declare on oath that he cherished no purpose of 
abandoning the State. Having first bound himself 
with such an oath, he drew his sword and threatened 
death to one of those standing near unless he too 
should take the oath. This man was constrained by 
fear to swear allegiance; the rest were compelled by 
the example of the first.? 

When the camp of the Volscians had been pitched 
near bushes and woods, Camillus set fire to every- 
thing which could carry the flames, once started, up 
to the very fortifications. In this way he deprived 
the enemy of their camp.? 

In the Social War Publius Crassus was cut off in 
almost the same way with all his troops.* 

When Quintus Metellus was about to break camp 
in Spain and wished to keep his soldiers in line, he 
proclaimed that he had discovered that an ambush 
had been laid by the enemy; therefore the soldiers 
should not quit the standards nor break ranks. 
Though he had done this merely for purposes of 
discipline, yet happening to meet with an actual 
ambuscade, he found his soldiers unafraid, since he 
had given them warning.? 


327 


Digitized by Google 


SEXTUS JULIUS FRONTINUS 
THE AQUEDUCTS OF ROME 


IVLII FRONTINI 
DE AOVIS VRBIS ROMAE 
LIBRI II 


1. Cum omnis res ab imperatore delegata intentio- 
rem exigat curam, et me seu naturalis sollicitudo 
seu fides sedula non ad diligentiam modo verum 
ad amorem quoque commissae rei instigent sitque 
nunc mihi ab Nerva Augusto, nescio diligentiore an 
amantiore rei publicae imperatore, aquarum in- 
iunctum officium ad usum, tum ad salubritatem 
atque etiam securitatem urbis pertinens, adminis- 
tratum per principes semper civitatis nostrae viros, 
primum ac potissimum existimo, sicut in ceteris 
negotiis institueram, nosse quod suscepi. 

2. Neque enim ullum omnis actus certius funda- 
mentum crediderim, aut aliter quae facienda quaeque 
vitanda sint posse decerni, aliudve tam indecorum 
tolerabili viro, quam delegatum officium ex adiutorum 


1 Praenomen not in C but attested by cir. vi. 2222, viii. 
7066, ix. 6083. 78. 


339 


SEXTUS? JULIUS FRONTINUS 
TWO BOOKS ON 


THE AQUEDUCTS OF ROME 


INasMucH as every task assigned by the Emperor 
demands especial attention ; and inasmuch as I am 
incited, not merely to diligence, but also to devotion, 
when any matter is entrusted to me, be it as a conse- 
quence of my natural sense of responsibility or of my 
fidelity ; and inasmuch as Nerva Augustus (an 
emperor of whom I am at a loss to say whether he 
devotes more industry or love to the State) has laid 
upon me the duties of water commissioner, an office 
which concerns not merely the convenience but also 
the health and even the safety of the City, and which 
has always been administered by the most eminent 
men of our State; now therefore I deem it of the 
first and greatest importance to familiarize myself 
with the business I have undertaken, a policy which 
I have always made a principle in other affairs. 

For I believe that there is no surer foundation for 
any business than this, and that it would be otherwise 
impossible to determine what ought to be done, what 
ought to be avoided ; likewise that there is nothing 
so disgraceful for a decent man as to conduct an 
office delegated to him, according to the instructions 


331 


SEXTUS JULIUS FRONTINUS 


agere praeceptis, quod fieri necesse est, quotiens 
imperitia praepositi ad illorum decurrit usum; 
quorum etsi necessariae partes sunt ad ministerium, 
tamen ut manus quaedam et instrumentum agentis. 

. .1 Quapropter ea quae ad universam rem perti- 
nentia contrahere potui, more iam per multa mihi 
officia servato in ordinem et velut corpus diducta in 
hunc commentarium contuli, quem pro formula 
administrationis respicere possem. In aliis autem 
libris, quos post experimenta et usum composui, 
succedentium res acta est ; huius commentarii perti- 
nebit fortassis et ad successorem utilitas, sed cum 
inter initia administrationis meae scriptus sit, in 
primis ad meam ? institutionem regulamque proficiet, 

3. Ac ne quid ad totius rei pertinens notitiam 
praetermisisse videar, nomina primum aquarum, 
quae in urbem Romam influunt, ponam; tum per 
quos quaeque earum et quibus consulibus, quoto 
post urbem conditam anno perducta sit; dein quibus 
ex locis et a quoto miliario capta sit? ac quan- 
tum subterraneo rivo, quantum substructione, quan- 
tum opere arcuato; post altitudinem cuiusque 
modulorumque . . .* erogationes ab illis factae sint, 


1 Gap of about eleven letters in C. In this edition, the 
number of letters omitted in C will be indicated by a 
corresponding number of dots in the text, except where footnotes 
are added giving the size of the lacunae. In these cases the 
lacunae will regularly be indicated by three dots. 

2 ind C; nostram B. 3 Bennett; cepisse C ; coepisset B. 

4 No gap in C, but B suggests supplying rationes. 


1 When it was necessary to carry the water pipes at a 
high elevation, the arched support was used in order to save 


332 


AQUEDUCTS OF ROME 


ot assistants. Yet precisely this is inevitable when- 
ever a person inexperienced in the matter in hand 
has to have recourse to the practical knowledge of 
subordinates. For though the latter play a necessary 
róle in the way of rendering assistance, yet they are, 
as it were, but the hands and tools of the directing 
head. Observing, therefore, the practice which I 
have followed in many offices, I have gathered in 
this sketch (into one systematic body, so to speak) 
such facts, hitherto scattered, as I have been able 
to get together, which bear on the general subject, 
and which might serve to guide me in my ad- 
ministration. Now in the case of other books 
which I have written after practical experience, I 
consulted the interests of my successors The 
present treatise also may be found useful by my 
successor, but it will serve especially for my own 
instruction and guidance, being prepared, as it is, at 
the beginning of my administration. 

And lest I seem to have omitted anything requi- 
site to a familiarity with the entire subject, I will 
first set down the names of the waters which enter 
the City of Rome ; then I will tell by whom, under 
what consuls, and in what year after the founding 
of the City each one was brought in; then at what 
point and at what milestone each water was taken ; 
: how far each is carried in a subterranean channel, 
how far on substructures,! how far on arches. Then 
I will give the elevation? of each, [the plan] of the 
taps, and the distributions that are made from them ; 


masonry ; otherwise a low foundation was built, to which 
the term substructio is applied. 
3 i.e. at the point of its entrance into the City. 


333 


SEXTUS JULIUS FRONTINUS 


quantum extra urbem, quantum intra urbem unicui- 
que regioni pro suo modo unaquaeque aquarum 
serviat; quot castella publica sint, et ex eis quantum 
publicis operibus, quantum muneribus—ita enim 
cultiores appellant—quantum lacibus, quantum no- 
mine Caesaris, quantum privatorum usibus beneficio 
principis detur ; quod ius ducendarum tuendarumque 
sit earum, quae id sanciant poenae lege, senatus 
consultis, mandatis principum inrogatae. 


1 The conventional interpretation of a very uncertain 
word. 


334 


AQUEDUCTS OF ROME 


how much each aqueduct brings to points outside 
the City, what proportion to each quarter within the 
City ; how many public reservoirs there are, and 
from these how much is delivered to public works, 
how much to ornamental fountains! (munera, as the 
more polite call them), how much to the water- 
basins ; how much is granted in the name of Caesar ; 
how much for private uses by favour of the Emperor ; 
what is the law with regard to the construction and 
maintenance of the aqueducts, what penalties enforce 
it, whether established by resolutions of the Senate 
or by edicts of the Emperors. 


335 


Digitized by Google 


BOOK 1 


VOL. 1, 


LIBER PRIMUS 


4. Ab urbe condita per annos quadringentos 
quadraginta unum contenti fuerunt Romani usu 
aquarum, quas aut ex Tiberi aut ex puteis aut ex 
fontibus hauriebant. Fontium memoria cum sancti- 
tate adhuc exstat et colitur; salubritatem aegris 
corporibus afferre creduntur, sicut Camenarum et 
Apollinis et Iuturnae. Nunc autem in urbem in- 
fluunt aqua Appia, Anio Vetus, Marcia, Tepula, 
Iulia, Virgo, Alsietina quae eadem vocatur Augusta, 
Claudia, Anio Novus. 

5. M. Valerio Maximo P. Decio Mure consulibus, 
anno post initium Samnitici belli tricesimo aqua 
Appia in urbem inducta! est ab Appio Claudio 
Crasso censore, cui postea Caeco fuit cognomen, qui 
et Viam Appiam a Porta Capena usque ad urbem 
Capuam muniendam curavit. Collegam habuit C. 
Plautium, cui ob inquisitas eius aquae venas Venocis 
cognomen datum est. Sed quia is intra annum et 
sex menses deceptus a collega tamquam idem facturo 


1 C; ducta B. 


1 The location of these is uncertain. 

3 This fountain is close to the Temple of Castor and Pollux, 
on the south side of the Roman Forum. 

* 312 B.c. . 

* This gate was on the south side of the City, in the old 
Servian Wall. 


338 


BOOK 1 


Fon four hundred and forty-one years from the 
foundation of the City, the Romans were satisfied 
with the use of such waters as they drew from the 
Tiber, from wells, or from springs. Esteem for 
springs still continues, and is observed with venera- 
tion. They are believed to bring healing to the 
sick, as, for example, the springs of the Camenae,} 
of Apollo,! and of Juturna.? But there now run into 
the City: the Appian aqueduct, Old Anio, Marcia, 
Tepula, Julia, Virgo, Alsietina, which is also called 
Augusta, Claudia, New Anio. 

In the consulship of Marcus Valerius Maximus 
and Publius Decius Mus,’ in the thirtieth year after 
the beginning of the Samnite War, the Appian aque- 
duct was brought into the City by Appius Claudius 
Crassus, the Censor, who afterwards received the 
surname of *the Blind," the same man who had 
charge of paving the Appian Way from the Porta 
Capena * as far as the City of Capua. As colleague 
in the censorship Appius had Gaius Plautius, to 
whom was given the name of *the Hunter" 5 for 
having discovered the springs of this water. But 
since Plautius resigned the censorship within a year 
and six months, under the mistaken impression that 


5 The English rendering does not reproduce the word play 
in venas Venocis. 
$ Eighteen months was the regular term of office for the 
censors. 
339 
z 2 


SEXTUS JULIUS FRONTINUS 


abdicavit se censura, nomen aquae ad Appii tantum 
honorem pertinuit, qui multis tergiversationibus 
extraxisse censuram traditur, donec et viam et huius 
aquae ductum consummaret. Concipitur Appia in 
agro Lucullano Via Praenestina! inter miliarium 
septimum et octavum deverticulo sinistrorsus pas- 
suum septingentorum octoginta. Ductus eius habet 
longitudinem a capite usque ad Salinas, qui locus 
est ad Portam Trigeminam, passuum undecim milium 
centum nonaginta; ex eo rivus est subterraneus 
passuum undecim milium centum triginta, supra 
terram substructio et opus arcuatum proximum 
Portam Capenam passuum sexaginta. lIungitur ei 
ad Spem Veterem' in confinio hortorum Torquatia- 
norum et Epaphroditianorum? ramus Augustae ab 
Augusto in supplementum eius additus . . . loco 
nomen . . . denti? Gemellorum. Hic Via Praenes- 
tina ad miliarium sextum deverticulo sinistrorsus 
passuum nongentorum octoginta proxime Viam 
Collatinam‘ accipit fontem. (Cuius ductus usque 
ad Gemellos efficit rivo subterraneo passuum sex 
milia trecentos octoginta. . Incipit distribui Appia 
imo Publicii Clivo ad Portam Trigeminam, qui locus 
Salinae appellantur. 


1 Collatina Lanciani. The emendation is suggested by the 
location of the supposed sources of the Appia which have been 
discovered. See map at end of book. 

2 Lanciani; gap in C. 

e... toco nomen , .... .. denti C; imposito 
cognomine respondenti Poleni. 

* Collatiam CB. 


1 The conventional rendering of passus by ‘‘ pace" is here 
followed, although the term applied in strictness to the 
distance between the outstretched hands, i.e. five Roman 
feet, equivalent to 4 feet 103 inches of our measure. 


340 


Pig 19. 
MAP OF 
AQVEDVCTS 


REPRODUCED BY PERMISSION O E" 


Digitized by Gpogle 


| 


AQUEDUCTS OF ROME, I. 5 


his colleague would do the same, the honour of 
giving his name to the aqueduct fell to Appius alone, 
who, by various subterfuges, is reported to have 
extended the term of his censorship, until he should 
complete both the Way and this aqueduct. The intake 
of Appia is on the Lucullan estate, between the 
seventh and eighth milestones, on the Praenestine 
Way, on a cross-road, 780 paces! to the left.? From 
its intake to the Salinae at the Porta Trigemina;? its 
channel has a length of 11,190 paces, of which 
11,130 paces run underground, while above ground 
sixty paces are carried on substructures and, near the 
Porta Capena, on arches. Near Spes Vetus,* on the 
edge of the Torquatian and Epaphroditian Gardens, 
there joins it a branch of Augusta, added by Augustus 
as a supplementary supply. . . . This branch has its 
intake at the sixth milestone, on the Praenestine 
Way, on a cross-road, 980 paces to the left, near the 
Collatian Way. Its course, by underground channel, 
extends to 6,380 paces before reaching The T wins.5 
The distribution of Appia begins at the foot of the 
Publician Ascent, near the Porta Trigemina, at the 
place designated as the Salinae.§ 
3 i.e. going from Rome. 


3 'This was at the northern base of the Aventine Hill, near 
the Tiber. 

4 The Temple of Spes Vetus was just inside the Aurelian 
Wall, in the eastern quarter of the City, not far from the 
Porta Labicana (the modern Porta Maggiore). See plan facing 
p. 363. 

5 The name is evidently derived from the junction of the 
two aqueducts. ‘‘There are considerable remains of two 
large reservoirs in a garden just outside of the boundary- 
wall of the Sessorium. These two great reservoirs, so close 
together in the line of the Aqua Appia, seem to have been 
the Gemelli mentioned by Frontinus. "— Parker. 

6 See map facing p. 341. 


341 


SEXTUS JULIUS FRONTINUS 


6. Post annos quadraginta quam Appia perducta 
est, anno ab urbe condita quadringentesimo octo- 
gesimo uno M'. Curius Dentatus, qui censuram cum 
Lucio Papirio Cursore gessit, Anionis qui nunc Vetus 
dicitur aquam perducendam in urbem ex manubiis 
de Pyrro captis locavit, Spurio Carvilio Lucio Papirio 
consulibus iterum. Post biennium deinde actum 
est in senatu de consummando eius aquae opere 
referente . . . norumi . .. praetore. Tum! ex 
senatus consulto duumviri aquae perducendae creati 
sunt Curius, qui eam locaverat et Fulvius Flaccus. 
Curius intra quintum diem quam erat duumvirum 
creatus decessit; gloria perductae pertinuit ad Ful- 
vium. Concipitur Anio Vetus supra Tibur vicesimo 
miliario extra Portam . . . RRa... nam,? ubi partem 
dat in Tiburtium usum. Ductus eius habet longi- 
tudinem, ita exigente libramento, passuum quadra- 
ginta trium milium : ex eo rivus est subterraneus 
passuum quadraginta duum milium septingentorum 
septuaginta novem, substructio supra terram passuum 
ducentorum viginti unius. 

7. Post annos centum viginti septem, id est anno 
ab urbe condita sexcentesimo octavo, Ser. Sulpicio 


1 B; irefent . . . . . .. .. norumi .. .. 
praetorium C. 

3 Various conjectures have been made in the attempt to 
identify this gate. Fea, with reference to Hor. Epist. 4. xiv. 8, 
suggested Varianam ; other readings that have been proposed are 
Baranam, Raranam, Romanam, Arretinam, Reatinam. A 
passage of Nicodemus, Storia di Tivoli, in which he recalls a 
village named Barana, lying to the east of Tivoli, seems to 
Lanciani to give some support to Baranam. Burn thinks this 
gate was probably on the site of the modern Porta S. Giovanni. 


1 273 B.c. 3 Cf. 13. 
342 


AQUEDUCTS OF .ROME, I. 6-7 


Forty years after Appia was brought in, in the 
four hundred and eighty-first year! from the founding 
of the City, Manius Curius Dentatus, who held the 
censorship with Lucius Papirius Cursor, contracted 
to have the waters of what is now called Old? Anio 
brought into the City, with the proceeds of the booty 
eaptured from Pyrrhus. This was in the second 
consulship of Spurius Carvilius and Lucius Papirius. 
Then two years later the question of completing the 
aqueduct. was discussed in the Senate on the 
motion. . . of the praetor. At the close of the dis- 
cussion, Curius, who had let the original contract, 
and Fulvius Flaccus were appointed by decree of the 
Senate as a board of two to bring in the water 
Within five days of the time he had been appointed, 
one of the two commissioners, Curius, died; thus 
the credit of achieving the work rested with Flaccus. 
The intake of Old Anio is above Tibur? at the 
twentieth milestone outside the . . . Gate, where it 
gives a part of its water to supply the Tiburtines. 
Owing to the exigence of elevation,* its conduit has 
a length of 43,000 paces. Of this, the channel runs 
underground for 42,779 paces, while there are above 
ground substructures for 221 paces. 

One hundred and twenty-seven years later, that is 
in the six hundred and eighth year from the found- 
ing of the City,5 in the consulship of Servius Sulpicius 


3 The modern Tivoli, about eighteen miles to the east of 
Rome. See map at end of book. 

4 All ancient aqueducts are constructed on the principle of 
flow, not of pressure. The fall was necessarily very gradual. 
Consequently, when the intake was at a considerable eleva- 
tion, long detours became necessary in bringing the water to 
the City. 

5 146 B.C., but Galba and Cotta were consuls in 144 B.C. 


343 


SEXTUS JULIUS FRONTINUS 


Galba Lucio Aurelio Cotta consulibus cum Appiae 
Anionisque ductus vetustate quassati privatorum 
etiam fraudibus interciperentur, datum est a senatu 
negotium Marcio, qui tum praetor inter cives ius 
dicebat, eorum ductuum reficiendorum ac vindican- 
dorum. Et quoniam incrementum urbis exigere 
videbatur ampliorem modum aquae, eidem manda- 
tum a senatu est, ut curaret, quatenus alias aquas 
posset in urbem perducere. . . . Priores? ductus 
restituit et tertiam illis salubriorem? . . . duxit, 
cui ab auctore Marciae nomen est. Legimus apud 
Fenestellam, in haec opera Marcio decretum sester- 
tium milies octingenties, et quoniam ad consum- 
mandum negotium non sufficiebat spatium praeturae, 
in annum alterum est^ prorogatum. Eo tempore 
decemviri, dum aliis ex causis libros Sibyllinos 
inspiciunt, invenisse dicuntur, non esse fas? aquam 
Marciam seu potius Anionem—de hoc enim con- 
stantius traditur—in Capitolium perduci, deque ea 
re in senatu M. Lepido pro collegio ê verba faciente 
actum Appio Claudio Q. Caecilio consulibus, ean- 
demque post annum tertium a Lucio Lentulo retrac- 
tatam C. Laelio Q. Servilio consulibus, sed utroque 


1 quatenus alias aquas posset in urhem perducere Schulze ; 

quatenus alias aquas quas posset in urbem perduceret 
^B. 
.... . Ores C ; priores B. 
> Bennett ; tertiam illiobriorum....... CB. 
Ci omitted by B. 
5 Schöne (Hermes vi. 248) ; omitted in C and B. 
€ Schöne ; collega CB. 


1 Praetor urbanus. 
2 A Roman historian ; he died in 21 A.D, 


344 


AQUEDUCTS OF ROME, I. 7 


Galba and Lucius Aurelius Cotta, when the conduits 
of Appia and Old Anio had become leaky by reason 
of age, and water was also being diverted from them 
unlawfully by individuals, the Senate commissioned 
Marcius, who at that time administered the law as 
praetor between citizens, to reclaim and repair 
these conduits; and since the growth of the City was 
seen to demand a more bountiful supply of water, 
the same man was charged by the Senate to bring 
into the City other waters so far as he could. 
. . . He restored the old channels and brought in 
a third supply, more wholesome than these, . . 

which is called Marcia after the man who intro- 
duced it. We read in Fenestella,? that 180,000,000 
sesterces? were granted to Marcius for these works, 
and since the term of his praetorship was not 
sufficient for the completion of the enterprise, it was 
extended for a second year. At that time the 
Decemvirs,* on consulting the Sibylline Books for 
another purpose, are said to have discovered that it 
was not right for the Marcian water, or rather the 
Anio (for tradition more regularly mentions this) to 
be brought to the Capitol. The matter is said to 
have been debated in the Senate, in the consulship 
of Appius Claudius and Quintus Caecilius, Marcius 
Lepidus acting as spokesman for the Board of 
Decemvirs ; and three years later the matter is said 
to have been brought up again by Lucius Lentulus, 
in the consulship of Gaius Laelius and Quintus 


* About £1,500,000. The sesterce at this period was 
worth about two pence. 

* A board of ten men who had charge of the Sibylline 
Books. 

5 143 B.C. 


345 


SEXTUS JULIUS FRONTINUS 


tempore vicisse gratiam Marci Regis; atque ita in 
Capitolium esse aquam  perductam.  Concipitur 
Marcia Via Valeria ad miliarium tricesimum. sextum 
deverticulo euntibus ab urbe Roma dextrorsus 
milium passuum trium. Sublacensi autem, quae 
sub Nerone principe primum strata est, ad miliarium 
tricesimum octavum sinistrorsus intra passus ducen- 
tos fontium . . . sub... bus petrei . . . stat 
immobilis stagni modo colore! praeviridi. Ductus 
eius habet longitudinem a capite ad urbem passuum 
sexaginta milium et mille septingentorum decem et 
semis ; rivo subterraneo passuum quinquaginta quat- 
tuor milium ducentorum quadraginta septem semis, 
opere supra terram passuum septem milium quadrin- 
gentorum sexaginta trium: ex eo longius ab urbe 
pluribus locis per vallis opere arcuato passuum 
quadringentorum sexaginta trium, propius urbem a 
septimo miliario substructione passuum quingentorum 
viginti octo, reliquo opere arcuato passuum sex 
milium quadringentorum septuaginta duum. 

8. Cn. Servilius Caepio et L. Cassius Longinus, 
qui Ravilla appellatus est, censores anno post urbem 
conditam sexcentesimo vicesimo septimo, M. Plautio 
Hypsaeo M. Fulvio Flacco cos., aquam quae vocatur 
Tepula ex agro Lucullano, quem quidam Tusculanum 
credunt, Romam et in Capitolium adducendam 
curaverunt. Tepula concipitur Via Latina ad deci- 
mum miliarium deverticulo euntibus ab Roma 
dextrorsus milium passuum duum....... inde 
suo rivo in urbem perducebatur. 


L fontin «535569 88D: V y s bus petrei...... 
statim. ....... stagnimo...... colore C. 
! 140 B.C. 3 127 B.C. 3 125 B.c. 
346 


AQUEDUCTS OF ROME, I. 7-8 


Servilius! but on both occasions the influence of 
Marcius Rex carried the day; and thus the water 
was brought to the Capitol. The intake of Marcia 
is at the thirty-sixth milestone on the Valerian Way, 
on a cross-road, three miles to the right as you 
come from Rome. But on the Sublacensian Way, 
which was first paved under the Emperor Nero, at 
the thirty-eighth milestone, within 200 paces to 
the left [a view of its source may be seen]. Its 
waters stand like a tranquil pool, of deep green hue. 
Its conduit has a length, from the intake to the 
City, of 61,7104 paces; 54,2474 paces of under- 
ground conduit; 7,463 paces on structures above 
ground, of which, at some distance from the City, 
in several places where it crosses valleys, there 
are 463 paces on arches; nearer the City, beginning 
at the seventh milestone, 528 paces on substructures, 
and the remaining 6,472 paces on arches. - 

The Censors, Gnaeus Servilius Caepio and Lucius 
Cassius Longinus, called Ravilla, in the year 627 ? after 
" the founding of the City, in the consulate of Marcius 
Plautius Hypsaeus and Marcus Fulvius Flaccus? had 
the water called Tepula brought to Rome and to the 
Capitol, from the estate of Lucullus, which some 
persons hold to belong to Tusculan * territory. The 
intake of Tepula is at the tenth milestone on the 
Latin Way, near a cross-road, two miles to the right 
as you proceed from Rome. . . . From that point it 
was conducted in its own? channel to the City. 


* The country around Tusculum (the modern Frascati), 
a town in Latium about twenty miles south-east of 
Rome. 

5 Later it flowed in the same channel with Julia. Cf. note 


on 9. 


347 


SEXTUS JULIUS FRONTINUS 


9. Post... . . Agrippa aedilis post primum con- 
sulatum imperatore Caesare Augusto II L. Volcatio 
cos., anno post urbem conditam septingentesimo nono 
decimo ad miliarium ab urbe duodecimum Via Latina 
deverticulo euntibus ab Roma dextrorsus milium 
passuum duum alterius aquae proprias vires collegit 
et Tepulae rivum intercepit. Adquisitae aquae ab 
inventore nomen Iuliae datum est, ita tamen divisa 
erogatione, ut maneret Tepulae appellatio. Ductus 
Iuliae efficit longitudinem passuum quindecim milium 
quadringentorum viginti sex S.: opere supra terram 
passuum septem milium: ex eo in proximis urbem 
locis a septimo miliario substructione passuum 
quingentorum viginti octo, reliquo opere arcuato 
passuum sex milium quadringentorum septuaginta 
duum. Praeter caput Iuliae transfluit aqua quae 
vocatur Crabra. Hanc Agrippa omisit, seu quia 
improbaverat, sive quia Tusculanis possessoribus 
relinquendam credebat; ea namque est quam omnes 
villae tractus eius per vicem in dies modulosque 
certos dispensatam accipiunt. Sed non eadem 
moderatione aquarii nostri partem eius semper in 
supplementum Iuliae vindicaverunt, nec ut Iuliam 
augerent, quam hauriebant largiendo compendi sui 
gratia. Exclusi ergo Crabram et totam iussu impera- 
toris reddidi Tusculanis, qui nunc, forsitan non sine 
admiratione, eam sumunt ignari cui causae insolitam 


1 33 B.C. 2 35 B.C. 3 Cf. note 4 on ch. 98. 

4 Apparently the name Julia et Tepula was applied to it. 
‘The Julia was admitted into the channel of the Tepula 
at the tenth milestone. At the sixth milestone the com- 
pound water was again divided into two conduits, pro- 
portioned to the volume of the springs.” —Lancian?, 


348 


AQUEDUCTS OF ROME, I. 9 


Later . . . in the second consulate? of the 
Emperor Caesar Augustus, when Lucius Volcatius 
was his colleague, in the year 719 ? after the founda- 
tion of the City, [Marcus] Agrippa, when aedile, after 
his first consulship,’ took another independent source 
of supply, at the twelfth milestone from the City 
on the Latin Way, on a cross-road two miles to 
the right as you proceed from Rome, and also tapped 
Tepula. The name Julia was given to the new aque- 
duct by its builder, but since the waters were again 
divided for distribution, the name Tepula remained. 
The conduit of Julia has a length of 15,4264 paces; 
7,000 paces on masonry above ground, of which 
528 paces next the City, beginning at the seventh 
milestone, are on substructures, the other 6,472 paces 
being on arches. Past the intake of Julia flows a 
brook, which is called Crabra. Agrippa refrained 
from taking in this brook either because he had 
condemned it, or because he thought it ought to 
be left to the proprietors at Tusculum, for this is 
the water which all the estates of that district receive 
in turn, dealt out to them on regular days and in 
regular quantities. But our water-men,5 failing to 
practise the same restraint, have always claimed a 
part of it to supplement Julia, not, however, thus 
increasing the actual flow of Julia, since they 
habitually exhausted it by diverting its waters for 
their own profit. I therefore shut off the Crabra 
brook and at the Emperor's command restored it 
entirely to the Tusculan proprietors, who now, 
possibly not without surprise, take its waters, with- 
out knowing to what cause to ascribe the unusual 


5 The water-men are the men who receive the water from 
the State and in turn furnish it to the consumers. 


349 


SEXTUS JULIUS FRONTINUS 


abundantiam debeant. Iulia autem revocatis deriva- 
. tionibus, per quas surripiebatur, modum suum 
quamvis notabili siccitate servavit. | Eodem anno 
Agrippa ductus Appiae, Anionis, Marciae paene 
dilapsos restituit et singulari cura compluribus 
salientibus instruxit urbem. 

10. Idem cum iam tertio consul fuisset, C. Sentio 
Q. Lucretio consulibus, post annum tertium deci- 
mum quam Iuliam deduxerat, Virginem quoque in 
agro Lucullano collectam Romam perduxit. Dies 
quo primum in urbe! responderit, quintus idus 
lunias invenitur. Virgo appellata est, quod quae- 
rentibus aquam militibus puella? virguncula venas 
quasdam monstravit, quas secuti qui foderant, 
ingentem aquae modum invenerunt. Aedicula fonti 
apposita hanc originem pictura ostendit. Con- 
cipitur Virgo Via Collatina® ad miliarium octavum 
palustribus locis, signino circumiecto continendarum 
scaturiginum causa. Adiuvatur et compluribus aliis 
adquisitionibus. Venit per longitudinem passuum 
decem quattuor milium centum quinque : ex eo rivo 
subterraneo passuum decem duum milium octin- 
gentorum sexaginta quinque, supra terram per 
passus mille ducentos quadraginta: ex eo substruc- 
tione rivorum locis compluribus passuum quingen- 
torum quadraginta, opere arcuato passuum septingen- 
torum. Adquisitionum ductus rivi subterranei 
efficiunt passus mille quadringentos quinque. 


1 Poleni, Jordan; urbem CB. 
2 C; omitted by D. 
3 Collatia CB. 


1 Agrippa was consul for the third time in 27 B.c. Gaius 


359 


"e. —————— J«S9—————— f pS -———— — S 


AQUEDUCTS OF ROME, I. 9-10 


abundance. The Julian aqueduct, on the other 
hand, by reason of the destruction of the branch 
pipes through which it was secretly plundered, has 
maintained its normal quantity even in times of most 
extraordinary drought. In the same year, Agrippa 
repaired the conduits of Appia, Old Anio, and 
Marcia, which had almost worn out, and with unique 
forethought provided the City with a large number 
of fountains. 

The same man, after his own third consulship, 
in the consulship of Gaius Sentius and Quintus 
Lucretius,! twelve years after he had constructed 
the Julian aqueduct, also brought Virgo to Rome, 
taking it from the estate of Lucullus. We learn that 
June 9 was the day that it first began to flow in the 
City. lt was called Virgo, because a young girl 
pointed out certain springs to some soldiers hunting 
for water, and when they followed these up and 
dug, they found a copious supply. A small temple, 
situated near the spring, contains a painting which 
illustrates this origin of the aqueduct. The intake 
of Virgo is on the Collatian Way at the eighth 
milestone, in a marshy spot, surrounded by a con- 
crete enclosure for the purpose of confining the 
gushing waters. Its volume isaugmented by several 
tributaries. Its length is 14,105 paces. For 12,865 
paces of this distance it is carried in an underground 
channel, for 1,240 paces above ground. Of these 
1,240 paces, it is carried for 540 paces on substruc- 
tures at various points, and for 700 paces on arches. 
The underground conduits of the tributaries measure 
1,405 paces. 


Sentius Saturninus and Quintus Lucretius were consuls in 
19 p.c. 


351 


SEXTUS JULIUS FRONTINUS 


11. Quae ratio moverit Augustum, providentissi- 
mum principem, perducendi Alsietinam aquam, quae 
vocatur Augusta, non satis perspicio, nullius gratiae, 
immo etiam parum salubrem ideoque nusquam in 
usus populi fluentem ; nisi forte cum opus Nauma- 
chiae adgrederetur, ne quid salubrioribus aquis 
detraheret, hanc proprio opere perduxit et quod 
Naumachiae coeperat superesse, hortis adiacentibus 
et privatorum usibus ad inrigandum concessit. Solet 
tamen ex ea in Transtiberina regione, quotiens 
pontes reficiuntur et a citeriore ripa aquae cessant, 
ex necessitate in subsidium publicorum salientium 
dari. Concipitur ex lacu Alsietino Via Claudia 
miliario quarto decimo deverticulo  dextrorsus 
passuum sex milium quingentorum. Ductus eius 
efficit longitudinem passuum viginti duum milium 
centum septuaginta duorum, opere arcuato passuum 
trecentorum quinquaginta octo. 

12. Idem Augustus in supplementum  Marciae, 
quotiens siccitates egerent auxilio, aliam aquam 
eiusdem bonitatis opere subterraneo perduxit usque 
ad Marciae rivum, quae ab inventore appellatur 
Augusta. Nascitur ultra fontem Marciae. Cuius 
ductus donec Marciae accedat, efficit passus octin- 
gentos. 

13. Post hos C. Caesar, qui Tiberio successit, cum 
parum et publicis usibus et privatis voluptatibus 


! Naumachia was the name given to the artificial lakes 
prepared for exhibitions of sham naval battles ; the same 
name was applied to the contests themselves. See map 
facing p. 341. 

2 Bridges sometimes served as carriers for the water pipes. 
Among the bridges crossing the Anio, Ponte Lupo near 
Gallicano served as transit for four waters, Marcia, Anio 


352 


AQUEDUCTS OF ROME, I. 11-13 


I fail to see what motive induced Augustus, a 
most sagacious sovereign, to bring in the Alsietinian 
water, also called Augusta. For this has nothing to 
commend it,—is in fact positively unwholesome, and 
for that reason is nowhere delivered for consump- 
tion by the people. It may have been that when 
Augustus began the construction of his Naumachia,! 
he brought this water in a special conduit, in order 
not to encroach on the existing supply of wholesome 
water, and then granted the surplus of the Nau- 
machia to the adjacent gardens and to private users 
for irrigation. It is customary, however, in the 
district across the Tiber, in an emergency, whenever 
the bridges? are undergoing repairs and the water 
supply is cut off from this side the river, to draw 
from Alsietina to maintain the flow of the public 
fountains. Its source is the Alsietinian Lake, at 
the fourteenth milestone, on the Claudian Way, on a 
cross-road, six miles and a half to the right. Its 
conduit has a length of 22,172 paces, with 358 paces 
on arches. 

To supplement Marcia, whenever dry seasons 
required an additional supply, Augustus also, by an 
underground channel, brought to the conduit of 
Marcia another water of the same excellent quality, 
called Augusta from the name of its donor. Its 
source is beyond the springs of Marcia; its conduit, 
up to its junction with Marcia, measures 800 paces. — 

After these aqueducts, Gaius Caesar,’ the successor 
of Tiberius, in the second year of his reign, in the 


Vetus, Anio Novus and Claudia, besides & carriage-way and 
& bridle-path. At Lyons there are the ruins of à Roman 
bridge, which still contains lead pipes. 

* Caligula, who reigned from 37 to 41 A.D. 


353 


VOL. I. AA 


SEXTUS JULIUS FRONTINUS 


septem ductus aquarum sufficere viderentur, altero 
imperii sui anno, M. Aquila Iuliano P. Nonio 
Asprenate cos., anno urbis conditae septingentesimo 
nonagesimo uno! duos ductus incohavit. Quod 
opus Claudius magnificentissime consummavit dedi- 
cavitque Sulla et Titiano consulibus, anno post 
urbem conditam octingentesimo tertio Kalendis 
Augustis. Alteri nomen, quae ex fontibus Caerulo 
et Curtio perducebatur, Claudiae datum. Haec 
bonitatis proximae est Marciae. Altera, quoniam 
duae Anionis in urbem aquae fluere coeperant, ut 
facilius appellationibus dinoscerentur, Anio Novus 
vocitari coepit; priori Anioni cognomen Veteris 
adiectum. | 

14. Claudia concipitur Via Sublacensi ad miliarium 
tricesimum octavum deverticulo sinistrorsus intra 
passus trecentos ex fontibus duobus amplissimis 
et speciosis, Caeruleo qui a similitudine appel- 
latus est, et Curtio. Accipit et eum fontem qui 
vocatur Albudinus, tantae bonitatis, ut Marciae 
quoque adiutorio quotiens opus est ita sufficiat, ut 
adiectione sui nihil ex qualitate eius mutet. Augus- 
tae fons, quia Marciam sibi sufficere apparebat, in 
Claudiam derivatus est, manente nihilo minus prae- 
sidiario in Marciam, ut ita demum Claudiam aquam 
adiuvaret Augusta, si eam ductus Marciae non 
caperet. Claudiae ductus habet longitudinem pas- 
suum quadraginta sex milium quadringentorum sex : 


! nonagesimo uno Bennett ; nonagesimo C ; undenonagesimo 
Poleni, B. The year 38 A.D., the 2nd year of Caligula’s reign, 
ts the 791st ycar A.U.C. 


1 38 A.D. 2 Cf. Suet. Claud. 20. 
3 52 A.D. * 50 A.D. 5 «The Blue.” 


354 


JO SNINY 


LL het 


AQUEDUCTS OF ROME, I. 13-14 


consulate of Marcus Aquila Julianus and Publius 
Nonius Asprenas, in the year 791! after the found- 
ing of the City, began two others, inasmuch as 
the seven then existing seemed insufficient to meet 
both the public needs and the luxurious private 
demands of the day. These works Claudius com- 
pleted on the most magnificent scale,? and dedicated 
in the consulship of Sulla and Titianus,’ on the Ist of 
August in the year 8034 after the founding of the 
City. To the one water, which had its sources in 
the Caerulean and Curtain springs, was given the 
name Claudia. This is next to Marcia in excellence. 
The second began to be designated as New Anio, 
in order the more readily to distinguish by title the 
two Anios that had now begun to flow to the City. 
To the former Anio the name of * Old" was 
added. 

The intake of Claudia is at the thirty-eighth mile- 
stone on the Sublacensian Way, on a cross-road, less 
than three hundred paces to the left. The water 
comes from two very large and beautiful springs, 
the Caerulean,® so designated from its appearance, 
and the Curtian. Claudia also receives the spring 
which is called Albudinus, which is of such excellence 
that, when Marcia, too, needs supplementing, this 
water answers the purpose so admirably that by 
its addition there is no change in Marcia's quality. 
The spring of Augusta was turned into Claudia, 
because it was plainly evident that Marcia was of 
sufficient volume by itself. But Augusta remained, 
nevertheless, a reserve supply to Marcia, the under- 
standing being that Augusta should run into Claudia 
only when the conduit of Marcia would not carry it. 
Claudia's conduit has a length of 46,406 paces, of 


355 
AA 2 


SEXTUS JULIUS FRONTINUS | 


ex eo rivo subterraneo passuum triginta sex milium 
ducentorum triginta, opere supra terram passuum 
decem milium centum septuaginta sex: ex eo opere 
arcuato in superiori parte pluribus locis passuum 
trium milium septuaginta sex, et prope urbem a 
septimo miliario substructione rivorum per passus 
sexcentos novem, opere arcuato passuum sex milium 
quadringentorum nonaginta et unius. 

15. Anio Novus Via Sublacensi ad miliarium qua- 
dragesimum secundum in Simbruino excipitur ex 
flumine, quod cum terras cultas circa se habeat soli 
pinguis et inde ripas solutiores, etiam sine pluviarum 
iniuria limosum et turbulentum fluit. Ideoque a 
faucibus ductus interposita est piscina limaria, ubi 
inter amnem et specum consisteret et liquaretur 
aqua. Sic quoque quotiens imbres superveniunt, 
turbida pervenit in urbem. Iungitur ei rivus Hercu- 
laneus oriens eadem via ad miliarium tricesimum 
octavum e regione fontium Claudiae trans flumen 
viamque. Natura est purissimus, sed mixtus gratiam 
splendoris sui amittit. Ductus Anionis Novi efficit 
passuum quinquaginta octo milia septingentos: ex 
eo rivo subterraneo passuum quadraginta novem 
milia trecentos, opere supra terram passuum novem 
milia quadringentos: ex eo substructionibus aut 
opere arcuato superiore parte pluribus locis passuum 
duo milia trecentos, et propius urbem a septimo 
miliario substructione rivorum passus sexcentos 
novem, opere arcuato passuum sex milia quad- 
ringentos nonaginta unum. Hi sunt arcus altissimi, 
sublevati in quibusdam locis pedes centum novem. 

16. Tot aquarum tam multis necessariis molibus 


4 The Simbruvian Hills were about thirty miles to the 
north-east of Rome. 


356 


AQUEDUCIS OF ROME, I. 14-16 


which 36,230 are in a subterranean channel, 10,176 
on structures above ground ; of these last there are 
at various points in the upper reaches 3,076 paces on 
arches ; and near the City, beginning at the seventh 
milestone, 609 paces on substructures and 6,491 on 
arches. 

The intake of New Anio is at the forty-second 
milestone on the Sublacensian Way, in the district 
of Simbruvium.! The water is taken from the river, 
which, even without the effect of rainstorms, is 
muddy and discoloured, because it has rich and 
cultivated fields adjoining it, and in consequence 
loose banks. For this reason, a settling reservoir 
was put in beyond the inlet of the aqueduct, in 
order that the water might settle there and clarify 
itself, between the river and the conduit. But even 
despite this precaution, the water reaches the City 
in a discoloured condition whenever there are rains. 
It is joined by the Herculanean Brook, which has 
its source on the same Way, at the thirty-eighth 
milestone, opposite the springs of Claudia, beyond 
the river and the highway. This is naturally very 
clear, but loses the charm of its purity by admix- 
ture with New Anio. The conduit of New Anio 
measures 58,700 paces, of which 49,300 are in an 
underground channel, 9,400 paces above ground on 
masonry; of these, at various points in the upper 
reaches are 2,300 paces on substructures or arches ; 
while nearer the city, beginning at the seventh 
milestone, are 609 paces on substructures, 6,491 
paces on arches. These are the highest arches, 
rising at certain points to 109 feet. 

With such an array of indispensable structures 
carrying so many waters, compare, if you will, the 


357 


SEXTUS JULIUS FRONTINUS 


pyramidas videlicet otiosas compares aut cetera 
inertia sed fama celebrata opera Graecorum. 

17. Non alienum mihi visum est, longitudines 
quoque rivorum cuiusque ductus etiam per species 
operum complecti. Nam cum maxima huius officii 
pars in tutela eorum sit, scire praepositum oportet, 
quae maiora impendia exigant. Nostrae quidem 
sollicitudini non suffecit, singula oculis subiecisse ; 
{formas quoque ductuum facere curavimus, ex quibus 
apparet ubi valles quantaeque, ubi flumina traice- 
rentur, ubi montium lateribus specus applicitae 
maiorem adsiduamque tuendi ac muniendi rivi exi- 
gant curam. Hinc illa contingit utilitas, ut rem 
statim veluti in conspectu habere possimus et 
deliberare tamquam adsistentes. 

18. Omnes aquae diversa in urbem libra perve- 
niunt. Inde fluunt quaedam altioribus locis et 
quaedam erigi in eminentiora non possunt; nam 
et colles sensim propter frequentiam incendiorum 
excreverunt rudere. Quinque sunt quarum altitudo 
in omnem partem urbis adtollitur, sed ex his aliae 
maiore, aliae leviore pressura coguntur. Altissimus 
est Anio Novus, proxima Claudia, tertium locum 
tenet Iulia, quartum Tepula, dehinc Marcia, quae 
capite etiam Claudiae libram aequat. Sed veteres 
humiliore directura perduxerunt, sive nondum ad 
subtile explorata arte librandi, seu quia ex industria 


! i.e., how much under ground ; how much on arches, etc. 


358 


aw 


AQUEDUCTS OF ROME, I. 16-18 


idle Pyramids or the useless, though famous, works 
of the Greeks! 

It has seemed to me not inappropriate to include 
also a statement of the lengths of the channels of 
the several aqueducts, according to the kinds of 
construction.! For since the chief function of this 
office of water-commissioner lies in their upkeep, 
the man in charge of them ought to know which of 
them demand the heavier outlay. My zeal was not 
satisfied with submitting details to examination; I 
also had plans made of the aqueducts, on which it is 
shown where there are valleys and how great these 
are; where rivers are crossed; and where conduits : 
laid on hillsides demand more particular constant 
care for their maintenance and repair. By. this 
. provision, one reaps the advantage of being able to 
have the works before one's eyes, so to speak, at a 
moment's notice, and to consider them as though 
standing by their side. 

The several aqueducts reach the City at different 
elevations. In consequence certain ones deliver 
water on higher ground, while others cannot rise to 
the loftier points; for the hills have gradually grown 
higher with rubbish in consequence of frequent 
conflagrations. ‘There are five whose head rises to 
every point in the City, but of these some are forced 
up with greater, others with lesser pressure. The 
highest is New Anio; next comes Claudia; the third 
place is taken by Julia; the fourth by Tepula; the 
last by Marcia, although at its intake this mounts 
even to the level of Claudia. But the ancients laid 
the lines of their aqueducts at a lower elevation, 
either because they had not yet nicely worked out 
the art of levelling, or because they purposely sunk 


359 


SEXTUS JULIUS FRONTINUS 


infra terram aquas mergebant, ne facile ab hostibus 
interciperentur, cum frequentia adhuc contra Italicos 
bella gererentur. Iam tamen quibusdam locis, sicubi 
ductus vetustate dilapsus est, omisso circuito sub- 
terraneo vallium brevitatis causa substructionibus 
arcuationibusque traiciuntur. Sextum tenet librae 
locum Anio Vetus, similiter suffecturus etiam altiori- 
bus locis urbis, si, ubi vallium summissarumque 
regionum condicio exigit, substructionibus arcua- 
tionibusve erigeretur. Sequitur huius libram Virgo, 
deinde Appia; quae cum ex urbano agro perduce- 
rentur, non in tantum altitudinis erigi potuerunt. 
Omnibus humilior Alsietina est, quae Transtiberinae 
regioni et maxime iacentibus locis servit. 

19. Ex eis sex Via Latina intra septimum mi- 
liarium contectis piscinis excipiuntur, ubi quasi 
respirante rivorum cursu limum deponunt. Modus 
quoque earum mensuris ibidem positis initur. Tres 
autem earum, Iulia, Marcia, Tepula quae intercepta, 
sicut supra demonstravimus, rivo Iuliae accesserat, 
nunc a piscina eiusdem luliae modum accipit ac 
proprio canali et nomine venit—hae tres a piscinis 
in eosdem arcus recipiuntur. Summus in his est 
Iuliae, inferior Tepulae, dein Marcia. Quae ad 
libram Collis Viminalis sco . . . ntea fluentes? ad 
Viminalem usque Portam deveniunt. Ibi rursus 
emergunt. Prius tamen pars Iuliae ad Spem 


POS DEA & a4 aoe Swe 5 minas sco........ 
ntea....ntes. C. 


1 i.e., when old aqueducts were rebuilt, they were carried 
across valleys on arches or low foundations, instead of going 
around the valleys, as the original underground structures 
had done. - 2 Namely, in the basins. 

3 Cf. 9 and footnote. * See illustration facing p. 361, 


36o 


THOIDDVK VIHNOd AHL LV SLOAGTAOV NAAGS AHL 


AQUEDUCTS OF ROME, I. 18-19 


their aqueducts in the ground, in order that they 
might not easily be cut by the enemy, since frequent 
wars were still waged with the Italians. But now, 
wherever a conduit has succumbed to old age, it 
is the practice to carry it in certain parts on sub- 
structures or on arches, in order to save length, 
abandoning the subterranean loops in the valleys.! 
The sixth rank in height is held by Old Anio, 
which would likewise be capable of supplying even 
the higher portions of the City, if it were raised 
up on substructures or arches, wherever the nature 
of the valleys and low places demands. Its eleva- 
tion is followed by that of Virgo, then by that 
of Appia. These, since they were brought from 
points near the City, could not rise to such high 
elevations. Lowest of all is Alsietina, which supplies 
the ward across the Tiber and the very lowest 
districts. 

Of these waters, six are received in covered catch- 
basins, this side the seventh milestone on the Latin 
Way. Here, taking fresh breath, so to speak, after 
the run, they deposit their sediment. Their volume 
also is determined by gauges set up at the same 
point. Three of these, Julia, Marcia, and Tepula, 
are carried by the same arches from the catch-basins 
onward. Tepula, which, as we have above explained, 
was tapped and added to the conduit of Julia, now 
leaves the basin of this same Julia, receives its own 
quota of water, and runs in its own conduit, under 
its own name. The topmost of these three is 
Julia; next below is Tepula; then Marcia.* These 
flowing [under ground] reach the level of the 
Viminal Hill, and in fact even of the Viminal Gate. 
There they again emerge. Yet a part of Julia is 


361 


SEXTUS JULIUS FRONTINUS 


Veterem excepta castellis Caelii montis diffunditur. 
Marcia autem partem sui post hortos Pallantianos 
in rivum qui vocatur Herculaneus deicit. Is per 
Caelium ductus, ipsius montis usibus nihil ut inferior 
sumministrans, finitur supra Portam Capenam. 

20. Anio Novus et Claudia a piscinis in altiores 
arcus recipiuntur ita ut superior sit Anio, Finiuntur 
arcus earum post hortos Pallantianos et inde in 
usum urbis fistulis diducuntur. Partem tamen sui 
Claudia prius in arcus qui vocantur Neroniani ad 
Spem Veterem transfert. Hi directi per Caelium 
montem iuxta templum Divi Claudii terminantur. 
Modum quem acceperunt aut circa ipsum montem 
aut in Palatium Aventinumque et regionem Trans- 
tiberinam dimittunt. 

21. Anio Vetus citra quartam miliarium infra 
Novum, qui a Via Latina in Labicanam inter arcus 
traicit, et ipse piscinam habet. Inde intra secundum 
miliarium partem dat in specum qui vocatur Octavi- 
anus et pervenit in regionem Viae Novae ad hortos 
Asinianos, unde per illm tractum distribuitur. 
Rectus vero ductus secundum Spem veniens intra 
Portam Esquilinam in altos rivos per urbem diducitur. 

22. Nec Virgo nec Appia nec Alsietina concep- 
tacula, id est piscinas, habent. Arcus Virginis 
initium habent sub hortis Lucullanis, finiuntur in 
Campo Martio secundum frontem Saeptorum. Rivus 


! On the Esquiline. 

2 See illustration facing p. 355. 

3 Cf. 76, 87. 

4 South of the Caelian, near the Baths of Caracalla. 
5 On the Pincian. 


362 


Digitized by Google 


'WAuYADY SALAQ 


PLL ty tp QaNsip ugy i SAL 


fl 


COLVMBARJA STATILIORVM 


2 


ate 


l 


ALDAG 


/ Proporz. di 1: 2000 


[From Lanciani 


Fig. 2” 


= Sa 


AQUEDUCTS OF ROME, I. 19-22 


first diverted at Spes Vetus, and distributed to the 
reservoirs of Mount Caelius. But Marcia delivers a 
part of its waters into the so-called Herculanean 
Brook, behind the Gardens of Pallas.! This brook, 
carried along tlie Caelian, affords no service to the 
occupants of the hill, on account of its low level; it 
ends beyond the Porta Capena. 

New Anio and Claudia are carried together from 
their catch-basins on lofty arches, Anio being above.? 
. Their arches end behind the Gardens of Pallas, and 
from that point their waters are distributed in pipes 
to serve the City. Yet Claudia first transfers a part. 
of its waters near Spes Vetus to the so-called 
Neronian Arches. These arches pass along the 
Caelian Hill and end near the Temple of the Deified 
Claudius.’ Both aqueducts deliver the volume which 
they receive, partly about the Caelian, partly on the 
Palatine and Aventine, and to the ward beyond the 
Tiber. 

Old Anio, this side the fourth milestone, passes 
under New Anio, which here shifts from the Latin 
to the Labican Way; it bas its own catch-basin. 
Then, this side the second milestone, it gives a part 
of its waters to the so-called Octavian Conduit and 
reaches the Asinian Gardens? in the neighbourhood 
of the New Way, whence it is distributed through- 
out that district. But the main conduit, which 
passes Spes Vetus, comes inside the Esquiline Gate 
and is distributed to high-lying mains throughout 
the city. 

Neither Virgo, nor Appia, nor Alsietina has a 
receiving reservoir or catch-basin. The arches of 
Virgo begin under the Lucullan Gardens,’ and end 
on the Campus Martius in front of the Voting 


363 


SEXTUS JULIUS FRONTINUS 


Appiae sub Caelio monte et Aventino actus emergit, 
ut diximus, infra Clivum Publicii. Alsietinae ductus 
post Naumachiam, cuius causa videtur esse factus, 
finitur. 

23. Quoniam auctores cuiusque aquae et aetates, 
praeterea origines et longitudines rivorum et ordinem 
librae persecutus sum, non alienum mihi videtur, 
etiam singula subicere et ostendere quanta sit copia 
quae publicis privatisque non solum usibus et auxiliis 


verum etiam voluptatibus sufficit, et per quot castella . 


quibusque regionibus diducatur, quantum extra ur- 
bem, quantum in urbe, et ex eo quantum lacibus, 
quantum muneribus, quantum operibus publicis, 
quantum nomine Caesaris, quantum privatis usibus 
erogetur. Sed rationis existimo, priusquam nomina 
quinariarum centenariarumque et ceterorum modu- 
lorum, per quos mensura constituta est, proferamus, 
et indicare quae sit eorum origo, quae vires et quid 
quaeque appellatio significet, propositaque regula, ad 
quam ratio eorum et initium computatur, ostendere 
qua ratione discrepantia invenerim et quam emen- 
dandi viam sim secutus. 

24. Aquarum moduli aut ad digitorum aut ad 
unciarum mensuram instituti sunt. Digiti in Cam- 


1 Cf. 5. 

2 The ajutage was the nozzle, fitted to the water-pipe. 
The size and character of the ajutage, therefore, were impor- 
tant factors in the measurement of the water discharged. 
e ajutage was gauged according to various principles. 
Cf. 26. 

3 One of the most serious abuses practised by the water- 
men at Rome was connected with the size of the pipes used 
in the receiving and the distribution of water. Cf. 112, 113, 
114. Since the size and position (cf. 36) of the ajutage 
controlled the amount discharged, it was necessary to know 


364 


AQUEDUCTS OF ROME, I. 22-24 


Porticoes. The conduit of Appia, running along the 
base of the Caelian and Aventine, emerges, as we 
have said above,! at the foot of the Publician Ascent. 
The conduit of Alsietina terminates behind the 
Naumachia, for which it seems to have been 
constructed. 

Since I have given in detail the builders of the 
several aqueducts, their dates, and, in addition, their 
sources, the lengths of their channels, and their 
elevations in sequence, it seems to me not out of 
keeping to add also some separate details, and to 
show how great is the supply which suffices not 
only for public and private uses and purposes, but 
also for the satisfaction of luxury; by how many 
reservoirs it is distributéd and in what wards; how 
much water is delivered outside the City ; how much 
in the City itself; how much of this latter amount 
is used for water-basins, how much for fountains, 
how much for public buildings, how much in the 
name of Caesar, how much for private consumption. 
But before I mention the names quinaria, centenaria, 
and those of the other ajutages? by which water is 
gauged, I deem it appropriate to state what is their 
origin, what their capacities, and what each name 
means; and, after setting forth the rule according 
to which their proportions and capacities are com- 
puted, to show in what way I discovered their dis- 
crepancies, and what course I pursued in correcting 
them. 

The ajutages to measure water are arranged 
according to the standard either of digits or of 
inches.? Digits are the standard in Campania and 


the exact capacity of each type, and Frontinus, therefore, 
enumerates these first of all. 


365 


SEXTUS JULIUS FRONTINUS 


pania et in plerisque Italiae locis, unciae in pApula! 
cita huc observatur. Est autem digitus, ut convenit, 
sextadecima pars pedis, uncia duodecima. Quem- 
admodum autem inter unciam et digitum diversitas, 
ita et ipsius digiti non simplex observatio est. Alius 
vocatur quadratus, alius rotundus. Quadratus tribus 
quartisdecumis suis rotundo maior, rotundus tribus 
undecumis suis quadrato minor est, scilicet quia anguli 
deteruntur. 

25. Postea modulus nec ab uncia nec ab alterutro 
digitorum originem accipiens inductus, ut quidam 


putant, ab Agrippa, ut alii, a plumbariis per Vitruvium . 


architectum in usum urbis exclusis prioribus venit, 
appellatus quinariae nomine. Qui autem Agrippam 
auctorem faciunt, dicunt, quod quinque antiqui 
moduli exiles et velut puncta, quibus olim aqua cum 
exigua esset dividebatur, in unam fistulam coacti 
sint; qui Vitruvium et plumbarios, ab eo quod 
plumbea lammina plana quinque digitorum latitudi- 
nem habens circumacta in rotundum hunc fistulae 
modulum efficiat. Sed hoc incertum est, quoniam 
cum circumagitur, sicut interiore parte adtrahitur, 
ita per illam, quae foras spectat, extenditur. Maxime 
probabile est, quinariam dictam a diametro quinque 
quadrantum, quae ratio in sequentibus quoque 


1 BC.; Apulia Scaliger. 


1 The Roman foot measured 11:6 English inches, 0:296 m. 

2 The difference between the areas of a square digit and a 
round digit whose diameter is equal to the side of the square 
digit is easily seen: ‘Ol. 

3 The quinaria was a measure not of volume but of 
pee be i.e. a8 much water as would flow through a pipe 
one and a quarter digits in diameter, constantly discharging 
under pressure. ‘‘A quinaria was about 5,000 or 6,000 


366 


AQUEDUCTS OF ROME, I. 24-25 


in most parts of Italy; inches are the standard 
in... Now the digit, by common understanding, 
is ṣẹ part of a foot ;! the inch 4, part. But pre- 
cisely as there is a difference between the inch and 
the digit, just so the standard of the digit itself 
is not uniform. One is called square; another, round. 
The square digit is larger than the round digit by 
3 of its own size, while the round is smaller than 
the square by 44 of its size, obviously because the 
corners are cut off.? 

Later on, an ajutage called a quinaria? came into 
use in theCity,to the exclusion of the former measures. 
This was based neither on the inch, nor on either 
of the digits, but was introduced, as some think, 
by Agrippa, or, as others believe, by plumbers at 
the instance of Vitruvius, the architect. Those who 
represent Agrippa as its inventor, declare it was so 
designated because five small ajutages or punctures, 
so to speak, of the old sort, through which water used 
to be distributed when the supply was scanty, were 
now united in one pipe. Those who refer it to 
Vitruvius and the plumbers, declare that it was 
so named from the fact that a flat sheet of lead 
5 digits wide, made up into a round pipe, forms this 
ajutage. But this is indefinite, because the plate, 
when made up into a round pipe, will be extended 
on the exterior surface and contracted on the 
interior surface. The most probable explanation is 
that the quinaria * received its name from having a 
diameter of 5 of a digit, a standard which holds in 


United States gallons per twenty-four hours, plus or minus 
2,000 or 3,000 gallons, according to circumstances, favourable 
or unfavourable ” (Herschel). 

4 i. e. ‘a fiver.” 


367 


SEXTUS JULIUS FRONTINUS 


modulis usque ad vicenariam durat, diametro per 
singulos adiectione singulorum quadrantum crescente: 
ut in senaria, quae sex quadrantes in diametro habet, 
et septenaria, quae septem, et deinceps simili incre- 
mento usque ad vicenariam. 

26. Omnis autem modulus colligitur aut diametro 
aut perimetro aut areae mensura, ex quibus et 
capacitas apparet. Differentiam unciae, digiti quad- 
rati et digiti rotundi, et ipsius quinariae ut facilius 
dinoscamus, utendum est substantia quinariae, qui 
modulus et certissimus et maxime receptus est. 
Unciae ergo modulus habet diametri digitum unum 
et trientem digiti; capit plus, quam quinaria, 
quinariae octava, hoc est sescuncia quinariae et 
scripulis tribus et besse scripuli. Digitus quadratus in 
rotundum redactus habet diametri digitum unum et 
digiti sescunciam sextulam ; capit quinariae dextan- 
tem. Digitus rotundus habet diametri digitum unum; 
capit quinariae septuncem semunciam sextulam. 

27. Ceterum moduli, qui a quinaria oriuntur, 
duobus generibus incrementum accipiunt. Est unum, 
cum ipsa multiplicatur, id est eodem lumine plures 
quinariae includuntur,,in quibus secundum adiec- 
tionem quinariarum amplitudo luminis crescit. Est 


1 (Cf, 38 ff. 

? Frontinus's fractions and the symbols which represent 
them are as follows. The total value in each case is the sum 
of the various members. 


Uncia,  $4;--or: Bes, à4, S= 
Sextans, 4, —orZ Dodrans, 4, S =— 
Quadrans, +, —=—or:- Dextans, 412, S == 
Triens, $ —-—or:: Deunx, #4, S——— 
Quincunx, 44, = = — Semuncia, F'(A) S or L 
Semissis, 3, S Scripulus, sts, 2 
Septunx, 7, S — 

368 


AQUEDUCTS OF ROME, I. 25-27 


the following ajutages also up to the 20-pipe, the 
diameter of each pipe increasing by the addition 
of + of a digit. For example the 6-pipe is six 
quarters in diameter, a 7-pipe seven quarters, and 
so on by a uniform increase up to a 20-pipe. 

Every ajutage, now, is gauged either by its 
diameter or circumference, or by its area of clear 
cross-section, from any of which factors its capa- 
city becomes evident. That we may distinguish 
the more readily between the inch ajutage, the 
square digit, the circular digit, and the quinaria 
itself, use must be made of the value of the quinaria, 
the ajutage which is most accurately determined 
and best known. Now the inch ajutage, has a 
diameter of 14 digits! Its capacity is [slightly] 
more than 1i quinariae, i.e. 14 twelfths of a quinaria 
plus 535 plus $ of zgg more. The square digit, 
reduced to the circle is 1 digit plus 14 twelfths 
of a digit plus ;,!, in diameter; its capacity is 19 of 
a quinaria. The circular digit is 1 digit in diameter ; 
its capacity is 45, plus 4 twelfth plus ; of a 
quinaria.? 

Now the ajutages which are derived from the 
quinaria, increase on two principles. One principle 
is that the quinaria itself is taken a given number 
of times, i.e. in one orifice the equivalent of several 
quinariae is included, in which case the size of 
the orifice increases according to the increase in the 
number of quinariae. This principle is regularly 


He also uses Sescuncia, 14 X 7s, (or 3) ; Duella, 4 ; Sicilicus, 
il ; and Sextula, 7;; and depends on combinations of these 
to express exact terms.  Owing to corruptions in text, 
Frontinuss figures are often at variance with obvious 
facts. 


369 


VOI.. 1. B B 


SEXTUS JULIUS FRONTINUS 


autem fere tum in usu, cum plures quinariae impe- 
tratae, ne rivus saepius convulneretur, una fistula 
excipiuntur in castellum, ex quo singuli suum modum 
recipiunt. 

28. Alterum genus est, quotiens non ad quinaria- 
rum necessitatem fistula incrementum capit, sed ad 
diametri sui mensuram, secundum quod et nomen 
accipit et capacitatem ampliat: ut puta quinaria, 
cum adiectus est ei ad diametrum quadrans, senariam 
facit. Nec iam in solidum capacitatem ampliat ; capit 
enim quinariam unam et quincuncem sicilicum. Et 
deinceps eadem ratione quadrantibus diametro adiec- 
tis, ut supra dictum est, crescunt septenaria, octonaria 
usque ad vicenariam. 

29. Subsequitur illa ratio, quae constat ex numero 
digitorum quadratorum, qui area, id est lumine, 
cuiusque moduli continentur, a quibus et nomen 
fistulae accipiunt. Nam quae habet areae, id est 
luminis in rotundum coacti, digitos quadratos viginti 
quinque, vicenum quinum appellatur: similiter tri- 
cenaria et deinceps pari incremento quinorum digi- 
torum quadratorum usque ad centenum vicenum. 

30. In vicenaria fistula, quae in confinio utriusque 
rationis posita est, utraque ratio paene congruit. 


1 Frontinus merely means that, instead of tapping the 
main conduit for individual consumers, the Romans delivered 
a given number of quinariae to a reservoir, from which the 
water was delivered to the consumer. 

2 [t seems advisable to restate, for clearness’ sake, the two 
principles of increase referred to by Frontinus. In the first 
class we have pipes, whose capacity is some multiple of the 
quinaria. In the second class, we have an ascending series 
of pipes each of which increases beyond the next smaller by 
a diameter of l inch. In other words the first class is 


379 


AQUEDUCTS OF ROME, I. 27-30 


employed, whenever several quinariae are delivered 
by one pipe and received in a reservoir, from which 
consumers receive their individual supply,—this 
being done in order that the conduit may not be 
tapped too often.! 

The second principle is followed, whenever the 
pipe does not increase according to some necessary 
multiple of quinariae, but according to the size of 
diameters, in conformity with which principle they 
enlarge their capacity and receive their names; as 
for example, when a quarter [of a digit] is added to 
the diameter of a quinaria, we get as a result the 
senaria,? but its capacity is not increased by a whole 
quinaria, for it contains a quinaria plus 45, plus 75. 
So on, by adding successive quarters of a digit to 
the diameter, as was said above, we get by gradual 
increases, a 7-pipe (septenaria), an 8-pipe (octonaria), 
and up to the 20-pipe (vicenaria). 

After that? we have the method of gauging which 
is based on the number of square digits contained 
in the cross-section, that is, the orifice of each 
ajutage, from which number of square digits the 
pipes also get their names. Thus those which in 
cross-section, that is, in circular orifice, have 25 
square digits, are called 25-pipes. Similarly we 
have the 30-pipe (£ricenaria), and so on, by a regular 
increase of 5 square digits, up to the 120-pipe. 

In the case of the 20-pipe, which is on the border 
line between the two methods of gauging,* the 
two methods almost coincide. For according to the 


based on multiples of volume; the second on slight increases 
in diameters. 
3 i.e. for the pipes above the 20-pipe. 
* i.e. those mentioned in 28 and 29. 
371 
BB 2 


SEXTUS JULIUS FRONTINUS 


Nam habet secundum eam computationem, quae in 
antecedentibus modulis servanda est, in diametro 
quadrantes viginti, cum diametri eiusdem digiti 
quinque sint; et secundum eorum modulorum ra- 
tionem, qui sequuntur, aream habet digitorum 
quadratorum exiguo minus viginti. 

31. Ratio fistularum quinariarum usque ad cente- 
num vicenum per omnes modulos ita se habet, ut 
ostendimus, et omni genere inita constat sibi. 
Convenit et cum is modulis, qui in commentariis 
invictissimi et piissimi principis positi et confirmati 
sunt. Sive itaque ratio sive auctoritas sequenda est, 
utroque commentariorum moduli praevalent. Sed 
aquarii cum manifestae rationi in pluribus consentiant, 
in quattuor modulis novaverunt, duodenaria et 
vicenaria et centenaria et centenum vicenum. 

32. Et duodenariae quidem nec magnus error nec 
usus frequens est. Cuius diametro adiecerunt digiti 
semunciam sicilicum, capacitatiquinariae quadrantem. 
In reliquis autem tribus modulis plus deprenditur. 
Vicenariam exiguiorem faciunt diametro digiti se- 
misse et semuncia, capacitate quinariis tribus et 
quadrante et semuncia, quo modulo plerumque 
erogatur. Centenaria autem et centenum vicenum, 
quibus adsidue accipiunt, non minuuntur sed augentur. 
Diametro enim centenariae adiciunt digiti bessem et 
semunciam, capacitati quinarias decem semissem 
semunciam, Centenum vicenum diametro adiciunt 
digitos tres septuncem semunciam sicilicum, capaci- 
tati quinarias sexaginta sex sextantem. 


1 By successive additions of a quarter of a digit to the 
diameter of a quinaria, the diameter of the vicenaria becomes 
five digits or twenty quarter digits. The number of square 
dpi in the cross section, therefore, would be s(£$)! = 19:6 
(almost twenty) square digits. 


372 


AQUEDUCTS OF ROME, I. 30-32 


reckoning to be used in the first-named set of 
ajutages, it is twenty quarter digits in diameter, inas- 
much as its diameter is 5 digits; while according to 
the computation to be applied to the higher ajutages, 
it has an area of 20 square digits, less a fraction.! 

The gauging of the entire series of ajutages from 
the 5-pipe (quinaria) up to the 120-pipe, is determined 
in the way I have explained, and in each class the 
principle adopted is adhered to for that class. 
It conforms also to the ajutages set down and 
verified in the records of our most puissant and 
patriotic emperor.? Whether, therefore, computa- 
tion or authority is to be followed, on either ground 
the ajutages of the records are of greater weight. 
But the water-men, while they conform to the 
obvious reckoning in most ajutages, have made 
deviation in the case of four of them, namely: the 
12-, 20-, 100-, and 120-pipe. 

In case of the 12-pipe, the error is not great, nor 
is its use frequent. They have added 4 plus 7; to 
its diameter, and to its capacity 1 of a quinaria. A 
greater discrepancy is detected in case of the three 
remaining ajutages. These water-men diminish the 
20-pipe in its diameter by 4 plus , of a digit, its 
capacity by 3 quinariae plus 1 plus j';; and common 
use is made of this ajutage for delivery. But in 
case of the 100-pipe and 120-pipe, through which 
they? regularly receive water, the pipes are not 
diminished but enlarged! For to the diameter of 
the 100-pipe they add 2 plus ., of a digit, and to 
the capacity, 10 quinariae plus $ plus +4. To the 
diameter of the 120-pipe they add 3 digits plus 4*, 
plus ,'; plus 7, ; to its capacity, 66 quinariae plus 1. 


2 Trajan is meant. 3 The water-men. 


373 


SEXTUS JULIUS FRONTINUS 


33. Ita dum aut vicenariae, qua subinde erogant, 
detrahunt aut centenariae et centenum vicenum 
adiciunt, quibus semper accipiunt, intercipiuntur in 
centenaria quinariae viginti septem, in centenum 
vicenum quinariae octoginta sex. Quod cum ratione 
approbetur, re quoque ipsa manifestum est, Nam 
et vicenaria, quam Caesar pro quinariis sedecim 
assignat, non plus erogant quam tredecim, et ex 
centenaria, quam ampliaverunt eque centenum vice- 
num certum est illos non erogare nisi ad artiorem 
numerum, quia Caesar secundum suos commentarios, 
cum ex quaque centenaria explevit quinarias octoginta 
unam semissem, item ex centenum vicenum quinarias 
nonaginta octo, tamquam exhausto modulo desinit 
distribuere. 

34. In summa moduli sunt XX quinque. Omnes 
consentiunt et rationi et commentariis, exceptis his 
quattuor, quos aquarii novaverunt. Omnia autem 
quae mensura continentur, certa et immobilia con- 
gruere sibi debent; ita enim universitati ratio 
constabit. Et quemadmodum verbi gratia sextarii 
ratio ad cyathos, modii vero et ad sextarios et ad 


1 Frontinus’s reckoning is as follows: The capacity of a 
20-pipe is 16,4 quinariae (cf. 46) ; the capacity of the 100-pipe 
is 8125, quinariae (cf. 62) ; the capacity of five 20-pipes, there- 
fore, practically equals that of one 100-pipe. Now, if the 
gain resulting from selling by short measure was 374 quinariae 
in one 20-pipe, it will have been 1631 quinariae in five 20- 
pipes (or one 100-pipe). In the same way, since the capacity 
of the 120-pipe is 97} qwinariae (cf. 63), it is equal to six 
20-pipes, and the gain in this case will have been 192 quin- 
ariae. But by the increase of the pipes through which they 
receive water (cf. 32), the gain was 1011 quinariae in case of the 
100-pipe, and 664 quínariae in case of the 120-pipe ; so that 
by adding the gains made at both ends of the bargain, we 


374 


AQUEDUCTS OF ROME, I. 33-34 


Thus by diminishing the size of the 20-pipe by 
which they constantly deliver, and enlarging the 100- 
and 120-pipes, by which they always receive, they 
steal in case of the 100-pipe 27 quinariae, and in 
case of the 120-pipe 86 quinariae.t While this is 
proved by computation, it is also obvious from the 
facts. For from the 20-pipe, which Caesar rates? 
at 16 quinariae, they do not deliver more than 13; 
and it is equally certain that from the 100-pipe 
and the 120-pipe, which they have expanded, they 
deliver only up to a limited amount, since Caesar, 
as his records show, has made delivery according 
to his grant, when out of each 100-pipe he 
furnishes 814 qwinariae, and similarly out of a 
120-pipe, 98. 

In all there are 25 ajutages. They all conform 
to their computed and recorded capacities, barring 
these four which the water-men have altered. But 
everything embraced under the head of mensura- 
tion ought to be fixed, unchanged, and constant. 
For only so will any special computation accord 
with general principles. Just as a seztarius,* for 
example, has a regular ratio to a cyathus,> and 


arrive at an aggregate gain of 27 quinariae in case of the 100- 
pipe, and of 85}4, practically 86, quinariae in case of the 
120-pipe. 

2 (Cf. 31. 

3 Literally: ‘‘stops distributing, as though the ajutage 
had run dry." Whoever wished to draw water for private 
uses had to seek for a grant and bring to the water- 
commissioner a writing from the sovereign (cf. 103, 105). 
Now, the records show that Caesar's grants from a 100-pipe 
amounted only to 81 quinariae, and from a 120-pipe to only 
98 quinariae, leaving a surplus to be accounted for. 

* The Roman pint. 5 About a gill. 


375 


SEXTUS JULIUS FRONTINUS 


cyáthos respondet; ita et quinariarum multiplicatio 
in amplioribus modulis servare consequentiae suae 
regulam debet. Alioqui cum in erogatorio modulo 
minus invenitur, in acceptorio plus, apparet non 
errorem esse sed fraudem. 

85. Meminerimus omnem aquam, quotiens ex 
altiore loco venit et intra breve spatium in castellum 
cadit, non tantum respondere modulo suo sed etiam 
exuberare ; quotiens vero ex.humiliore, id est minore 
pressura, longius ducitur, segnitia ductus modum 
quoque deperdere ; et ideo secundum hanc rationem 
aut onerandam esse erogatione aut relevandam. 

36. Sed et calicis positio habet momentum. In 
rectum et ad libram conlocatus modum servat, ad 
cursum aquae oppositus et devexus amplius rapit, ad 
latus praetereuntis aquae conversus et supinus, id est 
ad haustum pronior, segniter et exiguum sumit, Est 
autem calix modulus aeneus, qui rivo vel castello 
induitur; huic fistulae applicantur. Longitudo eius 
habere debet digitos non minus duodecim, lumen 
capacitatem quanta imperata fuerit. ^ Excogitatus 
videtur, quoniam rigor aeris difficilior ad flexum non 
temere potest laxari vel coartari. 

37. Formulas modulorum qui sunt omnes viginti 
et quinque subieci, quamvis in usu quindecim tantum 
frequentes sint, derectas ad rationem de qua locuti 


1 The Roman peck. 

2 i.e. to make the pipe discharge the normal quantity 
allotted to a pipe of that size. 

3 i.e. in any particular instance. 


376 


AQUEDUCTS OF ROME, I. 34-37 


similarly a modius! to both a cyathus and sextarius, so 
also the multiplication of the quinariae in case of the 
larger ajutages must follow a regular progression. 
However, when less is found in the delivery ajutages 
and more in the receiving ajutages, it is obvious that 
there is not error, but fraud. 

Let us remember that every stream of water, 
whenever it comes from a higher point and flows 
into a reservoir after a short run, not only comes up 
to its measure, but actually yields a surplus; but 
whenever it comes from a lower point, that is, 
under less pressure, and is conducted a longer 
distance, it shrinks in volume, owing to the resist- 
ance of its conduit; and that, therefore, on this 
principle it needs either a check or a help in its 
discharge? 

But the position of the calix is also a factor. 
Placed at right angles and level, it maintains the 
normalquantity. Setagainstthe current of the water, 
and sloping downward, it will take in more. If it 
slopes to one side, so that the water flows by, and if 
it is inclined with the current, that is, is less favourably 
placed for taking in water, it will receive the water 
slowly and in scant quantity. The caliz, now, is a 
bronze ajutage, inserted into a conduit or reservoir, 
and to it the service pipes are attached. Its length 
ought not to be less than 12 digits, while its orifice 
ought to have such capacity as is specified. Bronze 
seems to have been selected, since, being hard, 
it is more difficult to bend, and is not easily ex- 
panded or contracted. 

I have described below all the 25 ajutages that 
there are (although only 15 of them are in use), 
gauging them according to the method of com- 


377 


SEXTUS JULIUS FRONTINUS 


sumus, emendatis quattuor, quos aquarii novaverant. 
Secundum quod et fistulae omnes, quae opus facient, 
derigi debent aut, si haec fistulae manebunt, ad 
quinarias quot capient computari. Qui non sint in 
usu moduli, in ipsis est adnotatum. 

38. Uncia habet diametri digitum unum et trientem 
digiti; capit plus quam quinaria, quinariae sescuncia 
et scripulis tribus et besse scripuli. Digitus quadratus 
in latitudine et longitudine aequalis est. Digitus 
quadratus in rotundum redactus habet diametri 
digitum unum et digiti sescunciam sextulam, capit 
quinariae dextantem. Digitus rotundus habet dia- 
metri digitum unum, capit quinariae septuncem et 
semiunciam sextulam.! 

39. Fistula quinaria: diametri digitum unum — — 
perimetri digitos tres S ——-—— — 9 III, capit qui- 
nariam unam. 

40. Fistula senaria: diametri digitum unum semis, 
perimetri digitos III S — £9 II, capit quinariam 
I —— — 5 VII. 

41. Fistula septenaria: diametri digitum IS:., 
perimetri digitos V S, capit quinariam I S — — — £; 
in usu non est. 

42. Fistula octonaria: diametri digitos duos, peri- 
metri digitos sex — — 3 X, caput quinarias II S £9 
quinque. 

43. Fistula denaria: diametri digitos duos et semis, 
perimetri digitos septem S : : 3 VII, capit quinarias 
IIII. 

44. Fistula duodenaria: diametri digitos III, peri- 
metri digitos VIII — — — 3 III, capit quinarias 
quinque S — — 3 III ; in usu non est. Apud aquarios 


f 1 Bennett ; sextam CB, 
378 


AQUEDUCTS OF ROME, I. 37-44 


putation spoken of,! and correcting the four which 
the water-men have altered. To these specifications 
all ajutages in use ought to conform, or if those four 
remain in use, they ought to be gauged by the number 
of quinariae which they contain. The ajutages that 
are not in use are so referred to. 

The inch ajutage? is 1 digit plus 4 of a digit in 
diameter; it contains more than a quinaria by 
14 twelfths of a quinaria plus 424 plus $ of syp- 
The square digit has the same height as breadth. 
The square digit converted into its equivalent circle 
is 1 digit plus 14 twelfths of a digit plus , in 
diameter; it measures 12 of a quinaria. The circular 
digit is 1 digit in diameter; and measures 47; plus a 
4 twelfth plus 4! of a quinaria in area. 

The quinaria : 1 digit plus 42; in diameter; 3 digits 
plus 4 plus 55, plus 4,24 in circumference ; it has a 
capacity of 1 quinaria. 

The 6-pipe: 14 digits i in diameter; 4 digits plus 4 
plus 7 plus yy plus 725 m circumference ; it has a 
capacity of 1 quinaria plus 45, plus HE 

The 7-pipe: 1 digit plus 4 plus 4*5; in diameter; 
5 digits plus $ in DEN it has a capacity 
of 1 quinaria, plus 4 plus ;* 5 plus 4j; is not in use. 

m 8-pipe: 2 digits in “diameter ; 6 digits plus 

is plus ys% in circumference ; : it has a capacity of 
2. quinariae plus $ plus + plus zig 

The 10-pipe: 24 digits i in diameter ; ; 7 digits plus 
$ plus 45 plus sg in circumference; it has a 
capacity of 4 quinariae. 

The 12-pipe: 3 digits in diameter; 9 digits plus 
iz plus 42g in cireumference ; it has a capacity of 
5 quinariae plus 4 plus 42; plus ;24; is not in use. 


1 Cf, 26 ff. ? Cf. 26 
379 


SEXTUS JULIUS FRONTINUS 


habebat diametri digitos III £ 9 VI, capacitatis qui- 
narias sex. 

45. Fistula quinum denum: diametri digitos 
III S — —, perimetri digitos XI S — — 9 X, capit 
quinarias novem. 

46. Fistula vicenaria: diametri digitos quinque 
£ 3, perimetri digitos XV S :: 3 VI, capit quinarias 
sedecim — — £. Apud aquarios habebat diametri 
digitos IIII S, capacitatis quinarias.XIII. 

47. Fistula vicenum quinum: diametri digitos 
quinque S- £9 V, perimetri digitos decem et septem 
S — .£ ) VII, capit quinarias XX Z — 9 VIIII ; in 
usu non est. 

48. Fistula tricenaria: diametri digitos sex — 9 III, 
perimetri digitos decem et novem — Z — , capit 
quinarias viginti quattuor — Z — 3 quinque. 

49. Fistula tricenum quinum : diametri digitos sex 
S — 2 II, perimetri digitos XX SZZ — £ 9 IIII, 
capit quinarias XXVIII S 9 III; in usu non est 

50. Fistula quadragenaria: diametri digitos septem 
— £ JIII, perimetri digitos XXII — — — , capit 
quinarias XXXII S —. 

5l. Fistula quadragenum quinum : diametri digitos 
septem S £ J octo, perimetri digitos XXIII S — — £, 
capit quinarias XXXVI S — £ j octo; in usu non est. 

52. Fistula quinquagenaria: diametri digitos septem 
SZZ — 412 quinque, perimetri digitos XXV £4 
VII, capit quinarias XL SZ £9V. 

53. Fistula quinquagenum quinum: diametri digitos 
octo — — 2 decem, perimetri digitos XXVI — — £, 


380 


AQUEDUCTS OF ROME, I. 44-53 


But with the water-men it measured 3 digits plus 
zz plus zg, in diameter, containing 6 quinariae. 

The 15-pipe: 3 digits plus 4 plus 4. 3; in diameter ; 
11 digits plus $ plus 3, plus zag in circumference ; 
it has a capacity of 9 quinartae. 

The 20-pipe: 5 digits plus 1, plus 54, in diameter; 
15 digits plus $ plus 4$; plus 58, in circumference; 
it has a capacity of 16 quinariae plus 4; plus yr 
With the water-men it measured 4 digits plus 4 in 
diameter, holding 13 quinartae. 

The 25-pipe: 5 digits plus 4 plus ,', plus ;'; plus 
zis in diameter; 17 digits plus $ plus 44 plus 5, 
plus zg, in circumference’; it has a capacity of 20 
quinariae plus 4 yz plus ?;35; is not in = 

The 30-pipe : 6 digits plus ,2, plus ,3, in diameter; 
19 digits plus 45 in circumterencé it has a capacity 
of 24 quinariae plus 4& plus +85. 

The 35-pipe: 6 digits plus 4 plus yy plus z zee i in 
diameter; 20 digits plus 4 plus 45; plus 2 pz plus zés 
in circumference ; it has a capacity of 28 quinariae 
plus $ plus 535; is not in use. 

The 40-pipe: 7 digits plus y: qz plus + plus 424 in 
diameter ; 22 digits plus 45 in circumference; it has 
a capacity of 32 quinariae plus 4 plus 45. 

The 45-pipe: 7 digits plus 4 plus -4 plus z$ in 
diameter; 23 digits plus 4 plus 42; plus 54 in cir- 
cumference ; it has a capacity of 36 quinartiae plus $ 
plus 4! y plus 2 z4 plus ;$5; is not in use. 

The. DO-pipe: 7 digits plus 4 plus 7 3% plus z ZT plus 
z$g in diameter; 25 digits plus 4'; plus yf, in cir- 
cumterenee; : it has a capacity of 40 qutnariae plus 4 
plus yy plus 7; plus sgg. 

The 55-pipe: 8 digits plus 4$, plus ji, in dia- 
meter; 26 digits plus 44, plus 4; in circumference ; 

381 


SEXTUS JULIUS FRONTINUS 


capit quinarias XLIIII S — — £ II; in usu non 
est. 

54. Fistula sexagenaria: diametri digitos VIII 
SZ £9 octo, perimetri digitos XXVII Z Z — £, 
capit quinarias XL octo SZ Z9 XI. 


55. Fistula sexagenum quinum: diametri digitos 
novem — 9 III, perimetri digitos XX octo S — , 
capit quinarias quinquaginta duas S Z — £ 3 octo; 
in usu non est. 

56. Fistula septuagenaria: diametri digitos novem 
— —— — > sex, perimetri digitos XXIX S Z, capit 
quinarias LVII 3 V. 

57. Fistula septuagenum quinum: diametri digitos 
novem S Z — 3 sex, perimetri digitos XXX S 9 
VIII, capit quinarias LXI — 9 II; in usu non est. 

58. Fistula octogenaria: diametri digitos decem 
— 23 II, perimetri digitos XXXI S Z £, capit qui- 
narias LXV Z. 

59. Fistula octogenum quinum: diametri digitos 


decem ZL Z £ J septem, perimetri digitos XXXII 
S Z9 III, capit quinarias LXVIIII — —; in usu 
non est. 


60. Fistula nonagenaria : diametri digitos decem 
SZ 9 X, perimetri digitos triginta tres S — £ 9 I, 
capit quinarias septuaginta tres Z — £ 9 V. 

61. Fistula nonagenum quinum: diametri digitos 
X S Z — £9 VIII, perimetri digitos XXXIIII 


S £, capit quinarias LXXVII Z Z £ 9 Il; in usu 
non est. 

62. Fistula centenaria: diametri digitos XI Z — 9 
VIII, perimetri digitos XXXV Z Z — £, capit 


382 


AQUEDUCTS OF ROME, I. 53-62 


it has a capacity of 44 quinariae plus $ plus 45; plus 
zi plus 424 ; is not in use. 

The 60-pipe: 8 digits plus 4 plus 44; plus ;'; plus 
z;$5 in diameter; 27 digits plus 45 plus 4 in cir- 
cumference ; it has a capacity of 48 quinariae plus 4 
plus 45, plus 4i. 

The 65-pipe: 9 digits plus 4; plus 3, in dia- 
meter; 28 digits plus 4 plus ṣẹ in circumference ; 
it has a capacity of 52 quinariae plus 4 plus ;% plus 
sz plus zy; is not in use. 

The 70-pipe: 9 digits plus 45, plus 5%, in dia- 
meter; 29 digits plus 4 plus 47, in circumference ; 
it has a capacity of 57 quznariae plus 555. 

The 75-pipe: 9 digits plus 4 plus 44; plus 4$, in 
diameter; 30 digits plus 4 plus 42, plus 5%, in cir- 
cumterenee ; it has a capacity of 61 quinariae plus 
ys plus 52,5; is not in use. 

The 80-pipe: 10 digits plus 4! 1z plus 52, in dia- 
meter; 31 digits plus } plus plus ji in cir- 
cumference ; it has a capacity of 65 guinartae plus i 

The 85-pipe: 10 digits plus 4t, plus z oT plus 285 
in diameter; 32 digits plus 3 plus 5; plus 5$, in 
circumference it has a capacity of 69 quinariae plus 
15; is not in use. 

The 90-pipe: 10 digits plus 4 plus iz plus zug in 
diameter; 33 digits plus } plus j'; plus 4; plus 735 
in circumference ; it has a capacity of 73 quinariae 
plus & plus 27 plus z$;. 

The 95-pipe: 10 digits plus 4 plus 45 plus 4'; plus 
z$g in diameter; 34 digits plus $ plus 5, in cir- 
cumference; it has a capacity of 77 quinariae plus 
1z plus 4 plus zsg; is not in use. 

The 100-pipe: 11 digits plus jg plus s$s in 
diameter; 35 digits plus 45, plus y in circumference ; 


383 


SEXTUS JULIUS FRONTINUS 


quinarias octoginta unam Z Z — 3 X. Apud 
aquarios habebat diametri digitos XII, capacitatis 
quinarias nonaginta II. 


63. Fistula centenum vicenum: diametri digitos 


duodecim — Z 3 VI, perimetri digitos XXXVIII 
S — —,capit quinarias LXXXXVII S Z —. Apud 
aquarios habebat diametri digitos XVI, capacitatis 
quinarias centum sexaginta tres S Z Z —, qui 


modus duarum centenariarum est. 


384 


AQUEDUCTS OF ROME, I. 62-63 


it has a capacity of 81 quinariae plus 45 plus zp 
With the water-men it had a diameter of 12 digits ; 
having a capacity of 92 quinariae. 

The 120-pipe: 12 digits plus Ts plus zég in 
diameter ; 38 digits plus $ plus 45; in circumference ; ; 
it has a capacity of 97 quinariae plus 4 plus $}. 
With the water-men it had a diameter of 16 digits, 
having a capacity of 163 quinariae plus 4 plus $, 
which is the measure of two 100-pipes. 


385 


VOL. l. CC 


Digitized by Google 


BOOK II 


LIBER ALTER 


64. Persecutus ea quae de modulis dici fuit neces- 
sarium, nunc ponam, quem modum quaeque aqua, ut 
principum commentariis comprehensum est, usque ad 
nostram curam habere visa sit quantumque erogaverit ; 
deinde quem ipsi scrupulosa inquisitione praeeunte 
providentia optimi diligentissimique Nervae principis 
invenerimus. Fuerunt ergo in commentariis in uni- 
verso quinariarum decem duo milia septingentae 
quinquaginta quinque, in erogatione decem quattuor 
milia decem et octo: plus in distributione quam in 
accepto computabatur quinariis mille ducentis sexa- 
ginta tribus. Huius rei admiratio, cum praecipuum 
officii opus in exploranda fide aquarum atque copia 
crederem, non mediocriter me convertit ad scru- 
tandum, quemadmodum amplius erogaretur, quam 
in patrimonio, ut ita dicam, esset. Ante omnia 
itaque capita ductuum metiri adgressus sum, sed 
longe, id est circiter quinariarum decem milibus, 
ampliorem quam in commentariis modum inveni, ut 
per singulas demonstrabo. 

65. Appiae in commentariis adscriptus est modus 


1 Trajan, not Nerva, is meant. From the allusions in 
chapter 93 to Caesar Nerva Trajan Augustus, and in 102 to 
Divus Nerva, it is concluded that this work which was begun 
under Nerva was finished under Trajan. 

2 (Cf. 31. 3 Cf. footnote to 74. 

* In this and several following paragraphs, Frontinus 
points out various discrepancies which existed in the 
accounting for the different water supplies. These are (1) 
the difference between the amount of water found by actual 
measurement to exist, and the amount attributed to each 


388 


BOOK II 


HaviNc detailed those facts which it was necessary 
to state with reference to the ajutages, I will now 
set down what discharge each aqueduct, according 
to the imperial records, was thought to have up to the 
time of my administration, and also how much it 
actually did deliver; then the true measure, which 
I reached by careful investigation, acting on the 
suggestion of that best and most industrious emperor, 
Nerva! Now there were, in the aggregate, 12,755 
quinariae set down in the records,” but 14,018 quinariae 
actually delivered ; that is, 1,263 more quinartae were 
reported as deliveredthan were reckoned as received.? 
Since I considered it the most important function 
of my office to determine the facts concerning the 
water-supply, my astonishment at this state of affairs 
stirred me profoundly and led me to investigate 
how it happened that more was being delivered than 
belonged to the property, so to speak. Accordingly, 
I first of all undertook measurements of the intakes 
of the conduits and discovered a total supply far 
greater—that is, by about 10,000 quinariae—than I 
found in the records, as I shall explain in connection 
with each aqueduct. 

In the records Appia is credited with 841 quinariae.* 


water supply in the imperial records; (2) the difference 
between the amount of water recorded as received and that 
delivered ; (3) the difference between the amount proved by 
measurement and that delivered. In some cases, where the 
waters were received in catch-basins, or reservoirs (cf. 19), 
he computes separately the amounts lost before the water 
reached the basin, and that lost afterwards, 


389 


SEXTUS JULIUS FRONTINUS 


quinariarum — octingentarum quadraginta unius. 
Cuius aquae ad caput inveniri mensura non potuit, 
quoniam ex duobus rivis constat. Ad Gemellos 
tamen, qui locus est infra Spem Veterem, ubi 
iungitur cum ramo Augustae, inveni altitudinem 
aquae pedum quinque, latitudinem pedis unius do- 
drantis; fiunt areae pedes octo dodrans, centenariae 
viginti duae et quadragenaria, quae efficiunt qui- 
narias mille octingentas viginti quinque; amplius 
quam commentarii habent quinariis nongentis octo- 
ginta quattuor. Erogabat quinarias septingentas 
quattuor; minus quam in commentariis adscribitur 
quinariis centum triginta septem, et adhuc minus 
quam ad Gemellos mensura respondet quinariis 
mile centum viginti una. Intercidit tamen ali- 
quantum e ductus vitio, qui cum sit depressior, non 
facile manationes ostendit, quas esse ex.eo apparet 
quod in plerisque urbis partibus probata aqua 
observatur, quae ex ea manat. Sed et quasdam 
fistulas intra urbem inlicitas deprehendimus. Extra 
urbem autem propter pressuram librae, cum sit 
infra terram ad caput pedibus quinquaginte, nullam 
accipit iniuriam. 

66. Anioni Veteri adscriptus est in commentariis 
modus quinariarum mille quingentarum ! quadraginta 
unius. Ad caput inveni quattuor milia trecentas 
nonaginta octo praeter eum modum qui in proprium 


! B; quadringentarum C. 


1 Cf. 5 

2 The area of a cross section of the Appia would be 2,240 
square digits (cf. 24). The area of twenty-two 100-pipes 
would be 2,199 square digits (cf. 62), and that of one 
40-pipe would be 39:98 square digits (cf. 50), so that the 
area of a cross section of the Appia would practically equal 


390 


AQUEDUCTS OF ROME, II. 65-66 


A gauging of this aqueduct could not be taken at 
the intake, since there it consists of two channels. 
But at The Twins, which is below Spes Vetus,! 
where it joins with a branch of Augusta, I found 
a depth of water of 5 feet, and a width of 12 feet, 
making an area of 8$ square feet,? twenty-two 100- 
pipes plus a 40-pipe, which makes 1,825 quinariae,— 
more than the records have it by 984 quinariae. It 
was delivering 704 quinariae, —131 quinariae less than 
credited in the records; and, furthermore, 1,121 
quimanae less than given by the gauging at The 
Twins. A considerable amount of this, however, is 
lost by leaks in the conduit, which, being deeply 
buried, does not clearly exhibit them. And yet their 
presence is plainly indicated by the fact that in very 
many parts of the City excellent water is met with, 
which leaks from that aqueduct. But we also de- 
tected some illicit pipes within the City. Outside the 
City, however, on account of the depth of the level, 
which at the intake is 50 feet underground, the 
conduit suffers no depredations. 

Old Anio is credited in the records with the 
amount of 1,541 quinariae. At the intake I found 
4,398 quinariae, exclusive of the quantity which is 


the sum of the areas of the cross sections of these pipes. 
Now the capacity of twenty-two 100-pipes, 1,791:93 quinariae 
(cf. 62), added to that of one 40-pipe, 32°58 qu?nariae (cf. 50), 
gives approximately 1,825 qwinariae as the capacity of the 
Appia at that point. 

3 [n the Appia (1) actual measurements showed 1,825 
quinariae, the records called for 841 guinariae—a discrepancy 
of 984 quinariae ; (2) while the records credited 841 guinariae, 
.only 704 qwinariee were delivered, a discrepancy of 137 
quinariae ; (3) 1,825 quinarive were found by measurement, 
but only 704 were delivered, a discrepancy of 1,121 quénariae. 


391 


SEXTUS JULIUS FRONTINUS 


ductum Tiburtium derivatur, amplius quam in com- 
mentariis est quinariis duobus milibus octingentis 
quinquaginta septem. ^ Erogabantur antequam ad 
piscinam veniret quinariae ducentae sexaginta duae. 
Modus in piscina, qui per mensuras positas initur, 
efficit quinariarum duo milia trecentas sexaginta duas. 
Intercidebant ergo inter caput et piscinam quinariae 
mille septingentae septuaginta quattuor. Erogabat 
post piscinam quinarias mille trecentas quadraginta 
octo; amplius quam in commentariis conceptionis 
modum significari diximus quinariis sexaginta novem ; 
minus quam recipi in ductum post piscinam posuimus 
quinariis mille decem quattuor. Summa quae inter 
caput et piscinam et post piscinam .intercidebat 
quinariae duo milia septingentae octoginta octo, 
quod errore mensurae fieri suspicarer, nisi invenissem 
ubi averterentur. 

67. Marciae in commentariis adscriptus est modus 
quinariarum duum milium centum sexaginta duarum, 
Ad caput mensus inveni quinarias quattuor milia 
sexcentas nonaginta, amplius quam in commentariis 
est quinariis duobus milibus quingentis viginti octo. 
Erogabantur antequam ad piscinam perveniret qui- 
nariae nonaginta quinque, et dabantur in adiutorium 
Tepulae quinariae nonaginta duae, item in Anionem 
quinariae centum sexaginta quattuor. Summa quae 
erogabatur ante piscinam quinariae trecentae quin- 


1 Cf. 6. 

* Old Anio was received into a catch-basin. (1) The 
measurements at the intake showed 4,398 quinariac, the 
records credited 1,541 quinariae, a discrepancy of 2,857 


392 


AQUEDUCTS OF ROME, II. 66-67 


diverted into the special conduit of the Tiburtines,1— 
2,857 quinariae more than is recorded. There were 
distributed 262 quinariae, before the aqueduct reaches 
its settling-reservoir. The quantity at the reservoir, 
determined from the gauges placed there, was 2,362 
quinariae, so that 1,774 quinartae were lost between 
the intake and the reservoir. Down-stream from 
the settling-reservoir, 1,348 quinariae were delivered, 
—more than we have stated to be the capacity 
according to the records by 69 quinariae, but less 
than we have shown was received into the conduit 
from the settling-reservoir by 1,014 quinari«e. The 
total which was lost between the intake and the 
settling-reservoir, and below the settling-reservoir, 
amounted to 2,788 quinariae, which I should have 
suspected resulted from an error of measurement, 
had I not discovered where it was diverted.? 

In the records Marcia is credited with the quantity 
of 2,162 quimariae, Gauging it at the intake, I 
found 4,690 quinariae,—2,528  quinariae more than 
appear in the records. There were delivered, before 
it reaches the settling-reservoir, 95 quinariae; and 
92 quinariae were given to supplement Tepula; like- 
wise 164 to Anio. The total delivered before the 
settling-reservoir is reached, was 351 qutinariae, The 


quinariae ; (2) between the intake and the reservoir 262 
quinariae were distributed, and measurements at the 
reservoir showed 2,362 quinariae, revealing a loss of 1,774 
quinariae above the reservoir; (3) above and below the 
reservoir, there were delivered in all 1,610 quinariae, 69 
quinariae more than the records showed ; but since measure- 
ments at the reservoir found 2,362 quinariae, and only 
1,348 were delivered below that, 1,014 quinariae remained 
unaccounted for, and the loss above and below the reservoir 
totalled 2,788 quinariae. 


393 


SEXTUS JULIUS FRONTINUS 


quaginta una, Modus qui in piscina mensuris positis 
initur cum eo quod! circa piscinam ductum ? eodem 
canali in arcus excipitur, efficit quinarias duo milia 
nongentas quadraginta quattuor. Summa quae aut 
erogatur ante piscinam aut in arcus recipitur qui- 
nariarum tria milia ducentae nonaginta quinque; 
amplius quam in conceptis commentariorum positum 
est quinariis mille centum triginta tribus, minus, 
quam mensurae ad caput actae efficiunt quinariis 
mille trecentis nonaginta quinque.  Erogabat post 
piscinam quinarias mille octingentas quadraginta ; 
minus quam in commentariis conceptionis modum 
significari diximus quinariis ducentis viginti septem, 
minus quam ex piscina in arcus recipiuntur quinariis 
mille centum quattuor. Summa utraque quae inter- 
cidebat aut inter caput et piscinam aut post piscinam 
quinariarum duo milia ID, quas sicut in ceteris 
pluribus locis intercipi deprehendimus. Non enim 
eas cessare manifestum est et ex hoc quod ad caput 
praeter eam mensuram, quam comprehendisse nos 
capacitate ductus posuimus, effunduntur amplius 
trecentae quinariae. 

68. Tepulae in commentariis adscriptus est modus 
quinariarum quadringentarum. Huius aquae fontes 
nulli sunt ; venis quibusdam constabat, quae inter- 
ceptae sunt in Iulia, Caput ergo eius observandum 


! C; qui B. 3 C; ductus B. 


1 Marcia was received into a catch-basin. In the following 
computations, Frontinus sometimes includes and sometimes 
disregards the amounts given to Tepula and Anio. (1) The 
measurements at the intake showed 4,690 quinariae, the 
records credited 2,162 gquinariae, a discrepancy of 2,528 
quinariae; (2) between the intake and the reservoir 351 
quinariae were delivered (including those given to Tepula 
and Anio), and measurements at the reservoir showed 2,944 


394 


AQUEDUCTS OF ROME, II. 67—68 


quantity which is computed at the reservoir from 
the gauges set up there, along with what is carried 
around the reservoir and received in the same 
channel on arches, is 2,944 quinariae. The aggre- 
gate of what is delivered above the reservoir or 
is received on arches is 3,295 quinariae, —more than 
is set down in the scheduled capacity by 1,133 
quinariae, and less than given by the gaugings made 
at the intake by 1,395 quinariae. After passing the 
reservoir, it delivered 1,840 quinariae,——22'1 quinariae 
less than we said was set down in the scheduled 
capacity, and 1,104 quinariae less than is taken from 
the reservoir upon the arches. The aggregate of 
what was lost either between the intake and the 
reservoir or downstream from the reservoir, was 
2,499 quinariae, the diversion of which, as in case of 
the other aqueducts, we discovered at several places. 
For that there is no lack of water is manifest also 
from the fact that at the intake, besides the volume 
which we noted that we found from the capacity of 
the conduit, over 300 quinariae are wasted. 

Tepula is credited in the records with 400 
quinariae. This aqueduct has no springs; it con- 
sists only of some veins of water taken from Julia.? 
Its intake is therefore to be set down as beginning 


quinariae, thus revealing a loss of 1,395 quinariae above the 
reservoir; (3) above and below the reservoir, there were 
delivered in all 95 plus 1,840 quinariae (this does not take 
account of the contributions to Tepula and Anio), 227 fewer 
quinariae than the amount credited in the records ; and the 
amount delivered below the reservoir was 1,104 quinariae 
less than the amount measured at the reservoir. Since the 
amount at the intake was 4,690 quinariae, and the total 
distribution (including the amounts given to Tepula and 
Anio) amounted to 2,191 quinariae, there remained 2,499 
quinariae still unaccounted for. * Cf. 9, 19. 


395 


SEXTUS JULIUS FRONTINUS 


est a piscina Iuliae. Ex ea enim primum accipit 
quinarias centum nonaginta, deinde statim ex Marcia 
quinarias nonaginta duas, praeterea ex Anione Novo 
ad hortos Epaphroditianos quinarias centum sexa- 
ginta tres. Fiunt omnes quinariae quadringentae 
quadraginta quinque, amplius quam in commen- 
tariis quinariis quadraginta quinque, quae in 
erogatione comparent. 

69. Iuliae in commentariis adscriptus est modus 
quinariarum sexcentarum quadraginta novem. Ad 
caput mensura iniri non potuit, quoniam ex pluribus 
adquisitionibus constat, sed ad sextum ab urbe 
miliarium universa in piscinam recipitur, ubi modus 
eius manifestis mensuris efficit quinarias mille du- 
centas sex, amplius quam in commentariis quinariis 
quingentis quinquaginta septem. Praeterea accipit 
prope urbem post hortos Pallantianos ex Claudia 
quinarias centum sexaginta duas. Est omne Iuliae 
in acceptis quinariae mille trecentae sexaginta octo. 
Ex eo dat in Tepulam quinarias centum nonaginta, 
erogat suo nomine octingentas tres. Fiunt quas 
erogat quinariae nongentae nonaginta tres; amplius 
quam in commentariis habet quinariis trecentis 
quadraginta quattuor; minus quam in piscina 
habere posuimus ducentis decem tribus, quas ipsas 
apud eos, qui sine beneficiis principis usurpabant, 
deprehendimus. 

70. Virgini in commentariis adscriptus est modus 
quinariarum  sexcentarum quinquaginta duarum. 


1 That is, Tepula received and delivered 445 quinariae, 
while the records credited only 400. 

2 Julia was received into a catch-basin. (1) The measure- 
ments there taken showed its volume to be 1,206 quinariae, 


396 


AQUEDUCTS OF ROME, II. 68-70 


with the Julian reservoir, for from this it first 
receives 190 quinariae ; then immediately thereafter 
92 quinariae from Marcia, and further from New 
Anio at the Epaphroditian Gardens 163 quinariae. 
This makes in all 445 quinariae,—more than the 
records show by 45 quinariae,—which appear in the 
delivery.! 

Julia is credited in the records with a measure of 
649 quinariae, At the intake the gaugings could 
not be made, because the intake is composed of 
several tributaries. But at the sixth mile-stone 
from the City, Julia is wholly taken into the settling 
reservoir, at which place its volume, according to the 
plainly visible gauges, amounts to 1,206 quinariae,— 
more than set down in the records by 557 quinartae. 
Besides this, near the City, behind the Gardens 
of Pallas, it receives from Claudia 162 quinariae, 
making the whole number of quinariae received by 
Julia 1,368. Of this amount, it discharges 190 into 
Tepula, and delivers on its own account 803 quinariae ; 
from this we get a total of 993 quinariae which it 
delivers——more than the records credit by 344 
quinariae ; less than we set it down as having at the 
reservoir by 213, which is precisely the amount we 
found diverted by those who were taking water 
without grant from the sovereign.? 

Virgo is credited in the records with a measure 
of 652 quinariae. 1 could not take a gauging of this 


while the records credited only 649 quinariae, a discrepancy 
of 557 quinariae ; (2) there were delivered in all 993 quinariae, 
344 more than were credited in the records, but 213 less 
than the gauges showed at the reservoir. (The 162 quinariae 
coe from Claudia are not reckoned in computing this 
oss, ) 


397 


SEXTUS JULIUS FRONTINUS 


Huius mensuram ad caput invenire non potui, 
quoniam ex pluribus adquisitionibus constat et 
lenior rivum intrat. Prope urbem tamen ad mili- 
arium septimum in agro qui nunc est Ceionii 
Commodi, ubi velociorem cursum habet, men- 
suram egi quae efficit quinariarum duo milia quin- 
gentas quattuor, amplius quam in commentariis 
quinariis mille octingentis quinquaginta duabus. 
Approbatio nostra expeditissima est; erogat enim 
omnes quas mensura deprendimus, id est duo milia 
quingentas quattuor. 

71. Alsietinae conceptionis modus nec in com- 
mentariis adscriptus est nec in re praesenti certus 
inveniri potuit, cum ex lacu Alsietino et deinde circa 
Careias ex Sabatino! quantum aquarii tempera- 
verunt. Alsietina erogat quinarias trecentas nona- 
ginta duas. 

72. Claudia abundantior aliis maxime iniuriae 
exposita est. In commentariis habet non. plus 
quinariis duobus milibus octingentis quinquaginta 
quinque, cum ad caput invenerim quinariarum quat- 
tuor milia sexcentas septem; amplius quam in 
commentariis mille septingentis quinquaginta dua- 
bus. Adeo autem nostra certior est mensura, ut 
ad septimum ab urbe miliarium in piscina, ubi indu- 
bitatae mensurae sunt, inveniamus quinarias tria 
milia trecentas decem duas; plus quam in com- 
mentariis quadringentis quinquaginta septem, 
quamvis et ex beneficiis ante piscinam eroget et 
plurimum subtrahi deprehenderimus ideoque minus 
inveniatur, quam re vera esse debeat, quinariis mille 
ducentis nonaginta quinque. Et circa erogationem 
autem fraus apparet, quae neque ad commentariorum 
fidem neque ad eas quas ad caput egimus mensuras, 


1 addendum praeeunte Schultzio tantum accipiat B. 
398 


AQUEDUCTS OF ROME, II. 70-72 


at the intake, because Virgo is made up of several 
tributaries, and enters its channels with too slow 
a current. Near the City, however, at the seventh 
mile-stone, on the land which now belongs to 
Cejonius Commodus, where Virgo has a greater 
velocity, I made a gauging, and it amounted to 
2,504 quinariae, —1,852 quinartae more than was set 
down in the records. The correctness of our 
gauging is very easily proved ; for Virgo discharges 
all the quinariae which we found by gauging, that 
is, 2,504. 

The measure of the capacity of Alsietina is not 
set down in the records, nor could it be accurately 
arrived at under present conditions, because [it 
receives] from Lake Alsietinus, and afterwards in 
the vicinity of Careiae from Sabatinus as much 
water as the water-men arrange for. Alsietina 
delivers 392 quinariae. 

Claudia, flowing more abundantly than the others, 
is especially exposed to depredation. In the records 
it is credited with only 2,855 quinariae, although 
I found at the intake 4,607 quinartae,—1,752 quinariae 
more than are recorded. Our gauging, however, is 
confirmed by the fact that at the seventh mile-stone 
from the City, at the settling reservoir, where the 
gauging is without question, we find 3,312 quinar1ae, 
—457 more than are recorded, although, before 
reaching the reservoir, not only are deliveries made, 
to satisfy private grants, but also, as we detected, a 
great deal is taken secretly, and therefore 1,295 
quinariae less are found than there really ought to 
be. Moreover, in the delivery of the water also it 
is manifest that there is fraud, since the amount 
actually delivered does not agree either with the 
statements of the records or with the gaugings 


399 


SEXTUS JULIUS FRONTINUS 


neque ad illas saltem ad piscinam post tot iniurias 
sunt, convenit. Solae enim quinariae mille septin- 
gentae quinquaginta erogantur; minus quam com- 
mentariorum ratio dat quinariis mille centum 
quinque; minus autem quam mensurae ad caput 
factae demonstraverunt quinariis duobus milibus 
octingentis quinquaginta septem; minus etiam 
quam in piscina invenitur quinariis mille quingentis 
sexaginta duabus. Ideoque cum sincera in urbem 
proprio rivo perveniret, in urbe miscebatur cum 
Anione Novo, ut confusione facta et conceptio earum 
et erogatio esset obscurior. Quod si qui forte me 
adquisitionum mensuris blandiri putant, admonendi 
sunt adeo Curtium et Caeruleum fontes aquae 
Claudiae sufficere ad praestandas ductui suo qui- 
narias quas significavi quattuor milia sexcermtas 
septem, ut praeterea mille sexcentae effundantur. 
Nec eo infitias quin ea quae superfluunt non sint 
proprie horum fontium ; capiuntur enim ex Augusta, 
quae inventa! in Marciae supplementum, dum illa 
non indiget, adicitur? fontibus Claudiae, quamvis 
ne huius quidem ductus omnem aquam recipiat. 

73. Anio Novus in commentariis habere pone- 
batur quinarias tria milia ducentas sexaginta tres. 
Mensus ad caput repperi quinarias quattuor milia 
septingentas triginta octo, amplius quam in con- 
ceptis commentariorum est, quinariis mille quadrin- 
gentis septuaginta quinque. Quarum adquisitionem 
non avide me amplecti quo alio modo manifestius 


1 Poleni ; quem inventum C ; quam inventam B. 
3 Poleni ; adiecimus CE. 


1 Claudia was received into a catch-basin. (1) The 
measurements at the intake showed 4,607 quinariae, the 
records credited 2,855 quinariae, a discrepancy of 1,752 
quinariae; (2) measurements at the reservoir showed 3,312 
quinariae, a loss of 1,205 guinariae between the intake and 


400 


AQUEDUCTS OF ROME, II. 72-73 


made by us at the intake, or even with those made 
at the settling-basins, after so many depredations. 
For there are only 1,750 quinariae delivered,— less 
than the computation given in the records by 1,105 
quinariae ; also less than is shown by the gauging 
made at the intake by 2,857 quinariae, and less also 
than is found at the reservoir by 1,562 quinariae.! 
For this reason, although it arrived in the City 
perfectly clear in its own conduit, it was mixed 
within the City with the New Anio, so that by 
creating confusion, the quantity as well as the distri- 
bution of the two might be obscured. But should 
any one think that I exaggerate the measure of the 
water received, such a person must be reminded 
that the Caerulean and Curtian sources? of the 
Claudian aqueduct are so ample for supplying to 
their conduit the 4,607 quinariae which I have indi- 
cated, that 1,600 besides go to waste.? But at the 
same time [ do not deny that this superabundance 
does not really belong to these springs, for it comes 
from Augusta. This was devised to supplement 
Marcia, but is turned into the sources of Claudia, 
when Marcia does not need it, though not even 
the conduit of Claudia itself can carry all this 
water.* 

New Anio was put down in the records as having 
3,263 quinariae. Gauging at the intake I found 
4,738 quinariae,—more than the scheduled capacity 
by 1,475 quinariae. In what other way could I more 
clearly show that I do not exaggerate the number 
of quinariae at the intake than by the fact that in 


the reservoir; (3) 1,750 quinariae were delivered, a smaller 
amount than that indicated by the records or by either set 
of measurements. (In the 1,750 guinariae were included the 
162 given to Julia. Cf. 69.) 

2 (f. 13, 14. 

3 j.e. at the sources of the aqueduct. * Cf. 12, 14. 

40I 
VOL. I. DD 


SEXTUS JULIUS FRONTINUS 


probem, quam quod in erogatione ipsorum commen- 
tariorum maior pars earum continetur?  Erogantur 
enim quinariarum quattuor milia ducentae, cum 
alioquin in eisdem commentariis inveniatur con- 
ceptio non amplius quam trium milium ducentarum 
sexaginta trium. Praeterea intercipi non tantum 
quingentas XXXVIII, quae inter mensuras nostras 
et erogationem intersunt, sed longe ampliorem 
modum deprendi. Ex quo apparet etiam exuberare 
comprehensam a nobis mensuram. Cuius rei ratio 
est, quod vis aquae rapacior, ut ex largo et celeri 
flumine excepta, velocitate ipsa ampliat modum. 

74. Non dubito aliquos adnotaturos, quod longe 
maior copia actis mensuris inventa sit, quam erat 


in commentariis principum. Cuius rei causa est error 


1 The 4,900 quinariae included the 163 given to Tepula. 
Cf. 68. 

2 Literally: *'the amount estimated by me even exceeds 
(the figures which I gave).” 

3 «The most troublesome point of ignorance which 
Frontinus had to contend with was a total inability to 
measure the velocity of water, or even rightly and fully 
to grasp the idea of such velocity, whether as flowing in 
an open channel or in closed pipes. He accordingly compares 
streams of water merely by the area of their cross sections, 
and then worries himself into all sorts of explanations as to 
why his gaugings by areas, made irrespective of heads and 
velocities, do not balance. The frauds of the water-men, of 
the plumbers and of others who draw water unlawfully, 
always furnish a handy explanation, however."— Herschel. 

* The following table will show how Frontinus arrived at 
the figures which he gives :— 


402 


AQUEDUCTS OF ROME, II. 73-74 


the records of delivery most of this water is actually 
accounted for? For it is stated that 4,200 quinariae 
are delivered,! although elsewhere in the same 
records the amount taken in is put down as only 
3,263. Besides this, 1 have discovered that not only 
538 quinariae (the difference between our gauging and 
the recorded delivery) are stolen, but a far greater 
quantity. Whence it appears that the total found 
by me is none too large.? The explanation of this 
is, that the swifter current of water, coming as it 
does from a large and rapidly flowing river, increases 
the volume by its very velocity.? 

I do not doubt that many will be surprised that 
according to our gaugings, the quantity of water 
was found to be much greater than that given in the 
imperial records.* The reason for this is to be found 


Quinariae assigned to the various aqueducts in chapters 65-73 : 


| By measurement 
In records | ——-—— — — ——— —— —————— —-| Delivery 


| At intake |At reservoir; Elsewhere 
Appia 841 1,895 Likes 
Old Anio | 1,541 4,398 (2,362) 1,348 
: 95 |! 

Marcia 2,162 4,690 (2,944) 1,840 J 
190 

Tepula 400 92 445 
163 

Julia 649 1,206 (162) 803 2 

Virgo 652 2,504 _ | 2,504 

Alsietina 3925 392(?) 392 

Claudia 2,855 4,607 (3,312) 1,5883 

New Anio; 3,263 4,738 4,037 4 


———— 
—————gp—À————————M— — —— M ———— — 


12,755 | 18,433 | 3,710 | 2,662 |14,018 


1 Besides 92 to Tepula. 
and 164 to Anio (cf. 67). 
3 Besides 190 to Tue (cf. 68). 


* Besides 162 to Julia (cf. 69). 
* Besides 168 to Tepula (cf. 68). 5 Assumed from number delivered. 
771 
403 


D D2 


SEXTUS JULIUS FRONTINUS 


eorum, qui ab initio parum diligenter uniuscuiusque 
aquae fecerunt aestimationem. Ac ne metu aestatis 
aut siccitatum in tantum a veritate eos recessisse 
credam, obstat quod ipse actis mensuris Iulio mense 
hanc uniuscuiusque copiam, quae supra scripta est, 
tota deinceps aestate durantem exploravi. Quae- 
cumque tamen est causa quae praecedit, illud utique 
detegitur, decem milia quinariarum  intercidisse, 
dum beneficia sua principes secundum modum in 
commentariis adscriptum temperant. 

75. Sequens diversitas est quod alius modus con- 
cipitur ad capita, alius nec exiguo minor in piscinis, 
minimus deinde distributione continetur. Cuius rei 
causa est fraus aquariorum, quos aquas ex ductibus 
publicis in privatorum usus derivare deprehendimus. 
Sed et plerique possessorum, e quorum agris aqua 
cireumducitur, formas rivorum perforant, unde fit ut 
ductus publici hominibus privatis vel ad hortorum 
usus itinera suspendant. 

76. Ac de vitiis eiusmodi nec plura nec melius 
dici possunt, quam a Caelio Rufo dicta sunt in ea 
contione, cui titulus est “ De Aquis," quae nunc nos 
omnia simili licentia usurpata utinam non per offensas 
probaremus ; inriguos agros, tabernas, cenacula etiam, 
corruptelas denique omnes perpetuis salientibus in- 
structas invenimus, Nam quod falsis titulis aliae 


1 85-48 B.c. See Cicero, Epistulae ad Familiares, viii, 6, 4 
(c. 50 B.c.). 


404 


AQUEDUCTS OF ROME, II. 74—76 


in the blunders of those who carelessly computed 
each of these waters at the outset. Moreover, I am 
prevented from believing that it was from fear of 
droughts in the summer that they deviated so far 
from the truth, for the reason that I myself made 
my gaugings in the month of July, and found the 
above-recorded supply of each one remaining con- 
stant throughout the entire remainder of the 
summer. But whatever the reason may be, it has 
at any rate been discovered that 10,000 quinariae 
were intercepted, while the amounts granted by 
the sovereign are limited to the quantities set down 
in the records. 

Another variance consists in this, that one measure 
is used at the intake, another, considerably smaller, 
at the settling-reservoir, and the smallest at the 
point of distribution. The cause of this is the dis- 
honesty of the water-men, whom we have detected 
diverting water from the public conduits for private 
use. Buta large number of landed proprietors also, 
past whose fields the aqueducts run, tap the conduits ; 
whence it comes that the public water-courses are 
actually brought to a standstill by private citizens, 
just to water their gardens. 

Concerning misdemeanours of this sort, nothing 
more nor better needs to be said than was said by 
Caelius Rufus,! in his speech, which is entitled ** Con- 
cerning Waters.” And would that we were not 
having daily experience by actual infringement of 
the law that all these misdemeanours are committed 
just as flagrantly now as then. We have found 
irrigated fields, shops, garrets even, and lastly all dis- 
orderly houses fitted up with fixtures through which 
a constant supply of flowing water might be assured. 
For that some waters should be delivered under a 


405 


SEXTUS JULIUS FRONTINUS 


pro aliis aquae erogabantur, etiam sunt leviora 
ceteris vitia. Inter ea tamen quae emendationem 
videbantur exigere, numerandum est, quod fere circa 
montem Caelium et Aventinum accidit. Qui colles, 
priusquam Claudia perduceretur, utebantur Marcia 
et Iulia. Sed postquam Nero imperator Claudiam 
opere arcuato ad Spem exceptam usque ad templum 
Divi Claudii perduxit, ut inde distribueretur, priores 
non ampliatae sed omissae sunt; nulla enim castella 
adiecit, sed isdem usus est, quorum quamvis mutata 
aqua vetus appellatio mansit. 

TI. Satis iam de modo cuiusque et velut nova 
quadam adquisitione aquarum et fraudibus et vitiis 
quae circa ea erant dictum est. Superest ut eroga- 
tionem, quam confertam et, ut sic dicam, in massa 
invenimus, immo etiam falsis nominibus positam, 
per nomina aquarum, uti quaeque se habet, et per 
regiones urbis digeramus. Cuius comprensionem scio 
non ieiunam tantum sed etiam perplexam videri 
posse, ponemus tamen quam brevissime, ne quid 
velut formulae officii desit. Eis quibus sufficiet 
cognovisse summa, licebit transire leviora. 

78. Fit ergo distributio quinariarum quattuordecim 
milium decem et octo, ita ut quinariae DCCLXXI, 


! Cf. 20. 

2 Since Frontinus in 87 speaks of the rebuilding of Marcia 
under Trajan, it is probable that after Claudia was brought 
to this quarter, the aqueducts previously supplying it were 
allowed to fall into disuse. ; 

3 i.e. by discovering and correcting frauds. 


* i.e. the supply of one aqueduct had been accredited to 
another. 


406 


AVM 


NVIddV AHL YVAN VIGAWID VOOV do SNINA 


AQUEDUCTS OF ROME, II. 76-78 


forged name in place of other waters belongs to the 
lesser misdemeanours, But among the frauds.that 
seemed to demand correction, is to be mentioned 
what took place in the vicinity of the Caelian and 
Aventine Hills. These hills, before the construction 
of Claudia, utilized the waters of Marcia and Julia ; 
but after the Emperor Nero led Claudia over the 
arches at Spes Vetus up to the Temple of the Deified 
Claudius,! in order to distribute it from there, the first 
named waters, instead of being augmented by this 
new supply, were themselves allowed to go unused? ; 
for he did notbuild new reservoirs for Claudia, but used 
those that already existed ; and the old name of these 
remained, although the water had become a new one. 

With this, enough has been said about the volume 
of each aqueduct, and, if I may so express it, about 
a new way of acquiring water?; about frauds and 
about offences committed in connection with all this. 
It remains to account in detail for the supply delivered 
(which we found given collectively and in a lump 
sum, so to speak,—and even set down under false 
entries),* and to do this according to the several 
aqueducts and to the several wards of the City. I 
know very well that such an enumeration will appear 
not only dry but also complicated ; nevertheless, I will 
make it—but as short as possible—that nothing may 
be lacking to the data of this office. Those who are 
satisfied with knowing the totals, may skip the details. 

Now the distribution of the 14,018 quinartae is so re- 
corded that the 771 quinariae® which are transferred 


5 These 771 quinariae are made up as follows: 

92 from Marcia to Tepula, 
164 ,, $i „ Anio (Vetus), 

190 ,, Julia ,, Tepula, 
163 ,, Anio Novus to Tepula, 
162 ,, Claudia to Julia. 
771 quinariae. 

497 


SEXTUS JULIUS FRONTINUS 


quae ex quibusdam aquis in adiutorium aliarum dantur 
et bis in speciem erogationis cadunt, semel in com- 
putationem veniant. Ex his dividuntur extra urbem 
quinariae quattuor milia sexaginta tres: ex quibus 
nomine Caesaris quinariae mille septingentae decem 
et octo, privatis quinariae oo oo. CCCXXXXV. 
Reliquae intra urbem VIIII milia nongentae quin- 
quaginta quinque distribuebantur in castella ducenta 
quadraginta septem: ex quibus erogabantur sub 
nomine Caesaris quinariae mille septingentae septem 
semis, privatis quinariae tria milia octingentae quad- 
raginta septem, usibus publicis quinariae quattuor 
milia quadringentae una: ex eo castris . . .! quinariae 
ducentae septuaginta novem, operibus publicis sep- 
tuaginta quinque quinariae oo oo CCCI, muneribus 
triginta novem quinariae CCCLXXXVI, lacibus quin- 
gentis nonaginta uni quinariae co trecentae triginta 
quinque. Sed et haec ipsa dispensatio per nomina 
aquarum et regiones urbis partienda est. 

79. Ex quinariis ergo quattuordecim milibus decem 
et octo, quam summam  erogationibus omnium 
aquarum seposuimus, dantur nomine Appiae extra 
urbem quinariae tantummodo quinque, quoniam 
humilior turetia metitoribus.? . Reliquae quinariae 
sescentae nonaginta novem intra urbem dividebantur 
per regiones secundam IIX VIIII XI XII XIII XIV 


in castella viginti: ex quibus nomine Caesaris qui- 


1 ducentinarie C; XX quinariae Schultze; X et VIIII 
quinariae Poleni. 

2 humilior turetia meatoribus CB; oritur et a metitoribus 
Cod. Vat. 


1 i.e. subject to the disposition of the Emperor 
2 lhe manuscript reading here is unintelligible. 


408 


AQUEDUCTS OF ROME, II. 78-79 


from certain aqueducts to supplement others and 
are set down twice in showing the distribution, figure 
only once in reckoning. Of this quantity there are 
delivered outside the City, 4,063 quinariae, 1,718 
quinariae in the name of Caesar,! to private parties, 
2,345. The remaining 9,955 were distributed within 
the City to 247 reservoirs; of these there were de- 
livered in the name of Caesar 1,7074 quinariae, to 
private parties 3,847 quinariae, for public uses 4,401 
quinariae,—namely to . . .2 camps 279 quinariae, to 
seventy-five public structures 2,301 quinariae, to 
thirty-nine ornamental fountains 386 quinariae, to five 
hundred and ninety-one water-basins 1,335 quinariae. 
But the schedule must be made to apply also to the 
several aqueducts and to the several wards of the City.? 

Of the 14,018 quinariae, then, which we set down 
as the total discharge of all the aqueducts, only 5 
quinariae are given from Appia outside the City 
because [its source is so low].4 The remaining 699 
quinariae were distributed within the City through- 
out the second, eighth, ninth, eleventh, twelfth, 
thirteenth, and fourteenth wards, among twenty 
reservoirs. Of these there were furnished in the 


* The original MS. of the De Aquis is a hopeless confusion 
of figures as regards the statistics given in chapters 78-86. 
The numbers, as they have come down to us in the Monte- 
cassino manuscript. exhibit a great many errors, and it 
would be impossible to affirm what are errors, and what 
is the truth. Poleni endeavoured to reconcile these figures, 
so as to make them mathematically consistent. Tables 
showing his adjustments, and a second set of tables, prepared 
by Herschel on the basis of Biicheler’s figures, are given at 
the end of the book. 

* The manuscript reading here is hopeless except for 
humilior. 


409 


SEXTUS JULIUS FRONTINUS 


nariae centum quinquaginta una, privatis quinariae 
centum nonaginta quattuor, usibus publicis quinariae 
trecentae quinquaginta quattuor: ex eo castris I 
quinariae quattuor, operibus publicis quattuordecim 
quinariae centum viginti tres, muneri uni quinariae 
duae, lacibus nonaginta duobus quinariae ducentae 
viginti sex. 

80. Anionis Veteris erogabantur extra urbem no- 
mine Caesaris quinariae centum sexaginta novem, 
privatis quinariae CCCCIIII. Reliquae quinariae 
mille quingentae octo semis intra urbem divide- 
bantur per regiones primam III IIII V VI VII VIII 
VIIII XII XIII in castella triginta quinque: ex 
quibus nomine Caesaris quinariae sexaginta VI S, 
privatis quinariae CCCCXC, usibus publicis qui- 
nariae quingentae tres: ex eo castris unis quinariae 
quinquaginta, operibus publicis XIX quinariae centum 
nonaginta sex, muneribus novem quinariae octoginta 
octo, lacibus nonaginta quattuor quinariae ducentae 
decem et octo. 

81. Marciae erogabantur extra urbem nomine 
Caesaris quinariae CCLXI S. Reliquae quinariae 
mille quadringentae septuaginta duae intra urbem 
dividebantur per regiones primam tertiam quartam 
V VI VII VIII VIIII X XIIII in castella quinqua- 
ginta unum: ex quibus nomine Caesaris quinariae 
CXVI, privatis quinariae quingentae quadraginta 
tres,! usibus publicis quinariae CCCCXXXVIIII: ex 
eo castris IIII quinariae XLIIS, operibus publicis 
quindecim quinariae XLI,? muneribus XII quinariae 
CIIII, lacibus CXIII quinariae CCLVI. 


l no gap in C between tres and castris; usibus publicis 
quinariae ccccxxxviili Poleni ; ex eo B. * C; xv B. 


! The MS. omits the general statement usually given of 
410 


AQUEDUCTS OF ROME, II. 79-81 


name of Caesar 151 quinariae, to private parties 
194 quinariae, for public uses 354 quinariae,— —namely, 
to one camp 4 quinariae, to fourteen public struc- 
tures 123 quinariae, to one ornamental fountain 2 
quinariae, to ninety-two water-basins 226 quinariae. 

Out of Old Anio were delivered outside the City 
in the name of Caesar 169 quinariae, to private 
parties 404 quinariae. The remaining 1,5084 qui- 
nariae were distributed inside the City through the 
first, third, fourth, fifth, sixth, seventh, eighth, 
ninth, twelfth, and fourteenth wards, among thirty- 
five reservoirs. Of these there were furnished in 
the name of Caesar 664 quinariae, for the use of 
private parties 490 quinariae, for public uses 503 
quinariae,—namely, to one camp 50 quinariae, to 
. nineteen public structures 196 quinariae, to nine 
ornamental fountains 88 quinariae, to ninety-four 
water-basins 218 quinariae, 

Out of Marcia were delivered outside the City in 
the name of Caesar 2614 quinariae. The remain- 
ing 1,472 quinariae were distributed inside the City 
through the first, third, fourth, fifth, sixth, seventh, 
eighth, ninth, tenth, and fourteenth wards, among 
fifty-one reservoirs. Of these there were furnished 
in the name of Caesar 116 quinariae, to private 
parties 543 quinariae, for public uses 439 ! quinariae,— 
namely, to four camps 424 quinariae, to fifteen 
public structures 41 quinariae, to twelve orna- 
mental fountains 104 quinariae, to one hundred and 
thirteen water-basins 256 quinariae.? 


the amount distributed for public uses, and mentions onl 
the separate items which would fall under this general head. 
Poleni would insert a general statement, deriving his total 
from the addition of the separate amounts. 

2 A branch of Marcia supplied the baths of Caracalla 
(built 206 A.D.) 


411 


SEXTUS JULIUS FRONTINUS 


82. Tepulae erogabantur extra urbem nomine 
Caesaris quinariae LVIII, privatis quinariae quin- 
quaginta sex. Reliquae quinariae CCCXXXI intra 
urbem dividebantur per regiones quartam V VI VII 
in castella XIIII: ex quibus nomine Caesaris qui- 
nariae XXKXIIII,! privatis quinariae CCXXXVII, 
usibus publicis quinariae quinquaginta : ex eo castris 
I quinariae duodecim, operibus publicis III quinariae 
septem, lacibus XIII quinariae X XXII, 

83. Iuliae fluebant extra urbem nomine Caesaris 
quinariae LXXX quinque, privatis quinariae CXXI. 
Reliquae quinariae quingentae quadraginta octo 
intra urbem dividebantur per regiones secundam 
III V VI VIII X XII in castella decem et septem : 
ex quibus nomine Caesaris quinariae decem et octo, 
privatis quinariae, CXCVI,? usibus publicis quinariae 
CCCLXXXIII: ex eo castris . . .? quinariae sexa- 
ginta novem, operibus publicis . . .* quinariae CXXCI, 
muneribus III quinariae sexaginta septem, lacibus 
viginti octo quinariae sexaginta quinque. 

84. Virginis nomine exibant extra urbem qui- 
nariae ducentae. Reliquae quinariae duo milia tre- 
centae quattuor intra urbem dividebantur per regi- 
ones septimam nonam quartam decimam in castella 
decem et octo: ex quibus nomine Caesaris quinariae 
quingentae novem, privatis quinariae CCCX XXVIII, 
usibus publicis co centum sexaginta septem: ex eo 
muneribus II quinariae XXVI, lacibus viginti quin- 


1 O; xxxxii B. 

2 octo usibus publicis C'; privatis excvi added by Poleni ; 
quinariae Schultze. 

3 No gap in C ; iv Schultze ; iii Poleni. 

* No gap in C ; xi Schultze ; x Poleni. 


412 


AQUEDUCTS OF ROME, II. 82-84 


Out of Tepula there were delivered outside the City 
in the name of Caesar 58 quinariae, to private parties 
56 quinariae. The remaining 331 quinariae were dis- 
tributed within the City through the fourth, fifth, 
sixth, and seventh wards among fourteen reservoirs. 
Of these there were furnished in the name of 
Caesar 34 quinariae, to private pagie®237 quinariae, 
for public uses 50 quinariae,—namely, to one camp 
12 quinariae, to three public structures 7 quinariae, 
to thirteen basins 32 quinariae. 

Out of Julia there flowed outside the City in the 
name of Caesar 85 quinariae, to private parties 121 
guinariae. The remaining 548 quinariae were distri- 
buted within the City to the second, third, fifth, 
sixth, eighth, tenth, and twelfth wards, among seven- 
teen reservoirs. Of these there were furnished in 
the name of Caesar 18 quenariae, to private parties 
196 quinariae,! for public uses 383 quinariae,— —namely, 
to. . .2 camps 69 quinariae, to . . .? public struc- 
tures 181 quinariae, to three ornamental fountains 
67 quinariae, to twenty-eight basins 65 quinariae. 

Virgo delivered outside the City 200 quinariae. 
The remaining 2,304 quinariae were distributed within 
the City to the seventh, ninth, and fourteenth wards, 
among eighteen reservoirs. Of these there were 
furnished in the name of Caesar 509 quinariae, to 
private parties 338 quinariae, for public uses 1,167 
quinariae,—namely, to two ornamental fountains 26 
quinariae, to twenty-five basins 51 quinariae, to 


1 The MS. says nothing of deliveries to private persons. 
Poleni, for the sake of arithmetic, would amend the text 
here. | 

2 The MS. shows no gap, though a numeral is clearly 
called for. 


413 


SEXTUS JULIUS FRONTINUS 


que quinariae quinquaginta una, operibus publicis 
sedecim quinariae co CCCLXXX, in quibus per se 
Euripo, cui ipsa nomen dedit, quinariae CCCCLX. 

85. Alsietinae quinariae trecentae nonaginta duae. 
Haec tota extra urbem consumitur, nomine Caesaris 
quinariae trecentae quinquaginta quattuor, privatis 
quinariae cenfum, triginta octo. 

86. Claudia et Anio Novus extra urbem proprio 
quaeque rivo erogabantur, intra urbem confunde- 
bantur. Et Claudia quidem extra urbem dabat 
nomine Caesaris quinarias CCXIVI,! privatis qui- 
narias CCCCXXX novem; Anio Novus nomine 
Caesaris quinarias septingentas viginti octo.  Reli- 
quae utriusque quinariae tria milia quadringentae 
nonaginta octo intra urbem dividebantur per regi- 
ones urbis XIIII in castella nonaginta duo; ex 
quibus nomine Caesaris quinariae octingentae XVV,? 
privatis quinariae oo sexaginta septem, usibus pub- 
licis quinariae co XIV?: ex eo castris novem qui- 
nariae centum quadraginta novem, operibus publicis 
decem et octo quinariae CCCLXXIIII, muneribus 
XII quinariae centum septem, lacibus CC viginti sex 
quinariae CCCCX XCII. 

87. Haec copia aquarum ad Nervam imperatorem 
usque computata ad hunc modum discribebatur. 
Nunc providentia diligentissimi principis quicquid 
aut fraudibus aquariorum intercipiebatur aut inertia 


1 C; B has cexlvi. T'he figures are for 200 + 11 + 6, accord- 
ing to Petschenig. 

3 C; B has xviii. The figures, according to Petschenig, 
represent 15 + 5. 3 C; xii B. 


1 The most important of these were the Thermae of 
Agrippa. 
2 The name given to an artificial channel running through 


414 


f 


es 


AQUEDUCTS OF ROME, II. 84-87 


sixteen public structures! 1,380 quinariae, In the 
amount delivered to public structures are included 
460 quinariae for the Euripus ? alone, to which Virgo 
itself gave its name.? 

Alsietina has 392 quinariae. These are all used 
outside the City, 354 quinariae being furnished in the 
name of Caesar, and to private parties 138 quinariae. 

Outside the City, Claudia and New Anio delivered 
each from its own channel; inside the City they 
were mixed together. Claudia discharged outside the 
City in the name of Caesar 217 quinariae, to private 
parties 439 quinariae; New Anio delivered in the 
name of Caesar 728 quinariae. The remaining 3,498 
quinariae belonging to these two were distributed 
inside the City through all the fourteen wards, 
among ninety-two reservoirs. Of these, there were 
furnished in the name of Caesar 820 quinariae, to 
private parties 1,067 quinariae, for public uses 1,014 
quinariae, —namely, to nine camps 149 quinariae, to 
eighteen public structures * 374 quinariae, to twelve 
ornamental fountains 107 quinartae, to two hundred 
and twenty-six basins 482 quinariae. 

This is the schedule of the amount of water 
as reckoned up to the time of the Emperor 
Nerva? and this is the way in which it was dis- 
tributed. But now, by the foresight of the most 
painstaking of sovereigns, whatever was unlawfully 
drawn by the water-men, or was wasted as the 
result of negligence, has been added to our supply ; 


the Gardens of Agrippa on the Campus Martius and 
emptying into the Tiber. 

3 This allusion is not clear. 

* Among them the Baths of Nero. 

5 The Emperor Trajan is meant. 


415 


SEXTUS JULIUS FRONTINUS 


pervertebatur, quasi nova inventione fontium ac- 
crevit. Ac prope duplicata ubertas est et tam 
sedula deinde partitione distributa, ut regionibus 
quibus singulae serviebant aquae plures darentur, 
tamquam Caelio et Aventino in quos sola Claudia 
per arcus Neronianos ducebatur, quo fiebat ut 
quotiens refectio aliqua intervenisset, celeberrimi 
colles sitirent. Quibus nunc plures aquae et in 
primis Marcia reddita amplo opere a Spe in Aven- 
tinum usque perducitur. Atque etiam omni parte 
urbis lacus tam novi quam veteres plerique binos 
salientes diversarum aquarum acceperunt, ut si casus 
alterutram impedisset, altera sufficiente non desti- 


tueretur usus. 
88. Sentit hanc curam imperatoris piissimi Nervae 


principis sui regina et domina orbis in dies et magis 
sentiet salubritas eiusdem aucto castellorum, operum, 
munerum et lacuum numero. Nec minus ad pri- 
vatos commodum ex incremento beneficiorum eius 
diffunditur; illi quoque qui timidi inlicitam aquam 
ducebant, securi nunc ex beneficiis fruuntur. Ne 
pereuntes quidem aquae otiosae sunt: alia mundi- 
tiarum facies, purior spiritus, et causae gravioris 
caeli quibus apud veteres urbis infamis aer fuit, sunt 


416 


AQUEDUCTS OF ROME, II. 87-88 


just as though new sources had been discovered. 
And in fact the supply has been almost doubled, and 
has been distributed with such careful allotment that 
wards which were previously supplied by only one 
aqueduct now receive the water of several. Take for 
example the Caelian and the Aventine Hills, to 
which Claudia alone used to run on the arches of 
Nero. The result was, that whenever any repairs 
caused interruptions, these densely inhabited hills 
suffered a drought. They are now supplied by 
several aqueducts, above all, by Marcia, which 
has been rebuilt on a substantial structure and 
carried from Spes Vetus to the Aventine. In all 
parts of the City also, the basins, new and old alike, 
have for the most part been connected with the 
different aqueducts by two pipes each, so that if 
accident should put either of the two out of commis- 
sion, the other may serve and the service may not be 
interrupted. 

The effect of this care displayed by the Emperor 
Nerva, most patriotic of rulers, is felt from day to 
day by the present queen and empress of the world ; 
and will be felt still more in the improved health 
of the city, as a result of the increase in the number 
of the works, reservoirs, fountains, and water-basins. 
No less advantage accrues also to private consumers 
from the increase in number of the Emperor's 
private grants; those also who with fear drew water 
unlawfully, now free from care, draw their supply 
by grant from the sovereign. Not even the waste 
water is lost; the appearance of the City is clean 
and altered; the air is purer; and the causes of the 
unwholesome atmosphere, which gave the air of the 
City so bad a name with the ancients, are now 

417 

VOL. I. E E 


SEXTUS JULIUS FRONTINUS 


remotae. Non praeterit me, deberi operi novae 
erogationis ordinationem ; sed haec cum incremento 
adiunxerimus ; intellegi oportet, non esse ea ponenda 
nisi consummata fuerint. 

89. Quid quod nec hoc diligentiae principis, quam 
exactissimam civibus suis praestat, sufficit, parum 
praesidii usibus ac voluptatibus nostris contulisse 
sese credentis, quod tantam copiam adiecit, nisi eam 
ipsam sinceriorem iucundioremque faciat? X Operae 
pretium est ire per singula, per quae ille occurrendo 
vitiis quarundam universis adiecit utilitatem. Etenim 
quando civitas nostra, cum vel exigui imbres super- 
venerant, non turbulentas limosasque aquas habuit? 
Nec quia haec universis ab origine natura est, aut 
quia! istud incommodum sentire debeant quae? 
capiuntur ex fontibus, in primis Marcia et Claudia 
ac reliquae, quarum splendor a capite integer nihil 
aut minimum pluvia inquinatur, si putea exstructa 
et obtecta sint. 

90. Duae Anienses minus permanent limpidae, 
nam sumuntur ex flumine ac saepe etiam sereno 
turbantur, quoniam Anio quamvis purissimo defluens 
lacu mollibus tamen cedentibus ripis aufert aliquid 
quo turbetur, priusquam deveniat in rivos. Quod 
incommodum non solum hibernis ac vernis, sed 
etiam aestivis imbribus sentit, quo tempore gratior 
aquarum sinceritas exigitur. 


1 quia C cod. Urb.; quasi B. 2 quae C; quot B. 


! e, g. an artificial basin made to receive the water at its 
source. 


418 


AQUEDUCTS OF ROME, II. 88-90 


removed. Iam well aware that I ought to indicate 
in detail the manner of the new distribution ; but 
this 1 will add when the additions are made; it 
ought to be understood that no account should be 
given until they are completed. 

What shall we say of the fact that the pains- 
taking interest which our Emperor evinces for his 
subjects does not rest satisfied with what 1 have 
already described, but that he deems he has con- 
tributed too little to our needs and gratification 
merely by such increase in the water supply, unless 
he should also increase its purity and its palatable- 
ness? It is worth while to examine in detail how, 
by correcting the defects of certain waters, he has 
enhanced the usefulness of all of them. For when has 
our City not had muddy and turbid water, whenever 
there have been only moderate rain-storms? And 
this is not because all the waters are thus affected 
at their sources, or because those which are taken 
from springs ought to be subject to such pollution. 
This is especially true of Marcia and Claudia and the 
rest, whose purity is perfect at their sources, and 
which would be not at all, or but very slightly, made 
turbid by rains, if well-basins should be built and 
covered over. 

The two Anios are less limpid, for they are drawn 
from a river, and are often muddy even in good 
weather, because the Anio, although flowing from 
a lake whose waters are very pure, is nevertheless 
made turbid by carrying away portions of its loose 
crumbling banks, before it enters the conduits—a 
pollution to which it is subject not only in the rain- 
storms of winter and spring, but also in the showers 
of summer, at which time of the year a more 
refreshing purity of the water is demanded. 

419 
E E 2 


SEXTUS JULIUS FRONTINUS 


91. Et alter quidem ex his, id est Anio Vetus, 
cum plerisque libra sit inferior, incommodum intra 
se tenet. Novus autem Anio vitiabat ceteras, nam 
cum editissimus veniat et in primis abundans, defec- 
tioni aliarum succurrit. Imperitia vero aquariorum 
deducentium in alienos eum specus frequentius, 
quam explemento opus erat, etiam sufficientes aquas 
inquinabat, maxime Claudiam, quae per multa milia 
passuum proprio ducta rivo, Romae demum cum 
Anione permixta in hoc tempus perdebat proprie- 
tatem. Adeoque obvenientibus non succurrebatur, 
ut pleraeque accerserentur per imprudentiam non uti 
dignum erat aquas partientium. Marciam ipsam 
splendore et frigore gratissimam balneis ac fulloni- 
bus et relatu quoque foedis ministeriis deprehendimus 
servientem. 

92. Omnes ergo discerni placuit, tum singulas ita 
ordinari ut in primis Marcia potui tota serviret et 
deinceps reliquae secundum suam quaeque qualitatem 
aptis usibus assignarentur sic ut Anio Vetus pluribus 
ex causis (quo inferior excipitur minus salubris) in 
hortorum rigationem atque in ipsius urbis sordidiora 
exiret ministeria. 

93. Nec satis fuit principi nostro ceterarum re- 
stituisse copiam et gratiam; Anionis quoque Novi 
vitia excludi posse vidit. Omisso enim flumine 


420 


AQUEDUCTS OF ROME, II. 91-93 


One of the Anios, namely Old Anio, running at 
a lower level than most of the others, keeps this 
pollution to itself. But New Anio contaminated all 
the others, because, coming from a higher altitude 
and flowing very abundantly, it helps to make up 
the shortage of the others; but by the unskilfulness 
of the water-men, who diverted it into the other 
conduits oftener than there was any need of an 
augmented supply, it spoiled also the waters of 
those aqueducts that had a plentiful supply, especi- 
ally Claudia, which, after flowing in its own conduit 
for many miles, finally at Rome, as a result of its 
mixture with Anio, lost till recently its own qualities. 
And so far was New Anio from being an advantage 
to the waters it supplemented that many of these 
were then called upon improperly through the heed- 
lessness of those who allotted the waters. We have 
found even Marcia, so charming in its brilliancy and 
coldness, serving baths, fullers, and even purposes 
too vile to mention. 

It was therefore determined to separate them all 
and then to allot their separate functions so that 
first of all Marcia should serve wholly for drinking 
purposes, and then that the others should each be 
assigned to suitable purposes according to their 
special qualities, as for example, that Old Anio, for 
several reasons (because the farther from its source 
it is drawn, the less wholesome a water is), should be 
used for watering the gardens, and for the meaner 
uses of the City itself. 

But it was not sufficient for our ruler to have 
restored the volume and pleasant qualities of the other 
waters; he also recognized the possibility of remedy- 
ing the defects of New Anio, for he gave orders to 


421 


SEXTUS JULIUS FRONTINUS 


repeti ex lacu qui est super villam Neronianam 
Sublacensem, ubi limpidissimus est, iussit. Nam 
cum oriatur Anio supra Trebam Augustam, seu quia 
per saxosos montes decurrit, paucis circa ipsum 
oppidum obiacentibus cultis, seu quia lacuum altitu- 
dine in quos excipitur velut defaecatur, imminentium 
quoque nemorum opacitate inumbratus, frigidissimus 
simul ac splendidissimus eo pervenit. Haec tain 
felix proprietas aquae omnibus dotibus aequatura 
Marciam, copia vero superatura, veniet in locum 
deformis illius ac turbidae, novum auctorem impera- 
torem Caesarem Nervam Traianum Augustum prae- 
scribente titulo. 

94. Sequitur ut indicemus quod ius ducendae 
tuendaeque sit aquae, quorum alterum ad cohibendos 
intra modum impetrati beneficii privatos, alterum ad 
ipsorum ductuum pertinet tutelam. In quibus dum 
altius repeto leges de singulis aquis latas, quaedam 
apud veteres aliter observata inveni. Apud quos 
omnis aqua in usus publicos erogabatur et cautum 
ita fuit: ** Ne quis privatus aliam aquam ducat, quam 
quae ex lacu humum accidit "—haec enim sunt verba 
legis—id est quae ex lacu abundavit; eam nos 
caducam vocamus. Et haec ipsa non in alium usum 
quam in balnearum aut fullonicarum dabatur, eratque 
vectigalis, statuta mercede quae in publicum pende- 


! That is, water the private right to which has become 
void. 


422 


AQUEDUCTS OF ROME, Il. 93-94 


stop drawing directly from the river and to take 
from the lake lying above the Sublacensian Villa of 
Nero, at the point where the Anio is the clearest ; 
for inasmuch as the source of Anio is above Treba 
Augusta, it reaches this lake in a very cold and clear 
condition, be it because it runs between rocky hills 
and because there is but little cultivated land even 
around that hamlet, or because it drops its sediment 
in the deep lakes into which it is taken, being 
shaded also by the dense woods that surround it. 
These so excellent qualities of the water, which bids 
fair to equal Marcia in all points, and in quantity 
even to exceed it, are now to supersede its former 
unsightliness and impurity ; and the inscription will 
proclaim as its new founder, “Imperator Caesar 
Nerva Trajanus Augustus.” 

We have further to indicate what is the law with 
regard to conducting and safeguarding the waters, 
the first of which treats of the limitation of private 
parties to the measure of their grants, and the 
second has reference to the upkeep of the conduits 
themselves. In this connection, in going back to 
ancient laws enacted with regard to individual 
aqueducts, I found certain points wherein the 
practice of our forefathers differed from ours. With 
them all water was delivered for the public use, and 
the law was as follows: “No private person shall 
conduct other water than that which flows from the 
basins to the ground" (for these are the words 
of the law); that is, water which overflows from 
the troughs; we call it “lapsed” water;! and even 
this was not granted for any other use than for 
baths or fulling establishments ; and it was subject 
to a tax, for a fee was fixed, to be paid into the 


423 


SEXTUS JULIUS FRONTINUS 


retur. Aliquid et in domos principum civitatis da- 
batur, concedentibus reliquis. 

95. Ad quem autem magistratum ius dandae 
vendendaeve aquae pertinuerit, in eis ipsis legibus 
variatur. Interdum enim ab aedilibus, interdum a 
censoribus permissum invenio ; sed apparet, quotiens 
in re publica censores erant, ab illis potissimum 
petitum, cum ei non erant, aedilium eam potestatem 
fuisse. Ex quo manifestum est quanto potior cura 
maioribus communium utilitatium quam privatarum 
voluptatium fuerit, cum etiam ea aqua quam privati 
ducebant ad usum publicum pertineret. 

96. Tutelam autem singularum aquarum locari 
solitam invenio positamque redemptoribus necessi- 
tatem certum numerum circa ductus extra urbem, 
certum in urbe servorum opificum habendi, et quidem 
ita ut nomina quoque eorum, quos habituri essent in 
ministerio per quasque regiones, in tabulas publicas 
deferrent; eorumque operum probandorum curam 
fuisse penes censores aliquando et aediles, interdum 
etiam quaestoribus eam provinciam obvenisse, ut 
apparet ex S. C.! quod factum est C. Licinio et Q. 
Fabio cos.? 


1 i.. senatus consulto. Suggested by Pithow ; ex eo C. 
3 Poleni ; clycynio consule fabio censoribus C. 


1 Since censors were chosen only every five years, and held 
office for but eighteen months, their duties in the intervening 
periods devolved upon other officials. 

2 Since these grants were made only for the sake of public 
utilities, such as baths and fulleries, and since moreover the 
State profited from the tax paid into the public treasury. 

3 The manuscript reading has been amended as unintelli- 
gible, but the amended statement is not quite in agreement 
with recorded facts, Livy xxxix. 32 says that in 185 B.C. it 


424 


AQUEDUCTS OF ROME, II. 94-96 


public treasury. Some water also was conceded to 
the houses of the principal citizens, with the consent 
of the others. 

To which authorities belonged the right to grant 
water or to sell it, is variously given even in the laws, 
for at times I find that the grant was made by the 
aediles, at other times by the censors; but it is 
apparent that as often as there were censors in the 
government! these grants were sought chiefly from 
them. If there were none, then the aediles had 
the power referred to. It is plain from this how 
much more our forefathers cared for the general 
good than for private luxury, inasmuch as even the 
water which private parties conducted was made to 
subserve the public interest.” 

The care of the several aqueducts I find was 
regularly let out to contractors, and the obligation 
was imposed upon these of having a fixed number of 
slave workmen on the aqueducts outside the City, 
and another fixed number within the City; and of 
entering in the public records the names also of 
those whom they intended to employ in the service 
for each ward of the City. I find also that the duty 
of inspecting their work devolved at times on the 
aediles and censors, and at times on the quaestors, 
as may be seen from the resolution of the Senate 
which was passed in the consulate of Gaius 
Licinius and Quintus Fabius. 


was certainly expected that Quintus Fabius Labeo and 
Lucius Porcius Licinus would be elected consuls for the next 
year. The elections, however, resulted otherwise: Quintus 
Fabius Labeo and Marcius Claudius Marcellus were consuls 
in teh Lucius Porcius Licinus and Publius Claudius Pulcher 
in 184, 


ETT 


SEXTUS JULIUS FRONTINUS 


97. Quanto opere autem curae fuerit ne quis 
violare ductus aquamve non concessam derivare au- 
deret, cum ex multis apparere potest, tum et ex hoc 
quod Circus Maximus ne diebus quidem ludorum 
circensium nisi aedilium aut censorum permissu 
inrigabatur, quod durasse etiam postquam res ad 
curatores transiit sub Augusto, apud Ateium Capi- 
tonem legimus. Agri vero, qui aqua publica contra 
legem essent inrigati, publicabantur. Mancipi etiam 
si clam! eo quem adversus legem fecisset, multa 
dicebatur. In eisdem legibus adiectum est ita: “Ne 
quis aquam oletato dolo malo, ubi publice saliet. Si 
quis oletarit, sestertiorum decem milium multa esto." 
Cuius rei causa aediles curules iubebantur per vicos 
singulos ex eis qui in unoquoque vico habitarent 
praediave haberent binos praeficere, quorum arbitratu 
aqua in publico saliret. 

98. Primus M. Agrippa post aedilitatem, quam 
gessit consularis, operum suorum et munerum velut 
perpetuus curator fuit. Qui iam copia permittente 
discripsit, quid aquarum publicis operibus, quid laci- 
bus, quid privatis daretur. Habuit et familiam 


1 B; cum C. legendum mancipium vel (ale quid B. 


1 An eminent Roman jurist under Augustus and Tiberius. 

3 The meaning of this sentence is clear, though not its 
construction. 

8 A very large sum for those days, approximately £85. 

* The aedileship usually preceded the consulship by six 
years. In 33 B.C. Octavian was anxious that the people 
should be amused by shows and buildings of more than usual 
splendour, and Agrippa, in his loyalty to the Triumvir, 
descended from the rank which he had attained as a consular 
to serve in the inferior office of aedile. 


426 


AQUEDUCTS OF ROME, II. 97-98 


How much care was taken that no one should 
venture to injure the conduits, or draw water that 
had not been granted, may be seen not only from 
many other things, but especially from the fact that 
the Circus Maximus could not be watered, even on 
the days of the Circensian Games, except with per- 
mission of the aediles or censors, a regulation which, 
as we read in the writings of Ateius Capito,! was still 
in force even after the care of the waters had passed, 
under Augustus, to commissioners. Indeed, lands 
which had been irrigated unlawfully from the public 
supply were confiscated. Whenever a slave infringed 
the law, even without the knowledge of his master, a 
fine was imposed.? By the same laws it is also enacted 
as follows: * No one shall with malice pollute 
the waters where they issue publicly. Should any 
one pollute them, his fine shall be ten thousand 
sestertii.? Therefore the order was given to the 
Curule Aediles to appoint two men in each district 
from the number of those who lived in it, or owned 
property in it, in whose care the public fountains 
should be placed. 

Marcus Agrippa, after his aedileship (which he 
held after his consulship)* was the first man to 
become the permanent incumbent ? of this office, so 
to speak—a commissioner charged with the super- 
vision of works which he himself had created. 
Inasmuch as the amount of water now available 
warranted it, he determined how much should be 
allotted to the public structures, how much to the 
basins, and how much to private parties. He also 


6 Under the Republic, these special offices had been of a 
temporary nature ; now Agrippa, and certain others follow- 
ing him, held this office for life. . 


427 


SEXTUS JULIUS FRONTINUS . 


propriam aquarum, quae tueretur ductus atque 
castella et lacus. Hanc Augustus hereditate ab eo 
sibi relictam publicavit. 

99. Post eum Q. Aelio Tuberone Paulo Fabio 
Maximo cos. cum res usque in id tempus quasi 
potestate acta certo iure eguisset, senatus consulta 
facta sunt ac lex promulgata. Augustus quoque 
edicto complexus est, quo iure uterentur qui ex 
commentariis Agrippae aquas haberent, tota re in 
sua beneficia translata. Modulos etiam, de quibus 
dictum est, constituit et rei continendae exercen- 
daeque curatorem fecit Messalam Corvinum, cui 
adiutores dati Postumius Sulpicius praetorius et 
Lucius Cominius pedarius. Insignia eis quasi magis- 
tratibus concessa, deque eorum officio senatus con- 
sultum factum, quod infra scriptum est. 

100. *Quod Q. Aelius Tubero Paulus Fabius 
Maximus cos. V. F.! de eis qui curatores aquarum 
publicarum ex consensu senatus a Caesare Augusto 
nominati essent ornandis,? D. E. R. Q. F. P. D. E. 
R. I. C.? placere huic ordini, eos qui aquis publicis 
praeessent, cum eius rei causa extra urbem essent, 
lictores binos et servos publicos ternos, architectos 


1 i.e. verba fecerunt. 3 Bergk; ordinandis CB. 
3 i.e. de ea re quid facere placeret, de ea re ita censuerunt. 


1 [n 11 B.C. à Cf. 23. 
3 The senatores pedurii did not enjoy full senatorial rights. 


428 


AQUEDUCTS OF ROME, II. 98-100 


kept his own private gang of slaves for the main- 
tenance of the aqueducts and reservoirs and basins. 
This gang was given to the State as its property by 
Augustus, who had received it in inheritance from 
Agrippa. 

Following him, under the consulate of Quintus 
Aelius Tubero and Paulus Fabius Maximus,! resolu- 
tions of the Senate were passed and a law was pro- 
mulgated in these matters, which until that time had 
been managed at the option of officials, and had lacked 
definite control. Augustus also determined by an 
edict what rights those should possess who were 
enjoying the use of water according to Agrippa’s 
records, thus making the entire supply dependent 
upon his own grants. The ajutages, also, of which I 
have spoken above,? were established by him; and for 
the maintenance and operation of the whole system 
he named Messala Corvinus commissioner, and gave 
him as assistants Postumius Sulpicius, ex-praetor, and 
Lucius Cominius, a junior? senator. They were 
allowed to wear regalia as though magistrates ; and 
concerning their duties a resolution of the Senate 
was passed, which is here given :— 

©The consuls, Quintus Aelius Tubero and Paulus 
Fabius Maximus, having made a report relating to 
the duties and privileges of the water-commissioners 
appointed with the approval of the Senate by Caesar 
Augustus, and inquiring of the Senate what it 
would please to order upon the subject, it has been 
RESOLVED that it is the sense of this body: 
That those who have the care of the administra- 
tion of the public waters, when they go outside the 
City in the discharge of their duties, shall have two 
lictors, three public servants, and an architect for 


429 


SEXTUS JULIUS FRONTINUS 


singulos et scribas, librarios, accensos praeconesque 
totidem habere, quot habent ei per quos frumentum 
plebei datur. Cum autem in urbe eiusdem rei causa 
aliquid agerent, ceteris apparitoribus eisdem praeter- 
quam lictoribus uti. Utique quibus apparitoribus ex 
hoc senatus consulto curatoribus aquarum uti liceret, 
eos diebus decem proximis, quibus senatus consultum 
factum esset, ad aerarium deferrent; quique ita 
delati essent, eis praetores aerarii mercedem cibaria, 
quanta praefecti frumento dando dare deferreque 
solent, annua darent et adtribuerent; eisque eas 
pecunias sine fraude sua capere liceret. Utique 
tabulas, chartas ceteraque quae eius curationis causa 
opus essent eis curatoribus Q. Aelius Paulus Fabius 
cos. ambo alterve, si eis videbitur, adhibitis praetori- 
bus qui aerario praesint, praebenda locent. 

101. *« Itemque cum viarum curatores frumentique 
parte quarta anni publico fungantur ministerio, ut 
curatores aquarum iudiciis vacent privatis publicis- 
que." Apparitores et ministeria, quamvis perseveret 
adhuc aerarium in eos erogare, tamen esse curatorum 
videntur desisse inertia ac segnitia non agentium 
officium.  Egressis autem urbem dumtaxat agendae 


1 The resolution of the senate ends at this point. . The 
rest of the section is taken up with some comments of 
Frontinus on various provisions of the bill. 


430 


AQUEDUCTS OF ROME, II. 100-101 


each of them, and the same number of secretaries, 
clerks, assistants, and criers as those have who dis- 
tribute wheat among the people; and when they 
have business inside the City on the same duties, 
they shall make use of all the same attendants, 
omitting the lictors; and, further, that the list 
of attendants granted to the water-commissioner 
by this resolution of the Senate shall be by them 
presented to the public treasurer within ten 
days from its promulgation, and to those whose 
names shall be thus reported the praetors of the 
treasury shall grant and give, as compensation, food 
by the year, as much as the food-commissioners are 
wont to give and allot, and they shall be authorized 
to take money for that purpose without prejudice to 
themselves. Further, there shall be furnished to the 
commissioners tablets, paper, and everything else 
necessary for the exercise of their functions. To 
this effect, the consuls, Quintus Aelius and Paulus 
Fabius, are ordered, both or either one, as may seem 
best to them, to consult with the praetors of the 
treasury in contracting for these supplies. 

“ Furthermore, inasmuch as the superintendents 
of streets and those in charge of the distribution of 
grain occupy a fourth part of the year in fulfilling 
their State duties, the water-commissioners likewise 
shall adjudicate (for a like period) in private and 
State causes." ! Although the treasury has con- 
tinued down to the present to pay for these 
attendants and servants, they have, as far as 
appearance goes, ceased to belong to the com- 
missioners, who through laziness and indolence 
neglect their duties. Moreover, when the com- 
missioners went out of the City, provided it was 


431 


~ 


SEXTUS JULIUS FRONTINUS 


rei causa senatus praesto esse lictores iusserat. Nobis 
circumeuntibus rivos fides nostra et auctoritas a 
principe data pro lictoribus erit. 

102. Cum perduxerimus rem ad initium curatorum, 
non est alienum subiungere qui post Messalam huic 
officio ad nos usque praefuerint. Messalae successit 
Planco et Silio cos. Ateius Capito.  Capitoni C. 
Asinio Pollione C. Antistio Vetere cos. Tarius 
Rufus. Tario Servio Cornelio Cethego L. Visellio 
Varrone consulibus M. Cocceius Nerva, divi Nervae 
avus, scientia etiam iuris inlustris. Huic successit 
Fabio Persico L. Vitellio cos. C. Octavius Laenas. 
Laenati Aquila Iuliano et Nonio Asprenate consulibus 
M. Porcius Cato. Huic successit post mensem Ser. 
Asinio Celere A. Nonio! Quintiliano consulibus A. 
Didius Gallus. Gallo Q. Veranio et Pompeio Longo 
cos. Cn. Domitius Afer. Afro Nerone Claudio 
Caesare IIII et Cosso Cossi f. consulibus L. Piso. 
Pisoni Verginio Rufo et Memmio Regulo consulibus 
Petronius Turpilianus. Turpiliano Crasso Frugi et 
Laecanio Basso consulibus P. Marius. Mario Luccio 
Telesino et Suetonio Paulino cos. Fonteius Agrippa. 


1 Nipperdcy; huic successit post quem serasinius celera . . 
tonio C. 


1 Messala succeeded to Agrippa, under the consulate of 
Q. Aelius Tubero and Paulus Fabius Maximus, according to 
Varro. 


3 A.D. 13. 3 A.D. 23. * A.D. 24. 

$ A.D. 34. € A.D. 38. 

? Consules suffecti in 38 A.D., according to the conjecture of 
Nipperdey. 

8 A.D. 49. 9? A.D. 60. 10 A.D. 63. 

il A.D. 64. 13 4 p. 66. 


432 


“AQUEDUCTS OF ROME, II. 101-102 


on official business, the Senate had commanded the 
lictors to accompany them. For myself, when I go 
about to examine the aqueducts, my self-reliance 
and the authority given me by the sovereign will 
stand in place of the lictors. 

As I have followed the matter down to the intro- 
duction of the commissioners, it will not be out of 
place now to subjoin the names of those who followed 
Messala! in this office up to my incumbency :—To 
Messala succeeded, under the consulate of Silius and 
Plancus,? Ateius Capito; to Capito, under the con- 
sulate of Gaius Asinius Pollio and Gaius Antistius 
Vetus,? Tarius Rufus ; to Tarius, under the consulate 
of Servius Cornelius Cethegus and Lucius Visellius 
Varro,* Marcus Cocceius Nerva, the grandfather of the 
Deified Nerva, who was also noted as learned in the 
science oflaw. 'l'o him succeeded, under the consu- 
late of Fabius Persicus and Lucius Vitellius, Gaius 
Octavius Laenas; to Laenas, under the consulate 
of Aquila Julianus and Nonius Asprenas,$ Marcus 
Porcius Cato. To him succeeded, after à month, 
under the consulate of Servius Asinius Celer 
and Aulus Nonius Quintilianus; Aulus Didius 
Gallus; to Gallus, under the consulate of Quintus 
Veranius and Pompeius Longus,? Gnaeus Domitius 
Afer; to Afer, under the fourth consulate of Nero 
Claudius Caesar, and that of Cossus, the son of- 
Cossus,? Lucius Piso; to Piso, underthe consulate of 
Verginius Rufus and Memmius Regulus,!® Petronius 
Turpilianus; to Turpilianus, under the consulate of 
Crassus Frugi and Lecanius Bassus,!1 Publius Marius ; 
to Marius, under the consulate of Lucius Telesinus 
and Suetonius Paulinus,!?? Fonteius Agrippa; to 


433 
VOL. I. F F 


SEXTUS JULIUS FRONTINUS - 


Agrippae Silio et Galerio Trachalo cos. Albius 
Crispus.  Crispo Vespasiano III et Cocceio Nerva 
cos, Pompeius Silvanus. Silvano Domitiano II Valerio 
Messalino consulibus Tampius Flavianus. Flaviano 
Vespasiano V Tito III consulibus Acilius Aviola. 
Post quem imperatore Nerva III et Verginio Rufo III 
consulibus ad nos cura translata est. 

103. Nunc quae observare curator aquarum debeat 
et legem senatusque consulta ad instruendum actum 
pertinentia subiungam. Circa ius ducendae aquae 
in privatis observanda sunt, ne quis sine litteris 
Caesaris, id est ne quis aquam publicam non impe- 
tratam, et ne quis amplius quam impetravit ducat. 
Ita enim efficiemus ut modus, quem adquiri diximus, 
possit ad novos salientes et ad nova beneficia principis 
pertinere. In utroque autem magna cura multiplici 
opponenda fraudi est: sollicite subinde ductus extra 
urbem circumeundi ad recognoscenda beneficia ; idem 
in castellis et salientibus publicis faciendum, ut sine 
intermissione diebus noctibusque aqua fluat. Quod 
senatus quoque consulto facere curator iubetur, cuius 
haec verba sunt: 

104. ** Quod Q. Aelius Tubero Paulus Fabius Maxi- 


1 A.D. 68. 2 A.D. 71. 3 A.D. 73. 
4 A.D. 74. 5 A.D. 97. 


434 


AQUEDUCTS OF ROME, II. 102-104 


Agrippa, under the consulate of Silius and Galerius 
Trachalus,! Albius Crispus; to Crispus, under the 
third consulate of Vespasian, and that of Cocceius 
Nerva? Pompeius Silvanus; to Silvanus, under the 
second consulate of Domitian and that of Valerius 
Messalinus,? Tampius Flavianus ; to Flavianus, under 
the fifth consulate of Vespasian, and the third of 
Titus,* Acilius Aviola. After Aviola, under the 
third consulate of the Emperor Nerva, and the third 
of Verginius Rufus,’ the office was transferred to me. 

I will now set down what the water-commissioner 
must observe, being the laws and Senate enactments 
which serve to determine his procedure. As con- 
cerns the draft of water by private consumers, it is 
to be noted : No one shall draw water without an 
authorisation from Caesar, that is, no one shall draw 
water from the public supply without a licence, and no 
one shall draw more than has been granted. By this 
means, we shall make it possible that the quantity 
of water, which has been regained, as we have said, 
may be distributed to new fountains and may be used 
for new grants from the sovereign. Butin both cases 
it will be necessary to exert great resistance to 
manifold forms of fraud. Frequent rounds must be 
made of channels of the aqueducts outside the City, 
and with great care, to check up the granted 
quantities. The same must be done in case of the 
reservoirs and public fountains, that the water may 
flow without interruption, day and night. For this 
the commissioner has been directed to provide, by a 
resolution of the Senate, the language of which is as 
follows : 

“The consuls, Quintus Aelius Tubero and Paulus 
Fabius Maximus, having made a report upon the 


435 
FF2 


SEXTUS JULIUS FRONTINUS 


mus cos. V. F. de numero publicorum salientium qui 
in urbe essent intraque aedificia urbi coniuncta, quos 
M. Agrippa fecisset, Q. F. P. D. E. R. I. C. neque 
augeri placere nec minui numerum publicorum sa- 
lientium, quos nunc esse rettulerunt ei, quibus 
negotium a senatu est imperatum ut inspicerent 
aquas publicas inirentque numerum salientium publi- 
corum. Itemque placere curatores aquarum, quos 
Caesar Augustus ex senatus auctoritate nominavit, 
dare operam uti salientes publici quam adsiduissime 
interdiu et noctu aquam in usum populi funderent." 
In hoc senatus consulto crediderim adnotandum 
quod senatus tam augeri quam minui salientium 
publicorum numerum vetuerit. Id factum existimo, 
quia modus aquarum quae eis temporibus in urbem 
veniebant, antequam Claudia et Anio Novus perdu- 
cerentur, maiorem erogationem capere non vide- 
batur. | 

105. Qui aquam in usus privatos deducere volet, 
impetrare eam debebit et a principe epistulam ad 
curatorem adferre; curator deinde beneficio Caesaris 
: praestare maturitatem et procuratorem eiusdem officii 
libertum Caesaris protinus scribere. Procuratorem 
autem primus Ti. Claudius videtur admovisse, post- 
quam Anionem Novum et Claudiam induxit. Quid 
contineat epistula, vilicis quoque fieri notum debet, 
ne quando neglegentiam aut fraudem suam igno- 
rantiae colore defendant. Procurator calicem eius 


1 Of. 116, 117. 
436 


AQUEDUCTS OF ROME, II. 104-105 


number of public fountains established by Marcus 
Agrippa in the City and within structures adjacent 
to the City, and having inquired of the Senate 
what it would please to order upon the subject, 
it has been RESOLVED that it is the sense 
of this body: That the number of public fountains 
which exist at present, according to the report 
of those who were ordered by the Senate to 
examine the public aqueducts and to inventory the 
number of public fountains, shall be neither in- 
creased nor diminished. Further, that the water- 
commissioners, who have been appointed by Caesar 
Augustus, with the endorsement of the Senate, shall 
take pains that the public fountains may deliver 
water as continuously as possible for the use of the 
people day and night." In this resolution of the 
Senate, I think it should be noted that the Senate 
forbade any increase as well as any decrease in the 
number of public fountains. I think this was 
done because the quantity of water, which at that 
time came into the City, before Claudia and New 
Anio had been brought in, did not seem to permit 
of a greater distribution. 

Whoever wishes to draw water for private use 
must seek for a grant and bring to the commissioner 
a writing from the sovereign; the commissioner 
must then immediately expedite the grant of Caesar, 
and appoint one of Caesar's freedmen as his deputy 
for this service. Tiberius Claudius appears to have 
beenthe first man to appoint such a deputy after he 
introduced Claudia and New Anio. The overseers! 
must also be made acquainted with the contents of 
the writing, that they may not excuse their negli- 
gence or fraud on the plea of ignorance. The 


437 


SEXTUS JULIUS FRONTINUS 


moduli, qui fuerit impetratus, adhibitis libratoribus 
signari cogitet, diligenter intendat mensurarum quas 
supra diximus modum et positionis notitiam habeat, 
ne sitin arbitrio libratorum, interdum maioris luminis, 
interdum minoris pro gratia personarum calicem 
probare. Sed nec statim ab hoc liberum subiciendi 
qualemcumque plumbeam fistulam permittatur arbi- 
trium, verum eiusdem luminis quo calix signatus est 
per pedes quinquaginta, sicut senatus consulto quod 
subiectum est cavetur. 

106. *Quod Q. Aelius Tubero Paulus Fabius 
Maximus cos. V. F. quosdam privatos ex rivis 
publicis aquam ducere, Q. D. E. R. F. P. D. E. R. I. 
C. ne cui privato aquam ducere ex rivis publicis 
liceret, utique omnes ei quibus aquae ducendae ius 
esset datum ex castellis ducerent, animadverterent- 
que curatores aquarum, quibus locis intra urbem 
apte castella privati facere possent, ex quibus aquam 
ducerent quam ex castello communi ! accepissent a 
curatoribus aquarum. Neve cui eorum quibus aqua 
daretur publica ius esset, intra quinquaginta pedes 
eius castelli; ex quo aquam ducerent, laxiorem 


1 Bennett; communem CB, 


1 Cf. 36. 2 Cf. 94 ff. 3 Cf. 26 ff. and 36. 
* Cf. 26, and footnote 2 on p. 364. 5 Cf. 25 and footnote. 


438 


AQUEDUCTS OF ROME, II. 105-106 


deputy must call in the levellers and provide that 
the calix! is stamped as conforming to the deeded 
quantity, and must study the size of the ajutages 
we have enumerated above,? as well as have know- 
ledge of their location,’ lest it rest with the caprice 
of the levellers to approve a caliv of sometimes 
greater, or sometimes smaller, interior area,* accord- 
ing as they interest themselves in the parties. 
Neither must the deputy permit the free option of 
connecting directly to the ajutages any sort of 
lead pipe, but there must rather be attached for a 
length of fifty feet one of the same interior area as 
that which the ajutage has been certified to have, 
as has been ordained by a vote of the Senate which 
follows : 

“ The consuls, Quintus Aelius Tubero and Paulus 
Fabius Maximus, having made a report that some 
private parties take water directly from the public 
conduits, and having inquired of the Senate what 
it would please to order uponthe subject, it has 
been RESOLVED that it is the sense of this body : 
That it shall not be permitted to any private party 
to draw water from the public conduits; and all 
those to whom the right to draw water has been 
granted shall draw it from the reservoirs, the water- 
commissioners to direct at what points, within the 
City, private parties may suitably erect reservoirs 
for the purpose of drawing from them the water 
which they had received at the hands of the 
water-commissioner from some public reservoir; 
and no one of those to whom a right to draw 
water from the public conduits has been granted 
shall have the right to use a larger pipe than a 
quinaria? for a space of fifty feet from the reservoir 


439 


SEXTUS JULIUS FRONTINUS 


fistulam subicere quam quinariam." In hoc S. C. 
dignum adnotatione est, quod aquam non nisi ex 
castello duci permittit, ne aut rivi aut fistulae publi- 
cae frequenter lacerentur. 

107. Ius impetratae aquae neque heredem neque 
emptorem neque ullum novum dominum praediorum 
sequitur. Balneis quae publice lavarent privilegium 
antiquitus concedebatur, ut semel data aqua perpetuo 
maneret. Sic ex veteribus senatus consultis cognos- 
cimus, ex quibus unum subieci ; nunc omnis aquae 
cum possessore instauratur beneficium. 

108. * Quod Q. Aelius Tubero Paulus Fabius 
Maximus cos. V. F. constitui oportere, quo iure 
extra intraque urbem ducerent aquas, quibus ad- 
tributae essent, Q. D. E. R. F. P. D. E. R. I. C. uti 
usque eo maneret adtributio aquarum, exceptis quae 
in usum balinearum essent datae aut Augusti! 
nomine, quoad eidem domini possiderent id solum, 
in quod accepissent aquam." 

109. Cum vacare aliquae coeperunt aquae, ad- 
nuntiatur et in commentarios redigitur, qui respici- 
untur ut petitoribus ex vacuis dari possint. Has. 
aquas statim intercipere solebant, ut medio tempore 
venderent aut possessoribus praediorum aut aliis 


1 Herschel ; haustus CB. 


1 ie. through the death of the grantee or the transfer of 
this property. 


440 


AQUEDUCTS OF ROME, II. 106—109 


out of which he is to draw the water." In this 
resolution of the Senate it is worthy of note that 
the resolution does not permit water to be drawn 
except from reservoirs, in order that the conduits 
or the public pipes may not be frequently cut into. 

The right to granted water does not pass either 
to the heirs, or to the buyer, or to any new pro- 
prietor of the land. The public bathing establish- 
ments had from old times the privilege that water 
once granted to them should remain theirs for ever. 
We know this from old resolutions of the Senate, 
of which I give one below :—(Nowadays every grant 
of water is renewed to the new owner.) 

“ The consuls, Quintus Aelius Tubero and Paulus 
Fabius Maximus, having made a report upon the 
necessity of determining in accordance with what 
law those persons, to whom water had been granted, 
should draw water inside and outside the City, and 
having inquired of the Senate what it would please 
to order upon the subject, it has been RESOLVED 
that it is the sense of this body: That a grant of 
water, with the exception of those supplies which 
have been granted for the use of bathing estab- 
lishments, or in the name of Augustus, shall remain 
in force as long as the same proprietors continue to 
hold the ground for which they received the grant 
of the water.” 

As soon as any water-rights are vacated,! this is 
announced, and entered in the records, which are 
consulted, in order that vacant water-rights may be 
given to applicants. These waters they formerly 
used to cut off immediately, in order that between 
times they might sell them either to the occupants 
of the land, or to outsiders even. It seemed 


441 


SEXTUS JULIUS FRONTINUS 


etiam.  Humanius visum est principi nostro, ne 
praedia subito destituerentur, triginta | dierum 
spatium indulgeri, intra quod ei ad quos res per- 
tineret.......4 De aqua in praedia sociorum 
data nihil constitutum invenio. Perinde tamen 
observatur ac iure cautum, ut dum quis ex eis qui 
communiter impetraverunt superesset, totus modus 
praediis adsignatus flueret et tunc demum renova- 
retur beneficium, cum desisset quisque ex eis quibus 
datum erat possidere. Impetratam aquam alio, quam 
in ea praedia in quae data erit, aut ex alio castello, 
quam ex quo epstula principiis continebit, duci 
palamst non oportere ; sed et mandatis prohibetur. 

110. Impetrantur autem et eae aquae quae caducae 
vocantur, id est quae aut ex castellis aut ex mana- 
tionibus fistularum,? quod beneficium a principibus 
parcissime tribui solitum. Sed fraudibus aquariorum 
obnoxium est, quibus prohibendis quanta cura debe- 
atur, ex capite mandatorum manifestum erit quod 
subieci.? 

111. *Caducam neminem volo ducere nisi qui 
meot beneficio aut priorum principum habent. 
Nam necesse est ex castellis aliquam partem aquae 
effluere, cum hoc pertineat non solum ad urbis nostrae 
salubritatem, sed etiam ad utilitatem cloacarum 
abluendarum." 

112. Explicitis quae ad ordinationem aquarum 
privati usus pertinebant, non ab re est quaedam 


1 Addendum cum Jordansis petere possent beneficii instau- 
rationem B ; no gap in C. 

2 effluunt add. Jocundus B ; no gap in C. 

3 Between 110 and 111 ts a gap of about twenty letters in C. 

* mó C ; nostro B. 


l i,e. Imperial edict. 


442 


AQUEDUCTS OF ROME, II. 109-112 


less harsh to our ruler, in order not to deprive 
estates of water suddenly, to give thirty days’ 
grace, within which those whose interests were 
involved [might make suitable arrangements] I 
did not find anything set down about the water 
granted to an estate belonging to a syndicate. 
Nevertheless, the following practice is observed, 
just as though prescribed by law, “that as long as 
one of those who have received a common grant of 
water survives, the full amount of granted water 
shall flow upon the land, and the grant shall be 
renewed only when every one of those who received 
it has ceased to remain in possession of the property.” 
That granted water must not be carried elsewhere 
than upon the premises to which it has been made 
appurtenant, or taken from another reservoir than 
the one designated in the writing of the sovereign, 
is self-evident, but is forbidden also by ordinance. 

Those waters also that are called * lapsed," namely, 
those that come from the overflow of the reservoirs 
or from leakage of the pipes, are subject to grants; 
which are wont to be given very sparingly, however, 
by the sovereign. But this offers opportunity for thefts 
by the water-men ; and how much care should be 
devoted to preventing these, may be seen from a 
paragraph of an ordinance, which I append: 

* [ desire that no one shall draw *lapsed' water 
except those who have permission to do so by grants 
from me or preceding sovereigns; for there must 
necessarily be some overflow from the reservoirs, 
this being proper not only for the health of our 
City, but also for use in the flushing of the sewers." 

Having now explained those things that relate to 
the administration of water for the use of private 


443 


SEXTUS JULIUS FRONTINUS 


ex eis, quibus circumscribi saluberrimas constitutiones 
in ipso actu deprehendimus, exempli causa attingere. 
Ampliores quosdam calices, quam impetrati erant, 
positos in plerisque castellis inveni et ex eis aliquos 
ne signatos quidem. Quotiens autem signatus calix 
excedit legitimam mensuram, ambitio procuratoris 
qui eum signavit detegitur. Cum vero ne signatus 
quidem est, manifesta culpa omnium, maxime acci- 
pientis, deprehenditur, deinde vilici. In quibusdam, 
cum calices legitimae mensurae signati essent, statim 
amplioris moduli fistulae subiectae fuerunt, unde 
acciderat ut aqua non per legitimum spatium 
coercita, sed per brevis angustias expressa facile 
laxiorem in proximo fistulam impleret. Ideoque 
illud adhuc, quotiens signatur calix, diligentiae 
adiciendum est, ut fistulae quoque proximae 
per spatium, quod S. C. comprehensum diximus, 
signentur. Ita demum enim vilicus cum scierit non 
aliter quam signatas conlocari debere, omni carebit 
excusatione. 

113. Circa conlocandos quoque calices observari 
oportet ut ad lineam ordinentur nec alterius inferior 
calix, alterius superior ponatur. Inferior plus trahit ; 
superior, quia cursus aquae ab inferiore rapitur, 
minus ducit. In quorundam fistulis ne calices qui- 
dem positi fuerunt, Hae fistulae solutae vocantur 
et ut aquario libuit, laxantur vel coartantur. 


1 d.e. fifty feet ; cf. 105. 

2 “The ajutage was not less than about nine inches long." 
— Herschel. 

3 Cf. 36. 

* 4, e. the amount of water flowing through them. 


444 


AQUEDUCTS OF ROME, II. 112-113 


parties, it will not be foreign to the subject to touch 
upon certain practices, by way of illustration, 
whereby we have caught these most wholesome 
ordinances in the very act of being defeated. In a 
great number of reservoirs I found certain ajutages of 
a larger size than had been granted, and among them 
some that had not even been stamped. Now when- 
ever a stamped ajutage is larger than its legitimate 
measure it reveals designing dishonesty on the part 
of the deputy who stamped it; but when it is not 
even stamped, it clearly reveals the fault of all, 
especially of the grantee, also of the overseer. In 
some of the reservoirs, though their ajutages were 
stamped in conformity with their lawful admeasure- 
ments, pipes ofa greater diameter [than the ajutages] 
were at once attached to them. As a conse- 
quence, the water not being held together for the 
lawful distance,! and being on the contrary forced 
through the short restricted distance,? easily filled 
the adjoining larger pipes. Care should therefore 
be taken, as often as an ajutage is stamped, to 
stamp also the adjoining pipe over the length which 
we stated was prescribed by the resolution of the 
Senate. Forthen and then only can the overseer be 
held to his full responsibility, when he understands 
that none but stamped pipes must be set in place. 

In setting? ajutages also, care must be taken to 
set them on the level, and not place the one higher 
and the other lower down. The lower one will take 
in more; the higher one will suck in less, because 
the current of water is drawn in by the lower one. 
To some pipes no ajutages were even attached. Such 
pipes are called * uncontrolled," and are enlarged or 
diminished * as pleases the water-men. 


445 


SEXTUS JULIUS FRONTINUS 


114. Adhuc illa aquariorum intolerabilis fraus est : 
translata in novum possessorem aqua foramen novum 
castello imponunt, vetus relinquunt quo venalem 
extrahunt aquam. In primis ergo hoc quoque 
emendandum curatori crediderim. Non enim solum 
ad ipsarum aquarum custodiam, sed etiam ad castelli 
tutelam pertinet, quod subinde et sine causa foratum 
vitiatur. 

115. Etiam ille aquariorum tollendus est reditus, 
quem vocant puncta. Longa ac diversa sunt spatia, 
per quae fistulae tota meant urbe latentes sub silice. 
Has comperi per eum qui appellabatur a punctis 
passim convulneratas omnibus in transitu negotia- 
tionibus praebuisse peculiaribus fistulis aquam, quo 
efficiebatur ut exiguus modus ad usus publicos 
perveniret. Quantum ex hoc modo aquae sur- 
reptum sit, aestimo ex eo quod aliquantum plumbi 
sublatis eiusmodi ramis redactum est. 

116. Superest tutela ductuum, de qua priusquam 
dicere incipiam, pauca de familia quae huius rei 
causa parata est explicanda sunt.! Familiae sunt 
duae, altera publica, altera Caesaris. Publica est 
antiquior, quam ab Agrippa relictam Augusto et 
ab eo publicatam diximus; habet homines circiter 


1 At this point there is a gap of about twenty letters in C. 


446 


" AQUEDUCTS OF ROME, II. 114-116 


There is, besides, this intolerable method of 
cheating practised by the water-men: When a 
 water-right is transferred to a new owner, they will 
insert a new ajutage in the reservoir ; the old one 
they leave in the tank and draw from it water, 
which they sell. This practice especially, there- 
fore, as I believe, should be corrected by the 
Commissioner ; for this concerns not only the pro- 
tection of the water itself, but also the maintenance 
of the reservoirs, which get to be leaky when they 
are often and unnecessarily tapped into. 

The following mode of gaining money, practised 
by the water-men, is also to be abolished: the one 
called * puncturing.” There are extensive areas in 
various places where secret pipes run under the 
pavements all over the City. I discovered that these 
pipes were furnishing water by special branches 
to all those engaged in business in those localities 
through which the pipes ran, being bored for that 
purpose here and there by the so-called “ puncturers "; 
whence it came to pass that only a small quantity 
of water reached the places of publie supply. How 
large an amount of water has been stolen in 
this manner, I estimate by means of the fact that a 
considerable quantity of lead has been brought in 
by the removal of that kind of branch pipes. 

It remains to speak of the maintenance of the | 
conduits ; but before I say anything about this, a 
little explanation should be given about the gangs of 
slaves established for this purpose. There are two 
of those gangs, one belonging to the State, the other 
to Caesar. The one belonging to the State is the 
older, which, as we have said, was left by Agrippa 
to Augustus, and was by him made over to the 


447 


SEXTUS JULIUS FRONTINUS 


ducentos quadraginta. Caesaris familiae numerus 
est quadringentorum sexaginta, quam Claudius cum 
aquas in urbem perduceret constituit, 

117. Utraque autem familia in aliquot  mini- 
steriorum species diducitur, vilicos, castellarios, 
circitores, silicarios, tectores aliosque opifices. Ex 
his aliquos extra urbem esse oportet ad ea quae non 
sunt magnae molitionis, maturum tamen auxilium 
videntur exigere. Homines in urbe circa castellorum 
et munerum stationes opera quaeque urgebunt, in 
primis ad subitos casus, ut ex compluribus regionibus, 
in quam necessitas incubuerit, converti possit prae- 
sidium aquarum abundantium. Tam amplum nume- 
rum utriusque familiae solitum ambitione aut 
neglegentia praepositorum in privata opera diduci 
revocare ad aliquam disciplinam et publica ministeria 
ita instituimus, ut pridie quid esset actura dictaremus 
et quid quoque die egisset actis comprehenderetur. 

118. Commoda publicae familiae ex aerario dantur, 
quod impendium exoneratur vectigalium reditu ad 
ius aquarum pertinentium. Ea constant ex locis 
aedificiisve quae sunt circa ductus et castella aut 
muneraautlacus. Quem reditum prope sestertiorum 
ducentorum quinquaginta milium alienatum ac 
vagum, proximis vero temporibus in Domitiani 
loculos conversum iustitia Divi Nervae populo 
restituit, nostra sedulitas ad certam regulam re- 
degit, ut constaret quae essent ad hoc vectigal 
pertinentia loca. Caesaris familia ex fisco accipit 


1 (Cf. 98. 
2 Equivalent at this time to about £2,125 or from $10,000 
to $12,000. 


448 


AQUEDUCTS OF ROME, II. 116-118 


State.! It numbers about 240 men. The number 
in Caesar's gang is 460; it was organized by Claudius 
at the time he brought his aqueduct into the City. 
Both gangs are divided into several classes of 
workmen: overseers, reservoir-keepers, inspectors, 
pavers, plasterers, and other workmen ; of these, some 
must be outside the city for purposes which do not 
seem to require any great amount of work, but yet 
demand prompt attention ; the men inside the city at 
their stations at the reservoirs and fountains will 
devote their energies to the several works, especially 
in case of sudden emergencies, in order that a plentiful 
reserve supply of water may be turned from several 
wards of the city to the one afflicted by an emer- 
gency. Both of these large gangs, which regularly 
were diverted by exercise of favouritism, or by 
negligence of their foremen, to employment on 
private work, I resolved to bring back to some 
discipline and to the service of the State, by writing 
down the day before what each gang was to do, and 
by putting in the records what it had done each day. 
The wages of the State gang are paid from the 
State treasury, an expense which is lightened by 
the receipt of rentals from water-rights, which are 
received from places or buildings situated near 
the conduits, reservoirs, public fountains, or water- 
basins. This income of nearly 250,000 sesterti? 
formerly lost through loose management, was turned 
in recent times into the coffers of Domitian; but 
with a due sense of right the Deified Nerva restored 
it to the people. I took pains to bring it under 
fixed rules, in order that it might be clear what were 
the places which fell under this tax. The gang of 
Caesar gets its wages from the emperor’s privy purse, 


449 
VOL. I. G G 


SEXTUS JULIUS FRONTINUS 


commoda, unde et omne plumbum et omnes 
impensae ad ductus et castella et lacus pertinentes 
erogantur. 

119. Quoniam quae videbantur ad familiam perti- 
nere exposuimus, ad tutelam ductuum sicut promi- 
seram divertemus, rem enixiore cura dignam, cum 
magnitudinis Romani imperii vel praecipuum sit 
indicium. Multa atque ampla opera subinde dila- 
buntur, quibus ante succurri debet quam magno 
auxilio egere incipiant, plerumque tamen prudenti 
temperamento sustinenda, quia non semper opus aut 
facere aut ampliare quaerentibus credendum est. 
Ideoque non solum scientia peritorum sed et proprio 
usu curator instructus esse debet, nec suae tantum 
stationis architectis uti, sed plurium advocare non 
minus fidem quam subtilitatem, ut aestimet quae 
repraesentanda, quae differenda sint, et rursus quae 
per redemptores effici debeant, quae per domesticos 
artifices. 

120. Nascuntur opera ex his causis : aut impotentia 
possessorum quid corrumpitur aut vetustate aut vi 
tempestatium aut culpa male facti operis, quod 
saepius accidit in recentibus. 

121. Fere aut vetustate aut vi tempestatium eae 
partes ductuum laborant quae arcuationibus susti- 
nentur aut montium lateribus applicatae sunt, et 
ex arcuationibus eae quae per flumen traiciuntur, 


450 


AQUEDUCTS OF ROME, II. 118-121 


from which are also drawn all expenses for lead and 
for conduits, reservoirs, and basins. 

As I have now explained all, I think, that has to 
do with slave-gangs, I will now, as I promised, 
come back to the maintenance of the conduits, a 
thing which is worthy of more special care, as it 
gives the best testimony to the greatness of the 
Roman Empire. The numerous and extensive works 
are continually falling into decay, and they must be 
attended to before they begin to demand extensive 
repair. Very often, however, it is best to exercise 
a wise restraint in attending to their upkeep, since 
those who urge the construction or extension of the 
works cannot always be trusted. The water-com- 
missioner, therefore, not only ought to be provided 
with competent advisers, but ought also to be 
equipped with practical experience of his own. He 
must consult not only the architects of his own 
office, but must also seek aid from the trustworthy 
and thorough knowledge of numerous other persons, 
in order to judge what must be taken in hand forth- 
with, and what postponed, and, again, what is to be 
carried out by public contractors and what by his 
own regular workmen. 

The necessity of repairs arises from the following 
reasons: damage is done either by the lawlessness 
of abutting proprietors, by age, by violent storms, or 
by defects in the original construction, which has 
happened quite frequently in the case of recent 
works. 

As a rule, those parts of the aqueducts which are 
carried on arches or are placed on side-hills and, 
of those on arches, the parts that cross rivers suffer 
most from the effects of age or of violent storms. 

451 
G a 2 


SEXTUS JULIUS FRONTINUS 


Ideoque haec opera sollicita festinatione explicanda 
sunt. Minus iniuriae subiacent subterranea nec geli- 
cidiis nec caloribus exposita, Vitia autem eiusmodi 
sunt, ut aut non interpellato cursu subveniatur eis, 
aut emendari nisi averso non possint, sicut ea quae 
in ipso alveo fieri necesse est. 

122. Haec duplici ex causa nascuntur: aut enim 
limo concrescente, qui interdum in crustam indurescit, 
iter aquae coartatur, aut tectoria corrumpuntur, unde 
fiunt manationes quibus necesse est latera rivorum 
et substructiones vitiari. Pilae quoque ipsae tofo 
exstructae sub tam magno onere labuntur. Refici 
quae circa alveos rivorum sunt aestate non debent, 
ne intermittatur usus tempore quo praecipue desi- 
deratur, sed vere vel autumno et maxima cum festi- 
natione, ut scilicet ante praeparatis omnibus quam 
paucissimis diebus rivi cessent. Neminem fugit, per 
singulos ductus hoc esse faciendum, ne si plures 
pariter avertantur, desit aqua civitati. 

123. Ea quae non interpellato aquae cursu effici 
debent maxime structura constant, quam et suis 
temporibus et fidelem fieri oportet. Idoneum 
structurae tempus est a Kalendis Aprilibus in 
Kalendas Novembres ita ut optimum sit intermittere 
eam partem aestatis quae nimiis caloribus incandescit, 


452 


AQUEDUCTS OF ROME, IL 121-123 


These, therefore, must be put in order with care and 
despatch. The underground portions, not being 
subjected to either heat or frost, are less liable to 
injury. Defects are either of the sort that can be 
remedied without stopping the flow of the water, 
or such as cannot be made without diverting the 
flow, as, for example, those which have to be made 
in the channel itself. 

These latter become necessary from two causes: 
either the accumulation of deposit, which sometimes 
hardens into a crust, contracts the channel of the 
water; or else the concrete lining is damaged, 
causing leaks, whereby the sides of the conduits and 
the substructures are necessarily injured. Some- 
times even the piers, which are built of tufa, 
give way under the great load. Repairs to the 
channel itself should not be made in the summer 
time, in order not to stop the flow of water 
at a time when the demand for it is the greatest, 
but should be made in the spring or autumn, and 
with the greatest speed possible, and of course with 
all preparations made in advance, in order that the 
conduits may be out of commission as few days as 
possible. As is obvious to every one, a single aque- 
duct must be taken at a time, for if several were cut 
off at once, the supply would prove inadequate for 
the City’s needs. 

Repairs that should be executed without cutting 
off the water consist principally of masonry work, 
which should be constructed at the right time, and 
conscientiously. The suitable time for masonry 
work is from April 1 to November 1, but with this 
restriction, that the work would best be interrupted 
during the hottest part of the summer, because 


453 


SEXTUS JULIUS FRONTINUS 


quia temperamento caeli opus est, ut ex commodo ! 
structura combibat et in unitatem corroboretur; non 
minus autem sol acrior quam gelatio praecipit 
materiam. Nec ullum opus diligentiorem poscit 
curam quam quod aquae obstaturum est ; fides itaque 
eius per singula secundum legem notam omnibus sed 
a paucis observatam exigenda est. 

124. Illud nulli dubium esse crediderim, proximos 
ductus, id est qui a septimo miliario lapide quadrato 
consistunt, maxime custodiendos, quoniam et amplis- 
simi operis sunt et plures aquas singuli sustinent. 
Quos si necesse fuerit interrumpere, maiorem partem 
aquarum urbis destituent. Remedia tamen sunt et 
huius difficultatis: opus incohatum excitatur ad li- 
bram deficientis, alveus vero plumbatis canalibus per 
spatium interrupti ductus rursus continuatur. Porro 
quoniam fere omnes specus per privatorum agros 
derecti erant et difficilis videbatur futurae impensae 
praeparatio, nisi et aliqua iuris constitutione succur- 
reretur, simul ne accessu ad reficiendos rivos re- 
demptores a possessoribus prohiberentur, S. C. factum 
est quod subieci. 

125. *Quod Q. Aelius Tubero Paulus Fabius 
Maximus cos.: V. F. de rivis, specibus, fornicibus 


1 Schöne; ex commodi C ; et humorem commode B. 


454 


AQUEDUCTS OF ROME, II. 123-125 


moderate weather is necessary for the masonry 
properly to absorb the mortar, and to solidify into . 
one compact mass; for excessive heat of the sun is 
no less destructive than frost to masonry. Nor is 
greater care required upon any works than upon 
such as are to withstand the action of water; for 
this reason, in accordance with principles which all 
know but few observe, honesty in all details of the 
work must be insisted upon. 

I think no one will doubt that the greatest care 
should be taken with the aqueducts nearest to the 
City (I mean those inside the seventh mile-stone, 
which consist of block-stone masonry), both because 
they are structures of the greatest magnitude, and ` 
because each one carries several conduits ; for should 
it once be necessary to interrupt these, the City 
would be deprived of the greater part of its water- 
supply. But there are methods for meeting even 
these difficulties: provisional works are built up to 
the level of the conduit which is being put out. of 
use, and a channel, formed of leaden troughs, running 
along the course of the portion that has been cut 
off, again provides a continuous passage. Further- 
more, since almost all the aqueducts ran through 
the fields of private parties and it seemed difficult to 
provide for future outlays without the help of some 
constituted law; in order, also, that contractors 
should not be prevented by proprietors from access 
to the conduits for the purpose of making repairs, a 
resolution of the Senate was passed, which I give 
below :— 

‘The consuls, Quintus Aelius Tubero and Paulus 
Fabius Maximus, having made a report relating to 
the restoration of the canals, conduits, and arches of 


455 


SEXTUS JULIUS FRONTINUS 


aquae Iuliae, Marciae, Appiae, Tepulae, Anienis 
'reficiendis, Q. D. E. R. F. P. D. E. R. I. C. uti cum 
ei rivi, specus, fornices, quos Augustus Caesar se 
refecturum impensa sua pollicitus senatui est, re- 
ficerentur,! ex agris privatorum terra, limus, lapides, 
testa, harena, ligna ceteraque quibus ad eam rem 
opus esset, unde quaeque eorum proxime sine iniuria 
privatorum tolli, sumi, portari possint, viri boni 
arbitratu aestimata darentur, tollerentur, sumerentur, 
exportarentur; et ad eas res omnes exportandas 
earumque rerum reficiendarum causa, quotiens opus 
esset, per agros privatorum sine iniuria eorum itinera, 
actus paterent, darentur." 

126. Plerumque autem vitia oriuntur ex impotentia 
possessorum, qui pluribus rivos violant. Primum 
enim spatia, quae circa ductus aquarum ex S, C. 
vacare debent, aut aedificiis aut arboribus occupant. 
Arbores magis nocent, quarum radicibus concamera- 
tiones et latera solvuntur. Dein vicinales vias 
agrestesque per ipsas formas derigunt. Novissime 
aditus ad tutelam praecludunt. Quae omnia S. C. 
quod subieci provisa sunt. 

127. “Quod Q. Aelius Tubero Paulus Fabius 
Maximus cos. V. F. aquarum, quae in urbem veni- 


1 Gap of about ten letters in C. 


456 


AQUEDUCTS OF ROME, IL. 125-127 


' Julia, Marcia, Appia, Tepula, and Anio, and having 
inquired of the Senate what it would please to order 
upon the subject, it has been RESOLVED: That 
when those canals, conduits, and arches, which 
Augustus Caesar promised the Senate to repair at 
his own cost, shall be repaired, the earth, clay, stone, 
potsherds, sand, wood, etc., which are necessary for 
the work in hand, shall be granted, removed, taken, 
and brought from the lands of private parties, their 
value to be appraised by some honest man, and each 
of these to be taken from whatever source it may 
most conveniently and, without injury to private 
parties, be removed, taken, and brought; and that 
thoroughfares and roads through the lands of 
private parties shall, without injury to them, remain 
open and their use be permitted, as often as it is 
necessary for the transportation of all these things 
for the purposes of repairing these works." 

But very often damages occur by reason of the 
lawlessness of private owners, who injure the conduits 
in numerous ways. In the first place, they occupy 
with buildings or with trees the space around the 
aqueducts, which according to a resolution of the 
Senate should remain open. The trees do the most 
damage, because their roots burst asunder the top 
coverings as well as the sides. They also lay out 
village and country roads over the aqueducts them- 
selves. Finally, they shut off access to those coming 
to make repairs. All these offences have been 
provided against in the resolution of the Senate, 
which I append :— 

*'The consuls, Quintus Aelius Tubero and Paulus 
Fabius Maximus, having made a report that the 
routes of the aqueducts coming to the city are being 


457 


SEXTUS JULIUS FRONTINUS 


rent, itinera occupari monumentis et aedificiis et ` 
arboribus conseri, Q. F. P. D. E. R. I. C. cum ad 
reficiendos rivos specusque per quae opera publica 
corrumpantur,! placere circa fontes et fornices et 
muros utraque ex parte quinos denos pedes patere, 
et circa rivos qui sub terra essent et specus intra 
urbem et urbi continentia aedificia utraque ex parte 
quinos pedes vacuos relinqui ita ut neque monu- 
mentum in eis locis neque aedificium post hoc tempus 
ponere neque conserere arbores liceret, sique nunc 
essent arbores intra id spatium, exciderentur praeter- 
quam si quae villae continentes et inclusae aedificiis 
essent. Si quis adversus ea commiserit, in singulas 
res poena HS? dena milia essent, ex quibus pars 
dimidia praemium accusatori daretur, cuius opera 
maxime convictus esset qui adversus hoc S. C. com- 
misisset, pars autem dimidia in aerarium redigeretur. 
Deque ea re iudicarent cognoscerentque curatores 
aquarum." 

128. Posset hoc S. C. aequissimum videri, etiam 
si ex re tantum publicae utilitatis? ea spatia vindi- 
carentur. Multo magis autem maiores nostri admi- 
rabili aequitate ne ea quidem eripuerunt privatis 
quae ad modum publicum pertinebant, sed cum 
aquas perducerent, si difficilior possessor in parte 


1 Various emendations have been suggested for the reading 
here given, which is that of C, but none is thoroughly 
satisfactory. — . 

2 Sestertium. 3 C; utilitate B. 


1 About £85. 
458 


AQUEDUCTS OF ROME, II. 127—128 


encumbered with tombs and edifices and planted 
with trees, and having inquired of the Senate what 
it would please to order upon the subject, it has 
been RESOLVED: That since, for the purpose of 
repairing the channels and conduits [obstructions 
must be removed] by which public structures 
are damaged, it is decreed that there shall be 
kept clear a space of fifteen feet on each side of the 
springs, arches, and walls; and that about the sub- 
terranean conduits and channels, inside the City, 
and inside buildings adjoining the City, there shall 
be left a vacant space of five feet on each side; and 
it shall not be permitted to erect a tomb at these 
places after this time, nor any structures, nor to 
plant trees. If there be any trees within this space 
at the present time they shall be taken out by the 
roots except when they are connected with country 
seats or enclosed in buildings. Whoever shall con- 
travene these provisions, shall pay as penalty, for 
each contravention, 10,000 sestertz,! of which one-half 
shall be given as a reward to the accuser whose 
efforts have been chiefly responsible for the con- 
viction of the violator of this vote of the Senate. 
The other half shall be paid into the public treasury. 
About these matters the water-commissioners shall 
judge and take cognizance.” 

This resolution of the Senate would appear 
perfectly just, even if this ground were claimed 
solely in view of the public advantage; but with 
much more admirable justice, our forefathers did not 
seize from private parties even those lands which 
were necessary for public purposes but, in the 
construction of water-works, whenever a proprietor 
made any difficulty in the sale of a portion, they 


459 


SEXTUS JULIUS FRONTINUS 


vendunda fuerat, pro toto agro pecuniam intulerunt 
et post determinata necessaria loca rursus eum agrum 
vendiderunt, ut in suis finibus proprium ius res 
publica privatique haberent. Plerique tamen non 
contenti occupasse fines ipsis ductibus manus ad- 
tulerunt per suffossa latera passim cursus aquarum 
tam ei qui ius aquarum impetratum! habent, quam 
ei qui quantulicumque beneficii occasione ad ex- 
pugnandos rivos abutuntur. Quid porro fieret, si 
non universa ista diligentissima lege prohiberentur 
poenaque non mediocris contumacibus intentaretur? 
Quare subscripsi verba legis. 

129. ** T. Quintius Crispinus consul . . .? populum 
iure rogavit populusque iure scivit in foro pro rostris 
aedis Divi luli pr. K.? Iulias. Tribus Sergia 
principium fuit. Pro tribu Sex. L. f. Varro 
primus scivit. Quicumque post hanc legem rogatam 
rivos, specus, fornices, fistulas, tubulos, castella, lacus 
aquarum publicarum, quae ad urbem ducuntur, sciens 
dolo malo foraverit, ruperit, foranda rumpendave 
curaverit peiorave fecerit, quo minus eae aquae 
earumve quae pars in urbem Romam ire, cadere, 
fluere, pervenire, duci possit, quove minus in urbe 
Roma et in eis locis, aedificiis, quae loca, aedificia 
urbi continentia sunt, erunt, in eis hortis, praediis, 


1 R; cursus us aquarum imperatum C' ; tam ei qui Poleni. 
3 Gap of eight or ten letters in C. 
* B; P.R. Iulias C. 


460 


AQUEDUCTS OF ROME. II. 128-129 


paid for the whole field, and after marking off the 
needed part, again sold the land with the under- 
standing that the public as well as private parties 
should, each one within his boundaries, have his own 
full rights. But many have not been content to 
confine themselves to their limits, but have laid 
hands on the aqueducts themselves by puncturing, 
here and there, the side walls of the channels, 
not merely those who have secured a right to draw 
water, but also those who misuse the occasion of the 
least favour for attacking the walls of the conduits. 
What more would not be done, were all those things 
not prevented by a carefully drawn law, and were 
not the transgressors threatened with a serious 
penalty? Accordingly, I append the words of the 
law :— 

** The consul Titus Quinctius Crispinus duly put the 
question to the people, and the people duly passed a 
vote in the Forum, before the Rostra of the temple of 
the Deified Julius on thethirtieth day of June. The 
Sergian tribe was to vote first. On their behalf, 
Sextus Varro, the son of Lucius, cast the first vote for 
the following measure: Whoever, after the passage 
of this law, shall maliciously and intentionally pierce, 
break, or countenance the attempt to pierce or 
break, the channels, conduits, arches, pipes, tubes, 
reservoirs, or basins of the public waters which are 
brought into the City, or who shall do damage with 
intent to prevent water-courses, or any portions of 
them from going, falling, flowing, reaching, or being 
conducted into the City of Rome; or so as to prevent 
the issue, distribution, allotment, or discharge into 
reservoirs or basins of any water at Rome or in those 
places or buildings which are now or shall hereafter 


461 


SEXTUS JULIUS FRONTINUS 


locis, quorum hortorum, praediorum, locorum dominis 
possessoribusve aqua data vel adtributa est vel erit, 
saliat, distribuatur, dividatur, in castella, lacus im- 
mittatur, is populo Romano HS centum milia dare 
damnas esto. Et qui D. M.! quid eorum ita fecerit, 
id omne sarcire, reficere, restituere, aedificare, ponere 
et celere demolire damnas esto sine dolo malo atque 
omnia ita ut? quicumque curator aquarum est, 
erit, si curator aquarum nemo erit, tum is praetor 
qui inter cives et peregrinos ius dicet, multa, 
pignoribus cogito, coercito, eique curatori aut si 
curator non erit, tum ei praetori eo nomine cogendi, 
coercendi, multae dicendae sive pignoris capiendi 
ius potestasque esto. Si quid eorum servus fecerit, 
dominus eius HS centum milia populo Romano 
D. D. E? Si qui locus circa rivos, specus, fornices, 
fistulas, tubulos, castella, lacus aquarum publicarum, 
quae ad urbem Romam ducuntur et ducentur, ter- 
minatus est et erit, ne quis in eo loco post hanc 
legem rogatam quid opponito, molito, obsaepito, 
figito, statuito, ponito, conlocato, arato, serito, neve in 
eum quid immittito, praeterquam eorum faciendorum, 
reponendorum causa, quae hac lege licebit, oportebit. 
Qui adversus ea quid fecerit, siremps lex, ius causaque - 
omnium rerum omnibusque esto, atque uti esset 


1 i.e, dolo malo. 

2 lacunam indicavit Heinrichius, deest tale quid: curator 
aquarum iusserit vel curator aquarum e re publica fideve sua 
videbitur B; no gap in C. 

3 i.e. dare damnas esto. 


1 About £850. 


462 


AQUEDUCTS OF ROME, II. 129 


be adjacent to the City, or in the gardens, 

properties, or estates of those owners or pro- 
prietors to whom the water is now or in future 
shall be given or granted, he shall be con- 
demned to pay a fine of 100,000 sesterts;! to the 
Roman people; and in addition, whoever shall 
maliciously do any of these things shall be con- 
demned to repair, restore, re-establish, reconstruct, 
replace what he has damaged, and quickly demolish 
what he has built—all in good faith and in such 
manner [as the commissioners may determine]. 
Further, whoever is or shall be water-commissioner, or 
in default of such officer, that praetor who is charged 
with judging between the citizens and strangers, is 
authorized to fine, bind over by bail, or restrain the 
offender. For that purpose, the right and power to 
compel, restrain, fine, and bind over, shall belong 
to every water-commissioner, or if there be none, to 
the praetor. Ifa slave shall do any such damage, his 
master shall be condemned to pay 100,000 sestertii to 
the Roman people. If any enclosure has been made 
or shall be made near the channels, conduits, arches, 
pipes, tubes, reservoirs, or basins of the public waters, 
which now are or in future shall be conducted into the 
City of Rome, no one shall, after the passage of this 
law, putin the way, construct, enclose, plant, establish, 
set up, place, plough, sow anything, or admit any- 
thing in that space unless for the purpose of doing 
those things and making those repairs which shall 
be lawful and obligatory under this law. If any one 
contravenes these provisions, against him shall apply 
the same statute, the same law, and the same pro- 
cedure in every particular as could apply and ought 
to apply against him who in contravention of this 


463 


SEXTUS JULIUS FRONTINUS 


esseve oporteret, si is adversus hanc legem rivum, 
specum rupisset forassetve. Quo minus in eo loco 
pascere, herbam, fenum secare, sentes tollere liceat, 
eius hac lege nihilum rogatur.! Curatores aquarum, 
qui nunc sunt quique erunt, faciunto ut in eo loco, 
qui locus circa fontes et fornices et muros et rivos 
et specus terminatus est, arbores, vites, vepres, sentes, 
ripae, maceria, salicta, harundineta tollantur, exci- 
dantur, effodiantur, excodicentur, uti quod recte 
factum esse volent; eoque nomine eis pignoris capio, 
multae dictio coercitioque esto; idque eis sine fraude 
sua facere liceat, ius potestasque esto. Quo minus 
vites, arbores, quae villis, aedificiis maceriisve inclusae 
sunt, maceriae, quas curatores aquarum causa cognita 
ne demolirentur dominis permiserunt, quibus inscripta 
insculptaque essent ipsorum qui permisissent cura- 
torum nomina, maneant, hac lege nihilum rogatur.? 
Quo minus ex eis fontibus, rivis, specibus, fornicibus 
aquam sumere, haurire eis, quibuscumque curatores 
aquarum permiserunt, permiserint, praeterquam rota 
calice, machina liceat, dum ne qui puteus neque 
foramen novum fiat, eius hac lege nihilum rogatur.” ? 

130. Utilissimae legis contemptores non negaverim 
dignos poena quae intenditur, sed neglegentia longi 
temporis deceptos leniter revocari oportuit. Itaque 
sedulo laboravimus ut quantum in nobis fuit, etiam 


1 Mommsen ; gap of about twenty letters between sentes and 
curatores CB. 
2 rogator B; the MS. is uncertain. 


1 į.e. by the neglect of the officials to enforce the law. 
464 


AQUEDUCTS OF ROME, II. 129-130 


statute has broken into or pierced the channel or 
conduit of an aqueduct. Nothing of this law shall 
revoke the privilege of pasturing cattle, cutting 
grass or hay, or gathering brambles in this place. 
The water-commissioners, present or future, in any 
place which is now enclosed about any springs, arches, 
walls, channels, or conduits, are authorized to have 
removed, pulled out, dug up, or uprooted, any trees, 
vines, briars, brambles, banks, fences, willow-thickets, 
or beds of reeds, so far as they are ready to proceed 
with justice; and to that end they shall possess the 
right to bind over, to impose fines, or to restrain the 
offender; and it shall be their privilege, right, and 
power to do the same without prejudice. As for 
the vines and trees inside the enclosures of country- 
houses, structures or fences; as to the fences, 
which the commissioners after due process have 
exempted their owners from tearing down, and on 
which have been inscribed or carved the names of 
the commissioners who gave the permission—as to 
all these, nothing in this enactment prevents their 
remaining. Nor shall anything in this law revoke 
the permits that have been given by the water-com- 
missioners to any one to take or draw water from 
springs, channels, conduits, or arches, and besides 
that to use wheel, calix, or machine, provided that 
no well be dug, and that no new tap be made.” 

I should call the transgressor of so beneficent a 
law worthy of the threatened punishment. But 
those who had been lulled into confidence by long- 
standing neglect ! had to be brought back by gentle 
means to right conduct. 1 therefore endeavoured 
with diligence to have the erring ones remain 
unknown as far as possible. Those who sought 

465 


VOL. I, HH 


SEXTUS JULIUS FRONTINUS 


ignorarentur qui erraverant. Eis vero qui admoniti 
ad indulgentiam imperatoris decucurrerunt, possumus 
videri causa impetrati beneficii fuisse. In reliquum 
vero opto ne exsecutio legis necessaria sit, cum officii 
fidem etiam per offensas tueri praestiterit, 


466 


AQUEDUCTS OF ROME, II. 130 


the Emperor's pardon, after due warning received, 
may thank me for the favour granted. But for the 
future, I hope that the execution of the law may 
not be necessary, since it will be advisable for me 
to maintain the honour of my office even at the risk 
of giving offence. 


467 
HH 2 


INDEX OF PROPER NAMES 
IN THE STRATAGEMS 


(The References are to Book, Chapter, and Section.) 


ABYDENI, II. vii. 6 
Abydos, a town in Asia Minor on the 
Hellespont, I. iv. 7 
Achaia, II. iv. 4 
Acilius Glabrio, I1. iv. 4 
Adathas, 1I. v. 30 
Aegospotami, a town and river in the 
Thracian Chersonese, II. i. 18 
Aegyptii, Egyptians, I. i. 5; II. iii 
13; n.v.6 
Aelii, IV. v. 14 
Aelius, IV. v. 14 
Aemilian Way, II. v. 39 
Aemilianus, see Cornelius 
Aemilius: (1) Aemilius Paulus, I. 
ii. 7; I. iv. 1; (cf. notes on these 
passages) 
(2) L. Aemilius Paulus, consul 
216 B.C., IV. i. 4; IV. v. b 
(3) L. Aemilius Paulus Mace- 
donicus, II. iii. 20; III. xvii. 2; 
IV. vii. 3 
(4) Aemilius Rufus, tv. 1. 28 
(5) M. Aemilius Scaurus,IV. i. 13; 
IV. iii. 13 
Aequi, a warlike people of ancient 
Italy, dwelling to the north-east 
of Latium, 1I. viii. 2; III. i. 1 
Aesernia, a town in Samnium, I. v. 17 
Aetolia, a division of Central Greece, 
II. v. 19 
2 nA followers of Afranius, II. 
v.3 
Aranui, one of Pompey’s generals, 
I. v. 9; t. viii. 9; II. i. 11; II. v. 
38; II. xiii. 6 
Afri, age I. i 11; rr. fi. 11; 
II. iii. 1; TI. v. 
Africa, I. ji. 3; 1. iii. ; I. vil. 7 


I. xii. 1; IL. ii. 10; mr. iii. 10; 
II. iii. 16; II. v. 40; IL. vii. 4; 
III. vi. 1 


Africanus, see Cornelius 

Agathocles, I. xii. 9 

Agesilaus, king of Sparta, I. iv. 2; 
I. iv. 3; I. viii. 12; I. x. 3; I. xi. 
5; I. xi. 17; II. vi. 6; III. xi. 2 

Agrigentini, III. ii. 6; III. x. 6 

Agrigentum, a city of southern Sicily, 
III. x. 5 

Agrippa, see Furius 

Albani, inhabitants of Alba Longa, 
II. vii. 1 

Albania, an Asian province on the 
Caspian Sea, 11. iii. 14 

Alcetas, IV. vii. 19 

Alcibiades, an Athenian general at 
the time of the Peloponnesian War, 
II. v. 44; II. v. 45; II. vii. 6; 
III. fi. 6; ‘ir. vi. 6; III. ix. 6; III. 
xi. 3; Im. xii. 1 

Alexander of Macedon,I. fi. 3; 1.iii.1; 
I. iv. 9; I. iv. 9a; I. v. 11; I. vii. 
7; I. xi. 14; II. iii. 19; II. v. 17; 
II. xi. 3; II. xi. 4; II. ' xi. 6; III. 
vii. 4; IV. ii. 4; IV. iii. 10; Iv. 
vi. 3; IV. vii. 84 

Alexander, the Epirote, II. v. 10; 
IH. iv. b 

Mu HE Mores, Egyptian customs, 
I. 1. 

Alicius, II. xi. 5 

Alyattes, king of Lydia, father of 
Croesus, III. xv. 6 

Ambiorix, a Gallic chieftain, ITI. xvii. 6 

Ambracia, a town in Epirus, II. vii. 14 

Amphipolis, a town in Macedonia, 1. 
v. 28; III. xvi. 6 


469 


INDEX OF PROPER NAMES 


Anaxibius, a Spartan general, I. iv. 
7; II. v. 42 
Antigonus, the name of several Mace- 
donian kings: (1) Father of Deme- 
trius, IV. i. 10 
(2) A. Gonatas, III. iv. 2 
(3) A. Doson, II. vi. 5 
Antiochus, the name of several Syrian 
kings: (1) II. ii. 9; III. ix. 10 
(2) A., the Great, I. viii. 7; 
II. iv. 4; IV. vii. 10; Iv. vii. 30 
(3) A. Euergetes, II. xiii. 2 
Antipater, a general of Alexander of 
Macedon, I. iv. 13; II. xi. 4 
Antium, a town in Latium, iI. i. 1 
Antony, I. vii. 5; 11. iii. 15; II. v. 39; 
II. xiii. 7; III. xiii. 7; III. xiv. 3; 
III. xiv. 4; IV. 1. 37 
Apollonides, III. iii. 5 
Apennines, I. viii. 3 
Appius, see Claudius 
Aquae Sextiae, a Roman colony in 
southern Gaul, II. iv. 6 
Aquilius, IV. 1. 36 
Arabians, II. v. 16 
Arbela, a city in Assyria, II. iii. 19 
Arcadia, & province in the Pelopon- 
nesus, III. ii. 7 
Arcadians, I. xi. 9; III. ii. 4 
Archelaus, a general of Mithridates, 
Salis 18; 1. xi. 20; II. iii. 17; II. 
12 


Archidamus, a king of TAT I. xi. 9 

Ariovistus, a German king, I. xi. 3; 
II. 1. 16; IV. v. 11 

Aristides,’ an Athenian, renowned for 
his integrity, and surnamed “* the 
Just," IV. iii. 5 

Aristippus, III. ii. 8 

Aristonicus, brother of Attalus III of 
Pergamum, IV. v. 16 

Armenia, II. v. 33; IV. i. 21; IV. i. 
28 

Armenia Major, II. i. 14; II. ii. 4 

Armenians, I. iv. 10; II. ix. 5 

Arminius, a German chieftain, as ix. 4 

Arpi, a city of Apulia, III. ix. 2 

Artaxerxes Mnemon, king of Persia, 
II. iii. 6; IV. ii. 7 

Arusian Plains, in Samnium, IV. i. 14 

Asculani, III. xvii. 8 

Asculum, a town in Apulia, II. iii. 21 

Asia, II. ix. 8; II. xi. 3; III. xvii. 5; 


IV. v. 16 
Ategua, a city in Spain, III. xiv. 1 
470 


Atheas, II. iv. 20 

Athenians, I. iii. 6; T. iii. 9; I. iv. 7; 
I. iv. 13; I. iv. 13a; I. v. 7; I. v. 
23; I. xi. 10; II. i. 9; II. 1. 18; II. 
ix. 8; 11. ix. 9; II. ix. 10; III. ii. 6; 
HUI.iv.2; YII. vi. 6; III. xli. 1; III. 
xv.2; IV. iii. 5; IV. vii. 13 

Athens, I. 1. 10; IV. vii. 13 

Atilius Calatinus, I. v. 15; IV. v. 10 

Atilius Regulus: (1) Consul 294 B.O., 

II. viii. 11; IV. i. 29 
(2) Consul 267 B.O., II. iii, 10; 
IV. iii. 8 

Atrebas, a member of a Belgian tribe, 
Il. xiii, 11 

Attalus, II. xiii. 1 

Augustus, see Domitian and Vespasian 

Aurelius, IV. jJ. 31 

Aurelius Cotta, IV. i. 22; IV. i. 30; 
IV. i. 31 

Aurunculeius Cotta, a lieutenant of 
Caesar, III. xvii. 6 

Autophradates, a Persian general, I. 
iv. 5; II. vii. 9 


Babylon, III. vii. 4 

Babylonians, III. iii. 4; III. vii. 5 

Baleares, inhabitants of the Balearic 
T ne famous as slingers, II. iii. 


Bantius, 111. xvi. 1 

Barca, see Hamilcar 

Bardylis, II. v. 19 

Boeotia, II. viii. 12 

Boii, a Celtic people, who early 
migrated to Italy, I. ii. 7; 1. vi. 4 

Brasidas, a distinguished Spartan 
general during the Peloponnesian 
War, I. v. 23 

Britannia, 11. xiii. 11 

Brundisium, & seaport of southern 
Italy, I. v. 5 

Brutiani, followers of Brutus, IV. ii. 1 

Brutti, the inhabitants of the southern 
point of Italy, II. iii. 21 

Brutus, see Junius 

Byzantii, the inhabitants of Byzan- 
tium, the modern Constantinople, 
I. iii. 4; I. iv. 18a; IIl. xi. 3 


bacis o a people of southern Gaul, 

III. vii. 

Oaecilius Metellus (1) L. Caecilius 
Metellus, consul 251 B.O, I. 
vii. 1; II. v. 4 


IN THE STRATAGEMS 


(2) Q. Caecilius Metellus Mace- 
donicus, consul 143 B.O., III. vii. 
3; IV.i.11; IV. 1.23; IV. vii. 42 
(3) Q. Caecilius Metellus Numidi- 
cus, I. viii. 8; Iv.1.2; IV.ii.2; 
(cf. "note to IV. i. 11)’ 
(4) Q. Caecilius Metellus Pius, 
1.4.12; II. 1. 2; 11.1. 8; II. iii. 
5; II. xiii. 3 
Caedicius, IV. vii. 8 
(Q.) Caedicius, I. v. 15; IV. v. 10 
Caelii, IV. v. 14 
Caelius, IV. v. 14 
Caesar, see Julius and Domitian 
Caeso, see T'abius 
Calatinus, see Atilius 
Callidromus, II. iv. 4 
Calpurnius Flamma, I. v. 15; IV. v. 10 
Calpurnius Piso: (1) Cn. Calpurnius 
Piso, III. vi. 5 
(2) L. Calpurnius Piso, Iv. i. 26 
Calvinus, III. ii. 1 
Camalatrum, II. iv. 7 
Camertes, I. ii. 2* 
Camillus, see Furius 
Campania, I. ix.1 
Campanians, III. iv. 1; III. xiii. 2; 
IV. vii. 29 
Cannae, a village in Apulia, II. ii. 7; 
JI. iii. 7; II. v. 27; III. xvi. 1; Iv. 
i. 44; IV. v. 5; IV. v. 7; Iv. vii. 39 
Cannicus, II. iv. 7; II. v. 34 
Cantenna, II. v. 34 
Canusium, a town in Apulia, IV. v. 7 
Capitol, III. xiii. 1; YII. xv. 1 
Capitolinus, see Quintius 
Cappadocia, a country in Asia Minor, 
I.1. 6; I. v. 18; I1. ii. 2; II. vii. 9; 
III. ii. 9 
Capua, an ancient city of Campania, 
IV. xv iil, 3 
Cardianus, from Cardia, a town of the 
Thracian Chersonese, IV. vii. 34 
Caria, a province of Asia Minor, I. viii. 
12; II. ii. 5 
Carpetani, a people of central Spain, 
II. vii. 7 
Carthage, I. xi. 4 
Carthago Nova, a seaport of south- 
eastern Spain, III. ix. 1 
Carthaginienses, passim: 1. ii. 3; 
I.ii. 4; I. iii. 8; I. vii. 9; I. viii. 7; 
II. 1. 45; II. ii. 11; II. v. 11; II. v, 
12: II. v. 29; II. ix. 6; II. ii. 2 
Casilini, IV. v. 20 mM 


Casilinum, a town in Campania, III, 
xiv. 2; III. xv. 8 

Cassiani, followers of Cassius, IV. ii. 1 

Cassius, II. v. 35 ; IV. ii. 1; IV. vii. 11 

Castor and Pollux, I. xi. 8; I. xi. 9 

Castus, II. iv. 7; II. v. 34 

Catina, a city in Sicily, III. vi. 6 

Catinenses, III. vi. 6 

Cato, see Porcius 

Catulus, see Lutatius 

Caudine Forks, a mountain pass in 
Samnium , I. v. 16 

Se a people of Spain, II. v. 
3; II. v. 

Ceres, the Tintin goddess of agri- 
culture, II. ix. 9 

Chabrias, a celebrated Athenian 
general, I. iv. 14; I. xii. 12 

Chaeronea, a town in Boeotia, II. i. 9 

Chalcidians, the inhabitants of Chalcis 
in Euboea, III. xi. 1 

Chares, an Athenian general, II. xii. 
8; III. x. 8 

Charmades, III. ii. 11 

Chatti, a people of western Germany, 
II. iii. 23 

Chaucenses, II. xi. 2 

Chersonesus, the Thracian peninsula, 
west of the Hellespont, I. iv. 138; 
II. v. 42 

Chians, the inhabitants of Chios, an 
island in the Aegean Sea, I. iv. 13a 

Cicero, see Tullius 

Cimbrians, a dum of northern Ger- 
many, I. ii. 6; I. v. 3; II. ii. 8 
I. v. 8; II. vii. 12 

Ciminian Forest, in Etruria, I. ii. 2 

Cimon, a distinguished Athenian 
general, son of Miltiades, 11. ix. 10; 
III. íi. 5 

Cineas, an RENON a friend of Pyrrhus, 


IV. iii. 2 
Civilis, IV. iii. 14 
Claudius: (1) Appius Claudius Sabi- 
nus, IV. i. 34 
(2) Appius Claudius Caecus, IV. 
i. 18 


o “Appius Claudius Caudex, I 
. 11 
2 Aks Claudius Pulcher, IV. 
44 
m Publius Claudius, II. xiii. 9 
(6) M. Claudius Marcellus, consul 


222 B.C., II. ii. 6; Ir. iii. 9; 
Il. iv. 8; Ill. iii. 2; IH. xvi. 1; 


47} 


INDEX OF PROPER NAMES 


Iv. i. 44; 
IV. Vii. 38 
(7) Claudius Marcellus, officer 
under Marius, I1. iv. 6 
(8) C. Claudius Nero, I. i. 9; 
red. I. v. 19; 11. iii. 8; 1 
(9) T1. Claudius Nero, II. i. 15 
Cleandridas, II. iii. 12 
Clearchus, a Spartan general in the 
Peloponnesian War, III, v. 1; IV. 
.17 


IV. V. 4; IV. vii. 26; 


Cleomenes, king of Sparta, II. ii. 9 
Cleonymus, III. vi. 7 
Clisthenes, tyrant of Sicyon, III. vii. 6 
Clodius, I. v. 21 
Clusium, an important town in 
Etruria, I. viii. 3 
Cocles, see Horatius 
Cominius, III. xiii. 1 
Commius, II. xiii. 11 
Cononeus, III. iii. 6 
Consabra, IV. v. 19 
Corbulo, see Domitius 
Corcyreans, the inhabitants of Cor- 
cyra, an island in the Ionian Sea, 
I. xii. 11 
Corinth, III. xii. 2; IV. iii. 15 
Coriolanus, an early Roman patrician 
condemned to exile by the plebeian 
assembly. Hero of Shakespeare's 
play of that name, I. viii. 1 
Cornelius: (1) Cornelius Cossus, 426 
B.C., II. viii. 9 
(2) Cornelius Cossus, consul, 343 
B.C., I. v. 14; IV. v. 9 
(3) Cornelius Lentulus, IV. v. 5 
(4) P. Cornelius Rufinus, III. vi. 4 
(5) L. Cornelius Rufinus, III. ix.4 ; 
(cf. note) 
(6) Cornelius Beipio, legatus 297 
B.C., II. iv. 2 
(7) L. Cornelius Scipio, consul 
259 B.C., III. x. 2; (cf. III. ix. 
4 and note) 
(8) Cn. Cornelius Scipio, II. iii. 1; 
IV. iii. 4; Iv. vii. 9 
(9) P. Cornelius Scipio Africanus 
Major, I. ii. 1; 1. iii. 5; 1. iii. 8; 
I. viii. 10; I. xii. 1; II. i. 1; 
II. iii. 4; II. iii. 16; II. v. 29; 
II. vii. 4; II. xl. 5; III. vi. 1; 
III. ix. 1; IV. vii. 30; IV. vii. 39 
(10) L. Cornelius Scipio Asiaticus, 
IV. vii. 30 


4/2 


(11) P. Cornelius Scipio Aemilia- 
nus Africanus Minor, II. viii. 7 ; 
IV. 1. 1; Iv. i. 6; IV. lii. 9; 
IV. vil. 4; Iv. vii. 16; IV. vii. 27 
(12) P. Cornelius Scipio Nasica, 
IV. i. 15 
(13) P. Cornelius Scipio Nasica 
Corculum, IIT. vi. 2 
(14) P. Cornelius Scipio Nasica 
Serapio, Iv. i. 20 
(15) L. Cornelius Sulla, I. v. 17; 
I. v. 18; I. ix. 2; I. xi. 11; 
I. xi. 20; II. iii. 17; II. vii. 2; 
II. vii. 3; II. viii. 12; II. ix. 3; 
IV. i. 27 
Cossus, see Cornelius 
Cotta, see Aurelius and Aurunculeius 
Crassus, see  Fonteius, Licinius, 
Otacilius 
Craterus, III. vi. 7 
Crispinus, see Quintius 
Crissaei, the inhabitants of Crissa, a 
town in Phocis, III. vii. 6 
Croesus, the last king of Lydia, 1. v. 
4; II. iv. 12; III. viii. 3 
Crotona (Croton), a Greek town én 
southern Italy, III. vi. 4 
Crotonienses, III. vi. 4 
Cubii, II. xi. 7 
Cunctator, see Fabius 
Ourio, see Scribonius 
Curius, M'. Curius Dentatus, a hero 
of the Roman republic, I. viii. 4; 
II. ii. 1; IV. iii. 12 
Cursor, see Papirius 
Cyprus, the island, II. ix. 10 
Cyrrhestes, a native of Cyrrhestica, a 
province of Syria, I. i. 6 
Cyrus, the Elder, king of Persia, I. xi. 
19; II. v. 6; III. iii. 43 III. viii. 3 
Cyrus, the Younger, IV. ii. 5; Iv. ii. 7 
Cyzicenes, the inhabitants of Cyzicus, 
III. xiii. 6 
Cyzicus, a town and island north of 
Asia Minor, I1I. ix. 6; IV. v. 21 


Daci, the people of Dacia, on the 
north bank of the Danube, I. x. 4; 
II. iv. 3 

Dardanicum bellum, Iv. i. 43 

Darius, king of Persia, I. v. 25 

Datames, a distinguished Persian 
general, II. vii. 9 

Decelea, a deme m Attica, north of 
Athens, I. iii. 9 


IN THE STRATAGEMS 


Decius: P. Decius Mus, (1) consul 
340 B.C., I. v. 14; IV. v. 9; 
IV. v. 15 
(2) Consul 295 B.C. I. viii. 3; 
IV. v. 15 
Delminus, III. vi. 2 
Delphi, seat of the oracle of Apollo in 
Phocis, I. xi. 11 
Diana, the goddess, IIT. ii. 5 
Didius, I. viii. 5; I1. x. 1 
Diodotus, III. xvi. 5 
Dionysius, tyrant of Syracuse, I. viii. 
11; 111. iv. 3; rmm. iv. 4 
Dis, another name for Pluto, god of 
the underworld, I. ii. 10 
Domitian, the Emperor, I. i. 8; I. 
iii. 10; II. iii. 23; II. xi. 7; IV. 
lii. 14 
Domitius Calvinus, III. ii. 1 
Domitius Corbulo, a distinguished 
Roman general, II. ix. 5; IV. i. 21; 
IV. i. 28; IV. ii. 8; VI. vii. 2 
Duellius, winner of the first naval 
victory won by the Romans, I. v. 
6; II. iii. 24; III. ii. 2 
Duillius, I. v. 17 
Dyrrhachium, & seaport town of 
"us II. vii. 13; 1H. xvii. 4; IV. 
. 43 


Elea, a city of Aeolis in Asia Minor, 
IV. v. 16 

Eleusis, & city of Attica, famous for 
the Eleusinian mysteries, II. ix. 9 

Enipeus, a river of Thessaly, II. iii. 22 

Epaminondas, the famous Theban 
general, I. xí. 6; I. x1. 16; I. xii. 5; 
I.xii.6; I. xii. 7 ; II. ii. 12; II. v. 26; 
III. ii. 7; III. xi. 5; III. xii. 3; IV. 
11. 6; Iv. iii. 6 

Ephesii, the inhabitants of Ephesus, 
III. iii. 7; III. ix. 10 

Ephesus, a city of Ionia in Asia Minor, 
III. iii. 7 

Ephialtes, the betrayer of the Spartans 
at Thermopylae, II. ii. 13 

Epicydes, 111. iii. 2 

Epidaurus, a town in Argolis, famed 
a tne worship of Aesculapius, II. 


Epirotes, I. iv. 4; 1I. iii. 21; II. vi. 9; 
II. iii. 1; Iv. iii. 2 

Epirotica regio, II. v. 10 

Epirus, a province of northern Greece, 
II. xiii. 8 


Erythraei, the inhabitants of Ery 
thraea in Boeotia, II. v. 15 

Etrusca lingua, I. ii. 2 

Etrusci, Etruscans, I. viii. 8; I. xi. 1; 
II. v. 23 II. vi. 7; II. vii. 11 

Etruscum bellum, I. ii. 2; 1. ii. 7 

Eumenes : (1) the Cardian, Iv. vii. 34 

(2) king of Bithynia, I. xi. 15 

Euphrates, the river, I. i. 6; III. vii 
4; II. vii. 5 

Europe, II. vi. 8 

Eurymedon River, II. ix. 10 


Fabius: (1) Q. Fabius Maximus 
Rullus, I. ii. 2; I. viii. 9; I. 
xi. 21; II. 1. 8; IJ. iv. 2; II. v. 
2; IV.i. 35; IV. 1. 39 
(2) Fabius Caeso, I. ii. 2 
%3) Q. Fabius Maximus Servilia- 
nus, IV. i. 42 
(4) Q. Fabius Maximus Cuncta- 
tor, I. iii. 3; I. v. 28; I. viii. 25 
I. xi. 4; II. v. 22; Ill. iv. 1; 
III. ix. 2; IV. vi. 1; IV. vii. 36 
(5) Q. Fabius Maximus, son of 
No. 4, 111. ix. 2; IV. vi.1l 
(6) M. Fabius Vibulanus, 1. xi. 1; 
II. vi. 7; 1I. vii. 11 
Fabricius, a hero of the Roman re- 
public, Iv. iii. 2; Iv. iv. 2 
Falisci, the inhabitants of Falerii in 
Etruria, II. iv. 18; 1I. v. 9; IL 
viii. 3; II. viii. 8; Iv. iv. 1 
Fidenae, a town in the Sabine terri- 
tory, north of Rome, II. v. 1 
Fidenates, IJ. iv. 19; II. viii. 9 
Fimbria, a partisan of Marius and 
Cinna, III. xvii. 5 
Flaccus, see Fulvius 
Flaminius, a Roman general, defeated 
and slain by Hannibal, II. v. 24 
Flamma, see Calpurnius 
Fonteius Crassus, I. v. 12; IV. v. 8 
Forum Gallorum, a town of Cisalpine 
Gaul, II. v. 39 
Fulvius: (1) Cn. Fulvius, 11. v. 9 
(2) Cn. Fulvius Centumalus, I. 
viii. 3 
Fulvius Flaccus, consul 
212 B.O., IV. i. 44 
(4) Cn. Fulvius Flaccus, consul 
211 B.O., II. v. 21; IV. vii. 29 
(5) Q. Fulvius Flaccus, censor 
174 B.C., II. v. 8 (cf. note): 
Iv. i. 32 


413 


INDEX OF PROPER NAMES 


(6) Cn. Fulvius Flaccus, brother 
of No. 6, Iv. i. 32 
(7) Fulvius Nobilior, I. vl. 1; 
I. vi. 2; I. xl. 2 
Furius, I. 1. 1i; I. v. 13 
Furius EAE II. viii. 2 ' 
M. Furius Camillus: (1) dictator 
896 B.O., II. iv. 15; Pon vili. 4; 
IL. viii. 6; III. xili. 1; III. xv. 
1; Iv. iv. 1; Iv. vii. 40 
(2) Son of No. 1, II. vi. 1 


Gabii, a town in Latium, III. iii. 3 
Gabini, the inhabitants of Gabii, I. i. 
4; III. lii. 3 
Galli, the Gauls, I. ii. 6; I. viii. 3; 
I. xi. 15; II. 1. 8; t. li. 16; 1I. iii. 
18: II. iv. 5; II. iv. T5 I. v. 20; 
II. v. 34: II. vi. 1; II. xiii, 1; II. 
xiii. 1; IH. Xv. 1; III. xvi. 2; III. 
xvi. 3: Ul. xvii. 6; III. xvii. 1; 


IV. v. 
Gallia, I x 8; Ir. 1. 16; II. xiii. 11; 
III. vii. 2; in. xvii. 6; IV. iii. 14 
Gallic Way, II. vi. 1 
Gallus, see Sulpicius 
Gastron, II. iii. 13 
Gelo, tyrant of Syracuse, I. xi. 18 


Germani, the Germans, I. i. 8; I. iii. 

10; I. xi. 3; II. i. 16; II. v. 20; 
II. v. 34; II. vi. 3; II. ix. 4; IV. 
v. 11; Iv. vii. 8 


Germanicum bellum, IV. iii. 14 

Germanicus, see Domitian 

Germany, IV. vii. 8 

Gisgo, see Hasdrubal 

Glabrio, see Acilius 

Glaucia, IV. v. 1 

Gracchus, see Sempronius 

Graeca urbs, III. v. 3 

Graeci, the Greeks, Pref. to Bk. I., 
II. ii. 14; II. iii. 6; II. iii. 18; III. 
ii. 6; IV. ii. 7; IV. li. 8; IV. vii. 22 

Graecinus, II. v. 31 

Greece, I. iv. 6; II. ii. 14 


Halys, a river in Asia Minor, I. v. 4 
Hamilcar, the name of several Cartha- 
ginian generals: (1) III. xvi. 2 
(2) Hamilcar Rhodinus, I. ii. 3 
(3) Hamilcar Barca, II. iv. 17; 
III. x. 9 
Hannibal, the name of several Cartha- 
ginian generals: (1) son of 
Gisgo, III. x. à 


474 


(2) Hannibal, leader in First 
Punic War, IV. i. 19 
(3) Hannibal, son of Hamilcar 
Barca, I. 1. 9; 1.i1. 9; 1. ili. 3; 
I. iii. 8; I. v. 19; I. v. 28; 
I. vii. 2; I. viii. 2; I. viii. 7; 
I. viii. 10; II. ij. 6; II. ii. 7; 
II. iii. 7; II. iii. 9; II. iii. 16; 
II. V. 18; II. v. 213 II. v. 22; 
II. v. 23; II. V. 24; II. v. 25; 
JI. v. 27: HJ. vi. 4; II. vil. 1; 
II. ix. 2; III. fi. 3; III. iii. 6; 
II. vi. 1; IJI. ix. 2; II. x. 3; 
III. x. 4; III. xiv. 2; III. xv. 3; 
I. xvi. 1; III. xvi. 4; TII. xviii. 
1; rH. xviii, 2; III. xvii. 3; 
IV. iil. 7; IV. dif. 8; Iv. v. 20; 
IV. vii. 10; IV. vli. 25; IV. 
vii. 26; IV. "vii. 38 
Hanno, the name of several Cartha- 
ginian generals: (1) I. v. 27 
(2) Hanno, 261 B.C., IIJ. xvi. 3 
(3) Hanno, 218 R.C., II. iii. 1 
Harrybas, king of the Molossians, a 
people in Epirus, II. v. 19 
Hasdrubal, the name of several Car- 
thaginian generals: (1) H. 
brother of Hannibal, 1. i. 9; 
I. ii. 9; I. v. 19; II. iii. 8; 
II. ix. 2; IV. vii. 15 
(2) H., son of Gisgo, I. iii. 5; 
; I1. ili. 4 
(3) Others of this name: I, v. 12; 
II. V. 4; III. xvii.1; II. xvii. 3; 
IV. lii. 8; IV. v. 8; IV. vii. 18° 
Hellespont, the modern Dardanelles, 
I. iv. 7; 1I. v. 44 
Henna, a city of central Sicily, IV. 
vii. 22 
Heraclea, III. x. 7 
Hermocrates, a Syracusan general, 
II. ix. 6; II. ix. 7 
Hernici, a "people of Latium, 11. viii. 2 
Himera, a city of northern Sicily, 
III. x. 3 
Himeraeans, III. iv. 4; Ul. x. 3 
Himilco, a Carthaginian general, I. i, 
2; III. x. b 
Hippias, tyrant of Athens, son of 
Pisistratus, II. ii. 9 
Hirtius, consul 43 B.C., mm. xiii. 7; 
III. xiii. 8; III. xiv. 3; III. xiv. 4 
Hirtuleius, a lieutenant of Sertorius in 
Spain, I. v. 8; 11. i. 2; I. iil 6; 
II. vii. 5; IV. v. 19 


IN THE STRATAGEMS 


Hispani, the Spaniards, II. iii. 1; II. 
iv. 17; II. v. 31; Ir. x. 1; IV. v. 19 

Hispania, Spain, 1. i. 1; I. i. 12; 1. ii. 
5; 1.iii.5; I. v. 1; I. v. 8; I. v. 12; 
T. v. 19; 11. 1. 1; I1. 2; 1.1. 5; 
IL. iii. 1; rl. iii. 4; II. iii. 5; II. iii. 
11; II. v. 14; IJ. v. 31; II. v. 32; 
IIl. ix. 2: II. x. 1; II. xi. 6; II. xii. 
2; II. xiii, 6; III. i. 2; III. vii. 3; 
II. xiv. 1; III. xviii. 1; Iv.i. 23; 
IV. lii. 4; IV. v. 8; IV. vii. 31; IV. 
vii. 42 

Hispaniae, II. x. 2 

Homericus versus, IT. iii. 21 

Horatius Cocles, the defender of the 
bridge against the Etruscans under 
Porsenna, rI. xiii. 5 

Hostilius (Tullus H.), third king of 
Rome, II. vii. 1 

Hydaspes, a river in India, I. iv. 9 

Hyllii, the Illyrians, 11. iij. 2 


Iapydes, a people of Illyria, II. v. 28 

Ilerda, a town in Spain, II. v. 38; II. 
xiii. 6 

Ilergetes, a people of Spain, IV. vii. 31 

Illyrii, the Illyrians, & people on the 
eastern shore of the Adriatic, II. v. 
10; II. v. 19; III. vi. 3 

Indi, the people of India, I. iv. 9 

Indibile, a town in Spain, II. iii. 1 

Indus, the river in India, 1. iv. 9a 

Initia, a fortress in Armenia, IV. 1. 
21 


Iphicrates, a famous Athenian general, 
I. iv. 7; I. v. 24; I. vi. 3; 11.1. 5; 
II. 1. 6; II. v. 42; II. xii. 4; III. xii. 
2; IV. vii. 23 

Isaura, a town in Asia Minor, III. vii. 1 

Isthmos (of Corinth), II. v. 26 

E the Italians, IT. iii. 16; II. 


. 17 
Italy, 1. 111.2; 1.111. 8; I. 1v. 11; I. v. 
5; et passim 


Juba, a Numidian king, IT. v. 40 
Judael, the Jews, II. i. 17 
Jugurtha, a Numidian king, T. viii. 8; 
II. 1. 13; r1. iv. 10 
rir anu bellum, III. ix. 3; IV. 
2 


Julius Caesar, 1.1.5; 1.iii. 2; Y. v. 5; 
I. v. 9; I. viii. 9: I. ix. 4; I. xi. 3; 
I. xii. 2; I1. 1. 11; 11.1. 16; II. ii. 3; 
I. iii. 18; II. tii. 22; II. v. 20; IL v. 


38; 11. vi. 3; 11. vili. 135 11. viii. 18; 
JI. xiii. 6; II. xiii. 11, In. vii. 2; 
II. xiv. 1: III. xvii. 4; III. xvii. 6; 
IV. v. 2; IV. v. 11; IV. vii. 1; IV. 
vii. 32 
Julius Civilis, IV. iii. 14 
Junius : (1) D. Junius Brutus, consul, 
138 B.C., IV. i. 20 
(2) D. Junius Brutus, consul 43 
B.O., III. xiii. 7; III. xiii. 8 
(3) M. Junius Brutus, IV. ii. 1 
(4) M. Junius Pera, r1. v. 25 
Jupiter, I. xii. 12 


Kaeso, see Fabius 


Laberius, I. v. 15; Iv. v. 10 
Labienus: (1) T. Labienus, a lieute- 
rant of Caesar, II. v. 20; II. vil. 13 
(2) T. Labienus, son of No. 1, 
II. v. 36 
Lacedaemon, Sparta, I. i. 10; III. xi. 
5; IV. vii. 13 
Lacedaemonii, the Lacedaemonians, 
1.4.10; 1. iii. 7; 1.41.9; Liv. 2; 
I. iv. 12; I. xi.6; I. xi. 7; 1. xi. 16; 
I. xil. 9; I. xii. 7; 1I. 1. 6; 11.1. 10; 
II. ii. 12; II. 1i. 19; II. v. 26; II. v. 
42; II. V. 47; II. xi. 4; III. xi. 5; 
II. xii. 1; III. xv. 2; IV. ii, 6; 
IV. 11. 9; IV. v. 12; IV. vii. 13 
Lacetani, a people of Spain, III. x. 1 
Laelii, IV. v. 14 
Laelius: (1) C. Laelius, the friend of 
Scipio Africanus, the elder, I. i. 
3; I. ij. 1; II. lii. 16 
(2) D. Laelius, an adherent of 
Pompey, II. v. 31 
(3) Iv. v. 14 
Laenas, see Popilius 
Laevinus, see Valerius 
Latin League, IV. vii. 25 
Latina lingua, IT. iv. 10 
Latini, the people of Latium, I. xi. 8; 
II. viii. 4 
Latinum nomen, Iv. vii. 25 
Lauron, a town in Spain, II. v. 31 
Lentulus, see Cornelius 
Leonidas, the hero of Thermopylae, 
IV. v. 13 
Leotychidas, a Spartan admiral, I. xi. 7 
Leptines, II. v. 11 
Leucadia, a town and island in the 
Ionian Sea, III. iv. 5 
Liburni, an Illyrian people, r1. v. 43 


415 


INDEX OF PROPER NAMES 


Licinius : e P. Licinius, proconsul, 
I. v 


e r Siir pale Crassus Mucianus, 


(3) T. eR Crassus, IT. iv. 16; 
JV. vii. 41 

(4) M. Licinius Orassus, I. i. 18; 
I. v. 20; tI. iv. 7; 11. v. 34 

(5) Licinius Lucullus, 111. x. 7 

(6) L. Licinius Lucullus, II. i. 14 ; 


JI. ii. 4; Ir. v. 30; II. vii. 8; 
III. xiii. 6 
Ligures, I. ii. 6; I. v. 16; I. v. 26; 


Ir. iii. 16; YII. ii. 15; U1. ix. 3; III. 
xvii. 2; Iv. i. 46 
Liguria, a district of Cisalpine Gaul, 
I. v. 16 
Lilvbaeum, a promontory of western 
Sicily, UI. x. 9 
Lingones, a people of Gaul, Iv. iii. 14 
Liparae Insulae, Liparian Islands, 
north of Sicily, IV. i. 31 
Litana Forest, in Cisalpine Gaul, I. 
vi. 4 
Livius : (1) Livy, the historian, II. v. 
31; II. v. 34 
(2) M. Livius Macatus, III. iii. 6; 
III. xvii. 3 
(3) M. Livius Salinator, I. i. 9; 
I. ii. 9; II. iii. 8; 1v. i. 45; 
IV. vil. 15 
Locri, (Epizephyrii) a Greek settle- 
ment in southern Italy, Iv. vii. 26 
Longus, see Sempronius 
Lucani, the Lucanians, a people of 
southern Italy, I. iv. 1; 1. vi. 1; 
II.iii. 12; I1. iii. 21; III. "vi. 4 
Luceria, a city in Apulia, Iv. i. 29 
Lucullus, see Licinius 
Lueria, III. ii. 1 
Lusitani, TI. xiii. 4; III. v. 2 
Lusitania, a country of western Spain, 
I. xi. 13 
Lutatius Catulus, consul 102 B.C., I. 


v. 8 
Lydia, a district of Asia Minor, I. 
viii. 12; IV. vii. 30 
Lysander, a distinguished Spartan 
general, I. v. 7; I1.1. 18; 1V.i.9 
Lysimachus, one of Alexander’s 
generals, I. v. 11; III. iii. 7 


Macedones, I. iv. 6; I. iv. 13; II. ili. 
2; mr. iii. 16; II. iij. 17; II. iii. 
20; II. vii. 8; III. iii. 7 


476 


Macedonia, IV. ii. 1; IV. vi. 3 
Macedonicus habitus, III. ii. 11 
Magnetes, the Magnesians, a people 
of Thessaly, III. viii. 2 
Mago, the name of several Carthagi- 
nian generals: (1) brother of 
Hannibal, II. v. 23 
(2) another, ITI. vi. 5; Iv. vii. 26 
Maharbal, a Cathaginian, 1 II. v. 12 
Maleventum, Iv. i. 14 (cf. note) 
Mandro, III. iii. 7 
Manlius: (1) A. Manlius, I. ix. 1 
(2) Cn. Manlius, I. xí. 1; II. vi. 7; 
II. vii. 11 
(3) Manlius Imperiosus, Iv. i. 40 
(4) son of No. 3, Iv. i. 41 
@) A. Manlius Torquatus, III. 


Mantinea, a city of Arcadia in the 
Peloponnesus, III. xi. 5 
Marathon, a village in Attica, 11. ix. 8 
Marcellus, see Claudius 
Marcius: (1) T. Marcius, II. vi. 2; 
IH.x.2 
(2) Marcius Coriolanus, I. viii. 1 
(3) Q. Marcius Rufus, I1. iv. 7 
Mariani muli, Iv. 1. 7 
Marius, I. ii. 6; Y. a 12; n. ii. 8; 
II. iv. 6; II. iv. 10; 11. vii. 12; I. 
ix. 1; TII. ix. 8 : D 7; IV. 1. 2; 
IV. vil. 5 
noe aequo, II. iij. 13; II. iv. 1; II. 
. 6 
Ma-inissa, king of Numidia, II. iii. 16 ; 
IIl. vi. 1; 1V. iii. 11 
Massilienses, the inhabitants of Mas- 
silia, now Marseilles, I. vii. 4 
Mauri, the Moors, II. iii. 16; 111. xiv. 1 
Maximus, see Fabius 
Mediolanum, modern Milan, I. ix. 3 
Megara, a iy c of Megaris in central 
Greece, IY 
Megarenses, II. ix. 9 
Melanthus, II. v. 41 
Memmius, Iv. i. 1 
Memmon, the Rhodian, II. v. 18; 
I1. v. 46 
Messana, acity of north-eastern Sicily, 
I. iv. 11; IV. i. 31 
Messenii, the inhabitants of Messenia 
n the "Peloponnesus, JI. i. 10; III. 
.4 
Metellus, see Caecilius 
Milesii, the inhabitants of Miletus in 
Asia Minor, III. ix. 7; III. xv. 6 


IN THE STRATAGEMS 


Milo, ri. iil. 1 
Miltiades, the celebrated Athenian 
general, II. ix. 8 
Mindarus, II. v. 44 
Minerva, the goddess, TII. ii. 8; Iv. 
vii. 13 
Minucius: (1) M. Minucius Rufus, 
I1. v. 22 
(2) Minucius Rufus, II. iv. 3 
(3) Q. Minucius Thermus, I. v. 16; 
I. viii. 10 
Mithridates, king of Pontus, I. i. 7; 


I. v. 18; I. xi. 20; IT. i. 12; II. i. 
14; II. il. 2; II. di. 3; IIL. ii. 4; 
IH. v. 30; II. v. 83; III. xiii. 6; 


III. xvii. 5; IV. v. 21 

Mithridaticus exercitus, II. viii. 12 

Molossi, a people of Epirus, II. v. 19 

Mulucha, a river in northern Africa, 
III. ix. 3 

Mummius, the general who destroyed 
Corinth, Iv. iii. 15 

Munda, a city in Spain, II. viii. 13 

Munychia, one of the three Athenian 
harbours, I. v. 7 

Mutina, a city of Cisalpine Gaul, I. 
vii. Y III. xiii. 7 

Mutinenses, III. xiv. 3 

Myrina, a city of Aeolis in Asia Minor, 
IV. v. 16 

Myronides, II. iv. 11; IV. vii. 21 


Naevius, centurion, IV. vii. 29 

Nasica, see Cornelius 

Nautius, II. iv. 1 

Nero, see Claudius 

Nicostratus, king of the Aetolians, 
I. iv. 4 

Nobilior, see Fulvius 

Nolani, the inhabitants of Nola, a 
city in Campania, III. xvi. 1 

Numantia, a city in Spain, II. viii. 7; 
IV. i. 1; IV. vii. 27 

Numantini, III. xvii. 9; IV. v. 23 

Numidae, Numidians, I. v. 16; Ir. ii. 
11; rr. iii. 16; II. v. 23; Ir. v. 27; 


II. v. 29; II. v. 40; III. vi. 1; IV. 
vil. 18 
Numidis, a country of northern 


Africa, II. iv. 10; 1v. vii. 18 
Numistro, a city in Lucania, II. ii. 6 


Oceanus, the British Channel, II. xiii. 
11 
Octavius Graecinus, II. v. 81 


(On.) Octavius, IV. v. 7 

Orchomenos, a city in Boootia, I. xi. 5 

Orestes, son of Agamemnon, I. ii. 8 

Osaces, a Parthian general, 11. v. 35 

Otacilius Crassus, III. xvi. 3; IV. i. 
19 


Paches, an Athenlan general, IV. vii. 
17 i 


Pacorus, a Parthian general, I. i. 6 

Palaepharsalus, II. iii. 22 

Pammenes, a Theban general, II. iii. 3 

Pamphylia, a country of Asia Minor, 
II. ix. 10 

Pannonii, the people of Pannonia, a 
country north of Illyricum, II. 1. 15 

Panormitani, III. xvii. 1 

Panormus, the modern Palermo, It. 


v. 
Pansa, II. v. 39 
Papirius: (1) L. Papirius Cursor, 
dictator 325 B.O., Iv. i. 39 
(2) son of No. 1, II. iv. 1; III. 
iii. 1 
Papus, see Aemilius 
Parthi, the Parthians, an Asiatic 
people, I. i. 6; Ir. ii. 5; II. iii. 15; 
II. v. 35; II. v. 36; II. v. 37; II. 
xiii. 7; IV. ii. 3 
Paulus, see Aemilius 
Pelignus, a Pelignian, a man of Sabine 
descent, II. vili. 5 
Pelopidas, a celebrated Theban 
general, I. v. 2; III. viii. 2; Iv. 
2 


Peloponnesii, the Peloponnesians, I. v. 
10; II. xi. 4; III. ix. 9 

Peloponnesus, "the southern division 
of Greece, I. iii. 9; II. v. 26 

Perdiccas, a general of Alexander the 
Great, Iv. vii. 20 

Pericles, a great Athenian statesman, 
I. iii. 7; I. v. 10; I. xi. 10; I. xii. 
10; III. a 5; Il. ix. 9 

Perperna, the murderer of Sertorius, 
II. v. 32 

Persae, the Persians, I. xi. 17; II. ii. 
13; II. iii. 8; II. iii. 13; IT. ix. 85 II. 
ix. 10; IV. ii. 5; IV. v. 13; IV. vi. 3. 

PE Perseus, 'king of Macedonia, 
II. 111. 

Persicum bellum, II. viii. 5 

Persicus habitus, III. viii. 3 

Persis, Persia, II. iii. 6 

Peticus, see Sulpicius 


477 


INDEX OF PROPER NAMES 


Petilini, the inhabitants of Petelia, a 
town in southern Italy, IV. v. 18 
Petilius, Iv. i. 46 
Petreius, one of Pompey’s generals, 
I. viii. 95; II. i. 11 
Poen a tvrant of Agrigentum, III. 
v. 6 
Pharnabazus, a Persian satrap, II. vii. 6 
Pharnaces, son of Mithridates, II. ii. 8 
Pharnaeus, I. i. 6 
Pharnastanes, a Parthian general, II. 
v. 37 
Pharsalica pugna, II. vii. 13. 
Philip: (1) of Macedon, father of 
Alexander the Great, I. iii. 4; 
I. iv. 13; I. iv. 138; II. i. 9; 
II. iii. 2; II. viii. 14; ' LIT. iii. 5; 
IV. fi. 4; IV. v. 12; Iv. vil. 37 
(2) son of Demetrius, I. iv. 6; 
II. xiii. 8; III. viii. 1 
(3) III. ix. 8; Iv. i. 6 
Phocenses, ihe inhabitants of 
Phocaea, a city of Ionia, III. xi. 2 
Phormion, a celebrated Athenian 
general, II. xi. 1 
Phrygia, a district in Asia Minor, 
I 2 


Picentes, the inhabitants of Picenum, 
a district in central Italy, I. xii. 3 

Pinarius, IV. vii. 22 

Piraeus, the largest seaport of Athens, 
I. xi. 20 

Pon a country of Asia Minor, 
I. iv. 6 

ar ai a tyrant of Athens, TI. 
x.9 

Piso, see Calpurnius 

Pius, see Metellus 

Poeni, the Carthaginians, I. i. 9; I. 
iv. 11; I. iv. 12; I. viii. 6; I. xi. 
4; I. xi. 18; I. xii. 9; II. i. 1; 
I1. 1. 4; II. il. 11; II. iji. 4; II. iii. 
16; II. iv. 14; I. v. 4; II. v. 29; 
II. vi. 2; Il. "x. 2; I. x. 2; IL 
xiii. 9; II. xiii. 10; III. iii, 6; III. 
x.3; IH. x. 9; UI. xiii. 2; IV. i. 44; 
IV. v. 18; IV. vli. 12; Iv. vii. 22; 
IV. vii. 38 

dix brother of Castor, I. xi. 8; 
I. * 9 

Pompeianae partes, Pompeianl, fol- 
lowers of Pompey, IJ. v. 81; II. 
vil. 13; III. xiv. 1; IV. vil. 32 

Pompeius : (1) Cn. Ponpeio Strabo, 

lII. xvii. 8 
478 


(2) Cn. Pompeius Magnus, I. 1. 7; 
I.iv. 8; I. v. 6; t. ix. 3; 11.1.3; 
Il. i. 12; I. ii. 2; II. fii. 11; 
II. fii. 14; I. iii. 22; II. v. 81; 
II. v. 32; II. v. 33; II. xi. 2; 
III. xvii. 4; IV. v. l 
(3) €n. Pompeius, son of No. 2, 
III. xiv. 1 
Pomptinius, II. iv. 7 
Pomptinus ager, a marshy district in 
Latium, II. vi. 1 
XE: soldiers of Mithridates, II. i. 


Pontius Cominius, III. xiii. 1 
Popilius Laenas, III. xvii. 9 
Porcius Cato: (1) the Censor, 1. i. 1; 
I. ii. 5; YI. iv. 4; II. vii. 14; 
IH. 1. 2; III. x. 1; IV. i. 16; 
Iv. 1. 33; 1v. ili. 1; Iv. vii. 12; 
IV. vii. 31; Iv. vii. 35 
(2) son of No. 1, Iv. v. 17 
Porsenna, an Etruscan king, II. xiii. 5 
Porus, & king of India, I. iv. 9 
Postumius: (1) Aulus Postumius, 
consul 496 B.C., I. xi. 
(2) rd Postumius Megellus, I. 


(3) L. Postumius, II. i. 4 
(4) Postumius, consularis, IV. v. 3 
Praeneste, a town in Latium, II. ix. 3 
Prinassum, IIT. viii. 1 
Priscus, see Servilius, Tarquitius 
Prusias, king of Bithynia, IV. vii. 11 
ee m (1) Ptolemy Soter, 1v. 
vi 
(2) Ptolemy Ceraunus, III. fi. 11 
Punica acies, II. iii. 1; classis, II. iii. 
24; navis, I. iv. 12 
Punicum bellum, I. iii. 5; I. iv. 11; 
r 2H 6; II. ii. 11; II. iii. 8; 1v. 
Punicum valum, III. x. 3 
Pyrrhus, king of Epirus, II. ii. 1; II. 
ili. 21; II.iv. 9; Ir. iv. 18; II. vi. 
9; II. vi. 10; III. vi. 3; IV. 1. 3; 
IV. i. 14; 1v. 1. 18; Iv. iv. 2 
Pythias, IV. vii. 37 


phar tee : (I) L. ange he II. v. 84 
(2) T. Quintius S dn tolinus, II. 
vii. 10; II. viii. 8 (cf. note); 
II. xii. i; nI. i.l 
@), 3 Quintius Crispinus, IV. vii. 


(4) Quintius Crispinus, VI. vii. 26 


IN THE STRATAGEMS 


Regini, the inhabitants of Rhegium, 
II. iv. 3 

Regulus, see Atilius 

Rhegium, à Greek town in southern 
Italy, I. iv. 11; IV. i. 38 

Rhodii, the inhabitants of the island 
Rhodes, I. iv. 13a; I. vii. 4 ; III. ix. 10 

Rhodinus, see Hamilcar 


Rhyndacus, a river in Asia Minor, 
III. xvii. 5 

Romani, Romans, passim; I. vi. 4; 
I. viii. 1; 1. viii. 3; I. viii, 6; I. 
vlii.7; Tx. l; II. i. 13; II. iii. 16; 
IH. ii. 3; rm. xiii. 1; TIL. xiii. 2; 


III. xv. 15 ; III. XV. 4; III. xvi. 
III. xvii. 1; III. xviii. 1; III. vr 
2; III. xviii. 35 IV. 1. 14; IV. vii. 6 

Romanum nomen, I. ii. 2 

Rome, I. ii. 4; Iv. i. 39 

Romulus, founder of Rome, II. v. 1 

Rufinus, see Cornelius 

Rufus, see Aemilius, Marcius, Minucius 

Rullus, see Fabius 

Rutilius Rufus, a Roman statesman, 
IV. i. 12; IV. ii. 2 


Sabboras, II. v. 40 

Sabini, the Sabines, a people of central 
Italy, I. viii. 4; II. viii. 1; II. viii. 
10; Iv. iii. 12 

Sabinus, see Titurius 

Saepinum, a town of the Samnites, 
IV. i. 24 

Saguntini, the inhabitants of Sagun- 
tum in Spain, III. x. 4 

Salamis, an island off the west coast 
of Attica, II. ii. 14 

Salapia, a city in Apulia, IV. vii. 38 - 

Salinator, see Livius 

Sallentini, a people in south-eastern 
Italy, II. iii. 21 

Salvius, II. viii. 5 

Samii, the inhabitants of Samos, an 
island in the Aegean Sea, I. iv. M 

Samnites, the people of Samnium, 
I. viii. 3; I. xi. 2; II. 1. 8; II. ili. 
21; II. iv.1; II. iv. 2 

Samniticum bellum, I. v. 14; II. viii. 
11; IV. v. 9 

Samnium, a country in south central 
Italy, I. vi. 1; 11. iv. 2; IV. i. 29 

Sanii, III. ii. 11; III. iff. 5 

Sardes, Sardis, the capital of Lydia, 
III. viii. 3 

Sardinia, III. ix. 4; III. x. 2 


Saturni dies, II. 1. 17 

Scaurus, see Aemilius 

Scipio, see Cornelius 

Scipiones, II. vi. 2 

Scordisci, a people on the borders of 
Illyria, II. iv. 35 III. x. 7 

Scorylo, a Dacian chieftain, I. x. 4 

PRECES Curio: (1) consul 76 B.C., 

43 
(2) in Civil War, II. v. 40 

Scultenna River, in Cisalpine Gaul, 
III. xiii. 7; III. xiv. 3 

Scythae, the people of Scythia, north 
of the Black and Caspian Seas, I. v. 
25; II. iv. 20; II. v. 6; II. viii. 14 

Segobrigenses, a people of Spain, III. 
x. 6; III. xi. 4 

Segovienses, a people of Spain, Iv. v. 22 


Semiramis, the famous  Assyrian 
queen, III. vii. 5 
Sempronius: (1) Ti. Sempronius 
Gracchus, IV. vii. 24 


(2) T. Sempronius Gracchus, I. 
xii. 9 (cf. note) 
(3) T Sempronius Longus, II. 


v. 
(4) E Sempronius Tuditanus, IV. 


V. 
(5) Ti. Sempronius Gracchus, II. 
V. 3; II. v. 14; IJI. V. 2; IV. 
- vii. 33 


Sentinas ager, the country near 
Sentinum in Umbria, I. viii. 3 

Sertorius, a general of Marius, I. v. 1; 
I. V. 8; I. x. 1; I. x. 2; I. xi. 15; 
I. xil. 4; II. d. 3; II. iii. 11; II. 
v. 91; IL. vii. 6; il. xii. 2; II. 
xiii. 9; II. xiii. 4; Iv. vii. 6 

Servilius: Q (1) Q. Servilius Priscus, II 


@) J P. ‘Servilius Vatia, III. vii. 1; 
Servius Tu Tullius, sixth king of Rome, 
II. . 
Sicily, I. i 2; I. iv. 11; I. viii. 11; 
II. i. 4; II. v. 4; II. vii. 4; II. iv. 


6; III. vi. 6; III. x. 9; III. xvi. 8; 
IV. oo IV. i. 80; IV. i. 44; IV. 


vii. 2 

Siculum fretum, I. vii. 1 

Bicyonii, the inhabitants of Sicyon, a 
city in the Peloponnesus, III. li. 10; 
III. vii. 6; IIT. ix. 7 

Siris, a river ae Italy, Iv. i. 24 

Sosistratus, III. iii. 


479 


INDEX OF PROPER NAMES 


Sparta, TII. xí. 5 

Spartacus, a Thracian gladiator, 1. v. 
20; I. v. 21; I. v. 22; I. vii. 6; 
II. v. 34 

Spurius Nautius, II. iv. 1 

Statilius, Iv. vii. 36 

Statorius, I. i. 3 

Creva, the Hellespont, I. iv. 13 

Sudines, a soothsayer, I. xi. 15 

Sun Im a town in Cappadocia, III. 


Suessetani, a people of Spain, II. x. 1 

Sulla, see Cornelius 

Sulpicius: a C. Sulpicius Gallus, I. 
xil. 


(2) C. Sulpicius Peticus, II. iv. 6 

Superbus, see Tarquinius 

Sutrini, the inhabitants of Sutrium in 
Etruria, II. v. 2 

Syphax, a Numidian king, 1. i. 3; 
I. ii. 1; II. v. 29; II. vii. 4 

Syracusani, Syracusans, I. viii. 11; 
II. V. 11; II. ix. 7; III. iii. 2; III. 
vi. 6 

Syracusanus portus, I. v. 6 

Syracuse, a celebrated city in Sicily, 
I. iv. 12; I. viii. 11; I. xi. 18 

Syria, I. xi. 12; II. v. 35; II. xiii. 2 


Tarentini, the inhabitants of Taren- 
tum, I. iv. 1; TI. iii. 21; II. iv. 13; 
III. iii. 1; IH. iii. 6; IIT. xvii. 3 

Tarentum, a an 'southern Italy, 
III. iii. 1; III 

Tarpeia Saxa, the Tarpeian rock on 
the Capitoline Hill, named from 
Tarpeia, who betrayed the Roman 
citadel to the Sabines, III. xiii. 1 

Tarquinienses, the inhabitants of 
Tarquinii in Etruria, 1I. iv. 18 

Tarquinius Superbus, the fifth king 
of Rome, I. 1. 4; II. viii. 1; II. 
viii. 10; III. ili. 3 

(S.) Tarquinius, the last king of Rome, 
I. i. 4; III. iii. 8 

Tarquitius Priscus, II. v. 81 

Taurus Mts., 1. 1. 6 

Tegea, a city of Arcadia in the Pelo- 
ponnesus, III. ii. 8 

Terentius Varro, the Roman general 
defeated by Hannibal at Caunae, 
IV. 1. 4; IV. v. 6 

Teutoni, a people of Germany, II. ii. 
8; NH. iv. 6; II. vil. 12; WW. ix. 1; 
IV. vii. 6 


480 


Teutonicum bellum, 1. ii. 6 

Thamyris, a Scythian queen, IJ. v. 5 

Theagenes, a despot of Megara, Iv. i. 8 

Thebani, Thebans, I. iv. 3; I. x. 3; 
I. xi. 6; 1I. iv. 11; II. vi. 6; III. 
rus IV. il. 6; IV. vii. 19; IV. vii. 
2 

T & city of Boeotia, I. iv. 3; 


xi. 6 

Themistocles, the famous Athenian 
statesman, I. 1. 10; I. iii, 6; II. ii. 
14; II. vi. 8 

Thermopylae, a celebrated mountain 
pass, leading. from Thessaly to 
Locris, I. iv. 6; 11.41.13; II. iv. 4 
IV. li. 9 

hemu see Minucius 

Thessali, the inhabitants of Thessaly, 
a division of northern Greece, Iv. 
vii. 28 

Thessalicum bellum, I. v. 2 

Thrace, & district north of Greece, 
I. iv. 18; I. v. 24; I. vi. 3; II. xi. 8 

Thraces, Thracians, II. xii. 4; II. v. 
1; III. xv. 5; WI. xvi. 5; IV. v. 16 

Thrasybulus, tyrant of Miletus, JH. 
ix. 7; II. xv. 6 

Tiber, the river, II. vi. 1; III. xiii. ] 

Tiberius, see Claudius 

E Wn a king of Armenia, II. i. 14 ; 
II. ii. 

Tigranocerta, a city in ame II. i. 
14; II. ii. 4; II. ix. 

Timarchus, II. ii. 11 

Timotheus, an Athenian general, I. 
xii. 11; II. v. 47 

Tisamenus, son of Orestes, I. ii. 8 

Tissaphernes, & Persian satrap, I. 
viii. 12 

Titius, Iv. i. 26 

Titurius Sabinus, a lieutenant of 
Caesar, III. xvii. 6; 1II. xvii. 7 

Torquatus, see Manlius 

Trachinius, a native of Trachis in 
Thessaly, II. ii. 13 

Trasumenus, a lake in Etruria, II. v. 
24; II. vi. 4; IV. vii. 25 

Trebia, a river of Cisalpine Gaul, II. v, 


23 
Triballi, & Thracian people, II. iv. 20 
crea saltus, a pass of the Alps, 
IV. i. 18 
Troezen, a town of Argolis, I. ili. 6 
Hon the inhabitants of Troezen 
I"1. vi. 7 


| 
| 


IN THE STRATAGEMS 


Tryphon, a king of Syria, 11. xiii. 2 

Tuditanus, see Sempronius 

Servius Tullius, the sixth king of 
Rome, II. viii. 1 

(Q) Tullius Cicero, brother of the 
orator, III. xvii. 6 

Tullus Hostilius, see Hostilius 

Tuscus habitus, I. li. 2 


Vn * suae in north-eastern 
vaa'i Umbrians, I. viii. 3 


Vadandus, II. ix. 5 
Valerius: (1) P. Valerius, II. xi. 1 
(2) P. Valerius Laevinus, II. iv. 9; 
IV. 1. 24; IV. vii. 7 
(3) Valerius, Iv. 1. 30 
Variana clades, III. xv. 4; IV. vii. 8 
Varinius, I. v. 22 
Varro, see Terentius 
Veientes, inhabitants of Vell, II. iv. 
19; rm. vii. 1 
Veii, an ancient city of Etruria, JII. 
xii 
Ventidius, à Roman general, famous 
for his victory over the Parthians, 
1.1. 6; I1. 11. 6; II. v. 86; II. v. 37 


VOL. I. 


Verginius, II. i. 7 

Ye pa ID; the Emperor, 11. 1. 17; 1v. 

Vesuvius, I. v. 21 

Yeu an ancient city of Etruria, 
I. 

Vibius Pansa, consul 43 B.C., II. v. 39 

Viriathus, &@ celebrated Spanish 
general, II. v. 7; II. xiii, 4; IIIJ. x. 
6; III. xi.4 ; IV. v. 22 

Voccaei, Iv. vii. 33 

Volsci, a people of Latium, II. i. 7; 
II. iv. 15; II. viii. 4; II. xii. 1; III. 
I. 1; Iv. vii. 40 

Volturnus, a river in Campania, II. ii. 
7 (cf. note); III. xiv. 2 


Xanthippus, the Spartan commander 
of Carthaginian troops, II. ii. 11; 
II. iii. 10 

Xanthus, a Boeotian, IT. v. 41 

Xenophon, the historian, I. iv. 10; 
IV. ii. 8; Iv. vi. 2 

Xerxes, king of Porcia, I. iii. 6; II. ii. 
14; I. vi. 8; 1v. ii. 9 


Zeugma, a town in Syria, I. 1. 6 
Zopyrus, a Persian noble, IIT. iii. 4 


481 
II 


INDEX OF PROPER NAMES 
IN THE AQUEDUCTS 


(The References are to Chapters.) 


Acilius Aviola, 102 

Aelius Tubero, 2, 99, 100, 104, 106, 
108, 125, 127 

Agrippa, 3, 9, 10, 25, 98, 99, 104, 116 

Albius Crispus, 102 

Albudinus spring, 14 

Alsietina, 4, 11, 18, 22, 71, 85 

Alsietina, which is called Augusta, 
4, 11 

Alsietinus lake, 11, 71 

Anio river, 90, 93 

Anio Novus, 4, 13, 15, 18, 


20, 21, 68, 
86, 91, 93, 104, 105 


Anio Vetus, 4, 6, 7, 9, 13, 18, 21, 66, 67, 


80, 91, 92, 125 
Aniog, two aqueducts, 13, 90 
Antistius Vetus, U., 102 
Apollo, spring of, 4 
Appia, 4, 5, 6, 7, 9, 18, 22, 65, 79, 125 
Appian Way, 5 
Appius Claudius Crassus (Caecus), 5 
Appius Claudius Pulcher, 7 
Aquila Julianus, 13, 102 
Asinian Gardens, 21 
Asinius Celer, 102 
Asinius Pollio, C., 102 
Ateius Capito, 97, 102 
Augusta, 5, 12, 14, 65, 72 


Augustus, 9, 9, 11, 12, 97, 98, 99, 100, 


104, 108, 116, 125 
Aurelius Cotta, ie 7 
Aventine Mount, 20, 22, 76, 87 


Caecilius, Q., 7 

Caelian Mount, 19, 20, 22, 76, 87 
Caelius Rufus, 76 

Caerulean spring, 13, 14, 72 

Caesar, Caligula, 18 

Caesar, emperor, 3, 23, 33, 78, 79, 80, 


432 


81, 82, 83, 84, 85, 86, 103, 105, 116, 
18 


Camenae, spring of, 4 

Jampania, 24 

Capena Gate, 5, 19 

Capitolium, 7, 8 

Capua, 5 

Careiae, 71 

Carvilius, Sp., 6 

Cassius Longinus Ravilla, L., 8 

Cejonius Commodus, 70 

Circus Maximus, 97 

Claudia, 4, 13, 14, 15, 18, 20, 69, 7 
86, 87, 89, 91, 104, 105 

Claudian Way, Pu 

Claudius, 13, 20, 76, 105, 116 

Cocceius Nerva, M., 102 

Collatian Way, 5, 10 

Cominius, L., 99 

Cornelius Cethegus, 102 

Cossus, 102 

Crabra brook, 9 

Crassus Frugi, 102 

Curius Dentatus, 6 

Curtian spring, 13, 14, 72 


Decius Mus, 5 

Didius Gallus, 102 
Domitian, 102, 118 
Domitius Afer, 102 


Epaphroditian Gardens, 5, 68 
Esquiline Gate, 21 


Fabius Maximus, 99, 100, 104, 106, 
108, 125, 127 

Fabius Persicus, 102 

Fabius, 96 

Fenestella, 7 


INDEX OF PROPER NAMES 


Fonteius Agrippa, 102 
Fulvius Flaccus, 6 
Fulvius Flaccus, M., 8 


Galerius Trachalus, 102 
Gemelli, 5, 65 
Greeks, 16 


ITerculaneus rivus, 15, 19 


Italia, 24 
Italians, 18 


Julia, 4, 9, 10, 18, 19, 68, 69, 76, 83, 125 
Julius Caesar, 129 
Juturna, spring of, 4 


Labican Way, 21 
Laecanius Bassus, 102 
Laelius, 7 

Latin Way, 8, 9, 19, 21 
Lentulus, 7 

Lepidus, 7 

Licinius, 96 

Lucius Telesinus, 109 
Lucretius, 10 

Lucullan Gardens, 22 
Lucullan Field, 5, 8, 10 


Marcia, 4, 7, 9, 12, 13, 14, 18, 19, 67, 
68, 72, 76, 81, 87, 89, 91, 92, 93, 125 

Marctus Rex, 7 

Marius, P., 102 

Martius, Campus, 22 

Memmius Regulus, 102 

Messala Corvinus, 99, 102 


Naumachia, 11, 22 

Nero, 7, 76, 102 

Neronian Sublacensian villa, 93 
Nerva, 1, 64, 87, 88, 102, 118 
New Way, 21 

Nonius Asprenas, 13, 102 
Nonius Quintilianus, 102 


Octavian channel, 21 
Octavius Laenas, 102 


Palatium, 20 

Pallantian Gardens, 19, 20, 69 
Papirius Cursor, 6 

Petronius Turpilianus, 102 
Piso, 102 


Plancus, 102 

Plautius Hypsaeus, 8 
Plautius Venox, 5 
Pompeius Longus, 102 
Pompeius Silvanus, 102 
Porcius Cato, 102 
Postumius Sulpicius, 99 
Praenestine Way, 5 
Publician Hill, 5, 22 
Pyrrhus, 6 


Quintius Crispinus, 129 


Roman empire, 119 

Roman people, 129 
Romans, 4 

Rome, 3, 7, 8, 9, 10, 91, 129 


Sabatinus lake, 71 

Saepta, 22 

Salinae, 5 

Sentius, C., 10 

Sergian tribe, 129 

Servilius Caepio, Q., 7 

Servilius Caepio, Cn., 8 
Sibylline books, 7 

Silius, 102 

Silius Italicus, 102 
Simbruvium, 15 

Spes Vetus, 5, 19, 20, 21, 65, 76, 87 
Sublacensian Way, 7, 14, 15 
Sublacensian Neronian villa, 93 
Suetonius Paulinus, 102 

Sulla, 13 

Sulpicius Galba, 7 


Tampius Flavianus, 102 

Tarius Rufus, 102 

Tepula, 4, 8, 9, 18, 19, 67,768, 69, 82, 
125 


Tergemina Gate, 5 
Tiber, 4 


Torquatian Gardens, 5 
Trajan, 64, 87, 88, 93 
Transtiberine ward, 11, 18, 20 
Treba Augusta, 93 

Tusculan Field, 8 
Tusculanians, 9 


483 


INDEX OF PROPER NAMES 


Valerian Way, 7 
Valerius Maximus, 5 
Valerius Messalinus, 102 
Varro, Sex., 129 
Veranius, 102 

Verginius Rufus, 102 
Vespasian, 102 


Viminal Gate, 19 

Viminal Hill, 19 

Virgo, 4, 10, 18, 22, 70, 84 
Visellius Varro, 102 
Vitellius, 192 

Vitruvius, 25 

Volcatius, 9 


Printep in Great Bartain By Ricuarp CLAY & Sons, LIMITED, 
BUNGAY, SUFFOLK. 


*duosnuvur eq, ur 


309Jop * 03 onp uojespyuro uv suwour(;) 'xoepoo OUTSSBD equoy; [eujzr10 eq, ur uoa sv ore son Sg Oso ,— 5v] 


T0£ '€ 92 646 (i) lore |^ ° ° SOL 


p ee ed 
ed 
— 


SNAON ouy 


*"  $Ipn9[) 
nn ecc eee eee . . surgos y 
ot T Ys 19t'1 so cU, ts oA 
(i) 69 (i) eee pa g he a 
I 0 . . . 
a q B Y (i) " t * SUUIS]ÓN 
et 0c I €0€ * snjoA Oluy 
» . . . DI] d * 
T e VX ON | siondasanoy 
dq dO EET ALIO IHL "HL 
: UI 19394 
ALI) XHL NIHLIM 'ON WAR Aig gaye NIHLIM S8dHVA eq) Jo J0 SENVN 


q431eH 


III ATV
