The Challenge of the Klan (Stanley Frost, 1924)
==========================================================
Frost's 1924 journalistic investigation of the second Ku Klux Klan at its peak; exposé reportage. Public domain. Digitized from Internet Archive (https://archive.org/details/challengeofklan0000unse_o1r5).

entree shimeme pe rerere
ev aemge eee


VERMONT COLLEGE
MONTPELIER, VERMONT


Gary Memoral Library


Vermont College
Montpelier, Vt.


é A
ioe oe
x 4 n
<\ A
Po) ae
'
“4 5
. ~
A
; y 4
: LAE
cae ~
ee “ BL Hn
| . e
E A h/isw i 1 Pea a | = T v
= i — \ % @
RB u
yh
7 a


“/VERMONT COLLEGE .
_ MONTPELIER, VERMONT. -


a fa 7 i 7
foe lines"
F |


>


te ® hoy am i
aa 7? A) ted,
* dy, Sa |
‘pigeons


Digitized by the Internet Archive
in 2024


https://archive.org/details/challengeofklan0O000unse_o1r5


THE CHALLENGE
OF THE KLAN


y - . yi rk 7
i Wheat
ee ” " +p)
a i


THE CHALLENGE
OF THE KLAN


BY
STANLEY FROST


INDIANAPOLIS
THE BOBBS-MERRILL COMPANY
PUBLISHERS


Copyright, 1923, 1924
By Tue Bosss-MERRILL CoMPANY


Printed in the United States of Ameriea


CONTENTS


CHAPTER
FOREWORD


I. THE GIANT IN THE WHITE Hoop
Il. THe Giant CLEARS FOR ACTION


III. Otp Evits In tHE New Kian .


IV. THe CRUSADE OF THE FIERY Cross


V. INVOKING THE WHIRLWIND

VI. Tue Business or “KLuxInc”’
VII. THe Lure or THE WHITE MAsk
VIII. Tue STRENGTH oF INVISIBILITY .

IX. Tue Specter’s Heavy Hand


X. THe GIANT BEGINS TO Rute Us


.


XI. THe Pitan to CapturE WASHINGTON


APPENDIX: THE CONSTITUTION OF THE Ku


Kiux Kian


t


A Frys G


220


259


Sa te Pi


oe
; y


ee


eet


=


FOREWORD


HIS discussion of the Ku Klux Klan has been
written in the belief that the time has come
when both enemies and friends of that remarkable


ofganization will wish to know all the facts cts that car can


be-tearned about it, good as well as bad. "The move-
‘nent has reached an importance calling for more than


merely partisan knowledge, all good or all bad. This
work is therefore, as far as my ability allows, a piece
of reporting intended to avoid either-judicial_or_prop-
a agandist attitudes and merely presen iting the evidence
on both sides of the case.
~ It does assume that in doing this, purposes, motives,
“states of mind,” and social, economic and historical
backgrounds, perspectives and causes are at least as
important as those facts which lie on the surface.
There are obvious difficulties and possibilities of error
and bias in discovering and stating them, but they
must nevertheless be included in any report which
hopes to be of value. If, in the selection of material,
a slight preponderance has been given to the Klan’s
purposes and defenses, this is not with any desire to
favor that body, but because the attacks upon it have
vii


FOREWORD


been so many and thorough that too great a threshing
of this old straw is sure to become wearisome to any
except those who read merely to confirm and culti-
vate a fixed dislike.

The preparation of the material for publication in
book form has permitted considerable additions to the
articles which originally appeared in The Outlook.
While this does not alter the evidence in any vital
way, it is both important and interesting. It includes
a complete reprint of the Klan’s Constitution, con-
siderable excerpts from its published propaganda,
and a statement by a leading Klansman of the
spiritual and religious side of the movement, with the
effect this may have inside the Protestant church
organizations. ‘There are, besides, minor corrections
due partly to the growth of the Klan and to develop-
ments since the articles were first written, and_partly
‘to information furnished by. the many ads -who
have written to advise, criticize and sometimes com-


~ I regret that it is impossible to answer all such
letters, to debate with their writers. My answer, how-
ever, would be about the same in every case, and I
take this opportunity to bring it to the attention of
readers of the book. It is that in an organization so
large and so amazingly variegated as the Klan almost
anything that may be said about it, whether good or
bad, is true at some time and in some places. I have
told of no sins that are not admitted by its own officers
Vili


FOREWORD


except where there is clear proof, and of no virtues
not conceded by some of its most vigorous enemies.
No fair reporter could do less, nor could he base his
reports on any locality or group of localities, as most
readers must do of necessity.

The letters I have received do, however, show
sharply the need of pointing out not only this mixed
quality of the Klan, but its rapid changes. It is
growing so fast and is being reformed and developed
so rapidly that many facts which were true about it
even a year ago have become false, and conclusions
based upon them are by now very often invalid. It
is certain that modifications will have occurred even
between the time this is written and the time it is
read!

I can not hope that in making this report I have
been able always to be fair, or always to find the
whole truth. The one virtue I do claim for the book
is that it ive ial facts my limited
abilities have allowed me to find and i 13) written with
a strong desire for fairness. The fact that attack and
approval have come with about equal vigor from both
sides encourages me to hope that I have been measur-
ably successful.

THE AUTHOR


+


February I, 1924.


THE CHALLENGE
OF THE KLAN


THE CHALLENGE OF THE KLAN


CHAPTER I
THE GIANT IN THE WHITE HOOD


Ho Ku Klux Klan has become the most vigorous,

active and effective organization in American
life outside business. Its influence, though intangible
and often secret, affects every public question and
every activity which depends in any degree on public
opinion; its power is incalculable since it is wholly
different from that of any other known force. It
controls, in a way in which no political party has
ever controlled, hundred of cities, towns and counties,
a few states; it has elected its picked men mayors,
sheriffs and judges, legislators and governors, repre-
sentatives and senators in Congress. It is reaching
for the presidency.

Moreover, it is growing with tremendous speed.
Its members are already beyond four millions and are
increasing at the rate of a hundred thousand a week.
All efforts that have been made to check or destroy

I


THE CHALLENGE OF THE KLAN


it have failed; indeed, they seem only to have speeded
its growth. If it is not yet able to impose its will
on the nation, it is surely on a road which may soon
take it to the place of supreme power. The cloud
which two years ago was no bigger than a man’s hand
has covered a great part of the heavens and is still
spreading.

This is the first of the reasons why there should be
a new and careful consideration of the Klan. It is
a reason which appeals to every man and woman to
whom it makes a cent’s worth of difference whether
their opinions and judgments on public affairs are
accurate and well-founded. All such people must
from now on know the real facts of the strength, the
methods, the habits and the intentions of this white-
hooded giant, as well as the dangers his existence
creates. All thought regarding the body politic is
subject to discount in exact proportion to the lacks
and inaccuracies of this information.

But there are other reasons for a re-appraisal of the
Klan which will appeal equally to all fair-minded men
and women; reasons which seem to indicate that
earlier judgments found against it were at least partly
wrong, or have become wrong.

One is the quality of the people who are in the
Klan or are joining it. They are not always, though
sometimes, the best in the community, but they are
usually the good, solid, middle-class citizens, the
“back-bone of the nation.” It is absurd to continue

2


THE GIANT IN THE WHITE HOOD


to believe that these people, so many and of such
standing, are all criminal-minded; that they are any
more likely to commit outrages than are the members
of any other equal-sized body, such as the Presby-
terian Church, or that they can or will become a men-
ace to the country through any other cause than
ignorance.

Confirming this quality of the Klan’s present mem-
bership is the fact that even charges of Klan out-
. rages have practically stopped. There are still reports
in the papers concerning alleged outrages by Klan
members happening some months ago, but I have
found record of only three charged against the Klan
since the early spring of 1923, and these have not
been proved. It is possible to credit some of this to
the increased influence of the Klan, which makes news-
paper correspondents hesitate to report Klan outrage
and papers hesitate to publish them. If this is so, it
is rather startling testimony to the increased power
of the Klan. It can not be wholly true, however,
unless the entire newspaper world of the United
States has sunk to an unspeakably low level, which
is unthinkable, and even this would not explain silence
by the many vigorously anti-Klan papers. It seems
certain, then, that there is actually a tremendous im-
provement in this respect.

So it is clear that the opinion most of us formed
two years ago, that the Klan was an attempt to gather
the wild and lawless elements into a power, that it


3


THE CHALLENGE OF THE KLAN


was composed of gangs of night-riding hoodlums,
probably criminal and certainly crazy, along with a
scattering of feeble-minded people who had been hood-
winked—it is clear that this judgment is no longer
correct, no matter how well-founded it seemed.

It is clear too that the Klan can no longer be dis-
missed as an unimportant though distressing outbreak
of a few morons. Instead it has become a Great
National Movement, with all the power and entitled
to all the dignity and respect—yes, respect even if
joined with fear and nervous ridicule—which belong
to such movements. Whether for good or bad,
whether insane or inspired, it must be studied, judged
and dealt with on the basis of this growing importance.

And it is clear, finally, that since it has become such
a movement quick action must be taken if it is to be
diverted, controlled or stopped. Its power is very
real; already there are strong influences getting into
motion to use the power. If its leadership or pro-
gramme is wrong the time when either can be changed
will soon pass. When it has added the momentum
of another million members or so it will be as dif-
ficult to divert from its course as a comet.

As to stopping it, destroying it, that seems unlikely
for the present at least. The very fact of its power
and growth to-day is proof enough that it has not
been harmed by prosecution, persecution, ridicule,
ignorant criticism or any other of the methods so far
used. And whether the desire be to change, use,


4


THE GIANT IN THE WHITE HOOD


fight or destroy it, the time is plainly here when noth-
ing but facts will serve as ammunition.

It is, for example, pure folly any longer to attack
it as lawless. It is true that lawlessness may be ar-
gued from its methods; true that lawless acts have
been committed under cover of its hoods, true that a
trusted official in the fall of 1923 killed a man in
Atlanta. But when the great number of Klansmen
is considered, with the fact that in many states there
has never been an outrage that could even remotely
be charged to them—and this in states where their
strength is undoubted—and when it is further consid-
ered that of all the outrages attributed to the Klan
not a dozen have been proved, fairness must admit
that the charge falls as to actual conduct.

Since that is true, the charge of lawless intent
gets nowhere. In almost all communities the Klan
now has members who are known; they are not law-
less either actually or in intention and such charges
therefore seem absurd equally to them and to their
non-Klan neighbors. Such charges simply are not
believed and he who spreads them discredits himself.

The shoe in fact is now on the other foot; it is the
legal officials who have become lawless, and the Klan
which often suffers illegal persecution. The case of
Oklahoma is the most flagrant. In that state Gov-
ernor J. C. Walton overrode all constitutional re-
straints in his attempts to get at the Klan; imposed
martial law without excuse, engaged gunmen who


5


THE CHALLENGE OF THE KLAN


made vigorous attempts to provoke the Klan to vio-
lence, suspended civil courts, and attempted by means
of military courts-martial to fasten crimes upon the
Klansmen. It was these excesses of Walton’s which
led to his being impeached and removed from office.
Hundreds of minor officials all over the country have
stretched their powers in the same way though to a
less extent, in their efforts to suppress the Klan.

To give a single instance: A certain county judge
ordered the arrest on sight of any Klan organizer, and
when one was brought before him he shipped him out
of the county. There was no trial, no charge could
be proved, and the punishment is not one provided by
any law. The judge justified his action on the theory
that the Klan is in itself a menace to public peace
and security. But since the law contemplates that
action is required to constitute a crime, and since so
far as is known no court has yet held that the Klan
in and of itself is even a menace, much less criminal,
‘t would seem that the legal fiction was stretched re-
markably thin. At any rate other Klan organizers
found the judge’s action splendid propaganda for
their cause, and the Klan now has more than 2,000
members in his county. It has been thus in many
places. I get the impression that the Klan rather
enjoys such attacks.

Perhaps that county will do as well as any other
to illustrate the kind of men who are now joining the
Klan. They are, if not the “best people,” at least

6


THE GIANT IN THE WHITE HOOD


the next best. There are bankers, lawyers, doctors,
probably a majority of the preachers, a handful of
teachers, scores of small business men and hundreds
upon hundreds of farmers.

But the Klan also reaches into higher places. In
New York City three men may be mentioned as typical
of its upper layer: a man very near the top of one
of America’s biggest manufacturing corporations, a
doctor who is recognized as close to the head of his
profession, and the owner of a powerful magazine.
All, by the way, are active churchmen.

I learned in my investigations of one problem of
Klan membership that has its elements of humor. The
conscientious president of a large and highly respected
fresh-water college is greatly disturbed in his mind
whether to discharge the dozen or score of members
of his faculty who have joined the organization. The
Klan is watching him, rather hopefully, since such a
raid would be splendid advertising and would also pro-
vide some very able martyrs for its propaganda
bureau!

The total membership in the Klan to-day is, of
course, a secret of the order. Klan officials refuse to
give any figures. Others, whose information may or
may not be accurate, say the total, including both men
and women is now (January 30, 1924) about 6,000,-
000. Detailed estimates, not by Klansmen, are that
there are 500,000 each in Indiana and Ohio, 400,000
in Texas, more than 200,000 each in Oklahoma, Ore-


7


THE CHALLENGE OF THE KLAN


gon, California and New York State, and from 50,000
to 200,000 each in Arkansas, Washington, Kansas,
Missouri, Michigan, Illinois, Kentucky, West Virginia,
Maryland, New Jersey, Louisiana, Mississippi, Ala-
bama, Georgia, Florida and Tennessee. This would
give a minimum total of 2,600,000 and a maximum of
5,000,000 which is not far from the Klan guess when
allowance is made for scattered membership. My own
opinion, based on estimates too complicated to bear
repeating, is that the Klan strength is now just below
4,500,000. The larger figures are undoubtedly ex-
travagant, for Klansmen are inclined to boast and
politicians are frightened and subject to the complaint
of “seeing things at night.” But they will not be at
all extravagant if the increase in Klan membership
goes on at the present pace.

It is fairly amazing. I have spoken of the county
where the judge’s folly helped the Klan get 2,000
members. It took five men four weeks to do it, an
average of a hundred a week for each man. This is
probably a conservative average, for at one single
meeting of which a report reached me—not from a
Klansman—an organizer enlisted over five thousand
recruits. This man held five meetings during that
week, And there are—again the figures are approxi-
mate—some thousand Klan organizers at work. That
would give a total “naturalization” of 100,000 a week!
This agrees with an estimate I received from one of

8


THE GIANT IN THE WHITE HOOD


the leading Klan opponents. I believe it is approxi-
mately correct.

These people are all joining with a definite idea, for
a definite purpose, and are willing to work under strict
discipline to achieve that purpose. The result is a
tremendously effective force. It is also tremendously
active. Recent elections disclosed the fact that the
Klan is politically entrenched in seven states: Oregon,
Oklahoma, Texas, Arkansas, Indiana, Ohio and Cali-
fornia. It is so powerful in a dozen others that no
politician can by any possibility be driven to speak
against it, at least not for publication. It is to be
noted even in states which have passed anti-Klan laws
that they are not being enforced, as with the celebrated
Miller law in New York. Moreover, with few ex-
ceptions, the daily press has given over making at-
tacks, gratuitous or otherwise. Everywhere there is
the shadow of a power that those who depend on pub-
lic good-will do not offend without compelling reasons.

Entrenched in seven states—great power in others—
the Klan estimates that before the next election it can
carry on intensive membership campaigns im at least
twenty-one more states! The possible results of these
campaigns may be guessed from the fact that similar
ones gave it Ohio and Indiana in a few months, and
are now giving it Michigan and Kentucky and Illinois.

So much for the power and importance of the Klan
in our national life of to-day and to-morrow. It can
hardly be exaggerated, but to be estimated correctly it


9


THE CHALLENGE OF THE KLAN


must be taken in connection with the fact that the
history of the country has been filled with movements
which were, in a general way, quite similar. Time
after time there have broken out organized efforts to
restrict the power of alien-born and particularly of
Roman Catholic citizens. Each has raged with bitter-
ness, each has gained some headway, and each has van-
ished suddenly.

It was surprising to find out how little the heads of
the Klan knew of this historic background. To them
the movement is a natural outgrowth of present con-
ditions, almost unique, facing problems the nation has
never faced before. Yet it may almost be said that
such a movement is a normal accompaniment of any
such state of mental and moral unrest as America is
now undergoing. From these previous agitations, in
spite of certain differences between them and the Klan
idea which will be detailed in later chapters, much may
be learned as to the probable strength, probable results
and the equally probable prompt disappearance of Ku
Kluxism.

These movements have been dubbed “nativistic” by
certain historians and political writers. The word has
rather a horrendous sound and is undoubtedly intended
to express contempt. Yet the fundamental idea on
which all these movements agree is at least one on
which opinion may honestly be divided. It is merely
this: That native-born citizens, trained in the national
schools, sons and heirs of the men who built up the

Io


THE GIANT IN THE WHITE HOOD.


nation, are on the whole better interpreters of national
thought and purposes, and hence better fitted to rule
the country, than are people of alien blood, tradition
and training, whom those natives have admitted to a
share in their advantages.

This idea seems hardly criminal. It may fairly be
called illiberal, with whatever stigma that adjective
implies in view of the recent demonstration that lib-
eralism may wander far from common-sense patriot-
ism.

The first, then, of the “nativistic’? movements, came
in the very early years of the republic. The Federal-
ists wished a firm central government; the newly
arrived preferred a weak one. So the Federalists
made the alien vote an issue and in 1795 raised the
term of naturalization to fourteen years. The Demo-
cratic-Republicans, under Jefferson, restored the term
to five years in 1802 and grew powerful on the alien
vote—as other political parties have done several times
since. The issue was kept alive till it disappeared in
the War of 1812.

It revived again in New York City in 1835 when
the alien voters definitely banded together to control
the city, parading with banners which read: ‘“Ameri-
cans must not rule us!” The response of the Ameri-
cans was instant. They rallied under the leadership
of prominent men, of whom Samuel F. B. Morse,
inventor. of the telegraph, was one of the best known.
He wrote the famous “Brutus” letters, charging that

LE


THE CHALLENGE. OF THE KLAN


there was an alien, Roman Catholic conspiracy to
seize control of America. He attacked the “compact
and clannish body of immigrants, avid of office and
openly allying .themselves as foreigners against the
nation.” The movement resulted in practically driv-
ing foreigners from office in New York City, spread to
Boston and Philadelphia where there were riots, and
then slumbered.

The next outbreak was in 1843 when the Democrats
again carried New York City and gave the majority of
offices to foreigners. Again the alien issue won con-
trol, and again there were riots and bloodshed and
much bitterness. One notable outrage was the looting
and burning of a nunnery. Having accomplished its
immediate purposes it again died.

But the alien issue became a tremendous one in
1853. The big immigration from Ireland following
the famine of 1847, and from the Continent as a result
of the abortive revolutionary movements in 1848-50
swamped the American voters. This resulted in the
formation of “The Sons of 1776, or the Order of the
Star Spangled Banner,” the lower lodges of which
were pledged to vote for none but native Protestants—
there was no negro question then—and the higher
orders, to force foreigners and Catholics out of all
public service. The members were instructed to an-
swer “I don’t know” to all questions, and so got the
name of “Know-nothings.”

My own boyhood study of history left me with the

12


THE GIANT IN THE WHITE HOOD:


impression that the Know-nothings were a queer, ob-
scure and rather disreputable lot, without any par-
ticular influence. This is far from the fact. They
nearly got control of the country. Operating at first
by endorsing selected candidates—as the Anti-Saloon
League has done and the Ku Klux Klan is doing now
—they upset all political calculations in 1853 and 1854.
In 1855 their success went to their heads and they
came into the open as the American Party. This, as
events proved, was a fatal mistake, but it won great
immediate success. In that year they carried nine
states, and narrowly missed six others; the next year
they had eight governors and fourteen legislatures. A
side-light on their standing and membership is the
fact that they elected twenty-four ministers to the
Massachusetts legislature. Their strength was chiefly
in New England and the South, though they showed
sporadic power in all parts of the country.

But the movement died fast. Being a political party
it was forced to take a stand on the burning question
of slavery, tried to straddle, lost everything but the
border states in ’58, and by ’60, after a vain effort to
avert the war, had almost vanished. Nathaniel
Wright Stephenson, the historian, says that “about the
only definite thing it accomplished was the binding
together of the different racial stocks,” but its tem-
porary achievement was much greater. It did, for the
time, clean up much local political corruption and drive
from office many foreigners and Roman Catholics.


13


THE CHALLENGE OF THE KLAN


Both groups remembered Know-nothingism after
its power was gone, and their efforts, combined with
its pusillanimous record on slavery, covered it with
obloquy. Its members hunted cover, and it has never
had a friendly historian. Perhaps it did not deserve
one, for its propaganda was based on absurdly
lurid stories about the Catholic Church, and was from
first to last little but an appeal to prejudice, lacking the
dignity of the Morse movement. But it very nearly
won complete success.

Following the Civil War there was one other out-
break, the American Protective Association, but it fell
under the disrepute left over from the Know-nothings,
and though it once claimed two million members, never
achieved any power. The last flicker from it was the
Rev. Dr. Burchard’s famous “Rum, Romanism and
Rebellion,” which contributed to the defeat of Blaine
for the presidency. That debacle convinced poli-
ticians once for all that the anti-alien, anti-Catholic
agitation was too dangerous to monkey with.

So, in spite of all the talk of unfit immigration,
unassimilated aliens, hyphen-ism, and perversion of
Americanism which has been heard in the last few
years, the Ku Klux Klan is the first to dare raise the
fundamental issue openly once more. History, as well
as the Klan’s own success, shows how powerful an
appeal that issue may have. And the Klan has not yet
made, and its leaders declare that it will not make, the
mistakes which wrecked the Know-nothings. It is


14


THE GIANT IN THE WHITE HOOD-~


evident that the possibilities in such a situation confuse
the imagination.

It is evident, too, that an organization which has
grown as fast as the Klan has grown and has won
such support from so solid a class of citizens—all in
the face of the bitterest opposition, possesses enor-
mous vitality. There is a deeper reason for its exist-
ence than a desire to masquerade in white hoods, or
even to go night-riding and reform the neighbors with
a black-snake whip. Such a growth, in itself, proves
that the movement has an appeal to some deep-rooted
sentiment, instinct, prejudice, condition or whatever
you care to call it, but something wide-spread, funda-
mental and very much alive.

This book is an attempt to report with as little bias
as possible all the facts that can be learned in a very
confused and fast changing situation, about the Ku
Klux Klan, its purposes and why so many citizens
indorse thern, its methods and the reasons for their
success, the type of individuals who are joining and
why, the good results it may accomplish and the un-
doubted dangers it brings in its train. The book there-
fore is neither a crusade, an exposure, nor a defense;
its only purpose is to set forth the information needed
for sound judgment on a complicated and highly ex-
plosive condition, a condition which has grown need-
lessly obscure because much that has taken place in
recent years has been passed over in silence, and much
more has been misrepresented.


T5


THE CHALLENGE OF THE KLAN


If there is bias in this report, it works both ways.
First, is the conviction that four million American
citizens, the great majority of whom lead decent, god-
fearing, law-abiding and useful lives, can not be con-
demned offhand as either idiots or criminals. A move-
ment that has won their support, even though it may
seem both ridiculous and wrong-headed, must have
behind it some motives, impulses and purposes of very
considerable appeal and apparent soundness. And
even if they are utterly wrong, the very fact that they
exist is of the utmost importance, because of the effect
they may have on our national life.

The second bias, if it is that, is a belief that because
of the first bias there must be a new judgment on the
Klan which must be based on neither denunciation of
occasional crimes, nor on vague indignation against
mysterious methods and half-understood purposes.
Instead there must be a careful estimate of the patri-
otic values or dangers of the motives and ideals pro-
fessed, based on a determination whether the Klan
does actually further those motives and ideals, and
finally on a decision whether its methods and propa-
ganda contain a menace greater than lies within the
evils it assumes to cure. This book is written in the
further belief that only in the light of a judgment so
formed can current affairs be properly understood,
and that such a judgment is necessary even for effect-
ive dealing with the Klan or resistance to it.


CHAPTER II
THE GIANT CLEARS FOR ACTION


vd Gees Ku Klux Klan to-day is a very different or-

ganization from that of two years ago, when it.
was investigated by Congress and found guilty by pub-
lic opinion of serious crimes. This is the first fact
about it that strikes an inquirer. It is different in
leadership, in personnel, in purposes and in methods.
Its leaders, to be sure, declare that the difference is
merely a change of emphasis, but this seems to be
nothing more than an attempt on their part to hold the
previously acquired membership and maintain the
strength that comes from tradition. But the fact is,
there has been a deliberate overhauling. In it, what-
ever of the old Klan seemed useful has been kept, but
there have been important rejections and much that is
new has been added.

These changes are carefully calculated by a shrewd
and understanding mind. The new leaders recognized
that the position of the Klan and its reputation were
fatally weak. They had large ambitions, and set about


17


THE CHALLENGE OF THE KLAN


to make the Klan at once less easy to attack and far
more effective in its appeal to the average decent citi-
zen. They developed new strategy, new tactics. In
short, the Giant in the White Hood sought to clear the
decks for action. How well he succeeded is partly
proved by the growth that followed.

The first result is that the Klan to-day is far less
subject to the kind of criticism which has a direct,
simple, emotional appeal, than it was two years ago.
The Giant is wearing better armor. There is less and
less truth in the old indictments for violence and graft;
also they are less and less effective with those who
know the new Klan—and it is taking pains to be
known by those whom it wishes to enlist. It is put-
ting out a strong propaganda, and with much success,
to show that it is not in any way a champion or de-
fender of lawlessness. Behind the propaganda is an
effort to make sure that no such showing can ever
again be made against it as was made before the Con-
gressional Investigating Committee.

Moreover, it has adopted a rather different ob-
jective; at least a very different definition of its old
objectives. Though it has kept the fundamental idea
unchanged—“America for Americans’—it has at-
tempted to formulate a propaganda which does not
appeal to hate nor stimulate violent prejudices except
as the idea itself does so, and a programme which is
broader, more definite, and that offers opportunity for
lawful and satisfying action. It has tried thus to hold

18


THE GIANT CLEARS FOR ACTION |


the most effective of its old appeals, to widen their
scope and to make them proof against easy attack.

Finally, it is using very different methods. In place
of the black-snake whip and physical terrorism it has
adopted new weapons far more subtle and more dan-
gerous and far less open to simple or obvious criti-
cisms. Though it has stopped night-riding it has not
abandoned terrorism, but has put it on a mental, social
and economic basis. It has added the most effective
methods of a political minority and other methods
even more effective, which are not exactly new in
American politics, but have never been employed by so
tremendous an organization. One may easily dis-
approve these methods, but they are not illegal and
they are not peculiar to the Klan except in that it
uses them more scientifically and effectively than do
others.

In general, it may be said that the most important
result of these reforms has been to change the Ku
Klux Klan from an organization which could have an
appeal only in the South to one with a very broad
national outlook and interest. Each of the more im-
portant changes has modified the Klan’s purposes or
methods to make them less open to the criticism of the
average decent man north of the Mason and Dixon
line. It is probable that the Klan could never have
made its great expansion in the northern and mid-
western states if it had not rid itself of the incubus
incurred by night-riding and similar outrages.

19


THE CHALLENGE OF THE KLAN


This reform of the Giant began shortly after the
exposures already referred to. It was so far com-
pleted by 1923 that the new Klan was ready to launch
the campaign -which has had such success. The
reformation has been carried further now, and the
Klan is about prepared to lay its case before the bar
of public opinion. Its leaders have full confidence that,
at least, no serious objections to its programme can be
found by the great majority of decent people, and that
there is ample justification for its methods in the
emergency they believe to exist.

The first step in the reform was the obvious one, to
remove the opportunity for attacks based on reputation
for graft, for fomenting disorder and violence, for
being a menace to law and order, and for attempting
to substitute itself for the Government. The Klan
considers that this has been done.

“T will say to you this,’ said H. W. Evans, the
Imperial Wizard, when I asked him how much success
his reform campaign had achieved: “As much prog-
ress has been made as it seems to me could have been
expected within the short time since the change in
control of the Klan took place. The Klan is now, on
the whole, as entirely free from those evils in person-
nel as can be expected, so far as we have definitely
ascertained. Naturally, such failures on the part of
the members are continually occurring—a situation
which is perfectly sound may become unsound within
a few weeks or a month—but whenever such a situa-

20


THE GIANT CLEARS FOR ACTION-


tion arises it is corrected as soon as the facts are
learned.

“Failures on the part of individuals to live up to
convictions and teachings are always betrayals of
trust. Klansmen are not free from them, but we have
arrived at the point where the Klan recognizes that
such actions are in direct conflict with its doctrine and
oath.

“The. Klan, as a whole, has heartily supported all
corrective measures, making reform easier and more
expeditious.”

This statement, which admits the previous charges
against the Klan and the fact of the house-cleaning,
and which admits also that the organization is not yet
perfect, is quite typical of Dr. Evans. Before taking
up the story of what he has done to the Klan let us
stop for a moment to look at the man himself. His
position as Wizard makes him one of the most influen-
tial men in America to-day. On him, too, depends
largely whether the achievements of the Klan be good
or bad. As one of the highest grade men I know—an
ardent Klansman—said to me—“If the Klan should
be perverted it would be the most dangerous body that
ever existed. It would do incalculable harm.” Dr.
Evans, to-day, would be the man who would have to
pervert it.

Hiram Wesley Evans, then, is a man in the middle
forties; of middle height, too, and tending toward
flesh. He is smooth-shaved, round-headed and rather

21


THE CHALLENGE OF THE KLAN


round-faced, with the slightly prominent eyes so often
found in politicians. His gaze is clear and direct; his
mouth firm, though full, his hands supple and active,
but without much refinement. He dresses carefully.
His sense of humor is direct and blunt but not coarse.

He is a Texan born, a dentist by profession, an
active member of the Christian or Disciples’ Church,
and a Thirty-second Degree Mason, as are many of the
Klan leaders. He is a natural orator and speaks with
the softness and peculiarities of the South and with
something of the tang and rotundity of the old-
fashioned political oratory. He gives the impression
of tremendous activity, backed by great force. His
address would lack appeal to an “intellectual” audi-
ence; it is extremely effective with “common people.”

I was told by one of his intimates, before I saw him,
that he was not a great man, that the strength of the
Klan was in its ideas rather than in its leaders, but
that he was decidedly efficient. My contacts with him
confirmed this estimate. He seemed an excellent or-
ganizer, promoter and administrator—qualities not
always combined—but not strongly original or im-
aginative. He appeared most remarkable for practical
common sense, he has an undoubted instinct for poli-
tics, he understands the average citizen intuitively,
rather than by study. He was with me, though not
always for publication, briskly honest so far as I have
been able to check up on his statements. He is direct
in thought, though verbose in statement; he is not

22


THE GIANT CLEARS FOR ACTION-


highly educated nor highly cultured, his thoughts and
feelings are those of the commonalty rather than of
the intellectuals. He seemed sincere, and as honest
and sound as a good apple; he is under heavy pressure
and strong temptations, but all the indications are that
he has so far resisted both and that his selling price—
since every man must have a price—is very high. He
described himself to me as “the most average man in
America,” and that can not be improved as a thumb-
nail sketch.

The story of what Dr. Evans has dene to the Klan
and for it came mostly from other people. He said
little about it, except as to results, and when he did
speak he was careful always to identify himself with
the mass, to appear no more than their leader and
spokesman. Yet the evidence is that he has almost
single-handed taken control of the organization and
changed it to his purpose. There seems to be no doubt
that this purpose includes personal ambitions for
power, probably for position and possibly for wealth,
but there seems also no doubt that he expects to achieve
these through carrying the Klan to power and success,
and that he is too canny to risk losing the great tri-
umph for the sake of any minor self-gratifications.

There is no need to devote much space to the early
history of the Klan. It was founded in 1915 in At-
lanta by Col. W. J. Simmons, a preacher, dreamer and
—even according to his enemies—something of an
idealist, however warped. His imagination had been


23


THE CHALLENGE OF THE KLAN


stirred by outbreaks of race and religious prejudices in
Georgia and by the hyphenism of the war; he felt that
the law was failing to protect the rights of America as
well as of Americans against organized conspirators,
and he set out on a campaign of correction. He
founded his Order along the lines of the Ku Klux
Klan of reconstruction days, which many believe
saved the South from negroes and carpet-baggers. He
won some immediate success in enlisting members
through his appeal to the tradition of honor in which
the South holds the Klan of the ’sixties.

Whether he intended it or not, the tradition of the
lawless methods of the ’sixties was also carried over,
though the new Klan had none of the justifications for
violence which the old could claim. Many men take
easily to night-riding and a good many took the cover
of the new Klan to indulge this passion. The result
was to bring the Klan into immediate disrepute
throughout the country. The story of the outrages
committed under the White Hoods at that time is too
well-known to need repetition here.

Colonel Simmons, as has been said, is a dreamer;
he is nothing of an organizer. The Klan grew very
slowly, so presently he made a contract with Edward
Young Clark, who had been highly successful as an
organizer of drives, by which Clark was to get 80 per
cent. of the initiation fees of $10.00 each. Clark had
considerable success, though his organizers are accused
of appealing to the worst motives and prejudices, and


24


THE GIANT CLEARS FOR ACTION’


so did the Klan great harm. After paying them,
Clark’s profits were considerable; he is said to have
made as high as $40,000 a month. Charges of graft
and corruption naturally resulted.

The Congressional inquiry, the exposure in news-
papers and magazines and the storm of condemnation
which followed, nearly broke Simmons’ heart. He
understood it but little and although the Klan was so
organized that he could never have been ousted, he
resigned, undoubtedly under pressure from the Evans
crowd.

“Texas was the star Klan state and we came to the
meeting all ready to go ahead and do something,” one
of them said. “But when we got there we found the
Klan was not going anywhere or aiming to do any-
thing, so we got busy, and Simmons done saw the need
of a change.”

“There was a bunch of us in Indiana who saw that
something had to be done if the Klan was really going
to amount to anything,” an Indianapolis man told me.
“We started an agitation that got the better men
throughout the Klan together and we managed to
show Simmons that he was not the man for the
place.”

I am unable to pass judgment between the rival
claimants. My own impression is that the reforms
came as a spontaneous movement in which all the bet-
ter men of the Klan joined, and that they were very
largely due to the condemnation which fell upon the


25


THE CHALLENGE OF THE KLAN


Klan as the result of the exposures in the Congres-
sional investigation.

About the first thing Evans did was to cancel Clark’s
contract. This precipitated a fight which is still going
on. Simmons stood by his friends, backed by the
Atlanta Klan. The Evans group revoked its charter.
‘Although the fight is hot in Atlanta, I have found little
evidence of it elsewhere. It is certainly having little
effect on the power or growth of the Klan under
Evans, and does not seem to threaten his control. Its
chief importance has been to bring out some facts
about the Klan, and to show how complete is the
divergence between the old Klansmen and the new.
Colonel Simmons declares that Evans has utterly be-
trayed the Klan and perverted its ideals.

The fight is receiving newspaper notice apparently
out of all proportion to its actual importance. There
are, in many parts of the country, a small number of
Klans that have never received charters from the
National organization and most of which are support-
ing Clark and Simmons. There are also probably a
few members of the regular Klan, mostly in the South,
who have leanings in this direction. Mr. Clark’s at-
tack on the Klan and his offer to President Coolidge
to help him in exposing it, have made Klansmen regard
him as a traitor. They resulted in the banishment of
both himself and Colonel Simmons, who was support-
ing him. When it is remembered that Clark’s conduct
drew a large part of the criticism in previous investi-

26


THE GIANT CLEARS FOR ACTION ‘


gations and that the attack on the old Klan centered
upon him, it will be seen how little likelihood there is
that he will win any great success in his present at-
tempt to undermine Evans. The reforms he suggests
are undoubtedly desirable in many ways, but the fact
that it is he who has suggested them will make it very
difficult to get them considered on their merits.

One result of the Evans régime was at once ap-
parent; big personal profits were stopped. Clark had
built a splendid home in Atlanta. Evans lived for a
year in a $65.00 a month flat. When Evans took
charge the Klan treasury held only about $100,000.
The finances, by the way, are under the complete con-
trol of the Wizard. By July 31, 1923, according to
Court audit, the treasury held assets of $1,087,273 and
liabilities of $1,705 (balance $1,085,568) as against
assets of $403,173 and liabilities of $247,227 (bal-
ance $155,946) a year before. Dr. Evans and his
friends feel that they are pretty well clear of the charge
of graft.

This matter being attended to, Dr. Evans took up
the question of lawlessness. His practical mind saw
clearly that it not only accomplished nothing, but that
it aroused opposition, gave enemies of the Klan their
best ground for attack, and emphatically blocked all
possibility of carrying the Klan into the northern
states or among the better classes anywhere and so of
making it a real power. This is apart from his per-
sonal views on the morals of violence. On these he


27


4


y


,


THE CHALLENGE OF THE KLAN


spoke to me as strongly as any enemy of the Klan ever
has spoken or ever could speak.

“Violent methods are never justifiable,” he declared,
“not even when the ordinary agencies of law have
broken down. Violent measures should never be used,
and corrective measures applied to individuals by any
persons except duly elected law officers are never right.
Neither of them is practised and neither is permitted
by the Klan.”

At first he gave his attention to specific instances of
violence, often going to places where trouble was


N . brewing. One story is told of a town in which the
~ anti-Klan forces had organized to break up a Klavern


(Klan assembly). Evans managed to get to the meeting
but after it had assembled, and found some hundred
and forty men, all armed to the teeth ready to go forth
to battle. Around the house was a mob, not well-
organized but dangerous. Evans took his stand before
the door and for hours argued with his followers. In
the end he induced them to leave their arms in the
building and go out defenseless. Some were wounded,
many were mauled, but not one struck a blow. By this
and similar means he tried to establish the idea that a
Klansman must not use violence.

But he soon found that this was not enough, and
so made an open and direct fight inside the Order.
This culminated in a meeting of the Grand Dragons
(state heads) with minor officials at Asheville last
July. At this meeting he not only defined the new

28


THE GIANT CLEARS FOR ACTION


purposes and methods he had been perfecting, as will
be told in a later chapter, but laid down the law on the
subject of violence. In closing his address he said:

“We have not been appointed by Almighty God or
any Imperial Wizard to go out meddling in other
peoples’ business. Our duty is to get behind the con-
stituted officers of the law, as every one of you has
sworn to do. Let’s get a National Law enforcement
programme—let’ s fix it so people will have to go to the
penitentiaries for violating law. You can not enforce
laws in the form of a super-government trying to force
your will or your government on the law of the land.
The first time one of your Klansmen violates the law,
thus breaking his obligation, thus doing a thing in
direct conflict with that for which we stand, let us
administer on him as Klansmen for breaking his obli-
gation. Let us then get them outside the Klan and
let the judge and jury and the penitentiary take care


of them. When we do this, the thing will fade like the | °


morning dew.
“The Wizard is not responsible for any violation.
I am going to tell you now: go home and do your


duty and the first time you have a bunch of Klansmen~
that break a law, do not get behind them. Put your °°
influence with the constituted officers of the law, and ©


go with the law and act through the law and thus once

and for all and eternally end this accusation.” _

This, mind you, was to Klansmen alone, and not a

public statement. Dr. Evans may have intended to
29


~


THE CHALLENGE OF THE KLAN


make it public later, but the Klansmen gathered could
not know that. A further light on his orders is thrown
by the following quotation from a speech, at the same
meeting, by Clay Jewett, one of his strong supporters
and intimate friends, whom he had recently chosen to
reform the Klan in Oklahoma.

“You are all well acquainted with the plan of the
organization of Klankraft, the method of administra-
. tion and the many radical changes of operation since
the Order was originally conceived and promulgated.
, One of the great faults in the organization of the
. Klans throughout the various realms (states) now
* established, was the class of propaganda which the
“representatives first engaged in this work saw fit to
“promulgate.

“In their zeal to establish a record and in order to


~* awaken a certain interest in the hearts of men with


> whom they came in contact, they, in many instances,
secured the attention of those men by stories pertain-
, ing to the operation of the old Klan in 1866, wherein
the whip was the chief instrument of persuasion. In
“relating such stories, these organizers did not perhaps
make a statement to the effect that this was the pur-
pose of the organization, nevertheless, they would
leave the impression in the minds of the newly created
Klansmen that it was one of the features of the or-
ganization. Frequently such stories merely encour-
aged the idea that we should, by right, take the law
in our own hands in these cases where apparently the


30


THE GIANT CLEARS FOR ACTION


Jaw did not function or properly handle the offender.
Nothing could be more erroneous than this idea, and
organizers who resort to such practises have done a
great deal of harm to the growth of our Order.”

Dr. Evans soon succeeded in getting at the head of
the Klan in various states men who supported this
campaign. One such is Gen. Nathan Bedford Forrest,
Grand Dragon of Georgia, and son of the famous Con-
federate General who was head of the Klan of ’66.
Gen. Forrest is an unusually high type of man,
strong and clean, and he has made an open fight. His
“realm” was one of the worst, since it was the first
organized under the old methods. His record, how-
ever, is typical of several other southern Grand
Dragons.

General Forrest told me with some bitterness how
people in Georgia were continually calling on the Klan
to redress their personal grievances by either threaten-
ing or beating up some neighbor. He mentioned at
least three cases where women had applied to the Klan
to perform lynchings for them, and said that he got
on an average over twenty letters a week of this kind.

“Of course, we do nothing with them,” he said,
“except to turn them over to the regular law officers
in the neighborhood. Whatever may have been the
case in the earlier days of the Klan, the organization
has now been made to realize that its officials and the
Klan itself do not countenance or support lawlessness
or private justice of any kind. There are possibly


31


THE CHALLENGE OF THE KLAN


individual Klansmen who still try to do this, but we
are doing our best to suppress it. Our efforts toward
law enforcement are limited entirely to giving infor-
mation to officials or bringing influence to bear upon
them. If we find that they fail in their duty, then we
tell the local Klansmen the facts and let them take
action in the next election.”

He admitted that there were some cases in which
people had used the Klan regalia to cover crimes, and
fewer cases in which Klansmen themselves had broken
the law, always without sanction of the Klan. Wher-
ever this is suspected to have occurred, the local Klan
is under orders to help bring the offenders to justice.
Gen. Forrest, as Grand Dragon, has offered a reward -
of $1,500 for the conviction of any Klansman, and in
Macon, where some night-riders were on trial and
Klansmen were suspected, he sent detectives to work
under the sheriff. Men were finally brought to trial
on their evidence, and he had a statement made in
Court that the Klan did not endorse, support or protect
the men. In at least four cases where local Klans have
misbehaved, he has revoked their charters, and given
his evidence against them to the courts.

He has got results. “The Klan used to be made up
of riff-raff—not criminals, but rowdies and low-class
folks,” one of the best known men in Georgia told me,
and others agreed. “Now it is getting the reputation
of being a decent organization and a lot of much better
men are joining it. This is mostly since violence has


32


THE GIANT CLEARS FOR ACTION


been stopped. There has been very little for some
time.”

The final measure taken to stop violence is, perhaps,
a good test of the_sincerity of the reform. In many
states no member is now permitted to take his regalia
from the Klavern without permission. All hoods and
robes are checked with a doorkeeper, and are never in
possession of a Klansman except for official business.
This measure destroys the chief excuse of the Klan in
case of outrages—the plea that the regalia was used
without permission.

There is accumulating evidence that the Klan is
more and more letting the use of the hood drop into
the background, although a new arrangement made
by Dr. Evans has resulted in bringing the price down
to five dollars. At present only about one-third of the
members actually own hoods and robes. The rules of
the order are that every man must have them, so the
suspicion is justified that the officials are allowing to
drop into disuse a custom which they can not officially
change.

In every place where I investigated, or from which
I have reports, this reform of the Klan has been made
plain to every member and is insisted upon in all
propaganda. Thus, officially, at least, the Klan has
cleared its skirts. “The extent to which the change has
been accepted by the members is another matter, which
will be taken up later. But since there are now so few
reports of Klan violence, it seems clear that until new


33


THE CHALLENGE OF THE KLAN


evidence appears the new orders must be accepted as a
real position, fairly well maintained. So far as the
leaders are concerned or can make their efforts effect-
ive, the Klan does not take the law into its own hands,
nor permit its members to do so.

Opponents of the Klan naturally deny the sin-
cerity of this reform. They charge that it was forced
by the exposures and the prospect of internal disrup-
tion, that it is purely hypocritical, a matter of tactics
adopted for the expediency of the moment which will
be abandoned whenever some new expediency dictates.

There is, of course, no means at the disposal of a
reporter to determine men’s motives. I put the ques-
tion to a leading Klansman.

“I can’t prove to you that it isn’t so,” he smiled.
“But I will point out two things. First: the Klan is
absolutely committed, inside and out. If it fails to live

- up to the reform it will be damned much more com-

“pletely than before. Second: the great influx of mem-
“bers has come since the law and order programme was
made clear. They prove that this programme is good
policy. The Klan will not be foolish enough to
change. Moreover, the new members agree with this
principle, they now constitute a majority, and they will
see that it is lived up to.”

My own opinion on the reform, for whatever it is
worth, is that the change is sincere enough for all
practical purposes. I believe that Dr. Evans is per-
fectly honest in his detestation of violence, and that


34


THE GIANT CLEARS FOR ACTION -


both he and a majority of his followers are convinced
also that purely as a matter of policy, violence and
physical terrorism do not pay. Therefore, I think
their abandonment of them is sincere and as complete
as they can make it. Since, for practical social pur-
poses, hypocrisy well lived up to is as useful as sin-
cerity, this seems a sufficient answer to the question.
This reform, then, is the first and most important
step of the Klan in preparing for its great campaign.
So far as it is successful and gains credence it will
protect the movement from the charges which have
been the only basis for most of the attacks on it. Dr.
Evans reasons with some soundness that the whole
attack will fail if those charges become untenable.
Certainly, enemies of the Klan would be forced to find
new grounds for attack—not a great hardship in view
of the failure of their efforts to prevent the growth of
the Klan so far. Certainly, also, new attacks would
have to be based on the new ideals, programme and
methods of the Klan, even though such attacks would
be more difficult than the old, calling for argument and
intelligence rather than for simple condemnation.


CHAPTER III
OLD EVILS IN THE NEW KLAN


WAR Col. Simmons in 1915 formed his new
Ku Klux Klan along the lines of the Klan of
1866 he inevitably took over in one bundle not only
the form but much of the tradition and of the ideas
of terrorism, violence and defiance of government on
which the older organization was built. They may not
have been part of his intentions; they simply were
there, whatever he or any one else said or did. So,
although the Klan as Dr. Evans is now handling it
is considerably changed and far less open to obvious
criticism, it remains the same in many essentials.

Not all people will believe that these inherent quali-
ties are wholly evil and dangerous. Some actually
believe in them; some will hold that, even if objection-
able, they are necessary; some that the good they may
accomplish outweighs the danger. But to an outsider
they certainly appear, at least on the surface, to be
not only highly menacing but also sharply inconsistent
with the purpose and ideals which the Klan professes.
They make it easy to believe the Klan is utterly hypo-

36


OLD EVILS. IN THE NEW KLAN


critical. But, giving Dr. Evans and his associates
every credit for idealism and sincere patriotism, these
things still seem so fundamental that his whole effort
must come under suspicion of being an attempt to
grow figs on a thistle.

I say “on the surface’’ because Klan leaders, though
admitting in some degree the danger and in larger
degree the risk of misunderstanding, deny that these
things are what they seem, or that any of them are as
dangerous as they appear. These explanations and
defenses will be given in proper place; however con-
vincing they may or may not be, it is certain that
before taking up the purposes, protestations, strategy
and tactics of the Klan, the organization which is be-
hind them should be studied carefully.

Most important, because it permeates the whole
structure and of necessity colors all first impressions
of the Klan for members as well as outsiders, is the
tradition of the Klan of the ’sixties. That body,
springing out of the desperate needs of reconstruction
days, when what government there was had fallen
into the hands of ignorant and often vicious negroes,
led by northerners so depraved that “carpet-bagger”
has become a name of supreme contempt, that body {
did heroic work., It enabled the few and politically |
powerless survivors of the armies of the Confederacy |


and save the remnants of their civilization. It has_


left a tradition of high honor through the South. | “. |
37 ae


¢


\


to check terrific lawlessness, prevent hideous crimes, ~~


THE CHALLENGE OF THE KLAN


Equally, because of the blazing hatred and misunder-
standings of those days, it was condemned through the
North. Its justification is not in question here.

The important fact about it is that 1¢ was an or-
ganization of terror. Its regalia, its secrecy, its oaths,
the titles of its officers, the form of the organization
itself, were all intended to paralyze with fright those
against whom it was directed, black or white. Many
of them actually believed in wizards, ghosts and
dragons. The swift blow in the night, the invisible
power which struck, the ghastly regalia—all combined
to create overpowering horror. The organization, too,
was at war with the obnoxious governments that then
existed, and was adapted to defy and evade them. It
was a real “invisible empire,” a true super-government.
It was militant, autocratic, irresponsible.

And it was diabolically effective. It was so effective
that its creators destroyed it, carefully and completely.
As soon as the gravest disorder had passed, and long
before normal conditions had been restored, the
leaders, who were among the best men in the South,
decided that the dangers were so great, the inherent
evils so menacing, and the impossibility of control so
manifest, that it could not be allowed to live. In
1869 Gen. Nathan Sedford Forrest, the Grand Wiz-
ard, issued an order which dissolved it almost in a
night.

This is the organization which the new Klan has
imitated and of which it claims to be the heir; this the

38


OLD EVILS IN THE NEW KLAN


tradition it took over. It has added much to the for-
mulas and purposes of the older Order, which drew
no line against Catholics, Jews or alien born. But
Since it claims spiritual heirship, the burden of proof
is on it if it is to escape condemnation for reviving in
quiet times all the menaces which the old Klan used
under hideous emergency, and quickly abandoned.

The new Klan, it is true, has in it some of the men
who were members of the old, and their sons. But it
also has some of both among its opponents. A son of
one of Lee’s officers condemns it as follows:

“This outfit is a plain impostor. There’s nothing
of the old Klan about it but the name and nonsense.
Maybe it’s got some of the riff-raff who made the
trouble that caused the old Klan to disband—I don’t
know. But no true member of the old Klan and no
true southerner can draw the lines that this gang does.
The old Klan had Catholics in it, and Jews. No man
who loves the memory of the Confederacy is going to
join a crowd that would bar out Judah P. Benjamin,
General Beauregard and a dozen like them. No, sir!’

First of the characteristics of the old Klan which
mark the new and which must be judged in the light of
the old tradition, is the mask and all it implies of
secrecy and terrorism. This is, to begin with, a
secrecy different from that of other fraternities. They
protect their ritual and | purposes, as the Klan does; the
Klan hides its meéthbers ‘as well.

The efforts Dr. Evans has made to remove the


og


\


!


THE CHALLENGE OF THE KLAN


threat of physical terrorism from the Klan regalia
have already been described. But even if those efforts
should become completely successful this form of
secrecy is open to very grave objections. I know of
several high-grade men, now fighting the Klan, who
have told me that they would join it if, as one of them
put it, they could “wear a Klan button.”

One of the obvious dangers is the possibility of the
perversion of the Order. Behind its veil it could be
swung swiftly from one objective to another; it could
be used in whole or in part—without the knowledge of
better-class members—for purposes to which they
were bitterly opposed, but which they would aid
through the very fact of their membership.

More serious is the fact tHat it makes the Klan
utterly irresponsible except to the consciences of
Klansmen. It can strike in the dark as the old Klan
struck—and this covers much more than mere physical


| violence—and leave no clue. Its actions, whether good


or bad, may sometimes be suspected, but can seldom be
proved. Its officers are in the open, to be sure, but
they can easily deny or claim what they wish. Thus
the Klan is almost perfectly un-get-at-able either by
the public or the Government.

“The Government made every effort to suppress the
Klan,” writes General Forrest of reconstruction days,
“but it was utterly powerless.” The new Klan is
similarly organized. If it has the man-power and the
desire it can become in very fact an “invisible empire.”


40


OLD EVILS IN THE NEW KLAN


But most serious of all is the terrorism, the implied
threat of the mask. It is not enough for the Klan to
deny that it intends any such threat, not enough, even,
for it to avoid violence. The very existence of a
masked organization makes it possible for any group
of adventurers or criminals to act under Klan disguise
and often to gain something in safety thereby. The
essential fact is that the mask, in its very nature, is a
threat. It was devised by the old Klan for that pur-
pose. Public opinion so holds it; holds that to have
bodies of masked men wandering around in disguise
is in itself a threat against peace and law. At least
one juty—in Amarillo, Texas—has held that the
wearing of Klan regalia in public is a menace in and
by itself, and on that verdict a man was sentenced to
two years in the penitentiary. ©, o#

A second class of objections ‘to the Klan springs
from the form of the organization; not merely the
grotesque and ludicrous names and language, but the
method of control, the oaths and obligations and the
great danger that members will put a vicious inter-
pretation on them and on the Klan symbolism. All
these are all wide open to attack.

To any one unfamiliar with the extravagances of
secret societies, and even to some who are familiar,
the nomenclature of the Klan offers a broad target.
By official title its officers are an array of mythological
monsters and nightmare absurdities. For example,
the proclamation of the Klan constitution reads:


4I


THE CHALLENGE OF THE KLAN


“To all Genii, Grand Dragons and Hydras, Great
Titans and Furies, Giants, Exalted Cyclops and Ter-
rors, and to all citizens of the Invisible Empire,” etc.

The organization and the meanings of these fabu-
lous titles are as follows:

The nominal head of the organization is the Em-
peror, who has no real power, but has authority over
ritual, regalia, titles, etc. The actual executive head
is the Imperial Wizard. Gathered around him are a
Kloncilium, composed of the following “genii,” all
““mperial’: Klaliff, Klazik—vice-presidents; Klokard
—lecturer; Kludd—chaplain; Kligrapp—secretary;
Klabee—treasurer; Kladd—conductor; Klarogo—in-
ner guard; Klexter—outer guard; Klonsel—counsel;
Night-hawk—courier; and four Klokann—auditors
and advisers. The legislative body of the Klan is a
Klonvocation.

Each state is a realm, headed by a Grand Dragon,
having a council similarly named except that the mem-
bers are “grand” instead of “imperial,” and are the
“Hydras.” A “province,” usually a county, is
headed by a Great Titan, its council members are
“great” and are “Furies” ; the individual Klan, occupy-
ing a Klanton, is headed by an Exalted Cyclops, and
the members of his council are “Terrors.’’ A “Giant”
is an ex-officer, with some appropriate adjective; thus
an ex-wizard is an Imperial Giant, and an ex-cyclops
merely a Klan Giant. A Kleagle, now fairly well-
known, is an organizer.


42


OLD EVILS IN THE NEW KLAN


There is much of this sort of stuff, too much to be
worth detailing, as it is all along the same lines, except
perhaps the Klan Kalendar, now in its 58th year. In
it the days of the week are in order, “dark, deadly,
dismal, doleful, desolate, dreadful and desperate,” the
weeks are “woeful, weeping, wailing, wonderful and
weird,” and the months “bloody, gloomy, hideous,
fearful, furious, alarming, terrible, horrible, mournful,
sorrowful, frightful and appalling.” Thus the revised
Klan Constitution—I have not learned why it is not a
Klonstiklution—was officially proclaimed on Novem-
ber 29, 1922, or “on the Doleful Day of the Weird
Week of the Terrible Month of the year of the Klan
LVI.

In view of all the nomenclature, this seems a fitting
date!

All this, however, is not merely funny. A Klans-
man must take these names more or less seriously;
they have a meaning. However they are now inter-
preted—I have learned nothing about the ritualistic
symbolism of the Order—they carry on their face the
mark of the terroristic purposes of the old Klan. So,
too, do the insignia; the fiery cross, originally used to
call the Scottish clans to arms and a symbol of alarm
from time immemorial; the crossed swords which lie
upon the Bible before its shrines; the robed and
mounted horseman; the dragon on the ensign with
arrowheads for tongue and tail, and all the rest.

So, too, does much of the language of the oaths and


43


THE CHALLENGE OF THE KLAN


the Constitution. The very name of “Invisible Em-
pire’ has a sinister meaning in common speech and
thought; “Imperial Authority” to which the Klansman
swears allegiance, the titles of his officers, his oath to
enforce the law himself as well as to aid officers of the
law—all these things combine to give to the outsider
an impression, however they may be explained, of a
basic “complex” of militant activity hardly consistent
with complete obedience to the Nation’s laws.

Since these documents are of such importance in
defining the purposes and showing the organized power
of the Klan, it is worth while to give considerable
attention to them. The most important is undoubtedly
the Oath of Allegiance. In the text of the Oath, as
printed for Klan use, there are asterisks in place of the
name of the Klan and of certain other identifying
words. In the following text these have been filled in
and the directions as to the action of the initiate have
been omitted:


OATH OF ALLEGIANCE—KU KLUX KLAN


Section I1—Obedience


st , in the presence of God and Man most
solemnly pledge, promise and swear unconditionally,
that I will faithfully obey the constitution and laws
and will willingly conform to all regulations, usages


44


OLD EVILS IN THE NEW KLAN


and requirements of the Knights of the Ku Klux
Klan which do now exist or which may hereafter be
enacted, and will render at all times loyal respect
and steadfast support to the Imperial Authority of
the same, and will heartily heed all official mandates,
decrees, edicts, rulings and instructions of the Im-
perial Wizard thereof. I will yield prompt response
to all summonses, I having knowledge of same,
Providence alone preventing.


Section I]—Secrecy


“T most solemnly swear that I will forever keep
sacredly secret the signs, words and grips, and any
and all other matters and knowledge of the Knights
of the Ku Klux Klan regarding which a most rigid
secrecy must be maintained, which may at any time
be communicated to me, and will never divulge same
nor even cause same to be divulged to any person in
the whole world unless I know positively that such
person is a member of this Order in good and regular
standing and not even then unless it be for the best
interest of this Order.

“I most sacredly vow and most positively swear
that I will never yield to bribe, flattery, threats, pas-
sion, punishment, persecution, persuasion nor any
enticements whatever coming from or offered by
any person or persons, male or female, for the pur-
pose of obtaining from me a secret or secret infor-


45


THE CHALLENGE OF THE KLAN


mation of the Knights of the Ku Klux Klan. I
will die rather than divulge same, so help me God.
Amen!”


(The candidate then waits till the Exalted Cyclops
and his Klan have decided to admit him. If this
is done, he is taken into the Klavern, and the oath
continues. )


Section I]]—Fidelity


bel Be , before God and in the presence of these
mysterious Klansmen, on my sacred honor do most
solemnly and sincerely pledge, promise and swear
that I will diligently guard and faithfully foster
every interest of the Knights of the Ku Klux Klan
and will maintain its social caste and dignity.

“T swear I will never recommend any person for
membership in this Order whose mind is unsound or
whose reputation I know to be bad or whose char-
acter is doubtful or whose loyalty to our country is
in any way questionable.

“I swear that I will pay promptly all just and
legal demands made upon me to defray the expenses
of my Klan and this Order when same are due and
called for.

“I swear that I will protect the property of the
Knights of the Ku Klux Klan of any nature what-
soever and if any should be intrusted to my keeping

46


OLD EVILS IN THE NEW KLAN


I will properly keep or rightly use same and will
freely and promptly surrender same on official de-
mand or if I am ever banished from or voluntarily
discontinue my membership in this Order.

“T swear that I will most determinedly maintain
peace and harmony in all the deliberations of the
gatherings or assemblies of the Invisible Empire
and of any subordinate jurisdiction or Klan thereof.

“T swear that I will most strenuously discourage
selfishness and selfish political ambition on the part
of myself or any Klansman.

“T swear that I will never allow personal friend-
ship, blood or family relationship, nor personal,
political or professional prejudice, malice nor ill will
to influence me in casting my vote for the election
or rejection of any applicant for membership in this
Order, God being my helper.

AMEN!


Section 1V—Klannishness


nd , most solemnly pledge, promise and
swear that I will never slander, defraud, deceive, or
in any manner wrong the Knights of the Ku Klux
Klan, a Klansman or a Klansman’s family, nor will
I suffer the same to be done if I can prevent it.

“T swear that I will be faithful in defending and
protecting the home, reputation, and physical and

47


THE CHALLENGE OF THE KLAN


business interest of a Klansman and that of Klans-
man’s family.

“I swear that I will at any time, without hesi-
tating, go to the assistance or rescue of a Klansman
in any way at his call. I will answer. I will be
truly Klannish toward Klansmen in all things hon-
orable.

“T swear that J will never allow any animosity,
friction nor ill will to arise and remain between
myself and a Klansman, but will be constant in my
efforts to promote real Klannishness among the
members of this Order.

“T swear that I will keep secure to myself the
secret of a Klansman when same is committed to
me in the sacred bond of Klansmanship, the crime
of violating Tuts solemn oath, treason against the
United States of America, rape and malicious mur-
der alone excepted.

“T most solemnly assert and affirm that to the
Government of the United States of America and
any State thereof of which I may become a resident,
I sacredly swear an unqualified allegiance above any
other and every kind of government in the whole
world. I here and now pledge my life, my property,
my vote, and my sacred honor to uphold its flag, its
constitution and constitutional laws and will protect,
defend and enforce same unto death.

“I most Solemnly Promise and Swear That I will
always, at all Times and in all places, Help, aid and

48


OLD EVILS IN THE NEW KLAN


assist, The duly Constituted officers of The law in
The proper performance of Their Legal Duties.

“T swear that I will most zealously and valiantly
shield and preserve by any and all justifiable means
and methods the sacred constitutional rights and
privileges of free public schools, free speech, free
press, separation of church and state, liberty, white
supremacy, just laws, and the pursuit of happiness
against any encroachment of any nature by any per-
son or persons, political party or parties, religious
sect or people, native, naturalized or foreign, of any
race, color, creed, lineage or tongue whatsoever.

“All of which I have sworn by Tuis oath I will
seal with my blood, be Thou my witness, Almighty
God,

AMEN!”


I am informed, but have not been able to verify the
statement, that in the fourth section on klannishness
the two paragraphs which assert allegiance to the
Government of the United States and which pledge aid
to law officers, have been inserted recently. For those
who are interested in puzzles let me point out the
curious use of capitals in the section pledging sup-
port of law officers. It is very easy to suspect that
these constitute some sort of a secret code, though I
have heard no solution suggested.

The second important document of the Klan is its
Constitution. Its most interesting sections are those


49


THE CHALLENGE OF THE KLAN


which declare the purposes of the Order and limit its
membership. These are as follows:


L’ENVOI


To the lovers of Law and Order, Peace and Justice,
we send greeting; and to the shades of the
valiant, venerated Dead, we gratefully
and affectionately dedicate the


KNIGHTS OF THE KU KLUX KLAN


DECLARATION


“Wer SoLEMNLY DECLARE TO ALL MANKIND that
the Knights of the Ku Klux Klan, incorporated, is the
original Ku Klux Klan organized in the year 1866,
and active during the Reconstruction period of Amer-
ican history; and by and under its corporate name is
revived, remodeled and expanded into a Ritualistic,
Fraternal, Patriotic society of national scope, duly in-
corporated (under the laws of the State of Georgia)
in the years 1915 and 1916, and dedicated to the same
principles and spiritual purposes as more particularly
set forth in Article II, of the Constitution and Laws
of the Society.


50


OLD EVILS IN THE NEW KLAN


“We Do FurTHER DECLARE TO THE Wor~p that
our original Prescript used as the governing law of
the Ku Klux Klan, during the period of its former ac-
tivities, and all official titles, mannerisms, usages and
things therein prescribed have not been abandoned by
us; but on the contrary, all of these, together with
designs of paraphernalia, regalia, flags, banners, em-
blems, symbols, or other insignia and things prescribed
or previously used by or under the authority of the
Ku Klux Klan are the property of the Ku Klux Klan
under and by virtue of its corporate name of Knights
of the Ku Klux Klan and are held sacred by us as a
precious heritage, which we shall jealously preserve,
forever maintain and valiantly protect from profana-
tion.


THE IMPERIAL PROCLAMATION


“To the lovers of Law, Order, Peace and Justice of
all nations, People, Tribes and Tongues of the whole
earth, Greetings:

“T, and the citizens of the Invisible Empire through
me, make declaration to you:

“We, the members of this Order, desiring to pro-
mote patriotism toward our Civil Government; honor-
able peace among men and nations; protection for and
happiness. in the homes of our people; manhood,
brotherhood, and love among ourselves, and liberty,

51


THE CHALLENGE OF THE KLAN


justice, and fraternity among all mankind; believing
we can best accomplish these noble purposes through
a mystic, social, patriotic, benevolent association,
having a perfected lodge system, with an exalted
ritualistic form of work and an effective form of
government, not for selfish profit, but for the mutual
betterment, benefit and protection of our oath-bound
associates, and their loved ones; do physically, socially,
morally and vocationally


PROCLAIM TO THE WORLD


“That we are dedicated to the sublime duty of pro-
viding generous aid, tender sympathy and fraternal
assistance amid fortune and misfortune in the efful-
gent light of life and amid the sable shadows of death;
and to the exalted privilege of demonstrating the prac-
tical utility of the great (yet most neglected) doctrine
of the Fatherhood of God and the Brotherhood of
man as a vital force in the lives and affairs of men.

“We invite all men who can qualify to become cit-
izens of the Invisible Empire to approach the portal
of our beneficent domain, join us in our noble work
of extending its boundaries, and in disseminating the
gospel of ‘Klankraft,’ thereby encouraging, conserv-
ing, protecting and making vital the fraternal relation-
ship in the practice of an honorable klannishness; to
share with us the glory of performing the sacred duty

52


OLD EVILS IN THE NEW KLAN


of protecting womanhood; to maintain forever the
God-given supremacy of the white race; to com-
memorate the holy and chivalric achievements of our
fathers; to safeguard the sacred rights, privileges and
institutions of our Civil Government; to bless man-
kind and to keep eternally ablaze the sacred fire of a
fervent devotion to a pure Americanism.

“The Invisible Empire is founded on sterling char-
acter, and immutable principles based upon sacred
sentiment and cemented by noble purposes. It is pro-
moted by a sincere, unselfish devotion of the souls
of men, and is governed by their consecrated intel-
ligence. It is the soul of chivalry, virtue’s impene-
trable shield; and the devout impulse of an uncon-
quered race.

“DoNE IN THE AULIC oF His Majesty, the Em-
peror of the Invisible Empire, Knights of the Ku
Klux Klan, in the Imperial Palace, in the Imperial
City of Atlanta, Commonwealth of Georgia, United
States of America.


This the 29th day of
November, Anno
Domini, Nineteen
Hundred and
Twenty-two Anno


Klan LVI.


oo


THE CHALLENGE OF THE KLAN


KU KLUX KREED
(Original Creed Revised)


“We, the Order of the Knights of the Ku Klux
Klan, reverentially acknowledge the majesty and su-
premacy of Almighty God and recognize His good-
ness and providence through Jesus Christ our Lord.

“Recognizing our relation to the Government of
the United States of America, the Supremacy of its
Constitution, the Union of States thereunder, and the
Constitutional Laws thereof, we shall ever be devoted
to the sublime principles of a pure Americanism, and
valiant in the defense of its ideals and institutions.

“We avow the distinction between the races of man-
kind as decreed by the Creator, and we shall ever be
true to the maintenance of White Supremacy and
strenuously oppose any compromise thereof.

“We appreciate the value of practical, fraternal
relationship among men of kindred thought, purpose
and ideals and the infinite benefits accruing therefrom;
we shall faithfully devote ourselves to the practise of
an honorable klannishness that the life of each may
be a constant blessing to others.


54


OLD EVILS IN THE NEW KLAN


‘NON SILBA SED ANTHAR’


PREAMBLE


“We, the members of this Order, citizens and pro-
bationers of the Invisible Empire, Knights of the Ku
Klux Klan, in order to insure unity of organization;
to guarantee an effective form of government; to
perpetuate our great institution through patriotic and
fraternal achievements; to preserve forever its holy
principles; to continue and make vital its spiritual pur-
poses; to achieve its laudable objects; to attain its
lofty ideals; to consummate its mission and to pro-
mote effectively all things set forth in The Imperial
Proclamation herein; do declare this Constitution of
the Knights of the Ku Klux Klan, in lieu of the orig-
inal Prescript of the Ku Klux Klan, as the supreme
law of this Society, and pledge our voice, our loyalty,
our manhood and our sacred honor to enforce the
same. In our endeavor toward the faithful fulfillment
of this, our honorable mission, we solemnly invoke
the guidance and blessings of Almighty God in behalf
of our country, ovr homes, our race and each other,
now, and unto generations yet unborn.


55


THE CHALLENGE OF THE KLAN


APPELLATION AND GOVERNMENT


ARTICLE I


“Section 1. To the name of this Society, Ku Klux
Klan, has been prefixed the words ‘Knights of the,’
and therefore forever hereafter it shall be known as
‘KNIGHTS OF THE Ku Kiux KLAN,’ and is herein-
after referred to as, “This Order.’ It is, and shall
continue to be, a Patriotic, Military, Benevolent, Rit-
ualistic, Social and Fraternal Order or Society.

“Section 2. The government of this Order shall
ever be military in character, especially in its execu-
tive management and control; and no legislative en-
actment or constitutional amendment hereafter shall
encroach upon, affect or change this fundamental prin-
ciple of the Invisible Empire.

“Section 3. The government of this Order shall
be vested primarily in the Imperial Wizard, as Com-
mander-in-Chief, who shall be supreme within the
restrictions of this constitution, and as otherwise pro-
vided, and whose decisions, decrees, edicts, mandates,
rulings and instructions shall be of full authority and
unquestionably recognized and respected by each and
every citizen of the Invisible Empire.


56


OLD EVILS IN THE NEW KLAN


OBJECTS AND PURPOSES


ARTICLE II


“Section 1. The objects of this Order shall be to
unite white male persons, native-born Gentile citizens
of the United States of America, who owe no alle-
giance of any nature or degree to any foreign govern-
ment, nation, institution, sect, ruler, person or people;
whose morals are good; whose reputations and voca-
tions are respectable; whose habits are exemplary;
who are of sound minds and eighteen years or more
of age, under a common oath into a brotherhood of
strict regulations; to cultivate and promote patriotism
toward our Civil Government; to practise an honor-
able klannishness toward each other; to exemplify a
practical benevolence; to shield the sanctity of the
home and the chastity of womanhood; to maintain
forever white supremacy, to teach and faithfully in-
culcate a high spiritual philosophy through an exalted
ritualism, and by, a practical devotion to conserve,
protect and maintain the distinctive institutions,
rights, privileges, principles, traditions and ideals of
a pure Americanism.

“Section 2. To create and maintain an institution


a


THE CHALLENGE OF THE KLAN


by which the present and succeeding generations shall
coramemorate the great sacrifice, chivalric service and
imperishable achievement of the ‘Ku Klux Klan of
the Reconstruction period of American History,’ to
the end that justice and honor be done the sacred
memory of those who wrought through our mystic
society during that period, and that their valiant ac-
complishments be not lost to posterity; to perpetuate
their faithful courage, noble spirit, peerless principles
and faultless ideals; to hold sacred and make effective
their spiritual purpose in this and future generations;
that they be rightly vindicated before the world by
a revelation of the whole truth.

“Section 3. This Order is an institution of Chivy-
alry, Humanity, Justice and Patriotism; embodying in
its genius and principles all that is chivalric in conduct,
noble in sentiment, generous in manhood, and patriotic
in purpose. Its peculiar objects are: First, to protect
the weak, the innocent, and the defenseless from the
indignities, wrongs and outrages of the lawless, the
violent and the brutal; to relieve the injured and the
Oppressed; to succor the suffering and unfortunate,
especially widows and orphans. Second, to protect
and defend the Constitution of the United States of
America, and all laws passed in conformity thereto,
and to protect the States and the people thereof from
all invasion of their rights from any source whatso-
ever. Third, to aid and assist in the execution of all
constitutional laws, and to preserve the honor and


58


OLD EVILS IN THE NEW KLAN


dignity of the State by opposing tyranny, in any and
every form or degree, from any and every source
whatsoever, by a fearless and faithful administration
of justice through due process of law; and to meet
promptly and properly every behest of Duty without
fear and without reproach.


TERRITORIAL JURISDICTIONS AND
ASSEMBLIES


ARTICLE III


“Section 1. THE INVISIBLE Empire: The phrase
‘Invisible Empire’ in a material sense denotes the uni-
versal geographical jurisdiction of this Order and it
shall embrace the whole world. The convention of
the Invisible Empire shall be known as the Imperial
Klonvokation. The phrase ‘Invisible Empire’ in a
spiritual sense applies to all the secrets and secret
knowledge and information, secret work and working
and things of this Order, and to all that has been, to
all that now is and to all that is to be, the past, the
present and the future, yesterday, to-day and forever;
the dead of yesterday, the living of to-day, and the
contemplated of to-morrow, of the life that now is
and of that which is to come.

“Section 2. Ina material sense, the territorial di-
vision of the Invisible Empire into a subordinate juris-


Sie


THE CHALLENGE OF THE KLAN


diction shall be known as a ‘Realm,’ and same shall
embrace a State or States or a territorial possession
of the United States of America, and shall derive its
designation from that State or Territory which it
embraces, and its number shall be given it in order of
its formation. The convention of a Realm shall be
known as the ‘Klorero.’

“Section 3. <A territorial division of a Realm shall
be known as a ‘Province,’ and shall embrace a county
or a number of counties of a State. Provinces shall
be designated by number. The convention of a Prov-
ince shall be known as a ‘Klonverse.’

“Section 4. A ‘Klan’ is the unit of this Order; it
is the local or subordinate body, lodge, or organiza-
tion, and its territorial jurisdiction shall be known as
the ‘Klanton’ which shall extend in all directions to a
distance midway between the location of the Klan
and the nearest Klan thereto, except as otherwise des-
ignated by the Imperial Wizard or Grand Dragon
of a Realm. The boundaries of a Klanton shall be
fixed, so far as is possible, on the delivery of the
Klan charter. A convention or an assembly of a Klan
in secret session shall be known as the ‘Klonklave.’

“Section 5. All things and matters which do not
exist within this Order or are not authorized by or
do not come under its jurisdiction shall be designated
as the ‘Alien World.’ All persons who are not mem-
bers of this Order shall be designated as ‘Aliens.’


60


OLD EVILS IN THE NEW KLAN


MEMBERSHIP


ARTICLE JV


“Section 1. The qualifications for membership in
this Order shall be: An applicant must be a white
male Gentile person, a native-born citizen of the
United States of America who owes no allegiance of
any nature or degree whatsoever to any foreign gov-
ernment, nation, institution, sect, ruler, prince, poten-
tate, people or person; he must have attained the age
of eighteen years, be of sound mind, good character,
of commendable reputation and respectable vocation,
a believer in the tenets of the Christian Religion, and
one whose allegiance, loyalty and devotion to the Gov-
ernment of the United States of America in all things
is unquestionable. He must be a resident within the
jurisdiction of the Klan to which he applies, for at
least twelve months immediately preceding the date
of his application for citizenship, provided, however,
that special dispensation may be granted by the Grand
Dragon of that Realm in organized Realms, or by the
Imperial Wizard in unorganized Realms, to waive
this condition.

“Section 2. Applications for membership in this
Order must be on a regular charter petition by charter

61


THE CHALLENGE OF THE KLAN


applicants of a Klan, and on a regular application
blank after a Klan has been chartered. The applicant
must state whether he ever has applied for member-
ship in this Order, and such application made to a
chartered Klan must be endorsed by at least two
Klansmen, or by a Kleagle or by the Imperial Wizard
of this Order.

“Section 3. The ‘Klectokon’ (initiation fee) is
given by an applicant and accepted by this Order as
a donation to its propagation and general fund and
not in the sense of purchasing membership in this
Order by the applicant, and this donation must ac-
company each application for citizenship. The Klec-
tokon is a sum of money of not less than Ten ($10.00)
Dollars, nor more than Twenty-five ($25.00) Dollars.

“Section 4. All men who served as members of
the Original Ku Klux Klan or rendered direct service
thereto, or who were so connected with similar or-
ganizations during the Reconstruction period of
American history shall be admitted to full fellowship
in this Order without payment of Klectokon or dues;
provided, however, they individually qualify for mem-
bership under the requirements of Section 1 of this
Article.

“Section 5. An applicant’s qualifications must be
known before he is accepted for membership in this
Order. Great care must be exercised on the part of
a Kleagle or a Klan in ascertaining an applicant’s
qualifications under Section 1, of this Article.”

62


OLD EVILS IN THE NEW KLAN


The rest of the Constitution is devoted to details
of the organization, the duties of officers, etc.* It
shows what seems a complete inconsistency in the
Klan, since the form of its government is that of an
absolute despotism, although the Klan puts itself for-
ward as the one champion of democracy. The Im-
perial Wizard has enormous power and can veto the
election of any officer, or remove him at will, except
that he must grant a trial to Imperial officials—his
“Genii.” His term of office is fixed at four years,
but his election is by the Grand Dragons, and these
he appoints himself and can remove instantly. Thus
it seems impossible ever to remove him, however dan-
gerous he may become.

His power over all members, if they keep their
oaths, is considerable. They promise to “heed’’ all
his commands; I find in the Constitution no limit on
these commands, though there may be some in the
Kloran—the ritual. But there is no doubt that he has
a very complete, uncontrolled constitutional power,
and that he can produce sudden, secret and concen-
trated action when he wishes. How far he could go
is another matter; there are many things he could not
do without violating his oath and thus releasing his
followers. ‘

One more Klan document which is not official is
worth reading. It is called “A Klansman’s Creed”
and is published frequently in Klan newspapers. It


*It will be found in the Appendix.
63


THE CHALLENGE OF THE KLAN


seems to state very fairly the beliefs of a large pro-
portion of the membership.


A KLANSMAN’S CREED


I believe in God and the tenets of the Christian
religion and that a godless nation can not long


prosper.


I believe that a church that is not grounded on
the principles of morality and justice is a mockery
to God and to man.


I believe that a church that does not have the
welfare of the common people at heart is unworthy.


I believe in the eternal separation of Church and
State.


I hold no allegiance to any foreign government,
emperor, king, pope or any other foreign, political
or religious power.


T hold my allegiance to the Stars and Stripes next
to my allegiance to God alone.


I believe in just laws and liberty.


I believe in the upholding of the Constitution of
these United States.


I believe that our Free Public School is the cor-
64


OLD EVILS IN THE NEW KLAN


nerstone of good government and that those who
are seeking to destroy it are enemies of our Repub-
lic and are unworthy of citizenship.


I believe in freedom of speech.


I believe in a free press uncontrolled by political
parties or by religious sects.


T believe in law and order.


I believe in the protection of our pure woman-
hood.


I do not believe in mob violence, but I do believe
that laws should be enacted to prevent the causes
of mob violence.


I believe in a closer relationship of capital and
labor.


I believe in the prevention of unwarranted strikes
by foreign labor agitators.


I believe in the limitation of foreign immigration.


I am a native-born American citizen and I believe
my rights in this country are superior to those of
foreigners.


+


One further ground for criticism is inherent in the
Klan; the possibility that the members may feel oath-
bound to protect other Klansmen from justice. The
65


THE CHALLENGE OF THE KLAN


oath reads: “I swear that I will keep secure to my-
self a secret of a Klansman when same is committed
to me in the sacred bond of Klansmanship, the crime
of violating this sacred oath, treason against the
United States of America, rape and malicious murder
alone excepted.” This seems fairly flat and not likely
to assist any one who might attempt to bring Klans-
men to justice for ordinary crimes.

There is also to be considered the most serious
criticism that can be made against the Klan: that it
is based wholly on class division, race and religious
prejudice and hatred in general. The validity of this
criticism depends so much on the actual propaganda,
and is so involved with its purpose and programme,
that it must be left for a later chapter.

Of course there is a Klan defense for all this. In
the first place many of these same charges can be,
and have been, brought against other secret orders.
There was a time, now almost forgotten, when the
Masonic Order was under just this kind of attack.
I have seen old books which accused it of almost every
crime in the calendar, including treason and “ritual
murder.” Within a few years a book was printed in
London alleging that Masonry was responsible for the
Terror in the French Revolution and at least partly
responsible for Bolshevism. So, to a large extent,
the Klan in these matters is on all fours with other
secret orders.

Then, too, the section of the oath quoted above is

66


OLD EVILS IN THE NEW KLAN


in conflict with other sections. The Klansman also
swears unqualified allegiance to the United States
Government, support of the laws, and aid to law of-
ficers. So he has at least a choice under his oath
whether he will protect another Klansman from the
law. Dr. Evans believes there is no conflict—that the
enforcement of the law is unquestionably first. But
there is some talk in the Klan of changing the phrase-
ology.

I put to Dr. Evans, as bluntly as I could, all these
objections to the Klan. He discussed them very
frankly and admitted some grounds for most of them,
as well as explaining and justifying them. Though
he did not say so, I gathered that he feels some of
them are a heavy incubus left over from the evil days.
of the Simmons-Clark régime. But when I asked
whether he did not think it a mistake to have revived
the old Klan, with all the old associations, he said he
did not.

“Tt was necessary in launching the movement to
have some form of appeal which would give an im-
mediate grip on the imagination of men,” he declared.
“The South’s love of the old Klan did it. We have
now reached the point where the ancient history is less
important, and where the name ‘Knight of the Ku
Klux Klan’ is held sacred by every Klansman and is
the medium through which he expects to express his
Americanism.”

“Does not the obligation of the Klan oath to protect:

67


THE CHALLENGE OF THE KLAN


the Klansman in any secret except one involving trea-
son, malicious murder, or rape, actually prevent the
punishment of any Klansman guilty of crime, when
the evidence necessary to his conviction is in the hands
of other Klansmen?” I asked.

“There is nothing in the obligation of the Klansman
that requires him under the oath to protect another
Klansman in any secret that would conflict with his
duty to his government or with his oath of allegiance
to the constituted officers of the law. There has been
much discussion on this point, and in order to have
the matter perfectly clear, the particular part of the
oath referred to, officially quoted, is as follows:

““T Swear THat I Witt Keer Secure To My-
SELF A SECRET OF A KLANSMAN WHEN SAME IS
CoMMITTED To ME IN THE SACRED BonpD OF KLANS-
MANSHIP, THE CRIME OF VIOLATING THIS SOLEMN
OaTH—TREASON AGAINST THE UNITED STATES OF
AMERICA—RAPE AND Maticious MurDER ALONE
EXCEPTED.’

“This, upon reading, will reveal that the Klansman
merely pledges himself to hold secure to himself in-
formation pertaining to a Klansman from the outside
world, and in no way refers to protection of a Klans-
man or the maintenance of the secret of a Klans-
man when he has violated the law.” Dr. Evans then
quoted to me also the sections in relation to alleged
allegiance and law enforcement which appear in the
text of the oath already given.

68


OLD EVILS IN THE NEW KLAN


I asked his justification for secrecy. He had ad-
mitted that it might involve some serious evils.

“In the present state of the country, when it is
necessary to combat organizations using these and
even worse methods,” he said, “it would be foolish
to surrender an advantage.

“Then, too, in the early days of an organization
which is putting forward any strong programme or
doctrine which is new and controversial, there is
danger of retaliation against individual members.
When it becomes stronger this danger becomes less.

“The Klan will be out in the open one of these
days. It is practically so now in some places. It will
unmask, and it will make public its membership at
any time that those forces which are throttling Amer-
ican ideals and diluting our American citizenship and
living under their own interpretation—if they have
any !—of the Constitution, come into the spotlight of
American publicity and reveal their intentions and
motives and when legislation is made all-inclusive.
This applies to political as well as to religious organ-
izations.”

“Does not secrecy encourage lawlessness in Klans-
men?” I persisted.

“That argument is fallen to the ground,” he said.
“Statistics show most marvelous improvement in
crime conditions. In Louisiana they have thirty per
cent. less crime since the Klan became strong there.
In Texas there is less law violation then ever before,

69


THE CHALLENGE OF THE KLAN


and there are more convictions. Lynching has become
a thing of the past.”

“Does not secrecy at least give opportunity and
protection for lawlessness?” was my next question.

“Men with unlawful purposes may have thought so
and have tried to get somewhere where they could
violate the law without punishment. The idea of
secrecy itself operates negatively within the Klan, so
far as this question is concerned. In fact such action
is contrary to the Klansman’s oath, and the spirit of
the Klan is such that a Klansman wishing to commit
violence would be more likely to conceal it from his
fellow-members than to ask their assistance. The
laws of the Order are drawn to prevent any private
or unauthorized use of the hood and the gown.

“T will add that if any such danger does exist the
cure is not in attacking the Klan, but in providing
heavy punishment for violation of the law. The law
should not attempt to legislate against harmless uses
of the mask, but should provide heavy penalties for
conspiracy to violate the law and make a special crime
to cover lawlessness when in disguise.”

“Does not the Klansman’s oath of secrecy which
prevents his admitting his membership in the Order
when called for jury service, operate against the
proper administration of justice?”

“No,” he declared. “A Klansman will answer the
call of justice in any court at any time. No Klansman
to our knowledge has ever been asked, when being


70


OLD EVILS IN THE NEW KLAN,


questioned for jury service, whether he was or was
not a Klansman but has answered in the affirmative.
Naturally the question arises and brings up the point
that if it is the practise of legal procedure that jury-
men be asked this question, then the right to ask con-
cerning all fraternal and religious affiliations, would
be at least consistent. Very few judges consider this
question as relevant.”

“Does not the obligation of the Klansman, and also
the general respect or fear in which the Klan is held
by public officials, tend to the acquittal of Klansmen
brought to the bar?’ I asked. There is considerable
evidence, which will be presented in a later chapter,
that this is the case, although that evidence does not
imply that this is deliberately caused by Klan officials.
Dr. Evans, however, denies it, and probably hopes
that his denial is true.

“No, if it did it would be a severe indictment of
the public officials themselves,” he said. “There is no
more need for a public official in the exercise of his
duties to fear a Klansman than there is for him to
fear a Republican or a Democrat; not eS
cause both political parties are in politics and the Klan
is a a

“Tt is true that anonymous communications are
often used by individuals in an attempt to intimidate
public officials and sometimes private persons, but not
a single case is on record where they have been traced
back to the Klan or proved to be from an original

71


THE CHALLENGE OF THE KLAN


authoritative Klan source. The Klan will certainly
uphold any official in the carrying out of the respon-
sibilities of his office, probably more so were he under
anonymous threats than were he not.”

But when I asked what value there is for the Klan
in ‘“‘bedsheets and pillow cases’; if they are not to
create terror, the doctor first laughed, and then grew
grave.

“They are very valuable as an advertising feature,”
he said. “But though they may seem to the public
mind to be merely ‘bedsheets and pillow cases,’ they
certainly do not so seem to the Klansman. They are
regalia, they carry to him important significance and
typify certain ideals that are as old as the ages them-
selves. They are just as sacred to him as the fez and
the plume are to the Masons, as other religious regalia
are to the church, and as uniforms and flags are in
governmental functions. They occupy the same place
as a means of impressiveness in the conferring of
degrees that other fraternal regalia do in other organ-
izations.

“It is true that they have a certain psychological
appeal and have undoubtedly proved their value in the
propagation of the Knights of the Ku Klux Klan.
This appeal as an advertising feature is changed into
something far different in the mind of any individual
as soon as he has joined the Klan, has become
informed, and appreciates their significance as
regalia.


72


OLD EVILS IN THE NEW KLAN


He grew grave again when I asked what the Klan
means by “Invisible Empire.”

“We are dropping the expression,” he replied, “us-
ing it less and less. It is a ritualistic phrase referring
to the geographical jurisdiction of the Order. It has
no reference to any political government.”

“Is not the government of the Klan a complete dic-
tatorship?” I asked.

“In form, yes. In actuality, no,” he declared. “It
is necessary to have that form of government, as a
democracy, unless organized, can not protect nor
cleanse itself. Also, the only way to protect the Klan
from constant efforts to exploit it for personal profit,
or from demagogues who might be able to sway a
portion of its membership through an appeal to emo-
tion, is to have a government strong enough to sup-
press all such attempts.

“But actually, in spite of the form of constitution,
it would be impossible for an Imperial officer to run
counter to the wishes of the organization as a whole.
While the body of the organization is secret, the of-
ficers and their conduct are out in the open, subject
to constant watchfulness. If they go wrong they will
lose their following, and the organization be de-
stroyed. There have been instances in which this has
been proved. *

“I will add that this form of organization is com-
mon to all fraternities, and that the Klan is no more
centralized than even some religious bodies which


73


THE CHALLENGE OF THE KLAN


are never attacked on that ground. Still, there is an
apparent contradiction here. The Kian stands for
democracy in government, and must also stand for
democracy inside itself. A solution is being sought.”

“Ts not some of the language in the oaths and con-
stitution such that it suggests violence, at least to
certain types of mind?” I asked.

“T do not believe so. Few people understand the
spiritual vision of a Klansman. Any individual who
had that idea in mind would, I believe, be promptly
disabused of it in the obligations and interpretations
of the very first ceremony.”

“Does not the secrecy of the Klan show coward-
ice?’ was the last of my hectoring questions to the
Imperial Wizard.

“T think your question is unfair,” was his reply.
“But I will answer it. At Carnegie, Pennsylvania,
unarmed Klansmen took the bullets of the un-Amer-
ican alien forces unflinchingly and did not precipitate
a riot. At Perth Amboy, New Jersey, Klansmen
when cornered in a small room by a mob of from five
to eight thousand aliens, stacked their arms in the
center of the room, walked out into the crowd under
reported police assistance, where they stood a steady
barrage of brickbats, bullets and other missiles, many
being unmercifully beaten. But they did not resist,
knowing that such resistance would cause bloodshed.
Innumerable cases of this kind are evidence of what
we believe to be the greatest moral courage.”


74


OLD EVILS IN THE NEW KLAN


In his discussion of the ritual of the Klan, the gro-
tesque nomenclature and the symbolism of the Order,
I confess that Dr. Evans got beyond my depth. I
have never been a member of any secret order, and
what I have been able to see of their ceremonies has
never seemed very sacred to me. Yet I am forced to
consider this a blindness in myself, for I have friends,
sane and intelligent, to whom these things are very
solemn and very sacred. Certainly they are both of
these things to Dr. Evans, and his reverent attitude
made me ashamed of having referred to the “Klan
menagerie.” I can only give his reply to my ques-
tion as he made it.

“T probably can not explain in a way that would be
fully understood by any one outside fraternal soci-
eties,” he said. “The best answer I can give is this:
that, just as the spiritual ideals of religion have to be
clothed in formalities which to the non-religious man
seem ludicrous and are ridiculed, so it is necessary to
clothe the idealism and spiritual concepts of fraternal-
ism, and especially of a purposeful Order such as the
Klan, in similar ritualism and formalism.

“T will leave it to some psychologist to explain why.
that is so, but every man with experience in dealing
with ideals on a popular basis knows that the people
want and need) symbolism and that when it is de-
stroyed, something precious, vital and irreplaceable has
been taken away from them. For myself, I know
that if there is a question about the literal inspiration


75


THE CHALLENGE OF THE KLAN


of any word in the Bible I do not want to consider it.
I wish to believe. I do believe. It is only on this
basis that one can understand the formalism of the
ian."

His idea, by the way, received support from a very
different quarter only two days after this talk. Dr.
W. M. Guthrie, Rector of St. Mark’s-on-the-Bouwerie,
New York, demanded from his pulpit an increase in
ritualism_in religion, declaring that without it “all
we have are sickly doctrines.”

To return to Dr. Evans—my last question to him
along this line was whether the Klan would not be-
come extremely dangerous if ever perverted.

“Tt would,” he declared. “It would be frightful.
But the very organization of the Klan is such that
if the attempt were ever made, it would automatically
destroy itself. The strength of the Klan is in the
ideals of the Klansmen, and that strength can not be
used apart from those ideals.”

Some matters Dr. Evans did not wish to discuss
for publication. “Let’s leave that for a while—I’m
not ready for that yet,” he would say. Finally he
made a blanket statement, indicating that his reforms
are not ended, and that he plans changes in the Con-
stitution which will remove some of the grounds for
criticism, perhaps most.

“There are certain difficulties inherent in the growth
of the organization and its form and the language
of some of its official documents,” he said. “These


76


OLD EVILS IN THE NEW KLAN .


naturally must be handled slowly and with great care.
They are being handled in this fashion and will be cor-
rected. But I do not care to discuss them for publica-
tion until solutions have been reached.”

Whatever these reforms may be, they naturally can
not be taken into consideration until they are made
effective. Judgment for the time being must be based
on the Klan as it is. And, from the facts available, it
seems clear that the Klan to-day is still irresponsible,
uncontrollable, autocratic, and terroristic in form;
that if its members keep their oaths and take them
and some of the official language and formulas liter-
ally, and are impressed by the apparent meaning of
its symbolism, it is quite capable of becoming a real
invisible government, protecting its members from the
law and striking powerfully and with immunity from
the dark. It seems that General Forrest and his as-
sociates in 1868 had good reason to destroy such an
organization the moment their desperate emergency
passed. It can be justified to-day only by the belief
that there is a new emergency demanding drastic
methods.

The great present safeguard—the reason why all
these evils are apparent and only partly actual—is
in the leadership and control. The danger will remain
until the organization itself is changed. From meet-
ing and seeing many Klansmen I know that a very
large proportion have joined in spite of these features
of the Klan, not because of them. That they have


77


THE CHALLENGE OF THE KLAN


joined at all is proof of the power of appeal of the
present purposes and programme. Dr. Evans is right
when he says that the strength of the Klan to-day is
in the ideals of the Klansmen.


CHAPTER IV
THE CRUSADE OF THE FIERY CROSS


HE Ku Klux Klan, like all the rest of us, is quite
naturally at its best when seen through its am-
bitions, purposes and ideals. In them it can ignore
and escape from all bad habits, evil traditions, dis-
crepancies in practise and failures in conduct, and
appear in its Sunday best. Of course, this is a great
deal better than its working clothes, but the Klan
shares a very common failing if it wishes to be judged
entirely by it. Certainly, in reaching a verdict on any
human thing, purpose as well as practise must be
considered.

These ideals and aspirations are beyond question
the Klan’s strongest point. It is they that have
brought in so many hundreds of thousands of mem-
bers in the last few months and are now bringing
in 100,000 every week. The record proves that they,
and not the ritual, the allure of night-riding, nor the
pleasure of hating other races or sects, are the real
appeal of the Klan. All these were offered by the


79


THE CHALLENGE OF THE KLAN


Klan under the Simmons-Clark régime, yet after seven
years it claimed only 90,000 members. Evans, who
has given form and spirit to the new ideas, has rallied
millions in a single year!

Many things that he says sound like platitudes, to
be sure. They are, nevertheless, highly important.
They are the ideals and aspirations of the “most av-
erage man in America,” and America is the country
of the average man. In it there is no idea more
powerful than a well-chosen and well-aimed platitude.

Dr. Evans explained his ideals carefully to me in
the first interview he has ever given for publication
on this subject. He broke his long standing rule of
silence because he is now confident of his organiza-
tion; satisfied that it has been made over so that it
is safe from effective criticism, and is ready for great
things. He is ready, too, therefore, to tell about it.
He spoke partly, also, because of urgings for publicity
from the great northern wing of the Klan, men to
whom the old traditions mean less than nothing, and
who are smarting under criticism they believe to be
ignorant and unfair.

I talked with Dr. Evans for several hours in his
“aulic’ in the Imperial Palace in Atlanta, and later
for more hours in Washington. He talked freely
and apparently frankly, and the statements which fol-
low were carefully worded to express the thought
brought out in the two long discussions. The actual
wording is sometimes that of his advisers, for he

80


THE CRUSADE OF THE FIERY CROSS


himself has a tendency to oratorical prolixity, but the
thought is always his.

I have often been asked whether Dr. Evans is sincere
in his ideals and purposes. That is beyond my power
to determine, but I personally believe that he is. He
often reminds me of a rough-and-ready evangelist.
He has most of the tricks, including the—“Brother,
Pll say to you—” with which he began many of his
statements. But whether sincere or not, it is certain
that he believes fully in the power of these ideas, not
only to win support and recruits, but to hold men and
achieve results.

“Tl tell you, Brother,’ he said again and again,
“you don’t realize the power of the Klan ideal. It
makes men over. The Klan idea is the most potent
thought in America to-day.” .

“Suppose you define that idea exactly,” I finally
demanded. “What, in your mind, is the Klan to-day
—its central idea and general purpose? What are the
‘ideals of the Klansmen’ which you say are its real
strength ?”

“The Klan is an organization to promote practical
patriotism—Americanism,” he replied without hesita-
tion. “Its ideal is to restore and then to preserve and
develop the old, fundamental ideas on which the na-
tion was founded and which have made it great; to
provide for the uncontaminated growth of Anglo-
Saxon civilization. This, historically and instinct-
ively, involves racial purity, free Christian thought

81


THE CHALLENGE OF THE KLAN


(which is possible only under Protestanism), liberty
under law with full regard for the rights of others,
a complete and unselfish acceptance of the duties and
burdens of citizenship as well as its privileges, and
a spirit of democracy which considers the good of the
nation as a whole instead of merely the interest of
any class, race, religion, group, bloc, or any other
special and limited body.”

This, naturally, did not fit at all with my previous
notions of the Klan.

“Your critics,” I pointed out, “will say that actually
you are merely setting up another bloc; that the only
way by which the group that exists can be broken up
is through education.”

“Every one knows that education, so far, has failed
to do this,” he answered. *“The Klan, in fact, is try-
ing to educate the hostile elements in two ways; first,
by showing the value and the beauty of true citizen-
ship, and second by insisting that every new citizen
shall have had the benefit of an American education,
and shall thus have learned Americanism from his
youth up. In the meanwhile—till this education is
effective—the Klan is merely recognizing facts as they
exist. If it is setting up a new group, it is at least
a group which in time can absorb every real citizen,
and it is the only group which even pretends to do this.
And, until education does its work, the Klan is the
only body in a position to protect fundamental Amer-
icanism.”


82


THE CRUSADE OF THE FIERY CROSS


“Well, then, considering the Klan as a reform—a
crusade—what are the conditions in American polit-
ical and social life which demand such a crusade to-
day?” I asked.

“First and foremost, it is because Americans have
neglected their public duty,” he replied. “Three out
of ten of our native-born citizens—and until I be-
came a Kiansman I was one of them—have taken the
advantages of American liberties and free government
for granted. They did not either give them the
thought nor take the trouble regarding them that are
essential if they are to be maintained. Heretofore, the
average citizen has been born into conditions and en-
vironments which were accepted without thought or
regard to the fundamental principles involved. Not
so with a Klansman. He does not accept a given
condition of affairs, regardless of how long standing
or how great the authority therefor, but searches out
truth and facts. The need of the Klan is the same as
the need of America for this kind of thought.

“In the second place, there is the immediate and
alarming fact that American thought and life have
been and are being perverted from their true course
by excessive alien mixtures. It is foolish to expect,
and it has been proved wrong by experience to hope,
that people of’ alien races, with different traditions,
different education and different ideals which are bred
into them both by inheritance and training, can within
a few years understand America, the American spirit

83


THE CHALLENGE OF THE KLAN


or the American ideals. America stands for a definite
form of government and of social organization and of
thought, which have been developed through centuries
and which are, therefore, an essential part of and are
fitted to the American people. It is no reflection on
other peoples that they are different, but it is a fact
that they are and that the attempts which they make
to subvert American thought to their own traditions
are threatening the most fundamental factors in
American life.

“We believe that only those who have been born
or educated in America to American ideals of society
and home can intelligently conceive and apply Ameri-
canism in its true sense.”

“What specific reform does the Klan hope to
make?’’ was my next question. “In other words, what
are its direct objectives?”

Dr. Evans’ answer to this question may be taken
as the official platform of the Klan.

“The Klan hopes to inculcate the fundamental prin-
ciples of the Klan doctrine and the application thereof
into the minds of the American people to the extent
that all groups will become assimilated into a solidified
American electorate expressing the will of the Amer-
ican people, who will then form their own curative
remedies for specific evils,” he began.

I interrupted to point out that this was rather vague,
but he swept me aside and went on.

“Specifically, the Klan plans the education of the


84


THE CRUSADE OF THE FIERY CROSS


great mass of its own members and at the same time
of all American citizens, to the responsibilities as well
as privileges of citizenship; the development of an
operative patriotism, which is nothing more nor less
than the full understanding and expression of the
duties of citizens. Heretofore, this education has been
primarily within the organization, and has been re-
flected only in a small measure to the outside world.
No greater duty nor greater responsibility could be
accepted by any group than the furtherance of these
principles and the development of an educational pro-
gramme of enlightenment to all America.

“Secondly, the Klan aims to protect the American
electorate from further dilution by alien elements
which by racial and religious barriers resist assimila-
tion, by restricting the franchise to men and women
who are able, through birth and education, to under-
stand Americanism. This means practically a re-
striction to native-born children who have had the
benefit of the training given by the American educa-
tional system and who are thus by birth and educa-
tion fundamentally equipped for the responsibilities of
citizenship and the right of franchise.

“Third, the Klan aims to protect the nation from
any further evils of unassimilated and unassimilable
elements through an immediate and complete stopping
of immigration, the stoppage to remain complete until
reason appears again for accepting foreign immigra-
tion.


85


THE CHALLENGE OF THE KLAN


“As to the National Government: There has been
a wide-spread feeling among Klansmen that in the
last few years the operation of the National Govern-
ment has shown weaknesses indicating a possible need
of rather fundamental reform. This is shown by
the fact that in election after election the decision
has been based on dissatisfaction with and protest
against previous workings of the Government, rather
than on any constructive thought or a referendum
upon specific pledges for constructive and corrective
governmental measures. The immediate programme
of the Klan is to point out certain fundamental con-
ditions in the Governmennt and bring before the Amer-
ican electorate definite constructive facts upon which
the voters may predicate an intelligent expression of
the will of the American people.

“Locally, the Klan stands for law enforcement, the
election of competent and conscientious officials, state
and city, the elimination of private graft and spoils
hunting of all kinds, and the immediate and vigorous
improvement of the public schools by securing neces-
sary funds and in every other way working to advance
and perpetuate the public schools of our states and
counties.”

Leaving Dr. Evans for a moment, the perspective
from which this programme of the Klan is viewed
may be cleared a little by going back to compare it
with the ideas around which the Know-nothing move-
ment was formed. That movement took for its motto


86


THE CRUSADE OF THE FIERY CROSS


—‘“Americans must rule,” and for its countersign the
supposed command of Washington—“Place none but
Americans on guard to-night.” Another slogan often
used was—‘“‘Shall foreign influence rule? Never!”
And in its platform of 1855 when it came into the
open as a political party, there were provisions for
the following:


Acknowledgment of an Almighty Being.

Development of an intense American feeling.

Maintenance of the Union and opposition to sec-
tionalism (this was an attempt to straddle on the
slavery question).

Obedience to the Constitution and laws.

Restrictions on Immigration.

Opposition to political corruption.

Resistance to Roman Catholic church and

Teaching of the Bible in the Public Schools.


When Dr. Evans outlined his platform, my mind
went back to the second and third points in the Know-
nothing platform.

“Can not a Jew, Roman Catholic or Negro be a
good citizen,” I asked.

“According to their capabilities they could,” he an-
swered. “The Klan has no bitterness toward any
one of these pedple. The Klan is simply standing for
certain principles and it thinks that these principles
can best be exemplified by people possessing certain
qualifications and beliefs. There is no reflection on


87


THE CHALLENGE OF THE KLAN


others who may be very patriotic, but the Klan thinks
that for obvious reasons people born and educated
under true American ideals think more of this country
and typify a higher degree of patriotism than others.
The Klan has no monopoly on patriotism any more
than any other person or organization has a monopoly
on any other good thing, but it is selecting as mem-
bers, men with certain good qualifications and this is
done every day by other organizations without objec-
tion or comment.

“This right of selection is made to seem to draw
the inference that Catholics, Jews and Negroes are
not equally good citizens. This is not true. The Klan
will condemn no man or set of men so long as he or
they are obedient to law and uphold the principles of
Americanism and the principles of the Christian re-
ligion.”

“What is the basis,” I pursued, “for the discrimi-
nation which the Klan makes against members of these
races and religions?”

“Simply this,” Dr. Evans replied. ‘One places a
limitation on his citizenship by a religious principle
which precludes possibility of separation of church
and state. The other,.for two thousand years, has
rigidly adhered to a racial limitation and to an avoid-
ance of intermarriage which makes it impossible for
him to be assimilated into American life wholly and
unreservedly.

“As to the Negro, America must face the fact that

88


THE CRUSADE OF THE FIERY CROSS


God Almighty never intended social equality for
Negro and white man. The Negro is America’s prob-
lem and we should give him all the privileges we can
give, but face squarely the issue that intermarriage
and social equality are impossible. Now that the
passions and prejudices of the Civil War are so long
past, this can be done. The Negro is separated from
the white man by a profound racial barrier and many
centuries of civilization. The racial difference com-
pletely bars any thought of social equality, because
that would be impossible without intermingling; the
lack of mental development can not possibly be over-
come by any immediate process of education. Amer-
ica owes it to the Negro to give him every privilege
and protection, and every opportunity consistent with
our national safety. But we dare not risk the destruc-
tion of our civilization, which might come about if
its control should ever fall into the Negro’s hands.
“T would say that individual members of any of the
classes referred to might be patriotic citizens, and that
there have been instances in which they have shown
very high patriotism. But America to-day is threat-
ened very definitely; there is need for immediate or-
ganization to meet the danger, and the surest way of
making certain that our organization will be free from
alien influences ‘is to issue the same order that Wash-
ington did: ‘Put none but Americans on guard to-
night!”
- “How will the Klan try to put its programme into
89


THE CHALLENGE OF THE KLAN


effect?” was the next question. “What are its strategy
and tactics?”

“The Klan attempts to educate and influence its
members to vote for the best candidate regardless of
party, in every political contest,” was his reply. “And
it provides them with full and specific information
about all candidates and issues to enable them to form
individual opinions. It does not indorse any party or
any candidates nor any issues except those I have
specifically outlined. It is clear that the Klan pro-
gramme must result in political action, and that it
can be carried out in no other way. But this action
is sought purely through education and not through
direct attempt to control votes.

“The Klan objective is to inculcate the fundamental
principles of Klan doctrine, but the application thereof
must come from the people themselves.

“In actual operation it would appear that the Klan
functions along the same lines as the Anti-Saloon
League. This means that it does not affiliate with any
party but that by persistently supporting men of cer-
tain types and beliefs, opposing men of un-American
types and beliefs and working for the defeat of
officials who have failed-in public duty or in Ameri-
canism, it strives to make certain, and to make
politicians understand that America is to be ruled
locally and nationally by Americans, decently and
solely in the interests of America.

“Undoubtedly, as in other large organizations, there


go


THE CRUSADE OF THE FIERY CROSS


have been and will be attempts to pervert the power
of the Klan to selfish ends, to personal ambitions.
Those which have already occurred have been dealt
with by the removal of the guilty men from office
in the Klan, and future cases will be handled with
the utmost severity.”

“How active is the Klan in politics now, both di-
rectly and indirectly?” I asked.

“The Klan is and always will be active politically,”
he said. “The form of its organization and the nature
of its objective automatically insure that its chief ex-
pression will be found in the political field. It is not,
however, in politics in the usual sense of the word;
that is, it has no political ambitions or desires for
itself or its officials.”

Dr. Evans said much more, but this, I believe, gives
a fair and reasonably complete outline of Klan pur-
poses and programme as he sees them and as he wants
the country to see them. But, to complete the under-
standing, there should be taken into consideration also
the definitions given in shorter and somewhat uglier
words by two other leading Klansmen. It must be
remembered that they have no official right to speak
for the Klan, but they do speak for thousands.

“The real idea of the Klan,” said the first of them,
a lawyer and réform politician, “is to make this a
white man’s country once more, and then keep it that
way. A ‘white man’ means people of our own breed!
Other parts of the programme are important just so


go!


THE CHALLENGE OF THE KLAN


far as they contribute to that. But to do this it means
that we must have good officials, because a man who
will cater to any kind of corruption will be in reach
of anti-American influences. The best way to do this
is to get native white Americans into office. I don’t
pretend that’s a sure cure, but it will raise the average.
If that is done, then we have to contend only with
natural stupidity and natural crookedness, but not
with definitely hostile influences which become more
dangerous the more intelligent the official is. The
next part of the job will be to pick the best men among
the Americans.”

The other definition is even shorter. It was made
by a New York physician—an official of a Fifth
Avenue Church.

“Everybody knows that politicians nowadays cater
to all kinds of ‘elements,’ mostly selfish, some corrupt
and some definitely anti-American,’ he declared.
“They cater to the German vote, the Catholic vote,
the Jewish vote, the Italian vote, the bootleg vote,
the vice vote, and sometimes even to the violently
criminal vote. What the Klan intends to do is to make
them pay some attention to the American vote, the
Protestant Christian vote and the decent, God-fearing,
law-abiding vote!”

I have found no one ready to deny that in the Klan
programme, as thus laid down, there is much that is
sound and a great deal that is fine and patriotic.


g2


THE CRUSADE OF THE FIERY CROSS


There must be, since it is winning so many decent cit-
izens.

Criticism of it rests on two grounds, both of which
have a very large basis in fact.

The first is that this programme is not sincere, and
that the Klan in operation is very different from the
Klan in protestation. That question will be taken
up in the chapters eens of the actual working of the
organization.

The other is that, even if the ideas set forth are
sincere, and even if the Klan did fully live up to them,
they are extremely dangerous, because through and
under them there run certain basic concepts as old as
history, almost instincts, which have come to the sur-
face often and have always proved so terrible and
destructive that only the greatest need can justify
bringing them to life again. These are the ideas of
class, race and religious division, with all their lurk-
ing devils of discord, prejudice, hatred and strife.
These ideas, the situation they create, and the Klan’s
defense for its use of them will be taken up in the next
chapter.


CHAPTER AY
INVOKING THE WHIRLWIND


HERE are certain states of mind, shared by most

men, which are so dangerous and devastating
whenever they take possession of large groups that
the most daring of leaders hesitates to invoke them.
History always links them with storms of prejudice,
\ discord, hatred and strife. They are almost impos-
sible to compromise and they can hardly be discussed
without rancor, so by common consent as civilization
has advanced they have been more and more pushed
into the background of thought for the sake of peace
and quiet.

The most dangerous of these spring from the ideas
of exclusive and militant race, or national, or religious
unity. Each carries with it a record of bloodshed,
terror, persecution and unspeakable horror that stag-
gers the mind.

Yet the Ku Klux Klan has gathered all three into
one bundle, and is invoking the whirlwind they always
bring—and hoping to control it—as the basis for its
attempt to reform America!


94


INVOKING THE WHIRLWIND


This is, in fact, the really distinctive thing about
the Klan. One may work for law enforcement, better
education, better government or any of the other re-
forms at which the Klan aims, through a myriad of
other organizations. But in no other will one find
the programme and the very form of the organization
itself based on the exclusive Americanism of “native,
white, Protestant” supremacy.

The Klan makes its position on this perfectly clear.
It is one place where there is complete harmony be-
tween its formule and its thought and practise.
These ideas run through all its documents, acts and
speech ; they are present, sometimes spoken and some-
times implied, in every discussion of the Klan by its
leaders. They are the very soul of the movement.

A few quotations from the official documents al-
ready cited show this:


“To maintain forever the God given supremacy
of the white race . . . the devout impulse of an
unconquered race.”—Proclamation of the Klan
Constitution.

“We.avow the distinction between the races of
man as decreed by the Creator, and we shall ever
be true to the maintenance of White Supremacy and
strenuously oppose any compromise thereof.”—
Ku Klux Kreed.

“The objects of this Order shall be to unite all
white male persons, native-born Gentile citizens of
the United States of America, who owe no alle-
giance of any nature or degree to any foreign gov-

95


THE CHALLENGE OF THE KLAN


ernment, nation, institution, sect, ruler, person or
people . . . to maintain forever white supremacy
. . . to conserve, protect and maintain the distinct-
ive institutions, rights, privileges, principles, tradi-
tions and ideals of a pure Americanism.”—Klan
Constitution—Art. II—Section I. (Most of this is
repeated in the provisions regarding membership. )


Thus the Klan calls the devils from the vasty deep.
And they have come. It is safe to say that to every
man in the Klan these ideas iz some form are a com-
pelling motive. With many they are so refined as to
take the shape of reasoned convictions; with most they
are instinctive—with some, savage. The reforms
made by Dr. Evans have aimed to keep them under
control, to handle them without hatred, to restrict the
damage they may do, but they have not removed them.
The Klan stands and must stand till it dies, for
“native, white, Protestant supremacy.”

In most discussion of the Klan all argument ends
at this point, if it ever gets past the old talk of graft
and night-riding. To Jews, Roman Catholics, Ne-
groes and aliens, and to all the vast numbers whose
sympathies are still with the alien elements in our
population, there can hardly be further debate. The
movement is, on its face, hostile to them.

For many others, especially of the sentimental lib-
eral variety, this is also enough. They had fondly
believed that such ideas were practically dead, and
they hate the Klan merely because it has upset their

96


INVOKING THE WHIRLWIND


minds. But to a far higher type of mind the fact
that the Klan is using dangerous ideas and is making
trouble, carries sufficient condemnation.

But this is not quite enough. Sound judgment,
or even effective opposition, must go further back
than this. The careful thinker will note that to some
degree the Klan is simply going beyond the rest of us
in dealing with ideas that are already held widely and
without offense—the idea that the country is suffer-
ing from too much unassimilated immigration and too
much bloc action by radical and religious groups, and
that attempts are being made to destroy the funda-
mental ideas of Americanism. He will remember,
too, that in spite of all the devastation and horror
they have caused many of the greatest forward move-
ments of the world have been driven by these same
racial, patriotic and devout instincts and prejudices.
He will find sound judgment complicated.

To the average Klansman, however, the matter is
perfectly simple. With him the ideas are instinctive
and he trusts them. If you point out that they are
dangerous, he will reply that Christ declared He did
not come to bring peace to the world, but a sword.
He considers that this ends the argument.

The Klan leaders, in their defense, go far back of
this point—so far back that their attitude becomes one
not of defense but of attack. They deny that hatred
or injustice are involved in the lines they draw. On
the other hand they charge that while Protestant


97


THE CHALLENGE OF THE KLAN


natives have been liberal and have ignored race and
religious lines, the members of other races and sects
who have been allowed to share America’s opportuni-
ties have held these lines tight and kept as many
people as possible within the lines, have gained polit-
ical, social and economic power for the groups thus
formed, and have taken advantage of American good-
nature to use that power against American natives
and against the American tradition. In short, the
Klan pleads both self-defense and extreme provoca-
tion.

Before taking up this plea in detail it is worth
stopping a moment to look at the background of
thought in the minds of “native, white, Protestant’
Americans, to whom this attitude of the Klan appeals
so powerfully and with such astounding success. In
this background of thought are certain ideas which
are so deep-rooted that they are actually instincts—
subconscious and emotional. It contains prejudice
but also patriotism, aspiration as well as fear, ideal-
ism, hatred, devotion, bitterness and self-sacrifice, all
jumbled together in an almost unrecognizable mass.
Usually, and perhaps wisely, it is complacently ig-
nored, but now that the door has been opened it must
“be understood as far as possible, if the Klan itself,
its power and its dangers are to be either understood
or successfully combated, and if the issues the Klan
has raised are to be met with any hope of a sound
solution.


98


INVOKING THE WHIRLWIND


It is in this background of thought and feeling that
the real strength of the Klan lies; in it one must seek
to learn how powerful the Klan may become and how
long it may last. It is there, too, and on the weigh-
ing of each of the many different elements involved,
that the ultimate vindication or condemnation of the
whole Klan movement will be found. Finally, it is
there and only there that it can be fought, for the
Klan idea does fit into this background, as its very
success proves.

It is far beyond the scope of this book to go into
the infinitely delicate questions of fact, feeling and
instinct on which this background is based. That
would involve all history, all philosophy and all psy-
chology, at the very least. For the present purpose
it is enough <o point out in general terms the elements
which are involved in the situation and a few facts
about it. May I ask the reader to remember that
in doing this I am merely reporting what I have
found, neither approving nor condemning any part
of it, and with a full realization that in so involved
a subject my own observations can be no more than
suggestive?

It must be recognized, first, that this background is
there, however inarticulate it may be; ignoring it can
only lead to miSjudgment; denial of the real facts
or ridicule of them makes things worse; suppression
of the steam generated will increase the ultimate
explosion. In the second place it is not all prejudice;


99


THE CHALLENGE OF THE KLAN


there is much sincere thought and there are some very
real grievances. In the third place, there is a great
difference in the emphasis placed by different individ-
uals on the different elements involved; it must not
be supposed that the whole of this half-subconscious
feeling is equally effective with each man.

The largest single element is, undoubtedly, race
prejudice, or race pride, or race instinct, as you prefer.
It takes all forms from the high tradition of Nordic
supremacy to the raw prejudice and contemptuous
cruelty of the lowest order of toughs. It judges all
other races as being lower in exact proportion as they
differ from the Anglo-Saxon mixture which has be-
come American, and it shows itself in pity or contempt
according to the nature of each man. It produces
lynchings, and a sincere and unselfish bearing of the
“white man’s burden” from the same box.

With the average run of Americans it is fairly ex-
pressed in the old army song about the Filipino:


“He may be a brother of William H. Taft’s
But he ain’t no friend of mine.”


It is often curious in its manifestations, for I have
seen a man, ruthless and brutal in his treatment of
people who were not “white,” respond finely to the
appeal to “act like a white man.” It is so deep that
it is continually breaking out in queer and unconscious
ways even in the very people who talk most of uni-

100


INVOKING THE WHIRLWIND


versal brotherhood. And, finally, it will not grow
weaker in a country which uses “white” as the ad-
jective of supreme praise for a man or an action.

Along with this goes national prejudice—or patrio-
tism. This is based not only on a self-protective in-
stinct, but also on a feeling that the country belongs
by some right to the sons of the men who built it, and
that newcomers should act as if they were here on
sufferance. It runs against other breeds of the same
race, though with less force, just as the race instinct
tuns against other races. It has in it much of contempt
but more of fear; it includes a real pride in American
achievements; a belief in American thought and ways;
a jealousy of encroachment; it is, of course, much
more than an instinct for it is fostered by our whole
educational system and by the eloquence even of those
who are trying to undermine it.

Both these instincts have been considerably badg-
ered in America recently and are accordingly irritated ;
they re-act sharply against the alien who expresses
his open contempt of American ways, who disregards
them to his own profit, who makes himself too much
at home in scoffing at American traditions, thought
or feeling, or who, finally, undertakes to tell Amer-
icans how they ought to be, or think, or act. The
justice of his criticism has nothing to do with the
case. The average American is willing to be kind to
the alien, but discounts all he may say in criticism of
America on the ground that he is both self-interested

IOI


THE CHALLENGE OF THE KLAN


and ignorant. Also, because he is exceeding his priv-
ileges. If the alien, by any shift, gets strength to put
his ideas into effect, the American loses his good
nature.

A final extreme irritant is the fact that so many
speakers and editors consider anything American fair
game for jibes or criticisms, from mannerisms of
speech to the Puritan conscience, or the tradition of
southern chivalry. The American can grin and bear
it when these people make a by-word of “American-
ism.” But he does resent it when they shriek “per-
secution” and “prejudice” at any criticism of non-
American people or thought.

The third of these instinctive hostilities is religious;
specifically against the Roman Catholic Church, since
the resentment against the Jew is far more racial
than religious. The anti-Catholic feeling is based on
the memory of three hundred years of war and per-
secution, on the belief that the Roman Church would
if it dared and will if it ever does dare, renew both
its persecution and its claim to political power, and
the further belief that the Church does control the
votes of most of its communicants. My own observa-
tion leads me to believe that it does not run so strongly
against the Church itself as against the Knights of
Columbus, who are considered the body through which
it now applies political pressure.

It is hardly possible to exaggerate the strength of
this feeling throughout the evangelical populations of

102


INVOKING THE WHIRLWIND


the Middle West and the South. Men there may not
be very active Protestants, but they are vigorously
anti-Catholic. There is real fear in them. I know
intelligent men, well educated, who were “brought
up to believe’—and are not yet emotionally con-
vinced to the contrary—that the day will come when
they or their sons will have to fight with weapons in
hand as their forefathers fought to escape Papal rule.
The stories of guns buried under the churches are de-
tails ; the fact is that they have a settled conviction that
the Roman hierarchy still aims at world rule and will
use any possible means to get it.

There are other elements in this background, which
are, however, based more on reason. These grow out
of wholly modern conditions, and need barely be men-
tioned—the evils arising from failure to assimilate
recent immigration, the hyphenism which the war dis-
closed, the increasing tendency of all newcomers to
unite against Americans instead of trying to become
assimilated, the increasing solidarity of alien ele-
ments, and the rapid disappearance of the native
American stock.

There have been recurrent outbreaks of this anti-
American feeling since very early days. The most
striking occurred in the early ’30’s in New York City,
when Irish, German and other alien elements paraded
under banners declaring “Americans Shall Not Rule
Us.” The recent outbreak—the “Revolt Against the
Yankees”—has been almost as outspoken, having been
| 103


THE CHALLENGE OF THE KLAN


consolidated by the European War. Excellent evi-
dence of this revolt was furnished by the Wisconsin
elections in 1922 when LaFollette so overwhelmingly
carried the state. The reasons for his success were
very frankly stated by Victor Berger who is always
more outspoken than either LaFollette or the others
of his alien-minded supporters. Berger’s statement
said in part:


“The United States are not an ethnical unit. Our
population is of mixed European descent.

“Naturally, the inherited characteristics and in-
stincts play a strong part in our lives, and even for
that reason, alone, the American participation in
the World War was a crime and a blunder. Our
mission naturally should have been one of peace.

“Wisconsin is overwhelmingly German and
Scandinavian.

“For some reason LaFollette always has had a
strong hold on the Scandinavian farmers—which
surely was not lessened by the position he took
against the War, because the Scandinavians, by a
large majority, were not in favor of the War.

“And undoubtedly LaFollette has gained the sym-
pathies of ninety-nine per cent. of all the voters of
German descent who by instinct as much as by
political and economic insight were opposed to our
entrance into the World War.

“Add to this that the Irish element during the
War and since the War has also come to appreciate
Robert M. LaFollette as he had never been appre-
ciated before. It will be a sorry Irishman, indeed,

104


INVOKING THE WHIRLWIND


who would vote for the Rev. ‘Big Bill’ Garfield in
preference to voting for Robert M. LaFollette.

“The reactionaries in their stupidity have made
the War the issue in this election. They have boldly
proclaimed that the nomination and election of
Robert M. LaFollette is to be considered a refer-
endum on the War question.

“They will get their ‘referendum.’ ”


These things are disturbing to all thinking, serious-
minded men and women to-day, who it must be said
are floundering in their search for cures. Their
leadership, their thought are followed in cruder form
by millions, and to these millions the Klan offers a so-
lution of these particular and very real difficulties, as
well as a vehicle for prejudice. Many of the men
who oppose the Klan because they believe its methods
dangerous or ineffective, nevertheless admit sympathy
with its aims and have told me they believed the
movement can only be stopped by curing these evils, or
by the discovery of some better method of fighting
them.

There is one more factor which is helping the Klan
campaign. This is the wide-spread dissatisfaction
among the farmers and moderately well-to-do, espe-
cially native Americans. Things are not going well
with them, in ways other than economic; they see their
children forced into occupations they detest, their
schools invaded by teachers they distrust; their Sab-
bath sanctity violated, their laws broken almost with

105


THE CHALLENGE OF THE KLAN


impunity, and they, themselves, driven to meet compe-
tition by methods they abhor and to which they can
not conscientiously adjust themselves. In other
words, they are being forced to “change their ways.”

They do not like it, and possibly would not even
if the new ways were better. They do not enjoy hav-
ing aliens pass them in prosperity, whether it is their
own fault or due to the aliens’ use of methods or of
a standard of living which the American considers
beneath him. Add to this race, national and religious
prejudice and it is very easy for them to blame every-
thing on the racial or religious alien. It is very easy
for them to believe, too, that the alien is responsible
for corruption in the cities, in business and in politics.

This is, in general terms, the background to which
the Klan idea of “native, white, Protestant suprem-
acy” appeals. These are the forces which it aims to
gather together—which it actually is gathering to-
gether—for use in American political and social life.
So the great charge, the most serious charge against
the Klan is this—that it aims to use these forces by
favoring native Protestants above all others, by dis-
criminating against Jews, Catholics and Negroes,
merely because they are Jews, Catholics and Negroes,
and that in this way it is dividing the nation, culti-
vating hatred, developing class consciousness, and thus
running flatly against the very structure of the de-
mocracy it is supposed to protect.

This accusation can not be better expressed than by

106


INVOKING THE WHIRLWIND


quoting from a recent speech of Senator Under-
wood:


“Under the ideals adopted by the fathers it (the
American spirit) means that there shall be no dis-
crimination against any citizen because of his belief,”
he said. “It does not mean that we will not drive
a man from the street because he is of foreign birth,
but that when he is adopted into the fold of American
citizenship he stands on his own feet, the peer of any
other citizen. These are the principles of this coun-
try. Tear them down and you tear the flag down with
them.”


One more thing should perhaps be said about the
background of American thought, in reference to this
matter of principles. The Klan denies that Under-
wood states the case correctly—denies that a man is
entitled to be treated as an American unless he acts
like one. But aside from this, the appeal ‘on prin-
ciple” will have little influence on the kind of average
citizens to whom the Klan appeals. The American
breed is, when all is said and done, a rather lawless
one in emergencies. It is sentimental. It is also prac-
tical. Its slogans and to a large extent its principles
have been adopted because they are or were useful.
It is an historical fact that it has never applied those
slogans or principles when they caused much incon-
venience. Equality, freedom, free speech, even legal
safeguards, have been thrown overboard time and

107


THE CHALLENGE OF THE KLAN


again—and the jettisoning justified satisfactorily—
when they failed to produce the results wanted.

The same thing is true in regard to any meticulous
observance of law. We Americans prefer to let the
law do things for us just so long as it does the things
we want, but the principle of lawfulness is far less
important to us than the idea of getting those things
done somehow. We have the curious habit of making
laws for other people rather than for ourselves, and
we break laws so continually that it seems almost as
if we reserved the right to do so whenever we feel
disposed. The Klan is, therefore, entirely in harmony
with American character when it stresses the things
it wants to accomplish and is impatient when fault is
found with its methods.

Consider for example two instances, neither impor-
tant in itself, but each illustrating how the American
mind works in regard to law enforcement. The first
shows how usual it is for us to demand that everybody
obey the laws which we personally approve, and yet
how we personally refuse to obey the laws we do not
approve.

In the town of Ludington, Michigan, a group of
reformers last fall set out to put a stop to Sunday
dancing. They pointed out quite truthfully that the
law forbade Sunday dancing. They neglected to point
out that Sunday newspapers, movies, soda fountains,
golf, tennis and automobiling were also forbidden.
The prosecutor announced that he would enforce the

108


INVOKING THE WHIRLWIND


Sunday laws—all the laws. The people rose in their
might; even the leaders of reform objected to this
“narrow legalistic view” and complained bitterly be-
cause of the prosecutor's “petty persecution for tech-
nical violations.” Eventually none of the laws were
enforced!

The second illustration is in a way more important.
It also shows a national instinct, an instinct to use
private justice when we feel so moved. It is a story
which may or may not be true about an interview be-
tween Roosevelt and the Kaiser. His Imperial Maj-
esty pointed out to the ex-President that he had some
2,000,000 friends of Germany in this country who,
he declared, would prevent America from taking any
attitude hostile to German ambitions.

“Oh, no, Your Majesty,” said Roosevelt. “They
wouldn’t do that. We have a good many more than
2,000,000 lamp posts in America, and lots of rope.”

Now it is clear that this story is an indictment of
the whole American nation, intimating that we are
all ready to go in for a national lynching bee if suf-
ficiently provoked. I suppose no one would defend
the idea that we should hang even disloyal Germans
to our lamp posts, as a common practise. Yet this
story is credited to one of the greatest and best of
Americans, and certainly one typical of our best. It
may not be true, but it sounds very much like him.

I have told this story to many people, including
some of the most rarefied-minded intellectuals. There

109


THE CHALLENGE OF THE KLAN


has not been one American of the lot who has not re-
sponded with a whole-hearted laugh. Some men of
other breeds have been greatly distressed over the lack
of moral sensitiveness implied, but the Americans
seem to approve the sentiment implied.

There can be little doubt that the story is a true
parable and that in an emergency Americans will en-
force their own law—not merely their statutes but
also fundamental laws that they believe essential for
their own or the national good—and that they will
use lamp posts if it should become necessary. This
has been proved over and over again, not only by the
hideous record of lynchings and by the daily appear-
ance of the unwritten law in our courts, but by the
vigilance committees, by the present highly respect-
able defiance of the Volstead Act, and in a thousand
other ways. Such things have been common through-
out our history; they are common to-day.

Another point about the “Klan’s violation of Amer-
ican principles’: there is no warrant in history for
believing that Americans have ever worried very much
about the freedom of any one but themselves. Cer-
tainly our Puritan ancestors, who contributed a very
considerable share to the American idea, did not do
so. They came to this country because they wished
to worship in their own way, and they immediately
took pains to see that nobody else should worship in
any other way. Also they enacted the most rigid blue
laws, calling for the most intolerable interference with

I10


INVOKING THE WHIRLWIND


freedom of private conduct that can well be imagined.
Some of the things for which the Klan is most vigor-
ously criticized are entirely in harmony with New
England traditions.

Taking all these things into consideration, and as-
suming that what America has done once it is quite
likely to do again in similar circumstances, there
can be little surprise either at the Klan’s narrowness,
or at its occasional lawlessness. It is certainly quite
typical for a body of Americans suffering under irri-
tation to take any means that seem likely to relieve it,
letting theories, principles and legality go hang until
some more convenient season. There is even reason
to believe that the present Klan movement has in some
respects acted as a safety valve for discontent, which,
if it had been restrained too long, might have broken
out in some far more dangerous and destructive way.

Since these things are true the conclusion is inevi-
table; that the only effective way to check the Klan
movement is to go back into the prejudices or instincts
on which it depends, and to show Klansmen that these
basic ideas are wrong in themselves or—what would
be easier though far from easy—to show that it is not
necessary to call them into action now.

An eminently practical attitude is expressed very
clearly in the réply Dr. Evans, the Imperial Wizard,
made when J put these charges to him. His answer
also disclosed another attitude, the curious assumption
that people coming to America expect, or at any rate

III


THE CHALLENGE OF THE KLAN


are expected, to approve and adopt traditional Amer-
icanism, instead of trying to change America to their
own taste. His answer ignores the fact that every
other race, nationality or religion has traditions as
instinctive to it as the American spirit is to Americans;
and that they can not possibly leave these traditions
at Ellis Island, even if they wished to. But to this,
also, the Klan has an answer; it would bar all such
aliens until or unless they really want to become
Americans.

“No matter what your intentions are,” I had told
Dr. Evans, “the fact is that the Klan is not bringing
love and brotherhood into the country. It is causing
sharper divisions, and instead of breaking up the alien
groups, is driving them together.”

“Quite likely,” he responded. “The Klan is stand-
ing in the way of the selfish interests and purposes of
these groups, and naturally they are increasing their
efforts. They were having things pretty much their
own way before, and didn’t have to work very hard
to get what they wanted. The Klan merely acts ac-
cording to the facts. The whole country recognizes
that there are millions of un-American citizens, that
they are not being assimilated, and that many of them
can not be assimilated. Every publication and public
man has been talking about it for years. Every one
admits that the security of the country is in danger.
But no one does anything.

“The Klan does do something. It sets up, in the

112


INVOKING THE WHIRLWIND


first place, a standard of Americanism. If we find it is
wrong we can change it—at any rate there it is. We
invite every man or woman (except Negroes, who are
a special case) to meet that standard, and they all
could do it. We propose means to help them meet it.
We propose means to keep the evil from growing
worse. And we propose also that people who do not
meet it shall have full liberty, but they shall not be
given a chance to corrupt and destroy our government
and our institutions.

“Tt is our Christian duty to love our enemies, but
not to let them destroy us. It is also our Christian
duty to fight evil, and no sensible man will deny that
unassimilated and unpatriotic elements in our popu-
lation are an evil and a tremendous one.”

“But has not the Klan gathered much strength by
appealing to distinctly anti-social race and religious
prejudices?” I demanded.

“That is one of the evils we are trying to correct,”
he replied. “The Klan to-day does not deal in hatred,
or cultivate division between races or religions. It
specifically declines any applicant who wishes to join
for that reason, if his intentions are learned. The
most that can be said is that it recognizes the distinc-
tions as to race and religious divisions which actually
exist. >

“Many other organizations have specific restrictions
on membership, and the restrictions in the Klan natur-
ally call forth the implication of your question. I be-


113


THE CHALLENGE OF THE KLAN


lieve that many people have joined this movement
from unworthy motives, because such an institution
seems to them to give opportunity for gratification of
selfish purposes. But no institution can protect itself
against such people until their motives are made clear
by action. One of the remarkable things about the
Klan is the ability and thoroughness with which it
cleanses itself from within.”

“But does not the Klan, by drawing these distinc-
tions, tend to solidify these classes and therefore to
prevent Americanizing them, and thus defeat its own
aims?” I insisted.

“The Klan is opposed to class distinction of any
kind or to political action or social action on any other
basis than that of pure Americanism,” he declared.
“However, the fact is that these classes exist and are
active politically, socially and economically as groups
and classes. This is recognized by every politician.
Americans, so long as they are unorganized, are help-
less before the demands and attacks of these groups.
So long as they remain it is necessary for the protec-
tion of America that Americans themselves appear and
act together. In the long run the doctrine of love,
Americanism and awakened consciousness will draw
these classes together and away from the false ideas
that cause these barriers.”

Without disparaging Dr. Evans’ oratory, it seemed
to me that the most effective answer to the criticisms
of the Klan’s exclusive membership, and to the race


II4


INVOKING THE WHIRLWIND


and religious distinctions it draws, came from a well-
known artist.

“Rot!” he said when the criticisms were made. “I
wouldn’t be allowed to join the Knights of Columbus
or B’nai Brith. Why in Hades should their members
object if I join an order that bars them out?”

“But the Klan is a political body, with very definite
aims,” I objected. “Those others aren’t.”

“More rot!” he exploded. “You don’t believe that
yourself. If they haven’t got definite aims and aren’t
in politics, then ’'m a Chinaman.”

These, then, seem to be the important facts about
the Klan’s “campaign of hate.” It does, beyond ques-
tion, appeal to deep, powerful, explosive race and
religious instincts and prejudices; ideas which are
hideously dangerous or heroically valuable, according
to how they are put in action. It does also attempt
to offer a solution for the grave national problems
which race and religion produce, to which we are so
sensitive that they are usually ignored, but which are
causing deep concern to all thinking Americans. It
does, officially at least, attempt to solve those problems
without using the prejudices and hatred which are
the almost inevitable results of bringing those ques-
tions into the open. And it is in just this field that
it finds its greatest strength, and presents its gravest
danger.


CHAPTER VI
THE BUSINESS OF “KLUXING”


a) Pee the sins of the Klan be as scarlet, yet
the world will always owe it a little something
for giving us the verb “to klux,” with its derivatives
“kluxing” and “kluxer.” They enrich the language.
We have long needed some word to express the vocif-
erous rounding up of the populace which is one of
our great national activities. ‘“Kluxing” does it to a
nicety; not merely because of the barnyard sugges-
tion in the sound of the word but because of its
brevity, its implied humor, its onomatopceic fitness.
It ought to come into wide use very rapidly.

The Ku Klux Klan has brought recruiting to a
point of efficiency which is almost scientifically per-
fect and far beyond any similar system. No matter
how much credit is given to the appeal made by its
ideals and purposes, these could not propagate them-
selves. It is great skill in kluxing that has spread
them so far and so fast.

Much of the Klan propaganda needs very little men-
tion as it is entirely in harmony with the ideals and pro-

116


THE BUSINESS OF “KLUXING”


fessions already reported. In the addresses of its lead-
ing speakers and in the columns of the publications
controlled by its national officers, one finds much that
is fine and stimulating and little that can be construed
as an appeal to hatred even by the most bitter critic.
Its proposals and assumptions are of course debatable,
the foundation of “native, white, Protestant suprem-
acy” is always present, but within those bounds the
appeal is to the best side of patriotism and religious
devotion and there is no inconsistency and no sign of
hypocrisy. It would seem that the effect of this form
of propaganda must be on the whole stimulating and
inspiring. It is far below abstract idealism, but almost
as far above average thought and practise.

But this is only one side of the Klan appeal. There
is another side which fosters and stimulates tremend-
ous evils. In fact, in turning from the theory and
ideals of the Klan, with which we have so far been
concerned, to its actual operation, we find these evils
in every field. The practises of Klans and individual
Klansmen fall far short of the professions made;
faults appear of which there is no hint in the plat-
forms; there are discrepancies so great that it is very
easy to discredit all talk of ideals and high aims as
the merest camouflage.

This verdict would be unavoidable if it were not
that the evidences of high aims and idealism do also
appear. The same thing is true in some degree of
every organization, since all organizations come far


117


THE CHALLENGE OF THE KLAN


short of carrying out their ideals—there are many
men who quite sincerely condemn every church and
every other idealistic body on just these grounds. The
Klan is at least as fallible in its workings as are the
churches!

Judgment will largely depend, in the end, on the
point of view. It is possible to think of the Klan as
actually an idealistic—if often mistaken—hbody, strug-
gling to maintain its high aims against the faults and
mistakes and selfishness and sometimes downright
criminality of its agents and members, and wrestling
with the compromises which must be made by any
organization if it is to gain the strength for effective
action. There are always such compromises; a recent
similar case was that of Roosevelt, who in organizing
his Progressive Party used many discredited politi-
cians, the riff-raff, the down-and-outers and the
“lunatic fringe.” The Klan has all these elements
in it.

It is just as easy, because of these same facts, to
decide that the Klan’s professions are purely hypocrit-
ical, that its hidden purposes are as evil as imagination
can conceive, that the real control lies with the most
vicious elements, that all its decent actions are dust
thrown in the eyes of opinion, and that it is only in
its worst deeds that it has dared to drop its disguise
and act as it really desires and as it would act every-
where if it dared. This belief is of course very com-
mon ; it seems to have about the same degree of reason


118


THE BUSINESS OF “KLUXING”


as the anti-Catholic belief mentioned in the last chap-
ter—that the Catholic Church will resume burning
Protestants at the stake whenever it dares. The fact
seems to be that the Klan, like every other body, has
both idealists and materialists, saints and sinners and
that there is always struggle between them.

It is certain that, just as the Klan appears at its best
when talking of ideals and purposes, it appears at its
worst in its day-to-day workings. The compromises
or revelations, mistakes or vices—you can take your
choice—which show in actual operation are far below
its own standards.

Furthest below of all, perhaps, is its work of re-
cruiting—its kluxing. Recruiting seems to be a busi-
ness which always brings out the worst in any man
or organization, since it is so easy to believe that al-
most any kind of support is worth gaining for the
sake of “the larger cause,” and that almost any means
of winning recruits is justified, also by that cause. I
know one utterly devoted head of a missionary col-
lege who has sold his soul to perdition if half the
stories told of his lies and subterfuges in enlisting
workers, are true! I have rarely known of a leader
in any cause who refused support, however vicious,
if only it would actually work for the object he aimed
at. Since this is true of admittedly great movements,
and of splendid’leaders, the Klan can hardly be ex-
pected to do better.

As to the means used to get recruits, any one can


119


THE CHALLENGE OF THE KLAN


recall many instances of methods quite on a par with
those of the Ku Klux Klan which have been used
with general popular approval and have been backed
by very high-class men. There is, for instance, the
system of selling insurance by trying to scare the
prospect with lugubrious fiction regarding the horrid
fates of the wives and daughters of men who left no
estate; there is the evangelism which attempts to save
souls through stirring up emotion by hypnotic pro-
cesses, by threats of hell-fire and by a pathos that would
be too raw for the pages of the yellowest journals,
and finally, there was the recent war propaganda, paid
for from government funds, by which we were all
officially, systematically and impudently lied to. In
view of these facts it is clear that there are consider-
able classes who are barred from criticizing the Klan
recruiting methods.

One qualification should be made, not only as to this
report on the Klan’s recruiting methods, but as to all
my reports on its actual workings. It is possible to
say that certain good or bad things have been done
by the Klan, but it is not possible to say how much
there has been of each, or to strike an average of
conduct. In a body of such size and such secrecy
nothing less than omniscience can determine on which
side the balance stands, for no matter how much is
learned there will always be much that can not be dis-
covered. I do not believe that the leaders themselves
know these things with any accuracy.

120


THE BUSINESS OF “KLUXING”


I can only say this—and I realize that it has too
little weight to determine even my own opinion—that
so far as my own observations go, and in spite of the
confusing mixture of good and bad in many things,
the useful actions of the Klan seem on the whole to
outnumber the harmful, and the general level of Klan
activity seems to be improving considerably.

This, of course, is outside any question of the good
or evil in the Klan movement itself. And also it is
aside from the fact that the Klan can not escape re-
sponsibility for the evils which exist, or at least escape
the burden of proof of lack of responsibility, since
it uses an organization and a type of propaganda
which make those evils easy.

The kluxing system of the Klan was invented by
Edward Young Clark, the man whose huge profit was
one of the main targets in the Congressional inquiry
two years ago, whose departure from the Klan was
accelerated when Dr. Evans and the reform group
took charge, who recently offered to help President
Coolidge expose the organization and is now promot-
ing a rival Klan. The system’s simple efficiency
stamps him as almost a genius.

At the head of the kluxers is the Imperial Wizard;
each state is in charge of a King Kleagle who em-
ploys the Field Kleagles. The details vary, but as a
rule these Field Kleagles get $4.00 a head for every
member enrolled; the King Kleagles get $2.00 a head,
and the balance of the $10.00 initiation fee goes to

I2I


THE CHALLENGE OF THE KLAN


the Imperial Treasury. Expenses must always be paid
by each officer or agent from his own share of the
fees. The Imperial Government supplies high-grade
speakers in large number, paying their salaries. The
King Kleagles pay the expenses of the speakers in
their territories, the salaries and expenses of minor
speakers, officers and office workers and organization
in general; the field men pay their own costs, includ-
ing lecture halls. The whole army is spurred on and
trained by special instructors, paid from national
headquarters and working along the lines of any
modern selling organization.

The commission system is, naturally, immensely
effective, far more than any straight salaries scheme.
It keeps each Field Kleagle on his toes every minute,
stimulates his salesmanship and ingenuity to the ut-
most, eliminates unsuccessful men promptly and leaves
no room for discord. It has resulted in what seems
the best selling organization in America.

From its very nature, however, the system has its
great faults. One is the chance that some of the
Kleagles will make enormous profits, that the whole
thing will appear as a profit-making scheme, mulcting
the “suckers” of their $10.00 “klectokon” and pro-
viding comfortable living for a large number of loaf-
ers. This is at least half true, but then every organized
movement is more or less open to the same charges;
has its abuses, wastes money, and many overpay its
officers and collectors. It is very easy for opponents

122


THE BUSINESS OF “KLUXING”


to believe that these expenses and wastes are so great
that they may fairly be called graft, and that the
backers of such organizations are actually working
for their own pockets rather than for the charity.
Similar charges are made against the Y. M. C. A,
Anti-Saloon League, Charity Organization Society,
Salvation Army—everything!

The actual profits of the Kleagles do not seem to
be very large. Klansmen tell of three or four who
have made $50,000 a year by unusually successful
campaigns, but the average earning is said to be under
$5,000. I can not, of course, guarantee these figures,
but they check up fairly well with what I have been
able to learn of the number of enrollments. This
does not show unusually high pay for good salesman-
ship.

The total amount gathered by Klan organizers in
the last year is staggering, however. On the basis
of three million initiations it would be $30,000,000,
but Kleagles often accept notes for a portion of the
initiation fee so that this must be discounted some-
what. There should be added, however, the dues of
fifteen cents a month, which each Klansman pays
into the various treasuries; a total of more than
$8,000,000 a year. Most of this stops in the hands
of the Field Kleagles and goes for necessary expenses.
It seems safe on the whole to estimate that the Klan
expenditure for propagation in the last year has not
been less than $25,000,000, and may have reached

123


THE CHALLENGE OF THE KLAN


$35,000,000. With such funds it is no wonder that
the Klan grows rapidly.

A far more serious fault than high pay for organ-
izers is the pressure which this system puts on Kleagles
to take in every member they can get and to use every
kind of an argument or appeal that they think may
work. Apparently they do. I have not learned of a
single case where a Kleagle refused a member—who
had $10.00—no matter how vicious or dangerous he
might be. And there are reports, wherever the Klan
organizers are active, of the use of the most abom-
inable forms of appeal.

The worst of these I have heard of in three different
places, but always at second hand, so I can not say
definitely that it has come from Klan organizers, but
only that it has come from Klan members. It is an
argument said to be offered to prospective members
who hesitate. This is it: “If you have any doubt
about the ability of the Klan to enforce its orders, or
to protect its members, look at what we got away
with at Mer Rouge.”

Now, every high official of the Klan with whom
I have talked denies flatly that Klansmen were guilty
of any murders at Mer Rouge. They also deny, as
has been said over and over again, that the Klan
countenances or protects lawlessness of any kind. I
reported this Mer Rouge statement to Dr. Evans.

“That is either the statement of an enemy of the
Klan within the organization, or of a badly misguided


124


THE BUSINESS OF “KLUXING”


Kleagle,” he said. “If such a statement is made by
a Kleagle, a report of it will reach headquarters very
shortly, and will result not only in the Kleagle’s
prompt dismissal, but in his banishment from the
organization.”

I may add that in the one case I was able to check
up, this was done. In every case I have known of,
when such conditions were reported to headquarters,
prompt action was taken. But the system itself stimu-
lates just such abuses. It is needless to point out that
they give the lie to every ideal the Klan professes.

Dr. Evans believes that all these kluxing evils carry
their own corrective. He says:

“This is a matter that has been a problem to all
executives, and even to-day there is debate as to the
better form—straight commission, salary and commis-
sion or salary only. Possibly the present system has
a tendency to make Kleagles accept undesirable indi-
viduals. But it has been our experience thus far in
the new order of things, that Kleagles very quickly
learn that the successful development of a particular
unit of organization depends on the high class of the
individuals that form the nucleus around which they
build. Many of them have found, much to their
regret, that they have inadvertently let an undesirable
individual slip in. Immediately they have found a
slowing up in their organization work and sometimes
we have had to send other Kleagles to investigate be-
fore we have found the cause.

125


THE CHALLENGE OF THE KLAN


“The experience with the Kleagles has been—and
this is quite true—that they guard the membership
very closely, realizing that undesirable individuals re-
tard propagation. Therefore the commission system
really does not bring about the condition that might
generally be expected to follow. Further, the surest
way for a Kleagle to make certain of his discharge
would be to admit an unworthy man or to spread
propaganda not in harmony with the principles of the
organization.”

There is undoubtedly some truth in this, but it fails
to cover two cases: First, places where the general
tone of a community is so low that the profits will be
greater if the lower elements instead of the better
are organized, and second, cases where a few extra
dollars can be made by slipping in undesirables after
the organization is well started. The evidence which
has come to me indicates that Kleagles sometimes have
made profits by debasing the Klan propaganda to meet
and take advantage of both these situations; that a
considerable number of vicious types is admitted and
that in some communities the Klan is composed al-
most entirely of the lower elements.

As previously stated, I can not give the average con-
dition, though it does seem to be improving, and is
much better in the states where the Klan is compara-
tively new. I believe the earlier propaganda was
largely responsible for the various evils and that Dr.
Evans and his supporters are trying to remove them.

126


THE BUSINESS OF “KLUXING”


The propaganda of the Klan (as distinct from the
kluxing) takes three main forms. First is that of the
speakers. Such speeches as I have heard or on which
I have full reports, are open to very little criticism.
They follow the lines of the Klan appeal already re-
ported—better government, better citizenship, patriot-
ism and religion in general, and “native, white, Prot-
estant supremacy.” They have been fine, spirited,
balanced, eloquent, without any attempt to stir preju-
dice or appeal to hatred except that which comes from
the subject itself. They are as good, or as bad, as the
Klan movement at its best.

A typical speech was one given early in the fall of
1923, in northern Ohio. The speaker was not intro-
duced nor identified in any way. A careful watch
was kept for improper remarks, but except for an oc-
casional reference to “a white man’s country” none
was found. He spoke eloquently of the evils in the
country, the weaknesses of the government, the decay
of public morality, the prevalence of business fraud,
the possibilities of legal injustice, the need of better
education, and the importance of national unity. He
urged his audience as men, Americans and Christians
to forget differences and selfish interests and to unite
to make a better nation, safer homes. The entire
address was sound, sensible, appealing—and effective.
It was a mixture of patriotism and religion without
mixing church and state. It might have been made
by a first-class evangelist or a truly patriotic politician.

127


THE CHALLENGE OF THE KLAN


The published propaganda—the Klan press—is far
different, however. There are printed some thirty
Klan papers, with a combined circulation of more than
a million and a half—another testimonial to the
strength of the movement. The style of most of these
publications is execrable, but perhaps no worse than
the worst of country weeklies. They print much the
same matter, though they add pleas for Christian and
patriotic idealism of about the intellectual level of a
yellow editorial, but in support of Klan doctrine.

In addition, however, almost all of them carry defi-
nite appeals to hatred and prejudice; usually against
the Catholics. This is crude, raw, sometimes indecent.
A few samples will illustrate.

The Protestant Standard, of Merryville, Louisiana,
carries these head-lines: ‘Klan Calls Rome’s Hand
in Oklahoma. Jesuit Judases Jeopardize American
Life and Liberty. Pope Uses Walton in Effort to
Bring Back Inquisition of Dark Ages.” The text
under these heads shows that Walton is having the
Klan investigated by courts martial.

The Good Citizen, of Zerepath, New Jersey, says in
its editorial on “THE RIsINnc oF THE Ku Kiux Kian:

. now Rome has come across the great sea with
her un-American hordes, to sweep away Protestant-
ism as with a flood. For a time she was restrained,
but she grows bolder in her assaults on Protestant in-
stitutions, in her efforts to make this country subserve
the purposes of the Vatican.”

128


THE BUSINESS OF “KLUXING”


The Patriot, published in St. Louis, tells how “Syr-
acuse, New York, Patriots Rally to Defend Public
Schools from Rome-Controlled Politicians.”

The Arkansas Traveller, of Little Rock, prints
under the caption of “Lincoln’s Warning” a statement
beginning: “I do not pretend to be a prophet, I see
a very dark cloud on our horizon. That dark cloud
is coming from Rome. ... A cyclone such as the
world has never seen will pass over the country,
spreading ruin and desolation from north to south.”
There is nothing to show that “Lincoln” said this, or
where.

The Texas 100 Per Cent American under the head-


ing
“LIES—LIES—LIES”


editorially addresses a priest who had written to The
Outlook in defense of the Catholic Church, and says:


“Now, Reverend Sir, you who wears his collar
backward like a mule, that you have denied that the
Jesuit Order or the entire Catholic world for that
matter, does not hold to the doctrine that the end
justifies the means, we should like for you to deny
some other things. '


Did Your Church Cremate Joan of Arc?


129


THE CHALLENGE OF THE KLAN


“Was Joan of Arc burned as a heretic by your
fanatical followers, or rather those who led your
church in the centuries past?

“Deny that if you can.

“Then, after she had been burned at the stake for
being heretical, why did your church in these latter
days canonize her?

“Come on, Rome, we are asking you yo


Following are a half dozen other quotations from
the rabid Klan press illustrating the frequency of the
appeal to religious hatred:


“Charleston, South Carolina.—The plan of Gover-
nor Walton, of Oklahoma, to secure the assistance of
the Knights of Columbus organization through the
wholesale enlistment of its members in the state mil-
itia, as was stated in a dispatch from Chicago last
week, is to be supplemented by financial aid from the
same source. The Liberty Boys and Belles of this
city, an organization affiliated with the Knights of
Columbus, has instructed its secretary to notify the
‘mad governor of Oklahoma’ that ‘we are eager to
help you financially in our humble way and stand
ready to call upon all true Americans ev erywhere to
join in the fund to carry on the fight. How may

130


THE BUSINESS OF “KLUXING” ,


we proceed under your sanction, properly safeguard-
ing every dollar until it is used for its noble purpose?’
“Although the inquiry regarding the proper safe-
guarding of the funds of Governor Walton implies
somewhat of a suspicion in the minds of Governor
Walton’s Roman Catholic friends that the money sent
to him may not be properly used, it is presumed that
hatred for the Klan will offset any doubt of the gov-
ernor’s financial integrity and that the ‘Liberty Boys
and Belles’ will take the chance.” (From The Fellow-
ship Forum, Washington, District of Columbia.)


“New York City—Romanism, the wet forces, boot-
leggers, and all the anti-American elements which so
largely predominate in this city were startled last Sat-
urday night at the exhibition of strength which the
Ku Klux Klan gave at an initiation ceremony in which
500 candidates were naturalized.” (From The Fel-
lowship Forum, Washington, District of Columbia.)


INVISIBLE EMPIRE TO WATCH IS NOT
f THE KLAN


“The nine men arrested on the charge of inciting
to riot in connection with the Carnegie, Pennsylvania,
131


THE CHALLENGE OF THE KLAN


mob affair, in which one Klansman was killed and a
number of others seriously injured, have been freed
of all responsibility in the matter. What happened
to be a plain case of murder on the night of August
25 quickly resolved itself into the insignificant charge
of ‘inciting to riot.’

“The Roman Catholic undertaker, McDermott,
whom four witnesses, it was stated in the newspaper
account the morning following the murder, saw fire
four or five shots directly at the murdered Klansman
Abbott, was not even called upon to answer to the
charge of murder.

“While Roman Catholics are glibly prating of the
invisible empire of the Ku Klux Klan, their own ‘in-
visible empire’ of the Jesuits steadily pursues its goal
to ‘make America Catholic.’ The means to be em-
ployed matters not. Protecting murderers, bootleg-
gers and backing up the mad governor of Oklahoma
is all in a day’s work of this ‘invisible’ organization.

“And yet there are some Masons who would help
persecute and prosecute the Klan and thus become the
subservient tool of the ‘invisible empire’ of Rome.
In the light of daily events transpiring, showing the
mysterious, powerful influence which controls the
courts wherever Roman Catholicism and its subjects
are concerned, it would seem the ‘invisible empire’ of
the Jesuits is the organization that requires the careful
scrutiny of patriotic Americans, rather than the Klan,
which stands for the same principles and the ideals

132


THE BUSINESS OF “KLUXING”


espoused by Freemasons.” (From The Fellowship
Forum, Washington, District of Columbia. )


THE RISING OF THE KU KLUX KLAN—THE
NEW REFORMATION


“On account of the abuses of religion by the
Roman Catholic hierarchy, civilization had reached a
universal crisis in the sixteenth century; and Martin
Luther, the chosen instrument of God, was placed in
the breach to prevent the wheels of progress from
being reversed and the world from being plunged into
greater darkness than that of the Dark Ages.

“The thousand years preceding the Reformation,
known by religious historians as Satan’s Millennium,
was brought on by the Romish Church with her
paganistic worship and practices, during which time
millions of men and women poured out their blood as
martyrs of the Christian religion. . .


THE WHITE-ROBED ARMY


“Now come’ the Knights of the Ku Klux Klan in
this crucial hour of our American history to contend
for the faith of our fathers who suffered and died
in behalf of freedom. At the psychological moment


133


THE CHALLENGE OF THE KLAN


they have arrived to encourage the hearts of those
who have been battling heroically for the rights and
privileges granted them under the Constitution of the
United States.

“How our hearts have been thrilled at the sight of
this army! Words fail to express the emotions of
the soul at the appearance of this mighty throng upon
the battle-field, where a few faithful followers of the
lowly Nazarene have been contending for the faith
once delivered to the Saints, against Papal mobs who
have torn down gospel tabernacles, wrecked buildings
and imprisoned Protestant worshipers.


OUR NATIONAL PERIL


“The World War was the signal for greater alarm
than the average American has been willing to admit.
Notwithstanding the sacrifices that had to be made
at home and the thousands of our young men who
crossed the sea and laid down their lives on the battle-
fields of the Old World, it has taken the Ku Klux
Klan to awaken even a portion of the population of
the United States to our national peril. Our religi-
ous and political foes are not only within our gates,
but are coming by the hundreds of thousands, bringing
the chaos and ruin of old European and Asiatic coun-
tries to un-Americanize and destroy our nation, and
to make it subserve the purposes of the Pope in his
aspirations for world supremacy.


134


THE BUSINESS OF “KLUXING” |


ROME WOULD OVERTHROW PUBLIC
SCHOOLS


“One of the great efforts of the Roman hierarchy
toward this end is to get control of our public schools
by placing Roman Catholics on school. boards and in
the schoolrooms and taking the Bible out of the
schools. In the event of their success in their efforts
to overthrow our present school system there would
be a string of beads around every Protestant child’s
neck and a Roman Catholic catechism in his hand.
“Hail Mary, Mother of God,’ would be on every child’s
lips, and the idolatrous worship of dead saints a part
of the daily programme.


THE JEWISH AND CATHOLIC ALLIANCE


“The money-grasping Jew, who has no use for the
Christ of Calvary, does all in his power to bring dis-
credit on Christianity, and would be pleased to see
the whole structure broken down, and in this way
get rid of his responsibility for crucifying the Christ
on Calvary and bringing the curse on his race, which
they have had’ to suffer since the beginning of the
Christian era. The sons of Abraham have therefore
become a strong ally to the Papacy, not because they
have anything in common with it in religion, but in


135


THE CHALLENGE OF THE KLAN


their political propaganda against American institu-
tions and principles.

“While no true Christian has anything against the
Jew, it must be admitted that this alliance with the
Papacy is a dangerous menace to our flag and country.
The Jew is insoluble and indigestible; and when he
grows in numbers and power till he becomes a menace
to Christianity and the whole moral fabric, drastic
measures will have to be taken to counteract his de-
tructive work, and more especially when he is in alli-
ance with the old Papal religio-political machine.”
(From The Good Citizen; Zarephath, New Jersey.)


AWAKE! AMERICANS, AWAKE!


“Awake, Americans! You descendants of the pa-
triots of the Revolution! You sons of the Pilgrim
Fathers who fought back the hordes of the Tyrant!
Gird on the armor of God who led you out of bond-
age and chased slavery from out of our land! There
is an enemy without our gates ten thousand times more
dangerous than the redcoats ever were!

“Catholic politicians are filling the air with propa-
ganda which would lead you to believe that old Ship
of State has broken loose from her moorings and is
drifting far to sea. They cry out in tones of agony
that people are growing intolerant and Protestants are

136


THE BUSINESS OF “KLUXING”


seeking to abridge religious liberty. Catholics will
prescribe our religion and forbid a Protestant funeral
in a Catholic Church. Forbid Catholics attendance
at Masonic funerals and then lay claim to a corner
on tolerance. Now when Rome is caught red handed
in her designs to make American Catholics and Prot-
estants interfere, she cries intolerance and would have
you believe that liberty is crushed and bleeding.

“When Protestants exercise a right guaranteed to
all under the Constitution, when Americans meet in
peaceable assembly, Catholics arm themselves with
bludgeons and blunderbusses and try to beat down
honest men and murder American citizens. Only
fools resort to force to settle a dispute and bricks and
rocks are only used by savages. Rome not having
any grounds on which to fight in the realm of reason
seeks to unite State and Church by the use of sand-
bags and billies. Reason and enlightenment with
them are taboo. Blind passion is appealed to and
ignorance is made a virtue. Intellectual darkness for
the masses is sought by Rome as surely as a robber
seek the shadows. For when the bright light of reason
shines upon her, priests lose their power, and her in-
fluence crumbles as hastily as would a snowbank in
the nether regions.

“Catholic politicians, if intrusted with power, would
pass laws to force American organizations out of ex-
istence and shackle liberty, as they have done in every
clime wherein they have reigned supreme.


137


THE CHALLENGE OF THE KLAN


“There are men seeking high office in Louisiana
to-day who if elected in numbers sufficient would jail
Americans for assembling in peaceful meetings and
give to Rome the revenue of our State. Take the
Eagle from off the dollar and in its stead place a like-
ness of the unholy face of Pius. Strip the stripes
from the American Flag and rend the Stars asunder,
and make for us a National banner with background
dark and gloomy, and mount upon it a cluster of garlic
to commemorate the odor that permeates the Vatican.
Turn back the march of civilization and chain the
Bible to a box. Tether the intellects of man and en-
slave reason. Place a statue of a priest where now
stands the Goddess of Liberty and place in his hand
the torch of intolerance. Demolish our free institu-
tions of learning and imprison those bold enough to
preach freedom of the masses. Have black-robed
nuns who know only slavery teach our children and
drown our art in miasmic ignorance.

“Not all Catholics are of this stripe, but those who
seek high office are tainted woefully with Catholic
teachings and some have been so bold as to proclaim
no Protestant is fit for office and Catholics are the
only hope of liberty.

“Yes, we have no bananas.”” (From The Protestant
Standard, Merryville, Louisiana. )


138


THE BUSINESS OF “KLUXING”


AMERICANS ATTENTION


The American Free Public School is the Foundation
of our Free Institutions


ROME HATES PUBLIC SCHOOLS


““Fducation must be controlled by Catholic author-
ities, even to war and bloodshed.’.—The Catholic
W orld.

““Fiducation outside the Catholic church is a dam-
nable heresy. —Pope Piux IX.

“We must take part in the elections, move in solid
mass against the old party pledged to sustain the in-
tegrity of the public schools.—Cardinal McCluskey.

“*The public schools have produced nothing but a
Godless generation of thieves and blackguards.’—
Father Shaner.

“ ‘The common schools of this country are sinks of
moral pollution and nurseries of hell..—The Chicago


Tablet.
“‘T frankly confess that the Catholics stand before


139


THE CHALLENGE OF THE KLAN


the country as the enemies of the public schools.’—
Father Phelan.

“No American opposes American  schools!’—
(From The Patriot, St. Louis, Missouri.)


ALKALI IKE, ALCOHOL AL


“Have you ever heard of Alkali Ike? Ike was a
bad egg who could put down more Arizona rotgut,
and brag about more killings that he never did, than
any rattlesnake of a two-gun fighter who ever in-
fested the cactus-dotted western plains. Ike was a
rip roarin’ snorter, and to hear him tell it, he was
the originator of the private graveyard idea. Ike has
bloomed, and Ike has prospered, but Ike is now for-
gotten, because a greater than Ike has come to usurp
Ike’s place in the sun.


ALCOHOL AL


“Alcohol Al, is the name of the newcomer. Once-
uponatime there was a fish peddler in New York,
and peddling fish among the homes of the Tammany
politicians and ward heelers, he soon learned that it
was easier to shoot suckers than it was to shoot fish.
Accordingly, like all second-story workers he joined

140


THE BUSINESS OF “KLUXING’”


the second-story workers’ union, which in New York
is known by the name of Itstammanyhall. In due
process of time Tammany jimmied Al into a political
job, but not until they had sent his history, photograph
and autograph, and his confession made to a priest,
to the little papa in Rome, and asked him to approve.
The little papa approved with a flourish and a big
proviso. The flourish carried his signature and the
seal of the Vatican, and the proviso was that some
day Alcohol Al should kiss the Papal toe, as all good
Catholic brethren had done, who had before been
passed to occupy political office in the United States
of America.


GOVERNOR


“Finally after repeated approvals of the Pope on
Al, as he moved from political office to political office,
his political owners, the Pope—and Tammany Hall—
decided that they would put him in the office of Gov-
Gernot Of tie tates ..%,


“|. . once let either the Republicans or the Demo-
crats do so foul a thing as to try to offer for suffrage
that flagrant défier of American laws, Alcohol Al
Smith, for the presidency or the vice-presidency, and
the match is to the tinder, and nothing short of heaven
can stop the movement until the new-born American

I4I


THE CHALLENGE OF THE KLAN


party shall have placed its candidates at the head of
the nation.


THAT IS IN THE CARDS


“The Texas ‘American has been preaching ‘Why
not a Klansman for the presidency?’ lt may not come
to that exactly in our next presidential campaign, but
it is written in the cards that none but a 100 per cent
American shall be our next President.

“Choose ye Democrats, choose ye Republicans, this
day. Whom will ye serve? Do you intend to flaunt
in the faces of your former constituents, the same
old things that have been in the past? Do ye intend
to temporize with the Roman Catholic hierarchy? Do
you intend to let any set of men, who are greatly in
the minority, compel you to betray the American
people?

“Tt can’t be done. You can’t get away with it this
time. There is entirely too much political independ-
ence for any set of men to drag this country’s fair
name in the mud any longer. |

“The people are going to name, and the people are
going to elect the next-president of the United States,
and it will not be Alcohol Al Smith of New York,
nor any other defier of the Constitution, but it will be
an American through and through. This is a Protes-
tant Christian Nation.” (From The Texas roo Per
Cent American, Dallas, Texas.)


142


THE BUSINESS OF “KLUXING” ;


There is any quantity of such stuff. It reminds one
somewhat of the propaganda of the Know-nothings
though it is far milder, for they filled the country with
supposed confessions of monks and nuns, with sicken-
ingly illustrated brochures on the inquisition and on
martyrdom, and similar horrors. This lessened viru-
lence is probably encouraging, but the stuff is more
than bad enough.

There is, however, a good deal of material that is
just as definitely—perhaps even more definitely, and
certainly with more approval from high Klan officials
—Klan propaganda which is harmless and some of
which has a definite tendency to promote good citizen-
ship. Some examples of this, part of them from the
same organs already quoted, follow:


“Can’t hate. No, you can’t, Klansmen. You know
that is not part of the Klan Creed. If you think it
is look into the twelfth chapter of Romans again,
and see if you haven’t made a grave mistake. That
is, we can’t hate man. The Word of God is the best
teacher you have. It behooves us to study to know
what our teachers have to say to us on the subject
of hate, and then act accordingly. If we do that we
shall find that we are making this a very good old
world to live in.”


143


THE CHALLENGE OF THE KLAN


“We must be operative Klansmen. We will not
take the law into our own hands, for we are law-abid-
ing citizens. Yet we will see to it that our great in-
stitution shall continue to make vital its spiritual
purposes; achieve its laudable objects, and attain its
lofty ideals. We rededicate ourselves to insure unity
of organization, and guarantee an effective form of
government, and pledge our voice, our loyalty, our
manhood and our sacred honor to enforce the same—
that justice and honor may be done the sacred memory
of those who wrought through our mystic society dur-
ing that early period... .

“Let us beware of the temptation to misrepresent
for the sake of effect; let us remember that there are
business and social methods which break the heart as
well as ruin character; that ‘a falling drop at last
will cleave a stone.’ Let us not allow gossip or slander
to ride on rumor’s tongue but rather let us ‘set a watch
over our mouths, and keep the door of our lips,’ re-
membering that a tale bearer is worse than a thief, but
that a golden mind stoops not to shows of dross.”
(From The Kluxer, Dayton, Ohio. )


“The Ku Klux Klan—America’s greatest patriotic
brotherhood—marches on!
“The past summer season has witnessed the greatest
Taq


THE BUSINESS OF “KLUXING”


gathering together of America’s native-born Protes-
tant, American men that this country has ever known.

“From Maine to California, and from the Great
Lakes to the Gulf of Mexico, the Fiery Cross has
blazed its message of patriotic redemption in every
city and hamlet, and prairie and valley, in this great
land of democracy and freedom—striking fear into
the hearts of America’s enemies and, in some places,
goading them to deeds of desperation.

“In spite of malicious propaganda in the columns
of an unprincipled press—in spite of misrepresenta-
tion and abuse from enemies—in spite of misunder-
standing and criticism on the part of those who should
be friends—THE KU KLUX KLAN IS MARCH-
ING ON TO CERTAIN VICTORY.

“Tt has no desire to control the politics of our
nation, but it does expect to arouse the decent citizen-
ship of America to such an extent that those who be-
lieve in righteous government and free institutions
will arouse from their slumbers of half a century
and take possession of that which is rightfully their
heritage.

“In other words—the Ku Klux Klan hopes to
Americanize America.” (From The Patriot, St.
Louis, Missouri. )


+


145


THE CHALLENGE OF THE KLAN


KLAN NOT FOR PERSONAL GAIN


“When the writer became a member of the great
Masonic fraternity he was told: “You will get out
of Masonry just what you put into it—no more, no
less.’ It was a lesson that made a lasting impression
onus. The same thing is true of Klankraft. Neither
is an agency for self-gain or selfish ambition. Those
who take the vows of either fraternity with the intent
that they do so only for personal gain are unworthy
as Klansmen or as Masons. .. .

“The Klan is not essentially an employment bureau,
although in its exercise of Klannishness it may aid
many a worthy brother in securing employment; it is
not a means of advancing private political ambitions,
although as a guardian of their own interests, it may
wield a mighty influence in the election of good men
to office; it is not a selling agency to enhance the
commercial and industrial interests of its members,
although in guarding their business interests it will
ever be ‘truly Klannish toward Klansmen in all things
honorable.’

“Ideals, great nation-wide ideals, in the reflex of
which must all men be blessed, are the goal of Klan-
kraft. »The selfish, the trivial, the petty, the elevation
of the individual above the masses, the subordination
of the general good to the sordid grasping for per-

146


THE BUSINESS OF “KLUXING”


sonal gain—these things we are sworn to discourage.
Is our oath a sacred obligation, or is it a meaningless
jumble of high-sounding phrases? Unless the heart
is right, no oath ever made any man a true Mason
or an honest Klansman. If he measures his member-
ship by the question, ‘What’s in it for me?’ he should
have the manhood to get out and not foist his self-
ishness upon others more worthy.—A Mason and a
Klansman.” (From The Arkansas Traveller, Little
Rock, Arkansas.


Even the advertising in these sheets is not without
considerable interest. Some books offered in these
advertisements are of the kind referred to as having
been put out by the Know-nothings; the most vicious
kind of hate-creating propaganda possible. The Fel-
lowship Forum advertises The Suppressed Truth about
the Assassination of Abraham Lincoln, including the
oath of the Knights of the Golden Circle, which the
advertisement assures us, “should be in every Protes-
tant American’s library.”

The Protestant Standard advertises The Glorious
Pope and the Lowly Jesus, and also, Romanism versus
Christianity, a winging indictment proving Catholic-
ism unpatriotic, un-American, un-Christian.

The Patriot offers Convent Crueltics, A True Story,
by ex-Nun Helen Jackson, Author and victim.

147


THE CHALLENGE OF THE KLAN


In addition to these there is a very distinct Klannish
flavor about the ordinary business advertisement.
Most notable are the expressions “1oo per cent” and
the use of the three “K’s.” We have, for example,
in The Kluxer, “The Klean Koal Klanners,’ a man
who “Kleans Klothes Klean,” a garage which promises
“Krippled Kars Kured,’ and another speaks of the
beauties of a “Klean Krank Kase.”’ As to the “100 per
cent” people they are of all kinds. Evidently some
women favor this class of men for a widow advertises
for lodgers, and specifies that they must be “Hundred
Percenters.”

It would not be fair to fail to point out that the
anti-Klan propaganda fully matches that of the Klan
in virulence but, since the Klan rather than its enemies
is under consideration, there is no need to illustrate
this.

Klan officials deny responsibility for these publica-
tions, except for The Fiery Cross and The Night-
Hawk, its official organs, and a few other papers it has
recently bought, which are not subject to the same
criticism as the other sheets. The Klan has no con-
trol over these raging, unofficial outpourings, they de-
clare, and some editors are not even Klansmen, but
are merely seeking profit by catering to Klan feeling.
This is likely true; yet the very defense is an admis-
sion of the wide-spread religious prejudice in Klan
ranks, since there is profit in such screeds.

This seems to be another of the situations which

148


THE BUSINESS OF “KLUXING” -


the present régime inherited and has not yet straight-
ened out. Some efforts, with small success, were
made last spring and summer to tone down the rabid
Klan press. Now a new plan is under way; Milton
Elrod, an Indianian, who of all the Klansmen I have
met is most frank to admit faults and urge remedies,
has been appointed to organize a string of Klan papers
throughout the country which shall be under absolute
control and shall reform or drive out the present
sheets. He has begun his task, and from the tone
of the papers already bought it is evident that when
his work has been done, a very different verdict would
have to be rendered on the Klan press. At present,
“blatherskite” seems about the kindest adjective that
can be used.

Dr. Evans summed up the Klan’s official attitude
toward these papers as follows:

“One of the greatest problems the Klan could pos-
sibly have is obviously the control of newspapers as
well as of individuals who, without authority, at-
tempt to speak for the movement. There are no of-
ficial Klan publications except The Imperial Night-
Hawk and The Fiery Cross. A great many small
country weeklies, with editors who are not even Klans-
men have used the hate programme and the Klan
movement as a vehicle to increase circulation, generally
without success. They do not deserve any.

“The Klan weeklies, which we are now founding,
will speak authoritatively for the first time. The es-


149


THE CHALLENGE OF THE KLAN


tablishment of these papers has been found necessary
in order to carry true vision and understanding of the
organization to the American public. Klan lecturers
never appear in the open, and all Klan meetings where
the public is admitted are by invitation only, the non-
members being brought by individual Klansmen.

“I may add that the annunciation or interpretation
of Klan principles from the pulpits of churches by
ministers is never authorized, and is only the expres-
sion of individual opinions, ofttimes badly informed.”

The third type of propaganda is the “whispers.”
As with any kind of whispering propaganda it is prac-
tically impossible to prove authorship; and the Klan’s
secrecy makes it possible always to deny responsibility.
But there are certain whispers which appear so regu-
larly wherever Klan activity is great that they must
be considered part of the campaign, either as deliber-
ate promulgations or as a natural undertone.

Most of these are revivals of the standard myth-
ology about the Roman church; stories that a rifle is
buried under a Catholic Church or under the Knights
of Columbus Hall whenever a Catholic boy is born;
that the Knights of Columbus hold secret drills, that
priests seduce women -at confessional, and so forth.
There are current accusations; that the Catholic vote
is controlled by the priests and used to corrupt political
officials, that Catholic and Jewish capital controls and
prints seventy per cent. of the country’s newspapers,
that there is a Papal conspiracy to get control of

150


THE BUSINESS OF “KLUXING”


America as shown by the plan to move the Vatican
to America (the denial from Rome has not stopped
this story), that Catholics have more than their pro-
portion of office holders, that there is a Catholic-
Jewish alliance aiming at control of the public schools,
which has been so successful that in New York City
no Protestant can reach high office in the schools,
and that the criticism of the Y. M. C. A. during the
war was started by the Catholics and Jews, the former
under orders from Rome. This latter whisper has
had the interesting result of greatly increasing the
prosperity of the “Y” in some places.

There are fewer whispers about the Jews, and what
there are mostly follow the charges made two or
three years ago by The Dearborn Independent, alleg-
ing a world-wide Jewish money conspiracy, Jewish
backing for revolutionary movements and Jewish am-
bitions for the control of America. The large number
of Jewish advisers around Wilson when he was pres-
ident are pointed out and there are very dirty whispers
to account for the influence they had with him and
with other public men. Finally Jews, Catholics to a
lesser extent, and aliens in general, are credited with
a natural pre-eminence in crime, vice and the corrup-
tion of officials.

One particular whisper is interesting enough to re-
peat in detail. It has to do with the dollar bills of
the issue of 1917, the ones bearing a portrait of
Washington. This bill is supposed to have been cov-

I51


THE CHALLENGE OF THE KLAN


ered with Catholic symbols as a result of a defiant
and impudent scheme of Catholics in the Bureau of
Printing and Engraving. On its face, according to
the whisper, there are: A portrait of some Pope in
the upper left corner decorations, various hailing and
recognition signals of the Knights of Columbus being
made by members of the group depicting the discovery
of America by Columbus, and some snakes and a por-
trait of St. Patrick in the lower left corner decora-
tions. On the reverse the decorations of the ornate
“F’s” are supposed to show the Catholic cross, and
the big figure “1” is declared to represent a crozier,
the decoration over it a bishop’s mitre, and so forth.
The whole idea is that the bill symbolizes the watch-
ful eye which the popes have had on America from
the moment of its discovery, and their intention of
dominating it. The story goes on that when President
Harding discovered the profanation he discharged the
head of the bureau.

This is most effective propaganda. The bill actually
is a curious one; it takes no great imagination to see
several of the things alleged. It is even true that the
bureau head was discharged, though it was for getting
the serial numbers on liberty bonds mixed up. The
real weakness of the story is that the plates from
which the bill is printed were first made as long ago
as 1868 and have been used off and on ever since!
But hundreds of thousands believe the story utterly
and every good Klansman, when he gets one of these

152


THE BUSINESS OF “KLUXING”


bills, tears off the corner with the “pope’s picture.”
It is amazing that so silly a performance—supposing
it to be true—could cause such furor, yet thousands
take it as proof that Catholics are disloyal, flout the
power of the United States and expect the Pope to
rule America!

Before dropping these phases of kluxing, it should
be noted that the counter-propaganda is every bit as
bad as that of the Klan in its worst phases. Not only
publications but the whispers, the covert and unproved
charges, the defamation—all are unspeakable. The
counter-prejudice even goes so far that a very solemn
New York paper, after many well-justified attacks
on Klan violence, came out recently with an editorial
in justification of the mobbing of a Klan delegation
because it tried to put a wreath on a soldiers’ monu-
ment! Yet it was the Klan itself that called out all
these devils of prejudice, and it must bear much of
the blame when they turn on it.

Two more things about Klan propaganda. First,
it is highly adaptable. It makes use of resentment
against alien farmers in Ohio, against Sabbath viola-
tion in Indiana, bootlegging in Kansas, alien labor in
the factories, Catholic office-holders where there are
any—and also where there are not!—a Jew’s defense
of unrestricted immigration, high taxes, high railroad
rates, grafting contractors, parochial schools, the lat-
est local scandal—use of any and every resentment
that is handy. The Kleagles everywhere get inside


153


THE CHALLENGE OF THE KLAN


the community psychology and use it with great
skill.

The second point is the great value to the Klan of
opposition, especially when it is illegal and violent.
Every case of anti-Klan persecution, and there are
many, is used to prove the perversion of Americanism
and the domination of officials by Catholics, Jews, or
aliens. The fact that a boy was fined $100 for selling
a copy of The Fiery Cross was one of the best talking
points in the campaign that gave the Klan a half mil-
lion members in Indiana. The attacks on Klan pa-
rades in several places brought swarms of recruits.
“Tf we could have a riot a week, we’d own the country
in a year,” one Klan organizer told me, and he gave
figures to prove it. Almost all Klansmen firmly be-
lieve that these attacks were ordered by Catholic
priests, a sort of religious persecution, and were also
ordered stopped because they failed to check the Klan.

Curiously, this has had a reaction somewhat favor-
able to the Catholics, for, as one Klan official said:
“If they’re fools enough to do a thing like that, they
can’t really be very dangerous.” I assured him that
I didn’t believe the Church was responsible, but do
not know yet whether.my remark hurt or helped the
Klan—assuming that I convinced him.

Thus the evidence seems conclusive that the busi-
ness of kluxing carries with it not only stimulation
of patriotism and of a sense of civic duty, but very
grave evils. These include the appeal to and stimula-


154


THE BUSINESS OF “KLUXING” ,


tion of hatred and prejudice, the circulation of stories
some of which are untrue and all of which are cir-
culated to increase class solidarity and national di-
vision, and the gathering of all kinds of riff-raff who
can not possibly sympathize with the high aims the
Klan professes. The Klan claims that it regenerates
and uses such men. Even so, many evils remain;
evils which it is nothing less than criminal to foster
if the Klan is run for either profit or personal power,
as so many believe.

Even if the Klan’s own statement of its purpose be
accepted, it is still possible to condone these evils on
only one ground; that its purposes are high enough,
its chances of achieving them good enough and the
incidental reforms it makes important enough, to
offset the damage it does. This plea has to be made
for many organized movements and the Klan is cer-
tainly entitled to whatever benefit it may give. It
can also plead in defense the efforts it is making to
suppress these evils, and if it should succeed in stamp-
ing them out, as it has practically stamped out vio-
lence, its position would be immensely strengthened.

But there would always remain all the disruptive
force implied in its programme of “native, white, Prot-
estant supremacy.”


+


CHAPTER VII
THE LURE OF THE WHITE MASK


OME measure of the value of the Ku Klux idea

to members of the Klan can be found in the price
they pay to join. The amount is not large—$10.00
for initiation and $5.00 for regalia—yet as the price
of getting behind an idea that is considerable. One
can join a good many movements for less, and among
the people who make up the bulk of the Klan strength
even $15.00 is not treated with disrespect. Any one
who has ever tried to enlist people, at a price, in any
general movement will testify that it is no mean
achievement to induce four million men to pay any-
thing at all.

To this cash cost must be added the fact that most
members have joined the Klan in the face of strong
public disapproval and often of actual persecution.
Add, too, the attitude of members toward the Klan,
the serious view they take of its doctrine, their often
almost fanatical devotion, and it begins to be plain
that the Klan means something rather important to
them. It may not be what the Klan stands for of-

156


THE LURE OF THE WHITE MASK


ficially, it may be something warped or even vicious,
but the Klan seems to them to offer something they
want badly, something they are willing to pay for
both in cash and in service.

When there are four million people held in this way
by an idea there can be no doubt that the idea has
power. Imperial Wizard Evans declares that it is
the most potent idea in America and there is much
truth in this. But he means the Klan idea as he sees
it, and it must be remembered that the real driving
force is not his idea, but the thought in the minds of
the Klansmen themselves, often something very dif-
ferent.

Perhaps the first thing to do in attempting to get at
the spirit which animates and unites these four mil-
lions, is to set to one side the excrescences, for they
are both noisy and numerous and easily mistaken for
the real embodiment of the Klan.

As soon as any organization begins to gain power
certain kinds of men join it for personal profit. There
will be promoters and organizers, second-rate politi-
cians, business men looking for trade, sharks seeking
prey, criminals hoping for protection and chronic
failures who will try anything. The more powerful
the organization, the more numerous and active will
be these parasites; hypocrites and grafters. The Klan
has its full share of them, and they are often promi-
nent, since high places are the best for the grinding
of private axes. But after all they are parasites and


157


THE CHALLENGE OF THE KLAN


do not represent the idea and spirit that gave the
Klan its great growth. They are important in many
ways, for they have influence, but one can not measure
the real Klan by them.

Most numerous of these are the cheap politicians
who hope to push themselves by means of the Klan’s
strength. There are several varieties, men who are
about to be defeated for re-election, men who have
never been able to get far in political preferment, men
who are involved in all the piddling graft that goes
with local administration, and other kinds who work
in the same way. They usually try to build up a per-
sonal following among the Klansmen, and are always
a source of irritation to the higher officers who are
constantly struggling against them.

The next most numerous class is the business getter.
The principles of the Klan encourage trading among
Klansmen wherever possible. It is inevitable that a
considerable number of men should see in this a quick
road to wealth. Especially where a Klan has been
newly organized, signs of this activity appear on every
side. There will be crosses over the doors of shops,
the triple K monogram on the doors or windows, the
use of “100%” in all kinds of advertising. This also
the Klan officials are trying to stop, and orders have
been issued recently forbidding the use in business of
these or any other symbols of the Klan.

Undoubtedly a goodly number of the Kleagles and
Klan propagandists in general are in the business for


158


THE LURE OF THE WHITE MASK ,


revenue only. Another kind of parasite who appears
in considerable numbers is the petty criminal who
hopes to get protection from the Klan. There is one
southwestern state where the head of the Klan is
alleged to be the state’s boss bootlegger, and there are
many places in which there is talk of this kind of law-

breaking in connection with the Klan. Some similar
_ situations have to my knowledge been cleared up from
inside; there are others in which the higher officials
are now trying to get evidence. They seem wholly
sincere in their efforts to disinfect, but the job is far
from being done.

Coming to the real Klan spirit, there are such dif-
ferences between the Klan as it appears in Georgia
and Texas, in Ohio and New York, that there is
room for doubt whether it actually is moved by a
single thought. Yet I believe that it is; that there is
a unifying idea, a certain least common denominator
of purpose, which may be found and defined. There
is, of course, the “native, white, Protestant suprem-
acy” of the Klan creed, but that seems to be a formula
of action and a theory of social organization rather
than an end or purpose in itself, and it is not by any
means always involved in Klan activities. The true
spirit seems to be something deeper, and at bottom
far healthier, although it sometimes shows in danger-
ous and even abominable forms.

This fundamental and unifying idea is nothing more
abnormal than a passion for reform, as Dr. Evans


159


THE CHALLENGE OF THE KLAN


has said. Yet it is abnormal, too, for with the Klan
this very common trait has an intensity, a directness
and a concept of personal duty to do something, such
as are seldom found. And it produces very unusual
manifestations. This is partly because the Klan
reaches certain classes seldom stirred by such senti-
ments and therefore unfamiliar with the accepted pro-
cedure; people of simple, direct and intense emotions
who act accordingly. Partly, too, it is due to the
violent prejudices and instincts the Klan doctrine
arouses. But whether the immediate aim be the regu-
lation of a neighbor’s conduct, or the ousting of paro-
chial schools or of corrupt officials, reform of some
sort has been the moving spirit of the Klan wherever
I have seen it.

This is not a blanket approval—far from it. There
can be little debate that the reform spirit on the whole
is useful, but only when kept within limits. The line
is not well defined; sincere people who agree in dis-
approving drink, tobacco, dancing, betting and the
like are to be found on both sides of the question of
how far one’s own virtues should regulate other peo-
ple’s vices. But there is always a saving popular
resistance which prevents most reforms from going
too far. The Klan aims to go very far indeed; even
officially it attacks questions and employs methods to
which we are not hardened, in its programme it ap-
plies race and religion standards we are in the habit
of ignoring, and its individual members have aims and

160


THE LURE OF THE WHITE MASK


use methods considerably further from normal than
the leaders wish.

Moreover, reform at its best has some unlovely
aspects. It always implies a “holier than thow’ atti-
tude, it always makes trouble and disturbs the even
tenor of life, it is often so beneficial to the reformers
that their motives may easily be questioned, and it
sometimes shows a narrow, meddling, officious, unjust
and even cruel spirit. Often, too, the pleasure of
reforming other people appeals more strongly than
does the good to be done. These things appear promi-
nently in some members of the Klan; indeed it often
seems that the Klan is demonstrating just how bad
reform may be. It is no wonder the opposition is
violent. But, however distorted, the Klan idea is at
bottom nothing more or less than a new and violent
outbreak of our good old American habit of re-arrang-
ing the world. There is much expert testimony to
the effect that we do this oftener and worse than any
other people on earth.

When all allowances are made for other motives—
love of excitement, self-interest and brutality—this
reform idea is still to be seen even in the worst of
the Klan actions, the night-riding and maltreatment
of neighbors. This particular phase is worth study,
since if one can ‘understand it, then it will be easier
to understand also many of the less vicious but still
dangerous practises of Klansmen.

There is no need to list the evils of night-riding,

161


THE CHALLENGE OF THE KLAN


but it is always worth while to find why comparatively
decent people take to doing utterly wrong things. I
put this question to the governor of a state which has
been peculiarly cursed with this noxious crime—a man
who has done much to stop violence and has been
especially active against Klan mobs. The conditions
he describes are still to be found in many places, both
in the South and elsewhere.

“You understand that I don’t defend mob action in
any case or form,” the governor began. “Yet there
is something to be said for it—sometimes. There
have been cases where I had to admit some sympathy.
But I’m afraid this can hardly be understood by you
“people who live in communities so well protected that
police corruption means at worst bootlegging and
poker games, and a ‘crime wave’ means that there is
about one chance in fifty thousand that you will suffer
from something worse than sneak-thievery.

“Try to imagine, if you can, what it would mean
to live where it is practically impossible to enforce
any law, where intimidation and abuse are customary,
theft common, arson not unusual, and murder occa-
sional—all unpunishable. There are such places.
Sparse settlements, family feuds, powerful criminal
elements, make it almost impossible to get sure law
enforcement in these plague spots. And you can’t
reform them by the ballot, for the toughs control the
elections. If any man takes the lead in trying to
clean up, he will suffer. If he is not killed, his barns

162


THE LURE OF THE WHITE MASK.


will be burned, his crops ruined, his stock destroyed
or stolen, his women folks insulted.

“There is another type of case in which we also
find legal action either impossible or unsatisfactory.
This has to do with the reputation of decent women.
Every one knows that it is entirely possible for a good
woman to become involved in trouble without any
fault of her own, but in such circumstances that if
the facts became known it would do her irreparable
injury. Even when injury would not result, for her
to appear on the stand and testify would be an ordeal
unspeakable. We, in the South, and this is especially
true in the country districts, will go to almost any length
to save women from these things. There is one case
of night-riding now before the courts in this State
which, I believe, will never be prosecuted for this
reason. The injustice that would be done a certain
woman if the whole story were told is far greater
than any advantage that would come from convicting
the culprits.

“So there has always been a tendency in this state
—and some others—to form vigilance committees to
handle such situations. You can call it cowardice if
you want to, but when unknown men apply pressure
to the tough element, they can get results and still be
safe from reprisals. Scores of places have been
cleaned up in just that way. And when people are
suffering you can’t expect them to worry about the

163


THE CHALLENGE OF THE KLAN


danger that the same methods will be unjustly used
some other time.

“That was the condition which gave the Klan its
first start in this state. The best people didn’t join,
of course, and a lot of the uneducated, poor white
trash did. Lately the Klan has changed its methods
and some of the better class are joining. But they'll
lose out if they can’t keep on cleaning up.”

This testimony would be enough even if standing
alone. But the condition seems to have been general
in all the states where much night-riding occurred.
The story of what happened in Tulsa is lurid and
extreme, but typical of conditions in many towns.

Two years ago Tulsa was under almost absolute
control of the criminals whose influence in politics
outweighed that of any decent element.

Bootlegging, dope peddling and vice flourished
openly. Highway robbery, which the Southwest calls
“hi-jacking,’ was common, and on one celebrated
evening a gang took possession of one of the main
roads outside of the city and for hours systematically
looted all traffic. Murder was frequent, few decent
men and no decent woman left shelter at night. Of-
ficers seldom interfered, those who did were shot down
with impunity, and in the few cases where criminals
were convicted, they were usually promptly pardoned.

As has been the case so often in this country, the
citizens finally took to illegal means to restore order.
The reformers became night-riders. The methods

164


THE LURE OF THE WHITE MASK


used were direct, brutal and effective. Around Tulsa
they armed themselves, went out in automobiles as
bait for the “hi-jackers” and when they were held up,
shot to kill. Some of them were killed too, but within
a few weeks such “hi-jackers” as were left alive moved
to other fields. With bootleggers, dope peddlers, and
so on, less drastic means were used. Men who were
suspected—sometimes women—were given rump trials
and soundly whipped—the kind of raw-hiding from
which it takes the strongest man weeks to recover.
With the gangs thus broken a reform ticket was
elected and peace returned to the community.

There is no question that the Klan played a large
part in this. Governor Walton’s courts assembled a
great deal of evidence, some of which was apparently
perjured, but succeeded actually in convicting only
four Klansmen—one case out of more than sixty.
Klansmen themselves, however, have admitted com-
plicity in a great many other cases, and have defended
their actions on the ground that this was the only
possible way to bring about reform. Even in the
Mer Rouge horrors—whatever the facts there may be
—the Klan action was taken to stop alleged criminal
traffic. Thus the motive is always reform; the pur-
pose almost always a decent one.

The governor quoted above, however, did not get
at the whole reason for the appeal which night-riding
makes to this particular element. It has certain at-
tractions besides reform for simple and direct minds.

165


THE CHALLENGE OF THE KLAN


When Dr. Evans started his campaign which has so
largely stopped violence as a Klan method, a friend
in the South wrote me:

“T shall be surprised if the Southern faction agrees
with Evans in the matter of violence. Those methods
are the great attraction, the basis of confidence, a
manner of executing justice that renders the greatest
personal satisfaction.”

That “personal satisfaction”’—in executing justice,
be it noted !—was undoubtedly one of the lures of the
white masks, until a few months ago. And my friend’s
estimate was correct, too, for the Evans campaign
was followed by a falling off of Klan strength in the
night-riding states. There are signs now that a new
and better element is joining the Klan in these states,
but there is no doubt that the methods used, as well
as the reforms to be made, helped give the Klan its
hold.

There is another motive, almost as indefensible as
the urge to mob violence, but easier to sympathize
with and far more wide-spread, which has brought
many members into the Klan and is still bringing
them. ‘This is the desire to correct evils—often per-
sonal ones—which are out of reach of the law, through
mass action of various kinds. Most of us bear these
ills, especially those of other people, with such grins,
shrugs or curses as our natures call for, but great
numbers see in the Klan an opportunity for reform
along just these lines.

166


THE LURE OF THE WHITE MASK


“I wish I was as simple minded as some folks,”
one circuit judge confided. “Then I’d join the Klan.
One of the things that make a judge’s life hard is
the wrongs for which there is no legal remedy; the
unfair but not criminal methods of slick crooks, the
betrayals of women where more harm than good is
done if the law is called in, the oppressions of money-
lenders, the laziness of men who let their children
starve—all so common we take them for granted, and
nice folks think they’re melodramatic, but all devilish,
just the same. I can’t do anything about them.

“T can’t stand, either, for action against them that
isn’t based on trial and evidence. But the Klan doesn’t
worry about that. They are all neighbors and believe
they know what’s happened and they let it go at that.
They want action, and they think that’s what they’re
there for and go at it bald headed. Usually they’re
right, so far as substantial justice is concerned. I
don’t blame them—much.”

' Many Klansmen avow this motive freely enough.

“T joined just to see that they got after ” one
friend told me, naming a notorious cheat.

“T hear the Klan kind of fixes up things that ain’t
right,” another said. “Well, So-and-so has fixed it
up with the store so I can’t get good materials, and
my work’s so had I can’t make a living. I’m going
to join and see if it can’t be stopped.” And join he
did.

“My sister’s husband is off raising hell in Indiana


167


THE CHALLENGE OF THE KLAN


,


and don’t send her enough to live on,”’ remarked the
third. ‘“They’ve passed word to the Klan out there.”

These are only a few. The Grand Dragon of one
state told me he got twenty requests a week for action
» in just such cases; another put his calls at fifty. I
believe that on the whole the desire for this kind of
reform has been more powerful than any other one
thing in drawing men into the Klan. It is a very
human and often “neighborly” desire, supported by
the simpler morality, and it is difficult for “plain-
minded” folks to see the gross violation of fundamental
principles, which makes it vicious. I even notice that
people who do see this evil and disapprove on prin-
ciple, find it hard to work up much indignation over
actual cases where they believe the victims are guilty.
Action along these lines is not on the official Klan
programme, and is being discouraged by the leaders,
but without either the vigor or the success of the
campaign against violence.

These two are the great unavowed motives in the
Klan. Other motives, still reformatory, follow closely
the lines of the propaganda.

“They’re going to give Ohio and Indiana the biggest
cleaning up you ever heard of,” a Veterans’ Bureau
Worker reports. “They’re after every little thing—
crooked officials, crooked business, vice, crime, Sabbath
breaking, poor schools, and the rest.”

This is the official Klan programme, it will be seen.
Even in the “night-riding states” I found many who

168


THE LURE OF THE WHITE MASK


had joined for these reasons. And everywhere, of
course, there are very large numbers who have joined
because the Klan seems to them to offer a solution to
the great national questions of hyphenism and unas-
similated immigration.

One of the strongest motives in drawing men into
the Klan, or perhaps it would be more correct to say
that one of the strongest desires now in the minds
of Klansmen, is for reform of the public schools. This
is already so important and is growing so rapidly that
it may very soon become the dominant issue in the
Klan programme.

There are several reasons for dissatisfaction with
the public schools to-day in many parts of the country.
The simplest, of course, is that they do not equip
their pupils for either successful or comfortable living,
or for good citizenship. Klansmen believe that the
schools to-day very deliberately fail to teach the es-
sentials of government, of religion, of morals, or of
patriotism. They believe that there is a set purpose
behind this, and that the schools have been inten-
tionally and traitorously debauched.

They blame the Catholics. They declare that it
is the Catholics who have backed laws preventing the
teaching of the Bible in the schools, who have opposed
the making of adequate appropriations for the public
schools in order to save money for the priest-con-
trolled parochial schools, and who also encourage
members of the Roman church to become teachers

169


THE CHALLENGE OF THE KLAN


and then to teach as poorly as possible. The Klan
believes that the Catholics hope eventually by these
means not only to destroy the public schools, but so
to lower the intelligence of the nation that it will be
an easy prey.

There are an immense number of men and women
in the Klan who have either joined for the purpose
of affecting education, or who have now made it their
chief interest.

This, then, is the nucleus of thought around which
the Klan has been built—reform, sometimes selfish and
sometimes public-spirited, sometimes lawless, some-
times merely meddlesome, sometimes well-founded and
using the entirely proper methods of opinion and votes.
Often it is a mixture of all these elements. The
means used are determined by the state of civilization
of the men or the communities in which the Klan has
called this thought into action.

But always it is reform of one kind or another, and
however warped or misdirected, it is almost always
aimed at some real wrong or abuse. It may err in
ascribing the evils to Catholics, Jews, or aliens, but
the evils themselves are actual enough.

In other words the Klan movement seems to be
another expression of the general unrest and dissatis-
faction with both local and national conditions—the
high cost of living, social injustice and inequality,
mal-administration of justice, political corruption,
hyphenism, disunity, unassimilated and conflicting

170


THE LURE OF THE WHITE MASK


ideals and standards—which are distressing all
thoughtful men. The Klan is strong because it offers
what no one else has offered: a solution which,
whether right or not, is fundamental and all-embracing
in that it calls for a return to a time-honored standard.
The Klan, also, has been wise enough not to promise
any complete cure.

This is the nucleus, but it is not all the Klan. There
must be added the accretions which gather to any
growing organization and a few which are peculiar
to the Klan itself. Among the latter are the “haters”
whose prejudices are always strong and who react
violently to the Klan propaganda; the hot-heads who
are attracted by the chance for mysterious and violent
action; the youths who want “fun, romance and
swagger,’ and the cowards who hope under cover to
satisfy private grudges. Among the normal burrs are
the “joiners,” the people who go with the crowd, those
who have definite ends that may be helped by the
support of any organization, and the parasites.

This study of Klan psychology would be incomplete
without a word on “nigger-haters.”’ The Klan of the
’sixties was directed against the Negro, and undoubt-
edly this particular prejudice was large in the men
who formed the new Klan. But I can only report
that I have not found the Negro question as a motive
anywhere in the Klan. I suppose that it exists, but
in my entire inquiry and in many long discussions
with both Klansmen and Klan enemies, the Negro

171


THE CHALLENGE OF THE KLAN


has never been mentioned until I myself brought
him up.

The attitude of Dr. Evans toward these various
motives in Klansmen has been rather fully reported
in previous chapters. Two further remarks of his
bear on the subject. I had pointed out the large
number who joined from motives very different from
those the Klan avows.

“Human emotions and human motives are the same
the world over and since the world began,” he replied.
“Of course, in a vast organization, with millions of
members, there are bound to be undesirable individuals.
This is true in the most serious way during the propa-
gating period. There is an intangible something, how-
ever, in the Klan that searches out the hearts of men,
and it has been the experience that the man who has
joined for selfish or intolerant reasons is very quickly
converted or driven out.”

“Ts not a large part of the membership of the un-
balanced, hot-headed type of young men?” was another
question.

“No, I would not say that,’ he replied. “I would
say that the Klan is composed of young, rather than
old men, but it is the young men of the balanced minds
who are the stamina of the nation. I have seen audi-
ences of many kinds, and I will say that Klan audi-
‘ences will compare very favorably with any audience
you have ever seen.”

It is impossible to make more than a guess at the

172


THE LURE OF THE WHITE MASK


proportion of the various motives which lead men to
join the Klan. It differs in every community. But
taking the country as a whole I should guess that the
parasites number less than five per cent. of the whole,
the actual haters and trouble-hunters another five per
cent. and the “joiners” about twenty per cent. The re-
maining seventy per cent. seem sincere reformers, how-
ever mistaken. About half of this seventy per cent., I
believe, is moved largely by the desire to remedy things
which can not be reached by law—the largest single
element—and most of the rest by hope of local reform
of some rather valuable kind. Those primarily moved
to join by the national aims of the Klan I should not
put above ten per cent. But all these motives overlap,
though I should also guess that at least seventy per
cent. of the Klansmen would work with some vigor for
local reforms, and almost as many would support the
national programme.

There is one more thing about the composite mind
of the Klan which may be interpreted in different
ways, but can not be ignored. This is a certain in-
tensity, purposefulness, sometimes unselfishness, which
the Klan seems to instil into the majority of its
members. There is of course a great background for
emotionalism in the Klan’s aims and forms of appeal;
the Klan seizes on this, strengthens and uses it. To
many Klansmen the Klan doctrines have come with
the force of revelation, sacred, over-mastering, and
with most of the elements of religious conversion.


173


THE CHALLENGE OF THE KLAN


This is actually a spiritual force like the rather
narrow but very intense and often devoted emotional
conviction, which has been the chief driving power in
the more evangelistic of the Protestant denominations.
Every Klansman I have met, save one, is a Funda-
mentalist, and it is easy to understand why an organi-
zation such as the Klan, full of ritualism and sym-
bolism and demanding much blind faith, should
naturally be Fundamental.

I asked one of my friends in the Klan, who has had
very wide opportunities for observation, to define for
me the spiritual side of Ku Kluxism. He wrote as
follows:

“Tf I were to try in my feeble way to classify the
spiritual vision of the Klan, I would merely say that
the thoughts which are behind the political idea that
good Republicans and good Democrats can, as Klans-
men, maintain and perpetuate a government free from
present party bias, make Klansmen believe also that
the Klan can hold to the ideas of John Calvin and
yet correct within the Protestant church those evils
that seem to be inimical to the best interests of the
church.

. “They feel that its old system of ‘authority’ needs
revamping. They would not tamper with the funda-
mental creed, but I have heard many a good Protestant
Klansman—preachers, if you please—point out that
we should not too bitterly criticize the Roman Catholic
church, if at all, so long as certain ‘despotisms’ and


174


THE LURE OF THE WHITE MASK


‘authoritative conditions’ remain in the Protestant
churches.

“I believe the keynote of the Klansmen spiritually
is, that they should hold rigidly to the fundamental
idea of Protestanism, that they would not change the
‘faith’ and the ‘semblance of symbolism,’ but would
change in a manner ‘the machinery of government of
the church itself.’’ For instance, fifty-two per cent. of
a certain Methodist Assembly found itself face to face
with a bishop and a board that were opposed to the
Klan, modernists, in their sympathies at least. These
men of the fifty-two per cent. stood fast, were denied
their salary increases, and some of them were given
most inferior appointments. But some of them, with
their Klan congregations solidly behind them, dared
the Bishop to make a single move; and he certainly
did not!

“Whether or not the Klan means rebellion in the
Protestant church is something that will require very
careful and deep investigation, but it certainly bears
many signs pointing in that direction.

“T believe the Klan would do the same thing to
Protestantism that it hopes to do to the American
Government, and it seems to be entirely free from any
thought of denominationalism. It certainly is free
from the intolerance of one denomination toward
another. It is’ significant that Klansmen do attend
church, and that the Klan has had a remarkable influ-
ence in the increase of church attendance. They go


175


THE CHALLENGE OF THE KLAN


in large groups from first one church to another, and
one of the secrets of the organization is the vast
financial aid rendered by the Klan to worthy churches
and needy pastors.

“T would make just a fair guess that more than
two million dollars were contributed to churches last
year by Klansmen, without any strings whatsoever,
merely with the idea of giving support to fundamental
Protestantism.

“The spiritual inspiration of the Klan is its deepest
quality, far deeper, I believe, than the things you have
been discussing in your writings, but, like other parts
of the Klan, and its symbolism, carefully guarded,
silent but mighty and potential. There is running
through the Klan a spirit of vast humility. Its mem-
bers believe that the danger to Protestantism lies in
Catholic encroachments, and that Protestants (free
from creeds and denominationalism) must stoutly re-
sist or be driven from the field. They believe that
Protestantism as a religion must be made as militant
as the Klan is in its political activities, and that it
should appeal to all men who are teachable and aspir-
ing, who measure themselves by ideals of loyalty.
They feel the Klan is the power by which they, Klans-
men, can do their best work for America and Protest-
antism itself,

“Klansmen insist on personal character of a high
type because they believe that the value of the service
they can render in the spiritual field naturally depends

176


THE LURE OF THE WHITE MASK


on the quality of the men who serve. They certainly
believe in the composite Protestant mind. It stands in
the life of the Klansman for spiritual deeds and their
exemplification in every-day life, civic, political and
religious, all straight Protestant Americanism and, if
you please, Calvinism.

“I do not agree with all these points, but am trying
to give you in a brief way what I know of the com-
posite mind of the Klan on this subject. I believe
that it stands for a ‘religion of spirit’ and would get
rid of a lot of ‘religion of authority.’ It would draw
the line further and more completely between the idea
of authority expressed in the Roman Catholic church
and in its own. But it does not want to give up for
one minute the idea of ‘faith as a deposit.’ It does
not want to disbelieve, but wishes to continue to ac-
cept as true all the miracle stories in the Bible, that
are ‘not unworthy of God the Father and Our Lord
Jesus Christ.’ It does not wish any ‘scientific tests’
or proof, in these things.

“So, there you have it, the best that I can give you,
an apparent contradiction, an enigma if there ever
was one. The Klan can stand on the Protestant faith.
It certainly is wiping out denominationalism and it
is certainly bringing men back to a more rigid adher-
ence to the fundamental idea of Protestantism.

“T believe the element of symbolism can be applied
to the spiritual side of the organization fully and un-
reservedly, and that the Klan affords Protestants an


177


THE CHALLENGE OF THE KLAN


opportunity to get together on a common ground, to
consider the Master as a Patriot for the great cause,
and to work for the idea that the kingdom of God on
earth, the rule of righteousness in the personal life and
social relationship of the Klansmen, should be to all
mankind identical with the cause of Jesus Christ. The
Klansman will adhere to his Methodist affiliations, his
Christian, United Brethren, or other denomination, in
about the same way a Klansman adheres to such
fraternal affiliations, as the Knights of Pythias, Odd
Fellows, etc. He will accept the Klan as a common
cause, and in the Klan he becomes not only a Christian
but a Patriot for the cause of the Klan, which he
firmly believes to be the Cause of the Master. I believe
that you can rely upon a Klansman at all times to be
loyal to the Cause.

“Undoubtedly these men are looking to the Klan to
point out the common ground, and I believe the most
potent thing in the Klan itself, from a religious point
of view, is that it will solidify a straight Protestant
faith against the common enemy and for the common
good.

“You have made the point that the Klan is a protest
movement, and what is a Protestant but a protest-ant?
Each has thought his particular denomination the best
form of expression of ‘protest’ and probably his par-
ticular form of religious symbolism; but he sees in the
Klan a more definite, more militant, more operative
‘protestantism.’

178


THE LURE OF THE WHITE MASK


“The Twelfth Chapter of Romans, which is a part
of the Klan ritual, the fourth, fifth, and sixth verses,
certainly cover the point:


““For as we have many members in one body, and
all members have not the same office;

“So we, being many, are one body in Christ, and
every one members one of another.

“ “Having then gifts differing according to the grace
that is given to us, whether prophecy, let us prophesy
according to the proportion of faith.’ ”


The effect produced by this kind of fervid convic-
tion naturally depends on the character of the indi-
vidual man, but it is to be felt in some form in every
contact with the Klan. It rises sometimes to the pitch
of fierce fanaticism, with all the shocking and terrible
splendor of that form of obsession. Nothing less, for
example, could have held the paraders standing in the
streets of Carnegie while brick-bats and bullets felled
a quarter of their number. This was the martyr spirit.
But this same intensity may also produce a narrow,
intolerant, irascible attitude, impatient of opposition
or question, which classes all outsiders as enemies and
strikes with equal vigor at crimes, corruption or criti-
cism. A correspondent in Dallas who is fighting the
Klan bitterly, writes on this phase:

“I have reason to believe I know the psychology of
the Klansmen. It is a modern Mohammedanism more
than anything else. And great is the Grand Titan.


179


THE CHALLENGE OF THE KLAN


It is semi-religious, yet it is a religion of violence,
propagated by violence, and its adherents are modern
fuzzy-wuzzies in business clothes. No more cowards
than other men, but selfish, egotistic and dangerous
modern fanatics, and at the slightest show of dis-
agreement the sword is brought into play and the
‘Christian dog’ is slain. (Except that the sword is the
six-gun.)”

There is truth in this condemnation, yet it would
fit Cromwell’s Ironsides or the Salem Puritans—any
strongly convinced body of men! The Klan spirit
does not express itself with six-guns in Ohio and
Indiana, where the Klan strength is now centered, but
that seems a difference due chiefly to the customs of
the country. The spirit is nearly as intense there even
if less raw, and it can better be called devotion or
consecration than fanaticism. Certainly that is the
pitch at which the Klan leaders try to hold it.

But the difference is one of degree; there is still
the semi-religious feeling, the resentment toward oppo-
sition, the narrowness and often intolerance. It is
more than a coincidence that everywhere the Klan is
linked with and supported by the narrower, less liberal
churches, and that most of its members are “Funda-
mentalists.” In Ohio, for example, all the Protestant
churches are more or less involved except the Congre-
gationalists and Unitarians.

This strong religious element in the Klan naturally
leaves it wide open to attack, because of its bar against

180


THE LURE OF THE WHITE MASK


the race from which Jesus came. Probably the most
effective campaigner against the Klan at present is
former Governor Jim Ferguson of Texas. He is
certainly no saint, and several different kinds of in-
congruity are involved when he attacks the Klan on
religious grounds. “Big Jim’s”’ most telling attack
is the following story:

“T dreamed the other night that I had been inveigled
into going outside the Klavern or whatever it is they
call this here place where men go to wear bedsheets
and pillow cases. While I was waiting, there came
up to the door a tall man with fair hair that came
down over his shoulders, and a yellow beard, and long
trailing garments, and he was barefooted. And he
went up and knocked on the door. Pretty soon the
Klackter or Klickter or Klexter, or whatever it is
they call him, came out and asked this man what he
wanted. The man said he wanted to join the Klan.

““Are you an American?’ asked this Klexter.

“ ‘No,’ said the man with the beard, ‘I do not belong
to any nation.’

“‘Wuh! said the noble Knight. ‘Where were you
born?’

“ ‘T was born in Judea,’ said the man.

“Well get the hell out of here,’ said the Klexter.
‘We ain’t got;no use for no one but native white
Protestants.’ ”

Of course this is not a fair attack on the Klan, since
Christ could not be admitted under the rules of many

181


THE CHALLENGE OF THE KLAN


worthy organizations, nor become president of the
United States! It is, however, an extremely effective
piece of propaganda, and one tremendously painful
to the religious minded Klansman.

This then, is the mind of the Klan as nearly as it
can be seen. A mind with mixed motives, generally
well-intentioned, confused, warped and illogical, or
sane and clear in different individuals. It includes
purposes very different from those the leaders profess
as well as those they do avow, and prejudices and
hatreds they are trying to control. And the whole is
driven by an intense emotionalism which makes it a
tremendous power, and doubly a menace wherever
it goes wrong.


CHAPTER VIII
THE STRENGTH OF INVISIBILITY


i ee has seldom been an organization so amaz-

ingly well designed for getting what it wants as
is the Ku Klux Klan. One has to go back to the
unproved stories of the secret and deadly workings
of the lay branch of the Society of Jesus three hundred
years ago for a parallel. For the Klan is able not
only to make its will effective—startlingly effective
considering its numbers—but to do so with almost
complete immunity and to leave those whom it attacks
beating the air, helpless to strike back.

This is not accidental; the Klan has been planned
and built for just this end.

It is the offspring of extremely able brains, prob-
ably those of General Forrest and his associates in
the ’sixties with improvements added by experience.
It is devised to permit a minority—even a minute
minority—to multiply its power, to strike swiftly and
silently, and to remain secure. So long as its oaths
hold and its members are steadfast it can do this
almost flawlessly.

183


THE CHALLENGE OF THE KLAN


Every least thing about the Klan is made to con-
tribute to this. Just as its spirit is one of reform and
its basic idea is native, white, Protestant supremacy,
so its purpose focuses on direct, militant, immediate
action to put its spirit and its ideas into effect all
along the line. It gathers together for this all the
various elements of strength which have been de-
scribed in previous chapters—its secrecy, its appeal
to instinct or prejudice, its careful organization, and
finally its intense emotionalism—and drives them into
effective action. How successful this action is will
be told in the next chapter; the purpose of the present
one is to study the elements of power in action, which
make such success possible.

The first of these elements is the militant and mili-
tary organization, with its autocratic control. This
centers in the Imperial Wizard the power to order
action without waste of time or confusing counsels,
and it permits that sudden concentrated use of all
available strength which is only possible to despotism.
That in fact is the avowed object of this form of
organization. Says Paul S. Etherbridge, the Imperial
Klonsel:

“The form and character of our government is,
however, both in theory and in practise, military, and
in a sense autocratic. We ourselves have made it so.

“Article 1, Section 2, of the Constitution is very
explicit on this point. Our Imperial Wizard is Com-
mander-in-chief, and he is supreme within certain

184


THE STRENGTH OF INVISIBILITY


restrictions of the Constitution, and his decisions, de-
crees, edicts, mandates, rulings and instructions are of
full authority and must be unquestionably recognized
and respected by each and every citizen of the Invisible
Empire.

“The military feature runs all through our plan of
operation, and the autocratic form of government lies
in the fact of the authority and power vested in our
Imperial Wizard, and also in the method of his elec-
tion. See in this connection Article 9, Section 1;
where provision is made for the election of the Wizard
by the Grand Dragons. Some slight criticism of this
article has once or twice been suggested on the ground
that the Imperial Wizard—Supreme Chief Executive
of the Order—under the provisions of the said article
is elected by the Grand Dragons, who are themselves
subjects of his own appointment, and it has been
pointed out that a similarity of operation exists in
this respect between the Knights of the Ku Klux Klan
and the Roman Hierarchy. It is an admitted fact
that there is indeed a strong similarity between the
two. In answer to the criticism arising on this account
let it be remembered that no form of government in
all history has developed such proficiency in handling
the masses as has the Church of Rome, and we must
admit that any organization, religious or otherwise,
which can take a hopeless minority and with it control
an overwhelming majority in a Protestant, democratic
nation, like America, can not be ignored with safety.

185


THE CHALLENGE OF THE KLAN


And if the method and form of government can be
so organized as to develop to such a degree of efficiency
for the accomplishment of purposes destructive and
inimical to the free institutions of our government, is
there any good reason why the same or similar operat-
ing plans should not be perfected for the accomplish-
ment of good, and why the same should not be made
to operate along constructive lines with the same de-
gree of effectiveness?

“Some of the most iniquitous devices of the devil
himself are operated upon plans that develop the high-
est efficiency and the greatest degree of effectiveness,
but this does not mean that the devil owns the plans.
If the living Christ, a Klansman’s criterion of char-
acter, could commend to his disciples methods em-
ployed by his arch enemy, why should not we, in good
faith, adopt the methods which have proved their
efficacy through twenty centuries of history, although
we denounce the ends and purposes to which they have
been diverted.

“There is another reason why our government must
be military in character. Our organization is more
than a secret order; it is a movement; in a sense,
it is a crusade. Military discipline must be main-
tained in our organization because we, unlike purely
civic bodies, or civic governments, are sailing un-
charted seas, and there is no precedent by which we
may be guided. Many other organizations having
somewhat similar objects and purposes, but without

186


THE STRENGTH OF INVISIBILITY


the military feature, have fallen by the wayside and
been forgotten. Because there is no precedent by
which we can be guided, it becomes essential that one
general direct the march, and that direction be ac-
complished only through a rigid military programme.
If the time shall come when the purposes for which
the Klan was organized have all been accomplished,
then its members need no longer be a militant, fighting
organization, and they may possibly revert into an
organization something like the Veterans of Foreign
Wars, or the veterans of any other crusade; but until
such time, and until the purposes for which the Klan
was organized have been accomplished, the military
feature of the Klan must be maintained.”

This rigid, concentrated power in the first place, is
backed up by rigorous control over the individual
members, a discipline which is well-nigh military in
most ways. The words of the oath areclear: “I...
will render at all times loyal respect and steadfast
support to the Imperial authority, and will heartily
heed all official mandates, decrees, edicts, rulings and
instructions,” and so forth. There is no limitation in
this and I find none in the Constitution, yet there are
some things the Wizard could not order without break-
ing his own oath, and there is much evidence that the
leaders would, be afraid to attempt authority beyond
certain points. For all ordinary purposes within the
aims of the Klan, however, the authority is complete.

The proof of this, in its widest manifestation, is

187


THE CHALLENGE OF THE KLAN


the sudden ceasing of night-riding throughout the
whole Klan when Dr. Evans got control and issued
his reform orders. But there have been even clearer
evidences of the drastic control in local situations, as
where Klansmen have submitted to violence without
retaliation. A state-wide demonstration was given in
Oklahoma when Governor Walton’s gunmen made
really outrageous attempts to goad the Klansmen into
some kind of violence that would have justified Wal-
ton’s charges and have given him an excuse for mili-
tary action.

A typical performance was that at the town of
Comanche, where the Klan had called one of those
big open air meetings so loved by farmers. There
were to be speeches, bands, an initiation and a big
picnic dinner furnished by women of the churches.
Some ten thousand people had gathered when twenty-
five of Walton’s men appeared. They had no war-
rants, no official right to act even if their action had
been legal, as it was not. They ordered the gathering
to disperse, waved weapons, threatened the men,
hustled the women, kicked over the baskets of fried
chicken and apple pie, and in general behaved as of-
fensively as possible. There were enough fighting men
in the crowd to have routed them easily—Oklahoma
has a good many half-reformed cowboys—and the
Klan officials sweat blood before they finally got the
crowd broken up in peace. The fact that during the
whole Walton fight, with its many irritating contacts,

188


THE STRENGTH OF INVISIBILITY


no single instance of Klan violence occurred, speaks
volumes for the way Klansmen “heartily heed’ their
orders.

The third advantage derived from the military
organization is the ability of the Klan to reach all the
members on very short notice, and to get them into
action with bewildering swiftness.

This system works amazingly well, far better than
an emergency call to a militia regiment, for example.
There was a case in an Ohio city where the authorities
—uillegally—had forbidden any Klan meeting inside
the county. At five o’clock one day a national Klan
speaker arrived, word of a meeting began to be cir-
culated about six, and at eight some fifteen thousand
men had gathered in a field twenty miles away, across
the county line, though every one must have had to
change his plans for the evening, and though none but
the leaders knew, when he started, where he was going.

Another example of swift work was given by the
Klan in a Kentucky city. On the evening before an
election the Klan suddenly decided to put up a candi-
date; there was one brief newspaper advertisement,
but there were no meetings and no visible campaign.
Yet of twelve thousand votes next day, this unknown
man got seven thousand!

Thus, with autocratic generalship, military disci-
pline and a perfect contact system with obedient forces,
the Klan is able to plan campaigns without possibility
of the plans becoming known, to act absolutely as a

189


THE CHALLENGE OF THE KLAN


unit, to change instantly and without confusion when
necessary and to throw its whole strength, without
warning and in an hour’s time against whatever ob-
jective is chosen. Few generals have had a more
perfect fighting machine.

But this is only a part of the Klan’s strength in
action; probably less than half. Its greatest power
comes from secrecy, and this is so tremendously ef-
fective that it is easy to see why it holds to secrecy
in the face of all criticism. It more than doubles the
chance that the Klan will accomplish the things it has
set out to accomplish.

Dr. Evans spoke of some of these advantages in
one of his talks with me.

“A force which is in the open and can be seen and
calculated is far less feared by a corrupt official or
an anti-American propagandist than one which he can
not see,” the Wizard said. “Itis far more difficult and
less comfortable to undertake a conspiracy against
good government or against Americanism if the con-
spirator has no means of knowing that the first man
in whom he confides his plans may not be a Klansman.

“These advantages are very real and assist in carry-
ing out the Klan’s ideals. In an open democracy they
would not be necessary and might be classed as unfair:
In the present condition of the country, when it is
necessary to combat organizations using these and even
worse methods, it would be folly to surrender any:
advantage. When the time comes that the organiza-

190


THE STRENGTH OF INVISIBILITY


tions referred to abandon their secrecy, the Klan will
also willingly abandon its secrecy.”

These fighting values of secrecy are worth looking
into, as they are among the Klan’s most dangerous
and effective weapons. The Imperial Wizard did not
mention them at all, nor say all that is worth saying
of any of them. A study of the Klan at work shows
at least seven different advantages which it gains in
this way.

First is the fact that it can strike in the dark. There
is no warning before the blow falls, no certain
knowledge of what is behind it. It is seldom possible
to say with assurance, even that it was the Klan that
acted; it is never possible to know what men are
responsible. A blow so struck is doubly effective
against the man hit; it is bewildering to the onlookers.

In the second place the Klan by this means is able
to claim all successes and to deny any failures. If
the blow lands it can take the credit, but if it misses,
it is never known that anything was attempted or, if
known, the Klan can deny responsibility. In regard
to things which really are accomplished the advantage
is the same. The Klan can take credit for actions
which the community approves or fears, and deny
blame for those which have not worked out to its
advantage. Thus it is able to build up an aura of
success, infallibility and social service which may or
may not be justified, but is never quite so well justified
as appears.

IgI


THE CHALLENGE OF THE KLAN


A third great advantage of secrecy is the one first
mentioned by Dr. Evans, that it confuses the enemy.
‘A man who contemplates a fight against the Klan does
not know how great may be the force against him
nor how to calculate his chances. It may have five
members or five hundred and all the instinct against
jumping in the dark will make men keep peace with
it if they can. When it comes to an actual struggle
it has all the advantages so well demonstrated by
Gideon’s band against the hosts of the enemies of
Israel. The Klan might be beaten often if its foes
kept their nerve, but very few men do keep their
nerve against hard-hitting specters, for, as an infantry
officer once told me, a single hidden rifleman can
demoralize a company, when a hundred known oppo-
nents can not. The Klan keeps its sharpshooters
hidden.

The Klan’s ability to get information is secrecy’s
fourth great advantage. The benefit is not only the
one mentioned by Dr. Evans, that no one can be sure
there is not a Klansman included in the most care-
fully guarded plot who will lay all the details before
the Klan officials, though this is disheartening enough.
But the great advantage is that there is likely to be
some Klansman who will get hold of the most care-
fully guarded secrets of any kind, and with men every-
where the high Klan officials are able to run down
with very little trouble, whatever information they
desire, whether secret or not. The fact that the mem-

192


Cy Ute A tbs //


THE STRENGTH OF INVISIBILITY


ie bership is secret makes it impossible to guard against
S| this

I have had some contact with the espionage and
secret service systems of three great governments, and
it seems to me that the Klan’s is the best of them
all. In my talks with Klan officials I have been
astonished at the extent and detail of their informa-
tion. It covers every man with whom they may have
business, from presidents to bootleggers, and appar-
ently includes an actually complete record of each. It
covers also political and business deals, plots, log-
rollings, plans, performances, past, present and to
come. It seems on the whole as accurate as such
secret information ever is, though there are serious
_ inaccuracies. The Klan has a great bureau which
~~ collects, sorts, codifies and prepares all this material.

This kind of information is a tremendous weapon.
The power which it might give the Klan over any
man with a past, even over any man who does not
want the affairs of his whole life and business made
public at any given moment, is almost incalculable,
though I have not heard a whisper that it has ever
been used in this blackmailing way. It is also of
great value in allowing the Klan to act with uncanny
accuracy, and this seems to have been the chief use
made of it, sofar. And the very fact of its existence
does have a blighting effect on all kinds of opposi-
tion.

All these things combine to give the fifth advantage


193


THE CHALLENGE OF THE KLAN


—terror. It may not include fear of physical force,
but it is none the less real. Where the Klan is active
there is often actual panic among opponents. It is
like the fear of ghosts; men who would stand willingly
against visible heavy odds are demoralized by a vague,
unformed, unseen, intangible specter, armed with un-
known weapons and unguessed knowledge and clothed
with a reputation for ruthless power and unvarying
success.

The sixth advantage is that secrecy protects indi-
vidual Klansmen against reprisals. They can not be
located, therefore can not be hurt. Thus the best
known method of weakening an organized enemy—
“sniping” the weaker members—is impossible against
the Klan. Any blow which is struck in return must be
aimed at the Klan as a whole.

And when such a blow is aimed, usually there is
nothing there to take it. This is the final and greatest
advantage of secrecy. It is almost impossible to hit
back at the Klan except through general legislation
and court actions such as have been attempted so often
—and so fruitlessly. Those whom the Klan attacks
can never know when or where or how or against
whom to launch their counter-attacks. They must
remain forever on the defensive, which is the surest
road to final defeat.

One more advantage of secrecy—not of immediate
fighting value but of great help to the Klan as a whole
—should be mentioned. This is that secrecy goes far


194


THE STRENGTH OF INVISIBILITY


toward preventing individual Klansmen from exploit-
ing themselves, from using the Klan to further their
own ambitions. This keeps the Klan campaign and
purposes unified, prevents perversion of aims and
waste of strength in side-issues. Such things do occur,
of course, but the rule of secrecy greatly limits them
and the weaknesses that come from them.

There are two other great elements of strength in
the Klan in action, neither directly due either to
secrecy or organization. One is the careful spread
of information among members; “education” as the
leaders call it. This information is not always correct,
but it always supports Klan purposes. The Klansmen
are given reports about men and events from all over
the country—reports that smack of “inside dope’—
which strengthen their purposes and justify their ac-
tions. This helps much toward unity, intensity and
effectiveness.

Last and by no means the least is that the Klansmen
themselves believe not only in the righteousness of
their cause and its methods, but in its actual success.
They believe that they are doing the things they set
out to do, and can do them everywhere if they will
hold together and take enough trouble. Thus they
have the morale, esprit de corps, éclat of a victorious
army with allstheir incalculable value.

There is room for only one example of this belief
that success is being won; an excerpt from a letter
written by a clergyman in a state where the Klan has


195
a


THE CHALLENGE OF THE KLAN


been heard from so little that few people know of its
existence there. Since I have no personal knowledge
of the facts, I suppress the names, and give the letter
merely to show how Klansmen believe the Klan is
winning.

“For two decades,” this minister writes, “Bishop
Blank has held the state in the hollow of his hand by
cleverly manipulating the Catholic vote. Those ballots
have been handed to any one who would be most con-
venient and accommodating to Rome. But when the
Klan came, matters immediately changed and the
haughty Bishop received what rightfully belonged to
him and the church and nothing more. You are doubt-
less familiar with what has been done in this city in
a political way. Senator Richard Roe has been the
leader in the movement to take the management of
city and state affairs out of the Bishop’s hands and
place it in the keeping of all the people. This great
work will certainly result in his being chosen gover-
nor in the November election. Rome’s political ma-
chine here has been wrecked.”

So we find the Klan going into action with an amaz-
ing array of the accouterments of success: unity,
secrecy, immunity to reprisal, the ability to inspire
panic, wide information and faith in victory. With
such equipment it is no wonder that it is accomplishing
much, it is expecting to do much more, that it is draw-
ing increasing numbers into its march and that its
leaders see no limits to what may be done. Given


196


THE STRENGTH OF INVISIBILITY


another year or two at the present rate of growth,
and the possibilities of its power stagger the mind.

This summary has taken no consideration of the
fairness or viciousness of these elements of the Klan
strength. It will be observed that none of these
methods is illegal, that many are of the kind that are
highly praised when found in organizations which
we happen to approve, and that the worst of them are
measures which are always held to be justified in
warfare, no matter how despicable they may be in
themselves. The Klan practises espionage, a sort of
mental terrorism, a secret propaganda, attack from
ambush. These are not new methods; every combat-
ant uses them in war-time and they are not unknown
to political and other organizations in this country,
even in peace.

Judgment on them must depend on one’s judgment
as to the motives and purposes of the Klan. The
methods are undeniably dangerous, they are unfair in
all ordinary circumstances as Dr. Evans himself prac-
tically admitted. The Klan’s justification is that war
is necessary to protect and save Americanism, that such
methods are required, and that the Klan is not the
first to use them but has adopted them as the Allies
adopted poison gas, since it has merely done the same
things that are constantly being done by those whom
it classes as enemies of the country. From this point
of view its only fault is that it has done them better!
It can claim also in mitigation that its own aims are


197


THE CHALLENGE OF THE KLAN


open, while those of the anti-American bodies and
workers are not.

If one agrees with the Klan that the situation is
serious enough to call for a vigorous campaign along
the lines of the Klan programme, then, it would seem,
the organization and strategy it uses can not be seri-
ously condemned, although they may cause great mis-
givings. But it follows also that they must be aban-
doned at the earliest possible moment, and one must
believe that the danger is very great and very im-
manent to justify such methods even temporarily. It
will be recalled from Dr. Evans’ statements that he
admits both judgments.


CHAPTER IX
THE SPECTER’S HEAVY HAND


HE Ku Klux Klan, whatever its faults, has one

quality much praised by moralists. It gets ac-
tion, wasting no time in vain words. In fact there
is-réason to bélieve that this admirable trait is the
chief cause for the tremendous hostility it has aroused.
Most of us endure very calmly all sorts of opinions
or projects so long as they remain safely elocutionary.
It is when the ideas come to life and bite some one
that loud anathemas arise. The Klan certainly gets
this much tribute from its enemies; a tribute that
would hardly be paid if it confined its activities to
adopting resolutions.

The effect the Klan produces on the community is
the final test of the power and success of the move-
ment, and to a large extent of its justification. Its
whole purpose is to get things done; it makes almost
no attempt to,spread ideas outside its own actual or
prospective members. Its internal discussions are no
disputations over theory. Often it can not even state
its own case clearly. Everything is aimed toward the


199


af


4
\
Nt


THE CHALLENGE’ OF THE KLAN


single purpose of changing our individual, community
and national lives. For this the Klan has built up its


autocratic generalship, its solidly welded unity, its


secrecy, its terrorism and its intense emotionalism.
And because of all this heaped-up power and this sin-
gleness of purpose, the impact, when the Klan does
strike, is terrific, even though it is often invisible.

In its actual methods of reforming society, as well
as in the general system and strategy described in the
previous chapter, the Klan is seldom seen and never
heard. It is often, perhaps usually, impossible even
to know for a certainty that it is the Klan that acted,
no matter how evident the results may be. The thing
is done—that is about all that can be known in any
one case. It is a heavy hand that strikes, yet it is
as if a specter held the weapon and directed the blow.
Only through comparing what has happened in many
different places can the methods by which the Klan
acts be traced with any degree of accuracy.

It should be understood that these methods and,
indeed, most of the instances given of their operation,
can not be definitely proved to have any connection
with the Klan. They are too well concealed. Thus
this report is based on “general information and be-
lief.” But because so many similar situations appear
wherever the Klan exists and seldom appear elsewhere,
the connection between the two must be assumed, even
if it can not be proved.

The means by which the Klan acts are ordinary

200


THE SPECTER’S HEAVY HAND


enough in life both in America and elsewhere; most
organizations and most persons use them constantly.
They are deadly in the Klan’s hands merely because
of the power and skill with which it uses them—like
David and his sling.

There is, for example, the sense of a lurking menace
which the Klan always manages to create in the pop-
ular mind. There is doubtless a menace, but the Klan
“bluffs” the public far beyond its real strength or its
real ruthlessness, just as we all try more or less to
make those with whom we deal feel that we are a bit
stronger or a bit more determined than we actually
are. The Klan “works its bluff” to perfection. The
ordinary citizen comes to believe that it is a cruel and
determined monster of unknowable strength, working
by diabolic methods, through invisible agents, guided
by infernal acumen and able to hurt him through
every means that a man dreads. Since so much is
unknown, his fears are always exaggerated.

There may not be, and in most Klan towns there
never has been, an actual demonstration of force.
But unless they are themselves attacked men do not
care to become involved in a trouble they can not
measure. This holds the bulk of any community
neutral and leaves those whom the Klan does attack
unsupported and undefended. Klan officials deny that
they try to terrify people; I can not say that they
do, but this condition of being “bluffed to a stand-
still” is the first fact to be noted in any Klan com-

201


THE CHALLENGE OF THE KLAN


munity, and so far as my experience goes is never
missing.

This fear of the Klan is often so effective that no
further weapon is called for; a decree has only to be
issued to be obeyed. Probably a great many decrees
which do not come from the Klan are also issued
and obeyed. But when there is resistance the Klan
applies with scientific precision either social ostracism
or a boycott, or both. After a single demonstration
of these there is seldom need of further direct action,
and usually none is taken unless for definite punish-
ment or to drive some person out of the community.

Let me hasten to say that I am not accusing the
Klan of illegal conspiracy in these measures. There
is no order to Klansmen to ostracize or stop trading
with the obnoxious persons; information is simply
given that these persons are obnoxious. The distinc-
tion may seem small, but I believe this method has
been declared legal in various cases where labor boy-
cotts were involved. Klansmen are free to act on
this information or not as they choose, but they all
seem to choose to act. Let me quote Dr. Evans on
this:

“T know of no case where speakers have advocated
and pronounced official boycott. Where called to my
attention and information is furnished, they will be
summarily removed. It is contrary to law and in
violation of the principles of the Klan. This refers
to a specifically defined illegal boycott.

202


THE SPECTER’S HEAVY HAND


“As to the conferring or withholding of patronage
by Klansmen because of various attitudes of business
or professional men, that is a very different matter.
Vocational Klannishness—in other words the practise
of doing business with other Klansmen—is a tenet
of the Klan as of every other fraternity, including the
Rotary Club and the Kiwanis Club, which specifically
means ‘we trade.’ It is to be expected that in cases
where people are hostile to the Klan or are guilty of
un-American practises or of serious misconduct,
Klansmen will withhold patronage as individuals. If
it becomes generally known that certain firms, for
example, have discharged employees for no other rea-
son than that they are Klansmen, it would naturally
react against that firm with other Klansmen. It is
also natural that Klansmen and sometimes local Klans
having information of this kind should disseminate
it. But a Klansman is always free to act as he pleases
on such information.”

The first move of a Klan when it starts to clean
up a town seems to be among its own members. It
makes them behave; several have complained to me
that since joining they were no longer allowed to
drink! The Klan has rules of conduct and a system
of trial and punishment inside itself which are most
effective. Nor are the crimes it punishes only those
against fellow-members. There is little doubt that the
level of conduct is raised among men who join.

The sections of the Constitution covering this mat-

203


THE CHALLENGE OF THE KLAN


ter of Klan crimes show why this is so. They are as
follows:


OFFENSES AND PENALTIES


ARTICLE XX


Section 1. Offenses against this Order shall be di-
vided into two classes—major offenses and minor
offenses.

Section 2. Major offenses shall consist of (1)
treason against the United States of America; (2)
violating the oath of allegiance to this Order or any
supplementary oath or obligation thereof; (3) dis-
respect of virtuous womanhood; (4) violation of the
Constitution or the laws of this Order; conspiring
against the interest and prosperity of this Order or
any Klansman in any way or being a party thereto,
or being a party to any move, conspiracy or organiza-
tion whose existence is antagonistic or injurious to
or is an imitation of this Order; whose name, style
or title is a colorable imitation of this Order; swear-
ing allegiance to or otherwise become a citizen or
subject of any nation, government or institution of
any nature or classification whatsoever, or any ruler
or potentate, prince or person of any court whatever
that is foreign to or is inimical to the government of
the United States of America and its established in-
stitutions, or aiding or abetting such government,

204


ZF SPECTER S. HEAVY HAND


nation, institution, ruler, potentate, prince or person
against the interest, well-being or dignity of the
United States of America or the distinctive institu-
tions of its government; violating the by-laws of a
Klan of this Order; excessive or habitual drunken-
ness; drunkenness or the drinking of intoxicating
liquor or entering a klonklave in an intoxicated con-
dition; the habitual use of profane language or vul-
garity during a klonklave or during an assembly of
Klansmen just prior thereto; (5) being responsible
for the polluting of Caucasian blood through miscege-
nation, or the commission of any act unworthy of a
Klansman; (6) the repeated commission of a minor
offense shall in itself constitute a major offense.

Section 3. MINoR OFFENSES. Minor offenses shall
consist of drunkenness, drinking of intoxicating
liquor during a klonklave or on the premises thereof,
entering a klonklave in an intoxicated condition, use
of profane language or vulgarity during a klonklave
or in an assembly of Klansmen just prior thereto, or
committing any other act which might operate against
the best interest of the Klan or Klansmen, refusal or
failure to obey the mandates, rules, edicts and orders
of the Exalted Cyclops of the Klan, or the failure or
refusal on the part of any Klansman, upon demand
by the Exalted Cyclops, to respond to any summons
issued by him, unless he has a providential excuse; or
failure or refusal to surrender his credentials when
called for by the Exalted Cyclops.

205


THE CHALLENGE OF THE KLAN


Section 4. PENALTIES: All offenses enumerated
above under the head of major offenses shall be tried
and penalities assessed by the Tribunal hereinafter
provided for. All offenses enumerated as minor of-
fenses shall be heard and determined and penalties
assessed by the Exalted Cyclops of the Klan. Pen-
alties shall be of four classes, as follows: 1, Repri-
mand; 2, Suspension; 3, Banishment; 4, Extreme
Penalty—banishment forever, and there shall be added
thereto complete ostracism in any and all things by
each and every member of this Order.


The second move is against outsiders, usually
against men or women who have offended against
the Klan’s moral ideas. These are rather strict, being
set by the same literal-minded, church-going class of
decent people who have given us prohibition, who de-
mand strict observance of the Sabbath, and who have
no sympathy for any sexual indulgences. Often the
victims are Catholics, Jews and aliens, but I have
learned of no case in which there was not some defi-
nite charge of misconduct against them, as well as the
general fact of their faith or race.

Bootleggers seem to be the favorite objects of at-
tack; the Klan crusade against them at Herrin, II-
linois, has been widely advertised and has been in-
itiated in hundreds of towns. I find that in some
dozen places from which I have information the price
of liquor—the best gauge of law enforcement—has

206


THE SPECTER’S HEAVY HAND


risen from two to five hundred per cent. since the Klan
took hold. Bootleggers may always be counted among
the Klan’s chief enemies. Dope-peddlers come in for
attention, social vice is censored, grafting officials are
taken care of, places of amusement regulated, unfair
business dealings punished.

There is also much effort put into regulating per-
sonal conduct. I have stories of Klan influence being
brought to bear on men who maintained illicit rela-
tions with women, who failed to support their fam-
ilies, drank or gambled too heavily, or in general
“acted scandalously.” The great bulk of this private
reformation has to do with the cruder instances of
sexual irregularity.

With most of these a warning, backed by the indi-
vidual’s own fear of the Klan, brings prompt refor-
mation. When this fails pressure is applied, running
through ostracism and boycott up to measures which
in extreme cases drive the culprit into exile. The
whole procedure can be illustrated by a single case,
which is typical in that even the victim himself does
not know certainly that his enemy is the Klan. It
occurred early in 1924 in an eastern state, in one
of those communities where the original inhabitants
have inbred, fallen rather low, and dropped much of
their pretense to morality. The reformers seem to
be newcomers, backed by a few of the better bred
old residents.

In the town which is the center of this community

207


THE CHALLENGE OF THE KLAN


a young man who is steady, hard working and fairly
trustworthy, was living with a notoriously vicious
woman. He was called to the telephone one evening
and advised to leave her. The speaker argued at some
length, explained that the example was bad, made the
proper bringing up of children more difficult, and
so forth. A week was allowed for action. At the
end of that time a second brief warning was given, in
which he was told that he would regret it if he was
not rid of the woman in three days.

He kept her. On the fourth day he lost his job, for
plausible reasons. The next day his landlord de-
manded an exorbitant raise in rent, for plausible
reasons. He found that supplies were cut off; the
milkman disappeared, the butcher’s wagon failed to
stop, and when he went to the stores he could get little
attention—all for plausible reasons. Shortly after
this, some of the stores told him flatly that his trade
was not wanted. By the end of the week only one
man would sell him food and this grocer—who had
defied a telephone warning—was brought into line
within the next week by the loss of nearly seventy,
per cent. of his trade.

The fight—if it can be called that—was over inside
two weeks. The young man moved to a hovel some
miles in the country, where friends were at hand. As
this is written he is still out of work, living precari-
ously on his friends’ charity. Such further orders as


208


THE SPECFER’S HEAVY HAND


have come over the telephones of that town have been
instantly obeyed.

As an example of the use of the boycott in punish-
ment, let me submit a list read at a meeting of the
Klan in northern Ohio. It is written from memory
and incomplete, but nearly enough exact to do for
illustration. The names used here are of course fic-
titious. The speaker made no recommendation for
action. He said, in effect:

“T wish to tell you some of the things your fellow-
townsmen have done.

“The Elite Clothing Store sells half-cotton goods
as pure wool.

“Arthur Fredericks, a doctor, is a dope user.

“John Polaris, a restaurant keeper, has been traf-
ficking in women.

“Michael O’Flynn’s soft drink parlor sells white
mule.

“Walter Peters got a slice of that paving contract
graft.

“Jim Brady, the cigar store man, has a starving
wife in Omaha and has been making love to some girls
here.

“Benjamin Strauss, the dry goods man, underpays
his girls, and besides expects too much of them—you
understand. ,

“Fred Preston’s drug-store will give you the white
stuff if you know the sign.


209


THE CHALLENGE OF THE KLAN


“John Barton joined the Klan just to get trade, and
has been turned out.”

And so on. It was an amazingly inclusive list and
on its face showed neither race nor religious persecu-
tion. Klansmen there boast that more than sixty men
and firms have been put out of business in that town
for reasons such as these. It seems to work, for when
the crowd got back to town late that night, not one
went into Polaris’ restaurant, though it was empty,
they were hungry and some had to wait an hour to
be served in other restaurants.

It should be observed that in such cases the effective
strength of the boycott is far greater than the Klan
membership. This is due to the spread of information
—or rumors—about the man under attack, which
brings in the support of many outsiders. It may be
mere back-fence gossip, but it is more likely “whisper-
ing campaigns” developed to a fine art.

A final method used by the Klan in its clean-up is
to lay information before the regular officers of the
law, and to bring pressure to bear on them. This is
the only means officially sanctioned by the Klan of
affecting conduct, and is being used increasingly. The
fund of information the Klan gathers makes it ex-
tremely effective, both in inducing the officers to act
and in providing evidence for them to act on. It is
wholly commendable.


In some parts of the country there is a strong belief
210


THE SPECTER’S HEAVY HAND


that even though night-riding has stopped, the Klan
is still guilty of murder. Since no case of the kind
has ever been proved, it is added that if the man de-
tailed as executioner is ever brought to trial, the Klan
through its influence with officers and juries sees that
he is acquitted. I can not do more than report this
belief. These rumors are to be expected in any sec-
tion where shooting is common, and are current con-
cerning any powerful local organization. I have been
in places where the Masons, the Odd Fellows and the
Elks were similarly accused, and on plausible evidence.
Possibly they are sometimes true, though I have never
heard of one being proved. If any Klan has been
guilty it has been successful in escaping justice. But
if the charges are true they affect only about a quarter
of the present Klan, for in the territory where the
bulk of its strength now lies I have not found even
a whisper of violence.

The question, however, of how much officers of
the law favor Klansmen in places where the organ-
ization is strong, is a serious and universal one. Most
people believe that there is little chance of a Klans-
man ever being brought to justice in a Klan-ruled
community. This belief has somewhat weakened since
Philip Fox was convicted of murder in Atlanta; in-
cidentally the growth of the Klan jumped after this
happened. The Klan’s opponents who had confidently
predicted that Fox would be freed and had empha-
sized the control the Klan was supposed to have over

Ait


THE CHALLENGE OF THE KLAN


Georgia courts, found themselves caught in their own
argument.

My own opinion—I have met Fox and must admit
a liking for him—is that the Klan does not control
the Georgia courts, and also that it made no improper
effort to have Fox acquitted, but merely to see that
he was fairly tried. I do know that his friends hoped
he would be found insane—a plea frequent enough
outside Klan circles.

Dr. Evans declares that the Klan does not try nor
wish to control or influence any court. As has al-
ready been pointed out he says the Klansman’s oath
will not prevent his telling the truth about his mem-
bership in the Klan or about anything else, for that
matter.

In spite of this attitude and some vigorous efforts
to convince law officers of it, there is evidence that
in Klan counties it is difficult to get convictions of
Klansmen. One instance occurred at Macon, Georgia,
where several men were on trial for night-riding.
The first man up was acquitted, but when the second
man was arraigned, the Grand Dragon sent a message
which was read to the jury, that the Klan did not
support him nor wish anything but justice. On the
same evidence as in the first case, the jury hung. It
seems clear that in sending that message the Grand
Dragon admitted his belief that the jury in the first
trial had been swayed by fear of the Klan.

There were similar cases in Tulsa, Oklahoma, after

212


THE SPECTER’S HEAVY HAND,


the Klan strength there became manifest, and I was
told that no Klansman has been convicted of anything
since the Klan-supported administration came into
power. This is hardly a record to be accounted for
by the virtue of Klansmen. There can be no doubt,
too, that officials who owe their election to Klan sup-
port will be inclined, in common gratitude, to give
Klansmen all the favors their consciences will allow;
some official consciences are very elastic, and the grat-
itude of politicians is usually highly developed, since
re-election depends on it.

So there is little doubt that the law in Klan com-
munities is likely to favor Klansmen—as it does cer-
tain other classes in other places. Political influence
over courts and law officers in this country has been
suspected and has sometimes been proved. But this is
an evil of popular government, not chargeable to the
Klan unless it puts pressure on the law officers, a mat-
ter almost impossible to prove.

On the whole there is a good deal to show that the
general effect of the Klan crusades has been good.
The circuit judge quoted in a previous chapter told me
that in his district the Klan had done “substantial
justice’; an Oklahoma judge confirmed this. Both
said that the general morality and decency had been!
improved. My own observations agree with this.
This judgment is, of course, entirely apart from
any question of the good or evil of the methods em-
ployed.

213


THE CHALLENGE OF THE KLAN


The same thing is true of crimes, even of crimes of
violence, in spite of the general belief about the Klan.
The Klan information bureau has statistics which
show a decrease in crime in the states where the Klan
is strong. Governor Walton of Oklahoma, at the
same time that he was attacking the Klan, boasted of
a fifty per cent. decrease in crime in the state. Statis-
tics from either source are subject to challenge, of
course; but it is certain that lynching, which might
be supposed a peculiarly Klannish crime, has decreased
more than half in the year of the Klan’s great growth.
There are several instances where Klans have helped
sheriffs prevent mob violence.

While on the subject of crime it may be well to
give Dr. Evans’ statement about the Mer Rouge affair,
since that is often cited as a complete condemnation
of the Klan. This is the first official statement that
has come from a Klan leader on the subject, and
denies both that Klansmen were guilty or that the
Klan refused to help the prosecution.

“The true story of Mer Rouge has not been told,”
he said. “That is about all the Klan knows about it.
It does not know who were guilty nor of what they
were guilty. It does know that the prosecution of the
case has been proceeding on a wrong theory and
against the wrong men. It has been accused of not
aiding the prosecution; it has had no information that
it could give. Some such information, as yet unveri-
fied, has recently come to us. If that information

214:


a Cae”


(ditties


=


7)


Carn, ee


THE SPECTER’S HEAVY HAND


proves correct it will be given to the authorities and
the truth will be learned at last.”

In all this Klan crusading there has been much talk
of abuse of innocent people, and of punishment in-
flicted for the mere fact of opposing the Klan when
there were no charges of crime or misconduct. Here
again the situation is foggy. Undoubtedly there have
been cases of mob violence when there was no least
justification for it, and many of these have occurred
at times and places where the Klan was active. The
Klan’s denial of responsibility in such cases is not con-
vincing, since the conditions which make such outrages
possible, if not the outrages themselves, are due to
the Klan. In fairness it must be added that the pro-
portion of these cases to the total activities of the
Klan is very small, and that most of them, that I
have heard of, took place prior to the Evans reforms.

One more point: Dr. Evans and the other leaders
are now trying to stop “meddling” with the private
conduct of people, as they have stopped night-riding.
The rule has been laid down that the Klan shall never
take direct action, and that no case shall be acted upon
except through the regular Taw officers under enacted
statutes. Dr. Evans believes that “meddling” largely
has been stopped, but_I_am _forced to disagree with

him. The casés I have cited are all recent and in
northern and eastern states. There is reason to be-
lieve that the evil is decreasing considerably, but it
is far from dead.


215


THE CHALLENGE OF THE KLAN


It will be observed that all these methods of the
Klan, including those disapproved by the leaders, are
entirely legal, except the doubtful and unproved cases
of actual violence, or of intimidation of legal officers.
It is hard to attack these methods in the abstract, even
on moral grounds, since they are, in the last analysis,
nothing but an organized exercise of the right to
like whom we please, associate with whom we please,
and do business where we please. We have heard
a good deal lately about the immense good to be ac-
complished by public opinion and “social and economi¢
pressure.” Here we have it; the Klan has made it a
science!

The objection, of course, is that this is private jus-
tice, outside the law, without trial or the chance for
defense. True; but the same can be said of the per-
sonal verdicts and preferences which each of us passes
and enforces daily. As to the use of rumors, we all
act constantly on unproved rumors, and make people
suffer for them. The Klan has organized both rumor
and opinion and it would seem at first that there could
be no very well-founded objection nor very strong
condemnation for merely doing better than others,
things that we all do.

Yet there is objection. Almost everywhere that the
Klan appears there soon develops very bitter opposi-
tion. This comes not merely from the vicious and
criminal classes, hit in the reform campaigns. That
is to be expected and is a good symptom. It comes

216


THE SPECTER’S HEAVY HAND


also, of course, from Catholics, Jews and aliens and
has apparently resulted in strengthening the unity of
these groups, thus producing an effect directly oppo-
site to that at which the Klan aims. I say “appa-
rently” because while there are many statements that
this is the case I have been unable to obtain from the
Knights of Columbus or the B’nai Brith answers to
registered letters asking for the facts. But this op-
position also was to be expected, and in so far as parts
of these groups have been working for class or anti-
American interests, it is also wholesome.

Entirely apart from this, however, there is strong
opposition to and intense feeling against the Klan
among those same native white Protestants to whom
it tries to appeal. Much of this, to be sure, is based
on misinformation about what the Klan actually is
and wants, and some of it on snap judgments, or
prejudices inherited from the Civil War days. But
a considerable number of bitter opponents of the Klan
are not accounted for in any of these ways, and the
reasons for their attitude are rather obscure, since it
seems to be based only in small part on charges that
the Klan has been unjust in individual cases, and is
frequently accompanied by the admission that it has
done good. The reasons usually given are vague and
not fundamental ; disapproval of secrecy, of espionage,
or the statement that “nobody’s got any business doing
such things.”

There are many people, of course, who hate the

217


THE CHALLENGE OF THE KLAN


Klan merely because they fear it, and never acknowl-
edge that reason. But the real cause of the most seri-
ous opposition seems to me to lie in the complaint
against meddling. On analysis it shows three sound
reasons against the Klan methods, even against the
modified methods the leaders are trying to enforce.
The first is, that public opinion and our individual
attitude toward obnoxious persons are often unjust
and unfair, imply a right to judgment which can not
be well maintained, and are tempered in their effect
by varying opinions in the community as a whole.
These evils, overlooked and ignored in ordinary social
relations, become magnified and self-condemning when
they appear on a large and organized scale.

In the second place there is a vast difference be-
tween pressure applied by the community as a whole
and a similar pressure applied, even in the same ways,
by a part of the community which has arrogated full
power to itself.

In the third place there is no safeguard that the
power of the Klan will not be perverted at any mo-
ment to all kinds of personal desires—spite, jealousy,
revenge, ambition or plain meanness.

The objections to the Klan on the ground of secrecy
and espionage are loud but very often do not ring
true. Most of the objections I have heard have come
from men who themselves belong to organizations
more or less secret and more or less accustomed to
use espionage. They are anxious for laws which will

218


THE SPECTER’S HEAVY HAND


stop the Klan from using those weapons, but balk
when any attempt is made to provide laws which will
stop all organizations from using them. ‘This prob-
ably accounts for the futility of all anti-Klan laws
so far passed. There are, of course, a few men who
are clear-sighted and public-spirited enough to see
these things as evils in themselves. Many of them
are fighting the Klan, but they do not single it out
for attack to the exclusion of other bodies.

At any rate, the opposition is there. In some places
it has divided quiet communities into hostile factions.
In others it is at present hidden, held down by fear
of the Klan, but ready to spring into action if ever
that fear dies. The Klan, I believe, will be stunned
to find how great a baying will arise at its first sign
of weakness. The storm which followed the collapse
of the Know-nothings made their name a hissing for
two generations, and the Klan will suffer no less.
This suppressed hatred also makes it certain that if
the Klan does begin to break up, its fall will be even
faster than its growth.


CHAPTER X
THE GIANT BEGINS TO RULE US


HE really vital strength, the true hope or men-
ace of the Ku Klux Klan lies in politics. It is
there that it can produce the greatest effect, cause the
most stunning impact on our lives, exert the deepest
influence on the nation. Its social, economic and spir-
itual activities, its terrorism and boycotting and pos-
sible violence, are important enough in all conscience
and will make or break thousands of lives, but com-
pared to what it may do in politics they are trifles.
For through politics the Klan may rule America!
It has already started; it expects to make its rule
secure and as complete as it wishes in a single year!
This hope is no wild dream. In sober truth there
is a very fair chance that the Klan may succeed. It
will surely go far toward it, though just how far no
one can even guess till the smoke has blown away
after the November elections. But its success will
be startling unless there comes one of those miracles
which are always possible in politics but which almost
never happen. In fact, the chance for a sweeping
220


THE GIANT BEGINS TO RULE US


Klan victory—no matter which party wins—is about
as good as the chance for Coolidge to be elected. This
does not imply that he is the Klan candidate—it has
not yet picked its man—but illustrates how well jus-
tified is its hope that it will win in the play of skill
and run of luck in our great national game.

The Klan’s political power is already large for, as
was pointed out in the first chapter, it has elected
men of its choice to controlling places in six states,
has dominated the elections in half a hundred Con-
gressional districts and has won complete victories in
many hundreds of towns, counties and small cities, to
say nothing of throwing the whole political world into
aspasm. It has already shown power, in short, about
three times that of the non-Partisan League and
double that of the Populists in their best days.

But this is only the beginning. At the coming elec-
tions the Klan expects—not merely hopes but con-
fidently expects—to win more than twenty states,
most of the local elections inside those states and hun-
dreds outside them.

This is far from impossible. The Klan’s present
political power was won with far fewer and far less
well-disciplined members than answer its roll-calls to-
day. Two years ago in the Congressional elections it
had fewer than 200,000 votes. Last fall when it
scored so heavily, it had about 3,000,000. To-day
it has some 4,500,000 and by election time it con-
fidently counts on having 12,000,000. This doubtless

221


THE CHALLENGE OF THE KLAN


includes many unhatched chickens, but even if the
Klan growth continues at the average rate of the last
three months—and the rate has increased steadily dur-
ing that time—it will have close to nine million! And
nine million votes is more than a third of the largest
vote ever cast. Cleverly used these votes can get al-
most anything. When we recall the influence that has
been exerted by the two million German hyphenates or
the three million Jews, the possible power of nine
million Klansmen, or even of eight or seven or six or
five, begins to be clear.

The Klan intends to win. Its leaders believe that
a victory will give it freedom from the persecutions
and prosecutions which have plagued it so far, give
it a chance to consolidate its power and trim off its
excrescences and make certain internal reforms they
dare not yet attempt, and let it prove to the world
the worth of its theories and its programme. More,
they believe that they will have difficulty in even hold-
ing the organization together without a victory, and
that it is absolutely necessary if they are to keep on
growing. ‘They realize, too, how fast their mush-
room growth will crumble under any adversity. For
all these reasons they are gambling heavily on this
one card.

So they have focused all their efforts on politics.
They do not admit it, but I am convinced that this is
the true explanation of several of the present abuses
in the Klan: the acceptance of riff-raff members, the

222


THE GIANT BEGINS TO RULE US


carelessness about collecting dues and even initiation
fees, the tolerance of grafters and self-seeking leaders
in minor places. All will help until and at the elec-
tion, therefore all will be tolerated until that time.
Then the Klan can clean house!

This explains, too, the tremendous pressure behind
the kluxing, which is absorbing most of the funds of
the Order, the devotion of the great secret informa-
tion service to the collection of political ‘dope,” the
transfer to Washington of most of the high executives
(headquarters remains at Atlanta but little is done
there) and the busy establishment of a Klan-controlled
press and a dozen other lesser symptoms. If the Klan
fails to achieve its political ambitions it will not be
for want of using every ounce of strength it possesses.

So far as local elections and local governments are
concerned the control which the Klan seeks is prac-
tically absolute; there are limitations on its national
ambitions which will be explained in the following
chapter. And in these local campaigns the chief dif-
ficulty that the Klan has and will have, is not so much
with its opponents as inside its own ranks.

The most numerous of the various breeds of para-
sites with which the Klan is afflicted is composed of
cheap politicians who seek a chance to get jobs or
graft which they have been unable to reach in ordinary
party politics, or to hold on to places or profits they
are in danger of losing. Blatherskites, crooks, graft-
ers, chronic kickers, chronic candidates, criminals de-

223


THE CHALLENGE OF THE KLAN


pendent on political pull, “has-beens”’ and all the
flotsam of political life have grabbed at the Fiery
Cross as a hope of salvation. They are so obstreper-
ous, one political observer told me, that in his state
the whole Klan movement was “an attempt of the
political scrap-heap to seize the government.” Along
with these, too, there has gone into the Klan a swarm
of fanatics and world-savers who are trying to get it
to support every known crack-brained and half-baked
reform. Witness the “monkey-bill” to prevent the
teaching of evolution which was passed in Oklahoma
with Klan support, and the attempt to suppress all
private schools in Oregon.

These noisy and pestiferous members, however, do
not represent either the great body of the Klan or its
national leadership. They are apparently tolerated,
as such are always tolerated in new political move-
ments, for the sake of their votes. It was their
presence in the Progressive Party, I believe, which
inspired Roosevelt to coin the term “lunatic fringe.”
Certainly the Progressives gathered up a mighty fol-
lowing of them, and of the political hoboes as well.

In fact, there are many other ways in which the
Ku Klux movement resembles the Progressive Party.
It contains about the same basic elements of partly
dissatisfied and partly idealistic middle-class folk, as
well as the same fringes. Its gatherings have the
same appearance and feeling. It is strong in about
the same parts of the country, and it sings Onward,

224


THE GIANT BEGINS TO RULE US


Christian Soldiers just as indefatigably as the Bull
Moosers did. It has much of the same naive, inex-
perienced, youthful vigor.

All these conditions in the membership limit not
only the programme of the Klan in politics, but also
the demands it may make on candidates, bosses or
men in office. Its political record so far shows that
it has very largely respected these limits. It can
seldom nominate its own man, for example, as that
would aid one party or the other. It can not pick the
men whom it is going to support on any party basis,
but only on the basis of their ability and willingness
to support the Klan programme, and their general
fitness.

The church-going proclivity of most Klansmen
makes personal character unusually important for
candidates in Klan territory, and is likely to enforce
more than usually decent administration from officials.
It also gives the Klan a political morality rather above
the average, which is no very great praise. There are
cases, of course, as in other similar movements, when
very decent citizens overlook all other qualifications in
a candidate except his support of their pet ideas.
This has caused some curious situations, such as those
in the Anti-Saloon League Campaigns where the
churches have united behind men who were complete
scalawags except for their willingness to vote for pro-
hibition.

The Klan will very naturally support Klansmen

225


THE CHALLENGE OF THE KLAN


where possible, but it has often refused to do this
and has often voted for non-Klansmen (in at least
one case for an anti-Klan man) when it thought them
better, even against Klan members. But I have
learned of no case where it gave support to a man
who was not a native, white Protestant. It takes
pains to see that there is at least one such in every
political race.

When the Klan does move in politics, that is, when
it takes a hand in the selection or election of candi-
dates, or in influencing officials, it brings to bear a
pressure such as almost no other organization, even
one of the great parties, can apply. All its organized
unity, all its ability to strike suddenly in the dark,
all its secret information and its terrorism, are even
more effective here than in ordinary life, for politi-
cians are by nature a very timid tribe. The Klan,
too, can use not only this stunning political battle ax;
it can add to that the whole social and economic power
described in the last chapter. Political bosses, it is
true, often use similar additional means of coercing
candidates and officials, but few are ever able to do
it with a tithe of the force, and none of them with
the demoralizing terrorism, that the Klan commands.

In politics, as in boycotting, the Klan claims no
actual control over its members. It does not officially
tell them how to vote, any more than it tells them to
withhold trade from a business man. It merely gives
them information, sometimes advice, and they are

226


THE GIANT BEGINS TO RULE US


“free to act upon it as they see fit.” It also “educates”
them as to the desirability of acting on this informa-
tion and advice.

I asked Dr. Evans how far the Klan controls the
political action of its members.

“None whatsoever, so far as actual control is con-
cerned,” he replied. “No obligation of a Klansman,
nothing in his oath or understanding requires of him
or contemplates that he shall accept the information
and educational facts presented to him through the
Klan, as final. The whole thought is to develop a mind
that it will express itself through an electorate fully
informed.

“The actual strength of the Klan,’ he went on, “de-
pends upon the extent to which Klansmen have been
educated to their duties as citizens and on how they
respond to information given by Klan officials. This
is always uncertain, but experience indicates that these
are generally accepted and will be as long as they
represent in the minds of the Klansmen themselves
true American ideals. In the present state of public
opinion this means that the Klan can profoundly in-
fluence results in twenty-one states.”

There will be more states in the list before election.

So far as I can learn Dr. Evans is correct in say-
ing that the Klan does not give orders, only informa-
tion. Certainly it has such information to give, and
takes great pains in putting it out. Since it is secret,
it would easily be possible to give false information

220.


THE CHALLENGE OF THE KLAN


of a kind that might be exceedingly dangerous, but
I can not find that it does so, at least as far as actual
candidates are concerned.

I have learned of several instances in which it has
circulated, just before an election, a report on candi-
dates much like the reports put out by Citizens’ Com-
mittees and similar bodies. I have seen one such and
have information on others. They are all startlingly
detailed, intimate and exhaustive, but rather amazingly
fair. The one I saw was put on in Oklahoma in the
heat of a bitter fight, but there was no trace of par-
tisanship visible. It gave both the personal and polit-
ical records of each man, his affiliations in business,
society, religion and politics, and his relations with
the Klan. I was particularly impressed with the fact
that when a man had joined the Klan under circum-
stances which indicated that his purpose had been to
get political support, that fact was indicated. In sev-
eral such cases the advice was that he should be beaten.
So far as I could judge by that report, it was a valu-
able and trustworthy guide for any voter.

Incidentally, even if the advice given is bad, the
training given voters by this system is a very consid-
erable service to the community. If the Klan should
succeed in teaching its members to judge candidates
on any other basis than that of “regularity” and back-
scratching and pie-gathering ability, it would do much
for the future of democracy.

The actual political attitude of Klansmen as I have

228


THE GIANT BEGINS TO RULE US


seen them appears to be much more docile and de-
pendent, however, than Dr. Evans declares. Even on
the night before election they are likely not to know
what they are going to do at the polls; they are
“waiting for the word.” Possibly this is merely the
information and advice Dr. Evans described, but the
attitude was that of soldiers waiting for and ready
to carry out orders. So it seems that in political prac-
tise, as it was in the application of a boycott, it makes
little difference in results whether “the word” is a
command or a bit of information or advice.

There is, on the other hand, some doubt how far
the Klansmen will follow the lead given. In one case
in Oklahoma a Klansman and a man whom the Klan
opposed, running on the same ticket, finished only a
few votes apart. There have been other cases where
the apparent voting strength of the Klan was nil. But
these are exceptions, possibly due to lack of “educa-
tion” or some more subtle factor; they do prove that
the Klansmen seem to feel under no obligatien to
follow their leaders in politics beyond a point which
they—the individual Klansmen—determine for them-
selves. This is important in showing the limits of
the leaders’ power.

However, in nearly ninety per cent. of the cases I
have been able to check, the Klan apparently has cast
a practically solid vote. This is increasingly true, and
the Grand Dragon of Oklahoma told me that by next
fall the entire membership would be educated, and

229


~


THE CHALLENGE OF THE KLAN


“ready and able to make proper use of information
given them.” Dr. Evans adds that the Klan usually
casts more than its own vote.

“We have found by experience,” he remarked, “that
when a Klan issue is raised or when the Klan becomes
active in a political campaign, the actual pro-Klan
vote will be much larger than the numerical strength
of the Klan itself and sometimes many times as large.”
It should be added that the Klan officials declare that
the Klan itself has never been allowed to become an
issue, or a Klansman to run as such, unless an attack
had been made on it. I have not found a case in
which this was not true.

When it comes to the actual power of the Klan in
political action the fact that it is not a party, does not
want full control of offices, and therefore does not
need an actual plurality of votes, gives it great ad-
vantages in the fight for the results it does demand.
It leaves room for deals; for politicians to submit and
yet save their faces. And a minority, willing to swing
to either party a solid block of votes, is ina far better
position to get results than even a party majority
would be. The Anti-Saloon League has given the
most convincing proof of this. Such a body can
threaten both sides, quite likely secure pledges or dic-
tate nominations on both sides and be victorious
whichever party wins. If either party or candidate
balks, it can usually swing enough votes to insure
defeat.

230


THE GIANT BEGINS TO RULE US


The political law on which this minority power—
the power of any minority—is based, is the very
A B C of American politics, yet so often forgotten
that I may be pardoned for recalling it. It is that
control of one-half of the movable or floating vote
in any electorate gives political control. For example,
in most elections the two great parties are fairly evenly
balanced, party loyalty, to each party, holding some-
thing like forty per cent. of its voters. The election
then will be decided by the remaining twenty per cent.
or the largest fraction thereof, for any leader who
controls one vote more than half of them can throw
victory whichever way he pleases. The man who wins
must take his orders from that leader after election,
as he has taken them before election.

The actual figures vary, of course, but the fact al-
ways is that victory does not depend on winning a
majority of the voters, but only a majority of those
who are not party-bound. Hence it is that any small
and compact minority is usually able to get what it
wants. The Klan’s strength is that it has gathered
together such a minority.

But the Klan’s weakness is in the one exception to
this rule; rather in its corollary. This is that the
minority power fails as soon as there is formed another
group, equally large, and determined to vote against
the first group. If the two balance, both can be ig-
nored. In practise this seldom happens. Pro-Ger-
mans, for example, were long able to act as a unit,

27


THE CHALLENGE OF THE KLAN


while the rest of us were divided over tariff, conserva-
tion, or some other issue. In most local politics the
“liquor vote”’—and to-day the “bootleg vote’—can
easily win in any campaign which divides the elec-
torate on any other issue. Our electorate has become
full of minority groups for which there are no offsets;
racial, religious, business, farming, labor or whatnot,
each without any corresponding group of “antis.”
Politicians and office holders cater to them all; they
must, for if one is lost there is nothing to take its
place.

In the case of the Klan, however, this law of oppo-
sition groups works with full force. The Klan auto-
matically raises up its opponents; more accurately it
is an opposition group itself, its chief object being to
strike at certain of the groups already active, so that
its balancing blocs are ready made. Many politicians
therefore believe that they can win by defying the
Klan and rallying all these groups behind them. As
this is written there are indications that the northern
Democratic leaders—Murphy, Sullivan, Taggart and
their allies—are preparing to do this. Their plan is
certainly logical, for in the cities where their main
strength lies the bulk of the vote is alien, Jewish and
Catholic, and naturally anti-Klan. It is worth a smile
in passing to note that most of the Klan leaders and
probably a slight majority of their followers are
Democrats.

This rallying of alien elements has been the means

232


THE GIANT BEGINS TO RULE US


of defeating nativistic movements several times since
Jefferson first did it, shortly after 1800. The Demo-
cratic party did it in the forties, and again in the
fifties against the Know-nothings. With our present
large alien element—the last census showed nearly
four and half million alien-born citizens of voting
age to say nothing of the children of aliens and the
native Jews and Catholics who will naturally take
sides against the Klan—the Democrats are certain of
success in many localities.

The evils of an election based on these group divi-
sions are too obvious to need reciting. The possible
result to government by an alien, anti-American alli-
ance, is also clear.

When I pointed out to Dr. Evans that the Klan by
uniting these groups was likely to insure not only its
own defeat, but the defeat of the very principles of
Americanism for which it is standing, he minimized
the danger. He declared that the very characteristics
which have prevented the different national and re-
ligious groups from becoming assimilated, would also
prevent their joining for any effective action. This
may be true in some ways, but there is plenty of evi-
dence that they are willing to join, at least to beat the
Klan.

It is in meeting this opposition that the Klan’s
secrecy comes to its highest value, for the alien groups
can not unite against Klan candidates unless they know
whom the Klan is supporting, and they are barred

233


THE CHALLENGE OF THE KLAN


from uniting on openly alien candidates of their own,
because of the certainty that this would drive all
Americans into the Klan ranks, insuring its victory.
So they must work on the defensive, also in secrecy.
But they have not and can not possibly have the solid
and effective organization of the Klan.

Their task then, is a difficult one. They must
select their candidates from among men who may
already be Klansmen, work with groups which may
include Klan members, convince the Americans among
their followers that the men so selected are good Amer-
icans and convince the alien groups that the same men
are pro-alien. And they must determine from among
all the various candidates offered, which ones are
favorable to the Klan and concentrate opposition upon
them.

The last problem is the most baffling, for the Klan
will not label its candidates. It has learned that lesson
already in elections where open Klan support has
solidified opposition. To-day its candidates are, when
it seems desirable, as secret as is its organization. In
one recent case the Klan press openly attacked the
very man for whom “the word” finally went out. This
system is peculiarly effective in primaries where several
candidates are running and will often nominate pro-
Klan men on both tickets. It will not be needed in
many places, of course. Probably in most sections
where the Klan operates its strength will be so great


234


THE GIANT BEGINS TO RULE US


that it can fight best in the open. But when the fight
is made behind a hood, it will be baffling.

Nor is there much chance that the opposition can
checkmate the Klan by finding out in advance what
it intends to do. This could be done easily if the
Klan plans had to be confided in advance to the whole
membership, for a leak would be almost certain. But
the Klan need take no such risk. With the members
waiting for “the word,” that word can be held back
till the last moment, often till the last hour before the
polls close, when it will be far too late for any oppo-
sition to act. The Klan’s system of passing informa-
tion has been perfected to a point where, I am assured,
the entire membership can be reached in less than two
hours after the machinery is started. There are over
five thousand offices kept open day and night to make
this possible.

Altogether it seems, in this very complex situation,
that the great solidarity and the amazing perfection
of the organization of the Klan give it the advantage.
If it does get the nine million members it may reason-
ably expect, it would also have an advantage in num-
bers. With these advantages it is quite justified in
believing that at least so far as local elections are
concerned it can count on a very satisfying measure
of success—very satisfying indeed.

The one thing that is clear, is that in the coming
campaign there will be a mess of underground politics,


235


THE CHALLENGE OF THE KLAN


hidden issues, hypocritical candidates, and general
wool-pulling and lying such as the country has never
seen. The blame for this at first thought rests on the
Klan, which has caused the crisis. But in all fairness
must we not go back to the politicians and the groups
which for years have been dickering, openly and se-
cretly, with other minority groups, by the same filthy
methods? The political crimes committed at the de-
mand of these groups have been so many and have
become so notorious that they have automatically
aroused opposition. Not all members of the race and
religious groups belong to these voting blocks by any
means, but the blocks are there and have been used in
many vicious ways by unworthy leaders. The Klan
in politics is the more or less accidental vehicle of the
very natural attempt to thwart them.


CHAPTER XI
THE PLAN TO CAPTURE WASHINGTON


| Wier coming national election, unless very carefully
laid plans of the Ku Klux leaders miscarry, will
make the Klan masters at Washington, with all that
implies both in our government and our national life.
This is the most startling statement in all the story
of the hooded order.

It expects to rule America, not only by controlling
thousands of local governments, but from the very
top down, by controlling the national government. It
expects, as a result of the coming election, to have in
Congress a clear majority of members in both houses
who are in sympathy with its aims or at least willing
to vote for its programme, and in the White House
a president who will, at the very least, put no obstacle
in the way of the Klan demands, and will appoint to
office no man the Klan disapproves. Indeed, each man
appointed may’ actually be a member and a willing
servant of the organization!

Impossible, you say? Too sudden, too incredible!
Here is another statement even more impossible and


237


THE CHALLENGE OF THE KLAN


incredible: The Klan is very likely to succeed in doing
just this very thing. On the basis of cold-blooded
political calculation the Klan is at least as likely to
win as is any one of the different presidential candi-
dates now before the public; as likely to win as is
either of the two big political parties! For the plans
of the Ku Klux leaders go behind the detail of party
victory, and can succeed whichever of the two wins.
There are still many things that can defeat it, of
course; it hasn’t victory wrapped and tied up. But
this thing is sure: in all the welter of issues and
scandals and plottings which will come between now
and November, the Klan is almost certain to have the
greatest influence in deciding the result.

For in the election the Klan, as a mugwump minor-
ity solidly united and under military discipline, will
exert a tremendous power. This will be subject, to be
sure, to the offset of whatever union the anti-Klan
groups may be able to effect. But remember that the
Klan now has 4,500,000 members, that it is likely to
have 9,000,000 and expects to have 12,000,000 by
November. Then consider that in the presidential
elections during the present century (doubling the
figures before 1920 to allow for the doubled voting
strength under woman suffrage) the average plurality
of the winning party has been only a little over 3,500,-
ooo so that an average change of 1,800,000 votes
would have changed every election. In many cases
a change of 750,000 would have been enough!

238


THE PLAN TO CAPTURE WASHINGTON


Consider also that in most Congressional districts
a majority of 10,000 is rare and that in normal years
a plurality of 50,000 for a state ticket is high; that a
shift of 5,000 in a Congressional district and of 25,000
in a state would far more often than not, have changed
the result. Finally remember that this is a year when
all politicians expect a close vote. While, of course,
there would be cases in which the Klan vote would
change pluralities without affecting the result, it is
plain that if even a ‘fraction of Klan members take
its advice, and if it can escape solid and effective
oppositions it may easily win overwhelmingly.

It is true that the ability of the Klan to wield almost
its full strength in local elections must be heavily
discounted, in considering state and national votes. In
local elections party loyalty is comparatively weak,
while in national campaigns it will have a powerful
hold on ail but the most ardent Klansmen. How far
the Klan “education” will be able to swing the mem-
bers in the partisan heat of a national campaign is a
very doubtful question, and there has been no demon-
stration of strength along this line on which an answer
might be based. Politicians and political observers
disagree on the answer; most of them declare that
the Klan can be safely defied, but few of them act
that way. But.after all discounts it seems safe to say
that if the Klan can control a quarter of its nominal
strength it can win in most places.

All this, however, does not mean that the Klan


239


THE CHALLENGE OF THE KLAN


intends or wants to rule the country in the full sense, in
the sense in which a political party takes control. On
the contrary; its aims are very strictly limited, at
least for the time being. Dr. Evans states this posi-
tion in two sentences which are apparently contra-
dictory.

“The Klan is not in politics,” he and other leaders
have told me over and over and over. Yet he goes on:
“Tt is clear that the Klan programme must result in
political action and be carried out in no other way.”

This is not actually a contradiction. His meaning
is that the Klan works in politics not as a party but
as a mugwump, non-partisan, opportunist band of
guerrilla reformers. It does not want—at least not
yet—the full responsibilities of government, it does
not want to face the need of apportioning patronage,
it does not wish to have to find solutions for all the
controversial political issues or to try to unite its fol-
lowing on them, and finally, it does not have to hold
its organization together, as a political party does, by
the use of place, pork and pie.

What it does want is to get certain things done—
a most unusual political purpose in these days; to
free itself from government opposition, to put into
effect its programme of native, white, Protestant
Americanism, to make some general reforms and to be
able to claim a victory. It is playing for results only,
while the old political parties are playing chiefly for
offices. In this sense the Klan is not in politics.

240


THE PLAN TO CAPTURE WASHINGTON


But the Klan must be able to control officials and
legislatures if it is to put into effect any of the policies
on either its national programme or its local platforms,
or even if it is to make more than a temporary success
out of the minor victories it has so far achieved. In
this sense it is most completely in politics.

This self-denying attitude toward spoils and abso-
lute power is not due solely to virtue. It is forced
by the very nature of the Klan itself, by the fact that
the membership is almost equally divided between the
Democrats and Republicans. The moment that any
attempt is made to take up issues which have proved
partisan or which are even outside the platform on
which the Klan has been built and is united, the mo-
ment that its power is turned to picking plums, above
all at the first suspicion that its leaders are favoring
either party—at that moment its membership would
be split into a dozen bickering factions and its power
would vanish. The Klan may be able to win on its
present limited programme, but it can not, on the basis
of any development now in sight, attempt anything
more.

This is true whether the leaders recognize it or
not. If Dr. Evans and the rest ever do yield to the
constant pressure and “broaden out” the Klan plans,
there will be another story to tell—an obituary notice.
Its dying struggles might, it is true, produce results
in strange fields, but, until they begin the Klan can

241


THE CHALLENGE OF THE KLAN


have almost no political effect outside its chosen
ground.

There is proof of this in the fall of the Know-
nothings, to revert once more to that ill-fated fore-
runner of the Klan. The sudden collapse of that
movement was directly due to the mistake of attempt-
ing too much. As long as the organization remained
secret and stuck to its own issues, it grew rapidly and
wielded a mighty power. But the early successes went
to the heads of the leaders and they came into the
open as the American Party. For a year or two their
power did increase, but by that time the seeds of
trouble had germinated and ripened. Internal jeal-
ousies had festered, the attempt to graft on new issues
had split off large sections, the desire for offices, the
disputes over patronage and over compromises made
to gather more votes, all took the life out of the
original purposes. In the end an effort to straddle
on the slavery issue, in an attempt to save votes, gave
the death blow.

The movement would have been destroyed just as
surely, however, whichever way it turned. The mis-
take was in getting into a position where it was forced
to take a stand on any issue other than the one which
had built it up, in forgetting that a movement
based on one strong idea will be cut in two as
soon as another strong idea is foisted into its coun-
sels.

The more important of the Klan leaders recognize

242


THE PLAN TO CAPTURE WASHINGTON


this limitation, and have no desire to attempt to break
away from it.

“Tf the Klan should ever make the fatal mistake of
identifying itself with either party,’ Dr. Evans told
me, “or with any cause except the fundamental issue
of Americanism, it would invite division in its own
ranks, destroy its own power and insure its own dis-
memberment.”’

Many Klansmen, however, even many of the lesser
leaders, either do not see this or else are willing to
ignore it for selfish reasons. Both the fanatics and
the grafters are continually urging a diversion of
strength to side-issues, and the struggle with these
members demands much of the strength of the national
officers, and gives the best reason possible for the
autocratic and centralized control of the Klan under
which these fanatics and grafters can be kept in check.

The actual voting strength of the Klan, great as
it is, is only a part of the political power through
which the Order is likely to accomplish its purposes.
As great, if not greater, is the effect it can have pri-
vately, on candidates, on officials after they are elected
and above all on bosses. These politicians, of what-
ever grade, can not tell how many votes the Klan might
cast, they can not by any means be sure of an offsetting
support if they*antagonize the Klan, and they are
open to the non-political pressure which the Klan can
apply so effectively. Their easiest course by far will
always be to fall in with the Klan demands. This


243


THE CHALLENGE OF THE KLAN


form of terrorism in politics, or threat of reprisai
combined with promise of reward, is a common feature
of our political maneuvering, but the Klan can use
it with unprecedented force.

It is already doing so; I have not yet met a single
minor politician who is willing to speak openly against
the Klan, and except for a few of the Democratic
leaders and Col. Roosevelt, Jr., there is no recent
record of any of them taking such a stand, though it
was fashionable enough two years ago. The success
of the Klan in so many local elections and the greater
threat behind it to-day have upset the calculations of
politicians everywhere and have thrown local posses
in many places into a truly demoralized state of mind.

“You talk about the Klan terrifying folks,’ an
Imperial officer said. ‘We don’t aim to, except one
bunch—the politicians. We do that thing. They’re
scared senseless right now, big ones as well as little
ones. They don’t know which end they’re standing
on, and they duck every time any one says ‘Klan.’
They’re scared, terrified, paralyzed, buffaloed, licked!”

This is quite true. Thousands of them are in a
state such that if the Klan offers them salvation on
any terms they will seize it gratefully. There is, for
instance, the case of a man who for a generation has
ruled half a state by the good old system of controlling
nominations in both parties, and then allowing the
voters to worry about which of his pets they shall
elect. Last fall he woke up the day after election to


244


THE PLAN TO CAPTURE WASHINGTON


find that both of his hand-picked beauties had been
snowed under by a man whose name he had not even
heard. His bewilderment and distress were piteous.
He is still in a daze, as if the sun had risen in the
west, the United States Government had gone bank-
rupt and fire had turned cold, all at once. He will
listen very, very carefully to such advice and hints as
the Klan will presently give him about delegates to
the national convention and next fall’s candidates. He
is one of a great host.

The Klan system is just as effective where there
are rival bosses or unbossed rival candidates, either
in the election or the primaries. Each knows that to
win he must have a few dozen or hundred or thousand
votes in addition to his regular strength, and he must
hold all that strength. To each of these the Klan
goes, saying in effect:

“We control a large number of votes. We won’t
tell you how many; you can do your own guessing.
But some of them you have counted in your own sup-
port and some are against you. We can throw the
whole block either way. We also know many things
about your private affairs, and have influence with
many of your business customers and associates.
Here, then, is a pledge that will satisfy us. Sign on
the dotted line.”

How many will dare refuse? And of those who do
dare, how many will the Klan be able to beat? These
are the questions that must be answered before


245


THE CHALLENGE OF THE KLAN


one can estimate the Klan’s chances of victory this
fall.

Only a partial answer is possible now. In local
elections where the party loyalty is weak and the
national issues do not enter, the system should work
almost perfectly, for the reasons already given, until
or unless the opposition not only unites but finds out
what to do. This system has resulted in the hundreds
of victories already mentioned, and will undoubtedly
win thousands more.

Nationally, it will work far less perfectly. In as far
as the Klan can work in the primaries and conventions
of both parties, and succeed in choosing both candi-
dates, it will succeed completely. This will happen in
a good many cases. It will certainly put not a few
Klan candidates into Congress. It may even win
the power to choose who shall run for president
on both tickets, or at least to say who shall not run.
The chances of doing this are best in the Democratic
convention, where a third of the delegates can prevent
nomination.

But if it wins only half success in the primaries,
that is, can nominate men who are satisfactory only
on one ticket and not on both tickets, either for Con-
gress or the presidency, further success will be more
doubtful. To win under these circumstances it would
have to induce a vast number of men and women to
break their old party ties, which would be one of the
greatest feats in political history. It probably could

246


THE PLAN TO CAPTURE WASHINGTON


win a close election; it could hardly do so if the issues
or the candidates got any great grip on the public.
Still—people are not “regular” so often as they used
to be and a good many of the Kluxers are one-time
Progressives, who have learned how to bolt.

These are the factors in a problem that is making
gray hair for national leaders in both parties. They
know that the alien groups have little party loyalty,
and will swing en masse behind a plank attacking the
Klan. They know that the Klansmen, especially in
the South, have always been so party-bound that even
an anti-Klan plank could hardly make them change,
but they can not be quite sure that the Klan influence
might not do it this time. They can not guess, either,
how many Klansmen might be led across the party
line by a pro-Klan plank that would drive off all the
aliens. The problem is to decide whether pro-Klan,
anti-Klan or silence will be most profitable. The
problem, it will be seen, is not the same for the two
parties, because the bulk of the alien vote is now
normally Democratic.

One more point should be noted. Although the
Klan question will be uppermost in the minds of local
politicians in over half the country, and will have a
vital and perhaps deciding effect on the whole situa-
tion, it will be*kept in the background as far as pos-
sible. Neither the Klan leaders, nor the politicians
who are either with them or against them or on the
fence, want it brought into the open. It will inevitably


247


THE CHALLENGE OF THE KLAN


break out in spots, but on the whole we face an
election in which one of the most important and de-
cisive factors will be almost invisible and inaudible.

And if the Klan wins? That will mean in the first
place the enactment of its national programme; re-
striction of immigration and naturalization, vigorous
encouragement and some reform of the public schools,
perhaps some economy and “good government” ges-
tures, and the barring from office of Jews, Catholics
and alien born. On other things the Klan will have
no hold on officials or legislatures, and must let the
winning party’s programme take its course.

The Klan leaders might, of course, develop delu-
sions of grandeur, run wild, meddle with many things
and even try to persecute some one. But they will
not do this in their present temper, and they are very
unlikely to change. Against excesses, stands in the
first place the saving sense of fairness which in crises
has held America back time and again. There is also
the well-known fact that responsibility usually makes
leaders more sober, rather than more reckless. And
there is the final fact, already explained, that if Klan
leaders do try to involve the Order in new issues, it
will go to pieces.

They will be pressed to “broaden out” by the fana-
tics and grafters inside the Klan, and by advisers
outside, who will lay before them many and plausible
schemes. Some such efforts are already making trouble
inside the Klan. The leaders will lose a number of

248


THE PLAN TO CAPTURE WASHINGTON


their followers with each refusal to support some
folly, though less than if they adopted it. They will
also begin to lose as soon as they have put through
their programme, since the Klan is a limited reform
movement, and as Horace Greeley said of the Know-
nothings—“It would seem as devoid of the elements
of persistence as an anti-cholera or anti-potato-rot
party.” So there is a very strong probability that the
Klan, which almost requires a victory to live after
election, will find that victory is just as sure a road
to destruction, if a little slower.

The result in local elections will be about the same
as heretofore. The Klan record so far shows that
these victories will mostly be with reform tickets;
most of the successes it has won have resulted in better
local governments. But such victories, as the United
States has dearly learned, are also short lived, however
useful. There will be vigorous clean-ups, some econ-
omies, some ousting of non-Klan people from power,
and then a restful pause. There are many signs that
this is already happening in places where the Klan
strength developed earliest.

So, either nationally or locally, the fall election
would seem to be the beginning of the end of the
Klan on its present basis, whether it wins or loses.
The leaders expect to make the organization perma-
nent, after its immediate issues have passed, through
its educational and good citizenship programme and
some vague plans for governmental reforms. This


249


THE CHALLENGE OF THE KLAN


might be done, but the programme, so far, is so nebu-
lous that it presents no basis for forming any con-
clusions. It would make of the Klan a very different
organization.

It appears, then, that the Klan is a great and grow-
ing power in politics, a power whose sudden rise is
one of the most amazing in history—almost incredible.
Its methods in this field are even more effective than
in other fields, but—largely because they are not un-
usual—are less open to criticism leveled exclusively
at the Klan. Their methods are unusual in that they
have been raised to an uncanny efficiency.

The Klan’s aims, in local campaigns, must usually
command approval, and are supported nationally by a
very large body of opinion which at the same time
condemns the Klan organization and methods, and its
standard of narrow and exclusive Americanism. It is
sharply restricted to its own limited field by nature of
its membership, is hardly likely to go outside it, and
faces sure and swift destruction when, or if, it does.
Its success will be great unless the elements it attacks
contrive an opposition both solid and clever, and its
success be measured almost exactly by the ability the
opposition shows. Its chance of success, finally, is
considerable, but the victory will have within itself
factors likely to lead to disorganization.

If I may go back for a brief review of the previous
chapters, it would seem that the evidence shows that
the Klan is to-day a great power for good or evil in

250


THE PLAN TO CAPTURE WASHINGTON


every phase of life, as well as in politics. It has made
a tremendous recent growth, following important
reforms, and can no longer be considered a gang of
hoodlums and criminals, or simply a mob. Instead it
is respectable, largely composed of very decent, well
meaning and well behaved people of the kind who are
the backbone of the nation. Its “lunatic fringe” and
parasitic elements are large and dangerous, but not
typical nor remarkable.

It has sprung up because of very real grievances
and evils, in response for a growing demand for re-
form which was seeking leadership. It offers this
leadership, brings the movement to a high intensity,
unity and fine morale. It presents solutions which—
whether right or wrong—appeal in many ways to
certain types of minds, and it has grown so amazingly,
largely because there is to-day, as far as these prob-
lems and this demand for reform go, no alternative
except to join the Klan or be content with conversa-
tion. It has done much good, both in improving the
conduct of its members, in influencing the conduct of
others and in cleaning up bad local conditions.

But when all this has been granted, the fact remains
that the Klan also involves and intensifies great evils.
Its use of violence has been so largely controlled that
it is now inconsiderable. Its nomenclature and regalia
are after all more ridiculous than dangerous. Its ac-
ceptance of so many worthless members may—per-
haps—be excused in a new and fast growing organiza-

251


THE CHALLENGE OF THE KLAN


tion. But the terroristic symbolism remains, and an
actual use of terrorism persists, even though it be
only through scientific application of that “social and
economic pressure” which is customary in any exercise
of public opinion. The meddling with private affairs
is abominable, in spite of some good that results. It
is a sure road to greater evils, and is indefensible in
principle, intolerable in any free society. This the
Klan is trying to eliminate, to be sure, but it is a
great and actual evil.

If it does cure these things, however, there remains
and will remain until the very nature of the Klan
itself changes, its fundamental principles of secrecy,
espionage, and native, white, Protestant supremacy.
These things are inconsistent with Americanism under
a Declaration which holds that all men are created free
and equal; they are dangerous, destructive, creative
of disunity and hatred and so long as they exist will
make impossible a free and united nation. They
can not be too strongly condemned.

Yet—I have been unable to frame any indictment
of the Klan for these sins which does not cover other
secret organizations, based also on narrow race and
religious division. No reason has appeared why it
must be suppressed so long as they are tolerated. The
Klan can claim that these other bodies threaten Amer-
icanism directly as well as indirectly, while its own
menace is only indirect and its direct action is de-
fensive of the national spirit. It can claim also that

252


THE PLAN TO CAPTURE WASHINGTON


these other secret organizations were first in the field,
chose the weapons and gave the provocation, and that
it has no choice but to fight them on their own ground.
If that is true the blame for the situation rests on
them, not on the Klan. It may not be true, but it
has not been disproved.

From these facts it may be argued that the Klan,
in spite of all its evils and dangers, may be good for
the country, like a noxious medicine, may clear the
atmosphere, like a thunder-storm. Certainly there is
need of a better national digestion and of a clearer
fresher air. It is, I suppose, a matter of personal
choice whether one prefers to endure the illness a
little longer or until it grows worse, or to take a violent
and disruptive dose, which may prove poisonous.

I should like in conclusion to make a few general
observations about the Klan which do not rest on
definite proof and which may be no more than personal
opinion, though I believe them of greater importance
than that.

The first is, that the Klan is no hideous menace.
It can do much harm, beyond doubt, and will do some.
The prejudices it has released, the turmoil it has
aroused, its wrong principles and wrong methods are
all dangerous and might be serious indeed. Perhaps
I am a little weary of many menaces, but in spite of
these things I can not see that it is likely to do any
very great or irreparable harm.

For one thing, we can depend largely on the general


253


THE CHALLENGE OF THE KLAN


good sense and fairness of the members. They are
not a mob; not naturally cruel or unjust. The flare
of prejudice will die quickly, unless fed from the
outside. One correspondent declares that if the Klan
is not suppressed it will be burning convents in New
York, as was done by a mob in the ’thirties. If this
is possible, then the decidedly alien government of
New York needs overhauling, even as the Klan says.
But I can not believe it possible, even with all allow-
ances made for what the mob spirit may do with ordi-
narily decent folk. And the Klan leaders whom I
have seen would be the first to stop such an attempted
outrage, should the city government fail in its duty.

In the second place the Klan is getting better. Some
of its worst features are almost gone, others are going.
The leaders are of a more balanced type than at first,
are being sobered by power, and the better class mem-
bership that has recently joined, is taking control.

As to “invisible government” that seems any un-
usual kind of sheer nonsense. The Klan is a re- |
form movement, working largely through politics,
using pretty much the usual political methods. Any
group control of government is a menace, but we have
survived a good many of them, some of which
were invisible, and the Klan is not the worst of
the lot. Our system provides the means by which any
group can be ousted if it gets too strong or over-
bearing; the Klan itself is proof of this, since it is a
reaction against other groups which have had much


254


THE PLAN TO CAPTURE WASHINGTON


power and used it unwisely. Its political programme
may be wrong, but it is at worst, negative. If it
does stop immigration, for example, and we need more
aliens, the lack can very easily be righted.

Besides all this, the Klan can hardly live long in
anything much like its present form. It is a protest
movement, a reform drive, and as such is almost cer-
tain to be killed by either success or failure. It has,
indeed, within itself the elements of sure decay,
grounds for dissension, for jealousies, for division.
Moreover it is too high pitched; no body of men can
long hold the camp-meeting fervor which the Klan
now boasts without complete reaction. It may be
changed in ways which will give it longer life,
but that is a possibility outside the scope of this re-
port.

It seems clear, also, that the Klan is doing much
good along with the harm. Its local reforms are likely
to be as temporary as the fervor and prejudices it
has aroused, but they can at least be set off against
those evils. And its services in stirring up thought
and focussing attention on the evils which now
threaten Americanism are very great. This might
lead to solutions, even if the Klan does not find them
or bring them itself.

For all these reasons it again seems clear that the
Klan, in spite of its obvious evils and dangers, is far
less likely to destroy the nation or to do it serious
injury, than are several other of our present menaces,


255


THE CHALLENGE OF THE KLAN


It could not begin to do the damage, for example,
that is possible from a real coalition of alien elements
which would be almost as likely as in the Klan to win
control of the government; it is far less dangerous
than is the state of mind which permits some of the
country’s most trusted officers to use their places as
stepping stones to jobs where their political friend-
ships can be cashed in at a high figure; less dangerous
than the far more common attitude that in politics the
standard of conduct is neither justice, fairness nor
public service but what can be “got away with’’; less
dangerous even than our usual custom of judging
public men and giving them our support with regard
not at ail to their ability or value to the country as a
whole, but solely for their willingness to scratch our
own personal backs and their success in doing it. Since
we have been able to survive all these other menaces,
we can probably recover from the Klan!

The most serious menace in the Klan movement is
quite different from any of those usually shrieked
about. It is that the Klan may prevent reforms
which are bitterly needed. There is an urgent
demand for some drastic action to stop the flood of
unassimilable immigration, to Americanize or restrict
the powers of the alien groups which are deliberately
hostile to Americanism, to meet and defeat the influ-
ences which are trying to pervert and degrade Amer-
ican thought and purpose. The danger is that the
Klan, by using the wrong methods in attacking these

256


THE PLAN TO CAPTURE WASHINGTON


problems and failing to solve them, may discredit all
other efforts, and open the way for a period of un-
American domination that will wreck forever our
national purposes and opportunities.

I have been asked by several people whether there
is behind the Klan some mighty Machiavellian brain,
controlling the movement and directing it to hidden
and possibly Satanic ends. I have seen no sign of such
a force. The leaders with whom I have talked speak
as those having authority in themselves, and there
is certainly no Machiavellian brain among them. On
the other hand, they are apparently overwhelmed with
their own success, vastly sobered by it, troubled as to
what to do with it, fearful of leadership, but driven
on by the forces they have raised.

Finally it would seem practically impossible to de-
stroy the Klan forthwith. The momentum is too
great, the demand for some action of the kind it
promises, too intense. The leaders are leading only
in the sense that they are out in front; they, as well
as the rank and file, are in the grip of their own ideas
and can not stop. The Klan, as I have said, has grown
from a few thousand to a few millions in the face of
ridicule, prosecution, persecution and weakness. Now
it is rich, powerful and feared—I can conceive of
nothing likely tq be effective against it until it begins
to break down from the inside. The only possibility
is to find other and better means of meeting the prob-:
lems and evils which gave it strength, and this method


257


THE CHALLENGE OF THE KLAN


the most bitter of its enemies are the least inclined to
follow.

The movement can, however, be guided, its dangers
lessened, its really valuable possibilities put to better
use. The leaders themselves seem almost pitifully
anxious for guidance, they are seeking it everywhere
and employing the best minds they can get in the
hope of learning what to do—what they can do—with
their power. They are suspicious, also, having had
much experience with all kinds of bad advice. But
counsel which they believe to be disinterested, patri-
otic and fair, they will welcome.

It is to this, it seems to me, that those who fear
the Klan movement should now turn their energies,
though there is undoubted danger for them in such
an effort, for the opprobrium which followed the
Know-nothings may very easily attach to any one who
gives aid or comfort to the Klan. But there is nothing
else in sight that promises to have any value whatever
in dealing with the movement.


THE END


APPENDIX


Tue CoNSTITUTION OF THE Ku Krux Kian


(The first four sections of the Constitution will be found in
Chapter III)


EMPEROR OF THE INVISIBLE EMPIRE, HIS DUTIES
AND PRIVILEGES.


ARTICLE V.


Section 1. The Emperor of the Invisible Empire shall have
entire charge of Kloranic, Ritualistic and Philosophic work of
this Order, and he shall be an ex-officio member of all Imperial,
Grand, Great and Klan bodies. His term of office shall be for
life.

‘Section 2. In the event of a vacancy in his office, his successor
shall be called and installed by the Grand Dragons of the various
Realms, in the same manner as set forth in Article IX of this
constitution.

Section 3. He shall create and cause to be promulgated all
countersigns, passwords, ritualistic or kloranic work and secret
signs, symbols and work of this Order. He shall design, or
cause to be designed, all paraphernalia, regalia, uniforms, cos-
tumes, emblems, insignia, flags, banners, and jewelry for indi-
vidual wear, honorary and official jewels, books, pamphlets and
literature of this Order. All costumes, designs, symbols or other
insignia officially adopted by this Order, whether created by him
or not, shall be recognized as official, and shall be received by
the members of this Order.


259


THE CHALLENGE OF THE KLAN


Section 4. He shall have the sole power to create all titles and
honors within this Order on whomsoever he may elect, and
shall issue and sign all certificates or diplomas relative thereto,
and cause to be affixed thereon the great Imperial Seal of the
Order.


THE IMPERIAL KLONVOKATION.
ArTICcLE VI.


Section 1. The Imperial Klonvokation shall be the sole legis-
lative body of this Order; therefore, it shall have original juris-
diction in all matters pertaining to creating and amending this
Constitution and Laws, the regulation, government and general
welfare of this Order. It shall have power to enact laws for
the regulation of its ewn procedure, for the government of the
Invisible Empire, Realms, Provinces and Klans, and for the
general control and management of the business of this Order,
and to provide penalties for the violation thereof. It shall have
power to prescribe the rights, privileges, duties, and responsibili-
ties of Realms, Provinces and Klans, and of all officers and
members of this Order, and finally to determine the same. The
Imperial Klonvokation shall meet bienialiy in the month of Sep-
tember on day and at place to be fixed by the Imperial Wizard.

Section 2. The Imperial Klonvokation shall be composed of all
Imperial Officers, the Grand Dragons and an elected delegate
(Klepeer) from each organized Realm; the Great Titan, and
an elected delegate (Klepeer) from each Province. (Exalted
Cyclops from Klans that are in good standing by reason of
having paid all Imperial, Realm and Province taxes shall be
entitled to one vote each therein, which can not be delegated,
and which shall be deducted from the total vote of their Realm.)
Each organized Realm (State) represented in the Klonvokation
shall be entitled to one vote for each One Hundred or majority
fraction thereof of Klansmen in good standing in. fhat Realm
at the end of the calendar quarter next preceding the meeting
of the Imperial Klonvokation as shown by the records of the
Imperial Palace. The total vote of each Realm, after deducting


260


APPENDIX
the vote of the Exalted Cyclops present, thus determined shall be
equally divided among the representatives present at the Klon-
vokation. States not organized into Realms shall be entitled to
one representative for each state who shall be elected by the
Chartered Klans thereof and shall have same voting power as
in Realms. Provided, however, that in no event shall the con-
ditions of this section operate to increase the basis of representa-
tion for a State or Realm as herein provided in this section of
Article VI of the Constitution and Laws. Courtesy cards may
be issued entitling the holders of same to seat outside the
boundaries of the regular Klepeers’ seats, the holders of the
courtesy privilege, however, having no voting privilege and must
be members in good standing, in Klans in good standing in the
Imperial, Realm and Province funds.

Section 3. The active officers of the Imperial Klonvokation in
convention assembled shall be a president and a secretary. The
Imperial Klaliff shall be its president and the Imperial Kligrapp
shall be its secretary and recording officer. Other Imperial
Officers may act as chairmen of Committees, or constitute com-
mittees. All acts of the Klonvokation shall become effective
within one hour after their passage unless vetoed by the Im-
perial Wizard within that time, in which event the Klonvokation
may pass the act over the veto of the Imperial Wizard by
three-fourths (34) vote of the said Klonvokation.


THE IMPERIAL KLONCILIUM.


ArTICcLeE VII.


Section 1. The Imperial Kloncilium shall be the supreme ad-
visory board of this Order and shall be composed of all the
Imperial Officers named in Article VIII.

Section 2. The Imperial Kloncilium shall be the Supreme
Tribunal of Justice of this Order and shall have full appellate
jurisdiction to hear and finally determine all appeals of what-
ever nature presented to it affecting the relationship and con-
stitutional rights and privileges of Realms and Provinces, and
Klans and members of his Order in unorganized states.

261


THE CHALLENGE OF THE KLAN


Section 3. It shall have full power and authority, acting in the
presence of the Imperial Wizard or his authorized representative,
to act in the interim between sessions of the Imperial Klonvo-
kation.

Section 4. It shall meet in regular session in the month of
July each year on call of the Imperial Wizard, but special ses-
sions may be held at any other time on call of the Imperial
Wizard when same is deemed necessary by him or when he is
requested in writing to do so by five members thereof.

Section 5. Nine members present, in person or by proxy, of
the Imperial Kloncilium, including the Imperial Wizard, or his
authorized representative, shall constitute a quorum for the trans-
action of all matters coming before it, except where otherwise
provided herein.

Section 6. Decisions of the Imperial Kloncilium on all mat-
ters of a judiciary nature coming before it for adjudication
shall be final when same are ratified by the Imperial Wizard.

Section 7. Between the meetings of the Imperial Kloncilium,
whenever, in the judgment of the Imperial Wizard, it shall be-
come necessary for it to consider any matter or thing whatso-
ever, he may submit the matter to the members of the Imperial
Kloncilium in writing by mail or otherwise, and their votes
thereon shall be cast in writing by mail or otherwise within a
time limit to be fixed by the Imperial Wizard.

Section 8. The Imperial Kligrapp shall be the Secretary and
recording officer of the Imperial Kloncilium.


IMPERIAL OFFICERS.
ARTICLE VIII.


Section 1. Hereafter the Imperial officers of this Order shall
be sixteen in number, and their official titles shall be as follows:

The Imperial Wizard (Supreme Chief Executive).

Imperial Klaliff (Supreme 1st Vice-Pres.).

Imperial Klazik (Supreme 2nd Vice-Pres.).

Imperial Klokard (Supreme Lecturer).

Imperial Kludd (Supreme Chaplain).


262


APPENDIX


Imperial Kligrapp (Supreme Secretary).

Imperial Klabee (Supreme Treasurer).

Imperial Kladd (Supreme Conductor).

Imperial Klarogo (Supreme Inner-Guard).

Imperial Klexter (Supreme Outer-Guard).

Imperial Klonsel (Supreme Attorney).

Imperial Night-Hawk (Supreme Courier)
and four Imperial Klokann (Constituting a Board of Auditors
and supreme advisers).

These shall be known as the Imperial Wizard and his fifteen
GENII.


IMPERIAL WIZARD.


Articte IX.


Section 1. The Imperial Wizard is the supreme chief executive
of this Order. He shall be elected by the Grand Dragons. To
elect the Imperial Wizard, the Grand Dragons shall meet in
executive session upon the call of the Imperial Kligrapp. Each
Grand Dragon shall cast his vote the number of votes repre-
senting his Realm, in the Klonvokation as shown by the records
of the Imperial Palace on the first day of the quarter, on which
election is held; this vote to be ascertained in the same manner
as set forth in Section V, Article 6. If no result is determined
after three ballots all names must be dropped except the three
receiving the highest number of votes; if no result is determined
at the end of three more ballots, all names must be dropped
except the two receiving the highest number of votes. No
nomination shall be made. No motions except a motion to
recess shall be entertained during said election. No adjourn-
ment shall be taken until after the completion of the election.
Any Klansman in, good standing in any Klan in good standing
as determined by the records of the Imperial Palace is eligible
to be chosen Imperial Wizard. While the Grand Dragons are in
session for the purpose of electing an Imperial Wizard, they are
prohibited from having any communication of any nature what-


263


THE CHALLENGE OF THE KLAN


soever with any one outside of their meeting from the time they
are called to order until they have finally elected an Imperial
Wizard.

Section 2. The Imperial Wizard shall hold office for a period
of four years or until his successor is elected and installed. He
shall be removed for just cause by the Imperial Kloncilium
after charges have been preferred and a trial held, upon a three-
fourths vote of said body, in session assembled, subject to the
approval of the Grand Dragons who shall be immediately con-
vened in executive session by the Imperial Kligrapp.

Section 3. Upon the death or removal of the Imperial Wizard
from office, the Imperial Klaliff shall immediately succeed to
that office and shall govern until a successor to the Imperial
Wizard is installed. In the event the Imperial Wizard is re-
moved from office, a successor shall be named at the earliest
possible date thereafter, consistent with careful judgment in the
selection.


DUTIES, PREROGATIVES AND POWERS OF THE
IMPERIAL WIZARD.


ARTICLE X.


Section 1. Being the Supreme Chief Executive of this Order,
the Imperial Wizard shall have and hold supreme authority and
power within this Constitution in all administrative matters, and
to act in any and all matters not prescribed in this Constitution,
when in his judgment the best interest of this Order warrants.
He may delegate such authority to his subordinate executive
or administrative officers as he may deem necessary, but the
Imperial Authority of this Order shall ever center and be vested
in him and shall not be divided.

Section 2. He shall specify the duties of all officers regardless
of rank or station, of whatever department, bureau, or division,
other than those duties enumerated in this Constitution, and
shall require such duties to be properly performed on penalty of
removal from office.


264.


APPENDIX


4


Section 3. He shall issue charters for Klans, specify con-
ditions on which charters shall be issued, and shall have the
power to open and close charters of Klans in his discretion or
upon request of a Klan. He shall have full and unchallengable
authority and power to suspend or revoke charters of Klans,
for cause.

Section 4. He shall promulgate all countersigns and passwords,
and any and all other secret signs and work of this Order,
created by the Emperor.

Section 5. He shall have supreme supervision over all de-
partments of this Order.

Section 6. He shall have full authority to issue decrees, edicts,
mandates, rulings and instructions covering any matter not spe-
cifically set forth in this Constitution, or emphasizing any matter
of this Constitution, and all such decrees, edicts, mandates, rul-
ings and instructions must be respected and obeyed promptly
and faithfully by all members of this Order on penalty of banish-
ment.

Section 7. He shall manufacture, or cause to be manufactured,
all paraphernalia, regalia, uniforms, costumes, emblems, insignia,
flags, banners, jewelry for individual wear, jewels for official
use, clerical forms, books, pamphlets, literature, advertising mat-
ter, stationery, etc., etc., and no other design, emblem, insignia
or form or thing, article or articles shall be recognized, coun-
tenanced or used by this Order or any member of same. All
designs, emblems or other insignia officially adopted by the
Emperor whether created by him or not, shall be recognized
as official and duly respected by all members of this Order.

Section 8. He shall request of the Imperial Klonvokation such
legislation as he deems wise for the best interest of this Order in
its government, regulation and promulgation.

Section 9. He shall have full power and authority to remove
from office at any time any officer of this Order, other than an
Imperial Officer,,of any rank or station or capacity, or any
employee whomsoever, on the ground of incompetency, dis-
loyalty, neglect of duty, or for unbecoming conduct.

Section 10. He shall have full authority and power to appoint
all Imperial Officers and Grand Dragons, and their terms of


265


THE CHALLENGE OF THE KLAN


office shall be designated by him unless otherwise provided for
herein.

Section 11. He shall have and hold full and original authority
and power, office and title of “Supreme Kleagle,” and is fully
authorized and empowered to solicit applicants for membership
in this Order, to collect and receipt for Klectokons, and admit
to membership, in this Order, any person or any number of per-
sons at any time and in any place he may choose, provided such
person or persons qualify under the requirements of Article IV,
Section 1, of this Constitution.

Sectton 12. He shall issue and sign all commissions or other
credentials of this order in promulgating same, and affix the
Imperial Seal thereto; and he shall contract in the name of this
Order, with other members for its extension, financing, manage-
ment, operation and business interests, and shall fix the com-
pensation therefor.

Section 13. Whenever a question of paramount importance to
the interest, well-being or prosperity of this Order arises, not
provided for in this Constitution, he shall have full power and
authority to determine such question, and his decision, which
he shall report to the Imperial Klonvokation if requested, shall
be final.


DUTIES OF IMPERIAL OFFICERS.


ARTICLE XI.


Section 1. IMPERIAL KLALIFF: Is the second highest
officer of this Order; he shall be the president of the Imperial
Klonvokation, and perform such other duties as may be required
by the Imperial Wizard.

Section 2, IMPERIAL KLAZIK: Is the second vice-presi-
dent of this Order, and he shall be the executive head of the
department of Realms, and shall perform such other duties as
may be required by the Imperial Wizard.

Section 3. IMPERIAL KLOKARD: The duties of the Im-
perial Klokard shall be to disseminate Klankraft, and perform
such duties as may be required by the Imperial Wizard.


266


APPENDIX


Sectton 4. IMPERIAL KLUDD: Is the Chaplain of the
Imperial Klonvokation and shall perform such other duties as
may be required by the Imperial Wizard.

Section 5. IMPERIAL KLIGRAPP: Is the Supreme Secre-
tary and recording officer of this Order. He shall be in charge
of secretarial work and shall be the custodian of the Imperial
records and the Imperial Seal. He shall receive and receipt for
all funds coming from any source whatsoever. He shall trans-
mit all such funds in his possession to the Imperial Klabee
(Supreme Treasurer) at the close of each day, taking his receipt
therefor. He shall be the secretary of the Imperial Klonvokation
and shall act as secretary of the Imperial Kloncilium and shall
have general supervision of all the clerical work and workings.
He shall keep an accurate account of the receipts and disburse-
ments. He shall sign all papers, vouchers and other documents
requiring his signature or attestation. He shall prepare and
submit a report of the workings of his office to each session of
the Imperial Klonvokation. He shall furnish the Imperial Klon-
cilium when requested with such information as they desire with
reference to his office. He shall give bond for the faithful and
honest performance of the duties of his office in some reliable
bonding or surety company in the sum of $25,000.00, the said
bond to be approved by the Imperial Kloncilium. He shall not
assume the duties of his office until all these requirements are
complied with.

Section 6. IMPERIAL KLABEE: Is the Supreme Treasurer
of this Order and is, therefore, the custodian of its Funds. It
shall be his duty to demand of the Imperial Kligrapp at the
close of each day all funds received by the Imperial Kligrapp
and he shall receipt the Imperial Kligrapp therefor, and make a
deposit of funds once each day in some bank or banks, desig-
nated by the Imperial Kloncilium. These funds shall be carried
in the name of the Knights of the Ku Klux Klan and shall be
paid out only upon the signature of the Imperial Klabee, coun-
tersigned by the Imperial Wizard. He shall keep an accurate
record of all receipts and disbursements made by him, and shall
make a:full and complete report of the receipts and disburse-
ments of his office to the Imperial Kloncilium at its regular


267


THE CHALLENGE OF THE KLAN


annual meeting, and to the Imperial Klonvokation at its regular
meeting. He shall perform such other duties as may be required
of him by the Imperial Wizard. For the faithful and honest per-
formance of his duties he shall give bond in some bonding or
surety company to be approved by the Imperial Kloncilium in a
sum not less than $50,000.00. The amount of this bond may be
increased at any time by the Imperial Kloncilium.

Section 7. IMPERIAL KLADD: Shall perform such duties
as may be required of him by the Imperial Wizard.

Section 8. IMPERIAL KLAROGO: Is inner guard at all
Imperial Kloncilium and Imperial Klonvokation meetings and
shall perform such other duties as may be required by the Im-
perial Wizard.

Section 9. IMPERIAL KLEXTER: Is outer guard at all
meetings of the Imperial Kloncilium and Imperial Klonvokation,
and shall perform such other duties as may be required by the
Imperial Wizard.

Section 10. IMPERIAL KLONSEL: Is Supreme Attorney
or legal adviser of this Order and shall perform such other
duties as may be required by the Imperial Wizard.

Section 11. IMPERIAL NIGHT-HAWKEK: Is the head of the
Department of Investigation, and shall perform such other duties
as may be required by the Imperial Wizard.

Section 12, THE IMPERIAL KLOKANN: Is the Supreme
Board of Auditors and Special Advisers. It shall be composed
of four members, each of whom shall bear the official title of
“Imperial Klokan.” The chairman of this board shall be known
as “Chief Imperial Klokan.” The duties of this Board shall be
to audit the books, records and reports of the Imperia Kligrapp
and the Imperial Klabee and the clerical records of this Order,
and to make a written report at each regular session of the Im-
perial Klonvokation and the Imperial Kloncilium. It shall recom-
mend to the Imperial Wizard such plans and methods as it
deems wise for the welfare of this Order, and it shall perform
such other duties as may be required of it, and each member
thereof, individually, shall perform such other duties as may be
required of him by the Imperial Wizard.


268


APPENDIX


KLEAGLES AND GIANTS.


ARTICLE XII.


Section 1. A Kleagle is an organizer or field worker of this
Order, and shall be appointed only by or under the direct or
delegated authority of the Imperial Wizard, and shall work by
and under his requirements and instructions.

Section 2. The Imperial Wizard, being by virtue of his office
the Supreme Kleagle, shall have full power and authority to
commission and appoint members of this Order as Kleagles, and
he shall have full power to remove from office any Kleagle of
any rank, grade or station whatsoever.

Section 3. All authority, power, privileges and prerogatives
that may be vested in, or conferred upon the office of Kleagle
of any rank below the Supreme Kleagle shall be derived from
the Supreme Kleagle and delegated by him only, and same
must be evidenced by a documentary commission setting forth
such authority and power so delegated.

Section 4. Kleagles of whatever rank below the Supreme
Kleagle shall be employed under contract stipulations, and they
shall give bond in some reliable bonding or surety company in
such amount as may be required by the Imperial Wizard.

Section 5. Kleagles of whatever rank, grade, or station, must
thoroughly familiarize themselves with the Kloran, laws, prin-
ciples, objects, history, usages and mannerisms of this Order,
and must be able to demonstrate same in an intelligent and
proficient manner.

Section 6. The title of Giant may apply by gradation to all
officers who have served one or more terms as the chief execu-
tive officer of the Invisible Empire and of subordinate juris-
dictions thereof. A Klan Giant is one who has served as Exalted
Cyclops; a Great Giant is one who has served as Great Titan;
a Grand Giant is one who has served as Grand Dragon; an
Imperial Giant is one who has served as Imperial Wizard. The
title is not conferred on an officer until his successor has been
duly installed. The title Giant shall in all cases be conferred


269


THE CHALLENGE OF THE KLAN


upon the recommendation of the next officer above in rank.
This honorary title shall be conferred in recognition of regular
and faithful services performed as prescribed by the Constitution
and Laws of this Order. The Grand Dragon of a Realm shall,
at all times, keep in his office a list of the Giants in that Realm
and shall, whenever possible, use such Giants for special service.


PARAPHERNALIA, REGALIA, EMBLEMS, ENSIGNS,
INSIGNIA, ETC.


ARTICLE XIII.


Section 1. All ensigns, standards, flags or banners, and all em-
blems, insignia, paraphernalia, regalia, uniforms, and costumes,
and all designs thereof of our original society—the Ku Klux
Klan—are retained and officially re-adopted as property of this
Order under its now incorporate name of Knights of the Ku
Klux Klan.

Section 2. All designs, ensigns, flags, standards, banners, em-
blems, insignia, seals, paraphernalia, regalia, uniforms, costumes,
etc., and all clerical forms or matters to be printed, shall be
adopted by or designed by or under the directions of the Em-
peror only.

Section 3. All articles, designs and things referred to or im-
plied in Sections 1 and 2, above, and Article X, Section 10, of
this Constitution, and all property, real and personal, shall ever
be and remain the property of this Order and such supplies can
only be procured from the Imperial Wizard by the required
requisition therefor, and this also shall apply to all supplies
used by any subordinate jurisdiction, and any and all jewelry
or other articles used by a member.

Section 4. Any article or thing, regardless of form, or of what
material it shall be made, or for what purpose it shall be made,
or to what use it shall be subjected, if it bears an emblem or an
insignia of this Order, shall belong to and is the property of
this Order; and such article or thing can not legally bear an
emblem, insignia, or design of this Order without written au-
thority of the Imperial Wizard, and can only be procured


270


APPENDIX


through him, and can be used only by a member or by such
person or persons properly coming under the protection of this
Order by authority of the Imperial Wizard. If such article or
thing or other property be intrusted to or permitted to be in
the possession of a member, or other person, as set forth above,
it must be surrendered on official demand by an Exalted Cyclops
or the Imperial Wizard. If a member has in his possession any
article or property of this Order, and voluntarily discontinues
his membership, or is banished from membership, or in any other
manner his connection with this Order is severed, such article
or articles, thing or things, must be immediately returned or
surrendered by him to an Exalted Cyclops, Great Titan, Grand
Dragon, or to the Imperial Wizard, and he shall be given a
receipt for same. Upon his failure to do so within thirty days
the Exalted Cyclops or other officer shall take action necessary
to regain the actual possession of such article or articles. All
rights, privileges and use of all such designs, emblems, insignia,
etc., cited or implied above, are strictly reserved by this Order.
Section 5. It shall be unlawful for any person or persons, com-
pany, firm or corporation, to manufacture or cause to be manu-
factured, catalog or cause to be cataloged, advertise or cause to
be advertised, sell or offer for sale or cause same to be done,
any article or design whatsoever of this Order or anything used
by or properly belonging to this Order, unless such person or
persons, company, firm or corporation, be duly licensed by the
Imperial Wizard to manufacture, advertise or sell such article,
designs or things, and even then, only by a strict adherence to
the conditions, restrictions and directions specified in said license.
Section 6. It shall be unlawful for any member of this Order
to purchase, cause to be purchased, or otherwise come into
possession of any article or property of this Order from any
person, company, firm or corporation, without authority to do
so from the Imperial Wizard; he can procure such article from
the Imperial Wizard only by making requisition therefor, and
remitting the amount of money required. It shall be unlawful
for any subordinate jurisdiction to procure any article or prop-
erty of this Order, or any supplies, etc., used by it from any
other source than the Imperial Wizard, or by his authority.


eg i


THE CHALLENGE OF THE KLAN


Section 7. If an unauthorized person shall have in his pos-
session any article, or property of this Order, and this fact shall
become known to a member, it shall be the sworn duty of such
member to regain for this Order the actual possession of such
article without delay; his failure to do so will jeopardize his
membership,


COSTUMES, SEALS, ENSIGNS, SYMBOLS, ETC.


ARTICLE XIV.


Section 1. KLAN PARAPHERNALIA: Shall consist of
altar furnishings as per Kloran, and such account books, forms,
and other things as are necessary.

Section 2, COSTUMES: The official costume of this Order,
shall be a white robe of light weight cotton cloth, made with
cape of same material, and of proper length, with white girdle
around waist, and insignia of this Order worn on the left breast.
The cowl or helmet shall be made of same material as the robe,
and with whatever material necessary to give it the proper
stiffness, and so made that it will be collapsible, and when worn
shall be of a cone shape. There shall be one red tassel attached
to the peak of same. There shall be an apron of same material
in both the front and rear, so as to completely conceal the
identity of the wearer. The front apron shall have two holes
of the proper size and location to facilitate the vision of the
wearer. This shall be known as the Klansman’s robe or costume.
Costumes to be worn by active officers, of whatever rank or
station, shall be of such design, and made of such material, and
with the use of such colors, as may be prescribed by the Em-
peror.

Section 3. EMBLEMS AND SYMBOLS: Shall be such as
may be designed or authorized by the Emperor.

Section 4. ENSIGNS, FLAGS AND STANDARDS: The
official ensigns, flags and standards of this Order, together with
all official banners, shall be of such shape, size and design as
may be authorized by the Emperor.


272


THE CHALLENGE OF THE KLAN


Section 5. THE GRAND ENSIGN: The “Grand Ensign”
or Banner of this Order shall be in the form of an isosceles
triangle, five feet long and three feet wide at the staff. The
material shall be yellow, with a red scalloped border about three
inches in width. There shall be painted upon it in black, A
Dracovolans, or Flying Dragon, with the following motto in-
scribed on it: “Quod Semper, quod ubique, quod ab omnibus.”
The tongue shall be painted in red with an arrow head end. The
tail shall also end with an arrow head.

Section 6. SEAL: There shall be a Seal of this Order, which
shall be known as the Great Imperial Seal. It shall bear the
words, “Imperial Seal—Knights of the Ku Klux Klan,” and shall
be of such design as the Emperor shall direct. Each chartered
Klan of this Order shall have a Seal bearing the name, number,
and Realm of the Klan, together with the name of this Order,
“Knights of the Ku Klux Klan,’ and shall be of such design
as directed by the Emperor. This Seal must be procured by the
Klan immediately after it shall have been chartered. Seals to
be used by the various subordinate jurisdictions shall bear the
name—“Knights of the Ku Klux Klan,” and be of such design
as the Emperor may direct.

Section 7. KLIKON AND SYMBOLS: The Klikon is the
Sacred Picture of this Order, and as such must be rigidly safe-
guarded by whatever Klan or Klansman to whom it may be
intrusted. The various symbols of this Order, used in its
several Kloranic Orders, shall be such as are designed and
authorized by the Emperor.


REVENUES AND PROPERTY TITLES.


ARTICLE XV.


Section 1. The revenues of this Order shall consist of: First,
a percentage of each and every klectokon, whether paid to a
Klan or to a Kleagle; such percentage to be determined by the
Imperial Wizard. Second, a per capita tax, which shall be
known as the Imperial Tax; which shall be a sum of money
not to exceed fifteen (15c) cents per capita per month. Third,


273


THE CHALLENGE OF THE KLAN


all profits realized from the placing of paraphernalia, regalia,
supplies, jewelry, uniforms, costumes, stationery, and any and
all other articles used in the work of this Order, or by any
member. Fourth, all interest accruing on investments made by
this Order.

Section 2. The Imperial Tax shall begin with the month im-
mediately succeeding the month in which a Klan is chartered,
and is due and payable on the first day of each calendar quarter
thereafter; the Kligrapp of each Klan shall remit the same
with his regular quarterly report—his failure to do so will sub-
ject the charter of that Klan to suspension or cancellation. The
Imperial Tax is hereby levied upon each and every Klan now
chartered and which may be hereafter chartered, and the Im-
perial Wizard has full authority and power to collect same.

Section 3. The revenues of a Realm shall consist of: First,
such portion of the Imperial revenue received from that Realm
as may be fixed by proclamation of the Imperial Wizard. Second,
a per capita tax, to be known as a Province Tax, in such amount
as the Klonverse of each Province may determine, in no case
to be less than 8% cents per month.


REALMS.


ARTICLE XVI.


Section 1. A Realm may be organized within a state or states
of the United States, or other territorial sub-division when
recommended by a committee of three Realm Officers from other
States appointed by the Imperial Klazik for that purpose.

Section 2. A Realm is organized on the declaration of the
Imperial Wizard, and with such declaration he shall appoint and
name all officers thereof and shall furnish laws and regulations
for the government of that Realm, and such appointment of
officers and such laws, if not in conflict with this Constitution,
shall be effective until the convention of the initial Klorero of
that Realm after its organization; at which time the Klorero will
proceed to elect all of its elective officers, and adopt laws for


274


APPENDIX


the government of that Realm, but such laws adopted and such
elections held shall not be inconsistent with this Constitution
and the laws of this Order. Such laws and amendments of
laws adopted at this time or at any future Klorero must be
ratified by the Grand Dragon and the Imperial Wizard before
the same becomes effective as law.

Section 3. The Klorero of a Realm shall be composed of all
Grand Officers of that Realm, Great Titans and Great Officers
of provinces within that Realm, and five Klepeers from each
Province in said Realm. Grand Officers, Great Titans and Great
Officers shall be entitled to one vote each. The five Klepeers
shall be entitled to one vote for each one hundred Klansmen or
major fraction thereof in good standing within the province
that they represent, said Klepeers present to divide this vote
equally. Exalted Cyclops shall have the same voting rights,
and under the same conditions as in the Klonvokation.

Section 4. The Klorero shall possess no power to interfere
with the Imperial Wizard in his plans and purposes in the
promulgation of this Order within its respective bounds.

Section 5. The Klorero shall provide its own revenue to meet
the expenses of its convention and clerical obligations.

Section 6. The officers of a Realm shall be a Grand Dragon,
who shall be President of the Klorero; he shall be appointed
by the Imperial Wizard for a term of office designated in his
appointment or during faithful service and good behavior, and
shall govern his Realm in a manner not inconsistent with this
Constitution, or the instructions and directions of the Imperial
Klazik; Grand Klaliff, second highest officer of a Realm, who
shall be vice-president of the Klorero; Grand Klokard, lecturer;
Grand Kludd, chaplain; Grand Kligrapp, secretary; Grand
Klabee, treasurer; Grand Kladd, conductor; Grand Klarogo,
inner guard; Grand Klexter, outer guard; and a Grand Night-
Hawk. These shall be known as the Grand Dragon and his
nine Hydras. Officers of a Realm, other than the Grand Dragon,
shall be elected by the Klorero on the nomination of the Grand
Dragon, and such election must be ratified by the Imperial Kla-
zik prior to their installation.

Section 7. The Grand Dragon and Great Titans of each Realm


275


THE CHALLENGE OF THE KLAN


shall be required to meet en banc on the third Monday of July
of each year. The first meeting to be held on the third Monday
of July, 1923, at a place designated by the Imperial Klazik. The
object of the meeting is to discuss Klan problems and to suggest
solutions therefor.


PROVINCES.


ARTICLE XVII.


Section 1. The Grand Dragon shall designate the bounds of a
Province in his Realm, and shall form new Provinces as the
development warrants, but in number not to exceed six Provinces
in any one Realm, except by permission of the Imperial Wizard.
Desiring to form a Province he shall procure permission from
the Imperial Klazik. Upon receipt of such permission he shall
notify all Klans to be incorporated in that Province, naming
the officers appointed by him, and formally declaring such
Province formed, and report immediately such formation to the
Imperial Klazik.

Section 2. At the initial convention of a Klonverse of a
Province, the elective officers of that Province shall be elected,
but such election must be ratified by the Grand Dragon of that
Realm, and such officers elected and ratified shall be installed
by the Grand Dragon or by his duly appointed deputy, and they
shall govern the Province under the direction and instructions
of the Grand Dragon.

Section 3. A Klonverse shall be composed of all the Grand
Officers of the Realm; all Great Officers of that Province and
four Klepeers from each Klan in good standing in that Province.
The Grand Officers and Great Officers shall each be entitled
to one vote. The Klepeers shall be entitled to one vote for
each one hundred Klansmen or major fraction thereof in good
standing in their Klan and they shall divide the vote of their
Klan equally.

Section 4. The officers of a Province shall hereafter be: A
Great Titan, the highest officer of a Province, and President of


276


APPENDIX


the Klonverse; three great Klaliffs, who shall compose an Ad-
visory Board; a Great Kligrapp, secretary; a Great Klabee,
treasurer; a Great Kludd, chaplain; and a Great Night-Hawk.
These officers shall be known as the Great Titan and his Seven
Furies, and their terms of office shall be from the date of their
installation until the next convention of the Klonverse, or until
their successors shall have been elected and installed.

Section 5. The Great Titan of a Province shall be appointed by
the Grand Dragon of the Realm, with the consent and approval
of the Imperiai Klazik, but all other officers of a Province shall
be elected by the Klonverse on the nomination of the Great
Titan.

Section 6. The function of the Klonverse is social and fra-
ternal, for the purpose of promoting good fellowship within the
bounds of that Province, and stimulating and developing interest
in this Order, and its mission and work.

Section 7. The Klonverse shall meet in regular session each
calendar year, at such place as it may select, and at such time
as the Great Titan may designate—provided the Klonversé must
hold its session at least thirty days prior to the convention of
the Klorero of that Realm.


KLANS.


ARTICLE XVIII.


Section 1-a. In States having a perfected Realm organization,
the Grand Dragon shall designate the location of new Klans
to be instituted, and shall stipulate the number of charter peti-
tioners necessary to institute a new Klan.

Section 1-b. In States having no Realm organization, the King
Kleagle shall be the judge of the location and number of peti-
tioners necessary to institute a new Klan.

Section 2. The Kleagle in charge of the organization of a Klan
shall remain in charge and be responsible until that Klan is duly
chartered and its officers elected and installed.

Section 3-a. Upon the organization of a Klan, a vote shall be


277


THE CHALLENGE OF THE KLAN


had on the petitioners, and if there be three negative votes cast
on the ballot as a whole, then an individual ballot shall be had
by balloting on the petitioners one at a time, three negative
ballots rejecting. After a Klan has been organized and prior
to the issuance and closing of its charter, charter applicants must
be submitted to the Klan in klonklave assembled; if any Klans-
man present knows any just reason that disqualifies an applicant
for membership, he must rise to his feet and challenge that
applicant and state his reasons for so doing; this done, the
Provisional Exalted Cyclops, or the Kleagle in charge acting as
such, shall refer the application to the Klokann and the Klokann
shall investigate the application on the basis of the grounds of
objection, and they shall report on such applicant at the next
subsequent klonklave, if possible, or at the very earliest possible
date thereafter, at which klonklave final action shall be taken.
An applicant who has been finally rejected can not apply again
until after the expiration of twelve months from, date of re-
jection. If after a careful investigation the Klokann finds that
the objector was in error, they shall report accordingly and
recommend the passage of the applicant, and the Klan shall take
definite and final action on the report of the Klokann.

Section 3-b. Applications for membership in chartered Klans
shall be read three times in Klonklave assembled, and oppor-
tunity given each member present to make objections. All objec-
tions may be made in writing, signed by the objector and de-
fivered to the Klokann, whose duty it shall be to investigate the
objections and make their findings and report the same to the
Klan body for its adoption or rejection. All petitions must be
made in writing on Form K-115s.

Section 3-c. An applicant who has been finally rejected can
not apply again until after the expiration of twelve months from
date of rejection and shall be within the jurisdiction of that
Klan for a period of three years. Provided, however, upon
request of the Klokann of that Klan through regular channels
the Grand Dragon of organized Realms or the Imperial Wizard
in unorganized States, a special dispensation may be granted
ordering another ballot taken immediately.

Section 4. A Klansman who presents the name of an applicant


278


APPENDIX


for membership in this Order must know the applicant personally
and be familiar with his qualifications according to this Con-
stitution and Laws. All members of a Klan must faithfully
guard the portal of the Invisible Empire so that no person not
qualified to enter therein shall be admitted.

Seciion 5. In the event a petitioner or an applicant is denied
membership in this Order, the sum of his Klectokon shall be
immediately returned to him by the Kleagle, if same was col-
lected by him, or by the “ligrapp of the Klan if same was paid
into the Klan.

Section 6. All actions of a Klan in rejecting an applicant for
membership, as to the votes cast, and by whom objections were
made, are a positive secret of this Order; members who have
knowledge of same and divulge or intimate in the slightest de-
gree or cause such knowledge to be in any*way communicated
to any person not a member, shall be at once banished from
the Invisible Empire for the violation of his oath on the ground
of treason,

Section 7. When the required number of charter petitioners
have been obtained in a community where a Klan is to be located,
the Kleagle will immediately forward a regular petition for the
issuance of charter to the Imperial Wizard through regular
channels. Such petition must give the name selected for that
Klan, time of the meetings of regular klonklave and must be
signed by the Kleagle in charge or the officers, giving the address
of that Klan.

Section 8. The Klan charter shall contain the following text:


IMPERIAL PALACE INVISIBLE EMPIRE KNIGHTS Ok
THE KU KLUX KLAN, INCORPORATED.
TO ALL WHO READ AND RESPECT THESE LINES,
GREETING:
WHEREAS, the Imperial Wizard has received a petition
from the following named citizens of the Invisible Empire


seem ee meee e ere ese ree ress eseeeeerseeseoseeseee
Sooo coer Feecreeecereseseeeneceoe


et al., praying for themselves and others and their successors
to be instituted a Klan of the Order under the name and number


279


THE CHALLENGE OF THE KLAN


OE ete sc See Sea REINS iol ate 2 hans a ee eee ae
Klan Number s.......--.- 5 Reali Of 5c p.ccce sese > sae cette and
fame to. be located! at aay emastiemnee siete. in the county of
ee calle abciess sik ab. caioes  oicnens ee tcecbet este mittee State” Of acces eeeae
Gastar ie eve, Se ies oofasct wud 12 Naan ipa aha ote tata , United States of America,


and they having given assurance of their fidelity to this Order
and their competency to render the service required, and their
ready willingness to take upon themselves and their successors
the duties and responsibilities thereof, and their serious de-
termined purpose to rightly use and not abuse the powers,
privileges and prerogatives conferred on them as such, and be
faithful and true in all things committed to them;

Now know ye that I, the Imperial Wizard of the Knights of


the) Ki Kluxs Klanaion ethis= thes gc 2s se eee ee day of
MA BRE AE oa wehooe sree tos .. month of the Year of our Lord,
1o———; and on the .2.......0.2-000. day Of the. 5.45.05. eee
Wieeke Of 1h. Ss aia carnal accede coca tee eae Month of the Year
Orather Klanas poet noe » sand an the -c52. ce oes eect cere


Cycle of the Third Reign of our reincarnation, under the au-
thority possessed by me, do issue this Charter to the aforesaid
petitioners, their associates and successors, under the name and
number aforesaid, from the day and date hereon, and same is
effective from the date of its acceptance by said Klan as certified
below.

The said Klan is hereby authorized and empowered to do and
to perform all such acts and things as are prescribed by the
Kloran, Laws, Imperial Decrees, Edicts, Mandates and Usages
of the Order, and to enjoy all the rights, privileges and pre-
rogatives authorized by the Constitution thereof; and all Klans-
men are strictly enjoined to valiantly preserve and persistently
practise the principles of pure Patriotism, Honor, Klannishness
and White Supremacy, ever keeping in mind and heart the sacred
sentiment, peculiar purpose, manly mission, and lofty ideals and
objects of this Order, a devoted loyalty to their Emperor and
their Imperial Wizard—a steadfast obedience to the Constitution
of this Order, a faithful keeping of their “Oath of Allegiance,”
and a constant, unwavering fidelity to every interest of the In-
visible Empire, to the end that progress, power, purpose and


280


APPENDIX


7


influence of Klankraft be properly promoted, the knowledge of
the faithful, self-sacrificing service and noble achievements of
our Fathers be not lost to posterity, and all those things for
which this, our beloved Order, is founded to do and perform and
to protect, and to preserve and to perpetuate, be diligently done
and scrupulously maintained, and that they be blameless in pre-
serving the grace, dignity and intent of this Charter forever.

I solemnly charge you to hold fast to the dauntless faith of
our Fathers and to keep their spotless memory secure and un-
stained, and true to the traditions of our valiant sires, meet
every behest of Duty, in all the relationships of life and living,
promptly and properly, without fault, without fail, without fear
and without reproach.

The Imperial Wizard has and holds the full and unchallenge-
able authority, right and power to cancel, suspend or revoke
this Charter, and to annul all the rights, powers, prerogatives,
and immunities conferred hereby, for the neglect or the refusal
on the part of the said Klan to conform to and comply with
the Kloran, Constitution, and Laws of this Order, and the Im-
perial Decrees, Edicts, Mandates, Rulings and Instructions
thereof, or its failure to respect the usages of this Order as
proclaimed by and maintained under the Imperial Authority
of same.

In testimony whereof I, the Imperial Wizard of the Knights
of the Ku Klux Klan, have caused to be affixed hereon the
Great Imperial Seal of the Invisible Empire, and do hereunto
set my hand and impress my official seal, and same is duly
attested—“Non Silba Sed Anthar.”

Done in the Executive Chambers of his Lordship, the Im-
perial Wizard, in the Imperial Palace, in the Imperial City of
Atlanta, Commonwealth of Georgia, United States of America,
on the day and date above written.

BYS HTS heftnede eet

IMPERIAL ene OF THE INVISIBLE EMPIRE,

KNIGHTS OF THE KU KLUX KLAN:


IMPERIAL KLIGRAPP.


THE CHALLENGE OF THE KLAN


CERTIFICATE OF ACCEPTANCE:
This certifies that this Charter was read to and duly adopted
by above named Klan, in session assembled, with all stipulations


and conditions herein stated or implied, on the ..............
Gay Ol aca sicc amar anemia Avs Dt FONE Aa oes PK Se .3:ctabree
(Signed.)


ee


Exalted Cyclops of Above Named Klan.
Witness)


See ee me mee eee eee ree eee eee eeeeeeee eee eeeeeeeeeeeeene


Section 9. Upon the receipt of the charter, the Kleagle or the
Provisional Exalted Cyclops shall notify, or cause to be notified,
the members of that Klan to assemble at the earliest convenient
time in klonklave, at which klonklave the charter shall be read
and accepted by the Klan and a record made in the minutes of
the Klan. The charter of the Klan is then closed and the Klan
will proceed to elect its elective officers, exercising care to select
officers who are competent and fitted for the respective offices.
This done, the service of the Kleagle terminates with this Klan.
The Klan proceeds at once to supply itself with a seal and with
adequate and suitable by-laws for its government and the regula-
tion of its affairs and for the rigid protection and interests of
this Order within its Klanton.

Section to. By-laws of the Klan shall not conflict with or be
inconsistent with the Constitution and Laws of this Order, and
after same have been prepared by the Klan they must be im-
mediately sent to the Imperial Wizard or Grand Dragon to be
approved and ratified by him, corrected and amended by him
if necessary and upon his ratification such by-laws become effect-
ive as law for the regulation of that Klan.

Section 11. The charter of a Klan may be reopened by the
Grand Dragon of a Realm or by the Imperial Wizard upon a
request by the Klan, signed by its Exalted Cyclops and Kligrapp.
When a charter is reopened, the Grand Dragon or the Imperial
Wizard will provide a Kleagle for this Klan for work under
their direction.

Seciton 12. The elective officers of a Klan shall hereafter be


282


APPENDIX


as follows: The Exalted Cyclops, president; Klaliff, vice-presi-
dent; Klokard, lecturer; Kludd, chaplain; Kligrapp, secretary;
Klabee, treasurer; Kladd, conductor; Klarogo, inner guard;
Klexter, outer guard; Night-Hawk, in charge of candidates; and
three Klokann, board of investigators, auditors and advisers,
each of whom shall bear the title of “Klokan.”’ These shall be
known as the Exalted Cyclops and his twelve Terrors.

Section 13. The term of office for officers of a Klan shall be
for twelve months or until their successors have been elected
and installed. Officers of a Klan shall be nominated in the
klonklave immediately preceding the anniversary (May 6th) day,
and elected at the klonklave immediately succeeding the an-
niversary day, each year, and installed in the first klonklave in
the month of July.

Section 14. An officer of a Klan elected and who is absent on
the night of installation shall be installed at the next klonklave,
and if he should be absent from this klonklave he shall be
notified to be present at the next klonklave for installation;
then if he fails to present himself and has no providential ex-
cuse, his office shall be declared vacant by the Exalted Cyclops
and the Klan shall proceed to elect at that klonklave a member
to fill that vacancy, and such member elected shall be installed
at that klonklave.

Section 15. Officers-elect shall not in any case be installed
unless their Klan dues are paid up to and including the calendar
quarter of installation and their respective offices shall become
vacated if, at any time, their Klan dues become in arrears,
and no Klan installation of officers shall be recognized within
the Invisible Empire as being official unless that Klan be in
good standing with the Imperial Palace, Realm and Province
offices.

Section 16. When a Klan becomes in arrears in payment of
its Imperial, Realm or Provincial tax for a period of one hun-
dred days, its several officers are automatically vacated, its
members denied visiting privileges in other Klans, and its acts
subsequent thereto are invalid unless the time is extended by
the Grand Dragon in organized Realms or the Imperial Wizard
in unorganized Realms, either of whom shall have the authority


283


THE CHALLENGE OF THE KLAN


to order a complete audit of this Klan’s affairs at the expense of
the local Klan. Such Klan shall not be entitled to representa-
tion in any Klonverse, Klorero or Imperial Klonvokation. It
shall be the duty of all Grand Dragons of Realms and Great
Titans of Provinces to file with the Imperial Kligrapp, at least
ten days preceding the Klonvokation, a list of all Klans in their
respective territories which have paid their Realm or Province
tax, and the numerical strength of the individual Klans.

Section 17. Immediately upon the election of officers the
Kligrapp shall transmit the names of officers-elect to the Great
Titan of the Province for ratification. Upon ratifying such
officers-elect, the Great Titan shall immediately forward a copy
of the list, together with his ratification, to the Grand Dragon
of that Realm, who shall in turn file a copy in his office and
transmit a copy immediately to the Imperial Kligrapp. No
officer-elect shall be inducted into office unless he be worthy and
well qualified to fulfill the duties of that office and his election
duly ratified by the Great Titan or Grand Dragon.

Section 18. Klan dues shall be paid in advance. A new mem-
ber shall begin paying dues the month immediately succeeding
the month in which he was naturalized. A member failing to
pay his dues for three successive months shall be automatically
suspended from the Klan and his name dropped from the roll
and he shall be so reported in the next quarterly report. Upon
the payment of his arrears he shall be automatically reinstated
and shall be so reported by the Kligrapp in his next quarterly
report.

Section 19. Each and every member naturalized in this Order
must supply himself with a robe and helmet by sending, through
his Kligrapp, his measurement and the required fee for same.
This robe and helmet shall be his and his only just so long as he
is a member of this Order in good standing. Upon his volun-
tarily quitting this Order, or his being suspended or banished,
for any cause, he shall return to the Exalted Cyclops his robe
and helmet without delay, along with any other emblem, insignia
or other property of this Order in his possession; all monies
such member has paid were accepted as a guarantee of good
faith, and same are forfeited by him.


284


APPENDIX


Section 20. A Klan under any and all circumstances shall
accord full respect to its charter, and thereby strictly observe
the Constitution and Laws, mannerisms, usages and Kloranic
(ritualistic) regulations and requirements of this Order as same
are promulgated by the Imperial Wizard; and shall give due
respect and obedience to all Imperial, Realm and Provincial
decrees, edicts, mandates, rulings and instructions issued by the
said officers; and failure on the part of a Klan to do so shall
be cause for reyocation of its charter and the suspension of its
entire membership from this Order.

Section 21. A Klan shall meet in klonklave at least once every
month and gather promptly at the hour agreed upon. Six mem-
bers of a Klan shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of
any business at any regular klonklave.

Section 22. Special klonklaves may be held at any time when-
ever same are deemed necessary by the Exalted Cyclops or when
he is requested to do so by twenty-five per cent. of the member-
ship in good standing and ten per cent. in cases where the
membership in good standing is greater than one thousand;
provided, however, in no event under the provisions of this
section shall the number required be less than one hundred in
Klans having a membership in good standing greater than four
hundred. If this meeting is called upon petition in accordance
with the provisions of this section, forty per cent. of the mem-
bership in good standing at the time of such call shall con-
stitute a quorum.

Section 23. In the event the charter of a Klan has been re-
voked or cancelled for any cause whatsoever, and in the event
of disbandment of a Klan, whether it be a chartered or Pro-
visional Klan, all monies of that Klan in the possession of any
officer or member thereof shall automatically become the actual
monies of the Imperial Treasury of this Order and same must
be freely and promptly turned over, on demand, to the properly
accredited officer who is authorized by the Imperial Wizard to
receive same in the name of this Order; also all books, papers,
manuscripts, Klorans, records, seal, Klan paraphernalia, regalia,
robes, helmets and any and all other things used by the Klan,
and all articles or things appertaining to this Order as may have


285


THE CHALLENGE OF THE KLAN


been used by or are in the possession of any individual member
thereof.

Section 24. A Klan, or member of this Order shall not use
the official costume or any part of same on any occasion outside
the klavern without permission of the Grand Dragon in organ-
ized Realms, or the Imperial Wizard in unorganized States under
penalty of forfeiture of their charter or banishment from
this Order.

Section 25. No Klan or member shall use the name of this
Order or any part thereof for any purpose that contravenes
in any manner the laws of the land, that will reflect, or probably
reflect, upon the reputation and good name, or compromise, or
injure this Order, or any member thereof, in any way.


DUTIES OF KLAN OFFICERS.


ARTICLE XIX.


Section 1. EXALTED CYCLOPS: The Exalted Cyclops is
the supreme officer of a Klan and its official head. He shall
preside over the klonklaves and govern same with dignity, de-
votion and impartiality. He shall be faithful in the prompt
and efficient discharge of every duty prescribed or implied, in-
cumbent upon him, and fearless without respect to individual
persons in the administration of the affairs of his office in pro-
moting the welfare of this Order within the bounds of his
Klanton, and he shall set a laudable example to all Klansmen,
of patriotism, klannishness, benevolence, love, justice, honor and
a devoted loyalty to this Order in every respect. He shall re-
quire a faithful observance on the part of all Klansmen within
his Klanton of the Constitution, laws, usages, etc., of this Order,
and all Imperial Realm or Province decrees, edicts, mandates,
tulings and instructions, and seek to make vital and effective
the principles, objects and purposes of this Order. He shall call
the Klonklave to order promptly on the hour designated, if
there be a quorum present, and see that his Terrors fill their
respective offices in an acceptable manner. He shall diligently


286


APPENDIX


safeguard the sanctity and dignity of the charter of his Klan
and suffer no encroachment thereon, nor any departure there-
from. He shall require the ritualistic work of the Kloran to be
exemplified with the highest degree of perfection possible, and
he shall do such other things as may be required of him by the
Laws of this Order, the Kloran, the by-laws of his Klan, and
faithfully execute all orders and special instructions of the
Great Titan, Grand Dragon or the Imperial Wizard.

Section 2, KLALIFF: The Klaliff is the vice-president of his
Klan, and he shall preside over the klonklave in the absence of
the Exalted Cyclops. He shall preserve order during the de-
liberations of a klonklave, and otherwise assist the Exalted
Cyclops in klonklave assembled and perform such other duties as
may be required of him by the Exalted Cyclops, the Kloran and
by-laws of his Klan.

Section 3. KLOKARD: The Klokard is the lecturer or in-
structor and the Klan censor or critic. He shall administer the
oaths, deliver the Kloranic lectures, instruct in secret work,
do those things commonly required of a critic, and perform such
other duties as may be required of him by the Exalted Cyclops,
the Kloran and the by-laws of his Klan. He shall be responsible
for the proper performance of all ritualistic work within his
Klan, and shall disseminate Klankraft throughout his Klanton.

Section 4. KLUDD: The Kludd is the chaplain of the Klan.
He shall perform the duties peculiar to his sacred office, and
such other duties as may be required of him by the Exalted
Cyclops, the Kloran and the by-laws of his Klan. He shall be
responsible for such musical programs as may be presented; and
for the general spiritual welfare of his Klan.

Section 5. KLIGRAPP. The Kligrapp is the secretary and
recording officer of the Klan. He shall keep an accurate and
complete record of all the proceedings of his Klan assembled,
and a correct and systematic record of its membership, and of
the date each member was naturalized, etc., as required by the
record book for that purpose. He shall make a report through
the proper channels to the proper officers not later than the roth
of the month for the calendar quarter last past on the regular
blanks therefor, and with his reports he shall remit to said


287


THE CHALLENGE OF THE KLAN


officer or officers all monies belonging to this Order, such as
Imperial Tax, Realm or Provincial Tax, Klectokons, monies due
for supplies and any and all other monies due and payable to
said officers. He shall witness all requisitions made for any
article or paraphernalia, regalia, jewelry, or other property of
this Order, to be used by the Klan or a member thereof, and
see that the required sum of money is sent therewith. He shall
notify all members who are in arrears three months, and shall
notify the Imperial Office of the arrears of a member for three
months. He shall be the custodian of the seal of the Klan and
shall impress it on all papers and documents requiring same, and
perform such other duties as may be required of him by the
Exalted Cyclops, the Kloran and the by-laws of his Klan.

Section 6. KLABEE: The Klabee is the treasurer of the
Klan. He shall be the custodian of its funds, and shall receive
from the Kligrapp all monies due to be turned over to him,
giving his receipt for same, and keeping same apart from his
personal funds and secure for the sole use of the Klan. He
shall keep an accurate account of all monies received by him,
and pay same out only on order of the Klan, signed by the
Exalted Cyclops and the Kligrapp, except the monies due by the
Klan to the Imperial Realm and Province Officers, which monies
do not require action of the Klan, and make a faithful record
of such disbursements. He shall make a complete and itemized
report of his office to the Klan when same is requested by the
Exalted Cyclops or the Klan, and shall perform such other duties
as may be required of him by the Exalted Cyclops and the by-
laws of his Klan.

Section 7. KLADD: The Kladd is the conductor of the Klan
and the custodian of its paraphernalia and other properties. He
shall conduct candidates for naturalization, collect the counter-
sign and password at the opening of a klonklave, and perform
such other duties as may be required of him by the Exalted
Cyclops, the Kloran and the by-laws of his Klan.

Section 8. KLAROGO: The Klarogo is the inner guard of
the Klan. He shall keep a diligent watch at the inner door and
permit only those to enter the Klavern who are qualified or
have the permission of the Exalted Cyclops. If he should be


288


APPENDIX


in doubt as to the qualifications of the one seeking admission,
he must satisfy himself from the Klaliff or Kligrapp. He shall
perform such other duties as may be required of him by the
Exalted Cyclops, the Kloran and the by-laws of his Klan.

Section 9. KLEXTER: The Klexter is the outer guard of a
Klan. He shall keep a diligent and faithful watch at the
outer door, and allow no one to pass him from the outside ex-
cept those who are qualified and have permission of the Exalted
Cyclops. He shall observe from time to time the outside
premises of the Klavern to see that no eavesdroppers or other
persons are around who are liable to obtain information or
knowledge concerning the acts or procedure of the klonklave.
He shall in no case leave his post of duty unless summoned
therefrom by the Exalted Cyclops, and even then, a substitute
must be placed in his stead to watch until his return. He shall
perform such other duties as may be required of him by the
Exalted Cyclops, the Kloran and the by-laws of his Klan.

Section 10. NIGHT-HAWK: The Night-Hawk is the special
courier of the Exalted Cyclops. He shall have charge of and
shall entertain the candidate or candidates in the outer den of
the klavern until he is signaled to enter the klavern at the
beginning of the ceremony of naturalization. He shall carry
the Fiery Cross in the ceremony and on all public exhibitions
where same is used, and shall perform such other duties as may
be required of him by the Exalted Cyclops, the Kloran and the
by-laws of his Klan.

Section 11. KLOKANN: The Klokann is the Board of
Auditors, Advisers and Trustees, and the investigating commit-
tee of the Klan. It shall be composed of three members, each
of whom shall bear the title of “Klokan.” It shall be their duty
to audit the books and records of the Kligrapp and the Klabee
in the month of June of each year, and oftener if so required by
the Klan in writing. They shall see that all paraphernalia,
regalia and other sproperty of the Klan and of this Order is
properly kept, and shall perform such other duties as may be
required of them by the Exalted Cyclops and the by-laws of
their Klan. Said Klokann may select such assistants as in their
judgment seem necessary.


289


THE CHALLENGE OF THE KLAN


Section 12. An officer of a Klan who allows himself to get
in arrears for three months, or who absents himself from three
consecutive klonklaves without a providential excuse, or who
fails to master his part of the kloranic work within sixty days
after he is placed in office, shall forfeit all rights, prerogatives
and honors of his office; the Exalted Cyclops must declare his
office vacant and will at once appoint a successor thereto. If
the Exalted Cyclops shall be guilty of negligence as above, the
Klan in klonklave shall demand his resignation and whether
tendered by him or not, they shall proceed to elect his successor
at the following klonklave if he is not present to apologize to
the Klan and take up his duties of office.

Section 13. The Grand Dragon or the Great Titan shall have
the power to remove any officer of a local Klan for cause, but
must immediately report said removal to the Tribunal of the
Realm, whose duty it shall be to immediately pass on the cor-
rectness of his act. If he is sustained the Klan shall proceed
to elect a successor to the officer removed; if he is not sus-
tained, the officer removed resumes the duties of his office. This
applies in Realms that have perfected Realm organizations. In
all other jurisdictions this power is vested in the Imperial
Wizard, who shall report same to the Imperial Kloncilium for
review in the same manner as above set forth.


OFFENSES AND PENALTIES.


ARTICLE XX.


Section 1. Offenses against this Order shall be divided into
two classes—major offenses and minor offenses.

Section 2, Major offenses shall consist of (1) treason against
the United States of America; (2) violating the oath of al-
legiance to this Order or any supplementary oath or obligation
thereof; (3) disrespect of virtuous womanhood; (4) violation
of the Constitution or the laws of this Order; conspiring against
the interest and prosperity of this Order or any Klansman in
any way or being a party thereto, or being a party to any move,

290


APPENDIX


conspiracy or organization whose existence is antagonistic or
injurious to or is an imitation of this Order; whose name, style
or title is a colorable imitation of this Order; swearing allegiance
to or otherwise becoming a citizen or subject of any nation,
government or institution of any nature or classification what-
soever, or any ruler or potentate, prince or person of any court
whatever that is foreign to or is inimical to the government of
the United States of America and its established institutions,
or aiding or abetting such government, nation, institution, ruler,
potentate, prince or person against the interest, well-being or
dignity of the United States of America or the distinctive institu-
tions of its government; violating the by-laws of a Klan of this
Order; excessive or habitual drunkenness; drunkenness or the
drinking of intoxicating liquor or entering a klonklave in an
intoxicated condition; the habitual use of profane language or
vulgarity during a klonklave or during an assembly of Klansmen
just prior thereto; (5) being responsible for the polluting of
Caucasian blood through miscegenation, or the commission of
any act unworthy of a Klansman; (6) the repeated commission
of a minor offense shall in itself constitute a major offense.

Section 3. MINOR OFFENSES. Minor offenses shall consist of
drunkenness, drinking of intoxicating liquor during a klonklave
or on the premises thereof, entering a klonklave in an intoxicated
condition, use of profane language or vulgarity during a klon-
klave or in an assembly of Klansmen just prior thereto, or
committing any other act which might operate against the best
interest of the Klan or Klansmen, refusal or failure to obey
the mandates, rules, edicts and orders of the Exalted Cyclops
or the Klan, or the failure or refusal on the part of any Klans-
man, upon demand by the Exalted Cyclops, to respond to any
summons issued by him, unless he has a providential excuse; or
failure or refusal to surrender his credentials when called for
by the Exalted Cyclops.

Section 4. PENALTIES: All offenses enumerated above
under the head of major offenses shall be tried and penalties
assessed by the Tribunal hereinafter provided for. All offenses
enumerated as minor offenses shall be heard and determined and
penalties assessed by the Exalted Cyclops of the Klan. Penalties


291


THE CHALLENGE OF THE KLAN


shall be of four classes, as follows: 1, Reprimand; 2, Suspen-
sion; 3, Banishment; 4, Extreme Penalty—banishment forever,
and there shall be added thereto complete ostracism in any and
all things by each and every member of this Order.

Section 5. A member who fails to respect the penalty imposed
on another member shall receive the same penalty as if he him-
self were guilty of that offense.

Section 6. All charges against a Klansman, involving a major
offense under the Constitution and Laws of the Knights of the
Ku Klux Klan shall be in writing, specifying the acts com-
plained of, which shall be submitted to the Klokann of the Klan
of which the accused is a member, or in whose jurisdiction the
offense was committed.

Section 7. Upon the filing of such charges the Klokann shall
consider and investigate the same and take action thereon within
thirty days from the time such charges are filed. The Klokann
shall determine the sufficiency of the charges presented and the
advisability of a trial as herein provided, and their action on
such charges shall be final.

If the judgment of the Klokann is not unanimous, then the
decision of a majority of the Klokann, when approved by the
Exalted Cyclops, shall be final.

Section 8. Upon the filing of such charges the Klokann shall
have the right in its discretion, through the Exalted Cyclops, to
suspend the accused during the period of investigation of such
charges or until his acquittal (if trial is ordered).

If, in the opinion of the Klokann, the charges presented con-
stitute a minor offense, as herein defined, the same shall be
referred to the Exalted Cyclops for such action as he shall deem
proper.

Section 9. If the Klokann shall order a trial of the accused,
the charges and specifications shall be published in regular klon-
klave by the Klaliff.

Section 10. The Exalted Cyclops shall in such event set the
date of the trial which shall be not more than thirty days after
report of the Klokann, and shall serve the accused with a copy
of the indictment or charges not less Skt ten days before the
date of the trial.


292


APPENDIX


Section 11. (a) The accused shall be tried before a Tribunal
selected as follows: The Exalted Cyclops, Klaliff, Klokard and
Kludd shall each select from the membership in good standing
six Klansmen whose names shall be placed in some suitable
receptacle and from this receptacle the Kladd, wearing a hood-
wink, shall withdraw eight names, and the remaining sixteen
Kiansmen shall constitute the Tribunal whose attendance at the
trial is compulsory. In the event any one or more of the sixteen
Klansmen thus selected shall fail to appear, that number which
do appear may select from the Klan body sufficient Klansmen
to fill their places.

(b) In event of charges being presented against the Exalted
Cyclops of a Klan, he shall immediately vacate his office ‘and
he shall remain out of office until the case against him is finally
adjudicated. In such event the Klaliff shall immediately assume
the office, duties and responsibilites of the Exalted Cyclops and
shall appoint a Klaliff. The Klaliff in all respects shall be
Exalted Cyclops in fact and the one appointed by him to the
office of Klaliff shall be Klaliff in fact until the case against
the Exalted Cyclops is finally adjudicated. In event the Exalted
Cyclops so accused shall have been found guilty and duly penal-
ized, the acting Exalted Cyclops and Klaliff shall remain in their
respective offices until the end of the term, or until he shall
have been reinstated. In the event charges are preferred against
a Terror of a Klan he shall vacate his office immediately and
shall remain out of office until the case against him has been
finally adjudicated. Immediately upon his vacating office, the
Exalted Cyclops shall appoint a substitute thereto and this sub-
stitute shall act in this office until the case against the Terror
in question has been finally adjudicated. In the event the Terror
in question is convicted and penalized, the substitute in his
former office shall become the Terror in fact of that office unless
or until the said Terror shall have been reinstated. In the
event the Exalted Cyclops or any Terror of the Klan is accused
and tried and acquitted, such Exalted Cyclops or Terror shall
immediately resume his former office and proceed with the
affairs of his office as before.

Section 12. Such Tribunal shall select one of their number


293


THE CHALLENGE OF THE KLAN


as Triton, who shall preside, and one as Scribe, and the duty
of the Scribe shall be to make a record of the proceedings,
write the testimony of witnesses, or cause same to be done by
a competent Klansman stenographer. Said Tribunal shall have
authority and power to issue a summons directed to any Klans-
man, commanding him to appear and give testimony for or
against the accused, and hear the charges and evidence and to
render judgment in conformity with the laws of this Order and
the evidence adduced.

Section 13. The Tribunal and the accused may take testimony
touching the issues involved, except where Klan secrets and
secret information of the Klan are involved, by interrogatories
and cross interrogatories, first giving either party timely notice
thereof, and such evidence when so taken may be received as
evidence in the case and may be used by either party.

Section 14. On the date set for trial the accused shall be
required to be present in person or by counsel (who shall be a
Klansman in good standing), Providence alone preventing; and
in the event of his failure or refusal to be present or represented
by counsel the said Tribunal shall select a member in good
standing in that Klan as counsel for the defense and proceed
with the case and hear proof touching his guilt or innocence
and render its decision in accordance with the laws of this
Order and the evidence adduced at such trial; and said Tribunal
in rendering its decision shall find whether or not service of
the charges has been made upon the accused and notice of the
time and place of hearing has been given to the defendant.
Service of the time and place of the trial of the accused shall
be made upon him in person or by registered letter, and a return
card from the postoffice showing delivery thereof to such Klans-
man, coupled with an affidavit from the Night-Hawk of such
Klan to the effect that a copy of the charges or indictment and
a notice to the accused Klansman, specifying the time and place
of trial, was placed in a letter in an envelope with proper postage
and directed to such Klansman at his last known address, shall
constitute service and notice on such Klansman.

Section 15. No evidence shall be offered at such trial except
such as may be pertinent to the charges presented.


294


APPENDIX


Section 16. At a trial held under this article only the following
may be present: (a) the Tribunal in full regalia of the Order;
(b) the Prosecutor appointed by the Klokann; (c) the defendant
and his representative or representatives; (d) witnesses who are
Klansmen; (e) the Great Titan or his representative; (f) the
Grand Dragon or his representative; (g) the Imperial Wizard
or his representative; (h) a stenographer reporting the case,
who must be a Klansman.

Section 17. At the conclusion of the evidence, the prosecutor
and counsel for the accused shall have the right to argue the
case to the Tribunal and the accused shall have the right to
be heard in his own behalf, and at the conclusion of the argu-
ments all persons except the Tribunal immediately shall retire.

Section 18. After fully considering the charges and evidence
thereon, such Tribunal shall determine the guilt or innocence of
the accused by written ballot. Twelve or more votes shall be
necessary to convict or acquit.

Section 19. lf the accused shall be found guilty, the Tribunal
shall assess the penalty to be imposed and the Exalted Cyclops
shall enforce the same, and such judgment shall be published by
the Klaliff at the next regular klonklave.

Section 20. If the accused shall be acquitted, the Exalted
Cyclops shall be notified thereof and such acquittal shall be
published by the Klaliff at the next regular klonklave.

Section 21. If the Tribunal is unable to reach a decision as
herein provided, then such Tribunal shall be discharged, another
Tribunal composed altogether of different members from the
former Tribunal shall be created as herein provided, who shall
proceed to try the case as herein set forth.

Section 22. Should the accused be acquitted, a majority of the
Klokann shall have the right to appeal from the judgment of
the Tribunal and such majority of the Klokann shall also have
the right to suspend the accused through the Exalted Cyclops
until such appeal shall have been finally determined.

Section 23. Should the accused be convicted he shall have the
right to appeal from the judgment of the Tribunal; but he shall
remain suspended until such appeal shall have been finally de-
termined.


295


THE CHALLENGE OF THE KLAN


Section 24. Notice of appeal shall be in writing signed by the
party or parties appealing and filed with the Kligrapp of the
Klan in which the accused was tried, not more than 15 days
from the date the jud&ment of the Tribunal was published in
regular klonklave.

Section 25. Upon the filing of such appeal, the Kligrapp,
Triton and Scribe of the Tribunal shall, within 30 days, make up
a complete transcript of the proceedings had upon the trial,
which shall be duly certified to by the Kligrapp and forwarded
by him immediately to the Grand Dragon of that Realm. Pro-
vided, however, that any member who shall be found guilty
by a Tribunal in a Realm other than that in which he holds
membership, shall have the right, at his option, to take his
appeal to the Imperial Kloncilium instead of to the Grand
Tribunal of the Realm where the trial is held.

Section 26. In States where Realm organization has not been
instituted, the appeal shall be taken to the Imperial Kloncilium
and a transcript of appeal filed with the Imperial Kligrapp in
like manner as is provided in appeals to the Grand Tribunal of
a Realm.

Section 27. In organized Realms the Grand Dragon shall
annually select a Grand Tribunal composed of 12 Hydras or
Giants, provided that for the first two years after a Realm is
instituted the Tribunal may be composed of Hydras, Furies,
Exalted Cyclops and Klaliffs.

Section 28. The Grand Tribunal shall meet at the annual meet-
ing of the Klorero and at such other times as the Grand Dragon
thereof may direct.

Section 29. The Grand Dragon shall designate one of said
Grand Tribunal as Triton and he shall select his scribe there-
for from the membership of the Grand Tribunal. The decision
of nine or more members of said Grand Tribunal shall render
judgment.

Section 30. Until Realm organization is instituted all appeals
from judgments of the tribunal of the individual Klans in such
states shall be reviewed by the Imperial Kloncilium whose
judgments thereon shall be final.

Section 31. The procedure shall in all cases refer and apply


296


APPENDIX


to major offenses against the Order and shall in no sense alter
or affect Sections 3 and 4 of Article XX of the Constitution and
Laws.

Section 32. All judgments of the Tribunal shall be reported
promptly by the Kligrapp of the Klan within 5 days to the
Grand Dragon; or where a Realm organization has not been
perfected, to the Imperial Kligrapp.

Section 33. Where banishment has been imposed, the Grand
Dragon or the Imperial Kligrapp, as the case may be, shall so
notify all Klans within the Realm where the case originated.
Where the extreme penalty has been imposed, the Imperial
Wizard shall decree, proclaim and publish same or cause the
same to be done to all Klans throughout the Invisible Empire.

Section 34. In the event the preceding sections of this Con-
stitution fail to provide for punishment of any Klansman for
any of the offenses herein referred to, or for any other offense
that is inimical to the best interest of this Order, the Imperial
Wizard is hereby vested with authority and power to prefer
charges against such Klansman in accordance with the provisions
of this Article, or at his discretion to issue banishment order
against such Klansman, who shall have the right of appeal to
the Imperial Kloncilium for a period of 90 days after date of
banishment. The Imperial Kligrapp shall publish the decree of
banishment to Klans in the Realm in which such person held
membership, or throughout the bounds of the Invisible Empire
in accordance with the decree.


KU KLUX KALENDAR, KU KLUX KULLORS, ETC.


+ ARTICLE X XI.


Section 1. Hereafter the calendar of this Order, by which
days, weeks, months and years shall be designated in all official
documents, is as follows:


297


THE CHALLENGE OF THE KLAN


Days— Weeks— Months—
7. Desperate 5. Weird 12. Appalling
6. Dreadful 4. Wonderful 11. Frightiul
5. Desolate 3. Wailing 10. Sorrowful
4. Doleful 2. Weeping 9. Mournful
3. Dismal I. Woeful 8. Horrible
2. Deadly 7. Terrible
1. Dark 6. Alarming
5. Furious
4. Fearful
3. Hideous
2. Gloomy
1. Bloody


YEAR OF THE KLAN: The year of the Klan (Anno Klan)
begins with the month of May each year.

CYCLE: A cycle is twelve calendar months beginning with
the month of December each year.

REIGN: The reign of Incarnation includes all time up to
the American Revolutionary War. The first reign of our Re-
incarnation dates from the beginning of the Revolutionary War
and the establishment of our Government to the Organization
of the Ku Klux Klan of the Reconstruction, in the year A. D.
1866. The second Reign of our Re-incarnation dates from the
year A. D. 1866 to the year A. D. 1872. The third Reign of
our Re-incarnation dates from the year A. D. 1915 on to the
present and the future.

Section 2. The Kardinal Kullors of this Order, hereafter, shall
be White, Crimson, Gold and Black. The secondary Kullors
shall be Gray, Green and Blue. The Official Kullors of the
Emperor shall be such as he may designate; those of the Im-
perial Wizard, Royal Purple. The significance and the mystery
of these Kullors in the Invisible Empire shall be revealed
Kloranically.

Section 3. There shall be four Kloranic Orders of this Order,
namely: The Order of Citizenship or K-UNO (probationary) ;
Knights Kamellia or K-DUO (primary Order of Knighthood) ;


298


APPENDIX


Knights of the Great Forrest or K-TRIO (The Order of Amer-
ican Chivalry); and Knights of the Midnight Mystery or
K-QUAD (Superior Order of Knighthood and Spiritual Phi-
losophies).

Section 4. These several orders of Klannish achievement and
Kloranic advancement shall be communicated, and their Kloranic
regulations, requirements and governments shall be established
and promulgated by and in the discretion of the Emperor of this
Order in the unfoldment of its philosophies and in the revela-
tion of its spiritual mysteries.


ANNIVERSARY.


ARTICLE XXII.


Section 1. This Order was first organized and operated under
the appellation of the Ku Klux Klan, or Invisible Empire, in the
town of Pulaski, Tennessee, in the month of May, in the year
Eighteen Hundred and Sixty-Six (1866), by six young men as
a “social club.” In the Year Eighteen Hundred and Sixty-
Seven (1867) it was reorganized into a “regulative and pro-
tective organization” and as such it actively existed as a cohesive
organization until about the year Eighteen Hundred and Seventy-
Two (1872) at which time it voluntarily disbanded in pursuance
of an order issued by its Grand Wizard-General Nathan Bed-
ford Forrest. In the month of October, in the Year Nineteen
Hundred and Fifteen (1915) it was resurrected, reconstructed
and remodeled into its present incorporated form and character
as a “historical, social, patriotic, military, benevolent, ritualistic,
fraternal order or society” under its present appellation, by
William Joseph Simmons, of Atlanta, Georgia, and thirty-three
associates, three of whom were bona fide members in good
standing of this Order when it disbanded as a regulative and
protective Organization, as above stated.

Section 2. The anniversary date of this Order hereafter shall
be the Sixth (6th) day of the Month of May each year.

Section 3. An anniversary celebration shall be held each year


299


THE CHALLENGE OF THE KLAN


on the anniversary date in the City of Atlanta, Georgia, as the
principal anniversary celebration of this Order, the concluding
exercises of which shall be held, if possible, on the summit of
Stone Mountain, near the City of Atlanta, Georgia, at midnight
of the anniversary date.


BONDS.
ArTIcLE XXIII.


Section 1. Each and every Kleagle, regularly appointed and
commissioned by the Imperial Wizard, and the Kligrapp and
Klabee of each and all subordinate jurisdictions shall give
bond in whatever sum, and in whatever bond or surety company
the Imperial Wizard may direct, and the premium for said bond
must be paid by the jurisdiction or Klan for its Kligrapp and
Klabee, and by the Kleagle or other officer bonded, except Im-
perial Officers, whose bond shall be paid from the Imperial
Treasury.


ARTICLE XXIV.


Section 1. This Constitution may be amended by the Imperial
Klonvokation, at any regular session thereof, provided that such
proposed amendment be indorsed by the Klorero of three or
more Realms, or such amendment be proposed by the Imperial
Wizard. Such proposed amendment or amendments shall be-
come a part of this Constitution when same has been passed
by a two-thirds vote of the Klonvokation and also ratified by
the Imperial Wizard; provided further that no amendment shall
affect in any way the fundamental principles, objects, purposes
and ideals of this Order, or the military character of its gov-
ernment.

Section 2. All laws and parts of laws in conflict herewith are
hereby repealed and this Constitution shall go into effect im-
mediately upon its adoption.


300


APPENDIX


CERTIFICATE OF ADOPTION.


THIS CERTIFIES that the above Constitution and laws of
the Knights of the Ku Klux Klan, Incorporated, as duly author-
ized by the incorporators of said Corporation in session as-
sembled on the Third day of July, A. D. 1916, AK-L, were duly
adopted subject to ratification by the Imperial Wizard, by the
Imperial Klonvokation of the Knights of the Ku Klux Klan,
Incorporated, in its initial session, assembled on the Twenty-
Ninth day of November, A. D. Nineteen Hundred and Twenty-
Two, AK-LVI., in the City of Atlanta, Georgia. I officially
declare and affirm that the text hereof is correct.

Atlanta, Georgia, November 29th, 1922.


Imperial Klaliff.
(Ex-Officio President of the Impcrial Klonvokation.)


Attest:


Imperial Kligrapp,
(Secretary.)


CERTIFICATE OF RATIFICATION; AND
PROCLAMATION.


To all Genii, Grand Dragons and Hydras, Great Titans and
Furies, Giants, Exalted Cyclops and Terrors, and to all citizens
of the Invisible Empire; in the name of the Valiant and
Venerated dead, f affectionately greet you:

THIS CERTIFIES that the above Constitution and laws of
the Knights of the Ku Klux Klan, Incorporated, as authorized,
prepared and adopted by the Imperial Klonvokation of the
Knights of the Ku Klux Klan, Incorporated, has been duly


301


THE CHALLENGE OF THE KLAN


submitted to me for ratification and proclamation; the same is
hereby ratified and, therefore, I do


OFFICIALLY PROCLAIM


The same to be the Constitution and Laws of the Knights of
the Ku Klux Klan, Incorporated, for the government of the
Invisible Empire and all jurisdictions and Klans thereunder,
and all persons therein, and to which all citizens thereof, Klans-
men, members of this Order, have sworn an unqualified al-
legiance, and pledge in sacred sincerity, a constant inflexible
obedience.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, I, the Imperial Wizard of the
Invisible Empire, Knights of the Ku Klux Klan, Incorporated,
have caused the great Imperial Seal of the Knights of the Ku
Klux Klan, Incorporated, to be impressed hereon, and I here-
unto affix my official signature and seal on this the Twenty-
Ninth day of the Eleventh Month of the Year of Our Lord
Nineteen Hundred and Twenty-Two; and on the Doleful Day
of the Weird Week of the Terrible Month of the Year of the
Klan LVI, in the Seventh Cycle of the Third Reign of our
Re-incarnation.

TO THE LOVERS of law and order, peace and justice, we
send greetings; and to the shades of the Valiant, Venerated
Dead, we gratefully and affectionately dedicate the Knights of
the Ku Klux Klan.

Done in the executive chambers of His Lordship, the Imperial
Wizard, in the Imperial Palace, in the Imperial City of Atlanta,
Commonwealth of Georgia, United States of America, on the
day and date above written.

“Non Silba Sed Anthar,”

BY HIS LORDSHIP,


‘ I


Imperial Wizard,
Knights of the Ku Klux Klan, Inc.


302


APPENDIX


(Imperial Seal)
(NEW ADMINISTRATION)


Attest:


Imperial Kligrapp,
Knights of the Ku Klux Klan.
(NEW ADMINISTRATION)


call, ag» Set ii
“VERMONT COLLEGE


MONTPELIER, VERMONT


aay


.
sf -


DATE DUE
OCT 49 ‘74 iOfa |
NOV2 ‘7¢ ne 9


a | in


bay 4


om 1 > Ses
_. aes [
MAY 08 1997


i cd
20 ‘89 |
1 |


AP 10°90 |


GAYLORD PRINTEDINU.S.A.


cal


Ph es, ee 0
be. “VERMON] o 00 100 :


E4896 MONTPELIER, VERMONT


————————


oT Ag geet
FUI3B92


Tact, Hang
he LEP ye ofl Dent


a 0


Pema foaten pa menrnon whnoater pers nove


petedete ae onicete
